古文：张俊，字伯英，凤翔府成纪人。
现代文：张俊字伯英，凤翔府成纪人。
English: Zhang Junzhe Bo Ying, Fengxiangfu Cheng Ji Ren.

古文：好骑射，负才气。
现代文：爱好射箭，富有才气。
English: He likes archery and is very talented.

古文：起于诸盗，年十六，为三阳弓箭手。
现代文：出身于群盗之中，十六岁时，是三阳地区弓箭手。
English: He was born into a group of thieves and became an archer in the Sanyang region at the age of 16.

古文：政和七年，从讨南蛮，转都指挥使。
现代文：政和七年，随从征讨南方少数民族，转任都指挥使。
English: During the seven years of the Chinese Civil War, he accompanied the campaign to subjugate the ethnic minorities in the south, and was transferred to the post of commander.

古文：宣和初，从攻夏人仁多泉，始授承信郎。
现代文：宣和初年，随从进攻西夏仁多泉，开始授予为承信郎。
English: In the first year of the declaration of peace, he followed the attack on Western Xia and Rintao Quan, and began to be awarded as Chengxin Lang.

古文：平郓州贼李太及河朔、山东武胡群寇，功最，进武德郎。
现代文：平定郓州贼盗李太以及河朔、山东武胡群盗，功劳最大，进为武德郎。
English: He made the greatest contribution to the pacification of the Bozhou bandit Li Tai and the Heshuo and Shandong Wuhu bandits, and was promoted to Wudelang.

古文：靖康元年，以守东明县功，转武功大夫。
现代文：靖康元年，因为守卫东明县有功，转为武功大夫。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingkang, because of his meritorious service in guarding Dongming County, he was promoted to doctor of military valor.

古文：金人攻太原，城守，命制置副使种师中往援，屯榆次。
现代文：金军进攻太原，宋军固守城池，朝廷命令制置副使种师中率部前往增援，驻扎在榆次。
English: The gold army attacked Taiyuan, the Song army held fast to Chengchi, and the imperial court ordered the establishment of a deputy envoy division to go to reinforcement, stationed in Ganzi.

古文：金人以数万骑压之。
现代文：金朝用数万骑兵前来进攻。
English: The Kim dynasty attacked with tens of thousands of cavalry.

古文：俊时为队将，进击，杀伤甚众，获马千匹，请乘胜要战。
现代文：张俊当时是队将，率队进击，杀伤敌人甚多，缴获马匹一千匹，请求乘胜邀击敌人。
English: At that time, Zhang Jun was the team leader, led the team to attack, killed and injured a lot of enemies, captured a thousand horses, and asked to take advantage of the victory and invite the enemy to attack.

古文：师中以日不利，急令退保。
现代文：种师中认为时日不利于作战，急忙下令后退到榆次自保。
English: The division commander thought that the time was not favorable for the battle, and hastily ordered to retreat to 次 for self-protection.

古文：金人谍俊计不行，悉兵合围，攻益急。
现代文：金军侦察到张俊的计谋不被采纳，发动全部兵力包围榆次，进攻更急迫。
English: The Chinese army detected that Zhang Jun's stratagem would not be accepted, and launched an all-out encirclement. The attack became even more urgent.

古文：榆次破，师中死之。
现代文：榆次被攻破，种师中战死。
English: He was defeated three times, and died in battle in the middle of the seed division.

古文：俊与所部数百人突围而出，且行且战，至乌河川，再与敌遇，斩五百级。
现代文：张俊率所部数百人突围而出，边行边战，来到乌河川，再次同敌遭遇，斩杀敌人五百人。
English: Zhang Jun led hundreds of people from the headquarters to break out of the encirclement, fighting side by side, came to Wuhe River, encountered the enemy again, and killed five hundred enemies.

古文：金人围汴京，高宗时为兵马大元帅，俊勒兵从信德守臣梁扬祖勤王。
现代文：金兵包围汴京，高宗当时是兵马大元帅，张俊率兵随从信德守将梁扬祖前往救援。
English: Gold soldiers surrounded Beijing. Gaozong was the grand marshal of the Terracotta Army at the time, and Zhang Jun and his soldiers followed Liang Yangzu, the religious leader, to the rescue.

古文：高宗见俊英伟，擢元帅府后军统制，累功转荣州刺史。
现代文：高宗看见张俊像貌雄伟英武，擢升他为元帅府后军统制，累次立功转任荣州刺史。
English: Gao Zong saw Zhang Jun as a majestic and valiant man, promoted him to marshal of the rear army, and successively transferred to the post of Rongzhou chief historian.

古文：建炎元年正月，从高宗至东平府。
现代文：建炎元年正月，随从高宗到东平府。
English: In the first month of the first year of Jianyan, he followed Gaozong to Dongpingfu.

古文：时剧贼李昱据兖州，命俊为都统制讨之。
现代文：当时一股势力强盛的盗贼李昱占据兖州，命令张俊为都统制率兵前去讨伐。
English: At that time, a powerful thief, Li Yan, occupied Zhangzhou and ordered Zhang Jun to lead an army to fight for the central government.

古文：与数骑突围挠战，诸军争奋，贼遂歼。
现代文：率领数名骑兵突入敌阵奋勇战斗，各军将士争相奋击，于是歼灭贼盗。
English: He led several cavalrymen to rush into the enemy line and fight bravely. The soldiers of each army fought against each other, and the thieves were annihilated.

古文：进桂州团练使，寻加贵州防御使。
现代文：晋升为桂州团练使，不久又加任贵州防御使。
English: He was promoted to the Guizhou regimental training envoy, and was soon appointed the Guizhou defense envoy.

古文：中书舍人张澂，自汴京赍蜡诏，命高宗以兵付副帅还京，高宗问大计，俊曰： 此金人诈谋尔。
现代文：中书舍人张贗，从汴京带来钦宗藏在蜡丸中的诏书，命令高宗把军队交给副元帅返回京城，高宗询问计策，张俊说 ：这是金朝诡诈的阴谋。
English: Zhang Qian, the person in charge of Chinese literature, brought Qinzong's imperial edict, which was hidden in a ball of wax, from Beijing. He ordered Gao Zong to hand over the army to the vice-marshal and return to Beijing. Gao Zong inquired about the strategy. Zhang Jun said, "This is a cunning plot of the Kim dynasty."

古文：今大王居外，此天授，岂可徒往？ 因请进兵，高宗许之，遂如济州。
现代文：现在大王身在外面，这正是天赐大王皇位，怎么随便前去？ 请求进兵，高宗答应了他，于是来到济州。
English: Now that the great king is outside, this is the throne of the great king given by heaven, how can he go anywhere? He asked to join the army, and Gaozong agreed, so he came to Jeju.

古文：开启乾龙节，迫夜，有告高宗，欲俟元帅谒香劫以叛。
现代文：庆贺钦宗生日，接近夜晚，有人报告高宗，打算等元帅进香时劫掠叛变。
English: Celebrating the birthday of Qinzong, towards the evening, someone reported to Gaozong that he intended to wait for the marshal to enter the incense to plunder and mutiny.

古文：群议集诸军屯备，俊曰： 元帅不出，奸谋自破。 遂徙州治。
现代文：众人计议集中各军加强戒备，张俊说： 元帅不出去，奸谋自然就会破灭。 
English: Zhang Jun said: "If the marshal does not go out, the conspiracy will naturally collapse."

古文：贼术穷，黎明，引军北遁，俊勒兵追杀之。
现代文：于是转移州府所在地。贼盗技穷，黎明时分，引军北逃，张俊率兵把他们追杀。
English: As a result, the location of the state capital was moved. The thieves were poor at stealing and fled north at dawn. Zhang Jun and his soldiers chased and killed them.

古文：进徐州观察使。
现代文：晋升为徐州观察使。
English: Promoted to Xuzhou Observation Envoy.

古文：高宗以俊忠劳日积，迁拱卫大夫。
现代文：高宗因张俊功劳日益增多，升他为拱卫大夫。
English: Due to Zhang Jun's increasing merits, Gao Zong was promoted to the highest rank of Gongwei doctor.

古文：既而汴京破，二帝北迁，人心皇皇，俊恳辞劝进，高宗涕泣不许。
现代文：不久汴京被攻破，徽宗和钦宗被掳北去，人心惶惶不安，张俊恳切劝说高宗即位，高宗流泪不答应。
English: Soon, Shijing was breached, and Huizong and Qinzong were taken captive to the north. People were panicked and anxious. Zhang Jun earnestly persuaded Gao Zong to ascend the throne, but Gao Zong did not agree.

古文：俊曰： 大王皇帝亲弟，人心所归，当天下汹汹，不早正大位，无以称人望。 且白耿南仲奏之，表三上。
现代文：张俊说： 大王是皇帝的亲弟弟，人心归向，正当天下动荡不安时，不早日登上皇位，便难以满足民众的期望。 并且告诉耿南仲上奏劝说，耿南仲三次上奏。
English: Zhang Jun said: The great king is the emperor's own younger brother, the hearts of the people are inclined to him, and when the world is in turmoil, it is difficult to meet the expectations of the people without ascending the throne as soon as possible. And he told Geng Nanzhong to play persuasion, and Geng Nanzhong played three times.

古文：高宗发济州，俊便道扈行。
现代文：高宗离开济州，张俊随从护卫。
English: Gao Zong left Jeju, and Zhang Jun followed the escort.

古文：至应天府，高宗始即位。
现代文：到达应天府，高宗才即帝位。
English: When he reached Yingtianfu, Gao Zongcai became emperor.

古文：初置御营司，以俊为御营前军统制，遣还京迎隆祐太后。
现代文：开始设置御营司，以张俊为御营前军统制，派他回京迎接隆佑太后。
English: He began to set up the Imperial General Headquarters, with Zhang Jun as the commander of the Imperial General Headquarters, and sent him back to Beijing to greet Empress Dowager Longyou.

古文：权秦凤兵马钤辖。
现代文：权充秦凤兵马钤辖。
English: Quanzhong Qin Feng Terracotta Army.

古文：寻奉太后及六宫以归，除带御器械。
现代文：不久迎接太后和六宫归来，任带御器械。
English: Soon to welcome the return of the Empress Dowager and the Sixth Prince, let them bring their instruments.

古文：时江、淮群盗蜂起，俊讨杜用于淮宁，赵万、郭青于镇江，陈通于杭州，蒋和尚等于兰溪，皆平之。
现代文：当时江淮地区盗贼蜂起，张俊在淮宁征讨杜用，在镇江讨伐赵万、郭青，在杭州征讨陈通，在兰溪征讨蒋和尚等，都一一平定。
English: At that time, thieves in the Jianghuai region revolted. Zhang Jun in Huaining recruited Du Ying, Zhao Wan and Guo Qing in Zhenjiang, Chen Tong in Hangzhou, and Chiang Monk in Lanxi, and all of them were defeated.

古文：落阶官，除正任观察使。
现代文：解除他的虚衔，任真正的观察使。
English: Strip him of his bogus title and let a real watchdog take over.

古文：二年，升秦凤路马步军副总管，寻破秀州贼数万，缚徐明斩之。
现代文：建炎二年，升任秦凤路马步军副总管，不久击破秀州贼盗数万人，俘虏徐明将他斩首。
English: In the second year of Jianyan, he was promoted to the vice-chief of the Qin Feng Lu horse-walking army, and soon defeated tens of thousands of thieves in Xiuzhou, and the prisoner Xu Ming beheaded him.

古文：进武宁军承宣使。
现代文：进为武宁军承宣使。
English: He became the envoy of the Wu Ning Army.

古文：帝如扬州，召诸将议恢复，俊曰： 今敌势方张，宜且南渡，据江为险；练兵政，安人心，俟国势定，大举未晚。 俊又请移左藏库于镇江。
现代文：高宗到扬州，召集众将商议恢复中原事宜，张俊说： 当今敌人势力正处于强大之时，应该暂且南渡长江，占据长江作为天险，整军练兵，安定人心，等到国家形势安定下来后，再大举行动不晚。 张俊又请求把左藏库移到镇江。
English: Gao Zong went to Yangzhou to convene a group of generals to discuss the restoration of the Central Plains. Zhang Jun said: Today, when the enemy forces are strong, it is necessary to temporarily cross the Yangtze River to the south, occupy the Yangtze River as a natural hazard, reorganize the army, train soldiers, and stabilize people's hearts. After the national situation has stabilized, it is not too late to act in a big way. Zhang Jun also requested that the Zuo repository be moved to Zhenjiang.

古文：既而敌掩至，已逼近甸，俊亟奏饬甲乘，从帝如临安。
现代文：不久敌军突然来到，已逼近城郊，张俊急忙上奏整饰车马，随从高宗逃到临安。
English: Not long after, the enemy suddenly arrived and was already approaching the outskirts of the city. Zhang Jun hurriedly played the tune of the car and horse, and fled from Gaozong to Lin'an.

古文：苗傅、刘正彦反，俊时屯兵吴江县。
现代文：苗傅、刘正彦反叛，张俊当时率兵屯驻在吴江县。
English: Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyan rebelled, and Zhang Jun was stationed in Wujiang County at that time.

古文：傅等矫诏加俊捧日、天武四厢都指挥使，以三百人赴秦凤，命他将领余兵。
现代文：苗傅等伪作诏令加张俊为捧日、天武四厢都指挥使，率三百人赶往秦凤，并命令其他将领率领剩下的军队。
English: Miao Fu and others forged the imperial edict, and Zhang Jun led 300 men to Qin Feng, and ordered other generals to lead the remaining troops.

古文：俊知其伪，拒不受。
现代文：张俊知道诏令是假的，拒不接受。
English: Zhang Jun knew that the edict was fake and refused to accept it.

古文：三军汹汹，俊谕之曰： 当诣张侍郎求决。 即引所部八千人至平江。
现代文：全军上下人心惶恐，张俊劝说他们说： 应该到张浚那里请求决定。 于是立即率领所部八千人到平江。
English: The whole army was in panic, and Zhang Jun persuaded them that they should go to Zhang Jun to ask for a decision, so he immediately led eight thousand people from the headquarters to Pingjiang.

古文：张浚语俊以傅等欲危社稷，泣数行下，俊大恸。
现代文：张浚对张俊说及苗傅等人打算危害国家，涕泪纵横而下，张俊也大哭。
English: Zhang Jun burst into tears when Zhang Jun told him that Miao Fu and others intended to harm the country. Zhang Jun also burst into tears.

古文：浚谕以决策起兵问罪，俊泣拜，且曰： 此须侍郎济以机术，毋惊动乘舆。
现代文：张浚晓谕他以决定起兵反叛之罪讨伐苗傅，张俊哭泣下拜，并说 ：这必须你用计谋辅助，不要惊动皇上。 
English: Zhang Jun told him to punish Miao Fu with the crime of deciding to raise an army to rebel, Zhang Jun wept and bowed down, and said: "You must use your strategy to help, don't alarm the emperor."

古文：吕颐浩至，俊见之，亦涕泣曰： 今日惟以一死报国。 刘光世以所部至，俊释旧憾。
现代文：吕颐浩到，张俊会见他，也流泪说 ：今天只有一死报效国家了。 刘光世率领所部到来，张俊同他冰释前嫌。
English: When Lv Yinghao arrived, Zhang Jun met him and also shed tears, saying, "Today, there is only one death to repay the country." Liu Guangshi led the headquarters to arrive, and Zhang Jun and he were relieved.

古文：韩世忠来自海上，俊借一军与之俱。
现代文：韩世忠从海上来到，张俊军一部同他俱至。
English: Han Shizhong came from the sea, and a part of Zhang Jun's army came with him.

古文：世忠为前军，俊以精兵翼之，光世次之。
现代文：韩世忠为前锋，张俊率精兵作为两翼，刘光世随后。
English: Han Shizhong is the striker, Zhang Jun leads the elite soldiers as the two wings, Liu Guangshi follows.

古文：战于临平，傅等兵败，开城以出。
现代文：在临平展开激战，苗傅等失败，打开城门逃跑。
English: In Linping, a fierce battle was waged. Miao Fu and others failed and opened the city gate to escape.

古文：世忠、俊、光世入城，见于内殿，帝嘉劳久之，拜镇西军节度使、御前右军都统制，寻为浙东制置使。
现代文：韩世忠、张俊、刘光世进入城中，在内殿拜见高宗，高宗称赞慰劳了很长时间，拜张俊为镇西军节度使、御前右军都统制，不久又任浙东制置使。
English: Han Shizhong, Zhang Jun, and Liu Guangxing entered the city and paid homage to Gaozong in the inner hall. Gaozong praised and consoled them for a long time. Zhang Jun was appointed as the festival envoy of the Western Zhen army, the right army of the imperial court, and soon he was appointed as the envoy of the Eastern Zhejiang army.

古文：金人分兵深入，渡江攻浙，杜充弃建康，韩世忠自镇江退保江阴。
现代文：金兵分路深入，渡过长江进攻浙江，杜充放弃建康，韩世忠从镇江退保江阴。
English: Jin Bing branched deep, crossed the Yangtze River to attack Zhejiang, Duchong abandoned Jiankang, and Han Shizhong withdrew from the Zhenjiang River to defend Jiangyin.

古文：帝如明州，俊自越州引兵至。
现代文：高宗到明州，张俊从越州率兵赶到。
English: Gao Zong went to Mingzhou, and Zhang Jun arrived from Yuezhou with an army.

古文：兀术攻临安，帝御楼船如温州，留俊于明州以拒敌。
现代文：兀进攻临安，高宗乘坐楼船到温州，留下张俊在明州抵御敌人。
English: attacked Lin'an, Gaozong took a barge to Wenzhou, leaving Zhang Jun to fend off the enemy in Mingzhou.

古文：帝赐亲札曰： 朕非卿，则倡义谁先；卿舍朕，则前功俱废。
现代文：高宗赐给他亲笔书信说 ：我没有你，那么谁肯率先倡议早登帝位；你没有我，那么将前功尽弃。
English: Gaozong gave him a letter in his own handwriting, saying: "If I don't have you, then who will take the lead in advocating early accession to the throne; if you don't have me, then you will abandon your previous achievements."

古文：宜戮力共扞敌兵，一战成功，当封王爵。 癸卯除夕，金兵至城下，俊使统制刘宝与战，兵少却，其将党用、丘横死之，于是统制杨沂中、田师中、统领赵密皆殊死战。
现代文：应该努力抵御敌军，一旦成功，我将封你王位。 这年除夕，金军来到城下，张俊派统制刘宝同敌交战，宋军稍稍后退，部将党用、丘横战死，于是统制杨沂中、田师中、统领赵密都殊死搏斗。
English: This New Year's Eve, the Golden Army came to the city, the Zhang Jun faction commanded Liu Bao to fight with the enemy, the Song Army retreated a little, and the commander of the party and the hill died in the battle, so the command Yang Xizhong, Tian Shizhong, and the commander Zhao Midu fought to the death.

古文：沂中舍舟登岸力战，殿帅李质以班直来助，守臣刘洪道率州兵射其旁，大破之，杀数千人。
现代文：杨沂中舍船登岸苦战，殿前司将领李质率领班直前来助战，明州守将刘洪道率领州兵在旁边射击敌人，大败金军，杀死数千人。
English: Yang Xizhong boarded the ship in the middle of the night and fought a hard battle. Li Qian, the commander of the front of the palace, led the squad to come to the aid of the battle. Liu Hongdao, the commander of the Ming State, led the National Guard to shoot the enemy, defeated the gold army, and killed thousands of people.

古文：金呼人至砦计事，俊令小校往。
现代文：金兵呼叫派人到营中议事，张俊派一小校前往。
English: Jin Bing called and sent someone to the middle of the battalion to discuss, Zhang Jun sent a small school to go.

古文：金人与语，欲如越州请降，俊拒之。
现代文：金兵同他说，打算到越州请求投降，张俊拒绝了这一要求。
English: Jin Bing told him that he intended to go to Yuezhou to request surrender, but Zhang Jun refused this request.

古文：戒将士毋骄惰，虑敌必再至，下令清野，多以轻舟伏弩，闭关自守。
现代文：戒令将士不要骄傲轻敌，考虑敌人必会重来，下令坚壁清野，多用小船装载强弩，闭关自守。
English: He ordered the soldiers not to be proud and despise the enemy, and to consider that the enemy would surely come again. He ordered that the fields should be kept clear, and that small boats should be used to load strong sails, and that the gates should be closed for self-defense.

古文：四年正旦，忽西风起，金人乘之，果复攻明州。
现代文：建炎四年正月初一，忽起西风，金军乘此机会，果然又向明州发起进攻。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of Jianyan, the west wind suddenly arose, and the Chinese army took this opportunity to launch an attack on Mingzhou.

古文：俊与刘洪道坐城楼上，遣兵掩击，杀伤大当。
现代文：张俊和刘洪道坐在城楼上，派兵掩击金军，双方伤亡大体相当。
English: Zhang Jun and Liu Hongdao sat on the castle tower and sent soldiers to cover the gold army. Both sides suffered roughly the same number of casualties.

古文：金人奔北，死于江者无数，夜拔砦去，屯余姚，且请济师于兀术。
现代文：金军奔逃，溺水死于江中的不计其数，连夜拔营撤走，屯驻余姚，并且向兀请求增兵。
English: The Jin army fled, drowning countless people in the river. They withdrew their camp overnight, stationed themselves in Yuyao, and requested more soldiers from Zhai.

古文：后七日，敌再至，俊引兵趋入台州，明州居民去者十七八。
现代文：过了七天，金军再次来到，张俊率兵进入台州，明州居民逃走的十占七八。
English: Seven days later, the Chinese army came again. Zhang Jun and his soldiers entered Taizhou. Seventy-eight out of ten residents of Mingzhou fled.

古文：未几，江浙群盗蜂起，授俊两浙西路、江南东路制置使，以所部招收群盗，命后军统制陈思恭隶之，且令两浙宣抚使周望以兵属俊，刘光世、韩世忠之外，诸将皆受节度。
现代文：不久，江、浙一带盗贼蜂起，朝廷授张俊为两浙西路、江南东路制置使，率领所部招降群盗，并命令后军统制陈思恭隶属他指挥，还下令两浙宣抚使周望以所部兵隶属张俊，除刘光世、韩世忠以外，众将都由张俊指挥。
English: Not long after, the bandits in the areas of Jiangsu and Zhejiang revolted. The imperial court appointed Zhang Jun as the commander of the two western routes of Zhejiang and the eastern route of the south of Jiangsu, and he led the headquarters to recruit the bandits. He also ordered the commander of the rear army, Chen Sikyong, to be under his command. He also ordered the two Zhejiang envoys, Zhou Wang and the headquarters soldiers to be under Zhang Jun. Except for Liu Guangshi and Han Shizhong, all the generals were commanded by Zhang Jun.

古文：六月，改御前五军为神武军，俊即本军为神武右军都统制，除检校少保、定江昭庆军节度使。
现代文：六月，朝廷改御前五军为神武军，张俊部改为神武右军，他本人任都统制，升为检校少保、定江昭庆军节度使。
English: In June, the imperial court changed the Imperial Five Armies to the Jinwu Army, and Zhang Junbu was changed to the Jinwu Right Army. He himself was put in charge of the capital and promoted to the junior guard of the inspection school and the festival envoy of the Dingjiang Zhaoqing Army.

古文：十月，浙西群盗悉平，改江南招讨使。
现代文：十月，浙西群盗全部平定，张俊改任江南招讨使。
English: In October, all the bandits in western Zhejiang were subdued, and Zhang Jun was appointed as the recruiting envoy to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：绍兴元年，帝至会稽。
现代文：绍兴元年，高宗到会稽。
English: In the first year of Shaoxing, Gaozong went to the auditorium.

古文：时金人残乱之余，孔彦舟据武陵，张用据襄汉；李成尤悍，强据江、淮、湖湘十余州，连兵数万，有席卷东南意，多造符谶蛊惑中外，围江州久未解，时方患之。
现代文：当时正值金军残害蹂躏之后，孔彦舟占据武陵，张用占据襄汉；李成尤其精悍，强行占据江淮、湖湘地区十余个州郡，合兵数万人，有席卷东南地区的意图，大肆散布符咒谶言迷惑煽动人心，包围江州长时不解围，当时朝廷正为此感到忧虑。
English: At that time, after the devastation of the Golden Army, Kong Yanzhou occupied Wuling, Zhang Ying occupied Xiang Han; Li Cheng was particularly brave, forcibly occupied more than ten states and counties in the Jianghuai and Hunan regions, with tens of thousands of soldiers, with the intention of sweeping the southeastern region, and widely disseminated spells and incantations to confuse and incite the hearts of the people, and surrounded the governor of the river without breaking the siege. At that time, the court was worried about this.

古文：范宗尹请遣将致讨，俊慨然请行，遂改江、淮路招讨使。
现代文：范宗尹请求派遣将领前去征讨，张俊慷慨请战，于是改任江、淮路招讨使。
English: Fan Zongyin requested the dispatch of generals to go to collect, Zhang Jun generously requested war, so he was reassigned to Jiang and Huai Road to collect.

古文：成党马进在筠州。
现代文：李成党羽马进在筠州。
English: Licheng Party's feather horse enters in Ganzhou.

古文：豫章介江、筠之间，俊闻命就道，急趋豫章，且曰： 我已得洪州，破贼决矣。 乃敛兵，若无人者，金鼓不动，令将士登城者斩。
现代文：豫章介于江、筠州之间，张俊接到命令就率部出发，急赴豫章，并且说： 我已经得到洪州，击破贼寇是必然的。 乃收缩兵力进入城中，好像城中无人，金鼓不动，命令将士有登上城墙的斩首。
English: Yuzhang is located between the Yangtze River and Luzhou. Upon receiving the order, Zhang Junqu led his troops to set out and rushed to Yuzhang, saying, "I have obtained Hongzhou, and it is inevitable to defeat the bandits." He entered the city with a reduced force, as if there was no one in the city, and the golden drum did not move. He ordered to behead the soldiers who climbed the city wall.

古文：居月余，进以大书牒来索战，俊以细书状报之，贼以俊为怯。
现代文：居留一个多月，马进送来一封很大的书信要求决战，张俊写了一封很小的书信回答，马进以为张俊害怕。
English: After staying for more than a month, Ma Jin sent a large letter to Mao demanding a decisive battle. Zhang Jun wrote a very small letter in reply. Ma Jin thought Zhang Jun was afraid.

古文：俊谍知贼怠，乃议战。
现代文：张俊侦察到贼众戒备松懈，才准备作战。
English: Zhang Jun only prepared to fight when he detected that the bandits' defenses were lax.

古文：岳飞为先锋，杨沂中由上流径绝生米渡，出贼不意，追奔七十里，至筠州。
现代文：岳飞为先锋，杨沂中从上游断绝生米渡，出敌不意，追击奔逃的敌众七十里，到达筠州。
English: With Yuefei as the vanguard, Yang Yizhong cut off the rice crossing from the upper reaches, caught the enemy by surprise, chased the fleeing enemy for seventy miles, and reached Zhangzhou.

古文：贼背筠河而阵，俊用杨沂中计，亲以步兵当其前，精骑数千授沂中及陈思恭，俾从山后夹击，以午为期。
现代文：贼寇背靠筠河布列阵势，张俊采纳杨沂中的计策，亲率步兵在敌阵对面进攻，把精锐骑兵数千人交给杨沂中和陈思恭，让他们从山后夹击敌人，以中午为期限。
English: Thieves and robbers with their backs to the Li River breached the line of battle. Zhang Jun adopted Yang Yuzhong's strategy. He led his infantry to attack on the opposite side of the enemy line, and handed over thousands of elite cavalry to Yang Yuzhong and Chen Sikyong, allowing them to attack the enemy from behind the mountain, with a deadline of noon.

古文：俊与贼鏖战至午，精骑自山驰下，贼骇乱退走，大败。
现代文：张俊同贼寇激战到中午，杨沂中、陈思恭率领精锐骑兵从山下急驰而下，贼众惊骇混乱退走，大败。
English: Zhang Jun and the bandits fought fiercely until noon. Yang Yizhong and Chen Siqion led the elite cavalry to rush down from the bottom of the mountain. The bandits retreated in shock and confusion, defeated.

古文：既复筠州、临江军，捷奏，帝赐御笔，谓： 宜乘贼势已衰，当官军已振，驱除剿戮，速收全功。 俊未拜亲诏，已追至北奉新楼子庄。
现代文：收复筠州、临江军之后，捷报上奏朝廷，高宗赐亲笔书信，说 ：应当乘贼众势力已衰弱之际，官军士气振奋之时，长驱铲除剿灭贼寇，迅速争取彻底胜利。 张俊没有等到拜受高宗亲自书写的诏令，就已经追击贼众到北奉新楼子庄。
English: After the recapture of Bozhou and the Linjiang Army, the victory report was reported to the imperial court, and Gao Zong gave a personal letter, saying: It is necessary to take advantage of the time when the power of the thieves has weakened, when the morale of the government army is uplifted, to drive out and exterminate the thieves, and quickly strive for complete victory. Zhang Jun did not wait to receive the edict written by Gao Zong himself, he had already chased the thieves to Beibong New Township.

古文：贼党商元据草山，挟险设伏，俊遣步兵从间道直趋山椒，杀伏夺险，乘胜追至江州。
现代文：贼寇党羽商元占据草山，依凭险要地形布设埋伏，张俊派遣步兵从小道直奔山上，杀死伏兵夺得险隘，乘胜追击至江州。
English: The bandit merchant Yu Yuan occupied Caoshan, relying on the dangerous terrain to set up an ambush. Zhang Jun dispatched infantry from the trail straight to the mountain, killed the ambush, captured the narrow passage, and chased the victory to Jiangzhou.

古文：成势迫，绝江而遁，号俊为 张铁山 。
现代文：李成形势危急，渡江而逃，称呼张俊为 张铁山 。
English: Li Cheng was in a critical situation and fled across the river, calling Zhang Jun as Zhang Tie Shan.

古文：复江州。
现代文：张俊收复江州。
English: Zhang Jun recovered Jiangzhou.

古文：已而兴国军等处群盗闻俊兵至，皆遁去。
现代文：不久兴国军等处群盗听说张俊率兵来到，都逃走。
English: Soon after, a group of thieves from the Xingguo Army and other places heard that Zhang Jun and his soldiers had arrived, and they all fled.

古文：俊引兵渡江至黄梅县，亲与成战。
现代文：张俊率兵渡江到黄梅县，亲自同李成交战。
English: Zhang Jun led his soldiers across the river to Huangmei County and personally fought with Li Cheng.

古文：成惩奉新失险之败，据石矢坡，凭山以木石投人。
现代文：李成接受奉新丧失险隘失败的教训，占据石幢坡，凭借山险用木石滚压官军。
English: Li Cheng accepted the lesson of the failure of the narrow loss of Bongxin, occupied the stone slope, and used the mountain danger to roll the official army with wood and stone.

古文：俊先遣游卒进退，若争险状以诳贼，俊亲冒矢石，帅众攻险，贼众数万俱溃，马进为追兵所杀，成北走降刘豫，诸郡悉平。
现代文：张俊先派散兵前进，假做急夺险隘的样子以迷惑敌人，自己亲自冒着箭矢滚石，率众攻取险隘，贼众数万人全部崩溃，马进被追兵杀死，李成逃到北方投降刘豫，各郡全部平定。
English: Zhang Junxian sent the scattered soldiers to advance, pretending to be in a hurry to capture the narrow pass in order to confuse the enemy. He personally risked the arrow rolling stone and led the crowd to capture the narrow pass. The tens of thousands of thieves all collapsed, Ma Jin was killed by the pursuing soldiers, Li Cheng fled to the north to surrender to Liu Yu, and all counties were pacified.

古文：拜太尉。
现代文：朝廷拜张俊为太尉。
English: The imperial court promoted Zhang Jun to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：四年十月，金人与刘豫分道入侵。
现代文：绍兴四年十月，金朝和刘豫分兵数道入侵。
English: In October of the fourth year of Shaoxing, the Kim dynasty and Liu Yu's troops invaded several provinces.

古文：先是谍至，举朝震恐，或请他幸。
现代文：开始消息传来，举朝震惊恐慌，有人请求高宗逃避到其他地方。
English: When the news first came, the whole country was shocked and panicked. Some people asked Gao Zong to escape to other places.

古文：俊谓赵鼎曰： 避将何之？
现代文：张俊对赵鼎说： 准备逃避到哪里去呢？
English: Zhang Jun said to Zhao Ding: Where are you going to escape to?

古文：惟向前进一步，庶可脱。
现代文：只有向前进一步，才能免除祸难。
English: It is only by moving forward that we can avoid disaster.

古文：当聚天下兵守平江，徐为计。 鼎曰： 公言避非策，是也；以天下兵守一州，非也。
现代文：应当集结天下的兵力守卫平江，慢慢图谋对付敌人的计策。 赵鼎说 ：你说逃避不是良策，是对的；但用天下所有的兵力守卫一州，又不对。
English: It is necessary to gather the world's military forces to guard the Pingjiang River, and slowly devise strategies to deal with the enemy.Zhao Ding said: You are right to say that escape is not a good strategy; but it is not right to use all the world's military forces to guard one state.

古文：公但坚前议足矣。 遂以俊为两浙西路、江南东路宣抚使，屯建康。
现代文：你只管坚持前面议论就足够了。 于是任命张俊为两浙西路、江南东路宣抚使，屯驻建康。
English: It is enough for you to adhere to the previous discussion. Therefore, Zhang Jun was appointed as the envoy of the two western Zhejiang roads and the eastern Jiangnan road, stationed in Jiankang.

古文：既而改淮西宣抚使。
现代文：不久改任淮西宣抚使。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Huaxi Proclamation Envoy.

古文：濒江相距逾月，敌不得入。
现代文：濒临长江同敌人相持超过一个月，敌人终于没能南进。
English: On the edge of the Yangtze River, they held out against the enemy for more than a month, and the enemy was finally unable to advance south.

古文：俊遣张宗颜潜渡至六合，出其背。
现代文：张俊派张宗颜悄悄渡江到六合，出敌背后。
English: Zhang Jun sent Zhang Zongyan to cross the river quietly to Liuhe, behind the enemy.

古文：敌将引去，俊继遣王进曰： 敌既无留心，必迳渡淮去，可速及其未济击之。 进往，敌果北渡，遂薄诸淮，大败之，获其酋程师回、张延寿以献。
现代文：敌军准备退走，张俊又派王进说： 敌军既然已经无心留下，必然径直渡过淮河北去，应立即在其没有渡河时攻击它。 王进前往，敌军果然渡河，于是在淮河向敌人发起进攻，大败敌军，俘虏敌将程师回、张延寿献给朝廷。
English: As the enemy army was preparing to retreat, Zhang Jun sent Wang Jin to say, "Since the enemy army has no intention of staying, it must cross the Huai River to the north directly, and it should be attacked immediately if it does not cross the river." Wang Jin went to the river, the enemy army did cross the river, and then launched an attack on the enemy in the Huai River, defeated the enemy army, captured the enemy and presented Cheng Shihai and Zhang Yanshou to the imperial court.

古文：五年，刘麟入寇，俊与杨沂中合兵拒于泗州。
现代文：绍兴五年，刘麟率兵入寇，张俊和杨沂中合兵在泗州抵御。
English: In the fifth year of Shaoxing, Liu Lin led an army to invade, and Zhang Jun and Yang Hui joined forces to resist in Zhangzhou.

古文：六年，改崇信、奉宁军节度使。
现代文：绍兴六年，张俊改为崇信、奉宁军节度使。
English: Six years after the founding of Shaoxing, Zhang Jun was appointed as the military envoy to the Song Festival of the Chongxin and Fengning armies.

古文：刘麟兵十余万犯濠、寿，诏并以淮西属俊，杨存中亦听节制，与俊合兵拒敌。
现代文：刘麟率兵十余万进犯濠、寿州，朝廷诏令以淮西隶属张俊，杨存中也听从他指挥，同张俊合兵抵御敌人。
English: Liu Lin led more than a hundred thousand soldiers to invade Handan and Shoushou. The imperial court issued a decree that Huaxi belonged to Zhang Jun. Yang Cun also obeyed his command and joined forces with Zhang Jun to resist the enemy.

古文：俊分遣存中与张宗颜、王玮、田师中等，自定远军次越家坊，遇刘猊左右军，击走之。
现代文：张俊分别派遣杨存中和张宗颜、王玮、田师中等人，从定远军到赵家坊，遇到刘猊左右军，将其击退。
English: Zhang Jun dispatched Yang Cunzhong and Zhang Zongyan, Wang Qian and Tian Shi, respectively, from the Dingyuan Army to Zhaojiafang, encountered Liu Qian's left and right armies, and repulsed them.

古文：俊率大军鼓行而前，至李家湾遇猊大兵，与战，杀获略尽，降者万余人，猊仅以身免。
现代文：张俊率领大军击鼓前进，到达李家湾同刘猊大部队遭遇，双方交战，刘猊军全军覆没，投降的达到一万多人，刘猊只身逃脱。
English: Zhang Jun led a large army of drummers forward, arrived at Lijiawan and encountered Liu Ye's large army, the two sides fought, Liu Ye's entire army was destroyed, more than ten thousand people surrendered, Liu Ye escaped alone.

古文：拜少保，加镇洮、崇信、奉宁军节度使。
现代文：朝廷拜张俊为少保，加镇洮、崇信、奉宁军节度使。
English: The imperial court asked Zhang Jun to serve as a minor guard, and added Zhenqi, Chongxin, and Bongning Army as festival envoys.

古文：帝曰： 卿议论持重，深达敌情；兼闻挽强之士数万，报国如此，朕复何虑。 又曰： 群臣谓朕待卿独厚，其仰体眷怀，益思勉励。 
现代文：高宗说： 你的议论持平慎重，深刻了解敌情，统率精锐部队数万人，报效国家像这样，我还有什么忧虑。 又说 ：群臣说我对待你特别优厚，你应该体念我的眷顾关怀，更加努力报效。 
English: Gao Zong said, "I have no worries about your level-headed and prudent speech, deep understanding of the enemy's situation, commanding tens of thousands of elite troops, and serving the country like this." He also said, "The ministers said that I treated you particularly well, you should bear in mind my care and concern, and work harder to repay the favor."

古文：七年，改淮南西路宣抚使，置司盱眙。
现代文：绍兴七年，张俊改任淮南西路宣抚使，把宣抚司设在盱眙。
English: In the seventh year of Shaoxing, Zhang Jun was reappointed as the propaganda envoy of Huainan West Road, and the propaganda department was set up in Shao.

古文：俊与韩世忠入见，议移屯。
现代文：张俊和韩世忠入朝觐见高宗，计议转移防地。
English: Zhang Jun and Han Shizhong went to see Gaozong at the imperial court and discussed the transfer of the garrison.

古文：秦桧奏： 臣尝语世忠、俊，陛下倚此二大将，譬如两虎，固当各守藩篱，使寇不敢近。 帝曰： 正如左右手，岂可一手不尽力邪？ 命俊自盱眙屯庐州。
现代文：秦桧上奏 ：臣曾经说韩世忠、张俊，陛下依赖这两位大将，譬如两只猛虎，本来应当各自守卫国家门户，使敌人不敢逼近。 高宗说： 他们正如左右两手，怎能一手不尽力呢？ 命令张俊从盱眙移屯庐州。
English: Qin Yu's report: The minister once said of Han Shizhong and Zhang Jun, "Your majesty relies on these two generals, like two fierce tigers, and they should have each guarded the country's gate so that the enemy would not dare to approach." Gao Zong said, "They are like the right and left hands, how can they not do their best with one hand?" He ordered Zhang Jun to move from Handan to Danzhou.

古文：八年，金人请寝兵，许之。
现代文：绍兴八年，金朝请求休战，宋朝答应了。
English: In the eighth year of Shaoxing, the Kim dynasty requested a truce, and the Song dynasty agreed.

古文：赐俊 安民靖难功臣 ，拜少傅。
现代文：高宗赐张俊为 安民靖难功臣 ，拜官少傅。
English: Gao Zong gave Zhang Jun the title of "Minister of Peace and Tranquility" and "Minor Teacher."

古文：九年冬，金复渝盟，再破河南，图顺昌府，命俊策应刘锜。
现代文：绍兴九年冬，金朝又毁弃盟约，再次攻破河南，图谋攻取顺昌府，命令张俊率兵策应刘钅奇。
English: In the winter of the ninth year of Shaoxing, the Kim dynasty once again abandoned the alliance, invaded Henan again, attempted to capture Shunchangfu, and ordered Zhang Jun to lead the troops to meet Liu Bingqi.

古文：俊督军渡江，金人引退。
现代文：张俊督促军队渡过长江，金军退走。
English: Zhang Jun urged the army to cross the Yangtze River, and the Chinese army retreated.

古文：继而金人三路都统自东、南两京分道来侵，抵亳州北渡河，俊收宿、亳诸军击之，尽复卫真、鹿邑等地，师还。
现代文：不久金朝三路都统从东、南两京分路前来侵犯，进抵亳州北边渡过黄河，张俊派宿、亳各军出击，全部收复卫真、鹿邑等地，回师。
English: Soon, all three routes of the Kim dynasty invaded from the eastern and southern branches of Beijing, and arrived in the north of Luzhou and crossed the Yellow River. Zhang Jun sent troops to attack, and they all recovered Weizhen, Ruyi and other places, and returned to the division.

古文：十年，郦琼在亳州，俊以大军至城父，都统制王德下符离，乘胜趋亳与俊合。
现代文：绍兴十年，郦琼在亳州，张俊率大军到达城父，都统制王德攻占符离，乘胜直趋亳州同张俊会合。
English: In the 10th year of Shaoxing, Gong Qiong was in Ganzhou. Zhang Jun led a large army to arrive at the city's center. Wang De took control of the city, captured Fuli, and took advantage of the victory to head straight to Ganzhou to meet with Zhang Jun.

古文：俊引军入城，金人弃城遁，父老列香花迎俊，遂复亳州，留统制宋超守之。
现代文：张俊率兵入城，金军弃城逃遁，父老百姓排列香案鲜花迎接张俊，于是收复亳州，留下统制宋超镇守。
English: Zhang Jun led the troops into the city, the gold army abandoned the city and fled, and the people lined up to welcome Zhang Jun with incense and flowers, thus recovering Zhangzhou and leaving Song Chao, the ruler of the town, in charge.

古文：俊引军还寿春，进少师，封济国公。
现代文：张俊率军返回寿春，朝廷进他为少师，封济国公。
English: Zhang Jun led the army back to Shouchun, and the imperial court appointed him as a minor teacher, and he became a feudal benefactor.

古文：十一年二月，兀术入合肥，渐攻历阳，江东制置大使叶梦得见俊，请速出军。
现代文：绍兴十一年二月，兀进入合肥，进攻历阳，江东制置大使叶梦得会见张俊，请求迅速出兵。
English: In February of the eleventh year of Shaoxing, Yan entered Hefei and attacked Liyang. Ye Meng, the ambassador of Jiangdong Province, met with Zhang Jun and requested a speedy dispatch of troops.

古文：俊遣兵渡江，谕诸将曰： 先得和州者胜。 王德愿为诸军先，士鼓噪而行。敌已据之，德率众渡采石先登，俊宿中流。
现代文：张俊派兵渡江，对众将说 ：先夺取和州的有赏。 王德愿意作为各军的前锋，士兵鼓噪前进，敌军已经占据和州，王德率部在采石渡江首先登岸，张俊夜宿中游。
English: Zhang Jun sent soldiers to cross the Yangtze River and said to the generals, "There is a reward for taking Wazhou first." Wang De was willing to be the vanguard of the armies, the soldiers advanced noisily, the enemy army had occupied Wazhou, Wang De and his party were the first to land at the quarry crossing the Yangtze River, and Zhang Jun stayed in the middle of the night.

古文：德抵城下，金人退屯昭关。后三日，复败金将韩常于含山。
现代文：王德进抵城下，金军退屯于昭关，三天后，又在含山击破金将韩常军。
English: Wang De entered and arrived under the city, the Jin army retreated to Zhaoguan, and three days later, they defeated the Jin general Han Chang army in Hanshan.

古文：命关师古复巢县，遂复昭关。
现代文：张俊命令关师古收复巢县，于是收复昭关。
English: Zhang Jun ordered Guan Shi Guo to recover Chaozhou County, so he recovered Shouguan.

古文：使左军统制赵密偃兵篁竹，出六丈河以分金势。
现代文：派左军统制赵密在竹林中悄悄行军，出六丈河以分散金军。
English: Zhao Mi, who commanded the left army, quietly marched through the bamboo forest and came out of the Liuzhang River to disperse the gold army.

古文：张守忠以五百骑败金人于全椒。
现代文：张守忠率五百名骑兵在全椒击败金军。
English: Zhang Shouzhong led five hundred cavalrymen to defeat the Golden Army in full pepper.

古文：未几，敌断石梁以拒俊，俊疾作，力疾引众涉流登岸，追击之。
现代文：不久，敌人截断桥梁以抵御张俊，张俊生病，带病率众涉河登岸，追击敌人。
English: Soon, the enemy cut off the bridge to resist Zhang Jun. Zhang Jun fell ill, and many people waded ashore to pursue the enemy.

古文：王德与杨存中、刘锜会兵，败金人于柘皋。
现代文：王德同杨存中、刘钅奇合兵，在柘皋击败金军。
English: Wang De joined forces with Yang Cunzhong and Liu Bingqi to defeat the Golden Army in Handan.

古文：拜枢密使。
现代文：朝廷任命张俊为枢密使。
English: Zhou Bidaibai is a Privy Counsellor.

古文：俊知朝廷欲罢兵，首请纳所统兵。
现代文：张俊了解到朝廷打算罢免各大将兵权，首先请求交还所统辖的兵力。
English: Zhang Jun learned that the imperial court intended to remove the military power of the major generals, and first requested the return of the troops under his jurisdiction.

古文：议赏宿、亳功，俊部将王德、田师中、刘宝、李横、马立、张澥六人同日首受上赏。
现代文：朝廷奖赏宿、亳之战有功人员，张俊部将王德、田师中、刘宝、李横、马立、张氵解六人同一天首先受到重赏。
English: The Imperial Court awards accommodation and meritorious personnel in the Battle of Yunnan. Zhang Junbu, Wang De, Tian Shizhong, Liu Bao, Li Yang, Ma Li and Zhang Yijie were the first to receive the award on the same day.

古文：俊力赞和议，与秦桧意合，言无不从。
现代文：张俊极力赞同与金朝讲和，与秦桧意图相合，对秦桧的言论无不听从。
English: Zhang Jun strongly agreed with the peace talk with the Kim dynasty, which was in line with Qin Hui's intention, and listened to Qin Hui's speech.

古文：荐士大夫监司、郡守者甚众，虽刘子羽自谪籍起家，亦俊力也。
现代文：推荐士大夫担任监司、郡守的有很多人。刘子羽从被贬谪中起家，也是张俊出力的结果。
English: There are many people who recommend Dr. Shi to serve as supervisors and county governors. Liu Zi Yu started from being demoted, which is also the result of Zhang Jun's efforts.

古文：加太傅，封广国公，寻进益国公。
现代文：朝廷加张俊为太傅，封广国公，不久进为益国公。
English: The imperial court promoted Zhang Jun to Taifu, he was given the title of Guangguo Guogong, and soon he was promoted to Yikguogong.

古文：十二年十一月，以殿中侍御史江邈论之，罢为镇洮、宁武、奉宁军节度使，充醴泉观使。
现代文：绍兴十二年十一月，由于殿中侍御史江邈弹劾他，罢免为镇洮、宁武、奉宁军节度使，充任醴泉观使。
English: In November of the 12th year of Shaoxing, due to the impeachment of the palace attendant, Jiang Qi, he was dismissed as the festival envoy of the Zhenqi, Ningwu and Bongning armies, and appointed as the envoy of the Spring Festival.

古文：初，桧以俊助和议，德之，故尽罢诸将，以兵权付俊。
现代文：当初，秦桧因为张俊赞同与金讲和，感激他，因此众将全都罢免，将兵权交给张俊。
English: At first, because Zhang Jun agreed to make peace with Kim and was grateful to him, Qin Hui dismissed all generals and gave military power to Zhang Jun.

古文：岁余，俊无去意，故桧使邈攻之。
现代文：过了一年多时间，张俊没有交出兵权的意思，因此秦桧指使江邈攻击他。
English: After more than a year, Zhang Jun had no intention of handing over military power, so Qin Yu ordered Jiang Yu to attack him.

古文：寻进封清河郡王，奉朝请。
现代文：不久进封为清河郡王奉朝请。
English: Soon to be enthroned as the King of Qinghe County.

古文：十三年，敕修甲第，遣中使就第赐宴，侑以教坊乐部。
现代文：绍兴十三年，诏令为张俊修建府第，派宦官在府中赐宴，以教坊乐部在旁劝酒助兴。
English: In the thirteenth year of Shaoxing, the imperial edict ordered the construction of a residence for Zhang Jun. An eunuch was sent to give a banquet in the residence, and a teacher's club was set up to encourage drinking.

古文：十六年，改镇静江、宁武、静海军。
现代文：绍兴十六年，改为静江、宁武、静海军节度使。
English: In the 16th year of Shaoxing, it was changed to the Jingjiang, Ningwu and Jing Navy Festival Envoy.

古文：二十一年冬，帝幸其第，拜太师，以其侄清海军承宣使子盖为安德军节度使，其他子弟迁秩者十三人。
现代文：绍兴二十一年冬，高宗来到张俊府中，拜他为太师，任命他的侄儿清海军承宣使张子盖为安德军节度使，其余子弟有十三人升官。
English: In the winter of the 21st year of Shaoxing, Gaozong came to Zhang Junfu Middle School, worshiped him as the grandmaster, appointed his nephew Qing Navy Commander Zhang Ziguai as the festival envoy of the Andean Army, and the rest of his children were promoted to thirteen.

古文：南渡后，俊握兵最早，屡立战功，与韩世忠、刘锜、岳飞并为名将，世称张、韩、刘、岳。
现代文：宋朝南渡以后，张俊最早掌握兵权，屡立战功，同韩世忠、刘钅奇、岳飞都是著名的将领，世人称为张、韩、刘、岳。
English: After the Song Dynasty migrated to the south, Zhang Jun was the first to seize military power and repeatedly achieved military feats. Together with Han Shizhong, Liu Bingqi and Yuefei, he was a famous general, known to the world as Zhang, Han, Liu and Yue.

古文：然濠、寿之役，俊与锜有隙，独以杨沂中为腹心，故有濠梁之劫。
现代文：但濠、寿之战，张俊和刘钅奇不和，只以杨沂中为心腹，因此造成了濠梁之难。
English: However, in the battle of life and death, Zhang Jun and Liu Bingqi did not get along, only with Yang Bingzhong as a confidant, thus causing the difficulty of winning the battle.

古文：岳飞冤狱，韩世忠救之，俊独助桧成其事，心术之殊也，远哉！
现代文：岳飞冤案，韩世忠营救岳飞，张俊独自帮助秦桧构成冤狱，四人心术高下不同，相距十分遥远啊！
English: Yue Fei's unjust case, Han Shizhong rescuing Yue Fei, Zhang Jun single-handedly helping Qin Hui to form an unjust prison, the four people have different skill levels, and they are very far apart!

古文：有至自淮北者，传金人言曰： 此张铁山弟也。 绍兴九年卒，年四十四。
现代文：高宗在众将中对张俊特别爱护优厚，但是警告他的话也从未离口。自淮西入朝觐见，高宗教他阅读《郭子仪传》；召入宫中，告诫他不要与民争利，不要大兴土木。绍兴二十四年六月去世，时年六十九岁。
English: Among the generals, Gao Zong was especially fond of Zhang Jun, but his words of warning never left his mouth. Since Huaxi entered the imperial court, he read "The Biography of Guo Zi" with high religion; he was summoned to the palace and warned him not to compete with the people for profits and not to carry out large-scale civil engineering. Shaoxing died in June 24th, at the age of 69.

古文：赠保静军节度使，谥壮敏。
现代文：高宗停止上朝视事三天，以一品官服收殓，高宗亲临祭奠痛哭。追封他为循王。
English: Gao Zong stopped going to the imperial court for three days to observe the situation, and he was received with a piece of official dress. Gao Zong personally attended the memorial service and wept bitterly. He was given the title of King Xu.

古文：刘光世，字平叔，保安军人，延庆次子。
现代文：刘光世字平叔，保安军人，刘延庆的第二个儿子。
English: Liu Guangze, also known as Uncle Ping, is a security guard and the second son of Liu Yanqing.

古文：初以荫补三班奉职，累升鄜延路兵马都监、蕲州防御使。
现代文：当初以荫补为三班奉职，历任延路兵马都监、蕲州防御使。
English: At the beginning, he was assigned to three shifts, and successively held the posts of Yanlu Military and Horse Capital Supervisor and Zhangzhou Defense Envoy.

古文：方腊反，延庆为宣抚司都统，遣光世自将一军趋衢、婺，出其不意破之。
现代文：方腊起义后，刘延庆任宣抚司都统，派遣刘光世自率一军赴衢、婺州，出其不意击破方腊。
English: After the Fangla Uprising, Liu Yanqing was appointed as the propaganda secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, and sent Liu Guangzhe to lead an army to Handan and Handan, unexpectedly defeating Fangla.

古文：贼平，授耀州观察使，升鄜延路兵马钤辖。
现代文：方腊平定之后，朝廷命令刘光世为耀州观察使，升任延路兵马钤辖。
English: After Fanla was pacified, the imperial court ordered Liu Guangshi to be the observer of Yaozhou, and he was promoted to be in charge of Yanlu Terracotta Army.

古文：时有事燕洑，光世从延庆取易州，授奉国军承宣使。
现代文：当时宋朝正准备攻取辽燕蓟一带，刘光世随从刘延庆攻取易州，被授予为奉国军承宣使。
English: At that time, the Song Dynasty was preparing to conquer the area around Liaoyang and Yan'an. Liu Guangxi followed Liu Yanqing to conquer Yizhou, and was awarded the title of the Ambassador of the People's Republic of China.

古文：金将郭药师降，除威武、奉宁军承宣使。
现代文：金朝将领郭药师投降，刘光世又被任命为威武、奉宁军承宣使。
English: The Kim dynasty general Guo Yakushi surrendered, and Liu Guangxi was appointed as the commander of the Weiwu and Fengning armies.

古文：延庆遣诸将捣虚趋燕，以光世为后继。
现代文：刘延庆派众将乘虚直捣燕京，以刘光世为后续部队。
English: Liu Yanqing dispatched troops to take advantage of the virtual direct attack on Yanjing, with Liu Guangze as the follow-up force.

古文：光世不至，诸将失援而溃，降三官。
现代文：刘光世没能按时赶到，众将失去支援而溃散，刘光世被降官三级。
English: Liu Guangshi failed to arrive on time, the crowd lost support and dispersed, and Liu Guangshi was demoted three levels.

古文：河北贼张迪掠浚州境，诏光世讨之。
现代文：河北盗贼张迪寇掠睿州地区，诏令刘光世前去征讨。
English: Hebei thief Zhang Diqo plundered Ruizhou area, and ordered Liu Guangshi to go and investigate.

古文：光世曰： 贼乌合，非有纪律，佯北以邀之，其乱可取也。 即麾骑退。
现代文：刘光世说 ：盗贼是乌合之众，佯装失败而邀击他们，敌势必然混乱可以攻取。 于是指挥骑兵退却。
English: Liu Guangshi said, "The thieves are a rabble, so we should feign defeat and invite them to attack, and the enemy's situation will inevitably be chaotic, so we can attack."

古文：贼竞进，光世引骑贯其中，贼大溃。
现代文：盗贼争相前进，刘光世率兵直冲贼阵之中，贼众大溃而逃。
English: The thieves scrambled forward. Liu Guangshi led his soldiers to charge directly into the midst of the thieves, and the thieves fled in a stampede.

古文：复承宣使，充鄜延路马步军副总管。
现代文：恢复承宣使职务，任延路马步军副总管。
English: He resumed his post as the vice-commander of the Yanlu Horse-Infantry Corps.

古文：靖康元年，金兵攻汴京，夏人乘间寇杏子堡。
现代文：靖康元年，金军进攻汴京，西夏乘机入侵杏子堡。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingkang, the Golden Army attacked Suijing, and Western Xia seized the opportunity to invade Xingzi Fort.

古文：堡有两山对峙，地险厄，光世据之，敌至败去。
现代文：堡内有两座山对峙而立，地势险要，刘光世占据此地，敌人来到后败走。
English: There are two mountains facing each other in the fort, and the terrain is precarious. Liu Guangxi occupied this place, and the enemy came and went away defeated.

古文：擢侍卫马军都虞候。
现代文：被擢升为侍卫马军都虞候。
English: He was promoted to the guard of the horse army.

古文：金再攻汴京，光世入援，闻范致虚传檄诸路，议引兵会之。
现代文：金军再次进攻汴京，刘光世率部增援，听说范致虚传告各路，准备率兵前往会合。
English: The Chinese army once again attacked Beijing. Liu Guangzhe led the reinforcement. Hearing this, Fan Zhihu announced to everyone that he was ready to lead the troops to the meeting.

古文：会有诏止勤王兵，光世以为宜速进，不可以诏示众。
现代文：恰逢朝廷下诏禁止军队增援，刘光世认为应该迅速前进，不能将诏令交给众人观看。
English: It coincided with the imperial edict banning reinforcements from the army, and Liu Guangxi believed that it was necessary to advance quickly, and that the edict should not be shown to the public.

古文：既而溃兵至，具言京城事。
现代文：不久前方溃兵来到，详细说明京城情况。
English: Not long after, the vanquished soldiers from the front arrived and gave a detailed account of the situation in the capital.

古文：众惧，光世矫以蕃官来自汴京，谓二帝决围南去，众稍安，进屯陕府。
现代文：众人害怕，刘光世假称蕃官从汴京来到，说徽、钦二帝突围南去，众人稍稍安定，进驻陕府。
English: People were afraid. Liu Guangxi pretended that the eunuchs had come from Beijing, and said that Hui and Qin had broken out of the encirclement to the south. People were a little more stable, and they were stationed in Shaanxi.

古文：致虚欲合五路兵进与金战，光世难之，别道趋虢，遂至济州谒康王，命为五军都提举。
现代文：范致虚打算会合五路兵马前进同金军作战，刘光世阻止他，从另一条道路奔赴虢州，于是来到济州拜见康王赵构，被任命为五军都提举。
English: Fan Zhihu planned to gather five armies and horses to advance and fight against the Chinese army. Liu Guangshi stopped him and rushed to Bozhou from another road. He then came to Jeju to meet Kang Wang Zhao Jie and was appointed as the commander of the five armies.

古文：王即皇帝位，命为省视陵寝使，寻为提举御营使司一行事务、行在都巡检使。
现代文：康王即皇帝位，任命刘光世为省视陵寝使，不久改任提举御营使司一行事务、行在都巡检使。
English: Kang Wang, that is, the emperor, appointed Liu Guangshi as the provincial inspector of the mausoleum, and soon he was appointed as the inspector of the imperial envoy and the inspector in the capital.

古文：斩山东贼李昱，迁奉国军节度使。
现代文：斩杀山东盗贼李昱，升为奉国军节度使。
English: He killed the Shandong thief, Li Qian, and was promoted to be an envoy to the National Day of the Korean People's Army.

古文：平镇江叛兵，改滁濠太平州、无为军、江宁府制置使。
现代文：平定镇江叛兵，改任滁、濠、太平州、无为军、江宁府制置使。
English: He subdued the rebels in Zhenjiang, and was appointed to the posts of the governor of Min, Quan, Taiping, Wuwei, and Jiangning.

古文：讨张遇于池州，遇望其阵曰： 官军不整，可破也。 时湖水涸，贼越湖出官军后，官军乱，光世几被执，王德救之得免。
现代文：在池州讨伐张遇，张遇看到刘光世军阵势说： 官军军容不整，可以击破。 当时湖水干涸，贼众越湖出现在官军背后，官军大乱，刘光世几乎被贼众俘虏，赖王德营救才得以逃脱。
English: At that time, the lake had dried up, the bandits appeared behind the official army across the lake, the official army was in turmoil, Liu Guangshi was almost captured by the bandits, and it was only through the rescue of Lai Wangde that he was able to escape.

古文：遇循江而上，光世整兵追至江州，断其后军破之。
现代文：张遇顺江而上，刘光世重整军队追到江州，截断其后卫部队并将其击败。
English: Zhang Yutong went up the river, and Liu Guangxing's reorganized army chased him to Jiangzhou, cut off his rearguard troops and defeated them.

古文：遇复东下，又追击于江宁。
现代文：张遇又东下，刘光世追击到江宁。
English: Zhang Yu went east again, and Liu Guangxi chased him to Jiangning.

古文：二年，以功加检校少保，命讨李成。
现代文：建炎元年，朝廷因功加刘光世为检校少保，命他征讨李成。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, the imperial court promoted Liu Guangshi to the position of school inspector and ordered him to investigate Li Cheng.

古文：光世以王德为先锋，与成遇于上蔡驿口桥，败之。
现代文：刘光世以王德为先锋，同李成在上蔡驿口桥相遇，将李成击败。
English: With Wang De as his vanguard, Liu Guangshi met Li Cheng at the bridge of Shang Cai Hukou and defeated Li Cheng.

古文：成收散卒再战，光世以儒服临军，成遥见白袍青盖，并兵围之，德溃围拔光世以出。
现代文：李成收拾散卒再战，刘光世身穿儒服来到军中，李成远远望见白色衣袍青色伞盖，集中兵力围攻，王德冲破重围拉着刘光世出来。
English: Li Cheng gathered up the scattered soldiers to fight again. Liu Guangshi came to the army wearing a Confucian uniform. Li Cheng could see the white robe and blue umbrella cover from far away and concentrated the forces to besiege. Wang De broke through the heavy siege and pulled Liu Guangshi out.

古文：下令得成者以其官爵与之。
现代文：刘光世下令捉到李成的将把自己的官爵交给他。
English: Liu Guangxing ordered Li Cheng to be caught and handed over his title to him.

古文：士争奋，再战皆捷，成遁，执其谋主陶子思。
现代文：士卒争相奋击，再连战告捷，李成逃遁，活捉李成主要谋士陶子思。
English: The soldiers fought with each other, and the second battle was successful. Li Cheng fled, and Li Cheng's main strategist, Tao Zirong, was captured alive.

古文：加检校少傅。
现代文：朝廷加刘光世为检校少傅。
English: The imperial court appointed Liu Guangshi as a junior master of the inspection school.

古文：帝在扬州，金骑掩至天长，光世迎敌，未至而军溃。
现代文：高宗在扬州，金骑兵突然来到天长，刘光世率部迎敌，还没到天长而士卒溃散。
English: Gao Zong was in Yangzhou, the Golden Cavalry suddenly came to Tianchang, Liu Guangxu led the troops to meet the enemy, but the soldiers dispersed before reaching Tianchang.

古文：帝仓卒渡江，命光世为行在五军制置使，屯镇江府，控扼江口。
现代文：高宗仓皇渡过长江，任命刘光世为行在五军制置使，屯驻镇江府，控制江口。
English: Emperor Gao Zongcang crossed the Yangtze River and appointed Liu Guangxu as the envoy of the five-army system, stationed in Zhenjiang Prefecture to control the mouth of the river.

古文：寻加检校太保、殿前都指挥使。
现代文：不久加检校太保、殿前都指挥使。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to school inspector and superintendent.

古文：苗、刘为乱，素惮光世，迁光世为太尉、淮南制置使。
现代文：苗、刘叛乱，他们一向害怕刘光世，朝廷升刘光世为太尉、淮南制置使。
English: Miao and Liu rebelled. They had always been afraid of Liu Guangxing. The imperial court promoted Liu Guangxing to the rank of first lieutenant and made him an envoy to Huainan Province.

古文：张浚在平江，驰书谕以勤王，光世不从；吕颐浩遣使至镇江说之，乃引兵会于丹阳。
现代文：张浚在平江，快书驰告刘光世率兵勤王，刘光世不从；吕颐浩派使者到镇江劝说他，于是率兵到丹阳会合。
English: Zhang Jun was in the Pingjiang River, and he wrote a letter to Liu Guangxi, telling him to lead the troops to serve the king. Liu Guangxi did not obey; Lv Yinghao sent an envoy to the Zhenjiang River to persuade him, so he led the troops to meet in Danyang.

古文：兵进，光世以选卒为游击，仍分军殿后，遇苗翊、马柔吉军于临平，与韩世忠等破之。
现代文：军队前进时，刘光世用选卒作为游击，并分军殿后，在临平同苗翊、马柔吉军相遇，刘光世和韩世忠等人将其击败。
English: When the army was advancing, Liu Guangzhi used the soldiers to fight as guerrillas, and after the division of the army, he met Miao Wei and Ma Rongji's army in Linping, and Liu Guangzhi and Han Shizhong defeated them.

古文：至行在，迁太尉、御营副使。
现代文：到达高宗行营，升为太尉、御营副使。
English: Arrived at Gaozong marching camp, promoted to the rank of lieutenant and deputy envoy to the camp.

古文：光世遣王德助乔仲福追傅至崇安县，尽降其众，傅仅以身免。
现代文：刘光世派王德协助乔仲福追击苗傅到崇安县，苗傅部众全部投降，苗傅本人只身逃脱。
English: Liu Guangshi sent Wang De to assist Qiao Zhongfu in chasing Miao Fu to Chong'an County. All members of Miao Fu's party surrendered, and Miao Fu himself escaped.

古文：逆将范琼被执，张浚使光世抚定其众，又招贼靳赛降之。
现代文：叛将范琼被俘，张浚派刘光世安抚范琼部众，又招降贼寇靳赛。
English: The renegade general Fan Qiong was captured, and Zhang Jun sent Liu Guangshi to pacify the people of Fan Qiong's unit, and also recruited the traitor Qiong Xie.

古文：命光世为江东宣抚使，守太平及池州，受杜充节制。
现代文：高宗任命刘光世为江东宣抚使，守卫太平及池州，受杜充指挥。
English: Gao Zong appointed Liu Guangxie as the propaganda envoy of Jiangdong, guarding Taiping and Chizhou, under the command of Du Chong.

古文：光世言受充节制有不可者六，帝怒，诏毋入光世殿门，光世始受命。
现代文：刘光世六次上书说不能接受杜充指挥，高宗大怒，诏令不要让刘光世进入殿门，刘光世才接受命令。
English: Liu Guangshi wrote six times that he could not accept Du Cheng's command, Gao Zong was furious and ordered not to let Liu Guangshi enter the palace gate. Liu Guangshi only accepted the order.

古文：隆祐太后在南昌，议者谓金人自蕲、黄渡江，陆行二百里可至，命光世移屯江州为屏蔽。
现代文：隆佑太后在南昌，议者说金军自蕲、黄渡过长江、从陆上疾行二百里就能达到这里，命令刘光世移驻江州作为屏障。
English: When the Empress Dowager Longyou was in Nanchang, the councilor said that the Jin army had crossed the Yangtze River by itself, and the Yellow Army had crossed the Yangtze River, and it could be reached by traveling 200 miles by land, and ordered Liu Guangshi to move to Jiangzhou to act as a barrier.

古文：光世既至，日置酒高会。
现代文：刘光世到江州后，每天设宴喝酒会见朋友。
English: After Liu Guangshi arrived in Jiangzhou, he held a banquet every day to drink and meet friends.

古文：金人自黄州渡江，凡三日，无知之者。
现代文：金军从蕲州渡江，共三天，没有人知道。
English: The gold army crossed the river from Zhangzhou for a total of three days, and no one knew about it.

古文：比金人至，遂遁，太后退保虔州。
现代文：等到金军来到，刘光世军便逃遁，太后退到虔州。
English: When the Chinese army arrived, Liu Guangshis army fled and retreated to Kyeongju.

古文：冯楫贻书光世，言： 贼深入，最兵家之忌。
现代文：冯鰗送信给刘光世，说： 敌人深入我境犯兵家大忌。
English: Feng Qi sent a message to Liu Guangshi, saying: "It is a big taboo for the enemy to invade our territory and capture soldiers.

古文：进则距山，退则背江，百无一利，而敢如此横行者，以前无抗拒，后无袭逐也。
现代文：前进则面临高山，后退又背负长江，有百害无一利，在这种情况下他们还敢于横冲直闯，是因为前面没有抗拒，后面没有袭击追逐。
English: When advancing, they face the high mountains, and when retreating, they carry the Yangtze River on their backs. In this situation, they still dare to rush headlong, because there is no resistance in front, and there is no attack and pursuit behind.

古文：太尉傥选精兵自将来洪，而开一路令归，伏兵掩之，可使匹马不还。 光世不能用，自信州引兵至南康。
现代文：太尉如选精兵亲自率领来到洪州，而故意给敌人让开一条归路，埋伏军队掩击敌人，可使敌人匹马不能返回。 刘光世没有能够采纳，从信州率兵到南康。
English: The captain, as if he personally led the selected elite soldiers to Hongzhou, and deliberately gave the enemy a way back, ambushed the army to cover the enemy, so that the enemy could not return on horseback. Liu Guangshi could not accept it, and led the troops from Shinshu to Nankang.

古文：郦琼围固始县，光世遣人招降之，又遣王德擒妖贼王念经于信州。
现代文：郦琼包围固始县，刘光世派人招降他，又派王德在信州擒获盗贼王念经。
English: Gong Qiong besieged Gushi County, Liu Guangxi sent people to recruit him, and also sent Wang De to capture the thief Wang Lunjing in Shinshu.

古文：时光世部曲无所隶，号 太尉兵 ，侍御史沈与求论其非宜。
现代文：当时刘光世部队无所隶属，号称 太尉兵 ，侍御史沈与求论说这样不当。
English: At that time, Liu Guangshi's troops had no affiliation, and were known as the captain's soldiers, the attendants of the history of Shen and the discussion that it was inappropriate.

古文：会御营司废，乃以 巡卫 名其军，命充御前巡卫军都统制。
现代文：恰逢御营司废罢，于是以 巡卫 作为刘光世部队的军名，命令刘光世任御前巡卫军都统制。
English: It coincided with the abolition of the Imperial Guard Division, so he ordered Liu Guangxi to take charge of the Imperial Guard as the military name of Liu Guangxi's troops.

古文：召赴行在，授浙西安抚大使、知镇江府。
现代文：诏令到行营，授予他为浙西安抚大使、知镇江府。
English: The imperial edict went to the encampment and awarded him the title of Zhejiang-Xi'an Pacification Ambassador and the title of Zhenjiang Prefecture.

古文：光世言： 安抚控制一路，若但守镇江，则他郡有警，不可离任。
现代文：刘光世说： 安抚控制一路，如果只守镇江，那么其他地方有警报，难以离开。
English: Liu Guangshi said: Pacify and control all the way. If you only guard Zhenjiang, then there will be alarms in other places, and it will be difficult to leave.

古文：望别除守臣，光世专充安抚使，从便置司。 时光世虑金人必过江，故预择便地，帝觉之，止许增辟通判。
现代文：希望另外任命守将，光世专任安抚使，从便设立安抚司。 当时刘光世考虑金军必然过江，因此预先选择有利的地方，高宗觉察到了这一点，只允许他增设镇江府通判。
English: At that time, Liu Guangxi considered that the Chinese army would inevitably cross the river, so he chose a favorable place in advance. Gaozong was aware of this and only allowed him to add Zhenjiang Prefecture.

古文：右谏议大夫黎确疏其择便求佚，中外所愤，帝释不问，加宁武军节度使、开府仪同三司以遣之。
现代文：右谏议大夫黎确上奏刘光世选择便利之处谋求安乐，朝廷内外都很愤慨，高宗放过不加追究，加刘光世宁武军节度使、开府仪同三司然后遣回。
English: Right-wing doctor Li Jizhen appealed to Liu Guangxing to choose a convenient place to seek happiness, and both inside and outside the court were indignant. Gao Zong was let go without investigation, and Liu Guangxing was sent back to Ningwu Junction, Kaifu Ceremony and the three departments.

古文：光世乞便宜行事，不许。
现代文：刘光世乞求便宜行事，高宗没有答应。
English: Liu Guangzhe begged to act cheaply, but Gao Zong did not agree.

古文：时韩世忠、张俊兼领浙西制置使，光世复言本路兵火之余，不任三处需求，遂罢世忠、俊兼领。
现代文：当时韩世忠、张俊兼任浙西制置使，刘光世又说本路遭受战火之后，不能胜任三处需求，于是罢免韩世忠、张俊的兼职。
English: At that time, Han Shizhong and Zhang Jun concurrently held the post of Zhejiang and West China's Political Commissar. Liu Guangzhi also said that after the war, this road could not meet the three demands, so he dismissed Han Shizhong and Zhang Jun's part-time post.

古文：时金兵留淮东，光世颇畏其锋，楚州被围已百日，帝手札趣光世援楚者五，竟不行；但遣王德、郦琼将轻兵以出，时奏杀获而已。
现代文：当时金军留驻淮东，刘光世害怕敌人锋芒，楚州被围已有一百天，高宗亲自写信五次催促刘光世救援楚州，刘光世竟然不去；只派王德、郦琼率领轻兵前去，自己不时报告战果而已。
English: At that time, the Golden Army was stationed in Huadong, Liu Guangshi was afraid of the enemy's sharp edge, Chuzhou had been besieged for a hundred days, Gaozong personally wrote five times to urge Liu Guangshi to rescue Chuzhou, but Liu Guangshi did not go; he only sent Wang De and Zou Qiong to lead light soldiers, and he only reported the results of the battle from time to time.

古文：楚州破，命光世节制诸镇，力守通、泰。
现代文：楚州被攻破后，朝廷命令刘光世指挥各镇兵力，竭尽全力守卫通、泰地区。
English: After Chuzhou was breached, the imperial court ordered Liu Guangshi to command the troops of each town and do his best to guard the areas of Weidong and Tai.

古文：完颜昌屯承、楚，光世知其众思归，欲携贰之。
现代文：完颜昌屯驻承、楚州，刘光世了解金军希望北归，打算离间敌人。
English: After Yan Chang Tun was stationed in Jiahe and Chuzhou, Liu Guangshi learned that the Kim army hoped to return to the north and intended to split the enemy.

古文：乃铸金银铜钱，文曰 招纳信宝 。
现代文：于是铸造金银铜钱，上面写着 招纳信宝 四个字。
English: Therefore, gold, silver and copper coins were minted with the words "Recruitment of treasures" inscribed on them.

古文：获敌不杀，令持钱文示其徒，有欲归者，扣江执钱为信。
现代文：俘虏敌人不杀害，命令手持铜钱回营招降，有想归顺的，到江边执钱作为信物。
English: If they did not kill the captured enemy, they were ordered to return to the camp with copper money in hand to invite them to surrender. If they wanted to surrender, they were to take the money to the riverside as a token.

古文：归者不绝，因创 奇兵 、 赤心 两军，昌遂拔砦去。
现代文：前来归顺的络绎不绝，于是创立 奇兵 、 赤心 两军，完颜昌于是拔营退走。
English: There was an endless stream of people who came to surrender, so the two armies of Qi Bing and Chixin were created, and Yanchang then withdrew from the camp.

古文：绍兴元年，金人渡淮，真、扬州皆阙守，命光世兼淮南、京东路宣抚使，置司扬州，措置屯田，迄不行。
现代文：绍兴元年，金军渡过淮河，真、扬州都缺乏守将，命令刘光世兼任淮南、京东路宣抚使，在扬州设立宣抚司，安排屯田，最终没有施行。
English: In the first year of Shaoxing, when the Chinese army crossed the Huai River, and both Zhen and Yangzhou were short of garrisons, he ordered Liu Guangxi to concurrently serve as the envoy of Huainan and Beijing East Road, to set up the office of the envoy of Huainan and Beijing East Road in Yangzhou, and to arrange the construction of military camps, but it was not implemented in the end.

古文：张俊讨李成，又命光世分兵往舒、蕲捣其巢穴，光世以江北盗未平为辞。
现代文：张俊征讨李成，朝廷又命令刘光世分兵前往舒、蕲州捣毁李成巢穴，刘光世以江北盗贼没有平定为借口推辞。
English: Zhang Jun recruited Li Cheng, and the imperial court also ordered Liu Guangshi's detachment to travel to Shu and Ganzhou to destroy Li Cheng's lair. Liu Guangshi refused on the pretext that the thieves in the north of the river had not been leveled.

古文：命兼淮南宣抚使，领真扬通承楚州、涟水军。
现代文：朝廷命令刘光世兼任淮南宣抚使，节领真、扬、通、承、楚州、涟水军。
English: The imperial court ordered Liu Guangxi to concurrently serve as the Huainan envoy, leading the troops of Zhen, Yang, Tong, Cheng, Chuzhou, and Ershui.

古文：郭仲威谋据淮南以通刘豫，光世遣王德擒之，并其众。
现代文：郭仲威图谋占据淮南和刘豫勾结，刘光世派王德把他擒获，吞并他的部众。
English: Guo Zhongwei plotted to occupy Huainan in collusion with Liu Yu. Liu Guangxu sent Wang De to capture him and absorb his subordinates.

古文：范宗尹言： 光世军多冗费，请汰其罢软者。 帝曰： 俟作手书与之，如家人礼，庶几不疑。 
现代文：范宗尹说 ：刘光世军冗员很多耗费太大，请求将其中的老弱裁减下来。 高宗说 ：等我亲自写信给他，如同家人之间的礼仪，才能使他不产生疑虑。 
English: Fan Zongyin said, "Liu Guangshi's army has a lot of redundant personnel and it costs too much, so I request that the old and weak among them be cut down." Gao Zong said, "Only when I write to him in person, like the etiquette between family members, can he not have doubts."

古文：光世以枯秸生穗为瑞，闻于朝。
现代文：刘光世以为干枯的麦杆长出麦穗是祥瑞的征兆，报告给朝廷。
English: Liu Guangxie thought that dry wheat stalks sprouting ears of wheat was a sign of auspiciousness, and reported it to the imperial court.

古文：帝曰： 岁丰人不乏食，朝得贤辅佐，军有十万铁骑，乃可为瑞，此外不足信。 淮北人多归附者，命光世兼海、泗宣抚使以安辑之。
现代文：高宗说： 年景丰收民不缺粮，朝廷得到贤能辅佐，军队有十万铁骑，才是祥瑞的征兆，除此之外不足凭信。 淮北的民众有许多前来归附，朝廷命令刘光世兼任海、泗宣抚使以安置他们。
English: Gao Zong said, "A good harvest and no shortage of grain for the people, the imperial court supported by the most capable people, and an army of one hundred thousand cavalrymen are the signs of a prosperous year. Other than that, there is not enough evidence. Many people from Huaibei came to join the imperial court, and the imperial court ordered Liu Guangshi to concurrently serve as the sea and the imperial envoy to resettle them.

古文：五湖捕鱼人夏宁聚众千余，掠人为食，郭仲威余党出没淮南，邵青据通州，光世皆招降之。
现代文：五湖渔民夏宁聚众千余人，抢掠人口作为粮食，郭仲威余党出没淮南，邵青占据通州，刘光世都招降了他们。
English: Xia Ning, a fisherman of the five lakes, gathered more than a thousand people and plundered the population as food. Guo Zhongwei and the rest of the party haunted Huainan, Shao Qing occupied Tongzhou, and Liu Guangxi recruited and demoted them.

古文：光世请铸淮东宣抚使印，给钱粮，增将吏，皆从其请。
现代文：刘光世请求铸造淮东宣抚使印章，增加钱粮，增设将吏，朝廷都答应了他的要求。
English: Liu Guangshi requested the casting of the seal of the Huai-Dong envoy, the increase of money and grain, and the establishment of additional officers. The imperial court agreed to all of his requests.

古文：仍给镇江府、常州、江阴军苗米三十七万斛，为军中一岁费。
现代文：仍拨给镇江府、常州、江阴军米三十七万斛，作为军中一年的费用。
English: However, 370,000 baht of rice was still allocated to the Zhenjiang, Changzhou and Jiangyin armies as a one-year expense.

古文：二年，复命移屯扬州，时至镇江视师。
现代文：绍兴二年，朝廷又命令刘光世移驻扬州，不时到镇江视察军队。
English: In the second year of Shaoxing, the imperial court also ordered Liu Guangshi to move to Yangzhou and inspect the troops in Zhenjiang from time to time.

古文：光世不奉诏，入朝言：邻寇有疑，或致生事，愿仍领浙西为根本计。
现代文：刘光世不接受诏令，入朝说：附近的贼寇产生疑虑，有可能激起事变，愿意依旧节制浙西作为根本之计。
English: Liu Guangshi did not accept the imperial edict and entered the court saying: the thieves and robbers in the vicinity have doubts and may provoke incidents, and he is still willing to control western Zhejiang as a fundamental measure.

古文：右司谏方孟卿劾之，乞召宰执与议，使之必往，光世犹以乏粮为辞。
现代文：右司谏方孟卿弹劾他，请求召集宰执商议，使刘光世一定前往，刘光世仍以缺乏粮食为借口推辞。
English: The Right Rev. Fang Mengqing impeached him and requested that a meeting be convened to discuss the matter, so that Liu Guangxi would definitely go. Liu Guangxi still refused on the pretext of lack of grain.

古文：光世之来，以缯帛、方物为献，帝命分赐六宫，中丞沈与求以为不可，命还之。
现代文：刘光世来到后，向朝廷进献缯帛、当地特产，高宗下令分赐给六宫，中丞沈与求认为不可，下命交还给他。
English: After Liu Guangxing came to the court, he presented the imperial court with yakitori, a local specialty, and Gao Zong ordered that it be given to the Sixth Palace. Vice-Commander Shen Yigu thought it was unacceptable, and ordered it to be returned to him.

古文：吕颐浩与光世有故怨，颐浩将出视师，首言光世兵冗不练，乞移其军还阙。
现代文：吕颐浩同刘光世有旧怨，颐浩准备出外巡视军队，首先说刘光世军兵员冗多缺乏训练，请求把他的军队调回朝廷。
English: Lv Yinghao had an old grudge with Liu Guangshi. As Lv Yinghao prepared to go abroad to inspect the army, he first said that Liu Guangshi's military personnel were redundant and lacked training, and requested that his army be transferred back to the imperial court.

古文：帝曰： 光世军粮不足，若骤移，必溃，先犒军而后料简可也。 颐浩至镇江，光世军果告乏，颐浩奏光世军月费二千万缗，乞差官考核。
现代文：高宗说 ：刘光世军粮饷不足，如果突然转移，必然溃散，应先犒赏军队然后精简才成。 吕颐浩到镇江，刘光世军果然报告缺粮，吕颐浩上奏刘光世军每月消耗二千万缗，请求派官查验核实。
English: Gao Zong said: Liu Guangshi's army is short of grain, if it suddenly shifts, it will inevitably collapse, the army should be rewarded first and then streamlined. Lv Yinghao went to Zhenjiang, Liu Guangshi's army indeed reported a grain shortage, Lv Yinghao reported that Liu Guangshi's army consumes 20 million baht per month, and requested that an officer be sent to check and verify.

古文：诏御史江跻、度支胡蒙至军点校，终不得实。
现代文：诏令御史江跻、度支胡蒙到军中点验，最终没有得到核实。
English: The imperial edict ordered Goshijiang Lin and Duzhi Humong to be inspected by the military, but it was not verified in the end.

古文：帝方倚其成功，寻诏两漕臣措置镇江酒税务，助其军费；又罢织御服罗，省七百万缗以助之。
现代文：高宗正倚赖刘光世成就功业，不久诏令两漕官员安排镇江酒税务，补助刘光世军费；又罢免织御服罗，节省七百万缗以补助刘光世军。
English: Gao Zongzhen was relying on Liu Guangshi to accomplish his work. Soon, he ordered two groups of officials to arrange the taxation of Zhenjiang liquor to subsidize Liu Guangshi's military expenses; he also dismissed Weiyu, saving seven million baht to subsidize Liu Guangshi's army.

古文：加宁武、宁国军节度使。
现代文：朝廷命刘光世为宁武、宁国军节度使。
English: The imperial court ordered Liu Guangye to be the festival envoy of Ningwu and Ningguo armies.

古文：光世奏部将乔仲福、靳赛防江有劳，诏进一官，许回授。
现代文：刘光世上奏部将乔仲福、靳赛防卫长江有功，诏令进官一级，准予将官职转授给子弟。
English: Liu Guang, who played a significant role in the defense of the Yangtze River against Qiao Zhongfu and Jingsai, was promoted to the first level of official, and was allowed to transfer the official post to his son.

古文：光世固乞转行，给事中程瑀持不可，又言光世兵未渡江，金人或渡淮，江、浙必震。
现代文：刘光世坚决请求转调，给事中程王禹坚持以为不可，又说刘光世部队没有渡江，金军如果渡过淮河，必然震动江浙一带。
English: Liu Guangshi resolutely requested the transfer, but Wang Yu insisted that it was impossible. He also said that Liu Guangshi's troops did not cross the river, and if the Chinese army crossed the Huaihe River, it would inevitably shake the Jiangsu-Zhejiang region.

古文：光世方遣人按行宜兴湖洑之间，以备退保。
现代文：刘光世正派人在宜兴湖汊之间考察地形，做后退自保的准备。
English: Liu Guangxi is sending people to inspect the terrain between the Yixing Lake and the reeds, and prepare to retreat for self-protection.

古文：诏以章示之，光世迁延如故。
现代文：诏令将奏章交给他看，刘光世依旧拖延时间不肯前进。
English: After the edict was issued to show him the record, Liu Guangxi still delayed and refused to move forward.

古文：三年，命光世与韩世忠易镇，同召赴阙，授检校太傅、江东宣抚使。
现代文：绍兴三年，命令刘光世与韩世忠对调，同时召他们到朝廷。授予刘光世为检校太傅、江东宣抚使。
English: In the third year of Shaoxing, he ordered Liu Guangzhe and Han Shizhong to reconcile, and at the same time summoned them to the imperial court. Liu Guangzhe was awarded the title of school inspector, and the title of Jiangdong envoy.

古文：世忠既至镇江城下，奸人入城焚府库，光世擒之，皆云世忠所遣。
现代文：韩世忠来到镇江城下后，奸细入城焚烧府库，刘光世将他活捉，都说是韩世忠派遣的。
English: After Han Shizhong came to the city of Zhenjiang, spies entered the city to burn the government treasury, and Liu Guangxi captured him alive. All of this was said to have been sent by Han Shizhong.

古文：世忠屯登云门，光世引兵出，惧其扼己，改途趋白鹭店。
现代文：韩世忠屯驻登云门，刘光世率兵出城，惧怕韩世忠杀死自己，改道赴白鹭店。
English: Han Shizhong was stationed in Dengyunmen, while Liu Guangshi led his troops out of the city. Fearing that Han Shizhong would kill himself, he changed his route and went to Baekdu.

古文：世忠遣兵袭其后，光世以闻。
现代文：韩世忠派兵在他后面袭击，刘光世上报朝廷。
English: Han Shizhong sent troops to attack behind him, and Liu Guangxu reported to the imperial court.

古文：帝遣使和解，仍书《贾复》、《寇恂传》赐之。
现代文：高宗派使者前来和解，并写作《贾复传》、《寇恂传》赐给他们。
English: The emissaries of high sects came to reconcile, and the writing of "Jia Fu Zhuang" and "Kou Qi Zhuang" was given to them.

古文：命为江东、淮西宣抚使，置司池州，赐钱十万缗。
现代文：命令刘光世为江东、淮西宣抚使，设置宣抚司于池州，赐钱十万缗。
English: He ordered Liu Guangxu to be the envoy of Jiangdong and Huaixi, set up the office of the envoy in Chizhou, and gave him 100,000 baht.

古文：刘豫将王彦先扬兵淮上，有渡江意。
现代文：刘豫将领王彦先在淮河耀马扬兵，有渡过长江的意图。
English: Liu Yu sent his general Wang Yan to lead the Ma Yang soldiers across the Huai River, with the intention of crossing the Yangtze River.

古文：光世扼马家渡，遣郦琼屯无为军，为濠、庐援，贼乃退。
现代文：刘光世控制马家渡，派郦琼屯驻无为军，作为濠、庐州的后援，敌人才退走。
English: Liu Guangshi took control of Majiaodu, and sent Gong Qiong to stay there as a supporting force. Only then did the enemy retreat.

古文：光世奏鄜延李佾充阁门祗候，言者论其涉私，罢之。
现代文：刘光世奏请延人李佾任门祗候，议论者说刘光世涉及私情，因而作罢。
English: Liu Guangxie asked Yanren Li Qian to wait for him at the door. The commentator said that Liu Guangxie was involved in personal affairs, and therefore declined.

古文：金人、刘豫入侵，时光世、张俊、韩世忠权相敌，且持私隙，帝遣侍御史魏矼至军中，谕以灭怨报国。
现代文：金军、刘豫入侵，当时刘光世、张俊、韩世忠权力相当，并且都有私仇，高宗派侍御史魏石工到军中，劝说他们消除仇怨报效国家。
English: When Liu Guangshi, Zhang Jun, and Han Shizhong invaded the Golden Army and Liu Yu, they had equal power and had their own vendettas. Shi Wei, a stonemason who served the emperor, went to the army to persuade them to eliminate their vendettas and serve the country.

古文：光世乃移书二帅，二帅皆复书致情。
现代文：刘光世于是写信给韩世忠、张俊，他们两人都回信问候。
English: Liu Guangshi then wrote to Han Shizhong and Zhang Jun, both of whom replied with greetings.

古文：光世始移军太平州以援世忠。
现代文：刘光世才开始移驻太平州以支援韩世忠。
English: Liu Guangshi only began to move to Taiping to support Han Shizhong.

古文：金兵退，光世入觐，迁少保。
现代文：金军退后，刘光世入朝觐见，改为少保。
English: After the retreat of the Golden Army, Liu Guangzhe entered the imperial court and was promoted to the rank of Junior Guard.

古文：帝曰： 卿与世忠以少嫌不释，然烈士当以气义相许，先国家而后私仇。 复谕以光武分寇恂、贾复之事。
现代文：高宗说 ：你与韩世忠因小小嫌疑不和，但是大丈夫应当以气义相许，先国家而后私仇。 再次以汉光武时寇恂、贾复的事迹劝说他。
English: Gao Zong said, "You and Han Shizhong are at odds with each other due to minor suspicions, but everything should be based on the spirit of mutual trust, and the country should come first, followed by personal enmity. Once again, he was persuaded by the deeds of Han Guangwu when he was a bandit and Jia Fu.

古文：光世泣谢，请以所置淮东田易淮西田，给事中晏敦复言其扰民而止；又请并封其三妾为孺人，南渡后，诸大将封妾自此始。
现代文：刘光世哭着拜谢，请求以所开垦的淮东田地交换淮西的田地，给事中晏敦复说这样骚扰民众才停止，刘光世又请求加封自己的三位小妾为孺人，宋朝南渡以后，各大将加封妾的事例从此开始。
English: Liu Guangshi wept and said thanks, requesting to exchange the fields in Huaixi for the fields in Huai Dong that he had reclaimed. In the middle of the matter, Zou Dun replied that this was the only way to stop harassing the people. Liu Guangshi also requested that his three concubines be sealed as concubines. After the Song Dynasty went to the south, the cases of each country sealing their concubines began.

古文：会改神武军为行营护军，以光世所部称左护军。
现代文：恰逢朝廷改神武军为行营护军，以刘光世的部队称左护军。
English: Coincidentally, the imperial court changed the Shenwu Army to the camp escort, and Liu Guangxi's troops became known as the left escort.

古文：刘豫筑刘龙城以窥淮西，光世遣王师晟破之，加保静军节度使，遂领三镇。
现代文：刘豫修筑刘龙城以窥伺淮西地区，刘光世派王师晟率兵击破，朝廷加刘光世为保静军节度使，刘光世于是领受三地节度使。
English: Liu Yu built Liu Longcheng to spy on the Huaixi region, Liu Guangxing sent Wang Shijun and his soldiers to break it down, and the imperial court and Liu Guangxing were the delegates of the Peace Preservation Army, and Liu Guangxing then received the delegates of the three regions.

古文：张浚抚淮上诸屯，刘豫挟金人分道入侵，命光世屯庐州以招北军，与韩世忠、张俊鼎立，杨沂中将精卒为后距。
现代文：张浚巡抚淮河地区各军，刘豫依恃金军分路入侵，命令刘光世屯驻庐州招降刘豫部众，同韩世忠、张俊鼎足而立，杨沂中率精兵为后援。
English: Zhang Jun patrolled the troops in the Huaihe region, Liu Yu relied on the Jin army to invade the branch line, ordered Liu Guang Shitun stationed in Zhangzhou to recruit and demote Liu Yu's troops, and stood with Han Shizhong and Zhang Jun Ding, with Yang Jun's middle-ranking elite soldiers as backup.

古文：刘猊驱乡民伪为金兵，布淮境。
现代文：刘猊驱使乡民装成金兵，布列淮河地区。
English: Liu Bei drove the villagers to dress up as gold soldiers and roam the Bulei Huaihe area.

古文：光世奏庐难守，密干赵鼎，欲还太平州。
现代文：刘光世上奏庐州难以守卫，秘密同赵鼎联系，想返回太平州。
English: Liu Guangxu, who once said that it was difficult to guard Bozhou, secretly contacted Zhao Ding and wanted to return to Taiping.

古文：浚命吕祉驰往军中督师，光世已舍庐州退，浚遣人厉其众曰： 若有一人渡江，即斩以徇。 光世不得已，驻兵与沂中相应，遣王德、郦琼领兵自安丰出谢步，遇金将三战，皆败之。
现代文：张浚命令吕祉奔驰到军中监督军队，刘光世已经放弃庐州后退，张浚派人激励其部众说： 如有一人渡江，立即斩首示众。 刘光世迫不得已，驻兵同杨沂中相互呼应，派王德、郦琼领军从安丰出谢步，同金军相遇交战三次，都击败了敌人。
English: Zhang Jun ordered Lü Zhi Benzi to go to the middle of the army to supervise the army, Liu Guangzhi had already given up the retreat from Zhangzhou, Zhang Jun sent people to encourage his subordinates saying: If one person crosses the river, immediately behead him. Liu Guangzhi had no choice but to do so, the garrison and Yang Xizhong echoed each other, sent Wang De and Zi Qiong to lead the army from Anfeng to Xiepu, met and fought with the Golden Army three times, and defeated the enemy.

古文：张浚入对，言光世骄惰不战，不可为大将，请罢之。
现代文：张浚入朝上奏，说刘光世骄惰不战，不能当大将，请求罢免他。
English: Zhang Zhunying made a speech in the morning, saying that Liu Guangshi was too proud to fight and could not be a general, and requested that he be dismissed.

古文：帝命与赵鼎议，鼎曰： 光世将家子孙，将卒多出其门，罢之恐拂人心。 遂迁护国、镇安、保静军节度使。
现代文：高宗令他同赵鼎计议，赵鼎说： 刘光世将门子弟，将士很多出自他的门下，罢免他恐怕动摇军心。 于是改为护国、镇安、保静军节度使。
English: Gao Zong ordered him to discuss the matter with Zhao Ding. Zhao Ding said, "Liu Guangxing was a general's son, and many generals came from his school. If he were to be dismissed, it would shake the military's spirit. Therefore, he was changed to an envoy for national defense, peace and tranquility, and military discipline.

古文：右司谏陈公辅劾其不守庐州，张浚言其沈酣酒色，不恤国事，语以恢复，意气怫然，乞赐罢斥。
现代文：右司谏陈公辅弹劾刘光世不守卫庐州，张浚说他沉酣酒色之中，不体恤国家大事，对他说到恢复中原，他便怫然不高兴，请求罢免放逐他。
English: The Right Rev. Chen Gongfu impeached Liu Guangshi for not guarding Ganzhou. Zhang Jun said that he was drunk and did not consider national affairs. When he told him about the restoration of the Central Plains, he was very unhappy and asked for his dismissal and banishment.

古文：光世引疾请罢军政，又献所余金谷于朝。
现代文：刘光世以疾病请求罢免自己军政职务，又将所剩余的财物献给朝廷。
English: Liu Guangshi requested to be relieved of his military and political duties on the grounds of illness, and donated his remaining property to the imperial court.

古文：拜少师，充万寿观使，奉朝请，封荣国公，赐甲第一区，以兵归都督府。
现代文：朝廷拜他为少师，充任万寿观使、奉朝请，封他为荣国公，赐给第一等府第，将他的兵力拨给都督府统辖。
English: The imperial court worshiped him as a young teacher, appointed him as a disciple of Manjushri, invited him to serve the imperial court, named him the Prince of Glory, bestowed him to the first-class prefectures, and assigned his military forces to the control of the prefectural government.

古文：公辅又言光世虽罢，而迁少师，赏罚不明；中书舍人勾龙如渊又缴还赐第之命。
现代文：陈公辅又说刘光世虽已罢免，但拜他为少师，赏罚不明；中书舍人勾龙如渊又要求收回赐给府第的命令。
English: Chen Gongyu also said that although Liu Guangze had been removed from office, he was a minor teacher, and the reward and punishment were unknown; he also demanded that the order given to the prefecture be withdrawn.

古文：帝曰： 光世罢兵柄，若恩礼稍加，则诸将知有后福，皆效力矣。 卒赐之。
现代文：高宗说 ：刘光世罢去兵权，如果稍加一些恩惠礼遇，那么众将知道有后福，都努力报效了。 终于赐给他。
English: Gao Zong said, "Liu Guangxing was the first to give up military power, and if a few favors and courtesies were added, then everyone would know that there would be a blessing, and they would all work hard to repay the favor.

古文：初，光世麾下多降盗，素无纪律；至是，督府命吕祉节制其军。
现代文：当初，刘光世属下多是投降的盗贼，一向没有纪律；到这时，都督府命令吕祉统辖他的军队。
English: At first, most of Liu Guangxing's subordinates were capitulating thieves who had never been disciplined; at this time, the governor's office ordered Lv Zhi to control his army.

古文：郦琼杀祉，驱诸军降刘豫。
现代文：郦琼杀死吕祉，驱使各军投降刘豫。
English: Gong Qiong killed Lv Zhi and drove all the armies to surrender to Liu Yu.

古文：九年，用讲和恩，赐号 和众辅国功臣 ，进封雍国公、陕西宣抚使。
现代文：绍兴九年，沿用同金讲和对臣僚加官进爵的条例，赐刘光世为 和众辅国功臣 ，欲进封他为雍国公、陕西宣抚使。
English: In the ninth year of Shaoxing, using the same golden speech and the regulations on the promotion of ministers to knighthood, Liu Guangshi was given the title of Hero of the People's Republic of China. He wanted to be appointed as the Yong Guogong and the Shaanxi Proclamation Envoy.

古文：弟光远疏其短于言路，如渊时为中丞，再论光世不可遣而止。
现代文：其弟刘光远说他为议论讥讽，勾龙如渊当时任中丞，再次论说刘光世不能出朝重领军职，于是中止对他的封赏。
English: His younger brother, Liu Guangyuan, said that he was being sarcastic in his comments, and once again argued that Liu Guangshi could not return to lead the military, so his award was suspended.

古文：十年，金人围顺昌，拜太保，为三京招抚处置使，以援刘锜。
现代文：绍兴十年，金军围攻顺昌，朝廷拜刘光世为太保，任三京招抚处置使，以援助刘钅奇。
English: In the 10th year of Shaoxing, Shunchang was besieged by the Chinese army. The imperial court paid tribute to Liu Guangshi as the guardian of the court and appointed him as the envoy of the three capitals to aid Liu Beiqi.

古文：光世请李显忠为前军都统，又请王德自隶。
现代文：刘光世请求让李显忠任前军都统，又请求将王德拨隶自己。
English: Liu Guangshi requested that Li Xianzhong be appointed as the former military governor, and also requested that Wang De be made subordinate to him.

古文：德不愿受其节制；显忠行至宿、泗，军多溃。
现代文：王德不愿受他指挥；李显忠进至宿、泗时，士兵大多逃散。
English: Wang De did not want to be commanded by him; when Li Xianzhong entered the inn, most of the soldiers fled.

古文：进至和州，秦桧主罢兵，召还。
现代文：进至和州，秦桧力主撤兵，刘光世被召回。
English: After advancing to Hezhou, Qin Huili withdrew his troops, and Liu Guangxi was recalled.

古文：光世入见，为万寿观使，改封杨国公。
现代文：刘光世入朝觐见，任万寿观使，改封为杨国公。
English: Liu Guangzhe went to the imperial court and was appointed as the envoy of Wan Shou Guan, and changed his title to Yang Guogong.

古文：疾革，乞免其家科役，中书舍人张广格不下。
现代文：病愈后，乞求免去其家庭的科赋徭役，中书舍人张广阻挠不下。
English: After he recovered from his illness, he begged to be exempted from his family's scientific endowment service. Zhang Guang, the person in charge of the Chinese school, could not help but obstruct him.

古文：卒，年五十四。
现代文：去世时，五十四岁。
English: He later died at the age of 54.

古文：赠太师，官其子孙、甥侄十四人，谥武僖。
现代文：赠他为太师，子孙、甥侄十四人都得到官职，谥号 武僖 。
English: He gave him the title of Grand Master, and fourteen of his children, grandchildren, and nephews were given official positions, with the posthumous name of Wu Xi.

古文：乾道八年，追封安城郡王。
现代文：乾道八年，追封为安城郡王。
English: After eight years on the dry road, he was crowned the king of Ancheng County.

古文：开禧元年，追封鄜王。
现代文：开禧元年，追封为王。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was enthroned as king.

古文：光世在诸将中最先进。
现代文：刘光世在众将中最先成为大将。
English: Among the generals, Liu Guangxi was the first to become a general.

古文：律身不严，驭军无法，不肯为国任事，逋寇自资，见诋公论。
现代文：对自身要求不严，统驭军队没有法纪，不愿意为国家担负重任，拖延剿寇时机，一心只为自己打算，被公众舆论诋毁。
English: They are not strict with themselves, have no legal discipline in commanding the army, are unwilling to shoulder heavy responsibilities for the country, delay the opportunity to invade, are only concerned with their own plans, and are slandered by public opinion.

古文：又明年，进侍卫亲军马步军都虞候，寻授保信军节度使。
现代文：曾经入朝应对，说： 愿意尽力报国，他日史官将会记下我功绩第一。 高宗说 ：你不能只是口说空话，应当付诸行动之中。 
English: Once upon entering the imperial court, he said, "If I am willing to do my best to serve my country, someday the historian will record my achievements first." Gaozong said, "You can't just say empty words, you should put them into action."

古文：卒，年五十四。赠检校少保。
现代文：建炎初年，勾结宦宫康履以求自保。
English: In the first year of Jianyan, he colluded with Gong Gong Kanglu in order to protect himself.

古文：曲端字正甫，镇戎人。父涣，任左班殿直，战死。
现代文：又早日解除兵权，随时势浮沉，不被秦桧所忌恨，因此能窃居宠荣终其一生，和韩世忠、岳飞相比，差得远了。曲端字正甫，镇戎人。父亲曲涣，曾任左班殿直，后战死在沙场上。
English: He was also relieved of his military powers at an early date. He was able to rise and fall with the times, and was not hated by Qin Yu. As a result, he was able to stay in favor for the rest of his life. Compared to Han Shizhong and Yue Fei, he was far behind. Qu Duan's father, Zheng Fu, was a member of Zhen Rong. His father, Qu Yu, was a member of the Left Division of the Imperial Palace Guards, and died on the battlefield after the battle.

古文：端三岁，授三班借职。
现代文：曲端三岁时，被授予三班借职。
English: When she was three years old, she was assigned to the third grade.

古文：警敏知书，善属文，长于兵略，历秦凤路队将、泾原路通安砦兵马临押，权泾原路第三将。
现代文：机敏知书，善于写作文章，富有兵机韬略。历任秦凤路队将、泾原路通安寨兵马监押、泾原路第三将。
English: He was a quick learner, good at writing articles, and rich in military strategies. He was successively the commander of the Qinfeng Road Team, the commanding officer of the Anzai Troops and Horses of the Qinfeng Road Team, and the third commander of the Qinfeng Road Team.

古文：夏人入寇泾原，帅司调统制李庠捍御，端在遣中。
现代文：西夏军队入侵泾原路，帅司调统制李庠抵御，曲端也在派遣之中。
English: The Western Xia army invaded Yuyuan Road, and the commander-in-chief, Li Xi, resisted, and Quanduan was also dispatched.

古文：庠驻兵柏林堡，斥堠不谨，为夏人所薄，兵大溃，端力战败之，整军还。
现代文：李庠将部队驻扎在柏林堡，派出侦察戒备的士兵不谨慎，被夏军突袭，军队大溃而散，曲端极力苦战将敌击败，整顿军队返回。
English: Li Gan stationed his troops in the Berlin Fort, sent out soldiers for reconnaissance and alertness without caution, was raided by the Xia Army, the army was routed and dispersed, Qu Duan fought hard to defeat the enemy, and the rectified army returned.

古文：夏人再入寇，西安州、怀德军相继陷没。
现代文：夏军再次入侵，西安州、怀德军相继沦陷。
English: The Xia army invaded again, and the Xi'an and Huai'er armies fell one after another.

古文：镇戎当敌要冲，无守将，经略使席贡疾柏林功，奏端知镇戎军兼经略司统制官。
现代文：镇戎正处于敌人来路的要冲地带，没有守将，经略使席贡嫉妒曲端柏林堡之战所立的战功，奏请曲端知镇戎军兼经略司统制官。
English: Zhen Rong is located in the key area of the enemy's approach. There is no general in charge of the garrison. The Warlord made the Seigong jealous of Qu Duan's achievements in the Battle of Berlin Fort. He invited Qu Duan's military troops and the Warlord to be the commanding officer.

古文：建炎元年十二月，娄宿攻陕西。
现代文：建炎元年十二月，金将娄宿进攻陕西。
English: In December of the first year of Jianyuan, Jin launched an attack on Shansi.

古文：二年正月，入长安、凤翔，关、陇大震。
现代文：二年正月，进入长安、凤翔，关、陇地区极为震恐。
English: In the first month of the second year, the areas of Chang'an, Fengxiang, Guan and Handan were extremely shocked.

古文：二月，义兵起，金人自巩东还。
现代文：二月，各地抗金义军群起击敌，金军从巩州东撤还。
English: In February, the anti-gold-rebel forces in various regions rose up in groups to attack the enemy, and the gold forces withdrew from eastern Gongzhou.

古文：端时治兵泾原，招流民溃卒，所过人供粮秸，道不拾遗。
现代文：曲端当时在泾原治理军队，招集流民溃卒，对经过此地的人都供给粮食，因此道不拾遗。
English: At that time, Qu Duan was governing the army in Yuyuan, summoning the refugees to defeat the soldiers, and providing food to those who passed through this place. Therefore, there was no way to pick up the remains.

古文：金游骑入境，端遣副将吴玠据清溪岭与战，大破之。
现代文：金军游骑侵入泾原境内，曲端派副将吴占据清溪岭，同敌作战并大败敌人。
English: The cavalry of the Golden Army invaded the territory of Yuyuan, and Qu Duan sent Vice-General Wu to occupy Qingxi Ridge, fight with the enemy and defeat the enemy.

古文：端乘其退，遂下兵秦州，而义兵已复长安、凤翔。
现代文：曲端乘敌败退之机，于是攻下秦州，而义兵已经收复长安、凤翔。
English: Bokduan took advantage of the enemy's defeat and retreat, and then captured Qinzhou, while the volunteers had recovered Chang'an and Fengxiang.

古文：统领官刘希亮自凤翔归，端斩之。
现代文：统领官刘希亮从凤翔归来，曲端把他处死。
English: The commander-in-chief Liu Xiliang returned from Fengxiang, and Qu Duan put him to death.

古文：六月，以集英殿修撰知延安府。
现代文：六月，曲端以集英殿修撰的身份知延安府。
English: In June, Kyokudan visited Yan'an Prefecture as Shueiden Shusaku.

古文：王庶为龙图阁待制，节制陕西六路军马。
现代文：王庶任龙图阁待制，负责指挥陕西六路兵马。
English: Wang's son-in-law, Longtu Ge, was in charge of commanding the Shaanxi Sixth Route Army.

古文：遂授端吉州团练使，充节制司都统制，端雅不欲属庶。
现代文：于是任命曲端为吉州团练使，任节制司都统制，曲端很不愿意隶属王庶指挥。
English: As a result, Kyokuden was appointed as Yoshishu regimental drill sergeant, and was put in charge of the temperance division. Kyokuden was very reluctant to be subordinate to the second-in-command of the king.

古文：九月，金人攻陕西，庶召端会雍、耀间，端辞以未受命。
现代文：九月，金军进攻陕西，王庶征召曲端到雍、耀间会合，曲端推辞不接受命令。
English: In September, the Golden Army attacked Shaanxi Province. Wang Shou summoned Qudang to Yong and Yao for a meeting, but Qudang refused to accept the order.

古文：庶以鄜延兵先至龙坊，端又称已奏乞回避，席贡别遣统制官庞世才将步骑万人来会。
现代文：王庶以延军先到龙坊，曲端又声称已上奏请求回避，席贡另派统制官庞世才率步骑兵三万人前来会合。
English: Wang's second-in-command Yan Jun arrived at Longfang first, Qu Duan also claimed to have petitioned for evasion, and Xigong also sent the commanding officer Pang Shicai to lead 30,000 infantry and cavalry to the meeting.

古文：庶无如之何，则檄贡勒端还旧任，遣陕西节制司将官贺师范趋耀，别将王宗尹趋白水，且令原、庆出师为援，二帅各遣偏将刘仕忠、寇鯶来与师范会。
现代文：王庶对曲端无可奈何，只好写信给席贡勒令曲端还任旧职，派遣陕西节制司将官贺师范赴耀州，别将王宗尹赴白水，并命令原、庆州出兵作为后援，王庶、席贡各自派遣偏将刘仕忠、寇鱼军来同贺师范会合。
English: Wang Zongjun had no choice but to write to Xi Gongle to order him to keep his old post, to send He Shimin, the general of the Shaanxi Bureau of Statistics, to Yaozhou, and not to send Wang Zongyin to Baishui, and to order Yuan and Gyeongju to send troops as backup, and Wang Zongjun and Xi Gong to send partial general Liu Shizhong and the Pirate Army to meet with He Shimin.

古文：庶欲往耀督战，已行，会庞世才兵至邠，端中悔，以状白庶，言已赴军前，庶乃止。
现代文：王庶想到耀州督战，已经出发，会合庞世才部队到州，曲端中途后悔未应王庶征召，写信告诉王庶，说自己已赶到军前，王庶于是停止赴耀州督战。
English: Wang Shizhu thought of the Yaozhou overseer battle, and had already set out to gather the vast army to go to Yaozhou. Halfway through the journey, he regretted that he had not responded to Wang Shizhu's call, and wrote to Wang Shizhu to tell him that he had arrived at the front of the army. Wang Shizhu then stopped going to the Yaozhou overseer battle.

古文：师范轻敌不戒，卒遇敌于八公原，战死，二将各引去，端遂得泾原兵柄。
现代文：贺师范轻视敌人不加戒备，突然和敌人在八公原遭遇，贺师范战死，刘仕忠和寇鱼军各自率兵退走，曲端于是得到泾原路兵权。
English: He Shifan belittled the enemy without warning, and suddenly encountered the enemy in Hachigongyuan. He Shifan was killed in the battle, Liu Shizhong and the pirate army retreated with their respective troops, and Qu Duan was given the right to lead the troops along the Yingyuan Road.

古文：十一月，金谍知端、庶不协，并兵攻鄜延。
现代文：十一月，金军侦知曲端、王庶不和，集中兵力进攻延。
English: In November, the Golden Army detected the discord between Qu and Wang, and concentrated its forces to attack Yan.

古文：时端尽统泾原精兵，驻淳化。
现代文：当时曲端统领泾原路全部精兵，驻扎在淳化。
English: At that time, Qu Duan led all the elite soldiers of Yuyuan Road and was stationed in Junhua.

古文：庶日移文趣其进，又遣使臣、进士十数辈往说端，端不听。
现代文：王庶每天送达公文催促曲端前进，又派使臣、进士前后十多人前往劝说曲端，曲端不听。
English: Wang Shiao sent official documents every day to urge Qudang to advance, and sent more than ten envoys and envoys to persuade Qudang, but Qudang did not listen.

古文：庶知事急，又遣属官鱼涛督师，端阳许而实无行意。
现代文：王庶知道事情紧急，又派遣属官鱼涛前往督师，曲端表面答应而实际上并没有前行的意思。
English: Wang Shiao knew that the matter was urgent, and sent his subordinate official Yu Tao to the inspector. Qu Duan agreed on the surface, but actually had no intention of moving forward.

古文：权转运判官张彬为端随军应副，问以师期。
现代文：转运判官张彬跟随曲端军负责后勤供应，询问曲端行军日期。
English: Zhang Bin, the transit judge, followed the Qutang army to be responsible for logistics supply, and inquired about the date of the Qutang march.

古文：端笑谓彬曰： 公视端所部，孰与李纲救太原兵乎？ 彬曰： 不及也。 端曰： 纲召天下兵，不度而往，以取败。
现代文：曲端笑对张彬说： 你看我所率领的部队，与李纲救援太原的兵力谁强呢？ 张彬说： 你的不如李纲的兵力。 曲端说： 李纲召集天下兵，不加节制就前往，因此失败。
English: Qu Duan laughed and said to Zhang Bin, "Look at the troops I am leading, who is stronger than the troops Li Gang led to rescue Taiyuan?" Zhang Bin said, "You are not as strong as Li Gang's troops." Qu Duan said, "Li Gang gathered the world's soldiers and went to Taiyuan without restraint, so he failed.

古文：今端兵不满万，不幸而败，则金骑长驱，无陕西矣。
现代文：今天我的兵力不到一万，如不幸失败，那么金军骑兵就会长驱直入，陕西就会丧失了。
English: Today, my troop strength is less than ten thousand. If I fail miserably, then the cavalry of the Golden Army will drive straight in, and Shaanxi will be lost.

古文：端计全陕西与鄜延一路孰轻重，是以未敢即行，不如荡贼巢穴，攻其必救。 乃遣吴玠攻华州，拔之。
现代文：我估量陕西全境和延一路的轻重缓急，因此未敢立即行动，不如扫荡敌人巢穴，攻敌必救之地。 于是派遣吴进攻华州，将其攻拔。
English: I estimated the priorities of the entire territory of Shaanxi and Yan'an Road, so I did not dare to act immediately, but it was better to sweep the enemy's lair and attack the enemy's indispensable place. So I sent Wu to attack Huazhou and attack it.

古文：端自分蒲城而不攻，引兵趋耀之同官，复迂路由邠之三水与玠会襄乐。
现代文：曲端亲自率兵放弃蒲城不攻，率兵趋耀州的同官，又由远路从州的三水同吴在襄乐会合。
English: Qu Duan personally led the troops to abandon Putian without attacking, led the troops to seek the same officers in Yaozhou, and met with Wu in Xiangle from Sanshui in Zhoushou.

古文：金攻延安急，庶收散亡往援。
现代文：金军急攻延安，王庶收集散亡士卒前往救援。
English: The Chinese army suddenly attacked Yan'an, and Wang Shiao collected the scattered dead soldiers and went to the rescue.

古文：温州观察使、知凤翔府王〈王燮〉将所部发兴元，比庶至甘泉，而延安已陷。
现代文：温州观察使、知凤翔府王率领所部从兴元出发，等到王庶至甘泉，而延安已经失陷。
English: The Wenzhou observation envoy, Zhifeng Xiangfu Wang, led the expedition from Xingyuan to Ganquan, but Yan'an had already fallen.

古文：庶无所归，以军付〈王燮〉，自将百骑与官属驰赴襄乐劳军。
现代文：王庶没有地方可去，将军队交付王，自己率领一百多名骑兵和官属奔赴襄乐慰问军队。
English: Wang Shiao had no place to go, so he handed over the army to Wang. He led more than a hundred cavalry and officials to Xiangle to offer condolences to the army.

古文：庶犹以节制望端，欲倚以自副，端弥不平。
现代文：王庶依然以节制身份看待曲端，打算让他当自己的副手，曲端心中更加不满。
English: Wang Shiao still regards Qu Duan as a moderate and intends to make him his deputy, which makes Qu Duan even more dissatisfied.

古文：端号令素严，入壁者，虽贵不敢驰。
现代文：曲端号令一向严厉，进入城中的人，即使是权贵也不敢奔驰跑马。
English: The command at the end of the song has always been strict, and people who enter the city, even the powerful, do not dare to gallop.

古文：庶至，端令每门减其从骑之半，及帐下，仅数骑而已。
现代文：王庶来到，曲端下令每座城门减掉一半王庶随从骑兵，到帐下时，只剩下数骑。
English: When the prince's retainers arrived, Qu ordered each gate to be reduced by half. By the time the prince's retainers arrived, only a few retainers were left.

古文：端犹虚中军以居庶，庶坐帐中，端先以戎服趋于庭，即而与张彬及走马承受公事高中立同见帐中。
现代文：曲端依然腾出中军帐让给王庶居住，王庶坐于帐中，曲端先穿着军服来到庭中，接着同张彬及走马承受公事高中立一起到帐中拜见王庶。
English: Qu Duan still vacated the Chinese military account to let Wang Shizhu live, Wang Shizhu sat in the account, Qu Duan first came to the courtyard wearing a military uniform, and then went to the account with Zhang Bin and Wang Ma to meet Wang Shizhu.

古文：良久，端声色俱厉，问庶延安失守状，曰： 节制固知爱身，不知爱天子城乎？ 庶曰： 吾数令不从，谁其爱身者？ 端怒曰： 在耀州屡陈军事，不一见听，何也？ 因起归帐。
现代文：过了很长时间，曲端言辞俱厉，询问王庶延安失守的情况，说： 节制固然知道爱惜自身，而不知爱惜皇上的城池吗？ 王庶说 ：我数次命令你不服从，到底谁是爱惜自身的人？ 曲端愤怒地说 ：在耀州我曾多次陈述有关军事见解，没有一次被你采纳，这是为什么？ 
English: After a long time, Qu Duang became more and more rhetorical, asking Wang Shou about the situation of Yan'an's loss of defense, saying: Does restraint know how to cherish itself, but does not know how to cherish the emperor's castle? Wang Shou said: I ordered you several times not to obey, after all, who is the one who cherishes himself? Qu Duang said angrily: In Yazhou, I have repeatedly stated the relevant military opinions, and have not been adopted by you once, why is this?

古文：庶留端军，终夕不自安。
现代文：于是起身回到自己的军帐。王庶留在曲端军中，整夜惶恐不安。
English: So he got up and went back to his army account. Wang Shiao stayed in the Qutang army and was worried all night.

古文：端欲即军中杀庶，夺其兵。
现代文：曲端想在军中杀死王庶，吞并他的部队。
English: Qu Duan wanted to kill Wang Shiao in the army and absorb his troops.

古文：夜走宁州，见陕西抚谕使谢亮，说之曰： 延安五路襟喉，今已失之，《春秋》大夫出疆得以专之，请诛庶归报。 亮曰： 使事有指，今以人臣擅诛于外是跋扈也，公为则自为。 端意阻，复归军。
现代文：于是连夜来到宁州，拜见陕西抚谕使谢亮，对他说： 延安是五路咽喉之地，今已丧失，《春秋》记载大夫出兵在外可以专断行事，请求诛杀王庶上报。 谢亮说 ：他的职务是由朝廷指命的，今天以人臣的身份擅自把他诛杀在外，这是专横暴戾，你如果要这样做就自己去做。 曲端意图受阻，又回到军中。
English: Therefore, he came to Ningzhou overnight, met with the Shaanxi Fuzhuan, and told Xie Liang: Yan'an is a five-way throat land, and now it has been lost. "Spring and Autumn" records that the doctor can act arbitrarily when sending troops outside, and request the killing of Wang Shuo to be reported. Xie Liang said: His duties are ordered by the imperial court, and today, as a minister, he killed him outside without authorization. This is arbitrary and violent. If you want to do this, do it yourself. Qu Duan's intention was blocked, and he returned to the army.

古文：明日，庶见端，为言已自劾待罪。
现代文：第二天，王庶会见曲端，说自己已上奏检讨请求处治。
English: The next day, Wang Shao met with Qu Duan and said that he had submitted a review request for disciplinary action.

古文：端拘縻其官属，夺其节制使印，庶乃得去。
现代文：曲端拘留他的官属，夺取他的节制使印章，王庶才得以离去。
English: Qu Duan detained his officials, seized his seal of temperance, and Wang Shiao was able to leave.

古文：王〈王燮〉将两军在庆阳，端召之，〈王燮〉不应。
现代文：王率领两军在庆阳，曲端召见他，王置之不理。
English: Wang led the two armies in Qingyang. Qu Duan summoned him, but Wang Jian ignored him.

古文：会有告〈王燮〉过邠军士劫掠者，端怒，命统制官张中孚率兵召〈王燮〉，谓中孚曰： 〈王燮〉不听，则斩以来。 中孚至庆阳，〈王燮〉已去，遽遣兵要之，不及而止。
现代文：恰逢有人控告王经过州时其部下士众抢劫民众，曲端大怒，命令统制官张中孚率兵召王，对张中孚说： 王不服从，就杀死他再回来。 张中孚到庆阳，王已经离去，于是派兵邀击他，追不上而停止。
English: Just as someone accused Wang of robbing people while his subordinates were passing through the prefecture, Qu Duan flew into a rage and ordered the commanding officer Zhang Zhongfu to lead the troops to summon Wang, saying to Zhang Zhongfu: "If Wang disobeys, kill him and come back." Zhang Zhongfu arrived in Qingyang, but Wang had already left, so he sent troops to invite him to attack, but they could not catch up and stopped.

古文：初，叛贼史斌围兴元不克，引兵还关中。
现代文：当初，叛贼史斌围攻兴元不下，率兵返回关中。
English: At first, the traitor Shi Bin besieged Xingyuan and led his troops back to Guanzhong.

古文：义兵统领张宗谔诱斌如长安而散其众，欲徐图之。
现代文：义兵统领张宗谔引诱史斌到长安以分散他的部众，想慢慢消灭他。
English: Zhang Zonglu, the leader of the volunteers, lured Shi Bin to Chang'an in order to disperse his followers and slowly exterminate him.

古文：端遣吴玠袭斌擒之，端自袭宗谔杀之。
现代文：曲端派吴袭击并擒获史斌，曲端亲自率兵袭击并杀死张宗谔。
English: Qu Duan sent Wu to attack and capture Shi Bin, while Qu Duan personally led soldiers to attack and kill Zhang Zongyao.

古文：三年九月，迁康州防御使、泾原路经略安抚使。
现代文：建炎三年九月，曲端升任康州防御使、泾原路经略安抚使。
English: In September of the third year of Jianyan, Qu Duan was promoted to the post of Kangzhou defense envoy, and the post of Xingyuan Road was slightly pacified.

古文：时延安新破，端不欲去泾原，乃以知泾州郭浩权鄜延经略司公事。
现代文：当时延安刚刚被敌攻破。曲端不想离开泾原，于是以知泾州郭浩暂时管理延路经略司公事。
English: At that time, Yan'an had just been breached by the enemy. Qu Duan didn't want to leave Yuyuan, so Guo Hao, a scholar from Zhangzhou, temporarily managed the business affairs of Yan'an.

古文：自谢亮归，朝廷闻端欲斩王庶，疑有叛意，以御营司提举召端，端疑不行。
现代文：自谢亮归来后，朝廷听说曲端曾想杀死王庶，怀疑他有叛变的意图，于是召曲端回朝任御营司提举，曲端产生怀疑而不前去。
English: After Xie Liang's return, the imperial court heard that Qu Duan had wanted to kill Wang Shiao and suspected that he had mutinous intentions. Therefore, he summoned Qu Duan back to the imperial court to be promoted to the post of imperial commander. However, Qu Duan had doubts and did not go.

古文：议者喧言端反，端无以自明。
现代文：议论者扬言曲端反叛，曲端没有办法表明自己。
English: Controversialists have threatened to rebel against him, but he has no way to express himself.

古文：会张浚宣抚川、陕，入辨，以百口明端不反。
现代文：恰逢张浚宣抚川、陕，入朝辞行，以全家老少一百口做担保表明曲端没有反叛。
English: At the same time, Zhang Jun from Xunfu River and Shaanxi Province entered the imperial court and resigned from his post. He used his entire family of 100 members as a guarantee to show that Qu Duan did not rebel.

古文：浚自收揽英杰，以端在陕西屡与敌角，欲仗其威声。
现代文：张浚收罗延揽英雄豪杰，由于曲端在陕西多次同敌人交锋，打算依仗他的威名声誉。
English: Zhang Jun collection Luo Yan collection hero hero, because Qu Duan has repeatedly clashed with the enemy in Shaanxi, he intends to rely on his prestige and reputation.

古文：承制筑坛，拜端为威武大将军、宣州观察使、宣抚处置使司都统制、知渭州。
现代文：张浚按照制度筑祭坛，拜曲端为威武大将军、宣州观察使、宣抚处置使司都统制、知渭州。
English: Zhang Jun built the altar according to the system, and the worshipers were the great general Wei Wu, the Xuanzhou observation envoy, the Xuanfu disposal envoy, the capital control system, and the Zhisheng state.

古文：端登坛受礼，军士欢声如雷。
现代文：曲端登坛接受礼拜，将士欢声雷动。
English: At the end of the song, he ascended the altar to receive worship, and the soldiers cheered.

古文：浚虽欲用端，然未测端意，遣张彬以招填禁军为名，诣渭州察之。
现代文：张浚虽想使用曲端，但不清楚曲端的意向，派遣张彬以招募补充禁军做借口，到渭州观察他。
English: Although Zhang Jun wanted to use Qu Xuan, he did not know Qu Xuan's intention. He sent Zhang Bin to observe him in Zhangzhou under the pretext of recruiting additional forbidden troops.

古文：彬见端问曰： 公常患诸路兵不合，财不足；今兵已合，财已备，娄宿以孤军深入吾境，我合诸路攻之不难。
现代文：张彬见到曲端问道： 你常常忧虑各路兵马不能集中，财用不足；现在兵马已经集中，财用已经齐备，娄宿以孤军深入我境，我会合各路军队向他进攻并不困难。
English: When Zhang Bin saw Qu, he asked: You often worried that the troops and horses from all directions could not be concentrated and the financial resources were insufficient; now that the troops and horses have been concentrated and the financial resources have been fully prepared, it is not difficult for Xuzhou to invade our territory with a lone army, and I will join the troops from all directions to attack him.

古文：万一粘罕并兵而来，何以待之？ 端曰： 不然，兵法先较彼己，今敌可胜，止娄宿孤军一事；然将士精锐，不减前日。
现代文：万一粘罕集中兵力前来，怎么对付他？ 曲端说： 不是这样，兵法先比较敌我双方情况，现在敌人可以战胜，只有娄宿孤军一件事；但金军将士精锐，不减以前。
English: In the unlikely event that Klichan should come with a concentrated force, how would you deal with him? Qu Duan said, "Not so. First, we should compare the situation of the two sides. Now, the enemy can be defeated. It is only a matter of sending and receiving a lone army. However, the elite soldiers of the Golden Army will not be reduced."

古文：我不可胜，亦止合五路兵一事；然将士无以大异于前。
现代文：我不能胜利，也只有集中五路军队一事；但将士和从前没什么不同。
English: I can't win, and there is only the matter of concentrating the five-way army; but the soldiers are no different from before.

古文：况金人因粮于我，我常为客，彼常为主。
现代文：况且金军困粮于我，我常处于被动，敌人常处于主动。
English: Moreover, the Golden Army is in need of me, I am often passive, and the enemy is often active.

古文：今当反之，按兵据险，时出偏师以扰其耕获。
现代文：当今应当反其道而行之，指挥军队占据险要，不时派出偏师扰乱金军耕耘收获。
English: Today, we should do the opposite, command the army to occupy the critical point, and from time to time send out deviant divisions to disrupt the Golden Army's hard work and harvest.

古文：彼不得耕，必取粮河东，则我为主，彼为客，不一二年必自困毙，可一举而灭也。
现代文：敌人不能耕种，必然到河东夺取粮食，这样我就处于主动，敌人就处于被动，不到一二年时间敌人自己必然发生困敝，可以一举歼灭。
English: The enemy cannot cultivate, and will inevitably go to the east of the river to seize grain. In this way, I will be in the active position, and the enemy will be in the passive position. In less than a year or two, the enemy will inevitably be trapped, and can be annihilated at one stroke.

古文：万一轻举，后忧方大。 彬以端言复命，浚不主端说。
现代文：万一轻举妄动，必然留下无穷后患。 张彬将曲端的话上报，张浚没有采纳曲端的意见。
English: Zhang Bin reported Qu's words to the authorities, but Zhang Jun did not accept Qu's opinion.

古文：四年春，金人攻环庆，端遣吴玠等拒于彭原店，端自将屯宜禄，玠先胜。
现代文：建炎四年春，金军进攻环庆，曲端派吴等人在彭原店抵御，曲端自己率军屯驻宜禄，吴开始取得胜利。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of Jian Yan, the Golden Army attacked Huanqing, Qu Duan sent Wu and others to resist in Pengyuan, Qu Duan himself led the army to stay in Yilu, and Wu began to win.

古文：既而金军复振，玠小却，端退屯泾州，金乘胜焚邠州而去。
现代文：不久金军士气复振，吴稍稍后退，曲端退驻泾州，金军乘胜焚毁州后撤走。
English: Soon, the morale of the gold army was revived, Wu retreated a little bit, Qudan retreated to Bozhou, and the gold army took advantage of the victory to burn the state and withdrew.

古文：玠怨端不为援，端谓玠前军已败，不得不据险以防冲突，乃劾玠违节制。
现代文：吴报怨曲端不前去增援，曲端说吴前军已败，迫不得已后退占据险要以防止敌军冲突，于是弹劾吴违背指挥。
English: Wu complained that Qu Duan did not go forward to reinforce. Qu Duan said that Wu's front army had been defeated and was forced to retreat to occupy the critical point to prevent enemy conflict, and then impeached Wu for disobeying the command.

古文：是秋，兀术窥江、淮，浚议出师以挠其势。
现代文：这年秋天，兀窥伺江、淮，张浚计议出兵以阻挠金军势头。
English: In the autumn of that year, Yan Pei, Wei Jiang, Huai and Zhang Jun planned to send troops to block the momentum of the Golden Army.

古文：端曰： 平原广野，贼便于冲突，而我军未尝习水战。
现代文：曲端说 ：平原旷野，敌人便于往来驰骋，而我军未曾练习水战。
English: Qu Duan said: the plain is a wilderness, the enemy is easy to travel, and our army has never practiced water warfare.

古文：金人新造之势，难与争锋，宜训兵秣马保疆而已，俟十年乃可。 端既与浚异，浚积前疑，竟以彭原事罢端兵柄，与祠，再责海州团练副使、万州安置。
现代文：金军来势凶猛，难以同其争锋，应当厉兵秣马保卫边疆，等待十年才可以反击。 曲端既与张浚不合，张浚于是集中以前对曲端的怀疑，竟用彭原之事罢免曲端兵权，让他去管理祠祭事务，再贬为海州团练副使，安置到万州。
English: The arrival of the gold army was fierce, it was difficult to compete with it, and the frontier should be defended vigorously, and it was necessary to wait for ten years before it could counterattack. Qu Duan did not agree with Zhang Jun, so Zhang Jun concentrated on the doubts about Qu Duan before, and even used the Pengyuan matter to remove Qu Duan's military power, let him manage the ancestral hall and festival affairs, and then demoted him to the deputy envoy of Haizhou Reunification, and placed him in Wanzhou.

古文：是年，浚为富平之役，军败，诛赵哲，贬刘锡。
现代文：这年，张浚发起富平战役，遭到失败，诛杀赵哲，贬斥刘锡。
English: This year, Zhang Jun launched the Fuping Campaign, but failed. He killed Zhao Zhe and disparaged Liu Xi.

古文：浚欲慰人望，下令以富平之役，泾原军马出力最多，既却退之后，先自聚集，皆缘前帅曲端训练有方。叙端左武大夫，兴州居住。
现代文：张浚为了收拾人心，下令因富平之战，泾原军队出力最多，大军退却之后，又最先集结起来，都是由于以前的统帅曲端训练有方，叙复曲端为左武大夫，居住兴州。
English: In order to win the hearts and minds of the people, Zhang Jun ordered that because of the Battle of Fuping, the Yingyuan army should make the greatest output. After the retreat of the great army, it was the first to assemble again. This was all due to the fact that the former commander-in-chief, Qu Xuan, was well-trained, and the commander-in-chief, Qu Xuan, was Dr. Zuo Wu, who lived in Xingzhou.

古文：绍兴元年正月，叙正任荣州刺史，提举江州太平观，徙阆州。
现代文：绍兴元年正月，又叙复曲端任荣州刺史，提举江州太平观，迁徙到阆州。
English: In the first month of the first year of the year in Shaoxing, he also recited the history of the restoration of Qudan to Rongzhou, raised the Jiangzhou Taiping concept, and moved to Zhangzhou.

古文：于是浚自兴州移司阆州，欲复用端。
现代文：这时张浚将宣抚司从兴州移到阆州，准备重新起用曲端。
English: At this time, Zhang Jun moved the propaganda department from Xingzhou to Ganzhou to prepare for the re-appointment of Qu.

古文：玠与端有憾，言曲端再起，必不利于张公；王庶又从而间之。
现代文：吴同曲端有怨，说如曲端再被任用，必然对张浚不利；王庶又从中离间。
English: Wu Tongquan had a grudge, saying that if Ququan was reappointed, it would inevitably be unfavorable to Zhang Jun; Wang Shiao was also separated from him.

古文：浚入其说，亦畏端难制。
现代文：张浚采纳了他们的意见，也畏惧曲端难以制服。
English: Zhang Jun adopted their opinions, but also feared that it would be difficult to subdue Qu.

古文：端尝作诗题柱曰： 不向关中兴事业，却来江上泛渔舟。 庶告浚，谓其指斥乘舆，于是送端恭州狱。
现代文：曲端曾做诗题在柱子上说： 不向关中兴事业，却来江上泛渔舟。 王庶报告张浚，说曲端指责皇上，于是将曲端送到恭州监狱。
English: Qu Quan once wrote a poem on a pillar, saying, "I did not go to Guanzhong to promote the cause, but I came to the river to fish." Wang Shiao reported to Zhang Jun that Quan accused the emperor, so he sent Quan to Gongzhou Prison.

古文：武臣康随者尝忤端，鞭其背，随恨端入骨。
现代文：武将康随曾经忤逆曲端，曲端鞭打他的脊背，因此康随对曲端恨之入骨。
English: The warlord Kang Sui used to beat and whip Kyuden, and Kyuden whipped his back, so Kang Sui hated Kyuden.

古文：浚以随提点夔路刑狱，端闻之曰： 吾其死矣！ 呼 天 者数声；端有马名 铁象 ，日驰四百里，至是连呼 铁象可惜 者又数声，乃赴逮。
现代文：张浚任命康随提点夔路刑狱，曲端听说后说： 我这回死定了！ 连呼几声 天 ；曲端有坐骑名 铁象 ，一日能奔驰四百里，到这时又连呼几声 铁象可惜 ，然后到狱中自首。
English: After hearing that Zhang Jun had appointed Kang Sui to point out the way to the prison, Qu Duan said, "I'm sure to die this time!" He called out several times, "Heaven!"; Qu Duan had a horse named "Iron Elephant," which could gallop four hundred miles a day. At this time, he called out several times, "It's a pity for the Iron Elephant," and then surrendered to the prison.

古文：既至，随令狱吏絷维之，糊其口，熁之以火。
现代文：到了之后，康随命令监狱官吏把曲端捆绑起来，堵住他的嘴，用火烧烤他。
English: When he arrived, Kang ordered the prison officials to tie him up, gag him and grill him.

古文：端乾渴求饮，予之酒，九窍流血而死，年四十一。
现代文：曲端干渴请求饮水，给他酒，七窍流血而死，时年四十一岁。
English: Qu Duan thirstily asked for water and was given wine. He bled to death at the age of forty-one.

古文：陕西士大夫莫不惜之，军民亦皆怅怅，有叛去者。
现代文：陕西文人士大夫无不为此惋惜，士兵和民众也都惆怅不满，有不少人叛逃。
English: Shaanxi literati doctors all regret this, soldiers and people are also dissatisfied, and many people have defected.

古文：浚寻得罪，追复端宣州观察使，谥壮愍。
现代文：张浚不久得罪朝廷，朝廷追复曲端为宣州观察使，谥号 壮愍 。
English: Zhang Jun soon offended the imperial court, and the imperial court reinstated Qu as the Xuanzhou observation envoy, with the nickname Zhuangzhuang.

古文：端有将略，使展尽其才，要未可量。
现代文：曲端有将帅的谋略，假如能让他尽展自己的才能，前程不可限度。
English: The composer has a great strategy. If he is allowed to develop his talent to the full, his future will be limitless.

古文：然刚愎，恃才凌物，此其所以取祸云。
现代文：但是刚愎自用，恃才傲物，这是他遭受灾祸的原因。
English: But he was arrogant and self-willed, and this was the cause of his misfortune.

