古文：黄帝曰：呜呼远哉！
现代文：黄帝说：深远啊！
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "How profound!

古文：闵闵乎若视深渊，若迎浮云，视深渊尚可测，迎浮云莫知其际。
现代文：道之远大幽深，好象视探深渊，又好象迎看浮云，但渊虽深，尚可以测量，迎看浮云，却不到其边际。
English: The road is vast and deep, as if looking into the abyss, and as if looking at floating clouds, but although the abyss is deep, it can still be measured, and looking at floating clouds, it does not reach its edge.

古文：圣人之术，为万民式，论裁志意，必有法则，循经守数，接循医事，为万民副，故事有五过四德，汝知之乎？
现代文：圣人的医术，是万民学习的榜样，论栽人的志意，必有法则，因循遵守医学的常规和法则，审查医事，为万民的辅助，所以医事有五过和四德，你知道吗？
English: The medicine of the saints is a model for all people to learn from. When it comes to cultivating people's will, there must be rules. Follow the rules and regulations of medicine, review medical affairs, and serve as an aid to all people. Therefore, there are five transgressions and four virtues in medical affairs, do you know?

古文：雷公避席再拜曰：臣年幼小，蒙愚以惑，不闻五过与四德，比类形名，虚引其经，心无所对。
现代文：雷公离开席位再拜回答说：我年幼小，蒙昧无知，不曾听说过五过和四德，虽然也能从病的症状和名目上来比类，但只是虚引经义而已，心理还不明白不能回答。
English: Leaving his seat, Lei Gong bowed again and replied, "I am young and ignorant. I have never heard of the five virtues and the four virtues. Although I can compare the symptoms and names of diseases, it is only a false reference to the meaning of the scriptures. I still don't understand the psychology and can't answer.

古文：帝曰：凡未诊病者，必问尝贵后贱，虽不中邪，病从内生，名曰脱营。
现代文：黄帝说：在未诊病前，应问病人的生活情况，如果是先贵后贱，虽然没有感受外邪，也会病从内生，这种病叫 脱营 。
English: Huang Di said: Before the undiagnosed disease, the patient's living conditions should be asked. If it is first high and then low, although there is no feeling of external evil, the disease will also be endogenous. This disease is called "de-camping."

古文：尝富后贫，名曰失精，五气留连，病有所并。
现代文：如果是先富后贫，发病叫做 失精 ，由于五脏之气留连不运，积并而为病。
English: If it is first rich and then poor, the disease is called aspermia, which is caused by the accumulation of bad luck from the five internal organs.

古文：医工诊之，不在藏府，不变躯形，诊之而疑，不知病名。
现代文：医生诊察这种病，病的初期，由于病不在脏腑，形体也无改变，医生常诊而疑之，不知是什么病。
English: Doctors diagnosed this disease, the early stage of the disease, because the disease is not in the intestines, the body has not changed, doctors often suspect it, I do not know what disease.

古文：身体日减，气虚无精，病深无气，洒洒然时惊，病深者，以其外耗于卫，内夺于荣。
现代文：日久则身体逐渐消瘦，气虚而精无以生，病势深重则真气被耗，阳气日虚，因洒洒恶寒而心怯时惊，其所以病势日益深重，是因为在外耗损了卫气，在内劫夺了营血。
English: With each passing day, one's body gradually loses weight, one's qi is depleted, and one can't exert oneself. With a serious illness, one's qi is depleted, one's yang qi is depleted, and one's heart is scared because of the cold. The reason why one's illness becomes more and more serious is because one's qi is depleted outside, and one's blood is robbed inside.

古文：良工所失，不知病情，此亦治之一过也。
现代文：这种病即便是技术高明的医生，若不问明病人的情况，不知其致病的原因，更不能治愈，这是诊治上的第一个过失。
English: This is the first mistake in diagnosis and treatment. Even a highly skilled doctor cannot cure this disease without asking about the patient's condition and knowing the cause of the disease.

古文：凡欲诊病者，必问饮食居处，暴乐暴苦，始乐后苦，皆伤精气，精气竭绝，形体毁沮。
现代文：凡欲诊治疾病时，一定要问病人的饮食和居住环境，以及是否有精神上的突然欢乐，突然忧苦，或先乐后苦等情况，因为突然苦乐都能损伤精气，使精气遏绝，形体败坏。
English: Anyone who wants to diagnose and treat a disease must ask about the patient's diet and living environment, as well as whether there is a sudden spiritual joy, sudden sorrow, or pain after pleasure, because sudden bitterness can damage the spirit, suppress the spirit, and corrupt the body.

古文：暴怒伤阴，暴喜伤阳，厥气上行，满脉去形。
现代文：暴怒则伤阴，暴喜则伤阳，阴阳俱伤，则使人气厥逆而上行，充满于经脉，而神亦浮越，去离于形体。
English: Violent anger hurts the yin, violent joy hurts the yang, and both yin and yang are hurt, which makes people's qi flow backwards and upwards, filling the meridians, and the gods also float, leaving the body.

古文：愚医治之，不知补泻，不知病情，精华日脱，邪气乃并，此治之二过也。
现代文：技术低劣的医生，在诊治这种疾病时，既不能恰当地运用泻治法，又不了解病情，致使精气日渐耗散，邪气得以积并，这是诊治上的第二个过失。
English: In the diagnosis and treatment of this disease, doctors with inferior technology can neither use the laxative method properly nor understand the disease, resulting in the gradual dissipation of the essence and the accumulation of evil spirits. This is the second mistake in diagnosis and treatment.

古文：善为脉者，必以比类奇恒，从容知之，为工而不知道，此诊之不足贵，此治之三过也。
现代文：善于诊脉的医生，必将病之奇恒，比类辨别，从容分析，得知其病情，如果医生不懂得这个道理，他的诊治技术就没有什么可贵之处，这是诊病上的第三个过失。
English: A doctor who is good at diagnosing the pulse will surely distinguish the strangeness of the disease, compare and contrast, analyze calmly, and know its condition. If the doctor does not understand this principle, his diagnosis and treatment technology has nothing to be valued. This is the third fault in diagnosis.

古文：诊有三常，必问贵贱，封君败伤，及欲侯王。
现代文：诊病时须注意三种情况，即必须问其社会地位的贵贱，及是否曾有被削爵失势之事，以及是否有欲作侯王的妄想。
English: There are three things to be aware of when diagnosing the disease, that is, it is necessary to ask about the nobility and lowliness of his social status, and whether he has ever been stripped of his peerage and lost his power, and whether he has the desire to be a prince.

古文：故贵脱势，虽不中邪，精神内伤，身必败亡。
现代文：因为原来地位高贵，失势以后，其情志必抑郁不伸，这种人，虽然未中外邪，但由于精神已经内伤，身体必然败亡。
English: Because of the original noble status, after losing power, his sentiments will be depressed and not extend. This kind of person, although not evil in and out, but because the spirit has been injured internally, the body will inevitably perish.

古文：始富后贫，虽不伤邪，皮焦筋屈，痿躄为挛。
现代文：先富后贫的人，虽未伤于邪气，也会发生皮毛憔枯，筋脉拘屈，足痿弱拘挛不能行走。
English: People who are first rich and then poor, although they are not hurt by evil spirits, will also develop withered fur, stiff muscles, weak ankles, and unable to walk.

古文：医不能严，不能动神，外为柔弱，乱至失常，病不能移，则医事不行，此治之四过也。
现代文：对这类病人，医生如果不能严肃地对其开导，不能动其思想改变其精神面貌，而一味的对其柔弱顺从，任其发展下去，则必然乱之而失常，致病不能变动，医治也不发生效果，这是诊治上的第四个过失。
English: For such patients, if the doctor cannot seriously enlighten them, cannot move their thoughts to change their mental outlook, but blindly obeys their softness and weakness, and allows them to develop, they will inevitably be disordered and abnormal. The cause of the disease cannot be changed, and the treatment will not be effective. This is the fourth mistake in diagnosis and treatment.

古文：凡诊者必知终始，有知余绪，切脉问名，当合男女。
现代文：凡诊治疾病，必须了解其发病初期和现在的病情，又要知其病之本末，在诊脉问证时，应结合男女在生理及脉证上的特点。
English: When diagnosing and treating a disease, it is necessary to understand its early onset and current condition, and to know the cause of the disease. When examining the pulse, the characteristics of men and women in terms of physiology and pulse should be combined.

古文：离绝菀结，忧恐喜怒，五藏空虚，血气离守，工不能知，何术之语。
现代文：如因亲爱之人分离而怀念不绝，致情志郁结难解，及忧恐喜怒等，都可使五脏空虚，血气离守，医生如不知道这些道理，还有什么诊治技术可言。
English: If due to the separation of a dear person and miss it endlessly, causing emotional distress, and anxiety, fear, anger, etc., can make the internal organs empty, blood and qi away, if the doctor does not know these reasons, what kind of diagnosis and treatment techniques can be said.

古文：尝富大伤，斩筋绝脉，身体复行，令泽不息。
现代文：尝富之人，一旦失去财势，必大伤其心神，致筋脉严重损伤，形体虽然依能够行动，但津液已不再滋生了。
English: Those who have tasted wealth, once they lose their wealth, will be greatly hurt, causing serious damage to the arteries. Although the body can still move, the body fluid will no longer grow.

古文：故伤败结积，留薄归阳，脓积寒炅。
现代文：若旧伤败结，致血气留聚不散，郁而化热，归于阳分，久则成脓，脓血蓄积，使人寒热交作。
English: If the old injury is defeated, it will cause the blood gas to remain and not dissipate, and the depression will turn into heat, which will be attributed to the yang, and the long-term will become pus, and the pus will accumulate, causing cold and fever.

古文：粗工治之，亟刺阴阳，身体解散，四支转筋，死日有期，医不能明，不问所发，唯言死日，亦为粗工，此治之五过也。
现代文：粗律的医生治疗这种病，由于他不了解病系劳伤脓积，而多次刺其阴阳经脉，使其气血更虚，致身体懈散，四肢转筋，死期已不远了，医生对此既不能明辩，又不问其发病原因，只是说病已危重，这是粗律的医生，此为诊治上的第五个过失。
English: The rude doctor treated this disease, because he did not understand the accumulation of work injuries of the disease, and repeatedly stabbed his yin and yang meridians, making his qi and blood more deficient, causing the body to be loose, the limbs to turn into muscles, and the death is not far away. The doctor could not clearly argue about this, and did not ask the cause of the disease, but said that the disease was critical. This is a rude doctor, this is the fifth fault in diagnosis and treatment.

古文：凡此五者，皆受术不通，人事不明也。
现代文：上述的五种过失，都是由于医生的学术不精，人情事理不明所造成的。
English: The above-mentioned five types of negligence are all caused by the doctor's academic incompetence and unclear understanding of human affairs.

古文：故曰：圣人之治病也，必知天地阴阳，四时经纪，五藏六府，雌雄表里，刺灸砭石，毒药所主，从容人事，以明经道，贵贱贫富，各异品理，问年少长，勇怯之理，审于分部，知病本始，八正九候，诊必副矣。
现代文：所以说：圣人治病，必知自然界阴阳的变化，四时寒暑的规律，五脏六腑之间的关系，经脉之阴阳表里，刺灸、砭石、毒药治病之所宜，能周密祥审人情事理，骒有诊治之常道，从病人的贵贱贫富，区分其体制裁及发病的各自特点，问其年龄之长幼，知其性情勇怯之理，审察病色出现的部位，以知其病之本始，并结合四时八风正气及三部九侯脉象进行分析，所以他的诊疗技术是全备的。
English: Therefore, it is said that for a sage to cure a disease, he must know the changes of yin and yang in nature, the laws of cold and heat at four o'clock, the relationship between the five viscera and six glands, the yin and yang of the meridians, the appropriateness of moxibustion, vermiculite, and poison to cure a disease, and be able to carefully examine the human situation and reason. There is a common way of diagnosis and treatment, from the patient's noble and humble to the rich and poor, to distinguish the respective characteristics of its structure and the onset of the disease, to ask its age, to know its temperament, to

古文：治病之道，气内为宝，循求其理，求之不得，过在表里。
现代文：治病的道理，应重视病人元气的强弱，从其元气的强弱变化中，探求其病，如果求之不得，其病便是在阴阳表里之间。
English: The principle of treating diseases is to pay attention to the strength and weakness of the patient's vitality, and to explore the disease from the changes in the strength and weakness of its vitality. If this is not possible, the disease is between yin and yang.

古文：守数据治，无失俞理，能行此术，终身不殆。
现代文：治病时应遵守气血多少及针刺深浅等常规，不要失去取穴的理法，能这样来进行医疗，则终生可不发生差错。
English: When treating a disease, it is necessary to follow the rules such as the amount of qi and blood and the depth of acupuncture. Do not lose the logic of taking a hole. If you can carry out medical treatment in this way, you will not make mistakes throughout your life.

古文：不知俞理，五藏菀熟，痈发六府，诊病不审，是谓失常。
现代文：如果不知取穴的理法，而妄施针石，可使五脏积热，痈发于六脏。
English: If you do not know the logic of taking a hole, and apply a needle stone, you can make the five viscera accumulate heat and burst out in the six viscera.

古文：谨守此治，与经相明，《上经》《下经》，揆度阴阳，奇恒五中，决以明堂，审于终始，可以横行。
现代文：若诊病不能祥审周密，便是失常，若能遵守这些诊治法则，自会与经旨相明，能通晓《上经》、《下经》之义，及如何揆测度量阴阳的变化，诊察奇恒之疾和五脏之病，而取决于明堂之色，审知疾病的始终等道理，便可随心所欲而遍行于天下。
English: If the diagnosis and treatment of diseases can not be carefully examined, it is abnormal. If you can abide by these rules of diagnosis and treatment, you will be familiar with the purpose of the Sutra, can understand the meaning of the "Upper Sutra" and the "Lower Sutra," and how to measure and measure the changes of yin and yang, diagnose the strange diseases and the diseases of the five internal organs, and depending on the color of the bright hall, know the consistency of the disease, and so on, you can travel around the world as you wish.

