古文：裴子野，字几原，河东闻喜人，晋太子左率康八世孙。
现代文：裴子野字几原，是河东闻喜人，晋朝太子左率裴康的第八代孙。
English: Peizhino, also known as Kihara, was the eighth-generation grandson of Peikang, the Prince Regent of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：兄黎，弟楷、绰，并有盛名，所谓 四裴 也。
现代文：兄裴黎，弟裴楷、裴绰，都有盛名，称为 四裴 。
English: The elder brother Pei Li, the younger brother Pei Kai and Pei Cao, are all famous, known as the four Pei.

古文：曾祖松之，宋太中大夫。
现代文：曾祖裴松之，是宋朝太中大夫。
English: Zengzu Pei Songzhi was a doctor of the Song Dynasty.

古文：祖骃，南中郎外兵参军。
现代文：祖父裴驷，是南中郎外兵参军。
English: Pei's grandfather, Nan Zhong Lang, was a foreign soldier who joined the army.

古文：父昭明，通直散骑常侍。
现代文：父亲昭明，是通直散骑常侍。
English: His father, Akiaki, was a samurai who rode horseback.

古文：子野生而偏孤，为祖母所养，年九岁，祖母亡，泣血哀恸，家人异之。
现代文：子野出生后母亲就去世了。由祖母抚养，九岁那年，祖母去世，他悲痛泣血，家人感到诧异。
English: His mother died after he was born, and he was raised by his grandmother. When his grandmother passed away when he was nine years old, his family was surprised to see him weeping with grief.

古文：少好学，善属文。
现代文：年轻时好学，擅长写文章。
English: When young, he was eager to learn and good at writing articles.

古文：起家齐武陵王国左常侍，右军江夏王参军，遭父忧去职。
现代文：起家入朝为齐武陵王国左常侍，右军江夏王参军，因父亲去世离职。
English: He started his family and entered the court as the left attendant of the Qibuling Kingdom, and the right army, Jiang Xia Wang, joined the army and left the service due to his father's death.

古文：居丧尽礼，每之墓所，哭泣处草为之枯，有白兔驯扰其侧。
现代文：服丧期间的行为完全符合礼节，每到墓所，哭泣处草都为他枯萎，有白兔顺伏在他身旁。
English: His behavior during the period of mourning was completely in line with etiquette. Whenever he went to the cemetery, the grass withered for him in the weeping place, and a white rabbit lay obediently next to him.

古文：天监初，尚书仆射范云嘉其行，将表奏之，会云卒，不果。
现代文：天监初年，尚书仆射范云称赞他的品行，将要上表向皇上陈奏，因范云去世，此事未成。
English: In the first year of the celestial inspector, Shang Shuxu's servant Sho Fanyun praised his conduct and wanted to present a report to the emperor. However, this did not happen due to Fanyun's death.

古文：乐安任昉有盛名，为后进所慕，游其门者，昉必相荐达。
现代文：乐安人任防有盛名，受到后辈的仰慕，在他门下求学的人，任防必推荐引进。
English: Ren Fang, the founder of Le'an, is well-known and admired by the younger generation. Anyone who studies under his tutelage is sure to be recommended by Ren Fang.

古文：子野于昉为从中表，独不至，昉亦恨焉。
现代文：子野是任防的从表兄，却不去拜见，任防也怨恨他。
English: Ikuno is a reluctant cousin, but he doesn't go to visit him. Ikuno also resents him.

古文：久之，除右军安成王参军，俄迁兼廷尉正。
现代文：久之，除授右军安成王参军，随即迁任兼廷尉正。
English: After a long time, Wang Ancheng, who was awarded the Right Army, joined the army, and was immediately transferred to the post of imperial lieutenant.

古文：时三官通署狱牒，子野尝不在，同僚辄署其名，奏有不允，子野从坐免职。
现代文：当时，刑事判决文书是由三方官员共同签署，有一次子野不在，同僚就署上他的名字，奏章没有批准，子野受牵连被免职。
English: At that time, the criminal judgment document was co-signed by the officials of the three parties. On one occasion, when Zono was absent, his colleagues signed his name. The record was not approved, and Zono was implicated and removed from office.

古文：或劝言诸有司，可得无咎。
现代文：有人劝他去向有司说明事实，就可以无过错。
English: Some people advised him to go and explain the facts to the magistrate so that he could be found not guilty.

古文：子野笑而答曰： 虽惭柳季之道，岂因讼以受服。 
现代文：子野笑答： 虽惭愧没有柳季的操行，但也不能靠诉讼受到职务。 
English: Ikuno laughs: Although I'm ashamed that I didn't behave like Yanagi, I can't rely on a lawsuit to get a job.

古文：自此免黜久之，终无恨意。
现代文：自此被罢免很久，终无恨意。
English: It's been a long time since I was dismissed, but I don't hold any grudges.

古文：二年，吴平侯萧景为南兗州刺史，引为冠军录事，府迁职解。
现代文：二年，吴平侯萧景任南兖州刺史，引进他任冠军绿事，萧景调离后他被解职。
English: In the second year, Wu Ping Hou Xiao Jing was appointed as the governor of South Luzhou, and he was introduced as the champion of Green Affairs. After Xiao Jing was transferred away, he was dismissed.

古文：时中书范缜与子野未遇，闻其行业而善焉。
现代文：当时中书范缜与子野没有交往，听闻他有品行业迹也褒扬他。
English: At that time, Zhongshu Fanzhang did not have any contact with Zino, but heard that he had a good business record and praised him.

古文：会迁国子博士，乃上表让之曰： 伏见前冠军府录事参军河东裴子野，年四十，字几原，幼禀至人之行，长厉国士之风。居丧有礼，毁瘠几灭，免忧之外，蔬水不进。
现代文：范缜迁任国子博士，立即上表推让子野，说： 听闻前任冠军府录事参军河东人裴子野，年龄四十，字几原，幼年禀承了超人的品行，长大后磨炼出优秀的节操，服丧时遵守礼仪，哀痛几乎毁灭性命，服丧期满之后，还饭食不进。
English: Fan Xuanqian, appointed as Dr. Guo Zi, immediately went to the table to push Zeng Zino, saying: I heard that the former champion of the prefectural record, Pei Zino, a man from the east of the river, who joined the army, was forty years old, a few years old. When he was a child, he inherited superhuman conduct. When he grew up, he honed excellent self-discipline. When he was in mourning, he observed etiquette. Grief almost destroyed his life. After the mourning period was over, he could not eat.

古文：栖迟下位，身贱名微，而性不憛憛，情无汲汲，是以有识嗟推，州闾叹服。
现代文：地处下位，身贱名微，但性情不贪，不诈偶，因此有见识的人都推重他，家乡的人都叹服他。
English: He was in a lowly position, with a lowly name, but he was not greedy or deceitful. Therefore, people with insight respected him, and people in his hometown admired him.

古文：且家传素业，世习儒史，苑囿经籍，游息文艺。
现代文：而且家学相传，世习儒史，博览群书，居止行动都在研究作文章。
English: Moreover, the transmission of family learning, the study of Confucian history, the exposition of books, and the stay-at-home action are all studied and made into articles.

古文：著《宋略》二十卷，弥纶首尾，勒成一代，属辞比事，有足观者。
现代文：着有《宋略》二十卷，贯通首尾，写成一朝历史，撰文记事，值得观赏。
English: He is the author of "Song Liang," a 20-volume work, which is worth watching. It is a history of one dynasty, written from beginning to end.

古文：且章句洽悉，训故可传。脱置之胶庠，以弘奖后进，庶一夔之辩可寻，三豕之疑无谬矣。
现代文：而且剖章析句切合详尽，解释字句可以传世，如果让他在学校任职，这是弘奖后辈，能使一夔这类误传问题的辩论可寻到根源，三豕这类笔讹问题得到纠正。
English: Moreover, the detailed analysis of the chapter and the detailed explanation of the words can be passed on to the next generation. If he is allowed to serve in the school, this is a reward for the younger generation, which can make the debate of such misinformation problems can find the root cause, and the problems of such pencils can be corrected.

古文：伏惟皇家淳耀，多士盈庭，官人迈乎有妫，棫朴越于姬氏，苟片善宜录，无论厚薄，一介可求，不由等级。
现代文：皇家光耀，贤士满庭，官人越过有妈时代，才人众多超过姬氏时代，即使是有小善也记录，无论厚薄，衹要有一点可用的人可求用，不限等级。
English: The royal splendor, the court full of sages, the officials have surpassed the era of mother, and the number of talents has exceeded the era of Himeji. Even if there is a small good, it will be recorded. No matter how thick or thin, if there is a little available person to use, there is no limit to the level.

古文：臣历观古今人君，钦贤好善，未有圣朝孜孜若是之至也。
现代文：臣遍览古今人君推重喜好贤善之人的事情，没有像本朝这样的孜孜不倦。
English: There is nothing like the tireless efforts of this court in surveying the affairs of people from ancient times to the present to promote people who are good and virtuous.

古文：敢缘斯义，轻陈愚瞽，乞以臣斯忝，回授子野。
现代文：敢因循事理，轻陈愚见，乞求将我愧于担任的职位，回授子野。
English: Dare to be reasonable, light Chen stupidity, begging me to be ashamed of the position, back to Zino.

古文：如此，则贤否之宜，各全其所，讯之物议，谁曰不允。
现代文：如此，则贤舆不贤的位置，各得其所，讯问众人的意见，无不尊敬信任。
English: In this way, the position of the virtuous and the non-virtuous, each has its place, interrogates the opinions of many people, and respects and trusts everyone.

古文：臣与子野虽未尝衔杯，访之邑里，差非虚谬，不胜慺慺微见，冒昧陈闻。
现代文：臣与子野虽未曾一起饮酒，但访问邑里人，几乎不会有虚谬，非常恭谨地述说微见，冒昧陈闻。
English: Although the minister and Zino have never had a drink together, when they visit the people of the town, there will be almost no falsehood, they will very respectfully talk about their views, and venture into old stories.

古文：伏愿陛下哀怜悾款，鉴其愚实，干犯之愆，乞垂赦宥。 
现代文：愿陛下哀怜我诚恳的心意，鉴识我的愚忠，冒犯的罪遇，乞求赦免。 
English: May Your Majesty pity my sincere heart, recognize my foolish loyalty, offend me, and beg for forgiveness.

古文：有司以资历非次，弗为通。
现代文：有司认为裴子野的资历没有达到提任资格，没有被通过。
English: Yushi believed that Peizhino's qualifications did not meet the qualifications for promotion, and he was not approved.

古文：寻除尚书比部郎，仁威记室参军。
现代文：不久授尚书比部郎，仁威记室参军。
English: He was soon awarded the title of Shang Shubiburo and joined the army as a member of the Renwei Records Office.

古文：出为诸暨令，在县不行鞭罚，民有争者，示之以理，百姓称悦，合境无讼。
现代文：出任谴暨令，在县任时不实行鞭罚，百姓有争执者，向他们明示道理，百姓称赞，全境无诉讼事件。
English: He issued a reprimand and order, and did not carry out whipping when he was in charge of the county, and the people had disputes, and he made it clear to them, and the people praised him, and there were no litigation cases in the whole territory.

古文：初，子野曾祖松之，宋元嘉中受诏续修何承天《宋史》，未及成而卒，子野常欲继成先业。
现代文：当初，裴子野曾祖父裴松，在宋元嘉年间受诏续修何承天编纂的《宋史》，未完成就去世了，子野常想完成父业。
English: At first, Pei Zino's great-grandfather Pei Song, who was ordered to continue the "Song History" compiled by He Chengtian during the Song and Yuan Dynasties, died before completing it. Zino often wanted to complete his father's work.

古文：及齐永明末，沈约所撰《宋书》既行，子野更删撰为《宋略》二十卷。
现代文：到了齐永明末年，沈约所撰写的《宋书》已发行，子野将宋史更删撰成《宋略》二十卷。
English: By the end of Qi Yongming's reign, the "Song Book" written by Shen You had been published, and Zino edited the Song History into the "Song Sketches" of 20 volumes.

古文：其叙事评论多善，约见而叹曰： 吾弗逮也。 
现代文：他叙事评论多有高妙处，沈约看了赞叹说： 我赶不上他。 
English: His commentary on the narration has many high points. He looked at it with admiration and said, "I can't keep up with him."

古文：兰陵萧琛、北地傅昭、汝南周舍咸称重之。
现代文：兰陵人萧琛、北地人傅鳄、达宜人旦涂都称许看重他。
English: The Lanling people Xiao Wei, the Hokkien people Fu Gua, and the Da Yi people Dan Tu all praise and value him.

古文：至是，吏部尚书徐勉言之于高祖，以为著作郎，掌国史及起居注。
现代文：至是，吏部尚书逮垫向产担推荐他，任他为著作郎，负责编写国史及起居注。
English: So, the librarian, Shang Shu Fang Mat, recommended him to the production manager and appointed him as a writer, responsible for compiling national history and living notes.

古文：顷之，兼中书通事舍人，寻除通直正员郎，著作、舍人如故。
现代文：顷刻，兼中书通事舍人，不久授通直正员郎，著作、舍人之职照旧。
English: In an instant, he was also appointed as the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and soon he was promoted to the post of the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, with the same duties as before.

古文：又敕掌中书诏诰。
现代文：又命令他掌管中书诏诰。
English: He was also ordered to take charge of the Chinese imperial rescript.

古文：是时西北徼外有白题及滑国，遣使由岷山道入贡。
现代文：逭时西北塞外有白题与滑国，遣使从岷山道来朝进贡。
English: At that time, there were Baiqi and Niankuo outside the northwest of Tibet, and envoys were sent from the Lushan Road to pay tribute to the North.

古文：此二国历代弗宾，莫知所出。
现代文：此二国历代以来没有通使朝见，不知国情。
English: Since time immemorial, these two countries have not sent envoys to the DPRK, so they do not know the situation of the country.

古文：子野曰： 汉颍阴侯斩胡白题将一人。
现代文：子野说： 汉朝颖阴侯斩胡白题将一人。
English: Zino said, "There is only one person in the Han Dynasty who will be able to defeat Hu Baiqi.

古文：服虔《注》云： 白题，胡名也。 
现代文：服虔《注》说： 白题，胡名。 
English: "Comment" by Zhu Qian said, "It's all nonsense. It's a hoax."

古文：又汉定远侯击虏，八滑从之，此其后乎。 
现代文：又汉朝定远侯击虏，八滑跟从，现在来的是他的后人吧。 
English: In the Han Dynasty, Dingyuan Hou defeated the invaders, followed by Hachisui, and now it is his descendants who are coming.

古文：时人服其博识。
现代文：时人佩服他博识。
English: At the time, people admired his broad knowledge.

古文：敕仍使撰《方国使图》，广述怀来之盛，自要服至于海表，凡二十国。
现代文：敕命仍让他编撰《方国使图》，广述招徕塞外人员的盛况，从边远地区至海外，共有二十国。
English: He still desperately asked him to compile the "Fangguo Envoy Map," extensively describing the flourishing situation of recruiting foreign personnel, from remote areas to overseas, a total of twenty countries.

古文：子野与沛国刘显、南阳刘之遴、陈郡殷芸、陈留阮孝绪、吴郡顾协、京兆韦棱，皆博极群书，深相赏好，显尤推重之。
现代文：子野与沛国人刘显、南阳人刘之遴、陈郡人殷芸、陈留人阮孝绪、吴郡人顾协、京兆人韦棱，都博览群书，互相都深为赏识和友爱，刘颢更推重子野。
English: Liu Xian from Pei Province, Liu Zhizhu from Nanyang, Yin Yun from Chen County, Ruan Xiaoxu from Chen County, Gu Xie from Wu County, and Wei Ren from Beijing and Guangzhou are all well-versed in books. They all deeply appreciate and love each other, and Liu Xuan is more interested in Zino.

古文：时吴平侯萧劢、范阳张缵，每讨论坟籍，咸折中于子野焉。
现代文：当时吴平侯萧勘、范阳人张缵，每次讨论古籍，有争论都让子野评判。
English: At that time, Wu Ping Hou Xiao Kan and Fan Yang people Zhang Ye, every time they discussed ancient books, they let Zino judge if there was a dispute.

古文：普通七年，王师北伐，敕子野为喻魏文，受诏立成，高祖以其事体大，召尚书仆射徐勉、太子詹事周舍、鸿胪卿刘之遴、中书侍郎硃异，集寿光殿以观之，时并叹服。
现代文：普通七年，王师北伐讨魏，命令子野起草对魏谕文，子野受诏立即成文，高祖因事体重大，召尚书仆射徐勉、太子詹事周舍、鸿胪卿刘之遴、中书侍郎朱异，会集到寿光殿观看文章，在座的人都叹服。
English: In ordinary seven years, Wang Shi led the Northern Expedition to discuss Wei, ordered Zino to draft a commentary on Wei, and Zino received the edict and immediately wrote it down. Gao Zu, due to the importance of the matter, summoned Shang Shufu, Zhao Xu, Prince Zhan Zhi Zhou She, Hong Zhaqing, Liu Zhi Zhan, and Zhong Shufu, and gathered to Shuguang Hall to watch the article. Everyone present was impressed.

古文：高祖目子野而言曰： 其形虽弱，其文甚壮。 
现代文：高祖看着子野而说： 他的外形虽弱，但他的文章豪壮。 
English: Gao Zu looked at Zino and said: Although his appearance is weak, his writing is magnificent.

古文：俄又敕为书喻魏相元叉，其夜受旨，子野谓可待旦方奏，未之为也。及五鼓，敕催令开斋速上，子野徐起操笔，昧爽便就。
现代文：随即又命他起草晓谕魏相元叉文，当夜接受旨令，子野认为可待明日再上奏，就没有动笔，但到五更，韶书催令开斋门时交上文章，王墅安稳地操笔，拂晓便成。
English: He then ordered him to draft a commentary on Wei Xiangyuan, and received the order that night. Zino thought that it could be played again tomorrow, so he did not start writing. However, on the morning of the fifth day, the imperial edict ordered him to hand in the article at the time of Eid al-Fitr. Wangshu was able to write safely, and it was completed at dawn.

古文：既奏，高祖深嘉焉。
现代文：上奏后，台担极为褒奖。
English: After the performance, the stage manager was very complimentary.

古文：自是凡诸符檄，皆令草创。
现代文：自是凡各种符檄文，皆令他起草。
English: Since then, he has been asked to draft all kinds of documents.

古文：子野为文典而速，不尚丽靡之词。其制作多法古，与今文体异，当时或有诋诃者，及其末皆翕然重之。
现代文：子野的文章典雅而且速成，不崇尚华丽的词句，文体多效法古人，舆今文体不同，当时有人诋毁他，但到后来都一致尊重他。
English: Zino's essay is elegant and fast, not advocating ornate words and phrases, style multiple imitation of the ancients, public opinion today's style is different, at that time some people slandered him, but later they all respected him.

古文：或问其为文速者，子野答云： 人皆成于手，我独成于心，虽有见否之异，其于刊改一也。 
现代文：有人间他成文迅速的原因，子野回答说： 人们的文章是用手写出来的，我独自用心写成，虽有看见舆看不见的差异，那样修改起来是一样的。 
English: When asked why he was able to write so quickly, Zono replied: People's articles are written by hand, I write with my heart alone. Although there are differences that are visible and invisible, it is the same to revise in that way.

古文：俄迁中书侍郎，余如故。
现代文：不久迁任中书侍郎，其余任职如旧。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of junior secretary, while the rest of his duties remained the same.

古文：大通元年，转鸿胪卿，寻领步兵校尉。
现代文：大通元年，转任鸿胪卿，随即兼任步兵校尉。
English: In the first year of Datong, he was transferred to Hongyuqing, and then he also served as an infantry lieutenant.

古文：子野在禁省十余年，静默自守，未尝有所请谒，外家及中表贫乏，所得俸悉分给之。
现代文：子野在皇宫任职十余年，静沉缄默，洁身自爱，从来没有什么要求，母亲家舆父亲家亲戚贫困，就把所得俸禄全分给他们。
English: After more than ten years of service at the Imperial Palace, quiet and silent, clean and self-respecting, he never asked for anything. His mother's family and his father's relatives were poor, so he gave them all of his salary.

古文：无宅，借官地二亩，起茅屋数间。
现代文：没有住宅，借用官地二亩，盖草屋数间。
English: There are no houses, two mu of government-owned land has been borrowed, and there are only a few grass-thatched houses.

古文：妻子恒苦饥寒，唯以教诲为本，子侄祗畏，若奉严君。
现代文：妻子儿女经常受饥寒，而他祇以教诲为本，子侄敬畏他，像奉侍父亲。
English: His wife and children often suffer from hunger and cold, but he is only guided by his teachings. His nephews and nieces fear him, as if he were their father.

古文：末年深信释氏，持其教戒，终身饭麦食蔬。
现代文：晚年深信佛教，严守教规，终身衹吃素食。
English: In his later years, he was a firm believer in Buddhism, strictly adhered to the teachings, and ate vegetarian food all his life.

古文：中大通二年，卒官，年六十二。
现代文：中大通二年，在官任上去世，时年六十二岁。
English: In the second year of his middle and senior year, he died in office, at the age of sixty-two.

古文：先是子野自克死期，不过庚戌岁。
现代文：先是子野自己估计死期过不了庚戌年。
English: First of all, Zino himself estimated that he would die in the year of the Rooster.

古文：是年自省移病，谓同官刘之亨曰： 吾其逝矣。 
现代文：到造年自我省察求退，对同官刘之亨说： 我要逝去了。 
English: At the turn of the year, he self-examined and asked for retirement, and said to his colleague Liu Zhiheng: I want to pass away.

古文：遗命俭约，务在节制。
现代文：遣命丧事俭约，一定要节制。
English: When it comes to matters of life and death, moderation is a must.

古文：高祖悼惜，为之流涕。
现代文：高祖哀伤痛惜，为他流泪。
English: Gao Zu mourned and lamented, and shed tears for him.

古文：诏曰： 鸿胪卿、领步兵校尉、知著作郎、兼中书通事舍人裴子野，文史足用，廉白自居，劬劳通事，多历年所。
现代文：诏书说： 鸿胪卿、领步兵校尉、知著作郎、兼中书通事舍人裴子野，有足够的文史知识，廉洁自爱，任职辛劳，经过多年。
English: The imperial edict said: Hong Xuanqing, the leading infantry captain, the scholarly writer, and the Chinese calligrapher, Peizhino, has sufficient knowledge of literature and history, is honest and self-loving, and has worked hard for many years.

古文：奄致丧逝，恻怆空怀。
现代文：忽然丧逝，使人悲伤怀念。
English: His sudden death is a sad reminder.

古文：可赠散骑常侍，赙钱五万，布五十匹，即日举哀。
现代文：可追赠散骑常侍，给办丧事钱五万，布五十匹，近日安葬。
English: He can give a posthumous gift of a knight errant, fifty thousand money for the funeral service, fifty pieces of cloth, and was recently buried.

古文：谥曰贞子。 
现代文：谧号贞子。 
English: Her nickname is Sadako.

古文：子野少时，《集注丧服》、《续裴氏家传》各二卷，抄合后汉事四十余卷，又敕撰《众僧传》二十卷，《百官九品》二卷，《附益谥法》一卷，《方国使图》一卷，文集二十卷，并行于世。
现代文：子野年轻时，编有《集注丧服》、《续裴氏家传》各二卷，摘录后汉事情四十余卷，又韶令撰腺僧传》二十卷，《百官九品》二卷，《附益谧法》一卷，《方国使图》一卷，文集二十卷，都在世间流传。
English: When he was young, he compiled two volumes each of "Collection of Funeral Costumes" and "Continuation of the Biography of the Pei Family," and more than forty volumes of excerpts from the events of the Later Han Dynasty, as well as twenty volumes of "Biographies of Eminent Monks," two volumes of "Nine Works of Eminent Officials," one volume of "Laws of Succession," one volume of "Fang Guozhi" and twenty volumes of anthologies, all of which have been passed down to the world.

古文：又欲撰《齐梁春秋》，始草创，未就而卒。
现代文：又想编撰《齐梁春秋》，已开始起草，未成而去世。
English: He also wanted to compile "Qiliang Spring and Autumn." He had begun to draft it, but died before it was completed.

古文：子謇，官至通直郎。
现代文：子裴謇，官作到通直郎。
English: His son, Baekhyun, was promoted to the official rank of Tong Naorong.

古文：顾协，字正礼，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：顾协字正礼，是吴郡吴人。
English: Gu Xie is a native of Wu County.

古文：晋司空和七世孙。
现代文：晋朝司空顾和的第七代孙。
English: He is the seventh generation grandson of Emperor Jin's courtier, Emperor Kukuwa.

古文：协幼孤，随母养于外氏。
现代文：顾协幼时丧父，随母亲受养于外祖父家。
English: Gu Xie lost his father when he was young, and was raised by his maternal grandfather along with his mother.

古文：外从祖宋右光禄张永尝携内外孙侄游虎丘山，协年数岁，永抚之曰： 儿欲何戏？ 
现代文：外从祖父宋朝右光禄张永曾携带内外孙侄游虎丘山，顾协祇有几岁，张永抚摩他说： 儿想戏玩什么? 
English: Zhang Yong, the grandfather of the Song Dynasty's Emperor Guanglu, once took his nephew Gu Xie to visit Tiger Hill. Gu Xie was a few years old, Zhang Yong stroked him and said: "What do you want to play?

古文：协对曰： 儿正欲枕石漱流。 
现代文：顾协对答： 儿正想隐居山林。 
English: Gu Xie replied: My son wants to live in seclusion in the mountains.

古文：永叹息曰： 顾氏兴于此子。 
现代文：张永叹息说： 顾氏兴盛靠此子。 
English: Zhang Yong sighed and said: Gu's prosperity depends on this child.

古文：既长，好学，以精力称。
现代文：长大后，好学，因能专心致力被称赞。
English: When he grew up, he was praised for his eagerness to learn and his ability to concentrate.

古文：外氏诸张多贤达有识鉴，从内弟率尤推重焉。
现代文：外氏张氏家族有许多贤达有识鉴的人，而从内弟张率更推重他。
English: There are many wise and knowledgeable people in the Zhang family, and his younger brother Zhang is even more important to him.

古文：起家扬州议曹从事史，兼太学博士。
现代文：开始作官为扬州议曹从事史，兼太学博士。
English: He started as an official for Yangzhou Xie Cao, engaged in history, and also a doctor of science.

古文：举秀才，尚书令沈约览其策而叹曰： 江左以来，未有此作。 
现代文：举秀才，尚书令沈约看到他写的策文而赞叹说： 东晋以来，未有这样的作品。 
English: Referring to the talent, Shang Shuling Shen Yu saw the article he wrote and praised it, saying: Since the Eastern Jin Dynasty, there has not been such a work.

古文：迁安成王国左常侍，兼廷尉正。
现代文：迁任安成王国的左常侍，兼廷尉正。
English: He was transferred to the position of Zuo-no-chōji in the Ansei Kingdom, and concurrently held the position of Imperial Lieutenant.

古文：太尉临川王闻其名，召掌书记，仍侍西豊侯正德读。
现代文：太尉临川王闻其名，召他掌书记，便侍奉西丰侯正德读书。
English: Captain Linchuan Wang heard his name, called him to be the secretary, and then served Xi Feng Hou Zhengde to study.

古文：正德为巴西、梓潼郡，协除所部安都令。未至县，遭母忧。
现代文：正德任巴西、梓潼郡守，顾协授所属安都县令，未至县，母亲去世。
English: Zhengde was the governor of Brazil, Zizhi County, and Gu Xieju was the governor of Andu County, but his mother died before he could go to the county.

古文：服阕，出补西阳郡丞。
现代文：服丧期满，出补西阳郡丞。
English: At the end of the mourning period, the Xiyang County magistrate came out to make amends.

古文：还除北中郎行参军，复兼廷尉正。
现代文：回来又授北中郎行参军，再兼廷尉正。
English: When he came back, he was awarded the rank of Kitanakachiro (北中郎) to join the army, and was also given the rank of Imperial Lieutenant.

古文：久之，出为庐陵郡丞，未拜。会西豊侯正德为吴郡，除中军参军，领郡五官，迁轻车湘东王参军事，兼记室。
现代文：久之，出任庐陵郡丞，未拜授，这时西丰侯正德任吴郡守，授顾协中军参军，领郡五官，迁任轻车湘束王参军事，兼记室。
English: After a long time, he served as the county magistrate of Fuling County, but was not awarded the title. At that time, Xi Feng Hou Zhengde was appointed as the governor of Wuxi County, was granted the right to join the Chinese People's Liberation Army, led the county's five officials, and was transferred to the military of Hunan Shu Wang, and also served as a secretary.

古文：普通六年，正德受诏北讨，引为府录事参军，掌书记。
现代文：普通六年，正德受诏北讨，引荐顾协为府绿事参军，掌书记。
English: Six years later, Zheng De received the imperial edict for the Northern Expedition, recommended Gu Jie to join the army for the prefectural green affairs, and became the secretary.

古文：军还，会有诏举士，湘东王表荐协曰： 臣闻贡玉之士，归之润山；论珠之人，出于枯岸。
现代文：北讨回军，遣时有诏令推举有才能的人，湘塞王上表荐举堑垄说： 臣闻贡玉的人，是来自润山；论珠的人，是出自枯岸。
English: When the Northern army was sent back to the north, there was a decree to nominate talented people, and the king of Hunan recommended the nomination of Zhu Rong, saying: The person who heard the tribute to the jade was from Runshan; the person who discussed the jade was from the dry bank.

古文：是以刍荛之言，择于廊庙者也。
现代文：所以浅陋的见解，供朝廷择用。
English: Therefore, shallow opinions are used by the imperial court.

古文：臣府兼记室参军吴郡顾协，行称乡闾，学兼文武，服膺道素，雅量邃远，安贫守静，奉公抗直，傍阙知己，志不自营，年方六十，室无妻子。
现代文：臣府中兼记室参军吴郡人顾协，品行被乡间称赞，学问兼有文武，衷心信奉纯朴的德行，气度宏大深远，安贫守静，奉公耿直，虽有知己在皇帝身旁，立志不去为自己谋划，年已六十，室无妻儿。
English: Gu Xie, a member of the Wu County People's Political Consultative Conference, who was also a secretary of the government, was praised by the countryside for his moral conduct. He was a scholar as well as a warrior. He sincerely believed in pure and simple moral conduct. He had a grand and far-reaching demeanor. He was peaceful and quiet, and devoted to his duties. Although he had a confidant at the emperor's side, he was determined not to scheme for himself. He was sixty years old and had no wife.

古文：臣欲言于官人，申其屈滞，协必苦执贞退，立志难夺，可谓东南之遗宝矣。
现代文：臣想向官人推荐他，申述他久屈下位的情况，顾协必苦执对仕宦名利的淡泊，立志难改变，可谓是东南地区的遣实。
English: Vassals want to recommend him to officials, complain about his long-serving position, and Gu Xie will persist in his indifference to fame and fortune, and his determination is difficult to change, which can be described as the reality of the southeastern region.

古文：伏惟陛下未明求衣，思贤如渴，爰发明诏，各举所知。
现代文：我思量陛下天未明就起床治理国事，思贤若渴，于是发明诏，让各举所知。
English: I thought about His Majesty getting up in the early hours of the morning to manage state affairs, and I was so thirsty for ideas that I invented the edict to let everyone know about it.

古文：臣识非许、郭，虽无知人之鉴，若守固无言，惧贻蔽贤之咎。
现代文：臣的见识不如许劭、翅左，虽没有知人之鉴，但如果保持缄默，惧怕留下埋没贤能的错误。
English: A vassal's insight is not as good as that of Xu Yao and Ling Zuo. Although there is no reference from acquaintances, if you remain silent, you are afraid of leaving behind mistakes that have buried your ability.

古文：昔孔愉表韩绩之才，庾亮荐翟汤之德，臣虽未齿二臣，协实无惭两士。 
现代文：昔孔愉表彰韩续的才能，座台推荐玺荡的品德，臣虽然不能与二臣相排比，但题垄确实不会使两士惭愧。 
English: In the past, Confucius praised Han Zhe's talent, and Zhan Di recommended Han Zhe's virtuous character. Although Han Zhe can't be compared to the two ministers, it's true that the question won't make the two men feel ashamed.

古文：即召拜通直散骑侍郎，兼中书通事舍人。累迁步兵校尉，守鸿胪卿，员外散骑常侍，卿、舍人并如故。
现代文：即召拜授通直散骑侍郎，兼中书通事舍人，累迁步兵校尉，守鸿胪卿，员外散骑常侍，卿、舍人职位照旧。
English: Namely, the posts of the attendant of the imperial equestrian cavalry, the attendant of the Chinese calligraphy and the attendant of the Chinese calligraphy, the infantry lieutenant, the attendant of the imperial cavalry, the attendant of the imperial cavalry and the attendant of the Chinese calligraphy, the attendant of the Chinese calligraphy and the attendant of the Chinese calligraphy, the attendant of the Chinese calligraphy and the attendant of the Chinese calligraphy, the attendant of the Chinese calligraphy and the attendant of the Chinese calligraphy, the attendant of the imperial cavalry and the attendant of the imperial cavalry,

古文：大同八年，卒，时年七十三。
现代文：大回八年，去世，时年七十三岁。
English: He died eight years later, at the age of 73.

古文：高祖悼惜之，手诏曰： 员外散骑常侍、鸿胪卿、兼中书通事舍人顾协，廉洁自居，白首不衰，久在省闼，内外称善。
现代文：高祖哀悼怀念他，亲笔韶书说： 员外散骑常侍、鸿胪卿、兼中书通事舍人顾协，廉洁自居，至老不衰，久在宫中，内外人称善。
English: Gao Zu mourned and remembered him, and wrote in his own handwriting: "Outside the palace, he was a knight-errant, a knight-errant, a knight-in-waiting, a knight-in-waiting, and a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters. He was a man of integrity, and he never grew old. He stayed in the palace for a long time, and was praised by people inside and outside the palace.

古文：奄然殒丧，恻怛之怀，不能已已。
现代文：忽然去世，忧伤的怀念。不能休止。
English: Sudden death, sad memories. Can't stop.

古文：傍无近亲，弥足哀者。
现代文：他旁无近亲，更使人悲哀。
English: The fact that he has no next of kin makes it all the more tragic.

古文：大殓既毕，即送其丧柩还乡，并营冢椁，并皆资给，悉使周办。
现代文：穿好衣服入棺柩，立即送灵柩还乡，一并营造墓地棺椁，并给以费用，尽力周办。
English: Put on the clothes and put them in the coffin, immediately send the coffin back to the hometown, build a cemetery coffin together, and give the fee, and do your best.

古文：可赠散骑常侍，令便举哀。
现代文：可追赠散骑常侍，令便举哀。
English: He can be posthumously awarded the title of knight errant, and the order will be raised in mourning.

古文：谥曰温子。 
现代文：谧号称作温子。 
English: Its nickname is "Wanzo."

古文：协少清介有志操。
现代文：顾协年轻时清正耿直有志操。
English: When Gu Xie was young, he had a strong will.

古文：初为廷尉正，冬服单薄，寺卿蔡法度谓人曰： 我愿解身上襦与顾郎，恐顾郎难衣食者。 
现代文：初任廷尉正，冬天衣服单薄，寺卿基法度对人说： 我愿把身上短袄送给颅郎，恐怕颅郎难以接受别人送的衣食。 
English: The first lieutenant of the Imperial Court, winter clothes are thin, and the chief priest of the temple, Ji Fadu, said to people: I would like to give my short coat to Jianro, I am afraid that Jianro would find it difficult to accept the clothes and food sent by others.

古文：竟不敢以遗之。
现代文：竟不敢将短袄送给他。
English: I didn't dare to give him the short straw.

古文：及为舍人，同官者皆润屋，协在省十六载，器服饮食，不改于常。
现代文：到他任舍人时，同官者都装饰房屋，顾协在官署十六年，器服饮食，不改以往的状况。
English: By the time he took office, his colleagues were decorating their houses. Gu Xie, who had been working at the government office for 16 years, was accustomed to eating and drinking, and did not change the previous situation.

古文：有门生始来事协，知其廉洁，不敢厚饷，止送钱二千，协发怒，杖二十，因此事者绝于馈遗。
现代文：门生有事来找顾协，知他廉洁，不敢送他厚礼，衹送钱二千，顾协发怒。用杖抽打他二十下，从此有事找他的人绝不送礼。
English: When a disciple came to Gu Xie with a problem, knowing that he was an honest man, he didn't dare to give him a gift. Instead, he gave him two thousand yuan, and Gu Xie got angry. He beat him with a cane twenty times, and from then on, anyone who had a problem with him would never give him a gift.

古文：自丁艰忧，遂终身布衣蔬食。
现代文：自父母去世后，便终身布衣蔬食。
English: Since the death of his parents, he has lived on a diet of cloth, clothes and vegetables.

古文：少时将娉舅息女，未成婚而协母亡，免丧后不复娶。
现代文：年轻时已舆舅舅女儿订婚，未成婚而顾协母亡，服丧期满后不再娶她。
English: When I was young, my uncle's daughter was engaged to be married, but she died before the wedding, so I did not marry her after the mourning period was over.

古文：至六十余，此女犹未他适，协义而迎之。
现代文：到六十多岁，此女也未再嫁，顾协有感于她的情义而迎娶她。
English: In his sixties, the woman had not remarried, so Gu Xie married her because he was moved by her feelings.

古文：晚虽判合，卒无胤嗣。
现代文：晚年虽结婚，终无子孙。
English: Although he married late in life, he never had any children.

古文：协博极群书，于文字及禽兽草木尤称精详。
现代文：顾协博览群书，对于文字及禽兽草木知道的更为精详。
English: Gu Xie's extensive collection of books shows that he knows more about the characters, animals, plants and trees.

古文：撰《异姓苑》五卷，《琐语》十卷，并行于世。
现代文：编撰《异姓苑》五卷，《琐语》十卷，都在世间流传。
English: He compiled five volumes of "Different Surname Garden" and ten volumes of "Trivia," both of which have been circulated around the world.

古文：徐摛，字士秀，东海郯人也。
现代文：徐摘字士秀，是东海郯人。
English: Xu Zhan Zi Shi Xiu is a native of the East China Sea.

古文：祖凭道，宋海陵太守。
现代文：祖父凭道，是宋朝海陵太守。
English: His grandfather, Biao Dao, was the supreme governor of Hailing in the Song Dynasty.

古文：父超之，天监初仕至员外散骑常侍。
现代文：父亲超之，天监初年官至员外散骑常侍。
English: His father, Chozhi, was the first-year official of the Heaven's Watch, and he rode around as a regular attendant.

古文：摛幼而好学，及长，遍览经史。
现代文：徐搞年幼而好学，长大后遍览经史书籍。
English: As a child, Xu was eager to learn, and when he grew up, he read books on history.

古文：属文好为新变，不拘旧体。
现代文：写文章好新奇变化，不拘泥旧体。
English: It is good to write articles with novel changes, not sticking to the old style.

古文：起家太学博士，迁左卫司马。
现代文：起家任太学博士，迁任左卫司马。
English: He started his career as a Doctor of Taihaku, and moved to the position of Zuo Wei Sima.

古文：会晋安王纲出戍石头，高祖谓周舍曰： 为我求一人，文学俱长兼有行者，欲令与晋安游处。 
现代文：这时晋安王纲出戍石头，高祖对周舍说： 为我寻找一个人，文学俱长兼有品行，想让他舆晋安交往相伴。 
English: At this time, Jinan Wanggang came out of the stone, and Gaozhu said to Zhou She: I am looking for a person who is both a literary scholar and a moral person, and I want him to be accompanied by Jinan.

古文：舍曰： 臣外弟徐摛，形质陋小，若不胜衣，而堪此选。 
现代文：周舍说： 臣表弟徐搞，外表陋小，若不胜衣，但能胜任此事。 
English: Zhou She said, "Cousin Xu Eng is small in appearance, but he is competent in this matter.

古文：高祖曰： 必有仲宣之才，亦不简其容貌。 
现代文：高祖说： 如果有王粲的才能，也就不挑拣他的容貌了。 
English: Gao Zu said, "If Wang Yao had the talent, he wouldn't pick on his appearance."

古文：以摛为侍读。
现代文：任徐摘为侍读。
English: Appointed Xu Zhan as an assistant reader.

古文：后王出镇江州，仍补云麾府记室参军，又转平西府中记室。
现代文：后来晋安王出镇江州，便补任徐搞为云麾府记室参军，又转任平西府中记室。
English: Later, after Jinan Wang left Zhenjiang, he joined the army as Xu Ying for the Yunnan prefectural record office, and was transferred to the Pingxi prefectural record office.

古文：王移镇京口，复随府转为安北中录事参军，带郯令，以母忧去职。
现代文：王移镇京口，徐搞又随府转任安北中录事参军，兼任郯县令，因母亲去世离职。
English: Wang moved the town of Jingkou, and Xu Heng transferred to Anbei Middle School to join the army. He also served as the county magistrate of Handan County, but left the post due to his mother's death.

古文：王为丹阳尹，起摛为秣陵令。
现代文：王任丹阳尹，起用徐搞任秣陵县令。
English: Wang appointed Danyang Yin, and appointed Xu Jiaoren as the magistrate of Fuling County.

古文：普通四年，王出镇襄阳，摛固求随府西上，迁晋安王谘议参军。
现代文：普通四年，王出镇襄阳，徐搞坚决要求随王西上，迁任晋安王谘议参军。
English: In ordinary four years, Wang went to Xiangyang, and Xu Heng firmly demanded that he follow Wang Xi to the west, and transferred to Jin'an to advise Wang to join the army.

古文：大通初，王总戎北伐，以摛兼宁蛮府长史，参赞戎政，教命军书，多自摛出。
现代文：大通初年，王总率军队北伐，以徐搞兼宁蛮府长史，参赞军政，教令军书，多出自徐摘的手笔。
English: In the first year of Datong, General Wang led the army in the Northern Expedition, with Xu Jian and Ning Ban as the prefectural governor, the military and political counselor, and the military instruction book, mostly from Xu Zhan's handwriting.

古文：王入为皇太子，转家令，兼掌管记，寻带领直。
现代文：王被封为皇太子，徐摘转任家令，兼掌管记，不久带领直。
English: Wang was named the crown prince, and Xu Zhan was transferred to the position of family secretary, also in charge of the record, and soon became the leader.

古文：摛文体既别，春坊尽学之， 宫体 之号，自斯而起。
现代文：徐摘的文体有别传统，太子宫人都学他， 宫体 的称号，从遣而起。
English: Xu Zhan's style has a different tradition. People in the imperial court learned from him, and the title "Imperial Court" originated from him.

古文：高祖闻之怒，召摛加让，及见，应对明敏，辞义可观，高祖意释。
现代文：高祖听到此事大怒，召见徐搞要责备他，当见到他，他应对明敏，辞意可观，高祖怒意消失。
English: Gaozu was furious when he heard about this, and summoned Xu Hengjun to reprimand him. When he saw him, he was very responsive, and his words were impressive. Gaozu's anger disappeared.

古文：因问《五经》大义，次问历代史及百家杂说，末论释教。
现代文：于是问他《五经》大义，再问历代史及百家杂说，最后议论佛教。
English: So he asked him about the great meaning of the Five Classics, then asked him about the history of the ages and the miscellaneous sayings of a hundred families, and finally discussed Buddhism.

古文：摛商较纵横，应答如响，高祖甚加叹异，更被亲狎，宠遇日隆。
现代文：徐钟品评纵横，应答如响，高祖更加叹异，更被亲近，宠遇日增。
English: Xu Zhong's product evaluation is long and wide, and the response is resounding. Gao Zu is more amazing, more familiar, and more favored.

古文：领军硃异不说，谓所亲曰： 徐叟出入两宫，渐来逼我，须早为之所。 
现代文：领军朱异不愉快，对他亲近的人说： 徐叟出入两宫，渐渐逼胁我，须早点调他去别处。 
English: Zhu Yiren, the leader of the army, was not happy and said to those close to him: "Xu Yao enters and leaves the two palaces, gradually forcing me to transfer him to another place earlier.

古文：遂承间白高祖曰： 摛年老，又爱泉石，意在一郡，以自怡养。 
现代文：于是趁机禀告高祖： 徐搞年老，又喜爱山水，意在去一郡地，好让自己安养。 
English: So he took the opportunity to denounce Gao Zu: Xu is getting old, and he likes the mountains and rivers. He intends to go to a county so that he can live in peace.

古文：高祖谓摛欲之，乃召摛曰： 新安大好山水，任昉等并经为之，卿为我卧治此郡。 
现代文：高祖以为徐摘想这样做，便召徐搞说： 新安有大好山水，任防等人都经治过此地，卿为我无为而治此郡。 
English: Gao Zu thought that Xu Zhan wanted to do this, so he summoned Xu Heng and said: Xin'an has great landscapes and rivers, Ren Fang and other people have all been here. Sir, I have nothing to do but govern this county.

古文：中大通三年，遂出为新安太守。
现代文：中大通三年，便出任新安太守。
English: Three years after graduating from junior high school, he became the new governor of An County.

古文：至郡，为治清静，教民礼义，劝课农桑，期月之中，风俗便改。
现代文：至郡后，治事公平安静，教民礼义，鼓励督责农桑，一年之中，风俗便改变。
English: After arriving in the county, he administered the affairs fairly and quietly, taught the people manners and etiquette, and encouraged the supervision of farmers. Within a year, the customs began to change.

古文：秩满，还为中庶子，加戎昭将军。
现代文：任职期满，回朝任中庶子，加戎昭将军。
English: At the end of his term of office, he returned to the imperial court as the middle child of an illegitimate son, General Garosuke.

古文：是时临城公纳夫人王氏，即太宗妃之侄女也。
现代文：这时临城公娶夫人王氏，就是太宗妃的侄女。
English: At this time, Prince Lincheng married his wife Wang, who was the niece of Empress Taizong.

古文：晋宋已来，初婚三日，妇见舅姑，众宾皆列观，引《春秋》义云 丁丑，夫人姜氏至。
现代文：晋朝、宋朝以来，初婚第三日，新妇拜见公婆，所有的宾客都列观，这是根据《春秋》的记载 丁丑，夫人姜氏至。
English: Since the Jin and Song dynasties, on the third day of the first wedding, the bride visits her in-laws, and all the guests are lined up to watch. This is according to the records of "Spring and Autumn." Ding Xi, Mrs. Jiang Shi.

古文：戊寅，公使大夫宗妇觌用币 。
现代文：戊寅，庄公使大夫宗妇相见用币 。
English: Wu Yin, Zhuang Gongzhi, Dr. Sofu and his wife met each other with coins.

古文：戊寅，丁丑之明日，故礼官据此，皆云宜依旧贯。
现代文：戊寅，是丁丑的次，因此礼官根据此记载，都说应当依旧例。
English: According to this record, all the etiquette officials said that it should remain the same.

古文：太宗以问摛，摛曰： 《仪礼》云 质明赞见妇于舅姑 。
现代文：太宗征问徐搞，徐搞说： 《仪礼》记载 天明新妇拜见公婆 。
English: Emperor Taizong asked Xu Ying, and Xu Ying said: "The Ritual" records that the bride of Tianming paid a visit to her in-laws.

古文：《杂记》又云 妇见舅姑，兄弟姊妹皆立于堂下 。政言妇是外宗，未审娴令，所以停坐三朝，观其七德。
现代文：《杂记》又说 新妇拜见公婆，兄弟姊妹都站在堂下，正是说新妇是外宗，未审娴令，所以停朝办事，观察她的七德。
English: "Miscellaneous notes" also said that the bride paid a visit to her parents-in-law, and her brothers and sisters all stood under the court. It was said that the bride was from a foreign sect, and there was no court order, so she stopped working and observed her seven virtues.

古文：舅延外客，姑率内宾，堂下之仪，以备盛礼。
现代文：公公接待外客，婆婆率领女宾，堂下准备了盛大的礼仪。
English: The father-in-law received the foreign guests, the mother-in-law led the female guests, and the courtiers prepared a grand ceremony.

古文：近代妇于舅姑，本有戚属，不相瞻看。
现代文：近代新妇对于公婆，就有戚属关系，不相瞻看。
English: Modern brides have a kinship relationship with their in-laws and do not look at each other.

古文：夫人乃妃侄女，有异他姻，觌见之仪，谓应可略。 
现代文：夫人是妃的侄女，有异他姻，拜见的礼仪，应该省略。 
English: The lady is the niece of the princess, there is a difference in the marriage, and the etiquette of the visit should be omitted.

古文：太宗从其议。
现代文：太宗听从他的意见。
English: Emperor Taizong listened to his advice.

古文：除太子左卫率。
现代文：后授太子左卫率。
English: He was later given the title of crown prince.

古文：太清三年，侯景攻陷台城，时太宗居永福省，贼众奔入，举兵上殿，侍卫奔散，莫有存者。
现代文：太清三年，侯景攻陷台城，遣时太宗住在永福省，众贼奔入，举兵上殿，皇宫侍卫奔散，没有愿留下的。
English: In the third year of the Qing Dynasty, Hou Jing captured Taicheng, and sent Taizong to live in Yongfu Province. Thieves rushed in and raised an army, and the palace guards dispersed. They did not want to stay.

古文：摛独嶷然侍立不动，徐谓景曰： 侯公当以礼见，何得如此。 
现代文：徐摘独自威严侍立不动，缓缓地对侯景说： 侯公当用礼拜见，怎么能这样做。 
English: Xu Zhan stood motionless in a dignified manner, and slowly said to Hou Jing: "How can you do this, when Hou Gong should have used the prayer to see you?

古文：凶威遂折。
现代文：侯景的凶威被折服。
English: Houjing's ferocity was broken.

古文：侯景乃拜，由是常惮摛。
现代文：侯景于是拜见，从此常惧怕徐搞。
English: So Hou Jing went to see him, and from then on he was always afraid of Xu Heng.

古文：太宗嗣位，进授左卫将军，固辞不拜。
现代文：太宗继承皇位，进授左卫将军，徐搞坚辞不拜授。
English: Emperor Taizong succeeded to the throne and promoted General Zuo Wei to the position, while Emperor Xu refused to do so.

古文：太宗后被幽闭，摛不获朝谒，因感气疾而卒，年七十八。
现代文：后来太宗被囚禁，徐摘不能去朝见，因感气疾而去世，时年七十八岁。
English: Later, Emperor Taizong was imprisoned, and Xu Zhan could not go to the imperial court. He died of dysentery at the age of seventy-eight.

古文：长子陵，最知名。
现代文：长子徐陵，最知名。
English: The eldest son, Xu Ling, is the most famous.

古文：鲍泉，字润岳，东海人也。
现代文：鲍泉字润岳，是东海人。
English: Bao Quan, also known as Rong Yue, is from the East China Sea.

古文：父机，湘东王谘议参军。
现代文：父亲鲍机，是湘东王谘议参军。
English: His father, Bao Jie, was an adviser to the king of eastern Hunan on joining the army.

古文：泉博涉史传，兼有文笔。
现代文：鲍泉博览史传书籍，有韵无韵的文章均写得好。
English: Bao Quan Expo history books, rhymed and rhymeless articles are well written.

古文：少事元帝，早见擢任。
现代文：年轻时侍奉元帝，很早就被提拔任用。
English: He served Emperor Yuan when he was young, and was promoted and appointed very early.

古文：及元帝承制，累迁至信州刺史。
现代文：元帝继承皇位后，累迁至信州刺史。
English: After Emperor Yuan succeeded to the throne, he moved to Shinshu Province.

古文：太清三年，元帝命泉征河东王誉于湘州，泉至长沙，作连城以逼之，誉率众攻泉，泉据栅坚守，誉不能克。
现代文：太清三年，元帝命鲍泉去湘州征讨河东王萧誉，鲍泉至长沙，布置毗邻诸城逼迫萧誉，萧誉率众兵攻鲍泉，鲍泉据栅栏坚守，萧誉不能攻克。
English: In the third year of the Qing Dynasty, Emperor Yuan ordered Bao Quan to go to Xiangzhou to recruit Xiao You, the king of the East River, and Bao Quan to go to Changsha. He arranged the adjoining cities to persecute Xiao You. Xiao You led the soldiers to attack Bao Quan. Bao Quan held on to the fence, and Xiao You could not be defeated.

古文：泉因其弊出击之，誉大败，尽俘其众，遂围其城，久未能拔。
现代文：鲍泉又趁他疲困出击，萧誉大败，鲍泉俘获他许多兵士，于是包围城池，但久攻不下。
English: Bao Quan also took advantage of his exhaustion to attack, and suffered a great defeat. Bao Quan captured many of his soldiers, and then surrounded the city, but could not attack for a long time.

古文：世祖乃数泉罪，遣平南将军王僧辩代泉为都督。
现代文：世祖就数说鲍泉的罪过，派平南将军王僧辩代鲍泉任都督。
English: The patriarch counted the sins of Bao Quan and sent the Pingnan general Wang Sofen to replace Bao Quan as governor.

古文：僧辩至，泉愕然，顾左右曰： 得王竟陵助我经略，贼不足平矣。 
现代文：僧辩至军，鲍泉很惊讶，对左右人说： 得到王竟陵助我经略，不用费力就能平定贼寇。 
English: Bao Quan was very surprised when the monk argued with the soldiers. He said to the people around him, "If I can get Wang Jingling's tomb to help me with my strategy, I can defeat the bandits without much effort."

古文：僧辩既入，乃背泉而坐，曰： 鲍郎有罪，令旨使我锁卿，卿勿以故意见期。 
现代文：僧辩入室，便背对鲍泉而坐，说： 鲍郎有罪，令旨让我锁拿卿，卿不要以旧友的情意而怀有希望。 
English: When the monk entered the room, he sat with his back to Bao Quan and said: Bao Lang is guilty, order me to arrest Sir, Sir, don't hope for the affection of an old friend.

古文：因出令示泉，锁之床下。
现代文：于是拿出令旨让鲍泉看，将鲍泉锁在床下。
English: So he took out a writ to let Bao Quan see it, and locked Bao Quan under the bed.

古文：泉曰： 稽缓王师，甘罪是分，但恐后人更思鲍泉之愦愦耳。 
现代文：鲍泉说： 延缓了王师进攻，服罪是甘心的，但恐后人更想的是的泉的糊涂。 
English: Bao Quan said, "I delayed Wang Shi's attack, and I'm willing to take the blame, but I'm afraid people will think more of Quan's stupidity in the future."

古文：乃为启谢淹迟之罪。
现代文：于是僧辩上奏请原谅鲍泉用军迟缓的罪过。
English: So, please forgive the sin of Bao Quan's delay in using the army.

古文：世祖寻复其任，令与僧辩等率舟师东逼邵陵王于郢州。
现代文：世祖不久恢复他的职务，令他与僧辩等人率舟师从东面郢州进逼邵陵王。
English: The patriarch soon resumed his duties, and ordered him, along with other monks, to lead an expedition from the eastern state of Luzhou to force Shao Lingwang to surrender.

古文：郢州平，元帝以长子方诸为刺史，泉为长史，行府州事。
现代文：平定郢州后，元帝让长子方诸任刺史，鲍泉任长史，行府州事。
English: After the pacification of Bozhou, Emperor Yuan let the eldest son, Fang Zhu Ren Zhi Shi, and Bao Quan Ren Chang Shi, carry out the prefectural affairs.

古文：侯景密遣将宋子仙、任约率精骑袭之。方诸与泉不恤军政，唯蒲酒自乐，贼骑至，百姓奔告，方诸与泉方双陆，不信，曰： 徐文盛大军在东，贼何由得至？ 
现代文：侯景密遣将领宋子仙、任约率精骑袭击郢州，方诸舆鲍泉不考虑军政，衹是赌博酗酒自乐，贼骑兵至，百姓奔告，方诸舆鲍泉在博戏，不信，说： 徐文盛的大军守在束面，贼怎么会来? 
English: Hou Jing sent generals Song Zixian and Ren Yu to attack Zhangzhou, but Bao Quan did not consider military affairs. He was gambling, drinking and enjoying himself. Thieves and cavalry arrived, and the people rushed to tell him. Bao Quan was playing a game, he did not believe it, and said: Xu Wensheng's large army is in Shoumen, how can the thieves come?

古文：既而传告者众，始令阖门。贼纵火焚之，莫有抗者，贼骑遂入，城乃陷。
现代文：接着传告的人很多，才令关城门，贼纵火烧城，没有人敢抗拒，贼骑兵得以入城，城失陷。
English: Then a lot of people called out, and the gates were closed, the thieves set fire to the city, and no one dared to resist. The robber cavalry was able to enter the city, and the city fell.

古文：执方诸及泉送之景所。
现代文：执捕方诸及鲍泉送到侯景所。
English: The arresting party and Bao Quan were all sent to Houjing Town.

古文：后景攻王僧辩于巴陵，不克，败还，乃杀泉于江夏，沉其尸于黄鹄矶。
现代文：后来侯景在巴 凌攻王僧辩，没攻下，失败而还，便在江夏杀了鲍泉，将尸体沉入黄鹄矶。
English: Later, Hou Jing attacked Wang Sangye in Baling, but failed to capture him. He then killed Bao Quan in Jiangxia and sank his body into the Huangpi Mountains.

古文：初，泉之为南讨都督也，其友人梦泉得罪于世祖，觉而告之。
现代文：当初，鲍泉去任南讨都督时，他的朋友梦见鲍泉得罪了世祖，醒后告诉鲍泉。
English: At the beginning, when Bao Quan was appointed the governor of Nantan, his friend dreamed that Bao Quan had offended the ancestor, and told Bao Quan after waking up.

古文：后未旬，果见囚执。
现代文：没过十天，鲍泉果然被拘捕。
English: Less than ten days later, Bao Quan was indeed arrested.

古文：顷之，又梦泉著硃衣而行水上，又告泉曰： 君勿忧，寻得免矣。 
现代文：不久，又梦见鲍泉穿着红色的公服在水上走，又告鲍泉说： 君勿忧，不久可免罪。 
English: Not long after, he also dreamed that Bao Quan was walking on the water wearing a red official uniform. He also told Bao Quan, "Don't worry, you will be exonerated soon."

古文：因说其梦，泉密记之，俄而复见任，皆如其梦。
现代文：将梦说给鲍泉听，鲍泉密记此事，不久再被任用，都应了梦中所说。
English: He told the dream to Bao Quan, and Bao Quan kept the matter in secret and was soon reappointed. All of this was in accordance with what was said in the dream.

古文：泉于《仪礼》尤明，撰《新仪》四十卷，行于世。
现代文：鲍泉最懂《仪礼》，编撰《新仪》四十卷，在世上流传。
English: Bao Quan understood the "Rite" best, and compiled the "New Rite" of forty volumes, which has been circulated in the world.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：阮孝绪常言，仲尼论四科，始乎德行，终乎文学。
现代文：陈朝吏部尚书姚察曰：阮孝绪常言：仲尼论述四科，以德行为始，以文学为终。
English: Yang Shuxiu Yao, an official of the Chen Dynasty, said: "Ruan Xiaoxu often said: Zhong Ni discusses four subjects, starting with morality and ending with literature.

古文：有行者多尚质朴，有文者少蹈规矩，故卫、石靡余论可传，屈、贾无立德之誉。
现代文：有德行的人多崇尚质朴，有文学的人大都不信守准则，所以卫绾、石奋没有余论可传播，屈原、贾谊没有立德的声誉。
English: Virtuous people are more likely to advocate simplicity, and most people with literature do not adhere to the standards. Therefore, Wei Zheng and Shi Fen have no reputation to spread, and Qu Yuan and Jia Yi have no reputation for virtue.

古文：若夫宪章游、夏，祖述回、骞，体兼文行，于裴几原见之矣。
现代文：像效法子游、子夏，仿效颜回、子骞，德行和文学并存，在裴几原身上能见到。
English: Like emulating Ziyu and Zixia, and emulating Yan Hui and Zixuan, virtue and literature coexist, which can be seen in Pei Kihara.

