古文：王审知，字信通，光州固始人也。父恁，世为农。
现代文：王审知字信通，是光州固始人。父亲王恁，世代务农。
English: Wang Qian Zhi Zi Shuntong was the founder of Gwangju. His father, Wang Qian, was a farmer for generations.

古文：兄潮，为县史。
现代文：哥哥王潮，担任县的府吏。
English: His older brother, Wang Chao, served as a prefectural official.

古文：唐末群盗起，寿州人王绪攻陷固始，绪闻潮兄弟材勇，召置军中，以潮为军校。
现代文：唐末群盗并起，寿州人王绪攻陷固始，王绪听说王潮兄弟有才能勇力，召他们安置在军中，任命王潮为罩校。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, a group of bandits rose up simultaneously, and Wang Xiu, a resident of Shoushou, was the first to attack and capture Gushi. Wang Xiu heard that the Wang Chao brothers had talent and courage, called them to be placed in the army, and appointed Wang Chao as a shield school.

古文：是时，蔡州秦宗权方募士以益兵，乃以绪为光州刺史，召其兵会击黄巢。
现代文：这时，蔡州秦宗权正招募士兵扩充军队，于是任命王绪为光州刺史，召他的军队一起攻打黄巢。
English: At this time, Caizhou Qin Zongquan was recruiting soldiers to expand the army, so he appointed Wang Xu as the historian of Gwangju and called his army together to attack Huang Chao.

古文：绪迟留不行，宗权发兵攻绪。
现代文：王绪逗留不往，秦宗权出兵攻打王绪。
English: Wang Xiu did not stay, and Qin Zongquan sent troops to attack Wang Xiu.

古文：绪率众南奔，所至剽掠，自南康入临汀，陷漳浦，有众数万。
现代文：王绪率领兵众南逃，所到之处抢劫掠夺，从南康进入临汀，攻陷漳浦，有士兵数万人。
English: Wang Xu led the soldiers to flee to the south, robbed and plundered everywhere they went, from Nankang into Linting, and attacked Ganpo, with tens of thousands of soldiers.

古文：绪性猜忌，部将有材能者，多因事杀之，潮颇自惧。
现代文：王绪性格猜忌，对有才能的部将，常常藉事杀掉，王潮很害怕。
English: Wang Xuxu was suspicious of talented subordinates and often killed them. Wang Chao was very afraid.

古文：军次南安，潮说其前锋将曰： 吾属弃坟墓、妻子而为盗者，为绪所胁尔，岂其本心哉！
现代文：军队驻扎在南安，王潮游说他的前锋将领说： 我们之所以抛弃祖先的坟墓和妻子儿女而做盗贼，是受王绪逼迫罢了，难道这是我们的本来心愿吗！
English: The army was stationed in Nan'an, and Wang Chao lobbied his front-line generals, saying, "The reason why we abandoned the graves of our ancestors and our wives and children to become thieves is because of Wang Xu's persecution. Is this our original wish?"

古文：今绪雄猜，将吏之材能者必死，吾属不自保朝夕，况欲图成事哉！ 
现代文：如今王绪过分猜忌，有才能的将吏必定被杀死，我们自己朝夕难保，更何况想成就大事呢！ 
English: Now Wang Xiu is overly suspicious, talented generals are sure to be killed, and we ourselves are in danger day and night, let alone want to achieve great things!

古文：前锋将大悟，与潮相持而泣。
现代文：前锋将领彻底醒悟，和王潮相抱而哭。
English: The forward captain completely woke up, hugged Wang Chao and cried.

古文：乃选壮士数十人，伏篁竹间，伺绪至，跃出擒之，囚之军中。
现代文：于是挑选十多个强壮的士兵，埋伏在竹林中，等王绪到来，跳出来抓住他，把他拘囚在军中。
English: Therefore, he selected more than ten strong soldiers, lay in wait in the bamboo forest, waited for Wang Xu to arrive, jumped out to catch him, and detained him in the army.

古文：绪后自杀。
现代文：王绪后来自杀。
English: Wang Xu later committed suicide.

古文：绪已见废，前锋将曰： 生我者潮也。 
现代文：王绪被除掉后，前锋将领说： 使我活的人是王潮。 
English: After Wang Xu was eliminated, the forward general said, "The person who keeps me alive is Wang Chaozhou."

古文：乃推潮为主。
现代文：于是推举王潮做主帅。
English: As a result, Wang Chaozhou was elected as the head coach.

古文：是时，泉州刺史廖彦若为政贪暴，泉人苦之，闻潮略地至其境，而军行整肃，其耆老相率遮道留之，潮即引兵围彦若，逾年克之。
现代文：这时，泉州刺史廖彦若为政贪婪残暴，泉州人深感痛苦，听说王潮攻城略地到他们境内，而行军整齐严肃，那里的老人一道拦路挽留他们，王潮就率兵包围廖彦若，遇了一年攻克了他。
English: At this time, the Quanzhou assassin, Liao Yanru, was greedy and cruel in politics. The people of Quanzhou were deeply pained. They heard that Wang Chao had attacked the city and entered their territory, and the march was neat and serious. The old people there blocked the road to hold them back. Wang Chao led the troops to surround Liao Yanru and defeated him in a year.

古文：光启二年，福建观察使陈岩表潮泉州刺史。
现代文：光启二年，福建观察使陈岩表奏王潮焉泉州刺史。
English: In the second year of Guangqi, Fujian observation made Chen Yan play the role of the king of Quanzhou.

古文：景福元年岩卒，其婿范晖自称留后。
现代文：景福元年陈岩死。他的女婿范晖自称留后。
English: In the first year of Gingfu, Chen Yan died. His son-in-law, Fan Yu, claimed to be his successor.

古文：潮遣审知攻晖，久不克，士卒伤死甚众，审知请班师，潮不许。
现代文：王潮派王审知攻打范晖，很久役能攻克，士兵死伤很多。王审知请求回师，王潮不准许。
English: Wang Chao sent Wang Xizhi to attack Fan Ye, and it took him a long time to conquer Fan Ye, and many soldiers were killed and injured. Wang Xizhi asked for permission to return to his division, but Wang Chao did not allow it.

古文：又请潮自临军，且益兵，潮报曰： 兵与将俱尽，吾当自往。 
现代文：又请求王潮亲临军队，并请增兵，王潮回答说： 士兵和将领都死光了，我会亲自前往。 
English: He also asked Wang Chao to personally visit the army and ask for more soldiers. Wang Chao replied, "The soldiers and generals are all dead. I will go personally."

古文：审知乃亲督士卒攻破之，晖见杀。
现代文：王审知于是亲自督促士兵攻破了范晖的城池，范晖被杀。
English: Wang Xizhi then personally urged the soldiers to break through Fan Yu's castle, and Fan Yu was killed.

古文：唐即以潮为福建观察使，潮以审知为副使。
现代文：唐就任命王潮为福建观察使，王潮以王审知为副使。
English: Tang appointed Wang Chaozhou as Fujian Observer, and Wang Chaozhou appointed Wang Xizhi as Deputy Envoy.

古文：审知为人状兒雄伟，隆准方口，常乘白马，军中号 白马三郎 。
现代文：王审知长得高大魁梧，高鼻梁方嘴，常常骑着白马，军中称为 白马三郎 。
English: Wang Zizhi was tall and burly, with a high nose and a square mouth. He often rode a white horse, and was known in the army as the White Horse Saburo.

古文：乾宁四年，潮卒，审知代立。
现代文：干宁四年，王潮死，王审知代任。
English: After four years of work, Wang Chao died, and Wang Xizhi took over.

古文：唐以福州为威武军，拜审知节度使，累迁同中书门下平章事，封琅琊王。
现代文：唐以福州为威武军，封王审知焉节度使，累官升迁至同中书门下平章事，封为琅琊王。
English: The Tang Dynasty regarded Fuzhou as a powerful military force, and appointed Wang Xizhian as a special envoy of the emperor. He was promoted to the position of the second-ranked official of the same school, and was given the title of the king of Qi.

古文：唐亡，梁太祖加拜审知中书令，封闽王，升福州为大都督府。
现代文：唐灭亡，梁太祖加拜王审知为中书令，封为闽王，升福州为大都督府。
English: After the Tang Dynasty's demise, Liang's great-great-grandfather, King Jianchi, was given the title of Zhongshu Ling, the title of Shao Wang, and Fuzhou was promoted to Dadu Fu.

古文：是时，杨行密据有江淮，审知岁遣使泛海，自登、莱朝贡于梁，使者入海，覆溺常十三四。
现代文：这时，杨行密占据长江、淮河流域，王审知每年派使臣航海，从登、莱二州向梁进贡，使臣入海，翻船淹没的常有十分之三四。
English: At this time, Yang Xingmi occupied the Yangtze River and Huai River basins, and Wang Xizhi sent envoys to sail every year. He paid tribute to Liang from the two states of Deng and Lai, and the envoys went into the sea. There were often three or four out of ten ships that capsized.

古文：审知虽起盗贼，而为人俭约，好礼下士。
现代文：王审知虽然从盗贼起家，但为人节俭，喜好礼仪，对待士人谦和。
English: Although Wang Xizhi started his career as a thief, he was frugal, liked etiquette, and treated scholars with humility.

古文：王淡，唐相溥之子；杨沂，唐相涉从弟；徐寅，唐时知名进士，皆依审知仕宦。
现代文：王淡是唐宰相王溥的儿子，杨沂是唐宰相杨涉的弟弟，徐寅是唐代的着名进士，都依附王审知做官。
English: Wang Tan was the son of the Tang prime minister Wang Zhen, Yang Zhen was the younger brother of the Tang prime minister Yang Zhan, and Xu Yin was a famous scholar of the Tang Dynasty. All of them depended on Wang Xizhi to become officials.

古文：又建学四门，以教闽士之秀者。
现代文：又修建四所学校，教育闽中优秀的士人。
English: It also built four schools to educate outstanding scholars.

古文：招来海中蛮夷商贾。
现代文：招徕海上蛮夷商人。
English: Inviting barbarian merchants from the sea.

古文：海上黄崎，波涛为阴，一夕风雨雷电震击，开以为港，闽人以为审知德政所致，号为甘棠港。
现代文：海上的黄崎岛，被波涛阻隔，一天晚上刮风卞雨电闪雷击，劈开黄崎岛成为港口，闽人认为这是王审知的德政所致，称为甘棠港。
English: Huangqi Island on the sea, separated by the waves, was hit by wind, rain, lightning and lightning one night, splitting Huangqi Island into a port. The people thought that this was caused by Wang Xizhi's German policy, and it was called the Port of Gandang.

古文：审知同光三年卒，年六十四，谥曰忠懿。
现代文：王审知于同光三年去世，卒年六十四岁，谧号叫忠懿。
English: Wang Xizhi died at the age of sixty-four in the third year of Tongguang. His posthumous name was Zhongyao.

古文：子延翰立。
现代文：儿子王延翰继位。
English: His son Wang Yanhan succeeded him.

古文：延翰字子逸，审知长子也。
现代文：至玺翰字子逸，是王审知的长子。
English: He was the eldest son of Wang Xizhi.

古文：同光四年，唐拜延翰节度使。
现代文：同光四年，唐封王延翰为节度使。
English: In the same year, King Yanhan of Tang Dynasty was appointed as the festival envoy.

古文：是岁，庄宗遇弑，中国多故，延翰乃取司马迁《史记》闽越王无诸传示其将吏曰： 闽，自古王国也，吾今不王，何待之有？ 
现代文：这年，唐庄宗被杀，中原多事故，王延翰于是取来司马迁《史记，闽越王无诸传》给将吏们看，说： 闽，从古以来就是王国，现在我们不称王，又等什么呢？ 
English: That year, Tang Zhuangzong was killed and there were many accidents in the Central Plains. Wang Yanhan then brought Sima Qian's "Historical Records, There is no record of King Xueyue" to show the generals, saying: "Well, it has been a kingdom since ancient times, but now we don't call ourselves kings, so what are we waiting for?

古文：于是军府将吏上书劝进。
现代文：于是军府将士上书劝他登王位。
English: As a result, military officers wrote to him to persuade him to ascend to the throne.

古文：十月，延翰建国称王，而犹禀唐正朔。
现代文：十月，王延翰建国称王，而仍承唐的纪年。
English: In October, Wang Yanhan was crowned king after the founding of the country, and still followed the chronology of Tang.

古文：延翰为人长大，美皙如玉，其妻崔氏陋而淫，延翰不能制。
现代文：王延翰长得高大，美丽白皙如玉，他的妻子崔氏丑陋而淫乱，王延翰不能控制她。
English: Wang Yanhan is tall and beautiful with a white beard. His wife, Cui, is ugly and promiscuous. Wang Yanhan cannot control her.

古文：审知丧未期，彻其几筵，又多选良家子为妾。
现代文：王审知的丧礼没有到期，就撤掉几案，又挑选很多良家女子做妾。
English: Wang Xuancheng's funeral was not overdue, he withdrew several cases, and selected many good women to be concubines.

古文：崔氏性石，良家子之美者，辄幽之别室，系以大械，刻木为人手以击颊，又以铁锥刺之，一岁中死者八十四人。
现代文：崔氏性格妒忌，对长得美的良家女子，就把她们囚禁在另一问屋中，锁上枷锁，把树木雕成人手来打她们的脸，又用铁锥刺她们，一年中害死八十四个人。
English: Mr. Cui's character was jealous of good-looking girls from good families, so he imprisoned them in another interrogation room, locked them in shackles, carved trees into hands to hit their faces, and stabbed them with iron cones, killing eighty-four people in one year.

古文：崔氏后病，见以为祟而卒。
现代文：崔氏后来患病，见被害的人作祟而死去。
English: Mr Cui later fell ill and died as a result of the victim's actions.

古文：审知养子建州刺史延禀，本姓周氏，自审知时与延翰不叶。
现代文：王审知的养子建州刺史王延禀，原本姓周，从王审知时起就和王延翰不和。
English: Wang Yanxuan, the adopted son of Wang Xianzhi, originally surnamed Zhou, has been at odds with Wang Yanhan since the time of Wang Xianzhi.

古文：延翰立，以其弟延钧为泉州刺史，延钧怒。
现代文：王延翰继位，任命他的弟弟王延钩为泉州刺史，王延钧发怒。
English: Wang Yanhan succeeded to the throne and appointed his younger brother Wang Yanhu as the governor of Quanzhou. Wang Yanjun was furious.

古文：二人因谋作乱。
现代文：二人因而谋划作乱。
English: As a result, the two of them plotted to start a riot.

古文：十二月，延禀、延钧皆以兵入，执延翰杀之。
现代文：十二月，王延桌、王延钧都率兵攻入，抓获王延翰杀掉。
English: In December, Wang Yanbiao and Wang Yanbiao led troops to attack and capture Wang Yanhan and killed him.

古文：而延钧立，更名鏻。
现代文：而王延钧继位，改名叫王鳞。
English: However, Wang Yanxuan succeeded to the throne and changed his name to Wang Qiao.

古文：鏻，审知次子也。
现代文：王鳞是王审知的次子。
English: Wang Qian is the second son of Wang Qiancheng.

古文：唐即拜鏻节度使，累加检校太师、中书令，封闽王。
现代文：唐时就任命王鳞为节度使，累官加检校太师、中书令，封为闽王。
English: At the time of the Tang Dynasty, Wang Qi was appointed as the festival envoy, and he was also appointed as the official inspector, the school dean, and the official in charge of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：初，延禀与鏻之谋杀延翰也，延禀之兵先至，已执延翰而杀之，胆日鏻兵始至，延禀自以养子，推鏻而立之。
现代文：当初，王延禀和王鳞谋杀王延翰时，王延桌的军队先到，已经抓获王延翰杀掉，第二天王鳞的军队纔到，王延禀因为自己是养子，于是推举王鳞继位。
English: At the beginning, when Wang Yanqi and Wang Qian murdered Wang Yanhan, Wang Yanbai's army arrived first. They had already captured and killed Wang Yanhan. The next day, Wang Qian's army arrived. Since Wang Yanbai was his adopted son, he nominated Wang Qian to succeed him.

古文：延禀还建州，鏻饯于郊，延禀临诀谓鏻曰： 善继先志，毋烦老兄复来！ 
现代文：王延桌返回建州，王鳞在郊外为他饯行，王延禀临别对王鳞说： 好好继承先父遗愿，不要麻烦老兄再来！ 
English: Wang Yanbai returned to Jianzhou, while Wang Qiao walked for him in the suburbs. Wang Yanbai said to Wang Qiao before parting: Do your best to inherit your father's last wish, and don't bother your brother to come back!

古文：鏻衔之。
现代文：王鳞对此怀恨在心。
English: Wang Qi harbors a grudge against this.

古文：长兴二年，延禀率兵击鏻，攻其西门，使其子继雄转海攻其南门，鏻遣王仁达拒之。
现代文：长兴二年，王延桌率兵攻打王鳞，进攻西门，派他的儿子王继雄从海道攻打南门，王鳞派王仁达抗拒他们。
English: In the second year of Changxing, Wang Yanbiao led his troops to attack Wang Qi, attacked the West Gate, sent his son Wang Jixiong to attack the South Gate from the highway, and Wang Qi sent Wang Renda to resist them.

古文：仁达伏甲舟中，伪立白帜请降，继雄信之，登舟，伏兵发，刺杀之，枭其首西门，其兵见之皆溃去，延禀见执。
现代文：王仁达在船中埋伏甲兵，假装立起白旗请求投降，王继雄相信了，登上船，伏兵出动，把他刺死，在西门悬头示众，他的士兵见了都溃散逃去，王延桌被抓获。
English: Wang Renda ambushed the armored soldiers in the ship, pretended to raise a white flag and asked for surrender. Wang Jixiong believed him and boarded the ship. The ambushers went out and stabbed him to death. He was paraded at the West Gate. His soldiers scattered and fled when they saw him. Wang Yanbiao was captured.

古文：鏻诮之曰： 予不能继先志，果烦老兄复来！ 
现代文：王鳞讥诮他说： 我没能继承先父遗愿，果然麻烦你老兄再来！ 
English: Wang Qi scoffed at him and said, "I couldn't carry on my father's last wish, so I'm really asking you, my brother, to come again!"

古文：延廪不能对，遂杀之。
现代文：王延禀不能回答，于是杀了他。
English: Wang Yanqi couldn't answer, so he killed him.

古文：延禀子继升守建州，闻败，奔于钱塘。
现代文：王延桌的儿子王縿升守建州，听说被打败，逃奔到钱塘。
English: Wang Yanshan's son, Wang Shusheng, was in charge of Jianzhou. Hearing that he had been defeated, he fled to Qiantang.

古文：长兴三年，鏻上书言： 楚王马殷、吴越王钱镠皆为尚书令，今皆已薨，请授臣尚书令。 
现代文：长兴三年，王鳞上书说： 楚王马殷、昊越王钱缪都是尚书令，如今都已逝世，请求授予我尚书令。 
English: In the third year of Changxing, Wang Yan wrote: King Ma Yin of Chu and King Qian Miao of Haoyue, both of whom were Shang Shuling, have now passed away, and requested that I be granted Shang Shuling.

古文：唐不报，鏻遂绝朝贡。
现代文：唐不答复，王鳞于是断绝进贡。
English: Tang did not reply, so Wang Qiao cut off the tribute.

古文：鏻好鬼神、道家之说，道士陈守元以左道见信，建宝皇宫以居之。
现代文：王鳞喜好鬼神、道家学说，道士陈守元靠邪道受到信任，修建童皇官让他居住。
English: Wang Yan was fond of ghosts and spirits and Taoist teachings. Taoist Chen Shouyuan gained trust by relying on the wrong path, so he built a palace for the boy emperor to live in.

古文：守元谓鏻曰： 宝皇命王少避其位，后当为六十年天子。 
现代文：陈守元对王鳞说： 童皇命令王暂时避位，以后会做六十年天子。 
English: Chen Shouyuan said to Wang Qi: Emperor Tong ordered Wang to temporarily abdicate, and he will be the emperor for sixty years.

古文：鏻欣然逊位，命其子继鹏权主府事。
现代文：王鳞高兴地让位，让他的儿子王继鹏代管军府事。
English: Wang Qi gladly stepped aside and let his son Wang Jipeng take over the military affairs of the government.

古文：既而复位，遣守元问宝皇： 六十年后将安归？ 
现代文：不久复位，派陈守元询问宝皇： 六十年后将归于哪里？ 
English: Soon after his reinstatement, he sent Chen Shouyuan to inquire about the treasure emperor: Where will he go after sixty years?

古文：守元传宝皇语曰： 六十年后，当为大罗仙人。 
现代文：陈守元传宝皇的话说： 六十年后，会成为大罗仙人。 
English: Chen Shouyuan passed on the words of Emperor Bao: After sixty years, I will become a great sage.

古文：鏻乃即皇帝位，受册于宝皇，以黄龙见真封宅，改元为龙启，国号闽。
现代文：王鳞于是即皇帝位，在实皇官接受册命，因为黄龙出现在真封府宅，改年号叫龙启，国号闽。
English: Therefore, Wang Qian became the emperor, and in fact, the imperial officials accepted the written order, because the yellow dragon appeared in the Zhenfeng mansion, the new year's name was Longqi, and the country's name was Xi.

古文：追谥审知为昭武孝皇帝，庙号太祖，立五庙，置百官，以福州为长乐府。
现代文：追赠王审知谧号为昭武孝皇帝，庙号为太祖，修建五庙，设置百官，以福州为长乐府。
English: Wang Xizhi posthumously gave his posthumous name as Emperor Zhaowu Xiao, his temple name as Taizu, built five temples, set up hundreds of officials, and named Fuzhou as Changlefu.

古文：而闽地狭，国用不足，以中军使薛文杰为国计使。
现代文：而闽地狭小，国用不足，任命中军使薛文杰为国计使。
English: However, the land available was too small and insufficient for the needs of the country, so the Chinese military envoy Xue Wenjie was appointed as the national envoy.

古文：文杰多察民间阴事，致富人以罪，而籍没其赀以佐用，闽人皆怨。
现代文：薛文杰常常探察民间隐私，给富人罗织定罪，而没收他们的家产以补充国用，闽人都很怨愤。
English: Xue Wenjie often explored people's privacy, convicted the rich, and confiscated their family property to supplement the state, and the people were very resentful.

古文：又荐妖巫徐彦，曰： 陛下左右多奸臣，不质诸鬼神，将为乱。 
现代文：又推荐巫师徐彦，说： 陛下左右有很多奸臣，不向鬼神询问，将会造成灾乱。 
English: He also recommended the sorcerer Xu Yan, saying, "There are many treacherous vassals around Your Majesty. If you don't ask the ghosts and gods, it will cause a disaster."

古文：鏻使彦视鬼于宫中。
现代文：王鳞派徐彦在宫中察看是否有鬼作祟。
English: Wang Qi sent Xu Yan to the palace to see if there was any evil plot.

古文：文杰与内枢密使吴英有隙，英病在告，文杰谓英曰： 上以公居近密，而屡以疾告，将罢公。 
现代文：薛文杰和内枢密使昊英有矛盾，昊英患病休假，薛文杰对昊英说： 皇上因你身居宫禁，而多次因病请假，准备罢免你。 
English: Xue Wenjie and Inner Privy Councilor Hao Ying had a conflict. Hao Ying was on sick leave. Xue Wenjie said to Hao Ying, "Since you are under house arrest, the emperor has taken sick leave many times and is preparing to remove you.

古文：英曰： 奈何？ 
现代文：昊英说： 怎么办呢？ 
English: Hao Ying said: What should we do?

古文：文杰因教英曰： 即上遣人问公疾，当言 头痛而已，无他苦也。  
现代文：薛文杰借机教昊英说： 如果皇上派人间你的病，你应当说 只是头痛罢了，没有别的病。  
English: Xue Wenjie took the opportunity to teach Hao Ying, saying: If the emperor sends your illness to the world, you should say that it is just a headache, there is no other disease.

古文：英以为然。
现代文：昊英信以为然。
English: Hao Yingxin thinks so.

古文：明日，讽鏻使巫视英疾，巫言： 入北庙，见英为崇顺王所讯，曰： 汝何敢谋反？ 
现代文：第二天，薛文杰劝王鳞派巫人探枧昊英的病情，巫人说： 进入北庙，看见昊英受到崇顺王的审讯，说： 你怎敢谋反？ 
English: The next day, Xue Wenjie advised Wang Yu to send a sorcerer to investigate the illness of Hao Haoying. The sorcerer said: Enter the North Temple, see Haoying being interrogated by King Chongshun, and say: How dare you plot a rebellion?

古文：以金槌击其首。 
现代文：用金槌打他的头。 
English: Hit him on the head with a hammer.

古文：鏻以语文杰，文杰曰： 未可信也，宜问其疾如何。 
现代文：王鳞告诉薛文杰，薛文杰说： 不可全信，应当询问他的病情怎样。 
English: Wang Qi told Xue Wenjie, and Xue Wenjie said: Don't believe everything, you should ask him how he is.

古文：鏻遣人问之，英曰： 头痛。 
现代文：王鳞派人探问，昊英说： 头痛。 
English: Wang Qi sent someone to inquire, and Hao Ying said, "I have a headache."

古文：鏻以为然，即以英下狱，命文杰劾之，英自诬伏，见杀。
现代文：王辚信以为真，就把昊荚投进狱中，命令薛文杰审问他，昊英自编罪状伏罪，被杀。
English: Wang Yuxin believed it to be true, so he threw Hao Yao into prison and ordered Xue Wenjie to interrogate him. Hao Ying made up the accusation and was killed.

古文：英尝主闽兵，得其军士心，军士闻英死，皆怒。
现代文：昊英曾统管闽军，很得军士之心，士兵们听说昊英被杀，都发怒了。
English: Hao Ying used to be in charge of the Shan army, and was very popular with the soldiers. When the soldiers heard that Hao Ying had been killed, they were angry.

古文：是岁，吴人攻建州，鏻遣其将王延宗救之，兵士在道不肯进，曰： 得文杰乃进。 
现代文：逭年，昊人攻打建州，王鳞派他的将领王延宗救援，士兵们在路上不愿前进，说： 得到薛文杰纔前进。 
English: In the year of the rooster, the Hao people attacked Jianzhou. Wang Yu sent his general Wang Yanzong to the rescue. The soldiers did not want to advance on the road, saying: Let Xue Wenjie advance.

古文：鏻惜之不与，其子继鹏请与之以纾难，乃以槛车送文杰军中。
现代文：王鳞舍不得薛文杰，不给，他的儿子王继鹏请求把薛文杰交给士兵以救祸难，于是用槛车把薛文杰押送到军中。
English: Wang Qian could not bear to give up Xue Wenjie. His son, Wang Jipeng, requested that Xue Wenjie be handed over to the soldiers to save the day, so he sent Xue Wenjie to the army in a carriage.

古文：文杰善数术，自占云： 过三日可无患。 
现代文：薛文杰擅长敷衍，替自己占卜说： 过三天就没有灾患了。 
English: Xue Wenjie is good at perfunctory, for his own divination said: in three days there will be no disaster.

古文：送者闻之，疾驰二日而至，军士踊跃，磔文杰于市，闽人争以瓦石投之，脔食立尽。
现代文：押送他的人听了，急驰两天就到了，士兵们欢呼踊跃，车裂薛文杰于街市，闽人争相向尸体上投掷瓦块石头，割成肉块一下就吃光了。
English: His escort listened, and arrived two days later in a hurry. The soldiers cheered with joy. The carriage of Xue Wenjie was torn apart in the street market. The executioners threw bricks and stones at the corpse, cut it into pieces of meat, and ate it all up.

古文：明日，鏻使者至，赦之，已不及。
现代文：第二天，王鳞的使臣来到，赦免薛文杰，已经来不及了。
English: The next day, Wang Qi's envoy came to pardon Xue Wenjie, but it was too late.

古文：初，文杰为鏻造槛车，以谓古制疏阔，乃更其制，令上下通，中以铁芒内向，动辄触之，既成，首被其毒。
现代文：当初，薛文杰为王鉼制造槛车，认为古代的槛车规格太宽松，于是改变式样，使上下相通，中间用铁刺向内，一动就碰到铁刺，做成后，薛文杰第一个受它的苦。
English: At first, Xue Wenjie made a threshing machine for Wang Qian. He thought that the ancient specifications of the threshing machine were too loose, so he changed the style, so that the upper and lower parts were connected, and the middle was pierced with an iron spike. As soon as he touched the iron spike, he was the first to suffer from it.

古文：龙启三年，改元永和。
现代文：龙启三年，改年号为永和。
English: In the third year of Longqi, the year name was changed to Yonghe.

古文：王仁达为鏻杀延禀有功，而典亲兵，鏻心忌之，尝问仁达曰： 赵高指鹿为马，以愚二世，果有之邪？ 
现代文：王仁达替王鉼杀掉王延桌有功，而统领亲兵，王鳞心中猜忌他，曾问王仁连说： 趟高指鹿为马，愚弄秦二世，真有这事吗？ 
English: Wang Rinda did a good job of killing Wang Yan's table on behalf of Wang Xi, but the leader of his own soldiers, Wang Qi, was suspicious of him in his heart. He once asked Wang Renlian, "Is it true that you used a high-fingered deer as a horse to fool Qin II?"

古文：仁达曰： 秦二世愚，故高指鹿为马，非高能愚二世也。
现代文：王仁达说： 秦二世愚蠢，因此趟高指鹿为马，不是赵高能愚弄秦二世。
English: Wang Rinda said: Qin II is stupid, so it is not Zhao Gao who can fool Qin II.

古文：今陛下聪明，朝廷官不满百，起居动静，陛下皆知之，敢有作威福者，族灭之而已。 
现代文：如今陛下聪明，朝廷官吏不到一百，起居动静，陛下都知道，如有胆敢作威作福的人，不过把他灭族罢了。 
English: Nowadays, Your Majesty is wise. There are less than a hundred officials in the Imperial Court, and they all live and work quietly. Your Majesty knows that if someone dares to act like a tyrant, all he has to do is exterminate him.

古文：鏻惭，赐与金帛慰安之。
现代文：王鳞羞惭，赐给金银绸缎安慰他。
English: Embarrassed, the king gave him gold, silver and silk to console him.

古文：退而谓人曰： 仁达智略，在吾世可用，不可遗后世患。 
现代文：退下后对人说： 王仁达的机智才略，在我这一世可以用，不能给后世留下隐患。 
English: After stepping back, he said to people: Wang Rinda's wit and talent can be used in this life, and cannot leave hidden dangers for future generations.

古文：卒诬以罪杀之。
现代文：最终用罪名诬陷杀掉他。
English: They eventually framed him and killed him.

古文：鏻妻早卒，继室金氏贤而不见答。
现代文：王鳞的妻子早死，第二个妻子金氏贤惠却得不到回报。
English: Wang Qi's wife died prematurely, but his second wife, Kim Si Hyon Hui, received no reward.

古文：审知婢金凤，姓陈氏，鏻嬖之，遂立以为后。
现代文：王审知的婢女金凤，姓陈，王鳞宠爱她，于是立她焉皇后。
English: Wang Qiancheng's maid, Jinfeng, surnamed Chen, was a favorite of Wang Qian, so he made her his empress.

古文：初，鏻有嬖吏归守明者，以色见倖，号归郎，鏻后得风疾，陈氏与归郎奸。
现代文：当初，王鳞宠幸的官吏归守明，因美色受到宠爱，号称归郎，王鳞后来患风病，陈氏和归郎通奸。
English: At first, Wang Qian's favorite official was Gui Shouming, who was favored because of his beauty and was known as Gui Lang. Later, Wang Qian fell ill with a cold, and Chen and Gui Lang committed adultery.

古文：又有百工院使李可殷，因归郎以通陈氏。
现代文：又有百工院使李可殷，通过归郎和陈氏通奸。
English: In addition, the Baigong Academy made Li Keyin commit adultery with the Chen family through a returnee.

古文：鏻命锦工作九龙帐，国人歌曰： 谁谓九龙帐，惟贮一归郎！ 
现代文：王鳞命织锦工匠制作九龙帐，国中人唱道： 谁说是九龙帐，只藏有一个归郎！ 
English: Wang Qi ordered the brocade craftsmen to make the Nine Dragons, and the people in the country sang: Who says it is the Nine Dragons, there is only one returnee!

古文：鏻婢春燕有色，其子继鹏蒸之，鏻已病，继鹏因陈氏以求春燕，鏻怏怏与之。
现代文：王鳞的婢女春蔫有美色，他的儿子王继鹏同她淫乱，王鳞患病后，王继鹏通过陈氏索求春骛，王鳞怏怏不乐地给了他。
English: Wang Qian's maid, Chun Yao, was beautiful, and his son, Wang Jipeng, had an affair with her. After Wang Qian fell ill, Wang Jipeng asked Chen for Chun Yao, and Wang Qian reluctantly gave it to him.

古文：其次子继韬怒，谋杀继鹏，继鹏惧，与皇城使李仿图之。
现代文：他的次子王继韬发怒，准备谋杀王继鹏，王继鹏害怕，和皇城使李仿算计王继韬。
English: His second son, Wang Jipeng, was angry and prepared to murder Wang Jipeng. Wang Jipeng was afraid, so he and the imperial envoy Li Bong calculated to kill Wang Jipeng.

古文：是岁十月，钅粦飨军于大酺殿，坐中昏然，言见延禀来，仿以为鏻病已甚，乃令壮士先杀李可殷于家。
现代文：这年十月，王鉼在大醣殿犒赏士兵，宴会中途发昏，说看见王延禀来，李傲以为王鳞已经病重，于是命令武士先把李可殷杀死在家中。
English: In October of that year, when Wang Yao was entertaining soldiers at the Great Hall of the People, he fainted in the middle of the banquet, saying that when he saw Wang Yan Yao coming, Li Ao thought that Wang Qi was seriously ill, so he ordered the samurai to kill Li Ke Yin at home first.

古文：明日晨朝，鏻无恙，问仿杀可殷何罪，仿惧而出，与继鹏率皇城卫士而入。
现代文：第二天早晨上朝，王鳞安然无恙，问李做杀死李可殷是什么罪，李傲害怕退出，和王继鹏率领皇城卫士攻入。
English: In the morning of the next day, Wang Qi was safe and sound. He asked Li Do what was the crime of killing Li Ke Yin. Li Ao was afraid to withdraw, and Wang Jipeng led the imperial guards to break in.

古文：鏻闻鼓噪声，走匿九龙帐中，卫士刺之不殂，宫人不忍其苦，为绝之。
现代文：王鳞听见击鼓喧板声，逃走藏在九龙帐中，卫士刺中了他而没有死，宫人不忍心见他受苦，替他断了命。
English: Wang Yu heard the drumming noise and ran away to hide in the Jiulong tent. The guards stabbed him but he did not die. The palace people could not bear to see him suffer and took his life for him.

古文：继韬及陈后、归郎皆为仿所杀。鏻立十年见杀，谥曰惠皇帝，庙号太宗。
现代文：王继韬和陈皇后、归郎都被李傲杀死王鳞登位十年被杀，谧号为惠皇帝，庙号焉太宗。
English: Wang Jisheng, the Chen Empress, and the returnee were all killed by Li Ao. Wang Qian was killed ten years after his accession to the throne. His posthumous name was Emperor Hui, and his temple name was Yan Taizong.

古文：继鹏，鏻长子也。
现代文：王继鹏是王锈的长子。
English: Wang Jipeng is the eldest son of Wang Rust.

古文：既立，更名昶，改元通文，以李仿判六军诸卫事。
现代文：登位后，改名叫王昶，改年号通文，任命李做判六军诸卫事。
English: After ascending to the throne, he changed his name to Wang Qi, changed the year name to Tongwen, and appointed Li to be the judge of the six military guards.

古文：仿有弑君之罪，既立昶，而心常自疑，多养死士以为备。
现代文：李傲有杀君的罪过，拥立王昶后，心中常常自起疑心，养了很多敢死之士作防备。
English: Li Ao was guilty of killing the prince, and after supporting Wang Xuan, he often had doubts in his heart, and raised a lot of daredevils as a precaution.

古文：昶患之，因大享军，伏甲擒仿杀之，枭其首于市。
现代文：王昶对此担忧，趁大宴军队的时机，埋伏士兵抓住李傲杀掉，把头悬挂在街上示众。
English: Wang Yao was worried about this. Taking advantage of the army's grand banquet, the ambush soldiers caught Li Ao, killed him, and hung his head in the street for all to see.

古文：仿部曲千人叛，烧启圣门，夺仿首，奔于钱塘。
现代文：李傲的部属一千人反叛，烧毁启圣门，夺走李傲的头，逃奔到钱塘。
English: One thousand of Li Ao's subordinates rebelled, burned down the Qisheng Gate, took away Li Ao's head, and fled to Qiantang.

古文：晋天福二年，昶遣使朝贡京师，高祖遣散骑常侍卢损册昶闽王，拜其子继恭临海郡王。
现代文：晋天福二年，王昶派使臣到京师进贡，晋高祖派散骑常侍卢损册封王昶为闽王，封他的儿子王继恭为临海郡王。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jintianfu, Wang Xi sent envoys to pay tribute to the Beijing division, and the Emperor Jintao sent his equestrian attendant, Lu Zhizhong, to crown Wang Xi as the king of Zhai, and his son, Wang Jigong, as the king of Linhai County.

古文：损至闽，昶称疾不见，令继恭主之。
现代文：卢损到达闽中，王昶称病不见，命令王继恭主持接待他。
English: When Lu Zi arrived at the middle school, Wang Zi said that he was not ill and ordered Wang Jigong to receive him.

古文：又遣中书舍人刘乙劳损于馆，乙衣冠伟然，驺僮甚盛。
现代文：又派中书舍人刘乙到馆舍慰劳卢损，刘乙衣冠楚楚，气宇昂然，带了很多僮仆。
English: They also sent Liu Yi, a member of the Central Library, to the library to offer condolences. Liu Yi was well-dressed and cheerful, and he brought a lot of servants with him.

古文：他日损遇乙于途，布衣芒屩而已，损使人诮之曰： 凤阁舍人，何偪下之甚也！ 
现代文：另一天卢损在路上遇见刘乙，穿着布衣草鞋而已，卢损派人讥诮他说： 凤阁舍人，为何如此窘迫呢！ 
English: On another day, Luzhao met Liu B on the road, who was only wearing a cloth coat and sandals. Luzhao sent someone to mock him and said: "Fengge, why are you so embarrassed?

古文：乙羞愧，以手掩面而走。
现代文：刘乙羞愧，用手遮住脸跑了。
English: Ashamed, Liu Yi covered his face with his hands and ran away.

古文：昶闻之，怒损侵辱之，损还，昶无所答。
现代文：王昶听说后，气愤卢损侵凌欺辱刘乙，卢损返回时，王昶没有回报。
English: After hearing about it, Wang Yao was angry that Lu Jia violated and bullied Liu B. When Lu Jia returned, Wang Yao did not reciprocate.

古文：而其子继恭遣其佐郑元弼随损至京师贡方物，致书晋大臣，述昶意求以敌国礼相往来。高祖怒其不逊，下诏暴其罪，归其贡物不纳。
现代文：而他的儿子王继恭派他的僚佐郑元弼随卢损到京师进献土产，送书信给晋大臣，说王昶想按照对等国家间的礼节相往来，晋高祖对他的不恭敬非常生气，下诏揭露他的罪行，送回他的贡物不接受。
English: However, his son, Wang Jigong, sent his colleague, Zheng Yuanzhang, to Beijing along with Lu Zhizhong to donate local products and send a letter to the Jin minister, saying that Wang Jigong wanted to deal with each other in accordance with the etiquette between peer countries. The Jin emperor was very angry at his disrespect, and issued a decree to expose his crimes and not accept the tribute sent back to him.

古文：兵部员外郎李知损上书请籍没其物而禁锢使者，于是以元弼下狱。
现代文：兵部员外郎李知损上书请求没收他的贡品并囚禁使臣，于是把郑元弼投进狱中。
English: His brother-in-law, Li Zhizai, a member of the military department, sent a letter requesting the confiscation of his tribute and the imprisonment of the envoy, so Zheng Yuanzhang was thrown into prison.

古文：狱具引见，元弼俯伏曰： 昶，夷貊之君，不知礼义，陛下方示大信，以来远人，臣将命无状，愿伏斧钅质，以赎昶罪。 
现代文：案件判决后引见，郑元弼伏在地上说： 王昶是东方蛮夷君主，不懂礼义，陛下正向天下显示大诚信，以招徕远方的人，我执行使命没有礼貌，愿被处死，为王昶赎罪。 
English: After the case was adjudicated, Zheng Yuanzhang prostrated himself on the ground and said: Wang Yao is a barbarian monarch of the East who does not understand propriety. Your Majesty is showing great sincerity to the world to attract people from far away. I am not polite in carrying out my mission. I am willing to be put to death to atone for Wang Yao.

古文：高祖乃赦元弼，遣归。
现代文：晋高祖于是敖免郑元弼，让他返回。
English: Therefore, Jin Gaozu pardoned Zheng Yuanjun and allowed him to return.

古文：昶亦好巫，拜道士谭紫霄为正一先生，又拜陈守元为天师，而妖人林兴以巫见幸，事无大小，兴辄以宝皇语命之而后行。
现代文：王昶也喜好巫术，封道士谭紫霄焉正一先生，又封陈守元为天师，而妖人林兴因为巫术受到宠幸，事情无论大小，林兴动辄就用寅皇的话命令他然后施行。
English: Wang Yao was also fond of witchcraft. He appointed the Taoist Mr. Tan Zi Xiao Yan Zhengyi, and also appointed Chen Shouyuan as a heavenly teacher, while the demon Lin Xing was favored because of witchcraft. No matter how big or small the matter was, Lin Xing would order him with the words of the King of Yin and then carry it out.

古文：守元教昶起三清台三层，以黄金数千斤铸宝皇及元始天尊、太上老君像，日焚龙脑、薰陆诸香数斤，作乐于台下，昼夜声不辍，云如此可求大还丹。
现代文：陈守元教王昶修建三清台三层，用几千斤黄斤铸造窦皇和元始天尊、太上老君的塑像，每天烧龙脑、熏陆之类的香几斤，在台下奏乐，昼夜乐声不断，说像这样就可以得到大还丹。
English: Chen Shouyuan taught Wang Qian to build the three-story Sanqing Tower, and used several thousand pounds of yellow ingots to cast the statues of Emperor Dou and the founder of the dynasty, Emperor Taizhong. Every day, he burned several pounds of incense such as dragon's brains and smoked clams, and played music under the stage. The music continued day and night. He said that like this, he could get a big reward.

古文：三年夏，虹见其宫中，林兴传神言： 此宗室将为乱之兆也。 
现代文：三年夏，彩虹出现在宫中，林兴传达神的话说： 这是宗室将要作乱的征兆。 
English: In the summer of the third year, a rainbow appeared in the palace, and Lin Xing conveyed God's words, "This is a sign that the family will cause turmoil."

古文：乃命兴率壮士杀审知子延武、延望及其子五人。
现代文：于是命令林兴率武士杀王审知的儿子王延武、王延望和他的五个儿子。
English: Therefore, he ordered Lin Xing and his warriors to kill Wang Yanwu, Wang Yanwang and his five sons.

古文：后兴事败，亦被杀。
现代文：后来林兴的阴谋败露，也被杀了。
English: Later, Lin Xing's plot was exposed and he was also killed.

古文：而昶愈惑乱，立父婢春燕为淑妃，后立以为皇后。
现代文：而王昶更加迷乱，立父亲的婢女春骛为淑妃，后来又立为皇后。
English: Wang Yao was even more confused. He appointed his father's maid, Chun Yao, as his concubine, and later as his empress.

古文：又遣医人陈究以空名堂牒卖官。
现代文：又派医师陈究用未署名的堂牒卖官。
English: They also sent a doctor, Chen Kuo-ro, to sell unsigned certificates to officials.

古文：昶弟继严判六军诸卫事，昶疑而罢之，代以季弟继镛，而募勇士为宸卫都以自卫，其赐予给赏，独厚于他军。
现代文：王昶的弟弟王继严判六军诸卫事，王昶疑心把他罢免了，让小弟王继锈替代，而且招募勇士组成宸卫都来自卫，对他们的供给赏赐，比其它各军都要丰厚。
English: Wang Xi's younger brother, Wang Ji, severely condemned the guards of the six armies. Wang Xi, suspicious, dismissed him and let his younger brother, Wang Ji Rust, take his place. Moreover, he recruited warriors to form the guards to defend themselves. The supplies and rewards for them were more plentiful than those of other armies.

古文：控鹤都将连重遇、拱宸都将硃文进，皆以此怒激其军。
现代文：控鹤都将连重遇、拱宸都将朱文进，都藉此事来激怒军队。
English: The control cranes will meet again and again, and the arch cranes will be Zhu Wenjin, all of which are used to provoke the army.

古文：是岁夏，术者言昶宫中当有灾，昶徙南宫避灾，而宫中火，昶疑重遇军士纵火。
现代文：这年夏天，术士说王昶宫中会有灾祸，王昶迁到南官躲灾，而宫中起火，王昶怀疑是连重遇的士兵放的火。
English: This summer, the sorcerer said that there would be a disaster in Wang Yao's palace. Wang Yao moved to Nankan to hide from the disaster, and a fire broke out in the palace. Wang Yao suspected that it was a fire set by the soldiers he had met repeatedly.

古文：内学士陈郯素以便佞为昶所亲信，昶以火事语之，郯反以告重遇。
现代文：内学士陈郯历来靠阿谀奉承受到王昶的亲近信任，王昶把起火的事告诉他，陈郯反而告诉了连重遇。
English: Chen Yao, a bachelor of internal medicine, has always relied on flattery to be trusted by Wang Yao. Wang Yao told him about the fire, but Chen Yao told him about the repeated encounters.

古文：重遇惧，夜率卫士纵火焚南宫，昶挟爱姬、子弟、黄门卫士斩关而出，宿于野次。
现代文：连重遇害怕，晚上率领卫士放火烧毁南宫，王昶带着爱妃、子女、黄门卫士劈开宫门逃出，在野外留宿。
English: Repeatedly frightened, he led the guards to set fire to the South Palace in the evening. Wang Yao, with Aifei, his children, and the Yellow Gate guards, broke open the palace gate to escape and stayed in the open.

古文：重遇迎延义立之。
现代文：连重遇迎立王延羲。
English: Repeatedly encountering Wang Yanxuan.

古文：延义令其子继业率兵袭昶，及之；射杀数人，昶知不免，掷弓于地，继业执而杀之，及其妻、子皆死无遗类。
现代文：王延羲命令他的儿子王继业率兵袭击王昶，追上他们；王昶射死几个人，自知不能幸免，把弓箭扔到地上，王继业抓到他把他杀了，他的妻子、儿女都被杀死。
English: Wang Yanqi ordered his son Wang Jiye to attack Wang Jie and catch up with them. Wang Jie shot several people, knowing that he could not escape, and threw his bow and arrow to the ground. Wang Jie caught him and killed him. His wife and children were all killed.

古文：延义立，谥昶曰康宗。
现代文：玉玺羲登位，赠王昶的谧号为康宗。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, and the posthumous name given to King Taizong was Kangzong.

古文：延义，审知少子也。
现代文：王延羲是王审知的小儿子。
English: Wang Yanqi is the youngest son of Wang Xizhi.

古文：既立，更名曦，遣使者朝贡于晋，改元永隆。
现代文：登位后，改名焉曦，派遣使臣向晋朝贡，改年号叫永隆。
English: After ascending the throne, he changed his name to Yan Xi, sent envoys to pay tribute to the Jin Dynasty, and changed his era name to Yonglong.

古文：铸大铁钱，以一当十。
现代文：铸造大铁钱，以一当十。
English: Cast large iron money, with one to ten.

古文：曦自昶世倔强难制，昶相王倓每抑折之，曦亦惮倓，不敢有所发。
现代文：王曦自从王昶时就倔强难以控制，王昶的宰相王侠每每压制折服他，王曦也怕王俊，不敢做什么。
English: Wang Xi has been stubborn and difficult to control since he was Wang Yao. Wang Yao's prime minister, Wang Xiao, suppressed and subdued him at every turn. Wang Xi is also afraid of Wang Jun and dares not do anything.

古文：新罗遣使聘闽以宝剑，昶举以示倓曰： 此将何为？ 
现代文：新罗派使臣带着宝剑出使闽，王昶举起宝剑给王恢看，说： 拿这个做什磨？ 
English: Silla dispatched an envoy with a sword. Wang Yao held up the sword for Wang Wei to see and said, "What are you going to do with this?

古文：倓曰： 不忠不孝者，斩之。 
现代文：王伎说： 斩不忠不孝的人。 
English: Wangqi said, "Behead those who are disloyal and unfilial."

古文：曦居旁色变。
现代文：王曦在一旁脸色都变了。
English: Wang Xi's face changed.

古文：曦既立，而新罗复献剑，曦思倓前言，而倓已死，命发冢戮其尸，倓面如生，血流被体。
现代文：王曦登位后，新罗又进献宝剑，王曦想起王俊以前的话，而王侠已经死了，命令挖坟戮尸，王侠的脸色像活人一样，血流满身。
English: After Wang Xi ascended to the throne, Silla went to present the sword again. Wang Xi remembered Wang Jun's previous words, and Wang Xiao was already dead, and ordered to dig a grave and slaughter the corpse. Wang Xiao's face looked like a living person, and blood flowed all over his body.

古文：泉州刺史余廷英尝矫曦命掠取良家子，曦怒，召下御史劾之。
现代文：泉州刺史余廷英曾假藉王曦的命令掠敢良家女子，王曦发怒，把他投入御史台监狱审理他。
English: Quanzhou assassin Yu Tingying once pretended to kidnap a girl from a good family on the orders of Wang Xi. Wang Xi was furious and threw him into the Gushidai Prison to try him.

古文：廷英进买宴钱千万，曦曰： 皇后土贡何在？ 
现代文：余廷英进献买宴钱一千万，王曦说： 皇后的土贡在哪里？ 
English: Yu Tingying offered ten million yuan to buy the banquet. Wang Xi said, "Where is the queen's tribute?"

古文：廷英又献皇后钱千万，乃得不劾。
现代文：余廷英又向皇后进献钱一千万，纔得以不治罪。
English: Yu Tingying also made a donation of ten million yuan to the empress, which allowed him to escape punishment.

古文：曦尝嫁女，朝士有不贺者笞之。
现代文：王曦曾经嫁女，没有恭贺的朝官就受到鞭刑。
English: Wang Xi once married a girl, and imperial officials who did not congratulate her were whipped.

古文：御史中丞刘赞坐不纠举，将加笞，谏议大夫郑元弼切谏，曦谓元弼曰： 卿何如魏郑公，乃敢强谏！ 
现代文：御史中丞刘赞因为没有纠察举报获罪，将要受鞭刑，谏议大夫郑元弼急切谏阻，王曦对郑元弼说： 你怎么比得上魏郑公，却敢强谏！ 
English: Wang Xi said to Zheng Yuanzhang: How can you be compared to Wei Zheng Gong, but dare to be a strongman!

古文：元弼曰： 陛下似唐太宗，臣为魏郑公可矣。 
现代文：郑元弼说： 陛下像唐太宗，我是魏郑公就可以了。 
English: Zheng Yuanzhang said: Your Majesty is like Tang Taizong, I am Wei Zheng Gong.

古文：曦喜，乃释赞不笞。
现代文：王曦心喜，于是放过刘赞没有鞭打。
English: Wang Xi was pleased, so he let Liu Zan go without whipping.

古文：曦弟延政为建州节度使，封富沙王，自曦立，不叶，数举兵相攻，曦由此恶其宗室，多以事诛之。
现代文：王曦的弟弟王延政任建州节度使，封为富沙王，自从王曦登位后，两人不和，多次出兵相攻，王曦因此憎恶他的宗室，多次借故诛杀他们。
English: Wang Xi's younger brother, Wang Yan Zheng, was appointed as the envoy of the Jianzhou Festival and crowned as the King of Fusha. Since Wang Xi ascended the throne, the two did not get along and sent troops to attack each other many times. As a result, Wang Xi hated his family and killed them many times.

古文：谏议大夫黄峻舁榇诣朝堂极谏，曦怒，贬峻漳州司户参军。
现代文：谏议大夫黄峻抬上棺木到朝堂极力谏阻，王曦发怒，贬黄峻为漳州司户参军。
English: Wang Xi became angry and denounced Huang Jun for joining the army as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：校书郎陈光逸上书疏曦过恶五十余事，曦命卫士鞭之百而不死，以绳系颈，挂于木，久而乃绝。
现代文：校书郎陈光逸上书陈述王曦的过失五十多件事，王曦命令卫士鞭打他一百下还不死，用绳子拴住他的脖子，吊在树上，很久纔断气。
English: Wang Xi ordered the guards to whip him a hundred times until he died, tie a rope around his neck, hang him from a tree, and choke him for a long time.

古文：国计使陈匡范增算商之法以献，曦曰： 匡范人中宝也。 
现代文：国计使陈匡范进献商人增税法，王曦说： 陈匡范是人中之宝。 
English: Wang Xi said: Chen Kuangfan is a treasure among people.

古文：已而岁入不登其数，乃借于民以足之，匡范以忧死。
现代文：不久每年的收入达不到他的定敷，于是向百姓借债补足，陈匡范忧虑而死。
English: Soon, his annual income fell short of his quota, so he borrowed money from the people to make up for it. Chen Kuangfan died of worry.

古文：其后知其借于民也，剖棺断尸，弃之水中。
现代文：后来知道他是向百姓借债，就开棺戮尸，扔到水中。
English: Later, when they found out that he had borrowed money from the people, they opened the coffin, took out the body and threw it into the water.

古文：曦性既淫虐，而妻李氏悍而酗酒，贤妃尚氏有色而宠。
现代文：王曦的性格淫乱暴虐，而妻子李氏凶悍且酗酒，贤妃尚氏有美色受到宠爱。
English: Wang Xi's character is lewd and violent, while his wife Li's is fierce and alcoholic, and the virtuous consort Shang is favored for her beauty.

古文：李仁遇，曦甥也，以色嬖之，用以为相。
现代文：李仁遇是王曦的外甥，因美色受到宠幸，任用他做宰相。
English: Li Renyu is the nephew of Wang Xi. He was favored because of his beauty and appointed him as prime minister.

古文：曦常为牛饮，群臣侍酒，醉而不胜，有诉及私弃酒者辄杀之。
现代文：王曦常常狂饮，群臣陪酒，喝醉酒受不了，有被告发私自倒掉酒的人就被杀掉。
English: Wang Xi would often go on a drinking spree, accompanied by a group of ministers. He could not stand being drunk, and anyone accused of pouring out the wine on his own was killed.

古文：诸子继柔弃酒，并杀其赞者一人。
现代文：侄子王继柔把酒倒掉，同时杀掉帮助他的一个人。
English: The nephew, Wang Jirou, poured out the wine and killed a person who was helping him.

古文：连重遇杀昶，惧为国人所讨，与硃文进连姻以自固。
现代文：连重遇杀死王昶，怕受到国人讨伐，和来文进结亲以保护自己。
English: Repeatedly killed Wang Yao, afraid of being attacked by compatriots, and sent a letter to relatives to protect himself.

古文：曦心疑之，常以语诮重遇等，重遇等流涕自辨。
现代文：王曦心中怀疑他，常常说话讥诮连重遇等人，连重遇等人流泪焉自己辩白。
English: Wang Xi doubted him in his heart, and often spoke derisively of those who repeatedly encountered him, and those who repeatedly encountered him shed tears and defended themselves.

古文：李氏石尚妃之宠，欲图曦而立其子亚澄，乃使人谓重遇等曰： 上心不平于二公，奈何？ 
现代文：李氏忌妒尚妃受到宠爱，想算计王曦而立她的儿子王亚澄，于是派人对连重遇等人说： 皇上心中对你们二位不满，怎么办呢？ 
English: Mr. Li was jealous that Princess Shang was favored, and wanted to trick Wang Xi into elevating her son Wang Yacheng, so he sent people to repeatedly meet and say: The emperor is dissatisfied with you two, what should he do?

古文：重遇等惧。
现代文：连重遇等人害怕。
English: People are afraid of repeated encounters.

古文：六年三月，曦出游，醉归，重遇等遣壮士拉于马上而杀之，谥曰景宗。
现代文：六年三月，王曦出外游玩，喝醉酒回来，连重遇等人派武士把他从马上拉下杀掉，谧号焉景宗
English: In March of the sixth year, Wang Xi went out to play, came back drunk, and repeatedly encountered others who sent samurai to pull him off his horse and kill him.

古文：延政，审知子也。
现代文：王延政是王审知的儿子。
English: Wang Yanzheng is the son of Wang Xizhi.

古文：曦立，为淫虐，延政数贻书谏之。
现代文：王曦登位，淫乱暴虐，王延政多次致信谏阻他。
English: Wang Xi ascended to the throne, and committed adultery and violence. Wang Yanzheng repeatedly sent letters to oppose him.

古文：曦怒，遣杜建崇监其军，延政逐之，曦乃举兵攻延政，为延政所败。
现代文：王曦发怒，派杜建崇监督他的军队，王延政驱逐杜建崇，王曦于是出兵攻打王延政，被王延政打败。
English: Enraged, Wang Xi sent Du Jianzong to supervise his army. Wang Yanzheng drove Du Jianzong out. Wang Xi then sent troops to attack Wang Yanzheng and was defeated by Wang Yanzheng.

古文：延政乃以建州建国称殷，改元天德。
现代文：王延政于是在建州建国，称焉殷，改年号为天德。
English: Wang Yanzheng then founded the country in Jianzhou, calling himself Yan Yan, and changed his name to Tian De.

古文：明年，连重遇已杀曦，集闽群臣告曰： 昔太祖武皇帝亲冒矢石，遂启有闽，及其子孙，淫虐不道。
现代文：第二年，连重遇杀掉王曦后，召集闽中群臣说： 过去太祖武皇帝亲自冒着飞箭大石的危险，纔开创了闽，到了他的子孙后代，淫乱暴虐无道。
English: The following year, after Wang Xi had been killed repeatedly, he called together a group of ministers from the Middle Kingdom of Wu and said: In the past, the great-great-grandfather Emperor Wu personally risked the danger of flying arrows and large stones, he created the Han Dynasty, and to his descendants, there is no way to commit adultery and violence.

古文：今天厌王氏，百姓与能，当求有德，以安此土。 
现代文：如今上天厌弃王氏，百姓拥护有才能的人，应当寻求有德的人，来安抚这个地方。 
English: Now that heaven abhors the Wang clan and the people support the talented ones, we should seek the virtuous ones to pacify this place.

古文：群臣皆莫敢议，乃掖硃文进升殿，率百官北面而臣之。
现代文：群臣没有人敢议论，于是扶朱文进登殿，率领百官向北朝拜，对他称臣。
English: No one in the group of courtiers dared to discuss it, so they helped Zhu Wen to enter the palace and led hundreds of officials to bow to the north, praising him as a minister.

古文：文进以重遇判六军诸卫事，王氏子弟在福州者无少长皆杀之。
现代文：朱文进以连重遇判六军诸卫事，王氏在福州的子弟无论老少都被杀掉。
English: Zhu Wenjin was repeatedly sentenced to the Six Army Guards, and Wang's children in Fuzhou were killed regardless of age.

古文：以黄绍颇守泉州，程赟守漳州，许文缜守汀州，称晋年号，时开运元年也。
现代文：派黄绍颇守泉州，程赞守漳州，许文缜守汀州，用晋的年号，这时是开运元年。
English: Huang Shoupo was assigned to guard Quanzhou, Cheng Zan to guard Ganzhou, and Xu Wenyi to guard Tingzhou, using the year of Jin. This was the first year of the campaign.

古文：泉州军将留从效诈其州人曰： 富沙王兵收福州矣，吾属世为王氏臣，安能交臂而事贼乎？ 
现代文：泉州军将留从劫骗他的州人说： 富沙王的军队收复福州了，我们世代做王氏的臣民，怎能拱手事奉盗贼呢？ 
English: The Quanzhou army will stay away from the statesmen who robbed him and say: King Fusha's army has regained Fuzhou. We have been the subjects of the Wang clan for generations, how can we serve the thieves?

古文：州人共杀绍颇，迎王继勋为刺史，漳州闻之，亦杀赟，迎王继成为刺史，皆王氏之诸子也。
现代文：州中人共同杀掉黄绍颇，迎王继勋为刺史。漳州获知后，也杀掉程费，迎王继成为刺史，都是王氏的后代。
English: The people in Zhouzhou jointly killed Huang Shoupo, and Ying Wang Jixun became the assassin. After learning about Zhangzhou, they also killed Chengfei, and Ying Wang became the assassin. They were all descendants of the Wang clan.

古文：文缜惧，以汀州降于延政。
现代文：许文缜害怕，献汀州闷王延政投降。
English: Xu Wenyi was afraid and surrendered to Dingzhou King Yan Zheng.

古文：延政已得三州，重遇亦杀文进，传首建州以自归。
现代文：王延政得到三个州后，连重遇也杀掉朱文进，送头到建州来归附。
English: After Wang Yanzheng gained three prefectures, he killed Zhu Wenjin repeatedly and sent him to Jianzhou to be annexed.

古文：福州裨将林仁翰又杀重遇，谋迎延政都福州。
现代文：福州副将林仁翰又杀掉连重遇，谋划迎王延政在福州建都。
English: Fuzhou Vice-General Lin Renhan also killed several people and plotted to welcome Wang Yanzheng to build the capital in Fuzhou.

古文：是时，南唐李景闻闽乱，发兵攻之，延政遣其从子继昌守福州，而南唐兵方急攻延政，福州将李仁达谓其徒曰： 唐兵攻建州，富沙王不能自保，其能有此土也？ 
现代文：这时，南唐李景听说闽中作乱，出兵攻打，王延政派他的侄子王继昌守福州，而南唐军队正猛攻王延政，福州将领李仁达对他的部下说： 唐兵进攻建州，富沙王自身不保，他能占据这个地方吗？ 
English: At this time, Li Jing of the Southern Tang Dynasty heard that there was a disturbance in Yunnan and sent troops to attack. Wang Yan Zheng sent his nephew Wang Jichang to defend Fuzhou, while the Southern Tang Army was storming Wang Yan Zheng. Li Renda, the general of Fuzhou, said to his subordinates: The Tang soldiers are attacking Jianzhou. The King of Fusha cannot defend himself. Can he occupy this place?

古文：乃擒继昌杀之。欲自立，惧众不附，以雪峰寺僧卓俨明示众曰： 此非常人也。 
现代文：于是抓获王继昌杀掉，想自立为王，怕众人不归附他，将雪峰寺僧人卓俨明指示给众人，说； 他不是一般的人。 
English: So they captured and killed Wang Jichang, who wanted to become king himself. Fearing that the people would not follow him, he instructed the monks of Xuefeng Temple to tell the people that he was not an ordinary person.

古文：被以衮冕，率诸将吏北面而臣之。
现代文：给他披上皇袍戴上皇冠，率领将吏北面朝拜称臣。
English: He draped him in a royal robe and crowned him, and led the generals northward to pay homage to the emperor.

古文：已而又杀俨明，乃自立，送款于李景，景以仁达为威武军节度使，更其名曰弘义。
现代文：不久又杀掉卓俨明，于是自立，送降书给李景，李景任命李仁达为威武军节度使，更改他的名字为李弘义。
English: Soon after, he killed Zhuo Yiming, so he became independent and sent a letter of surrender to Li Jing. Li Jing appointed Li Renda as the commander of the armed forces and changed his name to Li Hongyi.

古文：而景兵攻破建州，迁延政族于金陵，封鄱阳王。
现代文：而李景的军队攻破建州，把王延政的族人迁到金陵，封为鄱阳王。
English: But Li Jing's army broke through Jianzhou, moved Wang Yanzheng's tribesmen to Jinling, and crowned him King of Shenyang.

古文：是岁，景保大四年也。
现代文：这年是李景的保大四年。
English: This year marks Li Jing's fourth year of college.

古文：留从效闻延政降唐，执王继勋送于金陵，李景以泉州为清源军，以从效为节度使。
现代文：留从効听说王延政向唐投降，捉住王继勋送到金陵，李景以泉州为清源军，任命留从劫为节度使。
English: He heard that Wang Yanzheng surrendered to the Tang Dynasty, captured Wang Jixun and sent him to Jinling, Li Jing took Quanzhou as the Qingyuan army, and appointed him as the festival envoy.

古文：景已破延政，遣人召李仁达入朝，仁达不从，遂降于吴越。
现代文：李景攻破王延政后，派人召李仁达入朝，李仁达不从命，于是向昊越投降。
English: After Li Jing defeated Wang Yanzheng, he sent someone to summon Li Renda to the North, but Li Renda did not follow his orders and surrendered to Hao Yue.

古文：而留从效亦逐景守兵，据泉、漳二州，景犹封从效晋江王。
现代文：而留从劫也驱逐李景的守兵，占据泉、漳二州，李景仍封留从劫为晋江王。
English: However, the guards of Li Jing, who had stayed behind after the invasion, were also expelled and occupied the two provinces of Quan and Handan. Li Jing remained behind after the invasion and became the king of the Jin River.

古文：周世宗时，从效遣牙将蔡仲兴为商人，间道至京师，求置邸内属。
现代文：周世宗时，留从劫派牙将蔡仲兴装扮成商人，从小路到京师，请求在京城设置邸舍归附于朝廷。
English: During Zhou Shizong's reign, he disguised Cai Zhongxing as a merchant and asked him to set up a residence in the capital to be annexed to the imperial court.

古文：是时，世宗与李景画江为界，遂不纳，从效仍臣于南唐。
现代文：这时，周世宗和李景划长江为界，便没有接纳他，留从劫仍向南唐称臣。
English: At this time, Zhou Shizong and Li Jing drew the Yangtze River as the boundary, but did not accept him, and he remained in Southern Tang as a vassal.

古文：其后事具国史。
现代文：以后的事都记载在奉朝国史中。
English: Subsequent events are recorded in the history of this dynasty.

