古文：李晟李晟，字良器，洮州临潭人。世以武力仕，然位不过裨将。
现代文：李晟字良器，是洮州临潭县人，世代凭武艺做官，但职位都不超过偏将。
English: Li Yanzhi, a native of Lintan County, Ganzhou, has been a martial arts official for generations, but has never held a position higher than general.

古文：晟幼孤，奉母孝。
现代文：李晟年幼时，父亲去世，侍奉母亲很孝顺。
English: When Li Yao was young, his father died, and he served his mother very dutifully.

古文：身长六尺。年十八，往事河西王忠嗣，从击吐蕃。
现代文：他身高六尺，十八岁时，投奔河西节度使王忠嗣，跟随他进攻吐蕃。
English: He was six feet tall. When he was eighteen years old, he ran to the Hexi Festival to help Wang Zhongzhi and followed him to attack Tubo.

古文：悍酋乘城，杀伤士甚众，忠嗣怒，募射者，晟挟一矢殪之，三军欢奋。
现代文：一个凶悍的吐蕃军头目登上城墙，杀伤了很多唐朝士兵，王忠嗣发怒，招募擅长射箭的士兵，李晟一箭射死了那吐蕃军头目，三军都欢呼振奋。
English: A fierce leader of the Tubo army climbed the city wall and killed many Tang soldiers. Wang Zhongzi became angry and recruited soldiers who were good at archery. Li Qian shot the leader of the Tubo army with one arrow. All three armies cheered and cheered.

古文：忠嗣抚其背曰： 万人敌也。 
现代文：王忠嗣抚摸着他的背说： 真是力敌万人的勇将啊！ 
English: Wang Zhongzhi stroked his back and said, "What a great warrior!

古文：凤翔节度使高升召署列将，击叠州叛羌于高当川，又击连狂羌于罕山，破之。累迁左羽林大将军。
现代文：凤翔节度使高升征召他，安排他任列将。在叠州高当川攻击反叛的羌人，又在罕山打败了连狂羌，积累军功升为左羽林大将军。
English: Fengxiang Jiedu made Gaosheng conscript him and arranged for him to be promoted to the rank of general. In Gaotangchuan, Meizhou, he attacked the rebellious Xiang people, and defeated the company of wild baboons in Handan Mountain. He was promoted to General Zuo Yulin after accumulating military merits.

古文：广德初，击党项有功，授特进，试太常卿。
现代文：广德初年，进攻党项，立了功，封特进、试太常卿。
English: In the first year of Guangde, he attacked the party line and made great achievements. He was promoted to special envoy and tried to become the permanent secretary of the CPC Central Committee.

古文：大历初，李抱玉署晟右军将。
现代文：大历初年，李抱玉召李晟去任右将军。
English: In the first year of the Great Calendar, Li Baoyu summoned Li Xi to be appointed as the right general.

古文：吐蕃寇灵州，抱玉授以兵五千击之，辞曰： 以众则不足，以谋则多。 
现代文：吐蕃侵犯灵州，抱玉交给他五千兵攻敌，李晟推辞说： 用强攻兵不够，用智取兵有余。 
English: When Tubo invaded Lingzhou and gave him five thousand soldiers to attack the enemy, Li Qiye said, "It's not enough to attack the enemy by force, but it's more than enough to use intelligence to recruit soldiers."

古文：乃请千人。
现代文：于是请求带一千兵。
English: So he asked for a thousand soldiers.

古文：由大震关趋临洮，屠定秦堡，执其帅慕容谷钟，虏乃解灵州去。
现代文：由大震关向临洮进发，攻下定秦堡，活捉了吐蕃统帅慕容谷钟，敌人就撤了围灵州的军队。
English: They marched from Dazhongguan to Linyi, captured Dingqin Fort, captured the commander of Tubo, Muronggu Bell, alive, and the enemy withdrew the army surrounding Lingzhou.

古文：迁开府仪同三司，以右金吾卫大将军为泾原、四镇、北庭兵马使。
现代文：李晟升任开府仪同三司，以右金吾卫大将军的职位任泾原、四镇、北庭兵马使。
English: Li Jun was promoted to the Third Division of the Kaifu Rites and Decrees, and was appointed to the position of the Right King Wuwei General, and served as the military envoy to Shibahara, Shizhen, and Beiting.

古文：马璘与吐蕃战盐仓，败绩；晟率游兵拔璘以归，封合川郡王。
现代文：马瞞与吐蕃在盐仓作战失败，李晟率巡哨兵救回马瞞，被朝廷封为合川郡王。
English: Ma Shizhe and Tubo failed in the battle of Yanakura, Li Zhe led the patrol to rescue Ma Shizhe, and was crowned the king of Hechuan County by the imperial court.

古文：璘内忌晟威略，归之朝，为右神策都将。
现代文：马瞞心里嫉忌李晟的武勇和谋略，让他回到京城，任右神策军都将。
English: Ma Zhe was jealous of Li Zhe's bravery and strategy, so he let him return to the capital, where he would lead the army.

古文：德宗始立，吐蕃寇剑南，方崔宁未还，蜀土大震，诏晟将神策兵救之。
现代文：德宗刚做皇帝，吐蕃侵犯剑南，正逢崔宁没有回来，四川震动。皇帝命令李晟带领神策军去救剑南。
English: As soon as Dezong became emperor, Tubo invaded Jianan, just as Cui Ning did not return, Sichuan was shaken. The emperor ordered Li Xi to lead the Shensha Army to save Jianan.

古文：逾漏天，拔飞越等三城，绝大渡，斩虏千级，虏遁去。
现代文：李晟翻越漏天，攻下飞越等三座城，渡过大渡河，杀敌千人，敌军逃走。
English: Li Qian climbed over the leaky sky, captured and flew over three cities, crossed the Dadu River, killed a thousand enemies, and the enemy army fled.

古文：建中二年，魏博田悦反，晟为神策先锋，与河东马燧、昭义李抱真合兵攻之。斩杨朝光，晟乘冰度洺水，破悦；又战洹水，悦大败，遂进攻魏。
现代文：建中二年，魏博镇田悦反叛。李晟任神策军先锋，与河东马燧、昭羲李抱真合军进攻田悦，杀了杨朝光，李晟趁河水结冰越过氵名水，打败田悦；又在洹水交战，田悦被打得大败。于是进兵攻打魏州。
English: In the second year of Jianzhong, the town of Wei Bo, Tian Yue rebelled. Li Qian served as the vanguard of the Shen Zhao army, and attacked Tian Yue with the joint forces of Hedong Ma Jun and Zhaojun Li Baozhen, and killed Yang Chaoguang. Li Qian took advantage of the icing of the river water to cross the famous water of Yunnan, and defeated Tian Yue; and in the battle of Yunnan water, Tian Yue was defeated. So he entered the army to attack Weizhou.

古文：加检校左散骑常侍，兼魏府左司马。
现代文：朝廷加封他为检校左散骑常侍，兼魏府左司马。
English: The imperial court appointed him as the regular attendant of the left sanshaku at the inspection of schools, and also as the left secretary of the Wei government.

古文：硃滔、王武俊围康日知于赵州也，抱真分兵二千戍邢，燧怒，欲班师。晟曰： 奉诏东讨者，吾三帅也。邢、赵比壤，今贼以兵加赵，是邢有昼夜忧，李公分众守之，不为过，公奈何遽引去！ 
现代文：朱滔、王武俊在赵州围攻康日知，李抱真分出两千兵守卫邢州，马燧发怒，想收兵回去，李晟说： 我们三个元帅，奉皇帝的命令东讨叛贼，邢州与赵州相邻，现在叛贼攻打赵州，这样邢州很快也不得安宁，李公分兵守卫，也不算错，您怎么就急着退兵呢？ 
English: Zhu Tao and Wang Wujun besieged Kang Rizhi in Zhaozhou, Li Bangzhen sent out two thousand soldiers to guard Ganzhou, Ma Jun was angry and wanted to withdraw the troops, Li Wei said: We three marshals, under the order of the emperor, fought against the traitors in the east, Ganzhou is adjacent to Zhaozhou, and now the traitors are attacking Zhaozhou, so Ganzhou will not be calm soon, Li Gongwen soldiers guarding, is not wrong, why are you in a hurry to leave the army?

古文：燧悟，释然，即造抱真垒，与交欢。晟建言： 以兵趋定州，与张孝忠合，以图范阳，则武俊等当舍赵。 
现代文：马燧醒悟，高兴地到抱真的营垒，与他重归于好，李晟建议说： 进军定州，与张孝忠合兵一处，攻打范阳，那么王武俊等人就会放弃赵州。 
English: Ma Zhen wakes up, happily goes to the camp of Hozhen and makes peace with him. Li Zhen suggested: "If you march into Dingzhou, join forces with Zhang Xiaozhong and attack Fanyang, then Wang Wujun and others will give up Zhaozhou."

古文：帝壮之，授御史大夫，又俾神策三将军莫仁擢等隶之。
现代文：皇帝认为他有雄心，封他为御史大夫，又令神策军的莫仁擢等三位将军归他统领。
English: The emperor thought he was ambitious, and appointed him to the post of Imperial Historian. He also promoted three generals to his command, including Moren, the divine strategist.

古文：晟自魏引而北，武俊果解去。
现代文：李晟从魏州领兵向北进攻，王武俊果然撤了赵州的围兵退走。
English: Li Qian led the troops from Weizhou to attack the north, and Wang Wujun successfully withdrew the besieging troops from Zhao.

古文：晟留赵三日，与孝忠连兵，北略恒州。围硃滔将郑景济于清苑，决水灌之。
现代文：李晟在赵州休整三天，与张孝忠军联合起来，向北进攻恒州，在清苑围困了朱滔的部将郑景济，李晟决河水灌城。
English: Li Yu rested for three days in Zhaozhou, united with Zhang Xiaozhong's army, and attacked Hengzhou to the north. In Qingyuan, he besieged Zhu Tao's general Zheng Jingji. Li Yu decided to flood the city with water.

古文：悦、武俊引兵战白楼，孝忠兵笮，晟引步骑击破之，清苑益急。
现代文：田悦、王武俊领兵在白楼作战，张孝忠的部队用竹索拉船，李晟带步兵和骑兵打败了田悦、王武俊，清苑更加危急。
English: Tian Yue and Wang Wujun led the troops to fight in Bai Lou, Zhang Xiaozhong's troops used bamboo ropes to pull the boat, Li Ying led the infantry and cavalry to defeat Tian Yue and Wang Wujun, Qingyuan was even more critical.

古文：滔、武俊大惧，悉起兵来救，围晟军。
现代文：朱滔、王武俊非常害怕，发动全部兵力救援，围困了李晟的部队。
English: Zhu Tao and Wang Wujun were so scared that they launched an all-out rescue and besieged Li Xuan's troops.

古文：晟内攻景济而外抗滔等，自正月至五月不解。
现代文：李晟对内攻击景济，对外又抵抗朱滔等人的攻击，从正月到五月还不能解围。
English: From the first month of the year to May, Li Gan attacked Jingji from the inside and resisted attacks from Zhu Tao and others from the outside.

古文：会晟疾甚，不能兴，军中共计引还定州，而贼犹不敢逼。
现代文：恰巧李晟病得厉害，不能起床，军中共同计议，领兵回定州，叛军不敢追击。
English: It just so happened that Li Lan was seriously ill and could not get out of bed. The army made a joint decision to lead the soldiers back to Dingzhou, and the rebels did not dare to chase them.

古文：疾间，将复进，会帝出奉天，有诏召晟即日治严。
现代文：李晟病痊愈后，准备再次进兵，逢皇帝到奉天避乱，又下诏书令李晟即日起兵勤王。
English: After Li Lan recovered from his illness, he prepared to march into the army again. Whenever the emperor went to Feng Tian to avoid turmoil, he issued an edict ordering Li Lan to be a loyal soldier from that day on.

古文：而孝忠以军介二盗间，倚晟为重，数止晟无西。晟语众曰： 天子播越，人臣当百舍一息。义武欲止吾，吾当以子为质。 
现代文：但张孝忠的部队夹在两支叛军之间，李晟的部队是他的重要依靠，多次劝阻李晟不要向西进兵，李晟对大家说： 皇帝流亡，臣子当百死一生去救驾，义武想阻止我，我准备留下儿子做人质。 
English: But Zhang Xiaozhong's troops were sandwiched between the two rebel armies. Li Lan's troops were his important support. He repeatedly dissuaded Li Lan from marching to the west. Li Lan said to everyone: The emperor is in exile, the vassals should save him with all their lives. Yi Wu wants to stop me, and I am ready to leave my son as a hostage.

古文：乃以凭约昏，并遗良马。
现代文：于是为儿子李凭向张孝忠约婚，并赠送良马。
English: So he arranged a marriage for his son, Li Biao, to Zhang Xiaozhong, and presented him with a fine horse.

古文：孝忠有亲将谒晟，晟解玉带遗之，使喻孝忠。
现代文：张孝忠有一亲信将领参见李晟，李晟解下自己的玉带送给他，让他去告诉孝忠。
English: Zhang Xiaozhong had a close confidant, a general, see Li Xi. Li Xi untied his jade belt and gave it to him, telling him to go and tell Xiaozhong.

古文：乃得逾飞孤，次代州，诏迎拜神策行营节度使。进临渭北，壁东渭桥，所过樵苏无犯。
现代文：于是李晟才得率部越过飞狐口，驻军代州。朝廷下诏书封李晟为神策军行营节度使，进兵到渭北，在东渭桥建营垒，部队经过的地方秋毫无犯。
English: As a result, Li Lan had to lead his troops across the Flying Fox's Mouth to garrison Daizhou. The imperial court issued an imperial edict to seal Li Lan as the envoy of God to organize the military camp, march into the north of Anhui, and build a camp in the East Anhui Bridge. The troops did not commit any crimes in the places they passed.

古文：时刘德信自扈涧败归，亦次渭南，军嚣无制。德信入谒晟，晟责所以败，斩之，以数骑入壁劳其军，无敢动。
现代文：当时刘德信从扈间战败逃回，也驻军渭南，部队喧闹没有纪律，德信进营参见李晟，李晟责问他战败的原因，杀了他，带几个骑兵到德信的营垒慰劳他的军队，没有人敢妄动。
English: At that time, Liu Dexin fled back from the defeat in Yunnan, and also garrisoned in the south of Yunnan. The troops were noisy and undisciplined. When Dexin entered the camp, see Li Qian. Li Qian asked him the reason for the defeat, killed him, and took several cavalrymen to Dexin's camp to comfort his army. No one dared to move.

古文：晟已并兵，则军益振。
现代文：李晟兼并了刘德信的部队后，士气更加振奋。
English: After the annexation of Liu Dexin's troops by Li Gan, morale was even more uplifting.

古文：于是朔方李怀光方军咸阳，不欲晟当一面，请与晟合。
现代文：当时朔方镇的李怀光正驻军咸阳，不想让李晟去独当一面，请求皇帝与李晟合兵一处。
English: At that time, Li Huaiguang of Shuofang Town was stationed in Xianyang. He did not want to let Li Jie go alone, and asked the emperor to join forces with Li Jie.

古文：有诏徙屯，乃引趋陈涛斜，与怀光联垒。
现代文：朝廷命令李晟移营，李晟于是领兵向陈涛斜进发，与李怀光营垒连在一起。
English: The imperial court ordered Li Hongzhi to move his camp. Li Hongzhi then led the soldiers to march diagonally towards Chen Tao, and was joined by Li Huaiguang at the battlements.

古文：晟每与贼战，必锦裘绣帽自表，指顾阵前。
现代文：李晟每次与敌军作战，必定穿锦绣皮袍，戴绣花帽子，显露自己，在战阵前观察战况，指挥作战。
English: Every time Li Lan fought with the enemy, he would wear a brocade embroidered leather robe and an embroidered hat to reveal himself, observe the situation before the battle, and command the battle.

古文：怀光望见，恶之，戒曰： 将务持重，岂宜自表襮，为贼饵哉！ 
现代文：李怀光看见了，不喜欢他这样做，教训他说 ：主帅必须稳重，怎能暴露自己成为敌人攻击的目标呢？ 
English: Li Huaguang saw this and didn't like him doing this, and lectured him, saying, "The coach must be steady. How can he expose himself to be the target of the enemy's attack?"

古文：晟曰： 昔在泾原，士颇相畏伏，欲令见之，夺其心尔。 
现代文：李晟说： 我原先在泾原，敌人士兵都很怕我，想让他们看见我，乱他们的军心。 
English: Li Yao said: I was originally in the Plain of Jars. The enemy soldiers were afraid of me and wanted to see me to disturb their morale.

古文：怀光不悦，迁延有异志。
现代文：怀光不高兴。迟迟不肯进兵，怀有异心。
English: Kaiko is not happy. He is reluctant to join the army and harbors ill will.

古文：晟使间说怀光曰： 贼据京邑，天子暴露于外，公宜速进兵。虽晟不肖，愿为公先驱，死且不悔。 
现代文：李晟派使者秘密地劝怀光说 ：叛军占领了京城，皇帝流亡在外，您应该很快进兵，李晟虽然不成材，但愿意为您打先锋，战死不后悔。 
English: Li Yu sent an envoy to secretly persuade Huai Guang, saying: The rebels have occupied Beijing, the emperor is in exile, you should quickly join the army. Although Li Yu is not qualified, he is willing to play the vanguard for you, and he does not regret dying in battle.

古文：怀光不纳。
现代文：李怀光不采纳。
English: Li Huaiguang did not adopt it.

古文：每兵至都城下，而怀光军多卤掠，晟军整戢。
现代文：每逢大军到了都城下，李怀光的部队就掳掠财物，李晟部队纪律严明。
English: Whenever a large army arrived at the capital city, Li Huai Guang's troops plundered and looted property, and Li Gan's troops were highly disciplined.

古文：怀光使分所获遗之，又辞不敢受。
现代文：李怀光令把掳掠的财物送给他，李晟又推辞说不敢收。
English: Li Huaiguang ordered that the plundered property be given to him, but Li Hui refused, saying that he did not dare to take it.

古文：怀光谋沮挠其军，即奏言： 神策兵给赐比方镇独厚，今桀逆未平，军不可以异。
现代文：怀光阴谋搞垮他的部队，就向皇帝报告说 ：神策兵给养赏赐比地方部队优厚，现在叛逆没有剿平，军队待遇不能不同。
English: He reported to the emperor that God had raised up soldiers and rewarded them more generously than the local troops. Now the rebellion had not been quelled, and the treatment of the troops could not be different.

古文：且众以为言，臣无以解。惟陛下裁处。 
现代文：况且众官兵都这样看，我没有办法解释，请陛下裁决。 
English: Moreover, all officers and soldiers see it this way. I have no way to explain it, so please let His Majesty decide.

古文：怀光欲晟自削其军，则士怨易挠。
现代文：李怀光想让李晟自己削减军饷，那么官兵就会怨恨，就容易出乱子。
English: If Li Huaiguang wants Li Jie to cut the military pay by himself, then the officers and soldiers will be resentful and prone to disorder.

古文：帝议诸军与神策等，力且不赡，遣翰林学士陆贽临诏怀光，令与晟计所宜者。
现代文：皇帝商议，各路部队与神策军待遇相同，财力将不足，派翰林学士陆贽到怀光军营下诏书，令他与李晟商议一个妥善的办法。
English: The emperor deliberated that all the troops would be treated the same as the Shenzhe Army, and the financial resources would be insufficient. He sent Hanlin Scholar Lu Yao to the Waiguang military camp to issue an edict, so that he and Li Xi could discuss a proper solution.

古文：怀光曰： 禀赐不均，军何以战！ 
现代文：李怀光说 ：军饷和赏赐不平等，军队怎么打仗？ 
English: Li Huaiguang said: Military pay and rewards are unequal, how does the army fight?

古文：贽数顾晟，晟曰： 公，元帅，军政得专之。晟将一军，唯所命，其增损费调，敢不听？ 
现代文：陆贽多次目视李晟，李晟说： 您是元帅，军政事务可以全权处置，李晟我只领一支部队，听从您的命令，您要增加或减少谁的军饷，我敢不听吗？ 
English: Lu Yao repeatedly looked at Li Yao, Li Yao said: You are a marshal, military and political affairs can be handled with full authority. Li Yao, I only lead one army, and I will follow your orders. Whose military pay do you want to increase or decrease? Do I dare not listen?

古文：怀光默然计塞，顾刻削禀赐事出己，乃止。
现代文：李怀光计穷，默不做声，想到削减神策军军饷赏赐的事是自己闹起来的，只好算了。
English: Li Huaiguang is calculating poor, silent, and thought of reducing the reward of God's policy, the army, and the army is his own trouble, so he had to let it go.

古文：怀光屯咸阳凡八旬，帝数促战，以伺贼隙为言，卒不出兵，阴通硃泚，反迹浸露。
现代文：李怀光在咸阳驻军共八十多天，皇帝多次催他出兵作战，他用等待战机做借口，始终不出兵，暗中勾结朱氵此，反叛的迹象已暴露出来。
English: Li Huaguang was stationed in Xianyang for a total of more than eighty days. The emperor repeatedly urged him to send troops to fight. He used waiting for warplanes as an excuse and never sent troops, secretly colluding with Zhu Xi. The signs of rebellion have been exposed.

古文：晟惧为所并，上言： 当先变制备，请假裨佐赵光铣、唐良臣、张彧为洋、利、剑三州刺史，各勒兵以通蜀、汉衿喉。 
现代文：李晟怕自己部队被怀光吞并，向皇帝建议： 应该先采取措施应变，请调偏将赵光铣、唐良臣、张代任洋、利、剑三州刺史，各自领兵守卫，使关中与四川的交通要道畅通。 
English: Fearing that his troops would be swallowed up by Huai Guang, Li Qian suggested to the emperor: First, measures should be taken to deal with the situation. Please send Zhao Guangyao, Tang Liangcheng, Zhang DeRen Yang, Li and Jian to the three states to make history and lead soldiers to guard each other, so that the traffic between Guanzhong and Sichuan can be smooth.

古文：未报。
现代文：朝廷没有回音。
English: There was no response from the Imperial Court.

古文：会吐蕃欲佐诛泚，帝议幸咸阳督战，怀光大骇，疑帝夺其军，图反益急。
现代文：恰逢吐蕃想帮助朝廷消灭朱氵此，皇帝商议到咸阳督战，怀光非常害怕，怀疑皇帝夺他的兵权，谋反更急迫。
English: At the same time that Tubo wanted to help the imperial court to eliminate Zhu Xi, the emperor discussed the Battle of Xianyang, and Huaguang was very afraid. He suspected that the emperor was trying to seize his military power, and his rebellion was even more urgent.

古文：晟与李建徽、阳惠元皆联屯，适有使者到晟军，晟乃令曰： 有诏徙屯。 
现代文：李晟与李建徽、阳惠元都把军营联结起来。恰好朝廷使者到李晟军中，李晟借机下令 ：皇帝命令移动防地。 
English: Li Yu, Li Jianhui and Yang Huiyuan all linked their military camps. Just as the imperial envoy arrived in Li Yu's army, Li Yu took the opportunity to give an order: the emperor ordered to move the ground defense.

古文：即结阵趋东渭桥。
现代文：就摆好作战的阵式向东渭桥进发。
English: They set up a battle formation and marched to Donglu Bridge.

古文：后数日，怀光并建徽、惠元兵，惠元死之。
现代文：过几天，李怀光吞并了建徽、惠元的部队，惠元被杀死。
English: A few days later, Li Huaiguang absorbed the troops of Jianhui and Huiyuan, and Huiyuan was killed.

古文：是日，帝进狩梁州，骆谷道隘，储供不豫，从官乏食，帝叹曰： 早用晟言，三蜀之利，可坐有也。 
现代文：这天，皇帝进驻梁州。骆谷道路狭窄，预先没储备给养，跟随的官员没有粮吃，皇帝叹息说： 早听李晟的话，四川的物资，只坐着就有了。 
English: On this day, the emperor entered Liangzhou. Luogu Road was narrow, there was no provisioning in advance, and the officials who followed did not have food to eat. The emperor sighed and said, "Listening to Li Qian's words, the materials of Sichuan are only sitting there.

古文：顾浑瑊曰： 渭桥在贼腹中，兵孤绝，晟能办胜邪？ 
现代文：对浑蠨说： 渭桥在贼军的中心，是绝地孤军，李晟能打胜吗？ 
English: He said to Hun Rong, "Shangqiao is in the center of the thief army, it is a lone Jedi army. Can Li Rong win?

古文：瑊曰： 晟秉义挺忠，崒然不可夺。
现代文：浑蠨说： 李晟秉性忠义正直，像高山一样不可动摇，我预料，一定能打败叛军。 
English: Hunhyun said, "Li Qian is loyal, honest and unshakable like a mountain. I expect that he will surely defeat the rebels.

古文：臣策之，必破贼。 帝乃安。
现代文：皇帝才安下心来。
English: Only then did the emperor calm down.

古文：自行在遣晟将张少弘口诏进晟尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：从行宫派李晟的部将张少弘宣布皇帝的口头命令，晋升李晟为尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事。
English: Zhang Shaohong, the general who sent Li Qian from the palace, announced the emperor's verbal order to promote Li Qian to the position of the left-hand servant of Shang Shu and the right-hand man of Dong Zhong Shu.

古文：晟受命，拜且泣曰： 京师天下本，若皆执羁靮，谁将复之！ 
现代文：李晟接受任命，边拜边哭说： 京师是国家的根本，如果都等待观望不进兵，谁能收复它呢？ 
English: Accepting the appointment, Li Wei bowed and wept as he said: Beijing division is the foundation of the country. If everyone waits and waits and does not enter the army, who can recover it?

古文：乃缮甲兵，治陴隍，以图收复。
现代文：于是修理衣甲武器，加高城墙，挖深濠沟，筹划收复京师。
English: As a result, armor and armor weapons were repaired, the city walls were raised, deep trenches were dug, and plans were made to recapture the capital.

古文：是时，晟提孤军横当寇锋，恐二盗合以轧之，则卑词厚币，伪致诚于怀光者。
现代文：这时，李晟领孤军横挡敌人的兵锋，他害怕朱氵此、李怀光这两支叛军夹击，就谦词厚币，假装对李怀光诚心诚意。
English: At this time, Li Shizhen led a lone army to block the enemy's front. He was afraid that the two rebel armies, Zhu Shizhen and Li Huaguang, would clash, so he made a humble speech and pretended to be sincere to Li Huaguang.

古文：时敖廥单覂，乃使张彧假京兆少尹，多署吏，调畿内赋，不淹旬，刍米告具。乃陈兵下令曰： 国家多难，乘舆播迁，见危死节，自吾之分。公等此时不诛元凶，取富贵，非豪英也。
现代文：当时粮草缺乏，就派张代理京兆少尹，多安排办事官员，征调京城郊县赋税，不超过十天，粮草筹备充足，于是集合全军列阵，发布命令说： 国家多难，皇帝流亡，目睹危难，为节义而死，自然是我们份内的事，你们此时不杀叛匪头子，立功博取富贵，就不是英雄豪杰！
English: At that time, there was a shortage of grain and grass, so they sent Zhang Zhaojun, the agent of Beijing Zhao Shaoyin, to arrange more officials, collect and transfer taxes from the suburbs of Beijing, not more than ten days, and the grain and grass preparations were sufficient. So they assembled the whole army and issued an order saying: The country is difficult, the emperor is in exile, witnessing the danger, and dying for righteousness are naturally our duties. If you do not kill the rebel leader at this time, and make great achievements, you are not a hero!

古文：渭桥断贼首尾，吾欲与公戮力一心，建不世之功，可乎？ 
现代文：渭桥从中截断了叛军，我想与你们同心合力，一起建立无可比拟的功劳，好不好？ 
English: I want to join forces with you to build an unparalleled achievement, okay?

古文：士皆雪泣曰： 惟公命。 
现代文：将士都擦着眼泪说 ：坚决听从您的命令！ 
English: The generals wiped their tears and said, "We will resolutely obey your orders!"

古文：于是骆元光以华州之众守潼关，尚可孤以神策兵保七盘，皆受晟节度；戴休颜举奉天，韩游瑰悉邠宁军从晟。怀光始惧。
现代文：这时骆元光带华州的部队扼守潼关，尚可孤带神策军保卫七盘关，都接受李晟指挥，戴休颜在奉天起兵，韩游瑰带宁镇全军跟随李晟作战，李怀光不免恐惧起来。
English: At this time, Luo Yuanguang led the troops of Huazhou to guard Shuguang Pass, but he could only lead the Shen Zhao Army to defend the Seven Passes. They all accepted the command of Li Qiye, Dai Xiuyan started the army in Bongtian, Han Yu Qi led the entire army of Ningzhen to fight with Li Qiye, and Li Huaiguang was inevitably afraid.

古文：晟乃移书显让之，使破贼自赎。怀光不听，然其下益携落，畏为晟袭，乃奔河中。其将孟涉、段威勇以兵数千自拔归，晟皆表以要官。
现代文：李晟就去信公开斥责他，让他打败叛贼朱氵此立功赎罪，李怀光不听，但他的部下更是背离他，他害怕李晟袭击，就逃奔河中郡，他的部将孟涉、段威勇带着几千兵自己拔营归顺李晟，李晟都上奏朝廷，请求给他们封官。
English: Li Yu went to the letter to publicly reprimand him and let him defeat the traitor Zhu Xi to redeem himself. Li Huiguang did not listen, but his subordinates turned away from him. He was afraid of Li Yu's attack and fled to Hezhong County. His subordinates, Meng Wanzhou and Duan Weiyong, with several thousand soldiers, withdrew from the camp and surrendered to Li Yu. Li Yu went to the imperial court to request that they be appointed officials.

古文：帝遣使者间道诏晟兼河中、晋绛慈隰节度使，又兼京畿、渭北、鄜坊、丹延节度招讨使。帝欲益西幸，晟请驻梁、汉以系天下望。
现代文：皇帝派使者从小路到李晟军中，任命李晟兼任河中、晋绛慈隰节度使，又兼任京畿、渭北、坊、丹延节度招讨使，皇帝想往更西的地方去，李晟请求皇帝驻留梁州、汉州之间，以安定天下之心。
English: The emperor sent an envoy from Xiaolu to Li Qiye's army, and appointed Li Qiye as the envoy of Hezhong, Jinshan, Cizhang festivals, and also as the envoy of Gyeonggi, North Gyeongsang, Fang and Danyang festivals. The emperor wanted to go further west, and Li Qiye asked the emperor to stay between Liangzhou and Hanzhou to stabilize the heart of the world.

古文：又进京畿、渭北、鄜坊、商华兵马副元帅。
现代文：李晟又晋升为京畿、渭北、坊、商、华兵马副元帅。
English: Li Jun was also promoted to vice marshal of the Gyeonggi, North Gyeongsang, Fang, Shang and Chinese armies.

古文：时京兆司录参军李敬仲自贼中来，乃署节度府判官，以谏议大夫郑云逵为行军司马，擢张彧自副。
现代文：当时京兆司录参军李敬仲从叛军中逃回，就安排他任节度府判官，任谏议大夫郑云逵为行军司马，提拔张为自己的副手。
English: At that time, when Li Jingzhong, a member of the Jingzha Division of the Central Military Commission, escaped from the rebels, he arranged for him to be appointed as a judge of the Jiedu Prefecture, appointed Zheng Yunyao, a doctor of the Second Sino-Japanese War, as a marshal, and promoted Zhang as his deputy.

古文：神策军及晟家皆为贼质，左右有言者，晟涕数行下，曰： 陛下安在，而欲恤家乎？ 
现代文：神策军和李晟的家属都成了叛贼朱氵此的人质，左右的人提起，李晟泪流满面，说： 陛下现在在什么地方啊，我能顾惜自己的家庭吗？ 
English: Shenshao's army and Li Yao's family members have all become hostages of the traitor Zhu Yigou. When people around him mentioned this, Li Yao burst into tears and said, "Where is Your Majesty now? Can I take care of my own family?"

古文：泚使晟吏王无忌婿款壁门曰： 公等家无恙。 
现代文：朱氵此派李晟属官王无忌的女婿到李晟营垒门前报信 ：您们的家属平安。 
English: Zhu Xi thus sent the unscrupulous son-in-law of Li Yu, a subordinate official, to the front of Li Yu's camp to report: Your family members are safe.

古文：晟怒曰： 尔乃与贼为间乎？ 
现代文：李晟发怒说 ：你替叛贼施离间计么？ 
English: Li Lan said angrily, "Are you scheming for the traitors?"

古文：叱斩之。
现代文：下令杀了他的头。
English: The order went out to behead him.

古文：时输缣不属，盛夏，士有衣裘者，晟能与下同其苦，以忠谊感发士心，终无携怨。
现代文：当时细绢细布运送不来，盛夏天气，士兵还有穿皮袍的。李晟能与部下一样吃苦，用忠义和情谊感动和激发军心，全军始终没有怨言。
English: At that time, fine linen could not be transported, the weather was in the height of summer, and soldiers still wore fur coats. Li Qian was able to suffer as much as his subordinates, using loyalty and friendship to move and inspire the military heart, and the whole army never complained.

古文：逻士得姚令言、崔宣谍者，晟命释缚，饭饮之，遣还，敕曰： 为我谢令言等，善为贼守，勿不忠于泚。 
现代文：巡逻兵捉到姚令言、崔宣的间谍，李晟命松绑，给他酒饭吃，放他回去，嘱咐他说 ：替我告诉姚令言等人，好好替叛贼守城，不要对朱氵此不忠。 
English: The patrol soldiers caught Yao Lingyan and Cui Xuan's spies, untied Li Xuan's life, gave him food and drink, let him go back, and ordered him to say: Tell Yao Lingyan and others for me, guard the city well for the traitors, and do not be disloyal to Zhu Xi.

古文：乃引兵叩都门，贼不敢出，振旅而还。
现代文：于是领兵攻打京都的城门，叛军不敢出战，就整顿军队回营。
English: So he led an army to attack the gates of Kyoto, but the rebels did not dare to fight, so he reorganized the army and returned to camp.

古文：明日，会诸将图所向，众对先拔外城，然后清宫。
现代文：第二天，集合将领们谋划进攻的目标，众将说先攻外城，然后扫清皇宫里的敌人。
English: The next day, the generals were gathered to plan the target of the attack. The generals said that they would first attack the outer city, and then clear the enemy in the palace.

古文：晟曰： 外城有里闬之隘，若设伏格战，居人嚣溃，非计也。
现代文：李晟说： 外城居民房屋是障碍，叛军若设伏兵与我巷战，居民会喧闹溃散，这不是好计。
English: Li Wei said: The houses of the residents of the outer city are an obstacle. If the rebels set up an ambush and fight with me in the street, the residents will noisily disperse. This is not a good plan.

古文：贼重兵精甲聚苑中，今直击之，是披其心腹，将图走不暇。 诸将曰： 善。 
现代文：叛贼的精锐士兵集中在皇苑中，现在直接进攻这里，是挖他的心腹要害，想逃跑还来不及呢！ 将领们说 ：好！ 
English: The renegade's elite soldiers were concentrated in the royal courtyard, and now they were attacking directly here, trying to get to his heart, before it was too late to escape! The generals said, "Good!

古文：乃自东渭桥移壁光泰门，以薄都城，连沟栅。
现代文：于是从东渭桥移营到光泰门，以大军直逼都城。
English: As a result, the camp was moved from Dongluqiao to Guangtai Gate, and the large army directly attacked the capital.

古文：而贼将张庭芝、李希倩求战，晟顾曰： 贼不出，是吾忧也。今乃冒死来，天诱之矣。 
现代文：用濠沟和木栅把营垒连接起来。叛军将领张庭芝、李希倩讨战，李晟对将领们说 ：我担心叛军不出战呢，现在是来送死，这是上天诱使他们走向灭亡啊！ 
English: The rebel generals, Zhang Tianzhi and Li Xizhi, went to fight. Li Xizhi said to the generals, "I'm worried that the rebels won't fight, but now they've come to fight to the death. This is God's way of tempting them to their doom!"

古文：勒吴诜等纵兵鏖击。
现代文：令吴诜等将挥军激战。
English: Wu Gan and the other generals led the troops into a fierce battle.

古文：贼攻华师急，晟以精骑驰救，中军噪而从，大破之，乘胜入光泰门；再战，败却，僵尸相藉，余众走白华，贼大哭，终夜不息。
现代文：叛军攻击华州的部队很猛烈，李晟带精锐骑兵飞驰救援，中军擂鼓呐喊跟进，大败叛军，乘胜攻入光泰门；第二次交战，叛军又败退了，满地是横七竖八的僵硬尸体，剩下的叛军逃奔白华，叛军哭声整夜不停。
English: The rebels attacked the troops of Huazhou very violently. Li Yingtao and his elite cavalry galloped to the rescue. The Chinese army followed with drums and shouts. They defeated the rebels and took advantage of the victory to break into Guangtai Gate. In the second battle, the rebels were defeated and retreated. The ground was covered with stiff corpses. The remaining rebels fled to Baihua. The rebels cried all night long.

古文：翌日，将复战。或请待西师，晟曰： 贼既败，当乘机扑殄。苟俟西军，是容其为计，岂吾利邪？ 
现代文：第二天，准备再战，有人请求等西边部队来后再进攻，李晟说： 叛军已失败，应该乘胜消灭他们，如果等候西边的部队，这是让他们施计再起，哪会对我们有利呢？ 
English: The next day, preparing to fight again, someone asked to wait for the western troops to come and then attack, Li Wei said: The rebels have failed, we should use the victory to eliminate them, if we wait for the western troops, this is to let them make plans to rise again, which will be beneficial to us?

古文：乃悉军军光泰门，使王佖、李演将骑，史万顷将步，抵苑北。
现代文：于是把全军召集到光泰门，令王佖、李演率领骑兵，史万顷率领步兵，进抵皇苑北面。
English: Therefore, the whole army was summoned to Guangtai Gate, and Wang Qi and Li Yuan were ordered to lead the cavalry, and Shi Wanha led the infantry, and arrived at the north side of the imperial garden.

古文：晟先夜隤苑垣为道二百步，比兵至，贼已伐木塞以拒战。晟叱诸将曰： 安得纵贼？今先斩公矣！ 
现代文：李晟派人先在夜里拆毁二百步长的皇苑围墙，作为进兵通道，等到大军赶到，叛军已砍树堵塞了通道抵抗，李晟斥责将领们说 ：怎么能放走叛贼，放走了我就先杀你们！ 
English: Li Qiye first sent people to demolish the two-hundred-step-long wall of the imperial garden in the night as a passage for marching troops. When the army arrived, the rebels had cut down trees and blocked the passage. Li Qiye rebuked the generals, saying: "How can you let the traitors go? If you let them go, I will kill you first!"

古文：万顷惧，先登，拔栅以入，佖督骑继之。
现代文：史万顷害怕，首先登上围墙，拔去栅木，攻入皇苑中，李佖率领骑兵跟着冲进厮杀，叛军的防线崩溃了，活捉了叛军将领段诚谏。
English: Shi Wanhao was afraid. First, he climbed the fence, pulled out the grating, and broke into the imperial garden. Li Yu led the cavalry and rushed into the battle. The rebel defense line collapsed, and the rebel general Duan Chengyi was captured alive.

古文：贼崩溃，执其将段诚谏，大兵分道进，雷噪震地。
现代文：大军分路进军，战鼓如雷，喊声震地。
English: The great army marched in separate lines, the war drums thundered, and the shouts shook the earth.

古文：令言、庭芝、希倩等殊死斗，晟令唐良臣等步骑奔突，贼阵成辄北，十余遇皆不胜，蹙入白华。贼伏千骑出官军背，晟以麾下百骑自驰之，左右呼曰： 相公来！ 
现代文：令言、庭芝、希倩等人殊死搏斗，李晟命令唐良臣等将领率步兵、骑兵一起冲击，叛军战阵刚布拢就被冲垮了，反复冲杀十多次，叛军都没有取胜，退缩进白华，埋伏的一千叛军骑兵袭击官军后背，李晟亲自率领卫队的一百名骑兵冲击，左右侍卫大声呐喊： 相公来了！ 
English: Lingyan, Tianzhi, Xizang and others fought to the death, Li Gan ordered Tang Liangchen and other generals to lead the infantry and cavalry to attack together, the rebel battle line was just about to be washed out, repeatedly killed more than ten times, the rebels did not win, retreated into Baihua, the ambush of a thousand rebel cavalry attacked the back of the official army, Li Gan personally led the guards of a hundred cavalry to attack, and the guards shouted loudly: The prince is coming!

古文：贼惊溃，禽馘略尽。
现代文：叛军惊惶地溃散了，差不多全被活捉或斩杀了。
English: The rebels scattered in panic, and almost all were captured alive or killed.

古文：泚率残卒万人西走，田子奇追之，余党悉降。
现代文：朱氵此领一万残兵向西败退，田子奇率军追击，剩下的党羽都投降了。
English: Zhu Xi led ten thousand remnants to retreat to the west, Tian Ziqi led the army to pursue, and the rest of the party all surrendered.

古文：晟引军屯含元外廷，舍右金吾次，令军中曰： 五日内不得辄通家问，违者斩。 
现代文：李晟领军驻扎在含元殿外面的庭院里。自己住在右金吾驻所，在军中下令说 ：五日内不准随便探家，违令的斩首。 
English: The leader of the army, Li Yan, was stationed in the courtyard outside the Hall of Han Yuan. He himself lived in the Right King's residence, and in the army he ordered: "No casual home visits within five days, illegal beheadings."

古文：遣京兆尹李齐运部长安、万年令，分慰居人，秋毫无所扰。
现代文：派京兆尹李齐运的部属长安、万年县令，分头慰问居民，军队秋毫无犯。
English: The subordinates of the Beijing Zhaoying and Li Qiun dispatched to Chang'an and the Wan'en County Government to offer condolences to the residents, and the army did not commit any crimes in the autumn.

古文：别将高明曜取贼妓一，司马伷取贼马二，即斩以徇。
现代文：别将高明曜私取叛贼的妓女，司马亻由拿了叛贼的两匹马，立即斩首示众。
English: Don't take Gao Mingyue's prostitute, Sima Ye took the traitor's two horses and immediately beheaded them.

古文：坊人之远者，宿昔乃知王师之入也。
现代文：住在远处街坊的居民，过了一夜才知道朝廷的军队进了城。
English: Residents of a distant neighborhood learned overnight that the imperial army had entered the city.

古文：明日，孟涉屯白华，尚可孤屯望仙门，骆元光屯章敬寺，晟屯安国寺。
现代文：第二天，派孟涉驻军白华，尚可孤驻军望仙门，骆元光驻军章敬寺，李晟驻扎安国寺。
English: The next day, he sent Meng Wanzhang to the Baihua garrison, Shang Ke to the Wuxianmen garrison, Luo Yuanguang to the Zhangjing Temple garrison, and Li Jie to the Anguo Temple garrison.

古文：斩贼用事者及臣贼宦竖于市，表著节不屈者，择文武摄台省官，以俟乘舆。条胁污于贼者，请以不死。
现代文：在街上杀了叛贼朱氵此的权臣、臣僚和宦官，表彰保持节义不屈服的人，选择文官武将代理台省官职，等候皇帝的车驾，清理登记被胁迫陷在叛贼一方的人，请皇帝不判他们的死罪。
English: In the streets, they killed the traitor Zhu Rongguo's vassals, ministers and eunuchs, commended those who remained loyal and did not give in, selected civilian generals to act as provincial officials, waited for the emperor's chauffeur, cleaned up and registered the people who were coerced into the traitor's side, and asked the emperor not to sentence them to death.

古文：露布至梁，帝感泣，群臣上寿，且言： 晟荡夷凶憝，而市不易廛，宗庙不震，长安之人不识旗鼓，虽三代用师，不能加之。 
现代文：捷报传到梁州，皇帝感动得流泪，群臣向皇帝祝贺，并且说： 李晟荡平凶恶的叛贼，但市场摊铺没有移散，宗庙没有惊动，长安居民未受惊扰，即使是三代时用兵，也不能超过他。 
English: The news of the victory spread to Liangzhou. The emperor was moved to tears, and his courtiers congratulated the emperor and said: Li Xuan had defeated the vicious traitor, but the market stalls had not been dispersed, the ancestral temple had not been disturbed, and the residents of Chang'an had not been disturbed. Even if there were three generations of soldiers, they could not surpass him.

古文：帝曰： 天生晟，为社稷万人，岂独朕哉！ 
现代文：皇帝说： 上天生下李晟，是国家和百姓的福分，哪里是我一人的福气呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "It is a blessing for the country and the people that God gave birth to Li Yan. Where is my blessing?

古文：拜晟司徒，兼中书令，实封千户。
现代文：封李晟为司徒，兼中书令，实封一千户。
English: Li Jie was appointed as a magistrate, and he also held the title of Zhongshu Ling. A total of one thousand households were sealed.

古文：晟遣大将吴诜以兵三千到宝鸡清道，自请迎扈，不许。
现代文：李晟派大将吴诜带三千兵到宝鸡，清理道路，请求亲自去迎接和保卫皇帝车驾，皇帝不答应。
English: Li Qiye sent General Wu Qiye with three thousand soldiers to Baoji to clear the road and asked him to personally meet and protect the emperor. The emperor did not agree.

古文：帝至自梁，晟以戎服见三桥，帝驻马劳之。
现代文：皇帝从梁州回来，李晟穿着甲胄在三桥参见皇帝，皇帝停马慰劳他。
English: When the emperor returned from Liangzhou, Li Lan, wearing armor, met the emperor at Sanqiao. The emperor stopped his horse to console him.

古文：晟再拜顿首，贺克殄大盗，庙朝安复，已，即跪陈： 备爪牙臣，不能指日破贼，致乘舆再狩，乃臣不任职之咎，敢请死。 
现代文：李晟两次跪拜叩头，向皇帝祝贺消灭了大盗，朝廷宗庙又恢复安定。祝贺完毕后，就跪着陈述： 陛下养着保卫朝廷的臣子，不能很快消灭叛贼，致使陛下车驾两次流亡，是我不称职的罪过，请定我的死罪。 
English: After the congratulations were over, he kneeled down and stated: Your Majesty raised courtiers to protect the imperial court, and you were unable to quickly eliminate the traitors, causing Your Majesty to be driven into exile twice. This is a crime of incompetence, please sentence me to death.

古文：伏道左，帝为掩涕，命给事中齐映起之，使就位。
现代文：拜伏在道路的左边，皇帝感动得掩面流泪，命令给事中齐映扶起他，让他回到自己的位置。
English: Bowing on the left side of the road, the emperor was moved to tears and ordered Qi Ying to lift him up and let him return to his position.

古文：有诏赐第永崇里、泾阳上田、延平门之林园、女乐一列。
现代文：又下诏书在永阳里赐府宅，赐泾阳的良田、延平门的园林及女乐一队。
English: The imperial edict also granted a mansion in Yongyang, good fields in Fenyang, gardens in Yanpingmen, and a group of female singers.

古文：晟入第，京兆供帐，教坊鼓吹迎导，诏将相送之。
现代文：李晟进府宅时，京兆尹设帷帐，教坊奏乐作为前导，皇帝命令将相送他回家。
English: When Li Qiye entered the residence, Jing Zhaoyun set up a curtain, and the music of the teaching hall was played as a prelude. The emperor ordered him to be sent home.

古文：帝纪其功，自文于碑，敕皇太子书，立于东渭桥，以示后世云。
现代文：皇帝记录他的功劳，亲自在石碑上写碑文，给皇太子敕书，命令立在东渭桥，以流芳后世。
English: The emperor recorded his merits, personally wrote an inscription on the stone tablet, wrote a letter to the crown prince, and ordered it to be erected on Donglu Bridge, so that it would be passed down to future generations.

古文：又令太子录副以赐。
现代文：又命令太子录下碑文副本，赐给李晟。
English: He also ordered the prince to write down a copy of the inscription and give it to Li Xuan.

古文：始，晟屯渭桥也，荧惑守岁，久乃退，府中皆贺曰： 荧惑退，国家之利，速用兵者昌。 
现代文：当初李晟驻军东渭桥，火星正巡行至它的上空，好长时间才退走，他府中的人祝贺说 ：火星退走，是国家的福气，迅速出兵打仗一定胜利。 
English: At that time, Li Qiye's army was stationed at Dongluo Bridge, and Mars was cruising over it for a long time before retreating. The people in his government congratulated him, saying, "It is a blessing for the country that Mars has retreated, and a swift dispatch of troops to fight will ensure victory."

古文：晟曰： 天子暴露，人臣当力死勤难，安知天道邪？ 
现代文：李晟说 ：皇帝流亡在外，臣子应当拼死帮助皇帝脱难回朝，哪里顾得上什么天命呢？ 
English: At this time, hurrying to use soldiers will surely win. Li Wei said: When the heavenly son encounters dangerous difficulties, the courtiers should try their best to solve the protection, how can there be time to manage the affairs of the celestial elephant?

古文：至是，乃曰： 前士大夫劝晟出兵，非敢拒也。且人可用而不可使之知也。
现代文：到这时才说 ：以前士大夫劝我出兵攻打叛军，不是敢拒绝不听，况且百姓可使用他，不能让他知道原因。
English: It was only then that he said, "In the past, my superior officer advised me to send troops to fight the rebels, but I didn't dare refuse to listen. Besides, the people can use him, but they can't let him know the reason.

古文：夫惟五纬盈缩不常，晟惧复守岁，则我军不战自屈矣！ 
现代文：金木水火土，五星运行有时不遵常规，我怕火星又回到这个区域，我军不等交战就自己认输了。 
English: Gold, wood, water, fire and earth, the five-star operation sometimes does not follow the routine, I am afraid that Mars will return to this area, and our army will not wait for the war to admit defeat.

古文：皆曰： 非所及也。 
现代文：部下们都说 ：这是我们比不上的。 
English: My subordinates all said, "This is something we can't match."

古文：泾州倚边，数戕其帅，晟请治不龚命者，因以训耕积粟实塞下，羁制西戎。
现代文：泾州靠着边境，乱兵多次杀死主帅，李晟请求惩办不听命令的，因而训导军队屯垦积粮，充实边防，牵制西戎。
English: Bozhou was close to the border, and the soldiers killed their commander several times. Li Jun requested that those who disobeyed orders be punished, so he instructed the army to stockpile grain, strengthen the border defense, and restrain Xi Rong.

古文：帝乃拜晟凤翔、陇右、泾原节度使，兼行营副元帅，徙王西平郡，实封千五百户。
现代文：皇帝就任命李晟为凤翔、陇右、泾原节度使，兼行营副元帅，改封西平郡王，实封一千五百户。
English: The emperor appointed Li Qian as Fengxiang, Zou Yu, and Yuyuan's envoy to the imperial court, concurrently acting as deputy field marshal, and changed his title to Xiping County King, with a real estate of 1,500 households.

古文：晟请与李楚琳俱行，亦将治杀张镒罪，帝方务安反侧，不许。
现代文：李晟请求让李楚琳一起赴任，将惩办他杀张镒之罪。皇帝正在安定朝廷让摇摆不定的人安心，不答应。
English: Li Yu requested that Li Chuling be allowed to take office together, and he will be punished for the crime of killing Zhang Ye. The emperor is stabilizing the court to reassure those who are wavering, and will not agree.

古文：晟至凤翔，乱将王斌等十余人以次伏诛。
现代文：李晟到凤翔将制造动乱的将领王斌等十多人先后依法处死。
English: From Li Jun to Feng Xiang, more than ten people including Wang Bin, the general who created the turmoil, were successively executed in accordance with the law.

古文：时宦者尹元贞持节到同、华，擅入河中谕慰李怀光。晟劾元贞矫使，欲洗宥元恶，请治罪。又言： 赦怀光有五不可：河中抵京师三百里，同州制其冲，兵多则示未信，少则力不足，忽惊东偏，何以待之？
现代文：当时宦官尹元贞拿着符节到同州、华州巡视，擅自进入河中郡抚慰李怀光，李晟上奏章弹劾尹元贞假借皇帝命令，想为叛乱的元凶开脱罪责，请皇帝治元贞的罪，又写道： 赦免怀光有五个不可：河中郡距京城三百里，同州挡住他的要冲，驻军多了，显得对他不信任，驻军少了就嫌力量不足，如果他突然带一支军向东进犯，凭什么抵挡他呢？
English: At that time, the eunuch Yin Yuanzhen took the festival to Tongzhou and Huazhou to inspect the situation, and entered Hezhong County without authorization to comfort Li Huiguang. Li Qian played the chapter to impeach Yin Yuanzhen on the pretext of the emperor's order, wanted to absolve the culprit of the rebellion, and asked the emperor to punish Yuanzhen. He also wrote: There are five impossibilities to pardon Huiguang: Hezhong County is three hundred miles away from Beijing, Tongzhou is blocking his rush, more garrisons appear to distrust him, and fewer garrisons seem to lack strength. If he suddenly marches east with an army,

古文：一也。今赦怀光，则必以晋、绛、慈、隰还之，浑瑊、康日知又且迁徙，二也。兵力未穷，忽宥反逆，四夷闻之，谓陛下兵屈而自罢耳；今回纥拒北，吐蕃梗西，希烈僭淮、蔡，若弃强示弱，以招窥觊，三也。怀光既赦，则朔方将士悉复叙勋行赏，追还缣廪；今府库空殚，物不酬满，是激其叛，四也。既解河中，诸道还屯，当有赐赉，赏典不举，怨言必起，五也。
现代文：这是第一；现在赦免怀光，就一定要把晋州、绛州、慈州、隰州还给他，浑蠨、康日知只好调任他处，这是第二；朝廷兵力不小，忽然赦免叛臣，四夷知道了，认为陛下兵力不足而且很疲惫，现在回纥在北方对峙，吐蕃堵住西边，希烈在淮西、蔡州一带建立伪政权，如果丢掉强大的态势而示弱，就会招致敌人窥伺，这是第三；怀光赦免后，朔方的将士都将论功行赏，追补原先的细绢粮草，现国库空虚，财物不够行赏，这又将激起叛乱，这是第四；解决河中的问题后，各路部队各回防地，应当有赏赐，不按法规赏赐，一定发怨言，这是第五。
English: This is the first; if he pardons Huai Guang now, he must return Jinzhou, Quzhou, Cizhou and Quzhou to him; if he pardons Hun Sen and Kang Rong Zhi, he must transfer them to other places, this is the second; the imperial army is not small, he suddenly pardoned the traitors, the Si Yi knew it, they thought that his majesty's army was insufficient and very tired, now the Hui Wei is facing off in the north, the Tu Wei is blocking the west, and the Hilei is establishing a pseudo-regime in Huai Xi and Cai Zhou. If he loses his strong posture and

古文：今河中米斗五百，刍稿且罄，人饿死墙壁间，其大将杀戮几尽，围之旬时，力穷且溃，愿无养腹心疾为后忧。臣请选精兵五千，约十日粮，可以破贼。 
现代文：现在河中郡一斗米卖到五百钱，草料将尽，居民饿死在墙壁间，他的大将都快被斩杀光了，围困他十天，叛贼走投无路定会溃败，请陛下不要留下心腹大患，我请求挑选五千精兵，带十天粮草，打败叛贼。 
English: At present, a barrel of rice in Hechong County is sold for 500 yuan. The fodder is running out. The residents are starving to death between the walls. His generals are all about to be killed. They have been besieging him for ten days. The traitors will be defeated if they are cornered. Please, Your Majesty, don't leave behind a major headache. I request that you select five thousand elite soldiers and bring ten days of grain and grass to defeat the traitors.

古文：帝方以贼委马燧、浑瑊，故不许。
现代文：皇帝刚把进攻叛贼的任务交给浑蠨、马燧，因而没有答应。
English: The emperor had just given the task of attacking the traitors to Mudan and Malang, so he did not agree.

古文：晟至泾而田希鉴迎谒，执之，并其党石奇等悉伏诛。表右龙武将军李观为泾原节度使。
现代文：李晟到泾州，田希鉴迎接并参见，李晟逮捕了他，连他的同伙石奇等人全部依法处死，上表朝廷，推荐右龙武将军李观任泾原节度使。
English: When Li Qiye arrived in Zhangzhou, Tian Xijian greeted him and said, "See, Li Qiye arrested him, and he and his accomplice Shi Qi and others were all executed according to the law. The imperial court recommended the Right Longwu General Li Guanzhong as the ambassador to the State Council of Yuyuan.

古文：晟常曰： 河、陇之陷，非吐蕃能取之，皆将臣沓贪，暴其种落，不得耕稼，日益东徙，自弃之尔。
现代文：李晟常说： 河、陇陷落，不是吐蕃能攻取它，都是守将散漫贪暴，残害当地居民，使他们不能耕种，因而一天天向东迁移，这是自己抛弃他们。
English: Li Xizang often said: If a river or stream falls, it is not possible for the Tuyn to capture it. The guards will spread corruption and brutality, destroy the local residents, make them unable to farm, and thus migrate eastward day by day. This is their own abandonment.

古文：且土无缯絮，人苦役扰，思唐之心，岂有既乎？ 
现代文：况且土地不出产细绢棉絮，百姓恨徭役的困扰，哪里还有留恋唐朝的心呢？ 
English: Moreover, the land does not produce fine cotton lint, and the people hate the troubles of the cotton service. Where is the heart that yearns for the Tang Dynasty?

古文：因悉家赀怀辑降附，得大酋浪息曩，表以王号。每虏使至，必召息曩于坐，衣大锦袍、金带，夸异之，虏皆指目歆艳。
现代文：因而拿出全部家产招揽投降归附的人，得到一个大酋长浪息曩，上表请朝廷给他封了王号，每当敌方使者来，一定召来息曩，为他设座，让他穿上锦袍，腰间围着金带，夸耀他受到的特殊礼遇，敌方使者都指着他看，非常羡慕。
English: Therefore, he took out all of his family's property to invite those who had surrendered to the annexation, and obtained a great chieftain, Nami Sessho, and asked the imperial court to seal the king's name for him. Whenever the enemy's envoys came, Sessho would be called, a seat would be set up for him, he would be dressed in a brocade robe with a gold belt around his waist, and he would boast about the special treatment he received. The enemy's envoys all pointed at him and looked at him with great envy.

古文：吐蕃君臣大惧，相与议。
现代文：吐蕃的君臣非常害怕，一起商议对策。
English: The princes and ministers of Tubo were very afraid, and they discussed countermeasures together.

古文：尚结赞者善计，乃曰： 唐名将特李晟与马燧、浑瑊尔，不去之，必为吾患。 
现代文：有个叫尚结赞的，善于用计，就说： 唐朝的名将只李晟、马燧、浑蠨罢了，不除掉他们，一定是我们的祸患。 
English: There was a man named Shang Jizan, who was good at using stratagems, and he said: "The Tang Dynasty's name will only be Li Zhen, Ma Zhen, and Hun Zhen. If we don't get rid of them, it will definitely be our misfortune."

古文：即遣使委辞，因燧请和，且求盟，因盟谋执瑊以卖燧，于是结赞大兴兵逾陇、岐，无所掠，阳怒曰： 召吾来，乃不牛酒犒军。 
现代文：就派使者致辞，通过马燧请求与唐朝讲和，并请求订盟约，阴谋趁订盟约活捉浑蠨，用这手段出卖马燧。于是结赞大举兴兵，越过陇西、岐山，没有抢掠，假装发怒说： 召我们来，竟然不送牛羊酒肉犒赏大军！ 
English: He sent an envoy to deliver a speech, requesting peace with the Tang Dynasty through Ma Jun, and requesting the signing of a treaty. The conspiracy took advantage of the signing of the treaty to capture Hun Sen alive, using this means to betray Ma Jun. Therefore, he praised and raised a large army, crossed Shaanxi and Qishan, did not loot, and pretended to be angry, saying: Call us, but did not send cattle, wine and mutton to reward the large army!

古文：徐引去。以是间晟。
现代文：慢慢地带军退走，用这计谋来离间李晟。
English: Slowly lead the army to retreat, and use this trick to split Li Qiye.

古文：晟选兵三千，使王佖伏汧阳旁，击其中军，几获结赞。
现代文：李晟挑选三千兵，令王佖带领着埋伏在阳旁边，进攻结赞的中军，结赞几乎被活捉。
English: Li Yu selected three thousand soldiers, and ordered Wang Yu to lead the Chinese army, which was lying in ambush next to the sun, to attack Yizan. Yizan was almost captured alive.

古文：晟又遣野诗良辅等攻摧沙堡，拔之。
现代文：又派野诗良辅等将攻下摧沙堡。
English: He also sent Noshi Ryosuke and others to capture the sand castle.

古文：结赞屡乞和，会晟朝京师，奏言： 戎狄无信，不可许。 
现代文：结赞多次乞求讲和，恰逢李晟回京朝见皇帝，上奏章说： 戎狄不讲信用，不能答应讲和。 
English: Ying Zhan repeatedly begged for peace, just as Li Lan returned to Beijing to see the emperor. The inscribed chapter said: "Uncle Yun Di is not trustworthy and cannot agree to make peace."

古文：宰相韩滉与晟合，因请调军食以给西师。
现代文：宰相韩的见解与李晟相同，趁机请求调拨粮饷供给西部边防部队。
English: Prime Minister Han shared the same opinion as Li Qiye and took the opportunity to request the allocation of grain and straw to supply the western border troops.

古文：然天子内厌兵，疑将臣生事。亦会滉卒而张延赏当国，故与晟有隙，后虽诏讲解，而阴不与也，密言晟不可久持兵，更荐刘玄佐、李抱真经略西北，俾立功以间晟。帝惑其言。
现代文：皇帝内心厌恶打仗，怀疑将领们生事，恰巧韩死了，张延赏掌握朝政，他曾经与李晟有嫌隙，后来虽奉皇帝命令和解，但暗地仍然与李晟不和，秘密向皇帝说李晟不能长期掌兵权，改荐刘玄佐、李抱真治理西北边防，让他们立功来疏远李晟，皇帝被他的话迷惑了。
English: The emperor had a visceral aversion to war and suspected the generals of causing trouble. It so happened that Han died and Zhang Yan was rewarded with control of the imperial government. He had once had a rift with Li Qiye. Later, although they were reconciled by order of the emperor, they were still secretly at odds with Li Qiye. He secretly told the emperor that Li Qiye could not hold military power for a long time. He recommended Liu Xuanzuo and Li Bozhen to govern the northwest border defense, and asked them to do their best to alienate Li Qiye. The emperor was puzzled by his words.

古文：贞元三年，帝坐宣政殿引见晟，备册礼，进拜太尉、中书令，罢其兵。
现代文：贞元三年，皇帝坐在宣政殿接见李晟，备齐册封的礼节，晋升李晟为太尉、中书令，罢免了他的兵权。
English: In the third year of the Zhengyuan era, the emperor sat in the Xuancheng Hall to receive Li Qian, prepared the etiquette of the seal, promoted Li Qian to the rank of captain, and dismissed him from the military.

古文：诏晟乘辂谒太庙，视事尚书省，赐良马、锦彩千计。
现代文：皇帝命令他乘坐车子去参拜太庙，在尚书省治事，赐给数以千计的良马和锦绢。
English: The emperor ordered him to take a carriage to visit the Great Temple, govern the province of Shangshu, and bestow thousands of fine horses and brocades.

古文：是岁，瑊与吐蕃盟平凉，虏劫之，瑊挺身免，诏罢燧河东，皆如结赞计云。
现代文：这年，浑蠨与吐蕃在平凉会盟，敌人劫持他，浑蠨挺身拼斗脱身免祸逃回，皇帝命令罢免马燧河东的军务，都像结赞原先预谋的一样。
English: In this year, muddy and sputum were allied in Pingliang, the enemy kidnapped him, muddy stood up and fought, escaped from the disaster and fled back, and the emperor ordered to dismiss the military affairs of the east of the Malu River, all of which were as originally planned by Jie Zhan.

古文：通王府长史丁琼者，尝为延赏挤抑，内怨望，乃见晟曰： 以公功，乃夺兵柄，夫惟位高者难全，盍早图之？ 
现代文：通王府的长史丁琼，曾经被延赏排挤压制，内心怨恨，就参见李晟说 ：以您的功劳，竟被夺了兵权，地位高的人难得保全生命，为什么不早做打算呢？ 
English: Long Shing Qiong of Tongwangfu, who was once rewarded and ousted and suppressed, harbored resentment, see Li Xi said: With your merit, you were actually deprived of military power, and it is rare for people with high status to save their lives, why not make plans early?

古文：晟曰： 君安得不祥之言？ 
现代文：李晟说 ：您怎么说这些不吉祥的话？ 
English: Li Zhe said: How can you say these unlucky words?

古文：执以闻。
现代文：逮捕他报告朝廷。
English: Arrest him and report him to the imperial court.

古文：明年，诏为晟立五庙，追贲高祖芝以下祔其主，给牲器床幄，礼官相事。
现代文：第二年，皇帝下令替李晟家建立五庙，追封其高祖李芝以下的先人，合祭他们的神主，赐祭祀的祭品、器皿和床帐，礼官主持祭祀。
English: In the following year, the emperor ordered five temples to be built for the Li Rong family, and the ancestors of his great-grandfather Li Zhi and his descendants to be exiled. They were to make a joint offering to their god, give sacrificial offerings, utensils and bedsheets, and the etiquette official presided over the sacrifice.

古文：它日，与马燧见延英，帝嘉其勋，下诏曰： 昔我烈祖，乘乾坤荡涤，扫隋季荒茀，体元御极，作人父母。
现代文：有一天，李晟与马燧在延英殿朝见皇帝，皇帝赞扬他们的功勋，下诏书说： 昔日我的祖先，乘着天下动荡，扫除隋末战乱，登上皇位，成为国家君主，做百姓的父母。
English: One day, Li Qian and Ma Qian went to see the emperor at the Yan Ying Palace. The emperor praised their feats and issued a decree saying: In the past, my ancestors took advantage of the turmoil in the world to sweep away the war at the end of the Sui Dynasty, ascended the throne, became the monarch of the country, and became the parents of the people.

古文：则有熊罴之士，不二心之臣，左右经纶，参翊缔构，昭文德，恢武功，威不若，康不乂，用端命于上帝，付畀四方。
现代文：又有熊罴般勇猛的战将，忠心耿耿的文臣，在左右运筹谋划，辅佐经营，光大文德，发扬武功，使不善的人威服，让无才能者安康，被上天委以真命，交托天下。
English: There are also courageous generals like Xiong Yao, loyal and earnest civil servants, who plan and assist in the operation of the left and right sides, have great moral character, promote martial arts, make bad people brave, and make the untalented healthy. They are entrusted to the world by the heavenly committee with their true lives.

古文：王业既成，太阶既平，乃图厥容，列于凌烟阁，懋昭绩效，表式仪形，以弗忘朝夕，永垂乎来裔。
现代文：帝业已经成就，太平已经奠定，于是画那些功臣的图像陈列在凌烟阁，赞扬他们的丰功，光显他们的伟绩，表彰模范，树立榜样，以示朝夕不忘，永垂后世。
English: The imperial cause has been achieved, peace has been established, so the images of those heroes are displayed in Lingyakou, praising their great achievements, highlighting their great achievements, commending models, and setting an example to show that they are not forgotten and will live forever.

古文：君臣之义，厚莫重焉。
现代文：君臣情深义厚，没有能超过他们的。
English: Princes and courtiers have a deep sense of loyalty, and nothing can surpass them.

古文：岁在己巳秋九月，我行西宫，瞻望崇构，见老臣遗像，颙然肃然，和敬在色。
现代文：在己巳年秋天的九月，我到西宫，仰望那高大雄伟的建筑，瞻仰老一代功臣的遗像，肃然起敬。
English: In September of the autumn of my thirtieth year, I went to the West Palace, looked up at the tall and majestic building, and gazed at the remains of the heroes of the old generation, awestruck.

古文：想云龙之协期，感致业之艰难，睹往思今，取类非远。
现代文：追想圣主贤臣，同心同德，感慨成就帝业的艰难，抚今追昔，取法不远。
English: Think about the saints and sages, have the same heart and the same morality, feel the hardships of achieving the empire, keep up with the times, and the method is not far away.

古文：且功与时并，才与世生，苟蕴其才，遇其时，尊主庇人，何代蔑有？
现代文：而且功业与时代相连，英才与时势并生，假如怀抱奇才，恰逢施展才能的时代，尊崇君主，保护百姓，这样的贤臣，哪个朝代没有？
English: Moreover, achievements are linked to the times, and talents are in line with the times. If embracing a prodigy coincides with the era of displaying talents, honoring the monarch, and protecting the people, which dynasty does not have such a sage?

古文：在中宗时，有如桓彦范等，著辅戴之绩；在玄宗时，有如刘幽求等，申弼翼之勋；在肃宗时，有如郭子仪，扫除氛祲。
现代文：在中宗时代，有像桓彦范一辈人，建立辅佐拥戴的业绩；在玄宗时代，有像刘幽求一批人，立下辅弼的功勋；在肃宗时代，有像郭子仪一班人，扫除凶恶的妖氛。
English: In the era of Zhongzong, there was a generation of people like Huan Yan Fan, who built up the performance of supporting and supporting; in the era of Xuanzong, there was a group of people like Liu Yuqiu, who established the merits of supporting and supporting; in the era of Su Zong, there was a group of people like Guo Ziyi, who swept away the evil atmosphere.

古文：今顾晟等，保宁朕躬，咸宣力肆勤，光复宗祏，订之前烈，夫岂多谢。
现代文：现在有李晟等人，保卫我朝平安，用尽全力，饱尝艰辛，光复宗庙，同前代贤臣相比，毫不逊色。
English: Now, there are people such as Li Xi, who defend the peace of our dynasty, do their best, suffer hardships, and restore the ancestral temple. Compared with the previous generation of wise men, they are not inferior.

古文：阙而未录，孰旌厥贤？
现代文：如果遗漏不著录，怎么能表彰那些贤臣？
English: If omissions are not recorded, how can we commend those wise men?

古文：况念功纪德，文祖所为也，在予其曷敢怠？
现代文：况且怀念武功，纪念文德，是祖先所创，在我朝怎敢忘记呢？
English: Moreover, the remembrance of martial arts and the commemoration of literature and ethics were created by our ancestors. How can we dare to forget them?

古文：有司宜叙先后，各图其象于旧臣之次。 
现代文：有关部门应该排列名次，各画出他们的图像，排列在凌烟阁前代贤臣后面。 
English: The relevant departments should arrange the rankings, each draw their images, and arrange them behind the former wise men of Lingyakou.

古文：命皇太子书其文以赐晟，晟刻石于门。
现代文：命令皇太子写了这段文字，赐给李晟，李晟把它刻在石碑上，立在大门前。
English: He ordered the crown prince to write this text and give it to Li Yao, who engraved it on a stone tablet and placed it in front of the gate.

古文：七年，以临洮未复，请附贯万年，诏可。
现代文：贞元七年，因为临洮未收复，李晟请求把万年县的赋税加给他，朝廷下诏书批准。
English: In the seventh year of the Zhengyuan era, because Linyi did not recover the money, Li Qian requested that the tax of Mannian County be added to him, which was approved by the Imperial Court.

古文：九年，薨，年六十七。
现代文：贞元九年，李晟去世，享年六十七岁。
English: In the ninth year of Zhengyuan, Li Xi passed away at the age of sixty-seven.

古文：帝闻流涕，诏百官就第进吊。
现代文：皇帝听到噩耗直流泪，下令百官到李晟府第吊唁。
English: When the emperor heard the bad news, he burst into tears and ordered hundreds of officials to go to Lixin to offer condolences.

古文：比大敛，帝手诏，誓以存保世嗣，申告柩前。册赠太师，谥曰忠武。
现代文：到装棺入殓时，皇帝亲自写诏书，立誓保护李晟的后代，延续他的爵位，在他的灵柩前宣读。追封他为太师，赠谥号 忠武 。
English: When the coffin was loaded into the coffin, the emperor personally wrote an imperial edict, vowing to protect the descendants of Li Xi, to continue his title, and read it out in front of his coffin. He was crowned Grand Master and given the title of Zhongwu.

古文：及葬，又御望春门临送，遣谒者宣诏于柩车，百官拜哭于道。
现代文：到下葬时，皇帝又亲到望春门送葬，派使者在灵车前宣读诏书，百官在路旁哭拜。
English: At the time of the funeral, the emperor personally went to the Wangchun Gate to attend the funeral, sent an envoy to read the imperial edict in front of the hearse, and hundreds of officials cried and bowed by the roadside.

古文：宪宗元和中，诏其家与属籍，以晟配飨德宗庙廷。
现代文：唐宪宗元和年间，下诏书给李晟的家属和亲族，让李晟在德宗的庙堂配祭。
English: In the first and second years of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Xianzong issued an edict to the family members and relatives of Li Xi, asking Li Xi to serve as a sacrificial offering in the temple of the German sect.

古文：僖宗狩蜀，仓部员外郎袁皓采晟功烈，为《兴元圣功录》，遍赐诸将，表励之。
现代文：唐僖宗流亡四川时，仓部员外郎袁皓收集李晟的功勋事迹，编写了《兴元圣功录》，遍赐诸将。表彰李晟，激励诸将。
English: When Tang Xizong was in exile in Sichuan, Yuan Qi, a member of the warehouse department, collected the merits and deeds of Li Xi, compiled the "Xingyuan Holy Records," and gave them to all generals. He commended Li Xi and encouraged all generals.

古文：晟性疾恶，临下明。
现代文：李晟生性痛恨丑恶，对下级严明。
English: Li Xinsheng hated ugliness and was strict with his subordinates.

古文：每治军，必曰： 某有劳，某长于是。 
现代文：每次作战，必定说： 某人有功劳，某人在这方面擅长。 
English: Every time there is a battle, it must be said: Someone deserves credit, someone is good at this.

古文：虽厮养小善，必记姓名，尤恶下为朋党者。
现代文：即使是做杂役的人做了点好事，也一定记下姓名，特别憎恶下属拉帮结派。
English: Even if the person who does the chores does something good, he must write down the name, and he especially hates subordinates pulling gangs.

古文：笃分义，隆于故旧。
现代文：坚守信义，对老朋友感情深厚。
English: They stick to their loyalty and have deep feelings for their old friends.

古文：岚州刺史谭元澄尝有德于晟，后贬死。晟既贵，直其枉，诏赠元澄宁州刺史，晟抚其二子，为成就之。
现代文：岚州刺史谭元澄曾对李晟有恩，后被朝廷流放而死，李晟显贵后，为他申冤，朝廷下诏追赠元澄为宁州刺史，李晟抚养他的两个儿子，让他们成才做官。
English: The prince of Zhangzhou, Tan Yuancheng, had been kind to Li Xi, and was later exiled by the imperial court and died. After Li Xi Xiangui, he was vindicated, and the imperial court posthumously awarded Yuancheng as the prince of Ningzhou. Li Xi raised his two sons and let them become officials.

古文：在凤翔，尝曰： 魏征以直言致太宗于尧舜上，忠臣也。
现代文：李晟在凤翔时，曾说： 魏征因为直言进谏，让太宗取得超过尧舜的业绩，真是忠臣啊！
English: When Li Qiye was in Fengxiang, he once said: Wei Zheng, because of his outspokenness, let Taizong achieve more than the performance of Zheng, what a loyal subject!

古文：我诚慕焉。 
现代文：我真仰慕他。 
English: I really admire him.

古文：行军司马李叔度曰： 彼缙绅儒者事，公勋德何希是哉？ 
现代文：行军司马李叔度说 ：那是文官的职分，您功高德厚，怎么还追求这呢？ 
English: Marching sergeant Ma Li Shudu said: That is the position of a civil servant, you are highly meritorious, how can you still pursue this?

古文：晟曰： 君失辞。晟幸得备将相，苟容身不言，岂可谓有犯无隐邪？
现代文：李晟说： 您说错了，我有幸能充任将相，如果为了明哲保身不说话，这难道能说是皇帝有错误臣下不隐瞒吗？
English: Li Zhe said: You said it wrong. I am fortunate to be able to serve as the commander-in-chief. If you don't speak in order to protect Mingzhe, can it be said that the emperor has a mistake and his vassals don't hide it?

古文：是非唯上所择尔。 
现代文：这不是皇帝所要选择的臣子。 
English: This is not the kind of vassal the emperor wants to choose.

古文：叔度惭。
现代文：叔度听了很惭愧。
English: Uncle Du was very ashamed to hear this.

古文：故晟每进对，謇謇尽大臣节，未尝露于外。
现代文：所以李晟每次上朝，对答皇帝，都忠诚正直地尽到大臣的节操，不曾居功自傲锋芒毕露。
English: Therefore, every time Li Qiye went to the court and answered to the emperor, he loyally and honestly fulfilled the minister's duties, and did not take credit for his arrogance.

古文：治家以严，子侄非晨昏不辄见，所与言未尝及公事。
现代文：治家严格，子侄辈不是早晚不特别见面，话家常时，不曾涉及国事。
English: He was a strict family man. His sons and nephews saw each other every now and then, and they often spoke to each other. He never got involved in state affairs.

古文：正岁，崔氏女归宁，让曰： 尔有家，而姑在堂，妇当治酒食，且以待宾客。 
现代文：正月，嫁到崔氏的女儿回娘家来，李晟批评她说 ：你有家，你的婆婆在堂，媳妇应当备办酒食，准备招待宾客。 
English: In the first month of the year, when Cui's daughter returned home after getting married, Li Yao criticized her, saying, "You have a home, your mother-in-law is in the hall, your daughter-in-law should prepare food and wine and be ready to invite guests."

古文：即却之，不得进。
现代文：立即挡住她，不让进门。
English: Block her immediately, do not let her in the door.

古文：达礼敦教类若此。
现代文：通达礼义，督促教化，竟到了这样的程度。
English: It has come to such an extent that we have to enforce etiquette and education.

古文：与马燧皆在朝，每宴乐恩赐，使者相衔于道。
现代文：李晟与马燧都在朝中，皇帝常恩赐酒宴舞乐，派出的使者在路上一个接一个。
English: Li Qian and Ma Qian were both in the imperial court. The emperor often gave them wine, banquets and dances, and sent emissaries one after another on the road.

古文：两家日出无钟鼓声，则金吾以闻，少选，使者至，必曰： 今日何不举乐？ 
现代文：两家早晨若没有钟鼓声，执金吾就会报告给皇帝，稍后，朝廷使者来了，必定说： 今天为什么不奏乐？ 
English: If there are no bells and drums in the morning of the two houses, he will report to the emperor. Later, the imperial envoy came and must have said: Why not play music today?

古文：既薨，城盐州，复故池，以新盐赐宰相。帝思晟，乃致盐灵座。其眷遇终始，无与比者。
现代文：死后，朝廷修了盐州城，恢复了原来的盐池，把新盐赐给宰相，皇帝怀念李晟，就送盐到李晟灵座前，从始至终受皇帝宠信，没有谁比得上。
English: After his death, the imperial court repaired the city of Yanzhou, restored the original salt pond, and gave the new salt to the prime minister. The emperor sent salt to Li Qian's tomb in memory of Li Qian. He was favored by the emperor from beginning to end. No one can match him.

古文：有十五子，其闻者愿、宪、愬、听云。
现代文：李晟有十五个儿子，其中有名望的是李愿、李宪、李訫、李听。
English: Li Lan had fifteen sons, among which the most famous were Li Zhan, Li Xian, Li Yao and Li He.

古文：愿少谦谨。晟立功时，诸子未官，宰相以闻，即日召授太子宾客、上柱国。
现代文：李愿年轻时谦虚谨慎，李晟建立功勋时，儿子们没有出来做官，宰相把这事报告皇帝，当天征召李愿委任为太子宾客、上柱国。
English: When Li Zheng was young, he was modest and prudent. When Li Xi was building up his merits, his sons did not come out to work as officials. The prime minister reported this to the emperor. On the same day, Li Zheng was summoned and appointed as the prince's guest and the top pillar country.

古文：故事，柱国门列戟，遂父子皆赐。
现代文：按先例，柱国府门前有列戟的仪仗，于是父亲、儿子的府第门前都恩赐列戟。
English: According to the precedent, there was a ceremonial battle in front of the gate of Zhu Guofu, so both the father and the son's gate were given a ceremonial battle.

古文：元和初，领夏绥银宥节度使。
现代文：元和初年，兼任夏绥银宥节度使。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he also served as an envoy to the Summer Palace.

古文：政简而严。部有失马者，愿署牒于道，以金购之。
现代文：李愿执法简明严格，有一个部属丢失了马，他立了一面告示牌在路口，上写悬赏找这匹丢失的马。
English: Li would enforce the law concisely and strictly. When one of his subordinates lost a horse, he put up a sign at a road junction offering a reward to find the lost horse.

古文：三日，失马并良马一系署下，且曰： 逸而至，不告，罪当死，谨以良马赎。 
现代文：第三天，丢失的那匹马和一匹良马系在衙门下并附言 ：这匹马跑到我家，没有报告官府，应判死罪，谨请用良马赎罪。 
English: On the third day, the lost horse and a good horse were placed under lock and key with a postscript: This horse ran to my house and did not report to the authorities. It should be sentenced to death. Please use a good horse to atone for the crime.

古文：愿归失马，而纵其良，境内肃然。
现代文：李愿收回丢失的马但放了良马。境内秩序井然。
English: Li was willing to recover the lost horse but released the good horse. The territory is in good order.

古文：徙节武宁军。
现代文：调任武宁军节度使。
English: He was transferred to the post of Military Governor of the Wu Ning Army.

古文：会伐青、郓，数有功，以久疾，用愬代之。
现代文：逢到进攻青州、郓州，多次立功，因为久病，朝廷用李訫代理他。
English: Whenever he attacked Qingzhou and Zhangzhou, he repeatedly made meritorious contributions. Because of his long illness, the imperial court used Li Xi to represent him.

古文：召为刑部尚书，俄检校尚书左仆射，节度凤翔，自是迩声色而政衰矣。
现代文：召回朝任刑部尚书，不久又任检校尚书右仆射、凤翔节度使。从这以后，接近美女和歌舞，政事腐败了。
English: Shang Shu was recalled to the imperial court and appointed to the Department of Criminal Law. Soon after, he was appointed as the inspector of schools, Shang Shu's right-hand man and Feng Xiang's deputy. From then on, he was close to beautiful women and song and dance, and political affairs became corrupt.

古文：长庆中，徙宣武。
现代文：长庆年间，调宣武节度使。
English: During the period of Changqing, the proclamation of martial law was carried out.

古文：始，张弘靖给其军颇厚；愿至，府库殚匮，赏赉不及弘靖时，而侈费过之。
现代文：当初，张弘靖发给宣武军士兵的军饷很丰厚，李愿到任府库空虚，奖赏将士比不上他在任时，但奢侈享乐的费用超过了他。
English: At first, Zhang Hongjing gave soldiers of the Xuanwu Army very rich military pay. Li Yan arrived at the government office with an empty treasury. The rewards for the soldiers were not as good as when he was in office, but the cost of luxury and enjoyment exceeded him.

古文：以威刑操下，用婚家窦缓典帐中兵，骄骜怠沓。牙将李臣则等因众不忍，夜斩缓首。
现代文：用酷刑控制部下，任用亲家窦缓主管帐中兵，窦缓骄横懒散，牙将李臣则等人因士兵们忍受不了，在夜晚砍下了窦缓的头。
English: He used torture to control his subordinates, appointed his relative Dou Ye to be in charge of the soldiers, Dou Ye was arrogant and lazy, and the commander Li Chen cut off Dou Ye's head at night because the soldiers couldn't stand him.

古文：愿闻变，不及巾，与左右数人缒而逸，夺野人乘，驰以免。
现代文：李愿听到兵变的消息，来不及系头巾，与左右的几个随从，从城上用绳缒下逃脱，抢了农夫的马奔逃，免了杀身之祸。
English: Li Xian heard the news of the mutiny, but before he could put on his turban, he and several of his attendants escaped from the city with ropes, grabbed the farmer's horse and ran away, avoiding the disaster of killing himself.

古文：其家死于兵，三子匿而免。
现代文：他的家属死于兵乱。三个儿子因躲藏起来了才免于丧命。
English: His family died in the fighting, his three sons only escaping death by going into hiding.

古文：兵既乱，因大掠，推李朅主后务，请诸朝。
现代文：兵乱后，乱兵趁机大肆抢掠，推举李宀介主持善后事务，向朝廷请示处理兵变。
English: After the mutiny, the mutineers took advantage of the opportunity to loot and pillage on a large scale, and appointed Li Xunkai to preside over the aftermath, and asked the imperial court to deal with the mutiny.

古文：时责愿不职，贬隋州刺史。
现代文：当时指责李愿不称职，降职为随州刺史。
English: At that time, Li Xian was accused of incompetence and demoted to Suizhou.

古文：入为左金吾卫大将军，复拜河中、晋、绛等节度使。
现代文：后回朝任左金吾卫大将军，又任命为河中、晋州、绛州等州节度使。
English: Later, he was appointed to the position of General Zuo Kinguwei by the imperial court, and he was also appointed as the envoy to the state festivals in Hechu, Jinzhou, and Zhangzhou.

古文：虽尝以荒侈败，不能自悛，军政愈弛，结纳权近，官赀随赂遗辄尽。蒲人怨，且乱。
现代文：虽然曾经因为奢侈荒淫失去官职，但仍然不自己悔改，军政事务更加荒废，并且巴结朝中权臣和皇帝亲近的人，府库的钱财随着贿赂立即用尽，蒲州百姓怨恨，将要发生暴乱，恰好李愿死了。
English: Although he once lost his official position because of extravagance and debauchery, he still did not repent himself, the military and political affairs were even more wasteful, and he pandered to the powerful ministers and people close to the emperor, the treasury's money and wealth were immediately exhausted with bribery, the people of Puzhou were resentful, and there would be a riot, just as Li Zhen died.

古文：会卒，赠司徒。
现代文：朝廷追封他为司徒。
English: The imperial court made him a magistrate.

古文：宪与愬于诸子号最仁孝。
现代文：李宪和李訫在李晟的儿子们中号称最有仁德最有孝心。
English: Li Xian and Li Yao are reputed to be the most benevolent and filial of Li Yao's sons.

古文：长喜儒，以礼法自矜制。
现代文：李宪长大后喜欢儒家学说，遵守礼法，庄重自持。
English: After growing up, Li Xian liked the Confucian doctrine, observed the etiquette, and held himself with dignity.

古文：调太原府参军事、醴泉尉。
现代文：调任太原府参军事、醴泉县尉。
English: He was transferred to the Taiyuan prefectural military, and became a lieutenant of Jiuquan County.

古文：于頔镇襄阳，辟署于府。
现代文：于由页任襄阳节度使，征召李宪到府里任职。
English: Yu Yu served as the Yangyang Festival envoy and summoned Li Xian to serve in the government.

古文：时吴少诚张淮西，独惮頔威强，时谓宪为之助。
现代文：当时吴少诚扩张到淮西，独怕于由页的强大威势，当时认为是有李宪帮助谋划。
English: At that time, Wu Shaocheng expanded to Huaxi, fearing only the powerful might of Zhuge Liang. At that time, it was believed that Li Xian helped plan the expansion.

古文：又辟魏博田弘正幕府，迁卫州刺史，以治行称。
现代文：又被召到魏博镇田弘正的幕府，升任卫州刺史，以政绩好著称。
English: He was also called to the bakufu of Weibo Zhen Tian Hiromasa, and was promoted to the position of the governor of Weizhou Province. He was known for his good political performance.

古文：徙绛州。绛有幻人訹民以乱，宪执诛之。
现代文：后来调任绛州刺史，绛州有人用妖术引诱百姓作乱，李宪将他们逮捕杀掉。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Zhangzhou chief historian. Some people in Zhangzhou used magic to lure the people into a riot, and Li Xian arrested and killed them.

古文：河中兵本仰食于绛，而汾可输河、渭，岁租与籴常数十万石，故敖保山为固，民之输者，十牛不胜一车。
现代文：河中郡的士兵本来靠绛州供应军粮，汾河船运可以通黄河、渭水，每年租谷和买的粮食，经常几十万石，运往旧敖堡山粮仓，道路险要，百姓运送粮食，十头牛难运一车粮。
English: The soldiers of Hezhong County originally relied on Luzhou to supply military grain. The Luzhou River can transport grain through the Yellow River and Surabaya. Every year, the grain that is rented and bought, often hundreds of thousands of stones, is transported to the grain silos of the former Qibao Mountain. The roads are precarious, and the people have to transport grain. It is difficult to transport a cart of grain with ten cows.

古文：宪滨汾相地治新仓，当费二百万，请留垣县粟粜河南，以钱还籴绛粟，既免负载劳，又权其赢以完新仓，绛人赖利。
现代文：李宪在汾河边选地建新仓，应当花费二百万钱，请求朝廷批准备留下垣县的粟卖到河南，用这钱买绛州的粟，既免除运输的辛苦，又计算它的赢利来修新仓，绛州人靠此获得了好处。
English: Li Xian should spend two million yuan to build a new warehouse at the selected location by the Li River. He should request the approval of the imperial court to prepare to sell the poppy from Qi County to Henan, and use the money to buy the poppy from Zhangzhou. This would not only save the trouble of transportation, but also calculate the profit to build a new warehouse. The people of Zhangzhou gained benefits from this.

古文：入为宗正少卿，副金吾大将军胡证为送太和公主使。
现代文：回朝廷任宗正少卿，与副金吾大将军胡证任护送太和公主的使者。
English: Returning to the imperial court, he was appointed as Zong Zheng Shaoqing, and he and Deputy Kingu General Hu Sheng were appointed as the envoys to escort the princess and the princess.

古文：还，献《回鹘道里记》，迁太府卿。太和初，繇江西观察使迁岭南节度使。
现代文：还朝后，向朝廷献上《回鹘道里记》，升任太府卿，太和初年，由江西观察使升任岭南节度使。
English: After the Qing Dynasty, he also presented the "Record of the Huchuan Road" to the imperial court and was promoted to the position of Taifuqing. In the first year of the Taiping Dynasty, he was promoted from the Jiangxi Observer to the Lingnan Festival Envoy.

古文：祐受任不辞，决策入死，以愬能用其谋也。
现代文：李宪是功臣显贵家的子弟，所历任的官职都因才能出众而扬名，同时政绩卓著。
English: Li Xian is the son of a meritorious and illustrious family. He is famous for his outstanding ability in all of his official positions, and his outstanding political achievements.

古文：祐之才，待愬乃显，故曰平蔡功，愬为多。
现代文：他善于制定和执行法律制度，性情明智宽厚，详审判定大案，让几百名没有罪的人保全了性命。后死在官任上。
English: He was good at formulating and implementing the legal system, wise and generous in nature, decided major cases in detail, and saved the lives of hundreds of innocent people. He later died in office.

古文：听，字正思，七岁以廕为协律郎，父吏少之，不甚敬，听辄使鞭之，晟奇其才。
现代文：李听字正思，七岁时因为是功臣李晟的儿子被任为协律郎，父亲的部下认为他年幼，不太尊敬他，李听立即令人鞭打这人，李晟认为他是个奇才。
English: At the age of seven, because he was the son of the meritorious soldier Li Yu, he was appointed as a conciliator. His father's subordinates thought he was too young and did not respect him. Li Yu immediately had the man whipped. Li Yu thought he was a genius.

古文：长乃辟佐于頔府。
现代文：长大才征召到于由页府中帮着干事。
English: He was only conscripted into the army when he was old enough to help officers in the middle of the war.

古文：吐突承璀讨王承宗，以听为神策行营兵马使。
现代文：吐突承璀征讨王承宗，任李听为神策军行营兵马使。
English: Tucu Chengyu enlisted Wang Chengzong, and Li He listened to him as an envoy of God's army.

古文：既战，斩贼骁将，宪宗壮之，诏图状以献。
现代文：战斗中，杀了叛军勇将，宪宗皇帝认为他很英勇，命令军中画他的图像献给朝廷。
English: During the battle, the rebels killed the brave general. Emperor Gensong thought he was very brave and ordered his image to be painted in the army and presented to the court.

古文：承璀数问听计，卒缚卢从史。
现代文：承璀多次向李听询问破敌的谋略，终于活捉了叛贼卢从史。
English: Cheng Yu repeatedly asked Li He about the strategy of defeating the enemy, and finally captured the traitor Lu Congshi alive.

古文：迁左骁卫将军，出为蔚州刺史。
现代文：升任左骁卫将军，出任蔚州刺史。
English: He was promoted to General Zuo Liwei, and served as the governor of Ulshu.

古文：州有铜冶，自天宝后废不治，民盗铸不禁。
现代文：蔚州有炼铜的作坊，自天宝年间就荒废不炼铜铸钱了。
English: There was a copper-smelting workshop in Ulshu, but it was abandoned in the Tenpo era.

古文：听乃开五炉，官铸钱日五万，人无犯者。
现代文：但百姓偷着炼铜铸钱没有人能禁止。李听就开了五个炼铜炉，官府每天铸五万钱，没有谁敢犯法私铸。
English: But no one can prohibit the people from stealing copper to make money. Li listened and opened five copper furnaces, and the government minted fifty thousand coins every day. No one dared to break the law and mint privately.

古文：徙安州。会观察使柳公绰方讨蔡，以听典军，一一咨之，声振贼中。
现代文：调安州，碰到观察使柳公绰正征讨蔡州的叛贼，用李听主持军务，不时向他询问计谋，声威震动叛军。
English: In An County, when he came across the observation that Liu Gongtuo was recruiting traitors in Cai County, he listened to Li to preside over military affairs, asked him about strategies from time to time, and shook the rebels with his voice.

古文：召为羽林将军。
现代文：召回朝任羽林将军。
English: The Imperial General Uirin is recalled.

古文：帝讨李师道，出听楚州刺史。
现代文：皇帝征讨李师道，令李听出任楚州刺史。
English: The emperor conscripted Li Shidao and made Li He serve as the governor of Chuzhou.

古文：淮西兵绵弱，郓人素易之。听日整勒，士皆奋。
现代文：淮南兵战斗力很弱，郓州人一向看不起他们，李听每天整训，将士都振奋起来，就是袭击叛军也不用担心不能作战。
English: Huainan soldiers are very weak in combat, and the people of Zhangzhou have always looked down on them. Li listened to the daily training, and the soldiers were excited. Even if they attacked the rebels, they did not have to worry about not being able to fight.

古文：即掩贼不虞，趋涟水，破沭阳，绝龙沮堰，遂取海州，攻朐山，降之，怀仁、东海两城望风送款。
现代文：进军涟水，占领沭阳，渡过龙沮堰，于是攻取了海州，进攻朐山，迫使守敌投降了。怀仁、东海两城望风归降。
English: They marched into Surabaya, occupied Poyang, and crossed Longshou Weir, and then captured Haizhou, attacked Shaoshan, and forced the defenders to surrender. Huairen and Donghai two cities surrendered.

古文：以功兼御史大夫，夏绥银宥节度使。
现代文：凭战功兼任御史大夫、夏绥银宥节度使。
English: By virtue of his war service, he also served as a goshi taifu (chief doctor of history) and a Xia Zhengyi jingduo (envoy of the emperor).

古文：又徙灵盐。
现代文：又调灵盐节度使。
English: It also adjusts the salt concentration.

古文：部有光禄渠，久廞废，听始复屯田以省转饷，即引渠溉塞下地千顷，后赖其饶。
现代文：辖境有光禄渠，已荒废很久，李听当初恢复屯田来省去转运粮饷时，就引渠水灌溉塞下土地一千顷，后来此地依靠这条渠富饶起来。
English: The jurisdiction has the Guanglu Canal, which has been abandoned for a long time. When Li Xun initially restored the farmland to save the transportation of grain, he diverted water from the canal to irrigate a thousand hectares of land. Later, the area became rich by relying on this canal.

古文：进检校工部尚书。
现代文：升任检校工部尚书。
English: He was promoted to the school inspection engineering department.

古文：穆宗初立，幽、镇反，择名臣节度太原者代裴度，使统兵北讨。
现代文：穆宗刚当皇帝，幽州、镇州反叛，挑选有威望的大臣任太原节度使代替裴度，统率部队向北征讨幽、镇两州。
English: Mu Zong had just become emperor when Yuzhou and Zhenzhou rebelled. He selected a prestigious minister, Taiyuan Jiedu, to replace Pei Jiedu, and led the troops to the north to conquer Yuzhou and Zhenzhou.

古文：始听为羽林时，有骏马，帝在东宫，使左右讽取之，听自以身宿卫，不敢献。
现代文：当初，李听当羽林将军时，有一匹骏马，皇帝当时是东宫太子，使左右的亲随劝李听，想占有这匹马。
English: At the beginning, when Li He listened to General Ulin, there was a good horse. The emperor was the crown prince of the Eastern Palace at that time, so the relatives on both sides persuaded Li He to want to possess this horse.

古文：于是帝曰： 李听往在军中，不与朕马，是必可任。 
现代文：李听自己认为身负警卫皇宫的重任，不敢献给太子。因此皇帝这时说： 李听昔日在羽林军中，不讲情面不给我马，这一定能胜任。 
English: Li Huan thought that he had the important duty of guarding the imperial palace and did not dare to offer it to the prince. Therefore, the emperor said at this time: Li Huan, in the past, in the Ulin Army, did not show mercy and did not give me a horse, this must be competent.

古文：乃授检校兵部尚书，充河东节度使。
现代文：于是任命他为检校兵部尚书，担任河东节度使。
English: As a result, he was appointed as the inspector of the school inspection military department, and served as the Hedong Festival envoy.

古文：敬宗嗣位，改义成军。
现代文：敬宗即位，改任义成军节度使。
English: Emperor Keizong ascended to the throne, and he was appointed as the regent of the Yicheng Army.

古文：太和初，讨李同捷，而魏博将丌志沼反，击其帅史宪诚，诏听出援，击杀志沼。以功封凉国公，拜一子五品官。
现代文：大和初年，征讨李同捷，但魏博镇将领丌志沼反叛，攻打他的统帅史宪诚，朝廷命令李听出兵救援史宪诚，李听攻杀志沼，因功封为凉国公，封他的一个儿子任五品官。
English: In the first year of the Yamato era, Li Tongjie was conscripted, but Wei Bo Town's general led the rebellion in Shishinuma and attacked his commander Shi Xiancheng. The imperial court ordered Li He to send soldiers to rescue Shi Xiancheng, and Li He to attack and kill Shishinuma. For his efforts, he was awarded the title of Prince of Liang Province, and one of his sons was awarded the title of Fifth Rank Officer.

古文：王廷凑之乱，诏听悉兵屯贝州，史宪诚惧听因取道袭之，衷甲候诸郊。
现代文：王廷凑叛乱，朝廷命令李听的全部兵力驻扎贝州，史宪诚惧怕李听趁上路时袭击他，就内穿甲衣在郊外迎候。
English: The king supported the rebellion, and the court ordered Li He's entire army to be stationed in Bozhou. Shi Xiancheng was afraid that Li He would attack him while he was on his way, so he put on his armor and waited for him in the suburbs.

古文：听敕士櫜兵野次，魏人乃安。
现代文：李听命令士兵收起武器在野外驻扎，魏州人才安定下来。
English: Li ordered the soldiers to put down their weapons and stay in the field, and the people of Weizhou settled down.

古文：宪诚既请朝，魏人怨，诏听兼帅魏博。
现代文：史宪诚后来请求回朝廷，魏州人怨恨，朝廷命令李听兼任魏博镇统帅。
English: Shi Xiancheng later requested to return to the imperial court, which was resented by the people of Weizhou, and the imperial court ordered Li He to also serve as the commander of Weibo Town.

古文：听迁延不即赴，魏遂乱，杀宪诚，共推大将何进滔乘城拒守。
现代文：李听拖延着不立即去魏州上任，魏州于是发生了叛乱，杀死了史宪诚，并且共推大将何进滔登城据守。
English: Li listened to the delay and did not immediately go to Weizhou to take office, and Weizhou then rebelled, killed Shi Xiancheng, and jointly promoted General He Jintao to defend the city.

古文：听不得入，乃屯馆陶。又不设备，魏人袭之，师惊溃，死失殆半，辎械尽弃之，听昼夜驰以免。
现代文：李听不能进城，就驻扎在陶馆，又不设防，魏州叛军袭击他，军队惊惶溃败，被杀死和散逃的差不多一半人，粮草和辎重都抛失了，李听昼夜奔逃脱险。
English: Li He could not enter the city, so he stationed himself in the Pottery Museum without setting up defenses. Wei rebels attacked him, and the army collapsed in panic. Almost half of the people were killed and scattered, and the grain, grass and straw were lost. Li He ran day and night to escape the danger.

古文：于是御史中丞温造等劾奏魏州乱，宪诚死，职繇于听，请论如法。
现代文：因此御史中丞温造等人弹劾说魏州叛乱，宪诚被杀死，是因为李听失职造成的，请求皇帝按法律治罪。
English: Therefore, the imperial historian Wen Zong and others impeached that the Weizhou rebellion and the killing of Xiancheng were caused by Li's dereliction of duty, and asked the emperor to punish the crime according to the law.

古文：天子不罪也，罢为太子少师。
现代文：天子没有治罪，罢免了他的节度使等职，降为太子少师。
English: Tianzi did not punish the crime, dismissed him from the position of the chief of the imperial guards, and reduced him to the position of the prince's apprentice.

古文：听素以赂遗得权幸心，故多为助力。
现代文：李听平时用贿赂手段获得了皇帝宠幸的权臣的欢心，所以这些人经常帮助他。
English: Li Xun usually bribed his way into the good graces of the emperor's favored officials, so they often helped him.

古文：未几，拜邠宁节度使。
现代文：不久，又任命为宁节度使。
English: Soon after, he was also appointed as the Ning Jiedu envoy.

古文：邠署相传不利治垣舍，前刺史视其坏，莫敢葺。
现代文：州衙门相传修房屋不利，前任剌史看到衙门损坏了也不敢修缮。
English: It is unfavorable for a prefectural governor to repair a house, and his predecessor did not dare to repair it when he saw that the governor's gate was damaged.

古文：听曰： 将出凿凶门，何避治署邪？ 
现代文：李听说 ：准备出去凿开凶门，怎么能避开不修理衙门呢！ 
English: Li Heard: Prepare to go out and chisel the evil door, how can you avoid not repairing the evil door!

古文：亟使完新之，卒无异。
现代文：很快将衙门修理一新，到底没有什么灾异发生。
English: The gate was quickly repaired, and nothing out of the ordinary happened.

古文：改帅武宁军。
现代文：改为统帅武宁军。
English: It was changed to Commander-in-Chief of the Wu Ning Army.

古文：有故奴为徐将，不喜听来，乃先杀亲吏之使徐者以沮听。
现代文：李听有个原先的奴仆当了徐州的将军，不喜欢李听来，就先杀掉李听出使徐州的亲随来阻止李听到任。
English: Li Heard that a former slave had become a general of Xuzhou. He did not like Li Heard, so he first killed Li Heard and made Xuzhou's relatives come to stop Li Heard.

古文：听果惧，以疾解，授太子少保。
现代文：李听果然害怕，以生病为借口解除职务，任为太子少保。
English: Li He was so scared that he used his illness as an excuse to be relieved of his duties and appointed as the crown prince's junior bodyguard.

古文：逾岁，节度凤翔，又徙陈许。
现代文：过了一年，任凤翔节度使，又调任陈许节度使。
English: A year later, he was appointed as Fengxiang Festival Envoy and then transferred to Chen Xu Festival Envoy.

古文：郑注摭其过，诏以太子太保分司东都。
现代文：郑注指责他的错误，朝廷任他为太子太保分司东都。
English: Zheng Zhu accused him of making a mistake, and the imperial court appointed him as the Crown Prince's personal bodyguard.

古文：开成初，为河中晋绛慈隰节度使。
现代文：开成初年，任河中晋绛慈隰节度使。
English: In the first year of Kaisei, he was appointed as an envoy of the Central Government of Japan.

古文：文宗叹曰： 付之兵不疑，退处散地不怨，惟听为可。 
现代文：文宗感叹说 ：交给他兵权不用猜疑，降职放在闲散的位置没有怨气，只有李听能做到。 
English: Wen Zong sighed and said, "There is no need to be suspicious when military power is handed over to him, and there is no grudge when he is demoted and placed in an idle position. Only Li He can do this."

古文：四年，以疾求还，复拜太子太保。
现代文：开成四年，因病请求回京城，又任太子太保。
English: In the fourth year of his reign, he requested to return to Kyoto due to illness, and was appointed Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：卒，年六十一，赠司徒。
现代文：死时享年六十一岁。追封为司徒。
English: He was sixty-one years old at the time of his death.

古文：听治官苛细，急揫敛，颇极所欲，盛饰车马服玩。
现代文：李听做官严酷琐细，横征暴敛，极力享乐，坐装饰豪华的车马，穿华丽的衣服，玩精美的物品。
English: Li listened to the officials' strict trivialities, extorted, and enjoyed himself as much as he could. He rode in a luxurious car, wore gorgeous clothes, and played with exquisite objects.

古文：或诫之，听曰： 家声在人，若示衰薄，恐不见忠功之效，吾欲夸而劝之也。 
现代文：有人告诫他，李听说 ：家庭的名声在于人，如果显得衰穷，担心不能显示功臣的荣耀，我想夸耀并鼓励它。 
English: Someone admonished him, Li Heard: The reputation of the family lies in the people, if it appears poor, I am afraid that I cannot show the glory of the hero, I want to boast and encourage it.

古文：好方书，择其验者，题于帷帟墙屋皆满。
现代文：喜欢医书，选择那些灵验的医方，在帷幕墙壁上都写满了。
English: Like a doctor's book, the choice of the most effective treatment is written all over the curtain walls.

古文：听子琢，以家阀擢累义昌、平卢、镇海三节度使，无显功，不为士大夫称道。
现代文：李听的儿子李琢，因是功勋家族提拔多次，官至义昌、平卢、镇海三镇节度使，没有大功，不被士大夫称道。
English: Li He's son, Li Tuo, was promoted many times because he was from a meritorious family. He served as an official to the three towns of Yichang, Pinglu, and Zhenhai, but he did not do much and was not praised by the shidafu.

古文：数免复迁。
现代文：多次免官又复职。
English: Repeatedly dismissed and reinstated.

古文：广明时，沙陀数盗边，于是琢为宿将，拜检校尚书右仆射，蔚朔等州招讨、都统、行营节度使。徙河阳三城，坐逗挠，下迁刺史，卒。
现代文：广明年间，沙陀族多次侵犯边境，因为李琢是老将，任命为检校尚书右仆射，蔚、朔等州招讨、都统、行营节度使，调河阳三城，因观望避战而犯错误，降为刺史，病故。
English: During the Guangyuan era, the Shatou people repeatedly violated the border, because Li Tuo was a veteran, he was appointed as the inspector of the school, the right-hand man, the right-hand man, the right-hand man, the right-hand man, the right-hand man, the right-hand man, the right-hand man, the right-hand man, the right-hand man, the right-hand man, the right-hand man, the right-hand man, the right-hand man, the right-hand man, the right-hand man, the right-hand man, the right-hand man, the right-hand man, the right-hand

古文：王佖者，晟之甥，武敢，闲骑射。
现代文：王佖是李晟的外甥，威武果敢，骑术、箭术娴熟。
English: Wang Qian is the nephew of Li Qian. He is strong and brave, and is skilled in horsemanship and archery.

古文：晟在师，佖无不从。
现代文：李晟在军队里，王佖没有哪次不随军作战。
English: Li Yao was in the army, and Wang Yao never did not fight with the army.

古文：攻硃泚于光泰门，贼方锐，佖与李演鏖战蹀血，贼数北，诸军乘之，遂大振。以功擢神策将。
现代文：在京城光泰门进攻叛贼朱氵此，叛军锐气正盛、王佖与李演喋血鏖战。叛军多次败退，各路部队乘机进攻，于是军威大振，因为立功升为神策军将领。
English: The rebels attacked the traitor Zhu Xi at the Guangtai Gate in Beijing. The rebels were in high spirits, and Wang Xi and Li Yan fought a bloody battle. The rebels were defeated many times, and all the troops took the opportunity to attack. As a result, the military power was greatly boosted, and because of his meritorious service, he was promoted to the general of the Shenzhao Army.

古文：击吐蕃有功。
现代文：抗击吐蕃有战功。
English: Anti-vomiting maggots have war merit.

古文：晟视佖与子姓等，其给与过之。
现代文：李晟把王佖与儿子们一样看待，给他的爱护还要超过儿子们。
English: Li Yao treated Wang Yao the same as his sons, and gave him more love than his sons.

古文：晟兵罢，佖亦不见用，召为左卫上将军。
现代文：李晟被削了兵权后，王佖也不被重用，召回朝任左卫上将军。
English: After Li Yao was stripped of his military powers, Wang Yao was not reused either, and was recalled to the imperial court to serve as Admiral of the Left Division.

古文：元和中，拜朔方、灵盐节度使。
现代文：元和年间，任命为朔方灵盐节度使。
English: During the Yuan and Heian period, he was appointed as the envoy of the Shuo Fangling Salt Festival.

古文：吐蕃欲作乌兰桥以过师，积材河曲，朔方府常遣兵发其木，委于河，故莫能成。
现代文：吐蕃想造乌兰桥让军队通行，在河曲屯积木材，朔方府常派兵搬走木材，丢到河里冲走，所以吐蕃修桥没有成功。
English: Tubo wanted to build the Ulan Bridge to allow the army to pass, and accumulated timber in the river bend. Shuo Fangfu often sent soldiers to remove the timber and throw it into the river, so Tubo did not succeed in repairing the bridge.

古文：及佖至，虏知其寡谋，乃厚赂之而亟遂功，筑月城以守。自是虏岁入为寇，朔方乘障不暇，人以咎佖。
现代文：到王佖上任，吐蕃军知道他有勇无谋，就用厚礼贿赂他，接着很快架起桥，并筑起月城守桥，从此以后，吐蕃军每年都侵犯边境，朔方军守塞都应付不暇，百姓归罪于王佖。
English: When Wang Qian took office, the Tubo army knew that he was brave and reckless, so they bribed him with a heavy gift, and then quickly erected a bridge and built the Yuecheng bridge. Since then, the Tubo army has violated the border every year, and the Shuo army has no time to deal with it, and the people blame Wang Qian.

古文：在镇检下亡术，猜忌多杀人。
现代文：在节度使任上管理部属没有谋略，猜忌并杀了很多的人。
English: During the festival, the subordinates of the management department did not have a strategy, suspected and killed a lot of people.

古文：召还为右卫将军。
现代文：召回朝任右卫将军。
English: The Imperial General of the Right Division was recalled.

古文：故事，将相除徙，皆内出制，故号 白麻 ；至佖，以责罢，遂中书进制。
现代文：按先例，将相升降职，都是皇帝内廷发布任免命令，所以号称 白麻 书。至王佖因为失职罢官，就由中书省下令免职。
English: According to the precedent, the promotion and demotion of officials were all issued by the Emperor's Inner Court, so they were known as Bai Ma Shi. When Wang Xi was dismissed for dereliction of duty, the Ministry of the People's Republic of China issued an order to dismiss him.

古文：久之，卒。
现代文：过了很久，王佖病死。
English: After a long time, Wang Yao died of illness.

