古文：诸夷海南诸国东夷西北诸戎海南诸国，大抵在交州南及西南大海洲上，相去近者三五千里，远者二三万里，其西与西域诸国接。
现代文：海南各国，大抵在交州南边以及西南大海的大岛上，各国之间近的相距三五千里，远的相距达二三万里。西边的国家与西域各国接壤。
English: The countries of Hainan are mostly in the south of Jiaozhou and on the large island in the southwest sea. The distance between the countries is close to 35,000 miles, and the distance is as far as 230,000 miles. The countries in the west have borders with the countries in the western region.

古文：汉元鼎中，遣伏波将军路博德开百越，置日南郡。
现代文：汉朝曾在元鼎年间派伏波将军路博德开发百越，设置日南郡。
English: During the reign of the Yuan Dynasty, the Han Dynasty sent Lu Baode, a general from Fubo Province, to develop Baiyue and establish Nichinan County.

古文：其徼外诸国，自武帝以来皆朝贡。
现代文：那些边塞之外的国家，从汉武帝在位以来，都派使者前来朝觐，进献贡品。
English: Since the reign of Emperor Hanwu, those countries outside the border fortress have all sent emissaries to come to the hajj and offer tributes.

古文：后汉桓帝世，大秦、天竺皆由此道遣使贡献。
现代文：后漠桓帝年间，大秦、天竺等国都顺着造条道路派使者前来进献贡品。
English: During the reign of Emperor Houmu, countries such as Daqin and Tianzhu sent emissaries along the road to offer tribute.

古文：及吴孙权时，遣宣化从事硃应、中郎康泰通焉。
现代文：吴孙权派宣化从事朱应、中郎康泰和那些国家交往。
English: Wu Sun Quan's Xuanhua engaged Zhu Ying and Zhong Lang Kangtai in exchanges with those countries.

古文：其所经及传闻，则有百数十国，因立记传。
现代文：他们到达遇的国家以及听说过的国家，共有一百几十个，因此就把这些国家写进了传记。
English: There are a hundred and twenty countries that they have encountered and heard about, so they write these countries into their biographies.

古文：晋代通中国者盖鲜，故不载史官。
现代文：到晋代，这些国家和中国交往的很少，所以史官的书中没有记载。
English: By the Jin Dynasty, these countries had little contact with China, so there is no record of it in the historian's book.

古文：及宋、齐，至者有十余国，始为之传。
现代文：到宋代、齐代，有十余个国家派遣使者到来，于是就为这些国家写了传。
English: In the Song and Qi dynasties, more than ten countries sent emissaries to China, so he wrote biographies for these countries.

古文：自梁革运，其奉正朔，修贡职，航海岁至，逾于前代矣。
现代文：从梁承继天运以后，归服梁、采用梁朝历法、交纳贡品、每年都渡海前来朝觐的国家，数量超过以前朝代。
English: The number of countries that have submitted to the Liang Dynasty, adopted the Liang Dynasty calendar, paid tribute, and come to the sea for the annual pilgrimage since the Liang Dynasty succeeded the Heaven's Fortune has exceeded that of previous dynasties.

古文：今采其风俗粗著者，缀为《海南传》云。
现代文：现在收集那些风俗为人们所了解的一些国家的情况，编撰成为《海南传》。
English: Now, we are collecting the information of some countries whose customs are known to people, and compiling it into "Hainan Biography."

古文：林邑国者，本汉日南郡象林县，古越裳之界也。
现代文：林邑国，就是原来的汉朝南郡象林县，即是古代越裳的地界。
English: Lin'e County is the original southern county of the Han Dynasty, Xianglin County, which is the ancient land boundary of Yuexiao.

古文：伏波将军马援开汉南境，置此县。
现代文：伏波将军马援开发汉南部边境，设置象林县。
English: General Ma Yuan of Fubo Province developed the southern border of Han and set up Xianglin County.

古文：其地纵广可六百里，城去海百二十里，去日南界四百余里，北接九德郡。
现代文：象林县土地纵横大约六百里，县城离海一百二十里，距日南郡边界四百余里，北和九德郡接壤。
English: The land of Xianglin County has a length and width of about six hundred miles, the county seat is one hundred and twenty miles from the sea, more than four hundred miles from the border of Nichinan County, and the north is bordered by Jiude County.

古文：其南界，水步道二百余里，有西国夷亦称王，马援植两铜柱表汉界处也。
现代文：从县的南部边界再往南去，大约经过水路陆路二百余里，有个西国，夷人在那裹也称王，那正是马援树立两根铜柱标明汉朝边界的地方。
English: From the southern border of the county to the south, about 200 miles by water and land, there is a West Country, where the barbarians are also kings, and that is where Ma Yuan set up two copper pillars to mark the border of the Han Dynasty.

古文：其国有金山，石皆赤色，其中生金。金夜则出飞，状如萤火。
现代文：林邑国有金山，山上石头都是红色，石头中有金，金在夜晚就从石头中飞出来，形状如同萤火。
English: There is a gold mine in Lin County. The stones on the mountain are all red. There is gold in the stones. The gold flies out of the stones at night and is shaped like a firefly.

古文：又出玳瑁、贝齿、吉贝、沉木香。
现代文：又出产玳瑁、贝齿、吉贝、沉木香。
English: It also produces oyster, shellfish tooth, jibe and agarwood incense.

古文：吉贝者，树名也，其华成时如鹅毳，抽其绪纺之以作布，洁白与籥布不殊，亦染成五色，织为斑布也。
现代文：吉贝是一种树的名称，它的花开放时如同鹅的绒毛，抽出花的丝絮可以纺纱织布，布色洁白，与贮布没有差别，也可以染成五色，织成斑布。
English: Jibei is the name of a tree. When its flowers open, they look like the down of a goose. The silk fluff from the flowers can be spun into a woven fabric. The color of the fabric is pure white, no different from the storage cloth. It can also be dyed into five colors and woven into a zebra fabric.

古文：沉木者，土人斫断之，积以岁年，朽烂而心节独在，置水中则沉，故名曰沉香。
现代文：当地土人把沉木斫断，积放多年，沉木外边腐烂，但木心木节却依然存留，放在水中就会沉下去，所以称做沉香。
English: The local natives cut off the dead wood and stored it for many years. The outside of the dead wood rots, but the heartwood is still preserved. If it is placed in water, it will sink, so it is called agarwood.

古文：次不沉不浮者，曰祼香也。
现代文：次一等的沉木不沉也不浮起，就称做筏香。
English: The next highest, which does not sink and does not float, is called musk.

古文：汉末大乱，功曹区达，杀县令自立为王。
现代文：汉朝末年发生大的动乱，功曹区达杀死象林县县令，自立为王，改称林邑国。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, a great turmoil occurred. Gong Cao Qu Da killed the county magistrate of Xianglin County and became the king himself. It was renamed Lin's County.

古文：传数世，其后王无嗣，立外甥范熊。
现代文：王位传了几代，后来一位国王没有后嗣继位，于是立外甥范能为王。
English: The throne was passed down through several generations. Later, a king had no heir to succeed to the throne, so he appointed his nephew, Fan Jian, as king.

古文：熊死，子逸嗣。
现代文：范熊死，他儿子范逸继位。
English: Fan Xiong died and was succeeded by his son Fan Yi.

古文：晋成帝咸康三年，逸死，奴文篡立。
现代文：晋成帝咸康三年，范逸死，范家家奴范文篡位为王。
English: Three years after the enthronement of Emperor Hamkang, Fan Yi died, and Fan Jiajian and Fan Wen usurped the throne.

古文：文本日南西卷县夷帅范稚家奴，常牧牛于山涧，得鳢鱼二头，化而为铁，因以铸刀。
现代文：范文本来是日南西卷县夷帅范稚的家奴，他曾经在山涧中牧牛，捕得两条鳢鱼，鳢鱼变成两块铁，范文就用这铁打铸刀。
English: Fan Wen was originally a domestic slave of Yizhuai Fan Zhi, who lived in Nichinan Xizhuan County. He used to herd cattle in the mountains and caught two eels. The eels turned into two pieces of iron, and Fan Wen used the iron to make a casting knife.

古文：铸成，文向石而咒曰： 若斫石破者，文当王此国。 
现代文：铸成刀之后，范文对着一块石头而祝告说： 假如造刀能斫破石头，我范文就将要在这地方称王。 
English: After the sword was cast, Fan Wen looked up at a stone and said, "If I could make a sword that could cut through stone, I, Fan Wen, would be king of this place."

古文：因举刀斫石，如断刍藁，文心独异之。
现代文：祝告之后范文就举起刀来砍斫石头，就像砍柴草那样，坚硬的石头被范文用刀砍成一块一块的。
English: After the greetings, Fan Wen raised his knife to cut the stones. Just like cutting firewood, the hard stones were cut into pieces by Fan Wen.

古文：范稚常使之商贾至林邑，因教林邑王作宫室及兵车器械，王宠任之。
现代文：范文心中感到非常奇异。范稚曾经派范文到林邑国经商，范文就教林邑王建造宫室、制造兵车器械，林邑王很宠信范文，授以重任。
English: Fan Wen felt very strange in his heart. Fan Zhi had sent Fan Wen to Linyi Province to do business. Fan Wen taught Linyi King to build a palace and manufacture chariot equipment. Linyi King was very fond of Fan Wen and gave him important tasks.

古文：后乃谗王诸子，各奔余国。
现代文：后来范文就谗害林邑王的王子们，使他们都各自逃亡到别的国家。
English: Later, Fan Wen plotted to kill the princes of King Lin, and they all fled to other countries.

古文：及王死无嗣，文伪于邻国迓王子，置毒于浆中而杀之，遂胁国人自立。
现代文：林邑王死后，没有人继位，范文假装到邻国去迎接王子继位，却在水浆中放毒把王子们都害死，范文于是就胁迫林邑国之人立自己为王。
English: After the death of King Lin-yi, there was no successor. Fan Wen pretended to go to a neighboring country to welcome the prince's succession, but put poison in the water to kill the princes. Fan Wen then coerced the people of Lin-yi to establish himself as king.

古文：举兵攻旁小国，皆吞灭之，有众四五万人。
现代文：范文立为王以后，就发兵攻打四周的小国，把它们全都消灭吞并，有了军卒四五万人。
English: After Fan Wen became king, he sent troops to attack the surrounding small countries, annihilated and annexed them all, and gained 450,000 soldiers.

古文：时交州刺史姜庄使所亲韩戢、谢稚，前后监日南郡，并贪残，诸国患之。
现代文：当时交州刺史姜庄派自己的亲信韩戢、谢稚先后监日南郡，他俩在任都很贪婪残暴，各国都为此忧虑重重。
English: At that time, Jiangzhuang, the governor of Jiaozhou, sent his cronies Han Min and Xie Zhi to supervise Nichinan County. Both of them were greedy and cruel in office, and all countries were worried about this.

古文：穆帝永和三年，台遣夏侯览为太守，侵刻尤甚。
现代文：晋穆帝永和，朝廷派夏侯览任太守，夏侯览侵害百姓特别厉害。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jinmu and Emperor Yonghe, the imperial court appointed Xia Houzhan as the de facto ruler. Xia Houzhan was particularly cruel to the common people.

古文：林邑先无田土，贪日南地肥沃，常欲略有之，至是，因民之怨，遂举兵袭日南，杀览，以其尸祭天。
现代文：林邑国原先没有田地，贪求日台娶土地肥沃，常常想掠夺占据日南郡。到这时候，林邑国藉着百姓的怨恨情绪，发兵袭击曰南郡，杀死夏侯览，用夏侯览的尸首祭天。
English: Originally, Lin County did not have any fields. It coveted fertile land from Japan and Taiwan, and often wanted to plunder and occupy Nichinan County. At this time, Lin County, through the resentment of the people, sent troops to attack Nichinan County, killed Xia Houxiang, and used Xia Houxiang's corpse to sacrifice to the heavens.

古文：留日南三年，乃还林邑。
现代文：林邑国的军队在日南郡驻留了三年，才返回林邑。
English: The army of Lin-eup stayed in Nichinan County for three years before returning to Lin-eup.

古文：交州刺史硃籓后遣督护刘雄戍日南，文复屠灭之。
现代文：交州刺史朱藩后来又派督护刘雄戍守曰南郡，范文又派兵屠戮杀害了刘雄。
English: Later, the Zhu clan of Jiaozhou sent Liu Xiong to guard Nan County, and Fan Wen sent soldiers to massacre and kill Liu Xiong.

古文：进寇九德郡，残害吏民。
现代文：范文又进犯九德郡，残害那裹的官员和百姓。
English: Fan Wen also invaded Jiude County, killing officials and people there.

古文：遣使告籓，愿以日南北境横山为界，籓不许，又遣督护陶缓、李衢讨之。文归林邑，寻复屯日南。
现代文：范文又派使者告诉朱藩，自己愿意以曰南郡北境横山为边界，朱藩不答应，又派督护陶缓、李衢进讨范文，范文返回林邑，不久又驻军日南郡。
English: Fan Wen also sent an envoy to tell the Zhu clan that he was willing to set the northern border of Zhannan County at Hengshan as the border. The Zhu clan did not agree, and also sent the superintendents Tao Xuan and Li Yujin to discuss with Fan Wen. Fan Wen returned to Linyi, and soon stationed troops in Nichinan County.

古文：五年，文死，子佛立，犹屯日南。
现代文：永和五年，范文死，他的儿子范佛立为王，范佛还是驻军在日南郡。
English: In the fifth year of Yonghe, Fan Wen died, and his son Fan Fo became king. Fan Fo was still stationed in Nichinan County.

古文：征西将军桓温遣督护滕畯、九真太守灌邃帅交、广州兵讨之，佛婴城固守。
现代文：征西将军桓温派督护滕唆、九真太守灌邃率领交州、广州的兵马进讨范佛，范佛环城固守。
English: The general of the Western Conquest, Kuan Wen, sent the superintendent and protector, Teng Yan, and the governor of Jiu Zhen, Guan Yu, to lead the soldiers and horses from Jiaozhou and Guangzhou to attack Fan Buddha, and Fan Buddha Ring City was firmly defended.

古文：邃令畯盛兵于前，邃帅劲卒七百人，自后逾垒而入，佛众惊溃奔走，邃追至林邑，佛乃请降。
现代文：灌邃就命滕峻在正面布置很多军队佯作进攻之势，灌邃自己率领七百名精锐士卒从城后翻过营垒进城，范佛的士兵因而惊慌溃逃，灌邃一直追击到林邑，范佛于是请求投降。
English: Dang Rong ordered Teng Rong to deploy a large number of troops at the front to prepare for an attack. Dang Rong himself led seven hundred elite soldiers to enter the city from the rear of the city, overturned the barricade, and Fan Fo's soldiers panicked and fled. Dang Rong chased them all the way to Lin Eup, whereupon Fan Fo asked for surrender.

古文：哀帝升平初，复为寇暴，刺史温放之讨破之。
现代文：晋穆帝升平初年，林邑国又进犯边境，侵害百姓，刺史温放之进讨，击败了林邑国来犯的军队。
English: In the first year of Emperor Jinmu's ascension to the throne, Lin County invaded the border again, infringed on the people, and defeated the invading army of Lin County.

古文：安帝隆安三年，佛孙须达复寇日南，执太守炅源，又进寇九德，执太守曹炳。
现代文：晋安帝隆安三年，范佛之孙范须达又进犯曰南郡，捉住太守炅源，又进犯九德郡，捉住太守曹炳。
English: In the third year of Emperor Yongan of the Jin Dynasty, Fan Suda, the grandson of Fan Buddha, once again invaded Nan County and captured the governor of Suyuan, and once again invaded Jiude County and captured the governor of Cao Pi.

古文：交趾太守杜瑗遣都护邓逸等击破之，即以瑗为刺史。
现代文：交趾太守杜瑗派都护邓逸等击败林邑国的军队，朝廷就命杜瑗为交州刺史。
English: When Emperor Jiaozuo's grand marshal, Du Xi, who was a follower of Deng Yu, defeated the army of Lin County, the imperial court ordered Du Xi to write the history of Jiaozuo.

古文：义熙三年，须达复寇日南，杀长史，瑗遣海逻督护阮斐讨破之，斩获甚众。
现代文：义熙三年。范须达又进犯日南郡，杀死长史，杜瑗派海运督护阮斐进讨，击败林邑国的军队，杀死和俘获很多人。
English: In the third year of Yixi, Fan Suda invaded Nichinan County again, killed Changshi, and sent Du Yu to escort Nguyen Fei Jin to defeat the army of Lin County, killing and capturing many people.

古文：九年，须达复寇九真，行郡事杜慧期与战，斩其息交龙王甄知及其将范健等，生俘须达息冉阝能，及虏获百余人。
现代文：义熙九年，范须达又进犯九真郡，行郡事杜慧期与范须达交战，杀死范须达之子交龙王范甄知及范须达的将领范健等人，活捉范须达的儿子范邮能，俘虏一百余人。
English: In the ninth year of Yixi, Fan Suda invaded Jiuzhen County again, and fought with Fan Suda during the county affairs Duhui period. He killed Fan Suda's son, the Dragon King Fan Zhenzhi, and Fan Suda's general Fan Jian and others, and captured Fan Suda's son, Fan Po Neng, alive. More than one hundred people were captured.

古文：自瑗卒后，林邑无岁不寇日南、九德诸郡，杀荡甚多，交州遂致虚弱。
现代文：杜瑗死后，林邑国没有一年不进犯日南、九德等郡，杀伤很多人，交州于是力量虚弱。
English: After Du Xuan's death, Lin's state did not go a year without invading Nichinan, Jiude and other counties, killing and wounding many people. As a result, Jiaozhou became weak.

古文：须达死，子敌真立，其弟敌铠携母出奔。
现代文：范须达死后，他的儿子范敌真立为王，范敌真的弟弟范敌钟携带母亲出逃。
English: After the death of Fan Su Da, his son Fan Zhizhen became king. Fan Zhizhen's younger brother, Fan Zhizhen Zhong, fled with his mother.

古文：敌真追恨不能容其母弟，舍国而之天竺，禅位于其甥，国相藏膋固谏不从。
现代文：范敌真因为不能容下母亲和弟弟而追悔，于是就放弃国家去天竺，把王位惮让给自己的外甥，国相藏辚坚决劝谏，范敌真不听从。
English: Fan Jizhen repented because he could not tolerate his mother and younger brother, so he gave up the country and went to Tianyao, and gave up the throne to his nephew. The minister of state strongly advised him, but Fan Jizhen did not listen.

古文：其甥既立而杀藏膋，藏膋子又攻杀之，而立敌铠同母异父之弟曰文敌。
现代文：范敌真之甥立为王之后就杀了藏辚，藏膦之子又攻杀范敌真之甥，而立范敌钟同母异父之弟范文敌为王。
English: After Fan Zhizhen's nephew became king, he killed Zanglu, and Zanglu's son attacked and killed Fan Zhizhen's nephew, and installed Fan Zhizhen's half-brother Fan Wenzhong as king.

古文：文敌后为扶南王子当根纯所杀，大臣范诸农平其乱，而自立为王。
现代文：范文敌后来被扶南王之子当根纯杀死，大臣范诸农平定本国的内乱，自立为王。
English: Fan Wen's enemy was later killed by the son of the King of Funan, Dang Gen Chun. Minister Fan Zhu Nong quelled the civil unrest in his country and became king.

古文：诸农死，子阳迈立。
现代文：范诸农死，他儿子范阳遭立为王。
English: Fan Zhunong died, and his son Fan Yang was made king.

古文：宋永初二年，遣使贡献，以阳迈为林邑王。
现代文：宋永初二年，林邑国派遣使者奉献贡品，宋即以范阳迈为林邑王。
English: In the second year of Song Yongchun, Linyi sent an envoy to offer tribute, and Song took Fan Yangmai as the king of Linyi.

古文：阳迈死，子咄立，慕其父，复曰阳迈。
现代文：范阳迈死，他儿子范咄立为王，因为思慕自己的父亲，所以又改名为范阳遭。
English: When Fan Yangmai died, his son Fan Yi became king. Because he missed his father, he changed his name to Fan Yangbin.

古文：其国俗：居处为阁，名曰于兰，门户皆北向；书树叶为纸；男女皆以横幅吉贝绕腰以下，谓之干漫，亦曰都缦；穿耳贯小镮；贵者著革屣，贱者跣行。
现代文：林邑国的习俗：居住的地方建造楼阁，称做于阑，门窗都朝北；把树叶当纸用来写字；男男女女都用横幅的吉贝布缠绕腰以下，称做干漫，也叫做都缦；在耳朵上穿孔佩戴小刨；尊贵的人穿皮做的鞋，贫贱的人赤脚走路。
English: The customs of Lin's country: the place of residence is built into a mansion, known as a yakitori, and the doors and windows all face north; leaves are used as paper for writing; men and women are wrapped around the waist with a banner called a jibe cloth, also known as a tudo; small shovels are pierced on the ears; the nobles wear shoes made of leather, and the poor walk barefoot.

古文：自林邑、扶南以南诸国皆然也。
现代文：林邑、扶南以南的各国风俗都是这样。
English: The customs of all countries south of Lin'eup and Funan are like this.

古文：其王著法服，加璎珞，如佛像之饰。
现代文：林邑国王穿尊贵的礼服，佩戴珠玉穿系而成的颈饰，和佛像的颈饰相同。
English: The king of Linyi wears a noble dress and a necklace made of beads, the same as the necklace of the Buddha statue.

古文：出则乘象，吹螺击鼓，罩吉贝伞，以吉贝为幡旗。
现代文：国王出外乘坐大象，随从吹螺击鼓，国王头上方罩着用吉贝布制成的伞，幡旗也是用吉贝布制作。
English: The king rides on an elephant when he is out and about, his attendants play the drums, and an umbrella made of jibe cloth is placed over the king's head. The flag is also made of jibe cloth.

古文：国不设刑法，有罪者使象踏杀之。
现代文：林邑国不设刑法，有罪的人就让大象把他踩死。
English: Lin County does not have a criminal law, and the guilty person is trampled to death by elephants.

古文：其大姓号婆罗门。
现代文：国中贵族称为婆罗门。
English: The nobles of the country are called Brahmins.

古文：嫁娶必用八月，女先求男，由贱男而贵女也。
现代文：林邑国嫁娶之事一定在八月进行，女子先找男子，造好比是看轻男人，看重女子。
English: In Lin's country, marriage must take place in August. Women look for men first, which is a metaphor for looking down on men and valuing women.

古文：同姓还相婚姻，使婆罗门引婿见妇，握手相付，咒曰 吉利吉利 ，以为成礼。
现代文：同姓可以互相通婚。结婚时叫婆逻旦牵着新郎去见新娘，把他们的手互相递交后让他们相握，然后祝告说 吉利吉利 ，这样就完成了婚礼。
English: People with the same surname can marry each other. At the time of marriage, the bridegroom is asked to take the groom to meet the bride, hand them to each other and let them hold each other, and then say "Giligili," thus completing the wedding.

古文：死者焚之中野，谓之火葬。
现代文：人死后在野外焚烧尸体，这叫做火葬。
English: When a person dies and their body is burned in the open air, this is called cremation.

古文：其寡妇孤居，散发至老。
现代文：那裹的寡妇单独居住，头发披散，直至死去。
English: The shrouded widow lived alone, her hair disheveled, until she died.

古文：国王事尼乾道，铸金银人像，大十围。
现代文：国王事奉尼干道，用金银铸造人像，人像身子有十围粗。
English: The king served the way of Nicanor, and made a statue of him out of gold and silver. The statue's body was ten times as thick.

古文：元嘉初，阳迈侵暴日南、九德诸郡，交州刺史杜弘文建牙欲讨之，闻有代乃止。
现代文：元嘉初年，范阳迈侵犯掠暴日南、九德等郡，交州刺史杜弘文这调拨军队想要进讨范阳迈，他听到有人替代自己的职务就停止了行动。
English: In the first year of Yuan Jia, Fan Yangmai invaded and plundered the counties of Nichinan, Jiude and other counties, and Jiaozhou sent troops to attack Fan Yangmai. When Du Hongwen heard that someone had replaced his position, he stopped the action.

古文：八年，又寇九德郡，入四会浦口，交州刺史阮弥之遣队主相道生帅兵赴讨，攻区栗城不克，乃引还。
现代文：元嘉八年，又进犯九德郡，入四会浦口，交州刺史阮弥之派队主相道生率兵赶去征讨，进攻区栗城，没有攻下，相道生于是率兵返回。
English: In the eighth year of Yuan Jia, he also invaded Jiude County, entered the Fourth Hui Pukou, and the leader of the team, Xiang Daosheng, who was sent by Jiaozhou Shishi Ruan Ya, rushed to recruit soldiers, attacked the area of Li Cheng, but did not capture it, so Xiang Daosheng returned with his soldiers.

古文：尔后频年遣使贡献，而寇盗不已。
现代文：这以后，林邑国连年派遣使者进献贡品，但进犯掠夺也从不停止。
English: After that, Lin's country sent emissaries to bring in tribute year after year, but the invasion and plunder never stopped.

古文：二十三年，使交州刺史檀和之、振武将军宗悫伐之。
现代文：二十三年，朝廷派交州刺史檀和之、振武将军宗悫去讨伐。
English: In 233, the imperial court sent Jiaozhou's top generals, Tan He and Zhenwu, to fight.

古文：和之遣司马萧景宪为前锋，阳迈闻之惧，欲输金一万斤，银十万斤，还所略日南民户，其大臣幰僧达谏止之，乃遣大帅范扶龙戍其北界区栗城。
现代文：和之遣司马萧景宪为前锋，范阳迈听到这消息，十分害怕，想要献纳金一万斤，银十万斤，归还抢掠的曰南郡百姓。因他手下的大臣苇僧达谏劝而停下了，于是就派大帅范扶龙防守林邑北部边界的区栗城。
English: When Fan Yangmai heard this news, he was very afraid and wanted to donate 10,000 catties of gold and 100,000 catties of silver to return the looted money to the people of South County. However, he was dissuaded by his subordinate minister, Zangzang Dajun, and he sent his general Fan Guolong to defend Li Cheng, a district on the northern border of Linyi.

古文：景宪攻城，克之，斩扶龙首，获金银杂物，不可胜计。
现代文：景宪攻城，攻下了城，斩下范扶龙的首级，缴获金银和其他物品，数都数不尽。
English: Jing Xian attacked the city, captured the city, cut off the head of Fan Fulong, seized gold and silver and other items, and the list is endless.

古文：乘胜径进，即克林邑。
现代文：檀和之乘胜一直前进，于是攻下了林邑。
English: Danwa's victory kept moving forward, so he captured Lin's village.

古文：阳迈父子并挺身逃奔。
现代文：范阳迈父子都抛下家小逃跑。
English: Fan Yangmai and his son left their home and fled.

古文：获其珍异，皆是未名之宝。
现代文：檀和之缴获林邑的珍奇异物，都是些不知名的宝物。
English: The rare and exotic objects seized from Lin-yi by Tan-he are all unknown treasures.

古文：又销其金人，得黄金数十万斤。
现代文：檀和之又销毁林邑国铸造的金人，得到黄金数十万斤。
English: In addition, he destroyed the golden man cast by Linyi Province and obtained hundreds of thousands of pounds of gold.

古文：和之后病死，见胡神为祟。
现代文：后来檀和之见到胡人的鬼怪作祟，因而病死。
English: Later, when Tanazu saw the ghost of Hujin haunting him, he fell ill and died.

古文：孝武建元、大明中，林邑王范神成累遣长史奉表贡献。
现代文：宋孝武帝孝建、大明年间，林邑王范神成多次派遣长史呈奏表章，进献贡品。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Xiaojian and Emperor Taizong of the Song and Wu dynasties, King Fan Shengcheng of Linyi dispatched Changshi several times to present the medal and offer tribute.

古文：明帝泰豫元年，又遣使献方物。
现代文：宋明帝泰豫元年，林邑王又派遣使者进献当地特产。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Song of the Ming Dynasty, King Lin sent an envoy to present local special products.

古文：齐永明中，范文赞累遣使贡献。
现代文：齐永明年间，范文赞多次派遣使者献纳贡品。
English: During the reign of Qianlong Emperor, Fan Wenzan repeatedly sent emissaries to offer tribute.

古文：天监九年，文赞子天凯奉献白猴，诏曰： 林邑王范天凯介在海表，乃心款至，远修职贡，良有可嘉。
现代文：天监九年，范文赞之子范天凯向梁朝高祖奉献白猴，高祖下诏说： 林邑王范天凯远在海外，但诚心款服，远远地献来贡品，实在可嘉。
English: In the ninth year of Tianjun, Fan Tiankai, the son of Fan Wenzan, dedicated a white monkey to Liang Chao Gao Zu. Gao Zu issued an edict saying: Lin Yi Wang Fan Tiankai is far away overseas, but it is truly commendable for him to come from afar to pay tribute.

古文：宜班爵号，被以荣泽。
现代文：应当赐给他爵位和封号，给予他荣耀和恩泽。
English: Let there be given to him a title and a title, and let there be given to him honour and glory.

古文：可持节、督缘海诸军事、威南将军、林邑王。 
现代文：应当任用他为持节、督缘海诸军事、威南将军、林邑王。 
English: He should be appointed as Jisetsu, the military governor of the sea, the general of Vinan, and the king of Linyi.

古文：十年、十三年，天凯累遣使献方物。
现代文：天监十年，十三年，范天凯又多次派使者献纳当地特产。
English: In the thirteenth year of the 10th year of Tianjun, Fan Tiankai repeatedly sent emissaries to offer local special products.

古文：俄而病死，子弼毳跋摩立，奉表贡献。
现代文：范天凯不久病死，他的儿子弼毳跋摩立为王，又向梁上表章献纳贡品。
English: Fan Tiankai died of illness not long after, and his son Xuan Baoma became king. He also offered tribute to Liang Shangzhang.

古文：普通七年，王高式胜铠遣使献方物，诏以为持节、督缘海诸军事、绥南将军、林邑王。
现代文：普通七年，林邑王高式胜镗派使者进献当地特产，高祖下诏命他为持节、督缘海诸军事、绥南将军、林邑王。
English: For seven years, Lin'er Wang Gao Shih Sheng sent an envoy to present local special products. Gao Zu ordered him to hold the festival, govern the sea, the military, the general of Hunan, and the king of Lin'er.

古文：大通元年，又遣使贡献。
现代文：大通元年，高式胜鳢又派遣使者献纳贡品。
English: In the first year of the Great Northern War, Goshiki Shosei sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：中大通二年，行林邑王高式律罗跋摩遣使贡献，诏以为持节、督缘海诸军事、绥南将军、林邑王。
现代文：中大通二年，摄任的林邑王高式律陁罗跋摩派遣使者献纳贡品，高祖下诏命他为持节、督缘海诸军事、绥南将军、林邑王。
English: In the second year of Zhongdazhong, Lin'yi Wang Gao-shih sent an envoy to pay tribute. Gao Zu ordered him to hold a festival, govern the sea, the military, the general of Hunan, and the king of Lin'yi.

古文：六年，又遣使献方物。
现代文：中大通六年，林邑王又派遣使者献纳当地特产。
English: Six years after the opening of the junior high school, Lin Yiwang sent an envoy to offer local special products.

古文：扶南国，在日南郡之南海西大湾中，去日南可七千里，在林邑西南三千余里。
现代文：扶南国在日南郡之南，在海西大湾中，离日南郡大约七千里，在林邑国西南三千余里。
English: Funan Province is in the south of Nichinan County, in the middle of the West Bay, about seven thousand miles from Nichinan County, and more than three thousand miles southwest of Linyi Province.

古文：城去海五百里。
现代文：扶南玺都城离海五百里。
English: The capital city of Funan is five hundred miles away from the sea.

古文：有大江广十里，西北流，东入于海。
现代文：国中有条大江，十里宽，从西北流过来，向东流人海。
English: There is a large river in the country, ten miles wide, flowing from the northwest to the east.

古文：其国轮广三千余里，土地洿下而平博，气候风俗大较与林邑同。
现代文：扶南国纵横三千余里，土地低洼而平坦宽广，气候风俗大体上和林旦玺相同。
English: Funan Province has a length and width of more than three thousand miles, the land is low-lying and flat and wide, and the climate and customs are generally the same as those of Lin Dan Qu.

古文：出金、银、铜、锡、沉木香、象牙、孔翠、五色鹦鹉。
现代文：扶南国出产金、银、铜、锡、沉木香、象牙、孔翠、五色鹦鹉。
English: Hunan Province produces gold, silver, copper, tin, agarwood, ivory, acacia, and the five-colored parrot.

古文：其南界三千余里有顿逊国，在海崎上，地方千里，城去海十里。
现代文：扶南国南边三千余里处有顿逊国，在曲折的海岸边，方圆千里，国城雕海十里。
English: In the southern part of Funan Province, there is Dongsong Province for more than three thousand miles. On the winding coast, there are thousands of miles in a circle, and the national city of Jiaohai is ten miles away.

古文：有五王，并羁属扶南。
现代文：扶南国有五个王，都附属于扶南国。
English: There are five kings in Funan Province, all of whom belong to Funan Province.

古文：顿逊之东界通交州，其西界接天竺、安息徼外诸国，往还交市。
现代文：扶南国东边通交州，西边舆天竺、安息等塞外国家接壤，往来互市。
English: The eastern part of Funan Province is a trading state, and the western part is bordered by foreign countries such as Moutian and Saban, and the exchanges between the cities are increasing.

古文：所以然者，顿逊回入海中千余里，涨海无崖岸，船舶未曾得径过也。
现代文：出现这种情况的原因，是因为顿逊国有千余里环绕大海的海岸，涨海没有崖岸，船舶不能够一直到岸边，所以都到顿逊国会聚。
English: The reason for this situation is that Dongson has more than a thousand miles of coastline surrounding the sea. When the sea rises, there are no cliffs, and ships cannot go all the way to the shore, so they all gather at Dongson.

古文：其市，东西交会，日有万余人。
现代文：顿逊国的集市，东西来往的商贾都在这裹会集，每天有万余人。
English: The bazaar of the Dongsung Kingdom, the merchants who go back and forth, all gather here, with more than ten thousand people every day.

古文：珍物宝货，无所不有。
现代文：珍奇实物，无所不有。
English: A real rarity, they are everywhere.

古文：又有酒树，似安石榴，采其花汁停甕中，数日成酒。
现代文：顿逊国又有一种酒树，和安石榴相似，采集酒树的花汁留存在瓮中，遇几天花汁就变成了酒。
English: There is another kind of wine tree in Dongsong, which is similar to the pomegranate. The collected juice of the wine tree is stored in the gourd, and after a few days the juice turns into wine.

古文：顿逊之外，大海洲中，又有毘骞国，去扶南八千里。
现代文：除顿逊国之外，大海岛中，又有个毗骞国，毗骞国距扶南国八千里。
English: In addition to the Dongsung country, there is also a neighboring country in the large island. The neighboring country is eight thousand miles away from Funan.

古文：传其王身长丈二，头长三尺，自古来不死，莫知其年。
现代文：传说毗骞国的国王身高一丈二尺，颈长三尺，自古以来都没见过国王死，所以没有谁知道国王的年岁。
English: According to legend, the king of the Viharn Kingdom was one and two feet tall, with a neck three feet long. Since ancient times, no one had seen the king die, so no one knew the king's age.

古文：王神圣，国中人善恶及将来事，王皆知之，是以无敢欺者。
现代文：国王是神灵，国中人的善恶以及未来的事情，国王都知道，所以没有人敢欺骗他。
English: The king is a god. He knows the good and evil of the people in the country, as well as the future, so no one dares to deceive him.

古文：南方号曰长颈王。
现代文：南方都称他为长颈王。
English: The south calls him the king of long necks.

古文：国俗，有室屋、衣服，啖粳米。
现代文：毗骞国的风俗，居住有房屋，有衣服，吃粳米。
English: The customs of the Fijians are to live in houses, wear clothes, and eat glutinous rice.

古文：其人言语，小异扶南。
现代文：那地方人的言语，和扶南国有小小的差别。
English: There is a slight difference between the local language and that of Funan.

古文：有山出金，金露生石上，无所限也。
现代文：毗骞国内有座山出产金，金都露在石头上。没有杂物阻隔。
English: There is a mountain that produces gold in Fujian, and the gold is exposed on the stone. There is no debris to block it.

古文：国法刑罪人，并于王前啖其肉。
现代文：毗骞国国法，杀死罪人，并且在国王面前吃掉逭罪人的肉。
English: He obeyed the laws of the land, killed sinners, and ate the flesh of the slain before the king.

古文：国内不受估客，有往者亦杀而啖之，是以商旅不敢至。
现代文：毗骞国内不准外来商人进入，若有商人进入他们国家，也把商人杀死吃掉，因此商人不敢去毗骞国。
English: Foreign merchants are not allowed to enter the country of Vichy, and if a merchant enters their country, they kill and eat the merchant, so the merchant does not dare to go to Vichy.

古文：王常楼居，不血食，不事鬼神。
现代文：毗骞国国王经常住在楼房裹，不吃鱼肉等荤腥食物，不事奉鬼神。
English: The king of Viharn often lives in a building, does not eat fish or meat, and does not worship ghosts and gods.

古文：其子孙生死如常人，唯王不死。
现代文：国王的子孙也像平常人那样有生有死。衹有国王不死。
English: The king's children live and die like ordinary people, but the king never dies.

古文：扶南王数遣使与书相报答，常遗扶南王纯金五十人食器，形如圆盘，又如瓦塸，名为多罗，受五升，又如碗者，受一升。
现代文：扶南王多次派遣使者带去书信与毗骞王相互往来酬答，毗骞王曾经赠送给扶南王可供五十人食用的纯金食器，形状像圆盘，又有形状像瓦器，叫做多罗，容量是五升，又有形状像碗的，容量是一升。
English: King Funan sent emissaries many times with letters to reciprocate the exchange of letters with King Vihar. King Vihar once presented King Funan with a solid gold tableware that could be used by fifty people. It was shaped like a disk, and it was also shaped like a pottery, called a toro, with a capacity of five liters, and it was also shaped like a bowl, with a capacity of one liter.

古文：王亦能作天竺书，书可三千言，说其宿命所由，与佛经相似，并论善事。
现代文：毗骞王也能写出天竺的书，全书大约三千字，述说宿命来由，与佛经相似，也评说行善之事。
English: Lord Vishnu can also write a heavenly book, the whole book is about three thousand words, describing the origin of fate, similar to the Buddhist scriptures, and also commenting on doing good deeds.

古文：又传扶南东界即大涨海，海中有大洲，洲上有诸薄国，国东有马五洲。
现代文：又传说扶南国东边就是大涨海，海中有大洲，洲上有诸薄国，诸薄国之束有马五洲。
English: It is also said that the east of Funan Province is the rising sea, there are continents in the sea, there are thin countries on the continent, and there are horses and five continents in the bundle of thin countries.

古文：复东行涨海千余里，至自然大洲。
现代文：又在涨海上往东走千余里，就到自然大洲。
English: Another thousand-odd miles to the east on the rising sea, and you'll reach the continent of nature.

古文：其上有树生火中，洲左近人剥取其皮，纺绩作布，极得数尺以为手巾，与焦麻无异而色微青黑；若小垢洿，则投火中，复更精洁。
现代文：自然大洲上有种树生长在火中，自然大洲附近的人剥取这种树的树皮，纺织成布，最多能得到几尺大小，做成手巾，这种布与焦麻没有区别但颜色稍显青黑；假如沾上污垢，就把手巾丢入火中，烧后手巾更加精细洁白。
English: On the continent of nature, there are trees that grow in fire. People near the continent of nature strip the bark of this tree and weave it into a cloth, which can be up to a few feet in size, to make hand towels. This cloth is no different from coke hemp, but the color is slightly bluish-black. If it gets dirty, throw the hand towel into the fire. After burning, the hand towel is finer and whiter.

古文：或作灯炷，用之不知尽。
现代文：有人用树皮作灯炷，使用这种灯炷不会烧损。
English: Some people use tree bark to make lanterns. The use of such lanterns will not burn out.

古文：扶南国俗本裸体，文身被发，不制衣裳。
现代文：扶南国百姓本来的习俗是裸体，文身披发，不缝制衣裳。
English: The original custom of the people of Funan Province is to be naked, with tattoos covering their hair, and not to sew clothes.

古文：以女人为王，号曰柳叶。
现代文：国家以女人为王，王名为柳叶。
English: The country is ruled by a woman, and the king's name is Liu Ye.

古文：年少壮健，有似男子。
现代文：柳叶年轻健壮，如同男子。
English: The willow leaves are young and robust, like a man's.

古文：其南有徼国，有事鬼神者字混填，梦神赐之弓，乘贾人舶入海。混填晨起即诣庙，于神树下得弓，便依梦乘船入海，遂入扶南外邑。
现代文：扶南国之南有个徼国，国中有个事奉鬼神的人名叫混填，他梦见神把弓赐给自己，然后乘坐商人的船入海，混填早晨起来就去拜诣神庙，在神树下得到一张弓，他便按梦中见到的情景乘船入海，于是就进入了扶南国的边境。
English: In the southern part of Funan Province, there is a country called Shikoku. In the country, there is a man who serves ghosts and gods named Shikoku. He dreamed that God gave him a bow, and then he took a merchant's boat into the sea. Shikoku got up in the morning and went to worship the God Temple. He got a bow under the sacred tree, and then he took a boat into the sea according to the scene he saw in his dream, and then he entered the border of Funan Province.

古文：柳叶人众见舶至，欲取之，混填即张弓射其舶，穿度一面，矢及侍者，柳叶大惧，举众降混填。
现代文：柳叶手下的人见到船来，就要去夺取船，混填就张弓搭箭射柳叶的船，箭穿过船帮，射到了侍者。柳叶十分害怕，就率领手下人众投降混填。
English: When Liu Ye's men saw the boat coming, they wanted to capture it, so they shot arrows at the boat with a bow and arrow. The arrows went through the side of the boat and hit the waiter. Liu Ye was very afraid, so he led his men to surrender.

古文：混填乃教柳叶穿布贯头，形不复露，遂治其国，纳柳叶为妻，生子分王七邑。
现代文：混填于是就教柳叶等在一块布中间开一个洞，头穿过去，布垂下来遮住身体称为贯头。
English: Mixed filling then teaches willow leaves, etc. to open a hole in the middle of a piece of cloth, the head passes through, and the cloth hangs down to cover the body, which is called the head.

古文：其后王混盘况以诈力间诸邑，令相疑阻，因举兵攻并之，乃遣子孙中分治诸邑，号曰小王。
现代文：扶南国人从此改变了裸体的习惯，混填因此就统治了扶南国。他娶柳叶为妻，生了孩子分别封在七个邑为王。混填以后的扶南国王混盘况依靠欺诈手段和武力离间各邑之间的关系，使各王之间互生疑惑，产生隔阂，混盘况就乘机举兵攻打并兼并了各邑，于是他派自己的子孙分别管理这些邑，称他们为小王。
English: From then on, the people of Funan Province changed the habit of being naked, and Mesting thus ruled Funan Province. He married Liu Ye and had a child, each of whom was crowned king in seven townships. After Mesting, King Mesting of Funan Province relied on fraudulent means and force to separate the relationship between the townships, causing mutual suspicion and estrangement between the kings. Mesting took the opportunity to attack and annex the townships, so he sent his sons and grandsons to manage these townships separately, calling them little kings.

古文：盘况年九十余乃死，立中子盘盘，以国事委其大将范蔓。
现代文：混盘况九十余岁才去世，他的排行中间的儿子盘盘立为王，盘盘把国家事务交给手下大将范蔓处理。
English: He died at the age of more than ninety, and his middle-ranking son, Pan Pan, became king. Pan Pan handed over state affairs to his subordinate, General Fan Meng.

古文：盘盘立三年死，国人共举蔓为王。
现代文：盘盘立为王之后三年就去世了，国中人一同推举范蔓为王。
English: Three years after Pan Pan became king, he died, and the people of the country jointly elected Fan Man as king.

古文：蔓勇健有权略，复以兵威攻伐旁国，咸服属之，自号扶南大王。
现代文：范蔓勇猛而且有谋略，他用武力攻打四周的国家，邻国都归服附属他，于是范蔓自称扶南大王。
English: Fanman was brave and resourceful. He attacked the surrounding countries by force, and the neighboring countries were subordinated to him. Therefore, Fanman called himself the great king of Funan.

古文：乃治作大船，穷涨海，攻屈都昆、九稚、典孙等十余国，开地五六千里。
现代文：范蔓于是制造大船，穿越涨海，攻打屈都昆、九稚、典孙等十多个国家，开拓了五六千平方里的土地。
English: Fanman then built a large ship, crossed the rising sea, attacked more than ten countries such as Kudukun, Jiuzhaigou, and Tenzin, and opened up five or six thousand square miles of land.

古文：次当伐金邻国，蔓遇疾，遣太子金生代行。
现代文：往后将要攻打金邻国，范蔓患病，就派太子范金生代自己统兵攻打。
English: In the future, they will attack Jin's neighboring countries. When Fan Man fell ill, he sent Prince Fan Jinsheng to attack on his own behalf.

古文：蔓姊子旃，时为二千人将，因篡蔓自立，遣人诈金生而杀之。
现代文：范蔓姐姐的儿子旃，当时担任统领二千人的将领，他乘机杀死范蔓，篡位为王，又派人欺骗范金生，把范金生杀了。
English: Fan Man's sister's son, Zou, who was the commander of 2,000 people at the time, took the opportunity to kill Fan Man, usurp the throne, and sent someone to deceive Fan Jinsheng and kill Fan Jinsheng.

古文：蔓死时，有乳下儿名长，在民间，至年二十，乃结国中壮士袭杀旃，旃大将范寻又杀长而自立。
现代文：范蔓死的时候，还有个吃奶的孩子范长，隐藏在民间。范长长一一十岁的时候，就邀结国中勇士，袭击并杀死旃。旃手下大将范寻又杀死范长，自立为王。
English: When Fan Man died, there was also a suckling child, Fan Chang, hidden among the people. When Fan Chang was 110 years old, he invited the warriors of the country to attack and kill Yao. Yao's subordinate general, Fan Xing, killed Fan Chang and became king.

古文：更缮治国内，起观阁游戏之，朝旦中晡三四见客。
现代文：范寻重新整治国家，起造观阁以供游玩。范寻衹在朝旦、中晡时偶尔会见来见他的人。
English: Fan Xuan re-organized the country and built a pavilion for tourists to visit. Fan Xuan occasionally met people who came to see him in the morning and in the afternoon.

古文：民人以焦蔗龟鸟为礼。
现代文：百姓之间用焦、蔗、龟、鸟作礼物。
English: People give gifts of coke, cane, turtles and birds to each other.

古文：国法无牢狱。
现代文：按国法他们没有牢狱。
English: According to the law, they are not in prison.

古文：有罪者，先斋戒三日，乃烧斧极赤，令讼者捧行七步。
现代文：有罪的人，先让他斋戒三天，三天后，把一把铁斧烧得通红通红，叫打官司的人捧着通红的铁斧头走七步。
English: The guilty person, first let him fast for three days, after three days, burn an iron axe until it is red and red, and make the litigant walk seven steps holding the red iron axe.

古文：又以金镮、鸡卵投沸汤中，令探取之，若无实者，手即焦烂，有理者则不。
现代文：或是把金刨、鶸蛋丢进沸腾的开水中，让打官司的人伸手把开水中的金刨、鶸蛋捞取出来。假若不诚实，说假话，手就会被烫得焦烂，有理的人手就不会被烫伤。
English: Or throw the shovel and the pickled eggs into the boiling water and let the litigant reach out and fish out the shovel and the pickled eggs. If you are dishonest and tell a lie, your hands will be burned to a crisp, but the hands of a reasonable person will not be burned.

古文：又于城沟中养鳄鱼，门外圈猛兽，有罪者，辄以喂猛兽及鳄鱼，鱼兽不食为无罪，三日乃放之。
现代文：他们又在护城河中养鳄鱼，城门外养猛虎，有罪的人，就被用来喂养猛虎和鳄鱼，如果鳄鱼猛虎不吃，就是无罪，遇三天就把这人放出来。
English: They also keep crocodiles in the moat and tigers outside the city gates. Guilty people are used to feed the tigers and crocodiles. If the crocodiles do not eat the tigers, they are not guilty. If this happens, the person is released after three days.

古文：鳄大者长二丈余，状如鼍，有四足，喙长六七尺，两边有齿，利如刀剑，常食鱼，遇得麞鹿及人亦啖之，苍梧以南及外国皆有之。
现代文：大的鳄鱼有二丈多长，形状像鼍，有四只脚，喙有六七尺长，两边都有牙齿，牙齿像刀剑那样锋利，常常吃鱼，遇上獐鹿以及人也吃，苍梧以南以及外国都有鳄鱼。
English: Large crocodiles are more than twice as long, shaped like a dragonfly, have four feet, the beak is sixty-seven feet long, both sides have teeth, the teeth are as sharp as a sword, often eat fish, meet elk and eat people, and there are crocodiles in the south of the country and abroad.

古文：吴时，遣中郎康泰、宣化从事硃应使于寻国，国人犹裸，唯妇人著贯头。
现代文：三国时，吴派中郎康泰、宣化从事朱应出使到范寻统治下的扶南国，扶南国人仍然保持着裸体的习俗，衹有妇人身穿贯头装。
English: During the Three Kingdoms period, Wu sent the middlemen Kangtai and Xuanhua engaged in Zhu Ying to Funan Province under the rule of Fan Hui. The people of Funan Province still maintained the custom of nudity, with a woman's body piercing the headdress.

古文：泰、应谓曰： 国中实佳，但人亵露可怪耳。 
现代文：康泰、朱应对范寻说： 你们国家实在很好，衹是人们赤身露体叫人觉得奇怪罢了。 
English: Kangtai and Zhu said to Fan Huan: Your country is really good, it's just that people are naked and it makes people feel strange.

古文：寻始令国内男子著横幅。
现代文：范寻才命令国内的男人穿上横幅。
English: Fan Xingcai ordered the country's men to wear the banner.

古文：横幅，今干漫也。
现代文：横幅，现在叫做干漫，即用一幅布做成筒状，遮住腰部以下。
English: The banner, now called a dryman, is made of a cloth in the shape of a tube, covering the lower part of the waist.

古文：大家乃截锦为之，贫者乃用布。
现代文：有钱人家裁锦缎制做，贫穷人家才用布制做。
English: Rich people use brocade, poor people use cloth.

古文：晋武帝太康中，寻始遣使贡献。
现代文：晋武帝太康年间，范寻才派遣使者来晋献纳贡品。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taikang, Fan Xun sent an envoy to Jin to offer tribute.

古文：穆帝升平元年，王竺旃檀奉表献驯象。
现代文：晋穆帝升平元年，扶南国王竺旃檀呈奉表章献纳驯象。
English: In the first year of Emperor Jinmu's ascension to the throne, the King of Funan, Xidan, presented a gift of a tamed elephant.

古文：诏曰： 此物劳费不少，驻令勿送。 
现代文：晋穆帝下诏说： 运送这东西花费不少，命他们停下来，不要再送了。 
English: Emperor Jinmu issued an edict saying, "It costs a lot to transport this thing, so order them to stop and not to send it any more."

古文：其后王憍陈如，本天竺婆罗门也。
现代文：竺旃檀以后的扶南王懦陈如，本是天竺婆罗门。
English: The king of Funan after Xingdan was Cui Chenru, who was originally the Brahman of Heaven.

古文：有神语曰 应王扶南 ，憍陈如心悦，南至盘盘，扶南人闻之，举国欣戴，迎而立焉。
现代文：有神对他说： 你应在扶南国为王。 懦陈如心中很高兴，于是南行到盘盘，扶南人听到这消息，全国上下欢心拥戴，把懦陈如迎来为王。
English: A god said to him, "You should be the king of Funan Province." Qichenru was very happy, so he traveled south to Panpan. When the people of Funan heard the news, they embraced with joy all over the country and welcomed Qichenru as their king.

古文：复改制度，用天竺法。
现代文：懦陈如立为王之后，又改变扶南国的制度，仿用天竺的法规。
English: After Wu Chen Ruzheng became king, he changed the system of supporting the southern countries and imitated the laws and regulations of Heaven.

古文：憍陈如死，后王持梨跋摩，宋文帝世奉表献方物。
现代文：懦陈如死，他以后的扶南王持梨陁跋摩在宋文帝年间呈奏表章进献当地特产。
English: Cowardly as death, he later became the ruler of Funan Province and presented the Song Dynasty Emperor Songwen with a musical seal to present local special products.

古文：齐永明中，王阇邪跋摩遣使贡献。
现代文：齐永明年间，扶南王合邪跋摩派遣使者进献贡物。
English: In the middle of the Qianlong year, the King of Funan sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：天监二年，跋摩复遣使送珊瑚佛像，并献方物。
现代文：天监二年，合邪跋摩又派遣使者呈送珊瑚佛像，并且进献当地特产。
English: In the second year of the celestial watch, Hezabatma also sent an envoy to present coral Buddha statues, and presented local specialties.

古文：诏曰： 扶南王憍陈如阇邪跋摩，介居海表，世纂南服，厥诚远著，重译献賝。
现代文：高祖下韶说： 扶南王懦陈如阐邪跋摩远居海外，世代承袭，管理南方，他的诚心早巳昭著，通过翻译，呈献珍宝。
English: Gao Zu said: King Guizhen of Funan lived abroad for a long time, inheriting and managing the south for generations. His sincerity has long been clear. Through translation, he presented precious treasures.

古文：宜蒙酬纳，班以荣号。
现代文：应当接纳他的诚心，赐给荣显的爵号。
English: His sincerity should be accepted, and he should be given a glorious title.

古文：可安南将军、扶南王。 
现代文：应当封他为安南将军、扶南王。 
English: He should be called General Annan and King of Funan.

古文：今其国人皆丑黑，拳发。
现代文：现在扶南国的人都黑而丑，头发鬈曲。
English: Now the people of Funan Province are all black and ugly, their hair twisted.

古文：所居不穿井，数十家共一池引汲之。
现代文：他们住的地方不挖井，数十家共用一个水池，大家都在池中汲水使用。
English: They do not dig wells where they live. Dozens of families share a pool, and everyone draws water from the pool to use.

古文：俗事天神，天神以铜为像，二面者四手，四面者八手，手各有所持，或小儿，或鸟兽，或日月。
现代文：他们百姓都事奉天神，天神的像用铜铸造，有的神像二个面孔，有的神像四个面孔，二个面孔的神像四只手，四个面孔的神像八只手，手中都拿着东西，有的拿着小孩，有的拿着鸟兽，有的拿着日月。
English: Their people all worshipped angels. The images of the angels were cast in bronze. Some gods had two faces, some had four faces, two-faced gods had four hands, and four-faced gods had eight hands. All of them held something in their hands. Some held children, some held birds and beasts, and some held the sun and the moon.

古文：其王出入乘象，嫔侍亦然。
现代文：他们的国王出外就乘坐大象，宫嫔侍从也乘坐大象。
English: Their kings rode on elephants when they went out, and their courtiers rode on elephants.

古文：王坐则偏踞翘膝，垂左膝至地，以白叠敷前，设金盆香炉于其上。国俗，居丧则剃除须发。
现代文：国王坐时右膝翘起，左膝屈下垂在地上，偏往一旁。在国王身前敷设用木棉织的白叠布，在白叠布上设置金盆香炉。扶南国的风俗，守丧期间就剃掉须发。
English: When the king is seated, the right knee is raised, and the left knee is bent and hangs on the ground, leaning to one side. A white cloth woven with cotton is laid in front of the king, and a golden incense burner is set on the white cloth. According to the customs of the Funan country, the hair is shaved off during the funeral.

古文：死者有四葬：水葬则投之江流，火葬则焚为灰烬，土葬则瘗埋之，鸟葬则弃之中野。
现代文：死去的人有四种埋葬方法：水葬就把死者投到江流中，火葬就把死者烧成灰烬，土葬就挖坑掩埋死者，鸟葬就把死者丢到野外，让鸟啄食。
English: There are four ways to bury the dead: water burial throws the dead into the river, cremation burns the dead to ashes, earth burial digs a pit to bury the dead, and bird burial throws the dead into the wild for the birds to peck at.

古文：人性贪吝，无礼义，男女恣其奔随。
现代文：扶南国人性贪婪吝啬，不懂礼义，男女间可以随意私奔。
English: The human nature of Funan people is greedy and stingy, they don't know the meaning of etiquette, and men and women can run away at will.

古文：十年、十三年，跋摩累遣使贡献。
现代文：天监十年，十三年，合邪跋摩多次派遣使者进献贡品。
English: In the 10th and 13th years of the 10th year of the Heaven's Supervision, He Yatma repeatedly sent emissaries to offer tributes.

古文：其年死，庶子留跋摩杀其嫡弟自立。
现代文：天监十三年，辟邪跋摩死去，他的庶子留陁跋摩杀死身份为嫡子的弟弟而自立为王。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Heaven's Warden's reign, his illegitimate son, Ryuunebebebema, killed his brother-in-law and became king.

古文：十六年，遣使竺当抱老奉表贡献。
现代文：玉监十六年，留陁跋摩派遣使者竺赏塑耋呈奉表章献纳贡品。
English: In the 16th year of the reign of Emperor Yuanzhong, Emperor Ruizong sent an envoy to reward the sculptor and presented him with a medal and tribute.

古文：十八年，复遣使送天竺旃檀瑞像、婆罗树叶，并献火齐珠、郁金、苏合等香。
现代文：天监十八年，留陁跋摩又派遣使者呈送互竺旃檀瑞像、婆罗树叶，同时献纳火齐珠、郁金、苏合等香。
English: In the 18th year of the Heaven's Guardianship, Emperor Lyu Binbama also sent an envoy to present the image of Dang Rui and the leaves of the Bora tree, and at the same time offered incense such as fire beads, tulips, and suho.

古文：普通元年、中大通二年、大同元年，累遣使瑞献方物。
现代文：普通元年，中大通二年，左回元年，留陁跋摩多次派遣使者献纳当地特产。
English: In the first year of the Common Era, in the second year of the Middle Ages, and in the first year of the Left Reversal, Lubao repeatedly sent emissaries to offer local specialties.

古文：五年，复遣使献生犀。
现代文：太回五年，他又派遣使者献纳活犀牛。
English: Five years later, he sent another envoy to offer a live rhinoceros.

古文：又言其国有佛发，长一丈二尺，诏遣沙门释云宝随使往迎之。
现代文：使者又说他们国家有佛发，长一丈二尺，高祖下韶派和尚宣跟随使者去取佛发。
English: The envoy also said that their country has Buddha's hair, which is one meter and two feet long. Gao Zu sent Monk Xuan to follow the envoy to get the Buddha's hair.

古文：先是，三年八月，高祖改造阿育王寺塔，出旧塔下舍利及佛爪发。发青绀色，众僧以手伸之，随手长短，放之则旋屈为蠡形。
现代文：这以前，大同三年八月，高祖改建阿育王寺塔，从旧塔下取出舍利以及佛爪佛发，佛发呈青钳色，众僧人用手拉佛发，佛发随手可以拉长缩短，放开手后佛发又旋即弯曲为螺旋形。
English: Prior to this, in August of the third year of Datong, Gao Zu rebuilt the pagoda of Ashoka Temple. He took out the shrine and the Buddha's claw from under the old pagoda. The Buddha's hair was bluish-grey. The monks pulled the Buddha's hair with their hands. The Buddha's hair could be stretched and shortened with their hands. After releasing their hands, the Buddha's hair was immediately bent into a spiral shape.

古文：案《僧伽经》云： 佛发青而细，犹如藕茎丝。 
现代文：据《僧伽经》说： 佛发青而捆，如同藕茎丝。 
English: According to the "Sangha Sutra," "The Buddha's hair is blue and tied up, like the filament of a reed.

古文：《佛三昧经》云： 我昔在宫沐头，以尺量发，长一丈二尺，放已右旋，还成蠡文。 
现代文：《佛三昧经》说： 我以前在房中洗头发，用尺量发长，长有一丈二尺，放手之后头发朝右旋，盘曲成螺旋花纹。 
English: "Buddha Samadhi Sutra" says: I used to wash my hair in my room. I used a ruler to measure my hair length. It was about two feet long. After I let it go, my hair swirled to the right and coiled into a spiral pattern.

古文：则与高祖所得同也。
现代文：这些说法和高祖得到的佛发情况相同。
English: These statements are the same as the Buddha's hair obtained by Gao Zu.

古文：阿育王即铁轮王，王阎浮提，一天下，佛灭度后，一日一夜，役鬼神造八万四千塔，此即其一也。
现代文：阿育王就是铁轮王，王阎浮提，统一了天下。佛死亡之后，阿育王在一天一夜之间，役使鬼神建造了八万四千座塔，高祖改建的就是其中的一座。
English: King Ashoka is the king of the iron wheel, the king of the yin and yang, and the unifier of the world. After the death of Buddha, King Ashoka, in a single day and night, built eighty-four thousand towers with the help of ghosts and gods, and Gaozu rebuilt one of them.

古文：吴时有尼居其地，为小精舍，孙綝寻毁除之，塔亦同泯。
现代文：吴国时有尼姑住在阿育王寺，成为小精舍，逐镒不久就把寺毁除，塔也同时被毁去。
English: At that time, there was a nun living in the Ashoka Temple in the State of Wu. It became a small hermitage, and soon the temple was destroyed, and the pagoda was destroyed at the same time.

古文：吴平后，诸道人复于旧处建立焉。
现代文：呈迩被平定后，众僧人又在原来地址建立寺院。
English: After Chengxuan was subdued, the monks built a temple at the original address.

古文：晋中宗初渡江，更修饰之。
现代文：晋中宗初渡辽的时候，重新装修寺院。
English: When the Jin Zhong sect first arrived in Liao, they renovated the temple.

古文：至简文咸安中，使沙门安法师程造小塔，未及成而亡，弟子僧显继而修立。
现代文：到简塞童灭壁年间，简文帝命僧人安法师程建造小塔，塔未建成，安法师程就亡故了。他的弟子僧题继续把塔建成。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jian Zedong, Emperor Jianwen ordered the monk Anfa Shicheng to build a small tower. Before the tower was completed, Anfa Shicheng passed away. His disciple Sotai continued to build the tower.

古文：至孝武太元九年，上金相轮及承露。
现代文：到孝武帝太元九年，才为塔安装金相轮和承露。
English: It was not until the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaowu that the gold pharaoh's wheel and dew drops were installed on the tower.

古文：其后西河离石县有胡人刘萨何遇疾暴亡，而心下犹暖，其家未敢便殡，经十日更苏。
现代文：以后西河离石县有胡人刘萨患病突然死去，但他心口还暖，他家中人不敢轻易殡殓，刘萨包经过十天又苏醒过来。
English: Later, Liu Sa, a Wu person in Xiheliishi County, suddenly died of illness, but his heart was still warm. His family members did not dare to bury him easily. After ten days, Liu Sa Bao woke up again.

古文：说云： 有两吏见录，向西北行，不测远近，至十八地狱，随报重轻，受诸楚毒。
现代文：他述说道： 有两个差吏捉住我，带我向西北方向走，不知道走了多远，到了十八层地狱，那裹根据罪行的轻重大小，给予不同程度的惩罚，让罪人经受各种责打痛苦。
English: He said: "Two officers caught up with me and took me northwest, I don't know how far, to the 18th level of hell, which metes out varying degrees of punishment depending on the severity of the crime, subjecting the guilty to various kinds of beatings and pain.

古文：见观世音语云： 汝缘未尽，若得活，可作沙门。
现代文：后来见到观世音，观世音对我说： 你的人世之缘尚未了结，假如你能复活，应当做和尚。
English: Later, I saw Guanyin. Guanyin said to me, "Your earthly life is not yet over. If you can be resurrected, you should become a monk."

古文：洛下、齐城、丹阳、会稽并有阿育王塔，可往礼拜。
现代文：洛下、齐城、丹阳、会稽都有阿育王塔，你应当去那些地方行礼拜神。
English: There are pagodas of Ashoka in Luoshan, Qicheng, Danyang, and Hefei. You should go to those places to worship God.

古文：若寿终，则不堕地狱。 语竟，如堕高岩，忽然醒寤。 
现代文：假如你能活满寿数而死，就不会堕入地狱，话说完，我就觉得像从高岩上掉下来，忽然问就醒过来了。 
English: If you can live a full life and die, you will not fall into hell. After saying this, I felt like I had fallen from a high rock and suddenly woke up.

古文：因此出家，名慧达。
现代文：刘萨何就此出家为僧，取名慧达。
English: As a result, Liu Sa He became a monk and took the name Huida.

古文：游行礼塔，次至丹阳，未知塔处，乃登越城四望，见长千里有异气色，因就礼拜，果是阿育王塔所，屡放光明。
现代文：他四出游历，向佛塔行礼致敬，后来到丹阳，不知道佛塔在什么地方，他于是登上越城向四面了望，见到长千里发出不同于别处的光彩云气，于是他就到长千里去行礼致敬，那儿果然是阿育王塔的旧址，屡屡放出光彩。
English: He travelled far and wide to pay homage to the pagoda, and then came to Danyang, not knowing where the pagoda was, so he climbed to Yuecheng and looked around. He saw that Changchili sent out a cloud of brilliance unlike anywhere else, so he went to Changchili to pay homage. It was indeed the former site of Ashoka's pagoda, which repeatedly emitted brilliance.

古文：由是定知必有舍利，乃集众就掘之，入一丈，得三石碑，并长六尺。
现代文：差谴因此知道那地方必定有舍利，于是召集人众在那地方挖掘，挖到一丈深的时候，见到三块石碑，都是六尺长。
English: So the scourge knew that there must be a shrine in that place, so he gathered the people to dig in that place, and when they dug to a depth of one foot, they saw three stone tablets, all six feet long.

古文：中一碑有铁函，函中有银函，函中又有金函，盛三舍利及爪发各一枚，发长数尺。
现代文：中间一块石碑下有个铁盒子，铁盒子中又有个银盒子，银盒子中又有金盒子，金盒子中盛着三粒舍利以及一枚指爪，一绺头发，头发有数尺长。
English: In the middle, under a stone tablet, there was an iron box, and in the iron box there was a silver box, and in the silver box there was a gold box, and in the gold box there were three cherries, and a fingernail, and a lock of hair, and the hair was several feet long.

古文：即迁舍利近北，对简文所造塔西，造一层塔。
现代文：慧达就把舍利往北稍作移动，在正对个塞童建造的塔的西边，又造了座一层的塔。
English: Heda then moved the shrine a little to the north and built another one-storey tower on the west side of the tower that was being built by a boy from Saigon.

古文：十六年，又使沙门僧尚伽为三层，即高祖所开者也。
现代文：左五十六年，又命僧人僧尚伽把塔加建为三层，这就是高祖改建开挖的那座塔。
English: In the 56th year of Zuo, he also ordered the monk Sangga to build the tower into three layers. This is the tower that Gao Zu rebuilt and excavated.

古文：初穿土四尺，得龙窟及昔人所舍金银镮钏钗镊等诸杂宝物。
现代文：高祖开挖时，刚挖到四尺深的地方，就见到龙窟以及从前人们施舍的金银镇、钏、钗、镊等许多珍宝。
English: When Gao Zu was digging, as soon as he reached a depth of four feet, he saw the Dragon Grotto, as well as many treasures such as the gold and silver town, the cocoon, the cocoon, and the cocoon that people used to give alms.

古文：可深九尺许，方至石磉，磉下有石函，函内有铁壶，以盛银坩，坩内有金镂罂，盛三舍利，如粟粒大，圆正光洁。
现代文：挖到大约九尺深的地方，才见到支撑塔基的石磉，石磉下有石匣，石匣裹有铁壶，铁壶中盛有银坩，银坩内装着一个金制的刻有花纹的小口大腹的罂，罂中盛着三粒舍利，舍利像粟粒那样大，圆正光洁。
English: After digging to a depth of about nine feet, they found the stone pillar supporting the tower. Under the stone pillar, there was a stone box. The stone box was wrapped with an iron pot. The iron pot contained a silver urn. The silver urn contained a gold urn engraved with a flower pattern. In the urn, there were three cherries. The cherries were as big as corn kernels and were round and shiny.

古文：函内又有琉璃碗，内得四舍利及发爪，爪有四枚，并为沉香色。
现代文：石匣内又有琉璃碗，从碗中找到四粒舍利以及佛发佛爪，佛爪有四枚，都是沉香色。
English: Inside the stone box, there is also a glass bowl. From the bowl, four grains of sherry were found, as well as the Buddha's claws. There are four claws, all of which are dark brown.

古文：至其月二十七日，高祖又到寺礼拜，设无捴大会，大赦天下。
现代文：到那个月二十七日，高祖又到寺中行礼拜神，设立无遮大会，在全国实行大赦。
English: On the 27th day of that month, Gaozu went to the temple to worship God, set up an open-door assembly, and implemented an amnesty across the country.

古文：是日，以金钵盛水泛舍利，其最小者隐钵不出，高祖礼数十拜，舍利乃于钵内放光，旋回久之，乃当钵中而止。
现代文：逭一天，直担用金钵盛水让舍利浮起来，舍利中最小的那粒却隐藏在钵中不浮起来。高祖面对金钵行了数十遍拜礼，舍利才在钵内放出光芒，回旋很久。才在金钵正中停住不动。
English: On the first day, the deity used a golden urn filled with water to float the relic, but the smallest grain of the relic was hidden in the urn and did not float. Gao Zu worshiped the golden urn dozens of times, and the relic only emitted light in the urn and swirled around for a long time. Only then did it stop in the middle of the golden urn.

古文：高祖问大僧正慧念： 今日见不可思议事不？ 
现代文：高祖问大僧正慧念： 今天见到了不可思议的事情吗? 
English: Gao Zu asked the great monk Zheng Hui Nian: Did you see anything incredible today?

古文：慧念答曰： 法身常住，湛然不动。 
现代文：慧念回答说： 法身常住，湛然不动。 
English: Hui Nian replied, "The dharma body is always present and does not move.

古文：高祖曰： 弟子欲请一舍利还台供养。 
现代文：高祖说： 弟子想请一粒舍利回宫廷供奉。 
English: Gao Zu said: The disciple wants to invite a grain of sherry back to the court for offering.

古文：至九月五日，又于寺设无捴大会，遣皇太子王侯朝贵等奉迎。
现代文：到九月五日，高祖又在寺内设无遮大会，派皇太子、王侯、朝中贵显大臣前往寺中，奉迎舍利。
English: On September 5, Gaozu held an open-to-the-public assembly in the temple and sent the crown prince, princes, and ministers of the Imperial Court to the temple to pay homage to the shrine.

古文：是日，风景明和，京师倾属，观者百数十万人。
现代文：遣一天，风光明丽，京城全城的人都关注这事，去观看的有一百几十万人。
English: For one day, the weather was bright and beautiful, and people from all over the capital paid attention to this event, with hundreds of thousands of people going to watch.

古文：所设金银供具等物，并留寺供养，并施钱一千万为寺基业。
现代文：高祖置办的金银器具等器物，全都留在寺中施舍给僧人，并且施舍一千万钱作寺中基业。
English: All the gold and silver utensils and other goods that Gao Zu had purchased were left in the temple to give to the monks, and he also gave ten million yuan as the foundation of the temple.

古文：至四年九月十五日，高祖又至寺设无捴大会，竖二刹，各以金罂，次玉罂，重盛舍利及爪发，内七宝塔中。
现代文：到大同四年九月十五日，高祖又到寺中设无遮大会，树立两座塔，又分别用金罂、玉罂重新盛装舍利和佛爪佛发，放进七宝塔中。
English: On the 15th day of the 9th month of the 4th year of the Datong, Gao Zu went to the temple again to set up an open-air assembly, set up two towers, and re-decorated the shrine and the Buddha's claw and hair with gold and jade respectively, and placed them in the seven pagodas.

古文：又以石函盛宝塔，分入两刹下，及王侯妃主百姓富室所舍金、银、镮、钏等珍宝充积。
现代文：又用石匣盛装七宝塔，分别放进两座塔下，王侯、妃嫔、公主、百姓中富厚人家施舍的金、银、刨、钏等珍宝也都填满塔下。
English: The seven pagodas were also decorated with stone boxes, which were placed under the two pagodas. The pagodas were also filled with precious treasures such as gold, silver, planed wood and jade, which were donated by princes, concubines, princesses and wealthy people.

古文：十一年十一月二日，寺僧又请高祖于寺发《般若经》题，尔夕二塔俱放光明，敕镇东将军邵陵王纶制寺《大功德碑》文。
现代文：大同十一年十一月二日，寺僧又请高祖阐发《般若经》经题含意，那天晚上，两座塔都大放光芒，高祖命镇束将军邵陵王萧纶撰写寺《大功德碑》文。
English: On November 2nd, the 11th year of Datong, the monks of the temple also asked Gao Zu to explain the meaning of the sutra theme of the "Praise Book." That evening, the two towers were ablaze with light, and Gao Zu's general Shao Ling Wang Xiaohui wrote the temple's "Great Achievement Monument."

古文：先是，二年，改造会稽鄮县塔，开旧塔出舍利，遣光宅寺释敬脱等四僧及舍人孙照暂迎还台，高祖礼拜竟，即送还县，入新塔下，此县塔亦是刘萨何所得也。
现代文：这以前，大同二年，改建会稽邓县塔，开挖旧塔取出舍利，高祖派光宅寺释敬脱等四名僧人以及舍人孙照把舍利临时迎回宫中，高祖向舍利行礼致敬之后，就把舍利送回邓县，安放在新塔之下，邓县塔也是刘萨何找到的。
English: Prior to this, in the second year of Datong, the Dangxian Pagoda was rebuilt, the old pagoda was excavated and the relics were taken out, and Gao Zu sent four monks including Shijian Du and Sun Zhao, a lay person, to temporarily welcome the relics back to the palace. After Gao Zu paid tribute to the relics, he sent the relics back to Dangxian and placed them under the new pagoda. The Dangxian Pagoda was also found by Liu Sa He.

古文：晋咸和中，丹阳尹高悝行至张侯桥，见浦中五色光长数尺，不知何怪，乃令人于光处掊视之，得金像，未有光趺。
现代文：晋咸和年间，丹阳尹高悝走到张侯桥，见到水边散发出数尺长的五色光，不知道是什么奇异的东西，于是命人在发出光亮的地方开挖，得到一座金制佛像，但没有底座。
English: During the Jin and Han dynasties, Danyang Yin Gaoqi walked to Zhanghou Bridge and saw a five-colored light several feet long emanating from the water's edge. He didn't know what the strange thing was, so he ordered someone to dig in the place where the light was emitted and get a gold Buddha statue, but without a base.

古文：悝乃下车，载像还，至长干巷首，牛不肯进，悝乃令驭人任牛所之。牛径牵车至寺，悝因留像付寺僧。
现代文：高悝于是下车，载着佛像回家，走到长干巷口，牛不肯再往前走，矗悝就叫驭车的人随顺牛的意向走，牛一直把车拉到寺庙中，高悝就把佛像留下来交给寺中僧人。
English: So Gao Gan got off the car, carried the Buddha statue home, and walked to the intersection of Changgan Lane. The cow refused to go any further, so Gao Gan told the driver to follow the cow's wishes. The cow kept pulling the car to the temple, and Gao Gan left the Buddha statue to the monks in the temple.

古文：每至中夜，常放光明，又闻空中有金石之响。
现代文：佛像在寺庙中，每到午夜，常常发出光亮，又可以听到空中有乐器演奏的声音。
English: Buddha statues in temples often glow at midnight, and the sound of musical instruments can be heard in the air.

古文：经一岁，捕鱼人张系世，于海口忽见有铜花趺浮出水上，系世取送县，县以送台，乃施像足，宛然合。
现代文：遇了一年，捕鱼人张系世在海突然见到铜花佛像底座浮在水上，张系世取来之后送往县中，县令又把它送往朝廷，朝廷就把这底座放在佛像足下，底座与佛像完全相合。
English: One year, the fisherman Zhang Jieshi suddenly saw the base of the bronze Buddha statue floating on the water. After Zhang Jieshi retrieved it, he sent it to the county government, and the county government sent it to the court. The court placed the base under the feet of the Buddha statue, and the base was completely in line with the Buddha statue.

古文：会简文咸安元年，交州合浦人董宗之采珠没水，于底得佛光艳，交州押送台，以施像，又合焉。
现代文：到简文帝咸安元年，交州合浦人董宗之到水下采珍珠，在水底找到一座佛光艳，交州派人把佛光艳送往朝廷，朝廷又把它安放到佛像上，又正好相合。
English: In the first year of Emperor Qianwen's reign, Dong Zongzhi, a native of Hepu, Jiaozhou, went underwater to collect pearls. He found a brightly colored Buddha under the water. Jiaozhou sent someone to take the brightly colored Buddha to the court. The court placed it on the Buddha statue, and the two coincided.

古文：自咸和中得像，至咸安初，历三十余年，光趺始具。
现代文：从咸和年间找到佛像，初年，经历三十余年，佛像底座才算完备。
English: The Buddha statue was found in the Han and Heian periods, and it took more than 30 years to complete the base of the Buddha statue.

古文：初，高悝得像后，西域胡僧五人来诣悝，曰： 昔于天竺得阿育王造像，来至鄴下，值胡乱，埋像于河边，今寻觅失所。 
现代文：起初，台悝找到佛像的时候，五名西域胡僧来拜谒高悝，说： 以前我们在天竺得到铸造的阿育王像，来到邺下，适逢我们家乡动乱，于是就把金像埋在河边，现在无处寻觅。 
English: At first, when Taiwanese found the Buddha statue, five Western Hu monks came to pay homage to Gao Gao, saying, "In the past, we obtained the cast statue of King Ashoka in Tianyao. When we came to Gao, it coincided with the turmoil in our hometown, so we buried the gold statue by the river, and now there is nowhere to look for it.

古文：五人尝一夜俱梦见像曰： 已出江东，为高悝所得。 
现代文：五人曾在一个夜晚都梦见金像说： 我已经在江束，被高悝得到。 
English: Five people once dreamed of a golden statue in one night and said: I have been in Jiangzhuang, and I have been won by a stilt.

古文：悝乃送此五僧至寺，见像嘘欷涕泣，像便放光，照烛殿宇。
现代文：高悝于是送这五名胡僧到寺中去，他们见到金像都欷歒流泪，金像便大放光芒，照亮整个殿堂。
English: Gao Yao then sent the five male monks to the temple. They saw the golden statue of Tudor shed tears, and the golden statue shined brightly, illuminating the entire hall.

古文：又瓦官寺慧邃欲模写像形，寺主僧尚虑亏损金色，谓邃曰： 若能令像放光，回身西向，乃可相许。 
现代文：又瓦官寺慧邃想要用蜡拓写金像的形体，寺主僧尚担心拓写会使金色受损，就对慧邃说： 假若你能令金像放光，金像又扭转身子向着西边，我才能够答应你的要求。 
English: Then, the head monk of the Wakan-ji Temple, Hui Yan, wanted to use wax to transfer the shape of the golden statue. The head monk was still worried that the transfer would damage the golden color, so he said to Hui Yan: "If you can make the golden statue shine, and the golden statue turns its body to the west, I can only agree to your request."

古文：慧邃便恳到拜请，其夜像即转坐放光，回身西向，明旦便许模之。
现代文：慧邃便恳切地向金像拜请，当天夜晚金像就扭转方向，放射光芒，金像正面转而向西，第二天清晨僧尚就准许慧邃拓写金像。
English: That night, the gold statue reversed its direction, emitting light, and the front of the gold statue turned to the west. The next morning, the monk still allowed Hui Yao to draw the gold statue.

古文：像趺先有外国书，莫有识者，后有三藏冉阝求跋摩识之，云是阿育王为第四女所造也。
现代文：金像底座原先有外国文字，没有人认识这文字，后来有三藏法师邮求跋摩认识底座上的字，他辨认说，文字写的是阿育王为自己的第四个女儿铸造。
English: Originally, the base of the gold statue had foreign characters on it, but no one knew what they were. Later, there were three Tibetan mages who sent postcards asking for the words on the base. He recognized that the words were written by King Ashoka for his fourth daughter.

古文：及大同中，出旧塔舍利，敕市寺侧数百家宅地，以广寺域，造诸堂殿并瑞像周回阁等，穷于轮奂焉。
现代文：到大同年间，挖出了旧塔下的舍利，高祖下令买下寺侧数百家宅地，以便扩大寺院，建造各种堂殿以及瑞像周回阁等，寺中房屋建设得极多而且宏伟高大。
English: In the same year, the relics under the old pagoda were excavated, and Gaozu ordered the purchase of hundreds of houses on the temple side in order to expand the temple, build various halls and statues, and so on. The number of buildings in the temple was extremely large and grand.

古文：其图诸经变，并吴人张繇运手。
现代文：那些描绘经文中故事的图画，全是吴人张繇动手绘制。
English: The pictures depicting the stories in the scriptures were all hand-painted by Zhang Ye, a native of Wu.

古文：繇，丹青之工，一时冠绝。
现代文：张繇是绘画的高手，在当时首屈一指，无人能与他相提并论。
English: Zhang Ye was a master of painting, second to none at the time, and no one can be compared to him.

古文：盘盘国，宋文帝元嘉，孝武孝建、大明中，并遣使贡献。
现代文：盘盘国在宋文帝元嘉年间，孝武帝孝建、大明年间，都派遣使者来献纳贡品。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Songwen and Emperor Yuanjia, Emperor Xiaowu and Emperor Xiaojian, and Emperor Taizong, Panpan dispatched envoys to pay tribute.

古文：大通元年，其王使使奉表曰： 扬州阎浮提震旦天子：万善庄严，一切恭敬，犹如天净无云，明耀满目；天子身心清净，亦复如是。
现代文：大通元年，盘盘国王派遣使者呈奉表章说： 扬州间浮提震旦天子：国土美善，万民恭敬，犹如明净无云的天空，一片光明。天子身心圣洁，也都是像这样。
English: In the first year of Datong, the king of Pan Pan sent an envoy to present a seal saying: Yangzhou floating between the trembling son of heaven: the land is good, the people are respectful, just like a clear sky without clouds, a bright. The son of heaven is physically and mentally holy, and it is all like this.

古文：道俗济济，并蒙圣王光化，济度一切，永作舟航，臣闻之庆善。
现代文：千千万万僧俗百姓，都蒙受圣王沐浴教化，圣王济度万民，永作舟航，我们听到这消息深感喜庆和吉祥。
English: Thousands upon thousands of monks and lay people have been enlightened by the bathing of the holy king. The holy king provides for the people and is always sailing. We are deeply joyful and auspicious to hear this news.

古文：我等至诚敬礼常胜天子足下，稽首问讯。
现代文：我们怀着至诚之心向常胜天子足下致敬，叩首问安。
English: With a sincere heart, we pay homage to the foot of the ever-victorious God, and bow our heads in greeting.

古文：今奉薄献，愿垂哀受。 
现代文：现在奉献微薄的贡品，希望你给予哀怜接受我们的敬意。 
English: We now offer our humble tribute, hoping that you will give us the compassion to accept our homage.

古文：中大通元年五月，累遣使贡牙像及塔，并献沉檀等香数十种。
现代文：中大通元年五月，盘盘国又多次派遣使者贡献象牙雕的佛像及佛塔，并且贡献沉檀等数十种香料。
English: In May of the first year of Zhongdaxu, Panpan repeatedly sent emissaries to contribute ivory Buddha statues and pagodas, and contributed dozens of spices such as sandalwood.

古文：六年八月，复使送菩提国真舍利及画塔，并献菩提树叶、詹糖等香。
现代文：中大通六年八月，盘盘国又派遣使者送菩提国真舍利及画塔，并献纳菩提树叶、詹糖等香料。
English: In August of the 6th year of Zhongdaxu, Panpan sent an envoy to Bodhi to send the Buddha's relic and the painting tower, and to offer the Buddha's leaves, sugar and other spices.

古文：丹丹国，中大通二年，其王遣使奉表曰： 伏承圣主至德仁治，信重三宝，佛法兴显，众僧殷集，法事日盛，威严整肃。
现代文：丹丹国，中大通二年，丹丹国王派遣使者呈奉表章说： 我们蒙受圣主的恩惠仁爱，圣主看重佛教，使佛法振兴昌盛，众僧会集，法事一天天兴盛，佛教威望一天天整肃提高。
English: In the second year of the reign of King Dandan, the country of Dandan, King Dandan sent an envoy to present a certificate saying, "We have received the grace and benevolence of the Lord. The Lord has valued Buddhism, reviving and flourishing the Dharma, gathering the monks, flourishing the Dharma every day, and improving the prestige of Buddhism every day."

古文：朝望国执，慈愍苍生，八方六合，莫不归服。
现代文：朝廷重臣、掌握国家大权之人，都怜爱同情百姓，四面八方的国家，没有一个不来归服。
English: The senior courtiers of the imperial court and those who hold the power of the state are all compassionate and sympathetic to the people, and there is no country in all directions that will not submit.

古文：化邻诸天，非可言喻。
现代文：圣王的教化广被邻国，不是用言语所能形容描绘的。
English: The edification of the holy king, who was widely admired by his neighbors, cannot be described in words.

古文：不任庆善，若暂奉见尊足。
现代文：我们感到说不尽的喜庆吉祥，如同突然间见到了圣王一样。
English: We felt an inexpressible sense of joy and happiness, as if we had suddenly met the holy king.

古文：谨奉送牙像及塔各二躯，并献火齐珠、吉贝、杂香药等。 
现代文：这裹恭谨地献上象牙雕的佛像及塔各两具，还一并献纳火齐珠、古贝、各种香药等。 
English: They respectfully presented two ivory statues of Buddha and two pagodas, as well as offerings of fire beads, ancient shells, and various incense.

古文：大同元年，复遣使献金、银、琉璃、杂宝、香、药等物。
现代文：大同元年，丹丹国王又派遣使者献纳金、银、琉璃、杂宝、香药等贡品。
English: In the first year of Datong, King Dandan sent an envoy to offer gold, silver, glass, miscellaneous treasures, incense and other tributes.

古文：干利国，在南海洲上。
现代文：干陁利国，在南海海岛上。
English: Gansu Province, on an island in the South China Sea.

古文：其俗与林邑、扶南略同。
现代文：遣国家的习俗与林邑、扶南大略相同。
English: The customs of the sending countries are roughly the same as those of Lin'eup and Funan.

古文：出班布、吉贝、槟榔，槟榔特好，为诸国之极。
现代文：干陁利国出产班布、古贝、槟榔。这裹出产的槟榔特别精良味美，是海南各国最出色的品种。
English: Gansu Province produces bamboo shoots, goji berries, and betel nut. The betel nut produced in this area is particularly exquisite and delicious, and is the most outstanding variety in all of Hainan.

古文：宋孝武世，王释婆罗冉阝怜遣长史竺留献金银宝器。
现代文：宋孝武帝时，干陁利国国王释婆罗邮怜陁派遣长史竺留陁献纳金银宝器。
English: During the reign of Emperor Song Xiaowu, the king of Ganymede sent his envoy to Changshu to present gold and silver treasures.

古文：天监元年，其王瞿昙修跋罗以四月八日梦见一僧，谓之曰： 中国今有圣主，十年之后，佛法大兴。
现代文：天监元年，千陁利国国王瞿昙修跋陀罗在四月八日梦见一个僧人对自己说： 中国现在有圣明的君主，十年之后，佛教会在中国大为盛行。
English: In the first year of Heaven's Guardianship, on April 8th, the king of the Chihli Kingdom, Zeshuvadara, dreamed of a monk who said to himself: China now has a holy monarch, and ten years later, the Buddhist Church is very popular in China.

古文：汝若遣使贡奉敬礼，则土地豊乐，商旅百倍；若不信我，则境土不得自安。 
现代文：你假如派遣使者献纳贡品，尊崇中国的君主，友好往来，以礼相待，那么你的国家就会年年丰收，百姓安乐，来往商旅增加百倍；假如你不相信我，那么你的国家就不能得到安宁。 
English: If you send envoys to pay tribute, honor the Chinese monarch, maintain friendly relations, and treat each other with courtesy, then your country will have a bumper harvest every year, the people will be happy, and the number of business trips will increase a hundredfold; if you do not believe me, then your country will not have peace.

古文：修跋罗初未能信，既而又梦此僧曰： 汝若不信我，当与汝往观之。 
现代文：脩跋陁罗起初不相信，过了不久他又梦见这个僧人说： 假如你不相信我说的话，我将和你一道去看看皇玺。 
English: At first he did not believe it, but soon he dreamed that the monk said, "If you do not believe me, I will go with you to see the coffin."

古文：乃于梦中来至中国，拜觐天子。
现代文：于是就在梦中来到，觐见史固天子。
English: So he came in a dream to see Shigutenko.

古文：既觉，心异之。
现代文：醒来之后，他感觉奇怪。
English: When he woke up, he felt strange.

古文：罗本工画，乃写梦中所见高祖容质，饰以丹青，仍遣使并画工奉表献玉盘等物。
现代文：他本来精于绘画，于是他就画下梦中见到的高祖的容貌形态，用彩色修饰高祖的画像，接着他就派遣使者和画工到中国，呈奉表章，献纳玉盘等贡品。
English: He was originally good at painting, so he painted the appearance of Gao Zu that he saw in his dream, and decorated the image of Gao Zu with color. Then he sent messengers and painters to China to present tributes such as a watch badge and a jade plate.

古文：使人既至，模写高祖形以还其国，比本画则符同焉。
现代文：使者、画工来到中国，画工就描摹高祖的形貌带回本国，和原来的画相比，形貌相同。
English: When envoys and painters came to China, the painters painted Gaozu's appearance and brought it back to their home country. Compared to the original painting, the appearance is the same.

古文：因盛以宝函，日加礼敬。
现代文：脩跋陁罗就用宝函盛装画像，每天对着画像行礼致敬。
English: To this day, he uses a treasure box to hold the portrait and salutes it every day.

古文：后跋死，子毘邪跋摩立。
现代文：后来脩跋陁罗死去，他的儿子毗邪跋摩立为王。
English: Later, Shivamala died and his son Vijayavarma became king.

古文：十七年，遣长史毘员跋摩奉表曰： 常胜天子陛下：诸佛世尊，常乐安乐，六通三达，为世间尊，是名如来。
现代文：天监十七年，毗邪跋摩派遣长史毗员跋摩呈奉表章说： 常胜天子陛下：诸佛世尊，常乐安乐，他有神足通、天眼通、天耳通、他心通、宿命通、漏尽通六种神通力，有能够通达宿命明、天眼明、漏尽明三明的能力，是世间的尊者，他的名字是如来。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Heaven's Supervisor, Vishambhama dispatched the Chief Historian, Vishambhama, to present an epitaph, saying: Ever-victorious, Your Majesty the Son of Heaven: All Buddhas are world-revered, ever-happy and at ease. He has six kinds of supernatural powers: divine feet, divine eyes, divine ears, divine heart, divine destiny, and divine omniscience. He has the ability to access the three powers of divine destiny, divine eyes, and divine omniscience. He is a venerable person in the world. His name is Tsuyu.

古文：应供正觉，遗形舍利，造诸塔像，庄严国土，如须弥山。
现代文：他受供奉成佛，留下身体上的舍利，人们建造佛塔，雕制佛像，使国土宏伟精妙，如同须弥山。
English: He was enshrined as a Buddha, leaving his body as a relic. People built pagodas and carved Buddha statues, making the country magnificent and exquisite, like Mount Sumeru.

古文：邑居聚落，次第罗满，城郭馆宇，如忉利天宫。具足四兵，能伏怨敌。
现代文：民间的邑居聚落，城郭馆宇，逐渐布满，如同忉利天宫，四面布满军队，能够使仇敌畏服。
English: The people's towns and villages, castles and museums are gradually filling up, just like the Heavenly Palace, with troops on all sides, which can intimidate the enemy.

古文：国土安乐，无诸患难，人民和善，受化正法，庆无不通。
现代文：陛下国土安乐，没有各种灾难，人民生活和谐，接受教化，遵守法纪，处处事事吉祥。
English: Your majesty, the country is at peace, there are no disasters of any kind, the people live in harmony, accept enlightenment, abide by laws and regulations, and deal with everything auspiciously.

古文：犹处雪山，流注雪水，八味清净，百川洋溢，周回屈曲，顺趋大海，一切众生，咸得受用。
现代文：如同处在雪山之上，雪水流注，水中八味清净，水流注使百川洋溢，川流迂回曲折，直趋大海，世上之人，都能受用。
English: As if you were on top of a snow-capped mountain, the snow-water flowed, the water was crystal clear, the water flow made the rivers overflow, the river flow meandered and twisted, straight to the sea, and everyone in the world could use it.

古文：于诸国土，殊胜第一，是名震旦。
现代文：在天下各国之中，陛下的国土景致最为优美，因此名为震旦。
English: Among all the countries in the world, the landscape of His Majesty's land is the most beautiful, hence the name Shindang.

古文：大梁扬都天子，仁廕四海，德合天心，虽人是天，降生护世，功德宝藏，救世大悲，为我尊生，威仪具足。
现代文：大梁扬都天子，仁爱庇荫四海，德政符合天意人心，虽在人间，却是由天降生，保护人世，带来功德。赐给宝藏，拯救人间悲苦，是我佛降生，律仪规范全都具备。
English: Daryang Yangdu is the son of heaven, benevolence and love protect the four seas, and virtue and politics are in line with the will of heaven. Although he is on earth, he was born from heaven to protect the human world and bring merit. To bestow treasure and save human suffering, our Buddha was born with all the rules and regulations.

古文：是故至诚敬礼天子足下，稽首问讯。
现代文：因此我们怀着至诚之心，向天子陛下行礼致敬，叩首问安。
English: Therefore, with a sincere heart, we salute and bow to His Majesty the Emperor.

古文：奉献金芙蓉、杂香、药等，愿垂纳受。 
现代文：奉献金芙蓉、杂香药等贡品，希望天子垂爱收受。 
English: Offer golden hibiscus, incense and other tributes, and hope that the heavenly son will be pleased to receive them.

古文：普通元年，复遣使献方物。
现代文：普通元年，毗邪跋摩又派遣使者献纳当地特产。
English: In the first year of the year, Vijayabhama sent an envoy to offer local specialties.

古文：狼牙修国，在南海中。
现代文：狼牙脩国，在南海中。
English: It is located in the middle of the South China Sea.

古文：其界东西三十日行，南北二十日行，去广州二万四千里。土气物产与扶南略同，偏多祼沉婆律香等。
现代文：它的境域由束到西有三十天的行程，由南到北有二十天的行程。狼牙脩国距广州二万四千里，那裹的土地、气候、物产，与扶南国大致相同，出产的筏沉婆律香等偏多。
English: Its territory is a thirty-day journey from Shu to the west, and a twenty-day journey from the south to the north. Yunnan is twenty-four thousand miles away from Guangzhou, and the land, climate, and products in that area are roughly the same as those in the southern part of the country. The production of ginger incense is relatively high.

古文：其俗男女皆袒而被发，以吉贝为干缦。
现代文：那裹的风俗男男女女都袒露上身，头发披散，用古贝树织成布，围在腰身以下，称属干缦。
English: The men and women in this custom bare their upper bodies, their hair is loose, and they wear a cloth woven from an ancient tree, which is wrapped around the waist and below, and is said to be a sign of dryness.

古文：其王及贵臣乃加云霞布覆胛，以金绳为络带，金镮贯耳。
现代文：国王和显贵的大臣加用云霞布覆盖在肩胛上，用金绳作络带，耳上戴着金刨。
English: The king and his high-ranking ministers also wore a cape of cloud-blue cloth over their epaulettes, a sash of gold cords, and gold shovels in their ears.

古文：女子则被布，以璎珞绕身。
现代文：女子身上披着布，用珠玉穿成璎珞，缠绕在身上。
English: The woman's body is draped in cloth, with jewels threaded into a cocoon and wrapped around her body.

古文：其国累砖为城，重门楼阁。
现代文：狼牙脩国用砖堆砌成城墙，设置宫门和建起楼阁。
English: He piled up bricks to build a city wall, set up a palace gate and built a pavilion.

古文：王出乘象，有幡毦旗鼓，罩白盖，兵卫甚设。
现代文：国王外出乘坐大象，有用羽毛装饰的幡旗鼓乐相随，头上罩着大白伞，卫兵众多，禁卫森严。
English: The king is out riding an elephant, accompanied by a flag and drums decorated with useful feathers, with a large white umbrella over his head, numerous guards, and a strict curfew.

古文：国人说，立国以来四百余年，后嗣衰弱，王族有贤者，国人归之。
现代文：据狼牙脩国国中人说，他们国家立国共四百余年，国王的后嗣衰弱，王族中出现了一个贤能的人，国中人都归附他。
English: According to the people in the kingdom of the wolf's teeth, their country was founded more than four hundred years ago. The king's heir was weak, and a wise man appeared in the royal family. The people in the kingdom all followed him.

古文：王闻知，乃加囚执，其鏁无故自断，王以为神，因不敢害，乃斥逐出境，遂奔天竺，天竺妻以长女。
现代文：国王听到这消息，就把这人囚禁起来，但锁住这人的锁却无缘无故自己断掉，国王认为这人是神，于是不敢害死他，就把他驱逐出境。这个人于是逃奔到天竺，天竺王把长女嫁给他为妻。
English: When the king heard the news, he imprisoned the man, but the man's locks broke without any reason. The king thought that the man was a god, and he did not dare to kill him, so he banished him. The man then fled to the Heavens, and the King of the Heavens married his eldest daughter to him.

古文：俄而狼牙王死，大臣迎还为王。
现代文：不久狼牙王死去，狼牙脩国大臣就把他接回来为国王。
English: King Fang died soon after, and the Minister of the State of Fang brought him back as king.

古文：二十余年死，子婆伽达多立。
现代文：他作国王二十余年后死去，他的儿子婆伽达多立为王。
English: He died after more than twenty years as king, and his son, Bhagadad Gita, became king.

古文：天监十四年，遣使阿撤多奉表曰： 大吉天子足下：离淫怒痴，哀愍众生，慈心无量。
现代文：天监十四年，婆伽达多派遣使者阿撤多向高祖呈奉表章说： 大吉天子足下：你逐离淫邪之人，斥弃痴愚之人，同情怜悯百姓，慈善之心不可限量。
English: In the 14th year of the Celestial Guardianship, Bhagavad-gita sent an emissary, Abhidhamma, to present a tablet to Gautama, saying: "At the foot of the great auspicious God: You expel the evil-doers, reject the fools, sympathize with and pity the people, and have a boundless heart of charity.

古文：端严相好，身光明朗，如水中月，普照十方。
现代文：你端庄严谨，仪容美好，身上发出光芒，十分明亮，如水中明月，普照十方。
English: You are dignified and solemn, your appearance is beautiful, your body is radiant, very bright, like a bright moon in the water, shining in all directions.

古文：眉间白毫，其白如雪，其色照曜，亦如月光。
现代文：你眉间有白毛，洁白如雪，光芒四射，也如同月光。
English: Between thy brows is white hair, white as snow, clear as the moon.

古文：诸天善神之所供养，以垂正法宝，梵行众增，庄严都邑。
现代文：供养护法诸神，让教义教典流传，清净寡欲、信佛之人增多，京师进入极乐之境。
English: Offer the deities of the Law of Conservation, let the doctrines and scriptures spread, increase the number of people who are pure and have few desires and believe in Buddhism, and the capital teacher will enter the realm of bliss.

古文：城阁高峻，如乾山。
现代文：京城城墙楼阁高耸入云，如同干陁山。
English: The Beijing Walled City Tower Tower rises high into the clouds, like a dry mountain.

古文：楼观罗列，道途平正。
现代文：楼阁宫殿四处布列，道路子坦。
English: Mansions and palaces are dotted everywhere, and the roads are clogged.

古文：人民炽盛，快乐安稳。
现代文：人民众多，生活快乐安稳。
English: The people are numerous, and life is happy and stable.

古文：著种种衣，犹如天服。
现代文：百姓穿的衣服，如同天神的衣服。
English: The clothes the people wear are like the clothes of the gods.

古文：于一切国，为极尊胜。
现代文：你在所有的国家中，是最尊贵的君主。
English: You are the most honored monarch among all nations.

古文：天王愍念群生，民人安乐，慈心深广，律仪清净，正法化治，供养三宝，名称宣扬，布满世界，百姓乐见，如月初生。
现代文：你体恤顾念百姓，百姓安乐。你慈悲之心广布，自身严格遵奉戒律，端正法纪，教化百姓，供奉佛教三宾，你的美名传扬，流布世界，百姓拥戴，如同新月出现。
English: You are compassionate and considerate of the people, and the people are at ease. Your compassionate heart is widespread, you strictly abide by the precepts, rectify the laws and regulations, educate the people, and offer the Buddhist three guests. Your good name is spread, spread around the world, and the people embrace it, like a crescent moon.

古文：譬如梵王，世界之主，人天一切，莫不归依。
现代文：你就如同梵王，是世界之主，天上人间，万物全都归顺。
English: You are just like King Brahma, the Lord of the world, and all things in heaven and on earth are subject to you.

古文：敬礼大吉天子足下，犹如现前，忝承先业，庆嘉无量。
现代文：我恭敬地向大吉天子足下致敬行礼，希望你将和现在一样，秉承以前的业绩，福寿无量。
English: I respectfully salute and bow to the foot of Daikichi Tenko, and hope that you will be the same as you are now, upholding your previous achievements, and have an immeasurable good life.

古文：今遣使问讯大意。
现代文：现在派遣使者前来问讯，带去我的心意。
English: Now therefore, send a messenger to me, that he may inquire for me, and bring me word again.

古文：欲自往，复畏大海风波不达。
现代文：本来想亲自前去，又怕大海风浪，不能到达。
English: Originally, I wanted to go there in person, but I was afraid of the sea and the waves, so I couldn't get there.

古文：今奉薄献，愿大家曲垂领纳。 
现代文：现在奉上菲薄的贡品，希望君王体谅我的心意接钠贡品。 
English: Now, I offer a meager tribute, and I hope that the king will understand my desire to accept a meager tribute.

古文：婆利国，在广州东南海中洲上，去广州二月日行。
现代文：婆利国，在广州东南海中岛上。离广州有两个多月的行程。
English: Borneo, on the island in the middle of the South China Sea southeast of Guangzhou. It is more than two months away from Guangzhou.

古文：国界东西五十日行，南北二十日行。
现代文：婆利国境界从束到西有五十天行程，从南到北有二十天行程。
English: It takes 50 days to travel from Sokha to the west and 20 days to travel from the south to the north of the border of Borneo.

古文：有一百三十六聚。
现代文：国内有一百三十六个聚居的部落。
English: There are one hundred and thirty-six tribes living together in the country.

古文：土气暑热，如中国之盛夏。
现代文：当地的气候暑热，如同中国的盛夏。
English: The local climate is hot, like the height of summer in China.

古文：谷一岁再熟，草木常荣。
现代文：这裹的谷物一年成熟两次，草木常年开花。
English: The wrapped grain ripens twice a year, and the plants bloom all year round.

古文：海出文螺、紫贝。
现代文：海中出产文螺、紫贝。
English: The sea produces snails and purple mussels.

古文：有石名蚶贝罗，初采之柔软，及刻削为物干之，遂大坚强。
现代文：遣裹有一种石头名叫蚶贝罗，最初开采出来，蚶贝罗石非常柔软，等到把石头刻削之后制成用具，让它干燥，于是就会变得十分坚硬。
English: There is a kind of stone called umbero, which was originally mined. Umbero stone is very soft, and when the stone is carved into a tool and allowed to dry, it becomes very hard.

古文：其国人披吉贝如帊，及为都缦。
现代文：婆利国人披着木棉布，犹如我们的头巾，又用木棉布制做围住腰以下的都缦。
English: The people of Borneo wear a woollen cloth, just like our headscarf, and use woollen cloth to make a Tudor girdle below the waist.

古文：王乃用班丝布，以璎珞绕身，头著金冠高尺余，形如弁，缀以七宝之饰，带金装剑，偏坐金高坐，以银蹬支足。
现代文：国王才用染色的木棉布，当地人称为班丝布来制作都缦，用珠玉串成饰物缠绕在身上，头戴一尺多高的金冠，冠形如同弁，王冠上缀着各种宝物作装饰。国王佩带金装剑，偏坐在金制造的高高的王座上，用银蹬支撑足。
English: The king used dyed cotton cloth, known locally as banshees, to make a Tudor, with beads twisted into ornaments wrapped around his body. He wore a foot-high gold crown, shaped like a valve, and decorated with various treasures. The king wore a gold-plated sword and sat on a high throne made of gold, supporting his feet with silver bracelets.

古文：侍女皆为金花杂宝之饰，或持白毦拂及孔雀扇。
现代文：侍女们都用金花、各种宝物作饰物，有的拿着白羽做的拂尘和孔雀羽做的扇子。
English: The ladies-in-waiting were all adorned with gold flowers and various treasures, some holding white feather dusters and peacock feather fans.

古文：王出，以象驾舆，舆以杂香为之，上施羽盖珠帘，其导从吹螺击鼓。
现代文：国王外出，用象驾车，国王的车驾用各种香木制造，车上设置羽盖珠帘，国王前后的仪仗吹螺击鼓。
English: The king went out, driving an elephant. The king's chariot was made of all kinds of fragrant wood, with a feather-covered bead curtain on the car, and the king played drums before and after the ceremony.

古文：王姓憍陈如，自古未通中国。
现代文：国王姓懦陈如，从古以来未和中国交往。
English: The king's surname is Wu Chenru, and he has not been in contact with China since ancient times.

古文：问其先及年数，不能记焉，而言白净王夫人即其国女也。
现代文：向国王询问他的祖先以及立国的年数，他都说不上来，衹是说白净王夫人就是他们国家的女子。
English: When the king was asked about his ancestors and the number of years since the founding of the country, he was unable to say, except to say that the wife of King Baekje was the woman of their country.

古文：天监十六年，遣使奉表曰： 伏承圣王信重三宝，兴立塔寺，校饰庄严，周遍国土。
现代文：天监十六年，婆利国国王派遣使者呈奉表章说： 我听说圣主你信奉敬重佛教三宝，建立塔寺，装修佛像，全国处处都这样。
English: In the 16th year of Tianjing, the king of Borneo sent an envoy to present a certificate saying: I have heard that you, the holy lord, believe in revering the three treasures of Buddhism, building pagodas and temples, and decorating Buddha statues, and this is the case throughout the country.

古文：四衢平坦，清净无秽；台殿罗列，状若天宫；壮丽微妙，世无与等。
现代文：四方道路平坦，清净而无秽杂。楼台宫殿四布，如同天宫，壮丽精美，世上没有一处能和你们国家相提并论。
English: The roads in all four directions are smooth, clean and free of filth and clutter. The buildings and palaces are spread out like heavenly palaces, magnificent and exquisite. There is no place in the world that can be compared to your country.

古文：圣主出时，四兵具足，羽仪导从，布满左右。
现代文：圣主外出时，四面禁兵威严，仪仗导从，布满左右。
English: When the Lord went out, soldiers were stationed on all four sides, and there were ceremonial guards all around.

古文：都人士女，丽服光饰。
现代文：士人美女，装饰华丽，衣服鲜艳。
English: Beautiful women, ornate decoration, bright clothes.

古文：市廛豊富，充积珍宝。
现代文：集市热闹非凡，满是珠宝。
English: The market is a hive of activity, full of jewels.

古文：王法清整，无相侵夺。
现代文：法纪严明，没有互相侵夺的事情发生。
English: The laws and regulations are strict, and there have been no incidents of mutual usurpation.

古文：学徒皆至，三乘竞集。敷说正法，云布雨润。
现代文：精通佛法的人争着会集，学习佛法的人也都从四方赶来，讲说佛教教义，犹如春雨滋润人们心田。
English: People who are proficient in Buddhism compete for the meeting, and people who study Buddhism come from all over the world to speak about Buddhist teachings, just like the spring rain moistens people's hearts.

古文：四海流通，交会万国。
现代文：你们和四方交流，和各国交往。
English: You have exchanges with the Quartet and with other countries.

古文：长江眇漫，清泠深广。有生咸资，莫能消秽。
现代文：长江辽阔无边，水流深广清澈，百姓都依靠长江为生，没有谁能使它干涸。
English: The Yangtze River is vast and boundless, the water is deep and clear, the people rely on the Yangtze River for their livelihood, and no one can dry it up.

古文：阴阳和畅，灾厉不作。
现代文：国家阴阳调和，灾害不会发生。
English: The national yin and yang are reconciled, and disasters will not occur.

古文：大梁扬都圣王无等，临覆上国，有大慈悲，子育万民。
现代文：大梁扬都圣王无人能比，治理遣上等的国家，有大慈大悲之心，像对待儿子似的抚育万民。
English: There is no one like the Great Yangdu King, who governs a first-class country, has great mercy and compassion, and treats all the people like his sons.

古文：平等忍辱，怨亲无二。
现代文：能够忍受诟辱，平等对待万物，对仇敌对亲人没有差别。
English: Able to tolerate insults, treat all things equally, and treat enemies and relatives alike.

古文：加以周穷，无所藏积。
现代文：周济穷人，不留积蓄。
English: Give to the poor, not to the rich.

古文：靡不照烛，如日之明；无不受乐，犹如净月。
现代文：圣王光辉如同太阳，天下无处不受光辉照耀；圣王温情如同明月，天下无人不受到滋润。
English: The glory of the holy king is like the sun, and there is no place in the world that is not illuminated by the glory; the warmth of the holy king is like the bright moon, and no one in the world is not moisturized.

古文：宰辅贤良，群臣贞信，尽忠奉上，心无异想。
现代文：圣王的宰辅贤良，群臣正直诚实，竭尽忠心事奉圣王，心中没有别的想法。
English: The king's aides-de-camp are virtuous, and his ministers are honest and honorable. They serve the king loyally to the best of their ability. They have no other thoughts in their hearts.

古文：伏惟皇帝是我真佛，臣是婆利国主，今敬稽首礼圣王足下，惟愿大王知我此心。
现代文：我们认为，大梁皇帝就是我们的真佛，臣下我是婆利国王，现在我恭敬地稽首礼拜圣王足下，希望圣王了解我这片诚心。
English: We believe that the Great Liang Emperor is our true Buddha, and my vassal is the king of Borneo. Now I respectfully bow my head and worship at the feet of the holy king, hoping that the holy king understands my sincerity.

古文：此心久矣，非适今也。
现代文：我有遣诚心由来已久，并不是现在才有。
English: I have been sincere for a long time, it's not just now.

古文：山海阻远，无缘自达，今故遣使献金席等，表此丹诚。 
现代文：因为山海阻隔，路途遥远，没有机会自己亲自前来表达诚心，现在特地派遣使臣进献金席等贡品，以表达我的赤诚。 
English: Because of the distance between the mountains and the sea, and the long journey, I did not have the opportunity to come and express my sincerity in person. Now, I am specially sending envoys to bring tributes such as donation seats to express my sincerity.

古文：普通三年，其王频伽复遣使珠贝智贡白鹦鹉、青虫、兜鍪、琉璃器、吉贝、螺杯、杂香、药等数十种。
现代文：普通三年，婆利国国王频伽又派遣使臣珠旦望进献白鹦鹉、青虫、兜鍪、琉璃器、古贝、螺杯、各种香料、香药等数十种贡品。
English: In the following three years, the king of Borneo, Phang Nga, sent his envoy, Zhu Dang Wangjin, to offer dozens of tributes such as white parrots, worms, handkerchiefs, glassware, ancient shells, snails, various spices, and perfumes.

古文：中天竺国，在大月支东南数千里，地方三万里，一名身毒。
现代文：中天竺国，在大月支东南数千里的地方，土地方圆三万里。
English: Zhongtianye is thousands of miles southeast of Dagetsu, while Tujia is about 30,000 miles away.

古文：汉世张骞使大夏，见邛竹杖、蜀布，国人云，市之身毒。
现代文：中天竺国又名皇童。龇退画出使左夏，见到塑竹杖、蜀布，左夏人说是从皇毒买来。
English: In the middle of the day, Zuo Xia, also known as the emperor's son, drew a picture of Zuo Xia, and saw a plastic bamboo cane and silk cloth. Zuo Xia said that he bought it from the emperor.

古文：身毒即天竺，盖传译音字不同，其实一也。
现代文：身毒就是天竺，大概是翻译译音用的汉字不同，其实是同一个国家。
English: The Chinese characters used for the transliteration are different, but it is actually the same country.

古文：从月支、高附以西，南至西海，东至槃越，列国数十，每国置王，其名虽异，皆身毒也。
现代文：从月支、高附往西，南至西海，东至槃越，有数十个国家，每个国家都有国王，他们的名称虽然不同，但都属于身毒。
English: There are dozens of countries from the crescent and ridge to the west, from the south to the West Sea, and from the east to the Yangtze River. Each country has a king. Although their names are different, they all belong to the body poison.

古文：汉时羁属月支，其俗土著与月支同，而卑湿暑热，民弱畏战，弱于月支。
现代文：汉朝时，身毒附属月支，他们的民俗也是定土而居，舆月支相同，但身毒地势低下潮湿，气候暑热，百姓怯弱，害怕打仗，国力比月支弱。
English: During the Han Dynasty, the body and the poison were attached to the lunar branch, and their folk customs were also sedentary. The body and the poison were the same, but the body and the poison were low and damp, the climate was hot, the people were timid and afraid of war, and the national strength was weaker than that of the lunar branch.

古文：国临大江，名新陶，源出昆仑，分为五江，总名曰恒水。
现代文：身毒国面临大江，大江名新陶，发源于崑蝓山，下游分成五条江，总的名称叫恒水。
English: The poisoned country faces the big river, the big river named Xintuo, which originates from Lushan, and is divided into five rivers downstream. The general name is Hengshui.

古文：其水甘美，下有真盐，色正白如水精。
现代文：江水甜美，水下产真盐，真盐颜色纯白如水精。
English: The water of the river is sweet, and true salt is produced underwater. The color of true salt is pure white like water essence.

古文：土俗出犀、象、貂、鼲、玳瑁、火齐、金、银、铁、金缕织成金皮罽、细摩白叠、好裘、毾。
现代文：当地出产犀、象、貂、孵、玳瑁、火齐、金、银、铁、金缕织成、金皮厕、细摩白叠、好裘、疑毡。
English: Locally produced rhinoceros horns, elephants, tadpoles, hatchlings, chrysalides, fireflies, gold, silver, iron, woven gold threads, gold toilet, fine white lace, good jellyfish, and suspicious jellyfish.

古文：火齐状如云母，色如紫金，有光耀，别之则薄如蝉翼，积之则如纱縠之重沓也。
现代文：火齐形态像云母，颜色如紫金，有光闪耀，像蝉翼那么薄，重叠起来就如同纱谷重叠。
English: The shape of the fire is like mica, the color is like purple-gold, the light is shining, it is as thin as a cicada's wing, and the overlapping is like overlapping gauzes.

古文：其西与大秦、安息交市海中，多大秦珍物一一珊瑚、琥珀、金碧珠玑、琅玕、郁金、苏合。
现代文：身毒国西部人与大台、堂皇等国的人在海上互市贸易，因此有很多大秦出产的珍贵物品，如珊瑚、琥珀、金碧珠玑、琅歼、郁金、苏合等。
English: The people of the western part of the country and the people of Datai, Danghuang and other countries trade with each other at sea. Therefore, there are many precious goods produced in Daqin, such as coral, amber, jade, jade, tulips, and so on.

古文：苏合是合诸香汁煎之，非自然一物也。
现代文：苏合是搀合各种香汁煎制而成，不是天然产物。
English: Suhe is not a natural product, but a mixture of various spices and sauces.

古文：又云大秦人采苏合，先笮其汁以为香膏，乃卖其滓与诸国贾人，是以展转来达中国，不大香也。
现代文：又说是大秦人采来苏合，先榨出其汁制作香膏，于是把榨汁以后的渣滓卖给各国商人，因此苏合辗转传到中国之后，已经不很香了。
English: It is also said that the people of the Great Qin Dynasty harvested Suhe, first squeezed out its juice to make balm, and then sold the dregs of the juice to merchants from all over the world. Therefore, after Suheyu was transmitted to China, it was not very fragrant.

古文：郁金独出罽宾国，华色正黄而细，与芙蓉华里被莲者相似。
现代文：郁金衹出产在阂宾国，花色正黄而细嫩，与荷花裹面覆盖在莲实上的花办相似。
English: Tulips are produced in Zibo Province. The flower color is yellow and delicate, similar to the lotus flowers that cover the lotus.

古文：国人先取以上佛寺，积日香槁，乃粪去之；贾人从寺中征雇，以转卖与佗国也。
现代文：熨宾国人先用这花敬奉佛寺，放了很多天之后，花儿枯槁，于是就清扫弃去。商人从寺中雇人收集，然后转卖给别国人。
English: The people of Eribin first used the flowers to venerate the Buddhist temple. After many days, the flowers withered, so they were cleaned and discarded. Merchants hired people from the temple to collect them and then resell them to other people.

古文：汉桓帝延熹九年，大秦王安敦遣使自日南徼外来献，汉世唯一通焉。
现代文：汉桓帝延熹九年，大秦王安敦派遣使者从旦日南徼外来献纳贡品，汉代衹有这一次交往。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Han Huan, the Great Qin King Andong sent an envoy from the south to the north to offer tribute. This was the first time the two countries had met in the Han Dynasty.

古文：其国人行贾，往往至扶南、日南、交趾，其南徼诸国人少有到大秦者。
现代文：大秦国人经商，常常到扶南、曰南、交趾，而南部边塞以及塞外各国却很少有人到大秦去经商。
English: The people of Daqin often go to Funan, Zhainan and Jiaozuo to do business, but very few people from the southern border cities and foreign countries go to Daqin to do business.

古文：孙权黄武五年，有大秦贾人字秦论来到交趾，交趾太守吴邈遣送诣权。权问方土谣俗，论具以事对。
现代文：孙权黄武五年，有大秦贾人字秦论来到交趾，交趾太守吴邈派人送他去见诣权，孙权向方土询问左台的风俗人情，秦论全据实回答。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Sun Quan Huang Wu, a great Qin Jia person named Qin On came to Jiazi, and the governor of Jiazi, Wu Xi, sent someone to see him. Sun Quan asked Fang Di about the customs and people of the left platform, and Qin On answered truthfully.

古文：时诸葛恪讨丹阳，获黝、歙短人，论见之曰： 大秦希见此人。 
现代文：当时诸葛恪进讨丹阳，抓获黝、歙矮人，秦论见到这些矮人说： 大秦很少见到这样的人。 
English: At that time, Zhuge Ke marched into Danyang and captured the dwarfs Yao and Yao. On seeing these dwarfs, Qin remarked, "Great Qin has rarely seen such people."

古文：权以男女各十人，差吏会稽刘咸送论，咸于道物故，论乃径还本国。
现代文：还护就拿男女各十名矮人送给秦论，并派遣官员会稽刘咸送论，咸在途中去世，于是直接回本国。
English: He also sent ten dwarfs, male and female, to Qin Rong, and dispatched officials to send Liu Xian to Qin Rong. Xian died on the way, so he directly returned to his home country.

古文：汉和帝时，天竺数遣使贡献，后西域反叛，遂绝。
现代文：汉和帝时，天竺屡次派遣使者献纳贡品，后来西域反叛，交往就中断了。
English: During the Han Dynasty and the Qing Dynasty, Tianzhu repeatedly sent emissaries to pay tribute. Later, when the Western Regions rebelled, the exchanges were interrupted.

古文：至桓帝延熹二年、四年，频从日南徼外来献。
现代文：到漠桓帝延熹二年、延熹四年，天竺使者又多次从日南边塞之外来献纳贡品。
English: In the 2nd and 4th years of the reign of Emperor Mokuantai, envoys from heaven repeatedly came from beyond Japan's southern borders to offer tribute.

古文：魏、晋世，绝不复通。
现代文：魏、晋时代，交往中断。
English: During the Wei and Jin dynasties, contacts were interrupted.

古文：唯吴时扶南王范旃遣亲人苏物使其国，从扶南发投拘利口，循海大湾中正西北入历湾边数国，可一年余到天竺江口，逆水行七千里乃至焉。
现代文：衹是在吴国时，扶南王范旃派遣自己的亲信苏物出使天竺国，从扶南投拘利口出发，从正西北方向进入海边的大海湾，经过海湾沿岸几个国家，大约一年多后到达天竺国大江江口，又在江中逆水上溯七千里才到达天竺国。
English: When he was in the State of Wu, the King of Funan, Fan Ye, dispatched his close confidant, Su Mu, to send an envoy to the State of Tianzhu. Starting from the Tianzhu of Funan, he entered the large bay on the coast from the northwest direction, passing through several countries along the coast of the bay. After about more than a year, he arrived at the estuary of the Dajiang River in the State of Tianzhu, and then traveled seven thousand miles upstream in the river to reach the State of Tianzhu.

古文：天竺王惊曰： 海滨极远，犹有此人。 
现代文：天竺王惊讶地说： 距我们海滨非常非常远的地方，竟也还有这种人在那裹。 
English: The King of Heaven and Earth was surprised and said, "This kind of person actually exists in a place very, very far away from our coast.

古文：即呼令观视国内，仍差陈、宋等二人以月支马四匹报旃，遣物等还，积四年方至。
现代文：天竺王就命苏物观看自己国内的情况，接着派陈、宋等二人带着四匹月支马回报范旃，并送苏物等人回国，他们经过四年才到达扶南。
English: King Tianzhu ordered Su Muo to observe the situation in his own country, and then sent Chen, Song and two others with four horses to return Fan Qi, and sent Su Muo and others back to China. It took them four years to reach Funan.

古文：其时吴遣中郎康泰使扶南，及见陈、宋等，具问天竺土俗，云： 佛道所兴国也。
现代文：当时吴国派遣中郎康泰出使扶南，康泰见到陈、宋等人，向他们询问天竺的风俗人情，陈、宋等人说： 天竺是佛教起源的国家。
English: At that time, the State of Wu sent the middle-ranking official Kangtai to Funan. Kangtai met Chen, Song and others and asked them about the customs and people of Tianzhu. Chen, Song and others said: Tianzhu is the country where Buddhism originated.

古文：人民敦厖，土地饶沃。
现代文：百姓众多而富足，土地辽阔而肥沃。
English: The people are numerous and prosperous, and the land is vast and fertile.

古文：其王号茂论。
现代文：天竺王叫做茂论。
English: The King of Heaven and Earth is called Maoism.

古文：所都城郭，水泉分流，绕于渠緌，下注大江。
现代文：都城的城部四周泉水分别在渠堑中流淌，往下注入大江。
English: The spring water around the city of the capital flows separately in channels and flows down into the river.

古文：其宫殿皆雕文镂刻，街曲市里，屋舍楼观，钟鼓音乐，服饰香华；水陆通流，百贾交会，奇玩珍玮，恣心所欲。
现代文：天竺国宫殿都雕镂花纹，街市里巷，建有屋舍楼观，喜好钟鼓音乐，服饰散发花香，水陆交通方便，各地商人到这襄会聚交易，各种奇异珍宝，可以随心所欲地购买。
English: The palaces of Tianyao Province are all carved with patterns, the streets and alleys are winding, there are houses and buildings to look at, people like to listen to the music of bells and drums, the clothing emits floral scents, land and water transportation is convenient, merchants from all over the country gather here to trade, and all kinds of strange treasures can be purchased as you wish.

古文：左右嘉维、舍卫、叶波等十六大国，去天竺或二三千里，共尊奉之，以为在天地之中也。 
现代文：天竺国周围有嘉维、舍卫、叶波等十六个大国，有的距离天竺国有二三千里，他们一起都尊崇敬仰天竺国，认为天竺国处在天地的中心。 
English: There are 16 big countries around Tianyao, including Jiawei, Shewei and Yebo. Some of them are 23,000 miles away from Tianyao. They all respect and admire Tianyao and believe that Tianyao is at the center of heaven and earth.

古文：天监初，其王屈多遣长史竺罗达奉表曰： 伏闻彼国据江傍海，山川周固，众妙悉备，庄严国土，犹如化城。
现代文：天监初年，天竺王屈多派遣长史竺罗达呈奉表章说： 我们听说你们国家据江傍海，山川环绕，国家稳定，各种美好的东西应有尽有，国家雄伟美丽，如同幻化中的美景。
English: In the first year of the Celestial Supervision, King Kudo of the Heavenly Reign sent his chief, Shi Roda, to present a certificate saying: We have heard that your country is bordered by rivers and seas, surrounded by mountains and rivers, the country is stable, there are all kinds of beautiful things, the country is majestic and beautiful, like a beautiful landscape in the process of illusion.

古文：宫殿庄饰，街巷平坦，人民充满，欢娱安乐。
现代文：宫殿庄严华丽，街道干坦，百姓众多，生活欢娱安乐。
English: The palace is stately and gorgeous, the streets are dry and flat, the people are numerous, and life is fun and peaceful.

古文：大王出游，四兵随从，圣明仁爱，不害众生。
现代文：大王出外，四面禁兵随从，大王圣明仁爱，不杀害众生。
English: When the great king goes out, soldiers are forbidden to follow him on all sides. The great king is holy, benevolent, and does not kill living beings.

古文：国中臣民，循行正法，大王仁圣，化之以道，慈悲群生，无所遗弃。
现代文：国中大臣百姓，遵守法纪，大王仁慈圣明，用正道感化他们，仁爱百姓，无一遣弃。
English: Ministers and people in the middle of the country should abide by the law and discipline, and the great king should be merciful and holy, inspire them with the right path, love the people, and abandon none of them.

古文：常修净戒，式导不及，无上法船，沉溺以济。
现代文：大王常常静修佛教的戒律，对那些没接受劝导，还没登上法船信奉佛法的人们，就把他们从沉溺中救出来。
English: The great king often meditated on the precepts of Buddhism, and for those who did not accept the advice and did not board the ship to believe in Buddhism, he saved them from indulgence.

古文：百官氓庶，受乐无恐。
现代文：朝中百官，万方百姓，全都生活安乐，无忧无虑。
English: All the officials of the DPRK and China and the people of all countries are living a happy and carefree life.

古文：诸天护持，万神侍从，天魔降服，莫不归仰。
现代文：护法天神保护大王，万神随从大王，天魔也都降服，没有谁不归服仰慕大王。
English: The guardian deities protect the great king, all the gods follow the great king, and the devils also submit. There is no one who does not submit to and admire the great king.

古文：王身端严，如日初出，仁泽普润，犹如大云，于彼震旦，最为殊胜。
现代文：大王自身端庄严谨，如初升的太阳，大王的仁泽滋润万民，如同大旱的云霓，在震旦之地，是最为优秀的。
English: The great king himself is dignified and solemn, like the rising sun, the benevolence of the great king moisturizes all the people, like the clouds of drought, in the land of tremors, is the best.

古文：臣之所住国土，首罗天守护，令国安乐。
现代文：臣下我居住的国土，由首罗天守护，使我们国家生活安乐。
English: The land where I live as a vassal is under the protection of Heaven, and our national life is happy.

古文：王王相承，未曾断绝。
现代文：国王一代代继承，未曾断绝。
English: The succession of kings from generation to generation is unbroken.

古文：国中皆七宝形像，众妙庄严，臣自修检，如化王法。
现代文：我们国中有佛教七宝，具备佛教的各种美善之实装饰国土，臣下我自己严谨修身，就像被王法感化。
English: In our country, there are seven treasures of Buddhism, with all kinds of virtues and virtues of Buddhism to decorate the land. As a subject, I myself have been strict in self-cultivation, as if I were influenced by the King Fa.

古文：臣名屈多，奕世王种。
现代文：臣下我名叫屈多，世世代代是国王的嫡传子孙。
English: My vassal's name is Kudo, and he has been the king's legitimate descendant for generations.

古文：惟愿大王，圣体和平。
现代文：衹希望大王圣体安康和乐。
English: I hope that the Great King's holy body will be healthy and happy.

古文：今以此国群臣民庶，山川珍重，一切归属，五体投地，归诚大王。
现代文：现在我率领我们国家群臣百姓，山川珍宝，全都归属大王，五体投地，向大王献出诚心。
English: Now I am leading our countrymen and people, the treasures of mountains and rivers, all belong to the great king, and I am devoting myself to the country and offering my sincerity to the great king.

古文：使人竺达多由来忠信，是故今遣。
现代文：使者竺达多一向忠贞诚实，所以现在派遣他来拜见大王。
English: The envoy Xingdado has always been loyal and honest, so now send him to see the great king.

古文：大王若有所须珍奇异物，悉当奉送。
现代文：大王假如需要什么珍奇异实，我们将会全部奉送。
English: If the great king needs anything rare or unusual, we will provide it all.

古文：此之境土，便是大王之国；王之法令善道，悉当承用。
现代文：造裹的境土，也就是大王的国土，大王的法令美政，我们将会全部遵照施行。
English: We will carry out the Great King's edict and policy in accordance with the Great King's edict and policy, which is the Great King's land.

古文：愿二国信使往来不绝。
现代文：希望两国之间使者的往来不要中断。
English: It is hoped that the exchange of envoys between the two countries will not be interrupted.

古文：此信返还，愿赐一使，具宣圣命，备敕所宜。
现代文：这个使者返回的时候，希望你派出一位使臣，宣谕大王你的命令，吩咐我们应当做的事情。
English: And it shall be, when the messenger cometh, that thou shalt send unto him by the hand of a captain of the guard, and shalt speak unto him according to all that I shall say unto thee.

古文：款至之诚，望不空返，所白如允，愿加采纳。
现代文：我真挚恳切地请求，希望使者不会单独返回，我上面说的如果恰当，就请大王采纳。
English: I do earnestly beseech, and hope, that the messenger will not return alone, and if what I have said be proper, let the great king receive him.

古文：今奉献琉璃唾壶、杂香、吉贝等物。 
现代文：现在奉献琉璃唾壶、各种香料、古贝布等贡物给大王。 
English: Now, they are dedicating a glass spittoon, various spices, ancient cloth and other tributes to the great king.

古文：师子国，天竺旁国也。
现代文：师子国是天竺国旁边的国家。
English: Shishikoku is the country next to Amaterasu.

古文：其地和适，无冬夏之异。
现代文：那个地方气候温和，没有冬季夏季的区别。
English: The climate there is temperate, with no distinction between winter and summer.

古文：五谷随人所种，不须时节。
现代文：五谷随时可以种植，不受时令节气限制。
English: Itani can be planted at any time and is not subject to seasonal restrictions.

古文：其国旧无人民，止有鬼神及龙居之。
现代文：师子国原来无人居住，衹有鬼神及龙居住。
English: Originally, there was no one living in Shizi Province, but ghosts, gods and dragons lived there.

古文：诸国商估来共市易，鬼神不见其形，但出珍宝，显其所堪价，商人依价取之。
现代文：各国商人来遣裹做买卖，鬼神不显露自己的形体，祇是拿出珍宝，标出珍宝的价格，商人按价付钱，取走珍宝。
English: Merchants from all over the world come here to do business. The ghosts and gods do not reveal their forms. They just take out the treasures and mark the prices of the treasures. Merchants pay according to the prices and take away the treasures.

古文：诸国人闻其土乐，因此竞至，或有停住者，遂成大国。
现代文：各国人听说这是一方乐土，因此争着来到这地方，有人就留下来居住，这地方就成为一个大国。
English: And the nations heard that this was the land of promise, and they came thither: and they dwelt therein, and it became a great nation.

古文：晋义熙初，始遣献玉像，经十载乃至。
现代文：晋义熙初年，师子国就派人向晋朝进献玉佛像，经历十年才到达。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jin Yixi, Shishi Province sent someone to the Jin Dynasty to present a jade Buddha statue, which took ten years to arrive.

古文：像高四尺二寸，玉色洁润，形制殊特，殆非人工。
现代文：佛像高四尺二寸，玉色洁白细腻，形状很为特别，恐怕不是人工制成。
English: The Buddha statue is four feet two inches tall, the color of jade is pure white and delicate, the shape is very special, I am afraid it is not artificially made.

古文：此像历晋、宋世在瓦官寺，寺先有征士戴安道手制佛像五躯，及顾长康维摩画图，世人谓为三绝。
现代文：遣玉佛像经历晋、宋两代，保存在瓦官寺中，寺中先就有征士戴安道亲手制作的五具佛像，以及顾长尘画的维摩诘画像，世人称为三绝。
English: The jade Buddha statues have been passed down through the Jin and Song dynasties and are preserved in the Wakan Temple. In the temple, there are five Buddha statues made by the conscript Dian Dao himself, as well as the image of Vimala painted by Gu Changcheng, known to the world as the Three Perfections.

古文：至齐东昏，遂毁玉像，前截臂，次取身，为嬖妾潘贵妃作钗钏。
现代文：到齐代，东昏侯就毁去了玉佛像，先截下佛像手臂，接着取用像身，为他宠爱的妃妾潘贵妃制作钗钏。
English: In the Qidai Dynasty, Dongwu Hou destroyed the jade Buddha statue. First, he cut off the arm of the Buddha statue, and then used the statue body to make a cocoon for his favorite concubine, Pan Guifei.

古文：宋元嘉六年、十二年，其王刹利摩诃遣使贡献。
现代文：宋元嘉六年，元嘉十二年，师子国国王刹利摩诃派遣使者献纳贡品。
English: In the sixth year of the Song and Yuan Dynasties, and the twelfth year of the Yuan Dynasties, the king of his disciple's country, Selim Mahaprabhu, sent an envoy to offer tribute.

古文：大通元年，后王伽叶伽罗诃梨邪使奉表曰： 谨白大梁明主：虽山海殊隔，而音信时通。
现代文：大通元年，继承王位的匝王迩国王伽叶伽罗诃梨邪派遣使臣进献表章说： 我恭敬地禀明大梁圣明君主：我们虽然因山海阻隔，但能时常互通音信。
English: In the first year of Datong, the successor to the throne, King Gayegaro, sent an envoy to present the seal and said: I respectfully inform the great leader Emperor Shengming: Although we are separated by mountains and seas, we can often communicate with each other.

古文：伏承皇帝道德高远，覆载同于天地，明照齐乎日月，四海之表，无有不从，方国诸王，莫不奉献，以表慕义之诚。
现代文：我恭敬地听说皇帝道德高深，像天地覆载万物，像日月明照四方。海外各国，没有谁不归服；各国国王，没有谁不进奉表章，献纳贡物，以表达仰慕道义的诚心。
English: I have heard respectfully that the emperor is highly moral, like the heavens and the earth covering all things, like the sun and the moon shining in all directions. Overseas countries, there is no one who does not submit; kings of all countries, there is no one who does not enter the watch and pay tribute to express admiration for moral sincerity.

古文：或泛海三年，陆行千日，畏威怀德，无远不至。
现代文：有人在海上航行三年，在陆上行走千日，赶来拜谒，大家都敬服梁主的威望，钦慕梁主的德行，不论路途多远，都会前来表达诚心。
English: Some people sail at sea for three years, walk on land for a thousand days, and come to pay homage. Everyone respects the prestige of the Master Liang, admires the virtue of the Master Liang, and will come to express their sincerity no matter how far the journey is.

古文：我先王以来，唯以修德为本，不严而治。
现代文：我国从先王以来，衹把修德作为治国的根本，不用威严而获得大治。
English: Since the last king, our country has regarded the cultivation of virtue as the fundamental principle of governing the country, and it is not necessary to be dignified to achieve great governance.

古文：奉事正法道天下，欣人为善，庆若己身，欲与大梁共弘三宝，以度难化。
现代文：我们事奉正道治理天下，看见人家为善就高兴，好比福庆就在自己身上。我们想和大梁一共弘扬佛教三宝，以济助那些难以教化之人。
English: We serve the righteous way to govern the world, and we are happy when we see others doing good, just as we are happy when we are blessed. We want to promote the three treasures of Buddhism together with Daliang to help those who are difficult to enlighten.

古文：信还，伏听告敕。
现代文：使者回来，我恭敬地听从梁主的命令。
English: When the messenger returned, I respectfully obeyed Master Liang's order.

古文：今奉薄献，愿垂纳受。 
现代文：现在奉献微薄的贡品，希望你体恤我们，接纳贡品。 
English: Now we offer a meager tribute, hoping that you will sympathize with us and accept the tribute.

古文：东夷之国，朝鲜为大，得箕子之化，其器物犹有礼乐云。
现代文：东夷各国之中，朝鲜最大，他们受到箕子的感化，在各种用器中还保留了中国的礼乐制度。
English: Among the Eastern Yi countries, North Korea is the largest. They were influenced by the dulcimer and preserved the Chinese ritual music system in various utensils.

古文：魏时，朝鲜以东马韩、辰韩之属，世通中国。
现代文：魏代时，朝鲜以束马韩、辰韩这些国家，世代和中国交往。
English: During the Wei Dynasty, North Korea made contact with China for generations through the countries of Sokka Han and Chun Han.

古文：自晋过江，泛海东使，有高句骊、百济，而宋、齐间常通职贡。
现代文：自从渡江南迁之后，晋朝派出使者，泛海柬渡，高句骊、百济等国，在宋、齐之时常常派遣使者献纳贡品。
English: After the southern migration across the Yangtze River, the Jin dynasty sent emissaries to the countries such as the Pan-Sea Cambodia, Goguryeo and Baekje, and often sent emissaries to pay tribute to the Song and Qi dynasties.

古文：梁兴，又有加焉。
现代文：梁朝建立之后，献纳贡品的国家又有增加。
English: After the establishment of the Liang Dynasty, the number of countries offering tribute increased again.

古文：扶桑国，在昔未闻也。
现代文：扶桑国，以前未曾听说。
English: Fusang, never heard of it before.

古文：普通中，有道人称自彼而至，其言元本尤悉，故并录焉。
现代文：普通年间，有僧人称说自己从扶桑国来，他介绍扶桑国的详情特别清楚，所以也一并收录。
English: In ordinary years, a monk said that he came from Fusang, and the details of his introduction to Fusang were particularly clear, so they were also included.

古文：高句骊者，其先出自东明。
现代文：高句骊国，他们祖先出自束明。
English: Gaogu County, their ancestors are from Sokming.

古文：东明本北夷丱离王之子。
现代文：东明本是北夷橐离王之子。
English: Dongming was originally the son of the Northern Yixing Emperor.

古文：离王出行，其侍儿于后任娠，离王还，欲杀之。
现代文：囊离王出外，他的侍儿在他出外之后怀孕，橐离王回来后，就想杀掉侍儿。
English: When he left the king, his servant became pregnant. When he returned, he wanted to kill his servant.

古文：侍儿曰： 前见天上有气如大鸡子，来降我，因以有娠。 
现代文：侍儿说： 先前见到天上有团气，像鶸蛋那么大，直降落到我身上，因此怀孕。 
English: The waiter said, "I saw a ball of gas in the sky earlier, as big as a quail's egg, and it landed on me, so I'm pregnant."

古文：王囚之，后遂生男。
现代文：粟离王把她囚禁起来，她就生下个男孩。
English: So the king put her in prison, and she gave birth to a son.

古文：王置之豕牢，豕以口气嘘之，不死，王以为神，乃听收养。
现代文：橐离王把这男孩放在猪圈裹，猪用口吐气养育男孩，男孩得以不死。王认为男孩是神，于是准许侍儿收养男孩，这男孩就是束明。
English: The king thought that the boy was a god, so he allowed the attendant to adopt the boy, and the boy became Shu Ming.

古文：长而善射，王忌其猛，复欲杀之，东明乃奔走，南至淹滞水，以弓击水，鱼鳖皆浮为桥，东明乘之得渡，至夫余而王焉。
现代文：东明长大之后，善于射箭，弃离王畏忌他的勇猛，又想杀掉他。束明于是逃跑，南逃到淹滞水，他就用弓击打水流，水中鱼鳖都浮起来，连结为桥，束明就从鱼鳖身上渡过淹滞水，逃到夫余，就在那裹立为王。
English: After Dongming grew up, he was good at archery. He abandoned his fear of the king and his bravery, and wanted to kill him. So Zouming ran away. He fled south to the backwaters, where he hit the current with his bow. In the water, the fish hooks all floated up and connected to form a bridge. Zouming then crossed the backwaters on the fish hooks and fled to Fuyu, where he became king.

古文：其后支别为句骊种也。
现代文：以后束明的后裔分出一支就成为句骊一族。
English: Later, when one of Sokuaki's descendants split off, they became the Kucho family.

古文：其国，汉之玄菟郡也，在辽东之东，去辽东千里。
现代文：高句骊国就是漠代的玄菟郡。方位在辽东束边，离辽东一千里。
English: Gaogu County is the Xuanwu County of the desert era. It is located in the east of Liaodong Province, a thousand miles away from Liaodong Province.

古文：汉、魏世，南与朝鲜、秽貃，东与沃沮，北与夫余接。
现代文：汉、魏时代，高句骊南边与朝鲜、秽铂接壤，束边与沃沮接壤，北边与夫余接壤。
English: During the Han and Wei dynasties, the southern side of Gaogu County was bordered by North Korea and Jilin Province, the northern side was bordered by Fujian Province, and the western side was bordered by Shandong Province.

古文：汉武帝元封四年，灭朝鲜，置玄菟郡，以高句骊为县以属之。
现代文：汉元封四年，汉武帝灭朝鲜，设置玄菟郡，把高句骊划为县，归属玄菟郡。
English: In the fourth year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Hanwu annihilated Korea, set up Xuanwu County, and designated Gaogu County as a county, belonging to Xuanwu County.

古文：句骊地方可二千里，中有辽山，辽水所出。
现代文：高句骊土地大约方圆二千里，国中有座辽山，辽水就在山中发源。
English: Goguryeo's land is about 2,000 miles in circumference. There is a Liao Mountain in the country, and the source of Liao Water is in the mountain.

古文：其王都于丸都之下，多大山深谷，无原泽，百姓依之以居，食涧水。
现代文：高句骊王在丸都山下建都。这个国家多大山深谷，没有平原沼泽，百姓依山而居，食用山涧之水。
English: King Goguryeo built his capital at the foot of Mt. Marutsu. The country has many mountains and deep valleys, but no plains or swamps. The people live in the mountains and drink the water from the mountains.

古文：虽土著，无良田，故其俗节食。
现代文：虽然定土而居，但是没有良田，所以那地方百姓养成节食的习俗。
English: Although they live in a settled area, there are no good fields, so the local people have developed a custom of dieting.

古文：好治宫室，于所居之左立大屋，祭鬼神，又祠零星、社稷。
现代文：百姓喜欢建造房屋。在他们住房的左边建造一座大屋，在大屋裹祭祀鬼神，又祭祀社稷之神和主稼穑的灵星。
English: The people like to build houses. On the left side of their houses, they build a big house, and in the big house they sacrifice ghosts and gods, and they also sacrifice the god of the community and the spirit star of the lord.

古文：人性凶急，喜寇抄。
现代文：百姓生性凶猛，喜欢抢劫掳掠。
English: The people are naturally ferocious and like to rob and plunder.

古文：其官，有相加、对卢、沛者、古邹加、主簿、优台、使者、皁衣、先人，尊卑各有等级。
现代文：他们的官职，有相加、对卢、沛者、古邹加、主簿、优台、使者、皁衣、先人，尊卑等名目，尊卑不同，各有等级。
English: Their official posts included the positions of "addition," "to Lu," "to Pei," "to Gu," "to Gu," "to Zhuo," "to Yutai," "to Envoy," "to Wei," "to Ancestor," and the titles of "superior" and "inferior," with different levels of superiority and inferiority.

古文：言语诸事，多与夫余同，其性气、衣服有异。
现代文：他们的言语风俗，多和夫余相同；但是性格、衣服和夫余有区别。
English: Their speech and customs are mostly the same as Yu's, but their personalities and clothes are different from Yu's.

古文：本有五族，有消奴部、绝奴部、慎奴部、雚奴部、桂娄部。
现代文：高句骊本有五族，有消奴部、绝奴部、慎奴部、雚奴部、桂娄部。
English: There are five groups in the book of the Gaogu, namely, the slave-eliminating group, the slave-renouncing group, the slave-cautious group, the slave-loving group, and the slave-loving group.

古文：本消奴部为王，微弱，桂娄部代之。
现代文：本来是消奴部属王，后来力量衰弱，桂娄部代之为王。
English: Originally, he was the king of the Slavery Eradication Department, but later his power weakened, and Gui Xingbu became the king instead.

古文：汉时赐衣帻、朝服、鼓吹，常从玄菟郡受之。
现代文：汉朝时朝廷赐给他们衣帧、朝服、鼓吹，他们常常到玄菟郡接受颁赐。
English: During the Han Dynasty, the imperial court gave them clothing frames, imperial robes, and propaganda, and they often went to Xuanzang County to receive the gifts.

古文：后稍骄，不复诣郡，但于东界筑小城以受之，至今犹名此城为帻沟娄。 沟娄 者，句骊名 城 也。
现代文：后来他们渐渐骄傲，不再到玄菟郡，衹是在束部边界建筑一座小城接受颁赐，至今他们还把这座小城称为帧沟娄。 沟娄 ，在句骊语中就是 城 。
English: Later, they gradually became proud, and no longer went to Xuanzang County. Instead, they built a small town on the border of Sokobe to receive the award. To this day, they still call this small town "Frame Gully." Gully, in the language of sentences, is a city.

古文：其置官，有对卢则不置沛者，有沛者则不置对卢。
现代文：高句骊任命官员，有对就不设置沛者，有沛者就不设置对。
English: Gao Guanzhong appointed officials, those who have the right will not set up the right, and those who have the right will not set up the right.

古文：其俗喜歌儛，国中邑落男女，每夜群聚歌戏。
现代文：他们的百姓喜欢唱歌跳舞，国中村邑男女，每夜群聚歌舞玩耍。
English: Their people like to sing and dance, and men and women from villages across the country gather every night to sing and dance.

古文：其人洁清自喜，善藏酿，跪拜申一脚，行步皆走。以十月祭天大会，名曰 东明 。
现代文：善于酿酒收藏。他们跪拜时一条腿伸着，行路时都是小跑。每年十月他们召开祭天大会，大会称为 束明 。
English: They are good at brewing and collecting wine. They kneel with one leg outstretched, and trot when they walk. Every October, they hold a festival assembly, which is called "Sokumin."

古文：其公会衣服，皆锦绣金银以自饰。
现代文：出场参加大会，衣服都用锦绣金银装饰。
English: Appearing at the conference, their clothes are decorated with brocade, gold and silver.

古文：大加、主簿头所著似帻而无后；其小加著折风，形如弁。
现代文：大加、主簿头上戴的和中国的帧相似但是脑后空缺；小加头戴折风，形状如同中国的弁。
English: Large plus, the main book worn on the head is similar to the Chinese frame, but the back of the head is vacant; small plus is worn folded, shaped like a Chinese valve.

古文：其国无牢狱，有罪者，则会诸加评议杀之，没入妻子。
现代文：他们国家没有牢狱，有人犯罪，就让大加、小加等官员评议之后杀死罪人，妻子儿女就没收入官。
English: There are no prisons in their country. If someone commits a crime, they let officials such as major and minor kill the criminal after deliberation. Their wives and children have no income.

古文：其俗好淫，男女多相奔诱。
现代文：他们的百姓喜欢淫荡，男女之间多互相诱引而私奔。
English: Their people love lewdness; men and women seduce each other and run away.

古文：已嫁娶，便稍作送终之衣。
现代文：结婚之后，就渐渐开始缝制死时穿的衣服。
English: After getting married, she gradually began to sew the clothes she would wear when she died.

古文：其死葬，有椁无棺。
现代文：人死后，葬埋时有椁无棺。
English: When a person dies, they are buried with or without a coffin.

古文：好厚葬，金银财币尽于送死。
现代文：喜欢厚葬，金银钱财全给死者陪葬。
English: They like to be buried with a lot of gold, silver and money.

古文：积石为封，列植松柏。
现代文：埋葬之后堆积石头成为坟墓，四周种上松柏。
English: After burial, stones were piled up to form a grave, and pine trees were planted around it.

古文：兄死妻嫂。
现代文：兄长死后，弟弟就以嫂为妻。
English: After the death of his elder brother, his younger brother married his sister-in-law.

古文：其马皆小，便登山。
现代文：高句骊国马匹身子都小，善于登山。
English: The horses in Gao Guo's country are all small and good at climbing.

古文：国人尚气力，便弓矢刀矛。
现代文：国家百姓崇尚气力，善于使用弓矢刀矛，百姓都有镜甲，惯于作战。
English: The people of the country advocate strength and are good at using bows, arrows, swords and spears. The people have mirror armor and are used to fighting.

古文：有铠甲，习战斗，沃沮、东秽皆属焉。王莽初，发高骊兵以伐胡，不欲行，强迫遣之，皆亡出塞为寇盗。
现代文：沃沮、束秽都归附高句骊。王莽初年，征发高句骊兵马征伐胡，高句骊人不愿出发，但被强迫送去，被送去的人都逃出塞外成为强盗。
English: In the first year of Wang Mang's reign, soldiers and horses from Gaozu County were sent to conquer Hu. Gaozu people did not want to go, but they were forced to go. Those who were sent fled the province and became bandits.

古文：州郡归咎于句骊侯驺，严尤诱而斩之，王莽大悦，更名高句骊为下句骊，当此时为侯矣。
现代文：州郡就把罪责加到句骊侯骝身上，严尤把句骊侯鞫骗来杀死，王莽十分高兴，就把高句骊改名为下句骊。在这时句骊君主都还是称作侯。
English: The prefectural government put the blame on the person of Guan Hou, especially Guan Hou was deceived and killed, and Wang Mang was very happy, so he changed Gao Guan Hou to Guan Hou. At this time, Guan Hou monarchs were still called Hou.

古文：光武八年，高句骊王遣使朝贡，始称王。
现代文：光武八年，高句骊王派遣使者朝见皇帝，交纳贡品，他们君主才开始称为王。
English: In the eighth year of Guangwu, King Gao Juxuan sent an envoy to the emperor to pay tribute, and only then did they begin to be called kings.

古文：至殇、安之间，其王名宫，数寇辽东，玄菟太守蔡风讨之不能禁。
现代文：到汉殇帝、汉安帝年间，高句骊王名宫，他屡次进犯辽东，玄菟太守蔡风派兵征讨，但不能禁绝他们的进犯。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Han and Emperor Han's successor, Emperor Gaozong, he repeatedly invaded Liaodong, and Emperor Xuanzang's father-in-law, Cai Feng, sent soldiers to investigate, but they could not stop the invasion.

古文：宫死，子伯固立。
现代文：宫死之后，他的儿子伯固立为王。
English: After the death of the emperor, his son, Bogo, became king.

古文：顺、和之间，复数犯辽东寇抄。灵帝建宁二年，玄菟太守耿临讨之，斩首虏数百级，伯固乃降属辽东。
现代文：汉顺帝、汉和帝年间，伯固又屡次进犯辽东，抢劫掳掠，汉灵帝建宁二年，玄菟太守耿临进讨他们，杀死数百人，伯固才投降，归属辽东。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Han Shun and Emperor Han He, Baogu repeatedly invaded Liaodong, looting and plundering. In the second year of Emperor Jianning of Han Dynasty, Geng Linjin, the governor of Xuanzang, fought against them and killed hundreds of people. It was only after Baogu surrendered that it became part of Liaodong.

古文：公孙度之雄海东也，伯固与之通好。
现代文：公孙度在海束称雄的时候，伯固与公孙度结交。
English: When Gongsundu was the champion of the sea bouquet, Bo Gu made friends with Gongsundu.

古文：伯固死，子伊夷摸立。
现代文：伯固死，他的儿子伊夷摸立为王。
English: After the death of Bogu, his son, Iyar, became king.

古文：伊夷摸自伯固时已数寇辽东，又受亡胡五百余户。
现代文：伊夷摸在伯固未死之前就已经多次进犯辽东，现在他又接收了五百余户逃亡的胡人。
English: Yi Yiba invaded Liaodong several times before the death of Bo Gu, and now he has received more than five hundred families of fugitive Hu people.

古文：建安中，公孙康出军击之，破其国，焚烧邑落，降胡亦叛伊夷摸，伊夷摸更作新国。
现代文：建安年间，公孙康出兵进击伊夷摸，攻破伊夷摸的国都，焚烧村邑。投降伊夷摸的胡人也叛离他。伊夷摸重新建立国都。
English: During the Jianan era, Gongsun Kang sent troops to attack Iyirago, defeated the capital of Iyirago, and burned villages and towns. The Hu people who surrendered to Iyirago also rebelled against him. Iyirago re-established the capital.

古文：其后伊夷摸复击玄菟，玄菟与辽东合击，大破之。
现代文：以后伊夷摸又进击玄菟郡，玄菟郡舆辽东郡合力进击伊夷摸，大破伊夷摸的军队。
English: Later, the Yi Yigou also attacked Xuanzang County, and the Xuanzang County and the Liaodong County jointly attacked the Yi Yigou and defeated the Yi Yigou army.

古文：伊夷摸死，子位宫立。
现代文：伊夷摸死，他的儿子位宫立为王。
English: Yi Yi died, and his son, Gong Zhuo, became king.

古文：位宫有勇力，便鞍马，善射猎。
现代文：位宫勇猛有力，善于骑马，也善于射箭狩猎。
English: The position of the palace is brave and powerful, good at riding horses, and also good at archery hunting.

古文：魏景初二年，遣太傅司马宣王率众讨公孙渊，位宫遣主簿、大加将兵千人助军。
现代文：景初二年，魏派遣太傅司马宣王率兵征讨公孙渊，位宫派遣主簿、大加率领一千人马帮助司马宣王。
English: In the second year of the Jingchu era, Wei dispatched the Tai Fu, Sima Xuan Wang, to lead an army to recruit Gongsun Yuan. The imperial court dispatched the master of the household, Daga, to lead a thousand horses to help Sima Xuan Wang.

古文：正始三年，位宫寇西安、嘉平。五年，幽州刺史母丘俭将万人出玄菟讨位宫，位宫将步骑二万人逆军，大战于沸流。
现代文：正始三年，位宫进犯西安平，正始五年，幽州刺史母丘俭率领一万人马从玄菟郡出击进讨位宫，位宫率领步兵骑兵两万人迎击，两军在沸流大战。
English: At the beginning of the third year, the imperial court attacked Xi'anping, and at the beginning of the fifth year, Yuzhou Zishi's mother, Qiu Jian, led 10,000 horses from Xuanwu County to attack the imperial court, and the imperial court led 20,000 infantry and cavalry to counterattack. The two armies were in a fierce battle.

古文：位宫败走，俭军追至岘，悬车束马，登丸都山，屠其所都，斩首虏万余级。位宫单将妻息远窜。
现代文：位宫败逃，挂丘俭军直追到岘山，越遇险阻，登上丸都山，攻破屠戮位宫的都城，杀死一万余人，位宫只身携带妻子儿女向远方逃窜。
English: The palace was defeated and fled, and the army of Hangqiu Jian chased them straight to Shaoshan. The more they were in distress, the more obstacles they encountered. They climbed Marudu Mountain, attacked and slaughtered the capital city of the palace, killed more than ten thousand people, and the palace fled far away, carrying only their wives and children.

古文：六年，俭复讨之，位宫轻将诸加奔沃沮，俭使将军王颀追之，绝沃沮千余里，到肃慎南界，刻石纪功；又到丸都山，铭不耐城而还。
现代文：正始六年，母丘俭又进讨位宫，位宫率领手下官员诸加等逃奔沃沮，毋丘俭派手下将领王顺追击他们，王顺横穿沃沮，经过一千余里，到达肃慎南部边界，刻石记载他们的功绩；大军又到丸都山，在不耐城刻下铭文，份丘俭才率军返回。
English: At the beginning of the sixth year, the mother, Qiu Jian, entered the court of the throne again. The court of the throne led the officials under the command of Zhu Jia and others to flee to Wudu. However, Qiu Jian sent his subordinates, the general Wang Shun, to pursue them. Wang Shun crossed Wudu, after more than a thousand miles, to reach the southern border of Sushen, engraved stones recorded their achievements; the army also went to Marudu Mountain, engraved an inscription on the city, and Qiu Jian led the army to return.

古文：其后，复通中夏。
现代文：以后，高句骊又和中原交往。
English: Later, Gao Guanzhang and Zhongyuan became friends again.

古文：晋永嘉乱，鲜卑慕容廆据昌黎大棘城，元帝授平州刺史。
现代文：晋永嘉动乱时，鲜卑慕容魔占据昌黎大棘城，晋元帝授他为平州刺史。
English: When Jin Yongjia was in turmoil, Xianbei Murong occupied Changli Spine City, and Emperor Jin Yuan awarded him the title of "Pingzhou Historian."

古文：句骊王乙弗利频寇辽东，廆不能制。
现代文：句骊王乙弗利频频进犯辽东，慕容魔不能制止。
English: King Eflli frequently invaded Liaodong, and Murong couldn't stop him.

古文：弗利死，子刘代立。康帝建元元年，慕容廆子晃率兵伐之，刘与战，大败，单马奔走。
现代文：乙弗利死，他的儿子乙弗钊继承王位，晋康帝建元元年，慕容魔之子慕容鱿率兵讨伐乙弗钊，乙弗钊迎战，被打得大败，乙弗钊自己单人独骑逃跑。
English: Yifu Li died, and his son Yifu Yao succeeded to the throne. In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jiankang, Murong Yao, the son of Murong Dao, led an army to fight Yifu Yao. Yifu Yao was defeated, and Yifu Yao fled alone.

古文：晃乘胜追至丸都，焚其宫室，掠男子五万余口以归。
现代文：慕容鱿乘胜追击，直至丸都，焚烧乙弗利的宫室，掳获五万余名男子之后返回。
English: Murong Yao successfully pursued them until Marudu, burned the palace of Yifuli, captured more than fifty thousand men, and returned.

古文：孝武太元十年，句骊攻辽东、玄菟郡，后燕慕容垂遣弟农伐句骊，复二郡。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元十年，句骊进攻辽东、玄菟郡，后燕慕容垂派遣自己的弟弟慕容农讨伐句骊，收复了二郡。
English: In the 10th year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, the Jurchens attacked Liaodong and Xuanzang counties. Later, Yan Murongtai sent his brother Murong Nong to fight the Jurchens and recovered two counties.

古文：垂死，子宝立，以句骊王安为平州牧，封辽东、带方二国王。
现代文：慕容垂死，他的儿子慕容实继位，慕容实命句骊王安为平州牧，封为辽东、带方二国王。
English: When Murong died, his son Murong Si succeeded to the throne. Murong Si decreed that Wang An should be the governor of Pingzhou and the king of Liaodong and Bifang.

古文：安始置长史、司马、参军官，后略有辽东郡。
现代文：安才开始设置长史、司马、参军等官职，后来他又占有辽东郡。
English: Ancai began to set up official positions such as Changshi, Sima, and Sangun, and later he occupied Liaodong County.

古文：至孙高琏，晋安帝义熙中，始奉表通贡职，历宋、齐并授爵位，年百余岁死。
现代文：晋安帝义熙年间，高安之孙高琏才呈奉表章，派遣使臣献纳贡品，宋、齐二朝也都给高琏授予爵位官职，高琏一百多岁时去世。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jinnan and Emperor Yixi, Gao An's grandson Gao Jiancai presented a medal and dispatched envoys to pay tribute. The Song and Qi dynasties also awarded Gao Jiancai a peerage and an official post. Gao Jiancai died when he was more than 100 years old.

古文：子云，齐隆昌中，以为使持节、散骑常侍、都督营、平二州、征东大将军、乐浪公。
现代文：高琏之子高云继位，齐隆昌年间，授高云为使持节、散骑常侍、都督营平二州、征束大将军、乐浪公。
English: Gao Jun's son Gao Yun succeeded to the throne, and during the reign of Qi Longchang, Gao Yun was awarded with the titles of Envoy, Cavalryman, Governor of Yingping and Erzhou, General of the Expeditionary Force, and Prince of Le Lang.

古文：高祖即位，进云车骑大将军。
现代文：高祖即位，又晋升高云为车骑大将军。
English: Gao Zu ascended to the throne and was promoted to General of Cavalry.

古文：天监七年，诏曰： 高骊王乐浪郡公云，乃诚款著，贡驿相寻，宜隆秩命，式弘朝典。
现代文：天监七年，高祖下诏说： 高骊王乐浪郡公高云，他的诚心、恳切之情都已表露，交纳贡品的使者往来不绝，应当增大他的俸禄，抬高他的官位，以弘扬朝廷的法令制度。
English: In the seventh year of the celestial governor, Gao Zu issued an edict: Gao Yun, the prince of Lelang County, the king of Gaozhou, his sincerity and earnest feelings have been revealed, and the emissaries who pay tribute have been in constant contact. He should increase his salary and elevate his official position to promote the imperial court's legal system.

古文：可抚东大将军、开府仪同三司，持节、常侍、都督、王并如故。 
现代文：应当授为抚柬大将军、开府仪同三司，持节、常侍、都督、王的职位都不变。 
English: He should be awarded the post of Fucam general, the post of Kaifu and the three departments, the post of holding the festival, the post of regular attendant, the post of governor and the post of king are all unchanged.

古文：十一年、十五年，累遣使贡献。
现代文：天监十一年，天监十五年，高云都多次派遣使者献纳贡品。
English: In the eleventh year of Tianjun and the fifteenth year of Tianjun, Gao Yun repeatedly sent emissaries to offer tribute.

古文：十七年，云死，子安立。
现代文：天监十七年，高云死，他的儿子高安继位。
English: In the 17th year of Tianjing, Gao Yun died, and his son Gao An succeeded to the throne.

古文：普通元年，诏安纂袭封爵，持节、督营、平二州诸军事、宁东将军。
现代文：普通元年，高祖下诏命高安继承高云的封爵，任持节、督营平二州诸军事、宁东将军。
English: In the first year of the common era, Gao Zu issued an edict ordering Gao An to succeed Gao Yun's knighthood, and appointed him as the commander of the military in the two states of Ping and Ningdong.

古文：七年，安卒，子延立，遣使贡献，诏以延袭爵。
现代文：普通七年，高安去世，他的儿子高延继位，高延派遣使者献纳贡品，高祖下诏命高延继承高安的封爵。
English: After seven years, Gao An died, and his son Gao Yan succeeded him. Gao Yan sent an envoy to pay tribute, and Gao Yuan issued an edict ordering Gao Yan to succeed Gao An's knighthood.

古文：中大通四年、六年，大同元年、七年，累奉表献方物。
现代文：中大通四年，中大通六年，大同元年，大同七年，高延多次派遣使者呈奉表章，献纳当地特产。
English: In the fourth year of the Middle Daesong, the sixth year of the Middle Daesong, the first year of the Datong, and the seventh year of the Datong, Gao Yan repeatedly sent emissaries to present the badge and offer local special products.

古文：太清二年，延卒，诏以其子袭延爵位。
现代文：太清二年，高延去世，高祖下诏命高延之子继承高延的爵位和宫职。
English: In the second year of the Taiching Dynasty, Gao Yan died, and Gao Zu issued an imperial edict ordering Gao Yan's son to succeed Gao Yan's title and palace duties.

古文：百济者，其先东夷有三韩国，一曰马韩，二曰辰韩，三曰弁韩。
现代文：百济国，原先东夷有三个整厘，第一个叫屋韩，第二个叫辰韩，第三个叫弁韩。
English: In Baekje, Dongyi originally had three divisions, the first called Ya Han, the second called Chen Han, and the third called Ben Han.

古文：弁韩、辰韩各十二国，马韩有五十四国。
现代文：弁韩、辰韩各有十二个属国，屋垄有五十四个属国。
English: Benhan and Chenhan each had twelve vassal states, and Ya Rong had fifty-four vassal states.

古文：大国万余家，小国数千家，总十余万户，百济即其一也。
现代文：大国有一万余家，小国也有数干家，三韩总共有十余万户，百济就是其中一个属国。
English: Large countries have more than ten thousand households, small countries also have several households, and the three Koreas have a total of more than one hundred thousand households. Baekje is one of the vassal states.

古文：后渐强大，兼诸小国。
现代文：百济后来逐渐强大，兼并了很多小国。
English: Later, Baekje gradually became powerful and annexed many small countries.

古文：其国本与句骊在辽东之东，晋世句骊既略有辽东，百济亦据有辽西、晋平二郡地矣，自置百济郡。
现代文：百济国本来和句骊都在辽东束边，晋代时，句骊占有辽东之后，百济也占据了辽西、晋平二郡的地域，自己设置百济郡。
English: Baekje and Jurchen were originally both located in the eastern part of Liaoning Province. During the Jin Dynasty, after Jurchen occupied eastern Liaoning Province, Baekje also occupied the western part of Liaoning Province and two counties in Jinping Province, and set up Baekje County.

古文：晋太元中，王须；义熙中，王余映；宋元嘉中，王余毘；并遣献生口。
现代文：晋太元年间，百济王须，义熙年间，百济王余映，宋元嘉年间，百济王余毗，都曾派遣使者献纳牲畜。
English: In the year of Jintai Yuan, King Su of Baekje, in the year of Yixi, King Yuying of Baekje, and in the year of Song Yuan Jia, King Yu Bei of Baekje all sent envoys to offer livestock.

古文：余毘死，立子庆。
现代文：余毗死，他的儿子余庆继位。
English: Yu Bi died, and his son Yu Qing succeeded him.

古文：庆死，子牟都立。
现代文：余庆死，他的儿子牟都继位。
English: Yu Qing died and was succeeded by his son Mutu.

古文：都死，立子牟太。
现代文：牟都死，他的儿子牟太继位。
English: Mutsu died and his son Muta succeeded him.

古文：齐永明中，除太都督百济诸军事、镇东大将军、百济王。
现代文：齐永明年间，朝廷任命牟太为都督百济诸军事、镇束大将军、百济王。
English: In the middle of the following year, the imperial court appointed Muta as the military governor of Baekje, general of the garrison, and king of Baekje.

古文：天监元年，进太号征东将军。
现代文：天监元年，高祖下令晋升牟太封号为征东将军。
English: In the first year of Tianjun, Gaozu ordered the promotion of Muta to the title of General of the Expedition to the East.

古文：寻为高句骊所破，衰弱者累年，迁居南韩地。
现代文：百济不久被高句骊攻破，因此很多年国家力量都很衰弱，迁居到南韩。
English: Baekje was soon conquered by Goguryeo, so the country was weak for many years, and they moved to South Korea.

古文：普通二年，王余隆始复遣使奉表，称 累破句骊，今始与通好 ，而百济更为强国。
现代文：普通二年，百济王余隆才又派遣使者呈奉表章，说是 多次攻破句骊，现在才和他们结交 。而百济又成为强国。
English: It was not until two years later that King Yulong of Baekje sent an envoy to present the imperial seal, saying that he had broken the seal many times, and that it was only now that he had made friends with them. Baekje became a powerful country again.

古文：其年，高祖诏曰： 行都督百济诸军事、镇东大将军、百济王余隆，守籓海外，远修贡职，乃诚款到，朕有嘉焉。
现代文：那一年，高祖下韶说： 行都督百济诸军事、镇东大将军百济王余隆，守卫海外，又远远送来贡品，诚心恳切，我十分赞赏。
English: In that year, Gao Zu said: I highly appreciate the sincerity of Baekje Wang Yulong, the military governor of Baekje and the general of the town of Dongdong, who went overseas to guard and sent tribute from far away.

古文：宜率旧章，授兹荣命。
现代文：应当按照原有的典章制度，授给他荣耀的职务。
English: He should be given a position of honor in accordance with the original award system.

古文：可使持节、都督百济诸军事、宁东大将军、百济王。 
现代文：应当授任他为使持节、都督百济诸军事、宁东大将军、百济王。 
English: He should be appointed as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of Baekje, the general of Ningdong, and the king of Baekje.

古文：五年，隆死，诏复以其子明为持节、督百济诸军事、绥东将军、百济王。
现代文：普通五年，余隆死，高祖下诏又命余隆之子余明为持节、督百济诸军事、绥束将军、百济王。
English: Five years later, after Yu Long's death, Gao Zu issued an edict ordering Yu Long's son, Yu Ming, to be a military commander, military governor of Baekje, general of Han Sok, and king of Baekje.

古文：号所治城曰固麻，谓邑曰檐鲁，如中国之言郡县也。
现代文：百济人称百济王居住施政的城为固麻，称邑为檐鲁，如同中国称郡称县。
English: The Baekje people called the city where King Baekje lived and governed Goma, and the town was called Jilu, just as China calls counties counties.

古文：其国有二十二檐鲁，皆以子弟宗族分据之。
现代文：百济国共有二十二个檐鲁，百济王都命自己的子弟或是同宗族之人分别据守。
English: There are a total of twenty-two dynasties in Baekje, and the king of Baekje ordered his sons or people of the same clan to guard them separately.

古文：其人形长，衣服净洁。
现代文：百济人身体高大，衣服洁净。
English: The Baekje people are tall and their clothes are clean.

古文：其国近倭，颇有文身者。
现代文：百济国接近倭国，所以有很多文身的人。
English: Baekje is close to Wakoku, so there are a lot of tattooed people.

古文：今言语服章略与高骊同，行不张拱、拜不申足则异。
现代文：现在百济的言语、衣服规制大体上和高句骊相同，而百济人行走时双手不张开成为拱形，跪拜没有一只脚伸直的习惯，这和高骊人有区别。
English: Nowadays, the language and clothing regulations of Baekje are generally the same as that of Gaogu, while Baekje people do not open their hands to become arched when walking, and they do not have the habit of kneeling with one foot straight, which is different from Gaogu people.

古文：呼帽曰冠，襦曰复衫，袴曰裈。
现代文：亘迺人称帽为冠，称襦为复衫，称裤为裨。
English: People call a cap a crown, a jacket a sweatshirt, and pants pants.

古文：其言参诸夏，亦秦、韩之遗俗云。
现代文：亘辽的语言当中杂有华夏的语言，这也是以前秦固、韩国留传下来的习惯。
English: Among the languages of ancient Liao mixed with the language of ancient China, this is also a custom that has been passed down from Qin and Korea.

古文：中大通六年、大同七年，累遣使献方物；并请《涅盘》等经义、《毛诗》博士，并工匠、画师等，敕并给之。
现代文：中大通六年，大同七年，百济多次派遣使者进献他们的特产；并且请求赐给他们《涅盘经》及其他经书的经义，赐给他们《毛诗》博士，以及工匠、画师等，高担下令都满足他们。
English: In the middle of the six years and in the seventh year of the Datong, Baekje repeatedly sent emissaries to offer their special products; and requested that the "Nirvana Sutra" and other scriptures be given to them, that they be given the "Mao Shi" doctor, as well as craftsmen, painters, etc. Gaotang ordered to satisfy them.

古文：太清三年，不知京师寇贼，犹遣使贡献；既至，见城阙荒毁，并号恸涕泣。
现代文：太清三年，不知道京城被侯景叛贼围攻占领，依然派遣使臣进献贡品；到达京城之后，使臣们见到京城宫阙被毁坏，于是都号呼痛哭，伤心流泪。
English: In the third year of the Qing Dynasty, not knowing that Beijing was besieged and occupied by the traitors of Houjing, they still sent envoys to bring in tribute. After arriving in Beijing, when the envoys saw that the imperial palace was destroyed, they cried bitterly and shed tears.

古文：侯景怒，囚执之，及景平，方得还国。
现代文：侯景大发脾气，把使臣们都收捕囚禁，直到侯景叛乱平定，使臣们才得以返回。
English: Hou Jingda lost his temper and had the envoys arrested and imprisoned. The envoys were not able to return until Hou Jing's rebellion was quelled.

古文：新罗者，其先本辰韩种也。
现代文：新罗国，他们的祖先本是辰韩的宗族。
English: In Silla, their ancestors were originally from the clan of Tatsuhan.

古文：辰韩亦曰秦韩，相去万里，传言秦世亡人避役来适马韩，马韩亦割其东界居之，以秦人，故名之曰秦韩。
现代文：辰韩也叫秦韩，距新罗一万里，传说秦代之人为逃避徭役逃亡到马韩，马韩就划出束部边界的土地让他们居住，因为是秦代人，所以称他们为秦韩。
English: Chenhan is also called Qinhan. It is ten thousand miles away from Silla. According to legend, the Qin Dynasty people fled to Mahan to escape the forced labor. Mahan marked out the land on the border of Sokube for them to live. Because they were from the Qin Dynasty, they were called Qinhan.

古文：其言语名物有似中国人，名国为邦，弓为弧，贼为寇，行酒为行觞。相呼皆为徒，不与马韩同。
现代文：秦韩的言语以及事物名称和中国相似，如称国为邦，称弓为弧，称强盗为寇，称依次敬酒为行觞，互相称呼都叫 徒 ，与马韩不一样。
English: Qin and Han's language and the names of things are similar to China, such as calling a country a state, calling a bow an arc, calling a robber a robber, calling a toast a toast, and calling each other pawns, which is different from Mahan.

古文：又辰韩王常用马韩人作之，世相系，辰韩不得自立为王，明其流移之人故也；恒为马韩所制。
现代文：又，辰韩王常由马韩人担任，世代相传，辰韩人不能自立为王，这是为了表明他们是流徙迁移来的人；辰韩常被马韩控制。
English: In addition, the king of Shenshan was often held by Ma Han, and it was passed down from generation to generation. Shenshan people could not independently become kings, which was to show that they were migratory people; Shenshan was often controlled by Ma Han.

古文：辰韩始有六国，稍分为十二，新罗则其一也。
现代文：辰韩开始有六个国家，渐渐分为十二国，新罗就是其中之一。
English: At the beginning of the Han Dynasty, there were six countries, gradually divided into twelve countries, and Silla was one of them.

古文：其国在百济东南五千余里。
现代文：新罗国在百济东南五千余里。
English: Silla is more than 5,000 miles southeast of Baekje.

古文：其地东滨大海，南北与句骊、百济接。
现代文：新罗国东边靠近大海，南北与句骊、百济接壤。
English: The eastern part of Silla is close to the sea, and it shares a border with Kuching and Baekje to the north and south.

古文：魏时曰新卢，宋时曰新罗，或曰斯罗。
现代文：新罗国在魏代时称为新卢，宋时称新罗，也有人叫斯罗。
English: Silla was called Silla during the Wei Dynasty and Silla during the Song Dynasty. Some people also call it Silo.

古文：其国小，不能自通使聘。
现代文：新罗国小，不能自己单独派遣使者行聘问之礼。
English: Silla is a small country and cannot send an envoy on its own.

古文：普通二年，王募名秦，始使使随百济奉献方物。
现代文：普通二年，新罗王姓募名秦，他才派使者随着百济使者一道来进献当地特产。
English: It was not until two years later, when the king of Silla changed his surname to Qin, that he sent an envoy to present the local special products along with the Baekje envoy.

古文：其俗呼城曰健牟罗，其邑在内曰啄评，在外曰邑勒，亦中国之言郡县也。
现代文：新罗百姓称城为健牟罗，都邑在内就称啄评，在外就称邑勒，也就如同中国称郡县。
English: The people of Silla call the city Jianmuro, and the capital city is called Jianping, and the outlying areas are called Yule, just as counties are called Guanxian in China.

古文：国有六啄评，五十二邑勒。
现代文：新罗国有六啄评，五十二邑勒。
English: Silla has six counties and fifty-two towns.

古文：土地肥美，宜植五谷。
现代文：新罗国土地肥美，适宜种植五谷。
English: The land in Silla is fertile and suitable for growing corn.

古文：多桑麻，作缣布。
现代文：他们桑麻种植很多，会制作缣布。
English: They grow a lot of mulberry and can make felt.

古文：服牛乘马，男女有别。
现代文：用牛驾车，骑马。男女衣着有分别。
English: Driving a car with a cow, riding a horse. Men and women dress differently.

古文：其官名，有子贲旱支、齐旱支、谒旱支、壹告支、奇贝旱支。
现代文：新罗国的官名，有子贲旱支、齐旱支、谒旱支、壹告支、奇贝旱支。
English: The official names of the Silla Kingdom are Yizi Yanzhong, Qi Yanzhong, Yanzhong, Yijie Yanzhong, and Qibai Yanzhong.

古文：其冠曰遗子礼，襦曰尉解，洿曰柯半，靴曰洗。
现代文：他们把冠称做遣子礼，称襦为尉解，称裤为柯半，称靴为洗。
English: They refer to the crown as "Eranzirei," the shovel as "Lie" (尉解), the trousers as "Ke" (柯半) and the shoes as "Ren" (洗).

古文：其拜及行与高骊相类。
现代文：他们行拜礼以及行走习惯舆高骊相似。
English: Their worship and walking habits are similar.

古文：无文字，刻木为信。
现代文：新罗没文字，刻木为符契。
English: Silla had no written language, and the characters were carved on wood.

古文：语言待百济而后通焉。
现代文：他们要通过百济才能和其他国家进行语言交流。
English: They want to communicate with other countries through Baekje.

古文：倭者，自云太伯之后，俗皆文身。
现代文：倭国，他们自称是太伯的后裔。百姓都文身。
English: In the country of Wa, they claim to be descendants of Tai Bo. The people are all tattooed.

古文：去带方万二千余里，大抵在会稽之东，相去绝远。
现代文：倭国距带方一万二千余里，大约在会稽东边，但距离非常远。
English: Wakoku is more than twelve thousand miles away from the Belt, roughly to the east of Kechi, but the distance is very far.

古文：从带方至倭，循海水行，历韩国，乍东乍南，七千余里始度一海；海阔千余里，名瀚海，至一支国；又度一海千余里，名未卢国；又东南陆行五百里，至伊都国；又东南行百里，至奴国；又东行百里，至不弥国；又南水行二十日，至投马国；又南水行十日，陆行一月日，至祁马台国，即倭王所居。
现代文：从带方至倭，沿海航行，经过韩国，一会儿朝束行，一会儿朝南行，航行七千余里才渡过一海。海阙一千余里，名为瀚海，就到了一支国。又渡过一千余里海面，就到了未卢国。又朝着东南在陆上行五百里，就到伊都国。又朝东南行一百里，就到奴国。又朝束行一百里，就到不弥国。又朝南航行二十天，就到投马国。又朝南航行十天，在陆上行走一个多月，就到邪马台国，造就是倭王居住的地方。
English: From Bifang to Wa, sailing along the coast, passing through South Korea, a little while in the morning, a little while in the south, sailing more than seven thousand miles before crossing a sea. The seagull sailed more than a thousand miles, called the vast sea, to a country. After crossing more than a thousand miles of the sea, it came to the country of Wei Lu. It also traveled five hundred miles on land to the southeast, to the country of Idu. It also traveled a hundred miles to the southeast, to the country of Nu. It also traveled a hundred miles in the morning, to the country of Fumi. It also sailed southward for twenty days, to the country of Tum

古文：其官有伊支马，次曰弥马获支，次曰奴往鞮。
现代文：倭国官职有伊支马，次一等叫弥马获支，再次一等叫奴往千。
English: The officials of the Wakoku Kingdom were called Ichima, the second-highest was called Yima, the third-highest was called Nama, and the first-highest was called Naka.

古文：民种禾稻籥麻，蚕桑织绩。
现代文：百姓种禾稻贮麻，种桑养蚕织布绩麻。
English: The common people grow rice to store hemp, grow mulberry to raise silkworms to weave cloth to make hemp.

古文：有姜、桂、橘、椒、苏，出黑雉、真珠、青玉。
现代文：出产姜、桂、橘、椒、苏。又出产黑雉、珍珠、青玉。
English: It produces ginger, cinnamon, tangerine, pepper, and sugar cane. It also produces black locust, pearl, and jade.

古文：有兽如牛，名山鼠；又有大蛇吞此兽。
现代文：堡厘有种兽如同牛，名叫山鼠。又有一种大蛇吞食山鼠。
English: In the fort, there is a kind of animal that looks like a cow, called a mountain rat. There is also a big snake that eats mountain rats.

古文：蛇皮坚不可斫，其上有孔，乍开乍闭，时或有光，射之中，蛇则死矣。
现代文：蛇皮坚硬，砍斫不能损伤它，蛇皮上有孔，忽开忽闭，有时发光，射中蛇皮上的孔，蛇就会死。
English: The snake's skin is hard and cannot be damaged by chopping. There are holes in the snake's skin, which can be opened and closed, and sometimes emit light. If you hit a hole in the snake's skin, the snake will die.

古文：物产略与儋耳、硃崖同。
现代文：倭国的物产大略与儋耳、朱崖相同。
English: The products of Wakoku are roughly the same as those of Mimi and Zhuya.

古文：地温暖，风俗不淫。
现代文：这裹气候温暖，风俗不淫乱。
English: The climate is warm and the customs are not lewd.

古文：男女皆露紒。
现代文：男女都露出发髻。
English: Both men and women are dewy-eyed.

古文：富贵者以锦绣杂采为帽，似中国胡公头。
现代文：富贵者才用各色锦绣制成帽，好似中国的一种称作胡公头的帽子。
English: It was only the rich and noble who embroidered caps of all kinds of colors, like a Chinese type of hat called Hu Gongzhu.

古文：食饮用笾豆。
现代文：倭国人饮食都用篷豆等礼器。
English: The people of Wakoku eat and drink with ceremonial objects such as taro beans.

古文：其死，有棺无椁，封土作冢。
现代文：人死后，有棺无椁，埋葬后，堆土为坟。
English: After a person dies, there is a coffin without a coffin, and after burial, the heap of earth becomes a grave.

古文：人性皆嗜酒。
现代文：倭玺人都嗜酒。
English: The people of Wa are all alcoholics.

古文：俗不知正岁，多寿考，多至八九十，或至百岁。
现代文：百姓都不知道自己准确的年岁，长寿之人多，多活到八九十岁，有的到百岁。
English: People don't even know their exact age. Many people live to be 80 or 90, and some even 100 years old.

古文：其俗女多男少，贵者至四五妻，贱者犹两三妻。
现代文：百姓女多男少，富贵者甚至有四五个妻室，贫贱者也还有两三个妻子。
English: There are more women than men among the common people. The rich even have four or five wives, while the poor have two or three wives.

古文：妇人无淫妒。
现代文：妇女没有淫荡妒忌之心。
English: Women are not lustful and jealous.

古文：无盗窃，少诤讼。
现代文：没有偷窃行为，也很少争吵。
English: There is no stealing and very little fighting.

古文：若犯法，轻者没其妻子，重则灭其宗族。
现代文：假如犯了罪，罪轻就没收犯罪者的妻子儿女，罪重就要诛灭犯罪者的家族。
English: If a crime is committed, the offender's wife and children will be confiscated for a minor offense, and the offender's family will be destroyed for a major offense.

古文：汉灵帝光和中，倭国乱，相攻伐历年，乃共立一女子卑弥呼为王。
现代文：汉灵帝王继年间，堡玺发生动乱，国人互相攻打多年，最终就共同立一个名叫卑弥呼的女子为王。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanling, there was turmoil in the castle, and the Chinese people fought each other for many years. Eventually, they jointly established a woman named Himiko as king.

古文：弥呼无夫婿，挟鬼道，能惑众，故国人立之。
现代文：卑弥呼没有丈夫，她利用邪术，可以迷惑众人，因此国人立她为王。
English: Himiko didn't have a husband. Using magic, she was able to confuse everyone, so the people of the country made her king.

古文：有男弟佐治国。
现代文：卑弥呼有个弟弟帮助她治理国家。
English: Himiko has a younger brother to help her run the country.

古文：自为王，少有见者，以婢千人自侍，唯使一男子出入传教令。
现代文：从被立为王之后，很少有人见到卑弥呼。卑弥呼用一千名女婢服侍自己，衹是命一名男子出入宫室，传布命令。
English: Very few people have seen Himiko since he was crowned king. He uses a thousand maids to serve him, and only orders one man to go in and out of the palace to spread his orders.

古文：所处宫室，常有兵守卫。
现代文：卑弥呼居住的宫室，常有兵守卫。
English: The palace where Himiko lived was often guarded by soldiers.

古文：至魏景初三年，公孙渊诛后，卑弥呼始遣使朝贡，魏以为亲魏王，假金印紫绶。
现代文：到魏景初三年，公孙渊被诛后，卑弥呼才派遣使者朝觐纳贡，魏封她为亲魏王，授予金印紫绶。
English: In the first three years of the Wei Dynasty, after Gongsun Yuan was exiled, Himiko sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court. Wei designated her as the pro-Wei king and awarded her the Golden Seal and Purple Ribbon.

古文：正始中，卑弥呼死，更立男王，国中不服，更相诛杀，复立卑弥呼宗女台与为王。
现代文：正始年间，卑弥呼死，他们另立男子为王，国中人不服，于是又互相诛杀，又立卑弥呼同宗女子台星为王。
English: At the beginning of the year, when Himiko died, they set up another man as king. The people of the country were not satisfied, so they fought with each other and set up Himiko as king of the female Taisei of the same clan.

古文：其后复立男王，并受中国爵命。
现代文：以后又立男子为王，并且接受中国封赠的爵位与官职。
English: Later, a man was made king, and he received a title and an official post from China.

古文：晋安帝时，有倭王赞。
现代文：晋安帝时，堡王名董。
English: At the time of Emperor Jian of An, Fort Wang was a famous general.

古文：赞死，立弟弥；弥死，立子济；济死，立子兴；兴死，立弟武。
现代文：董死，他的弟弟弥继位。弥死，他儿子济继位。遗死，他的儿子兴继位。兴死，他弟弟武继位。
English: Dong died and was succeeded by his brother Ya; Ya died and was succeeded by his son Ji; Yu died and was succeeded by his son Xing; Xing died and was succeeded by his brother Wu.

古文：齐建元中，除武持节、督倭、新罗、任那、伽罗、秦韩、慕韩六国诸军事、镇东大将军。
现代文：年间，任命运为持节、督堡薮罗任那台六国诸军事、镇束大将军。产担即位，晋升武的封号为征束大将军。
English: During the year, he was appointed as the military commander of the Six Kingdoms and the general of Zhenzhu, and was promoted to the general of Zhenzhu.

古文：高祖即位，进武号征东将军。其南有侏儒国，人长三四尺。又南黑齿国、裸国，去倭四千余里，船行可一年至。
现代文：倭国之南有侏儒国，侏儒国人身高三四尺。再往南有墨齿国、裸国，离倭国四千余里，坐船航行大约要一年才到达。
English: To the south of Wakoku, there is Dwarf Country, where people are three to four feet tall. Further south, there is Black Tooth Country and Barefoot Country, which are more than 4,000 miles away from Wakoku and take about a year to reach by ship.

古文：又西南万里有海人，身黑眼白，裸而丑。
现代文：再往西南一万里有海人，海人身黑眼白，裸体，形貌很丑。
English: Further to the south-west, there are 10,000 sea people. The sea people have black and white eyes, are naked, and have an ugly appearance.

古文：其肉美，行者或射而食之。
现代文：海人的肉味鲜美，有些来来往往的航海人就射杀海人，吃海人的肉。
English: The flesh of the abalone is delicious, and some sailors who come and go shoot the abalone and eat the flesh.

古文：文身国，在倭国东北七千余里。
现代文：文身国在堡玺东北七千余里。
English: Tenshin Province is more than seven thousand miles northeast of Hakodate.

古文：人体有文如兽，其额上有三文，文直者贵，文小者贱。
现代文：塞皇玺之人身体上有花纹，如同虎，人的额头上有三道纹，纹直的人就尊贵，纹浅而曲的人就卑贱。
English: People with the Emperor's seal have patterns on their bodies, like tigers. People have three stripes on their foreheads. People with straight stripes are noble, and people with light stripes and crooked stripes are lowly.

古文：土俗欢乐，物豊而贱，行客不赍粮。
现代文：当地百姓生活欢乐，物产丰富，价格低贱，来往客人不用带干粮。
English: Local people live a happy life, produce is abundant, prices are low, and guests do not need to bring dry food.

古文：有屋宇，无城郭。
现代文：他们有房屋，无城郭。
English: They have houses, but no city walls.

古文：其王所居，饰以金银珍丽。
现代文：文身国王居住的房屋，用金银珍宝装饰。
English: The house where the tattooed king lived was decorated with gold and silver treasures.

古文：绕屋为緌，广一丈，实以水银，雨则流于水银之上。
现代文：他们在房屋四周挖好沟堑，宽一丈，然后浇灌水银，下雨雨水就在水银之上流。
English: They dug a ditch around the house, a foot wide, and then poured mercury, and when it rained, the rainwater flowed over the mercury.

古文：市用珍宝。
现代文：集市上用珍宝购买物品。
English: Use treasures to purchase items at the market.

古文：犯轻罪者则鞭杖；犯死罪则置猛兽食之，有枉则猛兽避而不食，经宿则赦之。
现代文：犯轻罪的人就用鞭打杖责；犯死罪的人就把他放在猛虎笼中让猛虎吃，若有冤屈，那么猛虎就避开逭人不会吃他，经过一夜就赦免他。
English: A person who commits a misdemeanor is punished with a whipping stick; a person who commits a capital crime is placed in a tiger cage for the tiger to eat. If there is a grievance, the tiger avoids the man and does not eat him, and pardons him after one night.

古文：大汉国，在文身国东五千余里。
现代文：大汉国在文身国东五千余里。
English: Greater Han is more than 5,000 miles east of Wensi.

古文：无兵戈，不攻战。
现代文：没有兵器，不打仗。
English: No weapons, no war.

古文：风俗并与文身国同而言语异。
现代文：他们风俗都和文身国相同但语言有区别。
English: Their customs are the same as the tattoo countries but the language is different.

古文：扶桑国者，齐永元元年，其国有沙门慧深来至荆州，说云： 扶桑在大汉国东二万余里，地在中国之东，其土多扶桑木，故以为名。 
现代文：扶桑国，齐永元元年，迭忧鱼有个名叫沙门慧僧人来到荆州，他说： 扶桑在大汉国东面二万余里，位置在中国东面。那地方有很多扶桑树，所以就用扶桑作国名。
English: Fusang Country, Qiyongyuan In the first year of the first year, a monk named Shamen Hui came to Jingzhou. He said: Fusang is more than 20,000 miles east of the Han Dynasty, located in the east of China. There are many Fusang trees in that place, so Fusang is used as the country name.

古文：扶桑叶似桐，而初生如笋，国人食之，实如梨而赤，绩其皮为布以为衣，亦以为绵。
现代文：扶桑树叶和桐叶相似，初生时像笋，扶桑国人都吃初生的扶桑树叶。扶桑果像梨但是红色。扶桑树皮可以绩成布裁制衣服，也可作绵。
English: The leaves of Fusang are similar to those of Paulownia, and look like cucumbers when they are first born. The people of Fusang eat the leaves of Fusang when they are first born. The fruit of Fusang looks like a pear but is red. The bark of Fusang can be made into cloth, tailored clothing, and can also be used as a sponge.

古文：作板屋，无城郭。
现代文：他们居住搭制的板屋。扶垩玺没有城郭。
English: They live in prefabricated wooden houses. Fushun has no city walls.

古文：有文字，以扶桑皮为纸。
现代文：有文字，用扶桑树皮当纸写字。
English: There is writing, using Fusang bark as paper to write on.

古文：无兵甲，不攻战。
现代文：没有盔甲兵器，不打仗。
English: No armor, no weapons, no war.

古文：其国法，有南北狱。
现代文：扶桑国的国法，有南北两座监狱。
English: According to the national law of Fusang Province, there are two prisons in the north and south.

古文：若犯轻者入南狱，重罪者入北狱。
现代文：罪轻的进南狱，犯重罪的进北狱。
English: Those with minor crimes go to the South Prison, while those with serious crimes go to the North Prison.

古文：有赦则赦南狱，不赦北狱。
现代文：有赦令就赦免南狱的罪犯，北狱的罪犯不赦免。
English: If there is a pardon order, the criminals in the south prison will be pardoned, but the criminals in the north prison will not be pardoned.

古文：在北狱者，男女相配，生男八岁为奴，生女九岁为婢。
现代文：在北狱的罪犯，男女相配，生下男孩岁就送出狱去做奴仆，生下女孩到九岁就送出狱去做奴婢。
English: In the northern prison, male and female criminals are matched, and if a boy is born, he will be sent out of prison to be a slave, and if a girl is born, she will be sent out of prison to be a slave at the age of nine.

古文：犯罪之身，至死不出。
现代文：罪犯自己，到死也不准出狱。
English: Criminals themselves are not allowed to leave prison until they die.

古文：贵人有罪，国乃大会，坐罪人于坑，对之宴饮，分诀若死别焉。
现代文：显贵的人有罪，国家就召集大会，让犯罪人坐在坑中，会集的人对着罪人宴饮，如同面对将死的人诀别。
English: When a dignitary is guilty, the state calls an assembly and makes the criminal sit in the pit. The assembled people feast on the criminal, as if bidding farewell to a dying man.

古文：以灰绕之，其一重则一身屏退，二重则及子孙，三重则及七世。
现代文：然后用灰围绕犯罪人四周，围绕一层灰圈就衹斥退这个犯罪人，不准担任官职，围绕两层灰圈就连及犯罪人子孙也不准担任官职，围绕三层灰圈就连及犯罪人的七代子孙都不准当官。
English: The ashes are then used to surround the offender on all sides. A circle of ashes around one layer of ashes repels the offender, who is not allowed to hold public office. Around two layers of ashes, even the offender's descendants are not allowed to hold public office. Around three layers of ashes, even the seven generations of the offender's descendants are not allowed to hold public office.

古文：名国王为乙祁；贵人第一者为大对卢，第二者为小对卢，第三者为纳咄沙。
现代文：扶桑国人称国王为乙祁；第一等显贵者称为大对卢，第二等显贵者称为小对卢，第三等颢贵者称为纳咄沙。
English: The people of Fusang call the king Acetylene; the first-class dignitaries are called Great Lu, the second-class dignitaries are called Small Lu, and the third-class dignitaries are called Na Gusha.

古文：国王行有鼓角导从。
现代文：国王出行时有鼓吹乐队和仪仗。
English: When the king travels, there are marching bands and ceremonial battles.

古文：其衣色随年改易，甲乙年青，丙丁年赤，戊己年黄，庚辛年白，壬癸年黑。
现代文：他的衣服颜色每年改变，以十天干为序，甲乙年穿青色衣服，丙丁年穿红色衣服，戊己年穿黄色衣服，庚辛年穿白色衣服，壬癸年穿黑色衣服。
English: The color of his clothes changes every year, in the order of the ten dry days, wearing blue clothes in the year of A, B, red clothes in the year of B, yellow clothes in the year of G, white clothes in the year of G, and black clothes in the year of Y.

古文：有牛角甚长，以角载物，至胜二十斛。
现代文：国中有一种牛，牛角很长，人们让牛用角运载物品，牛角竟能承担二十斛米那么重的东西。
English: There is a kind of cow in the country with a long horn. People ask the cow to carry things with its horn. The horn can actually carry something as heavy as twenty stalks of rice.

古文：车有马车、牛车、鹿车。
现代文：扶桑国车有马车、牛车、鹿车。
English: The Fusang National Carriage includes a horse-drawn carriage, ox-drawn carriage and deer-drawn carriage.

古文：国人养鹿，如中国畜牛，以乳为酪。
现代文：他们养鹿，就如同中国人养牛那么普遍。
English: It is as common for them to raise deer as it is for the Chinese to raise cattle.

古文：有桑梨，经年不坏。
现代文：他们用乳制乳酪。出产桑梨，桑梨经久不壤。
English: They make milk cheese. They produce mulberries, and the mulberries last for a long time.

古文：多蒲桃。
现代文：多产葡萄。
English: The grapes are prolific.

古文：其地无铁有铜，不贵金银。
现代文：扶桑国没有铁但产铜，不看重金银。
English: Fusang has no iron but produces copper, and does not value gold and silver.

古文：市无租估。
现代文：集市上不收赋税。
English: No taxes are collected at the market.

古文：其婚姻，婿往女家门外作屋，晨夕洒扫，经年而女不悦，即驱之，相悦乃成婚。
现代文：他们的婚姻，是男方先往女家门外搭座小屋，早晚为女家洒扫劳作，经过一年而女子不喜欢这个男子，就把他赶走，女子喜欢逭男子才结婚。
English: Their marriage is that the man first builds a hut outside the door of the woman's house, and sooner or later works for the woman's house. After a year, if the woman does not like this man, she will drive him away. The woman likes to seduce the man before getting married.

古文：婚礼大抵与中国同。
现代文：婚礼大致舆中国相同。
English: Weddings are much the same.

古文：亲丧，七日不食；祖父母丧，五日不食；兄弟伯叔姑姊妹，三日不食。
现代文：父母去世，儿子守丧，七天不进食；祖父母去世，孙儿守丧，五天不进食；为兄弟叔伯姑姊妹守丧，三天不进食。
English: When parents die, the son mourns and does not eat for seven days; when grandparents die, the grandchild mourns and does not eat for five days; when brothers, uncles, aunts and sisters mourn, they do not eat for three days.

古文：设灵为神像，朝夕拜奠，不制縗绖。
现代文：设置灵位作为鬼神的象征，守丧的人早晚行礼祭奠，不穿丧服。
English: A shrine is set up as a symbol of ghosts and gods, and the mourners perform rituals morning and evening, without wearing mourning clothes.

古文：嗣王立，三年不视国事。
现代文：继位国王登上王位之后，三年不处理国事。
English: After the king-in-waiting ascends the throne, he does not deal with state affairs for three years.

古文：其俗旧无佛法，宋大明二年，罽宾国尝有比丘五人游行至其国，流通佛法、经像，教令出家，风俗遂改。
现代文：当地原来并无佛教，宋大明二年，厕宾国有五个和尚曾云游到扶桑国，在扶桑国传播佛教教义、佛经和佛像，劝导当地人出家，扶桑国不信佛教的风气才得以改变。 
English: Originally, there was no Buddhism in the area. In the second year of the Song Dynasty, five monks from Tubing Province traveled to Fusang Province to spread Buddhist teachings, Buddhist scriptures and Buddha statues in Fusang Province, and to persuade local people to become monks. It was only then that the non-belief in Buddhism in Fusang Province changed.

古文：慧深又云： 扶桑东千余里有女国，容貌端正，色甚洁白，身体有毛，发长委地。
现代文：慧深又说： 扶桑国束面一千余里有个女国，都是女子，她们容貌端正，肤色洁白，身上有毛，头发很长，一直拖到地上。
English: Huishen also said: There is a woman's country more than a thousand miles away from Fusang Province, and they are all women. Their appearance is neat, their skin color is white, they have hair on their bodies, and their hair is long and drags all the way to the ground.

古文：至二、三月，竞入水则任娠，六七月产子。
现代文：每年二、三月，她们争着跳下水去，跳下水去就会怀孕，过六七个月就会生下孩子。
English: Every February and March, they compete to jump into the water. If they jump into the water, they will become pregnant, and after six or seven months they will give birth to a child.

古文：女人胸前无乳，项后生毛，根白，毛中有汁，以乳子，一百日能行，三四年则成人矣。
现代文：女人胸前无乳，颈项后面长毛，毛根部是白色，毛中有水汁，女人就用遣汁来哺育孩子，孩子生下来一百天就会走路，过三四年就长大成人了。
English: A woman has no milk in front of her chest, and hair grows on the back of her neck. The hair roots are white, and there is watery juice in the hair. A woman uses the watery juice to feed her child. The child will be able to walk within a hundred days of being born, and will become an adult in three or four years.

古文：见人惊避，偏畏丈夫。
现代文：女子见到人就会惊慌避开，特别害怕男人。
English: When a woman sees someone, she panics and avoids them. She is especially afraid of men.

古文：食咸草如禽兽。
现代文：她们像禽兽那样吃咸草。
English: They eat salty grass like animals.

古文：咸草叶似邪蒿，而气香味咸。 
现代文：咸草叶似中国的邪蒿草，但气味香，味道咸。 
English: The leaves of salt grass are similar to those of Chinese yakitori, but they smell fragrant and have a salty taste.

古文：天监六年，有晋安人渡海，为风所飘至一岛，登岸，有人居止。
现代文：天监六年，有个晋安人航海时遇上大风，飘流到一个岛上，登上岸，见到有人居住。
English: In the sixth year of the Heaven's Guardianship, a Jinan man encountered a strong wind while sailing, drifted to an island, came ashore, and saw people living there.

古文：女则如中国，而言语不可晓；男则人身而狗头，其声如吠。
现代文：女子和中国人一样，但言语不通；男子却是在人的身体上长着狗的头，声音也像狗叫。
English: The women are like the Chinese, but their speech is slurred; the men, on the other hand, have a dog's head on a human body, and their voices sound like a dog.

古文：其食有小豆，其衣如布。
现代文：他们食物中有小豆。衣服像是用布制成。
English: They have red beans in their food, and their clothes look like they are made of cloth.

古文：筑土为墙，其形圆，其户如窦云。
现代文：他们用土筑成墙，住房的形状是圆的，房门像是孔穴。
English: They built walls out of dirt, the shape of their houses was round, and their doors were like holes.

古文：西北诸戎，汉世张骞始发西域之迹，甘英遂临西海，或遣侍子，或奉贡献，于时虽穷兵极武，仅而克捷，比之前代，其略远矣。
现代文：西北戎狄各国。汉代张骞首先开发通往西域的道路，甘英于是成功地到达西海岸边，这些国家，有的国王派出自己的儿子入朝陪侍天子，有的呈奉表章进献贡品，那时虽然是穷兵黩武，勉强取得胜利，但和以前的朝代相比，他们的谋划已经算是很深远了。
English: In the Han Dynasty, Zhang Di was the first to develop the road to the western region, and Am Ying succeeded in reaching the west coast. Some kings of these countries sent their sons to accompany the emperor to the court, and some presented medals to pay tribute. Although they were poor soldiers and barely achieved victory, their plans were far-reaching compared to previous dynasties.

古文：魏时三方鼎跱，日事干戈，晋氏平吴以后，少获宁息，徒置戊己之官，诸国亦未宾从也。
现代文：魏国之时，三国鼎立，每天行军打仗，直到晋代荡平吴国之后，才稍微获得宁静，但也衹是空设管理西域事务的戊己校尉，西域各国并未归服顺从。
English: At the time of Wei, the Three Kingdoms were standing tall, marching and fighting every day. It wasn't until after the Jin Dynasty had flattened the State of Wu that there was a bit of peace. However, there was also the empty post of Captain Wu Ji, who managed the affairs of the western region, and the countries in the western region did not surrender and obey.

古文：继以中原丧乱，胡人递起，西域与江东隔碍，重译不交。
现代文：接着中原发生动乱，胡人相继兴起，占领中原，西域各国与迁往江东的朝廷阻隔，翻译、使者无法交往。
English: Then the Central Plains experienced turmoil, and the Hu people rose up one after another to occupy the Central Plains. Countries in the western region were cut off from the imperial court, which had moved to the east of the Yangtze River. Translators and emissaries were unable to communicate.

古文：吕光之涉龟兹，亦获蛮夷之伐蛮夷，非中国之意也。
现代文：吕光攻占龟兹，也还衹是蛮夷讨伐蛮夷，并非中国人的主意。
English: It was not the Chinese people's idea for Luguang to conquer Kuez, but also for the barbarians to fight the barbarians.

古文：自是诸国分并，胜负强弱，难得详载。
现代文：从此各国的分裂或吞并，力量强弱、作战胜负，很难详细记载。
English: Since then, it has been difficult to record in detail the splitting or annexation of countries, their strength and weakness, and their military victories and defeats.

古文：明珠翠羽，虽仞于后宫；蒲梢龙文，希入于外署。
现代文：明珠翠羽各种宝物，虽然充初后宫，但西域进献的蒲梢龙文等良马，在马厩裹却很少见到。
English: Pearls, jade, feathers, all kinds of treasures, although it is only the beginning of the harem, but the good horses such as the Western region's gift of the dragon pattern, are rarely seen in the stables.

古文：有梁受命，其奉正朔而朝阙庭者，则仇池、宕昌、高昌、邓至、河南、龟兹、于阗、滑诸国焉。
现代文：梁接受天命，治理天下，向梁称臣并来京城朝觐的，就有仇池、宕昌、高昌、邓至、河南、龟兹、于阗、滑等国。
English: Liang accepted the Mandate of Heaven and governed the world. Among those who called Liang their vassal and came to Beijing for the imperial court, there were Qiuqi, Gaochang, Gaochang, Dengzhi, Henan, Gezi, Yuyao, Nian and other countries.

古文：今缀其风俗，为《西北戎传》云。
现代文：现在把这些国家的风俗人情编写在一起，成为《西北戎传》。
English: Now, the customs and manners of these countries have been compiled together to become the "Northwest Military Biography."

古文：河南王者，其先出自鲜卑慕容氏。
现代文：河南王，他的祖先出自鲜卑慕容氏。
English: The king of Henan, his ancestor was from the Xianbei Murong clan.

古文：初，慕容奕洛干有二子，庶长曰吐谷浑，嫡曰廆。
现代文：起初，慕容奕洛干有两个儿子，庶长子叫吐谷浑，嫡子叫趸查庐。
English: In the beginning, Murong Yi Luo Gan had two sons, the eldest illegitimate son was called Tu Gu Hun, and the legitimate son was called Yu Cha Yu.

古文：洛干卒，廆嗣位，吐谷浑避之西徙。
现代文：慕容奕洛干去世，慕容魔继位，吐谷运避开慕容廛向西迁徙。
English: Murong Yi Lokan died, Murong Dao succeeded to the throne, and the Tuyun movement moved westward to avoid Murong Yao.

古文：廆追留之，而牛马皆西走，不肯还，因遂徙上陇，度枹罕，出凉州西南，至赤水而居之。
现代文：慕容魔追着挽留他，但牛马都向西跑，不肯回头，吐谷浑因此就向西登上胧业，穿越塑芏，到速州西南，直到壶塞岸边居住下来。
English: Murong Dao chased and held him, but the cattle and horses all ran westward and refused to turn back. As a result, Tu Gu Hun went westward to Mianye, crossed the Yangtze River, and went to the southwest of Huzhou until he settled down on the shore of Huzo.

古文：其地则张掖之南，陇西之西，在河之南，故以为号。
现代文：造地方在张掖之南，陇西之西，正处在黄河之南，所以用河南作自己国家的名称。
English: It was built in the south of Zhangye, west of Shaanxi, just south of the Yellow River, so it used Henan as the name of its own country.

古文：其界东至垒川，西邻于阗，北接高昌，东北通秦岭，方千余里，盖古之流沙地焉。
现代文：河南国的境域柬到叠川，西和于阗相邻，北与高昌接壤，东北通往秦岭，方圆一千余里，大概是古代流沙之地。
English: The territory of Henan stretches from Cam to Jianchuan, with Xihe and Yucheng next to each other, bordering Gaochang in the north and Qinling in the northeast, with a radius of more than a thousand miles. It is probably a place of ancient quicksand.

古文：乏草木，少水潦，四时恒有冰雪，唯六七月雨雹甚盛；若晴则风飘沙砾，常蔽光景。
现代文：河南草木稀少，雨水很少，四季常有冰雪，祇有六七月常有大雨冰雹。假若天晴，一到起风就会飞沙走石，常会遮蔽阳光。
English: Grass and trees are scarce in Henan, rain is rare, there is often ice and snow in all four seasons, and there is often heavy rain and hail in June and July. If the weather is fine, sand and stones will fly when the wind picks up, often blocking the sun.

古文：其地有麦无谷。
现代文：河南国祇种麦，没有稻谷。
English: In Henan Province, there is no rice.

古文：有青海方数百里，放牝马其侧，辄生驹，土人谓之龙种，故其国多善马。
现代文：国中有个青海，方圆敷百里，在青海岸边牧放牝马，牝马就会生下马驹，当地土人称之为龙种，所以河南国多产良马。
English: There is a Qinghai in the country, with a radius of one hundred miles, and horses are herded on the edge of the Qinghai coast. The horses will give birth to foals. The local natives call it dragon breed, so Henan is a prolific horse.

古文：有屋宇，杂以百子帐，即穹庐也。
现代文：河南国有房屋，并间杂使用百子帐，百子帐就是一种毡帐，通常称之为穹庐。
English: Henan has state-owned houses, and uses a hundred-child account. The hundred-child account is a kind of loan account, usually called a dome account.

古文：著小袖袍、小口袴、大头长裙帽。
现代文：河南国人穿用小袖袍，小口裤，大头长裙帽。
English: The people of Henan wear small-sleeved gowns, small-collared trousers, and large long-skirted hats.

古文：女子披发为辫。
现代文：女子就垂下头发编为发辫。
English: The woman let down her hair and braided it into a bun.

古文：其后吐谷浑孙叶延，颇识书记，自谓 曾祖奕洛干始封昌黎公，吾盖公孙之子也 。
现代文：以后吐谷浑之孙叶延，能读会写，他自己说曾祖父奕洛干开始被封为昌黎公，自己就是公孙之子。
English: Later, Ye Yan, the grandson of Tu Guhun, was able to read and write. He said that his great-grandfather, Yi Luo Gan, was originally named Changli, and that he was the grandson's son.

古文：礼以王父字为国氏，因姓吐谷浑，亦为国号。
现代文：按照礼法，应当用祖父的字作姓氏，因而姓吐谷浑，也把吐谷浑作为国家名称。
English: According to the etiquette, the grandfather's name should be used as the surname, and thus the surname Tukuhun, and also Tukuhun as the name of the country.

古文：至其末孙阿豺，始受中国官爵。
现代文：叶延的后代子孙阿豺，才开始接受中国官爵。
English: It was not until the descendants of Ye Yan, the children and grandchildren of A Yan, that they began to accept Chinese official titles.

古文：弟子慕延，宋元嘉末又自号河南王。
现代文：阿豺弟弟的儿子慕延，在宋元嘉末年又自称为河南王。
English: Mu Yan, the son of Ah Yan's younger brother, called himself the King of Henan in the last years of the Song and Yuan Dynasties.

古文：慕延死，从弟拾寅立，乃用书契，起城池，筑宫殿，其小王并立宅。
现代文：慕延死，他的堂弟拾寅继位，才开始使用文字，建造城池，修筑宫殿，他手下那些小王也都各建宅院。
English: Mu Yan died, and his cousin Shu Yin succeeded to the throne. Only then did he begin to use the written language, build a city, and construct a palace. The minor kings under his command also each built a residence.

古文：国中有佛法。
现代文：国中信奉佛法。
English: The middle of the country believes in Buddhism.

古文：拾寅死，子度易侯立；易侯死，子休留代立。
现代文：拾寅死，他的儿子度易侯继位。度易侯死，他的儿子休留代继位。
English: Shuyin died and was succeeded by his son Du Yi Hou. Du Yi Hou died and was succeeded by his son Ke Rui.

古文：齐永明中，以代为使持节、都督西秦、河、沙三州、镇西将军、护羌校尉、西秦、河二州刺史。
现代文：齐永明年间，任命休留代为使持节、都督西秦河沙三州、镇西将军、护羌校尉、西秦河二州刺史。
English: In the middle of the next year, Qiyong appointed the deputy of rest to be the envoy of the festival, the governor of West Qin He Shasanzhou, the general of Zhenxi, the captain of the escort, and the historian of West Qin He Erzhou.

古文：梁兴，进代为征西将军。
现代文：梁国建立，晋升休留代为征西将军。
English: Liang Guo was established, and he was promoted to General of the Western Conquest.

古文：代死，子休运筹袭爵位。
现代文：休留代死，他的儿子伏连筹继承爵位和官职。
English: Hu Rui died in his place, and his son Fu Lianqiao inherited the title and official post.

古文：天监十三年，遣使献金装马脑钟二口，又表于益州立九层佛寺，诏许焉。
现代文：天监十三年，伏连筹派遣使者进献两口金装玛瑙钟，又上表请求在益州建立九层佛寺，高祖下韶准许。
English: In the thirteenth year of Tianjun, Fu Lianqiao sent an envoy to present two gold-plated agate bells, and requested the establishment of a nine-story Buddhist temple in Yizhou, which was approved by Gao Zu.

古文：十五年，又遣使献赤舞龙驹及方物。
现代文：天监十五年，伏连筹又派遣使者进献赤舞龙驹以及当地特产。
English: In the 15th year of Tianjun, Fulianqiao also sent an envoy to present red dragon dance and local special products.

古文：其使或岁再三至，或再岁一至。
现代文：他派出的使者有时一年到达两三批，有时两年来一批。
English: The envoys he sent sometimes arrived in two or three batches a year, and sometimes in one batch every two years.

古文：其地与益州邻，常通商贾，民慕其利，多往从之，教其书记，为之辞译，稍桀黠矣。
现代文：河南国土地与益州相邻，商人常常互相来往。益州百姓想要获利，所以有很多人到河南国去，教那裹人读书写字，替他们作语言翻译，河南国人也逐渐变得凶悍狡黠了。
English: The people of Yizhou wanted to make a profit, so many people went to Henan Province to teach the local people to read and write, and to translate for them. The people of Henan Province gradually became fierce and cunning.

古文：普通元年，又奉献方物。
现代文：普通元年，伏连筹又进献当地特产。
English: In the first year of the year, Fulianqiao also presented local special products.

古文：筹死，子呵罗真立。
现代文：伏连筹死，他的儿子呵罗真继位。
English: Fulian died and was succeeded by his son, Horocheng.

古文：大通三年，诏以为宁西将军、护羌校尉、西秦、河二州刺史。
现代文：大通三年，高祖下韶命呵罗真为宁西将军、护羌校尉、西秦河二州刺史。
English: In the three years since the death of Da-tsu, Gao Zu's subordinate, Horo Zhen, has become the general of Ningxi, the lieutenant of Fuxi, and the historian of the two states of West Qinhe.

古文：真死，子佛辅袭爵位，其世子又遣使献白龙驹于皇太子。
现代文：呵罗真死，他的儿子佛辅继承封爵和官职，佛辅的世子又派遣使者向皇太子进献白龙驹。
English: When Khoroshen died, his son, Buddha Fu, inherited the title and the official position. Buddha Fu's heir also sent an envoy to the crown prince to present the White Dragon Scepter.

古文：高昌国，阚氏为主，其后为河西王沮渠茂虔弟无讳袭破之，其王阚爽奔于芮芮。
现代文：高昌国，阐氏是这个国家的君主，以后高昌国被河西王沮渠茂虔之弟沮渠无讳袭击攻破。高昌国王阐爽逃到芮芮国。
English: Gaochang, Ying is the monarch of this country. Later, Gaochang was attacked and defeated by the brother of Hexi King Deqiu Moqian, Deqiu Mujie. Gaochang King Ying Shuang fled to Shandong.

古文：无讳据之称王，一世而灭。
现代文：沮渠无讳就占据高昌国称王，过三十年就死去。
English: He became the undisputed king of Gaochang and died 30 years later.

古文：国人又立麹氏为王，名嘉，元魏授车骑将军、司空公、都督秦州诸军事、秦州刺史、金城郡开国公。
现代文：高昌国人又立曲氏为王，国王名曲嘉，元魏授任曲嘉为车骑将军、司空公、都督秦州诸军事、秦州刺史、金城郡开国公。
English: The people of Gaochang also set up the Qu clan as king, the king named Qu Jia, and the Yuan Wei Dynasty appointed Qu Jia as the cavalry general, Sikuo, the military governor of Qinzhou, Qinzhou Zhishi, and the founding father of Jincheng County.

古文：在位二十四年卒，谥曰昭武王。
现代文：曲嘉在位二十四年去世，镒号为昭武王。
English: Qu Jia died in the twenty-fourth year of his reign, and his nickname was Shouwu Wang.

古文：子子坚，使持节、骠骑大将军、散骑常侍、都督瓜州诸军事、瓜州刺史、河西郡开国公、仪同三司、高昌王嗣位。
现代文：他的儿子曲子坚继位，任使持节、骠骑大将军、散骑常侍、都督瓜州诸军事、瓜州刺史、河西郡开国公、仪同三司、高昌王。
English: His son, Qu Zi Jian, succeeded to the throne, and was appointed as envoy, grand general of the cavalry, cavalry equerry, military governor of Guazhou, governor of Guazhou, the founding father of Hexi County, the third secretary of Yidong, and the king of Gaochang.

古文：其国盖车师之故地也。
现代文：高昌国就在原来车师国的土地上。
English: Gaochang is right on the land of the former Cheji country.

古文：南接河南，东连燉煌，西次龟兹，北邻敕勒。
现代文：高昌国南边：与更工卖鳕相连，束边舆继煌连接，西边紧靠皇兹，北边舆敕勒相邻。
English: On the south side of Gaochang: it is connected to Zenggouli, Sokou is connected to Muxihuan, the west side is close to Hanzhong, and the north side is adjacent to Muxil.

古文：置四十六镇，交河、田地、高宁、临川、横截、柳婆、洿林、新兴、由宁、始昌、笃进、白力等，皆其镇名。
现代文：高昌国设置四十六镇，交河、田地、高宁、临川、横截、柳婆、洿林、新兴、由宁、始昌、笃进、白力等，都是镇名。
English: There are 46 towns in Gaochang, including Jiahe, Tianchi, Gaoning, Linchuan, Qiaojie, Liuba, Yulin, Xingxing, Yuning, Shichang, Dukjin, and Baili.

古文：官有四镇将军及杂号将军、长史、司马、门下校郎、中兵校郎、通事舍人、通事令史、谘议、校尉、主簿。
现代文：他们的官职有四镇将军及杂号将军，长史，司马，门下校郎，中兵校郎，通事舍人，通事令史，谘议，校尉，主簿等。
English: Their official positions included four town generals and miscellaneous generals, long history, Sima, subordinate schoolmaster, lieutenant-commander schoolmaster, secretary, secretary-general history, advisory, school captain, principal, etc.

古文：国人言语与中国略同。
现代文：高昌国人的言语和史厘大致相同。
English: The language of the people of Gaochang is roughly the same as that of Shili.

古文：有《五经》、历代史、诸子集。
现代文：也有《五经》、历代史、诸子集。
English: There are also the Five Classics, the History of the Ages, and the various sub-collections.

古文：面貌类高骊，辫发垂之于背，著长身小袖袍、缦裆袴。
现代文：高昌国人面貌和产包曌人相似，他们头发编成辫垂在背上，穿用长身小袖袍、不开裆的缦裆裤。
English: The people of Gaochang are similar in appearance to the people of Baotou. Their hair is braided and hangs down their backs, and they wear long-sleeved gowns and wide-legged trousers.

古文：女子头发辫而不垂，著锦缬缨珞环钏。
现代文：女子头发也编成辫，但不拖垂，佩戴锦缬、珠玉穿成的缨珞、环钏作装饰。
English: Women's hair is also braided, but does not hang down, and is decorated with brocades, beaded bracelets, and hoops.

古文：姻有六礼。
现代文：他们婚姻也行六礼。
English: They also perform the "six bow" in marriage.

古文：其地高燥，筑土为城，架木为屋，土覆其上。
现代文：地势高而干燥，他们筑土为城墙，架木建房子，用土覆盖在房屋上面。
English: The terrain is high and dry, and they build walls of earth, build houses of wood, and cover them with earth.

古文：寒暑与益州相似。
现代文：高昌国季节寒暑与益州真相似。
English: The cold and hot seasons in Gaochang are very similar to those in Yizhou.

古文：备植九谷，人多啖罝及羊牛肉。
现代文：九谷他们全都种植，人们多吃鲜和羊肉牛肉。
English: They all grow crops in Kutani, and people eat more fresh vegetables and mutton and beef.

古文：元魏之居桑乾也，滑犹为小国，属芮芮。
现代文：产旦周出产良马、葡萄酒、石盐。高昌国多草木，有种草果实像蚕茧，茧中有丝如同细麻线，当地人称为白叠子，高昌国人常常取用白叠子织成布。
English: There are many plants and trees in Gaochang, and the fruits of some plants look like cocoons, and the silk in cocoons looks like fine twine. Locals call them white stamens, and people in Gaochang often use white stamens to weave cloth.

古文：后稍强大，征其旁国波斯、盘盘、罽宾、焉耆、龟兹、疏勒、姑墨、于阗、句盘等国，开地千余里。
现代文：布很软很白，他们常用来和中厘人在集市交换物品。产旦固有种朝乌鸟，天天聚集在国王殿前，排列成行，不畏惧人，日出之后才四散飞离。元魏还在桑干的时候，滑国还是个小国，附属于芮芮国。后来滑国渐渐强大，于是征伐周围的邻国波斯、盘盘、厕宾、焉耆、龟兹、疏勒、姑墨、于阗、句盘等国家，开拓了方圆一千余里的疆土。
English: The cloth was very soft and white, and they often used it to exchange goods with the Zhongli people at the bazaar. The morning blackbirds, an endemic species of the Tang Dynasty, gathered in front of the king's palace every day, lined up in rows, not afraid of people, and only scattered after sunrise. When the Yuan and Wei dynasties were still in the Sangan period, the State of Sui was still a small country, attached to the State of Yan. Later, the State of Sui gradually became powerful, so it conquered the surrounding neighboring countries, such as Persia, Pan Pan, Toibin, Yan Xuan, Zhezi, Shule, Gu Mo

古文：土地温暖，多山川树木，有五谷。
现代文：滑国气候温暖，国内多山川，树木繁茂，也有五谷。
English: The climate of the Land of Slip is warm, and there are many mountains and rivers in the country, trees are abundant, and there are valleys.

古文：国人以罝及羊肉为粮。
现代文：滑国人以耖以及羊肉为食粮。
English: The people of Skåne live on mackerel and mutton.

古文：其兽有师子、两脚骆驼，野驴有角。
现代文：滑国野兽有狮子、两脚骆驼，还有野驴，野驴有角。
English: The animals of the land of Sui include the lion, the two-legged camel, and the wild ass. The wild ass has horns.

古文：人皆善射，著小袖长身袍，用金玉为带。
现代文：滑国人都善于射箭，身穿小袖长身袍，用金玉为腰带。
English: The local skaters are good at archery, wear short-sleeved robes, and use gold as a belt.

古文：女人被裘，头上刻木为角，长六尺，以金银饰之。
现代文：女人身披皮裘，头戴用木刻制的角，角六尺长，角上用金银装饰。
English: The woman is wearing a fur coat and a headdress with a six-foot-long horn carved from wood and decorated with gold and silver.

古文：少女子，兄弟共妻。
现代文：滑国女子少，因此兄弟共娶一妻。
English: There are few women in the country, so the brothers all married the same woman.

古文：无城郭，氈屋为居，东向开户。
现代文：滑国没有城郭，人居住在毡屋中，屋门朝东。
English: There is no castle in the state of Nome. People live in huts, with the doors facing east.

古文：其王坐金床，随太岁转，与妻并坐接客。
现代文：滑国国王坐在金制胡床上，胡床的方位随着太岁星的转动而改变，国王舆妻子并肩而坐接待宾客。
English: The king of the State of Nusa Tenggara is sitting on a golden hammock. The position of the hammock changes with the rotation of the sun. The king and his wife are sitting side by side to receive guests.

古文：无文字，以木为契。
现代文：滑国没有文字，刻木记事。
English: There is no written language in the Land of Slip.

古文：与旁国通，则使旁国胡为胡书，羊皮为纸。
现代文：舆四周国家交往时，就叫周围国家的胡人用他们的文字书写文书，用羊皮作纸。
English: When the countries around the world interacted, they asked the Hu people of the surrounding countries to use their characters to write documents and use sheepskin for paper.

古文：无职官。
现代文：滑国不设官职。
English: There are no official positions in the Republic of Korea.

古文：事天神、火神，每日则出户祀神而后食。
现代文：他们祭祀天神、火神，每天要出门祭神之后才进食。
English: They worship the god of heaven and the god of fire, and only eat after they go out to offer sacrifices to the gods every day.

古文：其跪一拜而止。
现代文：他们跪拜衹行一次拜礼就停下来。
English: They kneel and prostrate and stop after one prostration.

古文：葬以木为椁。
现代文：死人埋葬时用木制椁。
English: Wooden urns were used to bury the dead.

古文：父母死，其子截一耳，葬讫即吉。
现代文：父母死后，儿子截下一只耳朵，埋葬之后就算是守丧期满。
English: After the death of the parents, the son cut off one ear, and even after the burial, the mourning period was over.

古文：其言语待河南人译然后通。
现代文：他们的言语要依靠河南国人翻译才能和别国交流。
English: They have to rely on Henan compatriots to translate their language in order to communicate with other countries.

古文：周古柯国，滑旁小国也。
现代文：周古柯国是旁边的小国。
English: Zhou Guoke is the small country next to it.

古文：普通元年，使使随滑来献方物。
现代文：普通元年，他们派遣使者跟随滑来使臣来进献当地特产。
English: In the first year of the common era, they sent envoys to accompany the sliding envoys to present local specialties.

古文：呵跋檀国，亦滑旁小国也。
现代文：呵跋檀国也是旁边的小国。
English: Hobadan is also a small country next to it.

古文：凡滑旁之国，衣服容貌皆与滑同。
现代文：凡是遣玺的邻国，人们的衣着容貌都与澄国人相同。
English: In all the neighboring countries of the Yuan Dynasty, people's clothing and appearance were the same as those of the Cheng people.

古文：普通元年，使使随滑使来献方物。
现代文：萱通元年，使使派遣使者随同滑使臣一起来进献当地特产。
English: In the first year of the Common Era, they sent an envoy to bring local special products along with the envoys from the past.

古文：胡蜜丹国，亦滑旁小国也。
现代文：胡蜜丹国，也是旁边的小国。
English: Humeidan is also a small country next to it.

古文：普通元年，使使随滑使来献方物。
现代文：普通元年，他们派遣使者随同过迩使者一同来进献当地特产。
English: In the first year of the Common Era, they sent an envoy to bring local special products along with the envoys from the past.

古文：白题国，王姓支名史稽毅，其先盖匈奴之别种胡也。
现代文：白题国，国王姓支名史稽毅，他们的祖先大概是从匈奴分支出来的胡人。
English: Bai Zhi Guo, the king's family name was Shijing Yi, and their ancestors were probably the Hu people who branched out from the Xiongnu.

古文：汉灌婴与匈奴战，斩白题骑一人。
现代文：漠代灌婴舆匈奴作战，斩杀一名白题骑兵。
English: He fought against the Huns in the desert and killed a white cavalryman.

古文：今在滑国东，去滑六日行，西极波斯。
现代文：白题国现在在滑国东边。离滑国有六日行程，白题国西边直到波斯。
English: Paektu is now to the east of Syria. It is a six-day journey from Syria to Persia to the west of Paektu.

古文：土地出粟、麦、瓜果，食物略与滑同。
现代文：白题国出产粟、麦、瓜果，食物大体上和滑国相同。
English: Paektu produces millet, wheat and melons, and its food is generally the same as that of Nome.

古文：普通三年，遣使献方物。
现代文：普通三年，白题国派遣使者进献当地特产。
English: Usually every three years, Baidai Province sends an envoy to present local special products.

古文：龟兹者，西域之旧国也。
现代文：龟兹国是西域古国。
English: Kuez is an ancient country in the Western Regions.

古文：后汉光武时，其王名弘，为莎车王贤所杀，灭其族。
现代文：后汉光武时，国王名弘，被莎车王贤杀死，宗族被诛灭。
English: During the reign of Emperor Guangwu of the Later Han Dynasty, King Nagahiro was killed by King Sheng, and his clan was annihilated.

古文：贤使其子则罗为龟兹王，国人又杀则罗。
现代文：贤命自己的儿子则罗作龟兹王，龟兹国人又杀死则罗。
English: Luo made his own son the king of Kuez, and the people of Kuez killed Luo.

古文：匈奴立龟兹贵人身毒为王，由是属匈奴。
现代文：匈奴立龟兹贵人身毒为王，于是附属匈奴。
English: The Xiongnu made turtle and tortoise poison the king, and the Xiongnu became attached to it.

古文：然龟兹在汉世常为大国，所都曰延城。
现代文：但是龟兹在汉世曾经是个大国，他们的都城是曰延城。
English: However, Kuez was once a great power in the Han Dynasty, and their capital was Yancheng.

古文：魏文帝初即位，遣使贡献。
现代文：魏文帝刚刚登上帝位，皇蓝派遣使者进献贡品。
English: Emperor Weiwen had just ascended to the throne, and Emperor Lan sent an envoy to bring tribute.

古文：晋太康中，遣子入侍。
现代文：晋太康年间，龟兹王又送儿子入朝陪侍皇帝。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taikang, King Gezi also sent his son into the court to accompany the emperor.

古文：太元七年，秦主苻坚遣将吕光伐西域。至龟兹，龟兹王帛纯载宝出奔，光入其城。
现代文：太元七年，秦君主苻坚派遣将领吕光讨伐酉域，吕光到龟兹，龟兹王帛纯带着珍宝出逃、吕光进入他们都城。
English: In the seventh year of the Taiyuan era, the Qin monarch Jian Jian dispatched the general Luguang to fight the Yangtze River, Luguang went to Guizi, Guizi King Jichun fled with precious treasures, and Luguang entered their city.

古文：城有三重，外城与长安城等，室屋壮丽，饰以琅玕金玉。
现代文：城有三层，外城和长安城相等。城内房室壮观美丽，都用琅歼金玉作装饰。
English: The city has three floors, the outer city and Chang'an City are the same. The rooms inside the city are spectacularly beautiful, all decorated with jade.

古文：光立帛纯弟震为王而归，自此与中国绝不通。
现代文：旦光立旦越之弟雳为王然后就率军返回，从此龟兹就中断了舆中国的交往。
English: Tang Guang installed Tang Yue's younger brother Zou as king and then returned with his army. From then on, Zou Zi broke off contact with the Chinese.

古文：普通二年，王尼瑞摩珠那胜遣使奉表贡献。
现代文：普通二年，龟兹王尼瑞摩珠那胜派遣使者呈奉表章进献贡品。
English: Usually in the second year, the King of Kamezi, Nereid, sent an envoy to Nakhon Ratchasima to present a watch badge as a tribute.

古文：于阗国，西域之属也。
现代文：于阗国也是西域中的一国。
English: Yunnan is also one of the countries in the western region.

古文：后汉建武末，王俞为莎车王贤所破，徙为骊归王，以其弟君得为于阗王，暴虐，百姓患之。
现代文：后汉建武末年，于阗王愈被莎车王置打败，因此徙为盐叠工，莎车王贤立其弟君得为于阗王，君得暴虐，百姓憎恶他。
English: In the last years of Jianwu of the Later Han Dynasty, King Yu was defeated more and more by King Zhaozhe, so he moved to be a salt stacker. King Zhaozhe made his younger brother, King Kun, the ruler of King Yu. He was tyrannical, and the people hated him.

古文：永平中，其种人都末杀君得，大人休莫霸又杀都末，自立为王。
现代文：永平年间，于阗人都末杀死君得，而担任大人官职的休莫霸又杀死都末，自立为王。
English: During the Yongping era, Yu Tongren killed Guende, while Shu Moba, who served as a high-ranking official, killed Du Mei and became king.

古文：霸死，兄子广得立，后击虏莎车王贤以归，杀之，遂为强国，西北诸小国皆服从。
现代文：死，他兄长之子广得继位，后来进击虏莎车王贤，把墅俘获回国，杀掉贤，于阗于是成为强国，西北各小国都归服于阗。
English: After his death, his elder brother's son, Guang, succeeded to the throne. Later, he invaded and captured Shache Wangxian, returned the villa to China, and killed Xian. As a result, Yunnan became a powerful country, and all the small countries in the northwest were subjugated to Yunnan.

古文：其地多水潦沙石，气温，宜稻、麦、蒲桃。
现代文：于阗国多积水，多沙石，气候温和，适宜种植稻、麦、葡萄。
English: Yunnan has a lot of standing water, sand and gravel, and a mild climate, making it suitable for growing rice, wheat and grapes.

古文：有水出玉，名曰玉河。
现代文：有条河，出产玉，因此叫做玉回。
English: There is a river that produces jade, so it is called the Jade River.

古文：国人善铸铜器。
现代文：于阗国人善于铸造铜器。
English: The people of Yunnan are good at casting copperware.

古文：其治曰西山城，有屋室市井。
现代文：他们的国都叫西山球。有房屋街市。
English: Their countries are all called Xishanqiu. There are housing markets everywhere.

古文：果蓏菜蔬与中国等。
现代文：王阗国出产的瓜果蔬菜和中国相同。
English: The cucumbers, fruits and vegetables produced in Wangye are the same as those in China.

古文：尤敬佛法。
现代文：他们特别崇敬佛教。
English: They have a particular reverence for Buddhism.

古文：王所居室，加以硃画。
现代文：于阗王居住的房屋，用红色彩昼作修饰。
English: The house where the king lived is decorated in red.

古文：王冠金帻，如今胡公帽；与妻并坐接客。
现代文：国王头戴金帧，形状如同现在的塑公帽。国王与妻子并肩而坐接待宾客。
English: The king, wearing a gold-framed headdress in the shape of today's top hat, sat alongside his wife to receive the guests.

古文：国中妇人皆辫发，衣裘袴。
现代文：国中妇女都把头发编结为辫，身穿裘裤。
English: Women all over the country wear their hair in braids and wear cropped trousers.

古文：其人恭，相见则跪，其跪则一膝至地。
现代文：他们待人恭敬有礼，相见时都屈一膝至地而跪。
English: They treat people with respect and courtesy, and when they see each other, they kneel on the ground.

古文：书则以木为笔札，以玉为印。
现代文：写信就用木板作信纸，用玉作印章。
English: When writing a letter, use a wooden board as letter paper and a jade seal.

古文：国人得书，戴于首而后开札。
现代文：于阗国人得到信，先把信顶在头上然后开读。
English: After receiving the letter, the people of Yunnan first put the letter on their heads and then read it.

古文：魏文帝时，王山习献名马。
现代文：魏文帝时，于阗王山习进献名马。
English: During the reign of Emperor Weiwen, he trained and presented a famous horse at Shaowang Mountain.

古文：天监九年，遣使献方物。
现代文：天监九年，于阗王派遣使者进献当地特产。
English: In the ninth year of the Heaven's Guardian, an envoy was sent to King Min to present local special products.

古文：十三年，又献波罗婆步鄣。
现代文：天监十三年，他们又进献波罗婆步鄣。
English: In the thirteenth year of the overseer's reign, they again presented the Bora Bora step stool.

古文：十八年，又献琉璃罂。
现代文：天监十八年，又进献琉璃罂。
English: In the 18th year of the Tenjin era, the glazed ware was presented again.

古文：大同七年，又献外国刻玉佛。
现代文：大同七年，又进献外国来的玉雕佛像。
English: In the seventh year of the Datong era, a jade Buddha statue from a foreign country was also presented.

古文：渴盘陁国，于阗西小国也。
现代文：渴盘陁国是于阗国西边的小国。
English: Shan State is a small country in the west of Shan State.

古文：西邻滑国，南接罽宾国，北连沙勒国。
现代文：西边和滑国相邻，南边与厕宾国接壤，北边与沙勒国相连。
English: To the west, it is adjacent to the State of Nam, to the south it borders the State of Toibin, and to the north it is connected to the State of Salé.

古文：所治在山谷中，城周回十余里，国有十二城。
现代文：渴盘陁国都城在山谷中，都城四周城墙有十余里长。全国有十二座城。
English: The country's capital city is located in a valley. The city wall around the capital is more than ten miles long. There are twelve cities across the country.

古文：风俗与于阗相类。
现代文：他们风俗和于阗国相似。
English: Their customs are similar to those of Yunnan.

古文：衣吉贝布，著长身小袖袍、小口袴。
现代文：人们穿古贝织成的布，穿长身小袖袍，小口裤。
English: People wear cloth woven by ancient beavers, wear long-sleeved gowns, and small trousers.

古文：地宜小麦，资以为粮。
现代文：渴盘陁国土地适宜种麦，当地人都靠麦作食粮。
English: The land of Shan State is suitable for growing wheat, and the local people rely on wheat for food.

古文：多牛马骆驼羊等。
现代文：牛马骆驼羊等牲畜很多。
English: Cattle, horses, camels, sheep and other livestock abound.

古文：出好氈、金、玉。
现代文：出产质地好的毡、金、玉等。
English: Produce good quality tungsten, gold, jade, etc.

古文：王姓葛沙氏。
现代文：国王姓葛沙氏。
English: The king's family name is Gesha.

古文：中大同元年，遣使献方物。
现代文：中大同元年，渴盘陁国派遣使者进献当地特产。
English: In the first year of the Chinese University of Hong Kong, the thirsty country sent an envoy to present local special products.

古文：末国，汉世且末国也。
现代文：末国就是漠代时的且末国。
English: The last country is the last country in the desert era.

古文：胜兵万余户。
现代文：家有成年男子可以参加作战的，全国共有一万户。
English: A total of 10,000 households across the country have adult men who can participate in combat.

古文：北与丁零，东与白题，西与波斯接。
现代文：末国北边舆丁零，东边舆白题，西边与波斯接壤。
English: The country is bordered on the north by Uddin, on the east by Ubaiti, and on the west by Persia.

古文：土人剪发，著氈帽、小袖衣，为衫则开颈而缝前。
现代文：当地土人剪发，头戴毡帽，穿小袖衣，还缝制一种从颈部开口而胸前缝缀的衫。
English: Local natives cut their hair, wear skullcaps, wear short sleeves, and also sew a shirt that is sewn from the neck opening to the chest.

古文：多牛羊骡驴。
现代文：末国多牛羊骡驴。
English: At the end of the country, there are more cattle, sheep and donkeys.

古文：其王安末深盘，普通五年，遣使来贡献。
现代文：末国国王安末深盘在普通五年派遣使者前来进献贡品。
English: The late King An Mueang sent an envoy to pay tribute in the fifth year of the reign.

古文：波斯国，其先有波斯匿王者，子孙以王父字为氏，因为国号。
现代文：波斯国，他们祖先中有个波斯匿王，子孙就用祖父的字为姓，同时也就用作国家名称。
English: In Persia, one of their ancestors was King Ananias of Persia, and their descendants took their grandfather's name as their surname, which was also used as the name of the country.

古文：国有城，周回三十二里，城高四丈，皆有楼观，城内屋宇数百千间，城外佛寺二三百所。
现代文：波斯国都有城墙，周围共长三十二里。城墙高四丈，也都建有楼观。城内房屋有数百上千栋，城外有二三百座佛寺。
English: In Persia, there are city walls with a total length of thirty-two miles around them. The walls are four stories high and also have a view of buildings. There are hundreds and thousands of houses in the city, and there are two or three hundred Buddhist temples outside the city.

古文：西去城十五里有土山，山非过高，其势连接甚远，中有鹫鸟啖羊，土人极以为患。
现代文：西边距城十五里处有座土山，山并不特别高，但山势绵延很远，山中有种惊鸟，会捕食羊，当地人很害怕这种鸟。
English: Fifteen miles to the west of the city, there is a dirt mountain. The mountain is not particularly high, but it stretches far and wide. There is a kind of frightened bird in the mountain that can prey on sheep. The locals are very afraid of this bird.

古文：国中有优钵昙花，鲜华可爱。
现代文：波斯国中有优钵昙花，鲜艳美丽，十分可爱。
English: In the country of Persia, there is an excellent rhododendron, bright and beautiful, very lovely.

古文：出龙驹马。
现代文：出产龙驹马。
English: Production of draught horses is booming.

古文：咸池生珊瑚树，长一二尺。
现代文：咸池中生长珊瑚树，长有一二尺。
English: Coral trees grow in the salt pond, reaching a length of one to two feet.

古文：亦有琥珀、马脑、真珠、玫回等，国内不以为珍。
现代文：也出产琥珀、玛瑙、珍珠、玫瑰等，但波斯国内并不把这些当作珍宝。
English: Amber, agate, pearls, roses, etc. are also produced, but they are not considered precious in Persia.

古文：市买用金银。
现代文：集市上买东西用金银。
English: Buy things at the bazaar with gold and silver.

古文：婚姻法：下聘讫，女婿将数十人迎妇，婿著金线锦袍、师子锦袴，戴天冠，妇亦如之。
现代文：波斯结婚的礼法：下聘之后，新郎带着敷十人去迎娶新娘，新郎穿金钱锦袍，狮子锦裤，头戴实冠，新娘的服饰也像新郎一样。
English: Persian wedding etiquette: After the betrothal, the groom takes ten people to marry the bride. The groom wears a gold brocade robe, lion brocade trousers, and a solid crown on his head. The bride's dress is also like the groom's.

古文：妇兄弟便来捉手付度，夫妇之礼，于兹永毕。
现代文：新娘的兄弟就来牵住新娘的手，把手交给新郎，结为夫妇的礼仪遣时就算全结束了。
English: The bride's brother comes to take the bride's hand and give it to the groom, and the couple's ceremonial time is over.

古文：国东与滑国，西及南俱与婆罗门国，北与泛忄栗国接。
现代文：国东与滑国相邻，西边及南边都与婆罗门国玺接壤，北与泛栗国接壤。
English: The east of the country is adjacent to the State of Nammu, the west and south are bordered by the State of Brahman, and the north is bordered by the State of Panchuri.

古文：中大通二年，遣使献佛牙。
现代文：中大通二年，派遣使者来进献佛牙。
English: In the second year of the junior high school, an envoy was sent to offer Buddha's tooth.

古文：宕昌国，在河南之东南，益州之西北，陇西之西，羌种也。
现代文：宕昌国，地处河南国的东南，益州的西北，陇西之西，是羌人的国家。
English: Tangchang Province, located in the southeast of Henan Province, the northwest of Yizhou Province, and the west of Shaanxi Province, is a country of Qiang people.

古文：宋孝武世，其王梁帟忽始献方物。
现代文：宋孝武帝年问，宕昌国国王梁璀匆才开始进献当地特产。
English: When Emperor Song Xiaowu asked for the year, the king of Tangchang, Liang Qianxuan, began to present local specialties.

古文：天监四年，王梁弥博来献甘草、当归，诏以为使持节、都督河、凉二州诸军事、安西将军、东羌校尉、河、凉二州刺史、陇西公、宕昌王，佩以金章。
现代文：天监四年，宕昌国国王梁弥博来进献甘草、当归，高祖下诏任命梁弥博为使持节、都督河凉二州诸军事、安西将军、东羌校尉、河凉二州刺史、陇西公、宕昌王，佩金印。
English: In the fourth year of Tianjing, Liang Mibo, the king of Tangchang, came to present liquorice, and when he returned, Gao Zu issued an edict appointing Liang Mibo as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of He Liang Erzhou, the general of Anxi, the lieutenant of Donglu, the history of He Liang Erzhou, the governor of Shaanxi, the king of Tangchang, and the gold seal.

古文：弥博死，子弥泰立；大同七年，复授以父爵位。
现代文：梁弥博死，他的儿子梁弥泰继位。大同七年，高祖又把梁弥泰父亲的封爵和官职授予梁弥泰。
English: After the death of Liang Yibo, his son Liang Metai succeeded to the throne. In the seventh year of Datong, Gao Zu awarded Liang Metai's father a knighthood and an official post.

古文：其衣服、风俗与河南略同。
现代文：宕昌国的衣着、风俗大体上和河南国相同。
English: The clothing and customs of Tangchang are generally the same as those of Henan.

古文：邓至国，居西凉州界，羌别种也。
现代文：邓至国，地处西凉州地界，他们是羌人的分支。
English: Dengzhi Province, located on the border of West Liangzhou Province, they are a branch of the Qiang people.

古文：世号持节、平北将军、西凉州刺史。
现代文：邓至国国王世代继承持节、平北将军、西凉州刺史的职位。
English: Deng Zhi Guo's generation of kings inherited the positions of Jisai, Pingbei General, and Xiliangzhou Sashishi.

古文：宋文帝时，王象屈耽遣使献马。
现代文：宋文帝时，邓至国国王象屈耽派遣使者进献良马。
English: During the reign of Emperor Songwen, King Xiang Qutan of the State of Deng Zi sent an envoy to present a fine horse.

古文：天监元年，诏以邓至王象舒彭为督西凉州诸军事，号安北将军。
现代文：天监元年，高祖下韶任命邓至王象舒彭为督西凉州诸军事，号安北将军。
English: In the first year of Tianjun, Emperor Gaozong appointed Deng Zi Wangxiang Shupeng as the military governor of West Liangzhou, with the title of General Anbei.

古文：五年，舒彭遣使献黄耆四百斤、马四匹。
现代文：天监五年，象舒彭派遣使者进献四百斤黄耆，四匹马。
English: In the fifth year of the overseer of heaven, Xiang Shupeng sent an envoy to present four hundred pounds of yellow rice and four horses.

古文：其俗呼帽曰突何，其衣服与宕昌同。
现代文：当地百姓称帽为突何。他们的衣着舆宕昌国相同。
English: The local people call the hat a tsukuda. Their clothing is the same as that of Changguo.

古文：武兴国，本仇池。
现代文：武兴国，本是仇池郡。
English: Wuxing Province, originally Qiuqi County.

古文：杨难当自立为秦王，宋文帝遣裴方明讨之，难当奔魏。
现代文：杨难当自立为秦王，宋文帝派裴方明进讨杨难当，杨难当逃奔魏。
English: Yang Nandu stood up for himself as Qin King, Song Emperor sent Pei Fangming to discuss Yang Nandu, Yang Nandu fled to Wei.

古文：其兄子文德又聚众茄卢，宋因授以爵位，魏又攻之，文德奔汉中。
现代文：杨难当兄长之子杨文德又收聚兵卒占据茄卢，宋就授给他封爵和官职，魏又进攻杨文德，杨文德逃奔漠中。
English: When Yang Nan's elder brother's son, Yang Wende, gathered soldiers to occupy Jialu, Song awarded him a knighthood and an official post, Wei attacked Yang Wende again, and Yang Wende fled into the desert.

古文：从弟僧嗣又自立，复戍茄卢。
现代文：杨文德的堂弟杨僧嗣自立为王，又据守茄卢。
English: Yang Wende's cousin, Yang Sangzhi, established himself as king and continued to rule Jialu.

古文：卒，文德弟文度立，以弟文洪为白水太守，屯武兴，宋世以为武都王。
现代文：杨僧嗣去世，杨文德之弟杨文度立为王，杨文度命他弟弟杨文洪任白水太守，驻兵武兴，宋代封杨文洪为武都王。
English: Yang Sangzhi died, Yang Mengde's brother Yang Mengdu became king, Yang Mengdu appointed his brother Yang Menghong as the governor of Baishui, stationed troops in Wuxing, and made Yang Menghong the king of Wudu in the Song Dynasty.

古文：武兴之国，自于此矣。
现代文：武兴国就从遣时候开始建国。
English: The founding of Wuxing Province began at the time of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：难当族弟广香又攻杀文度，自立为阴平王、茄卢镇主。
现代文：杨难当族弟杨广香又进攻杨文度，杀死了杨文度，杨广香自立为阴平王、茄卢镇主。
English: When Yang Nandu's younger brother Yang Guangxiang attacked Yang Wendu again and killed Yang Wendu, Yang Guangxiang established himself as the king of Yinping and the lord of Jialu Town.

古文：卒，子炅立；炅死，子崇祖立；崇祖死，子孟孙立。
现代文：杨广香死，他的儿子杨炅继位。杨炅死，他的儿子杨崇祖继位。杨崇祖死，他的儿子杨孟孙继位。
English: Yang Guangxiang died and was succeeded by his son Yang Hui; Yang Hui died and was succeeded by his son Yang Chongzu; Yang Chongzu died and was succeeded by his son Yang Mengsun.

古文：齐永明中，魏氏南梁州刺史、仇池公杨灵珍据泥功山归款，齐世以灵珍为北梁州刺史、仇池公。
现代文：齐永明年问，魏国南梁州刺史仇池公杨灵珍占据泥功山向齐投诚，齐任命杨灵珍为北梁州刺史、仇池公。
English: Qiyong asked next year, Yang Lingzhen, the prince of Qiqi in the southern Liangzhou of Wei, occupied the mud gong mountain to cast sincerity to Qi, and Qi appointed Yang Lingzhen as the prince of Qiqi in the northern Liangzhou.

古文：文洪死，以族人集始为北秦州刺史、武都王。
现代文：杨文洪死，齐任命杨文洪的族人杨集始为北秦州刺史、武都王。
English: After Yang Wenhong's death, Qi appointed Yang Jishi, a member of Yang Wenhong's tribe, as the governor of North Qin and the King of Wudu.

古文：天监初，以集始为使持节、都督秦、雍二州诸军事、辅国将军、平羌校尉、北秦州刺史、武都王，灵珍为冠军将军，孟孙为假节、督沙州刺史、阴平王。
现代文：天监初年，高祖命杨集始为使持节、都督秦雍二州诸军事、辅国将军、平羌校尉、北秦州刺史、武都王；杨灵珍为冠军将军；杨孟孙为假节、督沙州刺史、阴平王。
English: In the first year of Tianjun, Gao Zu's life Yang Jizhi was the envoy of the festival, the military of the two states of Qin and Yong, the general of the auxiliary state, the lieutenant of Pingyao, the history of North Qin, and the king of the capital; Yang Lingzhen was the champion general; Yang Mengsun was the false festival, the history of the sand state, and the king of Yinping.

古文：集始死，子绍先袭爵位。
现代文：杨集始死，他的儿子杨绍先继承他的爵位和官职。
English: After the death of Yang Jizhi, his son Yang Shao inherited his title and post.

古文：二年，以灵珍为持节、督陇右诸军事、左将军、北梁州刺史、仇池王。
现代文：天监二年，高祖命杨灵珍为持节、督陇右诸军事、左将军、北梁州刺史、仇池王。
English: In the second year of Tianjing, Gao Zu ordered Yang Lingzhen to be the military commander of the right, the general of the left, the governor of the right, the governor of the north, and the king of the enemy.

古文：十年，孟孙死，诏赠安沙将军、北雍州刺史。
现代文：天监十年，杨孟孙死，高祖下诏追赠他为安沙将军、北雍州刺史。
English: Ten years after Tianjun, Yang Mengsun died, and Gao Zu posthumously awarded him the title of Ansha General and the title of Beiyang State Historian.

古文：子定袭封爵。
现代文：杨孟孙之子杨定继承杨孟孙的封爵和官职。
English: Yang Mengsun's son, Yang Ding, succeeded Yang Mengsun's knighthood and official post.

古文：绍先死，子智慧立。
现代文：杨绍先死，他的儿子杨智慧继位。
English: Yang Shao died first, and his son Yang Zhizhi succeeded him.

古文：大同元年，克复汉中，智慧遣使上表，求率四千户归国，诏许焉，即以为东益州。
现代文：大同元年，朝廷收复漠中，杨智慧派遣使者呈奉表章，请求让自己率领四千户回到封国，高祖下诏准许了，就命杨智慧为东益州刺史。
English: In the first year of Datong, when the imperial court was in the process of recovering the country, Yang Zhizhi sent an envoy to the emperor to present a seal and request that he lead four thousand households back to the feudal state. Emperor Gaozhu gave his permission and ordered Yang Zhizhi to write the history of East Yizhou.

古文：其国东连秦岭，西接宕昌，去宕昌八百里，南去汉中四百里，北去岐州三百里，东去长安九百里。
现代文：武兴国束边和秦岭相连，西和宕昌国相连，距宕昌国八百里，南边距汉中四百里，北边距岐州三百里，东边距长安九百里。
English: Wuxing's Sokubei is connected to Qinling, Xihe's Xihe's Xihe's Xihe's Xihe's Xihe's Xihe's Xihe's Xihe's Xihe's Xihe's Xihe's Xihe's

古文：本有十万户，世世分减。
现代文：武兴国本有十万户百姓，但因一代一代分出而减少。
English: Originally, there were 100,000 households in Wuxing Province, but the number has decreased due to generation by generation migration.

古文：其大姓有符氏、姜氏。
现代文：武兴国中大姓有符氏、姜氏。
English: The Fu clan and the Jiang clan are the largest families in Wuxing Province.

古文：言语与中国同。
现代文：武兴国言语舆中国相同。
English: The language of Wuxing is the same as that of China.

古文：著乌皁突骑帽、长身小袖袍、小口袴、皮靴。
现代文：他们头戴乌皂突骑帽，身穿长身小袖袍，小口裤，皮靴。
English: They wear black riding hats, long-sleeved gowns, short trousers and leather boots.

古文：地植九谷。
现代文：土地种植九谷。
English: The land is planted with nine valleys.

古文：婚姻备六礼。
现代文：他们的婚姻也具备六礼。
English: Their marriage also has its ups and downs.

古文：知书疏。
现代文：他们懂得文字，会书信往来。
English: They know how to write and exchange letters.

古文：种桑麻。
现代文：武兴国种植桑麻。
English: Mulberry is grown in Wuxing Province.

古文：出、绢、精布、漆、蜡、椒等。
现代文：出产、绢、精布、漆、蜡、椒等。
English: Production of reeds, reeds, fine cloth, lacquer, wax, pepper, etc.

古文：山出铜铁。
现代文：山上出产铜铁。
English: Copper and iron are produced on the mountain.

古文：芮芮国，盖匈奴别种。
现代文：芮芮国，是匈奴的分支。
English: Shan State is a branch of the Xiongnu.

古文：魏、晋世，匈奴分为数百千部，各有名号，芮芮其一部也。
现代文：魏、晋时代，匈奴分成敷百上千部，每部各有自己的名称，芮芮就是其中的一部。
English: During the Wei and Jin dynasties, the Xiongnu was divided into hundreds of thousands of sections, each with its own name, and the crane was one of them.

古文：自元魏南迁，因擅其故地。
现代文：元魏南迁之后，芮芮就占领元魏原来的土地。
English: After the southern migration of the Yuan Wei Dynasty, the Yao occupied the original land of the Yuan Wei Dynasty.

古文：无城郭，随水草畜牧，以穹庐为居。
现代文：芮芮国没有城郭，他们追寻水草畜牧，居住在穹庐中。
English: There is no city wall in the country. They pursue aquatic plants and animal husbandry, and live in domes.

古文：辫发，衣锦，小袖袍，小口袴，深雍靴。
现代文：他们编发为辫，以锦缎作衣，穿小袖袍，小口裤，深雍靴。
English: They braided their hair, dressed in brocade, wore short-sleeved gowns, small trousers, and deep boots.

古文：其地苦寒，七月流澌亘河。
现代文：芮芮国天气严寒，七月份满河还都是刚刚融化的冰块。
English: The weather in Shandong Province is very cold. In July, the river is still full of just-melted ice.

古文：宋升明中，遣王洪轨使焉，引之共伐魏。
现代文：宋升明年间，朝廷派王洪轨出使芮芮，调集芮芮军队一同攻打墓。
English: During the reign of Song Sheng, the imperial court sent Wang Hongzong as an envoy to mobilize troops to attack the tomb.

古文：齐建元元年，洪轨始至其国，国王率三十万骑，出燕然山东南三千余里，魏人闭关不敢战。
现代文：齐建元元年，洪轨才到达芮芮国，芮芮国国王率领三十万骑兵，到燕盘山东南三千余里的地方，魏人紧闭关门不敢与芮芮骑兵交战。
English: In the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year

古文：后稍侵弱。
现代文：后来至其国逐渐衰弱。
English: It later weakened to a tropical depression.

古文：永明中，为丁零所破，更为小国而南移其居。
现代文：永明年间，被丁零打败，又成为小国而向南迁移。
English: In the following years, it was defeated by Ding Zero and became a small country and migrated south.

古文：天监中，始破丁零，复其旧土。
现代文：天监年间，芮芮才打败丁零，收复了他们原有的国土。
English: It was only during the time of the Heaven's Supervision that the Yao defeated the Ding and regained their original land.

古文：始筑城郭，名曰木末城。
现代文：然后芮芮开始建造城郭，都城称为木末城。
English: Then the Xiongnu began to build the castle, and the capital city was called the Wood End City.

古文：十四年，遣使献乌貂裘。
现代文：天监十四年，芮芮派遣使者进献乌貂裘。
English: In the 14th year of the Heaven's Guardianship, the Dragon Emperor sent an envoy to offer tribute to Wu Xizhe.

古文：普通元年，又遣使献方物。
现代文：普通元年，又派遣使者进献当地特产。
English: In the first year of the year, an envoy was sent to present local special products.

古文：是后数岁一至焉。
现代文：这以后每隔敷年就会有一批芮芮的使者来京城。
English: From then on, a group of envoys from the dragonfly would come to the capital every two years.

古文：大同七年，又献马一匹、金一斤。
现代文：大同七年，芮芮使者又来进献一匹马，一斤金。
English: In the seventh year of Datong, the envoy came again to offer a horse and one catty of gold.

古文：其国能以术祭天而致风雪，前对皎日，后则泥潦横流，故其战败莫能追及。
现代文：芮芮国能以巫术祭天而招致风雪，有时前方是白日高悬，而身后却泥泞遍地，积水横流。所以他们战败逃跑，没有人能追上他们。
English: They can cause snowstorms with sorcery and festivals, and sometimes the front is high in the daytime, while behind is muddy and water-logged, so they are defeated and run away, and no one can catch up with them.

古文：或于中夏为之，则曀而不雨，问其故，以暖云。
现代文：有人在中原施行这种巫术，但衹能招致天空阴云密布却不会下雨，向他们问其中的缘故，他们回答是因为中原气候温暖。
English: Some people in the Central Plains practice this kind of sorcery, but the dragonfly can cause the sky to be overcast but it will not rain. When asked why, they answer that it is because the Central Plains have a warm climate.

古文：史臣曰：海南东夷西北戎诸国，地穷边裔，各有疆域。
现代文：史臣曰：海南东夷西北戎狄各国，处在大地尽头，极远的世界边缘，各有自己的疆域。
English: Shichen said: "Hainan, Dongyi, Northwest Rongdi countries are at the end of the earth, far away on the edge of the world, each with its own territory.

古文：若山奇海异，怪类殊种，前古未闻，往牒不记。故知九州之外，八荒之表，辩方物土，莫究其极。
现代文：至于山中的珍奇，海中的异实，各国不同的人种，怪异的形貌，实在是前代古人都未曾听说，以前的典籍也未曾记载，由此可知，九州八荒之外，各国风土人情，没有人能全部清楚地了解。
English: As for the rarity in the mountains, the strangeness in the sea, the different races in various countries, and the strange shapes, it is true that previous generations of ancients have never heard of them, and previous classics have not been recorded. From this, it can be seen that no one can fully understand the customs and manners of countries outside the eight deserts of Kyushu.

古文：高祖以德怀之，故朝贡岁至，美矣。
现代文：高祖以德政抚慰他们，因此朝觐的使者、进献的贡品每年都来到京城，送至朝廷，实在是一大盛事啊。
English: Gaozou comforted them with his virtue, so the emissaries of the pilgrimage and the tributes came to the capital every year and sent them to the imperial court. It was really a great event.

