古文：凡与步、骑战于平原旷野，必须用偏箱、鹿角车为方阵，以战则胜。
现代文：凡是车兵同步、骑兵交战于平原旷野之上，必须用偏箱、鹿角车组成方阵，凭借此方阵对敌作战，就可以获胜。
English: Whenever the chariots and horsemen are synchronized and engage in battle on the plains and moors, they must form a phalanx with side boxes and antlers. With this phalanx fighting against the enemy, they can win.

古文：所谓一则治力，一则前拒，一则整束部伍也。
现代文：以偏箱、鹿角车组成方阵作战，其作用就是通常所说的：一能保持战力，二能正面抗拒敌人，三能掩护我军保持战斗队形。
English: To fight in a phalanx formed by a square box and a deer horn cart, its role is what is usually said: one can maintain combat effectiveness, the second can resist the enemy head-on, and the third can cover our army and maintain the battle formation.

古文：法曰： 广地则用车军。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 在开阔地域作战，就要用战车作战。 
English: As stated in the Art of War: To fight in an open area, it is necessary to fight with a chariot.

古文：晋凉州刺史杨欣，失羌戎之和，为虏所没。
现代文：西晋凉州刺史杨欣因和当地羌族关系恶化，被羌人所杀，致使河西地区与中原朝廷断绝联系。
English: Due to the deterioration of relations with the local Yi people, Yang Xin, a priest from Liangzhou, West Jin, was killed by the Yi people, causing the Hexi region to sever ties with the Central Plains imperial court.

古文：河西断绝，帝每有西顾之忧，临朝而叹曰： 谁能为我通凉州讨此虏者乎？ 
现代文：晋武帝司马炎经常为西部边境安全忧虑，每次临朝议政都叹息地说： 谁能为我讨伐敌人，打开通向凉州之路？ 朝臣没有一人应答。
English: Emperor Sima Yan of the Jin Dynasty often worried about the safety of the western border, and every time he held a meeting with the imperial court, he said with a sigh: Who can fight the enemy for me and open the road to Liangzhou? None of the courtiers answered.

古文：朝臣莫对。司马督马隆进曰： 陛下若能任臣，臣能平之。 
现代文：唯有司马督马隆上前奏道： 陛下如能任用我，我能讨平凉州叛乱。 
English: Only Sima Du Malong prefaced: If Your Majesty can appoint me, I can quell the Liangzhou Rebellion.

古文：帝曰： 若能灭贼，何为不任，顾卿方略何如耳！ 
现代文：晋武帝说： 你若能消灭此敌，怎么会不任用你呢？只是不知将采取什么办法？ 
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "If you can eliminate this enemy, why would you not be appointed? I just don't know what measures will be taken."

古文：隆曰： 陛下若能任臣，当听臣自任。 
现代文：马隆说： 陛下如能任用我，就应当让我自己方便行事。 
English: Malone said, "If His Majesty can appoint me, he should let me serve at my own convenience.

古文：帝曰： 云何？ 
现代文：武帝问道： 请讲讲你将采用什么办法？ 
English: Emperor Wu asked: Please tell me what method you will use?

古文：对曰： 臣请募勇士三千人，无问所从来，率之鼓行而西，禀陛下威德，丑类何足灭者！ 
现代文：马隆回答说： 我请求陛下准许招募三千勇士，不要过问他们以往是干什么的，我将率领他们大张旗鼓地向河西地区开进。凭借陛下的崇高威德，何愁敌人不被消灭！ 
English: Malon replied, "I ask your majesty's permission to recruit three thousand warriors. Don't ask what they used to do, I will lead them into the Hexi region with great fanfare. With your majesty's lofty virtue, why worry about the enemy not being eliminated!

古文：帝许之，乃以隆为武威太守。
现代文：晋武帝答应了马隆的请求，并任命他为武威太守。
English: Emperor Jinwu agreed to Malong's request and appointed him as Wuwei's eunuch.

古文：隆募腰开弩三十六钧，立标简试，自旦至日中，得三千五百人。
现代文：马隆受命后，立即招募勇士，其条件是，能靠腰部力量拉开三十六钧强弩的人，并且当场立靶测试。自清晨至中午，共招到这种勇士三千五百人。
English: Malone was instructed to recruit warriors immediately, on the condition that those who could pull off the thirty-six stubborn stumps with their waist strength and set up a target test on the spot. From early morning to noon, a total of three thousand and five hundred such warriors were recruited.

古文：隆曰： 足矣。 
现代文：马隆自信地说： 足够用了。 
English: "Enough is enough," Malone said confidently.

古文：隆于是率其众西渡温水，虏树机能等，以众万骑，或乘险以遏隆前，或设伏以截隆后。
现代文：于是，亲率其所募勇士向西进发，渡过温水后，与敌相遇。羌族一部落首领树机能等以万金骑兵，或者凭据险要阻挡，马隆前进，或者埋设伏兵截击晋军后路。
English: As a result, he led the warriors he had recruited to the west, and after crossing the warm water, they encountered the enemy. The leader of one of the Yao tribes led the cavalry with 10,000 gold, or blocked the advance of Malong with evidence of danger, or set an ambush to intercept the Jin army's rear path.

古文：隆依八阵图作偏箱车，地广用鹿角车，路狭则为木屋施于车上，且战且前，弓矢所及，应弦而倒。
现代文：针对此情，马隆依据古法八阵图制作了偏箱车，进入开阔地域时，就设置鹿角车营，遇到狭路地段，就做木屋装在车上，一边战斗一边前进，晋军箭矢所射之处，羌兵纷纷应弦而倒。
English: In response to this situation, Malong made a side-by-side boxcar according to the ancient eight-battalion map. When entering an open area, he set up an antler car camp. When encountering a narrow road section, he made a wooden house and mounted it on the car. While fighting, he advanced. Where the Jin army's arrows were shot, the soldiers fell in response.

古文：转战千里，杀伤以千数。
现代文：晋军转战千里之遥，杀伤敌众数以千计。
English: The Jin army went to war thousands of miles away, killing and wounding thousands of enemies.

古文：隆到武威，虏大人萃跋韩、且万能等，率万余众归。隆前后诛杀及降附者数万。
现代文：马隆率兵抵达武威后，羌族部落首领猝跋韩、且万能等人率众万余不战而归降，马隆前后击杀和收降的羌兵达数万人。
English: After Malong and his soldiers arrived in Wuwei, the leader of the Yao tribe, Qianba Han, and Wan Neng led more than 10,000 soldiers to surrender without a fight. Malong killed and defeated tens of thousands of Yao soldiers.

古文：又率善戎、没骨能等，与树机能等战，斩之，凉州遂平。
现代文：马隆前后诛杀和降服敌军数万人，又把善戎、没骨能等争取过来，直接与树机能作战，将其斩杀，终于平定了凉州。
English: Malong fought back and forth, killed and subdued tens of thousands of enemy troops, and won over the good soldiers and spineless soldiers, fought directly with the tree function, killed it, and finally leveled Liangzhou.

