古文：冯玠
现代文：冯玠
English: Feng Xuan

古文：唐冯玠者，患狐魅疾。
现代文：唐代有个冯玠，得了狐魅病。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Feng Xuan who suffered from fox charm disease.

古文：其父后得术士，疗玠疾，魅忽啼泣谓玠曰： 本图共终，今为术者所迫，不复得在。 
现代文：他的父亲后来找到一个术士，来治疗冯玠的病。狐狸忽然哭泣着对冯玠说： 本想与你终生在一起，现在被术士逼迫得不能再呆下去了。 
English: His father later found a sorcerer to treat Feng Xuan's illness. The fox suddenly cried and said to Feng Xuan: "I wanted to be with you for the rest of my life, but now the sorcerer is forcing me to stay.

古文：流泪经日，方赠玠衣一袭云： 善保爱之，聊为久念耳。 
现代文：哭了整整一天，赠送给冯玠一件衣服说： 好好地保护爱惜它，姑且当作永久的纪念吧。 
English: After crying for a whole day, he presented a piece of clothing to Feng Jun and said: "Protect and cherish it well, let it be a permanent souvenir."

古文：玠初得，惧家人见，悉卷书中。
现代文：冯玠刚收衣服时，害怕被家里的人看见，全都卷在书里放着。
English: When Feng Yao had just collected his clothes, he was afraid of being seen by the people at home and left them all rolled up in a book.

古文：疾愈，入京应举，未得开视。
现代文：病好以后，到京城去参加考试，没有时间打开看。
English: After recovering from the illness, I went to Beijing to take the exam, but I didn't have time to open it.

古文：及第后，方还开之，乃是纸焉。
现代文：考中以后，才回家打开看，都是些纸。
English: After the middle school entrance examination, I went home and opened it. It was all paper.

古文：贺兰进明
现代文：贺兰进明
English: Heran Shinmei

古文：唐贺兰进明为狐所婚，每到时节，狐新妇恒至京宅，通名起居，兼持贺遗及问讯。
现代文：唐代的贺兰进明与狐狸结婚，每到节令的时候，狐狸新媳妇常常到京城的住宅去，通报姓名并住在那里，并且带来贺兰进明的礼品和问候。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Heran Jinming married a fox. Every time there was a festival, the fox's new daughter-in-law would often go to a residence in Beijing, announce her name and live there, and bring Heran Jinming gifts and greetings.

古文：家人或有见者，状貌甚美。
现代文：家人中有的看见了她，相貌很美。
English: Some of her family members saw her, and she looked very beautiful.

古文：至五月五日，自进明已下，至其仆隶，皆有续命。
现代文：到五月五日这天，从贺兰进明到家中的仆人，都能得到她送给的礼物。
English: By May 5th, every servant in the family, from Heran Jinming to the servants, could receive the gifts she sent.

古文：家人以为不祥，多焚其物。
现代文：家人认为不吉祥，大多烧了她给的礼物。
English: Her family thought it was unlucky and most of the gifts she gave them were burned.

古文：狐悲泣云： 此并真物，奈何焚之？ 
现代文：狐狸悲伤地哭泣说： 这些都是真的礼物，为什么烧了它们？ 
English: The fox cried sadly and said, "These are real gifts, why did you burn them?"

古文：其后所得，遂以充用。
现代文：以后再得到她给的东西，就留下使用了。
English: If I get something from her later, I'll keep it and use it.

古文：后家人有就求漆背金花镜者，入人家偷镜挂项，缘墙行，为主人家击杀，自尔怪绝焉。
现代文：后来有个人向她要个背面上漆的金花镜，她到别人家里偷了镜子挂在脖子上，顺着墙往回走，被主人家打死了。此后怪事就没有了。
English: Later, someone asked her for a gold-colored mirror with a lacquer on the back. She went to someone's house, stole the mirror, hung it around her neck, walked back along the wall, and was beaten to death by the owner's family. After that, there were no more strange occurrences.

古文：崔昌
现代文：崔昌
English: Cui Chang

古文：唐崔昌在东京庄读书，有小儿颜色殊异，来止庭中。
现代文：唐代崔昌在东京庄读书，有个小孩容貌长得很出奇，走来停在院子里。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Cui Chang was studying in Tokyo Village. There was a child with a very strange appearance who walked around and stopped in the courtyard.

古文：久之，渐升阶，坐昌床头。
现代文：时间长了，慢慢地走上台阶，坐在崔昌的床头上，崔昌也不理，又用手去卷握崔昌的书。
English: After a long time, he slowly walked up the steps and sat on Cui Chang's bed. Cui Chang ignored him and went to roll up Cui Chang's book.

古文：昌不之顾，乃以手卷昌书，昌徐问： 汝何人斯？
现代文：崔昌慢慢地问： 你是什么人，到这里想干什么？ 
English: Cui Chang slowly asked: Who are you and what do you want to do here?

古文：来何所欲？ 小儿云： 本好读书，慕君学问尔。 
现代文：小孩说： 我本来喜欢读书，很羡慕你的学问。 
English: The child said: I used to like reading, and I admire your knowledge.

古文：昌不之却。
现代文：崔昌也不拒绝他。
English: Cui Chang did not refuse him either.

古文：常问文义，甚有理。
现代文：崔昌常常问他一些文章的意义，答得很有道理。
English: Cui Chang often asked him the meaning of some articles, and his answer was very reasonable.

古文：经数月，日暮，忽扶一老人乘醉至昌所。
现代文：过了几个月，天黑的时候，忽然小孩扶着一个老人乘着酒醉到崔昌家来。
English: A few months later, when it was dark, suddenly a child came to Cui Chang's house with the help of an old man who was drunk.

古文：小儿暂出，老人醉，吐人之爪发等，昌甚恶之。
现代文：小孩临时出去一会，老人已经醉了，吐出一些人的指甲和头发，崔昌很厌恶他。
English: The child went out temporarily for a while, the old man was already drunk, and spit out some people's nails and hair. Cui Chang was disgusted with him.

古文：昌素有所持利剑，因斩断头，成一老狐。
现代文：崔昌平时就有一把锋利的剑，顺手把老人的头砍下来，变成了一只老狐狸。
English: Cui Chang usually has a sharp sword. He cut off the old man's head and turned into an old fox.

古文：顷之，小儿至，大怒云： 君何故无状，杀我家长？我岂不能杀君？
现代文：不久，小孩回来了，非常生气地说： 你为什么这么不象样子，竟杀死了我的尊长，我难道就不能杀死你吗？
English: Presently the little boy returned, very angry, and said, "Why are you so cross that you have killed my father? Can I not kill you?"

古文：但以旧恩故尔。 
现代文：只是因为你从前对我的恩情，我不能这么做。 
English: It's only because of your kindness to me in the past that I can't.

古文：大骂出门，自尔乃绝。
现代文：大骂着走出门去。从此再也没有来。
English: He yelled at me and walked out the door. He never came back.

古文：长孙甲
现代文：长孙甲
English: Eldest Grandson A

古文：唐坊州中部县令长孙甲者，其家笃信佛道。
现代文：唐代坊州的中部县县令长孙甲，他的全家都很信奉佛教。
English: Sun Jia, the county magistrate of the central county of Tangdaifangzhou, and his whole family believe in Buddhism.

古文：异日斋次，举家见文殊菩萨，乘五色云从日边下。须臾，至斋所檐际，凝然不动。
现代文：有一天，在进行斋戒当中，全家人看见了文殊菩萨，坐着五彩云从太阳光中下来，不一会，降到斋室的房檐上，停住不动。
English: One day, while fasting, the whole family saw Manjushri, sitting on a multi-colored cloud, descend from the sun, and after a while, descend to the eaves of the room and stopped.

古文：合家礼敬恳至，久之乃下。
现代文：全家人恭敬诚恳，礼数备至，过了许久，他就下来了。
English: The whole family respectfully and sincerely bowed before him, and after a long time, he came down.

古文：其家前后供养数十日，唯其子心疑之，入京求道士为设禁，遂击杀狐。
现代文：家人前后供养了十几天，只有他的儿子心里怀疑，他儿子进京请道士来安排法术，于是杀死了狐狸。
English: His family provided for him for a dozen days, and only his son suspected in his heart that his son had gone to Beijing to ask a Taoist priest to arrange a spell, so he killed the fox.

古文：令家奉马一匹，钱五十千。
现代文：县令家送给道士一匹马，五十千钱。
English: The county magistrate gave the Taoist a horse and fifty thousand yuan.

古文：后数十日，复有菩萨乘云来到，家人敬礼如故，其子复延道士，禁咒如前。
现代文：又过了几十天，又有个菩萨坐着彩云来到县令家，家人象以前一样恭敬对待。他儿子又去请那道士。
English: Dozens of days later, another Bodhisattva came to the county magistrate's house, sitting on a colored cloud, and the family members treated him with the same respect as before. His son went to invite the Taoist again.

古文：尽十余日，菩萨问道士： 法术如何？ 
现代文：道士象以前一样地安排法术符咒，过了十多天，菩萨问那道士： 你的法术怎么样了？ 
English: After more than ten days, the Bodhisattva asked the priest, "How are your spells?

古文：答曰： 已尽。 
现代文：回答说： 已经用完了。 
English: He replied: "It's all gone."

古文：菩萨云： 当决一顿。 
现代文：菩萨说： 应当打你一顿。 
English: The Bodhisattva said, "You should be beaten."

古文：因问道士： 汝读道经，知有狐刚子否？ 
现代文：接着又问道士： 你读道经，知不知道有个狐刚子？ 
English: Then he asked, "When you read the Tao Te Ching, do you know that there is a fox son?

古文：答云： 知之。 
现代文：回答说： 知道。 
English: And he said, I know it.

古文：菩萨云： 狐刚子者，即我是也。我得仙来，已三万岁。
现代文：菩萨说： 狐刚子就是我，我成仙以来，已经三万年了。
English: The Bodhisattva said, "Fox Ganga is me. It has been thirty thousand years since I became an immortal.

古文：汝为道士，当修清净，何事杀生？
现代文：你是道士，应当到清净的地方去修炼，为什么要杀生呢？
English: You are a Taoist, you should go to a clean place to cultivate, why kill?

古文：且我子孙，为汝所杀，宁宜活汝耶？ 
现代文：况且，我的子孙，被你杀了，难道还应该让你活着吗？ 
English: Moreover, my children, having been killed by you, should I let you live?

古文：因杖道士一百毕，谓令曰： 子孙无状，至相劳扰，惭愧何言。当令君永无灾横，以此相报。 
现代文：接着用拐杖打了道士一百下，然后，对长孙甲说： 我的子孙不象样子，以至给你添了麻烦，我惭愧得没有什么说的，应当让你永远没有灾难和横祸，用这个来报答你吧。 
English: Then he beat the Taoist a hundred times with a crutch, and then said to his eldest grandson, Jia: My grandson is not what he appears to be, and has caused you trouble. I am so ashamed that I have nothing to say. I should let you never have any disasters or misfortunes. Let me repay you with this.

古文：顾谓道士： 可即还他马及钱也。 
现代文：回头对道士说： 要立即把马和钱还给人家。 
English: He turned back to the Taoist and said, "You must immediately return the horse and the money."

古文：言讫飞去。
现代文：说完就飞走了。
English: Saying that, the boy left.

古文：王老
现代文：王老
English: Wang Lao

古文：唐睢阳郡宋王冢旁有老狐，每至衙日，邑中之狗，悉往朝之，狐坐冢上，狗列其下。
现代文：唐代睢阳郡宋王坟地旁边有只老狐狸，每当到了衙日，城里的狗，全都去朝拜老狐狸，狐狸坐在坟头上，狗列队在下面。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was an old fox next to the graveyard of King Song of Poyang County. Whenever the New Year's Day came, the dogs in the city all went to worship the old fox. The fox sat at the head of the grave, and the dogs lined up below.

古文：东都王老有双犬能咋魅，前后杀魅甚多，宋人相率以财雇犬咋狐。
现代文：东都的王老有一对狗能够撕咬狐狸，前前后后杀死很多狐狸。姓宋的人互相结伴花钱雇狗捉狐狸。
English: Wang Lao of Dongdu has a pair of dogs that can tear and bite foxes, killing many foxes back and forth. People with the surname Song accompany each other and spend money to hire dogs to catch foxes.

古文：王老牵犬往，犬乃迳诣诸犬之下，伏而不动，大失宋人之望。
现代文：王老牵着狗前去，狗却一直走到那许多狗的后面，趴着一动不动，使姓宋的人很失望。
English: Wang Lao led the dog forward, but the dog kept walking behind the many dogs, lying down and not moving, which made the person surnamed Song very disappointed.

古文：今世人有不了其事者，相戏云： 取睢阳野狐犬。 
现代文：现在世上有解决不了的事情，人们互相说笑说： 牵来睢阳野狐狗。 
English: Now there are things in the world that can't be solved. People are joking with each other and saying, "Bring in the Yang wild foxes."

古文：刘众爱
现代文：刘众爱
English: Liu Zhongai

古文：唐刘全白说云，其乳母子众爱，少时，好夜中将网断道，取野猪及狐狸等。
现代文：唐代的刘全白曾说，他奶妈的儿子众爱，少年时，总是喜好在半夜时把网安放在道的中间，来捕捉野猪和狐狸等。
English: Liu Quanbai of the Tang Dynasty once said that when he was a young boy, he always liked to put a net in the middle of the road in the middle of the night to catch wild boars and foxes.

古文：全白庄在岐下，后一夕，众于庄西数里下网，己伏网中，以伺其至。
现代文：刘全白的庄子在岐山脚下。后来有一晚上，众爱在庄子西面几里的地方下了网，自己趴在网里，等着野兽的到来。
English: Liu Quanbai's village was at the foot of the Qishan Mountain. Later, one night, Zhuang Ai cast a net a few miles west of the village and lay down in the net, waiting for the beast to arrive.

古文：暗中闻物行声，觇见一物，伏地窥网，因而起立，变成绯裙妇人。
现代文：在暗中听动物行走的声音，就看见一只动物，趴在地上看网。接着站起来，变成一个穿浅红裙子的妇女。
English: After listening to the sound of animals walking in the dark, she saw an animal, lay down on the ground to look at the net, then stood up and turned into a woman wearing a light red dress.

古文：行而违网，至爱前车侧，忽捉一鼠食。
现代文：走路避开了网，走到众爱前面车子的旁边，忽然捉住一只老鼠吃起来。
English: While walking, he avoided the net, walked to the side of the car in front of everyone, and suddenly caught a mouse and ate it.

古文：爱连呵之，妇人忙遽入网，乃棒之致毙，而人形不改。
现代文：众爱连声地呵斥她，妇女匆忙中跑进网里，于是用棒子打死了她。可是人的形象没有变化。
English: The crowd shouted at her, and the woman ran into the net in a hurry, so they beat her to death with a stick, but the human image did not change.

古文：爱反疑惧，恐或是人，因和网没沤麻池中。
现代文：众爱反而怀疑害怕，怕的是或许是人，接着连人带网沉没到沤麻的水池里。
English: On the contrary, the crowd was suspicious and afraid, fearing that it might be a person, and then sank into the nettle pool with a net.

古文：夜还与父母议，及明，举家欲潜逃去。
现代文：晚上还家和父母商量，等到天亮，全家人准备悄悄地逃走。
English: In the evening, they returned home to consult with their parents. By dawn, the whole family was preparing to quietly flee.

古文：爱窃云： 宁有妇人食生鼠，此必狐耳。 
现代文：众爱私下说： 难道有吃生老鼠的女人吗？这一定是狐狸。 
English: Ai privately said, "Is there a woman who eats raw mice? It must be a fox."

古文：复往麻池视之，见妇人已活，因以大斧自腰后斫之，便成老狐。
现代文：又到沤麻池去察看，只见妇女已经活过来，又用大斧子从腰后砍她，就变成了老狐狸。
English: Then he went to the nettle-pond to see if the woman was still alive, and he cut her from the waist down with a great axe, and she became an old fox.

古文：爱大喜，将还村中。
现代文：众爱很高兴，提着狐狸回到村子里。
English: Everyone was delighted and took the fox back to the village.

古文：有老僧见狐未死，劝令养之，云： 狐口中媚珠，若能得之，当为天下所爱。 
现代文：有个老和尚看狐狸还没死，劝他饲养这只狐狸，说： 狐狸嘴里有颗媚珠，如果能得到珠子，就能被天下的人所爱慕。 
English: An old monk saw that the fox was still alive and advised him to keep the fox, saying, "The fox has a lovely bead in its mouth. If you can get the bead, you will be loved by people all over the world."

古文：以绳缚狐四足，又以大笼罩其上。
现代文：就用绳子捆住狐狸的四只脚，又用大笼子罩在上面。
English: He tied the four feet of the fox with a rope and covered it with a large cage.

古文：养数日，狐能食。
现代文：养了几天，狐狸能吃东西了。
English: After being raised for a few days, the fox is able to eat.

古文：僧用小瓶口窄者，埋地中，令口与地齐，以两胾猪肉，炙于瓶中。
现代文：和尚用一个窄口的瓶子，埋在地里，让瓶口和地面平齐，用两块猪肉，烤熟了放在瓶里。
English: The monk used a narrow-mouthed bottle, buried in the ground, so that the mouth of the bottle was level with the ground, with two pieces of pork, roasted and placed in the bottle.

古文：狐爱炙而不能得，但以口属瓶。
现代文：狐狸爱吃烤肉却吃不到，只能是用嘴对着瓶子。
English: The fox likes to eat grilled meat, but he can't eat it. He can only use his mouth to look at the bottle.

古文：候炙冷，复下肉脔。
现代文：等烤肉凉了，再放进两块烤肉。
English: When the roast is cool, add two pieces of roasted meat.

古文：狐涎沫久之，炙与瓶满，狐乃吐珠而死。
现代文：狐狸长久地流口水，烤肉已装了满瓶，狐狸就吐出媚珠死去。
English: The fox drooled for a long time, the bottle of roast meat was full, and the fox vomited out the bead and died.

古文：珠状如棋子，通圆而洁。
现代文：珠的样子象棋子大小，又圆又洁净。
English: The shape of the bead is the size of a chess piece, round and clean.

古文：爱母带之，大为其夫所贵。
现代文：众爱的母亲佩带着媚珠，她的丈夫特别敬爱她。
English: The much-loved mother-of-one wears her heart on her sleeve and is particularly adored by her husband.

古文：王黯
现代文：王黯
English: Wang Ying

古文：王黯者，结婚崔氏。
现代文：王黯，与崔氏结婚。
English: Wang Ying, married to Cui Zong.

古文：唐天宝中，妻父士同为淝州刺史。黯随至江夏，为狐所媚，不欲渡江，发狂大叫，恒欲赴水。
现代文：唐代天宝年间，妻子的父亲崔士同任淝州刺史，王黯跟随他来到江夏时，被狐狸迷住了，不想渡长江，发狂似的大叫，总想跳到江水里去。
English: During the Tang Dynasty's Tenpo era, his wife's father, Cui Shih, was also the governor of Zhangzhou. When Wang Qian followed him to Jiangxia, he was fascinated by a fox and did not want to cross the Yangtze River. He screamed like crazy and always wanted to jump into the river.

古文：妻属惶惧，缚黯著床枥上。
现代文：妻子和亲属们都很不安而且担心，把王黯捆在床架上。
English: Uneasy and worried, his wife and relatives tied Wang Ying to the bed frame.

古文：舟行半江，忽尔欣笑，至岸大喜曰： 本谓诸女郎辈不随过江，今在州城上，复何虑也。 
现代文：船行到江心，王黯忽然高兴得笑起来，到了岸上高兴地说： 本来说是诸位女郎不随我过江，现在已在淝州城上，又担心什么呢？ 
English: When the boat reached the middle of the river, Wang Qiao suddenly laughed with joy. When she reached the shore, she said happily: Originally, you girls did not follow me across the river, but now you are in Zhangzhou City. What are you worried about?

古文：士同莅官，便求术士。左右言州人能射狐者，士同延至。入令堂中悉施床席，置黯于屋西北陬。
现代文：崔士同到了任上，便去请术士，他身边的人说州中有个能射死狐狸的人，崔士同就请那人来，那人来了就让人把屋里全铺上席子，把王黯安置在屋的西北角，让几十个仆人打更守卫。
English: When Trieste took office, he went to invite a sorcerer. The people around him said that there was a man in the state who could shoot a fox. Trieste invited the man. When the man came, he had the whole house covered with mats, placed Wang Ying in the northwest corner of the house, and had dozens of servants stand guard.

古文：家人数十持更迭守，己于堂外，别施一床，持弓矢以候狐。至三夕，忽云： 诸人得饱睡已否？
现代文：自己在屋外，另外放了一张床，拿着弓箭等候狐狸。到第三天的晚上，他忽然说： 各位都睡得很香吗？
English: On the evening of the third day, he suddenly said, "Did you all sleep well?"

古文：适已中狐，明当取之。 
现代文：刚才已经射中了狐狸，明天可取。 
English: I've just shot a fox. I'd like to do it tomorrow.

古文：众以为狂而未之信。
现代文：大家认为这人太狂妄而不相信他。
English: Everyone thought the man was too arrogant to be believed.

古文：及明，见窗中有血，众随血去，入大坑中，草下见一牝狐，带箭垂死。
现代文：等到天一亮，就看见窗上有血，大家顺着血迹找去，血迹进入一个大坑中，从坑里的草下面找到一只雌狐狸，身上带着箭快要死了。
English: When dawn came, they saw blood on the window. They followed the trail of blood into a large pit. From under the grass in the pit, they found a female fox with an arrow in her body, about to die.

古文：黯妻烧狐为灰，服之至尽，自尔得平复。
现代文：王黯的妻子把狐狸烧成灰，并把灰全给王黯吃了，从此王黯的病就好了。
English: Wang Yao's wife burned the fox to ashes and gave the ashes to Wang Yao to eat. From then on, Wang Yao's illness was cured.

古文：后为原武县丞，在厅事，忽见老狐奴婢，诣黯再拜，云是大家阿奶，往者娘子枉为崔家杀害，翁婆追念，未尝离口。
现代文：后来做原武县的县丞，在厅里办公事，忽然看见老狐狸的女仆又来拜见王黯，说： 我是大户家的奶妈，以前，娘子冤屈地被崔家杀害了，父母回忆思念她，总挂在嘴上。
English: Later, when he was the county magistrate of the original Wu County and doing office work in the hall, he suddenly saw the old fox's maid come to visit Wang Qian again, saying: I am the wet nurse of a large family. Previously, my daughter was unjustly killed by the Cui family. My parents always remember and miss her.

古文：今欲将小女更与王郎续亲。故令申意，兼取吉日成纳。
现代文：现在想把小女儿再送给王郎续亲，所以让我来说明心意，同时定个吉日好成亲。 
English: Now I want to give my little daughter to Wang Lang for the second time, so let me clarify my intentions and set an auspicious date to get married.

古文：黯甚惧。许以厚利，万计料理，遽出罗锦十余匹，于通衢焚之。
现代文：王黯很害怕，答应给她优厚的利益，求她想办法帮助处理。立刻拿出十几匹罗锦，在大路上烧了。
English: Wang Qian was very scared, promised to give her a generous benefit, and asked her to find a way to help deal with it. He immediately took out a dozen horses of brocade and burned them on the highway.

古文：老奴乃谓其妇云： 天下美丈夫亦复何数，安用王家老翁为女婿？ 
现代文：老奶妈就对那个妇人说： 天下的漂亮男人数不过来，为什么非要姓王的老头做女婿。 
English: The old wet nurse said to the woman, "There are more handsome men in the world than I can count. Why do you want an old man with the surname Wang to be your son-in-law?

古文：言讫不见。
现代文：说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：袁嘉祚
现代文：袁嘉祚
English: Yuan Jiayuan

古文：唐宁王傅袁嘉祚，年五十，应制授垣县县丞。
现代文：唐代宁王的太傅叫袁嘉祚，五十岁了，应制科考试后授给垣县县丞的职务。
English: The Tai Fu of the Tang Dynasty's Ning Wang was called Yuan Jiayu. He was fifty years old and was given the post of county magistrate of Qi County after passing the examination.

古文：阙素凶，为者尽死。
现代文：这个官所住的官邸历来不吉祥，住过的人都死了。
English: The official residence where this official lives has always been unlucky, and everyone who has lived there has died.

古文：嘉祚到官，而丞宅数任无人居，屋宇摧残，荆棘充塞。
现代文：袁嘉祚到了任一看，县丞的住处几任以来都没人居住。房子残破不堪，里外长满荆棘杂草。
English: When Yuan Jiaqi arrived, he saw that the residence of the county magistrate had not been lived in for several years. The house was in ruins, with thorns and weeds growing inside and out.

古文：嘉祚剪其荆棘，理其墙垣，坐厅事中。邑老吏人皆惧，劝出不可。
现代文：袁嘉祚铲去那些荆棘，修理好院墙，坐在办公事的厅里，城里年老的官吏都很害怕，劝他出去住，他不答应。
English: Yuan Jiaqi shoveled away those thorns, repaired the courtyard wall, and sat in the office hall. The old officials in the city were very afraid. They advised him to go out and live, but he did not agree.

古文：既而魅夜中为怪，嘉祚不动，伺其所入。明日掘之，得狐，狐老矣，兼子孙数十头。
现代文：不久狐狸在夜里作怪，袁嘉祚也不动声色，只是暗中观察狐狸所进的洞穴，第二天挖掘它，抓住了狐狸，狐狸已经老了，还有它的几十个子孙，袁嘉祚把它们全部煮死了。
English: Soon, the fox was acting strange in the night, and Yuan Jiaqi did not make a sound, but secretly observed the cave where the fox had entered. The next day, he dug it up and caught the fox. The fox was already old, and there were dozens of its offspring. Yuan Jiaqi boiled them all to death.

古文：嘉祚尽烹之，次至老狐，狐乃言曰： 吾神能通天，预知休咎。愿置我，我能益于人。
现代文：剩下了那只老狐狸，老狐狸开口说： 我的神力能通天，预知吉凶，希望放了我，我能给人带来好处。
English: The old fox was the only one left. The old fox opened his mouth and said, "My divine power can penetrate the heavens, foretell good and evil, and release me in hope. I can bring good to people."

古文：今此宅已安，舍我何害？ 
现代文：现在这个住宅已经平安了，放了我有什么害处呢？ 
English: Now that the house is safe, what's the harm in letting me go?

古文：嘉祚前与之言，备告其官秩。
现代文：袁嘉祚上前与狐狸说话，狐狸详细地告诉了他将来做官的地位等级。
English: Yuan Jiaxuan stepped forward to speak with the fox, who told him in detail the status level of the future official.

古文：又曰： 愿为耳目，长在左右。 
现代文：又说： 愿意做你的耳目，经常地呆在你的身边。 
English: He also said, "I am willing to be your eyes and ears and stay by your side at all times."

古文：乃免狐。
现代文：袁嘉祚就放了狐狸。
English: Yuan Jiaxuan released the fox.

古文：后祚如狐言，秩满果迁。数年至御史。
现代文：后来袁嘉祚象狐狸说的那样，官任到期果然升了官，几年后升到御史。
English: Later, Yuan Jiaqi, as the fox said, was promoted to the post when his term of office expired, and several years later he was promoted to the imperial historian.

古文：狐乃去。
现代文：狐狸就离开了他。
English: So the fox left him.

古文：李林甫
现代文：李林甫
English: Li Linfu

古文：唐李林甫方居相位，尝退朝，坐于堂之前轩。
现代文：唐代的李林甫正担任丞相的职务，曾有一次退朝后坐在堂屋前的平台上。
English: Li Linfu of the Tang Dynasty was holding the post of chancellor, and once sat on the platform in front of the hall after retiring.

古文：见一玄狐，其质甚大，若牛马，而毛色黯黑有光，自堂中出，驰至庭，顾望左右。
现代文：看见一只黑色狐狸，它的体形很大，象牛马一样，毛色暗黑有光泽，从屋中出来，跑到庭院里，向左右张望。
English: He saw a large black fox, like a bull or a horse, with dark shiny fur, come out of the house, run into the courtyard, and look around.

古文：林甫命弧矢，将射之，未及，已亡见矣。
现代文：李林甫命人带着弓和箭，准备射那狐狸。没等射箭，已经不见了。
English: Li Linfu ordered someone to take a bow and arrow and prepare to shoot the fox. Before he could shoot the arrow, the fox had disappeared.

古文：自是凡数日，每昼坐，辄有一玄狐出焉。
现代文：从那以后共有好几天，每当白天坐着的时候，就有一只黑色狐狸出现。
English: After that, for several days, whenever I was sitting during the day, a black fox would appear.

古文：其岁林甫籍没。
现代文：那一年李林甫被抄了家产。
English: That year, Li Linfu's family property was confiscated.

古文：孙甑生
现代文：孙甑生
English: Sun Yat-sen

古文：唐道士孙甑生本以养鹰为业，后因放鹰，入一窟，见狐数十枚读书。
现代文：唐代道士孙甑生原来以养鹰为职业，后来因为出野外放鹰，进入一个洞窟，只见几十只狐狸在读书。
English: The Tang Dynasty Taoist priest Sun Yansheng originally raised eagles as his profession. Later, because he went out to release eagles, he entered a cave and saw dozens of foxes reading.

古文：有一老狐当中坐，迭以传授。
现代文：有一只老狐狸坐在中间，轮流地逐个传授。
English: An old fox sat in the middle and took it in turns to teach them one by one.

古文：甑生直入，夺得其书而还。
现代文：甑生一直走进去，抢了他们的书回去了。
English: The twins walked all the way in, grabbed their books and went home.

古文：明日，有十余人持金帛诣门求赎，甑生不与，人云： 君得此，亦不能解用之，若写一本见还，当以口诀相授。 
现代文：第二天，有十多人带着金银绸缎上门要求把书赎回去，甑生不给书。那人说： 你得到这本书，也不能理解并使用它，如果抄写一本后还给我们，我就把口诀传授给你。 
English: The next day, more than ten people came to the door with gold and silver brooches and demanded that the book be redeemed. The man said, "If you get this book, you will not be able to understand and use it. If you copy it and return it to us, I will teach you the secret."

古文：甑生竟传其法，为世术士。
现代文：甑生竟然学到了那法术，成了世间的一个术士。
English: He actually learned the spell and became a sorcerer in the world.

古文：狐初与甑生约，不得示人，若违者，必当非命。
现代文：狐狸当初与甑生约好，不能给别人看，如果违犯了约定，一定会不得好死。
English: The fox had originally made an appointment with the twins, and could not show them to others. If he violated the agreement, he would surely die.

古文：天宝末，玄宗固就求之，甑生不与，竟而伏法。
现代文：天宝后期，唐玄宗坚持要那本书，甑生不给，竟因此而被杀死。
English: In the late Tianbao period, Tang Xuan Zong insisted on having the book and refused to give it to him. As a result, he was killed.

古文：王璿
现代文：王璿
English: Wang Yao

古文：唐宋州刺史王璿，少时仪貌甚美，为牝狐所媚。
现代文：唐代宋州刺史叫王璿，少年时仪表外貌很美，被一只雌狐狸迷住了。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, the prince of Songzhou was named Wang Qian. When he was a young boy, he had a beautiful appearance and was fascinated by a female fox.

古文：家人或有见者，丰姿端丽。虽童幼遇之者，必敛容致敬。
现代文：家人中有看见那狐狸的，容貌端庄秀美，即使是仆人和小孩遇到她，她也会严肃地表示尊敬。
English: One of the members of the family saw the fox. She was a dignified and beautiful woman, and even when servants and children met her, she would gravely show her respect.

古文：自称新妇，祗对皆有理。由是人乐见之。
现代文：她自称是新娘子，言谈举止都合乎规矩，因此家人都喜欢见到她。
English: She claimed to be the bride, spoke and behaved in a proper manner, so the family liked to see her.

古文：每至端午及佳节，悉有赠仪相送，云： 新妇上某郎某娘续命。 
现代文：每当到了端午节以及其他佳节，都有礼品赠送给家人，并说： 新娘子给某个郎君某个娘子奉上礼品。 
English: Every Dragon Boat Festival and other festivals, gifts are given to family members, saying: The bridegroom gives a gift to a certain brother-in-law, a certain daughter.

古文：众人笑之，然所得甚众。
现代文：大家都觉得她说的话很好笑，可是得到的东西却很多。
English: Everyone thought it was funny, but she got a lot of flack for it.

古文：后璿职高，狐乃不至。
现代文：后来王璿的职务高升了，狐狸就不来了。
English: Later, when Wang Yao's position was elevated, the fox stopped coming.

古文：盖某禄重，不能为怪。
现代文：可能是一个人地位高了，就不能迷惑他了。
English: It may be that a person's status is high, so you can't confuse him.

古文：李黁
现代文：李黁
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：东平尉李黁初得官，自东京之任。
现代文：东平县县尉李黁刚得到官职，就从东京出发去上任，夜里来到故城住宿。
English: As soon as Li Ying, a county official of Dongping County, received his official position, he set off from Tokyo to take up the post, and came to the old town at night to stay.

古文：夜投故城，店中有故人卖胡饼为业。其妻姓郑有美色，李目而悦之，因宿其舍。留连数日，乃以十五千转索胡妇。
现代文：客店里有个熟人靠卖烧饼维持生活，他的妻子郑氏长得很美，李黁看见便喜欢上她，就住到他家里，一连住了好几天，并用十五千钱买下卖胡饼的妻子。
English: There was an acquaintance in the inn who made a living by selling burnt biscuits. His wife, Zheng, was very beautiful, and when Li Yao saw her, he fell in love with her. He stayed at his house for several days in a row, and bought his wife, who sold biscuits, for fifteen thousand yuan.

古文：既到东平，宠遇甚至。
现代文：到了东平县后，对她宠爱备至。
English: After arriving in Dongping County, he became very fond of her.

古文：性婉约，多媚黠风流；女工之事，罔不心了；于音声特究其妙。
现代文：她性情温和可爱，长得美并且又聪明又风流，女工的事，她没有不懂的，对音乐特别懂得它的妙处。
English: She was sweet-natured and lovely, beautiful, clever, and graceful. She did not know anything about women's work, and she especially understood the beauty of music.

古文：在东平三岁，有子一人。
现代文：在东平县住了三年，生了一个儿子。
English: Lived in Dongping County for three years and gave birth to a son.

古文：其后李充租纲入京，与郑同还。
现代文：那以后李黁因担任赋税运输工作要进京去，就和郑氏一起回去。
English: After that, Li Yu, who had to go to Beijing because he was in charge of tax transportation, went back with Zheng.

古文：至故城，大会乡里饮宴，累十余日。李催发数四，郑固称疾不起，李亦怜而从之。
现代文：到了故城，遍请故乡的亲朋好友赴宴，呆了十多天，李黁多次催促启程，郑氏固执地称病不起身，李黁也因爱她而听她的话。
English: After arriving at the ancient city, she invited relatives and friends from her hometown to a banquet, and stayed for more than ten days. Li Yao repeatedly urged her to leave. Zheng stubbornly said that she was sick and would not get up. Li Yao also listened to her words because he loved her.

古文：又十余日，不获已，事理须去。行至郭门，忽言腹痛，下马便走，势疾如风。
现代文：又过了十多天，不得已，有事要办必须启程，走到外城的大门时，郑氏忽然说肚子疼，下了马就跑，速度快得象风一样。
English: After more than ten days, he was forced to leave because he had to do something. When he reached the gate of the outer city, Mr. Zheng suddenly said that he had a stomachache. He got off the horse and ran as fast as the wind.

古文：李与其仆数人极骋，追不能及，便入故城，转入易水村，足力少息。李不能舍，复逐之。
现代文：李黁和几个仆人极力骑马追赶，也没追上。就跟着进到故城，转个弯进入易水村，郑氏跑得稍慢，李黁还不舍弃，又追下去，快追上时，郑氏进入一个小洞里，大声呼唤她，静静地也不回答。
English: Li Yao and several servants tried their best to chase after her on horseback, but they couldn't catch up. They followed her into the old city, turned a corner and entered Yishui Village. Zheng's running was a little slow, but Li Yao didn't give up and continued to chase her. When they were almost catching up, Zheng went into a small hole, called out to her loudly, and quietly didn't answer.

古文：垂及，因入小穴，极声呼之，寂无所应，恋结凄怆，言发泪下。会日暮，村人为草塞穴口，还店止宿。
现代文：李黁恋恋不舍，凄惨悲伤，一边说一边流泪。这时天黑了，村里人用草塞住洞，他们回客店住宿。
English: Li Yao was still in love with her lover. She was terribly sad and shed tears as she spoke. At this time, it was getting dark. The villagers plugged the hole with grass and they went back to the inn to stay.

古文：及明，又往呼之，无所见，乃以火熏。
现代文：等到天亮，又去洞口呼唤她，什么也没听见。
English: When it was dawn, he went to the cave again to call for her, but heard nothing.

古文：久之，村人为掘深数丈，见牝狐死穴中，衣服脱卸如蜕，脚上著锦袜。
现代文：于是用火熏，熏了很久，村里人又帮他挖洞，挖了几丈深，只见一只雌狐狸死在洞里，衣服脱了下来象蝉蜕一样。脚上还穿着锦丝袜子。
English: So he smoked with fire, smoked for a long time, and the villagers helped him dig a hole, dug several feet deep, only to see a female fox dead in the hole, her clothes off like a cicada. He was still wearing silk stockings on his feet.

古文：李叹息良久，方埋之。
现代文：李黁长时间地叹气，才埋了狐狸。
English: Li Yao sighed for a long time before burying the fox.

古文：归店，取猎犬噬其子，子略不惊怕。
现代文：回到店里，找来猎犬咬她生的孩子，孩子并不害怕。
English: She went back to the store to get a bloodhound to bite the child she had given birth to. The child was not afraid.

古文：便将入都，寄亲人家养之。输纳毕，复还东京，婚于萧氏。
现代文：就带着孩子进京去，寄养在亲属家。赋税交待完毕，又回东京，与萧氏结婚。
English: She took the child with her to Tokyo, where it was fostered at a relative's house. After the tax was paid, she returned to Tokyo and married Mr. Xiao.

古文：萧氏常呼李为野狐婿，李初无以答。
现代文：萧氏常常称呼李黁是野狐狸的女婿，李黁也没说什么。
English: Xiao often called Li Yao the son-in-law of the wild fox, but Li Yao did not say anything.

古文：一日晚，李与萧携手与归本房狎戏，复言其事。
现代文：一天晚上，李黁和萧氏拉着手一起回到屋说笑玩闹，又说起野狐婿，忽然听见堂屋前有人声。
English: One evening, Li Yao and Mr. Xiao went back to the house together holding hands and talking and joking. They also talked about the wild fox son-in-law. Suddenly, they heard someone's voice in front of the house.

古文：答云： 身即鬼也。 
现代文：李黁问是谁夜里跑来了，回答说： 你难道不认识郑四娘了吗？ 
English: When Li Qiye asked who had come running in the night, he replied, "Don't you know Zheng Si Niang?"

古文：欲近之而不能，四娘因谓李： 人神道殊，贤夫人何至数相谩骂？
现代文：李黁平时就怀念她，听了她的话，一下子高兴地跳起来问： 你是鬼呢还是人呢？ 回答说是鬼，想接近却做不到。郑四娘接着对李黁说： 人道和神道不一样，你的妻子为什么多次地骂我呢？
English: Li Qiye usually missed her. After listening to her words, he jumped up with joy and asked, "Are you a ghost or a human?" She replied that she was a ghost and that she wanted to get close to her but couldn't. Zheng Si Niang then said to Li Qiye, "Humanism and Shintoism are different. Why did your wife scold me so many times?"

古文：且所生之子，远寄人家，其人皆言狐生，不给衣食，岂不念乎？
现代文：况且我生的儿子，寄养在远方的亲属家，那些人都说是狐狸生的，不给他穿的和吃的，难道不想念他吗？
English: Moreover, the son I gave birth to, fostered in a distant relative's house, those people all said he was born of a fox, did not give him clothes and food, do not you miss him?

古文：宜早为抚育，九泉无恨也。
现代文：应该早点接回来抚养，我在九泉下也没有遗憾了。
English: I should have brought her back earlier and raised her. I have no regrets.

古文：若夫人云云相侮，又小儿不收，必将为君之患。 
现代文：如果萧氏说起话来就侮辱我，又不收养我的儿子，必将给你带来灾祸。 
English: If Mr. Shaw insults me in his speech and does not adopt my son, he will surely bring disaster to you.

古文：言毕不见。
现代文：说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：萧遂不复敢说其事。
现代文：萧氏于是不敢再说野狐婿的事。
English: So Mr. Xiao did not dare to talk about his wild fox son-in-law.

古文：唐天宝末，子年十余，甚无恙。
现代文：唐代天宝年间的后期，孩子有十多岁，一点没毛病。
English: In the late Tianbao period of the Tang Dynasty, the child was more than ten years old, and there was no problem at all.

古文：李揆
现代文：李揆
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：唐丞相李揆，乾元初，为中书舍人。
现代文：唐代的丞相李揆，在乾元初年，做中书舍人。
English: In the first year of the Qianyuan Dynasty, the Tang Dynasty's chancellor, Li Xi, became a renunciant of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：尝一日退朝归，见一白狐在庭中捣练石上，命侍童逐之，已亡见矣。
现代文：曾有一天退朝回家，看见一只白狐狸坐在庭院中间的捶衣石上，就命令僮仆赶走它，忽然不见了。
English: One day, when he was returning home, he saw a white fox sitting on a rock in the middle of the courtyard. He ordered his servants to chase it away, and it suddenly disappeared.

古文：时有客于揆门者，因话其事，客曰： 此祥符也，某敢贺。 
现代文：这时李揆家正有一个客人，与客人说了这件事。客人说： 这是吉祥的兆头，我向您祝贺。 
English: At this time, there was a guest at Li Yan's house who talked to the guest about this. The guest said: This is an auspicious sign, I congratulate you.

古文：至明日，果选礼部侍郎。
现代文：到了第二天，果然提拔为礼部侍郎。
English: On the second day, he was indeed promoted to the position of etiquette attendant.

古文：宋溥
现代文：宋溥
English: Song Tao

古文：宋溥者，唐大历中，为长城尉。
现代文：宋溥，在唐代大历年间，官职是长城尉。
English: Song Dynasty, in the Tang Dynasty, the official position was the Great Wall Lieutenant.

古文：自言幼时，与其党暝扱野狐，数夜不获。
现代文：自己说幼年时候，与他的同伴晚上去捉野狐狸，好几天晚上也没捉到。
English: He said that when he was a child, he and his companions went to catch wild foxes at night, and they did not catch them for several nights.

古文：后因月夕，复为其事。
现代文：后来的一个月明之夜，又去捉狐狸。
English: Later, on a moonlit night, he went to catch a fox.

古文：见一鬼戴笠骑狐，唱《独盘子》，至扱所。
现代文：看见一鬼戴着斗笠骑着狐狸，唱着独盘子曲调，走到放套子的地方。
English: Saw a ghost wearing a bucket hat, riding a fox, singing a monophonic tune, and walked to the place where the noose was kept.

古文：狐欲入扱，鬼乃以手搭狐颊，因而复回。
现代文：狐狸想进套子，鬼就用手搭在狐狸的脸颊上，不让进，因此又回头走，象这样走了好几次。
English: When the fox wanted to get into the trap, the ghost put his hand on the fox's cheek and would not let him in, so he turned around and went back again. He did this several times.

古文：如是数四。
现代文：那以后的一个晚上，宋溥又下套子等狐狸来。
English: It's happened many times.

古文：其后夕，溥复下扱伺之，鬼又乘狐，两小鬼引前，往来报所。
现代文：鬼又骑着狐狸，两个小鬼在前面领路，在套子的周围来来往往。
English: The ghost rides the fox again, and the two little ghosts lead the way in front, coming and going around the cover.

古文：溥等无所获而止。
现代文：宋溥等人没捉到狐狸就再不捉了。
English: If Song Tao and others don't catch the fox, they won't catch anything else.

古文：有谈众者亦云，幼时下报，忽见一老人扶杖至己所止树下，仰问树上是何人物。众时尚小，甚惶惧，其兄因怒骂云： 老野狐，何敢如此？ 
现代文：有个叫谈众的人也说，幼年时下套子，忽然看见一个老头拄着拐杖走到自己藏身的树下，仰起头问树上藏的是什么人，谈众那时还小，很害怕，他的哥哥接着生气地骂道： 老野狐狸，怎么敢如此戏耍！ 
English: A storyteller also said that when he was a child, he was playing hide-and-seek and suddenly saw an old man on crutches go under the tree where he was hiding. He looked up and asked who was hiding in the tree. The storyteller was very young at the time and was very scared. His brother then angrily scolded him: "Wild fox, how dare you play like that!"

古文：下树逐之，狐遂变走。
现代文：下树去追赶老头，老头就变成狐狸跑了。
English: He went down the tree to chase the old man, but the old man turned into a fox and ran away.

古文：僧晏通
现代文：僧晏通
English: 僧通

