古文：縣、都官用貞、栽為傰牏，及載縣鐘虞〈虡〉用，皆不勝任而折；及大車轅不勝任，折上，皆為用而出之。
现代文：县、都官用木棍、木板编成的筑墙用的模板，和挂钟木架上的横木，由于不堪受力而折断了；以及大车的木轩不堪受力，在轱的上面折断了，都上报损耗而加以注销。
English: The templates for building walls made of wooden sticks and planks by county and city officials, and the crossbars on the wooden frame of the clock, were broken due to unbearable force; and the wooden roof of the truck was broken due to unbearable force, and it was reported as a loss and cancelled.

古文：官府公車牛者□□□人所。
现代文：官府借用官有牛车借用者的地方。
English: The place where the government borrows official bullock carts from borrowers.

古文：或私用公車牛，及人食牛不善，牛訾；不攻閒車，車空失，大車；及不芥車，車蕃蓋強折列，其主車牛者及吏、官長皆有罪。
现代文：有私用官有车的，以及借用者不好好喂牛，使牛瘦瘠了；不修缮车，使车翻倒，大车的轱扭曲了，以及不把车盖好，草围和车伞生生断裂了，主管牛车的人和领用牛车的吏和官长都有罪。
English: There are private officials who have cars, and borrowers who do not feed the cattle well, making the cattle thin; do not repair the car, causing the car to overturn, the rim of the cart to twist, and do not cover the car well, the grass and the umbrella are broken, and the person in charge of the cattle car and the officials and officials who use the cattle car are all guilty.

古文：官長及吏以公車牛稟其月食及公牛乘馬之稟，可。
现代文：官长和吏可以用官有牛车领取自己每月的口粮和官有驾车牛的饲料。
English: Governors and officials can use government-owned ox carts to receive their monthly rations and feed from government-owned driving cattle.

古文：官有金錢者自為買脂、膠，毋金錢者乃月為言脂、膠，期。為鐵攻，以攻公大車。
现代文：有钱财的官府应自为车辆购买脂、胶，以为足用为度。要设立胶工作坊，来修缮官有的大车。
English: Wealthy government departments should buy their own grease and glue for their vehicles to make sure they have enough. A glue workshop should be set up to repair official vehicles.

古文：一脂、攻閒大車一輛，用膠一兩、脂二錘。
现代文：每加油和修缮一辆大车，用胶一两、脂三分之二两。
English: Every time I refuel and repair a large vehicle, I use one or two parts of glue and two-thirds of grease.

古文：攻閒其扁解，以數分膠以之。
现代文：修理车辆开胶，按开离的多少分胶使用。
English: When repairing a vehicle, apply the glue according to how much of the glue has come off.

古文：為車不勞稱議脂之。
现代文：如车运行不快，可酌量加油。
English: If the car is not running well, you can refuel as much as you like.

古文：令縣及都官取柳及木楘可用書者，方之以書；毋方者乃用版。
现代文：令县和都官用柳木或其他质柔可以书写的木材，削成木方以供书写；没有木方的，可用木版。
English: The prefectural and metropolitan officials were ordered to use willow or other soft-textured wood to make a wooden board for writing; if there is no wooden board, a wooden board can be used.

古文：其縣山之多者，以纏書；毋者以蒲、藺以枲萷之。
现代文：县中山上盛菅草的，用菅缠束文书；没有菅草的，用蒲草、兰草及麻封扎。
English: In the mountains in the middle of the county, if there is a lot of bentgrass, use bentgrass to wrap documents; if there is no bentgrass, use papyrus, bluegrass and hemp.

古文：各以其〈穫〉時多積之。
现代文：这些东西都应在其收获时多加储存。
English: All of these things should be stored more at the time of their harvest.

古文：有罪以貲贖及有責於公，以其令日問之，其弗能入及賞，以令日居之，日居八錢；公食者，日居六錢。
现代文：有罪应赀赎以及欠官府债务的，应依判决规定的日期加以讯问，如无力缴纳赔偿，即自规定日起使之以劳役抵偿债务，每劳作一天抵偿八钱；由官府给予饭食的，每天抵偿六钱。
English: Those who are guilty of debt redemption and debts owed to the government shall be interrogated according to the date specified in the judgment. If they are unable to pay compensation, they shall be compensated for the debt by labor service from the specified date, and eight yuan shall be compensated for each day of labor; if the government provides meals, six yuan shall be compensated for each day.

古文：居官府公食者，男子參，女子駟。
现代文：在官府服劳役而由官府给给予饭食的，男子每餐三分之一斗，女子每餐四分之一斗。
English: For those who work as laborers in government offices and are given meals by the government, men are entitled to one-third of a dowry per meal, while women are entitled to one-fourth of a dowry per meal.

古文：公士以下居贖刑罪、死罪者，居於城旦舂，毋赤其衣，勿枸櫝欙杕。
现代文：公士以下的人以劳役抵偿赎刑、赎死的罪，要服城旦、舂的劳役，但不必穿红色囚服，不施加木械、黑索和胫钳。
English: People below the rank of public official shall use labor service to atone for the crime of expiation and atonement for the crime of death. They shall serve the labor service of the city and county, but they do not have to wear red prison uniforms, and they shall not use woodworking machinery, black ropes and shackles.

古文：鬼薪白粲，下吏毋耐者，人奴妾居贖貲責於城旦，皆赤其衣，枸櫝欙杕，將司之；其或亡之，有罪。
现代文：鬼薪、白粲，下吏而不加耐刑的人们，私家奴婢被用以抵偿赀赎债务而服城旦劳役的，都穿红色囚服，施加木械、黑索和胫钳，并加以监管；如让他们逃亡了，监管者有罪。
English: The goblins, the egrets, the people who were not punished by the magistrate, and the private slaves and maidservants who were used to satisfy the ransom debt and serve the city labor service, all wore red prison uniforms, imposed wood, black rope and shackles, and supervised them; if they let them escape, the supervisor was guilty.

古文：葆子以上居贖刑以上到贖死，居於官府，皆勿將司。
现代文：葆子以上用劳役抵偿赎刑以上到赎死的罪。而在官府服劳役的，都不加监管。
English: Those above the rank of mule use labor service to atone for their sins from atonement to death. However, those who perform labor service at government offices are not subject to supervision.

古文：所弗問而久之，大嗇夫、丞及官嗇夫有罪。
现代文：若不加讯问而长期加以拘禁，则大啬夫、丞和该官府的啬夫有罪。
English: If they are detained for a long time without being interrogated, the big miser, the yakitori, and the miser of the government office are guilty.

古文：居貲贖責欲代者，耆弱相當，許之。
现代文：以劳役抵偿赀赎债务而要求以他人代替服役，只要强弱相当，可以允许。
English: The use of forced labor to satisfy the debt of redemption and the request to replace the service with others may be allowed as long as the strength and weakness are equivalent.

古文：作務及賈而負責者，不得代。
现代文：手工业作坊和商买欠债的，不得以他人代替。
English: If a handicraft workshop or a merchant buys back debts, they may not be replaced by others.

古文：官作居貲贖責而遠其計所官者，盡八月各以其作日及衣數告其計所官，毋過九月而觱到其官；官相者，盡九月而告其計所官，計之其作年。
现代文：一家有两人以上劳役抵偿赀赎债务而无人照看家室的，可以放出一人，叫他们轮流服役。以劳役抵偿赀赎债务的，有的要求借助别人和他一起服役，可以允许，但不能免除那个人的徭戍义务。凡不能自备衣服的，由官府给予衣服，叫他按法律规定以劳役抵偿。在另一官府劳作低偿赀赎债务而距原计帐官府路远的，应在八月底分别把劳作天数和领衣数通知原计帐官府，在九月底前都送到；所服役的官府路近的，在九月底通知原计帐官府，计算在劳作的当年以内。
English: If a family has more than two laborers to pay off the redemption debt and no one to take care of the household, one person may be released and they shall serve in turn. If a family has two or more laborers to pay off the redemption debt, and someone requests to serve with him with the help of others, it may be allowed, but it cannot exempt that person from the service obligation. If a person cannot provide his own clothes, the government shall provide him with clothes and require him to pay off the redemption debt with labor according to the provisions of the law. If a person works in another government for a low-paid redemption debt and is far away from the original accounting office, he shall notify the original accounting office

古文：百姓有貲贖責而有一臣若一妾，有一馬若一牛，而欲居者，許。
现代文：百姓有赀赎债务而有一个男或女的奴隶，有一头马或牛，要求用其劳役抵偿，可以允许。
English: If a man or woman has a slave, a horse or an ox, and the people have a debt to pay, it is permissible for them to demand payment for their services.

古文：司隸臣妾、城旦舂之司寇、居貲贖責城旦舂者，勿責衣食；其與城旦舂作者，衣食之如城旦舂。
现代文：隶臣妾、城旦舂之司寇，或以劳役抵偿赀债务而被拘系服城旦舂劳役的人，不收取衣食，凡参加城旦舂劳作的，按城旦舂标准给予衣食。
English: A subordinate, a concubine, a steward of the city government, or a person who has been detained to serve the city government labor service with labor service to satisfy the debt, does not receive clothing and food. Those who participate in the city government labor, will be given clothing and food according to the city government standard.

古文：隸臣有妻，妻更及有外妻者，責衣。
现代文：隶臣有妻，妻是更隶妾及自由人的，应收取衣服。
English: If a vassal has a wife, and if the wife is a concubine or a free woman, the clothes should be collected.

古文：人奴妾城旦舂，貣衣食公，日未備而死者，出其衣食。
现代文：私家男女奴隶被拘系服城旦舂劳役的，由官府借予衣食，其劳作日数未满而死，注销其衣食不必偿还。
English: If a private male or female slave is detained and subjected to forced labor, the government lends him or her food and clothing. If he or she dies before the number of days of forced labor is completed, his or her food and clothing are canceled and do not have to be repaid.

古文：城旦舂，公食當責者，石卅錢。
现代文：拘系服城旦舂劳役，官府给予饭食应收代价的，每石收三十钱。
English: For those who are subject to forced labor in the detention system, and the government gives them the cost of meals, they will receive 30 yuan per stone.

古文：居貲贖責者歸田農，種時、治苗時各二旬。
现代文：以劳役抵债赀赎债务的人回家农作，播种和管理禾苗的时节各二十天。
English: Those who use labor service to repay debts and redeem debts go home to farm, sowing and managing seedlings for 20 days each season.

古文：毋令居貲贖責將城旦舂。
现代文：不得令以劳役抵偿赀赎债务的人监率城旦舂。
English: People who are not allowed to use forced labor to pay off debts must be supervised by the city government.

古文：城旦司寇不足以將，令隸臣妾將。
现代文：城旦司寇的人数如不够监率，可令隶臣妾监率。
English: If there are not enough supervisors to supervise the number of city scouts, subordinates may be ordered to supervise.

古文：居貲贖責當與城旦舂作者，及城旦傅堅、城旦舂當將司者，廿人，城旦司寇一人將。
现代文：以劳役抵偿赀赎债务与城旦舂同样劳作的，以及城旦傅坚或城旦舂应加监管的，每二十人，由城旦司寇一人监率。
English: For every 20 people who use labor to pay off the redemption debt and work in the same way as the city tramp, and the city tramp Fu Jian or the city tramp should be supervised, one person will be supervised by the city tramp scout.

古文：司寇不，免城旦勞三歲以上者，以為城旦司寇。
现代文：如司寇人数不足，可以把已劳作三年以上的城旦减刑为城旦司寇。
English: If the number of scouts is insufficient, the city scouts who have worked for more than three years can be reduced to city scouts.

古文：城旦舂衣赤衣，冒赤，拘櫝欙杕之。
现代文：城旦舂身穿红色囚服，头盖红色毛巾，施加木械、黑索加胫钳。
English: He was dressed in a red prison uniform, with a red towel covering his head, and was beaten with wooden implements and a black rope.

古文：仗城旦勿將司；其名將司者，將司之。
现代文：老年的城旦不必监管；有指名须监管的，加以监管。
English: Elderly citizens do not need to be supervised; those who are designated to be supervised should be supervised.

古文：舂城旦出者，毋敢之市及留舍闠外；當行市中者，回，勿行。
现代文：舂城旦外出服役的，不准前往市场和市场门外停留休息，路经市场中间的，应绕行，不得通过。
English: Those who go out to serve in Lucheng are not allowed to go to the market and stay outside the market to rest. If you pass through the middle of the market, you should detour and not pass.

古文：城旦舂毀折瓦器、鐵器、木器，為大車折，輒治之。
现代文：城旦舂毁坏了陶器、铜器、木器，制造大车时折断了轮圈，应立即答打。
English: If a city magistrate destroys pottery, copperware, and woodware, or breaks the rim of a cart, he should be beaten up immediately.

古文：直一錢，治十；直廿錢以上，孰治之，出其器。
现代文：所毁损器每值一钱，答打十下，值二十钱以上，加以重打，注销其所毁器物。
English: For every one-yuan worth of damaged equipment, ten strokes shall be given, and if the equipment is worth more than twenty-yuan, it shall be beaten again, and the damaged equipment shall be cancelled.

古文：弗輒治，吏主者負其半。
现代文：如不立即答打，主管的吏应赔偿其价值的一半。
English: If there is no immediate response, the officer-in-charge shall pay half of its value.

古文：司寇勿以為僕、養、守官府及除有為。
现代文：不得任用司寇作赶车的僕、烹炊的养、看守官府或其他的事。
English: It is not allowed to appoint a scout as a servant to drive a car, cook food, guard the government office or other things.

古文：有上令除之，必復請之。
现代文：如有上级命令任用他们，一定要重新请示。
English: If there is a superior order to appoint them, they must reapply.

古文：百姓有母及同牲為隸妾，非適罪而欲為冗邊五歲，毋賞興日，以免一人為庶人，許之。
现代文：百姓有母亲或亲姐妹现为隶妾，本人没有流放的罪而自愿戍边五年，不算作戍边的时间，用来赎免隶妾一人成为庶人的，可以允许。
English: If a commoner has a mother or a sister-in-law who is now a concubine, and he himself has not committed the crime of banishment and has voluntarily been a concubine for five years, it is not counted as a period of concubinage. If it is used to redeem a concubine from becoming a commoner, it may be allowed.

古文：或贖，欲入錢者，日八錢。
现代文：有赎迁罪，愿缴钱的，刑期每天缴纳八钱。
English: Those who have the expiation crime and are willing to pay the fine shall pay eight yuan per day during the term of imprisonment.

