古文：立国
现代文：立国
English: Founding of the country

古文：国之所以治乱者三，杀戮刑罚，不足用也。
现代文：国家之所以治或乱，取决于三个条件，只有杀戮刑罚是不够用的。
English: The reason why a country is ruled or disorderly depends on three conditions. The punishment of killing is not enough.

古文：国之所以安危者四，城郭险阻，不足守也。
现代文：国家之所以安或危，取决于四个条件，只靠城郭险阻是不能固守的。
English: The reason why a country is safe or dangerous depends on four conditions. It is not possible to hold fast only by relying on fortifications and obstacles.

古文：国之所以富贫者五，轻税租，薄赋敛，不足恃也。
现代文：国家之所以贫或富，取决于五个条件，只用轻收租税、薄取赋敛的办法是靠不住的。
English: The reason why a country is poor or rich depends on five conditions. It is unreliable to rely only on the methods of light tax collection and thin taxation.

古文：治国有三本，而安国有四固，而富国有五事，五事五经也。
现代文：这就是说，治理国家有 三本 ，安定国家有 四固 ，而富国则有 五事 一一这五事乃是五项纲领性措施。
English: That is to say, there are three principles for governing a country, four principles for a stable country, and five principles for a rich country. These five principles are five programmatic measures.

古文：三本
现代文：三本
English: Three of them

古文：君之所审者三：一曰德不当其位；二曰功不当其禄；三曰能不当其官；此三本者，治乱之原也；故国有德义未明于朝者，则不可加以尊位；功力未见于国者，则不可授与重禄；临事不信于民者，则不可使任大官；故德厚而位卑者谓之过；德薄而位尊者谓之失；宁过于君子，而毋失于小人；过于君子，其为怨浅；失于小人，其为祸深；是故国有德义未明于朝而处尊位者，则良臣不进；有功力未见于国而有重禄者，则劳臣不劝；有临事不信于民而任大官者，则材臣不用；三本者审，则下不敢求；三本者不审，则邪臣上通，而便辟制威；如此，则明塞于上，而治壅于下，正道捐弃，而邪事日长。三本者审，则便辟无威于国，道涂无行禽，疏远无蔽狱，孤寡无隐治，故曰： 刑省治寡，朝不合众 。
现代文：这就叫作：刑罚减少，政务精简，甚至朝廷都无需召集群臣议事了。
English: This is called: the penalty is reduced, the government is streamlined, and even the imperial court does not need to convene a group of ministers for deliberation.

古文：四固
现代文：四固
English: Shigou

古文：君之所慎者四：一曰大德不至仁，不可以授国柄。二曰见贤不能让，不可与尊位。三曰罚避亲贵，不可使主兵。四曰不好本事，不务地利，而轻赋敛，不可与都邑。
现代文：君主要谨慎对待的问题有四个：一是对于提倡道德而不真正做到仁的人，不可以授予国家大权；二是对于见到贤能而不让的人，不可以授予尊高爵位；三是对于掌握刑罚而躲避亲贵的人，不可以让他统帅军队；四是对于那种不重视农业，不注重地利，而轻易课取赋税的人，不可以让他做都邑的官。
English: There are four problems that the prince should be cautious about: First, those who advocate morality but do not truly practice benevolence should not be granted the power of the state; second, those who see virtue but do not allow it should not be awarded the title of nobility; third, those who are familiar with punishment but avoid intimacy should not be allowed to command the army; fourth, those who do not attach importance to agriculture and do not pay attention to location, but easily collect taxes, should not be allowed to be the official of the capital.

古文：此四务者，安危之本也。
现代文：这四条巩固国家的原则是国家安危的根本。
English: These four principles of consolidating the country are fundamental to national security.

古文：故曰： 卿相不得众，国之危也。大臣不和同，国之危也。兵主不足畏，国之危也。民不怀其产，国之危也。 
现代文：应该说，卿相得不到众人拥护，是国家的危险；大臣不协力同心，是国家的危险；军中统帅不足以令人畏惧，是国家的危险；人民不怀恋自己的田产，是国家的危险。
English: It should be said that it is a danger to the country if the emperor and empress do not receive the support of the people; it is a danger to the country if the ministers do not make concerted efforts; it is a danger to the country if the commander-in-chief of the army is not sufficiently formidable; and it is a danger to the country if the people do not cherish their farmlands.

古文：故大德至仁，则操国得众。见贤能让，则大臣和同。罚不避亲贵，则威行于邻敌。好本事，务地利，重赋敛，则民怀其产。
现代文：因此，只有提倡道德而能真正做到仁，才可以胜任国事而众人拥护；只有见到贤能就进行推让，才能使大臣们协力同心；只有掌握刑罚不避亲贵，才能够威震邻敌；只有重视农业、注重地利，而不轻易课税，才能使人民怀恋自己的田产。
English: Therefore, it is only by advocating morality and being truly benevolent that one can be competent in state affairs and be supported by everyone; it is only by making concessions when one sees merit that ministers can work together as one; it is only by mastering punishment and not avoiding relatives and friends that one can intimidate neighbors; it is only by attaching importance to agriculture and paying attention to the region, and not easily levying taxes, that the people can cherish their own farmland.

古文：五事
现代文：五事
English: Five things

古文：君之所务者五：一曰山泽不救于火，草木不植成，国之贫也。二曰沟渎不遂于隘，鄣水不安其藏，国之贫也。三曰桑麻不植于野，五谷不宜其地，国之贫也。四曰六畜不育于家，瓜瓠荤菜百果不备具，国之贫也。五曰工事竞于刻镂，女事繁于文章，国之贫也。
现代文：君主必须注意解决的问题有五个：一是山泽不能防止火灾，草木不能繁殖成长，国家就会贫穷；二是沟渠不能全线通畅，堤坝中的水漫溢成灾，国家就会贫穷，国家就会贫穷；是田野不发展桑麻，五谷种植没有因地制宜，国家就会贫穷；四是农家不养六畜，蔬菜瓜果不齐备，国家就会贫穷； 五是工匠追逐刻木楼金，女红也广求采花文饰，国家就会贫穷。
English: There are five problems that the monarch must pay attention to and solve: First, the mountains and rivers cannot prevent fires, and the plants cannot reproduce and grow, and the country will be poor; second, the ditches cannot be smooth along the whole line, and the water in the dams overflows into disaster, and the country will be poor, and the country will be poor; third, the fields will not develop mulberry, and the cultivation of grain will not be adapted to local conditions, and the country will be poor; fourth, the farmers will not raise six livestock, and the vegetables and fruits will not be fully prepared, and the country will be poor; fifth, the craftsmen will chase the engraved gold,

古文：故曰： 山泽救于火，草木植成，国之富也。沟渎遂于隘，鄣水安其藏，国之富也。桑麻植于野，五谷宜其地，国之富也。六畜育于家，瓜瓠荤菜百果备具，国之富也。工事无刻镂，女事无文章，国之富也。 
现代文：这就是说，山泽能够防止火灾，草木繁殖成长，国家就会富足；使沟渠全线通畅，堤坝中的水没有漫溢，国家就会富足；田野发展桑麻，五谷种植能因地制宜，国家就会富足；农家饲养六畜，蔬菜瓜果能齐备，国家就会富足；工匠不进行刻木楼金，女红也不求文采花饰，国家就会富足。
English: That is to say, the mountains and lakes can prevent fires, the plants and trees can reproduce and grow, and the country will be rich; the ditches can be made smooth along the whole line, and the water in the dams will not overflow, and the country will be rich; the fields can develop mulberry, and the cereals can be planted according to local conditions, and the country will be rich; the farmers can raise six animals, and the vegetables and fruits can be fully prepared, and the country will be rich; the craftsmen will not carve the wooden floor, and the women will not ask for money to pick flowers, and the country will be rich.

古文：首宪
现代文：首宪
English: Head of the Constitution

古文：分国以为五乡，乡为之师，分乡以为五州，州为之长。
现代文：把都城地区分为五个乡，乡设乡师。把乡分为五个州，州设州长。
English: Divide the capital region into five townships, and set up township divisions for townships. Divide the townships into five prefectures, and set up prefectures for prefectures.

古文：分州以为十里，里为之尉。
现代文：把州分成十个里，里设里尉。
English: Divide the state into ten leagues, one for each lieutenant.

古文：分里以为十游，游为之宗。
现代文：把里分为十个游，游设游宗。
English: The village was divided into ten yu, and the yuzu was set up.

古文：十家为什，五家为伍，什伍皆有长焉。
现代文：十家为一什，五家为一伍；什和伍都设什长和伍长。
English: Ten families are a sho and five families are a troop; both sho and troop have sho leaders and troop leaders.

古文：筑障塞匿，一道路，博出入，审闾闬，慎筦键，筦藏于里尉。
现代文：要修筑围墙，堵塞缺口，只定一条进出的道路，只设一个进出的门户。要细心看管里门，注意关锁，钥匙由里尉掌管。
English: To build a fence, plug the gap, set only one entrance and exit road, set only one entrance and exit portal. Carefully guard the inner door, pay attention to the lock, the key is in the hands of the lieutenant.

古文：置闾有司，以时开闭。
现代文：任命 间有司 ，按时开闭里门。
English: There is a division between the appointment, open and close the back door on time.

古文：闾有司观出入者，以复于里尉。
现代文：间有司要负责观察出入的人们，向里尉报告情况。
English: Occasionally, a sergeant would be assigned to watch people coming and going and report back to the lieutenant.

古文：凡出入不时，衣服不中，圈属群徒，不顺于常者，闾有司见之，复无时。
现代文：凡是进出不遵守时间，穿戴不合时宜，家眷亲属及其他人中有行迹异常的，间有司发现，就随时上报。
English: Anyone who enters or leaves without observing the time, wears inappropriate clothing, and has abnormal behavior among family members, relatives and others, will be reported at any time.

古文：若在长家子弟臣妾属役宾客，则里尉以谯于游宗，游宗以谯于什伍，什伍以谯于长家，谯敬而勿复。
现代文：如果问题出在本里家长的子弟、臣妄、属役和宾客身上，那么，里尉要训斥游宗，游宗要训斥什、伍长，什、伍长要训斥家长。
English: If the problem is caused by the parents' children, vassals, subordinates and guests, then the lieutenant should reprimand Yu Zong, Yu Zong should reprimand Sh, the corporal, and Sh, the corporal should reprimand the parents.

古文：一再则宥，三则不赦。
现代文：只给训斥和警告而不必上报，初犯、再犯可以宽恕，第三次就不赦免了。
English: Only reprimands and warnings are given without having to be reported. First-time and repeat offenders can be pardoned, but the third time will not be pardoned.

古文：凡孝悌忠信、贤良俊材，若在长家子弟臣妾属役宾客，则什伍以复于游宗，游宗以复于里尉。里尉以复于州长。州长以计于乡师。乡师以著于士师。
现代文：凡发现孝悌、忠信、贤良和优秀人材，如果出在本里家长的子弟、臣妄、仆役和宾客，那么，就要逐级由什、伍长上报游宗，游宗上报里尉，里尉上报州长，州长再汇总上报于乡师，乡师最后登记举报到士师那里去。
English: Anyone who finds filial piety, loyalty, virtuousness and outstanding talent, if they are the children, vassals, servants and guests of the parents in this village, then they should report to Yu Zong from Shih to Corporal, from Yu Zong to Lieutenant, from Lieutenant to Governor, from Governor to Township Teacher, and from Township Teacher to Judge.

古文：凡过党，其在家属，及于长家。其在长家，及于什伍之长。其在什伍之长，及于游宗。其在游宗，及于里尉。其在里尉，及于州长。其在州长，及于乡师，其在乡师，及于士师。
现代文：凡责罚与犯罪有牵连的人，问题出在家属的，应连带及于家长；出在家长的，应连带及什、伍长；出在什、伍长的，连带游宗；出在游宗的，连带里尉；出在里尉的，连带州长；出在州长的，连带乡师；出在乡师的，也要连带于士师。
English: When punishing a person who is implicated in a crime, if the problem arises in the family, it should be brought to the parents; if it arises in the parents, it should be brought to the Shih, the corporal; if it arises in the Shih, the corporal, it should be brought to the Youzong; if it arises in the Youzong, it should be brought to the lieutenant; if it arises in the lieutenant, it should be brought to the governor; if it arises in the governor, it should be brought to the township teacher; if it arises in the township teacher, it should also be brought to the judge.

古文：三月一复，六月一计，十二月一著。
现代文：每年三个月一上报，六个月一汇总，十二个月来一次登记举报。
English: Every year, a report will be submitted every three months, a summary report will be submitted every six months, and a report will be registered every 12 months.

古文：凡上贤不过等，使能不兼官，罚有罪不独及，赏有功不专与。
现代文：凡推举贤才都不可越级，使用能臣都不可兼职；惩罚有罪，不独罚犯罪者自身；赏赐有功，不专给立功者本人。
English: Those who promote talents should not exceed their ranks, and those who employ talents should not work part-time; those who punish the guilty should not punish the guilty alone; those who reward the meritorious should not reward the meritorious alone.

古文：孟春之朝，君自听朝，论爵赏校官，终五日。
现代文：正月初起，国君要亲自临朝听政，评定爵赏，考核官吏，一共用五天时间。
English: From the beginning of the first month of the year, the sovereign must personally attend the court to listen to politics, evaluate peerage awards, and assess officials, a total of five days.

古文：季冬之夕，君自听朝，论罚罪刑杀，亦终五日。
现代文：腊月末尾，国君也要临朝听政，论定罚、罪、刑、杀，也用五天。
English: At the end of the lunar month, the sovereign also had to come to the imperial court to listen to the government and decide on punishment, crime, punishment, and killing, which also took five days.

古文：正月之朔，百吏在朝，君乃出令布宪于国，五乡之师，五属大夫，皆受宪于太史。
现代文：正月初一日，百官在朝，国君向全国发布法令。五乡乡师和五属大夫都在太史那里领受法令典籍。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, hundreds of officials were in the morning, and the sovereign issued decrees to the whole country. The five townships and villages and the five subordinate doctors all received the law books from Taishi.

古文：大朝之日，五乡之师，五属大夫，皆身习宪于君前。
现代文：又当全体官吏会集在朝之日，五乡乡师和五属大夫都要在国君面前学习法令。
English: In addition, when all the officials gather on the morning of the day, the five townships and the five doctors must study the laws and regulations in front of the sovereign.

古文：太史既布宪，入籍于太府。宪籍分于君前。
现代文：太史宣布法令后，底册存入太府，就在国君面前把法令和简册分发下去。
English: After Taishi announced the decree, the bottom book was deposited in Taifu, and the decree and brochure were distributed in front of the sovereign.

古文：五乡之师出朝，遂于乡官致于乡属，及于游宗，皆受宪。
现代文：五乡乡师出朝以后，就到乡办事处召集本乡所属官吏，直至游宗，同来领受法令。
English: After leaving the capital, the five-township township officials went to the township office to summon the officials belonging to their own townships, up to and including Yuzong, to come and receive the decree.

古文：宪既布，乃反致令焉，然后敢就舍；宪未布，令未致，不敢就舍。
现代文：法令公布完毕，要及时回报，然后回到任处。法令没有公布，报告没有交回，不敢到住处休息。
English: After the announcement of the decree is completed, it is necessary to return it in time, and then return to the office. The decree has not been announced, the report has not been returned, and I dare not go to my residence to rest.

古文：就舍，谓之留令。罪死不赦。
现代文：否则，叫作 留令 ，那是死罪不赦的。
English: Otherwise, known as a "stay away order," it is a capital offence.

古文：五属大夫，皆以行车朝，出朝不敢就舍，遂行至都之日。
现代文：五属大夫，都是乘车来朝的，但出朝也不能到任处休息，需要立即出发。
English: The doctors of the five families all came to the morning by car, but they could not go to their offices to rest after the morning, so they needed to leave immediately.

古文：遂于庙致属吏，皆受宪。
现代文：到达都邑的当天，就在祖庙里召集所属官吏，同来领受法令。
English: On the day they arrived in the capital, they summoned their officials to the ancestral temple to receive the edict.

古文：宪既布，乃发使者致令以布宪之日蚤晏之时，宪既布，使者以发，然后敢就舍；宪未布。
现代文：法令公布后，便派遣使者回报。
English: After the decree was published, they sent an envoy to return the favor.

古文：使者未发，不敢就舍；就舍，谓之留令，罪死不赦。宪既布，有不行宪者，谓之不从令，罪死不赦。
现代文：遣使应在公布法令的当天，不论早晚。法令公布完，使者派出去，然后才敢到住所休息。法令没有公布，使者没有派出，不能到住所休息。否则，也叫 留令 ，死罪不赦。法令公布后，有不执行的，叫做 不从今 ，死罪不赦。
English: The envoy should be sent on the day of promulgation of the decree, regardless of whether it is morning or evening. After the decree is announced, the envoy is sent out, and then dares to rest at the residence. If the decree is not announced, the envoy is not sent out, and cannot rest at the residence. Otherwise, it is also called a stay order, and the death penalty is not pardoned. After the decree is announced, if it is not enforced, it is called no longer, and the death penalty is not pardoned.

古文：考宪而有不合于太府之籍者，侈曰专制，不足曰亏令，罪死不赦。
现代文：检查法令文件，有与太府所存不符的，多了叫作 专制 ，少了叫作 亏令 ，也是死罪不赦。
English: The inspection of legal documents, some of which are inconsistent with the Taifu, is called "dictatorship" if it is too much, and "deficit order" if it is too little. It is also a capital crime.

古文：首宪既布，然后可以布宪。
现代文：这个所谓 首宪 的法令公布以后，各地就可以执行了。
English: After the promulgation of this so-called supreme constitutional decree, it can be implemented in various regions.

古文：首事
现代文：首事
English: First things first

古文：凡将举事，令必先出，曰事将为。
现代文：凡将办事，法令一定先出。这叫作事情将办，其赏罚办法就必须明示于前。
English: Whenever something is to be done, the decree must come out first. This is called the thing is to be done, and its reward and punishment must be made clear in advance.

古文：其赏罚之数，必先明之，立事者，谨守令以行赏罚，计事致令，复赏罚之所加，有不合于令之所谓者，虽有功利，则谓之专制，罪死不赦。
现代文：负责人总是要严守法令以掌握赏罚，检查工作并向君主上报的时候，也必须报告执行赏罚的情况。如果办事不合于法令的意旨，即使事有成效，也叫 专制 ，那是死罪不赦的。
English: The person in charge must always strictly abide by the law to grasp the reward and punishment, and when inspecting the work and reporting to the monarch, he must also report the implementation of the reward and punishment. If the work is not in accordance with the intention of the law, even if it is effective, it is called despotism, which is a capital crime.

古文：首事既布，然后可以举事。
现代文：这个所谓 首事 的命令一经发布，然后就可以遵照执行了。
English: Once this so-called Prime Directive is issued, it can then be enforced.

古文：省官
现代文：省官
English: Provincial officials

古文：修火宪，敬山泽，林薮积草，夫财之所出，以时禁发焉。
现代文：制定防火的法令，戒止山泽林薮之处堆积枯草；对自然资源的出产，要按时封禁和开放，以使人民有充足的房屋建筑用材的柴草贮备。这是 虞师 的职责。
English: It is the duty of the State Forester to formulate fire prevention decrees and prevent the accumulation of dead grass in mountainous areas; the production of natural resources should be banned and opened on time, so that the people have sufficient firewood storage for building materials.

古文：使民足于宫室之用，薪蒸之所积，虞师之事也，决水潦，通沟渎，修障防，安水藏，使时水虽过度，无害于五谷。
现代文：排泄积水，疏通沟渠，修整堤坝，以保持蓄水池的安全，做到雨水过多时无害于五谷，年景干旱时，也有收成。这是 司空 的职责。
English: It is the duty of the steward to drain the accumulated water, clear the ditches, and repair the dikes to keep the reservoir safe, so that when there is too much rain, it will not harm the crops, and when there is a drought, there will be a harvest.

古文：岁虽兇旱，有所秎获，司空之事也。相高下，视肥墝，观地宜，明诏期，前后农夫，以时均修焉，使五谷桑麻，皆安其处，由田之事也。
现代文：观测地势高下，分析土质肥瘠，查明土地宜于何种作物的生长；明定农民应召服役的日期，对农民生产、服役的先后，按时作全面安排，使五谷桑麻的种植，各得其适。这是 司田 的职责。
English: It is Sida's responsibility to observe the terrain from top to bottom, analyze soil fertility, and find out what kind of crops the land is suitable for growing; clearly set the date for farmers to be called up for service, and make timely and comprehensive arrangements for farmers' production and service successively, so that the planting of five-grain mulberry is suitable for each.

古文：行乡里，视宫室，观树艺，简六畜，以时钧修焉。劝勉百姓，使力作毋偷。怀乐家室，重去乡里，乡师之事也。
现代文：巡行乡里，察看房屋，观察树木、庄稼的生长，视查六畜的状况，并能按时作全面安排，做到劝勉百姓，使他们努力耕作而不偷闲，留恋家室而不轻离乡里，这是 乡师 的职责。
English: It is the duty of the township teacher to patrol the countryside, inspect houses, observe the growth of trees and crops, inspect the condition of the six livestock, and be able to make comprehensive arrangements on time, so as to encourage the people to work hard and not be idle, stay home and not leave the countryside lightly.

古文：论百工，审时事，辨功苦，上完利，监壹五乡，以时钧修焉。使刻镂文采，毋敢造于乡，工师之事也。
现代文：考核各种工匠，审定各个时节的作业项目，分辨产品质量的优劣，提倡产品完全和精致，统一管理五乡，按时作全面安排，使那种刻木、镂金、文采之类的奢侈品工艺，不敢在各乡作业。这是 工师 的职责。
English: It is the duty of the craftsmen to assess all kinds of craftsmen, validate the work items of each season, distinguish the quality of products, advocate the product to be complete and exquisite, unify the management of the five townships, and make comprehensive arrangements on time, so that the luxury craftsmanship such as wood carving, sheet metal, and literature collection will not dare to operate in each township.

古文：服制
现代文：服制
English: Dress code

古文：度爵而制服，量禄而用财，饮食有量，衣服有制，宫室有度，六畜人徒有数，舟车陈器有禁，修生则有轩冕服位谷禄田宅之分，死则有棺槨绞衾圹垄之度。
现代文：按照爵位制定享用等级，根据俸禄规定花费标准。饮食有一定标准，衣服有一定制度，房屋有一定限度，六畜和奴仆有一定数目，车船和陈设也都有一定的限制。活着的时候，在乘车、戴帽、职位、俸禄、田宅等方面，有所分别；死了的时候，在棺木、衣被、坟墓等方面，也有所规定。
English: According to the title of nobility, the level of enjoyment is determined, and the standard of expenditure is determined according to the salary. The diet has a certain standard, the clothes have a certain system, the house has a certain limit, the six animals and the slaves have a certain number, and the cars, ships and furnishings also have certain restrictions. When alive, there are differences in terms of car, hat, position, salary, farmhouse and so on; when dead, there are also regulations in terms of coffin, quilt, grave and so on.

古文：虽有贤身贵体，毋其爵，不敢服其服。虽有富家多资，毋其禄，不敢用其财。
现代文：虽然是身份高贵，没有那样的爵位也不敢穿那样的衣服；虽然是家富钱多，没有那样的俸禄也不敢作那样的花费。
English: Although he is of noble status, he would not dare to wear such clothes without such a title; although his family is rich, he would not dare to spend so much money without such a salary.

古文：天子服文有章，而夫人不敢以燕以飨庙，将军大夫不敢以朝官吏，以命士，止于带缘，散民不敢服杂采，百工商贾不得服长鬈貂，刑余戮民不敢服絻，不敢畜连乘车。
现代文：天子衣服的花纹样式有明文规定，夫人不能穿常服祭祀宗庙，将军大夫穿朝服，一般官吏穿命服， 士 只在衣带边缘上有所标志。平民不敢穿杂有文彩的衣服，工匠、商人不得穿羔皮和貂皮的衣服。受过刑和正在服刑的人不能穿丝料的衣服，也不敢备车和坐车。
English: There is a clear stipulation on the pattern style of the emperor's clothes. The wife cannot wear the regular clothes to worship the ancestral temple, the general doctor can wear the court uniform, the general officials can wear the life jacket, and the judges can only have a mark on the edge of the belt. Civilians dare not wear clothes with mixed patterns, craftsmen and merchants are not allowed to wear lambskin and mink. People who have been sentenced and are serving their sentences cannot wear silk clothes, and they dare not prepare and ride in a car.

古文：九败
现代文：九败
English: Nine defeats

古文：寝兵之说胜，则险阻不守；兼爱之说胜，则士卒不战。
现代文：废止军备的议论占优势，险阻就不能固守。泛爱人类的议论占优势，士卒就不肯作战。
English: Discussions on the abolition of armaments predominate, and dangerous obstacles cannot be adhered to. Discussions on the universal love of mankind predominate, and soldiers are reluctant to fight.

古文：全生之说胜，则廉耻不立。
现代文：全 生保命的议论占优势，廉耻之风就不能建立。
English: The whole discussion of life insurance is predominant, and a culture of integrity cannot be established.

古文：私议自贵之说胜，则上令不行。
现代文：私立异说、清高自贵的议论占优势，君主政令就无法推行。
English: The private dissident theory and the argument of lofty self-importance prevail, and the monarch's decree cannot be implemented.

古文：群徒比周之说胜，则贤不肖不分。
现代文：结交朋党的议论占优势，好人、坏人就不易分清。
English: Talk of cronyism prevails, and it is not easy to tell the good guys from the bad guys.

古文：金玉货财之说胜。
现代文：金玉财货的议论占优势，官爵服位就滥流到下边。
English: Discussions of gold, jewels, and riches predominate, and talk of official titles trickles down to the lower ranks.

古文：则爵服下流，观乐玩好之说胜。则奸民在上位。
现代文：观乐玩好的议论占优势，奸邪之辈就攀援到上位。
English: The discussion about whether it is good to watch and play is predominant, and the scoundrels are climbing to the top.

古文：请谒任举之说胜，则绳墨不正，谄谀饰过之说胜，则巧佞者用。
现代文：托拜保举的议论占优势，用人标准就不会正确。阿谀奉承、文过饰非的议论占优势，巧言而奸佞的人就会出来干事了。
English: If the discussion of "tobai haku" prevails, the employment standard will not be correct. If the discussion of "flattery" and "dressing up" prevails, people who are eloquent and deceitful will be promoted.

古文：七观
现代文：七观
English: Seven Views

古文：期而致，使而往，百姓舍己以上为心者，教之所期也。
现代文：征召就立即来到，派遣就立即前往，老百姓舍弃自己而以君上之心为心，这是教化所期望的结果。
English: The enlistment immediately came, the dispatch immediately went, and the common people abandoned themselves to the heart of the ruler, which was the desired result of the indoctrination.

古文：始于不足见，终于不可及，一人服之，万人从之，训之所期也。
现代文：起初还看不出迹象，最后则成效不可比拟，君主一人行事，臣民万人随从，这是训练所期望的结果。
English: At first there are no signs, but in the end the results are incomparable. The monarch acts alone, and his subjects follow him. This is the desired result of the training.

古文：未之令而为，未之使而往，上不加勉，而民自尽，竭俗之所期也。
现代文：不加命令而主动办事，不加派遣而主动前往，不用上面劝勉，而人民自己就能够尽心竭力，这是树立风俗所期望的结果。
English: To do things without being ordered, to go to places without being sent, to do things without being advised by superiors, and for the people themselves to be able to do their best, this is the desired result of the establishment of customs.

古文：好恶形于心，百姓化于下，罚未行而民畏恐，赏未加而民劝勉，诚信之所期也。
现代文：君主的好恶才在心里形成，百姓就化为行动，刑未行而人民知道恐惧，奖赏未发而人民得到劝勉，这是实行诚信所期望的结果。
English: The monarch's likes and dislikes are formed in the heart, and the people turn them into actions. The punishment has not been carried out, but the people know fear. The reward has not been issued, but the people are persuaded. This is the desired result of practicing honesty.

古文：为而无害，成而不议，得而莫之能争，天道之所期也。
现代文：做事不产生恶果，成事之后也没有失败，得到的成果没有人能够争夺，这是遵守天道所期望的结果。
English: Work does not produce evil results, and there is no failure after the completion of the work, and no one can compete for the results obtained. This is the desired result of abiding by the heavenly way.

古文：为之而成，求之而得，上之所欲，小大必举，事之所期也。
现代文：行事即成，有求即得，君主所要求的，大小事情都能实现，这是办事所期望的结果。
English: The deed is done, the desire is achieved, the monarch's request can be achieved in all matters, large and small. This is the desired result of the deed.

古文：令则行，禁则止，宪之所及，俗之所被，如百体之从心，政之所期也。
现代文：有令则行，有禁则止，凡是法令所及和风俗所影响到的地方，就象四肢百骸服从内心一样，这是为政所期望的结果。
English: Where there is a command, there is a way, where there is a prohibition, there is a stop. Wherever the laws and customs affect, it is as if the limbs obey the heart. This is the desired result for the government.

