古文：一人之所需，百工斯为备。
现代文：一个人生活中使用的各种物品，需要具备各种技能的工匠才能制造出来。
English: All kinds of items used in a person's life require craftsmen with various skills to make them.

古文：但用则各适其用，而名则每异其名。
现代文：因为每种物品都有其适用之处，所以名称各不相同。
English: Because each item has its place of application, so the names vary.

古文：管城子、中书君，悉为笔号；石虚中、即墨侯，皆为砚称。
现代文： 管城子 、 中书君 是毛笔的别称； 石虚中 、 即墨侯 是砚台的别称。
English: Guanchengzi, Zhongshujun is another name for the brush; Shihuizhong, that is, Mokhou is another name for Xingtai.

古文：墨为松使者，纸号楮先生。
现代文：墨又称做 松使者 ，纸称做 楮先生 。
English: Ink is also known as pine messenger, and paper is known as Mr. Zou.

古文：纸曰剡藤，又曰玉版；墨曰陈玄，又曰龙脐。共笔砚，同富之谓；付衣钵，传道之称。
现代文：剡藤和玉版都是纸的别名；陈玄、龙剂都是墨的别号。 共笔砚 ，是同学的意思； 付衣钵 ，是师生传授弟子的意思。
English: "藤" and "玉版" are aliases for paper; "陈玄" and "龙剂" are aliases for ink; "共筆" means classmates; "付衣" means teachers and students teaching their students.

古文：笃志业儒，曰磨穿铁砚；弃文就武，曰安用毛锥。
现代文：立定志向去钻研儒学，哪怕磨穿铁砚。丢弃文学去学习武艺，哪里还用得到毛笔呢？
English: If you are determined to study Confucianism, even if you have to grind an anvil, and abandon literature to study martial arts, where else can you get a brush?

古文：剑有干将镆邪之名，扇有仁风便面之号。
现代文：干将、莫邪都是宝剑的名称；仁风、便面都是扇子的别号。
English: "Gang Zheng" and "Mozha" are the names of swords; "Ren Feng" and "Pen Fan" are the other names of fans.

古文：何谓箑，亦扇之名；何谓籁，有声之谓。
现代文：何谓箑？就是扇子；何谓籁？就是声音。
English: What is the fan? What is the fan? What is the fan? What is the voice?

古文：小舟名蚱蜢，巨舰曰艨艟。
现代文：小船别名舴艋，战舰叫做艨艟。
English: A small boat is called a yakitori, and a warship is called a yakitori.

古文：金根是皇后之车，菱花乃妇人之镜。银凿落原是酒器，玉参差乃是箫名。
现代文：皇后乘坐的车子叫做金根车。女子梳妆所用的镜子叫做菱花镜。 银凿落 原来是酒杯的名字， 玉参差 就是排箫的别名。
English: The carriage used by the empress is called the Golden Root Car, the mirror used for women's make-up is called the Diamond Flower Mirror, the Silver Chisel Drop was originally the name of a wine glass, and the Tamasensha is another name for the Sorting Hat.

古文：刻舟求剑，固而不通；胶柱鼓瑟，拘而不化。
现代文： 刻舟求剑 ，这是讽刺人一味固执愚笨，全然不知变通； 胶柱鼓瑟 ，这是嘲笑那种固执拘泥不化的人。
English: Carving a boat and asking for a sword, this is a satire of people who are stubborn and stupid, and do not know how to be flexible at all; the rubber drum, this is a mockery of those who are stubborn and rigid.

古文：斗筲言其器小，梁栋谓是大材。
现代文： 斗筲 是说人的才识短浅气量狭小， 梁栋 是说才干出众的人。
English: Duopeng means that a person's talent is short, shallow and narrow, and Liangdong means a person with outstanding talent.

古文：铅刀无一割之利，强弓有六石之名。
现代文：用铅做的刀拿来切东西锋利都不够，强硬的弓有 六石 之称。
English: A knife made of lead is not sharp enough to cut things. A strong bow is said to weigh six stone.

古文：杖以鸠名，因鸠喉之不噎；钥同鱼样，取鱼目之常醒。
现代文：拐杖取名为 鸠杖 ，是因鸠鸟吃食不噎，用以祝福老人饮食不噎；锁钥做成鱼的形状，是因为鱼昼夜都不闭眼，取它能常醒守护之意。
English: The crutch is named "Climbing Stick" because the ostrich can eat but not swallow, and it is used to bless the elderly for not swallowing; the lock key is made into the shape of a fish because the fish does not close its eyes day and night, and it can be kept awake for protection.

古文：兜鍪系是头盔，叵罗乃为酒器。
现代文：兜鍪俗名称做 头盔 ， 叵罗 是饮酒的杯子。
English: Popularly known as helmets, helmets are drinking cups.

古文：短剑名匕首，毡毯曰氍毹。
现代文：短剑叫做 匕首 ，毛织的地毯称为 氍毹 。
English: A short sword is called a dagger, and a woolen carpet is called a ruff.

古文：琴名绿绮焦桐，弓号乌号繁弱。
现代文： 绿绮 、 焦桐 都是琴的别名， 乌号 、 繁弱 都是弓的代称。
English: "Grün" and "Jiaotong" are aliases for the harp, and "Wu" and "繁弱" are synonyms for the bow.

古文：香炉曰宝鸭，烛台曰烛奴。
现代文：鸭形的香炉叫做 宝鸭 ，人形的炉台称 炉奴 。
English: The duck-shaped incense burner is called the treasure duck, and the human-shaped hearth is called the furnace.

古文：龙涎鸡舌，悉是香茗；鹢首鸭头，别为船号。
现代文： 龙涎 、 鸡舌 都是香料的名称； 鹢首 、 鸭头 都是船的名号。
English: Dragon's beak, chicken's tongue are all names of spices; dagger, duck's head are all names of ships.

古文：寿光客，是妆台无尘之镜；长明公，是梵堂不灭之灯。
现代文：寿光客是梳妆台上不染纤尘的宝镜，长明公是佛堂里永不熄灭的油灯。
English: Shou Kuang Ke is a precious mirror that does not stain on the dresser, and Chang Ming Gong is an oil lamp that never goes out in the Buddhist temple.

古文：桔槔是田家之水车，袯襫是农夫之雨具。
现代文： 桔槔 是种田人提水用的工具，袯襫是农夫遮雨的雨具。
English: The orangutan basket is a tool used by farmers to carry water, and the plough is a farmer's rain cover.

古文：乌金，炭之美誉；忘归，矢之别名。
现代文：乌金是炭的美名，忘归是箭的名称。
English: Ugin is the name of the charcoal, and oblivion is the name of the arrow.

古文：夜可击，朝可炊，军中刁斗；《云汉》热，《北风》寒，刘褒画图。
现代文：军队中用的刁斗，夜里巡更可以用来敲击，白天可以用来煮饭。东汉刘褒画图真神妙，画《云汉图》，看的人都会觉得热；画《北风图》，看的人都会觉得寒冷，这些都是室内挂的图画。
English: The crossbow used in the army, the night patrol can be used for striking, and during the day it can be used for cooking rice. The Eastern Han Dynasty Liu Bao painting is really wonderful, painting "Cloud and Han," the viewer will feel hot; painting "North Wind," the viewer will feel cold, these are all pictures hanging indoors.

古文：勉人发愤，曰猛着祖鞭；求人宥罪，曰幸开汤网。
现代文：勉励他人发愤进取，说 猛著祖鞭 ；请求别人宽恕自己的罪过，就说 幸开汤网 。
English: Encourage others to be angry and enterprising, saying, "Strike the ancestral whip"; ask others to forgive their sins, say, "Happily open the soup net."

古文：拔帜立帜，韩信之计甚奇；楚弓楚得，楚王所见未大。
现代文：拔去赵国的白帜，树起汉朝的赤帜，韩信所用的计谋甚为奇特；楚王失了弓，便说道楚人失了楚人得了，楚王的见识还是不够远大。
English: Han Xin's strategy of pulling down the white banner of Zhao and raising the red banner of the Han Dynasty was very strange. When King Chu lost his bow, he said that Chu people lost and Chu people gained, but King Chu's insight was still not far-reaching enough.

古文：董安于性援，常佩弦以自急；西门豹性急，常佩韦以自宽。
现代文：董安于慢性子，经常佩带弓弦以督促自己迅速一些；西门豹急性子，经常佩戴熟牛皮，以提醒自己缓和一些。
English: Dong An, a slow runner, often wears a bowstring to urge himself to be faster; Ximen Leopard, a fast runner, often wears a ripe cowhide to remind himself to slow down.

古文：汉孟敏尝堕甑不顾，知其无益；宋太祖谓犯法有剑，正欲立成。
现代文：汉代孟敏失手把甑掉在地上，并不再看它一眼，因为再看也无用；宋太祖说犯法有剑，是想树立自己的威信。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Meng Min accidentally dropped his shovel on the ground and did not look at it again, because it was useless to look at it again; Song Taizu said that he had a sword when he broke the law, in order to establish his prestige.

古文：王衍清谈，常持麈尾；横渠讲《易》，每拥皋比。
现代文：王衍清谈时常拿着拂尘，横渠先生讲《易》，常常坐在虎皮椅中。
English: Wang Yan often holds a whisk when he talks, and Mr. Hengqiu talks about "Yi" and often sits in a tiger skin chair.

古文：尾生抱桥而死，固执不通；楚妃守符而亡，贞信可录。
现代文：尾生信守诺言等候女子，结果遇到洪水被淹死，真是不知变通；楚妃在渐台上等待信符，水淹台塌而亡，其坚贞诚信值得载入史册。
English: Osei kept his promise to wait for the girl, but as a result, he was drowned in a flood, which was really inexplicable; Chufei waited for the letter on the gradient table, and the flooded table collapsed and died, and his steadfast integrity is worthy of being recorded in history.

古文：温桥昔燃犀，照见水族之鬼怪；秦政有方镜，照见世人之邪心。
现代文：温峤曾经燃犀，照见了水族中的奇异怪兽；秦始皇有一方镜，能洞察世人的邪恶之心。
English: Wen Xuan was once so enraged that he photographed the strange monsters in aquariums; Qin Shihuang had a one-way mirror that could see into the evil hearts of the world.

古文：车载斗量之人，不可胜数；南金东箭之品，实是堪奇。
现代文： 车载斗量 ，是说那些平庸的人数也数不清楚； 南金东箭 ，都是非常珍奇的物品。
English: The number of car-carrying buckets, that is to say, the number of those who are mediocre is also unclear; Nanjin Dongyao, are all very rare items.

古文：传檄可定，极言敌之易破；迎刃而解，甚言事之易为。
现代文： 传檄可定 ，是说能够轻易战胜敌人； 迎刃而解 ，是说事情非常容易解决。
English: To be able to defeat an enemy easily; to be able to solve a problem quickly; to be able to solve things easily.

古文：以铜为鉴，可整衣冠；以古为鉴，可知兴替。
现代文：唐太宗曾说用铜做镜子，可以对镜整理衣冠；以历史作为镜子，能够知道王朝兴衰得失的缘由。
English: Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty once said that a mirror made of copper can be used to arrange the crowns on the mirror; using history as a mirror, it is possible to know the reasons for the rise and fall of the dynasty.

