古文：贾偶章泛谢弘敞妻梁氏朱氏李强名妻荆州女子周哲滞妻刘长史女
现代文：贾偶章泛谢弘敞妻梁氏朱氏李强名妻荆州女子周哲滞妻刘长史女
English: Jia doll chapter Pan Xie Hongzhang wife Liang family Zhu family Li Qiang famous wife Jingzhou woman Zhou Zhe wife Liu Changshi daughter

古文：卢顼表姨刘氏子妻延陵村人妻赵某妻
现代文：卢顼表姨刘氏子妻延陵村人妻赵某妻
English: Lu Wei's aunt, Liu Shi's son's wife, Yanling village's wife, Zhao Mou's wife

古文：贾偶
现代文：贾偶
English: Jia Rong

古文：汉建安中，南阳贾偶字文合，得病而亡。
现代文：汉代建安年间，南阳人贾偶，字文合，得病去世。
English: During the Jianan period of the Han Dynasty, Jia Yu, a Nanyang native, died of illness.

古文：时有吏将诣太山，司命阅簿，谓吏曰： 当召某郡文合，何以召此人？
现代文：当时有一个差吏带着他来到太山，司命复核生死簿子，对官员说： 应该召的是某某郡的文合，怎么把这个南阳的给召到阴间来了？
English: At that time, a police officer brought him to Taishan. The officer reviewed the life and death book and said to the official: It should have been the county's Wenhe who should have been summoned. How did this person from Nanyang get summoned to the underworld?

古文：可速遣之。 
现代文：快把他送回阳世吧。 
English: Let's send him back to the sun.

古文：时日暮，遂至郭外树下宿。
现代文：当时天已黄昏，贾文合被放还出了阴间的城门后，在城外一棵树下歇息，看见一个少女在独身走路。
English: At that time, it was already dusk. Jia Wenhe was released from the gate of the underworld and rested under a tree outside the city. He saw a girl walking alone.

古文：见一少女子独行，文合问曰： 子类衣冠，何乃徒步？
现代文：文合就问女子， 你很像是大家闺秀，怎么一个人徒步走路呢？
English: Wen He asked the woman, "You look like everyone's girlfriend, how can you walk alone on foot?"

古文：姓字为谁？ 
现代文：你叫什么名字？ 
English: What's your name?

古文：女曰： 某三河人，父见为弋阳令，昨被召而来，今得却还。
现代文：少女说： 我是三河人，我父亲现在是弋阳县的县令。昨天我被召到阴间来，今天被放回阳世。
English: The girl said, "I am from Sanhe, and my father is now the county magistrate of Shenyang County. Yesterday I was summoned to the underworld, and today I have been returned to the world of the sun.

古文：遇日暮，惧获瓜田李下之讥。望君之容，必是贤者，是以停留，依冯左右。 文合曰： 悦子之心，愿交欢于今夕。 
现代文：我看天色晚了，在别处休息怕男女之间多有不便会被人议论，看见你后，觉得你的容貌风度一定是个很贤德的人，所以我才走到你这儿来和你作个伴，心里也能有点底。 文合对女子说： 我一看见你萌生出喜爱你的感情，今夜我们就作成夫妻吧。 
English: I think it's getting late in the day, and I'm afraid that if I rest somewhere else, the inconvenience between men and women will be talked about. After seeing you, I felt that your appearance and demeanor must be a very virtuous person, so I came to you to be your companion, and I can also have a bit of a bottom in my heart. Wenhe said to the woman: As soon as I saw you sprout feelings of liking you, let's become husband and wife tonight.

古文：女曰： 闻之诸姑，女子以贞专为德，洁白为称。 
现代文：少女说： 我常听母亲姨妈姑母这些长辈说，女子的至德就是保持贞节，只有纯贞的姑娘才为人称赞。 
English: The girl said: I often hear my mother, aunts and uncles say that a woman's virtue is to maintain chastity, and only chaste girls are praised.

古文：文合反复与言，终无动志，天明各去。
现代文：文合反复向少女解释、求爱，但少女始终不动心。天亮后，两个人分道而去。
English: Wen He repeatedly explained to the girl and courted her, but the girl remained unmoved. After dawn, the two parted ways.

古文：文合卒以再宿，停丧将殓，视其面有色，扪心下稍温，少顷却苏。
现代文：文合已死了两夜，家里人停丧后准备装殓他，但看他脸上还有活人的气色，摸他的心口还有些温热，果然不一会就苏醒复活了。
English: Wenhe had been dead for two nights. After the mourning period, his family members prepared to decorate him. However, he still had the look of a living person on his face, and there was still some warmth in his heart. Sure enough, he woke up and revived after a while.

古文：文合欲验其事，遂至弋阳，修刺谒令，因问曰： 君女宁卒而却苏耶？ 
现代文：文合复活后，想验证他在阴间的事，就去了弋阳县，拿着自己的名帖去见县令，问县令说： 你有个女儿死后又复活了吗？ 
English: After Wen He was resurrected, he wanted to verify what happened to him in the underworld, so he went to Poyang County, took his famous letter to see the county magistrate, and asked the county magistrate: Did you have a daughter who died and was resurrected?

古文：具说女子姿质服色，言语相反复本末。
现代文：并详细说了女子的相貌服饰，以及和自己谈话的经过。
English: He also detailed the woman's appearance and clothing, as well as the course of the conversation with himself.

古文：令入问女，所言皆同。
现代文：县令进内宅问女儿，女儿所说的和文合的话完全相符。
English: The county magistrate went into the house and asked the daughter, and what the daughter said was completely consistent with the words of Wenhe.

古文：初大惊叹，竟以女配文合焉。
现代文：县令先是又惊又感叹，最后竟把女儿许配给文合作妻子。
English: The county magistrate was surprised and lamented, and finally married off his daughter to his wife.

古文：章泛
现代文：章泛
English: General Chapter

古文：临海乐安章泛年二十余，死经日，未殡而苏。
现代文：临海郡乐安县有个章泛，二十多岁，死了没装殓，一天后又复活了。
English: In Linhai County, Le'an County, there was a chap in his twenties who died without decoration and was resurrected a day later.

古文：云，被录天曹，天曹主者是其外兄，料理得免。
现代文：他说被召到天曹，天曹的主管官员是他的大舅哥，经过他的疏通，得以免死还阳。
English: He said that he was called to Tenso. The official in charge of Tenso was his older brother-in-law. Through his mediation, he was able to avoid death and return to the sun.

古文：初到时，有少女子同被录送，立住门外。
现代文：章泛刚到天曹时，有一个年轻的女子和他一起被捉了来，在门外等着。
English: When Zhang Pan first arrived in Tien Cao, a young woman who had been arrested with him was waiting outside the gate.

古文：女子见泛事散，知有力助，因泣涕，脱金钏三只及臂上杂宝托泛与主者，求见救济。
现代文：后来女子见章泛得以还阳，知道他在阴间有得力的人帮忙，就哭着摘下自己手上的三只金镯子和其他的宝物，托章泛交给主管生死的官员，代为疏通营救。
English: Later, when the woman saw that Zhang Pan was able to return to the sun, and knew that he was helping someone powerful in the underworld, she cried and took off the three gold bracelets and other treasures on her hands, and handed Zhang Pan to the official in charge of life and death, on behalf of the dredging rescue.

古文：泛即为请之，并进钏物。
现代文：章泛就替女子向大舅子求情，并把金镯子等物送了上去。
English: Zhang Pan pleaded with his brother-in-law on behalf of the woman, and sent gold braid and other items.

古文：良久出，语泛已论，秋英亦同遣去，秋英即此女之名也。
现代文：过了很久章泛出了大门，说天槽主官说： 章泛的案子已了结，遣回人世，秋英也一同送回阳世。 秋英就是那女子的名字。
English: After a long time, Zhang Pan came out of the gate, saying that the head of the sky grotto said: Zhang Pan's case has been concluded, sent back to the world, and Qiu Ying was also sent back to the world.

古文：于是俱去。
现代文：于是章泛和秋英就一同上路。
English: So Zhang Pan and Qiu Ying went on the road together.

古文：脚痛疲顿，殊不堪行，会日亦暮，止道侧小屈。
现代文：但秋英脚痛，疲乏不堪，实在不能再走，加上天色已晚，两个人就在道旁一个小房歇息。
English: But Qiu Ying's feet hurt, she was exhausted, she really couldn't walk anymore, and it was late in the day, so the two of them rested in a small room next to the road.

古文：状如客舍，而不见主人。
现代文：小房像个旅店，但里面没有主人。
English: The small room is like an inn, but there is no owner inside.

古文：泛共宿嬿接，更相问。
现代文：这天夜里，章泛就和秋英作了夫妻。
English: That night, Zhang Pan and Qiu Ying became husband and wife.

古文：女曰： 我姓徐，家吴县乌门，临渎为居，门前倒枣树即是也。 
现代文：章泛又仔细问女子的情况，女子说： 我姓徐，家在吴县的乌门。门前有一株倒了的枣树，那就是我的家。 
English: Zhang Pan also carefully asked the woman about her situation. The woman said: My surname is Xu, my home is in Wumen, Wuxian. There is a fallen jujube tree in front of the door, that is my home.

古文：明晨各去，遂并活。
现代文：第二天早晨，两人就分手各自回家，两个人都还了阳。
English: The next morning, the two broke up and went home separately. Both of them returned the sun.

古文：泛先为护军府吏，依假出都，经吴，乃对乌门。依此寻索。
现代文：章泛原来在护军府当府吏，就请了假出了城，到吴县去，找到了乌门，然后按秋英说的去访寻，找到了徐氏的家。
English: Zhang Pan, who used to be an official at the Military Garrison, took a leave of absence and left the city. He went to Wu County, found Umen, and then, according to Qiu Ying, went to visit and found Mr. Xu's home.

古文：得徐氏舍，与主人叙阔，问秋英何在，主人云： 女初不出入，君何知其名？ 
现代文：章泛向徐氏问候叙谈，并问秋英在哪里。徐氏说： 我的女儿从来不出门，你怎么会知道她的名字？ 
English: Zhang Pan greeted and talked to Xu and asked where Qiu Ying was. Xu said: My daughter never goes out, how do you know her name?

古文：泛因说昔日魂相见之由。
现代文：章泛细说了他在阴间和秋英相遇的事。
English: Zhang Pan elaborated on his encounter with Qiu Ying in the underworld.

古文：秋英先说之，所言因符主人乃悟。
现代文：秋英复活后，已向父母先讲了在阴间遇见章泛，徐氏一听章泛说的和秋英说的一样。
English: After Qiu Ying's resurrection, she told her parents that she had met Zhang Pan in the underworld. Xu listened to what Zhang Pan said and what Qiu Ying said.

古文：惟羞不及寝嬿之事，而其邻人或知，以语徐氏。
现代文：只是秋英由于害羞，没有说她在阴间和章泛作成夫妻的事。但徐氏的邻居有的知道，就告诉了徐氏。
English: However, because of her shyness, Qiu Ying did not say that she and Zhang Pan had married in the underworld. However, some of Mr. Xu's neighbors knew and told Mr. Xu.

古文：徐氏试令侍婢数人递出示泛曰： 非也。 
现代文：徐氏就把家里的几个丫环叫出来，一个一个的让章泛认，章泛都说不是。
English: Mr. Xu called out several maids in the family, one by one let Zhang Pan recognize, and Zhang Pan said no.

古文：乃令秋英见之，则如旧识。
现代文：最后让秋英出来，秋英和章泛一见面，两人就像老相识那样。
English: Finally, let Qiu Ying come out, Qiu Ying and Zhang Pan meet, the two are like old acquaintances.

古文：徐氏谓天意，遂以妻泛。
现代文：徐氏说这是天意促成的姻缘，就把秋英许配给章泛。
English: Mr. Xu said that this was a marriage brought about by the will of heaven, so he gave Ms. Qiu Ying Xu to Mr. Zhang.

古文：生子名曰天赐。
现代文：后来他们生了个儿子，起名叫天赐。
English: They later had a son, whom they named Heaven's Gift.

古文：谢弘敞妻
现代文：谢弘敞妻
English: Xie Hong's open wife

古文：唐吴王文学陈郡谢弘敞，妻高阳许氏。
现代文：唐朝时，给吴王讲授文学的师傅叫谢弘敞，是陈郡人。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the master who taught literature to King Wu was named Xie Hongzang, a native of Chen County.

古文：武德初，遇患死，经四日而苏。
现代文：他的妻子是高阳的许氏，武德初年得病死去，过了四天又苏醒过来。
English: His wife was Xu of Gaoyang. Wu De died of illness in the first year, and woke up four days later.

古文：说云，被二三十人拘至地狱，未见官府，即闻唤。
现代文：据她说，她被二三十人拘捕后送到地狱，没见到审案官本人，就先听到官员喊自己的名字。
English: According to her, she was arrested by twenty or thirty people and sent to hell. She did not see the adjudicator in person, but first heard the official call out her name.

古文：虽不识面，似是姑夫沈吉光语音。
现代文：虽然没见到人，听声音像是自己的姑夫沈吉光。
English: Although he didn't see anyone, he heard a voice that sounded like his uncle, Shen Jiguang.

古文：许问云： 语声似是沈丈，何因无头？ 
现代文：许氏就问道， 听说话的声像是沈丈，为什么没有脑袋呢？ 
English: Mr. Xu asked, "Listening to the speaking voice is like listening to Shenzhao, why is there no head?"

古文：南人呼姑姨夫，皆为某姓丈也。
现代文：南方人对姑夫姨夫都叫 ×丈 。
English: People in the south call their uncles and aunts their x-husbands.

古文：吉光即以手提其头，置于膊上，而诫许曰： 汝且在此，勿向西院。
现代文：这时只见沈吉光用手提着自己的头，把头放在胳膊上，并警告许氏说： 你就在这儿呆着，千万不要到西院去。
English: At this time, Shen Jiguang was seen holding his head in his hand, putting his head on his arm, and warning Mr. Xu: "You just stay here, don't go to Xi'an."

古文：待吾汝造请，即应得出。 
现代文：等我为你向上司求情，你得到允许后再出来。
English: Wait until I plead with my superiors for you, and you get permission to come out.

古文：许遂住，吉光经再宿始来。
现代文：许氏就在原地呆着。
English: Mr. Xu stayed put.

古文：语许云： 汝今此来，王欲令汝作女伎。
现代文：沈吉光过了一夜才又来见许氏，对许氏说： 这次把你拘到阴间，是因为大王想让你作乐伎。
English: It took Shen Jiguang only one night to come to see Mr. Xu again. He said to Mr. Xu, "This time, I have detained you in the underworld because the great king wants you to play games.

古文：倘引见，不须道解妶管。
现代文：如果大王接见你，你就说你不懂得音乐和乐器。
English: If the king receives you, say that you do not know music and musical instruments.

古文：如不为所悉，可引吾为证也。 
现代文：如果大王不信，你就让我为你作证。 
English: If you don't believe me, let me be your witness.

古文：少间，有吏抱案引入。王果问解妶管不，许云： 不解，沈吉光具知。 
现代文：过了片刻，有个官员抱着卷宗领许氏上堂，大王果然问许氏懂乐器不。许氏说： 不懂，沈吉光最知道我。 
English: After a while, an official came into the hall with a file to receive Mr. Xu. The king asked Mr. Xu if he knew musical instruments. Mr. Xu said, "No, Shen Jiguang knows me best."

古文：王问吉光，答曰： 不解。 
现代文：大王就问沈吉光，沈吉光回答说： 她真的不懂音乐。 
English: The king asked Shen Jiguang, and Shen Jiguang replied, "She really doesn't know music."

古文：王曰： 宜早放还，不须留也。 
现代文：大王说： 那还是早点把她送回去吧，这里不要留她了。 
English: The king said, "Then you'd better send her back early. Don't keep her here."

古文：于时吉光欲发遣，即共执案人筹度。
现代文：当时沈吉光就想送许氏还阳，但却在一旁和管案卷的官员商量办法。
English: At that time, Shen Jiguang wanted to send Mr. Xu back to the sun, but he was discussing with the officials in charge of the case file.

古文：许不解其语，执案人曰： 娘子功德虽强，然为先有少罪，随便受却，身业具净，岂不怪哉！ 
现代文：许氏不懂他俩说些什么，管案卷的官员就对许氏说： 你在人世虽然积了很多功德，但你过去也犯过罪。如果你在这里把罪赎净，带着一个干干净净的无罪之身回到人世，那该多么痛快！ 
English: Mr. Xu did not understand what they were saying, so the official in charge of the case file said to Mr. Xu: Although you have accumulated a lot of merits during your life, you have also committed sins in the past. If you can redeem your sins here and return to the world with a clean and innocent body, how pleasant it would be!

古文：吏东引入一院，其门极小。
现代文：说罢就领着许氏向东进了一个小院，院门非常小。
English: As soon as he said that, he led Mr. Xu to a small courtyard to the east. The gate of the courtyard was very small.

古文：见有人受罪，许甚惊惧。乃求于主者曰： 平生修福，何罪而至斯耶？ 
现代文：许氏看见院里有人正在受刑，心里十分害怕，就向主管的官员哀求道， 我在人世时一直行善积德，没犯过什么罪，为什么要让我到这里来受刑啊？ 
English: Mr. Xu saw someone being tortured in the hospital and was very scared. He pleaded with the official in charge, "I have always been virtuous during my lifetime and have never committed any crime. Why should I be punished here?"

古文：答曰： 娘子曾以不净碗盛食与亲，须受此罪，方可得去。 
现代文：主管回答说： 你曾经用不干净的碗盛饭给老人吃，所以应该受刑才能回人世。 
English: The supervisor replied, "You once gave a meal to an old man with an unclean bowl, so you should be punished in order to come back to life."

古文：遂以铜汁灌口，非常苦毒，比苏时，口内皆烂。
现代文：然后就把烧化了的铜汁灌进许氏的嘴里，许氏觉得嘴里又若又疼。等苏醒时，嘴里全烧烂了。
English: He then poured the burnt copper juice into Mr. Xu's mouth. Mr. Xu felt pain in his mouth. When he woke up, his mouth was completely burnt.

古文：吉光即云： 可于此人处受一本经，记取将归，受持勿怠。自今已去，保年八十有余。 
现代文：沈吉光就对主管说： 可以在此接受一本佛经，把它带回去，念经拜佛不可懈怠，从此以后就可以保你活到八十还有余。 
English: Shen Jiguang said to the supervisor: "You can receive a Buddhist scripture here, take it back, and do not slack off in reciting and worshiping Buddha. From now on, you can guarantee that you will live to be over eighty."

古文：许生时素未诵经，苏后，遂诵得一卷。
现代文：许氏在人世时，从来没有念过经，还阳后，就背诵了一卷经文，遍访人世间谁也不会她念的这一本经。
English: When she was alive, Ms. Xu had never read a sutra. After she was reborn, she recited a volume of scriptures. No one in the world would have been able to read this sutra.

古文：询访人间，所未曾有，今见受持不缺，吉光其时尚存。后二年，方始遇害。
现代文：一直到现在，许氏坚守佛戒从不松懈。沈吉光那时还活着，两年后被人害死。
English: Up until now, Xu has never wavered in his adherence to Buddhist precepts. Shen Jiguang was still alive at the time, but was killed two years later.

古文：凡诸亲属，有欲死者，三年前并于地下预见。
现代文：凡是他的亲属中将要死的人，三年前沈吉光就会在阴间看到。
English: For any of his relatives who were about to die, Shen Jiguang would have seen them in the underworld three years ago.

古文：许之从父弟仁则说之。
现代文：许氏的叔伯弟弟仁则曾说过这件事。
English: Mr. Xu's uncle and younger brother, Mr. Ren, said the same thing.

古文：梁氏
现代文：梁氏
English: Mr. Leung

古文：咸阳有妇人姓梁，贞观年中，死经七日而苏。
现代文：咸阳有个姓梁的女人，唐贞观年间死了，过了七天又活过来。
English: In Xianyang, there was a woman surnamed Liang. She died during the reign of Tang Zhenguan, but came back to life seven days later.

古文：自云，被收至一大院，见厅上有官人，据案执笔，翼侍甚盛。
现代文：她自己说，死后被拘押在一个大院里，见堂上有个大官伏在桌子上，手里拿着笔，两旁站着很多侍从。
English: She herself said that after her death she was detained in a large courtyard, where she saw a high-ranking official lying on a table, holding a pen in his hand, with many attendants standing on either side.

古文：令勘问，此妇人合死不。
现代文：大官命手下人查一查梁氏该不该死。
English: The senior official ordered his subordinates to investigate whether Mr. Liang should die.

古文：有吏人赍一案云： 与合死者同姓名，所以误追。 
现代文：这时有个官员拿来一个卷宗报告说： 梁氏和一个该死的人同名同姓，所以抓错了她。 
English: At this time, an official brought a file and reported: Ms. Liang has the same name as a damned person, so they arrested her by mistake.

古文：官人敕左右，即放还。
现代文：大官告诉左右的人立刻放梁氏回阳世。
English: The high-ranking official told the people on both sides to immediately release Mr. Liang back to the world.

古文：吏白官人云： 不知梁有何罪，请即受罪而归。 
现代文：这时那官员向大官说： 不知道这个梁氏在人间犯没犯罪，如果她有罪，应该让她受刑赎罪后，再放他还阳。 
English: At this time, the official said to the senior official: I don't know if this Liang committed a crime on earth, but if she is guilty, she should be punished to atone for her crime, and then he should be released.

古文：官人即令勘案，云： 梁生平唯有两舌恶骂之罪，更无别罪。 
现代文：大官就命人查看梁氏的卷宗，查完后报告说： 梁氏只有一件好骂人的罪，别的罪倒没有。 
English: The magistrate ordered someone to check Mr. Liang's file, and after the investigation, he reported: Mr. Liang has only one crime of swearing, and there is no other crime.

古文：即令一人拔舌，一人执斧砍之，日常数四。
现代文：于是命一个鬼卒把梁氏的舌头拔出来，另一个鬼卒用斧子砍舌头，每天上好几次这样的刑罚。
English: So he ordered one demon to pull out Mr. Liang's tongue, and another demon to chop off his tongue with an axe, inflicting this punishment several times a day.

古文：凡经七日，始送令归。
现代文：过了七天，才送梁氏回人间。
English: It took seven days to send Mr. Liang back to the world.

古文：初似落深崖，少时如睡觉。
现代文：梁氏先是觉得好像掉下一个深崖，过了片刻又像是突然睡醒了，就复活过来。
English: At first, Mr. Liang felt as if he had fallen down a deep cliff. After a while, he suddenly woke up and came back to life.

古文：家人视其舌上，犹大烂肿。
现代文：家里人看她的舌头仍然又肿又烂。
English: The family members saw that her tongue was still swollen and rotten.

古文：从此以后，永断酒肉，至令犹存。
现代文：从此以后，梁氏不但不再骂人，连喝酒吃肉的罪过都不犯了，至今她还活着。
English: Since then, Ms. Liang has not only stopped swearing, but has also not committed the sin of drinking and eating meat. She is still alive.

古文：朱氏
现代文：朱氏
English: Zhu family

古文：唐郑州武阳县妇女姓朱，其夫先负外县人绢，夫死之后，遂无人还。
现代文：唐代郑州武阳县有个妇女朱氏，他丈夫原先欠一名外县人绢绸，丈夫死后，就没人去还了。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a woman named Zhu in Wuyang County, Zhengzhou. Her husband originally owed money to a man from outside the county for silk. After his death, no one came to pay him back.

古文：贞观末，因病死，经再宿而苏。
现代文：贞观末年，朱氏妇女病死，过了一夜又苏醒过来。
English: At the end of Zhenguan's life, a woman from the Zhu family died of illness, but she woke up overnight.

古文：自云，被人执至一所，见一人云： 我是司命府史。
现代文：据她自己说，被人抓到一个府衙，衙里的一个官员说： 我是司命府史。
English: According to her own account, she was arrested in a prefectural capital, and an official in the capital said, "I am the prefectural historian."

古文：汝夫生时，负我家若干匹，所以追汝。
现代文：你丈夫生前欠了我家若干定绢绸，没有还，所以我把你抓来了。
English: When your husband was alive, he owed my family a certain amount of money, and he didn't pay it back, so I arrested you.

古文：今放汝归，宜急具物，至某县某村，送还我母。
现代文：现在我马上把你放回去，你回去后要赶快准备好绢绸，到某县某村还给我母亲。
English: Now I will immediately put you back, and when you return, you must quickly prepare the silk, and return it to my mother in a certain county and village.

古文：如其不送，追捉更切。
现代文：如果不还，我会马上再把你抓到阴间来！
English: If you don't, I'll drag you back to the underworld again!

古文：兼为白我娘，努力为造像修福。 
现代文：你还绢时顺便告诉我娘，要好生造神像积功德。 
English: By the way, when you were a child, you told my daughter that she should accumulate merit by making statues of gods.

古文：朱即告某乙乡闾，得绢送还其母。
现代文：朱氏还阳后就把这事告诉乡亲某乙，拿了绢绸还给那外县人的母亲，并诉说了阴间当司命的那个人的相貌形状。
English: After Mr. Zhu was reborn, he told this to a villager, took the silk and returned it to the mother of the person from the other county, and told her about the appearance and shape of the person who was in charge of life in the underworld.

古文：具言其男貌状，有同平生。其母亦对之流涕，觑欷久之。
现代文：外县人的母亲一听，他儿子的模样跟活着时一样，就感叹了很久，哭了一场。
English: When the mother of a person from outside the county heard that her son looked the same as when he was alive, she sighed for a long time and cried.

古文：李强名妻
现代文：李强名妻
English: Li Qiang's famous wife

古文：陇西李强名，妻清河崔氏，甚美，其一子，生七年矣。
现代文：陇西人李强名的妻子是清河人崔氏，长得很漂亮，生了个儿子已经七岁了。
English: The wife of Li Qiangren, a Shaanxi native, is Cui, a Qinghe native. She is very beautiful and has given birth to a seven-year-old son.

古文：开元二十二年，强名为南海丞。方署月，妻因暴疾卒。
现代文：开元二十二年，强名当南海丞，正是天热的时候，妻子崔氏得了急病死了。
English: In the 22nd year of the year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, when the strong name was Nanhai Zheng, it was in the heat of the day that his wife Cui fell ill and died.

古文：广州嚣热，死后埋棺于土，其外以墼围而封之。
现代文：广州那地方特别热，崔氏死后棺材入土，又在棺外用砖坯子封死。
English: The place in Guangzhou was particularly hot. After Cui's death, the coffin was buried and sealed with a brick block outside the coffin.

古文：强名痛其妻夭年，而且远官，哭之甚恸，日夜不绝声。
现代文：崔氏正当盛年暴死，强名又是远在边地作官，所以心里十分悲痛，哭得十分伤心，好几天哭声不绝。
English: Cui died suddenly at the prime of his life. He was a well-known and distant official, so his heart was very sad and he cried inconsolably for several days.

古文：数日，妻见梦曰： 吾命未合绝，今帝许我活矣。
现代文：几天后，妻子忽然托梦给强名说， 我的阳寿还没尽，现在上天答应让我复活。
English: A few days later, his wife suddenly recalled a dream to Qiang Ming and said, "I haven't reached the end of my days yet, and now God has promised to resurrect me."

古文：然吾形已败，帝命天鼠为吾生肌肤。
现代文：可是我的肉身已腐烂了，上天要派天上的老鼠为我生肌肉皮肤。
English: But my flesh has rotted away. Heaven will send heavenly mice to grow muscle and skin for me.

古文：更十日后，当有大鼠出入墼棺中，即吾当生也。
现代文：十天以后，会有大老鼠在我的棺材里出入，那时我就会复活了。
English: After ten days, a big rat will come out of my coffin, and then I will be resurrected.

古文：然当封闭门户，待七七日，当开吾门，出吾身，吾即生矣。 
现代文：不过你得把咱家的门窗关严，等七七四十九天，然后再开我的门，抬出我的身子，那时我才真复活了。 
English: But you will have to keep the doors and windows of our house tightly closed for seven days and forty-nine days, and then open my door and carry out my body, and then I will really be resurrected.

古文：及旦，强名言之，而其家仆妾梦皆协。
现代文：第二天早上，强名向家里人说他昨夜的梦，没想到他家的仆人和他的小老婆也做了同样的梦。
English: The next morning, Qiangmei told his family about the dream he had last night, not realizing that his family servant and his younger wife had also had the same dream.

古文：十余日，忽有白鼠数头，出入殡所，其大如狘。强名异之，试发其柩，见妻骨有肉生焉，遍体皆尔。强名复闭之。
现代文：十多天后，忽见有几头白色的老鼠在崔氏的坟墓里出入，像小猪那么大，强名很奇怪，就试着把棺材打开，看见妻子的骨头上果然长出了肉，全身都有了肉，强名就赶快再把棺材封好。
English: More than ten days later, he suddenly saw several white mice coming and going in and out of Cui's grave. They were as big as small pigs and had very strange names. He tried to open the coffin and saw that meat had indeed grown on his wife's bones. There was meat all over her body. He quickly sealed the coffin again.

古文：积四十八日，其妻又见梦曰： 吾明晨当活，盍出吾身。 
现代文：过了四十八天，崔氏又托梦说： 我明天早晨就复活了，该把我抬出来了。 
English: Forty-eight days later, Cui again recalled the dream and said, "I will be resurrected tomorrow morning, it's time to carry me out."

古文：既晓，强名发之，妻则苏矣。
现代文：天亮后，强名又打开了棺材，见妻子已经活过来了。
English: After dawn, Qiang Ming opened the coffin again and saw that his wife had come back to life.

古文：扶出浴之。
现代文：把妻子扶出来，让她洗了澡。
English: He helped his wife out and gave her a bath.

古文：妻素美丽人也，及乎再生，则美倍于旧。肤体玉色，倩盼多姿。袨服靓妆，人间殊绝矣。强名喜形于色。
现代文：崔氏本来就很漂亮，复活以后，比过去更加美丽。肤色像美玉一样，体态婀娜多姿，衣服华美装束漂亮，简直是人世上的绝色美人，强名喜不自胜。
English: Ms. Cui was originally very beautiful, but after her resurrection, she became even more beautiful than before. Her skin color was like that of a beautiful jewel, her body was graceful and multi-faceted, her clothes were gorgeous and her attire was beautiful. She was simply the most beautiful woman in the world, and she was overjoyed to be famous.

古文：时广州都督唐昭闻之，令其夫人观焉，于是别驾已下夫人皆从。
现代文：当时的广州都督唐昭听说这事，就让他的夫人到强名家去看看。
English: When Tang Zhao, the then-governor of Guangzhou, heard about this, he asked his wife to go to Qiangmei's house to have a look.

古文：强名妻盛服见都督夫人，与抗礼，颇受诸夫人拜。
现代文：唐昭的夫人带着别驾官以下的夫人们来到强名家，崔氏盛装见都督夫人，和夫人平等的行礼拜见，并接受了其他夫人们的施礼。
English: Tang Zhao's wife came to the Qiangmei family with other wives below the rank of captain. Cui dressed up to meet the governor's wife, and paid homage to her as an equal, and accepted the gifts from the other wives.

古文：薄而观之，神仙中人也。
现代文：大家仔细一看，崔氏简直美得像天仙一样。崔氏说话饮食和正常人一样，只是很少说话。
English: If you look closely, Ms. Cui is as beautiful as a fairy. She eats and speaks like a normal person, but rarely speaks.

古文：言语饮食如常人，而少言，众人访之，久而一对。
现代文：大家问她话，好半天她才应一句。如果问她阴间的情形，就绝口不谈，就是对她的丈夫也不说阴间的事。
English: If you ask her about the underworld, she will not talk about it, not even to her husband.

古文：若问冥间事，即杜口，虽夫子亦不答。明日，唐都督夫人置馔，请至家。
现代文：第二天，唐都督的夫人设了酒宴请来崔氏，官场上各位官员的夫人们都来看崔氏。
English: The next day, the wife of the governor of Tang set up a wine banquet to invite Cui, and the wives of all officials in the government came to see Cui.

古文：诸官夫人皆同观之，悦其柔姿艳美，皆曰： 目所未睹。既而别驾长史夫人等次其日列筵，请之至宅，而都督夫人亦往。
现代文：她们都非常赞赏崔氏艳丽端庄，都说从没见过这样的美人。接着，别驾夫人、长史夫人等都陆续设宴，请崔氏到家做客，都督夫人每次都参加宴会作陪。
English: Both of them highly appreciated Cui's bright and elegant demeanor, and both said that they had never seen such a beautiful woman. Next, Mrs. Buyei, Mrs. Changshi, etc. successively held a banquet, invited Cui to be a guest at home, and Mrs. Tudor attended the banquet every time.

古文：如是已二十日矣。出入如人，唯沉静异于畴日。
现代文：这样过了二十天，崔氏出入举止都和常人一样，只是比未死前更沉静寡言。
English: After twenty days of this, Cui's comings and goings were the same as those of an ordinary person, but he was quieter than before he died.

古文：既强名使于桂府，七旬乃还。
现代文：后来强名到桂林出差，七十天才回来。
English: Later, Qiangmei went to Guilin on a business trip and did not return for 70 days.

古文：其妻去后为诸家所迎，往来无恙。
现代文：强名出差在外时，很多人家还是依次接待崔氏，没有一点病或不适。
English: When Qiangmei was away on a business trip, many families still received Cui successively, without any illness or discomfort.

古文：强名至数日，妻复言病。病则甚间一日遂亡。
现代文：强名回来后没几天，崔氏又说有病，而且很重，一天后就死了。
English: A few days after Qiangmei's return, Cui again said he was ill and very heavy, and died a day later.

古文：计其再生，才百日矣。
现代文：算一算她复活到再次死去，正好是一百天。
English: It was exactly 100 days from the time she was resurrected to the time she died again.

古文：或曰，有物凭焉。
现代文：有的人说，这大概是有什么依附在她身上。
English: Some say it's probably something attached to her.

古文：荆州女子
现代文：荆州女子
English: Jingzhou women's team

古文：开元二十三年，荆州女子死三日生。
现代文：唐代开元二十三年，荆州有个女子死了三天又复活了。
English: In the 23rd year of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, a woman in Jingzhou died for three days and was resurrected.

古文：自言具见冥途善恶，国家休咎。
现代文：她说不但看见了阴间的一切善恶因果，而且知道了国家的兴衰大事，并说鬼王让她给人间的皇帝带了口信。
English: She said that she not only saw all the good and evil causes and effects of the underworld, but also knew the rise and fall of the country, and said that the ghost king asked her to bring a message to the emperor of the human world.

古文：鬼王令其传语于人主，荆州以闻，朝廷骇异，思见之。
现代文：荆州把此事上报朝廷，朝廷十分震惊，皇上想亲自见一见荆州女子。
English: Jingzhou reported the matter to the imperial court, which was very shocked. The emperor wanted to meet the Jingzhou woman in person.

古文：敕给驿骑，令至洛。
现代文：于是特命给她派来了驿站的马，让她到洛阳去。
English: So a special mission sent her a horse from the stable to take her to Luoyang.

古文：行至南阳，遂喑不能言，更无所识。
现代文：然而荆州女子走到南阳就突然变成了哑巴，不能说话，而且什么也分辨不清。
English: However, when the Jingzhou woman went to Nanyang, she suddenly became mute, unable to speak and unable to distinguish anything.

古文：至都，以其妄也，遽归。
现代文：到了京都洛阳，朝廷一看她这个样子，认为她是疯子，立刻把她打发回去了。
English: When she arrived in Kyoto's Luoyang, the imperial court saw her like this, thought she was a lunatic, and immediately sent her back.

古文：周哲滞妻
现代文：周哲滞妻
English: Zhou Zhe's wife

古文：汝南周哲滞妻者，户部侍郎席豫之女也。
现代文：汝南周哲滞的妻子，是户部侍郎席豫的女儿。
English: The wife of Junan Zhou Zhezhao was the daughter of the household's chamberlain, Shi Yu.

古文：天宝中，暴疾，危亟殆死。
现代文：唐天宝年间，席氏得了急病，病危得快要死了。
English: During Tang Tianbao's reign, Mr. Xi fell seriously ill and was on the verge of death.

古文：平生素有衣服，悉舍为功德。唯有一红地绣珠缀背裆，是母所赐，意犹惜之，未施。
现代文：席氏平时有些衣服，大都施舍给穷人积了功德，只有一件红色缀着珠子的坎肩，由于是她母亲给的，非常喜爱，没有施舍出去。
English: Shi Shi usually has a few clothes, most of which she donates to the poor to accumulate merit. She only has one red shawl with beads, which her mother gave her. She loves it so much that she doesn't give it away.

古文：其疾转剧。又命佛工，以背裆于疾所铸二躯佛，未毕而卒。初群鬼搏撮席氏，登大山。
现代文：后来，席氏的病更加重了，就把坎肩给了塑佛像的工匠，让工匠把坎肩卖掉塑两尊佛像。佛像还没最后完工，席氏就死了。
English: Later, when Mr. Xi's illness became more serious, he gave his shoulder to a craftsman who was making a Buddha statue, and asked the craftsman to sell his shoulder to make two Buddha statues. Mr. Xi died before the Buddha statue was finally completed.

古文：忽闻背后有二人唤，令且住，群鬼乃迁延不敢动。
现代文：死后她被一群鬼又打又拉地爬一座大山，忽然听到背后有两个人呼喊，让他们站住，鬼卒们就都站住不敢动。
English: After her death, she was beaten and dragged by a group of ghosts to climb a big mountain. Suddenly, she heard two people shouting behind her, telling them to stop. The ghosts all stopped and dared not move.

古文：二人既至，颜色滋黑，灰土满面。群鬼畏惧，莫不骇散。
现代文：那两个人赶了上来，一看浑身漆黑，满脸是灰土，那群鬼吓得都逃散了。
English: The two men came running up, and when they saw that everything was pitch black and their faces were covered with dust, the group of ghosts ran away in fright.

古文：遂引席氏还家，闻家人号哭，二人直至尸前，令入其中，乃活。
现代文：那两个人就领着席氏回家，到家后听见家里人正在号哭，两个人领着席氏一直来到她的尸体前，让她进入自己的身子里，席氏就活过来了。
English: The two men took Mr. Xi home. After arriving home, they heard the family members crying. The two men led Mr. Xi all the way to her corpse, let her enter her own body, and Mr. Xi came back to life.

古文：二人即新铸二佛也。
现代文：那两个人，原来就是新塑的两个佛像。
English: Those two people turned out to be two newly made Buddha statues.

古文：刘长史女
现代文：刘长史女
English: Liu Changshi's daughter

古文：吉州刘长史无子，独养三女，皆殊色，甚念之。
现代文：吉州的长史刘某没有儿子，只生了三个女儿，都十分秀丽，刘长史很喜欢她们。
English: Liu Mou, the chief historian of Jizhou, did not have a son. He only had three daughters, all of whom were very beautiful. Liu Changshi liked them very much.

古文：其长女年十二，病死官舍中。
现代文：长女十二岁，病死在官舍里。
English: The eldest daughter, twelve years old, died of illness in the official residence.

古文：刘素与司丘掾高广相善，俱秩满，与同归，刘载女丧还。
现代文：刘长史向来和任司丘掾的高广处得很好，两个人做官的任期都满了，就一同回故乡。刘长史用船载着死去的女儿，高广也乘船一同上路。
English: Liu Changshi had always been on good terms with Gao Guang, Ren Shiqiu's subordinate, and when both of their terms as officials were over, they returned to their hometown together. Liu Changshi carried his dead daughter in a boat, and Gao Guang also went on the road by boat.

古文：高广有子，年二十余，甚聪慧，有姿仪。
现代文：高广有个儿子，十分聪明，仪表也很潇洒。
English: Gao Guang has a son who is very smart and has a very dashing appearance.

古文：路次豫章，守水不得行，两船相去百余步，日夕相往来。
现代文：船走到豫章县时，由于江水枯浅船不能走，只好停下来等水涨后再走。刘、高两家的船相离只有一百多步，所以两家人天天有来往。
English: When the boat reached Yuanzhang County, due to the dry river water, the shallow boat could not go, so they had to stop and wait for the water to rise before going. Liu and Gao's boats are only a hundred steps apart, so the two families come and go every day.

古文：一夜，高氏子独在船中披书。二更后，有一婢，年可十四五，容色甚丽，直诣高云： 长史船中烛灭，来乞火耳。 
现代文：一天夜里，高广的儿子独自在船里看书，二更以后，有一个丫环约十四五岁，长得很不错，直接来见高公子说： 刘长史船里的蜡烛灭了，向您借个火。 
English: One night, Gao Guang's son was reading a book alone in the boat. Two days later, a maid of about fourteen or fifteen years old, who was very good-looking, came directly to Gao Gongzi and said: "The candle in Liu Changshi's boat has gone out. I would like to borrow a fire from you."

古文：高子甚爱之，因与戏调，妾亦忻然就焉。
现代文：高公子看这个丫环生得貌美，心里很喜爱，就和她调笑，丫环也半推半就地不拒绝。
English: Gao Gongzi saw that this maidservant was born with beauty and was very fond of her, so he made fun of her. The maidservant also half pushed and half did not refuse on the spot.

古文：曰： 某不足顾，家中小娘子，艳绝无双，为郎通意，必可致也。 
现代文：后来丫环说： 我算不了什么，我们家的小姐那才叫艳丽无双呢。我可以替你向她通通消息，一定能成你俩的美事。 
English: Later the maid said, "I'm nothing, our family's young lady is the only one who is beautiful beyond compare. I can pass on information to her for you. I'm sure it will be a wonderful thing for both of you."

古文：高甚惊喜，意为是其存者，因与为期而去。
现代文：高公子又惊又喜，以为丫环说的小姐就是现在活着的，就和丫环约好了见小姐的时间。
English: Gao Gongzi was both surprised and pleased. He thought that the young lady mentioned by the maidservant was the one who was still alive, so he made an appointment with the maidservant to meet the young lady.

古文：至明夜，婢又来曰： 事谐矣，即可便待。 
现代文：第二天夜里，那丫环又来了，对高公子说： 事已成了，你现在就等着吧。 
English: In the evening of the next day, the maidservant came again and said to Gao Gongzi, "The matter is over, you just wait now."

古文：高甚踊跃，立候于船外。
现代文：高公子喜不自胜，就站在船外等待。
English: Gao Gongzi was overjoyed and stood outside the boat to wait.

古文：时天无纤云，月甚清朗。
现代文：这时天上一点云彩也没有，月色十分清朗。
English: At this time, there was not a cloud in the sky, and the moon was very clear.

古文：有顷，遥见一女，自后船出，从此婢直来，未至十步，光彩映发，馨香袭人。
现代文：过了片刻，远远看见一个女子从后面的船上走出来，和那丫环一齐向他走来。离着还有十几步，就觉得那小姐真是光彩焕发，香气袭人。
English: After a while, he saw a woman in the distance come out of the boat behind him and walk towards him together with the maidservant. When he was still a dozen steps away, he felt that the young lady was really radiant and her fragrance was amazing.

古文：高不胜其意，便前持之。女纵体入怀，姿态横发，乃与俱就船中，倍加款密。
现代文：高公子心旌摇荡得控制不住自己，就迎上前去拉起小姐的手，小姐也一下扑进高公子怀里，十分动情。两个人就进了船里，亲亲热热地过了一夜。
English: Gao Gongzi's heart was so shaken that he couldn't control himself, so he stepped forward to take up the young lady's hand. The young lady also rushed into Gao Gongzi's arms, very emotional. The two of them went into the boat and spent the night together.

古文：此后夜夜辄来，情念弥重。
现代文：从此小姐每夜都来，两人的感情越来越深。
English: From then on, the young lady came every night, and their feelings grew deeper and deeper.

古文：如此月余日，忽谓高曰： 欲论密事，得无嫌难乎？ 高曰： 固请说之。 
现代文：这样过了一个多月，小姐忽然对高公子说： 我想告诉你一件十分秘密的事，你不会嫌我怪我吧？ 高公子说： 你尽管说吧。 
English: After more than a month of this, the young lady suddenly said to Gao Gongzi, "I want to tell you a very secret thing. You don't think I'm to blame, do you?" Gao Gongzi said, "Go ahead.

古文：乃曰： 儿本长史亡女，命当更生。
现代文：小姐就说： 我就是刘长史死去的女儿，命里该着复生，并和你成为夫妻。
English: The young lady said, "I am Liu Changshi's dead daughter, and it is my destiny to be reborn and to become your husband and wife."

古文：业得承奉君子，若垂意相采，当为白家令知也。 
现代文：如果你真的喜欢我并愿意娶我，就应该告诉家里，让他们知道。 
English: If you really like me and want to marry me, you should tell your family and let them know.

古文：高大惊喜曰： 幽明契合，千载未有。
现代文：高公子听后大喜说： 阴阳两界的男女结合，这是千年没有的事，而且我俩还能终生结为夫妻，这是多么好的事啊！ 
English: After hearing this, Gao Gongzi was overjoyed and said, "The union of men and women from the two realms of yin and yang is something that hasn't happened for thousands of years, and we can still be married for the rest of our lives. What a wonderful thing!

古文：方当永同枕席，何乐如之！ 
现代文：小姐又说： 三天后我就会复活，你就让人打开我的棺木。
English: She also said, "In three days I will come back to life, so have someone open my coffin."

古文：女又曰： 后三日必生，使为开棺。
现代文：夜里让我的脸接天上的露水，白天做稀粥给我喝，我就能活过来了。 
English: Let my face receive the dew from the sky at night, make porridge for me to drink during the day, and I will be able to survive.

古文：夜中以面乘霜露，饮以薄粥，当遂活也。 
现代文：高公子答应了。第二天早上，他就把这事告诉了父亲高广。
English: Gao Gongzi agreed. The next morning, he told his father Gao Guang about this.

古文：高许诺。明旦，遂白广。
现代文：高广不太相信，但觉得这事太奇怪了，就让高公子也去对刘长史去说。
English: Gao Guang didn't quite believe it, but thought it was too strange, so he asked Gao Gongzi to tell Liu Changshi.

古文：广未之甚信，亦以其绝异，乃使诣刘长史，具陈其事。
现代文：刘长史的夫人一听十分生气地说： 我的女儿连尸体都烂了，你怎么竟敢这样玷污死去的人呢？ 
English: Hearing this, Liu Changshi's wife said angrily, "My daughter's body is rotten. How dare you defile a dead person like this?"

古文：夫人甚怒曰： 吾女今已消烂，宁有玷辱亡灵，乃至此耶？ 深拒之。
现代文：坚决不答应高公子的请求，高公子就苦苦地哀求。这天夜里，刘长史和他夫人都梦见女儿来对他们说： 我命中该复生，上天的旨意让我和高公子结合，现在你们这样坚决的拒绝，莫非不愿意让女儿我复生吗？ 
English: On that night, Liu Changshi and his wife both dreamed that their daughter came to them and said, "It is my destiny to be reborn. Heaven's will is for me to be united with Gao Gongzi. Now that you have so resolutely refused, aren't you willing to let your daughter revive me?"

古文：高求之转苦。
现代文：刘长史和夫人醒来后，才恍然大悟。
English: After Liu Changshi and his wife woke up, they suddenly realized.

古文：至夜，刘及夫人俱梦女曰： 某命当更生，天使配合，必谓喜而见许。
现代文：再加上高公子描述女儿的衣服容貌都十分对头，就答应了高公子。三天以后，家人共同打开刘小姐的棺木，见小姐的气色非常好，身上已有了暖气，家里人又惊又喜，就在河岸上围起了布幕，把小姐抬到里面。
English: Three days later, the family opened Miss Liu's coffin together. They were surprised and delighted to see that Miss Liu looked very good and was already warm. They put up a curtain on the riverbank and carried her inside.

古文：一日，转有气息，稍开目，至暮能言，数日如故。
现代文：夜里仰面来接露水，做稀粥白天给小姐喝。她的父母都守在她身旁。这时，小姐开始能呼息了，并稍稍睁开了眼睛。到了晚上就能说话了，几天后就完全恢复得和好人一样了。
English: In the evening she lay on her back to soak up the dew, and during the day she made porridge for the young lady to drink. Her parents stood by her side. At this time, the young lady began to be able to breathe, and opened her eyes a little. By the evening she was able to speak, and after a few days she had completely recovered to be like a good person.

古文：高问其婢，云： 先女死，尸柩亦在舟中。 
现代文：高广问刘长史丫环是怎么回事，刘长史说： 这丫环是在女儿之前死的，丫环的棺材也在船中放着。 
English: Gao Guang asked Liu Changshi what happened to the maiden, Liu Changshi said: This maiden died before her daughter, and the coffin of the maiden was also placed in the boat.

古文：女既苏，遂临，悲泣与决。
现代文：现在小姐复活了，那丫环最后又来了，哭着和小姐诀别。
English: Now Mademoiselle revived, the maid came again at last, and bade her farewell, weeping.

古文：乃择吉日，于此地成婚，后生数子。
现代文：于是高、刘两家选定了一个好日子，就在当地为高公子和刘小姐举行了婚礼。后来他们生了好几个孩子。
English: As a result, the Gao and Liu families chose a good day and held a wedding for Mr. Gao and Ms. Liu there. Later, they had several children.

古文：因名其地，号为礼会村也。
现代文：这件事使这河边的村子也出了名，人们都把这村子叫作 礼会村。 
English: This event also made the village by the river famous, and people called it the village of etiquette.

古文：卢顼表姨
现代文：卢顼表姨
English: Aunt Lu Yao

古文：洛州刺史卢顼表姨常畜一狗子，名花子，每加念焉。
现代文：洛州刺史卢顼的表姨，曾经养了一只小狗，名叫 花子 ，十分喜爱。
English: My cousin, who lives in Los Angeles, once had a little dog named Hanako, which she loved very much.

古文：一旦而失，为人所毙。
现代文：有一天，花子忽然丢了，可能是被人打死了。
English: One day, Hanako was suddenly lost. She may have been beaten to death.

古文：后数月，卢氏忽亡。
现代文：过了几个月，卢氏忽然死了。
English: A few months later, Mr. Lu died suddenly.

古文：冥间见判官姓李，乃谓曰： 夫人天命将尽，有人切论，当得重生一十二年。 
现代文：她到了冥间，见到一个姓李的判官。李判官对她说： 夫人的阳寿快要完了，但有人替你重新算了一下，让你再活十二年。 
English: When she arrived in the underworld, she met a judge surnamed Li. Judge Li said to her: "Your wife's life is almost over, but someone has recalculated for you and let you live another twelve years.

古文：拜谢而出。行长衢中，逢大宅，有丽人，侍婢十余人，将游门屏，使人呼夫人入。谓曰： 夫人相识耶？ 曰： 不省也。 
现代文：卢氏拜谢后走出来，在阴间的大街上看见一个高大的府第，里面有个美人，被十几个丫环簇拥着刚走出门前的影壁，看见了卢氏。美人让丫环把卢氏请到家里，问卢氏道， 夫人还认识我吗？ 卢氏说： 我想不起来了。 
English: After bowing and thanking, Mr. Lu walked out and saw a tall mansion on the street in the underworld. There was a beautiful woman inside, surrounded by a dozen maids, who had just walked out of the shadow wall in front of the door and saw Mr. Lu. The beautiful woman asked the maids to invite Mr. Lu to her home and asked Mr. Lu, "Does your wife still know me?" Mr. Lu said, "I can't remember."

古文：丽人曰： 某即花子也。
现代文：美女说： 我就是花子啊。
English: The beautiful woman said, "I am Hanako."

古文：平生蒙不以兽畜之贱，常加育养。
现代文：在阳间，我承蒙你不以我是个动物畜牲而轻视我，非常细心地养育我，使我感恩不尽。
English: In the sun, I am grateful that you do not despise me for being an animal and raise me very carefully, making me grateful.

古文：某今为李判官别室，昨所嘱夫人者，即某也。
现代文：我现在是李判官的姨太太，昨天在大堂上为你争取添加阳寿的就是我。
English: I am now Judge Lee's aunt, and I was the one in the lobby yesterday trying to increase your longevity.

古文：冥司不广其请，只加一纪，某潜以改十二年为二十，以报养育之恩。 
现代文：冥司没有完全允准我的请求，只给你加寿十二年，我想把十二年改为二十年，以报答你对我的养育之恩。 
English: Hades did not fully grant my request, only giving you an extra twelve years of life. I want to change the twelve years to twenty years, in order to repay your kindness to me.

古文：有顷李至，伏愿白之本名，无为夫人之号，恳将力祈。
现代文：这时外面丫环报说李判官来了， 花子 就偷偷对卢氏说： 你把你的原名告诉我，不要说你当夫人的名号，我就用你的本名再向李判官为你说已增寿。 
English: At this time, the maidservant outside reported that Judge Lee had arrived, so Hanako secretly said to Mr. Lu: Tell me your original name, don't say your wife's name, and I'll use your real name to tell Judge Lee that your life expectancy has increased.

古文：李逡巡而至，至别坐语笑。
现代文：李判官正要责备她，坐在一旁和 花子 说笑。
English: Judge Lee, who was about to reprimand her, sat and joked with Hanako.

古文：丽人首以图乙改年白李，李将让之。
现代文：花子就向李判官说已把卢氏的十二年阳寿改为二十年。
English: Hanako told Judge Lee that she had changed Mr. Lu's life expectancy from 12 years to 20 years.

古文：对曰： 妾平生受恩，以此申报，万不获一，料必无难之。 
现代文：李判官正要责备她， 花子 就说： 我平生得到夫人的恩德，以此来回报，只不过是报答了人家万分之一罢了，想来不会使你为难的。 
English: Just as Judge Lee was about to reprimand her, Hanako said, "I'm repaying the kindness my wife has shown me throughout my life. I'm only repaying her one ten-thousandth of her kindness. I don't think this will be a problem for you."

古文：李欣然谓曰： 事则匪易，感言请之切，遂许之。 
现代文：李判官很痛快的答应说： 这事虽然不好办，但念你这样恳切地求我，就答应你吧。 
English: Judge Li was very enthusiastic and promised, "Although this is not an easy thing to do, since you have begged me so earnestly, I will grant your request."

古文：临将别，谓夫人曰： 请收余骸，为痤埋之。
现代文：花子和卢氏告别时说： 请你把我的尸体收起来，把我埋掉。
English: When Hanako and Lu bid farewell, she said, "Please put my body away and bury me."

古文：骸在履信坊街之北墙，委粪之中。 
现代文：我的尸体在履信坊街的北墙下，被人扔在粪坑里。 
English: My body was dragged under the north wall of Lushunfang Street and dumped in a cesspit.

古文：夫人既苏，验而果在，遂以子礼葬之，后申谢于梦寐之间。
现代文：卢氏还阳后，按 花子 说的地方去找，果然找到了它的尸体，就用埋葬儿子的的礼仪，把 花子 的尸体埋掉。后来， 花子 又给卢氏托梦表示感谢。
English: After Lu returned to the sun, Hanako went to the place where Lu had told her to look, and when she found Lu's body, she buried it with the same etiquette as burying her son. Later, Hanako expressed her gratitude to Lu for the dream.

古文：后二十年，夫人乃亡也。刘氏子妻
现代文：卢氏果然又活了二十年才去世。刘氏子妻
English: Mr. Lu indeed lived for another 20 years before he passed away.

古文：刘氏子者，少任侠，有胆气，常客游楚州淮阴县，交游多市井恶少。
现代文：有个姓刘的人，年轻时很侠义，胆子也很大，曾到楚州淮阴游历，结交了不少地面上的青皮后生。
English: There was a man surnamed Liu, who was very chivalrous and daring when he was young. He traveled to Huaiyin, Chuzhou, and made friends with many young people on the ground.

古文：邻人王氏有女，求聘之，王氏不许。
现代文：刘某的邻居王氏有个女儿，刘某曾去求婚，王氏没有同意。
English: Mr. Wang, a neighbor of Mr. Liu, has a daughter. Mr. Liu once proposed marriage, but Mr. Wang did not agree.

古文：后数岁，因饥。遂从戎。
现代文：过了几年，因为生活无着落，刘某就从军当了兵。
English: After a few years, because there was no stability in his life, Liu became a soldier.

古文：数年后，役罢，再游楚乡。与旧友相遇，甚欢，常恣游骋。
现代文：几年后兵役期满，刘某就又回到楚州，和当年结交的那帮哥们儿重逢，都十分高兴，常常在一起骑马出游，白天打猎，晚上就在花街柳巷聚会。
English: A few years later, at the end of his military service, Liu returned to Chuzhou and reunited with the group of friends he had made that year. They were very happy. They often went horseback riding together, hunting during the day, and partying on Huajie Liuxiang in the evening.

古文：昼事弋猎，夕会狭邪。因出郭十余里，见一坏墓，棺柩暴露。
现代文：有一次刘某一伙又出城游玩，看见一个塌坏的坟墓，棺材都露在外面。
English: Once, a group of Liu's friends went out of the city to play and saw a collapsed tomb, with the coffin exposed.

古文：归而合饮酒。
现代文：游玩回来，大家聚在一起喝酒。
English: After the tour, everyone got together for a drink.

古文：时将夏夜，暴雨初至，众人戏曰： 谁能以物送至坏冢棺上者？ 
现代文：这时是夏天的夜晚，忽然来了一场暴雨。大家就开玩笑说： 谁敢把一件东西送到那座坏墓的棺材上？ 
English: It was a summer night, and suddenly there was a rainstorm. Everyone joked: Who would dare to send something to the coffin in that rotten grave?

古文：刘秉酒恃气曰： 我能之。 
现代文：刘某仗着酒力胆气更壮，就说： 我能！ 
English: Liu, bolstered by the power of alcohol, said: I can!

古文：众曰： 若审能之，明日，众置一筵，以赏其事。 
现代文：大家说： 如果你真能作到，我们大家共同出钱明天办一桌酒席来犒赏你。 
English: Everyone said: If you really can do it, we will all jointly pay to hold a banquet tomorrow to reward you.

古文：乃取一砖，同会人列名于上，令生持去，余人饮而待之。
现代文：于是就拿来一块土坯，把大家的名字都写在坯上，让刘某拿到墓地去，大家一边喝酒一面等着。
English: So he brought a piece of adobe, wrote everyone's names on the adobe, let Liu take it to the cemetery, and everyone waited while drinking.

古文：生独行，夜半至墓。
现代文：刘某独自一个人上了路，半夜时分来到坏墓前。
English: Liu went on the road alone and came to the bad tomb at midnight.

古文：月初上，如有物蹲踞棺上，谛视之，乃一死妇人也。
现代文：这时月亮刚刚出来，影影绰绰看见有个东西蹲在棺材上，仔细一看，是个死了的女人。
English: At this time, the moon had just come out, and I saw something crouching on the coffin. On closer inspection, it was a dead woman.

古文：生舍砖于棺，背负此尸而归。
现代文：刘某就把那块土坯放在棺材上，背起那具女尸往回走。
English: Liu put the piece of adobe on the coffin, picked up the female corpse and walked back.

古文：众方欢语，忽闻生推门，如负重之声。
现代文：朋友们正在屋里谈笑，忽然听得刘某推门，好像背着一件很重的东西。
English: The friends were talking and laughing in the room, when they suddenly heard Liu shove the door, as if he was carrying something very heavy.

古文：门开，直入灯前，置尸于地，卓然而立，面施粉黛，髻发半披。
现代文：门开后，刘某一直走到灯前，把女尸放在地上，那女尸竟直挺挺地站着，脸上还擦着胭粉，头发半披着。
English: After opening the door, Liu walked all the way to the lamp and placed the female corpse on the ground. The female corpse was actually standing upright, her face was still rubbed with talcum powder and her hair was half-covered.

古文：一座绝倒，亦有奔走藏伏者。生曰： 此我妻也。 
现代文：朋友们都惊呆了，有的吓得逃掉，有的吓得趴在地上。刘某对大家说： 这是我的妻子。 
English: His friends were stunned, some were so scared that they ran away, some were so scared that they lay on the ground. Liu Mou said to everyone: This is my wife.

古文：遂拥尸至床同寝。
现代文：然后就搂着女尸上床一同睡下了，大家更加害怕。
English: Then he took the dead woman's body to bed and they fell asleep together. Everyone was even more afraid.

古文：众人惊惧。至四更，忽觉口鼻微微有气。
现代文：睡到四更时分，刘某忽然觉得女子的鼻子和嘴微微有气，仔细察看，这女子竟活过来了。
English: After sleeping until 4 a.m., Liu suddenly felt that the woman's nose and mouth were slightly inflamed. Upon closer inspection, the woman had actually come back to life.

古文：诊视之，即已苏矣。问所以，乃王氏之女，因暴疾亡，不知何由至此。
现代文：问她是怎么回事，回答说她是王氏之女，得急病死了，不知怎么会到了这里。
English: When asked what had happened to her, she replied that she was the daughter of Mr. Wang, who had suddenly fallen ill and died, and had somehow ended up here.

古文：未明，生取水，与之洗面濯手，整钗髻，疾已平复。
现代文：这时天还没亮，刘某打来水，让女子洗脸洗手，整理梳妆，这女子的病已经完全好了。
English: At this time, it was not yet dawn, Liu called for water and asked the woman to wash her face, wash her hands and tidy up her makeup. The woman's illness had completely improved.

古文：乃闻邻里相谓曰： 王氏女将嫁暴卒，未殓，昨夜因雷，遂失其尸。
现代文：后来乡邻们就纷纷传告，说王氏女将出嫁时突然死亡，还没入殓，昨天夜里下雨打雷时，尸体忽然不见了。
English: Later, the neighbors announced one after another that Wang's daughter had died suddenly when she was getting married, before she was born, and when it rained and thundered yesterday night, the body suddenly disappeared.

古文：生乃以告王氏，王氏悲喜，乃嫁生焉。
现代文：刘某就到王氏家讲了这件事，王氏悲喜交加，就把女儿嫁给他了。
English: Liu went to Wang's home to talk about the matter, and Wang, overcome with grief and joy, married his daughter to him.

古文：众咸叹其冥契，亦伏生之不惧也。
现代文：人们都惊叹阴阳两界竟能成就了婚事，也佩服刘某的胆量真是太大了。
English: People are amazed that the two worlds of yin and yang can actually achieve marriage, and they also admire Liu's courage.

古文：延陵村人妻
现代文：延陵村人妻
English: Yanling Village Married Woman

古文：延陵灵宝观道士谢又损，近县村人有丧妇者，请又损为斋。
现代文：延陵村有个人的妻子死了，请灵宝观的道士谢又损来作道场超度亡灵。
English: In Yanling Village, a man's wife died, and he invited the Taoist priest of Lingbao Guan, Xie Yanzhong, to come and serve as a dojo for the souls of the dead.

古文：妇死已半月矣，忽闻推棺而呼，众皆惊走。其夫开棺视之，乃起坐，顷之能言。
现代文：这女人死了已有半个月，忽然听见她在棺材里又敲又喊，人们都吓得逃散了，她的丈夫打开棺材看，那女人竟坐了起来，不一会就能说话了。
English: The woman had been dead for half a month, and suddenly she was heard knocking and shouting in the coffin. People fled in fright. Her husband opened the coffin and saw that the woman had sat up and would soon be able to speak.

古文：云，为舅姑所召去，云我此无人，使之执爨。
现代文：她说： 我是被我公婆召到阴间去的，他们说身边没人侍奉，召我去给他们做饭。
English: She said: "I was summoned to the underworld by my in-laws. They said there were no servants around and called me to cook for them.

古文：其居处甚闲洁，但苦无水。
现代文：他们住的地方倒很宽敞干净，只是苦于没有水。
English: The place where they live is spacious and clean, but they suffer from a lack of water.

古文：一日，见沟中水甚清，因取以漉馈。
现代文：有一天，我看见一条沟里有很清的水，就打了水淘米作饭。
English: One day, I saw a ditch with very clear water, so I used the water to wash rice for cooking.

古文：姑见之，大怒曰： 我不知尔不洁如是，用尔何为？ 
现代文：婆婆看见了大怒说， 我不知道你竟是这么不干净！
English: My mother-in-law saw the fury and said, "I didn't know you were so unclean!"

古文：因逐之使回。
现代文：让你来真是什么也干不了。 
English: I can't get you to do anything.

古文：走出门，遂苏。
现代文：然后就把我赶出了门。我一出门，就苏醒过来了。 
English: Then they threw me out the door. As soon as I got out the door, I came to.

古文：今尚无恙。
现代文：这个女人到现在还活得很太平。
English: This woman is still very much alive.

古文：赵某妻
现代文：赵某妻
English: Zhao's wife

古文：丁亥岁，浙西有典客吏赵某妻死。未及大殓，忽大叫而活。
现代文：丁亥那年，浙西有个在官府当礼宾官的赵某，妻子死了还没有入殓，忽然大叫一声活了过来。
English: In the year of Dinghai, there was a Zhao in western Zhejiang who worked as a protocol officer in a government office. His wife had not yet been married when she died. Suddenly, she cried out and came back to life.

古文：云为吏所录，至鹤林门内，有府署，侍卫严整，官吏谘事及领囚禁者甚众。
现代文：她说被一个阴间的官吏抓了去，到了鹤林门里，来到一个府衙前。门前警卫森严，里面官员审案和领出领进的囚犯很多。
English: She said that she had been arrested by a bureaucrat from the underworld, and that she had arrived at the Henlin Gate, in front of a government building. The guards in front of the gate were very strict, and there were many officials trying cases and leading prisoners in and out.

古文：吏持己入，至庭下，堂上一绿衣一白衣偶坐。
现代文：那官吏把她带到大堂前，只见堂上两个官员相对而坐，一个穿绿衣，一个穿白衣。
English: The official led her to the lobby, where two officials sat opposite each other, one in green and one in white.

古文：绿衣谓吏曰： 汝误，非此人也，急遣之。 
现代文：绿衣官员看见她后就对带她来的官吏说： 你抓错了，不是她，快把她送回去吧。 
English: When the green-clad official saw her, he said to the official who had brought her: "You made a mistake, it's not her, send her back quickly."

古文：白衣曰： 已追至此，何用遣也？ 
现代文：白衣官员却说： 既然已经抓来了，何必再送回去呢？ 
English: But the white-coated official said: Since they have already arrested him, why send him back again?

古文：绿衣不从，相质食顷。绿衣怒，叱吏遣之。
现代文：绿衣官员不同意，两个官员争执了有一顿饭工夫，绿衣官员生气了，斥责那个官吏说： 我命令你马上把她送回去！ 
English: The officer in green disagreed. The two officers argued and had a meal. The officer in green got angry and scolded the officer, saying, "I order you to send her back immediately!"

古文：吏持己疾趋出，路经一桥，数十人方修桥，无板有钉。
现代文：那官吏抓着她急忙出了府衙。路上经过一座桥，有几十个人正在修桥，但桥上没有板子，光有钉子。
English: The official grabbed her and hurried out of the prefecture. On the way, they passed a bridge. Dozens of people were repairing the bridge, but there were no boards on the bridge, only nails.

古文：吏持之走过，钉伤足，因痛失声，遂活。
现代文：官吏抓着她过桥，钉子扎伤了她的脚，她痛得大喊了一声，就活过来了。
English: The officials dragged her across the bridge, a nail pierced her foot, she cried out in pain and came back to life.

古文：视足果伤，俄而邻妇暴卒，不复苏矣。
现代文：不久，邻居的一个女人就突然死了，而且再也没有复活。
English: Soon after, a woman in the neighborhood died suddenly and never came back to life.

