古文：公曰： 嗟！
现代文：穆公说： 啊！
English: Mu Gong said: Ah!

古文：我士，听无哗！
现代文：众大臣将士们，听着，不要喧哗！
English: Ministers and generals, listen, don't make a fuss!

古文：予誓告汝群言之首。
现代文：我有重要的话告诉你们。
English: I have something important to tell you.

古文：古人有言曰： 民讫自若，是多盘。 责人斯无难，惟受责俾如流，是惟艰哉！
现代文：古人有话说： 人总是贪图安逸，责难他人并不困难，但是要做到让自己受责备还能够从善如流，这就困难了。 
English: The ancients said: People are always greedy for comfort. It is not difficult to blame others, but it is difficult to let oneself be blamed and still be able to be virtuous.

古文：我心之忧，日月逾迈，若弗云来。
现代文：责备别人不是难事，受到别人责备，听从它如流水一样地顺畅，这就困难啊！我心里的忧虑，在于时间过去，就不回来了。
English: It is not difficult to reproach others, but it is difficult to be reproached by others and obey it as smoothly as running water! The worries in my heart will not come back because time has passed.

古文：惟古之谋人，则曰未就予忌；惟今之谋人，姑将以为亲。
现代文：以前的谋臣，却说 不能顺从我的教导 ；现在的谋臣，秉承着我的意志，让我亲近了他们。
English: My former advisers said they could not follow my teachings, but my current advisers, in accordance with my will, let me get close to them.

古文：虽则云然，尚猷询兹黄发，则罔所愆。 
现代文：虽说这样，但是军国一类的大事还是应该请教德高望重的老臣的想法，才不会失误。那些白发苍苍的老臣，体力已经衰了，我还是信任他们。
English: Having said that, when it comes to important matters such as the military and the country, it is still necessary to consult the thoughts of highly respected old ministers in order not to make mistakes. Those gray-haired old ministers have lost their strength, but I still trust them.

古文：番番良士，旅力既愆，我尚有之；仡仡勇夫，射御不违，我尚不欲。惟截截善谝言，俾君子易辞，我皇多有之！
现代文：强壮勇猛的武士，射箭和驾车都不错，我还是不能够立即任用。而对于那些善于花言巧语，容易让在位的良臣受到蛊惑变得懈怠的，我也没有时间理会！
English: I still can't make an immediate appointment for a strong and brave samurai who is good at archery and driving, and I don't have time to pay attention to those who are good at rhetoric and can easily make the reigning ministers become lazy!

古文：昧昧我思之，如有一介臣，断断猗无他技，其心休休焉，其如有容。
现代文：我暗暗思量着，如果有一个大臣，诚实专一而没有别的技能，他的胸怀宽广而能容人。
English: I thought to myself, if there is a minister who is honest and dedicated and has no other skills, his mind is broad and tolerant.

古文：人之有技，若己有之。人之彦圣，其心好之，不啻若自其口出。
现代文：看到别人有能力，就好像自己拥有一样那般高兴；别人美好明哲，他的心里的欢喜，又超过了他口头的称道。
English: He is as pleased to see another's ability as if he had it himself; another's beauty and sagacity, and the joy in his heart exceeds his verbal praise.

古文：是能容之，以保我子孙黎民，亦职有利哉！
现代文：这样能够容人，用来保护我的子孙众民，也或许有利啊！
English: It may also be advantageous to be able to accommodate people in this way, to be used to protect my children and grandchildren!

古文：人之有技，冒疾以恶之；人之彦圣而违之，俾不达是不能容，以不能保我子孙黎民，亦曰殆哉！
现代文：还有一种人，别人有能力，就妒忌，就厌恶。别人美好明哲，就想方设法阻拦他让他不能通向君主。这样不能宽容人，用来也不能保护我的子孙众民，也很危险啊！
English: There is also a type of person who envies and loathes other people's ability, and who tries to prevent other people's beauty and wisdom from leading them to the monarch. It is dangerous to be intolerant and unable to protect my children and grandchildren.

古文：邦之杌陧，曰由一人；邦之荣怀，亦尚一人之庆。 
现代文：国家的危险不安，由于一人；国家的繁荣安定，也许是由于一个人的贤能而造就的啊！ 
English: The danger and insecurity of the country is due to one person; the prosperity and stability of the country may be due to the wisdom of one person!

