古文：李宗闵
现代文：李宗闵
English: Lee Jong-il

古文：李德裕在维扬，李宗闵在湖州，拜宾客分司。
现代文：李德裕在扬州，李宗闵在湖州。李宗闵被朝廷任命为宾客，在洛阳任职。
English: Li Deyu was in Yangzhou, and Li Zongyao was in Huzhou. Li Zongyao was appointed as a guest by the imperial court and served in Luoyang.

古文：德裕大惧，遣专使，厚致信好，宗闵不受，取路江西而过。
现代文：李德裕很害怕，派出专人，向李宗闵表示诚信友好。李宗闵不接受，取道江西而绕过扬州。
English: Li Deyu was very scared and sent a special envoy to Li Zongyao to express his sincerity and friendship. Li Zongyao did not accept and took the road to Jiangxi and bypassed Yangzhou.

古文：非久，德裕入相，过洛，宗闵忧惧，多方求厚善者致书，乞一见，欲以解纷。
现代文：不久，李德裕进京做了宰相，经过洛阳，李宗闵担心害怕，多方寻找与李德裕有交情的人捎信，请求见一面，想要以此排解纠纷。
English: Soon after, Li Deyu entered Beijing and became the prime minister. After passing through Luoyang, Li Zongyao was worried and afraid. Many parties were looking for people who had friendship with Li Deyu to send a letter, asking to meet, and wanted to resolve the dispute in this way.

古文：复书曰： 怨则不怨，见则无端。 
现代文：李德裕复信说： 怨恨倒没有什么怨恨，见面倒也没什么理由。 
English: Li Deyu replied, "Resentment is not resentment, and there is no reason to meet.

古文：初德裕与宗闵早相善，在中外，交致势力。及位高，稍稍相倾。
现代文：当初李德裕和李宗闵关系很好，在中央和地方扩张自己的势力，等地位高了，开始互相倾轧。
English: At the beginning, Li Deyu and Li Zongyao had a good relationship. They expanded their influence in the central and local governments, and as their status became higher, they began to compete with each other.

古文：及宗闵在位，德裕为兵部尚书，自得歧路，必当大用，宗闵多方沮之。
现代文：等到李宗闵登上相位时，李德裕担任兵部尚书。李德裕自己选择了一条独特的路，看样子必然会受到重用，李宗闵千方百计地阻止他。
English: When Li Zongyao ascended to the throne, Li Deyu served as the head of the military department. Li Deyu himself chose a unique path, which seemed to be bound to be heavily used, and Li Zongyao tried his best to stop him.

古文：及邠公杜悰入朝，即宗闵之党也，时为京兆尹。
现代文：等到邠公社悰入朝，他是李宗闵的同党，当时是京兆尹。
English: He was a member of the same party as Li Zongyao when the Kuomintang invaded Korea. At that time, he was called Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：一日，诣宗闵，值宗闵深念。
现代文：一天，杜悰去拜访李宗闵，正赶上李宗闵在那里深思。
English: One day, Du Juan went to visit Li Zongyao. He caught up with Li Zongyao, who was deep in thought.

古文：杜曰： 何念之深也？ 
现代文：杜悰说： 想什么想得这么专心？ 
English: The cuckoo said, "What are you thinking about so intently?"

古文：答曰： 君揣我何念。 
现代文：李宗闵说： 你猜我在想什么？ 
English: Li Zongyao said: Can you guess what I'm thinking?

古文：杜曰： 得非大戎乎？ 
现代文：杜悰说： 大概是李德裕吧？ 
English: Du Juan said: Probably Li Deyu, right?

古文：曰： 是也，然何以相救？ 
现代文：李宗闵说： 对了。但是怎么挽救呢？ 
English: Li Zongyao said: That's right. But how to save it?

古文：曰： 某则有策，顾相公必不能用耳。 曰： 请言之。 
现代文：杜悰说： 我倒有个办法，但是你一定不能采用。 李宗闵说： 请说说看。 
English: Du Juan said, "I have a way, but you must not use it." Li Zongyao said, "Please tell me."

古文：杜曰： 大戎有词学，而不由科第。若与知举，则必喜矣。 
现代文：杜悰说： 李德裕有词章学问，却没有科考功名，如果从这方面给以知遇荐举，他就一定高兴。 
English: Du Juan said: Li Deyu has a knowledge of poetry and prose, but no scientific research achievements. If you give him a recommendation from this aspect, he will certainly be happy.

古文：宗闵默然，良久曰： 更思其次。 
现代文：李宗闵默不作声，老半天才说： 再想想别的办法。 
English: Li Zong was silent for a long time before he said, "Let's think of another way."

古文：曰： 更有一官，亦可平其慊。 
现代文：杜悰说： 还有一个官职，也可消除他的怨恨。 
English: Du Juan said, "There is also an official post, which can also eliminate his hatred."

古文：宗闵曰： 何官？ 
现代文：李宗闵说： 什么官？ 
English: Li Zongyao said: What official?

古文：曰： 御史大夫。 
现代文：杜悰说： 御史大夫。 
English: The cuckoo said, "Good morning, Dr. Shih."

古文：曰： 此即得矣。 
现代文：李宗闵说： 这就行啦！ 
English: Li Zongyao said, "That's it!

古文：邠公再三与约，乃驰诣曰： 适宗相有意旨，令某传达。 
现代文：杜悰与李宗闵再三商量约定之后，杜悰就骑马到李德裕那里说： 刚才李宗闵宰相有个想法，派我来传达。 
English: After Du Juan and Li Zongyao repeatedly discussed the agreement, Du Juan rode to Li Deyu and said: Just now, Prime Minister Li Zongyao has an idea and sent me to convey it.

古文：遂言亚相之拜，德裕惊喜，双泪遽落，曰： 此大门官也，小子岂敢当此荐拔？ 
现代文：就说了要拜李德裕为亚相的事。李德裕又惊又喜，泪水很快就落下来，说： 这是大门官，我怎能担当得起这推荐和提拔呢？ 
English: Li Deyu was surprised and happy, and tears soon fell down, saying: This is the gate officer, how can I bear the responsibility of this recommendation and promotion?

古文：寄谢重叠。
现代文：他反复致谢。
English: He repeated his thanks.

古文：杜还报，宗闵复与杨虞卿议之，竟为所隳，终致后祸。
现代文：杜悰回去作了汇报。李宗闵又与杨虞卿商议这件事，竟被他否定了，终于导致了后来的祸患。
English: Du Juan went back to report. Li Zongyao also discussed the matter with Yang Yuqing, but he denied it, which eventually led to the subsequent disaster.

古文：冯宿
现代文：冯宿
English: Fengjuku

古文：冯宿，文宗朝，扬历中外，甚有美誉，垂入相者数矣。
现代文：冯宿在唐文宗在位时，为官的政绩朝中朝外都宣传，很有声誉，他差点儿当上宰相的有好多次了。
English: When Emperor Wenzong of Tang was on the throne, Feng Shuk's achievements as an official were well-publicized both inside and outside the country. He had a great reputation, and he almost became the prime minister many times.

古文：又能曲事北司权贵，咸得其欢心焉。
现代文：又能奉承北司的豪门贵族，深得他们的欢心。
English: He was also able to flatter the wealthy aristocrats of Hokusai, winning their favor.

古文：一日晚际，中尉封一合，送与之。开之，有乌中二顶，暨甲煎面药之属。
现代文：一天傍晚，中尉送来一只封闭的盒子，打开后，看到里面有两顶乌纱帽，以及甲香防冻膏之类的东西。
English: Late one evening, the lieutenant delivered a sealed box, which, when opened, contained two mauve hats and some kind of amber antifreeze.

古文：时班行结中贵者，将大拜，则必先遗此以为信。
现代文：当时朝中官员结交显贵侍从宦官的人，如果将升大职，一定先用这些东西通消息。
English: At that time, officials of the DPRK and China made friends with distinguished attendants of eunuchs. If they were to be promoted to higher positions, they must first use these things to pass on information.

古文：冯大喜，遂以先呈相国杨嗣复，盖常佐其幕也。
现代文：冯宿欣喜万分，就把这些呈送给宰相杨嗣复，大概因为冯宿常常辅佐他。
English: Feng Shuk was overjoyed and presented these to Prime Minister Yang Shifu, probably because Feng Shuk often assisted him.

古文：冯又性好华楚鲜洁，自夕达曙，重衣数袭。
现代文：冯宿喜欢衣着华丽干净整洁，从晚到早要换几套华贵的衣服。
English: Feng Yue likes to dress gorgeously, clean and tidy. He has to change several sets of expensive clothes from night to morning.

古文：选骏足数匹，鞍鞯照地，无与比。
现代文：挑选几匹骏马，鞍鞯光亮照地，无与伦比。
English: Select a few good horses, the saddle bridle shines brightly, unparalleled.

古文：冯以既有的信，即不宜序班，欲穷极称惬之事，遂修容易服而入。
现代文：冯宿认为有了可靠的消息，就不适合依序上班，要尽情享受称心如意的快乐，就修整容貌换好衣服前往相府。
English: Feng Yu believes that with reliable information, it is not suitable to go to work in order, and to enjoy the joy of satisfying your heart, you should fix your appearance, change your clothes and go to the government office.

古文：至幕次，吏报有按，则伪为不知。
现代文：到了幕府附近时，小吏通报说已有诏书，冯宿假装不知。
English: When they reached the vicinity of the shogunate, the minor officials informed them that there was already an imperial edict, but Feng Shuang pretended not to know.

古文：比就，果有按。
现代文：等到了幕府，果然已有诏书。
English: By the time the shogunate arrived, the imperial edict had already been issued.

古文：谒者捧麻，必相也。
现代文：通接宾客的近侍捧着诏书，看来一定是宰相的职位。
English: The valet who greets the guests holds the imperial edict in his hand, and it seems that this must be the position of the prime minister.

古文：将宣，则谒者向殿，执敕罄折，朗呼所除拜大僚之姓名，既而大呼曰： 萧倣。 
现代文：将要公布时，那近侍面向大殿，躬身拿着诏书，大声叫着所授大官的姓名，接下去大声叫道： 萧倣！ 
English: When the announcement was about to be made, the aide-de-camp stood facing the main hall, bowed down and held the edict. He shouted out the name of the grand official to be awarded, and then shouted out: "Sho mimic!"

古文：冯乃惊仆于地，扶而归第，得疾而卒。
现代文：冯宿竟然惊诧得仆到在地。别人搀扶他回到家，就得病死了。
English: Feng Shuk was so surprised that he fell to the ground. When others helped him get home, he fell ill and died.

古文：盖其夕拟状，将付学士院之时，文宗谓近臣曰： 冯宿之为人，似非沉静；萧倣方判盐铁，朕察之，颇得大臣之体。 
现代文：原来那晚准备拟定委任状送到学士院时，唐文宗对亲近大臣说： 冯宿的为人，好像不够沉稳。萧倣兼任盐铁官时，我观察他，很有大臣的风度。 
English: That night, when he was preparing to draft a letter of appointment and send it to the Academy, Tang Wenzong said to a minister close to him: "Feng Shuk seems to be a person who is not stable enough. When Xiao Xi was also a salt and iron official, I observed him, he had the demeanor of a minister.

古文：遂以易之。
现代文：于是用萧倣代替了冯宿。
English: As a result, Fengjuku was replaced with Xiao Yiming.

古文：李回
现代文：李回
English: Li Hui

古文：太和初，李回任京兆府参军，主试，不送魏谟，谟深衔之。
现代文：太和初年，李回任京兆府参军，主持考试，没有送魏谟，魏谟很恨他。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Li returned to Beijing to join the army, presided over the examination, but did not send Wei Mu, and Wei Mu hated him very much.

古文：会昌中，回为刑部侍郎，谟为御史中丞。常与次对官三数人，候对于阁门。
现代文：会昌年间，李回任刑部侍郎，魏谟任御史中丞，常和地位低的三个等候应对的官，在内阁等候传唤。
English: During the Heichang era, Li was reappointed as the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, Weimu was appointed as the Vice-Minister of History, and three officials with low status were waiting to be summoned in the cabinet.

古文：谟曰： 某顷岁府解，蒙明公不送，何事今日同集于此？ 
现代文：魏谟说： 前些年官府举荐我入京考试，承蒙您不送我。有什么事今天都聚集在这里？ 
English: Weimar said, "Some years ago, the government recommended that I take the exam to enter Beijing, and I am grateful that you did not send me. What are we gathered here for today?

古文：回应声曰： 经如今也不送。 
现代文：李回应声说道： 估计今天你也不会送我。 
English: Li said in response, "I guess you won't send me today either."

古文：谟为之色变，益怀愤恚。
现代文：魏谟听了此话，脸色都变了，更加怀恨在心。
English: When Weimar heard this, his face changed, and he harbored more hatred in his heart.

古文：后回谪刺建州，谟大拜，回有启状，谟悉不纳。
现代文：后来李回被贬为建州刺史，魏谟高升。凡是李回有诉状，魏谟都不接受。
English: Later, Li Hui was relegated to the status of state-building history, and Weimar was elevated. Whenever Li Hui had a complaint, Weimar would not accept it.

古文：既而回怒一衙官，决杖勒停。
现代文：不久李回怒责一个衙官，处以杖刑并勒令停用。
English: Soon after, Li Hui angrily reprimanded a eunuch, punished him with a cane and ordered him to stop using the cane.

古文：建州衙官，能庇徭役，求隶籍者，所费不下数十万。
现代文：建州衙官，能够使人躲避劳役，请求在他们手下登记，花费不下数十万。
English: Jianzhou eunuchs, able to make people evade labor service, request registration under their hands, spending hundreds of thousands.

古文：其人不恚于杖，止恨停废耳，因亡命至京师，投时相诉冤，诸相皆不问。
现代文：那衙官并不恨怨受了杖刑，只恨停止了他的职务，就逃到京城，找宰相伸冤。各宰相都不过问。
English: The eunuch did not hate being caned, he only hated being relieved of his duties, so he fled to the capital to seek redress from the chancellors. None of the chancellors cared.

古文：会亭午，憩于槐阴，颜色憔悴，旁人察其有故，私诘之，其人具述本志，于是诲之曰：建阳相公素与中书相公有隙，子盍诣之？ 言讫，见魏导骑自中书而下。
现代文：衙官就详述了事情本来。那人告诉他： 建阳相公和中书相公一向有仇，你为什么不去找中书相公呢？ 刚说完，就看见魏谟的前行随从从中书省出来。
English: The eunuch explained the matter in detail. The man told him: King Jianyang and King Zhongshu have always been enemies. Why don't you go to King Zhongshu? As soon as he finished speaking, he saw Weim's entourage coming out of King Zhongshu.

古文：其人常怀文状，即如所诲，望尘而拜。
现代文：衙官经常带着诉状，就立即按那人教的，望尘而拜。
English: The eunuch would often come up with a complaint and immediately bow to the dust, as the man had taught.

古文：导从问之，对曰： 建州百姓诉冤。 
现代文：随从问他，他说： 建州百姓要诉冤。 
English: A follower asked him, he said: Jianzhou people want to sue.

古文：魏闻之，倒持塵尾，敲鞍子令止。
现代文：魏谟一听，倒拿拂尘，敲敲马鞍命令停下。
English: Weim listened, took the whisk upside down, and tapped the saddle to order it to stop.

古文：及览状，所论事二十余件。
现代文：看那诉状，共列二十多条。
English: Look at the complaint. It lists more than 20 complaints.

古文：第一件，取同姓子女入宅，于是为魏极力锻成大狱。
现代文：第一条：把同姓子女娶入家中。于是，魏谟极力判成重案。
English: Article one: marrying a child with the same surname into the family. Therefore, Weimar tried hard to make it a serious case.

古文：时李已量移邓州刺史，行次九江，遇御史鞫狱，却回建阳。竟坐贬抚州司马，终于贬所。
现代文：当时李回已被调任邓州刺史，途中住宿九江时，遇到御史审讯案件，又被退回建阳，竟无故被贬为抚州司马，死在贬所。
English: At that time, Li Hui had been transferred to Dengzhou Sima, and on the way to stay in Jiujiang, he encountered the trial of the Sima case, and was sent back to Jianyang. He was demoted to Fuzhou Sima for no reason, and died in the demotion station.

古文：周复
现代文：周复
English: Zhou Fu

古文：元稹在鄂州，周复为从事。
现代文：元稹在鄂州时，周复做他的从事。
English: When Yuan Shao was in Ezhou, Zhou Fu did his business.

古文：稹尝赋诗，命院中属和。
现代文：元稹曾写诗，并让其他人步韵奉和。
English: Yuan Zang once wrote poetry and had others perform it in rhythm.

古文：复乃簪笏见稹曰： 某偶以大人往还，谬获一第，其实诗赋皆不能。 
现代文：周复就带着簪笔笏板来见元稹，说道： 我偶然因为与大官来往，错误地使我考中，实际上我写诗作赋都不会。 
English: Zhou Fu came to see Yuan Xuan with a quill pen and a chopping board and said, "By chance, because of my association with a high-ranking official, I mistakenly failed to pass the middle school entrance examination. In fact, I am not good at writing poetry."

古文：稹嘉之曰： 质实如是，贤于能诗者矣。 
现代文：元稹赞许地说： 如此诚实，比会写诗的贤德。 
English: Yuan Qi said approvingly: Such honesty is better than the virtue of writing poetry.

古文：杨希古
现代文：杨希古
English: Yang Xigu

古文：杨希古，靖泰诸杨也，朋党连结，率相期以死。权势熏灼，力不可拔。
现代文：杨希古，是靖泰杨姓之一。杨姓人结成同党，聚在一起相约生死与共，权柄势力威焰迫人，力不可除。
English: Yang Xigu is one of the surnames of Jing Tai Yang. People with the surname of Yang have formed the same party, gathered together to live and die together, and the power of authority is imposing, and the power cannot be removed.

古文：与同里崔氏相埒，而敦厚过之。
现代文：和同乡崔氏势力相当，但比他们诚朴宽厚。
English: The power of the Choe clan is comparable to that of their countrymen, but they are more sincere and generous.

古文：希古性迂僻，初应进士举，以文投丞郎，丞郎奖之。
现代文：杨希古性格迁阔怪僻。当初考进士时，拿一篇文章投给丞郎，丞郎赞赏他。
English: Yang Xigu's personality is capricious and eccentric. When he took the entrance examination, he took an article and submitted it to Jairo, who praised him.

古文：希古乃起而对曰： 斯文也，非希古之作也。 
现代文：杨希古站起来说： 这篇文章不是我写的。 
English: Yang Xigu stood up and said: I did not write this article.

古文：丞郎讶而话之，曰： 此舍弟源嶓为希古作也。 
现代文：丞郎惊讶地议论起来。杨希古说： 这是我弟弟源嶓替我写的。 
English: Surprised, Joe started to discuss. Yang Xigu said, "This is what my brother, Yuan Shao, wrote for me."

古文：丞郎大异之曰： 今子弟之求名者，太半假手也。苟袖一轴，投知于先达，靡不私自炫耀，以为莫我若也。
现代文：丞郎非常吃惊地说： 现在年青人求取功名，多半找人代笔，如果能拿到一篇文章，投到有名望的前辈那里，没有不私下炫耀，认为没有比得上自己的。
English: Surprised, Choiro said, "Nowadays, young people seek fame, and most of them look for a ghostwriter. If they can get an article and submit it to a famous predecessor, they will show it off privately, thinking that it is not comparable to their own.

古文：如子之用意，足以整顿颓波矣。 
现代文：像你这种做法，足以整顿颓败的风气。 
English: Efforts like yours are enough to clean up the rotten culture.

古文：性酷嗜佛法，常置僧于第，陈列佛像，杂以幡盖，所谓道场者。
现代文：杨希古又酷爱佛教，常把和尚请到家里，供上佛像，插上幢幡华盖，算作所说的 道场 。
English: Yang Xigu was also very fond of Buddhism. He often invited monks to his home, provided them with Buddha statues, and put up a large flower-covered flagpole, which he considered to be the dojo.

古文：每凌旦，辄入其内，以身俯地，俾僧据其上，诵《金刚经》三遍。
现代文：每天早晨，就进道场，五体投地，让和尚骑在上面诵读三遍《金刚经》。
English: Every morning, he enters the dojo, prostrates himself on the ground, and has a monk ride on top of him to recite the Diamond Sutra three times.

古文：性又洁净，内逼如厕，必散衣无所有，然后高屐以往。
现代文：杨希古又爱干净，要上厕所，一定一丝不挂，穿上厚底鞋才进去。
English: Yang Xigu also loves cleanliness. If he wants to go to the toilet, he must be completely naked and wear thick-soled shoes before entering.

古文：刘禹锡
现代文：刘禹锡
English: Liu Yuxi

古文：刘禹锡自屯田员外左迁朗州司马，凡十年，始征还。
现代文：刘禹锡从屯田员外降职为朗州司马，共十年，才调回京城。
English: Liu Yuxi was demoted from outside the military garrison to the post of Lanzhou Sima for a total of ten years, before being transferred back to Beijing.

古文：方春，作《赠看花诸君子》诗曰： 紫陌红尘拂面来，无人不道看花回。
现代文：当时正是春天，写下了《赠看花诸君子》一诗。诗中写道： 繁华的京城大道，红尘拂面而来，路上人人都说看桃花刚回来。
English: At that time, it was spring, and he wrote a poem, "Presenting Flowers to Gentlemen," in which he wrote: On the bustling Keijo Boulevard, red dust was blowing in the wind, and everyone on the road was saying that they had just come back from seeing the peach blossoms.

古文：玄都观里桃千树，尽是刘郎去后栽。 
现代文：玄都观里的千株桃树，都是我刘禹锡离京后所栽。 
English: The thousand peach trees in Xuandu Guanli were all planted by me, Liu Yuxi, after I left Beijing.

古文：其诗当日传于都下。
现代文：这首诗当天在京城传开。
English: The poem went viral in the capital on the same day.

古文：有嫉其名者，白于执政，又诬其有怨愤。
现代文：有嫉妬刘禹锡的，禀告给执政长官，诬陷他心怀怨恨。
English: He was jealous of Liu Yuxi and sent an obituary to the chief executive, accusing him of harboring grudges.

古文：他见日，时宰与坐，慰其厚。既辞，即曰： 近者新诗，未免其累，奈何？ 
现代文：以后，宰相和刘禹锡同坐，深切安慰他。寒暄完了，就说： 最近的一首诗，惹了些麻烦，有什么办法呢？ 
English: Afterward, the prime minister and Liu Yuxi sat together and consoled him deeply. After the exchange of greetings, he said: A recent poem has caused some trouble, what can be done?

古文：不数日，出为连州刺史。
现代文：不久，出任连州刺史。
English: Soon, he was appointed as Lianzhou chief historian.

古文：禹锡自叙云： 贞元二十一年春，予为屯田员外时，此观未有花。是岁出牧连州，至荆南，又贬朗州司马。
现代文：刘禹锡自叙说道： 贞元二十一年春天，我作屯田员外郎，当时这个观里没有花，那年出任连州刺史，到荆南，又被贬为朗州司马。
English: Liu Yuxi said in his autobiography: In the spring of the twenty-first year of the Zhen, I was the son of a military officer. At that time, there was no flower in this view. That year, I served as the Lianzhou Sima, and when I went to Jingnan, I was relegated to the Lianzhou Sima.

古文：居十年，诏至京师。人人皆言，有道士手植仙桃，满观盛如红霞，遂有前篇，以志一时之事耳。
现代文：过了十年，召我回京，人人都说有个道士亲手栽植了仙桃树，满观盛开好似红霞，于是有前一首诗，来记一时之事。
English: After ten years, I was called back to Beijing, and everyone said that a Taoist monk had planted a peach tree with his own hands, and it was in full bloom like a red sky, so I wrote the previous poem to remember the moment.

古文：旋又出牧，于连州至十四年，始为主客郎中，重游玄都，荡然无复一树，唯兔葵燕麦，动摇于春风耳。
现代文：不久又出任连州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as Lianzhou chief historian.

古文：因再题二十八字，以俟后游。
现代文：因此再题二十八个字，以等待后来的游人指教。
English: Therefore, I will ask another 28 words to wait for the guidance of later visitors.

古文：时太和二年三月也。 
现代文：太和二年三月记。 
English: March of the second year of the Taiwa era.

古文：诗曰： 百亩庭中半是苔，桃花静尽菜花开。
现代文：那诗说： 百亩的庭院一半长了青苔，桃花没有了只有野花开。
English: The poem says: Half of the hundred mu courtyard has grown moss, peach blossoms are gone, only wildflowers bloom.

古文：种桃道士今何在，前度刘郎今独来。 
现代文：种桃的道士哪里去了？以前的刘郎今天独自来了。 
English: Where has the Taoist who planted peaches gone? The former Liu Lang came alone today.

古文：催阵使
现代文：催阵使
English: The rallying cry

古文：会昌中，王师讨昭义，久未成功。
现代文：会昌年中，皇室军队讨伐昭义，很久也没成功。
English: In the middle of the Heichang era, the imperial army led a crusade against Zhao Yi, which did not succeed for a long time.

古文：贼之游兵，往往散出山下，剽掠邢洛怀孟。又发轻卒数千，伪为群羊，散漫山谷，以啖官军。
现代文：敌人的流动部队，往往散布在山下，抢劫邢州、洛阳、怀州、孟州一带；又发出几千轻装的兵，扮作一群羊，散布在山谷，来使官府军兵吃。
English: The enemy's mobile forces often spread out at the foot of the mountains and looted the areas around Zhangzhou, Luoyang, Huaizhou and Mengzhou. They also sent out several thousand light-armed soldiers, disguised as a flock of sheep, to scatter in the valley to make the government soldiers eat.

古文：官军自远见之，乃分头掩捕。因不成列，且无备焉，于是短兵接斗，蹂践相乘，凡数十里，王师大败。
现代文：官府军兵远远看见了，就分头去捉拿，由于不成行列，又没有准备，结果短兵相接，蹂躏践踏，遍及几十里。官府军队大败。
English: The government soldiers saw it from far away and split up to catch it. Since they didn't line up and weren't prepared, the result was that the soldiers were too close to each other, and they trampled and trampled on each other for dozens of miles. The government army was soundly defeated.

古文：是月，东都及境上诸州，闻之大震，咸加备戒严。
现代文：当日，东都洛阳及边境各州，听说此事后大受震惊，都加强防备实行戒严。
English: On the same day, the eastern capital Luoyang and the border provinces were shocked to hear of the incident, and all strengthened their preparations for the imposition of martial law.

古文：都统王宰、石雄等，皆坚壁自守。
现代文：都统王宰、石雄等人，都坚守壁垒自卫防守。
English: Wang Zai, Shi Xiong and others all held fast to the self-defence barrier.

古文：武宗坐朝不怡，召宰臣李德裕等谓之曰： 王宰、石雄，不与朕杀贼，频遣中使促之，尚闻逗挠依违，岂可使贼党坐至东都耶？
现代文：唐武宗坐朝时很不高兴，召来大臣宰相李德裕等人说： 王宰、石雄，不给我杀退贼兵，屡派中使督促，他们还是徘徊观望迟疑不决。难道能让贼兵轻易得到洛阳吗？
English: Tang Wuzong was very unhappy when he sat in the imperial court. He summoned the minister and prime minister Li Deyu and others and said: "Wang Zai, Shi Xiong, you refused to let me kill and repel the bandits. You sent many envoys to urge them, but they still lingered, watching and hesitating. Can you let the bandits easily take Luoyang?"

古文：卿今日可为朕晚归，别与制置军前事宜奏来。 
现代文：你们今天为我晚些回去，另外制定安置军前事务的办法奏上来。 
English: You should go back for me later today, and come up with another plan for settling my pre-military affairs.

古文：时宰相陈夷行、郑肃，拱默听命。
现代文：当时宰相陈夷行、郑肃，拱手沉默听受命令。
English: At that time, the prime ministers Chen Yixing and Zheng Su silently obeyed the order.

古文：德裕归中书，即召御史中丞李回，具言上意。
现代文：李德裕回到中书省，就召来御史中丞李回，详说了皇帝的意图。
English: When Li Deyu returned to the Ministry of Literature, he summoned the Imperial Historian, Li Hui, and detailed the emperor's intentions.

古文：曰： 中丞必一行，责戎帅，早见成功，慎无违也。 
现代文：说： 中丞你一定亲自去一趟，督促军中主帅，早日成功，千万不要违命。 
English: He said, "Middle sergeant, you must go there in person and urge the commander-in-chief to succeed as soon as possible, and never disobey orders.

古文：回刻时受命，于是具名以闻。曰： 今欲以御史中丞李回为催阵使。 
现代文：李回立即接受命令。李德裕于是署名上报说： 现在想让御史中丞李回为催阵使。 
English: Li Hui immediately accepted the order. Li Deyu then signed a report saying, "I now want to make Li Hui, the Vice-Minister of History, the leader of the advance party."

古文：帝曰： 可。 
现代文：武宗说： 行。 
English: Takemune said, "All right.

古文：即日，李自银台戒路，有邸吏五十导从，至于河中，缓辔以进，俟王宰等至河中界迎候，乃行。
现代文：当天，李回从银台出发，有王府小吏五十人作向导随从。到河中一带，李回放松缰绳，让马缓行，等候王宰等人到河中来迎接。继续前进。
English: On the same day, Li Hui set out from Yintai, accompanied by fifty minor officials of the royal court as guides. When he reached the middle of the river, Li Hui loosened the reins and let the horse slow down, waiting for Wang Zai and others to meet him in the middle of the river. Continue to move forward.

古文：二帅至翼城东，道左执兵，如外府列校迎候仪。
现代文：二军帅到翼城东边，站在道左手执兵器，按州郡官署排列军队的欢迎仪式。
English: The commander of the Second Army went to the east side of the Wing City, stood on the left hand side of the road holding weapons, and lined up the troops according to the state and county government offices for the welcoming ceremony.

古文：回立马，受起居寒温之礼。
现代文：李回停住马，接受日常问候的礼节。
English: Li Hui stopped his horse to receive the daily greeting.

古文：二帅复前进数步，罄折致词，回掉鞭，亦不甚顾之。
现代文：二军帅又前进几步，恭敬地致欢迎词，李回摇着马鞭，也没有理睬。
English: The second-in-command advanced a few steps and respectfully gave a welcoming speech. Li Hui waved his horsewhip and ignored him.

古文：礼成，二帅旁行，俯首俟命。
现代文：礼仪完毕，二军帅陪行，俯首听命。
English: After the etiquette is completed, the second sergeant accompanies the march, bowing his head to obey.

古文：回于马上厉声曰： 今日当直令史安在？ 
现代文：李回在马上厉声问道： 今天的值班人在哪里？ 
English: Li Wei immediately asked sharply, "Where is the person on duty today?"

古文：群吏跃马听命，回曰： 责破贼限状来。 
现代文：众军吏策马跑过来听从命令。李回说： 拿出击破贼兵的期限状来。 
English: Li replied, "Give me the time limit for defeating the bandits."

古文：二帅鞠躬流汗，而请以六十日破贼，过约，请行军中令。
现代文：二军帅弯下身子流下汗来，请求六十天内打退敌人，过了期限，按军令处罚。
English: The commander of the Second Army bent over, sweating profusely, and asked for sixty days to repel the enemy. If the deadline passed, he would be punished according to the military order.

古文：于是二帅大惧，率亲军而鼓之，士卒齐进。凡五十八日，攻拔潞城，枭刘稹首以献。
现代文：于是二帅非常害怕，率领亲兵亲自督阵，士兵一齐进攻，一共五十八天，攻下潞城，砍下刘稹的头献上去。
English: As a result, the two generals were very afraid. They led their own soldiers to personally supervise the battle, and the soldiers attacked together for a total of 58 days. They captured Lucheng and cut off Liu Ye's head as a gift.

古文：功成，回复命。
现代文：大功告成，李回回去复命。
English: The deed was done, and Li returned home to resume his life.

古文：后六十日，由御史中丞拜中书侍郎平章事。
现代文：此后第六十天，李回由御史中丞提升为中书侍郎平章事。
English: After that, on the sixtieth day, Li Hui was promoted from Mishi Chujo to Chusaji Rohei Shoji.

古文：李群玉
现代文：李群玉
English: Li Qunyu

古文：李群玉既解天禄之任，而归涔阳，经二妃庙，题诗二首曰： 小孤洲北浦云边，二女明妆尚俨然。
现代文：李群玉解去天禄的职务后，回归涔阳，经过二妃庙，题诗二首： 小孤洲的北面浦云边上，二妃的装束还像从前一样完好。
English: After Li Qunyu was relieved of his duties in Tianlu, he returned to Fenyang, passing the Second Concubine Temple and reciting two poems: North of the small island, on the edge of the clouds, the Second Concubine's attire was still intact as before.

古文：野庙向江春寂寂，古碑无字草芊芊。
现代文：寂寂春色中荒凉的古庙对着长江，萋萋荒草里只有一无字的古老碑碣。
English: Facing the Yangtze River, the desolate old temple in the lonely spring, there is only a wordless ancient monument in the weeds.

古文：东风近墓吹芳芷，落日深山哭杜鹃。
现代文：春风吹拂墓地芳草，夕阳落入深山，杜鹃声声啼哭。
English: The spring breeze blows the fragrant grass of the cemetery, the setting sun falls into the mountains, and the cuckoo cries.

古文：犹似含颦望巡狩，九疑如黛隔湘川。 
现代文：仍像皱眉望着舜帝出巡青青的九疑山就在湘水那边。 
English: The Nine Doubts Mountain, which still looks like a frowning face at the Emperor's coming out parade, is on the other side of Xiangshui.

古文：又曰： 黄陵庙前莎草春，黄陵女儿茜裙新。
现代文：又写道： 黄陵庙前面的莎草欣欣向荣，黄陵女儿红裙崭新。
English: He also wrote: The sedge grass in front of Huangling Temple is flourishing, and Huangling's daughter's red dress is brand new.

古文：轻舟小楫唱歌去，水远山长愁杀人。 
现代文：轻舟小桨随歌远去，山水遥远愁坏了人。 
English: The small paddle of the light boat goes away with the song, and the distant landscape makes people sad.

古文：后又题曰： 黄陵庙前春已空，子规滴血啼松风。不知精爽落何处，疑是行云秋色中。 
现代文：以后又题诗： 黄陵庙前春天已去了，子规在松风中悲啼至流出血来，不知道魂灵落在哪里，好似在秋天的行云之中。 
English: Later, there was another poem: Before the Huangling Temple, spring had already passed. Zi Gui was saddened by the pine wind and bled profusely. He did not know where his soul had landed, as if he were in the clouds of autumn.

古文：李自以第二篇，春空便到秋色，踟蹰欲改之，乃有二女郎见曰： 儿是娥皇、女英也，二年后，当与郎君为云雨之游。 
现代文：李群玉自认为第二篇，春去很快到了秋来有些不妥，犹豫着想改一改。眼前便出现了两个女郎，她们说： 我们是娥皇、女英，两年以后，会和你有一番男女交往。 
English: Li Qunyu thought that there was something wrong with the second chapter, which went from spring to autumn very quickly, and hesitated to change it. Two girls appeared in front of her, and they said: We are the Empress and Empress, and after two years, we will have sex with you.

古文：李乃志其所陈，俄而影灭，遂礼其神像而去。
现代文：李群玉就记住她们说的话。一会儿两个身影消失了。于是李群玉对着神像施礼后也走了。
English: Li Qunyu remembered what they said. After a while, the two figures disappeared. So Li Qunyu bowed to the statue and left.

古文：重涉湖岭，至于浔阳。
现代文：重新度过湖岭，到达浔阳。
English: Re-cross the lake ridge and arrive at Fenyang.

古文：太守段成式素与李为诗酒之友，具述此事。
现代文：太守段成式一向和李群玉是作诗饮酒的朋友，李群玉就详细说了这件事。
English: Taishoudan Chengshih has always been a poetry drinking friend of Li Qunyu, and Li Qunyu spoke about this in detail.

古文：段因戏之曰： 不知足下是虞舜之辟阳侯也。 
现代文：段成式于是开玩笑说： 想不到你还是虞舜的辟阳侯。 
English: Duan Jingshi then joked: I didn't expect you to still be the governor of Yunnan Province.

古文：群玉题诗后二年，乃逝于洪州。
现代文：李群玉题诗后二年，就死在洪州。
English: Li Qunyu died in Hongzhou two years after writing the poem.

古文：段乃为诗哭之曰： 酒里诗中三十年，纵横唐突世喧喧。
现代文：段成式就写诗哭悼他的朋友： 饮酒作诗三十年，纵横纷乱世上喧闹。
English: Duan Chengshi wrote a poem to mourn his friend: Drinking and writing poetry for thirty years, the world is noisy and chaotic.

古文：明时不作弥衡死，傲尽公卿归九泉。 
现代文：醒时不要像弥衡那样死去，笑傲所有的公侯而后命归九泉。 
English: When you wake up, don't die like Mihira, laughing at all the princes and then dying.

古文：又曰： 增话黄陵事，今为白日催。老无儿女累，谁哭到泉台？ 
现代文：又说： 再话黄陵往事，都被光阴催走，到老没有儿女之累，谁去哭送他呢？ 
English: He also said: Let's talk about Huangling's past, all of which have been swept away by time, until he is no longer burdened by his children. Who will weep for him?

古文：温庭筠
现代文：温庭筠
English: Wen Tingyao

古文：温庭筠有词赋盛名，初将从乡里举，客游江淮间，扬子留后姚勖厚遗之。
现代文：温庭筠享有擅长词赋的盛名。当初要在乡里应举，客居游览在长江淮河之间，扬子留后姚勖赠给他一大笔钱。
English: Wen Tingtao enjoyed a reputation for being good at writing. He originally wanted to live in the countryside, and his guest house was between the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River. After Yangzi stayed, Yao Tong gave him a large sum of money.

古文：庭筠少年，其所得钱帛，多为狭邪所费。
现代文：温庭筠年轻，所得的钱财，大多为寻花问柳所浪费。
English: Wen Tingyao is young, and most of the money he earns is wasted on looking for flowers and asking about willows.

古文：勖大怒，笞且逐之，以故庭筠卒不中第。
现代文：姚勖非常生气，把他打了一顿又赶走了他，因此，温庭筠始终没有考上。
English: Yao Yao was very angry. He beat him up and drove him away. As a result, Wen Tingyao was never admitted.

古文：其姊赵颛之妻也，每以庭筠下第，辄切齿于勖。
现代文：他的姐姐是赵颛的妻子，每想起庭筠落榜，就对姚勖产生切齿痛恨。
English: His sister is Zhao Yao's wife, and every time she thinks of her brother falling down the list, she hates Yao Yao with all her teeth.

古文：一日，厅有客，温氏偶问客姓氏，左右以勖对。
现代文：一天，家里来了客人，温氏偶然问起来客姓名，身边的人告诉她是姚勖。
English: One day, a guest came to the house. Mr. Wen happened to ask the guest's name, and the people around him told him that she was Yao Yao.

古文：温氏遂出厅事，前执勖袖大哭。
现代文：温氏就走进前厅，上前扯着姚勖的袖子大哭起来。
English: Mr. Wen walked into the anteroom, tugged on Yao Yao's sleeve and burst into tears.

古文：勖殊惊异，且持袖牢固，不可脱，不知所为。
现代文：姚勖非常惊讶，而且袖子被拽很得牢，不能摆脱，不知她要干什么。
English: Yao Yao was very surprised, and her sleeve was pulled tightly, she couldn't get rid of it, she didn't know what she was going to do.

古文：移时，温氏方曰： 我弟年少宴游，人之常情，奈何笞之？
现代文：过了好一会儿，温氏才说： 我弟弟年青喜欢宴饮游乐，也是人之常情，为什么要打他？
English: After a while, Mr. Wen finally said, "My younger brother likes to party and have fun, which is a normal human emotion. Why did you beat him?"

古文：迄今无有成遂，得不由汝致之？ 
现代文：致使他到现在也没有成就，难道不是你造成的吗？ 
English: Isn't it your fault that he hasn't achieved anything so far?

古文：复大哭，久之方得解。
现代文：又大哭起来。很久，姚勖才得以解脱。
English: She burst into tears again. It took a long time for Yao Yao to be able to free herself.

古文：勖归愤讶，竟因此得疾而卒。
现代文：姚回去后又惊又气，竟因此得病死了。
English: When Yao returned, he was shocked and angry, and as a result, he fell ill and died.

古文：苗耽
现代文：苗耽
English: Miao Tan

古文：苗耽进士登第，闲居洛中有年矣，不堪其穷。
现代文：苗耽中进士后，闲居在洛中已经有几年了。
English: Miao Tan has been living in Loshong for a few years now, after graduating from high school.

古文：或意为将来通塞，可以响卜。
现代文：不能忍受那种穷困，有时心里想将来通达与否可以用响声占卜。
English: I can't bear that kind of poverty, and sometimes I think that I can use the ringing to predict whether or not I will be able to get through in the future.

古文：耽即命子侄扫洒厅事，设几焚香，束带秉笏，端坐以俟一言。
现代文：就命令晚辈打扫客厅，摆好几案焚起香来，苗耽扎上腰带拿着笏板，端端正正坐着等待一句话。
English: He ordered the younger generation to clean the living room, set up several cases, light incense, tie the seedling on the belt, hold the cutting board, and sit upright and wait for a word.

古文：所居穷僻，久之无所闻。
现代文：所住的地方太偏僻，很久也没有听到什么。
English: The place where I live is too remote, and I haven't heard anything for a long time.

古文：日晏，有货枯鱼者至焉，耽复专其志而谛听之，其家童连呼之，遂挈鱼以入。
现代文：日暮时分，有个卖干鱼的来了。苗耽又专心去听，家僮连声叫他他也没答理，家僮就拿着鱼进来。
English: At dusk, a seller of dried fish came. Miao Tang listened attentively. Jia Wei called him repeatedly, but he didn't answer. Jia Wei came in with the fish.

古文：其实无一钱，良久方出。
现代文：实际上家中没有一文钱。过了很久苗耽才出来。
English: In fact, there was not a penny in the house. It took a long time for the seedlings to grow.

古文：货者迟其出，固怒之矣，又见或微割其鱼，货者视之，因骂曰： 乞索儿，卒饿死耳，何滞我之如是邪？ 
现代文：卖鱼的嫌他出来得晚，本来就生气了，又看见他的鱼被稍稍割去一些，就骂道： 乞丐！早晚得饿死！干什么耽误我这么久？ 
English: The fishmonger didn't like him coming out late. He was already angry, and when he saw that his fish had been slightly cut off, he cursed: "Beggar! Sooner or later I'll starve to death! What took me so long?

古文：初耽尝自外游归，途遇疾甚，不堪登升。忽见有以辇棺而回者，以其价贱，即僦而寝息其间。
现代文：当初，苗耽曾从外游历回来时，道上病得厉害，不能走路了，忽然看见有用人力车拉棺材回城的，因为便宜，就租用，躺在棺材里面。
English: At first, when Miao Tan returned from a trip abroad, he was very ill on the road and could not walk. Suddenly, he saw a rickshaw pulling a coffin back to the city. Because it was cheap, he rented it and lay inside the coffin.

古文：至洛东门，阍者不知其中有人，诘其所由来。
现代文：到洛城东门，守门人不知道棺材里有人，就问棺材打哪儿来。
English: At the east gate of Los Angeles, the gatekeeper did not know that there was someone in the coffin, so he asked where the coffin had come from.

古文：耽谓其讶己，徐答曰： 衣冠道路得病，食不能致他物，相与无怪也。 
现代文：苗耽以为他惊讶自己，慢慢地回答说： 斯文的人在道上病了，太穷了不能坐别的，你不要奇怪。 
English: Miao Tan thought he was surprising himself, and slowly replied: "Don't be surprised if a humble person is sick on the road, too poor to sit anywhere else.

古文：阍者曰： 吾守此三十年矣，未尝见有解语神柩。 
现代文：守门人说： 我在这儿守了三十年了，没见过有懂人语的神棺材。 
English: The doorkeeper said, "I've been here for thirty years, and I've never seen a coffin that understands human language.

古文：后耽终江州刺史。
现代文：以后，苗耽死在江州刺史任上。
English: After that, Miao lingered on the post of Jiangzhou chief historian.

古文：裴勋
现代文：裴勋
English: Pei Xun

古文：裴勋容貌幺麽，而性尤率易。
现代文：裴勋容貌丑陋，性格特别率直平易。
English: Pei Xun's appearance is ugly, and his character is particularly straightforward and easy-going.

古文：与父垣会饮，垣令飞盏，每属其人，辄自言状。
现代文：和父亲裴垣一块喝酒，裴垣让轮流喝酒，轮到谁，谁就说一段话。
English: He and his father, Baigaki, drink together. Baigaki lets them take turns drinking, and whoever takes their turn gets to say a few words.

古文：垣付勋曰： 矬人饶舌，破车饶楔。
现代文：裴坦把杯交给裴勋说： 矮人好多嘴，破车楔子多。
English: Pei Tan handed the cup to Pei Xun and said, "Dwarfs have a lot of mouths and a lot of car wedge.

古文：裴勋千分。 
现代文：裴勋千分。 
English: Pei Xun is worth a thousand.

古文：勋饮讫而复其盏曰： 蝙蝠不自见，笑他梁上燕。
现代文：裴勋喝完酒把杯交还给裴垣说： 蝙蝠看不见自己，笑话房梁上的燕子。
English: After drinking the wine, Pei Xun handed the cup back to Peigaki and said, "Bats can't see themselves. Swallows on the beam of the house are a joke.

古文：十一郎十分。 
现代文：十一郎十分。 
English: Juichiro is ten.

古文：垣第十一也，垣怒笞之。
现代文：裴垣排行第十一，就生气地打了儿子。
English: Baigaki, ranked 11th, angrily hit his son.

古文：慈恩寺连接曲江，及京辇诸境，每岁新得第者，毕列姓名于此。
现代文：慈恩寺连接曲江以及京城各地。每年新考中的，一定把姓名写在慈恩寺。
English: Jionji Temple connects the Qujiang River and all parts of the capital. In the new examination every year, you must write your name in Jionji Temple.

古文：勋常与亲识游，见其父及诸家榜，率多物故，谓人曰： 此皆鬼录也。 邓敞
现代文：裴勋常和父亲去识记游览，看到父亲以及各家的题榜，而题榜的人大多已死。就对人说： 这都是记载鬼的。 邓敞
English: Pei Xun used to go sightseeing with his father, and when he saw his father and the records of each family, and most of the people on the records were dead, he said to people, "These are all records of ghosts."

