古文：李将军广者，陇西成纪人也。
现代文：将军李广，是陇西郡成纪县人。
English: General Li Guang was from Chengji County, Shaanxi Province.

古文：其先曰李信，秦时为将，逐得燕太子丹者也。
现代文：他的先祖叫李信，秦国时任将军，就是追获了燕太子丹的那位将军。
English: His ancestor was Li Xin, the general of Qin, who was the one who captured Prince Yan.

古文：故槐里，徙成纪。
现代文：他的家原来在槐里县，后来迁到成纪。
English: His family was originally from Baili County, but later moved to Chengji.

古文：广家世世受射。
现代文：李广家世代传习射箭之术。
English: The Li Guang family has been practicing archery for generations.

古文：孝文帝十四年，匈奴大入萧关，而广以良家子从军击胡，用善骑射，杀首虏多，为汉中郎。
现代文：文帝十四年，匈奴人大肆举兵侵入萧关，李广以良家子弟的身份参军抗击匈奴，因为他善于骑术和射箭，斩杀敌人首级众多，所以被任为中郎。
English: In the fourteenth year of Emperor Wen, the Huns invaded Xiaoguan with a large number of troops. Li Guang joined the army to fight against the Huns as the son of a good family, because he was good at riding and archery, and killed many enemies, so he was appointed as the middle brother.

古文：广从弟李蔡亦为郎，皆为武骑常侍，秩八百石。
现代文：李广的堂弟李蔡，也被任为中郎。二人又都任武骑常侍，年俸八百石粮食。
English: Li Guang's cousin, Li Cai, was also appointed as the second-in-command. Both of them also served as equestrian constables, with an annual salary of 800 koku of grain.

古文：尝从行，有所冲陷折关及格猛兽，而文帝曰： 惜乎，子不遇时！如令子当高帝时，万户侯岂足道哉！ 
现代文：李广曾跟随皇帝出行，常有冲锋陷阵、抵御敌人，以及格杀猛兽的事，文帝说： 可惜啊！你没遇到好时机，如果你赶上高祖时代，封个万户侯那还在话下吗！ 
English: Li Guang used to travel with the emperor and often had to charge into battle, fend off enemies, and kill ferocious beasts. Emperor Wen said: What a pity! You didn't have a good opportunity. If you catch up with the time of Gao Zu, will you still be able to seal a million households?

古文：及孝景初立，广为陇西都尉，徙为骑郎将。
现代文：到景帝即位后，李广任陇西都尉，又改任骑郎将。
English: After Emperor Jing ascended to the throne, Li Guang served as the captain of Shaanxi, and was also reappointed as the cavalry general.

古文：吴楚军时，广为骁骑都尉，从太尉亚夫击吴楚军，取旗，显功名昌邑下。
现代文：吴、楚七国叛乱的时候，李广任晓骑都尉，随从太尉周亚夫反击吴、楚叛军，在昌邑城下夺取了敌人的军旗，立功扬名。
English: During the rebellion of the Seven Kingdoms of Wu and Chu, Li Guang Ren Xiao led the cavalry captain, followed by the captain Zhou Yafu to counterattack the rebel army of Wu and Chu, captured the enemy's banner under the city of Changyi, and made a name for himself.

古文：以梁王授广将军印，还，赏不行。
现代文：可是由于梁孝王私自把将军印授予李广，回朝后朝廷没有对他封赏。
English: However, since Liang Xiaowang personally awarded the seal of generalship to Li Guang, the imperial court did not reward him after he returned to China.

古文：徙为上谷太守，匈奴日以合战。
现代文：调他任上谷太守，匈奴每天都来交战。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Shanggu, and the Xiongnu came to fight every day.

古文：典属国公孙昆邪为上泣曰： 李广才气，天下无双，自负其能，数与虏敌战，恐亡之。 
现代文：典属国公孙昆邪对皇上哭着说： 李广的才气，天下无双，他倚仗自己的才能，屡次和敌人正面作战，恐怕会失去这员良将。 
English: Li Guang's talent is unparalleled in the world. He relied on his own talent and repeatedly fought the enemy head-on. I'm afraid we'll lose this good general.

古文：於是乃徙为上郡太守。
现代文：于是又调他任上郡太守。
English: As a result, he was transferred to the post of county governor.

古文：後广转为边郡太守，徙上郡。
现代文：以后李广转任边境各郡太守，又调任上郡太守。
English: After that, Li Guang was transferred to be the governor of the border counties, and he was also transferred to be the governor of the upper counties.

古文：尝为陇西、北地、雁门、代郡、云中太守，皆以力战为名。
现代文：他曾任陇西、北地、雁门、代郡、云中等太守，都以奋力作战而出名。
English: He served as the grand marshal of Shaanxi, Hubei, Yanmen, Daigun, and Yunnan provinces, and was famous for fighting hard.

古文：匈奴大入上郡，天子使中贵人从广勒习兵击匈奴。
现代文：匈奴大举入侵上郡，天子派来一名宦官跟随李广学习军事，抗击匈奴。
English: The Xiongnu invaded Shang County in a big way. God sent a eunuch to follow Li Guang to study military and fight against the Xiongnu.

古文：中贵人将骑数十纵，见匈奴三人，与战。三人还射，伤中贵人，杀其骑且尽。
现代文：这位宦官带领几十名骑兵纵马驰骋，遇到三个匈奴人，就和他们交战，三个匈奴人回身放箭，射伤了宦官，几乎杀光了他的骑兵。
English: The eunuch led dozens of cavalry on horseback, encountered three Huns, and fought with them. The three Huns turned and shot arrows, wounding the eunuch and almost killing his cavalry.

古文：中贵人走广。广曰： 是必射雕者也。 
现代文：宦官逃回到李广那里，李广说： 这一定是匈奴的射雕能手。 
English: The eunuch fled back to Li Guang, who said, "This must be the Xiongnu's skilled archer."

古文：广乃遂从百骑往驰三人。
现代文：李广于是就带上一百名骑兵前去追赶那三个匈奴人。
English: Li Guang then took a hundred horsemen to chase the three Huns.

古文：三人亡马步行，行数十里。
现代文：那三个人没有马，徒步前行。
English: The three men had no horses and were on foot.

古文：广令其骑张左右翼，而广身自射彼三人者，杀其二人，生得一人，果匈奴射雕者也。
现代文：走了几十里，李广命令他的骑兵左右散开，两路包抄，他亲自去射杀那三个人，射死了两个，活捉了一个，果然是匈奴的射雕手。
English: After walking for dozens of miles, Li Guang ordered his cavalry to spread out to the right and left, encircling both ways. He personally went to shoot the three people, shot two dead, and captured one alive. It was indeed the Xiongnu's archer.

古文：已缚之上马，望匈奴有数千骑，见广，以为诱骑，皆惊，上山陈。
现代文：把他捆绑上马之后，远远望见几千名匈奴骑兵。他们看到李广，以为是诱敌之骑兵，都很吃惊，跑上山去摆好了阵势。
English: After tying him to a horse, they could see thousands of Hun horsemen in the distance. They were surprised to see Li Guang, thinking that he was a cavalryman to lure the enemy, and ran up the mountain to set up a position.

古文：广之百骑皆大恐，欲驰还走。
现代文：李广的百名骑兵也都大为惊恐，想纵马往回跑。
English: Li Guang's hundred horsemen were also very frightened and wanted to run back.

古文：广曰： 吾去大军数十里，今如此以百骑走，匈奴追射我立尽。
现代文：李广说： 我们离开大军几十里，照现在这样的情况，我们这一百名骑兵只要一跑，匈奴就要来追击射杀我们，会立刻被杀光的。
English: Li Guang said, "We are dozens of miles away from the main army. According to the current situation, as soon as our hundred cavalrymen run, the Huns will come to chase and shoot us, and they will be killed immediately.

古文：今我留，匈奴必以我为大军诱，必不敢击我。 
现代文：如果我们停留不走，匈奴一定以为我们是大军来诱敌的，必定不敢攻打我们。 
English: If we stay and do not go, the Huns will certainly think that we are a large army to lure the enemy, and will certainly not dare to attack us.

古文：广令诸骑曰： 前！ 
现代文：李广向骑兵下令： 前进！ 
English: Li Guang ordered the cavalry: Forward!

古文：前未到匈奴陈二里所，止，令曰： 皆下马解鞍！ 
现代文：骑兵向前进发，到了离奴阵地还有大约二里的地方，停下来，下令说： 全体下马解下马鞍！ 
English: The cavalry moved forward, and when they were about two miles from the slave position, they stopped and gave the order: "All hands dismount and unsaddle!"

古文：其骑曰： 虏多且近，即有急，柰匈？ 
现代文：骑兵们说： 敌人那么多，并且又离得近，如果有了紧急情况，怎么办？ 
English: The cavalrymen said: With so many enemies and so close, what if there is an emergency?

古文：广曰： 彼虏以我为走，今皆解鞍以示不走，用坚其意。 
现代文：李广说： 那些敌人原以为我们会逃跑，现在我们都解下马鞍表示不逃，这样就能使他们更坚定地相信我们是诱敌之兵。 
English: Li Guang said, "Those enemies thought that we would run away, but now we have all unsaddled our horses to show that we will not run away, which will make them more firmly believe that we are the soldiers of the enemy.

古文：於是胡骑遂不敢击。
现代文：于是匈奴骑兵终于不敢来攻击。
English: As a result, the Hun cavalry finally dared not attack.

古文：有白马将出护其兵，李广上马与十馀骑饹射杀胡白马将，而复还至其骑中，解鞍，令士皆纵马卧。
现代文：有一名骑白马的匈奴将领出阵来监护他的士兵，李广立即上马和十几名骑兵一起奔驰，射死了那骑白马的匈奴将领，之后又回到自己的骑兵队里，解下马鞍，让士兵们都放开马，随便躺卧。
English: There was a Hun general on a white horse leading the battle to guard his soldiers. Li Guang immediately got on his horse and galloped with a dozen cavalrymen, shot the Hun general on a white horse, and then returned to his cavalry team, removed his saddle, and let the soldiers let go of the horse and lie down casually.

古文：是时会暮，胡兵终怪之，不敢击。
现代文：这时正值日暮黄昏，匈奴军队始终觉得奇怪，不敢进攻。
English: By this time it was dusk, and the Hun army still felt strange and did not dare to attack.

古文：夜半时，胡兵亦以为汉有伏军於旁欲夜取之，胡皆引兵而去。
现代文：到了半夜，匈奴兵又以为汉朝有伏兵在附近，想趁夜偷袭他们，因而匈奴就领兵撤离了。
English: In the middle of the night, the Xiongnu soldiers thought that the Han Dynasty had an ambush nearby and wanted to take advantage of the night to attack them, so the Xiongnu led the troops to evacuate.

古文：平旦，李广乃归其大军。大军不知广所之，故弗从。
现代文：第二天早晨，李广才回到他的大军营中，大军不知道李广的去向，所以无法随后接应。
English: The next morning, Li Guang only returned to his large army camp. The large army did not know Li Guang's whereabouts, so they could not respond later.

古文：居久之，孝景崩，武帝立，左右以为广名将也，於是广以上郡太守为未央卫尉，而程不识亦为长乐卫尉。
现代文：过了好几年，景帝去世，武帝即位。左右近臣都认为李广是名将，于是李广由上郡太守调任未央宫的禁卫军长官，程不识也来任长乐宫的禁卫军长官。
English: Several years later, Emperor Jing died and Emperor Wu ascended to the throne. All the courtiers on both sides thought that Li Guang was a great general, so Li Guang was transferred from the county eunuch to serve as the chief of the palace guard of Weiyang Palace, and Cheng also came to serve as the chief of the palace guard of Changle Palace.

古文：程不识故与李广俱以边太守将军屯。
现代文：程不识和李广从前都任边郡太守并兼管军队驻防。
English: Both Cheng Wuxuan and Li Guang were previously the governor of the border county and also in charge of the military garrison.

古文：及出击胡，而广行无部伍行陈，就善水草屯，舍止，人人自便，不击刀斗以自卫，莫府省约文书籍事，然亦远斥候，未尝遇害。
现代文：到出攻打匈奴的时候，李广行军没有严格的队列和阵势，靠近水丰草茂的地方驻扎军队，筑营停宿，人人都感到便利，晚上也不打更自卫，幕府简化各种文书簿册，但他远远地布置了哨兵，所以没有遭遇过危险。
English: When it came time to attack the Huns, Li Guang marched without strict queues and positions. He stationed his army in a place with abundant water and thick vegetation, built a camp and stopped there. Everyone felt it was convenient. He did not fight at night to defend himself. The shogunate simplified all kinds of paperwork, but he placed sentries far away, so he did not encounter any danger.

古文：程不识正部曲行伍营陈，击刀斗，士吏治军簿至明，军不得休息，然亦未尝遇害。
现代文：程不识对队伍的编制、行军队列、驻营阵势等要求很严格，夜里打更，文书军吏处理考绩等公文簿册要到天明，军队得不到休息，但也从来没有遭遇过危险。
English: Cheng did not know that the requirements for the composition of the team, the marching line of the army, and the camp position were very strict. It was more difficult to fight at night, the clerks and military officers had to deal with the performance appraisal and other official documents until dawn, and the army could not rest, but it had never encountered danger.

古文：不识曰： 李广军极简易，然虏卒犯之，无以禁也；而其士卒亦佚乐，咸乐为之死。
现代文：程不识说： 李广治兵简便易行，然而敌人如果突然进犯他，他就无法阻挡了；而他的士卒倒也安逸快乐，都甘心为他拼死。
English: Cheng did not know to say: Li Guang's treatment of soldiers is simple and easy to do, but if the enemy suddenly attacks him, he will not be able to stop him; and his soldiers are also comfortable and happy, and are willing to die for him.

古文：我军虽烦扰，然虏亦不得犯我。 
现代文：我的军队虽然军务纷繁忙乱，但是敌人也不敢侵犯我。 
English: Although my army is busy with military affairs, the enemy does not dare to invade me.

古文：是时汉边郡李广、程不识皆为名将，然匈奴畏李广之略，士卒亦多乐从李广而苦程不识。
现代文：那时汉朝边那的李广、程不识都是名将，但是匈奴人害怕李广的谋略，士兵也大多愿意跟随李广而以跟随程不识为苦。
English: At that time, Li Guang and Cheng Wukong of the Han Dynasty were both famous generals, but the Huns were afraid of Li Guang's strategy, and most soldiers were willing to follow Li Guang and suffered from following Cheng Wukong.

古文：程不识孝景时以数直谏为太中大夫。为人廉，谨於文法。
现代文：程不识在景帝时由于屡次直言进谏被封为太中大夫，为人清廉，谨守朝廷文书法令
English: Cheng did not know that at the time of Emperor Jing, due to his repeated outspokenness, he was appointed as the Grand Physician. He was a man of integrity and scrupulously adhered to the imperial documents and decrees.

古文：後汉以马邑城诱单于，使大军伏马邑旁谷，而广为骁骑将军，领属护军将军。
现代文：后来，汉朝用马邑城引诱单于，派大军在马邑附近的山谷埋伏，李广任骁骑将军，受护军将军韩安国统领节制。
English: Later, the Han Dynasty used the city of Mayi to lure Shan Yu, and sent a large army to ambush in the valley near Mayi. Li Guang served as the cavalry general, and Han An, the general of the escort army, led the restraint.

古文：是时单于觉之，去，汉军皆无功。
现代文：当时单于发觉了汉军的计谋，就逃跑了。
English: At that time, Shan Yu discovered the plot of the Chinese army and fled.

古文：其後四岁，广以卫尉为将军，出雁门击匈奴。
现代文：汉军都没有战功。四年以后，李广由卫尉被任为将军，出雁门关进攻匈奴。
English: Four years later, Li Guangyu, a lieutenant of the imperial guard, was appointed as a general and went out to attack the Xiongnu at Yanmen Pass.

古文：匈奴兵多，破败广军，生得广。
现代文：匈奴兵多，打败了李广的军队，并生擒李广。
English: There were many Xiongnu soldiers, who defeated Li Guang's army and killed Li Guang.

古文：单于素闻广贤，令曰： 得李广必生致之。 
现代文：单于平时就听说李广很有才能，下令说： 俘获李广一定要活着送来。 
English: He just heard that Li Guang was very talented in ordinary times, and ordered: If Li Guang is captured, he must be sent back alive.

古文：胡骑得广，广时伤病，置广两马间，络而盛卧广。
现代文：匈奴骑兵捉到了李广，当时李广有伤病，就把李广放在两匹马中间，装在绳编的网兜里躺着。
English: The Xiongnu cavalry caught Li Guang. At that time, Li Guang was injured and ill, so Li Guang was placed in the middle of two horses and placed in a rope-woven net bag.

古文：行十馀里，广详死，睨其旁有一胡兒骑善马，广暂腾而上胡兒马，因推堕兒，取其弓，鞭马南驰数十里，复得其馀军，因引而入塞。
现代文：走了十多里，李广假装死去，斜眼看到他旁边的一个匈奴少年骑着一匹好马，李广突然一纵身跳上何奴少年的马，趁势把少年推下去，夺了他的弓，打马向南飞驰数十里，又重新遇到了他的剩余部队，于是带领他们进入关塞。
English: After walking for more than ten miles, Li Guang pretended to be dead. With averted eyes, he saw a Hun teenager riding a good horse next to him. Li Guang suddenly jumped onto the horse of the Hun teenager, took advantage of the situation to push the teenager down, took his bow, and rode south for dozens of miles. He met his remaining troops again, and led them into the pass.

古文：匈奴捕者骑数百追之，广行取胡兒弓，射杀追骑，以故得脱。
现代文：匈奴出动几百名骑兵来追赶他，李广一边逃一边拿起匈奴少年的弓射杀追来的骑兵，因此才能逃脱。
English: The Xiongnu dispatched several hundred cavalry to chase him, and Li Guang, while fleeing, picked up the Xiongnu boy's bow and shot the pursuing cavalry, so he could escape.

古文：於是至汉，汉下广吏。
现代文：于是回到汉朝京城，朝廷把李广交给执法官更。
English: So he returned to the capital of the Han Dynasty, and the imperial court handed Li Guang over to the magistrate.

古文：吏当广所失亡多，为虏所生得，当斩，赎为庶人。
现代文：执法官判决李广损失伤亡太多，他自己又被敌人活捉，应该斩首，李广用钱物赎了死罪，削职为民。
English: The magistrate ruled that Li Guang had suffered too many losses and casualties, that he himself had been captured alive by the enemy, and that he should be beheaded. Li Guang atoned for the capital crime with money and goods, and gave up his job to serve the people.

古文：顷之，家居数岁。广家与故颍阴侯孙屏野居蓝田南山中射猎。
现代文：转眼间，李广在家已闲居数年，李广家和已故颖阴侯灌婴的孙子灌强一起隐居在蓝田，常到南山中打猎。
English: In the blink of an eye, Li Guang had been idling at home for several years. Li Guang and the grandson of the late Ying Yin Hou, Gan Qiang, lived together in seclusion in Lantian and often went hunting in the Nanshan.

古文：尝夜从一骑出，从人田间饮。
现代文：曾在一天夜里带着一名骑马的随从外出，和别人一起在田野间饮酒。
English: He had been out one night with a riding companion, drinking with others in a field.

古文：还至霸陵亭，霸陵尉醉，呵止广。
现代文：回来时走到霸陵亭，霸陵尉喝醉了，大声喝斥，禁止李广通行。
English: When he came back, he walked to the Tyring Pavilion. The tyrant lieutenant was drunk and shouted loudly, forbidding Li Guang to pass.

古文：广骑曰： 故李将军。 
现代文：李广的随从说： 这是前任李将军。 
English: Li Guang's entourage said: This is the former General Li Cang.

古文：尉曰： 今将军尚不得夜行，何乃故也！ 
现代文：亭尉说： 现任将军尚且不许通行，何况是前任呢！ 
English: The pavilion officer said: The current general is not allowed to pass, let alone his predecessor!

古文：止广宿亭下。
现代文：便扣留了李广，让他停宿在霸陵亭下。
English: He then detained Li Guang and made him stay under the Buling Pavilion.

古文：居无何，匈奴入杀辽西太守，败韩将军，後韩将军徙右北平。
现代文：没过多久，匈奴入侵杀死辽西太守，打败了韩将军，韩将军迁调右北平。
English: Not long after, the Xiongnu invaded and killed Liao Xi Ta Shou, defeated General Han, and General Han was transferred to the right Beiping.

古文：於是天子乃召拜广为右北平太守。
现代文：于是天子就召见李广，任他为右北平太守。
English: As a result, the heavenly son summoned Li Guang and appointed him as the right Beiping governor.

古文：广即请霸陵尉与俱，至军而斩之。
现代文：李广随即请求派霸陵尉一起赴任，到了军中就把他杀了。
English: Li Guang then immediately requested to send a tyrant lieutenant to take office together, and when he arrived in the army, he killed him.

古文：广居右北平，匈奴闻之，号曰 汉之飞将军 ，避之数岁，不敢入右北平。
现代文：李广驻守右北平，匈奴听说后，称他为 汉朝的飞将军 ，躲避他好几年，不敢入侵右北平。
English: Li Guang was stationed in Right Beiping. When the Xiongnu heard of him, they called him the "Flying General of the Han Dynasty," and avoided him for several years, not daring to invade Right Beiping.

古文：广出猎，见草中石，以为虎而射之，中石没镞，视之石也。
现代文：李广外出打猎，看见草丛中有块石头，认为是老虎就向它射去，射中了石头，箭头都射进去了，过去一看，原来是石头。
English: Li Guang went out hunting, saw a stone in the grass, thought it was a tiger and shot at it. He hit the stone and all the arrows went into it. When he looked back, it turned out to be a stone.

古文：因复更射之，终不能复入石矣。
现代文：接着重新再射，终究不能再射进去了。
English: Then I shot again and again, but in the end I couldn't get another shot in.

古文：广所居郡闻有虎，尝自射之。
现代文：李广驻守过各郡，听说有老虎，常常亲自去射杀。
English: Li Guang has been stationed in various counties. When he heard that there were tigers, he often went to shoot them himself.

古文：及居右北平射虎，虎腾伤广，广亦竟射杀之。
现代文：到驻守右北平时，又去射虎，老虎跳起来伤了李广，李广最终同样射死了老虎。
English: When he was stationed in Right Peiping, he went to shoot a tiger. The tiger jumped up and injured Li Guang. Li Guang eventually shot the tiger as well.

古文：广廉，得赏赐辄分其麾下，饮食与士共之。
现代文：李广为官清廉，得到赏赐就分给他的部下，饮食总与士兵在一起。
English: Li Guang was an incorruptible officer. When he received rewards, he distributed them to his subordinates. He always ate together with the soldiers.

古文：终广之身，为二千石四十馀年，家无馀财，终不言家产事。
现代文：李广一生到死，做二千石俸禄的官共四十多年，家中没有多余的财物，始终也不谈及家产方面的事。
English: Li Guang was a 2,000-koku salary official for more than 40 years from birth to death. There were no superfluous possessions in his family, and he never talked about the family property.

古文：广为人长，猿臂，其善射亦天性也，虽其子孙他人学者，莫能及广。
现代文：李广身材高大，两臂如猿，他善于射箭也是天赋，即便是他的子孙或外人向他学习，也没人能比得上他。
English: Li Guang is tall, with arms like a monkey. He is good at archery, which is also a talent. Even if his grandchildren or outsiders learn from him, no one can match him.

古文：广讷口少言，与人居则画地为军陈，射阔狭以饮。
现代文：李广语言迟钝，话不多，与别人在一起就在地上画军阵，然后比射箭，按射中较密集的行列还是较宽疏的行列来定罚谁喝酒。
English: Li Guang's language is sluggish and he doesn't talk much. When he is with others, he draws a line on the ground, and then compares it to archery, pressing whether it is a denser line or a wider line to determine who drinks.

古文：专以射为戏，竟死。
现代文：他专门以射箭为消遣，一直到死。
English: He specialized in archery as a pastime until his death.

古文：广之将兵，乏绝之处，见水，士卒不尽饮，广不近水，士卒不尽食，广不尝食。
现代文：李广带兵，遇到缺粮断水的地方，发现有水，士兵还没有饮遍，他不去靠近水；士兵还没有完全吃上饭，李广一口饭也不尝。
English: When Li Guang led soldiers to a place where there was a shortage of grain and water, he found that there was water, but the soldiers had not drunk it all, so he did not go near the water; the soldiers had not fully eaten the meal, and Li Guang did not taste a bite of the meal.

古文：宽缓不苛，士以此爱乐为用。
现代文：李广对士兵宽厚和缓不苛刻，士兵因此爱戴他，乐于为他所用。
English: Li Guang is generous and lenient to soldiers, so soldiers love him and are happy to be used by him.

古文：其射，见敌急，非在数十步之内，度不中不发，发即应弦而倒。
现代文：李广射箭的方法是，看见敌人逼近，如果不在数十步之内，估计射不中就不射。只要一发射，敌人立即随弓弦之声倒地。
English: Li Guang's method of archery is to see the enemy approaching, if it is not within a few dozen steps, it is estimated that it will not be shot. As long as it is fired, the enemy will immediately fall to the ground with the sound of the bowstring.

古文：用此，其将兵数困辱，其射猛兽亦为所伤云。
现代文：因此他领兵几次被困受辱，射猛兽也曾被猛兽所伤。
English: As a result, he has been trapped and humiliated several times while leading soldiers, and he has also been wounded by a ferocious beast.

古文：居顷之，石建卒，於是上召广代建为郎中令。
现代文：没过多久，石建去世，于是皇上召见李广，让他接替石建任郎中令。
English: Not long after, Shi Jian died, so the emperor summoned Li Guang and asked him to succeed Shi Jian as second-in-command.

古文：元朔六年，广复为後将军，从大将军军出定襄，击匈奴。
现代文：元朔六年李广又任后将军，跟随大将车卫青的军队从定襄出塞，征伐匈奴。
English: In the sixth year of the Yuan Shao Dynasty, Li Guang was appointed as a general and followed the army of General Che Weiqing from Dingxiang to conquer the Xiongnu.

古文：诸将多中首虏率，以功为侯者，而广军无功。
现代文：许多将领因斩杀敌人首级符合规定数额，以战功被封侯，而李广的军队却没有战功。
English: Many generals were given the title of feudal lords for their war exploits because they had cut off the heads of their enemies in accordance with the prescribed amount, but Li Guang's army had no war achievements.

古文：後二岁，广以郎中令将四千骑出右北平，博望侯张骞将万骑与广俱，异道。
现代文：过了两年，李广以郎中令官职率领四千骑兵从右北平出塞，博望侯张骞率领一万骑兵与李广一同出征，分行两条路。
English: Two years later, Li Guang led 4,000 cavalry out of the right Beiping with the official title of vice-commander, and Bo Wang Hou Zhang Jie led 10,000 cavalry to go to war with Li Guang, branching two ways.

古文：行可数百里，匈奴左贤王将四万骑围广，广军士皆恐，广乃使其子敢往驰之。
现代文：行军约几百里，匈奴左贤王率领四万骑兵包围了李广，李广的士兵都很害怕，李广就派他的儿子李敢骑马往匈奴军中奔驰。
English: After marching about several hundred miles, the Hun Zuoxian Wang led forty thousand cavalry to surround Li Guang. Li Guang's soldiers were very afraid, and Li Guang sent his son Li Dang to gallop on horseback to the Hun army.

古文：敢独与数十骑驰，直贯胡骑，出其左右而还，告广曰： 胡虏易与耳。 
现代文：李敢独自和几十名骑兵飞奔，直穿匈奴骑兵阵，又从其左右两翼突出，回来向李广报告说： 匈奴敌兵很容易对付啊！ 
English: Li Dang alone and dozens of cavalry galloped, straight through the Hun cavalry array, and protruded from its left and right wings, came back to Li Guang and reported: Hun enemy soldiers are easy to deal with!

古文：军士乃安。
现代文：士兵们这才安心。
English: This is reassuring for the soldiers.

古文：广为圜陈外乡，胡急击之，矢下如雨。
现代文：李广布成圆形兵阵，面向外，匈奴猛攻，箭如雨下。
English: Li Guang spread into a circular array of soldiers, facing outward, the Xiongnu stormed, arrows raining down.

古文：汉兵死者过半，汉矢且尽。
现代文：汉兵死了一半多，箭也用光了。
English: More than half of the Han soldiers died, and the arrows were used up.

古文：广乃令士持满毋发，而广身自以大黄射其裨将，杀数人，胡虏益解。
现代文：李广就命令士兵拉满弓，不要放箭，而李广亲自用大黄弩弓射匈奴的副将，杀死了好几个，匈奴军才渐渐散开。
English: Li Guang ordered the soldiers to draw full bows and not to shoot arrows, and Li Guang himself shot the vice-general of the Xiongnu with a large yellow crossbow, killing several, and the Xiongnu army gradually dispersed.

古文：会日暮，吏士皆无人色，而广意气自如，益治军。
现代文：这时天色已晚，军吏士兵都面无人色，可是李广却神态自然，更加注意整顿军队。
English: By this time, it was late in the day, and the military officers and soldiers were unimpressed, but Li Guang looked natural and paid more attention to the rectification of the army.

古文：军中自是服其勇也。
现代文：军中从此都很佩服他的勇敢。
English: The army has admired his bravery ever since.

古文：明日，复力战，而博望侯军亦至，匈奴军乃解去。
现代文：第二天，又去奋力作战，博望侯的军队也赶到了，匈奴军才解围退去。
English: The next day, they went to fight hard again, the army of Bohang Hou also arrived, and the Xiongnu army was relieved and retreated.

古文：汉军罢，弗能追。
现代文：汉军非常疲惫，所以也不能去追击。
English: The Chinese troops were very tired, so they couldn't go after them.

古文：是时广军几没，罢归。
现代文：当时李广军几乎全军覆没，只好收兵回朝。
English: At that time, Li Guang's army was almost completely wiped out, and he had no choice but to withdraw his troops back to the North.

古文：汉法，博望侯留迟後期，当死，赎为庶人。
现代文：按汉朝法律，博望侯行军迟缓，延误限期，应处死刑，用钱赎罪，降为平民。
English: According to the laws of the Han Dynasty, Bohangou marched slowly, delayed the deadline, should be sentenced to death, use money to atone, reduced to civilians.

古文：广军功自如，无赏。
现代文：李广功过相抵，没有封赏。
English: Li Guang's achievements are more than enough, there is no award for him.

古文：初，广之从弟李蔡与广俱事孝文帝。
现代文：当初，李广的堂弟李蔡和李广一起侍奉文帝。
English: At first, Li Guang's cousin Li Cai and Li Guang served Emperor Wen together.

古文：景帝时，蔡积功劳至二千石。
现代文：到景帝时，李蔡累积功劳已得到年俸二千石的官位。
English: By the time of Emperor Jing's arrival, Li Cai's accumulated merits had earned him an official post with an annual salary of 2,000 koku.

古文：孝武帝时，至代相。
现代文：武帝时，做到代国的国相。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu, he served as the country's prime minister.

古文：以元朔五年为轻车将车，从大将军击右贤王，有功中率，封为乐安侯。
现代文：元朔五年前李蔡被任为轻车将军，跟随大将军卫青攻打匈奴右贤王有功，达到斩杀敌人首级的规定，被封为乐安侯。
English: Five years ago, Li Cai was appointed as the general of light vehicles. He followed the general Wei Qing to attack the Hun Uxian Wang, and achieved the requirement of killing the enemy's head, and was named Le An Hou.

古文：元狩二年中，代公孙弘为丞相。
现代文：元狩二年前间，代公孙弘任丞相。
English: Two years before the Genkari Incident, Daikongsun Hirose was appointed chancellor.

古文：蔡为人在下中，名声出广下甚远，然广不得爵邑，官不过九卿，而蔡为列侯，位至三公。
现代文：李蔡的才干在下等之中，声名和李广相差很远，然而李广得不到封爵和封地，官位没超过九卿，可是李蔡却被封为列侯，官位达到三公。
English: Li Cai's talent was in the lower class, and his reputation was far from that of Li Guang. However, Li Guang did not receive a knighthood and fief, and his official rank did not exceed nine Lords, but Li Cai was made a vassal, and his official rank reached three Lords.

古文：诸广之军吏及士卒或取封侯。
现代文：李广属下的军官和士兵们，也有人得到了侯爵之封。
English: Some of the officers and soldiers under Li Guang also received the title of marquis.

古文：广尝与望气王朔燕语，曰： 自汉击匈奴而广未尝不在其中，而诸部校尉以下，才能不及中人，然以击胡军功取侯者数十人，而广不为後人，然无尺寸之功以得封邑者，何也？
现代文：李广曾和星象家王朔私下闲谈说： 自从汉朝攻打匈奴以来，我没有一次不参加。可是各部队校尉以下的军官，才能还不如中等人，然而由于攻打匈奴有军功被封侯的有几十人。我李广不算比别人差，但是没有一点功劳来获取封地，这是为什么呢？
English: Li Guang once gossiped with the astrologer Wang Shuo: "Since the Han Dynasty attacked the Xiongnu, I have not once not participated. However, the talent of the officers below the rank of captain in each army is not as good as that of the average person. However, there are dozens of people who have been knighted for their military exploits in attacking the Xiongnu. I, Li Guang, am not inferior to others, but I have not made any contribution to acquiring fiefs. Why is that?

古文：岂吾相不当侯邪？
现代文：难道是我命相中就不该封侯吗？
English: Isn't it my destiny to become a feudal lord?

古文：且固命也？ 
现代文：还是本来就命该如此呢？ 
English: Or was it meant to be this way?

古文：朔曰： 将军自念，岂尝有所恨乎？ 
现代文：王朔说： 将军自己回想一下，难道曾经有过值得悔恨的事吗？ 
English: Wang Shuo said: General, think back for a moment, have you ever done anything worth regretting?

古文：广曰： 吾尝为陇西守，羌尝反，吾诱而降，降者八百馀人，吾诈而同日杀之。
现代文：李广说： 我曾当过陇西太守，羌人有一次反叛，我诱骗他们投降，投降的有八百多人，我用欺诈手段在同一天把他们都杀了。
English: Li Guang said: I once served as the governor of Shaanxi Province. The people of Shaanxi rebelled once. I tricked them into surrendering. More than 800 people surrendered. I killed them all on the same day using fraudulent means.

古文：至今大恨独此耳。 
现代文：直到今天我最大的悔恨只有这件事。 
English: To this day, my biggest regret is just that.

古文：朔曰： 祸莫大於杀已降，此乃将军所以不得侯者也。 
现代文：王朔说： 灾祸，没有比杀死已投降的人更大的了，这也就是将军不能封侯的原因。 
English: Wang Shuo said, "There is no greater calamity than killing a person who has surrendered, which is why the general cannot be put under house arrest.

古文：後二岁，大将军、骠骑将军大出击匈奴，广数自请行。
现代文：又过了两年，大将军卫青、骠骑将军霍去病率军大举出征匈奴，李广几次亲自请求随行。
English: Two years later, when General Wei Qing and General Huo of the Horse Cavalry became ill and led the army to go to the Xiongnu in a big way, Li Guang personally requested several times to accompany him.

古文：天子以为老，弗许；良久乃许之，以为前将军。
现代文：天子认为他已年老，没有答应；过了很久才准许他前去，让他任前将军。
English: The emperor thought he was too old and did not agree; it was a long time before he allowed him to go and let him be a former general.

古文：是岁，元狩四年也。
现代文：这一年是元狩四年。
English: This year is the fourth year of Genkari.

古文：广既从大将军青击匈奴，既出塞，青捕虏知单于所居，乃自以精兵走之，而令广并於右将军军，出东道。
现代文：李广不久随大将军卫青出征匈奴，出边塞以后，卫青捉到敌兵，知道了单于住的地方，就自己带领精兵去追逐单于，而命令李广和右将军的队伍合并，从东路出击。
English: Li Guang soon followed the general Wei Qing to the Huns. After leaving the border fortress, Wei Qing caught the enemy soldiers, knew where Duan Yu lived, led the elite soldiers to chase Duan Yu, and ordered Li Guang and the right general's team to merge and attack from the east.

古文：东道少回远，而大军行水草少，其势不屯行。
现代文：东路有些迂回绕远，而且大军走在水草缺少的地方，势必不能并队行进。
English: The eastern route is somewhat circuitous, and large armies cannot march side by side in places where water and grass are scarce.

古文：广自请曰： 臣部为前将军，今大将军乃徙令臣出东道，且臣结发而与匈奴战，今乃一得当单于，臣原居前，先死单于。 
现代文：李广就亲自请求说： 我的职务是前将军，如今大将军却命令我改从东路出兵，况且我从少年时就与匈奴作战，到今天才得到一次与单于对敌的机会，我愿做前锋，先和单于决一死战。 
English: Li Guang himself pleaded: My position is a former general, but now the great general has ordered me to send troops from the east. Moreover, I have been fighting against the Xiongnu since I was a boy, and today I have only been given one chance to fight against the enemy. I would like to be a striker, first and only to fight to the death.

古文：大将军青亦阴受上诫，以为李广老，数奇，毋令当单于，恐不得所欲。
现代文：大将军卫青曾暗中受到皇上的警告，认为李广年老，命运不好，不要让他与单于对敌，恐怕不能实现俘获单于的愿望。
English: General Wei Qing had been secretly warned by the emperor that Li Guang was old and his fate was not good, and that he should not be pitted against Shanyu, and that his wish to capture Shanyu would probably not be fulfilled.

古文：而是时公孙敖新失侯，为中将军从大将军，大将军亦欲使敖与俱当单于，故徙前将军广。
现代文：那时公孙敖刚刚丢掉了侯爵，任中将军，随从大将军出征，大将军也想让公孙敖跟自己一起与单于对敌，故意把前将军李广调开。
English: At that time, Gongsun Rong had just lost his marquis, he was appointed as a middle-ranking general, and he went to war with the general. The general also wanted Gongsun Rong to fight with him against the enemy, and deliberately moved the former general Li Guang away.

古文：广时知之，固自辞於大将军。
现代文：李广当时也知道内情，所以坚决要求大将军收回调令。
English: Li Guang also knew the inside story at that time, so he resolutely demanded that the general withdraw the transfer order.

古文：大将军不听，令长史封书与广之莫府，曰： 急诣部，如书。 
现代文：大将军不答应他的请求，命令长史写文书发到李广的幕府，并对他说： 赶快到右将车部队中去，照文书办。 
English: The general did not agree to his request, and ordered Changshi to write a document and send it to Li Guang's shogunate, and told him: "Hurry to the right and go to the vehicle unit, and follow the document."

古文：广不谢大将军而起行，意甚愠怒而就部，引兵与右将军食其合军出东道。
现代文：李广不向大将军告辞就起程了，心中非常恼怒地前往军部，领兵与右将车军赵食其合兵后从东路出发。
English: Li Guang did not say goodbye to the general and set off. He was very angry and went to the military department. The leader and the right commander of the cavalry army, Zhao Shiji, joined forces and set off from the east road.

古文：军亡导，或失道，後大将军。
现代文：军队没有向导，有时迷失道路，结果落在大将军之后。
English: Without a guide, an army sometimes loses its way and ends up following the general.

古文：大将军与单于接战，单于遁走，弗能得而还。
现代文：大将军与单于交战，单于逃跑了，卫青没有战果只好回兵。
English: The great general and Shan Yu engaged in battle, and Shan Yu fled. Wei Qing had no choice but to return to the army.

古文：南绝幕，遇前将军、右将军。
现代文：大将军向南行渡过沙漠，遇到了前将军和右将军。
English: The great general went south across the desert and met the former general and the right general.

古文：广已见大将军，还入军。
现代文：李广谒见大将军之后，回到自己军中。
English: After meeting the general, Li Guangyao returned to his own army.

古文：大将军使长史持糒醪遗广，因问广、食其失道状，青欲上书报天子军曲折。
现代文：大将军派长史带着干粮和酒送给李广，顺使向李广和赵食其询问迷失道路的情况，卫青要给天子上书报告详细的军情。
English: The general sent Changshi to Li Guang with dry grain and wine to give to him. The general asked Li Guang and Zhao Zhigu to inquire about the situation of the lost road. Wei Qing wanted to write to heaven to report the detailed military situation.

古文：广未对，大将军使长史急责广之幕府对簿。
现代文：李广没有回答。大将军派长史急切责令李广幕府的人员前去受审对质。
English: Li Guang did not answer. The general dispatched Chang Shi to urgently order Li Guang's shogunate personnel to come forward for questioning.

古文：广曰： 诸校尉无罪，乃我自失道。吾今自上簿。 
现代文：李广说： 校尉们没有罪，是我自己迷失道路，我现在亲自到大将军幕府去受审对质。 
English: Li Guang said: The school captains are not guilty, it was I who lost my way. I am now personally going to the shogun's office to be tried and confronted.

古文：至莫府，广谓其麾下曰； 广结发与匈奴大小七十馀战，今幸从大将军出接单于兵，而大将军又徙广部行回远，而又迷失道，岂非天哉！
现代文：到了大将军幕府，李广对他的部下说： 我从少年起与匈奴打过大小七十多仗，如今有幸跟随大将军出征同单于军队交战，可是大将军又调我的部队去走迂回绕远的路，偏又迷失道路，难道不是天意吗！
English: When he arrived at the general shogunate, Li Guang said to his subordinates: I have fought more than seventy battles with the Xiongnu since I was a boy, and now I am fortunate to follow the general and fight with the army alone. However, the general has sent my troops to take a roundabout and circuitous route, and they have lost their way. Isn't it the will of heaven!

古文：且广年六十馀矣，终不能复对刀笔之吏。 
现代文：况且我已六十多岁了，毕竟不能再受那些刀笔吏的侮辱。 
English: Besides, I am more than sixty years old, after all, I can no longer be insulted by those pen-pushers.

古文：遂引刀自刭。
现代文：于是就拔刀自刎了。
English: So he pulled out a knife and killed himself.

古文：广军士大夫一军皆哭。
现代文：李广军中的所有将士都为之痛哭。
English: All the soldiers in Li Guang's army burst into tears.

古文：百姓闻之，知与不知，无老壮皆为垂涕。
现代文：百姓听到这个消息，不论认识的不认识的，也不论老的少的都为李广落泪。
English: When the people heard this news, they shed tears for Li Guang, whether they knew him or not, and whether they were old or young.

古文：而右将军独下吏，当死，赎为庶人。
现代文：右将军赵食其单独被交给执法官吏，应判为死罪，用财物赎罪，降为平民。
English: The right-wing general Zhao Zhiqui was handed over to the law enforcement officials alone. He should be sentenced to death, use his property to atone for his crime, and be reduced to a civilian.

古文：广子三人，曰当户、椒、敢，为郎。
现代文：李广有三个儿子，名叫当户、椒、敢，都任郎官。
English: Li Guang had three sons, named Danghu, Jiao and Gan, all of whom served as his vassals.

古文：天子与韩嫣戏，嫣少不逊，当户击嫣，嫣走。於是天子以为勇。
现代文：一次天子和弄臣韩嫣戏耍，韩嫣行为有些放肆，李当户去打韩嫣，韩嫣逃跑了，于是天子认为当户很勇敢。
English: One time, Tian Zi was playing with the jester Han Zi, and Han Zi's behavior was a bit reckless. Li Dang Hau went to fight Han Zi, and Han Zi ran away. Therefore, Tian Zi thought that Dang Hau was very brave.

古文：当户早死，拜椒为代郡太守，皆先广死。
现代文：李当户死得早，李椒被封为代郡太守，二人都比李广先死。
English: Li Danghu died early, Li Jiao was appointed as acting county governor, and both of them died before Li Guang.

古文：当户有遗腹子名陵。
现代文：李当户有遗腹子名李陵。
English: Li Danghu has a son named Li Ling.

古文：广死军时，敢从骠骑将军。
现代文：李广死在军中的时候，李敢正跟随骠骑将军霍去病。
English: When Li Guang died in the army, Li Gan was following General Huo to the hospital.

古文：广死明年，李蔡以丞相坐侵孝景园壖地，当下吏治，蔡亦自杀，不对狱，国除。
现代文：李广死后第二年，李蔡以丞相之位侵占景帝陵园前大道两旁的空地，因而获罪，应送交法吏查办，李蔡不愿受审对质，也自杀了，他的封国被废除。
English: In the second year after Li Guang's death, Li Cai, as the prime minister, occupied the vacant land on both sides of the avenue in front of Emperor Jing's mausoleum. As a result, he was found guilty and should be sent to legal officials for investigation. Li Cai did not want to be tried and confronted, and also committed suicide. His fiefdom was abolished.

古文：李敢以校尉从骠骑将军击胡左贤王，力战，夺左贤王鼓旗，斩首多，赐爵关内侯，食邑二百户，代广为郎中令。
现代文：李敢以校尉官职随从骠骑将军出击匈奴左贤王，奋力作战，夺得左贤王的战鼓和军旗，斩杀很多敌人首级，因而赐封了关内侯的爵位，封给食邑二百户，接替李广任郎中令。
English: Li Dang, with the rank of lieutenant-colonel, accompanied the cavalry general to attack the Hun Zuoxian Wang, fought hard, captured Zuoxian Wang's war drums and flags, and killed many enemy heads, and thus granted the title of Guanai Marquis, sealed to two hundred households in the food village, and succeeded Li Guangren Lang.

古文：顷之，怨大将军青之恨其父，乃击伤大将军，大将军匿讳之。
现代文：不久，李敢怨恨大将军卫青使他父亲饮恨而死，就打伤了大将军，大将军把这件事隐瞒下来，没有张扬。
English: Soon after, Li Dang grudged General Wei Qing and caused his father's death, injuring the general. The general concealed the incident and did not publicize it.

古文：居无何，敢从上雍，至甘泉宫猎。
现代文：又过了不久，李敢随从皇上去雍县，到甘泉宫打猎。
English: Not long after, Li Gang followed the emperor to Yongxian County and went to Ganquan Palace to hunt.

古文：骠骑将军去病与青有亲，射杀敢。
现代文：骠骑将军霍去病和卫青有亲戚关系，就射死了李敢。
English: General Huo Gaozhong, who was a relative of Wei Qing, shot and killed Li Gang.

古文：去病时方贵幸，上讳云鹿触杀之。
现代文：霍去病当时正显贵并且受宠，皇上就隐瞒真相，说李敢是被鹿撞死的。
English: At the time of Huo's illness, he was a prominent and favored person. The emperor concealed the truth and said that Li Gang was killed by a deer.

古文：居岁馀，去病死。
现代文：又过一年多，霍去病去世。
English: More than a year later, Huo went off sick and died.

古文：而敢有女为太子中人，爱幸，敢男禹有宠於太子，然好利，李氏陵迟衰微矣。
现代文：李敢有个女儿是太子的侍妾，很受宠爱，李敢的儿子李禹也受太子宠爱，但他贪财好利，李氏家族日渐败落衰微了。
English: Li Gang had a daughter who was the prince's concubine and was very much loved. Li Gang's son Li Yu was also loved by the prince, but he was greedy for money and profit. The Li family gradually fell into decline.

古文：李陵既壮，选为建章监，监诸骑。
现代文：李陵到壮年以后，被选任为建章营的监督官，监管所有骑兵。
English: After Li Ling came of age, he was selected as the supervisor of the medal-making camp, supervising all the cavalry.

古文：善射，爱士卒。天子以为李氏世将，而使将八百骑。
现代文：他善于射箭，爱护士兵，天子认为李家世代为将，因而让李陵率领八百骑兵。
English: He was good at archery and loved soldiers. The emperor believed that the Li family would be victorious for generations, so he let Li Ling lead eight hundred cavalry.

古文：尝深入匈奴二千馀里，过居延视地形，无所见虏而还。
现代文：李陵曾深入匈奴境内两千多里，穿过居延海，观察地形，没有遇见敌人就回来了。
English: Li Ling once went more than two thousand miles deep into the territory of the Xiongnu, crossed the Juyan Sea, observed the terrain, and returned without encountering the enemy.

古文：拜为骑都尉，将丹阳楚人五千人，教射酒泉、张掖以屯卫胡。
现代文：后被封为骑都尉，统率丹阳的楚兵五千人，在酒泉、张掖教练射箭，屯驻在那里防备匈奴。
English: Later, he was made a cavalry captain and led 5,000 Chu soldiers from Danyang to shoot arrows at Jiuquan and Zhangye Coach, and stationed there to guard against the Xiongnu.

古文：数岁，天汉二年秋，贰师将军李广利将三万骑击匈奴右贤王於祁连天山，而使陵将其射士步兵五千人出居延北可千馀里，欲以分匈奴兵，毋令专走贰师也。
现代文：几年后，天汉二年秋天，贰师将军李广利率领三万骑兵在祁连山进攻匈奴右贤王，武帝派李陵率领他的步兵射手五千人，出兵到居延海以北大约一千里的地方，想用此法分散敌人的兵力，不让他们专门去对付贰师将军。
English: A few years later, in the autumn of the second year of the Heian period, Emperor Wu sent Li Ling and his 5,000 infantry archers to a place about 1,000 miles north of the Juyan Sea, hoping to use this method to disperse the enemy's forces and prevent them from specifically attacking the general of the Heian period.

古文：陵既至期还，而单于以兵八万围击陵军。
现代文：李陵已到预定期限就要回兵，而单于用八万大军包围截击李陵的军队。
English: Liling has reached the scheduled time limit to return the troops, but only by encircling and intercepting Liling's army with 80,000 troops.

古文：陵军五千人，兵矢既尽，士死者过半，而所杀伤匈奴亦万馀人。
现代文：李陵军队只有五千人，箭射光了，士兵死了大半，但他们杀伤匈奴也有一万多人。
English: Li Ling's army was only five thousand strong, the arrows were shot out, and most of the soldiers died, but they also killed and wounded more than ten thousand Huns.

古文：且引且战，连斗八日，还未到居延百馀里，匈奴遮狭绝道，陵食乏而救兵不到，虏急击招降陵。
现代文：李陵军边退边战，接连战斗了八天，往回走到离居延海还有一百多里的地方，匈奴兵拦堵住狭窄的山谷，截断了他们的归路。李陵军队缺乏粮食，救兵也不到，敌人加紧进攻，并劝诱李陵投降。
English: Li Ling's army retreated while fighting, fought for eight days in a row, walked back to the place more than a hundred miles away from Yanhai, the Hun soldiers blocked the narrow valley and cut off their way back. Li Ling's army lacked food, and the rescuers did not arrive, the enemy stepped up the attack and persuaded Li Ling to surrender.

古文：陵曰： 无面目报陛下。 
现代文：李陵说： 我没脸面去回报皇帝了！ 
English: Li Ling said, "I don't have the face to repay the emperor!"

古文：遂降匈奴。
现代文：于是就投降了匈奴。
English: So they surrendered to the Huns.

古文：其兵尽没，馀亡散得归汉者四百馀人。
现代文：他的军队全军覆没，余下逃散能回到汉朝的只有四百多人。
English: His entire army was wiped out, and only more than four hundred people were able to escape and return to the Han Dynasty.

古文：单于既得陵，素闻其家声，及战又壮，乃以其女妻陵而贵之。
现代文：单于得到李陵之后，因平素就听说过李陵家的名声，打仗时又很勇敢，于是就把自己的女儿嫁给李陵，使他显贵。
English: After he obtained Li Ling, he had heard about the reputation of the Li Ling family and that they were very brave during the war, so he married his daughter to Li Ling to make him famous.

古文：汉闻，族陵母妻子。
现代文：汉朝知道后，就杀了李陵的母亲妻儿全家。
English: When the Han Dynasty found out, they killed Li Ling's mother, wife and entire family.

古文：自是之後，李氏名败，而陇西之士居门下者皆用为耻焉。
现代文：从此以后，李家名声败落，陇西一带的人士曾为李氏门下宾客的，都以此为耻辱。
English: Since then, the reputation of the Li family has fallen, and people in the Shaanxi region who were once guests of the Li family have taken this as a disgrace.

古文：太史公曰：传曰 其身正，不令而行；其身不正，虽令不从 。
现代文：太史公说：《论语》里说， 在上位的人自身行为端正，不下命令事情也能实行；自身行为不正，发下命令也没人听从。 
English: Tai Shigong said: "The Analects says that people at the top themselves behave well, and things can be implemented without giving orders; their own behavior is not correct, and no one obeys orders.

古文：其李将军之谓也？
现代文：这就是说的李将军吧！
English: That's General Lee you're talking about!

古文：余睹李将军悛悛如鄙人，口不能道辞。及死之日，天下知与不知，皆为尽哀。
现代文：我所看到的李将军，老实厚道像个乡下人，开口不善讲话，可在他死的那天，天下人不论认识他的还是不认识他的，都为他尽情哀痛。
English: General Lee, whom I saw, was honest and kind, like a countryman. He did not speak well, but on the day of his death, people all over the world, whether they knew him or not, mourned for him with all their hearts.

古文：彼其忠实心诚信於士大夫也？
现代文：他那忠实的品格确实得到了将士们的信赖呀！
English: His loyal character has really gained the trust of the generals!

古文：谚曰 桃李不言，下自成蹊 。
现代文：谚语说： 桃树李树不会讲话，树下却自然地被人踩出一条小路。 
English: A proverb says: The peach tree and the plum tree cannot talk, but a path is naturally made under the tree.

古文：此言虽小，可以谕大也。
现代文：这话虽然说的是小事，但可以用来比喻大道理呀。
English: Although this is a small thing, it can be used as a metaphor for a great truth.

