古文：魏之先，毕公高之後也。
现代文：魏氏的祖先是毕公高的后代。
English: The ancestors of the Wei clan are descendants of Bi Gonggao.

古文：毕公高与周同姓。
现代文：毕公高和周天子同姓。
English: Bi Gonggao and Zhou Tianzi share the same surname.

古文：武王之伐纣，而高封於毕，於是为毕姓。
现代文：武王伐纣之后，高被封在毕，于是就以毕为姓。
English: After King Wu cut down the trees, Gao was sealed in Bi, so he took Bi as his surname.

古文：其後绝封，为庶人，或在中国，或在夷狄。
现代文：他的后代中断了封爵，变成了平民，有的在中原，有的流落到夷狄。
English: His descendants interrupted the knighthood and became commoners, some in the Central Plains, some were exiled to Yidi.

古文：其苗裔曰毕万，事晋献公。
现代文：他的后代子孙有个叫毕万的，侍奉晋献公。
English: One of his descendants, Bi Wan, served the Jin Dynasty.

古文：献公之十六年，赵夙为御，毕万为右，以伐霍、耿、魏，灭之。
现代文：晋献公十六年，赵夙驾车，毕万为车右护卫，去征讨霍、耿、魏，把它们都灭了。
English: In the 16th year of Jinkang, Zhao Zhe drove the car, Bi Wan was the right guard of the car, went to solicit Ho, Geng, Wei, and destroyed them all.

古文：以耿封赵夙，以魏封毕万，为大夫。
现代文：献公把耿封给赵夙，把魏封给毕万，二人都成了大夫。
English: He dedicated Gengfeng to Zhao Yao and Weifeng to Bi Wan, and both of them became doctors.

古文：卜偃曰： 毕万之後必大矣，万，满数也；魏，大名也。
现代文：主管占卜的卜偃说： 毕万的后代一定很兴旺。 万 是满数； 魏 是高大的名称。
English: Bu Jun, the chief diviner, said: "Bi Wan's descendants must be very prosperous. Wan is a perfect number; Wei is the name of the tall one.

古文：以是始赏，天开之矣，天子曰兆民，诸侯曰万民。
现代文：用这样的名称开始封赏，这是上天对他的赞助。天子所统治的叫做兆民，诸侯所统治的叫做万民。
English: It was Heaven's patronage that he began to award rewards with such a name. Those who are ruled by the Son of Heaven are called Zhaomin, and those who are ruled by lords are called Wanmin.

古文：今命之大，以从满数，其必有众。 
现代文：如今封他的名称是大，后边又跟着满数，他一定会拥有民众。 
English: Now that his name is big, followed by a full number, he will certainly have the people.

古文：初，毕万卜事晋，遇屯之比。
现代文：当初，毕万占卜侍奉晋君的吉凶，得到屯ｚｈūｎ，阴平 准 卦变为比卦。
English: At the beginning, Biwan divination served Jinjun's good and bad fortune, got tun zhūn, yin 平 准 卦 turned into biga.

古文：辛廖占之，曰： 吉。
现代文：辛廖推断说： 吉利。
English: Xin Liao deduced: Geely.

古文：屯固比入，吉孰大焉，其必蕃昌。 
现代文：屯卦象征坚固，比卦象征进入，还有什么比这个更吉利的呢？将来必定繁盛兴旺。 
English: Tun Gua symbolizes solidity, and Biga symbolizes entry. What could be more auspicious than this? The future is sure to be prosperous.

古文：毕万封十一年，晋献公卒，四子争更立，晋乱。
现代文：毕万受封后十一年，晋献公去世，他的四个儿子互相争夺君位，晋国内乱。
English: Eleven years after Biwan received the title, Jin Xiangong died, his four sons competed with each other for the throne, and the Jin civil war broke out.

古文：而毕万之世弥大，从其国名为魏氏。
现代文：而毕万的子孙越来越多，随他们的国名称为魏氏。
English: However, the descendants of Bi Wan are more and more numerous, and their country is called Wei.

古文：生武子。
现代文：毕万生了武子。
English: He was a samurai all his life.

古文：魏武子以魏诸子事晋公子重耳。
现代文：魏武子以魏氏诸子的身份侍奉晋公子重耳。
English: Wei Wu Zi, as a son of the Wei clan, served Jin Gongzi.

古文：晋献公之二十一年，武子从重耳出亡。十九年反，重耳立为晋文公，而令魏武子袭魏氏之後封，列为大夫，治於魏。
现代文：晋献公二十一年的时候，魏武子跟随重耳外出流亡，十九年之后回国，重耳即位为晋文公，让魏武子承袭魏氏后代的封爵，升到了大夫的地位，他的官府设在魏邑。
English: When he was 21 years old, Wei Wuzi went into exile with Chung E. He returned to China 19 years later. Chung E. ascended to the throne as the Prince of Jin and Wen, and allowed Wei Wuzi to inherit the knighthood of the descendants of the Wei clan. He was promoted to the position of doctor, and his government office was located in Weiyi.

古文：生悼子。
现代文：魏武子生了悼子。
English: Wei Wu Zi gave birth to a daughter.

古文：魏悼子徙治霍。
现代文：魏悼子把官府迁到了霍邑。
English: Wei Weizi moved the government office to Huoyu.

古文：生魏绛。
现代文：他生了魏绛。
English: He gave birth to Wei Yao.

古文：魏绛事晋悼公。
现代文：魏绛侍奉晋悼公。
English: Wei Yao served Jin to mourn.

古文：悼公三年，会诸侯。
现代文：悼公三年，同诸侯盟会。
English: After three years of mourning, the League of Princes was formed.

古文：悼公弟杨干乱行，魏绛僇辱杨干。
现代文：悼公的弟弟杨干搞乱队列，魏绛杀了杨干的仆人羞辱他。
English: Wei Zheng killed Yang Gan's servant and humiliated him after Yang Gan, the brother of the mourning prince, disrupted the queue.

古文：悼公怒曰： 合诸侯以为荣，今辱吾弟！ 
现代文：悼公怒冲冲地说： 会合诸侯是以此为荣的，如今却侮辱我的弟弟！ 
English: Mourning the public's anger, he said angrily, "You are proud of meeting the princes, but now you are insulting my brother!"

古文：将诛魏绛。
现代文：将要诛杀魏绛。
English: He's going to kill Wei Xi.

古文：或说悼公，悼公止。
现代文：有人劝说悼公，悼公才作罢。
English: Some people have been persuaded to stop mourning the public.

古文：卒任魏绛政，使和戎、翟，戎、翟亲附。
现代文：后来终于任用魏绛执政，派他去同戎、狄修好，戎、狄从此亲近依附晋国。
English: Later, he finally appointed Wei Wei to govern and sent him to make peace with Rong and Di. From then on, Rong and Di were closely attached to Jin.

古文：悼公之十一年，曰： 自吾用魏绛，八年之中，九合诸侯，戎、翟和，子之力也。 
现代文：悼公十一年，悼公说： 自从我任用了魏绛，八年之中，九次会合诸侯，戎、狄同我们合睦，这全靠您的努力呀！ 
English: In the eleventh year of mourning, the mourner said: Since I appointed Wei Tong, in the eight years, there have been nine meetings of the lords, the eunuchs, the deities, and we are in harmony. This is all thanks to your efforts!

古文：赐之乐，三让，然後受之。
现代文：赐给魏绛乐器和乐队，魏降三次辞让，然后才接受了。
English: He gave Wei Wei's musical instruments and band, and Wei Wei made three concessions before he accepted.

古文：徙治安邑。
现代文：魏绛把官府迁到安邑。
English: Wei Wei moved the government office to An'yun.

古文：魏绛卒，谥为昭子。
现代文：魏绛去世后，谥号是昭子。
English: After Wei Zheng's death, his posthumous name was Shao Zheng.

古文：生魏嬴。嬴生魏献子。
现代文：他生了魏赢，魏赢生了魏献子。
English: He gave birth to Wei Ying, Wei Ying gave birth to Wei Xianzi.

古文：献子事晋昭公。
现代文：魏献子侍奉晋昭公。
English: Wei Xianzi served Jin Zhaogong.

古文：昭公卒而六卿彊，公室卑。
现代文：昭公去世后，晋国的六卿强盛起来，公室衰微下去。
English: After the death of Prince Akihito, the six nobles of the Jin dynasty prospered, while the imperial court declined.

古文：晋顷公之十二年，韩宣子老，魏献子为国政。
现代文：晋顷公十二年，韩宣子告老，魏献子主持国政。
English: In the twelfth year of the reign of Emperor Jin, Han Xuan Zi came of age, and Wei Xian Zi presided over state affairs.

古文：晋宗室祁氏、羊舌氏相恶，六卿诛之，尽取其邑为十县，六卿各令其子为之大夫。
现代文：晋国宗族祁氏和羊舌氏互相诽谤，六卿把他们诛杀了，收回他们的全部封地分为十个县，六卿分别派他们的儿子去十县为大夫。
English: The Jin clans of the Yi clan and the Sheep Tongue clan slandered each other. The Six Lords killed them, took back all their fiefs and divided them into ten counties. The Six Lords sent their sons to the ten counties to become doctors.

古文：献子与赵简子、中行文子、范献子并为晋卿。
现代文：魏献子与赵简子、中行文子、范献子同任晋国的卿。
English: Wei Xianzi, Zhao Jianzi, Zhong Xing Fanzi, and Fan Xianzi were all appointed as nobles of Jin.

古文：其後十四岁而孔子相鲁。
现代文：此后十四年，孔子在鲁国代理宰相。
English: Fourteen years later, Confucius became acting prime minister in the State of Lu.

古文：後四岁，赵简子以晋阳之乱也，而与韩、魏共攻范、中行氏。
现代文：再过四年，赵简子由于晋阳之乱，同韩氏、魏氏一起攻打范氏和中行氏。
English: Four years later, due to the Jinyang Rebellion, Zhao Jianzi, together with the Han and Wei clans, attacked the Fan and Zhongxing clans.

古文：魏献子生魏侈。魏侈与赵鞅共攻范、中行氏。
现代文：魏献子生了魏侈，魏侈同赵鞅一起攻打范氏和中行氏。
English: Wei Xianzhi gave birth to Wei Luxi, and Wei Luxi fought against the Fan and Zhongxing clans together with Zhao Jun.

古文：魏侈之孙曰魏桓子，与韩康子、赵襄子共伐灭知伯，分其地。
现代文：魏侈的孙子是魏桓子，他和韩康子、赵襄子一起讨伐除灭了知伯，并瓜分了他的领地。
English: Wei Han Zi, the grandson of Wei Liao, together with Han Kang Zi and Zhao Xiang Zi, fought against and exterminated Zhibo and divided his territory.

古文：桓子之孙曰文侯都。
现代文：桓子的孙子是文侯魏斯。
English: Kaneko's grandson is Munhō Weiss.

古文：魏文侯元年，秦灵公之元年也。
现代文：魏文侯元年，正是秦灵公元年。
English: The first year of Wei Wen Hou was the year of Qin Ling.

古文：与韩武子、赵桓子、周威王同时。
现代文：魏文侯和韩武子、赵桓子、周威烈王同时。
English: Wei Wenhou, Han Mu Zi, Zhao Huan Zi, and Zhou Weili Wang all appeared at the same time.

古文：六年，城少梁。
现代文：文侯六年，在少梁筑城。
English: After six years as a prince, he built a castle in Shao Liang.

古文：十三年，使子击围繁、庞，出其民。
现代文：十三年，派子击去围攻繁和庞两地，迁出那里的百姓。
English: In the thirteenth year, soldiers were sent to besiege the two provinces of Shang and Pang, and the people there were evacuated.

古文：十六年，伐秦，筑临晋元里。
现代文：十六年，进攻秦国，在临晋、元里筑城。
English: In 166, he attacked Qin and built cities in Linjin and Yuanli.

古文：十七年，伐中山，使子击守之，赵仓唐傅之。
现代文：文侯十七年，攻灭中山国，派子击在那里驻守，让赵仓唐辅佐他。
English: In the seventeenth year of the reign of King Wen, he invaded and destroyed Zhongshan, and stationed his troops there, with Zhao Cang Tang as his assistant.

古文：子击逢文侯之师田子方於朝歌，引车避，下谒。
现代文：子击在朝歌遇到了文侯的老师田子方，他退车让路，下车拜见。
English: In the morning song, Zihao met the teacher of Wenhou, Tian Zi Fang. He backed out of the car to make way, and got out of the car to say goodbye.

古文：田子方不为礼。
现代文：田子方却不还礼。
English: However, Tago did not return the compliment.

古文：子击因问曰： 富贵者骄人乎？且贫贱者骄人乎？ 
现代文：子击就问他说： 是富贵的人对人傲慢呢还是贫贱的人对人傲慢呢？ 
English: Subhuti asked him, "Are the rich arrogant or are the poor arrogant?"

古文：子方曰： 亦贫贱者骄人耳。
现代文：田子方说： 也就是贫贱的人对人傲慢罢了。
English: Tagokata said: In other words, poor people are arrogant towards others.

古文：夫诸侯而骄人则失其国，大夫而骄人则失其家。
现代文：诸侯如果对人傲慢就会失去他的封国，大夫如果对人傲慢就会失去他的家。
English: If princes are arrogant to others, they will lose their fiefdoms; if doctors are arrogant to others, they will lose their homes.

古文：贫贱者，行不合，言不用，则去之楚、越，若脱鵕然，柰何其同之哉！ 
现代文：贫贱的人，如果行为不相投合，意见不被采纳，就离开这里到楚、越去，好像脱掉草鞋一样，怎么能和富贵者相同呢！ 
English: The poor and lowly, if their actions do not match and their opinions are not accepted, will leave here for Chu and go further, just like taking off straw sandals. How can they be the same as the rich?

古文：子击不怿而去。
现代文：子击很不高兴地离开了。
English: The boy left in a bad mood.

古文：西攻秦，至郑而还，筑雒阴、合阳。
现代文：向西进攻秦国，到郑国就回来了，在雒阴、合阳筑城。
English: They attacked Qin Province to the west and returned to Zheng Province, building cities in Shuyin and Hejang.

古文：二十二年，魏、赵、韩列为诸侯。
现代文：文侯二十二年，魏国、赵国、韩国被承认为诸侯。
English: In the 22nd year of the Bunhaku era, the states of Wei, Zhao, and Korea were recognized as vassals.

古文：二十四年，秦伐我，至阳狐。
现代文：文侯二十四年，秦军攻伐魏国，打到了阳狐。
English: In the 24th year of the reign of King Wen, the Qin army invaded Wei and defeated the Yanghu.

古文：二十五年，子击生子。
现代文：文侯二十五年，子击生子。
English: In the 25th year of the reign of Emperor Wen, Zi Hui gave birth to Zi Zong.

古文：文侯受子夏经艺，客段干木，过其闾，未尝不轼也。
现代文：文侯师从子夏学经书，以客礼对待段干木，经过他的乡里，没有一次不凭轼敬礼的。
English: Wen Hou Shi studied scriptures from Zixia and treated the piece of dry wood with courtesy. He never passed through his hometown without saluting it.

古文：秦尝欲伐魏，或曰： 魏君贤人是礼，国人称仁，上下和合，未可图也。 
现代文：秦国曾想进攻魏国。有人说： 魏君对贤人特别敬重，魏国人都称赞他的仁德，上下和谐同心，不能对他有什么企图。 
English: Qin once wanted to attack Wei. Some people said: Wei Jun had a special respect for wise men. The Wei people all praised his benevolence, harmony and unity, and could not have any intentions towards him.

古文：文侯由此得誉於诸侯。
现代文：文侯因此得到诸侯的赞誊。
English: As a result, Bunhō received the praise of the lords.

古文：任西门豹守鄴，而河内称治。
现代文：任命西门豹为邺郡郡守，因而河内号称清平安定。
English: Appointed Ximen Leopard as the county governor of Qu county, thus Hanoi was known as a city of peace and stability.

古文：魏文侯谓李克曰： 先生尝教寡人曰 家贫则思良妻，国乱则思良相 。
现代文：魏文侯对李克说： 先生曾经教导寡人说： 家贫就想得贤妻，国乱就想得贤相 。
English: Wei Wenhou said to Li Ke: Teacher once taught some people to say: If you are poor, you want a virtuous wife; if you are in a state of civil war, you want a virtuous person.

古文：今所置非成则璜，二子何如？ 
现代文：如今要安排宰相，不是成子就是翟璜，这两个人您看怎么样？ 
English: Now we have to arrange for a prime minister, either a son or a daughter. What do you think of these two people?

古文：李克对曰： 臣闻之，卑不谋尊，疏不谋戚。
现代文：李克回答说： 我听说，卑贱的人不替尊贵的人谋划，疏远的人不替亲近的人谋划。
English: Li Ke replied, "I have heard that a lowly person does not scheme for a high-ranking person, and an estranged person does not scheme for a close person.

古文：臣在阙门之外，不敢当命。 
现代文：我的职责在宫门以外，不敢承担这个使命。 
English: My duties lie outside the palace gates, and I dare not undertake this mission.

古文：文侯曰： 先生临事勿让。 
现代文：文侯说： 先生面对此事就不要推辞了。 
English: Wen Hou said, "If you are confronted with this, don't deny it.

古文：李克曰： 君不察故也。
现代文：李克说： 这是您不注意考察的缘故。
English: Li Ke said: This is because you did not pay attention to the investigation.

古文：居视其所亲，富视其所与，达视其所举，穷视其所不为，贫视其所不取，五者足以定之矣，何待克哉！ 
现代文：平时看他亲近哪些人，富有时看他结交哪些人，显贵时看他推举哪些人，不得志时看他不做哪些事，贫苦时看他不要哪些东西，有这五条就足能决定谁当宰相了，何需等我李克呢！ 
English: In ordinary times, see which people he is close to, when he is distinguished, see which people he recommends, when he is discouraged, see what things he does not do, and when he is poor, see what things he does not want. These five are enough to decide, why do I need Li Ke?

古文：文侯曰： 先生就舍，寡人之相定矣。 
现代文：文侯说： 先生回家吧，我的宰相已经决定了。 
English: Wen Hou said: Sir, go home, my prime minister has already decided.

古文：李克趋而出，过翟璜之家。
现代文：李克快步走出去，到翟璜家中拜访。
English: Li Ke walked out at a fast pace and paid a visit to Zou's home.

古文：翟璜曰： 今者闻君召先生而卜相，果谁为之？ 
现代文：翟璜说： 今天听说君主召见先生去选择宰相，结果是谁当宰相呢？ 
English: Zou said, "Today I heard that the monarch has summoned you to choose a prime minister. Who will be the prime minister?

古文：李克曰： 魏成子为相矣。 
现代文：李克说： 魏成子当宰相了。 
English: Li Ke said: Wei Cheng Zi has become the prime minister.

古文：翟璜忿然作色曰： 以耳目之所睹记，臣何负於魏成子？
现代文：翟璜气得变了脸色，他说： 就凭耳目的所见所闻，我哪一点比魏成子差？
English: He said, "Based on what I have seen and heard with my eyes and ears, how am I worse than Wei Cheng Zi?

古文：西河之守，臣之所进也。
现代文：西河的守将是我推荐的。
English: I recommend the defense of the West River.

古文：君内以鄴为忧，臣进西门豹。
现代文：君主对内地最忧虑的是邺郡，我推荐了西门豹。
English: The monarch's biggest concern about the mainland is County Lushan. I have recommended Xiamen Panther.

古文：君谋欲伐中山，臣进乐羊。
现代文：君主计划要攻伐中山国，我推荐了乐羊。
English: The monarch plans to invade Zhongshan Province, and I have recommended Le Yang.

古文：中山以拔，无使守之，臣进先生。
现代文：中山攻灭以后，派不出人去镇守，我推荐了先生。
English: After the defeat of Zhongshan, no one could be sent to guard the town, so I recommended Mr.

古文：君之子无傅，臣进屈侯鲋。
现代文：君主的儿子没有师傅，我推荐了屈侯鲋。
English: The monarch's son has no master, so I recommended Qu Houyao.

古文：臣何以负於魏成子！ 
现代文：我哪一点比魏成子差！ 
English: How am I any worse than Wei Cheng Zi!

古文：李克曰： 且子之言克於子之君者，岂将比周以求大官哉？
现代文：李克说： 您向您的君主推荐我的目的，难道是为了结党营私来谋求做大官吗？
English: Li Ke said: Did you recommend me to your monarch for the purpose of forming a party and seeking to become a high-ranking official?

古文：君问而置相 非成则璜，二子何如 ？
现代文：君主询问安排宰相 不是成子就是翟璜，两个人怎么样？ 
English: The monarch inquired of the prime minister, "Whether it's a son or a daughter, how about two?"

古文：克对曰： 君不察故也。
现代文：我回答说： 这是您不注意考察的缘故。
English: I replied, "It's because you didn't pay attention to the inspection."

古文：居视其所亲，富视其所与，达视其所举，穷视其所不为，贫视其所不取，五者足以定之矣，何待克哉！ 
现代文：平时看他亲近哪些人，显贵时看他推举哪些人，不得志时看他不做哪些事，贫苦时看他不要哪些东西。有这五条就足能决定了，何需我李克呢？ 
English: In ordinary times, see which people he is close to, when he is distinguished, see which people he recommends, when he is discouraged, see what things he does not do, and when he is poor, see what things he does not want. These five are enough to decide, why do I need Li Ke?

古文：是以知魏成子之为相也。
现代文：因此就知道魏成子要做宰相了。
English: Therefore, it is known that Wei Chengzi will become the prime minister.

古文：且子安得与魏成子比乎？
现代文：您怎么能跟魏成子相比呢？
English: How can you compare with Wei Chengzi?

古文：魏成子以食禄千锺，什九在外，什一在内，是以东得卜子夏、田子方、段干木。
现代文：魏成子有千钟俸禄，十分之九用在外边，十分之一用在家里，因此从东方聘来了卜子夏、田子方、段干木。
English: Wei Chengzi had a thousand-bell stipend, nine-tenths of which was spent outside and one-tenth at home. Therefore, he hired Buzixia, Tianzifang and Duan dry wood from the East.

古文：此三人者，君皆师之。
现代文：这三个人，君主把他们都奉为老师。
English: These three people, the monarch regards them all as teachers.

古文：子之所进五人者，君皆臣之。
现代文：您所推荐的那五个人，君主都任他们为臣。
English: The five men you recommended, the sovereign made them his vassals.

古文：子恶得与魏成子比也？ 
现代文：您怎么能跟魏成子相比呢？ 
English: How can you compare with Wei Chengzi?

古文：翟璜逡巡再拜曰： 璜，鄙人也，失对，原卒为弟子。 
现代文：翟璜迟疑徘徊后再拜说： 我翟璜是个浅薄的人，说话很不得当，我愿终身做您的弟子。 
English: After hesitating for a while, Zou Bai said, "I am a shallow person, and my speech is not proper. I am willing to be your disciple for life."

古文：二十六年，虢山崩，壅河。
现代文：文侯二十六年，虢山崩塌，堵塞了黄河。
English: In the 26th year of the reign of King Wen, Mount Lushan collapsed and blocked the Yellow River.

古文：三十二年，伐郑。
现代文：文侯三十二年，魏军攻伐郑国。
English: In the 32nd year of the reign of King Wen, the Wei army invaded Zheng.

古文：城酸枣。
现代文：在酸枣筑城。
English: Build a city on sour dates.

古文：败秦于注。
现代文：在注城打败秦军。
English: Defeated the Qin army at Zhucheng.

古文：三十五年，齐伐取我襄陵。
现代文：三十五年，齐军攻占了魏国的襄陵。
English: Thirty-five years ago, the Qi army captured the Xiangling Mausoleum in Wei.

古文：三十六年，秦侵我阴晋。
现代文：三十六年，秦军侵入魏国的阴晋。
English: In 36 A.D., the Qin army invaded Yin Jin in Wei.

古文：三十八年，伐秦，败我武下，得其将识。
现代文：文侯三十八年，魏军攻秦，在武下被打败，魏俘虏了秦将识。
English: In the thirty-eighth year of Wenhou, the Wei army attacked Qin, was defeated under Wu, and Wei captured Qin Shoshu.

古文：是岁，文侯卒，子击立，是为武侯。
现代文：这一年，文侯去世，子击即位，这就是武侯。
English: In the same year, Wenhou died and Zibo ascended to the throne. This was the beginning of Wuhou.

古文：魏武侯元年，赵敬侯初立，公子朔为乱，不胜，奔魏，与魏袭邯郸，魏败而去。
现代文：魏武侯元年，赵敬侯刚刚即位，公子朔作乱，没有成功，逃到了魏国，与魏军一起袭击邯郸，魏军失败后撤离。
English: In the first year of Wei Wuhou, Zhao Jinghou had just ascended to the throne, and his son Shuo started a riot, but was unsuccessful. He fled to Wei, attacked Yunnan with the Wei army, and withdrew after the Wei army was defeated.

古文：二年，城安邑、王垣。
现代文：武侯二年，在安邑、王垣筑城。
English: In the second year of Wuhou, he built a castle in Wangaki, Ami.

古文：七年，伐齐，至桑丘。
现代文：武侯七年，魏军进攻齐国，打到了桑丘。
English: In the seventh year of Wuhou, the Wei army attacked Qi and reached Sanqiu.

古文：九年，翟败我于澮。
现代文：九年，狄人在浍水打败魏军。
English: In nine years, the Di people defeated the Wei army in Surabaya.

古文：使吴起伐齐，至灵丘。
现代文：魏侯派吴起进攻齐国，打到了灵丘。
English: Wei Hou sent Wu Qi to attack Qi, and they reached Lingqiu.

古文：齐威王初立。
现代文：齐威王刚刚即位。
English: King Qi Wei has just ascended to the throne.

古文：十一年，与韩、赵三分晋地，灭其後。
现代文：武侯十一年，魏与韩、赵三国瓜分了晋国领土，消灭了它的后代。
English: In the eleventh year of Wuhou, Wei divided the territory of Jin with Han and Zhao and wiped out its descendants.

古文：十三年，秦献公县栎阳。
现代文：武侯十三年，秦献公迁都栎阳。
English: In the 13th year of Wuhou, the Qin Dynasty moved its capital to Shenyang.

古文：十五年，败赵北蔺。
现代文：十五年，魏军在北蔺打败赵军。
English: Fifteen years later, the Wei army defeated the Zhao army in Beilun.

古文：十六年，伐楚，取鲁阳。武侯卒，子立，是为惠王。
现代文：武侯十六年，魏军进攻楚国，占领了鲁阳，武侯去世，子即位，这就是惠王。
English: In the 16th year of Wuhou, the Wei army attacked Chu and occupied Luyang. Wuhou died, and Zihong ascended the throne. This is King Hui.

古文：惠王元年，初，武侯卒也，子与公中缓争为太子。
现代文：惠王元年。当初，武侯去世的时候，子和公中缓争做太子。
English: In the first year of King Hui, when Wuhou passed away, Zixuan and Gongzhong were fighting for the crown prince.

古文：公孙颀自宋入赵，自赵入韩，谓韩懿侯曰： 魏与公中缓争为太子，君亦闻之乎？
现代文：公孙颀从宋国到赵国，又从赵国到韩国，对韩懿侯说： 魏与公中缓争做太子，您也听说这件事了吧？
English: From Song to Zhao and from Zhao to Korea, Gongsun Qian said to Han Qian Hou, "Wei Qian and Gongzhong have been fighting for the position of crown prince for a long time. Have you heard about this?

古文：今魏得王错，挟上党，固半国也。
现代文：如今魏得到了王错的辅佐，拥有上党，来就算半个国家了。
English: Today, Wei Wei has been assisted by Wang Zhe, has the upper party, and has come to count for half of the country.

古文：因而除之，破魏必矣，不可失也。 
现代文：趁这个机会除掉他，打败魏国是一定的，不可失去这个机会。 
English: Take advantage of this opportunity to get rid of him, defeat Wei is certain, do not lose this opportunity.

古文：懿侯说，乃与赵成侯合军并兵以伐魏，战于浊泽，魏氏大败，魏君围。
现代文：懿侯很高兴，就跟赵成侯合兵一起攻魏国，在浊泽交战，魏国大败，魏君被围困。
English: Yan Hou was very happy, so he joined forces with Zhao Cheng Hou to attack Wei, and they fought in Heze. Wei was defeated, and Wei Jun was besieged.

古文：赵谓韩曰： 除魏君，立公中缓，割地而退，我且利。 
现代文：赵侯对韩侯说： 除掉魏君，让公中缓即位，割地后我们退兵，对我们有利。 
English: Zhao Hou said to Han Hou: It is to our advantage to get rid of Wei Jun, allow Gong Zhong to ascend the throne, and withdraw our troops after the land is divided.

古文：韩曰： 不可。
现代文：韩侯说： 不能这样。
English: Han Hou said, "This can't be."

古文：杀魏君，人必曰暴；割地而退，人必曰贪。
现代文：杀死魏君，人们必定指责我们残暴，割地退兵，人们必定指责我们贪婪。
English: If we kill Wei Jun, people will certainly accuse us of cruelty, if we retreat, people will certainly accuse us of greed.

古文：不如两分之。魏分为两，不彊於宋、卫，则我终无魏之患矣。 
现代文：不如把魏国分成两半，魏国分为两国，不会比宋国、卫国还强，我们就永远也不会有魏国的祸患了。 
English: It would be better to divide Wei into two halves. If Wei were divided into two countries, it would not be stronger than Song or Wei, and we would never have the calamity of Wei.

古文：赵不听。
现代文：赵侯不听。
English: Zhao Hou did not listen.

古文：韩不说，以其少卒夜去。
现代文：韩侯不高兴，带领部分军队连夜离去。
English: Han Hou was not happy and led part of his army to leave overnight.

古文：惠王之所以身不死，国不分者，二家谋不和也。若从一家之谋，则魏必分矣。
现代文：魏惠王所以没有死，魏国没有被分裂的原因，就在于韩、赵两家的意见不和，如果听从一家的意见，魏国就一定被分裂了。
English: The reason why Wei Hui Wang did not die and Wei was not divided is that Han and Zhao had different opinions. If they listened to the opinion of one family, Wei would definitely be divided.

古文：故曰 君终无適子，其国可破也 。
现代文：所以说 君主死了没有嫡子继承，这个国家就可能被攻破 。
English: Therefore, it is said that if the monarch dies without a legitimate son to succeed him, the country may be invaded.

古文：二年，魏败韩于马陵，败赵于怀。
现代文：惠王二年，魏军在马陵打败韩军，在怀邑打败赵军。
English: In the second year of King Hui, the Wei army defeated the Korean army in Maling and the Zhao army in Huaiyi.

古文：三年，齐败我观。
现代文：三年，齐军在观城打败魏军。
English: Three years later, the Qi army defeated the Wei army in Guancheng.

古文：五年，与韩会宅阳。
现代文：五年，魏王与韩侯在宅阳相会。
English: Five years later, Wei Wang and Han Hou met in Zhayang.

古文：城武堵。
现代文：筑武堵城。
English: Tsukuba Tojo.

古文：为秦所败。
现代文：魏军被秦军打败。
English: The Wei army was defeated by the Qin army.

古文：六年，伐取宋仪台。
现代文：六年攻占了宋国的仪台。
English: It took six years to conquer the Song Dynasty's ceremonial stage.

古文：九年，伐败韩于澮。
现代文：九年，在浍水进攻并打败了韩军。
English: In nine years, it attacked and defeated the Korean army in Surabaya.

古文：与秦战少梁，虏我将公孙痤，取庞。
现代文：魏军在少梁与秦军交战，秦军俘虏了魏将公孙痤，并夺取了庞城。
English: The Wei army clashed with the Qin army in Shaoliang. The Qin army captured the Wei general Gongsun Rong and captured Pangcheng.

古文：秦献公卒，子孝公立。
现代文：秦献公去世，他的儿子孝公即位。
English: Qin Xianguo died, and his son Xiaogong ascended the throne.

古文：十年，伐取赵皮牢。
现代文：惠王十年，魏军攻占了赵国的皮牢。
English: In the tenth year of King Hui's reign, the Wei army captured the stronghold of Zhao.

古文：彗星见。
现代文：彗星出现。
English: A comet appears.

古文：十二年，星昼坠，有声。
现代文：十二年，白天陨星坠落，有声响。
English: Twelve years ago, a meteor fell during the day, and there was a loud noise.

古文：十四年，与赵会鄗。
现代文：惠王十四年，魏王与赵侯在鄗邑相会。
English: In the 14th year of Hui Wang, Wei Wang and Zhao Hou met each other in Zouyi.

古文：十五年，鲁、卫、宋、郑君来朝。
现代文：十五年，鲁国、卫国、宋国和郑国的君主来朝见魏惠王。
English: In the fifteenth year, the monarchs of the states of Lu, Wei, Song and Zheng came to the imperial court to meet King Wei Hui.

古文：十六年，与秦孝公会杜平。
现代文：十六年，魏惠王与秦孝公在杜平相会。
English: Sixteen years later, Wei Hui Wang and Qin Xiaogong met in Duping.

古文：侵宋黄池，宋复取之。
现代文：侵占了宋国的黄池，宋国又把它夺回去了。
English: invaded Song's Huangchi, and Song took it back.

古文：十七年，与秦战元里，秦取我少梁。
现代文：惠王十七年，魏军与秦军在元里交战，秦军攻占魏国的少梁。
English: In the seventeenth year of King Hui, the Wei army and the Qin army fought in Yuanli, and the Qin army conquered Shaoliang in Wei.

古文：围赵邯郸。
现代文：魏军包围赵国的邯郸。
English: The Wei army encircled the capital of Zhao.

古文：十八年，拔邯郸。
现代文：十八年，魏军攻下邯郸。
English: In the 18th year, the Wei army captured Tong.

古文：赵请救于齐，齐使田忌、孙膑救赵，败魏桂陵。
现代文：赵国向齐国请救兵，齐国派田忌、孙膑救赵，在桂陵打败了魏军。
English: Zhao asked Qi for help, and Qi sent Tianqi and Sun Rong to rescue Zhao, and defeated the Wei army in Guilin.

古文：十九年，诸侯围我襄陵。
现代文：惠王十九年，诸侯联合包围魏国的襄陵。
English: In the 19th year of King Hui, the princes jointly encircled the Xiangling Mausoleum in Wei.

古文：筑长城，塞固阳。
现代文：修筑长城，固阳成为要塞。
English: After the Great Wall was built, Guyang became a fortress.

古文：二十年，归赵邯郸，与盟漳水上。
现代文：惠王二十年，魏国把邯郸归还赵国，魏王与赵侯在漳水之滨会盟。
English: In the 20th year of King Hui's reign, the State of Wei returned the imperial scepter to the State of Zhao, and the King of Wei and the Prince of Zhao made an alliance at the coast of Surabaya.

古文：二十一年，与秦会彤。
现代文：二十一年，与秦君在彤相会。
English: In 1921, he met Qin Jun in Handan.

古文：赵成侯卒。
现代文：赵成侯去世。
English: Zhao Chenghou passed away.

古文：二十八年，齐威王卒。
现代文：二十八年，齐威王去世。
English: In the 28th year, King Qi Wei passed away.

古文：中山君相魏。
现代文：中山君任魏国宰相。
English: Zhongshan Jun became the prime minister of Wei.

古文：三十年，魏伐赵，赵告急齐。
现代文：惠王三十年，魏军进攻赵国，赵国向齐国告急。
English: In the 30th year of King Hui's reign, the Wei army attacked the State of Zhao, and the State of Zhao rushed to the State of Qi.

古文：齐宣王用孙子计，救赵击魏。
现代文：齐宣王用孙子的计策，进击魏国援救赵国。
English: King Qi Xuan used his grandson's strategy to attack Wei to rescue Zhao.

古文：魏遂大兴师，使庞涓将，而令太子申为上将军。
现代文：魏国于是大量发兵，派庞涓率领，让太子申做上将军。
English: As a result, Wei dispatched a large number of troops, sent Pang Jun to lead them, and made Prince Shen a general.

古文：过外黄，外黄徐子谓太子曰： 臣有百战百胜之术。 
现代文：魏军经过外黄的时候，外黄徐子对太子申说： 我有百战百胜的方法。 
English: When the Wei army passed Waigaoqiao, Waigaoqiao's Xu Zi said to Prince Shen: I have a way to win every battle.

古文：太子曰： 可得闻乎？ 
现代文：太子说： 可以让我听听吗？ 
English: The prince said, "May I hear it?"

古文：客曰： 固原效之。 
现代文：徐子说： 本来就想要呈献给您的。 
English: Xu Zi said: I originally wanted to present it to you.

古文：曰： 太子自将攻齐，大胜并莒，则富不过有魏，贵不益为王。
现代文：他接着说： 太子亲自领兵攻齐，即使大胜并占领莒地，富也不过就是拥有魏国，贵也不过就是做魏王。
English: He went on to say: The prince personally led the troops to attack the Qi, and even if he won a great victory and occupied the Fengtian, the rich would only own Wei, and the expensive would only be the king of Wei.

古文：若战不胜齐，则万世无魏矣。
现代文：如果不能战胜齐国，那就会万世子孙也不能得到魏国了。
English: If we can't defeat Qi, then we will never be able to conquer Wei.

古文：此臣之百战百胜之术也。 
现代文：这就是我的百战百胜的方法。 
English: That's how I win every battle.

古文：太子曰： 诺，请必从公之言而还矣。 
现代文：太子申说： 好吧，我一定听从您的意见回国去。 
English: Prince Shin said, "All right, I will definitely follow your advice and go back to my country."

古文：客曰： 太子虽欲还，不得矣。
现代文：徐子说： 太子虽然想回去，已经不可能了。
English: Xu Zi said: Although the prince wants to go back, it is no longer possible.

古文：彼劝太子战攻，欲啜汁者众。
现代文：那些劝太子打仗，想从中得利的人太多了。
English: There are too many people who want to make a profit from persuading the prince to go to war.

古文：太子虽欲还，恐不得矣。 
现代文：太子虽然想回去，恐怕不可能了。 
English: Although the prince wants to go back, I'm afraid it's impossible.

古文：太子因欲还，其御曰： 将出而还，与北同。 
现代文：太子于是想回去，他的驾车人却说： 将军领兵刚出来就回去，和打败仗是一样的。 
English: The prince then wanted to go back, but his driver said: "The general and the leader of the soldiers went back as soon as they came out, which is the same as losing the war."

古文：太子果与齐人战，败於马陵。
现代文：太子申果然同齐军作战，在马陵战败。
English: Prince Shen fought with the Qi army and was defeated at Maling.

古文：齐虏魏太子申，杀将军涓，军遂大破。
现代文：齐军俘虏了魏太子申，杀死了将军庞涓，魏军终于大败。
English: The Qi army captured the Wei prince Shen and killed the general Pang Jun, and the Wei army was finally defeated.

古文：三十一年，秦、赵、齐共伐我，秦将商君诈我将军公子卬而袭夺其军，破之。
现代文：惠王三十一年，秦、赵、齐一起进攻魏国，秦将商鞅诈骗并俘虏了魏国将军公子卬，然后又袭击夺取了他的军队，打败了魏军。
English: In the 31st year of King Hui, Qin, Zhao, and Qi attacked Wei together. Qin deceived and captured the Wei general Gong Zixuan, and then attacked and captured his army, defeating the Wei army.

古文：秦用商君，东地至河，而齐、赵数破我，安邑近秦，於是徙治大梁。
现代文：秦国任用商鞅，东边的领土到了黄河，而齐国、赵国又屡次打败魏国，安邑又靠近秦国，于是魏国就把都城迁到大梁。
English: Qin appointed Shangguan, the eastern territory reached the Yellow River, while Qi and Zhao repeatedly defeated Wei, and An'yun was close to Qin, so Wei moved the capital to Dalian.

古文：以公子赫为太子。
现代文：公子赫被立为太子。
English: Prince He was enthroned as crown prince.

古文：三十三年，秦孝公卒，商君亡秦归魏，魏怒，不入。
现代文：惠王三十三年，秦孝公去世，商鞅从秦国逃出来投奔魏国，魏人恼怒，不收留他。
English: In the 33rd year of King Hui, after the death of Qin Xiaogong, Shangguan escaped from Qin and fled to Wei. The Wei people were angry and refused to accept him.

古文：三十五年，与齐宣王会平阿南。
现代文：三十五年，魏王与齐宣王在平阳南边相会。
English: In 35 years, Wei Wang and Qi Xuan Wang met on the southern edge of Pingyang.

古文：惠王数被於军旅，卑礼厚币以招贤者。邹衍、淳于髡、孟轲皆至梁。
现代文：惠王屡次遭受军事上的失败，就用谦恭的礼节和优厚的礼物来招纳贤人，邹衍、淳于髡、孟轲都来到魏国。
English: Hui Wang suffered repeated military defeats, and he recruited sages with courteous etiquette and generous gifts. Zou Yan, Chun Yu Yao, and Meng Yao all came to Wei.

古文：梁惠王曰： 寡人不佞，兵三折於外，太子虏，上将死，国以空虚，以羞先君宗庙社稷，寡人甚丑之，叟不远千里，辱幸至弊邑之廷，将何利吾国？ 
现代文：梁惠王说： 寡人没有才能，军队三次在国外受挫折，太子被俘，上将战死，国内因而空虚，以致使祖先的宗庙社稷受到羞辱，寡人非常惭愧。老先生屈尊亲临敝国朝廷，将用什么方法使我国得利呢？ 
English: Liang Hui Wang said: Few people have no talent, the army suffered setbacks three times abroad, the prince was captured, the general died in battle, and the country was empty as a result, so that the ancestors of the ancestral temple community were humiliated, and few people were very ashamed. What methods will the old gentleman use to benefit our country by condescending to the imperial court of Linyi?

古文：孟轲曰： 君不可以言利若是。
现代文：孟轲说： 君主不可以像这样谈论利益。
English: Monarchs are not allowed to talk about interests like this, Meng Wei said.

古文：夫君欲利则大夫欲利，大夫欲利则庶人欲利，上下争利，国则危矣。
现代文：君主想得利，那么大夫也想得利；大夫想得利，那么百姓也想得利，上上下下都来争利，国家就危险了。
English: If the monarch wants to make a profit, then the doctor also wants to make a profit; if the doctor wants to make a profit, then the people also want to make a profit. Everyone is competing for profit, and the country is in danger.

古文：为人君，仁义而已矣，何以利为！ 
现代文：作为一国君主，讲仁义就行了，为什么要讲利呢？ 
English: As a monarch of a country, it is enough to talk about benevolence and righteousness, why talk about profit?

古文：三十六年，复与齐王会甄。
现代文：惠王三十六年，再次与齐王在甄邑相会。
English: In the 36th year of King Hui's reign, he met King Qi again in Zhenyi.

古文：是岁，惠王卒，子襄王立。
现代文：这一年，惠王去世，他的儿子襄王即位。
English: In the same year, King Hui died and his son King Xiang ascended to the throne.

古文：襄王元年，与诸侯会徐州，相王也。
现代文：襄王元年，魏王与诸侯在徐州相会，是为了互相称王。
English: In the first year of King Xiang, the Wei king and the princes met in Xuzhou in order to praise each other.

古文：追尊父惠王为王。
现代文：襄王追尊他的父亲惠王为王。
English: King Xiang followed his father, King Hui, as king.

古文：五年，秦败我龙贾军四万五千于雕阴，围我焦、曲沃。
现代文：襄王五年，秦军在雕阴打败魏国龙贾率领的军队四万五千人，并围困魏国的焦城和曲沃。
English: In the fifth year of King Xiang, the Qin army defeated the army of 45,000 people led by Longjia of Wei in Zhiyin, and besieged Jiaocheng and Quwo of Wei.

古文：予秦河西之地。
现代文：魏国把河西之地割给秦国。
English: Wei assigned the land west of the river to Qin.

古文：六年，与秦会应。
现代文：襄王六年，魏王与秦王在应城相会。
English: In the sixth year of King Xiang, King Wei and King Qin met in Yingcheng.

古文：秦取我汾阴、皮氏、焦。
现代文：秦军夺取魏国的汾阴、皮氏和焦城。
English: The Qin army captured the Wei states of Jinyin, Pi and Jiaocheng.

古文：魏伐楚，败之陉山。
现代文：魏军征讨楚国，在陉山打败了楚军。
English: The Wei army conquered the state of Chu and defeated the Chu army in Shaoshan.

古文：七年，魏尽入上郡于秦。
现代文：七年，魏国把上郡全部给了秦国。
English: In the seventh year, Wei gave all of Shang County to Qin.

古文：秦降我蒲阳。
现代文：秦军占领了魏国的蒲阳。
English: The Qin army occupied Puyang in Wei.

古文：八年，秦归我焦、曲沃。
现代文：八年，秦国把焦城、曲沃归还魏国。
English: In the eighth year, Qin returned Jiaocheng and Quwo to Wei.

古文：十二年，楚败我襄陵。
现代文：襄王十二年，楚军在襄陵打败魏军。
English: In the twelfth year of King Xiang, the Chu army defeated the Wei army in Xiangling.

古文：诸侯执政与秦相张仪会齧桑。
现代文：各诸侯国的执政大臣与秦相张仪在啮桑相会。
English: The ruling ministers of the various states met with Qin Emperor Zhang Yi in Xinsang.

古文：十三年，张仪相魏。
现代文：十三年，张仪任魏国宰相。
English: In the thirteenth year, Zhang Yi became the prime minister of Wei.

古文：魏有女子化为丈夫。
现代文：魏国有女子变成男子。
English: In the state of Wei, women became men.

古文：秦取我曲沃、平周。
现代文：秦军攻取了魏国的曲沃、平周。
English: The Qin army captured Quwo and Pingzhou in Wei.

古文：十六年，襄王卒，子哀王立。
现代文：襄王十六，襄王去世，他的儿子哀王即位。
English: In the sixteenth year of King Xiang, King Xiang died, and his son, King Mo, ascended to the throne.

古文：张仪复归秦。
现代文：张仪又回到秦国。
English: Zhang Yi returned to Qin.

古文：哀王元年，五国共攻秦，不胜而去。
现代文：哀王元年，五国联合攻秦，没有胜利就撤兵了。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Ai, the five countries jointly attacked Qin, and withdrew without victory.

古文：二年，齐败我观津。
现代文：哀王二年，齐军在观津打败魏军。
English: In the second year of King Mu's reign, the Qi army defeated the Wei army in Guanzhong.

古文：五年，秦使樗里子伐取我曲沃，走犀首岸门。
现代文：五年，秦国派樗里子攻取魏国的曲沃，并在岸门赶跑了犀首公孙衍。
English: In the fifth year, the Qin State sent Jia Li Zi to conquer the Quvo of the Wei State, and chased away the rhinoceros head Sun Yan at the shore gate.

古文：六年，秦来立公子政为太子。
现代文：六年，秦国派人来魏国立魏公子政为太子。
English: In the sixth year, Qin State sent people to Wei State to make Wei Gongzimasa the crown prince.

古文：与秦会临晋。
现代文：魏王与秦王在临晋相会。
English: The Wei king and the Qin king meet in Linjin.

古文：七年，攻齐。
现代文：七年，魏军进攻齐国。
English: In the seventh year, the Wei army attacked Qi.

古文：与秦伐燕。
现代文：同秦军一起征讨燕国。
English: Together with the Qin Army, they conquered Yan Province.

古文：八年，伐卫，拔列城二。
现代文：哀王八年，魏军进攻卫国，攻克两座城邑。
English: In the eighth year of King Mu's reign, the Wei army attacked the defense of the country and conquered two cities.

古文：见卫君曰： 请罢魏兵，免成陵君可乎？ 
现代文：卫国国君非常忧虑，魏大夫如耳去见卫君，他说： 让我去使魏国收兵，并免去成陵君，可以吗？ 
English: Emperor Wei was very worried. Dr. Wei went to see Emperor Wei as if he had an earful. He said, "May I go to get Wei to withdraw its troops and get rid of Emperor Chengling, is that okay?"

古文：卫君曰： 先生果能，孤请世世以卫事先生。 
现代文：卫君说： 先生果真能做到，我愿意世世代代以卫国侍奉先生。 
English: He said, "If you really can do it, I am willing to serve you for generations to come as the guardian of the country."

古文：如耳见成陵君曰： 昔者魏伐赵，断羊肠，拔阏与，约斩赵，赵分而为二，所以不亡者，魏为从主也。
现代文：如耳见了成陵君说道： 从前魏军攻赵，断绝羊肠坂，攻克阏与，准备割裂赵国，把它分为两半，可是赵国所以没有灭亡，是因为魏国是合纵的盟主。
English: As if he overheard, Cheng Lingjun said: Once upon a time, the Wei army attacked Zhao, cut off the Yangtze River, conquered Yunnan, and prepared to split Zhao and divide it into two halves. However, Zhao did not perish because Wei was the leader of the vertical alliance.

古文：今卫已迫亡，将西请事於秦。
现代文：如今卫国已濒临灭亡，将向西方请求侍奉秦国。
English: Now that the motherland is on the verge of extinction, they will ask the West to serve Qin.

古文：与其以秦醳卫，不如以魏醳卫，卫之德魏必终无穷。 成陵君曰： 诺。 
现代文：与其由秦国来解救卫国，不如由魏国来宽释卫国，这样，卫国一定会永远感激魏国的恩德。 成陵君说： 是的。 
English: Rather than letting Qin liberate and save Wei, it is better to let Wei liberate Wei. In this way, Wei will always be grateful for Wei's kindness. Cheng Lingjun said: Yes.

古文：如耳见魏王曰： 臣有谒於卫。
现代文：如耳又去见魏王说： 臣曾去进见卫君。
English: Ruyi went to see Wei Wang again and said, "The minister went to see Wei Jun.

古文：卫故周室之别也，其称小国，多宝器。
现代文：卫国本来是周王室的分支，它虽号称小国，但宝器非常多。
English: Originally, Heiguo was a branch of the Zhou royal family. Although it is known as a small country, it has a lot of treasures.

古文：今国迫於难而宝器不出者，其心以为攻卫醳卫不以王为主，故宝器虽出必不入於王也。
现代文：如今国家濒临危难，可是宝器还不献出来，原因是他们心里认为进攻卫国或宽释卫国都不由大王做主，所以宝器即使献出来也一定不会到大王手里。
English: Now the country is on the brink of disaster, but the treasures have not yet been offered, because in their hearts they believe that it is not up to the great king to attack or release the country, so even if the treasures are offered, they will not reach the great king.

古文：臣窃料之，先言醳卫者必受卫者也。 
现代文：臣私下里猜测，最先建议宽释卫国的人，一定是接受了卫国贿赂的人。 
English: Privately, the minister guessed that the first person to suggest the release of the defenders must have been the one who accepted the bribe from the defenders.

古文：如耳出，成陵君入，以其言见魏王。
现代文：如耳出去后，成陵君进来，照如耳所说的话拜见魏王。
English: After Ru'er went out, Cheng Lingjun came in and met the Wei king as Ru'er had said.

古文：魏王听其说，罢其兵，免成陵君，终身不见。
现代文：魏王听了他的意见，撤回了魏军，同时也免去了成陵君的职位，终身不再见他。
English: The Wei king listened to his opinion and withdrew the Wei army. At the same time, he dismissed Cheng Lingjun from his post and never saw him again.

古文：九年，与秦王会临晋。
现代文：哀王九年，魏王与秦王在临晋相会。
English: In the ninth year of King Mu's reign, King Wei and King Qin met in Linjin.

古文：张仪、魏章皆归于魏。
现代文：张仪、魏章都归附魏国。
English: Zhang Yi and Wei Zhang were both annexed to Wei.

古文：魏相田需死，楚害张仪、犀首、薛公。
现代文：魏国宰相田需去世，楚国唯恐张仪、犀首或薛公做魏相。
English: Wei Prime Minister Tian Bo passed away, and Chu was afraid that Zhang Yi, Saishou or Xue Gong would become Wei Prime Minister.

古文：楚相昭鱼谓苏代曰： 田需死，吾恐张仪、犀首、薛公有一人相魏者也。 
现代文：楚国宰相昭鱼对苏代说： 田需死了，我恐怕张仪、犀首、薛公三人中有一人要做魏相了。 
English: Chu Prime Minister Zhaoyu said to Sudai: Tian Bo died, I am afraid that one of the three people, Zhang Yi, Rhino Head, and Xue Gong, will become Wei Xiang.

古文：代曰： 然相者欲谁而君便之？ 
现代文：苏代说： 那么做宰相的是谁对您才有利呢？ 
English: Sudai said, "Then who would be good for you as prime minister?"

古文：昭鱼曰： 吾欲太子之自相也。 
现代文：昭鱼说： 我想让魏国太子亲自做宰相。 
English: Zhaoyu said, "I want the crown prince of Wei to be the prime minister himself."

古文：代曰： 请为君北，必相之。 昭鱼曰： 柰何？ 
现代文：苏代说： 请允许我为您北上，一定会让他做宰相。 昭鱼说： 怎么办？ 
English: Sudai said, "Please allow me to go to the north for you, I will definitely make him prime minister." Akio said, "What should I do?

古文：对曰： 君其为梁王，代请说君。 昭鱼曰： 柰何？ 
现代文：苏代回答说： 您来做梁王，请让我向梁王游说。 昭鱼说： 你怎么说？ 
English: Sudai replied, "You come to be the king of Liang, please let me lobby the king of Liang." Zhao Yu said, "What do you say?"

古文：对曰： 代也从楚来，昭鱼甚忧，曰： 田需死，吾恐张仪、犀首、薛公有一人相魏者也。 
现代文：苏代回答说： 我从楚国来，昭鱼非常担忧，他说： 田需去世了，我恐怕张仪、犀首、薛公三人中有一人要做魏相了。 
English: Sudai replied, "I came from the state of Chu. Zhaoyu was very worried. He said, "Tian Bo has passed away. I'm afraid that one of the three, Zhang Yi, Zhaishou, and Xue Gong, will become Wei Xiang."

古文：代曰： 梁王，长主也，必不相张仪。
现代文：我说： 梁王是一位贤君，一定不会让张仪做宰相。
English: I said: King Liang is a wise man, he will not let Zhang Yi become prime minister.

古文：张仪相，必右秦而左魏。
现代文：张仪做了宰相，一定会偏向秦国，不助魏国。
English: When Zhang Yi became the prime minister, he would definitely be biased towards Qin and would not help Wei.

古文：犀首相，必右韩而左魏。
现代文：犀首做了宰相，也一定偏向韩国，不助魏国。
English: The head of the rhinoceros became the prime minister, and he must have been biased towards Korea and did not help Wei.

古文：薛公相，必右齐而左魏。
现代文：薛公做了宰相，也一定偏向齐国，不助魏国。
English: When Xue Gong became the prime minister, he was definitely biased towards Qi and did not help Wei.

古文：梁王，长主也，必不便也。 
现代文：梁王是一位贤君，一定会知道这样对魏国不利。 
English: King Liang was a wise ruler and would have known that this was not good for Wei.

古文：王曰： 然则寡人孰相？ 
现代文：魏王会说： 那么寡人应该让谁做宰相呢？ 
English: The Wei king would say: Then who should be made prime minister?

古文：代曰： 莫若太子之自相。
现代文：我说： 不如让太子亲自做宰相。
English: I said: It would be better to let the crown prince be prime minister himself.

古文：太子之自相，是三人者皆以太子为非常相也，皆将务以其国事魏，欲得丞相玺也。
现代文：太子亲自做宰相，这三个人都会认为太子不是长期任宰相，都将尽力让他们原来的国家侍奉魏国，想借此得到丞相的地位。
English: The prince himself will be the prime minister, and all three will think that the prince is not a long-term prime minister, and will do their best to make their original country serve Wei, and want to use this to get the position of chancellor.

古文：以魏之彊，而三万乘之国辅之，魏必安矣。
现代文：以魏国的强大，再加上三个大国的辅助，魏国一定会安定的。
English: With the strength of the State of Wei and the assistance of the three great powers, the State of Wei will surely be stable.

古文：故曰莫若太子之自相也。  
现代文：所以说不如让太子亲自做宰相。  
English: Therefore, it is better to let the crown prince be the prime minister himself.

古文：遂北见梁王，以此告之。
现代文：于是北上见到魏王，把这些话告诉他。
English: Therefore, Kitakami saw Wei Wang and told him these words.

古文：太子果相魏。
现代文：魏国太子果然做了宰相。
English: The crown prince of Wei did indeed become prime minister.

古文：十年，张仪死。
现代文：哀王十年，张仪去世。
English: After ten years of mourning, Zhang Yi passed away.

古文：十一年，与秦武王会应。
现代文：十一年，魏王与秦武王在应城相会。
English: In the eleventh year, Wei Wang and Qin Wu Wang met in Yingcheng.

古文：十二年，太子朝於秦。
现代文：十二年，魏太子到秦国朝拜。
English: In the twelfth year, the Wei prince went to Qin to pay homage.

古文：秦来伐我皮氏，未拔而解。
现代文：秦军来进攻魏国的皮氏，没有攻克就撤兵了。
English: The Qin army came to attack the Pi clan in Wei, but withdrew without conquering.

古文：十四年，秦来归武王后。
现代文：十四年，秦国把秦武王王后送回魏国。
English: In the 14th year, Qin State sent Queen Qinwu back to Wei.

古文：十六年，秦拔我蒲反、阳晋、封陵。
现代文：十六年，秦军攻下魏国的蒲反、阳晋和封陵。
English: In the 16th year, the Qin army conquered Budan, Yangjin and Fengling in Wei.

古文：十七年，与秦会临晋。
现代文：十七年，魏王与秦王在临晋相会。
English: In the seventeenth year, the king of Wei and the king of Qin met in Linjin.

古文：秦予我蒲反。
现代文：秦国把蒲反还给魏国。
English: Qin returned Putan to Wei.

古文：十八年，与秦伐楚。
现代文：十八年，魏国与秦国联合攻楚。
English: In the 18th year, Wei and Qin jointly attacked Chu.

古文：二十一年，与齐、韩共败秦军函谷。
现代文：二十一年，魏军与齐军、韩军联合在函谷关打败秦军。
English: In the twenty-first year, the Wei army, the Qi army and the Korean army jointly defeated the Qin army in Hanyu Pass.

古文：二十三年，秦复予我河外及封陵为和。
现代文：哀王二十三年，秦国又把河外之地以及封陵还给魏国，同魏国讲和。
English: In the 23rd year of King Mu's reign, the State of Qin returned the land outside the river and the mausoleum to the State of Wei, and made peace with the State of Wei.

古文：哀王卒，子昭王立。
现代文：哀王去世，他的儿子昭王即位。
English: King Aye passed away and his son King Sho ascended to the throne.

古文：昭王元年，秦拔我襄城。
现代文：昭王元年，秦军攻占魏国襄城。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Zhao, the Qin army captured the city of Xiang in Wei.

古文：二年，与秦战，我不利。
现代文：二年，魏军与秦军交战，魏军失利。
English: In the second year, the Wei army fought with the Qin army, and the Wei army was defeated.

古文：三年，佐韩攻秦，秦将白起败我军伊阙二十四万。
现代文：三年，魏国帮助韩国进攻秦国，秦将白起在伊阙打败二十四万韩魏军。
English: Three years later, Wei helped Korea to attack Qin. Qin defeated 240,000 Han and Wei troops in Yili.

古文：六年，予秦河东地方四百里。
现代文：六年，魏国把河东四百里土地让给秦国。
English: Six years later, the State of Wei ceded the four hundred miles of land east of the river to the State of Qin.

古文：芒卯以诈重。
现代文：芒卯因善用诡诈之计被魏国重用。
English: Mengwu was often used by the Wei dynasty because of his skillful use of trickery.

古文：七年，秦拔我城大小六十一。
现代文：七年，秦军攻下魏国大小城邑六十一处。
English: In the seventh year, the Qin army conquered sixty-one cities and towns in Wei.

古文：八年，秦昭王为西帝，齐湣王为东帝，月馀，皆复称王归帝。
现代文：八年，秦昭王亲自称西帝，齐湣王自称东帝，过了一个多月，都重新称王收回了帝号。
English: Eight years ago, Qin Zhao Wang personally called himself the Western Emperor, and Qichen Wang called himself the Eastern Emperor. After more than a month, both regained the title of king and withdrew the imperial title.

古文：九年，秦拔我新垣、曲阳之城。
现代文：九年，秦军攻克魏国新垣、曲阳两城。
English: In the ninth year, the Qin army conquered the two cities of Niigaki and Quyang in Wei.

古文：十年，齐灭宋，宋王死我温。
现代文：昭王十年，齐国灭了宋国，宋王死在魏国的温邑。
English: In the tenth year of King Zhao, the State of Qi destroyed the State of Song, and the King of Song died in the State of Wei at Wenyu.

古文：十二年，与秦、赵、韩、燕共伐齐，败之济西，湣王出亡。
现代文：十二年，魏国与秦、赵、韩、燕共同攻伐齐国，在济西把齐军打败，齐湣王出外逃亡。
English: In the twelfth year, Wei, Qin, Zhao, Han, and Yan jointly invaded Qi, defeated the Qi army in Jixi, and the king of Qi fled abroad.

古文：燕独入临菑。
现代文：燕军单独进入临淄。
English: Yan's army entered Linyi alone.

古文：与秦王会西周。
现代文：魏王与秦王在西周国相会。
English: The Wei king and the Qin king meet in West Zhou.

古文：十三年，秦拔我安城。
现代文：昭王十三年，秦军攻下魏国的安城。
English: In the thirteenth year of King Zhao, the Qin army captured Ancheng in Wei.

古文：兵到大梁，去。
现代文：军队到了大梁，又撤离了。
English: The army reached the girders and withdrew.

古文：十八年，秦拔郢，楚王徙陈。
现代文：十八年，秦军攻陷楚国的郢都，楚王迁都到陈城。
English: In the 18th year, the Qin army captured the capital of Chu, and the king of Chu moved the capital to Chencheng.

古文：十九年，昭王卒，子安釐王立。
现代文：昭王十九年，昭王去世，他的儿子安釐王即位。
English: In the 19th year of King Zhao, King Zhao died, and his son King Anhui ascended to the throne.

古文：安釐王元年，秦拔我两城。
现代文：安釐王元年，秦军攻下魏国两座城。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Antao, the Qin army captured two cities in Wei.

古文：二年，又拔我二城，军大梁下，韩来救，予秦温以和。
现代文：二年，又攻下魏国两座城，陈兵大梁城下，韩国派兵来援救，把温邑让给秦国求和。
English: Two years later, they captured two more cities in Wei, Chen Bing and Dailiang. South Korea sent troops to help, and ceded Wenyu to Qin to sue for peace.

古文：三年，秦拔我四城，斩首四万。
现代文：三年，秦军攻下魏国四座城，斩杀四万人。
English: Three years later, the Qin army captured four cities in Wei and killed 40,000 people.

古文：四年，秦破我及韩、赵，杀十五万人，走我将芒卯。
现代文：四年，秦军打败魏军和韩军、赵军、杀死十五万人，赶跑了魏将芒卯。
English: In four years, the Qin army defeated the Wei army, the Korean army, and the Zhao army, killed 150,000 people, and drove away the Wei general Mengwu.

古文：魏将段干子请予秦南阳以和。
现代文：魏将段干子请求把南阳让给秦国求和。
English: Wei asked Duan Ganzi to cede Nanyang to Qin for peace.

古文：苏代谓魏王曰： 欲玺者段干子也，欲地者秦也。
现代文：苏代对魏王说： 想升官的是段干子，想得到土地的是秦国。
English: Su Dai said to Wei Wang: It is Duan Gan Zi who wants to be promoted, and it is Qin Guo who wants to get land.

古文：今王使欲地者制玺，使欲玺者制地，魏氏地不尽则不知已。
现代文：如今大王让想得土地的人控制官印，让想升官的人控制土地，魏国的土地不送光了就不会终结。
English: Nowadays, the emperor lets those who want to get land control the official seal, and those who want to be promoted control the land. The land of Wei will not end if it is not exhausted.

古文：且夫以地事秦，譬犹抱薪救火，薪不尽，火不灭。 
现代文：况且用土地侍奉秦国，就好像抱着干柴去救火，柴不烧完，火是不会灭的。 
English: Moreover, using land to serve Qin is like holding dry wood to put out a fire. If the wood does not burn out, the fire will not be extinguished.

古文：王曰： 是则然也。虽然，事始已行，不可更矣。 
现代文：魏王说： 那是当然了，尽管如此，可是事情已经开始实行，不能更改了。 
English: Wei Wang said, "That is natural, but in spite of that, things have already begun to be implemented and cannot be changed.

古文：对曰： 王独不见夫博之所以贵枭者，便则食，不便则止矣。
现代文：苏代回答说： 大王没见过玩博戏的人所以特别看重枭子的缘故，是由于有利就可以吃掉对方的子，无利就停下来。
English: Sudai replied, "The great king has never seen a gambler, so he especially values the dice. If it is advantageous, he can eat the other person's dice. If it is not advantageous, he will stop.

古文：今王曰 事始已行，不可更 ，是何王之用智不如用枭也？ 
现代文：如今大王说 事情已经开始实行，不能更改了 ，大王使用智谋怎么还不如博戏时的用枭呢？ 
English: Now that the great king said, "Things have already begun to be implemented and cannot be changed," how can the great king's use of wisdom and strategy be inferior to the use of shovels in the play?

古文：九年，秦拔我怀。十年，秦太子外质於魏死。
现代文：安釐王九年，秦军攻下魏国怀邑，十年，在魏国作人质的秦国太子死了。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of King Antao, the Qin army captured Huaiyun in Wei. In the tenth year, the Crown Prince of Qin, who was a hostage in Wei, died.

古文：十一年，秦拔我郪丘。
现代文：十一年，秦军攻下魏国的郪丘。
English: In the eleventh year of the Qin Dynasty, the Qin army conquered the Wei Kingdom's Mengqiu.

古文：秦昭王谓左右曰： 今时韩、魏与始孰彊？ 
现代文：秦昭王对左右侍臣说： 现在的韩、魏和他们初起时比，哪个阶段强？ 
English: Qin Zhao Wang said to his courtiers on the left and right: The current Han and Wei are better than when they first started, which stage is stronger?

古文：对曰： 不如始彊。 
现代文：回答说： 不如初起时强。 
English: And he answered, Not so much as at the beginning.

古文：王曰： 今时如耳、魏齐与孟尝、芒卯孰贤？ 
现代文：秦王说： 现在的如耳、魏齐和从前的孟尝君、芒卯相比，谁更贤能？ 
English: The king of Qin said, "Compared with the current Ru Er and Wei Qi and the former Meng Yaojun and Meng Wu, who is more capable?"

古文：对曰： 不如。 
现代文：回答说： 如耳、魏齐不如孟尝君和芒卯。 
English: He answered: Ru Er and Wei Qi are not as good as Meng Qi Jun and Meng Wu.

古文：王曰： 以孟尝、芒卯之贤，率彊韩、魏以攻秦，犹无柰寡人何也。
现代文：秦王说： 靠孟尝君和芒卯的贤能，率领韩、魏的强兵来进攻秦国，还未能把寡人怎么样呢。
English: The king of Qin said: Relying on the wisdom of Meng Yuqun and Meng Wu, he led the strong soldiers of Han and Wei to attack Qin. However, he was unable to defeat many of them.

古文：今以无能之如耳、魏齐而率弱韩、魏以伐秦，其无柰寡人何亦明矣。 
现代文：如今由无能的如耳、魏齐率领疲弱的韩、魏军队来攻打秦国，他们不可能把寡人怎么样也是很明显的了。 
English: Now that the incompetent Ru Ru Yi and Wei Qi are leading the weak Han and Wei armies to attack Qin, it is clear that they will not be able to defeat Qin.

古文：左右皆曰： 甚然。 
现代文：左右侍臣都说： 太对了。 
English: The courtiers on both sides said, "That's right."

古文：中旗冯琴而对曰： 王之料天下过矣。
现代文：中旗倚着琴却回答说： 大王对天下形势的估计错了。
English: The middle banner leaned on the harp, but replied: The great king's estimate of the situation in the world is wrong.

古文：当晋六卿之时，知氏最彊，灭范、中行，又率韩、魏之兵以围赵襄子於晋阳，决晋水以灌晋阳之城，不湛者三版。
现代文：当初晋国六卿掌权的时候，智氏最强，灭了范氏和中行氏，又率领韩、魏的军队在晋阳围攻赵襄子，决开晋水淹灌晋阳城，只剩下三版高没有淹没。
English: When the Six Princes of the Jin Dynasty took power, the Zhi clan was the strongest and destroyed the Fan and Zhongxing clans. They also led the Han and Wei armies to besiege Zhao Xiangzi in Jinyang, cut off the Jin water and flooded Jinyang City. Only Sanban Gao was not flooded.

古文：知伯行水，魏桓子御，韩康子为参乘。
现代文：知伯巡察水势，魏桓子驾车，韩康子在车右陪侍。
English: Zhi Bo inspects the water level, Wei Huan Zi drives, Han Kang Zi accompanies him on the right side of the car.

古文：知伯曰： 吾始不知水之可以亡人之国也，乃今知之。 
现代文：知伯说： 我起初不知道水也可以灭亡别人的国家，如今才知道了。 
English: Zhi Bo said: At first, I didn't know that water could also destroy other people's countries, but now I know.

古文：汾水可以灌安邑，绛水可以灌平阳。
现代文：既然晋水可以淹灌晋阳，汾水自然也可以淹灌魏都安邑，绛水也可以淹灌韩都平阳。
English: Since Jinshui can flood Jinyang, naturally, Jinshui can also flood Weidu Anyi, and Jinshui can also flood Handu Pingyang.

古文：魏桓子肘韩康子，韩康子履魏桓子，肘足接於车上，而知氏地分，身死国亡，为天下笑。
现代文：于是魏桓子用臂肘碰一碰韩康子，韩康子也用脚碰一碰魏桓子，两人在车上用肘和脚暗中示意，结果知氏的领土被瓜分，知伯身死国亡，被天下人嘲笑。
English: As a result, Wei Huan Zi touched Han Kang Zi with his elbow, Han Kang Zi also touched Wei Huan Zi with his foot, and the two secretly gestured with their elbows and feet in the car. As a result, Tomo's territory was divided, and Tomo died and was ridiculed by the world.

古文：今秦兵虽彊，不能过知氏；韩、魏虽弱，尚贤其在晋阳之下也。
现代文：如今秦兵虽然较强，但不会超过知氏；韩、魏虽然较弱，但还是要胜过当初在晋阳城下的时候。
English: Today, although Qin soldiers are stronger, they will not surpass Ji; although Han and Wei are weaker, they will still be better than when they were under Jinyang Castle.

古文：此方其用肘足之时也，原王之勿易也！ 
现代文：现在正是他们用肘和脚暗中互相联合的时候，希望大王不要把形势看得太简单了！ 
English: Now is precisely the time for them to secretly unite with each other with elbows and feet, and hope that the great king does not see the situation as too simple!

古文：於是秦王恐。
现代文：于是秦王有些惊恐。
English: As a result, King Qin was somewhat alarmed.

古文：齐、楚相约而攻魏，魏使人求救於秦，冠盖相望也，而秦救不至。
现代文：齐、楚两国联合起来攻魏，魏国派人到秦国求救，使臣络绎不绝，可是秦国的救兵却不来。
English: The two countries of Qi and Chu united to attack Wei, and Wei sent people to Qin for help. The envoys kept coming, but Qin's rescuers did not come.

古文：魏人有唐雎者，年九十馀矣，谓魏王曰： 老臣请西说秦王，令兵先臣出。 
现代文：魏国有个叫唐睢的人，九十多岁了，对魏王说： 老臣请求到西方去游说秦王，一定让秦国的军队在我离秦之前出发。 
English: There was a ninety-plus-year-old man in the State of Wei named Tang Xuan who said to the King of Wei: The old minister asked me to go to the West to lobby the King of Qin. I must let the army of Qin depart before I leave Qin.

古文：魏王再拜，遂约车而遣之。
现代文：魏王再拜，就准备好车辆派他前去。
English: Wei Wang said good-bye, and they prepared a vehicle to send him on his way.

古文：唐雎到，入见秦王。
现代文：唐睢到秦国，入宫拜见秦王。
English: Tang Xuan went to Qin and entered the palace to pay homage to King Qin.

古文：秦王曰： 丈人芒然乃远至此，甚苦矣！
现代文：秦王说： 老人家疲惫不堪地远路来到秦国，太辛苦了！
English: Qin Wang said: The old man's exhausting journey to Qin is too hard!

古文：夫魏之来求救数矣，寡人知魏之急已。 
现代文：魏国来求救已是多次了，寡人知道魏国的危急了。 
English: Wei has come for help many times. Few people know that Wei is in a critical situation.

古文：唐雎对曰： 大王已知魏之急而救不发者，臣窃以为用策之臣无任矣。
现代文：唐睢回答说： 大王既然已经知道魏国的危急却不发救兵，我私下以为是出谋划策之臣无能。
English: Tang Xuan replied, "Since the Great King already knew that Wei was in a critical situation, but did not send soldiers to rescue it, I privately thought that the minister who made the plan was incompetent.

古文：夫魏，一万乘之国也，然所以西面而事秦，称东籓，受冠带，祠春秋者，以秦之彊足以为与也。
现代文：魏国是有万辆战车的大国，之所以向西侍奉秦国，称为东方藩属，接受秦国赐给的衣冠，春秋两季都向秦国送祭品，是由于秦国的强大足以成为盟国。
English: Wei was a large country with tens of thousands of chariots. The reason why it served Qin to the west and was called the eastern clan, accepted the crown given by Qin, and sent sacrifices to Qin in both spring and autumn was because Qin was powerful enough to become an ally.

古文：今齐、楚之兵已合於魏郊矣，而秦救不发，亦将赖其未急也。
现代文：如今齐、楚的军队已经在魏都的郊外会合，可是秦国还不发救兵，也就是依仗魏国还不太危急吧。
English: Now the armies of Qi and Chu have gathered on the outskirts of the Wei capital, but Qin has not yet sent relief troops, that is, it is not too critical to rely on Wei.

古文：使之大急，彼且割地而约从，王尚何救焉？
现代文：假如到了特别危急的时候，它就要割地来加入合纵集团，大王您还去救什么呢？
English: If it comes to a particularly critical time, it will have to cut the ground to join the merger group, what are you going to save?

古文：必待其急而救之，是失一东籓之魏而彊二敌之齐、楚，则王何利焉？ 
现代文：一定要等到危急了才去救它，这是失去东边一个作为藩属的魏围，而增强了齐和楚两个敌国，那么大王您有什么利益呢？ 
English: You must wait until there is a crisis before rescuing it. This means losing Weiwei in the east, which belongs to the clan, and strengthening the two enemy countries of Qi and Chu. So, great king, what are your interests?

古文：於是秦昭王遽为发兵救魏。魏氏复定。
现代文：于是秦昭王马上就发兵援救魏国，魏国才恢复了安定。
English: As a result, Qin Zhao Wang immediately sent troops to rescue Wei, and Wei regained stability.

古文：赵使人谓魏王曰： 为我杀范痤，吾请献七十里之地。 
现代文：赵国派人对魏王说： 为我杀了范痤，我们愿意献出七十里土地。 
English: Zhao Guo sent a messenger to Wei Wang saying: "Kill Fan Ye for me, we are willing to offer seventy li of land."

古文：魏王曰： 诺。 
现代文：魏王说： 好。 
English: Wei Wang said: Good.

古文：使吏捕之，围而未杀。
现代文：于是派官吏去逮捕范痤，包围了他的家但还没有杀他。
English: So officials were sent to arrest Fan Qi, surrounded his home but did not kill him.

古文：痤因上屋骑危，谓使者曰： 与其以死痤市，不如以生痤市。
现代文：范痤因而上了屋顶骑在屋脊上，对使臣说： 与其用死范痤去作交易，不如用活范痤去作交易。
English: So Fan Ye got up on the roof and rode on the ridge and said to the envoy: "Instead of using dead Fan Ye to make a deal, it is better to use live Fan Ye to make a deal."

古文：有如痤死，赵不予王地，则王将柰何？
现代文：如果把我范痤杀死了，赵国却不给大王土地，那么大王将怎么办呢？
English: If Fan Ye killed me, but the State of Zhao does not give the great king land, then what will the great king do?

古文：故不若与先定割地，然後杀痤。 魏王曰： 善。 
现代文：所以不如与赵国先把割让的土地划定了，然后再杀我。 魏王说： 很好。 
English: Therefore, it is better to first delineate the ceded land with Zhao Guo, and then kill me. Wei Wang said: Very good.

古文：痤因上书信陵君曰： 痤，故魏之免相也，赵以地杀痤而魏王听之，有如彊秦亦将袭赵之欲，则君且柰何？ 
现代文：范痤于是给信陵君上书说： 范痤是过去魏国免职的宰相，赵国用割地为条件要求杀我，而魏王竟听从了，如果强秦沿用赵国的办法对待您，那么您将怎么办？ 
English: Fan Qi then sent a letter to Xin Lingjun, saying: Fan Qi was the dismissed prime minister of Wei in the past, Zhao asked to kill me on the condition of cutting land, and the Wei king actually obeyed. If Qiang Qin along with the methods of Zhao to treat you, then what will you do?

古文：信陵君言於王而出之。
现代文：信陵君向赵王进谏之后范痤被释放了。
English: After Mr. Xinling confronted Mr. Zhao, Ms. Fan was released.

古文：魏王以秦救之故，欲亲秦而伐韩，以求故地。
现代文：魏王因为秦国曾经援救的缘故，想要亲近秦国，攻伐韩国，以便收回原来的土地。
English: The Wei king wanted to get close to Qin and invade Korea in order to recover the original land, because Qin had once come to his rescue.

古文：无忌谓魏王曰：
现代文：信陵君无忌对魏王说：
English: Xinlingjun said to Wei Wang:

古文：秦与戎翟同俗，有虎狼之心，贪戾好利无信，不识礼义德行。
现代文：秦人和狄戎的习俗相同，有虎狼一样的心肠，贪婪凶狠，好利而不讲信用，不懂得礼义德行。
English: The customs of Qin people and Di Rong are the same, they have the same heart as tigers and wolves, they are greedy and ferocious, they are greedy but not trustworthy, and they do not know how to be polite and virtuous.

古文：苟有利焉，不顾亲戚兄弟，若禽兽耳，此天下之所识也，非有所施厚积德也。
现代文：如果有利，连亲戚兄弟也不顾，好像禽兽一样，这是天下人都知道的，他们不曾施厚恩，积大德。
English: If it is to their advantage, they will disregard even their relatives and brothers, as if they were beasts. This is known to everyone in the world. They have never done any favors, and they have great virtue.

古文：故太后母也，而以忧死；穰侯舅也，功莫大焉，而竟逐之；两弟无罪，而再夺之国。
现代文：所以太后本是秦王的母亲，却由于忧愁而死去，穰侯是秦王的舅父，功劳没有比他大的，可是竟然把他驱逐了；秦王两个弟弟没有罪过，却一再被削夺封地。
English: Therefore, the empress dowager, who was the mother of King Qin, died of grief, and the prince, who was the uncle of King Qin, had no greater merit than him, but he was expelled; the two brothers of King Qin were not guilty, but they were repeatedly deprived of their fiefs.

古文：此於亲戚若此，而况於仇雠之国乎？
现代文：这是对亲戚尚且如此，何况对仇敌之国呢？
English: And how much more to a hostile nation?

古文：今王与秦共伐韩而益近秦患，臣甚惑之。
现代文：如今大王与秦国共同攻伐韩国就会更加接近秦国的祸害，臣特别感到迷惑不解。
English: Now that the Great King and the State of Qin are jointly attacking Korea, it will be closer to the scourge of the State of Qin, and the minister is particularly puzzled.

古文：而王不识则不明，群臣莫以闻则不忠。
现代文：大王不懂此理就是不明，君臣没有来向您奏闻此理就是不忠。
English: If the great king does not understand this principle, it is unknown, and if the monarchs and ministers have not come to report this principle to you, it is disloyalty.

古文：今韩氏以一女子奉一弱主，内有大乱，外交彊秦魏之兵，王以为不亡乎？
现代文：如今韩国靠一个女人辅佐一个幼弱的君主，国内有大乱，外边要与秦魏的强兵交战，大王以为它还会不亡吗？
English: Nowadays, South Korea relies on a woman to assist a young and weak monarch, there is great turmoil in the country, and the outside world has to fight with the strong soldiers of Qin and Wei. Does the great king think that it will not die?

古文：韩亡，秦有郑地，与大梁鄴，王以为安乎？
现代文：韩国灭亡后，秦国将要占有原来郑国的土地，与大梁相邻，大王以为能安宁吗？
English: After the demise of Korea, the Qin State will occupy the land of the original Zheng State, adjacent to the Great Beam. Do you think the great king can be at peace?

古文：王欲得故地，今负彊秦之亲，王以为利乎？
现代文：大王想得到原来的土地，就要依靠和强秦的亲近，大王以为这会有利吗？
English: If the great king wanted to get the original land, he would have to rely on the closeness of the strong Qin Dynasty. Did the great king think this would be beneficial?

古文：秦非无事之国也，韩亡之後必将更事，更事必就易与利，就易与利必不伐楚与赵矣。
现代文：秦国不是一个安分的国家，韩国灭亡后必将另起事端，另起事端必定要找容易的和有利的目标，找容易的和有利的目标必定不去找楚国和赵国。
English: Qin is not a peaceful country. After the fall of Korea, there will be another incident. If there is another incident, we must look for an easy and favorable target. If we are looking for an easy and favorable target, we must not look for Chu and Zhao.

古文：是何也？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：夫越山逾河，绝韩上党而攻彊赵，是复阏与之事，秦必不为也。
现代文：如果越大山跨黄河，穿过韩国的上党去进攻强大的赵国，这是重复阏与那一仗的失败，秦国一定不会这样的。
English: If Yuedaishan crosses the Yellow River and goes through Shangdang in South Korea to attack the powerful Zhao Kingdom, it will be a repeat of the defeat in that battle. Qin will never be like that.

古文：若道河内，倍鄴、朝歌，绝漳滏水，与赵兵决於邯郸之郊，是知伯之祸也，秦又不敢。
现代文：如果取道河内，背向邺城和朝歌，横渡漳水、滏水，与赵军决战于邯郸郊外，这就会遇到知伯那样的灾祸，秦国又不敢这样做。
English: If you take the road to Hanoi, turn your back on Lucheng and Chaoga, cross Lushui and Lushui, and fight the Zhao army in the outskirts of Lushui, you will encounter the same disaster as Zhibo, and Qin will not dare to do so.

古文：伐楚，道涉谷，行三千里。而攻冥戹之塞，所行甚远，所攻甚难，秦又不为也。
现代文：进攻楚国，要取道涉谷，行军三千里，去攻打冥阨关塞，走的路太远，攻打的地方太难，秦国也不会这样做的。
English: To attack Chu, it is necessary to take the Shibuya road, march three thousand miles, and attack the Hiei Pass. The road is too far to walk, and the place to attack is too difficult. Qin will not do this.

古文：若道河外，倍大梁，右上蔡、召陵，与楚兵决於陈郊，秦又不敢。
现代文：如果取道河外，背向大梁，右边是上蔡、召陵，与楚军在陈城郊外决战，秦国又不敢。
English: If you take the road outside the river, turn your back to the girder, the right side is Shang Cai, Zhaoling, and fight with the Chu army in the outskirts of Chencheng, Qin will not dare.

古文：故曰秦必不伐楚与赵矣，又不攻卫与齐矣。
现代文：所以说秦国一定不会进攻楚国和赵国，更不会进攻卫国和齐国了。
English: Therefore, Qin will definitely not attack Chu and Zhao, and even less will it attack Wei and Qi.

古文：夫韩亡之後，兵出之日，非魏无攻已。
现代文：韩国灭亡之后，秦国出兵的时候，除去魏国就没有可进攻的了。
English: After the fall of Korea, when Qin dispatched troops, there was nothing to attack except Wei.

古文：秦固有怀、茅、邢丘，城垝津以临河内，河内共、汲。必危；有郑地，得垣雍，决荧泽水灌大梁，大梁必亡。
现代文：秦国本来已占有怀邑、茅邑、邢丘，如在垝津筑城逼近河内，河内的共城、汲邑必定危险；秦国据有郑国故地，得到垣雍城，决开荧泽，水淹大梁，大梁必定失陷。
English: Qin had already occupied Huaiyun, Maoyun and Qiuqiu. If they built a city in Shuijin and approached Hanoi, it would be dangerous to attack the common city and Cuyun in Hanoi. Qin gained Qin Yongcheng from Zheng's ancestral land, and broke through the fluorescence and flooded the girders. The girders would certainly fall down.

古文：王之使者出过而恶安陵氏於秦，秦之欲诛之久矣。
现代文：大王的使臣去秦已成过失，而又在秦国毁谤安陵氏，秦国早就想诛灭它了。
English: It was a mistake for the emperor's envoys to go to Qin and defame the Anlin clan in Qin. Qin had long wanted to exterminate it.

古文：秦叶阳、昆阳与舞阳邻，听使者之恶之，随安陵氏而亡之，绕舞阳之北，以东临许，南国必危，国无害乎？
现代文：秦国的叶阳、昆阳与魏国的舞阳相邻，听任使臣毁谤安陵氏，听任安陵氏被灭亡，秦军就会绕过舞阳北边，从东边逼近许国故地，这样南方一定危急，这对魏国无害吗？
English: Qin's Yeyang and Kunyang are adjacent to Wei's Muyang. If the envoys were allowed to slander the Anling clan, and if the Anling clan were allowed to perish, the Qin army would bypass the northern side of Muyang and approach Xu's hometown from the east. The south must be in danger. Is this harmful to Wei?

古文：夫憎韩不爱安陵氏可也，夫不患秦之不爱南国非也。
现代文：憎恶韩国、不喜爱安陵氏是可以的，可是不担心秦国不爱南方那就错了。
English: It's okay to hate South Korea and dislike the Anlin clan, but it's wrong not to worry that Qin doesn't love the South.

古文：异日者，秦在河西晋，国去梁千里，有河山以阑之，有周韩以间之。
现代文：从前，秦国在河西晋国故地，离大梁有千里之远，有黄河及高山阻挡，有周与韩把它隔开。
English: Once upon a time, Qin was in the former place of Jin in Hexi, thousands of miles away from Daliang, blocked by the Yellow River and high mountains, and separated by Zhou and Han.

古文：从林乡军以至于今，秦七攻魏，五入囿中，边城尽拔，文台堕，垂都焚，林木伐，麋鹿尽，而国继以围。
现代文：自从林乡一战到现在，秦国七次进攻魏国，五次攻入囿中，边境城邑都被攻陷，文台被毁，垂都被烧，林木被砍伐，麋鹿被猎尽，国都接着被围。
English: From the time of the First Battle of Linxiang to the present, Qin attacked Wei seven times, and invaded Yunnan five times. The border towns were captured, the publishing houses were destroyed, the villages were burned, the forests were cut down, the elk were hunted to extinction, and the country was then besieged.

古文：又长驱梁北，东至陶卫之郊，北至平监。
现代文：秦军又长驱到大梁以北，东边打到陶、卫两城的郊外，北边打到平监。
English: The Qin army also drove to the north of Daliang, in the east to the suburbs of Tao and Wei, and in the north to Pingyan.

古文：所亡於秦者，山南山北，河外河内，大县数十，名都数百。
现代文：丧失给秦国的，有山南山北，河外河内，大县几十个，名都几百个。
English: Lost to Qin were Shannan, Shanbei, Hebei, dozens of large counties and hundreds of famous capitals.

古文：秦乃在河西晋，去梁千里，而祸若是矣，又况於使秦无韩，有郑地，无河山而阑之，无周韩而间之，去大梁百里，祸必由此矣。
现代文：秦国还在河西晋国故地，离大梁一千里的时候，祸患就已经如此了。又何况让秦国灭了韩国，据有郑国故地，没有黄河大山阻拦它，没有周和韩间隔它，离大梁只有一百里，大祸必定由此开始的。
English: When Qin was still in the ancestral land of Jin in Hexi, a thousand miles away from Daliang, the disaster was already like this. Moreover, Qin destroyed South Korea, according to the ancestral land of Zheng, there was no Yellow River mountain to stop it, no Zhou and South Korea to separate it, only a hundred miles away from Daliang, the disaster must have started from this.

古文：异日者，从之不成也，楚、魏疑而韩不可得也。
现代文：从前，合纵汉有成功，是由于楚、魏互相猜疑，而韩国又不可能参加盟约。
English: In the past, the success of the Han-Chong alliance was due to the mutual suspicion between Chu and Wei, and the impossibility of South Korea joining the alliance.

古文：今韩受兵三年，秦桡之以讲，识亡不听，投质於赵，请为天下雁行顿刃，楚、赵必集兵，皆识秦之欲无穷也，非尽亡天下之国而臣海内，必不休矣。
现代文：如今韩国遭受战祸已有三年，秦国使它屈从同它媾和，韩国知道要亡了可是不肯听从，反而送人质到赵国，表示愿做天下诸侯的先锋与秦国死战。楚国、赵国必定集结军队，他们都知道秦国的贪欲是无穷的，除非把天下各诸侯国完全灭亡，使海内之民都臣服于秦国，它是绝不会罢休的。
English: Now three years have passed since Korea suffered the calamity of war. Qin State made it submit to make peace with it. Korea knew that it was about to die, but refused to obey. Instead, it sent hostages to Zhao State, expressing its willingness to be the vanguard of the world's princes in a war to the death with Qin State. Chu State and Zhao State will certainly assemble their armies. They both know that Qin State's greed is boundless. It will never stop unless it completely destroys the world's princes and subjects the people of the sea to Qin State.

古文：是故臣原以从事王，王速受楚赵之约，而挟韩之质以存韩，而求故地，韩必效之。夫存韩安魏而利天下，此亦王之天时已。
现代文：开通共城、宁邑到韩国上党的道路，让这条路经过安成，进出的商贾都要纳税，这就等于魏国又把韩国的上党做为抵押。
English: The opening of the road from Gongcheng and Ningyi to South Korea's Shangdang, so that this road passes through Ancheng, and the merchants going in and out have to pay taxes, which is tantamount to Wei's country using South Korea's Shangdang as collateral.

古文：通韩上党於共、甯，使道安成，出入赋之，是魏重质韩以其上党也。今有其赋，足以富国。韩必德魏爱魏重魏畏魏，韩必不敢反魏，是韩则魏之县也。
现代文：如果有了这些税收就足能使国家富足。韩国必定要感激魏国、爱戴魏国、尊崇魏国、尊崇魏国、惧怕魏国，韩国一定不敢反叛魏国，这样，韩国就成为魏国的郡县了。
English: If these taxes are sufficient to make the country rich, South Korea must be grateful to Wei, love Wei, respect Wei, respect Wei, fear Wei, and must not dare to rebel against Wei. In this way, South Korea will become a county of Wei.

古文：魏得韩以为县，卫、大梁、河外必安矣。
现代文：魏国得到韩国作为郡县，卫、大梁、河外必然能安定。
English: After Wei gained Korea as a county, Wei, Daliang, and Hebei would be able to maintain stability.

古文：今不存韩，二周、安陵必危，楚、赵大破，卫、齐甚畏，天下西乡而驰秦入朝而为臣不久矣。
现代文：如果不保存韩国，东西二周、安陵必定危险，楚国、赵国大败之后，卫国、齐国就很害怕，天下诸侯都向西奔赴秦国去朝拜称臣的日子没多久了。
English: If Korea is not preserved, the two circumferences of east and west and the tomb of Anlin will certainly be in danger. After the great defeat of Chu and Zhao, the countries of Wei and Qi were very afraid. The days when all the princes of the world rushed westward to Qin to worship and praise him were not long in coming.

古文：二十年，秦围邯郸，信陵君无忌矫夺将军晋鄙兵以救赵，赵得全。无忌因留赵。
现代文：安釐王二十年，秦军围困邯郸，信陵君无忌假传王命夺得将军晋鄙的军队去救援赵国，赵国得到保全，无忌也因此留在赵国。
English: In the 20th year of King Antao's reign, the Qin army besieged and besieged Yunnan. Xinlingjun did not hesitate to falsely preach the king's life to win the general Jinshan's army to rescue Zhao Province. Zhao Province was preserved, and therefore he did not hesitate to stay in Zhao Province.

古文：二十六年，秦昭王卒。
现代文：二十六年，秦昭王去世。
English: In the 26th year, Qin Zhaowang passed away.

古文：三十年，无忌归魏，率五国兵攻秦，败之河外，走蒙骜。
现代文：安釐王三十年，无忌返回魏国，率领五国军队进攻秦国，在河外打败秦军，赶跑了秦将蒙骜。
English: In the thirtieth year of King Antao's reign, he returned to Wei, led the armies of five countries to attack Qin, defeated the Qin army outside the river, and drove away the Qin general Mengye.

古文：魏太子增质於秦，秦怒，欲囚魏太子增。
现代文：那时魏国太子增在秦国作人质，秦王发怒，要囚禁魏太子增。
English: At that time, the Wei prince Zeng was a hostage in Qin. The Qin king was angry and wanted to imprison the Wei prince Zeng.

古文：或为增谓秦王曰： 公孙喜固谓魏相曰 请以魏疾击秦，秦王怒，必囚增。
现代文：有人替太子增对秦王说： 公孙喜本来对魏相说过： 请用魏军快速攻秦，秦王一怒，必定要囚禁太子增。
English: Someone said to the King of Qin on behalf of the Crown Prince Zeng: Gongsun Xi originally said to Wei Xiang: Please use the Wei army to quickly attack Qin. When the King of Qin became angry, he must imprison the Crown Prince Zeng.

古文：魏王又怒，击秦，秦必伤 。
现代文：这又会使魏王发怒，再攻打秦国，秦国必定要伤害太子增。 
English: This would make the Wei king angry and attack Qin again. Qin would definitely want to harm Prince Zeng.

古文：今王囚增，是喜之计中也。
现代文：现在大王要囚禁太子增，这是公孙喜的计谋得逞了。
English: Now the great king wants to imprison Prince Zeng, which is Gongsunxi's successful strategy.

古文：故不若贵增而合魏，以疑之於齐、韩。 
现代文：所以不如厚待太子增而与魏国交好，让齐国、韩国去猜疑魏国。 
English: Therefore, it is better to treat Prince Zeng well and make friends with Wei, and let Qi and South Korea suspect Wei.

古文：秦乃止增。
现代文：秦王这才取消了囚禁太子增的打算。
English: It was only then that King Qin cancelled the plan to imprison Prince Zeng.

古文：三十一年，秦王政初立。
现代文：安釐王三十一年，秦王政开始即位。
English: In the 31st year of King Antao, the reign of King Qin began.

古文：三十四年，安釐王卒，太子增立，是为景湣王。
现代文：安釐王三十四年，安釐王去世，太子增即位，这就是景湣王。
English: In the thirty-fourth year of King Antao, King Antao died, and Prince Zeng ascended the throne. This is King Jingyao.

古文：信陵君无忌卒。
现代文：信陵君无忌去世。
English: Mr. Shinryo passed away.

古文：景湣王元年，秦拔我二十城，以为秦东郡。
现代文：景湣王元年，秦军攻下魏国二十座城，设置为秦国的东郡。
English: In the first year of King Jingzhu, the Qin army conquered twenty cities in Wei and set them up as the East County of Qin.

古文：二年，秦拔我朝歌。
现代文：二年，秦军攻下魏国的朝歌。
English: In the second year, the Qin army captured the morning song of Wei.

古文：徙野王。
现代文：卫国迁到野王。
English: The imperial guard moved to Nio.

古文：三年，秦拔我汲。
现代文：三年，秦军攻下魏国的汲邑。
English: In the third year, the Qin army captured the Wei state of Kumyur.

古文：五年，秦拔我垣、蒲阳、衍。
现代文：五年，秦军攻下魏国的垣地、蒲阳、衍邑。
English: In the fifth year, the Qin army conquered Wei's fences, Puyang, and Yan.

古文：十五年，景湣王卒，子王假立。
现代文：十五年，景湣王去世，他的儿子魏王假即位。
English: Fifteen years later, King Jingye passed away, and his son, King Wei, ascended to the throne.

古文：王假元年，燕太子丹使荆轲刺秦王，秦王觉之。
现代文：魏王假元年，燕国太子丹派荆轲刺杀秦王，被秦王发觉了。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, the prince of Yan, Dan, sent Jing Qi to assassinate the Qin King, and was discovered by the Qin King.

古文：三年，秦灌大梁，虏王假，遂灭魏以为郡县。
现代文：魏王假三年，秦军水淹大梁，俘虏了魏王假，终于灭了魏国，设置为郡县。
English: In the third year of the Wei Dynasty, the Qin Army flooded the Great Beam, captured the Wei Dynasty, and finally destroyed the Wei Dynasty, setting it up as a county.

古文：太史公曰：吾適故大梁之墟，墟中人曰： 秦之破梁，引河沟而灌大梁，三月城坏，王请降，遂灭魏。 
现代文：太史公说：我曾到过大梁的旧城址，那里的人说： 秦军攻破大梁，是引鸿沟之水淹灌大梁，经过三个月城被毁坏，魏王请求投降，于是灭亡了魏国。 
English: Taishigong said, "I once went to the site of the old city of Dalian. The people there said, "The Qin army broke through Dalian. It was the water from the ravine that flooded Dalian. After three months, the city was destroyed. The king of Wei asked for surrender, and thus the state of Wei was destroyed."

古文：说者皆曰魏以不用信陵君故，国削弱至於亡，余以为不然。
现代文：议论的人都说，由于魏王不重用信陵君的缘故，国家削弱以至于灭亡。我认为不是这样。
English: Commentators say that because the Wei king did not make much use of the tomb, the country was weakened to the point of collapse. I don't think that's true.

古文：天方令秦平海内，其业未成，魏虽得阿衡之佐，曷益乎？
现代文：天意正是让秦国平定海内，它的功业尚未成，魏国即使得到像阿衡一样的贤臣辅佐，又有什么用呢？
English: It was God's will to let Qin conquer the inland sea. Its work has not yet been accomplished. Even if Wei was assisted by wise men like Aheng, what good would it do?

