古文：凡与敌战，须要选拣勇将锐卒，使为先锋，一则壮我志，一则挫敌威。
现代文：凡是跟敌人作战，必须选拔勇将、精兵，编组而使其担任先锋。这样，一方面能够鼓舞我军士气，一方面可以挫杀敌人威风。
English: Whenever fighting with the enemy, we must select brave generals and elite soldiers, and organize them to serve as the vanguard. In this way, on the one hand, we can encourage the morale of our troops, and on the other hand, we can frustrate the enemy's prestige.

古文：法曰： 无选锋曰北。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 用兵打仗没有勇将精兵担任先锋，必然要遭到失败。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: If one does not have the courage to use soldiers to fight, and does not take the best soldiers as the vanguard, one is bound to fail.

古文：建安十二年，袁尚、熙奔上谷郡，乌桓数入塞为害。
现代文：东汉献帝建安十二年，袁绍之子袁尚、袁熙兵败逃往上谷郡，这时候乌桓兵也多次进入边塞作乱。
English: In the 12th year of the Eastern Han Dynasty's dedication to Emperor Jianan, Yuan Shao's son Yuan Shang and Yuan Xi's defeated soldiers fled to Shanggu County. At this time, Wu Huan's soldiers also repeatedly entered the border fortress to make trouble.

古文：曹操征之。夏五月，至无终；秋七月，大水，傍海道路不通。
现代文：曹操率兵征伐，同年夏季五月，部队到达无终。秋季七月，洪水泛滥，沿海道路不能通行，随军司空户曹掾田畴请求担任向导，曹操同意了，遂率军出卢龙塞。
English: Cao Cao led the troops in the campaign. In the summer of the same year, in May, the troops arrived in Lulong. In the autumn, in July, when the coastal roads were impassable due to flooding, Cao Shantian, the military commander, asked Cao Shantian to act as a guide. Cao Cao agreed and led the troops out of Lulong.

古文：田畴请为乡导，操从之，率兵出卢龙塞，水潦，塞外道绝不通，乃堑山堙谷五百余里，经白檀，历平刚，涉鲜卑庭，东指柳城。未至二百里，虏方知之。
现代文：在卢龙塞时道路因洪水隔绝不通，于是开山填谷五百多里，经白檀，历平冈，过鲜卑部落领地，向东直趣柳城。当距柳城二百里时，敌人才发觉。
English: At the time of Lulongse, the road was cut off due to floods, so he drove more than five hundred miles through mountains and valleys, through sandalwood, through Pinggang, through the territory of the Xianbei tribe, and eastward to Liucheng. When he was two hundred miles away from Liucheng, the enemy only discovered him.

古文：尚、熙与蹋顿、辽西单于楼班、右北平单于能臣抵之等将数万骑逆军。
现代文：于是，袁尚、袁熙与蹋顿、辽西单子楼班、右北平单于能臣抵之等率领几万骑兵，前来堵击。
English: Yuan Shang, Yuan Xi and Xingtang, as well as Liao Xi Shan in Louban and Right Beiping Shan in Nengshen, came to meet the battle with tens of thousands of cavalry.

古文：八月，登白狼山，卒与虏遇，众甚盛。操辎重在后，披甲者甚少，左右皆惧。
现代文：八月，曹操率军登越白狼山时，突然与敌人遭遇，而且敌军兵力众多，曹军因辎重留在后面，披挂铠甲的很少，所以曹操左右的人都很恐慌。
English: In August, when Cao Cao led his army to climb the White Wolf Mountain, he suddenly encountered the enemy. Moreover, the enemy had a large number of troops. Cao Cao's army was left behind due to the heavy load, and few wore armor, so people around Cao Cao were very panicked.

古文：操登高而望，见虏阵不整，乃纵兵击之，使张辽为先锋，虏众大溃。斩蹋顿及名王以下，胡、汉降者二十余万口。
现代文：曹操登上高处观察敌情，发现敌军阵势紊乱不整，于是挥军出击，并派猛将张辽担任先锋打头阵，结果大败敌军，击斩蹋顿及著名首领以下多人，收降胡、汉部众二十多万人。
English: Cao Cao ascended to a high place to observe the enemy situation and found that the enemy's formation was disorderly, so he waved the army to attack and sent Zhang Liao as the vanguard to take the lead. As a result, he defeated the enemy army, killed many people including Xing Dong and famous leaders, and captured more than 200,000 Hu and Han people.

