古文：《玉堂闲话》：知温少年，与外弟徐某为盗于兗、郓之境。
现代文：房知温，字伯玉，兖州瑕丘人。年少时勇猛有力，在本地军队当兵，担任赤甲都官健。
English: Fang Zhiwen, also known as Bo Yu, is a native of Keqiu, Zhangzhou. When he was young, he was brave and powerful. He was a soldier in the local army and served as a Red Army officer.

古文：梁将葛从周镇其地，选置麾下。
现代文：后梁将领葛从周镇守兖州时，被选拔进葛的部下。
English: When General Hou Liang led Ge from Zhou Town to guard Zhangzhou, he was selected to be one of Ge's subordinates.

古文：时部将牛存节屯于镇，好摴博，每求辨采者，知温以善博见推，因得侍左右，遂熟于存节。
现代文：当时部将牛存节驻扎兖州，喜爱赌博，常寻求有特长的人，房知温因善于博弈被推崇，因此得以服侍左右，便与牛存节来往密切。
English: At that time, the department stationed Niu Cun Jie in Zhangzhou, loved gambling, and often sought people with special skills. Fang Zhiwen was respected for being good at gambling, so he was able to serve around, and then he was in close contact with Niu Cun Jie.

古文：及王师范遣刘鄩据兗州，梁祖命存节将兵讨之，知温夕缒出奔，存节喜而纳焉。明夜，窃良马一驷，复入城，鄩乃擢为裨将。
现代文：到王师范派刘寻阝占据了兖州，梁太祖令牛存节率兵讨伐，房知温在夜晚用绳子拴着自己吊出城投奔，牛存节高兴地接纳了他，第二天夜晚，房知温偷窃了四匹好马，又进入了兖州城里。
English: By the time Wang Shifan sent Liu Xunjun to occupy Zhangzhou, Liang Taizu ordered Niu Cunjie to lead an army to fight. At night, Fang Zhiwen hung himself with a rope and ran out of the city. Niu Cunjie gladly accepted him. The next night, Fang Zhiwen stole four good horses and entered Zhangzhou.

古文：鄩降，隶于同州刘知俊，知俊补为克和军使。
现代文：刘寻阝便提拔他做了偏将。刘寻阝投降后，房知温隶属同州刘知俊，刘知俊把他补充为克和军使。
English: After Liu Xingkun's surrender, Fang Zhiwen was subordinated to Liu Zhijun of the same state, and Liu Zhijun added him as a peace envoy.

古文：知俊奔岐，改隶魏州杨师厚，以为马步军校，渐升至亲随指挥使，继加检校司空。
现代文：刘知俊出奔岐地，他又改属魏州杨师厚，担任马步军校，后来逐渐升迁到亲随指挥使。接着加封检校司空。
English: Liu Zhijun went to the land of Qi, and he was transferred to Yang Shihou of Weizhou to serve as a horse-walking military school. Later, he was gradually promoted to the personal envoy of the commander. Then he was added to the seal of the school inspector.

古文：庄宗入魏，赐姓，名绍英，改天雄军马步都指挥使，加检校司徒、澶州刺史、行台右千牛卫大将军。
现代文：后唐庄宗李存勖进入魏州。赐给他李姓，改名绍英，改任天雄军马步都指挥使，加官检校司徒、澶州刺史、行台右千牛卫大将军。
English: Later, Li Cunxu, the patriarch of Tangzhuang, entered Weizhou. He was given the surname Li, changed his name to Shaoying, and was appointed as the commander of the Tianxiong Army Ma Budu, and was promoted to the positions of the inspector of schools, the inspector of Zhangzhou, and the general of the right thousand cattle guard of Xingtai.

古文：庄宗平梁，历曹、贝州刺史，权充东北面蕃汉马步都虞候，遣戍瓦桥关。
现代文：庄宗平定梁州，房知温历任曹、贝二州刺史，临时充任东北方蕃汉马步都虞候，被派去戍守瓦桥关。
English: Zhuangzong subdued Liangzhou, Fangzhi Wen successively served as Cao, Bei Erzhou stabbed history, temporarily served as the northeastern Shih Hamabudu, and was sent to guard the tile bridge pass.

古文：明宗自鄴入洛，知温与王晏球首赴焉。
现代文：明宗从邺城进入洛阳，房知温与王晏球首先奔赴那里。
English: Mingzong entered Luoyang from Shicheng, and Fang Zhiwen and Wang Yingqiu rushed there first.

古文：明宗自总管府署知温滑州两使留后。
现代文：明宗以总管府身份暂任房知温为滑州两使留后。
English: Mingzong, in his capacity as the head of the administration, temporarily appointed Fang Zhiwen to stay as the two envoys in Slum.

古文：天成元年，授兗州节度使。
现代文：天成元年，任命为兖州节度使。
English: In the first year of Tiancheng, he was appointed as the chief envoy of the Bozhou Festival.

古文：明宗即位，诏充北面招讨，屯于卢台军。
现代文：明宗即位，诏令他任北方招讨，驻扎卢台军防区。
English: When Emperor Mingzong ascended to the throne, he was ordered by the emperor to be stationed in the Lutetia Military Defense Zone.

古文：以卢文进来归，加特进、同平章事，赏招讨之功也。
现代文：因卢文进前来归顺，加封特进、同平章事，以奖赏他招讨的功劳。
English: Because Lu Wen came forward to submit, he was given a special promotion and a peerage to reward him for his efforts.

古文：后除乌震为招讨副使，代知温归镇。知温怒震遽至，有怨言，因纵博，诱牙兵杀震于席上。
现代文：后来任命乌震为招讨副使，代替房知温回去镇守，房知温恼恨乌震突然到来，口出怨言，因此放纵赌博，诱使牙兵在赌桌上杀害了乌震。
English: Later, he appointed Wu Zhen as the vice envoy to invite and replace Fang Zhi Wen to go back to the town guard. Fang Zhi Wen was annoyed by the sudden arrival of Wu Zhen and complained, so he indulged in gambling and induced the tooth soldiers to kill Wu Zhen on the gambling table.

古文：会次将安审通保骑军隔河按甲不动，知温惧不济，乃束身渡水，复结审通，逐其乱军以奏。时朝廷姑息知温，下诏于鄴尽杀军士家口老幼凡数万，清漳为之变色。
现代文：碰上副将安审通带领骑兵隔河按兵不动，房知温害怕安审通不帮忙，便束身渡水，又勾结安审通追杀叛乱军队以上奏朝廷，当时，朝廷放纵宽容房知温，从邺城传下命令，杀掉了叛军士兵家中老小共几万人。清漳水因此改变了颜色。
English: When he met Vice Admiral An Zhi Tong leading the cavalry across the river and standing still, Fang Zhi Wen was afraid that An Zi Tong would not help, so he tied himself up and crossed the water. He also colluded with An Zi Tong to pursue the rebel army and reported to the imperial court. At that time, the imperial court indulged and tolerated Fang Zhi Wen and issued orders from Lucheng, killing tens of thousands of children in the homes of rebel soldiers. Qing Lishui therefore changed color.

古文：寻诏遣知温就便之镇，以安反侧。
现代文：不久，诏令派房知温因便去镇守兖都，以此安定动荡的局面。
English: Soon after, Fang Zhiwen was dispatched by imperial edict to guard the capital of Shandong Province to stabilize the turbulent situation.

古文：俄改徐州节度使，加兼侍中。会朝廷起兵伐高季兴，授荆南招讨使，知行府事。
现代文：不多时，调任徐州节度使，加官兼任侍中，碰上朝廷兴兵讨伐高季兴，任命房知温为荆南招讨使，兼理行府事务。
English: Not infrequently, he was transferred to the post of Xuzhou Festival Envoy, and he also served as an attendant. When the imperial army attacked Gao Jixing, he appointed Fang Zhiwen as the Jingnan Recruitment Envoy to handle the affairs of the government.

古文：寻丁母忧，起复云麾将军，墨缞即戎，竟无功而还。
现代文：不久，遇上母亲的丧事，服丧期起用为云麾将军，穿着黑色丧服率军出征，结果无功而返。
English: Soon after, he met with the death of his mother, and during the period of mourning, he was appointed as the general Yun Qi, wearing a black mourning uniform and leading the army to go to war, but he returned without any results.

古文：长兴中，节制文阳。
现代文：长兴年间，出任汶阳节制。
English: During the Changxing years, he served as the governor of Wenyang.

古文：越二年，除平卢军节度使，累官至开府仪同三司、检校太师、兼中书令，封东平王，食邑五千户，食实封三百户。
现代文：过了二年，出任平卢军节度使，历官开府仪同三司、检校太师、兼中书令，封为东平王，食邑五千户，实封三百户。
English: Two years later, he was appointed as the Pinglu Army's festival envoy, and his officials included the head of the prefectural government, the third secretary, the inspector of schools, and the secretary of the Central Government, and he was given the title of the King of Dongping, with 5,000 households in food villages and 300 households in actual enclosures.

古文：天福元年冬十二月辛巳，卒于镇。
现代文：天福元年十二月辛巳日，死在镇守任上。
English: Tenfu died in December of the first year of Xinshi, when he was in charge of the town.

古文：赠太尉，归葬于瑕丘，诏立神道碑。
现代文：追赠为太尉，送回安葬在瑕丘，诏令替他立神道碑。
English: He was posthumously promoted to taifu (second lieutenant) and sent back to be buried in Kakeoka. An imperial edict was issued to erect a Shinto monument for him.

古文：知温性粗犷，动罕由礼。
现代文：房知温性情粗犷豪放，举止动作很少有礼可循。
English: Fang Zhiyuan's temperament is rough and bold, and his manners and actions are rarely polite.

古文：每迎待王人，不改戎服，寡言笑，多纵左右排辱宾僚，他日知误，亦无愧色。
现代文：常常迎送朝廷官员，也不更换军装。很少言语欢笑，多放纵左右随从侮辱宾客僚属，事后方知荒谬，但也没有惭愧的表现。
English: He often received officials of the imperial court, and did not change his military uniform. He rarely laughed, but rather indulged his attendants in insulting the guests and their families. They knew it was absurd in hindsight, but they did not show any shame.

古文：始与唐末帝尝失意于杯盘间，以白刃相恐，及末帝即位，知温忧甚，末帝乃封王爵以宁之也。知温径赴洛阳，申其宿过，且感新恩，末帝开怀以厚礼慰而遣之。
现代文：当初，曾经与后唐末帝在酒宴上闹翻，用刀子相威吓。末帝即位，房知温非常恐惧，末帝便封给他王的爵位来安稳他，房知温直赴洛阳，申述他从前的过错，并且感激新赐给他的恩宠，末帝胸怀大度，用丰厚的礼物慰藉，打发他回去。
English: At first, he had a falling out with the late Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty at a wine banquet and threatened each other with a knife. When the late Emperor ascended the throne, Fang Zhiwen was very afraid. The late Emperor then gave him the title of king to keep him safe. Fang Zhiwen went straight to Luoyang to complain about his past mistakes and be grateful for the new grace given to him. The late Emperor was generous and consoled him with a rich gift and sent him back.

古文：及还郡，厚敛不已，积货数百万，治第于南城，出则以妓乐相随，任意所之，曾不以政事为务。
现代文：等到回到郡治，又不停地搜刮民财，聚积几百万财货，在城南修建了府宅，出去时以乐妓伶人相随从，想去哪就去哪，全不把国家政事作为自己的工作。
English: When he returned to the county government, he kept raiding the people's wealth, accumulating millions of wealth and goods, and built a mansion in the south of the city. When he went out, he used prostitutes to accompany him, and went wherever he wanted. He did not regard national politics as his job.

古文：有幕客颜衎者，正直之士也，委曲陈其利病，知温不能用焉。
现代文：有个名叫颜絗的幕僚，是个正直的士人，委婉地向他陈述利害，房知温不采纳他的劝谏。
English: There was an aide named Yan Qi, an honest scholar, who gently explained the stakes to him, but Fang Zhiwen did not accept his advice.

古文：及高祖建义入洛，尚不即进献，耀兵于牙帐之下，衎正色谓曰： 清泰富有天下，多力善战，岂明公之比！
现代文：到高祖树立义旗进入洛阳，房知温不仅不马上前去献礼，还在军帐之下炫耀武力。颜絗严肃地对他说： 末帝富贵拥有天下，力量雄厚，关于打仗，哪里是明公你可以匹敌的？
English: When Gaozu set up the banner of righteousness and entered Luoyang, Fang Zhiwen not only did not immediately go forward to offer gifts, but also showed off his military power under the military account. Yan Yan said to him seriously: The last emperor, rich and noble, owns the world, and has great strength. As far as war is concerned, where is Ming Gong that you can match?

古文：而天运有归，坐成灰烬。
现代文：然而天命有定，过不了多久唐室就将变为灰烬。
English: However, as fate would have it, it wouldn't be long before the Tang Dynasty would be reduced to ashes.

古文：今青州迁延不贡，何以求安？
现代文：如今青州拖延，不缴纳贡礼，凭什么求取安稳？
English: Nowadays, Qingzhou is delaying and not paying tribute. On what basis can it seek stability?

古文：建立先人之坟在于榆社，其岗阜重复，松桧蔼然，占者云 后必出公侯 ，故建立自为墓，恐子孙易之也。
现代文：成千上百的武将，不足以作为依靠，我深深地替大王你担忧。 房知温于是驰马向高祖上表致贺，青州才得以安宁。不久，因陶醉酒色酿成疾病而死，他的部下将领分占了他所收刮的财货，照例成为富豪之家。
English: Hundreds of generals are not enough to rely on, and I am deeply worried for you, the great king. Fang Zhiwen then rode his horse to congratulate Gao Zu on the table, and Qingzhou was able to rest. Soon, he died of a disease caused by intoxication, and his subordinate generals took the share of the goods he collected, and became a rich man's house as usual.

古文：子守恩，《周书》有传。康福，蔚州人，世为本州军校。
现代文：颜絗又劝说房知温的儿子房彦儒进献钱货十万贯，以资助国家的开销，朝廷任命房彦儒为沂州刺史，房知温的家人有幸得以保全，全靠颜絗的力量。康福，蔚州人，世代担任本州军校。
English: Yan Yan also persuaded Fang Zhiwen's son, Fang Yan Ru, to donate 100,000 yuan worth of goods to fund the state's expenses. The court appointed Fang Yan Ru as the governor of Zhangzhou. Fang Zhiwen's family was fortunate enough to be preserved, all thanks to Yan Yan's strength. Kangfu, a native of Ulshu, served as the military school of the state for generations.

古文：祖嗣，蕃汉都知兵马使，累赠太子太师。
现代文：祖父康嗣，曾担任蕃汉总知兵马使，追赠太子太师。
English: His grandfather, Kang Zhi, had served as the commander-in-chief of the Han Dynasty and was posthumously awarded the title of Crown Prince and Grand Master.

古文：父公政，历职至平塞军使，累赠太傅。
现代文：父亲康公政，历官至平塞军使，追赠太傅。
English: His father, Kang Gongzheng, was a high-ranking official and military envoy to Pingsei, and was posthumously awarded the title of Taifu.

古文：福便弓马，少事后唐武皇，累补军职，充承天军都监。
现代文：康福熟谙弓箭兵马，年轻时事奉后唐武皇，历补军职，兼承天军都监。
English: Kangfu was a skilled archer and warrior. When he was young, he served Emperor Wu of the Tang Dynasty, served in the military, and also served as the inspector of the Capital of the Heavenly Army.

古文：庄宗嗣位，尝谓左右曰： 我本蕃人，以羊马为活业。
现代文：庄宗即位，曾经对左右侍臣说： 我本来是蕃地人，以放羊牧马为生。
English: When Emperor Zhuangzong ascended to the throne, he once said to his attendants: I was originally from Shandong Province and made a living from herding sheep and horses.

古文：彼康福者，体貌丰厚，宜领财货，可令总辖马牧。 
现代文：那康福，形貌丰满仁厚，应主管财货，可让他总管马匹牧畜。 
English: That Kangfu, plump and benevolent, should be in charge of wealth and goods, and he can be in charge of horse herding.

古文：由是署为马坊使，大有蕃息。
现代文：因此任命他为马坊使，他使马匹繁殖生息很快。
English: So he appointed him groom, and he made the horses multiply and grow quickly.

古文：及明宗为乱兵所迫，将离魏县，会福牧小坊马数千匹于相州，乃驱而归。
现代文：当明宗被叛军所胁迫，将离开魏县时，遇上康福在相州牧放几千匹小马，便与康福一同驱马而回。
English: When Mingzong was coerced by the rebels and was about to leave Wei County, he met Kangfu herding a few thousand ponies in Xiangzhou and drove back with him.

古文：明宗即位，授飞龙使，俄转磁州刺史，充襄州兵马都监。
现代文：明宗即位，任康福为飞龙使，不久调任磁州刺史，兼襄州兵马都监。
English: When Emperor Mingzong ascended the throne, he appointed Kangfu as the Flying Dragon Envoy, and he was soon transferred to the position of the Magical State Historian, and also the Yangzhou Terracotta Warriors and Horses Supervisor.

古文：寻以江陵叛命，朝廷举兵伐之，以福为荆南道行营兵马都监，俄以王师无功而还。
现代文：不久因为江陵反叛，朝廷兴兵讨伐，任康福为荆南道行营兵马都监，不久因朝廷军队无功而还。
English: Soon after, because of the rebellion in Gangneung, the imperial court raised an army to fight against the rebels, and appointed Kangfu as the commander of the army and horses of Jingnan Road, but he soon returned because the imperial army was ineffective.

古文：福善诸蕃语，明宗视政之暇，每召入便殿，谘访时之利病，福即以蕃语奏之。
现代文：康福精通各蕃族语言，明宗在主持朝政的闲暇，常召他进入便殿，咨询时政的利弊，康福就用蕃语奏答。
English: Kangfu was fluent in all the Yi languages. When Mingzong presided over the government in his spare time, he often called him into the hall to consult the pros and cons of the current government, and Kangfu answered in the Yi language.

古文：枢密使重诲恶焉，常面戒之曰： 康福但乱奏事，有日斩之！ 
现代文：枢密使安重诲憎恶他，经常当面警告他说： 康福你只是胡乱禀奏朝事，当心有一天要杀掉你。 
English: The privy councillor An Chongzhen detested him and often warned him to his face: "Kang Fu, you are just playing around, beware, one day I will kill you."

古文：福惧。
现代文：康福很是惧怕。
English: Kangfu is very afraid.

古文：会灵武兵马留后韩浔，以人情不协，虑为所图，上表请帅，制加福光禄大夫、检校司空，行凉州刺史，充朔方、河西等军节度，灵威雄警甘肃等州观察处置、管内营田、押蕃落、温池榷税等使。
现代文：碰上灵武兵马留后韩氵寻在任上不得人心，担心被人算计，上表请求指派主帅，明宗便下令封康福为光禄大夫、检校司空，代理凉州刺史，兼朔方、河西等军节度使，灵、威、雄、甘、肃等州观察处置、管内营田、押蕃落、盐池榷税等使。
English: When Han Yuxuan was unpopular in his post after Lingwu's soldiers and horses were left behind, fearing that he would be miscalculated, he requested the appointment of a head coach in the above table. Mingzong then ordered that Kangfu be appointed as the doctor of Guanglu, the school inspection officer, the agent of Liangzhou's history, and the military festival envoy of Shuofang and Hexi, the state observation and disposal of Ling, Wei, Xiong, Gan, and Su, and the envoy of the administration of the camp, the detention of the prisoners, and the taxation of the salt ponds.

古文：福之是拜，盖重诲嫉而出之，福泣而辞之。
现代文：康福的这次授官，是因为安重诲嫉恨他而将他调出京城，康福哭泣着推辞不受。
English: This time, Kofu's promotion was because Anshu envied him and transferred him out of the capital. Kofu wept and refused to accept the resignation.

古文：明宗宣重诲别与商议，重诲奏曰： 臣累奉圣旨，令与康福一事，今福骤升节镇，更欲何求！
现代文：明宗令安重诲再另做商议，安重诲奏告道： 我多次承奉圣旨，让我给康福担任一职，现在康福骤然提升为节镇，还想要求什么啊？
English: The Ming Dynasty ordered An Chong Liang to have another discussion, and An Chong Liang replied, "I have repeatedly obeyed the Holy Will and let Kangfu hold a post, and now Kangfu has suddenly been elevated to a festival town, what else do you want to ask for?"

古文：况已有成命，难于改移。 
现代文：况且已经有了圣命，很难改移。 
English: Moreover, it is already a sacred life, and it is difficult to change it.

古文：明宗不得已，谓福曰： 重诲不肯，非朕意也。 
现代文：明宗不得已便对康福说： 安重诲不愿更改，不是我的意思。 
English: As a last resort, Mingzong said to Kangfu, "I didn't mean to make you unwilling to change.

古文：福辞，明宗曰： 朕遣兵援助，勿过忧也。 
现代文：康福向明宗告辞，明宗说： 我派兵援助你，不要过于忧虑。 
English: Kangfu bade farewell to Mingzong. Mingzong said, "Don't worry too much, I'll send soldiers to help you."

古文：因令将军牛知柔领兵送赴镇。
现代文：便令将军牛知柔率兵送康福前往藩镇上任。
English: He then ordered General Niu Zhi Rong and his soldiers to escort Kangfu to the town to take office.

古文：行次青岗峡，会大雪，令人登山望之，见川下烟火，吐蕃数千帐在焉，寇不之觉，因分军三道以掩之。蕃众大骇，弃帐幕而走，杀之殆尽，获玉璞、羊马甚多。
现代文：走到青岗峡，遇上大雪，令人登上山巅望，只见山川下烟火缭绕的地方，吐蕃几千营帐驻扎在那里，蕃贼没有发觉唐军来到，康福趁机分兵三路掩杀吐蕃，蕃军大惊，丢下帐幕逃去，几乎被杀尽，缴获玉璞、羊马极多。
English: When they reached Qinggang Gorge, they encountered heavy snow, which made people climb to the top of the mountain and look down. They could only see the smoke and fire of the mountains and rivers below. Several thousand camp tents of the Tuy were stationed there. The invaders did not notice the arrival of the Tang army. Kangfu took the opportunity to send a detachment of soldiers to cover the Tuy in three directions. The Tuy army was shocked, left their tents and fled. They were almost killed, and captured a lot of jade and horses.

古文：到镇岁余，西戎皆款附，改赐福耀忠匡定保节功臣，累加官爵。
现代文：到藩镇上任一年多，西戎都平安依附，朝廷改赐康福耀忠匡定保节功臣名号，接连加官进爵。
English: More than a year after he took office in the han town, Xi Rongdu peacefully adhered, the imperial court changed the name to Kangfu Yaozhong Qianding Festival Hero, and he was successively promoted to the peerage.

古文：福镇灵武凡三岁，每岁大稔，仓储盈羡，有马千驷，因为人所谮。
现代文：康福镇守灵武共有三年，每年年成丰收，仓廪储积满盈，有战马数千匹，因而被人诬陷。
English: Kangfu Town kept Lingwu for a total of three years, with a bumper harvest every year, warehouses full of reserves, and thousands of war horses, so it was framed.

古文：安重诲奏曰： 累据使臣所言，康福大有宝货，必负朝廷。 
现代文：安重诲上奏道 ：根据多次使官所说，康福大聚财宝货物，一定有背叛朝廷之心。 
English: An Chongyuan made the following report: According to what the envoys have said many times, there must be a spirit of betrayal of the imperial court in the gathering of wealth and goods at Kofu.

古文：明宗密遣人谓曰： 朕何负于卿，而有异心耶！ 
现代文：明宗秘密派人对康福说： 我哪里亏待了你，你却有背叛之心？ 
English: The Ming Sect secretly sent someone to say to Kangfu: Where have I wronged you, but you have a heart of betrayal?

古文：福奏曰： 臣受国重恩，有死无贰，岂愿负于圣人，此必谗人之言也。 
现代文：康福上奏道： 我蒙受朝廷恩宠，至死不变心，岂肯辜负皇上，这一定是谗人之言。 
English: "I have been favored by the imperial court, and I will not change my mind until the day I die. Will I betray the emperor? This must be the words of a traitor."

古文：因表乞入觐，不允。
现代文：因此上表请求入朝觐见明宗，明宗不予准允。
English: Therefore, the above request to enter the Imperial Palace to see Myongjong, Myongjong is not allowed.

古文：及再上章，随而赴阙，移授彰义军节度使，又转邠州，检校太傅。
现代文：到再次上奏时，就让他回朝觐见，改任他为彰义军节度使，又改任州，授检校太傅。
English: By the time of the next performance, he was allowed to return to the imperial court, and was appointed as the festival envoy for the pro-rebellion army, and was also appointed as the prefect of the prefecture, and the inspector of the inspection school.

古文：清泰中，移镇秦州，加特进、开国侯，充西面都部署。
现代文：清泰年间，移镇秦州，加封特进、开国侯，兼西面都部署。
English: During the Qing and Tai Dynasties, Qinzhou was moved to Qinzhou, Gafeng was specially advanced, the country was founded, and Ximen was deployed.

古文：高祖受命，就加检校太尉、开国公。
现代文：后晋高祖登上帝位，加封检校太尉、开国公。
English: After he was promoted to high school, his ancestor ascended to the throne of God, and he was also awarded the title of lieutenant of the inspection school and the founding of the country.

古文：未几，又加同平章事。
现代文：不久，又加同平章事。
English: Soon after, he was given the same punishment.

古文：及移领河中，加兼侍中。以天和节入觐，改赐输忠守正翊亮功臣，加开府仪同三司，增食邑至五千户，实封五百户。
现代文：当调任河中时，加兼侍中，在天和节入朝觐见，改赐输忠守正翊亮功臣，加开府仪同三司，增赐食邑达到五千户，实封五百户。
English: When he was transferred to the middle of the river, he was also appointed to the middle of the attendants, and he entered the imperial court on the day of the Spring Festival, and he was awarded the title of the most loyal, the most brilliant and the most meritorious vassal, and he was also awarded the Kaifu ceremony and the three offices, and he was also awarded the title of 5,000 households and 500 households were sealed.

古文：久之，受代归阙。
现代文：过了很久，去职回朝。
English: After a long time, I went back to work in the morning.

古文：天福七年秋，卒于京师，年五十八。
现代文：天福七年秋，在京城去世，时年五十八岁。
English: Tianfu died in the autumn of his seventh year in Beijing, at the age of fifty-eight.

古文：赠太师，谥曰武安。
现代文：追赐太师，谥号武安。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master, and his posthumous name was Wu'an.

古文：福无军功，属明宗龙跃，有际会之幸，擢自小校，暴为贵人，每食非羊之全髀不能饫腹，与士大夫交言，懵无所别。
现代文：康福没有军功，遭逢明宗即位之时，有附会风云之幸。从小校提拔起来，突然变为贵族，每天吃饭没有整羊腿就不能吃饱，与士大夫一起交谈，混然没有特出之处。
English: Kangfu didn't have any military merit. When Emperor Mingzong ascended to the throne, he had the good fortune of being promoted from elementary school to become an aristocrat. He couldn't eat a full meal without a whole leg of lamb every day. There was nothing unusual about his conversation with the scholar-officials.

古文：在天水日，尝有疾，幕客谒问，福拥衾而坐。
现代文：在天水的时候，曾经染过病，幕客谒见探问，康福拥锦被而坐。
English: At the time of Tianshui, he had once contracted an illness, and when he was asked about it by the guests, he just sat there with a quilt.

古文：客有退者，谓同列曰： 锦衾烂兮！ 
现代文：幕客退下来，有位引用《诗经？唐风？葛生》中的一句诗对同僚说 ：锦衾烂兮。 
English: When the guests left, one of them said to his colleagues, quoting a poem from "Poetry? Tang style? Ge Sheng": "The brocade is rotten."

古文：福闻之，遽召言者，怒视曰： 吾虽生于塞下，乃唐人也，何得以为烂奚！ 
现代文：康福听见了，马上叫来说这话的人，怒目而视道： 我虽然生于塞下，却是汉人，怎么是异族的烂奚呢！ 
English: When Kangfu heard this, he immediately called out to the person who had said this, glaring at him angrily: Although I was born in Jie, I am a Han Chinese. How can I be a foreigner?

古文：开运中，卒，赠太师。
现代文：便呵叱他出去，从此以后，各幕客不敢再对他使用典雅的辞句。
English: They scolded him to go out, and from then on, the guests did not dare to use any elegant words to him.

古文：彦威与太妃为同宗，少帝以舅事之，彦威未尝自以为言。
现代文：后来又有个姓骆的下等幕客，他的祖先与后唐懿祖都来自金山府，在公宴上，康福对随从们说： 骆评事官职虽然卑微，但论门族则非常高贵，是真正的沙陀人。 
English: Later, there was also a low-ranking guest of the shogunate with the surname Luo. His ancestors and post-Tang Dynasty ancestors all came from Jinshan Prefecture. At a public banquet, Kangfu said to his followers: Although Luo's official position is lowly, his family is very noble, and he is a true satyr.

古文：及卒，太妃与少帝临丧，人始知为国戚，闻者益重其人焉。李周，字通理，邢州内丘人也，唐潞州节度使抱真之后。曾祖融、祖毅、父矩，皆不仕。
现代文：听到的人都私下里暗笑不止。李周，字通理，邢州内丘人，是唐潞州节度使李抱真的后代。曾祖父李融、祖父李毅、父亲李矩，都不曾入仕做官。
English: Everyone who heard it secretly laughed and laughed. Li Zhou, a literate man from the hills of Zhangzhou, was a descendant of Li Bozhong, who had been made an official by the Emperor of Tang Dynasty. His great-grandfather Li Rong, his grandfather Li Yi, and his father Li Rui had never served as officials.

古文：周年十六，为内丘捕贼将，以任侠自负。
现代文：李周十六岁时，担任内丘捕贼将，以豪侠仗义自诩。
English: When Li Zhou was 16 years old, he served as a thief-catcher in the Inner Hill and defended himself as a hero.

古文：时河朔群盗充斥，南北交兵，行旅无援者不敢出郡邑。
现代文：当时河朔群盗充斥，南北交战，没有援助的来往旅客不敢外出郡府州邑。
English: At that time, Hexuo was full of bandits, the north and the south were at war, and passengers who did not have assistance did not dare to go out of the county seat.

古文：有士人卢岳，家于太原，携妻子囊橐寓于逆旅，进退无所保，唯与所亲相对流涕，周悯之，请援送以归。
现代文：有个名叫卢岳的士人，家住太原，带着妻子儿女和箱子口袋住在客馆，进退都没有保障，只与自己的亲人相对流泪，李周怜悯他，请让帮助他们送他们回去。
English: There was a scholar named Lu Yue, who lived in Taiyuan, with his wife, children, suitcases and bags, living in a guest house. There was no guarantee of entry or exit, and he only shed tears with his relatives. Li Zhou pitied him, and asked them to help him send them back.

古文：行经西山中，有贼夜于林麓间俟之，射卢岳，中其马。
现代文：行经西山中，有强盗夜晚在山坡林间守候他们，射击卢岳，射中了他的乘马。
English: Passing through the western mountains, some robbers waited for them at night in the hillside woods, shot Lu Yue, and shot his horse.

古文：周大呼曰： 尔为谁耶？ 
现代文：李周大吼道 ：你们是谁呢？ 
English: Li Zhou shouted: Who are you?

古文：贼闻其声，相谓曰： 李君至此矣。 
现代文：强盗听出了他的声音，相互说： 李周到这里了。 
English: The robbers recognized his voice and said to each other, "Li Zhou is here."

古文：即时散走。
现代文：马上散开逃走。
English: They immediately scattered and fled.

古文：岳全其行装，至于家。
现代文：卢岳保全了他的行装，完好地抵达家中。
English: Lu Yue saved his luggage and arrived home safely.

古文：周将辞去，岳谓周曰： 岳明历象，善知人。子有奇表，方颐隆准，眉目疏朗，身长七尺，乃将相之材也。
现代文：李周将要辞别回去，卢岳对李周说： 我明了历数相术，善于看相卜卦，你有奇特的仪表，方脸高鼻，眉毛眼睛明朗，身长七尺，这乃是将相的身材。
English: When Li Zhou was about to leave for home, Lu Yue said to Li Zhou, "I understand the art of dating, and I am good at divination. You have a peculiar appearance, a square face, a high nose, clear eyebrows and eyes, and you are seven feet tall. This is the stature of a fortune teller.

古文：河东李氏将有天下，子宜事之，以求富贵。 
现代文：河东李氏将要拥有天下，你应该去事奉他，以求取功名富贵。 
English: Mr. Li of Hedong will own the world. You should serve him in order to gain fame and fortune.

古文：周辞以母老而归。
现代文：李周以母亲年老推辞而回。
English: Li Zhou returned with the excuse that his mother was too old.

古文：既而梁将葛从周拔邢、洺，唐武皇麾兵南下，筑垒于青山口。
现代文：不久梁将葛从周攻取邢、氵名两州，唐武皇率兵南下，在青山口构筑营垒。
English: Soon after, Liang led Ge from Zhou to capture the two provinces of Quzhou and Henan, and Emperor Wu of Tang led his troops south to build a camp in the Qingshan Pass.

古文：周向背莫决，因思卢岳之言，乃投青山寨将张污落，武皇赏之，补万胜黄头军使。
现代文：李周不知投靠谁好，因想到卢岳的话，便去投奔青山寨将领张污落，唐武皇奖赏他，补任他为万胜黄头军使。
English: Li Zhou did not know who to rely on, because he thought of Lu Yue, he went to the Qing Dynasty general Zhang Zaglai. The Tang Emperor rewarded him and appointed him as the military envoy of Wan Sheng and Huang Tou.

古文：武皇之平云州，庄宗之战柏乡，周皆有功，迁匡霸都指挥使。
现代文：武皇平定云州，庄宗攻战柏乡，李周都有功劳，被提升为匡霸军都指挥使。
English: Emperor Wu pacified Yunnan, Zhuozong attacked Baoxiang, and Li Zhou was promoted to commander of the Kuangba army.

古文：少聪敏，多智略，事武皇，尤所委信。
现代文：庄宗进入魏地，李周率军屯守临河、杨刘，所到之地与士兵同甘共苦。
English: Zhuang Zong entered Wei, Li Zhou and his army garrisoned Linhe and Yang Liu, and they shared the joys and sorrows of the soldiers in the places they visited.

古文：及庄宗即位，迁左监门卫将军，充四方馆使，出护邢州军。梁将王彦章以数万众攻之。
现代文：李周尤长于守护城池，一天因他奔赴母亲的丧事，由其他将领代替防守，他走后，那座城池就将被攻陷，庄宗连忙派人前去追赶李周，让他穿着丧服守城。庄宗北征，李周与宦官焦彦宾留守杨刘城，梁将王彦章率领几万军队前来进攻。
English: Li Zhou especially excelled in guarding the city. One day, because he rushed to his mother's funeral, other generals took the place of defense. After he left, the city would be captured. Zhuang Zong quickly sent people to chase Li Zhou and let him guard the city in mourning clothes. Zhuang Zong marched north, Li Zhou and eunuch Jiao Yibin stayed in Yang Liu City, and Liang general Wang Yanzhang led tens of thousands of troops to attack.

古文：周日夜乘城，躬当矢石，使人驰告庄宗，请百里趋程，以纾其难。庄宗曰： 李周在内，朕何忧也！ 
现代文：李周日夜登城，亲身抵挡飞箭流石，并派人快马禀告庄宗，请求百里兼程，以解危难，庄宗说： 李周在城中，我担心什么！ 
English: Li went to the city on Sunday night, personally resisted the flying arrows and stones, and sent a fast horse to report to Zhuang Zong, requesting a hundred miles and a journey to solve the crisis. Zhuang Zong said: Li Zhou is in the city, what am I worried about!

古文：遂日行二舍，不废畋猎，既至，士众绝粮三日矣。
现代文：便每天只走六十里路，仍不停止田猎，到达的时候，将士断绝粮食已经三天了。
English: He walked only sixty miles a day, and still did not stop hunting. By the time he arrived, it had been three days since the soldiers had been deprived of food.

古文：及攻围既解，庄宗谓周曰： 微卿九拒之劳，诸公等为梁人所掳矣。 
现代文：等到围困解开，庄宗对李周说： 如果没有你多次阻击的功劳，恐怕各位都被梁军俘虏了。 
English: When the siege was lifted, Zhuang Zong said to Li Zhou, "If it weren't for your repeated efforts to resist, I'm afraid all of you would have been captured by Liang's army."

古文：同光中，历相、蔡二州刺史，及蜀平，授西川节度副使。
现代文：同光年间，历任相、蔡二州刺史，蜀地平定后，被任为西川节度副使。
English: During the same period, successive ministers, Cai Erzhou stabbed history, and after Shu was settled, he was appointed as the deputy envoy of the Nishikawa Festival.

古文：天成二年春，迁遂州两使留后，寻正授节旄，未几，受代归阙。
现代文：天成二年春节，迁任遂州两使留后，不久正式授任节度使，不多时，辞官回朝。
English: On the Spring Festival of the second year of Tiancheng, after the transfer of Suizhou two envoys to stay, he was soon officially appointed as the festival envoy, and not long after that, he resigned and returned to the North.

古文：三年秋，出为邠州节度使，会庆州刺史窦廷琬据城拒命，周奉诏讨平之。
现代文：三年秋天，外出担任州节度使，碰上庆州刺史窦廷琬据城违抗皇命，李周奉命讨伐平定他。
English: In the autumn of the third year, when he went out to serve as the state festival envoy, he encountered the Gyeongju assassin Dou Tingyu, who defied the imperial order, and Li Zhou was ordered to fight and subdue him.

古文：长兴、清泰中，历徐、安、雍、汴四镇，所至无苛政，人皆乐之。
现代文：长兴、清泰年间，历镇徐、安、雍、汴四州，所到的地方没有苛政，老百姓都安居乐业。
English: During the Changxing, Qing and Tai dynasties, the towns of Xu, An, Yong and Zou were the first in the four states. There was no harsh government in the places they visited, and the people lived and worked in peace.

古文：高祖有天下，复镇邠州，累官至检校太师、兼侍中。
现代文：晋高祖夺取天下后，李周再次镇守州，累官至检校太师、兼侍中。
English: After Emperor Gaozu conquered the whole country, Li Zhou once again governed the state, and was promoted to procurator and attendant.

古文：及罢镇赴阙，会少帝幸澶渊，以周累朝耆德，乃命为东京留守。
现代文：到免镇职回朝，逢上少帝临幸澶渊，因李周是历朝老臣，便命他为东京留守。
English: When he was relieved of his duties and returned to the imperial court, he met the young emperor Lin Xingyuan. Since Li Zhou was an old retainer of the imperial court, he ordered him to stay in Tokyo.

古文：车驾还京，授开封尹。
现代文：少帝回京时，拜为开封尹。
English: When the young emperor returned to Beijing, he paid homage to Kaifeng Yin.

古文：及遘疾，梦焚旌旗铠甲，因自嗟叹，上章请退，寻卒于官，时年七十四。
现代文：到染上疾病时，梦见焚烧旌旗铠甲，因此而独自感慨嗟叹，上章请求退职，不久在官府去世，时年七十四岁。
English: When he contracted the disease, he dreamed of burning the national flag and coat of arms, so he was alone in his feelings. He asked to retire from his post, and soon died in the government office, at the age of seventy-four.

古文：诏赠太师，陪葬于明宗徽陵之北。
现代文：诏令追赠太师，陪葬在后唐明宗徽陵的北面。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master, and was buried with him in the northern part of the Mausoleum of Hui of the Later Tang and Ming Dynasties.

