古文：武王问太公曰： 予欲立功，有三疑；恐力不能攻强、离亲、散众，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武王问太公说： 我想建功立业，但有三点疑虑：担心自己力量不足不能够进攻强大的敌人，无法离间敌君的亲信，不能瓦解敌国的军队。
English: King Wu asked the Grand Duke, "I want to make a great achievement, but I have three doubts: I am worried that I am not strong enough to attack a powerful enemy, I can't alienate the enemy's close friends, and I can't destroy the enemy's army.

古文：太公曰： 因之，慎谋，用财。
现代文：应该怎么办呢？ 太公回答说： 这种情况，首先是因势利导，其次是慎用计谋，再次是使用钱财。
English: What should be done? The grandfather-in-law replied, "This situation is firstly due to snobbery, secondly due to the cautious use of strategy, and thirdly due to the use of money.

古文：夫攻强，必养之使强，益之使张。
现代文：进攻强敌，一定要先纵容他，让对方恃强骄横；放任他，使其狂妄自大。
English: When attacking a strong enemy, you must first indulge him, let the other side be stubborn and arrogant; let him go, let him be arrogant.

古文：太强必折，太张必缺。
现代文：敌人过于强横，必遭折挫；过于狂妄，一定会导致失误。
English: If the enemy is too domineering, he will be defeated; if he is too arrogant, he will make mistakes.

古文：攻强必强，离亲以亲，散众以众。
现代文：要进攻强大的敌人，必先助长它的强暴；要离间敌人的亲信，收买他的心腹；要瓦解敌人的军队，一定要先争取敌国的民心。
English: If you want to attack a powerful enemy, you must first encourage its violence; if you want to alienate the enemy's close friends, you must bribe his confidants; if you want to destroy the enemy's army, you must first win the hearts and minds of the enemy's people.

古文：凡谋之道，周密为宝。
现代文：凡是运用计谋，以周密最为重要。
English: When it comes to strategy, it's important to be thorough.

古文：设之以事，玩之以利，争心必起。
现代文：许诺给敌人一些好处，给予敌人一些利益，敌人内部必然发生争夺。
English: Promise some benefits to the enemy, give some benefits to the enemy, and there will inevitably be a struggle within the enemy.

古文：欲离其亲，因其所爱，与其宠人，与之所予，示之所利，因以疏之，无使得志。
现代文：要想离间敌国君臣，应根据他们的爱好，给予他所宠爱的佞臣一些好处，送给他们所想得到的东西，许给他们丰厚的利益，使他们疏远君主，让他们不能有所作为。
English: If you want to alienate the enemy's princes and ministers, you should, according to their inclinations, give his favorite courtiers some benefits, give them what they want, promise them rich benefits, alienate them from the monarch, and make them unable to do anything.

古文：彼贪利甚喜，遗疑乃止。
现代文：他们因为得到我们给予的好处而非常高兴，就不会对我们的图谋产生疑虑了。
English: They are so happy with the benefits we have given them that they do not have any doubts about our intentions.

古文： 凡攻之道，必先塞其明，而后攻其强，毁其大，除民之害。
现代文：进攻强大敌人的方法是，首先必须蒙蔽敌国君主的耳目，然后再进攻他强大的军队，摧毁他庞大的国家，为民众扫除祸害。
English: The method of attacking a powerful enemy is to first blind the eyes and ears of the enemy monarch, and then attack his powerful army, destroy his huge country, and eliminate the scourge for the people.

古文：淫之以色，啖之以利，养之以味，娱之以乐。
现代文：而蒙蔽敌君耳目的方法是：用女色腐蚀他，用厚利引诱他，用美食娇养他，用淫乐迷乱他。
English: And the way to blind the enemy's ears is: to corrupt him with feminine color, to seduce him with thick profit, to pamper him with gourmet food, and to bewitch him with lewd music.

古文：既离其亲，必使远民，勿使知谋，扶而纳之，莫觉其意，然后可成。
现代文：既要离间他的亲信，还要让他疏远自己的民众。不要让他识破我们的计谋，引诱他进人我的圈套，而他还没有觉察我的意图，这样我们就可以成就大事了。
English: Let him not find out our devices: let him not come into my snare, while he is not yet aware of my designs, that we may do great things.

