古文：○李训郑注王涯王璠贾餗舒元舆郭行余罗立言李孝本李训，肃宗时宰相揆之族孙也。
现代文：李训，肃宗时宰相李揆之族孙。
English: Li Xun, the grandson of Su Zong's prime minister Li Xi.

古文：始名仲言。
现代文：原名李仲言。
English: His original name was Li Zhongyan.

古文：进士擢第。
现代文：进士及第。
English: He was promoted to the rank of sergeant.

古文：形貌魁梧，神情洒落；辞敏智捷，善揣人意。
现代文：形貌魁梧，神情潇洒大方，言辞机智思维敏捷，善解人意。
English: He is a burly man, with a dashing and generous demeanor, quick-witted and quick-thinking, and good at understanding others.

古文：宝历中，从父逢吉为宰相，以训阴险善计事，愈亲厚之。
现代文：宝历年间，他的叔父李逢吉任宰相，因李训阴险善于谋划，越发亲近和厚待他。
English: During the Baoli years, his uncle Li Fengji served as prime minister. Because Li Xun was good at plotting, he became closer to him and treated him well.

古文：初与茅汇等欲中伤李程，及武昭事发，训坐长流岭表，会赦得还。
现代文：当初与茅汇等人打算中伤李程，等到武昭之事发作，李训获罪远远流放岭南，后遇赦才得以回京。
English: At first, he and Mao Hui and others planned to slander Li Cheng, but when the Wu Zhao Incident occurred, Li Xun was sentenced to exile far away in Lingnan, and only after being pardoned was he able to return to Beijing.

古文：丁母忧，居洛中。
现代文：又遭母丧，居处洛中。
English: He also suffered the loss of his mother and lived in the middle of the city.

古文：时逢吉为留守，思复为宰相，且深怨裴度，居常愤郁不乐。
现代文：这时李逢吉任留守，想重做宰相，加上深恨裴度，时常郁郁不乐。
English: At this time, Li Fengjiren stayed behind, wanted to be prime minister again, and deeply hated Pei Du, and was often depressed.

古文：训揣知其意，即以奇计动之。
现代文：李训理解他的心思，便出奇计打动他。
English: Li Xun understood his thoughts, so he came up with a plan to impress him.

古文：自言与郑注善，逢吉以为然，遗训金帛珍宝数百万，令持入长安，以赂注。
现代文：李训自称同郑注有交情。李逢吉信以为真，交给李训价值数百万的金帛珍宝，让他带到长安，用以贿赂郑注。
English: Li Xun claimed to have a friendship with Zheng Zhu. Li Feng Jixin believed it to be true and gave Li Xun millions worth of gold and precious stones to take to Chang'an to bribe Zheng Zhu.

古文：注得赂甚悦，乘间荐于中尉王守澄，乃以注之药术，训之《易》道，合荐于文宗。
现代文：郑注得了贿赂十分高兴，寻机将李训推荐给中尉王守澄，王守澄便将郑注的炼药术、李训的《易》学造诣，一并推荐给文宗。
English: Zheng Zhu was very happy to get the bribe. He recommended Li Xun to Lieutenant Wang Shoucheng, and Wang Shoucheng recommended Zheng Zhu's alchemy and Li Xun's "Yi" study to Wenzong.

古文：守澄以训缞粗，难入禁中。帝令训戎服，号王山人，与注入内。
现代文：王守澄说李训衣著粗鄙，难入宫禁，皇上便命他改换戎装，号称王山人，同郑注一道入宫。
English: Wang Shoucheng said that Li Xun was poorly dressed and could not enter the palace, so the emperor ordered him to change his military uniform. Known as Wang Shanren, he entered the palace together with Zheng Zhu.

古文：帝见其指趣，甚奇之。
现代文：皇上听他分析《易》理，觉得不同凡响。
English: The emperor listened to his analysis of "Yi" theory and thought it was extraordinary.

古文：及训释服，在京师。
现代文：等到李训脱下戎装，便留在京师了。
English: After Li Xun took off his military uniform, he stayed in Beijing Division.

古文：太和八年，自流人补四门助教，召入内殿，面赐绯鱼。
现代文：大和八年，李训从一无官阶补任四门助教，被皇上召入内殿，面赐绯衣银鱼袋。
English: In the 8th year of the Yamato era, Li Xun was appointed as a four-door assistant teacher from no official rank. He was called into the inner hall by the emperor and was given a silver fish bag.

古文：其年十月，迁国子《周易》博士，充翰林侍讲学士。
现代文：这年十月，调任国子《周易》博士，充当翰林侍讲学士。
English: In October of the same year, he was transferred to Dr. Kuniko "Zhou Yi" and served as Hanlin's assistant lecturer.

古文：入院日，赐宴，宣法曲弟子二十人就院奏法曲以宠之。
现代文：入院那天，皇上赐宴，宣召法曲弟子二十人到院中演奏法曲以示恩宠。
English: On the day he was admitted to the hospital, the emperor gave a banquet and called for twenty Dharma music disciples to come to the hospital to play Dharma music to show his grace.

古文：两省谏官伏阁切谏，言训奸邪，海内闻知，不宜令侍宸扆，终不听。
现代文：中书门下两省谏官俯身阁下极力劝谏，说李训为人奸邪，海内尽知，不宜让他侍奉圣上。皇上始终不听。
English: The eunuchs of the two provinces under the tutelage of Zhongshu bent down to his excellency and tried their best to persuade him, saying that Li Xun was a person of treachery and evil, and that it was not appropriate for him to serve the saint. The emperor did not listen.

古文：文宗性守正嫉恶，以宦者权宠太过，继为祸胎，元和末弑逆之徒尚在左右，虽外示优假，心不堪之。
现代文：文宗性情正直嫉恨邪恶，觉得宦官所享权力恩宠过多，日后会成祸根，加上元和末年那帮 诛杀叛逆 的人尚在身边，虽然表面上重用他们，内心却不能忍受。
English: Wenzong's disposition was one of honest envy of evil, and he felt that the eunuchs enjoyed too much power and favour, which would become a bane in the future. In addition, in the Yuan Dynasty and at the end of the Ming Dynasty, the gangs of murderous rebels were still around. Although he reused them on the surface, he could not bear it in his heart.

古文：思欲芟落本根，以雪雠耻，九重深处，难与将相明言。
现代文：想要斩草除根，报仇雪恨，但身陷深宫，难对将相明说。
English: You want to root out the weeds and get revenge, but when you're trapped in a deep palace, it's hard to tell the difference.

古文：前与侍讲宋申锡谋。谋之不臧，几成反噬，自是巷伯尤横。
现代文：先前曾与侍讲宋申锡谋划，谋划未妥，却差点被反咬，从此宦官更加横行。
English: Previously, he had planned with the eunuch Song Shenxi, but the plan was not perfect, but he was almost bitten back. Since then, eunuchs have become more rampant.

古文：因郑注得幸守澄，俾之援训，冀黄门之不疑也。
现代文：现因郑注受王守澄宠幸，让他协助李训，想来宦官们不会生疑。
English: Now, because Zheng Shuchu is favored by Wang Shuzhen, let him assist Li Xun, and the eunuchs will not be suspicious.

古文：训既在翰林，解《易》之际，或语及巷伯事，则再三愤激，以动上心。
现代文：李训到翰林院后，乘讲解《易》理之时，不时谈及宦官之事，便一再表示愤激，以打动皇上。
English: After Li Xun arrived at the Hanlin Academy, he took advantage of the opportunity to talk about the eunuchs from time to time when he was explaining the "Yi" principle, and repeatedly expressed his indignation to impress the emperor.

古文：以其言论纵横，谓其必能成事，遂以真诚谋于训、注。
现代文：皇上因他极善分析，认为他必能成事，于是吐露真心同李训、郑注商议。
English: Because of his excellent analysis, the emperor believed that he would be able to accomplish something, so he confided his true feelings to Li Xun and Zheng Zhu and discussed with them.

古文：自是二人宠幸，言无不从；而深秘之谋，往往流闻于外。
现代文：从此二人获宠，意见无不被采纳，但密谋之事往往流传到外面。
English: Since then, the two have been in favor, and their opinions have not been rejected, but the conspiracy has often spread to the outside.

古文：上虑中人猜虑，乃疏《易》义六条，示于百辟，有能出训之意者赏之，盖欲知上以师友宠之。
现代文：皇上担心宦官猜疑，便将五条《易》义理的详注，诏示百官览阅，有能超过李训之说解者给予奖赏，其用心是想让百官知道皇上不过把李训当作师友宠幸而已。
English: The emperor was worried about the suspicion of eunuchs, so he read the detailed notes of the five "Yi" principles to hundreds of officials, and rewarded those who could surpass Li Xun's explanation. His intention was to let the hundreds of officials know that the emperor only regarded Li Xun as a teacher and friend.

古文：九年七月，改兵部郎中、知制诰，充翰林学士。
现代文：大和九年七月，李训改任兵部郎中、知制诰，充任翰林学士。
English: In July of the ninth year of the Yamato era, Li Xun was reassigned to the position of Hyobusho-ro-chung, Chisei-ryo, and appointed as Hanlin Baccalaureate.

古文：九月，迁礼部侍郎、同平章事，仍赐金紫之服。
现代文：九月，升礼部侍郎、同平章事，依例赐紫服金鱼袋。
English: In September, the attendants of the promotion ceremony, the same rank, were given a purple goldfish bag as usual.

古文：诏以平章之暇，三五日一入翰林。
现代文：诏令李训于平章职事之闲暇，三五日到翰林院去一次。
English: The imperial edict ordered Li Xun to go to Hanlin Academy once every three to five days in his spare time.

古文：训既秉权衡，即谋诛内竖。
现代文：李训既掌大权，立即策划诛杀宦官。
English: As soon as Li Xun assumed power, he immediately plotted to assassinate the eunuch.

古文：中官陈弘庆者，自元和末负弑逆之名，忠义之士无不扼腕。
现代文：宦官陈弘庆，自从元和末年享受诛杀叛逆的美名，忠义之士无不愤恨。
English: The eunuch Chen Hongqing, since the Yuan and the end of the year, has enjoyed the reputation of being a murderous traitor, and the loyalists are all indignant.

古文：时为襄阳监军，乃召自汉南，至青泥驿，遣人封杖决杀。
现代文：当时陈弘庆任襄阳监军，便将他从汉南召回，等他行至青泥驿，派人用御赐之杖将他打死。
English: At that time, Chen Hongqing was in charge of supervising the troops in Xiangyang, so he recalled him from Hannan, waited for him to go to Qingdao, and sent someone to beat him to death with the scepter given by God.

古文：王守澄自长庆已来知枢密，典禁军，作威作福。
现代文：王守澄从长庆以来执掌枢密院，统率禁军，作威作福。
English: Wang Shoucheng has been in charge of the Privy Council since Changqing, leading the forbidden army, and doing his best.

古文：训既作相，以守澄为六军十二卫观军容使，罢其禁旅之权，寻赐鸩杀之。
现代文：李训做宰相后，让王守澄任六军十二卫观军容使，罢免他统率禁军之权，不久赐药酒将他毒杀。
English: After Li Xun became the prime minister, he appointed Wang Shoucheng as the envoy of the Six Armies and the Twelve Guardians, removed him from the command of the Forbidden Army, and soon poisoned him with medicinal liquor.

古文：训愈承恩顾，每别殿奏对，他宰相莫不顺成其言，黄门禁军迎拜戢敛。
现代文：此后李训愈加受皇上恩宠，每逢在便殿奏对，别的宰相没有不顺着他说话的，宦官或禁军遇见他都恭敬揖拜。
English: After that, Li Xun was more and more favored by the emperor. Whenever he gave a speech in the hall, other prime ministers did not disobey him. When eunuchs or forbidden soldiers met him, they all respectfully bowed down.

古文：训本以纤达，门庭趋附之士，率皆狂怪险异之流。时亦能取正人伟望，以镇人心。
现代文：李训原本靠精细机智成功，到他门下趋炎附势的，大都是狂放怪诞阴险奇异的人，李训当时也能启用一些正直之人，利用他们的崇高声望，来安定人心。
English: Li Xun originally relied on subtle wit to succeed. Those who rose to power under him were mostly wild, grotesque, sinister and strange people. Li Xun could also use some honest people at that time to use their lofty reputation to stabilize people's hearts.

古文：天下之人，有冀训以致太平者，不独人主惑其言。
现代文：天下的人，有寄希望于李训实现国家太平的，不只是皇上被他的话所迷惑。
English: People around the world have pinned their hopes on Li Xun to achieve national peace, and it is not just the emperor who is confused by his words.

古文：训虽为郑注引用，及禄位俱大，势不两立；托以中外应赴之谋，出注为凤翔节度使。
现代文：李训虽由郑注引荐得以重用，等到他官高禄厚，便与郑注势不两立，假托朝中朝外相应合，派郑注出京任凤翔节度使。
English: Although Li Xun was able to make heavy use of the introduction by Zheng Shu, when he became a high-ranking official, he and Zheng Shu were inseparable, and he sent Zheng Shu out of Beijing to serve as Fengxiang's festival envoy.

古文：俟诛内竖，即兼图注。
现代文：等到诛杀宦官时，便同时设法除掉郑注。
English: While waiting to kill the eunuch, he also tried to get rid of Zheng Zhu.

古文：约以其年十一月诛中官，须假兵力，乃以大理卿郭行余为邠宁节度使，户部尚书王璠为太原节度使，京兆少尹罗立言权知大尹事，太府卿韩约为金吾街使，刑部郎中知杂李孝本权知中丞事，皆训之亲厚者。
现代文：约定当年十一月诛杀宦官，必须凭借兵力，于是派大理卿郭行余任宁节度使，户部尚书王任太原节度使，京兆府少尹罗立言临时掌管太尹职务，太府卿韩约为金吾街使，刑部郎中知杂李孝本临时掌管中丞职务，这些人均系李训心腹。
English: It was agreed that in November of that year, it was necessary to kill eunuchs by force, so they sent Dai Li's secretary Guo Xing Yu to be Ning's regent, the head of the household Shang Shu Wang to be Taiyuan's regent, Jing Zhaofu's Shao Yin Luo to be temporarily in charge of Taiyun's duties, Tai Fu's secretary Han Yu to be Jin Wu Jie's envoy, and the head of the criminal department Lang Zhong Zhizhe Li Xiaobeng to be temporarily in charge of the vice-president's duties. All of these people were Li Xun's henchmen.

古文：冀王璠、郭行余未赴镇间，广令召募豪侠及金吾台府之从者，俾集其事。
现代文：要求王、郭行余赴镇之前，广为召募豪侠及金吾府随从，协助完成大事。
English: Before asking Wang and Guo Xingyu to go to the town, they widely called for heroes and followers of Kingu to help complete the event.

古文：是月二十一日，帝御紫宸。
现代文：当月二十一日，皇上驾临紫宸殿。
English: On the 21st of that month, the Emperor arrived at Shishinden.

古文：班定，韩约不报平安，奏曰： 金吾左仗院石榴树，夜来有甘露，臣已进状讫。 
现代文：朝臣分班站定，韩约不报平安，奏道： 金吾左仗院石榴树，夜来有甘露，臣已具状奏禀。 
English: The courtiers stood at their posts in shifts, but did not report peace in Korea. They sang: "The pomegranate tree in Kingu Zuoguin, there is nectar in the night, the courtiers have gathered to play the gong."

古文：乃蹈舞再拜。宰相百官相次称贺。
现代文：于是手舞足蹈再拜，宰相百官依次称贺。
English: As a result, there was much hand-wringing, with hundreds of prime ministers and officials congratulating each other in turn.

古文：李训奏曰： 甘露降祥，俯在宫禁。
现代文：李训奏道： 甘露降下吉祥，俯在宫禁。
English: Li Xun recited: It is auspicious for nectar to fall, but it is forbidden for it to fall on the palace.

古文：陛下宜亲幸左仗观之。 
现代文：陛下应亲幸左仗院观看。 
English: His Majesty should personally watch the parade at the left guardhouse.

古文：班退，上乘软舁出紫宸门，由含元殿东阶升殿，宰相侍臣分立于副阶，文武两班，列于殿前。
现代文：即刻退班，皇上乘软轿出紫宸门，由含元殿东阶升殿，宰相侍臣分立于侧阶，文武两班官员，列队站立殿前。
English: He immediately left his post, and the emperor took a limousine out of the Shishimen Gate, ascending from the eastern steps of the Kanemoto-den, the prime minister and his attendants stood on the side steps, and the officials of the two classes, civil and military, stood in line in front of the hall.

古文：上令宰相两省官先往视之。既还，曰： 臣等恐非真甘露，不敢轻言。
现代文：皇上命宰相及中书门下两省官员先去察看，看罢回来，奏道： 臣等担心并非真的甘露，不敢轻易发言。
English: The emperor ordered the prime minister and the officials of the two provinces under the tutelage of the Chinese Academy of Letters to go and inspect first, and when they returned, they reported: The ministers are worried that it is not real nectar, and they dare not speak easily.

古文：言出，四方必称贺也。 
现代文：一言既出，四方必来称贺。 
English: Once the word is out, all four parties will come to congratulate.

古文：上曰： 韩约妄耶？ 
现代文：皇上道： 韩约胡说吗？ 
English: Empress Dowager: Is Han Yoo talking nonsense?

古文：乃令左右军中尉、枢密内臣往视之。
现代文：于是命左右军中尉、枢密内臣前去察看。
English: Therefore, he ordered the army lieutenant and the privy councillor to go and inspect.

古文：既去，训召王璠、郭行余曰： 来受敕旨！ 
现代文：中尉、枢密去后，李训召王、郭行余说道： 来领圣旨！ 
English: After the lieutenant and the privy councillor left, Li Xunxiao called Wang and Guo Xingyu and said: Come and receive the imperial edict!

古文：璠恐悚不能前，行余独拜殿下。
现代文：王害怕不敢上前，郭行余独自拜于殿下。
English: The king was afraid to come forward, and Guo Xingyu bowed to His Royal Highness alone.

古文：时两镇官健，皆执兵在丹凤门外，训已令召之，唯璠从兵入，邠宁兵竟不至。
现代文：当时两镇官兵，皆手持武器守候在丹凤门外，李训已下令召他们前来，只有王的随从军士入宫，郭行余的军队竟然不来。
English: At that time, the officers and soldiers of the two towns, all armed with weapons, were waiting outside the Danfeng Gate. Li Xun had ordered them to come. Only the king's entourage of sergeants entered the palace, and Guo Xingyu's army did not come.

古文：中尉、枢密至左仗，闻幕下有兵声，惊恐走出。阍者欲扃锁之，为中人所叱，执关而不能下。
现代文：中尉、枢密来到左仗院，听见帐幕下有兵器声，惊恐跑出，把门人打算将门锁上，被宦官呵叱，手持门闩而不敢放下。
English: The lieutenant and the privy councillor came to the left guardhouse, heard the sound of weapons under the tent, ran out in fright, the doorkeeper intended to lock the door, was scolded by the eunuch, and did not dare to let go of the latch.

古文：内官回奏，韩约气慑汗流，不能举首。
现代文：内官回禀皇上，韩约心惧汗流，不敢抬头。
English: The courtier replied to the emperor that Han You was afraid of perspiration and did not dare to look up.

古文：中官谓之曰： 将军何及此耶？ 
现代文：宦官问他： 将军为何到这地步？ 
English: The eunuch asked him, "How did the general get to this point?"

古文：又奏曰： 事急矣，请陛下入内。 
现代文：又奏道： 事情紧急，请陛下入内。 
English: It also said, "This is an urgent matter. Please come in, Your Majesty."

古文：即举软舆迎帝。
现代文：随即举软轿迎接皇上。
English: A limousine was then brought out to meet the Emperor.

古文：训殿上呼曰： 金吾卫士上殿来，护乘舆者，人赏百千。 
现代文：李训在殿上呼叫： 金吾卫士上殿来，护卫圣驾的，人人重赏。 
English: Li Xun called out in the hall: "King Wu's guards have come to the hall, everyone should appreciate those who guard the sacred horse."

古文：内官决殿后罘罳，举舆疾趋。训攀呼曰： 陛下不得入内。 
现代文：内官踢倒殿后屏风，抬轿疾奔，李训攀住软轿喊道： 陛下不能入内。 
English: The steward kicked down the screen behind the palace and rushed to carry the limousine. Li Xun clung to the limousine and shouted: "Your Majesty can't come in."

古文：金吾卫士数十人，随训而入。
现代文：金吾卫士数十人，跟随李训入内宫。
English: Dozens of Kingo guards followed Li Xun into the inner palace.

古文：罗立言率府中从人自东来，李孝本率台中从人自西来，共四百余人，上殿纵击内官，死伤者数十人。
现代文：罗立言率府中役卒从东边冲过来，李孝本率府中役卒从西边冲过来，共四百余人，上殿大打出手，内官死伤数十人。
English: Luo Lijian led the middle-ranking officials to rush from the east, Li Xiaobeng led the middle-ranking officials to rush from the west, a total of more than four hundred people, a big fight broke out in the upper hall, and dozens of officials were killed and injured.

古文：训时愈急，逦迤入宣政门。
现代文：李训这时愈加焦急，绕道进入宣政门。
English: At this time, Li Xun became more and more anxious and took a detour to enter the Xuanzheng Gate.

古文：帝瞋目叱训，内官郄志荣奋拳击其胸，训即僵仆于地。
现代文：皇上怒目呵叱他，内官郄志荣奋力挥拳击中他的胸部，李训立即僵仆在地。
English: The emperor scolded him angrily, and the internal affairs officer, Zou Zhirong, punched him in the chest. Li Xun immediately fell to the ground.

古文：帝入东上阁门，门即阖，内官呼万岁者数四。
现代文：皇上进入东上阁门，门便关闭，内官连声呼喊万岁。
English: When the emperor entered the gate of the eastern pavilion, the door was closed, and the officials shouted "Long live the emperor!"

古文：须臾，内官率禁兵五百人，露刃出阁门，遇人即杀。
现代文：一会儿，内官率禁兵五百人，拔刀冲出阁门，逢人便杀。
English: In a moment, the steward led 500 soldiers, drew his sword and rushed out of the attic door, killing everyone.

古文：宰相王涯、贾餗、舒元舆、方中书会食，闻难出走，诸司从吏死者六七百人。
现代文：宰相王涯、贾饣束、舒元舆正在中书署衙会餐，听说祸事发生便逃走了，众官署吏员被杀死六七百人。
English: The prime ministers Wang Lai, Jia Yuzhong, and Shu Yuanwu were having a banquet at the Central Government Publishing Office when they heard of the disaster and fled. Six or seven hundred officials of the General Government Publishing Office were killed.

古文：是日，训中拳而仆，知事不济，乃单骑走入终南山，投寺僧宗密。
现代文：当天，李训中拳仆地，知事已失败，便单人匹马跑到终南山，投奔寺僧宗密。
English: On the same day, Li Xun was in a fistfight, and the governor had already lost, so he ran single-handedly to Zhanan Mountain to join the monk Zongmi in the temple.

古文：训与宗密素善，欲剃其发匿之。从者止之，乃趋凤翔，欲依郑注。
现代文：宗密同李训素来相好，打算给李训剃发让他藏在寺中，被手下人劝止，于是李训只好奔凤翔，企图投靠郑注。
English: Zongming had always been friendly with Li Xun. He planned to shave off Li Xun's hair and hide him in a temple, but was dissuaded by his subordinates. Li Xun had no choice but to run to Fengxiang in an attempt to win Zheng Zhu's favor.

古文：出山，为盩厔镇将宗楚所得，械送京师。
现代文：出了终南山，便被周至守将宗楚捉住，加了械具押送京师。
English: When he finally left Nanshan, he was caught by Zhou Zhi Shou, and was escorted to Beijing with additional equipment.

古文：至昆明池，训恐入军别受搒掠，乃谓兵士曰： 所在有兵，得我者即富贵，不如持我首行，免被夺取。 
现代文：行至昆明池，李训害怕到军中倍受拷打，便对兵士说： 到处有兵，捉住我就能富贵，不如携带我的首级前行，免被别人夺取。 
English: When he went to Kunming Pool, Li Xun was afraid of being tortured in the army, so he said to the soldiers: There are soldiers everywhere. If you capture me, you can become rich. It is better to carry my head forward to avoid being captured by others.

古文：乃斩训，持首而行。
现代文：于是兵士杀了李训，带着他的首级赶路。
English: The soldier then killed Li Xun and rushed away with his head.

古文：训弟仲景、再从弟户部员外郎元皋，皆伏法。
现代文：李训弟仲景、隔房堂弟户部员外郎李元皋，皆被诛伏法。
English: Li Xun's younger brother, Zhongjing, and his second cousin, member of the household staff, and maternal uncle, Li Yuanqi, were all beaten.

古文：仇士良以宗密容李训，遗人缚入左军，责以不告之罪。
现代文：仇士良因宗密收容李训，派人将他绑赴左军，谴责他犯有不举报之罪，打算将他处死。
English: Qiu Shiliang detained Li Xun because of Zongmi, sent someone to tie him to the Left Army, accused him of the crime of not reporting, and planned to execute him.

古文：将杀之，宗密怡然曰： 贫僧识训年深，亦知反叛。
现代文：宗密镇静自若地说： 贫僧认识李训很久了，也知他反叛朝廷。
English: Zongmi said calmly and confidently: The poor monk has known Li Xun for a long time, and he also knows that he rebelled against the imperial court.

古文：然本师教法，遇苦即救，不爱身命，死固甘心。 
现代文：然而本师教导佛法，遇苦难即解救，不吝惜自己的生命，纵然一死本也甘心。 
English: However, this teacher teaches the Dharma, rescues in times of suffering, does not spare his own life, and is even willing to die.

古文：中尉鱼弘志嘉之，奏释其罪。
现代文：中尉鱼弘志赞扬他的品格，奏请赦免他的罪过。
English: Lt. Hiroshi Uta praised his character and asked for forgiveness for his sins.

古文：郑注，绛州翼城人，始以药术游长安权豪之门。
现代文：郑注，绛州翼城人，最初以药术交游于长安权豪之门。
English: Zheng Zhu, a native of Zhangzhou Yingcheng, initially traveled to the gate of the Chang'an power elite with medicine.

古文：本姓鱼，冒姓郑氏，故时号鱼郑。注用事时，人目之为 水族 。
现代文：本姓鱼，冒姓郑氏，故当时号称鱼郑，郑注被重用时，人们称他为 水族 。
English: His real surname was Yu, but he pretended to be Zheng, so he was known as Yu Zheng at that time. When Zheng was reused, people called him Aquarius.

古文：元和十三年，李愬为襄阳节度使，注往依之。
现代文：元和十三年，李訫任襄阳节度使，郑注前往投靠他。
English: In the 13th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Li Yu was appointed as the Xiangyang Festival envoy, and Zheng Zhu went to join him.

古文：愬得其药力，因厚遇之，署为节度衙推。
现代文：李訫得益于他的药力，因而优礼相待，委用他为节度衙推。
English: Li Yan benefited from his medicinal power, so he treated him with courtesy and appointed him as the curator.

古文：从愬移镇徐州，又为职事，军政可否，醖与之参决。
现代文：郑注跟从李訫移镇徐州，又任职事，军政大事之可否，李訫均与他商议决定。
English: Zheng Zhu followed Li Hongzhi to Xuzhou, and Li Hongzhi discussed and decided with him whether or not to hold office and whether or not to hold military and political events.

古文：注诡辩阴狡，善探人意旨，与愬筹谋，未尝不中其意。
现代文：郑注为人诡秘阴险狡猾，善于揣摩他人心思，与李訫筹划商议，从无不符合李訫意图的。
English: Zheng Zhu is a person of mysterious, insidious and cunning, good at guessing other people's thoughts, and planning and discussing with Li Yao. There is never anything that does not meet Li Yao's intention.

古文：然挟邪任数，专作威福，军府患之。
现代文：然而他心怀邪念玩弄手段，专好作威作福，军府上下都认为是个祸根。
English: However, he cherished evil thoughts and toyed with means, and was dedicated to arrogance and self-serving, which was considered to be a bane by the military authorities.

古文：时王守澄监徐军，深怒注。
现代文：当时王守澄为徐州监军，非常恼恨郑注。
English: At that time, Wang Shoucheng was the supervisor of the Xuzhou army, and he was very angry with Zheng Shu.

古文：一日，以军情患注白于愬。愬曰： 彼虽如此，实奇才也。
现代文：一日，将军中舆论以郑注为祸害之事告诉李訫，李訫道： 他虽如此，但的确是个奇才。
English: One day, the public opinion of the generals told Li Yao that Zheng Shu was a scourge. Li Yao said: Although he is so, he is indeed a prodigy.

古文：将军试与之语；苟不如旨，去未为晚 愬即令谒监军。
现代文：将军试同他交谈，如果不满意，再让他离开犹未为晚。 
English: The general should try to talk to him, and if he is not satisfied, let him leave before it is too late.

古文：守澄初有难色，及延坐与语，机辩纵衡，尽中其意，遂延于内室，促膝投分，恨相见之晚。
现代文：李訫即令郑注谒见监军，王守澄开始面有难色，及至让他坐下同他谈话，郑注机警善辩谈锋纵横，完全符合王守澄的心意，于是请入内室，促膝而谈心志契合，真是相见恨晚。
English: Li Yan immediately ordered Zheng Shuxuan to meet with the supervisors, Wang Shoucheng was initially reluctant, and even asked him to sit down and talk with him. Zheng Shuxuan was a good debater, and fully in line with Wang Shoucheng's intentions, so he invited him to enter the inner room, urged him to talk about the harmony of their hearts, and it was really too late to see each other.

古文：翌日，守澄谓愬曰： 诚如公言，实奇士也。 
现代文：次日，王守澄对李訫道： 的确如公所言，实在是个奇士啊。 
English: The next day, Wang Shoucheng said to Li Xuanwu: Indeed, as you said, he really is a miracle worker.

古文：自是出入守澄之门，都无限隔。
现代文：从此郑注任意出入王守澄之门，毫无阻碍。
English: From then on, Zheng Zhu entered and left Wang Shoucheng's gate at will, without any hindrance.

古文：愬署为巡官，齿于宾席。
现代文：李訫任用他为巡官，当作贵宾对待。
English: Li Yan appointed him as an inspector and treated him as a VIP.

古文：及守澄入知枢密，当长庆、宝历之际，国政多专于守澄。
现代文：及至王守澄入朝执掌枢密院，时值长庆、宝历之际，国政多为他所垄断。
English: When Wang Shoucheng took over the Privy Council after his accession to the throne, at the time of Changqing and Baoli, he monopolized most of the state affairs.

古文：注昼伏夜动，交通赂遗。初则谗邪奸巧之徒附之以图进取；数年之后，达僚权臣，争凑其门。
现代文：郑注白昼蛰伏夜间活动，结交拉拢赠遗贿赂，起初只是那些谗邪奸狡之徒依附他以图进取，数年之后，大官权臣，都争相挤进他的门庭。
English: At first, it was only those wicked and cunning people who attached themselves to him in an attempt to make progress. A few years later, high-ranking officials and powerful ministers all crowded into his courtyard.

古文：累从山东、京西诸军，历卫佐、评事、御史，又检校库部郎中，为昭义节度副使。
现代文：屡屡在山东、京西诸军任职，历任卫佐、评事、御史，又检校库部郎中，任昭义节度副使。
English: He repeatedly served in the armies of Shandong and West Beijing, successively serving as a guard, commentator, and historian, as well as a junior member of the inspection and library department, and as a deputy envoy of the Shouyi Festival.

古文：既以阴事诬陷宋申锡，守道正人，始侧目焉。
现代文：直到郑注以阴私之事诬陷宋申锡，恪守人道的正直之士，这才对他怒目相看。
English: It wasn't until Zheng Zhu framed Song Shenxi, an honest man who adhered to humanity, with a sinister and selfish matter, that he became angry with him.

古文：太和七年，罢邠宁行军司马，入京师。御史李款阁内弹之曰： 郑注内通敕使，外结朝官，两地往来，卜射财货，昼伏夜动，干窃化权。
现代文：大和七年，郑注被免去宁行军司马，召入京师，御史李款于紫宸殿弹劾他道： 郑注内通敕使，外结朝官，两地往来，牟取财货，昼伏夜动，窃位求权。
English: In the seventh year of the Yamato era, Zhengzhu was relieved of his duties as the commander-in-chief of the Ningxing army and was called to the Beijing division. The imperial historian Li Jian impeached him in Shijiazhuang Palace, saying: Zhengzhu is an internal courier, an external official of the imperial court, he travels between the two places to obtain wealth and goods, he is active day and night, and seeks power by stealing positions.

古文：人不敢言，道路以目。
现代文：人们虽不敢言，但行道怒目而视。
English: People dare not speak, but the sidewalks glare angrily.

古文：请付法司。 
现代文：请交付执法官署。 
English: Please deliver to the magistrate's office.

古文：旬日内，谏章十数，文宗不纳。
现代文：十日内，上章谏奏十数本，文宗不听纳。
English: Within ten days, more than ten copies of the above chapter were played, and the literary works were not accepted.

古文：寻授注通王府司马，充右神策判官，中外骇叹。
现代文：不久授郑注通王府司马，充任右神策判官，朝廷内外人皆惊叹。
English: Soon after, Zheng Zhuntong was appointed as the King's Steward and served as the Judge of the Right Divine Policy. Everyone inside and outside the court was astonished.

古文：八年九月，注进药方一卷，令守澄召注对浴堂门，赐锦彩。
现代文：大和八年九月，郑注进献药方一卷，皇上命王守澄召郑注到浴堂门应对，赐锦彩。
English: In September of the eighth year of the Yamato era, Zheng Chuan submitted a volume of medicinal prescriptions, and Wang Shoucheng, by order of the emperor, summoned Zheng Chuan to the door of the bathhouse to respond and bestow the crown jewels.

古文：召对之夕，彗出东方，长三尺，光耀甚紧。
现代文：召入应对的当晚，彗星出现在东方，长三尺，光辉耀眼。
English: On the night of the summoning, the comet appeared in the east, three feet long and shining brightly.

古文：其年十二月，拜太仆卿、兼御史大夫。
现代文：当年十二月，拜太仆卿、兼御史大夫。
English: In December of that year, he was promoted to the position of the Grand Chamberlain and also the Grand Historian.

古文：注起第善和里，通于永巷，长廊复壁。日聚京师轻薄子弟、方镇将吏，以招权利。
现代文：郑注在善和里修建宅第，有深巷相通，长廊夹壁，每日聚集京师轻浮子弟、方镇将吏，以图招徕权势及财货。
English: Zheng Zhu built a mansion in Shanhe, with a deep alleyway, a long corridor between the walls, and gathered the frivolous children of the Beijing division and the Fangzhen generals every day in an attempt to attract power and wealth.

古文：间日入禁军，与守澄款密，语必移时，或通夕不寐。
现代文：隔日入禁军，与王守澄亲热，谈话不止一个时辰，有时通宵不寐。
English: The next day, he joined the Forbidden Army and became close friends with Wang Shoucheng. They talked for more than an hour and sometimes stayed up all night.

古文：李训既附注以进，承间入谒；而轻浮躁进者，盈于注门。
现代文：李训既依附郑注而进升，伺隙入府谒见，只见那些轻薄浮躁之人，挤满了郑注的宅门。
English: Since Li Xun was promoted by Zheng Shou, he waited for an opportunity to enter the palace to see him. However, he only saw those frivolous and impetuous people crowding the door of Zheng Shou's house.

古文：九年八月，迁工部尚书，充翰林侍讲学士。
现代文：大和九年八月，升工部尚书，充任翰林侍讲学士。
English: In August of 1910, he was promoted to the position of a member of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, and served as an assistant lecturer to Hanlin.

古文：召自九仙门，帝面赐告身。
现代文：皇上面赐委任文牒。
English: A letter of appointment was issued by the Emperor.

古文：时李训已在禁庭，二人相洽，日侍君侧，讲贯太平之术，以为朝夕可致升平。
现代文：此时李训已在宫中，二人相互应合，每日侍奉于君侧，讲习建造太平盛世的方略，以为朝夕之间即可导致太平安乐的局面。
English: At this time, Li Xun was already in the palace. The two of them corresponded with each other, served at the monarch's side every day, and studied strategies for building a peaceful and prosperous world, thinking that they could lead to a peaceful and happy situation between morning and evening.

古文：两奸合从，天子益惑其说。
现代文：两奸合谋，天子愈加被其邪说所迷惑。
English: The two conspirators conspired, and the Son of Heaven became more and more confused by their evil theories.

古文：是时，训、注之权，赫于天下。
现代文：此时，李训、郑注之权势，已煊赫于天下。
English: At this time, the power of Li Xun and Zheng Zhu had already spread all over the world.

古文：既得行其志，生平恩仇，丝毫必报。
现代文：既然其意愿得逞，平生之恩仇，点滴必报。
English: Now that his wish has come true, he will have to pay back every bit of his lifelong favor.

古文：因杨虞卿之狱，挟忌李宗闵、李德裕，心所恶者，目为二人之党。
现代文：因杨虞卿一案，对李宗闵、李德裕胸怀嫉恨，只要心中厌恶的人，便看作二人之党徒。
English: Because of the case of Yang Yuqing, he harbored jealousy towards Li Zongyao and Li Deyu. As long as he disliked them in his heart, he regarded them as two party members.

古文：朝士相继斥逐，班列为之一空，人人惴栗，若崩厥角。
现代文：朝官相继被斥逐，朝谒天子的行列大量空缺，人人心中战栗，犹如畜兽之头角遭崩摧一般。
English: The imperial officials were expelled one after another, and there were a large number of vacancies in the ranks of the imperial princes. Everyone shuddered, as if the horns of a beast had been broken.

古文：帝微知之，下诏慰谕，人情稍安。
现代文：皇上略知一二，下诏抚慰，人心稍安。
English: The emperor knew a thing or two, and sent a message of consolation to ease the people's minds.

古文：训、注天资狂妄，偷合苟容，至于经略谋猷，无可称者。
现代文：李训、郑注天性狂妄，偷巧苟合，至于治政谋略，毫无可称道之处。
English: Li Xun and Zheng Zhu are arrogant by nature, and are devious and conniving. As far as political strategy is concerned, they have nothing to commend themselves for.

古文：初浴堂召对，上访以富人之术，乃以榷茶为对。
现代文：当初在浴堂召见应对，皇上询问有什么致富的方针措施，郑注回答可实行茶叶专卖。
English: Initially summoned in the bathhouse to respond, the emperor asked what policies and measures to get rich, Zheng answered that tea monopoly could be implemented.

古文：其法，欲以江湖百姓茶园，官自造作，量给直分，命使者主之。
现代文：其办法，拟将各地百姓茶园，由官府统一管理，根据上交数量付给报酬，朝廷可命专使主管此事。
English: According to the method, it is proposed that the tea gardens of the people in various regions will be uniformly managed by the government, and remuneration will be paid according to the quantity submitted. The Imperial Court may appoint a special envoy to be in charge of this matter.

古文：帝惑其言，乃命王涯兼榷茶使。
现代文：皇上被其言语迷惑，于是命王涯兼榷茶使。
English: The emperor was puzzled by his words, so he ordered Wang Ya to serve tea.

古文：又言秦中有灾，宜兴工役以禳之。
现代文：郑注又说秦中有灾荒，应兴土木以禳除灾祸。
English: Zheng An also said that there was a disaster in Qin, and civil engineering should be built to eliminate the disaster.

古文：文宗能诗，尝吟杜甫《江头篇》云： 江头宫殿锁千门，细柳新蒲为谁绿？ 
现代文：文宗善诗，曾吟诵杜甫《江头篇》诗句： 江头宫殿锁千门，细柳新蒲为谁绿？ 
English: The poet Du Fu once recited a verse from "The Head of the River": "The palace of the head of the river locks thousands of doors. For whom is the willow tree green?

古文：始知天宝已前，环曲江四岸，有楼台行宫廨署，心切慕之。
现代文：始知天宝以前，环绕曲江池四岸有楼台行宫廨署，心中极为向往。
English: Prior to the establishment of Shichizhientianbao, the four banks of the Qujiang Lake were surrounded by pavilions for the Imperial Household Agency, which was greatly yearned for in the heart.

古文：既得注言，即命左右神策军差人淘曲江、昆明二池，仍许公卿士大夫之家于江头立亭馆，以时追赏。
现代文：听郑注奏报之后，立即命左右神策军差派役工疏浚曲江、昆明二池，并允许公卿士大夫之家在池岸修建亭馆，届时追加赏赐。
English: After listening to Zheng's commentary on the report, he immediately ordered the Shanzhe military to send workers to dredge the Qujiang River and the two ponds in Kunming, and allowed the Kugyong Shidafu House to build a pavilion on the bank of the pond, at which time an additional reward would be given.

古文：时两军造紫云楼、彩霞亭，内出楼额以赐之。
现代文：当时两军修造紫云楼、彩霞亭，宫中赐以匾额。
English: At that time, the two armies built the Ziyun Building and the Caixia Pavilion, and the Imperial Court awarded them the Imperial Decoration.

古文：注言无不从，皆此类也。
现代文：皇上对郑注言无不从，皆如此类事。
English: The emperor listened to Zheng attentively, and they all did the same.

古文：九月，检校尚书左仆射、凤翔尹、凤翔节度使。
现代文：九月，郑注授检校尚书左仆射、凤翔尹、凤翔节度使。
English: In September, Zheng An awarded the inspection of the school to Shang Shuzo, Feng Xiang Yin, and Feng Xiang Jiedu.

古文：盖与李训谋事有期，欲中外协势。
现代文：这大概是因为同李训商定如期举事，企图造成内外配合之势。
English: This is probably due to the fact that he and Li Xun agreed to hold the event as scheduled, in an attempt to create a trend of internal and external cooperation.

古文：十一月，注闻训事发，自凤翔率亲兵五百余人赴阙。
现代文：十一月，郑注得知李训动手翦灭中官，自凤翔率亲兵五百余人奔赴京城。
English: In November, Zheng Zhan learned that Li Xun had set out to kill the lieutenant-general, and more than five hundred soldiers led by Feng Xiang rushed to Beijing.

古文：至扶风，闻训败，乃还。
现代文：至扶风，听说李训已败，便返回凤翔。
English: When Fu Feng heard that Li Xun had been defeated, he returned to Fengxiang.

古文：监军使张仲清已得密诏，迎而劳之，召至监军府议事。
现代文：监军使张仲清已得密诏，迎接郑注并表示慰劳，召至监军府议事。
English: Zhang Zhongqing, the inspector general, had received a secret edict, greeted Zheng Zhu and expressed his condolences, and was summoned to the inspector general's office for deliberation.

古文：注倚兵卫即赴之，仲清已伏兵幕下。
现代文：郑注仗着有军队护卫立即前往，哪知张仲清已在帐幕后埋伏了兵士。
English: Zheng Zhu immediately went there with an army escort, unaware that Zhang Zhongqing had already ambushed the soldiers behind the tent curtain.

古文：注方坐，伏兵发，斩注，传首京师，部下溃散。
现代文：郑注刚坐下，伏兵便冲出，斩杀郑注，将首级送往京师，郑注的部下皆溃散。
English: As soon as Zheng Zhu sat down, the ambush soldiers rushed out, beheaded Zheng Zhu, and sent his head to the Beijing Division. All of Zheng Zhu's subordinates scattered.

古文：注家属屠灭，靡有孑遗。
现代文：郑注之家属被屠杀灭门，无一幸免。
English: Zheng Zhu's family members were slaughtered, and no one was spared.

古文：初未获注，京师忧恐。
现代文：先前未捕获郑注时，京师人士忧惧不已。
English: When Zheng Zhu was not captured earlier, people in Beijing were worried.

古文：至是，人人相庆。
现代文：至此，人人相庆。
English: At this point, everyone is celebrating.

古文：注两目不能远视，自言有金丹之术，可去痿弱重膇之疾。
现代文：郑注双目不能远视，自称有金丹之术，可消除痿弱肿胀之病。
English: Zheng Zhu can't see far into the distance with both eyes, and claims to have the art of acupuncture and moxibustion, which can eliminate the disease of weak and swollen eyes.

古文：始李愬自云得效，乃移之守澄，亦神其事。
现代文：起先李訫自称得其药术之效，便引荐给王守澄，王守澄也认为有神奇效验。
English: At first, Li Qian claimed to have obtained the effect of his medicine, then he recommended it to Wang Shoucheng. Wang Shoucheng also believed that it had a magical effect.

古文：由是中官视注皆怜之，卒以是售其狂谋。
现代文：从此中官见到郑注皆亲近他，因此他的狂妄计谋终能得逞。
English: From then on, the lieutenant-general saw that Zheng Shou was close to him, so his arrogant strategy would eventually succeed.

古文：而守澄自贻其患，复致衣冠涂地，岂一时之沴气欤？
现代文：而王守澄自遭其祸，后来导致衣冠涂地，难道只是一时中了邪气吗？
English: And Wang Shoucheng himself suffered the misfortune, which later led to his downfall. Was it just a moment of evil?

古文：既籍没其家财，得绢一百万匹，他货称是。
现代文：郑注家财被朝廷没收后，查出有绢一百万匹，其他财物价值与此相当。
English: After Zheng Zhu's family wealth was confiscated by the imperial court, more than one million horses were found, and the value of other property was equivalent to this.

