古文：徐无鬼因女商见魏武侯，武侯劳之曰： 先生病矣，苦于山林之劳，故乃肯见于寡人。 
现代文：徐无鬼经过商女的引荐见到了魏武候，武候慰劳徐无鬼说： 先生一定十分疲惫吧？而且是受隐居山林的劳累所困苦，所以才肯来拜访我。 
English: After being introduced by a businesswoman, Xu Wugong met Wei Wuhou, who consoled him for his hard work. Xu Wugong said: "The teacher must be very tired, right? And he is suffering from the fatigue of living in seclusion in the mountains, so he was only willing to visit me.

古文：徐无鬼曰： 我则劳于君，君有何劳于我！
现代文：徐无鬼说： 我是来慰劳你的，你为什么慰劳我呢？
English: Xu Wugu said: I came to comfort you, why are you comforting me?

古文：君将盈耆欲，长好恶，则性命之情病矣；君将黜耆欲，牵好恶，则耳目病矣。
现代文：如果你想要满足自己的嗜好和欲望，增加喜好和憎恶，这样你的心灵就会受到创伤；如果你想要废弃嗜好和欲望，减少喜好和憎恶，这样你的耳目的享用就会困顿乏厄。
English: If you want to satisfy your likes and dislikes, increase likes and dislikes, then your mind will be traumatized; if you want to abandon likes and dislikes, decrease likes and dislikes, then your ears and eyes will be deprived of enjoyment.

古文：我将劳君，君有何劳于我！ 
现代文：我来是打算慰劳你的，你对我有什么可慰劳的呢？ 
English: I have come to comfort you, but what comfort can you give me?

古文：武侯超然不对。
现代文：武候听后怅然若失，不能回答。
English: Wu Wu was stunned and could not answer.

古文：少焉，徐无鬼曰： 尝语君吾相狗也：下之质，执饱而止，是狸德也；中之质，若视日；上之质，若亡其一。
现代文：不一会儿，徐无鬼说： 请让我告诉你，我善于观察狗的体态以确定它们的优劣。下等品类的狗只求填饱肚子也就算了，这是跟野猫一样的禀性；中等品类的狗好像总是凝视上方，上等品类的狗便总像是忘掉了自身的存在。
English: After a while, Xu Wu Ghost said: Let me tell you, I am good at observing dogs' physique to determine their strengths and weaknesses. Lower-class dogs only want to fill their stomachs, which is the same stubbornness as wild cats; middle-class dogs always seem to stare above, and upper-class dogs always seem to forget their own existence.

古文：吾相狗又不若吾相马也。
现代文：我观察狗，又不如我观察马。
English: I don't watch dogs as much as I watch horses.

古文：吾相马：直者中绳，曲者中钩，方者中矩，圆者中规。是国马也，而未若天下马也。
现代文：我观察马的体态，直的部分要合于墨线，弯的部分要合于钩弧，方的部分要合于角尺，圆的部分要合于圆规，这样的马就是国马，不过还比不上天下最好的马。
English: I observe the horse's physique, the straight part should fit the ink line, the curved part should fit the hook arc, the square part should fit the cubit, and the round part should fit the compass. Such a horse is the national horse, but it is not as good as the best horse in the world.

古文：天下马有成材，若卹若失，若丧其一。若是者，超轶绝尘，不知其所。 
现代文：天下最好的马具有天生的材质，或缓步似有忧虑或奔逸神采奕奕，总像是忘记了自身的存在，超越马群疾如狂风把尘土远远留在身后，却不知道这样高超的本领从哪里得来。 
English: The best horses in the world have a natural material, or slow pace seems to have worries or galloping spirit, always seems to have forgotten its own existence, surpassing the horse herd, leaving the dust far behind, but do not know where to get such a superb ability.

古文：武侯大悦而笑。
现代文：魏武侯听了高兴得笑了起来。
English: Wei Wuhou laughed with joy when he heard this.

古文：徐无鬼出，女商曰： 先生独何以说吾君乎？
现代文：徐无鬼走出宫廷，商女说： 先生究竟是用什么办法使国君高兴的呢？
English: When Xu Wugong walked out of the court, the businesswoman said, "Exactly what did you do to make the sovereign happy?"

古文：吾所以说吾君者，横说之则以《诗》、《书》、《礼》、《乐》，从说则以《金板》、《六韬》，奉事而大有功者不可为数，而吾君未尝启齿。
现代文：我用来使国君高兴的办法是，从远处说向他介绍诗、书、礼、乐，从近处说向他谈论太公兵法。侍奉国君而大有功绩的人不可计数，而国君从不曾有过笑脸。
English: The method I use to make the sovereign happy is to introduce him to poetry, books, etiquette, and music from a distance, and to talk to him about military tactics from a close distance. There are countless people who have served the sovereign with great merits, but the sovereign has never had a smiling face.

古文：今先生何以说吾君？使吾君说若此乎？ 
现代文：如今你究竟用什么办法来取悦国君，竟使国君如此高兴呢？ 
English: Now, by what means have you pleased the sovereign, and made him so happy?

古文：徐无鬼曰： 吾直告之吾相狗马耳。 
现代文：徐无鬼说： 我只不过告诉他我怎么相狗、相马罢了。 
English: Xu Wugong said, "I just told him how I matched dogs and horses.

古文：女商曰： 若是乎？ 
现代文：商女说： 就是这样吗？ 
English: The saleswoman said: Is that it?

古文：曰： 子不闻夫越之流人乎？
现代文：徐无鬼说： 你没有听说过越地流亡人的故事吗？
English: Xu Wugong said, "Haven't you heard the story of the people who emigrated from Yueji?

古文：去国数日，见其所知而喜；去国旬月，见所尝见于国中者喜；及期年也，见似人者而喜矣。不亦去人滋久，思人滋深乎？
现代文：离开都城几天，见到故交旧友便十分高兴；离开都城十天整月，见到在国都中所曾经见到过的人便大喜过望；等到过了一年，见到好像是同乡的人便欣喜若狂；不就是离开故人越久，思念故人的情意越深吗？
English: If you leave the capital for a few days, you will be very happy to see old friends and old friends; if you leave the capital for ten days and a whole month, you will be overjoyed to see people you have seen in the capital; if you wait a year, you will be overjoyed to see people who seem to be fellow villagers; isn't it true that the longer you leave the deceased, the deeper your feelings of missing the deceased?

古文：夫逃虚空者，藜藋柱乎鼪鼬之径，良位其空，闻人足音跫然而喜矣，又况乎昆弟亲戚之謦欬其侧者乎！
现代文：逃向空旷原野的人，丛生的野草堵塞了黄鼠狼出入的路径，却能在杂草丛中的空隙里跌跌撞撞地生活，听到人的脚步声就高兴起来，更何况是兄弟亲戚在身边说笑呢？
English: Who flees to the open country, where the weeds close in on the weasel's path, but can live stumbling through the gaps in the weeds, and is gladdened by the sound of human footsteps, much less by the laughter of brothers and relatives?

古文：久矣夫，莫以真人之言謦欬吾君之侧乎！ 
现代文：很久很久了，没有谁用真人纯朴的话语在国君身边说笑了啊！ 
English: It's been a long time since anyone used real, unadorned words to joke around the sovereign!

古文：徐无鬼见武侯，武侯曰： 先生居山林，食芧栗，厌葱韭，以宾寡人，久矣夫！
现代文：徐无鬼去见魏武侯，魏武侯说： 先生身居深山老林，吃橡子，食葱韭，你摈弃我已很长时间了。
English: Xu Wu Ghost went to see Wei Wuhou, Wei Wuhou said: Teacher lives deep in the mountains and forests, eating acorns, eating scallions, you have abandoned me for a long time.

古文：今老邪？
现代文：你现在老了吗？
English: Are you old now?

古文：其欲干酒肉之味邪？
现代文：是想求得酒肉的滋味呢？
English: Is it to get a taste of the meat and wine?

古文：其寡人亦有社稷之福邪？ 
现代文：还是为我的国家造福呢？ 
English: Or is it for the good of my country?

古文：徐无鬼曰： 无鬼生于贫贱，未尝敢饮食君之酒肉，将来劳君也。 
现代文：徐无鬼说： 无鬼出身贫穷低贱，不曾敢想享用你的酒肉，是来慰问你的。 
English: Xu Wugong said: Wugong was born poor and lowly, and never dared to enjoy your meat and wine. He came to console you.

古文：君曰： 何哉！
现代文：武侯说： 怎么？
English: Wuhou said, "Why?

古文：奚劳寡人？ 
现代文：你怎样来慰问我？ 
English: How can you console me?

古文：曰： 劳君之神与形。 
现代文：徐无鬼说： 慰问你的精神和形体。 
English: Xu Wugong said: My condolences to your spirit and body.

古文：武侯曰： 何谓邪？ 
现代文：武侯说： 什么意思？ 
English: Wuhou said, "What do you mean?

古文：徐无鬼曰： 天地之养也一，登高不可以为长，居下不可以为短。
现代文：徐无鬼说： 天地对万物的养育是均等的，地位高的人不能够自认为高人一等，地位低的人也不应认为自己矮人三分。
English: Xu Wugu said: The nurturing of all things by heaven and earth is equal. People with high status should not think that they are superior, and people with low status should not think that they are inferior.

古文：君独为万乘之主，以苦一国之民，以养耳目鼻口，夫神者不自许也。
现代文：你身为大国的国君，用全国百姓的劳累困苦换来自己眼耳口鼻的享用，弄得心神不自得。
English: You, as the sovereign of a great country, have exchanged the toil and hardship of the people of the whole country for the enjoyment of your own eyes, ears, mouth and nose, making your heart feel elated.

古文：夫神者，好和而恶奸。夫奸，病也，故劳之。
现代文：圣明之人从不为自己的私欲求取分外的东西，人的心灵天然喜欢和顺而厌恶偏私，偏私是一种严重的病态，所以，我特地前来慰问你。
English: A holy man never takes anything else for his selfish desires. The human mind naturally likes to be obedient and abhors selfishness. Selfishness is a serious illness. Therefore, I have come specially to console you.

古文：唯君所病之何也？ 
现代文：只有你患有这种病症，这是为什么呢？ 
English: You're the only one with this condition. Why is that?

古文：武侯曰： 欲见先生久矣！
现代文：武候说： 我想见先生已经很久了。
English: Wuhou said, "I've wanted to see you for a long time.

古文：吾欲爱民而为义偃兵，其可乎？ 徐无鬼曰： 不可。
现代文：如果我爱民为义而制止战争，这样做行了吧？ 徐无鬼说： 不行。
English: If I love the people and stop the war for the sake of justice, can I do this? Xu Wu Ghost said: No.

古文：爱民，害民之始也；为义偃兵，造兵之本也。
现代文：所谓爱民，其实是害民的开始；为义而制止战争，也是制造新的战争的根源。
English: The so-called love of the people is actually the beginning of harming the people; stopping wars for the sake of justice is also the root cause of creating new wars.

古文：君自此为之，则殆不成。
现代文：如果你从这些方面来治理国家，恐怕不会成功。
English: If you govern the country from these aspects, I'm afraid you won't succeed.

古文：凡成美，恶器也。
现代文：凡是成就了美好的名声，也就有了作恶的工具。
English: Anyone who achieves a good reputation also has the tools to do evil.

古文：君虽为仁义，几且伪哉！
现代文：虽然你这样做是在推行正义，相反更接近于虚假啊！
English: Although you are doing so in the pursuit of justice, on the contrary, it is closer to falsehood!

古文：形固造形，成固有伐，变固外战。
现代文：出现仁义形迹肯定会出现伪造仁义的形迹，成功了肯定会自夸，出现了变故必定会再次掀起战争。
English: If there is a trace of benevolence, there will definitely be a trace of falsified benevolence, if there is success, there will definitely be boasting, if there is a change of circumstances, there will definitely be a war again.

古文：君亦必无盛鹤列于丽谯之间，无徒骥于锱坛之宫，无藏逆于得，无以巧胜人，无以谋胜人，无以战胜人。
现代文：你千万不要在城门瞭望台下摆兵，作严阵以待状；不要在宫里陈列步卒骑士；不要包藏一颗贪求之心；不要用智巧去取胜，不要用策略去制敌；不要去通过战争去征服别人。
English: You must not place soldiers under the observation platform at the gate of the city, and make a strict line to wait; do not display foot knights in the palace; do not hide a greedy heart; do not use cleverness to win, do not use strategy to control the enemy; do not use war to conquer others.

古文：夫杀人之士民，兼人之土地，以养吾私与吾神者，其战不知孰善？
现代文：通过杀死别国的士卒和百姓，吞并别国的土地，用来满足自己的私欲，这样战争究竟有何益处？
English: What is the benefit of waging war by killing other countries' soldiers and people, annexing other countries' land, and using it to satisfy one's own selfish desires?

古文：胜之恶乎在？
现代文：胜利又存在于哪里？
English: Where does victory exist?

古文：君若勿已矣！修胸中之诚以应天地之情而勿撄。
现代文：你还是停止争战，修养天性，顺应自然赋予你的真情，而不去扰乱其规律。
English: You still have to stop fighting, cultivate your nature, and conform to the true feelings given to you by nature, without disturbing its laws.

古文：夫民死已脱矣，君将恶乎用夫偃兵哉！
现代文：这样，百姓就能够摆脱死亡的威胁，你哪里用得上息兵的议论？ 
English: In this way, the people will be able to get rid of the threat of death, where do you use the argument of the soldiers?

古文：黄帝将见大隗乎具茨之山，方明为御，昌寓骖乘，张若、谐朋前马，昆阍、滑稽后车。至于襄城之野，七圣皆迷，无所问涂。
现代文：黄帝要到具茨山去拜见大隗，天刚亮就驾车出发，昌宇做陪乘，张若、謵朋在马车前导引，昆阍、滑稽跟在车后；来到襄城的旷野，七位圣人都迷失了方向，而且没有什么人可以问路。
English: The Yellow Emperor wanted to go to Gutz Mountain to meet the seven sages. He set off by car at first light, with Chang Yu as his escort, Zhang Ruo and Zou Peng leading the way in front of the carriage, and Kunlun and Funny following behind. When they arrived in the wilderness of Xiangcheng, the seven sages had lost their way, and there was no one to ask for directions.

古文：适遇牧马童子，问涂焉，曰： 若知具茨之山乎？ 
现代文：正巧遇上一位牧马的少年，便向牧马少年问路，说： 你知道具茨山吗？ 少年回答： 是的。 
English: He happened to meet a young wrangler, and asked the young wrangler for directions, saying, "Do you know the Guz Mountains?" The boy replied, "Yes."

古文：曰： 然。  若知大隗之所存乎？ 
现代文：又问： 你知道大隗居住在什么地方吗？ 
English: He also asked: Do you know where Otsuka lives?

古文：曰： 然。 
现代文：少年回答： 是的。 
English: Ying Hou replied: Yes.

古文：黄帝曰： 异哉小童！
现代文：黄帝说： 真是奇怪啊，这位少年！
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "How strange, this boy!

古文：非徒知具茨之山，又知大隗之所存。
现代文：不仅知道具茨山，而且知道大隗居住的地方。
English: They not only know the Guz Mountains, but also where the giant salamanders live.

古文：请问为天下。 
现代文：请问怎样治理天下。 
English: How do you govern the world?

古文：小童曰： 夫为天下者，亦若此而已矣，又奚事焉！
现代文：少年说： 治理天下，也就像牧马一样罢了，又何须多事呢！
English: The boy said, "Ruling the world is just like herding horses. Why do you need to do so many things?

古文：予少而自游于六合之内，予适有瞀病，有长者教予曰： 若乘日之车而游于襄城之野。 
现代文：我幼小时独自在天地四方内游玩，碰巧生了头眼眩晕的病，有位长者教导我说： 你还是乘坐太阳车去襄城的旷野里游玩。 
English: When I was young, I wandered the four corners of the world by myself. I happened to get vertigo. An elder taught me: You should still take the sun carriage to wander the wilderness of Xiangcheng.

古文：今予病少痊，予又且复游于六合之外。
现代文：如今我的病已经有了好转，我又将到天地四方之外去游玩。
English: Now that my illness has improved, I will once again travel to places far and wide.

古文：夫为天下亦若此而已。予又奚事焉！ 
现代文：至于治理天下恐怕也就像牧马一样罢了，我又何须去多事啊！ 
English: As for governing the world, I'm afraid it's just like herding horses, I don't need to do much!

古文：黄帝曰： 夫为天下者，则诚非吾子之事，虽然，请问为天下。 
现代文：黄帝说： 治理天下，固然不是你操心的事。虽然如此，我还是要向你请教怎样治理天下。 
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Of course, ruling the world is not your concern. Nevertheless, I still want to ask you how to rule the world.

古文：小童辞。
现代文：少年听了拒绝回答。
English: The boy refused to answer.

古文：黄帝又问。
现代文：黄帝又问。
English: Huangdi asked again.

古文：小童曰： 夫为天下者，亦奚以异乎牧马者哉！
现代文：少年说： 治理天下，跟牧马哪里有什么不同呢！
English: The boy said: What's the difference between ruling the world and being a wrangler?

古文：亦去其害马者而已矣！ 
现代文：也就是去除过分、任其自然罢了！ 
English: In other words, remove the excess and let nature take its course!

古文：黄帝再拜稽首，称天师而退。
现代文：黄帝听了叩头至地行了大礼，称他为天师而离去。
English: The Yellow Emperor listened to the kowtowing and made a grand salute, calling him the heavenly teacher and left.

古文：知士无思虑之变则不乐；辩士无谈说之序则不乐；察士无凌谇之事则不乐：皆囿于物者也。
现代文：善于谋划的人没有思虑上的变易与转换便不会得到快乐，善于辩论的人没有丝丝入扣的辩论就不会感到快乐，严察苛刻的人如果没有明辨的事端就不会感到快乐，这些都是受到外物的局限与束缚的人。
English: Those who are good at planning will not be happy without thoughtful changes and transformations, those who are good at debating will not be happy without in-depth debate, and those who are strict and harsh will not be happy if there is no discernible cause. These are people who are limited and bound by external things.

古文：招世之士兴朝；中民之士荣官；筋力之士矜難；勇敢之士奋患；兵革之士乐战；枯槁之士宿名；法律之士广治；禮教之士敬容；仁义之士贵际。农夫无草莱之事则不比；商贾无市井之事则不比；庶人有旦暮之业则劝；百工有器械之巧则壮。
现代文：招摇于世的人立足朝廷，中等的人以爵禄为荣，身强力壮的人以排忧解难为自矜，英勇无畏的人遇上祸患总是冲锋陷阵，全副武装的人喜欢征战，隐居山林的人留意名声，研修法制律令的人推广法治，讲求礼乐的人注重仪容，施行仁义的人看重交际，农夫没有除草耕耘就不安，商人没有贸易买卖就不乐，百姓只要有短暂的工作就自勉，工匠只要有器械的技巧就会跃跃欲试。
English: Those who swagger in the world base themselves on the imperial court, those who are mediocre are proud of their peerage, those who are physically strong pride themselves on solving problems, those who are brave and fearless always charge into battle when disaster strikes, those who are fully armed like to go to war, those who live in seclusion in the mountains pay attention to reputation, those who study law and order promote the rule of law, those who teach etiquette pay attention to appearance, those who practice benevolence value communication, farmers are uneasy without weeding and plowing, merchants are not happy without trading and buying, people are self-sufficient as long as they have short-term work, and

古文：钱财不积则贪者忧，权势不尤则夸者悲，势物之徒乐变。
现代文：贪婪的人钱财积攒得不够总是忧愁不乐，私欲很盛的人权势不高便会悲伤哀叹。依仗权势掠夺财物的人热衷于变故。
English: Greedy people who have not accumulated enough money are always sad and unhappy. People with strong selfish desires will be sad and lament if their human rights are not strong. People who rely on power to plunder property are keen on changing the past.

古文：遭时有所用，不能无为也，此皆顺比于岁，不物于易者也。驰其形性，潜之万物，终身不反，悲夫！
现代文：这些人都是逐时俯仰，拘限于一事而茅塞不通的人。全身心地投入追逐并且沉溺于外物的包围之中，一辈子也不会醒悟，不知返回人的自然本性，实在是可悲啊！
English: These people are all people who are constantly looking up, who are limited to one thing and cannot get through. They devote themselves to the pursuit and indulge in the encirclement of foreign objects, and will not wake up for the rest of their lives. They do not know how to return to the natural nature of man. It is really pathetic!

古文：庄子曰： 射者非前期而中谓之善射，天下皆羿也，可乎？ 惠子曰： 可。 
现代文：庄子说： 射箭的人不是预先瞄准而误中靶的，称他是善于射箭，那么普天下都是羿那样善射的人，可以这样说吗？ 惠子说： 可以。 
English: Zhuo Zi said, "If an archer does not aim in advance and misses the target, but claims to be good at archery, then everyone in the world is as good a shot as a baboon. Can you say that?" Keiko said, "Yes."

古文：庄子曰： 天下非有公是也，而各是其所是，天下皆尧也，可乎？ 惠子曰： 可。 
现代文：庄子说： 天下本没有共同认可的正确标准，却各以自己认可的标准为正确，那么普天下都是唐尧那样圣明的人，可以这样说吗？ 惠子说： 可以。 
English: Chuang Tzu said: Since there is no universally accepted standard of correctness, but everyone is correct according to their own standards, then everyone in the world is as holy as Tang Xuan, can we say this? Huizi said: Yes.

古文：庄子曰： 然则儒墨杨秉四，与夫子为五，果孰是邪？
现代文：庄子说： 那么郑缓、墨翟、杨朱、公孙龙四家，跟先生你一道便是五家，到底谁是正确的呢？
English: Zhuangzi said, "Then Zheng Xuan, Mo Xuan, Yang Zhu, and Gong Sunlong are the four families, and together with you, sir, they are the five families. Who is right?

古文：或者若鲁遽者邪？
现代文：或者都像是周初的鲁遽那样吗？
English: Or is it all like the rush at the beginning of the week?

古文：其弟子曰： 我得夫子之道矣！吾能冬爨鼎而夏造冰矣！ 
现代文：鲁遽的弟子说： 我学得了先生的学问，我能够在冬天生火烧饭在夏天制出冰块。 
English: Lu Xun's disciple said: I have learned from my master, I can make a fire in winter to cook rice and make ice cubes in summer.

古文：鲁遽曰： 是直以阳召阳，以阴召阴，非吾所谓道也。
现代文：鲁遽说： 这只不过是用具有阳气的东西来招引出具有阳气的东西，用具有阴气的东西来招引出具有阴气的东西，不是我所倡导的学问。
English: Lu Huan said: This is just using something with yang to attract something with yang, and using something with yin to attract something with yin, and is not the kind of learning I advocate.

古文：吾示子乎吾道。 
现代文：我告诉给你我所主张的道理。 
English: I'll tell you what I stand for.

古文：于是乎为之调瑟，废一于堂，废一于室，鼓宫宫动，鼓角角动，音律同矣！
现代文：于是当着大家调整好瑟弦，放一张瑟在堂上，放一张瑟在内室，弹奏起这张瑟的宫音而那张瑟的宫音也随之应合，弹奏那张瑟的角音而这张瑟的角音也随之应合，调类相同的缘故啊。
English: So, in front of everyone, I adjusted the chord, put a chord in the hall, put a chord in the inner room, played this chord's palace sound and that chord's palace sound also matched, played that chord's horn sound and this chord's horn sound also matched, because of the same tuning.

古文：夫或改调一弦，于五音无当也，鼓之，二十五弦皆动，未始异于声而音之君已！
现代文：如果其中任何一根弦改了调，五个音不能合谐，弹奏起来，二十五根弦都发出震颤，然而却始终不会发出不同的声音，方才是乐音之王了。
English: If any one of the strings is out of tune, the five notes are out of tune, and when played, the twenty-five strings vibrate but never produce a different sound, then that is the king of notes.

古文：且若是者邪！ 
现代文：而你恐怕就是象鲁遽那样的人吧？ 
English: And I'm afraid you're just like Ruth, aren't you?

古文：惠子曰∶ 今乎儒墨杨秉，且方与我以辩，相拂以辞，相镇以声，而未始吾非也，则奚若矣？ 
现代文：惠子说： 如今郑缓、墨翟、杨朱、公孙龙，他们正跟我一道辩论，相互间用言辞进行指责，相互间用声望压制对方，却从不曾认为自己是不正确的，那么将会怎么样呢？ 
English: Keiko said, "Nowadays, Zheng Xuan, Mo Xuan, Yang Zhu, Gong Sun Long, they are debating with me, accusing each other with words, suppressing each other with prestige, but they have never thought of themselves as incorrect, so what will happen?

古文：庄子曰： 齐人蹢子于宋者，其命阍也不以完；其求钘钟也以束缚；其求唐子也而未始出域：有遗类矣！
现代文：庄子说： 齐国有个人使自己的儿子滞留于宋国，命令守门人守住他而不让他有完整的身形返回来，他获得一只长颈的小钟唯恐破损而包了又包，捆了又捆，他寻找远离家门的儿子却不曾出过郊野，这就像辩论的各家忘掉了跟自己相类似的情况！
English: Chuang Tzu said: A man from the State of Qi detained his son in the State of Song, ordered the gatekeeper to guard him and not let him return with a complete body. He obtained a small bell with a long neck and wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it, wrapped it,

古文：夫楚人寄而蹢阍者；夜半于无人之时而与舟人斗，未始离于岑而足以造于怨也。 
现代文：楚国有个人寄居别人家而怒责守门人，半夜无人时走出门来又跟船家打了起来，还不曾离开岸边就又结下了怨恨。 
English: In the state of Chu, an individual stayed at someone else's house and angrily scolded the doorman. In the middle of the night, when no one was there, he came out of the door and fought with the boatman. He had not even left the shore before he bore a grudge.

古文：庄子送葬，过惠子之墓，顾谓从者曰： 郢人垩慢其鼻端若蝇翼，使匠人斫之。
现代文：庄子送葬的时候，路过惠子的坟墓，回过头对跟随的人说： 郢人用白土刷墙的时候，有小点飞泥落在鼻尖上，让匠石用斧子砍掉白灰泥。
English: At the time of Zhuangzi's funeral, he passed by Keiko's grave and looked back at the people following him and said, "When the mortar man was brushing the wall with white soil, a small speck of flying mud landed on the tip of his nose. Let the mason use an axe to cut away the white plaster.

古文：匠石运斤成风，听而斫之，尽垩而鼻不伤，郢人立不失容。
现代文：匠石挥动斧子呼呼作响，嗖的一声，鼻尖上的白灰泥就被完全除去，而鼻子却毫无损伤，郢人也若无其事地站在那里。
English: The smith swung the axe and whirled. With a bang, the white plaster on the tip of the nose was completely removed, but there was no damage to the nose. The deaf man stood there as if nothing had happened.

古文：宋元君闻之，召匠石曰： 尝试为寡人为之。 
现代文：宋元君听到了这件事，就召见匠石说： 你在我身上也这么试一试。 
English: When Song Yuanjun heard about this, he summoned the carpenter and said, "Try the same with me."

古文：匠石曰： 臣则尝能斫之。
现代文：匠石说： 我曾经确实砍掉鼻尖上的小灰泥。
English: The carpenter said, "I did once chop off the small piece of plaster on the tip of my nose.

古文：虽然，臣之质死久矣！ 
现代文：但是，那个敢让我砍的人已经去世很久了。 
English: But the man who dared me to cut it was long dead.

古文：自夫子之死也，吾无以为质矣，吾无与言之矣！ 
现代文：自从惠子离开人世以后，我就没有对手了！我再没有可以论辩的人了！ 
English: Since Keiko passed away, I have no rival! I no longer have anyone to argue with!

古文：管仲有病，桓公问之曰： 仲父之病病矣，可不讳云，至于大病，则寡人恶乎属国而可？ 
现代文：管仲病得很严重，齐桓公问他： 您的病已经很重了，不避讳地说，一旦病危不起，我将把国事托付给谁才合适呢？ 
English: Guanzhong was seriously ill. Qi Huan Gong asked him, "Your illness is already very serious. I will not hesitate to say that if I become seriously ill, to whom should I entrust the affairs of state?

古文：管仲曰： 公谁欲与？ 
现代文：管仲说： 您想要交给谁呢？ 
English: Guanzhong said: Who do you want to give it to?

古文：公曰： 鲍叔牙。 
现代文：齐桓公说： 鲍叔牙。 
English: Lord Qi Kuan said: Uncle Bao's teeth are gone.

古文：曰： 不可。
现代文：管仲说： 不可以。
English: No, you can't.

古文：其为人洁廉，善士也；其于不己若者不比之；又一闻人之过，终身不忘。
现代文：鲍叔牙为人，算得上是清白廉正的好人，他对不如自己的人从不去亲近，而且一听到别人的过错，总是念念不忘。
English: As a person, Bao Shouya can be regarded as a pure and honest good man. He never gets close to people who are not as good as him, and he always remembers the faults of others as soon as he hears them.

古文：使之治国，上且钩乎君，下且逆乎民。
现代文：让他治理国家，对上肯定会约束国君，对下肯定会忤逆百姓。
English: Let him govern the country, he will certainly restrain the sovereign on the one hand, and he will certainly rebel against the people on the other hand.

古文：其得罪于君也将弗久矣！ 
现代文：一旦得罪于国君，也就不会长久执政了！ 
English: Once you offend the sovereign, you won't be in power for long!

古文：公曰： 然则孰可？ 
现代文：齐桓公说： 那么谁可以呢？ 
English: Qi Kuan Gong said, "Then who can do it?"

古文：对曰： 勿已则隰朋可。
现代文：管仲回答说： 要不，隰朋还可以。
English: Guanzhong replied, "Otherwise, you and your friends can still play."

古文：其为人也，上忘而下畔，愧不若黄帝，而哀不己若者。
现代文：隰朋为人，对上不显示位尊而对下不分别卑微，自愧不如黄帝又能怜悯不如自己的人。
English: As a person, he does not show respect to his superiors, but is humble to his inferiors. He is ashamed to be inferior to the Yellow Emperor and can pity those who are inferior to him.

古文：以德分人谓之圣；以财分人谓之贤。
现代文：能用道德去感化他人的称作圣人，能用财物去周济他人的称作贤人。
English: Those who can use morality to influence others are called saints, and those who can use wealth to help others are called sages.

古文：以贤临人，未有得人者也；以贤下人，未有不得人者也。
现代文：以贤人自居而驾临于他人之上。不会获得人们的拥戴；以贤人之名而能谦恭待人，不会得不到人们的拥戴。
English: If you act like a wise man and lord it over others, you will not win people's support; if you act like a wise man and treat people with courtesy, you will not lose people's support.

古文：其于国有不闻也，其于家有不见也。
现代文：他对于国事一定不会事事听闻，他对于家庭也一定不事事看顾。
English: He is not familiar with state affairs, and he is not familiar with family affairs.

古文：勿已则隰朋可。 
现代文：不得已，那么还是隰朋可以。 
English: If you have to, then you can still be friends.

古文：吴王浮于江，登乎狙之山，众狙见之，恂然弃而走，逃于深蓁。
现代文：吴王渡过长江。登上猕猴聚居的山岭。猴群看见吴王打猎的队伍，惊惶地四散奔逃，躲进了荆棘丛林的深处。
English: Wu Wang crossed the Yangtze River and climbed the mountain range where macaques live. When the monkeys saw Wu Wang's hunting party, they ran away in panic and hid in the depths of the thorn forest.

古文：有一狙焉，委蛇攫囗，见巧乎王。
现代文：有一只猴子留下了，它从容不迫地腾身而起抓住树枝跳来跳去，在吴王面前显示它的灵巧。
English: One monkey was left behind, and it showed off its dexterity in front of King Wu by leisurely jumping up and grabbing a branch.

古文：王射之，敏给搏捷矢。
现代文：吴王用箭射它，他敏捷地接过飞速射来的利箭。
English: Wu Wang shot it with an arrow, and he nimbly caught the sharp arrow that came flying.

古文：王命相者趋射之，狙执死。
现代文：吴王下命令叫来左右随从打猎的人一起上前射箭，猴子躲避不及中箭而死。
English: King Wu gave the order to his attendants to come forward and shoot arrows together. The monkey could not avoid the arrows and died.

古文：王顾谓其友颜不疑曰： 之狙也，伐其巧、恃其便以敖予，以至此殛也。
现代文：吴王回身对他的朋友颜不疑说： 这只猴子，夸耀它的灵巧，仗恃它的便捷而蔑视于我，以至受到这样的惩罚而死去！
English: King Wu turned to his friend and said without hesitation: "This monkey, boasting of its dexterity, boasting of its convenience, despised me so much that it was punished in this way and died!

古文：戒之哉！
现代文：要以此为戒啊！
English: Take this as a warning!

古文：嗟乎！无以汝色骄人哉？ 
现代文：唉，不要用你傲慢的态度对待他人啊！ 
English: Alas, do not treat others with your arrogant attitude!

古文：颜不疑归而师董梧，以锄其色，去乐辞显，三年而国人称之。
现代文：颜不疑回来后便拜贤士董梧为师用以铲除自己的傲气，除去骄态，去享乐，就贫苦，辞显贵，甘淡漠，三年时间国人都称赞他。
English: After Yan returned, he worshiped the sage Dong Wu as a teacher to eradicate his arrogance, remove his pride, and enjoy himself. He was poor, dignified, and indifferent. For three years, the Chinese people praised him.

古文：南伯子綦隐几而坐，仰天而嘘。颜成子入见曰： 夫子，物之尤也。
现代文：南伯子綦靠几案坐着，仰天吐气，颜成子进来见到说： 先生，真是出类拔萃的人物。
English: Nanbo Zi Rong sat leaning on several cases, exhaling, Yan Cheng Zi came in and said: Sir, you are truly an outstanding person.

古文：形固可使若槁骸，心固可使若死灰乎？ 
现代文：形体固然可以使它成为枯骨，心固然可以使它成为死灰一样吗？ 
English: Surely the body can make it into bones, surely the mind can make it into ashes?

古文：曰： 吾尝居山穴之中矣。
现代文：南伯子綦说： 我曾隐居在山洞里。
English: Nanbo Zizhao said: I used to live in a cave.

古文：当是时也，田禾一睹我而齐国之众三贺之。我必先之，彼故知之；我必卖之，彼故鬻之。
现代文：正在这个时候，齐国的国君田禾一来看我，而齐国的民众就再三祝贺他，我的名声一定先于他，所以他知道我；我一定卖了我的名声，所以，他才把我的名声贩卖出去。
English: Just at this time, Tian He, the sovereign of Qi, came to see me, and the people of Qi repeatedly congratulated him. My reputation must have preceded him, so he knew me; I must have sold my reputation, so he sold my reputation out.

古文：若我而不有之，彼恶得而知之？
现代文：如果我没有名声，他怎么会知道我？
English: How would he know me if I didn't have a reputation?

古文：若我而不卖之，彼恶得而鬻之？
现代文：如果我不贩卖名声，他怎么能贩卖我的名声呢？唉！
English: If I don't sell my reputation, how can he sell my reputation? Alas!

古文：嗟乎！我悲人之自丧者；吾又悲夫悲人者；吾又悲夫悲人之悲者；其后而日远矣！ 
现代文：我悲伤人的自我丧失，我又悲伤那些悲伤别人的人。我又悲伤那悲伤的悲伤，然后一天天地远离炫耀而达到泊然无心的境界。 
English: I grieve people's loss of self, I grieve those who grieve others, I grieve that grieving grief, and then, day by day, I move away from showing off and reach a state of mindlessness.

古文：仲尼之楚，楚王觞之。孙叔敖执爵而立。市南宜僚受酒而祭，曰： 古之人乎！
现代文：孔子去楚国，楚王宴请他，孙叔敖拿着酒器站立一旁，市南宜僚把酒洒在地上祭祷，说： 古时候的人啊！
English: Confucius went to the State of Chu, the King of Chu invited him to a banquet, Sun Shulun stood by with a drinking vessel, Shi Nan Yi Liang sprinkled wine on the ground and prayed, saying: "Ancient people!

古文：于此言已。 
现代文：在这种情况下总要说一说话。 
English: In these situations, it's important to speak up.

古文：曰： 丘也闻不言之言矣，未之尝言，于此乎言之：市南宜僚弄丸而两家之难解；孙叔敖甘寝秉羽而郢人投兵；丘愿有喙三尺。 
现代文：孔子说： 我听说有不用言谈的言论，但从不曾说过，在这里说上一说。市南宜僚从容不迫地玩弄弹丸解决了两家的危难，孙叔敖运筹帷幄使敌国不敢对楚国用兵而楚国得以停止征战。
English: Confucius said: I have heard that there are remarks that do not need to be talked about, but I have never said it. Let me say it here. Shi Nanyi and his colleagues solved the crisis of the two families by playing with the projectile in a leisurely manner. Sun Xiuwen's operational planning made the enemy country dare not to use troops against Chu, and Chu was able to stop the war.

古文：彼之谓不道之道，此之谓不言之辩。
现代文：我孔丘多么希望有只长长的嘴巴来说上几句呀！ 
English: How I wish Confucius had a long mouth to say a few words!

古文：故德总乎道之所一，而言休乎知之所不知，至矣。
现代文：他们所说的是不言之道，孔子所说的是不言之辩，故而归根到底是德与道的齐一，而言语停止在知识所不知的境遇，就是极点了。
English: What they say is the unspoken way, and what Confucius said is the unspoken argument. Therefore, in the final analysis, virtue and the way are one and the same. In other words, if the language stops in a situation that is unknown to knowledge, it is the extreme.

古文：道之所一者，德不能同也。知之所不能知者，辩不能举也。
现代文：道的同一，德不能同；知识所不能知道的，善辩的人也不能列举完。
English: Where there is the same word, there is not the same virtue; and where there is not knowledge, it is not possible for a man of understanding to enumerate.

古文：名若儒墨而凶矣。
现代文：名声像儒墨，那就危险了。
English: Fame is like Confucianism, it's dangerous.

古文：故海不辞东流，大之至也。
现代文：所以大海不制止河水东流，才能大到极点。
English: Therefore, the sea does not stop the eastward flow of the river, in order to reach the extreme.

古文：圣人并包天地，泽及天下，而不知其谁氏。是故生无爵，死无谥，实不聚，名不立，此之谓大人。
现代文：圣人包容天地，恩泽到天下，而人民不知他是谁，所以，他活时无爵位，死后无谥号，财货不聚集，名声不建立，这就是大人。
English: A saint embraces heaven and earth, and is a blessing to the world, but the people do not know who he is. Therefore, when he was alive, he did not have a title, when he died, he did not have a nickname, he did not accumulate wealth, and he did not establish a reputation. This is an adult.

古文：狗不以善吠为良，人不以善言为贤，而况为大乎！
现代文：狗不因为善于叫唤便是好的，人不因为会说教便是贤人，何况成就大业的人呢！
English: A dog is not good because he is good at barking, a man is not wise because he is a preacher, and what is more, a man is not wise because he has achieved great things!

古文：夫为大不足以为大，而况为德乎！
现代文：有心求取伟大倒不足以成为伟大，何况成德呢！
English: To aspire to greatness is not enough to become great, let alone virtuous.

古文：夫大备矣，莫若天地。然奚求焉，而大备矣！
现代文：最大而完备的，莫如天地，然而没有什么追求的，它却最大而完备了。
English: The greatest and most complete is like heaven and earth, yet there is nothing to pursue, yet it is the greatest and most complete.

古文：知大备者，无求，无失，无弃，不以物易己也。
现代文：知道大而完备的，是无所追求，无所丧失，无所舍弃，不用外物改变自己。
English: Know that what is great and complete is that there is nothing to pursue, nothing to lose, nothing to give up, and no need to change oneself with external things.

古文：反己而不穷，循古而不摩，大人之诚！
现代文：返回自己的本性而不穷尽，因循常道而不矫饰，这就是大人的真性。
English: To return to one's own nature without exhausting it, to follow the common path without pretense, this is the true nature of an adult.

古文：子綦有八子，陈诸前，召九方歅曰： 为我相吾子，孰为祥。 
现代文：子綦有八个儿子，排列在子綦身前，叫来九方歅说： 给我八个儿子看看相，谁最有福气。 
English: Zixuan had eight sons, who were lined up in front of Zixuan. Zixuan called for the nine sons and said, "Show me your eight sons, who is the most fortunate?"

古文：九方囗曰： 梱也为祥。 
现代文：九方歅说： 梱最有福气。 
English: Jiufang Yao said: Packing is the most fortunate.

古文：子綦瞿然喜曰： 奚若？ 
现代文：子綦惊喜地说： 怎么最有福气呢？ 
English: Surprised, Zeng Yao said, "How can I be the most fortunate?"

古文：曰： 梱也，将与国君同食以终其身。 
现代文：九方歅回答： 梱将会跟国君一道饮食而终了一生。 
English: Jiufangyao replied, "Baling will eat and drink with the king for the rest of his life."

古文：子綦索然出涕曰： 吾子何为以至于是极也？ 
现代文：子綦泪流满面地说： 我的儿子为什么会达到这样的境遇！ 
English: With tears streaming down his face, Zeng Yao said: "Why did my son end up in this situation!

古文：九方囗曰： 夫与国君同食，泽及三族，而况父母乎！
现代文：九方歅说： 跟国君一道饮食，恩泽将施及三族，何况只是父母啊！
English: Jiufangyao said, "Eating and drinking with the sovereign will benefit the three ethnic groups, not to mention the parents!"

古文：今夫子闻之而泣，是御福也。
现代文：如今先生听了这件事就泣不成声，这是拒绝要降临的福禄。
English: Now, when my husband hears about this, he can't stop crying. This is a blessing that refuses to come.

古文：子则祥矣，父则不祥。 
现代文：你的儿子倒是有福气，你做父亲的却是没有福分了。 
English: Your son is blessed, but you are no longer blessed as a father.

古文：子綦曰： 歅，汝何足以识之。而梱祥邪？
现代文：子綦说： 歅，你怎么能够知道，梱确实是有福呢？
English: Zixuan said, "Hao, how do you know that Baoling is really blessed?

古文：尽于酒肉，入于鼻口矣，而何足以知其所自来！
现代文：享尽酒肉，只不过从口鼻进到肚腹里，又哪里知道这些东西从什么地方来？
English: Enjoying all the wine and meat, only from the mouth and nose into the stomach, and who knows where these things come from?

古文：吾未尝为牧而牂生于奥，未尝好田而鹑生于宎，若勿怪，何邪？
现代文：我不曾牧养而羊子却出现在我屋子的西南角，不曾喜好打猎而鹌鹑却出现在我屋子的东南角，假如不把这看作是怪事，又是为了什么呢？
English: If I do not regard it as strange that a goat should appear in the south-west corner of my house when I have never been a shepherd, and a badger in the south-east corner of my house when I have never been fond of hunting, why should I?

古文：吾所与吾子游者，游于天地，吾与之邀乐于天，吾与之邀食于地。
现代文：我和我的儿子所游乐的地方，只在于天地之间。
English: The only place where my son and I can play is between heaven and earth.

古文：吾不与之为事，不与之为谋，不与之为怪。吾与之乘天地之诚而不以物与之相撄，吾与之一委蛇而不与之为事所宜。
现代文：我跟他一道在苍天里寻乐，我跟他一道在大地上求食；我不跟他建功立业，不跟他出谋划策，不跟他标新立异，我只和他一道随顺天地的实情而不因外物便相互背违，我只和他一应顺任自然而不为任何外事所左右。
English: Together with him, I seek pleasure in the sky, and together with him, I seek food on the earth. I don't work with him to build a career, I don't make plans with him, and I don't innovate with him. I only work with him to follow the reality of heaven and earth, and not to contradict each other because of external things. I only work with him to follow nature and not to be influenced by any external matters.

古文：今也然有世俗之偿焉？
现代文：如今我却得到了世俗的回报啊！
English: Now I'm getting a worldly reward!

古文：凡有怪征者必有怪行。
现代文：大凡有了怪异的征兆，必定会有怪异的行为，实在是危险啊，并不是我和我儿子的罪过，大概是上天降下的罪过！
English: When there are strange signs, there must be strange behavior, it's really dangerous, it's not my and my son's fault, it's probably God's fault!

古文：于是乎刖而鬻之于齐，适当渠公之街，然身食肉而终。啮缺遇许由曰： 子将奚之？ 
现代文：我因此泣不成声。 没过多久派遣梱到燕国去，强盗在半道上劫持了他，想要保全其身形而卖掉实在担心他跑掉，不如截断他的脚容易卖掉些，于是截断他的脚卖到齐国，正好齐国的富人渠公买了去给自己看守街门，仍能够一辈子吃肉而终了一生。齧缺遇见许由，说： 你要去哪里呢？ 
English: I couldn't stop crying. Not long after I sent him packing to Yan's country, the robbers kidnapped him in the middle of the road. I wanted to save his body and sold him. I was really worried that he would run away. It would have been easier to cut off his feet and sell them. So I cut off his feet and sold them to Qi country. It just so happened that the rich people of Qi bought him to guard the street door for themselves. They can still eat meat for the rest of their lives and live for the rest of their lives. When they were short of money, they met Xu Yue and said, "Where are you going?"

古文：曰： 将逃尧。 
现代文：许由回答： 逃避尧的让位。 
English: Xu Yue replied: To avoid giving way to the dragonfly.

古文：曰： 奚谓邪？ 
现代文：齧缺说： 这是为什么呢？ 
English: Zou Que said, "Why is that?

古文：曰： 夫尧畜畜然仁，吾恐其为天下笑。
现代文：许由说： 尧，孜孜不倦地推行仁的主张，我担心他会受到天下人的耻笑。
English: Hui Yu said: "He has been tirelessly promoting the idea of benevolence. I am afraid that he will be ridiculed by the world.

古文：后世其人与人相食与！
现代文：后代一定会人与人相食啊！
English: Future generations will definitely eat each other!

古文：夫民不难聚也，爱之则亲，利之则至，誉之则劝，致其所恶则散。
现代文：百姓，并不难以聚合，给他们爱护就会亲近，给他们好处就会靠拢，给他们奖励就会勤勉，送给他们所厌恶的东西就会离散。
English: The people are not difficult to gather. If you give them love, they will be close. If you give them benefits, they will be closer. If you give them rewards, they will be diligent. If you give them something they dislike, they will be scattered.

古文：爱利出乎仁义，捐仁义者寡，利仁义者众。
现代文：爱护和利益出自仁义，而弃置仁义的少，利用仁义的多。
English: Love, care and profit come from benevolence, but the abandonment of benevolence is less, and the use of benevolence is more.

古文：夫仁义之行，唯且无诚，且假乎禽贪者器。
现代文：仁义的推行，只会没有诚信，而且还会被禽兽一般贪婪的人借用为工具。
English: The implementation of benevolence and righteousness will only lack integrity, and will also be used as a tool by greedy people like animals.

古文：是以一人之断制天下，譬之犹一覕也。
现代文：所以一个人的裁断与决定给天下人带来了好处，打个比方说就好像是短暂的一瞥。
English: So one person's judgment and decision has brought benefits to the world, metaphorically speaking, it's like a brief glimpse.

古文：夫尧知贤人之利天下也，而不知其贼天下也。夫唯外乎贤者知之矣。 
现代文：唐尧知道贤人能给天下人带来好处，却不知道他们对天下人的残害，而只有身处贤者之外的人才能知道这个道理。 
English: Tang Xuan knew that the sages could bring benefits to the people of the world, but did not know their harm to the people of the world, and only those who were outside the sages could know this truth.

古文：有暖姝者，有濡需者，有卷娄者。
现代文：有自美自得的，有苟且偷安的，有劳形自苦的。
English: There are those who are self-satisfied with their beauty, those who are scrupulous and steal from others, and those who work hard.

古文：所谓暖姝者，学一先生之言，则暖暖姝姝而私自说也，自以为足矣，而未知未始有物也。
现代文：所谓自美自得的人，只学一位老师的言论，就非常自美自得而私自喜悦，自以为满足了，而不知道空虚无物，所以叫做自美自得的人。
English: The so-called self-congratulatory people, only learn the speech of a teacher, they are very self-congratulatory and self-satisfied, they think they are satisfied, but they do not know emptiness and nothingness, so they are called self-congratulatory people.

古文：是以谓暖姝者也。濡需者，豕虱是也，择疏鬣长毛，自以为广宫大囿。奎蹄曲隈，乳间股脚，自以为安室利处。不知屠者之一旦鼓臂布草操烟火，而己与豕俱焦也。
现代文：苟且偷安的人，像猪身上的虱子，选择稀疏毛长之处自以为广阔的宫殿和大的园圃，腿蹄皱折深处，乳间股脚的地方，自以为是安全居室有利住所，不知道屠夫一旦挥臂摆开柴草点燃烟火，自己和猪会一起烧焦。
English: People who are anxious to steal peace, like lice on a pig, choose sparsely furred places where they think they are vast palaces and large gardens, deep grooves in the hoofs and feet, between the breasts and the feet, where they think they are safe rooms and advantageous residences. They do not know that once the butcher swings his arm to open the firewood to ignite the fireworks, he and the pig will be scorched together.

古文：此以域进，此以域退，此其所谓濡需者也。
现代文：这就是随境域而进，这就是随境域而退，这就是那种叫做苟且偷安的人。
English: This is advancing with the territory, this is retreating with the territory, and this is the kind of person who is called anxious and insecure.

古文：卷娄者，舜也。
现代文：劳形自苦的人，舜是典型。
English: People who work hard and make their own way are the epitome of hard work.

古文：羊肉不慕蚁，蚁慕羊肉，羊肉羶也。
现代文：羊肉不爱蚂蚁，蚂蚁爱羊肉，因为羊肉味是膻的，勾引蚂蚁。
English: Mutton does not love ants, ants love mutton, because mutton is salty and attracts ants.

古文：舜有羶行，百姓悦之，故三徙成都，至邓之虚而十有万家。
现代文：舜就像有膻味似的，百姓喜欢他，所以三次迁都到邓的废墟的有十几万家。
English: The people liked him, so there are more than a hundred thousand families in the ruins of the three times the capital was moved to Deng.

古文：尧闻舜之贤，举之童土之地，曰： 冀得其来之泽。 
现代文：尧听说舜的贤能，推举他治理荒漠的土地，说是希望他来施恩泽。
English: Hearing of Yao's ability, Zou recommended him to govern the desert land, saying that he hoped he would bestow favors.

古文：舜举乎童土之地，年齿长矣，聪明衰矣，而不得休归，所谓卷娄者也。
现代文：舜治理这块荒漠的土地，年龄大了，耳目衰退了，而无法回家休息，这就叫做形劳自苦的人。
English: To govern this desert land, to be old, to have faded eyes and ears, and not to be able to go home to rest, that is what is called a self-made man.

古文：是以神人恶众至，众至则不比，不比则不利也。
现代文：因此神人厌恶众人到来，众人到来就会结党营私，结党营私就是不利的。
English: Therefore, the God-man abhors the arrival of many people. When many people arrive, they will form a faction, and it is disadvantageous to form a faction.

古文：故无所甚亲，无所甚疏，抱德炀和，以顺天下，此谓真人。
现代文：所以没有过分的亲近，没有过分的疏远，抱持德性去温人心以顺应天下，这就叫做真人。
English: Therefore, there is no excessive closeness, no excessive estrangement, holding the virtue to warm people's hearts to conform to the world, this is called a real person.

古文：于蚁弃知，于鱼得计，于羊弃意。
现代文：去掉像蚂蚁那样羡慕羊肉的一点智慧，像鱼那样忘掉江湖的自得其适，去掉像羊那样的有意之行。
English: Get rid of the little bit of wisdom that envies mutton like ants, forget the self-sufficiency of the river and lake like fish, and get rid of the intentional behavior like sheep.

古文：以目视目，以耳听耳，以心复心。
现代文：用眼睛看眼睛能看见的，用耳朵听耳朵能听到的，用心灵领悟心灵能领悟的。
English: See with the eyes what the eyes can see, hear with the ears what the ears can hear, understand with the mind what the mind can understand.

古文：若然者，其平也绳，其变也循。
现代文：像这样，他的心既平静又直率，他的行为既变化也因顺。
English: As such, his mind is both calm and straightforward, and his behavior is both varied and orderly.

古文：古之真人！以天待之，不以人入天，古之真人！
现代文：古代的真人，以自然之道对待人事，不以人事之道对待自然。古代的真人。
English: The ancient real man treated people according to the laws of nature, but did not treat nature according to the laws of people.

古文：得之也生，失之也死；得之也死，失之也生：药也。
现代文：得到它就生，失掉它就死；得到它就死，失掉它就生。
English: Get it and live, lose it and die; get it and die, lose it and live.

古文：其实堇也，桔梗也，鸡雍也，豕零也，是时为帝者也，何可胜言！
现代文：药物，其实不过就是乌头、桔梗、鸡头草、猪苓根等，这些药物迭相为主药，怎么可以说得尽其中的妙蕴呢！
English: Drugs, in fact, are nothing more than aconite, calendula, astragalus, valerian root, etc. These drugs are the main drug, how can we say that we have to make the best of it!

古文：句践也以甲楯三千栖于会稽，唯种也能知亡之所以存，唯种也不知其身之所以愁。
现代文：勾践以三千士兵困守于会稽山，只有文种能够知道越国复国的办法，也只有文种不知道自身未来的忧患。
English: With the three thousand soldiers trapped in Hechi Mountain, only the literati can know the way to restore Vietnam, and only the literati do not know their future worries.

古文：故曰：鸱目有所适，鹤胫有所节，解之也悲。
现代文：所以说猫头鹰的眼睛只有在夜晚才适宜看视，仙鹤具有修长的双腿，截断就会感到悲哀。
English: Therefore, it is said that the owl's eyes are only suitable for seeing at night, and the crane has slender legs, and it will feel sad if it is cut off.

古文：故曰：风之过，河也有损焉；日之过，河也有损焉；请只风与日相与守河，而河以为未始其撄也，恃源而往者也。
现代文：所以说，风儿吹过了河面河水就会有所减损，太阳照过河去河水也会有所减损。假如风与太阳总是盘桓在河的上空，而河水却认为不曾受到过干扰，那就是靠河水源头小溪的不断汇聚。
English: Therefore, if the wind blows across the surface of the river, the water will be impaired, and if the sun shines across the river, the water will also be impaired. If the wind and the sun are always hovering over the river, but the river thinks that it has not been disturbed, it is due to the continuous convergence of the stream at the source of the river.

古文：故水之守土也审，影之守人也审，物之守物也审。
现代文：所以，水保持住了泥土也就安定下来，影子留住了是因为人体安定下来，事物固守着事物因而相互安定下来。
English: Therefore, the water holds the mud and settles down, the shadow holds because the human body settles down, things hold on to things and thus settle down.

古文：故目之于明也殆，耳之于聪也殆，心之于殉也殆，凡能其于府也殆，殆之成也不给改。
现代文：所以，眼睛一味地追求超人的视力也就危险了，耳朵一味地追求超人的听力也就危险了，心思一味地追求外物也就危险了。才能从内心深处显露出来就会危险，危险一旦形成已经来不及悔改。
English: Therefore, it is dangerous for the eyes to blindly pursue superhuman vision, dangerous for the ears to blindly pursue superhuman hearing, and dangerous for the mind to blindly pursue external things. It is dangerous for talent to reveal itself from the depths of the heart, and once the danger is formed, it is too late to repent.

古文：祸之长也兹萃，其反也缘功，其果也待久。
现代文：灾祸滋生并逐渐地增多与聚集，返归本性却为功名所萦绕，要想获得成功便须持续很久很久。
English: Misfortune breeds and gradually multiplies and gathers, but the return to nature is haunted by merit, and it takes a long, long time to succeed.

古文：而人以为己宝，不亦悲乎！
现代文：可是人们却把上述情况看作是自己最可宝贵的，不可悲吗？
English: But people regard the above situation as their most precious, isn't it sad?

古文：故有亡国戮民无已，不知问是也。
现代文：因此国家败亡、人民受戮从没有中断，却又不知道问一问造成这种情况的原因。
English: Therefore, the country's defeat and the people's suffering have never stopped, but they do not know to ask the reasons for this situation.

古文：故足之于地也践，虽践，恃其所不蹍而后善博也；人之知也少，虽少，恃其所不知而后知天之所谓也。
现代文：所以，脚对于地的践踏很小很小，虽然很小，仰赖所不曾践踏的地方而后才可以去到更为博大、旷远的地方；人对于各种事物的了解也很少很少，虽然很少，仰赖所不知道的知识而后才能够知道自然所称述的道理。
English: Therefore, the trampling of the earth by the feet is small, very small, although small, relying on the place that has not been trampled before and then can go to a more vast and distant place; people's understanding of all kinds of things is also very small, although small, relying on the knowledge that is not known and then can know the truth that is said by nature.

古文：知大一，知大阴，知大目，知大均，知大方，知大信，知大定，至矣！大一通之，大阴解之，大目视之，大均缘之，大方体之，大信稽之，大定持之。
现代文：知道 天 ，知道 地 ，知道 大目 ，知道 大均 ，知道 大方 ，知道 大信 ，知道 大定 ，这就达到了认识的极限。 天 加以贯通， 地 加以化解，万物各视其所见，顺其本性令其自得，各得其宜自成轨迹，各守其实无使超逸，顺任安定持守不渝。
English: To know Heaven, to know Earth, to know Magnitude, to know Mean, to know Magnitude, to know Magnitude, to know Magnitude, to know Magnitude, to know Magnitude, to know Magnitude, to know Magnitude, this has reached the limit of knowledge.

古文：尽有天，循有照，冥有枢，始有彼。
现代文：万物之中全都有其自然，顺应就会逐渐明朗清晰，深奥的道理之中都存在着枢要，而任何事物产生的同时又必然出现相应的对立面。
English: In all things, everything has its own nature. Conformity will gradually become clearer and clearer. There is a central point in the profound truth, and at the same time that any thing arises, a corresponding opposite will inevitably appear.

古文：则其解之也似不解之者，其知之也似不知之也，不知而后知之。
现代文：那么，自然的理解好像是没有理解似的，自然的知晓好像是没有知晓，但这 不知 之后方才会有真知。
English: So, natural understanding seems to be no understanding, natural knowledge seems to be no knowledge, but this not knowing is followed by true knowledge.

古文：其问之也，不可以有崖，而不可以无崖。
现代文：深入一步问一问，本不可能有什么界限，然而又不可以没有什么界限。
English: To go one step further, it is not possible to have any boundaries, yet it is not possible to have no boundaries.

古文：颉滑有实，古今不代，而不可以亏，则可不谓有大扬搉乎！
现代文：万物虽然纷扰杂乱却有它的根本，古今不能相互替换，但是无古无今、无今无古谁也不能缺少，这能不说是仅只显露其概略吗！
English: Although everything is chaotic and disorderly, it still has its foundation. The past and the present cannot be replaced with each other, but no one can be lacking without the past and the present, and no one can be lacking without the past and the present. Can this not be said to only reveal its outline?

古文：阖不亦问是已，奚惑然为！
现代文：何不再深入一步探问这博大玄妙的道理，为什么会迷惑成这个样呢？
English: Why not delve a little deeper into this vast and mysterious truth, why is it so confusing?

古文：以不惑解惑，复于不惑，是尚大不惑。
现代文：用不迷惑去解除迷惑，再回到不迷惑，这恐怕还是当初的不迷惑。
English: Use "do not confuse" to get rid of confusion, and then return to "do not confuse," which is probably still the original "do not confuse."

