古文：凡与敌战，若我众敌寡，当择平易宽广之地以胜之。
现代文：凡是对敌作战，如果我方兵力比敌军多，应当选择平坦开阔的地域来战胜敌人。
English: When fighting against the enemy, if we have more troops than the enemy, we should choose a flat and open area to defeat the enemy.

古文：若五倍于敌，则三术为正，二术为奇；三倍于敌，二术为正，一术为奇。
现代文：如果兵力对比我五倍于敌时，就要分兵以三份的兵力为 正兵 进攻敌人正面，以二份的兵力为 奇兵 进攻敌人侧后；如果兵力对比我三倍于敌时，就要分兵以二份的兵力为 正兵 进攻敌人正面，以一份的兵力为 奇兵 进攻敌人侧后。
English: If I am outnumbered five to one by the enemy, I should attack the enemy's front with three times the number of regulars and the rear with two times the number of irregulars. If I am outnumbered three to one by the enemy, I should attack the enemy's front with two times the number of regulars and the rear with two times the number of irregulars.

古文：所谓一以当其前，一以攻其后。
现代文：这种分兵击敌的进攻部署，就是通常所说的，以主要兵力行正面进攻，以部分兵力行侧后袭击的前后夹击的战法。
English: This kind of offensive deployment of detachments to attack the enemy is commonly referred to as a frontal attack with the main force and a front and rear attack with a part of the force.

古文：法曰： 分不分为縻军。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 应当分散使用兵力时而不分散兵力，就成为自己束缚自己的 縻军 了。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: When it is necessary to disperse the use of troops, if troops are not dispersed, they will become their own shackles.

古文：梁将陈霸先、王僧辩讨侯景，军于张公洲。
现代文：南北朝时期，南朝梁大将陈霸先和王僧辩率军讨伐叛乱分子侯景，进至张公洲。
English: During the period of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, the Southern Dynasties General Liang Chen Baxian and Wang Soen led the army to fight against the rebels Houjing and advanced to Zhang Gongzhou.

古文：高旗巨舰，截江蔽空，乘潮顺流。
现代文：梁军巨大战舰上旌旗高高飘扬，以横断江面、遮蔽天日之势，乘潮顺流浩荡而下。
English: The huge warships of Liang's army flew their banners high, crossing the river and shielding the sun. They rode the tide down the river.

古文：景登石头，望之不悦，曰： 彼军士有如是之气，不可易也。 
现代文：侯景登上石头城，望见梁军舰船的磅礴气势，不高兴地说： 敌军气势雄壮，不能轻视他们啊。 
English: Hou Jing boarded the Stone City, saw the magnificent momentum of Liang's warships, and said with displeasure: The enemy forces are powerful, we cannot despise them.

古文：帅铁骑万人，鸣鼓而前。
现代文：于是，侯景亲率精锐骑兵万人，擂动战鼓而向前迎战。
English: As a result, Hou Jiankui led the elite cavalry of ten thousand men, beating the war drum and moving forward to meet the battle.

古文：霸先谓僧辩曰： 善用兵者，如常山之蛇，首尾相应。
现代文：陈霸先见状对王僧辩说： 善于用兵打仗的人，能把部队指挥得如同常山之蛇那样，首尾相应。
English: Chen Ba foresaw the situation and said to Wang Sangyu: A person who is good at using soldiers to fight can command the troops like a snake of Changshan, corresponding to each other.

古文：贼今送死，欲为一战。
现代文：敌人现在来送死，妄想拼死一战获得胜利。
English: The enemy now wants to fight to the death, and is hell-bent on winning the war.

古文：我众彼寡，宜分其势。 
现代文：我军众多而敌兵少，我们应当采取分兵击敌的战法去打击敌人。 
English: Our army is numerous, but the enemy soldiers are few. We should adopt the method of fighting against the enemy.

古文：僧辩从之，以劲弩当其前，轻锐蹂其后，大阵冲其中。景遂大溃，弃城而走。
现代文：王僧辩听从了陈霸先的意见。梁军以一支配有强劲弓弩的部队迎战敌人正面，以轻捷精锐骑兵袭击敌人侧后，而以主力部队冲击敌军中央，侯景的部队很快被击溃，他立刻丢下城池仓慌地逃走了。
English: Wang Sangye listened to Chen Baxian's advice. Liang's army met the enemy front with a force dominated by a strong bow and arrow, attacked the enemy side with light and elite cavalry, and attacked the enemy center with the main force. Hou Jing's troops were quickly defeated, and he immediately left the city and fled in a panic.

