古文：戊辰，河中节度使王景移镇凤翔，宋州节度使常思移镇青州，凤翔节度使赵晖移镇宋州，河阳节度使王彦超移镇河中。
现代文：广顺三年春三月五日，以皇子、澶州节度使郭荣任开封尹兼功德使，封为晋王，又令有关部门选择日期准备礼仪予以册立。十四日，起大风，天降沙土。二十九日，驾临南庄。
English: On March 5th, the third spring of Guangshun, Guo Rong was appointed as Kaifeng Yin and meritorious envoy by the prince and Zhangzhou Festival, and was appointed as Jin Wang. He also ordered the relevant departments to select the date to prepare the etiquette to be recorded. On the 14th, a strong wind blew, and sand fell from the sky. On the 29th, he arrived in Nanzhuang.

古文：赐朗州刘言绢三百匹，以兵革之后匮乏故也。
现代文：夏四月五日，禁止边境一带的人将兵器卖给蕃族人。赐给朗州刘言绢布三百匹，是因为军费匮乏的缘故。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the summer, the people along the border were forbidden to sell weapons to the Yi people, and 300 pieces of cloth were given to Lanzhou Liu Yan, because of the lack of military expenditure.

古文：诏在京诸军将士持支救接。
现代文：诏令在京各军将士支援救助。
English: The imperial edict ordered all military personnel in Kyoto to come to the aid of the rescue.

古文：五月己卯朔，帝御崇元殿受朝贺，仗卫如仪。
现代文：五月一日，太祖登崇元殿接受朝拜，仪仗卫队按礼节排列整齐。
English: On May 1, the great ancestor ascended to the Chongyuan Hall to receive worship, and the honor guard was neatly arranged according to etiquette.

古文：辛巳，前庆州刺史郭彦钦勒归私第。
现代文：三日，前庆州刺史郭彦钦被勒令罢官回家。
English: On the third day, Guo Yanqin, the former secretary of Gyeongju, was ordered to return home.

古文：国初，以彦钦再刺庆州，兼掌榷盐，彦钦擅加榷钱，民夷流怨。
现代文：开国初年，以郭彦钦再度担任庆州刺史，兼管盐业专营事务，郭彦钦擅自抬高盐价，汉蕃百姓抱有怨言。
English: In the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Guo Yanqin once again served as the chief historian of Gyeongju, and also managed the salt industry franchise affairs. Guo Yanqin raised the price of salt without authorization, and the people of Hanzhong complained.

古文：州北十五里寡妇山有蕃部曰野鸡族，彦钦作法扰之。
现代文：庆州北部十五里寡妇山上有部族叫野鸡族，郭彦钦设法骚扰他们。
English: Fifteen miles north of Gyeongju, on Widow's Hill, there is a tribe called the Pheasants. Guo Yanqin tried to harass them.

古文：蕃情犷悍，好为不法，彦钦乃奏野鸡族掠夺纲商，帝遣使赍诏抚谕，望其率化。
现代文：野鸡族民性粗犷强悍，不爱守法，郭彦钦就报告说野鸡族掠夺商人财物，太祖派人带着诏书安抚晓谕他们，希望他们遵循教化。
English: Guo Yanqin reported that the Pheasants were rough and tough and did not like to abide by the law, and that the Pheasants plundered merchants' property. The great-grandfather sent people with an edict to pacify them, hoping that they would follow the edification.

古文：蕃人既苦彦钦贪政，不时报命，朝廷乃诏邠州节度使折从阮、宁州刺史张建武进兵攻之。
现代文：野鸡族既痛恨郭彦钦的贪政，不按时回报诏命，朝廷就诏令州节度使折从阮、宁州刺史张建武进兵攻打他们。
English: Since the pheasants hated Guo Yanqin's greedy politics and did not return the imperial edict on time, the imperial court ordered the state festival to send troops from Ruan and Ningzhou to attack them.

古文：建武勇于立功，径取野鸡族帐，击杀数百人。
现代文：张建武恃勇贪功，一直攻到野鸡族帐营，杀死几百人。
English: Zhang Jianwu was courageous and greedy for success. He attacked the camp of the pheasants and killed hundreds of people.

古文：又，杀牛族素与野鸡族有憾，且闻官军讨伐，相聚饷馈，欣然迎奉。
现代文：又，杀牛族与野鸡族一向有矛盾，听说官军讨伐野鸡族，便相聚赠以粮饷，高兴地迎接官军。
English: In addition, the cow-killing tribe and the pheasant tribe have always had conflicts. When they heard that the government army was fighting the pheasant tribe, they gathered together to give grain baskets and gladly welcomed the government army.

古文：官军利其财货孳畜，遂劫夺之，翻为族所诱，至包山负险之地，官军不利，为蕃人迫逐，投崖坠涧而死者数百人。
现代文：官军爱他们的钱财牲畜，就抢掠他们，反被杀牛族引诱到包山背负险阻的地方，官军处境不利，被杀牛族追击，掉下山崖涧谷而死的有好几百人。
English: The government army loved their money, wealth and livestock, so they plundered them. On the other hand, they were lured by the cow-killing tribe to a place where Baoshan was surrounded by dangerous obstacles. The government army was in an unfavorable situation. They were pursued by the cow-killing tribe, and several hundred people died after falling down the mountain cliff and ravine.

古文：癸丑，以前开封尹、楚国公侯益为太子太师，以前西京留守、莒国公王守恩为左卫上将军，以前永兴军节度使李洪信为左武卫上将军。
现代文：折从阮等人拥兵自守，不去救援接应。太祖对郭彦钦和张建武大怒，一齐罢免他们的官职，当郭彦钦到京师时，就被勒令罢官回家。九日，新任青州节度使常思在宋州每天可生产四万一千四百两丝，请求官府征收。
English: The emperor was furious with Guo Yanqin and Zhang Jianwu, and dismissed them from their posts. When Guo Yanqin arrived in Beijing, he was ordered to return home. On the 9th, the newly appointed Qingzhou Festival made it possible for Changsi to produce 41,400 pairs of silk per day in Songzhou, and requested the government to collect it.

古文：甲寅，以左卫上将军宋彦筠为太子少师，以太子少师杨凝式为尚书右仆射致仕。癸亥，前河阳节度使王继宏卒。
现代文：诏令宋州发还民户契券，不征收他们的丝。六月四日，沧州报告，契丹幽州榷盐制置使兼防州刺史、主管卢台军事务的张藏英，带领本部兵士及职员民户牲畜归顺。十五日，前河阳节度使王继弘去世。
English: On June 4, according to the report of Cangzhou, Zhang Zangying, the Qidan Yuzhou salt-making envoy, also the governor of Fozhou, and the person in charge of the affairs of the Luzhou-Taiwan army, led the soldiers and staff of the headquarters and the livestock of the people's households to surrender. On the 15th, Wang Jihong died before the Heyang Festival.

古文：己巳，太子太傅李怀忠卒。
现代文：二十一日，太子太傅李怀忠去世。
English: On the 21st, the Crown Prince and Grand Duke Li Huaizhong passed away.

古文：是月河南、河北诸州大水，霖雨不止，川陂涨溢。
现代文：本月黄河南、北各州涨大水，大雨不停，河水上涨越过堤岸。
English: This month, the southern and northern states of the Yellow River have seen heavy rain, and heavy rain has not stopped, and the river has risen over the embankment.

古文：襄州汉水溢入城，深一丈五尺，居民皆乘筏登树。
现代文：襄州汉水漫出进入州城，深至一丈五尺，居民都坐着筏子爬上树。
English: The Xiangzhou Han River overflowed into the state capital, reaching a depth of one and a half feet. Residents climbed up trees with their shovels.

古文：秋七月戊寅朔，徐州言，龙出丰县村民井中，即时澍雨，漂没城邑。
现代文：秋七月一日，徐州传言，有龙从丰县村民井中飞出，立时天降暴雨，淹没城邑。
English: On the first day of July in autumn, according to a rumor in Xuzhou, a dragon flew out of the well of a villager in Feng County, and heavy rain fell from time to time, flooding the city.

古文：癸未，太子宾客马裔孙卒。
现代文：六日，太子宾客马裔孙去世。
English: On the 6th, the prince's guest, Ma Zi Sun, passed away.

古文：丁酉，诏曰： 京兆、凤翔府、同、华、邠、延、鄜、耀等州所管州县军镇，顷因唐末籓镇殊风，久历岁时，未能厘革，政途不一，何以教民。
现代文：七日，邺都王殷上奏请求朝见，共送上三次奏章，太祖同意了。紧接着因北方报告契丹机务，诏令他不来朝见。十三日，太府卿、主管司天监的赵延繧去世。十九日，以太子太师辞官退隐的安审信去世。二十日，颁布诏令说： 京兆、凤翔府，同、华？延？耀等州所管辖的州县军镇，以前因循后唐末年藩镇的特殊风习，过了很久岁月，未能变革，政策途径不统一，怎么能教化人民？
English: On the 7th, Emperor Xizong sent Wang Yin to the imperial court with a request to meet with the emperor, and he sent the imperial rescript to the emperor three times. The emperor agreed. Then, due to the North's report on the Khitan Incident, the emperor ordered him not to come to the imperial court. On the 13th, Zhao Yanqi, the prefectural governor and the head of the imperial court, died. On the 19th, Emperor Xizong's son, An Xijin, who had retired from the imperial court, died. On the 20th, the emperor issued an imperial decree saying: The prefectural and county military towns under the jurisdiction of Jingz

古文：其婚田争讼、赋税丁徭，合是令佐之职。
现代文：那婚嫁田地争斗讼诉赋税民夫徭役等事，应是县令郡守担任的职责。
English: The duties of the county magistrate and the county governor should be the most important ones in matters such as the marriage, the field dispute, the lawsuit, and the taxation of the people.

古文：其擒奸捕盗、庇护部民，合是军镇警察之职。
现代文：那捉拿奸邪捕获盗贼保护本地人民等事，应是军镇警察担任的职责。
English: It should be the duty of the military town police to do things such as catching traitors, capturing thieves and protecting local people.

古文：今后各守职分，专切提撕，如所职疏遣，各行按责，其州府不得差监征军将下县。 
现代文：今后各自负责自己的职分，专心一意忠于职守，如所负责的事务有疏忽贻误，分别追究责任，州府不准差派军将下县。 
English: In the future, each of them will be responsible for their own duties, concentrate on and be loyal to their duties. If there is negligence in the affairs they are responsible for, they will be held accountable separately. The state government is not allowed to send troops to the county.

古文：戊戌，卫尉少卿李温美责授房州司户参军。
现代文：二十一日，卫尉少卿李温美因过贬任房州司户参军。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Lieutenant Li Wenmei joined the army after being demoted from the post of Fuzhou steward.

古文：温美奉使祭海，便道归家，家在寿光县，为县吏冯勋所讼，故黜之。
现代文：李温美奉使命去祭奠海神，顺便回家，家在寿光县，被县吏冯勋告发，所以贬谪他。
English: Li Wenmei was sent on a mission to pay tribute to the god of the sea. On the way home, her home was in Shouguang County. She was denounced by the county official Feng Xun, so he was reprimanded.

古文：壬寅，以鸿胪少卿赵修己为司天监。八月己酉，幸南庄。
现代文：供奉官武怀赞被诛抛尸街头，因贪污马价归于己有。八月二日，驾临南庄。
English: The body of the sacrificial official, Wu Huai Zan, was thrown into the street, and the horse price was attributed to him due to corruption. On August 2nd, he arrived in Nanzhuang.

古文：癸酉，以翰林学士、户部侍郎王溥为端明殿学士。甲戌，潭州王进逵奏： 朗州刘言与淮贼通连，差指挥使郑珓部领兵士，欲并当道。
现代文：供给各军将士的粮草不足。二十七日，潭州王逵报告 ：朗州刘言与南唐贼寇勾结，派指挥使郑王交带领兵士，想一起断绝道路交通。
English: On the 27th, Tanzhou Wang Yao reported: Lanzhou Liu Yan colluded with the Southern Tang bandits and sent a commander to ask Zheng Wang Jia to lead the soldiers and wanted to cut off road traffic together.

古文：郑珓为军众所执，奔入武陵，刘言寻为诸军所废，臣已至朗州安抚讫。 
现代文：郑王交被军士们抓住，又逃脱奔入武陵，刘言紧接着被众军废除，我已经到朗州安抚完毕。 
English: Zheng Wangjiao was caught by the sergeants and escaped to Wuling. Liu Yan was immediately abolished by the army. I have finished pacifying Lanzhou.

古文：诏刘言勒归私第，委王进逵取便安置。
现代文：诏令刘言罢职回家，委任王逵顺便安置。
English: He ordered Liu Yan to resign from his post and return home, and appointed Wang Xuan to take his place.

古文：是月所在州郡奏，霖雨连绵，漂没田稼，损坏城郭庐舍。
现代文：本月各州郡报告，大雨连绵，淹没漂走庄稼，损坏城廓房屋。
English: This month, various states and counties reported continuous heavy rain, flooding and drifting away crops, and damaging buildings.

古文：九月己卯，太子少保卢损卒。
现代文：九月二日，太子少保卢损去世。
English: On September 2nd, Crown Prince Shobo Rukia passed away.

古文：丁酉，深州上言： 乐寿县兵马都监杜延熙为戍兵所害。 
现代文：二十日，深州上报说： 乐寿县兵马总监杜延熙被戍守士兵杀害。 
English: On the 20th, Shenzhou reported: Du Yanxi, the director of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses of Leshou County, was killed by the soldiers of the garrison.

古文：先是，齐州保宁郡兵士屯于乐寿，都头刘彦章等杀延熙为乱。
现代文：在这以前，齐州保宁郡兵士驻扎在乐寿，都头刘彦章等谋杀杜延熙作乱。
English: Prior to this, soldiers from Boryeong County, Quizhou, were stationed in Leju, and the murder of Du Yanxi by Liu Yanzhang and others led to a riot.

古文：时郑州开道指挥使张万友亦屯于乐寿，然不与之同。
现代文：当时郑州开道指挥使张万友也驻扎在乐寿，但不与刘彦章合作。
English: At that time, Zhengzhou Kaidou conductor Zhang Wanyu was also stationed in Lezhu, but he did not cooperate with Liu Yanzhang.

古文：朝廷急遣供奉官马谔省其事，谔乃与万友擒彦章等十三人斩之，余众奔齐州。
现代文：朝廷急忙派供奉官马谔调查此事，马谔就与张万友抓住刘彦章等十三人诛杀掉，其他人逃奔到齐州。
English: The imperial court hurriedly dispatched the official Ma Jun to investigate the matter. Ma Jun and Zhang Wanyu caught Liu Yanzhang and thirteen others and killed them. The others fled to Qizhou.

古文：是月多阴壹，木再华。
现代文：本月多阴天，树木再次开花。
English: It's been cloudy this month, so the trees are blooming again.

古文：冬十月戊申朔，诏以来年正月一日有事于南郊，诸道州府不得以进奉南郊为名，辄有率敛。
现代文：冬十月一日，诏令在明年正月一日到南郊祭祀，各道州府不准以赞助南郊祭祀为名，擅自摊派征收。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the imperial edict decreed that on the first day of the first month of the next year, there would be a sacrificial rite in the southern suburbs. Each prefectural government was not allowed to arbitrarily allocate and collect in the name of sponsoring the southern suburbs' sacrificial rite.

古文：以前翰林学士、工部侍郎鱼崇谅为礼部侍郎，充翰林学士。时崇谅解职于陕州就养，至是再除禁职，仍赐诏召之，令本州给行装鞍马，侍亲归朝。以太子宾客张昭为户部尚书，以太子宾客李涛为刑部尚书。
现代文：二日，右金吾上将军张彦成去世。三日，太常上奏，南郊祭庙社稷坛位等设施，请下属有关部门修筑，太祖同意了，以中书令冯道任南郊大礼使，以开封尹、晋王郭荣任顿递使，临时兵部尚书王易任卤簿使，御史中丞张煦任仪仗使，临时执掌太常卿田敏任礼仪使，以前颍州防御使郭琼任临时宗正卿。九日，驾临南庄、西庄。
English: On the second day, Zhang Yancheng, General of the Right Kingu, passed away. On the third day, the Grand Patriarch ascended the throne and asked the relevant departments to build the altar of the Nanjiao Festival and Shrine. The Grand Patriarch agreed, and appointed Feng Dao as the Grand Envoy of the Southern Suburbs, Kaifeng Yin and Jin King Guo Rong as the Envoy of Tong Tong, Shang Shu Wang Yi as the Envoy of the Provisional Military Department, Shang Shu Wang Yi as the Envoy of the Provisional Military Department, Goshi Zhongzhen Zhang Xi as the Envoy of the Provisional Military Department, Tian Min as the Envoy of the Provisional Military Department,

古文：诏中书令冯道赴西京迎奉太庙神主。
现代文：十二日，前宁州刺史张建武贬任右司御副率，因为征讨野鸡族失利的缘故。诏令中书令冯道到西京洛阳迎奉太庙神主。
English: On the 12th, Zhang Jianwu, the former Ningzhou statesman, was demoted to the vice-head of the Right Division, because of the failure to conquer the pheasants. In the imperial edict, Feng Dao was ordered to go to Luoyang in West Beijing to welcome the god of the temple.

古文：甲子，中书令冯道率百官上尊号曰圣明文武仁德皇帝，答诏不允，凡三上章，允之，仍俟郊礼毕施行。
现代文：十七日，中书令冯道率领百官上太祖尊号叫圣明文武仁德皇帝，回诏令不应允，共上三次奏章，才接受，但仍要等南郊祭礼完毕后再册封。
English: On the 17th, the Chinese imperial rescript ordered Feng Dao to lead hundreds of officials to call Emperor Mingwenwu Rende as the great ancestor. The imperial rescript did not agree, and it took three times to accept, but it still had to wait until after the Southern Suburbs Festival was over.

古文：壬申，鄴都、邢、洺等州皆上言地震，鄴都尤甚。
现代文：二十五日，邺都、邢、氵名等州都上报有地震，邺都特别强烈。
English: On the 25th, Shidu, Handan, Handan and other prefectures reported earthquakes, and Handan was particularly strong.

古文：十一月辛巳，废共城稻田务，任人佃莳。
现代文：十一月五日，废除共城稻田务一职，让农民自由租佃耕种。
English: On November 5th, the post of the city's rice paddy manager was abolished, allowing farmers to freely rent rice paddies for cultivation.

古文：乙酉，日南至，帝不受朝贺。
现代文：九日，冬至，太祖没接受朝贺。
English: On the 9th, the winter solstice, Taizu did not accept morning greetings.

古文：庚寅，镇州节度使何福进奏乞朝觐，三奏，允之。
现代文：镇州节度使何福进奏请上朝晋见，上奏三次，才同意。
English: During the Zhenzhou Festival, He Fu asked Jin to play for him, and he played for him three times before he agreed.

古文：诏侍卫步军都指挥使曹英权知镇州军府事。癸巳，以将作监李琼为济州刺史。壬寅，诏： 重定天下县邑，除畿赤外，其余三千户已上为望县，二千户已上为紧县，一千户已上为上县，五百户以上为中县，不满五百户为中下县。 
现代文：二十六日，颁布诏令： 重新确定天下县邑，除京城四周畿县外，其余的三千户以上的为望县，二千户以上为紧县，一千户以上为上县，五百户以上为中县，不满五百户为中下县。 十二月二日，天上洒下裹着树枝的冰块。
English: On the 26th, an imperial edict was issued: the world's counties and towns were redefined, and in addition to the four counties surrounding Beijing, the remaining 3,000 or more households were designated as Wang County, 2,000 or more households were designated as Yan County, 1,000 or more households were designated as Shang County, 500 or more households were designated as Zhong County, and less than 500 households were designated as Zhongxia County.

古文：十二月戊申，雨木冰。是日，四庙神主至西郊，帝郊迎奠飨，奉神主入于太庙，设奠安神而退。
现代文：同一天，四庙的神主迁移到达西郊，太祖到西郊祭奠供奉，捧着神主放进太庙，设置祭奠安放神主才退下。
English: On the same day, the deities of the four temples were moved to the western suburb, and the great-grandfather went to the western suburb to offer a memorial service, holding the deity into the temple, setting up a memorial service and releasing the deity before retreating.

古文：甲子，镇州节度使何福进来朝。
现代文：六日，前单州刺史赵凤被赐死，因被民众告状的缘故。十八日，镇州节度使何福进朝见。
English: On the 6th, Zhao Feng, the former liaison officer of Zhanzhou, was sentenced to death for being sued by the public. On the 18th, the Zhanzhou Festival brought He Fu to the imperial court.

古文：乙丑，鄴都留守王殷来朝。
现代文：十九日，邺都留守王殷朝见。
English: On the 19th, Shidu stayed behind to see Wang Yin.

古文：丙寅，礼仪使奏： 皇帝郊庙行事，请以晋王荣为亚献，通摄终献行事。 
现代文：二十日，礼仪使上奏说： 皇帝到南郊太庙祭祀，请以晋王郭荣作为祭祀时第二次献爵的人。 
English: On the 20th, the etiquette envoy delivered the following message: The emperor has come to the southern suburb of Taimiao for a ritual, and I request that Guo Rong, King of Jin, be the second person to offer a knighthood at the time of the ritual.

古文：从之。
现代文：太祖同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：己巳，左补阙王伸停任，坐检田于亳州，虚凭纽配故也。辛未，鄴都留守、侍卫亲军都指挥使王殷削夺在身官爵，长流登州，寻赐死于北郊。
现代文：二十五日，邺都留守、侍卫亲军都指挥使王殷被削夺现任官爵，永久流放登州，紧接着又被赐死在北郊。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the capital stayed behind, and the bodyguards commanded the troops, so that Wang Yin was deprived of his current title, permanently exiled to Danzhou, and then killed in the northern suburbs.

古文：其家人骨肉，并不问罪。
现代文：他的家人儿女，全不问罪。
English: His family, his children, they're all innocent.

古文：癸酉，帝宿斋于崇元殿，为来年正月一日亲祀南郊也。
现代文：二十七日，太祖在崇元殿住宿斋戒，准备明年正月一日亲自祭祀南郊。
English: On the 27th, Taizu fasted and stayed overnight at the Chongyuan Hall, preparing to personally offer sacrifices to the southern suburbs on the first day of the first month of the next year.

古文：时帝已不豫。
现代文：这时太祖已经生病。
English: At this time, the great-grandfather was already ill.

古文：甲戌，宿于太庙。
现代文：二十八日，住宿在太庙。
English: On the 28th, we stayed at Taimiao.

古文：乙亥质明，帝亲飨太庙，自斋宫乘步辇至庙庭，被衮冕，令近臣翼侍升阶，止及一室行礼，俯首而退，余命晋王率有司终其礼。
现代文：二十九日天亮，太祖亲自在太庙供奉，从斋宫坐人拉的车子到庙庭，穿戴上皇帝的礼服礼帽，令身旁的侍臣排列侍立在台阶两边，只到神庙中的一室行礼，就垂着头退下，剩下的礼仪叫晋王率领有关官员完成。
English: At dawn on the 29th, the great-grandfather himself made an offering at the Great Temple. He rode a carriage pulled by people from the Palace of Prayer to the temple courtyard, put on the emperor's ceremonial dress and hat, and ordered the attendants around him to line up and stand on both sides of the steps. When he reached only one room in the temple, he bowed his head and retreated. The remaining etiquette was completed by the king of Jin and the relevant officials.

古文：是日，车驾赴郊宫。
现代文：当天，御驾到郊外行宫。
English: On the same day, he drove to the suburbs to visit the Imperial Palace.

古文：显德元年春正月丙子朔，帝亲祀圜丘，礼毕，诣郊宫受贺。
现代文：显德元年春正月一日，太祖亲自祭祀社稷圆坛，行礼毕，到郊外行宫接受朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Hende, the great ancestor personally sacrificed the round altar of the shrine, bowed, and went to the suburban palace to receive morning greetings.

古文：车驾还宫，御明德楼，宣制： 大赦天下，改广顺四年为显德元年。
现代文：车驾回宫，到明德楼，宣布诏命 ：大赦天下，改广顺四年为显德元年。
English: He drove back to the palace, went to the Mingde Building, and announced the imperial decree: to grant amnesty to the whole world, and to change the fourth year of Guangshun to the first year of Xiande.

古文：自正月一日昧爽已前，应犯罪人，常赦所不原者，咸赦除之。
现代文：从正月一日黎明以前，凡犯法罪人，按通常赦免仍不能原宥的，全都赦免。
English: From the first day of the first month, before dawn, all the sinners who have broken the law and cannot be pardoned according to the usual pardon are pardoned.

古文：内外将士各优给，文武职官并与加恩，内外命妇并与进封。
现代文：朝廷内外将士各增加俸禄，文武官员全给与加恩，内外接受封号的命妇都进升封号。
English: The soldiers both inside and outside the court increased their salaries, the civil and military officials were all granted grants, and the empresses who received titles both inside and outside the court were promoted to higher titles.

古文：寺监摄官七周年已上者，同明经出身，今后诸寺监不得以白身署摄。
现代文：寺监任官七周年以上的，等同于明经出身，今后各寺监不准以平民身份担任。
English: The appointment of a temple overseer for more than seven years is equivalent to the Ming Dynasty. In the future, each temple overseer is not allowed to serve as a civilian.

古文：升朝官两任已上，著绿十五周年与赐绯，著绯十五年与赐紫。
现代文：升朝官两任以上的，穿绿衣十五周年的赐穿绯衣，穿绯衣十五周年的赐穿紫衣。
English: For those who have been promoted to court officials for more than two terms, those who wear green clothes for the fifteenth anniversary will be given a navy blue dress, and those who wear navy blue clothes for the fifteenth anniversary will be given a purple dress.

古文：州县官曾经五度参选，虽未及十六考，与授朝散大夫阶，年七十已上，授优散官，赐绯。
现代文：州县官员曾经五次参加官吏选拔，即使没有达到十六次考核，也授予朝散大夫官阶，年龄七十岁以上的，授予优散官，赐穿绯衣。
English: State and county officials have participated in the selection of officials five times, and even if they have not reached the 16th assessment, they have been awarded the rank of doctor in the morning, and those over the age of 70 have been awarded the rank of senior officials, and have been given the right to wear a gown.

古文：应奉郊庙职掌人员，并与恩泽。
现代文：凡奉守郊外祖庙职位的人员，一并施与恩泽。
English: All the people who hold the positions of the ancestral temple in the suburbs will also be rewarded.

古文：今后不得以梁朝及清泰朝为伪朝伪主，天下帝王陵庙及名臣坟墓无后，官为检校 云。
现代文：今后不准称后梁朝代和后唐清泰年代为伪朝伪主。天下帝王的陵墓祭庙及名臣坟墓没有后人照料的，官府派人照料。 
English: In the future, it is not allowed to call the Later Liang Dynasty and the Later Tang, Qing and Tai Dynasties as pseudo-dynasties and pseudo-lords. If there are no descendants to take care of the mausoleums and temples of the emperors of the world and the tombs of eminent ministers, the government will send someone to take care of them.

古文：宣赦毕，帝御崇元殿受册尊号，礼毕，群臣称贺。
现代文：宣布赦令完毕，太祖到崇元殿接受册封尊号，受封礼毕，群臣朝贺。
English: After the pardon was announced, the great-grandfather went to the Chongyuan Hall to receive the title of honor, and after the ceremony, the courtiers came to congratulate him.

古文：时帝郊祀，御楼受册，有司多略其礼，以帝不豫故也。
现代文：当时太祖到南郊祭祠，到崇元殿受封，有关部门都大大省略了应有的礼仪，是因为太祖病了的缘故。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather went to the southern suburb of the festival and shrine, to the Chongyuan Hall to receive the seal, and the relevant departments greatly omitted the proper etiquette, because the great-grandfather was ill.

古文：先是，有占者言： 镇星在氐、房，乃郑、宋之分，当京师之地；兼氐宿主帝王路寝。若散财以致福，迁幸以避灾，庶几可以驱禳矣。 
现代文：此前，有占星者说 ：镇星在氐宿和房宿，氐、房是郑州、宋州的分野，应当是京城之地；加上氐宿主帝王的外地寝宿，如果耗散钱财来求福，迁移都城以避灾，大概是可以免除祸殃的。 
English: Previously, some astrologers said: Zhenxing is located in Xingjuku and Fangjuku, and Xing and Fang are in the Zhengzhou and Songzhou areas, which should be the location of the capital city; coupled with the Emperor's out-of-town sleeping place, if you dissipate money and wealth to seek happiness and relocate the capital city to avoid disasters, you can probably avoid disaster.

古文：帝以迁幸烦费，不可轻议，散财可矣，故有郊禋之命。
现代文：太祖因为迁都麻烦费用大，不可轻易谈及，散财是可以的，所以有南郊祭祀的诏令。
English: Because the relocation of the capital is troublesome and costly, it is not easy to talk about it, but it is possible to spread money, so there is a decree for the southern suburbs.

古文：洎岁暮，帝疾增剧，郊庙之礼盖勉而行之耳。
现代文：到上年底，太祖病痛加重，郊庙祭祀的礼仪只是勉强施行而已。
English: By the end of last year, Taizu's illness had worsened, and the rituals of the suburban temple were only reluctantly carried out.

古文：戊寅，诏废鄴都依旧为天雄军，大名府在京兆府之下。
现代文：三日，诏令废邺都依旧设立天雄军，大名府隶于京兆府之下。
English: On the third day, the imperial edict was revoked, but the Tianxiong Army was still established, and the Daimyo-fu was subordinated to the Kyosho-fu.

古文：自赵晖已下并加开府仪同三司。乙酉，分命朝臣往诸州开仓，减价出粜，以济饥民。
现代文：五月，诏令皇子、开封尹、晋王郭荣可任开府仪同三司、检校太尉、兼侍中，代任开封尹、功德使，掌管内外兵马事务。十日，分别命令在朝臣子到各州打开官仓，减价出售粮食，以救济灾民。
English: In May, the emperor ordered the prince, Kaifeng Yin, and the Jin king, Guorong, to be appointed as the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong, the captain of the inspection of schools, and the attendant, and to take the place of Kaifeng Yin, the meritorious envoy, in charge of domestic and foreign military affairs. On the 10th, he ordered the courtiers to open the official warehouse in each state and sell grain at a reduced price to help the victims of the disaster.

古文：诏潭州依旧为大都督府，在朗州、桂州之上。
现代文：诏令潭州依旧为大都督府，在朗州、桂州以上。
English: According to the imperial edict, Tanzhou is still the largest prefectural capital, higher than that of Lanzhou and Guizhou.

古文：是日巳时，帝崩于滋德殿，圣寿五十一。
现代文：十五日夜晚，东北方有大星坠落，响声如雷。十七日上午，太祖在滋德殿驾崩，圣寿五十一岁。
English: On the evening of the 15th, a great star fell in the northeast, making a thunderous noise. On the morning of the 17th, Taizu passed away at Zide Hall at the age of fifty-one.

古文：秘不发丧。
现代文：隐秘不发布讣告。
English: There will be no obituary.

古文：乙未，迁神柩于万岁殿，召文武百官班于殿廷，宣遗制： 晋王荣可于柩前即皇帝位，服纪月日一如旧制 云。
现代文：二十日，将太祖灵柩迁移到万岁殿，召集文武百官排立在朝廷，宣读太祖遗诏： 晋王郭荣可在灵柩前即皇帝位，服丧和年号纪元一如旧制。 
English: On the 20th, the great-grandfather's coffin was moved to the Hall of Long Life, and hundreds of civil and military officials were summoned to stand in line at the imperial court and read out the great-grandfather's will: Guo Rong, the King of Jin, could be the emperor before the coffin, and the funeral service and the year and era were the same as the old system.

古文：重进年长于世宗，及太祖寝疾，召重进受顾命，令拜世宗，以定君臣之分。
现代文：这一年，从正月一日以后，景色昏晦不明，日月周围多有光圈，到皇子即位那天，天气晴朗，朝廷内外一片整肃庄重气氛。太祖从南郊祭祀之后，他的病情忽好忽坏，晋王在旁照看服侍，不离左右。
English: This year, from the first day of the first month, the scenery was dim and unclear, and there were many apertures around the sun and moon. On the day of the prince's enthronement, the weather was fine, and there was a solemn and solemn atmosphere inside and outside the imperial court. After the great-grandfather's sacrifice from the southern suburbs, his condition fluctuated from good to bad, and the king of Jin looked after and served, never leaving his side.

古文：累谕晋王曰： 我若不起此疾，汝即速治山陵，不得久留殿内。
现代文：太祖多次教导晋王说： 我如果一病不起，你就赶快修筑陵墓，不要久留在殿内。
English: The great-grandfather repeatedly instructed the king of Jin, saying, "If I fall ill, you should quickly build a mausoleum and not stay in the palace for a long time."

古文：陵所务从俭素，应缘山陵役力人匠，并须和雇，不计近远，不得差配百姓。陵寝不须用石柱，费人功，只以砖代之。用瓦棺纸衣。
现代文：陵墓尽量俭省朴素，应顺着山势安排人力工匠修治，并需协商雇用，不计远近，不准强行派遣征用百姓，墓穴里不必使用石柱，只要用砖替代，用瓦棺纸衣。
English: The mausoleum should be as frugal and simple as possible. It is necessary to arrange for human craftsmen to repair the mausoleum according to the mountain situation, and it is necessary to negotiate employment. It is not allowed to forcibly dispatch requisitioned people, regardless of the distance. It is not necessary to use stone pillars in the tomb, as long as they are replaced with bricks, and the casket is covered with corrugated paper.

古文：临入陵之时，召近税户三十家为陵户，下事前揭开瓦棺，遍视过陵内，切不得伤他人命。
现代文：到下葬陵墓时，召附近三十家交纳国税的人家作为守陵的民户，下葬前揭开瓦棺盖，先检查墓穴内，千万不要伤了别人性命。
English: When going to the mausoleum for burial, summon thirty nearby families who have paid national taxes as private households guarding the mausoleum. Before burial, open the tile coffin lid and first check the inside of the tomb. Do not hurt other people's lives.

古文：勿修下宫，不要守陵宫人，亦不得用石人石兽，只立一石记子，镌字云： 大周天子临晏驾，与嗣帝约，缘平生好俭素，只令著瓦棺纸衣葬。 
现代文：不要修下宫，不要守陵宫人，也不要立石人石兽，只立一石头标记，上面刻上 大周天子临崩之前，与即位皇帝约定，因平生喜好节俭朴素，只让使用瓦棺纸衣下葬 等字。
English: Don't repair the lower palace, don't guard the people in the mausoleum, and don't erect stone people and stone animals. Just erect a stone marker, inscribed with the words, "Before the death of the great Zhou Tianzi, it was agreed with the reigning emperor that due to his lifelong preference for frugality and simplicity, only the use of an earthenware coffin with a paper shroud would be allowed for burial."

古文：若违此言，阴灵不相助。 
现代文：如违背我的话，我在九泉之下不保佑你。 
English: If you go against my word, I will not protect you under any circumstances.

古文：又言： 朕攻收河府时，见李家十八帝陵园，广费钱物人力，并遭开发。
现代文：又说： 朕攻取河府时，看见李唐十八位皇帝陵园，大量使用钱物人力，都被人盗掘。
English: He also said: "When I conquered Hefu, I saw the cemeteries of the 18 emperors of the Li Tang Dynasty, with a large amount of money, materials and manpower, all of which were stolen and excavated.

古文：汝不闻汉文帝俭素，葬在霸陵原，至今见在。
现代文：你没听说汉文帝节俭朴素，葬在霸陵原，到现在还完好存在？
English: Haven't you heard that Emperor Hanwen was frugal and simple, was buried in the Badaling Plain, and still exists intact?

古文：如每年寒食无事时，即仰量事差人洒扫，如无人去，只遥祭。
现代文：如每年寒食节没有事情时，就酌情派人洒扫，如没有人去，就只在家里遥祭。
English: If there is nothing to do during the annual cold food festival, they will send someone to sweep up as appropriate. If no one goes, they will only hold a remote festival at home.

古文：兼仰于河府、魏府各葬一副剑甲，澶州葬通天冠、绛纱袍，东京葬一副平天冠、衮龙服。
现代文：又切望在河府、魏府各葬一副刀剑铠甲，澶州葬通天冠、绛色纱袍，东京洛阳葬一副平天冠、衮龙袍。
English: It is also eager to bury a pair of swords and armor in Hefu and Weifu, a pair of crowns and gauze robes in Bozhou, and a pair of crowns and dragon robes in Luoyang, Tokyo.

古文：千万千万，莫忘朕言。 
现代文：千万千万切记，不要忘记我的话。 
English: Remember, do not forget my words.

古文：二月甲子，太常卿田敏上尊谥曰圣神恭肃文武孝皇帝，庙号太祖。
现代文：二月十九日，太常卿田敏奉上谥号叫圣神恭肃文武孝皇帝，庙号叫太祖。
English: On February 19th, Tai Changqing Tian Min was given the posthumous title of "Heavenly Father" and the temple name of "Grandfather."

古文：四月乙巳，葬于嵩陵。
现代文：四月二日，葬在嵩陵。
English: On April 2, he was buried in Songling.

古文：宰臣李穀撰谥册文，王溥撰哀册文。
现代文：宰臣李谷撰写谥册文告，王溥撰写哀册文告。
English: Vice-Minister Li Gu wrote a condolence message, and Wang Xi wrote a lamentation message.

