古文：经曰： 羞用五事。
现代文：经上说： 有五件事要恭谨做到。
English: The scripture says: There are five things that must be done respectfully.

古文：五事：一曰貌，二曰言，三曰视，四曰听，五曰思。
现代文：五件事：一是容貌，二是言论，三四眼光，四是听觉，五十思想。
English: Five things: First, appearance, second, speech, third, observation, fourth, hearing, and fifth, thinking.

古文：貌曰恭，言曰从，视曰明，听曰聪，思曰睿。
现代文：容貌要恭敬，言论要顺从，眼光要明亮，听觉要敏锐，思想要通达。
English: Appearance is called qing, speech is called zhu, speech is called ming, hearing is called zhu, and thinking is called rui.

古文：恭作肃，从作艾，明作哲，聪作谋，睿作圣。
现代文：容貌恭敬，就能做到严肃；言论可行，就能善于治理；看得分明，做事就能明智；听得清楚，就便于谋划；思想通达，为人就圣明了。
English: If one's appearance is respectful, one can be serious; if one's speech is feasible, one can be good at governing; if one can see clearly, one can do things wisely; if one can hear clearly, it is easier to plan; if one's thoughts are clear, one is a saint.

古文：休征：曰肃，时雨若；艾，时阳若；哲，时奥若；谋，时寒若；圣，时风若。
现代文：善行而得善的验征：恭敬严肃，及时之雨就顺调而降；善于治理，应时的阳光就和煦而照；做事明智，气温就顺合节气；谋划合理，寒冷就应时而不过分；通达圣明，就会风和宜人。
English: The signs of good deeds and good results: respect and seriousness, timely rain will fall in accordance; good at governance, sunshine at the right time will be warm and sunny; doing things wisely, the temperature will be in accordance with the solar terms; planning is reasonable, cold should be from time to time but not excessive; access to the holy light, the wind will be pleasant.

古文：咎征；曰狂，恒雨若；僭，恒阳若；舒，恒奥若；急，恒寒若；恒风若。 
现代文：恶行也会有可怕的验征：狂妄，就大雨不止；僭越，就酷曰无阴；萎靡不振，就高温持续；急功近利，就大寒不消；政治昏暗，就大风不息。 
English: Evil deeds will also have terrible signs: arrogance, the heavy rain will not stop; arrogance, the cold will not stop; apathy, the high temperature will continue; quick success, the cold will not disappear; political gloom, the wind will not cease.

古文：传曰： 貌之不恭，是谓不肃，厥咎狂，厥罚恒雨，厥极恶。
现代文：传上说： 态度不恭就是不严肃，过错在于狂妄，受到的惩罚就是大雨连绵，后果严重。
English: Legend has it that: a disrespectful attitude is not serious, the fault lies in arrogance, and the punishment is continuous heavy rain with serious consequences.

古文：时则有服妖，时则有龟孽，时则有鸡祸，时则有下体生上之，时则有青眚青祥。
现代文：有时有奇装异服，有时有龟孽，有时有鸡祸，有时有下体长到上身即所谓疴，有时有青眚或青祥的怪物。
English: Sometimes there are strange clothes, sometimes there is a curse, sometimes there is a chicken plague, sometimes there is a lower body that grows to the upper body, that is, the so-called dragonfly, sometimes there is a green dragonfly or a green-cheeked monster.

古文：唯金沴木。 
现代文：出现金克木。 
English: Appearance of Kim Kechu.

古文：说曰：凡草木之类谓之妖。
现代文：解释说：凡是草木之类出现的怪异都叫做妖。
English: Explanation: All plants and trees are called demons.

古文：妖犹夭胎，言尚微。
现代文：妖就是妖胎，就是说还微而未显。
English: The demon is the fetus of the demon, that is to say, it is small and does not appear.

古文：虫豸之类谓之孽。
现代文：虫豸之类的怪异叫做孽。
English: Insect larvae and the like are called maggots.

古文：孽则牙孽矣。
现代文：孽就是妖孽。
English: Evil is evil.

古文：及六畜谓之祸，言其著也。
现代文：孽生长在牛羊等六畜身上，叫做祸，是说怪异显著。
English: Wickedness grows on six animals, such as cattle and sheep, and is called woe, which means that it is strange and remarkable.

古文：及人，谓之，病貌，言浸深也。
现代文：孽发生在人的身上，叫做疴。痫，就是病状，说明病情变得严重了。
English: Evil happens to people, it's called epilepsy. Epilepsy is a medical condition, which means that the condition has become serious.

古文：甚则异物生，谓之眚；自外来，谓之祥，祥犹祯也。
现代文：甚至生成异物，叫做眚；如是异物由外界而来，则叫做祥。祥也就是祯。
English: If the foreign body comes from the outside, it is called xiang. Xiang is also known as cormorant.

古文：气相伤，谓之沴。
现代文：气的相互侵伤，叫做诊。
English: For gas injuries, it's called a clinic.

古文：沴犹临莅，不和意也。
现代文：渗有如来临不和的意思。
English: "Diagnostic" is like "superior," which means "incompatible."

古文：每一事云 时则 以绝之，言非必俱至，或有或亡，或在前或在后也。
现代文：每种情况都用 时有发生 作结语，就是说不是事情全部或必然这样，而是或有或无，有时发生在事前，有时发生在事后。
English: Each case is concluded by the words "sometimes" or "occasionally," that is to say, it is not all or necessarily so, but "sometimes" or "sometimes not," sometimes before, sometimes after.

古文：孝武时，夏侯始昌通《五经》，善推《五行传》，以传族子夏侯胜，下及许商，皆以教所贤弟子。
现代文：汉孝武帝的时候，夏侯始昌通晓《五经》，善于推衍发扬《五行传》，把学术传给了他的本家子侄夏侯胜，然后往下传到许商，代代相续都把学术教给自己的得意门生。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowu, Xia Hou Shichang was familiar with the "Five Classics" and was good at calculating the "Five Elements." He passed it on to his cousin Xia Hou Sheng, and later to Xu Shang, both of whom used it to teach their wise disciples.

古文：其传与刘向同，唯刘歆传独异。
现代文：他们的传注解说与刘向的说法相同，衹有刘歆作的传注有所不同。
English: Their transcription commentary is the same as Liu Xiang's, but the transcription with Liu Xuan is different.

古文：貌之不恭，是谓不肃。
现代文：态度不恭敬，这叫做不严肃。
English: Disrespectful appearance, this is called shamelessness.

古文：肃，敬也。
现代文：肃就是恭敬。
English: "Shu" means respect.

古文：内曰恭，外曰敬。
现代文：内在为恭，外边为敬。
English: Inwardly respectful, outwardly respectful.

古文：人君行己，体貌不恭，怠慢骄蹇，则不能敬万事，失在狂易，故其咎狂也。
现代文：国君自己的言谈举止，如果仪表态度不恭敬，表现得怠慢骄横，就不能认真对待国家各项事务，失误的原因是由于狂妄、轻率而没有常性。
English: If the speech and demeanor of the sovereign himself are not respectful, if he behaves carelessly and arrogantly, he cannot take the various affairs of the country seriously. The reason for the mistakes is due to arrogance, imprudence and lack of constancy.

古文：上嫚下暴，则阴气胜，故其罚常雨也。
现代文：所以错就错在一个狂字上。国君轻侮不以民意为怀，臣下残暴害民，就造成阴气盛，所以天帝就用大雨不停作为惩罚。
English: Therefore, the mistake was made on a wild character. The ruler of the country did not take the people's opinion into account, and the vassals brutally harmed the people, causing a gloomy mood, so the emperor used heavy rain as a punishment.

古文：水伤百谷，衣食不足，则奸轨并作，故其极恶也。
现代文：大水损伤百谷，百姓衣食不足，这样就造成作奸犯科图谋不轨一起发生，所以说它后果特别严重。
English: The floods have caused damage to hundreds of villages, and people are short of food and clothing. This has caused the perpetrators of crimes to conspire together, so it is said that the consequences are particularly serious.

古文：一曰，民多被刑，或形貌丑恶，亦是也。
现代文：有一种说法认为，黎民百姓很多受到刑罚，以致有的造成肢体残缺、形貌丑陋，也会引起大雨不停。
English: There is a saying that many of the Lebanese people have been punished, so that some have caused limbs to be mutilated and ugly, and will also cause heavy rain to continue.

古文：风俗狂慢，变节易度，则为剽轻奇怪之服，故有服妖。
现代文：社会风气狂妄轻浮，改变时令更换制度，人们就会喜欢剽悍轻薄奇形怪状的服饰，所以出现服妖。
English: The culture and customs are insanely arrogant and have changed the rules of etiquette. Strange and bizarre clothing will appear, so there are strange clothes.

古文：水类动，故有龟孽。
现代文：水族动乱，因而出现龟孽。
English: Water moves, therefore there is evil.

古文：于《易》， 巽 为鸡，鸡有冠距文武之貌。
现代文：在《易经》上，《巽》的卦象是鸡，鸡有高耸的鶸冠和坚利的距爪，是文武官员的形貌。
English: In the "I Ching," the gaga of "Chi" is like a chicken, the chicken has a towering crest and strong talons, and is the appearance of a literary and military official.

古文：不为威仪，貌气毁，故有鸡祸。
现代文：不修威严的仪表，形貌气度受损，因而产生鶸祸。
English: If the dignified appearance is not maintained, the appearance and dignity will be damaged, resulting in bad luck.

古文：一曰，水岁鸡多死及为怪，亦是也。
现代文：有一种说法是，水灾年鶸多死以及出现怪异，也是这样。
English: There is a theory that this is also the case for the many deaths and strange occurrences in the flood years.

古文：上失威仪，则下有强臣害君上者，故有下体生于上之痾。
现代文：国君没有威仪，就会有强臣以下犯上之事，所以就出现下体长在上身的畸形。
English: If the sovereign does not have dignity, there will be things committed by the powerful ministers, so there will be a deformity of the lower body growing into the upper body.

古文：木色青、故有青眚青祥。
现代文：草木的颜色是青的，所以有青眚、青祥。
English: The color of grass and trees is blue, so there are Qingcheng and Qingxiang.

古文：凡貌伤者病木气，木气病则金沴之，冲气相通也。
现代文：凡是形貌有伤就是木气受损，木气损伤就会引来金气之害，气之间的冲撞是相通互连的。
English: Any damage to the appearance is wood gas disease, wood gas disease, the gold will crack the wood, this is the impact of gas.

古文：于《易》， 震 在东方，为春为木也； 兑 在西方，为秋为金也； 离 在南方，为夏为火也； 坎 在北方，为冬为水也。
现代文：在《易经》上，《震》在东方，代表着春天和木气；《兑》在西方，代表着秋天和金气；《离》在南方，代表着夏天和火气；《坎》在北方，代表着冬天和水气。
English: In the I Ching, "Zhen" in the east represents spring and wood gas; "Du" in the west represents autumn and gold gas; "Yi" in the south represents summer and fire gas; "Kan" in the north represents winter and water gas.

古文：春与秋，日夜分，寒暑平，是以金木之气易以相变，故貌伤则致秋阴常雨，言伤则致春阳常旱也。
现代文：春天与秋天一样，都是日夜等分，寒暑适中，因此金木之气容易相互变化，所以，形貌仪态有失，就导致秋季的连阴天老下雨；而言论有失就导致春季多晴天而持久干旱。
English: Spring, like autumn, is equally divided into day and night, with moderate cold and heat. As a result, the temperament of gold and wood is easy to change. Therefore, if there is a loss of shape and form, it will lead to continuous cloudy days and rain in autumn; if there is a loss, it will lead to more sunny days and prolonged drought in spring.

古文：至于冬夏，日夜相反，寒暑殊绝，水火之气不得相并，故视伤常奥，听伤常寒者，其气然也。
现代文：至于说到冬天与夏天，一是夜长曰短，一是曰长夜短，情况正好相反，一寒一热相差悬殊，水火二气不能相合相容。所以，眼光有误就会持续高温；听觉有失就会常冷不暖，气的运行就是这样。
English: As for winter and summer, one is long night and one is short night, the situation is just the opposite. Cold and heat are very different, and water and fire are incompatible. Therefore, if there is a vision error, the high temperature will continue; if there is a hearing loss, it will be cold and not warm, and the operation of gas is like this.

古文：逆之，其极曰恶；顺之，其福曰攸好德。
现代文：违反了运行规律，其后果相当可怕；顺其自然，有福降临，即所谓好德而得善报。
English: Rebellion, its extreme, is called evil; compliance, its blessing, is called virtue.

古文：刘韵貌传曰有鳞虫之孽，羊祸，鼻。
现代文：刘歆所作的虚夸不实的传注上说，有鳞虫之孽、羊祸、鼻疴。
English: According to the boastful and untruthful report made by Liu Bei, there will be a plague of scabies, a plague of sheep, and a boil on the nose.

古文：说以为于天文东方辰为龙星，故为鳞虫；于《易》， 兑 为羊，木为金所病，故致羊祸，与常雨同应。
现代文：他解说为在天文上，东方的星辰是龙星，所以是长鳞的动物；在《易经》上，《兑》卦以羊为物象，木被金所伤，就要导致羊祸出现，与常雨不停的报应相同。
English: He explained that in astronomy, the star in the east is a dragon star, so it is a long-scaled animal; in the I Ching, Dui Gua uses a sheep as an object, and if a tree is injured by gold, it will lead to a sheep disaster, which is the same as the continuous rain.

古文：此说非是。
现代文：这种说法不对。
English: This is not true.

古文：春与秋，气阴阳相敌，木病金盛，故能相并，唯此一事耳。
现代文：春天与秋天一样，都是阴阳之气相等，木衰则金盛，所以能相兼并合，就是这样一种情况。
English: Spring and autumn are the same, both yin and yang are equal, wood decay is golden, so they can merge, this is such a situation.

古文：祸与妖？祥、眚同类，不得独异。
现代文：祸与妖、病、祥、眚一样，不会有特别的不同。
English: Woe is the same as demon, disease, auspiciousness, and misfortune, and there is no particular difference.

古文：史记成公十六年，公会诸侯于周，单襄公见晋厉公视远步高，告公曰： 晋将有乱。 
现代文：历史上记载在鲁成公十六年，成公与诸侯在周会盟，周朝的卿士单襄公看见晋厉公走路时两眼远视，脚步高台的样子，就对鲁成公说： 晋国要出乱子了。 
English: It is recorded in history that in the 16th year of Lu Chenggong, Chenggong and the princes were in the Zhou League, and the Zhou Dynasty's noblemen, Shan Xianggong, saw Jin Liguo's two far-sighted eyes when he walked and his high-stepping gait, and said to Lu Chenggong: "There will be chaos in Jin."

古文：鲁侯曰： 敢问天道也？抑人故也？ 
现代文：成公说： 请问这是天意，还是人的原因呢？ 
English: Cheng Gong said, "Please tell me, is this the will of heaven, or is it due to human reasons?

古文：对曰： 吾非瞽史，焉知天道？
现代文：单襄公回答说： 我不是算卦的乐太师或太史公，怎能知道天道？
English: Shan Xiang replied, "I am not a music master or historian of divination, how can I know the way of heaven?

古文：吾见晋君之容，殆必祸者也。
现代文：我是看见晋君的造副尊容，估计晋国必将有灾祸发生。
English: When I saw the dignified countenance of the prince of Jin, I estimated that a disaster would surely occur in Jin.

古文：夫君子目以定体，足以从之，是以观其容而知其心矣。
现代文：君子的目光出自身体的稳定，两脚依从目光，所以观察他的面容神态，就可以知道他的心志了。
English: A gentleman's gaze reflects the stability of his body, and his feet follow his gaze. Therefore, observing his facial expression, you can know his mind.

古文：目以处谊，足以步目。
现代文：目光远近适宜，脚步由目光指挥，步伐自然稳健。
English: Eyesight far and near is appropriate, steps are directed by the eyes, and the pace is naturally steady.

古文：晋侯视远而足高，目不在体，而足不步目，其心必异矣。
现代文：晋侯眼往远处看而脚抬得很高，这是目光脱离了身体，脚步脱离了目光，他的心志必是发生了变异。
English: Jin Hou's eyes look far away and his feet are raised high. This is because his eyes are detached from his body, his steps are detached from his eyes, and his mind must have changed.

古文：目、体不相从，何以能久？
现代文：眼睛与身体不相依从，还怎么能长久下去呢？
English: If the eyes and the body do not depend on each other, how can it continue for a long time?

古文：夫合诸侯，民之大事也，于是乎观存亡。
现代文：再说会合诸侯是关系民众的大事啊，从这裹可以观察到兴衰存亡的契机或端倪。
English: Furthermore, the gathering of the lords is an important matter concerning the people, and from this we can observe the rise and fall of the opportunity or hint of survival.

古文：故国将无咎，其君在会，步、言、视、听必皆无谪，则可以知德矣。
现代文：所以国家如果没有灾祸，国君在会盟上的言谈举止、观瞻耳闻必然都正确得体，无可指责。这样也就可以知道他的德行了。
English: Therefore, if there is no calamity in the country, the speech, behavior, observation and hearing of the sovereign at the meeting of the League must be correct and proper, beyond reproach. In this way, you can know his virtue.

古文：视远，曰绝其谊；足高，曰弃其德；言爽，曰反其信；听淫，曰离其名。
现代文：目光过远就是断绝了他的道义；脚拾得过高就是舍弃道德；说话爽而不实就是违反信义；耳听不正之言就是背离名分。
English: To look too far is to sever one's morality; to lift one's feet too high is to abandon morality; to speak boldly but untruthfully is to violate one's integrity; to listen to dishonest words is to deviate from one's duty.

古文：夫目以处谊，足以践德，口以庇信，耳以听名者也，故不可不慎。
现代文：人的眼睛用来观察正义，脚步用来履行仁德，口用来维护信义，耳朵用来聆听号令。所以目视、耳闻、言谈、举止都不能不慎重。
English: One's eyes are used to observe justice, one's feet are used to fulfill benevolence, one's mouth is used to maintain truthfulness, and one's ears are used to listen to orders. Therefore, one must not be careless in seeing, hearing, speaking, or behaving.

古文：偏丧有咎；既丧，则国从之。
现代文：一有偏颇之失就要出现差错和灾难，若是完全丧失规范失去控制，整个国家也就跟着陷入灾祸。
English: If there is a partial failure, there will be mistakes and disasters. If there is a complete loss of norms and control, the whole country will also fall into disaster.

古文：晋侯爽二，吾是以云。 
现代文：晋侯现在是失去了其中的两个方面，我是就此而做出这一判断的。 
English: Jinhou has now lost two of these aspects, which is why I have made this judgment.

古文：后二年，晋人杀厉公。
现代文：两年之后，晋国人杀死丁晋厉公。
English: Two years later, the people of Jin killed Ding Jin Li Gong.

古文：凡此属，皆貌不恭之咎云。
现代文：凡是这类情况，都是态度不恭所导致的灾祸。
English: In all such cases, it is the attitude that leads to disaster.

古文：《左氏传》桓公十三年，楚屈瑕伐罗，斗伯比送之，还谓其驭曰： 莫嚣必败，举止高，心不固矣。 
现代文：《左氏传》载桓公十三年，楚国的莫嚣屈瑕受命讨伐罗国，斗伯比送行，送行回来的路上，斗伯比对驾车人说： 莫嚣这次打仗一定会失败，他走路时脚抬得很高，说明他的心志不稳了。 
English: In the thirteenth year of the reign of King Huan of Chu, Morohan of Chu was ordered to fight against Luo. On the way back from seeing him off, Morohan said to the driver: "Morohan will surely fail in this battle. When he walks, his feet are raised very high, indicating that his mind is not stable."

古文：遽见楚子以告。
现代文：回到朝廷就马上觐见楚王，把这一情况作了禀告。
English: When he returned to the imperial court, he immediately met with King Chu and made an obituary of this situation.

古文：楚子使赖人追之，弗及。
现代文：楚王派在楚当官的一个赖国人去追还莫嚣，没追上。
English: The king of Chu sent a Lai Guo person, who was a high-ranking official in Chu, to chase after Mo Ran, but he did not catch up with him.

古文：莫嚣行，遂无次，且不设备。
现代文：莫嚣率军前进，果然队列不整，而且不作应有的防备。
English: Mo Hanran led the army forward, and sure enough, the queue was not in order, and they did not take proper precautions.

古文：及罗，罗人军之，大败。
现代文：到了罗国，罗国人发起进攻，楚军大败。
English: When they reached Luo Province, the Luo people launched an attack, and the Chu army was soundly defeated.

古文：莫嚣缢死。
现代文：莫嚣自缢身亡。
English: He committed suicide by hanging himself.

古文：釐公十一年，周使内史过赐晋惠公命，受玉，惰。
现代文：僖公十一年，周王派内史过把命圭赏赐给晋惠公，晋惠公接受圭玉时，态度怠慢而不积极。
English: In the eleventh year of Emperor Xizong's reign, King Zhou sent a messenger to King Jinhui to reward him with the key to life. When Jinhui accepted the key, his attitude was negligent and not active.

古文：过归告王曰： 晋侯其无后乎！
现代文：过回朝禀告周王说： 晋侯将不能继续享受封国爵位了！
English: After returning to the Imperial Court, Zhou Wang said: Jin Hou will not be able to continue to enjoy the title of nobility!

古文：王赐之命，而惰于受瑞，先自弃也已，其何继之有！
现代文：天子赐命圭给他，他却懒于接受这一福瑞，这是自己先放弃了自己的福瑞，那还有什么继续可言！
English: The Son of God gave him a mandate, but he was too lazy to accept this blessing. He gave up his own blessing first, so what else is there to say!

古文：礼，国之干也；敬，礼之舆也。
现代文：礼是立国之本；敬是礼的基础。
English: Courtesy is the foundation of a nation; respect is the foundation of courtesy.

古文：不敬则礼不行，礼不行则上下昏，何以长世！ 
现代文：没有敬就不能遵行礼仪，礼仪得不到遵行必然上上下下浑浑噩噩昏庸不堪，还怎能永世长存！ 
English: Without respect, it is impossible to follow etiquette, and if etiquette is not followed, it will inevitably be muddled up and down, and how can it last forever!

古文：二十一年，晋惠公卒，子怀公立，晋人杀之，更立文公。
现代文：二：十一年，晋惠公去世，他的儿子晋怀公立为国君，晋国人杀了怀公，改立了晋文公。
English: Two: In the eleventh year, Prince Jin Huigong died, and his son Prince Jin Huigong became the sovereign. The people of Jin killed Prince Huigong and replaced him with Prince Jinwen.

古文：成公十三年，晋侯使郤绮乞师于鲁，将事不敬。
现代文：成公十三年，晋侯派却锜到鲁国来求援军，奉行君命却不敬重其事。
English: In the thirteenth year of Chenggong, the Jin faction came to Lu to ask for reinforcements, but they did not respect the king's order.

古文：孟献子曰： 郤氏其亡乎！
现代文：孟献子说： 邵氏要灭亡了吧！
English: Meng Xianzi said, "Shao is about to perish!

古文：礼，身之干也；敬，身之基也。
现代文：礼是身家性命的支柱；敬是立身的根基。
English: Courtesy is the pillar of one's life; respect is the foundation of one's standing.

古文：郤子无基。
现代文：部子已失去根基。
English: The ministry has lost its foundation.

古文：且先君之嗣卿也，受命以求师，将社稷是卫，而惰弃君命也，不亡何为！ 
现代文：况且他作为其父卿位的继承人，接受国君的命令来求兵，就是为了保卫社稷，却如此懈怠而弃君令于不顾，怎么能不灭亡呢！ 
English: Moreover, as the heir to his father's title of nobility, he accepted the order of the sovereign to solicit soldiers, that is, to defend the community, but he was so lazy and disregarded the sovereign's order, how could he not perish!

古文：十七年，郤氏亡。
现代文：成公十七年，邵氏果然灭亡。
English: Seventeen years after his accession to the throne, Shao died.

古文：成公十三年，诸侯朝王，遂从刘康公伐秦。
现代文：成公十三年，诸侯们朝见周王，然后跟从周大夫刘康公去征伐秦国。
English: In the thirteenth year of King Chenggong's reign, the princes went to see King Zhou in the morning, and then followed Zhou's doctor Liu Kang to conquer Qin.

古文：成肃公受脤于社，不敬。
现代文：周大夫成肃公在社神庙接受祭肉时，怠慢无礼。
English: Dr. Zhou Cheng Su Gong was negligent and disrespectful when he received the sacrificial meat at the shrine temple.

古文：刘子曰： 吾闻之曰，民受天地之中以生，所谓命也。
现代文：刘康公说： 我听人说，百姓承受天地间的中和之气而降生，即所谓天命。
English: Liu Kang said: I have heard people say that people are born under the influence of the balance between heaven and earth, which is the so-called "mandate of heaven."

古文：是以有礼义动作威仪之则，以定命也。
现代文：因此就有礼义的举止和礼仪细节的规则来保护和稳定生命。
English: Therefore, there are rules of etiquette and etiquette details to protect and stabilize life.

古文：能者养以之福，不能者败以取祸，是故君子勤礼，小人尽力。
现代文：能够遵守规则的，就能护养生命而得福；不遵守规则的，就败坏生命而取祸。所以君子尽心于礼，小人竭尽出力。
English: Those who can abide by the rules can protect their lives and gain blessings; those who do not abide by the rules will corrupt their lives and bring misfortune. Therefore, a gentleman is dedicated to courtesy, and a villain is dedicated to effort.

古文：勤礼莫如致敬，尽力莫如惇笃。
现代文：尽心于礼，没有比恭敬更重要的了；竭尽出力，没有比敦厚老实更重要的了。
English: Nothing is more important than courtesy; nothing is more important than sincerity; nothing is more important than hard work.

古文：敬在养神，笃在守业。
现代文：国家的大事就在于祭祀与征战。
English: The important thing for the country is the ritual and the march to war.

古文：国之大事，在祀与戎。祀有执膰，戎有受脤，神之大节也。今成子惰，弃其命矣，其不反乎！ 五月，成肃公卒。
现代文：祭祀有向参祭者分肉之礼，出兵祭社有以牲肉颁赐众人之礼，这些都是祭神通神的大礼大节啊现在成肃公对此表现得怠慢不敬，就是抛弃自己的生命不要了，他的命运将无法挽回了！ 这年五月，成肃公去世。
English: Sacrifices include the gift of meat to the participants, and the troop-sending ceremony includes the gift of meat to the people. These are all great feasts of worshiping the gods, and now Cheng Su Gong has shown disrespect, that is, he did not want to give up his life, and his fate will be irretrievable! This May, Cheng Su Gong died.

古文：成公十四年，卫定公享苦成叔，甯惠子相。
现代文：成公十四年，卫定公宴请晋国大夫苦成叔，卫国大夫宁惠子作陪。
English: In the 14th year of the reign of Emperor Chenggong, the Emperor Weidong invited the doctor of the State Council, Uncle Ku Cheng, and the doctor of the State Council, Ning Huizi, to accompany him at a public banquet.

古文：苦成叔敖，甯曰： 苦成家其亡乎！
现代文：苦成叔的态度傲慢无礼，宁惠子说： 苦成叔家可能要亡了！
English: Uncle Kuching's attitude is arrogant and rude, Ning Huizi said: Uncle Kuching's family may be about to die!

古文：古之为享食也，以观威仪省祸福也。
现代文：古代举行享食之礼，是用来观察威仪、省察祸福的。
English: In ancient times, the ceremony of feasting was held to observe dignities and reflect on misfortunes and blessings.

古文：故《诗》曰： 兕觥其觩，旨酒思柔，匪敖匪傲，万福来求。 今夫子傲，取祸之道也。 
现代文：所以《诗经》上说： 兕觥如虬，美酒味柔。不妄不傲，万福成就，今天这位夫子竟如此傲慢，这是取祸之道啊！ 
English: Therefore, the "Song of Songs" said: "The gourd is sweet as honey, and the wine is sweet as honey. No arrogance, no pride, and all good fortune. Today, this master is so arrogant. This is the way to bring about disaster!"

古文：后三年，苦成家亡。
现代文：三年后，苦成家败人亡。
English: Three years later, Su Cheng Jia lost his life.

古文：襄公七年，卫孙文子聘于鲁，君登亦登。
现代文：襄公七年，卫国大夫孙文子出访鲁国。礼仪上，鲁襄公登一台阶，孙文子也并肩登上。
English: In the seventh year of Emperor Xianggong's reign, Sun Wenzi, the doctor of national defense, visited Lu. In the etiquette, Emperor Xianggong of Lu ascended one step, and Sun Wenzi also ascended side by side.

古文：叔孙穆子相，趋进曰： 诸侯之会，寡君未尝后卫君。
现代文：鲁国大夫叔孙穆子做赞相礼官，急忙赶过来对孙文子说： 在诸侯会盟之时，我们国君未曾让卫君走在后面。
English: Sun Muzi, the uncle of the Grand Duke of Lu, who was the minister of praise and etiquette, hurried over to Sun Wenzi and said: At the time of the alliance of princes, our sovereign did not let Wei Jun walk behind.

古文：今吾子不后寡君，寡君未知所过，吾子其少安！
现代文：今天你不甘走在我们国君的后面，我们国君不知是错在哪裹了，还是请先生您步子放慢些吧！ 
English: Today, you are unwilling to walk behind our sovereign. I don't know where our sovereign went wrong, but please, sir, slow down your pace!

古文：孙子亡辞，亦亡悛容。
现代文：孙文子无言以对，但也没有歉意的表示。
English: Sun Wenzi was speechless, but did not apologize.

古文：穆子曰： 孙子必亡，为臣而君，过而不悛，亡之本也。 
现代文：叔孙穆子说： 孙文子必将灭亡。作为臣子却有国君的派头，错了还不改正，这是灭亡的根本原因。 
English: Uncle Sun Mu Zi said: Sun Wenzi will surely perish. As a vassal, he has the pomp of a sovereign, and he does not correct his mistakes. This is the root cause of his demise.

古文：十四年，孙子逐其君而外叛。
现代文：襄公十四年，孙文子驱逐了卫君而叛变外国。
English: In the 14th year of the reign of Emperor Xiang, Sun Wenzi expelled Emperor Wei and rebelled abroad.

古文：襄公二十八年，蔡景侯归自晋，入于郑。
现代文：襄公二十八年，蔡景侯从晋国回国，途经郑国。
English: In the 28th year of the reign of Emperor Xiang, Cai Jinghou returned from Jin via Zheng.

古文：郑伯享之，不敬。
现代文：郑伯设宴款待他，他席间不礼貌。
English: Zheng Bo set up a banquet to entertain him, but he was rude during the meal.

古文：子产曰： 蔡君其不免乎！
现代文：郑国大夫子产说： 蔡君将不免于灾祸了！
English: Dr. Zheng Guo said: Cai Jun will not be spared from disaster!

古文：曰其过此也，君使子展往劳于东门，而敖。
现代文：往他去晋国时路过这裹，国君派子展到国都东门去慰劳他，他却表现得傲慢。
English: When he passed by here on his way to Jin, the sovereign sent his son Zenn to the east gate of the capital to console him, but he behaved arrogantly.

古文：吾曰： 犹将更之。 今还，受享而惰，乃其心也。
现代文：我说： 这是能够改正的，现在他回国又途经这裹，接受宴请而怠惰无礼，这说明他的心地就是如此。
English: I said: This can be corrected, and now he is going back to his country and passing through here, accepting a banquet and being lazy and rude, which shows that his heart is like this.

古文：君小国，事大国，而惰敖以为己心，将得死乎？
现代文：身为小国之君，事奉大国，却把傲慢当作自己的心志和风格，将来能得好死吗？
English: As a prince of a small country, serving a big country, but taking arrogance as his spirit and style, will he be able to die well in the future?

古文：君若不免，必由其子。
现代文：如不免于灾祸，必然来自他的儿子。
English: If calamity comes, it will come from his son.

古文：淫而不父，如是者必有子祸。 
现代文：他行为淫乱丧失了做父亲的资格，其结果必有来自儿子的杀身之祸。 
English: His act of fornication forfeited his qualification to be a father, and the result was certain to be the death of his son.

古文：三十年，为世子般所杀。
现代文：襄公三十年，终被世子般所杀。
English: For thirty years, Prince Xiang was killed like a son of the world.

古文：襄公三十一年，公薨。
现代文：襄公三十一年，襄公去世。
English: In the 31st year of Prince Xiang, Prince Xiang passed away.

古文：季武子将立公子裯，穆叔曰： 是人也，居丧而不哀，在戚而有嘉容，是谓不度。
现代文：季武子要立公子裯为鲁国之君，穆叔说： 这个人啊，服丧没有哀痛之情，在悲伤期间却面露喜容，这叫不遵礼规。
English: When Ji Wuzi wanted to make him the ruler of Lu, Mu Shu said, "This man, in mourning, has no feeling of sorrow, but during the time of sorrow, he shows a happy face. This is called not following the rules of etiquette."

古文：不度之人，鲜不为患。
现代文：不守礼规的人，很少有不带来祸害的。
English: Few people who do not observe the rules of etiquette do not bring harm.

古文：若果立，必为季氏忧。 
现代文：如果是立他为君，必成为季氏的隐患。 
English: If he were to be appointed, he would become a hidden danger to Mr. Ji.

古文：武子弗听，卒立之。
现代文：季武子不听，终于立公子裯当了国君。
English: Ji Wuxi did not listen, and finally made Gongzixi the ruler of the country.

古文：比及葬，三易衰，衰衽如故衰。
现代文：到为襄公举行葬礼的时候，这位新君三次更换孝服，刚穿上的孝服很快弄脏，跟旧孝服一样。
English: By the time of the funeral for Prince Xiang, the new prince had changed his filial piety three times. The filial piety he had just put on quickly got dirty, just like the old filial piety.

古文：是为昭公。
现代文：他就是鲁昭公。
English: He is Lu Zhaogong.

古文：立二十五年，听谗攻季氏。
现代文：即位后二十五年，听信谗言而攻打季氏。
English: Twenty-five years after he ascended the throne, he listened to his advisors and attacked the Ji clan.

古文：兵败，出奔，死于外。
现代文：兵败，出逃，死在国外。
English: Defeated, fled, died abroad.

古文：襄公三十一年，卫北宫文子见楚令尹围之仪，言于卫侯曰： 令尹似君矣，将有它志；虽获其志，弗能终也。 
现代文：襄公三十一年，卫国大夫北宫文子看到楚国令尹围的仪容，对卫侯说： 令尹像国君的气派了，可能心怀异志；不过就是实现了他的志向，也不能长久保持。 
English: In the 31st year of Emperor Xianggong's reign, Bei Gong Fumiko, the doctor of national defense, saw the appearance of Yinwei, the governor of Chu, and said to Wei Hou, "Yinwei has the air of a sovereign, and he may harbor a different ambition; however, even if he achieves his ambition, he cannot maintain it for long.

古文：公曰： 子何以知之？ 
现代文：卫侯说： 你怎么会知道？ 
English: Jing Gong said, "On what basis do you know this?

古文：对曰： 《诗》云 敬慎威仪，惟民之则 ，令尹无威仪，民无则焉。
现代文：回答说： 《诗经》上说 在上边的要虔敬谨慎自己的威仪，好做下民的榜样 ，这位令尹没有像样的威仪，百姓也就没有标准可循了。
English: He replied, "The Book of Songs says that those above should be pious and careful of their dignity, so that they can serve as an example for the people below. This man has deprived Yin of proper dignity, and the people have no standard to follow.

古文：民所不则，以在民上，不可以终。 
现代文：百姓不可效法的人，却居于百姓之上，是不可能善终的。 
English: It is impossible for those who live above the people, but who cannot be imitated by the people, to have a happy ending.

古文：昭公十一年夏，周单子会于戚，视下言徐。
现代文：昭公十一年夏季，周朝大夫单子在戚地与诸侯相会。
English: In the summer of the eleventh year of the reign of King Zhaogong, Zhou Dynasty doctor Shan Zi met with the princes at a relative's place.

古文：晋叔向曰： 单子其死乎！
现代文：他目光向下说话迟缓。晋国大夫叔向说： 单子快要死了！
English: He looked down and spoke slowly. Uncle Jin Guo said: Shan Zi is about to die!

古文：朝有著定，会有表，衣有襘，带有结。
现代文：朝见时，朝廷上设有固定的席位；野外会见时，也有排列次序的标志。衣领有交会之处，衣带有交叉纽系之结。
English: When meeting in the morning, there is a fixed seat in the imperial court; when meeting outdoors, there is also a sign of the order of arrangement. The collar has a meeting place, and the clothing has a cross-knot.

古文：会朝之言必闻于表著之位，所以昭事序也；视不过结襘之中，所以道容貌也。
现代文：会见或朝见，讲话的声音必须达到每个定好的位置以使列席者听到，从而把事情讲得明白；而目光则应在衣领交会与衣带纽结的中间，以便表示神情仪态。
English: In a meeting or audience, the voice of the speaker must reach every fixed point for the audience to hear, and thus make things clear; and the eyes should be in the middle of the collar meeting with the tie knot, in order to express the look and manner.

古文：言以命之，空貌以明之，失则有阙。
现代文：言语用以发布命令，仪态神情用以表明态度，做不到就会造成失误。
English: Words are used to issue orders, gestures are used to show attitude, and failure to do so will result in mistakes.

古文：今单子为王官伯，而命事于会，视不登带，言不过步，貌不道容而言不昭矣。
现代文：今天单子作为周天子的百官之长，在传达王命的会盟上，目光不高过衣带，声音传不出一步，仪容不能让人看态度，言词不能让人听得明白。
English: Today, as the chief of the hundred officials of Zhou Tianzi, in the alliance to convey the king's life, the eyes are not higher than the waistband, the voice cannot be heard, the appearance cannot be seen, and the words cannot be heard clearly.

古文：不道不恭，不昭不从，无守气矣。 
现代文：态度不明朗，人们不会恭敬，语言不明白人们就难以从命。他没有守身的底气了。 
English: His attitude is unclear, people will not be respectful, and if they do not understand the language, it will be difficult for them to follow his orders. He no longer has the strength to protect himself.

古文：十二月，单成公卒。
现代文：这年十二月，单子去世。
English: In December of that year, Shan Zi passed away.

古文：昭公二十一年三月，葬蔡平公，蔡太子朱失位，位在卑。
现代文：昭公二十一年三月，安葬蔡平公，蔡国太子朱所在的位置不对，他被排在身份低下的人的位置上。
English: In March of the twenty-first year of Zhaogong, Cai Pinggong was buried, and the position of Cai Guofei Zhu was wrong. He was ranked in the position of a person with low status.

古文：鲁大夫送葬者归告昭子。
现代文：参加葬礼的鲁国大夫回国后把这件事告诉了昭子。
English: Dr. Luko, who attended the funeral, told Akiko about this after returning home.

古文：昭子叹曰： 蔡其亡乎！
现代文：昭子叹惜说： 蔡国要亡了吧！
English: Akiko sighed and said, "Cai Guo is going to die!

古文：若不亡，是君也必不终。
现代文：就是不亡，这位新国君也必然不能善终。
English: Even if he does not die, this new sovereign will not have a happy ending.

古文：《诗》曰： 不解于位，民之攸塈。 今始即位而适卑，身将从之。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 在执政之位上不懈怠，民众就能得到安定，如今刚即位却屈尊于卑下的位置，以后他整个人也将随之而下，失去君位。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "He who does not slacken his pace in ruling will bring stability to the people. He who has just ascended to the throne has stooped to a lowly position. In the future, his whole person will follow suit and lose his royal position."

古文：十月，蔡侯朱出奔楚。
现代文：当年十月，这位新蔡侯朱逃到楚国。
English: In October of that year, the new Cai Hou Zhu fled to Chu.

古文：晋魏舒合诸侯之大夫于翟泉，将以城成周。
现代文：晋国的魏舒在翟泉与诸侯各国派来的大夫们会见，要加修成周的城防。
English: Wei Shu of Jin met with the doctors sent by the princes of various countries in Jiuquan to improve the city's defenses.

古文：魏子莅政，卫彪傒曰： 将建天子，而易位以令，非谊也。
现代文：魏舒代替周天子的大夫掌管此事，卫国大夫彪俣说： 要建天子之城，就改居君位来发号施令，是不合乎礼仪的。
English: Wei Shu took charge of the matter in place of Zhou Tianzi's doctor, and Wei Guo Daofu Bumata said: To build the city of Tianzi, it is not proper etiquette to change your position to give orders.

古文：大事奸谊，必有大咎。
现代文：在大事上违犯礼仪，必定有大灾大难。
English: If you violate etiquette in a big event, you are sure to have a big disaster.

古文：晋不失诸侯，魏子其不免乎！ 
现代文：即使晋国不丧失诸侯之位，魏舒也难免灾祸！ 
English: Even if Jin did not lose its status as a vassal state, Wei and Shu would still be doomed to disaster!

古文：是行也，魏献子属役于韩简子，而田于大陆，焚焉而死。
现代文：这次修城，魏舒把事情交给韩简子负责，自己却到旷野去打猎，在那裹放火驱赶动物，死在那里。
English: This time, Wei Shu entrusted the task of rebuilding the city to Han Jianzi, but he himself went hunting in the wilderness, where he set fire to drive away the animals and died there.

古文：定公十五年，邾隐公朝于鲁，执玉高，其容仰。
现代文：定公十五年，邾隐公来朝见鲁公，邾隐公高高地拿着玉圭，仰着脸。
English: In the fifteenth year of the reign of King Ding, King Gongyin came to see King Lu in the morning. King Gongyin held Gyokugei aloft and looked up.

古文：公受玉卑，其容俯。
现代文：鲁公则态度谦卑地接受玉圭，低着头。
English: Mr. Lu humbly accepted the award, bowing his head.

古文：子赣观焉，曰： 以礼观之，二君者皆有死亡焉。
现代文：子贡当时在观礼，他说： 从行礼中可以看到，这两位国君都有要死的征兆。
English: Zigong, who was watching the ceremony, said: "You can see from the ceremony that both emperors were showing signs of death.

古文：夫礼，死生存亡之体也。
现代文：礼，这是生死存亡的根本。
English: This is a matter of life and death.

古文：将左右周施，进退俯仰，于是乎取之；朝祀丧戎，于是乎观之。
现代文：人们的左右周旋、进退俯仰，都要以选取礼来实行；朝会、祭祀、治丧、演武，也都要观察它是否合礼。
English: People's left and right turning, advancing and retreating, and bowing should be carried out with the etiquette of etiquette; the imperial court, rituals, funerals, and martial arts should also observe whether it is appropriate.

古文：今正月相朝，而皆不度，心已亡矣。
现代文：现在正月的朝会，都不合法度，已经没有心思了。
English: Now, the first month's imperial court meeting is not legal, and there is no thought.

古文：嘉事不体，何以能久？
现代文：这样重要的礼仪之事都不合礼制，还怎么能够长久下去？
English: Such a good thing as the morning assembly is not proper, how can it survive for a long time?

古文：高仰，骄也；卑俯，替也。
现代文：高仰脸容是骄傲；俯首是颓废。
English: To look up is pride; to look down is decadence.

古文：骄近乱，替近疾。
现代文：骄傲近乎叛乱，颓废近乎得病。
English: Pride is close to rebellion, decadence is close to illness.

古文：君为主，其先亡乎！ 
现代文：我们鲁君是这次朝会的主人，恐怕要先死吧！ 
English: We, Lu Jun, are the masters of this imperial meeting, I'm afraid we'll have to die first!

古文：庶征之恒雨，刘歆以为《春秋》大雨也。刘向以为大水。
现代文：众多验征中的久雨不停，刘歆认为是《春秋》上的大雨，刘向认为是发大水。
English: It rained for a long time during many inspections, and Liu Wei thought it was heavy rain in Spring and Autumn, and Liu Xiang thought it was heavy rain.

古文：隐公九年 三月癸酉，大雨，震电；庚辰，大雨雪 。
现代文：隐公九年 三月癸酉曰，下大雨，有雷电；庚辰，有大雨雪 。
English: On the third day of March in the ninth year of King Yin, there was heavy rain and lightning; in the ninth year of King Yin, there was heavy rain and snow.

古文：大雨，雨水也；震，雷也。
现代文：大雨就是降水；震是打雷。
English: Heavy rain is precipitation; earthquake is thunder.

古文：刘歆以为三月癸酉，于历数春分后一日，始震电之时也，当雨，而不当大雨。
现代文：刘歆认为三月癸酉，在历法上是春分后的第一天，是开始有雷电的时节，该下雨了，但不该下大雨。
English: Liu Wei believes that the March equinox, which is the first day after the vernal equinox on the calendar, is the time when thunder and lightning begin. It should rain, but it should not rain heavily.

古文：大雨，常雨之罚也。
现代文：大雨是常雨不停的惩罚。
English: Heavy rain is the punishment for incessant rain.

古文：于始震电八日之间而大雨雪，常寒之罚也。
现代文：在开始有雷电的八天之内就下大雪，是常寒不暖的惩罚。
English: Heavy snowfall within eight days of the start of thunder and lightning is a punishment for not being warm enough.

古文：刘向以为周三月，今正月也，当雨水，雪杂雨，雷电未可以发也。
现代文：刘向认为周代的三月，就是今天的正月，已经到了降水的时候，一般是雨雪夹杂，雷电则还不到发生的时候。
English: Liu Xiang believes that the March of Zhou Dynasty, that is, today's New Year, has already arrived at the time of precipitation, usually rain and snow, while thunder and lightning have not yet occurred.

古文：既已发也，则雪不当复降。
现代文：既已有了雷电，雪就不应再降。
English: Once there is lightning, snow should not fall again.

古文：皆失节，故谓之异。
现代文：这都不合节气，所以叫做怪异。
English: It's all unseasonable, that's why it's called weird.

古文：于《易》，雷以二月出，其卦曰 豫 ，言万物随雷出地，皆逸豫也。
现代文：在《易经》上，雷在二月出现，其卦为《豫》卦，是说万物随着雷声从地下萌生而出，都生机勃勃。
English: In the I Ching, thunder begins to appear in February, and its hexagram is Hen, which means that all things sprout from the ground with the sound of thunder and are full of vitality.

古文：以八月入，其卦曰 归妹 ，言雷复归。
现代文：而到了八月雷就消声入地，卦为《归妹》，是说雷又回去了。
English: But by August, the thunder had faded away, and the gossip was "Go back to your sister," which meant that the thunder had returned.

古文：入地则孕毓根核，保藏蛰虫，避盛阴之害；出地则养长华实，发扬隐伏，宣盛阳之德。
现代文：入地就孕育植物的根或核，躲藏蛰伏的动物，使它们避免盛阴的伤害；出地则培养增长使其开花结果，发扬隐伏潜在之气，通宣盛阳之生机。
English: Entering the earth, it nurtures the roots or nuclei of plants, and hides the animals that lie dormant, so that they can avoid the harm of the yin and yang; leaving the earth, it cultivates growth to make it blossom and bear fruit, carry forward the latent potential, and promote the vitality of the yang and yang.

古文：入能除害，出能兴利，人君之象也。
现代文：入能除害，出能兴利，这是人君的象征。
English: Put energy into eliminating harm, and get energy out to benefit others. This is the symbol of a gentleman.

古文：是时，隐以弟桓幼，代而摄立。
现代文：当时，鲁隐公因弟弟桓公年纪幼小，而代为君主。
English: At that time, Prince Luyin became the monarch due to the young age of his younger brother Prince Kan.

古文：公子翚见隐居位已久，劝之遂立。
现代文：公子晕见隐公在位已久，就劝他自立为君算了。
English: Seeing that the prince had been on the throne for a long time, he advised him to become independent.

古文：隐既不许，翚惧而易其辞，遂与桓共杀隐。
现代文：隐公不同意，公于晕害怕因此得罪就改变了言词，反诬隐公，于是与桓公一起杀了隐公。
English: Ying Gong did not agree, and Ying Gong was afraid of being offended, so he changed his words, against Ying Gong, and then killed Ying Gong together with Huan Gong.

古文：天见其将然，故正月大雨水而雷电。
现代文：天帝看到将要发生这样的事，就在正月大降雨水加上雷电。
English: Heavenly Father saw that something like this was going to happen, and in the first month, there was a lot of rain and thunder and lightning.

古文：是阳不闭阴，出涉危难而害万物。
现代文：造就是阳气禁闭不住阴气，阴气冒出来造成危难而伤害万物。
English: Creation means that the yang cannot confine the yin, and the yang emerges to cause danger and harm all things.

古文：天戒若曰，为君失时，贼弟佞臣将作乱矣。
现代文：天帝的告诫似乎是说，当国君而坐失时机，邪恶的弟弟和奸臣要作乱了。
English: The heavenly emperor's admonition seems to say that when the sovereign misses the opportunity, the evil brother and the treacherous vassal will make trouble.

古文：后八日大雨雪，阴见间隙而胜阳，篡杀之祸将成也。
现代文：八天后降了大雪，阴气从间隙出来而克胜了阳气，篡位杀身之祸就要发生了。
English: Eight days later, heavy snow fell, the yin came out of the gap and defeated the yang, and the disaster of usurpation was about to happen.

古文：公不寤，后二年而杀。
现代文：隐公没有醒悟，二年后被杀。
English: Hinkō did not come to his senses and was killed two years later.

古文：昭帝始元元年七月，大水雨，自七月至十月。
现代文：汉昭帝始元元年七月，下大雨，从七月下到十月。
English: In July of the first year of the Han Dynasty, heavy rain fell from July to October.

古文：成帝建始三年秋，大雨三十余日；四年九月，大雨十余日。
现代文：汉成帝建始三年秋，大雨连下三十多天；四年九月，大雨十多天。
English: In the autumn of the third year after the founding of the Han Dynasty, it rained for more than 30 days in a row; in September of the fourth year, it rained for more than 10 days.

古文：《左氏传》愍公二年，晋献公使太子申生帅师，公衣之偏衣，佩之金玦。
现代文：《左氏传》载，愍公二年，晋献公派太子申生率军出征，献公让申生穿左右两色的偏衣，佩上金块。
English: According to "The Legend of Zuo," in the second year of Zou Gong, Prince Shen Sheng, the prince of the Jin Dynasty, led the army to go to war. For the dedication, Shen Sheng was allowed to wear the left and right two-colored clothes and put on gold.

古文：狐突叹曰： 时，事之征也；衣，身之章也；佩，衷之旗也。
现代文：晋大夫狐突对此叹气说： 太子的选择是事情成败的征兆；衣服是身份的明示；所佩之物是心地的表白。
English: Dr. Jin Foxtrot said with a sigh: The prince's choice is a sign of success or failure; the clothes are an expression of identity; the adornment is a confession of the heart.

古文：故敬其事，则命以始；服其身，则衣之纯；用其衷，则佩之度。
现代文：所以，如果重视他的出征，就应在一年之初命他出发；让他身负重任，就应该让他穿颜色纯正的官服；信任他的忠心，就应让他佩带表明忠心无贰的玉。
English: Therefore, if you value his departure, you should order him to leave at the beginning of the year; if you give him a heavy responsibility, you should let him wear a pure-colored official uniform; if you trust his loyalty, you should let him wear a jade that shows his loyalty.

古文：今命以时卒，閟其事也；衣以癝服，远其躬也；佩以金玦，弃其衷也。
现代文：现在却是在一年之终，命他出征，在时曰上来了个封闭，预示事之难成；让他穿杂色之衣，则是表示对他疏远；佩带金块，就是不承认他的忠心了。
English: But now, at the end of the year, he was ordered to go to war, and at that time there was a blockade, indicating that things would be difficult; to let him wear a mixed-colored robe was to alienate him; to wear gold was to deny his loyalty.

古文：服以远之，时以閟之，尨凉冬杀，金寒玦离，胡可恃也！ 
现代文：用衣服疏远他，用时预示无成，杂色意味凉薄，冬季意味肃杀，金意味寒冷，块意味诀绝，这样他还有什么依靠呢！ 
English: Alienate him with clothes, use time to foreshadow failure, mixed colors mean cool and thin, winter means cold, gold means cold, block means no way, so what else can he rely on!

古文：梁馀子养曰： 帅师者，受命于庙，受脤于社，有常服矣。
现代文：梁余子养说： 领兵的人在太庙接受命令，在神社接受祭肉，还有规定的服饰。
English: Liang Yu Zi Yao said: The person leading the soldiers receives orders at the Imperial Temple, receives the sacrificial meat at the shrine, and the prescribed clothing.

古文：弗获而尨，命可知也。
现代文：现在得不到正式的礼服而穿上这杂色服装，命令中的含义不问可知也。
English: No matter what the meaning of the order is, they are not allowed to wear formal gowns, but have to wear this motley attire.

古文：死而不孝，不如逃之。 
现代文：与其死了还落个不孝之名，不如就此逃走。 
English: It's better to run away than to die and be called a traitor.

古文：罕夷曰： 尨奇无常，金玦不复，君有心矣。 
现代文：罕夷说： 杂色奇服表示事不正常，金块表示去而无回，国君有害太子之心了。 
English: Han Yi said: The odd-colored clothes indicate that things are not normal, the gold nugget indicates that things have gone and there is no turning back, and the sovereign is harmful to the prince's heart.

古文：后四年，申生以谗自杀。
现代文：四年后，申生因受谗言陷害而自杀。
English: Four years later, Shen Sheng committed suicide after being framed.

古文：近服妖也。
现代文：此事近乎服妖之说。
English: Close to fancy dress.

古文：《左氏传》曰，郑子臧好聚鹬冠，郑文公恶之，使盗杀之，刘向以为近服妖者也。
现代文：《左氏传》上说，郑子臧喜好收集一种用鹬乌羽毛装饰的术士冠，郑文公厌恶他，派人暗杀了他。刘向认为这件事类似奇装异服的例子。
English: According to "The Biography of Zuo Zixuan," Zheng Zixuan liked to collect a kind of sorcerer's crown decorated with waxen feathers. Zheng Wengong detested him and sent someone to assassinate him. Liu Xiang thought that this matter was similar to the example of fancy dress.

古文：一曰，非独为子臧之身，亦文公之戒也。
现代文：另一种说法认为，这件事的前因后果不仅在于郑子臧本人，也是对郑文公的警戒。
English: Another view is that the cause and effect of this matter lies not only in Zheng Zixuan himself, but also in the vigilance of Zheng Wengong.

古文：初，文公不礼晋文，又犯天子命而伐滑，不尊尊敬上。
现代文：起初，郑文公对晋文公不礼貌，还违犯周天子的命令去攻打滑国，不尊敬至尊的天子，以下犯上。
English: At first, Zheng Wenguang was rude to Jin Wenguang, and also violated the order of Zhou Tianzi to attack Niankuo, and disrespected the supreme god, and committed the following crimes.

古文：其后晋文伐郑，几亡国。
现代文：到后来晋文公讨伐郑国，郑国几乎灭亡。
English: Later, Emperor Jinwen led a crusade against Zheng, and Zheng almost perished.

古文：昭帝时，昌邑王贺遣中大夫之长安，多治仄注冠，以赐大臣，又以冠奴。
现代文：汉昭帝时，昌邑王刘贺派遣中大夫到长安，做了好多仄注冠，用来赏赐大臣，还让奴仆们戴这种冠。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Zhao, Liu He, the king of Chang'e, sent a middle-ranking doctor to Chang'an and made a lot of crowns, which were used to reward ministers, and also let the servants wear this crown.

古文：刘向以为近服妖也。
现代文：刘向认为这种穿戴近似奇装异服。
English: Liu Xiang thinks that this kind of dress is similar to fancy dress.

古文：时王贺狂悖，闻天子不豫，弋猎驰骋如故，与驺奴、宰人游居娱戏，骄嫚不敬。
现代文：当时昌邑王刘贺狂妄胡闹，知道皇帝有病，还照常跑马打猎射鸟，跟饲养马的奴隶、掌管膳食的厨子游玩相处寻欢作乐，骄横放荡不守规矩。
English: At that time, Liu He, the king of Changyi, was reckless and reckless. Knowing that the emperor was ill, he still ran horses to hunt and shoot birds as usual, played with the slaves who raised the horses and the cooks in charge of meals to have fun, and was arrogant and unruly.

古文：冠者尊服，奴者贱人，贺无故好作非常之冠，暴尊象也。
现代文：冠本来是表示尊贵的服饰，奴仆是卑贱之人，刘贺无缘无故地喜好制作这种奇特非常的冠，这是对尊贵施以凌犯的象征。
English: The crown was originally a sign of noble attire, and the servant was a lowly person. Liu He liked to make this very strange crown for no reason, which was a symbol of insulting nobility.

古文：以冠奴者，当自至尊坠至贱也。
现代文：而让奴仆戴这种冠，则意味着将从最为尊贵的地位坠落到最卑贱的地步。
English: For a servant to wear such a crown would mean a fall from the most exalted position to the lowest.

古文：其后帝崩，无子，汉大臣征贺为嗣。
现代文：后来，皇帝驾崩，没有儿子，汉朝大臣选刘贺为皇嗣。
English: Later, when the emperor died without a son, the ministers of the Han Dynasty selected Liu He as the imperial heir.

古文：即位，狂乱无道，缚戮谏者夏侯胜等。
现代文：他即位后，狂乱胡来没有为君之道，缚绑杀害了敢于进谏的夏侯胜等人。
English: After he ascended the throne, there was no way for him to be king, and he tied up and killed Xia Hou Sheng and others who dared to enter the imperial palace.

古文：于是大臣白皇太后，废贺为庶人。
现代文：因此，大臣们禀告皇太后，把刘贺废黜为民。
English: Therefore, the ministers denounced the Empress Dowager and deposed Liu He.

古文：贺为王时，又见大白狗冠方山冠而无尾，此服妖，亦犬祸也。
现代文：刘贺在做昌邑王的时候，还看见遇大白狗戴着方山冠而没长尾巴，这是服妖，也是犬祸。
English: When Liu He was the king of Changyi, he also saw a large white dog wearing a square crown but without a long tail. This is a clothing demon, but also a dog accident.

古文：贺以问郎中令龚遂，遂曰： 此天戒，言在仄者尽冠狗也。
现代文：刘贺向郎中令龚遂询问，龚遂说： 这是天帝的告诫，告诉您，在您身边的那些人都是不识礼的小人，就像戴冠的狗一样。
English: Liu He asked his brother-in-law, Gong Sui, about this. Gong Sui said, "This is a warning from the Heavenly Emperor to tell you that those people around you are impolite villains, just like dogs wearing crowns.

古文：去之则存，不去则亡矣。 
现代文：把他们赶走，您的王位可以保持，不把他们赶走，您的王位就会失去。 
English: If you drive them out, your throne will remain, but if you do not drive them out, your throne will be lost.

古文：贺既废数年，宣帝封之为列侯，复有罪，死不得置后，又犬祸无尾之效也。
现代文：刘贺被废黜数年之后，新君汉宣帝封他做了列侯，他却又犯罪，因而死后不能立子继爵，造则又是犬祸无尾的应验。
English: A few years after Liu He was dethroned, the new emperor Han proclaimed him a vassal and made him a vassal, but he also committed a crime, so he could not appoint his son as a vassal after his death, and the creation of rules was a never-ending fulfillment of the dog plague.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 行不顺，厥咎人奴冠，天下乱，辟无適巠，妾子拜。 
现代文：京房着的《易传》上说： 行为逆乱，就要遭受人奴戴冠，天下大乱，国君无嫡子，妾子得大位的处罚。 
English: In "I Chuan" written by Jing Fang, it is said that: if one's behavior is rebellious, he will be punished by being crowned as a slave, the world will be in turmoil, the sovereign will have no legitimate son, and his concubine will be elevated to the throne.

古文：又曰： 君不正，臣欲篡，厥妖狗冠出朝门。 
现代文：又说： 君不走正道，大臣要篡位，这种形势下出现的妖孽就是狗戴冠出入朝门。 
English: He also said: "If you don't follow the right path, the minister will usurp the throne. The evil that occurs in this situation is a dog wearing a crown entering and leaving the imperial palace."

古文：成帝鸿嘉、永始之间，好为微行出游，选从期门郎有材力者，及私奴客，多至十余，少五六人，皆白衣袒帻，带持刀剑。
现代文：汉成帝在鸿嘉、永始年间，喜欢化装成庶民百姓悄悄出外游玩。从期门郎中挑选有勇力的人，和私家奴仆门客，多的时候十几个人，少的时候五六人，都身穿白色衣服，不戴冠，衹用帧布把头发一扎，携带刀剑。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Han Chengdu in the Hongjia and Yongshi dynasties, he liked to disguise himself as a commoner and quietly go out to play. He selected courageous people from the servants, and private servants and guests, sometimes more than a dozen people, sometimes five or six people, all wearing white clothes, not wearing a crown, braiding their hair with a cloth, and carrying a sword.

古文：或乘小车，御者在茵上，或皆骑，出入市里郊野，远至旁县。
现代文：有时是乘坐小车，赶车的御者和他一同坐在小车的茵垫上，有的时候都骑马。出入城内街巷和郊外旷野，远到长安之外的郡县。
English: Sometimes he rode in a cart, and the driver sat with him on the cushion of the cart, and sometimes he rode on horseback. He rode in and out of the streets and lanes of the city and the wilderness of the suburbs, as far as counties outside of Chang'an.

古文：时，大臣车骑将军王音及刘同等数以切谏。
现代文：当时，大臣车骑将军王音以及刘向等人多次恳切地劝谏。
English: At that time, Minister of Chariots and Cavalry Wang Yin and Liu Xiang and others repeatedly and earnestly urged him.

古文：谷永曰： 《易》称 得臣无家 ，言王者臣天下，无私家也。
现代文：谷永说： 《易经》上说 得臣无家 ，就是说天子以天下为臣，再没个人的私家了。
English: Tanaga said, "In the I Ching, it is said that a vassal has no home, which means that the Son of Heaven is a vassal of the whole world, and there is no personal private home.

古文：今陛下弃万乘之至贵，乐家人之贱事；厌高美之尊称，好匹夫之卑字；崇聚票轻无谊之人，以为私客；置私田于民间，畜私奴车马于北宫；数去南面之尊，离深宫之固，挺身独与小人晨夜相随，乌集醉饱吏民之家，乱服共坐，混肴亡别，闵勉遁乐，昼夜在路。
现代文：现在陛下您放弃天子的至尊至贵，喜欢上普通民家的卑贱琐事；厌烦了至高至美的尊号，爱好上匹夫庶民的小辈贱称；聚集剽悍轻薄不义之人，作为私客；在民间置买私田，在北宫养着私奴车马；多次不要皇帝的尊严，离开深宫的安全，只身而出单独和一帮卑贱小人早晚相随形影不离。如乌合之众在吏民之家大吃大喝酒醉饭饱；服饰不讲尊卑，杂坐在一起，混乱而看不出君臣之别；没完没了地游荡取乐，白天黑夜在路上逛来逛去。
English: Now, Your Majesty, you have given up the supreme dignity of the Son of Heaven, preferring the lowly trifles of the ordinary people's home; you are tired of the highest and most beautiful honorific, the junior lowly title of the commoners who like to be the best man; you gather the brave, the light and the unjust, as a private guest; you buy private land from the people, and keep the slave car and horse in the North Palace; you do not want the dignity of the emperor many times, leave the safety of the Deep Palace, and go out alone with a group of lowly villains. Sooner or later, they are inseparable. For example, the rabble

古文：典门户奉宿卫之臣执干戈守空宫，公卿百寮不知陛下所在，积数年矣。
现代文：致使主管宫廷门户、侍奉宿卫的臣子手持干戈，守卫无主的空宫；公卿百官不知陛下在什么地方。
English: As a result, the vassals in charge of the palace gate and those who served as the palace guards, armed with swords, guarded the ownerless empty palace; the nobles and officials did not know where His Majesty was.

古文：昔虢公为无道，有神降曰 赐尔土田 ，言将以庶人受土田也。
现代文：这样已经好几年了。古时候虢公做了有失为君之道的事，有神由天而降，对他说 赐给你田地 ，意思是说他将要以庶民百姓的地位接受田地。
English: This has been going on for several years. In ancient times, the lord of the manor did something unworthy of a king. A god descended from the heavens and said to him, "I will give you a field," meaning that he was going to accept the field as a commoner.

古文：诸侯梦得土田，为失国祥，而况王者畜私田财物，为庶人之事乎！ 
现代文：诸侯梦中得赐田地，都是丧位亡国的征兆，何况您身为天子却自己置办蓄积私田财物，情愿做庶民小人的事情呢！ 
English: In the dreams of the princes, the granting of fields is a sign of the fall of the throne and the destruction of the country. What's more, you, as the son of heaven, have been accumulating private fields and property yourself, and would rather do the things of a commoner!

古文：《左氏传》曰，周景王时大夫宾起见雄鸡自断其尾。
现代文：《左氏传》上说，周景王的时候，大夫宾起看到雄鸡自己咬断尾巴。
English: According to "The Legend of Zuo," when King Zhou Jing was alive, he saw a rooster bite off its own tail.

古文：刘向以为近鸡祸也。
现代文：刘向认为这近似鸡祸。
English: Liu Xiang believes that this is similar to the chicken disaster.

古文：是时王有爱子子晁，王与宾起阴谋欲立之。
现代文：当时，周王有个爱子，叫子鼂。周王与宾起暗中商议要立他为太子。
English: At that time, King Zhou had a favorite son, called Zixuan. King Zhou and Binqi secretly discussed to make him the crown prince.

古文：田于北山，将因兵众杀適子之党，未及而崩。
现代文：要在北山围猎的时候，使用军队杀掉嫡子的党羽。这一计划未得实现周王就驾崩了。
English: The plan was to use the army to kill the legitimate son's followers during the siege of Beishan. However, King Zhou died before the plan could be carried out.

古文：三子争国，王室大乱。
现代文：三个王子争夺王位，王室大乱。
English: Three princes fight for the throne, and the royal family is in turmoil.

古文：其后，宾起诛死，子晁奔楚而败。
现代文：后来，宾起被杀，子鼂逃奔到楚国而最后失败。
English: Later, Pengqi was killed and Zijun fled to Chu and eventually failed.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 有始无终，厥妖雄鸡自啮断其尾。 
现代文：京房的《易传》说： 有始无终这种事的征兆是雄鸡自己咬断自己的尾巴。 
English: Jingfang's "Easy Biography" said: The sign of this kind of thing from beginning to end is that the rooster bites off his own tail.

古文：宣帝黄龙元年，未央殿辂軨中雌鸡化为雄，毛衣变化而不鸣，不将，无距。
现代文：汉宣帝黄龙元年，未央殿辖斡厩中有雌鸡变成雄鶸，羽毛变了但不会呜叫，不会率领鶸群，脚后没有长距。
English: In the first year of Emperor Huanglong of the Han Dynasty, there was a hen in the stables under the jurisdiction of the Weiyang Palace that turned into a male stork. Its feathers changed but it would not cry, it would not lead the flock of storks, and there was no long distance behind its feet.

古文：元帝初元中，丞相府史家雌鸡伏子，渐化为雄，冠距鸣将。
现代文：汉元帝初元年间，丞相府史的家中，有雌鸡孵小鸡，逐渐雌鸡自己变成了雄鸡，头上有冠，脚后生距，会呜叫，能率领鸡群。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the hen of the chancellor prefectural historian hatched chicken chicks, but gradually became a rooster, grew a crest and talons, and would chirp.

古文：永光中，有献雄鸡生角者。
现代文：永光年间，有人进献头上长角的雄鸡。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yongguang, a rooster with a long horn was offered as a gift.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 鸡知时，知时者当死。 
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 鸡能知时，知时者应死。 
English: Jing Fang said in "I Chuan": The chicken can know the time, and the one who knows the time should die.

古文：房以为己知时，恐当之。
现代文：京房认为自己是知时的人，恐怕要应此恶征。
English: Kyofusa considers himself to be a person who knows the time, so I'm afraid I have to comply with this evil sign.

古文：刘向以为房失鸡占。
现代文：刘向认为京房对于鶸的占卜有误。
English: Liu Xiang believes that Jingfang's divination about the dragonfly is wrong.

古文：鸡者，小畜，主司时，起居人，小臣执事为政之象也。
现代文：鸡是一种小动物，天明而鸣，给人的起居提示时间的早晚，这是小臣任事当政的征象。
English: The chicken is a small animal. It chirps at the crack of dawn, giving people an early or late wake-up call. This is a sign that a minor minister is in power.

古文：言小臣将秉君威，以害正事，犹石显也。
现代文：是说小臣将要把持君主的权威，来危害政事，如石显那样。
English: That is to say, a junior minister will usurp the authority of the reigning monarch to endanger political affairs, as Shi Xian did.

古文：竟宁元年，石显伏辜，此其效也。
现代文：竟宁元年，石显伏法，就是这怪异的应验。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Ning, the Shixianfu method was the fulfillment of this strange dream.

古文：一曰，石显何足以当此？
现代文：有一种说法认为，石显怎能足以应此征兆？
English: There is a saying that how can the stone show enough to respond to this omen?

古文：昔武王伐殷，至于牧野，誓师曰： 古人有言曰 牝鸡无晨；牝鸡之晨，惟家之索。 
现代文：从前周武王讨伐殷纣，行至牧野，誓师说 古人说过 雌鸡不能鸣报天明，雌鸡报明，就要倾家荡产 。
English: From the previous week, King Wu went to the pasture to fight against Yin Yao, and the oath master said that the ancients said that the hen could not announce the dawn of the day, and the hen announced the dawn of the day, and it was necessary to go bankrupt.

古文：今殷王纣惟妇言用。 
现代文：现今殷王纣衹听妇人之言。 
English: Now Yin Wangyao listens to the woman.

古文：繇是论之，黄龙、初元、永光鸡变，乃国家之占，妃、后象也。
现代文：由此而论，黄龙、初元、永光年间出现的雌鸡的变异，是关于国家的征兆，是妃后之象征。
English: Therefore, the variation of the hen that appeared in the years of Huanglong, Chuyuan and Yongguang is a sign of the country and a symbol of the empress.

古文：孝元王皇后以甘露二年生男，立为太子。
现代文：孝元帝的王皇后在甘露二年生了男孩，立为太子。
English: Emperor Xiaoyuan's Empress Wang gave birth to a boy in the second year of her reign, and he became crown prince.

古文：妃，王禁女也。
现代文：原来这位妃子是王禁的女儿。
English: It turned out that this concubine was Wang Han's daughter.

古文：黄龙元年，宣帝崩，太子立，是为元帝。
现代文：黄龙元年，汉孝宣帝驾崩，太子继立为帝，即汉孝元帝。
English: In the first year of the Yellow Dragon, Emperor Han Xiao Xuan passed away and was succeeded by his son, Emperor Han Xiao Yuan.

古文：王妃将为皇后，故是岁未央殿中雌鸡为雄，明其占在正宫也。
现代文：这位姓王的妃子将要封为皇后，所以这年未央殿中雌鸡变成雄鶸，表明其征兆是在正宫。
English: This concubine, whose surname was Wang, was to be crowned as empress, so this year the hen in the palace turned into a male rooster, indicating that the sign was in the main palace.

古文：不鸣不将无距，贵始萌而尊未成也。
现代文：变成的雄鶸不会报晨，不会领鶸群，脚后没长搏斗用的距，这是说虽开始高贵了但还没有尊为皇后。
English: The transformed stallion will not announce the dawn, will not lead the herd, and does not have a long fighting distance behind his feet. This means that although he has begun to be noble, he has not yet been honored as a queen.

古文：至元帝初元元年，将立王皇后，先以为婕妤。
现代文：到了元帝初元元年，要立王皇后了，先册封为婕妤。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, it was time to establish a king and queen, and the first to be crowned was the empress.

古文：三月癸卯制书曰： 其封婕妤父丞相少史王禁为阳平侯，位特进。 
现代文：三月癸卯曰诏书说： 封婕妤的父亲即丞相少史王禁为阳平侯，列位特进。 
English: In March, the imperial edict said, "The father of Fuchu, that is, the prime minister, Wang Shishi, is banned from being Yang Pinghou, and will be promoted to a special rank."

古文：丙午，立王婕妤为皇后。
现代文：丙午曰，册立王婕妤为皇后。
English: On the afternoon of the third day, Wang Yao was crowned empress.

古文：明年正月，立皇后子为太子。
现代文：第二年正月，立皇后的儿子为太子。
English: In the first month of the following year, the son of the Empress Dowager became the Crown Prince.

古文：故应是，丞相府史家雌鸡为雄，其占即丞相少史之女也。
现代文：所以与此相应，丞相府史家雌鶸变性为雄，其应就是丞相少史之女。
English: Therefore, in accordance with this, the female chrysanthemum of the chancellor's prefectural historian changed sex to male, which should be the daughter of the chancellor's junior historian.

古文：伏子者，明已有子也。
现代文：孵小鶸，即说明已有儿子。
English: If a chick hatches, it means you have a son.

古文：冠距鸣将者，尊已成也。
现代文：有鸡冠、鸡距，会呜叫、会领头，说明已尊立为后了。
English: There is a cock's crown, a cock's distance, it will howl, it will lead, indicating that it has stood up for the latter.

古文：永光二年，阳平顷侯禁薨，子凤嗣侯，为侍中卫尉。
现代文：永光二年，阳平顷侯王禁去世，他的儿子王凤嗣立为侯，做诗中卫尉。
English: In the second year of the Yongguang era, Yang Pinghao marquis Wang Jian passed away, and his son Wang Fengshi was appointed as marquis, and became a lieutenant of the guard.

古文：元帝崩，皇太子立，是为成帝。
现代文：元帝驾崩，皇太子继立为帝，这就是汉成帝。
English: Emperor Yuan passed away, and the crown prince succeeded him as emperor. This was Emperor Han.

古文：尊皇后为皇太后，以后弟凤为大司马、大将军，领尚书事，上委政，无所与。
现代文：尊王皇后为皇太后，封太后的弟弟王凤为大司马大将军，领尚书事，皇帝把朝政交给他，自己一概不问。
English: His Majesty the Empress was the Empress Dowager, and Wang Feng, the younger brother of the Empress Dowager, was the Grand Master and General of the Horse. He was in charge of the paperwork, and the Emperor handed over the government to him without asking any questions.

古文：王氏之权自凤起，故于凤始受爵位时，雄鸡有角，明视作威颛君害上危国者，从此人始也。
现代文：王氏的权势从王凤开始，所以，在王凤刚受爵位的时候，雄鶸长角，明白揭示了作威作福、专君权、害皇上、危及国家的事，从此人开始。
English: The power of the Wang clan began with Wang Feng. Therefore, when Wang Feng just received the title of nobility, he had a long horn, which clearly revealed the matter of arrogance, despotism, harming the emperor and endangering the country, starting with this person.

古文：其后群弟世权，以至于莽，遂篡天下。
现代文：后来他一群弟弟世代掌权，以致到了王莽掌权，就篡夺了汉朝天下。
English: Later, a group of his younger brothers held power for generations, so that when Wang Mang took power, he usurped the Han Dynasty.

古文：即位五年，王太后乃崩，此其效也。
现代文：王莽称帝第五年，王太后才驾崩，这就是关于鸡之变性的应验。
English: Wang Mang said that it was the fifth year of the emperor, and the empress dowager only passed away, which is the fulfillment of the transformation of the chicken.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 贤者居明夷之世，知时而伤，或众在位，厥妖鸡生角。
现代文：京房的《易传》上说： 贤明之人处昏暗之世，知道天时而被挫伤，惑众之奸人，窃权在位。
English: Jingfang's "I Chuan" said: Wise people are in a dark world, know the time and are frustrated, deceivers of the people, stealing power reigns.

古文：鸡生角，时主独。 
现代文：因此而出现的妖祥就是鶸生角。鸡生角，当朝君主孤独无援。 
English: Therefore, the omen that appears is the horn of the goose. The horn of the chicken, when the monarch is alone and helpless.

古文：又曰： 妇人颛政，国不静；牝鸡雄鸣，主不荣。
现代文：又说： 妇人专政，国不得静；雌鸡像雄鸡一样鸣叫，君主受辱。 
English: He also said: "When a woman is in power, the country cannot be quiet; when a hen crows like a rooster, the monarch is insulted."

古文：故房以为己亦在占中矣。
现代文：所以京房认为自己也在所应之事当中了。
English: Therefore, Kyofusa thinks that he is also in the middle of the right thing.

古文：成公七年 正月，鼷鼠食郊牛角；改卜牛，又食其角。 
现代文：《春秋经》上载，成公十五年 正月，鼷鼠啃食用以郊祀的牛的角；后来改用另外的牛以备占卜之需，其角也被啃食 。
English: In the first month of the fifteenth year of his reign, according to the "Spring and Autumn Annals" uploaded, Weasel Toad ate the horn of a cow worshipped in the suburbs; later, he switched to another cow to prepare for divination, and its horn was also eaten.

古文：刘向以为，近青祥，亦牛祸也，不敬而之所致也。
现代文：刘向认为这事近乎青祥，也是牛祸，是因为不敬而无知所导致的。
English: Liu Xiang believes that this is almost a Qingxiang and a cow accident, which is caused by disrespect and ignorance.

古文：昔周公制礼乐，成周道，故成王命鲁郊祀天地，以尊周公。
现代文：从前周公制定礼乐，成就了周治天下之道，所以周成王命令鲁国也如天子那样郊祀天地，用以表示对周公的尊敬。
English: Since Zhou Gong set up the ritual music and achieved Zhou's way of ruling the world, Zhou Cheng Wang ordered Lu to also worship heaven and earth like Tianzi to show respect for Zhou Gong.

古文：至成公时，三家始颛政，鲁将从此衰。
现代文：到了鲁成公的时候，季氏、叔孙、孟孙三家大夫开始专权执掌国政，鲁国从此衰落。
English: By the time of Lu Chenggong, the three doctors, Ji, his uncle and grandson, and Meng Sun, began to hold exclusive power over state affairs, and Lu fell into decline.

古文：天愍周公之德，痛其将有败亡之祸，故于郊祭而见戒云。
现代文：天帝哀怜周公之德，伤痛鲁国将有败亡之祸，所以在郊祭之时而显示警戒。
English: The heavenly emperor pities Zhou Gong's virtue, and the woeful Lu country will have the misfortune of defeat, so at the time of the suburb festival, it shows vigilance.

古文：鼠，小虫，性盗窃；鼷，又其小者也。
现代文：鼠是小虫，生性盗窃，鼷又是鼠中之小者。
English: A mouse is a small insect, a natural thief, and a maggot is the smallest of mice.

古文：牛，大畜，祭天尊物也。
现代文：牛是大牲畜，是祭天的尊贵之物。
English: The cow is a large animal, and it is a precious thing to be offered to the heavens.

古文：角，兵象，在上，君威也。
现代文：角是征战的象征，在头上是君威的表示。
English: The horns are a symbol of conquest, and on the head is a representation of royal power.

古文：小小鼷鼠，食至尊之牛角，象季氏乃陪臣盗窃之人，将执国命以伤君威而害周公之祀也。
现代文：小小鼷鼠，啃食最为尊贵之用的牛角，这象征着季氏就是陪臣盗窃主人，将要执掌国家大权来损伤国君的权威，破坏对周公的祭祀。
English: The little weasel, nibbling on the horns of the most valuable cattle, symbolizes that the Ji clan is a vassal stealing the master, and will hold the power of the state to damage the authority of the sovereign and destroy the sacrificial rites of Zhou Gong.

古文：改卜牛，鼷鼠又食其角，天重语之也。
现代文：改用另外的牛来占卜，鼷鼠又啃食这头牛的角，这是天帝反覆告诫。
English: Switching to another cow for divination, and the weasel eating the horn of this cow, this is the repeated admonition of the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：成公怠慢昏乱，遂君臣更执于晋。
现代文：鲁成公怠慢昏乱，国政大坏，于是君臣先后轮流被扣在晋国。
English: Lu Chenggong was sluggish and confused, and the national politics was very bad, so the monarchs and ministers were detained successively in Jin Province.

古文：至于襄公，晋为溴梁之会，天下大夫皆夺君政。
现代文：到了鲁襄公的时候，晋国招集在溴梁的会盟，这时天下各诸侯国都是大夫夺得国君之政。
English: When the time came for Prince Lu Xiang, the State of Jin called for an alliance in Bromliang. At that time, all the principalities in the world were in the process of seizing power from the sovereign.

古文：其后三家逐昭公，卒死于外，几绝周公之祀。
现代文：后来三家大夫驱逐昭公，昭公最后死在外边，对周公的祭祀几乎断绝。
English: Later, the three families of doctors expelled Zhou Gong. Zhou Gong eventually died outside, and the worship of Zhou Gong was almost cut off.

古文：董仲舒以为，鼷鼠食郊牛，皆养牲不谨也。
现代文：董仲舒认为鼷鼠啃食郊祀之牛，都是因为养牲口不小心发生的。
English: Dong Zhongshu believes that the muskrat's gnawing on the cattle of the suburban worship is all due to the carelessness of raising livestock.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 祭天不慎，厥妖鼷鼠啮郊牛角。 
现代文：京房的《易传》则说： 祭天不谨慎，由之而生的妖祥是鼷鼠啃食祭祀用之角。 
English: Kyofusa's "Ikiden" says: "Sacrifice is not prudent, and the evil omen that comes from it is the horn of the muskrat used in sacrifices."

古文：刘向以为，定公知季氏逐昭公，罪恶如彼，亲用孔子为夹谷之会，齐人俫归郓、讠雚、龟阴之田，圣德如此，反用季桓子，淫于女乐，而退孔子，无道甚矣。《诗》曰： 人而亡仪，不死何为！ 
现代文：定公十五年 正月，鼷鼠啃食祭祀用牛，牛死 。刘向认为，鲁定公知道季氏驱逐了鲁昭公，罪恶昭彰，所以亲自参加夹谷之会用孔子辅佐。会上孔子制服齐国，齐人归还了郸、谁、龟阴的土地。圣德这么大，返回后却用季桓子执政，沉湎于女乐歌舞，辞退了孔子。这太失为君之道了。《诗经》上说： 人如果抛弃了礼仪，还活着干什么！ 
English: In the fifteenth year of the reign of King Ding, in the first month of the year, a muskrat ate a sacrificial ox, and the ox died. Liu Xiang believed that King Luding knew that the Ji clan had expelled King Lu Zhaogu, and that the evil had become obvious, so he personally participated in the Valley Meeting and used Confucius as an assistant. At the meeting, Confucius subdued Qi country, and the Qi people returned the land of Qi, He, and Guyin. With such great virtue, after returning, he used Ji Huan Zi to govern, indulged in female music and dance, and dismissed Confucius. This was too much for

古文：是岁五月，定公薨，牛死之应也。
现代文：这年五月，鲁定公去世，应了祭祀用牛之死的征兆。
English: In May of that year, King Luding died, which was a sign of the death of the sacrificial ox.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 子不子，鼠食其郊牛。 
现代文：京房的《易传》上说： 人不像人，鼠食其祭祀用牛。 
English: It is said in "I Chuan" by Kyofusa: People are not like people, rats eat their sacrificial cattle.

古文：哀公元年 正月，鼷鼠食郊牛 。
现代文：哀公元年 正月，鼷鼠啃食祭祀用牛 。
English: In the first month of the year of mourning, the muskrat eats the sacrificial ox.

古文：刘向以为，天意汲汲于用圣人，逐三家，故复见戒也。
现代文：刘向认为天帝的意思是执意地希望鲁君任用孔子，把季氏等三家大夫从朝廷赶走，所以反复显示这一警戒。
English: Liu Xiang thought that the meaning of the Heavenly Emperor was to persistently hope that Lu Junru would appoint Confucius and drive away the three doctors such as Ji from the imperial court, so he repeatedly showed this warning.

古文：哀公年少，不亲见昭公之事，故见败亡之异。
现代文：鲁哀公年少，没有亲眼看到昭公时三家大夫作乱害政之事，所以显示这败亡之征的怪异。
English: Lu Aigong was young and did not see with his own eyes that the three doctors at the time of Zhaogong made a mess to harm the government, so he showed the strangeness of this defeat.

古文：已而哀不寤，身奔于粤，此其效也。
现代文：但造之后哀公并没醒悟，从而逃奔到粤，造就是怪异的应验。
English: However, after the creation, Aiko did not wake up and fled to Guangdong. The creation was a strange fulfillment.

古文：昭帝元凤元年九月，燕有黄鼠衔其尾舞王宫端门中，王往视之，鼠舞如故。
现代文：汉孝昭帝元凤元年九月，燕国有黄鼠叼着自己的尾巴跳舞，就在王宫正门裹面。燕王去看，黄鼠不害怕，照样地跳。
English: In September of the first year of Emperor Han Xiao Zhao's reign, a weasel in the state of Yan danced with its tail and wrapped its face around the main gate of the royal palace. Yan Wang went to see, the weasel was not afraid and danced as before.

古文：王使吏以酒脯祠，鼠舞不休，一日一夜死。
现代文：燕王让小吏用酒和肉脯喂它，黄鼠跳个不停，一天一夜之后死掉。
English: The king of the swallows let the little officials feed it with wine and meat. The weasel kept jumping and died one day and one night later.

古文：近黄祥，时燕剌王旦谋反将死之象也。
现代文：这事近乎黄祥。这是当时燕剌王刘旦谋反将被处死的征象。
English: This was almost auspicious. It was a sign that Liu Dan, the tern king, would be put to death for plotting a rebellion.

古文：其月，发觉伏辜。
现代文：就在这个月，燕王谋反之事被朝廷发觉，于是伏法处死。
English: That month, he was found guilty of sedition.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 诛不原情，厥妖鼠舞门。 
现代文：京房的《易传》上说： 诛罚而不留情面，预示此祸的妖祥就是老鼠在门中跳舞。 
English: Jing Fang said in "I Chuan": "Fighting is not about friendship, its demon rat dances at the end of the door."

古文：成帝建始四年九月，长安城南有鼠衔黄蒿、柏叶，上民冢柏及榆树上为巢，桐柏尤多。
现代文：成帝建始四年九月，在长安城南有老鼠叼着黄蒿和柏树叶，到民间坟地的柏树或榆树上做窝。桐柏那个地方最多。
English: In September of the fourth year of the founding of Emperor Chengdu, in the south of Chang'an City, there were mice nibbling on astragalus and cypress leaves and making nests on cypress or eucalyptus trees in folk cemeteries. Tungbai was the largest in that place.

古文：巢中无子，皆有干鼠矢数十。
现代文：窝裹没有小鼠，都是祇有数十粒干鼠屎。
English: There are no mice in the nest, only dozens of dried mouse droppings.

古文：时议臣以为恐有水灾。
现代文：当时廷议之臣认为怕是要有水灾。
English: At the time, courtiers feared a flood.

古文：鼠，盗窃小虫，夜出昼匿；今昼去穴而登木，象贱人将居显贵之位也。
现代文：鼠是偷吃东西的小动物，夜晚出来活动，白天藏在窝裹。现在却大白天离开洞穴，爬到树上，这是象征着卑贱之人要居显贵之位。
English: The rat is a small animal that steals food. It comes out at night and hides in its burrow during the day. Now it leaves its burrow during the day and climbs up a tree. This is a symbol that the lowly should occupy a place of prominence.

古文：桐柏，卫思后园所在也。
现代文：桐柏是卫思后的陵园所在地。
English: Tongbai is the location of the Mausoleum of Emperor Wei Si.

古文：其后，赵皇后自微贱登至尊，与卫后同类。
现代文：这以后，皇后赵飞燕从微贱的地位登上至尊之位，其情况与当年的卫后相似。
English: After this, Empress Zhao Feiyan ascended from a lowly position to the supreme position, which was similar to that of the Queen of Wei.

古文：赵后终无子而为害。
现代文：赵皇后终于自己没有儿子而干出毒害皇子之事。
English: Empress Zhao finally had no son of her own and poisoned the prince.

古文：明年，有鸢焚巢，杀子之异也。
现代文：第二年，有鸢鸟焚巢之事，这是象征杀子的怪异。
English: The following year, there was the burning of an ostrich's nest, a bizarre symbol of infanticide.

古文：天象仍见，甚可畏也。
现代文：天象频繁出现，太可怕了。
English: The frequent apparitions are terrifying.

古文：一曰，皆王莽窃位之象云。
现代文：有一种说法认为，这些都是王莽窃国篡汉的征兆。
English: There is a saying that these are all signs of Wang Mang stealing the country and usurping Han.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 臣私禄罔辟，厥妖鼠巢。 
现代文：京房的《易传》上说： 臣子自封爵禄欺君罔上，就出现老鼠筑巢的灾异。 
English: It is said in the "I Chuan" by Kyofusa: When a vassal cheats his lord by giving himself a peerage, a plague of mice builds a nest.

古文：文公十三年， 大室屋坏 。
现代文：文公十三年， 大室屋坏 。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Bunko era, Omuroya went bad.

古文：近金沴木，木动也。
现代文：近似金害木，木气动荡。
English: Approximate gold-damaged wood, wood gas turbulence.

古文：先是，冬，釐公薨，十六月乃作主。
现代文：此前，冬季，鲁僖公去世，过了十六个月才制作神主。
English: Prior to this, in the winter, Lu Yonggong passed away, and it took sixteen months to make the god.

古文：后六月，又吉禘于太庙而致釐公，《春秋》讥之。经曰： 大事于太庙，跻釐公。 
现代文：又过了六个月，在太庙举行下葬后的吉祭，却把僖公的神主升到受祭之位。《春秋经》对此作了讥评。说： 在太庙行大事，跻僖公。 
English: Six months later, the auspicious festival after the funeral was held in the Great Temple, but the god of the god was elevated to the position of the sacrificial victim. "Spring and Autumn Annals" made a mockery of this, saying: "Do big things in the Great Temple and join the god."

古文：《左氏》说曰：太庙，周公之庙，飨有礼义者也；祀，国之大事也。
现代文：《左氏》解释说：太庙，周公之庙，祭祀有礼义的先祖；祀，国家的大事。
English: "Mr. Zuo" explained: the Great Temple, the Temple of Zhou Gong, is a ritual of ancestors with propriety; worship is an important matter for the country.

古文：恶其乱国之大事于太庙，胡言大事也。
现代文：因为厌恶他们在太庙弄乱了国家的祭祀，所以叫做大事。
English: Because of disgust, they disrupted the national ritual in the Imperial Temple, so it was called a big event.

古文：跻，登也，登釐公于愍公上，逆祀也。
现代文：跻，升也，把僖公升到愍公之上，这是反着祭祀了。
English: It is a reverse of the sacrificial rite.

古文：釐虽愍之庶兄，尝为愍臣，臣子一例，不得在愍上，又未三年而吉禘，前后乱贤父圣祖之大礼，内为貌不恭而狂，外为言不从而僭。
现代文：僖公虽然是愍公的庶出兄长，但曾是愍公之臣，应属臣子一列，不应位居愍公之上。再者，还没满三年之丧期就举行吉祭，这就前后弄乱了贤父之祭与圣祖之祭的大礼。从思想上说，是态度不恭敬而狂妄；从做事上说，则是言不顺而僭越。
English: Although Shigong was Shigong's elder half-brother, he had been Shigong's vassal, and should have been treated as a vassal, and should not have been placed above Shigong. Furthermore, the auspicious festival was held before the three-year mourning period was over, which disrupted the ceremony of the wise father's festival and the holy ancestor's festival. In terms of thought, it was disrespectful and arrogant; in terms of work, it was unsatisfactory and arrogant.

古文：故是岁自十二月不雨，至于秋七月。
现代文：因此这一年从十二月不下雨，一直旱到第二年秋季七月。
English: As a result, there was no rain from December that year, and it remained dry until the following autumn in July.

古文：后年，若是者三，而太室屋坏矣。
现代文：此后几年，像这样的大旱有三次，接着太室屋就坏了。
English: In the years that followed, there were three such droughts, after which the house fell into disrepair.

古文：前堂曰太庙，中央曰太室；屋，其上重层尊高者也，象鲁自是陵夷，将堕周公之祀也。
现代文：前堂叫太庙，中央的厅堂叫太室；屋，就是太室顶上的重楼，太室的最尊最高之处。屋坏就象征鲁国从此陵夷而衰，将要毁掉世代相继对周公的祭祀。
English: The front hall is called the Great Temple, and the central hall is called the Great Chamber; the roof is the heavy building on the top of the Great Chamber, and is the most revered and highest place in the Great Chamber. If the roof is destroyed, it will symbolize the decline of the State of Lu, and will destroy the worship of Zhou Gong for generations to come.

古文：《穀梁》、《公羊经》曰，世室，鲁公伯禽之庙也。
现代文：《谷梁经》、《公羊经》则说，世室，这是鲁公伯禽的庙。
English: "Gu Liang Jing" and "Ram Jing" say that this is the temple of Lu Gong Bo Yang.

古文：周公称太庙，鲁公称世室。
现代文：周公庙称太庙，鲁公庙称世室。
English: Zhou Gong Temple is called the Great Temple, and Lu Gong Temple is called the World Chamber.

古文：大事者，祫祭也。
现代文：大事，指合祭。
English: It's a big deal. It's a festival.

古文：跻釐公者，先祢后祖也。
现代文：所谓跻厘公，是说先祭了父而后才祭祖先。
English: The so-called "Rinri Gong" means to first sacrifice one's father before sacrificing one's ancestors.

古文：景帝三年十二月，吴二城门自倾，大船自覆。
现代文：汉孝景帝三年十二月，吴国的两座城门自己倒塌了，大船自己侧翻了。
English: In December of the third year of the reign of Emperor Han Xiao Jing, two city gates in the State of Wu collapsed on their own, and a large ship capsized on its own.

古文：刘向以为，近金沴木，木动也。
现代文：刘向认为逭近乎金害木，而木气动荡所致。
English: Liu Xiang believes that cadmium almost harms wood, while wood gas is caused by turbulence.

古文：先是，吴大王濞以太子死于汉，称疾不朝，阴与楚王戊谋为逆乱。
现代文：在此之前，吴王刘濞因为他的太子死在朝廷，就藉有病不再到京朝见皇帝，暗中与楚王刘戊策划发动叛乱。
English: Prior to this, because of the death of his prince at the imperial court, Wu King Liu Bei took advantage of his illness to avoid going to the imperial court in Beijing to see the emperor, and secretly plotted with Chu King Liu Wu to launch a rebellion.

古文：城犹国也，其一门名曰楚门，一门曰鱼门。
现代文：城也就是国，倒塌的两座城门，一座叫楚门，一座叫鱼门。
English: The city is also the country, the two collapsed gates, one called Truman, one called Fish Gate.

古文：吴地以船为家，以鱼为食。
现代文：吴地之人以船为家，以鱼为食。
English: People in Wudi live on boats and eat fish.

古文：天戒若曰，与楚所谋，倾国覆家。
现代文：天帝的警戒好像是说，与楚王所谋划的事，将丧国灭家。
English: The heavenly emperor's warning seemed to say that the things plotted with King Chu would ruin the country and destroy the family.

古文：吴王不寤，正月，与楚俱起兵，身死国亡。
现代文：吴王不醒悟，第二年正月，与楚王同时起兵叛乱，结果身死国亡。
English: King Wu did not wake up, and in the first month of the second year, he and King Chu simultaneously raised an army to rebel. As a result, he died and the country was destroyed.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 上下咸誖，厥妖城门坏。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 上下都乱，出现的妖祥就是城门白塌。 
English: Jingfang "Yi Chuan" said: Up and down are chaotic, and the appearance of the evil omen is the gate collapsing.

古文：宣帝时，大司马霍禹所居第门自坏。
现代文：宣帝时，大司马霍禹所居住的宅第之门自己倒塌。
English: During the proclamation of the emperor, the gate of the mansion where Grand Master Ma Huoyu lived collapsed on its own.

古文：时，禹内不顺，外不敬，见戒不改，卒受灭亡之诛。
现代文：当时霍禹内心不服，外露不敬，被警戒却不改悔，终受灭亡的诛罚。
English: At that time, Huo Yu was not satisfied with his heart, showed disrespect, was warned but did not repent, and finally suffered the punishment of death.

古文：哀帝时，大司马董贤第门自坏。
现代文：哀帝时，大司马董贤的宅门自己倒塌。
English: When the emperor was mourned, the gate of the house of the grand secretary Ma Dongxian collapsed on its own.

古文：时，贤以私爱居大位，赏赐无度，骄嫚不敬，大失臣道，见戒不改。
现代文：当时董贤因皇帝的宠爱而得任高官大位，得到非分的厚赏，以致骄横傲慢对皇帝也不再恭敬，大失为臣之道，受到告诫也不改悔。
English: At that time, because of the emperor's favor, Dong Xian was appointed to a high-ranking position and received a generous reward. As a result, he was so arrogant that he no longer respected the emperor, lost his way as a vassal, and did not repent when he was admonished.

古文：后贤夫妻自杀，家徙合浦。
现代文：后来董贤夫妻自杀，家人流放到合浦。
English: Later, Mr. and Mrs. Dong Xian committed suicide, and the family was exiled to Hapu.

古文：传曰： 言之不从，是谓不艾，厥咎僭，厥罚恒阳，厥极忧。
现代文：传上说： 言之不从，是谓不艾，厥咎僭，厥罚恒阳，厥极忧。
English: According to legend: If you don't do as you're told, you're not good, you'll be blamed, you'll be punished by Hengyang, and you'll be extremely worried.

古文：时则有诗妖，时则有介虫之孽，时则有犬祸。时则有口舌之，时则有白眚白祥。
现代文：时则有诗妖，时则有介虫之孽，时则有犬祸，时则有舌之痈，时则有白眚白祥。
English: Sometimes there is a poem demon, sometimes there is the evil of insects, sometimes there is a dog accident, sometimes there is the tongue of the tongue, and sometimes there is the egret Bai Xiang.

古文：惟木沴金。 
现代文：惟木诊金。 
English: It is made of wood and gold.

古文： 言之不从 ，从，顺也。 是谓不乂 ，乂，治也。
现代文： 言之不从 ，从，即顺从。 是谓不义 ，义，即治理。
English: Not to obey, but to submit, is called unrighteousness, but righteousness, and government.

古文：孔子曰； 君子居其室，出其言不善，则千里之外违之，况其迩者乎！ 
现代文：孔子说： 君子坐在屋裹，如所讲的话不正确，就是远在千里之外的人也反对，何况近在眼前的人呢！ 
English: Confucius said: A gentleman sitting at home, if what he says is not correct, even if it is a thousand miles away, will be opposed, let alone someone who is right in front of him!

古文：《诗》云： 如蜩如螗，如沸如羹。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 就像蝉堰的聒噪，就像锅中热汤的沸腾。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: It is like the noise of cicadas, like the boiling of hot soup in a pot.

古文：言上号令不顺民心，虚哗愦乱，则不能治海内，失在过差，故其咎僭，僭，差也。
现代文：都是形容在上位的人所发的号令不顺民心，虚夸昏愤，不能治理国家，错就错在差错上，所以其过为僭。僭，也就是差错。
English: All of them describe that the orders issued by the people in power are not in line with the people's hearts, boastful and angry, and unable to govern the country. The fault is in the error, so the fault is bad. Bad, that is, error.

古文：刑罚妄加，群阴不附，则阳气胜，故其罚常阳也。
现代文：刑罚乱施不照法律，众多阴魂不得安定，致使阳气胜，所以这样的天罚就是常阳而少阴。
English: The punishment is wanton and indiscriminate, the yin cannot be smooth, and the yang prevails, so the punishment is long and hard.

古文：旱伤百谷，则有寇难，上下俱忧，故其极忧也。
现代文：天旱伤害百谷，从而造成寇贼发难，朝野上下都紧张，所以其结果是可怕的。
English: If drought harms a hundred valleys, there will be the scourge of thieves and robbers, and everyone will be worried, so the scourge will be great.

古文：君炕阳而暴虐，臣畏刑而柑口，则怨谤之气发于歌谣，故有诗妖。
现代文：君王急躁横暴，臣子害怕受到刑罚而缄口不言，于是怨愤之气发于歌谣，所以就有诗妖。
English: Kings are impetuous and violent, and courtiers are afraid of being punished and do not speak out, so the resentment comes from songs, so there are poetry demons.

古文：介虫孽者，谓小虫有甲飞扬之类，阳气所生也，于《春秋》为螽，今谓之蝗，皆其类也。
现代文：介虫之孽，是指小虫子有甲壳能飞的那些，是阳气所生的，在《春秋》中称作螽，现在称作蝗，都属这一类。
English: The witchcraft of beetles is to say that small insects such as flying beetles, which are born of yang qi, were maggots in Spring and Autumn, and are now called locusts, are all of the same kind.

古文：于《易》， 兑 为口，犬以吠守，而不可信，言气毁故有犬祸。
现代文：在《易经》上，《兑》卦为，狗用叫的声音看家，但不可信赖，所以言论受到压抑，就有犬祸。
English: In the I Ching, the Dui Gua is that the dog is watching the house with a barking voice, but it cannot be trusted, so if the speech is suppressed, there will be a dog accident.

古文：一曰，旱岁犬多狂死及为怪，亦是也。
现代文：一种说法认为，大旱之年狗多疯狂而死甚至发生怪异现象，也由此造成。
English: It is also correct to say that in years of great drought, dogs often go mad and die and become monsters.

古文：及人，则多病口喉咳者，故有口舌疴。
现代文：表现在人的身上，则多是得喉之病，所以有口舌生病。
English: In the human body, it is mostly a throat disease, so there is a disease of the mouth and tongue.

古文：金色白，故有白眚白祥。
现代文：金为白色，所以有白眚白祥。
English: The color of gold is white, so there is white evil and white good.

古文：凡言伤者，病金气；金气病，则木沴之。
现代文：凡属言论之伤，都是金气之害；金气受害，木气就来侵害。
English: He who speaks injuriously is ill with the gold-nature; the gold-nature is weak, but wood cures it.

古文：其极忧者，顺之，其福曰康宁。
现代文：其后果可忧者如能顺过来，便能得康宁之福。
English: Sorrow comes, adjust it, and its blessing is called Kangning.

古文：刘歆言传曰时有毛虫之孽，说以为于天文西方参为虎星，故为毛虫。
现代文：刘歆说传上讲有时有毛虫之孽。解释说是因为在天文上西方参星是虎星，所以叫毛虫。
English: Liu Yao said that it is said that there is sometimes the evil of caterpillars. He explained that it is because the western ginseng star is a tiger star in astronomy, so it is called a caterpillar.

古文：史记周单襄公与晋锜、郤犨、郤至、齐国佐语，告鲁成公曰： 晋将有乱，三郤其当之乎！
现代文：历史上记载周朝的大夫单襄公与晋国的大夫邵锜、邵孪、邵至、齐国大夫国佐交谈之后，告诉鲁成公说： 晋国将要出乱子，三邵大概要遭祸了！
English: According to historical records, the doctor of Zhou Dynasty, Shan Xianggong, told Lu Chenggong after talking with the doctors of Jin Province, Shao Jun, Shao Jun, Shao Zhi, and the doctor of Qi Province, Guo Zuo, that: Jin Province will be in turmoil, and the three Shao provinces will be in trouble!

古文：夫郤氏，晋之宠人也，三卿而五大夫，可以戒惧矣。
现代文：邵氏，是晋国的宠幸大臣，有三人为卿，五人为大夫，应该注意些了。
English: Mr. Shao is the favored minister of Jin Province, with three titles of nobility and five titles of doctor. You should pay attention.

古文：高位实疾颠，厚味实腊毒。
现代文：地位高有垮台颠覆的危险，味重就有极度之毒。
English: High status has the danger of downfall and subversion, and heavy taste has extreme poison.

古文：今郤伯之语犯，叔迂，季伐。犯则陵人，迂则诬人，伐则掩人。
现代文：现在邵锜说话放肆，邵挛说话不讲根据，邵至说话自夸自美。放肆就会盛气凌人；不讲根据就会诬害人；自夸就会掩人之功。
English: Now, Shao Jun speaks impudently, Shao Jun speaks baselessly, and Shao Zui speaks boastfully. The impudent will abuse others; the baseless will slander others; and the boastful will conceal others' merits.

古文：有是宠也，而益之以三怨，其谁能忍之！
现代文：有那么高的地位，再加上这三种仇怨，谁能甘心忍受！
English: With such a high position, plus these three grudges, who can bear it willingly!

古文：虽齐国之亦将与焉。
现代文：就是齐国的国佐也将会遇上麻烦。
English: Even the governor of Qi will be in trouble.

古文：立于淫乱之国，而好尽言以招人过，怨之本也。
现代文：身在淫乱不治的国家，却好畅言而指责人家的错误，这是结怨的根源。
English: In a country where fornication is incurable, it is a source of resentment to speak out and accuse others of wrongdoing.

古文：唯善人能受尽言，齐其有乎？ 
现代文：衹有善良正直的人才能听取直言不讳之词，齐国有这种人吗？ 
English: There are no good and honest people to listen to the outspoken words, is there such a person in Qi State?

古文：十七年，晋杀三郤。
现代文：鲁成公十七年，晋国杀了三却。
English: In the 17th year of the reign of King Lu Chenggong, the State of Jin killed three emperors.

古文：十八年，齐杀国佐。
现代文：十八年，齐国杀了国佐。
English: In 18th year, Qi killed Guo Zuo.

古文：凡此属，皆言不从之咎云。
现代文：凡属此类之事，都是说话不顺从引来的灾祸。
English: All such things are the evil consequences of speaking and disobeying.

古文：晋穆侯以条之役生太子，名之曰仇；其弟以千畮之战生，名之曰成师。
现代文：晋穆侯在条地战役时生了太子，取名为仇；太子的弟弟在千晦之战时出生，取名为成师。
English: At the time of the Battle of Jochi, Prince Jinmu gave birth to a son, who was named Qu; the prince's younger brother was born at the time of the Battle of Chihue, and was named Chengshi.

古文：师服曰： 异哉，君之名子也！
现代文：师服说： 怪哉，晋侯竟这样给儿子取名！
English: Shifu said, "It's strange that Jin Hou actually named his son like this!

古文：夫名以制谊，谊以出礼，礼以体政，政以正民，是以政成而民听；易则生乱。
现代文：名字关系制定义理，义理则产生礼仪，礼仪能规范政令，政令用以端正民众，因此政事成功而百姓服从；反之就要发生变乱。
English: The name relationship establishes the principle, and the principle produces the etiquette. The etiquette can regulate the government decree, and the government decree is used to correct the people, so the government is successful and the people obey; otherwise, chaos will occur.

古文：嘉耦曰妃，怨耦曰仇，古之命也。
现代文：好的配偶叫妃，冤家对头叫做仇，古代就是这么叫的。
English: A good spouse is called a concubine, an enemy is called a foe, and this is how it was called in ancient times.

古文：今君名太子曰仇，弟曰成师，始兆乱矣，兄其替乎！ 
现代文：今天晋穆侯给太子起名叫仇，给太子的弟弟起名叫成师，罱 子开始出现兆头了，哥哥的太子之位可能要保不住！ 
English: Today, Jinmukhou named the prince a foe, and named the prince's younger brother a mentor. The signs are beginning to appear, and the brother's position as prince may be untenable!

古文：及仇嗣立，是为文侯。
现代文：后来仇嗣立为君，就是鲁文侯。
English: Later, a hostile heir was appointed as the prince, that is, the prince of Luwen.

古文：文侯卒，子昭侯立，封成师于曲沃，号桓叔。
现代文：文侯卒，其子昭侯嗣立为君，封成师于曲沃，号为桓叔。
English: He was a pupil of Bunhō, and his son, Akihō Shiryaku, was a pupil of Quwo, and his nickname was Uncle Kan.

古文：后晋人杀昭侯而纳桓叔，不克。
现代文：再往后，晋人杀死昭侯而要让桓叔入朝为君，没成功。
English: Later, the Jin people killed the Zhaohou and tried to make Uncle Huan enter the imperial court, but without success.

古文：复立昭侯子孝侯，桓权子严伯杀之。
现代文：又立昭侯之子孝侯为君，桓叔的儿子严伯杀了孝侯。
English: In addition, Akihiro's son, Takahiro, was appointed as regent, and Uncle Kan's son, Yanbo, killed Takahiro.

古文：晋人立其弟鄂侯。
现代文：晋国人立孝侯弟鄂侯。
English: Jin people set up a filial piety brother, E Hou.

古文：鄂侯生哀侯，严伯子武公复杀哀侯及其弟，灭之，而代有晋国。
现代文：鄂侯生哀侯，严伯之子武公又杀了哀侯和他的弟弟，终于灭掉宗子一系，取代国君之位而拥有晋国。
English: E Hou gave birth to Ma Hou, Yan Bo's son Wu Gong then killed Ma Hou and his younger brother, finally eliminating the line of the patriarch, replacing the position of the sovereign and possessing Jin Province.

古文：宣公六年，郑公子曼满与王子伯廖语，欲为卿。
现代文：宣公六年，郑国公子曼满与王子伯廖讲，要做国卿。
English: Six years after the proclamation of the Republic, Zheng Guozhong Manman and Prince Bo Liao told him that he should be the Secretary of State.

古文：伯廖告人曰： 无德而贪，其在《周易》 丰 之 离 ，弗过之矣。 
现代文：伯廖对人说： 没有道德却贪图高爵显位，如在《周易。丰》之变《离》，不过三年就要灭亡了。 
English: Beriau said to the people, "There is no morality, but there is a craving for high rank and prominence, such as in "Zhou Yi. Feng" and "Leave," but it will be destroyed in three years.

古文：间一岁，郑人杀之。
现代文：隔了一年，郑国人就杀了曼满。
English: A year later, the Zheng people killed Man Man.

古文：襄公二十九年，齐高子容与宋司徒见晋知伯，汝齐相礼。
现代文：襄公二十九年，齐高子容与宋国的司徒会见晋国的知伯，汝齐赞礼。
English: In the 29th year of the reign of Emperor Xiang, Qi Gaozirong and Sito of Song met with Zhibo of Jin, and Ru Qi praised him.

古文：宾出，汝齐语知伯曰： 二子皆将不免！
现代文：两位宾客走后，汝齐对知伯说： 这二位都将不免于祸！
English: After the two guests left, Ru Qi said to Zhi Bo: These two will not be spared from the disaster!

古文：子容专，司徒侈，皆亡家之主也。
现代文：高子容专横，司徒奢侈，都是亡家之人。
English: Gao Zi Rong is domineering, and Sito is extravagant. They are both deceased.

古文：专则速及，侈将以其力敝，专则人实敝之，将及矣。 
现代文：专横将很快惹祸，奢侈将因其恃力而败亡，专横了，别人就要打败他，没多久了。 
English: Arrogance will soon bring trouble, luxury will be defeated by its strength, and arrogance will be defeated by others, soon.

古文：九月，高子出奔燕。
现代文：这年九月，高子容出逃燕国。
English: In September of that year, Takako Yodo fled to Yan Province.

古文：襄公三十一年正月，鲁穆叔会晋归，告孟孝伯曰： 赵孟将死矣！
现代文：襄公三十一年正月，鲁国大夫穆叔到晋国会谈后回来，告诉鲁国大夫孟孝伯说： 赵孟快死了！
English: In the first month of the 31st year of the reign of King Xiang, Lu Guotong's doctor Mu Cang went to the State of Jin for talks and came back, telling Lu Guotong's doctor Meng Xiaobo: "Zhao Meng is dying!

古文：其语偷，不似民主；且年未盈五十，而谆谆焉如八九十者，弗能久矣。
现代文：他所谈的都是些苟且之言，不像为民做主的大臣；再看他年纪没到五十，而絮絮叨叨地像八九十岁的老翁，活不多久了。
English: What he says is all fine words, not like a minister who makes decisions for the people; besides, he's not even fifty years old, but he babbles like an eighty- or ninety-year-old man who doesn't have long to live.

古文：若赵孟死，为政者其韩子乎？吾子盍与季孙言之？可以树善，君子也。 
现代文：如趟孟死了，代他执政的可能是韩子了，你何不找季孙谈谈，可以与韩子建立良好关系，韩子可是位君子啊。 
English: If Meng dies, it's possible that Han Zi will take over. Why don't you talk to Ji Sun? You can establish a good relationship with Han Zi. Han Zi is a gentleman.

古文：孝伯曰： 民生几何，谁能毋偷！
现代文：孟孝伯说： 人生几何，谁能不苟且偷生！
English: Meng Xiaobo said, "Life is like a geometry, who can be scrupulous and steal a living?

古文：朝不及夕，将焉用树！ 
现代文：朝不虑夕，还建立什么良好关系！ 
English: You can't build a good relationship overnight!

古文：穆叔告人曰： 孟孙将死矣！
现代文：穆叔听到这番话，又对别人说： 孟孝伯快要死了！
English: When Uncle Mu heard this, he said to others, "Meng Xiaobo is about to die!"

古文：吾语诸赵孟之偷也，而又甚焉。 
现代文：我跟他说晋国赵孟萎靡不振，而他却比赵孟更严重。 
English: I told him that Zhao Meng in Jin Province was depressed, but he was even more depressed than Zhao Meng.

古文：九月，孟孝伯卒。
现代文：当年九月，孟孝伯去世。
English: In September of that year, Meng Xiaobo passed away.

古文：昭公元年，周使刘定公劳晋赵孟，因曰： 子弁冕以临诸侯，盍亦远绩禹功，而大庇民乎？ 
现代文：昭公元年，周天子派刘定公去慰劳晋卿赵孟，刘定公乘机对赵孟说： 您戴冠冕、为大臣以接待诸侯，何不也远继大禹之功，而给民众造大福呢？ 
English: In the year of Zhao, Zhou Tianzi sent Liu Dinggong to console Zhao Meng, the emperor of Jin. Liu Dinggong took the opportunity to say to Zhao Meng: You wear a crown, you are a minister to receive princes, why not follow in the footsteps of Dayu and create great blessings for the people?

古文：对曰： 老夫罪戾是惧，焉能恤远？
现代文：回答说： 老夫我衹担心会犯下什么罪过，哪裹还顾得到长远之事呢！
English: He replied, "Old man, I'm not worried about committing a crime, I'm worried about the long term!

古文：吾侪偷食，朝不谋夕，何其长也？ 
现代文：我们这些人，苟且度日，朝不虑夕，哪能作长远考虑呢！ 
English: Those of us who live day to day, without a care in the world, can't think about the long term!

古文：齐子归，以语王曰： 谚所谓老将和而耄及之者，其赵孟之谓乎！
现代文：刘定公回去把这一情况告诉周天子说： 俗话说，人老心眼多，而衰颓也来了，那说的就是赵孟吧！
English: Liu Dingong went back and told Zhou Tianzi about this situation, saying: As the saying goes, people have many hearts and eyes, but decline is also coming, that's what Zhao Meng said!

古文：为晋王卿以主诸侯，而侪于隶人，朝不谋夕，弃神人矣。
现代文：他身为晋国的正卿来主持诸侯会盟，却把自己等同卑贱之人，朝不虑夕，自弃于神灵与百姓了。
English: Although he presided over the alliance of lords and vassals as the rightful lord of Jin, he regarded himself as a lowly person and abandoned himself to the gods and the people without a second thought.

古文：神怒民畔，何以能久？
现代文：天怒人怨，怎能长久下去？
English: How can this go on for long?

古文：赵孟不复年矣！ 
现代文：趟孟活不过一年了！ 
English: I've only been alive for a year!

古文：是岁，秦景公弟后子奔晋，赵孟问： 秦君如何？ 
现代文：这一年，秦景公的弟弟后子逃奔到晋国，趟孟问他： 秦君怎样？ 
English: In this year, the younger brother of Qin Jinggong fled to Jin Province, and Meng asked him: How is Qin?

古文：对曰： 无道。 
现代文：回答说： 没有为君治国之道。 
English: He replied: "There is no way to govern for the sake of governing."

古文：赵孟曰： 亡乎？ 
现代文：赵孟说： 要灭亡吗？ 
English: Zhao Meng said: Do you want to perish?

古文：对曰： 何为？
现代文：回答说： 那怎么会呢？
English: And he said, How shall this be?

古文：一世无道，国未艾也。
现代文：一代昏乱无道，国家还不致走到绝境。
English: A generation of chaos and confusion, and the country has not yet reached a dead end.

古文：国于天地，有与立焉。不数世淫，弗能敝也。 
现代文：立国天地之间，自有帮助立国的力量，不是几代荒淫乱政，是不会灭亡的。 
English: Between the founding of the country and the world, there is a power to help the founding of the country, not several generations of wild and chaotic politics, and it will not perish.

古文：赵孟曰： 夭乎？ 
现代文：趟孟说： 会是短命吗？ 
English: Wai Meng said: Will it be short-lived?

古文：对曰： 有焉。 
现代文：回答说： 有可能。 
English: "It's possible," he replied.

古文：赵孟曰： 其几何？ 
现代文：赵孟说： 大约多长时间？ 
English: Zhao Meng said: About how long?

古文：对曰： 钅咸闻国无道而年谷和孰，天赞之也，鲜不五稔。 
现代文：回答说： 我听说国君无道而年成丰收，这是老天的赞助，最少也得五年。 
English: He replied, "I have heard that the king has a good harvest every year without any reason. This is God's blessing, and it will last for at least five years.

古文：赵孟视廕，曰： 朝夕不相及，谁能待五？ 
现代文：赵孟看着树影说： 朝不虑夕，谁能等上五年之久？ 
English: Zhao Meng looked at the shadow of the tree and said, "If you don't worry about tomorrow, who can wait for five years?

古文：后子出而告人曰： 赵孟将死矣！
现代文：后子告退后对人们说： 趟孟快死了！
English: The son-in-law retreated and said to the people, "Wat Meng is about to die!"

古文：主民玩岁而惕日，其与几何？ 
现代文：主持民政国事，却虚度时日而衹顾眼前，还能活几天？ 
English: How many days can you live if you preside over civil affairs and state affairs, but waste time and mindlessly look ahead?

古文：冬，赵孟卒。
现代文：冬季，趟孟去世。
English: In the winter, Wu Meng passed away.

古文：昭五年，秦景公卒。
现代文：昭公五年，秦景公去世。
English: In the fifth year of Zhaogong, Qin Jinggong passed away.

古文：昭公元年，楚公子围会盟，设服离卫。
现代文：昭公元年，楚国公子围参加各国会盟，他摆出了国君的服饰和二入执戈在前以侍卫国君的架势。
English: In the year of Zhao, the princes of the State of Chu gathered to participate in the League of Nations, and he put on the costume of the sovereign and the posture of serving and guarding the sovereign.

古文：鲁叔孙穆子曰： 楚公子美矣君哉！ 
现代文：鲁国的叔孙穆子说： 这楚公子美得像个国君一样啊！ 
English: Lu's great-great-uncle Mu Zi said: This Chu boy is as beautiful as a sovereign!

古文：伯州犁曰： 此行也，辞也假之寡君。 
现代文：楚国太宰伯州犁说： 这一次参加会盟，出发时从国君那裹借来的这些服饰。 
English: "This time, I'm participating in the league, and I'm wearing these clothes that I borrowed from the sovereign when I set out," said the grand vizier of the State of Chu, Bozhong.

古文：郑行人子羽曰： 假不反矣。 
现代文：郑国行人子羽说： 借了就不会还了。 
English: Zheng Guo Xingren Zi Yu said: If you borrow something, you won't be able to pay it back.

古文：伯州犁曰： 子姑忧予子晢之欲背诞也。 
现代文：伯州犁说： 你还是去为郑国子哲要背叛作乱担心吧！ 
English: Bozhou Yao said: You should still go and worry about Zheng Guozizhe betraying and creating turmoil!

古文：子羽曰： 假而不反，子其无忧乎？ 
现代文：子羽说： 借了不还，你不为此担心吗？ 
English: Zi Yu said, "If you borrow something and don't pay it back, don't you worry about that?

古文：齐国子曰： 吾代二子闵矣。 
现代文：齐大夫国子说： 我替您二位担心了。 
English: Dr. Qi Kuniko said, "I am worried about you two.

古文：陈公子招曰： 不忧何成？
现代文：陈国的公子招说： 人无忧怎能成事？
English: Chen Guo's son-in-law said, "How can one accomplish anything without worries?"

古文：二子乐矣！ 
现代文：我看这二位很高兴！ 
English: I think these two are very happy!

古文：卫齐子曰： 苟或知之，虽忧不害。 
现代文：卫国大夫齐子说： 如事先知道，就是有可忧之事发生也不会遭受损害。 
English: "If you know in advance, you won't be harmed even if something worrisome happens," said Dr. Qi Rong, a doctor at the National Defense Medical Center.

古文：退会，子羽告人曰： 齐、卫、陈大夫其不免乎！
现代文：退席后，子羽对人们说： 齐、卫、陈三国大夫可能都难免于祸！
English: After leaving the meeting, Zi Yu said to the people: Drs. Qi, Wei and Chen may all be unavoidable!

古文：国子代人忧，子招乐忧，齐子虽忧费害。
现代文：国子替人担忧，子招以忧为乐，齐子认为虽忧而无害。
English: Guo Zi worries for others, Zi Zhao enjoys worrying, Qi Zi believes that although worrying, it is harmless.

古文：夫弗及而忧，与可忧而乐，与忧而弗害，皆取忧之道也。
现代文：与己无关而替人担忧，和应忧反而高兴，以及认为忧而无害，这都是自取忧患之道。
English: Worrying for others without concern for oneself, and being happy instead of worrying, and thinking that worrying is harmless, are all ways of self-causing worries.

古文：《太誓》曰： 民之所欲，天必从之。 
现代文：《太誓》上说： 民众所要求的，老天一定依从。 
English: In the "Great Oath," it says: "What the people ask for, God will surely comply with."

古文：三大夫兆忧矣，能无至乎？
现代文：这三位大夫已经都有了忧患将至的兆头了，能没忧患降临吗！
English: These three doctors have already seen the signs of trouble ahead. Can there be no trouble ahead?

古文：言以知物，其是之谓矣。 
现代文：由说话而可预知事物的到来，大概说的就是这种情况。 
English: This is roughly what happens when you can predict the arrival of an object just by speaking.

古文：昭公十五年，晋籍谈如周葬穆后。既除丧而燕，王曰： 诸侯皆有以填抚王室，晋独无有，何也？ 
现代文：昭公十五年，晋国大夫籍谈到成周参加穆后的葬礼，丧服脱去后举行宴会，周天子对籍谈说： 诸侯都有礼器呈献王室，惟独晋国没有，这是为什么？ 
English: In the 15th year of the reign of King Zhaogong, a doctor from the State of Jin said that Zheng Zhou attended the funeral of Queen Mu, and held a banquet after the funeral clothes were removed. Zhou Tianzi said to the doctor: The princes all have ceremonial objects to present to the royal family, but the State of Jin does not. Why is this?

古文：籍谈对曰： 诸侯之封也，皆受明器于王室，故能荐彝器。
现代文：籍谈回答说： 诸侯受封赏之时，都从王室接受了明德之器，所以能进献实用之器。
English: The scholar replied, "When the princes received their awards, they all received Ming and De ware from the royal family, so they were able to donate practical ware.

古文：晋居深山，戎翟之与邻，拜戎不暇，其何以献器？ 
现代文：晋国位居深山与戎狄为邻，礼拜戎狄都来不及，哪还能进献礼器呢？ 
English: Jin Province is located deep in the mountains and is adjacent to Yongdi, and it is too late to worship Yongdi, where else can you enter the votive offering?

古文：王曰： 叔氏其忘诸乎！
现代文：周天子说： 叔氏难道是忘了吗！
English: Zhou Tianzi said, "Has my uncle forgotten everything?"

古文：叔父唐叔，成王之母弟，其反亡分乎？
现代文：当初称为叔父的唐叔是成王的同母兄弟，难道反而分不到礼器吗？
English: Uncle Tang, who was originally called uncle, was Cheng Wang's half-brother. Couldn't he have been given a ceremonial tool instead?

古文：昔而高祖司晋之典籍，以为大正，故曰籍氏。
现代文：从前你的高祖掌管晋国的典籍，作为大臣，所以才称为籍氏。
English: Once upon a time, your great-great-great-grandfather was in charge of Jin's classic books, and as a minister, that's why he was called "Cheng."

古文：女，司典之后也，何故忘之？ 
现代文：你是司典之臣的后人啊，为什么会忘记这些呢？ 
English: You are a descendant of the scribe's vassal, why do you forget these things?

古文：籍谈不能对。
现代文：籍谈不能作答。
English: I can't answer that.

古文：宾出，王曰： 籍父其无后乎！
现代文：宾客退出之后，周天子说： 籍谈的后代恐怕不能再享有爵禄了！
English: After the guests had left, Zhou Tianzi said: "I'm afraid that the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants!

古文：数典而忘其祖。 
现代文：世掌典籍之后裔，竟忘了他的祖先。 
English: The descendant of a world-renowned author has forgotten his ancestor.

古文：籍谈归，以语叔向。
现代文：籍谈回国后，向叔向谈了这一情况。
English: After returning to China, he talked to his uncle about the situation.

古文：叔向曰： 王其不终乎！
现代文：叔向说： 周天子恐怕不得善终了！
English: Uncle Xiang said: I'm afraid Zhou Tianzi will not have a happy ending!

古文：吾闻所乐必卒焉。
现代文：我听说，人爱好什么，将来就会因什么而死。
English: I have heard that what a man loves, he will die for.

古文：今王乐忧，若卒以忧，不可谓终。
现代文：现在天子以丧忧为乐，若最后死在丧忧上，那就不是善终了。
English: Now the Son of Heaven takes pleasure in sorrow, and if he finally dies of sorrow, it will not be a good end.

古文：王一岁而有三年之丧二焉，于是乎以丧宾燕，又求彝器，乐忧甚矣。
现代文：周天子一年之内遇上了两个三年之期的大丧，在这种情况下宴请前来吊丧的宾客，还要诸侯进献礼器，以丧忧为乐，太过分了。
English: Zhou Tianzi had two three-year-long funerals within a year. Under such circumstances, it was too much to invite guests who came to mourn, and to ask the lords to bring in votive offerings, and to take pleasure in sorrow.

古文：三年之丧，虽贵遂服，礼也。
现代文：丧期三年，就是贵为天子也应遵守，这是礼制。
English: The three-year mourning period should be observed even if you are a son of heaven. This is the etiquette.

古文：王虽弗遂，燕乐已早。
现代文：天子就是不服丧三年，这饮宴之乐也太早了。
English: God willing, it will only be three years since his death, and it's too early to enjoy this banquet.

古文：礼，王之大经也；一动而失二礼，无大经矣。
现代文：礼是天子约己而治天下的大纲啊；这一举动就违失了两个丧礼，已无纲常可言了。
English: Rites are the outline for the heavenly son to rule the world according to his own will; this action violates two funerals, and there is no longer any outline to speak of.

古文：言以考典，典以志经。忘经而多言举典，将安用之！ 
现代文：言行应以有典有据，典是记载纲常的，现在忘了纲常之礼却大谈典故，那还有什么用呢！ 
English: Words and deeds should be backed up by the scriptures. The scriptures are the standard of record. Now they have forgotten the standard of etiquette, but talk about allusions. What use is that?

古文：哀公十六年，孔丘卒，公诔之曰： 旻天不吊，不慭遗一老，俾屏予一人。 
现代文：哀公十六年，孔丘去世，哀公为孔子致悼词说： 老天不善待我，不能暂且为我留下这位老人，让他保护我一人。 
English: Sixteen years after the death of Confucius, his father-in-law gave a eulogy for Confucius, saying, "God has not been kind to me, and I cannot leave this old man to protect me alone.

古文：子赣曰： 君其不殁于鲁乎？
现代文：子贡说： 我们国君可能不能最后死在鲁国了！
English: Zigong said, "Our sovereign may not be able to die in Lu Province after all!"

古文：夫子之言曰： 礼失则昏，名失则愆。 失志为昏，失所为愆。
现代文：我们的夫子这样说过： 人失了礼就要昏愤，失了名分就是犯错，失去大志就要昏庸，失去自己的本分就是犯错。
English: Our master said this: If one loses propriety, one will become angry; if one loses prestige, one will make mistakes; if one loses aspiration, one will become mediocre; if one loses one's duty, one will make mistakes.

古文：生弗能用，死而诔之，非礼也；称 予一人 ，非名也。
现代文：夫子在世的时候，不能任用，死了却致词悼念，这不合礼义；自称 我一人 ，这不合名分。
English: When he was alive, he could not be appointed, but when he died, he gave a speech to mourn, which was not proper; he called himself "I alone," which was not proper.

古文：君两失之。 
现代文：我君把这两样都失了。 
English: I lost them both.

古文：二十七年，公孙于邾，遂死于越。
现代文：哀公二十七年，哀公逊位邾，最后死于越。
English: After 27 years of mourning, he abdicated the throne and finally died in Yue.

古文：庶征之恒阳，刘向以为《春秋》大旱也。
现代文：各种征兆中的恒阳，刘向认为是《春秋》上说的大旱。
English: Among the various signs of Hengyang, Liu Xiang believes that it is the drought mentioned in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：其夏旱雩祀，谓之大雩。
现代文：而在夏季大旱时祭天求雨叫做大雩。
English: In the summer, when there is a big drought, it is called "Daesong" (大) to pray for rain.

古文：不伤二谷，谓之不雨。
现代文：旱而未伤春秋两季谷物，衹叫做不雨。
English: Cereals can grow in both seasons of spring and autumn without being damaged by drought. This is called no rain.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 欲德不用兹谓张，厥灾荒。
现代文：京房的《易传》说： 欲求得贤才却不任用，这叫做虚张声势，因此而生的灾害是地荒。
English: Jingfang's "I Chuan" said: The desire to get a talented person but not to appoint him is called bluffing, and the resulting disaster is land shortage.

古文：荒，旱也，其旱阴云不雨，变而赤，因而除。
现代文：荒，即因旱而荒。旱的时候有云有阴就是不下雨，再变而为无云，因而除。
English: Drought, that is, due to drought. When there is drought, there is cloud and shade, that is, no rain, and then it changes to no cloud, so it is eliminated.

古文：师出过时兹谓广，其旱不生。
现代文：出兵作战超过时间，这叫做旷曰持久，因此而引发的旱灾使庄稼不能存活生长。
English: When the army goes to war, it's too late. It's called a drought. It's not a drought.

古文：上下皆蔽兹谓隔，其旱天赤三月，时有雹杀飞禽。
现代文：朝野上下都隐蔽无言这叫作隔膜不通，引发的旱灾是天空无云三个月，时有冰雹击杀飞乌。
English: Both up and down are blinded by this so-called gap. Its drought is three months of fine weather, and sometimes there are hailstones that kill birds.

古文：上缘求妃兹谓僭，其旱三月大温亡云。
现代文：到处寻求妃妾是所谓乱，引发的旱灾是三个月气温过高没有云雾。
English: The king searched far and wide for the concubine, known as the cormorant, who had been missing for three months.

古文：居高台府，兹谓犯阴侵阳，其旱万物根死，数有火灾。
现代文：在高处建筑官府是所谓侵犯阴阳，由之导致的大旱将万物从根上旱死，常有火灾发生。
English: Building government offices in high places is a so-called violation of yin and yang. The resulting drought will dry everything to death from the roots, and fires often occur.

古文：庶位逾节兹谓僭，其旱泽物枯，为火所伤。 釐公二十一年 夏，大旱 。
现代文：地位卑低而越级是所谓僭越，由之导致旱灾是有水分的东西变得枯干，而起火。 僖公二十一年 夏季，大旱 。
English: Those who are lowly in status and rise above their class are said to be greedy. As a result, droughts cause things that have water to become dry and catch fire.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，齐桓既死，诸侯从楚，釐尤得楚心。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向认为，齐桓公死后，诸侯顺从了楚国，鲁僖公尤得楚君欢心。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang believed that after the death of Prince Qi Huan, the princes obeyed the State of Chu, and Prince Lu Yao won the favor of King Chu.

古文：楚来献捷，释宋之执。
现代文：楚国来鲁国献俘，释放宋国的俘虏。
English: The State of Chu came to the State of Lu to offer captives, and the captives of the State of Song were released.

古文：外倚强楚，炕阳失众，又作南门，劳民兴役。
现代文：鲁国对外倚重强大的楚国，对内暴虐而不得民心，又修建南门，兴土木之工而劳累百姓。
English: The State of Lu relied heavily on the powerful State of Chu for external support, but abused the internal affairs of the country and failed to win the hearts and minds of the people. Moreover, the construction of the South Gate and the construction of civil engineering work exhausted the people.

古文：诸雩旱不雨，略皆同说。
现代文：多种祈雨而天旱无雨的情况，大致都是这类失众而天怒降灾的表现。
English: A variety of situations of praying for rain, but no rain, are generally manifestations of this kind of loss of popularity and the wrath of heaven.

古文：宣公七年 秋，大旱 。
现代文：宣公七年 秋季，大旱 。
English: In the autumn of the seventh year after the proclamation of the Republic, there was a severe drought.

古文：是夏，宣与齐侯伐莱。
现代文：这年夏天，鲁宣公与齐侯一起征伐莱国。
English: In the summer of that year, Lu Xuan Gong and Qi Hou went to conquer Laiwu together.

古文：襄公五年 秋，大雩 。
现代文：襄公五年 秋季，举行求雨大祭 。
English: In the autumn of the fifth year of Emperor Xianggong's reign, a rain-seeking festival was held.

古文：先是，宋鱼石奔楚，楚伐宋，取彭城以封鱼石。
现代文：此前，宋臣鱼石逃奔到楚国，楚国征伐宋国，夺取了彭城，把这个地方封给鱼石。
English: Previously, Song's vassal Yu Shi ran away to Chu. Chu conquered Song, captured Pengcheng, and gave this place to Yu Shi.

古文：郑畔于中国而附楚，襄与诸侯共围彭城，城郑虎牢以御楚。
现代文：郑国背叛中原而投向楚国，鲁襄公与诸侯一起围攻彭城，在原属郑地的虎牢修筑城防用以防御楚国。
English: When Zheng betrayed the Central Plains and invaded Chu, Lu Xiang and his lords besieged Pengcheng and built fortifications in the Tiger's Lair of Zheng to defend Chu.

古文：是岁郑伯使公子发来聘，使大夫会吴于善道。
现代文：这一年郑伯派使臣公子发来鲁国访问，鲁国派大夫到善道与吴国会谈。
English: In this year, Zheng Bo sent an envoy to visit the State of Lu, and the State of Lu sent a doctor to talk with the State of Wu in Shandao.

古文：外结二国，内得郑聘，有炕阳动众之应。
现代文：对外结交二国，内得郑使来访，从而有了暴厉扰民引发的反应。
English: The two countries established diplomatic relations with the outside world, and the Zheng envoy was invited to visit, which led to a reaction caused by violent disturbance of the people.

古文：八年 九月，大雩 。
现代文：八年 九月，举行求雨大祭 。
English: In September of the eighth year, the rain-seeking festival was held.

古文：时作三军，季氏盛。
现代文：当时鲁国军队扩编为三军，季氏势力强盛。
English: At that time, the Lu army was expanded into three armies, and the influence of the Ji clan was strong.

古文：二十八年 八月，大雩 。
现代文：二十八年 八月，举行祈雨大祭 。
English: In August, the Great Rain Festival was held.

古文：先是，比年晋使荀吴、齐使庆封来聘，是夏邾子来朝。
现代文：此前，晋国使臣荀吴、齐国使臣庆封连年来访，这年夏天邾子来鲁朝会。
English: Prior to this, the envoys of Jin State, Zou Wu, and Qi State, Qingfeng, had been visiting for several years. This summer, Zou Zi came to the Lu imperial court.

古文：襄有炕阳自大之应。
现代文：鲁襄公遇上了因为暴厉大引起的天应。昭公三年 八月，大祀求雨 。
English: Lu Xianggong met with the heavenly response caused by the violence. In August of the third year of Zhaogong, the emperor prayed for rain.

古文：昭公三年 八月，大雩 刘歆以为，昭公即位年十九矣，犹有童心，居丧不哀，炕阳失众。六年 九月，大雩 。
现代文：刘歆认为，昭公即位十九年了，还有幼童的心态，处在丧亲之期而无哀痛之情，属于高傲自大不得人心，从而引发天旱无雨。六年 九月，大祀求雨 。
English: Liu Wei believed that 19 years after the enthronement of Prince Zhaohong, he still had the mentality of a young child, and he was in the period of bereavement without grief. He was arrogant and arrogant, which caused drought and no rain. In September of the sixth year, he prayed for rain.

古文：先是，莒牟夷以二邑来奔，莒怒伐鲁，叔弓帅师，距而败之，昭得入晋。
现代文：先前莒国大夫牟夷以奉献二邑之地为礼投奔鲁国，莒国因此发怒而攻打鲁国，鲁国大夫叔弓率军，抵御而打败莒军，鲁昭公得以去朝见晋国国君。
English: Earlier, Dr. Muyi of Shikoku made a courtesy visit to the state of Shinkoku by dedicating two villages. As a result, the state of Shikoku became angry and attacked Shikoku. Dr. Shikoku led the army with his bow and arrow, resisted and defeated the Shikoku army, and Lu Zhaogong was able to go to the court to meet the prince of Shinkoku.

古文：外和大国，内获二邑，取胜邻国，有炕阳动众之应。
现代文：鲁国对外结好大国，对内获得莒国的两邑，从邻国取胜，从而有燥阳恃力兴师动众而引发的天应。
English: To the outside world, Russia is a great power. To the inside world, it has gained two counties from China and won victories from its neighboring countries. As a result, there is a divine response caused by the country's efforts to arouse the masses.

古文：十六年 九月，大雩 。
现代文：十六年 九月，大祀求雨 。
English: In September, the 16th year, the great ritual of praying for rain began.

古文：先是，昭公母夫人归氏薨，昭不戚，又大搜于比蒲。
现代文：先前鲁昭公之母夫人归氏去世，昭公不伤痛难过，还到比蒲举行大规模的打猎。
English: Previously, Lu Zhaogong's mother's wife passed away, and Zhaogong was not hurt or sad, but went to Bibo to hold a large-scale hunting.

古文：晋叔向曰： 鲁有大丧而不废搜。
现代文：晋国大夫叔向说： 鲁国有大丧却还不停止聚众田猎之事。
English: Uncle Jin Guodong said to him, "Luzhou has suffered a great loss, but it has not stopped the gathering of people to hunt in the fields.

古文：国不恤丧，不忌君也；君亡戚容，不顾亲也。
现代文：国民不为国丧而哀，是心不敬君；君也没有哀痛的表现，是不念亲人。
English: If the people do not mourn for the national mourning, it is because they do not respect you; if you do not show sorrow, it is because you do not miss your relatives.

古文：殆其失国 。
现代文：恐怕要亡国了。 
English: I'm afraid we're going to lose our country.

古文：与三年同占。
现代文：此与昭公三年之事征兆相同。
English: This is the same as what happened to Akiko three years ago.

古文：二十四年 八月，大雩 。
现代文：二十四年 八月，大祀求雨 。
English: In August, 1924, the great ritual of praying for rain ended.

古文：刘歆以为，《左氏传》二十三年邾师城翼，还经鲁地，鲁袭取邾师，获其三大夫。
现代文：刘歆认为与下边的事情有关：《左氏传》载二十三年时邾国军队筑建翼地城防，返回时途经鲁国的领地，鲁国袭击消灭了邾军，俘获了邾国三位大夫。
English: Liu Wei believed that it was related to the events below: "The Legend of Zuo" was written in the 23rd year of the Warring States period, when the Warring States army built a winged city defense and returned through the territory of Lu. The attack of Lu destroyed the Warring States army and captured the three doctors of the Warring States.

古文：邾人诉于晋，晋人执我行人叔孙婼，是春乃归之。
现代文：邾人向晋国告状求援，晋国就扣下了鲁国使臣叔孙躇，造年春天才放归。
English: Xingren appealed to Jin for help, and Jin detained Lu's envoy, Sun Jian, who was not released until the spring of the following year.

古文：二十五年 七月上辛大雩，季辛又雩 ，旱甚也。
现代文：二十五年 七月上旬之辛卯曰举行求雨大祀，下旬之辛亥又举行一次 ，旱情太严重了。
English: In the first half of July, the Great Prayer for Rain was held, and in the second half of the year, the Great Prayer for Rain was held again. The drought was too severe.

古文：刘歆以为时后氏与季氏有隙。又季氏之族有淫妻为谗，使季平子与族人相恶，皆共平子。
现代文：刘歆认为，当时后氏与季氏两家有矛盾，又加上季氏族内有行为淫荡的妻子进献谗言，使季平子与本族人相互仇视，人们都攻击乎子。
English: Liu Wei believed that at that time, there was a contradiction between the two families of the Hou clan and the Ji clan, and the wife of the Ji clan, who had a lascivious behavior, made Ji Pingzi and the people of the tribe hate each other, and people attacked Ji Pingzi.

古文：子家驹谏曰： 谗人以君徼幸，不可。 
现代文：子家驹向昭公进谏说： 那些攻击季平子的人想让您冒险，这可不好。 
English: "It's not good that those who attack Ji Ping Zi want you to take risks," Zi Jiaqi said to Zhaogong Jinlu.

古文：昭公遂代季氏，为所败，出奔齐。
现代文：昭公还是讨伐了季氏，而被季氏打败，逃奔齐国。
English: Akihiro still fought against the Ji clan, but was defeated by the Ji clan and fled to Qi Province.

古文：定公七年 九月，大雩 。
现代文：定公七年 九月，大祀求雨 。
English: In September of the seventh year of King Seongjo's reign, the emperor prayed for rain.

古文：先是，定公自将侵郑，归而城中城。
现代文：先前鲁定公自己率军侵略郑国，回师后修建中城之城墙。
English: Previously, Luding himself led an army to invade Zheng, and after returning to the capital, he built the city wall in the middle of the city.

古文：二大夫帅师围郓。
现代文：又派两位大夫率军围攻鄣邑。
English: He also sent two doctors to lead an army to besiege the city.

古文：严公三十一年 冬，不雨 。
现代文：严公三十一年 冬季，无雨 。
English: The winter of 1931 was severe, with no rain.

古文：是岁，一年而三筑台，奢侈不恤民。
现代文：这一年，一年之内三次建筑台榭，奢侈铺张不管百姓疾苦。
English: This year, three times in one year, the construction of platforms, luxury and extravagance, regardless of the suffering of the people.

古文：釐公二年 冬十月不雨 ，三年 春正月不雨，夏四月不雨 ， 六月雨 。
现代文：僖公二年 冬天十月无雨 ，三年 春天正月无雨，夏天四月无雨 ， 六月下了雨 。
English: There was no rain in the winter of October in the second year of King Min, no rain in the first month of spring in the third year, no rain in the summer of April, and rain in June.

古文：先是者，严公夫人与公子庆父淫。而杀二君。
现代文：在此之前，鲁严公的夫人与公子庆父通奸，并先后杀了两个鲁君。
English: Prior to this, Lu Yan's wife had committed adultery with his son Qingfu, and had killed two Lu Jun successively.

古文：国人攻之，夫人逊于邾，庆父奔莒。
现代文：鲁国人攻伐他们，夫人退到邾国，庆父逃奔莒国。
English: The people of Lu attacked them, the wife retreated to Yunnan, and the father fled to Yunnan.

古文：釐公即位，南败邾，东败营，获其大夫。
现代文：僖公即位后，向南打败邾国，往东打败莒国，俘获莒国大夫。
English: After the enthronement of the Duke of Yunnan, he defeated Yunnan to the south, defeated Yunnan to the east, and captured the doctor of Yunnan.

古文：有炕阳之应。
现代文：有干枯的报应。
English: There is a dry retribution.

古文：文公二年， 自十有二月不雨，至于秋七月 。
现代文：文公二年， 从十二月无雨，一直到次年秋天七月 。
English: In the second year of the Bunko era, there was no rain from December until the following autumn in July.

古文：文公即位，天子使叔服会葬，毛伯赐命。
现代文：文公即位，周天子派使臣叔服来鲁参加僖公的葬礼，又派使臣毛伯来鲁赐文公命圭。
English: When Emperor Wengong ascended to the throne, Zhou Tianzi sent the envoy Uncle Fuxi to Lu to attend the funeral of Emperor Zengong, and also sent the envoy Mao Bo to Lu to bestow the imperial command on Emperor Wengong.

古文：又会晋侯于戚。公子遂如齐纳币。又与诸侯盟。
现代文：鲁国对外与晋侯在戚地会见，派公子遂到齐国行纳币礼定婚，又与诸侯会盟。
English: Lu met with Jin at a relative's place, and sent a nobleman to Qi to pay tribute and get married, and then made an alliance with the princes.

古文：上得天子，外得诸侯，沛然自大。
现代文：上得周天子之照应，外得诸侯之谊，傲然自大起来。
English: Having received the patronage of Zhou Tianzi, and the friendship of the princes, he became arrogant.

古文：跻釐公主。
现代文：把其父僖公的神主升进太庙。
English: He promoted the god of his father, Shoko, to the Imperial Temple.

古文：大夫始颛事。
现代文：大夫开始专权。
English: The doctor began to exert his authority.

古文：十年， 自正月不雨。至于秋七月 。
现代文：十年， 从正月天不下雨，直到秋天七月 。
English: For ten years, it did not rain from the first month of the year until the autumn of July.

古文：先是，公子遂会四国而救郑。
现代文：先前公子遂会同晋、宋、卫、许四国抗楚救郑。
English: The former prince then joined with Jin, Song, Wei, and Xu to fight against Chu and save Zheng.

古文：楚使越椒来聘。
现代文：后来，楚国使臣越椒来访。
English: Later, the envoy of the State of Chu, Yue Jiao, paid a visit.

古文：秦人归禭。
现代文：秦国人来赠裢衣问丧。
English: People from Qin Province came to offer mourning clothes.

古文：有炕阳之应。
现代文：有干枯的报应。
English: There is a dry retribution.

古文：十三年， 自正月不雨，至于秋七月 。
现代文：十三年 从正月不下雨，直到秋天七月 。
English: Thirteen years, no rain from the first month of the year until the fall of July.

古文：先是，曹伯、杞伯、滕子来朝，郕伯来奔，秦伯使遂来聘，季孙行父城诸及郓。
现代文：先前曹伯、杞伯、滕子来朝见鲁君，邸伯来投奔鲁国，秦国使臣遂来访，季孙行父建筑诸与鄣二城。
English: Previously, Cao Bo, Zibo, and Tengzi came to the imperial court to meet Lu Jun, and Zibo came to Lu Province, and Qin State envoys came to visit, and Qisun Xingfa built Zhuye two cities.

古文：二年之间，五国趋之，内城二邑。
现代文：二年之间，五国君臣来鲁，国内建了两座城。
English: Within two years, the princes and ministers of five countries came to Lvov, and two cities were built in the country.

古文：炕阳失众。
现代文：因而张皇自大而失民心。
English: As a result, Emperor Zhang became arrogant and lost the hearts of the people.

古文：一曰，不雨而五谷皆孰，异也。
现代文：一种说法是，天不下雨而五谷都能成熟，奇异少见。
English: One way of putting it is that it is rare for the grain to ripen when it does not rain.

古文：文公时，大夫始颛盟会，公孙敖会晋侯，又会诸侯盟于垂陇。
现代文：文公时，大夫开始专权盟会之事，公孙敖与晋侯会见，又在垂陇与诸侯会盟。
English: When Wengong, the doctor began the matter of the exclusive power alliance, Gongsunjun met with Jinhou, and was coveting the alliance with the princes.

古文：故不雨而生者，阴不出气而私自行，以象施不由上出，臣下作福而私自成。
现代文：之所以不下雨谷物却能生长成熟的原因，是阴弱不能出气却私自跑出来了，以象征恩施不由国君所出，而臣下作威作福私自作主办事。
English: The reason why it does not rain but the grain can grow and ripen is that the weak cannot show their strength but run out of their own accord. It is a symbol that the favor does not come from the sovereign, but the vassal does the bidding of the sovereign.

古文：一曰，不雨近常阴之罚，君弱也。
现代文：一种说法是，天不下雨近似于对常阴少阳的惩罚，即国君势弱所致。
English: One theory is that the lack of rain is similar to the punishment of yin and yang, that is, caused by the weakness of the sovereign.

古文：惠帝五年夏，大旱，江河水少，溪谷绝。
现代文：汉孝惠帝五年夏季，大旱，江河水少，溪谷绝流。
English: In the summer of Emperor Han Xiao Hui's fifth year, there was a severe drought, rivers and streams were short of water, and there was no flow in the valleys.

古文：先是，发民男女十四万六千人城长安，是岁城乃成。
现代文：先前征发百姓男女十四万六干人修筑长安城，到这一年城才修成。
English: Previously, 146,000 able-bodied men and women were conscripted to build Chang'an City, but the city was only completed this year.

古文：文帝三年秋，天下旱。
现代文：文帝三年秋天，天下干旱。
English: In the autumn of Emperor Wen's third year, there was a drought.

古文：是岁夏，匈奴右贤王寇侵上郡，诏丞相灌婴发车骑士八万五千人诣高奴，击右贤王走出塞。
现代文：这年夏天，匈奴右贤王入侵上郡，皇帝韶令丞相灌婴发车骑兵八万五千人前往高奴，打击右贤王，把他赶出塞外。
English: In the summer of that year, the Hun Ugyen Wang invaded Shang County, and the emperor ordered the prime minister to dispatch 85,000 cavalry to Gao Nu to attack Ugyen Wang and drive him out of the province.

古文：其秋，济北王兴居反，使大将军讨之，皆伏诛。
现代文：当年秋天，济北王刘兴居造，朝廷派大将军去征讨叛王，都伏法处死。
English: In the autumn of that year, Liu Xingju, the king of northern Jibei, was overthrown, and the imperial court sent a general to subjugate the rebels, who were all put to death.

古文：后六年春，天下大旱。
现代文：六年后的春天，全国大旱。
English: Six years later, in the spring, there was a nationwide drought.

古文：先是，发车骑材官屯广昌。是岁二月，复发材官屯陇西。
现代文：在此之前征调骑兵步兵屯驻广昌，这年二月又征调步兵屯驻陇西。
English: Prior to this, the cavalry and infantry were stationed in Guangchang, and in February of this year, the infantry were stationed in Shaanxi.

古文：后匈奴大入上郡、云中，烽火通长安，三将军屯边，又三将军屯京师。
现代文：后来匈奴大举侵入上郡、云中，战争波及京城长安，为此派三位将军率军屯防边境，又派三位将军屯防京师。
English: Later, the Huns invaded Shang County and Yunzhong on a large scale, and the war spread to the capital Chang'an. To this end, he sent three generals to lead the army to defend the border, and sent three generals to defend the Beijing division.

古文：景帝中三年秋，大旱。
现代文：景帝中三年秋天，大旱。
English: In the autumn of the third year of Jingdi Middle School, there was a big drought.

古文：武帝元光六年夏，大旱。
现代文：武帝元光六年夏天，大早。
English: In the summer of the sixth year of Emperor Wuyuan's reign, it was early morning.

古文：是岁，四将军征匈奴。
现代文：追年，朝廷派四位将军征伐匈奴。
English: The following year, the imperial court sent four generals to conquer the Huns.

古文：元朔五年春，大旱。
现代文：元朔五年春天，大旱。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of the lunar calendar, there was a severe drought.

古文：是岁，六将军众十余万征匈奴。
现代文：这年，派六位将军率十余万军队征伐匈奴。
English: That year, he sent six generals to lead more than 100,000 troops to conquer the Huns.

古文：元狩三年夏，大旱。
现代文：元狩三年夏天，大旱。
English: In the summer of 1983, there was a severe drought in Motokari.

古文：是岁，发天下故吏伐棘上林，穿昆明池。
现代文：年微调全国废黜之吏到上林苑砍伐杂树，挖长安城外的昆明池。
English: In the year of fine-tuning, officials from all over the country went to Shanglinyuan to cut down trees and dig Kunming Pond outside Chang'an City.

古文：天汉元年夏，大旱；其三年夏，大旱。
现代文：天汉元年夏天，大旱；天汉三年夏天，大旱。
English: In the summer of the first year of Tianhan, there was a big drought; in the summer of the third year of Tianhan, there was a big drought.

古文：先是，贰师将军征大宛还。
现代文：在此之前贰师将军征伐大宛班师回朝。
English: Prior to this, the general Zou's division had defeated the Da-Wan division and returned to the imperial court.

古文：天汉元年，发適民。
现代文：天汉元年，征发罪犯戍边。
English: In the first year of the Tianhan Dynasty, the criminals were sent to Fuxian.

古文：二年夏，三将军征匈奴，李陵没不还。
现代文：天汉二年夏天，三位将军征伐匈奴，李陵败没未还。
English: In the summer of the second year of the Heavenly and Han Dynasties, three generals conquered the Xiongnu, and Li Ling was defeated and did not return.

古文：征和元年夏，大旱。
现代文：征和元年夏天，大旱。
English: In the summer of the first year of the war, there was a severe drought.

古文：是岁，发三辅骑士闭长安城门，大搜，始治巫蛊。
现代文：这年调遣三辅地区的骑兵，关闭长安城门，大搜捕，开始了对巫蛊案的追查。
English: This year, the cavalry in the Sanfu area was dispatched, the Chang'an city gate was closed, a large-scale manhunt was carried out, and the investigation of the Wusong case began.

古文：明年，卫皇后、太子败。
现代文：第二年，卫皇后和太子败亡。
English: The following year, Empress Wei and the crown prince were overthrown.

古文：昭帝始元六年，大旱。
现代文：昭帝始元六年，大旱。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Zhao, there was a severe drought.

古文：先是，大鸿胪田广明征益州，暴师连年。
现代文：此前大鸿胪田广明征讨益州，连年用兵在外。
English: Prior to this, the great giant, Putian Guangming, had been recruiting soldiers for the benefit of the state for several years in a row.

古文：宣帝本始三年夏，大旱，东西数千里。
现代文：宣帝本始三年夏季，大旱，从东到西数千里受灾。
English: In the summer of the first three years of Emperor Xuan's reign, there was a severe drought that affected thousands of miles from east to west.

古文：先是，五将军众二十万征匈奴。
现代文：在这之前派五位将军率军二十万征伐匈奴。
English: Prior to this, he sent five generals to lead an army of 200,000 to conquer the Huns.

古文：神爵元年秋，大旱。
现代文：神爵元年秋天，大旱。
English: In the autumn of the first year of Jinshaku, there was a severe drought.

古文：是岁，后将军赵充国征西羌。
现代文：这年，后将军赵充国征伐西羌。
English: Later that year, General Zhao Chongguo began the conquest of Xidi.

古文：成帝永给三年、四年夏、大旱。
现代文：成帝永始三年、四年夏季，大旱。
English: In the summer of the third and fourth years of Emperor Chengdu's reign, there was a severe drought.

古文：《左氏传》晋献公时童谣曰： 丙子之晨，龙尾伏辰，袀服振振，取虢之旂。
现代文：《左氏传》载晋献公时候的童谣说： 丙子日的早晨，龙尾星被曰光照耀，军服威武齐整，是夺取虢国的旗号。
English: "The Legend of Zuo," a nursery rhyme from the time of Jin's dedication to the emperor, says: On the morning of Cixi Day, the dragon's tail star was illuminated by the sun, and the military uniform was powerful and powerful, which was the banner for seizing the country.

古文：鹑之贲贲，天策焞焞，火中成军，虢公其奔。 
现代文：鹑火星像只鹑鸟，天策星没有光耀，鹑火星下勒马整旅，虢公可能要跑。 
English: Mars is like an ostrich, the Celestial Star does not shine,  Mars is slowing down the whole journey, and the Dragon King may have to run.

古文：是时，虢为小国，介夏阳之厄，怙虞国之助，亢衡于晋，有炕阳之节，失臣下之心。
现代文：当时虢是个小国，隔着夏阳的险阻，靠着虞国的相助，抗衡晋国，有阳盛之坚强，无臣服之意。
English: At that time, Yunnan was a small country, across the perilous obstacles of the summer sun, relying on the assistance of the neighboring countries to counterbalance Jin, with the strength of Yang Sheng and no sense of submission.

古文：晋献伐之，问于卜偃曰： 吾其济乎？ 
现代文：晋献公征伐虢国，询问卜偃说： 我能成功吗？ 
English: Jin Xian publicly led a military expedition to conquer Bao's country, and asked Buo: "Can I succeed?

古文：偃以童谣对曰： 克之。
现代文：卜偃就用童谣来回答他说： 能成功。
English: Bu Wei replied to him with a nursery rhyme: Can succeed.

古文：十月朔丙子旦，日在尾，月在策，鹑火中，必此时也。 
现代文：十月初一丙子曰的黎明，太阳在龙尾星之上，月亮在天策星之上，鹑火星在太阳与月亮中间，必定是在这个时候灭掉虢。 
English: At dawn on the first day of October, when the sun is above Draco, the moon is above Draco, and Mars is between the sun and the moon, it must be at this time that the dragonflies are extinguished.

古文：冬十二月丙子朔，晋师灭虢，虢公丑奔周。
现代文：当年冬天十二月丙子初一，晋军灭掉虢国，虢公丑逃奔成周。
English: On the first day of the Chinese New Year in December of that year, the Jin army wiped out the Xiongnu, and the Xiongnu fled into the Zhou.

古文：周十二月，夏十月也。
现代文：周历的十二月，是夏历的十月。
English: The December of the lunar calendar is the October of the solar calendar.

古文：言天者以夏正。
现代文：讲天文的都按夏历说。
English: Those who talk about astronomy use the summer calendar.

古文：史记晋惠公时童谣曰： 恭太子更葬兮，后十四年，晋亦不昌，昌乃在其兄。 
现代文：史书上记载晋惠公时的童谣唱道： 把恭太子改葬啊，十四年后，晋国也要遭殃，晋国再强，由他兄长。 
English: A nursery rhyme from the time of Prince Jin Hui, recorded in the history books, goes like this: Change Prince Gong's burial place. Fourteen years later, Jin Province will also suffer misfortune. If Jin Province becomes strong again, it will be because of his brother.

古文：是时，惠公赖秦力得立，立而背秦，内杀二大夫，国人不说。
现代文：当时，晋惠公依靠秦国的扶持得立为晋君，即位后背叛了秦国，在国内又杀死了两位大夫，国内臣民为此不满。
English: At that time, Prince Jin Hui relied on the support of the Qin state to become the ruler of Jin. After he ascended the throne, he betrayed the Qin state and killed two doctors in the country. The domestic subjects were dissatisfied with this.

古文：及更葬其兄恭太子申生而不敬，故诗妖作也。
现代文：等到改葬他的哥哥恭太子申生时不能敬重行事，所以有人写讽刺诗。
English: When it came time to bury his older brother, Crown Prince Shinsho, he couldn't behave respectfully, so someone wrote a satirical poem.

古文：后与秦战，为秦所获，立十四年而死。
现代文：后来与秦国作战，被秦军捉住，在位十四年而死。
English: Later, he fought against Qin, was captured by the Qin army, and died fourteen years into his reign.

古文：晋人绝之，更立其兄重耳，是为文公，遂伯诸侯。
现代文：晋国人没立他的后嗣，改立他的哥哥重耳为君，造就是晋文公，后来称霸于诸侯。
English: The people of Jin did not set up his heir, but instead set up his brother Chong Er as the prince, creating the prince of Jin, who later dominated the princes.

古文：《左氏传》文、成之世童谣曰： 雊之鹆之，公出辱之。
现代文：《左氏传》载，鲁文公、鲁成公时期的童谣说： 鸥鹤鹳鹤，国君出国，备遭困辱。
English: According to "The Legend of Zuo," a nursery rhyme from the time of King Luwen and King Lu Cheng said, "If you go abroad, prepare to be humiliated."

古文：雊鹆之羽，公在外野，往馈之马。
现代文：鹳鹄有羽，国君在外，需送马匹。
English: The egrets have feathers, the sovereign is out, we need to send horses.

古文：雊鹆跌跌，公在乾侯，征褰与襦。
现代文：鹳鹄蹦蹦跳跳，君在干侯，要裤要袄。
English: The grasshopper hops and skips, you're in a drought, pants are needed.

古文：雊鹆来巢。远，哉摇摇，裯父丧劳，宋父以骄，雊鹆雊鹆，往歌来哭。 
现代文：鹳鹄有巢，远居飘摇，裯父丧身疲劳，宋父得立而骄。鹳鹤鹳鹤，去时有歌，归来哭啼。 
English: The stork has a nest, lives far away and wanders, the stork's father died of fatigue, the song father stood up and was proud. The stork and the crane, when they go there is a song, and they come back crying.

古文：至昭公时，有雊鹆来巢。
现代文：到了昭公时候，果然有鹳鹆来筑巢。
English: When it was time for Akihiko, there was indeed a cormorant to build a nest.

古文：公攻季氏，败，出奔齐，居外野，次乾侯。
现代文：昭公攻打季氏，失败，逃亡齐国，露宿旷野，驻留在干侯。
English: Shoko attacked the Ji clan, failed, fled Qi, camped in the wilderness, and stayed in Ganghwa.

古文：八年，死于外，归葬鲁。
现代文：八年后，死在国外，后归葬鲁国。
English: Eight years later, he died abroad and was buried in Russia.

古文：昭公名裯。
现代文：昭公名裯。
English: Shoko's name is.

古文：公子宋立，是为定公。
现代文：公子宋被立为鲁君，就是鲁定公。
English: Prince Song was established as Lu Jun, that is, Lu Ding Gong.

古文：元帝时童谣曰： 井水溢，灭灶烟，灌玉堂，流金门。 
现代文：汉元帝时的童谣唱道： 井水冒，灭烟灶，灌玉堂，金门泡。 
English: The nursery rhyme at the time of Emperor Han Yuan sang: The well is full of water, the smoke-extinguishing stove is on, the temple is filled with jewels, and the golden gate is bubbling.

古文：至成帝建始二年三月戊子，北宫中井泉稍上，溢出南流，象春秋时先有雊鹆之谣，而后有来巢之验。
现代文：到了汉成帝建始二年三月戊子，北宫的井泉水位逐渐上升，冒出井口往南流去，这事如同春秋时候先有鹳鹄的歌谣，后来确有鹳鹤飞巢的验证一样。
English: In March of the second year of the founding of the Han Dynasty, the water level of the well spring of the Northern Palace gradually rose and flowed southward from the wellhead, which was like the verification of the song of the crane in spring and autumn, and later the crane flying nest.

古文：井水，阴也；灶烟，阳也；玉堂、金门，至尊之居，象阴盛而灭阳，窃有宫室之应也。
现代文：井水，属阴；烟灶属阳；玉堂、金门，那是皇帝居住的地方。此事象征阴盛而灭阳，窃居宫室的应验。
English: Well water is yin; stove is yang; Jade Hall, Golden Gate, that is where the emperor lived. This event symbolizes the prevalence of yin and the extinction of yang, the fulfillment of stealing the palace room.

古文：王莽生于元帝初元四年，至成帝封侯，为三公辅政，因以篡位。
现代文：王莽生于元帝初元四年，到成帝时被封为侯，位居三公辅佐朝政，藉此篡位。
English: Wang Mang was born at the beginning of the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, and when he became emperor, he was given the title of marquess, and he held the position of Third Prince Assistant of the Imperial Court, thereby usurping the throne.

古文：成帝时童谣曰： 燕燕尾涎涎，张公子，时相见。
现代文：成帝时童谣唱道： 燕燕尾涎涎，张公子，时相见。
English: The nursery rhyme sung at the time of Emperor Chengdu goes: Swallow Swallowtail, Zhang Gongzi, see each other.

古文：木门仓琅根，燕飞来，啄皇孙，皇孙死，燕啄矢。 
现代文：木门琯琅根，燕飞来，啄皇孙，皇孙死，燕啄矢。 
English: The wooden door takes root, the swallow flies, the grandchild flies, the grandchild dies, the swallow shoots an arrow.

古文：其后帝为微行出游，常与富平侯张放俱称富平侯家人，过阳阿主作乐，见舞者赵飞燕而幸之，故曰 燕燕尾涎涎 ，美好貌也。 张公子 ，谓富平侯也。 木门仓琅根 ，谓宫门铜锾，言将尊贵也。
现代文：后来汉成帝化装为民私下出游，常常跟富平侯张放一起自称富平侯的家人仆隶，到阳阿公主家寻欢作乐，看到舞女趟飞燕并爱上她，所以说 燕燕尾涎涎 ，好漂亮的外貌啊。 张公子 即富平侯。 木门琯琅根 ，是指宫门上的铜环，意思是将要尊贵了。
English: Later, Emperor Han Chengdu went on private trips disguised as a commoner, and often went with Fuping Marquis Zhang Fang, who claimed to be a family servant of Fuping Marquis, to the home of Princess Yang Ah to have fun and play. He saw the maiden dance and fell in love with her, so he said, "Yanwei Yao, what a beautiful appearance." Zhang Gongzi is Fuping Marquis. "Kumon Yao," refers to the bronze ring on the palace gate, meaning that he will be honored.

古文：后遂立为皇后。
现代文：后来果然立为皇后。
English: She was later crowned empress.

古文：弟昭仪贼害后宫皇子，卒皆伏辜，所谓 燕飞来，啄皇孙，皇孙死，燕啄矢 者也。
现代文：妹妹进宫被封为昭仪。因偷着杀死后宫的皇子，最后都被处死，造就是 燕飞来，啄皇孙，皇孙死，燕啄矢 的含意了。
English: Her younger sister entered the palace and was given the title of Shouyi. For stealing and killing the prince of the harem, they were all eventually executed, creating the meaning of "Yan Fei Lai" (燕飞来), "Yan Fei Lai" (燕飞来), "Yan Fei Lai" (皇孙) and "Yan Fei Ya" (燕矢).

古文：成帝时歌谣又曰： 邪径败良田，谗口乱善人。
现代文：成帝时的歌谣又说： 邪道坏良田，谗言坏好人。
English: The ballad at the time of his accession to the throne also said: Evil ways ruin good fields, and evil words ruin good people.

古文：桂树华不实，黄爵巢其颠。
现代文：桂树开花不结实，黄雀筑巢在树颠。
English: The flowers of the cinnamon tree are not strong, and the yellow finches build their nests in the twigs.

古文：故为人所羡，今为人所怜。 
现代文：过去为人羡慕，现在为人可怜。 
English: Once admired, now pitied.

古文：桂，赤色，汉家象。
现代文：桂树，赤色，汉朝的象征。
English: Katsura, red, a symbol of the Han Dynasty.

古文：华不实，无继嗣也。
现代文：花开不实，即没有子孙继嗣。
English: If the blossoms do not open properly, there will be no heirs.

古文：王莽自谓黄象，黄爵巢其颠也。
现代文：王莽自称以黄为命，正应了 黄雀筑巢在树颠 。
English: Wang Mang claimed to live for the yellow, just as the yellow sparrow builds its nest in the tree.

古文：严公十七年，冬，多麋 。
现代文：鲁严公十七年 冬季，多麋鹿 。
English: In the winter of the seventeenth year of the reign of King Lu Yan, there were many elk.

古文：刘歆以为毛虫之孽为灾。
现代文：刘歆认为毛虫之孽造成灾害。
English: Liu Wei believed that the evil of caterpillars caused disasters.

古文：刘向以为麋色青，近青祥也。
现代文：刘向认为麋的毛色是青的，这近于青祥。
English: Liu Xiang believes that the hair color of the dragonfly is blue, which is close to Qingxiang.

古文：麋之为言迷也，盖牝兽之淫者也。
现代文：麋字的发音是迷，当指母兽中好淫的一种。
English: The pronunciation of the Chinese character  is迷, which refers to a kind of lecherous female beast.

古文：是时，严公将取齐之淫女，其象先见。天戒若曰，勿取齐女，淫而迷国。
现代文：当时，严公将要娶齐国的淫荡之，事情的征象先显示出来，天帝似乎在警戒说：不要娶齐国女人，她淫荡而乱国。
English: At that time, Yan Gong was going to marry the lewd woman of Qi, and the signs of the matter were first revealed. The Heavenly Emperor seemed to be warning: Do not marry the woman of Qi, she is lewd and disturbs the country.

古文：严不寤，遂取之。
现代文：严公不醒悟，还是娶了。
English: Yan Gong still did not wake up, so he married Qi Niu.

古文：夫人既入，淫于二叔，终皆诛死，几亡社稷。
现代文：这位夫人来了之后，与两个小叔子通奸，后来都被处死，国家也几乎灭亡。
English: When the lady arrived, she committed adultery with her two younger brothers-in-law, both of whom were later executed, and the country almost perished.

古文：董仲舒指略同。
现代文：董仲舒的看法与此大致相同。
English: This is similar to what Dong Zhongshu pointed out.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 废正作淫，大不明，国多麋。 
现代文：京房的《易传》说： 荒废正道，行为淫乱，太不明白，国内就多有麋鹿。 
English: Jingfang's "I Chuan" said: "Wasting the righteous path, behaving promiscuously, not understanding too much, there are many elk in the country.

古文：又曰：  震 遂泥，厥咎国多麋。 
现代文：又说： 《震》卦坠泥，其灾是国内多麋。 
English: He also said: "Earthquake" Gua falling mud, the disaster is caused by domestic floods.

古文：昭帝时，昌邑王贺闻人声曰 熊 ，视而见大熊。
现代文：昭帝时，昌邑王刘贺听到有人说： 有熊！ 一看。果然是只大熊。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhao, King Liu He of Changyi heard someone say: There is a bear! Take a look. It is indeed a big bear.

古文：左右莫见，以问郎中令龚遂，遂曰： 熊，山野之兽，而来入宫室，王独见之，此天戒大王，恐宫室将空，危亡象也。 
现代文：但左右的人谁都没看见，他问郎中令龚遂这是怎么回事，龚遂说： 熊，山林中的野兽，却来到宫裹，还衹您一人看到，这是天帝在告诫您呀，恐怕王宫要废弃而空无其主了，这是危亡的象征。 
English: But no one on either side saw him. He asked his brother-in-law, the king, what was going on. The king then said, "A bear, a wild beast from the mountains and forests, has come to the palace, and you are the only one to see it. This is the emperor warning you. I'm afraid the palace will be abandoned and left empty. This is a symbol of peril.

古文：贺不改寤，后卒失国。
现代文：刘贺没有醒悟而改悔其恶行，后来终于失国。
English: Liu He did not wake up and repent of his evil deeds, and later finally lost his country.

古文：《左氏传》襄公十七年十一月甲午，宋国人逐狾狗，狾狗入于华臣氏，国人从之。
现代文：《左氏传》载，襄公十七年十一月甲午曰，宋国人追赶一只疯狗，疯狗跑进华臣的家，人们也跟着进来。
English: According to "The Biography of Zuo," on the afternoon of November 1st, 17th year of Xianggong, the people of Song chased a mad dog. The mad dog ran into the home of Hua Chen, and the people also followed.

古文：臣惧，遂奔陈。
现代文：华臣吓坏了，就逃奔到陈国。
English: Terrified, he fled to Chen Province.

古文：先是，臣兄阅为宋卿，阅卒，臣使贼杀阅家宰，遂就其妻，宋平公闻之，曰： 臣不唯其宗室是暴，大乱宋国之政。 
现代文：在这之前，华臣的哥哥华阅做宋国的大臣，华阅死后，华臣派盗贼杀死了华阅的管家，就占有了华阅的妻子。宋平公闻知这件事，说： 华臣不仅施暴行扰乱了他的宗室家族，还要大乱宋国政坛。 
English: Prior to this, Hua Zhen's brother Hua Yue was the minister of Song. After Hua Yue's death, Hua Zhen sent thieves to kill Hua Yue's housekeeper and took possession of Hua Yue's wife. Song Ping Gong heard about this and said: Hua Zhen not only disturbed his family by committing violence, but also caused havoc in Song politics.

古文：欲逐之。左师向戌曰： 大臣不顺，国之耻也，不如盖之。 
现代文：要把华臣驱逐出国，左师向戌说： 大臣大逆不顺，是国家的耻辱，不如掩盖起来。 
English: To expel Hua Sen from the country, Zuo Shi said to Yu: "The minister's high treason is a national disgrace, it is better to cover it up."

古文：公乃止。
现代文：宋公才罢休。
English: Song Gongcai resigned.

古文：华臣炕暴失义，内不自安，故犬祸至，以奔亡也。
现代文：华臣横暴而丧失道德仁义，心裹也不踏实，所以犬祸由天而降，从而逃亡。
English: As a result of his arrogance, Watson lost his sense of morality, and his heart was not steady. Therefore, the dog's misfortune fell from the sky, and he fled.

古文：高后八年三月，祓霸上，还过枳道，见物如仓狗，橶高后掖，忽而不见。
现代文：汉高后八年三月，到霸上作祈神除祸的祭祀，还朝的路上经过枳道，见一个像黑狗一样的东西抓住高后的腋下，忽然又不见了。
English: In March of the eighth year of Henkel's reign, he went to Hachijo to perform a ritual to pray for a god to ward off evil. On his way back, he passed through a narrow path and saw something that looked like a black dog grabbing Henkel's armpit and suddenly disappearing.

古文：卜之，赵王如意作崇。
现代文：占卜此事，说是赵王刘如意的冤魂作祟。
English: The fortune-teller said that it was caused by the evil spirit of Zhao Wang Liu Ruyi.

古文：遂病掖伤而崩。
现代文：于是高后因腋伤而驾崩。
English: As a result, Gao Hou died from a bruise.

古文：先是，高后鸩杀如意，支，搉其眼，以为人彘。
现代文：在此之前，高后用毒酒杀死了刘如意，砍断了他母亲戚夫人的手足，挖去了双眼，使她成为所谓的人猪。
English: Prior to this, Gao Hou used poisoned wine to kill Liu Ruyi, cut off the hands and feet of his mother's relative, and gouged out her eyes, making her a so-called "human pig."

古文：文帝后五年六月，齐雍城门外有狗生角。
现代文：文帝后五年六月，齐国的雍城门外有一只狗头上长角。
English: In June of the fifth year after Emperor Wen, there was a dog with a long horn on its head outside the Yongcheng Gate in Qi.

古文：先是，帝兄齐悼惠王亡后，帝分齐地，立其庶子七人皆为王。
现代文：在此之前，文帝的哥哥齐悼惠王死后，文帝把齐国地盘分割，把嫡子外的七个庶出之子都封了王。
English: Prior to this, after the death of Emperor Wen's elder brother, King Qi of Qi, Emperor Wen divided the territory of Qi and made the seven illegitimate sons, except the legitimate son, kings.

古文：兄弟并强，有炕阳心，故犬祸见也。
现代文：这些弟兄都强大起来，有张皇自大的野心，所以犬祸出现。
English: These brothers all became powerful and had arrogant ambitions, which is why the dog disaster occurred.

古文：犬守御，角兵象，在前而上乡者也。
现代文：犬是看守门户的家畜，角是兵器的象征，长在前面，尖向上的武器。
English: The dog is a domestic animal that guards the gate, and the horn is a symbol of weapons, growing in front and pointing upwards.

古文：犬不当主角，犹诸侯不当举兵乡京师也。
现代文：犬不应长角，这如同诸侯王不应举兵指向京师一样。
English: Dogs should not have long horns, just as princes should not raise an army to attack the capital.

古文：天之戒人蚤矣，诸侯不寤。
现代文：天帝早就这样告诫人们了，可诸侯王都不醒悟。
English: The Heavenly Emperor had warned people about this a long time ago, but the princes did not wake up.

古文：后六年，吴、楚畔，济南、胶西、胶东三国应之，举兵至齐。
现代文：六年后，吴、楚两王发动叛乱，济南、胶西、胶束三诸侯王响应，带兵到齐国。
English: Six years later, the kings of Wu and Chu launched a rebellion, and the three princes of Jinan, Jiaoxi, and Jiaozuo responded by leading troops to Qi.

古文：齐王犹与城守，三国围之。
现代文：齐王还为朝廷据守临淄，这三国就对齐包围。
English: King Qi also defended Linyi for the imperial court, and the three countries were encircled.

古文：会汉破吴、楚，因诛四王。
现代文：这时朝廷军队大破吴、楚叛军，就顺势攻来，杀了四个响应造的王。
English: At this time, the imperial army defeated the rebel forces of Wu and Chu, and attacked in accordance with the situation, killing four kings who responded.

古文：故天狗下梁而吴、楚攻梁，狗生角于齐而三国围齐。
现代文：所以说天狗下降到梁，吴、楚就玫梁；狗在齐长角，三国就围攻齐。
English: Therefore, it is said that Tengu descends to Liang, Wu and Chu descend to Mei Liang; Dog descends to Qi Chang Kok, and the three countries encircle each other.

古文：汉卒破吴、楚于梁，诛四王于齐。
现代文：朝廷最后在梁大破吴、楚，在齐处死了四个叛王。
English: The imperial court finally defeated Wu and Chu at Liangda, and executed four traitor kings at Qi.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 执政失，下将害之，厥妖狗生角。
现代文：京房之《易传》说： 执政有失误，下面就会有人谋害作乱，出现的妖祥就是狗头长角。
English: Jingfang's "Easy Biography" said: If there is a mistake in governing, there will be people plotting to cause trouble. The evil omen that appears is the long horn of the dog's head.

古文：君子苟免，小人陷之，厥妖狗生角。 
现代文：君子苟且免祸，小人却要陷害他，出现的妖祥也是狗头臣角： 
English: The gentleman is safe from harm, but the villain wants to frame him, and the evil omen that appears is also the dog-headed vassal angle:

古文：景帝三年二月，邯郸狗与彘交。悖乱之气，近犬豕之祸也。
现代文：景帝三年二月，邯郸有狗与猪交配一这种悖乱反常的现象，近乎犬猪之祸。
English: In February of the third year of King Jing's reign, there was a dog mating with a pig, a disorderly and abnormal phenomenon, which was close to the calamity of dogs and pigs.

古文：是时，赵王遂悖乱，与吴、楚谋为逆，遣使匈奴求助兵，卒伏其辜。犬，兵革失众之占；豕，北方匈奴之象。
现代文：当时趟王刘遂叛乱，与吴、楚二王阴谋造，还派人到匈奴求兵援助，最后败伏法：犬，这是兵家失众求援的征兆；猪，这是北方匈奴的象征。
English: At that time, King Liu Sui rebelled, conspired with King Wu and King Chu II, and also sent people to the Xiongnu to seek military assistance, and finally succumbed to defeat: dog, this is a sign of soldiers losing their support; pig, this is a symbol of the northern Xiongnu.

古文：逆言失听，交于异类，以生害也。
现代文：不听逆耳忠言，与异族勾结，制造祸害。
English: Not listening to contrary advice, colluding with foreigners, creating disasters.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 夫妇不严，厥妖狗与豕交。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 夫妻关系不当，其妖象是狗与猪交配。
English: Beijing House "Easy Biography" said: The relationship between husband and wife is improper, and its demon is like a dog mating with a pig.

古文：兹谓反德，国有兵革。 
现代文：这叫做反性，国家要有战乱。 
English: This is called inversion, and the country must be at war.

古文：成帝河平元年，长安男子石良、刘音相与同居，有如人状在其室中，击之，为狗，走出。
现代文：成帝河平元年，长安有石良、刘音两个男人同住在一个屋内，看见有一个像人的东西在他们的屋裹，一打，那束西变成了狗，跑掉了。
English: In the first year of Emperor Heping's reign, two men, Shi Liang and Liu Yin, both from Chang'an, were living together in a house. They saw a human-like creature in their house. The bundle turned into a dog and ran away.

古文：去后，有数人被甲持兵弩至良家，良等格击，或死或伤，皆狗也。
现代文：这以后有好几个人身披甲胄手持兵器来找石良打架，石良等跟来人格斗，这几个人有的死有的伤，一看都是狗。
English: After this, several people wearing armor and carrying weapons came to look for Ishira to fight, and Ishira and others followed to fight. These several people had some deaths and injuries, but at first glance, they were all dogs.

古文：自二月至六月乃止。
现代文：这事从二月一直闸到六月才停止。
English: This went on from February until June when it stopped.

古文：鸿嘉中，狗与彘交。
现代文：鸿嘉年间，狗与猪交配。
English: In Hong Jia's time, dogs were mated with pigs.

古文：《左氏》昭公二十四年十月癸酉，王子晁以成周之宝圭湛于河，几以获神助。
现代文：《左氏传》载，昭公二十四年十月癸酉曰，王子鼂把成周的宝圭沉到黄河襄以祭神，希望得到神的帮助。
English: According to "The Biography of Zuo," Zhaogong said on October 23, 2004, that the prince had sunk Zheng Zhou's treasure into the Yellow River to offer it to the gods, hoping to receive divine help.

古文：甲戌，津人得之河上，阴不佞取将卖之，则为石。
现代文：甲戌曰，渡口船家从黄河边捡到宝圭，周大夫阴不佞取来要卖掉，竟变成一块石头。
English: Gao Jian said that when the ferrymen picked up Bao Gui from the Yellow River, Dr. Zhou wanted to sell it, but it turned into a rock.

古文：是时，王子晁篡天子位，万民不乡，号令不从，故有玉变，近白祥也。
现代文：当时王子鼂篡夺天子之位，万民不服，号令无人听从，所以有玉变之事，这近于白祥。
English: At that time, the prince usurped the position of the son of heaven, and the people were not satisfied, and no one obeyed the order, so there was a change, which was close to Bai Xiang.

古文：癸酉入而甲戌出，神不享之验云。
现代文：癸酉曰沉入，而甲戍曰就出来了，这是神不受享的验证。
English: This is the proof that God does not enjoy.

古文：玉化为石，贵将为贱也。
现代文：玉化为石，意味着贵者将变成贱者。
English: To be turned to stone means that the noble will become the base.

古文：后二年，子晁奔楚而死。
现代文：二二年后，王广鼂逃奔楚国而死。
English: Two years later, Wang Guangyao died after fleeing Chu.

古文：史记秦始皇帝三十六年，郑客从关东来，至华阴，望见素车白马从华山上下，知其非人，道住止而待之。
现代文：历史上记载，秦始皇帝三十六年，有位郑地的客人从关东来，走到华阴，远远望见白马拉着白色的车从华山上下来，心裹知道车上的不是凡人，于是停在道上等着看一看。
English: According to historical records, in the 36th year of Emperor Qin Shi Huang, a guest from Zhengde came from Guandong and walked to Huayin. From a distance, he saw a white horse pulling a white cart coming down from Huashan. He knew in his heart that the person on the cart was not an ordinary person, so he stopped on the road and waited to see.

古文：遂至，持璧与客曰： 为我遗镐池君。 
现代文：车到跟前了，车上的人把手中的璧交给客人说： 请替我送给镐池君。 
English: When the car arrived, the person on board handed the gem to the guest and said, "Please give it to Tsugaike-kun for me."

古文：因言 今年祖龙死 。
现代文：接着又说： 今年祖龙死。 
English: Then he said, "This year, the ancestor dragon died."

古文：忽不见，郑客奉璧，即始皇二十八年过江所湛璧也。
现代文：说完就忽然不见了。郑地来的客人把璧进呈上来，一看，正是秦始皇二十八年过长江的时候为祭神而沉到江中的那块璧。
English: After he finished speaking, he suddenly disappeared. The guest from Zhengdi brought in the gem and showed it to me. At first glance, it was the gem that sank into the Yangtze River in the 28th year of the reign of Qin Shi Huang for the deity.

古文：与周子晁同应。
现代文：造事与周子鼂那件事所应相同。
English: It's the same as what happened with Zhou Zixuan.

古文：是岁，石陨于东郡，民或刻其石曰： 始皇死而地分 。
现代文：这一年，有陨石落在束郡，百姓中有人在石上刻了一句话： 始皇死而地分。 
English: In that year, a meteorite fell in Sok County, and someone from the people carved a sentence on the stone: "The first emperor died and was buried."

古文：此皆白祥，炕阳暴虐，号令不从，孤阳独治，群阴不附之所致也。
现代文：这都是白祥，这是孤阳独裁，群阴不附和所导致的。
English: All of this is caused by Bai Xiang, the dictatorship of the lone sun, and the lack of harmony among the group of yin.

古文：一曰，石，阴类也，阴持高节，臣将危君，赵高、李斯之象也。
现代文：一种说法认为，石属阴类，阴持高节而自愿，臣下将要危害君主，这是赵高、李斯的象征。
English: One theory is that the stone belongs to the yin group, the yin holds a high festival and is voluntary, and the vassals will harm the monarch. This is a symbol of Zhao Gao and Li Si.

古文：始皇不畏戒自省，反夷灭其旁民，而燔烧其石。
现代文：秦始皇不知敬畏和反省自身，反而把附近的百姓都杀光了，把陨石烧毁。
English: Qin Shihuang did not know reverence and self-reflection, but instead killed all the people nearby and burned the meteorite.

古文：是岁始皇死，后三年而秦灭。
现代文：这一年秦始皇死掉，三年后秦朝灭亡。
English: In the same year, Qin Shi Huang died, and three years later, the Qin Dynasty fell.

古文：孝昭元凤三年正月，泰山莱芜山南匈匈有数千人声。
现代文：汉孝昭帝元凤三年正月，泰山莱芜山南侧汹汹有声，好像是几千人在喧哗。
English: In the first month of the third year of the reign of Emperor Yuanfeng of the Han Dynasty, the southern side of Mount Laiwu of Mount Tai was noisy, as if thousands of people were making noise.

古文：民视之，有大石自立，高丈五尺，大四十八围，入地深八尺，三石为足。
现代文：人们去看，见有一巨大的石块自己立起来了。石高有一丈五尺，粗有四十八围，入地有八尺深，有三个较小的石头在下边像是它的足。
English: When people looked, they saw a huge stone standing up by itself. The stone was five feet high, forty-eight feet thick, eight feet deep into the ground, and there were three smaller stones at the bottom like its feet.

古文：石立处，有白乌数千集其旁。
现代文：石立的地方，有几千只白乌鸦聚在一旁。
English: Where the stone stands, there are several thousand white crows gathered at one side.

古文：眭孟以为，石阴类，下民象，泰山岱宗之岳，王者易姓告代之处，当有庶人为天子者。
现代文：眭孟认为石属阴类，是小民的象征，而泰山是群山所宗的山岳，是改朝换代，新天子来此告诉天帝之处，造说明要有庶当天子了。
English: Yao Meng believed that the stone belongs to the yin type and is a symbol of the common people, while Mount Tai is the mountain where the mountains live, it is the place where the dynasty changes and the new heavenly son comes to tell the heavenly emperor, so it is said that there must be an illegitimate heavenly son.

古文：孟坐伏诛。
现代文：眭孟被判有罪而处死。
English: Yan Meng was found guilty and executed.

古文：京房《易传》曰：  《复》，崩来无咎。 自上下者为崩，厥应泰山之石颠而下，圣人受命人君虏。 
现代文：京房之《易传》说：  《复》，崩来无咎，自上而下叫做崩，其所应就是泰山的石头从高处坠下，圣人受命为君，入君为虏。 
English: The "Easy Biography" of Kyofusa said: "Fu," collapse without blame, from the top down is called collapse, which should be that the stone of Mount Tai falls from a high place, the saint is ordered to be the prince, and the prince is the prey.

古文：又曰： 石立如人，庶士为天下雄。
现代文：又说： 石立如人，预示庶民将为天下之长。
English: He also said: "A stone standing like a man, foretells that the common people will be the leaders of the world."

古文：立于山，同姓；平地，异姓。
现代文：石立在山上，新的天子当出自同姓；石立在平地，当出自异姓。
English: If the stone is placed on a mountain, the new heavenly son should come from the same surname; if the stone is placed on a flat land, it should come from a different surname.

古文：立于水，圣人；于泽，小人。 
现代文：立在水中，当是圣人；立在泥塘，就是小人了。 
English: If you stand in water, you are a saint; if you stand in a muddy pond, you are a villain.

古文：天汉元年三月，天雨白毛；三年八月，天雨白氂。
现代文：天汉元年三月，天上降落白毛；三年八月，天上降落白色长毛。
English: In March of the first year of the Heian period, white feathers fell from the sky; in August of the third year, long white feathers fell from the sky.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 前乐后忧，厥妖天雨羽。 
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 先乐而后忧，出现妖祥就是天降羽。 
English: Saiya's "I Chuan" said: First joy, then sorrow, the strange thing is the feathers falling from the sky.

古文：又曰： 邪人进，贤人逃，天雨毛。 
现代文：又说： 邪人进，贤人逃，天上降毛。 
English: He also said, "Evil men advance and good men retreat, but feathers fall from the sky."

古文：史记周威烈王二十三年，九鼎震。
现代文：历史上记载，周威烈王二十三年，九鼎震动。
English: According to historical records, in the 23rd year of the reign of King Zhou Weili, Jiuding shook.

古文：金震，木动之也。
现代文：金有震，这是木气动荡造成的。
English: Gold has tremors, which is caused by wood gas turbulence.

古文：是时，周室衰微，刑重而虐，号令不从，以乱金气，鼎者，宗庙之宝器也。
现代文：当时周室衰微，刑罚苛重暴虐，民众不服从号令，从而乱了金气。鼎，这是宗庙中的宝物。
English: At that time, the Zhou dynasty was in decline, the punishment was severe and brutal, and the people disobeyed orders, thus disturbing the gold. Ding, this is a treasure in the ancestral temple.

古文：宗庙将废，宝鼎将迁，故震动也。
现代文：宗庙将要废毁，宝鼎就要迁移，所以发生震动。
English: The ancestral temple is about to be demolished, and Baoding is about to be relocated, which is why the shaking occurred.

古文：是岁，晋三卿韩、魏、赵篡晋君而分其地，威烈王命以为诸侯。
现代文：逭一年置迩的韩、赵、魏三家大臣篡夺晋君之位而瓜分了晋国，威烈王封他们为诸侯。
English: The three ministers of Han, Zhao and Wei, who had been in power for only one year, usurped the throne of Jin and divided Jin Province, and King Weli made them princes.

古文：天子不恤同姓，而爵其贼臣，天下不附矣。
现代文：天子不救同姓的晋君，反而把乱臣贼子封爵，天下的臣民们不再附属和承认周天子了。
English: Tianzi did not save Jinjun with the same surname, but instead knighted the ruffian thief, and the subjects of the world no longer affiliated with and recognized Zhou Tianzi.

古文：后三世，周致德祚于秦。
现代文：过了三代，周天子将福佑让给了秦国。
English: After three generations, Zhou Tianzi ceded Fuyou to Qin.

古文：其后秦遂灭周，而取九鼎。
现代文：后来秦就把周灭掉，而取走九鼎。
English: Later, Qin wiped out Zhou and took Jiuding.

古文：九鼎之震，木沴金，失众甚。
现代文：九鼎的震动，是木害金，表明大失天下民众。
English: The tremors of Jiuding are wood damage gold, indicating that the people of the world have lost a lot.

