古文：呜呼，五代之乱极矣，《传》所谓 天地闭，贤人隐 之时欤！
现代文：唉，五代的祸乱到了极点，是《易传》所说的 天地闭塞，贤人隐退 的时代吧！
English: Alas, the calamity of the Five Dynasties has reached its climax. It is the time when heaven and earth are blocked, and the wise men retreat, as described in the Yi Zhen!

古文：当此之时，臣弑其君，子弑其父，而搢绅之士安其禄而立其朝，充然无复廉耻之色者皆是也。
现代文：当这个时候，臣子杀死他的君主，儿子杀死他的父亲，而官吏们安享自已的俸禄而立身于朝廷，心满意足地不再有廉洁知耻的品质，这种人到处都是。
English: At this time, the courtier kills his sovereign, the son kills his father, and the officials enjoy their salaries and stand in the court, satisfied that they no longer have the quality of integrity. Such people are everywhere.

古文：吾以谓自古忠臣义士多出于乱世，而怪当时可道者何少也，岂果无其人哉？
现代文：我认为自古忠臣义士大多出在乱世，因而奇怪当时值得称道的人多么少，难道果真没有这样的人吗？
English: I think that most of the loyal subjects and righteous men since ancient times were born in a chaotic world, so it is strange how few people were praiseworthy at that time. Is there really no such person?

古文：虽曰干戈兴，学校废，而礼义衰，风俗隳坏，至于如此，然自古天下未尝无人也，吾意必有洁身自负之士，嫉世远去而不可见者。
现代文：虽然说干戈兴起，学校废置，而礼义衰微，风俗败坏，到了这样的地步，然而自古以来天下不曾没有贤人，我想一定有洁身自持的士人，痛恨世俗，远远离去而不能考见的。
English: Although it is said that the rise of ganko, the abolition of schools, the decline of etiquette, and the corruption of customs have reached such a level, since ancient times, the world has never been without sages. I think there must be a virtuous scholar who hates the world and is far away and cannot be seen.

古文：自古材贤有韫于中而不见于外，或穷居陋巷，委身草莽，虽颜子之行，不遇仲尼而名不彰，况世变多故，而君子道消之时乎！
现代文：自古贤才有蕴藏在心中而不表露在外面，有的困居在狭陋的街巷，弃身在荆棘草莽之中，即使像颜子那样有德行，没有遇上仲尼声名就不能显扬，何况社会多变故，而君子之道消亡的时候呢！
English: Since ancient times, the talents of the sages have been stored in their hearts without being exposed to the outside world. Some people live in narrow streets and abandoned themselves in the thorns and weeds. Even if you have virtues like Yan Zi, you can't be famous without meeting Zhong Ni. Moreover, society is changing, and the way of the gentleman is dying out!

古文：吾又以谓必有负材能，修节义，而沉沦于下，泯没而无闻者。
现代文：我还认为必定有怀持才能，培养节义，却沉沦于下层，泯没无闻的人。
English: I also think that there must be people who possess talent and cultivate righteousness, but sink to the bottom and disappear without a trace.

古文：求之传记，而乱世崩离，文字残缺，不可复得，然仅得者四五人而已。
现代文：在传记中寻找这样的人，而混乱之世分崩离析，文字记载残缺不全，不能再找到，仅仅得到四五个人罢了。
English: Looking for such a person in the biography, and the chaotic world falls apart, the written records are incomplete, can no longer be found, and only four or five people are obtained.

古文：处乎山林而群麋鹿，虽不足以为中道，然与其食人之禄，俯首而包羞，孰若无愧于心，放身而自得，吾得二人焉，曰郑遨、张荐明。
现代文：身处山林之中而和麋鹿作伴，虽不足以作为正道，但与其享用别人的俸禄，低头忍辱，内含羞愧，哪比得上心中无愧，放纵身心而开怀自得的人呢？我获知有两个人，名叫郑遨、张荐明。
English: Being in the middle of the mountain forest and being with the elk is not enough to be a righteous path, but rather than enjoying the salary of others, bowing down and enduring humiliation, which contains shame, what is comparable to a person who is unashamed, indulging in body and mind and enjoying self-satisfaction? I learned that there are two people named Zheng Qi and Zhang Jiaming.

古文：势利不屈其心，去就不违其义，吾得一人焉，曰石昂。
现代文：权势和利诱不能使他意志屈从，仕途去留不违背正义，这样的人我找到一个，名叫石昂。
English: I found such a person, named Shi'ang, who was not able to bend his will to power and profit, and whose career path did not violate justice.

古文：苟利于君，以忠获罪，而何必自明，有至死而不言者，此古之义士也，吾得一人焉，曰程福赟。
现代文：如果对君主有利，因为忠诚而遭受罪罚，又何必替自己辩白，有到死也不申辩的人，这是古代的义士，这样的人我找到一个，名叫程福赞。
English: If it is beneficial to the sovereign, why should you have to defend yourself if you are punished for being loyal? There are people who will not defend themselves to the death. These are the righteous people of ancient times. I found one such person, named Cheng Fuzan.

古文：五代之乱，君不君，臣不臣，父不父，子不子，至于兄弟、夫妇人伦之际，无不大坏，而天理几乎其灭矣。
现代文：五伐乱世，君主不像君主，臣子不像臣子，父亲不像父亲，儿子不像儿子，至于兄弟、夫妇间的人伦关系，没有不败坏无余的，而天理几乎灭亡了。
English: In the chaotic times of the Five Dynasties, the sovereign was not like the sovereign, the vassal was not like the vassal, the father was not like the father, and the son was not like the son. As for the human relations between brothers and husbands and wives, there was nothing that could not be destroyed, but the heavenly law was almost destroyed.

古文：于此之时，能以孝悌自修于一乡，而风行于天下者，犹或有之，然其事迹不著，而无可纪次，独其名氏或因见于书者，吾亦不敢没，而其略可录者，吾得一人焉，曰李自伦。
现代文：在逭个时代，能够在某一个地方自我修养孝顺父母敬爱兄长，而影响流传于天下的人，或许还有，但他们的事迹不昭著，因而无可记述，只有他们的名字姓氏有的因记载在书上，我也不敢让他们泯没，而其中粗略可记的，我找到一个人，名叫李白伦。
English: In three ages, there may have been people who were able to cultivate themselves in a certain place, who were filial to their parents and respected their brothers and sisters, and whose influence spread throughout the world, but their deeds were not famous, so they could not be recorded. Only their first names and surnames were recorded in books, so I did not dare to let them disappear. Among them, I found a person named Li Bai Lun.

古文：作《一行传》。
现代文：编写《一行传》。
English: Compiled "One Line Story."

古文：○郑遨张荐明附郑遨，字云叟，滑州白马人也。
现代文：郑遨字云叟，滑州白马人。
English: Zheng Qi Zi Yun Qi, from Baima, Nanzhou.

古文：唐明宗祖庙讳遨，故世行其字。
现代文：唐明宗的祖庙避讳遨，因此当时通用他的字。
English: The ancestral temple of the Tang and Ming dynasties eschewed, so his character was commonly used at the time.

古文：遨少好学，敏于文辞。
现代文：郑遨年轻时好学，文辞敏捷。
English: When he was young, Zheng Rong was eager to learn and had a quick wit.

古文：唐昭宗时，举进士不中，见天下已乱，有拂衣远去之意，欲携其妻、子与俱隐，其妻不从，遨及入少室山为道士。
现代文：唐昭宗时，考进士没中，见天下已乱，产生了拂衣远去的打算，准备带上他的妻子儿女和他一道归隐，他的妻子不愿跟随，郑遨于是进少室山做道士。
English: At the time of Tang Zhaozong, when he failed the entrance examination and saw that the world was in chaos, he had a plan to flee far away, ready to take his wife and children to go into seclusion with him. His wife did not want to follow, so Zheng Qi went to Shomuroshan to be a Taoist.

古文：其妻数以书劝遨还家，辄投之于火，后闻其妻、子卒，一恸而止。
现代文：他的妻子多次写信劝郑遨回家，他都把信扔进火中，后来听说他的妻子、儿女死了，大哭一场作罢。
English: His wife wrote to him many times to persuade him to return home, but he threw the letters into the fire. Later, when he heard that his wife and children had died, he burst into tears.

古文：遨与李振故善，振后事梁贵显，欲以禄遨，遨不顾，后振得罪南窜，遨徒步千里往省之，由是闻者益高其行。
现代文：郑遨和李振在过去相友善，李振后来在梁做官，地位显贵，想让郑遨做官，郑遨不理睬，后来李振获罪流放南方，郑遨步行一千多里去探望他，因此知情的人更加称颂他的德行。
English: In the past, Zheng Rong and Li Zhen were friendly with each other. Li Zhen later became a high-ranking official in Liang and wanted to make Zheng Rong an official, but Zheng Rong ignored him. Later, Li Zhen was convicted and exiled to the south, and Zheng Rong walked more than a thousand miles to visit him. Therefore, people in the know praised his virtues even more.

古文：其后，遨闻华山有五粒松，脂沦入地，千岁化为药，能去三尸，因徙居华阴，欲求之。
现代文：后来，郑遨听说华山有五粒松，松脂流进地下，一千多年后变成药，能去除在人体肉作祟的三尸神，于是移居到华阴，想得到这种药。
English: Later, Zheng Yao heard that Huashan had five-grain pines, and the pine resin flowed into the ground and turned into medicine after more than a thousand years, which could remove the three dead gods that haunted the human body, so he moved to Huayin and wanted to get this medicine.

古文：与道士李道殷、罗隐之友善，世目以为三高士。
现代文：和道士李道殷、罗隐之相交好，世人把他们看成三个高士。
English: He was good friends with the Taoist priests Li Daoyin and Luo Ying, and the world regarded them as three high priests.

古文：遨种田，隐之卖药以自给，道殷有钓鱼术，钩而不饵，又能化石为金，遨尝验其信然，而不之求也。
现代文：郑遨种田，罗隐之责药为生，李道殷有钓鱼术，下钩不用鱼饵，又能点化石头成金子，郑遨曾核验确实如此，但没有向他求教。
English: Zheng Yao was a farmer, and Luo Yin's medicine was his livelihood. Li Dao Yin had a fishing technique, he did not use a fishhook, and he could turn a stone into gold. Zheng Yao had verified that this was true, but he did not ask him for advice.

古文：节度使刘遂凝数以宝货遗之，遨一不受。
现代文：节度使刘遂凝多次拿宝物送给他，郑遨一样也不接妥。
English: The festival made Liu Suigen repeatedly take the treasure and give it to him, and Zheng Yao did not do the same.

古文：唐明宗时以左拾遗、晋高祖时以谏议大夫召之，皆不起，即赐号为逍遥先生。
现代文：唐明宗时以左拾遣、晋高祖时以谏议大夫宣召他，都不应召，就赐号叫逍迁先生。
English: When he was a member of the Tang and Ming Dynasties, he was referred to as Zuo Zhiyuan (左拾遣), and when he was promoted to Gaozhu (晋高祖), he was referred to as Zhengyi Dafu (議大夫).

古文：天福四年卒，年七十四。
现代文：天福四年死，享年七十四岁。
English: Tenfuku died four years later at the age of 74.

古文：遨之节高矣，遭乱世不污于荣利，至弃妻、子不顾而去，岂非与世自绝而笃爱其身者欤？
现代文：郑遨的节操高尚，遭逢乱世而不被荣利玷污，以至于弃妻子、儿女于不顾而隐去，难道不是自绝于世而十分珍爱自身的人吗？
English: Zheng Qi's modesty was noble. He was not tarnished by fame and fortune in a turbulent world, so much so that he abandoned his wife and children and went into hiding. Wasn't he a self-sacrificing person who cherished himself?

古文：然遨好饮酒弈棋，时时为诗章落人间，人间多写以缣素，相赠遗以为宝，至或图写其形，玩于屋壁，其迹虽远而其名愈彰，与乎石门、荷之徒异矣。
现代文：但郑遨喜好饮酒下棋，常常写诗在人世间流传，人们常把他的诗抄写在白色绸绢上，作为宝贝互相赠送，甚至于有人画下他的像，挂在屋壁上审视玩味，他的行踪虽远离世人但名声却更加彰着，与石门守门人、荷葆丈人之类不同。
English: However, Zheng Qi liked to drink alcohol and play chess. He often wrote poems and passed them around the world. People often copied his poems on white satin and gave them to each other as gifts. Some people even painted his portrait and hung it on the roof to examine the taste. Although his whereabouts were far away from the world, his reputation was more prominent. He was different from the gatekeepers of the stone gate and the people of Huan.

古文：与遨同时张荐明者，燕人也。
现代文：和郑遨同时的张荐明，是燕地人。
English: Zhang Guiming, who was born at the same time as Zheng Yao, was a native of Yan.

古文：少以儒学游河朔，后去为道士，通老子、庄周之说。
现代文：年轻时以儒学游历河朔，后来去做道士，精通老子、庄周的学说。
English: When he was young, he traveled to Hexuo with Confucianism, and later became a Taoist, proficient in the teachings of Lao Zi and Zhuang Zhou.

古文：高祖召见，问 道家可以治国乎？ 
现代文：汉高祖召见他，问他道家可以治国不。
English: Henkel's ancestor summoned him and asked him whether a Taoist could govern the country.

古文：对曰： 道也者，妙万物而为言，得其极者，尸居衤任席之间可以治天地也。 
现代文：回答说： 道是体察万物微妙处而形成的学说，学到它的极深处，坐在铺席之间不动，就能治理天下。 
English: He replied, "Tao is a doctrine formed by perceiving the subtleties of all things, learning its deepest depths, sitting between the stalls without moving, and being able to govern the world.

古文：高祖大其言，延入内殿讲《道德经》，拜以为师。
现代文：汉高祖觉得他的话博大宏深，请到内殿讲授《道德经》，拜他为师。
English: Han Gao Zu thought his words were profound, so he invited him to the inner hall to lecture on the Tao Te Ching and worship him as his teacher.

古文：荐明闻宫中奉时鼓，曰： 陛下闻鼓乎？
现代文：张荐明听到宫中演奏时鼓，说： 陛下听到鼓声了吗？
English: Zhang Riminming heard the drums playing in the palace and said, "Your Majesty, did you hear the drums?

古文：其声一而已。
现代文：鼓声只是一种声音罢了。
English: A drumbeat is just a sound.

古文：五音十二律，鼓无一焉，然和之者鼓也。
现代文：五音十二律吕，鼓声没有一样，但伴和它们的却是鼓声。
English: Five tones and twelve rhythms, the drums are not the same, but they are accompanied by drums.

古文：夫一，万事之本也，能守一者可以治天下。 
现代文：一，是万事万物的根本，能坚守根本的人就能够治理天下。 
English: First, it is the foundation of all things. Those who can adhere to the foundation will be able to govern the world.

古文：高祖善之，赐号通玄先生，后不知其所终。
现代文：汉高祖认为他说得对，赐号为通玄先生，后来不知道他的去向。
English: Henkel's great-grandfather thought he was right and gave him the name of Mr. Tong Xuan. Later, he did not know where he was going.

古文：○石昂石昂，青州临淄人也。
现代文：石昂是青州临淄人。
English: Shi Ang is from Linyi, Qingzhou.

古文：家有书数千卷，喜延四方之士，士无远近，多就昂学问，食其门下者或累岁，昂未尝有怠色。
现代文：家中有藏书几千卷，喜欢招延四方贤士，士人无论远近，不少人到石昂处做学问。在他门下谋生就食的人有时几年不离去，石昂不曾露出怠慢的神色。
English: He had a collection of several thousand volumes at home and liked to invite sages from all over the country. Many scholars, both near and far, came to study with Shi Ang. Those who made a living under his tutelage sometimes did not leave for several years, and Shi Ang never showed a look of neglect.

古文：而昂不求仕进。
现代文：但石昂不求做官。
English: But Shih Ang does not seek to be an official.

古文：节度使符习高基行，召以为临淄令。
现代文：节度使符习赞赏他的品行，召他任临淄令。
English: The governor sent Fu Xi to praise his conduct and called him to serve as the crown prince.

古文：习入朝京师，监军杨彦朗知留后事，昂以公事至府上谒，赞者以彦朗讳 石 ，更其姓曰 右 。昂趋于庭，仰责彦朗曰： 内侍奈何以私害公！
现代文：符习去京师朝拜，监军杨彦朗主持节度使留后的事宜，石昂因公事到府上谒见，引见的人因杨彦朗避讳 石 字，就改称他的姓叫 右 石昂快步走到庭中，抬头斥责杨彦朗说： 你怎么能因私害公！
English: Fuxi went to Beijing to pay homage to the emperor, Yang Yanlong, the military supervisor, presided over the festival and the matters left behind, Shi Ang went to the palace for an audience due to his official duties, and the person who introduced him changed his surname to Right because Yang Yanlong avoided the Chinese character for stone. Shi Ang walked briskly into the courtyard, looked up and rebuked Yang Yanlong, saying, "How can you harm the public for private gain!

古文：昂姓 石 ，非 右 也。 
现代文：我石昂姓 石，不是 右 。 
English: My surname is Shi Ang, not Right.

古文：彦朗大怒，拂衣起去，昂即趋出。
现代文：杨彦朗大怒，拂衣起身离去，石昂就快步出去了。
English: Yang Yanlang was furious. He got up, brushed off his clothes and left. Shi Ao walked out quickly.

古文：解官还于家，语其子曰： 吾本不欲仕乱世，果为刑人所辱，子孙其以我为戒！ 
现代文：辞去官职回到家中，对他的儿子说： 我本来就不愿在乱世做官，现在果然受到宦官的侮辱，子孙们要以我为戒啊！ 
English: He resigned from his official position and returned home, saying to his son: I originally did not want to be an official in a chaotic world, but now I have been insulted by a eunuch. My children and grandchildren should take me as a warning!

古文：昂父亦好学，平生不喜拂说，父死，昂于柩前诵《尚书》，曰： 此吾先人之所欲闻也。 
现代文：石昂的父亲也好学，一生不喜欢佛学，父亲死后，石昂在灵柩前诵读《尚书》，说： 这是我的父亲想听的。 
English: Shi Ang's father was also a quick learner and disliked Buddhism throughout his life. After his father's death, Shi Ang read "The Book of Songs" in front of the coffin and said, "This is what my father wanted to hear."

古文：禁其家不可以佛事污吾先人。
现代文：告诫他的家人不能让佛事玷污他的父亲。
English: He warned his family not to let Buddhism tarnish his father.

古文：昂既去，而晋室大乱。○程福赟程福赟者，不知其世家。
现代文：登壹祖时，下韶求天下忠信孝悌的士人，户部尚书王权、宗正卿石光赞、国子祭酒田敏、兵部侍郎王延等人一起到束上合门，上奏石昂的品行道义可以应诏。诏令石昂到京师，在便殿召见他，任命他为宗正寺丞。升迁少卿。晋出帝登位，晋的朝政日益衰败，石昂多次上疏极力劝谏，不被采纳，于是称病束归，在家寿终正寝。程福赞，不知道他的家世。
English: At the time of the enthronement of the first ancestor, the lower echelon asked the world's most loyal and filial scholars, including the head of the household, Shoshu Wangquan, the head of the dynasty, Zong Zheng, Shi Guangzan, the son of the state, Sakata Min, and the head of the military, Wang Yan, to come to Sucsang to close the door. The moral and ethical conduct of Shi Ang could be answered by the emperor. The emperor ordered Shi Ang to go to the Beijing division, summoned him to the hall of residence, and appointed him as the secretary of the Zong Zheng Temple. He was promoted to the rank of

古文：为人沉厚寡言而有勇。
现代文：为人沉稳忠厚少言语而有勇力。
English: He is calm, loyal, and brave with few words.

古文：少为军卒，以战功累迁洺州团练使。
现代文：年轻时当兵，因战功累官升迁沼州团练使。
English: When he was young, he was a soldier. Due to his distinguished war service, he was promoted to the post of Nushu regimental training officer.

古文：晋出帝时，为奉国右厢都指挥使。
现代文：晋出帝时，任奉国右厢都指挥使。
English: When he was promoted to emperor, he served as the commander of the right wing of the country.

古文：开运中，契丹入寇，出帝北征，奉国军士乘间夜纵火焚营，欲因以为乱，福赟身自救火被伤，火灭而乱者不得发。
现代文：开运年问，契丹军队入侵，晋出帝北征，奉国士兵乘机在晚上放火焚毁营寨，想借机作乱，程福簧亲自救火受伤，火被扑灭，作乱的人没能起事。
English: At the beginning of the year, the Khitan army invaded and marched from the north to the north of the empire. The soldiers serving the country took advantage of the opportunity to set fire to the camp in the evening and wanted to use the opportunity to make trouble. Cheng Fuleun was injured when he personally put out the fire. The fire was extinguished, and the troublemakers were unable to start trouble.

古文：福赟以为契丹且大至，而天子在军，京师虚空，不宜以小故动摇人听，因匿其事不以闻。
现代文：程福赞认为契丹大军将到，而天子在军队中，京师空虚，不应因小事情动摇人心，因而隐瞒了这件事没有上奏。
English: Cheng Fuzan thought that the Khitan army was about to arrive, and the heavenly son was in the army, the capital was empty, and people should not be shaken by small things, so he concealed the matter and did not report it.

古文：军将李殷位次福赟下，利其去而代之，因诬福赟与乱者同谋，不然何以不奏。
现代文：军将李殷的位次排在程福簧之下，利于程福赞离去而由他取代，于是诬告程福费和作乱的人合谋，要不然为什么不上奏。
English: The military ranked Li Yin's rank below Cheng Fuzan, which was advantageous for Cheng Fuzan to leave and be replaced by him, so they falsely accused Cheng Fufai of conspiring with the troublemakers, otherwise why not play.

古文：出帝下福赟狱，人皆以为冤，福赟终不自辨以见杀。
现代文：晋出帝把程福蟹投进狱中，人们都认为他冤枉，程福簧始终没有为自己辩白而被杀害了。
English: When Emperor Jinzhi threw Chengfu Crab into prison, people thought that he had been wronged. Chengfu Spring never defended himself and was killed.

古文：○李自伦
现代文：李白伦，是深州人。
English: Li Bailun is a native of Shenzhou.

古文：李自伦者，深州人也。天福四年正月，尚书户部奏： 深州司功参军李自伦六世同居，奉敕准格。
现代文：天福四年正月，尚书户部上奏说： 深州司功参军李白伦六代人同住，奉诏按规定旌赏。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Tianfu, Shang Shuxu, the head of the household department, said: the six generations of Li Bailun, the Shenzhou Sikyong, lived together and received rewards according to regulations.

古文：按格，孝义旌表，必先加按验，孝者复其终身，义门仍加旌表。得本州审到乡老程言等称，自伦高祖训，训生粲，粲生则，则生忠，忠生自伦，自伦生光厚，六世同居不妄。 
现代文：依照规定，表彰忠孝仁义之人，必定要首先加以核查，忠孝的人终身免除徭役，全家仁义的一并加以表彰得到本州岛审察到乡中老人程言等人称说，李白伦的高祖叫李训，李训生李粲，李粲生李则，李则生李忠，李忠生李白伦，李白伦生李光厚，六代人同居属实。 
English: According to the regulations, the person who commends the loyalty, filial piety and benevolence must first be verified. The person who is loyal and filial is exempted from serving as a guard for life, and the whole family is commended for benevolence together. According to the old man Cheng Yan and others in the village who were inspected by the Honshu Island, Li Bailun's great-grandfather is called Li Xun, Li Xun's son is Li Yao, Li Yao's son is Li Ze, Li Ze's son is Li Zhong, Li Zhong's son is Li Bailun, Li Bailun's son is Li Guanghou

古文：敕以所居飞凫乡为孝义乡，匡圣里为仁和里，准式旌表门闾。
现代文：下诏以他们居住的飞尧乡为孝义乡，匡圣里为仁和里，按规定立牌坊赐匾额加以表彰。
English: The following edict designated the Hebei Township where they lived as a filial piety township, and the Kuangshan Township as a benevolence township, and set up a plaque to commend them.

古文：九月丙子，户部复奏： 前登州义门王仲昭六世同居，其旌表有听事、步栏，前列屏，树乌头正门，阀阅一丈二尺，乌头二柱端冒以瓦桶，筑双阙一丈，在乌头之南三丈七尺，夹树槐柳，十有五步，请如之。 
现代文：九月丙子，卢部又上奏说： 前登州孝义人家王仲昭六代人同住，为表彰他忠孝建有厅堂、步栏，前面树立屏风，修建乌头正门，门前两柱高一丈二尺，墨染的柱子顶端覆盖瓦桶，修筑双阙高一丈，在乌头正门南面三丈七尺，两旁种上槐树柳树，相距十五步，请仿照这一形式为李白伦旌表门间。 
English: In September of the same year, Lu Bu made another report: Six generations of Wang Zhong Zhao, the former Dengzhou filial piety person, lived together. In recognition of his loyalty and filial piety, he built a hall and a walkway, erected a screen in front, built the main gate of Wuzhou, the two pillars in front of the door were two feet high, and the top of the ink-dyed pillar was covered with a tile bucket, built a double gate one foot high, three feet seven feet south of the main gate of Wuzhou, and planted eucalyptus willows on both sides, fifteen steps apart. Please follow this form for Li Bailun's

古文：敕曰： 此故事也，令式无之。
现代文：下韶说： 这是从前的事，没有令格。
English: The lower jaw said: This is a thing of the past, there is no precedent.

古文：其量地之宜，高其外门，门安绰楔，左右建台，高一丈二尺，广狭方正称焉，圬以白而赤其四角，使不孝不义者见之，可以悛心而易行焉。 
现代文：依据地势所宜，外门修高些，门两旁安放旌表木柱，左右修建台，高一丈二尺，长宽方正相称，涂成白色而四角用红色，使不孝不义的人看见，可以产生悔改之心而改变他们的行为。 
English: According to the terrain, the outer door should be built higher, the door should be placed on both sides of the door, and the wooden pillars should be placed on both sides of the door. The building platform should be two feet high, the length and width should be commensurate, painted white and the four corners should be red, so that the unfilial and unrighteous people can see that they can have a repentant heart and change their behavior.

