古文：○神宗二三年春正月癸丑，录唐李氏、周柴氏后。
现代文：熙宁三年春正月二十一日，录用唐朝李氏、后周柴氏后代。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Xi Ning, the descendants of the Tang Dynasty Li clan and the Zhou Chai clan were recruited.

古文：乙卯，诏诸路散青苗钱禁抑配。
现代文：二十三日，诏令各地发散青苗钱禁止抑配。
English: On the 23rd, it was decreed that the distribution of seedling money in various regions would be prohibited.

古文：戊午，判尚书省张方平罢知陈州。
现代文：二十六日，判尚书省张方平罢为陈州知州。
English: On the 26th, it was decided that Zhang Fangping of Shangshu Province would become Chenzhou Chizhou.

古文：二月壬申，以翰林学士司马光为枢密副使，凡九辞，诏收还敕诰。
现代文：二月十一日，任命翰林学士司马光为枢密副使，司马光前后九次推托，神宗下诏收回任命书。
English: On February 11, Sima Guang, a scholar of Hanlin, was appointed as a Privy Vice-Envoy. Sima Guang postponed the appointment nine times, and Shenzong issued a decree to withdraw the appointment letter.

古文：甲戌，以河州刺史瞎欺丁木征为金紫光禄大夫、检校刑部尚书。
现代文：十三日，任命河州刺史瞎欺丁木征为金紫光禄大夫、检校刑部尚书。
English: On the 13th, he appointed Hezhou Zhishi Xianqiu Dingmu Zheng as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu and the inspector of the school's criminal department.

古文：乙酉，韩琦罢河北安抚使，为大名府路安抚使。
现代文：二十四日，韩琦罢去河北安抚使，改为大名府路安抚使。
English: On the 24th, Han Zheng dismissed the Hebei Pacifying Envoy and replaced it with the Damingfu Road Pacifying Envoy.

古文：三月丙申，孙觉、吕公著、张戬、程颢、李常上疏极言新法，不听。
现代文：三月初五，孙觉、吕公著、张戮、程颖、李常上疏极言新法，神宗不听。
English: On the 5th day of March, Sun Jue, Lyu Gong, Zhang Lin, Cheng Ying, and Li Changshu preached the new law, but the gods did not listen.

古文：己亥，始策进士，罢诗、赋、论三题。
现代文：初八，开始用时务策考进士，罢除诗、赋、论三题。
English: In the eighth year of junior high school, students began to use the time management strategy in the entrance examination, eliminating the three questions of poetry, fu, and discussion.

古文：戊申，李常言青苗敛散不实，有旨具析，翰林学士兼知通进、银台司范镇封还诏书，以为不当，坐罢职，守本官。
现代文：十七日，李常上书说青苗钱敛散不实，神宗命令要一一陈述分析，翰林学士兼知通进、银台司范镇封还诏书，被认为不应该，因而罢职，只守本官。
English: On the 17th, Li Chang wrote a letter saying that it was untrue that young seedlings were scattered and dispersed. Shenzong ordered a report and analysis. Hanlin Scholar and Zhitongjin, and Yintai Secretary Fan Zhenfeng also wrote a decree, which was considered inappropriate. Therefore, he resigned from his post and only kept his post.

古文：壬子，赐礼部奏名进士、明经及第八百二十九人。
现代文：二十一日，赐礼部奏名进士、明经及第八百二十九人。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Ministry of Rites and Rituals was given the names of eight hundred and twenty-nine people.

古文：乙卯，诏诸路毋有留狱。
现代文：二十四日，诏令全国各路不得迟滞狱讼案件的处理。
English: On the 24th, it was decreed that all roads in the country must not delay the handling of prison cases.

古文：丙辰，立试刑法及详刑官。
现代文：二十五日，确立考试刑法和提拔详官的办法。
English: On the 25th, the Criminal Law Examination and the method of promoting detailed officers were established.

古文：右正言孙觉以奉诏反覆，贬知广德军。
现代文：右正言孙觉因执行诏令反复无常被贬为知广德军。
English: Sun Jue, the right-hand man, was relegated to the rank of general of the German army because of his capricious execution of the imperial edict.

古文：夏四月癸亥，幸金明池观水嬉，宴射琼林苑。
现代文：夏四月初三，到金明池观看嬉水，在琼林苑设宴射箭。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of summer, go to the Jinming Pool to watch the playful water, and set up a banquet for archery in Qionglin Garden.

古文：丙寅，辽遣耶律宽来贺同天节。
现代文：初六，辽朝派耶律宽来祝贺同天节。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the Liao Dynasty sent Ye Lukuan to congratulate the same day.

古文：丁卯，给两浙转运司度僧牒，募民入粟。
现代文：初七，拨给两浙转运司度僧碟，招募富民纳粟。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, it was allocated to the two Zhejiang Transportation Departments to recruit rich people to harvest millet.

古文：戊辰，御史中丞吕公著贬知颍州。
现代文：初八，御史中承吕公著被贬为颖州知州。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the book written by Cheng Lyu Gong in the history was downgraded to Yingzhou Chizhou.

古文：己卯，赵抃罢知杭州，以韩绛参知政事。
现代文：十九日，赵林罢为杭州知州，任命韩绛参知政事。
English: On the 19th, Zhao Lin was transferred to Hangzhou Chizhou, and Han Wei was appointed to the post of vice-governor.

古文：监察御史里行程颢罢为京西路同提点刑狱。
现代文：监察御史里行程颖罢为京西路同提点刑狱。
English: The inspector's trip to the historical site turned out to be the same as the one to the west of Beijing.

古文：壬午，右正言李常贬通判滑州，监察御史里行张戬贬知公安县，王子韶贬知上元县。
现代文：二十二日，右正言李常贬为滑州通判，监察御史里行张哉贬为公安县知县，王子韶贬为上元县知县。
English: On the 22nd, Yu Zhengyan Li Chang was downgraded to Luzhou Tongzhan, Supervisor Gu Shi Li Xing Zhang Ya was downgraded to Public Security County Zhixian, and Prince Zou was downgraded to Shangyuan County Zhixian.

古文：癸未，侍御史知杂事陈襄罢为同修起居注，程颢签书镇宁军节度判官公事，前秀州军事判官李定为太子中允、监察御史里行。
现代文：二十三日，侍御史知杂事陈襄罢为同修起居注，程颖签书镇宁军节度判官公事，前秀州军事判官李定为太子中允、监察御史里行。
English: On the 23rd, Chen Xiang, the attendant of the history of knowledge and miscellaneous affairs, became a fellow practitioner, Cheng Ying signed the book of the judge of the Ningjun Festival, and Li, the former military judge of Xiuzhou, was designated as the prince's middle son and the inspector of the history.

古文：五月癸巳，诏并边州郡毋给青苗钱。
现代文：五月初四，诏令沿边州郡不给散青苗钱。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, the edict was issued that no money would be given to young seedlings along the border counties.

古文：太白昼见。
现代文：太白星白天出现。
English: Too white Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：壬寅，诏令司马光详定转对封事。
现代文：十三日，诏令司马光详细审定转对封事。
English: On the 13th, the emperor ordered Sima Guang to make a detailed examination of the transfer.

古文：甲辰，诏罢制置三司条例归中书。
现代文：十五日，下诏罢除制置三司条例司归人中书省。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the edict was issued to abolish and establish three departments, and the regulation department was transferred to the People's Republic of China.

古文：辛亥，赐进士苏丕号安退处士。
现代文：二十二日，赐给进士苏巫 安退处士 的称号。
English: On the 22nd, he conferred the title of Su Wu An Di Mao to the enlisted soldier.

古文：壬子，罢入阁仪。
现代文：二十三日，罢除人阁礼仪。
English: On the 23rd, the ceremony of removing the cabinet of ministers began.

古文：丁巳，诏以审官院为东院，别置西院。
现代文：二十八日，下诏审官院为东院，另外建置西院。
English: On the 28th, the Lower Great Hall of the Supreme People's Procuratorate became the East Hall, and the West Hall was built separately.

古文：六月癸酉，日有五色云。
现代文：六月十四日，太阳出现五种颜色的云。
English: On June 14th, the sun appeared as a five-colored cloud.

古文：丁丑，封宗室秦、鲁、蔡、魏、燕、陈、越七王后为公。
现代文：十八日，封宗室秦、鲁、蔡、魏、燕、陈、越七王后代为公。
English: On the 18th, the descendants of the seven kings of Fuzong, Qin, Lu, Cai, Wei, Yan, Chen and Yue, became kings.

古文：戊寅，诏修武成王庙。
现代文：十九日，下诏修武成王庙。
English: On the 19th, he issued an edict to renovate the King Wucheng Temple.

古文：丙戌，知谏院胡宗愈贬通判真州。
现代文：二十七日，知谏院胡宗愈贬为真州通判。
English: On the 27th, Zhishan's Hu Zong was increasingly relegated to the Zhenzhou Intermediate Court.

古文：秋七月辛卯，欧阳修徙知蔡州。
现代文：秋七月初三，欧阳修改知蔡州。
English: On the third day of the seventh month of autumn, Ouyang modified Zhi Caizhou.

古文：壬辰，吕公弼罢枢密使，以知太原府冯京为枢密副使。
现代文：初四，吕公弼罢除枢密使职务，任命知太原府冯京为枢密副使。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Lv Gongtao dismissed the post of Privy Envoy and appointed Feng Jing of Zhitaiyuan as Deputy Privy Envoy.

古文：罢潞州交子务。
现代文：罢除潞州交子务。
English: The Zhangzhou Foreign Exchange Office was abolished.

古文：戊戌，雨雹。
现代文：初十，降雹。
English: At the beginning of the 10th year, drop the gong.

古文：癸丑，详定宗室袭封制度。
现代文：二十五日，详细审定宗室袭封制度。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the family room inheritance system was verified in detail.

古文：甲寅，置三班院主簿。
现代文：二十六日，设置三班院主簿。
English: On the 26th, three sets of hospital ledgers were set up.

古文：八月戊午，罢看详银台司文字所。
现代文：八月初一，罢除看详银台司文字所。
English: On the first day of August, the Department of Literature and Calligraphy was abolished.

古文：丙寅，以旱虑囚，死罪以下递减一等，杖、笞者释之。
现代文：初九，因早灾讯察全国监狱里囚犯罪状，死罪以下递减一等罪行，杖刑、答刑释放。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, due to the early disaster, the criminal status of prisoners in prisons across the country was investigated, and the first-class crimes below the death penalty were reduced, and the cane punishment and the answering punishment were released.

古文：以卫州旱，令转运司振恤，仍蠲租赋。
现代文：因卫州早灾，命令转运司贩济抚恤，免除租赋。
English: Due to the early disaster in Weizhou, it ordered the forwarding agent to give a pension and waive the rent.

古文：戊寅，诏川陕、福建、广南七路官令转运司立格就注，具为令。
现代文：二十一日，下诏川峡、福建、广南等七路官员，由转运司确立标准注册，勒成法令。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the officials of the seven routes such as Zhaozhuang River Gorge, Fujian and Guangnan were established and registered by the Transportation Division, and a decree was issued.

古文：遣张景宪等贺辽主生辰、正旦。
现代文：派张景宪等人祝贺辽主生辰和新春。
English: Zhang Jingxian and others congratulated Liao on his birthday and the new year.

古文：己卯，夏人犯大顺城，知庆州李复圭以方略授环庆路钤辖李信、庆州东路都巡检刘甫、监押种咏出战，兵少取败。
现代文：二十二日，夏人进犯大顺城，庆州知州李复圭向环庆路铃辖李信、庆州东路都巡检刘甫、监押种咏面授出战方略，因兵力不足而失败。
English: On the 22nd, the Xia people attacked Dashun City, and Li Fugui of Gyeongju Chizhou issued a battle strategy to Li Xin, who was in charge of the ring of Huanqing Road, and Liu Fu, who was in charge of the inspection of Gyeongju East Road, as well as the detention of seeds and noodles. However, they failed due to insufficient troops.

古文：复圭诬信等违其节制，斩信及刘甫，种咏死于狱。
现代文：李复圭诬告李信等人不听其节制，斩杀李信和刘甫，种咏死在狱中。
English: Li Fugui falsely accused Li Xin and others of not listening to his restraint, killed Li Xin and Liu Fu, and Zeng Yao died in prison.

古文：是月，庆州巡检姚兕败夏人于荔原堡。
现代文：这个月，庆州巡检姚咒在荔原堡打败西夏军队。
English: This month, Gyeongju patrolman Yao Jie defeated the Western Xia army at Lihwon Fort.

古文：钤辖郭庆、都监高敏死之。
现代文：铃辖郭庆、都监高敏在这次战斗中战死。
English: Guo Qing and Gao Min died in this battle.

古文：九月戊子朔，中书置检正官。
现代文：九月初一，中书省设置检正官。
English: On the first day of September, the Ministry of Education set up a procuratorate.

古文：乙未，韩绛罢为陕西宣抚使。
现代文：初八，韩绛罢为陕西宣抚使。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Han Zheng became the envoy of Shaanxi.

古文：己亥，始试法官。
现代文：十二日，第一次考试法官。
English: On the 12th, the first examination judge left.

古文：庚子，曾公亮罢为司空兼侍中、河阳三城节度使。
现代文：十三日，曾公亮罢为司空兼侍中、河阳三城节度使。
English: On the thirteenth day, Zeng Guoliang was promoted to the position of the secretary of the sky and the attendant, and the festival envoy of the three cities of Kayan.

古文：辛丑，以冯京参知政事，翰林学士吴充为枢密副使。
现代文：十四日，任命冯京参知政事，翰林学士吴充为枢密副使。
English: On the 14th, Feng Jing was appointed as the Vice-President of the State Council and Hanlin Scholar Wu Chong was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council.

古文：乙巳，亲策贤良方正及武举。
现代文：十八日，神宗亲自策试贤良方正科和武举科的考生。
English: On the 18th, Shenzong personally selected and tested the candidates for the Xianliang Fang Zhengke and Wuhouke.

古文：壬子，太白昼见。
现代文：二十五日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 12th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：癸丑，作东、西府以居执政。
现代文：二十六日，建成执政居住的东西府。
English: On the 26th, the East-West Government, where the government resides, was completed.

古文：司马光罢知永兴军。
现代文：司马光罢为知永兴军。
English: Sima Guang became the leader of the Zhiyongxing Army.

古文：诏环庆阵亡义勇余丁当刺者，悉免之。
现代文：下诏：上个月在环庆地区抵抗西夏战斗中阵亡义勇剩下的兵丁应当刺字的，全部免予刺字。
English: The following edict: The soldiers who died in the battle against the Western Xia in the Huanqing region last month and who are still alive should be tattooed, but they are all exempted from tattooing.

古文：冬十月辛酉，诏延州毋纳夏使。
现代文：冬十月初四，诏令延州不要接纳夏国使者。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of winter, the emperor ordered Yanzhou not to receive the envoys from Xia.

古文：甲子，雨木冰。
现代文：初七，降木冰。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the lunar calendar, the snow falls.

古文：壬申，朝谒神御殿。
现代文：十五日，朝拜神主殿。
English: On the fifteenth day, morning worship of the main shrine begins.

古文：丙子，知庆州李复圭擅兴兵败绩，诬裨将李信、刘甫、种咏以死，御史劾之，贬保静军节度副使。
现代文：十九日，知庆州李复圭擅自兴兵，导致失败，反过来诬陷副将李信、刘甫、种咏，并杀死他们，这件事遭到御史弹勃，李复圭被贬为保静军节度副使。
English: On the 19th, Li Fugui of Qingzhou was accused of raising an army without authorization, which led to failure. In turn, he framed Vice Generals Li Xin, Liu Fu, and Zeng Yao, and killed them. This incident was reported to the imperial court, and Li Fugui was demoted to Vice Minister of Defense.

古文：戊寅，陈升之以母忧去位。
现代文：二十一日，陈升之因母亲去世离开职位。
English: On the 21st, Chen Shengzhi left his post due to the death of his mother.

古文：乙酉，诏罢诸场务内侍监当。
现代文：二十八日，诏令罢除各地场务内侍监当。
English: On the 28th, the Emperor's edict dismissed the supervisors of venue affairs in various regions.

古文：十一月戊子，振河北饥民徙京西者。
现代文：十一月初一，贩济河北饥民流亡到京西的人。
English: On the first day of the month of November, people who sold food to the starving people in Hebei who had fled to the west of Beijing.

古文：己丑，官节行之士二十一人。
现代文：初二，授给节行高迈的二十一人官职。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, twenty-one high-ranking officials were awarded.

古文：壬辰，蠲陕西蕃部贷粮。
现代文：初五，免除陕西蕃部借贷的粮食。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the grain loaned by Shaanxi and Hebei will be exempted.

古文：癸卯，授布衣王存下班殿侍、三班差使、宣抚司指挥使。
现代文：十六日，授给布衣王存下班殿侍、三班差使、宣抚司指挥使。
English: On the 16th, the King of Cloth was awarded the following ranks of palace attendants, three groups of envoys, and the commanding officer of the Department of Propaganda.

古文：甲辰，夏人寇大顺城，都监燕达等击走之。
现代文：十七日，夏人寇掠大顺城，都监燕达等人带兵打退了夏军。
English: On the 17th, the Xia people raided Dashun City, and the governor Yanda and others led the troops to beat back the Xia army.

古文：庚戌，诏升朝官除南郊赦封赠父母外，不得以加恩转官。
现代文：二十三日，下诏：升朝官除南郊大赦封赠父母外，不得因加恩转官。
English: On the 23rd, the following edict was issued: except for the Southern Suburbs amnesty granted to parents, no one could be promoted to the imperial court because of Gahn.

古文：乙卯，以韩绛兼河东宣抚使。
现代文：二十八日，任命韩绛兼任河东宣抚使。
English: On the 28th, Han Zheng was appointed to concurrently serve as the Henan-Tang-Hedong Proclamation Envoy.

古文：梓州路转运使韩璹等以能兴利除害，赐帛有差。
现代文：梓州路转运使韩寿等人因能兴利除害，得到多少不等朝廷赏赐的帛。
English: The Zizhou Road transshipment enabled Han Shou and others to obtain a number of imperial awards for their ability to eliminate harm.

古文：十二月己未，诏立诸路更戍法，旧以他路兵杂戍者遣还。
现代文：十二月初三，下诏确立各路更戍法，原来以他路士兵混合戍守的人一律遣还。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, the following edict established the law of detachment of each road, and all those who had originally mixed with soldiers from other roads were sent back.

古文：乙丑，立保甲法。
现代文：初九，颁立保甲法。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the Law on the Protection of Qualifications was promulgated.

古文：丁卯，以韩绛、王安石并同中书门下平章事，王珪参知政事。
现代文：十一日，任命韩绛、王安石一起任同中书门下平章事，王盖为参知政事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Han Zheng and Wang Anshi were appointed to be the vice-chancellors of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and Wang Gai was appointed as the vice-president of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

古文：赐布衣陈知彦进士出身，知县王辅同进士出身。
现代文：赐给布衣陈知彦进士出身，知县王辅同进士出身。
English: It was given to Buyi Chen Zhihong, who was born as a scholar, and Zhixian Wang Fu, who was born as a scholar.

古文：庚午，夏人寇镇戎军三川砦，巡检赵普伏兵邀击，败之。
现代文：十四日，夏人寇掠镇戎军三川碧，巡检赵普设置伏兵阻击，打败夏军。
English: On the 14th, the Xia people raided the town and the troops of the Mikawa Bi army came, and the patrol Zhao Pu set up an ambush to defeat the Xia army.

古文：丁丑，增广南摄官奉。
现代文：二十一日，增加广南摄官棒禄。
English: On the 21st, the salary of the Guangnan chief of police was increased.

古文：戊寅，初行免役法。
现代文：二十二日，开始实行免役法。
English: On the 22nd, the law on exemption from military service came into effect.

古文：赐西蕃董毡诏并衣带、鞍马。
现代文：赐给西蕃董毡诏书以及衣带、鞍马。
English: He gave Xidi the imperial edict of Dongguan, as well as a sash and a pommel horse.

古文：庚辰，命王安石提举编修三司令式。
现代文：二十四日，命令王安石提举编修三司法令。
English: On the 24th, Wang Anshi was ordered to raise and amend three judicial orders.

古文：壬午，辽遣萧遵道等来贺正旦。
现代文：二十六日，辽朝派萧遵道等人来祝贺新春。
English: On the 26th, the Liao Dynasty sent Xiao Zundao and others to congratulate the New Year.

古文：癸未，命宋敏求详定命官、使臣过犯。
现代文：二十七日，命令宋敏求详细审定命官、使臣的过错。
English: On the 27th, he ordered Song Min to ask for a detailed examination to determine the faults of the officers and envoys.

古文：是岁，振河北、陕西旱饥，除民租。
现代文：这一年，贩济河北、陕西早灾地区的饥民，免除租税。
English: In that year, those who sold food to the starving people in the early disaster areas in Hebei and Shaanxi were exempted from tax.

古文：交阯入贡，广源、下溪州蛮来附。
现代文：交趾进贡，广源、下溪州蛮前来归附。
English: Guangyuan and Shimohe County came forward to pay tribute.

古文：四年春正月丁亥朔，不视朝。
现代文：熙宁四年春正月初一，神宗不上朝处理政事。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of Xi Ning, Shenzong did not go to the court to deal with political affairs.

古文：己丑，种谔袭夏兵于啰兀北，大败之，遂城啰兀。
现代文：初三，种愕在缪兀北袭击西夏军队，大败敌军，于是在缪兀筑城。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, they attacked the Western Xia army in the north of Muxi, defeated the enemy army, and then built a city in Muxi.

古文：自是夏人日聚兵为报复计，言者以谔为稔边患不便。
现代文：从此，西夏每天都在向边境结集军队，企图报复。宋朝廷有人议论说种愕的行为导致了这次边患。
English: Since then, Xixia has been amassing troops on the border every day in an attempt to take revenge. Some people in the Song Dynasty have argued that this act of consternation led to the border incident.

古文：壬辰，王安石请鬻天下广惠仓田为三路及京东常平仓本，从之。
现代文：初六，王安石请求卖掉全国广惠仓田，用这笔钱作为三路及京东常平仓的本钱，神宗同意这个建议。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Wang Anshi requested to sell the national Guanghui warehouse field and use this money as the capital of Sanlu and Jingdong Changping warehouse. Shenzong agreed to this suggestion.

古文：乙未，渝州夷贼李光吉叛，巡检李宗闵等战死，命夔州路转运使孙构讨平之。
现代文：初九，渝州少数民族李光吉起义，巡检李宗阂等人在镇压中战死，命令夔州路转运使孙构率部平定。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Li Guangji, a member of the minority ethnic group in Yuzhou, revolted, and Li Zongya, a patrol inspector, and others died in the crackdown. He ordered the transfer of troops from Bozhou Road to subdue the troops led by Sun Zhe.

古文：诏详定大辟覆谳法。
现代文：诏令详细审定死罪的复审办法。
English: The imperial edict detailed the method for reviewing the death penalty.

古文：丁酉，朝谒太祖、太宗神御殿。
现代文：十一日，朝拜太祖、太宗神主殿。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the morning worship of Taizu and Taizong Shrine began.

古文：庚子，幸集禧观，宴从臣，又幸大相国寺，御宣德门观灯。
现代文：十四日，到集禧观宴请大臣，又到大相国寺，到宣德门观灯。
English: On the 14th, the minister was invited to a banquet to watch the jubilee, and he also went to Daisho Koku-ji Temple and Xuande Gate to watch the lanterns.

古文：韩绛等言种谔领兵入西界，斩获甚众，诏遣使抚问。
现代文：韩绛等人报告说种愕率领士兵进人西夏境内，杀死了不少西夏士兵，神宗下诏派使臣安抚慰问。
English: Han Zheng and others reported that Qian Zheng led soldiers into the territory of Western Xia and killed many Western Xia soldiers. Emperor Shenzong sent envoys to appease and console.

古文：乙巳，停括牧地。
现代文：十九日，停止搜括牧地。
English: On the 19th, the search for grazing land was stopped.

古文：丁未，立京东、河北贼盗重法。
现代文：二十一日，确定京东、河北贼盗加重处罚的办法。
English: On the 21st, the measures to increase the punishment of JD.com and Hebei thieves were determined.

古文：庚戌，罢永兴军买盐钞场。
现代文：二十四日，罢除永兴军买盐钞场。
English: On the 24th, the Yongxing Army was dismissed to buy salt.

古文：甲寅，定文德殿朔望视朝仪。
现代文：二十八日，确定文德殿初一、十五祭祀太庙、临朝听政的礼仪。
English: On the 28th, the etiquette for the first day of the year and the 15th day of the year for worshiping at the Imperial Temple and listening to the government in the Imperial Palace was determined.

古文：二月丁巳朔，罢诗赋及明经诸科，以经义、论、策试进士。
现代文：二月初一，罢除诗赋和明经各考试科目，确定用经义、论、策考试进士。
English: On the first day of February, the examination subjects of poem endowment and Mingjing were abolished, and it was determined that the examination of sutra meaning, theory and strategy would be used to enter the examination.

古文：置京东西、陕西、河东、河北路学官，使之教导。
现代文：设置京东西、陕西、河东、河北路学官，让他们教育引导士子学习。
English: Set up academic officials in Beijing East and West, Shaanxi, Hedong and Hebei, and let them educate and guide scholars to study.

古文：辛酉，诏治吏沮青苗法者。
现代文：初五，下诏处理阻挠青苗法实行的官吏。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, officials who obstructed the implementation of the Law on Young Seedlings will be dealt with.

古文：戊辰，诏振河北民乏食者。
现代文：十二日，下诏贩济河北缺食民众。
English: On the 12th day of the month, hawkers came down to help the people of Hebei who were short of food.

古文：赙恤西界战死军人。
现代文：慰问西部边境战死士兵的家属并赠给财物帮忙安葬。
English: He offered condolences to the families of the soldiers killed in the war on the western border and gave them gifts to help bury them.

古文：庚午，于阗国来贡。
现代文：十四日，于闻国来进贡。
English: On the 14th, they came to pay tribute in Wen.

古文：壬申，进封高密郡王頵为嘉王。
现代文：十六日，进封高密郡王茜页为嘉王。
English: On the 16th, Wang Xizhe from Gaomi County, Jinfeng, was crowned as the King of Glory.

古文：癸酉，诏审官院所定人赴中书，察堪任者引见。
现代文：十七日，下诏审官院确定的人员到中书省，核察可以任用的人，向神宗引见。
English: On the 17th, the personnel determined by the Lower Court of Imperial Rescriptors went to the Ministry of Chinese Literature to inspect the people who could be appointed and introduce them to the Shensong.

古文：甲戌，赐讨渝州夷贼兵特支钱。
现代文：十八日，赐给征讨渝州少数民族起义士兵特支钱。
English: On the 18th, special money was given to the soldiers who fought against the Yuzhou ethnic minority uprising.

古文：丁丑，祷雨。
现代文：二十一日，祈祷降雨。
English: On the 21st, pray for rain.

古文：诏增漳河等役兵。
现代文：下诏增加漳河等地服役士兵。
English: The next edict is to increase the number of soldiers serving in places such as Luohe.

古文：三月丁亥，夏人陷抚宁堡。
现代文：三月初二，西夏军队攻陷抚宁堡。
English: On the second day of March, the Western Xia army captured Fusing Fort.

古文：戊子，庆州广锐卒叛，寻讨平之。
现代文：初三，庆州广锐士兵发动叛乱，不久被平定。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, soldiers from Gyeongju launched a rebellion, which was soon put down.

古文：庚寅，诏给诸路学田，增教官员。
现代文：初五，下诏拨给各路学田，增加教学官员。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the new year, the following edict was issued to all schools, increasing the number of teaching officials.

古文：辛卯，遣使察奉行新法不职者。
现代文：初六，派遣使臣核察执行新法不力的官吏。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, it dispatched envoys to inspect officials who were not effectively implementing the new law.

古文：癸卯，减河东、陕西路囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：十八日，减轻河东、陕西路囚犯罪行一等，徒刑以下的犯人全部释放。
English: On the 18th, the first-class crimes of prisoners in Henan Province and Shaanxi Province were mitigated, and all prisoners with a prison sentence or less were released.

古文：民缘军事科役者，蠲其租赋。
现代文：民众因军事情况而服役的人，免除家庭租赋。
English: People who serve in the military due to the military situation are exempt from family rent.

古文：丙午，种谔坐陷抚宁堡，责授汝州团练副使、潭州安置。
现代文：二十一日，种愕因抚宁堡被夏军攻陷，被降为汝州团练副使、潭州安置。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, he was demoted to vice-envoy of the Ruzhou regimental drill and resettled in Tanzhou due to the fall of Fusing Fort by the Xia army.

古文：丁未，韩绛坐兴师败衄罢，以本官知邓州。
现代文：二十二日，韩绛因兴师遭到挫败罢职，以本官降为邓州知州。
English: On the 22nd, Han Wei was dismissed due to the defeat of Xing Division, and was demoted to Dengzhou Zhizhou.

古文：辛亥，录唐李氏后。
现代文：二十六日，录用唐代李氏后代。
English: On the 26th, the descendants of the Tang Dynasty Li family were hired.

古文：夏四月丙辰朔，恤刑。
现代文：夏四月初一，下诏慎用刑法。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of summer, criminal law will be used with caution.

古文：辛酉，辽遣萧广等来贺同天节。
现代文：初六，辽朝派萧广等人来祝贺同天节。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the Liao Dynasty sent Xiao Guang and others to congratulate the festival.

古文：壬戌，遣环庆都钤辖幵赟以兵屯邠、泾、河中，以备西夏。
现代文：初七，调派环庆都铃堵汗贾分出部分兵力屯驻径、河中，防备西夏进攻。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, some troops were dispatched from Lingdu, the capital of Huanqing, to Khanjia and stationed there to guard against the Western Xia's attack.

古文：癸亥，罢陕西交子法。
现代文：初八，罢除陕西交子法。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, the Shaanxi Foreign Exchange Law was abolished.

古文：癸酉，司马光权判西京留台。
现代文：十八日，司马光暂代西京留台通判。
English: On the 18th, Sima Guang was ordered to stay in West Beijing temporarily.

古文：种谔再贬贺州别驾。
现代文：种愕又被贬为贺州别驾。
English: This kind of consternation has been relegated to the category of Heshu Beidou.

古文：甲戌，诏司农寺月进诸路所上雨雪状。
现代文：十九日，下诏司农寺每月进呈各路所上祈求雨雪的文状。
English: On the 19th day of the month, the head priest of the agricultural temple sent a monthly letter to all the temples to pray for rain and snow.

古文：丙子，遣使按视宿、亳等州灾伤，仍令修饬武备。
现代文：二十一日，派人视察宿州、毫州等地灾害状况，仍旧命令整治武备。
English: On the 21st, sent people to inspect the disaster situation in Shuzhou, Wuzhou and other places, and still ordered to rectify the military preparedness.

古文：壬午，定进士考转官。
现代文：二十七日，确定进士转官的考校办法。
English: On the 27th, the examination method for the transfer of officers was determined.

古文：五月甲午，右谏议大夫吕晦卒。
现代文：五月初十，右谏议大夫吕诲逝世。
English: On the 10th day of the 5th month of the year, Dr. Lü Qi, a doctor of right-hand surgery, passed away.

古文：壬寅，诏许富弼养疾西京。
现代文：十八日，下诏允许富弼在西京洛阳养病。
English: On the 18th, the lower edict allowed Fuxi to recuperate in Luoyang, West Beijing.

古文：丙午，高丽国来贡。
现代文：二十二日，高丽国来进贡。
English: On the 22nd, Korea paid tribute.

古文：辛亥，诏宗室率府副率以上，遭父母丧及嫡孙承重，并解官行服。
现代文：二十七日，下诏：宗室率府副率以上的官吏，父母去世及承受丧祭重任的嫡孙，一律解除官职，服丧三年。
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued: All officials at or above the rank of family head, deputy head of the prefectural government, and legitimate grandchildren whose parents have passed away and who bear the heavy responsibilities of funeral rites, shall be relieved of their official duties and serve three years of mourning.

古文：壬子，诏恩、冀等州灾伤，遣使振恤，蠲其税。
现代文：二十八日，恩州、冀州等地受灾，派遣使臣贩济抚恤，免除田税。
English: On the 28th, Enzhou, Jizhou and other places affected by the disaster, sent envoys and merchants to provide subsidies and exempted from rice field tax.

古文：六月丁巳，河北饥民为盗者，减死刺配。
现代文：六月初四，河北饥民被逼为盗贼的人，免除死刑，刺配充军。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month, the starving people of Hebei were forced to become thieves, exempted from the death penalty, and assigned to the army.

古文：庚申，群臣三上尊号曰绍天法古文武仁孝皇帝，不许。
现代文：初七，大臣们三次敬上尊号为绍天法古文武仁孝皇帝，神宗没有答应。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the ministers three times paid their respects to Emperor Shao Tianfa Guwen Wu Ren Xiao, but Shenzong did not agree.

古文：甲子，欧阳修以太子少师致仕。
现代文：十一日，欧阳修以太子少师身份退休。
English: On the 11th day, Ouyang Xiu retired as a junior teacher.

古文：丙寅，虑囚。
现代文：十三日，讯察全国监狱囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 13th, the crimes of prisoners in prisons across the country were investigated.

古文：甲戌，富弼坐格青苗法，徙判汝州。
现代文：二十一日，富弼因抵制青苗法，改为汝州通判。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Fuxi, due to its resistance to the Law on Young Seedlings, was changed to the Ruzhou General Judgment.

古文：秋七月戊子，层檀国来贡。
现代文：秋七月初五，层檀国来贡。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of autumn, tributes came from all over the country.

古文：甲午，振恤两浙水灾。
现代文：十一日，贩济抚恤两浙水灾地区灾民。
English: On the 11th day of the month, vendors donated to the flood victims in the two Zhejiang flood-stricken areas.

古文：乙未，录死事将校崔达子遇为三班奉职。
现代文：十二日，录用为国捐驱的将校崔达的儿子崔遇为三班奉职。
English: On the 12th, Cui Yuan, the son of Cui Da, an officer who was expelled from the country, was assigned to the third shift.

古文：丁酉，监察御史里行刘挚罢监衡州盐仓，御史中丞杨绘贬知郑州。
现代文：十四日，监察御史里行刘挚罢官监衡州盐仓，御史中承杨绘贬为郑州知州。
English: On the 14th, Liu Zhiqin, the inspector of the imperial history, was dismissed as the inspector of Hengzhou salt warehouse, and Yangpai, the successor of the imperial history, was demoted to Zhengzhou Zhizhou.

古文：庚子，诏宗室不得祀祖宗神御。
现代文：十七日，下诏宗室不得祭祀祖宗神主。
English: On the 17th, it was decreed that the ancestral house could no longer worship the ancestral deity.

古文：丁未，诏唐、邓给流民田。
现代文：二十四日，下诏给授唐、邓地区流民土地。
English: On the 24th, an edict was issued to grant land to the displaced people in Tang and Deng regions.

古文：八月癸丑朔，高丽来贡。
现代文：八月初一，高丽来进贡。
English: On the first day of August, Korea paid tribute.

古文：遣官体量陕西差役新法及民间利害。
现代文：派遣官员考察陕西差役新法及民间利害情况。
English: Dispatching officials to study the new law on civil servants in Shaanxi and the interests of the people.

古文：甲寅，诏郡县保甲与贼斗死伤者，给钱有差。
现代文：初二，下诏郡县保甲组织人员与 贼 战斗致死、伤的人，赐给多少不等的钱。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the officials of the county and county defense organization and the thieves will fight to the death, and those who are injured will receive different amounts of money.

古文：庚申，复《春秋三传》明经取士。
现代文：初八，恢复春秋三传明经科取士。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the spring and autumn three lectures of the Ming Dynasty were resumed.

古文：癸酉，遣楚建中等贺辽主生辰、正旦。
现代文：二十一日，派遣楚建中等人祝贺辽主生辰和新春。
English: On the twenty-first day, Chu Jian sent a middle-ranking person to congratulate the Liao Lord on his birthday and the new spring.

古文：置洮河安抚司，命王韶主之。
现代文：设置姚河安抚司，命令王韶主管。
English: Set up the Yaohe Pacification Division, and ordered Wang Yao to be in charge.

古文：九月丙戌，河决郓州。
现代文：九月初五，黄河在邪州决口。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of September, the Yellow River burst its banks in Yanzhou.

古文：辛卯，大飨明堂，以英宗配。
现代文：初十，在明堂举行大规模祭祀和集会，配用英宗神主。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, a large-scale ritual and gathering were held in Myeong-dong, and the priest of the Yeongjong Sect was used.

古文：赦天下，内外官进秩有差。
现代文：大赦全国，朝廷内外官员不同程度进官加爵。
English: The whole country was amnestied, and officials both inside and outside the imperial court were promoted to higher ranks to varying degrees.

古文：庚子，夏人入贡。
现代文：十九日，夏人来进贡。
English: On the 19th, Xia Ren came to pay tribute.

古文：癸卯，增选人奉。
现代文：二十二日，增加幕职州县官的棒禄。
English: On the 22nd, the bonus for shogunate-appointed prefectural and county officials was increased.

古文：冬十月壬子朔，罢差役法，使民出钱募役。
现代文：冬十月初一，罢除差役法，让人们出钱募役。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the draft law was abolished, and people had to pay to be drafted.

古文：立选人及任子出官试法。
现代文：确立幕职州县官及任子官出官的考试办法。
English: An examination method was established for the appointment of shogunate prefectural and county officials, as well as the appointment of subordinate officials.

古文：丙辰，置枢密院检详官。
现代文：初五，设置枢密院检详官。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Privy Council Procuratorate was established.

古文：戊辰，立太学生内、外、上舍法。
现代文：十七日，确立太学生内舍、外舍、上舍法。
English: On the 17th, the internal residence, external residence, and upper residence methods for female students were established.

古文：丙子，诏罪人配流，遇冬者至中春乃遣。
现代文：二十五日，下诏：被判流放的罪犯，遇上冬季的，改在春季的第二个月遣送。
English: On the 25th, the following edict was issued: Criminals sentenced to exile should be deported in the second month of spring instead of winter.

古文：十一月壬午朔，诏凡赏功罚罪，事可惩劝者，月颁之天下。
现代文：十一月初一，下诏：凡是赏功罚罪、事迹和情节可以发挥惩恶劝善作用的人和事，每个月及时向全国颁布。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the following edict was issued: All people and events that reward and punish crimes, deeds and circumstances that can play a role in punishing evil and persuading good will be promulgated to the whole country in a timely manner every month.

古文：甲申，诏蠲逋租。
现代文：初三，下诏免除积欠租税。
English: On the third day of the new year, the lower edict exempted the tax arrears.

古文：丁亥，作中太一宫。
现代文：初六，修建中太一宫。
English: Sixth year of junior high school, construction of Chutai Ichinomiya.

古文：壬寅，开洪泽河达于淮。
现代文：二十一日，开导洪泽湖，使与淮河相通。
English: On the 21st, Hongze Lake was opened up to connect with the Huai River.

古文：十二月辛亥朔，诏增赐国子监钱四千缗。
现代文：十二月初一，下诏增加国子监赐钱四千络。
English: On the first day of December, the imperial edict was issued to increase the amount of money given by the Imperial Procurator by 4,000 rupees.

古文：戊午，归夏俘。
现代文：初八，归还西夏俘虏。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the Western Xia prisoners were returned.

古文：己未，安定郡王从式薨。
现代文：初九，安定郡王赵从式去世。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Zhao Congshih, the Prince of Anping County, passed away.

古文：甲子，封越国公世清为会稽郡王。
现代文：十四日，封越国公赵世清为会稽郡王。
English: On the 14th, Zhao Shiching, the Duke of Yue, was appointed as the King of the county.

古文：丙寅，省诸路厢军。
现代文：十六日，减省各路厢军。
English: On the 16th, the provincial troops were reduced.

古文：乙亥，崇义公柴咏致仕，子若讷袭封。
现代文：二十五日，崇仪公柴咏退休，他的儿子柴若呐承袭封爵。
English: On the 25th, Chongyi Gong Chai Yao retired, and his son Chai Ruo Na inherited the knighthood.

古文：丙子，辽遣耶律纪等来贺正旦。
现代文：二十六日，辽朝派遣耶律纪等人来祝贺新春。
English: On the 26th, the Liao Dynasty sent Ye Lu Ji and others to congratulate the Spring Festival.

古文：五年春正月己丑，诏听降羌归国。
现代文：熙宁五年春正月初九，下诏允许降羌归依夏国。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 5th year of Xining's Spring, the emperor issued an edict allowing the emperor to abdicate and return to Yixia.

古文：己亥，诏太庙时飨，以宗室使相已上摄事。
现代文：十九日，下诏：祭祀太庙，由宗室使相以上官员负责进行。
English: On the 19th, the following edict was issued: Sacrifices to the Imperial Temple were to be carried out by officials above the rank of family secretary.

古文：置京城逻卒，察谤议时政者收罪之。
现代文：设置京城巡逻队伍，稽察社会上诽谤讥议新法的人，汇集起来治罪。
English: Beijing patrol teams will be set up to inspect those in society who slander and ridicule the new law, and gather together to punish them.

古文：二月壬子，龟兹来贡。
现代文：二月初二，龟兹来进贡。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the turtle came to pay tribute.

古文：以两浙水，赐谷十万石振之，仍募民兴水利。
现代文：因两浙发生水灾，赐给十万石粮食贩济灾民，并招募人们兴修水利。
English: Due to floods in Zhejiang and Zhejiang, 100,000 koku of grain was given to grain traders to help the victims, and people were recruited to build water conservancy.

古文：壬戌，诏罢陕西递运铜锡。
现代文：十二日，下诏罢除陕西递运铜锡。
English: On the 12th, the decree was issued to cancel the shipment of copper and tin from Shaanxi.

古文：癸亥，太白昼见。
现代文：十三日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 20th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：丙寅，以知郑州吕公弼为宣徽南院使、判秦州，龙图阁直学士蔡挺为枢密副使。
现代文：十六日，任命郑州知州吕公弼为宣徽南院使，通判秦州；龙图阁直学士蔡挺为枢密副使。
English: On the 16th, Zhengzhou Chizhou Lv Gongyao was appointed as the envoy of the Southern Academy of Xuanhui Province, and Qinzhou was appointed as the envoy of the Southern Academy of Xuanhui Province; Longtu Ge Zhizhong Baccalaureate Cai Ting was appointed as the deputy envoy.

古文：三月甲午，李日尊卒，子乾德嗣，遣使吊赠。
现代文：三月十四日，李日尊逝世，他的儿子李乾德承继父位，派遣使臣吊丧并赠给财物。
English: On March 14, Li Rizhong passed away. His son, Li Qiande, succeeded his father and sent envoys to pay his respects and give him gifts.

古文：戊戌，富弼以司空致仕，进封韩国公。
现代文：十八日，富弼以司空的头衔退休，进封韩国公。
English: On the 18th, Fusang retired with the title of Siku, and was given the title of Prince of Korea.

古文：立文武换官法。
现代文：确立文武换官法。
English: The Civil and Military Official Replacement Law was established.

古文：丙午，以内藏库钱置市易务。
现代文：二十六日，用内藏库钱设置市易务。
English: On the 26th, the exchange office was set up with the money from the internal depository.

古文：夏四月庚戌朔，立殿前马步军春秋校试殿最法。
现代文：夏四月初一，确立殿前马步军春秋教阅考核并评选最优的具体办法。
English: On the first day of April in the summer, a specific method was established for the spring and autumn teaching and reading assessment and the selection of the best.

古文：乙卯，辽遣耶律适等来贺同天节。
现代文：初六，辽朝派遣耶律适等人来祝贺同天节。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the Liao Dynasty sent Ye Lu Shi and others to congratulate the festival on the same day.

古文：己未，括闲田。
现代文：初十，检括全国荒闲田地。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, it will inspect idle fields across the country.

古文：置弓箭手。
现代文：设置弓箭手。
English: Set archers ablaze.

古文：辛未，塞北京决河。
现代文：二十二日，堵塞北京黄河决口。
English: On the 22nd, Beijing blocked the mouth of the Yellow River.

古文：五月辛巳，诏以古渭砦为通远军，命王韶兼知军。
现代文：五月初二，下诏决定古渭塞为通远军，任命王韶兼知军。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, the following edict decided that Gu Xuesi would be the Tongyuan army, and appointed Wang Xuan and Zhijun.

古文：行教阅法。
现代文：颁行教阅法。
English: Enact the Teaching and Reading Law.

古文：宗室非袒免亲者许应举。
现代文：宗室不是五服亲者允许应试科举。
English: Those who are not relatives of the fifth grade are not allowed to take the examination.

古文：庚寅，以青唐大首领俞龙珂为西头供奉官，赐姓名包顺。
现代文：十一日，任命青唐大首领俞龙坷为西头供奉官，赐姓名包顺。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the leader of the Qing and Tang Dynasties, Qianlong Bumpy, was appointed as the Xitou offering official, and his name was given as Bao Shun.

古文：壬辰，以赵尚宽等前守唐州辟田疏水有功，增秩以劝天下。
现代文：十三日，因赵尚宽等前任唐州守官开垦荒地、兴修水利有功，特提升官职，以鼓励各地方官员。
English: On the 13th, because Zhao Shangguan and other former Tangzhou officials had made great achievements in reclaiming wasteland and building water conservancy, they were promoted to encourage local officials.

古文：丙午，太白昼见。
现代文：二十七日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 27th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：行保马法。
现代文：颁行保马法。
English: The Horse Protection Law was promulgated.

古文：六月壬子，曾公亮以太傅致仕。
现代文：六月初四，曾公亮以太傅头衔退休。
English: On the 4th of June, Zeng publicly retired with the title of ether fu.

古文：癸亥，诏以四场试进士。
现代文：十五日，下诏进士考试四场。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, four examinations were held.

古文：丙寅，作京城门铜鱼符。
现代文：十八日，制作京城城门铜鱼符。
English: On the 18th, the bronze fish charm for the gate of the capital city was made.

古文：乙亥，置武学。
现代文：二十七日，设置武学。
English: On the 27th, martial arts were introduced.

古文：秋七月壬寅，初以文臣兼枢密都承旨。
现代文：秋七月二十五日，首次以文臣兼枢密都承旨。
English: On the 25th day of the 7th month of the autumn, he was appointed as a civil servant and privy councillor for the first time.

古文：闰月庚戌，遣中书检正官章惇察访荆湖北路。
现代文：闰七月初三，派遣中书检正官章视察访问荆湖北路。
English: On the third day of the seventh month of the lunar calendar, the official of the General Office of the Central Book Inspection visited the North Jinghu Road for inspection.

古文：诏入内供奉官以下，已有养子，更养次子为内侍者斩。
现代文：下诏：进人宫内供奉官以下的人，已经有一养子，另外再养次子为内侍的人，斩杀。
English: The following edict: Anyone entering the Imperial Palace who is below the rank of a courtier, who already has an adopted son, and anyone who has a second son serving as an attendant, is to be killed.

古文：八月甲申，太子少师致仕欧阳修薨。
现代文：八月初八，以太子少师头衔退休的欧阳修逝世。
English: On the eighth day of the eighth month of August, Ouyang Xiu, who retired with the title of Etherchild Young Master, passed away.

古文：秦凤路沿边安抚王韶复武胜军。
现代文：秦凤路沿边安抚使王韶率军收复武胜军。
English: The pacification along Qinfeng Road enabled Wang Xi to lead the army to recover the victorious army.

古文：丁亥，诏求欧阳修所撰《五代史》。
现代文：十一日，下诏访求欧阳修所撰写的瓦代史。
English: On the 11th, he visited Ouyang Xiu's Wada History.

古文：壬辰，以武胜军为镇洮军。
现代文：十六日，决定武胜军改为镇兆军。
English: On the 16th, it was decided to change the Wu Sheng Army to the Zhenchao Army.

古文：癸巳，遣崔台符等贺辽主生辰、正旦。
现代文：十七日，派遣崔台符等人祝贺辽主生辰、新春。
English: On the 17th, Cui Taifu and others were sent to congratulate Liao on his birthday and the New Year.

古文：乙未，诏侍从及诸路监司各举有才行者一人。
现代文：十九日，诏令侍从官及各路监司分别举荐德才兼备的人才一人。
English: On the 19th, the magistrate ordered the attendants and the supervisors of each road to separately recommend one person who is both talented and qualified.

古文：甲辰，王韶破木征于巩令城。颁方田均税法。
现代文：二十八日，王韶在巩令城攻破木征。颁行方田均税法。
English: On the 28th, Wang Hui defeated Muxing in Gongling City and promulgated the Fangda Tax Law.

古文：九月癸丑，许宗室试换文资。
现代文：九月初八，允许宗室子弟试换文职。
English: On the eighth day of the ninth month, the younger son of the family was allowed to try out for a clerical position.

古文：癸亥，始御便殿，旬校诸军武技。
现代文：十八日，首次到便殿，渴问校阅各军武技。
English: On the 18th day, I went to the toilet for the first time and asked the school to read the military martial arts.

古文：丙寅，少华山崩，诏压死者赐钱，贫者官为葬祭。
现代文：二十一日，少华山崩塌，下诏赐给压死者家属钱，贫寒者官府帮助安葬、祭祀。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, Mount Shaohua collapsed, and the emperor gave money to the families of the victims, and the government helped the poor and the poor to bury and offer sacrifices.

古文：淮南分东、西路。
现代文：淮南路分为淮南东路和淮南西路。
English: Huainan Road is divided into Huainan East Road and Huainan West Road.

古文：冬十月戊戌，升镇洮军为熙州、镇洮军节度，置熙河路。
现代文：冬十月二十三日，升镇姚军为熙州镇姚军节度，设置熙河路。
English: On October 23rd, winter, the Yeojun Festival of Yeojun Town of Xizhou was held in Yeojun Town of Xizhou, and the Yeojun Road was set up.

古文：减秦凤囚罪一等。
现代文：减轻秦凤地区囚犯罪行一等。
English: Mitigate the crimes of prisoners in Qinfeng District, first class.

古文：十一月癸丑，河州首领瞎药等来降，以为内殿崇班，赐姓名包约。
现代文：十一月癸丑，河州首领瞎药等人来降宋，任命为内殿崇班，赐姓名包约。
English: In November, Xingwu, the leader of Hezhou, Xianyao and others came to the Song Dynasty and were appointed to the Inner Court of the Song Dynasty, and their names were given to Baoyu.

古文：丁卯，贬权监察御史里行张商英监荆南税。
现代文：二十二日，代理监察御史里行张商英贬为荆南监税。
English: On the 22nd, Zhang Shangying, acting inspector of the History Line, was demoted to Jingnan Tax Supervisor.

古文：壬申，分陕西为永兴、秦凤路，仍置六路经略司。
现代文：二十七日，分陕西为永兴路、秦凤路，仍旧设置六路经略司。
English: On the 27th, Shaanxi was divided into Yongxing Road and Qinfeng Road, and still set up six road departments.

古文：章惇开梅山，置安化县。
现代文：章开梅山，设置安化县。
English: Zhangkai Meishan, set up in Anhua County.

古文：十二月丙子，赦亡命荆湖溪洞者。
现代文：十二月初二，释放逃命到荆湖溪洞蛮的人。
English: On the second day of December, the people who had fled to Jinghu Cave were released.

古文：丁丑，诏太原置弓箭手。
现代文：初三，下诏太原设置弓箭手。
English: On the third day of the new year, Taiyuan issued an edict to set up an archery team.

古文：戊寅，诏寺观奉圣祖及祖宗陵寝神御者免役钱。
现代文：初四，诏令寺观崇奉圣祖及祖宗陵寝神主者免纳役钱。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Emperor decreed that those who worship the holy ancestors and the ancestors' mausoleums would be exempted from paying the tax.

古文：改温成庙为祠。
现代文：改温成庙为祠殿。
English: It was changed from a temple to an ancestral hall.

古文：壬午，陈升之为枢密使。
现代文：初八，陈升之为枢密使。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month, Chen Shingong became a Privy Counsellor.

古文：癸未，雨土。
现代文：初九，天上降土。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, the sky fell to the ground.

古文：乙未，筑熙州南、北关及诸堡砦。
现代文：二十一日，修筑熙南北关及各处堡寨。
English: On the twenty-first day, the construction of the north-south pass and the various fortresses began.

古文：己亥，辽遣萧瑜等来贺正旦。
现代文：二十五日，辽朝派遣萧瑜等人来祝贺新春。
English: On the 25th, Liao Dynasty sent Xiao Yu and others to congratulate the New Year.

古文：六年春正月辛亥，复僖祖为太庙始祖，以配感生帝。
现代文：熙宁六年春正月初七，恢复嘻祖为太庙始祖，用来配感生帝。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the first month of the sixth year of Xining, He Zu was restored as the ancestor of the Great Temple, and was used to match the emperor.

古文：祧顺祖于夹室。
现代文：在夹室祭祀顶祖。
English: The top ancestor is worshipped in the antechamber.

古文：二月辛卯，夏人寇秦州，都巡检使刘惟吉败之。
现代文：二月十七日，西夏军队寇掠秦州，都巡检使刘惟吉打退夏军。
English: On February 17th, the Western Xia army invaded and plundered Qinzhou, and Liu Weiji was sent on a patrol to repel the Xia army.

古文：丙申，永昌陵上宫东门火。
现代文：二十二日，永昌陵上宫东门发生火灾。
English: On the 22nd, a fire broke out at the East Gate of the Upper Palace of Yongchang Mausoleum.

古文：王韶复河州，获木征妻子。
现代文：王韶恢复河州，俘虏木征妻子。
English: Wang Qian recovered Hezhou and captured Mu Zheng's wife.

古文：壬寅，以韩绛知大名府。
现代文：二十八日，任命韩绛知大名府。
English: On the 28th, Han Xizhi was appointed as the new daimyofu.

古文：三月己酉，诏赠熙河死事将田琼礼宾使，录其子三人、孙一人。
现代文：三月初六，下诏赠给在熙河为国捐躯的将领田琼礼宾使，录用他的三个儿子、一个孙子。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, the following edict was issued to the general Tian Qiong concierge, who died for the country in Heihe, to employ his three sons and one grandson.

古文：庚戌，亲策进士。
现代文：初七，亲自策试进士。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, I tried to become a member of the chorus.

古文：置经局，命王安石提举。
现代文：设置经义局，命令王安石提举。
English: He set up the Bureau of Economic and Political Affairs and ordered Wang Anshi to be promoted.

古文：辛亥，试明经诸科。
现代文：初八，考试明经各科目。
English: In the eighth year of junior high school, all subjects were clear in the examination.

古文：丙辰，以四月朔日当食，自丁巳避殿、减膳，降天下囚罪一等，流以下释之。
现代文：十三日，因四月一日日食，自十四日起暂不上殿并减少饮食，减轻全国囚犯罪行一等，流刑以下全部释放。
English: On the 13th, due to the solar eclipse on April 1st, from the 14th, he temporarily did not go to the hall and reduced his diet, alleviating the first-class crimes of prisoners across the country, and releasing all of them from exile.

古文：己未，置诸路学官。
现代文：十六日，设置各种学官。
English: On the 16th, various academic officials were set up.

古文：壬戌，赐奏名进士、诸科及第出身五百九十六人。
现代文：十九日，赐奏名进士、诸科及第出身五百九十六人。
English: On the 19th, five hundred and ninety-six people from various disciplines and backgrounds were conferred with the title of Songming Scholar.

古文：甲子，交州来贡。
现代文：二十一日，交州来进贡。
English: On the twenty-first day, Jiaozhou came to pay tribute.

古文：丁卯，宰相上表请复膳，不许。
现代文：二十四日，宰相上表请求恢复饮食，神宗没有答应。
English: On the 24th, the Prime Minister requested that the meal be resumed, but Shinso did not agree.

古文：诏进士、诸科并试明法注官。
现代文：下诏进士、诸科同出身必须经明法各科目考试后才能注官。
English: According to the following edict, candidates must pass the examination of each subject of the Ming Law before they can be appointed.

古文：丁丑，辽遣耶律宁等来贺同天节。
现代文：二十五日，设置刑狱检法官。二十七日，封李日尊的儿子乾德为交趾郡王。夏四月初一，日食，看不见。
English: On the 25th, a procurator was appointed. On the 27th, Qian De, the son of Li Rizong, was named the king of Jiaozuo County. On the first day of the fourth month of summer, the sun was eclipsed and could not be seen.

古文：甲午，定齐、徐等州保甲。
现代文：二十一日，确定齐、徐等州的保甲组织。
English: On the twenty-first day, the A-level organizations of Qi, Xu and other states were determined.

古文：戊戌，裁定在京吏禄。
现代文：二十五日，裁定在京吏人棒禄。
English: On the 25th, it was decided that the salary of officials in Beijing would be raised.

古文：五月癸卯朔，播州杨贵迁遣子光震来贡，以光震为三班奉职。
现代文：五月初一，播州杨贵迁派遣他的儿子杨光震来进贡，任命光震为三班奉职。
English: On the first day of May, Yang Guiqian of Banzhou sent his son, Yang Guangzheng, to pay tribute, and appointed Guangzheng to serve in the third shift.

古文：戊申，祷雨。
现代文：初六，祈祷降雨。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, pray for rain.

古文：乙丑，诏京东路察士人有行义者以闻。
现代文：二十三日，下诏京东路考察士人中行义优异者报告朝廷。
English: On the 23rd, the Beijing East Road inspectors reported to the imperial court.

古文：遣中书检正官熊本措置泸夷。
现代文：派遣中书检正官熊本措置沪夷事务。
English: Dispatching Kumamoto, the official in charge of book inspection in China, to deal with the Shanghai-Yi affair.

古文：西京左藏库副使景思忠等攻烧遂州夷囤战殁，录其子昌符等七人，军士死者，赐其家钱帛有差。
现代文：西京左藏库副使景思忠等攻烧遂州夷囤，在战斗中阵亡，录用他的儿子景昌符等七人，在战斗中死亡的士兵，分别赐给家属多少不等的钱帛。
English: Jing Sizhong, the vice-commander of the Western Capital Left Bank, and others attacked and burned Suizhou Yizhong, and were killed in the battle. His son, Jing Changfu, and seven others were recruited, and the soldiers who died in the battle were given varying amounts of money to their families.

古文：辛未，西南龙蕃来贡。
现代文：二十九日，西南龙蕃来进贡。
English: On the 29th, Southwest Longyan paid tribute.

古文：六月己亥，置军器监。
现代文：六月二十七日，设置军器监。
English: On June 27th, the Ordnance Inspectorate was established.

古文：秋七月乙巳，诏京西、淮南、两浙、江西、荆湖等六路各置铸钱监。
现代文：秋七月初四，下诏京西、淮南、两浙、江西、荆湖等六路各置铸钱监。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the casting supervisors were set up in six regions including West Beijing, Huainan, Zhejiang, Jiangxi and Jinghu.

古文：丙午，大食陀婆离来贡。
现代文：初五，大食陀婆离来进贡。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the great food goddess left to pay tribute.

古文：己酉，祷雨。
现代文：初八，祈祷降雨。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, pray for rain.

古文：甲寅，录在京囚，死罪以下降一等，杖罪释之。
现代文：十三日，讯察京城囚犯罪行，死罪以下减轻一等，杖刑以下的一律释放。
English: On the 13th, it was reported that the criminal acts of the prisoners in Beijing had been investigated, and the first-class commutation of the death penalty or less, and the release of all prisoners with a cane or less.

古文：丁巳，诏沿边吏杀熟户以邀赏者戮之。
现代文：十六日，下诏：在边境一带任职的将官杀熟户邀功请赏者一律斩杀。
English: On the 16th, the following edict was issued: All generals who served along the border who killed their acquaintances, solicited honors, or received rewards were to be killed.

古文：乙丑，分河北为东、西路。
现代文：二十四日，分河北路为河北东路、河北西路。
English: On the 24th, Hebei Road was divided into Hebei East Road and Hebei West Road.

古文：丙寅夜，西北有声如硙。
现代文：二十八日，西北方向有撞击石磨的声音。
English: On the 28th, there was the sound of stone grinding in the northwest direction.

古文：八月壬申朔，遣贾昌衡等贺辽主生辰、正旦。
现代文：八月初一，派遣贾昌衡等人祝贺辽主生辰和新春。
English: On the first day of August, Jia Changheng and others were sent to congratulate Liao on his birthday and the new year.

古文：甲申，罢简州岁贡绵。
现代文：十三日，罢除简州岁贡绵绸。
English: On the 13th, the Jianzhou New Year's Tribute Garment was abolished.

古文：甲午，赐熙河、泾原军士特支钱。
现代文：二十三日，赐给熙河、径原军士特支钱。
English: On the 23rd, special money was given to Heihe and Jingyuan military officers.

古文：戊戌，复比闾族党之法。
现代文：二十七日，恢复比间族党之法。
English: On the 27th, the law of the Hima Party was restored.

古文：九月壬寅，置两浙和籴仓，立敛散法。
现代文：九月初二，设置两浙和来仓，确立敛散办法。
English: On the second day of September, two Zhejiang and Lai Cang were set up to establish a dispersion method.

古文：戊申，诏兴水利。
现代文：初八，下诏兴修水利。
English: In the eighth month of the year, the emperor issued an edict for the construction of water conservancy.

古文：辛亥，策武举。
现代文：十一日，策试武举。
English: On the 11th day, the strategic military exercise began.

古文：戊午，岷州首领木令征以其城降，王韶入岷州。
现代文：十八日，山民州首领本令征据城降宋，王韶进人崛州。
English: On the 18th, the leader of Shanmin Prefecture issued an order to subjugate the city to the Song Dynasty, and Wang Hui marched into the province.

古文：丙寅，太白犯斗。
现代文：二十六，太白星犯北斗星。
English: On the 13th, Jin Xing Ling committed a crime.

古文：戊辰，诏祷雨，决狱。
现代文：二十八日，下诏祈祷降雨，处理狱讼案件。
English: On the 28th, it was time to pray for rain and deal with the prison case.

古文：冬十月辛未，章惇平懿、洽州蛮。
现代文：冬十月初二，章平定靓州、洽州蛮。
English: On the second day of the first month of October in winter, Zhang Pingding Danzhou and Chaozhou Manchu were defeated.

古文：辛巳，以复熙、河、洮、岷、叠、宕等州，御紫宸殿受群臣贺，解所服玉带赐安石。
现代文：十二日，因收复熙、河、姚、山民、叠、宕等州，到紫哀殿接受大臣们的祝贺，解下所服玉带赐给王安石。
English: On the 12th, because of the recovery of He, He, Yao, Shanmin, Stack, and Tang and other states, he went to the Purple Hall to receive the congratulations of the ministers and gave the jade belt to Wang Anshi.

古文：甲申，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：十五日，在景灵宫祭祀。
English: On the 17th, the ceremony was held at Jingling Palace.

古文：丙戌，振两渐、江、淮饥。
现代文：十七日，贩济两浙、江、淮饥民。
English: On the 17th, they sold food to the starving people in Zhejiang, Jiangsu and Huai.

古文：壬辰，行折二钱。
现代文：二十三日，颁行折二钱。
English: On the 23rd, two coins were issued.

古文：丁酉，遣使瘗熙河战骨。
现代文：二十八日，派人掩埋在熙河战死士兵的尸体。
English: On the 28th, people were sent to bury the bodies of soldiers who died in the battle in Xihe.

古文：十一月癸丑，中太一宫成，减天下囚罪一等，流以下释之。
现代文：十一月十四日，中太一宫修成，减轻全国囚犯罪行一等，流刑以下全部释放。
English: On November 14th, the Zhongtaiyigu was completed, alleviating the first-class crimes of prisoners across the country, and releasing all of them below the banishment.

古文：乙卯，亲祀太一宫。
现代文：十六日，亲自祭祀太一宫。
English: On the 16th, he personally performed the ritual at Taichung.

古文：丙寅，大雪，诏京畿收养老弱冻馁者。
现代文：二十七日，下大雪，下诏京城附近地区收养老弱饥寒的人。
English: On the 27th, there was a heavy snowfall, and the area near the capital received old people who were weak, hungry and cold.

古文：十二月戊子，诏决开封府囚。
现代文：十二月二十日，下诏处决开封府囚犯。
English: On December 20th, the following order was issued to execute the remaining Kaifeng Prisoners.

古文：丙申，辽遣耶律洞等来贺正旦。
现代文：二十八日，辽朝派遣耶律洞等人来祝贺新春。
English: On the 28th, the Liao Dynasty sent Yerudong and others to congratulate the New Year.

古文：七年春正月辛亥，赏复岷、洮等州功，西京左藏库使桑湜等迁官有差。
现代文：熙宁七年春正月十三日，赏赐收复崛州、泪匕州等地有功人员，西京左藏库使桑等人都不同程度地得到升迁。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the seventh year of Xining, meritorious personnel in the recovery of Jorizhou, Leshan and other places were rewarded, and the West Beijing Zuozang Library enabled San and others to be promoted to varying degrees.

古文：壬子，幸中太一宫宴从臣，又幸大相国寺，御宣德门观灯。
现代文：十四日，到中太一宫宴请跟随的大臣们，又到大相国寺，到宣德门观灯。
English: On the 14th, the ministers invited to the banquet at the Zhongtaiyi Palace, and then went to the Daxianguo Temple and the Xuande Gate to watch the lanterns.

古文：乙卯，封皇子俊为永国公。
现代文：十七日，封皇子赵俊为永国公。
English: On the 17th, the crown prince Zhao Jun became Yongguogu.

古文：甲子，熊本平泸夷。
现代文：二十六日，熊本平定沪夷。
English: On the 26th, Kumamoto conquered Huji.

古文：二月辛未，于阗来贡。
现代文：二月初三，于闻来进贡。
English: On the third day of the second lunar month, Yu Wenlai paid tribute.

古文：发常平米振河阳饥民。
现代文：调发常平仓米，贩济河阳饥民。
English: They often sell rice from their rice silos to help the hungry people in Heyang.

古文：癸未，诏三司岁会天下财用出入之数以闻。
现代文：十五日，下诏三司每年汇集全国财政收人支出数目报告朝廷。
English: On the fifteenth day of the following month, the Third Division of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Finance compiled the annual report on the number of national financial receipts and expenditures to the Imperial Court.

古文：乙丑，祷雨。
现代文：二十一日，祈祷降雨。
English: On the 21st, pray for rain.

古文：辛卯，置客省、引进、四方馆、阁门使副等员。
现代文：二十三日，设置客省、引进、四方馆、阎门使、副使等官职。
English: On the 23rd, the guest ministry, the introduction, the four square hall, the yamen envoy, the deputy envoy and other official positions were set up.

古文：乙未，知河州景思立等与青宜结鬼章战于踏白城，败死。废辽州。
现代文：二十七日，河州知州景思立等人与青宜结鬼章大战于踏白城，景思立在战斗中阵亡，废罢辽州。
English: On the 27th, Hezhou, Chizhou, Jing Sili and others fought against Qing Yi in the Battle of Tabai. Jing Sili was killed in the battle, and Liaozhou was abolished.

古文：三月壬寅，木征、鬼章寇岷州，高遵裕遣包顺等击走之。
现代文：三月初五，木征、鬼章攻打崛州，高遵裕派遣包顺等人打退他们。
English: On the fifth day of the third month of the year, Muzheng and Qizhang attacked Jorizhou. Gao Zunyu dispatched Bao Shun and others to repel them.

古文：虑囚，减死罪一等，杖以下释之。
现代文：讯察全国囚犯的罪状，减轻死罪以下囚犯罪行一等，杖刑以下的一律释放。
English: to investigate the crimes of prisoners across the country, and to commute the sentences of prisoners sentenced to less than the death penalty to first-degree crimes, and to release all prisoners sentenced to less than the cane.

古文：癸卯，以旱，避殿减膳。
现代文：初六，因早灾不上殿听政并减少饮食。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, he did not go to the palace to listen to the government and reduced his diet.

古文：乙巳，白虹贯日。
现代文：初八，白色虹横贯天空。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, a white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：丙午，遣使分行诸路，募武士赴熙河。
现代文：初九，派遣使臣分别到各路，招募武士前往熙河。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, he sent envoys to each province to recruit samurai to go to Heihe.

古文：庚戌，诏熙河死事者家给钱有差。
现代文：十三日，下诏在熙河战事中为国捐躯的人，分别赐给他们家属多少不等的钱。
English: On the 13th, the emperor decreed that the families of those who sacrificed their lives for the country in the Battle of Heihe would receive different amounts of money.

古文：罢两浙增额预置绢。
现代文：罢除两浙增加的预买绸绢。
English: Eliminate the pre-purchase of silk and satin that has increased in Zhejiang and Zhejiang.

古文：令诸路监司察留狱。
现代文：命令各路监司核察稽留下来的狱讼案件。
English: Ordered the supervisors of various roads to audit the remaining prison cases.

古文：癸丑，群臣表请复膳，不许。
现代文：十六日，大臣们上表请求恢复饮食，神宗没有答应。
English: On the 16th, the ministers made a request to resume the diet, but Shinso did not agree.

古文：丙辰，辽遣林牙萧禧来言河东疆界，命太常少卿刘忱议之。
现代文：十九日，辽朝派遣林牙萧禧来讨论河东地区两国疆界，命令太常少卿刘忱商议这件事。
English: On the 19th, the Liao Dynasty sent Lin Ya Xiao Xi to discuss the border between the two countries in the Hedong region, and ordered the Taizang Shaoqing Liu Zhen to discuss the matter.

古文：己未，行方田法。
现代文：二十二日，颁行方田法。
English: On the 22nd, the Fangda Law was promulgated.

古文：甲子，遣使报聘于辽。
现代文：二十七日，派遣使臣回访辽朝。
English: On the 27th, an envoy was dispatched to pay a return visit to Liao Dynasty.

古文：乙丑，诏以灾异求直言。
现代文：二十八日，下诏因灾异变化要求臣民上书直言朝政得失。
English: On the 28th, the Emperor issued the following edict: Due to the changes brought about by natural disasters, the subjects were required to submit a letter to the emperor, stating the merits and demerits of the imperial government.

古文：夏四月癸酉，以旱，罢方田。
现代文：夏四月初六，因早灾罢除方田法。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, the Fangda Law was revoked due to an early disaster.

古文：是日，雨。
现代文：这一天，降雨。
English: On this day, it was raining.

古文：辽遣耶律永宁等来贺同天节。
现代文：辽朝派遣耶律永宁等人来祝贺同天节。
English: The Liao Dynasty sent Ye Lu Yong Ning and others to congratulate the festival on the same day.

古文：乙亥，王韶破西蕃于结河川。丙子，御殿复膳。
现代文：初八，王韶在结河川攻破西蕃。初九，上殿听政并恢复饮食。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Wang Yao defeated Xidi in Jiehe River. On the ninth day of the first month, he went to the palace to listen to the government and resumed eating and drinking.

古文：己卯，以高遵裕为岷州团练使。
现代文：十二日，任命高遵裕为崛州团练使。
English: On the 12th, Gao Zunyu was appointed as the Horishu regimental drill sergeant.

古文：甲申，诏边兵死事无子孙者，廪其亲属终身。
现代文：十七日，下诏：边境士兵为国捐躯而没有子孙后代的人，官府负责供给他的亲属粮食，直到逝世。
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued: If a border soldier died for the country and has no descendants, the government is responsible for providing his relatives with food until his death.

古文：乙酉，王韶进筑珂诺城，与蕃兵连战，破之，斩首七千余级，焚二万余帐，木征率酋长八十余人诣军门降。
现代文：十八日，王韶进筑坷诺城，与蕃兵接连发生战斗，一一打败蕃兵，斩首七千多级，焚烧三万多帐，木征率酋长八十多人来军营投降。
English: On the 18th, Wang Hui entered the city of Chikukeno, and fought with the soldiers of the Xiongnu one after another. He defeated the soldiers of the Xiongnu one by one, beheaded more than seven thousand people, burned more than thirty thousand accounts, and led more than eighty chiefs to the military camp to surrender.

古文：雨雹。
现代文：降冰雹。
English: The hail is falling.

古文：丙戌，王安石罢知江宁府。
现代文：十九日，王安石罢为江宁知府。
English: On the 19th, Wang Anshi became the governor of Jiangning.

古文：以韩绛同中书门下平章事、监修国史，翰林学士吕惠卿参知政事。
现代文：任命韩绛同中书门下平章事、监修国史，翰林学士吕惠卿为参知政事。
English: Han Xuan Tong, a scholar of Chinese classics, was appointed to the post of secretary and supervisor of national history, and Hanlin Scholar Lü Huiqing was appointed to the post of governor.

古文：置沅州。
现代文：设置沉州。
English: Set to sink.

古文：丁酉，诏王韶发木征及其家赴阙。
现代文：三十日，下诏王韶带领木征及其家属到朝廷。
English: On the thirtieth day, Wang Zhe led Muxie and his family to the imperial court.

古文：辽遣枢密副使萧素议疆界于代州境上。
现代文：辽朝派遣枢密副使萧素在代州边境与宋商议边界。
English: The Liao Dynasty dispatched its confidential deputy envoy Xiao Su to negotiate the border with the Song Dynasty at the border of Daizhou.

古文：五月戊戌朔，减熙河路囚罪一等，流以下释之。
现代文：五月初一，减轻熙河路囚犯罪行一等，流刑以下一律释放。
English: On the first day of May, Xihe Road prisoners' crimes were mitigated to the first degree, and all of them were released after exile.

古文：辛丑，诏河州瘗蕃部暴骸。
现代文：初四，下诏河州掩埋蕃部暴露在外的尸骨。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the new year, Haeju buried the skeleton with the exposed hip.

古文：壬寅，雨雹。
现代文：初五，降冰雹。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, hail fell.

古文：癸卯，大雨雹。
现代文：初六，降大雨冰雹。
English: On the 18th, there was a heavy hailstorm.

古文：辛亥，罢贤良方正等科。
现代文：十四日，罢除贤良方正等科目。
English: On the 14th, the subjects such as virtuous and upright were abolished.

古文：乙丑，大雨水，坏陕、平陆二县。
现代文：二十八日，降大雨，洪水冲坏陕、平陆二个县。
English: On the 28th, heavy rain fell and floods devastated two counties in Shaanxi and Pinglu.

古文：六月戊寅，赐讨洮州将士特支钱。
现代文：六月十二日，赐给征讨姚州将士特支钱。
English: On June 12th, Yaozhou will be given a special allowance to collect money.

古文：丁亥，作浑仪、浮漏。
现代文：二十一日，制作浑仪、浮漏。
English: On the twenty-first day, mud instruments and floatation devices were made.

古文：广州凤凰见。
现代文：广州凤凰出现。
English: Guangzhou Phoenix appeared.

古文：以木征为荣州团练使，赐姓名赵思忠。
现代文：任命木征为荣州团练使，赐姓名赵思忠。
English: He appointed Mu Zheng as the training envoy of the Rongzhou Regiment and gave him the name Zhao Sizhong.

古文：秋七月癸卯，群臣五上尊号曰绍天宪古文武仁孝皇帝，不许。
现代文：秋七月初七，大臣们五次上表尊号为绍天宪古文武仁孝皇帝，神宗没有答应。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 5th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7

古文：癸亥，诏河北两路捕蝗。
现代文：二十七日，下诏河北两路捕捉蝗虫。
English: On the 27th, the locusts were caught in Hebei Province.

古文：又诏开封、淮南提点、提举司检覆蝗旱。
现代文：又下诏开封府、淮南提点、提举司官员核察蝗早灾害情况。
English: In addition, officials from Kaifeng Prefecture, Huainan Province and the Department of Civil Affairs inspected the locusts early disaster situation.

古文：以米十五万石振河北西路灾伤。
现代文：调拨十五万石米贩济河北西路灾民。
English: Allocate 150,000 kilos of rice to the victims of the disaster on the north-west road of Jihe.

古文：八月丁丑，赐环庆安抚司度僧牒，以募粟振汉蕃饥民。
现代文：八月十二日，赐给环庆安抚司度僧碟，用来募集粮食贩济汉蕃饥民。
English: On August 12th, a disk was given to Huan Qing to appease St. Stephen, which was used to recruit grain traders to feed the hungry.

古文：遣张刍等贺辽主生辰、正旦。
现代文：派遣张当等人祝贺辽主生辰、新春。
English: Zhang Dang and others were sent to congratulate Liao on his birthday and the New Year.

古文：辛卯，诏免淮南、开封府来年春夫，除放邢、洺等州秋税。
现代文：二十六日，下诏免除淮南、开封府来年春天因治河而征发的夫役，免除邢、洛等州秋税。
English: On the 26th, the lower edict exempted Huainan and Kaifeng from the husband service levied next spring due to river management, and exempted Luo and Luo from the autumn tax.

古文：癸巳，置场于南薰、安上门，给流民米。
现代文：二十八日，在南薰、安上门设置摊子，供给流民粮米。
English: On the 28th, stalls were set up in Nanxuan and Anjiemen to supply the displaced people with grain and rice.

古文：集贤院学士宋敏求上编修《阁门仪制》。
现代文：集贤院学士宋敏求呈上编修的润门仪市少。
English: Song Min, a scholar at Shuxian Academy, asked for a smaller number of runners.

古文：九月戊戌，以时雨降，诏河北、京西、陕西、淮南等路劝民趋耕，有因事拘系者释之。
现代文：九月初三，因天降及时雨，下诏河北、京西、陕西、淮南等路官员劝民及时耕种，释放因事关押在官府的百姓。
English: On the third day of September, due to the weather and timely rain, officials from Hebei, West Beijing, Shaanxi, Huainan and other provinces issued an order to persuade the people to cultivate in time and release the people detained in government offices.

古文：壬子，三司火。
现代文：十七日，三司发生火灾。
English: On the 17th, a fire broke out in the Third Division.

古文：癸丑，置京畿、河北、京东西路三十七将。
现代文：十八日，在京瓷、河北、京东西路设置三十七将。
English: On the 18th, 37 general stores were set up in Kyocera, Hebei Province, and East-West Road, Beijing.

古文：甲寅，诏枢密院议边防。
现代文：十九日，下诏枢密院商议边防事宜。
English: On the 19th, the Privy Council convened to discuss border defense issues.

古文：冬十月壬申，诏韩琦、富弼、文彦博、曾公亮条代北事宜以闻。
现代文：冬十月初八，下诏韩琦、富弼、文彦博、曾公亮陈述代北事宜报告朝廷。
English: On the eighth day of the tenth month of winter, Han Zheng, Fu Zheng, Wen Yanbo and Zeng Gongliang made a report on behalf of the North and reported to the imperial court.

古文：戊寅，诏浙西路提举司出米振常、润州饥。
现代文：十四日，下诏浙西路提举司出米贩济常州、润州饥民。
English: On the 14th day of the month, rice traders from West Zhejiang Road came to help the hungry people in Changzhou and Runzhou.

古文：庚辰，置三司会计司，以韩绛提举。
现代文：十六日，设置三司会计司，任命韩绛主管。
English: On the 16th, the Third Division of the Accounting Department was set up, and Han Wei was appointed as the head.

古文：辛巳，以河北灾伤，减州、军文武官员。
现代文：十七日，因河北受灾，减省州军部分文武官员。
English: On the 17th, due to the disaster in Hebei, some civil and military officials of the provincial army were reduced.

古文：癸巳，以常平米于淮南西路易饥民所掘蝗种，又振河北东路流民。
现代文：二十九日，用常平米在淮南西路交换饥民所挖得的蝗种，又贩济河北东路流民。
English: On the 29th, he exchanged the locust seeds dug up by the starving people with ordinary flat rice on Huainan West Road, and also sold rice to the displaced people on Jibei East Road.

古文：十一月己未，祀天地于圜丘，赦天下。
现代文：十一月二十五日，在圆形高坛上祭祀天地，赦免全国。
English: On November 25th, the heavens and the earth were sacrificed on the circular high altar, and the whole country was pardoned.

古文：十二月丙寅，省熙、河、岷三州官百四十一员。
现代文：十二月初三，精简熙、河、山民三州官员一百四十一人。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, one hundred and forty-one officials from the three prefectures of He, He and Shanmin were streamlined.

古文：丁卯，文武官加恩。
现代文：初四，文武官员加赏推恩。
English: On the fourth day of the new school year, officials from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology rewarded him for his kindness.

古文：己丑，辽遣耶律宁等来贺正旦。
现代文：二十六日，辽朝派遣耶律宁等人来祝贺新春。
English: On the 26th, the Liao Dynasty sent Jeru Ning and others to congratulate the Spring Festival.

古文：是岁，高丽入贡，淯井、长宁夷十郡及武都夷内附。
现代文：这一年，高丽来进贡，清井、长宁夷十郡及武都夷归附宋朝。
English: In this year, Goryeo paid tribute, and Kiyoi, Changningyi 10 counties and Wuduyi were annexed to the Song Dynasty.

古文：八年春正月庚子，蔡挺罢判南京留司御史台，冯京罢知亳州。
现代文：熙宁八年春正月初七，蔡挺罢为判南京留司御史台，冯京罢为毫州知州。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the eighth year of Xining's Spring, Cai Ting was ordered to stay in Nanjing to supervise the history station, and Feng Jing was ordered to stay in Wuzhou Chizhou.

古文：丙午，分京东为东、西路。
现代文：十三日，分京东路为东、西两路。
English: On the 13th, Beijing East Road was divided into east and west roads.

古文：辍江南东路上供米，均给灾伤州军。
现代文：停止发运江南东路上供米，就地转发给受灾地区。
English: Stop the shipment of rice along the south-eastern road of the Yangtze River and forward it to the affected areas.

古文：丁未，御宣德门观灯。
现代文：十四日，到宣德门观灯。
English: On the 14th, I went to Xuande Gate to watch the lanterns.

古文：乙卯，诏出使廷臣，所至采吏治能否以闻。
现代文：二十二日，下诏外出视察的朝廷大臣，收集所到之处官吏治绩、才能大小情况报告朝廷。
English: On the 22nd, the Minister of the Imperial Court, who went out to inspect, collected reports on the performance and talent of officials and reported to the Imperial Court.

古文：雨木冰。
现代文：天降木冰。
English: The sky was covered in ice.

古文：戊午，诏所在流民愿归业者，州县赍遣之。
现代文：二十五日，下诏：各地流民愿意回归家园的人，州县官府发给路费和口粮，保证他们回到家园。
English: On the 25th, the following edict was issued: If the displaced people in various regions are willing to return to their homes, the state and county governments will provide them with travel expenses and rations to ensure that they return to their homes.

古文：己未，洮西安抚司以岁旱，请为粥以食羌户饥者。
现代文：二十六日，姚西安抚司因早灾请求制作米粥供给羌民饥饿的人。
English: On the 26th, because of the early disaster, Yao Xi An Fuxi requested the production of rice porridge to feed the hungry people.

古文：二月甲子，增陕西钱监改铸大钱。
现代文：二月初二，增加陕西钱监，然后专铸大钱。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the Shaanxi money supervisor was increased, and then a large amount of money was specially minted.

古文：癸酉，以王安石同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十一日，任命王安石同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wang Anshi was appointed as a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.

古文：戊寅，诏枢密副都承旨张诚一等，以李靖营阵法教殿前马步军。
现代文：十六日，诏令枢密副都承旨张诚一等，用李靖营阵法训练殿前马步军。
English: On the 16th, the imperial edict ordered the vice-premier of the Privy Council to instruct Zhang Zhengyi to use the method of the Li Jing Battalion to train the troops in front of the Great Hall.

古文：乙酉，初行河北户马法。
现代文：二十三日，首先在河北颁行户马法。
English: On the 23rd, Hebei was the first to issue the "Household Horse Law."

古文：丙戌，停京畿土功七年。
现代文：二十四日，停止京瓷土木工程七年。
English: On the 24th, Kyocera's civil engineering project was suspended for seven years.

古文：三月丁酉，振润州饥。
现代文：三月初五，贩济润州饥民。
English: On the fifth day of the third month of the year, vendors sold to the hungry in Jirunju.

古文：戊戌，知河州鲜于师中乞置蕃学，教蕃酋子弟，赐田十顷，岁给钱千缗，增解进士二人，从之。
现代文：初六，河州知州鲜于师中请求设置蕃学，教导少数民族部落首领的子弟，赐田十顷，每年赐给络钱一千，增加进士录取名额二人，神宗同意这个请求。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Heshu Chizhou Shinsui Junior High School requested to set up a school to teach the children of ethnic minority tribal leaders, to grant ten hectares of land, to give a thousand dollars a year, and to increase the number of students admitted by two. Shenzong agreed to this request.

古文：庚子，辽萧禧再来，遣韩缜往河东会议。
现代文：初八，辽朝萧禧又一次来讨论边界，朝廷派韩填前往河东与萧禧商议。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Liao Dynasty and Xiao Xi once again came to discuss the border, and the imperial court sent Han Jian to Hedong to discuss with Xiao Xi.

古文：癸丑，知制诰沈括报聘。
现代文：二十一日，知制浩沈括回访辽朝。
English: On the 21st, Zhizhe Hao and Shen Guo made a return visit to the Liao Dynasty.

古文：复振常、润饥民。
现代文：又一次贩济常州、润州饥民。
English: Once again, a peddler helps the hungry in Changzhou and Runzhou.

古文：戊午，太白昼见。
现代文：二十六日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 26th, the day of the white star appeared.

古文：夏四月乙丑，诏减将作监冗官。
现代文：夏四月初四，下诏精简将作监冗官。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the summer, the next edict streamlining will be the superintendent.

古文：丁卯，辽遣耶律景熙等来贺同天节。
现代文：初六，辽朝派遣耶律景熙等人来祝贺同天节。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the Liao Dynasty sent Jeru Jingxi and others to congratulate the festival on the same day.

古文：乙亥，正僖祖禘祫东向位。
现代文：十四日，确定嘻祖祭祀方位为东。
English: On the 14th, it was determined that the direction of the He Zu ritual would be east.

古文：戊寅，以吴充为枢密使。
现代文：十七日，任命吴充为枢密使。
English: On the 17th, Wu Chong was appointed as a Privy Counsellor.

古文：壬午，湖南江水溢。
现代文：二十一日，湖南长江水涨满流出。
English: On the twenty-first day, the water of the Yangtze River in Hunan was overflowing.

古文：闰月乙未，陈升之罢为镇江军节度使、判扬州。
现代文：闰四月初四，陈升之罢为镇江军节度使、扬州通判。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th lunar month, Chen Sheng was appointed as the Zhenjiang Army's special envoy to Yangzhou.

古文：广源州刘纪寇邕州，归化州侬智会败之。
现代文：广源州刘纪攻打琶州，归化州侬智会打退他们。
English: Guangyuan Province's Liu Ji attacked Pazhou, and the naturalized province's Nongzhi rebuffed them.

古文：壬寅，沈括上《奉元历》。
现代文：十一日，沈括进上捧元历。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Shen Kuo stepped forward to hold up the original calendar.

古文：癸卯，以宣徽北院使张方平判永兴军。
现代文：十二日，任命宣徽北院使张方平为永兴军通判。
English: On the 12th, Zhang Fangping, the envoy of the Northern Court of Xuanhui, was appointed as the general magistrate of the Yongxing Army.

古文：分秦凤路兵为四将。
现代文：分秦凤路兵为四将。
English: Qin and Feng soldiers were divided into four generals.

古文：壬子，沂州民朱唐告前余姚县主簿李逢谋反，辞连右羽林大将军世居及河中府观察推官徐革，命御史中丞邓绾、知谏院范百禄、御史徐禧杂治之。
现代文：二十一日，沂州民朱唐控告前任余姚县主簿李逢谋反，证据牵连到右羽林大将军世居及河中府观察推官徐革，命令御史中承邓缩、知谏院范百禄、御史徐禧一起处理这个案件。
English: On the 21st, Zhu Tang, a citizen of Zhangzhou, accused his predecessor, Li Feng, the main book of Yuyao County, of plotting rebellion. The evidence implicated Yu Lin, General of the Right Division, and Xu Ge, the inspector-general of Henan Province, and ordered Gu Shi Zhongcheng Deng Zi, Zhishuin Fan Bailu, and Gu Shi Xu Xiyi to handle the case together.

古文：狱具，世居赐死，逢、革等伏诛。
现代文：案件处理结果，世居赐死，李逢、徐革被判死刑。
English: As a result of the case, Shi Ju was sentenced to death, and Li Feng and Xu Ge were sentenced to death.

古文：甲寅，录赵普后。
现代文：二十三日，录用赵普后代。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Pu's descendants were hired.

古文：乙卯，诏西南蕃五姓蛮五年一入贡。
现代文：二十四日，下诏西南蕃五姓蛮五年进贡一次。
English: On the 24th, it was announced that five families in the southwestern part of Jiangxi Province had paid tribute for the first time in five years.

古文：五月辛酉朔，虑囚，降死罪一等，杖以下释之。
现代文：五月初一，讯察全国囚犯罪状，减轻死罪一等，杖刑以下全部释放。
English: On the first day of May, the status of prisoners in the whole country was investigated, the death penalty was commuted to the first degree, and all were released from the cane.

古文：甲子，分环庆兵为四将。
现代文：初四，分环庆兵为四将。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Guanhuang Qingbing was promoted to the fourth rank.

古文：丁丑，雨土及黄毛。
现代文：十七日，天降土及黄毛。
English: On the seventeenth day, the sky fell to the ground and yellow hair appeared.

古文：甲申，熙河路蕃官殿直顿埋谋叛，伏诛。
现代文：二十四日，熙河路蕃官殿直顿埋谋划叛乱，被判死刑。
English: On the 24th, he was sentenced to death for plotting a rebellion in the eunuch's residence on Xihe Road.

古文：己丑，遣使振鄜延、环庆饥。
现代文：二十九日，派遣使臣贩济延、环庆饥民。
English: On the 29th, envoys were sent to the starving people in Jiyan and Huanqing.

古文：六月乙未，日上有五色云。
现代文：六月初五，太阳上出现五种色彩的云。
English: On the fifth day of the sixth month, clouds of five colors appeared on the sun.

古文：丙午，酾汴水入蔡河以通漕。
现代文：十六日，疏导汁水进人蔡河用来通槽运。
English: On the 16th, the diversion of juice and water into the Caihe River was used to transport it through the tank.

古文：己酉，颁王安石《诗》、《书》、《周礼义》于学官。辛亥，以安石为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎。
现代文：十九日，向学官颁布王安石诗、书、凋礼必。二十一日，任命王安石为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎。
English: On the 19th, it was announced to the scholars that Wang Anshi's poems, books, and wreaths must be preserved. On the 21st, Wang Anshi was appointed as Shangshu's left-hand man and servant.

古文：戊午，太师魏国公韩琦薨。
现代文：二十八日，太师魏国公韩琦逝世。
English: On the 28th, the Grand Master of the Wei Dynasty, Han Yu, passed away.

古文：己未，以琦配飨英宗庙庭。
现代文：二十九日，以韩琦配享英宗庙庭。
English: On the 29th, they enjoyed the Yingzong Temple Garden with Korean ginger.

古文：秋七月甲子，虔州江水溢。
现代文：秋七月初四，虔州长江水涨满流出。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the water of the Yangtze River in Qianzhou was full to overflowing.

古文：戊寅，太白昼见。
现代文：十八日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 26th, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：戊子，分泾原兵为五将。
现代文：二十八日，分径原兵为五将。
English: On the 28th, the original soldiers were reduced to five generals.

古文：命韩缜如河东割地。
现代文：命令韩填到河东割地。
English: Han was ordered to fill in the land to the east of the river.

古文：八月庚寅朔，日当食，云阴不见。
现代文：八月初一，应有日食，阴云密布看不见。
English: On the first day of August, there should be a solar eclipse, which cannot be seen because of the thick clouds.

古文：癸巳，募民捕蝗易粟，苗损者偿之，仍复其赋。
现代文：初四，招募百姓捕捉蝗虫用来交换粮食，庄稼损坏，照实赔偿，并免其赋。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, people were recruited to catch locusts to exchange for grain, crops were damaged, compensation was made according to the facts, and they were exempted from payment.

古文：丙申，遣谢景温等贺辽主生辰、正旦。
现代文：初七，派遣谢景温等人祝贺辽主生辰、新春。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Xie Jingwen and others were sent to congratulate Liao on his birthday and the New Year.

古文：减官户役钱之半。
现代文：减轻官户役钱一半。
English: Reduce the amount of money spent on government and household services by half.

古文：诏发运司体实淮南、江东、两浙米价，州县所存上供米毋过百万石，减直予民，斗钱勿过八十。
现代文：下诏： 发运司核实淮南、江东、两浙米价，州县储存的上供米不要超过一百万石，剩下的粮食减价卖给百姓，每斗的价格不要超过八十钱。 
English: The next edict: the Shipping Department will verify the price of rice in Huainan, Jiangdong, and the two Zhejiang Provinces. The rice stored by prefectures and counties should not exceed one million koku, and the remaining grain should be sold to the people at a reduced price. The price of each barrel should not exceed eighty yuan.

古文：庚戌，韩绛罢。
现代文：二十一日，韩绛被罢免。
English: On the 21st, Han Wei was removed from office.

古文：发河北、京东兵及监牧卒修都城。
现代文：征发河北、京东士兵及监牧士卒修建都城。
English: Hebei and Jingdong soldiers and overseers were conscripted to build the capital city.

古文：丁巳，大阅。
现代文：二十八日，检阅军队。
English: On the 28th, the troops were inspected.

古文：九月庚申朔，王安石兼修国史。
现代文：九月初一，任命王安石兼监修国史。
English: On the first day of September, Wang Anshi was also appointed to supervise the national history.

古文：立武举绝伦法。
现代文：确立武举绝伦法。
English: Establishing martial arts excellence.

古文：冬十月庚寅，吕惠卿罢知陈州。
现代文：冬十月初二，吕惠卿罢为陈州知州。
English: On the second day of October in winter, Lu Huixing became Chenzhou Chizhou.

古文：乙未，彗出轸。
现代文：初七，彗星出现在较宿中间。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the comet appeared in the middle of the night.

古文：己亥，诏以灾异数见，不御前殿，减常膳，求直言。
现代文：十一日，下诏因灾异现象多次出现，不到前殿，减少常规饮食，下诏要求直言朝政得失。
English: On the 11th day of the month, due to the phenomenon of disasters and abnormalities, the next emperor did not come to the front hall, reduced the regular diet, and the next emperor demanded to tell the truth about the gains and losses of the government.

古文：壬寅，赦天下。
现代文：十四日，赦免全国。
English: Ren Yin, Tang Ruizong issued an edict of amnesty to the world.

古文：罢手实法。
现代文：罢除手实法。
English: Repeal the handshake law.

古文：丁未，彗不见。
现代文：十九日，彗星消失。
English: On the 19th, the comet disappeared.

古文：丙辰，御殿复膳。
现代文：二十八日，上殿治理朝政并队复饮食。
English: On the 28th, the upper court took over the administration of the imperial government and resumed eating and drinking.

古文：十一月戊寅，交阯陷钦州。
现代文：十一月二十日，交趾攻陷钦州。
English: On November 20th, Kojima invaded and occupied Chinshu.

古文：壬午，立陕西蕃丁法。
现代文：二十四日，颁立陕西蕃丁法。
English: On the 24th, the Shaanxi Fending Law was promulgated.

古文：甲申，交阯陷廉州。
现代文：二十六日，交趾攻陷廉州。
English: On the 26th, Koji attacked and captured Lianzhou.

古文：丙戌，渝州改南平军。
现代文：二十八日，改渝州为南平军。
English: On the 28th, Yu Prefecture was transformed into Nanping Army.

古文：十二月丙申，浚河。
现代文：十二月初九，疏浚黄河。
English: On the 9th day of the 12th month, the Yellow River was dredged.

古文：壬寅，以翰林学士元绛参知政事，龙图阁直学士曾孝宽签书枢密院事。
现代文：十五日，任命翰林学士元降参知政事，龙图阁直学士曾孝宽签书枢密院事。
English: On the 15th, Hanlin Yuanjun, a bachelor, was appointed to the post of governor, and Longtu Gejun, a bachelor, was appointed to the post of Privy Councillor.

古文：辛亥，天章阁待制赵禼为安南道招讨使，嘉州防御使李宪副之，以讨交阯。
现代文：二十四日，任命天章阁待制赵为安南道招讨使，嘉州防御史李宪为招讨副使，率军征讨交趾。
English: On the 24th, Zhao Tianzhangge was appointed as the recruiting envoy of Annan Province, and Li Xian, the defense historian of Jiazhou, was appointed as the recruiting deputy envoy, and led the army to recruit.

古文：癸丑，辽遣耶律世通等来贺正旦。
现代文：二十六日，辽朝派遣耶律世通等人来祝贺新春。
English: On the 26th, the Liao Dynasty sent Yerut Shitong and others to congratulate the New Year.

古文：甲寅，熙河路木宗城首领结彪谋叛，熟羌日脚族青厮扒斩其首来献，补下班殿侍。
现代文：二十七日，熙河路木宗城首领结彪策划叛乱，熟羌日脚族青厮扒斩杀结彪，把他的首级献给朝廷，神宗下诏补官下班殿侍。
English: On the twenty-seventh day, the leader of the city of Xihe Road, Muzong, planned a rebellion against Jie Biao. He was familiar with the Hifu people, the Qing Dynasty, and killed Jie Biao. He presented his head to the imperial court. Shensong issued an edict to fill the position of the lower-ranking palace attendant.

古文：九年春正月乙丑，雨木冰。
现代文：熙宁九年春正月初八，天降木冰。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the spring of the ninth year of Xi Ning, the sky fell and the trees froze.

古文：戊辰，交阯陷邕州，知州苏缄死之。
现代文：十一日，交趾攻陷琶州，知州苏缄战死。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Koji invaded and occupied Wazhou, and Chizhou Su Shi died in the battle.

古文：己卯，下溪州刺史彭师晏及天赐州降。
现代文：二十二日，下溪州刺史彭师晏及天赐州降宋。
English: On the 22nd, Shimohe County was conquered by Spen Shijuan and Tianye County was conquered by Song Dynasty.

古文：庚辰，遣使祭南岳、南海，告以南伐。
现代文：二十三日，派遣使臣祭祀南岳、南海，告知兴兵南讨交趾。
English: On the 23rd, envoys were dispatched to offer sacrifices at Nangak and Nanhae, and to inform the Xinghe soldiers to go south.

古文：辛巳，赠苏缄奉国军节度使，谥忠勇，以其子子元为西头供奉官、阁门祗候。
现代文：二十四日，赠给苏缄奉国军节度使称号，溢号忠勇，任命他的儿子苏子元为西头供奉官、阎门抵候。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Su Shi was given the title of the commander of the festival of the national army, and his son Su Zi Yuan was appointed as the head of the west tributary and waited for the arrival of the gate of hell.

古文：二月戊子，宣徽南院使郭逵为安南道招讨使，罢李宪，以赵禼副之。
现代文：二月初二，宣徽南院使郭连为安南道招讨使，罢免李宪，任命赵为副将。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the Southern Court of Xuanhui Province appointed Guo Lian as the envoy of Annan Province, dismissed Li Xian, and appointed Zhao as vice-general.

古文：诏占城、占腊合击交阯。
现代文：下诏占城、占腊联合进攻交趾。
English: The next day, Zhancheng and Zhanla made a joint attack.

古文：己丑，宗哥首领鬼章寇五牟谷，蕃官蔺毡讷支等邀击，大破之。
现代文：初三，宗哥首领鬼章攻打五牟谷，蕃官蔺毡呐支等人率军阻截，打败鬼章。
English: On the third day of the junior high school, the head of the head of the head of the head of the head of the head of the head of the head of the head of the head of the head of the head of the head of the head of the head of the head of the head of the head of the head of the head

古文：己亥，以出师，罢春宴。
现代文：十三日，因出兵罢免春宴。
English: On the 13th, the spring banquet was cancelled due to the dispatch of troops.

古文：乙卯，雨雹。
现代文：十九日，降冰雹。
English: On the 19th, hail fell.

古文：三月内辰朔，进仁宗婉容周氏为妃。
现代文：三月初一，进封仁宗婉容周氏为贤妃。
English: On the first day of March, Wen Rong Zhou of the Nanzong Dynasty was enthroned as a virtuous empress.

古文：辛酉，御集英殿策进士。
现代文：初六，到集英殿策试进士。
English: In his sixth year of junior high school, he went to Shueiden to prepare for his entrance exam.

古文：恤钦、廉、邕三州死事家，瘗战亡士，贼所蹂践，除其田征。
现代文：抚恤慰问钦、廉、琶三州为国捐躯兵士的家属，掩埋阵亡士兵，被敌人破坏了的庄稼免除田税。
English: The families of the soldiers who sacrificed their lives for the country in the three states of Qin, Lian, and Wa were given pensions and condolences, the soldiers who died in battle were buried, and the crops destroyed by the enemy were exempted from the field tax.

古文：甲戌，赐进士、诸科及第出身五百九十六人。
现代文：十九日，赐进士、诸科及第出身五百九十六人。
English: On the 19th, 596 people were conferred with the title of academician.

古文：丁丑，以广西进士徐伯祥为右侍禁、钦廉白州巡检。
现代文：二十二日，任命广西进士徐伯样为右侍禁、钦廉白州巡检。
English: On the 22nd, he appointed Xu Bozang, a scholar from Guangxi Province, as his right-hand attendant and Qin Lian as inspector of Baizhou.

古文：宗哥首领鬼章寇五牟谷，熙河钤辖韩存宝败之。
现代文：宗哥首领鬼章攻打五牟谷，熙河铃辖韩存宝率部打败鬼章。
English: Zong's elder brother, the leader of the Ghost Chapter, attacked Gomu Valley, and Heihe Ling, led by Han Cunbao, defeated the Ghost Chapter.

古文：庚辰，以种谔知岷州。
现代文：二十五日，任命种愕知山民州。
English: On the 25th, he was appointed as the head of Shanmin County.

古文：夏四月辛卯，辽遣耶律庶几等来贺同天节。
现代文：夏四月初六，辽朝派遣耶律庶几等人来祝贺同天节。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, the Liao Dynasty sent Ye Lu, Zhao Jia and others to congratulate the festival on the same day.

古文：乙未，以辽主母丧，罢同天节上寿。
现代文：初十，因辽主母亲逝世，罢除同天节祝寿。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, due to the death of Liao's mother, the celebration of the same day was cancelled.

古文：戊戌，复广济河漕。
现代文：十三日，恢复广济河槽运。
English: On the 13th, the canal transport of the Guangji River was resumed.

古文：癸卯，诏广南亡没士卒及百姓为贼残破者，转运、安抚司具实，并议振恤以闻。
现代文：十八日，下诏：广南阵亡士兵及百姓遭敌残破的人，转运司、安抚司核实情况并报告贩济、抚恤意见。
English: On the 18th, the following edict was issued: For the soldiers who died in battle in Guangnan and the people who were destroyed by the enemy, the transfer department and the pacification department should verify the situation and report their opinions on the sale of money and pensions.

古文：甲辰，给空名告身付安南，以招降赏功。
现代文：十九日，发放空额的任命书给安南，用来招降赏功。
English: On the 19th, a vacant appointment letter was issued to Annan, which was used to offer a reward.

古文：诏诸路募武勇赴广西。
现代文：下诏各路招募武勇奔赴广西。
English: The following was issued to recruit warriors to go to Guangxi.

古文：赠广西死事将士官有差。
现代文：赠给广西为国捐躯将士官职不等。
English: Presented to Guangxi for sacrificing his life for the country, they will be promoted to non-commissioned officer positions.

古文：丙午，遣王克臣等吊慰于辽。
现代文：二十一日，派遣王克臣等人到辽朝吊丧、慰问。
English: On the 21st, Wang Keshen and others were sent to Liao Dynasty for mourning and condolences.

古文：辛亥，茂州夷寇边，遣内侍押班王中正经制。
现代文：二十六日，茂州夷攻打边境，派遣内侍押班王中正处理。
English: On the 26th, Maozhou Yi attacked the border and dispatched the palace guard to escort Wang Zhongzheng to deal with it.

古文：甲寅，辽遣耶律孝淳以国母丧来告，帝发哀成服，辍视朝七日。
现代文：二十九日，辽朝派遣耶律孝淳来告母丧，神宗公布辽主母亲去世的消息，并穿丧服，停止处理朝政七天。
English: On the 29th, the Liao Dynasty sent Jerut Xiaochun to mourn his mother's death. Shenzong announced the news of the death of Liao's mother, wore mourning clothes, and stopped handling the imperial government for seven days.

古文：五月丙辰朔，诏邕州沿边州峒首领来降者，周惠之。
现代文：五月初一，下诏：琶州沿边州酮首领来投降宋朝的人要从各方面给以优惠。
English: On the first day of May, the following edict was issued: Those who surrendered to the Song Dynasty from the leaders of the border states along the Pazhou River should be given preferential treatment in all aspects.

古文：癸亥，诏试医学生。
现代文：初八，下诏考试医学生。
English: In the eighth year of junior high school, a medical student is about to take the final exam.

古文：丙寅，分两浙为东、西路。
现代文：十一日，分两浙路为两浙东、西路。
English: On the 11th, two Zhejiang roads were divided into two Zhejiang East and West roads.

古文：丁卯，城茂州。
现代文：十二日，修城茂州。
English: On the 12th, the city of Shoushu was rebuilt.

古文：壬申，诏安南诸军过岭有疾者，所至护治。
现代文：十七日，下诏：安南各军越过岭南后患病的人，各地要积极护理医治。
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued: People who fell ill after Annan's armies crossed Lingnan should be actively nursed and treated in various regions.

古文：丙子，大理国来贡。
现代文：二十一日，大理国来进贡。
English: On the 21st, Dali Province came to pay tribute.

古文：庚辰，静州下首领董整白等来降。
现代文：二十五日，静州下首领董整白等人降宋。
English: On the 25th, the leader of Jingzhou, Dong Chaibai, and others surrendered to Song.

古文：六月丁亥，诏安南将吏，视军士有疾者月以数闻。
现代文：六月初三，下诏安南将领官吏，每月报告士兵中患病的人数给朝廷。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, Annan ordered generals and officials to report the number of sick soldiers to the imperial court every month.

古文：己丑，绵州都监王庆、崔昭用、刘珪、左侍禁张乂援战茂州，死之。
现代文：初五，绵州都监王庆、崔昭用、刘盖，左侍禁张援助茂州的战斗，战死。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Wang Qing, Cui Zhaoying, Liu Gai, the governor of Mianzhou, left Zhang to assist in the battle of Maozhou, and died in the battle.

古文：诏庆等子与借职，女出嫁，夫与奉职；白丁王禹锡等二人，赐钱其家。
现代文：下诏：王庆等人的儿子为借职官，女儿出嫁的，丈夫补给奉职官；白丁王禹锡等二人，赐给家属钱。
English: The following edict: the sons of Wang Qing and others are loaned officials, the daughters are married, and the husbands supplement the loaned officials; two people, such as Baoding Wang Yuxi, give money to their families.

古文：辛卯，诏滨海富民得养蜑户，毋致为外夷所诱。
现代文：初七，下诏沿海富民所养樵户，不要被外夷引诱走了。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, it was decreed that the tenants raised by the coastal rich people should not be lured away by foreigners.

古文：己亥，虑囚，降死罪一等，杖以下释之。
现代文：十五日，讯察全国囚犯的罪状，减轻死罪一等，杖刑以下全部释放。
English: On the 15th, the crimes of prisoners across the country were investigated, the death penalty was commuted to the first degree, and all were released from the cane.

古文：癸卯，以水源等洞蛮主侬贺等七人为定远、宁远将军。
现代文：十九日，任命水源等洞蛮主侬贺等七人为定远、宁远将军。
English: On the 19th, Dingyuan and Ningyuan generals were appointed from seven people, including the warlord of Shuiyuan and other caves, Nong He.

古文：秋七月丙辰，朱崖军黎贼黄婴入寇，诏广南西路严兵备之。
现代文：秋七月初二，朱崖军黎贼黄婴攻掠宋境，下诏广南西路动员士兵准备抵抗。
English: On the second day of the second month of the autumn, the Zhuliang army of the Li thief Huang Ying attacked and plundered the Song territory, and the soldiers were mobilized on the west road of Guangnan to prepare for resistance.

古文：庚申，关以西蝗蝻、虸蚄生。
现代文：初六，关西蝗纳、虫舫 出现。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, locusts and worms appeared in Kansai.

古文：壬戌，筑下溪州，改名会溪城。
现代文：初八，修筑下溪州，改名会溪城。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the city of Xizhou was built, and its name was changed to Huixi City.

古文：癸亥，静州将杨文绪结蕃部谋叛，王中正斩之以徇。
现代文：初九，静州将杨文绪勾结蕃部策划叛乱，王中正将其斩首示众。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Jingzhou plotted a rebellion with Yang Wenshu, and Wang Zhongzheng publicly beheaded him.

古文：诏广西死事官无子孙者许立后。
现代文：下诏：广西为国捐躯的将官没有子孙后代的允许立后。
English: The following edict: The generals of Guangxi who sacrificed their lives for the country were not allowed to have descendants.

古文：乙丑，诏自今遇大礼推恩，官昭宪太后族一人。
现代文：十一日，下诏：从今以后遇较大的礼俗向有关的人施加恩惠，都要任命昭宪太后族一人为官。
English: On the 11th day, the following edict was issued: From now on, in the event of a major ritual or custom imposing favors on the relevant people, one person from the family of the Empress Dowager Shoken should be appointed as an official.

古文：是月，安南行营次桂州，郭逵遣钤辖和斌等督水军涉海自广东入，诸军自广南入。
现代文：这个月，安南行营驻扎桂州，郭连派遣铃辖和斌等人指挥水军涉海从广东进攻交趾，其余各军从广南进攻交趾。
English: This month, Annan's campaign battalion was stationed in Guizhou, and Guo Lian sent Ling Jihabin and others to command the navy to attack from Guangdong, while the other armies attacked from Guangnan.

古文：八月甲申朔，齐州监务左班殿直孙纪死贼，录其一子为三班借职。
现代文：八月初一，齐州监务左班殿直孙纪在与贼人交战中战死，录用他的一个儿子为三班借职。
English: On the first day of August, Naosong Ji, the left shift supervisor of the Qizhou Supervision Bureau, was killed in a battle with thieves, and one of his sons was hired to work for the third shift.

古文：戊子，以文彦博守太保兼待中，行太原尹。
现代文：初五，任命文彦博守太保兼侍中，行使太原府尹的职权。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, he appointed Fumihiko Hiroshige as the governor of Taiho and chamberlain, exercising the powers of Taiyuan.

古文：己丑，遣程师孟等贺辽主生辰、正旦。罢鬻祠庙钱。
现代文：初六，派遣程师孟等人祝贺辽主生辰、新春，罢除誓卖祠庙钱。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, sent Cheng Shi Meng and others to congratulate the birthday of the Liao Lord, the New Year, and removed the oath to sell temple money.

古文：丁酉，禁北边民阑出谷粟。
现代文：十四日，禁止北方边民擅自将粮谷运出边境。
English: On the 14th, northern border residents were prohibited from transporting grain out of the border without authorization.

古文：庚子，占城来贡。
现代文：十七日，占城来进贡。
English: On the 17th, Zhancheng came to pay tribute.

古文：九月戊午，浚汴河。
现代文：九月初五，疏浚汁河。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of September, the dredging of the Su River began.

古文：丙寅，诏罢都大制置河北河防水利司。
现代文：十三日，下诏罢除都大制置河北河防水利司。
English: On the 13th, it was decreed to abolish the capital city system and establish the Hebei River Water Conservancy Department.

古文：己卯，辽遣使回谢。
现代文：二十六日，辽朝派遣使臣回谢。
English: On the 26th, Liao Dynasty sent envoys to return thanks.

古文：诏恤岭南死事家，表将士墓。
现代文：下诏抚恤岭南为国捐躯士兵的家属，在将士墓上设立标记。
English: The following edict paid tribute to the families of the soldiers who died for the country in Lingnan and set up a marker on the soldiers' graves.

古文：冬十月乙酉，太白昼见。
现代文：冬十月初二，太白星白天出现。
English: On the second day of October in winter, the Taibai Star appears in the daytime.

古文：乙未，诏东南诸路教阅新军。
现代文：十二日，下诏东南各路训练新军。
English: On the 12th, troops were sent to the southeast to train the new army.

古文：丙午，王安石罢判江宁府。
现代文：二十三日，王安石罢为江宁府通判。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Anshi was appointed as the chief judge of Jiangning Prefecture.

古文：以吴充监修国史，王珪为集贤殿大学士，并同中书门下平章事。
现代文：任命吴充监修国史，巨盖为集贤殿大学士，并同中书门下平章事。
English: Wu Chong was appointed to supervise the study of national history, and Juguet became a scholar of Jixianden University. He was also appointed to be a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：资政殿学士冯京知枢密院。
现代文：资政殿学士冯京知枢密院。
English: Feng Jingchi Privy Councilor.

古文：辛亥，除放沅州归明人户去年倚阁秋税。
现代文：二十八日，免除沉州归明人户去年暂停交纳的秋税。
English: On the 28th, the autumn tax that was suspended last year was exempted from the households of Shenzhou Guiming.

古文：十一月乙卯，赐广南东路空名告敕，募入钱助军。
现代文：十一月初三，赐给广南东路空额的任命书，用以招募出钱补助军队开支。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, an appointment letter for a vacant post in East Guangnan Road was issued to recruit money to subsidize military expenses.

古文：辛酉，录唐相魏征后同州司士参军道严，流内铨特免试注官。
现代文：初九，录用唐朝宰相魏征后代同州司士参军道严，流内锉特免试注官。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, the descendants of Wei Zheng, the prime minister of the Tang Dynasty, were recruited as the same state magistrates to join the military.

古文：乙亥，以安南行营将士疾疫，遣同知太常礼院王存祷南岳，遣中使建祈福道场。
现代文：二十三日，因安南行营将士疾疫流行，派遣同知太常礼院王存祈祷南岳，派遣中使修建祈福道场。
English: On the 23rd, due to the epidemic of the disease in the southern camp of Ann, Wang Cun, a friend of the Taizhong Temple, was dispatched to pray for Nangyue, and an envoy was dispatched to build a prayer dojo.

古文：己卯，洮东安抚司言包顺等破鬼章兵于多移谷。
现代文：二十七日，姚东安抚司报告说包顺等人在多移谷打败鬼章军。
English: On the 27th, Yao Dong's pacification division reported that Bao Shun and others defeated the ghost Zhang army in Doyu Valley.

古文：壬午，鬼章寇岷州，知州种谔等败之铁城。
现代文：三十日，鬼章攻打崛州，知州种愕等率军在铁城打败鬼章军。
English: On the 30th, the Ghost Chapter attacked Horizhou, and the Chizhou kind of astonishment led the army to defeat the Ghost Chapter army in Tiecheng.

古文：十二月丙戌，安南伪观察使刘纪降。
现代文：十二月初四，安南伪观察使刘纪降宋。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, Annan's false observation caused Liu Ji to be demoted to Song Dynasty.

古文：置司农丞。
现代文：设置司农承。
English: Set up a farmer's heir.

古文：庚寅，子佣生。
现代文：初八，皇子倩出生。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Prince Shiori was born.

古文：丁酉，诏岷州界经鬼章兵燹者赐钱，胁从来归者释其罪。
现代文：十五日，下诏：山民州境内遭受鬼章焚掠的人赐给钱，被鬼章威逼顺从而能归附朝廷的人，免除罪行。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the following edict was issued: People in Shanmin Prefecture who suffered from the burning and pillaging of ghost banners were given money, and those who were forced to submit by the threat of ghost banners so that they could join the imperial court were absolved of their crimes.

古文：癸卯，郭逵败交阯于富良江，获其伪太子洪真，李乾德遣人奉表诣军门降，逵遂班师。
现代文：二十一日，郭连在富良江打败交趾军队，俘获交趾伪太子洪真，李乾德派人奉降表到军营投降，郭连于是班师。
English: On the twenty-first day, Guo Lian defeated the Kota troops in the Fuliang River and captured the Kota pseudo-princeling Hong Zhen. Li Qiande sent a person to the military camp to surrender, and Guo Lian became the squad leader.

古文：丁未，辽遣耶律运等来贺正旦。
现代文：二十五日，辽朝派遣耶律运等人来祝贺新春。
English: On the 25th, the Liao Dynasty sent Ye Lu Yun and others to congratulate the Spring Festival.

古文：庚戌，诏有得鬼章、冷鸡朴首者，赏之。
现代文：二十八日，下诏：有能得到鬼章、冷鸡朴首级的人，朝廷给予奖赏。
English: On the 28th, the following edict was issued: The Imperial Court would award prizes to those who could obtain the Ghost Badge and the Head of Cold Chicken Park.

古文：置威戎军。
现代文：设置威戎军。
English: Set up the Wei army.

古文：十年春正月乙丑，御宣德门观灯。
现代文：熙宁十年春正月十四日，到宣德门观灯。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the tenth year of Xining's Spring, he went to the Xuande Gate to watch the lanterns.

古文：戊辰，仙韶院火，不视朝。
现代文：十七日，仙韶院发生火灾，不到朝廷处理政事。
English: On the 17th, a fire broke out in Xianjuin, and the imperial court was unable to deal with the political situation.

古文：己巳，白虹贯日二月甲申，以崇信军节度使宗旦同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十八日，一道白色的虹横贯天空。二月初三，任命崇信军节度使宗旦为同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 18th, a white rainbow streaked across the sky. On the 3rd day of the 2nd month of the year, Sotan was appointed as the commander of the army of Chongxin.

古文：戊子，以鬼章败，种谔等赏官有差。
现代文：初七，因打败鬼章，种愕等人得到不同等级的升官奖赏。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, because of defeating the ghost chapter, the kind of astonishment and other people got different grades of promotion reward.

古文：辛卯，日中有黑子。
现代文：初十，太阳中出现黑子。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, a spot appeared in the sun.

古文：甲午，诏宗室使相虽及十年，更不取旨磨勘。
现代文：十三日，下诏：宗室任使相虽年满十年，也不磨勘转官。
English: On the 13th, the following edict was issued: Although the heir to the position of envoy was ten years old, he did not have to undergo a vetting process to become an envoy.

古文：丁酉，诏诸州岁以十一月给老疾贫乏者粟，尽三月乃止。
现代文：十六日，下诏各州每年从十一月开始供给老弱病残缺乏粮食的人米谷，到第二年三月停止。
English: On the 16th, it was announced that the states would begin to supply rice to the old, the weak, the sick, and those who lacked food every year from November, and would stop in March of the following year.

古文：己亥，以王韶知洪州。
现代文：十八日，任命王韶为洪州知州。
English: On the 18th, Wang Qi was appointed as Hongzhou Chizhou.

古文：丙午，以复广源、苏茂等州，群臣表贺，赦广州囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：二十五日，因收复广源、苏茂等少，大臣们上表祝贺，赦免广州囚犯罪行一等，徒刑以下全部释放。
English: On the 25th, due to the recovery of Guangyuan, Sumo, etc., the ministers congratulated on the table, pardoned Guangzhou prisoners for first-class crimes, and released all prisoners below imprisonment.

古文：赐行营诸军钱，民缘征役者恤其家。
现代文：赐安南行营各军钱，百姓因兴兵征役者抚恤其家。
English: Annan gave military money to all the military camps in the south, and the people were forced to subsidize their families because of the military conscripts.

古文：以广源州为顺州，赦李乾德罪。
现代文：改广源州为顺州，赦免李乾德罪行。
English: He changed Guangyuanzhou to Shunzhou and pardoned Li Qiande's crime.

古文：以郭逵判潭州，赵禼知桂州。
现代文：任命郭连为潭州通判，赵为桂州知州。
English: Guo Lian was appointed as the chief judge of Tanzhou and Zhao as the chief judge of Guizhou Zhizhou.

古文：己酉，以交阯降，赦广南东路、荆湖南路系囚，余各降一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：二十八日，因交趾投降，赦免广南东路、荆湖南路关押的囚犯，其余罪犯各减轻罪行一等，徒刑以下全部释放。
English: On the 28th, the prisoners held in the Guangnan East Road and the Jinghu South Road were pardoned for surrendering, and the remaining criminals were given first-class mitigated crimes, and all of them were released from prison.

古文：三月辛未，虑囚，降死罪一等，杖以下释之。
现代文：三月二十一日，讯察全国囚犯罪状，减轻死罪囚犯罪行一等，杖刑以下全部释放。
English: On March 21, the situation of prisoners nationwide was surveyed, and the first-class crimes of death-penalty prisoners were mitigated, and all of them were released from the cane.

古文：壬申，诏州县捕蝗。
现代文：二十二日，下诏州县捕捉蝗虫。
English: On the 22nd, the locusts were captured in Zhaozhou County.

古文：夏四月辛巳，复置宪州。
现代文：夏四月初二，恢复设置宪州。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, the establishment of the constitutional state was resumed.

古文：乙酉，辽遣萧仪等来贺同天节。
现代文：初六，辽朝派遣萧仪等人来祝贺同天节。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the Liao Dynasty sent Xiao Yi and others to congratulate the same day.

古文：癸巳，文州蕃贼寇边，州兵击走之。
现代文：十四日，文州蕃贼攻打宋朝边境，州兵打退他们。
English: On the 14th, the Wenzhou bandits attacked the Song Dynasty border, and the National Guard drove them back.

古文：丁酉，赐熙河路兵特支钱，战死者赐帛，免夏秋税。
现代文：十八日，赐给熙河路兵士特支钱，赐给战死的人帛，免除夏秋税。
English: On the 18th, the soldiers of Xihe Road were given special payment, the war dead were given medals, and the summer and autumn taxes were exempted.

古文：五月戊午，诏修仁宗、英宗史。
现代文：五月初九，下诏撰修《仁宗、英宗史。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month of the year, he wrote "Ninshu, Yingzong History."

古文：甲戌，太白昼见。
现代文：二十五日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 26th, the too-white Venus appeared in broad daylight.

古文：六月壬午，注辇国朝贡。
现代文：六月初四，注举国来进贡。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th lunar month, the country was summoned to pay tribute.

古文：癸巳，王安石以使相为集禧观使。
现代文：十五日，王安石以使相身份为集禧观使。
English: On the 15th, Wang Anshi was appointed as the celebrant.

古文：丁未，置岷州铁城堡。
现代文：二十九日，设置山民州铁城堡。
English: On the 29th, the Mountain Minzhou Iron Castle was set up.

古文：秋七月甲寅，祷雨。
现代文：秋七月初六，祈祷降雨。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, pray for rain.

古文：丁巳，令诸路岁上县令课绩。
现代文：初九，命令全国各路每年上报县令考课政绩情况。
English: On the first day of the ninth month of the year, all roads in the country were ordered to report the political performance of the county examination every year.

古文：辛酉，群臣五上尊号曰奉天宪古文武仁孝皇帝，不许。
现代文：十三日，大臣们五次上表敬献尊号奉天宪古文武仁孝皇帝，神宗没有答应。
English: On the thirteenth day, the ministers five times went to pay their respects to the emperor, but Shenzong did not agree.

古文：乙亥，郭逵以安南失律，贬为左卫将军。
现代文：二十七日，郭连因在安南对自己要求不严，贬为左卫将军。
English: On the 27th, Guo Lian was demoted to General of the Left Division for not being strict with himself in Annan.

古文：丙子，河决澶州曹村埽。
现代文：二十八日，黄河在擅州曹村塌决口。
English: On the 28th, the Yellow River burst its banks in Cao Village, Wanzhou.

古文：八月壬寅，诏潭州置将及增武臣一员。
现代文：八月二十五日，下诏潭州置将及增加武臣一人。
English: On August 25th, the Lower Zhaotan prefecture was reorganized and one more samurai was added.

古文：遣苏颂等贺辽主生辰、正旦。
现代文：派遣苏颂等祝贺辽主生辰和新春。
English: Sending Susong and others to congratulate the Liao Lord on his birthday and the new year.

古文：甲辰，诏侍从、台谏、监司各举文臣有才行者一人。
现代文：二十七日，下诏侍从、台谏、监司分别推举文臣德才兼备的人才一人。
English: On the 27th, the lower eunuch, the eunuch, and the supervisor separately nominated a person who was both a scholar and a man of virtue.

古文：九月庚戌，诏： 河决害民田，所属州县疏瀹，仍蠲其税，老幼疾病者振之。 
现代文：九月初三，下诏： 黄河决口损害民田，所属州县要组织疏导，并免除田税，老幼病弱的人要予给贩济。 
English: On the third day of the first month of September, the following edict was issued: Since the Yellow River's outflow has damaged people's fields, the states and counties to which they belong should organize guidance and exempt them from the field tax. The old, the young, the sick and the weak should be given assistance.

古文：乙卯，诏： 诸传宣、内批、面谕，事无法守，并从中书、枢密覆奏。
现代文：初八，下诏： 皇帝的传宣、内批、面谕，所涉及事宜没有固定的法令可依的，一律听从中书省、枢密院重行上奏后的处理意见。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the following edict was issued: In matters involving the emperor's proclamation, internal approval, and imperial edict, where there is no fixed law to be followed, the opinions of the Central Government, the Ministry of Education, and the Privy Council on the handling of the matter shall be taken into consideration after it is reissued.

古文：其祈恩泽规免罪者劾之。 
现代文：若有祈求恩泽、规免罪行的人，中书省、枢密院要上奏弹勃。 
English: If there are people who pray for grace and pardon of crimes, the Ministry of the People's Republic of China and the Privy Council should play the bugle call.

古文：辛酉，诏镇戎、德顺军各置都监一员。癸酉，立义仓。
现代文：十四日，下诏镇戎军、德顺军各设置都监一人，二十一日，设立义仓。
English: On the 14th, the Zhaozhen army and the Deshun army each set up a governor, and on the 21st, a charity warehouse was set up.

古文：甲戌，宗朴兼侍中，封濮阳郡王。
现代文：二十七日，宗朴兼任侍中，封攫阳郡王。
English: On the 27th, Zong Pak also served as a chamberlain, and was crowned the King of Shenyang County.

古文：冬十月戊寅朔，宗朴薨。
现代文：冬十月初一，宗朴逝世。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Zong Pak passed away.

古文：癸巳，昭化军节度使宗谊封濮国公。
现代文：十六日，封昭化军节度使宗谊为攫国公。
English: On the 16th, the Fei Zhaohua Army Festival made Soyei the prince of Shandong Province.

古文：诏濮王子以次袭封奉祀。
现代文：下诏攫王的儿子按顺序袭封奉祀。
English: In the following, the sons of King Zhaozhang were enshrined in the order of succession.

古文：戊戌，太子太师张昪卒。
现代文：二十一日，太子太师张逝世。
English: On the twenty-first day, Prince Zhang passed away.

古文：十一月庚午，以西蕃邈川首领董毡、都首领青宜结鬼章为廓州刺史，阿令骨为松州刺史。
现代文：十一月二十三日，任命西蕃邀川首领董毡、都首领青宜结鬼章为廓州刺史，阿令骨为松州刺史。
English: On November 23rd, appointed the West Guizhou invited the leader of Sichuan, Dong Xuan, and the leader of the capital, Qingyi, to be the ghost of Guizhou, and the Aling Bone was the ghost of Songzhou.

古文：甲戌，祀天地于圜丘，赦天下。十二月丁丑朔，占城国献驯象。
现代文：二十七日，在圆形高坛上祭祀天地，赦免全国。十二月初一，占城国献上驯象。
English: On the 27th, heaven and earth were sacrificed on the round high altar, and the whole country was pardoned. On the first day of December, the country of Zhancheng presented a tamed elephant.

古文：壬午，诏改明年为元丰。
现代文：初六，下诏改明年为元丰。
English: Junior high school students in the sixth year of junior high school will be changed to junior high school students in the next year.

古文：甲申，以郊祀，文武官加恩。
现代文：初八，因郊祀，文武百官普遍得到恩惠。
English: On the first day of the eighth lunar month, due to the suburb worship, civil and military officials generally received favors.

古文：丁亥，封子佣为均国公。
现代文：十一日，封皇子墉为均国公。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Fon no Miko became Hitokuni no Kimi.

古文：辛丑，辽遣耶律孝淳等来贺正旦。
现代文：二十五日，辽朝派遣使臣耶律孝淳等人来祝贺新春。
English: On the 25th, the Liao dynasty sent envoy Ye Luo Xiao Jun and others to congratulate the new spring.

古文：元丰元年春正月乙卯，以王安石为尚书左仆射、舒国公、集禧观使。
现代文：元丰元年春正月初九，任命王安石为尚书左仆射、舒国公、集禧观使。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of Fengyuan, Wang Anshi was appointed as Shang Shuzo's assistant, Shu Guogong, and Jixi Guanzhi.

古文：戊午，命详定郊庙礼仪。
现代文：十二日，命令详细审定郊庙礼仪。
English: On the 12th, an order was issued to examine the etiquette of suburban temples in detail.

古文：诏减陈留捧日、天武等军剩员。
现代文：下诏减除陈留捧日、天武等军中剩员。
English: In the following edict, the remaining members of the army, including Chen Rüütai, Tianwu, and others, were removed.

古文：庚申，御宣德门，召从臣观灯。
现代文：十四日，到宣德门，召集大臣一起观灯。
English: On the 14th, he went to the Xuande Gate and gathered the ministers to watch the lanterns.

古文：乙丑，以太皇太后疾，驿召天下医者。
现代文：十九日，因太皇太后患病，用骚车在全国招集医生。
English: On the 19th, due to the illness of the Grand Empress Dowager, doctors were summoned from all over the country.

古文：闰月辛巳，以翰林侍读学士、宝文阁学士、提点中太一宫吕公著兼端明殿学士。
现代文：闰正月初六，任命翰林侍读学士、宝文阁学士、提点中太一宫吕公著兼端明殿学士。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the leap year, Hanlin was appointed a bachelor of attendance, a bachelor of Baowen Pavilion, and a bachelor of Taichung Palace and Duanming Palace.

古文：己丑，诏赠尚书令韩琦依赵普故事。
现代文：十四日，下诏赠尚书令韩琦依赵普故事，不另加赠。
English: On the 14th day of the month, the emperor issued an imperial edict to give Han Xuan a copy of Zhao Pu's story, with no additional gifts.

古文：壬辰，枢密直学士孙固同知枢密院事。
现代文：十七日，枢密直学士孙固同知枢密院事。
English: On the 17th, Sun Gu Tongzhi, a Privy Councilor and Direct Scholar, was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：己亥，太傅兼侍中曾公亮薨。
现代文：二十四日，太傅兼侍中曾公亮逝世。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Grand Master and Chamberlain Zeng Gongliang passed away.

古文：庚子，日中有黑子。
现代文：二十五日，太阳上出现黑子。
English: On the 25th, a spot appeared on the sun.

古文：癸卯，以公亮配飨英宗庙庭。
现代文：二十八日，以曾公亮配享英宗庙庭。
English: On the 28th, Zeng Gongliang was assigned to enjoy the Yingzong Temple Garden.

古文：二月庚戌，濮国公宗谊薨。
现代文：二月初五，攫国公宗谊逝世。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, Zeng Guokong passed away.

古文：甲寅，以邕州观察使宗晖为淮康军节度使，封濮国公。
现代文：初九，行命琶州观察使宗晖为淮康军节度使，封攫国公。
English: On the 9th day of the first lunar month, Zonglu, who was sent to observe Wazhou to fulfill his mission, was appointed as the envoy of the Huai Kang Army, and became the crown prince.

古文：戊辰，诏赦安南战棹都监杨从先等，仍论功行赏。
现代文：二十三日，下诏赦免安南战掉都监杨从先等人，并论功行赏。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor pardoned Annan for defeating Metropolitan Yang Congxian and others, and awarded him for his service.

古文：三月辛巳，虑囚，降死罪一等，杖以下释之。
现代文：三月初七，讯察全国囚犯罪行，减轻死罪囚犯罪行一等，杖刑以下全部释放。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month of the year, the crime of prisoners in the whole country was investigated, and the crime of death-penalty prisoners was reduced to the first class, and all of them were released from the cane.

古文：御迩英阁，沈季长进讲《周礼》八法。
现代文：到迩英阁，沈季长进讲凋字巨八法。
English: At the Yu Ying Ge, Shen Qizhong gave a lecture on the eight-syllable Chinese characters.

古文：癸未，诏内外文武官各举堪应武举一人。
现代文：初九，下诏朝廷内外文武官员分别推举可以应试武举人才一人。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the imperial edict decreed that the civil and military officials inside and outside the imperial court should separately select one person who could take the military examination.

古文：广南西路经略司乞教阅峒丁，从之。
现代文：广南西路经略司请求训练酮丁，神宗同意这一请求。
English: Shenzong agreed to a request from the Guangnan West Road Economic Development Bureau to train keto-diners.

古文：乙未，御崇政殿阅诸军。
现代文：二十一日，到崇政殿检阅各军。
English: On the twenty-first day, he went to the Imperial Palace to inspect the troops.

古文：辰、沅贼寇边，州兵击走之。
现代文：辰州、沉州摇贼攻打边境，州兵打退他们。
English: The Chenzhou and Shenzhou ruffians attacked the border, and the National Guard repelled them.

古文：夏四月己酉，辽遣耶律永宁等来贺同天节。
现代文：夏四月初六，辽朝耶律永宁等人来祝贺同天节。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, Liao Dynasty's Yelu Yongning and others came to congratulate the same day's festival.

古文：丙辰，诏增置两浙路提举官。
现代文：十三日，下诏增加设置两浙路提举官。
English: On the 13th, the next edict increased the number of officials to be appointed from two Zhejiang provinces.

古文：庚申，诏除《九经》外，余书不得出界。
现代文：十七日，下诏除九经外，其他书籍不得带出边境。
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued: Except for the Nine Classics, no other books may be taken out of the border.

古文：癸亥，太白昼见。
现代文：二十日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 20th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：乙丑，封虢国公宗谔为豫章郡王。
现代文：二十二日，封貌国公宗愕为豫章郡王。
English: On the 22nd, the enthronement of Guo Gongzong as the king of Yuzhang County.

古文：戊辰，塞曹村决河，名其埽曰灵平。
现代文：二十五日，堵塞黄河在曹村的决口，称其塌为灵平。
English: On the 25th, they blocked the mouth of the Yellow River in Cao Village, claiming that it had collapsed into Lingping.

古文：五月甲戌朔，赐塞河役死家钱。
现代文：五月初一，赐给堵塞黄河工程而死的人家庭钱。
English: On the first day of May, family money was given to the victims of the Yellow River damming project.

古文：乙亥，诏试中刑法官以次推恩。
现代文：初二，下诏考试中刑法官，按顺序等级施加恩惠。
English: In the second year of junior high school, the magistrate judges in the next imperial edict examination, and the grace is imposed according to the order of rank.

古文：六月癸卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初一，日食。
English: In June, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：乙巳，诏以灵平功迁太常博士苗师中等各一官。
现代文：下诏因灵平堵塞黄河决口有功，太常博士苗师中等人分别提升一级官职。
English: According to the following edict, because of Lingping's achievement in blocking the mouth of the Yellow River, Dr. Tai Chang, Miao Shi and other middle-ranking officials were promoted to the first-level official posts.

古文：秋七月癸酉朔，命西上阁门使、忠州团练使韩存宝经制泸州纳溪夷。
现代文：秋七月初一，命令西上阎门使、忠州团练使韩存宝策划处理沪州纳溪夷。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, he ordered the envoy to Yanmen in the west and the envoy to Han Cunbao in Chungju to plan and deal with Naxi in Huzhou.

古文：己亥，诏齐州预备水灾。
现代文：二十七日，下诏齐州做好防灾准备工作。
English: On the 27th, the next order was issued to Qi Prefecture to do a good job in disaster prevention and preparedness.

古文：辛丑，夔州言甘露降。
现代文：二十九日，夔州报告说降甘露。
English: On the 29th, Zhangzhou reported a drop in the amount of nectar.

古文：八月癸卯，西边将讷儿温、禄尊谋反，伏诛。
现代文：八月初二，西部边将内儿温、禄尊策划叛乱被处以死刑。
English: On the second day of August, the western border generals Ne'er Wen and Lu Zun were sentenced to death for plotting a rebellion.

古文：丁未，诏河北被水者蠲其租。
现代文：初六，下诏免除河北遭受水灾百姓的租税。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the following edict exempted the people of Hebei who suffered from floods from paying taxes.

古文：甲寅，遣黄履等贺辽主生辰、正旦。
现代文：十三日，派遣黄履等人祝贺辽主生辰、新春。
English: On the 13th, Huang Lui and others were dispatched to congratulate the Liao Lord on his birthday and the New Year.

古文：戊午，以韩绛为建雄军节度使。
现代文：十七日，任命韩绛为建雄军节度使。
English: On the 17th, Han Zheng was appointed as the chief envoy of the Jianxiong Army.

古文：己巳，诏滨、棣、沧三州被水民以常平粮贷之。
现代文：二十八日，下诏：用常平粮米贷给滨、棣、沧三州遭受水灾的百姓。
English: On the 28th, the following edict was issued: to use the Jangping grain and rice loan to the people who suffered from floods in Bin, Handan and Cangzhou.

古文：庚午，诏青、齐、淄三州给流民食。
现代文：二十九日，下诏：青、齐、淄三州供给流民粮食。
English: On the 29th, the following edict was issued: The three states of Qing, Qi, and Qi should supply grain to the displaced people.

古文：九月癸酉，交阯来贡。
现代文：九月初二，交趾来进贡。
English: On the 2nd day of the 9th month, the tributes started coming in.

古文：癸未，李乾德表乞还广源等州，诏不许。
现代文：十二日，李乾德上表请求回到广源等州，神宗下诏没有允许。
English: On the 12th, Li Qiande petitioned to return to Guangyuan and other provinces, but Shenzong did not allow him to do so.

古文：乙酉，以端明殿学士吕公著、枢密直学士薛向并同知枢密院事。
现代文：十四日，任命端明殿学士吕公著、枢密直学士薛向一起同知枢密院事。
English: On the 14th, Lu Gongzhu and Xue Xiang, academician of Duanming Palace and academician of the Privy Council respectively, were appointed to the Tongzhi Privy Council.

古文：诏祀天地及配帝并用特牲。
现代文：下诏祭祀天地及配享帝王一律用一头牛或一头猪。
English: According to the following edict, a cow or a pig must be used for the sacrifice of heaven and earth and the emperor's allotment.

古文：是月，武康军嘉禾生，河中府甘露降。
现代文：这个月，武康军出现嘉禾，河中府降甘露。
English: This month, the Wukang army appeared in Jiahe, and the capital of Hebei Province fell into chaos.

古文：冬十月庚戌，定秋试诸军赏格。
现代文：冬十月初九，确定秋试各军奖赏标准。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of winter, the award standards for each army in the autumn test will be determined.

古文：侍禁仵全死事，录其弟宣为三班借职。
现代文：侍禁件全为国捐躯，录用他的弟弟宣为三班借职。
English: His brother, Xuan, was hired as a third-shift loan officer.

古文：辛亥，韩存宝破泸夷后城十有三囤。
现代文：初十，韩存宝攻破沪夷后城十四囤。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Han Cunbao broke through the 14 gates of Hujiang Town.

古文：癸亥，于阗来贡。
现代文：二十二日，于闻来进贡。
English: On the 22nd, Yu Wen came to pay tribute.

古文：十一月己丑，命龙图阁直学士宋敏求等详定正旦御殿仪注。
现代文：十一月十九日，命令龙图略直学士宋敏求等人详细审定正月初一上殿仪注。
English: On November 19th, he ordered Song Minqiu, a Longtu Liangzhi scholar, and others to verify in detail the notes of the ceremony of going to the palace on the first day of the first month.

古文：癸巳，辰州贼叛，诏沅州兵讨之。
现代文：二十三日，辰州摇贼叛乱，下诏沉州出兵攻讨。
English: On the 23rd, the rebels in Chenzhou rebelled, and Shenzhou sent troops to fight them.

古文：乙亥，罢文武功臣号。
现代文：二十九日，罢除文武功臣称号。
English: On the 29th, the title of "Civil and Military Meritorious Servant" was revoked.

古文：是月，梁县嘉禾生。
现代文：这个月，梁县出现嘉禾。
English: This month, Jiahe emerged in Liang County.

古文：十二月丙午，日中有黑子，凡十二日。
现代文：十二月初六，太阳中出现黑子，持续十二天。
English: On the sixth day of the twelfth month, a spot appeared in the sun, which lasted for twelve days.

古文：辛亥，录囚，降死罪一等，杖以下释之。
现代文：十一日，讯察全国囚犯罪状，死刑罪犯减刑一等，杖刑以下全部释放。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the status of prisoners in the whole country was inspected, and the death penalty criminals were commuted to the first class, and all of them were released after the caning.

古文：丙辰，诏青州民王赟以复父仇免死，刺配邻州。
现代文：十六日，下诏：青州人王贾因为是为父亲报仇免予处死，刺面发配到邻州。
English: On the 16th, the following edict was issued: Wang Jia, a resident of Qingzhou, was exempted from execution because he was avenging his father, and his face was sent to a neighboring state.

古文：戊午，置大理寺狱。
现代文：十八日，在大理寺审判案件。
English: On the 18th, the case was tried in Dali Temple.

古文：己未，诏罢都大提举在京诸司库务司。
现代文：十九日，下诏罢除都大提举在京各司库务司。
English: On the 19th, the following edict was issued to remove the capital's treasurer in Beijing.

古文：甲子，以婉容邢氏为贤妃。
现代文：二十四日，以婉仪邢氏为贤妃。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, she was crowned as a virtuous empress.

古文：诏罢三司推勘公事官，减军器监勾当公事，审官东院、流内铨及将作监、三班院主簿，左右军巡判官。
现代文：下诏罢除三司推勘公事官；减除军器监勾当公事、审官东院、流内锉及将作监、三班院主簿，左右军巡判官。
English: The following edict was issued to dismiss the three civil servants of the Third Division of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army; to reduce the number of civil servants of the Ordnance Supervision Bureau, the East Court of the People's Liberation Army, the Inner Court of the People's Liberation Army and the Inspector-General of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army, the chief clerks of the three courts of the People's Liberation Army, and the judges of the Left and Right Armies.

古文：丙寅，辽遣耶律隆等来贺正旦。
现代文：二十六日，辽朝派遣耶律隆等人来祝贺新春。
English: On the 26th, the Liao Dynasty sent Jerulong and others to congratulate the New Year.

古文：二年春正月乙亥，罢岢岚、火山军市马。
现代文：元丰二年春正月初五，罢除奇岚、火山军市马。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Yuanfeng Spring, Qichen and the Volcano Army were ousted.

古文：丙子，诏立高丽交易法。
现代文：初六，下诏颁立高丽交易法。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the Koryo Exchange Law was promulgated.

古文：壬午，以容州管内观察使、上柱国、南阳郡开国公杨遂为宁远军节度使。
现代文：十二日，任命容州管内观察使、上柱国、南阳郡开国公杨遂为宁远军节度使。
English: On the 12th, Yang Guoguang of Shangzhu Province and Nanyang County was appointed as the observation envoy of Yongzhou Province, and Yang Guoguang of Ningyuan Army was appointed as the festival envoy.

古文：癸未，诏知沅州谢麟督捕徭贼。
现代文：十三日，下诏沉州知州谢麟督促捕捉摇贼。
English: On the 13th, Shenzhou Chizhou Xie Lin issued an edict to urge the capture of the thief.

古文：甲申，御宣德门观灯。
现代文：十四日，到宣德门观灯。
English: On the 14th, I went to Xuande Gate to watch the lanterns.

古文：丁亥，诏以经义、论试宗室。
现代文：十七日，下诏用经义、论考试宗室。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the following edict was issued in the name of the family.

古文：甲午，京兆府学教授蒋夔乞以十哲从祀孔子，从之。
现代文：二十四日，京兆府学教授蒋夔请求以十哲从祀孔子，神宗同意这一请求。
English: On the 24th, Jiang Wei, a professor of Beijing Shao Prefecture, requested to worship Confucius with ten sages, and Shenzong agreed to this request.

古文：诏辰州叙浦县置龙潭堡。
现代文：下诏辰州叙浦县设置龙潭堡。
English: The following decreed the establishment of Longtan Fort in Xupu County, Chenzhou.

古文：是月，颍州、寿州甘露降。
现代文：这个月，颖州、寿州降甘露。
English: This month, Yingzhou and Shoushou are in full bloom.

古文：二月甲寅，诏瘗汉州暴骸。
现代文：二月十五日，下诏掩埋汉川暴露在外的尸骨。
English: On February 15th, they buried the exposed bones of Hanchuan.

古文：日中有黑子。
现代文：太阳中出现黑子。
English: Spots appear in the sun.

古文：乙卯，以泸州夷乞弟犯边，诏王光祖等讨之。
现代文：十六日，因沪少夷乞弟侵犯边境，下诏王光祖等人率军征讨。
English: On the 16th, due to the encroachment of the border by the Shanghai Shao Yi beggars, Wang Guangzu and others led an army to investigate.

古文：丙辰，诏定解盐岁额。
现代文：十七日，下诏确定解盐一年的产量。
English: On the 17th, the lower edict determined the maximum annual production of salt.

古文：乙丑，沧州饥，发仓粟振之。
现代文：二十六日，沧州饥，调发仓库粮食贩济饥民。
English: On the 26th, Cangzhou was starving, and grain traders from warehouses were dispatched to feed the hungry.

古文：三月庚午朔，董毡遣使来贡。
现代文：三月初一，董毡遣使来进贡。
English: On the first day of March, Dong Xuan sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：辛未，诏给地葬畿内寄菆之丧，无所归者官瘗之。
现代文：初二，下诏辟给土地埋葬京瓷寄居人的尸体，没有归属的人官府负责埋葬。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the following edict was issued to give land for the burial of the bodies of Kyocera sojourners, and the government was responsible for the burial of those who did not belong.

古文：庚辰，亲试礼部进士。
现代文：十一日，亲自策试礼部进士。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he personally organized the entrance examination for the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：壬午，试特奏名进士及武举。
现代文：十三日，考试特奏名进士及武举。
English: On the thirteenth day, the examination special performance of famous students and military exercises were held.

古文：癸未，试诸科明法。赐董毡缗钱、银帛、对衣、金带等物。
现代文：十四日考试各科明法，赐给董毡络钱、银帛、对衣、金带等物品。
English: On the 14th day of the examination of each subject of the Ming Dynasty, Dong Xuanluo was given money, silver ingots, matching clothes, gold belts and other items.

古文：丙戌，诏雄州两输户南徙者谕令复业。
现代文：十七日，下诏：雄州两输户向南迁徙的人，命令他们恢复耕业。
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued: Those who had lost two households in Xiongzhou and migrated south were ordered to resume farming.

古文：庚寅，疏汴、洛。
现代文：二十一日，疏浚汁水、洛水。
English: On the twenty-first day, dredging sap water, Luo water.

古文：夏四月辛丑，幸金明池观水嬉，宴射琼林苑。
现代文：夏四月初三，到金明池观看嬉水，在琼林苑设宴射箭。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of summer, go to the Jinming Pool to watch the playful water, and set up a banquet for archery in Qionglin Garden.

古文：甲辰，辽遣萧晟等来贺同天节。
现代文：初六，辽朝派遣萧晨等人来祝贺同天节。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the Liao Dynasty sent Xiao Chen and others to congratulate the same day.

古文：丁巳，陈升之以检校太尉依前同中书门下平章事、镇江军节度使、上柱国、秀国公致仕。
现代文：十九日，陈升之以检校太尉依前同中书门下平章事、镇江军节度使、上柱国、秀国公的头衔退休。
English: On the 19th, Chen Shengyi retired from the title of inspecting captain in accordance with the previous titles of Zhongshumen Shimo Pingzhangji, Zhenjiang Army, Shangzhu Guo and Hsiu Guo.

古文：己未，陈升之卒。
现代文：二十一日，陈升之去世。
English: On the 21st, Chen Shengzhi passed away.

古文：癸亥，定正旦御殿仪。
现代文：二十五日，确定正月初一上殿礼仪。
English: On the 25th, the etiquette for entering the hall on the first day of the first month was determined.

古文：甲子，诏增审刑院详议、详断官，罢刑部校法官。
现代文：二十六日，下诏增加审刑院详议、详断官，罢除刑部检法官。
English: On the 26th, the next edict increased the detailed deliberation and detailed adjudication officers of the Sentencing and Punishment Court, and removed the procurator of the Criminal Division.

古文：是月，南康军甘露降，眉州生瑞竹。
现代文：这个月，南康军降甘露，眉州出现瑞竹。
English: This month, the Nankang Army dropped nectar, and Mizhu appeared in Meizhou.

古文：五月丙子，顺州蛮叛，峒兵讨平之。
现代文：五月初三，顺州蛮叛乱，酮兵攻讨平定他们。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, there was a violent rebellion in Shunzhou. The Keto soldiers attacked and subdued them.

古文：庚辰，诏以濮安懿王三夫人并称王夫人，祔濮园。
现代文：初七，下诏以攫安爵王三夫人并称王夫人，合葬攫园。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, it was decreed that the third Mrs. Wang, also known as Mrs. Wang, would be buried together in the garden.

古文：辛巳，太子太师致仕赵概上所集《谏林》。
现代文：初八，以太子太师身份退休的赵概呈上所辑集的谏林一书。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Zhao Zi, who retired as the grandmaster of the Etheric, presented the book of Yulin collected above.

古文：甲申，元绛罢知亳州。
现代文：十一日，元绛罢为毫州知州。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Yuancheng was renamed as Wanzhou Zhizhou.

古文：乙酉，诏安南军死事孤寡廪给之。
现代文：十二日，下诏：安南军中为国捐躯家庭的孤寡老人由官府供给粮食。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the following edict was issued: lonely old people of families who died for the country in Annan's army would be provided with grain by the government.

古文：戊子，御史中丞蔡确参知政事。
现代文：十五日，御史中承蔡确参知政事。
English: On the 15th, Cai Jizhen, the heir to the throne, took part in the political affairs.

古文：六月甲辰，广西捕斩侬智春，执其妻子以献。
现代文：六月初七，广西捕获斩杀侬智春，并抓获他的妻子献给朝廷。
English: On June 7, Guangxi captured and killed Nong Zhichun, and captured his wife and presented her to the imperial court.

古文：戊申，命蔡确参定编修《传法宝录》。
现代文：十一日，命令蔡确参加审定编修传法宝录。
English: On the 11th day, Cai Jizhen was ordered to participate in the verification and editing of the book.

古文：癸丑，诏五路帅臣、副总管军臣僚各举任将领及大使臣者二人。
现代文：十六日，诏令五路帅臣、副总管军臣僚各自推举二名担任将领及大使臣的人。
English: On the 16th, it was decreed that the five generals and vice-commanders and vice-ministers of war would each nominate two people to serve as general and ambassador.

古文：甲寅，清汴成。
现代文：十七日，清汁修成。
English: On the 17th, the clear juice was refined.

古文：辛酉，诏镇宁军节度使、魏国公宗懿追封舒王。
现代文：二十四日，下诏追封镇宁军节度使、魏国公宗爵为舒王。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the imperial edict was issued to enthrone the Zhenning Army's ceremonial envoy and the prince of Wei as King Shu.

古文：是月，南康军甘露降，忠州雨豆。
现代文：这个月，南康军降甘露，忠州降豆。
English: This month, Nankang Army dropped nectar and Chungju Army dropped beans.

古文：秋七月甲戌，张方平以太子少师致仕。
现代文：秋七月初八，张方平以太子少师头衔退休。
English: On the eighth day of the seventh month of autumn, Zhang Fangping retired with the title of Etheric Minor.

古文：戊寅，详定朝会仪。
现代文：十二日，详细审定朝会礼仪。
English: On the 12th, the etiquette of the Imperial Court Reunion was verified in detail.

古文：己卯，命中书句考四方诏狱。
现代文：十三日，命令中书省仔细核察全国各地奉诏令关押囚犯的案件。
English: On the 13th, the Ministry of Education and Culture was ordered to carefully examine the cases of prisoners detained by imperial decree throughout the country.

古文：庚辰，以淮康军节度使宗晖同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十四日，任命淮康军节度使宗晖同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 14th, the appointment of the Huai Kang Army's festival envoy Zong Yu to the Chinese Academy of Letters was made.

古文：丁亥，详定郊庙礼仪。
现代文：二十一日，详细确定郊庙礼仪。
English: On the twenty-first day, the suburb temple etiquette was determined in detail.

古文：是月，陈州芝草生，南宾县雨豆，琼州甘露降。
现代文：这个月，陈州出现芝草，南宾县降豆，琼州降甘露。
English: This month, grass appeared in Chenzhou, beans fell in Nanbin County, and nectar fell in Qiongzhou.

古文：八月丙申朔，夏人寇绥德城，都监李浦败之。
现代文：八月初一，夏人攻打绥德城，都监李浦打败夏军。
English: On the first day of August, the Xia people attacked Shunde City, and Li Pu, the governor of the city, defeated the Xia army.

古文：辛丑，分泾原路兵为十一将。
现代文：初六，分径原路兵力为十一将。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the division of the original road was increased to 11 generals.

古文：壬寅，复八作司为东、西两司，各置监官，文臣一员、武臣二员。
现代文：初七，恢复八作司为东西两司，分别设置监官，文臣一名，武臣二名。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the eight divisions were restored as two divisions, east and west, with a supervisor, a civil servant, and two military officers respectively.

古文：遣李清臣等贺辽主生辰、正旦。
现代文：派遣李清臣等人祝贺辽主生辰、正旦。
English: Li Qingchen and others were dispatched to congratulate Liao on the birth of his son, Zhengdan.

古文：甲寅，诏： 增太学生舍为八十斋，斋三十人。外舍生二千人，内舍生三百人。
现代文：十九日，下诏： 增加太学生斋舍为八十，每斋三十人，外舍生名额二千人，内舍生名额三百人。
English: On the 19th, the following edict was issued: The number of student dormitories was increased to 80, with 30 students per dormitory, and the number of non-student dormitories was increased to 2,000, and the number of student dormitories was increased to 300.

古文：月一私试，岁一公试，补内舍生。
现代文：每月举行由本学长官出题的考试，每年终举行由朝廷差官主考的考试，成绩合格的升补为内舍生。
English: Examinations with questions proposed by the president of the university are held every month, and the final exam is held every year by an imperial court official. Students who pass the exam are promoted.

古文：间岁一舍试，补上舍生。 
现代文：内舍生隔一年举行舍试，成绩优秀的补为上舍生。 
English: In the second year, the students of Inner Renunciation will take the Renunciation Examination, and the students of Upper Renunciation will be promoted to Upper Renunciation if their grades are excellent.

古文：以颍州为顺昌军节度。
现代文：命令颖州为顺昌军节度。
English: Yingzhou was ordered to be a fortress for the Shunchang army.

古文：是月，曹州生瑞谷，河阳生芝草。
现代文：这个月，曹州出现瑞谷，河阳出现芝草。
English: This month, Zuigu appeared in Caozhou, and Zhigusa appeared in Heyang.

古文：九月癸未，降顺昌军囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：九月十八日，顺昌军囚犯减刑一等，徒刑以下全部释放。
English: On September 18th, the Shunchang Army prisoners received a first-class commutation of sentence and were all released from prison.

古文：甲申，西南龙蕃来贡。
现代文：十九日，西南龙蕃来进贡。
English: On the 19th, Southwest Longyan paid tribute.

古文：丁亥，大宴集英殿。
现代文：二十二日，在集英殿举行大规模宴会。
English: On the 22nd, a large-scale banquet was held at Shueiden.

古文：己丑，进婕妤朱氏为昭容。
现代文：二十四日，进宫中女官婕好朱氏为昭容。
English: On the twenty-fourth day of the month, the court lady, Zou Hao Zhu, came to the palace.

古文：壬辰，出《马步射格斗法》颁诸军。
现代文：二十七日，颁布冯步射格斗念给各军。
English: On the twenty-seventh day, Feng Buxiao issued a call to arms to all the armies.

古文：甲午，西南罗蕃、方蕃来贡。
现代文：二十九日，西南罗蕃、方蕃来进贡。
English: On the 29th, Southwestern Luo and Fangyuan came to pay tribute.

古文：冬十月丙申，西南石蕃来贡。
现代文：冬十月初一，西南石蕃来进贡。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, tributes came from as far away as Southwestern Shikotsu.

古文：癸卯，置籍田令。
现代文：初八，制定籍田令。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the Shikiden Order was established.

古文：诏立水居船户，五户至十户为一甲。
现代文：下诏确立水居船户，五户至十户为一甲。
English: The following edict established that the number of households living on boats should be increased from five to ten.

古文：戊申，交阯归所掠民，诏以顺州赐之。
现代文：十三日，交趾归还所掳掠的百姓，下诏给交趾顺州。
English: On the 13th, Koji returned the abducted people and issued an edict to Koji Shonshu.

古文：己酉，太皇太后疾，上不视事。
现代文：十四日，太皇太后患病，神宗不上朝听政。
English: On the 14th, the great empress dowager fell ill, and Shinso did not go to the court to listen to politics.

古文：庚戌，罢朝谒景灵宫，命辅臣祷于天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：十五日，罢除对景灵宫的朝拜，命令辅臣在天地、宗庙、社翟祈祷。
English: On the fifteenth day, the worship of the Jingling Palace was abolished, and the vassals were ordered to pray in heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the shrine.

古文：减天下囚死罪一等，流以下释之。
现代文：全国死罪犯人减刑一等，流刑以下全部释放。
English: Nationwide, death-row prisoners will have their sentences reduced to the first class, and all of them will be released after being exiled.

古文：乙卯，太皇太后崩。
现代文：二十日，太皇太后逝世。
English: On the 20th, the Grand Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：戊午，诏易太皇太后园陵曰山陵。
现代文：二十三日，下诏把太皇太后园陵改名为山陵。
English: On the 23rd, the imperial edict changed the name of the garden mausoleum of the great empress dowager to the mountain mausoleum.

古文：辛酉，以群臣七上表，始听政。
现代文：二十六日，因大臣们七次上表，才上朝听政。
English: On the 26th, due to the fact that the ministers had to go to the table seven times, they only went to the court to listen to the government.

古文：命王珪为山陵使。
现代文：任命巨盖为山陵使。
English: He appointed Juguai as the mountain mausoleum envoy.

古文：十一月癸未，始御崇政殿。
现代文：十一月十九日，开始到崇政殿。
English: On November 19th, they started to go to the Suisho-den.

古文：丁亥，雨土。
现代文：二十三日，天降土。
English: On the 23rd, the sky fell.

古文：十二月乙巳，御史中丞李定上《国子监敕式令》并《学令》凡百四十条。
现代文：十二月十一日，御史中承李定呈上咽子监救式令和学令，共一百四十条。
English: On December 11th, Zhi Zhong Cheng Li Ding presented the Shanglangzi Supervision and Rescue Order and School Order, a total of one hundred and forty articles.

古文：丙午，复置御史六察。
现代文：十二日，恢复设置御史六察。
English: On the 12th, the establishment of Goshi Rokkasho was resumed.

古文：庚申，辽遣萧宁等来贺正旦。
现代文：二十六日，辽朝派遣萧宁等人来祝贺新春。
English: On the 26th, Liao Dynasty sent Xiaoning and others to congratulate the new year.

古文：是月，全州芝草生，桂州甘露降。
现代文：这个月，全州出现芝草，桂州降甘露。
English: This month, fenugreek appeared all over the state, and nectarine fell in Guizhou.

