古文：◎世宗下二十一年正月戊申朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：大定二十一年正月初一，宋国、高丽、夏国分别派遣使者前来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the twenty-first year of Dading, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate the new emperor.

古文：壬子，以夏国请，诏复绥德军榷场，仍许就馆市易。
现代文：初五，因为夏国请求，皇上诏令恢复绥德军贸易市场，仍然允许就馆市贸易。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, because of Xia Guo's request, the emperor issued an imperial edict to restore the Shandong-German military trade market, still allowing trade in the pavilion city.

古文：上闻山东、大名等路猛安谋克之民，骄纵奢侈，不事耕稼。诏遣阅实，计口授地，必令自耕，地有余而力不赡者，方许招人租佃，仍禁农时饮酒。
现代文：皇上听说山东、大名等路猛安谋克的平民，骄纵奢侈，不从事耕稼，下诏派人去查看落实，统计人口分配土地，命令他们必须自己耕种，地有余而劳力不足的，才允许招人租佃，仍然禁止农忙时节饮酒。
English: The emperor heard that the commoners in Shandong, daimyo, and other places were living in opulence, indulging in luxury and not engaged in farming. He issued an edict to send people to check the implementation, count the population, allocate land, and order them to cultivate their own land. If they had more land but not enough labor, they were allowed to hire people to rent plows. Drinking alcohol during the busy farming season was still prohibited.

古文：丙辰，追贬海陵炀王亮为庶人，诏中外。
现代文：九日，追贬海陵炀王亮为庶人，并诏告中外。
English: On the 9th, Hai Ling Xuan Wang Liang was downgraded to a commoner, and this was announced to the public.

古文：甲子，如春水。
现代文：十七日，皇上到春水去。
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor went to Chunshui.

古文：丙子，次永清县。
现代文：二十九日，到达永清县。
English: On the 29th, it arrived at Yongqing County.

古文：有移剌余里也者，契丹人也，隶虞王猛安，有一妻一妾。妻之子六，妾之子四。
现代文：有一个叫移剌余里也的，是契丹族人，隶属虞王猛安，他有一妻一妾，妻生了六个儿子，妾生了四个儿子。
English: There was a man called Yigong Yuliya, a member of the Khitan tribe, who belonged to Yu Wang Meng'an. He had a wife and a concubine. His wife gave birth to six sons, and his concubine gave birth to four sons.

古文：妻死，其六子庐墓下，更宿守之。
现代文：妻死了，他的六个儿子在墓下盖了个棚，轮换在里面住宿守墓。
English: After his wife died, his six sons built a shed under the grave and took turns to stay there and guard the grave.

古文：妾之子皆曰： 是嫡母也，我辈独不当守坟墓乎？ 于是，亦更宿焉，三岁如一。
现代文：妾的儿子都说 是嫡母，我辈不应当守坟墓吗 ，于是，也轮换宿在墓下，三年如一日。
English: The concubine's sons all said that she was the legitimate mother, shouldn't we guard the grave, so they also took turns to live under the grave, three years like a day.

古文：上因猎，过而闻之，赐钱五百贯，仍令县官积钱于市，以示县民，然后给之，以为孝子之劝。
现代文：皇上因为打猎，路过这里听说了这件事，赐给他们五百贯钱，还命令县官在市场上募集钱，并用来向县里人民昭示，然后也把钱给了他们，用来作为对孝子的劝勉。
English: The emperor, who was passing by because he was hunting, heard about the incident and gave them five hundred crowns. He also ordered the county officials to collect money in the market and use it to show the people of the county, and then he also gave them the money to use as an exhortation to the filial son.

古文：二月戊戌，太白昼见。
现代文：二月二十一日，太白星白日显现。
English: On February 21, the Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：庚子，还都。
现代文：二十三日，返回京都。
English: On the 23rd, he returned to Kyoto.

古文：壬寅，以河南尹张景仁为御史大夫。
现代文：二十五日，任命河南尹张景仁为御史大夫。
English: On the 25th, Yin Zhang Jingren of Henan Province was appointed as the chief historian.

古文：乙巳，以元妃李氏之丧，致祭兴德宫，过市肆不闻乐声，谓宰臣曰： 岂以妃故禁之耶？
现代文：二十八日，因为元妃李氏的丧事，到兴德宫祭奠，经过市肆听不到乐声，对宰相大臣说： 难道是因为元妃逝世的缘故而禁止音乐的吗？
English: On the 28th, because of the funeral of the former Empress Li, he went to the Xingde Palace to pay tribute. After passing through the city, he could not hear the music and said to the Prime Minister: Is it because of the death of the former Empress that music is prohibited?

古文：细民日作而食，若禁之是废其生计也，其勿禁。
现代文：佃民日作而食，如果禁止是废了他们的生计了，不要禁止这个。
English: People work for a living. If a ban is going to destroy their livelihood, don't ban this.

古文：朕前将诣兴德宫，有司请由蓟门，朕恐妨市民生业，特从他道。
现代文：朕将到兴德宫，有司请经由蓟门，朕恐怕妨碍市民生计营业，特地选走别的道路。
English: I will go to the Xingde Palace. If there is a division, please go through the gate. I am afraid that I will hinder the livelihood of citizens, so I will choose another road.

古文：顾见街衢门肆，或有毁撤，障以帘箔，何必尔也。
现代文：回头看见街道门面，有的撤毁，用帘箔遮障，何必这样做呢。
English: When I look back, I see the street facades, some of which have been torn down, shielded with curtain foil. Why do we have to do this?

古文：自今勿复毁撤。 
现代文：从今以后不要再拆毁门面了。 
English: From now on, don't tear down the facade.

古文：三月丁未朔，万春节，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：三月一日，是万春节，宋国、高丽、夏国分别派遣使者前来祝贺。
English: On March 1st, the Spring Festival, Song, Goryeo and Xia sent envoys to congratulate each other.

古文：上初闻蓟、平、滦等州民乏食，命有司发粟粜之，贫不能籴或贷之。
现代文：皇上刚听说蓟、平、滦等州百姓缺乏粮食，就命令有司发放卖出粮食，贫穷不能买进的可以赁贷。
English: As soon as the emperor heard that the people in the states of Yao, Ping and Yao were short of grain, he ordered the departments to distribute and sell grain. Those who were too poor to buy grain could borrow grain.

古文：有司以贷贫民恐不能偿，止贷有户籍者。
现代文：有司因为恐怕贷给贫民不能偿还，只贷给有户籍的。
English: Some officials, fearing that loans to the poor would not be repaid, lent only to those with household registration.

古文：上至长春宫，闻之，更遣人阅实，赈贷。
现代文：皇上到达长春宫，听说这件事，改派人去查证落实，下令赈济贷粮。
English: When the emperor arrived at Changchun Palace, he heard about this matter, sent someone to verify and implement it, and ordered to subsidize grain loans.

古文：以监察御史石抹元礼、郑达卿不纠举，各笞四十，前所遣官皆论罪。
现代文：因为监察御史石抹元礼、郑达卿不纠正不举报，各杖笞四十，以前所派遣去贷粮的官员都按有罪论处。
English: Because the supervisors of history, Shi Makuyuanli and Zheng Daqing, did not correct or report, and each stick was worth forty, the officials who had previously been sent to borrow grain were all convicted.

古文：甲子，太白昼见。乙丑，诏山后冒占官地十顷以上者皆籍入官，均给贫民。
现代文：十九日，皇上诏令山后原被皇亲冒占的土地凡十顷以上的都登记入官，然后均给贫民。
English: On the 19th, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering that all land over ten hectares that had been occupied by the imperial family be registered with the government and then given to the poor.

古文：辽州民朱忠等乱言，伏诛。
现代文：辽州平民朱忠等人煽动叛乱，伏法被诛。
English: Zhu Zhong, a civilian from Liaozhou, and others instigated a rebellion and were arrested.

古文：上谓宰臣曰： 近闻宗州节度使阿思懑行事多不法，通州刺史完颜守能既与招讨职事，犹不守廉。
现代文：皇上对宰相大臣说 ：最近听说宗州节度使阿思懑做事大多不遵守法令，通州刺史完颜守能已经被任命了招讨的职事，还是不自觉守廉。
English: The Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "Recently, I heard that the Zongzhou Festival has caused the majority of Asiya's work to not comply with the law, and that Tongzhou's chief historian, Yan Shou Neng, has been appointed to the post of solicitor, but he still does not consciously keep a low profile.

古文：达官贵要多行非理，监察未尝兴劾。
现代文：达官贵族显要人物多行非理的事，监察不曾举报弹劾。
English: Government officials, aristocrats, and prominent figures have often done unreasonable things, and the supervision has never reported impeachment.

古文：斡睹只群牧副使仆散那也取部人二球仗，至细事也，乃便劾奏。
现代文：斡睹只群牧副使仆散那也拿了部人两只球杖，是极细微的事，却马上劾奏。
English: It is a very minor matter to see that the deputy herdsman of the herdsmen has also taken two clubs from his subordinate, but it is immediately impeached.

古文：谓之称职，可乎？
现代文：说他们称职，可以吗？
English: Is it OK to say that they are competent?

古文：今监察职事修举者与迁擢，不称者，大则降罚，小则决责，仍不许去官。 
现代文：现在监察职事中称职的要给予迁升，不称职的，大到降职处罚，小到批评斥责，仍然没有让离职。 
English: At present, supervisors who are competent are to be promoted, and those who are incompetent are to be punished with demotion, and those who are not competent are to be criticized and reprimanded, but they are still not dismissed.

古文：闰月己卯，恩州民邹明等乱言，伏诛。辛卯，渔阳令夹谷移里罕、司候判官刘居渐以被命赈贷，止给富户，各削三官，通州刺史郭邦杰总其事，夺俸三月。
现代文：闰三月十五日，渔阳令夹谷移里罕、司候判官刘居渐因为受命赈济贷粮，只给富户，各被削去三级官职；通州刺史郭邦杰总管这件事，被剥夺三个月的俸禄。
English: On the 15th day of the 3rd month of the leap year, Yuyang ordered Zhegu to move to Lihang, and Liu Juqian, the judge-in-waiting, was each removed from his third-level official position because he was ordered to subsidize grain loans and only give them to rich households. Guo Bangjie, the head of the Tongzhou District Court, was deprived of his salary for three months.

古文：乙未，上谓宰臣曰： 朕观自古人君多进用谗谄，其间蒙蔽，为害非细，若汉明帝尚为此辈惑之。
现代文：十九日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 朕观察自古以来为君的多进用其间受蒙蔽，为害不小，比如汉明帝尚且被此辈所迷惑。
English: On the 19th, the emperor said to the prime minister: "I have observed that since ancient times, the more you advance, the more you are deceived, and the harm is not small. For example, Emperor Han Ming was still confused by this generation.

古文：朕虽不及古之明君，然近习谗言，未尝入耳。
现代文：朕虽然赶不上古代的明君，然而最近一些谗言，不曾入耳。
English: Although I can't keep up with the ancient Ming Dynasty, some of the recent criticisms have fallen on deaf ears.

古文：至于宰辅之臣，亦未尝偏用一人私议也。 
现代文：至于宰相辅佐大臣，也不曾偏用他们中伤某人的私议。 
English: As for the Prime Minister and the Vice-Minister, they never used their private discussions to slander someone.

古文：癸卯，以尚书左丞相完颜守道为太尉、尚书令，尚书左丞蒲察通为平章政事，右丞襄为左丞，参知政事张汝弼为右丞，彰德军节度使梁肃为参知政事。
现代文：大定二十二年三月七日，命令尚书省重申勒令西北路招讨司勒猛安谋克官督促部人习武常备。十四日，告诉户部，今年巡行山后，所需费用不得从民间收取，所需用的民夫，一并用官钱去商议雇用，违反者笞杖八十，并免除职务。
English: On the 14th, he told the Household Department that after the parade this year, the required fees should not be collected from the people, and the people who needed to be used should be hired together with the government money, and those who violated the law would be fined 80 yuan and relieved of their duties.

古文：四月戊申，以右丞相徒单克宁为左丞相，平章政事唐括安礼为右丞相。
现代文：六月一日，议定凡订有解放期限的奴隶，在做奴隶的期限内娶良家妇女为妻，所生男孩女孩都是良人。八日，任期已满的右丞相石琚逝世。
English: On the first day of June, it was agreed that all slaves whose emancipation period had been set would marry a woman from a good family within the period of being a slave, and the boys and girls born would be good people. On the eighth day, Ujisho Seki, whose term of office had expired, died.

古文：增筑泰州、临潢府等路边堡及屋宇。
现代文：九月二十一日，因为同知东京留守司事裔在任专断恣横，失去上下之分，贬谪他为复州刺史。
English: On September 21st, he was demoted to Fuzhou's history because his acquaintance, Tokyo's absent secretary, who was in office at the time, was arbitrary and lost the upper and lower points.

古文：庚戌，奉安昭祖以下三福三宗御容于衍庆宫，行亲祀礼。
现代文：二十七日，寿州刺史讹里也、同知查剌、军事判官孙绍先、榷场副使韩仲英等人因为收受商人赂贿而放纵违禁物资出界，都被处死。十一月九日，东京留守徒单贞因为和海陵谋划叛逆，伏法被杀。
English: On the 27th, Shuzhou's Shishiriya, his confidant Zhaojun, military judge Sun Shaoqian, and deputy envoy Han Zhongying were all executed for accepting bribes from merchants and allowing prohibited materials to leave the country. On November 9th, Tokyo's left-behind disciple Shan Zhen was killed for plotting a rebellion with Hai Ling.

古文：以大理正纥石主列速为横赐高丽使，壬戌，幸寿安宫，剌有司为民祷雨。
现代文：他的妻永平县主、儿子慎思一并被赐死。大定二十三年正月十一日，参知政事梁肃任满辞官。十五日，广乐园灯山失火。
English: His wife, the head of Yongping County, and his son, Shen Si I, were sentenced to death. On the 11th day of the first month of the 23rd year of Dading, the councillor and politician Liang Sui resigned. On the 15th day, Guangyuan Lantern Mountain caught fire.

古文：是夕，雨。五月庚午，县令大雏讹只等十人以不任职罢归。六十以上者进官两阶，六十以下者进官一阶，并给半俸。
现代文：五月七日，县令大雏讹只等十人因为不任职而罢除回乡，皇上决定对于其中六十岁以上的人进官两级，六十岁以下的进官一级，并发给二分之一的薪俸。
English: On May 7th, only ten people, including the county magistrate, were dismissed from their posts and returned to their hometowns. The emperor decided to promote those over the age of sixty to the second grade, and those under the age of sixty to the first grade, and to give them one-half of their salaries.

古文：甲戌，命应部除官尝以罪罢而再叙者，遣使按其治迹，如有善状，方许授以县令，无治状者，不以任数多少，并不得授。丁亥，雷，雨雹，地生白毛。六月壬子，有司奏右司郎中段珪卒，上曰： 是人甚明正，可用者也。
现代文：六月十九日，有司禀奏右司郎中段皀逝世。
English: On June 19th, a member of the orchestra, Utsuro Chudan, passed away.

古文：如知登闻检院巨构，每事但委顺而已。
现代文：皇上说： 这个人很是清明廉正，是个可以任用的人。如果知道登闻检院巨构，每当遇到事情委曲顺从而已。
English: The emperor said: This person is very clean and honest, and is a person who can be appointed. If you know the huge structure of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, whenever you encounter a matter, you will be able to solve it.

古文：燕人自古忠直者鲜，辽兵至则从辽，宋人至则从宋，本朝至则从本朝，其俗诡随，有自来矣！
现代文：燕人自古忠直的少见，辽兵到来就顺从辽国，宋人到来就顺从宋国，本朝到就顺从本朝，他的风俗诡变随时，从来就是这样的。
English: Yan people have been rare in their loyalty since ancient times. When the Liao soldiers arrived, they obeyed the Liao state, when the Song people arrived, they obeyed the Song state, and when the Song dynasty arrived, they obeyed the Song dynasty. His customs are subject to change at any time. It has always been like this.

古文：虽屡经迁变而未尝残破者，凡以此也。
现代文：虽然屡次经过变迁而不曾残破的原因，大概就在于此。
English: This is probably the reason why it has gone through many transformations but has never been destroyed.

古文：南人劲挺，敢言直谏者多，前有一人见杀，后复一人谏之，甚可尚也。 
现代文：南人刚劲挺拔，敢言直谏的人多，前面有一个人被杀，后面又有一个人出来谏议，很应该崇尚的。 
English: There are many South Koreans who are tough and forthright, who dare to speak their minds. One person was killed in front of them, and another person came out to argue behind them. This is something that should be admired.

古文：闰月甲午，上谓宰臣曰： 帝王之政，固以宽慈为德，然如梁武帝专务宽慈，以至纲纪大坏。
现代文：又说 ：昨天晚间酷热，朕通宵不能睡眠，于是惦念老百姓房屋相连，互相遮挡，怎么能得到安处！ 
English: He also said: "It was very hot yesterday evening, I couldn't sleep all night, so I thought about how people's houses are connected and block each other, how can I get a safe place!

古文：朕尝思之，赏罚不滥，即是宽政也，余复何为？ 
现代文：八月三日，在东郊视察庄稼。把女真文字的《孝经》一千部交付点检司分别赐给护卫亲军。
English: On August 3, he inspected the crops in the eastern suburbs. He gave 1,000 copies of the "Filial Piety Sutra" in the Jurchen script to the inspectors at the delivery point.

古文：以尚书左丞襄为平章政事，右丞张汝弼为左丞，参知政事粘割斡特剌为右丞，礼部尚书张汝霖为参知政事。
现代文：九月七日，译经所进献所译的《易经》、《书经》、《论语》、《孟子》、《老子》、《扬子》、《文中子》、《刘子》以及《新唐书》。
English: On September 7th, the Institute of Biblical Translation presented the translations of "I Ching," "Book of Songs," "Analects," "Mencius," "Lao Tzu," "Yang Tzu," "Wen Zhong Zi," "Liu Zi" and "New Tang Dynasty."

古文：以西京留守婆庐火等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：皇上对宰相大臣说： 朕所以命令翻译《五经》的原因，正是想让女真人知道仁义道德所在罢了。 命令颁布发行《五经》。
English: The Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "The reason why I ordered the translation of the Five Classics is that I want people to know the essence of benevolence, righteousness, and morality.

古文：制外任官尝为宰执者，凡吏牍上省部，依亲王例，免书名。
现代文：闰十一月三日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 帝王的为政之道，固然把宽容慈爱作为德政，然而梁武帝专门注重宽容慈爱，却使纲纪遭致很大破坏。
English: On the third day of the eleventh month, the emperor said to the prime minister: Although the emperor's way of doing politics is to regard tolerance and benevolence as a virtue, Emperor Liangwu paid special attention to tolerance and benevolence, but caused great damage to discipline.

古文：戊午，岁星昼见。上谓宰臣曰： 女直进士可依汉儿进士补省令史。
现代文：朕曾经思考这其中的道理，赏罚不滥，就是宽政，其余还有什么是宽政？ 二十七日，皇上对宰相大臣说 ：女真族进士可以依照汉人进士补省令史。
English: On the 27th, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "Female Jin scholars can supplement the history of the province in accordance with Han scholars.

古文：夫儒者操行清洁，非礼不行。
现代文：有学问的儒者操行清洁，无礼的事不做。
English: A learned Confucian behaves cleanly and does not do rude things.

古文：丙戌，以东上阁门使完颜进儿等为高丽敕祭使，西上阁门使大仲尹为慰问使，虞王府长史永明为起复使，以器物局使皞为横赐夏国使。
现代文：因为是官宦人家出身的，自幼是官吏，平时学习恋于书写，到了当官的时候，习惯性情不能更改。政道的兴废，实在是由于这个原因。 二十九日，尚书省左司员外郎徐伟禀奏事情，皇上对宰相大臣说： 这个人单纯而干练，右司郎中郭邦杰正直而急躁。 十二月十三日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 海陵自认为失道，害怕上京的宗室群起而图谋他，所以不问疏远的还是亲近的，一并把他们迁徙到南方。
English: On the 29th, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "This man is simple and capable, while the Right Secretary, Guo Bangjie, is honest and impetuous." On the 13th of December, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "Hailing thinks he has lost his way, and is afraid that his parents, who have come to Tokyo, will try to find him, so he has moved them all to the south, regardless of whether they are distant or close.

古文：三月庚寅朔，万春节，宋、夏遣使来贺。甲午，以上将如上京，尚书省奏定 皇太子守国诸仪 。
现代文：难道不是拿汉光武、宋康王的疏庶得继大统，所以有这样的心思。过于忧虑到这种地步，多么荒谬！ 大定二十四年三月五日，因为皇上将到上京去，尚书省上奏请皇上审定《皇太子守国诸仪》。
English: Isn't it because of the succession of Han Guangwu and Song Kang Wang, that there is such a thought. Too worried to such a degree, how absurd! On March 5, 1924, because the emperor will go to Beijing, Shangshu Province requested the emperor to review the "Crown Prince Guarding the State Ceremonies."

古文：丙申，尚书省进 皇太子守国宝 ，上召皇太子授之，且谕之曰： 上京祖宗兴王之寺，欲与诸王一到，或留三二年，以汝守国。
现代文：七日，尚书省进献 皇太子守国宝 ，皇上召见皇太子授给他，并且告诉他说： 上京是祖宗兴创王室的地方，想和诸王会和一道，或许在那里留住三、二年，让你守国。
English: On the seventh day, the Ministry of Education and Culture presented the crown prince with the national treasure, and the emperor summoned the crown prince to present it to him, and told him: Going to Beijing is the place where the ancestors founded the royal family, and I want to work with the kings, and perhaps stay there for three or two years, so that you can protect the country.

古文：譬之农家种田，商人营财，但能不坠父业，即为克家子，况社稷任重，尤宜畏慎。
现代文：比如农家种田，商人营财，只要能不丢失父辈的基业，即是克家子，况且社稷责任重大，尤其应当小心谨慎。
English: For example, if a farmer cultivates farmland or a businessman makes money, as long as he can not lose the inheritance of his parents, he is a son of the family. Moreover, he has great social responsibility, and he should be especially careful.

古文：常时观汝甚谨，今日能纾朕优，乃见中心孝也。 
现代文：平时观察你很谨慎，今天能分担朕忧，才显出你心中的孝敬了。 
English: I usually observe that you are very cautious, but today I can share my worries, which shows the filial piety in your heart.

古文：皇太子再三辞让，以不谙政务，乞备扈从。
现代文：皇太子再三推辞谦让，以不熟悉政务为理由，乞求随驾护从。
English: The crown prince repeatedly refused to make concessions, citing his lack of familiarity with government affairs as the reason, and begged the escort to follow him.

古文：上曰： 政事无甚难，但用心公正，毋纳谗邪，久之自熟。 
现代文：皇上说： 政事没有什么难的，只要用心公正，不要听信谗言，时间久了自然就熟悉了。 
English: The emperor said: There is nothing difficult about politics, as long as you are fair-minded and don't listen to gossip. After a long time, you will naturally become familiar with it.

古文：皇太子流涕，左右皆为之感动。
现代文：皇太子哭泣流涕，左右的人都被这个场面感动了。
English: The crown prince wept profusely, and everyone around him was moved by the scene.

古文：皇太子乃受宝。
现代文：皇太子才接受了 守国宝 。
English: The crown prince only accepted the role of national treasure.

古文：丁酉，如山陵。
现代文：八日，皇上到山陵。
English: On the eighth day, the emperor went to the mausoleum.

古文：己亥，还都。
现代文：十日，返回京都。
English: On the 10th, he returned to Kyoto.

古文：壬寅，如上京。
现代文：十三日，皇上动身到上京去。
English: On the 13th, the Emperor left for Kyoto.

古文：皇太子允恭守国。
现代文：皇太子允恭守国。
English: Crown Prince Ingyo took over the defense of the country.

古文：癸卯，宰执以下奉辞于通州。
现代文：十四日，宰执以下官员侍奉到通州与皇上辞别。
English: On the 14th, the officials below the head servant went to Tongzhou to bid farewell to the emperor.

古文：上谓宰执曰： 卿辈皆故老，皇太子守国，宜悉心辅之，以副朕意。 
现代文：皇上对宰执说 ：卿等都是老臣，皇太子守国，应该尽心辅助他，这才符合朕的心意。 
English: The emperor said to the vice-regent, "Sir, you are an old retainer, and the crown prince is defending the country. You should do your best to assist him. This is what I want.

古文：又谓枢密使徒单克宁曰： 朕巡省之后，脱或有事，卿必亲之。毋忽细微，大难图也。 
现代文：又对枢密使徒单克宁说 ：朕巡省之后，或者会有什么事发生，卿一定要亲自处理，不要忽略细微之处，贻误了大事。 
English: He also said to the Privy Apostle Shan Kening: After my inspection of the province, or if something happens, my lord must deal with it personally, do not ignore the subtleties, and miss the big things.

古文：又顾六部官曰： 朕闻省部文字多以小不合而驳之，苟求自便，致累岁不能结绝，朕甚恶之。
现代文：又回头看着六部官说： 朕听说省部的文书大多因为不合要求而驳回去了，苛求下面而求自己方便，致使多年不能了结断绝，朕很讨厌这样做。
English: Looking back at the six officials, he said: I heard that most of the provincial and ministerial documents were rejected because they did not meet the requirements. They demanded from below and asked for their own convenience. As a result, they could not be severed for many years. I really hate doing this.

古文：乙酉，观渔于混同江。
现代文：从今天起可行则行，可罢则罢，不要让下面有被滞留的叹息。 
English: From today, do what you can, do what you can, do not let there be a lingering sigh below.

古文：五月己丑，至上京，居于光兴宫。
现代文：当时各位亲王都随皇上出行，只把赵王永中留下辅佐太子。五月二日，皇上及随行人员到达上京，皇上居住在光兴宫。
English: At that time, all the princes traveled with the emperor, leaving only Zhao Wang Yongzhong as the assistant crown prince. On May 2, the emperor and his entourage arrived in Tokyo, and the emperor lived in Guangxing Palace.

古文：庚寅，朝谒于庆元宫。
现代文：三日，在庆元宫朝谒。
English: On the third day, the morning prayer was held at the Qingyuan Palace.

古文：戊戌，宴于皇武殿。
现代文：十一日，在皇武殿开宴。
English: On the eleventh day, a banquet was held at the Imperial Palace.

古文：上谓宗戚曰： 朕思故乡，积有日矣，今既至此，可极欢饮，君臣同之。 
现代文：皇上对宗室亲戚说： 朕思念故乡，已经许多日子了，今天已经到了这里，要尽兴尽欢，君臣同饮。 
English: The emperor said to his relatives, "I have been thinking about my hometown for many days, and today I have arrived here. I want to enjoy myself to the full, and drink with my officials.

古文：赐诸王妃、主，宰执百官命妇各有差。
现代文：并赏赐各位王妃、公主、宰执百官命妇不同的奖赏。
English: Various prizes will also be awarded to queens, princesses, and the wives of hundreds of high-ranking officials.

古文：宗戚皆沾醉起舞，竟日乃罢。
现代文：宗室亲戚都乘着醉意跳起舞来，整整一天才作罢。
English: The relatives of the family all danced with intoxication and danced for a whole day.

古文：六月辛酉，幸按出虎水临漪亭。壬戌，阅马于绿野淀。七月乙未，上谓宰臣曰： 天子巡狩当举善罚恶。凡士民之孝弟渊睦者举而用之，其不顾廉耻无行之人则教戒之，不悛者则加惩罚。 
现代文：七月九日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 天子巡狩应当举善罚恶，凡是士人平民中的兄弟姻亲和睦的要举荐并且任用他们，那些不顾廉耻没有德行的人则要教育警戒他们，其中不悔改的则要加以惩罚。 
English: On July 9, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "It is the duty of Heaven's emissaries to promote virtue and punish vice. Those who are brothers by marriage and in harmony among the common people should be recommended and appointed. Those who are shameless and devoid of virtue should be educated and warned. Those who do not repent should be punished."

古文：丙午，猎于勃野淀。
现代文：二十日，在勃野淀打猎。
English: On the 20th, I went deer hunting in Bojo-Yodo.

古文：乙卯，上谓宰臣曰： 今时之人，有罪不问，既过之后则谓不知。
现代文：二十九日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 现时的人，有罪不问，已经做过之后则说不知道。
English: On the 29th, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister: People nowadays don't ask about guilt, but after they've done something, they say they don't know.

古文：有罪必责，则谓每事寻罪。
现代文：有罪必责，就说是每事寻罪。
English: Guilt by association, they say, leads to guilt by association.

古文：癸亥，幸皇武殿击球，许士民纵观。
现代文：风俗败坏到这种地步。不拿文德感化教育，不能恢复古代传统。卿等要用德来辅佐朝政，应当让古风恢复。 
English: The custom has deteriorated to such an extent. If education is not influenced by literature and virtue, it will not be possible to restore the ancient tradition. Lords and others should use virtue to assist the government, and the old style should be restored.

古文：甲子，诏于速频、胡里改两路猛安下选三十谋克为三猛安，移置于率督畔窟之地，以实上京。壬申，曲赦会宁府仍放免今年租税，百姓年七十以上者补一官。
现代文：大定二十五年正月初三，皇上在光德殿与妃嫔、亲王、公主、文武随从官员设宴饮酒，对于宗室、宗妇和五品以上命妇，以及在座的一千七百多人，皇上各有不同的赏赐。四月十日，皇上驾临皇武殿打球，允许士人和百姓观看。十一日，诏令在速频、胡里改两路猛安部下选出三十谋克为三猛安，迁移安置到率督畔窟的地方，用来充实上京的力量。十九日，曲赦会宁府，免除今年的租税，百姓七十岁以上的补授一级官职。
English: On the 3rd day of the 1st month of the 25th year of the Daejeon era, the emperor held a banquet and drank alcohol with his concubines, princes, princesses, and officials accompanying the emperor and emperors at the Kuangde Hall. The emperor gave different rewards to the ancestral chamber, the mother-in-law, and the consort of more than five generations, as well as the more than 1,700 people present. On April 10, the emperor drove to the Imperial Palace to play ball, allowing the nobles and the people to watch. On the 11th day, the imperial edict selected 30 measures of rice as the three bounties under the fast frequency and

古文：甲戌，以会宁府官一人兼大宗正丞，以治宗室之政。
现代文：二十一日，任命会宁府一名官员兼大宗正丞，来治理宗室的政务。
English: On the 21st, an official from Ning Prefecture and Daizong Zhengyo was appointed to manage the affairs of the family.

古文：上谓群臣曰： 上京风物朕自乐之，每奏还都，辄用感怆。
现代文：皇上对群臣说 ：上京的风物朕自然是喜欢的，每当有人奏请返回京都，就会感慨悲怆。
English: The Emperor said to his courtiers, "Naturally, I like the scenery of Kyoto. Whenever someone invites me to return to Kyoto, I feel sad.

古文：祖宗旧邦，不忍舍去，万岁之后，当置朕于太祖之侧，卿等无忘朕言。 
现代文：祖宗旧邦，不忍舍弃离去，万岁以后，应当把朕安放在太祖身边，卿等不要忘了朕的话。 
English: The ancestors of the old country cannot bear to give up and leave. After a long life, you should place me next to the great-grandfather. Sirs, do not forget my words.

古文：丁丑，宴宗室、宗妇于皇武殿，大功亲赐官三阶，小功二阶，緦麻一阶，年高属近者加宣武将军。及封宗女，赐银、绢各有差。
现代文：二十四日，皇上在皇武殿宴请宗室、宗妇，对有大功的，皇上亲自赐予三阶官职，小功赐两级，缌麻一阶，年龄高又是近亲的加赐宣武将军，以及封宗女，赐予不同数量的银、绢。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the emperor held a banquet at the Imperial Palace for the imperial family and their wives. For those who had made great contributions, the emperor personally bestowed the third rank of official posts, two grades for minor contributions, one rank for nettle, and senior and close relatives were given the title of General of the Imperial Army, as well as the title of granddaughter, and different amounts of silver and money were given.

古文：曰： 朕寻常不饮酒，今日甚欲成醉，此乐亦不易得也！ 
现代文：说 ：朕平时不饮酒，今天很想喝醉，像这样的欢乐也不容易多得啊。 
English: He said, "I don't usually drink, but I really want to get drunk today. It's not easy to have so much fun like this."

古文：宗室妇女及群臣故老以次起舞，进酒。
现代文：宗室妇女以及群臣故老依次起身跳舞，并上前敬酒。
English: The matriarchs and senior courtiers got up in turn to dance and make a toast.

古文：上曰： 吾来数月，未有一人歌本曲者，吾为汝等歌之。 
现代文：皇上说 ：我来几个月了，没有一个人唱本曲的，我为你们来歌唱一曲。 
English: The emperor said, "I have been here for several months, and no one has sung this song. I will sing a song for you."

古文：命宗室弟叙坐殿下者皆坐殿上，听上自歌。
现代文：于是命令坐在殿下聊天的宗室子弟都坐到殿上，听皇上自己唱歌。
English: As a result, the children of the family who had been ordered to sit and chat with His Imperial Highness all sat in the hall to listen to the Emperor himself sing.

古文：其词道王业之艰难，及继述之不易，至 慨想祖宗，宛然如睹 ，慷慨悲激，不能成声，歌毕泣下。
现代文：歌词大意是说王业的艰难，以及继承的不容易，唱到 慨想祖宗，宛然如睹 ，慷慨悲痛，激动异常，唱不成声，歌完泪下。
English: The lyrics are to the effect that it is difficult to succeed to the throne, and it is not easy to succeed, and they are sung to the tune of "Mourning for the Ancestors," as if it were being witnessed, with generous sorrow, unusual excitement, singing without a voice, and tears after the song.

古文：右丞相元忠率群臣、宗戚捧觞上寿，皆称万岁。
现代文：右丞相元忠率领群臣、宗戚捧着酒杯上前祝寿，都称呼 万岁 。
English: The Minister of the Right, Mototada Mototada, led a group of his ministers and relatives to celebrate his birthday with a glass of wine, and they all called him "long live."

古文：于是，诸夫人更歌本曲，如私家之会。
现代文：于是，众夫人改歌本曲，像私人家庭聚会一样。
English: As a result, the ladies changed the song to the original, like a private family gathering.

古文：既醉，上复续调，至一鼓乃罢。
现代文：已经醉了，皇上又继续调整，到一更鼓响才作罢。
English: Already drunk, the emperor continued to adjust, and only stopped when the drum sounded louder.

古文：己卯，发上京。
现代文：二十六日，皇上一行从上京出发。
English: On the 26th, the imperial party set out from Kamigyo.

古文：庚辰，宗室戚属奉辞。
现代文：二十七日，宗室戚属侍奉辞别。
English: On the 27th, the relatives of the family left.

古文：上曰： 朕久思故乡，甚欲留一二岁，京师天下根本，不能久于此也。
现代文：皇上说 ：朕长久以来思念故乡，很想住一、二年，京师是天下根本，不能长久留在此地。
English: The emperor said, "I have been thinking about my hometown for a long time, and I would like to live there for one or two years. The capital is the most important place in the world, and I cannot stay here for a long time."

古文：太平岁久，国无征徭，汝等皆奢纵，往往贫乏，朕甚怜之。
现代文：太平年岁长久了，国家没有征收徭役，你们都奢侈放纵了，往往会贫乏，朕很可怜你们。
English: It has been a long time since the Taiping era, the state has not levied corvee, you are all extravagant and indulgent, often you will be poor, I feel very sorry for you.

古文：九月辛巳朔，次辖沙河，赐百岁老妪帛。
现代文：当务之急是要勤俭节约，不要忘记祖先的艰难。 
English: The top priority is to be thrifty and frugal, and not to forget the hardships of our ancestors.

古文：甲申，次辽水，召见百二十岁女直老人，能道太祖开创事，上嘉叹，赐食，并赐帛。
现代文：说到这里数行泪下，宗室戚属都很感动，边哭泣边退下了。六月三日，在附近山中打猎，看见田地没有整治，命令杖笞种田的人。九日，皇太子允恭逝世。十五日，尚书右丞相乌古论元忠解除官职。
English: On the 3rd of June, while hunting in the nearby mountains, he saw that the fields had not been tidied up, so he ordered his staff to plow the fields. On the 9th, Crown Prince Ingyong passed away. On the 15th, the Minister of the Right, Sho Sho Sho, dismissed Mototada.

古文：己酉，至自上京。
现代文：十九日，调遣左宣徽使唐括鼎到京师来，致祭皇太子。
English: On the 19th, Zuo Xuanhui sent Tang Shending to Beijing to pay homage to the crown prince.

古文：是日，上临奠宣孝皇太子于熙春园。
现代文：二十七日，命令皇太子妃及众皇孙执丧，并且用汉族仪式。
English: On the 27th, he ordered the crown princess and all the grandchildren to hold a funeral, and to use Han Chinese rituals.

古文：十月丙辰，尚书省奏亲军数多，宜稍减损，诏定额为三千。
现代文：十月七日，尚书省禀奏亲军人数多，应该稍有削减，皇上下诏定额为三千。
English: On October 7th, the number of pro-army soldiers in Shangshu Province was large, and should be slightly reduced. The imperial edict set the quota at three thousand.

古文：宰臣退，上谓左右曰： 宰相年老艰于久立，可置小榻廊下，使少休息。 
现代文：宰臣退下后，皇上对左右说： 宰相年纪老了，长久站立艰难，可以在廊下放置小榻，让他们稍微休息一下。 
English: After the Vice-Minister stepped back, the Emperor said to both sides: "The Vice-Minister is old, it is difficult to stand for a long time, you can place a small bed in the corridor, let them take a short break.

古文：甲子，禁上京等路大雪及含胎时采捕。上谓宰臣曰： 护卫年老出职而授临民，手字尚不能画，何以治民？
现代文：十五日，皇上对宰相大臣说 ：护卫年老出外任职而面临百姓进行教育，手尚且不能写，怎样去治民？
English: On the fifteenth day, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "How can you govern the people when you have to educate the people in the face of an aged bodyguard who has to go abroad to perform his duties, and cannot even write?"

古文：人胸中明暗外不能知，精神昏耄已见于外，是强其所不能也。
现代文：人胸中是明是暗，外人不能知道，精神昏聩已经可以从外表看出，这是强其所不能。
English: In the human chest is clearly dark, outsiders can not know, mental drowsiness can already be seen from the outside, this is beyond its ability.

古文：乙亥，诏曰： 每季求仕人，问以疑难，令剖决之。
现代文：天子把亿万百姓当作自己的儿子，不能家家都安抚到，就在于用人罢了。知道他不能干而强交给他，百姓们该说我什么？ 
English: The Son of Heaven regards hundreds of millions of people as His sons. If He cannot appease everyone, then He just has to use people. Knowing that He cannot force them to surrender to Him, what should the people say to Me?

古文：其才识可取者，仍访察政迹，如其言行相副，即加升用。 三月乙卯朔，万春节，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：二十八日，命令学士院、谏院、秘书监、司天台、著作局、门、通进、拱卫、直武器署等部门的官员，凡在宫中值勤，中午以前准许退勤。大定二十六年三月一日，是万春节，宋国、高丽、夏国分别派遣使者前来祝贺。
English: On the 28th, he ordered the officials of the Academy of Sciences, the Palace of the Grand Dukes, the Office of the Superintendent of the Secretariat, the Office of the Chairman of the State Council, the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Education, the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Education, the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Education, the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Education, the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Education, the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Education, the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Education, the General Office of the

古文：丁亥，以大理卿阙，上问谁可？右丞粘割斡特剌言，前使部尚书唐括贡可，乃授以是职。
现代文：九日，因为大理卿缺员，皇上问谁可以担任，右丞粘割斡特剌说，前吏部尚书唐括贡可以，于是把这个职位授给了唐括贡。
English: On the 9th, because there was a vacancy for the position of Daliqing, the emperor asked who could fill the position, and the right-hand man, Gui Jiaotong, said that the former head of the personnel department, Shang Shuxu, could fill the position, so he gave the position to Tang Shuguang.

古文：己丑，尚书省拟奏除授，上曰： 卿等在省未尝荐士，止限资级，安能得人？
现代文：十一日，尚书省拟出奏请授职或免除的名单，皇上说： 卿等在尚书省不曾举荐贤士，只限于调整资格级别，这怎么能得到人才？
English: On the 11th day, the Ministry of Education and Culture drew up a list of talents to be conferred or exempted, and the emperor said: Sir, in the Ministry of Education and Culture, they have not recommended any talents, but only adjusted the qualification level. How can they get talents?

古文：古有布衣人相者，闻宋亦多用山东、河南流寓疏远之人，皆不拘于贵近也。
现代文：古代有布衣百姓进入宰相官职的，听说宋代也不少启用山东、河南流域疏远的人，都不拘泥于尊贵或是近亲。
English: In ancient times, there were clothed people who entered the post of prime minister, and it is said that in the Song Dynasty, there were also many people from Shandong and Henan who were estranged from their relatives, and they were not particular about their nobility or close relatives.

古文：以本朝境土之大，岂无其人，朕难遍知，卿又不举。
现代文：拿本朝国域这样广大，难道能没有人才？朕难以遍知天下人，卿等又不举荐，自古以来哪有终身当宰相的？
English: With the vast territory of this dynasty, can there be no talent? It is difficult for me to know all the people in the world, and I do not recommend them. Since ancient times, has there been a prime minister for life?

古文：自古岂有终身为相者，外官三品以上，必有可用之人，但无故得进耳。 左丞张汝弼曰： 下位虽有才能，必试之乃见。 
现代文：外官三品以上，一定有可用的人，但没有机会得以进升了。 左丞相张汝弼说 ：职位低下的虽有才能，必须通过考试才能看出。 
English: There must be people who can be used for positions higher than Third Rank, but there is no opportunity to be promoted. Minister of the Left, Zhang Ruchen, said: Although there is talent in low-ranking positions, it must be seen through examinations.

古文：参政程辉曰： 外官虽有声，一旦入朝，却不称任，亦在沙汰而已。 
现代文：参政程辉说 ：外官虽然有名声，一旦进入朝廷做官，却不能胜任，也就被淘汰罢了。 
English: Cheng Hui, a politician, said: Although foreign officials have a reputation, once they enter the imperial court as officials, they are not competent, and they are eliminated.

古文：癸巳，香山寺成，幸其寺，赐名大永安，给田二千亩，栗七千株，钱二万贯。
现代文：十五日，香山寺落成，皇上视察这座寺，赐名大永安，拨给田地二千亩，栗树七千棵，钱二万贯。
English: On the fifteenth day, Xiangshan Temple was completed, and the emperor inspected the temple, gave it the name of Great Yongan, allocated two thousand mu of fields, seven thousand chestnut trees, and twenty thousand yuan.

古文：丁酉，以亲军完颜乞奴言，制猛安谋克皆先读女直字经史然后承袭。因曰： 但令稍通古今，则不肯为非。
现代文：十九日，因为亲军完颜乞奴说，裁定猛安谋克都先读女真文字的经史然后承袭，皇上因此说道： 但凡稍通古今，就不会做不该做的事了。
English: On the 19th day, because the pro-army had finished the begging, it was decided that Meng'an and Mok would first read the history of the Jurchen script and then inherit it. Therefore, the emperor said: But anyone who knows a little about the past and the present will not do what should not be done.

古文：尔一亲军粗人，乃能言此，审其有益，何惮而不从。 
现代文：你是一个亲军粗人，能说出这番话来，考虑这话有好处，怎么能胆敢不听从？ 
English: You are a pro-army ruffian, how can you dare to disobey when you can say such a thing and consider it beneficial?

古文：四月壬子，尚书省奏定院务监官亏陪兑纳法及横班格。因曰： 朕常日御膳亦从减省，尝有一公主至，至无余膳可与，当直官皆目睹之。
现代文：四月五日，尚书省禀奏制定了院务监官亏兑陪纳法以及横班格，皇上因此说道 ：朕平常日子进膳也是从简的，曾经有一回公主到来，竟至于没有多余的膳食可以给她吃，当时值班的官吏都亲眼见这个场面。
English: On April 5, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) issued a regulation on the payment of compensation to hospital supervisors in the event of a loss, as well as a horizontal ban. As a result, the emperor said, "I usually have a simple meal. Once upon a time, a princess came, but there was no extra food for her to eat. The officials on duty at the time witnessed the scene.

古文：若欲丰腆，虽日用五十羊亦不难矣！然皆民之脂膏，不忍为也。
现代文：如果想丰富美好，虽然每天用五十只羊也并不难，然而这都是民脂民膏，不忍心这样做。
English: If you want to enrich beauty, although it is not difficult to use fifty sheep every day, but this is all people's fat, people's cream, do not have the heart to do so.

古文：监临官惟知利己，不知其利自何而来？
现代文：监临官只知道有利自己，不知道他得的利从哪里来。
English: The procurator only knows how to benefit himself, he doesn't know where his profits come from.

古文：朕尝历外任，稔知民间之事，想前代之君，虽享富贵，不知稼穑艰难者甚多，其失天下，皆由此也！
现代文：朕曾经在外地做官，对民间的事情很熟悉。想到前代的君王，虽然享受富贵，但他们不知道种庄稼的艰难，他们失去天下，都是由于这个原因。
English: I used to be an official in a foreign country and am very familiar with the affairs of the people. I thought of the previous generation of kings, although they enjoyed wealth, they did not know the difficulties of growing crops. They lost the world, all because of this reason.

古文：辽主闻民间乏食，谓何不食干腊，盖幼失师保之训，及其即位，故不知民间疾苦也。
现代文：辽国君主听说民间缺乏粮食，说那怎么不吃干肉腊肉，完全是幼年失去了老师的训教，到他即位当皇帝，就不知道民间的疾苦了。
English: The monarch of Liao heard that the people were short of food, and said that they did not eat dried meat and bacon. He had completely lost the training of his teacher at an early age. When he became emperor, he did not know the suffering of the people.

古文：随炀帝时，杨素专权行事，乃不慎委任之过也。
现代文：隋炀帝时，杨素专权行事，是不慎重委他重任的过错。
English: During the reign of Emperor Sui, Yang Su acted in an autocratic manner, which was the fault of not carefully entrusting him with important responsibilities.

古文：与正人同处，所知必正道，所闻必正言，不可不慎也。
现代文：和正派的人一同相处，所懂得的必是正道，所听说的一定是正言，不能不慎重啊。
English: When you get along with decent people, what you understand must be the right way, and what you hear must be the right words. You can't be careless.

古文：六月癸亥，尚书省奏速频、胡里改世袭谋克事，上曰： 其人皆勇悍，昔世祖与之邻，苦战累年，仅能克复。
现代文：现在原王府的属官，应当挑选纯正、严谨、秉性正直的人来充任，不要用会玩权术的人。 十一日，尚书左丞张汝弼被免除官职。十二日，皇上驾临寿安宫。十五日，太尉、左丞相完颜守道任满辞职。六月十七日，尚书省禀奏速频、胡里改世袭谋克的事，皇上说： 这两家人都很勇敢强悍，往昔世祖和他们相邻，苦战几年，仅能战胜收复他们。
English: Now, the officials of the former royal palace should select pure, rigorous and honest people to perform their duties, and should not use people who can play power games. On the 11th day, Shangshu Zuoxing Zhang Rong was relieved of his official duties. On the 12th day, the emperor arrived at Shouan Palace. On the 15th day, the captain and Zuoxing resigned after completing their duties. On the 17th day of June, Shangshu Zongxiao and Huli reformed the hereditary plot, and the emperor said: These two families are very brave and strong. In the past, their ancestors were close to them. They fought hard for several years, and they could only

古文：其后乍服乍叛，至穆、康时，始服声教。
现代文：从那时以后，他们一时降服一时背叛，到穆、康时候，才开始服从声教。
English: Since then, they have been subjected to subjugation and betrayal at one time, and only began to obey the teachings of the voice at the time of Mu Kang.

古文：近世亦尝分徙。
现代文：近年来他们也曾经分别迁徙。
English: In recent years, they have also migrated separately.

古文：朕欲稍迁其民上京，实国家长久之计。 
现代文：朕想少迁移他们的百姓到上京，确实是国家的长久之计。 
English: It is indeed a long-term plan of the country to reduce the migration of their people to Beijing.

古文：己巳，上谓宰执曰： 齐桓中庸主也，得一管仲，遂成霸业。
现代文：二十三日，皇上对宰执说 ：齐桓公是行中庸之道的君主，得到一个管仲，于是成就了霸业。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor said to the leader, "Qi Kuan Gong is a monarch who practices the middle way. He obtained a middle man, and thus achieved hegemony.

古文：朕夙夜以思，惟恐失人。
现代文：朕白天晚上思考，只恐怕失去人才。
English: I think about it day and night, but I'm afraid of losing talent.

古文：朕既不知，卿等又不荐，必俟全才而后举，盖亦难矣！
现代文：朕既然不了解，卿等又不举荐，一定要等到发现全才而后才推荐，这也太难了。
English: Since I don't understand, sir, and don't recommend, I must wait until I find out everything before recommending, which is too difficult.

古文：如举某人长于某事，朕亦量材用之。
现代文：如果举荐某人在某方面有长处，朕也要量材使用他。
English: If the person I recommend is good at something, I want to use him or her.

古文：朕与卿等俱老矣！天下至大，岂得无人？
现代文：朕和卿等人都老了，天下这么大，难道得不到能人？
English: I'm getting old, and so is Sir, and the world is so big, can't we get someone capable?

古文：荐举人材，当今急务也。 
现代文：荐举人才，是现在的当务之急。 
English: It is now a top priority to recommend talents.

古文：又言： 人之有干能，固不易得，然不若德行之士最优也。 
现代文：又说： 人有才干有能力，固然是不容易得到，但是不像德行兼备最优秀的人士那样难得啊！ 
English: He also said: People with talent and ability are not easy to get, but they are not as rare as the best people with virtue!

古文：上谓右丞相原王曰： 尔尝读《太祖实录》乎？
现代文：皇上对右丞相原王说： 你曾经读过《太祖实录》吗？
English: The Emperor said to the Minister of the Right, King Hara: Have you ever read "The True Record of the Great Ancestors"?

古文：甲午，诏增河防军数。戊戌，宁昌军节度使崇肃、行军都统忠道以讨乌底改，不待克敌而还，崇肃杖七十，削官一阶，忠道杖八十，削官三阶。十一月甲辰朔，定闵宗陵庙荐享礼。
现代文：太祖征讨麻产，袭击他，陷到泥淖中马不能前进，太祖舍弃马而步行，欢都射中麻产，于是擒获了他。创业艰难像这样，能不考虑吗？ 二十八日，皇帝诏令： 凡是陈述性文书到登闻检院送学士院听奏，不需再经过省廷。 十一月一日，裁定闵宗陵庙荐享礼。
English: On the 28th, the emperor issued an imperial edict: All declarative documents should be sent to the State Audit Office to be audited by the Academy of Music without going through the provincial court. On the 1st of November, it was decided that the Mausoleum of Emperor Xuanzong should be recommended as a place of worship.

古文：上谓宰臣曰： 女直人中材杰之士，朕少有识者，盖亦难得也。
现代文：皇上对宰相大臣说 ：女真人中才干杰出的士人，朕少有认识的，这些人也是非常难得的。
English: The Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "Among the Jurchens, I know very few outstanding scholars, and these people are also very rare.

古文：新进士如徒单镒、夹古阿里补、尼厖古鉴辈皆可用之材也。
现代文：新进士如徒单镒、夹古阿里补、尼庞古鉴一类人都是可用之材。
English: Newcomers such as Tu Shanqian, Zhang Guo Ali Shu, and Nipang Guo Jian are all useful materials.

古文：起身刀笔者，虽用才力可用，其廉介之节，终不及进士。
现代文：出身刀笔吏的，虽然才干能力可以使用，考察介绍他们的志节，终究赶不上进士。
English: Although the talents and abilities of those who were born as clerks can be used, the examination and introduction of their ambitions will not be able to catch up with the promotion of cadres.

古文：今五品以上阙员甚多，必资级相当，至老有不能得者，况欲至卿相乎？
现代文：现在五品以上官吏缺员很多，一定要资历级别相当，到老也有得不到这一品位的，何况想达到卿相呢！
English: At present, there are many vacancies for officials above grade five. They must have the same level of seniority, and there are people who can't get this grade, let alone want to achieve the title of minister!

古文：古来宰相率不过三五年而退，罕有三二十年者，卿等特不举人，甚非朕意。 
现代文：自古以来宰相大概不过干三、五年就退了，很罕见有干三、二十年的，卿等不举荐人才，很不符合朕的意愿。 
English: Since ancient times, prime ministers have usually been in office for three to five years before stepping down. It is very rare to have a prime minister who has been in office for three to twenty years, and it is not in line with my wishes if the prime minister does not recommend talented people.

古文：上顾修起居注崇璧曰： 斯人孱弱，付之以事，未必能办，以其谨厚长者，故置诸左右，欲诸官效其为人也。 
现代文：皇上看着修起居注的崇壁说 ：这人很孱弱，交给他的事，不一定能办，因为他是谨慎忠厚的长者，所以安置在左右，想要让众官吏效法他的为人。 
English: The emperor looked at Chongbi, who was busy with the construction, and said, "This man is very weak, and he may not be able to do the work assigned to him. Because he is a cautious and loyal elder, he is placed on the right and left, and he wants all officials to follow his example.

古文：辛亥，以刑部尚书移剌子元等为贺宋正旦使。戊午，以左警巡副使鹘沙通敏善断，擢殿中侍御史兼右三部司正。庚申，立右丞相原王璟为皇太孙。
现代文：十五日，因为左警巡副使鹘沙通达敏捷善于判断，提升为殿中侍御史兼右三部司正。十七日，立右丞相原王瞡为皇太孙。
English: On the 15th, because the left police inspector and deputy made Bishatonda quick and good at judging, he was promoted to the palace attendant and secretary of the right three departments. On the 17th, the minister of the right, Wang Xi, was appointed as the emperor's grandson.

古文：甲子，上谓宰臣曰： 朕闻宋军自来教习不辍，今我军专务游惰，卿等勿谓天下既安而无豫防之心，一旦有警，军不可用，顾不败事耶？
现代文：二十一日，皇上对宰臣说： 朕听说宋国军队从来教训练习没有停止，现在我军专务游漫散惰，卿等不要说天下已经安定，没有预防的心事，一旦有紧急军情，军队不能用，看不失败才怪。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Emperor said to the Vice-Minister: I have heard that the Song army has never stopped training. Now our army is just idle. Sir, do not say that the world is stable and there is no need for prevention. If there is a military emergency and the army cannot be used, it is not surprising that it will fail.

古文：其令以时训练。 
现代文：要下令拿出时间训练。 
English: They should be ordered to devote time to training.

古文：丙寅，上谓侍臣曰： 唐太子承乾所为多非度，太宗纵而弗检，遂至于废，如早为禁止，当不至是。
现代文：二十三日，皇上对侍臣说： 唐太子承乾所做的事大多不合法度，唐太宗纵容而不约束他，于是导致成为废人，如果及早制止，应当不至于这样。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor said to his courtiers: Most of the things done by Tang Taizong were illegal. Emperor Taizong indulged and did not restrain him, which led to him becoming an outcast. If he had been stopped earlier, this would not have happened.

古文：朕于圣经不能深解，至于史传，开卷辄有所益。
现代文：朕对于圣经不能深入理解。至于说史传，开卷阅读就有所收益。
English: I don't have a deep understanding of the Bible. As far as history is concerned, it is beneficial to open the book and read.

古文：每见善人不忘忠孝，检身廉洁，皆出天性。
现代文：每次见到善人不忘忠孝，检查自身，勤政廉洁，都是出于天性。
English: Every time I see a good person, they do not forget their loyalty and filial piety, they check themselves, they are diligent and honest, and it is all due to nature.

古文：朕尝自思，岂能无过，所患过而不改，过而能改，庶几无咎。
现代文：至于常常有人总喜欢干非礼的事，拥有天下的人暂且没有惩罚他，有什么理由能达到大治？孔子当政七天而杀了少正卯，圣人尚且如此，何况其余的人呢！ 
English: As for someone who always likes to do things that are not polite, if the person who owns the world does not punish him for the time being, what reason is there to achieve a great cure? Confucius was in power for seven days and killed Shao Zhengwu, the saint is still like that, let alone the rest of the people!

古文：省朕之过，颇喜兴土木之工，自今不复作矣。 
现代文：二十五日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 朕虽然年纪老了，对好的事听不厌。孔子说 ：见善如不及，见不善如探汤。 这话伟大啊！ 
English: On the 25th, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "Although I am old, I cannot get tired of hearing about good things." Confucius said, "Seeing good things is like looking at soup, and seeing bad things is like tasting soup." What a great saying!

古文：十二月甲申，上退朝，御香閤，左谏议大夫黄久约言递送荔支非是，上谕之曰： 朕不知也，今令罢之。 
现代文：十二月十一日，皇上退朝，御临香阁，左谏议大夫黄久约说递送荔枝不对，皇上告诉他说： 朕不知道这件事，现在命令他们免去。 
English: On December 11, after the Emperor had left the Imperial Palace, he went to Shang Ge, where the left-handed doctor Huang Jiu said that the delivery of lychees was wrong. The Emperor told him: "I do not know about this matter, now I order them to be excused."

古文：丙戌，上谓宰臣曰： 有司奉上，惟沽办事之名，不问利害如何。
现代文：十三日，皇上对宰相大臣说 ：有司奉上的，只沽办事之名，不问利害如何。
English: On the thirteenth day, the emperor said to the prime minister and minister of finance: If you have a secretary, just do the job, no matter what the interests are.

古文：朕尝欲得新荔支，兵部遂于道路特设铺递。
现代文：朕曾经想得到新荔枝，兵部于是在道路上特设驿站传递。
English: I once wanted to get new lychees, so the military department passed them to me at a special station on the road.

古文：比因谏官黄久约言，朕方知之。
现代文：最近因为谏官黄久约说了这事，朕才知道。
English: I only found out about it recently because the eunuch Huang Jiu had told me about it.

古文：夫为人无识，一旦临事，便至颠沛。
现代文：为人处事没有见识，一旦面对事情要处理，便至于狼狈困顿。
English: They have no insight into how to deal with people, and once they are faced with things to deal with, they are in dire straits.

古文：宫中事无大小，朕常亲览者，以不得人故也，如使得人，宁复他虑。 
现代文：宫中的事不论大小，朕常亲自阅办，是因为没有得到人才的缘故。如果让我得到能人，宁愿不再有别的顾虑。 
English: Regardless of the size of things in the palace, I often read them myself, because I did not get talented people. If I get talented people, I would rather not have any other concerns.

古文：丁亥，上谓宰臣曰： 朕年来惟以省约为务，常膳止四五味，已厌饫之，比初即位十减七八。 
现代文：十四日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 朕今年以来只以俭省节约为重，用膳常常只有四、五味，已经厌食它，比当初即位时饭量十减七、八。 
English: On the 14th, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister: "Since this year, I have been focusing on frugality and economy. I often eat only four or five dishes, and I have become anorexic. This is seven or eight times less than when I first ascended the throne.

古文：宰臣曰： 天子自有制，不同余人。 
现代文：宰相大臣说： 天子自有制度，和别的人不同。 
English: The Prime Minister said: God's own system is different from other people's.

古文：上曰： 天子亦人耳，枉费安用。 
现代文：皇上说： 天子也是人罢了，枉然浪费有什么用？ 
English: The emperor said, "God's son is just a man. What's the use of wasting it?

古文：丙申，上谓宰臣曰： 比闻河水泛溢，民罹其害者赀产皆空。
现代文：二十三日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 最近听说黄河水泛滥，百姓受灾，家资财产全部丧失一空。
English: On the 23rd, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister: "Recently, I heard that the Yellow River was flooded, the people were affected, and all the family assets were lost.

古文：今复遣官于彼推排，何耶？ 
现代文：现在又派遣官员到那里去却推排，是为什么呢？ 
English: Now they are sending officials there and pushing the queue. Why is that?

古文：右丞张汝霖曰： 今推排皆非被灾之处。 
现代文：右丞张汝霖说： 现在推排的都不是受灾的地方。 
English: Zhang Rulin, a member of the Communist Party of China (CPC) Central Committee, said: "Nowadays, it is not the disaster-affected areas that are being evacuated.

古文：上曰： 必邻道也。
现代文：皇上说： 一定是邻道的。
English: The emperor said: It must be a neighboring road.

古文：既邻水而居，岂无惊扰迁避者乎？
现代文：既然邻着水居住，难道没有害怕惊忧而迁移躲避的吗？
English: Since they live next to the water, aren't they afraid of being worried and moving to avoid it?

古文：计其赀产，岂有余哉！
现代文：算计一下他的资产，哪里还有剩余的？
English: Count his assets, what's left?

古文：尚何推排为。 
现代文：还有什么可推排的？ 
English: What else can be postponed?

古文：右丞张汝霖曰： 人材须作养，若令久任练习，自可得人。 
现代文：又说 ：平时用人应当崇尚公平正直。至于军职，当用权谋，让人不容易推测，可以集事。
English: He also said: In ordinary times, employers should advocate fairness and honesty. As for military posts, when using power, it is not easy for people to speculate, and things can be gathered.

古文：庚戌，如长春宫春水。二月乙亥，还都。
现代文：唐太宗从少年起就能用兵，他后来虽然高居帝王之位，还是不能改变。吮疮剪须，都是权谋。 
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang had been able to use soldiers since he was a boy, and even though he later ascended to the throne, he still could not change.

古文：乙卯，改闵宗庙号曰熙宗。
现代文：大定二十七年二月七日，改闵宗庙号叫熙宗。
English: On February 7th, 277, the name of the temple was changed to Xi Zong.

古文：癸未，命曲阳县置钱监，赐名 利通 。
现代文：十日，命令曲阳县设置钱监，赐名叫 利通 。
English: On the 10th, he ordered Quyang County to set up a money supervisor, named Litong.

古文：乙酉，上谓宰执曰： 朕自即位以来，言事者虽有狂妄，未尝罪之。
现代文：十二日，皇上对宰执说 ：朕自从即位以来，禀报事情的人虽然有的狂妄，不曾加罪于他。
English: On the twelfth day, the emperor said to the chief priest, "Since I ascended the throne, I have never punished the person who reported the matter, although he was arrogant.

古文：卿等未尝肯尽言，何也？
现代文：但是卿等不曾肯把话说完，为什么呢？
English: But he did not want to finish his speech, why?

古文：当言而不言，是相疑也。
现代文：当说的而不说，是互相疑心不信任。
English: What should be said, but is not, is mutual suspicion and mistrust.

古文：君臣无疑，则谓之嘉会。
现代文：君臣之间没有猜疑，就说是嘉会。
English: If there is no suspicion between princes and ministers, it is said to be a welcome party.

古文：事有利害，可竭诚言之。
现代文：事情关系到利和害，可以竭诚说出。
English: Things are related to benefits and harms, and can be said wholeheartedly.

古文：朕见缄默不言之人，不欲观之矣。 
现代文：朕遇见缄默不言语的人，不想看他。 
English: When I meet a silent person, I don't want to look at him.

古文：丁亥，命沿河京、府、州、县长贰官，并带管勾河防事。
现代文：十四日，命令沿着黄河的京、府、州、县长贰官，一并管理黄河防洪的事。
English: On the 14th, he ordered the eunuchs of the Beijing, prefectural, state and county governors along the Yellow River to jointly manage the flood control of the Yellow River.

古文：己丑，谕宰执曰： 近侍局官须选忠直练达之人用之。
现代文：十六日，皇上告诉宰执说： 近侍局的官员必须选择忠直练达的人任用他们。
English: On the 16th, the emperor told the chief steward: "The officials of the Privy Council must choose loyal and experienced people to appoint them.

古文：朕虽不听谗言，使佞人在侧，将恐渐渍听从之矣！ 
现代文：朕虽然不听信谗言，但如果让佞人在身旁，将恐怕渐渐受到侵染而听从了他们的话了。 
English: Although I don't listen to them, if I keep them around, I'm afraid I'll gradually be infected and listen to them.

古文：上谓宰执曰： 朕闻宝坻尉蒙括末也清廉，其为政何如？ 
现代文：皇上对宰执说 ：朕听说宝坻尉蒙括特末也为政清廉，他为政究竟怎么样？ 
English: The emperor said to the leader, "I have heard that Bao Yongli Meng Kui Te Mian is also a clean politician. What is he like as a politician?

古文：左丞斡特剌对曰： 其部民亦称誉之，然不知所称何事？ 
现代文：左丞相斡特剌回答说： 他的部民也称誉他，然而不知道所称誉的是什么事。 
English: Zuo Zheng, Minister of the Left, replied: His subordinates also praised him, but they didn't know what they were praising.

古文：上曰： 凡为官但得清廉亦可矣，安得全才之人。
现代文：皇上说 ：当官得到清廉的名声也就可以了，哪里能得到有全面才能的人？
English: The emperor said, "It is enough for officials to have a reputation for being incorruptible. Where can we get people with all-round talent?"

古文：近时台谏惟指摘一二细碎事，姑以塞责，未尝有及国家大利害者，岂知而不言欤？
现代文：可以提升一级官职，升为县令。 又说 ：朕时常有体内感到不佳的时候，但没有不理朝政。
English: He can be promoted to the first-level official post, to the county magistrate. He also said: I often have times when I feel bad inside, but I did not ignore the government.

古文：无乃亦不知也。 
现代文：众位亲王、百官但凡有点病，便不管事，从今以后应该戒掉这些。 
English: Princes, dignitaries, all of them, they don't care if you're a little bit ill, they should stop it now.

古文：宰臣无以对。十一月庚戌，以左副都点检崇安为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：二十三日，发布命令： 犯罪的人在关押期间有病，听凭亲属入监探视。 十一月十三日，派遣左副都点检崇安为贺宋正旦使。
English: On the 23rd, an order was issued: "Criminals who are ill during their detention are allowed to visit their relatives under supervision." On the 13th of November, the left deputy was dispatched to inspect Chong'an as an envoy of He Song Zhengdan.

古文：甲寅，诏： 河水泛溢，农夫被灾者，与免差税一年。
现代文：十七日，皇上下诏： 河水泛滥，农夫受灾的，免去差税一年。
English: On the 17th, the emperor issued an edict: If the river floods and the farmers are affected, they will be exempt from the tax for one year.

古文：卫、怀、孟、郑四州塞河劳役，并免今年差税。
现代文：卫、怀、孟、郑四州拦堵洪水的劳役，一并免除今年的差税。 
English: The laborers in the four prefectures of Wei, Huai, Meng and Zheng will be exempted from this year's tax.

古文：庚申，平章政事崇尹致仕。
现代文：二十三日，平章政事崇尹任职期满辞去官职。
English: On the 23rd, the political secretary of the Taira chapter, Chong Yin, resigned from his post at the end of his term of office.

古文：甲子，上谓宰臣曰： 卿等老矣，殊无可以自代者乎，必待朕知而后进乎？ 
现代文：二十七日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 卿等年纪老了，竟然没有可以代替自己的人吗？一定要等待朕知道有什么人而后才推荐吗？ 
English: On the 27th, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister: Sir, you are so old, is there no one who can replace you? Do you have to wait until you know someone before you recommend them?

古文：顾右丞张汝霖曰： 若右丞者亦石丞相所言也。
现代文：看着右丞相张汝霖说 ：像右丞相这样的也是石丞相所说的。 
English: Looking at the Minister of the Right, Zhang Rulin, he said: Like the Minister of the Right, this is also what the Minister of the Left said.

古文：癸巳，宋使朝辞，以所献礼物中玉器五，玻璃器二十，及弓剑之属使还遗宋，曰： 此皆尔国前主珍玩之物，所宜宝藏，以无忘追慕。
现代文：平章政事襄和汝霖回答说 ：臣等如果有所知道的，怎敢不说？只是没有合适的人罢了。 皇上说 ：春秋时代各国分裂，土地狭小，都有贤才。卿等不举荐罢了。
English: Pingzhang Zhengzhi and Rulin replied, "If our ministers know something, how dare they not tell us? It's just that there are no suitable people." The emperor said, "During the Spring and Autumn Period, when countries were divided, the land was small, and there were all kinds of talents. We just don't recommend you."

古文：今受之，义有不忍，归告尔主，使知朕意也。 
现代文：今天朕自己勉励自己，差不多达到大治，他日谁与子孙共同治理国家呢？ 
English: Today, I myself have encouraged myself and almost achieved great governance. Who will govern the country together with their children and grandchildren in the future?

古文：三月丁酉朔，万春节，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：宰臣都有惭愧之色。大定二十八年三月一日，是万春节，宋国、高丽、夏国派遣使者前来庆贺。
English: The emissaries of Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to celebrate the Spring Festival on March 1st, in the 28th year of Dading.

古文：御庆和殿受群臣朝，复宴于神龙殿，诸王、公主以次捧觞上寿。
现代文：皇上在庆和殿接受群臣朝贺，又在神龙殿开宴，众王、公主依次捧杯祝寿。
English: The Emperor received the morning greetings from his retainers at the Keiwa-den, and a banquet was held at the Shiryu-den. The kings and princesses raised their glasses in turn to celebrate his birthday.

古文：上欢甚，以本国音自度曲。盖言临御久，春秋高，渺然思国家基绪之重，万世无穷之托。
现代文：皇上高兴得很，用本国音乐自度曲，大概是说自己临朝执政时间久了，年事高了，渺然思虑国家基业的重大，是万世无穷的托付。
English: The emperor was very happy, using his own music to amuse himself, probably saying that he had been in power for a long time, was old, and thought little about the importance of the national heritage, which was an eternal trust.

古文：以戒皇太孙，当修身养德，善于持守，及命太尉、左丞相克宁尽忠辅导之意。
现代文：用来警戒皇太孙，应当修身养德，善于主持守业，以及命令太尉、左丞相克宁尽忠辅导的意思。
English: It was used to warn the emperor's great-grandson that he should cultivate his virtue, be good at presiding over business, and order the captain and the minister of the left to be loyal.

古文：汝霖对曰： 世乱则忠言进，承平则忠言无所施。 
现代文：于是，皇上自己歌唱着，皇太孙和克宁和唱着，极尽欢乐才罢休。
English: As a result, the Emperor himself sang, and the Emperor's great-grandson knelt down and sang, until they were overjoyed.

古文：上曰： 何代无可言之事，但古人知无不言，今人不肯言耳！ 
现代文：十二日，命令随朝六品、外路五品以上在职官员，举进士已在仕、才可居翰苑的，试制作诏书等文书三道，取文理优秀的补充学士院任职。应赴部求仕的人，对老病昏昧的，勒令他们辞职，只发给一半薪俸，更不给迁升。
English: On the 12th, it was ordered that the officials with the rank of six in the morning and five or more in the evening should be promoted, and those who have already served and can only live in the Han Court should try to make three kinds of documents such as the imperial edict, and take an excellent supplementary academy of arts and sciences. Those who should go to the ministry to apply for a job, who are confused about the old disease, are ordered to resign, and only half of their salary will be paid, and they will not be promoted.

古文：汝霖不能对。
现代文：四月十七日，皇上命令建立女真大学。
English: On April 17th, the emperor ordered the establishment of Jianzhen University.

古文：十一月戊戌，以改葬熙陵，诏中外。
现代文：十一月七日，把改葬熙陵的事，诏告中外。
English: On November 7th, the matter of the reburial of the mausoleum was announced to the public.

古文：上谓侍臣曰： 凡修身者，喜怒不可太极，怒极则心劳，喜极则气散，得中甚难，是故节其喜怒，以思安身。
现代文：皇上对侍臣说： 凡是修身的人，喜或怒都不可太极端，怒极则心劳，喜极则气散，取其中很难，因此要节制喜或怒，以此来考虑安身立命。
English: The emperor said to his courtiers: "All those who cultivate their bodies should not be too extreme in their happiness or anger. Extreme anger is hard work, and extreme happiness is discouraging. It is difficult to choose between the two. Therefore, one should control one's happiness or anger in order to secure one's future.

古文：今宫中一岁未尝责罚人也。 
现代文：现在宫中有一年不曾责罚人了。 
English: There has been no punishment in the palace for a year now.

古文：庚子，太白昼见。
现代文：九日，太白星白天显现。
English: On the 9th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：诏南京、大名府等处避水逃移不能复业者，官与津济钱，仍量地顷亩给以耕牛。
现代文：皇上诏令南京、大名府等处在躲避水灾而逃难迁移不能恢复旧业的，由官府赈济钱财，丈量土地按顷亩给予耕牛。
English: The emperor decreed that in Nanjing, Damingfu and other places where people fled to avoid floods and could not restore their old businesses, the government should provide money and measure the land to give cattle per hectare.

古文：甲辰，以河中尹田彦皋等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：十三日，派遣河中尹田彦皋等当贺宋正旦使。
English: On the 13th, he dispatched the envoys of Song Zhengdan and others, including Yin Tianhong of the Central Military Commission.

古文：戊申，上谓宰臣曰： 制条以拘于旧律，间有难解之辞。
现代文：十七日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 制定条令用来拘于旧律，其间有难解之辞。
English: On the seventeenth day, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "There are some difficult words in the regulations that are used to adhere to the old law.

古文：夫法律历代损益而为之，彼智虑不及而有乖违本意者，若行删正，令众易晓，有何不可。
现代文：法律历代损益而制定它，那些智慧思虑达不到而有违背本意的地方，如果进行删改更正，让众人容易知道明白，有什么不可以？
English: The law has been formulated based on the historical gains and losses. If there are areas that are not reached by wisdom and consideration and are contrary to the original intention, if they are deleted, amended and corrected, so that everyone can easily know and understand, what is wrong?

古文：宜修之，务令明白。 
现代文：应该修订法律，务必要让大家明白。 
English: The law should be amended, and it must be made clear to everyone.

古文：有司奏重修上京御容殿，上谓宰臣曰： 宫殿制度，苟务华饰，必不坚固。
现代文：有司禀奏重新修建上京御容殿，皇上对宰相大臣说： 宫殿制度，苟务华饰，一定不坚固。
English: The Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "The palace system, the pomp and circumstance, is not solid.

古文：今仁政殿辽时所建，全无华饰，但见它处岁岁修完，惟此殿如旧，以此见虚华无实者，不能经久也。
现代文：今天的仁政殿是辽代时所兴建的，完全没有华丽的装饰，但见其他的地方年年修建完善，只有此殿依然如故，从这里可以看出虚华不实的，不能经久耐用。
English: Today's Ren Zheng Hall was built in the Liao Dynasty. It has no ornate decoration at all. However, other places have been built and perfected over the years. Only this hall is still the same. From here, you can see that it is false and not durable.

古文：今土木之工，灭裂尤甚，下则吏与工匠相结为奸，侵克工物，上则户工部官支钱度材，惟务苟办，至有工役才毕，随即欹漏者，奸弊苟且，劳民费财，莫甚于此。
现代文：今天的土木工程，坏裂尤其严重，下层有官吏和工匠互相勾结狼狈为奸，侵吞克扣工程物质；上面有户工部官员支钱度材，惟务苟办，以致造成工程才完毕，接着就有欺漏的，奸弊苟且，劳民费财，没有比这更厉害的了。
English: Today's civil engineering projects are particularly bad, with officials and craftsmen at the lower levels colluding with each other to embezzle project materials; officials at the higher levels of the Ministry of Industry and Trade spending money and materials, but doing their best, resulting in the completion of the project, and then there is deception, fraud and malpractice, labor and expense, there is nothing more powerful than this.

古文：自今体究，重抵以罪。 
现代文：从今以后检查追究，严重的要对当事者治罪。 
English: From now on, inspections and investigations will be carried out, and serious crimes will be prosecuted against the parties involved.

古文：庚戌，上谓宰臣曰： 朕近读《汉书》，见光武所为，人有所难能者。
现代文：十九日，皇上对宰相大臣说： 朕近来阅读《汉书》，看汉光武帝所做的，有些是一般人难能的。
English: On the 19th, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister: I have recently read the "Chinese Book" and seen what Han Guangwu did, some of which are difficult for ordinary people.

古文：更始既害其兄伯升，当乱离之际，不思报怨，事更始如平日，人不见戚容，岂非人所难能乎？
现代文：更始这个人害了他的兄长伯升，正当乱离的时候，他不想着图报冤仇，待更始像平日一样，人们不见他悲戚的面容，这难道不是一般人所难以做到的吗？
English: In the beginning, this man harmed his brother Bo Sheng. When the separation was justified, he didn't want to seek revenge. When he was treated like an ordinary person, people didn't see his sad face. Isn't this difficult for ordinary people to do?

古文：此其度量盖将大有为者也，其他庸主岂可及哉。 
现代文：这是他的度量完全将大有作为的表现，其他庸碌的君主怎么能比得上他呢？ 
English: This is a manifestation of his meticulousness, how can other mediocre monarchs compare to him?

古文：右丞张汝霖曰： 湖阳公主奴杀人，匿主车中，洛阳令董宣从车中曳奴下，杀之。
现代文：右丞相张汝霖说 ：湖阳公主的奴隶杀了人，藏在他主人的车中，洛阳令董宣把奴才从车中拽出来，杀了他。
English: Minister of the Right Zhang Rulin said: The slave of Princess Hoyang killed a man and hid in his master's car. Luoyang ordered Dong Xuan to pull the slave out of the car and kill him.

古文：主人奏，光武欲杀宣，及闻宣言，意遂解，使宣谢主，宣不奉诏。
现代文：主人进朝廷禀奏，光武皇帝要杀董宣，等到听了董宣说了经过，杀意于是释去，让董宣向公主道谢，董宣不奉诏。
English: The master entered the imperial court and announced that Emperor Guangwu wanted to kill Dong Xuan. After listening to what Dong Xuan had to say, he let go of his intention to kill. He asked Dong Xuan to thank the princess, but Dong Xuan did not obey.

古文：主以言激怒光武，光武但笑而已，更赐宣钱三十万。 
现代文：公主用话激怒光武皇帝，光武帝只是笑罢了，更加赐董宣三十万钱。 
English: The princess angered Emperor Guangwu with her words, but Emperor Guangwu just laughed and gave Dong Xuan 300,000 yuan.

古文：上曰： 光武闻直言而怒解，可谓贤主矣，令宣谢主，则非也。
现代文：皇上说 ：光武帝听到直言而解除了怒气，可以说是一个贤明的君主。让董宣感谢公主，就不对了。
English: The emperor said: Emperor Guangwu could be said to be a wise monarch, as he was relieved of his anger after hearing the direct speech. It would not be right for Dong Xuan to thank the princess.

古文：高祖英雄大度，驾驭豪杰，起自布衣，数年而成帝业，非光武所及，然及即帝位，犹有布衣粗豪之气，光武所不为也。 
现代文：汉高祖英雄大度，驾驭豪杰，起自布衣，几年时间成就了帝业，不是光武帝所能比的，然而等到登上帝位，还有布衣粗犷豪放的气概，这是光武帝所不能为的。 
English: Han Gao, the progenitor of the Han dynasty, was a generous and brave hero, who rose from the cloth and achieved the imperial career in a few years. He was not comparable to Emperor Guangwu, but when he ascended to the throne, he still had the courage of the rugged cloth hero, which was something that Emperor Guangwu could not do.

古文：癸丑，幸太尉克宁第。十二月丙寅，以大理正移剌彦拱为高丽生日使。
现代文：十二月五日，派遣大理正移剌彦拱为高丽生日使。十四日，皇上不舒适。
English: On December 5th, the Emperor dispatched Dali Zhengyi and Gong Yanqong as envoys for the birthday of Goryeo. On the 14th, the Emperor was uncomfortable.

古文：乙亥，上不豫。
现代文：十九日，赦免天下。
English: On the 19th, the world was pardoned.

古文：庚辰，赦天下。乙酉，诏皇太孙景摄政，居庆和殿东庑。
现代文：二十四日，诏令皇太孙瞡摄政，居住在庆和殿东侧的房子里。
English: On the 24th, Emperor Taizong ordered Sun Yat-sen, the regent, to live in a house on the east side of the Qinghe Hall.

古文：丙戌，以太尉、左丞相徒单克宁为太尉兼尚书令，平章政事襄为尚书右相，右丞张汝霖为平章政事。
现代文：二十五日，任命太尉、左丞相徒单克宁为太尉兼尚书令，平章政事襄为尚书右丞相，右丞张汝霖为平章政事。
English: On the 25th, he appointed the first lieutenant and the left senator, Tut Chan Kening, as the second lieutenant and the minister of letters, the right senator, Ping Zhang, as the minister of letters, and the right senator, Zhang Rulin, as the minister of letters.

古文：参知政事完颜婆卢火罢，以户部尚书刘暐为参知政事。
现代文：参知政事完颜婆卢火被免除官职，任命户部尚书刘日韦为参知政事。
English: After Yanba Lu was relieved of his official duties, he appointed the head of the household, Liu Rongwei, as the political advisor to the governor.

古文：戊子，诏尚书令徒单克宁、右丞相相襄、平章政事张汝霖宿于内殿。
现代文：二十七日，诏令尚书令徒单克宁、右丞相襄、平章政事张汝霖在内殿住宿。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Taizong issued the imperial edict of Shangshu, ordering the disciples Shankening, Ujo Sangyo, and Pingzhang Zhengji Zhang Rulin to stay in the inner hall.

古文：二十九年正月壬辰朔，上大渐，不能视朝。
现代文：大定二十九年正月初一，皇上身体有大的变化，不能亲理朝政。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 29th year of Dading, there was a big change in the emperor's body, and he could no longer personally govern the imperial court.

古文：诏遣宋高丽、夏贺正旦使还。
现代文：诏令派遣到宋国、高丽、夏国的贺正旦使返回。
English: He Zhengdan, who was sent to Song, Goryeo, and Xia by imperial edict, returned.

古文：癸巳，上崩于福安殿，寿六十七。
现代文：初二，皇上在福安殿逝世，享年六十七岁。
English: On the second day of the new year, the emperor died at Fu'an Palace at the age of sixty-seven.

古文：皇太孙即皇帝位。
现代文：皇太孙即皇帝位。
English: The emperor's great-great-grandson becomes emperor.

古文：己亥，殡于大安殿。
现代文：初八，将皇帝灵柩停放在大安殿。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the emperor's coffin was placed in the Daan Hall.

古文：三月辛卯朔，上尊谥曰光天兴运文德武功圣明仁孝皇帝，庙号世宗。
现代文：三月一日，皇上被尊谥为光天兴运文德武功圣明仁孝皇帝，庙号是世宗。
English: On March 1, the emperor was honored as the Emperor Guang Tian Xing Yun Wen De Wu Gong Sheng Ming Ren Xiao, and his temple name was Shizong.

古文：四月乙酉，葬兴陵。
现代文：四月二十五日，安葬在兴陵。
English: On April 25, he was buried in Xingling.

