古文：凡与敌战，傍与邻国，当卑辞厚赂以结之，引为己援。
现代文：凡是与敌军作战，对于毗连战区的邻国，就应当用谦和的言辞和贵重的礼物去结交该国，争取其成为自己的同盟。
English: When one is at war with an enemy, one should befriend the neighboring country adjoining the war zone with humble words and valuable gifts, and strive to make it an ally.

古文：若我攻敌人之前，彼犄其后，则敌人必败。
现代文：倘若作战中我进攻敌人的正面，盟国牵制敌人的后面，这样，就一定能把敌人打败。
English: If, in a battle, I attack the enemy's front and the allies hold back the enemy's rear, then we will surely defeat the enemy.

古文：法曰： 衢地则合交。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 在多国交界的地区作战，就应当搞好外交关系，结好盟友。 
English: As stated in the Art of War: When fighting in an area bordered by many countries, it is necessary to establish good diplomatic relations and make good allies.

古文：三国，蜀将关羽，围魏曹仁于樊，魏遣左将军于禁等救之，会汉水暴起，羽以舟兵虏禁等步骑三万，送江陵。
现代文：三国时期的蜀国大将关羽把魏将征南将军曹仁围困在樊城，曹操派遣左将军于禁等人率军前往救援，正碰上汉江洪水暴涨，关羽指挥水师迎战，俘获了于禁等步骑兵三万人，然后把他们押送到江陵。
English: During the Three Kingdoms period, Guan Yu, the general of the State of Shu, besieged Cao Ren, the general of the Wei general for the conquest of the south, in Lucheng. Cao Cao dispatched the left general Yu Huan and others to lead the army to the rescue. When the Han River was flooded, Guan Yu commanded the sailors to fight, captured 30,000 infantry cavalrymen such as Yu Huan, and then escorted them to Gangneung.

古文：是时，汉帝都许昌，魏武以为近贼，欲徙河北，以避其锋。
现代文：当时，汉献帝立都于许昌，曹操认为许昌距敌太近，打算将都城迁往黄河北，以躲避关羽的兵锋威胁。
English: At that time, Emperor Han Xian set up the capital in Xuchang. Cao Cao thought that Xuchang was too close to the enemy and planned to move the capital to the north of the Yellow River to avoid the military threat from Guan Yu.

古文：司马懿谏曰： 禁等为水所没，非战守之所失，于国家大计未有所损，而便迁都，既示敌以弱，又淮、沔之人俱不安矣。
现代文：但大将司马懿却劝阻说： 于禁等人实为洪水所淹没，并非作战不力所造成的失败，这对国家根本不是什么大的损失。如果因此而轻率迁都，不仅是向敌人示弱，还会引起淮河、汉水流域的民众慌惧不安。
English: However, General Sima Yi dissuaded him, saying, "It is not a failure caused by a lack of combat power that Yu Gansu and others were actually flooded, and this is not a great loss to the country at all. If the capital is rashly moved as a result, it will not only show weakness to the enemy, but also cause panic and anxiety among the people in the Huaihe River and Han River basins.

古文：孙权、刘备，外亲而内疏，羽今得意，权必不愿也。
现代文：孙权与刘备虽然结为盟友，实际上是外表亲近而内里疏忌。现在关羽打了胜仗，孙权必不高兴。
English: Although Sun Quan and Liu Bei are allies, they are actually close on the outside but not on the inside. Now that Guan Yu has won the battle, Sun Quan will not be happy.

古文：可谕权，令犄其后，则樊围自解。 
现代文：据此，可以派人谕示孙权，使令他从背后牵制关羽，这样我们的樊城之围就能够解除。 
English: According to this, we can send someone to instruct Sun Quan to make him hold off Guan Yu from behind, so that our siege of Lucheng can be lifted.

古文：魏武从之，遣使结权。
现代文：曹操采纳了司马懿的建议，派遣使者去东吴结好孙权。
English: Cao Cao accepted Sima Yi's suggestion and sent an envoy to Dongwu to secure Sun Quan.

古文：权遂遣吕蒙西袭公安、南郡，拔之，羽果弃樊而去。
现代文：孙权于是派吕蒙率军西进袭占了公安和南郡，关羽果然放弃对樊城的围困而退走了。
English: Sun Quan then sent Lv Meng and his army to the west to attack and occupy the public security and Nanshun. Guan Yu finally gave up the siege of Lucheng and withdrew.

