古文：传书曰：宋景公之时，荧惑守心，公惧，召子韦而问之曰： 荧惑在心，何也？ 
现代文：传书上说： 宋景公的时候，火星在心宿附近，宋景公感到害怕，召子韦来问他： 火星快要处在心宿的位置上，这是为什么？ 
English: The biography said: When Song Jing Gong was at the scene, Mars was near his home. Song Jing Gong felt scared and summoned Zi Wei to ask him: Mars is about to be in the position of his home, why is this?

古文：子韦曰： 荧惑，天罚也，心，宋分野也，祸当君。
现代文：子韦回答： 火星的出现，预示着上天的惩罚，心宿是宋国的分野，灾祸正当在君主。
English: Zi Wei replied: The appearance of Mars indicates the punishment of heaven, the heart is the domain of the Song Dynasty, and the disaster is rightfully in the monarch.

古文：虽然，可移於宰相。 
现代文：但是，可以把它转嫁给宰相。 
English: Nevertheless, the disaster can be transferred to the Prime Minister.

古文：公曰： 宰相所使治国家也，而移死焉，不祥。 
现代文：景公说： 宰相是我任命治理国家的人，却把死转嫁给他，不吉祥。 
English: Jing Gong said, "The prime minister is the person I appointed to govern the country, but it is not auspicious to pass the death on to him.

古文：子韦曰： 可移於民。 
现代文：子韦又说： 可以转嫁给老百姓。 
English: Zi Wei said: The disaster pot can be transferred to the people.

古文：公曰： 民死，寡人将谁为也？
现代文：景公回答： 老百姓死光了，我将去做谁的国君呢？
English: King Jing replied: With all the people dead, whose sovereign will I become?

古文：宁独死耳。 
现代文：宁可我一个人死。 
English: I'd rather die alone.

古文：子韦曰： 可移於岁。 
现代文：子韦再建议： 可以转嫁到年成上去。 
English: Zi Wei said; it is also possible to transfer the disaster to agricultural harvest.

古文：公曰： 民饥，必死。
现代文：景公则回答： 老百姓饥饿，一定会死去。
English: Jing Gong replied: The common people are starving and will surely die.

古文：为人君而欲杀其民以自活也，其谁以我为君者乎？
现代文：做君主的却要杀他的百姓来求得自己活下去，那谁还肯把我当做君主呢？
English: If a prince wants to kill his people in order to keep himself alive, who will consider me a prince?

古文：是寡人命固尽也，子毋复言。 
现代文：看来，这是我的寿命本来已经到头，你不要再说了。 
English: It seems that this is the end of my life, so stop talking about it.

古文：子韦退走，北面再拜曰： 臣敢贺君。
现代文：之后，子韦又返回来，朝着北面再向景公叩拜说： 臣冒昧地向君王恭贺。
English: After that, Zi Wei came back again and bowed to King Gyeonggong again, facing north, saying, "Your Majesty, I take the liberty of congratulating you."

古文：天之处高而耳卑，君有君人之言三，天必三赏君。
现代文：天虽处在很高的地方，但它能听见地上的话，君王说了三句作为君主该说的话，上天必定要三次奖赏君王。
English: Although the sky is in a high place, it can hear the words of the earth. The king said three words as a monarch should say. Heaven must reward the king three times.

古文：今夕星必徙三舍，君延命二十一年。 
现代文：今天晚上火星肯定要移动三个地方，这样君王就会延长寿命二十一年。 
English: This evening, Mars will move three places, so that the king will live 21 years longer.

古文：公曰： 奚知之？ 
现代文：景公问道： 你怎么知道呢？ 
English: Jing Gong asked: How do you know?

古文：对曰： 君有三善，故有三赏，星必三徙。
现代文：子韦回答： 君王说了三句作为君主该说的话，所以要受到三次奖励，火星肯定会移动三个地方。
English: Zi Wei replied: The king said three words as a monarch should say, so he should be rewarded three times, and Mars will definitely move three places.

古文：徙行七星，星当一年，三七二十一，故君命延二十一岁。
现代文：移动一个地方要经过七颗星，一颗星相当于一年，三七二十一，所以君王的寿命会延长二十一年。
English: Moving one place requires seven stars, one star is equivalent to one year, 3721, so the king's life will be extended by 21 years.

古文：臣请伏於殿下以伺之，星必不徙，臣请死耳。 
现代文：臣请求匍伏在宫殿的台阶下面观察，火星如果不移动，臣请求处死。 
English: If Mars did not move, the vassal requested that he be put to death.

古文：是夕也，火星果徙三舍。
现代文：这天晚上，火星果然移动了三个地方。
English: On this night, Mars actually moved three places.

古文：如子韦之言，则延年审得二十一岁矣。
现代文：像子韦说的那样，景公确实得到延长寿命二十一年。
English: As Zi Wei said, Jing Gong did get an extension of life of twenty-one years.

古文：星徙审则延命，延命明则景公为善，天佑之也。
现代文：火星果真移动，景公就延长了寿命，寿命确实延长，那么景公行善，这是上天保祐了他。
English: If the planet Mars really moves, Jing Gong's lifespan will be extended. If his lifespan is really extended, then Jing Gong will do good deeds. This is God's blessing on him.

古文：则夫世间人能为景公之行者，则必得景公佑矣。
现代文：这样看来，世上能做到景公善行的人，就必然会得到景公那样的上天保祐。
English: From this perspective, those who can do good deeds like Jinggong in the world will inevitably receive heavenly protection like Jinggong.

古文：此言虚也。
现代文：这话不确实。
English: This allegation is false.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：皇天迁怒，使荧惑本景公身为有恶而守心，则虽听子韦言，犹无益也。
现代文：因为按照上天会降怒的说法，假使火星本来是由于景公自身有恶行而迫近心宿，那即使听了子韦的话，也没有什么用处。
English: Because according to the saying that the heavens will be angry, if Mars was originally due to the evil deeds of Jing Gong himself and approached the heart, then even listening to Zi Wei's words would be of no use.

古文：使其不为景公，则虽不听子韦之言，亦无损也。
现代文：如果火星不是为了景公的恶行而迫近心宿，那即使不听子韦的话，也不会有什么害处。
English: If Mars is not approaching the heart for the sake of the evil deeds of the prince, then even if he does not listen to Zi Wei, there will be no harm.

古文：齐景公时有彗星，使人禳之。
现代文：齐景公的时候有彗星出现，景公要派人去祭祀和祈祷以解除灾难。
English: At the time of King Qi Jing, a comet appeared, and King Jing had to send people to offer sacrifices and prayers to relieve the calamity.

古文：晏子曰： 无益也，只取诬焉。
现代文：晏子说： 没有用处，那只会受骗。
English: The cripple said, "It's no use, you'll only be cheated."

古文：天道不暗，不贰其命，若之何禳之也？
现代文：天道不糊涂，不会更改它的命令和主张的，既然如此，为什么要去禳解它呢？
English: If the heavenly way is not confused, and does not change its orders and propositions, then why try to solve it?

古文：且天之有彗，以除秽也。君无秽德，又何禳焉？
现代文：况且天有彗星，是用来扫除污秽，君主没有污秽德行，又何必去禳解它呢？
English: Moreover, there is a comet in the sky, which is used to sweep away filth. The sovereign has no filthy virtue, and why should he relieve it?

古文：若德之秽，禳之何益？
现代文：如果德行有污秽，禳解又有什么用处呢？
English: If virtue is filthy, what is the use of purification?

古文：《诗》曰： 惟此文王，小心翼翼，昭事上帝，聿怀多福；厥德不回，以受方国。 
现代文：《诗经·大雅·大明》上说： 这个周文王，小心翼翼地特意侍奉上天，得到许多福祐；他的德行不奸邪，因而享有四方诸侯国。 
English: "Shijing, Daya, Daming" said: This King Zhouwen carefully and deliberately served heaven and received many blessings; his virtue did not commit evil, and thus enjoyed the four-square principality.

古文：君无回德，方国将至，何患於彗？
现代文：君王你没有奸邪的德行，将要拥有四方诸侯之国，为什么要担忧彗星呢？
English: King, you have not the virtue of treachery, you will have the country of the four princes, why worry about the comet?

古文：《诗》曰：我无所监，夏後及商，用乱之故，民卒流亡。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 我没有什么借鉴的，只看到夏朝和商朝，它们由于政治昏乱的缘故，老百姓终于流亡。 
English: "The Book of Songs" said: I have nothing to learn from, I only see the Xia Dynasty and the Shang Dynasty. Due to their political confusion, the common people finally went into exile.

古文：若德回乱，民将流亡，祝史之为，无能补也。
现代文：如果君王的德行邪乱，百姓就要流亡，太祝和太史的禳解活动，是无法弥补的。 
English: If the virtue goes against the fate of heaven and becomes chaotic, the people will go into exile, and the actions of Zhu Xi will not help.

古文：公说，乃止。齐君欲禳彗星之凶，犹子韦欲移荧惑之祸也。
现代文：齐景公听了很高兴，于是就停止了对彗星禳解的祭祀和祈祷。齐景公想禳解彗星的灾难，就像子韦想转嫁火星的灾祸一样。
English: Qi Jing Gong was very pleased to hear this, so he stopped the sacrifices and prayers for the comet relief. Qi Jing Gong wanted to relieve the disaster of the comet, just as Zi Wei wanted to pass on the disaster of Mars.

古文：宋君不听，犹晏子不肯从也。
现代文：宋景公不肯听信子韦的劝说，就像晏子不肯依从齐景公禳解彗星灾难一样。
English: Song Jing Gong did not want to listen to the persuasion of Xin Zi Wei, just as Zou Zi did not want to follow Qi Jing Gong to solve the comet disaster.

古文：则齐君为子韦，晏子为宋君也。
现代文：齐景公如像子韦，晏子如像宋景公。
English: Qi Jing Gong is like Zi Wei, Zizi is like Song Jing Gong.

古文：同变共祸，一事二人。天犹贤宋君，使荧惑徙三舍，延二十一年，独不多晏子使彗消而增其寿，何天佑善偏驳之齐一也？
现代文：同样的凶兆，同类的事情，表现在两个人身上，上天好像赞赏宋景公，让火星移动三个地方，延长他寿命二十一年，唯独不称赞晏子，让彗星消除增添他的寿命，为什么上天保祐善人那么不公平、不纯正，不用同一个标准呢？
English: The same evil omen, the same kind of thing, manifested itself in two people. Heaven seemed to appreciate Song Jing Gong, allowing Mars to move three places, extending his life span by twenty-one years. However, it did not praise the cripple, and allowed the comet to eliminate and increase his life span. Why was Heaven's protection of good people so unfair and impure, and why did it not use the same standard?

古文：人君有善行，善行动於心，善言出於意，同由共本，一气不异。
现代文：国君有好的德行好的言语，好德行生于好心，好言语出于好意，它们同样的来源，同样的气，没有什么两样。
English: Princes have good morals, good deeds and good words. Good morals are born from good intentions, and good words are born from good intentions. They come from the same source, the same breath, and there is no difference between them.

古文：宋景公出三善言，则其先三善言之前，必有善行也。
现代文：宋景公说了三句好听的话，在他说三句好话之前，必定有好的德行。
English: Song Jing Gong said three nice words. Before he said three nice words, he must have a good moral character.

古文：有善行，必有善政，政善，则嘉瑞臻，福祥至，荧惑之星无为守心也。
现代文：有好的德行，一定有好的政治。政治好，就会有吉祥的征兆出现，福祥的到来，火星就没有理由迫近心宿。
English: If you have good morals, you must have good politics. If you have good politics, auspicious signs will appear. If you have good fortune, there is no reason for Mars to come close to your heart.

古文：使景公有失误之行，以致恶政，恶政发，则妖异见，荧惑之守心，桑谷不生朝。
现代文：假使宋景公有错误的德行，导致成恶劣政治，恶劣政治发生，就会凶兆出现，火星就会迫近心宿，像桑树和穀树就会突然在朝廷里长出。
English: If Song Jing Gong has the wrong moral conduct, leading to bad politics, bad politics will occur, ominous signs will appear, Mars will approach the heart, like mulberry trees and grain trees will suddenly grow in the imperial court.

古文：高宗消桑谷之变，以政不以言；景公却荧惑之异，亦宜以行。
现代文：商高宗消除桑树和穀树的灾祸，是靠改善政治，而不是靠讲好话；宋景公消除火星的灾祸，也应该靠好的行动。
English: Shang Gaozong eliminated the scourge of mulberry trees and grain trees by improving politics, not by speaking good words; Song Jinggong eliminated the scourge of Mars, but also by good actions.

古文：景公有恶行，故荧惑守心。
现代文：宋景公有恶劣德行，所以火星侵犯心宿。
English: Song Jing Gong had a bad moral character, so Mars invaded his heart.

古文：不改政修行，坐出三善言，安能动天？
现代文：他却不改善政治修养德行，而是坐着说三句好话，怎么就能感动上天！
English: However, he does not improve his political cultivation and moral conduct, but sits and says three good words, how can he move heaven!

古文：天安肯应！
现代文：上天怎么肯答应！
English: How could God agree to this!

古文：何以效之？
现代文：用什么来证明呢？
English: What will be used to verify this?

古文：使景公出三恶言，能使荧惑守心乎？
现代文：假使让宋景公说三句坏话，能使火星吃心宿吗？
English: If you let Song Jing Gong say three bad words, can you make Mars eat his heart?

古文：夫三恶言不能使荧惑守心，三善言安能使荧惑退徙三舍？
现代文：三句坏话不能使火星吃掉星宿，那么三句好话怎么能使火星退去转移三个地方呢？
English: Three bad words cannot make Mars eat the stars, so how can three good words make Mars retreat and move to three places?

古文：以三善言获二十一年，如有百善言，得千岁之寿乎？
现代文：以三句好话得到二十一年寿命，如果说一百句好话，那不是要得到千年的寿命？
English: With three kind words you can get a life span of twenty-one years. If you say a hundred kind words, won't you get a life span of a thousand years?

古文：非天佑善之意，应诚为福之实也。
现代文：这不是上天保祐善人的意思，也不是用赐福来报答诚心人的实情。
English: This is not God's intention to bless the good people, nor is it to reward the sincere people with blessings.

古文：子韦之言： 天处高而听卑，君有君人之言三，天必三赏君。 
现代文：子韦的话说： 天虽处在很高的地方，但它的耳朵离地面却很近，君王说了三句作为君主该说的话，上天必定要三次奖赏君王。 
English: Zi Wei said: Although the sky is in a high place, but its ear is very close to the ground. The king said three words as a monarch should say. Heaven must reward the king three times.

古文：夫天体也，与地无异。
现代文：其实天体跟地没有什么不同。
English: In fact, celestial bodies are no different from the earth.

古文：诸有体者，耳咸附於首。
现代文：凡是有形体的，耳朵都生在头上。
English: Everything that has a body has ears on its head.

古文：体与耳殊，未之有也。
现代文：身体与耳朵分开，从来没有过。
English: Never before has the body been separated from the ear.

古文：天之去人，高数万里，使耳附天，听数万里之语，弗能闻也。
现代文：天离人有数万里，假使让耳朵长在天上，要听数万里之外说的话，是不可能听见的。
English: The sky is tens of thousands of miles away from a person. Even if the ear grows in the sky, it is impossible to hear what is said tens of thousands of miles away.

古文：人坐楼台之上，察地之蝼蚁，尚不见其体，安能闻其声。
现代文：一个人坐在楼台上，观看地上的蝼蛄和蚂蚁，尚且看不见它们的身体，怎么能听到它们的声音。
English: How can one hear the sound of crickets and ants without being able to see their bodies?

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：蝼蚁之体细，不若人形大，声音孔气不能达也。
现代文：因为蝼蛄和蚂蚁的身体细小，不如人体大，声音小、气少，是不可能达到楼台上的。
English: Because the bodies of crickets and ants are small, not as large as the human body, the sound is small, the gas is small, it is impossible to reach the platform.

古文：今天之崇高非直楼台，人体比於天，非若蝼蚁於人也。
现代文：如今天很高很高，并非楼台可比，人体与天比，不同于蝼蛄和蚂蚁跟人比。
English: If today is very high, it is not comparable to the building, the human body is compared to the sky, unlike the centipede and the ant compared to the human.

古文：谓天非若蝼蚁于人也。谓天闻人言，随善恶为吉凶，误矣。
现代文：说天能听见人说话，于是随着人的善恶而降吉凶，这不对。
English: It is not right to say that the heavens can hear people's words, and then bring good or bad fortune according to people's good or evil.

古文：四夷入诸夏，因译而通。
现代文：四方的民族到中原地区来，要通过翻译才能互通语言。
English: When ethnic groups from the four directions come to the Central Plains, it is only through translation that they can communicate with each other.

古文：同形均气，语不相晓。虽五帝三王，不能去译独晓四夷，况天与人异体、音与人殊乎？
现代文：同样的形体，承受相同的气，说话却互相不懂得，即使是五帝三王也不能离开翻译而独自懂得四方民族的语言，何况天与人不是同一种形体，声音跟人不一样！
English: The same body, bearing the same breath, speak but do not understand each other. Even the five emperors and three kings could not understand the language of the peoples of the four quarters without an interpreter. What's more, heaven and man are not the same kind of body, and the voice is different from man's!

古文：人不晓天所为，天安能知人所行。
现代文：人不知道天要做什么，天又怎么能知道人要做什么呢？
English: Man does not know what God will do, so how can God know what man will do?

古文：使天体乎，耳高不能闻人言；使天气乎，气若云烟，安能听人辞？
现代文：假使天是实体，耳朵离地面太远就不能听见人说话。假使天是气，气同云彩烟雾，怎么能听得懂人的话！
English: If the sky is a solid body, and the ear is too far from the ground, it cannot hear people's words. If the sky is air, and air is the same as clouds and smoke, how can it understand people's words?

古文：说灾变之家曰： 人在天地之间，犹鱼在水中矣。
现代文：解释灾变的人说： 人在天与地之间，就像鱼在水中一样。
English: The man who explains cataclysms says: Man is between heaven and earth, like a fish in water.

古文：其能以行动天地，犹鱼鼓而振水也，鱼动而水荡气变。 
现代文：人能够用行为感动天地，就像鱼动能震荡水一样。鱼动水被震荡，就能使气受感应发生变化上达于天。 
English: People can move heaven and earth with their actions, just as a fish's kinetic energy shakes the water.

古文：此非实事也。
现代文：这不是事实。
English: This is not true.

古文：假使真然，不能至天。
现代文：假使真是这样，也不会上达于天。
English: Even if this were true, it would not reach heaven.

古文：鱼长一尺，动於水中，振旁侧之水，不过数尺，大若不过与人同，所振荡者不过百步，而一里之外淡然澄静，离之远也。
现代文：鱼身长一尺，在水中动，震动旁边的水不会超过数尺，大的不过与人一样，所震荡的远近不过百步，而一里之外仍然安然清彻平静，因为离得太远了。
English: The fish is one foot long, moves in the water, the water next to the shaking does not exceed a few feet, the big one is just like a person, the shock is only a hundred paces away, and a mile away is still safe and calm, because it is too far away.

古文：今人操行变气，远近宜与鱼等；气应而变，宜与水均。
现代文：如果说人操行的善恶能使气变动，那么其远近应该跟鱼震荡水的远近相等，气受人操行善恶感应变化的范围，也应该跟水一样。
English: If it is said that the good and evil done by man can cause the qi to change, then its distance and proximity should be equal to the distance and proximity of the fish shaking the water, and the range of the qi induced by the good and evil done by man should also be the same as that of water.

古文：以七尺之细形，形中之微气，不过与一鼎之蒸火同。从下地上变皇天，何其高也！
现代文：人这七尺小的形体，形体中细微的气，不过跟蒸熟一鼎食物所需的气相同，却要从下面的地向上感动上天，怎么能达到那么高呢？
English: How is it possible for a seven-foot-tall human being, with a tiny amount of air in his body, but the same amount of air that is needed to steam a bowl of food, to be moved from the ground up to the sky?

古文：且景公贤者也。
现代文：况且宋景公是个贤者。
English: Moreover, Song Jing Gong was a wise man.

古文：贤者操行，上不及圣人，下不过恶人。
现代文：贤者的操行，比上达不到圣人，比下超不过恶人。
English: The conduct of a wise man is no better than that of a saint, and that of a wicked man no better than that of a sinner.

古文：世间圣人，莫不尧、舜，恶人，莫不桀、纣。
现代文：谈到世间上的圣人没有不说尧、舜的，讲到恶人没有不骂桀、纣的。
English: When it comes to the saints of the world, there is no one who does not say "thou" and "thou," and when it comes to the wicked, there is no one who does not swear "thou" and "thou."

古文：尧、舜操行多善，无移荧惑之效；桀、纣之政多恶，有反景公脱祸之验。
现代文：尧、舜的操行多善行，并没有使火星移动地方而延长寿命的效验；桀、纣的政治多恶行，也没有火星降灾的效验，反而有宋景公逃脱灾难不早死的应验。
English: The more virtuous actions of Zhai and Zhai, there is no effect of extending life by moving the planet Mars; the more evil political actions of Zhai and Zhai, there is no effect of Mars reducing disaster, but there is a fulfillment of Song Jinggong's escape from disaster and early death.

古文：景公出三善言，延年二十一岁，是则尧、舜宜获千岁，桀纣宜为殇子。
现代文：宋景公说了三句好话，得延长寿命二十一年，那么尧、舜就应该得到延寿千岁，而桀、纣就应该夭折。
English: Song Jing Gong said three good words, it is necessary to extend the life of twenty-one years, then the dragonfly and dragonfly should get the extension of life of a thousand years, and the dragonfly and dragonfly should die young.

古文：今则不然，各随年寿，尧、舜、桀、纣皆近百载。
现代文：如今则不然，他们各人随顺自己的年寿而终，尧、舜、桀、纣，都活到了近百岁。
English: Today, however, they do not. Each of them dies according to his own age,,,,,, all living to nearly a hundred years old.

古文：是竟子韦之言妄，延年之语虚也。
现代文：这样看来，子韦的话终究是不可靠的，宋景公延长寿命的说法是假的。
English: From this perspective, Zi Wei's words are ultimately unreliable, and Song Jinggong's claim to extend life is false.

古文：且子韦之言曰： 荧惑，天使也；心，宋分野也。祸当君。 
现代文：而且子韦的话说： 火星的出现，是上天要它这样的，心宿是宋国的分野，灾祸正当在君主身上。 
English: Moreover, Zi Wei said: The appearance of Mars is what God wants it to be, the heartland is the field of the Song Dynasty, and the disaster is on the monarch.

古文：若是者，天使荧惑加祸於景公也，如何可移於将相、若岁与国民乎？
现代文：要是这样，就是上天使火星降灾祸给宋景公，怎么可以转移给将相，或者年成及老百姓呢？
English: If this is the case, that is, the angel Mars brought disaster to Song Jinggong, how can it be transferred to the generals, or to Niancheng and the common people?

古文：天之有荧惑也，犹王者之有方伯也。
现代文：上天有火星，就像当王的人有方伯一样。
English: There is a Mars in the sky, just as a king has a consort.

古文：诸侯有当死之罪，使方伯围守其国，国君问罪於臣，臣明罪在君。虽然，可移於臣子与人民。
现代文：诸侯有该死的罪过，王就派方伯去包围、监视这个诸侯国家。国君向大臣问罪，大臣说明罪在君王，即使这样，君王仍然可以把罪转移在大臣和老百姓身上。
English: The princes are guilty of a heinous crime, and the king sends his governors to encircle and monitor this princely state. The sovereign asks the minister about the crime, and the minister explains that the crime lies with the monarch. Even so, the monarch can still transfer the crime to the ministers and the people.

古文：设国君计其言，令其臣归罪於国人，方伯闻之，肯听其言，释国君之罪，更移以付国人乎？
现代文：假设国君考虑了子韦的话，命令他的大臣把灾祸归罪在百姓身上，方伯听了，肯听话，而免除国君罪过，转移给老百姓吗？
English: Suppose that the sovereign considered Zi Wei's words and ordered his minister to blame the disaster on the people. The governor listened, and was willing to obey, and absolve the sovereign's sin and transfer it to the people?

古文：方伯不听者，自国君之罪，非国人之辜也。
现代文：方伯之所以不肯听，因为本来是国君的罪过，并非是老百姓的罪过。
English: The reason why the governor did not want to listen was because it was originally the fault of the sovereign, not the fault of the people.

古文：方伯不听自国人之罪，荧惑安肯移祸於国人！
现代文：方伯不肯听从，本来是国君的罪过，火星又怎么肯转移灾祸给老百姓呢？
English: The governor did not want to listen, which was the sovereign's fault, so how could Mars transfer the disaster to the people?

古文：若此，子韦之言妄也。
现代文：像这样，子韦的话就是假的。
English: As such, Zi Wei's words are completely false.

古文：曰：景公听乎言、庸何能动天？
现代文：再说，宋景公不听从子韦的劝说，怎么就能感动上天呢？
English: Besides, if Song Jinggong did not listen to Zi Wei's persuasion, how could he have moved heaven?

古文：使诸侯不听其臣言，引过自予。方伯闻其言，释其罪，委之去乎？
现代文：如果诸侯不肯听他臣子的话，把过错归在自己身上，方伯听了他的话，能免除他的罪过，放他离开吗？
English: If the lords would not listen to his vassal, but took the blame upon themselves, could the governor, having listened to him, absolve him of his guilt and let him go?

古文：方伯不释诸侯之罪，荧惑安肯徙去三舍？
现代文：方伯不免除诸侯的罪过，火星又怎么肯移动三个地方呢！
English: The governor does not absolve the sins of the princes, how can Mars move three places!

古文：夫听与不听，皆无福善，星徙之实，未可信用。
现代文：可见，听不听子韦的话，都没有福善之类的事发生，火星移动的事情，不能相信。
English: You see, whether you listen to Zi Wei's words or not, there is no such thing as good fortune happening, and you can't believe that Mars is moving.

古文：天人同道，好恶不殊。人道不然，则知天无验矣。
现代文：天上与人间是同样的道理，喜好和厌恶没有什么两样，人间的道理不是这样，那么也就知道上天不会有免除宋景公罪过的效验。
English: Heaven is the same as the human world. There is no difference between likes and dislikes. The human world is not like this. Therefore, we know that heaven will not have the effect of absolving Song Jinggong's crime.

古文：宋、卫、陈、郑之俱灾也，气变见天。
现代文：宋国、卫国、陈国、郑国同时发生火灾，这种气数的变化上天早有预兆。
English: In Song, Wei, Chen and Zheng dynasties, fires occurred at the same time. This change in the number of qi was foreshadowed by the heavens.

古文：梓慎知之，请於子产有以除之，子产不听。
现代文：梓惧知道了，告诉子产，想办法把它禳除掉，子产不听。
English: Azusa was afraid to find out, so she told the midwife to find a way to get rid of it, but the midwife wouldn't listen.

古文：天道当然，人事不能却也。
现代文：认为天道该这样，人力无法消除它。
English: It is believed that this is the way of heaven and cannot be eliminated by human effort.

古文：使子产听梓慎，四国能无灾乎？
现代文：如果子产听了梓慎的话，四国能不发生火灾吗？
English: If Shikoku listens to Zi Shen, can there be no fire in Shikoku?

古文：尧遭鸿水时，臣必有梓慎、子韦之知矣。
现代文：尧遭遇洪水的时候，大臣中肯定有像梓慎、子韦见识的。
English: When Handan was hit by floods, there must have been ministers like Zi Shen and Zi Wei who saw it coming.

古文：然而不却除者，尧与子产同心也。
现代文：然而没有禳除，是尧与子产有同样的想法。
English: However, it has not been eradicated, and it is the earthworm that has the same idea as the offspring.

古文：案子韦之言曰： 荧惑，天使也；心，宋分野也。祸当君。 
现代文：考察一下子韦说的： 火星是上天派来的，心宿是宋国的分野，灾祸正当在君主身上。 
English: Let's take a look at what Wei said: Mars was sent by the heavens, the heart of the country is the Song Dynasty, and the disaster is rightfully on the monarch.

古文：审如此言，祸不可除，星不可却也。
现代文：果如此言，灾祸不能消除，火星也不会退出。
English: If so, the disaster cannot be eliminated, and Mars will not withdraw.

古文：若夫寒温失和，风雨不时，政事之家，谓之失误所致，可以善政贤行变而复也。
现代文：至于寒温失调，风雨不合时令，解说政事的人说它是政治失误造成的，可以用好的政治好的行为来消除并恢复正常。
English: As for the cold temperature imbalance, the wind and rain are out of season, the political commentator said that it was caused by political mistakes, and it can be eliminated and restored to normal with good politics and good behavior.

古文：若荧惑守心，若必死，犹亡祸安可除？
现代文：像火星迫近心宿，如果就预示必定死君主还要亡国家的话，那么灾祸怎么能消除呢？
English: If, as Mars approaches the heart, it foretells the death of the monarch and the ruin of the state, how can the calamity be averted?

古文：修政改行，安能却之？
现代文：改良政治改善行为，又怎么能消除它呢？
English: How can it be eliminated by reforming politics and improving behavior?

古文：善政贤行，尚不能却，出虚华之三言，谓星却而祸除，增寿延年，享长久之福，误矣。
现代文：好的政治、好的行为，尚且不能消除，讲了华而不实的三句话，说火星就能退去，灾祸就能解除，于是增寿延年，享长久之福，这话不对。
English: It is not correct to say that good politics and good behavior cannot be eliminated, and to say that Mars can retreat, and disasters can be relieved, so that people can live longer and enjoy long-term happiness.

古文：观子韦之言景公，言荧惑之祸，非寒暑风雨之类，身死命终之祥也。
现代文：看子韦讲火星的灾祸，并不是寒暑风雨之类，而是君主身死王朝命终的征兆。
English: The calamity of Mars that Kan Zi Wei speaks of is not cold, heat, wind and rain, but a sign of the end of the dynasty when the monarch dies.

古文：国且亡，身且死，祆气见於天，容色见於面。
现代文：王朝将亡，君主将死，凶兆在天上出现，将死的神色在脸上呈现。
English: The dynasty will perish, the monarch will die, ominous signs will appear in the sky, and a look of death will appear on their faces.

古文：面有容色，虽善操行不能灭，死征已见也。
现代文：脸上有将死的神色，即使有好的操行也不会消除，因为死的征兆已经出现。
English: There was a deathly look on his face, which even good manners could not dispel, for the signs of death were already there.

古文：在体之色，不可以言行灭；在天之妖，安可以治除乎？
现代文：在人身上的神色，不能用言论、操行来消除；在天上的凶兆，怎么能用善政来消除呢？
English: The appearance on the human body cannot be eliminated by words and deeds; how can the ominous signs in the heavens be eliminated by good governance?

古文：人病且死，色见於面，人或谓之曰： 此必死之征也。
现代文：人病重将死，气色显在脸上，人有的说： 这肯定是要死的征兆。
English: When a man is gravely ill and on the verge of death, and his face is pale, some people say, "This must be a sign that he is about to die."

古文：虽然，可移於五邻，若移於奴役。 
现代文：虽然如此，但是可以转嫁给五邻，或转嫁给奴仆。 
English: Nevertheless, it can be passed on to the five neighbors, or passed on to the servants.

古文：当死之人，正言不可，容色肯为善言之故灭，而当死之命，肯为之长乎？
现代文：该死的人即使严正他说不能够嫁祸于人，那将死的神色肯因为好听的话的缘故而消除，该死的命肯为之而延长吗？
English: Even if the damned man strictly said that he could not blame others, would the dying look be eliminated for the sake of good words, and would the damned life be extended for it?

古文：气不可灭，命不可长。
现代文：妖气不能消除，生命不能延长。
English: Evil spirits cannot be eliminated, and life cannot be prolonged.

古文：然则荧惑安可却？景公之年安可增乎？
现代文：那么火星怎么能够退出，宋景公的寿命怎么能增长呢？
English: So how can Mars withdraw, and how can Song Jinggong's life expectancy increase?

古文：由此言之，荧惑守心，未知所为，故景公不死也。
现代文：由此说来，火星迫近心宿，不知道是什么原因，所以宋景公才没有死。
English: As a result, Mars is close to the heart, and it is not known what the reason is, so Song Jing Gongcai did not die.

古文：且言 星徙三舍 者，何谓也？
现代文：况且说火星移动三个地方的人，讲的是什么呢？
English: Besides, what do people talk about when they say that Mars moves three places?

古文：星三徙於一舍乎？
现代文：是火星三次移动三个地方呢？
English: Did Mars move three times in three places?

古文：一徙历於三舍也？
现代文：还是一次移动经历三个地方呢？
English: Or is it a mobile experience in three places?

古文：案子韦之言曰： 君有君人之言三，天必三赏君，今夕星必徙三舍。 
现代文：考察子韦说的： 君王说了三句作为君主该说的话，上天必定要三次奖赏君王，今天晚上火星肯定要移动三个地方。 
English: Investigating Zi Wei said: The king said three words as a monarch should say, heaven must reward the king three times, and Mars must move three places tonight.

古文：若此，星竟徙三舍也。
现代文：像这样火星终于移动了三个地方。
English: Like this, Mars finally moved three places.

古文：夫景公一坐有三善言，星徙三舍，知有十善言，星徙十舍乎？
现代文：宋景公竟坐着说了三句好话，火星就移动了三个地方，如果说了十句好话，那火星岂不是要移动十个地方吗？
English: Song Jing Gong actually sat down and said three good words, and Mars moved three places. If he said ten good words, wouldn't Mars have to move ten places?

古文：荧惑守心，为善言却，如景公复出三恶言，荧惑食心乎？
现代文：火星迫近心宿，因为几句好话就退去，要是宋景公重复说出三句坏话，火星会吃掉心宿吗？
English: Mars is approaching the heart destination, because a few good words will retreat. If Song Jinggong repeats three bad words, will Mars eat the heart destination?

古文：为善言却，为恶言进，无善无恶，荧惑安居不行动乎？
现代文：因为好话而退去，因为坏话而进犯，无好话又无坏话，火星就会安定在位置上不行动吗？
English: Because of good words and retreat, because of bad words and attack, no good words and no bad words, Mars will be stable in the position of inaction?

古文：或时荧惑守心为旱灾，不为君薨。
现代文：或许火星迫近心宿是旱灾的预兆，而不是君主要死的预兆。
English: Perhaps the approach of Mars is a harbinger of drought, not the death of a monarch.

古文：子韦不知，以为死祸。
现代文：子韦不知道，就认为是君主将死的灾祸，便相信了世俗至诚能感动上天的说法。
English: Zi Wei did not know, he thought it was a calamity that the monarch would die, and he believed in the saying that worldly sincerity could move heaven.

古文：信俗至诚之感，荧惑去处星，必偶自当去，景公自不死，世则谓子韦之言审，景公之诚感天矣。
现代文：火星离开停留的地方，一定是它恰巧本来该离开，而宋景公本来也不该死，世人则说子韦的话确实，宋景公的诚意感动了上天。
English: Mars left the place of stay, it must have happened to leave, and Song Jing Gong did not deserve to die. The world said that Zi Wei's words were true, and Song Jing Gong's sincerity moved heaven.

古文：亦或时子韦知星行度适自去，自以著己之知，明君臣推让之所致；见星之数七，因言星七舍，复得二十一年，因以星舍计年之数。
现代文：也或许是子韦知道火星按运行的度数恰好本来要离开，自然以此来显示自己的才智，宣扬它是君臣相互推让造成的。他知道火星运行的规律每移动一次要经过七星，因此说火星移动三个地方，于是宋景公又得二十一岁，这是通过火星移动地方来算出延年的数目。
English: It may also be that Zi Wei knew that Mars was just about to leave according to the degree of its movement, and naturally used this to show his intelligence, proclaiming that it was caused by the mutual concession of monarchs and ministers. He knew that the law of the movement of Mars had to pass through seven stars every time it moved, so he said that Mars moved three places, so Song Jinggong was twenty-one years old again, which was the number of years of extension calculated by the place where Mars moved.

古文：是与齐太卜无以异也。
现代文：这与齐国的太卜没有什么不同。
English: This is no different from the queens of Qi.

古文：齐景公问太卜曰： 子之道何能？ 
现代文：齐景公问太卜道： 你的道术能干什么？ 
English: Qi Jing Gong asked the Taoist: What can your Taoism do?

古文：对曰： 能动地。 
现代文：太卜回答说： 能震动地。 
English: Taib replied: It can make the earth tremble.

古文：晏子往见公，公曰： 寡人问太卜曰： 子道何能？ 
现代文：晏子会见齐景公，景公说： 我问太卜： 你的道术能干什么？ 
English: Zongzi met with Qi Jing Gong, and Jing Gong said: I asked the goddess: What can your Taoism do?

古文：对曰： 能动地。 
现代文：他回答： 能震动地。 
English: Taib replied: It can make the earth tremble.

古文：地固可动乎？ 
现代文：地会震动吗？ 
English: Will the ground shake?

古文：晏子嘿然不对，出见太卜曰： 昔吾见钩星在房、心之间，地其动乎？ 
现代文：晏子默然不回答，出去碰见太卜说： 以前我看见水星在房宿、心宿之间，地会震动吗？ 
English: The cripple silently did not answer, but went out to meet the old woman and said, "Before, I saw Mercury between the house and the heart. Will the earth shake?

古文：太卜曰： 然。 
现代文：太卜说： 对。 
English: "That's right," replied the old woman.

古文：晏子出，太卜走见公： 臣非能动地，地固将自动。 
现代文：晏子外出，太卜跑去见齐景公说： 臣子不是能震动地，而是地原来将要自己震动。 
English: When the mule went out, the lady ran to see Lord Qi Jing and said, "The courtier is not able to shake the earth, but the earth will shake itself.

古文：夫子韦言星徙，犹太卜言地动也。
现代文：看来子韦说火星移动地方，就像太卜说会使地震动一样。
English: It seems that Zi Wei said that the place where Mars moves is just like the woman said that it would cause the earth to shake.

古文：地固且自动，太卜言己能动之。星固将自徙，子韦言君能徙之。
现代文：地本来将要自己震动，太卜则说自己能使它震动；火星本来将要自己移动，子韦则说宋景公能使它移动。
English: The earth was originally going to shake by itself, but Dabo said that he could make it shake; Mars was originally going to move by itself, but Zi Wei said that Song Jinggong could make it move.

古文：使晏子不言钩星在房、心，则太卜之奸对不觉。
现代文：假使晏子不说水星在房宿与心宿间的事，那么齐太卜欺骗性的回答就不会被发觉。
English: If the cripple had not mentioned Mercury's transit between the house and the heart, then Zidab's deceitful answer would not have been discovered.

古文：宋无晏子之知臣，故子韦之一言，遂为其是。
现代文：宋国没有像晏子样有才智的臣子，所以子韦一说，就认为他的话是正确的。
English: Song did not have an intelligent vassal like Xun Zi, so as soon as Zi Wei spoke, he thought his words were correct.

古文：案《子韦书录序秦》亦言： 子韦曰： 君出三善言，荧惑宜有动 。 
现代文：考察《子韦书录序奏》也说子韦讲过： 君主说了三句好话，火星应该要移动。
English: An examination of "The Prelude of Zi Wei's Record" also says that Zi Wei said: The monarch said three good words, Mars should move.

古文：於是候之，果徙舍。 
现代文：于是守候着，火星果真移动了地方。 
English: So we waited, and Mars did indeed move.

古文：不言 三 。
现代文：但没有说移动三个地方。
English: But it didn't say move three places.

古文：或时星当自去，子韦以为验，实动离舍，世增言 三 。
现代文：或许火星该自动离开，子韦以此作试验，而火星确实移动离开了原来的地方，世人便夸大说移动了三个地方。
English: Perhaps Mars should leave automatically, Zi Wei made an experiment with this, and Mars did move away from the original place, and the world exaggerated that it moved three places.

古文：既空增三舍之数，又虚生二十一年之寿也。
现代文：这既凭空夸大移动三个地方的数目，又虚构生出二十一年的寿命。
English: This not only exaggerated the number of moving three places out of thin air, but also fictitiously created a life expectancy of 21 years.

