古文：《六经》之道同归，而《礼》、《乐》之用为急。
现代文：《六经》所说的道理都是达到同一目标，而《礼》和《乐》的功用尤为迫切。
English: The principles mentioned in the "Six Classics" are all to achieve the same goal, and the functions of "Rite" and "Music" are particularly urgent.

古文：治身者斯须忘礼，则暴嫚入之矣；为国者一朝失礼，则荒乱及之矣。
现代文：进行自我修养的人一旦忘记了礼，就会染上凶恶轻慢的毛病；治理国家的人一旦失去了礼，那么荒废紊乱就会到来。
English: If a person who cultivates himself forgets the etiquette, he will be infected with the malady of ferocious frivolity; if a person who governs the country loses etiquette, then desolation and disorder will come.

古文：人函天、地、阴、阳之气，有喜、怒、哀、乐之情。
现代文：人包含有天地阴阳之气，有喜怒哀乐的感情。
English: People contain the energy of heaven and earth, yin and yang, and emotions of joy, anger, sorrow and happiness.

古文：天禀其性而不能节也，圣人能为之节而不能绝也，故象天、地而制礼、乐，所以通神明，立人伦，正情性，节万事者也。
现代文：上天秉持它的特性却不能有所节制，圣人能够加以节制地利用而且不会断绝，所以就依照天地的规律制作了礼乐，用来通达神灵，建立人的伦理，端正人的性情，调节万事万物。
English: Heaven upholds its characteristics but cannot be restrained, saints can use it with restraint and will not be cut off. Therefore, according to the laws of heaven and earth, liturgical music was made to reach the gods, establish human ethics, rectify human temperament, and regulate everything.

古文：人性有男女之情，妒忌之别，为制婚姻之礼；有交接长幼之序，为制乡饮之礼；有哀死思远之情，为制丧祭之礼；有尊尊敬上之心，为制朝觐之礼。
现代文：人的本性有男女的差别，有妒嫉他人的感情，因此制定了嫁娶的礼仪；人的本性有长辈和晚辈交往的次序，所以制定了乡饮酒礼；人的本性有哀悼死者思念远祖的感情，因此制定了祭祀死者的礼仪；有尊重尊长敬重皇上的心意，因此制定了朝见君王的礼仪。
English: Human nature has the differences between men and women, has the feelings of envy of others, and therefore has established the etiquette of marriage; human nature has the order of interaction between elders and younger generations, and therefore has established the town drinking ceremony; human nature has the feelings of mourning the dead and thinking of distant ancestors, and therefore has established the etiquette of sacrificing the dead; has the feelings of respecting and respecting the emperor, and therefore has established the etiquette of meeting the king.

古文：哀有哭踊之节，乐有歌舞之容，正人足以副其诚，邪人足以防其失。
现代文：悲痛有哭悼哀丧的礼节，高兴有歌唱和舞蹈的仪容，正直的人足以称诚心诚意，邪恶的人足以用来防止过失。
English: Grief has the etiquette of weeping and mourning, joy has the appearance of singing and dancing, honest people are enough to commend sincerity, and evil people are enough to prevent mistakes.

古文：故婚姻之礼废，则夫妇之道苦，而淫辟之罪多；乡饮之礼废，则长幼之序乱，而争斗之狱蕃；丧祭之礼废，则骨肉之恩薄，而背死忘先者众；朝聘之礼废，则君臣之位失，而侵陵之渐起。
现代文：因此嫁娶的礼仪被废除了，那么夫妻间的礼节就粗劣了，而男女间放荡淫乱的罪过就多了；乡饮酒礼被废除了，那么长辈和晚辈的次序就混乱了，而且争斗的官司也多了；丧祭的礼仪被废除了，那么骨肉问的恩情也就薄了，而且背弃死者忘掉祖先的人越来越多；朝见皇帝的礼仪被废除了，那么君和臣的位置就会出现错误，侵犯欺凌的现象就会逐渐发生。
English: Therefore, if the marriage ceremony is abolished, then the etiquette between husband and wife will be coarse, and the sins of debauchery and fornication between men and women will increase; if the town drinking ceremony is abolished, then the order of elders and juniors will be confused, and there will be more lawsuits; if the funeral ceremony is abolished, then the kindness of the flesh will be thin, and there will be more and more people who betray the dead and forget the ancestors; if the ceremony of meeting the emperor is abolished, then the position of the prince and the minister will be wrong, and the phenomenon of infringement and bullying will gradually occur.

古文：故孔子曰： 安上治民，莫善于礼；移风易俗，莫善于乐。 
现代文：所以孔子说： 安定国家治理百姓，没有比礼更好的；改变风气转换习俗，没有比乐更好的。 
English: Therefore, Confucius said: There is nothing better than etiquette for a stable country to govern the people; there is nothing better than music to change the customs and customs.

古文：礼节民心，乐和民声，政以行之，刑以防之。
现代文：礼能节制百姓的思想，乐能调和百姓的声音，用政令来实行它，用刑法来防患它。
English: Use etiquette to control the people's hearts, use music to harmonize the people's mood, use politics to promote it, and use criminal punishment to prevent it.

古文：礼、乐、政、刑四达而不誖，则王道备矣。
现代文：礼、乐、政令、刑法四样都通行无阻，那么王道就具备了。
English: If all four aspects of etiquette, music, government decrees, and criminal law are allowed to flow unimpeded, then the royal road is in place.

古文：乐以治内而为同，礼以修外而为异；同则和亲，异则畏敬；和亲则无怨，畏敬则不争。
现代文：乐用来治理内部就需要和谐，礼用来修饰外部就需要相异；和谐就能和睦相亲，相异就能产生畏惧和敬意；和睦相亲就不会有怨恨，畏惧和敬佩就不会相争。
English: For the purpose of governing internally, harmony is needed; for the purpose of decorating externally, differences are needed; for harmony, there can be harmony and affinity; for difference, there can be fear and respect; for harmony and affinity, there can be no resentment; for fear and admiration, there can be no conflict.

古文：揖让而天下治者，礼、乐之谓也。
现代文：无为而天下治理得很好，礼和乐的功效。
English: Without doing anything, the world is well governed, and the effect of etiquette and music is great.

古文：二者并行，合为一体。
现代文：这两者一同使用，合为一体。
English: The two are used together, as one.

古文：畏敬之意难见，则著之于享献、辞受，登降、跪拜；和亲之说难形，则发之于诗歌咏言，钟石、管弦。
现代文：畏惧和敬重的心意难以表现出来，就用奉献酒食和辞让以及上下的跪拜来表现；和睦相亲的喜悦难以形容，就用诗词歌唱咏叹言语以及钟石管弦来抒发。
English: Fear and respect are difficult to express, so they are expressed by offering wine and food, making concessions, and kneeling down; the joy of harmony and friendship is indescribable, so they are expressed by poetry, singing, aria, and bell and stone orchestra.

古文：盖嘉其敬意而不及其财贿，美其欢心而不流其声音。
现代文：这都是赞美人的敬意而不涉及他的财物，赞美人愉快的心情而不涉及声音。
English: All of these are praising a person's respect without involving his belongings, praising a person's happy mood without involving the voice.

古文：故孔子曰： 礼云礼云，玉帛云乎哉？
现代文：所以孔子说： 礼啊礼，难道可以用玉帛来表示吗？
English: Therefore, Confucius said, "Rei ah rei, can it be expressed by the Jade Scepter?"

古文：乐云乐云，钟鼓云乎哉？ 
现代文：乐呀乐，岂有用钟鼓来表示？ 
English: Music, music, is it just the banging, banging, banging of musical instruments such as bells and drums?

古文：此礼乐之本也。
现代文：这就是礼和乐的根本。
English: This is the essence of Reiwa music.

古文：故曰： 知礼乐之情者能作，识礼乐之文者能述；作者之谓圣，述者之谓明。
现代文：所以说： 懂得礼乐本性的人就能创新，了解礼乐制度的人就能传承；创新的人称为圣，传承的人称为明。
English: Therefore, it is said: Those who understand the nature of ritual music can innovate, and those who understand the ritual music system can pass it on; those who innovate are called sacred, and those who pass it on are called enlightened.

古文：明圣者，述作之谓也。 
现代文：明圣就是针对创新和传承来说的。 
English: Ming Sheng is all about innovation and heritage.

古文：王者必因前王之礼，顺时施宜，有所损益，即民之心，稍稍制作，至太平而大备。
现代文：帝王一定要根据前代帝王的礼，顺应时代的要求加以施行，进行增删，按照百姓的想法，逐渐制作，至天下太平时就完备了。
English: Emperors must carry out the rituals of previous emperors according to the requirements of the times, make additions and deletions, and gradually make them according to the ideas of the people. They will be complete when the world is at peace.

古文：周监于二代，礼文尤具，事为之制，曲为之防，故称礼经三百，威仪三千。
现代文：周朝借鉴夏、殷二代，礼制尤为齐全，大事都设立制度，小事就加以防范，所以称作礼节仪式有三百条，礼仪的细节有三千条。
English: The Zhou dynasty borrowed from the Xia and Yin dynasties, and the etiquette system was particularly complete. A system was set up for major events, and minor matters were prevented. Therefore, there are three hundred so-called etiquette ceremonies, and there are three thousand etiquette details.

古文：于是教化浃洽，民用和睦，灾害不生，祸乱不作，囹圄空虚，四十余年。
现代文：于是教化遍及，民用和睦，不生灾害，没有祸乱，监狱空虚，这样的情况保持了四十多年。
English: As a result, enlightenment was widespread, civil harmony, no disasters, no disasters, prisons were empty, and this situation remained for more than forty years.

古文：孔子美之曰： 郁郁乎文哉！
现代文：孔子赞美它说： 礼仪太完备了！
English: Confucius praised it, saying: The etiquette is too complete!

古文：吾从周。 
现代文：我要学习周朝。 
English: I advocate accepting the system of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：及其衰也，诸侯逾越法度，恶礼制之害己，去其篇籍。
现代文：等到周朝衰落的时候，诸侯超越法律限度，憎恶礼制损害自己利益，就删去其中相关的书卷文籍。
English: When the Zhou Dynasty declined, the princes exceeded the legal limits, abhorred the etiquette and harmed their own interests, and deleted the relevant books and literature.

古文：遭秦灭学，遂以乱亡。
现代文：又逢秦朝毁灭各家学说，礼乐从此散乱流失。
English: The Qin Dynasty also destroyed the doctrines of various schools, and the ritual music was scattered and lost.

古文：汉兴，拨乱反正，日不暇给，犹命叔孙通制礼仪，以正君臣之位。
现代文：汉朝建立后，开始治理乱世，使之恢复正常安定，虽然没有一天空闲，但高祖仍命叔孙通制定礼仪，用来端正君臣的地位。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, it began to govern the chaotic world and restore it to normal stability. Although there was not a day off, Gao Zu still ordered his uncle Sun Tong to formulate etiquette to rectify the status of monarchs and ministers.

古文：高祖说而叹曰： 吾乃今日知为天子之贵也！ 
现代文：高祖高兴地赞叹道： 我今天才知道做天子的最贵！ 
English: Gaozu happily praised, "I just learned today that being a heavenly son is the most precious!

古文：以通为奉常，遂定仪法，未尽备而通终。
现代文：任命叔孙通为常，就此制定礼仪法度，但还没有完全齐备叔孙通就去世了。
English: He appointed his great-uncle and great-grandson as regulars and formulated a code of etiquette, but he died before he had fully prepared his great-uncle and great-grandfather.

古文：至文帝时，贾谊以为： 汉承秦之败俗，废礼义，捐廉耻，今其甚者杀父兄，盗者取庙器，而大臣特以簿书不报，期会为故，至于风俗流溢，恬而不怪，以为是适然耳。
现代文：到文帝时，贾谊认为 汉朝承袭了秦朝的坏习俗，不讲礼义，不顾廉耻，现在更有甚者去杀害父亲兄长，盗窃的人偷走宗庙的器物，而大臣也以文案簿书不报告政令的实行为理由，以至于邪风横行，大家心安理得而不觉得奇怪，以为本来就是这样。
English: When he came to Emperor Wen, Jia Yi believed that the Han Dynasty had inherited the bad customs of the Qin Dynasty. He did not care about propriety, did not care about dishonesty, and now even more people killed his father and brother. Thieves stole the artifacts of the ancestral temple, and the minister also did not report the implementation of the decree on the grounds of the copybook, so that the evil trend was rampant. Everyone felt at ease and did not feel strange, thinking that this was the case.

古文：夫移风易俗，使天下回心而乡道，类非俗吏之所能为也。
现代文：可见，改变风气转换习俗，使天下人都回心转意走向正道，大概不是庸俗的官吏所能办得到的。
English: It can be seen that it is probably not possible for a vulgar official to change the culture and customs and make the people of the world change their minds and turn to the right path.

古文：夫立君臣，等上下，使纲纪有序，六亲和睦，此非天之所为，人之所设也。
现代文：设立君主和臣子，使上下有差别，使国家制度有次序，使六亲和睦，这不是上天的安排，而是人自己设立的。
English: It is not God's arrangement, but man's own creation, that establishes monarchs and courtiers, differentiates between the upper and lower classes, puts the state system in order, and harmonizes the six families.

古文：人之所设，不为不立，不修则坏。
现代文：既然是人自己所设立的，不做就不能树立，不修明就会败坏。
English: Since it is man's own creation, if it is not done, it cannot be established, and if it is not rectified, it will be corrupted.

古文：汉兴至今二十余年，宜定制度，兴礼乐，然后诸侯轨道，百姓素朴，狱讼衰息。 
现代文：汉朝建立到现在有二十多年了，理应制定制度，提倡礼乐，然后诸侯才能走上正轨，百姓就能简朴无华，官司逐渐消失 。
English: The Han Dynasty has been established for more than 20 years now. It is natural that a system should be established and ceremonial music should be promoted. Then, the lords can get on the right track, the people can be simple and unpretentious, and lawsuits will gradually disappear.

古文：乃草具其仪，天子说焉。
现代文：于是贾谊创立了礼仪，文帝感到高兴。
English: So Jia Yi created the etiquette, and Emperor Wen was delighted.

古文：而大臣绛、灌之属害之，故其议遂寝。
现代文：但大臣周勃、灌婴之辈忌妒他，所以他的建议便没有被采用。
English: However, Minister Zhou Bo and his cronies were jealous of him, so his suggestion was not adopted.

古文：至武帝即位，进用英隽，议立明堂，制礼服，以兴太平。
现代文：到汉武帝即位，他提拔任用才智杰出的人物，商讨建立宣明政教的明堂，制定礼仪和衣服的颜色，用来振兴太平。
English: When Emperor Hanwu ascended to the throne, he promoted and appointed people with outstanding talents, discussed the establishment of the Ming Hall of Xuanming Politics and Religion, and formulated the etiquette and color of clothes to revitalize Taiping.

古文：会窦太后好黄老言，不说儒术，其事又废。
现代文：正巧窦太后喜好黄帝和老子的道家学说，不喜欢儒学，这件事就不了了之了。
English: It just so happened that Empress Dowager Dou liked the Taoist doctrines of the Yellow Emperor and Laozi, but disliked Confucianism, and the matter was resolved.

古文：后董仲舒对策言： 王者欲有所为，宜求其端于天。
现代文：后来董仲舒在试卷中答道： 帝王想有所作为，应根据上天来探求他的行为。
English: Later, Dong Zhongshu answered in the examination paper: If the emperor wants to make a difference, he should explore his behavior according to heaven.

古文：天道大者，在于阴阳。
现代文：天道无边，全在于阴阳。
English: The way to heaven is boundless, it all lies in yin and yang.

古文：阳为德，阴为刑。
现代文：阳是仁德，阴是刑法。
English: Yang is benevolence, yin is criminal law.

古文：天使阳常居大夏，而以生育长养为事；阴常居大冬，而积于空虚不用之处，以此见天之任德不任刑也。
现代文：天使阳常处在盛夏用来养育万物使之生长，使阴常处在隆冬并聚积在空虚不用的地方，从这里可以看出天是主张德行而不主张刑法的。
English: The angelic yang is always in the height of summer to nurture all things and make them grow, and the yin is always in the middle of winter and accumulates in empty and useless places. From this, it can be seen that heaven advocates virtue and does not advocate criminal law.

古文：阳出布施于上而主岁功，阴入伏藏于下而时出佐阳。
现代文：阳气出现散布在上来主导一年的时序，阴气进入地下伏藏，时时出来辅佐阳气。
English: Yang appears and spreads, dominating the year's time sequence. Yin goes underground and emerges from time to time to support Yang.

古文：阳不得阴之助，亦不能独成岁功。
现代文：阳气没有阴气的帮助，也不能单独形成年的时序。
English: Yang does not have the help of yin, nor can it alone form the chronology of the year.

古文：王者承天意以从事，故务德教而省刑罚。
现代文：帝王秉承上天的意志来行动，所以要致力于仁德教化而减少刑罚。
English: Emperors act in accordance with the will of heaven, so they should devote themselves to benevolence and reduce punishments.

古文：刑罚不可任以治世，犹阴之不可任以成岁也。
现代文：刑罚不能用来治理国家，就像阴气不能用来形成一年的时序一样。
English: Punishment cannot be used to govern a country, just as the yin and yang cannot be used to form the chronology of a year.

古文：今废先王之德教，独用执法之吏治民，而欲德化被四海，故难成也。
现代文：现在废弃先王的仁德教化，衹用执掌法令的官吏来治理百姓，要想用德行来使四海的人都受到感化，是很难成功的。
English: If we now discard the benevolent moralizing of the previous king and use bureaucrats in charge of laws and regulations to govern the people, it will be difficult to succeed in using virtue to influence people around the world.

古文：是故古之王者，莫不以教化为大务，立大学以教于国，设庠序以化于邑。
现代文：所以古代的帝王没有不以政教风化为大事的，建立太学在国都来实行教导，设立庠序在小镇来进行教化。
English: Therefore, the emperors of ancient times had no choice but to take the political and religious etiquette as a matter of great importance, establishing the Taigaku in the capital to carry out teaching, and setting up the Shosei in the small town to carry out enlightenment.

古文：教化以明，习俗以成，天下尝无一人之狱矣。
现代文：政教风化已经明确，习惯和风俗已经形成，天下就会没有一个人在监狱了。
English: Political and religious etiquette has been clarified, habits and customs have been formed, and there will be no one in prison in the world.

古文：至周末世，大为无道，以失天下。
现代文：到周代末年，大行无道之事，以致失掉了天下。
English: By the end of the Zhou Dynasty, he had done so many foolish things that he lost the world.

古文：秦继其后，又益甚之。
现代文：秦朝跟在周朝的后面，所行更有过之而无不及。
English: The Qin Dynasty followed in the wake of the Zhou Dynasty, and its actions were even more egregious.

古文：自古以来，未尝以乱济乱，大败天下如秦者也。
现代文：从古代到现在，不曾有用乱来增添乱，极端破坏天下像秦朝那样的。
English: From ancient times to the present, there has never been any use of chaos to increase chaos and cause extreme damage to the world like that of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：习俗薄恶，民人抵冒。
现代文：习惯风俗轻薄可恶，人民毫无畏惧。
English: Habits and customs are frivolous and abominable, and the people are fearless.

古文：今汉继秦之后，虽欲治之，无可奈何。
现代文：现在汉朝跟在秦朝的后面，即使想治理这种情况，却没有办法。
English: Now the Han Dynasty is following behind the Qin Dynasty. Even if you want to control this situation, there is no way.

古文：法出而奸生，令下而诈起，一岁之狱以万千数，如以汤止沸，沸俞甚而无益。
现代文：法律一颁布就有狡诈的人出现，法令一下达就有欺骗发生，一年的官司就有千万数，就像用热水来止息沸腾的开水，衹会使水更沸而没有帮助。
English: As soon as a law is promulgated, there will be cunning people, as soon as a decree is issued, there will be deception, and there will be tens of millions of lawsuits a year. It is like using hot water to stop boiling water, and the pestle will make the water boil more without helping.

古文：辟之琴瑟不调，甚者必解而更张之，乃可鼓也。
现代文：比如琴瑟不协调，厉害一点的就一定要拆散后再装上才能弹奏。
English: For example, if the harpsichord is not coordinated, it must be disassembled and then installed before it can be played.

古文：为政而不行，甚者必变而更化之，乃可理也。
现代文：处理政事而得不到实行，情况很严重的就要加以重新改变，才可以治理。
English: If the handling of political affairs cannot be implemented, the situation is very serious and must be changed again before it can be governed.

古文：故汉得天下以来，常欲善治，而至今不能胜残去杀者，失之当更化而不能更化也。
现代文：因此汉得到天下以来，常想治理得很好，但到现在仍不能使凶暴的人转化为善，使他们可因此免除死刑，这是由于在应当变更教化的时候没有加以变更。
English: Therefore, since the Han Dynasty came to power, it has always wanted to govern well, but until now it has not been possible to transform the violent people into good, so that they can be exempted from the death penalty. This is because they have not been changed when they should be changed and educated.

古文：古人有言： 临渊羡鱼，不如归而结网。 
现代文：古人曾说： 在池边羡慕鱼多，不如回去把鱼网结好。 
English: The ancients once said: There are too many fish at the edge of the pond, it is better to go back and tie the fish net.

古文：今临政而愿治七十余岁矣，不如退而更化。
现代文：现在掌握政权打算治理好国家有七十多年了，还不如先进行变革。
English: It has been more than 70 years since the current regime has been in power and intends to govern the country well. It is better to carry out reforms first.

古文：更化则可善治，而灾害日去，福禄日来矣。 
现代文：变革就能治理得好国家，使国家灾害曰益减少，幸福曰益增多。 
English: With reform, the country can be well governed, national disasters can be reduced, and happiness can be increased.

古文：是时，上方征讨四夷，锐志武功，不暇留意礼文之事。
现代文：这时候，皇上正在征讨四夷，致力于武功，来不及留心礼节仪式之类的事情。
English: At this time, the emperor was in the process of conquering the four provinces and was dedicated to martial arts, and it was too late to pay attention to things like etiquette and ceremonies.

古文：至宣帝时，琅邪王吉为谏大夫，又上疏言： 欲治之主不世出，公卿幸得遭遇其时，未有建万世之长策，举明主于三代之隆者也。
现代文：到了宣帝的时候，琅邪王吉任谏大夫，他又给皇帝上书道： 想治理好天下的君主并不是世代都有的，公卿等官有幸身逢其时，却没有建立万代的长远计策，帮助圣明君主达到三代那样兴盛的人。
English: At the time of the proclamation of the emperor, the evil king Qi was appointed as the doctor of Qi, and he also wrote to the emperor: The monarchs who want to govern the world well are not all generations. The nobles and other officials were fortunate to be in the right time, but they did not establish a long-term strategy for all generations to help the holy monarchs achieve the prosperity of three generations.

古文：其务在于簿书、断狱、听讼而已，此非太平之基也。
现代文：他们的任务只是靠官署文书来判决官司听取诉讼而已，这不是天下太平的根本所在。
English: Their task is only to rely on official documents to adjudicate lawsuits and hear lawsuits. This is not the essence of world peace.

古文：今俗吏所以牧民者，非有礼义科指可世世通行者也，以意穿凿，各取一切。
现代文：现在庸俗的官吏所用来统治百姓的，没有可以世代通行的礼义条文，就用自己的想法去附会，各自图一时的安定。
English: Now the vulgar officials used to rule the people do not have a code of etiquette that can be passed down from generation to generation, so they use their own ideas to attach the meeting, each of them seeking temporary stability.

古文：是以诈伪萌生，刑罚无极，质朴日消，恩爱浸薄。
现代文：因此狡诈虚伪便萌发，刑罚没有边际，朴实日益消失，恩爱逐渐淡薄。
English: Therefore, cunning and hypocrisy germinate, punishment has no limit, simplicity disappears day by day, and love gradually weakens.

古文：孔子曰 安上治民，莫善于礼 ，非空言也。
现代文：孔子说 安定国家，治理百姓，没有比礼更好的了 ，这不是空话。
English: Confucius said that there is nothing better than etiquette for a stable country and for governing the people, and this is not empty talk.

古文：愿与大臣延及儒生，述旧礼，明王制，驱一世之民，济之仁寿之域，则俗何以不若成、康？
现代文：愿同大臣一起选拔儒生，继承旧时礼仪，彰明王者的制度，督促一代的百姓，达到仁爱长寿的境地，这样的礼俗又怎么不如周成王、周康王时期呢？
English: I am willing to work with the minister to select Confucian students, inherit the old-time etiquette, highlight the king's system, and urge the people of the generation to achieve the state of benevolence and longevity. How is this etiquette and custom not as good as that of King Zhoucheng and King Zhoukang?

古文：寿何以不若高宗？ 
现代文：长寿又怎么不及殷高宗呢？ 
English: And why is longevity not as good as that of Yin Gaozong?

古文：上不纳其言，吉以病去。
现代文：皇上没有采纳他的建议，王吉只好称病辞官。
English: The emperor did not accept his suggestion, and Wang Ji had no choice but to call in a doctor.

古文：至成帝时，犍为郡于水滨得古磐十六枚，议者以为善祥。
现代文：到成帝的时候，犍为郡在河边挖到十六枚古磬，大家都认为这很吉祥。
English: By the time of Emperor Chengdi, sixteen ancient cucumbers were dug up by the river for the county, and everyone thought it was very auspicious.

古文：刘向因是说上： 宜兴辟雍，设庠序，陈礼乐，隆雅颂之声，盛揖攘之容，以风化天下。
现代文：刘向根据这个情况就劝说成帝道： 应当兴建辟雍，设立庠序，陈设礼乐，使雅颂之声盛隆，使揖让的礼仪盛行，用来教化天下。
English: Based on this situation, Liu Xiang persuaded Chengdi Dao: It is necessary to build a pagoda, establish a pagoda sequence, set up liturgical music, make the voice of elegant chanting flourish, and make the etiquette of etiquette prevail, and use it to enlighten the world.

古文：如此而不治者，未之有也。
现代文：如果这样还没有形成天下太平，还从没有过。
English: If this doesn't create world peace, nothing ever will.

古文：或曰，不能具礼。
现代文：有人说，礼不能都齐备。
English: Some people say that you can't have it all.

古文：礼以养人为本，如有过差，是过而养人也。
现代文：礼是以教育人为根本的，即使有过错，这些过错也还是教育人。
English: Etiquette is based on educating people. Even if there are mistakes, these mistakes are still educating people.

古文：刑罚之过，或至死伤。
现代文：刑罚的错误，有的就让人或死或伤。
English: Mistakes in sentencing have left some people dead or injured.

古文：今之刑，非皋陶之法也，而有司请定法，削则削，笔则笔，救时务也。
现代文：如今的刑法，不是皋陶时候的法令了，有关部门制定法令，说删就删，说增就增，衹是为了援助常世的要事。
English: Today's criminal law is not the law of the time of the Tao. Relevant departments formulate laws and regulations, and when it is said to be deleted, it is deleted, and when it is said to be increased, it is increased in order to assist the eternal important matters.

古文：至于礼乐，则曰不敢，是敢于杀人不敢于养人也。
现代文：至于增设礼乐，就说不敢，这是敢于杀人而不敢于教育人。
English: As for the addition of liturgical music, they say they dare not. This is daring to kill and not daring to educate people.

古文：为其俎豆、管弦之间小不备，因是绝而不为，是去小不备而就大不备，或莫甚焉。夫教化之比于刑法，刑法轻，是舍所重而急所轻也。
现代文：为了俎豆这样的礼器和管弦这样的乐器没有齐备，因此就绝对不去做，这是放弃没有齐备的一点小东西而结果成了大部分都不具备的局面，没有比这更亏的了：用教化和刑法相比较，刑法比较轻微，这是抛开重要的东西而去急着处理轻微的东西。
English: There is nothing worse than giving up a small thing that is not complete and ending up with a situation in which most things are not available, for the reason that a ceremonial object such as a pea and a musical instrument such as an orchestra are not available, and therefore absolutely do not do it. Compared with indoctrination and criminal law, criminal law is relatively minor, which is to put aside the important things and rush to deal with the minor things.

古文：且教化，所恃以为治也，刑法所以助治也。
现代文：况且教化是依靠它来治理国家的，刑法是用来辅助治理的。
English: Moreover, indoctrination is relied on to govern the country, while criminal law is used to support governance.

古文：今废所恃而独立其所助，非所以致太平也。
现代文：现在抛弃应该依赖的而惟独建立衹是用来起辅助作用的东西，这不是达到天下太乎的方法。
English: To now discard what should be relied upon and build only what is used to play a supporting role is not the way to go.

古文：自京师有誖逆不顺之子孙，至于陷大辟受刑戮者不绝，繇不习五常之道也。
现代文：从京师有违抗不孝顺的子孙到那些遭受大辟杀戮之刑的入不断，这是由于不通晓仁、义、礼、智、信五常的道理的缘故。
English: From the sons and daughters of teachers in Beijing who were disobedient and unfilial to those who suffered the punishment of being killed, this is due to the fact that they are not familiar with the principles of benevolence, righteousness, etiquette, wisdom, and faith.

古文：夫承千岁之衰周，继暴秦之余敝，民渐渍恶俗，贪饕险诐，不闲义理，不示以大化，而独驱以刑罚，终已不改。
现代文：汉朝继承了周朝千年的衰败，残暴秦朝的遗留弊端，百姓逐渐染上坏习俗，贪婪险恶，不懂道理，不告诉他们教化，衹用刑罚来约束他们，民俗始终不会改正。
English: The Han Dynasty inherited the decay of the thousand years of the Zhou Dynasty and the remaining drawbacks of the brutal Qin Dynasty. The people gradually became infected with bad customs, greedy and sinister, did not understand the truth, did not tell them to be educated, and used punishments to restrain them. Folk customs will never be corrected.

古文：故曰： 导之以礼乐，而民和睦。 初，叔孙通将制定礼仪，见非于齐、鲁之士，然卒为汉儒宗，业垂后嗣，斯成法也。 
现代文：所以说： 用礼乐来引导百姓，他们就会和睦，原先，叔孙通将要制定礼仪时，遭到齐地、鲁地读书人的非议，但最后还是成为汉朝儒生的宗师，功业流传后代，成为法典。 
English: Therefore, it is said that if the people are guided by the ritual music, they will be harmonious. Originally, when the uncle and grandson were going to formulate the etiquette, they were criticized by the readers in Qi and Ludi, but in the end they became the master of the Han Dynasty Confucianism, and the work was passed down to future generations and became the legal code.

古文：成帝以向言下公卿议，会向病卒，丞相大司空奏请立辟雍。
现代文：成帝就把刘向的话交给公卿讨论，正好刘向病逝，丞相大司空就请求皇上设立辟雍。
English: Emperor Cheng then gave Liu Xiang's words to the nobles for discussion. Just as Liu Xiang died of illness, the prime minister, Dai Siku, asked the emperor to establish the Yong.

古文：案行长安城南，营表未作，遭成帝崩，群臣引以定谥。
现代文：巡视长安城的南边，确定位置的表还没有制作好，成帝就驾崩，群臣就引用这件事来为他确定谧号。
English: When inspecting the south side of Chang'an City, the table to determine the location had not yet been made. Emperor Chengde passed away, and the courtiers cited this incident to determine the nickname for him.

古文：及王莽为宰衡，欲耀众庶，遂兴辟雍，因以篡位，海内畔之。
现代文：等到王莽称号为宰衡，想迷惑众人，就兴建辟雍，因此而篡夺了帝位，国内人开始反叛他。
English: When Wang Mang received the title of Zaiheng, he wanted to confuse everyone, so he built and built Yong, thus usurping the imperial throne, and the people in China began to rebel against him.

古文：世祖受命中兴，拨乱反正，改定京师于土中。
现代文：世祖光武帝受天命使衰落的汉朝重新兴盛，他治理乱世，使之恢复正常安定，把国都改定在洛阳。
English: Emperor Guangwu, the forefather of the Han Dynasty, was ordered by heaven to make the declining Han Dynasty flourish again. He governed the chaotic world, restored it to normal stability, and changed the capital to Luoyang.

古文：即位三十年，四夷宾服，百姓家给，政教清明，乃营立明堂、辟雍。
现代文：在位三十年，四夷臣服，百姓家家富足，政治教化清明，于是建立了明堂、辟雍。
English: During the thirty years of his reign, the four barbarians were subjugated, the people were rich, and the political education was clear, so he established Myeongdong and Biyong.

古文：显宗即位，躬行其礼，宗祀光武皇帝于明堂，养三老、五更于辟雍，威仪既盛美矣。
现代文：显宗即位，亲自主持礼仪，在明堂祭祀光武皇帝，在辟雍奉养三老五更，礼仪细节既多又完美。
English: Hsien Tsung ascended to the throne, personally presided over the etiquette, sacrificed Emperor Guangwu in the Ming Hall, and upheld the Three Elders and Five Elders in the Pai Yong Hall. The details of the etiquette were numerous and perfect.

古文：然德化未流洽者，礼乐未具，群下无所诵说，而庠序尚未设之故也。
现代文：但道德教化没有广泛传播，是因为礼乐没有具备，群臣百姓没有可述说的，而且庠序还没有设立。
English: However, the moral education was not widely spread because the ritual music was not available, there was nothing for the common people to recite, and the rites had not yet been established.

古文：孔子曰： 辟如为山，未成一匮，止，吾止也。 
现代文：孔子说： 比如造山，还差一匮之上，却停止不干了，我也不再去教谕他了。 
English: Confucius said, "For example, I will no longer teach him how to build a mountain when he is one step away from completing it.

古文：今叔孙通所撰礼仪，与律令同录，臧于理官，法家又复不传。
现代文：现在叔孙通所撰写的礼节仪式，和律令一同记绿着，被法官所收藏，但法家又没有再传下来。
English: Now, the etiquette ceremony written by Tsuneo's uncle and grandson is recorded along with the ritsuryo and collected by judges, but it has not been passed down to the next generation.

古文：汉典寝而不著，民臣莫有言者。
现代文：汉朝的典籍就再也不加着录，百姓臣子也不再提及。
English: The classics of the Han Dynasty were no longer recorded, and the people's subjects were no longer mentioned.

古文：又通没之后，河间献王采礼乐古事，稍稍增辑，至五百余篇。
现代文：还有叔孙通去世之后，河问献王选取一些礼乐旧事，慢慢加以增加辑录，达到五百多篇。
English: Also, after the death of his great-uncle Tong, he selected some old ceremonial music and slowly added to the collection, reaching more than five hundred pieces.

古文：今学者不能昭见，但推士礼以及天子，说义又颇谬异，故君臣长幼交接之道浸以不章。
现代文：现在的学者却不能彰明，衹是向天子推荐《士礼》，所说的道理又多有错误，因此君臣长幼相处的规则渐渐模糊。
English: Today's scholars, however, cannot make it clear that it was the emperor who recommended "The Rite of the Magistrate" to the emperor, and there are many errors in what was said. As a result, the rules for the relationship between monarchs and ministers and their children have gradually become blurred.

古文：乐者，圣人之所乐也，而可以善民心。
现代文：音乐，是圣人所喜爱的的，它可以使百姓的思想变好。
English: Music is a form of entertainment for sages, and it can turn people's hearts to the good.

古文：其感人深，移风易俗，故先王著其教焉。
现代文：它感动人的力量深厚，转变风气转换习俗容易，因此先王就标举它的教化作用。
English: It has a profound power to move people, and it is easy to change customs and customs, so the first king praised its educational role.

古文：夫民有血、气、心、知之性，而无哀、乐、喜、怒之常，应感而动，然后心术形焉。
现代文：人有感情、思想和智慧的本性，却没有哀、乐、喜、怒的常态，有感应就有内心活动，然后人们认识事物的方法和途径就形成了。
English: People have the nature of emotion, thought and wisdom, but they do not have the normal state of sorrow, joy, happiness and anger. When there is a response, there is an inner activity, and then people's ways and means of knowing things are formed.

古文：是以纤微憔瘁之音作，而民思忧；阐谐嫚易之音作，而民康乐；粗厉猛奋之音作，而民刚毅；廉直正诚之音作，而民肃敬；宽裕和顺之音作，而民慈爱；流辟邪散之音作，而民淫乱。
现代文：因此，细微急促的乐声响起，人就思想忧虑；和谐舒缓的乐声响起，人就高兴；高亢激扬的乐声响起人就意志坚强；正直纯洁的乐声响起，人就肃然起敬；宽广流畅的乐声响起，人就仁慈爱人；淫邪散乱的乐声响起，人就邪恶混乱。
English: Therefore, when the subtle and rapid music sounds, people will think and worry; when the harmonious and soothing music sounds, people will be happy; when the high-pitched and exciting music sounds, people will be strong-willed; when the honest and pure music sounds, people will be awestruck; when the broad and smooth music sounds, people will be kind and loving; when the lewd and disorderly music sounds, people will be evil and confused.

古文：先王耻其乱也，故制雅颂之声，本之情性，稽之度数，制之礼仪，合生气之和，异五常之行，使之阳而不散，阴而不集，刚气不怒，柔气不慑，四暢交于中，而发作于外，皆安其位而不相夺，足以感动人之善心也，不使邪气得接焉，是先王立乐之方也。
现代文：先王为这种混乱感到耻辱，就制定了雅颂之乐，本着人的情性，考察音乐的道理，根据礼节仪式进行制作，配合阴阳之气的调和，引导五常的行动，使它外露而不离散，隐藏而不凝滞，刚气不怒，柔气不散，阴阳刚柔四者通畅汇合于一身，而散发在身外，使其都能安于自己的位置而不发生冲撞，这足以感动人的良心，不使邪气侵入，这是先王设立乐的方针。
English: The Ancestor King felt ashamed of this confusion, so he formulated the Elegance Song. Based on human affection, he examined the principles of music, made it according to the etiquette ceremony, coordinated with the harmony of yin and yang, and guided the actions of the five elements, so that it was exposed but not dispersed, hidden but not stagnant, rigid but not angry, soft but not dispersed, and yin and yang were smoothly merged into one body, but spread outside the body, so that it could be at ease in its own position without collision. This was enough to move people's conscience and prevent evil spirits from invading. This was the Ancestor King's goal in

古文：王者未作乐之时，因先王之乐以教化百姓，说乐其俗，然后改作，以章功德。
现代文：帝王还没有创作音乐的时候，就用先王的音乐来教导百姓，使他们和悦安乐，在这之后再进行改动创作，用来彰明功业与德行。
English: When the emperor had not yet composed music, he used the music of the previous king to teach the people, to make them happy and happy, and then to modify and create, to highlight the merits and virtues.

古文：《易》曰： 先王以作乐崇德，殷荐之上帝，以配祖考。 
现代文：《易》上说： 先王制作音乐来推崇德行，演奏盛大乐歌来祭祀上天，同时配飨祖先。 
English: "Yi" said: The previous king made music to promote virtue, played grand music to worship the heavens, and accompanied the ancestors.

古文：昔黄帝作《咸池》，颛顼作《六茎》，帝喾作《五英》，尧作《大章》，舜作《招》，禹作《夏》，汤作《濩》，武王作《武》，周公作《勺》。
现代文：以前黄帝制作《咸池》，颛顼制作《六茎》，帝署制作《五英》，尧制作《大章》，《舜》作《韶》，禹作《夏》，汤作《濩》，武王作《武》，周公作《勺》。
English: In the past, Huang Di produced "Ham Pool," Zou produced "Six Stems," the Imperial Household Agency produced "Five Yings," Zou produced "Big Chapter," "Zou" produced "Yang," Yu produced "Summer," Tang produced "Yang," Wu Wang produced "Wu" and Zhou Gong produced "Spoon."

古文：《勺》，言能勺先祖之道也。
现代文：《勺》，是说能够取得先祖之道。
English: "Spoon" means to be able to obtain the ancestral way.

古文：《武》，言以功定天下也。
现代文：《武》，是说凭功业安定天下。
English: "Wu" means that the world is stable by virtue of merit.

古文：《》言救民也。
现代文：《濩》，是说拯救百姓。
English: "" means to save the people.

古文：《夏》，大承二帝也。
现代文：《夏》，是说大规模地继承尧、舜二帝。
English: "Summer" refers to the large-scale succession of the two emperors.

古文：《招》，继尧也。
现代文：韶》，是说继承尧。
English: ," which means inheriting.

古文：《大章》，章之也。
现代文：《大章》，是说彰明德行。
English: The music of the dragonfly is called "Daizhang," which means the virtue of the dragonfly.

古文：《五英》，英茂也。
现代文：《五英》，是说德化很盛。
English: "Wu Ying" means that virtue is very prosperous.

古文：《六茎》，及根茎也。
现代文：《六茎》，是说波及到根茎了。
English: "Six stems" means that it has spread to the rhizome.

古文：《咸池》，备矣。
现代文：《咸池》，就已齐全了。
English: The music of the Yellow Emperor is called "Hamchi," which means that the Yellow Emperor is the best in the world.

古文：自夏以往，其流不可闻已，殷《颂》犹有存者。
现代文：从夏再往前，就没有再听说这类乐曲了，《殷颂》现还保存着。
English: From the summer onwards, there was no more news of this kind of music, and "Ode to Yin" is still preserved.

古文：周《诗》既备，而其器用张陈，《周官》具焉。
现代文：《周诗》也都齐备，它的演奏乐器，《周官》都掌管齐全。
English: "Zhou Shi" is also complete, and its performance instruments, "Zhou Guan" are under complete control.

古文：典者自卿大夫、师瞽以下，皆选有道德之人，朝夕习业，以教国子。
现代文：掌管者从卿大夫师瞽以下，都选取有道德的人，早晚操练，来教导国子。
English: Those in charge, from the rank of doctor to the rank of disciple, all choose moral people and train them in the morning and evening to teach Kuniko.

古文：国子者，卿大夫之子弟也，皆学歌九德，诵六诗，习六舞，五声、八音之和。
现代文：国子，就是卿大夫的子弟，都要学唱九德，诵读六诗，演习六舞、五声、八音。
English: Kuniko, that is, the son of the doctor, must learn to sing nine virtues, recite six poems, and practice six dances, five voices, and eight tones.

古文：故帝舜命夔曰： 女典乐，教胄子，直而温，宽而栗，刚而无虐，简而无敖。
现代文：所以舜帝任命夔时说： 你掌管乐，教导国子，要使他们正直温和，宽大谨慎，刚毅而又不粗暴，简约但不傲慢。
English: Therefore, Emperor Qian appointed him, saying: "You are in charge of music and teach the sons of the country, so that they are honest and gentle, generous and prudent, resolute but not rude, simple but not arrogant.

古文：诗言志，歌咏言，声依咏，律和声，八音克谐。 
现代文：用诗来表达志向，用歌来抒发心声，用五声来协助歌唱，用六律来调和声音，八音就和谐了。 
English: Use poetry to express your aspirations, use songs to express your heart, use the five tones to help you sing, use the six laws to harmonize your voice, and the eight tones to create harmony.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：就是说的这个。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：又以外赏诸侯德盛而教尊者。
现代文：又另外奖赏诸侯中德行盛大而且所教导被尊崇的人。
English: In addition, the nobles would reward those who had practiced great virtue and who had been taught and respected.

古文：其威仪足以充目，音声足以动耳，诗语足以感心，故闻其音而德和，省其诗而志正，论其数而法立。
现代文：乐的礼仪细节足以让人看个够，音声足以让人听得着迷，诗歌足以感动人的心囊，因此听到声音道德就和谐，阅读诗志向就会正直，讨论它们的规律法令就建立了。
English: The etiquette details of music are enough for people to see, the sound is enough for people to listen to, and the poetry is enough to move people's hearts. Therefore, when the sound is heard, the morality will be harmonious, the reading of poetry will be honest, and the rules and regulations for discussing them will be established.

古文：是以荐之郊庙则鬼神飨，作之朝廷则群臣和，立之学官则万民协。
现代文：所以把它用在郊外祭祀天地就能让鬼神享受，用在朝廷那么群臣就和顺，设立于学校那么万民就和洽。
English: Therefore, if it is used in the suburbs to worship heaven and earth, it can be enjoyed by ghosts and gods. If it is used in the imperial court, then the courtiers will be harmonious, and if it is set up in a school, then all people will be harmonious.

古文：听者无不虚己竦神，说而承流，是以海内遍知上德，被服其风，光辉日新，化上迁善，而不知所以然，至于万物不夭，天地顺而嘉应降。故《诗》曰： 钟鼓锽锽，磐管锵锵，降福穰穰。 
现代文：倾听的人没有不凝神虚心，高兴地沉浸其中，因此国内都知道皇帝的仁德，沐浴在他的精神下，能够使光辉曰新，使人变得高尚善良，却不知道是怎样如此的，最后还能达到万物不夭折，天地和顺，幸福降临。所以《诗》上说： 钟鼓齐鸣，磬管齐奏，神降福就多。 
English: The listener does not have to be self-absorbed and humble, happily immersed in it, so the country knows the emperor's benevolence, bathed in his spirit, can make the glory say new, make people become noble and good, but do not know how to do so, and finally can achieve the immortality of all things, the harmony of heaven and earth, and the arrival of happiness. Therefore, the "Poem" says: The gongs and drums chime in unison, the cymbals chime in unison, and God's blessing is more.

古文：《书》云： 击石拊石，百兽率舞。 
现代文：《书》上说： 敲击石磬，各种野兽都随着音乐起舞。 
English: The Book says: "Strike the cymbals, and all the beasts dance to the music."

古文：鸟兽且犹感应，而况于人乎？
现代文：对乌兽尚且有感动影响，何况人呢？
English: There is still an emotional impact on the black beast, and what about people?

古文：况于鬼神乎？
现代文：更何况鬼神呢？
English: Not to mention ghosts and gods?

古文：故乐者，圣人之所以感天地，通神明，安万民，成性类者也。
现代文：因此乐是圣人用来感动天地，通达神明，安定百姓，形成性格类型的。
English: Therefore, music was used by sages to move heaven and earth, to reach the gods, to stabilize the people, and to form personality types.

古文：然自《雅》、《颂》之兴，而所承衰乱之音犹在，是谓淫过凶嫚之声，为设禁焉。
现代文：但自从《雅》、《颂》兴起后，所继承的衰落动乱的音乐仍然存在，这是所说的惑乱嘈杂的声音，要设法禁止。
English: However, since the rise of "Ya" and "Ode," the music of decline and turmoil that has been inherited still exists. This is the so-called confused and noisy sound, which should be banned.

古文：世衰民散，小人乘君子，心耳浅薄，则邪胜正。
现代文：世道衰微人心离散，小人就欺凌君子，思想浅薄，那么邪恶就会胜遇正直。
English: When the world is decadent and the hearts of people are scattered, when the villain bullies the gentleman and the thought is shallow, then evil will triumph over honesty.

古文：故《书》序： 殷纣断弃先祖之乐，乃作淫声，用变乱正声，以说妇人。 
现代文：因此《书》序中说 商纣抛弃祖先的音乐，制作了惑乱人心的音乐，改变正声使之混乱，以取悦妇人。 
English: Therefore, in the preface of the "Book," it is said that Shangguan abandoned the music of his ancestors and made bewildering music, changing the positive tone to make it confusing, in order to please the woman.

古文：乐官师瞽抱其器而奔散，或适诸侯，或入河海。
现代文：官师瞽抱着乐器逃散出走，有的到了各诸侯，有的到了黄河和海上。
English: The officials and teachers fled with their musical instruments, some to various provinces, some to the Yellow River and the sea.

古文：夫乐本情性，浃肌肤而臧骨髓，虽经乎千载，其遗风余烈尚犹不绝。
现代文：音乐是依照人的情性，穿透肌肤深藏骨髓，即使经过上千年，它的余音仍然不绝。
English: Music is in accordance with human nature, penetrating the skin and bone marrow, and even after thousands of years, its aftertaste is still incessant.

古文：至春秋时，陈公子完奔齐。
现代文：到春秋的时候，陈公子完逃到齐国。
English: By spring and autumn, Chen Gongzi finally fled to Qi Province.

古文：陈，舜之后，《招》乐存焉。
现代文：陈，是舜的后代，《韶乐》保存在那裹。
English: Chen is a descendant of Gong, and Gong Le is kept there.

古文：故孔子适齐闻《招》，三月不知肉味，曰： 不图为乐之至于斯！ 
现代文：因此孔子到齐国后听到《韶》，三个月不知道肉足什么味，说： 没有想到音乐能达到这样的境界！ 
English: Therefore, when Confucius came to Qi Province, he heard "Dragonfly" and for three months did not know the taste of flesh and feet. He said, "I never thought that music could reach such a level!"

古文：美之甚也。
现代文：孔子对它很赞赏。
English: Confucius appreciated it very much.

古文：周道始缺，怨刺之诗起。
现代文：周朝开始大行无道的时候，怨恨讽刺之类的诗开始兴起。
English: When the Zhou Dynasty began to be ruthless, poems such as resentment and irony began to rise.

古文：王泽既竭，而诗不能作。
现代文：帝王的恩泽枯竭后，诗就不能再写了。
English: When the emperor's bounty is exhausted, poems can no longer be written.

古文：王官失业，《雅》、《颂》相错，孔子论而定之，故曰： 吾自卫反鲁，然后乐正，《雅》、《颂》各得其所。 
现代文：帝王的官员失去职位，《雅》、《颂》就出现混杂现象，孔子加以研究然后进行确定，所以他说： 我从卫国回到鲁国后，然后音乐就被纠正了，《雅》和《颂》有了各自原有的用途。 
English: When the imperial officials lost their positions, there was a mixture of "Ya" and "Ode," which Confucius studied and then determined, so he said: "After I returned to Lu from the motherland, the music was corrected, and "Ya" and "Ode" had their own original uses.

古文：是时，周室大坏，诸侯恣行，设两观，乘大路。
现代文：这时候，周王朝严重衰败，诸侯肆意横行，设立了两观，坐天子的车。
English: At this time, the Zhou Dynasty was in serious decline, and the princes were running amok, setting up the two views and riding in the chariot of the son of heaven.

古文：陪臣管仲、季氏之属，三归《雍》彻，八佾舞廷。
现代文：诸侯的臣子管仲、季氏之流，娶了三个女人，还在撤鳝时演奏《雍》乐，在室内舞蹈《八佾》。
English: The vassals of the lords, such as Guanzhong and Ji, married three women, still played "Yong" music when withdrawing, and danced "Hachiman" in the room.

古文：制度遂坏，陵夷而不反，桑间、濮上，郑、卫、宋、赵之声并出。内则致疾损寿，外则乱政伤民。
现代文：制度于是被败坏，逐渐衰落下去而无复兴之望，桑间、濮上、郑、卫、宋、赵的乐声一同出现，对内则造成疾病减少寿命，对外则扰乱政治伤害百姓。
English: As a result, the system was corrupted and gradually fell into decline with no hope of revival. The music of Sangma, Shuxiang, Zheng, Wei, Song and Zhao appeared together, causing illness and reducing life expectancy internally, and disrupting politics and harming the people externally.

古文：巧伪因而饰之，以营乱富贵之耳目。
现代文：奸巧虚假用它来修饰，以扰乱富贵人的耳目。
English: cunningly and falsely embellished with it, so as to disturb the ears and eyes of the rich.

古文：庶人以求利，列国以相间。
现代文：平民百姓用来求取利益，各诸侯国用来互相离间。
English: It is used by the common people to seek profits, and by the various vassal states to drive a wedge between them.

古文：故秦穆遗戎而由余去，齐人馈鲁而孔子行。
现代文：所以秦穆公把女乐给西戎后由余就离开了，齐人赏给鲁国女乐孔子就走了。
English: Therefore, after Qin Mu Gong gave the women's music to Xi Rong, Yu Yu left, Qi people awarded the women's music to Lu, and Confucius left.

古文：至于六国，魏文侯最为好古，而谓子夏曰： 寡人听古乐则欲寐，及闻郑、卫，余不知倦焉。 
现代文：到了六国的时候，魏文侯最好古，但他对于夏说： 寡人听到古乐就想打瞌睡，等到听郑、卫之音的时候，我就不知疲倦了。 
English: When it came to the Six Kingdoms, Wei Wenhou preferred ancient music, but he said to Xia: Some people want to doze off when they hear ancient music. When I listen to Zheng and Wei's music, I don't get tired.

古文：子夏辞而辨之，终不见纳，自此礼乐丧矣。
现代文：子夏责让他并且加以辩论，但最终不被接受，从此以后礼乐就丧失掉了。
English: Zixia blamed him and debated it, but in the end it was not accepted, and from then on, the ritual music was lost.

古文：汉兴，乐家有制氏，以雅乐声律世世在大乐官，但能纪其铿鎗鼓舞，而不能言其义。
现代文：汉朝建立后，乐家有位制氏，因为知道郊庙朝会的正乐和五声六律而世代任大乐官，但只能记下乐曲的节奏与舞蹈，却不能说出它们的含义。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, there was a hierarchy of musicians. Because they knew the correct music and the five-part harmony of the suburban temple court, they were appointed as grand music officials for generations. However, they could only record the rhythm and dance of the music, but could not tell their meaning.

古文：高祖时，叔孙通因秦乐人制宗庙乐。
现代文：高祖的时候，叔孙通依靠秦朝的乐人制作宗庙的音乐。
English: At the time of Gao Zu, his uncle and grandson relied on musicians from the Qin Dynasty to produce music for the ancestral temple.

古文：大祝迎神于庙门，奏《嘉至》，犹古降神之乐也。
现代文：祝在庙门迎接神灵，演奏《嘉至》乐，就像古代使神降临的音乐。
English: I wish you to greet the gods at the temple gate and play "Jia Zi" music, just like the music that brought the gods down in ancient times.

古文：皇帝入庙门，奏《永至》，以为行步之节，犹古《采荠》、《肆夏》也。
现代文：皇帝进入庙门，演奏《永至》乐，作为行走的节奏，就像古代的《采荠》、《肆夏》乐。
English: The emperor entered the gate of the temple and played the music of "Forever" as the rhythm of walking, just like the ancient music of "Cherry Picking" and "Summer."

古文：乾豆上，奏《登歌》，独上歌，不以管弦乱人声，欲在位者遍闻之，犹古《清庙》之歌也。
现代文：献上干豆，演奏《登歌》，衹有上一人歌唱，不用管弦扰乱人的声音，希望当官的都能听到，就像古代的《清庙》之歌。
English: Offer dried beans, play "Climbing Song," and have the last person sing. Do not use an orchestra to disturb people's voices. I hope that all officials can hear it, just like the ancient "Qing Temple" song.

古文：《登歌》再终，下奏《休成》之乐，美神明既飨也。
现代文：《登歌》演奏两遍后，再奏《休成》乐，赞美神明已经享受了祭祀。
English: After the "Climbing Song" is played twice, the "Resting Song" is played again, and the praising gods have already enjoyed the sacrifice.

古文：皇帝就酒东厢，坐定，奏《永安》之乐，美礼已成也。
现代文：皇帝到束厢去饮酒，坐好后，演奏《永安》乐，赞美祭礼已完成。
English: The emperor went to the casket to drink, and after sitting down, he played "Yongan" music, and the praise ceremony was completed.

古文：又有《房中祠乐》，高祖唐山夫人所作也。
现代文：又有《房中祠乐》，是汉高祖的唐山夫人所创作的。
English: There is also the "Chamber Music of the Ancestral Hall," which was created by the Tangshan Lady of the Han Emperor Gaozu.

古文：周有《房中乐》，至秦名曰《寿人》。
现代文：周朝有《房中乐》，到秦叫《寿人》。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, there was "Fangzhongle," and in the Qin Dynasty, there was "Shu Ren."

古文：凡乐，乐其所生，礼不忘本。
现代文：凡音乐，喜欢它所创作的，礼是不要忘记根本。
English: When it comes to music, if you like what it creates, it's important not to forget the basics.

古文：高祖乐楚声，故《房中乐》楚声也。
现代文：高祖喜欢楚国的音乐，所以《房中乐》有楚国音乐的旋律。
English: Gao Zu liked the music of the State of Chu, so "Fangzhongle" has the melody of the music of the State of Chu.

古文：孝惠二年，使乐府令夏侯宽备其箫管，更名曰《安世乐》。
现代文：孝惠二年，让乐府令夏侯宽备齐箫管，就改名为《安世乐》。
English: In the second year of Xia Hui's reign, he changed the name of the opera to "Anse Le."

古文：高庙奏《武德》、《文始》、《五行》之舞；孝文庙奏《昭德》、《文始》、《四时》、《五行》之舞；孝武庙奏《盛德》、《文始》、《四时》、《五行》之舞。
现代文：高庙里演奏的是《武德》、《文始》、《五行》的舞蹈音乐；孝文庙里演奏的是《昭德》、《文始》、《四时》、《五行》的舞蹈音乐；孝武庙里演奏的是《盛德》、《文始》、《四时》、《五行》的舞蹈音乐。
English: The high temple plays the dance music of "Wu De," "Wen Shi Huang" and "Five Elements"; the Xiaowen Temple plays the dance music of "Zhao De," "Wen Shi Huang," "Four Hours" and "Five Elements"; the Xiaowen Temple plays the dance music of "Sheng De," "Wen Shi Huang," "Four Hours" and "Five Elements."

古文：诸帝庙皆常奏《文始》、《四时》、《五行舞》云。
现代文：各帝庙都最常演奏的是《文始》、《四时》、《五行舞》等。
English: The most frequently performed pieces in the imperial temples were "The Beginning of the Text," "Four O'Clock," "The Dance of Five Movements" and so on.

古文：高祖六年又作《昭容乐》、《礼容乐》。
现代文：高祖六年时又制作了《昭容乐》、《礼容乐》。
English: When Gaozu was six years old, he also produced "Zhao Rongle" and "Rei Rongle."

古文：《昭容》者，犹古之《昭夏》也，主出《武德舞》。
现代文：《昭容乐》，就像古代的《昭夏乐》，主要出自《武德舞》。
English: "Zho Rong Le," like the ancient "Zho Xia Le," is mainly from "Wu De Wu."

古文：《礼容》者，主出《文始》、《五行舞》。
现代文：《礼容乐》，主要出自《文始》、《五行舞》。
English: "Ritual Music," mainly from "The Beginning of the Poem" and "The Dance of Five Movements."

古文：舞人无乐者，将至至尊之前不敢以乐也；出用乐者，言舞不失节，能以乐终也。
现代文：舞蹈的人没有音乐，是表明将到最为尊敬的人面前时不敢用音乐；使用音乐，是表示舞蹈不失去节奏，能合着音乐结束。
English: If a dancer does not have music, it means that he does not dare to use music when he is in front of the most respected people; if he uses music, it means that the dance does not lose its rhythm and can end with music.

古文：大氐皆因秦旧事焉。
现代文：造大抵都是照着秦朝的旧事而来的。
English: Most of the buildings were built according to the old Qin Dynasty.

古文：初，高祖既定天下，过沛，与故人父老相乐，醉酒欢哀，作 风起 之诗，令沛中僮兒百二十人习而歌之。
现代文：起初，高祖平定天下后，路过沛县，同旧时的朋友及父老乡亲相庆祝，喝醉酒后乐极生悲，就创作了 风起 诗，命令沛县裹的儿童一百二十人练习并演唱。
English: At first, after Gao Zu had pacified the world, he passed through Peixian to celebrate with his old friends and fellow countrymen. After getting drunk, he composed the poem "The Wind Rises" and ordered 120 children from Peixian to practice and sing.

古文：至孝惠时，以沛宫为原庙，皆令歌兒习吹以相和，常以百二十人为员。
现代文：到孝惠帝的时候，把沛宫作为原庙，全都叫唱歌的孩子练习吹奏用来相和，经常以一百二十人作为定员。
English: By the time of Emperor Xiao Hui, the Pei Palace was used as the original temple, and all the children who were called to sing practiced blowing to harmonize, often with a hundred and twenty people as the quota.

古文：文、景之间，礼官肄业而已。
现代文：文帝、景帝的时候，礼官衹是练习现成的东西罢了。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Wen and Emperor Jing, etiquette and etiquette were practiced with ready-made tools.

古文：至武帝定郊祀之礼，祠太一于甘泉，就乾位也；祭后土于汾阴，泽中方丘也。
现代文：到武帝时确定了在郊外祭祀祖先的礼仪，在甘泉祭祀太一，选择的是京师西北的干位；在汾阴祭祀土地神，是水洼中的方形丘地。
English: At the time of Emperor Wu, the etiquette of sacrificing ancestors in the suburbs was determined. In Ganquan, Taichi was sacrificed, and the northwestern part of Beijing was chosen; in Suyin, the land god was sacrificed, and it was a square hill in a puddle.

古文：乃立乐府，采诗夜诵，有赵、代、秦、楚之讴。
现代文：于是就建立乐府，搜集诗歌后就在夜晚歌诵，有趟、代、秦、楚的歌曲。
English: As a result, he established the Music House, and after collecting poems, he would sing and recite them at night, including songs of Watan, Dai, Qin, and Chu.

古文：以李延年为协律都尉，多举司马相如等数十人造为诗赋，略论律吕，以合八音之调，作十九章之歌。
现代文：任命李延年为协律都尉，多次举荐司马相如等几十人创作诗赋，简要地讨论律吕，用来调和八种乐器的音调，写出了十九章歌曲。
English: He appointed Li Yan Nian as the captain of the orchestra, repeatedly recommended Sima Xiangru and dozens of others to compose poems, briefly discussed the ryu, used to harmonize the tones of eight musical instruments, and wrote nineteen chapters of songs.

古文：以正月上辛用事甘泉圜丘，使童男女七十人俱歌，昏祠至明。
现代文：在正月上辛曰祭祀于甘泉圜丘，派少男少女七十入一同歌唱，从黄昏一直到天亮。
English: On the first day of the month, Shinshinsai is held at Ganquan Mountain, and boys and girls in their seventies are sent to sing together from dusk until dawn.

古文：夜常有神光如流星止集于祠坛，天子自竹宫而望拜，百官侍祠者数百人皆肃然动心焉。
现代文：夜间经常有神光如流星集中停止在祭坛，天子就从用竹建造的宫室里远望并拜祭，一同陪着祭祀的官员几百人都肃然心动。
English: At night, there is often a meteor-like concentration of divine light that stops at the altar, and the heavenly son looks out from the bamboo-built palace room and worships the sacrifice. Together with the hundreds of officials accompanying the sacrifice, they are awestruck.

古文：《安世房中歌》十七章，其诗曰：
现代文：《安世房中歌》有十七章，这首诗说：
English: There are seventeen chapters in the "Song of the Peace Palace," and this poem says:

古文：大孝备矣，休德昭清。
现代文：大孝齐备，美德明显。
English: The filial piety is complete, the virtue is obvious.

古文：高张四县，乐充官庭。
现代文：把乐器高高悬挂四周，让乐器充满宫廷。
English: Hang the instruments high all around, and let the instruments fill the court.

古文：芬树羽林，云景杳冥，金支秀华，庶旄翠旌。
现代文：纷纷树立的羽葆像树林一样，像云影一样高远难见，黄金装饰的乐器羽葆，像草木一样华秀，像用旎牛尾和翠羽装饰的旌旗一样漂亮。
English: The egrets that have been erected one after another are as tall and hard to see as the trees, and as high and far away as the shadows of the clouds. The gold-decorated musical egrets are as gorgeous as the plants and trees, and as beautiful as the banners decorated with yakitori and cedar feathers.

古文：《七始》、《华始》，肃倡和声。
现代文：《七始华始》，要恭敬演唱和谐的声部。
English: "The Beginning of the 7th Century" should be reverently sung by a harmonious voice.

古文：神来宴娭，庶几是听。
现代文：神也差不多来宴饮嬉乐，倾听歌声。
English: God almost came to feast and revel and listen to the singing.

古文：鬻鬻音送，细齐人情。
现代文：用音乐恭敬谨慎地欢送神灵，稍微使他们感受到人的情感。
English: Music is used to respectfully and discreetly send off the gods and make them feel a little human emotion.

古文：忽乘青玄，熙事备成。
现代文：神灵忽登青天而去，吉祥的事就齐备了。
English: The divine spirit suddenly ascended into the blue sky and left, and everything auspicious was ready.

古文：清思眑々，经纬冥冥。
现代文：淡淡的思绪缥渺幽静，天地空旷高远。
English: Faint thoughts are dim and quiet, the sky and earth are vast and far away.

古文：我定历数，人告其心。
现代文：我确定了历数，人人都竭尽全心。
English: I've got my dates set and everyone's doing their best.

古文：敕身齐戒，施教申申。
现代文：虔诚地进行斋戒，不断地进行教育。
English: He fasted religiously and continued his education.

古文：乃立祖庙，敬明尊亲。
现代文：于是建立祖宗的庙宇，敬奉尊敬的和亲爱的人。
English: So they built ancestral temples to worship the respected and beloved.

古文：大矣孝熙，四极爰轃。
现代文：孝顺的福气很大，可以到达四方极远的地方。
English: The blessings of filial piety are great and can reach far and wide.

古文：王侯秉德，其邻翼翼，显明昭式。清明矣，皇帝孝德。
现代文：王侯能够持有德行，他周围的人就很恭敬，这是很显著的。政治清明畅达，是皇帝的孝德。
English: If a prince can be virtuous, the people around him will be respectful, which is very remarkable. Political clarity is the emperor's filial piety.

古文：竟全大功，抚安四极。
现代文：完成了大功，安抚了四方。
English: He accomplished a great feat and pacified the four parties.

古文：海内有奸，纷乱东北。
现代文：海内有邪恶的人，在东北制造动乱。
English: There are evil people at sea, creating turmoil in the northeast.

古文：诏抚成师，武臣承德。
现代文：下诏慰问部队，武臣承受德行。
English: The emperor sent a message of condolence to the troops, and the samurai accepted the act of kindness.

古文：行乐交逆，《箫》、《勺》群慝。
现代文：用音乐去征伐，《箫》、《勺》能安抚群恶。
English: Using music to wage war, "Dragonfly" and "Spoon" can appease evil spirits.

古文：肃为济哉，盖定燕国。
现代文：他们恭敬地服从了，燕国也就安定了。
English: They obeyed respectfully, and Yan's country became stable.

古文：大海荡荡水所归，高贤愉愉民所怀。
现代文：大海浩荡无边，众水汇归，高明的贤人和颜悦色，众人向往。
English: The sea is vast and boundless, many waters are converging, clever sages and beautiful colors, and everyone is yearning.

古文：大山崔，百卉殖。
现代文：大山崔嵬，能生养百卉。
English: Da Shan Cui Yao, can grow hundreds of flowers.

古文：民何贵？
现代文：人们崇尚什么？
English: What do people worship?

古文：贵有德。
现代文：他们崇尚有道德的人。
English: They admire people with morals.

古文：安其所，乐终产。
现代文：万物各安其所，各乐其终。
English: Everything has its place, and everything has its end.

古文：乐终产，世继绪。
现代文：各乐其终，就能世代传递无穷。
English: Each song has its own ending, which can be passed down from generation to generation.

古文：飞龙秋，游上天。
现代文：驰骋的飞龙，在上天巡游。
English: A galloping flying dragon, cruising in the sky.

古文：高贤愉，乐民人。
现代文：贤能的人和颜悦色，人民就会安乐。
English: When the virtuous are amiable, the people will be at ease.

古文：丰草葽，女罗施。
现代文：青草茂盛，松萝绵延。
English: The grass is luxuriant and the pineapples are spreading.

古文：善何如，谁能回！
现代文：有什么能比这更好的，有谁能来破坏！
English: What can be better than this, who can destroy it!

古文：大莫大，成教德；长莫长，被无极。
现代文：不管大不大，能形成教化的德行；不管长不长，能覆盖无限的空间。
English: No matter how big or small, it can form the virtue of edification; no matter how long or short, it can cover an infinite space.

古文：雷震震，电耀耀。
现代文：雷声震震，电光闪闪。
English: Thunder shook, lightning flashed.

古文：明德乡，治本约。
现代文：彰明德义的原则，治理政治的根本。
English: The principle of highlighting virtue and justice is the foundation of governance politics.

古文：治本约，泽弘大。
现代文：治理根本，恩泽宏大。
English: Governance is fundamental, and the rewards are great.

古文：加被宠，咸相保。
现代文：施加德政，人人受到宠爱，家庭就能相互保护。
English: When virtue rules, everyone is loved, and families can protect each other.

古文：德施大，世曼寿。
现代文：德政实行得广大，世代延续就会加长。
English: If the German policy is carried out widely, the continuity of generations will increase.

古文：都荔遂芳，窅寙桂华。
现代文：泽兰、香草都有芬芳，桂花凹突起伏。
English: Zeeland and vanilla are fragrant, and osmanthus is concave and undulating.

古文：孝奏天仪，若日月光。
现代文：以孝道进献上天，就像曰月的光芒。
English: To offer up filial piety to the heavens is like saying the light of the moon.

古文：乘玄四龙，回驰北行。
现代文：神灵乘着四龙车，来回奔驰。
English: The deity rides a four-dragon chariot, galloping back and forth.

古文：羽旄殷盛，芬哉芒芒。
现代文：鸟羽牦牛尾装饰的旌旗林立，又密又长。
English: The banners decorated with bird feathers and ox tails are dense and long.

古文：孝道随世，我署文章。
现代文：孝道在世上，我就题写文章。
English: If there is filial piety in the world, I will write an article about it.

古文：《桂华》
现代文：《桂花》
English: "Katsura"

古文：冯冯翼翼，承天之则。
现代文：盛大众多，继承上天的法则。
English: A great multitude, inheriting the laws of heaven.

古文：吾易久远，烛明四极。
现代文：强大长远。照明四方。
English: Powerful and long-range. Four-way illumination.

古文：慈惠所爱，美若休德。
现代文：慈祥宽大的人所爱，就像美德一样。
English: Kindness and magnanimity are loved as virtues.

古文：杳杳冥冥，克绰永福。
现代文：杳杳冥冥，能永享幸福。
English: Never give up, you can always enjoy happiness.

古文：《美若》
现代文：《美若》
English: "Beautiful"

古文：磑磑即即，师象山则。
现代文：高大充实，就像山一样。
English: Tall and solid, like a mountain.

古文：乌呼孝哉，案抚戎国。
现代文：用孝来安抚少数民族。
English: Using filial piety to appease ethnic minorities.

古文：蛮夷竭欢，象来致福。
现代文：蛮夷部尽情欢畅，派翻译来进贡。
English: The barbarian club was as happy as can be, and sent an interpreter to pay tribute.

古文：兼临是爱，终无兵革。
现代文：接受这种爱戴，终于没有发生战争。
English: Accepting this love, there was finally no war.

古文：嘉荐芳矣，告灵飨矣。
现代文：好的祭品很芳香，祭告神窥，神灵就来享受。
English: A good sacrifice is sweet to the taste. When it is offered to the gods, the gods come to enjoy it.

古文：告灵既飨，德音孔臧。
现代文：祭告神灵，等他们享受后，就热烈歌颂。
English: They offer sacrifices to the gods, and after they have enjoyed themselves, they sing fervent hymns.

古文：惟德之臧，建侯之常。
现代文：衹有善德，是诸侯所常有的。
English: It is common for lords to have good morals.

古文：承保天休，令问不忘。
现代文：继承上天的美德，就不会被忘记好名声。
English: Inherit the virtues of heaven, and your good name will not be forgotten.

古文：皇皇鸿明，荡侯休德。
现代文：真是太英明了，天下平定，是有帝王的美德。
English: It's so clever, it's so peaceful, it's got all the virtues of an emperor.

古文：嘉承天和，伊乐厥福。
现代文：很好地承受上天的祥和之气，这是音乐带来的福气。
English: It is a blessing brought by music to be able to bear the peaceful atmosphere of heaven well.

古文：在乐不荒，惟民之则。
现代文：欣赏音乐但不放纵，这是人们的准则。
English: Enjoying music but not overindulging is the norm.

古文：浚则师德，下民咸殖。
现代文：有深刻的法律和众多的道德，就能蓄育万民。
English: With profound laws and numerous morals, it is possible to nurture all people.

古文：令问在旧，孔容翼翼。孔容之常，承帝之明。
现代文：善名流传很久，那他的仪容一定很受尊敬。
English: His good name has been around for a long time, so his appearance must be well respected.

古文：下民之乐，子孙保光。
现代文：美好仪容的准则是承受上天的英明。百姓的安乐可以使子孙永保光荣。
English: The criterion for a beautiful appearance is to bear the wisdom of heaven. The people's happiness can make their children and grandchildren eternally glorious.

古文：承顺温良，受帝之光。
现代文：恭顺善良，可以受到上天的关照。
English: If you are obedient and good, you can be taken care of by heaven.

古文：嘉荐令芳，寿考不忘。
现代文：芳香美好的贡品，能够延长众生的生命。
English: A fragrant and beautiful tribute, able to prolong the lives of all living beings.

古文：承帝明德，师象山则。
现代文：承受上天完美的德性，就像山一样不亏损不崩塌。
English: To withstand the perfect virtue of heaven is like a mountain that does not collapse.

古文：云施称民，永受厥福。
现代文：公平地施舍，恩泽就像云一样，人民就能永远享受幸福。
English: Giving charity equitably, the blessing is like a cloud, and the people can enjoy happiness forever.

古文：承容之常，承帝之明。
现代文：有仪容的准则，有上天的英明。
English: There are standards of appearance, and there is God's wisdom.

古文：下民安乐，受福无疆。《郊祀歌》十九章，其诗曰：
现代文：地上的百姓就会安乐，就会永远享受幸福。《郊祀歌》有十九章，其诗说：
English: The people on earth will be at ease, and will enjoy happiness forever. "Suburban Worship Song" has nineteen chapters, and its poem says:

古文：练时日，侯有望，爇膋萧，延四方。
现代文：选择时曰，就去祭祀！点燃油脂和艾蒿，延请四方的神霰。
English: When choosing, say, "Let's go and make a sacrifice! Light the oil and incense, and invite the gods of the four directions."

古文：九重开，灵之斿，垂惠恩，鸿祜休。
现代文：天门大开，神灵出游，降下恩惠，带来大福。
English: The gates of heaven are wide open, the gods are traveling, bestowing favors and bringing great blessings.

古文：灵之车，结玄云，驾飞龙，羽旄纷。
现代文：神灵的车，环绕着青云，驾御着飞龙，鸟羽牦牛尾装饰的旌旗纷纷飘扬？
English: The chariot of the gods, surrounded by blue clouds, driving a flying dragon, bird feathers, cow tail decorated banners fluttering in succession?

古文：灵之下，若风马，左仓龙，右白虎。
现代文：神灵的下面，飞驰的马像风一样疾速，左边是苍龙，右边是白虎。
English: Underneath the deity, a horse is galloping as fast as the wind. On the left is a blue dragon, and on the right is a white tiger.

古文：灵之来，神哉沛，先以雨，般裔裔。
现代文：神霞的到来，真是太快了，先降雨，雨淋淋。
English: The arrival of Shenxia is really too fast. First it rains, then it rains.

古文：灵之至，庆阴阴，相放怫，震澹心。
现代文：神灵到来，遮天蔽曰，景象仿佛震动人心。
English: When the gods arrive and cover the sky, the scene seems to shake people's hearts.

古文：灵已坐，五音饬，虞至旦，承灵亿。
现代文：神灵安坐后，五音整齐，奏乐到天明，使神鬃安静。
English: After the gods are seated, the five tones are neatly arranged, and the music is played until dawn, so that the gods are quiet.

古文：牲茧栗，粢盛香，尊桂酒，宾八乡。
现代文：用牛犊和祭器内芳香的黍稷以及樽中的桂花酒来宴请各方神灵。
English: Deities from all over the world were invited to a banquet with beef brisket, fragrant bean paste in an offering vessel, and osmanthus wine in a barrel.

古文：灵安留，吟青黄，遍观此，眺瑶堂。
现代文：神灵很安静地停留，就歌诵青黄乐，在这裹四周观看，眺望瑶堂。
English: The deities stayed very quietly, singing and chanting the Blue and Yellow Music, looking around and overlooking the hall.

古文：众嫭并，绰奇丽，颜如荼，兆逐靡。
现代文：许多美女在一块，柔美奇丽，容颜如荼，百姓争相观看。
English: Many beautiful women in one place, soft and beautiful, their faces radiant, and the people watching eagerly.

古文：被华文，厕雾縠，曳阿锡，佩珠玉。
现代文：披着华丽的服饰，像云雾一样轻盈，牵着细丝捆布，佩戴着珠玉。
English: Draped in ornate costumes, as light as clouds, holding bundles of silk, wearing jewels.

古文：侠嘉夜，茝兰芳，淡容与，献嘉觞。《练时日》一
现代文：她们怀抱香草，发出芷兰一样的芳香，安详闲适，并献上好酒。《练时日》一
English: They embrace the herbs, emit the fragrance of the camellia, are peaceful and leisurely, and offer good wine.

古文：帝临中坛，四方承宇，绳绳意变，备得其所。
现代文：天帝降临到中间的祭坛，四方神灵各承一个空间，小心谨慎以防意外变故，各自在自己的位置上准备着。
English: The heavenly emperor descended to the altar in the middle, and the four deities each took a space, being careful to prevent accidents, each preparing in their own position.

古文：清和六合，制数以五。
现代文：在天气清明和暖，月建与日辰相合的吉，用五来制数。
English: In Kyoto, where the weather is clear and warm, and the moon and sun are congruent, the number system is based on five.

古文：海内安宁，兴文武。
现代文：海内安宁，兴文息武。
English: Peace at sea, prosperity in the air.

古文：后土富媪，昭明三光。
现代文：土地富庶繁盛，烟媪之气上逢于天。
English: The land is rich and bountiful, and smoke rises to the sky.

古文：穆穆优游，嘉服上黄。《帝临》二
现代文：沉静悠闲，吉祥的服色是黄色。《帝临》二
English: Calm and leisurely, the auspicious color of clothing is yellow.

古文：青阳开动，根荄以遂，膏润并爱，跂行毕逮。
现代文：春天万物发动，根须生长出来，加上甘霖滋润的加惠，很快就能追赶上。
English: In spring, all things are set in motion, roots grow out, and with the benefit of rain and moisture, it will soon be able to catch up.

古文：霆声发荣，壧处顷听，枯槁复产，乃成厥命。
现代文：雷声使草木复苏，让洞穴中的蛰虫倾听，凋零的枯草朽木又开始生长，又形成了生命。
English: The sound of thunder revives the grass and trees, makes the maggots in the cave listen, and the withered dead grass and dead trees begin to grow again, forming life again.

古文：众庶熙熙，施及夭胎，群生啿噬，惟春之祺。
现代文：都很和乐，感染幼小的以及胚胎，众生丰厚，是春天带来的福祉。
English: are all in harmony, infecting the young and the embryo, the abundance of all beings, is the well-being brought by spring.

古文：《青阳》三邹子乐
现代文：《青阳》三邹子乐
English: "Qingyang" with three musical accompaniments

古文：朱明盛长，敷与万物，桐生茂豫，靡有所诎。
现代文：夏天万物生长茂盛，舒展自在，自由生长，光泽盛美，没有什么来进行阻碍。
English: In summer, everything grows luxuriantly, stretches freely, grows freely, shines beautifully, and there is nothing to hinder it.

古文：敷华就实，既阜既昌，登成甫田，百鬼迪尝。
现代文：把华彩与果实相结合，就又大又多，因为田大而丰收，百神可以得到祭品的享受。
English: Combining the gorgeous colors with the fruits, there are more and more of them. Because the fields are large and the harvest is plentiful, hundreds of gods can enjoy the offerings.

古文：广大建祀，肃雍不忘，神若宥之，传世无疆。《朱明》四邹子乐
现代文：祭祀进行得盛大，没有忘记恭敬地烹调，神灵就会友好地保护，使它世代相传。《朱明》四邹子乐
English: If the sacrificial rites are carried out grandly and the cooking is not forgotten with respect, the gods will protect it in a friendly manner and pass it down from generation to generation.

古文：西颢沆砀，秋气肃杀，含秀垂颖，续旧不废。
现代文：西方少吴有白气，秋气酷烈萧索，五谷百草，因为没有废绝旧苗，都能充实成熟。
English: In the west, Shao Wu has a white atmosphere, the autumn atmosphere is severe and gloomy, and the grain and grass, because there is no waste of old seedlings, can be fully mature.

古文：奸伪不萌，袄孽伏息，隅辟越远，四貉咸服。
现代文：奸诈和虚伪都没有萌发，妖孽衹得伏藏，在边远偏僻地方的四夷都臣服。
English: Treachery and hypocrisy did not germinate. Sorcerers were forced to hide, and in remote and isolated places, all the barbarians were subdued.

古文：既畏兹威，惟慕纯德，附而不骄，正心翊翊。
现代文：畏惧这样的威严，思慕美德，他们归附后虔诚恭敬，不敢骄傲、怠慢。
English: Fearing such majesty, and meditating on virtue, they become pious and reverent, and do not dare to be proud and negligent.

古文：《西颢》五邹子乐
现代文：《西颢》五邹子乐
English: "Xiqiao" five-stringed zither music

古文：玄冥陵阴，蛰虫盖臧，草木零落，抵冬降霍。
现代文：北方的神灵登上阴地，冬眠的动物都藏了起来，草木凋零飘落，到了冬天就降下霜。
English: The gods of the north ascend to the underworld, hibernating animals hide, plants wither and fall, and frost falls in winter.

古文：易乱除邪，革正异俗，兆民反本，抱素怀朴。
现代文：这时候结束动乱消除邪恶，改正诡异的习俗，亿万人民回到本业，返朴归真。
English: This is the time to end the turmoil, eliminate the evil, correct the strange customs, and hundreds of millions of people return to their work and return to reality.

古文：条理信义，望礼五岳。
现代文：分清忠信和礼义的脉络，遥祭五岳。
English: Distinguishing the lineage of loyalty and propriety, the Five Mountains Remote Festival.

古文：籍敛之时，掩收嘉谷。
现代文：在籍田收获时候，全收好谷。
English: At harvest time in his home field, he harvests the entire valley.

古文：《玄冥》六邹子乐
现代文：《玄冥》六邹子乐
English: "The Profound Darkness" Six-Chambered Music

古文：惟泰元尊，媪神蕃釐，经纬天地，作成四时。
现代文：天神地位最高，地神福气最大，他们分别统治着天和地，形成了四个季节。
English: The god of heaven has the highest status, and the god of earth has the greatest blessing. They respectively rule heaven and earth, forming the four seasons.

古文：精建日月，星辰度理，阴阳五行，周而复始。
现代文：月星辰精确无误地运行，阴阳五行，循环往返。
English: The moon and stars run accurately, yin and yang are five elements, and the cycle goes back and forth.

古文：云风雷电，降甘露雨，百姓蕃滋，咸循厥绪。
现代文：风云雷电，降下及时的雨露，百姓靠此繁衍生长，都能安守他们的本业。
English: The wind and lightning, the timely rain and dew fall, the people rely on this to reproduce and grow, and can safely protect their own business.

古文：继统共勤，顺皇之德，鸾路龙鳞，罔不肸饰。
现代文：天子继承祖业，恭敬勤劳，顺从上天之德，有虞氏的鸾辂车光彩如龙鳞，没有不经过装饰的。
English: The heavenly son inherits the ancestral inheritance, respects and works hard, obeys the virtue of heaven, and has the splendor of the Yu clan's carriage, which is like a dragon scale. There is nothing without decoration.

古文：嘉笾列陈，庶几宴享，灭除凶灾，烈腾八荒。
现代文：装满果脯的祭祀礼器纷纷摆好，差不多就可以享受祭祀的酒食，消灭凶恶和灾害，威烈超越了八方荒远的地区。
English: The sacrificial vessels filled with fruit preserves were arranged one after another, and it was almost possible to enjoy the sacrificial food and wine, eliminate evil and disasters, and surpass the desolate regions in all directions.

古文：钟鼓竽笙，云舞翔翔，招摇灵旗，九夷宾将。
现代文：钟鼓竽笙齐奏，都翩翩起舞，举着画有招摇的神旗，各民族归顺。
English: The bells, drums and gongs were played in unison, and everyone danced, holding up the sacred banner with a swaggering design. All ethnic groups were submissive.

古文：《惟泰元》七建始元年，丞相匡衡奏罢 鸾路龙鳞 ，更定诗曰 涓选休成 。
现代文：《惟泰元》七建始元年，丞相匡衡演奏完 鸾路龙鳞 ，就把诗名更改定为 涓选休成 。
English: In the first year of the seventh year of the reign of King Taejo, after the performance of "Kushiro Ryukyu" by the Prime Minister Kuang Han, the poem's title was changed to "Selected and Suspended."

古文：天地并况，惟予有慕，爰熙紫坛，思求厥路。
现代文：天地给予的恩惠，我心中向往，兴建紫坛，想得到神降临的路。
English: The grace given by heaven and earth, I yearn in my heart, build a purple altar, and want to get the way of God's descent.

古文：恭承禋祀，豫为纷，黼绣周张，承神至尊。
现代文：恭敬地承受祭祀，云烟弥漫，绣有斧形花纹的衣服四处张挂，欢迎最为尊贵的神灵。
English: They respectfully receive the offerings, smoke fills the air, and clothes embroidered with axe-shaped patterns hang everywhere, welcoming the most precious deities.

古文：千童罗舞成八溢，合好效欢虞泰一。
现代文：许多幼童在一起成八列起舞，一致用欢快乐曲来使泰一高兴。
English: Many young children danced together in eight rows, making Taiyi happy with happy songs.

古文：九歌毕奏斐然殊，鸣琴竽瑟会轩朱。
现代文：奏完各种歌曲后感觉差异很大，在轩槛的前面弹着呜琴竽瑟等各种乐器。
English: After playing all kinds of songs, the feeling is very different. In front of Xuan Zhuan, various musical instruments such as Wuqin Gongsa are played.

古文：璆磬金鼓，灵其有喜，百官济济，各敬厥事。
现代文：玉磬金钮和大鼓响起来，神灵很高兴，百官济济一堂，都很恭敬地忙碌自己的事情。
English: Tamakazura gold buttons and large drums sounded, the gods were pleased, and hundreds of officials gathered, all respectfully busy with their own affairs.

古文：盛胜实俎进闻膏，神奄留，临须摇。
现代文：把盛着祭牲的礼器进献给神灵，芬香直达神灵所在的地方，神灵停留片刻，光临这裹。
English: Offer the sacred vessel containing the sacrificial animal to the deity. The incense will reach the place where the deity is. The deity will stay for a while and visit this place.

古文：长丽前掞光耀明，寒暑不忒况皇章。
现代文：长丽鸟在前面放出光芒照明天空，寒暑不差，赐给君王，表彰贤德。
English: In the foreground, the long-legged bird emits light to illuminate the sky, and the cold and heat are not bad. It is given to the king to commend virtue.

古文：展诗应律鋗玉鸣，函宫吐角激徵清。
现代文：表演诗歌和音律玉声奏鸣，宫调弱小角声高扬征声激扬清脆。
English: The poetry and melody are performed with the tambourine sounding sonorous, the minor horn sounding high-pitched, and the clarion call sounding crisp.

古文：发梁扬羽申以商，造兹新音永久长。
现代文：歌声绕梁羽调高扬重叠着商调，制造这样新式的音乐将永久保存下去。
English: Singing around the beam and feather tuning uplifting overlapping commercial tuning, creating such a new style of music will be preserved forever.

古文：声气远条凤鸟鴹，神夕奄虞盖孔享。《天地》八
现代文：声音悠远流长凤鸟翱翔，神灵快乐地享受祭品。《天地》八
English: The sound of the long-distance stream of the long phoenix soars, and the gods happily enjoy the offerings.

古文：丞相匡衡奏罢 黼绣周张 ，更定诗曰 肃若旧典 。
现代文：丞相匡衡演奏完 黼绣周张 ，就改定诗为 肃若旧典 。
English: After the Minister of War, Kuang Heng, had finished his performance of 绣周张, he revised the poem to 肃若旧典.

古文：日出入安穷？
现代文：太阳的出没怎么会有穷尽呢？
English: How can there be an end to the sun's presence?

古文：时世不与人同。
现代文：时光不会与人的寿命相等。
English: Time does not equal human life.

古文：故春非我春，夏非我夏，秋非我秋，冬非我冬。
现代文：因此春并不是我的春，夏也不是我的夏，秋不是我的秋，冬也不是我的冬。
English: Therefore, spring is not my spring, summer is not my summer, autumn is not my autumn, and winter is not my winter.

古文：泊如四海之池，遍观是邪谓何？
现代文：人的寿命和太阳相比，太阳就像四海，而人就像池水，遍观这样一种情况是什么意思呢？
English: Compared with the sun, the sun is like the four seas, and people are like pools of water. What does it mean to observe such a situation?

古文：吾知所乐，独乐六龙，六龙之调，使我心若。
现代文：我知道怎样快乐，我衹喜欢驾驭六龙，六龙好驾驭，它们使我心中顺畅。
English: I know how to be happy, I like to ride the six dragons, the six dragons are easy to ride, they make my heart smooth.

古文：訾黄其何不徠下？
现代文：黄龙为何不下来呢？
English: Why doesn't the yellow dragon come down?

古文：《日出入》九
现代文：《日出入》九
English: "Sunrise" Nine

古文：太一况，天马下，沾赤汗，沫流赭。
现代文：太一恩赐，天马降临，浑身被血色的汗所浸湿，流着赤赭的唾沫。
English: By the grace of God, the heavenly horse came down, and my whole body was drenched in blood-colored sweat, with reddish spittle flowing.

古文：志俶傥，精权奇，浮云，晻上驰。
现代文：它的志向奇伟，精力非同一般，跃上浮云，飞奔驰骋。
English: Its ambition is extraordinary, its energy is extraordinary, it leaps into the clouds and flies.

古文：体容与，万里，今安匹，龙为友。
现代文：身体稍微一动，就越过万里，现在有什么可以和它匹敌的呢，衹有龙可以与它为友。
English: A slight movement of the body can travel thousands of miles. What can compete with it now? Even a dragon can be friends with it.

古文：元狩三年马生渥洼水中作。
现代文：元狩三年天马诞生在渥洼水中时作。
English: The three-year-old Heavenly Horse of Motogari was born in the waters of the Woda River.

古文：天马徠，从西极，涉流沙，九夷服。
现代文：天马从西方极远处来，涉过流沙，各少数民族都臣服。
English: Tianma came from the far west, waded through the quicksand, and all ethnic minorities were subjugated.

古文：天马徠，出泉水，虎脊两，化若鬼。
现代文：天马从泉水中出来，毛色如虎的脊背有两面，变化如同鬼神。
English: Tianma comes out of the spring water, the fur color like a tiger's back has two sides, changes like a ghost.

古文：天马徠，历无草，径千里，循东道。
现代文：天马从没有毛草的地方而来，经过了千里，才到达束面的道路。
English: Tianma came from a place without wool and grass, and traveled thousands of miles before reaching the road in Sokumen.

古文：天马徠，执徐时，将摇举，谁与期？
现代文：天马来时岁星在辰，它将奋发高飞，谁又能确定它的日期呢？
English: When the heavenly horse comes, the year star is in the hour, it will fly high, and who can determine its date?

古文：天马徠，开远门，竦予身，逝昆仑。
现代文：天马来时，很远就把门打开，它驮着我的身体，飞往昆仑。
English: When the Heavenly Horse came, I opened the door far away. It hugged my body and flew to Kunlun.

古文：天马徠，龙之媒，游阊阖，观玉台。
现代文：天马来了，是作为龙的媒介，周游在天门，观望在玉台。
English: The Heavenly Horse has come, it is as a medium of the dragon, traveling around in the Heavenly Gate, watching in the Jade Terrace.

古文：太初四年诛宛王获宛马作。
现代文：太初四年诛杀大宛王，汉武帝获得大宛国的实马时写。
English: It was written in the first four years of the reign of Emperor Wu of Han, when he killed the king of Dawan and gained the real horse of Dawan.

古文：《天马》十
现代文：《天马》十
English: "Heavenly Horse"

古文：天门开，詄荡荡，穆并聘，以临飨。
现代文：天门大开，天空空旷飘荡，众神神情严肃，一同驰骋而来，光临祭祀。
English: The gates of heaven are wide open, the sky is empty and wafting, and the gods are solemn, galloping together to attend the sacrifice.

古文：光夜烛，德信著，灵浸鸿，长生豫。
现代文：神光夜照，德行和信义显著，神灵恩泽广大，我能长生，这是让人很高兴的。
English: God's light shines in the night, virtue and righteousness are conspicuous, God's grace is vast, and I can live forever, which is very gratifying.

古文：大朱涂广，夷石为堂，饰玉梢以舞歌，体招摇若永望。
现代文：到处都涂满朱丹，把路上石头弄平以建造明堂，装饰着玉的旗竿用来跳舞唱歌，上面画着北斗经常可以望见。
English: Everywhere is covered with vermilion, the stones on the road are smoothed to build the Ming Hall, the flagpole decorated with jade is used for dancing and singing, and the Big Dipper can often be seen on it.

古文：星留俞，塞陨光，照紫幄，珠熉黄。
现代文：众星留住神灵，要求享受自己的祭品，他们竞相闪烁光芒，照耀着紫幄，珠色成了黄色。
English: The stars hold the gods, and demand the enjoyment of their sacrifices. They compete in flashing light, shining violet, pearly yellow.

古文：幡比翅回集，贰双飞常羊。
现代文：翻腾迥旋就像鸟翅双击，逍遥自在。
English: The tossing and turning is like the double beat of a bird's wing, free and easy.

古文：月穆穆以金波，日华耀以宣明。
现代文：月色柔和发出金色光波，阳光灿烂发出夺目光芒。
English: The moon softly emits golden light waves, the sun shines brightly emitting a dazzling radiance.

古文：假清风轧忽，激长至重觞。
现代文：假藉清风而来，虽急速但也较长远，只好不停地进献。
English: With the help of the wind, although it was fast, it took a long time, so we had to keep moving forward.

古文：神裴回若留放，殣冀亲以肆章。
现代文：神灵往返回旋，好像要停留不走，我就可以觐见，希望能亲自去表明诚意。
English: The spirit keeps circling back, as if to stay or not to go, so I can see it, hoping to show my sincerity in person.

古文：函蒙祉福常若期，寂谬上天知厥时。
现代文：得到幸福就会指曰可待，上天寂寥高远知道这个时间。
English: If you get happiness, it will indicate that you can wait, and God knows this time.

古文：泛泛滇滇从高斿，殷勤此路胪所求。
现代文：浩浩荡荡跟随向上飞游，一路殷勤侍奉是为了陈述所要请求的事。
English: The vastness of the vastness follows the upward flight, and all the way the courteous service is to state the things to be requested.

古文：佻正嘉吉弘以昌，休嘉砰隐溢四方。
现代文：幸福美满所以要加以弘扬昌大，美好洪大声传四方。
English: Happiness is wonderful, so it should be promoted and spread far and wide.

古文：专精厉意逝九阂，纷云六幕浮大海。
现代文：专心致志振奋精神飞上九天，雄心勃勃游遍大地飘浮大海。
English: He flew for nine days with a single-minded determination to lift his spirits, and ambitiously swam across the land and the sea.

古文：《天门》十一
现代文：《天门》十一
English: "Heaven's Gate" Chapter Eleven

古文：景星显见，信星彪列，象载昭庭，日亲以察。
现代文：景星显现，镇星显著排列，悬挂神奇的东西，使它昭显在庭中，太阳照临，能够明察。
English: The stars appear, the town stars are conspicuously arranged, a magical thing hangs, making it appear in the courtyard, the sun shines, and it can be clearly seen.

古文：参侔开阖，爰推本纪，汾脽出鼎，皇祜元始。
现代文：同天地相参照，就要首推当朝，汾阴高丘发现鼎，大福显现。
English: With reference to heaven and earth, it is necessary to first push that morning, find the peak of the gloomy hill, and reveal the great fortune.

古文：五音六律，依韦飨昭，杂变并会，雅声远姚。
现代文：五音六律，和谐响亮，同杂音相遇，高雅的音乐更为悠扬。
English: Five-tone and six-tone, harmony and loudness, meet with noise, elegant music is more melodious.

古文：空桑琴瑟结信成，四兴递代八风生。
现代文：空桑的琴瑟名副其实，跳舞的人四列互相交换八风就产生了。
English: Kuusang's zither truly lives up to its name, as the four rows of dancers exchange the eight winds with each other.

古文：殷殷钟石羽龠鸣。
现代文：钟磬声音洪亮羽龠奏鸣。
English: The sound of the gongs resounds.

古文：河龙供鲤醇牺牲。
现代文：河龙供给鲤鱼，牛羊纯色。
English: The river dragon supplies eel, and the cattle and sheep are of pure color.

古文：百末旨酒布兰生。
现代文：用百草的精华搀杂酒中，酒既香又美。
English: The liquor is both fragrant and beautiful, brewed with the essence of paraquat.

古文：泰尊柘浆析朝酲。
现代文：用大杯盛满甘蔗汁用来解酒。
English: Use a large glass full of sugar cane juice to loosen the alcohol.

古文：微感心攸通修名，周流常羊思所并。
现代文：精微的感应能使心意远达上天通告自己的美名，来回行走思考怎样与神道相会。
English: Subtle sensing can make the mind reach up to the heavens to announce one's good name, walking back and forth thinking about how to meet with Shinto.

古文：穰穰复正直往宁，冯蠵切和疏写平。
现代文：神赐福多，使自己归于正道，这止是自己往的希望，河伯命令峭龟极力配合水神，疏导河流，使水泻平均。
English: God gave him many blessings so that he would return to the right path. This was just his hope. Hebe ordered the tortoise to cooperate with the water god, divert the river and make the water flow evenly.

古文：上天布施后土成，穰穰丰年四时荣。
现代文：上天安排土神执行，丰年常有，四季繁荣。
English: Heaven arranges for the gods of the soil to carry it out. There are often good years, and the four seasons are prosperous.

古文：《景星》十二元鼎五年得鼎汾阴作。
现代文：《景星》十二元鼎五年在汾阴得到鼎时创作。
English: "Jingxing" was created in the twelfth year of the Yuan Dynasty, in the twelfth year of the Yin Dynasty.

古文：齐房产草，九茎连叶，宫童效异，披图案谍。
现代文：斋房所产的草，许多根茎都连着叶，这是宫中的奴仆所显现的异兆，展开图查找家谱。
English: Many of the rhizomes of the grass produced by the fasting room are connected to the leaves, which is a sign of the servants in the palace, expand the map to find the family tree.

古文：玄气之精，回复此都，蔓蔓日茂，芝成灵华。
现代文：天气的精华，在云阳的都城回旋往返，经过很长时间，曰益茂盛，芝草具有灵气。
English: The essence of the weather, in the capital of Yunyang round-trip, after a long time, it is said to be more and more prosperous, and the grass has aura.

古文：《齐房》十三元封二年芝生甘泉齐房作。
现代文：《齐房》十三元封二年芝草生长在甘泉斋房时创作。
English: "Qifang" thirteen yuan seal two years of turf grass growing in Ganquan temple when creating.

古文：后皇嘉坛，立玄黄服，物发冀州，兆蒙祉福。
现代文：地神和天神的好祭坛建立了，以玄黄作为祭服颜色，在冀州发现了宝鼎，亿万人民获得幸福。
English: Good altars to the gods of the earth and the gods of heaven have been established, with dark yellow as the color of the sacrificial vestments. Baoding has been discovered in Jizhou, and hundreds of millions of people have gained happiness.

古文：四塞，假狄合处，经营万亿，咸遂厥宇。《后皇》十四
现代文：众多的四方边塞，远处的戎狄都归顺，统治亿万人民，全部得到了他们的地盘。《后皇》十四
English: The numerous four-sided frontier fortresses, the distant armies, have all surrendered, rule hundreds of millions of people, and have all gained their territory.

古文：华烨烨，固灵根。
现代文：光彩照射，原来是祖先。
English: Brilliantly illuminated, it turned out to be an ancestor.

古文：神之斿，过天门，车千乘，敦昆仑。
现代文：神灵巡游，经过天门，有千辆车聚集在昆仑。
English: A thousand vehicles gathered in Kunlun for the parade of the gods, passing through the Heavenly Gate.

古文：神之出，排玉房，周流杂，拔兰堂。
现代文：神灵出来，张设玉饰的房子，周转循环聚到一块，居住在兰堂。
English: The gods come out, set up a house decorated with jade, gather the circulation circulation into one piece, and live in the Orchid Hall.

古文：神之行，旌容容，骑沓沓，般纵纵。
现代文：神灵行走，旌旗飞扬，车骑疾驶，众人相连。
English: The gods walk, the banners fly, the chariots and horses speed along, and everyone is connected.

古文：神之徠，泛翊翊，甘露降，庆云集。
现代文：神霾到来，飘扬空中，甘露降临，五色云彩聚集。
English: The divine haze arrives, floating in the air, the nectar descends, and the five-colored clouds gather.

古文：神之揄，临坛宇，九疑宾，夔龙舞。
现代文：引来神灵降临祭坛和宫室，九疑的宾客中夔和龙跳舞。
English: Deities descend to the altar and the palace, and among the doubtful guests, the dragon dances with the dragon.

古文：神安坐，鴹吉时，共翊翊，合所思。
现代文：神灵安然坐下和高高飞翔都赶上吉祥时刻，恭敬礼貌，符合人们所想象的。
English: The gods sit down peacefully and fly high to catch the auspicious moment, respectful and polite, in line with people's imagination.

古文：神嘉虞，申贰觞，福滂洋，迈延长。
现代文：神灵很高兴，就一再饮酒，幸福广大无边，绵延长久。
English: Shenling was very happy, so he drank again and again. The happiness was boundless and lasted for a long time.

古文：沛施晁，汾之阿，扬金光，横泰河，莽若云，增阳波。
现代文：所施福祉盛大，在汾水的弯曲处，金光闪烁，充满大河，盛大如云，增加太阳的光波。
English: The benefits are great. At the bend of the Surabaya River, the golden light shines, filling the river, grand as a cloud, increasing the sun's light wave.

古文：遍胪欢，腾天歌。
现代文：到处呈现欢乐景象，歌声升腾到天空。
English: Scenes of joy were everywhere, and songs soared into the sky.

古文：《华烨烨》十五
现代文：《华烨烽》十五
English: "Huaqi" 15th

古文：五神相，包四邻，土地广，扬浮云。
现代文：五帝加以辅助，包容了四方，土地广阔，上面飘扬着浮云。
English: With the assistance of the five emperors, it embraced the four directions, the land was vast, and floating clouds floated above.

古文：嘉坛，椒兰芳，璧玉精，垂华光。
现代文：抚摸祭坛，播洒椒兰的芬香，璧玉精良，发出美丽的光泽。
English: Stroking the altar, sprinkling the fragrance of pepper orchids, the gems are exquisite, emitting a beautiful luster.

古文：益亿年，美始兴，交于神，若有承。
现代文：再过一亿年，福庆开始兴盛，与神交会，神情恭敬。
English: After another 100 million years, Fuqing began to flourish, meeting with the gods and showing respect.

古文：广宣延，咸毕觞，灵舆位，偃蹇骧。
现代文：广泛地接引神灵，让酒杯都喝空，神灵的车马各就其位，腾空奔驰。
English: Widely attract the gods, let the wine glasses are empty, the chariots and horses of the gods each in its place, take off and gallop.

古文：卉汩胪，析奚遗？
现代文：迅速分开陈列，分散归去哪裹有停留呢？
English: Quickly separated display, dispersed return, where is there a stay?

古文：淫渌泽，汪然归。《五神》十六
现代文：赐给广溢的福禄后，就回去了。《五神》十六
English: After bestowing the abundant blessings, he went back.

古文：朝陇首，览西垠，雷电，获白麟。
现代文：朝拜陇山之首，观看西方天边，祭祀时声若雷，光若电，获得了白麟。
English: Paying homage to the head of Lushan Mountain, watching the western edge of the sky, worshiping with thunder and lightning, light and electricity, and obtaining a white unicorn.

古文：爰五止，显黄德，图匈虐，熏鬻殛。
现代文：白麟有五只蹄，显现出土德，谋划凶恶暴虐的，匈奴就被灭了。
English: The white unicorn had five hooves, displayed native virtues, plotted evil and violence, and the Xiongnu were exterminated.

古文：辟流离，抑不详，宾百僚，山河飨。
现代文：屏除恶人，抑制不祥，请百神之官来做客，祭祀山河。
English: Banish the wicked, restrain the evil, invite the officials of a hundred gods to be guests, and worship the mountains and rivers.

古文：掩回辕，长驰，腾雨师，洒路陂。
现代文：车辕转瞬就回转，一下飞驰很远，雨神飞腾，清洒道路。
English: The car turns around in the blink of an eye, it flies very far, the rain god flies, and the road is sprinkled.

古文：流星陨，感惟风，籋归云，抚怀心。
现代文：流星陨落，感慨这样的好风，踏上归去的云彩，抚慰归顺的心灵。
English: Meteor fall, such a good wind of emotion, stepping on the clouds of return, soothing the hearts of the converted.

古文：《朝陇首》十七元狩元年行幸雍获白麟作。
现代文：《朝陇首》十七元狩元年到雍时获得白麟时创作。
English: "Morning Dagger" was created between the 17th year of the 1st year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the

古文：象载瑜，白集西，食甘露，饮荣泉。
现代文：赤雁像车舆一样美丽，白色的集中在西方，以甘露为食，饮用清澈有光华的泉水。
English: The red geese are as beautiful as the snow geese, and the white ones are concentrated in the west. They feed on nectar and drink the clear, sparkling spring water.

古文：赤雁集，六纷员，殊翁杂，五采文。
现代文：赤色的大雁飞来集中，六批赤色大雁纷纭而来，雁颈毛色斑斓，五彩缤纷。
English: The red geese fly in and gather, six batches of red geese come in various colors, and the goose's neck feathers are brightly colored and colorful.

古文：神所见，施祉福，登蓬莱，结无极。
现代文：这是神所显现赐给的福祉，登上蓬莱，达到无极的境界。
English: This is the blessing bestowed by God's appearance, ascending to the Penglai and reaching the boundless realm.

古文：《象载瑜》十八太始三年行幸东海获赤雁作。
现代文：《象载瑜》十八太始三年到东海时得到赤雁时所创作。
English: "The Elephant Carrying Yu" was created by Akaganshi when he came to the East China Sea in the first three years of the 18th century.

古文：赤蛟绥，黄华盖，露夜零，昼掩。
现代文：像赤蛟一样红光闪闪，黄色的金光笼罩，露气在夜间降落，白天云气阴暗。
English: Red light flashes like a red dragonfly, yellow golden light envelops, dew falls at night, and clouds are dark during the day.

古文：百君礼，六龙位，勺椒浆，灵已醉。
现代文：给百神和六龙斟上椒香的酒浆，他们都已醉了。
English: Hundreds of gods and six dragons were doused with pepper-scented wine, and they were all drunk.

古文：灵既享，锡吉祥，芒芒极，降嘉觞。
现代文：神灵享祭完毕，就赐给吉祥，广大无边，这是对好酒感到高兴的缘故。
English: After the gods have enjoyed the festival, it is given to the auspicious, vast and boundless, which is the reason for the pleasure of good wine.

古文：灵殷殷，烂扬光，延寿命，永未央。
现代文：神灵盛大，光芒灿烂，延长寿命，没有止境。
English: God's spirit is grand, radiant, life-extending, and boundless.

古文：杳冥冥，塞六合，泽汪濊，辑万国。
现代文：远大无边，充满天地四方，恩泽汪洋，达到万国。
English: Vast and boundless, filling the four quarters of heaven and earth, abounding in bounty, reaching out to all nations.

古文：灵禗禗，象舆轙，票然逝，旗逶蛇。
现代文：神灵不忍离去，但车舆已准备好，飘然远逝，旌旗逶迤。
English: The deity could not bear to leave, but the chariot was ready and flew away, carrying the banner.

古文：礼乐成，灵将归，托玄德，长无衰。
现代文：礼乐完成，神灵就要归去，寄托天德，没有衰竭。
English: When the liturgy is complete, the deities will return, entrusting heaven and earth, without exhaustion.

古文：《赤蛟》十九其余巡狩福应之事，不序郊庙，故弗论。
现代文：《赤蛟》十九其他的一些到外地巡视和福瑞应验之类的事，郊庙中没有记载，因此就不用论计。
English: There is no record of the "Red Kite" nineteen other things such as the inspection tour to other places and the fulfillment of Furui, so there is no need to calculate.

古文：是时，河间献王有雅材，亦以为治道非礼乐不成，因献所集雅乐。
现代文：当时，河间献王很有才能，他也认为治理国家的规则没有礼乐是不行的，就把他所收集的用于郊庙朝的正乐献了上去。
English: At that time, Kawama Kenwang was very talented. He also believed that the rules for governing the country would not work without ceremonial music, so he offered up the music he had collected for the suburb temple.

古文：天子下大乐官，常存肄之，岁时以备数，然不常御，常御及郊庙皆非雅声。
现代文：天子就给了大乐官，让他们加以保存并进行练习，每年到了祭祀时就用来充数，但不常用，平常所用到的郊庙乐都不是正乐。
English: The heavenly son gave it to the great music officials, let them preserve it and practice it, and every year it was used to replenish it at the time of the ritual, but it was not commonly used, and the suburban temple music that was usually used was not the real music.

古文：然诗乐施于后嗣，犹得有所祖述。
现代文：但是诗和乐延续到后代，还得要有所师法前人，加以陈说的东西。
English: However, for poetry and music to be passed on to future generations, there must be something that was taught and presented by the predecessors.

古文：昔殷、周之《雅》、《颂》，乃上本有娀、姜原，稷始生，玄王、公刘、古公、大伯、王季、姜女、大任、太姒之德，乃及成汤、文、武受命，武丁、成、康、宣王中兴，下及辅佐阿衡、周、召、太公、申伯、召虎、仲山甫之属，君臣男女有功德者，靡不褒扬。
现代文：以前殷、周的《雅》、《颂》，向前秉承有贼、姜原，到高、稷开始出现，玄王、公刘、古公、大伯、王季、姜女、大任、太姒的德操，才使成汤、文、武接受天命，使武丁、成、康、宣王由衰落而重新兴盛，向后到辅佐的阿衡、周、召、太公、申伯、召虎、仲山甫这些人，君臣男女有功劳和德操的，没有不加以褒奖赞扬。
English: In the past, Yin and Zhou's "Ya" and "Ode" were followed by thief and Jiang Yuan, and they began to appear in Gao and Yao. It was the virtue of Xuan Wang, Gong Liu, Gu Gong, Great Uncle, Wang Ji, Jiang Niang, Dairen, and Taibao that made Cheng Tang, Wen, and Wu accept the destiny of heaven, and made Wuding, Cheng, Kang, and Xuan Wang re-prosper from the decline, and backward to the assistants of A Heng, Zhou, Zhao, Taigong, Shen Bo, Zhao Hu, and Zhong Shan Fu. These men and women, who had merits and

古文：功德既信美矣，褒扬之声盈乎天地之间，是以光名著于当世，遗誉垂于无穷也。
现代文：功劳德操的确美好，褒奖赞扬的声音充满天地之间，因此大名著称于当代，遣留的声誉留传无穷。
English: The merits and virtues are indeed beautiful, and the voices of praise and praise are full of heaven and earth. Therefore, the daimyo is famous in the contemporary world, and the reputation of the exiles has been passed down endlessly.

古文：今汉郊庙诗歌，未有祖宗之事，八音调均，又不协于钟律，而内有掖庭材人，外有上林乐府，皆以郑声施于朝廷。
现代文：现在汉朝的郊庙诗歌，没有祖宗的事迹，八音的和谐，又不同钟律相配合，而且内有掖庭的材人，外有上林的乐府，都把郑声用于朝廷。
English: Now the Han Dynasty's suburban temple poetry, without the deeds of ancestors, eight-tone harmony, and different clock rhythms to match, and there are people from the courtyard inside, and the music hall outside the forest, all use Zhengxing for the imperial court.

古文：至成帝时，谒者常山王禹世受河间乐，能说其义，其弟子宋晔等上书言之，下大夫博士平当等考试。
现代文：到成帝的时候，谒者常山王禹世代传授河间的音乐，能够陈说它的含义，他的弟子宋晔等人就给皇上上书告诉这件事，皇上就把这件事交给大夫博士平当等人进行考试。
English: By the time he became emperor, Changshan Wang Yu, who had been teaching the music of the river for generations, was able to explain its meaning. His disciple Song Xi and others sent a letter to the emperor to tell him about this, and the emperor handed the matter over to Dr. Ping Dang and others for examination.

古文：当以为： 汉承秦灭道之后，赖先帝圣德，博受兼听，修废官，立大学，河间献王聘求幽隐，修兴雅乐以助化。
现代文：平当认为 汉朝在秦朝灭绝道德之后建国，依赖先帝们的圣德，广泛地接受多方面地听取，整修衰败的官制，建立了太学，河间献王访求隐藏的东西，修整征集正乐来辅助教化。
English: It is generally believed that the Han Dynasty founded the country after the Qin Dynasty destroyed morality, relied on the sanctity of the previous emperors, widely accepted and listened to various aspects, renovated the decaying official system, established Taixue, visited the hidden things between the rivers, and collected righteous music to assist the enlightenment.

古文：时，大儒公孙弘、董仲舒等皆以为音中正雅，立之大乐。
现代文：当时的大儒公孙弘、董仲舒等人都认为凡音乐中的正声，都把它归入太乐官府。
English: The great Confucian scholars of the time, including Sun Hong and Dong Zhongshu, believed that all positive tones in music were classified as taileku.

古文：春秋乡射，作于学官，希阔不讲。
现代文：春秋两季比赛选士，用校官掌管，疏远而不加以练习。
English: Spring and autumn two seasons of competition selectors, with school officials in charge, alienated without practice.

古文：故自公卿大夫观听者，但闻铿鎗，不晓其意，而欲以风谕众庶，其道无由。
现代文：所以从公卿大夫到一般观看倾听的人，衹闻铿锵之声，却不知道其中的意义，而想用来示意劝导广大人民，这种方法没有来源。
English: Therefore, from noblemen and doctors to ordinary people who watch and listen, there is no source for this method of hearing the voice of the people, but not knowing the meaning of it, and trying to use it to persuade the broad masses of the people.

古文：是以行之百有余年，德化至今未成。
现代文：因此流行了一百多年，道德教化到现在还没有形成。
English: Therefore, it has been popular for more than a hundred years, and moral education has not yet been formed.

古文：今晔等守习孤学，大指归于兴助教化。
现代文：如今宋晔等人坚持练习独一无二的学问，主要的宗旨是倡导辅助教化。
English: Nowadays, Song Tao and others persist in practicing unique learning, the main purpose of which is to advocate supplementary education.

古文：衰微之学，兴废在人。
现代文：衰弱势微的学问，兴起和废弃都在于人。
English: The decline of weak and feeble learning, the rise and abandonment are all due to people.

古文：宜领属雅乐，以继绝表微。
现代文：应该收集正乐，用来接续绝学显扬衰微。
English: It is necessary to collect positive music and use it to continue the cycle of learning, development and decline.

古文：孔子曰： 人能弘道，非道弘人。 河间区区，小国籓臣，以好学修古，能有所存，民到于今称之，况于圣主广被之资，修起旧文，放郑近雅，述而不作，信而好古，于以风示海内，扬名后世，诚非小功小美也。 
现代文：孔子说： 人能够弘扬道，不是道能弘扬人，河间衹有一点点，是小国和臣属，因为喜好学问研究古代的东西，因此能有所保存，百姓到现在还称赞他们，更何况英明的君主有广为覆盖的资质，撰修兴起旧文，远离郑声接近雅乐，传述陈说而不自立新意，相信并且喜好古代学问，于是用这来示意劝告海内，扬名后代，实在不是小功小德。 
English: Confucius said: People can promote the Tao, but not the Tao can promote people. There is a little bit of the river, a small country and subjects. Because they like to study ancient things, they can be preserved. The people still praise them. Not to mention that the wise monarchs have the ability to cover a wide range. They write and write old texts, are far away from Zheng Xing and close to elegant music. They tell stories without being independent and innovative. They believe in and like ancient knowledge. So they use this to show that they advise the mainland and promote future generations. It is not a small virtue.

古文：事下公卿，以为久远难分明，当议复寝。
现代文：这件事被交给公卿讨论，认为事情太久远难以分辨，平当的建议又被扣住不发。
English: The matter was referred to a barrister for discussion, who said it was too long ago to be able to tell the difference, and the usual advice was withheld.

古文：是时，郑声尤甚。
现代文：这个时候，郑国的音乐更加多了起来。
English: At this time, Zheng Guo's music became more and more popular.

古文：黄门名倡丙强、景武之属富显于世，贵戚五侯定陵、富平外戚之家淫侈过度，至与人主争女乐。
现代文：皇宫官府中有名的歌舞艺人丙彊、景武之流富贵显现于天下，贵戚五侯定陵、富平等和外戚的家庭过分放纵奢侈，甚至同皇帝争夺歌舞伎。
English: Famous song and dance artists such as He Jiong and Jingwu of the imperial palace and government offices appeared all over the world, and the families of the five noble families, rich people and their relatives indulged in extravagance and even competed with the emperor for kabuki.

古文：哀帝自为定陶王时疾之，又性不好音，及即位，下诏曰： 惟世俗奢泰文巧，而郑、卫之声兴。
现代文：哀帝从任定陶王时就痛恨这些事，又加上本性不喜欢音乐，等到登上帝位，就下韶说： 由于世间习俗挥霍无度而又舞文弄墨，以致郑国和卫国的音乐兴盛。
English: From the time of his appointment as the king of Tao, Emperor A Lai hated these things. In addition, he did not like music by nature. When he ascended to the throne, he said: Due to the extravagance of worldly customs and the manipulation of dances, the music of Zhengzhou and the motherland flourished.

古文：夫奢泰则下不孙而国贫，文巧则趋末背本者众，郑、卫之声兴则淫辟之化流，而欲黎庶敦朴家给，犹浊其源而求其清流，岂不难哉！
现代文：挥霍无度就会造成下面的人不恭顺以致国家贫困，舞文弄墨就会使背本趋末的人增多，郑国和卫国的音乐兴盛就会使放纵与邪恶的教化流行，要想使黎民百姓敦厚朴实家中能够自给自足，就像使源头浑浊而又要求水流清澈一样，难道不是很困难吗！
English: Profligate spending will cause the people below to be disobedient and the country to become impoverished. Dancing with ink will increase the number of people who are backward. The flourishing of music in Zhengzhou and the defense of the country will make indulgence and evil education popular. Is it not very difficult to make the Li people self-sufficient in their thick and simple homes, just as it is difficult to make the source turbid and require a clear stream?

古文：孔子不云乎？ 放郑声，郑声淫。 
现代文：孔子不是说吗？ 远离郑国的音乐，郑国音乐邪恶。 
English: Didn't Confucius say? Stay away from Zhengzhou music, Zhengzhou music is evil.

古文：其罢乐府官。
现代文：因此废除乐府官。
English: Therefore, the post of Lefuku-kan was abolished.

古文：郊祭乐及古兵法武乐，在经非郑、卫之乐者，条奏，别属他官。 
现代文：郊祭的音乐以及古代兵法中的军乐，在经上而又不是郑国和卫国的音乐的，逐条上奏，再另外分给其他的官员。 
English: The music of the suburban festival and the military music of ancient warfare, which are not the music of Zhengzhou and the defense of the country, are played one by one and then separately assigned to other officials.

古文：丞相孔光、大司空何武奏： 郊祭乐人员六十二人，给祠南北郊。
现代文：丞相孔光、大司空何武上奏道： 郊祭乐人共有六十二人，供祭祀南北郊时用。
English: The chancellor Kong Guang and the grand secretary Ku He Wu played the following music: A total of sixty-two suburban festival musicians were used for the rituals in the northern and southern suburbs.

古文：大乐鼓员六人，《嘉至》鼓员十人，邯郸鼓员二人，骑吹鼓员三人，江南鼓员二人，淮南鼓员四人，巴俞鼓员三十六人，歌鼓员二十四人，楚严鼓员一人，梁皇鼓员四人，临淮鼓员二十五人，兹邡鼓员三人，凡鼓十二，员百二十八人，朝贺置酒陈殿下，应古兵法。
现代文：大乐鼓手有六人，《嘉至》鼓手有十人，邯郸的鼓手有二人，骑吹的鼓手三人，江南鼓手二人，淮南鼓手四人，巴俞鼓手三十六人，歌鼓手有二十四人，楚严鼓手一人，梁皇鼓手四人，临淮鼓手三十五人，兹邡鼓手三人，一共鼓有十二面，鼓手一百二十八人，朝见庆贺置办的酒席陈列在殿下，以对应古代兵法。
English: There are six grand music drummers, ten "Jia Zhi" drummers, two gong drummers, three riding drummers, two Jiangnan drummers, four Huainan drummers, thirty-six Baju drummers, twenty-four singing drummers, one Chu Yan drummer, four Lianghuang drummers, thirty-five Linhuai drummers, three Zhu Drummers, a total of twelve drums, one hundred and twenty-eight drummers, and a celebratory banquet are displayed in the morning, corresponding to ancient military methods.

古文：外郊祭员十三人，诸族乐人兼《云招》给祠南郊用六十七人，兼给事雅乐用四人，夜诵员五人，刚、别柎员二人，给《盛德》主调篪员二人，听工以律知日冬、夏至一人，钟工、磬工、箫工员各一人，仆射二人主领诸乐人，皆不可罢。
现代文：另外郊祭的十三人，各族乐人以及《云招》供祭祀南郊用的六十七人，加上供演奏正乐用的四人，夜晚朗诵诗歌的五人，演奏刚和别拊鼓的鼓手二人，供《盛德》乐主持调簏音的二人，听乐的工匠凭音律知晓太阳冬至夏至的一人，钟工匠、磬工匠、箫工匠各一人，仆射二入主持领导各位乐人，都不可以废除。
English: In addition, the thirteen members of the Suburban Festival, the musicians of all ethnic groups, and the sixty-seven members of "Yun Zha" for the Southern Suburbs, plus the four people for the performance of the regular music, the five people who recite poetry at night, the two drummers who play the Gang and Bejing drums, the two people who preside over the tuning of the "Shengde" music, the craftsman who listens to music and knows the sun's winter solstice and summer solstice by the musical rhythm, the clock craftsman, the cymbal craftsman, and the cymbal craftsman, one each, and the two

古文：竽工员三人，一人可罢。
现代文：竽工匠有三人，可以减去一个人。
English: There are three craftsmen, so you can subtract one.

古文：琴工员五人，三人可罢。
现代文：琴工匠有五人，可以裁减三人。
English: There are five luthiers, but three can be cut.

古文：柱工员二人，一人可罢。
现代文：柱工匠有二人，可裁减一人。
English: There are two pillar craftsmen, so one can be reduced.

古文：绳弦工员六人，四人可罢。
现代文：给弦上绳的工匠六人，可以裁减四人。
English: There are six craftsmen who string the strings, and four of them can be reduced.

古文：郑四会员六十二人，一人给事雅乐，六十一人可罢。
现代文：郑国与四方乐舞会合的人有六十二个，一人用来主持止乐，其余六十一人可以裁减。
English: There are sixty-two people in Zheng Guo and the Quartet Music and Dance Meeting. One person is used to preside over the music, and the remaining sixty-one people can be reduced.

古文：张瑟员八人，七人可罢。
现代文：给瑟卜弦的工匠有八人，可裁减七人。《安世乐》的鼓手有二卜人。
English: There are eight craftsmen for the reed strings, and seven can be reduced. The drummer of "Ansei Le" has two reed players.

古文：《安世乐》鼓员二十人，十九人可罢。
现代文：十九人可以裁减。
English: Nineteen people could be made redundant.

古文：沛吹鼓员十二人，族歌鼓员二十七人，陈吹鼓员十三人，商乐鼓员十四人，东海鼓员十六人，长乐鼓员十三人，缦乐鼓员十三人，凡鼓八，员百二十八人，朝贺置酒，陈前殿房中，不应经法，治竽员五人，楚鼓员六人，常从倡三十人，常从象人四人，诏随常从倡十六人，秦倡员二十九人，秦倡象人员三人，诏随秦倡一人，雅大人员九人，朝贺置酒为乐。
现代文：沛的吹鼓手十二人，族歌鼓手有二十七人，军阵吹鼓手卜三人，商乐鼓手卜四人，束海鼓手十六人，长乐鼓手十三人，杂乐鼓手十三人，一共鼓有八面，鼓手一百二十八人，朝见庆贺安排的酒席，摆设在前殿的房中，不合经上的法度。研究竽器的人有五个，楚鼓手有六人，平常跟随歌舞艺人的人有三卜人，跟随戴假面的人有四人。诏令跟随平常陪伴歌舞乐人的人有十六个，秦国的歌舞乐人有二十九人，秦国歌舞艺人中戴假面的有三人，诏令跟随秦国歌舞艺人的人有一人，雅人人有凡人，朝见庆贺摆酒奏乐。
English: There were twelve peppy trumpeters, twenty-seven folk song drummers, three military band trumpeters, four commercial music drummers, sixteen cormorant sea drummers, thirteen choral music drummers, and thirteen sundry music drummers. In total, there were eight drums, one hundred and twenty-eight drummers, and a banquet arranged for the celebration of the dawn, which was placed in the room of the front hall, which was not in accordance with the law. There were five people who studied the cymbals, six Chu drummers, four people who usually followed the song and dance artists, and four people who wore masks. There were sixteen people who usually accompanied the song

古文：楚四会员十七人，巴四会员十二人，铫四会员十二人，齐四会员十九人，蔡讴员三人，齐讴员六人，竽、瑟、钟、磬员五人，皆郑声，可罢。
现代文：演奏楚国敬酒祝寿的音乐的人有十乙人，演奏巴人敬酒祝寿的音乐的人有十：二人，演奏剑国敬酒祝寿的音乐的人有十二：人，演奏齐国敬酒祝寿的音乐的人有十九人，蔡歌唱的人有三人，齐歌唱的人有六人，演奏竽瑟钟磬的人有五人，都是郑国的音乐，可以废除。
English: There are ten-and-a-half people playing the music of Chu's toast and celebration, ten people playing the music of Ba's toast and celebration, two people playing the music of Jian's toast and celebration, twelve people playing the music of Jian's toast and celebration, nineteen people playing the music of Qi's toast and celebration, three people singing Cai's song, six people singing Qi's song, and five people playing Zhe's song, all of which are Zheng's music and can be abolished.

古文：师学百四十二人，其七十二人给大官挏马酒，其七十人可罢。
现代文：从师学习的一百四 二人，其中十二人用来给太官的桐马酒宫，其余七十人可以裁减。
English: One hundred and forty-two people are studying under the teacher, of which twelve are used for the Tongma Wine Palace of the eunuch, and the remaining seventy can be reduced.

古文：大凡八百二十九人，其三百八十八人不可罢，可领属大乐，其四百四十一人不应经法，或郑、卫之声，皆可罢。 
现代文：这些总共有八百二十九人。其中三百八十八人不可以免除，可以让他们归属到太乐官府，其余四百四十一人不符合经上的法度，或者是郑、卫的音乐，部可以免除。 
English: There are a total of 829 of them, of which 388 are non-exempt and can be assigned to the Tai Le Music Office, and the remaining 441 do not meet the requirements of the law, or are Zheng and Wei's music, and can be exempted.

古文：奏可。
现代文：这个奏议被批准了。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：然百姓渐渍日久，又不制雅乐有以相变，豪富吏民湛沔自若，陵夷坏于王莽。
现代文：然而百姓所受感染的日产很久了，又没有制作出正乐来相应加以变化，豪富官民依旧沉湎其中，逐渐衰落以至于坏在王莽之手。
English: However, the Nissan that the people were infected with had been around for a long time, and there was no production of Zhengrong to change it accordingly. The rich and affluent officials and people were still mired in it, gradually declining to such an extent that the damage was in Wang Mang's hands.

古文：今海内更始，民人归本，户口岁息，平其刑辟，牧以贤良，至于家给，既庶且富，则须庠序、礼乐之教化矣。
现代文：现在国家重新开始，人民回归根本，户口年年增加，治理刑事犯罪，用善良贤能的人来统治国家，至于家庭自治，既多又富，就要进行学校的礼乐教育感化。
English: Now the country is starting anew, the people are returning to the fundamentals, the number of household registrations is increasing year by year, criminal offenses are being controlled, and the country is being ruled by good and capable people. As for family autonomy, since there are many families and they are rich, it is necessary to carry out the influence of school music education.

古文：今幸有前圣遗制之威仪，诚可法象而补备之，经纪可因缘而存著也。
现代文：现在幸好有前代英明的人遗留下来的制度的礼仪细节，实在可以效法模仿并加以补充完备，法度可以因此而得以保存显著。
English: Now, fortunately, there are etiquette details of the system left by previous generations of wise people, which can be imitated and supplemented, and the rules can be preserved significantly.

古文：孔子曰： 殷因于夏礼，所损益可知也；周因于殷礼，所损益可知也；其或继周者，虽百世可知也。 
现代文：孔王说： 殷代因循夏代礼制，加以增减，可以知夏礼；旦伐因循凿礼，加以增减，可以知殷礼；后来有人继承周礼的，百年中可以知道。 
English: King Kong said: If the Yin Dynasty follows the Summer Rite system and increases or decreases it, it can be known as the Summer Rite; if the Tang Dynasty follows the Chisel Rite system and increases or decreases it, it can be known as the Yin Rite; if someone inherits the Zhou Rite system later, it can be known in a hundred years.

古文：今大汉继周，久旷大仪，未有立礼成乐，此贾谊、仲舒、王吉、刘向之徒所为发愤而增叹也。
现代文：现在左坠继承刮，很长一段时间空缺大的礼仪，没有建立礼制形成乐制，造就是贾谊、董仲舒、王昼、型血等人之所以发愤而产牛感叹的原因。
English: Now the left-leaning inherits the scraping, the etiquette that has been vacant for a long time, and the etiquette system has not been established to form a music system. This is the reason why Jia Yi, Dong Zhongshu, Wang Rong, and the blood type people are angry and lament the birth of cattle.

