古文：藏年
现代文：藏年
English: The Year of Tibet

古文：一人娶一老妻，坐床时，见面多皱纹，因问曰： 汝有多少年纪？ 
现代文：有个人娶了一个年老的妻子，坐在床上时，看见她脸上有很多皱纹，所以就问她说： 你有多大年纪？ 
English: A man married an old wife. As he sat on the bed, he saw that she had many wrinkles on her face, so he asked her, "How old are you?"

古文：妇曰： 四十五六。 
现代文：老妇人回答说： 四十五六。 
English: The old woman replied, "Forty-five and six."

古文：夫曰： 婚书上写三十八岁，依我看来还不止四十五六。可实对我说。 
现代文：丈夫说： 婚书上写着三十八岁，依我看来，还不止四十五六，你应该如实告诉我。 
English: The husband said, "My marriage certificate says I'm thirty-eight, but I think I'm more like forty-five or forty-six. You should tell me the truth."

古文：曰： 实五十四岁矣。 
现代文：答： 实际上已经五十四岁了。 
English: A: I am actually 54 years old.

古文：夫复再三诘之，只以前言对。
现代文：丈夫反复再三地追问她，她都用前边说过的话来回答。
English: Her husband asked her again and again, and she replied with what she had said before.

古文：上床后，更不过心。乃巧生一计曰： 我要起来盖盐瓮，不然，被老鼠吃去矣。 
现代文：上床以后，丈夫更不放心，就巧生一计说： 我要起来盖盐罐子，不然盐就被老鼠偷吃了。 
English: After going to bed, her husband was even more worried, so she made a plan: "I'll get up and cover the salt jar, otherwise the salt will be stolen by mice."

古文：妇曰： 倒好笑，我活了六十八岁，并不闻老鼠会偷盐吃。 
现代文：老妇人说： 这倒好笑，我活了六十八岁，从没听说过老鼠会偷盐吃。 
English: The old lady said, "That's funny, I've been alive for sixty-eight years and I've never heard of a mouse stealing salt."

古文：鹰啄
现代文：鹰啄
English: eagle cormorant

古文：一母生一子一女，而女尤钟爱。
现代文：有一个母亲，生了一儿一女，她更喜爱女儿。
English: There was a mother who had a son and a daughter, but she loved her daughter more.

古文：及遣嫁后，思念不已，谓其子曰： 人家再不要养女儿，养得这般长成，就如被饿老鹰轻轻一爪便抓去了。 
现代文：女儿嫁了人之后，母亲经常思念，对儿子说： 一个人再不要生女儿，等到她长大成人，就好像被饿老鹰轻轻一爪便抓去了。 
English: After her daughter got married, the mother often thought about it and said to her son: "No one should have a daughter again. When she grows up, it will be like being grabbed by a hungry eagle.

古文：子曰： 阿姆，阿姆，他们如今正在那里啄着哩。 
现代文：儿子说： 妈妈，他们现在正在那里啄着呢。 拜堂产儿
English: My son said, "Mom, they're laying there right now.

古文：拜堂产儿有新妇拜堂，即产下一儿。
现代文：有个新妇人刚拜过堂，就生下一个孩子。
English: There was a bride who had just given birth to a child.

古文：婆愧甚，急取藏之。
现代文：婆婆觉得羞愧，急忙把孩子抱走藏起来。
English: The mother-in-law felt ashamed and hurriedly took the child away and hid it.

古文：新妇曰： 早知婆婆这等爱惜，快叫人把家中阿大、阿二都领了来罢。 
现代文：新妇说： 早知道婆婆这样喜欢孩子，就快叫人把家中老大、老二都领来算了。 
English: The bride said: "I already knew that my mother-in-law liked children so much, so I quickly asked someone to bring the eldest and second eldest in the family.

古文：抢婚
现代文：抢婚
English: Forced marriage

古文：有婚家女富男贫，男家虑其赖婚，率领众人抢亲，误背小姨以出。
现代文：有两家人订了亲，男方家贫，怕女方赖婚，于是就叫上几个人去抢亲，误将小姨子背出来了。
English: There were two families who had made an appointment with a relative. The man's family was poor, and he was afraid that the woman would marry against her will. So he called several people to go and snatch the relative, and by mistake he took out the sister-in-law.

古文：女家人急呼曰： 抢差了！ 
现代文：女方家人急忙呼喊： 抢错了！ 
English: The woman's family members hurriedly shouted: The robbery was a mistake!

古文：小姨在背上曰： 不差，不差！快走上些，莫信他哄你哩。 
现代文：小姨子在背上说： 没错没错，赶快跑，不要相信，他们是哄你们的！ 
English: On her back, the sister-in-law said: That's right, that's right, run quickly, don't believe it, they're tricking you!

古文：两坦
现代文：两坦
English: Two tanks

古文：有一女择配，适两家并求。东家郎丑而富，西家郎美而贫。
现代文：有个女子选择婚配对象，正赶上有两家求婚，东家郎貌丑，但富有；西家郎貌美，但贫穷。
English: A woman was trying to choose a husband. There were two suitors. The first one was ugly but rich, and the second one was beautiful but poor.

古文：父母问其欲适谁家。女曰： 两坦。 
现代文：父母问女儿想嫁给哪一家，女子回答说： 两家都愿意。 
English: When her parents asked her which family she wanted to marry into, she replied: "Both."

古文：问其故，答曰： 我爱在东家吃饭，西家去睡。 
现代文：问她为什么，回答说： 我喜欢去东家吃饭，去西家睡觉。 
English: When I asked her why, she replied, "I like to eat at my host family's house and sleep at my host family's house."

古文：谢周公
现代文：谢周公
English: Xie Zhou Gong

古文：一女初嫁，哭问嫂曰： 此礼何人所制？ 
现代文：有个女子要出嫁，哭着问嫂子： 结婚的制度是谁制定的？ 
English: A woman who wanted to get married asked her sister-in-law in tears: "Who established the marriage system?

古文：嫂曰： 周公。 
现代文：嫂子说： 是周公。 
English: Sister-in-law said: It is Zhou Gong.

古文：女将周公大骂不已。
现代文：女子听后，把周公的祖宗十八代都骂出来了。
English: After listening, the woman scolded all 18 generations of Zhou Gong's ancestors.

古文：及满月归宁。问嫂曰： 周公何在？ 
现代文：等到度完蜜月回到娘家，女子问嫂子说： 周公在哪里？ 
English: After returning to her daughter's home after the honeymoon, the woman asked her sister-in-law: "Where is Zhou Gong?

古文：嫂云： 他是古人，寻他做甚？ 
现代文：嫂子说： 他是古人，找他干什么？ 
English: My sister-in-law said, "He's an old man, what are you looking for?

古文：女曰： 我要制双鞋谢他。 
现代文：女子回答说： 我要做双鞋谢谢他。 
English: The woman replied, "I want to make a pair of shoes" and thanked him.

古文：舌头甜
现代文：舌头甜
English: Sweet on the tongue

古文：新婚夜，送亲席散。
现代文：新婚夜，送亲的宴席散去。
English: On the wedding night, the send-off banquet is dispersed.

古文：次日，厨师检点桌面，不见一顶糖人。
现代文：第二天，厨师收拾查点桌面，发现不见了一顶糖人。
English: The next day, the chef tidied up the table and found that one of the candies was missing.

古文：各处查问，新人忽大笑不止。
现代文：便到处寻找，新郎突然大笑不止。
English: He looked everywhere, and the groom suddenly burst out laughing.

古文：喜娘在旁，问： 笑甚么？ 女答曰： 怪不得昨夜一个人舌头是甜津津的。 
现代文：喜娘在旁边问笑什么，新娘答道： 怪不得昨天晚上有个人的舌头是甜滋滋的。 
English: Happily smiling, she asked what was going on. The bride replied, "It's no wonder someone's tongue tasted sweet last night.

古文：大话
现代文：大话
English: Big talk.

古文：一女出嫁坐床，掌礼撒帐云： 撒帐东，官人棒子好撞钟。 
现代文：有个女子出嫁时坐在床边，司仪撒帐说： 撒帐东，官人棒子好撞钟。 
English: When a woman was getting married, she was sitting on the edge of the bed, and the master of ceremonies was giving out the bells and whistles. He said, "Give out the bells and whistles.

古文：女忙接口云： 弗怕。 
现代文：新娘忙接口道： 不怕。 
English: The busy bride interjects: I'm not afraid.

古文：喜嫔曰： 新娘子不宜如此口快。 
现代文：喜娘说： 新娘子不应该这样口快。 
English: She said: "A bride shouldn't talk so fast.

古文：新妇曰： 不是我也不说，才得进门，可恶他把这大话来吓我。 
现代文：新娘说： 不然我也不说，我刚刚进门，讨厌他用大话来吓唬我。 
English: The bride said: "Otherwise I wouldn't have said anything. I had just walked in the door and I didn't like him using big words to scare me.

古文：两来船
现代文：两来船
English: Two boats arrive

古文：一人遇两来船，手托在窗槛外，夹伤一指，归诉于妻。
现代文：有个人乘船时，把手放在窗户外面，被一艘对面过来的船夹伤了手指。他回来后把这件事告诉了妻子。
English: A man was on a boat when he put his hand out of the window and got his finger caught in a boat coming the other way. He came back and told his wife about it.

古文：妻骇然嘱曰： 今后遇两来船，切记不可解小便。 
现代文：妻子十分害怕，嘱咐说： 今后遇到对面过来的船，千万别站在船边小便。 
English: His wife was very scared, and he told her, "In the future, when you encounter a boat coming from the opposite direction, don't stand on the side of the boat to urinate.

古文：扇尸
现代文：扇尸
English: Fan corpse

古文：夫死，妻以扇将尸扇之不已。
现代文：丈夫死后，妻子连忙拿着扇子扇丈夫的尸体。
English: After the death of her husband, the wife quickly took a fan to fan the corpse of her husband.

古文：邻人问曰： 天寒何必如此？ 
现代文：邻居问道： 天气本来就冷，何必要扇他？ 
English: The neighbor asked, "It's cold enough as it is, why do you need to fan him?"

古文：妇拭泪答曰： 拙夫临终吩咐： 你若要嫁人，须待我肉冷。  
现代文：妻子揩着眼泪说： 我男人临死前吩咐： 你如果要嫁人，必须等我的肉冷了。  
English: With tears in her eyes, the wife said, "Before my husband died, he said, 'If you want to get married, you'll have to wait until my flesh is cold.'

古文：她大我大
现代文：她大我大
English: She's taller than me

古文：一家娶妾，年纪过长于妻。
现代文：有个人讨了一个小老婆，年纪却比大老婆大。
English: There was a man who married a younger wife, but she was older than his older wife.

古文：有卖婆见礼，问哪位是大，妾应云： 大是她大，大是我大。 
现代文：有个卖东西的老妇人向她们请安，问谁是大的，谁是小的，以免失礼，小老婆说道： 地位是她大，年纪是我大。 
English: An old woman who was selling things greeted them and asked who was the oldest and who was the youngest. In order not to be rude, the little wife said, "Her position is the oldest, and I am the oldest."

古文：罚真咒
现代文：罚真咒
English: Chastisement Spell

古文：一人欲往妾处，诈称： 我要出恭，去去就来。 
现代文：有个人想到小老婆屋里去行乐，对大老婆撒谎说自己要拉屎，去去就来。
English: There was a man who wanted to have fun in the little old lady's house. He lied to the big old lady and said that he was going to shit.

古文：妻不许。夫即赌咒云： 若他往做狗。 
现代文：大老婆不同意，丈夫就赌咒说： 如果到别处去，就变做狗。 
English: The first wife did not agree, so the husband made a bet and said, "If I go somewhere else, I will turn into a dog."

古文：妻将索系其足放去。
现代文：大老婆将绳子系住丈夫的脚，就放他去了。
English: The first wife tied a rope around her husband's feet and let him go.

古文：夫解索。转缚狗脚上，竟往妾房。
现代文：丈夫解开绳子，把绳子转拴在另一间屋的狗腿上，径直到了小老婆的房间。
English: The husband untied the rope, twisted it around the dog's leg in the other room, and went straight to the little wife's room.

古文：妻见久不至，收索到床边，起摸着狗背。
现代文：大老婆见丈夫出去很久了都不回来，就用手拉绳子，收到床边，却摸着狗背。
English: When the eldest wife saw that her husband had been away for a long time and had not returned, she pulled the rope with her hand, received the bedside, but touched the dog's back.

古文：乃骇云： 这死乌龟，我还道是骗我，却原来倒罚了真咒。 
现代文：于是吃惊地说： 这死乌龟，我原来以为他是骗我，没想到他竟然赌了真咒。 
English: Then he said in surprise: This dead turtle, I originally thought he was deceiving me, but I didn't expect him to actually cast a real spell.

古文：日进
现代文：日进
English: Nisshin

古文：老年娶妾，欲结其欢心，说某处有田地若干，房屋若干。
现代文：有个老头讨了一个小老婆，老头想让小老婆高兴，便说自己某处有田地很多，房屋不少。
English: There was an old man who had a small wife. The old man wanted to make the little wife happy, so he said that somewhere he had a lot of fields and houses.

古文：妾曰： 这都不在我心上。
现代文：小老婆说： 这都不是我所关心的。
English: The little old lady said, "That's none of my business.

古文：从来说家财万贯，不如日进分文的好。 
现代文：从来人们都说家财万贯，不如日进分文的好。 
English: People have always said that it is better to be rich than poor.

古文：咬牙
现代文：咬牙
English: Gnashing of teeth

古文：有姑媳孀居。
现代文：有婆媳两人都死了丈夫。
English: Both the mother-in-law and the daughter-in-law lost their husbands.

古文：姑曰： 做寡妇须要咬紧了牙根过日子。 
现代文：婆婆说： 做寡妇必须要咬紧了牙根过日子。 
English: My mother-in-law said: "As a widow, you have to live with your teeth clenched.

古文：未几，姑与人私，媳以前言责之，姑张口示媳曰： 你看，也得我有了牙齿方好咬。 
现代文：没多久，婆婆与人通奸，媳妇拿她过去说过的话责备她，婆婆张开嘴给媳妇看，说道： 你看，也得我有了牙齿才好咬。 
English: Not long after, her mother-in-law committed adultery with someone, and her daughter-in-law reproached her for what she had said in the past. Her mother-in-law opened her mouth to show her daughter-in-law and said, "You see, I have to have teeth to bite."

古文：不怕死的
现代文：不怕死的
English: Not afraid to die

古文：有新妇进门年余，孕已满月，临盆极难，胎转之际，腹中绞痛几欲死，迟两三日方下，视之男也。
现代文：有个新媳妇，结婚刚一年多，怀孕已经满月，在临盆时是难产，胎儿转的时候，肚子痛得几乎都要死了，推迟了两三天孩子才生下来，一看是个男孩。
English: There is a new daughter-in-law. She has been married for just over a year, and her pregnancy is already full-term. At the time of delivery, it was difficult to give birth. When the fetus turned, her stomach hurt so much that she almost died. The child was born two or three days later. At first glance, it was a boy.

古文：妇谓夫曰： 吾为此一块肉，几濒于死。
现代文：既然他可以传宗接代了，就希望我们从此不睡在一起。
English: Now that he can pass on the family name, he hopes that we will never sleep together again.

古文：既有此子，宗祀可不绝。愿从此不睡合欢床，若再怀胎生产，我必不能活，君如念夫妇情，请异室独居以救余生。 
现代文：如果再怀胎生产，我一定不能活了，夫君您如果念及夫妻之情，就请在另外的屋子单独住，以救我的余生。 丈夫答应了她，就按着她的要求，自己在别的屋子里放了床另住。
English: If I am pregnant again and give birth, I will definitely not be able to live. Husband, if you are thinking about the feelings of husband and wife, please live alone in another room to save the rest of my life. The husband agreed with her, and according to her request, he put a bed in another room to live separately.

古文：夫诺之，即遵阃教，设榻别室，距子生已逾两月余，一夕更已深，夫展被登床，灭烛独卧，渐入黑甜乡，不复有他念矣。
现代文：离生孩子已经过了两个月。一天深更半夜，丈夫已经铺好床，吹灭了灯，独自躺下了，渐渐地进入了梦乡，不再有其他的念头。
English: Two months have passed since the birth of the child. One day, in the middle of the night, the husband has made the bed, blown out the lamp, lay down alone, and gradually fell asleep, no longer having any other thoughts.

古文：忽敲门声甚急，夫惊醒，问为谁？
现代文：忽然响起了急促的敲门声，丈夫惊醒，问是谁？
English: Suddenly there was a quick knock on the door. My husband woke up and asked who it was.

古文：妇曰： 我。 
现代文：媳妇答道： 我。 
English: The daughter-in-law replied: I am.

古文：夫问汝为谁？
现代文：丈夫又问： 你是谁？ 
English: The husband asked again, "Who are you?"

古文：妇又曰： 我。 
现代文：媳妇又说： 我。 
English: The daughter-in-law added: I am.

古文：夫问汝究竟是谁？
现代文：丈夫又问： 你究竟是谁？ 
English: The husband then asked, "Who are you, anyway?"

古文：妇隔窗笑语曰： 不怕死的人来了，速开门。 
现代文：媳妇隔着窗户笑着回答说： 不怕死的人来了，快点开门。 
English: My daughter-in-law smiled through the window and replied, "Someone who is not afraid of death is here, open the door quickly."

古文：啖馄饨
现代文：啖馄饨
English: 

古文：一妻病，夫问曰： 想甚吃否？ 
现代文：妻子病了，丈夫问她： 想吃点什么？ 
English: When his wife was sick, her husband asked her, "What would you like to eat?"

古文：妻曰： 除非好肉馄饨，想吃一二只。 
现代文：妻子回答说： 除非是鲜肉馄饨，想吃一两个。 
English: The wife replied, "Unless it's fresh meat stew, I'd like to eat one or two."

古文：夫为治一盂，意欲与妻同享。
现代文：丈夫就为她做了一大盆，想和妻子一同分享。
English: The husband made a big pot for her and wanted to share it with his wife.

古文：方往取箸回，而妻已染指啖尽。止余其一。
现代文：没想到等他刚刚拿筷子回来，妻子已经用手抓着吃完了，只剩下一个在盘子里面。
English: Unexpectedly, when he just came back with the chopsticks, his wife had already finished eating with her hands, leaving only one on the plate.

古文：夫曰： 何不并啖此枚？ 
现代文：丈夫就问： 为什么不把这个一起吃掉？ 
English: My husband asked, "Why don't we eat this together?"

古文：妻攒眉曰： 我若吃得下此只，不害这病了。 
现代文：妻子皱着眉头说： 我如果吃得下这个，就不会生这病了。 
English: My wife frowned and said, "If I can eat this, I won't get sick."

古文：痴婿
现代文：痴婿
English: Absent-minded son-in-law

古文：人家有两婿，小者痴呆，不识一字。
现代文：有一个人家，有两个女婿，小女婿是个痴呆，不识一个字。
English: There was a family with two sons-in-law. The younger son-in-law was demented and could not read a single word.

古文：妻曰： 姐夫读书，我爹敬他，你目不识丁，我面上甚不争气。
现代文：他的妻子说： 我姐夫读了很多书，我爹爹就敬佩他，你一个字也不识，我很没面子。
English: His wife said: My brother-in-law reads a lot of books, my father admires him, you don't know a word, I'm ashamed.

古文：来日我兄弟完姻，诸亲聚会，识认几字，也好在人前卖嘴。
现代文：明天我弟弟结婚，亲戚们聚会，你到时候在他们面前认几个字，也好显示一下文才。
English: Tomorrow my brother is getting married, my relatives are having a party, and you'll be able to recognize a few words in front of them, or show your literary talent.

古文：我家土库前，写 此处不许撒尿 六字，你可牢记，人或问起，亦可对答，便不敢欺你了。 
现代文：我家仓库土墙前写着 此处不许撒尿 六个字，你要牢牢记住，如果有人问起来，你也好回答，人家就不敢欺负你了。 
English: In front of the earthen wall of my warehouse, there is a sign that says, "Don't pee here." These are six words that you should remember. If someone asks, you should answer, and they won't dare to bully you.

古文：呆子惟诺。
现代文：呆子答应了。
English: The blockhead agreed.

古文：至日，行至墙边，即指曰： 此处不许撒尿。 
现代文：第二天，来到岳父家，呆子走到土墙边，就指着墙上的字念道： 此处不许撒尿。 
English: The next day, when he arrived at his father-in-law's house, he walked over to the dirt wall, pointed to the words on the wall, and read: "Don't pee here."

古文：岳丈喜曰： 贤婿识字大好。 
现代文：岳父高兴地说： 贤婿识字大有长进。 
English: The father-in-law said happily: "My son-in-law has made great progress in his literacy.

古文：良久，舅母出来相见，裙上有销金飞带，绣 长命富贵，金玉满堂 八字，坠于裙之中间。
现代文：过了一段时间，舅母从屋里出来相见，裙子上面有金字飘带，绣着 长命富贵，金玉满堂 八个字。
English: After a while, my aunt came out of the house to meet me. Her skirt had gold streamers on it, embroidered with the words "Live long and prosper" and "Gold is plentiful."

古文：呆子一见，忙指向众人曰： 此处不许撒尿。 
现代文：呆子一看，马上指着裙带对大家说： 此处不许撒尿。 
English: At first glance, the idiot immediately pointed to his crony and said to everyone: "You're not allowed to pee here."

古文：正夫纲
现代文：正夫纲
English: Zhengfu Gang

古文：众怕婆者，各受其妻惨毒。纠合十人歃血盟誓，互为声援。
现代文：有一些怕老婆的人，都受尽了老婆的虐待，于是他们纠集了十个人，在一个地方歃血盟誓，约定要互相声援。
English: There were some misogynists who had all been abused by their wives, so they gathered ten people and made a blood oath in one place, agreeing to support each other.

古文：正在酬神饮酒，不想众妇闻知。一齐打至盟所。
现代文：正当他们酬谢神灵，喝酒发誓的时候，没想到他们的老婆们听到了这件事，一起打到发誓的地方来了。
English: Just as they were thanking the gods and drinking and swearing, their wives heard about it and came to the place where they were swearing.

古文：九人飞跑惊窜，惟一人危坐不动。
现代文：其中九个人马上吓得到处躲藏，只有一个人端正地坐着没动。
English: Nine of them immediately scrambled for cover, but only one sat still.

古文：众皆私相佩服曰： 何物乃尔，该让他做大哥。 
现代文：那另外的九个人都非常佩服他，私下里说： 什么人竟能这样镇定，该让他做大哥。 
English: The other nine admired him very much and said in private, "What kind of person can be so calm? He should be the eldest brother."

古文：少顷妇散，察之。已惊死矣。
现代文：不一会儿，老婆们离开后，大家仔细察看，原来那人已被惊吓死了。
English: A short time later, after the women had left, everyone took a closer look, and it turned out that the man had been scared to death.

古文：七月儿
现代文：七月儿
English: July's Child

古文：有怀孕七个月即产一儿者，其夫恐养不大。遇人即问。
现代文：有一个怀孕七个月就生下孩子的人，她的丈夫害怕孩子养不大，逢人就问这事。
English: There was a case of a woman who gave birth to a child after seven months of pregnancy, and her husband was afraid that the child would not grow up, so he asked everyone about it.

古文：一日，与友谈及此事。友曰： 这个无妨。我家祖亦是七个月出世的。 
现代文：有一天和朋友谈到这件事，朋友说： 七个月，没关系，我爷爷也是七个月出生的。 
English: One day I was talking to a friend about this and he said: "Seven months, it doesn't matter, my grandfather was also born at seven months."

古文：其人愕问曰： 若是这等说，令祖后来毕竟养得大否？ 
现代文：那个丈夫吃惊地说： 若是这样说的话，你爷爷最后养大了没有？ 
English: Surprised, the husband said, "If that's the case, did your grandfather eventually raise you?"

古文：丑汉看
现代文：丑汉看
English: Look at the ugly man

古文：一妇人在门首，被人注目而看，妇人大骂不已。
现代文：一妇人在门边站着，有个人目不转睛地看她。妇人便对他骂个不停。
English: A woman was standing by the door, a man was staring at her, and she kept cursing at him.

古文：邻妪劝曰： 你又不在内室，凭他看看何妨？ 
现代文：邻居家一位老太太她说： 你又不是在屋子里面，就让他看一看又有什么关系？ 
English: An elderly woman who lives next door said: "You're not in the house, so why does it matter if he looks in?

古文：妇曰： 我若把好面孔看看也罢，被这样呆脸看了，岂不苦毒。 
现代文：妇人回答说： 如果让一个漂亮的小伙子看一看倒也罢了，被这种既呆又丑的人看了，那不是很痛苦吗？ 
English: The woman replied, "Wouldn't it be painful to let a handsome young man look at you, only to be looked at by such a dull, ugly person?

