古文：赵南星，字梦白，高邑人。
现代文：赵南星，字梦白，高邑人。
English: Zhao Nansing, surnamed Mengbai, a native of Gaoyou.

古文：万历二年进士。除汝宁推官。
现代文：万历二年进士，授职汝宁推官。
English: In the second year of Wanli's reign, he was promoted to the post of Ru Ning's superior officer.

古文：治行廉平，稍迁户部主事。
现代文：行为廉洁，治理太平，逐渐提升为户部主事。
English: The behavior is clean, the governance is peaceful, and it is gradually promoted to the head of the household department.

古文：张居正寝疾，朝士群祷，南星与顾宪成、姜士昌戒弗往。
现代文：张居正卧病，朝廷大臣都为他祈祷，赵南星与顾宪成、姜士昌不去。
English: Zhang Ju was ill in bed, and the ministers of the imperial court were all praying for him. Zhao Nansing did not go with Gu Xiancheng and Jiang Shichang.

古文：居正殁，调吏部考功。
现代文：张居正死，调任吏部考功郎中，称病回家。
English: Zhang Ju was dying. He was transferred to the cadre department as a meritorious student, but he said he was sick and went home.

古文：引疾归。起历文选员外郎。
现代文：起用担任文选员外郎。
English: Gairo was appointed as a writer.

古文：疏陈天下四大害，言： 杨巍乞休，左都御史吴时来谋代之，忌户部尚书宋纟熏声望，连疏排挤。
现代文：上疏陈述天下四大害，说： 杨巍乞求退休，左都御史吴时来图谋取代他，忌恨户部尚书宋纟熏的声望，接连上疏排挤他。
English: Shang Zuo stated the four great evils of the world, saying: Yang Zheng begged for retirement, Zuo Guo Shi Wu Shilai plotted to replace him, hated the reputation of the head of the household, Shang Shu Song Xuan, and successively ousted him by Shang Zuo.

古文：副都御史詹仰庇力谋吏、兵二部侍郎。
现代文：副都御史詹仰庇极力谋取吏部和兵部的侍郎。
English: Zhan Yangpi, the vice-governor of the capital, tried his best to find a servant for the personnel and military departments.

古文：大臣如此，何以责小臣，是谓干进之害。
现代文：大臣尚且如此，拿什么来责备小臣，这是不正当的求进之害。
English: If the minister is still like this, how can he blame the junior minister? This is the harm of improperly seeking advancement.

古文：礼部尚书沈鲤、侍郎张位、谕德吴中行、南京太仆卿沈思孝相继自免，独南京礼部侍郎赵用贤在，词臣黄洪宪辈每阴谗之，言官唐尧钦、孙愈贤、蔡系周复显为诋诬。
现代文：礼部尚书沈鲤、侍郎张位、谕德吴中行、南京太仆寺卿沈思孝相继自行离职，只有南京礼部侍郎赵用贤在位，词臣黄洪宪一帮人每每背后讲他的坏话，言官唐尧钦、孙愈贤、蔡系周又公开地诋毁诬蔑他。
English: The minister of etiquette, Shangshu Shen Yi, the attendant Zhang Yi, the secretary De Wu Zhong Xing, and the Nanjing grand chamberlain, Shen Si Xiao, successively resigned on their own. Only the minister of etiquette in Nanjing, Zhao Yuxian, was still in office, and the eulogist Huang Hongxian and a group of people were always talking bad about him behind his back, and the eulogists Tang Yuchin, Sun Yuxian, and Cai Jie Zhou openly slandered and slandered him.

古文：众正不容，宵人得志，是谓倾危之害。
现代文：不能容忍正直的人而使小人得志，这叫作倾轧排挤之害。
English: Can't tolerate the honest people and let the villains win, this is called the harm of dumping and crowding out.

古文：州县长吏选授太轻，部寺之官计日而取郡守，不问才行。
现代文：州县官员的选拔任用过于随便，部、寺的官员不超过一月便可当上省级官长，不考察他的才干品行。
English: The selection and appointment of state and county officials is too casual. Ministry and temple officials can become provincial governors in no more than one month, without examining their talents and performance.

古文：而抚按论人赃私有据，不曰未甚，则曰任浅，概止降调，其意以为惜才，不知此乃惜不才也。
现代文：而巡抚、按察使品评人物全看是否对自己有利，不是说还差得远，就是说资历太浅，一概不加升迁或降职。本意以为是爱惜人才，却不知这实在是爱惜庸才。
English: On the other hand, the supervisors, inspectors, and evaluators all look at whether it is beneficial to themselves, not to say that it is still far from it, that is, the qualifications are too shallow, and there is no promotion or demotion. I thought it was to cherish talents, but I don't know if it is really to cherish mediocrity.

古文：吏治日污，民生日瘁，是谓州县之害。
现代文：吏治一天天地污秽，民生一天天衰竭，这叫做地方州县之害。
English: The day-to-day management of officials is filthy, and the people's livelihood is exhausted day-to-day. This is called the harm of local states and counties.

古文：乡官之权大于守令，横行无忌，莫敢谁何。
现代文：退休大官的权力比郡守县令还大，横行乡里，无所顾忌，谁也奈何不得。
English: The power of retired officials is greater than that of county magistrates, and they run rampant in the countryside without any scruples.

古文：如渭南知县张栋，治行无双，裁抑乡官，被谗不获行取，是谓乡官之害。
现代文：像渭南知县张栋，治理品行之好，找不出第二个来，约束抑制退休居乡官员，结果被人谗言中伤没有获得升迁，这叫作乡官横行之害。
English: For example, Zhang Dong, a township official in Zhixian County, southern Anhui Province, who had a good governance record and could not find a second one, restrained and suppressed retired officials in his hometown. As a result, he was slandered and did not receive promotion. This is called the harm of rampant township officials.

古文：四害不除，天下不可得治。 
现代文：这四害不除，国家就不可能得到治理。 
English: If these four evils are not eliminated, the country cannot be governed.

古文：疏出，朝论韪之。
现代文：奏疏出来后，朝中议论称是。
English: After the release of the statement, the DPRK and China argued that it was.

古文：而中所抨击悉时相所庇，于是给事中李春开起而驳之。
现代文：而疏中所抨击的全都是当朝庇护的，于是给事中李春开站出来反驳他。
English: However, all of the criticisms made in the essay were sheltered by the government, so Li Chunkai stood up to refute him.

古文：其疏先下，南星几获谴。
现代文：李春开的奏疏先交给廷议，赵南星几乎被贬。
English: Li Chunkai's report was first submitted to the court for deliberation, and Zhao Nanxing was almost demoted.

古文：给事中王继光、史孟麟、万自约，部曹姜士昌、吴正志并助南星诋春开，且发时来、仰庇、洪宪谗谄状。
现代文：给事中王继光、史孟麟、万自约，部下姜士昌、吴正志一起帮赵南星攻击李春开，并且揭发吴时来、詹仰庇、黄洪宪诬陷忠良、阿谀奉承的情形。
English: Wang Jiguang, Shi Menglin, Wan Ziyou, and their subordinates Jiang Shichang and Wu Zhengzhi helped Zhao Nanxing attack Li Chunkai, and exposed Wu Shili, Zhan Yangbi, and Huang Hongxian for framing and flattering Zhongliang.

古文：春开气沮，然南星卒以病归。
现代文：李春开为之丧气，而赵南星最终因病回家。
English: Li Chunkai was disheartened, and Zhao Nansing eventually went home due to illness.

古文：再起，历考功郎中。
现代文：再次起用，担任考功郎中。
English: He was called up again and served as a junior high school honor student.

古文：二十一年大计京官，与尚书孙鑨秉公澄汰。
现代文：万历二十一年，考核在京官员，跟尚书孙钅龙一起秉公执法，淘汰选择，澄清吏治。
English: In the 21st year of Wanli, the assessment of officials in Beijing was at the top, and together with Shang Shusun Yulong, they enforced the law impartially, eliminated choices, and clarified the administration of officials.

古文：首黜所亲都给事中王三余及鑨甥文选员外郎吕荫昌，他附丽政府及大学士赵志皋弟皆不免，政府大不堪。
现代文：首先贬黜他亲近的都给事中王三余和孙钅龙的外甥文选员外郎吕胤昌，其他依附政府的人连大学士赵志皋的弟弟都不能幸免。政府难以承受。
English: First of all, those who were close to him were demeaned by Wang Sanyu and Sun Yulong's nephew, Lu Yinchang, the author's brother-in-law. Other people who depended on the government, even the younger brother of the university scholar Zhao Zhixuan, could not be spared. The government could not bear it.

古文：给事中刘道隆因劾吏部议留拾遗庶僚非法。
现代文：给事中刘道隆于是弹劾吏部建议留任被纠察的庶僚不合法。
English: As a result, Liu Daolong's impeachment of the personnel department's recommendation to retain the picketed staff member was illegal.

古文：得旨，南星等专权植党，贬三官。
现代文：皇帝下旨，认为赵南星等人擅权培植自己的党羽，将他降官三级。
English: The emperor decreed that Zhao Nansing and others had the power to cultivate their own party, and demoted him to the third level.

古文：俄因李世达等疏救，斥南星为民。
现代文：不久由于李世达等上疏挽救，贬斥赵南星为平民。
English: Soon after, Li Shida and others came to the rescue, denouncing Zhao Nansing as a commoner.

古文：后论救者悉被谴，鑨亦去位，一时善类几空。
现代文：后来议论挽救他的人都受到谴责，孙钅龙也离开了他的职位，一时间好人几乎全走光了。
English: Later, those who talked about saving him were reprimanded, Sun Yulong also left his post, and for a while, almost all the good people left.

古文：事具鑨传。
现代文：详情见《孙钅龙传》。
English: For details, please refer to "The Story of Sun Yulong."

古文：南星里居，名益高，与邹元标、顾宪成，海内拟之 三君 。
现代文：赵南星定居乡里，名声更大，与邹元标、顾宪成号称为海内三君子。
English: Zhao Nansing settled in the countryside and became more famous. He is known as one of the Three Gentlemen of the Inland Sea along with Xuan Yuanbiao and Gu Xiancheng.

古文：中外论荐者百十疏，卒不起。
现代文：朝廷内外上疏议论推荐他的不下百十起，终于没被起用。
English: He was recommended no less than a hundred and ten times, and finally was not appointed.

古文：光宗立，起太常少卿。
现代文：光宗即位，起用为太常寺卿。
English: Mitsumune ascended to the throne and was appointed Lord of Taijo-ji Temple.

古文：俄改右通政，进太常卿，至则擢工部右侍郎。
现代文：不久改任右通政，提拔为太常寺卿。到任后又提升为工部右侍郎。
English: He was soon appointed as Utsusho-sei and promoted to Taijo-ji-kyo. After taking office, he was promoted to Utsusho-ro of the Ministry of Works.

古文：居数月，拜左都御史，慨然以整齐天下为任。
现代文：数月之后，授官左都御史，慷慨激昂地把治理国家当作自己职责。
English: A few months later, he was appointed the first governor of the Left Capital, enthusiastically taking on the responsibility of governing the country.

古文：天启三年大计京官，以故给事中亓诗教、赵兴邦、官应震、吴亮嗣先朝结党乱政，议黜之，吏科都给事中魏应嘉力持不可。
现代文：天启三年考核在京官员，因原给事中亓诗教、赵兴邦、官应震、吴亮嗣在万历朝时结党营私、扰乱朝政，建议贬黜他们。吏科都给事中魏应嘉极力不同意。
English: During the three-year appraisal of officials in Beijing in the year of the Apocalypse, it was suggested that they should be demoted because of the fact that in the original case, Zeng Shi Jiao, Zhao Xing Bang, Gu Ying Zhen, and Wu Liang Zhi had formed a party to fight against each other and disrupt the imperial government during the Wanli Dynasty. Wei Ying Jia strongly disagreed.

古文：南星著《四凶论》，卒与考功郎程正己置四人不谨。他所澄汰，一如为考功时。
现代文：赵南星著《四凶论》，终于同考功郎程正已认定四人不合做官体统，其他考核汰除情形，完全跟他做考功郎中时相同。
English: Zhao Nansing wrote "The Four Evil Doers," and finally fellow exam winner Cheng Zheng has determined that the four people do not fit into the official system, and the other assessment and elimination situations are completely the same as when he was an exam winner.

古文：浙江巡按张素养荐部内人材，及姚宗文、邵辅忠、刘廷元，南星劾其谬，素养坐夺俸。
现代文：浙江巡按张素养举荐部内的人才，包括了姚宗文、邵辅忠、刘廷元。赵南星揭发他的错误，张素养被定罪剥夺俸禄。
English: The Zhejiang inspection team recommended talents in the department, including Yao Zongwen, Shao Shuozhong, and Liu Tingyuan, according to Zhang Suyang. Zhao Nansing exposed his mistake, and Zhang Suyang was convicted and deprived of his salary.

古文：先是，巡方者有提荐之例，南星已奏止之；而陕西高弘图、山西徐扬先、宣大李思启、河东刘大受，复踵行如故，南星并劾奏之，巡方者始知畏法。
现代文：在此之前，巡抚地方的人有提拔举荐人才的先例，赵南星已上疏制止了。而陕西高弘图、山西徐扬先，宣府、大同李思启，河东刘大受，还按旧例继续实行。赵南星一并上疏弹劾他们，巡抚地方的人这才知道畏惧法令。
English: Prior to this, there was a precedent for local supervisors to promote and recommend talents, and Zhao Nansing had already stopped it in Shangxo. However, Shaanxi Gao Hongtu, Shanxi Xu Yangsian, Xuanfu, Datong Li Siqi, and Hedong Liu Da Jie continued to implement it according to the old practice. Zhao Nansing impeached them together with Shangxo, and the local supervisors only knew to fear the decree.

古文：寻代张问达为吏部尚书。当是时，人务奔竞，苞苴恣行，言路横尤甚。每文选郎出，辄邀之半道，为人求官，不得则加以恶声，或逐之去。
现代文：不久替代张问达为吏部尚书，这个时候，人人千方百计奔走于升迁之道，贿赂公行，言官尤为横行，每逢文选郎外出，就在半道上将他拦住，替别人求官，得不到满足就说他的坏话，或者把他赶走。
English: It was not long before Zhang Qianda was replaced by Shang Shu from the cadre department. At this time, everyone was trying their best to get promoted, bribing officials, and officials were especially rampant. Whenever Wen Xuan Lang went out, they would stop him halfway and apply for positions for others. If they were not satisfied, they would speak ill of him or drive him away.

古文：选郎即公正无如何，尚书亦太息而已。
现代文：选官即使公正行使权力，也无法奈何他们，尚书也只有叹息而已。
English: Even if the election officials exercise their power fairly, they cannot help but do so, and they can only sigh.

古文：南星素疾其弊，锐意澄清，独行己志，政府及中贵亦不得有所干请，诸人惮其刚严不敢犯。
现代文：赵南星一向憎恨这弊端，锐意改革，一意推行自己的想法，政府官员和太监权贵也不能对他有什么请求，各人害怕他的刚毅严肃也不敢有什么冒犯。
English: Zhao Nanxing always hated this evil, he was determined to reform and pursue his own ideas. Government officials and eunuchs could not ask him for anything. Everyone was afraid of his toughness and seriousness and dared not offend him.

古文：有给事为赀郎求盐运司，即注赀郎王府，而出给事于外。
现代文：有一位给事赀郎请求盐运司的官职，赵南星就将赀郎注籍在王府里，而将给事派往外地。
English: There was a man who asked Zhao Nanxing to give him an official position as a salt transportation official. Zhao Nanxing registered Zhao in the royal court, but sent Zhao to another place.

古文：知县石三畏素贪，夤缘将行取，南星亦置之王府。
现代文：知县石三畏一向贪财，巴结权贵将要调任京职，赵南星也把他安置在王府里。
English: Zhixian Shishangyi has always been greedy for money. He is going to be transferred to the Beijing post, and Zhao Nansing has also placed him in the royal palace.

古文：时进士无为王官者，南星不恤也。
现代文：当时进士没有在王府做官的，赵南星却不顾惜。
English: At that time, Jinshi did not work as an official in the royal palace, but Zhao Nansing did not care.

古文：魏忠贤雅重之，尝于帝前称其任事。
现代文：魏忠贤向来推重他，曾在皇帝面前称赞他的才干。
English: Wei Zhongxian had always respected him and had praised his talent in front of the emperor.

古文：一日，遣娣子傅应星介一中书贽见，南星麾之去。
现代文：有一天，派遣内亲傅应星介绍一位中书拿着礼物来拜见他，赵南星把他赶走了。
English: One day, Zhao Nansing sent his uncle Fu Yingxing to introduce a Chinese scholar to visit him with a gift. Zhao Nansing drove him away.

古文：尝并坐弘政门，选通政司参议，正色语忠贤曰： 主上冲龄，我辈内外臣子宜各努力为善。 
现代文：曾与魏忠贤一起坐在弘政门下，选拔通政司的参议，态度严肃地对魏忠贤说： 皇上年幼，我们这些朝廷内外的臣子应该各自努力做好事。 
English: He once sat together with Wei Zhongxian under the gate of Hongzheng to discuss the selection of Tong Zhengji, and said to Wei Zhongxian with a serious attitude: The emperor is young, and we, the courtiers inside and outside the imperial court, should make every effort to do good deeds.

古文：忠贤默然，怒形于色。
现代文：魏忠贤一声不吭，愤怒之情溢于言表。
English: Wei Zhongxian did not say a word, but his anger was on full display.

古文：大学士魏广微，南星友允贞子也，素以通家子畜之。广微入内阁，尝三至南星门，拒勿见。又尝叹曰： 见泉无子。 
现代文：大学士魏广微，是赵南星的朋友魏允贞的儿子，向来以世交子弟抚养他，魏广微进入内阁，曾三次到赵南星家，都被拒之门外，又曾经感叹说： 见泉没有儿子。 
English: Wei Guangwei, a university scholar, is the son of Wei Yunzhen, a friend of Zhao Nansing, and has always raised him as a world-renowned child. Wei Guangwei entered the cabinet, went to Zhao Nansing's home three times, but was turned away, and once lamented: See Quan has no son.

古文：见泉，允贞别号也。
现代文：见泉是魏允贞的别号。
English: Seequan is another name for Wei Yunzheng.

古文：广微恨刺骨，与忠贤比而龁南星。
现代文：魏广微恨之入骨，与魏忠贤相勾结来陷害赵南星。
English: Wei Guang was filled with bitterness and colluded with Wei Zhongxian to frame Zhao Nanxing.

古文：东林势盛，众正盈朝。
现代文：东林党势力昌盛，大批正直的人充盈朝廷。
English: The influence of the Donglin Party flourished, and a large number of honest people filled the imperial court.

古文：南星益搜举遗佚，布之庶位。
现代文：赵南星加倍寻找举荐被遗漏的东林党人，把他们安排在各个部门。
English: Zhao Nansing redoubled his search for missing Donglin Party members to recommend and placed them in various departments.

古文：高攀龙、杨涟、左光斗秉宪；李腾芳、陈于廷佐铨；魏大中、袁化中长科道；郑三俊、李邦华、孙居相、饶伸、王之寀辈悉置卿贰。
现代文：高攀龙、杨涟、左光斗执掌法令；李腾芳、陈于廷辅助选举；魏大中、袁化中主管科道；郑三俊、李邦华、孙居相、饶伸、王之肕等人全部放在部里执政。
English: Gao Panglong, Yang Hui, and Zuo Guangdou were in charge of decrees; Li Tengfang and Chen Yuting assisted in elections; Wei Da Zhong and Yuan Hua Zhong were in charge of science and technology; Zheng Sanjun, Li Banghua, Sun Ju Xiang, Rao Sheng, and Wang Zhixuan were all placed in ministries to govern.

古文：而四司之属，邹维琏、夏嘉遇、张光前、程国祥、刘廷谏亦皆民誉。
现代文：而这四司的下属官员邹维琏、夏嘉遇、张光前、程国祥、刘廷谏也都受到民众的称颂。
English: And the subordinate officials of these four departments, Zou Weixuan, Xia Jiayun, Zhang Guangcheng, Cheng Guoxiang and Liu Tingtao, have also been praised by the public.

古文：中外忻忻望治，而小人侧目，滋欲去南星。
现代文：朝廷内外欣喜地期望能有所作为，而小人侧目，更想赶走赵南星。
English: Both inside and outside the imperial court, they were joyfully expecting to be able to make a difference, while the villains looked sideways and wanted to drive away Zhao Nanxing.

古文：给事中傅櫆以维琏改吏部己不与闻，首假汪文言发难，劾南星紊旧制，植私人。
现代文：给事中傅魁以邹维琏改任吏部自己不知道为由，首先凭借汪文言发难，弹劾赵南星改变旧制，培植私党。
English: During the incident, Fu Kui, on the grounds that he did not know the reason for Zou Weiqi's appointment to the cadre department, first took advantage of Wang Wenyan to make trouble and impeach Zhao Nansing for changing the old system and cultivating a private party.

古文：维琏引去，南星奏留之，小人愈恨。
现代文：邹维琏引咎辞职，赵南星上疏挽留他，小人更加不满。
English: Xing Weiqin resigned, Zhao Nanxing retained him, and the villain was even more dissatisfied.

古文：会涟劾忠贤疏上，宫府益水火。
现代文：正好杨琏上疏弹劾魏忠贤，宫中太监与政府官员更加对立，势同水火。
English: Just as Yang Xuanjie impeached Wei Zhongxian, the palace eunuchs and government officials were more opposed to each other.

古文：南星遂杜门乞休，不许。
现代文：赵南星于是闭门乞求退休，皇帝不同意。
English: Zhao Nansing then begged for retirement behind closed doors, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：攀龙之劾崔呈秀也，南星议戍之。
现代文：高攀龙弹劾崔呈秀，赵南星疏论让他充边。
English: Gaopanlong impeached Cui Chengxiu, Zhao Nanxing sidelined him.

古文：呈秀窘，夜走忠贤邸，叩头乞哀，言： 不去南星及攀龙、涟等，我两人未知死所。 
现代文：崔呈秀处境窘迫，连夜跑到魏忠贤的住处，叩头哀求，说： 赵南星、高攀龙、杨涟等人不走，我们二人将不知死在哪里啊。 
English: Cui Hengxiu was in a difficult situation. He went to Wei Zhongxian's residence overnight and begged him, saying, "If Zhao Nanxing, Gao Panglong, Yang Hui and others do not leave, we two will not know where to die."

古文：忠贤大以为然，遂与定谋。
现代文：魏忠贤认为的确是这样的，于是和他一起制定阴谋。
English: Wei Zhongxian thought that this was indeed the case, so he worked out a conspiracy with him.

古文：会山西缺巡抚，河南布政使郭尚友求之。
现代文：恰巧山西巡抚空缺，河南布政使郭尚友想得到它。
English: It just so happened that there was a vacancy for an inspector in Shanxi Province, and Guo Shangyou, the political envoy of Henan Province, wanted to get it.

古文：南星以太常卿谢应祥有清望，首列以请。
现代文：赵南星认为太常寺卿谢应祥有好名声，将他列在第一位请求皇帝批准。
English: Zhao Nansing thought that Xie Yingxiang, the Lord of Taiji Temple, had a good reputation, and listed him as the first to request the emperor's approval.

古文：既得旨，而御史陈九畴受广微指，言应祥尝知嘉善，大中出其门，大中以师故，谋于文选郎嘉遇而用之，徇私当斥。
现代文：已经获得圣旨恩准，御史陈九畴受魏广微的指使，说谢应祥曾出知嘉善，魏大中是他的门生，魏大中以师徒关系的缘故，同文选郎夏嘉遇商量启用他，徇私舞弊理当斥责。
English: He had already obtained the approval of the Holy Spirit, and Chen Jiuzhou, the chief historian, was instructed by Wei Guangwei to say that Xie Yingxiang had discovered Jiashan, Wei University was his protégé, Wei University was the reason for the teacher-student relationship, and Xia Jia, the author of the same article, met with him to discuss the use of him, and the selfishness and malpractice should be reprimanded.

古文：大中、嘉遇疏辩，语侵九畴，九畴再疏力诋，并下部议。
现代文：魏大中、夏嘉遇上疏争辩，语言涉及陈九畴。陈九畴再次上疏极力诋毁，二疏一起交给部里讨论。
English: In Wei University, Xia Jia and Chen Jiuquan were involved in a dispute over language. Chen Jiuquan once again tried his best to discredit Shang Soh, and the two were handed over to the ministry for discussion.

古文：南星、攀龙极言应祥以人望推举，大中、嘉遇无私，九畴妄言不可听。
现代文：赵南星、高攀龙确切指出谢应祥是因为在群众有声望而被推荐的，魏大中、夏嘉遇没有私情，陈九畴的胡说不能相信。
English: Zhao Nansing and Gao Panglong pointed out that Xie Yingxiang was recommended because of his reputation among the masses, Wei Dazhong and Xia Jia had no personal feelings, and Chen Jiuzhang's nonsense could not be believed.

古文：忠贤大怒，矫旨黜大中、嘉遇，并黜九畴，而责南星等朋谋结党。
现代文：魏忠贤大怒，假传圣旨废黜魏大中、夏嘉遇，连同陈九畴一同被废黜，而斥责赵南星等人相互勾结、结党营私。
English: Wei Zhongxian was furious. He deposed Wei Daizhong and Xia Jiaxuan, who were deposed together with Chen Jiuzhuang, and accused Zhao Nansing and others of colluding with each other and forming a party.

古文：南星遽引罪求去，忠贤复矫旨切责，放归。
现代文：赵南星立即引咎辞职，魏忠贤再次假传圣旨痛切责备他，放赵南星回家。
English: Zhao Nansing immediately blamed and resigned, Wei Zhongxian again falsely preached the holy will and severely rebuked him, and sent Zhao Nansing home.

古文：明日，攀龙亦引去。
现代文：第二天，高攀龙也引咎辞职。
English: The next day, Gao Panglong also resigned.

古文：给事中沈惟炳论救，亦出之外。
现代文：给事中沈惟炳上疏挽救，也被流放在外。
English: In the middle of the incident, Shen Wei was rescued and was also exiled.

古文：俄以会推忤忠贤意，并斥于廷、涟、光斗、化中，引南星所摈徐兆魁、乔应甲、王绍徽等置要地。小人竞进，天下大柄尽归忠贤矣。
现代文：不久因为会同推举官员违背魏忠贤的意思，同时排斥陈于廷、杨涟、左光斗、袁化中，把赵南星摈弃了的徐兆魁、乔应甲、王绍徽等人安排在政府要害部门，小人竞相升迁，国家大权都被魏忠贤夺去了。
English: Soon, because the co-election officials violated the intention of Wei Zhongxian, and at the same time excluded Chen Yu-ting, Yang Hui, Zuo Guangdou, and Yuan Huazhong, and placed Xu Zhaokui, Qiao Yingjia, Wang Shaohui and others, who had been abandoned by Zhao Nansing, in key government departments, the villains competed for promotion, and the country's power was taken away by Wei Zhongxian.

古文：忠贤及其党恶南星甚，每矫敕谕，必目为元凶。
现代文：魏忠贤及其党徒非常憎恨赵南星。每当假传皇帝下诏、告示时，总是把他看作罪魁祸首。
English: Wei Zhongxian and his followers hated Zhao Nanxing very much. Whenever the false emperor issued an edict or proclamation, they always regarded him as the main culprit.

古文：于是御史张讷劾南星十大罪，并劾维琏、国祥、嘉遇及王允成。
现代文：于是御史张讷弹劾赵南星十大罪状，并且弹劾邹维涟、程国祥、夏嘉遇以及王允成。
English: Therefore, the Grand Historian Zhang Ne impeached Zhao Nansing on ten charges, and impeached Nie Weiyuan, Cheng Guoxiang, Xia Jiayun, and Wang Yuncheng.

古文：得旨，并削籍。
现代文：得皇帝旨，将他们全部削籍为平民。
English: By order of the emperor, they were all demoted to the status of commoners.

古文：令再奏南星私党，讷复列上邦华及孙鼎相等十四人，并贬黜。
现代文：叫人再次上奏赵南星的同伙，张讷又列上李邦华及孙鼎相十四人的名字，统统将他贬职废黜了。
English: Zhao Nanxing's associates were summoned again, and Zhang Ne also listed the names of 14 people, including Li Banghua and Sun Dingxiang, all of whom were demoted and deposed.

古文：自是为南星摈弃者，无不拔擢，其素所推奖者，率遭奇祸。
现代文：自此被赵南星摈弃的人，没有不被提拔任用的。他向来所推重奖赏的人，全都遭到了意想不到的灾祸。
English: Since then, no one who had been abandoned by Zhao Nansing had not been promoted and appointed. Those who had always been rewarded by him had all suffered unexpected disasters.

古文：诸干进速化之徒，一击南星，辄遂所欲。
现代文：那些希望迅速谋求进身为官的人，一旦攻击赵南星，便随心所欲，为所欲为。
English: Once they attack Zhao Nanxing, those who hope to quickly seek promotion to official positions will do whatever they want.

古文：而石三畏亦起为御史，疏攻南星及李三才、顾宪成、孙丕扬、王图等十五人。
现代文：石三畏也被起用任命为御史，上疏攻击赵南星以及李三才、顾宪成、孙丕扬、王图等十五人。
English: Shi Sanji was also appointed as imperial historian, and Shang So attacked Zhao Nansing, as well as Li Sancai, Gu Xiancheng, Sun Yingyang, Wang Tu and 15 others.

古文：死者皆削夺，缙绅祸益烈。
现代文：已经死亡的都剥夺官职，有官职的祸害更加惨烈。
English: Those who have died have been deprived of official positions, and the scourge of official positions has become even more severe.

古文：寻以汪文言狱词连及南星，下抚按提问。
现代文：不久因为汪文言的供词涉及到赵南星，交给抚按审讯。
English: Soon, because Wang Wenyan's confession involved Zhao Nansing, he was put on trial.

古文：适郭尚友巡抚保定，而巡按马逢皋亦憾南星，乃相与庭辱之。笞其子清衡及外孙王钟庞，系之狱，坐南星赃万五千。
现代文：正好郭尚友巡抚保定，而巡抚马逢皋也怀恨赵南星，于是相邀在朝廷上侮辱他，用竹板打他的儿子赵清衡和外孙王钟庞，将他们下狱，让赵南星赔偿赃款一万五千两银子。
English: It just so happened that Guo Shangyou was the governor of Baoding, and the governor Ma Fengjun also hated Zhao Nansing, so he was invited to insult him at the imperial court, beat his son Zhao Qingheng and his grandson Wang Zhongpang with a bamboo board, put them in prison, and let Zhao Nansing compensate the stolen money with fifteen thousand two silver coins.

古文：南星家素贫，亲故捐助，始获竣。
现代文：赵南星家一向贫穷，靠亲友捐助才将官司了结。
English: Zhao Nanxing's family has always been poor, relying on donations from relatives and friends to settle the lawsuit.

古文：卒戍南星代州，清衡庄浪，钟庞永昌。
现代文：最后将赵南星发配代州，赵清衡流放庄浪，王钟庞谪戍永昌。
English: In the end, Zhao Nanxing was assigned to Zhouzhou, Zhao Qingheng was exiled to Zhuanglang, and Wang Zhong Pangyu to Yongchang.

古文：嫡母冯氏、生母李氏，并哀恸而卒。
现代文：嫡母冯氏，生母李氏，都由于哀痛过度而死。
English: Both the legitimate mother, Ms. Feng, and the biological mother, Ms. Li, died from excessive grief.

古文：子生七龄，惊怖死。
现代文：七岁的儿子也由于受惊吓死去了。
English: His seven-year-old son also died of fright.

古文：南星抵戍所，处之怡然。
现代文：赵南星到达发配地，安然自处。
English: Zhao Nansing arrived at the distribution site and was safe and sound.

古文：庄烈帝登极，有诏赦还。
现代文：庄烈皇帝登基，下诏赦免让他返京。
English: Emperor Zhuge Liang ascended to the throne. He was pardoned and allowed to return to Beijing.

古文：巡抚牟志夔，忠贤党也，故迟遣之，竟卒于戍所。
现代文：巡抚牟志夔，是魏忠贤的死党，故意推迟派送，赵南星最终死在发配的地方。
English: Magistrate Mou Zhisheng, a close ally of Wei Zhongxian, deliberately delayed the delivery, and Zhao Nansing eventually died at the place of delivery.

古文：崇祯初，赠太子太保，谥忠毅。
现代文：崇祯初年，赠太子太保，谥号 忠毅 。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, he was given the title of Crown Prince Taibao and the posthumous name of Zhongyi.

古文：櫆、呈秀、广微、九畴、兆魁、应甲、绍徽、讷、三畏、尚友、志夔，俱名丽逆案，为世大僇焉。
现代文：傅槐、崔呈秀、魏广微、陈九畴、徐兆魁、乔应甲、王绍徽、张讷、石三畏、郭尚友、牟志夔，都与 逆案 相牵连，为世人所憎恶。
English: Fu Xi, Cui Chengxiu, Wei Guangwei, Chen Jiuquan, Xu Zhaokui, Qiao Yingjia, Wang Shaohui, Zhang Ne, Shi Sanji, Guo Shangyou, Muzhi Yao, are all implicated in the "reverse case" and are hated by the world.

古文：邹元标，字尔瞻，吉水人。
现代文：邹元标，字尔瞻，江西吉水人。
English: 元标,字爾瞻,江西吉水人.

古文：九岁通《五经》。
现代文：九岁通晓 五经 。
English: The nine-year-old is well versed in the Five Classics.

古文：泰和胡直，嘉靖中进士，官至福建按察使，师欧阳德、罗洪先，得王守仁之传。
现代文：泰和人胡直，是嘉靖时的进士，官做到福建按察使，师从于欧阳德、罗洪先，得到王守仁学说的真传。
English: Taihe's ancestor, Hu Zhizhong, was a high-ranking officer in the Jiajing Dynasty. He served as an inspector in Fujian Province, and studied under Ouyang De and Luo Hongxian. He obtained the true transmission of Wang Shuren's teachings.

古文：元标弱冠从直游，即有志为学。
现代文：邹元标年轻时跟胡直交游，就有志于学术探讨。
English: When he was young, Yu Yuanbiao went on a tour with Hu Zhiguo, and he was interested in academic discussion.

古文：举万历五年进士。观政刑部。
现代文：万历五年中进士，在刑部学习政事。
English: He entered the middle school of Wanli for five years and studied government affairs in the criminal department.

古文：张居正夺情，元标抗疏切谏。
现代文：张居正专权，邹元标上疏痛切规劝。
English: Zhang Juzheng's exclusive right, Xuan Yuan's pain-relieving exhortation.

古文：且曰： 陛下以居正有利社稷耶？
现代文：并且说： 陛下以为张居正对国家有利吗？
English: And he said: Does Your Majesty think that Zhang Jiu Zheng is beneficial to the country?

古文：居正才虽可为，学术则偏；志虽欲为，自用太甚。
现代文：张居正论才干虽然有所作为，学术根基却非正途；志向虽然远大，却过于刚愎自用。
English: Zhang Juzheng said that although the talent has made some achievements, the academic foundation is not the right way; although the ambition is lofty, it is too self-serving.

古文：其设施乖张者，如州县入学，限以十五六人，有司希指，更损其数。
现代文：他的一些政策措施不合情理，比如州县入学的人数，限定为十五六人。有关官署迎合他的旨意，更加减少数量。
English: Some of his policy measures are unreasonable, such as the number of people enrolled in state and county schools, limited to fifteen or six. Relevant government departments cater to his will and further reduce the number.

古文：是进贤未广也。
现代文：这是选拔贤才的路子不广。
English: This is not a broad way to select talents.

古文：诸道决囚，亦有定额，所司惧罚，数必取盈。
现代文：各地判决囚犯，也有一定的数量，有关部门害怕受处分，数量上一定追求有所富余。
English: Each region also has a certain number of sentenced prisoners, and the relevant departments are afraid of being punished, so they must pursue a surplus in terms of quantity.

古文：是断刑太滥也。
现代文：这是刑罚实施得太无节制。
English: It's the excessive use of punishment.

古文：大臣持禄苟容，小臣畏罪缄默，有今日陈言而明日获谴者。
现代文：大臣拿了俸禄苟且偷生，小臣害怕获罪保持沉默，有的人今天陈述意见，明天却遭到了谴责。
English: Ministers live on their salaries, while junior ministers keep silent for fear of being punished. Some present their opinions today, only to be reprimanded tomorrow.

古文：是言路未通也。
现代文：这是上下言路没有通畅。
English: It's an up-and-down conversation.

古文：黄河泛滥为灾，民有驾蒿为巢、啜水为餐者，而有司不以闻。
现代文：黄河泛滥成灾，老百姓有的以荒草地为家，以喝水充饥，而有关部门却充耳不闻。
English: The Yellow River floods, and some people live on barren grassland and drink water to satisfy their hunger, but the relevant departments turn a deaf ear.

古文：是民隐未周也。
现代文：这是老百姓的疾苦没有得到救济。
English: This is the reason why the sufferings of the common people have not been relieved.

古文：其他用刻深之吏，沮豪杰之材，又不可枚数矣。
现代文：其他诸如任用残酷的官员，埋没杰出的人才，真是举不胜举。
English: Other examples, such as the appointment of cruel officials and the burying of outstanding talents, are too numerous to mention.

古文：伏读敕谕 朕学尚未成，志尚未定，先生既去，前功尽隳 ，陛下言及此，宗社无疆之福也。
现代文：臣恭恭敬敬地读皇帝的诏示，上面说道： 朕的学业还没有完成，志向还没有确定，先生就离开了我，将使前功尽弃了。 陛下还这样说，真是国家无尽的福份啊。
English: The courtier respectfully read the emperor's imperial edict, saying: My studies are not yet complete, my aspirations have not yet been determined, my master has left me, and I will give up my previous achievements. His Majesty also said this, it is really an endless blessing for the country.

古文：虽然，弼成圣学，辅翼圣志者，未可谓在廷无人也。
现代文：虽然如此，辅助完成皇上的学业，协助树立皇帝的志向的人，不能说朝廷就没有啊。
English: Nevertheless, it cannot be said that the imperial court does not have people who assist in completing the emperor's studies and helping to establish the emperor's aspirations.

古文：且幸而居正丁艰，犹可挽留；脱不幸遂捐馆舍，陛下之学将终不成，志将终不定耶？
现代文：幸好是张居正遭遇父母丧事，还可以挽留，倘若不幸就此离去，陛下的学业莫非就此不得完成，志向莫非终究不能确定么？
English: Fortunately, it is Zhang Ju who is experiencing the death of his parents, and he can still be retained. If, unfortunately, he were to leave, wouldn't his majesty's studies have to be completed, and wouldn't his aspirations be uncertain?

古文：臣观居正疏言 世有非常之人，然后办非常之事 ，若以奔丧为常事而不屑为者，不知人惟尽此五常之道，然后谓之人。
现代文：臣看到张居正的上疏说： 世上先有非同寻常的人，然后才能做非同寻常的事。 这是把奔丧看作事而不屑于去做的人。谁不知道人只有恪守仁、义、礼、智、信五种道德伦理才能成其为人。
English: When the minister saw Zhang Juzheng, he said: "In the world, there are extraordinary people first, and then extraordinary things can be done. This is a person who regards mourning as a thing and does not disdain to do it. Who does not know that a person can only become a person by adhering to the five moral ethics of benevolence, righteousness, courtesy, wisdom, and faith.

古文：今有人于此，亲生而不顾，亲死而不奔，犹自号于世曰我非常人也，世不以为丧心，则以为禽彘，可谓之非常人哉？ 
现代文：现在这个人，父母活着时不去照顾，父母死了不去奔丧，还自我吹嘘为非同寻常的人，世道人心不认为他丧失天良，就认为他是猪狗禽兽，这能叫作非同寻常的人吗？ 
English: Now this man, who did not take care of his parents when they were alive, and did not grieve for them when they died, still boasts of himself as an extraordinary person. The world's people do not think that he has lost his virtue, but think that he is a pig, a dog, and an animal. Can this be called an extraordinary person?

古文：疏就，怀之入朝，适廷杖吴中行等。
现代文：奏疏写好，放入怀中然后上朝。正好赶上吴中行等人受廷杖刑。
English: He wrote it down, put it in his bosom and then went to the palace. Just in time for Wu Zhongxing and others to be punished by the imperial scepter.

古文：元标俟杖毕，取疏授中官，绐曰： 此乞假疏也。 
现代文：邹元标等打完棍子后，把奏疏拿出来交给中官，哄骗他说： 这是请假的奏疏。 
English: After Yuanyuan Bao and the others had finished playing with the sticks, they took out the recorder and handed it to the lieutenant colonel, tricking him into saying, "This is the recorder requesting leave."

古文：及入，居正大怒，亦廷杖八十，谪戍都匀卫。卫在万山中，夷獠与居，元标处之怡然。
现代文：等奏疏呈上后，张居正十分恼怒，也将邹元标打了八十棍子，贬职流放都匀卫，都匀卫位于万山丛中，与少数民族杂居，邹元标处之泰然。
English: After the report was submitted, Zhang Juzheng was very angry, and he also beat Xuan Yuan with eighty sticks. He was demoted and banished to Duyunwei. Duyunwei is located in the mountains, mixed with ethnic minorities, and the Xuan Yuan was calm.

古文：益究心理学，学以大进。
现代文：更加专心研究理学，学问得到很大的进步。
English: He devoted himself more to the study of science, and his studies made great progress.

古文：巡按御中承居正指，将害元标。
现代文：巡抚御史受张居正的指使，将要陷害邹元标。
English: At the behest of Zhang Jizheng, the governor, Guo Shi, is going to frame Xuan Yuanbiao.

古文：行次镇远，一夕，御史暴死。
现代文：路过镇远在那里住宿，一个夜晚，御史突然死了。
English: He passed through the town and stayed there. One night, he suddenly died.

古文：元标谪居六年，居正殁，召拜吏科给事中。首陈培圣德、亲臣工、肃宪纪、崇儒行、饬抚臣五事。
现代文：邹元标流放了六年，张居正死，征召授官吏科给事中，首先陈述培养道德观念、亲近大臣部属、严肃法令准则、尊崇儒家品行、整顿地方吏治五件事。
English: Xuan Yuan Bei was exiled for six years, Zhang Ju was dying, and in the matter of recruiting and awarding officials, he first stated five things: cultivating moral concepts, being close to ministerial subordinates, serious legal standards, respecting Confucian ethics, and rectifying local officials.

古文：寻劾罢礼部尚书徐学谟、南京户部尚书张士佩。
现代文：不久弹劾罢免礼部尚书徐学谟、南京户部尚书张士佩。
English: Soon after, the impeachment and dismissal of Xu Xuemou, the Rector of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and Zhang Shipei, the Rector of the Nanjing Household Department.

古文：徐学谟者，嘉定县人。
现代文：徐学谟是嘉定县人。
English: Xu Xuemu is from Jiading County.

古文：学谟力抗不予，为王所劾，下抚按逮问，改官。
现代文：嘉靖年间担任荆州知府。景恭王分封德安，想夺取荆州城北面的沙市地盘，徐学谟坚持不给他，被景恭王弹劾。交给抚按官审问，改到别的地方当官。
English: During the Jiajing Dynasty, he served as the governor of Jingzhou. King Jinggong divided the fief of De'an and wanted to seize the Shashi site north of Jingzhou City. Xu Xuemu insisted that he would not give it to him, and was impeached by King Jinggong. He was interrogated by the magistrate and transferred to another place.

古文：荆州人德之，称沙市为 徐市 。
现代文：荆州人感激他，把沙市称作 徐市 。
English: The people of Jingzhou are grateful to him and call Sha Shi as Xu Shi.

古文：居正素与厚。
现代文：张居正跟他一向很好。
English: Zhang Juzheng has always been on good terms with him.

古文：万历中，累迁右副都御史，抚治郧阳。
现代文：万历年间，积官至右副都御史，巡抚郧阳。
English: During the Wanli era, he rose through the ranks to the position of vice-governor of the capital and governor of Shenyang.

古文：居正归葬父，学谟事之谨，召为刑部侍郎。
现代文：张居正回家处理父亲的葬事，徐学谟小心地为他服务，征召授官刑部侍郎。
English: Zhang Ju was returning home to deal with his father's funeral. Xu Xu Moo carefully served him and was conscripted as a courtier of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：越二年，擢礼部尚书。
现代文：过了二年，提拔为礼部尚书。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：自弘治后，礼部长非翰林不授，惟席书以言 大礼 故，由他曹迁；万士和不由翰林，然先历其部侍郎。
现代文：自弘治以后，礼部长官不是翰林出身不予任命。只有席书因为说 大礼 的缘故，由其他官署调任；万士和不是翰林，但他先担任过礼部侍郎。
English: Since Hongzhi, the Minister of Ceremonies is not from Hanlin and is not appointed. Only Seishu was transferred from other government offices because of saying the Great Rite; Wanshiwa is not from Hanlin, but he first served as a waiter of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：学谟径拜尚书，廷臣以居正故，莫敢言。
现代文：徐学谟直接被任命为礼部尚书，朝廷大臣因为张居正的缘故，没有人敢说话。
English: Xu Xu Miao was directly appointed to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the Minister of the Imperial Court, because of Zhang Juzheng, no one dared to speak.

古文：居正卒，学谟急缔姻于大学士申时行以自固。
现代文：张居正死，徐学谟赶忙跟大学士申时行结为亲家以巩固自己的地位。
English: Zhang Jiu was dying, and Xu Xu Miao hastily married the university scholar Shen Xing as a relative to consolidate his position.

古文：及奉命择寿宫，通政参议梁子琦劾其始结居正，继附时行，诏为夺子琦俸。
现代文：等到奉皇帝命令选择寿官，通政参议梁子琦揭发他先是巴结张居正，然后依附申时行。下诏剥夺梁子琦的俸禄。
English: When, by order of the emperor, he was to choose a magistrate, the leading political councilor Liang Zixuan revealed that he was first a supporter of Zhang Jizheng, and then a follower of Shen Shi Rong. Liang Zixuan was deprived of his salary.

古文：元标复劾之，遂令致仕归。
现代文：邹元标接着揭发他，于是命令他辞官回家。
English: Xing Yuanbiao then exposed him and ordered him to resign and return home.

古文：慈宁宫灾，元标复上时政六事，中言： 臣曩进无欲之训，陛下试自省，果无欲耶？寡欲耶？
现代文：慈宁宫遭火灾，邹元标又上疏陈述有关时事政治六件事。其中说道： 臣先前进献无欲望的教诲，陛下尝试自我检查，是真没有欲望呢，还是节制了欲望？
English: Cining Palace was set on fire, and Zhang Yuanbai made a brief statement on six current affairs and politics, saying: "Vassal, go ahead and offer the teaching of no desire, Your Majesty, try to examine yourself, do you really have no desire, or have you restrained your desire?

古文：语云： 欲人勿闻，莫若勿为。 
现代文：俗话说： 要想人不知，除非己不为。 
English: As the saying goes: If you want to be famous, you have to do something.

古文：陛下诚宜翻然自省，加意培养。 
现代文：陛下的确应该尽快彻底地自我检查，着意节制自己的欲望。 
English: Your Majesty should really examine himself thoroughly as soon as possible and try to restrain his desires.

古文：当是时，帝方壮龄，留意声色游宴，谓元标刺己，怒甚，降旨谯责。
现代文：这个时候，皇帝正当壮年，沉迷于声色巡游、宴席，以为邹元标指责自己，很不高兴，降旨责怪他。
English: At this time, the emperor was in his prime, indulging in the color parade and banquet, and thought that Xuan Yuanbiao was blaming himself. He was very unhappy and blamed him.

古文：首辅时行以元标己门生，而劾罢其姻学谟，亦心憾，遂谪南京刑部照磨。
现代文：首辅申时行因为邹元标是自己的门生，却弹劾罢免了他的姻亲徐学谟，也心怀不满，于是把他贬职为南京刑部照磨。
English: The capital's vice-governor, Shin Shih-hong, impeached and dismissed his in-law, Xu Xuemou, because Xuan Yuanbiao was his protégé. He was also dissatisfied, so he demoted him to the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：就迁兵部主事。
现代文：调任兵部主事。
English: He was transferred to be in charge of the military department.

古文：召改吏部，进员外郎，以病免。
现代文：征召改任吏部，提升员外郎，因病免职。
English: He was conscripted and transferred to the cadre department, promoted to the rank of officer, and relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：起补验封。
现代文：后起用候补验封。
English: Use a spare to check the seal afterwards.

古文：陈吏治十事，民瘼八事，疏几万言。
现代文：陈述吏治十件事，百姓疾苦八件事，奏疏接近一万言。
English: Ten cases of officials' rule and eight cases of people's hardships were reported, with a total of nearly 10,000 words.

古文：文选缺员外郎，尚书宋纟熏请用元标，久不获命，纟熏连疏趣之。
现代文：文选员外郎空缺，尚书宋纟熏请求任用邹元标，很久都没有消息，宋纟熏接连上疏催促。
English: There was a vacancy for the position of literary selector, and Song Jianxuan requested the appointment of the chief editor. There was no news for a long time, and Song Jianxuan was repeatedly urged.

古文：给事中杨文焕、御史何选亦以为言。
现代文：给事中杨文焕、御史何选也帮着说话。
English: Yang Wenhuan and Mishi Hezhen also helped to speak during the ceremony.

古文：帝怒，诘责纟熏，谪文焕、选于外，而调元标南京。
现代文：皇帝发火了，斥责宋纟熏，将杨文焕、何选贬到外地，而将邹元标调往南京。
English: The emperor was enraged and reprimanded Song Shuxuan, demoted Yang Wenhuan and He Xuan to other provinces, and transferred Xuan Yuan to Nanjing.

古文：刑部尚书石星论救，亦被谯让。
现代文：刑部尚书石星为他辩论，也遭到皇帝的责备。
English: The head of the Department of Justice, Shang Shuxu, argued for him, and was also rebuked by the emperor.

古文：元标居南京三年，移疾归。
现代文：邹元标在南京过了三年，称病回家。
English: After three years in Nanjing, Xuan Yuanbao said he was sick and went home.

古文：久之，起本部郎中，不赴。
现代文：很久之后，起用为本部郎中，不去赴任。
English: After a long time, he was appointed as Motobu's retainer, but did not take up the post.

古文：旋遭母忧，里居讲学，从游者日众，名高天下。
现代文：不久母亲死，定居乡里讲学，跟他学习交游的人一天比一天多，名气也越来越大。
English: Soon after his mother's death, he settled in the countryside to give lectures. The number of people who studied and traveled with him increased day by day, and his fame grew.

古文：中外疏荐遗佚，凡数十百上，莫不以元标为首。卒不用。
现代文：朝廷内外上疏举荐被遗失的人才，共有几十甚至百道奏疏，没有不把邹元标列在第一位的，终于不被起用。
English: Both inside and outside the imperial court, dozens or even hundreds of lost talents were recommended and recommended, and no one who did not put Xuan Yuan in the first place was finally not used.

古文：家食垂三十年。
现代文：在家隐居将近三十年。
English: He lived in seclusion at home for almost thirty years.

古文：光宗立，召拜大理卿。
现代文：光宗即位，征召授官大理寺卿。
English: Emperor Kōjō ascended the throne, and the post of Dairi-ji chieftain was created.

古文：未至，进刑部右侍郎。
现代文：未到任，提升刑部右侍郎。
English: Before taking up the post, he was promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：天启元年四月还朝，首进和衷之说，言： 今日国事，皆二十年诸臣酝酿所成。
现代文：天启元年四月回到朝廷，首先进呈 中和 的言论，说： 现在国家这个样子，都是二十年来各大臣纷争酿造成的。
English: When Emperor Tenchi returned to the Imperial Court in April of the first year of the Heian period, he was the first to present a neutral speech, saying, "The present state of the country is the result of the strife brewed by the ministers over the past twenty years.

古文：往者不以进贤让能为事，日锢贤逐能，而言事者又不降心平气，专务分门立户。
现代文：过去不选拔人才、礼让贤能，却天天嫉贤妒能，压制人才，讨论事情的人又不能心平气和，反而专门致力于分立门户派系。
English: In the past, talents were not selected, courtesy and ability prevailed, but jealousy and envy prevailed every day, talents were suppressed, and people who discussed things could not be calm, but were dedicated to separating the portal faction.

古文：臣谓今日急务，惟朝臣和衷而已。
现代文：卑臣以为今天最要紧的，只是朝廷大臣彼此和睦而已。
English: The vassal thought that the most important thing today was just that the ministers of the imperial court were in harmony with each other.

古文：朝臣和，天地之和自应。
现代文：朝廷大臣和睦了，天地之间自然就和顺了。
English: When the ministers of the Imperial Court are reconciled, there will naturally be harmony between heaven and earth.

古文：向之论人论事者，各怀偏见，偏生迷，迷生执，执而为我，不复知有人，祸且移于国。
现代文：以前讨论人和事，每个人都心怀偏见，偏见导致迷乱，迷乱导致固执，固执转而自私，不再知道有别人，国家的灾祸就降临了。
English: In the past, when people and matters were discussed, everyone harbored prejudices. Prejudices led to confusion, confusion led to stubbornness, and stubbornness turned into selfishness. When people no longer knew anyone else, the country's disaster came.

古文：今与诸臣约，论一人当惟公惟平，毋轻摇笔端，论一事当惩前虑后，毋轻试耳食，以天下万世之心，衡天下万世之人与事，则议论公，而国家自享安静和平之福。 
现代文：现在跟各大臣立一个约定，讨论一个人应该公平，不要轻易下笔做结论；讨论一件事应该借鉴以前的经验，考虑它的后果，不要不加思考、轻信传闻。用天下万世的良心，来衡量天下万世的人和事，则议论公平，而国家能享受安定和平的幸福。 
English: Now, make an agreement with the ministers that when discussing a person, one should be fair and not jump to conclusions; when discussing a matter, one should draw on previous experience and consider its consequences, and should not believe rumors without thinking. When measuring people and things with the conscience of the world, one should discuss fairness, and the country can enjoy the happiness of stability and peace.

古文：因荐涂宗浚、李邦华等十八人。
现代文：于是推荐涂宗浚、李邦华等十八人。
English: As a result, eighteen people, including Tu Zongjun and Li Banghua, were recommended.

古文：帝优诏褒纳。
现代文：皇帝优先下诏，嘉奖并接受了。
English: The emperor accepted all of them, and issued an imperial edict to reward them.

古文：居二日，复陈拔茅阐幽、理财振武数事，及保泰四规。
现代文：过了二天，又陈奏发掘选拔人才、理财振军等数事以及保证安宁的四项规条。
English: Two days later, several matters such as the discovery and selection of talents, financial management, and the four rules to ensure tranquility were also announced.

古文：且请召用叶茂才、赵南星、高攀龙、刘宗周、丁元荐，而恤录罗大纮、雒于仁等十五人。
现代文：并请求征召录用叶茂才、赵南星、高攀龙、刘宗周、丁元荐，而抚恤、登录罗大、雒于仁等十五人。
English: He also requested that Ye Maocai, Zhao Nansing, Gao Panglong, Liu Zongzhou and Ding Yuan be recommended for recruitment, and that 15 people, including Luo Da and Zou Yuren, be given a pension and registration.

古文：帝亦褒纳。
现代文：皇上也赞同接纳。
English: The Emperor also approved of the move.

古文：初，元标立朝，以方严见惮，晚节务为和易。
现代文：当初，邹元标站在朝廷上，正直威严，令人生畏，晚年努力争取做到和睦平易。
English: At first, Xuan Yuanbiao stood at the imperial court, honest and dignified, intimidating. In his later years, he strived to achieve harmony and simplicity.

古文：或议其逊初仕时，元标笑曰： 大臣与言官异。
现代文：有人议论他赶不上刚开始做官的时候有气魄。邹元标笑着说： 大臣跟言官是有区别的。
English: Some people argue that he lacks the drive that he had when he first became an official. Hao Yuan said with a smile: There is a difference between a minister and a spokesperson.

古文：风裁踔绝，言官事也。
现代文：风度超绝，是言官的事情。
English: It is a matter for the spokesman to have a superb demeanor.

古文：大臣非大利害，即当护持国体，可如少年悻动耶？ 
现代文：大臣关心的不是大的利益和损害，就是应当保护扶持国家，怎么能像年轻人那样怒形于色呢？ 
English: The minister's concern is not big profits and losses, but to protect and support the country. How can he be so angry as a young man?

古文：时朋党方盛，元标心恶之，思矫其弊，故其所荐引不专一途。
现代文：这时结帮拉派十分兴盛，邹元标讨嫌这种做法，想改正这种陋习，所以他举荐引用的人不拘一格。
English: At this time, the gang-pulling faction was very prosperous. Xuan Yuanbiao condemned this practice and wanted to correct this bad habit, so he recommended and quoted people from all walks of life.

古文：尝欲举用李三才，因言路不与，元标即中止。
现代文：曾经想推举任用李三才，因言路不通，邹元标没有坚持。
English: I once wanted to nominate and appoint Li Sancai, but because of the language barrier, I did not insist.

古文：王德完讥其首鼠，元标亦不较。
现代文：王德完讽刺他首鼠两端，邹元标也不计较。
English: After Wang De finished satirizing the two ends of his first mouse, he did not care about the original target.

古文：南京御史王允成等以两人不和，请帝谕解。
现代文：南京御史王允成等人以为他们二人有矛盾，请求皇帝下诏调解。
English: Wang Yuncheng, the governor of Nanjing, and others thought that there was a conflict between the two of them and requested the emperor to issue an edict to mediate.

古文：元标言： 臣与德完初无纤芥，此必有人交构其间。
现代文：邹元标说： 我与王德完从来没有矛盾，这一定是有人在从中捣鬼。
English: Xing Yuanbiao said: I have never been in conflict with Wang Deguan, this must be someone's trick.

古文：臣尝语朝士曰： 方今上在冲岁，敌在门庭，只有同心共济。
现代文：我曾跟朝中大臣说： 当今皇帝年幼，敌人就在国门边上，只有同心协力、同舟共济了。
English: I once said to the Minister of the DPRK and China: Today's emperor is young, the enemy is at the doorstep of the country, and we can only work together and help each other.

古文：倘复党同伐异，在国则不忠，在家则不孝。
现代文：倘使再党同伐异，对国家来说就是不忠，对家庭而言就是不孝。
English: If the party were to continue to suppress dissent, it would be disloyal to the country and unfilial to the family.

古文：世自有无偏无党之路，奈何从室内起戈矛耶？  
现代文：世上自有不偏袒、不结党的正道，为什么总是在窝里斗个没完呢？  
English: There is a righteous way in the world without favoritism or partisanship, so why is there always endless fighting in the den?

古文：帝嗣位已久，而先朝废死诸臣犹未赠恤，元标再陈阐幽之典，言益恳切。
现代文：皇帝即位已经很久，但前朝被废黜、死亡的各臣还没有得到赠封照顾，邹元标再次上疏阐述抚恤大典，言辞更为恳切。
English: It has been a long time since the emperor ascended to the throne, but the ministers who were deposed and died in the previous reign have not yet received the care of the gift seal. Xuan Yuan Bao once again elaborated on the pension ceremony, and the words were more earnest.

古文：其年十二月改吏部左侍郎。
现代文：这年十二月改任吏部左侍郎。
English: In December of that year, he was reassigned to the position of the Left Attendant of the Cadre.

古文：未到官，拜左都御史。
现代文：未到任，授官左都御史。
English: Before taking office, he was awarded the post of Sadogimi.

古文：明年，典外察，去留惟公。
现代文：第二年主管在外地官员的考核，离职或是留任全凭公论。
English: In the second year, supervisors are evaluated by officials in the field, and whether they leave or stay in office is entirely based on public opinion.

古文：御史潘汝桢、过庭训雅有物议，及庭训秩满，汝桢注考溢美。
现代文：御史潘汝祯、过庭训一向有人议论。等过庭训官期任满，潘汝祯的评价充满了赞扬的话。
English: There have always been discussions about Pan Ryu-soo's post-trial training. When the post-trial training officer's term of office expired, Pan Ryu-soo's evaluation was full of praise.

古文：元标疏论之，两人并引疾去。
现代文：邹元标上疏弹劾，二人一起称病离职。
English: Yan Yuan was impeached, and the two called in sick to resign.

古文：已，言丁已京察不公，专禁锢异己，请收录章家祯、丁元荐、史记事、沈正宗等二十二人。
现代文：不久，邹元标说丁巳年对京官的考核不公正，专门打击压制跟自己意见不一致的人，请求皇帝收留录用章家祯、丁元荐、史记事、沈正宗等二十二人。
English: Soon after, Xuan Yuan said that Ding Si's assessment of the Beijing officials was unfair, and specifically cracked down on the suppression of people who disagreed with him. He asked the emperor to accept 22 people, including Zhang Jiaqi, Ding Yuanzhong, Shi Ji Ji, and Shen Zhengzong.

古文：由是诸臣多获昭雪。
现代文：由此各臣多得到平反昭雪。
English: As a result, most of the ministers were rehabilitated by Akiyuki.

古文：又言： 明诏收召遗佚，而诸老臣所处犹是三十年前应得之官，宜添注三品崇秩，昭陛下褒尊耆旧至意。 
现代文：又说： 公开下诏征召被遗失的人才，但各老臣的官阶还是三十年前就应该得到的，应该增加三品抬高他们的官级，表示陛下褒扬尊敬年高德重之人的美德。 
English: He also said, "I publicly issued an edict to recruit the lost talents, but the ranks of the old ministers should have been obtained thirty years ago, and their ranks should be increased by three grades, to show that His Majesty praises the virtues of those who respect the elderly.

古文：帝纳其言。
现代文：皇帝采纳了他的意见。
English: The emperor accepted Zou's suggestion.

古文：于是两京太常、太仆、光禄三卿各增二员。
现代文：于是北京和南京的太常寺、太仆寺、光禄寺三卿各增加了二个名额。
English: As a result, the three temples in Beijing and Nanjing, Taizhong Temple, Taipu Temple and Guanglu Temple, have each added two seats.

古文：孙慎行之论 红丸 也，元标亦上疏曰： 乾坤所以不毁者，惟此纲常；纲常所以植立者，恃此信史。
现代文：孙慎行议论 红丸案 ，邹元标也上疏说： 人类所以存在，是因为有三纲五常。三纲五常所以确立，是因为有信史。
English: Sun Shengxing discussed the Red Circle Case, but also omitted the Five Elements, saying, "Human beings exist because there are three principles and five constants. The three principles and five constants are established because there is a history of belief.

古文：臣去年舟过南中，南中士大夫争言先帝猝然而崩，大事未明，难以传信。
现代文：我去年乘船经过南中，南中的知识分子都说先皇帝突然驾崩，死因不清楚，传闻不可轻信。
English: Last year, I passed by Nanzhong Middle School by boat. The intellectuals of Nanzhong Middle School all said that the former emperor died suddenly, the cause of death was unclear, and the rumors were not to be trusted.

古文：臣初不谓然。
现代文：我开始还不以为然。
English: I didn't think much of it at first.

古文：及既入都，为人言先帝盛德，宜速登信史。
现代文：等到进入北京城，跟人说起先皇帝有大德，应该尽快记入信史。
English: Wait until you enter Beijing to tell people that the first emperor had great virtue and should be recorded in history as soon as possible.

古文：诸臣曰： 言及先帝弥留大事，令人阁笔，谁敢领此？ 
现代文：各大臣说： 提到先皇帝弥留之际的大事，叫人停笔不敢下，有谁敢担当这个责任？ 
English: The ministers said: Mentioning the important event of the last emperor's death, people dare not stop writing. Who would dare to take on this responsibility?

古文：臣始有疑于前日之言。
现代文：我开始对前些天听到的话有了怀疑。
English: I'm beginning to doubt what I heard the other day.

古文：元辅方从哲不伸讨贼之义，反行赏奸之典，即谓无其心，何以自解于世？
现代文：首辅方从哲不伸张讨伐逆贼的正义，反而实行奖赏奸细的法令，即使是无心做事，又怎么向世人解释交待。
English: Instead of upholding the justice of cracking down on traitors, the Shoufu side implemented a decree to reward traitors. Even if they did things unintentionally, how could they explain their actions to the world?

古文：且从哲秉政七年，未闻建树何事，但闻马上一日三趣战，丧我十万师徒。
现代文：况且方从哲执政七年以来，没有听说有什么建树，只听见说骑在马上一天打三次仗，损失我国十万士卒。
English: Moreover, since Fang Zhe has been in power for seven years, we have not heard of any achievements. We only heard that he rode on a horse to fight three times a day, losing our country 100,000 soldiers.

古文：讯问谁秉国成，而使先帝震惊，奸人闯宫，豺狼当路，憸邪乱政？
现代文：请问是在谁当政期间，使先皇帝受到震惊，奸邪之人闯入内宫、豺狼当道，扰乱朝政？
English: Excuse me, but who was in power during the period when the former emperor was shocked, when evil-doers broke into the inner palace, when jackals took over, and disrupted the government?

古文：从哲何词以对？
现代文：方从哲如何回答？
English: How did Fang Congzhe respond?

古文：从来惩戒乱贼，全在信史。
现代文：从来惩戒乱臣贼子，都是依靠信史。
English: In the past, the punishment of ruffian thieves depended on the history of faith.

古文：失今不成，安所底止。 
现代文：信史耽误于今天，不知到何时才能写成？ 
English: The history of faith is delayed until today, I wonder when it will be written?

古文：时刑部尚书黄克缵希内廷意，群小和之，而从哲世居京师，党附者众，崔文升党复弥缝于内，格慎行与众议，皆不得伸。
现代文：当时刑部尚书黄克缵观望内廷的意图，小官吏们都跟着他，而方从哲世代定居京城，盘根错节的关系不少，崔文升一帮人迎合内廷，极力追究孙慎行和大家的议论，都不能陈述。
English: At that time, Huang Kegui of the Criminal Investigation Department had the intention of watching the inner court. Minor officials followed him, while Fang settled in Beijing from the Zhe generation. There were many intertwined relationships. Cui Wensheng and his group catered to the inner court and tried their best to investigate Sun Shengxing and everyone's discussions, but they could not make a statement.

古文：未几，慎行及王纪偕逐，元标疏救，不听。
现代文：不久，孙慎行和王纪一起被驱逐，邹元标上疏挽留，皇帝不听。
English: Soon after, Sun Shengxing and Wang Ji were expelled together, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：元标自还朝以来，不为危言激论，与物无猜。
现代文：邹元标自从回到朝廷以来，不危言耸听，不发表过激言论，对于事物没有猜疑。
English: Since returning to the imperial court, Xuan Yuanbiao has not been alarmist, has not made excessive remarks, and has not been suspicious of things.

古文：然小人以其东林也，犹忌之。
现代文：然而奸诈小人因为他是东林党人，还是忌恨他。
English: However, the treacherous villain still hated him because he was a Donglin Party member.

古文：给事中朱童蒙、郭允厚、郭兴治虑明年京察不利己，潜谋驱逐。
现代文：给事中朱童蒙、郭允厚、郭兴治担心明年考核京官对他们不利，暗地里想办法赶走他。
English: Zhu Tongmeng, Guo Yunhou, and Guo Xingzhi were worried that the next year's appraisal of Beijing officials would be unfavorable to them, and secretly tried to get rid of him.

古文：会元标与冯从吾建首善书院，集同志讲学，童蒙首请禁之。
现代文：正好邹元标同冯从吾创建首善书院，集合志同道合的人讲学，朱童蒙首先请求禁止。
English: It just so happened that Zou Yuanbiao and Feng Congwu founded Shoushen Academy and gathered like-minded people to give lectures. Zhu Tongmeng was the first to request a ban.

古文：元标疏辨求去，帝已慰留，允厚复疏劾，语尤妄诞。
现代文：邹元标上疏辩论请求辞职，皇帝已经安慰挽留，郭允厚又上疏弹劾，语言尤其荒谬没有根据。
English: Yuanyuan marked the resignation request on the Sohu debate, the emperor has consoled and retained, Guo Yunhou also on the Sohu impeachment, the language is particularly absurd and unfounded.

古文：而魏忠贤方窃柄，传旨谓宋室之亡由于讲学，将加严谴。
现代文：而魏忠贤刚刚大权独揽，传旨说宋朝之所以灭亡是因为讲学，将要严加谴责。
English: However, Wei Zhongxian had just seized power, and it was said that the Song Dynasty was destroyed because of lecturing, which would be severely condemned.

古文：叶向高力辨，且乞同去，乃得温旨。兴治及允厚复交章力攻，兴治至比之山东妖贼。
现代文：叶向高极力辩解，并且乞求一起辞职，这才下了道温和的诏书，郭兴治和郭允厚又交相上疏大力攻击，郭兴治竟然把他们比作山东的 妖贼 。
English: Ye Xianggao strenuously defended and begged Gao Gao to resign together, and only then did he issue a moderate edict. Guo Xingji and Guo Yunhou also made vigorous attacks on each other, and Guo Xingji even compared them to the "monster thieves" of Shandong.

古文：元标连疏请益力，诏加太子少保，乘传归。
现代文：邹元标更加坚定地接连上疏请求离职，下诏加赠太子太保，乘驿车回家。
English: Xuan Yuanbiao more firmly requested the resignation of Shang Sohu one after another, and added the gift of the Crown Prince Taibao to the next edict, and took the train home.

古文：陛辞，上《老臣去国情深疏》，历陈军国大计，而以寡欲进规，人为传诵。
现代文：闭门谢客，进呈《老臣请去国情深疏》，一一陈述军国大计，而规劝皇帝节制欲望，人们争相传诵。
English: After thanking the guests behind closed doors, he presented the "Old Minister, Please Go to the Deep State," and stated the military state plan one by one, while exhorting the emperor to restrain his desires. People rushed to recite it.

古文：四年，卒于家。
现代文：天启四年死在家里。
English: He died at home four years later.

古文：兴治亦加至太仆卿。忠贤败，三人并丽逆案云。
现代文：第二年，御史张讷请求拆毁天下的讲坛，极力诋毁邹元标，魏忠贤于是假传圣旨剥夺他的官籍。崇祯初年，赠太子太保、吏部尚书，谥号 忠介 。
English: In the second year, Grand Historian Zhang Ne requested the demolition of all the pulpits in the world, and tried his best to discredit Zou Yuanbiao, so Wei Zhongxian deprived him of his official registration by falsely transmitting the holy will. In the first year of Zou Yuan, he gave the crown prince Taibo, the cadre Shang Shu, and the nickname Zhong Jie.

古文：孙慎行，字闻斯，武进人。
现代文：孙慎行，字闻斯，江苏武进人。
English: Sun Shengxing, surnamed Wens, from Wujin, Jiangsu Province.

古文：幼习闻外祖唐顺之绪论，即嗜学。
现代文：年轻时听到外祖父唐顺之的绪论，就十分喜好读书。
English: When he was young and heard the introduction of his grandfather, Tang Shunzhi, he was very fond of reading.

古文：万历二十三年举进士第三人，授编修，累官左庶子。
现代文：万历二十三年，考中进士第三名，授职编修，积官至左庶子。
English: In the 23rd year of Wanli, he ranked third in the junior high school entrance examination, was awarded the title of editor, and was promoted to the second son.

古文：数请假里居，键户息交，覃精理学。
现代文：几次请假定居乡里，闭门绝交，精心钻研理学。
English: He took several leaves of absence to settle in the countryside, severed all ties behind closed doors, and diligently studied science.

古文：当事请见，率不纳。有以政事询者，不答。
现代文：有人求见，都不接纳，有人向他询问政事，他也不回答。
English: Some people asked to see him, but he didn't accept. Some people asked him about politics, but he didn't answer.

古文：四十一年五月，由少詹事擢礼部右侍郎，署部事。
现代文：万历四十一年五月从少詹事提拔为礼部右侍郎，代理本部事务。
English: In May of the 41st year of Wanli, he was promoted from Shao Zhanji to the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, acting for the headquarters.

古文：当是时，郊庙大享诸礼，帝二十余年不躬亲，东宫辍讲至八年，皇长孙九龄未就外傅，瑞王二十三未婚，楚宗人久锢未释，代王废长立幼，久不更正，臣僚章奏一切留中，福府庄田取盈四万顷，慎行并切谏。
现代文：正在这时，城郊祖庙大规模宴享各礼节，皇帝有二十多年没有亲自主持，东宫太子停止讲读已有八个年头，皇帝长孙九岁了还没有请外面的老师，瑞王二十三岁尚未成婚，楚王同族的人禁锢很久没有释放，代王废除大儿子立小儿子，好久都不更正，臣子的奏章上疏全部扣留禁中，福王府庄田超过四万顷。针对上述情况，孙慎行痛切进谏。
English: At this time, the ancestral temple on the outskirts of the city was enjoying a large-scale banquet of various etiquettes, the emperor had not personally presided for more than 20 years, the East Palace Prince had stopped lecturing for eight years, the emperor's eldest grandson was nine years old and had not invited outside teachers, King Rui was 23 years old and had not yet married, the people of the same race as King Chu had been imprisoned for a long time and had not been released, the king abolished the eldest son and set up the youngest son, and had not been corrected for a long time, the vassals were all detained in detention, and the King's residence had more than

古文：已，念东宫开讲，皇孙出阁，系宗社安危，疏至七八上。
现代文：此后，考虑到东宫太子开讲，皇帝孙子请老师，关系到宗庙社稷的安危，上疏多达七八次。
English: After that, considering that the East Palace Prince began to speak, the emperor's grandson invited the teacher, which was related to the safety and security of the ancestral temple community, up to seven or eight times.

古文：代王废长子鼎渭，立爱子鼎莎，李廷机为侍郎时主之，其后，群臣争者百余疏，帝皆不省。
现代文：代王废除长子朱鼎渭，立爱子朱鼎莎，李廷机当侍郎的时候主持这事，这以后，大臣们上疏一百多道争论，皇帝都不省悟。
English: On behalf of the king, the eldest son Zhu Dingyao was abolished, and the beloved son Zhu Dingsha was set up. Li Tingji presided over this matter when he was a waiter. After this, the ministers had more than a hundred arguments, and the emperor did not understand.

古文：慎行屡疏争，乃获更置。
现代文：孙慎行多次上疏力争，才得以改正。
English: It took Sun Shengxing several attempts to correct the mistake before he was able to do so.

古文：楚宗人击杀巡抚赵可怀，为首六人论死，复锢英憔等二十三人于高墙，禁蕴钫等二十三人于远地。
现代文：楚王族人打死巡抚赵可怀，为首的六个人处以死刑，又将朱英女蕉等二十三人囚禁在监牢里面，将朱蕴钫等二十三人关押在很远的地方。
English: The members of the Chu royal family killed the procurator Zhao Kehai, and six people led by Zhu Ying were sentenced to death. Twenty-three people, including Zhu Ying Nian, were imprisoned in a prison, and twenty-three people, including Zhu Ying Yao, were imprisoned in a faraway place.

古文：慎行力白其非叛，诸人由此获释。
现代文：孙慎行极力辩白他们并非谋反，各人因此得以释放。
English: Sun Shengxing tried his best to argue that they were not plotting a rebellion, and each of them was released.

古文：皇太子储位虽定，福王尚留京师，须庄田四万顷乃行，宵小多窥伺。
现代文：皇太子虽已确立，福王还滞留京城，需要四万顷庄田才离开，势利小人多暗中侦察。
English: Although the crown prince has been established, the king of fortune is still staying in the capital. It takes forty thousand hectares of farmland to leave, and snobs are surreptitiously investigating.

古文：廷臣请之国者愈众，帝愈迟之。
现代文：朝臣请求让福王回王国的人越多，皇帝就越推迟他的行期。
English: The more courtiers pleaded with King Fook to return to the kingdom, the more the emperor postponed his trip.

古文：慎行疏十余上，不见省。
现代文：孙慎行上疏十几次，都不见省悟。
English: Sun Sheng went to Shangzhu more than a dozen times, but he did not reflect on it.

古文：最后，贵妃复请帝留王庆太后七旬寿节，群议益籍籍。
现代文：最后，贵妃又请皇帝挽留福王庆贺太后七十年的寿辰，大家的议论更加纷扬。
English: Finally, Guifei also asked the emperor to retain Fu Wang to celebrate the 70th birthday of the empress dowager, and everyone's discussions became more intense.

古文：慎行乃合文武诸臣伏阙力请，大学士叶向高亦争之强。
现代文：孙慎行于是联合文武大臣跪在宫殿前极力请求，大学士叶向高也竭力争辩。
English: Sun Shengxing then knelt in front of the palace together with the Minister of Education and Culture to make a strong request, and the university scholar Ye Xianggao also tried his best to argue.

古文：帝不得已，许明年季春之国，群情始安。
现代文：皇帝不得已，答应明年阴历三月让他回王国，大家的情绪才安定下来。
English: As a last resort, the emperor promised to let him return to the kingdom in March of the next lunar calendar, and everyone's mood settled down.

古文：韩敬科场之议，慎行拟黜敬。
现代文：韩敬议论科举考试，孙慎行准备废黜韩敬。
English: Han Jing discusses the entrance examination, Sun Shengxing prepares to depose Han Jing.

古文：而家居时素讲学东林，敬党尤忌之。
现代文：他在家乡居住时一向在东林讲学，韩敬的同党很忌恨他。
English: When he lived in his hometown, he always lectured in Donglin. Han Jing's fellow party members hated him.

古文：会吏部缺侍郎，廷议改右侍郎李鋕于左，而以慎行为右，命俱未下。
现代文：正好吏部侍郎空缺，朝廷议论让李志改任吏部左侍郎，孙慎行为右侍郎，任命都还没有下达。
English: Just as there was a vacancy for a chamberlain, the imperial court discussed having Li Zhi appointed as the left chamberlain and Sun Shen as the right chamberlain. The appointments have not yet been made.

古文：御史过廷训因言鋕未履任，何复推慎行，给事中亓诗教和之。
现代文：御史过廷训于是说李志未到任，何必再推举孙慎行，给事中亓诗教附和他。
English: After the imperial historian passed the imperial edict, he said that since Li Zhi had not yet taken office, there was no need to re-nominate Sun Shengxing and attach him to the matter.

古文：慎行遂四疏乞归，出城候命，帝乃许之。
现代文：孙慎行于是四次上疏请求回家，到城外等候命令，皇帝于是同意了。
English: Sun Shengxing then requested four times to go home and wait for orders outside the city, and the emperor agreed.

古文：已而京察，御史韩浚等以趣福王之国，谓慎行邀功，列之拾遗疏中。帝察其无罪，获免。
现代文：不久考核京官，御史韩浚等人因为催促福王回国，认为孙慎行求取功名，把他的名字写进纠察过失的上疏中，皇帝清楚他无罪，孙慎行幸免于难。
English: Not long after, the Beijing officials, the imperial historian Han Jun and others thought that Sun Shengxing was seeking fame by urging Fu Wang to return to China, and wrote his name into the record of the picketing fault. The emperor knew that he was not guilty, and Sun Shengxing was spared.

古文：熹宗立，召拜礼部尚书。
现代文：熹宗即位，征召授官礼部尚书。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, and officials of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies were summoned.

古文：初，光宗大渐，鸿胪寺丞李可灼以红铅丸药进。俄帝崩，廷臣交章劾之。
现代文：当初，光宗皇帝病情加重，鸿胪寺丞李可灼进献红铅药丸，不久皇帝驾崩，朝廷大臣轮流上书弹劾他。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Guangzong's condition worsened, Hongwu's chief priest Li Kehong donated red lead pills, and soon after the emperor passed away, the ministers of the imperial court took turns to write a letter to impeach him.

古文：大学士方从哲拟旨令引疾归，赉以金币。
现代文：大学士方从哲草拟圣旨让他称病回家，赠送给他金币。
English: The university officials let him go home saying he was ill, and presented him with gold coins.

古文：天启元年四月，慎行还朝，上疏曰：
现代文：天启二年四月，孙慎行回到朝廷，上疏说：
English: In April of the second year of the Apocalypse, Sun Shengxing returned to the imperial court and said:

古文：先帝骤崩，虽云夙疾，实缘医人用药不审。
现代文： 先皇帝死得这么快，虽然说有旧病，实际上是治病的人用药不慎重。
English: The former emperor died so quickly that, although it was said that he had an old disease, it was actually the people who treated him who were not careful with their medicine.

古文：阅邸报，知李可灼红丸乃首辅方从哲所进。
现代文：读官府的报纸，得知李可灼的红丸是首辅方从哲进献的。
English: Reading the government's newspaper, I learned that Li Kegui's red ball was donated by the chief aide, Zhe Jin.

古文：夫可灼官非太医，红丸不知何药，乃敢突然以进。
现代文：李可灼不是宫内太医，红丸不知道是什么药，却竟敢那么快地进献给皇帝。
English: Li Kegui was not a court physician, and Red Pill did not know what kind of medicine it was, but it dared to offer it to the emperor so quickly.

古文：昔许悼公饮世子药而卒，世子即自杀，《春秋》犹书之为弑。
现代文：往昔许悼公喝太子药而死，太子就自杀了，《春秋》还记载为弑君。
English: In the past, Xu Yougong drank the medicine of the crown prince and died, and the prince committed suicide. "Spring and Autumn" also recorded that it was Zou Jun.

古文：然则从哲宜何居？速引剑自裁以谢先帝，义之上也；合门席稿以待司寇，义之次也；乃悍然不顾，至举朝共攻可灼，仅令回籍调理，岂不以己实荐之，恐与同罪与？臣以为从哲纵无弑之心，却有弑之事；欲辞弑之名，难免弑之实。
现代文：等到满朝大臣一起攻击李可灼时，方从哲只是命令他回家休整，难道不是因为自己举荐了李可灼，恐怕跟他一起受处分吗？我以为方从哲纵然不是有心弑君，却造成了弑君的事实；想要洗刷弑君的罪名，难逃弑君的事实。
English: When the Manchurian ministers attacked Li Kegui together, Fang Congzhe only ordered him to go home to recuperate. Wasn't it because he had recommended Li Kegui and was afraid of being punished along with him? I thought that although Fang Congzhe didn't have the heart to kidnap Li Kegui, he caused the fact of the kidnapping; if he wanted to clear his name, he couldn't escape the fact of the kidnapping.

古文：实录中即欲为君父讳，不敢不直书方从哲连进药二丸，须臾帝崩，恐百口无能为天下后世解也。
现代文：《实录》中如果想要替君父避讳，不得不直接写上方从哲连续进献二颗药丸，皇帝片刻驾崩，恐怕到了后代，要想真相大白于天下，是不能够了。
English: In the "Real Record," if you want to avoid the taboo for your father, you have to directly write the above from Zhe to donate two pills in a row. The emperor died for a while, and I am afraid that it will reach future generations. If you want the truth to be revealed to the world, it is not enough.

古文：然从哲之罪实不止此。
现代文： 然而方从哲的罪行实在不止于此。
English: However, Fang Congzhe's crimes really go beyond this.

古文：先是则有皇贵妃欲为皇后事，古未有天子既崩而立后者。
现代文：首先有皇贵妃想立为皇后的事情。自古以来没有皇帝一死就立皇后的。
English: First of all, there was the matter of the empress dowager wanting to be crowned queen. Since ancient times, no emperor has crowned an empress upon his or her death.

古文：倘非礼官执奏，言路力持，几何不遗祸宗社哉！
现代文：倘若不是礼官上疏，言路极坚持，岂不是要嫁祸于国家吗！
English: If it weren't for the lack of etiquette and the insistence on speaking one's mind, wouldn't the blame be placed on the state?

古文：继此则有谥皇祖为恭皇帝事。
现代文：其次有谥号皇祖为恭皇帝的事情。
English: Secondly, there is the matter of the emperor's nickname, Emperor Jing.

古文：历考晋、隋、周、宋，其末世亡国之君率谥曰 恭 ，而以加之我皇祖，岂真不学无术？实乃咒诅君国，等于亡王，其设心谓何？
现代文：遍考晋、隋、周、宋各朝，凡是末代亡国的君主都谥号为 恭 ，方从哲却将它加在我朝皇祖的头上，难道真是不学无术，实际是在诅咒我国已经快要亡国了，其居心何在？
English: Throughout the Jin, Sui, Zhou, and Song dynasties, all the monarchs of the last generation of the ruined country were surnamed "Kong," but Fang Congzhe added it to the head of my imperial ancestor. Is it really uneducated, actually cursing our country that is about to be ruined? What is its intention?

古文：后此则有选侍垂帘听政事。
现代文：最后有选侍垂帘听政的事情。
English: Finally, there is the matter of choosing an attendant to listen to politics.

古文：刘逊、李进忠幺么小竖，何遂胆大扬言。
现代文：刘逊、李进忠这二个些微小臣，何至于如此大胆，口出狂言。
English: Liu Xun, Li Jinzhong, these two minor ministers, what is so bold, uttering crazy talk.

古文：说者谓二竖早以金宝输从哲家，若非九卿、台谏力请移宫，选侍一日得志，陛下几无驻足所。
现代文：或以为二小臣早就把黄金宝物送到方从哲家，如果不是九卿、台谏极力请求移宫，选侍一旦得志，陛下将无立足之地。
English: Or perhaps he thought that the two ministers had already sent the gold treasure to the philosopher from Fang, and if it were not for the nine nobles and the emperor's concubine strongly requesting to move to the palace, once the choice of the concubine was approved, his majesty would have no foothold.

古文：闻尔时从哲濡迟不进，科臣趣之，则云迟数日无害。
现代文：听说那时方从哲迟迟不肯进奏，科臣催促他，他却说迟几天没关系。
English: I heard that at that time, the side from Zhe was reluctant to play, Kosen urged him, but he said that it did not matter if it was a few days late.

古文：任妇寺之纵横，忍君父之杌隉，为大臣者宜尔乎？
现代文：放任太监肆意嚣张，忍心看着皇上不安，做大臣的应该像这样无动于衷么？
English: Allowing the eunuch to be arrogant, he could bear to watch the emperor's uneasiness. Should a minister be so indifferent?

古文：臣在礼言礼，其罪恶逆天，万无可生之路。
现代文： 我在礼部说有关礼的事情。他罪恶滔天，毫无生路可言。
English: I was talking about etiquette in the etiquette department. His crime was so heinous that there was no way out for him.

古文：若其他督战误国，罔上行私，纵情蔑法，干犯天下之名义，酿成国家之祸患者，臣不能悉数也。
现代文：至于其他督战误国，欺上徇私，纵情声色，践踏国法，冒犯天下名义，酿成国家灾害的罪行，我不能一一列举。
English: As for the other crimes of misguiding the country in the war, deceiving and favoring oneself, indulging in lust, trampling on the laws of the country, offending the name of the world, and causing national disasters, I cannot list them all.

古文：陛下宜急讨此贼，雪不共之仇！
现代文：陛下应立即声讨这贼臣，以雪不共戴天之仇。
English: His Majesty should immediately denounce this traitor and avenge him with all his might.

古文：毋询近习，近习皆从哲所攀援也；毋拘忌讳，忌讳即从哲所布置也。
现代文：不要问身旁的人，身旁的人都是方从哲巴结好了的。不要拘禁忌讳的人，那些人都是方从哲布置好了的。
English: Don't ask the people around you, the people around you are all arranged by Fang from Zheba. Don't restrain the taboo people, those people are all arranged by Fang from Zhe.

古文：并急诛李可灼，以泄神人之愤。
现代文：请求皇上立即诛杀李可灼，以泄神人之共愤。 
English: He asked the emperor to immediately kill Li Kegui to vent the common indignation of the gods.

古文：时朝野方恶从哲，慎行论虽过刻，然争韪其言。
现代文：当时全国都痛恨方从哲，孙慎行的言论虽过于尖刻，然而大家都认为他说得对。
English: At that time, the whole country hated Fang Congzhe. Although Sun Shengxing's speech was too harsh, everyone thought he was right.

古文：顾近习多为从哲地，帝乃报曰： 旧辅素忠慎，可灼进药本先帝意。
现代文：看到身边亲侍多为方从哲说话，皇帝于是说： 方从哲一向忠诚小心，李可灼进药本是先皇帝的意思。
English: Seeing that the attendants around him mostly spoke for Fang Congzhe, the emperor then said: "Fang Congzhe has always been loyal and careful. Li Keyong into medicine is the meaning of the first emperor."

古文：卿言虽忠爱，事属传闻。
现代文：你的话虽出于忠诚爱护，事情却是传闻。
English: What you say is out of loyalty and love, but it's just hearsay.

古文：并进封移宫事，当日九卿、台谏官亲见者，当据实会奏，用释群疑。 
现代文：连同进封、移宫等事情，当天九卿、台谏官亲眼看到的，当据实上报，用以释解大家的疑虑。 
English: Along with matters such as the annexation of Taiwan and the relocation of the imperial palace, what the nine emperors and the Taiwan eunuchs saw with their own eyes on that day should be reported on the basis of facts to explain everyone's doubts.

古文：于是从哲疏辨。
现代文：于是方从哲上疏辩解。
English: As a result, Fang Zhuozhong made a feeble excuse.

古文：刑部尚书黄克缵右从哲，亦曲为辨。
现代文：刑部尚书黄克缵偏袒方从哲，也为他曲意辩解。
English: The head of the criminal investigation department, Huang Kegui, who favored Zhe, also defended his actions.

古文：慎行复疏折之，曰： 由前则过信可灼，有轻进药之罪，由后则曲庇可灼，有不讨贼之罪，两者均无辞乎弑也。
现代文：孙慎行又上疏驳斥，说： 此前过于相信李可灼，罪在轻视进药；此后曲意庇护李可灼，罪在不声讨盗贼。二者都不能开脱弑君的罪名。
English: Sun Shengxing also refuted the accusation, saying: Previously, the crime of believing too much in Li Keqiang was to despise the medicine; thereafter, the crime of protecting Li Keqiang was to silently condemn the thief. Neither of these can absolve the crime of Zou Jun.

古文：从哲谓移宫有揭，但诸臣之请在初二，从哲之请在初五。
现代文：方从哲说移宫有真凭实据，但各臣的请求是在初二，方从哲的请求是在初五。
English: According to Fang Congzhe, there is real evidence that he moved the palace, but the request of the ministers was in the second month of the first year, and the request of Fang Congzhe was in the fifth month of the first year.

古文：尔时章疏入乾清不入慈庆者已三日，国政几于中断，非他辅臣访知，与群臣力请，其害可胜言哉！
现代文：那时奏章上疏送到乾清宫不送到慈宁宫已有三天，国家大事几乎中断，不是其他辅臣调查获悉，与朝臣极力请求，其危害真是一言难尽啊！
English: At that time, it had been three days since the musical score was sent to the Qianqing Palace and not to the Cining Palace, and the national event was almost interrupted. It was not other aides who learned about the investigation, and the courtiers strongly requested it. The harm is really inexhaustible!

古文：伏读圣谕 辅臣义在体国，为朕分忧。
现代文：臣恭敬拜读皇帝的诏书，其中说： 辅臣的意义在于分管国事，替朕分担忧愁。
English: The vassal reverently read the emperor's edict, which said: The significance of the vassal is to be in charge of state affairs, and to worry and worry for me.

古文：今似此景象，何不代朕传谕一言，屏息纷扰，君臣大义安在？ 
现代文：现在这种局面，为何不代朕传一句话，平息各种意见纠纷，君臣之间的大义到哪里去了？ 
English: In the current situation, why don't you deliver a message on my behalf to quell all kinds of disputes, and where has the great justice between monarchs and ministers gone?

古文：又云 朕凌虐不堪，昼夜涕泣六七日。 
现代文：又说： 朕不能忍受侮辱虐待，六七天都在日夜哭泣。 
English: She also said: "I can't bear the insults and abuse, so I cry day and night for six or seven days.

古文：夫从哲为顾命元臣，使少肯义形于色，何至令至尊忧危如此！
现代文：方从哲是顾命元老重臣，假使他能稍微有所行动，何至于让至尊的皇帝如此忧愤危险！
English: Fang Congzhe is a senior senator who cares about his life. If he could act a little, what is the danger of making the supreme emperor so upset?

古文：惟阿妇寺之意多，戴圣明之意少，故敢于凌皇祖，悖皇考，而欺陛下也。 
现代文：他阿谀奉承太监是那么多，感戴皇帝的圣明是如此少，所以胆敢侮辱皇帝的祖先，违抗皇帝的父亲，而欺负皇帝陛下啊。 
English: He has so much flattery for eunuchs, and so little reverence for the emperor, that he dares to insult the emperor's ancestors, defy the emperor's father, and bully the emperor.

古文：末复力言克缵之谬。
现代文：最后又极力说明黄克缵的荒谬。
English: Finally, he tried his best to illustrate the absurdity of Huang Kegui.

古文：章并下廷议。
现代文：二疏章一起交朝廷讨论。
English: The two chapters were submitted to the Imperial Court for discussion.

古文：既而议上，惟可灼下吏戍边，从哲置不问。
现代文：不久上报皇帝，只是将李可灼下狱发配边地，方从哲不问罪。
English: Soon reported to the emperor, but Li Kegui will be sent to prison, Fang Congzhe will not be charged.

古文：山东巡抚奏，五月中，日中月星并见。
现代文：山东巡抚报告，五月中旬，大白天月亮和星星一齐出现了。
English: According to the report of the Shandong governor, in the middle of May, the moon and stars appeared together in broad daylight.

古文：慎行以为大异，疏请修省，语极危切。
现代文：孙慎行以为非常怪异，上疏请求皇帝修身反省，语言非常直率中肯。
English: Sun Shengxing thought it was very strange, Shang Shu asked the emperor to self-reflect, and the language was very straightforward and pertinent.

古文：秦王谊漶由旁枝进封，其四子法不当封郡王，厚贿近幸，遂得温旨。
现代文：秦王朱谊氵患由庶受封，排行老四按规矩不应该封为郡王，重礼贿赂皇帝近臣，才得圣旨批准。
English: Qin King Zhu Yixuan suffered from being crowned by a commoner. According to the rules, he should not have been crowned as a county king. He had to bribe the emperor's close vassal to get the approval of the imperial edict.

古文：慎行坚不奉诏，三疏力争，不得。
现代文：孙慎行坚决不接受诏书，三次上疏争辩，没有结果。
English: Sun Shengxing resolutely refused to accept the edict, and argued with Shang Shao three times, but to no avail.

古文：七月谢病去。
现代文：七月称病离职。
English: He resigned in July, saying he was ill.

古文：其冬，廷推阁臣，以慎行为首，吏部侍郎盛以弘次之。
现代文：这一年冬天，朝廷推举内阁大臣，以孙慎行第一，吏部侍郎盛以弘第二。
English: In the winter of that year, the imperial court elected cabinet ministers, with Sun Shengxing as the first and the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, Mori Ihiro, as the second.

古文：魏忠贤抑不用，用顾秉谦、朱国祯、朱延禧、魏广微，朝论大骇。
现代文：魏忠贤压制不任用，任用顾秉谦、朱国祯、朱延禧、魏广微，朝臣大吃一惊。
English: Wei Zhongxian suppressed the appointment, and appointed Gu Bingqian, Zhu Guojun, Zhu Yanxi, Wei Guangwei, which greatly surprised the courtiers.

古文：叶向高连疏请用两人，竟不得命。
现代文：叶向高接连上疏请求任用孙、盛二人，最终没有效果。
English: Ye Xianggao successively sent requests to Shangsu for the appointment of Sun and Sheng, which ultimately had no effect.

古文：已，忠贤大炽，议修《三朝要典》， 红丸 之案以慎行为罪魁。
现代文：此后，魏忠贤气焰嚣张，讨论编写《三朝要典》，孙慎行列为 红丸案 的首犯。
English: After that, Wei Zhongxian was full of enthusiasm and discussed the compilation of the "Three Dynasties Guidebook," and Sun Shengxing was listed as the first offender in the Red Pill Case.

古文：其党张讷遂上疏力诋，有诏削夺。
现代文：同党张讷于是上疏极力诋毁，下诏剥夺官籍。
English: Zhang Ne, a member of the same party, then tried his best to discredit Shang Sohu and deprived him of his official status.

古文：未几，刘志选复两疏追劾，诏抚按提问，遣戍宁夏。未行，庄烈帝嗣位，以赦免。
现代文：不久，刘志选又两次上疏追查揭发，下诏抚按调查审讯，发配宁夏充边，没有出发，庄烈皇帝即位，赦免了他。
English: Not long after, Liu Zhixuan was investigated and exposed twice more, investigated and investigated twice more, investigated and investigated twice more, investigated and investigated twice more, investigated and investigated twice more, investigated and investigated twice more, investigated and investigated twice more, investigated and investigated twice more, investigated and investigated twice more, investigated and investigated twice more, investigated and investigated twice more, investigated and investigated twice more, investigated and investigated twice more, investigated and investigated twice more, investigated and investigated twice more, investigated and investigated twice more, investigated and investigated twice more, investigated and exposed twice more, investigated and exposed twice more, investigated and exposed twice more, investigated and exposed twice more, investigated and exposed twice more.

古文：崇祯元年，命以故官协理詹事府，力辞不就。
现代文：崇祯元年命令以原来官职协助治理詹事府，极力推辞不到任。
English: In the first year of the Chongzhen era, he was ordered to use his former official position to assist in the governance of Zhanji Prefecture, but he refused to resign.

古文：慎行操行峻洁，为一时搢绅冠。
现代文：孙慎行操守严峻，品行纯洁，为一代官吏之宗师。
English: Sun Shengxing had a strict code of ethics and a pure moral conduct. He was the mentor of a generation of government officials.

古文：朝士数推毂入阁，吏部尚书王永光力排之，迄不获用。
现代文：朝士多数推举他进入内阁，吏部尚书王永光极力排斥他，终究不被任用。
English: Most of the court nobles recommended him to enter the cabinet, but the secretary, Shangshu Wang Yongguang, strongly rejected him, and he was not appointed after all.

古文：崇祯初，起故官，协理詹事府，卒官。
现代文：八年，推举内阁大臣，几次皇帝都不满意。
English: In eight years, the emperor was dissatisfied with the choice of cabinet ministers several times.

古文：明世，卫所世职用儒业显者，讷父子而已。高攀龙，字存之，无锡人。
现代文：最后把孙慎行、刘宗周、林钅干的名字上报，皇帝立即召见他们。孙慎行已经患病，刚到北京就死了。赠封太子太保，谥号文介。高攀龙，字存之，无锡人。
English: Finally, the names of Sun Sheng Xing, Liu Zong Zhou, and Lin Yigang were reported, and the emperor immediately summoned them. Sun Sheng Xing had fallen ill and died just after arriving in Beijing. He was given the title of Prince Taibo, and the posthumous title of Wen Jie. Gao Pang Long, the character exists, was from Wuxi.

古文：少读书，辄有志程朱之学。
现代文：少年时读书，就喜好程颐、朱熹的学说。
English: When he was a boy, he read books and liked the teachings of Cheng Yu and Zhu Xi.

古文：举万历十七年进士，授行人。
现代文：万历十七年中进士，授行人职。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Wanli era, he entered the priesthood and was given the post of a clerk.

古文：四川佥事张世则进所著《大学初义》，诋程、朱章句，请颁天下。攀龙抗疏力驳其谬，其书遂不行。
现代文：四川佥事张世则进呈他的著作《大学初义》，诋毁程颐、朱熹的章句，并请求颁行天下，高攀龙上疏极力反驳他的错误，张世则这本书便没有颁行。
English: On the subject of Sichuan anecdote, Zhang Shizhe submitted his book "Commencement of the University," which slandered the chapters of Cheng Xi and Zhu Xi, and requested that it be published all over the world. Gaopanlong Shangso tried his best to refute his mistake, but Zhang Shizhe's book was not published.

古文：侍郎赵用贤、都御史李世达被讦去位，朝论多咎大学士王锡爵。
现代文：侍郎赵用贤、都御史李世达被别人攻击丢了官，袁中的议论多数归咎于大学士王锡爵。
English: Zhao Yixian, the chamberlain, and Li Shida, the governor of the capital, were attacked by others and lost their posts, and most of the discussions in Yuanzhong were attributed to the university scholar Wang Xizhe.

古文：攀龙上疏曰：
现代文：高攀龙上疏说：
English: Gaopanlong Shangzho said:

古文：近见朝宁之上，善类摈斥一空。
现代文： 近来朝廷之上，正人君子被排挤一空。
English: In recent times, the court has been completely emptied of upright gentlemen.

古文：大臣则孙鑨、李世达、赵用贤去矣，小臣则赵南星、陈泰来、顾允成、薛敷教、张纳陛、于孔兼、贾岩斥矣。
现代文：大臣则孙钅龙、李世达、赵用贤走了，小臣则赵南星、陈泰来、顾允成、薛敷教、张纳陛、于孔兼、贾岩被斥退了。
English: As for the ministers, Sun Yulong, Li Shida, and Zhao Yixian left, and as for the junior ministers, Zhao Nansing, Chen Tairai, Gu Yuncheng, Xue Shikijo, Zhang Na, Yu Kongjian, and Jia Yan were expelled.

古文：迩者李祯、曾乾亨复不安其位而乞去矣，选郎孟化鲤又以推用言官张栋，空署而逐矣。
现代文：近来李祯、曾乾亨又无法安心本职而乞求走了，选郎孟化鲤又借口推荐言官张栋，随着这股潮流去了。
English: Recently, Li Wei and Zeng Qianheng were unable to perform their duties with confidence and begged to leave, and Meng Huayu, the chosen one, also recommended Zhang Dong, the speech officer, under the pretext of going with this trend.

古文：夫天地生才甚难，国家需才甚亟，废斥如此，后将焉继。
现代文： 天地之间造就一个人才是很难的，国家需要人才是很急迫的，这样的废置排斥，以后的人才怎么接得上。
English: It is difficult to create a person between heaven and earth, and the country needs talents very urgently. How can future talents catch up with such abandonment and exclusion?

古文：致使正人扼腕，曲士弹冠，世道人心何可胜慨！
现代文：这些情况已使得正直的人扼腕叹息，奸邪的人弹冠相庆，世道人心如此真叫人不胜感慨！
English: These circumstances have caused honest people to wring their hands and sigh, and treacherous people to celebrate, and the world's moral heart is so real that people can't help but feel sad!

古文：且今陛下朝讲久辍，廷臣不获望见颜色。
现代文：而且现在陛下的朝讲已经停止很久了，朝臣不能望见皇帝的龙颜。
English: Moreover, His Majesty's speeches to the Imperial Court have long ceased, and courtiers cannot see the Emperor's long face.

古文：天言传布，虽曰圣裁，隐伏之中，莫测所以。故中外群言，不曰： 辅臣欲除不附己 ，则曰 近侍不利用正人 。
现代文：皇帝传旨下来，虽然说是圣上亲自裁定，但这里面隐藏了些什么，难以揣度其究竟，所以朝廷内外的舆论，不是说 辅臣想除掉不归附自己的人 ，就是说 近侍不利用正直的人 。
English: When the Emperor's edict came down, although it was said to have been personally decided by His Holiness, there was something hidden in it, and it was difficult to figure out what it was. Therefore, the public opinion inside and outside the Imperial Court was not that the vassals wanted to get rid of people who did not belong to them, but that the courtiers did not take advantage of honest people.

古文：陛下深居九重，亦曾有以诸臣贤否陈于左右；而陛下于诸臣，亦尝一思其得罪之故乎？
现代文：陛下深居九重之内，也曾经把每位大臣是否贤能的情况写了陈列在左右；而陛下对于各臣，也曾想过他们为什么会获罪的原因吗？
English: Your Majesty, who is well-versed in the nine levels of government, used to write down the merits and demerits of each of his ministers and display them on the walls; but did your Majesty ever think about the reasons why each of his ministers was found guilty?

古文：果以为皆由圣怒，则诸臣自孟化鲤而外，未闻忤旨，何以皆罢斥？
现代文：如果以为都是由于圣上发怒，可是各臣除孟化鲤之外，未曾听说有触犯圣旨的，为什么都遭罢免斥退呢？
English: If it was thought that it was all due to the anger of the emperor, but the ministers, except for Meng Huayuan, had never heard of anyone violating the imperial edict, why were they all dismissed and expelled?

古文：即使批鳞逆耳，如董基等，陛下已尝收录，何独于诸臣不然？
现代文：即便违抗了皇帝讲了不中听的话，例如董基等，陛下已经录用，为什么对于这些人却不是这样呢？
English: Even if you defy the emperor and say things that are not good to hear, such as Dong Ji and so on, your majesty has already hired, why is it not the same for these people?

古文：臣恐陛下有祛邪之果断，而左右反借以行媢嫉之私；陛下有容言之盛心，而臣工反遗以拒谏诤之诮。
现代文：我恐怕陛下有驱逐奸邪的果断，而左右的人反而利用来实现自己嫉妒的私心；陛下有接纳进言的博大胸怀，而臣子反而留给您拒绝谏诤的讥嘲。
English: I am afraid that Your Majesty has the determination to expel treachery, but people on both sides use it to realize their jealous selfishness; Your Majesty has a broad mind to accept input, but the courtiers leave you with the mockery of rejecting it.

古文：传之四海，垂诸史册，为圣德累不小。
现代文：传到各地，写进史册，使圣德受累不浅。
English: It spread to all parts of the country and was written into the annals of history, causing great damage to the sanctity of life.

古文：辅臣王锡爵等，迹其自待，若愈于张居正、申时行，察其用心，何以异于五十步笑百步？
现代文： 辅臣王锡爵等，看他自我约束的情况，好像胜过张居正、申时行；观察他的用心和五十步笑百步又有什么不同呢？
English: His aide Wang Xizhe and others, looking at his self-restraint, seem to be better than Zhang Juzheng and Shen Shijie; what is the difference between observing his intentions and fifty steps and a hundred steps?

古文：即如诸臣罢斥，果以为当然，则是非邪正，恒人能辨，何忍坐视至尊之过举，得毋内泄其私愤，而利于斥逐之尽乎？
现代文：即如各臣被罢退斥逐，如果以为当然是这样，那么是非邪正，一般人都能辨别，怎么忍心坐视皇帝的错误做法，难道不是为了发泄私愤，而得益于把那些人全都罢免斥退光吗？ 
English: That is to say, if the ministers are dismissed and expelled, if it is taken for granted that this is the case, then the right and the wrong, the average person can discern, how can we bear to see the emperor's wrongdoing, is it not to vent personal anger, and benefit from dismissing and expelling all those people?

古文：末力诋郑材、杨应宿谗谄宜黜。
现代文：最后极力诋毁郑材、杨应宿说人坏话、巴结奉承应该罢免。
English: Finally, Zheng Zai and Yang Yingju should be dismissed for slandering and flattering others.

古文：应宿亦疏讦攀龙，语极妄诞。
现代文：杨应宿也上疏攻击高攀龙，所讲的话非常荒诞，没有根据。
English: Yang Yingjuku also attacked Gao Panglong in Shang Shou. What he said was very absurd and baseless.

古文：疏并下部院，议请薄罚两臣，稍示惩创。
现代文：两份奏疏一起交给部院，议论的结果是请求对二人稍加责罚，以表示惩治过去，警戒未来。
English: The two reports were submitted to the ministry together, and the result of the discussion was a request for a slight punishment for the two, in order to punish the past and warn the future.

古文：帝不许，镌应宿二秩，谪攀龙揭阳添注典史。
现代文：皇帝不准，降杨应宿二级，把高攀龙贬职流放到揭阳为添注典史。
English: The emperor did not approve, and Yang Yingjuku was downgraded to the second level, and Gao Panglong was demoted and exiled to Jieyang to add to the classic history.

古文：御史吴弘济等论救，并获谴。
现代文：御史吴弘济等议论挽救，都受到谴责。
English: Wang Shi, Wu Hongji, and others who spoke of salvation were all condemned.

古文：攀龙之官七月，以事归。寻遭亲丧，遂不出，家居垂三十年。
现代文：高攀龙上任七个月就因事归去，接着父母去世，于是不再做官，在家住了近三十年。
English: Gao Panglong returned home seven months after taking office due to the incident, and then his parents passed away, so he no longer worked as an official and lived at home for nearly thirty years.

古文：言者屡荐，帝悉不省。
现代文：言者多次推荐，皇帝都不醒悟。
English: The speaker recommended it many times, but the emperor did not wake up.

古文：熹宗立，起光禄丞。
现代文：熹宗即位，起用高攀龙为光禄寺丞。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, and Gaopanlong was appointed as the second-in-command of the Guanglu Temple.

古文：天启元年进少卿。
现代文：天启元年升为少卿。
English: He was promoted to Shokei in 1869.

古文：明年四月，疏劾戚畹郑养性，言： 张差梃击实养性父国泰主谋。
现代文：第二年四月上疏弹劾外戚郑养性，说： 张差梃击谋害太子实在是郑养性的父亲郑国泰所主使。
English: In April of the following year, Shang So impeached his maternal relative, Zheng Yaoxing, saying: Zhang Zhaqi's plot to assassinate the crown prince was actually the father of Zheng Yaoxing, the chief envoy of the Zheng Guotai Institute.

古文：今人言籍籍，咸疑养性交关奸宄，别怀异谋，积疑不解，当思善全之术。
现代文：现在人们议论纷纷，都怀疑郑养性勾结宫内外犯法作乱的人，另有异谋，怀疑积累多了得不到解决，应当考虑一个妥善处理的办法。
English: Now people are talking about it one after another. They are all suspicious of Zheng Yao's collusion with people inside and outside the palace who are breaking the law and causing disturbances. They suspect that there are other conspiracies, and that the suspicions have accumulated too much to be resolved. A proper solution should be considered.

古文：至刘保谋逆，中官卢受主之，刘于简狱词具在。
现代文：至于刘保谋反，是中官卢受主使的，刘于简的供词都在。
English: As for Liu Bao plotting a rebellion, it was Lieutenant Colonel Lu who was the main instigator, and Liu Yujan's confessions are all there.

古文：受本郑氏私人，而李如桢一家交关郑氏，计陷名将，失地丧师。于简原供，明言李永芳约如桢内应。
现代文：卢受本是郑氏的私党，而李如祯一家勾结郑氏，阴谋陷害名将，导致失地丧师，刘于简原来的供词，说明李永芳约了李如祯做内应。
English: Lu Shou was originally a private member of the Zheng family, while the Li Ruxuan family colluded with the Zheng family and conspired to frame a famous general, resulting in the loss of land and the death of a teacher. Liu Yujian's original confession shows that Li Yongfang had an appointment with Li Ruxuan to do internal correspondence.

古文：若崔文升素为郑氏腹心，知先帝症虚，故用泄药，罪在不赦。
现代文：像崔文升向来就是郑氏的心腹，知道先帝有虚症，故意给他服用泄药，这罪不能赦免。
English: Like Cui Wensheng, who had always been Zheng's confidant, he knew that the former emperor had a deficiency and deliberately gave him the antidote. This crime cannot be pardoned.

古文：陛下仅行斥逐，而文升犹潜住都城。
现代文：陛下仅仅将他斥责赶走，而崔文升还秘密住在京城。
English: His majesty merely scolded him and sent him away, but Cui Wensheng still secretly lived in Beijing.

古文：宜勒养性还故里，急正如桢、文升典刑，用章国法。 
现代文：应该勒令郑养性回到家乡，尽快将李如祯、崔文升绳之以法，以昭彰国家大法。 
English: Zheng Yangsheng should be ordered to return to his hometown, and Li Rugao and Cui Wensheng should be brought to justice as soon as possible, so as to highlight the great law of the country.

古文：疏入，责攀龙多言，然卒遣养性还籍。
现代文：奏疏送入，皇帝责怪高攀龙多事，但终于遣送郑养性回了老家。
English: The emperor blamed Gao Panglong for many things, but finally sent Zheng Yangxing back to his hometown.

古文：孙慎行以 红丸 事攻旧辅方从哲，下廷议。
现代文：孙慎行因为 红丸案 攻击前朝首辅方从哲，交给大臣们讨论。
English: Sun Shengxing, because of the attack on the Red Maru case, the first and second vice-premiers of the DPRK side from Zhe, handed over to the ministers for discussion.

古文：攀龙引《春秋》首恶之诛，归狱从哲。
现代文：高攀龙引用《春秋》首恶性之诛为例，把 红丸案 的主要责任归咎于方从哲。
English: Gao Panglong cited "Spring and Autumn" as an example of the first malignant case, and attributed the main responsibility of the Red Ball Case to Fang Congzhe.

古文：给事中王志道为从哲解，攀龙遗书切责之。
现代文：给事中王志道为方从哲辩解，高攀龙写信切实责备他。
English: Wang Zhidou defended Fang Congzhe in the matter, and Gao Panglong wrote a letter to reproach him.

古文：寻改太常少卿，疏陈务学之要，因言： 从哲之罪非止红丸，其最大者在交结郑国泰。
现代文：不久改任太常寺少卿，上疏陈述努力学习的重要，接着说： 方从哲的罪行并非只有 红丸 一件事，他最大的罪行在于勾结郑国泰。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of Junior Secretary of Taiji Temple. Shang So stated the importance of studying hard, and went on to say: Fang Congzhe's crime was not only the Red Marbles incident, but his biggest crime was colluding with Zheng Guotai.

古文：国泰父子所以谋危先帝者不一，始以张差之梃，继以美姝之进，终以文升之药，而从哲实左右之。
现代文：郑国泰父子有计划地谋害先帝的事不止一件，开始是张差的梃击，接着是郑贵妃进送美女，最后是崔文升的药，而方从哲实在是佑护他。
English: There was more than one thing that Zheng Guotai and his son plotted to kill the former emperor. The first was Zhang Zha's attack, followed by Zheng Guifei's delivery of a beautiful woman, and finally Cui Wensheng's medicine, while Fang Congzhe was actually protecting him.

古文：力扶其为郑氏者，力锄其不为郑氏者；一时人心若狂，但知郑氏，不知东宫。
现代文：尽力扶持帮助郑氏的党徒，尽力铲除不听从郑氏的人；一时人心惶惑，只知道郑氏，不知道东宫太子。
English: He tried his best to support the party members who helped Zheng, and tried his best to eradicate those who did not listen to Zheng. For a moment, his heart was confused, knowing only Zheng, but not the East Palace Prince.

古文：此贼臣也，讨贼则为陛下之孝。
现代文：这是盗贼一样的臣子，讨伐盗贼，就是陛下的孝。
English: This is a courtier who is just like a thief, who fights against thieves, who is His Majesty's filial son.

古文：而说者乃曰 为先帝隐讳则为孝 ，此大乱之道也。
现代文：而有的人却说： 为先帝隐讳才是孝。 这是扰乱天下的歪理。
English: On the other hand, some people say that it is filial piety to conceal one's feelings for the former emperor, which is a distorted logic that disturbs the world.

古文：陛下念圣母则宣选侍之罪，念皇考则隆选侍之恩，仁之至义之尽也，而说者乃曰 为圣母隐讳则为孝 。
现代文：陛下顾念圣母就应该宣布李选侍的罪行，顾念皇考就应该加厚对李选侍的恩德，这样就仁至义尽了。而有的人却说： 为圣母隐讳才是孝。 
English: Considering the Virgin Mary, His Majesty should declare Lee Seung-soo's crime, considering the imperial examination, He should increase Lee Seung-soo's grace, and this would be the ultimate act of mercy. However, some people say: It is filial piety to conceal oneself for the sake of the Virgin Mary.

古文：明如圣谕，目为假托；忠如杨涟，谤为居功。
现代文：明明是圣谕，看作是假托；像杨涟那样忠心，却被诽谤为居功自傲。
English: What is clearly a sacred text is regarded as a pretext; those who are as faithful as Yang Mi are slandered as being proud of their achievements.

古文：人臣避居功，甘居罪，君父有急，袖手旁观，此大乱之道也。
现代文：大臣怕被说是居功，宁愿以待罪之身躲在一边，当君父有急难的时候，却在那里袖身旁观，这也是导致天下大乱的歪理。
English: The minister is afraid of being said to be taking credit, and would rather hide behind the guise of waiting for the crime. When the king's father is in dire straits, he stands by and watches. This is also the distortion that leads to chaos in the world.

古文：惑于其说，孝也不知其为孝，不孝也以为大孝；忠也不知其为忠，不忠也以为大忠。
现代文：被这样的说法所迷惑，真正的孝不知道是孝，把不孝也当作大孝；真正的忠不知道是忠，把不忠也当作大忠。
English: Confused by this argument, true filial piety does not know what filial piety is, and regards unfilial piety as great filial piety; true loyalty does not know what loyalty is, and regards disloyalty as great loyalty.

古文：时从哲辈奥援甚固，摘疏中 不孝 语激帝怒，将加严谴。
现代文：忠孝都可以颠倒，什么事情不可以胡为呢？所以方从哲、郑养性不能不讨伐，为什么还让他们住在天子脚下？ 
English: Both loyalty and filial piety can be turned upside down, what things can not be done? Therefore, it is necessary to fight against the side from Zhe and Zheng, why let them live under the feet of the Son of Heaven?

古文：叶向高力救，乃夺禄一年。旋改大理少卿。邹元标建书院，攀龙与焉。
现代文：当时在朝廷暗中支持方从哲的势力很大，他们摘取了高攀龙奏疏中 不孝 的话激怒皇帝，将要对他严加谴责。
English: At that time, the hidden supporters of Zong Zhe in the imperial court were very powerful. They extracted the words of filial piety from Gaopan Ryongsuo to infuriate the emperor, and they would severely condemn him.

古文：元标被攻，攀龙请与同罢，诏留之。
现代文：叶向高大力拯救，这才停发俸禄一年。邹元标受到攻击，高攀龙请求和他一同罢免，皇帝下诏挽留他。
English: Ye Xiang saved Gao vigorously, and it was only then that the stipend was suspended for one year. Xuan Yuanbei was attacked, Gao Panglong requested to be dismissed together with him, and the emperor issued an edict to retain him.

古文：进太仆卿，擢刑部右侍郎。
现代文：升为太仆卿，提升刑部右侍郎。
English: He was promoted to Daju-kyo (Minister of the Imperial Household) and Right Attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：四年八月，拜左都御史。
现代文：天启四年八月拜左都御史。
English: In August of the 4th year of the Apocalypse, the left capital was destroyed.

古文：杨涟等群击魏忠贤，势已不两立。
现代文：杨涟等一群人攻击魏忠贤，双方已势不两立。
English: Yang Hui and a group of others attacked Wei Zhongxian, and the two sides were already at loggerheads.

古文：及向高去国，魏广微日导忠贤为恶，而攀龙为赵南星门生，并居要地。
现代文：等到叶向高离职，魏广微天天引导魏忠贤做坏事，而高攀龙是赵南星的门生，一同在重要部门。
English: By the time Ye Xianggao left office, Wei Guangwei was guiding Wei Zhongxian to do bad things every day, while Gao Panglong was Zhao Nanxing's protégé, both in important departments.

古文：御史崔呈秀按淮、扬还，攀龙发其秽状，南星议戍之。呈秀窘，急走忠贤所，乞为义儿，遂摭谢应祥事，谓攀龙党南星。
现代文：御史崔呈秀巡按淮、扬回来，高攀龙揭发他贪污受贿的邪恶行为，赵南星建议把他充军，崔呈秀处境困迫，急忙跑到魏忠贤那里，乞求做他的干儿子，于是捡了谢应祥的事，说高攀龙党附赵南星。
English: Guo Shi Cui Xianxiu came back from his inspection tour after Huai and Yang, Gao Panglong exposed his evil behavior of corruption and bribery, Zhao Nansing suggested that he be enlisted in the army, Cui Xianxiu was in a difficult situation, rushed to Wei Zhongxian and begged to be his son-in-law, and then picked up the matter of Xie Yingxiang and said that Gao Panglong was affiliated with Zhao Nansing.

古文：严旨诘责，攀龙遽引罪去。
现代文：皇帝下了道严厉的圣旨责问追究，高攀龙自己承担罪责走了。
English: The emperor issued a stern order to investigate, and Gao Panglong himself took the blame and left.

古文：顷之，南京御史游凤翔出为知府，讦攀龙挟私排挤。
现代文：不久，南京御史游凤翔调出当知府，揭发高攀龙挟持私人势力排挤他。
English: Soon after, Nanjing governor Yu Fengxiang was transferred to the governor's office, exposing Gaopanlong's use of private forces to oust him.

古文：诏复凤翔故官，削攀龙籍。
现代文：下诏恢复了游凤翔过去的官职，革了高攀龙的职。
English: The following edict restored You Fengxiang's former official post and stripped him of the post of Gaopanlong.

古文：呈秀憾不已，必欲杀之，窜名李实劾周起元疏中，遣缇骑往逮。
现代文：崔呈秀还不解恨，一定要杀他，把他的名字偷偷塞进李实弹劾周起元的奏疏中，派遣缇骑前往逮捕他。
English: Cui Hengxiu still could not get rid of his hatred, so he had to kill him, secretly put his name into Li Si's impeachment of Zhou Qianyuan, and send his cavalry to arrest him.

古文：攀龙晨谒宋儒杨龟山祠，以文告之。归与二门生一弟饮后园池上，闻周顺昌已就逮，笑曰： 吾视死如归，今果然矣。 
现代文：高攀龙早上拜谒宋代儒家学者杨龟山祠，有人把这公文告诉了他，高攀龙回去和二个门生一个弟弟在后园的池上喝酒，听说周顺昌已经被逮捕，笑说： 我视死如归，现在就要实现了。 
English: In the morning, Gao Panglong paid homage to Yang Guishan, a Confucian scholar of the Song Dynasty. Someone told him about this official document. Gao Panglong went back to drink with two disciples and a younger brother in the backyard pool. When he heard that Zhou Shunchang had been arrested, he smiled and said, "I feel like I'm back from the dead. Now I'm going to make it happen."

古文：入与夫人语，如平时。
现代文：进去和夫人说话，跟平时一样。
English: Go in and talk to your wife, like you always do.

古文：出，书二纸告二孙曰： 明日以付官校。 
现代文：出来，写了两张纸告诉二个孙儿说： 明天交给官府的校尉。 
English: He came out, wrote two pieces of paper and told his two grandchildren: "Tomorrow, give it to the school captain at the government office."

古文：因遣之出，扃户。
现代文：于是让他们出去，关好门。
English: So let them out and close the door.

古文：移时诸子排户入，一灯荧然，则已衣冠自沈于池矣。
现代文：过了一会儿，大伙推门进去，看到一盏灯火光微弱，高攀龙已经整整齐齐地穿戴好衣帽自己溺死在池中了。
English: After a while, everyone pushed the door in and saw a dim light. Gao Panglong had neatly put on his coat and hat and drowned himself in the pool.

古文：发所封纸，乃遗表也，云： 臣虽削夺，旧为大臣，大臣受辱则辱国。
现代文：拆开他所封的纸，是一个遗表，说： 我虽然被革职，从前曾是大臣，大臣受侮辱就是侮辱国家。
English: He opened the sealed paper, which was a suicide note, and said: Although I was dismissed, I was once a minister, and to insult a minister is to insult the country.

古文：谨北向叩头，从屈平之遗则。 
现代文：谨向北面叩头，跟从屈原遗留下来的榜样。 
English: I humbly bow to the north and follow the example left by Qu Yuan.

古文：复别门人华允诚书云： 一生学问，至此亦少得力。 
现代文：又有告诉门生华久诚的信说： 我能够像这样从容不迫的死去，多少还是得力于我一生治学的结果。 
English: There is also a letter to his protégé, Hua Jiucheng, saying: I can die like this unhurriedly, thanks in part to the results of my life's study.

古文：时年六十五。
现代文：当时他六十五岁。
English: He was then sixty-five years old.

古文：远近闻其死，莫不伤之。
现代文：远近的人听到他的死讯，没有不为他哀伤的。
English: When people near and far heard of his death, they couldn't help but mourn for him.

古文：呈秀憾犹未释，矫诏下其子世儒吏。刑部坐世儒不能防闲其父，谪为徒。
现代文：崔呈秀还不解恨，假传圣旨把高攀龙的儿子世儒交给司法部门审理，刑部判世儒不能防范他的父亲，流放服劳役。
English: Cui Chengxiu still couldn't get rid of his hatred. He sent Gao Panglong's son Shiju to the judicial department for trial, and the criminal department judged that Shiju couldn't prevent his father from being exiled to labor service.

古文：崇祯初，赠太子少保，兵部尚书，谥忠宪，授世儒官。
现代文：崇桢初年，追赠高攀龙为太子少保、兵部尚书，谥号忠宪，授予高世儒官职。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Gaopanlong was posthumously awarded the title of the youngest prince, the title of the youngest prince, the title of the youngest prince, the title of the youngest prince, the title of the youngest prince, the title of the youngest prince, the title of the youngest prince, and the title of the youngest prince.

古文：初，海内学者率宗王守仁，攀龙心非之。与顾宪成同讲学东林书院，以静为主。
现代文：起初，海内学者全部都尊奉王守仁的学说，高攀龙心里很不以为然，他和顾宪成同在东林书院讲学，以静为主。
English: At first, all scholars at home respected Wang Shouren's theory, but Gaopanlong was not impressed. He and Gu Xiancheng both lectured at Donglin Academy, focusing on silence.

古文：操履笃实，粹然一出于正，为一时儒者之宗。
现代文：品行纯良忠厚，完全是一个正直的人，被当时的学者所尊奉。
English: He was a man of pure and virtuous character, a man of complete honesty, and was revered by scholars of the time.

古文：海内士大夫，识与不识，称高、顾无异词。
现代文：海内士大夫，认识的和不认识的，都一致称颂高、顾二人。
English: Dr. Haines, both those who knew him and those who didn't, were unanimous in praising Gao and Gu.

古文：攀龙削官之秋，诏毁东林书院。
现代文：高攀龙被革职的时候，皇帝下诏拆毁了东林书院。
English: When Gao Panglong was dismissed, the emperor issued an edict to demolish Donglin Academy.

古文：庄烈帝嗣位，学者更修复之。
现代文：庄烈帝即位，学者重新修复了它。
English: After Emperor Zhuge Liang ascended the throne, scholars restored it.

古文：冯从吾，字仲好，长安人。
现代文：冯从吾，字仲好，陕西长安人。
English: Feng Zongwu is a native of Chang'an, Shaanxi Province.

古文：万历十七年进士。改庶吉士，授御史。
现代文：万历十七年进士，改任庶吉士，授官御史。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Shinshi in 17 B.C. and was later appointed to Shoseki Shis, and later to Shokan Goshi.

古文：巡视中城，阉人修刺谒，拒却之。
现代文：巡视宫城，宦官置备名帖求见，拒绝不见。
English: He made a tour of Miyagi, and the eunuch put up a postcard asking to see him, but he refused.

古文：礼科都给事中胡汝宁倾邪狡猾，累劾不去。
现代文：礼科都给事中胡汝宁奸诈狡猾、胡作非为，多次揭发都不离职。
English: In matters of etiquette, Hu Runing was treacherous, cunning and unscrupulous. She was exposed many times and refused to resign.

古文：从吾发其奸，遂调外。时当大计，从吾严逻侦，苞苴绝迹。
现代文：冯从吾揭露他的邪恶，才把他调往外地，正值考核地方官员的时候，冯从吾严加巡视，行贿者销声匿迹。
English: It was only when Feng Congwu exposed his evil that he was transferred to a foreign country. It was the time of the assessment of local officials. Feng Congwu strictly patrolled, and the bribe-giver disappeared.

古文：二十年正月，抗章言： 陛下郊庙不亲，朝讲不御，章奏留中不发。
现代文：万历二十年正月上奏章说： 陛下郊庙祭礼不亲自参加，朝臣聚会不亲自驾临，奏章扣留在禁中不下发。
English: In the first month of the 20th year of the Wanli calendar, the Song of Songs said: His Majesty did not attend the suburban temple festival in person, the courtier gathering did not come in person, and the Song of Songs was kept in custody and not issued.

古文：试观戊子以前，四裔效顺，海不扬波；己丑以后，南倭告警，北寇渝盟，天变人妖，叠出累告。
现代文：请看戊子以前，周边国家效忠顺服，天下太平；己丑以后，南有倭寇告急，北有强敌犯边，天灾人祸，层出不穷。
English: Please look at the time before Wu Zi, the surrounding countries were loyal and obedient, and the world was peaceful; after he was disgraced, the south was attacked by Japanese pirates, the north was invaded by strong enemies, and natural disasters and man-made disasters occurred one after another.

古文：励精之效如彼，怠斁之患如此。
现代文：前者为励精图治的功效，后者是懈怠败坏的灾祸。
English: The former is the effect of working hard to improve, the latter is the disaster of slacking.

古文：近颂敕谕，谓圣体违和，欲借此自掩，不知鼓钟于宫，声闻于外。
现代文：近来传颂皇帝告谕，说皇帝身体欠佳，想以此为由自我掩饰，却不知宫内敲钟，声音已传于宫外。
English: Recently, there have been rumours of an imperial edict, saying that the emperor is in poor health and wants to use this as a reason to cover himself, but he does not know that the bells are ringing inside the palace, and the sound has spread outside the palace.

古文：陛下每夕必饮，每饮必醉，每醉必怒。
现代文：陛下每晚必饮酒，每饮必醉，每次喝醉了必定发脾气。
English: His Majesty drinks every night, gets drunk every time, and loses his temper every time he gets drunk.

古文：左右一言稍违，辄毙杖下，外庭无不知者。
现代文：左右的人稍有一句话不对劲，就用乱棍打死，外廷没有不知道的。
English: People on both sides were beaten to death with a club if they uttered a single word that was not correct. The court did not fail to notice this.

古文：天下后世，其可欺乎！
现代文：天地良心，难道是可以欺骗的么！
English: Conscience, is it possible to deceive it!

古文：愿陛下勿以天变为不足畏，勿以人言为不足恤，勿以目前晏安为可恃，勿以将来危乱为可忽，宗社幸甚。 
现代文：希望陛下不要以为天灾不足畏惧，不要以为人言不足忧虑，不要以为目前的太平安定可以依赖，不要以为将来的危险动乱可以忽视，如此，则是国家社稷的大坏事。 
English: I hope that Your Majesty will not think that natural disasters are not scary enough, that people are not worried enough, that the current peace and stability can be relied on, and that future dangerous turmoil can be ignored, which is a great evil of the country and society.

古文：帝大怒，欲廷杖之。
现代文：皇帝大怒，想处罚他廷杖刑。
English: The emperor was furious and wanted to punish him with the cane.

古文：会仁圣太后寿辰，阁臣力解得免。
现代文：正好赶上仁圣太后的寿辰，内阁大臣极力劝解得以幸免。
English: Just in time for the birthday of Empress Dowager Ren Sheng, the cabinet minister tried his best to persuade her to be spared.

古文：寻告归，起巡长芦盐政。
现代文：不久告假回家，起用巡视长芦盐政。
English: Soon after, he went home on leave and was appointed inspector of the Changlu Salt Mine.

古文：洁己惠商，奸宄敛迹。
现代文：为政清廉，优待商人，奸猾之徒大为收敛。
English: The government is clean and honest, the businessmen are treated with preferential treatment, and the traitors are greatly restrained.

古文：既还朝，适帝以军政大黜两京言官。
现代文：回到朝廷后，正赶上皇帝因为军事事务大批废黜北京和南京的言官。
English: After returning to the imperial court, he was just in time for the emperor to depose a large number of officials in Beijing and Nanjing because of military affairs.

古文：从吾亦削籍，犹以前疏故也。
现代文：冯从吾也被剥夺官籍，还是由于先前上疏的缘故。
English: Feng Congwu was also stripped of his official status, again due to his previous defection.

古文：从吾生而纯悫，长志濂、洛之学，受业许孚远。
现代文：冯从吾生性纯正而诚实，有志于濂、洛二个学派的理学，跟着许孚远学习。
English: Feng was born with a pure and honest nature. He was interested in the two schools of science of Zhai and Luo, and studied with Xu Fuyuan.

古文：罢官归，杜门谢客，取先正格言，体验身心，造诣益邃。
现代文：罢官回家，闭门谢客，用前辈学者的格言，对照自己的实践，造诣更加深邃。
English: Returning home, thanking guests behind closed doors, using the motto of predecessors, comparing with their own practice, the accomplishment is more profound.

古文：家居二十五年。光宗践阼，起尚宝卿，进太仆少卿，并以兄丧未赴。
现代文：在家隐居二十五年，光宗即位，起用尚宝卿，提升太仆少卿，全因为哥哥的丧礼没有赴任。
English: He lived in seclusion at home for twenty-five years. When Emperor Guangzong ascended the throne, he appointed Shang Baoqing and promoted Taigu Shaoqing, but he did not attend the funeral of his brother.

古文：俄改大理。
现代文：不久改任大理寺。
English: He was soon transferred to Dali Temple.

古文：天启二年擢左佥都御史。
现代文：天启二年提拔为左佥都御史。
English: In the second year of the Apocalypse, he was promoted to Zuozhu Miyoshi.

古文：甫两月，进左副都御史。
现代文：才二个月，提升为左副都御史。
English: Just two months later, he was promoted to deputy governor of the capital.

古文：廷议 三安 ，从吾言： 李可灼以至尊尝试，而许其引疾，当国何心！
现代文：朝廷讨论 三案 ，冯从吾说： 李可灼拿至尊皇帝试验药物，却同意他称病回家，掌权者是何用心？
English: The imperial court discussed three cases, Feng Congwu said: Li Keqiang took the supreme emperor to test drugs, but agreed to him calling home sick. What was the intention of those in power?

古文：至梃击之狱，与发奸诸臣为难者，即奸人也。 
现代文：至于梃击这个官司，跟揭发奸人的各臣作对的人，就是奸人。 
English: As for attacking this lawsuit, anyone who opposes the ministers who exposed the traitors is a traitor.

古文：由是群小恶之。
现代文：因此众太监讨厌他。
English: Therefore the eunuchs hated him.

古文：已，与邹元标共建首善书院，集同志讲学其中，给事中朱童蒙遂疏诋之。
现代文：不久，与邹元标共同创建首善书院，召集志同道合的人在里面讲学。给事中朱童蒙上疏诋毁。
English: Soon after, he and Zou Yuanbiao jointly founded Shoushen Academy and gathered like-minded people to give lectures there. Zhu Tong was slandered in the process.

古文：从吾言： 宋之不竞，以禁讲学故，非以讲学故也。
现代文：冯从吾说： 宋朝不兴盛，是因为禁止讲学的缘故，而不是讲学的缘故。
English: Feng Congwu said: The Song Dynasty did not flourish because of the ban on lectures, not because of lectures.

古文：我二祖表章《六经》，天子经筵，皇太子出阁，皆讲学也。
现代文：我朝太祖、成祖宣扬 六经 ，皇帝布置讲经史的几席，皇太子出楼听讲，都是讲学。
English: I preached the Six Classics of Confucianism to my grandfather and father-in-law, the emperor arranged several seats for the lecture on the history of the classics, and the crown prince went out to listen to the lecture, all of which were lectures.

古文：臣子以此望君，而己则不为，可乎？
现代文：臣子期望皇帝讲学，自己却不去做，能行吗？
English: Can a courtier expect the emperor to give a lecture, but not do it himself?

古文：先臣守仁，当兵事倥偬，不废讲学，卒成大功。
现代文：原大臣王守仁，在行军打仗的空隙，还不忘记讲学，终于成就伟大的功业。
English: Wang Shouren, the former minister, did not forget to lecture in the gap between marching and fighting, and finally achieved great feats.

古文：此臣等所以不恤毁誉，而为此也。 
现代文：这就是我们不计较名誉得失而兴书院讲学的原因。 
English: This is the reason why we have set up the college lectures regardless of the loss of reputation.

古文：因再称疾求罢，帝温诏慰留。
现代文：于是再次称病辞职，皇帝下诏好言相劝，挽留他。
English: So he resigned again, saying he was ill, and the emperor issued an edict to persuade him to stay.

古文：而给事中郭允厚、郭兴治复相继诋元标甚力。
现代文：给事中郭允厚、郭兴治又先后极力诋毁邹元标。
English: Guo Yunhou and Guo Xingzhi both tried their best to defame Guo Yuanbiao.

古文：从吾又上言： 臣壮岁登朝，即与杨起元、孟化鲤、陶望龄辈立讲学会，自臣告归乃废。
现代文：冯从吾又上疏说： 我壮年时进入朝廷，就跟杨起元、孟化鲤、陶望龄等人创立讲学会，直到我告病回家才停止。
English: Feng Congwu said: When I entered the imperial court in my prime, I founded a lecture society with Yang Qiyuan, Meng Huayuan, Tao Wangling and others, and did not stop until I was sick and went home.

古文：京师讲学，昔已有之，何至今日遂为诟厉？ 
现代文：北京讲学，过去就有了，为什么直到今天才被谴责？ 
English: The Beijing lecture has existed in the past, so why has it only been condemned today?

古文：因再疏引归。
现代文：于是再次上疏辞职。
English: So he resigned again.

古文：四年春，起南京右都御史，累辞未上，召拜工部尚书。
现代文：天启四年春天，起用为南京右都御史，多次推辞没有批复，征召授官工部尚书。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of the Apocalypse, he was appointed as the head of the Imperial History Department of the Nanjing U.S. Capital. He was repeatedly rejected without reply, and was conscripted to the Ministry of Industry and Commerce.

古文：会赵南星、高攀龙相继去国，连疏力辞，予致仕。
现代文：正好赵南星、高攀龙相继离职，接连上疏极力推辞，让他辞官回家。
English: Just as Zhao Nansing and Gao Panglong left their posts one after another, Shang So was forced to resign, and he was allowed to return home.

古文：明年秋，魏忠贤党张讷疏诋从吾，削籍。
现代文：第二年秋天，魏忠贤的党羽张讷上疏诋毁冯从吾，剥夺官籍。
English: In the autumn of the following year, Wei Zhongxian's followers publicly slandered Feng Congwu and stripped him of his official status.

古文：乡人王绍徽素衔从吾，及为吏部，使乔应甲抚陕，捃摭百方，无所得。
现代文：同乡王绍徽一向怀恨冯从吾，等到在吏部任职，使乔应甲巡抚陕西，千方百计地搜集材料，但一无所获。
English: Wang Shaohui, a fellow villager, had always harbored a grudge against Feng Conger, until he was appointed to the personnel department and made Qiao Yingjia the governor of Shaanxi Province. He tried his best to collect materials, but nothing was found.

古文：乃毁书院，曳先圣像，掷之城隅。
现代文：于是毁坏书院，推倒先圣的像，丢在城角。
English: So they destroyed the college, tore down the statue of the first saint, and left it at the corner of the city.

古文：从吾不胜愤悒，得疾卒。
现代文：冯从吾非常愤怒、忧郁，得病死了。
English: Feng Congwu was very angry and depressed. He became ill and died.

古文：崇祯初，复官，赠太子太保，谥恭定。
现代文：崇祯初年，恢复官阶，赠封太子太保，谥号恭定。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the official ranks were restored, the title of Crown Prince Taibo was bestowed, and the posthumous title of Gongding was bestowed.

