古文：◎成祖三十二年春正月庚寅，思州苗平。
现代文：永乐十二年正月十五日，平定思州苗民。
English: On the 15th day of the first month of the 12th year of Yongle, the Miao people of Shizhou were pacified.

古文：辛丑，发山东、山西、河南及凤阳、淮安、徐、邳民十五万，运粮赴宣府。
现代文：二十六日，派遣山东、山西、河南及凤阳、淮安、徐、邳农民十五万运粮到宣府。
English: On the 26th, 150,000 farmers from Shandong, Shanxi, Henan, Fengyang, Huai'an, Xu and Handan were sent to transport grain to Xuanfu.

古文：二月己酉，大阅。
现代文：二月五日，举行大阅兵。
English: On February 5, a grand military parade was held.

古文：庚戌，亲征瓦剌，安远侯柳升领大营，武安侯郑亨领中军，宁阳侯陈懋、丰城侯李彬领左、右哨，成山侯王通、都督谭青领左、右掖，都督刘江、朱荣为前锋。
现代文：六日，亲征瓦剌，安远侯柳升领大营，武安侯郑亨领中军，宁阳侯陈懋、丰城侯李彬领左右哨，成山侯王通、都督谭青领左右掖，都督刘江、朱荣为前锋。
English: On the 6th, he personally led the campaign to capture Wawu, Anyuan marquis Liu Sheng led the main camp, Wu'an marquis Zheng Heng led the Chinese army, Ningyang marquis Chen Zhen, Fengcheng marquis Li Bin led the left and right posts, Chengshan marquis Wang Tong and governor Tan Qing led the left and right posts, and governor Liu Jiang and Zhu Rong were the forwards.

古文：庚申，振凤翔、陇州饥，按长吏不言者罪。
现代文：十六日，赈济凤翔、陇州饥荒，审察不说实情长吏罪行。
English: On the 16th, the Guizhou Feeding Fengxiang and the Guizhou Famine were investigated, and the crimes of officials who did not tell the truth were investigated.

古文：三月癸未，张辅俘陈季扩于老挝以献，交阯平。
现代文：三月十日，张辅在老挝俘获陈季扩献京师，平定交趾。
English: On March 10th, Zhang Yu captured Chen Ji Zhancheng's Beijing division in Laos, thus ending the war.

古文：庚寅，发北京，皇太孙从。
现代文：十七日，皇太孙随从成祖从北京出发。
English: On the 17th, the Emperor's grandson set off from Beijing with Cheng Zu.

古文：夏四月甲辰朔，次兴和，太阅。己酉，颁军中赏罚号令。
现代文：四月一日，住兴和，大阅兵。六日颁布军中赏罚号令。
English: On April 1st, a grand military parade was held in Juxinghe. On the 6th, the military issued a reward and punishment order.

古文：庚戌，设传令纪功官。
现代文：七日，设传令记功官。
English: On the 7th, the post of biographical record officer was established.

古文：丁卯，次屯云谷，孛罗不花等来降。
现代文：二十四日，临时住屯云谷，孛罗不花等前来投降。
English: On the 24th, he temporarily lived in Tun Yungu, and waited for Luo Fuxia to come and surrender.

古文：五月丁丑，命尚书、光禄卿、给事中为督阵官，察将士用命不用命者。
现代文：五月五日，命尚书、光禄卿、给事中为督阵官，检查将士是否听从皇帝命令。
English: On May 5, he ordered Shang Shu and Guang Luqing, who was the inspector of the line during the incident, to check whether the soldiers obeyed the emperor's order.

古文：六月甲辰，刘江遇瓦剌兵，战于康哈里孩，败之。
现代文：六月三日，刘江与瓦剌兵相遇，刘江大败瓦剌兵于康哈里孩。
English: On June 3, Liu Jiang met with the Varangian soldiers, and Liu Jiang defeated the Varangian soldiers in Kanghariya.

古文：戊申，次忽兰忽失温，马哈木帅众来犯，大败之，追至土剌河，马哈木宵遁。
现代文：七日，到忽兰忽失温，大败前来侵犯的马哈木军，追至土剌河，马哈木趁夜晚逃跑。
English: On the seventh day, the Mahagi army that came to invade Hulan suddenly lost heat and was defeated. They were chased to the Tuyi River, and Mahagi took advantage of the night to escape.

古文：庚戌，班师，宣捷于阿鲁台。戊午，次三峰山，阿鲁台遣使来朝。
现代文：九日，回师，向阿鲁台宣告胜利消息。十七日，住三峰山，阿鲁台前来朝见。
English: On the 9th, he returned to the division and announced the news of victory to Arutai. On the 17th, he lived in Sanfeng Mountain, and Arutai came to see him.

古文：己巳，以败瓦剌诏天下。
现代文：二十八日，因大败瓦剌兵而布告天下。
English: On the 28th, it announced to the world that it was withdrawing due to the crushing defeat at the hands of the Wafang soldiers.

古文：秋七月戊子，次红桥。
现代文：七月十七日，暂住红桥。
English: On July 17th, he temporarily moved to Hongqiao.

古文：诏六师入关有践田禾取民畜产者，以军法论。
现代文：诏告六师入关有践踏庄稼夺取民间牲畜产业者，以军法论处。
English: It was announced that the six divisions entering the customs had trampled on crops and seized the folk livestock industry, and were dealt with by military law.

古文：己亥，次沙河，皇太子遣使来迎。
现代文：二十八日，住沙河，皇太子派使臣迎接。
English: On the 28th, he stayed in Shahe, and the crown prince sent an envoy to welcome him.

古文：八月辛丑朔，至北京，御奉天殿受朝贺。
现代文：八月一日，到北京，在奉天殿受朝臣庆贺。
English: On August 1st, he went to Beijing and was congratulated by courtiers at the Bong Tian Dian.

古文：丙午，蠲北京州县租二年。
现代文：六日，免北京州县租税二年。
English: On the 6th, he was exempted from Beijing county tax for two years.

古文：戊午，赏从征将士。
现代文：七日，赏赐跟随征战将士。
English: On the seventh day, the award was given to the soldiers who followed the expedition.

古文：九月癸未，郭亮、徐亨备开平。
现代文：十二日，郭亮、徐亨在开平加强戒备。
English: On the 12th, Guo Liang and Xu Heng went on high alert in Kaiping.

古文：丙戌，靖州苗平。
现代文：十五日，平定靖州苗民。
English: On the 15th, the Miao people of Jingzhou were pacified.

古文：甲午，费瓛镇甘肃，刘江镇辽东。
现代文：二十三日，费王献镇守甘肃，刘江镇守辽东。
English: On the 23rd, Fei Wang offered to guard Gansu, and Liu Jiang offered to guard Liaodong.

古文：闰月甲辰，以太子遣使迎驾缓，徵侍读黄淮，侍讲杨士奇，正字金问及洗马杨溥、芮善下狱，未几释士奇复职。
现代文：闰九月四日，因太子遣使迎接皇帝缓慢，侍读黄淮、侍讲杨士奇、正字金问及洗马杨溥、芮善被投入监狱，不久杨士奇恢复原职。
English: On September 4th, because the prince's envoys were slow to meet the emperor, the attendant Huang Huai, the attendant Yang Shichi, the attendant Jin Qian, the attendant Ma Yang Qian, and the attendant Yao Shan were thrown into prison. Soon, Yang Shichi resumed his original position.

古文：甲子，召吴高还。
现代文：二十四日，召吴高回京。
English: On the 24th, Wu Gao was summoned back to Beijing.

古文：丁卯，都督朱荣镇大同。
现代文：二十七日，都督朱荣镇守大同。
English: On the 27th, Zhu Rong, the governor of Datong, arrived.

古文：冬十一月甲辰，录囚。
现代文：十月五日，审查囚犯。
English: On October 5, the prisoners were reviewed.

古文：庚戌，废晋王济熺为庶人。
现代文：十一日，废晋王济火喜为庶人。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the deposed Jin king Ji Huaxi became a commoner.

古文：庚申，蠲苏、松、杭、嘉、湖水灾田租四十七万九千余石。
现代文：二十一日，免苏、松、杭、嘉、湖州水灾区田租四十七万九千余石。
English: On the 21st, the land rent of more than 479,000 koku in the flood-stricken areas of Su, Song, Hang, Jia and Huzhou was exempted.

古文：是年，泥八剌国沙的新葛来朝，封为王。
现代文：这年，泥八剌国沙的新葛前来朝见皇帝，封其为王。
English: This year, the new geese of the muddy sand came to see the emperor and crowned him king.

古文：彭亨、乌斯茂入贡。
现代文：彭亨、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: Pengheng and Wushu paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：真腊进金缕衣。
现代文：真腊进贡金缕衣。
English: Real wax in tribute to gold wreaths.

古文：琉球中山王贡马。
现代文：琉球中山王进贡马匹。
English: Ryukyu mid-mountain king into tribute horses.

古文：榜葛剌贡麒麟。
现代文：榜葛剌进贡麒麟。
English: Punggye-soo pays tribute to Kirin.

古文：十三年春正月丙午，塞居庸以北隘口。
现代文：永乐十三年正月七日，堵塞居庸以北关口。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of the 13th year of Yongle, the north pass of Juyong was blocked.

古文：丁未，马哈木谢罪请朝贡，许之。
现代文：八日，马哈木谢罪请求入朝进贡，皇帝允许了。
English: On the eighth day, Mahamushi requested to pay tribute to the emperor, and the emperor allowed it.

古文：壬子，北京午门灾。
现代文：十三日，北京午门发生火灾。
English: On the 13th, a fire broke out in Beijing's Noon Gate.

古文：戊午，敕内外诸司蠲诸宿逋，将士军官犯罪者悉宥之。
现代文：十九日，斥责内外有关部门减免所有逃跑在外之人罪行，将士军官犯罪的一律宽大。
English: On the 19th, it reprimanded the relevant departments at home and abroad to commute the crimes of all those who fled abroad, and to be lenient with all crimes committed by officers.

古文：二月癸酉，遣指挥刘斌、给事中张磐等十二人巡视山西、山东、大同、陕西、甘肃、辽东军操练、屯政，核实以闻。
现代文：二月五日，派指挥刘斌、给事中张磐等十二人巡视山西、山东、大同、陕西、甘肃、辽东军士操练、屯政，核实上报。
English: On February 5, twelve people, including commanders Liu Bin and Zhang Ban, were sent to inspect Shanxi, Shandong, Datong, Shaanxi, Gansu and Liaodong military drill and military camp, and verify the report.

古文：甲戌，命行在礼部会试天下贡士。
现代文：六日，命礼部执行会试天下贡士之事。
English: On the 6th, the Executive Committee of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies tried to get the world's tribute.

古文：癸未，张辅等师还。
现代文：十五日，张辅等回师。
English: On the 15th, Zhang Yu waited for the coach.

古文：戊子，论平交阯功，赏赉有差。
现代文：二十日，议评平定交趾功劳，赏赐各有差别。
English: On the 20th, it was discussed that there were differences in the awards given to the most meritorious members of the fraternity.

古文：三月己亥，策士于北京，赐陈循等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月一日，在北京举行考试，赐陈循等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On March 1, an examination was held in Beijing, awarding Chen Cui and other candidates with different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：丙午，广西蛮叛，指挥同知葛森讨平之。
现代文：八日，广西蛮叛乱，指挥同知葛森讨伐并平定。
English: On the 8th, Guangxi rebelled violently, led by comrade Gessen, and was put down.

古文：夏四月戊辰，张辅镇交阯。
现代文：四月一日，张辅镇守交趾。
English: On April 1st, Zhangyuan Town Guard was attacked.

古文：五月丁酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月一日，有日食。
English: On May 1st, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：乙丑，凿清江浦，通北京漕运。
现代文：二十九日，开凿清江浦，开通至北京漕运。
English: On the 29th, Qingjiangpu was excavated and opened to Beijing.

古文：六月，振北京、河南、山东水灾。
现代文：六月，救济北京、河南、山东水灾。
English: In June, the relief of Beijing, Henan and Shandong floods began.

古文：秋七月癸卯，郑和还。
现代文：七月八日，郑和使西洋回国。
English: On July 8th, Zheng He returned to China.

古文：乙巳，四川戎县山都掌蛮平。
现代文：十日，平定四川戎县山都掌蛮。
English: On the 10th, the mountainous area of Ebisu County in Sichuan Province was pacified.

古文：八月庚辰，振山东、河南、北京顺天州县饥。
现代文：八月十六日，赈济山东、河南、北京、顺天州县饥荒。
English: On August 16, famine broke out in Shandong Province, Henan Province, Beijing Province and Shuntianzhou County.

古文：九月壬戌，北京地震。
现代文：九月二十八日，北京发生地震。
English: On September 28, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：冬十月甲申，猎于近郊。
现代文：十月二十一日，在北京近郊打猎。
English: On October 21, I went hunting in the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：壬辰，法司奏侵冒官粮者，帝怒，命戮之。
现代文：二十九日，执法部门上奏侵夺冒领官粮的人，皇帝大怒，命令将其杀掉。
English: On the 29th, the law enforcement department reported the person who stole the official grain, the emperor was furious and ordered to kill him.

古文：及覆奏，帝曰： 朕过矣，仍论如律，自今死罪者皆五覆奏，著为令。 
现代文：到覆奏时，皇帝说： 这是我的过失，仍要以法律为准绳，自今起判死罪仍要五次覆奏，要明文为法。 
English: When it came to the rehearing, the emperor said, "This is my fault. The law must still be used as the standard. From now on, death sentences must still be reheard five times, and the law must be made clear.

古文：十二月，蠲顺天、苏州、凤阳、浙江、湖广、河南、山东州县水旱田租。
现代文：十二月，因顺天、苏州、凤阳、浙江、湖广、河南、山东州县水灾，免除田租。
English: In December, due to floods in Shuntian, Suzhou, Fengyang, Zhejiang, Huguang, Henan and Shandong Prefecture, the field rent was exempted.

古文：是年，琉球山南、山北，爪哇西王，占城，古里，柯枝，南渤利，甘巴里，满剌加，忽鲁谟斯，哈密，哈烈，撒马儿罕，火州，土鲁番，苏门答剌，俺都淮，失剌思入贡。
现代文：这一年，琉球山南、山北，爪哇西王，占城，古里，柯枝，南渤利，甘巴里，满剌加，忽鲁谟斯，哈密，哈烈，撒马儿罕，火州，吐鲁番，苏门答剌，俺都淮，失剌思入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Ryukyu Shannan, Shanbei, Java Xiwang, Zhancheng, Guli, Kezhi, Nanqili, Gambari, Manchukuo, Hulhumus, Hami, Harei, Samarkand, Huzhou, Turpan, Sumendakun, I was all excited and lost in thought about the morning tribute.

古文：麻林及诸番进麒麟、天马、神鹿。
现代文：麻林及诸番进献麒麟、天马、神鹿。
English: Ma Lin and others presented gifts of unicorns, heavenly horses, and sacred deer.

古文：琉球中山入贡者再。
现代文：琉球中山两次入贡。
English: Ryukyu Nakayama twice paid tribute.

古文：十四年春正月己酉，北京、河南、山东饥，免永乐十二年逋租，发粟一百三十七万石有奇振之。
现代文：永乐十四年正月十六日，北京、河南、山东饥荒，免永乐十二年欠交田租，发一百三十七万余石赈济。
English: On the 16th day of the first month of the 14th year of Yongle, Beijing, Henan Province and Shandong Province were freed from famine, the arrears of field rent in the 12th year of Yongle were exempted, and more than 1.37 million koku of rice was distributed.

古文：辛酉，都督金玉讨山西广灵山寇，平之。
现代文：二十八日，都督金玉征讨山西、广灵山寇并平定。
English: On the 28th, the prefectural governor Jin Yu led a crusade against the Shanxi and Guangling mountain bandits and subdued them.

古文：三月癸巳，都督梁福镇湖广、贵州。
现代文：三月一日，都督梁福镇守湖广、贵州。
English: On March 1, Liang Fuzhen, the prefectural governor of Guizhou, became the governor of Huguang.

古文：壬寅，阿鲁台败瓦剌，来献捷。
现代文：十日，阿鲁台打败瓦剌，特报告胜利捷报。
English: On the 10th, Alutai defeated Wawu, and made a special report on the victory.

古文：夏四月壬申，礼部尚书吕震请封禅。
现代文：四月十日，礼部尚书吕震请求封禅。
English: On April 10th, the head of the ritual department, Shangshu Lv Zhen, requested the sealing of Zen.

古文：帝曰： 今天下虽无事，四方多水旱疾疫，安敢自谓太平。
现代文：成祖说： 现在天下虽太平无事，但四方多发生水灾疾疫，怎么敢自称太平。
English: Cheng Zu said: Although there is peace and tranquility in the world now, there are more floods, diseases and epidemics in all four directions. How dare they call themselves peaceful?

古文：乙巳，锦衣卫指挥使纪纲有罪伏诛。
现代文：而且《六经》没有封禅之文，事不学古人，没什么意思。 不听。六月十六日，掌管锦衣卫卫士都指挥佥事纪纲犯罪被杀。
English: Moreover, the "Six Classics" does not have the text of the seal of Zen, and it is not interesting to learn from the ancients. Do not listen. On June 16, the person in charge of the brocade guards was killed.

古文：八月癸酉旦，寿星见，礼臣请上表贺，不许。
现代文：八月十四日，清晨，出现寿星，礼臣请求上奏祝贺，不许。
English: On August 14th, in the early morning, a birthday star appeared, and the courtiers requested that congratulations be sent, but they were not allowed.

古文：丁亥，作北京西宫。
现代文：二十日，建北京西宫。
English: On the 20th, the West Palace was built in Beijing.

古文：九月癸卯，京师地震。
现代文：九月十五日，京师发生地震。
English: September 25th, Beijing earthquake.

古文：戊申，发北京。
现代文：二十日，从北京出发。
English: On the 20th, they set off from Beijing.

古文：冬下月丁丑，次凤阳，祀皇陵。
现代文：十月十九日，临住凤阳，祭皇陵。
English: On October 19th, he stayed in Fengyang and visited the imperial mausoleum.

古文：癸未，至自北京，谒孝陵。
现代文：二十五日，从北京拜谒孝陵。
English: On the 25th, they came from Beijing to pay their respects at the Mausoleum of Sun Yat-sen.

古文：十一月壬寅，诏文武群臣集议营建北京。
现代文：十一月十五日，召集文武群臣商议营建北京城。
English: On November 15th, a group of civil and military officials were convened to discuss the construction of Beijing City.

古文：丙午，召张辅还。
现代文：十九日，召张辅回京。
English: On the 19th, Zhang Fu was summoned back to Beijing.

古文：戊申，汉王高煦有罪，削二护卫。
现代文：二十一日，汉王高煦有罪，削减护卫两名。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Han Wang Gaoqin was found guilty and his escort was reduced by two.

古文：徙山东、山西、湖广流民于保安州，赐复三年。
现代文：迁山东、山西、湖广流民于保定州，又连续三年赏赐。
English: The resettlement of Shandong, Shanxi and Hukang refugees to Baoding has been awarded for three consecutive years.

古文：十二月丁卯，郑和复使西洋。
现代文：十二月十日，郑和再次出使西洋。
English: On December 10, Zheng He once again sent an envoy to the West.

古文：是年，占城、古里、爪哇、满剌加、苏门答剌、南巫里、浡泥、彭亨、锡兰山、溜山、南渤利、阿丹、麻林、忽鲁谟斯、柯枝入贡。
现代文：本年，占城、古里、爪哇、满剌加、苏门答剌、南巫里、氵孛泥、彭亨、锡兰山、溜山、南氵孛利、阿丹、麻林、忽鲁谟斯、柯枝入朝进贡。
English: This year, Zhancheng, Guli, Java, Manchukuo, Sumatra, Sumatra, South Wuli, Putuo, Pengheng, Mount Ceylon, Lushan, South Guli, Adan, Malin, Hulhumus, and Gochirim paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：琉球中山入贡者再。
现代文：琉球中山第二次来贡。
English: Ryukyu Nakayama twice paid tribute.

古文：十五年春正月丁酉，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：永乐十五年春一月十日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 10th day of January in the spring of the 15th year of Yongle, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs.

古文：壬子，平江伯陈瑄督漕，运木赴北京。
现代文：二十五日，平江伯陈蠧总督漕运，运木材到北京。
English: On the 25th, the governor of Pingjiang, Bo Chenqi, made a rowing trip to transport timber to Beijing.

古文：二月癸亥，谷王橞有罪，废为庶人。
现代文：二月六日，谷王朱木惠犯罪，废为庶人。
English: On February 6, Gu Wang Zhu Mu Hui committed a crime and was dethroned as a commoner.

古文：丁卯，丰城侯李彬镇交阯。
现代文：十日，丰城侯李彬镇守交趾。
English: On the 10th, Fengcheng marquis Li Bin, the town guard, came to visit.

古文：壬申，泰宁侯陈珪董建北京，柳升、王通副之。
现代文：十五日，泰宁侯陈王圭监督营建北京，柳升、王通为其副将。
English: On the 15th, Taining Hou Chen Wang Gui oversaw the construction of Beijing, with Liu Sheng and Wang Tong as vice generals.

古文：三月丁亥，交阯始贡士至京师。
现代文：三月一日，交趾贡士至京师。
English: On March 1st, Koji Gonshi left for the capital.

古文：丙申，杂犯死罪以下囚，输作北京赎罪。
现代文：十日，杂犯死罪以下的犯人运到北京劳动以赎罪。
English: On the 10th, minor offenders and prisoners with less than capital crimes were transported to Beijing to work to atone for their sins.

古文：丙午，汉王高煦有罪，徙封乐安州。
现代文：二十日，汉王高煦犯罪，迁封乐安州。
English: On the 20th, Han Wang Gaoqin committed a crime and was transferred to Le An Prefecture.

古文：壬子，北巡，发京师，皇太子监国。
现代文：十二日，从京师出发北巡，由皇太子监国。
English: On the 12th, a northern tour set out from Beijing, with the crown prince overseeing the country.

古文：夏四月己巳，次邾城。
现代文：四月十三日，住邾城。
English: April 13th, Zhuye City.

古文：申禁军士毋践民田稼，有伤者除今年租。
现代文：重申禁止军士践踏民田庄稼，有被损害的减除今年田租。
English: Reaffirm the prohibition of soldiers trampling on the crops of private fields, and the reduction of this year's field rent for those who have been damaged.

古文：或先被水旱逋租，亦除之。
现代文：先遭水灾欠交租税一并免除。
English: Those who failed to pay taxes due to the floods are also exempted.

古文：癸未，西宫成。
现代文：二十七日，北京西宫修成。
English: On the 27th, Beijing Xigong was completed.

古文：五月丙戌，至北京。
现代文：五月一日，成祖到北京。
English: On May 1, Chengzu arrived in Beijing.

古文：六月丁酉，李彬讨交阯贼黎核，斩之。
现代文：六月十三日，李彬征讨交趾贼黎核并杀死黎氏。
English: On June 13th, Li Bin enlisted the help of Li Jia, a fellow thief, and killed Li Jie.

古文：己亥，中官张谦使西洋还。
现代文：十五日，中官张谦出使西洋回京。
English: On the 15th, Lieutenant General Zhang Qian sent an envoy to the West to return to Beijing.

古文：败倭寇于金乡卫。秋八月甲午，瓯宁人进金丹。
现代文：在金乡卫打败倭寇。八月十一日，瓯宁人进献金丹。
English: In Jinxiangwei, they defeated the wokou. On August 11th, the people of Suining made a donation of gold dust.

古文：帝曰： 此妖人也。令自饵之，毁其方旧。 
现代文：成祖说： 这是个妖人，命他自杀，毁掉方书。 
English: Cheng Zu said: This is a demon, order him to commit suicide and destroy Fang Shu.

古文：九月丁卯，曲阜孔子庙成，帝亲制文勒石。
现代文：九月十五日，曲阜孔庙修成，成祖亲自撰文并刻于石碑上。
English: On September 15, the Qufu Confucius Temple was completed, and Chengzu personally wrote an article and engraved it on the stone monument.

古文：冬十月，李彬败交阯贼杨进江，斩之。
现代文：冬十月，李彬打败并斩杀交趾贼杨进江。
English: In the winter of October, Li Bin defeated and killed Yang Jinjiang, a fellow thief.

古文：十一月癸酉，礼部尚书赵羽兵部尚书，巡视塞北屯戍军民利弊。
现代文：十二月二十二日，礼部尚书赵羽工任兵部尚书，巡视塞北屯田戍卫及军民利弊。
English: On December 22nd, Zhao Yu, the ceremonial secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed as the military secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and inspected the North Saipan military garrison and the advantages and disadvantages of the military and the people.

古文：是年，西洋苏禄东西峒王来朝。
现代文：这年，西洋苏禄东、西峒王朝见皇帝。
English: In the same year, the Western Sulu East and West Gobi dynasties met with the emperor.

古文：琉球中山、别失八里、琉球山南、真腊、浡泥、占城、暹罗、哈烈，撒马儿人贡。
现代文：琉球中山、别失八里、琉球山南、真腊、氵孛泥、占城、暹罗、哈烈、撒马儿罕入朝进贡。
English: Ryukyu Nakayama, Beppu Hachiri, Ryukyu Shannan, Jinra, Huludao, Zhancheng, Siam, Halei, Samarkand paid tribute to the dynasty.

古文：十六年春正月甲寅，交阯黎利反，都督朱广击败之。
现代文：永乐十六年正月三日，交趾黎利反叛，被都督朱广击败。
English: On the third day of the first month of the 16th year of Yongle, Koji Lili rebelled and was defeated by the governor Zhu Guang.

古文：甲戌，倭陷松门卫，按察司佥事石鲁坐诛。
现代文：二十三日，倭寇攻陷松门卫，按察司佥事石鲁犯罪被诛灭。
English: On the 23rd, the wokou attacked and captured the pine gatekeeper, and according to the inspector's report, Shilu's crime was wiped out.

古文：兴安伯徐亨、都督夏贵备开平。
现代文：兴安伯徐亨、都督夏贵防备开平。
English: Xing'an Mayor Xu Heng, and Governor Xia Gui are preparing for Kaiping.

古文：二月辛丑，交阯四忙县贼杀知县欧阳智以叛，李彬遣将击走之。
现代文：二月二十日，交趾四忙县贼杀知县欧阳智，发动叛乱，被李彬派兵赶走。
English: On the 20th of February, the bandits in Shichixia County killed Ouyang Zhi in Ouyang Zhi County, launched a rebellion, and were driven away by Li Bin.

古文：三月甲寅，赐李骐等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月四日，赏赐李骐等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On March 4th, awards were given to the likes of Li Jie and others, with different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：都督佥事刘鉴备边大同。
现代文：都督佥事刘鉴防备大同边境。
English: Liu Jian's anecdote about the protection of the Datong border.

古文：夏五月庚戌，重修《太祖实录》成。
现代文：五月一日，《太祖实录》修成。八日，胡广死。
English: On May 1, the "Ancestral Record" was completed. On the 8th, Hu Guang died.

古文：丁巳，胡广卒。秋七月己巳，敕责陕西诸司： 比闻所属岁屡不登，致民流莩，有司坐视不恤，又不以闻，其咎安在。
现代文：七月二十日，斥责陕西各有关部门： 连连听说所属郡县庄稼年年不丰收，有关部门观望而不去救济，又不报告，其罪过在哪里。
English: On July 20, he reprimanded all relevant departments in Shaanxi Province: "I have heard repeatedly that the crops in my county and county are not plentiful year after year. The relevant departments are watching, but do not go for relief, and do not report. What is their fault?"

古文：其速发仓储振之。 
现代文：应立即开仓发储存之粮救济。 
English: Grain relief stocks should be opened immediately.

古文：赞善梁潜、司谏周冕以辅导皇太子有阙，皆下狱死。
现代文：赞善梁潜、司谏周冕因辅导皇太子有过错，全部下狱处死。
English: Zanzan Liangqian and priest Zhou Guan were all sent to prison and executed for coaching the crown prince.

古文：冬十二月戊子，谕法司： 朕屡敕中外官洁己爱民，而不肖官吏恣肆自若，百姓苦之。
现代文：十二月十三日，太祖告诉有关法令部门： 我经常告诫中外官吏洁己爱民，而不孝顺官吏肆意按自己主张办事，百姓深受其苦。
English: On December 13, the great-grandfather told the relevant legal departments: I often admonish Chinese and foreign officials to be pure and love the people, but unfilial officials wantonly act according to their own ideas, and the people suffer from it.

古文：夫良农必去稂莠者，为害苗也。
现代文：好农民必须除掉稂莠，因为它是害苗。
English: A good farmer must get rid of the earthworm, because it is a pest of seedlings.

古文：继今，犯赃必论如法。 
现代文：直到今天，用不正当手段侵犯他人必须依法论处。 
English: To this day, using improper means to violate others must be dealt with in accordance with the law.

古文：辛丑，成山侯王通驰传振陕西饥。
现代文：二十六日，成山侯王通通过驿站传讯赈济陕西饥荒。
English: On the 26th, Chengshan Hou Wang Tong sent a message to the famine in Shaanxi Province through the post.

古文：是年，暹罗、占城、爪哇、苏门答剌、泥八剌、满剌加、南渤利、哈烈、沙哈鲁、千里达、撒马儿罕入贡。
现代文：这一年，暹罗、占城、爪哇、苏门答剌、泥八剌、满剌加、南渤利、哈烈、沙哈鲁、千里达、撒马尔罕入朝进贡。
English: In the same year, Siam, Champa, Java, Sumatra, Java, Manchukuo, Manchukuo, Nanchang, Haryana, Sakhalin, Chillida, and Samarkand paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：琉球中山入贡者再。
现代文：琉球中山两次入贡。
English: Ryukyu Nakayama twice paid tribute.

古文：十七年春二月乙酉，兴安伯徐亨备兴和、开平、大同。
现代文：永乐十七年二月十日，兴安伯徐亨防备兴和、开平、大同。
English: On February 10th, Yongle 17th year, Xing'an Bo Xu Heng defended against Xinghe, Kaiping and Datong.

古文：夏五月丙午，都督方政败黎利于可蓝栅。
现代文：五月二日，都督方政在可蓝栅打败黎利。
English: On May 2nd, Governor Fang Zheng defeated Lili in Kailangzhu.

古文：六月壬午，免顺天府去年水灾田租。
现代文：六月九日，因顺天府去年水灾，免除田租。
English: On June 9th, as a result of last year's floods in Shuntianfu, rice field rent was exempted.

古文：戊子，刘江歼倭寇于望海埚，封江广宁伯。
现代文：七日，刘江在望海埚歼灭倭寇，封刘江为广宁伯。
English: On the seventh day, Liu Jiang annihilated the wokou in Wanghaicheng, and Liu Jiang was named Guangningbo.

古文：秋七月庚申，郑和还。
现代文：七月十七日，郑和回京。
English: On July 17, Zheng He returned to Beijing.

古文：八月，中官马骐激交阯乂安土知府潘僚反。
现代文：八月，中官马骐激怒交趾，安土知府潘僚造反。
English: In August, Lieutenant-Colonel Ma Jun infuriated his comrades, and the Pan colleagues of the Ando Prefecture rebelled.

古文：九月丙辰，庆云见，礼臣请表贺，不许。
现代文：九月十四日，有福云出现。礼臣请求庆贺，未得到允许。
English: On September 14th, a lucky cloud appeared. The courtiers requested to celebrate, but were not allowed.

古文：冬十二月庚辰，谕法司曰： 刑者，圣人所慎。匹夫匹妇不得其死，足伤天地之和，召水旱之灾，甚非朕宽恤之意。
现代文：十二月十日，告诉有关法律部门说： 用刑，是圣人所谨慎的，平民百姓免其一死，足够损伤天下之和气，招致水旱之灾，并非朕宽恤之意。
English: On December 10th, he told the relevant legal department: "The use of punishment is prudent for a saint, and for the common people to be spared his death is enough to damage the harmony of the world and cause floods and droughts. It is not my intention to be lenient.

古文：自今，在外诸司死罪，咸送京师审录，三覆奏然后行刑。 
现代文：从今起，在外诸负责人判死罪，全部送到京师审查，三次覆奏然后执行。 
English: From now on, the responsible persons outside the capital will be sentenced to death, all of which will be sent to the Beijing Division for review, and then executed after being replayed three times.

古文：乙未，工部侍郎刘仲廉核实交阯户口田赋，察军民利病。
现代文：二十五日，工部侍郎刘仲廉核实交趾户口田赋，察看军民好处和弊端。
English: On the 25th, Liu Zhonglian, a staff sergeant of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, verified the interlocking households and fields, and observed the benefits and drawbacks of the military and the people.

古文：是年，哈密、土鲁番、失剌思、亦思弗罕、真腊、占城、哈烈、阿鲁、南渤利、苏门答剌、八答黑商、满剌加入贡。
现代文：这一年，哈密、吐鲁番、失剌思、亦思弗罕、真腊、占城、哈烈、阿鲁、南縨利、苏门答剌、八答黑商、满剌加入朝进贡。
English: In the same year, Hami, Trupan, Zhouzhuizhong, Yizhifang, Zhenla, Zhancheng, Hale, Aru, Nanqili, Sumantawang, Batawang and Manchukuo joined the tributes to the North.

古文：琉球中山入贡者四。
现代文：琉球中山四次入贡。
English: Ryukyu Nakayama came four times to pay tribute.

古文：十八年春正月癸卯，李彬及都指挥孙霖、徐謜败黎利于磊江。
现代文：永乐十八年春一月四日，李彬及都指挥孙霖、徐讠原在磊江打败黎利。
English: In the spring of 18th year of Yongle, on January 4th, Li Bin and the two commanders Sun Lin and Xu Bingyuan defeated Lili in Leijiang.

古文：闰月丙子，翰林院学士杨荣、金幼孜为文渊阁大学士。
现代文：闰正月七日翰林院学士杨荣、金幼孜为文渊阁大学士。
English: On the 7th day of the leap month, Yang Rong, a bachelor of Hanlin Academy, and Jin Yuzi, a bachelor of Wenyu Academy.

古文：庚辰，擢人材，布衣马麟等十三人为布政使、参政、参议。
现代文：十一日，提拔人才，布衣马麟等十三人分别提为布政使、参政、参议。
English: On the 11th day, talents were promoted, and 13 people, including Buyi Malin, were promoted to cloth political envoy, political participation, and participation in deliberation.

古文：二月己酉，薄台妖妇唐赛儿作乱，安远侯柳升帅师讨之。
现代文：二月十一日，蒲台妖妇唐赛儿叛乱，安远侯柳升率师镇压。
English: On February 11th, the Putai demoness Tang Xie Er rebelled, and Anyuan Hou Liu Sheng led the division to suppress it.

古文：三月辛巳，败贼于御石栅寨，都指挥刘忠战没，赛儿逸去。
现代文：三月十三日，在卸石栅寨打败妖妇唐赛儿，都指挥刘忠战死，唐赛儿逃跑。
English: On March 13th, after defeating the sorceress Tang Xie Er at the stone-dumping site, Liu Zhong was killed and Tang Xie Er fled.

古文：甲申，山东都指挥佥事卫青败贼于安丘，指挥王真败贼于诸城，献俘京师。
现代文：十六日，山东都指挥佥事卫青在安丘打败唐赛儿，指挥王真又败唐赛儿于诸城，持俘虏进献京师。
English: On the 16th, the Shandong Du commander Anji Wei Qing defeated Tang Xiel in Anqiu, and the commander Wang Zhen defeated Tang Xiel in Zhucheng, and took prisoners to the Beijing Division.

古文：戊子，山东布政使储埏、张海，按察使刘本等坐纵盗诛。
现代文：二十日，山东布政使储埏、张海，按察使刘本等因纵容盗贼犯罪被诛杀。
English: On the 20th, Shandong Provincial Political Envoys Zhu Rong, Zhang Hai, and Deputy Inspector Liu Ben were beaten to death for condoning the crime of theft.

古文：戊戌，以逗留徵柳升下吏，寻释之。
现代文：三十日，以逗留为名诏柳升入狱，不久释放。
English: On the 30th, Zhao Liu Sheng was sent to prison in the name of staying, and was soon released.

古文：夏五月壬午，左都督朱荣镇辽东。
现代文：五月十五日，左都督朱荣镇守辽东。
English: On May 15, Zhu Rongzhen, the left-wing governor, took over as governor of Liaodong.

古文：庚寅，交阯参政侯保、冯贵御贼，战死。
现代文：二十三日交趾参政侯保、冯贵抵御盗贼，战死。
English: On the 23rd day of the month, the political advisors Hou Bao and Feng Gui resisted the thieves and died in battle.

古文：六月丙午，北京地震。
现代文：六月九日，北京发生地震。
English: On June 9, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：秋七月丁亥，徐亨备开平。
现代文：七月二十一日，徐亨防备开平。
English: On July 21st, Xu Heng's defense preparations began.

古文：八月丁酉朔，日有食之。九月己巳，召皇太子。
现代文：八月一日，有日食。九月四日，召见皇太子。
English: On August 1st, there was a solar eclipse. On September 4th, the crown prince was summoned.

古文：丁亥，诏自明年改京师为南京，北京为京师。
现代文：二十二日，下诏从明年开始，改京师为南京，北京为京师。
English: On the 22nd, the following edict announced that from next year, the capital would be changed from Beijing to Nanjing, and Beijing to Beijing.

古文：冬十月庚申，李彬遣指挥使方政败黎利于老挝。
现代文：十月二十五日，李彬遣指挥使方政在老挝打败黎利。
English: On October 25th, Li Bin sent a command to Fang Zheng to defeat Lili in Laos.

古文：十一月戊辰，以迁都北京诏天下。
现代文：十一月四日，因迁都北京而诏告天下。
English: On November 4, it was announced to the world that the capital would be moved to Beijing.

古文：是月，振青、菜饥。
现代文：当月，赈济青、莱二州饥荒。
English: That month, famine broke out in the two prefectures of Fujian and Fujian.

古文：十二月己未，皇太子及皇太孙至北京。
现代文：十二月二十五日皇太子及皇太孙到北京。
English: On December 25, the crown prince and the great-grandson of the emperor left for Beijing.

古文：癸亥，北京郊庙宫殿成。
现代文：二十九日，北京郊庙宫殿修成。
English: On the 29th, the Beijing suburb temple palace was completed.

古文：是年，始设东厂，命中官剌事。
现代文：这一年，开始设东厂，命中官刺探秘密情报。
English: In this year, the East Factory began to be set up, and the hitman spied on secret information.

古文：古麻剌朗王来朝。
现代文：古麻剌朗王前来朝见皇帝。
English: King Komasaburo came to see the emperor.

古文：暹罗、占城、爪哇、满剌加、苏门答剌、苏禄西王入贡。
现代文：暹罗、占城、爪哇、满剌加、苏门答剌、苏禄西王入朝进贡。
English: The kings of Siam, Champa, Java, Manchukuo, Sumatra, and Sulu paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：十九年春正月甲子朔，奉安五庙神主于太庙。
现代文：永乐十九年正月一日，进献安放五庙神主于太庙。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 19th year of Yongle, the five temple deities were enshrined in the Great Temple.

古文：御奉天殿受朝贺，大宴。
现代文：成祖在奉天殿接受朝臣庆贺，大摆宴席。
English: Chiso received congratulations from the courtiers at the Bongten Hall and a grand banquet was held.

古文：甲戌，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十一日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 11th day, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs.

古文：戊寅，大赦天下。
现代文：十五日，大赦天下。
English: On the 15th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：癸巳，郑和复使西洋。
现代文：三十日，郑和再次出使西洋。
English: On the 16th, Zheng He sent another envoy to the West.

古文：二月辛丑，都督佥事胡原帅师巡海捕倭。
现代文：二月八日，都督佥事胡原率师巡逻海上捕捉倭寇。
English: On February 8th, Hu Yuan led his division on a patrol to capture wako at sea.

古文：三月辛巳，赐曾鹤龄等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十九日，赐曾鹤龄等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On March 19th, Ji Zenghering and other new recruits were awarded with different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：夏四月庚子，奉天、华盖、谨身三殿灾，诏群臣直陈阙失。
现代文：四月八日，奉天、华盖、谨身三殿火灾，诏谕群臣直接陈述灾难损失。
English: On April 8th, the fire broke out in the three halls of Fengtian, Huagai, and Zhiming, and the ministers were ordered to directly report the disaster losses.

古文：乙巳，诏罢不便于民及不急诸务，蠲十七年以前逋赋，免去年被灾田粮。
现代文：十三日，下诏停止与民无益及不急需办理之事，减免十七年以前欠交赋税，免去去年遭灾地方田粮。
English: On the 13th, the following edict was issued to stop dealing with matters that are not beneficial to the people and do not need to be dealt with urgently, to reduce and exempt the tax arrears before the 17th, and to exempt the local crops that were affected by the disaster last year.

古文：己酉，万寿节，以三殿灾止贺。
现代文：十七日，因有三殿火灾而停止万寿节庆典。
English: On the 17th, due to the fire in Sanden, the celebration of the Manju Festival was stopped.

古文：癸丑，蹇义等二十六人巡行天下，安抚军民。
现代文：二十一日，蹇义等二十六人巡行天下，安抚军民。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, twenty-six people, including Xing Yi, toured the country to pacify the military and the people.

古文：五月乙丑，出建言给事中柯暹，御史何忠、郑维桓、罗通等为知州。
现代文：五月四日，建言给事中柯暹、郑维桓、罗通等贬为知州。二十九日，命交趾屯田。
English: On May 4, Ke Siem, Zheng Wei Huan, and Rotong, among others, were recommended to be demoted to Chizhou, and on the 29th, their fate was intertwined with Tonden.

古文：庚寅，令交阯屯田。秋七月己巳，帝将北征，敕都督朱荣领前锋，安远侯柳升领中军，宁阳侯陈懋领御前精骑，永顺伯薛斌、恭顺伯吴克忠领马队，武安侯郑亨、阳武侯薛禄领左右哨，英国公张辅、成山侯王通领左右掖。
现代文：七月九日，成祖准备北征，命都督朱荣领前锋，安远侯柳升领中军，宁阳侯陈懋领皇帝前面精选骑兵，永顺伯薛斌、恭顺伯吴克忠领马队，武安侯郑亨、阳武侯薛禄领左、右哨，英国公张辅、成山侯王通领左、右掖。
English: On July 9, Cheng Zu prepared for the Northern Expedition. He ordered the governor Zhu Rong to lead the vanguard, Anyuan Hou Liu Sheng to lead the Central Army, Ningyang Hou Chen Yu to lead the emperor's front-line cavalry, Yongshun Bo Xuebin and Gongshun Bo Wu Kezhong to lead the cavalry, Wu'an Hou Zhengheng and Yangwu Hou Xueruo to lead the left and right posts, and British Gong Zhang Fu and Chengshan Hou Wang Tong to lead the left and right posts.

古文：八月辛卯朔，日有食之。冬十一月辛酉，分遣中官杨实、御史戴诚等核天下库藏出纳之数。
现代文：十八日，有日食。十一月二日，分遣中官杨实、御史戴诚等核实天下库藏及出纳数目。
English: On the 18th, there was a solar eclipse. On November 2nd, Lieutenant Colonel Yang Shih and Grand Historian Dai Cheng were dispatched to verify the number of treasuries and cash registers in the world.

古文：丙子，议北征军饷，下户部尚书夏原吉、刑部尚书吴中于狱，兵部尚书方宾自杀。
现代文：十七日，讨论北征军饷，户部尚书夏原吉、刑部尚书吴中被下狱，兵部尚书方宾自杀。
English: On the seventeenth day, discussing the Northern Expedition, the head of the household, Shangshu Xia Yuanji, and the head of the criminal department, Shangshu Wu, were sent to prison, and the head of the military department, Shangshu Fangbin, committed suicide.

古文：辛巳，下侍读李时勉于狱。
现代文：二十二日，侍读李时勉下狱。
English: On the 22nd, Li Shimin was released from prison.

古文：甲申，发直隶、山西、河南、山东及南畿应天等五府，滁、和、徐三州丁壮运粮，期明年二月至宣府。
现代文：二十五日，派遣直隶、山西、河南、山东及南郊应天等五府和滁、和、徐三州壮丁运送粮饷，打算明年二月至宣府。
English: On the 25th, it dispatched soldiers from five prefectures including Zhili, Shanxi, Henan, Shandong and the southern suburb of Yingtian, as well as soldiers from three prefectures of Hebei, Hebei and Hebei to transport grain and plan to go to Xuanfu in February next year.

古文：是年，瓦剌贤义王太平、安乐王把秃孛罗来朝。
现代文：这年，瓦剌贤义王太平、安乐王把秃孛罗前来朝见皇帝。
English: In this year, King Varangian Xianyi, King Taiping, and King Anle brought Vulture Luo to meet the emperor.

古文：忽鲁谟斯、阿丹、祖法儿、剌撒、不剌哇、木骨都束、古里、柯枝、加异勒、锡兰山、溜山、南渤利、苏门答剌、阿鲁、满剌加、甘巴里、苏禄、榜葛剌、浡泥、古麻剌朗王入贡。
现代文：忽鲁谟斯、阿丹、祖法儿、剌撒、不剌哇、木骨都束、古里、柯枝、加异勒、锡兰山、溜山南縨利、苏门答剌、阿鲁、满剌加、甘巴里、苏禄、榜葛刺、氵孛泥、古麻拉朗王入朝进贡。
English: Hurrummus, Adam, Zophar, Caesar, Bhuvah, the whole bundle of bones, Guri, Kochi, Qayil, Mount Ceylon, Namgyal, Sumatra, Aru, Manchukuo, Gambari, Sulu, Punggatse, Kashi, and the king of ancient Malalang paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：暹罗入贡者再。
现代文：暹罗两次进贡。
English: Siam paid tribute twice.

古文：二十年春正月己未朔，日有食之，免朝贺，诏群臣修省。
现代文：永乐二十年一月一日，有日食，免朝贺，诏告群臣反省。
English: On January 1st, Yongle 20th, there was a solar eclipse, free of morning greetings, and the imperial edict told the ministers to reflect.

古文：辛未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十三日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 11th day, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs.

古文：壬申，丰城侯李彬卒于交阯。
现代文：十四日，丰城侯李彬死于交趾。
English: On the 14th, Fengcheng Hou Li Bin died of a broken toe.

古文：二月乙巳，隆平侯张信、兵部尚书李庆分督北征军饷，役民夫二十三万五千有奇，运粮三十七万石。
现代文：二月十八日，隆平侯张信、兵部尚书李庆分别督运北征军饷，役使民夫二十三万五千余人，运粮饷三十七万石。
English: On February 18th, Zhang Xin, the Prince of Longping, and Li Qing, the Secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, respectively supervised the transportation of more than 235,000 people to the north for military recruitment, and the transportation of 370,000 koku of grain.

古文：三月丙寅，诏有司遇灾先振后闻。
现代文：三月九日，颁诏有关部门，凡遇灾害，先赈救后上奏。
English: On March 9th, the relevant departments issued an edict that in the event of a disaster, first rescue and then report.

古文：乙亥，阿鲁台犯兴和，都指挥王唤战死。
现代文：十八日，阿鲁台侵犯兴和，都指挥王唤战死。
English: On the 18th, Arutai invaded Xinghe, and both commanders were killed in battle.

古文：丁丑，亲征阿鲁台，皇太子监国。
现代文：二十日，成祖亲征阿鲁台，皇太子监国。
English: On the 20th, Cheng Zu personally conquered Arutai, and the crown prince supervised the country.

古文：戊寅，发京师。
现代文：二十一日，从北京出发。
English: On the 21st, they set off from Beijing.

古文：辛巳，次鸡鸣山，阿鲁台遁。
现代文：二十四日，住鸡鸣山，阿鲁台逃窜。
English: On the 24th, living in Jining Mountain, Arutai escaped.

古文：夏四月乙卯，次云州，大阅。
现代文：四月二十九日，暂住云州，大阅兵。
English: On April 29th, temporarily staying in Yunnan, a large military parade was held.

古文：五月乙丑，猎于偏岭。
现代文：五月九日，在偏岭打猎。
English: On May 9th, I went hunting in the mountains.

古文：丁卯，大阅。
现代文：十一日，大检阅。
English: On the 11th day, the grand review was held.

古文：辛未，次西凉亭。
现代文：十五日，住西凉亭。
English: On the 15th, he lived in the West Pavilion.

古文：壬申，大阅。
现代文：十六日，大阅兵。
English: On the 16th, a grand military parade was held.

古文：乙酉，次开平。
现代文：二十九日，住开平。
English: On the 29th, I moved to Kaiping.

古文：六月壬辰，令军行出应昌，结方阵以进。
现代文：六月七日，命北征军出应昌，结成方阵前进。
English: On June 7, the Northern Expeditionary Force was ordered to march out of Yechang and advance in a square formation.

古文：癸巳，谍报阿鲁台兵攻万全，诸将请分兵还击，帝曰： 诈也。彼虑大军捣其巢穴，欲以牵制我师，敢攻城哉。 
现代文：八日，侦察情报说阿鲁台进攻万全，诸将领请求分兵还击。成祖说： 这是假相，他怕我们进攻其老巢，想以此牵制我军，不敢攻城。 
English: On the eighth day, reconnaissance information said that the attack on Alutai was complete, and the generals requested a detachment of soldiers to return fire. Cheng Zu said: This is a fake, he is afraid that we will attack his home, he wants to use this to keep our army at bay, and he does not dare to attack the city.

古文：甲午，次阳和谷，寇攻万全者果遁去。
现代文：九日，住阳和谷，侵犯万全兵果然逃走。
English: On the 9th, in Zhiyang and Gu, the invading Wanquan soldiers actually fled.

古文：秋七月己未，阿鲁台弃辎重于阔栾海侧北遁，发兵焚之，收其牲畜，遂旋师。
现代文：七月四日，阿鲁台弃军中武器从阔栾海旁向北逃窜。发兵焚烧，没收其牲畜，后回师。
English: On the 4th of July, the weapons of the abandoned army in Arutai fled north from the coast of the Bohai Sea. The soldiers burned them, confiscated their livestock, and then returned to the division.

古文：谓诸将曰： 阿鲁台敢悖逆，恃兀良哈为羽翼也。
现代文：对诸将说： 阿鲁台敢叛逆，依靠兀良哈为羽翼。
English: To the generals, he said: Arutai dares to rebel and relies on Hailiang Ha as his wingman.

古文：当还师翦之。 
现代文：应当回师剪除兀良哈。 
English: You should go back to your teacher and cut off your hair.

古文：简步骑二万，分五道并进。
现代文：选步骑二万，分五路并进。
English: Choose the pace to ride twenty thousand, divided into five parallel lines.

古文：庚午，遇于屈裂儿河，帝亲击败之，追奔三十里，斩部长数十人。
现代文：十五日，在屈裂儿河相遇，成祖亲自击败兀良哈，追击六十里，斩杀部落长数十人。
English: On the fifteenth day, they met at Qu Ril He, and Cheng Zu personally defeated Ao Liang Ha, chased him for sixty miles, and killed dozens of tribal leaders.

古文：辛未，徇河西，捕斩甚众。
现代文：三日，巡行河西，捕杀很多。
English: On the third day, they marched through Hexi, catching and killing many.

古文：甲戌，兀良哈余党诣军门降。
现代文：十九日，兀良哈余部到军门来投降。
English: On the 19th, the rest of Ailiangha came to the gate to surrender.

古文：是月，皇太子免南、北直隶、山东、河南郡县水灾粮刍共六十一万有奇。
现代文：这一月，皇太子免征南、北直隶、山东、河南郡县水灾后粮草共六十一万有余。
English: This month, the crown prince exempted a total of more than 6.11 million grains and grasses from the southern, northern Zhili, Shandong and Henan counties after the floods.

古文：八月戊戌，诸将分道者俱献捷。
现代文：八月十四日，分道前进的诸路将士全部告捷。
English: On August 14th, all the soldiers who went their separate ways were successful.

古文：辛丑，以班师诏天下。
现代文：九月二日，因班师而诏告天下。
English: On September 2nd, it was announced to the world that the class teacher had resigned.

古文：壬寅，郑亨、薛禄守开平。
现代文：十九日，郑亨、薛禄守卫开平。
English: On the 19th, Zheng Heng and Xue Lu guarded Kaiping.

古文：郑和还。
现代文：郑和回国。
English: Zheng He returned to China.

古文：九月壬戌，至京师。
现代文：九月二十三日，到北京。
English: September 23rd, arrived in Beijing.

古文：癸亥，下左春坊大学士杨士奇于狱。
现代文：九日，左春坊大学士杨士奇被投入监狱。
English: On the 9th, Zuo Chunfang University Scholar Yang Shiqi was thrown into prison.

古文：丙寅，下吏部尚书蹇义、礼部尚书吕震于狱，寻俱释之。
现代文：十二日，吏部尚书蹇义、礼部尚书吕震被投入监狱，不久全部释放。
English: On the 12th, the officials, Shang Shuxun Rongyi, and the ceremonial officials, Shang Shuxun Lucheng, were thrown into prison, and all of them were soon released.

古文：辛未，录从征功，封左都督朱荣武进伯，都督佥事薛贵安顺伯。
现代文：十七日，记随帝北征功劳，封左都督朱荣武进伯，都督佥事薛贵安顺伯。
English: On the 17th, it was recorded that Zhu Rongwu Jinbo, the left-hand governor, and Xue Gui'an Shunbo, the right-hand governor, were awarded for their services in the Northern Expedition.

古文：冬十月癸巳，分遣中官及朝臣八十人核天下仓粮出纳之数。
现代文：冬十月九日，分遣中官及朝臣八十人核实天下仓库粮食进出数目。
English: On the 9th of October in winter, a lieutenant-general and eighty courtiers were dispatched to verify the number of grain entering and leaving the warehouse.

古文：十二月辛卯，朱荣镇辽东。
现代文：十二月八日，朱荣镇守辽东。
English: On December 8th, Zhu Rong, the commander of Liaodong.

古文：闰月戊寅，乾清宫灾。
现代文：闰十二月二十五日，乾清宫发生火灾。
English: On December 25th, a fire broke out in the Qianqing Palace.

古文：是年，暹罗、苏门答剌、阿丹等国遣使随贡方物。
现代文：这年，暹罗、苏门答剌、阿丹遣使臣进贡地方特产。
English: This year, Siam, Sumatra, and Adan sent envoys to pay tribute to local specialties.

古文：占城、琉球中山、卜花儿、哈密、瓦剌、土鲁番、爪哇入贡。
现代文：占城、琉球中山、卜花儿、哈密、瓦剌、土鲁番、爪哇入朝进贡。
English: Zhancheng, Ryukyu Zhongshan, Buhuaer, Hami, Wadao, Turuban, Java paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：二十一年春正月乙未，大礼天地于南郊。
现代文：永乐二十一年正月十三日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the 21st year of Yongle, the grand festival was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：癸卯，交阯参将荣昌伯陈智追败黎利于车来。
现代文：二十一日，交趾参将荣昌伯陈智追击并打败黎利于车来。
English: On the twenty-first day, Rongchang Bo Chen Zhi chased and defeated Lili Yu Che Lai.

古文：二月己巳，都指挥使鹿荣讨柳州叛蛮，平之。
现代文：二月十八日，都指挥使鹿荣征讨柳州叛蛮并平定之。
English: On February 18th, Du Du commanded Deer Rong to invade Liuzhou and quell the rebellion.

古文：三月庚子，御史王愈等会决重囚，误杀无罪四人，坐弃市。
现代文：三月十九日，御史王愈等一起处决重罪囚犯，误杀无罪四人，因犯罪被弃市示众。
English: On March 19th, Wangyu Mishi and others executed a felon prisoner, killed four innocent people by mistake, and were abandoned to the public for the crime.

古文：夏五月癸未，免开封、南阳、卫辉、凤阳等府去年水灾田租。
现代文：五月四日，因开封、南阳、卫辉、凤阳等府去年水灾，免去田租。
English: On May 4, due to floods in Kaifeng, Nanyang, Weihui, Fengyang and other prefectures last year, they were exempted from land rent.

古文：己丑，常山护卫指挥孟贤等谋逆，伏诛。
现代文：十日，常山护卫指挥孟贤谋反，被诛杀。
English: On the 10th, Meng Xian, commander of the Changshan escort, plotted a rebellion and was beaten to death.

古文：六月庚戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月一日，有日食。
English: On June 1st, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：秋七月戊戌，复亲征阿鲁台，安远侯柳升、遂安伯陈英领中军，武安侯郑亨、保定侯孟瑛领左哨，阳武侯薛禄、新宁伯谭忠领右哨，英国公张辅、安平伯李安领左掖，成山侯王通、兴安伯徐亨领右掖，宁阳侯陈懋领前锋。
现代文：七月二十日，再次亲征阿鲁台，安远侯柳升、遂安伯陈英领中军，武安侯郑亨、保定侯孟瑛领左哨，阳武侯薛禄、新宁伯谭忠领右哨，英国公张辅、安平伯李安领左掖，成山侯王通、兴安伯徐亨领右掖，宁阳侯陈懋领前锋。
English: On July 20th, he personally marched to Arutai again, Anyuan marquis Liu Sheng and Sui Anbo Chen Ying led the Central Army, Wu'an marquis Zheng Heng and Baoding marquis Meng Ying led the left post, Yangwu marquis Xue Lu and Xinning marquis Tan Zhong led the right post, British prince Zhang Fu and Anping marquis Li An led the left post, Chengshan marquis Wang Tong and Xingan marquis Xu Heng led the right post, and Ningyang marquis Chen Yu led the front.

古文：庚子，释李时勉，复其官。
现代文：二十二日，释放李时勉，恢复原官职。
English: On the 22nd, Li Shimin was released and restored to his former official position.

古文：辛丑，皇太子监国。
现代文：二十三日，皇太子监国。
English: On the 18th, Crown Prince Li Zhe took over as acting head of state.

古文：壬寅，发京师。
现代文：二十四日，从北京出发。
English: On the 24th, it set off from Beijing.

古文：戊申，次宣府，敕居庸关守将止诸司进奉。
现代文：三十日，到宣府，嘱咐居庸关守将，不准各司前来进奉。
English: On the 30th, he went to Xuanwu and ordered Gu Yong, the guard, not to allow any division to enter.

古文：八月己酉，大阅。
现代文：八月一日，大检阅。
English: On August 1st, the grand review was held.

古文：庚申，塞黑峪、长安岭诸边险要。
现代文：十二日，堵塞黑峪、长安岭诸边险要关隘。
English: On the 12th, the blockage of Heihe, Chang'an and other border areas was critical.

古文：丁丑，皇太子免两京、山东郡县水灾田租。
现代文：二十九日，皇太子免征北京、南京、山东郡县遭水灾之田租。
English: On the 29th, the crown prince exempted Beijing, Nanjing and Shandong counties from the flood disaster.

古文：九月戊子，次西阳河。
现代文：九月十日，临住西阳河。
English: September 10th, near Xiyang River.

古文：癸巳，闻阿鲁台为瓦剌所败，部落溃散，遂驻师不进。
现代文：十五日，听说阿鲁台被瓦剌打败，部落溃散，于是驻师不进。
English: On the fifteenth day, they heard that Arutai had been defeated by the Varangians and that the tribe had broken up, so the stationed division did not advance.

古文：冬十月甲寅，次上庄堡，迤北王子也先土干帅所部来降，封忠勇王，赐姓名金忠。
现代文：十月七日，住上庄堡，迤北王子也先土干率师投降，封为忠勇王，赐姓名金忠。
English: On October 7th, he lived in Shangzhuang Fort, and the prince of Shandong Province also surrendered before the local leader, and was named King Zhongyong and given the name Jinzhong.

古文：庚午，班师。
现代文：二十三日，班师。
English: On the 23rd, the class teacher left.

古文：十一月甲申，至京师。
现代文：十一月七日，到北京。
English: On November 7, he arrived in Beijing.

古文：是年，锡兰山王来朝，又遣使入贡。
现代文：当年，锡兰山王前来朝见皇帝，还派使臣入朝进贡。
English: In that year, the King of Ceylon came to see the emperor, and also sent envoys to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：占城、古里、忽鲁谟斯、阿丹、祖法儿、剌撒、不剌哇、木骨都束、柯枝、加异勒、溜山、南渤利、苏门答剌、阿鲁、满剌加、失剌思、榜葛剌、琉球中山入贡。
现代文：占城、古里、忽鲁谟斯、阿丹、祖法儿、剌撒、不剌哇、木骨都束、柯枝、加异勒、溜山、南縨利、苏门答剌、阿鲁、满剌加、失剌思、榜葛剌、琉球中山入朝进贡。
English: Zhancheng, Guli, Hurrummus, Adan, Zufar, Caesar, Bubaowah, Bokotsu, Kezhi, Qayil, Yangsan, Nankili, Sumendak, Aru, Manchukuo, Zhouzhuisi, Pungge, and Zhongshan in Ryukyu paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：二十二年春正月甲申，阿鲁台犯大同、开平，诏群臣议北征，敕边将整兵俟命。
现代文：永乐二十二年正月七日，阿鲁台侵犯大同、开平，诏见群臣讨论北征之事，告诫边将整兵待命。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of the 22nd year of Yongle, when Alutai invaded Datong and Kaiping, he saw the ministers discussing the Northern Expedition and warned the generals to be on standby.

古文：丙戌，徵山西、山东、河南、陕西、辽东五都司及西宁、巩昌、洮、岷各卫兵，期三月会北京及宣府。
现代文：九日，征调山东、山西、河南、陕西、辽东五都司及西宁、巩昌、洮、岷各卫卫兵，期望三月在北京及宣府会合。
English: On the 9th, the guards of Shandong, Shanxi, Henan, Shaanxi and Liaodong Five Capital Cities, as well as the guards of Xining, Gongchang, Handan and Handan, were transferred and expected to meet in Beijing and Xuanfu in March.

古文：戊子，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十一日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 11th day, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs.

古文：癸巳，郑和复使西洋。
现代文：十六日，郑和又出使西洋。
English: On the 16th, Zheng He sent another envoy to the West.

古文：三月戊寅，大阅，谕诸将亲征。
现代文：三月二日，大阅兵，告诉诸将亲自出征。
English: On March 2nd, after a grand military parade, he told the generals to go to war in person.

古文：命柳升、陈英领中军，张辅、朱勇领左掖，王通、徐亨领右掖，郑亨、孟瑛领左哨，薛禄、谭忠领右哨、陈懋、金忠领前锋。
现代文：命柳升、陈英领中军，张辅、朱勇领左掖，王通、徐亨领右掖，郑亨、孟瑛领左哨，薛禄、谭忠领右哨，陈懋、金忠领前锋。
English: Liu Sheng and Chen Ying led the middle army, Zhang Fu and Zhu Yong led the left army, Wang Tong and Xu Heng led the right army, Zheng Heng and Meng Ying led the left army, Xue Lu and Tan Zhong led the right army, and Chen Yu and Jin Zhong led the vanguard.

古文：己卯，赐邢宽等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三日，赐邢宽等进士及第出身各有差别。
English: On the third day, there were differences in the number of graduates and the first-born.

古文：夏四月戊申，皇太子监国。己酉，发京师。
现代文：四月三日，皇太子监国。四日，从北京出发。
English: On April 3rd, the crown prince became the guardian of the country. On the 4th, he set off from Beijing.

古文：庚午，次隰宁，谍报阿鲁台走答兰纳木儿河，遂趋进师。
现代文：二十五日，临时住隰宁。侦察的情报说阿鲁台向答兰纳木儿河逃跑，于是率师前进。
English: On the 25th, he temporarily resided in Huning. Intelligence from reconnaissance said that Alutai had fled to the Namur River, so he led his division forward.

古文：五月己卯，次开平，使使招谕阿鲁台诸部。
现代文：五月五日，暂住开平，派使臣招谕阿鲁台各部。
English: On May 5, he temporarily stayed in Kaiping and sent envoys to invite the various departments of Arutai.

古文：乙酉，瘗道中遗骸。
现代文：十一日，掩埋道路上尸骨。
English: On the 11th day, the bones on the road were buried.

古文：丁酉，宴群臣于应昌，命中官歌太祖御制词五章，曰： 此先帝所以戒后嗣也，虽在军旅何敢忘。 
现代文：二十三日，在应昌大宴群臣，命中官唱《太祖》御制词五章，说： 这就是先帝所以警诫后人，虽在军中也不敢忘记。 
English: On the 23rd, at the grand banquet of the ministers in Yingchang, the commander-in-chief sang the five chapters of "Grandfather" and said: This is the reason why the former emperor warned future generations, even though he did not dare to forget it in the army.

古文：己亥，次威远州。
现代文：二十五日，临时住威远州。
English: On the 25th, he temporarily lived in Weiyangzhou.

古文：复宴群臣，自制词五章，命中官歌之。
现代文：又宴请群臣，成祖亲自作词五章，命中官歌唱。
English: He also held a banquet for his courtiers. Cheng Zu personally wrote five chapters of lyrics, and the commanders sang.

古文：皇太子令免广平、顺德、扬州及湖广、河南郡县水灾田租。
现代文：皇太子命令免去广平、顺德、扬州及湖广、河南郡县水灾后所欠田租。
English: The crown prince ordered to waive the land rent owed by Guangping, Shunde, Yangzhou and Huguang and Henan counties after the floods.

古文：六月庚申，前锋至答兰纳木儿河，不见敌，命张辅等穷搜山谷三百里无所得，进驻河上。
现代文：六月十七日，前锋到达答兰纳木儿河，不见敌人，命张辅等搜尽三百余里山谷均无所得，便进军驻扎河上。
English: On June 17th, the vanguard arrived at the mouth of the Namur River in Dharan and found no enemy. Zhang Fu and his men searched the valley for more than three hundred miles, but found nothing, so they marched into the river and camped there.

古文：癸亥，陈懋等引兵抵白邙山，以粮尽还。
现代文：二十日，陈懋等引兵抵达白邙山，因军粮已尽而回。
English: On the 20th, Chen Yao and other soldiers arrived at Mount Paekche, but had to return because they had run out of rations.

古文：甲子，班师，命郑亨等以步卒西会于开平。
现代文：二十一日，回师，命郑亨等以步兵向西会合于开平。
English: On the twenty-first day, the returning division, ordered Zheng Heng and other infantry to meet westward at Kaiping.

古文：壬申夜，南京地震。
现代文：二十九日夜晚，南京地震。
English: On the evening of the 29th, the Nanjing earthquake occurred.

古文：秋七月庚辰，勒石于清水源之崖。
现代文：七月七日，刻石于清水源崖壁上。
English: On the 7th of July, the carved stone appeared on the cliff wall of Qingshuiyuan.

古文：戊子，遣吕震以旋师谕太子，诏告天下。
现代文：十五日，派吕震告诉皇太子随即回师，诏告天下。
English: On the fifteenth day, he sent Lu Zhen to tell the crown prince to immediately return to his teacher and announce it to the world.

古文：己丑，次苍崖戍，不豫。
现代文：十六日，临时住苍崖戍，觉身体不适。
English: On the 16th, he temporarily lived in Cangyacun and felt unwell.

古文：庚寅，至榆木川，大渐。
现代文：十七日，到榆木川，病情突然加重。
English: On the 17th, he went to Zhangmu River, where his condition suddenly worsened.

古文：遗诏传位皇太子，丧礼一如高皇帝遗制。
现代文：留遗诏传位皇太子，丧礼尊从高皇帝遗制。
English: The imperial edict was left for the crown prince to succeed to the throne, and the funeral rites were bequeathed by Emperor Gao.

古文：辛卯，崩，年六十有五。
现代文：十八日，成祖死，终年六十五岁。
English: On the 18th, Cheng Zu died at the age of 65.

古文：太监马云密与大学士杨荣、金幼孜谋，以六军在外，秘不发丧，熔锡为椑以敛，载以龙举，所至朝夕上膳如常仪。
现代文：太监马云与大学士杨荣、金幼孜秘密商量，保守秘密不发驾崩消息，用锡熔化后制成内棺装殓成祖遗体，用龙车运载，所到之处早晚饮食同往常一样。
English: Eunuch Ma Yun secretly discussed with university scholars Yang Rong and Jin Yuzi, kept the secret and did not release the death news. After melting with tin, they made an inner coffin and decorated it with the ancestor's remains. They were transported by dragon car. The food and drink were the same as usual in the morning and evening.

古文：壬辰，杨荣偕御马监少监海寿驰讣皇太子。
现代文：十九日，杨荣和御马监少监海寿一起骑马赶路向皇太子报丧。
English: On the 19th, Yang Rong and Mima Supervisor and Junior Supervisor Haishou rode together to rush to the crown prince to announce the funeral.

古文：壬寅，次武平镇，郑亨步军来会。
现代文：二十九日，暂住武平镇，郑亨步军会合于此。
English: On the 29th, he temporarily stayed in Wuping Town, and Zheng Heng's marching army gathered here.

古文：八月甲辰，杨荣等至京师，皇太子即日遣太孙奉迎于开平。
现代文：八月二日，杨荣等赶到北京，皇太子当天派皇太孙奉迎于开平。
English: On August 2, Yang Rong and others arrived in Beijing. On the same day, the crown prince sent his great-grandson Bong to meet Kaiping.

古文：己酉，次雕鹗谷，皇太孙至军中发丧。
现代文：七日，住雕鹗谷，皇太孙到军中发丧。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor's great-grandson, who lived in Shibuya, went to the army to mourn.

古文：壬子，及郊，皇太子迎入仁智殿，加殓纳梓宫。
现代文：十日，到北京近郊，皇太子迎入仁智殿，加棺材后殓入灵柩。
English: On the 10th, in the suburbs of Beijing, the crown prince was welcomed into the Nizhi Palace, and after the coffin was added, he was led into the coffin.

古文：九月壬午，上尊谥曰体天弘道高明广运圣武神功纯仁至孝文皇帝，庙号太宗，葬长陵。
现代文：九月十日，加上尊敬谥号叫体天弘道高明广运圣武神功纯仁至孝文皇帝，庙号太宗，葬于长陵。
English: On September 10th, in addition to the reverential name of Emperor Taizong, the temple name of Emperor Taizong was buried in the Changling Mausoleum.

古文：嘉靖十七年九月，改上尊谥曰启天弘道高明肇运圣武神功纯仁至孝文皇帝，庙号成祖。
现代文：嘉靖十七年九月，改上尊谥叫启天弘道高明肇运圣武神功纯仁至孝文皇帝，庙号成祖。
English: In September of the 17th year of Jiajing, he changed his name to "Qi Tian Hong Dao Gao Ming Zha Yun Shenwu Sheng Kung Chun Ren to Emperor Xiaowen" and became the founder of the temple.

古文：赞曰： 文皇少长习兵，据幽燕形胜之地，乘建文孱弱，长驱内向，奄有四海。
现代文：赞美道：文皇帝从小擅长练兵，据有幽、燕地形较好之地，乘建文帝幼弱，长驱向内进攻，才有四海。
English: Praise: Emperor Wen was good at training soldiers from an early age. According to Yu and Yan, the terrain was good. Emperor Wen took advantage of Emperor Jianwen's infancy and weakness to attack inward. Only then did he conquer the four seas.

古文：即位以后，躬行节俭，水旱朝告夕振，无有壅蔽。
现代文：即位以后，亲自带头节俭，遇水旱灾情早上报告傍晚立即赈济，从来没有阻拦和掩盖。
English: After ascending the throne, he personally took the lead in frugality. In the event of floods or droughts, he would report the situation in the morning and immediately provide relief in the evening. He never obstructed or covered up.

古文：知人善任，表里洞达，雄武之略，同符高祖。
现代文：他知人善任，表里通达如一，雄武之略，同高祖一样。
English: He knows people and is good at what he does. He is as honest as the day is long. He has a strong sense of strategy, just like Gao Zu.

古文：六师屡出，漠北尘清。
现代文：经常率六师出征，漠北如尘土一样被扫清。
English: Six divisions were regularly sent out, and the north of the country was swept away like dust.

古文：至其季年，威德遐被，四方宾服，明命而入贡者殆三十国。
现代文：晚年时期，威德盖世，四方诚服。受朝之命入贡的约有三十国。
English: In his later years, he was admired by all quarters, and about thirty countries paid tribute to him by order of the imperial court.

古文：幅陨之广，远迈汉、唐。
现代文：幅员辽阔，远远超过汉、唐。
English: Its vast territory far exceeds that of the Han and Tang dynasties.

古文：成功骏烈，卓乎盛矣。
现代文：成功之快，功绩之显赫，算卓绝昌盛了。
English: The success is fast, the achievements are outstanding, and the excellence is flourishing.

古文：然而革除之际，倒行逆施，惭德亦曷可掩哉。
现代文：然而，变革修整之际，倒行逆施，欺诈品行也是不可掩饰的。
English: However, at the time of reform and rectification, it is also impossible to conceal fraudulent behavior.

