古文：鲁欲使慎子为将军。孟子曰： 不教民而用之，谓之殃民。
现代文：鲁国君想让慎子做将军，孟子说： 没有教导百姓就使用他们，这叫坑害百姓。
English: Lu Guojun wanted to make Shen Zi a general. Mencius said, "If you use the people without teaching them, this is called harming the people."

古文：殃民者，不容于尧舜之世。
现代文：坑害百姓的人，在尧舜时代是不允许存在的。
English: People who harmed the people were not allowed to exist in the Heian period.

古文：一战胜齐，遂有南阳，然且不可。 
现代文：即使一仗能打败齐国，占领齐国的南阳，这仍然是不可以的。 
English: Even if it were possible to defeat Qi in a single battle and occupy Nanyang in Qi, it would still be impossible.

古文：慎子勃然不悦曰： 此则滑厘所不识也。 
现代文：慎子突然发怒不高兴地说： 这话我没有明白。 
English: "I didn't understand that," said a suddenly angry and displeased Shinko.

古文：曰： 吾明告子。
现代文：孟子说： 我明明白白告诉你。
English: Mencius said, "I will tell you plainly.

古文：天子之地方千里；不千里，不足以待诸侯。
现代文：天子的土地纵横千里；不到一千里，就不够接待诸侯。
English: The land of the Son of Heaven stretches for thousands of miles; less than a thousand miles is not enough to receive princes.

古文：诸侯之地方百里；不百里，不足以守宗庙之典籍。
现代文：诸侯的土地纵横百里，不到一百里，就不够奉守宗庙的礼制。
English: It is not enough to observe the rituals of the ancestral temple if the land of the lords is less than a hundred miles in length and breadth.

古文：周公之封于鲁，为方百里也；地非不足，而俭于百里。
现代文：当年周公被封在鲁地，方圆百里；当时土地不是不够，实际却少于百里。
English: In that year, Zhou Gong was sealed in Ludi, with a radius of one hundred miles; at that time, the land was not insufficient, but actually less than one hundred miles.

古文：太公之封于齐也，亦为方百里也；地非不足也，而俭于百里。
现代文：太公被封在齐地，也是方圆百里。土地不是不够，实际却少于百里。
English: Tai Gong was sealed in Qi, which is also a hundred miles in circumference. The land is not insufficient, but it is actually less than a hundred miles.

古文：今鲁方百里者五，子以为有王者作，则鲁在所损乎？
现代文：如今鲁国已经有五个方圆百里了，你以为有王者兴起，是使鲁国的封地有所减损呢？
English: Now that the country of Lu has five hundred miles in a circle, do you think that the rise of a king has diminished the fiefdoms of Lu?

古文：在所益乎？
现代文：还是会使其增加呢？
English: Or will it increase it?

古文：徒取诸彼以与此，然且仁者不为，况于杀人以求之乎？
现代文：不用战争而把彼国的土地拿给此国，仁者尚且不干，何况是用战争屠杀去求取得到呢？
English: It is not enough for a benevolent person to take the land of another country and give it to this country without war, how much more is it necessary to use war and slaughter to obtain it?

古文：君子之事君也，务引其君以当道，志于仁而已。 
现代文：君子侍奉君主，就是要努力把君主引向正道，立志于爱民而已。 
English: For a gentleman to serve the monarch, he must strive to lead the monarch to the right path and aspire to love the people.

