古文：献公卜伐骊戎，史苏占之，曰： 胜而不吉。 
现代文：晋献公卜问讨伐骊戎的结果，史苏占卜后说： 能取胜但不吉利。 
English: After Shisu divined the outcome of the Jinxian public divination, he said, "It is possible to win, but it is not auspicious."

古文：公曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：献公问： 此话怎讲？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "How can this be?

古文：对曰： 遇兆，挟以衔骨，齿牙为猾，戎、夏交捽。
现代文：史苏回答说： 从兆象看是齿牙互相夹持，衔着一块骨头，齿牙咬弄着它，象征骊戎和晋国的互相冲突。
English: Su Su replied, "From the aspect of omens, it is the teeth clutching each other, holding a piece of bone, and the teeth biting and playing with it, symbolizing the conflict between Qiong Rong and Jin.

古文：交捽，是交胜也，臣故云。
现代文：齿牙交对，就是交替取胜，所以我才说胜而不吉。
English: To fight tooth and nail is to win alternately, that's why I say it's bad luck to win.

古文：且惧有口，携民，国移心焉。 
现代文：况且兆象最怕遇到口，口意味着百姓离弃，国家将会不稳哩。 
English: Moreover, the signs are most afraid of encountering the mouth, mouth means abandoning the people, the country will be unstable.

古文：公曰： 何口之有！
现代文：献公说： 哪来什么口！
English: The devotee said: What a mouthful!

古文：口在寡人，寡人弗受，谁敢兴之？ 
现代文：口由我控制，我不接受，谁敢起来说话？ 
English: I control the mouth, I do not accept, who dares to speak up?

古文：对曰： 苟可以携，其入也必甘受，逞而不知，胡可壅也？ 
现代文：史苏回答说： 假如连百姓都可以离弃，那么入耳的甜言蜜语必然会欣然接受。如此任性而不自知，又怎么防止祸患呢？ 
English: Su Su replied, "If even the common people can be abandoned, then the sweet words that fall on one's ears will certainly be gladly accepted. How can one prevent the evil if one is so headstrong and does not know oneself?

古文：公弗听，遂伐骊戎，克之。获骊姬以归，有宠，立以为夫人。
现代文：献公不听，于是讨伐骊戎，打败了它，俘获骊姬并把她带回晋国，骊姬得宠，被立为夫人。
English: However, he did not listen to the offering, so he attacked and defeated Gong Rong, captured Gong Ji and brought her back to Jin Province. Gong Ji was favored and became his wife.

古文：公饮大夫酒，令司正实爵与史苏，曰： 饮而无肴。
现代文：献公设酒宴款待大夫们，命司正官斟满酒递给史苏，说： 只饮酒不许吃菜。
English: The doctors were treated to a public wine banquet, and the official in charge of the ceremony poured a full glass of wine and handed it to Su Su, saying, "Only drink alcohol, don't eat vegetables."

古文：夫骊戎之役，女曰 胜而不吉 ，故赏女以爵，罚女以无肴。
现代文：当初讨伐骊戎的战役，你说 胜而不吉 ，所以现在只赏你酒，而罚你不许吃菜。
English: At the beginning of the campaign to subdue Gyeongju, you said that victory was ill-fated, so now you are only rewarded with wine, and you are not allowed to eat vegetables.

古文：克国得妃，其有吉孰大焉！ 
现代文：打败敌国得到爱妃，还有什么吉利比这更大的！ 
English: Defeating the enemy country to get the princess, what else is greater than this!

古文：史苏卒爵，再拜稽首曰： 兆有之，臣不敢蔽。
现代文：史苏饮完酒，低头拜谢说： 兆象上有的，我不敢隐蔽。
English: After drinking the wine, Su Su bowed her head and said, "There are some signs, I dare not hide them.

古文：蔽兆之纪，失臣之官，有二罪焉，何以事君？
现代文：隐蔽兆象的内容，就失了做臣子的职责，有了这两项罪，怎么事奉国君呢？
English: To conceal the contents of the omens is to forfeit one's duties as a courtier. With these two sins, how can one serve the sovereign?

古文：大罚将及，不唯无肴。
现代文：大的惩罚将要临头，不只是没有菜下酒了。
English: The big punishment is coming, and it's not just the wine.

古文：抑君亦乐其吉而备其凶，凶之无有，备之何害？
现代文：国君也许是喜欢吉兆而防备凶兆的，虽然凶兆没有出现，防备一下又有什么害处呢？
English: The sovereign may like good omens and beware of bad omens. Although the bad omens have not appeared, what is the harm in taking precautions?

古文：若其有凶，备之为瘳。
现代文：如果真的出现凶险，防备了也可以减轻。
English: If there is a real danger, it can be mitigated by being prepared.

古文：臣之不信，国之福也，何敢惮罚。 
现代文：我占的卜不灵验，是国家的福气啊，我岂敢害怕受罚。 
English: The failure of my divination is a blessing for the country. How dare I be afraid of being punished?

古文：饮酒出，史苏告大夫曰： 有男戎必有女戎。
现代文：饮完酒出来，史苏对大夫们说： 有男兵必有女兵。
English: After drinking the wine, Su Su said to the doctors: "If there are male soldiers, there must be female soldiers.

古文：若晋以男戎胜戎，而戎亦必以女戎胜晋，其若之何！ 
现代文：如果说晋国以男人的力量战胜了骊戎，那么它也一定会用女人的力量战胜晋国的，怎么办！ 
English: If Jin with the strength of a man defeated Gong, then Jin with the strength of a woman will surely defeat Gong. What to do?

古文：里克曰： 何如？ 
现代文：大夫里克问： 这是怎么一会事？ 
English: Dr Rick asked: How did this happen?

古文：史苏曰： 昔夏桀伐有施，有施人以妹喜女焉，妹喜有宠，于是乎与伊尹比而亡夏。
现代文：史苏说： 过去夏朝的桀讨伐有施氏，有施氏的人把妹喜进献给桀，妹喜得宠，于是就与伊尹一起使夏朝灭亡。
English: Su Su said: In the past, there was a Shi clan that fought against the Xia dynasty, and a person with a Shi clan dedicated his sister Xijin to the Shi clan, and his sister was favored by the Shi clan, so he and Yi Yin worked together to bring about the downfall of the Xia dynasty.

古文：殷辛伐有苏，有苏氏以妲己女焉，妲己有宠，于是乎与胶鬲比而亡殷。
现代文：商朝的纣讨伐有苏氏，有苏氏的人把妲己进献给纣，妲己得宠，于是就与胶鬲一起使商朝灭亡。
English: The Su clan fought against the Shang dynasty, and the people of the Su clan sacrificed the cormorant to the cormorant, and the cormorant was favored by the cormorant, so it and the rubber cormorant brought about the downfall of the Shang dynasty.

古文：周幽王伐有褒，褒人以褒姒女焉，褒姒有宠，生伯服，于是乎与虢石甫比，逐太子宜臼而立伯服。
现代文：周幽王讨伐褒国，褒国的人把褒姒进献给幽王，褒姒得宠，生了伯服，于是就联合虢石甫赶走了太子宜臼，改立伯服为太子。
English: Zhou Yu Wang fought against Bao Guo, the people of Bao Guo dedicated Bao Xuan to Yu Wang, Bao Xuan was favored and gave birth to Bofu, so he and Zou Shifu drove away Prince Yisu and re-established Bofu as prince.

古文：太子出奔申，申人、鄫人召西戎以伐周，周于是乎亡。
现代文：宜臼出走申国，申国人、鄫国人邀集西戎一起讨伐周，西周由此而灭亡。
English: Yi Usu left for Sheng, and the Sheng people and the Qiang people invited Xi Rong to fight Zhou together. As a result, Xi Zhou was destroyed.

古文：今晋寡德而安俘女，又增其宠，虽当三季之王，不亦可乎？
现代文：现在晋君德行不高，而被那个俘虏的女人所迷惑，还增加对她的宠幸，把晋君比作夏、商、西周三朝的末代君王，不也可以吗？
English: Now that Jinjun's virtue is not high, he is confused by the captive woman and increases his favor to her. Is it not possible to compare Jinjun to the last king of the Xia, Shang and Western Zhou dynasties?

古文：且其兆云： 挟以衔骨，齿牙为猾。 
现代文：况且那兆象上说： 上下挟持衔着骨头，齿牙咬弄着它。 
English: Moreover, the elephant said: The elephant is holding the bone up and down, and its teeth are biting it.

古文：我卜伐骊，龟往离散以应我。
现代文：我卜问的是讨伐骊戎的胜败，回答我的结果却是晋国的离散，像这样可是败国的征兆啊。
English: I asked about the victory or defeat of the Jiefang Campaign, but the answer I got was that Jin was separated from China, which is a sign of defeat.

古文：夫若是贼之兆也，非吾宅也，离则有之。
现代文：非但我们不能安居下去，国家也有分裂的危险。
English: Not only can we not live in peace, but the country is in danger of splitting up.

古文：不跨其国，可谓挟乎？
现代文：没有人从外面入据晋国，可以说是挟持吗？
English: No one has entered Jin Province from the outside, can it be said to be a hostage situation?

古文：不得其君，能衔骨乎？
现代文：没有人得宠于国君，可以说是衔骨吗？
English: No one is favored by the sovereign, can it be said to be the backbone?

古文：若跨其国而得其君，虽逢齿牙，以猾其中，谁云不从？
现代文：如果有人入据晋国而且得宠于国君，干出齿牙咬弄的事情，谁敢不服从？
English: If someone is in possession of Jin Province and is favored by the sovereign, who dares to disobey?

古文：诸夏从戎，非败而何？
现代文：晋国服从骊戎的女人，不是失败又是什么？
English: A woman who obeys Jin's command is not a failure, but what is?

古文：从政者不可以不戒，亡无日矣！ 
现代文：参预国政的人不能不警戒，亡国没有几天了！ 
English: Those who take part in pre-election politics should be on their guard. The country is just days away from ruin!

古文：郭偃曰： 夫三季王之亡也宜。
现代文：大夫郭偃说： 夏、商和西周三个末代君王的灭亡是合理的。
English: Dr. Guo Wei said: The deaths of Xia, Shang and Xi Zhou, the last three emperors, are reasonable.

古文：民之主也，纵惑不疚，肆侈不违，流志而行，无所不疚，是以及亡而不获追鉴。
现代文：百姓的统治者放纵惑乱而毫不反省，肆意奢侈而毫不忌讳，行动随心所欲，无所不用其极，所以亡了国而且得不到后世的追念。
English: The rulers of the people indulge in chaos and confusion without reflection, indulge in luxury without restraint, act as they please, and use everything to the utmost, so they have lost their country and cannot be remembered by future generations.

古文：今晋国之方，偏侯也。其土又小，大国在侧，虽欲纵惑，未获专也。大家、邻国将师保之，多而骤立，不其集亡。
现代文：现在晋国是个偏远的小侯国，土地不多，齐、秦等大国就在旁边，即使国君想放纵惑乱，也没有那个条件，国内的上卿和邻国将会教训他，一次次地用新君取代荒淫的旧君，还不至于亡国。
English: At present, Jin is a remote small vassal state, with not much land, and big countries such as Qi and Qin are nearby. Even if the sovereign wants to indulge in chaos, there is no such condition. Domestic nobles and neighboring countries will teach him a lesson, and replace the old monarch with a new one again and again, so as not to ruin the country.

古文：虽骤立，不过五矣。
现代文：虽说会多次改立新君，但也不可能超过五次。
English: Although there will be several changes of the new emperor, it is not possible to have more than five.

古文：且夫口，三五之门也。是以谗口之乱，不过三五。
现代文：因为口在星象上是纪三辰和宣五行的，所以由口而引发的内乱，不过牵涉到三个或者五个国君而已。
English: Because the mouth is in the constellation of the three chakras and the five signs, the civil strife caused by the mouth only involves three or five kings.

古文：且夫挟，小鲠也。可以小戕，而不能丧国。
现代文：至于挟，只是小鲠塞，可以造成小的内伤，但不足以亡国。
English: As for pinching, it's just a minor pinching, which can cause minor internal injuries, but it's not enough to ruin the country.

古文：当之者戕焉，于晋何害？
现代文：当事者虽受到伤害，对晋国则无大碍。
English: Although the parties were harmed, there was no great harm to Jin.

古文：虽谓之挟，而猾以齿牙，口弗堪也，其与几何？
现代文：虽说是内外挟持，而且齿牙咬弄，口不能承受，但又能为害多久呢？
English: Although it is internal and external restraint, and teeth gnashing, the mouth can not bear, but how long can it do harm?

古文：晋国惧则甚矣，亡犹未也。
现代文：晋国的恐惧是很严重了，亡国还不至于。
English: The fear of Jin is very serious, and the country will not be destroyed.

古文：商之衰也，其铭有之曰： 嗛嗛之德，不足就也，不可以矜，而只取忧也。
现代文：商朝衰亡的原因，在钟鼎铭文上是这样记载的： 小小的德行，不足以让世人归心，不可以因此而自夸，那样只会带来忧患。
English: The reason for the decline of the Shang Dynasty is recorded in the Zhongding Inscription as follows: A small virtue is not enough to make the world come to its senses, and one should not boast about it, as that will only bring sorrow.

古文：嗛嗛之食，不足狃也，不能为膏，而只罹咎也。 
现代文：少少的食禄，不值得贪欲，不能肥己，那样只会遭到不幸。 
English: A small amount of food is not worth greed and cannot enrich oneself. That will only lead to misfortune.

古文：虽骊之乱，其罹咎而已，其何能服？
现代文：就算骊姬挑起内乱，不过是她自己遭到不幸罢了，又怎么能使人顺从呢？
English: Even if she provoked a civil war, it would only be her own misfortune. How could she make people obey her?

古文：吾闻以乱得聚者，非谋不卒时，非人不免难，非礼不终年，非义不尽齿，非德不及世，非天不离数。
现代文：我听说通过动乱聚敛财富邀笼人心的人，没有好的计谋就不能维系长久，得不到民众就不能自免于难，不合礼法就不能坚持到底，违反仁义就不能尽其天寿，缺少德惠就不能得到继嗣，没有天命佑助就不能长盛不衰。
English: I have heard that those who accumulate wealth through turmoil and captivate people's hearts cannot maintain themselves for a long time without a good strategy, cannot avoid difficulties without the people, cannot persist to the end without following etiquette and law, cannot live out their natural life in violation of benevolence and righteousness, cannot obtain heirs without virtue and benefit, and cannot flourish without the help of fate.

古文：今不据其安，不可谓能谋；行之以齿牙，不可谓得人；废国而向己，不可谓礼；不度而迂求，不可谓义；以宠贾怨，不可谓德；少族而多敌，不可谓天。
现代文：现在骊姬不居安而处危，不能算善谋；做齿牙咬弄的事以害人，不能算得民心；毁弃国家而为个人，不能算合乎礼；不考虑利害而以邪夺正，不能算讲究义；自恃得宠而招怨国人，不能算有德；缺少盟友而广树政敌，不能算得天助。
English: Now, if you do not live in peace and are in danger, you cannot be a good strategist; if you do things that hurt people by biting your teeth, you cannot win the hearts of the people; if you destroy the country and become an individual, you cannot be considered polite; if you do not consider interests and take advantage of evil, you cannot be considered righteous; if you think you are favored and attract the resentment of the people, you cannot be considered virtuous; if you lack allies and make a wide range of political enemies, you cannot be considered heavenly help.

古文：德义不行，礼义不则，弃人失谋，天亦不赞。
现代文：不行德义，不效礼法，背弃百姓，缺乏谋略，所以上天也不会帮助她。
English: She is not virtuous, does not follow the etiquette, betrays the people, lacks strategy, so heaven will not help her.

古文：吾观君夫人也，若为乱，其犹隶农也。虽获沃田而勤易之，将不克飨，为人而已。 
现代文：依我看君夫人如果挑起内乱，将会像农村的奴隶一样，虽然获得一块良田并且勤于耕作，也不够吃的，为人辛劳而已。 
English: In my opinion, if you provoke civil unrest, you and your wife will be like slaves in the countryside. Although you have obtained a good piece of land and are diligent in farming, you will not have enough to eat. You will just have to work hard.

古文：士偃曰： 诚莫如豫，豫而后给。
现代文：大夫士偃说： 与其告诫不如预作准备，有了准备一旦出事就好对付了。
English: Dr. Zou said: It is better to prepare in advance than to give a warning. Once you have prepared, you will be able to deal with the accident.

古文：夫子诫之，抑二大夫之言其皆有焉。 
现代文：您告诫过了，两位大夫的话都是很有道理的。 
English: You've been warned. What the two doctors said makes a lot of sense.

古文：既，骊姬不克，晋正于秦，五立而后平。
现代文：过后，骊姬的图谋没有得逞，晋国的内乱在秦国的干预下被荡平，先后立了五个国君才安定下来。
English: Later, Yan Ji's plot did not succeed, and the civil strife in Jin was quelled under the intervention of Qin. It took the establishment of five sovereigns to stabilize the situation.

