古文：乐府者，声依永，律和声也。
现代文：所谓 乐府 ，是用宫、商、角、徵、羽的音调，来引申发挥诗意，又用黄钟、大吕等十二律来和五音配合。
English: The so-called "Lefu" is to use the tones of the palace, merchant, horn, flute and feather to enhance the poetry, and to use the twelve rhythms such as the yellow bell and big lute to match the five tones.

古文：钧天九奏，既其上帝；葛天八阕，爰及皇时。
现代文：不但传说天上常奏《万舞》，而且上古葛天氏的时候也曾有过八首乐歌。
English: Not only is there a legend that "Million Dance" is often played in the sky, but there were also eight pieces of music in the time of the ancient Ge Tian clan.

古文：自《咸》、《英》以降，亦无得而论矣。
现代文：此外如黄帝时的《咸池》、帝喾时的《五英》等等，现在都无从考究了。
English: In addition, such as the "Salty Pond" at the time of the Yellow Emperor, the "Five Kingdoms" at the time of the Emperor, and so on, now there is no way to be refined.

古文：至于涂山歌于候人，始为南音；有娀谣乎飞燕，始为北声；夏甲叹于东阳，东音以发；殷整思于西河，西音以兴：音声推移，亦不一概矣。
现代文：以后夏禹时涂山女唱 候人兮猗 ，是南方乐歌的开始。
English: Later, in the summer of Yu Dynasty, the mountain maidens sang the song, which was the beginning of the Southern Song.

古文：匹夫庶妇，讴吟土风，诗官采言，乐胥被律，志感丝篁，气变金石：是以师旷觇风于盛衰，季札鉴微于兴废，精之至也。夫乐本心术，故响浃肌髓，先王慎焉，务塞淫滥。敷训胄子，必歌九德，故能情感七始，化动八风。自雅声浸微，溺音腾沸，秦燔《乐经》，汉初绍复，制氏纪其铿锵，叔孙定其容典，于是《武德》兴乎高祖，《四时》广于孝文，虽摹《韶》、《夏》，而颇袭秦旧，中和之响，阒其不还。
现代文：有娀氏二女唱 燕燕往飞 ，是北方乐歌的开始。夏代孔甲在东阳作《破斧》歌，是东方乐歌的开始。商代整甲在西河想念故居而作歌，是西方乐歌的开始。
English: When the two daughters of the Yi clan sang "Yan Yan Flying Away," it was the beginning of the Northern Song. When Kong Jia of the Xia Dynasty composed the "Broken Axe" Song in Dongyang, it was the beginning of the Eastern Song. When Jing Jia of the Shang Dynasty pined for his former residence in the West River and composed a song, it was the beginning of the Western Song.

古文：暨武帝崇礼，始立乐府，总赵代之音，撮齐楚之气，延年以曼声协律，朱马以骚体制歌，《桂华》杂曲，丽而不经，《赤雁》群篇，靡而非典，河间荐雅而罕御，故汲黯致讥于《天马》也。
现代文：历代音律声调的演变，是很复杂的。
English: The evolution of the tone of the past is very complex.

古文：至宣帝雅颂，诗效《鹿鸣》，迩及元成，稍广淫乐，正音乖俗，其难也如此。
现代文：宣帝时所作的乐章，常常模仿《诗经》中的《鹿鸣》。到元帝、成帝时，渐渐推广淫邪的音乐。因为雅正的音乐不能适应一般人的爱好，所以难于发展。
English: The music composed at the time of the proclamation of the emperor often imitated the "deer call" in the "Song of Songs." By the time of the Yuan Emperor and the enthronement of the emperor, the music of lust was gradually popularized. Because the music of the aristocracy could not adapt to the hobbies of ordinary people, it was difficult to develop.

古文：暨后汉郊庙，惟杂雅章，辞虽典文，而律非夔旷。
现代文：后汉的郊庙祭祀，由东平王刘苍写了新的歌辞；辞句虽文雅，但音节上却与古乐不同。
English: The Dongping King Liu Cang wrote new lyrics for the suburb temple rituals of the later Han Dynasty. Although the lyrics are elegant, the syllables are different from the ancient music.

古文：至于魏之三祖，气爽才丽，宰割辞调，音靡节平。
现代文：到三国时魏的曹操、曹丕、曹睿，他们的气质高朗，才华美妙，用古题乐府写时事，音节也美妙而和平。
English: In the Three Kingdoms period, Cao Cao, Cao Pi and Cao Rui of the Wei Dynasty were at the top. Their temperament was high-spirited and their talent was wonderful. They wrote about current affairs with the ancient theme music, and their syllables were also wonderful and peaceful.

古文：观其北上众引，《秋风》列篇，或述酣宴，或伤羁戍，志不出于杂荡，辞不离于哀思。虽三调之正声，实《韶》、《夏》之郑曲也。
现代文：但读了曹操的《苦寒行》、曹丕的《燕歌行》等作品，觉得里边无论叙述宴饮或哀叹出征，内容都不免过分放纵，句句离不开悲哀的情绪；虽然直接继承汉代乐府诗，可是比之《韶乐》、《大夏》等古乐却差的远了。
English: However, after reading Cao Cao's "Bitter Cold" and Cao Yu's "Yan Song" and other works, I felt that whether it was a description of a banquet or a lament about going to war, the content was inevitably too indulgent, and every sentence was inseparable from a sad mood. Although it directly inherited Han Dynasty music poems, it was far inferior to ancient music such as "Bitter Music" and "Big Summer."

古文：逮于晋世，则傅玄晓音，创定雅歌，以咏祖宗；张华新篇，亦充庭万。
现代文：到了晋代，傅玄通晓音乐，写了许多雅正的乐歌，来歌颂晋代的祖先；张华也写了一些新的篇章，作为宫庭的《万舞》。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, Fu Xuan was well versed in music and wrote many elegant songs to praise the ancestors of the Jin Dynasty; Zhang Hua also wrote some new chapters, such as "Ten Thousand Dances" for the palace.

古文：然杜夔调律，音奏舒雅，荀勖改悬，声节哀急，故阮咸讥其离声，后人验其铜尺。
现代文：但杜夔所调整的音律，节奏舒缓而雅正；而晋初荀勖所改制的乐器，音节却比较感伤而急促。所以阮咸曾批评他定的不协调，后来有人考查了古代的铜尺，才知道荀勖改的不对。
English: However, the rhythms adjusted by Du Xuan are soothing and elegant, while the syllables of the musical instruments modified by Jin Chuxuan are sentimental and hasty. Therefore, Nguyen Xan criticized the incongruity of his decision. Later, someone examined the ancient copper ruler to know that the tampering was not right.

古文：和乐之精妙，固表里而相资矣。
现代文：可见和谐的乐曲之所以能达到精妙的地步，是要各方面相配合的。
English: It can be seen that the reason why the harmony of the music can reach the exquisite level is that it is necessary to cooperate in all aspects.

古文：故知诗为乐心，声为乐体；乐体在声，瞽师务调其器；乐心在诗，君子宜正其文。 好乐无荒 ，晋风所以称远； 伊其相谑 ，郑国所以云亡。
现代文：由此可知，诗句是乐府的核心，声律是乐府的形体。乐府的形体既然在于声律，那么乐师必须调整好乐器；乐府的核心既然在于诗句，那么士大夫应该写出好的歌辞来。《唐风》中说： 喜爱娱乐，不要过度。 
English: From this, it can be seen that the poem is the core of the music, and the vocal rhythm is the shape of the music. Since the shape of the music is in the vocal rhythm, the musician must adjust the instrument; since the core of the music is in the poem, the scholar should write a good song. "Tang Feng" said: Love entertainment, do not overdo it.

古文：故知季札观乐，不直听声而已。
现代文：季札称之为有远见。《郑风》中说： 男男女女互相调笑。 
English: Ji Fata called it far-sighted. "Zheng Feng" said: Men and women make fun of each other.

古文：若夫艳歌婉娈，怨诗诀绝，淫辞在曲，正响焉生？
现代文：季札认为这是亡国的预兆。由此可见季札听《诗经》的演奏，并不仅仅是注意它的声调。
English: Kifuda considered this to be an omen of the country's downfall, which shows that Kifuda listened to the performance of "Shikyo" and did not just pay attention to its tone.

古文：然俗听飞驰，职竞新异，雅咏温恭，必欠伸鱼睨；奇辞切至，则拊髀雀跃；诗声俱郑，自此阶矣！
现代文：至于后来乐府诗中，写缠绵的恩爱或者是决裂的怨恨；把这些不适当的作品制成谱，怎能产生良好的音乐呢？但是一般流行的，主要倾向于新奇的乐章。雅正的乐府诗是温和严肃的，人们听了都厌烦得打呵欠、瞪眼睛；对奇特的乐府诗就感到十分亲切，人们听了就喜欢得拍着大腿跳起来。所以诗句和声调都走到邪路上去，从此越来越厉害了。
English: As for the later music poems, they wrote lingering love or ruptured resentment; how could these inappropriate works be made into music, how could they produce good music? But they were generally popular and mainly inclined to novel movements. Yazheng's music poems were mild and serious, and people were bored to yawn and stare when they heard them; they felt very familiar with the strange music poems, and people liked to jump up and down when they heard them. So the verses and tones went the wrong way, and they became more and more powerful.

古文：凡乐辞曰诗，诗声曰歌，声来被辞，辞繁难节。
现代文：乐府的辞句就是诗，诗句配上声律就变成歌。声律配合辞句时，如果辞句过于繁杂，便难于节制。
English: Lefu's words are poems, and poems become songs when they are paired with vocal rhythms. When vocal rhythms are paired with words, if the words are too complicated, it is difficult to control them.

古文：故陈思称 左延年闲于增损古辞，多者则宜减之 ，明贵约也。
现代文：所以曹植说，左延年善于增减原作，太多了便删去一些。这说明歌辞应该注意精炼。
English: Therefore, Cao Zhi said that Zuo Yan Nian is good at adding and subtracting original works, and if there are too many, he will delete some. This shows that the lyrics should be refined.

古文：观高祖之咏《大风》，孝武之叹《来迟》，歌童被声，莫敢不协。
现代文：试看汉高祖的《大风歌》，以及汉武帝的《李夫人歌》，辞句并不多，而歌唱者很容易配合音节。
English: Take a look at Han Gaozu's "Great Wind Song" and Emperor Hanwu's "Lady Li Song." There are not many words, and the singer can easily match the syllables.

古文：子建士衡，咸有佳篇，并无诏伶人，故事谢丝管，俗称乖调，盖未思也。
现代文：后来曹植、陆机等人，都写过较好的诗，但并没有令乐师制谱，所以不能演奏。
English: Later, Cao Zhi, Lu Ji and others all wrote better poems, but they did not ask the musicians to make music, so they could not play.

古文：至于轩岐鼓吹，汉世铙挽，虽戎丧殊事，而并总入乐府，缪韦所改，亦有可算焉。
现代文：一般人认为他们的诗不合声律，其实这是没有经过仔细考虑的挑剔。此外，还有传说黄帝令岐伯制《鼓吹曲》，到汉代又出现《饶歌》和《挽歌》等等；虽然内容有军事和丧事的区别，但都算是乐府的一种。还有缪袭的作品，也值得我们注意。
English: In addition, there is a legend that the Yellow Emperor ordered Qi Bo to compose "The Drum Song," and "The Rap Song" and "The Elegy" appeared in the Han Dynasty, etc. Although there is a difference in content between military and funeral, they are all considered to be a kind of music. There are also works of Miao Hei, which are also worth our attention.

古文：昔子政品文，诗与歌别，故略具乐篇，以标区界。
现代文：从前刘向整理文章，把 诗 和 歌 分开；所以我现在另写这篇《乐府》，以表示其间的区别。
English: Once upon a time, Liu Xiang organized articles and separated poems from songs; so I am writing this "Music House" separately to show the difference.

古文：赞曰∶
现代文：总结：
English: What is this word? Summary:

古文：八音攡文，树辞为体。
现代文：各种乐器产生种种动听的音乐，而好的歌词却是其中的主干。
English: All kinds of musical instruments produce all kinds of beautiful music, but good lyrics are the backbone of it.

古文：讴吟坰野，金石云陛。
现代文：首先在乡村里产生了歌谣，宫廷中谱制成种种乐章。
English: First of all, ballads were created in the countryside, and various pieces of music were made from the court's musical scores.

古文：《韶》响难追，郑声易启。
现代文：卓越的古乐很难继承，不正当的音乐却容易开展。
English: Excellent ancient music is difficult to inherit, but improper music is easy to develop.

古文：岂惟观乐，于焉识礼。
现代文：从这里不仅看到了音乐的演变，更可看出礼法的盛衰。
English: From here, you can not only see the evolution of music, but also the rise and fall of etiquette.

