古文：马世龙，字苍元，宁夏人。由世职举武会试，历宣府游击。
现代文：马世龙，字苍元，宁夏人。早年由世袭的职务上考中武举会试，做过宣府游击军将。
English: Ma Shilong, surnamed Cangyuan, was born in Ningxia. In his early years, he passed the examination for hereditary positions, and served as the commander of the Xuanwu guerrilla army.

古文：天启二年抉永平副总兵。
现代文：天启二年，他升任永平副总兵。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to Yongping Deputy Commander-in-Chief.

古文：署兵部孙承宗奇其才，荐授署都督佥事，充三屯营总兵官。
现代文：代理兵部事务的孙承宗欣赏他的才干，推荐他做了都督佥事，充任三屯营总兵官。
English: Sun Chengzong, who was in charge of the affairs of the military department, appreciated his talent and recommended him to be the governor of the capital and the commander-in-chief of the Sandun Camp.

古文：承宗出镇，荐为山海总兵，俾领中部，调总兵王世钦、尤世禄分领南北二部。
现代文：承宗出任辽东镇守后，推荐世龙做了山海总兵，让他领管中部，调总兵王世钦、尤世禄分管南、北二部。
English: After Chengzong was appointed as the guard of Liaodong Town, he recommended Shilong to be made the commander of the Mountain and Sea, let him take charge of the central part, and transferred the commander Wang Shichin and You Shilu to be in charge of the southern and northern two parts.

古文：明年正月赐尚方剑，实授府衔。
现代文：第二年正月，朝廷赐给世龙尚方宝剑，正式授官都督佥事。
English: In the first month of the second year, the imperial court bestowed the sword of Shangfang to Shilong, and officially conferred the post of governor.

古文：承宗为筑坛拜大将，代行授钺礼，军马钱谷尽属之。
现代文：承宗为他修建了任命大将的祭坛，为他举行了授钺仪式，把军队中的军马钱粮等事务全交给他管理。
English: Emperor Chengzong built an altar for him to be appointed general, held an investiture ceremony for him, and put him in charge of all the affairs of the army, such as horses, money and grain.

古文：寻定分地，世龙居中，驻卫城，世钦南海，世禄北山，并受世龙节制，兵各万五千人。
现代文：不久确定五路将领分守的地盘，世龙在中间，驻在卫城之中，世钦分防南海，世禄分防北山，都接受世龙的管制，每部各一万五千人。
English: It was soon determined that the five generals would divide up the territory to be guarded, with Shilong in the middle, stationed in the middle of the Acropolis, Shichin guarding the South China Sea, and Shilu guarding the North Mountain, all of which would be under the control of Shilong, each with fifteen thousand people.

古文：世龙感承宗知已，颇尽力，与承宗定计出守关外诸城。
现代文：世龙感激承宗对自己的赏识，做事很尽心尽力，和承宗一起商定计策，出兵驻守关外的城镇。
English: Shilong was grateful to Chengzong for his appreciation. He did his best, agreed on strategies with Chengzong, and sent troops to garrison towns outside Guanzhong.

古文：四年，偕巡抚喻安性及袁崇焕东巡广宁，又与崇焕、世钦航海抵盖套，相度形势而还。
现代文：四年，他陪同巡抚喻安性及袁崇焕东巡广宁，又和崇焕、世钦一起航海到达盖套，考察了地理形势，然后返回。
English: In four years, he accompanied the governor Yu Anxiong and Yuan Chonghuan on an eastward tour of Guangning, and sailed with Chonghuan and Shichin to Gaidai, examined the geographical situation, and then returned.

古文：叙劳，加右都督。
现代文：评定功劳，朝廷给他加官为左都督。
English: In recognition of his services, the Imperial Court promoted him to the post of Left Governor.

古文：当是时，承宗统士马十余万，用将校数百人，岁费军储数百万。
现代文：当时，承宗统率着十多万兵马，手下使唤的将校有几百人，每年开支军费几百万两白银。
English: At that time, Cheng Zongtong led more than one hundred thousand soldiers and horses, with several hundred officers serving under him, and the annual military expenditure was several million taels of silver.

古文：诸有求于承宗者，率因世龙，不得则大恚。
现代文：那些有求于承宗的人，大都通过世龙开口，达不到目的就异常恼火。
English: Those who aspire to be the next generation of the family, mostly speak through Shilong, and if they do not achieve their goal, they are extremely annoyed.

古文：而世龙貌伟，中实怯，忌承宗者多击世龙以撼之。
现代文：可是世龙为人虽相貌雄壮，实际上心里胆小，所以那些忌恨承宗的人也大都通过抨击世龙来拆承宗的台。
English: However, although the dragon is a strong-looking person, it is actually timid at heart, so those who are afraid of inheriting the dynasty mostly criticize the dragon to dismantle the throne of inheriting the dynasty.

古文：承宗抗辩于朝曰： 人谓其贪淫朘削，臣敢以百口保其必无。 
现代文：承宗抗言上书向朝廷辩解说： 别人说世龙贪婪、荒淫、剥削他人，我敢用一百张嘴巴保证没有这些事。 
English: He wrote a letter to the Imperial Court to defend himself, saying, "Others say that dragons are greedy, lewd, and exploit others, but I can assure you with a hundred mouths that this is not the case.

古文：帝以承宗故，不问。
现代文：熹宗皇帝因为承宗的缘故，对这些没加追究。
English: Emperor Taizong did not investigate these matters because he was the heir to the throne.

古文：五年九月，世龙误信降人刘伯漒言、遣前锋副将鲁之甲、参将李承先率师袭取耀州，败没。
现代文：五年九月，世龙误信降人刘伯氵强的话，派遣先锋副将鲁之甲、参将李承先率兵袭取耀州，全军覆没了。
English: In September of the fifth year, the dragon erroneously believed the words of the subordinate Liu Bo Xuanqiang, and sent the vanguard vice-general Lu Zhi Jia and the general Li Chengxian to attack Yaozhou, and the whole army disappeared.

古文：言官交章劾奏，严旨切责，令戴罪图功。
现代文：言官纷纷上书弹劾，熹宗颁布诏书对世龙做了严厉批评，让他戴罪立功。
English: The magistrates sent letters of impeachment one after another, and Emperor Taizong issued an edict severely criticizing Shilong, making him pay for his crime.

古文：时魏忠贤方以清君侧疑承宗，其党攻世龙者并及承宗。
现代文：当时魏忠贤正怀疑承宗想要清君侧，他的党羽攻击世龙时就连带攻击承宗。
English: At that time, Wei Zhongxian was suspecting that Zhengzong wanted to side with Qing, and when his followers attacked Shilong, they also attacked Zhengzong.

古文：承宗不安其位去，以兵部尚书高第来代。
现代文：承宗在自己的位置上感到不安，离职走了，朝廷派兵部尚书高第来接任。
English: Chengzong felt uneasy in his position and left his post, and the imperial court sent the military commander Shang Shugao to take over.

古文：职方主事徐日久者，先佐第挠辽事，及从第赞画，力攻世龙。
现代文：职方主事徐日久这个人，起初帮助高第干涉辽东的事务，现在跟高第来参谋军事，就极力上书攻击世龙。
English: The person in charge of the staff, Xu Rijiju, who at first helped Gaudi interfere in the affairs of Liaodong and is now a military staff officer with Gaudi, vigorously attacked the dragon in a letter.

古文：世龙阴结忠贤，反削日久籍。
现代文：世龙暗中勾结魏忠贤，反而把日久给剥夺了官籍。
English: Shilong secretly colluded with Wei Zhongxian, but deprived Hijiu of his official status.

古文：其冬，世龙亦谢病去。
现代文：这年冬天，世龙也告病还乡去了。
English: This winter, Shilong also fell ill and returned to his hometown.

古文：崇祯元年，王在晋为尚书。世龙上疏极论其罪，有诏逮世龙，久不至。
现代文：崇祯元年，王在晋做尚书，世龙上书极力数说他的罪过，朝廷下诏逮捕世龙，很长时间没抓到。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Wang Zaijin wrote a letter to Shilong, and Shilong wrote a letter saying that he was guilty. The court ordered the arrest of Shilong, but he was not caught for a long time.

古文：在晋罢，始诣狱。
现代文：在晋罢官后，世龙才来投案。
English: After promotion and dismissal, Shilong came to join the case.

古文：二年冬，都城戒严。刑部尚书乔允升荐世龙才，诏图功自赎。
现代文：二年冬天，京师戒严，刑部尚书乔允升上书推荐世龙的才干，崇祯皇帝命令他立功赎罪。
English: In the winter of the second year, the capital was under martial law, and the criminal department Shang Shuxu Qiao Yun Sheng wrote a letter recommending the dragon's talent. Emperor Chongzhen ordered him to make meritorious deeds to atone for his sins.

古文：会祖大寿师溃，京师大震。
现代文：正好祖大寿的部队逃跑了，京师受到很大震动。
English: Just as Zu Dashu's troops fled, the capital was shaken.

古文：承宗再起督师，以便宜遣世龙驰谕大寿听命。
现代文：承宗这时又出来担任督师，就让世龙见机行事，飞马到祖大寿那里叫他归顺。
English: At this time, Chengzong came out again to act as supervisor, and let Shilong act as he saw fit, and Pegasus went to Zu Dashou to make him submit.

古文：及满桂战死，遂令世龙代为总理，赐尚方剑，尽统诸镇援师。
现代文：等满桂阵亡后，崇祯皇帝就让世龙接任总理，赐给他尚方宝剑，让他统率所有从各地来救援京师的部队。
English: After Man Gui's death, Emperor Chongzhen let Shilong take over as prime minister, gave him the Shangfang Sword, and let him command all the troops coming from all over the country to rescue the Beijing Division.

古文：三年三月进左都督。
现代文：三年三月，世龙被提升为左都督。
English: In March of the third year, Shilong was promoted to the left governor.

古文：时遵化、永平，迁安、滦州四城失守已三月。
现代文：当时遵化、永平、迁安、滦州四城失守已经三个月了。
English: At that time, it had been three months since the four cities of Zunhua, Yongping, Qian'an and Zhangzhou had been lost.

古文：承宗、大寿隔关门，与世龙诸军声息断绝。
现代文：承宗、大寿隔了一道山海关大门，跟世龙的各军音讯不通。
English: Chengzong and Datou are separated by a mountain customs gate, and there is no communication with the armies of the world.

古文：帝急诏四方兵勤王，昌平尤世威、蓟镇杨肇基、保定曹鸣雷、山海宋伟、山西王国樑、固原杨麒、延绥吴自勉、临洮王承恩、宁夏尤世禄、甘肃杨嘉谟，所将皆诸边锐卒；内地则山东、河南、南都、湖广、浙江、江西、福建、四川诸军，亦先后至。
现代文：崇祯皇帝赶忙下诏要各地的部队来勤王，昌平的尤世威、蓟镇的杨肇基、保定的曹鸣雷、山海的宋伟、山西的王国梁、固原的杨麒、延绥的吴自勉、临洮的王承恩、宁夏的尤世禄、甘肃的杨嘉谟等大将赶来，他们所带来的都是边疆各地的精兵。内地有山东、河南、南京、湖广、浙江、江西、福建、四川的部队也先后赶来了。
English: Emperor Chongzhen hurriedly issued an edict to the troops from all over the country to come to Qin Wang. Generals such as You Shihwei from Changping, Yang Zhaoji from Shuzhen, Cao Minglei from Baoding, Song Wei from Shanhai, Wang Guoliang from Shanxi, Yang Hui from Guyuan, Wu Zicheng from Yancheng, Wang Cheng'en from Linyi, You Shilu from Ningxia, and Yang Jia Mu from Gansu arrived. They brought with them elite soldiers from all over the frontier. The troops from Shandong, Henan, Nanjing, Hubei, Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Fujian, and Sich

古文：并壁蓟门，观望不进。
现代文：这些部队都驻扎在蓟门，观望不前。
English: These troops are stationed at the gate, watching and waiting.

古文：给事中张第元上言： 世龙在关数载，绩效无闻，非若卫、霍之俦，功名足以服人也。
现代文：给事中张第元上书说： 世龙在山海关干了几年，没听说建立过什么功勋，不像卫青、霍去病那样的大将，所建立的功名足以服人。
English: In the petition, Zhang Diyuan said: Shilong worked at the Shanhaiguan Customs for several years, and I have not heard of any achievements. Unlike generals such as Wei Qing and Huo Dezi, the achievements he has made are enough to serve others.

古文：诸帅宿将，非世龙偏裨，欲驱策节制，谁能甘之。
现代文：这些带兵的老将，并不是世龙的偏裨小校，他即使想加以调遣、辖制，哪个人能甘心听他的呢？
English: These veterans with soldiers are not the world's dragons. Even if he wants to dispatch and control them, who can be willing to listen to him?

古文：师老财匮，锐气日消，延及夏秋，将有不可言者。 
现代文：这样子下去，兵力衰减，浪费钱财，一天天磨掉了锐气，误到夏秋季节时，结果将不堪设想。 
English: If things continue like this, the troops will decline, money will be wasted, morale will be eroded day by day, and by the time we get to the summer and autumn seasons, the result will be unimaginable.

古文：帝以世龙方规进取，不纳其言。
现代文：崇祯皇帝因为世龙正在部署作战，没听他的意见。
English: Emperor Chongzhen did not listen to him because the dragon was being deployed for battle.

古文：时大寿于五月十日薄滦州。明日，世龙等以师会。又明日复其城。
现代文：当时大寿于五月十日兵临滦州，第二天，世龙等率兵同他会合，第三天收复了滦州城。
English: At that time, Datong sent soldiers to Linshou on May 10. On the second day, Shilong and other soldiers joined him, and on the third day, they recovered Linshou City.

古文：十三日，游击靳国臣复迁安。
现代文：十三日，游击靳国臣收复了迁安。
English: On the 13th, the guerrillas of the Kuomintang regained control of Jianan.

古文：明日，副将何可纲复永平。
现代文：第二天，副将何可刚收复了永平。
English: The next day, Vice Admiral He Ke just recovered Yongping.

古文：又二日，别将复遵化。
现代文：又过两天，另外一些将领收复了遵化。
English: Two days later, other generals recaptured Zunhua.

古文：阅五月，四城始复。
现代文：就这样四城在失陷后经过五个月才得到恢复。
English: In this way, it took five months for the four cities to recover after the fall.

古文：论功，大寿最，世禄次之。
现代文：评定战功时，大寿排在第一，世禄第二。
English: In the evaluation of war exploits, Dahu ranked first, and Shilu second.

古文：世龙加太子少保，荫本卫世千户。
现代文：世龙被加官太子少保，荫封后代为本卫世袭千户。
English: Shilong was promoted to the position of crown prince and Shao Bao, and his descendants became the ancestors of thousands of households.

古文：八月复谢病归。
现代文：八月，他又称病回去了。
English: In August, he called in sick again.

古文：六年五月，插汉虎墩兔合套寇犯宁夏，总兵贺虎臣战殁，诏起世龙代之。
现代文：六年五月，插汉的虎墩兔联合河套地方的狄人来侵犯宁夏，总兵贺虎臣阵亡，朝廷颁诏起用世龙去接替他。
English: In May of the 6th year of the Heian period, the Han-installed Tigress and Rabbit combined with the Di people from the Hetao region to invade Ningxia. The general He Huochen was killed in battle, and the court issued an edict to replace him with Shilong.

古文：世龙生长宁夏，习其形势，大修战备。
现代文：世龙在宁夏长大，熟悉当地的山川形势，上任后大修战备。
English: Shilong grew up in Ningxia, familiar with the local mountain and river situation, and overhauled the combat readiness after taking office.

古文：明年正月，二部入犯，遣参将卜应第大破之，斩首二百有奇。
现代文：第二年正月，这两个部落进来骚扰，世龙派参将卜应第把他们打得大败，斩获二百多个首级。
English: In the first month of the second year, the two tribes came to harass, and the dragon sent the general Bu Yingdi to beat them badly, gaining more than two hundred heads.

古文：逾月，套寇犯贺兰山。世龙遣降丁潜入其营，馘其长撒儿甲，斩级如前。
现代文：过了一个月，河套地区的狄寇进犯贺兰山，世龙派遣投降过来的兵丁偷偷进入他们的营帐中，割下了他们首领撒儿甲的脑袋，斩获的首级跟上次数目相当。
English: A month later, Dicko from the Hetao region invaded Mount Horan. Shilong sent soldiers who had surrendered to sneak into their camp and cut off the head of their leader, Zarga. The number of severed heads was the same as the previous time.

古文：未几，插部大举入寇。世龙遣副将娄光先等分五道伏要害，而己中道待之，夹击，斩首八百有奇。
现代文：不久，插部大举来犯，世龙派副将娄光先等分五路埋伏在要害地带，自己在中路等敌人过来，然后群起夹击，斩获了八百多首级。
English: Soon, the intruders came in large numbers. The vice-commander of the Shilong faction, Hao Guang, first divided into five equal parts and ambushed in the key area. He waited for the enemy to come over in the middle, and then clamped down and captured more than eight hundred heads.

古文：巡抚王振奇亦斩三百余级。
现代文：巡抚王振奇也斩了三百多首级。
English: The governor Wang Zhenqi also cut off more than three hundred heads.

古文：寇复犯河西玉泉宫，世龙复邀斩五百余。
现代文：敌人来进犯河西的玉泉营，世龙又拦截作战，斩敌五百多人。
English: The enemy came to attack the Jade Spring Camp in the west of the river, and the dragon intercepted and fought, killing more than five hundred people.

古文：迨文龙取金州，未几复失。
现代文：当年七月他们又来侵犯枣国堡，世龙又把他们打得大败，俘获、杀死了一千多敌兵。
English: In July of that year, they invaded Zaozhuang National Fortress again, and Shilong defeated them again, capturing and killing more than a thousand enemy soldiers.

古文：四年，有容以年老乞骸骨，归，卒。
现代文：在半年中他屡奏大捷，名震西塞。不久，世龙死在任上，终年仅四十多岁。
English: In half a year, he repeatedly achieved great success, and his fame spread far and wide. Soon, Shilong died in office, only in his forties.

古文：赠都督同知，赐祭葬。张可大，字观甫，应天人。
现代文：后来朝廷评定他的功绩，追赠他为太子太傅，世袭锦衣佥事，并按照规定给予了抚恤。张可大，字观甫，应天人。
English: Later, the imperial court evaluated his merits and posthumously awarded him the title of crown prince and hereditary grand vizier, and gave him a pension in accordance with regulations. Zhang Keda, pronounced Guan Fu, was a man of heaven.

古文：世袭南京羽林左卫千户，举万历二十九年武会试，授建昌守备。
现代文：世袭南京羽林左卫千户，又考中万历二十九年武举会试，初任建昌守备。
English: He inherited 1,000 households of Nanjing Yulin Zuwei, and passed the 29th year of the middle school entrance examination, and was appointed as the first Jianchang guard.

古文：迁浙江都司佥书，分守瓜洲、仪真，江洋大盗敛迹。
现代文：后来升任浙江都司佥书，负责守卫瓜洲、仪真，江洋大盗在他任职期间不敢逞凶。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of the Zhejiang governor, responsible for guarding Guazhou and Yizhen. During his tenure, Jiang Yang Dajiao did not dare to be aggressive.

古文：税监鲁保死，淮抚李三才令可大录其赀。保家馈重贿，却不受。
现代文：税监鲁保死后，淮州巡抚李三才让可大登记他的财产，鲁保家给他送来重礼，可大拒不受贿。
English: After the death of Lu Bao, the tax inspector, Li Sancai, the governor of Huai Zhou, allowed Keda to register his property. The Rubo family sent him a heavy gift, but Keda refused to accept bribes.

古文：叶向高赴召过仪，见而异之，曰： 此不特良将，且良吏也。 
现代文：叶向高应召赴京时经过仪真，见到可大后惊奇地说： 这个人不仅是个良将，也是一个良吏的料子呢。 
English: When Ye Xianggao was called to go to Beijing, he passed through Yizhen and said with surprise after seeing Keda: This man is not only a good general, but also a good official.

古文：迁刘河游击，改广东高肇参将。调浙江舟山。
现代文：后来他升任刘河游击，改任广东高肇参将，然后调到浙江舟山。
English: Later, he was promoted to Liuhe guerrilla, changed to Guangdong Gaozhao staff general, and then transferred to Zhoushan, Zhejiang.

古文：奉命征黎，与总兵王鸣鹤用黑番为导，捣其巢，黎乃灭。
现代文：在此期间，他奉命征讨黎都，与总兵王鹤鸣一起用黑番做向导，捣毁了贼寇的巢穴，黎部才算被消灭了。
English: During this period, he was ordered to conquer the Lidu, and together with the general soldier Wang Huanming, he used the Black Watch as a guide to destroy the robber's lair. Only then was the Lidu eliminated.

古文：舟山，宋昌国城也，居海中，有七十二墺，为浙东要害。
现代文：舟山，也就是宋朝称为昌国城的地方，位于大海之中，有七十二个小岛，是浙江的战略要地。
English: Zhoushan, also known as Changguocheng in the Song Dynasty, is located in the middle of the sea and has 72 islets. It is a strategic place in Zhejiang.

古文：可大条上八议，皆硕画。
现代文：可大向朝廷列举了八条主张，都是宏谋高议，对国家大有裨益。
English: Koda enumerated eight propositions to the imperial court, all of which were ambitious and highly discussed, and of great benefit to the country.

古文：倭犯五罩湖、白沙港、茶山，潭头，连败之，加副总兵。
现代文：倭寇侵犯五罩湖、白沙港、茶山潭头，可大接连打败了他们，被加官副总兵。
English: The wokou invaded Wuhu Lake, Baisha Port, and Chashan Tantou, but defeated them one after another, and was promoted to vice admiral.

古文：城久圮，可大与副使蔡献臣筑之，两月工竣。
现代文：当地城墙坍塌已久，可大与副使蔡献臣加以修建，只两个月就完工了。
English: The local city wall had long since collapsed, but Koda and his deputy, Cai Xianchen, rebuilt it, and it was completed in just two months.

古文：城内外田数千亩，海潮害稼。
现代文：城内外有水田几千亩，海潮妨害耕种。
English: There are thousands of mu of paddy fields inside and outside the city, and the sea tide hinders cultivation.

古文：可大筑碶蓄淡水，遂为膏腴。民称曰： 张公碶 。
现代文：可大修建蓄水闸储蓄淡水，这些田土就改造成为沃土，百姓都叫这些蓄水闸称为 张公石契 。
English: These fields can be transformed into fertile land by building large-scale water storage dams to save fresh water, and the people call these water storage dams Zhang Gongshi Ji.

古文：天启元年以都指挥使掌南京锦衣卫。
现代文：天启元年，可大以都指挥使的身份掌管南京锦衣卫。
English: In the first year of the apocalypse, he was able to take charge of Nanjing Jinlingwei as the commander of the capital.

古文：六年擢都督佥事，佥书南京右府。
现代文：六年升任都督佥事，在南京右府担任佥书。
English: Six years later, he was promoted to the post of prefectural governor of Anji, and served as the prefectural governor of Nanjing.

古文：崇祯元年出为登莱总兵官。
现代文：崇祯元年，可大出任登莱总兵官。
English: In the first year of the Chongzhen era, he was promoted to the post of the general officer of Denglai.

古文：会议裁登、莱抚镇，乃命以总兵官视登州副总兵事，而巡抚遂罢不设。
现代文：当朝廷讨论罢设登莱巡抚时，就命令可大以总兵官的身份办理登州副总兵的差事，巡抚就停设了。
English: When the Imperial Court was discussing the dismissal of the inspector of Denlai, it was ordered that Koda could carry out the duties of the deputy inspector of Denlai as the chief military officer, and the inspector was suspended.

古文：可大尽心海防，亲历巡视，图沿海地形、兵力强弱，为《海防图说》上之。
现代文：可大全心全意地加强海防，亲自到各处视察，绘图记载沿海一带的地形和兵力强弱，撰写《海防图说》报送给朝廷。
English: However, he wholeheartedly strengthened the coastal defense, personally inspected everywhere, drew maps to record the topography and strength of troops along the coast, and wrote "The Story of the Coastal Defense Map" and submitted it to the Imperial Court.

古文：二年冬，白莲贼余党围莱阳，可大击破之，焚其六砦，斩伪国公二人，围遂解。
现代文：二年冬天，白莲贼的余党包围了莱阳，可大把他们打败，焚烧了他们的六个营寨，斩杀了他们的两个伪国公，莱阳之围才解除。
English: In the winter of the second year, the remnants of the White Lotus Thieves besieged Laiyang, but defeated them, burned their six camps, and killed their two pseudo-princes. Only then was the siege of Laiyang lifted.

古文：京师被兵，可大入卫，守西直、广宁诸门。
现代文：京师受到侵犯时，可大进京防卫，把守西直、广宁等城门。
English: When the Beijing division is encroached upon, it can enter Beijing to defend and guard the city gates such as Xizhi and Guangning.

古文：明年，以勤王功，升都督同知。
现代文：第二年，因为勤王的战功，升任都督同知。
English: The next year, because of his war service, he was promoted to the post of governor-general.

古文：刘兴治反东江，遂奉诏还镇。
现代文：刘兴治在东江造起反来，可大于是奉命返回驻地。
English: Liu Xingzhi rebelled in the East River and was ordered to return to his base.

古文：已而四城并复，朝议复设登莱巡抚，以孙元化为之。
现代文：后来丢失的四座城池都得到收复，朝廷决定重新设置登莱巡抚，由孙元化出任。
English: The four castles that were later lost were recovered, and the imperial court decided to re-establish the governor of Denglai, to be held by Sun Yuanhua.

古文：元化率关外八千人至，强半皆辽人。
现代文：元化率领关外部队八千人来了，其中一大半是辽东人。
English: Yuanhua led eight thousand troops from outside the pass, most of whom were from Liaodong.

古文：可大虑有变，屡言于元化，不听。
现代文：可大担心发生意外，屡次给元化讲，元化不听。
English: Can be very worried about accidents, repeatedly told Yuanhua, Yuanhua did not listen.

古文：四年七月，录前守城功，进右都督。
现代文：四年七月，朝廷评定他以前守城的功劳，提拔可大做了右都督。
English: In July of the fourth year, the imperial court evaluated his previous contribution to the defense of the city and promoted him to the position of right-hand governor.

古文：十月，佥书南京左府，兼督池河、浦口二军，登人泣留之。
现代文：十月，调他到南京左府当佥书，兼管池河、浦江二处驻军，登州人流着泪挽留他。
English: In October, he was transferred to Nanjing's Zuofu to be in charge of the imperial rescript, and was also in charge of the two garrisons in the Chihe River and the Pujiang River. The people of Dengzhou were in tears to retain him.

古文：未行而孔有德反吴桥，东陷六城。
现代文：可大尚未动身，孔有德在六桥造起反来，往东打下了六座城池。
English: However, Kong Youde had not yet set out, so he set up a counter-attack at the six bridges and built six fortresses to the east.

古文：可大急往剿，元化檄止之，不听。次莱州，遇元化，复为所阻，乃还镇。
现代文：可大急忙前往征剿，元化传令制止他，可大不听，当可大行军途中驻在莱州时，碰上了元化，又被他阻拦，才返回驻地。
English: Koda was in a hurry to go to recruit soldiers. Yuanhua sent him an order to stop him, but Koda did not listen. When Koda was stationed in Laizhou on his way to march, he ran into Yuanhua and was blocked by him before returning to his station.

古文：岁将晏，有德暮薄城。可大请击之，元化持抚议，不许。
现代文：这一年就要结束时，有德在傍晚时候兵临城下，可大请求出击，元化主张招安，不让他出兵。
English: At the end of the year, when the soldiers of Youde came to the city in the evening, Youde could make a big request to attack, and Yuanhua advocated recruiting security and did not allow him to send troops.

古文：可大陈利害甚切，元化期明岁元日发兵合击。
现代文：可大把利害讲得很明白了，元化才约定明年元旦节出兵合击。
English: But he made it very clear what was at stake, and it was only on New Year's Day that Yuanhua agreed to send troops to join the attack.

古文：至期，元化兵不发。
现代文：到了那一天，元化的部队没动。
English: On that day, the demobilized troops did not move.

古文：明日，合兵战城东，可大兵屡胜。
现代文：第二天，双方在城东对敌作战，可大的部队屡屡得胜。
English: The next day, the two sides fought against the enemy in the east of the city, and the large troops repeatedly won.

古文：元化部卒皆辽人，亲党多，无斗志。
现代文：元化的部下都是辽东人，反贼中有很多他们的亲朋好友，所以没有斗志。
English: The subordinates of Yuanhua are all from Liaodong Province, and many of the anti-thieves are their relatives and friends, so they have no fighting spirit.

古文：其将张焘先走，可大兵亦败。
现代文：元化的将领张焘率先逃走，可大的部队也战败了。
English: The radicalized general Zhang Ye took the lead in fleeing, but the large force was also defeated.

古文：中军管维城，游击陈良谟，守备盛洛、姚士良皆战死。
现代文：中军管维城，游击陈良谟，守备盛洛、姚士良都战死了。
English: The Chinese army managed to hold the city, the guerrilla Chen Liangmu, the guard Sheng Luo, and Yao Shiliang all died in the battle.

古文：焘兵半降有德，遣归为内应。元化开门纳之，可大谏，不听。
现代文：张焘的士兵有一半投降了有德，有德派他们回来做内应，元化要开门让他们进来，可大劝阻，元化不听。
English: Half of Zhang Ye's soldiers surrendered to Youde. Youde sent them back to do internal correspondence. Yuanhua wanted to open the door and let them in. Youde could dissuade them, but Yuanhua would not listen.

古文：夜半贼至，城遂陷。
现代文：半夜里反贼打来，城就被打下了。
English: In the middle of the night, the anti-thieves called, and the city was taken down.

古文：可大时守水城，抚膺大恸。解所佩印付旗鼓，间道走济南上之。
现代文：可大当时正在防守水城，听说后抚膺大哭，伤心透了，解下他所佩带的官印交给旗手和鼓手，让他们走小路把它交给济南的上司。
English: At the time, Koda was defending Suicheng. When he heard about it, he burst into tears and was heartbroken. He took off the official seal he was wearing and gave it to the flag bearer and the drummer, and asked them to take a back road and give it to their boss in Jinan.

古文：还家辞母，令弟可度、子鹿征奉母航海趋天津。
现代文：回到家里拜别了自己的母亲，让弟弟可度、儿子鹿征护送母亲航海到天津去。
English: She went back home to bid farewell to her mother, and let her younger brother Kedu and son Deer Levy escort their mother to sail to Tianjin.

古文：而以佩剑付部将，尽斩诸婢妾，遂投缳死。
现代文：然后把佩剑交给部将，把所有的丫环都杀死，可大方结绳自缢而死。
English: Then he handed the saber to his subordinate and killed all the maids, but he was generous enough to tie a rope around himself and die.

古文：事闻，赠特进荣禄大夫、太子少傅，谥庄节，赐祭葬，予世荫，建祠曰： 旌忠 。
现代文：事情报朝廷知道后，朝廷追赠可大为特进荣禄大夫、太子少傅，谥庄节，赐予他公祭、丧葬，并予以世袭封荫，为他建立了一所祠堂，名叫 旌忠祠 。
English: After the information was made known to the imperial court, the imperial court posthumously bestowed the title of "special honor doctor," "princeling doctor" and "young master" on him. He was given a public memorial service, a funeral, and a hereditary seal. An ancestral hall was built for him, named "Shizhong Ancestral Hall."

古文：可大好学能诗，敦节行，有儒将风。
现代文：可大爱好学问，善于做诗，很注意品行修养，有儒将的风范。
English: He has a great love for learning, is good at writing poetry, pays great attention to moral cultivation, and has the demeanor of a Confucian general.

古文：为南京锦衣时，欧阳晖由刑部主事谪本卫知事，尝赋诗有 阴霾国事非 句，扬州知府刘铎书之扇，赠一僧。
现代文：他总领南京锦衣卫时，欧阳晖由刑部主事贬来锦衣卫做知事，欧阳晖曾经做了一首诗，中间有一句话说 阴霾国事非 ，扬州知府刘铎把它写在扇面上赠给了一个和尚。
English: When he was the commander-in-chief of Nanjing Jinyiwei, Ouyang Zou was demoted from the head of the criminal department to the governor of Jinyiwei. Ouyang Zou once wrote a poem, in the middle of which there was a sentence "The haze is not a state affair," Yangzhou Governor Liu Zou wrote it on a fan and presented it to a monk.

古文：崇祯中，以蓟镇副总兵为总督吴阿衡中军。
现代文：恨刘铎的人就向魏忠贤做了诬告，欧阳晖、刘铎都遭到逮捕。
English: People who hated Liu Ye made false accusations against Wei Zhongxian, and Ouyang Ye and Liu Ye were both arrested.

古文：十一年冬，墙子岭失事，与阿衡并力战死。
现代文：可大管教旗牌、差官，又捐出官俸帮助他们两人，为他们的妻子、儿女选择房屋居住。他为人崇尚道义的事例大都与此相类似。
English: Most of his examples of being a moral person are similar to this: He disciplined the flag and officers, donated his salary to help two of them, and chose houses for their wives and children to live in.

古文：秦良玉，忠州人，嫁石砫宣抚使马千乘。
现代文：他的弟弟可仕，字文峙，用字不用名。文峙隐居博学，曾经编辑过明代平民百姓的诗集一百卷。秦良玉，忠州人，早年嫁石石主宣抚使马千乘为妻。
English: His younger brother, Keshi, is a wordsmith, using words without a name. He lives in seclusion and is well-educated. He once edited a hundred volumes of poetry for the common people in the Ming Dynasty. Qin Liangyu, a native of Chungju, was married to Ma Qianxuan in his early years.

古文：万历二十七年，千乘以三千人从征播州，良玉别统精卒五百裹粮自随，与副将周国柱扼贼邓坎。
现代文：万历二十七年，千乘率领三千人从征播州，良玉率五百名精兵运粮相随，同副将周国柱在邓坎遏制贼寇。
English: In the 27th year of the Manchurian calendar, Qian Rong led 3,000 men from Zengbozhou, Liang Yu led 500 elite soldiers to transport grain, and together with Vice Admiral Zhou Guozhu, they curbed the bandits in Duncan.

古文：明年正月二日，贼乘官军宴，夜袭。
现代文：第二年正月二日，贼兵乘官军设宴饮酒，夜间过来偷袭。
English: On the second day of the first month of the second year, the robber soldiers took advantage of the official army to have a banquet and drink, and came over at night to make a sneak attack.

古文：良玉夫妇首击败之，追入贼境，连破金筑等七寨。
现代文：良玉夫妇首先击败他们，追赶到贼兵境内，一连打下金筑等人的七个营寨。
English: Mr. and Mrs. Liangyu first defeated them, chased them into the territory of the bandits, and knocked down seven camps of Jinzhu and others.

古文：已，偕酉阳诸军直取桑木关，大败贼众，为南川路战功第一。
现代文：后来他们跟酉阳的各路官军直取桑木关，大败贼兵，在南川路战功第一。
English: Later, they directly captured the Mulberry Pass with the government troops of various routes in Shenyang, defeated the bandits, and won the first place in the Nanchuan Road.

古文：贼平，良玉不言功。
现代文：贼兵剿平后，良玉没有自报战功。
English: After the bandit soldiers were defeated, Liangyu did not report his war exploits.

古文：其后，千乘为部民所讼，瘐死云阳狱，良玉代领其职。
现代文：后来，千乘被部落内的百姓起诉入狱，病死在云阳监狱中，良玉代理了他的职务。
English: Later, Qian Rong was sued and jailed by people within the tribe, and died of illness in Yunyang Prison. Liang Yu took over his duties.

古文：良玉为人饶胆智，善骑射，兼通词翰，仪度娴雅。而驭下严峻，每行军发令，戎伍肃然。
现代文：良玉富有胆略，擅长骑马射箭，兼通诗文，仪态娴雅，但是对部下要求很严格，每次行军传令，将士都严肃执行。
English: Liangyu was daring, good at riding and archery, versed in poetry and literature, and had an elegant demeanor. However, he was very strict with his subordinates. Every time he issued a marching order, his soldiers carried it out seriously.

古文：所部号白杆兵，为远近所惮。
现代文：她的军队称为白杆兵，是周围地区都害怕的一支劲旅。
English: Her army, known as the White Guards, is a feared force in the region.

古文：泰昌时，征其兵援辽。
现代文：泰昌年间，朝廷征调她的兵力援助辽东。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taichang, the imperial court conscripted her troops to aid Liaodong.

古文：良玉遣兄邦屏、弟民屏先以数千人往。
现代文：良玉派遣哥哥邦屏、弟弟民屏先率领几千人前去。
English: Liang Yu sent his elder brother, Bang Ping, and his younger brother, Min Ping, to lead several thousand people.

古文：朝命赐良玉三品服，授邦屏都司佥书，民屏守备。
现代文：朝廷下令赐给良玉三品官服，任命邦屏为都司佥书，民屏为守备。
English: The imperial court ordered that Liangyu be given three official uniforms, and appointed Bangping as the prefect of the capital and Minping as the guard.

古文：天启元年，邦屏渡浑河战死，民屏突围出。
现代文：天启元年，邦屏抢渡浑河时战死，民屏突围出去。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, Bangping died in battle while trying to cross the Hun River, and Minping broke out of the encirclement.

古文：良玉自统精卒三千赴之，所过秋毫无犯。
现代文：良玉亲率三千精兵前来，对沿途经过的地方没有丝毫侵扰。
English: Liang Yucai came with three thousand elite soldiers and did not disturb the places he passed along the way.

古文：诏加二品服，即予封诰。
现代文：朝廷下诏加她二品官服，并且给了她封诰印信。
English: The imperial court gave her a second-class official uniform, and gave her a sealed letter.

古文：子祥麟授指挥使。
现代文：她的儿子马祥麟也授官指挥使。
English: Her son, Ma Xianglin, was also awarded the post of commander.

古文：良玉陈邦屏死状，请优恤。因言： 臣自征播以来，所建之功，不满谗妒口，贝锦高张，忠诚孰表。 
现代文：良玉向朝廷陈述了邦屏的死状，请求给予抚恤，借此机会又说： 我从出征播州以来所立下的战功塞不住别人忌贤妒能的嘴巴，他们故意编造谣言诬陷我，有谁表彰过我的忠诚呢？ 
English: Liangyu told the imperial court about the death of Bangping, and asked for a pension. She also took this opportunity to say: My war exploits since I went to Bozhou cannot stop the jealous mouths of others. They deliberately fabricated rumors to frame me. Who has commended my loyalty?

古文：帝优诏报之。
现代文：熹宗皇帝颁布了一道措辞婉转的诏书回答了她。
English: Emperor Taizong issued a euphemistically-worded edict in response.

古文：兵部尚书张鹤鸣言： 浑河血战，首功数千，实石砫、酉阳二土司功。
现代文：兵部尚书张鹤鸣说 ：浑河这场血战斩获敌人首级数千，实际上是石柱、酉阳两地土司的功劳。
English: Zhang Hurming, the secretary of the military department, said: "This bloody battle in Hunhe won thousands of enemy heads, which is actually the merit of Shizhu and the local governors of the two places in Shenyang.

古文：邦屏既殁，良玉即遣使入都，制冬衣一千五百，分给残卒，而身督精兵三千抵榆关。
现代文：邦屏死后良玉派遣使者来京城，请求为她的军队缝制了一千五百套冬衣，分给了残存的士兵，然后就率领三千精兵抵达榆关。
English: After the death of Bangping, Liangyu sent an envoy to Beijing to request that 1,500 sets of winter coats be sewn for her army and distributed to the remaining soldiers, and then led 3,000 elite soldiers to Shaoguan.

古文：上急公家难，下复私门仇，气甚壮。
现代文：她这样做往上说是忧念国家的危难，往下说是为了报复自家的仇恨，所以胆子更壮了。
English: She did this, first, out of sorrow for the perils of her country, and, second, to avenge the hatred of her own family, and so her courage grew stronger.

古文：宜录邦屏子，进民屏官。 
现代文：朝廷应该把邦屏的儿子收录入官，提升民屏的官职。 
English: The imperial court should enroll the son of Bangping into the government and promote the official position of Minping.

古文：乃赠邦屏都督佥事，锡世荫，与陈策等合祠；民屏进都司佥书。
现代文：于是朝廷追赠邦屏为都督佥事，准予子孙世袭，把他同陈策等人放在同一个庙堂里祭祀，又提升民屏为都督佥书。
English: As a result, the imperial court posthumously bestowed Bangping as the title of the governor-general, allowed his descendants to inherit it, placed him in the same temple with Chen Zhe and others, and promoted Minping to the title of the governor-general.

古文：部议再征兵二千。
现代文：兵部让良玉再征集二千名士兵。
English: The military department asked Liangyu to recruit another two thousand soldiers.

古文：良玉与民屏驰还，抵家甫一日，而奢崇明党樊龙反重庆，赍金帛结援。
现代文：良玉与民屏骑兵返回石柱，到家才一天功夫，奢崇明的党羽樊龙在重庆造反，让人带着金银、丝绸过来拉良玉入伙。
English: Liang Yu and the Minping cavalry returned to Shizhu, and it took them only one day to get home. Liang Yu was recruited by Su Chongming's rebels in Chongqing, who brought gold, silver, and silk.

古文：良玉斩其使，即发兵率民屏及邦屏子翼明、拱明溯流西上，度渝城，奄至重庆南坪关，扼贼归路。
现代文：良玉杀了他派来的使者，立即带领民屏、邦屏的儿子翼明、拱明一起出战，逆流而上，渡过渝城，乘敌不备，到达重庆的南坪关，扼住贼兵的归路。
English: Liang Yu killed the envoy sent by him, and immediately led the sons of Minping and Bangping, Yiming and Gongming, to go to war together, go upstream, cross Yucheng, take advantage of the enemy's unpreparedness, reach Nanping Pass in Chongqing, and strangle the way back for the thief soldiers.

古文：伏兵袭两河，焚其舟。
现代文：又埋下伏兵袭击贼寇占领的两条河流，烧毁了他们的船只。
English: They also set up ambushes to attack the two rivers occupied by the bandits and burned their boats.

古文：分兵守忠州，驰檄夔州，令急防翟塘上下。
现代文：然后分派部队守护忠州，派人骑马传布檄文到夔州，要当地驻军赶紧防守瞿塘峡上下游地段。
English: Then they assigned troops to guard Chungju, sent people on horseback to spread the message to Chungju, and asked the local garrison to quickly defend the upstream and downstream sections of the Qutang Gorge.

古文：贼出战，即败归。
现代文：贼兵出来作战，即刻败回。
English: Rogue soldiers come out to fight and are immediately defeated.

古文：良玉上其状，擢民屏参将，翼明、拱明守备。 
现代文：良玉向朝廷报告了这次战况，朝廷提升民屏为参将，翼明、拱明为守备。
English: Liangyu reported the battle to the imperial court, which promoted Minping to the rank of general, and Yiming and Gongming to the ranks of guards.

古文：已而奢崇明围成都急，巡抚朱燮元檄良玉讨。
现代文：不多久，奢崇明围攻成都，情况紧急，巡抚朱燮元发布檄文调良玉前往讨贼。
English: Not long after, Shuxu Chongming besieged Chengdu, the situation was urgent, and the inspector Zhu Yingyuan issued a command to go to the thief.

古文：时诸土司皆贪贼赂，逗遛不进。独良玉鼓行而西，收新都，长驱抵成都，贼遂解围去。
现代文：当时各地的土司都贪图贼寇的贿赂，按兵不动，只有良玉击鼓西征，收复新都后，长驱直入抵达成都，贼兵于是解围离去。
English: At that time, local governors all over the country were greedy for bribes from the bandits and did not move their troops. Only the good soldiers marched westward, beating drums. After the restoration of the new capital, they drove straight into the old capital, whereupon the bandits broke the siege and left.

古文：良玉乃还军攻二郎关，民屏先登，已，克佛图关，复重庆。
现代文：良玉接着回师攻打二郎关，民屏一马当先登上了城墙。过后他们又打下了佛图关，收复了重庆。
English: Liang Yu then returned to his division to attack Jiro Guan. Min Ping and his horse were the first to climb the city wall. Later, they also defeated Buddha Guan and recovered Chongqing.

古文：良玉初举兵，即以疏闻。
现代文：良玉这次刚一出征就上书报告了朝廷，朝廷下令加封良玉为夫人，赐给她封诰印信。
English: As soon as Ryotama left for the war, she sent a report to the Imperial Court. The Imperial Court ordered that Ryotama be given the title of wife, and gave her a sealed letter.

古文：命封夫人，锡诰命，至是复授都督佥事，充总兵官。命祥麟为宣慰使，民屏进副总兵，翼明、拱明进参将。
现代文：到这时给她封官为都督佥事，让她担任了总兵官，让祥麟做了宣慰使，提升民屏为副总兵，翼明、拱明为参将。
English: At this time, she was appointed as the governor of Anji, and she served as the chief military officer, let Xiang Lin do the consolation, promoted Minping to the deputy chief soldier, and Yiming and Gongming to the general.

古文：良玉益感奋，先后攻克红崖墩、观音寺、青山墩诸大巢，蜀贼底定。
现代文：良玉从此更加感恩于朝廷，奋不顾身，先后打下了红崖墩、观音寺、青山墩等大贼窝，四川的贼寇彻底给平定了。
English: From then on, Liangyu was even more grateful to the imperial court, and he worked tirelessly, successively building the Red Cliff Tower, Guanyin Temple, Aoyama Tower and other great thieves' dens. The thieves and robbers in Sichuan were completely subdued.

古文：复以援贵州功，数赉金币。
现代文：再加上她援助贵州的战功，熹宗皇帝几次赐给她金币作为奖赏。
English: In addition to her contribution to the war effort in Guizhou, Emperor Zizong gave her several gold coins as a reward.

古文：三年六月，良玉上言： 臣率翼明、拱明提兵裹粮，累奏红崖墩诸捷。
现代文：三年六月，良玉上书说： 我带着翼明、拱明裹粮出战，先后取得了像红崖墩三战那样的胜利。
English: In June of the third year, Liang Yu wrote: I went to war with Yiming and Gongming Wrapped in Grain, and successively achieved victories like the three battles of the Red Cliff.

古文：乃行间诸将，未睹贼面，攘臂夸张，及乎对垒，闻风先遁。
现代文：可是那些离间我们君臣的大将们，他们没见过贼兵的面，却在那里整天挥着胳膊吹嘘，等到和贼兵对垒时，就闻风而逃。
English: But the generals who have divided our lords and masters, who have not seen the face of the bandits, are there all day waving their arms and boasting, and when they confront the bandits, they run away.

古文：败于贼者，唯恐人之胜；怯于贼者，唯恐人之强。
现代文：那些自己被贼兵打败了的人就担心别人战胜贼兵；自己被贼兵吓住了的人就怕别人胆子比贼兵大。
English: Those who have themselves been defeated by the bandits are worried that others will defeat the bandits; those who have been frightened by the bandits are afraid that others will be bolder than the bandits.

古文：如总兵李维新，渡河一战，败衄归营，反闭门拒臣，不容一见。
现代文：像总兵李维新，他在渡河一战中失败回营，反而拒我于门外，不容我进城相见。
English: Like the general soldier Li Weixin, he failed in the first battle of crossing the river and returned to the camp. Instead, he rejected me outside the gate and did not allow me to enter the city to meet.

古文：以六尺躯须眉男子，忌一巾帼妇人，静夜思之，亦当愧死。 
现代文：以一个六尺身躯的大男子忌妒一个巾帼妇人，他如果夜静时想一想就应当羞死。 
English: For a big man of six feet to be jealous of a pretty woman, he ought to die of shame if he thought of it in the quiet of the night.

古文：帝优诏报之，命文武大吏皆以礼待，不得疑忌。
现代文：熹宗皇帝又下达诏书好言抚慰她，并且下令文武官吏都要以礼待她，不得有任何猜忌。
English: Emperor Taizong also issued an edict to comfort her, and ordered the civil and military officials to treat her with courtesy, without any suspicion.

古文：是年，民屏从巡抚王三善抵陆广，兵败先遁。
现代文：这一年民屏跟从巡抚王三善抵达陆广，军队战败后抢先逃回。
English: In this year, Minping followed the governor Wang Sanshan to arrive in Luguang. After the defeat of the army, he fled back ahead of others.

古文：其冬，从战大方，屡捷。
现代文：冬季他又从征，在大方激战，屡战屡胜。
English: In winter, he joined the army again and fought fiercely in Dafang, repeatedly winning battles.

古文：明年正月，退师。贼来袭，战死。
现代文：第二年正月他班师回营，贼兵前来偷袭，民屏阵亡了。
English: In the first month of the second year, his division returned to the camp, the bandits came to sneak attack, and Minping was killed.

古文：二子佐明、祚明得脱，皆重伤。
现代文：他的两个儿子佐明、祚明得以逃脱，身上也负了重伤。
English: His two sons, Saming and Haoming, were able to escape and were also seriously injured.

古文：良玉请恤，赠都督同知，立祠赐祭，官二子。
现代文：良玉上书请求给以恤典，朝廷就赐官都督同知给他，并且为他修建庙堂，举行了祭奠仪式，又给他的两个儿子封了官。
English: When Liang Yu wrote a letter requesting the award of a medal, the imperial court gave him the title of governor-general, and also built a temple for him, held a memorial ceremony, and gave his two sons official titles.

古文：而是时翼明、拱明皆进官至副总兵。
现代文：这个时候翼明、拱明都已做了副总兵。
English: At this time, both Yiming and Gongming had already been made vice-commanding officers.

古文：崇祯三年，永平四城失守。良玉与翼明奉诏勤王，出家财济饷。
现代文：崇祯三年，永平四城失守，良玉同翼明接受诏书的号召出兵勤王，并拿出家中的资产充作军饷。
English: In the third year of Chongzhen, the four cities of Yongping were lost, and Liangyu Tongyu clearly accepted the call of the edict to serve the king, and took out his family's assets as military pay.

古文：庄烈帝优诏褒美，召见平台，赐良玉彩币羊酒，赋四诗旌其功。
现代文：崇祯皇帝特意下诏书赞扬她，并在平台召见她，赐给她彩帛和羊酒，赋了四首诗赞扬她的功劳。
English: Emperor Chongzhen specially issued an edict to commend her, and summoned her to the platform, gave her colored gourd and sheep wine, and endowed her with four poems to commend her merits.

古文：会四城复，乃命良玉归，而翼明驻近畿。
现代文：恰好四城收复了，就命令良玉还乡，而让翼明驻兵京城近郊。
English: Just as the four cities were recovered, he ordered Liangyu to return to his hometown, and let Yiming station troops in the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：明年筑大凌河城。
现代文：第二年修筑大凌河城。
English: The next year, Dalinghe Town was built.

古文：翼明以万人护筑，城成，命撤兵还镇。
现代文：翼明率领一万人看管筑城。城修好以后，命令他撤兵回营。
English: Yue Ming led ten thousand men to supervise the construction of the city. After the city was completed, he was ordered to withdraw his troops back to the camp.

古文：七年，流贼陷河南，加翼明总兵官，督军赴讨。
现代文：崇祯七年，流贼打下河南，朝廷任命翼明为总兵官，让他率领军队前去讨伐。
English: In the seventh year of Chongzhen, the rebels invaded Henan, and the imperial court appointed Yiming as the chief military officer and let him lead the army to fight.

古文：明年，邓玘死，以所部皆蜀人，命翼明将之，连破贼于青崖河、吴家堰、袁家坪，扼贼走郧西路。
现代文：第二年，邓王己死了，因为他的部下都是四川人，朝廷就下令让翼明率领他们，在青崖河、吴家堰、袁家坪连连打败贼兵，扼住了贼兵通往郧西的道路。
English: The following year, when Deng Wang died, because his subordinates were all Sichuanese, the imperial court ordered Yiming to lead them to defeat the bandits in Qingya River, Wujiayan, and Yuanjiaping, and to block the bandits' way to Shaanxi.

古文：翼明性恇怯，部将连败，不以实闻，革都督衔，贬二秩办贼。已，从卢象升逐贼谷城。
现代文：只是翼明的性情慌张、胆子不大，部下的将领连连失败，他却不如实向上汇报，因此被免去了都督军衔，贬官二级，继续剿贼，后来他跟从卢象升在谷城追逐贼兵。
English: However, he was not brave enough, and his subordinate generals failed one after another. However, he did not report to his superiors as he should have. As a result, he was removed from the military rank of governor, demoted to the second level, and continued to fight the bandits. Later, he followed Lu Xiangsheng to chase the bandits in Gu Cheng.

古文：贼走均州，翼明败之青石铺。
现代文：贼兵逃往均州，翼明在清石铺打败了他们。
English: The bandits fled to Junzhou, and Yiming defeated them at Qingshi Pu.

古文：贼入山自保，翼明攻破之。
现代文：贼兵进入了山地自卫，翼明又打败了他们。
English: The bandits went into the mountains to defend themselves, and Yiming defeated them.

古文：连破贼界山、三道河、花园沟，擒黑煞神、飞山虎。
现代文：接着又在界山、三道河、花园沟连连破贼，捉住黑煞神、飞山虎两位贼军将领。
English: Next, they broke up the bandits in Jieshan, Sandohe and Garden Gully, and caught the two generals of the bandit army, Heixia Shen and Feishanhu.

古文：贼出没郧、襄间，抚治郧阳苗胙土遣使招降，翼明赞其事，为贼所绐，卒不绛。
现代文：贼兵出没在郧阳、襄阳一带，巡抚郧阳的苗胙土派遣使者去招降贼寇时，翼明赞成此事，结果上当受骗了，贼兵最终没有投降。
English: Kleptocrats haunted the area around Shenyang and Xiangyang. When the governor of Shenyang, Miao Xiangtu, sent an envoy to recruit Kleptocrats, he clearly approved of the matter. As a result, he was deceived, and the Kleptocrats ultimately did not surrender.

古文：翼明、胙土皆被劾。
现代文：翼明、胙土都受到弹劾。
English: Both Yiming and Baidu were impeached.

古文：已而贼犯襄阳，翼明连战得利，屯兵庙滩，以扼汉江之浅。
现代文：后来贼兵进犯襄阳，翼明连续作战获取战果，屯兵庙滩，用来扼守汉江的浅水处。
English: Later, the robber soldiers invaded Xiangyang, and Yiming continuously fought to obtain the results of the battle, and stationed soldiers on the temple beach to guard the shallow waters of the Han River.

古文：而罗汝才、刘国能自深水以渡，遂大扰蕲、黄间。
现代文：只是罗汝才、刘国能却从深水处渡了过去，接着就在蕲春、黄冈一带大肆骚扰。
English: However, Luo Rucai and Liu Guoneng passed through from the deep water, and then harassed in the areas of Hunchun and Huanggang.

古文：帝以郧、襄属邑尽残，罢胙土，切责翼明，寻亦被劾解官。
现代文：崇祯皇帝因为郧阳、襄阳所属的城市都被毁坏完了，于是罢了胙土的官，严厉批评了翼明，不久翼明又被弹劾，解除了官职。
English: Because the cities belonging to Fenyang and Xiangyang had been completely destroyed, Emperor Chongzhen dismissed the officials of Fenyang and severely criticized Yiming. Soon after, Yiming was impeached and dismissed from his post.

古文：而良玉自京师还，不复援剿，专办蜀贼。
现代文：良玉从京师返回以后，不再走出四川援剿，专门致力于惩办四川的贼寇。
English: After Liang Yu returned from the Beijing Division, he no longer went out to Sichuan to help, but devoted himself exclusively to punishing the bandits in Sichuan.

古文：七年二月，贼陷夔州，围太平，良玉至乃走。
现代文：七年二月，贼兵打下夔州，围攻太平，良玉到来才撤退。
English: In February of the seventh year, the robber soldiers defeated Zhangzhou and besieged Taiping, and only retreated when Liangyu arrived.

古文：十三年扼罗汝才于巫山。
现代文：十三年在巫山扼住罗汝才。
English: Thirteen years in Wushan strangle Luo Rucai.

古文：汝才犯夔州，良玉师至乃去。
现代文：汝才进犯夔州，良玉的军队赶到，他才离开。
English: You just invaded Zhangzhou, Liangyu's army arrived, and he just left.

古文：已，邀之马家寨，斩首六百，追败之留马垭，斩其魁东山虎。
现代文：后来，良玉在马家塞阻击贼兵，斩获了六百首级，又在留马垭追击打败了他们，杀了他的首领东山虎。
English: Later, Liang Yu blocked the bandits in Majiajie and captured six hundred heads. He also defeated them in the pursuit of Zhuo Maqi and killed his leader Dongshanhu.

古文：复合他将大败之谭家坪北山，又破之仙寺岭。
现代文：又联合其他将领在谭家坪的北山大败他们，又在仙寺岭打败了他们。
English: He also defeated them together with other generals in the North Hill of Tanjiaping, and defeated them in the Xianjialing.

古文：良玉夺汝才大纛，擒其渠副塌天，贼势渐衰。
现代文：良玉奇取了汝才的军旗，捉拿了贼兵首领副塌天，贼兵势力这才逐渐衰弱了。
English: Liang Yu miraculously captured the banner of Ru Cai, captured the leader of the bandits, and the bandits' forces gradually weakened.

古文：当是时，督师杨嗣昌尽驱贼入川。
现代文：这个时候，督师杨嗣昌把贼兵全部驱逐到四川来。
English: At this time, the inspector Yang Shichang expelled all the bandits to Sichuan.

古文：川抚邵捷春提弱卒二万守重庆，所倚惟良玉及张令二军。
现代文：四川巡抚邵捷春率领二万弱兵戍守重庆，所能依靠的只有良玉和张令二人的军队。
English: The Sichuan governor Shao Jiechun led 20,000 weak soldiers to defend Chongqing, and could only rely on the army of Liang Yu and Zhang Ling.

古文：绵州知州陆逊之罢官归，捷春使按营垒。
现代文：绵州知州陆逊之罢官回家，捷春让他负责视察营垒。
English: Mianzhou Chizhou Lu Xun's dismissal to go home, Jechun let him be responsible for inspecting the camp.

古文：见良玉军整，心异之。
现代文：他见到良玉的部下军容整齐，心里感到奇怪。
English: He was surprised to see the neat appearance of Ryotama's subordinates.

古文：良玉为置酒。语逊之曰： 邵公不知兵。吾一妇人，受国恩，谊应死，独恨与邵公同死耳。 
现代文：良玉安排酒席招待他时，对逊之说： 邵公不懂兵法，我作为一个妇道人家，蒙受国家的恩惠，论情理应当为国而死，所恨的只是要与邵公一起死罢了。 
English: When Liangyu arranged a banquet to invite him, she said to Sunzhu: Shao Gong doesn't know the art of war. I, as a woman, have been favored by the state and should die for the country. What I hate is to die with Shao Gong.

古文：逊之问故，良玉曰： 邵公移我自近，去所驻重庆仅三四十里，而遣张令守黄泥洼，殊失地利。
现代文：逊之问他什么原因，良玉说： 邵公调我到他附近来，距他所驻的重庆只有三四十里，而派遣张令守黄泥洼，很大程度上丧失了地利。
English: When Sun Zhi asked him what the reason was, Liang Yu said: Shao Gong transferred me to his neighborhood, only thirty or forty miles away from Chongqing, where he was stationed, while sending Zhang Ling to guard Huang Diwa largely lost its position.

古文：贼据归、巫万山巅，俯瞰吾营。铁骑建瓴下，张令必破。令破及我，我败尚能救重庆急乎？
现代文：贼兵假如占据归山、巫山的顶峰，向下俯瞰我们的军营，再用强劲的骑兵居高临下，俯冲下来，张令一定会被打败，张令败后再来打我，我失败后还能解救重庆的危急吗？
English: If the robber soldiers occupy the peak of Guishan and Wushan, look down on our military camp, and then use strong cavalry to stay high and dive down, Zhang Ling will definitely be defeated, Zhang Ling will come to fight me after defeat, can I save Chongqing after defeat?

古文：且督师以蜀为壑，无愚智知之。
现代文：况且督师把四川当作沟壑，想把贼兵都赶到四川来，这一点无论聪明人还是愚蠢人都知道。
English: Moreover, the superintendent regarded Sichuan as a ravine and wanted to drive all the bandits to Sichuan, which was known to both the wise and the foolish.

古文：邵公不以此时争山夺险，令贼无敢即我，而坐以设防，此败道也。 
现代文：邵公不在这个时候争山夺险，迫使贼兵不敢来攻击我们，却一味在这里进行消极防守，这是必败之路啊。 
English: At this time, Shao Gong is not scrambling for risks, forcing the bandits not to dare to attack us, but is blindly engaged in passive defense here. This is a sure way to defeat.

古文：逊之深然之。
现代文：逊之认为这话说得很对。
English: Sun Zhi thought this was very true.

古文：已而捷春移营大昌，监军万元吉亦进屯巫山，与相应援。
现代文：不多久捷春把军营迁移到大昌，监军万元吉也屯兵巫山，与良玉相互呼应。
English: Not long after, Jiechun moved the military camp to Dachang, and the overseer of the army, Yuanji, also stationed soldiers in Wushan, echoing each other with Liangyu.

古文：其年十月，张献忠连破官军于观音岩、三黄岭，遂从上马渡过军。良玉偕张令急扼之竹坪，挫其锋。
现代文：那年十月，张献忠在观音岩、三黄岭连连打败官军，接着从上马渡过江进兵，良玉偕同张令急忙在竹菌坪扼制他们，挫败了他们的前锋。
English: In October of that year, Zhang Xianzhong repeatedly defeated the government army at Guanyin Rock and Sanhuangling, and then crossed the river from Shangma to enter the army. Liang Yuqi and Zhang Ling hurriedly stifled them at Zhuye Ping and defeated their forwards.

古文：会令为贼所殪，良玉趋救不克，转斗复败，所部三万人略尽。
现代文：当张令被贼兵杀死时，良玉前去援救没有成功，辗转作战又失败了，部下的三万人几乎全部死光。
English: When Zhang Rong was killed by the bandits, Liang Yu went to the rescue without success, and the turnaround operation failed again, and almost all of his 30,000 subordinates were killed.

古文：乃单骑见捷春请曰： 事急矣，尽发吾溪峒卒，可得二万。
现代文：于是单枪匹马去向捷春请求说： 情况紧急了，把我溪峒的士兵全部调出，还可以有二万人。
English: So he went single-handedly to beg Jechun and said, "The situation is urgent, I have to transfer all of my soldiers from Khe Sanh, and there are still twenty thousand left.

古文：我自廪其半，半饩之官，犹足办贼。 
现代文：我自拿出一半粮饷，其余一半如果能向官府支取，就可以继续剿贼。 
English: I take out half of the grain basket myself, and if I can withdraw the remaining half from the government, I can continue to support the thieves.

古文：捷春见嗣昌与己左，而仓无见粮，谢其计不用。
现代文：捷春看到嗣昌与自己不和，而仓库中没有现成的粮食，谢绝她的计策，没有采用。
English: When Jechun saw that Tsuchang was at odds with her and that there was no ready-made grain in the warehouse, she rejected her strategy and did not adopt it.

古文：良玉乃叹息归。
现代文：良玉就只好叹息而归。
English: The winner had to return home with a sigh.

古文：时摇、黄十三家贼横蜀中。
现代文：当时摇天动、黄龙等十三家贼兵在四川横行。
English: At that time, the sky was shaking, and the Yellow Dragon and other Thirteen Thieves were rampant in Sichuan.

古文：有秦缵勋者，良玉族人也，为贼耳目，被擒，杀狱卒遁去。
现代文：有一个叫秦缵勋的人，是良玉的族人，给贼兵当了耳目，被捉拿后杀死狱卒逃跑了。
English: There was a man named Qin Yuxun, a member of the Liangyu ethnic group, who acted as the eyes and ears of the bandits. After he was captured, he killed his jailer and escaped.

古文：良玉捕执以献，无脱者。
现代文：良玉抓获了他，把他交给了官府，他的手下也没有一个逃脱。
English: Liangyu captured him and handed him over to the government, and none of his men escaped.

古文：张献忠尽陷楚地，将复入蜀。
现代文：张献忠完全占领湖北，打算再一次进入四川。
English: Zhang Xianzhong completely occupied Hubei and planned to enter Sichuan again.

古文：良玉图全蜀形势上之巡抚陈士奇，请益兵守十三隘，士奇不能用。
现代文：良玉画出全四川的形势上呈给巡抚陈士奇，请增派兵力守住三个关隘，士奇没能听她的建议。
English: Liangyu drew a picture of the situation in all of Sichuan and presented it to the inspector Chen Shiqi, asking him to send more troops to guard the three passes. Shiqi did not listen to her suggestion.

古文：复上之巡按刘之勃，之勃许之，而无兵可发。
现代文：良玉又上呈给巡按刘之勃，之勃赞同他的建议，但是没有多余的兵力可以拨出来。
English: Liang Yu also submitted to Liu Zhibo, the patrol commander, and Zhibo agreed with his suggestion, but no extra troops could be allocated.

古文：十七年春，献忠遂长驱犯夔州。
现代文：十七年春天，张献忠就长驱直入进犯夔州。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year, Zhang Xianzhong drove straight into Zhangzhou.

古文：良玉驰援，众寡不敌，溃。
现代文：良玉骑马前往援助，由于寡不敌众，败退回来。
English: Liang Yu rode to help, but he was outnumbered and had to retreat.

古文：及全蜀尽陷，良玉慷慨语其众曰： 吾兄弟二人皆死王事，吾以一孱妇蒙国恩二十年，今不幸至此，其敢以余年事逆贼哉！ 
现代文：等到全四川都失陷以后，良玉对她的部下慷慨激昂地说 ：我的兄弟两个人都为国事而死，我作为一个孱弱的妇道人家，蒙受国恩达二十年之久，现在不幸到了这个地步，怎么敢拿所剩不多的年月来投靠贼寇呢？ 
English: After waiting until all of Sichuan had fallen, Liang Yu said to her subordinates in a passionate manner: My brothers both died for the national cause. As a weak woman, I have received the national welfare for twenty years, and now I have reached this level of misfortune. How dare I use the few remaining years to rely on the bandits?

古文：悉召所部约曰： 有从贼者，族无赦！ 
现代文：她召集部下的将士给他们订立规约说： 有跟随贼兵走的，坚决杀而不赦！ 
English: She gathered the soldiers of her subordinates to establish a statute for them, saying: If anyone follows the bandits, kill them without mercy!

古文：乃分兵守四境。
现代文：接着分兵把守四处边界。
English: Next, detachments of soldiers guarded the four borders.

古文：贼遍招土司，独无敢至石砫者。
现代文：贼兵在四川到处招纳土司，却没有人敢到石石主来。
English: The bandits recruited soldiers from all over Sichuan, but no one dared to come to Shishishu.

古文：后献忠死，良玉竟以寿终。
现代文：后来张献忠死了，良玉竟然享尽天年才去世。
English: Later, Zhang Xianzhong died, and Liangyu passed away after living a full life.

古文：翼明既罢，崇祯十六年冬，起四川总兵官。道梗，命不达。
现代文：翼明罢官后，又在崇祯十六年冬天被朝廷起复为四川总兵官，因为道路阻塞，任命状没能传到他手里来。
English: After the dismissal of Yiming, he was reinstated by the imperial court as the Sichuan general officer in the winter of the 16th year of Chongzhen, because the road was blocked and the appointment letter could not reach him.

古文：而拱明值普名声之乱，与贼斗死，赠恤如制。
现代文：拱明碰上普名声叛乱，在与贼寇作战时死掉，朝廷按规定给他进行了追赠和抚恤。
English: Gongming encountered the rebellion of universal fame and died while fighting against the bandits. The court gave him a posthumous gift and pension according to regulations.

