古文：◎文宗二天历二年春正月己未朔，立都督府，以总左、右钦察及龙翊卫。庚申，封知枢密院事火沙为昭武王。
现代文：天历二年春正月初一，设立都督府，以总管左、右钦察卫和龙翊卫。初二，封知枢密院事火沙为昭武王。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of the Chinese calendar, the prefectural governor's office was established, with the general managers of the left and right wings, Qin Chawei and Long Jianwei. On the second day of the first month of the second year of the Chinese calendar, the Fuchi Privy Council was set ablaze by King Shouwu.

古文：床兀儿之子答邻答里袭父封为句容郡王。
现代文：床兀儿的儿子答邻答里承袭其父的封爵成为句容郡王。
English: The son of the bed-ridden son inherited his father's knighthood and became the king of Gu Rong County.

古文：高丽国遣使来朝贺。
现代文：高丽国派遣使者来朝恭贺。
English: The Republic of Korea sent an envoy to the DPRK to offer congratulations.

古文：遣前翰林学士承旨不答失里北还皇兄行在所，仍命太府太监沙剌班奉金、币以往。
现代文：派遣前任翰林学士承旨不答失里返还皇兄行在处所，又命太府太监沙剌班恭奉黄金币帛前往。
English: He dispatched the former Hanlin Scholar to return the imperial brother to the premises, and also ordered the grand eunuch of the palace, Shayban, to go there with the gold coin.

古文：辛酉，封朵列帖木儿复为楚王。
现代文：初三，册封朵列帖木儿再为楚王。
English: On the third day of the junior high school year, he was crowned the King of Chu.

古文：高昌王铁木儿补化为中书左丞相，大司农王毅为平章政事，钦察台知枢密院事。
现代文：任命高昌王铁木儿补化为中书左丞相，大司农王毅为平章政事，钦察台知枢密院事。
English: Gaochang Wang Tiemu'er was appointed to the post of Vice-Minister of the Left of the Central Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC), and the Grand Secretary of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC), Wang Yi, was appointed to the post of Vice-Minister of the People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) and the Vice-Minister of the Central Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC).

古文：皇兄遣火里忽达孙、剌剌至京师。
现代文：皇兄明宗派遣火里忽达孙、剌剌到达京师。
English: The emperor's brother, Emperor Mingzong, suddenly sent Dazon and Zou to the capital.

古文：以伯帖木儿扈从有功，遣使以币帛百匹即行在赐之。
现代文：因伯帖木儿随驾扈从有功，派遣使者带百匹币帛前往行在处所赐给他。
English: Imhotep sent a messenger with a hundred pennies to the place where he was.

古文：诸王浑都帖木儿薨，取其印及王傅印以赐斡即。
现代文：诸侯王浑都帖木儿逝世，取其王印与王傅之印赐给斡即。
English: After the death of Tamerlane, king of the Huns, the king's seal and the seal of the king's tutor were given to Yoritsune.

古文：武宁王彻彻秃遣使来言皇兄启行之期。
现代文：武宁王彻彻秃派遣使者来告皇兄启程行进的日期。
English: King Choe Chol of Muning sent an envoy to inform his brother of the date of the march.

古文：癸亥，燕铁木儿为御史大夫，太平王如故。
现代文：初五，燕铁木儿任职为御史大夫，太平王封爵照旧。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Yan Tiemu Er was appointed to the post of Imperial Historian, and Taiping Wang was knighted as before.

古文：赐鲁国大长公主钞二万锭营第宅。
现代文：赐给鲁国大长公主钱钞二万锭营建宅第。
English: He gave the eldest princess of the State of Lu 20,000 baht in banknotes and coins to build a house.

古文：甲子，太白犯垒壁阵。
现代文：初六，金星凌犯垒壁阵。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, Venus transits the ridge.

古文：时享于太庙。
现代文：按时享祭于太庙。
English: The festival was held on time at the Imperial Temple.

古文：齐王月鲁帖木儿薨。
现代文：齐王月鲁帖木儿逝世。
English: Qi King Yue Luchemur passed away.

古文：乙丑，中书省言： 度支今岁刍槁不足，常例支给外，凡陈乞者，宜勿予。 
现代文：初七，中书省上言说： 度支今年草料不足，除按常例支给之外，凡属陈请支给的不要答应。 
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Chinese Book Ministry issued the following statement: "This year, there is a shortage of herbaceous materials. In addition to the usual expenditure, please do not agree to any request for expenditure.

古文：从之，仍命中书右丞彻里帖木儿总其事。
现代文：同意这项提议，照例命中书右丞撒帖木儿总管此事。
English: Agreeing to this proposal, as usual, he ordered Shuchu Ujo Sa Timur to be in charge of the matter.

古文：丙寅，帝幸大崇恩福元寺。
现代文：初八，文宗临幸大崇恩福元寺。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Wenzong Rinchen Da Chongn Fuyuan Temple was founded.

古文：遣使赐西域诸王燕只吉台海东鹘二。
现代文：派遣使者赐给西域诸侯王燕只吉台海东鹘二只。
English: An envoy was sent to the Western Regions to give the princes Wang Yan only two Eastern Gulls from the Kichitai Sea.

古文：戊辰，遣使献海东鹘于皇兄行在所。
现代文：初十，派遣使者奉献海东鹘于皇兄明宗行在处所。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, an envoy was sent to dedicate the East Sea to the emperor's brother Ming Zongxing at the site.

古文：己巳，赐内外军士四万二千二百七十人钞各一锭。
现代文：十一日，赐给内外军士四万二千二百七十人钱钞各一锭。
English: On the 11th day of the month, 42,270 soldiers at home and abroad were given a bag of money.

古文：作佛事。
现代文：修作佛事。
English: to practice Buddhism.

古文：陕西告饥，赈以钞五万锭。
现代文：陕西行省报告饥荒，赈济钱钞五万锭。
English: Shaanxi Province Reports Famine, Donates 50,000 Yuan in Banknotes.

古文：辛未，以册命皇后，告于南郊。
现代文：十三日，因册命皇后，告祭于南郊。
English: On the 13th, by order of the Empress, a memorial service was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：赐豫王黄金印。
现代文：赐给豫王黄金之印。
English: and bestowed upon Yu Wang the seal of gold.

古文：回回人户与民均当差役。
现代文：命回回族人户与民众平均分担差役。
English: Hui households and the general public will share the work equally.

古文：中书省臣言： 近籍没钦察家，其子年十六，请令与其母同居；仍请继今臣僚有罪致籍没者，其妻有子，他人不得陈乞，亦不得没为官口。 
现代文：中书省官员上言说 ：近来抄查钦察家产，其子年龄十六岁，请让他与其妻母共同居住；按此例请今后官员有罪抄没家产者，其有子，他人不得陈请占有，也不得没收为官属奴仆。 
English: An official from the People's Republic of China's Shandong Province said: "Recently, an official confiscated the property of a family in Chaqincha. The son is 16 years old. Please let him live with his wife and mother. Following this example, I request that future officials who are guilty of confiscating the property of a family should not ask others to take possession of their son, nor should they confiscate him as an official slave.

古文：从之。
现代文：同意这项提议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：壬申，遣近侍星吉班以诏往四川招谕囊加台。
现代文：十四日，派遣近侍星吉班持诏书前往四川招谕囊加台。
English: On the 14th, he dispatched a group of close attendants of Xingji to Sichuan with an imperial edict.

古文：癸酉，命中书省、宣徽院臣稽考近侍、宿卫廪给，定其名籍。
现代文：十五日，命令中书省及宣徽院官员检核考定近侍及宿卫人员的廪食供给情况，确定其名单账簿。
English: On the 15th, officials from the Ministry of Education and Culture and the Xuanhui Academy were ordered to inspect and assess the supply of snacks for attendants and guards, and to determine their list and account books.

古文：以辽阳省蒙古、高丽、肇州三万户将校从逆，举兵犯京畿，拘其符印制敕。
现代文：因辽阳行省蒙古、高丽、肇州三万户府将校附从叛逆，起兵进犯京师地区，收缴其符印制敕。
English: As a result of Liaoyang's march to the provinces of Mongolia, Goryeo, and Zhao Prefecture, 30,000 officers of the prefectures joined the rebellion, marched into the Beijing Division area, and confiscated their seal-making badges.

古文：罢今岁柳林田狩。
现代文：罢免今年柳林行猎活动。
English: This year's willow forest hunting activities have been cancelled.

古文：复盐制每四百斤为引，引为钞三锭。
现代文：恢复盐制为每四百斤为一引，每引为钱钞三锭。
English: The restoration of the salt system means that there will be one deduction for every four hundred catties, and each deduction will be equivalent to three money banknotes.

古文：四川囊加台乞师于镇西武靖王搠思班，搠思班以兵守关隘。
现代文：四川囊加台向镇西武靖王请求军马相助，搠思班率兵守其关隘。
English: Sichuan Sucukatai requested military assistance from Zhenxi Wu Jingwang, and Shuxiban led the soldiers to guard their pass.

古文：甲戌，复命太仆卿教化献海东鹘于皇兄行在所。
现代文：十六日，再次委派太仆卿教化进献海东鹘于皇兄行在之处。
English: On the 16th, he once again appointed Taiguqing Jianhua to go to the place where the emperor and his brother were present.

古文：罢中瑞司。
现代文：撤销中瑞司。
English: Revocation of Sino-Swedish Division.

古文：丙子，皇后媵臣张住童等七人授集贤侍讲学士等官。
现代文：十八日，皇后随嫁臣仆张住童等七人，被授予集贤侍讲学士等官职。
English: On the 18th, seven members of the empress' retinue, including her retainer Zhang Zhidong, were awarded official positions such as scholars and lecturers.

古文：丁丑，四川囊加台攻破播州猫儿垭隘，宣慰使杨延里不花开关纳之。
现代文：十九日，四川囊加台攻破播州猫儿垭要隘。播州宣慰史杨延里不花打开关门予以接纳。
English: On the 19th, Sichuan and Taiwan broke through the narrow gate of Banzhou. Banzhou Xuancheng consoled Shi Yang Yanli without opening and closing the door to be accepted.

古文：陕西蒙古军都元帅不花台者，囊加台之弟，囊加台遣使招之，不花台不从，斩其使。
现代文：陕西蒙古军都元帅不花台是囊加台的弟弟，囊加台派使者招呼他同叛朝廷，不花台不愿反叛，杀了派来的使者。
English: Fu Huatai, the marshal of the capital of the Mongolian army in Shaanxi, was the younger brother of Zeng Jia Tai. Zeng Jia Tai sent an envoy to invite him to rebel against the imperial court. Fu Huatai did not want to rebel and killed the envoy.

古文：中书省臣言： 朝廷赏赉，不宜滥及罔功。
现代文：中书省官员上言说： 朝廷赏赐，不应滥及无功之人。
English: An official of China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy said: The Imperial Court should not reward those who have no merit.

古文：鹰、鹘、狮、豹之食，旧支肉价二百余锭，今增至万三千八百锭；控鹤旧止六百二十八户，今增二千四百户。又，佛事岁费，以今较旧，增多金千一百五十两、银六千二百两、钞五万六千二百锭、币帛三万四千余匹；请悉拣汰。 
现代文：鹰、鹘、狮、豹的肉食供应，旧例支给肉价二百多锭，现已增至一万三千八百锭；控鹤旧辖六百二十八户，现已增至二千四百户；另外，佛事活动每年的费用，和从前相比，增加黄金一千一百五十两、白银六千二百两、钱钞五万六千二百锭、币帛三万四千多匹；请分别加以减损。 
English: The supply of meat for eagles, storks, lions, and leopards, which used to cost more than 200 baht, has now increased to 13,800 baht; the control of cranes, which used to be under the jurisdiction of 628 households, has now increased to 2,400 households; in addition, the annual cost of Buddhist activities, compared to the past, has increased by 1,152 gold, 62,002 silver, 56,200 banknotes, and more than 34,000 coins; please reduce them separately.

古文：从之。
现代文：接受这项提议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：中政院臣言，皇后日用所需，钞十万锭、币五万匹、绵五千斤。
现代文：中政院官员上言说，皇后日用所需钱财，计钞十万锭、币五万匹、棉五千斤。
English: An official of the Central Government said that the Empress needed 100,000 baht in banknotes, 50,000 coins and 5,000 kg of cotton daily.

古文：诏钞予所需之半，币给一万匹。
现代文：下诏钱钞给予所需的一半。币帛给予一万匹。
English: The lower-denomination banknotes will be given half of what they need. Banknotes will be given a maximum of 10,000 coins.

古文：赈大都路涿州房山、范阳等县饥民粮两月。
现代文：赈济大都路涿州房山、范阳等县饥民粮食两个月。
English: For two months, the starving people in Fangshan, Fanyang and other counties in Ganzhou will receive grain.

古文：己卯，以册命皇后，告于太庙。
现代文：二十一日，因册命皇后，告祭于太庙。
English: On the twenty-first day, by order of the Empress, a memorial service was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：庚辰，赐潜邸说书刘道衡等四人官从七品，薛允等十六人官从八品。
现代文：二十二日，赐予潜邸说书艺人刘道衡等四人官阶为从七品，薛允等十六人官阶为从八品。
English: On the 22nd, four officials, including Liu Daoheng, a storyteller and artist of the Hidden Residence, were given the rank of Junior Seventh Rank, and sixteen officials, including Xue Yun, were given the rank of Junior Eighth Rank.

古文：辛巳，起复中书左丞史惟良为御史中丞。上都官吏，惟初入仕及骤升者黜之，余听叙复。
现代文：二十三日，起复中书左丞史惟良官职为御史中丞，上都官员，除初次入仕为官及破格提升者予以罢黜外，其余的听任起复原职。
English: On the 23rd, the post of Chushizazaojo Shiveryoshi was reinstated as Goshi Chujo, and the officials of Shangdu, except for those who were first appointed to the post and those who were promoted in an unprecedented manner, were dismissed, and the rest were reinstated.

古文：以御史台赃罚钞三百锭赐教坊司撒剌儿。
现代文：将御史台赃罚钞三百锭赐予教坊司撒剌儿。
English: He fined her 300 baht and gave the money to the school's teacher, Sasahiro.

古文：壬午，以陕西行台御史大夫阿不海牙为中书平章政事。
现代文：二十四日，任命陕西行台御史大夫阿不海牙为中书平章政事。
English: On the 24th, he appointed the Shaanxi and Taiwan Imperial Historian Abou Haiga as the political affairs of Pingzhang.

古文：皇兄遣常侍孛罗及铁住讫先至京师，赏以金、币、居宅，仍遣内侍秃教化如皇兄行在所。
现代文：皇兄明宗派遣常侍孛罗与铁住讫先到京师，赏赐他们黄金、币帛和居宅，照旧派遣内侍秃教化前往皇兄行在处所。
English: Emperor Mingzong, the brother of the emperor, sent his regular attendants, Zhao Luo and Tiezumi Yao, to the capital first, and rewarded them with gold, coins, and a residence. As before, he sent his inner attendant, Gao Xuehua, to the emperor's brother's residence.

古文：播州杨万户引四川贼兵至乌江峰，官军败之；八番元帅脱出亦破乌江北岸贼兵，复夺关口。
现代文：播州杨万户引导四川贼兵到达乌江峰，官军将其击败。八番宣抚司元帅脱出也攻破乌江北岸贼兵，重新夺回关口。
English: Banzhou Yang Wanyu led the Sichuan bandits to the peak of the Wujiang River, and the government army defeated them. The Eighth Marshal of the General Staff also defeated the bandits on the north bank of the Wujiang River and recaptured the pass.

古文：诸王月鲁帖木儿统蒙古、汉人、答剌罕诸军及民丁五万五千，俱至乌江。
现代文：诸王月鲁帖木儿统率蒙古、汉人、答剌罕等军及民壮五万五千人，都进至乌江岸边。
English: The Mongolian, Chinese, and Mongolian-Han armies led by the kings of the Yue and Lu clans, as well as 55,000 strong people, all entered the bank of the Wujiang River.

古文：癸未，遣宣靖王买奴往行在所。
现代文：二十五日，派遣宣靖王买奴前往行在所。
English: On the 25th, they sent Xuanjing Wang to buy slaves to travel to the site.

古文：丙戌，皇兄明宗即皇帝位于和宁之北。
现代文：二十八日，皇兄明宗在和宁以北地方即皇帝位。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Mingzong, the brother of the emperor, ascended to the throne in the area north of Haining.

古文：四川囊加台焚鸡武关大桥，又焚栈道。
现代文：四川囊加台焚毁鸡武关大桥，还焚毁栈道。
English: Sichuan Buxia and Taiwan burned the Jibuguan Bridge, and also burned the trestle road.

古文：命中书省录江陵、汴梁郡县官扈从者三十四人，并升其阶秩。
现代文：命令中书省登记江陵、汴梁地方官扈从有功者三十四人，全都升其官阶品秩。
English: Thirty-four meritorious local officials from Jiangling and Qiliang were ordered to be registered by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and all of them were promoted to higher ranks.

古文：陕西大饥，行省乞粮三十万石、钞三十万锭，诏赐钞十四万锭，遣使往给之。
现代文：陕西发生大饥荒，行省官员请求调拨粮食三十万石、钱钞三十万锭；下诏赐予钱钞十四万锭，派遣使者前往分发。
English: A great famine occurred in Shaanxi. Provincial officials requested the allocation of 300,000 koku of grain and 300,000 baht of banknotes; the following edict granted 140,000 baht of banknotes and sent emissaries to distribute them.

古文：大同路言，去年旱且遭兵，民多流殍，命以本路及东胜州粮万三千石，减时直十之三赈粜之。
现代文：大同路官员上言说，去年干旱，且遭兵祸，人民多流亡甚至饿死。下令将本路及东胜州粮食一万三千石，按当时粮价的十分之三减价出售予以赈济。
English: Datong Road officials said that last year's drought and military disaster caused many people to emigrate and even starve to death. They ordered that 13,000 kilos of grain from this road and Dongshengzhou be sold at a discount of three-tenths of the grain price at that time.

古文：奉元蒲城县民王显政五世同居，卫辉安寅妻陈氏、河间王成妻刘氏、冀宁李孝仁妻寇氏、濮州王义妻雷氏、南阳郄二妻张氏、怀庆阿鲁辉妻翟氏皆以贞节，并旌其门。
现代文：奉元路蒲城县平民王显政一家五世同居，卫辉路安寅之妻陈氏、河间路王成之妻刘氏、冀宁路李孝仁之妻寇氏、濮州王义之妻雷氏、南阳府郄二之妻张氏、怀庆路阿鲁辉之妻翟氏都因贞节之行，一并旌表其门。
English: The fifth generation of the Wang Xianzheng family, a commoner in Putian County, lived together on Bongyuan Road. The Chen family, the wife of An Yin on Weihui Road, the Liu family, the wife of Wang Cheng on Hema Road, the Kou family, the wife of Li Xiaojin on Jining Road, the Lei family, the wife of Wang Yi on Zhangzhou Road, the Zhang family, the wife of Zou Er on Nanyang Road, and the Zou family, the wife of Alu Hui on Huaiqing Road, all showed their families for their chaste behavior.

古文：二月己丑，曲赦四川囊加台。
现代文：二月初二，宽赦四川囊加台。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, Sichuan Province and Taiwan Province were pardoned.

古文：庚寅，燕铁木儿复为中书右丞相。
现代文：初三，燕铁木儿再次出任中书右丞相。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Yan Tiemu'er once again served as the Vice-Minister of Education.

古文：立缮工司，掌织御用纹绮，秩正三品。
现代文：设立缮工司，职掌纺织御用纹绮，品秩为正三品。
English: The Department of Decorative Arts was established, with the responsibility for textiles and the official use of patterned brocade, with a product ranking of the top three.

古文：辛卯，帝御大明殿，册命皇后雍吉剌氏。
现代文：初四，文宗临御大明殿，册命皇后雍吉剌氏。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the year, Emperor Wenzong arrived at the Great Hall of the Emperor, and was summoned by Empress Yongjizhe.

古文：广西思明路军民总管黄克顺来贡方物。
现代文：广西思明路军民总管黄克顺前来进贡当地物品。
English: Huang Keshun, the military and civilian chief of Guangxi Siming Road, came to pay tribute with local items.

古文：壬辰，囊加台据鸡武关，夺三义、柴关等驿。
现代文：初五，囊加台占据鸡武关，夺取三叉、柴关等驿站。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Chinese, Canadians and Taiwanese occupied Jiwu Pass and captured the stations of the Three Forks and Chai Pass.

古文：癸巳，遣翰林侍讲学士曹元用祀孔子于阙里。
现代文：初六，派遣翰林侍讲学士曹元用在阙里地方祭祀孔子。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Hanlin's attendant and lecturer, Cao Yuan, was sent to worship Confucius in Bali.

古文：囊加台以书诱巩昌总帅汪延昌。
现代文：囊加台用书信招诱巩昌总帅江延昌。
English: He used letters to lure the general of Gongchang, Jiang Yanchang.

古文：丙申，命中书省、翰林国史院官祀太祖、太宗、睿宗御容于普庆寺。
现代文：初九，命令中书省及翰林国史院官员在普庆寺祭祀太祖、太宗、睿宗御容。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, officials from the Ministry of Education and Culture and the Hanlin Institute of National History were ordered to hold a memorial service for Taizu, Taizong, and Ruizong at Puqing Temple.

古文：丁酉，遣晋邸部曲之在京师者还所部。
现代文：初十，遣返留在京师的原晋邸部曲回原部落。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the original Jin family that stayed in Beijing was repatriated back to the original tribe.

古文：囊加台以兵至金州，据白土关，陕西行省督军御之。
现代文：囊加台率兵到达金州，占领白土关，陕西行省官员督率军马进行抵御。
English: Zeng Jia Tai led the troops to arrive in Jinzhou and occupy Baidu Pass, while officials from Shaanxi Province led the troops to resist.

古文：枢密院言： 囊加台阻兵四川，其乱未已，请命镇西武靖王搠思班等皆调军，以湖广行省官脱欢、别薛、孛罗及郑昂霄总其兵进讨。 
现代文：枢密院官员上言说： 囊加台举兵于四川，其乱还没终止，请命令镇西武靖王搠思班等全都调发军马，而以湖广行省官员脱欢、别薛、孛罗及郑昂霄总率其兵进讨。 
English: An official of the Privy Council said in his speech: The rebellion in Sichuan has not yet ended after the Sino-Canadian-Taiwanese troops were raised. Please order the towns of Xiwu, Jing, Wang, Shuxipan, etc. to all dispatch troops and horses, and the provincial officials of Hubei, Guangxi, Deguan, Beixue, Jiao Luo and Zheng Angxiao to lead their soldiers into the discussion.

古文：从之。
现代文：接受这项提议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：戊戌，命察罕脑儿宣慰使撒忒迷失将本部蒙古军，会镇西武靖王等讨四川。
现代文：十一日，命令察罕脑儿宣慰使撒忒迷失率领本部蒙古军马，会合镇西武靖王等人征讨四川。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he ordered the head of the Mongolian army to lead the headquarters of the Mongolian army, and the town of Xiwu, Jingwang and others to gather to conquer Sichuan.

古文：诸佣雇者，主家或犯恶逆及侵损己身，许诉官，余非干己，不许告讦，著为制。
现代文：凡受雇佣者，主人犯下十恶叛逆及伤害己身之事，方许告官，其余不干己事，不许告状生事，并将此意著为法令。
English: If any hired person commits the heinous crime of treason and self-mutilation, the employer shall be allowed to sue the employer. If the hired person does not commit the heinous crime, the employer shall not be allowed to sue the employee, and this shall be made into a law.

古文：颁行《农桑辑要》及《栽桑图》。
现代文：颁行《农桑辑要》及《栽桑图》。
English: Issued the "Outline of Agricultural Mulberry" and "Planting Mulberry Chart."

古文：辛丑，中书省议追尊皇妣亦乞烈氏曰仁献章圣皇后，唐兀氏曰文献昭圣皇后，命有司具册宝。
现代文：十四日，中书省官员商议追尊皇妣亦乞烈氏为仁献章圣皇后，唐兀氏为文献昭圣皇后，命令有关衙门具办册宝。
English: On the 14th, the officials of China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy discussed and ordered that the Emperor and Empress should be venerated, and the Emperor and Empress should be honored with the Medal of the Sacred Empress, and the Emperor and Empress should be honored with the Medal of the Sacred Empress, and the Emperor and Empress should be honored with the Medal of the Sacred Queen, and the Emperor and Empress should be honored with the Medal of the Sacred Queen.

古文：建游皇城佛事。
现代文：做游皇城佛事。
English: Do the tour of the imperial city of Buddhism.

古文：云南行省蒙通蒙算甸土官阿三木，开南土官哀放，八百媳妇、金齿、九十九洞、银沙罗甸，咸来贡方物。
现代文：云南行省蒙通蒙算甸土官阿三木，开南土官哀放，八百媳妇、金齿、九十洞、银沙罗甸等处，都来进贡当地物产。
English: In Yunnan Province, the provincial officials of Mengtong, Mengsandian, and Amagi, and the provincial officials of Kainan, and the 800 daughters-in-law, Jintao, Jizhidong, Yinsharodian and other places, all came to pay tribute to local products.

古文：癸卯，赐吴王木楠子、西宁王忽答的迷失、诸王那海罕、阔儿吉思金银有差。
现代文：十六日，赐予吴王木楠子、西宁王忽答的迷失、诸侯王那海罕、阔儿吉思金银不等。
English: On the 16th day, Wu Wang Mucanzi, Xining Wang Huadu's Lost, Princes Wang Nahihan, and Kuoerjis were given gold and silver.

古文：丙午，囊加台分兵逼襄阳，湖广行省调兵镇播州及归州。
现代文：十九日，囊加台分兵进逼襄阳，湖广行省官员调兵镇守播州与归州。
English: On the 19th, a detachment of Chinese, Canadian and Taiwanese troops entered Xiangyang, and officials from Hunan and Guangxi Provinces sent troops to guard Banzhou and return to the province.

古文：己酉，荧惑犯井宿。
现代文：二十二日，火星凌犯井宿。
English: On the 22nd, Mars invaded Jingjing.

古文：辛亥，帝谓廷臣曰： 撒迪还，言大兄已即皇帝位。凡二月二十一日以前除官者，速与制敕；后凡铨选，其诣行在以闻。 
现代文：二十四日，文宗对朝廷官员说： 撒迪回京，说皇兄已即皇帝之位，凡二月二十一日以前任命的官员，赶快给予制书敕令。以后凡是铨选官员，都要送行在处所报批。 
English: On the 24th, Emperor Wenzong said to the officials of the imperial court, "Saadi has returned to Beijing and said that the emperor's brother has become the emperor. All officials appointed before February 21st should quickly give the order to make a book. After that, all elected officials should go to the place to apply for approval.

古文：庐州路合肥县地震。
现代文：庐州路合肥县发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred at Luzhou Road, Hefei County.

古文：壬子，命有司造行在帐殿。
现代文：二十五日，命令有关部门建造行在所需帐殿。
English: On the 25th, the relevant departments were ordered to build the bank in the required building.

古文：癸丑，诸王月鲁帖木儿等至播州，招谕土官之从囊加台者，杨延里不花及其弟等皆来降。
现代文：二十六日，诸王侯月鲁帖木儿等到达播州，招谕随从囊加台的土官，杨延里不花及其兄弟等人全来投诚。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the princes, such as the princes Yueyulu and Timur, arrived in Banzhou, and invited the local officials who followed Zaccadai, Yang Yanli and his brothers, and others to all come to cast their votes.

古文：甲寅，立奎章阁学士院，秩正三品，以翰林学士承旨忽都鲁都儿迷失、集贤大学士赵世延并为大学士，侍御史撒迪、翰林直学士虞集并为侍书学士，又置承制、供奉各一员。
现代文：二十七日，设立奎章阁学士院，品秩为正三品，任命翰林学士承旨忽都鲁都儿迷失、集贤大学士赵世延并为大学士，侍御史撒迪、翰林直学士虞集并为侍书学士，还设置承制、供奉官各一员。
English: On the 27th, the Keizhang Academy was established, with the rank of Senior Third Class, and the following members were appointed: the Hanlin Scholar-in-charge, the Hu Du Rudol Lost, the Jixian Scholar-in-charge, the Zhao Shiyan Scholar-in-charge, the Attendant Scholar-in-charge, the Hanlin Direct Scholar-in-charge, and the Attendant Scholar-in-charge, as well as the Scholar-in-charge and the Servant-in-charge.

古文：更铸钞版，仍毁其刓者。
现代文：重新铸造钞版，照旧销毁损伤了的旧版。
English: Re-mint the banknote version and destroy the damaged version as before.

古文：调河南、江浙、江西、山东兵万一千，及左右翼蒙古侍卫军二千，讨四川。
现代文：调发河南、江浙、江西及山东一万一千人，与左右翼蒙古侍卫军二千人，征讨四川。
English: Eleven thousand people from Henan, Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Jiangxi and Shandong, and two thousand Mongolian bodyguards from the left and right, were dispatched to conquer Sichuan.

古文：乙卯，置银沙罗甸等处宣慰司都元帅府。
现代文：二十八日，设置银沙罗甸等处宣慰司都元帅府。
English: On the 28th, the Consolation Division of the Marshal's Office was set up in Yin Sha Rhodian and other places.

古文：丙辰，奉元临潼、咸阳二县及畏兀儿八百余户告饥，陕西行省以便宜发钞万三千锭赈咸阳，麦五千四百石赈临潼，麦百余石赈畏兀儿，遣使以闻，从之。
现代文：二十九日，奉元路临潼、咸阳二县及畏兀儿八百多户报告饥荒，陕西行省官员先行调发钱钞一万三千锭赈济咸阳，麦子五千四百石赈济临潼，麦子百余担赈济畏吾儿，遣使奏闻朝廷，朝廷表示同意。
English: On the 29th, more than 800 households in the two counties of Fengyuan Road, Linyi and Xianyang, as well as the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the

古文：永平、大同二路，上都云需两府，贵赤卫，皆告饥，永平赈粮五万石，大同赈粜粮万三千石，云需府赈粮一月，贵赤卫赈粮二月。
现代文：永平、大同二路，上都云需两府，贵赤卫，都来报告饥荒。永平路赈济粮食五万石，大同路赈济平卖粮食一万三千石，云需府赈济粮食一个月，贵赤卫赈济粮食两个月。
English: Yongping and Datong 2nd Road, Shangdu Yunnan, Guizhou and Guizhou all came to report the famine. Yongping Road donated 50,000 kilos of grain, Datong Road donated 13,000 kilos of grain, Shangdu Yunnan donated grain for one month, and Guizhou and Guizhou donated grain for two months.

古文：真定平山县、河间临津等县、大名魏县，有虫食桑，叶尽，虫俱死。
现代文：真定路平山县，河间路临邑、宁津等县，大名路魏县，有虫食桑叶，结果桑叶被吃尽，虫也一并死掉。
English: In Hirayama County, Jinding Road, Lin'ur, Ningjin and other counties in Kawama Road, and Wei County, Daimyo Road, there were worm-eating mulberry leaves. As a result, the mulberry leaves were eaten up, and the insects also died.

古文：三月辛酉，遣燕铁木儿奉皇帝宝于明宗行在所，仍命知枢密院事秃儿哈帖木儿、御史中丞八即剌，翰林直学士马哈某、典瑞使教化的、宣徽副使章吉、佥中政院事脱因、通政使那海、太医使吕廷玉、给事中咬驴、中书断事官忽儿忽答、右司郎中孛别出、左司员外郎王德明、礼部尚书八剌哈赤等从行。
现代文：三月初四，派遣燕铁木儿恭奉皇帝之宝前往明宗行在处所，照惯例命令知枢密院事秃儿哈帖木儿、御史中丞八即剌、翰林直学士马哈某、典瑞使教化的、宣徽副使章吉、佥中政院事脱因、通政使那海、太医使吕迁玉、给事中咬驴、中书断事官忽儿忽答、右司郎中孛别出、左司员外郎王德明、礼部尚书八剌哈赤等随同前往。
English: On the 4th day of the 3rd month of the year, Yan Tiemu'er was dispatched to Mingzong's residence in honor of the emperor's treasure. According to the usual practice, he ordered the following to accompany him: the Secretary of the Privy Council, Baldur Hatemulmu'er; the Vice-President of the General History Department, Yao Yao; the Vice-President of the General History Department, Maha Moumou; the Vice-President of the General History Department, Xu Rui; the Vice-President of the General History Department, Zhang Ji; the Vice-President of the General History Department, Yao Zhongzheng; the Vice-President of the

古文：复命有司奉金千五百两、银七千五百两、币帛各四百匹及金腰带二十，诣行在所，以备赐予。
现代文：又命令有关部门备办黄金一千五百两、白银七千五百两、币帛各为四百匹，及金制腰带二十条，前赴行在处所，以备赏赐之用。
English: He also ordered the relevant departments to prepare 1,500 taels of gold, 7,500 taels of silver, 400 pennies each, and 20 gold belts, and go to the site to prepare for the reward.

古文：帝命廷臣曰： 宝玺既北上，继今国家政事，其遣人闻于行在所。 
现代文：文宗下令朝廷官员说： 宝印既已北上，今后凡属国家政事，都应派人前往行在处所奏闻。 
English: Emperor Wenzong ordered the officials of the imperial court to say, "Since the treasure has been taken to the north, in the future, whenever there is a matter of state politics, someone should be sent to the place of the journey to report it."

古文：癸亥，命有司造乘舆服御，北迎大驾。
现代文：初六，命令有关部门修造乘舆服御之物，北上迎接明宗大驾。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, he ordered the relevant departments to repair the things that were taken away by the public, and to go north to meet the great leader of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：改潜邸所幸诸路名：建康曰集庆，江陵曰中兴，琼州曰乾宁，潭州曰天临。
现代文：将潜邸临幸的各路改名：建康为集庆路，江陵为中兴路，琼州为乾宁安抚司，潭州为天临路。
English: Renamed the roads of the Hidden Residence Linxing: Jiankang to Jiuqing Road, Jiangling to Zhongxing Road, Qiongzhou to Qianning Pacification Division, and Tanzhou to Tianlin Road.

古文：甲子，减大官羊直。
现代文：初七，削减太官羊价费用。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the cost of the official sheep price will be reduced.

古文：丙寅，跃里帖木儿自行在还，谕旨曰： 朕在上都，宗王、大臣必皆会集，有司当备供张。
现代文：初九，跃里帖木儿从行在所回京，传谕圣旨： 我在上都，宗王、大臣必定都来会集，有关部门应当准备供应物品。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Yurihime Timur returned to the capital from the place where he had been traveling, and proclaimed the sacred edict: I am in Shangdu, my father-in-law and ministers will certainly come to the assembly, and the relevant departments should prepare to supply goods.

古文：上都积贮，已为倒剌沙所耗，大都府藏，闻亦悉虚。
现代文：上都积贮之物，已被倒剌沙耗费殆尽，大都府库所藏，听说也已空虚。
English: The things stored in the capital have been exhausted by the sandstorm, and most of the capital's storehouses are said to be empty.

古文：供亿如有不足，其以御史台、司农司、枢密、宣徽、宣政等院所贮充之。 
现代文：供应如有不足的话，就把御史台、司农司、枢密、宣徽、宣政等院所贮藏的东西拿出充用。 
English: If there is a shortage of supplies, they will take out the things stored by the Imperial Historical Records Office, the Ministry of Agriculture, the Privy Council, the State Emblem, the Proclamation of the People's Republic of China and other institutions.

古文：蒙古饥民之聚京师者，遣往居庸关北，人给钞一锭、布一匹，仍令兴和路赈粮两月，还所部。
现代文：蒙古族饥民聚集京师者，遣往居庸关以北地区，每人给予钱钞一锭、布一匹，照旧例令兴和路官员赈济两个月的粮食，使之返还原属部落。
English: Mongolian starving people gathered in Beijing and were sent to the area north of Juyongguan. Each person was given a pile of money and a piece of cloth. As usual, the officials of Xinghe Road were ordered to provide two months of grain to return it to the original tribe.

古文：戊辰，云南诸王答失不花、秃坚不花及平章马思忽等集众五万，数丞相也儿吉尼专擅十罪，将杀之。
现代文：十一日，云南诸王答失不花、秃坚不花及行省平章马思忽等人，集众五万，数说行省丞相也儿吉尼专擅十罪，准备加以杀害。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the kings of Yunnan, such as Atsushi, Bald Jian, and Guanzhou Pingzhang, Ma Sihou, gathered a crowd of fifty thousand, and said that Guanzhou's prime minister, Yaer Jini, was guilty of ten crimes, and they were preparing to kill him.

古文：也儿吉尼遁走八番，答失不花等伪署参知政事等官。
现代文：也儿吉尼逃往八番，答失不花等人伪署参知政事等官职。
English: Yergini fled to the 8th ward, and it did not take long for others to assume official positions such as the pseudo-deputy of the governor and political affairs.

古文：己巳，命改集庆潜邸，建大龙翔集庆寺，以来岁兴工。
现代文：十二日，下令改造集庆路潜邸，兴建大龙翔集庆寺，准备第二年动工。
English: On the 12th, he ordered the transformation of the Jieqing Road Hidden Residence and the construction of the Dalongxiang Jieqing Temple, with construction to begin the following year.

古文：辛未，监察御史与紥鲁忽赤等官录囚。
现代文：十四日，监察御史与扎鲁铁赤等官员审讯囚徒。
English: On the 14th, Supervisor Mishi and officials such as Zaru Tieka interrogated the prisoners.

古文：壬申，以去冬无雪，今春不雨，命中书及百司官分祷山川群祀。
现代文：十五日，因去冬不降雪，今春不下雨，命令中书省及各部门官员分别祭祀山川诸神祈祷雨水。
English: On the 15th, because there was no snow in the winter and no rain in the spring, the Ministry of Education and Culture and the officials of various departments were ordered to separately worship the gods of mountains and rivers and pray for rain.

古文：设奎章阁授经郎二员，职正七品，以勋旧、贵戚子孙及近侍年幼者肄业。
现代文：设置奎章阁授经郎官二员，官职为正七品，以勋旧大臣与贵戚之子孙和近侍年幼者任其职，习其业。
English: Two members of the Qui Zhangge Scholarship Awarding Office were set up, with the official position of senior seventh grade, and the former minister and the son of the noble relative, the grandson and the close attendant's young children were appointed to their positions to learn their business.

古文：甲戌，旧赐笃麟帖木儿平江田百顷，官尝收其租米，诏特予之。
现代文：十七日，从前赐予笃麟帖木儿平江路农田一百顷，官府曾征收其租米，下诏特地给予他。
English: On the 17th, a hundred hectares of farmland on Pingjiang Road was previously granted to Tu Lin Tsmuer. The government had collected his rent rice and gave it to him specially.

古文：开辽阳酒禁。
现代文：开放辽阳酒禁。
English: Liaoyang's alcohol ban is lifted.

古文：乙亥，置行枢密院，以山东都万户也速台儿知行枢密院事，与湖广、河南两省官进兵平四川，也速台儿以病不往。
现代文：十八日，设置行枢密院，任命山东都万户也速台儿知行枢密院事，与湖广、河南两行省官员进兵平定四川，也速台儿因病不能前往。
English: On the 18th, the Privy Council was set up, and the Shandong capital of Shandong was appointed as the Privy Council. Together with the provincial officials from Hukang and Henan, they marched into Sichuan to pacify Sichuan, but Yazdai was unable to go due to illness.

古文：命明里董阿为蒙古巫觋立祠。
现代文：命令明里董阿为蒙古族巫觋建立祠堂。
English: Mingli ordered Dong Ah to build an ancestral hall for Mongolian Wusong.

古文：丁丑，文献昭圣皇后神御殿月祭，特命如列圣故事。
现代文：二十日，在文献昭圣皇后神御殿举行月祭，特命按列宗列祖旧例办理。
English: On the 20th, the moon festival was held at the Literature Shosheng Empress God's Palace, and it was specially ordered to be handled according to the old example of the ancestors of the lineage.

古文：僧、道、也里可温、术忽、合失蛮为商者，仍旧制纳税。
现代文：僧、道、也里可温、术忽、答失蛮做生意者，仍按旧制缴纳赋税。
English: Businessmen who are monks, Taoists, or practitioners of other arts, still have to pay taxes according to the old system.

古文：丙戌，囊加台所遣守隘碉门安抚使布答思监等降于云南行省。
现代文：二十九日，囊加台所遣把守碉门要隘的安抚使布答思监等人降于云南行省。
English: On the 29th, the Qatari envoy sent to pacify the gatekeepers to narrow the gate, so that Buta Siyuan and others were reduced to Yunnan Province.

古文：丁亥，雨土，霾。
现代文：三十日，刮大风，降沙土。
English: On the 30th, a strong wind blew and sand fell.

古文：夏四月己丑，时享于太庙。
现代文：夏四月初二，按时享祭于太庙。
English: On the 2nd day of the 4th month of summer, the festival will be held on time at Taimiao.

古文：辛卯，命跃里铁木儿、王不怜吉台代也速台儿讨四川，不怜吉台以母老辞，同佥枢密院事傅岩起请往，从之。
现代文：初四，命令跃里铁木儿、王不怜吉台代替也速台儿征讨四川，不怜吉台以母老为由推辞这项任命，同佥枢密院事傅岩起请前往从征，同意这项请求。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, he ordered Yue Li Tie Mu'er and Wang Fu Rong Jitai to go to Sichuan to recruit in place of Yazdai. Fu Rong Jitai declined the appointment on the grounds that he was too old. Iwaki, the Minister of the Privy Council, was asked to go to Sichuan to recruit and agreed to the request.

古文：壬辰，匠官年七十者，许致仕。
现代文：初五，匠官年满七十者，允许退休。
English: On the fifth day of the new year, craftsmen who have reached the age of 70 are allowed to retire.

古文：浚漷州漕运河。
现代文：疏浚氵郭州运粮河道。
English: Dredging of the Guozhou grain transport channel.

古文：甲午，四番卫士各分五十人直东宫。
现代文：初七，西番卫士各分五十人直宿东宫。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, fifty West Guardsmen were sent to the East Palace.

古文：丁酉，给钞万锭，为集庆大龙翔寺置永业。
现代文：初十，给予钱钞一万锭，为集庆大龙翔寺置办永业。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he was given 10,000 baht in banknotes, and the construction of the Grand Dragon Xiang Temple was carried out for the celebration.

古文：戊戌，以陕西久旱，遣使祷西岳、西镇诸祠。
现代文：十一日，因陕西久旱不雨，派遣使者祷祭西岳、西镇等祠庙。
English: On the 11th day, due to the long drought in Shaanxi, an envoy was sent to pray for the temples of Xidake and Xizhen.

古文：赐卫士万三千人钞，人八十锭。
现代文：赐予卫士一万三千人钱钞，每人八十锭。
English: The guards were given 13,000 banknotes, 80 baht each.

古文：四番卫士旧以万人为率，至是增三千人。
现代文：四番卫士旧例员额一万人，至此增加三千人。
English: The number of fourth guards will increase by 3,000 from the previous 10,000.

古文：己亥，湖广行省参知政事孛罗奉诏至四川，赦囊加台等罪，囊加台等听诏，蜀地悉定，诸省兵皆罢。
现代文：十二日，湖广行省参知政事孛罗奉诏到达四川，赦免囊加台等人罪过，囊加台等人接受诏书，蜀地全都平定，各行省兵马都撤了回去。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Zhao Luo, the political leader of Hunan and Guangxi provinces, arrived in Sichuan with an imperial edict, pardoning the sins of Zangjia and Tai and others. Zangjia and Tai and others accepted the imperial edict. Shu was completely subdued, and the troops and horses of all provinces were withdrawn.

古文：癸卯，明宗遣武宁王彻彻秃、中书平章政事哈八儿秃来锡命，立帝为皇太子，命仍置詹事院，罢储庆司。
现代文：十六日，明宗派遣武宁王彻彻秃、中书平章政事哈八儿秃前来赐命，立文宗为皇太子，命照例设置詹事院，撤销储庆司。
English: On the 16th, Emperor Mingzong dispatched King Wu Ning to Checheng Bald, and the Chinese scholar Pingzhang and the statesman Habara Bald to come and give orders to establish Emperor Wenzong as the crown prince, to set up the Zhanji Academy as usual, and to revoke the appointment of Prince Shuqing.

古文：陕西诸路饥民百二十三万四千余口，诸县流民又数十万，先是尝赈之，不足；行省复请令商贾入粟中盐，富家纳粟补官，及发孟津仓粮八万石及河南、汉中廉访司所贮官租以赈，从之。
现代文：陕西各路饥民一百二十三万四千多口，各县流民还有数十万人，先前曾加以赈济而不足；行省官员再次奏请，令商贾纳粮而与之盐，富户纳粮而与之官职，并调发孟津仓库粮食八万石及河南、汉中廉访司所贮藏的官府租米予以赈济，同意这项奏请。
English: There are more than 1.234 million hungry people in Shaanxi, and there are hundreds of thousands of displaced people in various counties. Previously, there was a shortage of relief supplies. Provincial officials once again appealed to merchants to donate grain for salt, and rich households to donate grain for official positions. They also transferred 80,000 koku of grain from the Mengjin warehouse and government-rented rice stored by the Henan and Hanzhong Lianghuizi to provide relief, and agreed to this appeal.

古文：德安府屯田饥，赈粮千石。
现代文：德安府屯田处发生饥荒，赈济粮食一千石。
English: A famine occurred in the Tonden area of De'an Prefecture, and a thousand koku of grain was donated.

古文：常德、澧州、慈利州饥，赈粜粮万石。
现代文：常德路与澧州路慈利州饥荒，赈济平卖粮食一万石。
English: Changde Road and Zhangzhou Road, Cilizhou famine, Zhangjiaping grain sales of ten thousand.

古文：赈卫辉路饥民万七千五百余户。
现代文：赈济卫辉路饥民一万七千五百多户。
English: There are more than 17,500 households of hungry people in Weihui Road, Shaanxi Province.

古文：丙午，封孛罗不花为镇南王。
现代文：十九日，封孛罗不花为镇南王。
English: On the 19th, Luo Fuhua was crowned the king of the south of the town.

古文：占腊国来贡罗香木及象、豹、白猿。
现代文：真腊国来使进贡罗香木和象、豹、白猿。
English: Manchukuo sent tribute of rosewood, elephant, leopard, and white monkey.

古文：戒翰林、典瑞两院官，不许互相奏请玺书以护其家。
现代文：告诫翰林院、典瑞院官员，不得互相奏请玺书以保护其家。
English: He warned officials of the Hanlin Academy and the Dianrui Academy that they should not send each other begging letters in order to protect their families.

古文：诸王分邑达鲁花赤受代，不得仍留官所，其父兄所居官，子弟不得再任。
现代文：诸侯王封地达鲁花赤交卸其职后，不得仍旧留居官所，其父兄所任官职，子弟不得继任。
English: After the lords and princes of the Daruhana fiefdom relinquished their posts, they were not allowed to remain in the government office, their fathers and brothers held government posts, and their children were not allowed to succeed.

古文：辛亥，赈邓州诸县被兵逃户粮三千六百石。
现代文：二十四日，赈济邓州各县遭受兵祸的逃户粮食三千六百石。
English: On the 24th, 3600 kilos of grain were delivered to the displaced families in the counties of Ganzi and Dengzhou that suffered from the military disaster.

古文：壬子，赈通州诸县被兵之民粮两月，被俘者四千五百一十人，命辽阳行省督所属簿录，护送归其家。
现代文：二十五日，赈济通州各县遭受兵祸的民户粮食两个月，被俘获的四千五百一十人，命令辽阳行省督促所属进行登记，护送他们返回家乡。
English: On the 25th, he ordered the Liaoyang Provincial Government to urge the captured 4,510 people to register and escort them back to their hometowns.

古文：丙辰，行在所遣只儿哈郎等至京师。
现代文：二十九日，行在所派遣只儿哈郎等人来到京师。
English: On the 29th, only Haro and others were sent to Kyoto.

古文：河南廉访司言： 河南府路以兵、旱民饥，食人肉事觉者五十一人，饿死者千九百五十人，饥者一万七千四百余人。
现代文：河南廉访司上言说 ：河南府路因兵祸、旱灾造成饥荒，饥民食人肉被发觉者五十一人，饿死者一千九百五十人，受饥者二万七千四百多人。
English: The head of the Henan Bureau of Investigation said: Due to the military disaster and drought caused by famine in Henan Province, 51 people were found to be cannibals, 1,950 people died of starvation, and more than 27,400 people suffered from starvation.

古文：乞弛山林川泽之禁，听民采食，行入粟补官之令，及括江淮僧道余粮以赈。 
现代文：请放松山林川泽的禁令，听任人民采食，推行纳粮补官的政策，并征集江淮地区僧道寺观余粮加以赈济。 
English: Please relax the ban on the mountains, forests and rivers, allow the people to gather food, implement the policy of supplementing officials with grain, and collect surplus grain from Buddhist temples in the Jianghuai region.

古文：从之。
现代文：同意这项奏请。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：江浙行省言： 池州、广德、宁国、太平、建康、镇江、常州、湖州、庆元诸路及江阴州饥民六十余万户，当赈粮十四万三千余石。 
现代文：江浙行省上言说 ：池州、广德、宁国、太平、建康、镇江、常州、湖州、庆元等路及江阴州共有饥民六十多万户，应当赈济粮食十四万三千多石。 
English: The preamble of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province said: There are more than 600,000 hungry households in Chizhou, Guangde, Ningguo, Taiping, Jiankang, Zhenjiang, Changzhou, Huzhou, Qingyuan and other provinces and Jiangyin Province, and more than 143,000 kilos of grain should be provided.

古文：从之。
现代文：也予以批准。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：诸王忽剌答儿言黄河以西所部旱蝗，凡千五百户，命赈粮两月。
现代文：诸侯王忽剌答儿上言说黄河以西所部发生旱蝗灾害，受灾者共一千五百户，下令赈济粮食两个月。
English: The Prince of the Princes, Hu Rong, replied that locust plagues had occurred in the western part of the Yellow River, affecting a total of 1,500 households, and ordered grain to be donated for two months.

古文：大都、兴和、顺德、大名、彰德、怀庆、卫辉、汴梁、中兴诸路，泰安、高唐、曹、冠、徐、邳诸州，饥民六十七万六千余户，赈以钞九万锭、粮万五千石。
现代文：大都、兴和、顺德、大名、彰德、怀庆、卫辉、汴梁、中兴等路，泰安、高唐、曹州、冠州、徐州、邳州等州，共有饥民六十七万六千多户，用钱钞九万锭、粮食一万五千石予以赈济。
English: Dadu, Xinghe, Shunde, Daming, Zhangde, Huaiqing, Weihui, Qiliang, Zhongxing and other roads, Tai'an, Gaotang, Caozhou, Guanzhou, Xuzhou, Ganzhou and other states, a total of more than 676,000 hungry households, with 90,000 baht of money and 15,000 koku of grain to help.

古文：大都宛平县，保定遂州、易州，赈粮一月，靖州赈粜粮九千八百石。
现代文：大都路宛平县，保定路遂州、易州赈济粮食一个月。靖州赈济平卖粮食九千八百石。
English: Wanping County of Datu Road, Suizhou and Yizhou of Baoding Road sell grain for one month, and Jingzhou sells grain for 9,800 kilos.

古文：濮州鄄城县蚕灾，大宁兴中州、怀庆孟州、庐州无为州蝗。
现代文：濮州鄄城县蚕灾。大宁路兴中州、怀庆路孟州、庐州路无为州蝗虫成灾。
English: Silkworm infestation in Luzhou's Lucheng County. Locusts infesting Danying Road, Xingzhongzhou, Huaiqing Road, Mengzhou, and Luzhou Road.

古文：广西獠寇古县。
现代文：广西蛮夷进犯吉县。
English: Guangxi barbarians invade Ji County.

古文：五月丁巳朔，复赐鲁国大长公主钞二万锭，以构居第。
现代文：五月初一，再次赐予鲁国大长公主钱钞两万锭，以建造宅第。
English: On the first day of May, he once again gave the eldest princess of the State of Lu 20,000 baht in banknotes and coins to build a house.

古文：赐燕铁木儿祖父纪功碑铭。
现代文：赐予燕铁木儿祖父纪功碑铭。
English: Grandfather Yan Tie Mu'er was awarded the Medal of Merit.

古文：水达达路阿速古儿千户所大水。
现代文：水达达路阿速古儿千户所发大水。
English: Water spills onto road in Ashogul, thousands of homes flooded.

古文：己未，遣翰林学士承旨阿邻帖木儿北迎大驾。
现代文：初三，派遣翰林学士承旨阿邻帖木儿北迎明宗大驾。
English: In the third year of junior high school, he dispatched Hanlin Baccalaureate with the intention of becoming a neighbor of Timur Kita Yingmingzong.

古文：命司天监翙星。
现代文：命令司天监祭星。
English: Order the priest, the overseer of the festival, to dance.

古文：昌王八剌失里还镇。
现代文：昌王八剌失里返回镇所。
English: After losing eight times, Changwang returned to the town hall.

古文：庚申，太白犯鬼宿积尸气。
现代文：初四，金星凌犯鬼宿积尸气星云。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Venus transits the corpse gas nebula.

古文：癸亥，复遣翰林学士承旨斡耳朵迎大驾。
现代文：初七，再派翰林学士承旨斡耳朵往迎明宗大驾。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, he sent Hanlin Scholar Chengzhi to welcome the Ming Dynasty.

古文：乙丑，命有司给行在宿卫士衣粮及马刍豆。
现代文：初九，命令有关部门供给行在所宿卫战士衣粮及马匹草及豆料。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the relevant departments were ordered to supply the guardsmen who were staying at the base with clothing and grain, as well as horse grass and beans.

古文：以储庆司所贮金三十锭、银百锭，建大承天护圣寺。
现代文：用储庆司所贮藏的黄金三十锭，白银一百锭，建造大承天护圣寺。
English: He used 30 monies of gold and 100 monies of silver, which were stored by Zuo Qingji, to build the Dazhong Tianwu Holy Temple.

古文：给皇子宿卫之士千人钞，四番宿卫增为万三千人，至是又增千人。
现代文：给予皇子宿卫之士一千人钱钞，四番宿卫已增到一万三千人，到此时又增加一千人。
English: He gave 1,000 coins to the prince's bodyguards. The number of bodyguards for the 4th battalion had already increased to 13,000, and another 1,000 were added at this time.

古文：甲戌，命中书省臣拟注中书六部官，奏于行在所。
现代文：十八日，命令中书省官员拟定中书六部官员名单，奏闻于行在所。
English: On the 18th, the officials of the Ministry of the People's Republic of China were ordered to draw up a list of six officials of the People's Republic of China, which was reported to the government.

古文：乙亥，幸大圣寿万安寺，作佛事于世祖神御殿，又于玉德殿及大天源延圣寺作佛事。
现代文：十九日，临幸大圣寿万安寺，在世祖神御殿修作佛事，又在玉德殿及大天源延圣寺修作佛事。
English: On the 19th, Rinchen Daishoshu Ban'anji Temple held a Buddhist service at Sezoshin Goten, and a Buddhist service was also held at Gyokutuden and Datengen Enshoji Temple.

古文：丙子，武宁王彻彻秃、中书平章政事哈八儿秃至自行在所，致立皇太子之命。
现代文：二十日，武宁王彻彻秃、中书平章政事哈八儿秃从行在所来到京师，传达册立皇太子之命。
English: On the 20th, King Wuming Cheche Bald and the Chinese scholar Pingzhang Zhengji and the political officer Habar Bald came to Beijing from Xingzhe to convey the order of the crown prince.

古文：赐彻彻秃金五百两，余有差。
现代文：赐予彻彻秃黄金五百两，其余人员多寡不一。
English: Five hundred taels of gold were given to the completely bald, and the number of remaining personnel varied.

古文：改储庆使司为詹事院。
现代文：改储庆使司名称为詹事院。
English: The name of the department was changed to Zhanji Institute.

古文：伯颜、铁木儿补化及江南行台御史大夫阿儿思兰海牙、江浙行省平章政事曹立，并为太子詹事；又除副詹事、詹事丞及断事官、家令司、典宝、典用、典医等官。
现代文：伯颜、铁木儿补化及江南行台御史大夫阿儿思兰海牙、江浙行省平章政事曹立，并为太子詹事；还任命了副詹事、詹事丞及断事官、家令司、典宝、典用、典医等官员。
English: Baoyan, Tiemu'er and Suihua, and Aersiran, the chief historian of the south of the Yangtze River in Taiwan, and Cao Li, the political secretary of Pingzhang in Jiangsu and Zhejiang, and the prince Zhanji; also appointed the deputy Zhanji, Zhanji and the adjudicator, the family secretary, the treasure, the use of the treasure, the classic doctor and other officials.

古文：丁丑，帝发京师，北迎明宗皇帝。
现代文：二十一日，文宗从京师出发，北迎明宗皇帝大驾。
English: On the twenty-first day, Emperor Wenzong set out from Beijing and headed north to meet Emperor Mingzong.

古文：戊寅，次于大口。
现代文：二十二日，到达大口。
English: On the 22nd, we arrived in Otsuchi.

古文：征诸王鼎八入朝。
现代文：征召诸侯王鼎八入朝。
English: The princes Wang Dingbai were called up to join the imperial court.

古文：庚辰，次香水园。
现代文：二十四日，进驻香水园。
English: On the 24th, it moved into the Perfume Garden.

古文：置江淮财赋都总管府，秩正三品，隶詹事院。
现代文：设置江淮财赋都总管府，品秩为正三品，隶属于詹事院。
English: The Jianghuai Financial Capital General Administration Office was set up, with a rank of Senior Third Rank, affiliated to the Zhanji Academy.

古文：陕西行省言： 凤翔府饥民十九万七千九百人，本省用便宜赈以官钞万五千锭。
现代文：陕西行省官员上言说 ：凤翔府饥民有十九万七千九百人，本省临时权变用官钞一万五千锭予以赈济。
English: An official from Shaanxi Province said, "There are 197,900 starving people in Fengxiang Prefecture. The province has the temporary power to use 15,000 yuan in official banknotes to help them.

古文：又，丰乐八屯军士饥，死者六百五十人，万户府军士饥者千三百人，赈以官钞百三十锭。 
现代文：另外，丰乐八处屯田军士饿死者有六百五十人，万户府军士受饥者一千三百人，用官钞一百三十锭予以赈济。 
English: In addition, there were 650 soldiers from Tonden and 1,300 soldiers from Wanhu who died of starvation in the eight districts of Fengle, and 130 baht in government money was used to help them.

古文：从之。
现代文：同意这种做法。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：给保定路定兴驿车马，又赈被兵之民百四十五户粮一月，真定路民被兵者二千七百四十八户，亦命赈之。
现代文：给予保定路定兴驿车马，还赈济遭兵祸之民一百四十五户粮食一个月。真定路平民遭受兵祸者有二千七百四十八户，也下令予以赈济。
English: A month's supply of grain was given to 145 households on Baoding Road that were affected by the military disaster, and 2,748 households on Zhending Road that were affected by the military disaster were also ordered to provide relief.

古文：上都迭只诸位宿卫士及开平县民被兵者，并赈以粮。
现代文：上都迭只诸位宿卫军士及开平县平民遭受兵祸者，都有粮食进行赈济。
English: On the whole, only the guards and the civilians in Kaiping County who suffered from military disasters had food to help them.

古文：大名路蚕灾。
现代文：大名路蚕灾。
English: Daimyo Road silkworm infestation.

古文：六月丁亥朔，明宗遣近侍马驹、塔台、别不花至。
现代文：六月初一，明宗派遣近侍马驹、塔台、别不花前来。
English: On the first day of June, the Ming Dynasty sent close attendants Ma Jun, Toutai, and Beibuhua to come.

古文：丁酉，铁木儿补化以旱乞避宰相位，有旨谕之曰： 皇帝远居沙漠，未能即至京师，是以勉摄大位。
现代文：十一日，铁木儿补化因旱灾请求退避宰相之位，有圣旨晓谕他说 ：因皇帝远居沙漠地区，不能迅速来到京师，所以我勉力代其大位。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Temur's successor, Taika, requested to retire from the position of prime minister due to drought. A sacred edict was revealed to him: "Since the emperor lives far away in the desert, he cannot quickly come to the capital, so I will do my best to take his place."

古文：今亢阳为灾，皆予阙失所致。
现代文：现在发生旱灾，都是因我行事阙失所造成。
English: The droughts that are happening now are all caused by my failure to act.

古文：汝其勉修厥职，祗修实政，可以上答天变。 
现代文：你应勉力尽其职责，办好实政，就可以上答天变告诫之意了。 
English: You should do your best to fulfill your duties and do a good job of real politics, then you can answer the meaning of the warning.

古文：仍命驰奏于行在。
现代文：照例命令将此事快马奏闻于行在所。
English: As usual, the order was given to quickly report the matter to the police.

古文：己亥，江浙行省言，绍兴、庆元、台州、婺州诸路饥民凡十一万八千九十户。
现代文：十三日，江浙行省上言说，绍兴、庆元、台州、婺州等路饥民共十一万八千九十户。
English: On the 13th, Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province announced that a total of 118,090 households in Shaoxing, Qingyuan, Taizhou, and Zhangzhou had suffered from hunger.

古文：乙巳，命中书省逮系也先捏以还。
现代文：十九日，命令中书省将也先捏逮捕回来。
English: On the 19th, the order was issued to the Ministry of Education to arrest Zeng first.

古文：丙午，永平屯田府所隶昌国诸屯大风骤雨，平地出水。
现代文：二十日，永平屯田府所属的昌国等屯因狂风暴雨袭击，致使平地发水。
English: On the 20th, Yongping Township, Changguo Township and other townships belonging to Yongping Township were hit by violent storms and rain, causing water to rise from the flat land.

古文：丁未，太白昼见。
现代文：二十一日，金星白天出现。
English: On the 23rd, a too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：庚戌，次于上都之六十里店。
现代文：二十四日，进驻上都路的六十里店。
English: On the 24th, it moved into the sixty-mile store on Shangdu Road.

古文：辛亥，陕西行台御史孔思迪言： 人伦之中，夫妇为重。
现代文：二十五日，陕西行台御史孔思迪上言说： 人伦之中，以夫妇一伦为重。
English: On the 25th, Kong Sidi, the governor of Shaanxi Province, said in his speech, "Among the relationships between people, the relationship between husband and wife is the most important.

古文：比见内外大臣得罪就刑者，其妻妾即断付他人，似与国朝旌表贞节之旨不侔、夫亡终制之令相反。
现代文：近来闻知内外大臣犯罪处决者，其妻妾随即断付他人，似乎与我朝旌表贞节的旨意不相符合，与夫亡后终身守制之令正好相反。
English: Recently, I learned that the wife and concubine of the Minister of the Interior and Foreign Affairs, who was executed for a crime, immediately disowned him. This does not seem to be in line with the intention of my Hajj Purity Day, and is exactly the opposite of the order of lifelong observance after the death of her husband.

古文：况以失节之妇配有功之人，又与前贤所谓 娶失节者以配身是己失节 之意不同。
现代文：何况将失节之妇配给有功之人，又和前贤所说的 娶失节者以配自身也是自身失节 之意不同。
English: Moreover, it is different from the meaning of "marrying a woman who is out of line with oneself is also one's own out of line" that the ancients said.

古文：今后凡负国之臣籍没奴婢财产，不必罪其妻子。
现代文：今后凡叛国之臣，抄没奴婢财产，而不必罪其妻子。
English: In the future, all treasonous ministers will confiscate the property of slaves and maids without having to incriminate their wives.

古文：当典刑者，则孥戮之，不必断付他人，庶使妇人均得守节。
现代文：犯刑法者，则予以捕杀，不必断付他人，以使妇人都能守其贞节。
English: Those who violate the criminal law will be caught and killed, and there is no need to punish others, so that women can maintain their chastity.

古文：请著为令。 
现代文：请将此意著为法令。 
English: Please make this a law.

古文：壬子，海运粮至京师，凡百四十万九千一百三十石。
现代文：二十六日，海运粮食到达京师，共一百四十万九千一百石。
English: On the 26th, the seaborne grain arrived at the Beijing Division, with a total of 1,409,100 koku.

古文：是月，陕西雨。
现代文：这一月，陕西下了雨。
English: This month, it rained in Shaanxi Province.

古文：赐凤翔府岐阳书院额。
现代文：赐予凤翔府岐阳书院匾额。
English: Fengxiang Prefecture Qiyang College was awarded a scholarship.

古文：书院祀周文宪王，仍命设学官，春秋释奠，如孔子庙仪。
现代文：该书院祭祀周文宪王，照例命令设置学官，春秋二季举行释奠活动，仿照孔庙礼仪。
English: The school held a ceremony to celebrate King Zhou Wenxian. As usual, it ordered the establishment of academic officials, and held explanatory activities in the spring and autumn, following the etiquette of the Confucius Temple.

古文：明宗遣吏部尚书别儿怯不花还京师。
现代文：明宗派遣吏部尚书别儿怯不花返回京师。
English: The Ming Dynasty dispatched its official, Shang Shuxue, to return to Beijing.

古文：命中书集老臣议赈荒之策。
现代文：命令中书省招集年长官员商议救荒的办法。
English: It ordered the Ministry of Education to convene senior officials to discuss ways to relieve the famine.

古文：时陕西、河东、燕南、河北、河南诸路流民十数万，自嵩、汝至淮南，死亡相藉，命所在州县官以便宜赈之。
现代文：当时陕西、河东、燕南、河北、河南各路有流民十九万人，自嵩州、汝州直至淮南一带，死亡者相枕藉，命令所在州县官员，可用权宜办法予以赈济。
English: At that time, there were 190,000 displaced people in Shaanxi, Hedong, Yan'nan, Hebei and Henan provinces, from Songzhou, Ruzhou to Huainan, and the deceased were all related to each other. The officials of the states and counties in which they were located were ordered to use expedient measures to help them.

古文：顺元、思、播州诸驿，因兵兴，马多羸毙，驿户贫乏，令有司市马补之。
现代文：顺元、思州、播州各处驿站，因兵起以后，马多伤损，驿户贫困，命令有关部门买马予以补充。
English: Shunyuan, Shizhou and Banzhou all have post stations. Due to the fact that many horses were injured and their owners were poor after the war, the relevant departments were ordered to buy horses to supplement them.

古文：益都莒、密二州春水，夏旱蝗，饥民三万一千四百户，赈粮一月。
现代文：益都路莒州、密州两处春季发水灾，夏季发生旱灾、蝗灾，饥民有三万一千四百户，赈济粮食一个月。
English: There were floods in two places in Yidu Road, Luzhou and Mizhou, in the spring, and droughts and locust plagues in the summer. Thirty-one thousand four hundred households were affected by famine, and food aid was provided for one month.

古文：陕西延安诸屯，以旱免征旧所逋粮千九百七十石。
现代文：陕西延安各屯田处，因旱灾免征从前所欠税粮一千九百七十石。
English: In Yan'an, Shaanxi Province, due to the drought, the former tax arrears of grain were exempted from taxation by 1,970 koku.

古文：永平屯田府昌国、济民、丰赡诸署，以蝗及水灾，免今年租。
现代文：永平屯田府所辖的昌国、济民、丰赡等署，因蝗灾及水灾的缘故，免除今年租粮。
English: Due to the locusts and floods, the Changguo, Jimin, Fengyi and other departments under the jurisdiction of Yongping Tunden Prefecture are exempt from grain rent this year.

古文：汴梁蝗，卫辉蚕灾，峡州旱，淮东诸路、归德府徐、邳二州大水。
现代文：汴梁路蝗灾。卫辉路桑蚕受灾。峡州旱灾。淮东各路与归德府徐州、邳州发大水。
English: Locusts in Qiliang Road. Mulberry silkworms in Weihui Road. Drought in Xiaozhou. Floods in Xuzhou and Zhangzhou in Huadong Province.

古文：秋七月丙辰朔，日有食之。丁巳，次上都之三十里店。
现代文：秋七月初一，发生日食。初二，进驻上都路的三十里店。
English: On the first day of autumn and the first day of July, a solar eclipse occurred. On the second day of the first month, the Sanjuri store on Shangdu Road opened.

古文：宗仁卫屯田大水，坏田二百六十顷。
现代文：宗田卫屯田处发大水，毁坏农田二百六十顷。
English: Large amounts of water were released in the Soda Wetland area, destroying 260 hectares of farmland.

古文：戊午，大都之东安、蓟州、永清、益津、潞县，春夏旱，麦苗枯；六月壬子雨，至是日乃止，皆水灾。
现代文：初三，大都路东安、蓟州、永清、益津、潞县，春夏发生旱灾，麦苗枯槁；六月二十六日开始降雨，到七月初一才停止，各处都发生水灾。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Dong'an, Zhangzhou, Yongqing, Yijin, and Handan counties along the Dadu Road experienced drought in the spring and summer, and the wheat seedlings withered. Rainfall began on June 26 and did not stop until the beginning of July. Floods occurred everywhere.

古文：己未，更定迁徙法：凡应徙者，验所居远近，移之千里，在道遇赦，皆得放还；如不悛再犯，徙之本省不毛之地，十年无过，则量移之；所迁人死，妻子听归土著。
现代文：初四，重新定立迁徙之法：凡应迁徙者，检查所居地区的远近情况，移于千里之外，在道上遇到赦免时，都可放回原居住地；如不悔改再犯过失，迁移到本行省所辖的不毛之地，十年无过失，则酌情迁移到条件较强一些的地区；被迁移者死亡，其妻子儿女听其回归原籍。
English: Fourth, re-establish the law of migration: all those who should migrate, check the distance and proximity of the area they live in, move thousands of miles away, and when they are pardoned on the road, they can be returned to their original place of residence; if they do not repent and commit another fault, they will move to the barren land under the jurisdiction of the province, and if they have no fault for ten years, they will move to a region with stronger conditions as appropriate; if the relocated person dies, his wife and children will allow him to return to his place of origin.

古文：著为令。
现代文：将此条著为律令。
English: This article shall be construed as a ritsuryo.

古文：征京师僧道商税。
现代文：征收京师僧道寺观的商税。
English: The commercial tax levied on Buddhist monks and Taoist temples in Beijing.

古文：癸亥，太白经天。
现代文：初八，金星经过天空。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Venus passes through the sky.

古文：丙子，帝受皇太子宝。
现代文：二十一日，文宗接受皇太子之宝。
English: On the twenty-first day, Wenzong accepted the crown prince's treasure.

古文：辛巳，发诸卫军六千完京城。
现代文：二十六日，征发各卫军士六千人修整京师城墙。
English: On the 26th, 6,000 soldiers from each of the Imperial Guards were dispatched to repair the walls of the capital.

古文：冀宁阳曲县雨雹，大者如鸡卵。
现代文：冀宁路阳曲县降冰雹，大的有鸡蛋大小。
English: Hailstones fell in Yangqu County, Jining Road. The largest ones were the size of eggs.

古文：令诸王封邑达鲁花赤，推择本部年二十五以上、识达治体、廉慎无过者以充，或有冒滥，罪及王傅。
现代文：命令诸侯王封地达鲁花赤官，推选本部落年满二十五岁以上，通晓治政大体、廉洁谨慎无过失者担任；如有冒滥情况发生，就对王傅治罪。
English: Ordered the princes and princes of the Daruhana fiefdom to select the tribe's elders who are at least 25 years old, have a general knowledge of government, are honest and prudent, and have no faults; if any abuse occurs, Wang Fu will be punished.

古文：遣使以上尊、腊羊、钞十锭至大都国子监，助仲秋上丁释奠。
现代文：派遣使者携上尊、腊羊及钱钞十锭到大都国子监，帮助办理仲秋月上丁日的释奠活动。
English: Send an emissary with Shangzong, La Yang and ten yuan in banknotes to the provincial overseer in Dadu to help with the explanatory activities on the first day of the first day of the Mid-Autumn Festival.

古文：以淮安海宁州、盐城、山阳诸县去年水，免今年田租。
现代文：因淮安路海安州、盐城、山阳等县去年发生水灾，免除今年田租。
English: Due to the floods in Huai'an Road, Hai'an Prefecture, Yancheng, Sanyang and other counties last year, this year's field rent is exempted.

古文：真定、河间、汴梁、永平、淮安、大宁、庐州诸属县及辽阳之盖州蝗。
现代文：真定、河间、汴梁、永平、淮安、大宁、庐州等路属县与辽阳路所辖的盖州蝗虫成灾。
English: The locusts of Jinding, Hema, Qiliang, Yongping, Huai'an, Daning, Zhangzhou and other counties under the jurisdiction of Liaoyang Road have become a disaster.

古文：八月乙酉朔，明宗次于王忽察都。
现代文：八月初一，明宗进驻于王忽察都地方。
English: On the first day of August, the Ming Dynasty settled in the area of Wang Quzadu.

古文：丙戊，帝入见，明宗宴帝及诸王、大臣于行殿。
现代文：初二，文宗入见明宗皇帝，明宗在行殿中宴请文宗及诸王、大臣。
English: On the second day of the first month, Emperor Mingsong came to see Wenzong, and Mingsong invited Wenzong and the kings and ministers to a banquet in the main hall.

古文：庚寅，明宗崩，帝入临哭尽哀。
现代文：初六，明宗皇帝突然逝世，文宗入临哭泣，很是悲哀。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Emperor Mingzong died suddenly, and Emperor Wenzong came to the tomb crying. It was very sad.

古文：燕铁木儿以明宗后之命，奉皇帝宝授于帝，遂还。
现代文：燕铁木儿托明宗皇后之命，奉皇帝之宝授于文宗，随即回返。
English: By the order of the Empress Tomintsong, Yan Tie Mu'er was given to the Emperor Wenzong as a treasure, and then returned.

古文：壬辰，次孛罗察罕，以伯颜为中书左丞相，依前太保；钦察台、阿儿思兰海牙、赵世延并中书平章政事；甘肃行省平章朵儿只为中书右丞；中书参议阿荣、太子詹事丞赵世安并中书参知政事；前右丞相塔失铁木儿、知枢密院事铁木儿补化及上都留守铁木儿脱并为御史大夫。
现代文：初八，驻扎于孛罗察罕，任命伯颜为中书左丞相，照旧为太保；钦察台、阿儿思兰海牙、赵世延并为中书平章政事；甘肃行省平章朵儿只为中书右丞；中书参议阿荣、太子詹事丞赵世安并为中书参知政事；前任右丞相塔失铁木儿、右枢密院事铁木儿补化及上都留守铁木儿脱并为御史大夫。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he was stationed in Luo Chakhan and appointed Bao Yan as the Left Vice-Minister of the Central Government, and as before as the Tai Bao; Qin Xatai, Aersiran Hague, Zhao Shiyan as the Vice-Minister of the Central Government; Gansu Provincial Vice-Minister of the Central Government, Ping Zhangdou only as the Vice-Minister of the Central Government; Vice-Minister of the Central Government, A Rong, and Prince Zhan Vice-Minister of the Central Government, Zhao Shian as the Vice-Minister of the Central Government; former Vice-Minister of

古文：癸巳，帝至上都。
现代文：初九，文宗到达上都。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, Wenzong arrived in Shangdu.

古文：乙未，赐护守大行皇帝山陵官、御史大夫孛罗等钞有差。
现代文：十一日，赐予守护大行皇帝山陵官、御史大夫孛罗等人钱钞不一。
English: On the 11th day of the month, various amounts of money and banknotes were given to the Emperor Da Xing's guardian Da Xing, the mountain mausoleum official, the chief historian, and others.

古文：焚四川伪造盐、茶引。
现代文：焚毁四川行省伪造的盐引和茶引。
English: The forged salt and tea vouchers from Sichuan Province were burned.

古文：丙申，监察御史徐奭言： 天下不可一日无君，神器不可一时而旷。
现代文：十二日，监察御史徐上言说： 天下不可一天没有君主，皇位也不能空旷一刻。
English: On the 12th, the inspector general Xu Shangyin said: The world cannot be without a monarch for a day, and the throne cannot be empty for a moment.

古文：先皇帝奄弃臣庶已逾数日，伏望圣上早正宸极，以安亿兆之心，实宗社无疆之福。 
现代文：先皇帝告别臣民已过了好几天，希望圣上早登大位，以安亿万民众之心，这也是宗庙社稷无穷无尽的福份。 
English: It has been several days since the former emperor bid farewell to his subjects. I hope that he will soon ascend to the throne and bring peace to the hearts of hundreds of millions of people. This is also the inexhaustible blessing of the family temple.

古文：流诸王忽剌出于海南。
现代文：流放诸王忽剌出于海南。
English: The exile of all the kings of the Hui Dynasty from Hainan.

古文：丁酉，命阿荣、赵世安提调通政院事，一切给驿事皆关白然后给遣。
现代文：十三日，命令阿荣、赵世安提调通政院事，一切给予驿递的事项都得告知后才予以发遣。
English: On the 13th, he ordered A Rong and Zhao Shianti to be transferred to the Political Science Research Institute, and all matters to be handed over must be notified before being dispatched.

古文：戊戌，四川囊加台以指斥乘舆，坐大不道弃市。
现代文：十四日，四川囊加台因指斥皇上，坐违逆不道之罪被处决。
English: On the 14th, Sichuan Sucukatai was executed for denouncing the emperor and the crime of treason.

古文：己亥，帝复即位于上都大安阁，大赦天下，诏曰：
现代文：十五日，文宗在上都大安阁再次即皇帝之位。大赦天下，并下诏书说：
English: On the fifteenth day, Emperor Wenzong ascended the throne of Shangdu Da'an Pavilion once again. He pardoned the whole world, and issued an edict saying:

古文：朕惟昔上天启我太祖皇帝肇造帝业，列圣相承。
现代文： 从前是上天引导我家太祖皇帝始创帝王基业，之后，各位圣主递相承袭。
English: Once upon a time, it was Heaven that guided my great-grandfather, the emperor, to create the Imperial Foundation, and after that, all the saints handed it down.

古文：世祖皇帝既大一统，即建储贰，而我裕皇天不假年，成宗入继，才十余载。
现代文：我世祖皇帝既已大一统天下，随即册立储贰之君，而我裕宗皇帝因上天不延长其年岁而未能登基，以致成宗入继大统，当权十余年即逝世。
English: My ancestor, Emperor Chengzong, ruled the world from the age of one, and was immediately crowned the Prince of Heaven. However, Emperor Yuanzong was not able to ascend to the throne because God did not extend his life. As a result, Emperor Chengzong succeeded to the throne, and died after more than ten years in power.

古文：我皇考武宗归膺大宝，克享天心，志存不私，以仁庙居东宫，遂嗣宸极。
现代文：故我皇考武宗皇帝接受大宝，得到上天的佑护，而怀有不私天下之心，以仁宗居东宫之位，遂使仁宗登临大位。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wu Zong of our imperial examination accepted the great treasure, received the blessing of heaven, and harbored the selfless heart of the world, with Ren Zong living in the East Palace, and then made Ren Zong ascend to the throne.

古文：甫及英皇，降割我家。
现代文：传位于英宗皇帝之后，天忽降祸于我皇家。
English: According to legend, after Emperor Yingzong, the heavens suddenly fell upon the imperial family.

古文：晋邸违盟构逆，据有神器，天示谴告，竟陨厥身。
现代文：晋邸竟然违背盟誓造成凶逆，从而据有天子之位，而上天示变谴告，终于送了性命。
English: Jintei actually violated his oath and caused a violent rebellion, thus assuming the position of the son of heaven, and heaven rebuked him, and finally sent him to his death.

古文：于是宗戚旧臣，协谋以举义，正名以讨罪，揆诸统绪，属在眇躬。
现代文： 这时，宗室贵戚以及勋旧臣子，共同谋划以起义兵，正定名份以讨罪人，考察皇室统绪，注目在我身上。
English: At this time, the noble relatives of the imperial family and the honored old courtiers, jointly planned to use the insurgents, set the name to punish the sinners, and examine the royal family, and paid attention to me.

古文：朕兴念大兄播迁朔漠，以贤以长，历数宜归，力拒群言，至于再四。
现代文：我念及皇兄远居于朔漠之地，无论凭贤德还是凭年长，皇位都应归属于他；故力拒众人之言，一而再，再而三，推辞好多次。
English: I remembered that the emperor's brother lived far away in the land of the new moon, whether by virtue or by age, the throne should belong to him; so I rejected the words of everyone, again and again, and pushed back many times.

古文：乃曰艰难之际，天位久虚，则众志弗固，恐隳大业。
现代文：可群臣说在此艰难之际，皇位久虚，恐会毁害皇家大事。
English: However, courtiers say that in these difficult times, the long absence of the imperial throne may ruin the royal event.

古文：朕虽从请而临御，秉初志之不移，是以固让之诏始颁，奉迎之使已遣。
现代文：我虽接受群臣的请求而临御天下，仍保持初意而不改变，所以尽力推让的诏书刚一颁发，奉迎皇兄的使节就随即派出。
English: Although I accepted the request of the ministers and came to the world, I still kept my original intention and did not change. Therefore, as soon as the imperial edict was issued, I tried my best to make concessions, and the envoys to welcome the emperor's brother were immediately sent.

古文：寻命阿剌忒纳失里、燕铁木儿奉皇帝宝玺，远迓于途。
现代文：不久便命阿剌忒纳失里和燕铁木儿恭奉皇帝宝玺，远迎于途。
English: Soon after, they were ordered to pay homage to Emperor Baojun, and they were on their way.

古文：受宝即位之日，即遣使授朕皇太子宝。
现代文：皇兄接受宝玺即皇帝位的当天，就派遣使者授予我皇太子之宝。
English: On the day that my brother received the treasure, the throne, he sent an envoy to give me the crown prince's treasure.

古文：朕幸释重负，实获素心，乃率臣民北迎大驾。
现代文：我自幸脱释重担，能满足平素的心意，于是率领内外臣民，北上迎接皇帝大驾。
English: I fortunately freed myself from the burden and was able to satisfy my heart's desire, so I led the subjects at home and abroad to the north to meet the emperor.

古文：而先皇帝跋涉山川，蒙犯霜露，道里辽远，自春徂秋，怀艰阻于历年，望都邑而增慨，徒御弗慎，屡爽节宣。
现代文：而先皇帝因长途跋涉山川道路，蒙受霜露侵凌，加上路途遥远，从春到秋，历尽艰难而越年，望都邑而增添感慨，徒御不够谨慎，屡违节气所宜。
English: The first emperor, on the other hand, was affected by frost and dew on his long trek through the mountains and rivers, as well as the remoteness of the journey. From spring to autumn, he went through hardships and grew older, and he became more and more nostalgic for the capital. He was not cautious enough, and repeatedly violated the solar terms.

古文：信使往来，相望于道路，彼此思见，交切于衷怀。
现代文：两边信使往来不绝，相望于路途之上，彼此皆思会面，情真意切出自内心。
English: Messengers from both sides come and go incessantly. They look out for each other on the road, they all want to meet each other, and the true feelings come from the heart.

古文：八月一日，大驾次王忽察都，朕欣瞻对之有期，独兼程而先进，相见之顷，悲喜交集。
现代文：八月初一这天，皇帝大驾进驻王忽察都地方，我因指日即可见面而欣喜，便加快速度先行进发，相见之时，悲喜交集。
English: On the first day of August, when the emperor made his grand entry into the capital city of Wangchuck, I was delighted to be able to meet him on the first day of the month, so I sped up and went ahead of him. When we met, there was a mixture of happiness and sadness.

古文：何数日之间，而宫车弗驾，国家多难，遽至于斯！
现代文：不想几天之后，皇帝竟然撒手而去，国家多灾多难，转眼竟至于此！
English: Just a few days later, the emperor was forced to abdicate, the country was in turmoil, and now this!

古文：念之痛心，以夜继旦。
现代文：想起这事便令人痛心不已，昼夜不安。
English: The thought of it is excruciating. It haunts me day and night.

古文：诸王、大臣以为祖宗基业之隆，先帝付托之重，天命所在，诚不可违，请即正位，以安九有。
现代文： 诸王与大臣认为祖宗基业不可忽略，先皇帝的付托不可轻视，天命所在，诚不可违，奏请早日正位，以安天下。
English: The kings and ministers believed that the foundation of the ancestors should not be ignored, the trust of the former emperor should not be despised, and the destiny of heaven should not be violated. They asked the emperor to be enthroned as soon as possible for the peace of the world.

古文：朕以先皇帝奄弃方新，摧怛何忍；衔哀辞对，固请弥坚，执谊伏阙者三日，皆宗社大计，乃以八月十五日即皇帝位于上都，可大赦天下，自天历二年八月十五日昧爽以前，罪无轻重，咸赦除之。
现代文：我因先皇帝逝世不久，悲伤不忍，含哀推辞，而群臣固请即位之意更坚，执此意伏阙下达三天之久，所陈说者都是有关宗庙社稷的大计，于是于八月十五日即皇帝位于上都。可以大赦天下，从天历二年八月十五日天亮以前算起，罪过不分轻重，一律予以赦免。 啊！
English: Because the previous emperor died not long ago, I couldn't bear the grief and made a regretful excuse, but the intention of the group of ministers to invite him to ascend the throne was stronger. I kept this intention for three days. The speakers were all related to the grand plan of the imperial family, temples and shrines. Therefore, on August 15, the emperor was located in Shangdu. The whole world can be pardoned. Starting from before dawn on August 15, the second year of the heavenly calendar, all sins, regardless of severity, will be pardoned. Ah!

古文：於戏！戡定之余，莫急乎与民休息；丕变之道，莫大乎使民知义。
现代文：祸患平定之后，没有比推行让人民休养生息的政策更急迫的事了；转变世风的方法，没有比使民众懂得道义更为重要的了。
English: After the calamity has subsided, there is nothing more urgent than to carry out the policy of letting the people recover and live; there is no more important way to change the world style than to make the people understand morality.

古文：亦惟尔中外大小之臣，各究乃心，以称朕意。
现代文：这就要靠你们这些内外大小官员，各尽其心，以合我意了。 
English: It is up to you, officials at home and abroad, great and small, to do your best to meet my wishes.

古文：庚子，命阿荣、赵世安督造建康龙翔集庆寺。
现代文：八月十六日，命令阿荣、赵世安监督建造建康地方的龙翔集庆寺。
English: On August 16, he ordered A Rong and Zhao Shian to supervise the construction of Longxiang Jieqing Temple in Jiankang.

古文：辛丑，立宁徽寺，掌明宗宫分事。
现代文：十七日，设立宁徽寺，掌管明宗宫分事务。
English: On the 17th, Ninghui Temple was set up to manage the affairs of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：壬寅，以钞万锭、币帛二千匹，供明宗后八不沙费用。
现代文：十八日，拨钱钞一万锭、币帛二千匹，供给明宗皇后八不沙使用。
English: On the 18th, ten thousand baht in banknotes and two thousand baht in coins were provided to the Mingsong Empress for her use.

古文：升奎章阁学士院秩正二品，更司籍郎为群玉署，秩正六品。
现代文：将奎章阁学士院升格，品秩为正二品，改司籍郎为群玉署，品秩为正六品。
English: He upgraded Kuizhangge Academy to the rank of Senior Second Class, and changed the name of the Registrar to Gunma Prefectural Office, raising the rank to Senior Sixth Class.

古文：癸卯，幸世祖所御幄殿祓祭。
现代文：十九日，临幸世祖皇帝所御幄殿举行除灾求福的祭祀活动。
English: On the 19th, the Imperial Palace of Emperor Linxing held a ceremony to pray for good fortune.

古文：禁凡送诸王、驸马恩赐者，毋受金币，犯者以赃论；或以衣、马为赠者听。
现代文：禁止为诸侯王、驸马送恩赐钱物的人接受金、币，违犯者按贪赃罪论处；如以衣服、马匹赠送，则可接受。
English: It is forbidden to accept money and coins from those who send gifts of money and goods for princes and kings, and violators will be punished for corruption; if clothes and horses are presented, they can be accepted.

古文：遣道士苗道一、吴全节修醮事于京师，毛颖远祭遁甲神于上都南屏山、大都西山。
现代文：调遣道士苗道一、吴全节在京师修醮事活动，毛颖达在上都南屏山、大都西山祭祀遁甲神。
English: Taoist priests Miao Dao I and Wu Quan Jie were dispatched to Beijing to carry out religious activities, and Mao Yingda went to Nanping Mountain in Shangdu and to Xishan Mountain in Dadu to worship the Armor God.

古文：甲辰，命司天监及回回司天监翙星。
现代文：二十日，命令司天监与回回司天监祭星。
English: On the 20th, he ordered the chief overseer of heaven and earth to return to the chief overseer of heaven and earth.

古文：中书省臣言： 祖宗故事，即位之初，必恩赉诸王、百官。
现代文：中书省官员上言说： 根据祖宗旧例，即位之初，必定恩赏诸王与百官。
English: An official from the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy said: "According to the old practice of the ancestors, at the beginning of the reign, we must reward the kings and officials.

古文：比因兵兴，经费不足，请如武宗之制，凡金银五锭以上减三之一，五锭以下全畀之，又以七分为率，其二分准时直给钞。 
现代文：近年因兵起，所需经费不足，请按武宗的办法，凡赏赐金银五锭以上者削减三分之一，五锭以下者全给。另外以七分为标准，其中二分按当时市价给予钞票。 
English: In recent years, due to the shortage of funds required after the war, please follow the method of Wuzong, and reduce the reward of gold and silver by one-third for those who have more than five baht, and the full amount for those who have less than five baht. In addition, the standard is divided into seven, of which two are given banknotes according to the market price at that time.

古文：制可。
现代文：文宗表示同意。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：遣钦察台先还京师，经理政务；燕铁木儿、阿荣留上都，监给恩赉金币。
现代文：派遣钦察台先行返回京师，处理政务；燕铁木儿、阿荣留驻上都，监督分发恩赏的金、币。
English: He dispatched the Qin inspection team to return to Beijing first to deal with government affairs; Yan Tiemuer and A Rong stayed in Shangdu to supervise the distribution of the reward money and coins.

古文：以仁宗、英宗潜邸宿卫士二百人还大都，备直宿。
现代文：调仁宗、英宗潜邸宿卫军士二百人返回大都，以备轮值宿卫。
English: Two hundred soldiers of the Jin and Ying dynasties, who were assigned to guard the residence of the absconders, returned to the capital to prepare for the rotation of the guards.

古文：乙巳，立艺文监，秩从三品，隶奎章阁学士院；又立艺林库、广成局，皆隶艺文监。
现代文：二十一日，设立艺文监，秩为从三品，隶属于奎章阁学士院；还设立了艺林库、广成局，都隶属于艺文监。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Arts and Literature Supervisor was established, with the rank of junior third grade, affiliated with the Kuizhang Academy; the Art Forest Library and the Guangcheng Bureau were also established, both affiliated with the Arts and Literature Supervisor.

古文：赐御史中丞史惟良沛县地五十顷。
现代文：赐予御史中丞史惟良沛县田地五十顷。
English: He was given fifty hectares of farmland in Vererape County.

古文：发诸卫军浚通惠河。
现代文：征发各卫军士疏浚通惠河。
English: All guardsmen and sergeants were conscripted to dredge the Tonghui River.

古文：丙子，自庚子至是日，昼雾夜晴。
现代文：二十二日，从十六日至这一天，白天起雾夜晚转晴。
English: On the 22nd, from the 16th to this day, the daytime is foggy and the night is clear.

古文：封牙纳失里为辽王，以故辽王脱脱印赐之。
现代文：册封牙纳失里为辽王，赐给他前辽王脱脱之印。
English: He was given the seal of the former King of Liao and was given the seal of the former King of Liao.

古文：出官米五万石，赈粜京师贫民。
现代文：拿出官米五万石，赈济减价卖给京师贫民。
English: He took out 50,000 koku of government rice and sold it at a reduced price to the poor people of Beijing.

古文：丁未，以马紥儿台为上都留守。
现代文：二十三日，任命马扎儿台为上都留守。
English: On the 23rd, Mazar-i-Ta'if was appointed as the leader to stay behind in Shangdu.

古文：马紥儿台前为陕西行台侍御史，坐涂毁诏书得罪，以其兄伯颜有功，故特官之。
现代文：马扎儿台从前曾任陕西行台侍御史，坐涂毁诏书之事得罪，因其兄伯颜有功，所以特意加以封官。
English: Mazartai had previously served as the governor of Shaanxi Province, and was guilty of siding with the destruction of the imperial edict. Because his brother Boyan had made a great contribution, he had him specially banned.

古文：戊申，封诸王宽彻为肃王。
现代文：二十四日，册封诸侯王宽彻为萧王。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the vassal king Kuncho was enthroned as the king of Xiao.

古文：己酉，车驾发上都。
现代文：二十五日，文宗车驾从上都出发。
English: On the 25th, Wenzong drove from Shangdu.

古文：赐明宗北来卫士千八百三十人各钞五十锭，怯薛官十二人各钞二百锭；赐诸部曲出征者币帛人各二匹，遣还。
现代文：赐予跟随明宗北来的卫士一千八百三十人钱钞各五十锭，怯薛官十二人钱钞各二百锭。赐予各部曲随同出征者币、帛每人各二匹遣还。
English: Each of the eighteen hundred and thirty guardsmen who came north with Mingzong was given fifty baht in banknotes, and each of the twelve officials of Xue was given two hundred baht in banknotes.

古文：冀宁之忻州兵后荐饥，赈钞千锭。
现代文：冀宁路所辖的忻州兵乱后出现饥荒，赈济钱钞一千锭。
English: There was a famine after the Bozhou Rebellion, which was under the jurisdiction of Jining Road, and there was a shortage of banknotes of one thousand baht.

古文：庚戌，改詹事院为储政院，伯颜兼储政使，中政使哈撒儿不花、太子詹事丞霄云世月思、前储庆使姚炜并储政使。
现代文：二十六日，将詹事院改为储政院，命伯颜兼任储政使，中政使哈撒儿不花、太子詹事丞霄云世月思、前任储庆使姚炜并为储庆使。
English: On the 26th, the Zhan Council was changed to the Council for the Preservation of Political Rights, and the life of Bo Yan was also appointed as the Council for the Preservation of Political Rights, the Central Council for the Preservation of Political Rights, the Prince of Zhan Council for the Preservation of Political Rights, the Prince of Zhan Council for the Preservation of Political Rights, the Prince of Zhan Council for the Preservation of Political Rights, the Prince of Zhan Council for the Preservation of Political Rights, the Prince of Zhan Council for the Preservation of Political Rights, the Prince of Zhan Council for the Preservation of Political Rights, the Prince of Zhan Council for the Preservation of

古文：河东宣慰使哈散托朝贺为名，敛所属钞千锭入己，事觉，虽会赦，仍征钞还其主。
现代文：河东宣慰使哈散假托朝贺为由，收敛所属钱钞一千锭据为己有，事情败露，虽遇上大赦，仍征缴钱钞归还原主。
English: On the grounds that Hedong Xuancheng deceived Hasan into giving him the morning greeting, he took possession of a thousand banknotes belonging to Hasan. The matter was uncovered, and although there was an amnesty, the banknotes were still collected and returned to the original owner.

古文：敕自今有以朝贺敛钞者，依枉法论罪。
现代文：敕令今后凡属以朝贺为名收敛钱钞者，按贪赃枉法罪论处。
English: In the future, anyone who collects money and banknotes in the name of Asaga will be punished according to the crime of embezzlement.

古文：癸丑，征吴王泼皮及其诸父木楠子赴京师。
现代文：二十九日，征召吴王泼皮及其叔父木楠子前来京师。
English: On the 29th, Wu Wang Pengpi and his uncle Mu Nanzi were summoned to come to Beijing.

古文：甲寅，置隆祥总管府，秩正三品，总建大承天护圣寺工役。
现代文：三十日，设置隆祥总管府，品秩为正三品，总管建造大承天护圣寺的工役。
English: On the 30th, the Longxiang General Administration Office was set up, with a rank of Senior Third Rank, and the General Administration of the construction of the Dazhong Tianwu Holy Temple.

古文：监察御史劾： 前丞相别不花昔以赃罢，天历初因人成功，遂居相位。
现代文：监察御史弹劾说 ：前任丞相别不花从前因赃罪罢免，天历初年因人成功，遂居于相位。
English: The Supervisor of the Historical Impeachment said, "The former prime minister was removed from office for the crime of sedition, but he was successful in the first year of the calendar, so he stayed in office.

古文：既矫制以买驴家赀赐平章速速，又与速速等潜呼日者推测圣算。
现代文：既假托制命将买驴家资赐予平章速速，又和速速等人暗地招呼日者推测圣算。
English: Not only did the fake trustee give the donkey's family money to Pingzhang Xuecheng, but also secretly invited Xuecheng and others to speculate on the sacred calculation.

古文：今奉诏已释其罪，宜窜诸海岛，以杜奸萌。 
现代文：现在根据诏令已赦免其罪，应将其流放到海岛上去，以杜绝奸萌。 
English: Now that he has been pardoned according to the imperial edict, he should be exiled to an island to prevent him from committing adultery.

古文：帝曰： 流窜海岛，朕所不忍，其并妻子置之集庆。 
现代文：文宗说： 流放海岛，我不忍心，可将他及其妻子儿女一同安置集庆路。 
English: Wenzong said, "I can't bear to exile him to the island, but I can resettle him, his wife and children together at Jiaqing Road."

古文：河南府路旱、疫，又被兵，赈以本府屯田租及安丰务递运粮三月。
现代文：河南府路发生旱灾、瘟疫，又遭兵祸，将本府屯田租米与安丰务递运粮食予以赈济三个月。
English: Henan prefectural road was hit by drought, plague, and military disaster, and the prefecture's tonden rent rice and Anfeng delivery grain were donated for three months.

古文：莒、密、沂诸州，饥民采草木实，盗贼日滋，赈以米二万一千石，并赈晋宁路饥民钞万锭。
现代文：莒州、密州、沂州等处饥民靠采摘草木果实为生，盗贼活动日益滋盛，赈济粮米二万一千石，并赈济晋宁路饥民钱钞一万锭。
English: The starving people in Luzhou, Mizhou, Luzhou and other places live by picking herbs and fruits, and the activities of thieves are increasingly flourishing. Twenty-one thousand kilos of grain and rice have been donated, and ten thousand banknotes have been donated to the starving people in Jining Road.

古文：大名、真定、河间诸属县及湖、池、饶诸路旱，保定之行唐县蝗。
现代文：大名、真定、河间诸路属县及湖州、池州、饶州诸路干旱。保定路所辖的行唐县发生蝗灾。
English: Daimyo, Jindo, and Kawama roads belong to Mogao County, and Huzhou, Chizhou, and Raozhou roads are arid. Locusts occurred in Gyotang County, which is under the jurisdiction of Baoding Road.

古文：加封大都城隍神为护国保宁王，夫人为护国保宁王妃。
现代文：加封大都城隍神为护国保宁王，夫人为护国保宁王妃。
English: He and his wife were crowned King Boryeong and Queen Boryeong respectively.

古文：九月乙卯朔，作佛事于大明殿、兴圣、隆福诸宫。
现代文：九月初一，在大明殿、兴圣宫、隆福宫等处做佛事活动。
English: On the first day of September, Buddhist activities will be held at the Daimyo-den, the Heungseonggung, the Longfookgung and other places.

古文：市故宋太后全氏田为大承天护圣寺永业。
现代文：买已故宋太后全氏田产为大承天护圣寺永业。
English: The late Song Dynasty Empress Dowager Cixi bought the whole family's farmland for the Great Successor of Heaven's Guardianship of the Sacred Temple Yongye.

古文：戊午，赐武宁王彻彻秃金百两、银五百两，西域诸王燕只吉台金二千五百两、银万五千两，钞币有差。
现代文：初四，赐予武宁王彻彻秃黄金百两、白银五百两，西域诸侯王燕只吉台黄金二千五百两、白银一万五千两，钞、币等数目不一。
English: On the fourth day of the first lunar month, the king of the Western Regions, Wang Yan, was given 2,500 taels of gold and 15,000 taels of silver, as well as a number of banknotes and coins.

古文：己未，立龙翔、万寿营缮提点所、海南营缮提点所，并秩正四品，隶隆祥总管府。
现代文：初五，设立龙翔、万寿营缮提点所、海南营缮提点所，官秩皆为正四品，隶属于隆祥总管府。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Longxiang, Wanshou Camp, and Hainan Camp were established. All of them were awarded the official rank of Senior Fourth Class and were affiliated with the Longxiang General Administration Office.

古文：庚申，加封故领诸路道教事张留孙为上卿、大宗师、辅成赞化保运神德真君。
现代文：初六，加封故领诸路道教事张留孙为上卿、大宗师、辅成赞化保运神德真君。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the new year, Zhang Ruzun, the late leader of Jiafeng, became the high priest, the great teacher, and the auspicious guardian god Dezhenjun.

古文：辛酉，凡往明宗所送宝官吏，越次超升者皆从黜降。
现代文：初七，凡往明宗行在所送宝的官员，越秩超升者全都加以黜降。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, all the officials who went to the Ming Dynasty and sent treasure, and those who were promoted to higher ranks, were all demoted.

古文：赈甘肃行省沙州、察八等驿钞各千五百锭。
现代文：赈济甘肃行省沙州、察八等处驿站钱钞各为一千五百锭。
English: The banknotes of each of the stations in Gansu Province, Shazhou Province and Zhaba Province are 1500 baht.

古文：癸亥，敕宣徽院所储金、银、钞、币，百司毋得奏请。
现代文：初九，敕令宣徽院所储存的金、银、钞、币，各官府不得奏请提用。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the government ordered that all gold, silver, banknotes and coins stored by the Xuanhui Academy must not be used.

古文：甲子，赐云南乌撒土官禄余、曲靖土官举精衣各一袭。
现代文：初十，赐给云南乌撒土官禄余、曲靖土官举精衣服各一件。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, one piece of fine clothing was given to each of the Yunnan Usa local officials Luoyu and Qujing local officials.

古文：丁卯，大驾至大都。
现代文：十三日，文宗车驾到达大都。
English: On the 13th, Wenzong arrived in Dadu by car.

古文：戊辰，敕翰林国史院官同奎章阁学士采辑本朝典故，准《唐》、《宋会要》，著为《经世大典》。
现代文：十四日，敕令翰林国史院官员会同奎章阁学士一道采辑本朝典故，按照《唐会要》、《宋会要》的体例，编著《经世大典》。
English: On the 14th, the officials of the National Academy of History of the Hanlin Academy of History of the Hanlin Academy of History of the Hanlin Academy of History of the Hanlin Academy of History of the Hanlin Academy of History of the Hanlin Academy of History of the Hanlin Academy of History of the Hanlin Academy of History of the Hanlin Academy of History of the Hanlin Academy of History of the Hanlin Academy of History of the Hanlin Academy of History of the Hanlin Academy of History of the Hanlin Academy of History

古文：召威顺王宽彻不花赴阙。
现代文：征召威顺王宽彻不花入朝。
English: The conscription of King Weishun to the imperial court did not work.

古文：敕： 使者颁诏赦，率日行三百余里。
现代文：下敕令说 ：使者颁布诏书赦令，以日行三百多里为标准。
English: The imperial edict said: The emissary promulgated the imperial edict of pardon, with a daily distance of more than three hundred miles as the standard.

古文：既受命，逗留三日及所至饮宴稽期者治罪，取赂者以枉法论。 
现代文：既已受命，逗留三天以及所到之处饮宴误期者予以治罪。收取贿赂者按贪赃枉法罪论处。 
English: Those who have already been ordered to stay for three days and delay the banquet wherever they go will be punished. Those who receive bribes will be punished according to the crime of embezzlement.

古文：辛未，以控鹤士二十人赐宣靖王买奴。
现代文：十七日，将控鹤军士二十人赐给宣靖王买奴。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, he gave the king of Xuanjing twenty soldiers to buy slaves.

古文：监察御史劾奏： 知枢密院事塔失帖木儿阿附倒剌沙，又与王禅举兵犯阙。
现代文：监察御史劾奏说 ：知枢密院事塔失帖木儿阿谀附合倒剌沙，又和王禅一道兴兵冒犯朝廷。
English: The inspector of the imperial history impeachment report said: Zhihuangzhuyuan lost the tower of the Privy Council, and the mulberry tree was attached to the sand, and together with Wang Zhen, he raised an army to offend the imperial court.

古文：今既待以不死，而又付之兵柄，事非便。 
现代文：现在既优待以不杀，又将兵权授予他，这样办很不妥当。 
English: It is not right to give him preferential treatment for not killing, and to give him military powers.

古文：诏罢之。
现代文：于是下诏罢免其职。
English: He was dismissed from his post by imperial edict.

古文：壬申，怯薛官武备卿定住特授开府仪同三司。
现代文：十八日，怯薛官武备卿定住特别授予开府仪同三司的官阶。
English: On the 18th, the official Wu Beiqing Qiu Xue settled in and was specially awarded the official rank of Kaifu Yi and the three departments.

古文：癸酉，帝御大明殿，受诸王、百官朝贺。
现代文：十九日，文宗临御大明殿，接受诸王与百官朝贺。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Wenzong came to the Imperial Palace to receive the morning greetings from kings and officials.

古文：铁木迭儿诸子锁住等，明宗尝敕流于南方，燕铁木儿言，锁住天历初有劳于国，请各遣还田里，从之。
现代文：铁木迭儿诸子锁住等，明宗曾敕令流放于南方。燕铁木儿上言说 ：锁住在天历初年曾经为国建立过功劳，请把他们遣还田里。 
English: The sons of Tiemu Tsering were locked up, and others were exiled to the south by order of Emperor Mingzong. Yan Tiemu Tsering said, "Those who were locked up in the first year of the calendar once did great service to the country, please send them back to the fields."

古文：甲戌，命江浙行省明年漕运粮二百八十万石赴京师。
现代文：接受这项提议。二十日，命令江浙行省第二年漕运粮食二百八十万石发赴京师。
English: On the 20th, he ordered Jiangsu and Zhejiang to send 2.8 million koku of grain to Beijing for the second year.

古文：广西思明州土官黄宗永遣其子来贡虎、豹、方物。
现代文：广西思明州土官黄宗永派其子前来进贡虎、豹及当地物产。
English: Huang Zongyong, the local official of Guangxi Siming Prefecture, sent his son to bring in tribute tigers, leopards and local products.

古文：乙亥，史惟良上疏言： 今天下郡邑被灾者众，国家经费若此之繁，帑藏空虚，生民凋瘵，此政更新百废之时。
现代文：二十一日，史惟良上疏说： 当今天下路府州县受灾者众多，国家经费所需却是如此繁重，库藏空虚，民生凋敝，这正是百废更新的时候。
English: On the 21st, Shi Weiliang said at the meeting: When there are so many disaster victims in prefectures and counties today, but the national funds required are so heavy, the storehouses are empty, and the people's livelihoods are withering, this is exactly the time to update the waste.

古文：宜遵世祖成宪，汰冗滥蚕食之人，罢土木不急之役，事有不便者，咸厘正之。
现代文：应遵守世祖皇帝既定的制度。淘汰冗散不尽职的人员，停建并非急务的土木工程，办事有不便民的，全都加以改正。
English: It is necessary to abide by the system established by the ancestor emperor. Eliminate redundant and incompetent personnel, stop the construction of civil engineering projects that are not urgent, and correct any inconvenience to the people.

古文：如此则天灾可弭，祯祥可致。
现代文：这样的话，就能使天灾停止，吉祥到来。
English: In this way, you can stop natural disasters and bring good luck.

古文：不然，将恐因循苟且，其弊渐深，治乱之由，自此而分矣。 
现代文：不这样做，恐怕会因循苟且，使其弊日渐加深，天下治乱的由来，将会自此而分别了。 
English: If we do not do so, I am afraid that we will gradually deepen its drawbacks due to meticulousness, and the origin of chaos in the world will be separated from this.

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：文宗高兴地接受这项意见。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：丙子，改太禧院为太禧宗禋院。
现代文：二十二日，将太禧院改为太禧宗院。
English: On the 22nd, the Taishii-in was changed to the Taishii-so-in.

古文：立温州路竹木场。
现代文：设立温州竹木场。
English: The Wenzhou Bamboo and Wood Farm was established.

古文：以卫辉路旱，罢苏门岁输米二千石。
现代文：因卫辉路干旱，免除苏门今年输米二千石。
English: Due to the drought in Weihui Road, Sumen was exempted from exporting 2,000 kilos of rice this year.

古文：铁木儿补化加录军国重事。
现代文：铁木儿补化加录军国重事之衔。
English: Tiemu'er complements and adds the title of military affairs.

古文：以翰林学士承旨也儿吉尼、元帅梁国公都列捏并知行枢密院事。
现代文：任命翰林学士也儿吉尼、元帅梁国公都列捏并为知枢密院事。
English: Hanlin Scholar Yaerjini and Marshal Liang Guogong were appointed as Privy Councillors.

古文：立卫候司，秩正四品，隶储政院。
现代文：设立卫候司，品秩为正四品，隶属于储政院。
English: The Ministry of Health and Welfare was established, with a rank of Senior Fourth Rank, and was subordinate to the Privy Council.

古文：赈陕西临潼等二十三驿各钞五百锭。
现代文：赈济陕西临潼等处二十三所驿站钱钞各五百锭。
English: Twenty-three post stations in Linyi, Shaanxi and other places have issued 500-baht banknotes.

古文：论也先捏以不忠不敬，伏诛。
现代文：审论也先捏不忠不敬之罪，予以处决。
English: The trial also first pinched the crime of disloyalty and disrespect and executed them.

古文：岚、管、临三州所居诸王八剌马、忽都火者等部曲，乘乱为寇，遣省、台、宗正府官往督有司捕治之。
现代文：岚州、管州、临州三处所居诸王八剌马，忽都火者等人所辖部曲乘乱为寇，派遣省、台及宗正府官员前往督率有关部门进行捕治。
English: The provincial, prefectural and township officials were dispatched to supervise the relevant departments to investigate and deal with the cases of banditry committed by the members of the Eight Immortal Kings, Eight Immortal Kings and Eight Immortal Kings residing in the three places of Luzhou, Guanzhou and Linzhou.

古文：壬午，伯颜以病在告，居赤城，遣使召赴阙。
现代文：二十八日，伯颜先前因病告假，居于赤城，这一天派遣使者招他入朝。
English: On the 28th, Boyan had previously taken a leave of absence due to illness and was living in Akagi. On this day, an envoy was sent to invite him to the imperial court.

古文：封知枢密院事燕不邻为兴国公，以大司农卿燕赤为司徒。
现代文：封知枢密院事燕不邻为兴国公。任命大司农卿燕赤为司徒。
English: The Privy Council of Fochi appointed Yan Bu as the Prince of Xing Province, and the Chief Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, Yan Chia, as the magistrate.

古文：癸未，建颜子庙于曲阜所居陋巷。
现代文：二十九日，兴建颜子庙于曲阜城内所居陋巷。
English: On the 29th, Yan Zi Temple was built in a back alley in Qufu City.

古文：上都西按塔罕、阔干忽剌秃之地，以兵、旱，民告饥，赈粮一月。
现代文：上都西边按塔罕、阔干忽剌秃地区，因兵祸与干旱，民众报告饥情，赈济粮食一个月。
English: Due to the military disaster and drought, the people in the western part of Shangdu, in the areas of Takhan, Kuanggan and Gaozhou, reported that they were starving and had to ration food for a month.

古文：冬十月甲申朔，帝服衮冕，享于太庙。
现代文：冬十月初一，文帝穿戴礼服礼帽，享祭于太庙。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Emperor Wen wore a ceremonial dress and a ceremonial hat to attend a festival at the Great Temple.

古文：丙戌，命钦察台兼领度支监，遣镇南王孛罗不花还镇杨州。
现代文：初三，命令钦察台兼管度支监。遣发镇南王孛罗不花还镇扬州。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, he ordered the Qin Inspection Office and the Administration Support Supervisor.

古文：禁奉元、永平酿酒。
现代文：禁止奉元路、永平路酿酒。
English: It is prohibited to brew alcohol on Fengyuan Road and Yongping Road.

古文：戊子，知枢密院事昭武王火沙知行枢密院事。
现代文：初五，命令知枢密院事昭武王火沙知行枢密院事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the order to know the Privy Council affairs came from King Zhaowu.

古文：己丑，立大承天护圣寺营缮提点所，秩正五品；又立大都等处、平江等处田赋提举司二，秩从五品；皆隶隆祥总管府。
现代文：初六，设立大承天护圣寺营缮提点所，品秩为正五品；还设立大都等处、平江等处田赋提举司二所，品秩为从五品；全都隶属于隆祥总管府。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the Dazhong Tianwu Holy Temple Camp Renovation and Promotion Office was established, with a rank of the highest five; two other offices, such as the Dadu Office and the Pingjiang Office, were also established, with a rank of the lowest five; all of them were subordinate to the Longxiang General Administration Office.

古文：辛卯，燕铁木儿率群臣请上尊号，不许。
现代文：初八，燕铁木儿率领群臣请求加上尊号，不予批准。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Yan Tiemu Er led a group of ministers to request the addition of the honorific, but it was not approved.

古文：云南行省立元江等处宣慰司。
现代文：云南行省设立元江等处宣慰司。
English: Yunnan Province has set up the Yunnan-Yuanjiang Reconciliation Division.

古文：申饬海道转漕之禁。
现代文：申饬海道转漕的禁令。
English: The ban on turning boats on the Shenyang sea route has been lifted.

古文：籍四川囊加台家产，其党杨静等皆夺爵，杖一百七，籍其家，流辽东。
现代文：籍没四川囊加台的家产；其党徒杨静等人全都剥夺爵位，杖责一百零七板，籍没其家资，流放到辽东地区。
English: He was deprived of his family property in Sichuan and Taiwan; his party members, Yang Jing and others, were all deprived of their titles of nobility, and were exiled to Liaodong region.

古文：封太禧宗禋使秃坚帖木儿为梁国公。
现代文：封太禧宗使秃坚帖木儿为梁国公。
English: Emperor Taizong made Bald Jian Timur the Prince of Liang.

古文：甲午，以登极恭谢，遣官代祀于南郊、社稷。
现代文：十一日，因即位恭谢神明，派遣官员代为祭祀于南郊及社稷坛。
English: On the 11th day of the month, officials were dispatched to offer sacrifices to the deity in the southern suburbs and at the shrine altar in thanks for his enthronement.

古文：中书省臣言： 旧制，朝官以三十月为一考，外任则三年为满。
现代文：中书省臣上言说 ：按旧制规定，在朝官员以三十月为一考，外任官员则以三年为满。
English: The Minister-Counselor of the Ministry of Culture and Literature said, "According to the provisions of the old system, officials in the DPRK were required to retire in three months, while officials outside the DPRK were required to retire in three years.

古文：比年朝官率不久于其职，或数月即改迁，于典制不类，且治迹无从考验。
现代文：近年来朝官多不久任其职，有的人只几个月便改迁其职，不合于典章制度，而且其政绩无从检查。
English: In recent years, most of the imperial officials have been in office for a short period of time, and some people have only been in office for a few months, which is not in line with the award system, and their political achievements cannot be checked.

古文：请如旧制为宜。 
现代文：请遵旧制办理为宜。 
English: Please follow the old system.

古文：敕： 除风宪官外，其余朝官，不许二十月内迁调。 
现代文：传下敕令说 ：除掌风宪官员以外，其余朝官，不许在二十月以内迁调。 
English: A royal edict was issued stating that, with the exception of the officials in charge of the constitution, the remaining imperial officials were not allowed to be transferred within twenty months.

古文：监察御史劾奏： 吏部尚书八剌哈赤，先除陕西行台侍御史，避难不行。 
现代文：监察御史劾奏说 ：吏部尚书八剌哈赤，先前曾被任为陕西行台侍御史，躲避艰难而不赴任。 
English: According to the impeachment report of the inspector of imperial history: the head of the personnel department, Shangshu Yajia, was previously appointed as the attendant of imperial history in Shaanxi and Taiwan, but avoided the difficulties and did not take up the post.

古文：罢之。
现代文：予以罢免。
English: and dismissed him.

古文：丙申，中书省臣言： 臣等谨集枢密院、御史台、翰林、集贤院、奎章阁、太常礼仪院、礼部诸臣僚，议上大行皇帝尊谥曰翼献景孝皇帝，庙号明宗，国言谥号曰护都笃皇帝。 
现代文：十三日，中书省臣上言说： 我等恭谨地会集枢密院、御史台、翰林国史院、集贤院、奎章阁、太常礼仪院、礼部各位官员，商议加上大行皇帝尊谥为翼献景孝皇帝，庙号为明宗，蒙古国语谥号为护都笃皇帝。 
English: On the 13th, the minister of the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy said: "We will respectfully gather the officials of the Privy Council, the Imperial Historian's Office, the Hanlin National History Institute, the Jixian Institute, the Kuizhang Pavilion, the Taizhong Rites and Ceremonies Institute, and the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and discuss with the Emperor Da Xing of Emperor Da Xing, the Emperor Xing of Emperor Jing Xiao, the temple name of Mingzong, and the Mongolian language name of Emperor Xudutu.

古文：是日，奉玉册、玉宝于太庙，如常仪。
现代文：这天，按通常礼仪，恭奉玉册、玉宝于太庙。
English: On this day, according to the usual etiquette, the Jade Scroll and the Jade Treasures were venerated in the Great Temple.

古文：命江西、湖广分漕米四十万石，以纾江浙民力；给钞十五万锭，赈陕西饥民。
现代文：命令江西、湖广二行省分担漕米四十万石，以减轻江浙民众负担。给予钱钞十五万锭，赈济陕西饥民。
English: He ordered the two provinces of Jiangxi and Hukang to share 400,000 koku of rice to reduce the burden on the people of Jiangsu and Zhejiang, and to give 150,000 baht in banknotes to help the hungry in Shaanxi.

古文：己亥，加封天妃为护国庇民广济福惠明著天妃，赐庙额曰灵慈，遣使致祭。
现代文：十六日，加封天妃为护国庇民广流福惠明著天妃，赐予庙宇匾额为灵慈，派遣使者进行祭祀。
English: On the 16th, Tianfei was awarded the title of "Protector of the Nation and Beneficiary of the People" and given the title of "Goddess of Mercy," and an envoy was sent to perform the ritual.

古文：申饬都水监河防之禁。
现代文：申饬都水监河堤禁令。
English: A ban on river embankments has been declared by the city's water authority.

古文：辛丑，遣使括勘内外郡邑官久次事故应代者，岁终上名于中书省。
现代文：十八日，派遣使者巡查内外路府州县官员久任或因故缺任应代者，年终时报上名姓于中书省。
English: On the 18th, an envoy was dispatched to inspect the officials of prefectures and counties at home and abroad who have been in office for a long time or are absent for some reason. The names of the deputies are listed in the year-end time in Zhongshuo.

古文：以怯怜口诸色民匠总管府及所属诸司隶徽政院者，悉隶储政院。
现代文：将怯怜口诸色民匠总管府及所属各部门原隶属于徽政院者，全都改隶于储政院。
English: The General Administration of All-China Handicrafts and the departments under it, which were originally subordinate to the State Council, have all been transferred to the State Administration of Reserves.

古文：发中政院财赋总管府粮储在江南者赴京师，以助经费，验时直以钞还之。
现代文：调发中政院财赋总管府储存在江南地区的粮食进京，以助经费之用，按市价以钞票还付其值。
English: The grain stored in the south of the Yangtze River by the General Administration of Finance of the Central People's Government was transferred to Beijing to help finance the project, and its value was paid back in banknotes at the market price.

古文：诸王、公主、官府、寺观拨赐田租，除鲁国大长公主听遣人征收外，其余悉输于官，给钞酬其直。壬寅，弛陕西山泽之禁以与民。
现代文：十九日，放松陕西山泽的禁令以便民。
English: On the 19th, the ban on Shanxi's mountains and lakes was relaxed for the sake of the people.

古文：大宁路地震。
现代文：大宁路发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred at DaNing Road.

古文：癸卯，命道士苗道一建醮于长春宫。
现代文：二十日，命道士苗道一在长春宫修醮事。
English: On the 20th, the death of Taoist priest Miao Dao I occurred in Changchun Palace.

古文：改琼州军民安抚司为乾宁军民安抚司，升定安县为南建州，隶海北元帅府，以南建洞主王官知州事，佩金符，领军民。
现代文：将琼州军民安抚司改名为乾宁军民安抚司。将安定县升格为南建州，隶属于海北元帅府，任命南建洞主王官知州事，佩挂金符，管领军民。
English: He renamed Qiongzhou Military and Civilian Reassurance Division to Qianning Military and Civilian Reassurance Division, upgraded Anding County to Nanjian County, which was subordinate to the Beihai Marshal's Office, and appointed the head of Nanjian Cave to be in charge of state affairs, wear a gold badge, and lead the military and civilians.

古文：监察御史劾奏： 张思明在仁宗朝，阿附权臣铁木迭儿，间谍两宫，仁宗灼见其奸，既行黜降。
现代文：监察御史劾奏说 ：张思明在仁宗朝时，阿谀附合权臣铁木迭儿，探查两宫动静，仁宗皇帝洞见其奸恶，已经将他罢黜。
English: The inspector of the imperial history impeachment report said: Zhang Siming, when he was in the reign of Emperor Nanzong, was accompanied by the grand aunt and the rightful vassal Tiemu Di'er to investigate the movements of the two palaces. Emperor Nanzong saw through his treachery and had him deposed.

古文：及英宗朝铁木迭儿再相，复援为左丞，稔恶不悛，竟以罪废。
现代文：到英宗朝时铁木迭儿再次任相，又授引他为中书左丞，一贯为恶而不知悔改，结果因罪废免。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yingzong, Tiemu Di'er became a minister again, and he was also awarded the title of Zhongshu Zuojo. He was always evil and did not know how to repent. As a result, he was dismissed for his crime.

古文：今又冒居是官，宜从黜罢。 
现代文：现在他又来冒居这个官职，应予以罢黜。 
English: Now he's doing it again, and he should be removed from office.

古文：诏罢之。
现代文：下诏罢免其官。
English: He was dismissed from his post by imperial edict.

古文：敕刑部尚书察民之无赖者惩治之。
现代文：敕令刑部尚书查实民户中的刁滑者予以惩治。
English: He ordered the Criminal Law Department to investigate and punish those who commit adultery in private households.

古文：甲辰，畏兀僧百八人作佛事于兴圣殿。
现代文：二十一日，畏兀儿僧众一百零八人在兴圣殿修作佛事。
English: On the twenty-first day, a total of one hundred and eight fearless monks performed Buddhist rituals at the Xing Temple.

古文：戊申，以江淮财赋都总管府隶储政院，供皇后汤沐之用。
现代文：二十五日，将江淮财赋都总管府隶属于储政院，以供皇后个人私用。
English: On the 25th, the Jianghuai Financial Capital General Administration Office was subordinated to the Savings and Loan Institution for the personal private use of the empress.

古文：作佛事于广寒殿。
现代文：在广寒殿做佛事活动。
English: Doing Buddhist activities in the Guangan Hall.

古文：征朵朵、王士熙等十二人于贬所，放还乡里。
现代文：征召朵朵、王士熙等十二人于管谪处所，放他们返回故里。
English: Twelve people, including Dodo and Wang Shixi, were called up at the Guanzhang office and allowed to return to their hometowns.

古文：庚戌，以亲祀太庙礼成，诏天下。
现代文：二十六日，因亲祀太庙礼完成，下诏天下。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, because of the completion of the temple ceremony, the imperial edict was issued.

古文：罢大承天护圣寺工役。
现代文：停建大承天护圣寺工役。
English: The construction of the Dazhong Tianwu Holy Temple has been suspended.

古文：囚在狱三年疑不能决者，释之。
现代文：在押囚犯因缺乏证据不能定罪者，释放回家。
English: Detained prisoners who cannot be convicted for lack of evidence are released to go home.

古文：民间拖欠官钱无可追征者，尽行蠲免。
现代文：民间拖欠官府钱物无法追缴者，全都予以蠲免。
English: All civil defaulters who are unable to recover money and goods owed to the government will be pardoned.

古文：命通政院官分职往所在官司，佥补逃亡驿户。
现代文：命令通政院官员前往所在官府签补已逃亡的驿户。
English: He ordered officials of the State Council to go to their respective government offices to sign for the escaped tenants.

古文：大都至上都并塔思哈剌、旭麦怯诸驿，自备首思，供给繁重，天历三年官为应付。
现代文：大都至上都沿途以及塔思哈剌、旭麦怯诸驿站，自备诸物，供给繁重，天历三年，由官府代为应付其职。
English: Most of the cities along the route, as well as the railway stations of Tashi Harbin and Xumaiqiu, have their own supplies, and the supply is heavy. It takes three years for the government to perform its duties.

古文：免征奉元路民间商税一年，命所在官司设置常平仓。
现代文：免征奉元路民间商税一年，命令所在官府设置常平仓储粮。
English: Fengyuan Road was exempted from private business tax for one year, and the government ordered the relevant government office to set up a grain storage warehouse.

古文：云南八番为囊加台所诖误，反侧未安者，并贳其罪。
现代文：云南八番因囊加台受牵连，反侧不安者，全都宽免其罪。
English: Yunnan No. 8 was implicated because of the bag plus Taiwan, but those who were uneasy were all pardoned.

古文：免各处煎盐灶户杂泛夫役二年。
现代文：免除各处煎盐灶户各类夫役二年。
English: Exempt all kinds of salt-cooking households from labor service for two years.

古文：遣使代祀岳渎山川。
现代文：派遣使者代为祭祀岳渎山川之神。
English: He sent an emissary to offer sacrifices to the god of mountains and rivers.

古文：免永平屯田总管府田租，申禁天下私杀马牛。
现代文：免除永平屯田总管府应缴田租。申令禁止天下私自宰杀马牛。
English: The Yongping General Administration of Tunden was exempted from paying land rent. A decree was issued prohibiting the world from slaughtering horses and cattle.

古文：明宗乳媪夫斡耳朵，在武宗时为大司徒，仁宗朝拘其印。
现代文：明宗乳母的丈夫斡耳朵，在武宗时曾为大司徒，仁宗时朝廷纠缴其印。
English: The husband of the nursemaid of the Ming dynasty had been a great disciple of Emperor Wu, and when Emperor Renzong was in power, the imperial court demanded his seal.

古文：燕铁木儿以为言，诏给还之。
现代文：燕铁木儿说明此事，下诏给还其印。
English: Yan Tie Mu Er explained the matter, and the following edict was issued to return the seal.

古文：云南威楚路黄州土官哀放遣其子来朝贡。
现代文：云南威楚路黄州土官哀放派其子来朝进贡。
English: Yunnan Weizhu Road, Huangzhou local officials sent their sons to pay tribute to the North.

古文：湖广常德、武昌、澧州诸路旱饥，出官粟赈粜之。
现代文：湖广行省常德、武昌、澧州等路因旱灾发生饥荒，拿出官府的粮食赈济平卖。
English: Due to droughts, famines occurred in Changde, Wuchang, Luzhou and other provinces in Hubei Province, and the government's grain was taken out and sold.

古文：陕西凤翔府饥民四万七千户，皆赈以钞。
现代文：陕西凤翔府饥民凡四万七千户，全都用钱钞予以赈济。
English: All 47,000 households of the hungry people in Fengxiangfu, Shaanxi Province, used banknotes to help them.

古文：十一月乙卯，以立皇后，诏天下。
现代文：十一月初三，因册立皇后之事，下诏天下。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, due to the fact that the empress was established, the imperial edict was issued.

古文：受佛戒于帝师，作佛事六十日。
现代文：在帝师处接受佛戒，做佛事活动六十天。
English: Accept the Buddhist precepts from the emperor and do Buddhist activities for sixty days.

古文：丙辰，以句容郡王答邻答里知行枢密院事。
现代文：初四，任命句容郡王答邻答里知行枢密院事。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the year, he was appointed as the Privy Councillor of Gu Rong County.

古文：诏列圣诸宫后妃陪从之臣，永给衣廪刍粟。
现代文：下诏列圣诸宫后妃及陪从的臣子，永远供应其衣料粮草。
English: The following edict sanctifies the queens of the palaces and the accompanying courtiers, and forever supplies them with clothing, grain and grass.

古文：后八不沙请为明宗资冥福，命帝师率群僧作佛事七日于大天源延圣寺，道士建醮于玉虚、天宝、太乙、万寿四宫及武当、龙虎二山。
现代文：明宗皇后八不沙请求为明宗资助冥福，命帝师率领群僧在大天源延圣寺做佛事七天，道士修醮事于玉虚、天宝、太乙、万寿四宫以及武当、龙虎二山。
English: The Empress of the Ming Sect, Hapusha, requested that the Ming Sect fund the Buddhist pilgrimage, and ordered the emperor to lead a group of monks to perform Buddhist rituals for seven days at the Great Heaven Source Enshu Temple, and the Taoists to perform Buddhist rituals at the Jade Palace, Heavenly Treasure, Taiyi Palace, Manshou Palace, and Wudang Palace, as well as the Two Mountains of Dragon and Tiger.

古文：戊午，遣使代祀天妃。
现代文：初六，派遣使者代为祭祀海神天妃。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month, an emissary was sent to offer a sacrifice to the sea god Tenbi.

古文：赐燕铁木儿宅一区。
现代文：赐予燕铁木儿宅第一所。
English: It was the first house to be given the title of "Yan Tie Mu Rong Zhai."

古文：皇后以银五万两，助建大承天护圣寺。
现代文：皇后拿出白银五万两，帮助建造大承天护圣寺。
English: The empress took out 50,000 taels of silver to help build the Dazhong Tianwu Holy Temple.

古文：冠州旱。
现代文：冠州发生旱灾。
English: Drought in Guanzhou.

古文：命朵耳只亦都护为河南行省丞相。
现代文：任命朵耳只亦都护为河南行省丞相。
English: Appointed Doer Yidaduo as Henan Provincial Party Secretary.

古文：近制行省不设丞相，中书省以为言，帝有旨： 朵耳只先朝旧臣，不当以例拘。 
现代文：依照近制行省不能设立丞相，中书省以此上言，文宗下圣旨说： 朵耳只是先朝老臣，不应拘泥于常例。 
English: In accordance with the recent system, the province could not set up a chancellor, and the central book ministry made this as the first sentence, and the text of the second edict said: Doer is only an old minister of the previous dynasty, and should not stick to the usual practice.

古文：武宗宿卫士岁赐，如仁宗卫士例。
现代文：武宗宿卫军士的年俸，按仁宗卫士旧例办理。
English: The annual salary of the military sergeant of the Buzong residential guard will be handled according to the old example of the guards of the Renzong.

古文：西夏僧总统封国公冲卜卒，其弟监藏班臧卜袭职，仍以玺书、印章与之。
现代文：西夏僧人总管封国公冲卜去世，其兄弟监藏班臧卜承袭其职，仍将玺书、印章给予他。
English: After the death of the chief administrator of the monks in Western Xia, Fuguo Chongbu, his brother Jianzangban Chongbu took over his duties, and still gave him the imperial edict and seal.

古文：癸亥，以翰林学士承旨阔彻伯知枢密院事，位居众知院事上。
现代文：十一日，任命翰林学士承旨阔彻伯知枢密院事，其位居于其他知院事之上。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Hanlin Bachelors was appointed as a member of the Privy Council, which ranks higher than other governors.

古文：甲子，庐州旱饥，发粮五千石赈之。
现代文：十二日，庐州路因旱灾发生饥荒，调发粮食五千石予以赈济。
English: On the 12th, famine occurred in Luzhou due to drought, and 5,000 kilos of grain were allocated to help.

古文：止鹰坊毋猎畿甸。
现代文：制止鹰坊不得在京郊行猎。
English: to stop Yingfang from hunting in the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：江西龙兴、南康、抚、瑞、袁、吉诸路旱。
现代文：江西龙兴、南康、抚州、瑞州、袁州、吉州等路干旱。
English: Jiangxi, Longxing, Nankang, Fuzhou, Ruizhou, Yuanzhou, Jizhou and other provinces are experiencing drought.

古文：丙寅，升山东河北蒙古军大都督府秩从二品。
现代文：十四日，将山东河北蒙古军大都督府官秩升为从二品。
English: On the 14th, he raised the rank of the governor of Shandong Hebei Mongolian Army to second class.

古文：改普庆修寺人匠提举司为营缮提点所，秩从五品，隶崇祥总管府。
现代文：将普庆修寺人匠提举司改为营缮提点所，官秩为从五品，隶属于崇祥总管府。
English: The Puqing Shuji Temple Craftsmen Promotion Office was changed to the Construction Promotion Office, with an official rank of the fifth grade, affiliated to the Chongxiang General Administration Office.

古文：云南威楚路土官昵放来朝贡。
现代文：云南威楚路土官昵放前来朝贡。
English: Yunnan Weizhu Road local officials came to pay tribute.

古文：罢功德使司，以所掌事归宣政院。
现代文：撤销功德使司，将其所掌管的事归之于宣政院。
English: The Office of the Minister of Merit was abolished, and the matters under its control were transferred to the State Council.

古文：己巳，撒迪为中书右丞。
现代文：十七日，任命撒迪为中书右丞。
English: On the 17th, Sadi was appointed to the post of Chushujojo.

古文：命中书左丞赵世安提调国子监学。
现代文：任命中书左丞赵世安提调国子监学。
English: Zhao Shianti was appointed to supervise Kuniko's education.

古文：庚午，诸王阔不花至自陕西，收其印，遣还。
现代文：十八日，诸侯王阔不花从陕西进京，收缴其印后予以遣返。
English: On the 18th, Prince Wang Kuo-Fu came to Beijing from Shaanxi Province. His seal was confiscated and he was repatriated.

古文：壬申，毁广平王木剌忽印，命哈班代之，更铸印以赐。
现代文：二十日，销毁广平王木剌忽之印，命哈班代其位，另铸新印赐给他。
English: On the 20th, he destroyed the seal of Guangping Wang Muxuhu, ordered Haban to take his place, and gave him a new seal.

古文：癸酉，太阴犯填星。
现代文：二十一日，太阴星凌犯土星。
English: On the twenty-first day, the great yin star overtook Saturn.

古文：丙子，诸王阿剌忒纳失里翊戴有劳，以其父越王秃剌印与之。
现代文：二十四日，诸侯王阿剌忒纳失里因拥戴有功，将其父越王秃剌之印给予他。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the vassal king, Ajna Puzuli, gave him the seal of his father, King Yue, for his meritorious service.

古文：丁丑，复立孟定路军民总管府，复给元江路军民总管府印。
现代文：二十五日，重新设立孟定路军民总管府。重新给予元江路军民总管府之印。
English: On the 25th, the Mengding Road Military and Civil Administration Headquarters was re-established, and the seal of the Yuanjiang Road Military and Civil Administration Headquarters was re-granted.

古文：湖广州县为广源等徭寇掠者二百八十余所，命行省平章刘脱欢招捕之。
现代文：湖广州县受广源等瑶人寇掠的有二百八十多处，命令行省平章刘脱欢进行招降或捕讨。
English: There are more than 280 places in Huzhongzhou County that have been plundered by bandits such as Guangyuan, and the provincial commander Ping Zhang Liu has been ordered to recruit or hunt down the bandits.

古文：造青木绵衣万领，赐围宿军。
现代文：制造青木棉衣一万件，赐予围宿的军士。
English: The production of ten thousand pieces of Aoki cotton clothing was awarded to the military officers who stayed in the encampment.

古文：乙卯，翰林国史院臣言： 纂修《英宗实录》，请具倒剌沙款伏付史馆。 
现代文：二十七日，翰林国史院官员上言说： 因纂修《英宗实录》，请将倒剌沙款伏事交付史馆。 
English: On the 27th, an official from the Hanlin Institute of National History made an appeal: "For compiling and revising the Record of the Yingzong Dynasty, please submit the case of the attempted overthrow of the Han Dynasty to the History Museum.

古文：从之。
现代文：同意这项要求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：高丽国王王焘久病，不能朝，请命其子桢袭位。
现代文：高丽国王王焘因久病，不能朝见，奏请朝廷命其子王祯承袭其位。
English: Due to a long-term illness, the King of Goryeo, Wang Bi, is unable to meet with the Imperial Court. He asks the Imperial Court to order his son, Wang Bi, to succeed to the throne.

古文：以平江官田百五十顷，赐大龙翔集庆寺及大崇禧万寿寺。
现代文：将平江路官田一百五十顷，赐予大龙翔集庆寺及大崇禧万寿寺。
English: He gave 150 hectares of government-owned land on Pingjiang Road to the Dalongxiang Jieqing Temple and the Dalongxiang Wanzhou Temple.

古文：辛巳，迁山东河北蒙古军大都督府于濮州，仍听山东廉访司按治。
现代文：二十九日，将山东河北蒙古军大都督府迁往濮州，照旧归山东廉访司按治。
English: On the 29th, the Mongolian military governor's office of Shandong Hebei was moved to Zhangzhou, and it was administered by the Shandong Bureau of Investigation.

古文：钦察台兼右都威卫使。
现代文：命钦察台兼任右都威卫使。
English: He also served as the Right Capital Wei Wei Envoy.

古文：壬午，诏豫王阿剌忒纳失里镇云南，赐其卫士钞万锭，仍每岁豫给其衣廪。
现代文：三十日，下诏豫王阿剌忒纳失里往镇云南，赐予其卫士钱钞一万锭，照旧每年预给其衣粮。
English: On the thirtieth day, the next day, King Ahna of Henan went to the town of Yunnan, gave his guards ten thousand baht in money and banknotes, and continued to give them clothes and grain every year.

古文：十二月甲申，给豳王忽塔忒迷失王傅印，以西僧辇真吃剌思为帝师。
现代文：十二月初二，给予豳王忽塔忒迷失王傅之印。以西僧辇真吃剌思为帝师。
English: On the second day of the second month of December, the seal of the Lost King Fu was given to King Hu Ta'o, with the Western Monk Jian Zhen eating Jian Si as the master.

古文：诏僧尼徭役一切无有所与。
现代文：下诏僧人尼姑所有徭役予以免除。
English: The following edict exempts monks and nuns from all labor.

古文：丙戌，诏百官一品至三品，先言朝政得失一事；四品以下，悉听敷陈。
现代文：初四，下诏百官一品到三品者，上言朝政得失之事一件；四品以下，全都任其上书陈言。
English: On the 4th day of the first month, if there are 100 officials from the 1st to the 3rd rank, there will be one speech on the merits and demerits of the government; below the 4th rank, they will all be allowed to make a speech.

古文：仍命赵世安、阿荣辑录所上章疏，善者即议举行。
现代文：照例命赵世安、阿荣辑录所上章疏，说得对的就商议办理执行。
English: As usual, Zhao Shian and A Rong were ordered to record the last chapter of the book, and if they were right, they would be discussed and implemented.

古文：追封燕铁木儿曾祖班都察为溧阳王，祖土土哈为升王，父床兀儿为杨王。
现代文：追封燕铁木儿曾祖班都察为溧阳王，祖父土土哈为升王，父亲床兀儿为扬王。
English: His great-great-grandfather Ban Duca was the King of Shenyang, his grandfather Tu Tu Ha was the King of Sheng, and his father Bedouin was the King of Yang.

古文：庚寅，祓祭于太祖幄殿。
现代文：初八，在太祖幄殿举行除灾求福的祭祀活动。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, a ritual was held at Taizu Shinden to pray for good fortune.

古文：以末吉为大司徒。
现代文：命末吉为大司徒。
English: At the end of his life, Yoshitoshi became a disciple of Daisetsu.

古文：中书省臣言： 旧制，凡有奏陈，众议定共署，乃入奏。
现代文：中书省官员上言说 ：根据旧制，凡有所奏请，集众议定后共同署名，然后才入奏。
English: An official from the Ministry of Education and Culture said, "According to the old system, if there is a request for a recital, it must be agreed upon and signed by all, and then the recital will begin.

古文：并从之。辛卯，命帝师率其徒作佛事于凝晖阁。
现代文：近年来，政事还未议妥，即有一二名省臣任己意上请，致使办事往往出错或延误。现在请按旧制办理。 
English: In recent years, political affairs have not yet been settled, that is, there are one or two provincial ministers at their own discretion, which often leads to errors or delays. Now, please follow the old system.

古文：甲午，冀宁路旱饥，赈粮二千九百石。
现代文：御史台官员上言说： 风宪官员赴任，不要拘泥于道路远近，都应给驿为好。 一并接受。
English: An official from the Office of the Chief Historian said in his speech: When a constitutional official takes office, he should not stick to the road far and near, and it is better to give him a gong.

古文：乙未，改封前镇南王帖木儿不花为宣让王。
现代文：十三日，改封前任镇南王帖木儿不花为宣让王。
English: On the 13th, the former King of Zhenan, Timur, was renamed King of Xuanzang.

古文：初，镇南王脱不花薨，子孛罗不花幼，命帖木儿不花袭其爵。
现代文：当初，镇南王脱不花去世，其子孛罗不花年幼，因此命帖木儿不花承袭其爵位。
English: At the beginning, the king of Zhenan, Defuhua, passed away, and his son, Yao Luo Fuhua, was young. Therefore, it was decreed that Timur Fuhua would inherit his title.

古文：孛罗不花既长，帖木儿不花请以王爵归之，乃特封宣让王，以示褒宠。
现代文：孛罗不花既以长成，帖木儿不花请求将王爵还给孛罗不花，所以特封为宣让王，以表示褒宠之意。
English: Since it was not enough for Dairo to grow up, nor for Timur to request that the crown be returned to Dairo, he was given the special title of King of Concession to show his appreciation.

古文：收诸王帖古思金印。
现代文：收缴诸侯王帖古思的金印。
English: Confiscation of the gold seal of the vassal king Turgus.

古文：诏谕廷臣曰： 皇姑鲁国大长公主，蚤寡守节，不从诸叔继尚，鞠育遗孤，其子袭王爵，女配予一人。
现代文：下诏晓谕廷臣说 ：皇姑鲁国大长公主，早寡守节，不随旧俗改嫁，抚育遗孤，其子袭封王爵，其女嫁与我本人。
English: The following edict was issued to the courtiers: The eldest princess of the Kingdom of Gulu, who was widowed at an early age, kept the festival, did not marry according to the old custom, raised orphans, her son became a prince, her daughter-in-law and I myself.

古文：朕思庶民若是者犹当旌表，况在懿亲乎？
现代文：我想平民有此行为尚且旌表，况是皇亲呢？
English: I think it's quite common for commoners to behave like this, and what about the imperial family?

古文：赵世延、虞集等可议封号以闻。 
现代文：赵世延、虞集等人可商议封号予以奏闻。 
English: Zhao Shiyan, Yu Ji and others can discuss the seal number and report it.

古文：诏： 诸僧寺田，自金、宋所有及累朝赐予者，悉除其租。
现代文：还下诏书说 ：各僧寺田产，从金、宋代就有的以及本朝历次赐予者，全都免其租税。
English: The imperial edict also stated that all monastic and temple estates that had been in existence since the Jin and Song dynasties, as well as those that had been granted to this dynasty repeatedly, were all exempt from tax.

古文：其有当输租者，仍免其役。
现代文：其中有应输租者，照旧免其徭役。
English: Among them, there are those who should export rent, and they will be exempted from labor service as before.

古文：己亥，遣使驿致故帝师舍利还其国，给以金五百两、银二千五百两、钞千五百锭、币五千匹。
现代文：僧人还俗者，任其重新出家为僧。 十六日，将淮、浙、山东、河间四处转运司盐引六万，给予鲁国大长公主作为汤沐费用。
English: On the 16th, he brought 60,000 tons of salt from Huai, Zhejiang, Shandong, and Hebei provinces and gave it to the Grand Princess of the State of Lu as a souvenir.

古文：加谥汉长沙王吴芮为长沙文惠王。
现代文：十七日，派遣使者驰驿护送已故帝师的舍利子返回本国。
English: On the 17th, an emissary was dispatched to escort the late emperor's son, Sherizi, back to his home country.

古文：壬寅，命江浙行省印佛经二十七藏。
现代文：二十日，命令江浙行省印造佛经二十七种。
English: On the 20th, he ordered Jiangsu and Zhejiang to print 27 kinds of sutras.

古文：癸卯，蕲州路夏秋旱饥，赈米五千石。
现代文：二十一日，蕲州路夏秋两季因旱灾造成饥荒，赈济米粮五千石。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the drought caused famine in Luzhou in the summer and autumn seasons, and 5,000 kilos of rice grain had to be donated.

古文：甲辰，以明年正月武宗忌辰，命高丽、汉僧三百四十人，预诵佛经二藏于大崇恩福元寺。
现代文：二十二日，因第二年正月为武宗忌辰，命令高丽僧与汉僧三百四十人，在大崇恩福元寺预诵佛经两部。
English: On the 22nd, because the first month of the second year was the anniversary of the death of Emperor Wuzong, he ordered 340 Korean and Han monks to recite two Buddhist sutras in advance at the Dazhong'en Fuyuan Temple.

古文：丁未，造至元钞四十五万锭、中统钞五万锭，如岁例。
现代文：二十五日，印造至元钞四十五万锭，中统钞五万锭，依照每年常例。
English: On the 25th, the printing of yuan banknotes increased to 450,000 baht, and the central banknotes to 50,000 baht, in accordance with the annual practice.

古文：中书省臣言： 在京酒坊五十四所，岁输课十余万锭。
现代文：中书省官员上言说 ：京师酒坊五十四所，每年输纳课钞十余万锭。
English: An official from China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy said: "There are fifty-four liquor stores in Beijing, and more than one hundred thousand baht in tax money is paid each year.

古文：比者间以赐诸王、公主及诸官寺，诸王、公主自有封邑、岁赐，官寺亦各有常产，其酒课悉令仍旧输官为宜。 
现代文：近年来时时赐给诸王、公主及各官府寺庙。诸王、公主自有封地和岁赐，官府寺庙也各有固定的产业，其酒课钞仍按旧例全都输纳官府为宜。 
English: In recent years, it has been given to kings, princesses and government-run temples from time to time. Kings and princesses have their own fiefdoms and land grants, and government-run temples also have their own fixed properties. It is appropriate that all of their liquor bills are still accepted by the government according to the old practice.

古文：从之。
现代文：接受这项提议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：开河东冀宁路、四川重庆路酒禁。
现代文：开放河东冀宁路、四川重庆路酒禁。
English: The liquor ban on Hedong Jining Road and Sichuan Chongqing Road has been lifted.

古文：罢土番巡捕都元帅府。
现代文：撤销土蕃巡捕都元帅府。
English: Cancellation of the mound patrol to the Marshal's Office.

古文：赈上都留守司八剌哈赤二千二百余户、烛剌赤八百余户粮三月，钞有差；牙连秃杰鲁迭所居鹰坊八百七十户粮三月。
现代文：赈济上都留守司八剌哈赤二千二百多户、烛剌赤八百多户粮食三个月，钱钞多寡不一；赈济牙连秃杰鲁迭所居鹰坊八百七十户粮食三个月。
English: More than 2,200 households in Shibahachih, and more than 800 households in Tsendangachih, were left with grain for three months, with varying amounts of money and banknotes; and 870 households in Yingfang, the residence of Zhang Lian and Bald Jerudie, were left with grain for three months.

古文：戊申，以玥璐不花为御史大夫，兼领隆祥总管府事。
现代文：二十六日，任命王月璐不花为御史大夫，兼管隆祥总管府事。
English: On the 26th, Wang Yueyuan was appointed as the chief historian, and also took charge of Longxiang's general management of government affairs.

古文：庚戌，诏兴举中政院事。
现代文：二十八日，下诏兴举中政院事。
English: On the 28th, it was decided to hold a meeting of the Central Military Commission.

古文：辛亥，趣内外已授官者速赴任。
现代文：二十九日，催促内外已授官职者速往赴任。
English: On the 29th, those who have been appointed to posts at home and abroad are urged to go to their posts as soon as possible.

古文：改上都馒头山为天历山。
现代文：将上都馒头山改名为天历山。
English: Shangdu Shantou Mountain was renamed Tianlishan Mountain.

古文：壬子，织武宗御容成，即神御殿作佛事。
现代文：三十日，织造武宗御容事完成，随即神御殿做佛事活动。
English: On the 30th, the weaving ceremony of the Wushu sect was completed, followed immediately by the Buddhist activities at the Shrine.

古文：敕： 凡阶开府仪同三司者，班列居一品之前。 
现代文：下敕令说 ：凡官阶为开府仪同三司者，朝见排班时位居一品官之前。 
English: The imperial edict said: Those whose official ranks are Kaifu-gi and Sanji will be in front of Ipponkan when lining up for morning inspection.

古文：武昌江夏县火，赈其贫乏者二百七十户粮一月。
现代文：武昌路江夏县发生火灾，赈济其贫穷困乏者二百七十户粮食两个月。
English: Wuchang Road, Jiangxia County, a fire occurred, and 270 poor and needy households were provided with grain for two months.

古文：黄州路及恩州旱，并免其租。
现代文：黄州路与恩州干旱，都免除其租税。
English: Huangzhou Road and Enzhou Arid are exempt from the tax.

古文：是岁，会赋入之数：金三百二十七锭，银千一百六十九锭，钞九百二十九万七千八百锭，币帛四十万七千五百匹，丝八十八万四千四百五十斤，绵七万六百四十五斤，粮千九十六万五十三石。
现代文：这一年，统计赋税收入之数为：黄金三百二十七锭，白银一千一百六十九锭，钱钞九百二十九万七千八百锭，币帛四十万七千五百匹，丝八十八万四千四百五十斤，棉七万六百四十五斤，粮食一千零九十六万零五十三石。
English: In that year, the amount of tax revenue was as follows: gold, 327,000 baht; silver, 1,169,000 baht; banknotes, 9,297,800 baht; coinage, 407,500 baht; silk, 884,450 jin; cotton, 76,455 jin; grain, 10,960,533 koku.

