古文：郁林王昭业，字元尚，文惠太子长子也。
现代文：郁林王萧昭业字元尚，是文惠太子的长子。
English: Yu Lin Wang Xiao Zhaoye is the eldest son of Prince Wen Hui.

古文：小名法身。
现代文：小名法身。
English: Obi-no-hosshin said.

古文：世祖即位，封南郡王，二千户。
现代文：世祖即位后，被封为南郡王，食邑二千户。
English: After the enthronement of the founder, he was named the king of the southern county, with a population of two thousand households.

古文：永明五年十一月戊子，冠于东宫崇政殿。
现代文：永明五年十一月戊子，在东宫崇政殿行加冠礼。
English: In November of the fifth year of the Yongming Dynasty, the crowning ceremony was held at the East Palace of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：其日小会，赐王公以下帛各有差，给昭业扶二人。
现代文：这天举行小型聚会，赏赐王公以下帛各有不等，给昭业扶二人。
English: On this day, a small gathering was held to reward the princes and lower echelons with varying amounts of money, and to give two horses to Zhao Ye.

古文：七年，有司奏给班剑二十人，鼓吹一部，高选友、学。
现代文：永明七年，主管部门奏请给予班剑仪仗二十人，鼓吹一部，选择最好的朋友、学校。
English: In the seventh year of Sun Myung Moon, the competent department requested that 20 people be given a ceremonial sword fight, a part of the propaganda, and the best friends and school be selected.

古文：十一年，给皂轮三望车。
现代文：永明十一年，给予皂轮三望车。
English: In the eleventh year of Sun Myung Moon's reign, the soap wheel was given a three-pointed carriage.

古文：诏高选国官。
现代文：韶令选为国家高级官员。
English: He was elected as a senior state official by the imperial edict.

古文：文惠太子薨，立昭业为皇太孙，居东宫。
现代文：文惠太子去世，立昭业为皇太孙，住到东宫。
English: After the death of Prince Wenhui, Zhao Ye became the emperor's great-grandson and lived in the East Palace.

古文：世祖崩，太孙即位。
现代文：世祖去世，太孙即位。
English: The patriarch died, and the great-grandson ascended the throne.

古文：八月，壬午，诏称先帝遗诏，以护军将军武陵王晔为卫将军，征南大将军陈显达即本号，并开府仪同三司，尚书左仆射西昌侯鸾为尚书令。太孙詹事沈文季为护军将军。
现代文：八月壬午，下诏称先帝遣诏，任命护军将军武陵王萧晔为卫将军，征南大将军陈显达就用本号，并开府仪同三司，尚书左仆射西昌侯萧鸾为尚书令，太孙詹事沈文季为护军将军。
English: In the afternoon of August, the emperor sent an imperial edict, appointing the escort general Wuling Wang Xiaojun as the guard general. Chen Xianda, the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, used this number, and opened the government ceremony with three divisions. Xiaojun, the left-hand servant of Shang Shuxi Xichang Hou, was the Shang Shuling, and the great-grandson of Zhan Zhi, Shen Wenzhi, was the escort general.

古文：癸未，以司徒竟陵王子良为太傅。
现代文：癸未，任命司徒竟陵王萧子良为太傅。
English: Not long after, the king of the imperial tombs, Xiao Ziliang, was appointed grand tutor.

古文：诏曰： 朕以寡薄，嗣膺宝政，对越灵命，钦若前图，思所以敬守成规，拱揖群后。
现代文：下诏书说： 朕德业孤寡微薄，继承国家政权，配称神灵天命，敬重从前的法度，思考如何恭敬地遵守已有的法规，尊重诸位后妃。
English: The next imperial edict said: I am a man of few virtues, inheriting the state power, worthy of being called a god of destiny, respecting the previous laws, thinking about how to respectfully abide by the existing laws and regulations, and respecting your empresses.

古文：哀荒在日，有懵大猷，宜育德振民，光昭睿范。
现代文：有灾荒的时候，大道不明，应当培育道德，振奋百姓，光大明亮圣王的风范。
English: In times of disaster and famine, when the road is unclear, it is necessary to cultivate morality, inspire the people, and have a bright and shining holy king's demeanor.

古文：凡逋三调及众责，在今年七月三十日前，悉同蠲除。
现代文：凡是拖欠三调及各种债务，在今年七月三十之前的，全部一起免除。
English: All arrears and debts up to and including July 30 of this year will be completely forgiven.

古文：其备偿封籍货鬻未售，亦皆还主。
现代文：那些准备偿债及没收入官的货物没有卖出的，也都归还原主。
English: Those goods that have not been sold in order to pay off debts and the unpaid taxes will also be returned to their original owners.

古文：御府诸署池田邸冶，兴废沿事，本施一时，于今无用者，详所罢省。
现代文：御府及各衙门所有的池塘、田地、府第、冶炼场，其兴废是根据时事而决定，本来衹在一定时期施行，对现在没有什么用处的，详加审查后废除减免。
English: For all ponds, fields, government offices and smelting plants in the Imperial Palace and each provincial capital, their renewal and abolition are decided on the basis of current affairs. Originally, it was implemented for a certain period of time, but it is of no use now. After detailed review, the reduction and exemption will be abolished.

古文：公宜权禁，一以还民，关市征赋，务从优减。 
现代文：公家应当暂且禁止，一律把它们归还百姓，集市征收的赋税，务必从优减免。 
English: Public houses should be banned for the time being, and they should all be returned to the people, and the taxes levied by the bazaar must be reduced and exempted.

古文：丙戌，诏曰： 近北掠余口，悉充军实。刑故无小，罔或攸赦，抚辜兴仁，事深睿范。
现代文：丙戌，下韶令说： 近来从北方抢掠的剩余人，全部充实到了军队刑罚固然没有小的，可法网或许有宽赦，安抚罪人施行仁爱，事关圣明的规范。
English: For example, the lower edict said: The remaining people who have recently been plundered from the north have all been enriched to the extent that the military punishment is certainly not small, but the legal network may have clemency, appease the sinners and practice benevolence, which is related to the sacred norms.

古文：宜从荡宥，许以自新，可一同放遣，还复民籍。
现代文：应该从宽赦免，允许改过自新，可以一同释放遣返，恢复民籍。
English: They should be pardoned with clemency, allowed to reform and reform, and can be released and repatriated together, and their citizenship can be restored.

古文：已赏赐者，亦皆为赎。 
现代文：已经赏赐给人的，也都要赎出来。 
English: Whatever has been given to a person must be paid back.

古文：辛丑，诏曰： 往岁蛮虏协谋，志扰边服，群帅授略，大歼凶丑。
现代文：辛丑，下韶书说： 往年蛮虏合谋，定要骚扰边疆，众帅传授方略，大大地歼灭敌凶。
English: Sin ugly, the lower part of the book said: In previous years, the barbarians conspired to harass the frontier, the generals taught strategies, and greatly destroyed the enemy.

古文：革城克捷，及舞阴固守，二处劳人，未有沾爵赏者，可分遣选部，往彼序用。 
现代文：革城攻克取胜，以及舞阴固守，两处有功劳的人，没有得到封爵奖赏的，可以分派到选部，到那裹按次序任用。 
English: Those with meritorious service in two areas, i.e. conquering and winning the revolutionary city and holding the capital, who have not been rewarded with a knighthood, can be assigned to the Selection Division, where they will be appointed in order.

古文：九月，癸丑，诏 东西二省府国，长老所积，财单禄寡，良以矜怀。
现代文：九月癸丑，下诏书说 东西二省以及各王府封国，都积聚了一批年长的元老，财产单薄俸禄寡少，应好好地加以怜惜安抚。
English: At the end of September, the next imperial edict said that the two eastern and western provinces, as well as the various royal fiefs, had accumulated a group of elderly elders, with little property and little salary, who should be well pitied and appeased.

古文：选部可甄才品能，推校年月，邦守邑丞，随宜量处，以贫为先。 
现代文：选部可以甄别评价他们的才能，推算考定年月，邦守邑丞，根据实际情况斟酌处理，首先考虑贫穷的 。
English: The selection department can screen and evaluate their talents, estimate and determine the age, nationality and residence, and deal with them according to the actual situation, and first consider the poor.

古文：辛酉，追尊文惠皇太子为世宗文皇帝。
现代文：辛酉，追尊文惠皇太子为世宗文皇帝。
English: Xin Zhen, the crown prince Wen Hui was crowned Emperor Zongwen.

古文：冬，十月，壬寅，尊皇太孙太妃为皇太后，立皇后何氏。
现代文：冬十月壬寅，尊奉皇太孙太妃为皇太后，立何氏为皇后。
English: In the winter and October of Ren Yin, the granddaughter of the emperor Taifei was honored as the empress dowager, and Li He was the empress.

古文：十一月，辛亥，立临汝公昭文为新安王，曲江公昭秀为临海王，皇弟昭粲为永嘉王。
现代文：十一月辛亥，立临汝公萧昭文为新安王，曲江公萧昭秀为临海王，皇弟萧昭粲为永嘉王。
English: In November of Xinhai, Lin Ru Gong Xiao Zhaowen became the king of Xin'an, Qujiang Gong Xiao Zhaoxiu became the king of Linhai, and the king's younger brother Xiao Zhaojun became the king of Yongjia.

古文：隆昌元年春，正月，丁未，改元，大赦。
现代文：隆昌元年春正月丁未，改用新年号，实行大赦。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of Longchang, it was changed to the New Year's Day, and an amnesty was implemented.

古文：加太傅、竟陵王子良殊礼，骁骑将军、晋熙王銶为郢州刺史，丹阳尹、安陆王子敬为南兖州刺史，征北大将军、晋安王子懋为江州刺史，临海王昭秀为荆州刺史，永嘉王昭粲为南徐州刺史，征南大将军陈显达进号车骑大将军，郢州刺史、建安王子真为护军将军。
现代文：加封太傅竟陵王萧子良特殊的礼遇。骁骑将军晋熙王萧銶为郢州刺史，丹阳尹安陆王萧王邀为南兖州刺史，征北大将军置安王萧子懋为辽业刺史，临海王萧昭秀为趔业刺史，丞台玉萧昭粲为南徐州刺史，征南大将军陈显达进封号为车骑大将军，郢州刺史建安王萧子真为护军将军。
English: King Xiao Ziliang of Jinxi was invited to be the chief historian of Zhangzhou, King Xiao Ziliang of Danyang, King Yin of Anlu was invited to be the chief historian of Southern Zhangzhou, King Xiao Ziliang of the Northern Expeditionary Force was invited to be the chief historian of Liaoyang, King Xiao Zhaoxiu of the Linhai Expeditionary Force was invited to be the chief historian of Zhangye, King Xiao Zhaoxiu of the Southern Expeditionary Force was invited to be the chief historian of Southern Xuzhou, King Chen Xanda of the Southern Expeditionary Force was invited to be the chief historian of the Southern Expeditionary Force,

古文：诏百僚极陈得失。
现代文：诏令百官积极上陈有关治国得失的意见。
English: The following edict allows officials at all levels to talk freely about the gains and losses of the DPRK government.

古文：又诏王公以下各举所知。
现代文：又诏令王公以下各自推举所了解的人才。
English: He also issued an edict that officials below the rank of crown prince should each recommend a person they knew.

古文：戊申，以护军将军沈文季为领军将军。
现代文：戊申，任命护军将军沈文季为领军将军。
English: Wushin, appointed the escorting general Shen Wenzhi as the leading general.

古文：己酉，以前将军曹虎为雍州刺史，右卫将军薛渊为司州刺史。
现代文：己酉，任命前将军萱处为雍州刺史，右卫将军萨渊为司州刺史。
English: Ji Yu, appointed the former general Yu Du to be the Yongzhou chief historian, and the right guard general Sayuan to be the chief historian of Sizhou.

古文：庚戌，以宁朔将军萧懿为梁、南秦二州刺史，辅国长史申希祖为交州刺史。
现代文：庚戌，任命宁朔将军萧懿为梁、南秦二州刺史，辅国长史空希祖为交州刺史。
English: Geng Zheng, appointed Ningshuo General Xiao Zheng as Liang, Southern Qin as Erzhou, and Assistant Governor Shi Ku Xizu as Jiaozhou.

古文：辛亥，车驾祠南郊。
现代文：辛亥，皇帝到南郊祭祀。
English: In Xinhai, the emperor went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices.

古文：诏曰： 执耜暂忘，悬磬比室，秉机或惰，无褐终年。
现代文：下诏书说： 持耜忘记劳作，贫穷的人家就会一产挨一户，用织机要是懒惰，就会终年没有衣服穿。
English: The next edict said: "If you hold the plough and forget to work, the poor will go from house to house, and if you are lazy with the loom, you will have no clothes to wear all year round."

古文：非怠非荒，虽由王道，不稂不莠，实赖民和。
现代文：不懈怠农事不荒废田地，虽然是由于推行仁义之道，但是庄稼不生杂草，实是有赖于百姓的和睦。
English: Although it is due to the implementation of the path of benevolence and righteousness that the agricultural work is not slack and the fields are not abandoned, but the crops do not grow weeds, it really depends on the harmony of the people.

古文：顷岁，多稼无爽，遗秉如积，而三登之美未臻，万斯之基尚远。
现代文：近年庄稼种植很多且没有败坏，丢弃满把的禾堆积如山，可是谷物连年丰收的美事尚未达到，距离建立万世基业还很遥远。
English: In recent years, many crops have been planted and have not been spoiled, and mountains of discarded handfuls of grain have piled up. However, the beauty of consecutive years of bumper grain harvests has not yet been achieved, and it is still a long way from establishing a world-class foundation.

古文：且风土异宜，百民舛务，刑章治绪，未必同源。妨本害政，事非一揆，冕旒属念，无忘夙兴。
现代文：况且风土人情各不相宜，百姓从事的劳作也不相同，刑律典章治国首务，未必有相同的起源，妨碍农业损害国政，不衹是一类事情，作为国君时刻放在心上，清晨起来都不忘记。
English: Moreover, the customs of different lands and peoples are not suitable for each other, the work done by the people is not the same, the criminal law and regulations governing the country's first duty may not have the same origin, hindering agriculture and harming national politics are just one type of thing. As a sovereign, I always keep it in mind and do not forget it when I wake up in the morning.

古文：可严下州郡，务滋耕殖，相亩辟畴，广开地利，深树国本，克阜民天。
现代文：可严令各州郡，致力于耕作种植，考察土壤开辟田界，广泛开发地利，深深地树立国家的根本，增加粮食生产。
English: We can strictly order the states and counties to devote themselves to farming and planting, explore the soil, open up fields, widely develop the country, deeply establish the foundation of the country, and increase grain production.

古文：又询访狱市，博听谣俗，伤风损化，各以条闻，主者详为条格。 
现代文：又要查询走访监狱集市，广泛听取民谣风俗，凡是损伤风俗教化的，分别条列上奏，主管部门要逐条详加追究。 
English: In addition, it is necessary to inquire about and visit the prison bazaar, and listen to folk songs and customs extensively. If there is any damage to customs and education, it should be listed separately, and the competent department should investigate in detail one by one.

古文：戊午，车驾拜景安陵。
现代文：戊午，皇帝祭拜崇安陵。
English: In the afternoon, the emperor paid homage to Chong An Mausoleum.

古文：己巳，以新除黄门待郎周奉叔为青州刺史。
现代文：己巳，任命新上任的黄门侍郎周奉叔为青州刺史。
English: At the same time, the newly appointed Huangmen waiter Zhou Fengxiu was appointed as the history of Qingzhou.

古文：二月，辛卯，车驾祠明堂。
现代文：二月辛卯，皇帝君临明堂祭祀。
English: At the end of February, the Emperor Rinmei Hall was dedicated.

古文：夏，四月，辛巳，卫将军、开府仪同三司武陵王晔薨。
现代文：夏四月辛巳，卫将军、开府仪同三司武陵王萧晔去世。
English: In the summer of April, General Wei, Kaifu Yi, and the Three Wuling Emperors Xiao Qi passed away.

古文：戊子，太傅竟陵王子良薨。
现代文：戊子，太傅竟陵王萧子良去世。
English: On the 14th, Emperor Taifu passed away.

古文：戊戌，以前沙州刺史杨炅为沙州刺史。
现代文：戊戌，任命前沙州刺史杨炅为沙州刺史。
English: The former governor of Shazhou, Yang Jie, was appointed as the governor of Shazhou.

古文：丁酉，以骠骑将军庐陵王子卿为卫将军。尚书右仆射鄱阳王锵为骠骑将军，并开府仪同三司。
现代文：丁酉，任命骠骑将军庐陵王萧子卿为卫将军，尚书右仆射鄱阳王萧锵为骠骑将军，并开府仪同三司。
English: Ding Xi, appointed the cavalry general Gongling Wang Xiao Ziqing as the guard general, Shang Shu's right-hand man Shaoyang Wang Xiao Xi as the cavalry general, and opened the prefectural ceremony and the three departments.

古文：闰月，乙丑，以南东海太守萧颖胄为青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：闰月乙丑，任命南束海太守萧颖胄为青、冀二州刺史。
English: On the second day of the leap month, Xiao Yingyao, the governor of Nanzuka Sea, was appointed as the new governor, and the two prefectures of Hebei Province were designated as the new prefectures.

古文：丁卯，镇军大将军鸾即本号开府仪同三司。
现代文：丁卯，镇军大将军萧鸾即本号开府仪同三司。
English: Dingwu, the general of the town army, Xiao Wei, who is the founder of this issue, is the same as the three divisions.

古文：戊辰，以中军将军新安王昭文为扬州刺史。
现代文：戊辰，任命中军将军新安王萧昭文为扬州刺史。
English: Wuchen, appointed the Chinese general Xin'an Wang Xiao Zhaowen as Yangzhou's chief historian.

古文：六月，丙寅，以黄门侍郎王思远为广州刺史。
现代文：六月丙寅，任命黄门侍郎王思远为广州刺史。
English: In June, he appointed Huangmen waiter Wang Siyuan as the chief historian of Guangzhou.

古文：秋，七月，庚戌，以中书郎萧遥欣为兖州刺史，东莞太守臧灵智为交州刺史。
现代文：秋七月庚戌，任命中书郎萧遥欣为兖州刺史，东莞太守臧灵智为交州刺史。
English: In the autumn and July of Geng Zi, appointed Zhong Shulang Xiao Yuxin as the governor of Zhangzhou, and Dongguan Dazhonglu Lingzhi as the governor of Jiaozhou.

古文：癸巳，皇太后令曰： 镇军、车骑、左仆射、前将军、领军、左卫、卫尉、八座：自我皇历启基，受终于宋，睿圣继轨，三叶重光。
现代文：癸巳，皇太后发布政令说：镇军、车骑、左仆射、前将军、领军、左卫、卫尉、八座：自从我朝皇运之基开启，承受宋室帝位，圣明而且能继承法度，连续三代功德显著。
English: Suddenly, the empress dowager issued a decree saying: Zhenjun, Chezhi, Zuo Fuxia, Former General, Leading Army, Zuo Wei, Wei Wei, Eight: Since the foundation of my imperial movement was opened, I have inherited the throne of the Song Dynasty, I am holy and can inherit the law, and I have three consecutive generations of remarkable merits.

古文：太祖以神武创业，草昧区夏，武皇以英明提极，经纬天人。
现代文：太祖凭神勇威武开创基业，启蒙于华夏各地，武皇因为英明而即国君之位，规划治理。
English: The great-great-grandfather founded the foundation with courage and valor, and was enlightened in various parts of China. Emperor Wu, because of his wisdom, became the ruler of the country, planning and governing.

古文：文帝以上哲之资，体元良之重，虽功未被物，而德已在民。
现代文：文帝凭藉良好的资质，履行太子的重任，虽然功绩没能覆盖万物，但恩德已经惠及百姓。
English: By virtue of his good qualifications, Emperor Wen fulfilled the important duties of a prince. Although his achievements did not cover everything, his benevolence has benefited the people.

古文：三灵之眷方永，七百之基已固。
现代文：三位英灵正永远被怀念，七百年的基业已经稳固。
English: The three great spirits are forever remembered, and the seven-hundred-year-old foundation has been solidified.

古文：嗣主特钟沴气，爰表弱龄，险戾著于绿车，愚固彰于崇正。狗马是好，酒色方湎。
现代文：但是如今继位的君主身上集中了许多灾异不祥之气。年纪很小时，就在其乘坐的绿车上表现出了阴险暴戾，住在束宫崇正殿时，就表现出了愚笨鄙陋。喜好狗马，沉湎于酒色。
English: However, many disasters and ominous spirits are now concentrated in the monarch who succeeded to the throne. At a very young age, he showed insidious violence on the green car he was riding, and when he lived in the Sokugu Palace, he showed stupidity and meanness. He likes dogs and horses, and indulges in alcohol.

古文：所务唯鄙事，所疾唯善人。
现代文：从事的都是些卑贱的事，痛恨的都是些有道德的人。
English: All of them are engaged in lowly things, and all of them hate people with morals.

古文：世祖慈爱曲深，每加容掩，冀年志稍改，立守神器。
现代文：世祖对其慈爱有加，常常给予宽容掩饰，希望其长大后志向有所改变，即位后守住国家社稷。
English: The founder of the world was very kind to him, often giving him a tolerant disguise, hoping that his ambition would change when he grew up, that is, he would keep the national social order after he ascended the throne.

古文：自入纂鸿业，长恶滋甚。
现代文：但是他自从继承王业，恶行越发滋长。
English: But since he succeeded to the throne, his evil deeds have grown worse and worse.

古文：居丧无一日之哀，缞绖为欢宴之服。
现代文：居丧期间没有一天悲哀，丧服成为欢乐宴饮的服装。
English: During the period of mourning, there is not a single day of sadness, and the mourning clothes become the costumes of joyous feasting.

古文：昏酣长夜，万机斯壅，发号施令，莫知所从。
现代文：整夜沉湎于饮酒作乐，政务大量堆积，发号施令，不知道根据的是什么。
English: Up all night drinking and carousing, piling on the pounds, issuing orders without knowing what they're based on.

古文：阉竖徐龙驹专总枢密，奉叔、珍之互执权柄，自以为任得其人，表里缉穆，迈萧、曹而愈信、布，倚太山而坐平原。
现代文：阀竖徐龙驹专擅总理朝廷要政，奉叔、珍之交互执掌权柄，自以为用人恰当，内外和睦，超出萧何、曹参，胜过韩信、英布，背倚泰山而坚守平原。
English: Xu Longtao was an expert in the important politics of the prime minister of the imperial court, holding power through the interaction of honoring his uncle and cherishing his wife. He thought it was appropriate to employ people, and he was harmonious at home and abroad. He surpassed Xiao He and Cao San, and was better than Han Xin and Ying Bu. He leaned on Mount Tai and held fast to the plain.

古文：于是恣情肆意，罔顾天显，二帝姬嫔，并充宠御，二宫遗服，皆纳玩府。
现代文：于是纵情放肆，不顾上天显示的警告，前代两位帝王的姬嫔，都充实到自己的后宫，两宫遗留的服饰器物，都纳入府库玩赏。
English: As a result, indulging in licentiousness, in spite of the warning shown by the heavens, the honeysuckles of the previous two emperors were enriched to their harem, and the vestiges of the two palaces were included in the prefectural treasury.

古文：内外混漫，男女无别。丹屏之北，为酤鬻之所，青蒲之上，开桑中之肆。
现代文：朝廷内外混乱放纵，男女之间没有区别，皇宫门内，成为买卖场所，河水岸边，开放男女幽会私奔的放荡风气。
English: There was chaos and indulgence both inside and outside the court, and there was no difference between men and women. The inside of the palace gate became a place for buying and selling, and the banks of the river were open to the debauchery of men and women eloping.

古文：又微服潜行，信次忘反，端委以朝虚位，交戟而守空宫积旬矣。
现代文：又身着便服秘密出行，留宿在外多忘记回宫，致使衣冠整齐的大臣朝见空的王位，执戟相交的侍卫守护空的宫殿，已经很久了。
English: It has been a long time since he secretly traveled in civilian clothes and mostly forgot to return to the palace when he stayed out, causing the neatly dressed ministers to see the empty throne, and the attendants guarding the empty palace.

古文：宰辅忠贤，尽诚奉主，诛锄群小，冀能悛革，曾无克己，更深怨憾。
现代文：辅政大臣忠诚贤良，竭尽诚，辅助君主，杀死除去众多奸佞小人，希望君主能够悔改，然而君主未曾克制收敛，这更加深了他们的不满。
English: The Vice-Minister of State was loyal and virtuous, he did his best to assist the monarch, killed and removed many villains, and hoped that the monarch would repent. However, the monarch did not restrain himself, which further deepened their dissatisfaction.

古文：公卿股肱，以异己置戮，文武昭穆，以德誉见猜。放肆丑言，将行屠脍，社稷危殆，有过缀旒。
现代文：公卿等可以依赖的大臣，因为政见不同被杀，文帝武帝的后裔，因为有品德美好之名被猜疑，纵容丑恶的言词，将要实行屠杀，国家政权面临的危险，比君主权力旁落还要严重。
English: Ministers who can be relied on, such as court nobles, have been killed because of their different political views. Descendants of Emperor Wen and Emperor Wu, who are suspected because they have a good reputation for virtue and condone ugly words, will carry out massacres. The danger facing the national regime is even more serious than the decline of monarchical power.

古文：昔太宗克光于汉世，简文代兴于晋氏，前事之不忘，后人之师也。
现代文：当年太宗光耀于汉世，简文帝继晋氏而兴起，前事不忘，后事之师。
English: At that time, Taizong shone in the Han Dynasty, and Emperor Jianwen followed the rise of the Jin Dynasty. He did not forget the past, but he was a teacher of the future.

古文：镇军居正体道，家国是赖，伊霍之举，实寄渊谟，便可详依旧典，以礼废黜。
现代文：镇军遵循正确的原则实施有道政治，国家依靠他，伊、霍的举动，实在寄托了深远的用意，现在就可以详细援引旧有的制度，依照礼制废黜他。
English: The townspeople followed the correct principles to implement the correct politics, and the state relied on him. The actions of Yi and Huo have really set a far-reaching intention. Now they can invoke the old system in detail and depose him in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：中军将军新安王，体自文皇，睿哲天秀，宜入嗣鸿业，永宁四海。
现代文：中军将军新安王，系文皇所生，圣明且天赋优秀，适宜继承王业，使天下永远安宁。
English: Xin'an Wang, the general of the Chinese army, is the son of Emperor Wen. He is holy and gifted. He is suitable to inherit the throne and make the world forever peaceful.

古文：外即以礼奉迎。
现代文：外边马上按照礼仪迎接。
English: They were immediately greeted outside according to etiquette.

古文：未亡人属此多难，投笔增慨。 
现代文：未亡之人记述了如此多的灾难，放下笔后增添了许多感慨。
English: The survivor recounted so many disasters, and added a lot of emotion after he put down his pen.

古文：昭业少美容止，好隶书，世祖敕皇孙手书不得妄出，以贵重之。
现代文：昭业年纪轻，容貌举止优美，喜好隶书，世祖下令皇孙的手迹不能随便拿面，以此表示贵重。
English: Shokei was young, good-looking, and had a penchant for calligraphy. The founder of the dynasty ordered that the handwriting of the grandson of the emperor should not be taken casually, as a sign of respect.

古文：进对音吐，甚有令誉。
现代文：应答言谈，有很好的声誉。
English: It has a good reputation for being responsive.

古文：王侯五日一问讯，世祖常独呼昭业至幄座，别加抚问，呼为法身，钟爱甚重。
现代文：王侯是五天问讯一次，可世祖常常单独叫昭业到帐内的座旁，另加抚慰问讯，称他为法身，特别锤爱。
English: The prince inquired once every five days, but the patriarch often called Zhao Ye alone to the seat in the account, and added a message of consolation, calling him the Dharma body, and especially loved him.

古文：文惠皇太子薨，昭业每临哭，辄号咷不自胜，俄尔还内，欢笑极乐。
现代文：文惠皇太子去世，昭业每次哭吊，就号啕大哭不能自己，遇一会回到宫内，却欢笑快乐至极。
English: After the death of Crown Prince Wenhui, every time Zoya cried, she couldn't help herself but burst into tears. When she returned to the palace, she was laughing and happy.

古文：在世祖丧，哭泣竟，入后宫，尝列胡妓二部夹阁迎奏。
现代文：在为世祖服丧期间，哭泣完后，进到后宫，曾让两队胡妓在门两边夹道演奏迎接。
English: During the period of mourning for the ancestor, after crying, he entered the harem and was greeted by two teams of prostitutes playing music on both sides of the door.

古文：为南郡王时，文惠太子禁其起居，节其用度，昭业谓豫章王妃庾氏曰： 阿婆，佛法言，有福德生帝王家。
现代文：任南郡王时，文惠太子限制他的日常起居，节制他的费用，昭业对豫章王妃庾氏说： 阿婆，佛法说，有福德生在帝王家。
English: When he was the king of Nan County, Prince Wen Hui restricted his daily living and controlled his expenses. Zhao Ye said to Yu Zhang Wangfei: Grandma, according to Buddhism, it is a blessing to be born into the royal family.

古文：今日见作天王，便是大罪，左右主帅，动见拘执，不如作市边屠酤富儿百倍矣。 
现代文：现在看作为帝王，就是大罪过，左右主帅，动辄就被拘禁，还不如作市场上屠宰酤酒的富家子，差百倍了。 
English: Nowadays, being an emperor is a great sin. If you are a coach, you will be arrested. If you are a rich kid who butchers alcohol in the market, it is a hundred times worse.

古文：及即位，极意赏赐，动百数十万。每见钱，辄曰： 我昔时思汝一文不得，今得用汝未？ 
现代文：等到即位之后，任意赏赐，动辄百数十万每次看到钱，就说： 我从前想你一文都得不到，现在能用你了没有? 
English: After ascending to the throne, he gave out rewards at will, often hundreds of thousands of dollars. Every time he saw money, he would say, "I never thought you would get a penny. Can I use you now?"

古文：期年之间，世祖斋库储钱数亿垂尽。
现代文：一年之内，世祖府库储备的数亿钱几乎用尽。
English: Within a year, the hundreds of millions of money in the treasury of Shizu was almost exhausted.

古文：开主衣库与皇后宠姬观之，给阉人竖子各数人，随其所欲，恣意辇取；取诸宝器以相剖击破碎之，以为笑乐。
现代文：打开君主的衣库和皇后、宠姬参观，给各人几个宦官童仆，随其所欲，任意用车拉取，拿那些宝物相互击打，让它们破碎，以此欢笑取乐。
English: Open the monarch's wardrobe and visit the queen and favorite, give each person a few eunuchs and servants, as they wish, use any car to pull, take those treasures to beat each other, let them break, and have fun with laughter.

古文：居尝裸袒，著红裈，杂采袒服。
现代文：平时经常袒衣裸体，穿红壳挥杂色内衣。
English: In normal times, they are often naked and wear red underwear of various colors.

古文：好斗鸡，密买鸡至数千价。
现代文：喜好斗鶸，秘密买的鶸价达数千。
English: Likes cockfighting, secretly buys chickens worth thousands.

古文：世祖御物甘草杖，宫人寸断用之。
现代文：世祖御用的甘草杖，宫女折成短段使用。
English: The licorice cane, which was used by the founder of the dynasty, was broken into short pieces by the empress.

古文：毁世祖招婉殿，乞阉人徐龙驹为斋。龙驹尤亲幸，为后阁舍人，日夜在六宫房内。
现代文：毁弃世祖的招婉殿，给予宦官徐龙驹作为宅第龙驹特别受宠，任后合舍人，白天晚上在六宫房内。
English: Destroyed the ancestor's Zhaowan Hall, and gave it to the eunuch Xu Longyu, who was particularly favored as the head of the eunuch's household. After his appointment, he lived in the six palace rooms during the day and at night.

古文：昭业与文帝幸姬霍氏淫通，龙驹劝长留宫内，声云度霍氏为尼，以余人代之。
现代文：昭业与文帝宠爱的姬妾霍氏淫乱私通，龙驹劝昭业将她长久留在宫内，声称让霍氏出家为尼姑，实际用别人代替。
English: Emperor Wen's favorite concubine, Lady Huo, had an adulterous affair with Zhao Ye. Long Yu persuaded Zhao Ye to keep her in the palace for a long time, claiming that she would let Lady Huo become a nun, but she actually used someone else instead.

古文：尝以邪谄自进，每谓人曰： 古时亦有监作三公者。 
现代文：龙驹曾凭藉奸邪谄媚自我引荐，常对人说： 古时候也有太监作三公的。 
English: Long Hao had introduced himself with the help of the treacherous and evil Su Mei, and often said to people: In ancient times, there were also eunuchs who served as the three princes.

古文：皇后亦淫乱，斋阁通夜洞开，内外淆杂，无复分别。
现代文：皇后也参与淫乱，门户整夜大开，内外混杂，不再有什么区别。
English: The empress also takes part in the debauchery, the door is wide open all night, inside and outside are mixed, there is no longer any difference.

古文：中书舍人綦母珍之、朱隆之，直阁将军曹道刚、周奉叔，并为帝羽翼。
现代文：中书舍人綦母珍之、朱隆之，直合将军曹道刨、周奉叔，都是帝的羽翼。
English: Zhu Rong, Cao Daohua, and Zhou Bongxiu, the generals of Zhouga, are the wings of the emperor.

古文：高宗屡谏不纳，先启诛龙驹，次诛奉叔及珍之，帝并不能违。
现代文：台塞屡次进谏不被采纳，于是启奏首先杀死龙驹，然后杀死奉叔及丝，帝都没能提出异议。
English: Taisei's repeated advances were not accepted, so Kaisei first killed Long Jie, and then killed Uncle Feng and Si, and the emperor could not raise any objection.

古文：既而尼媪外入，颇传异语，乃疑高宗有异志。
现代文：随后有个老尼姑从外地来，传播许多怪诞的言论，于是怀疑高宗有野心。
English: Then an old nun came from out of town and spread a lot of grotesque statements, so he suspected Gao Zong of having ambitions.

古文：中书令何胤以皇后从叔见亲，使直殿省，尝随后呼胤为三父，与胤谋诛高宗，令胤受事，胤不敢当，依违杜谏，帝意复止。
现代文：中书令何胤因为是皇后的堂叔而被亲近，让他在中央机关当值，曾随后叫何胤为三父，与何胤密谋杀死产塞，命令包胤接受这事，妞胤不敢担当，迟疑不决，进谏阻止，帝的意图就又作罢了。
English: In the middle of the book, He Yatian was approached because he was the cousin of the empress, and he was put on duty at the central office. He later called He Yatian the third father, conspired with He Yatian to murder the stillbirth, and ordered Bao Yatian to accept the matter. Yu Yatian did not dare to take charge, hesitated, and prevented him from entering the palace, and the emperor's intention was abandoned.

古文：乃谋出高宗于西州，中敕用事，不复关谘。
现代文：于是谋划放逐高宗到西州，亲自当政，不再商议咨询。
English: As a result, he planned to banish Gaozong to Xizhou and take the reins of government himself, no longer consulting others.

古文：高宗虑变，定谋废帝。
现代文：高宗担心事变，定下计谋废黜皇帝。
English: Gaozong was worried about the incident and decided to depose the emperor.

古文：二十二日壬辰，使萧谌、坦之等于省诛曹道刚、朱隆之等，率兵自尚书入云龙门，戎服加朱衣于上。
现代文：二十二日壬辰，高宗派萧谌、坦之等在官署杀死曹道刚、朱隆之等人，率兵自尚书省进入云龙门，在军服外面套上红色公服。
English: On the 22nd of Imjin, Gao Sect members Xiao Yao, Tan Zhi and others killed Cao Daogang, Zhu Longzhi and others at the government office, and led the soldiers from Shangshu Province into Yunlongmen, putting on red uniforms outside the military uniforms.

古文：比入门，三失履。
现代文：等到进入宫门，多次失掉鞋子。
English: Wait until you enter the palace gate and lose your shoes several times.

古文：王晏、徐孝嗣、萧坦之、陈显达、王广之、沈文季系进。
现代文：王晏、徐孝嗣、萧坦之、陈显达、王广之、沈文季随后跟进。
English: Wang Hui, Xu Xiaozhi, Xiao Tan Zhi, Chen Xian Da, Wang Guang Zhi, and Shen Wenzhi followed.

古文：帝在寿昌殿，闻外有变，使闭内殿诸房阁，令阉人登兴光楼望，还报云： 见一人戎服，从数百人，急装，在西钟楼下。 
现代文：皇帝在寿昌殿，听到外边发生事变，让人关闭殿内各房门，命令宦官登上兴光楼了望，回来报告说： 看见一个人穿着军服，跟着数百人，全副武装，在西钟楼下面。 
English: The emperor was in Shuchang Palace, and when he heard that there was an incident outside, he had people close the doors of all the rooms in the palace, ordered the eunuchs to go up to the Xingguang Building for a lookout, and came back to report: I saw a man wearing a military uniform, followed by hundreds of people, fully armed, under the West Bell Tower.

古文：须臾，萧谌领兵先入宫，截寿昌阁，帝走向爱姬徐氏房，拔剑自刺不中，以帛缠颈，舆接出延德殿。
现代文：不一会儿，萧谌率兵首先入宫，阻截寿昌合，皇帝走向爱妾徐氏的住房，拔剑自杀没有刺进，拿帛缠住脖子，用车接出延德殿。
English: In a short while, Xiao Jun and his soldiers entered the palace first, intercepted Shou Changhe, the emperor went to the house of his beloved concubine Xu, drew his sword to commit suicide without piercing it, wrapped his neck in a scarf, and drove out of the Yende Palace.

古文：谌初入殿，宿卫将士皆操弓盾欲拒战，谌谓之曰： 所取自有人，卿等不须动！ 
现代文：萧谌刚进入宫殿时，守卫将士都拿起弓盾要抵抗，萧谌对他们说： 要抓的自有其人，你们不许动手! 
English: When Xiao Yao had just entered the palace, the guards and soldiers all took up their bows and shields to resist. Xiao Yao said to them: You have your own people to catch, you are not allowed to do anything!

古文：宿卫信之，及见帝出，各欲自奋，帝竟无一言。
现代文：守卫相信了他，等看到皇帝出来，众人都要拼命，可是皇帝竟没说一句话。
English: The guards believed him, and when they saw the emperor coming out, they all tried their best, but the emperor didn't say a word.

古文：出西弄，杀之，时年二十一，舆尸出徐龙驹宅，殡葬以王礼。
现代文：走出西弄，杀掉了皇帝，时年二十二岁。用车装载尸首从徐龙驹宅第出来，按照王的礼节殡葬。
English: He was twenty-two years old when he went out of the west wing and killed the emperor. The corpse was loaded onto a cart and taken out of the second floor of Xu Longyu's house, where it was buried according to the king's etiquette.

古文：余党亦见诛。
现代文：皇帝的余党也被杀死。
English: The rest of the emperor's party was also killed.

古文：史臣曰：郁林王风华外美，众所同惑。伏情隐诈，难以貌求。
现代文：史臣曰：郁林王风华正茂外表优美，众人都被迷惑，藏匿真情隐瞒奸诈，可见难以凭貌取人。
English: The historian said, "The king of Yulin, Fenghua Zhengmao, is beautiful in appearance, and everyone is confused, hiding the truth and concealing treachery. It can be seen that it is difficult to judge people by their appearance.

古文：立嫡以长，未知瑕衅，世祖之心，不变周道。
现代文：立嫡长子继位，不知道其遇错恶行，世祖的本心，是不改变周的治国之道。
English: The true intention of the founder was not to change Zhou's way of governing the country.

古文：既而愆鄙内作，兆自宫闱，虽为害未远，足倾社稷。
现代文：不久罪恶在内部发生，征兆来自宫廷，虽然为害还未深远，但也足以颠覆国家。
English: Soon evils arose from within, and signs from the court, though not yet far-reaching, were sufficient to subvert the state.

古文：《春秋》书梁伯之过，言其自取亡也。
现代文：《春秋》记述梁伯的过错，说他是自取灭亡。
English: "Spring and Autumn" describes Liang Bo's mistake, saying that he died by his own hand.

古文：赞曰：十愆有一，无国不失。
现代文：赞曰：十项罪过中有一项，就没有国家不会灭亡。
English: Zang said: "If one of the ten sins is committed, no country will not perish."

古文：郁林负荷，弃礼亡律。
现代文：郁林王承担的罪名，是毁弃礼制取消法规。
English: The crime that Yu Lin Wang is charged with is the destruction of the etiquette system and the abolition of regulations.

