古文：自古受命帝王及继体守文之君，非独内德茂也，盖亦有外戚之助焉。
现代文：自古以来，受天命的开国帝王和继承正统遵守先帝法度的国君，不只是内在的品德高尚，大都也由于有外戚的帮助。
English: Since ancient times, the founding emperors who were chosen by Heaven and the sovereigns who inherited the orthodoxy and obeyed the laws of the former emperors were not only inherently virtuous, but also mostly due to the help of relatives.

古文：夏之兴也以涂山，而桀之放也以末喜。
现代文：夏代的兴起是因为有涂山氏之女，而夏桀的被放逐也和末喜有关。
English: The rise of the Xia dynasty was due to a daughter of the Tuishan clan, and the banishment of Xia Yao was also related to Suehi.

古文：殷之兴也以有娀ō，纣之杀也嬖妲己。
现代文：殷代的兴起也依靠了娀氏，商纣王的被杀也和宠幸妲己有关。
English: The rise of the Yin Dynasty also relied on the Zou clan, and the killing of the merchant Zou Wang was also related to the favour of Zou himself.

古文：周之兴也以姜原及大任，而幽王之禽也淫于褒姒。
现代文：周代的兴起也依靠了姜原及太任，而幽王的被擒也和他与褒姒的淫乱有关。
English: The rise of the Zhou dynasty also relied on Jiang Yuan and Tai Ren, and the beheading of Yu Wang was also related to his adultery with Bo Xun.

古文：故《易》基《干》《坤》，《诗》始《关雎》，《书》美厘降，《春秋》讥不亲迎。
现代文：所以《易经》以《乾》《坤》两卦为基本，《诗经》以《关雎》开篇，《尚书》赞美尧把女儿下嫁给舜，《春秋》讥讽娶妻不亲自去迎接。
English: Therefore, the "I Ching" is based on the "Kian" and "Kun" sagas, the "Song of Songs" begins with "Guan Zi," the "Song of Songs" praises Zou for marrying his daughter to Zou, and the "Spring and Autumn" ridicules marrying a wife without going to meet her in person.

古文：夫妇之际，人道之大伦也。
现代文：夫妇之间的关系，是人道之中最重大的伦常关系。
English: The relationship between a husband and wife is the most important moral relationship in humanity.

古文：礼之用，唯婚姻为兢兢。
现代文：礼的应用，只有婚姻最为谨慎。
English: Only marriage is the most cautious in the application of etiquette.

古文：夫乐调而四时和，阴阳之变，万物之统也。可不慎与？
现代文：乐声协调四时就和顺，阴阳的变化是万物生长变化的统领怎能不慎重呢？
English: The harmony of music is harmonious at four o'clock, and the change of yin and yang is the ruler of the growth and change of all things. How can we not be cautious?

古文：人能弘道，无如命何。
现代文：人能弘扬人伦之道，可是对天命却无可奈何。
English: People can promote the way of human ethics, but they can't do anything about the destiny.

古文：甚哉，妃匹之爱，君不能得之于臣，父不能得之于子，况卑下乎！
现代文：确实啊，配偶的亲爱之情，国君不能从大臣那里得到，父亲也不能从儿子那里得到，更何况是那些地位卑下的人呢！
English: Indeed, the love of a spouse, a sovereign cannot receive from a minister, nor a father from a son, let alone those who are in a lower position!

古文：既欢合矣，或不能成子姓；能成子姓矣，或不能要其终。
现代文：夫妇欢合之后，有的不能繁育子孙；能繁育子孙了，有的又不能得到好的归宿。
English: After the couple reunites, some can't breed children; after they can breed children, some can't get a good home.

古文：岂非命也哉？
现代文：这难道不是天命吗？
English: Isn't that what life is all about?

古文：孔子罕称命，盖难言之也。
现代文：孔子很少谈天命，大概是因为难以说清楚吧。
English: Confucius rarely spoke about the Mandate of Heaven, probably because it was difficult to explain.

古文：非通幽明之变，恶能识乎性命哉？
现代文：不能明了阴阳的变化，怎能懂得人性和天命的道理呢？
English: If you can't understand the changes of yin and yang, how can you understand the principles of human nature and destiny?

古文：太史公曰：秦以前尚略矣，其详靡得而记焉。
现代文：太史公说：秦以前的情况太过古远，那些详情没能记载下来。
English: Tai Shikong said: The situation before the Qin Dynasty was too ancient, and those details could not be recorded.

古文：汉兴，吕娥姁为高祖正后，男为太子。
现代文：汉朝建立，吕娥姁成为汉高祖的正宫皇后，她的儿子是太子。
English: When the Han Dynasty was established, Lu Ye Ye became the empress of the main palace of the founder of the Han Dynasty, and her son was crown prince.

古文：及晚节色衰爱弛，而戚夫人有宠，其子如意几代太子者数矣。
现代文：到了晚年，她容颜衰老就不受宠爱了。而戚夫人得宠，他的儿子如意好几次差点就取代了太子。
English: In her later years, her aging face fell out of favor, but her cousin was favored, and his son almost replaced the crown prince several times.

古文：及高祖崩，吕后夷戚氏，诛赵王，而高祖后宫唯独无宠疏远者得无恙。
现代文：到高祖去世后，吕后诛灭了戚氏，杀死赵王如意，而高祖后宫的妃子只有不受宠爱被疏远的人才能平安无事。
English: After Gao Zu's death, Lv Hou annihilated his relatives and killed Zhao Wang Ruyi, and the concubines of Gao Zu's harem could only be safe if they were not loved and were estranged.

古文：吕后长女为宣平侯张敖妻，敖女为孝惠皇后。
现代文：吕后的长女是宣平侯张敖的妻子，张敖的女儿是惠帝的皇后。
English: The eldest daughter of Empress Lyu was the wife of Prince Xuanping Zhang Ye, and Zhang Ye's daughter was the empress of Emperor Hui.

古文：吕太后以重亲故，欲其生子万方，终无子，诈取后宫人子为子。
现代文：吕太后由于亲上加亲的缘故，用种种办法想让她生子，可是始终没有生子，只得从后宫抱来别人的儿子谎称是她的儿子。
English: Empress Dowager Lv, as a result of having many relatives, tried in various ways to have her have a son, but she never had a son. She had to bring someone else's son from the harem and falsely claim that he was her son.

古文：及孝惠帝崩，天下初定未久，继嗣不明。
现代文：到孝惠帝去世以后，天下刚刚安定不久，继承皇位的人还没有明确。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiao Hui, the world had just stabilized, and it was not clear who would succeed to the throne.

古文：于是贵外家，王诸吕以为辅，而以吕禄女为少帝后，欲连固根本牢甚，然无益也。
现代文：于是就提高外戚的地位，封吕氏兄弟为王以作为辅佐，并让吕禄的女儿做少帝的皇后，想把根基连结得更牢固，然而毫无益处。
English: Therefore, he raised the status of his maternal relative, made Lu's brother the king as his assistant, and made Lu Lu's daughter the empress of the young emperor, hoping to connect the foundation more firmly, but to no avail.

古文：高后崩，合葬长陵。
现代文：吕后去世，与高祖合葬在长陵。
English: Lü Guo passed away and was buried with Gao Zu in the Changling Mausoleum.

古文：禄、产等惧诛，谋作乱。
现代文：吕禄、吕产等人害怕被诛杀，就阴谋作乱。
English: Lulu, Lussang and others were afraid of being killed, so they plotted to start a riot.

古文：大臣征之，天诱其统，卒灭吕氏。
现代文：大臣征讨他们，上天引导着汉家的皇统，终于消灭了吕氏。
English: The minister conscripted them, and heaven guided the imperial line of the Han family, finally eliminating the Lv clan.

古文：唯独置孝惠皇后居北宫。
现代文：只有孝惠皇后被安置住在北宫。
English: Only Empress Xiao Hui was placed in the North Palace.

古文：迎立代王，是为孝文帝，奉汉宗庙。
现代文：大臣把代王迎来即位，这就是孝文帝，由他供奉汉家的宗庙。
English: The minister ushered the acting king to the throne, this is Emperor Xiaowen, who dedicated the Han family's ancestral temple.

古文：此岂非天邪？
现代文：这难道不是天命吗？
English: Isn't that what life is all about?

古文：非天命孰能当之？
现代文：倘若不是天命，谁可以担此重任呢？
English: If it is not fate, who can take on this responsibility?

古文：薄太后，父吴人，姓薄氏，秦时与故魏王宗家女魏媪通，生薄姬，而薄父死山阴，因葬焉。
现代文：薄太后，父亲是吴他人，姓薄氏，秦朝时与原魏王宗族的女子魏媪私通，生了薄姬，薄姬的父亲死在山阴，于是就葬在那里。
English: Empress Dowager Bo, whose father was a Wu tian with the surname Bo, had an affair with a woman from the original Wei Wang clan, Wei Wei, during the Qin Dynasty, and gave birth to Bo Ji. Bo Ji's father died in the mountains and was buried there.

古文：及诸侯畔秦，魏豹立为魏王，而魏媪内其女于魏宫。
现代文：到诸侯反抗秦朝的时候，魏豹自立为魏王，魏就把她的女儿送入魏王宫中。
English: When the princes rebelled against the Qin Dynasty, Wei Leopard became the king of Wei, and Wei sent her daughter into the palace of the king of Wei.

古文：媪之许负所相，相薄姬，云当生天子。
现代文：魏媪到许负那里去看相，让他给薄姬相面，许负说她一定能够生下天子。
English: Wei Wei went to Xu Sheng to look at her face, and asked him to look at Bo Ji's face. Xu Sheng said that she would definitely be able to give birth to a heavenly child.

古文：是时项羽方与汉王相距荥阳，天下未有所定。
现代文：那时项羽正与汉王刘邦在荥阳相持天下，天下归谁还没有一定。
English: At that time, Xiang Yu was competing with the Han King Liu Bang in Shenyang, and it was not certain who would rule the world.

古文：豹初与汉击楚，及闻许负言，心独喜，因背汉而畔，中立，更与楚连和。
现代文：魏豹起初是与汉王一同攻打楚王，等到听了许负的话，心里独自高兴，便背叛汉王，先是保持中立，接着又与楚王联合。
English: At first, the Wei panther fought with the Han king against the Chu king. When he heard the negative words, he was happy alone in his heart and betrayed the Han king. First, he remained neutral, and then he united with the Chu king.

古文：汉使曹参等击虏魏王豹，以其国为郡，而薄姬输织室。
现代文：汉王派曹参等进攻并浮虏了魏王豹，把他据有的圭地改为郡，把薄姬送入收容罪犯的织造府。
English: The Han king sent Cao San and others to attack and captured the Wei king panther, changed his existing Gui territory into a county, and sent Bo Ji into the Weizhou government to accommodate criminals.

古文：豹已死，汉王入织室，见薄姬有色，诏内后宫，岁余不得幸。
现代文：魏王豹死后，有一次汉王进入织造府，看到薄姬容貌秀美，下诏把她收进后宫，一年多也没有得到宠幸。
English: After the death of the Wei king, the Han king once entered the Weaving Palace, saw Bo Ji's beautiful appearance, and ordered her to be taken into the harem. She was not favored for more than a year.

古文：始姬少时，与管夫人、赵子儿相爱，约曰： 先贵无相忘。 
现代文：当初薄姬年少时，与管夫人、赵子儿很亲密，三人立下誓约说： 谁先富贵不要把别人忘了。 
English: When Bo Ji was young, she was very close to Mrs. Guan and Zhao Zi'er. The three of them made a vow saying, "Whoever gets rich first should not forget the others."

古文：已而管夫人、赵子儿先幸汉王。
现代文：后来管夫人、赵子儿都先后得到汉王宠幸。
English: Later, Lady Guan and Zhao Zi Er were both favored by the Han King.

古文：汉王坐河南宫成皋台，此两美人相与笑薄姬初时约。
现代文：有一次汉王坐在河南宫的成皋台上，这两位美人谈起当初与薄姬的誓约而相互戏笑。
English: Once, Han Wang was sitting on the throne of Henan Palace, and the two beauties were joking with each other about the oath they had originally made with Bo Ji.

古文：汉王闻之，问其故，两人具以实告汉王。
现代文：汉王听到后，问她们缘故，两人把实情都告诉了汉王。
English: After hearing this, Han Wang asked them why, and both of them told Han Wang the truth.

古文：汉王心惨然，怜薄姬，是日召而幸之。
现代文：汉王心中有些伤感，可怜薄姬，这天就召见她并与她同宿。
English: Han Wang felt a little sad in his heart. He felt sorry for Bo Ji, so he summoned her that day and lodged with her.

古文：薄姬曰： 昨暮夜妾梦苍龙据吾腹。 
现代文：薄姬说： 昨天夜里妾梦见苍龙盘据在我的腹上。 
English: Bo Ji said, "Yesterday night, my concubine dreamt that I had a dragon plate on my stomach.

古文：高帝曰： 此贵征也，吾为女遂成之。 
现代文：高祖说： 这是显贵的征兆，我来为你成全了吧。 
English: Gaozu said, "This is a sign of nobility. Let me fulfill it for you."

古文：一幸生男，是为代王。
现代文：一次临幸就生了男孩，这就是代王。
English: A boy was born by a stroke of luck, and this is the acting king.

古文：其后薄姬希见高祖。
现代文：此后薄姬就很少见到高祖了。
English: After that, Bo Ji rarely saw Gao Zu.

古文：高祖崩，诸御幸姬戚夫人之属，吕太后怒，皆幽之，不得出宫。
现代文：高祖去世后，对那些为高祖侍寝而得宠幸的妃子如戚夫人等人，吕太后非常怨恨，就把她们都囚禁起来，不准出宫。
English: After Gao Zu's death, Empress Dowager Lv was very resentful of the concubines who had the privilege of sleeping with Gao Zu, such as his cousin's wife. She imprisoned them all and did not allow them to leave the palace.

古文：而薄姬以希见故，得出，从子之代，为代王太后。
现代文：而薄姬由于极少见高祖的缘故，得以出宫，跟随儿子到代国，成为代王太后。
English: However, because of her rarely seen great-great-grandfather, Bo Ji was able to leave the palace and follow her son to the dynastic state, becoming the dynastic empress dowager.

古文：太后弟薄昭从如代。
现代文：太后的弟弟薄昭也跟随到代国。
English: The empress dowager's younger brother, Bo Zhao, also followed her to the dynastic state.

古文：代王立十七年，高后崩。
现代文：代王在位十七年，吕后去世。
English: Seventeen years into his reign, Emperor Lyu passed away.

古文：大臣议立后，疾外家吕氏强，皆称薄氏仁善，故迎代王，立为孝文皇帝，而太后改号曰皇太后，弟薄昭封为轵侯。
现代文：大臣商议立新君，都痛恨外戚吕氏势力强盛，都称赞薄氏仁德善良，所以迎回代王，立为孝文皇帝，薄太后改称号为皇太后，她的弟弟薄昭被封为轵侯。
English: The ministers deliberated on the appointment of the new prince. They all hated the strong influence of their maternal relative, the Lü clan, and praised the benevolence and kindness of the Bo clan. Therefore, they welcomed back the acting king and established him as Emperor Xiaowen. The Bo empress dowager changed her title to empress dowager, and her brother, Bo Zhao, was given the title of prince.

古文：薄太后母亦前死，葬栎阳北。
现代文：薄太后的母亲已在这之前就去世了，葬在栎阳北边。
English: Empress Dowager Bo's mother had already passed away before this, and was buried in the north of Shenyang.

古文：于是乃追尊薄父为灵文侯，会稽郡置园邑三百家，长丞已下吏奉守冢，寝庙上食祠如法。
现代文：这时就追尊薄太后的父亲为灵文侯，在会稽郡设置在三百户的园邑，长丞以下的人被派去侍奉看守陵墓，宗庙供奉祭品及祀典都依照规定的礼制进行。
English: At this time, the father of the revered Empress Dowager Bo was revered as Ling Wen Hou, and the county of Heji was set up in a garden village of three hundred households. People below the rank of chojo were sent to serve as guardians of the mausoleum. The ancestral temple offered sacrifices and ceremonies were carried out in accordance with the prescribed etiquette.

古文：而栎阳北亦置灵文侯夫人园，如灵文侯园仪。
现代文：在栎阳北边也设置了灵文侯夫人陵园，所有礼仪都和灵文侯陵园一样。
English: In the north of Fenyang, Ling Wen Hou's wife's mausoleum is also set up, and all the etiquette is the same as Ling Wen Hou's mausoleum.

古文：薄太后以为母家魏王后，早失父母，其奉薄太后诸魏有力者，于是召复魏氏，赏赐各以亲疏受之。
现代文：薄太后认为自己的母家是魏王的后代，她的父母早逝，魏氏家族中有人侍奉薄太后很尽力，于是下令恢复魏氏家族地位，分别按照亲疏程度接受赏赐。
English: The Empress Dowager Bo believed that her mother's family was a descendant of the Wei King. Her parents died early, and some people in the Wei family served the Empress Dowager Bo very hard. Therefore, she ordered to restore the status of the Wei family and receive rewards according to the degree of kinship.

古文：薄氏侯者凡一人。
现代文：薄氏家族中被封侯的只有一人。
English: Only one member of the Bo family has been given a title.

古文：薄太后后文帝二年，以孝景帝前二年崩，葬南陵。
现代文：薄太后比文帝去世晚两年，在景帝前元二年去世，葬在南陵。
English: Empress Dowager Bo died two years after Emperor Wen and two years before Emperor Jing, and was buried in the South Mausoleum.

古文：以吕后会葬长陵，故特自起陵，近孝文皇帝霸陵。
现代文：由于吕后在长陵与高祖合葬，所以她特为自己单独起建陵墓，靠近孝文帝的霸陵。
English: Since Lyu Hou was buried together with Gao Zu in Changling Mausoleum, she specially built a mausoleum for herself alone, close to the mausoleum of Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：窦太后，赵之清河观津人也。
现代文：窦太后，赵国清河郡观津县人。
English: Dowager Empress Dou, from Guanzhong County, Qinghe County, Zhao Province.

古文：吕太后时，窦姬以良家子入宫侍太后。
现代文：吕太后时候，窦姬由良家女子选入宫中服侍太后。
English: At the time of Empress Dowager Lv, Dou Ji was chosen from a good family to serve the empress dowager.

古文：太后出宫人以赐诸王，各五人，窦姬与在行中。
现代文：后来太后把宫女遣送出宫赐给各诸侯王，每王五人，窦姬就在这批宫女之中。
English: Later, the empress dowager sent the maids of honor out of the palace and gave them to the princes, five for each prince, and Dou Ji was among this group of maids of honor.

古文：窦姬家在清河，欲如赵近家，请其主遣宦者吏： 必置我籍赵之伍中。 
现代文：窦姬家在清河，想到赵国离家较近，就请求主管遣送的宦官： 一定把我的名册放在去赵国的队伍里。 
English: Dou Ji's family was in Qinghe. Thinking that Zhao was closer to home, she asked the eunuch in charge of the deportation: "Be sure to put my name on the list to go to Zhao."

古文：宦者忘之，误置其籍代伍中。
现代文：宦官把这件事忘了，错把她的名册放到去代国的队伍中了。
English: The eunuch forgot about it and mistakenly put her name on the list of delegates.

古文：籍奏，诏可。
现代文：名册上奏，诏令说可以，应该启程了。
English: The roll call was announced, the decree said yes, it was time to leave.

古文：当行，窦姬涕泣，怨其宦者，不欲往，相强，乃肯行。
现代文：窦姬痛哭流涕，理怨那个宦官，不想去，强制她走，她才肯动身。
English: Dou Ji wept bitterly, she blamed the eunuch, she didn't want to go, he forced her to go, and only then did she agree to leave.

古文：至代，代王独幸窦姬，生女嫖，后生两男。
现代文：到了代国，代王偏偏只宠爱窦姬，生下女儿叫嫖，后来又生了两个男孩。
English: When it came to the next generation, the king favored Dou Ji, and she gave birth to a daughter named Yao, and later gave birth to two boys.

古文：而代王王后生四男。
现代文：代王王后生了四个男孩子。
English: The reigning queen gave birth to four boys.

古文：先代王未入立为帝而王后卒。及代王立为帝，而王后所生四男更病死。
现代文：在代王尚未入朝立为皇帝之前王后就死了，等到代王立为皇帝，王后所生的四个男孩子也接连病死。
English: The queen died before the king-in-waiting was installed as emperor, and when the king-in-waiting was installed as emperor, the four boys born to the queen also died one after another.

古文：孝文帝立数月，公卿请立太子，而窦姬长男最长，立为太子。
现代文：孝文帝即位几个月之后，公卿大臣请求立太子，窦姬的长子年龄最大，被立为太子。
English: A few months after the enthronement of Emperor Xiaowen, the Minister of the Court requested that a crown prince be appointed. Dou Ji's eldest son, who was the oldest, was appointed crown prince.

古文：立窦姬为皇后，女嫖为长公主。
现代文：窦姬也被立为皇后，女儿刘嫖为长公主。
English: Dou Ji was also made empress, and her daughter Liu Ye became the first princess.

古文：其明年，立少子武为代王，已而又徙梁，是为梁孝王。
现代文：第二年，立小儿子刘武为代王，不久又迁徙到梁国，这就是梁孝王。
English: In the second year, he appointed his youngest son Liu Wu as acting king, and soon moved to Liang Province. This is Liang Xiaowang.

古文：窦皇后亲蚤卒，葬观津。
现代文：窦皇后的双亲早已去世，葬在观津。
English: The parents of Empress Dou died long ago and are buried in Guanzhong.

古文：于是薄太后乃诏有司，追尊窦后父为安成侯，母曰安成夫人。
现代文：这时薄太后就下诏有关官员，追尊窦皇后父亲为安成侯，母亲为安成夫人。
English: At this time, Empress Dowager Bo issued an edict to the relevant officials, naming Emperor Dou's father as Prince Ancheng and his mother as Lady Ancheng.

古文：令清河置园邑二百家，长丞奉守，比灵文园法。
现代文：下令清河设置二百户的园邑，由当地长丞侍奉看守，一切都按灵文园的做法。
English: Qinghe was ordered to set up a garden village of two hundred households, with the local chancellor serving as warden. Everything was done according to the practice of Lingwen Garden.

古文：窦皇后兄窦长君，弟曰窦广国，字少君。
现代文：窦皇后的哥哥窦长君，弟弟叫窦广国，字少君。
English: Queen Dou's brother Dou Changjun, his younger brother is called Dou Guangguo, and his nickname is Shaojun.

古文：少君年四五岁时，家贫，为人所略卖，其家不知其处。
现代文：少君四五岁的时候，家境贫穷，被人掠去后出卖，他家中不知他被卖到了哪里。
English: When the young prince was four or five years old, his family was poor, he was robbed and sold, and his family did not know where he was sold.

古文：传十余家，至宜阳，为其主入山作炭，暮卧岸下百余人，岸崩，尽压杀卧者，少君独得脱，不死。
现代文：又转卖了十几家，卖到宜阳。他为主人进山烧炭，晚上一百多人躺在山崖下睡觉，山崖崩塌，把睡在下边的人全都压死了，只有少君脱险，没有被压死。
English: He went into the mountains to burn coal for his master. In the evening, more than a hundred people lay down to sleep under the cliff. The cliff collapsed, crushing all the people sleeping below to death. Only the young prince escaped danger and was not crushed to death.

古文：自卜数日当为侯，从其家之长安。
现代文：他自己算了一卦，断定他几天之内要被封侯，于是就从主人家去了长安。
English: He made his own calculations and concluded that he would be banished within a few days, so he left his master's house and went to Chang'an.

古文：闻窦皇后新立，家在观津，姓窦氏。
现代文：听说窦皇后是刚被封立的，她的家乡在观津，姓窦氏。
English: It is said that Empress Dou has just been enthroned. Her hometown is Guanzhong, and her surname is Dou.

古文：广国去时虽小，识其县名及姓，又常与其姊采桑堕，用为符信，上书自陈。
现代文：广国离家时年龄虽小，也还知道县名和自家的姓，又曾和姐姐一起采桑，从树上掉下来，把这些事做为证据，上书陈述自己的经历。
English: Although Guangguo was young when he left home, he still knew the name of the county and the surname of his family, and had once picked mulberry with his sister and fallen from a tree. He took these things as evidence and submitted a letter to state his experience.

古文：窦皇后言之于文帝，召见，问之，具言其故，果是。
现代文：窦皇后把这件事告诉文帝，广国即被召见，问他，他详细说明了情况，果然不错。
English: Empress Dou told Emperor Wen about this matter, and Guangguo was summoned to see him, and he explained the situation in detail, which turned out to be a good thing.

古文：又复问他何以为验。对曰： 姊去我西时，与我决于传舍中，丐沐沐我，请食饭我，乃去。 
现代文：又问他还能用什么来验证，他回答说： 姐姐离开我西去的时候，和我在驿站宿舍里诀别，姐姐讨来米汤给我洗头，又要来食物给我吃，然后才离去。 
English: He also asked him what else he could use to verify, and he replied: When my sister left me to go west, she said goodbye to me in the station dormitory. My sister asked for rice soup to wash my hair and food to eat before she left.

古文：于是窦后持之而泣，泣涕交横下。
现代文：于是窦后就拉住弟弟痛哭起来，涕泪纵横。
English: So Dou Huan grabbed her brother and burst into tears.

古文：侍御左右皆伏地泣，助皇后悲哀。
现代文：左右侍从也都趴伏在地上哭泣，一起为皇后助哀。
English: The attendants on both sides also prostrated themselves on the ground and wept, weeping together for the queen.

古文：乃厚赐田宅金钱，封公昆弟，家于长安。
现代文：于是赏赐他很多田地、房屋和金钱，又分封与皇后同祖的窦氏兄弟，让他们迁居到长安。
English: As a result, he was rewarded with many fields, houses and money, and the Dou brothers, who were the same ancestors as the empress, were given separate fiefs so that they could move to Chang'an.

古文：绛侯、灌将军等曰： 吾属不死，命乃且县此两人。
现代文：绛侯周勃、将军灌婴等人说： 我们这些人不死，可是命都悬在窦氏兄弟二人的手里。
English: Zhou Bo, Gen. Guan Yu and others said, "We cannot die, but our lives are in the hands of the two Dou brothers."

古文：两人所出微，不可不为择师傅宾客，又复效吕氏大事也。 
现代文：这两个人出身低微，不能不给他们挑选师傅和宾客，否则，又会再次效法吕氏阴谋叛乱。 
English: These two people are from a lowly background, and they must have their masters and guests selected for them, otherwise they will once again follow the example of Lü's conspiracy and rebellion.

古文：于是乃选长者士之有节行者与居。
现代文：于是就挑选年长有德、品行端正的士人和他俩在一起。
English: So he chose an elderly, virtuous and well-behaved scholar to be with them.

古文：窦长君、少君由此为退让君子，不敢以尊贵骄人。
现代文：窦长君、少君从此成为谦逊礼让的君子，不敢倚仗他们的尊贵对人骄横傲慢。
English: Since then, Dou Changjun and Shao Jun have become humble and courteous gentlemen, and dare not rely on their dignity to be arrogant.

古文：窦皇后病，失明。
现代文：窦皇后生病，双目失明。
English: Empress Dou fell ill and lost her sight.

古文：文帝幸邯郸慎夫人、尹姬，皆毋子。
现代文：文帝宠幸邯郸慎夫人、尹姬，她们都没有生下子女。
English: Emperor Wen favored Lady Zhengshen and Lady Yin, neither of whom gave birth to children.

古文：孝文帝崩，孝景帝立，乃封广国为章武侯。
现代文：孝文帝去世，孝景帝即位，封广国为章武侯。
English: Emperor Xiaowen died, Emperor Xiaojing ascended to the throne, and Guanggu was given the title of Zhangwu.

古文：长君前死，封其子彭祖为南皮侯。
现代文：长君已先去世，就封他的儿子彭祖为南皮侯。
English: Since Nagakuni had already passed away, his son, Peng Zu, was named the Prince of Nanpi.

古文：吴楚反时，窦太后从昆弟子窦婴，任侠自喜，将兵，以军功为魏其侯。
现代文：吴、楚等七国叛乱时，窦太后党兄弟的儿子窦婴，喜欢仗义行侠，率领军队平乱，因有战功被封为魏其侯。
English: When Wu, Chu and other seven countries rebelled, Dou Youyou, the son of Dou Youyou, the son of Dou Youyou, the son of Dou Youyou, the son of Dou Youyou, the son of Dou Youyou, the son of Dou Youyou, the son of Dou Youyou, the son of Dou Youyou, the son of Dou Youyou, the son of Dou Youyou, the son of Dou Youyou, the son of Dou Youyou, the son of Dou Youyou, the son of Dou Youyou, the son of Dou Youyou, the son of Dou Youyou, the son of Dou Youyou, the son of Dou Youyou, the son of Dou Youyou,

古文：窦氏凡三人为侯。
现代文：窦氏共有三人被封侯。
English: A total of three members of the Dou clan were given the title of marquess.

古文：窦太后好黄帝、老子言，帝及太子诸窦不得不读《黄帝》《老子》，尊其术。
现代文：窦太后爱好黄帝、老子的学说，皇帝、太子以及所有窦氏子弟都不得不读《黄帝》《老子》，尊奉黄老的学术。
English: Empress Dowager Dou loved the teachings of the Yellow Emperor and Laozi, and the emperor, the crown prince, and all the children of the Dou clan had to read "Yellow Emperor" and "Laozi" and respect the learning of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：窦太后后孝景帝六岁崩，合葬霸陵。
现代文：窦太后比景帝晚六年去世，她与文帝合葬在霸陵。
English: Empress Dowager Dou died six years later than Emperor Jing, and she was buried together with Emperor Wen in the Mausoleum.

古文：遗诏尽以东宫金钱财物赐长公主嫖。
现代文：遗下诏书把东宫的金钱财物全部赐给长公主刘嫖。
English: He left an imperial edict to give all the money and property of the East Palace to the eldest princess Liu Ye.

古文：王太后，槐里人，母曰臧儿。
现代文：王太后，槐里人，母亲叫臧儿。
English: The Empress Dowager, a native of Bali, whose mother's name was Zoro.

古文：臧儿者，故燕王臧荼孙也。
现代文：臧儿是原来的燕王臧荼的孙女。
English: Yan Er is the granddaughter of the original Yan Wang Rong.

古文：臧儿嫁为槐里王仲妻，生男曰信，与两女。
现代文：臧儿先嫁给槐里王仲为妻，生个儿子名叫信，还有两个女儿。
English: Xun Er was first married to Xun Li Wang Zhong, and they had a son named Xin and two daughters.

古文：而仲死，臧儿更嫁长陵田氏，生男鼢、胜。
现代文：后来王仲死了，臧儿又改嫁给长陵田氏，生了儿子田蚡、田胜。
English: Later, Wang Zhong died, and Jie Er remarried to a member of the Choryeotian clan, and gave birth to sons Tian Yao and Tian Sheng.

古文：臧儿长女嫁为金王孙妇，生一女矣，而臧儿卜筮之，曰两女皆当贵。
现代文：臧儿的长女嫁给金王孙为妻，生了一个女儿，臧儿为子女算封，结果说她的两个女儿都是贵人。
English: Yaer's eldest daughter married Jin Wangsun and gave birth to a daughter. Yaer's children were counted as nobility, and it turned out that both of her daughters were noblewomen.

古文：因欲奇两女，乃夺金氏。
现代文：因而她想要倚仗两个女儿，就把女儿从金氏家中强行接回。
English: So she forcibly took her two daughters back from the Kim family, wanting to be able to rely on them.

古文：金氏怒，不肯予决，乃内之太子宫。
现代文：金氏很愤怒，不肯和妻子断绝，臧儿就把女儿送进太子宫中。
English: Mr Kim was furious and refused to break up with his wife, so his daughter was put into the womb of the crown prince.

古文：太子幸爱之，生三女一男。
现代文：太子很宠爱她，生了三女一男。
English: The prince was very fond of her and had three daughters and a son.

古文：男方在身时，王美人梦日入其怀。
现代文：当男孩还在胎孕的时候，王美人梦见太阳投入她的怀中。
English: When the boy was still in the womb, Wang Meiren dreamed of the sun falling into her arms.

古文：以告太子，太子曰： 此贵征也。 
现代文：她把这个梦告诉太子，太子说： 这是大贵的征兆。 
English: She told the dream to the prince, who said, "This is a sign of nobility."

古文：未生而孝文帝崩，孝景帝即位，王夫人生男。
现代文：还没降生时孝文帝就去世了，孝景帝即位后，王夫人生下这个男孩。
English: Emperor Xiaowen died before he was born, and after Emperor Xiaojing ascended the throne, Mrs. Wang gave birth to this boy.

古文：先是臧儿又入其少女儿í姁ǔ，儿姁生四男。
现代文：先前臧儿又把她的小女儿儿姁送进宫中，儿姁生了四个男孩。
English: Previously, she had given birth to four boys after giving birth to her youngest daughter, Niu Niu.

古文：景帝为太子时，薄太后以薄氏女为妃。
现代文：景帝做太子的时候，薄太后选了一个薄氏的女子做他的妃子。
English: When Emperor Jing was crown prince, Empress Dowager Bo chose a Bo woman to be his concubine.

古文：及景帝立，立妃曰薄皇后。
现代文：到景帝即位，这个妃子就被立为薄皇后。
English: When Emperor Jing ascended the throne, this concubine was made the Queen of Bo.

古文：皇后毋子，毋宠。
现代文：皇后没有生子，不受宠幸。
English: The empress had no children, so she was not favored.

古文：薄太后崩，废薄皇后。
现代文：薄太后一去世，薄皇后就被废了。
English: As soon as the Empress Dowager Bo died, the Empress Bo was abolished.

古文：景帝长男荣，其母栗姬。
现代文：景帝的长子刘荣，他的母亲是栗姬。
English: Liu Rong, the eldest son of Emperor Jing, was born to a mother named Li Ji.

古文：栗姬，齐人也。
现代文：栗姬是齐人。
English: Kurihisa is a chihito.

古文：立荣为太子。
现代文：刘荣被立为太子。
English: Liu Rong was made crown prince.

古文：长公主嫖有女，欲予为妃。
现代文：长公主刘嫖有个女儿，打算给太子做妃子。
English: The eldest princess, Liu Ye, has a daughter who intends to become the prince's concubine.

古文：栗姬妒，而景帝诸美人皆因长公主见景帝，得贵幸，皆过栗姬，栗姬日怨怒，谢长公主，不许。
现代文：栗姬为人善妒，景帝的几位美人都是靠长公主才见到景帝的，她们得到的尊贵和宠爱都超过了栗姬，栗姬天天怨怒，为此就谢绝了长公主的要求，不应允亲事。
English: Kurihime was a jealous person. Several of Emperor Jing's beauties had to rely on the eldest princess to see Emperor Jing. They received more honor and favor than Kurihime. Kurihime was angry every day. For this reason, she refused the request of the eldest princess and did not agree to be married.

古文：长公主欲予王夫人，王夫人许之。
现代文：长公主想把女儿许配给王夫人的儿子，王夫人就答应了。
English: The eldest princess wanted to marry off her daughter to Mrs. Wang's son, and Mrs. Wang agreed.

古文：长公主怒，而日谗栗姬短于景帝曰： 栗姬与诸贵夫人幸姬会，常使侍者祝唾其背，挟邪媚道。 
现代文：长公主为这件事生气，就常常在景帝面前讲栗姬的坏话说： 栗姬和各位贵夫人及宠姬聚会，常常让侍从在他们背后吐口水诅咒，施用妖邪惑人的道术。 
English: The eldest princess was angry about this, and often spoke ill of Kurihime in front of Emperor Jing: Kurihime would gather with the ladies and favorites, and often had her attendants spit curses behind their backs, and use magic to bewitch people.

古文：景帝以故望之。
现代文：景帝因此恼恨栗姬。
English: As a result, Emperor Jing became angry with Li Qiye.

古文：景帝尝体不安，心不乐，属诸子为王者于栗姬，曰： 百岁后，善视之。 
现代文：景帝曾有一次身体不好，心中不乐，就把被封王的儿子们都托付给栗姬，对她说： 我死了以后，你要好好照顾他们。 
English: On one occasion, Emperor Jing was in poor health and unhappy, so he entrusted his sons, who had been crowned kings, to Kurihisa, saying to her: "After I die, you must take good care of them."

古文：栗姬怒，不肯应，言不逊。
现代文：栗姬生气，不肯答应，并且出言不逊。
English: Kurihime got angry, refused to agree, and spoke harshly.

古文：景帝恚，心嗛之而未发也。
现代文：景帝很气愤，怀恨在心并未发作。
English: Emperor Jing was very angry, but he did not hold a grudge.

古文：长公主日誉王夫人男之美，景帝亦贤之，又有曩者所梦日符，计未有所定。
现代文：长公主天天称赞王夫人儿子的优点，景帝也认为他德才兼备，又有从前他母亲梦日入怀的祥兆，但改立太子的想法还是没能定下来。
English: The eldest princess praised the merits of Mrs. Wang's son every day, and Emperor Jing also thought that he was both virtuous and talented, as well as the auspicious sign that his mother had dreamed of, but the idea of re-establishing the prince was still not settled.

古文：王夫人知帝望栗姬，因怒未解，阴使人趣大臣立栗姬为皇后。
现代文：王夫人知道景帝怨恨栗姬，趁他怒气未消，暗中派人催促大臣奏请立栗姬为皇后。
English: Mrs. Wang knew that Emperor Jing held a grudge against Kurihisa, and she took advantage of his lingering anger to secretly send someone to urge the minister to petition for Kurihisa to be made empress.

古文：大行奏事毕，曰：  子以母贵，母以子贵 ，今太子母无号，宜立为皇后。 
现代文：一次朝会大行官奏事完了，又说：  子以母贵，母以子贵 ，如今太子的母亲还没有封号，应当立为皇后。 
English: Once the report of the grand marshal of the Imperial Court was completed, he also said: "Children are precious to their mothers, and mothers are precious to their children. Nowadays, the prince's mother has not yet been given a title, and she should be made the empress."

古文：景帝怒曰： 是而所宜言邪！ 
现代文：景帝发怒说： 这是你应该讲的话吗！ 
English: Jingdi said angrily: Is this what you should say!

古文：遂案诛大行，而废太子为临江王。
现代文：结果竟论罪处死了大行官，并废了太子，改封他为临江王。
English: As a result, Daigokan was actually executed for his crime, and the crown prince was abolished and his title changed to King of Linjiang.

古文：栗姬愈恚恨，不得见，以忧死。
现代文：栗姬更加怨恨，无法见到景帝，就这样郁郁而终。
English: Kurihisa was even more resentful that she couldn't see Emperor Jing, and she died in such a gloomy state.

古文：卒立王夫人为皇后，其男为太子，封皇后兄信为盖侯。
现代文：王夫人终于被立为皇后，他的儿子立为太子，皇后的哥哥王信被封为盖侯。
English: Mrs. Wang was finally appointed empress, his son was appointed crown prince, and the queen's brother, Wang Xin, was made a vassal lord.

古文：景帝崩，太子袭号为皇帝。
现代文：景帝去世，太子继位为皇帝。
English: Emperor Jing died, and the crown prince became emperor.

古文：尊皇太后母臧儿为平原君。
现代文：尊皇太后的母亲臧儿为平原君。
English: The mother of the revered empress dowager is played by Hirahara-kun.

古文：封田鼢为武安侯，胜为周阳侯。
现代文：封田蚡为武安侯，田胜为周阳侯。
English: Feng Tianjun was a Wu'an marquis, and Tian Sheng was a Zhouyang marquis.

古文：景帝十三男，一男为帝，十二男皆为王。
现代文：景帝有十三个儿子，一个儿子做了皇帝，十二个儿子都封为王。
English: Emperor Jing had thirteen sons, one of whom became emperor, and twelve of whom were crowned as kings.

古文：而儿姁早卒，其四子皆为王。
现代文：儿姁早逝，她的四个儿子也都封为王。
English: When her son died young, her four sons also became kings.

古文：王太后长女号曰平阳公主，次为南宫公主，次为林虑公主。
现代文：王太后的长女封号是平阳公主，次女是南宫公主，三女是林虑公主。
English: The eldest daughter of the Queen Mother was named Princess Pingyang, the second daughter was named Princess Nangu, and the third daughter was named Princess Lin Qi.

古文：盖侯信好酒。
现代文：盖侯王信好饮酒。
English: Gai Hou Wang Xin likes to drink alcohol.

古文：田鼢、胜贪，巧于文辞。
现代文：田蚡、田胜为人贪婪，善用文辞巧辩。
English: Tian Qi and Tian Sheng are greedy people, and they are good at using words to argue.

古文：王仲蚤死，葬槐里，追尊为共侯，置园邑二百家。
现代文：王仲早死，葬在槐里，追尊为共侯，设置了二百户的园邑。
English: Wang Zhong died at an early age and was buried in Yili. He was revered as a noble and set up a garden village of 200 households.

古文：及平原君卒，从田氏葬长陵，置园比共侯园。
现代文：等到平原君去世，跟田氏一起葬在长陵，设置的陵园同共侯陵园的规格一样。
English: When Hirahara passed away, he was buried together with the Tian clan in the Choson Mausoleum. The cemetery was set up with the same specifications as the Kyoho Cemetery.

古文：而王太后后孝景帝十六岁，以元朔四年崩，合葬阳陵。
现代文：王太后比孝景帝晚死年十六年，在元朔四年去世，与景帝合葬在阳陵。
English: Empress Dowager Wang died sixteen years later than Emperor Xiao Jing, in the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, and was buried with Emperor Jing in Yangling.

古文：王太后家凡三人为侯。
现代文：王太后家共有三人被封侯。
English: A total of three members of the empress dowager's family were given the title of prince.

古文：卫皇后字子夫，生微矣。
现代文：卫皇后字子夫，出身低微。
English: He was the son-in-law of Empress Wei and came from a humble background.

古文：盖其家号曰卫氏，出平阳侯邑。
现代文：大概她家号称卫氏，在平阳侯封地以内。
English: Presumably, her family name was Wei, within the fiefdom of Pingyang.

古文：子夫为平阳主讴者。
现代文：子夫是平阳公主的歌姬。
English: Her son-in-law is Poems of Princess Pingyang.

古文：武帝初即位，数岁无子。
现代文：武帝新即位，几年没有儿子。
English: Emperor Wu was newly enthroned and had not had a son for several years.

古文：平阳主求诸良家子女十余人，饰置家。
现代文：平阳公主挑选了十几个良家女子，装扮起来留在家里。
English: Princess Pingyang selected more than a dozen girls from good families to dress up and stay at home.

古文：武帝祓霸上还，因过平阳主。
现代文：武帝在霸上参加除灾求福的礼仪回来，顺便到平阳公主家。
English: When Emperor Wu returned from participating in the ritual of disaster relief and seeking good fortune in Hegang, he dropped by Princess Pingyang's home.

古文：主见所侍美人。
现代文：公主让侍奉的美人都出来见武帝，武帝都不喜欢。
English: The princess asked her attendants to come out to see Emperor Wu, but Emperor Wu did not like them.

古文：上弗说。既饮，讴ō者进，上望见，独说卫子夫。
现代文：饮酒之后，歌姬进来，武帝看见后，唯独喜欢卫子夫。
English: After drinking, Gakki came in, and Emperor Wu saw her, but he only liked the tutor.

古文：是日，武帝起更衣，子夫侍尚衣轩中，得幸。
现代文：这天，武帝起身换衣服，子夫在皇帝的衣车中侍奉，得到亲幸。
English: On this day, Emperor Wu got up to change his clothes, and his son-in-law served in the emperor's carriage, and was very lucky.

古文：上还坐，欢甚，赐平阳主金千斤。
现代文：武帝回到座位上，非常高兴，赐给平阳公主黄金千斤。
English: Emperor Wu returned to his seat, very happy, and gave Princess Pingyang a thousand pounds of gold.

古文：主因奏子夫奉送入宫。
现代文：公主趁机奏请把卫子夫奉送入宫。
English: The princess took the opportunity to plead for the guardsman to be sent to the palace.

古文：子夫上车，平阳主拊其背曰： 行矣，强饭，勉之！
现代文：子夫上车后，平阳公主抚着她的背说： 走吧，好好吃饭，努力吧！
English: After her son-in-law got on the bus, Princess Pingyang stroked her back and said, "Let's go, have a good meal, work hard!"

古文：即贵，无相忘。 
现代文：如果尊贵了，别把我忘了。 
English: If you are honored, don't forget me.

古文：入宫岁余，竟不复幸。
现代文：子夫入宫一年多，竟再没有得到武帝的宠幸。
English: Zifu entered the palace for more than a year, but he was no longer favored by Emperor Wu.

古文：武帝择宫人不中用者，斥出归之。
现代文：武帝把不中用的宫人挑出来，让她们出宫回家。
English: Emperor Wu singled out the useless courtiers and let them go home.

古文：卫子夫得见，涕泣请出。
现代文：卫子夫因而得见武帝，她哭泣着请求出宫。
English: As a result, the palace guard was able to see Emperor Wu, and she wept and begged to leave the palace.

古文：上怜之，复幸，遂有身，尊宠日隆。
现代文：皇上怜爱她，再次亲幸，于是有了身孕，一天比一天更受尊宠。
English: The emperor took pity on her, and they were once again blessed with a child, and she became pregnant. Day by day, she became more and more beloved.

古文：召其兄卫长君弟青为侍中。
现代文：武帝召见她的哥哥卫长君和弟弟卫青任侍中。
English: Emperor Wu summoned her brother Wei Changjun and brother Wei Qing to serve as attendants.

古文：而子夫后大幸，有宠，凡生三女一男。男名据。
现代文：子夫后来大受武帝宠幸，一共生了三个女儿一个儿子，儿子名叫据。
English: The son-in-law was later greatly favored by Emperor Wu, and together they had three daughters and a son, who was named Yan.

古文：初，上为太子时，娶长公主女为妃。立为帝，妃立为皇后，姓陈氏，无子。
现代文：当初，武帝还是太子的时候，娶了长公主的女儿做妃子，他即位为皇帝，妃子就立为皇后，姓陈氏，没有生子。
English: In the beginning, when Emperor Wu was still a prince, he married the daughter of the eldest princess, Wu, to be his concubine. He ascended to the throne as emperor, and the concubine became the empress. Her surname was Chen, and she had no children.

古文：上之得为嗣，大长公主有力焉，以故陈皇后骄贵。
现代文：皇上能够继承帝位，大长公主出力不小，因此陈皇后骄横高傲。
English: The emperor is able to succeed to the throne, and the eldest princess's output is not small. Therefore, Empress Chen is arrogant.

古文：闻卫子夫大幸，恚，几死者数矣。
现代文：听说卫子夫受武帝宠幸，非常气愤，多次寻死。
English: Hearing that the guardian was favored by Emperor Wu, he became very angry and tried to kill himself several times.

古文：上愈怒。
现代文：皇上也更加生气。
English: The Emperor also became more angry.

古文：陈皇后挟妇人媚道，其事颇觉，于是废陈皇后，而立卫子夫为皇后。
现代文：陈皇后施用妇人惑人的邪术，武帝对此事颇有觉察，于是就废了陈皇后，立卫子夫为皇后。
English: Empress Chen used the sorcery of a woman to deceive people. Emperor Wu was quite aware of this matter, so he abolished Empress Chen and set up a tutor as empress.

古文：陈皇后母大长公主，景帝姊也，数让武帝姊平阳公主曰： 帝非我不得立，已而弃捐吾女，壹何不自喜而倍本乎！ 
现代文：陈皇后的母亲大长公主是景帝的姐姐，多次责备武帝的姐姐平阳公主说： 皇帝没有我就不能即位，即位后竟抛弃了我的女儿，为何不自感庆幸而忘记本分啊！ 
English: Empress Chen's mother, the eldest princess, was the elder sister of Emperor Jing. She repeatedly rebuked Emperor Wu's elder sister, Princess Pingyang, saying: "The emperor cannot ascend the throne without me. After he ascended the throne, he abandoned my daughter. Why don't you feel lucky and forget your duty!"

古文：平阳公主曰： 用无子故废耳。 
现代文：平阳公主说道： 是没有儿子的缘故才废的。 
English: Princess Pingyang said: It was because I didn't have a son that I had to give it up.

古文：陈皇后求子，与医钱凡九千万，然竟无子。
现代文：陈皇后渴求得子，花费的医药费有九千万之多，然而终究未能生子。
English: Queen Chen longed for a child and spent as much as 90 million yuan on medical expenses, but in the end she was unable to have a child.

古文：卫子夫已立为皇后，先是卫长君死，乃以卫青为将军，击胡有功，封为长平侯。
现代文：卫子夫立为皇后的时候，卫长君就已经死了，武帝就任命卫青为将军，卫青因抗击胡人立下战功，封他为长平侯。
English: When the Empress was appointed by her husband, Emperor Wu appointed Wei Qing as a general, and he was given the title of Changping Hou (長平侯).

古文：青三子在襁褓中，皆封为列侯。
现代文：他的三个儿子还在襁褓之中，也都被封为列侯。
English: His three sons, who were still in their infancy, were also made vassals.

古文：及卫皇后所谓姊卫少儿，少儿生子霍去病，以军功封冠军侯，号骠骑将军。
现代文：卫皇后有个姐姐卫少儿，她生的儿子霍去病，因有战功被封为冠军侯，号称骠骑将军。
English: Empress Wei had an older sister, Wei Shao'er. The son she gave birth to, Huo Gao, became ill and was awarded the title of champion marquis for his military exploits. He was known as the general of the cavalry.

古文：青号大将军。
现代文：卫青号称大将军。
English: Wei Qing was known as the great general.

古文：立卫皇后子据为太子。
现代文：卫皇后的儿子刘据被立为太子。
English: Liu Rong, the son of Empress Wei, was made crown prince.

古文：卫氏枝属以军功起家，五人为侯。
现代文：卫氏的亲族以军功起家，有五人被封侯。
English: The relatives of the Wei clan started their family with military achievements, and five of them were given the title of marquess.

古文：及卫后色衰，赵之王夫人幸，有子，为齐王。
现代文：到卫皇后姿色衰老了，赵国的王夫人受宠幸，有儿子，被封为齐王。
English: When the Queen of Wei became old, the Queen of Zhao was favored with a son and was named the King of Qi.

古文：王夫人蚤卒。
现代文：王夫人早逝。
English: Mrs. Wang died early.

古文：而中山李夫人有宠，有男一人，为昌邑王。
现代文：中山李夫人受宠，生了一个儿子，被封为昌邑王。
English: Mrs. Zhongshan Li was favored and gave birth to a son, who was named the King of Changyi.

古文：李夫人蚤卒，其兄李延年以音幸，号协律。
现代文：李夫人早逝，她的哥哥李延年因精于音律而得宠，封为协律官。
English: Mrs. Li died at an early age, and her brother, Li Yannian, was favored because of his mastery of music and was appointed as an assistant judge.

古文：协律者，故倡也。
现代文：所谓协律，就是从前的歌舞艺人。
English: The so-called accompaniment is the former song and dance artist.

古文：兄弟皆坐奸，族。
现代文：他们兄弟都因犯淫乱后宫罪而被灭族。
English: Their brothers were all exterminated for committing the crime of harem fornication.

古文：是时其长兄广利为贰师将军，伐大宛，不及诛，还，而上既夷李氏，后怜其家，乃封为海西侯。
现代文：当时她的长兄李广利为贰师将军，正在征讨大宛，没有被杀，回到长安，皇上已经诛灭了李氏，后来又怜悯他这一家，才把他封为海西侯。
English: At that time, her eldest brother, Li Guangli, was the general of the Yi Division, and he was in the process of conquering Dayuan. He was not killed, and he returned to Chang'an. The emperor had already annihilated the Li clan, and later he took pity on his family and made him the Marquis of Haixi.

古文：他姬子二人为燕王、广陵王。
现代文：别的皇妃还有两个儿子是燕王、广陵王。
English: Other empresses also had two sons, Yan Wang and Guangling Wang.

古文：其母无宠，以忧死。
现代文：他们的母亲不受宠爱，因忧伤而死。
English: Their mother was unloved and died of grief.

古文：及李夫人卒，则有尹婕妤之属，更有宠。然皆以倡见，非王侯有土之士女，不可以配人主也。
现代文：到李夫人去世后，又有尹婕之流交替受宠，然而她们都是以歌女的身份得见武帝，不是有封地的王侯之家的女子，不应该和皇帝匹配。
English: After the death of Mrs. Li, there was also a succession of Yin Xizhangs who were favored alternately. However, they all met Emperor Wu as songstresses. They were not women of princely families with fiefdoms, and should not be matched with the emperor.

古文：褚先生曰：臣为郎时，问习汉家故事者钟离生。
现代文：褚先生说：我任郎官的时候，问过熟习汉家旧事的锺离生。
English: Mr. Zou said: When I was a vassal, I asked Zou Yixing, who was familiar with the old affairs of the Han family.

古文：曰：王太后在民间时所生一女者，父为金王孙。
现代文：据他说：王太后在民间时所生的一个女儿，他的父亲是金王孙。
English: According to him, his father was Jin Wangsun, a daughter born to the Queen Mother when she was a commoner.

古文：王孙已死，景帝崩后，武帝已立，王太后独在。
现代文：王孙已经死了，景帝去世后，武帝即位，只有王太后还在。
English: Wang Sun had already died. After the death of Emperor Jing, Emperor Wu ascended to the throne. Only the Queen Mother was still alive.

古文：而韩王孙名嫣素得幸武帝，承间白言太后有女在长陵也。
现代文：韩王孙名叫嫣的人平时受到武帝的宠爱，他趁机会谈起太后有个女儿在长陵。
English: Han Wangsun, whose name was Yu, was usually favored by Emperor Wu. He took the opportunity to talk about the Empress Dowager having a daughter in Changling.

古文：武帝曰： 何不蚤言！ 
现代文：武帝说： 怎么不早说！ 
English: Emperor Wu said: Why didn't you say so earlier!

古文：乃使使往先视之，在其家。
现代文：于是派人先去看一看，她果然在家中。
English: So they sent someone to take a look first, and sure enough, she was at home.

古文：武帝乃自往迎取之。
现代文：武帝就亲自前去迎接她。
English: Emperor Wu went to meet her in person.

古文：跸道，先驱旄骑出横城门，乘舆驰至长陵。
现代文：路上清道禁行，先驱警卫的骑兵出横城门，武帝乘坐的车飞驰到长陵。
English: On the road, the road was closed, the cavalry of the pioneer guard came out of the city gate, and the car in which Emperor Wu was riding sped to Changling.

古文：当小市西入里，里门闭，暴开门，乘舆直入此里，通至金氏门外止，使武骑围其宅，为其亡走，身自往取不得也。
现代文：在小市的西边进入里巷，里门关闭着，用力打开门，武帝乘的车一直进入里中，到达金氏门外才停下来，马上派武装骑兵包围这座宅院，为的是防止她逃走，以免亲自前来也接不到人。
English: Entering the alley on the west side of the small city, the inner door was closed, and the door was forced open. Emperor Wu's car went all the way into the alley, and only stopped when it reached the outside of Kim's door. He immediately sent armed cavalry to surround the house, in order to prevent her from escaping, so as not to be able to pick up people in person.

古文：即使左右群臣入呼求之。
现代文：随即派左右群臣进去呼喊寻找。
English: He immediately sent a group of courtiers to go in and shout for help.

古文：家人惊恐，女亡匿内中床下。
现代文：金氏家里人人惊恐，金女躲藏在内室的床下。
English: Everyone in the Kim family was terrified, and Kim Yo Jong hid under the bed in the inner room.

古文：扶持出门，令拜谒。
现代文：随从找到后扶着她出门，让她拜见皇上。
English: When the attendant found her, he helped her out of the house and invited her to meet the emperor.

古文：武帝下车泣曰： 嚄！
现代文：武帝下车哭着说： 哎呀！
English: Wu Di got out of the car crying and said, "Oh!

古文：大姊，何藏之深也！ 
现代文：我的大姐，怎么藏得这么深哪！ 
English: My eldest sister, how could she hide so deeply!

古文：诏副车载之，掉头驰还，而直入长乐宫。
现代文：下令副车载上她，掉转车子飞驰回城，直入长乐宫。
English: He ordered the second car to pick her up, and the car sped back to the city, straight into the Changle Palace.

古文：行诏门着引籍，通到谒太后。
现代文：武帝在行车途中就诏令看守宫门的人把自己的名帖向太后通报，车一到就去拜见太后。
English: On the way, Emperor Wu ordered the person guarding the palace gate to inform the empress dowager of his famous post, and he would go to see the empress dowager as soon as the car arrived.

古文：太后曰： 帝倦矣，何从来？ 
现代文：太后说： 皇上疲倦了，从哪里来呀？ 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "If the Emperor is tired, where did it come from?

古文：帝曰： 今者至长陵得臣姊，与俱来。 
现代文：武帝说： 今天到长陵找到了我的姐姐，和她一起来了。 
English: Wu Di said: Today, I found my sister in Changling and came with her.

古文：顾曰： 谒太后！ 
现代文：回过头来对姐姐说： 拜见太后！ 
English: She turned to her sister and said, "See the Empress!"

古文：太后曰： 女某邪？ 
现代文：太后说： 这就是我那个女儿吗？ 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "Is this my daughter?"

古文：曰： 是也。 
现代文：回答说： 是呀。 
English: "Yes," he replied.

古文：太后为下泣，女亦伏地泣。
现代文：太后落泪哭泣，女儿也伏在地上哭泣。
English: The Empress burst into tears and wept, and her daughter also fell to the ground weeping.

古文：武帝奉酒前为寿，奉钱千万，奴婢三百人，公田百顷，甲第，以赐姊。
现代文：武帝捧着酒到跟前来为太后和姐姐祝贺，拿出一千万钱，三百名奴婢，一百顷公田，上等宅第，赐给姐姐。
English: Emperor Wu came with wine to congratulate the empress dowager and her sister, and gave her ten million yuan, three hundred slaves, one hundred hectares of public land, and a first-class residence.

古文：太后谢曰： 为帝费焉。 
现代文：太后道谢说： 让皇上破费了。 
English: The empress dowager thanked him and said, "You have cost the emperor a lot of money."

古文：于是召平阳主、南宫主、林虑主三人俱来谒见姊，因号曰修成君。
现代文：于是又召来平阳公主、南宫公主和林虑公主三人都来拜见姐姐，给她的封号是修成君。
English: Therefore, Princess Pingyang, Princess Nangu, and Princess Lin Qian were summoned to visit their sister, who was given the title Xiu Chengjun.

古文：有子男一人，女一人。
现代文：她有一个儿子，一个女儿。
English: She has a son, a daughter.

古文：男号为修成子仲，女为诸侯王王后。
现代文：儿子号为修成子仲，女儿做了诸侯王的王后。
English: His son's name was Shou Cheng Zi Zhong, and his daughter became the queen of princes.

古文：此二子非刘氏，以故太后怜之。
现代文：这两个孩子不出于刘氏，因此太后怜爱他们。
English: The two children were not from the Liu clan, so the empress dowager took pity on them.

古文：修成子仲骄恣，陵折吏民，皆患苦之。
现代文：修成子仲骄横放纵，常常欺凌压迫官吏和百姓，人们都为此而忧虑苦恼。
English: People are worried and distressed about the arrogance and self-indulgence of Xiu Chengzi, who often bullies and oppresses officials and the people.

古文：卫子夫立为皇后，后弟卫青字仲卿，以大将军封为长平侯。
现代文：卫子夫立为皇后之后，她的弟弟卫青字仲卿，以大将军的职位被封为长平侯。
English: After the Empress was appointed by her husband, her younger brother Wei Qing (衛青), also known as Zhongqing, was given the title of Changping Hou (長平侯) with the rank of general.

古文：四子，长子伉为侯世子，侯世子常侍中，贵幸。
现代文：他有四个儿子，长子卫伉是准备继承爵位的世子，他曾任皇帝侍从官侍中，地位尊贵，很受重新。
English: He has four sons. The eldest son, Wei Wei, is the heir who is preparing to inherit the title of nobility. He was once the emperor's attendant in the official attendants, a position of honor, and is highly respected.

古文：其三弟皆封为侯，各千三百户，一曰阴安侯，二曰发干侯，三曰宜春侯，贵震天下。
现代文：卫伉的三个弟弟都被封侯，各给封地一千三百户，一个叫阴安侯，一个叫发干侯，一个叫宜春侯，他们的富贵震动天下。
English: Wei Zheng's three younger brothers were all given fiefs, and each of them was given a fief of 1,300 households. One was called Yin An Hou, one was called Fagan Hou, and one was called Yichun Hou. Their wealth shook the world.

古文：天下歌之曰： 生男无喜，生女无怒，独不见卫子夫霸天下！ 
现代文：天下流传这样一首歌谣： 生儿不必太高兴，生女莫把怒气发，难道没有看到卫子夫霸天下！ 
English: There is a popular folk song that goes like this: A newborn baby does not have to be too happy, a newborn girl should not be angry, have you not seen the guardian overpower the world!

古文：是时平阳主寡居，当用列侯尚主。
现代文：当时平阳公主守寡，应该选一位列侯做她的丈夫。
English: At that time, Princess Pingyang was a widow, so she should choose a vassal to be her husband.

古文：主与左右议长安中列侯可为夫者，皆言大将军可。
现代文：公主和左右侍从议论长安城里的列侯谁可以做她的丈夫，都说大将军卫青可以。
English: The princess and her attendants were discussing who among the vassals of Chang'an could be her husband. They all agreed that General Wei Qing could be her husband.

古文：主笑曰： 此出吾家，常使令骑从我出入耳，奈何用为夫乎？ 
现代文：公主笑着说： 他是从我家出去的人，我常常让他骑马跟随我出入，怎能让他做我的丈夫呢？ 
English: The princess smiled and said, "He is a stranger in my house, I often let him ride with me, how can I make him my husband?"

古文：左右侍御者曰： 今大将军姊为皇后，三子为侯，富贵振动天下，主何以易之乎？ 
现代文：左右侍从们说： 如今大将军的姐姐是皇后，她的三个儿子都封侯了，富贵震动天下，公主怎么倒把他看轻了呢？ 
English: The attendants on his right and left said, "Nowadays, the general's sister is the empress, her three sons have been crowned as princes, and their wealth has shaken the world. How could the princess have treated him so lightly?"

古文：于是主乃许之。
现代文：于是公主才同意了。
English: Then the princess consented.

古文：言之皇后，令白之武帝，乃诏卫将军尚平阳公主焉。
现代文：把这件事告诉了皇后，皇后禀告武帝，武帝就诏令卫将军做平阳公主的丈夫。
English: He told the matter to the empress, and the empress denounced Emperor Wu, who then ordered General Wei to become the husband of Princess Pingyang.

古文：褚先生曰：丈夫龙变。
现代文：褚先生说： 丈夫可以像龙那样变化无穷。
English: Mr Zou said: "Husbands can change like a dragon.

古文：传曰： 蛇化为龙，不变其文；家化为国，不变其姓。 
现代文：书传上面说： 蛇变成龙，不会改变它的花纹；家变成了国，不会改变它的姓氏。 
English: The book said: "When a snake turns into a dragon, it will not change its pattern; when a family turns into a country, it will not change its surname."

古文：丈夫当时富贵，百恶灭除，光耀荣华，贫贱之时何足累之哉！
现代文：丈夫在富贵的时候，有多少污点都可以被掩盖消除，只剩光彩荣耀，贫贱时候的事情如何能够牵累他呢！
English: When the husband is rich, how many stains can be covered up and eliminated, only glory remains, how can the things of the poor time affect him!

古文：武帝时，幸夫人尹婕é妤ú。
现代文：武帝时，宠爱过夫人尹婕妤。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu, he favored his wife, Yin Zong.

古文：邢夫人号娙娥，众谓之 娙何 。
现代文：邢夫人官号娙娥，人们都叫她 娙何 。
English: Mrs. Zou's official title is Chang'e, and people call her Zou He.

古文：何秩比中二千石，容华秩比二千石，婕妤秩比列侯。
现代文：娙何的品级相当于俸禄中二千石的官，容华的品级相当于列侯，婕妤的地位相当于列侯。
English: 何's rank was equivalent to that of an official with 2,000 koku in salary,容华's rank was equivalent to that of a vassal, and  optimally was equivalent to that of a vassal.

古文：常从婕妤迁为皇后。
现代文：曾有人从婕妤升为皇后。
English: Once upon a time, someone rose from the cocoon to become the empress.

古文：尹夫人与邢夫人同时并幸，有诏不得相见。
现代文：尹夫人与邢夫人同时被宠幸，武帝有诏令她们两人不能相见。
English: Both Mrs. Yin and Mrs. Zou were favored at the same time, and Emperor Wu issued a decree that the two of them could not see each other.

古文：尹夫人自请武帝，愿望见邢夫人，帝许之。
现代文：有一次尹夫人亲自请求武帝，希望能看见邢夫人，武帝答应了。
English: Once, Lady Yin personally asked Emperor Wu to see Lady Zhou, and Emperor Wu agreed.

古文：即令他夫人饰，从御者数十人，为邢夫人来前。
现代文：就让另一位夫人修饰打扮，跟随的侍从有几十人，假冒邢夫人来到面前。
English: He asked another lady to dress up, followed by dozens of attendants, and the impostor lady came forward.

古文：尹夫人前见之，曰： 此非邢夫人身也。 
现代文：尹夫人走上前去见她，说： 这不是邢夫人。 
English: Mrs. Yin stepped forward to meet her and said, "This is not Mrs. Zou.

古文：帝曰： 何以言之？ 
现代文：武帝说： 为什么这样讲呢？ 
English: Emperor Wu said, "Why do you say that?

古文：对曰： 视其身貌形状，不足以当人主矣。 
现代文：尹夫人回答说： 看她的身段相貌姿态，不足以匹配皇上。 
English: Lady Yin replied, "Looking at her stature, appearance and posture, it is not enough to match the emperor.

古文：于是帝乃诏使邢夫人衣故衣，独身来前。
现代文：于是武帝就下令让邢夫人穿上旧衣服，单独前来。
English: So Emperor Wu ordered Lady Zou to put on old clothes and come alone.

古文：尹夫人望见之，曰： 此真是也。 
现代文：尹夫人远远看见她就说： 这才是真的。 
English: When Mrs. Yin saw her from afar, she said, "This is the real thing."

古文：于是乃低头俯而泣，自痛其不如也。
现代文：于是就低头哭泣，伤心自己不如邢夫人。
English: So he bowed his head and wept, saddened that he was not as good as Lady Zou.

古文：谚曰： 美女入室，恶女之仇。 
现代文：谚语说： 美女一旦进了家室，就是丑女的仇人。 
English: A proverb says: Once a beautiful woman enters a family, she is the enemy of the ugly one.

古文：褚先生曰：浴不必江海，要之去垢；马不必骐骥，要之善走；士不必贤世，要之知道；女不必贵种，要之贞好。
现代文：褚先生说：洗澡不必非到江海去，主要是能除去污垢；骑马不必是有名的骏马，主要是善于奔跑；士人不必都要超出世上一般人，主要是应懂得道理；女子不必是出身高贵，主要是应贞洁美好。
English: Mr. Zou said: bathing does not have to go to the river and sea, but mainly can remove dirt; riding a horse does not have to be a famous horse, but mainly good at running; scholars do not have to be above the average person in the world, but mainly should understand the truth; women do not have to be noble, but mainly should be chaste and beautiful.

古文：传曰： 女无美恶，入室见妒；士无贤不肖，入朝见嫉。 
现代文：书传上面说： 女子不论美丑，一进家室就会被人嫉妒；士人不论贤与不贤，一入朝廷就会被人嫉妒。 
English: The book said: "No matter how beautiful or ugly a woman is, she will be envied as soon as she enters a family; no matter how wise or unwise a scholar is, he will be envied as soon as he enters the imperial court."

古文：美女者，恶女之仇。岂不然哉！
现代文：美女是丑女的仇人，难道不对吗！
English: Isn't it true that beauty is the enemy of ugliness?

古文：钩弋夫人姓赵氏，河间人也。
现代文：鉤弋夫人，姓赵氏，河间人。
English: Mrs. Zou, surnamed Zhao, is from Kawama.

古文：得幸武帝，生子一人，昭帝是也。
现代文：得到武帝宠幸，生了一个儿子，就是昭帝。
English: She was favored by Emperor Wu and gave birth to a son, Emperor Zhao.

古文：武帝年七十，乃生昭帝。
现代文：武帝七十岁的时候才生昭帝。
English: Emperor Wu was seventy years old when Emperor Zhao was born.

古文：昭帝立时，年五岁耳。
现代文：昭帝即位时刚刚五岁。
English: Emperor Zhao was just five years old when he ascended the throne.

古文：卫太子廢后，未复立太子。
现代文：卫太子被废以后，没有重新立太子。
English: After the crown prince was abolished, there was no re-establishment of the crown prince.

古文：而燕王旦上书，愿归国入宿卫。
现代文：而燕王刘旦上书，愿意回到京城入宫任警卫之职。
English: However, Yan Wang Liu Dan wrote that he was willing to return to Beijing to enter the palace to serve as a guard.

古文：武帝怒，立斩其使者于北阙。
现代文：武帝非常生气，立刻在北阙把燕王的使者问斩。
English: Emperor Wu was very angry and immediately killed the envoy of King Yan in Beilun.

古文：上居甘泉宫，召画工图画周公负成王也。
现代文：皇上住在甘泉宫，召画工画了一幅周公背负成王的画图。
English: The emperor lived in Ganquan Palace, and summoned an artist to draw a picture of Zhou Gong carrying the king on his back.

古文：于是左右群臣知武帝意欲立少子也。
现代文：于是左右群臣知道武帝想要立小儿子为太子。
English: As a result, the left and right courtiers knew that Emperor Wu wanted to make his youngest son the crown prince.

古文：后数日，帝谴责钩弋夫人。
现代文：过了几天，武帝谴责鉤弋夫人。
English: A few days later, Emperor Wu denounced Lady Zou.

古文：夫人脱簪珥ě叩头。
现代文：夫人摘下发簪耳饰等叩头请罪。
English: His wife removed her hair, earrings and other adornments and bowed her head in apology.

古文：帝曰： 引持去，送掖庭狱！ 
现代文：武帝说： 把她拉走，送到掖庭狱！ 
English: Emperor Wu said, "Take her away and send her to Fengting Prison!"

古文：夫人还顾，帝曰： 趣行，女不得活！ 
现代文：夫人回过头来看，武帝说： 快走，你不可以活着！ 
English: When his wife looked back, Emperor Wu said, "Quickly go, you can't be alive!"

古文：夫人死云阳宫。
现代文：夫人死在云阳宫。
English: My wife died in Yunyang Palace.

古文：时暴风扬尘，百姓感伤。
现代文：死的时候暴风刮得尘土飞扬，百姓也都很悲伤。
English: At the time of his death, the storm was blowing up dust, and the people were very sad.

古文：使者夜持棺往葬之，封识其处。
现代文：使者夜里拉着棺材去埋葬，在埋葬的地方做了标志。
English: The messenger dragged the coffin to the burial site at night and made a sign at the burial site.

古文：其后帝闲居，问左右曰： 人言云何？ 
现代文：事后，武帝闲时问左右说： 人们对这件事都怎么说？ 
English: Afterwards, Emperor Wu asked idly: "What do people say about this?"

古文：左右对曰： 人言且立其子，何去其母乎？ 帝曰： 然。
现代文：左右回答说： 人们说既然要立她的儿子了，为什么要除掉他的母亲呢？ 武帝说： 是的。
English: Both sides replied, "People say that since her son is to be elevated, why should his mother be eliminated?" Emperor Wu said, "Yes."

古文：是非儿曹愚人所知也。
现代文：这不是小孩子们和愚人所能理解的。
English: This is not for children and fools to understand.

古文：往古国家所以乱也，由主少母壮也。
现代文：从前国家之所以出乱子，就是由于君主年少，而他的母亲正在壮年。
English: In the past, the country was in turmoil because the monarch was young and his mother was in her prime.

古文：女主独居骄蹇，淫乱自恣，莫能禁也。
现代文：女子独居就会骄横傲慢，淫乱放纵，没有人能禁止。
English: If a woman lives alone, she will be arrogant, promiscuous and indulgent. No one can forbid her.

古文：女不闻吕后邪？ 
现代文：你们没有听说过吕后的事吗？ 
English: Haven't you heard about what happened in Lugu?

古文：故诸为武帝生子者，无男女，其母无不谴死，岂可谓非贤圣哉！
现代文：因此，所有为武帝生过孩子的，无论是男是女，他们的母亲没有不被谴责处死的，难道能说这就不是圣贤了吗？
English: Therefore, all those who bore children for Emperor Wu, whether male or female, and whose mothers were not condemned to death, can we say that they are not sages?

古文：昭然远见，为后世计虑，固非浅闻愚儒之所及也。
现代文：这样明确的远见，为后世深思熟虑，本来就不是那些见闻浅陋的愚儒所能达到的。
English: Such a clear-sighted, thought-out vision for the future was never going to be achieved by a bunch of ill-informed fools.

古文：谥为 武 ，岂虚哉！
现代文：谥号为 武 ，难道是虚名吗！
English: His nickname is Wu, isn't that a fake name?

