古文：凡天文在图籍昭昭可知者，经星常宿中外官凡百一十八名，积数七百八十三星，皆有州国官宫物类之象。
现代文：凡天文在图文典籍中记载，明白可知的，恒星及经常出现的星，主管它们的内外星官共一百一十八名，总数七百八十三星，它们都是州、国、官、宫及物类的征象。
English: Of all the stars and frequently appearing stars that are recorded in the astronomical texts, there are a total of one hundred and eighteen inner extraterrestrial officials in charge of them, with a total of seven hundred and eighty-three stars. They are all signs of states, countries, officials, palaces, and objects.

古文：其伏见蚤晚，邪正存亡，虚实阔狭，及五星所行，合散犯守，陵历斗食，彗孛飞流，日月薄食，晕适背穴，抱珥虹蜺，迅雷风袄，怪云变气：此皆阴阳之精，其本在地，而上发于天者也。
现代文：其隐其现，或早或晚，或有无规律，或运行的远近，出现的虚实，以及五星运行或合或离，或相犯或相守，或相侵凌或相遮掩，彗星、孛星、飞星、流星的出现，日月或交食或薄食，晕的形状或重环或全环或半环或背向太阳或耳状或有霓虹变幻，出现迅雷、疾风、怪云、变气的现象，这些都是阴阳的精魄所现，它的根本是生于地上，仅是表现在天象上罢了。
English: The appearance of comets, comets, shooting stars, meteors, the appearance of the sun and the moon, or eclipses or eclipses, the shape of the halo, or the heavy ring, or the full ring, or the half ring, or the back to the sun, or the ear-shaped, or the neon transformation, the appearance of lightning, wind, strange clouds, and the phenomenon of gas change, are all manifestations of the spirit of yin and yang. It is basically born on the earth and only appears on the celestial body.

古文：政失于此，则变见于彼，犹景之象形，乡之应声。
现代文：政失于此，则变现于彼，有如人影之所以像人形，响声有回应之和。
English: If the government fails here, it will be realized in him, as if the shadow is like a doll, and the sound is the sum of the response.

古文：是以明君睹之而寤，饬身正事，思其咎谢，则祸除而福至，自然之符也。
现代文：所以明君看见这些现象而有所感悟，谨慎地对待政事，思过谢罪，则祸除而福至。这是大自然给予我们的信号。
English: Therefore, when Ming Jun saw these phenomena, he was impressed, treated political affairs with caution, and thought about and repented of his sins. This is a signal given to us by nature.

古文：中宫天极星，其一明者，泰一之常居也，旁三星三公，或曰子属。
现代文：中宫天极星，其一明者，是天帝泰一的居所，旁边三星是天帝的三公，或者又说是天帝的儿子之属。
English: The central celestial pole star, the brightest one, is the residence of the heavenly emperor Taiyi, and the three stars next to it are the three princes of the heavenly emperor, or the sons of the heavenly emperor.

古文：后句四星，末大星正妃，余三星后宫之属也。
现代文：其后勾状排列的四星，末端的大星是天帝的正妃，其余三星是天帝的后妃之属。
English: Behind the celestial pole star are four hook-shaped hooked stars, of which the last brighter star is called the primary, and the remaining three are the harem's side concubines.

古文：环之匡卫十二星，籓臣。
现代文：环排列守卫的十二星，是天帝的藩臣。
English: The twelve stars surrounding the guards are the vassals of the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：皆曰紫宫。
现代文：这些都组成叫紫宫的天区。
English: Together, they are known as the Purple Palace.

古文：前列直斗口三星，随北耑锐，若见若不见，曰阴德，或曰天一。
现代文：前列正当斗口的三星，顺北排列、顶端尖锐，若隐若现的星，叫阴德，又叫天一星。
English: The three stars in the foreground of the right mouth of the cup, arranged in a northerly direction, with sharp points at the top, are faintly visible stars, and are called Yin De and Tian Yixing.

古文：紫宫左三星曰天枪，右四星曰天棓。
现代文：紫宫天区左面三星叫天枪星，右面四星叫天桔星。
English: The three stars to the left of the Purple Palace are called the Heavenly Gun Stars, and the four stars to the right are called the Heavenly Orange Stars.

古文：后十七星绝汉抵营室，曰阁道。
现代文：后面十七星横行直渡银河抵达室宿，叫阁道星。
English: In the back, seventeen stars travel across the Milky Way to reach Muroshuku. They are called "Gakudo Stars."

古文：北斗七星，所谓 旋、玑、玉衡，以齐七政 。杓携龙角，衡殷南斗，魁枕参首。
现代文：北斗七星，所谓 察看璇、玑、玉衡来确定七项政事 ，斗柄与角宿相连，斗之中央正当南斗。
English: The seven stars of the Big Dipper, the so-called "observing the dragonfly, dragonfly, and yamahira" to determine the seven political affairs, the handle of the dipper is connected to the horn lodge, and the center of the dipper is the south dipper.

古文：用昏建者杓；杓，自华以西南。
现代文：北斗的第一星临近参宿之首。在黄昏观测北斗星斗柄的指向来判定时令，斗柄，主预示华夏以西南地区。
English: At dusk, the four-hour moon is set at the direction indicated by the dragonfly; the dragonfly is the main blessing and misfortune in the southwest direction of Hua County.

古文：夜半建者衡；衡，殷中州河、济之间。
现代文：在子夜时观测判定时令时是验看衡星，衡星，主预示中原各州地区、黄河、济水之间。
English: At midnight, the four-hour moon is set at the direction indicated by Douheng; Douheng, the Central Plains region between the main Yellow River and Jishui, is full of misfortune, fortune and good luck.

古文：平旦建者魁；魁，海岱以东北也。
现代文：在黎明时观测判定时令时，验看的是魁星，魁星主预示大海、泰山以东北的地区。
English: At dawn, according to the direction indicated by the leader of the fight, the four months of the year are determined; the leader of the fight, the main sea, and the northeastern direction of the dragonfly are evil, good, and auspicious.

古文：斗为帝车，运于中央，临制四海。
现代文：斗星是天帝的车驾，运行于天的中央，君临四海。
English: The shooting star is the chariot of the heavenly emperor, which runs in the center of the sky and dominates the four seas.

古文：分阴阳，建四时，均五行，移节度，定诸记，皆系于斗。
现代文：分阴阳，建立四季，调节五行，变换节气，定纪岁历法，都决定于北斗星的运行。
English: The division of yin and yang, the establishment of the four seasons, the adjustment of the five elements, the transformation of the solar system, and the fixed calendar are all determined by the movement of the Big Dipper.

古文：斗魁戴筐六星，曰文昌宫：一曰上将，二曰次将，三曰贵相，四曰司命，五曰司禄，六曰司灾。
现代文：斗魁之星上似戴着的筐形六星，叫文昌宫，一星叫上将，二星叫次将，三星叫贵相，四星叫司命，五星叫司禄，六星叫司灾。
English: The six stars in the shape of a basket, which appear to be worn on the star, are called Wenchang Palace, one star is called Admiral, two stars are called Vice Admiral, three stars are called Noble, four stars are called Sifu, five stars are called Siroku, and six stars are called Sifu.

古文：在魁中，贵人之牢。
现代文：在斗魁星区中它是主预示贵人之牢狱。
English: It is the prison of the Lord's heralded nobles in the Qui-Gon region.

古文：魁下六星两两而比者，曰三能。
现代文：斗魁星下有六星两相靠的，叫三能星。
English: There are six stars that are close to each other under the star Doo Kui. They are called three-pointed stars.

古文：三能色齐，君臣和；不齐，为乖戾。
现代文：三能星色相同，则君臣和；不相同，则为乖戾。
English: The three-pointed star of the same light and dark color symbolizes the unity of the monarch and the minister; the different colors indicate the tension between the monarch and the minister.

古文：柄辅星，明近，辅臣亲强；斥小，疏弱。
现代文：斗柄上的辅星，星光明且近，预示辅臣亲睦朝廷强胜；远而小，则表示君臣疏远，国力微弱。
English: The bright and close star on the handle of the dipper indicates that the vassals are friendly and the imperial court is strong; the distant and small star indicates that the monarchs and vassals are distant and the national strength is weak.

古文：杓端有两星：一内为矛，招摇；一外为盾，天蜂。
现代文：斗柄末端有两星，距离近的一个叫矛星，又叫招摇星。远处的那个叫盾星又叫天蜂星。
English: There are two stars at the end of the handle. The closer one is called Spear Star and the farther one is called Shield Star and Heavenly Bee Star.

古文：有名圜十五星，属杓，曰贱人之牢，牢中星实则囚多，虚则开出。
现代文：还有勾状环连的十五星，属斗柄，称它主预示贱人之牢狱。牢中星密集则犯人多，虚空则预示释的多。
English: There is also a hook-shaped ring of fifteen stars, belonging to the dipper handle, saying that it mainly foreshadows the prison of the prostitute. The prison is densely populated with many prisoners, and the void is foreshadowed by many explanations.

古文：天一、枪？矛、盾动摇，角大，兵起。
现代文：天一星、枪星、桔星、矛星、盾星闪动，星光有芒角且大，则有战争发动。
English: The celestial one star, the gun star, the orange star, the spear star, and the shield star are flashing, and the starlight has a mane angle and is large, then war is launched.

古文：东宫苍龙，房、心。
现代文：东宫苍龙，房宿、心宿为其所属。
English: The East Palace is called Soryu, and includes the following star hotels: the room hotel and the heart hotel.

古文：心为明堂，大星天王，前后星子属。不欲直，直，王失计。
现代文：心宿是天帝的明堂，大星是天帝，前后星是天王的儿子之属，不希望排列直，直则天帝失筹算。
English: The heart's abode is the bright hall of the heavenly emperor, the great star is the heavenly emperor, and the stars before and behind belong to the sons of the heavenly emperor. If you don't want to line up in a straight line, the heavenly emperor will lose his head.

古文：房为天府，曰天驷。
现代文：房宿是天帝的天府，房宿四星叫天驷星。
English: The lodging is the Heavenly Palace of the Heavenly Emperor, and the four-star lodging is called the Heavenly Palace.

古文：其阴，右骖。旁有两星曰衿。
现代文：北边是右骖星，其旁边有两星叫衿星。
English: To the north is the star to the right of Uranus, and next to it are two stars called the Pleiades.

古文：衿北一星曰辖。
现代文：衿星北面有一星叫牵。
English: There is a star to the north of Uranus called Traction.

古文：东北曲十二星曰旗。
现代文：东北面深隐着十二星叫旗星。
English: In the northeastern sky, there are twelve stars called "flag stars."

古文：旗中四星曰天市。
现代文：旗星中四星叫天市。
English: The four-pointed star in the flag is called Tianshi.

古文：天市中星众者实，其中虚则耗。
现代文：天市星区中星星多则年景丰收，其星区中虚空则为歉收。
English: The stars in the star area of Tianshi have a good harvest, while the void in the star area has a poor harvest.

古文：房南众星曰骑官。
现代文：房宿南面众星叫骑官。
English: There are many stars to the south of the inn, known as the horsemen.

古文：左角，理；右角，将。
现代文：角宿左边一星为天帝的法官，角宿右一星，为将军。
English: The star to the left of Kakunodate is the emperor's judge, and the star to the right of Kakunodate is the general.

古文：大角者，天王帝坐廷。
现代文：大角星，是天帝朝廷。
English: Arcturus is the celestial emperor's court.

古文：其两旁各有三星，鼎足句之，曰摄提。
现代文：其两边各有三星，鼎足而立相勾连，叫摄提。
English: There are three stars on each side, which stand upright like a hook, and are called the shooting stars.

古文：摄提者，直斗杓所指，以建时节，故曰 摄提格 。
现代文：摄提星，正当斗杓的指向，可以它来测定时令节气，所以叫 摄提格 。
English: The reason why they are called "photograms" is because they are facing the direction indicated by the crossbow and are aligned by the crossbow, which can more accurately indicate the time period, so they also have the name "photogram."

古文：亢为宗庙，主疾。
现代文：亢宿是天帝的宗庙，主预示疾病。
English: Shishuku is the ancestral temple of the Heavenly Emperor, and the Lord foretells illness.

古文：其南北两大星，曰南门。
现代文：它南北有两大星，叫南门。
English: In the north and south of it, there are two large stars, called the South Gate.

古文：氐为天根，主疫。
现代文：氐宿是天廷的根基，主预示流行病。
English: 宿 is the meaning of the root of heaven, the main plague.

古文：尾为九子，曰君臣；斥绝，不和。
现代文：尾宿有九星，是天帝的臣属，距离远，为预示不和。
English: There are nine stars in Oyado, representing the nine sons of the heavenly emperor, and some say it symbolizes the emperor and his ministers; the stars are very far apart, meaning that the emperor and his ministers are at odds with each other.

古文：箕为敖客，后妃之府，曰口舌。
现代文：箕宿是天廷中的是非之人，预示后妃的府第，称为口舌。
English: Shishuku is a person who is right or wrong in the heavenly court, foreshadowing the home of the empress, called the tongue.

古文：火犯守角，则有战。
现代文：火星侵犯角宿并留守不去，则预示有战争。
English: Martian grave robbers or guards near the corner inn, indicating that there will be a war.

古文：房、心，王者恶之。
现代文：火星侵犯房宿、心宿并留守不去，是作王的人厌恶的事情。
English: Mars invading one's home and heart and staying away is an abomination for a king.

古文：南宫朱鸟，权、衡。
现代文：南宫朱鸟，权星、衡星属于它。
English: The South Palace's famous vermilion bird includes the following constellations: Wei and He.

古文：衡、太微，三光之廷。
现代文：衡星也叫太微垣，是天帝的南宫，曰月五星入朝此廷。
English: Hengxing, also known as Taihuigaki, is the southern palace of the Heavenly Emperor. It is said that five stars enter this court every month.

古文：筐卫十二星，籓臣；西，将；东，相；南四星，执法；中，端门；左右，掖门。
现代文：其旁环守十二星，是藩臣。西为将；东为相；南四星是执法星；中间是天廷的正门，左右为天廷的掖门。
English: It is surrounded by twelve stars, which are the vassals of the domain. The west star is the general; the east star is the phase; the south four stars are the law enforcement stars; the middle star is the main gate of the heavenly court, and the left and right stars are the gates of the heavenly court.

古文：掖门内六星，诸侯。
现代文：掖门区内有六星，是诸侯星。
English: There are six stars in Qimen District, all of which are princes' stars.

古文：其内五星，五帝坐。
现代文：其内五星是五帝座星。
English: The five stars in it are the constellations of the five emperors.

古文：后聚十五星，曰哀乌郎位；旁一大星，将位也。
现代文：后面聚集十五星，称哀乌，居天廷的郎位，叫郎位星。
English: Fifteen stars gather in the back, calling for mourning, living in the celestial court, called the rooster star.

古文：月、五星顺入，轨道，司其出，所守，天子所诛也。
现代文：其旁边的大星，居天廷的将位，叫将位星。月、五星从西向东顺行进入、沿正常的轨道运行时，要观察它们所出与所留守的星官，而与其对应的官员，则是天子所以有所诛罚的对象。
English: The moon and the five stars follow the order from west to east to enter the Great Wall of China. It is necessary to carefully observe the situation when they are too small and wait there. If they stay near a certain star, the world's officials corresponding to that star will be dispatched by the Son of Heaven to fight.

古文：其逆入，若不轨道，以所犯名之；中坐，成形，皆群下不从谋也。
现代文：若月、五星从东向西逆行进入、不按常规运行，则按被侵犯的星官给相应的官员定罪。侵犯了五帝座，灾祸就形成了，都是臣民群下不能言听计从的征象。
English: If the moon and the five stars enter retrograde from east to west and do not operate normally, the corresponding officials will be convicted according to the violated star officials. If the Five Emperors are violated, the disaster will be formed, all of which are signs that the subjects cannot obey.

古文：金、火尤甚。
现代文：如果是金星、火星侵犯，问题尤其严重。
English: The situation is even more serious if Venus or Mars, two of the five planets, are in the sign of Aries.

古文：廷籓西有随星四，名曰少微，士大夫。
现代文：太微廷中藩臣各星官之西有跟从的四星，名叫少微，是天廷中的士大夫。
English: In the Taiwei court, each star official of the feudal vassals had a follower in the west, a four-star official named Shaowei, who was a senior official in the heavenly court.

古文：权，轩辕，黄龙体。
现代文：权星也是轩辕星，形状如黄龙之体。
English: The ruling star is also a bright star, shaped like the body of a yellow dragon.

古文：前大星，女主象；旁小星，御者后宫属。
现代文：前面大星，是女主的象征；旁边小星是侍者，后宫所属的女侍。
English: There is a large star in front of Xuan Zang, which is a symbol of the mistress; other small stars represent the harem and belong to the concubine.

古文：月、五星守犯者，如衡占。
现代文：月、五星若 守 或 犯 的情况，从衡星占测。
English: The principle of divination is the same as that of weighing when the moon and the five stars are in the vicinity of Xuanwu or waiting here.

古文：东井为水事。
现代文：东井宿主水情之事。
English: The host of the East Well divines water-related matters.

古文：火入之，一星居其左右，天子且以火为败，东井西曲星曰戊；北，北河；南，南河；两河、天阙间为关梁。
现代文：火星入宿区，一星在它左右，天子的事以火星为败象。束井宿西隐伏一星叫铁；它的北面是北河星；南面是南河星；两河星像是天阙，其间是曰月五星运行的关梁。
English: Mars enters the quarter, a star is around it, and the things of the heavenly son are represented by Mars. In the west of the Sokai quarter, there is a star called Iron; its north side is the North River Star; the south side is the South River Star; the two river stars are like the heavenly harpoons, and in the middle is the Guan Liang, where the five stars of the sun, moon and stars move.

古文：舆鬼，鬼祠事；中白者为质。
现代文：舆鬼宿主预示祭祠之事，其中星光发白的是质星。
English: In the ghost's house, the fortune-teller divines, and a white star is called the "qualitative star."

古文：为守南北河，兵起，谷不登。
现代文：火星留守在南、北河星区，预示有战争发动，五谷不登。
English: Mars remains in the southern and northern regions, foreshadowing the outbreak of war, and does not enter the valley.

古文：故德成衡，观成潢，伤成戊，祸成井，诛成质。
现代文：所以，德政之兆显示在衡星，阅览、观测之兆显示在潢星，伤损之兆显示在铁星，祸害之兆显示在井宿，诛罚之兆显示在质星。
English: Therefore, the sign of virtue is shown by the star of measurement, the sign of reading and observation is shown by the star of judgment, the sign of injury is shown by the star of iron, the sign of calamity is shown by the star of well, and the sign of punishment is shown by the star of quality.

古文：柳为鸟喙，主木草。
现代文：柳宿为鸟嘴，主预示草木。
English: The willow lodge is the bird's beak, and the Lord foreshadows the plants.

古文：七星，颈，为员宫，主急事。
现代文：七星的位置像是朱乌的颈，是朱鸟的喉，故主预示急切之事。
English: The position of the seven stars is like the neck of Zhu Wu, the throat of Zhu Bird, so the Lord is foreshadowing something urgent.

古文：张，嗉，为厨，主觞客。
现代文：张宿的位置在朱鸟的鸟嗉，是厨房主事，故主预示以食待客。
English: The location of Zhang's lodging is in the beak of the scarlet ibis, and the kitchen is the main business, so the Lord foretells that guests will be served with food.

古文：翼为羽翮，主远客。
现代文：翼宿的位置在朱鸟的鸟翼，故主预示远方之客。
English: The wing lodge is the feather cocoon of the Suzaku, responsible for the arrival of guests.

古文：轸为车，主风。
现代文：轸宿为车，主预示风。
English: Shishuku is the chariot of Tenjin, in charge of customs.

古文：其旁有一小星，曰长沙，星星不欲明；明与四星等，若五星入轸中，兵大起。
现代文：它旁边有一小星，叫长沙，星有星光时不希望它光亮，如亮度与轸宿四星一样，又如果五星正运行进入轸宿中，则预示战争要发生。
English: There is a small star next to it, called the Changsha Star. The star should not be bright. If it is as bright as the four stars in Oshuku, five stars will enter Oshuku, indicating that a major war will occur.

古文：轸南众星曰天库，库有五车。
现代文：轸宿以南众星叫天库，天库星中有五车星。
English: The stars south of Oshuku are called Tenku, and there are five stars in the Tenku star.

古文：车星角，若益众，及不具，亡处车马。
现代文：五车星光出现芒角，好像增加很多，到了星光的芒角不见了，就预示没有车马。
English: When the five-chariot starlight appears, the angularity seems to increase a lot. When the angularity of the starlight disappears, it indicates that there is no chariot horse.

古文：西宫咸池，曰天五潢。
现代文：西宫咸池，叫天五潢星。
English: The western palace is called Hamchi, and the constellations include: the five constellations.

古文：五潢，五帝车舍。
现代文：五潢星，是天上五帝的车库。
English: Wudi is the name of Wudi's chariot and house.

古文：火入，旱；金，兵；水，水。
现代文：火星犯该星区，则预示有旱情发生；金星犯该星区，则有兵灾；水星犯该星区则有水灾。
English: When Mars is in the fifth house, it portends drought; when Venus is in the fifth house, it portends war; when Mercury is in the fifth house, it portends floods.

古文：中有三柱；柱不具，兵起。
现代文：五潢星区中有三柱排列，每一柱由三颗星组成，如果柱形不具，则战争发起。
English: In addition, there are three pillars in the pentagram; each pillar has three stars. If the three pillars do not line up, it indicates that there will be war.

古文：奎曰封豨，为沟渎。
现代文：奎宿又称封稀，主预示沟渠、河川。
English: Kuei-juku, also known as Fuxi, symbolizes ditches and rivers.

古文：娄为聚众。
现代文：娄宿主预示聚敛众物之事。
English: The host divines and gathers a crowd.

古文：胃为天仓。
现代文：胃宿主预示天子的仓库。
English: The gastric host divines the fate of the chrysalis.

古文：其南众星曰廥积。
现代文：它南方众星叫唐积星。
English: There are many stars in the south of the stomach, called hoarding.

古文：昂曰旄头，胡星也。为白衣会。
现代文：昴宿又称旄头，主预示胡人的星，预示有白衣之会的丧事。
English: Shantou, also known as Shantou, the Lord foreshadowed the star of the Hu people, foreshadowing the funeral of the white-clad party.

古文：毕曰䍐车，为边兵，主弋猎。
现代文：毕宿又叫罕车星，主预示边防之兵，主游猎之事。
English: It is also called the star of rare cars, the main heralds the soldiers of the border defense, and the main thing is hunting.

古文：其大星旁小星为附耳。
现代文：其大星旁边的小星是附耳星。
English: The small star next to its large star is the Pleiades.

古文：附耳摇动，有谗乱臣在侧。
现代文：附耳星闪动，则预示有谗言之乱臣在帝王之侧。
English: If the eared star is flashing, it means that the emperor is surrounded by disgruntled vassals.

古文：昂、毕间为天街。
现代文：昴宿、毕宿之间为天街。
English: Between Shibuya and Ibusuki, there is a sky street.

古文：其阴，阴国；阳，阳国。
现代文：其北面的星为阴国，主预示北方之国的事；其南面的星为阳国，主预示南方之国的事。
English: The north side of Tianjie symbolizes the country of the Yidi people; the south side of Tianjie symbolizes the country established by China.

古文：参为白虎，三星直者，是为衡石。
现代文：参宿为白虎。参宿三星东西直列，像是秤。
English: The white tiger is the Betelgeuse. The three stars of the Betelgeuse are in a row, like a scale.

古文：下有三星，锐，曰罚，为斩艾事。
现代文：下有三星，上尖下大，叫罚，主预示平定叛军之事。
English: There are three stars below, big at the top and big at the bottom, calling for punishment. The Lord foretells the defeat of the rebels.

古文：其外四星，左右肩股也。
现代文：它外面的四星像参宿的左右肩股。
English: The four stars outside Hengshi are the left and right shoulders and the left and right groin of the Betelgeuse.

古文：小三星隅置，曰觜觿，为虎首，主葆旅事。
现代文：小三星排列在一角，叫觜脯，像老虎的头，主预示饥荒之事。
English: There are three small stars arranged in a triangle in the upper corner of the Betelgeuse, named, just like the tiger head of the white tiger, Betelgeuse, responsible for the transportation of military supplies.

古文：其南有四星，曰天厕。
现代文：它南面有四星，叫天厕星。
English: There are four stars to the south of the Betelgeuse, called the celestial toilet.

古文：天厕下一星，曰天矢。
现代文：天厕星下有一星，叫天矢星。
English: There is a star under the sky, called Tianya Star.

古文：矢黄则吉；青、白、黑、凶。
现代文：天矢星黄色则吉祥；青色、白色、黑色则凶。
English: The yellow star is auspicious; the blue, white and black stars are evil.

古文：其西有句曲九星，三处罗列：一曰天旗，二曰天苑，三曰九斿。
现代文：它的西面有勾连弯曲九星，分三处罗列，每处各九星：一叫天旗，二叫天苑，三叫九脖。
English: On the west side of it, there is a curved nine-pointed star, divided into three rows, each with nine stars: one is called Tianqi, the second is called Tianyuan, and the third is called Jiuhuan.

古文：其东有大星曰狼，狼角变色，多盗贼。
现代文：它的东面有一大星叫狼星，狼星星光有芒角并变色，预示多盗贼。
English: To the east of it there is a large star called the Wolf Star. The Wolf Star shines with a crescent and changes colour, foreshadowing many thieves.

古文：下有四星曰弧，直狼。
现代文：下有四星叫弧星，正对着狼星。
English: Below are four stars called the Arcs, directly opposite the Wolf star.

古文：比地有大星，曰南极老人。
现代文：狼星与地平之间有一大星，叫南极老人。
English: Between the wolf star and the horizon there is a large star, called the South Pole old man.

古文：老人见，治安；不见，兵起。
现代文：老人星出现，则预示世事治安；不现，则预示有兵祸起。
English: If the old man appears, the world will be at peace; if he does not appear, there will be war.

古文：常以秋分时候之南郊。
现代文：一般秋分时候在南方地平面之上能见到老人星。
English: At the time of the general autumnal equinox, the old man's star can be seen above the southern horizon.

古文：北营玄武，虚、危。
现代文：北宫玄武，虚宿、危宿是其属。
English: Bei Gong Xuanwu, Hokujuku and Jiejuku belong to it.

古文：危为盖屋；虚为哭泣之事。
现代文：危宿形似盖屋；虚宿为预示哭泣之事。
English: The host of danger should do earthwork such as building a house in Tianfu or Tianshi; the host of falsehood should do divination and mourning.

古文：其南有众星，曰羽林天军。
现代文：在它南面有众多的星，叫羽林天军。
English: To the south of it, there are many stars, which are called the Urim and Thummim.

古文：军西为垒，或曰戊。旁一大星。北落。
现代文：羽林天军星的西边为垒星，或叫铁星，旁边的一颗大星，是北落星。
English: The west side of the "Hulin Tianjun star" is the "base star," or "iron star," and the big star next to it is the "north-falling star."

古文：北落若微亡，军星动角益稀，及五星犯北落，入军，军起。
现代文：北落星若微暗或不见，羽林天军星摇动芒角越稀，以及五星的光芒干犯北落星，或进入羽林天军星星区，即有军队兴起。
English: If the North Star is slightly dim or absent, the more rare it is for the Feathered Star to shake its cape, and the light of the five stars to interfere with the North Star, or enter the Feathered Star zone, the army will rise.

古文：火、金、水尤甚。
现代文：五星中火星、金星、水星尤为厉害。
English: Of the five planets, Mars, Venus, and Mercury are particularly powerful.

古文：火入，军忧；水，水患；木、土，军吉。
现代文：火星入星区，军队则忧；水星入星区则有水患；土星、木星入星区则军队吉祥。
English: When Mars enters the sidereal zone, the army is worried; when Mercury enters the sidereal zone, there is a flood; when Saturn and Jupiter enter the sidereal zone, the army is lucky.

古文：危东六星，两两而比，曰司寇。
现代文：危宿柬面六星，两两并列，叫司寇星。
English: There are six stars on the face of the bed, two in a row, called Scorched Star.

古文：营室为清庙，曰离宫、阁道。
现代文：营室宿，是天廷的清庙，又叫离宫，经由阁道星与天廷相通。
English: The dormitory is a celestial Qing temple, and there is a detached palace and a loft road nearby.

古文：汉中四星，曰天驷。
现代文：银河中四星叫天驷。
English: In the Milky Way to the north of the barracks, there are four stars, called the Pleiades.

古文：旁一星，曰王梁。
现代文：旁边一星叫王梁。
English: The next star is Wang Liang.

古文：王梁策马，车骑满野。
现代文：王梁星闪动，宛如策马，王车骑遍野奔驰。
English: Wang Liangxing flashes, like a horse, and the king's chariot rides all over the country.

古文：旁有八星，绝汉，曰天横。
现代文：旁边有八星，直渡银河，叫天横。
English: There are eight stars next to it, which go straight to the Milky Way, called the celestial horizon.

古文：天横旁，江星。
现代文：天横星旁有江星。
English: Beside the horizontal star of heaven is the star of the river.

古文：江星动，以人涉水。
现代文：江星闪动，预示有人涉水。
English: Jiang Xing flashes, indicating someone wading in the water.

古文：杵、臼四星，在危南。
现代文：杵星、臼星四星在危宿南。
English: There are four stars in Usu, to the south of Kejuku.

古文：匏瓜，有青黑星守之，鱼盐贵。
现代文：匏瓜星区，有外来客星，星色青黑居守其中，则预示人间鱼盐贵。
English: There is also the star of the muskmelon. If the blue and black stars stay nearby, the price of fish salt will be high.

古文：南斗为庙，其北建星。
现代文：南斗为天帝的庙堂，其北有建星。
English: Nanto-juku is the temple of the heavenly emperor, and there is a star on the north side of it.

古文：建星者，旗也。
现代文：建星，是天帝的旗。
English: Jianxing, shaped like a flag.

古文：牵牛为牺牲，其北河鼓。河鼓在星，上将；左，左将：右，右将。
现代文：牵牛星是天帝祭祀的供奉，其北面有河鼓星，河鼓三星中最大者，为上将；左边的为左将；右边的为右将。
English: The Cowherd Star is an offering to the Heavenly Emperor. On its north face is the River Drum Star. The largest of the three stars of the River Drum is the Admiral; the one on the left is the Left Admiral; the one on the right is the Right Admiral.

古文：婺女，其北织女。
现代文：女宿，在北面的是织女星。
English: There is also a maiden's lodging, and to the north of it is Vega.

古文：织女，天女孙也。
现代文：织女星是天帝的孙女儿。
English: The Weaver Maiden is the granddaughter of the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：岁星曰东方，春，木；于人五常，仁也；五事，貌也。
现代文：岁星是东方四季配春，五行配木。对于人伦来说是代表五常中的仁，代表五事中的相貌。
English: The year star is the four seasons in the East with spring, and the five elements with wood. For human relations, it represents the benevolence in the five constants, and the appearance in the five things.

古文：仁亏貌失，逆春令，伤木气，罚见岁星。
现代文：如果仁义不存，相貌不尊，违逆春令，伤害木气，惩罚之征兆显示在岁星。
English: If the benevolence and righteousness do not exist, the appearance is not respected, the Spring Festival is violated, and the wood gas is harmed, the signs of punishment are displayed on the New Year star.

古文：岁星所在，国不可伐，可以伐人。
现代文：岁星所在天区，所相对应的分野之国，不可战胜，攻击别国则无不胜。
English: In the celestial region where the year star is located, the country of the corresponding field is invincible, and attacking other countries is invincible.

古文：超舍而前为赢，退舍为缩。
现代文：运行超越正常的度次而前为赢，行进不足度次为缩。
English: Running faster than normal is a win, running slower than normal is a loss.

古文：赢，其国有兵不复；缩，其国有忧，其将死，国倾败。
现代文：赢则分野之国有军队败散不能归国；缩则分野之国有忧患，其将死，其国倾败。
English: If the state-owned army in the winning sector is defeated and dispersed, it cannot return to the country; if the state-owned army in the shrinking sector is in distress, it will die and its country will be defeated.

古文：所去，失地；所之，得地。
现代文：岁星要离开的天区相对应的分野之国，失地；所到天区相对应的分野之国，得地。
English: The year star wants to leave the country of the corresponding field of the celestial region, the lost land; the country of the corresponding field of the celestial region, the gained land.

古文：一曰，当居不居，国亡；所之，国昌；已居之，又东西去之，国凶，不可举事用兵，安静中度，吉。
现代文：又一说，当居守而不居守，国家亡；所到，国昌；已经留守，又向东西方运行离去的，国有凶险，不可兴事用兵。行进运行安然适度，则是吉兆。
English: Another said, "If you stay and do not stay, the country will perish; if you go, the country will prosper; if you stay and run away to the east and west, the country will be in danger, and you should not make use of soldiers. If you go and run smoothly, it is a good omen."

古文：出入不当其次，必有天祅见其舍也。
现代文：岁星运行出入星宿区不按常规，必有不祥天象出现在星区。
English: If the year star does not move in and out of the star region as usual, an ominous celestial phenomenon is bound to appear in the star region.

古文：岁星赢而东南。《石氏》 见彗星 ，《甘氏》 不出三月乃生彗，本类星，末类彗，长二丈 。
现代文：岁星运行快，早出现在东南宿度，《石氏》中说 有彗星出现 ，《甘氏》中说 不出三月就生成彗星，头像星，尾像彗星，长二丈 。
English: The stars of the year run fast and appear early in the southeastern latitudes. "Shi" says that a comet will appear, "Gan" says that a comet will be formed in March. Head-like star, tail-like comet, second in length.

古文：赢东北，《石氏》 见觉星 ，《甘氏》 不出三月乃生天欃，本类星，末锐，长四尺。 
现代文：运行快出现在东北，《石氏》说 会出现天觉星 ，《甘氏》中说 不出三月就生成天樯星，头像星，尾尖，长四尺 。
English: The movement will soon appear in the northeast, "Shi" said that there will be a heavenly star, "Gan" said that a heavenly star will be generated in March, a head star, a tail tip, four feet long.

古文：缩西南，《石氏》 见欃云，如牛 ，《甘氏》 不出三月乃生天枪，左右锐，长数丈 。
现代文：运行慢出现在西南，《石氏》中说 会出现搀云星，形状像牛 ，《甘氏》中说 不出三月就生成天枪星，左右尖，长数丈 。
English: The slow-moving star appeared in the southwest, "Shi" said that there would be a mushroom cloud star, shaped like a cow, "Gan" said that it would form a celestial gun star in March, with left and right tips, and a long number of heights.

古文：缩西北，《石氏》 见枪云，如马 ，《甘氏》 不出三月乃生天欃，本类星，末锐，长数丈 。
现代文：运行慢出现在西北方，《石氏》中说 出现枪云星，形状如马 ，《甘氏》中说 不出三月就生成天搀星，头像星，尾尖，长数丈 。
English: The slow-moving star appeared in the northwest, and "Shi" said that a shooting star appeared, shaped like a horse, and "Gan" said that a shooting star would appear in March, with a head star, a tail tip, and a long tail.

古文：《石氏》 枪、欃、彗异状，其殃一也，必有破国乱君，伏死其辜，余殃不尽，为旱、凶、饥、暴疾 。
现代文：《石氏》中说 枪状、梭状、棒状、扫帚状都是形态各异，它们一样都是预示灾殃的，必有破国乱君，伏尸百姓，殃及不尽，是旱、凶、饥荒、暴疾的预兆 。
English: "Shishi" says that the shape of the spear, shuttle, stick, and broom are all different, and they all foreshadow disaster. There must be a country-destroying tyrant, buried people, and the damage is inexhaustible. It is an omen of drought, evil, famine, and violent disease.

古文：至日行一尺，出二十余日乃入，《甘氏》 其国凶，不可举事用兵 。
现代文：岁星如果一运行一尺，出现二十余曰后隐入，《甘氏》中说 这种现象兆示其国有凶险，不可举事动兵 。
English: If the year star moves one foot at a time and disappears after appearing for more than twenty days, "Mr. Gan" said that this phenomenon indicates that the country is in danger and cannot mobilize troops.

古文：出而易， 所当之国，是受其殃 。
现代文：岁星出现但有改易， 所兆示的分野之国，正当受其殃灾 。
English: The country in which the star of the year appears but there is a reversal of fortune, the signified field, is justifiably affected by its disaster.

古文：又曰 祅星，不出三年，其下有军，及失地，若国君丧 。
现代文：又说 变异之星出现，不出三年，下面的分野之地有战争发生，到时会失地，或国君丧亡 。
English: It is also said that no sooner than three years after the mutant star appears, there will be a war in the area below, at which time the land will be lost, or the sovereign will be killed.

古文：荧惑曰南方，夏，火；礼也；视也。
现代文：火星是主南方之星，代表四季中夏季，属五行之火，代表人伦五常中的礼，五事中的视。
English: Mars is the main southern star, representing the summer in the four seasons, belonging to the fire of the five elements, representing the etiquette in the five elements, and the view in the five things.

古文：礼亏视失，逆夏令，伤火气，罚见荧惑。
现代文：如果其国礼亏视失，违逆夏令，伤损火气，对其惩罚的征兆显示在火星。
English: If his or her national honor is neglected, if he or she disobeys the summer time, or if he or she is injured by fire, the signs of his or her punishment will appear on Mars.

古文：逆行一舍二舍为不祥，居之三月国有殃，五月受兵，七月国半亡地，九月地大半亡。
现代文：从束向西逆行在一舍、二舍的范围内为不祥，留守在星区内三月之久，其分野之国有灾殃发生，五月之久有被侵略的战争发起，七月国土失去一半，九月国土大半失去。
English: It is ominous to retrograde from the bunch to the west within the range of one house and two houses. If you stay in the star region for three months, the country in your field will have a disaster. If you are invaded in May, a war will be launched. In July, half of the land will be lost, and in September, most of the land will be lost.

古文：因与俱出入，国绝祀。
现代文：九个月后还沿顺此情况时隐时现，其国亡绝祭祀烟火。
English: If you stay after September and don't leave, your country will be destroyed.

古文：荧惑为乱为贼，为疾为丧，为饥为兵，所居之宿国受殃。
现代文：火星预示的是有乱国、有强盗，有疾病、有丧事，有饥馑、有兵祸，所居留的星区对应的分野之国受其殃祸。
English: Mars foretells that there will be disorderly countries, robbers, disease, death, famine, and military disasters, and that the countries of the corresponding fields in the star region where they reside will suffer from their woes.

古文：殃还至者，虽大当小；居之久殃乃至者，当小反大。
现代文：殃灾很快应验的，虽来势大，但灾情小；居守之曰长久才应验其祸殃的情况，本来是小反而渐大。
English: If the calamity is soon to come to pass, though the force is great, the calamity is small; if the calamity takes a long time to come to pass, the calamity is small but gradually increases.

古文：已去复还居之，若居之而角者，若动者，绕环之，及乍前乍后，乍左乍右，殃愈甚。
现代文：火星运行已经离开星区，又还回居守的情况，如果滞留并且星光有芒角的，或星光闪动的，环绕着，又忽前忽后，忽左忽右的，殃祸愈烈。
English: When Mars has left the sidereal zone and returns to the sidereal zone, if it stays and the starlight is angular, or if the starlight is flickering, or if it is encircling, or if it is flickering back and forth, or if it is flickering left and right, the calamity will be even greater.

古文：一曰，荧惑出则有大兵，入则兵散。
现代文：一说是火星出现则有大战争发动，隐入则军兵溃散。
English: It is said that when Mars appears, a great war is unleashed, and when it is hidden, soldiers are scattered.

古文：周还止息，乃为其死丧。
现代文：环绕又停止，就视为死丧之兆。
English: When the encircling stopped, it was seen as a sign of death.

古文：寇乱在其野者亡地，以战不胜。
现代文：暴乱发生在分野之国会失地，战斗没有胜利。
English: The riot took place in the field of the National Congress lost ground, the battle is not a victory.

古文：东行疾则兵聚于东方，西行疾则兵聚于西方；其南为丈夫丧，北为女子丧。
现代文：火星向东运行快则兵乱聚于东方，西行快则兵乱聚于西方；在南方预示丧失男子，在北方预示丧失女子。
English: If Mars travels east, soldiers will gather in the east, and if it travels west, soldiers will gather in the west; in the south, it indicates the loss of men, and in the north, the loss of women.

古文：荧惑，天子理也。故曰虽有明天子，必视荧惑所在。
现代文：火星，是天帝的执法之官，所以说纵使有有道天子，也必察验火星的运行情况。
English: Mars is the law enforcement officer of the heavenly emperor, so even if there is a heavenly son, he must also inspect the operation of Mars.

古文：太白曰西方，秋，金；义也；言也。
现代文：金星是主西方之星，代表四季中的秋季，五行中的金，是人伦五常中的义，五事中的言。
English: Venus is the main western star, representing the autumn in the four seasons, the gold in the five elements, the meaning in the five constants, and the word in the five things.

古文：义亏言失，逆秋令，伤金气，罚见太白。
现代文：义亏言失，违逆秋令，伤损金气，对其惩罚的征兆显示在金星。
English: Morality is tainted, speech is irrational, autumn decrees are disobeyed, and gold and gas are damaged. The punishment is manifested in Taibaixing.

古文：日方南太白居其南，日方北太白居其北，为赢，侯王不宁，用兵进吉退凶。
现代文：太阳止当南金星留在它的南面，太阳正当北金星留在它的北面，此时金星运行超前，预示王侯会不安宁，起兵进攻则吉，退守则凶。
English: The sun stands still when the south Venus remains in the south of it, and the sun stands still when the north Venus remains in the north of it. At this time, Venus runs ahead, indicating that the prince will be restless. It is good to attack, and it is bad to retreat.

古文：日方南太白居其北，日方北太白居其南，为缩，侯王有忧，用兵退吉进凶。
现代文：太阳正当南金星留在它的北面，太阳正当北金星留在它的南面，此时金星运行过缓，预示王侯有忧患，用兵退守则吉，进攻则凶。
English: When the sun is due south, Venus remains on its north side, and when the sun is due north, Venus remains on its south side. At this time, Venus is moving too slowly, indicating that the prince is in trouble, and retreating with soldiers is good, and attacking is fierce.

古文：当出不出，当入不入，为失舍，不有破军，必有死王之墓，有亡国。
现代文：该出现不出现，该隐没不隐没，是运行失度，预示没有破阵败军，必有亡君亡国。
English: The appearance does not appear, Cain did not appear, Cain did not appear, Cain did not appear, Cain did not appear, Cain did not appear, Cain did not appear.

古文：一曰，天下偃兵，野有兵者，所当之国大凶。
现代文：一说，天下偃旗息鼓，而分野之地有战争，所当的一国有大凶。
English: It is said that when the world is at a standstill, and there is a war in the field, the country that is responsible will be the worst offender.

古文：当出不出，未当入而入，天下偃兵，兵在外，入。
现代文：当出现而未出现，不当隐没而隐没，天下息兵，军兵在境外，则入境。
English: If the Taibai does not appear when it should, or goes underground when it should not, it is a sign that the world will stop fighting, there will be no more wars, and the troops outside will return.

古文：未当出而出，当入而不入，天下起兵，有至破国。
现代文：不当出现而出现，当隐没而不隐没，天下有战争起动，有国家破败的情况发生。
English: Unjustly appearing and appearing, when disappearing but not disappearing, there are wars starting all over the world, and countries falling into ruin.

古文：未当出而出，未当入而入，天下举兵，所当之国亡。
现代文：不当出现而出现，不当隐没而隐没，天下大举兴兵，所当的国家亡国失地。
English: Unjustly appearing and appearing, improperly disappearing and disappearing, the whole world raised an army, and the country in question lost its territory.

古文：当期而出，其国昌。
现代文：应规律如期出现，预示分野之国昌盛。
English: The law of supply and demand appears as scheduled, indicating the country's prosperity in the field.

古文：出东为东方，入为北方；出西为西方，入为南方。
现代文：按期出现在东方，东方之国昌，隐入为北方之国昌；出现西方为西方昌，隐入为南方昌。
English: According to the schedule, it will appear in the East as the Eastern National Day, and disappear into the North as the Northern National Day; it will appear in the West as the Western National Day, and disappear into the South as the Southern National Day.

古文：所居久，其国利；易，其乡凶。
现代文：留守久，分野之国有利；有变易其分野之地凶险。
English: If you stay for a long time, the country of your field will be advantageous; if you change your field, the country of your field will be dangerous.

古文：入七日复出，将军战死。
现代文：隐没七日又出现，预示将军战死。
English: It reappeared seven days later, foreshadowing the general's death in battle.

古文：入十日复出，相死之。
现代文：隐入十年后又出现，为相的人亡。
English: After hiding for ten years, it reappears, as the death of a relative.

古文：入又复出，人君恶之。
现代文：才隐没又出现，作帝王的人厌恶它。
English: Then it disappears and reappears. Emperors detest it.

古文：已出三日而复微入，三日乃夏盛出，是为耎而伏，其下国有军，其众败将北。
现代文：已经出现三日又似隐似现，三日就又星光明亮，是软弱和拜伏的征兆，其分野之国有军事行动，其军众败北。
English: There have been three days and it seems to be looming, three days and the star is bright, is a sign of weakness and subservience, its field of state-owned military operations, its army defeated.

古文：已入三日，又复微出，三日乃复盛入，其下国有忧，帅师虽众，敌食其粮，用其兵，虏其帅。
现代文：已隐入三日，又似隐似现，三又全部隐没，其分野之国有忧患，所率领的军队虽众，敌军吃其军粮，俘其兵，掳其将帅。
English: He has been in hiding for three days, and it seems that he has been in hiding for three days, and it seems that he has been in hiding for three days, and it seems that he has been in hiding for three days, and it seems that he has been in hiding for three days, and it seems that he has been in hiding for three days.

古文：出西方，失其行，夷狄败；出东方，失其行，中国败。
现代文：出现于西方，而不按规律运行，预示夷狄败落；出现于东方而不按常规运行，中原之国败落。
English: If it appears in the west, but does not operate according to the rules, it foreshadows the fall of the barbarians; if it appears in the east, but does not operate according to the rules, the country of the Central Plains will fall.

古文：一曰，出蚤为月食，晚为天祅及彗星，将发于亡道之国。
现代文：一说提前出现，有月食发生，推迟出现，有异常星变及彗星出现，将发生在无道之国。
English: Some say that it will appear ahead of schedule, that there will be a lunar eclipse, that it will appear later, that there will be unusual star changes and comets, and that it will occur in a pathless country.

古文：太白出而留桑榆间，病其下国。
现代文：金星在傍晚出现在桑树、榆树顶，损害它下面所对的分野之国。
English: Venus appears in the evening at the top of the mulberry and eucalyptus trees, damaging the country below it.

古文：上而疾，未尽期日过参天，病其对国。
现代文：上升快速，未到期而已过三分之一天空，损害分野之国所对立的一国。
English: Rising rapidly, it has not yet passed one-third of the sky, damaging countries in the field and antagonizing one country.

古文：太白经天，天下革，民更王，是为乱纪，人民流亡。
现代文：金星白天经过中天，天下有改朝换代的革命，民众换君主，是乱了纲纪，百姓流亡。
English: Venus passes through the middle of the sky during the day, there are revolutions in the world to change the dynasty, the people change the monarch, the discipline is disordered, and the people are exiled.

古文：昼见与日争明，强国弱，小国强，女主昌。
现代文：金星白天出现与太阳争光，是强国衰弱，小国强盛，皇后运昌的预示。
English: The appearance of Venus during the day to compete with the sun is a sign of the weakness of a strong country, the strength of a small country, and the success of the queen.

古文：太白，兵象也。
现代文：金星，是战争的象征。
English: Venus is the symbol of war.

古文：出而高，用兵深吉浅凶；埤，浅吉深凶。
现代文：出现而且位置高，进军深入则吉，不深入则凶；位低下，不深入则吉，深入则凶。
English: Appearing and having a high position, advancing deeper is good luck, not going deeper is bad luck; lower position, not going deeper is good luck, going deeper is bad luck.

古文：行疾，用兵疾吉迟凶；行迟，用兵迟吉疾凶。
现代文：运行快，进军快则吉，缓则凶；运行迟缓，进军缓则吉，迅速则凶。
English: Run fast, go fast is good, go slow is bad; run slow, go slow is good, go fast is bad.

古文：角，敢战吉，不敢战凶；击角所指吉，逆之凶。
现代文：星光有芒角，勇战者吉，不勇者凶；攻打芒角所指的方向则吉，逆向则凶。
English: The starlight has the angle of the arc, and those who fight bravely are lucky, and those who do not fight bravely are unlucky; attacking the direction indicated by the angle of the arc is lucky, and the opposite direction is unlucky.

古文：进退左右，用兵进退左右吉，静凶。
现代文：金星进退左右，进军随之进退左右则吉，静止不动则凶。
English: Venus advances and retreats to the right and left, so advancing and retreating to the right and left is good, and standing still is bad.

古文：圜以静，用兵静吉趮凶。
现代文：星光环且安静，用兵沉着吉，操切则凶。
English: The star halo is quiet, and it is good to use soldiers calmly, but it is bad to use them recklessly.

古文：出则兵出，入则兵入。
现代文：金星出现则出军，隐没则兵入。
English: When Venus appears, troops are sent out, and when Venus is absent, troops are sent in.

古文：象太白吉，反之凶。
现代文：军事行动有如金星活动者则吉，反之则凶。
English: Military operations are like Venusian activities: those who are active are lucky, and those who are not are unlucky.

古文：赤角，战。
现代文：星光色赤而有芒角，是战争爆发的征象。
English: Starry red and with horns, it is a sign of the outbreak of war.

古文：太白者，犹军也，而荧惑，忧也。
现代文：金星，象征军，而火星象征忧患。
English: Venus, symbolizes the army, while Mars symbolizes sorrow.

古文：故荧惑从太白，军忧；离之，军舒。
现代文：所以火星跟随金星，预示有军忧；离开金星，军队高兴。
English: Therefore, Mars follows Venus, indicating military worries; leaving Venus, the army is happy.

古文：出太白之阴，有分军；出其阳，有偏将之战。
现代文：火星出现在金星之北，有分支军队；火星出现在金星之南，有偏师作战。
English: Mars appears to the north of Venus, with a branching army; Mars appears to the south of Venus, with a warring division.

古文：当其行，太白还之，破军杀将。
现代文：火星在正常的宿度上运行，金星还来依从它，是破军杀将的征兆。
English: Mars is running on a normal schedule, and Venus is still following it, which is a sign of breaking the deadlock.

古文：辰星，杀伐之气，战斗之象也。
现代文：水星，有杀伐之气，是战斗的征象。
English: Mercury, the hunter, is the sign of battle.

古文：与太白俱出东方，皆赤而角，夷狄败，中国胜；与太白俱出西方，皆赤而角，中国败，夷狄胜。
现代文：与金星同出于东方，都是色赤而星光有芒角，预示夷狄军败，中原之国军胜；舆金星同时出现西方，都是赤色而光有芒角，预示中原之国败，夷狄军胜。
English: Together with Venus, both appear in the east, both are red in color and the starlight has a crescent, foreshadowing the defeat of the Yidi army and the victory of the Central Plains' national army; both appear in the west at the same time, both are red and have a crescent, foreshadowing the defeat of the Central Plains' national army and the victory of the Yidi army.

古文：五星分天之中，积于东方，中国大利；积于西方，夷狄用兵者利。
现代文：五星分布于中天，聚积在东方，兆示中原之国大利；聚积在西方，兆示夷狄的军事行动有利。
English: Five stars distributed in the middle of the sky, concentrated in the East, indicates the Central Plains of Italy; concentrated in the West, indicates the military operations of the Yidi are favorable.

古文：辰星不出，太白为客；辰星出，太白为主人。
现代文：水星不出现，金星为客人；水星出现，金星主人之星。
English: Mercury does not appear, Venus is the guest; Mercury appears, Venus is the host star.

古文：辰星与太白不相从，虽有军不战。
现代文：水星与金星不相跟随，其分野之地虽有军队，但无战争。
English: Mercury and Venus do not follow each other, and although there are armies in their sector, there is no war.

古文：辰星出东方，太白出西方。若辰星出西方，太白出东方，为格，野虽有兵，不战。
现代文：水星出现在东方，金星出现在西方，或者水星出现西方，金星出现东方，是相隔之状态，四野虽有军兵，但没有战斗。
English: Mercury appears in the East, Venus appears in the West, or Mercury appears in the West, Venus appears in the East, is a state of separation, although there are soldiers in the four fields, but there is no battle.

古文：辰星入太白中，五日乃出，及入而上出，破军杀将，客胜；下出，客亡地。
现代文：水星被金星光芒所遮掩，五后又出现，它进入金星后从上方运行出，预示有破军杀将，入侵一方胜；从下面运行出，入侵方失地。
English: Mercury was obscured by the glow of Venus, and reappeared five days later. After it entered Venus, it moved out from above, indicating that there would be a decisive battle, and the invading side would win; it moved out from below, and the invading side would lose ground.

古文：辰星来抵，太白不去，将死。
现代文：水星接近金星，金星不离开，预示大将死。
English: Mercury close to Venus, Venus does not leave, heralding the general's death.

古文：正其上出，破军杀将，客胜；不出，客亡地。
现代文：当它从金星上方行进出现，兆示破军杀将，入侵方胜；下方出现，入侵方失地。
English: When it emerges from above Venus, it signals the defeat of the invaders and the victory of the invaders; when it emerges from below, the invaders lose ground.

古文：视其所指，以名破军。
现代文：看水星运行方向的星区，以其星官之名预示所破军之将。
English: Look at the star area in the direction of Mercury's movement, and the name of the star official will herald the general of the defeated army.

古文：辰星绕环太白，若斗，大战，客胜，主人吏死。
现代文：水星环绕金星运行，若其芒角相及，是大战，入侵者胜，被侵方主管官吏死亡。
English: Mercury orbits Venus, and if the angles of the two planets are equal, there will be a great war, the invaders will win, and the officials in charge of the invaded side will die.

古文：辰星过太白，间可椷剑，小战，客胜；居太白前旬三日，军罢；出太白左，小战；历太白右，数万人战，主人吏死；出太白右，去三尺，军急约战。
现代文：水星经过金星，两星之间的间距容一剑，发生小战，入侵一方胜；水星位于金星之前时间十三天，兆示战争结束；出现在金星左面，预示有小战；经过金星右面，有数万人的大战，被侵方主管官吏死亡；出现在金星右方，离它三尺距离，预示军队急切挑战。
English: Mercury passes Venus, the distance between the two stars is a sword's length, a small war occurs, and the invading side wins; Mercury is located thirteen days before Venus, indicating the end of the war; appears on the left side of Venus, indicating a small war; passes on the right side of Venus, there are tens of thousands of people in a large war, and the officials in charge of the invaded side are dead; appears on the right side of Venus, three feet away from it, indicating the urgent challenge of the army.

古文：凡太白所出所直之辰，其国为得位，得位者战胜。
现代文：凡是金星出现所正对的辰位，其国正所谓 得位 ，得位的一方战胜。
English: Whenever Venus appears in the right place at the right time, the country is said to be in the winning position, and the winning side wins.

古文：所直之辰顺其色而角者胜，其色害者败。
现代文：与所正当其辰位的星官颜色协调，同时光有芒角的预示胜利，星光色不协调的预示失败。
English: Coordinate the color of the star with the official color of the rightful position, and at the same time, the light with the angle of light indicates victory, and the starlight color that is not coordinated indicates failure.

古文：太白白比狼，赤比心，黄比参右肩，青比参左肩，黑比奎大星。
现代文：金星的颜色有时与狼星一样白，有时与心宿一样赤，有时与参宿右角星一样黄，有时与左角星一样青，有时与奎大星一样黑。
English: The color of Venus is sometimes as white as Lupus, sometimes as red as Antares, sometimes as yellow as Betelgeuse, sometimes as blue as Lyra, and sometimes as black as Pluto.

古文：色胜位，行胜色，行得尽胜之。
现代文：金星不失本色胜于得位，运行的状况胜于星光不失本色，运行合乎规律则能胜过所有的。
English: Color trumps placement, movement trumps color, and movement trumps everything else.

古文：辰星曰北方，冬，水，知也；听也。
现代文：水星主北方代表冬季，属五行中的水，人伦五常中的智，五事中的听。
English: Mercury, the lord of the north, represents winter, which is water in the five elements, wisdom in the five humanities, and listening in the five things.

古文：知亏听失，逆冬令，伤水气，罚见辰星。
现代文：智亏听失，违逆冬令，损伤水气，惩罚显示在水星。
English: Loss of wisdom, loss of hearing, violation of winter regulations, damage to water and gas, and punishment are displayed on Mercury.

古文：出蚤为月食，晚为彗星及天祅。
现代文：出现的早为有月食发生，晚为有彗星及变异之星象出现。
English: Lunar eclipses occur early, and comets and variable stars appear late.

古文：一时不出，其时不和；四时不出，天下大饥。
现代文：一个季节不出现，其时节不和；四季不出现，天下有大饥荒发生。
English: One season does not appear, the yin and yang of the season are not in harmony, the four seasons do not appear, there is no grain in the world, and there is a great famine.

古文：失其时而出，为当寒反温，当温反寒。
现代文：不按时令出现，天气就当寒反温，当温反寒。
English: If the star does not appear on time, it means that the weather should be cold but warm, and it should be warm but cold.

古文：当出不出，是谓击卒，兵大起。
现代文：应出现时不出现，是所谓有伏击士兵要出现，兆示军兵大兴。
English: If it should appear, but does not, it is a false alarm, and the whole world will be at war.

古文：与它星遇而斗，天下大乱。
现代文：与五星中其他星辰相遇，星光相撞，则天下大乱。
English: Encounter with other stars in the five stars, starlight collision, then the world is in chaos.

古文：出于房、心间，地动。
现代文：水星出现于房宿、心宿之间，有地震发生。
English: Mercury appears between the house and the heart, and an earthquake occurs.

古文：填星曰中央，季，夏，土；信也；思，心也。
现代文：土星主中央之地代表夏末，属五行中的木，人伦五常中的信，五事中的思心。
English: The land in the center of Saturn represents the end of summer. It belongs to the wood of the five elements, the letter of the five constants, and the mind of the five things.

古文：仁义礼智以信为主，貌言视听以心为正，故四星皆失，填星乃为之动。
现代文：人伦常纲中仁、义、礼、智、信以信为最重要。五事十貌、言、听、视、心，以心为首，所以其他四星失常，土星就为之所动。
English: In the human ethics syllabus, benevolence, righteousness, courtesy, wisdom, and faith are the most important. The five things - appearance, speech, listening, sight, and heart - are led by the heart, so the other four stars are abnormal, and Saturn is moved by them.

古文：填星所居，国吉。
现代文：土星所处星宿区的分野之国，吉祥。
English: Saturn is located in the sector of the country of the zodiac, auspicious.

古文：未当居而居之，若已去而复还居之，国得土，不乃得女子。
现代文：土星不当处而处之，或已经运行离去又回来处之，其下分野之国得国土，不然就得女子。
English: If Saturn is out of place, or has moved away and come back again, the country under it gets the land, otherwise it gets the girl.

古文：当居不居，既已居之，又东西去之，国失土，不乃失女，不，有土事若女之忧。
现代文：当处而不处，或暂处之后又东西方向离去，其分野之国失国土，不然就失女子，反之，有土木工程之劳或女主忧患。
English: If it is in place, but not in place, or if it is in place for a while and then moves away in an east-west direction, the country in its field loses its land, otherwise it loses its women, and vice versa, there is the labor of civil engineering or the worries of the mistress.

古文：居宿久，国福厚；易，福薄。
现代文：所处时间长的星宿，其分野之国有大福；短的，则福薄。
English: The long-term star constellation is the national blessing in its field; the short-term star constellation is the blessing.

古文：当居不居，为失填，其下国可伐；得者，不可伐。
现代文：当处而不处，叫作失镇，其下分野之国可以征讨；当处而处的，不能征伐它。
English: If it is everywhere but not there, it is called a lost town, and the country below it can be conquered; if it is everywhere but not there, it cannot be conquered.

古文：其赢，为王不宁；缩，有军不复。
现代文：土星出现的早，是王者不安宁的征兆；出现的晚，是军队不复归还的征兆。
English: The early appearance of Saturn is a sign that the king is restless; the late appearance is a sign that the army will never return.

古文：一曰，既已居之又东西去之，其国凶，不可举事用兵。
现代文：一说，暂处之后又向东西方向离去的，其分野之国凶险，不可举事动兵。
English: The first one said that if you leave the country for a while and then leave in an east-west direction, the country in your sector is in grave danger and you must not raise an army.

古文：失次而上一舍三舍，有王命不成，不乃大水；失次而下二舍，有后戚，其岁不复，不乃天裂若地动。
现代文：失常规提早出现一舍、三舍的，预示有君王之命不被执行，不然，就发大水；失常规而缓慢迟舍的，有外戚之患，其年成不好，不然有天裂好像地震。
English: If one or three people die prematurely, it indicates that the king's order will not be carried out, otherwise, there will be a flood; if people die prematurely and slowly, there will be a relative's illness, their year will not be good, otherwise there will be a crack in the sky like an earthquake.

古文：凡五星，岁与填合则为内乱，与辰合则为变谋而更事，与荧惑合则为饥，为旱，与太白合则为白衣之会，为水。
现代文：凡是五星运行，木星与土星会合为有内乱之兆，与水星会合为有谋变而更换工作之兆，与火星会合则为有饥荒、旱灾之兆，与金星会合为有白衣之会的丧事，或水灾之兆。
English: Whenever the five planets are in motion, the conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn is a sign of civil unrest, the conjunction with Mercury is a sign of change and a change of work, the conjunction with Mars is a sign of famine and drought, and the conjunction with Venus is a sign of a white-robed funeral or a flood.

古文：太白在南，岁在北，名曰牝牡，年谷大孰。太白在北，岁在南，年或有或亡。
现代文：金星在南木星在北，叫做牝牡，兆示五谷丰登，金星在北，木星在南，年成或好或坏。
English: Venus is in the south, Jupiter is in the north, and is called the year of the horse. The omens indicate a good harvest. Venus is in the north, Jupiter is in the south, and the year will be either good or bad.

古文：荧惑与太白合则为丧，不可举事用兵；与填合则为忧，主孽卿；与辰合则为北军，用兵举事大败。
现代文：火星与金星会合则为有丧事之兆，不可举事用兵；与土星会合则有忧，主预示有庶子作卿相；与水星会合则预示有败军，动兵起事会大败。
English: The meeting of Mars and Venus is a sign of death, and soldiers should not be raised; the meeting with Saturn is worrying, and the Lord foretells that there will be an illegitimate son; the meeting with Mercury foretells that there will be a defeated army, and the mobilization will be a big defeat.

古文：填与辰合则将有覆军下师；与太白合则为疾，为内兵。
现代文：土星与水星会合则预示全军覆没；与金星会合则预示有疾病发生，有内乱。
English: The conjunction of Saturn and Mercury foretells the destruction of the entire army; the conjunction with Venus foretells the occurrence of disease and civil unrest.

古文：辰与太白合则为变谋，为兵忧。
现代文：水星与金星会合则预示有谋变，是兵患之忧。
English: The meeting of Mercury and Venus, on the other hand, indicates that there will be a change of plans, which is a worry for soldiers.

古文：凡岁、荧惑、填、太白四星与辰斗，皆为战，兵不在外，皆为内乱。
现代文：凡木星、火星、上星、金星与水星光芒相及，都是战争的兆示，军队如不在境外都为内乱之兆。
English: Whenever Jupiter, Mars, the Pleiades, Venus and Mercury are in conjunction, it is a sign of war, and if the army is not outside the country, it is a sign of civil unrest.

古文：一曰，火与水合为淬，与金合为铄，不可举事用兵。
现代文：一说，火与水会合为淬火，与金会合为熔炼，因此不可举事动兵。
English: One said that the meeting of fire and water is a bonfire, and the meeting of fire and gold is a smelting, so it is impossible to raise an army.

古文：土与金合国亡地，与木合则国饥，与水合为雍沮，不可举事用兵。
现代文：土星舆金星会合，国失国土，与木星会合则国有饥荒，与水星会合为阻塞，不可举事用兵。
English: When Saturn and Venus meet, the country loses its land. When they meet Jupiter, the country suffers from famine. When they meet Mercury, the country is blocked and cannot raise an army.

古文：木与金合斗，国有内乱。
现代文：木星与金星光芒相及，国家有内乱。
English: Jupiter and Venus are in conjunction and there is civil unrest in the country.

古文：同舍为合，相陵为斗。
现代文：两星行至在同一宿内为合，星光相触及为斗。
English: Two stars travel to meet in the same inn, and the starlight touches each other and fights.

古文：二星相近者其殃大，二星相远者殃无伤也，从七寸以内必之。
现代文：二星之间距离相近，其预示的殃祸大，二星距离相远，所示灾害无所伤害，二星相距在观测距离七寸以内必有害伤。
English: If two stars are close to each other, it portends great calamity. If two stars are far apart, there will be no harm from the disasters shown. If two stars are within seven inches of each other, there will be harmful harm.

古文：凡月食五星，其国皆亡：岁以饥，荧惑以乱，填以杀，太白强国以战，辰以女乱。
现代文：凡月亮遮掩五星，其分野之地亡国：木星被食有饥荒发生，火星被食有动乱发生，土星被食有杀戮之祸，金星被食，强国因此发动战争，水星被食有后妃引起的变乱发生。
English: Whenever the moon hides the five stars, the country of the field is ruined: Jupiter is eaten and famine occurs, Mars is eaten and turmoil occurs, Saturn is eaten and killing occurs, Venus is eaten and powerful countries start wars as a result, Mercury is eaten and turmoil caused by concubines occurs.

古文：月食大角，王者恶之。
现代文：月亮遮掩大角星，为王者所厌恶。
English: The moon eclipses the star Arcturus, which is abhorred by kings.

古文：凡五星所聚宿，其国王天下：从岁以义，从荧惑以礼，从填以重，从太白以兵从辰以法。
现代文：凡五星所聚拢的星宿，其分野之国称霸天下：跟从木星聚拢义胜，跟从火星则礼兴，跟从土星则德厚，跟从金星则兵强，跟从水星则法制。
English: For all the constellations gathered by the five stars, the countries in their fields dominate the world: from Jupiter comes victory, from Mars comes prosperity, from Saturn comes virtue, from Venus comes military strength, and from Mercury comes the rule of law.

古文：以法者，以法致天下也。
现代文：用法得到天下的，因法治理天下。
English: If the usage is accepted by the world, the world will be governed by the usage.

古文：三星若合，是谓惊立绝行，其国外内有兵与丧，民人乏饥，改立王公。
现代文：三星如果会合，是所谓惊立绝行，其分野之国内外有兵祸及丧事，百姓穷困饥馑，起而改立王公。
English: If the three stars meet, it will be a so-called surprise attack, and there will be military disasters and funerals at home and abroad in their fields, and the people will be poor and hungry, and they will be replaced by princes.

古文：四星若合，是谓大汤，其国兵丧并起，君子忧，小人流。
现代文：如果四星聚合，是所谓大荡，分野之国兵乱丧事一并发动，君子忧患，百姓流散。
English: If the four stars converge, it is the so-called great disturbance, the national soldiers of the field will launch a riot together, the gentleman will be troubled, and the people will be dispersed.

古文：五星若合，是谓易行：有德受庆，改立王者，掩有四方，子孙蕃昌；亡德受罚，离其国家，灭其宗庙，百姓离去，被满四方。
现代文：如果五星聚合，所谓易行：有德者受福庆，改立之王，拥有四方土地，子孙昌盛；无德之君受天罚，离开他的国家，宗庙被毁，百姓离弃他，遍布四方流浪。
English: If the five stars converge, the so-called easy way: the virtuous person is blessed with good fortune, becomes the king, owns the land in the four directions, and his descendants prosper; the wicked prince is punished by heaven, leaves his country, the ancestral temple is destroyed, the people abandon him, and wander all over the four directions.

古文：五星皆大，其事亦大；皆小，其事亦小也。
现代文：五星的形状都大，兆示其发生之事大；都小，其发生之事也小。
English: The shapes of the five stars are all large, indicating that the things that happen to them are large; all are small, and the things that happen to them are small.

古文：凡五星色：皆圜，白为丧为旱，赤中不平为兵，青为忧为水，黑为疾为多死，黄吉；皆角，赤犯我城，黄地之争，白哭泣之声，青有兵忧，黑水。
现代文：凡五星的光色都为环形，色白兆示丧事，旱灾，色赤并且中央有深有浅，兆示有兵乱，色青兆示有忧患，水灾，色黑兆示有疾病发生，有病人多死亡，黄色为吉祥之兆；都有角，赤色兆示有敌犯我城池，黄色兆示土地之争，白色兆示有哭泣之声，青色兆示有兵忧，黑色兆示有水灾。
English: The colors of the five stars are all ring-shaped. White indicates mourning, drought, red and the center has depth and light. The signs indicate war, blue and green indicate sorrow, flood, black and black indicate disease, more patients and more deaths, yellow is an auspicious sign, and there are horns. Red indicates enemy attack, yellow indicates land dispute, white indicates crying, blue indicates war, and black indicates flood.

古文：五星同色，天下偃兵，百姓安宁，歌舞以行，不见灾疾，五谷蕃昌。
现代文：五星同色，天下息兵，百姓安宁，歌舞升平，灾疾不现，五谷丰盛。
English: The five stars are the same color, the world is at peace, the people are peaceful, the songs and dances are leveled, the disasters and diseases do not appear, and the grain is plentiful.

古文：凡五星，岁，缓则不行，急则过分，逆则占。
现代文：关于五星：木星，星行迟缓，则运行不到应到的宿度；急切，则运行过了应到的宿度，若从东向西逆行，则要占卜。
English: Regarding the five stars: Jupiter, if the movement of the star is slow, then it will not run as far as it should; if it is urgent, then it will run past its proper destination; if it is retrograde from east to west, then it is necessary to divinize.

古文：荧惑，缓则不出，急则不入，违道则占。
现代文：火星，星行迟缓，则该出现而不出现；急切，则该隐没而不隐没，若违背正常的运行轨道，则要占卜。
English: Fluorescent planets, mitigation does not occur, the disease calendar exceeds its residence, and disobedience is accounted for.

古文：填，缓则不建，急则过舍，逆则占。
现代文：土星，星行迟缓，则运行不到应到的宿度；急切，则运行过了应到的宿度，逆行则要占卜。
English: Saturn, retrograde, will not run as long as it should; eager, it will run longer than it should, and retrograde will require divination.

古文：太白，缓则不出，急则不入，逆则占。
现代文：金星，星行迟缓，则该出现而不出现；急切，则该隐没而不隐没，逆行则要占卜。
English: When it comes to health, mitigation is out, when it comes to illness, it's out, and when it's not, it's accounted for.

古文：辰，缓则不出，急则不入，非时则占。
现代文：水星，星行迟缓，则该出现而不出现；急切，则该隐没而不隐没，其运行的状况不合时节，则要占卜。
English: Mercury, if the astrology is slow, should appear and not appear; if it is urgent, it should disappear and not disappear, and if its operation is out of season, it should be divined.

古文：五星不失行，则年谷丰昌。
现代文：五星运行不快不慢，符合正常的规律，则年成丰收，国家昌盛。
English: Five stars without losing the foundation, the grain harvest of the year is the best.

古文：凡以宿星通下之变者，维星散，句星信，则地动。
现代文：凡是认为星宿通分野之地的变化的情况：斗杓后的三星不相从的，勾星直排则有地震。
English: Any change in the position of the stars in the celestial sphere is considered: if the three stars are out of alignment after a battle, an earthquake will occur if the stars are in a straight line.

古文：有星守三渊，天下大水，地动，海鱼出。
现代文：有行星留守在三渊星区的天下发大水，有地震，海鱼跃出。
English: There is a planet left behind in the sky of the Samyuon star region, which causes great water, earthquakes, and sea fish to jump out.

古文：纪星散者山崩，不即有丧。
现代文：天纪星散排无序的有山崩，不久有丧事。
English: There was a landslide due to the disorderly arrangement of the celestial stars, and there was a funeral soon after.

古文：龟、鳖星不居汉中，川有易者。
现代文：龟星、鳖星不处于银河中的，河川有改易的情况。
English: If the tortoise star and the hawk star are not in the Milky Way, the situation of the rivers will be changed.

古文：辰星入五车，大水。
现代文：水星进入五车星星区，有大水。
English: Mercury enters the five-chariot star zone, there is heavy water.

古文：荧惑入积水，水，兵起；入积薪，旱，兵起；守之，亦然。
现代文：火星进入积水星星区，有水灾，有战争发动；行入积薪星星区，有旱灾，有战争；羁留不去的也是这样。
English: When Mars enters the water sign, there will be floods and wars; when it enters the fire sign, there will be droughts and wars; the same is true for those who cannot be detained.

古文：极后有四星，名曰句星。
现代文：天极后面有四星，名叫勾星。
English: Behind the celestial pole, there are four stars, called the Pleiades.

古文：斗杓后有三星，名曰维星。散者，不相从也。
现代文：斗杓后面有三星，名叫维星。 散 是不相从的意思。
English: There is a three-pointed star behind the dragonfly, which is called Vixing.

古文：三渊，盖五车之三柱也。
现代文：三渊星，就是五车星中的三柱星。
English: Sanyuan star is the three-pillar star in the five-chariot star.

古文：天纪属贯索。
现代文：天纪星座临近贯索星座。
English: The celestial constellations are approaching the constellation of Draco.

古文：积薪在北戍西北。
现代文：积薪星在北河星西北。
English: The star of accumulation is in the northwest of Beihexing.

古文：积水在北戍东北。
现代文：积水星在北河星东北。
English: Mercury is in the northeast of Beihexing.

古文：角、亢、氐，沇州。
现代文：角宿、亢宿、氐宿的分野地区是沆州。
English: The areas of Kakunodate, Shibuya, and Shibuya are all in Choshu.

古文：房、心，豫州。
现代文：房宿。宿的分野地是豫州。
English: Fang and Xin are both in Henan Province.

古文：尾、箕，幽州。
现代文：尾宿、箕宿的分野地是幽州。
English: Tail, beak, the field is Yuzhou.

古文：斗，江、湖。
现代文：斗宿，分野地是垦辽和鄱阳湖。
English: Nandu is the center of the river and lake area.

古文：牵牛、婺女，扬州。
现代文：牵牛宿、婺女宿分野地是扬州。
English: "Cowherd" and "Lady with an Ermine" are from Yangzhou.

古文：虚、危，青州。
现代文：虚宿、危宿分野地是青州。
English: The virtual and dangerous areas are in Qingzhou.

古文：营室、东壁，并州。
现代文：营室宿、束壁宿分野地是差业。
English: The areas of Yakitori-juku and Sokubi-juku are poor.

古文：奎、娄、胃，徐州。
现代文：奎宿、娄宿、胃宿分野地是徐州。
English: Kui, Qi, stomach, Mishuku, the field is Xuzhou.

古文：昴、毕，冀州。
现代文：昴宿、毕宿分野地是冀州。
English: , Bi Erjuku is Jizhou.

古文：觜觿、参、益州。
现代文：觜峭宿、参宿分野地是益州。
English: The site of the Tsukidake lodge and the Betake lodge is in Iksu.

古文：东井、舆鬼，雍州，柳、七星、张，三河。
现代文：束井宿、舆鬼宿分野地是雍州。柳宿、七星、张宿分野地是三河。
English: The Sokai-juku and Utsugi-juku areas are in Yongzhou, and the Yagyu-juku, Shichisei-juku and Zhang-juku areas are in Mikawa.

古文：翼、轸，荆州。
现代文：翼宿、轸宿分野地是荆州。
English: 翼 and 二宿 are in Jingzhou.

古文：甲乙，海外，日月不占。
现代文：甲乙曰时。海外不占卜日月。
English: A and B are the same time. Overseas, the sun and the moon are not divined.

古文：丙丁，江、淮、海、岱。
现代文：丙丁曰时，长江、淮河、海和泰山不占卜曰月。
English: According to the lunar calendar, the Yangtze River, the Huai River, the sea and Mount Tai are not divinable.

古文：戊己，中州河、济。
现代文：戊己曰时，中原的黄河、济江地区不占卜曰月。
English: At that time, the Yellow River and Jijiang areas in the Central Plains did not have divination.

古文：庚辛，华山以西。
现代文：庚辛曰时，华山以西不占卜日月。
English: According to Geng Xin, there is no fortune-telling in the west of Huashan.

古文：壬癸，常出以北。
现代文：壬癸曰时，常山以北不占卜日月。
English: At that time, there was no fortune-telling north of Changshan.

古文：一曰，甲齐，乙东夷，丙楚，丁南夷，戊魏，己韩，庚秦，辛西夷，壬燕、赵，癸北夷。
现代文：一说，甲曰时齐国，乙曰时柬夷，丙曰时楚国，丁曰时南夷，戊日时魏国，己曰时韩国，庚曰时秦国，辛曰时西夷，壬曰时燕国、趟国，癸曰时北夷。
English: One said, A said, when Qi, B said, when Cambrian, C said, when Chu, D said, when Nan'i, E said, when Wei, Zi said, when Korea, G said, when Qin, Xin said, when Xi'i, Ren said, when Yan, when Wai, Zi said, when Bei'i.

古文：子周，丑翟，寅赵，卯郑，辰邯郸，已卫，午秦，末中山，申齐，酉鲁，戌吴、越，亥燕、代。
现代文：子曰时周国，丑曰时翟国，寅曰时赵国，卯日时郑国，辰时邯郸，巳时卫国，午曰时秦国，末日时中山国，申时齐国，酉曰时鲁国，戌日时吴国、越国，亥曰时燕国、代国不占卜日月。
English: The son says Zhou, the ugly says Shandong, the yang says Zhao, the yang Zheng, the hour Yin, the morning Wei, the afternoon Qin, the last day Zhongshan, the morning Qi, the afternoon Lu, the afternoon Wu, the morning Yue, the evening Yan, and the evening Yin.

古文：秦之疆，候太白，占狼、弧。
现代文：秦国的疆域，占验在金星、狼星和弧星。
English: In the territory of Qin, the horoscopes are held on Venus, Wolf Star and Arc Star.

古文：吴、楚之疆，候荧惑，占鸟衡。
现代文：吴国、楚国的疆域占验在火星、鸟星、衡星。
English: The territory of the State of Wu and the State of Chu is occupied by Mars, the Bird Star, and the Weighing Star.

古文：燕、齐之疆，候辰星，占虚、危。
现代文：燕国、齐国的疆域占验在水星、虚宿和危宿。
English: The territories of Yan Guo and Qi Guo are located in Mercury, Fictitious Abode and Dangerous Abode.

古文：宋、郑之疆，候岁星，占房、心。
现代文：宋国、郑国的疆域占验在木星、房宿、心宿。
English: The territories of Song and Zheng dynasties occupy Jupiter, the abode, and the heart.

古文：晋之疆，亦候辰星，占参、罚。
现代文：晋国的疆域占验在水星、参宿和罚星。
English: The boundaries of Jin are determined by Mercury, Betelgeuse and the Punishing Star.

古文：及秦并吞三晋、燕、代，自河、山以南者中国。
现代文：等到秦国并吞三晋、燕国、代国，自黄河、华山以南为中原。
English: It was not until the Qin State annexed the three Jin States, the Yan State, and the Dai State that the Central Plains extended from the Yellow River and south of Mount Huashan.

古文：中国于四海内则在东南，为阳，阳则日、岁星、荧惑、填星，占于街南，毕主之。
现代文：中原对四海宇内来说则在东南，为阳，阳就是太阳、木星、火星、土星，在天街南面观测它们的征候，毕宿主管阳。
English: For the four seas and the universe, the Central Plains are in the southeast, for the sun, the sun is the sun, Jupiter, Mars, Saturn, observe their symptoms on the south side of the Milky Way, and the yang is in charge.

古文：其西北则胡、貉、月氏旃裘引弓之民，为阴，阴则月、太白、辰星，占于街北，昴主之。
现代文：中原的西北则是胡人、北夷、月氏等穿皮衣用弓箭的少数民族，为阴，阴就是月亮、金星、水星，在天街北面观测它们的征候，昴宿主管阴。
English: In the northwest of the Central Plains, ethnic minorities such as the Hu people, the Beiyi people, and the Yue people, who wear skins and use bows and arrows, are yin. Yin is the moon, Venus, and Mercury. Observe their symptoms on the north side of Tianjie. Yin is in charge of lodging.

古文：故中国山川东北流，其维，首在陇、蜀，尾没于渤海碣石。
现代文：所以中原的山西！东北走向，其脉胳首在陇、蜀地区，尾没于渤海碣石山。
English: Therefore, the Central Plains moved to the west of Shanxi and to the northeast, with the first leg in the Shou and Shu regions, and the last leg in the Bohai Sea and Shishishan Mountains.

古文：是以秦、晋好用兵，复占太白。
现代文：所以秦、晋之国好用兵，又可以占验金星。
English: Therefore, the Qin and Jin dynasties were good at using soldiers, and they were also good at divining Venus.

古文：太白主中国，而胡、貉数侵掠，独占辰星。
现代文：金星主预示中原，而北方少数民族数次侵掠，可单独观测水星。
English: Venus mainly foreshadows the Central Plains, while the northern ethnic minorities invade and plunder several times, and Mercury can be observed separately.

古文：辰星出入疾，常主夷狄，其大经也。
现代文：水星运行疾切，一般是主预示夷狄，这些大概如此。
English: Mercury runs fast, and is usually the main harbinger of spring, which is probably the case.

古文：凡五星，早出为赢，赢为客；晚出为缩，缩为主人。
现代文：凡五星早出现为赢，赢是占验客人的；晚出现为缩，缩是占验主人的。
English: Where five stars appear early to win, winning is the guest's test; late to appear to shrink, shrinking is the host's test.

古文：五星赢缩，必有天应见杓。
现代文：五星运行或早或晚，必有天象应验于杓星。
English: Sooner or later, when the five stars are in motion, a celestial phenomenon will come to pass on the planet Uranus.

古文：太岁在寅曰摄提格。
现代文：太岁星在寅位，叫摄提格。
English: The eldest son is in the first place, and is called Tege.

古文：岁星正月晨出东方，《石氏》曰名监德，在斗、牵牛。
现代文：木星正月晨出现东方，《石氏》中说名为监德，位置在斗星、牵牛星星区。
English: Jupiter appears in the east in the morning of the first month of the year. According to "Shiuji," it is named Guande and is located in the region of the shooting star and the cowherd star.

古文：失次，杓，早水，晚旱。
现代文：运行失常，在杓星星区出现，出现提早有水灾，出现过晚有旱灾发生。
English: abnormal operation, appeared in the starry sky area, early flood occurred, and drought occurred too late.

古文：《甘氏》在建星、婺女。《太初历》在营室、东壁。
现代文：《甘氏》上说，在建星和婺女宿出现，《太初历》上说在营室宿、东壁宿出现。
English: According to "Mr. Ganshi," it appeared in Jianxing and Huanmei Inns, and according to "Taihatsu Calendar," it appeared in Yingshu Inn and Dongbi Inn.

古文：在卯曰单阏。
现代文：在卯位叫单阏。
English: In Ui, it is called "Sanzo."

古文：二月出，《石氏》曰名降人，在婺女、虚、危。
现代文：木星二月晨出东方，《石氏》称为降入，在婺女宿、虚宿、危宿出现。
English: Jupiter rises in the east in the morning of February, and the "rock clan" is called the descent, and appears in the girl's inn, the false inn, and the dangerous inn.

古文：《甘氏》在虚、危。
现代文：《甘氏》中说，在虚宿、危宿出现。
English: In "Kanshi," it is said that it appears in a bogus inn or a dangerous inn.

古文：失次，杓，有水灾。
现代文：运行失常于杓星，有水灾。
English: Irregularities in the operation of the Iridium, there are floods.

古文：《太初》在奎、娄。
现代文：《太初历》中说在奎宿、娄宿出现。
English: It is said to have appeared in Kui-juku and Haku-juku in the Taihatsu calendar.

古文：在辰曰执徐。
现代文：在辰位叫执徐。
English: In the morning, it is called "Xing Xu" (执徐).

古文：三月出，《石氏》曰名青章，在营室、东壁。
现代文：木星三月晨出东方，《石氏》称为青章，在营室宿、柬壁宿出现。
English: Jupiter rises in the east in the morning of March, and the "stone clan" is called the blue chapter, appearing in the camp room inn and the Cambodian wall inn.

古文：失次，杓，早旱，晚水。《甘氏》同。
现代文：运行失常于杓星，出现提早有旱灾，出现过晚有水灾，《甘氏》中说的和这一样。
English: It is the same as what is said in "Ganji" that the irregularities in the operation are due to bad luck, droughts occur early, and floods occur too late.

古文：《太初》在胃、昴。
现代文：《太初历》中说在胃宿、昴宿出现。
English: It is said in the "Tai Hatsu Calendar" that it appears in Magoshuku and Shishuku.

古文：在巳曰大荒落。
现代文：在巳位叫大荒落。
English: At this point, it is called the Great Desolation.

古文：四月出，《石氏》曰名路踵，在奎、娄。
现代文：木星四月晨出东方，《石氏》称为路踵，在奎宿、娄宿出现。
English: Jupiter rises in the east in the morning in April, and the "stone clan" is called the heel of the road, appearing in Kuijuku and Shibuya.

古文：《甘氏》同。
现代文：《甘氏》所述与它相同。
English: The scene described in "Mr. Kame" is the same.

古文：《太初》在参、罚。
现代文：《太初历》中说在参宿、罚星出现。
English: It is said in "The First Lunar Calendar" that the star of punishment appears in Betelgeuse.

古文：在午曰敦牂。
现代文：在午位叫敦牂。
English: In the afternoon, I called Dunyao.

古文：五月出。《石氏》曰名启明，在胃、昴、毕。
现代文：木星五月晨出东方，《石氏》称为启明，在胃宿、昴宿、毕宿出现。
English: Jupiter rises in the east in the morning in May. "Ishuji" is called "Qiming" and appears in the stomach, abdomen, and abdomen.

古文：失次，杓，早旱，晚水。
现代文：运行失常于杓星，出现提早有旱灾，出现过晚有水灾。
English: Irregularities in the operation of the satellite, early droughts, late floods.

古文：《甘氏》同。
现代文：《甘氏》中所述与它相同。
English: The scene described in "Mr. Kame" is the same.

古文：《太初》在东井、舆鬼。
现代文：《太初历》中说在束井宿、舆鬼宿出现。
English: It is said in "The First Lunar Calendar" that ghosts appear in Sokai-juku and Utsugi-juku.

古文：在未曰协洽。
现代文：在未位叫协洽。
English: In the absence of cooperation.

古文：六月出，《石氏》曰名长烈，在觜觿、参。
现代文：木星六月晨出东方，《石氏》称为长烈，在觜脯星、参宿出现。
English: Jupiter rises in the east in the morning of June. "Shiuji" is known as the long-lived, appearing in the constellation of Cancer and Betelgeuse.

古文：《甘氏》在参、罚。
现代文：《甘氏》中说在参宿、罚星出现。
English: It is said in "Mr. Kame" that he appeared in "Banshuku" and "Penalty Star."

古文：《太初》在注、张、七星。
现代文：《太初历》中说在柳宿、张宿和七星宿出现。
English: According to the "Tai Hatsu Calendar," it appears in Yanagishuku, Zhangshuku, and Shichiseishuku.

古文：在申曰氵君滩。
现代文：在申位叫氵君滩。
English: It is called Shujun Beach in the petition.

古文：七月出。《石氏》曰名天晋，在东井、舆鬼。
现代文：木星七月晨出东方，《石氏》称为天晋，在束井宿、舆鬼宿出现。
English: Jupiter rises in the east in the morning in July, and the "rock clan" is called the "Heavenly Jin," appearing in the Sokai Inn and the Utsugi Inn.

古文：《甘氏》在弧。
现代文：《甘氏》中说在弧星出现。
English: In "Mr. Kane," it is said to appear in the arc star.

古文：《太初》在翼、轸。
现代文：《太初历》中说在翼宿、轸宿出现。
English: It is said to have appeared in Tsubasa-juku and Shibuya-juku in the "Taihatsu calendar."

古文：在酉曰作詻八月出。
现代文：在酉位叫作证。
English: In the dock, called to testify.

古文：《石氏》曰名长壬，在柳、七星、张。
现代文：木星八月晨出东方，《石氏》称为长壬，在柳宿、七星宿、张宿出现。
English: Jupiter rises in the east in the morning of August, and the "rock clan" is called Changren, and appears in the Willow Inn, the Seven Stars Inn, and the Zhang Inn.

古文：失次，杓，有女丧、民疾。
现代文：运行失常于杓星，有女主的丧事、百姓有病。
English: The operation is out of kilter, the mistress is in mourning, and the people are sick.

古文：《甘氏》在注、张。
现代文：《甘氏》中说在柳宿、张宿出现。
English: According to "Mr. Ganshi," he appeared in Yanagishuku and Zhangshuku.

古文：失次，杓，有火。
现代文：运行失常于杓星，有火灾。
English: There was a malfunction on the Iridium and a fire broke out.

古文：《太初》在角、亢。
现代文：《太初历》中说在角宿、亢宿出现。
English: It is said in the "Tai Hatsu Calendar" that it appears in Kakuno-juku and Haku-juku.

古文：在戌曰掩茂。
现代文：在戌位叫掩茂。
English: In this position, he is called "Kamo."

古文：九月出，《石氏》曰名天睢，在翼、轸。
现代文：木星九月晨出东方，《石氏》称为天睢，在翼宿、轸宿出现。
English: Jupiter rises in the east in the morning of September. "Ishuji" is known as the heavenly cocoon and appears in Tsubasa and Shibuya.

古文：失次，杓，水。
现代文：运行失常于杓星，有水灾发生。
English: Irregularities in the operation of the Iridium, flooding occurred.

古文：《甘氏》在七星、翼。
现代文：《甘氏》中说在七星宿、翼宿出现。
English: It is said in "Kanshi" that it appears in Shichiseijuku and Tsubasa.

古文：《太初》在氐、房、心。
现代文：《太初历》中说在氐宿、房宿、心宿出现。
English: It is said in the "Tai Hatsushiku" that it appears in Shishuku, Hoshuku, and Shinjuku.

古文：在亥曰大渊献。
现代文：在亥位叫大渊献。
English: At the boar's place, it is called Ohunokken.

古文：十月出，《石氏》曰名天皇，在角、亢始。
现代文：木星十月晨出东方，《石氏》称为天皇，在角宿、亢宿出现。
English: Jupiter rises in the east in the morning of October. "Ishuji" is called the emperor and appears in Kakuno-juku and Shibuya.

古文：《甘氏》在轸、角、亢。
现代文：《甘氏》中说在轸宿、角宿、亢宿出现。
English: In "Kanshi," it is said to have appeared in Oshuku, Kakushuku, and Oshuku.

古文：《太初》在尾、箕。
现代文：《太初历》中说在尾宿、箕宿出现。
English: It is said in the "Tai Hatsu Calendar" that it appears in Oshuku and Shibuya.

古文：在子曰困敦。
现代文：在于位叫困敦。
English: To be in a place of yu is to be in a tight spot.

古文：十一月出，《石氏》曰名天宗，在氐、房始。
现代文：木星十一月晨出东方，《石氏》称为天宗，在氐宿、房宿出现。
English: Jupiter rises in the east in the morning of November. "Shiuji" is called Tenshu, and appears in Shishuku and Houshuku.

古文：《甘氏》同。
现代文：《甘氏》中所述与它相同。
English: The scene described in "Mr. Kame" is the same.

古文：《太初》在建星、牵牛。
现代文：《太初历》中说在建星、牵牛宿出现。
English: It is said in "The First Lunar Calendar" that the Cowherd's Inn appeared in Jianxing.

古文：在丑曰赤奋苦。
现代文：在丑位叫赤奋若。
English: In the ugly position, he is called red-faced.

古文：十二月出，《石氏》曰名天昊，在尾、箕。
现代文：木星十二月晨出东方，《石氏》称为天昊，在尾宿、箕宿出现。
English: Jupiter rises in the east in the morning of December, and "Shiuji" is called Tianhao, appearing in Oshuku and Shibuya.

古文：《甘氏》在心、尾。
现代文：《甘氏》中说在心宿、尾宿出现。
English: In "Kanshi," it is said to appear in the middle and at the end.

古文：《太初》在婺女、虚、危。
现代文：《太初历》中说在婺女宿、虚宿、危宿出现。
English: It is said in "The First Lunar Calendar" that there are three types of women's lodgings, false lodgings, and dangerous lodgings.

古文：《甘氏》、《太初历》所以不同者，以星赢缩在前，各录后所见也。
现代文：《甘氏》、《太初历》所以关于木星的记载有所不同，是因为行星运行快慢在前，而各书记载所见在后。
English: Therefore, the records of Jupiter in "The Tale of Genji" and "The Tale of Genji" are different, because the speed of the planet's movement is in the foreground, while what is recorded in the records is in the background.

古文：其四星亦略如此。
现代文：那四星也大略如此。
English: The four stars are roughly the same.

古文：古历五星之推，亡逆行者，至甘氏、石氏《经》，以荧惑、太白为有逆行。
现代文：古历中推究五星的运行，没有记载逆行的情况，到了甘氏、石氏的《星经》，记载了火星、金星有逆行的情况。
English: In the ancient calendar, the movement of the five stars was deduced, and there was no record of retrograde conditions. In the "Star Scripture" of Gan and Shi, the retrograde conditions of Mars and Venus were recorded.

古文：夫历者，正行也。
现代文：古代历书，是记载五星正常运行的。
English: The ancient almanac is a record of the normal operation of the five stars.

古文：古人有言曰： 天下太平，五星循度，亡有逆行。
现代文：古人有言说： 天下太平，五星循行合度，没有逆行。
English: The ancients said: The world is peaceful, the five stars follow the same direction, and there is no retrograde movement.

古文：日不食朔，月不食望。 
现代文：初一不发生食，十五不发生月食。 
English: Lunar eclipses do not occur on the first day of the new year and the fifteenth day of the new year.

古文：夏氏《日月传》曰： 日月食尽，主位也；不尽，臣位也。 
现代文：夏氏的《日月传》中说： 曰、月全食，象征主位；日食、月食偏食，象征臣位。 
English: Xia's "Sun and Moon" said: "The total lunar eclipse symbolizes the position of the master; the partial solar eclipse and lunar eclipse symbolize the position of the vassal.

古文：《星传》曰： 日者德也，月者刑也，故曰日食修德，月食修刑。 
现代文：《星传》中说： 太阳是象征德的，月亮是象征刑的，所以说日食发生应修养德行，月食发生应整治法度。 
English: In the "Star Biography," it is said: The sun is a symbol of virtue, and the moon is a symbol of punishment. Therefore, it is said that the occurrence of a solar eclipse should cultivate virtue, and the occurrence of a lunar eclipse should rectify laws and regulations.

古文：然而历纪推月食，与二星之逆亡异。
现代文：所以，历书记载推算月食与火星、金星的逆行没有差异。
English: Therefore, there is no difference between the lunar eclipse and the retrograde motion of Mars and Venus.

古文：荧惑主内乱，太白主兵，月主刑。
现代文：火星主示内乱，金星主示战争，月主示刑狱。
English: Mars stands for civil unrest, Venus for war, and the Moon for prison.

古文：自周室衰，乱臣贼子师旅数起，刑罚失中，虽其亡乱臣贼子师旅之变，内臣犹不治，四夷犹不服，兵革犹不寝，刑罚犹不错，故二星与月为之失度，三变常见；及有乱臣贼子伏尸流血之兵，大变乃出，甘、石氏见其常然，因以为纪，皆非正行也。
现代文：自从周室衰亡，乱臣贼子军兵数起，刑罚失当，虽然亡于乱臣贼子的军旅之变，内臣也像是治理不当，四夷也像是不顺服，兵戈也像是不能止息，刑罚也像是不能施行，所以金星、火星与月亮运行失度，三变常见；到了有乱臣贼子伏尸流血的战争发生，大变于是出现。甘、石氏观察到它们的规律，所以为之记载，说这些都是不正常的运行。
English: Since the fall of the Zhou dynasty and the rise of the number of soldiers in the army of unruly vassals and thieves, punishments have been inappropriate. Although the deaths were caused by changes in the military journeys of the unruly vassals and thieves, the vassals also seemed to be improperly governed, the four barbarians also seemed to be disobedient, the war also seemed to be unable to stop, and the punishments also seemed to be unable to be carried out. Therefore, Venus, Mars and the moon were running out of control, and the three changes were common. When a war occurred in which the bodies of the unruly vassals and thieves were bleeding, a

古文：《诗》云： 彼月而食，则惟其常；此日而食，于何不臧？ 
现代文：《诗经》说： 那个月亮被遮掩，则是很平常的；这个太阳被遮掩，又有什么不吉祥呢？ 
English: The "Song of Songs" says: It is quite common for the moon to be covered; what is not auspicious about this sun being covered?

古文：《诗传》曰： 月食非常也，比之日食犹常也，日食则不臧矣。 
现代文：《诗经传》中说： 月食不平常，比食却更常见，日食则是不祥。 
English: "Shijing Zhuan" said: Lunar eclipses are unusual, but more common than eclipses, and solar eclipses are ominous.

古文：谓之小变，可也；谓之正行，非也。
现代文：称它为小变，可以了；称它为正常运行，则不可。
English: Calling it a minor change is fine; calling it normal operation is not.

古文：故荧惑必行十六舍，去日远而颛恣。
现代文：所以火星必行十六舍，离太阳远而且任意独行。
English: Therefore, Mars must travel sixteen houses, far from the sun and arbitrarily travel alone.

古文：太白出西方，进在日前，气盛乃逆行。
现代文：金星出现在西方，行进在太阳之前，气盛于是逆行。
English: Venus appears in the west, travels in front of the sun, and then goes retrograde.

古文：及月必食于望，亦诛盛也。
现代文：一定在望出现月食，也是削夺盛的征象。
English: A lunar eclipse must be in the offing, and it is also a sign of waning prosperity.

古文：国皇星，大而赤，状类南极。
现代文：国皇之星，大而且色红，形状像南极老人星。
English: King Star, the star is large and reddish in color, similar in shape to the Antarctic Old Man's Star.

古文：所以，其下起兵。
现代文：它的出现预示其分野之地有战争发动。
English: Its appearance heralds the start of a war in the area.

古文：兵强，其冲不利。
现代文：分野之地兵强，其相对应的一方不利。
English: Where the field is strong, its corresponding side is unfavorable.

古文：昭明星，大而白，无角，乍上乍下。
现代文：昭明之星，大而色白，星光无芒角，忽上忽下。
English: The bright star, large and white, starlight without a rim, suddenly up and suddenly down.

古文：所出国，起兵多变。
现代文：所出现星区对应的分野之国，出兵会遭遇多次变故。
English: For countries in the field corresponding to the star zone, the dispatch of troops will encounter many changes.

古文：五残星，出正东，东方之星。
现代文：五残之星，出现在正东，是东方之星。
English: The Five Remnants Star, appearing due east, is the Eastern Star.

古文：其状类辰，去地可六丈，大而黄。
现代文：其形状像水星，离地大约六丈，大而色黄。
English: It is shaped like Mercury, about six feet above the ground, large and yellow.

古文：六贼星，出正南，南方之星。
现代文：六贼星，出现在正南，是南方之星。
English: The Star of the Six Thieves, appearing due south, is the Southern Star.

古文：去地可六丈，大而赤，数动，有光。
现代文：离地大约六丈，大而色红，屡次闪动，有光。
English: About six feet off the ground, large and reddish, repeatedly flashing, with light.

古文：司诡星，出正西，西方之星。
现代文：司诡星，出现在正西，是西方之星。
English: The strange star, appearing in the west, is the star of the west.

古文：去地可六丈，大而白，类太白。
现代文：离地大约六丈，大而色白，形状像金星。
English: About six feet off the ground, large and white, shaped like Venus.

古文：咸汉星，出正北，北方之星。
现代文：咸汉星，出现在正北，是北方之星。
English: The Ham Ham Star, appearing due north, is the North Star.

古文：去地可六丈，大而赤，数动，察之中青。
现代文：离地大约六丈，大而色红，屡次闪动，观察它的星光，中间有青色。
English: About six feet above the ground, large and red, repeatedly flashing, observe its starlight, with blue in the middle.

古文：此四星所出非其方，其下有兵，冲不利。
现代文：此四星出现在它不应出现的方向，其下分野之地有兵祸，对应的一方不利。
English: This four-pointed star appears in the direction that it should not appear, and there is a disaster in the field below it, and the corresponding side is unfavorable.

古文：四填星，出四隅，去地可四丈。
现代文：四填星，出现在东南、西南、东北、西北，离地大约四丈。
English: Four-pointed star, appearing in the southeast, southwest, northeast, northwest, about four feet above the ground.

古文：地维臧光，亦出四隅，去地可二丈，若月始出。
现代文：地维星隐藏光芒，也出现在东南、西南、东北、西北方向，离地大约二丈，其星好像月亮刚出现时一样。
English: The hidden light of the terrestrial star also appears in the southeast, southwest, northeast, and northwest directions, about two feet from the ground, and its star seems to be the same as when the moon first appeared.

古文：所见下，有乱者亡，有德者昌。
现代文：它所出现下方的分野之地，乱政者亡，有德者昌。
English: It appears in the lower field, the place where those who are disorderly die and those who have virtue flourish.

古文：烛星，状如太白，其出也不行，见则灭。
现代文：烛星，形状如金星，它出现后不运行，现后不久则灭。
English: A candlestick, shaped like Venus, which does not move after it appears, but disappears soon after it appears.

古文：所烛，城邑乱。
现代文：所照耀的地方，城邑有爆乱发生。
English: Where it shines, there are explosions in the city.

古文：如星非星，如云非云，名曰归邪。
现代文：似星非星，似云非云的那种彗星名叫归邪。
English: The kind of comet that looks like a star but is not a star, or like a cloud but is not a cloud, is called a cometary anomaly.

古文：归邪出，必有归国者。
现代文：归邪出现，必有归附者。
English: If there is a return to evil, it is a sign that there will be a return to the Chinese.

古文：星者，金之散气，其本曰人。
现代文：星者，是金属之体有气散发，其本在于人。
English: The star is a metal body with air diffusion, and its origin lies in people.

古文：星众，国吉，少则凶。
现代文：星星多，分野之国吉祥，星少则凶。
English: The more stars, the more auspicious the country in the field, and the fewer stars, the more evil.

古文：汉者，亦金散气，其本曰水。
现代文：银河，也是金属之体有气散发，其本在于水。
English: The Milky Way is also a metal body with gaseous diffusion, and its origin lies in water.

古文：星多，多水，少则旱，其大经也。
现代文：星星多，预示有水灾，少则预示有旱情，大略是这样的。
English: More stars indicate floods, fewer stars indicate droughts, and so on.

古文：天鼓，有音如雷非雷，音在地而下及地。
现代文：天鼓星，发出声音似雷非雷，声音在地又及于地下。
English: Heavenly drums and stars, sounding like thunder and not thunder, sound on the ground and underground.

古文：其所住者，兵发其下。
现代文：它所发生的地方，有战争发生在分野之地。
English: Where it happens, there is war in the field.

古文：天狗，状如大流星，有声，其下止地，类狗。
现代文：天狗星，形状如大流星，有声音，它下落在地上，形像狗。
English: The sky dog star, shaped like a large meteor, has a sound, it lands on the ground, shaped like a dog.

古文：所坠及，望之如火光炎炎中天，其下圜如数顷田处，上锐见则有黄色，千里破军杀将。
现代文：所坠落之地，看去如火光炎炎冲天，其下有圆坑，有如敷顷田大，上尖，出现则有黄色，兆示千里破军杀将。
English: The place where it fell looks like a blazing flame soaring into the sky, with a round pit below, like a large field, and a tip on top. When it appears, it is yellow, indicating that the army will be defeated by a thousand miles.

古文：格泽者，如炎火之状，黄白，起地而上，下大上锐。
现代文：格泽星，像焰火之形状，色黄白，从地平线升上，下大上尖。
English: Lattice star, like the shape of fireworks, yellow and white in color, rising from the horizon, with a large cusp at the bottom.

古文：其见也，不种而获。
现代文：它出现兆示其分野之地，不种而获。
English: It appears where it shows signs of its field, and is obtained without sowing.

古文：不有土功，必有大客。
现代文：没有土木工程，必有大宴宾客。
English: If there are no civil engineering works, there are bound to be big party guests.

古文：蚩尤之旗，类彗而后曲，象旗。
现代文：蚩尤之星，像彗星而其尾部弯曲，像旗。
English: Zhou Yuqi, shaped like a comet, with the difference that the back end is curved like a flag.

古文：见则王者征伐四方。
现代文：出现则预示做帝王的要征讨四方。
English: The appearance of the banner indicates that there will be a king to conquer the four directions.

古文：旬始，出于北斗旁，状如雄鸡。
现代文：旬始星，出现于北斗星旁，形状像雄鸡。
English: At the beginning of the season, it appears next to the Big Dipper, shaped like a rooster.

古文：其怒，青黑色，象伏鳖。
现代文：星光有芒角刺出，青黑色，像趴着的鳖。
English: The starlight has spikes sticking out of it, bluish-black, like a crouching toad.

古文：枉矢，状类大流星，蛇行而苍黑，望如有毛目然。
现代文：枉矢星，形状像大流星，蜿蜒运行而色苍黑，观察它像是有毛看得见。
English: An arrowhead star, shaped like a large meteor, meanders and is dark in color. It looks hairy when observed.

古文：长庚，广如一匹布著天。
现代文：长庚星，广如一匹布挂在天上。
English: Evergreens, as wide as a horse, hang in the sky.

古文：此星见，起兵。
现代文：此星出现有战争发动。
English: This planet appears to be at war.

古文：星坠至地，则石也。
现代文：星体陨落到地上，就是石头。
English: Stars fall to the ground and turn to stone.

古文：天暒而见景星。
现代文：天晴而出现景星。
English: It was a fine day and the stars were out.

古文：景星者，德星也，其状无常，常出于有道之国。
现代文：景星是有德之星，其行止无常，常出现在有道之国。
English: Jing Xing is a virtuous star, whose behavior is fickle, often appearing in a virtuous country.

古文：日有中道，月有九行。
现代文：说有中道，月有九条轨道。
English: They say there is a middle way, and that the moon has nine orbits.

古文：中道者，黄道。一曰光道。
现代文：中道说的是黄道，又叫光道。
English: The middle path is the zodiac, also known as the light path.

古文：光道北至东井，去北极近；南至牵牛，去北极远；东至角，西至娄，去极中。
现代文：光道北至束井宿，离天北极近；南到牵牛星，离天北极远；束到角宿，西至娄宿，离天北极居中。
English: The light path runs north to Sokui-juku, close to the celestial north pole; south to Morning Glory, far from the celestial north pole; Soku to Kakuno-juku, west to Haku-juku, and central to the celestial north pole.

古文：夏至至于东井，北近极，故晷短；立八尺之表，而晷景长尺五寸八分。
现代文：夏至运行到东井宿，北近天极，所以晷影短；立八尺之圭表，晷影长一尺五寸八分。
English: The summer solstice runs to Higashii-juku, and the north is close to the celestial pole, so the mirage is short; standing eight feet from the kei, the mirage is one foot, five inches, and eight minutes long.

古文：冬至至于牵牛，远极，故晷长；立八尺之表，而晷景长丈三尺一寸四分。
现代文：冬至运行到牵牛宿，远离天极，所以晷影长；立八尺之圭表，晷影长一丈三尺一寸四分。
English: The winter solstice runs to the Cowherd's Inn, far away from the celestial pole, so the mirage is long; standing eight feet from the watch, the mirage is three feet, one inch and four minutes long.

古文：春秋分日至娄、角，去极中，而晷中；立八尺之表，而晷景长七尺三寸六分。
现代文：春分秋分太阳到娄宿、角宿，离天北极居中，所以晷影长度中等；立八尺之圭表，晷影长七尺三寸六分。
English: At the vernal equinox and autumnal equinox, the sun reaches Shishuku and Kakujuku, and the north celestial pole is in the middle, so the length of the mirage is medium; at the height of eight feet, the mirage is seven feet, three inches and six minutes long.

古文：此日去极远近之差，晷景长短之制也。
现代文：此时太阳离天北极远近的差距，在晷影长短的刻度上反映出来。
English: At this time, the distance between the sun and the north celestial pole is reflected on the eclipse length scale.

古文：去极远近难知，要以晷景。
现代文：离天北极远近难以知晓，重要的是用晷影来测定。
English: It is difficult to know how far away the north celestial pole is. The important thing is to measure it with a telescope.

古文：晷景者，所以知日之南北也。
现代文：有了晷影的长度，所以能知道太阳的南北位置。
English: With the length of the umbra, we can know the north-south position of the sun.

古文：日，阳也。
现代文：日，太阳。
English: The sun, the sun.

古文：阳用事则日进而北，昼进而长，阳胜，故为温暑；阴用事则日退而南，昼退而短，阴胜，故为凉寒也。
现代文：阳气盛，太阳逐渐推移向北，白天逐渐长，阳胜，天气为温暑；阴气盛，则太阳逐渐退向南，白天渐短，阴胜，天气寒冷。
English: When the yang is strong, the sun gradually moves to the north, the day gradually lengthens, the yang wins, and the weather is warm and hot; when the yin is strong, the sun gradually retreats to the south, the day becomes shorter, the yin wins, and the weather is cold.

古文：故日进为暑，退为寒。
现代文：所以太阳北进为暑、南退为寒。
English: Therefore, the sun's northward movement is hot and its southward movement is cold.

古文：若日之南北失节，晷过而长为常寒，退而短为常奥。
现代文：如果太阳的南北运行失去节令，晷影过长为常寒，晷影过短为常热。
English: If the sun's north-south movement loses its season, the shadow is too long to be cold, and the shadow is too short to be hot.

古文：此寒奥之表也，故曰为寒暑。
现代文：这是寒暑的表现，所以称为寒暑。
English: This is a manifestation of cold and heat, so it is called cold and heat.

古文：一曰，晷长为潦，短为旱，奢为扶。
现代文：又说晷影长为涝，晷影短为旱，过分了为扶。
English: It is also said that the long shadow of a dragonfly is a cocoon, the short shadow of a dragonfly is a drought, and the excessive shadow is a support.

古文：扶者，邪臣进而正臣疏，君子不足，奸人有余。
现代文：扶就是说，邪臣在身旁而正臣疏远，君子不足而奸人有余。
English: To support is to say that the evil vassal is nearby and the upright vassal is far away, the gentleman is not enough and the traitor is more than enough.

古文：月有九行者：黑道二，出黄道北；赤道二，出黄道南；白道二，出黄道西；青道二，出黄道东。
现代文：月有九条轨道的情况：黑道有两条，出现在黄道北面；赤道有两条，出现在黄道南面；白道有两条，出现在黄道的西面；青道有两条，出现在黄道的束面。
English: The Moon has nine orbits: there are two black orbits, which appear on the north side of the ecliptic; there are two equatorial orbits, which appear on the south side of the ecliptic; there are two white orbits, which appear on the west side of the ecliptic; and there are two blue orbits, which appear on the umbilical side of the ecliptic.

古文：立春、春分，月东从青道；立秋、秋分，西从白道；立冬、冬至，北从黑道；立夏、夏至，南从赤道。
现代文：立春、春分，月在东面顺从青道；立秋、秋分，月在西面顺从白道；立冬、冬至，月在北面顺从黑道；立夏、夏至，月在南面顺从赤道。
English: At the beginning of spring, the vernal equinox, the moon follows the meridian in the east; at the beginning of autumn, the autumnal equinox, the moon follows the meridian in the west; at the beginning of winter, the winter solstice, the moon follows the meridian in the north; at the beginning of summer, the summer solstice, the moon follows the equator in the south.

古文：然用之，一塊房中道。
现代文：在判断其所行轨道时，最主要决定于其与经过房宿的中道的位置。
English: When judging its trajectory, the most important thing is to determine its position in the middle of the road passing through the house.

古文：青赤出阳道，白黑出阴道。
现代文：月行青赤两道为运行在阳道，月行黑白两道为运行在阴道。
English: The lunar ecliptic and the lunar ecliptic run in the solar tract, and the lunar ecliptic and the lunar ecliptic run in the vagina.

古文：若月失节度而妄行，出阳道则旱风，出阴道则阴雨。
现代文：如果月行失去正常轨迹而妄行，运行在阳道则有旱风，运行在阴道则有阴雨。
English: If the moon loses its normal trajectory and travels recklessly, there will be a dry wind in the yang road and a rainy rain in the vagina.

古文：凡君行急则日行疾，君行缓则日行迟。
现代文：凡君王治政过严则日行快，君王治政过宽则曰行缓。
English: If a monarch's governance is too strict, it will be fast-tracked. If a monarch's governance is too broad, it will be slow-tracked.

古文：日行不可指而知也，故以二至二分之星为候。
现代文：太阳运行的状况不可一想就知，所以用夏至、冬至、春分、秋分时的星象来占候。
English: The state of the sun's movement cannot be known at a glance, so the stars at the time of the summer solstice, winter solstice, spring equinox, and autumn equinox are used to tell fortunes.

古文：日东行，星西转，冬至昏，奎八度中；夏至，氐十三度中；春分，柳一度中；秋分，牵牛三度七分中；此其正行也。
现代文：太阳束行，恒星西转。冬至黄昏，太阳在奎宿八度中；夏至，太阳在氐宿十三度中；春分，太阳在柳宿一度中；秋分，太阳在牵牛宿三度七分中：造时的天象为正行。
English: The sun sets, the stars turn west. At the winter solstice and dusk, the sun is in the 8th degree of Kuizuku; at the summer solstice, the sun is in the 13th degree of Usuki; at the spring equinox, the sun is in the 1st degree of Yanagisuku; at the autumn equinox, the sun is in the 3rd degree and 7th degree of Usuki: the celestial body at the time of creation is in the right direction.

古文：日行疾，则星西转疾，事势然也。
现代文：太阳运行速度快，则是恒星西转速度快，这是形势的必然。
English: The sun runs fast, but the star turns west fast, which is an inevitable situation.

古文：故过中则疾，君行急之感也；不及中则迟，君行缓之象也。
现代文：所以说过中度则快，是君王治政过严的感应；不到中度则为迟缓，是君王治政过宽的征象。
English: Therefore, it has been said that if it is moderate, it is fast, which is a sign that the king's governance is too strict; if it is less than moderate, it is slow, which is a sign that the king's governance is too broad.

古文：至月行，则以晦朔决之。
现代文：说到月亮的运行，则以晦朔来判断它。
English: When it comes to the movement of the moon, it is difficult to judge it.

古文：日冬则南，夏则北；冬至于牵牛，夏至于东井。
现代文：太阳在冬季则偏南，夏季则偏北；冬至在牵牛宿，夏至在束井宿。
English: The sun is south in the winter and north in the summer; the winter solstice is in Tsugyu-juku and the summer solstice is in Sakui-juku.

古文：日之所行为中道，月、五星皆随之也。箕星为风，东北之星也。
现代文：到了《易。巽卦》中说 在东南，是风；风是阳中之阴，是大臣的征象，所占示的星是轸宿 。
English: In the "Yi. Zi Gua," it is said that in the southeast, it is the wind; the wind is the yin to the yang, it is the sign of the minister, and the star it represents is the rooster.

古文：东北地事，天位也，故《易》曰： 东北丧朋，及《巽》在东南，为风；风，阳中之阴，大臣之象也，其星，轸也。月去中道，移而东北入箕，若东南入轸，则多风。
现代文：月离开中道，移向东北入箕宿，如移向东南入轸宿，则多风。
English: The moon will leave the middle path and move to the northeast to enter Oshuku. If it moves to the southeast to enter Oshuku, it will be windy.

古文：西方为雨；雨，少阴之位也。
现代文：移向西方为有雨；雨是少阴的位象。
English: Moving westward, there will be rain; rain is an aspect of less shade.

古文：月失中道，移而西入毕，则多雨。
现代文：月离开中道，移向西入毕宿，则多雨。
English: If the moon leaves the middle path and moves westward into the last quarter, there will be more rain.

古文：故《诗》云 月离于毕，俾滂沱矣 ，言多雨也。
现代文：所以《诗经》说 月离开毕宿，使大雨滂沱 ，说得是多雨的情况。
English: Therefore, the "Song of Songs" says that the moon leaves the end of the lodging, causing heavy rain, and it is said to be a rainy situation.

古文：《星传》曰 月入毕则将相有以家犯罪者 ，言阴盛也。
现代文：《星传》中说 月亮运行入毕宿，则将相有因为家中的事牵连犯罪的 ，说得是阴盛。
English: According to "The Tale of the Stars," when the moon moves into its final quarter, there will be a gloomy time for those who have been implicated in crimes because of things at home.

古文：《书》曰 星有好风，星有好雨，月之从星，则以风雨 ，言失中道而东西也。
现代文：《书》中说 星宿有好风的，星宿有好雨的，月行至这些星宿附近，则因此有风雨 ，说得是月亮偏离中道而东西运行的情况。
English: "The Book" says that the stars have good wind, the stars have good rain, and when the moon passes near these stars, there will be wind and rain, which is said to be the case when the moon deviates from the middle path and moves east and west.

古文：故《星传》曰： 月南入牵牛南戒，民间疾疫；月北入太微，出坐北，若犯坐，则下人谋上。 
现代文：所以《星传》中说 月亮运行向南入牵牛宿的南面。民间有流行疾病发生；月亮运行北入太微垣，出现在五帝座以北，如果干犯五帝座，则有下位之人谋上的情况 。
English: Therefore, "Star Legend" says that the moon runs south to the south of the Cowherd's Inn. There are epidemics among the people; the moon runs north to the Taiko-gaki, appearing north of the Five Emperors, and if it interferes with the Five Emperors, there is a situation in which the lower-ranking people conspire.

古文：一曰月为风雨，日为寒温。
现代文：又一说月亮代表风雨，太阳代表寒温。
English: Another said that the moon represented wind and rain, and the sun represented cold temperatures.

古文：冬至日南极，晷长，南不极则温为害；夏至日北极，晷短，北不极则寒为害。
现代文：冬至太阳应在南极位置，晷影最长，太阳运行不到南极位置，则温热过分；夏至应太阳在北极位置，晷影最短，太阳向北运行不到北极位置，则寒为损伤。
English: For the winter solstice, the sun should be at the South Pole, the shadow should be the longest, and if the sun does not reach the South Pole, the temperature will be too hot; for the summer solstice, the sun should be at the North Pole, the shadow should be the shortest, and if the sun does not reach the North Pole, the cold will be damaging.

古文：故《书》曰 日月之行，则有冬有夏 也。
现代文：所以《书》中说 月运行，则有冬有夏 了。
English: Therefore, the Book says that when the moon moves, there is winter and summer.

古文：政治变于下，日月运于上矣。
现代文：在人间是政治变化，在天上是日月运行啊。
English: On earth, it's political change, but in the sky, it's the sun and the moon.

古文：月出房北，为雨为阴，为乱为兵；出房南，为旱为夭丧。
现代文：月亮出现在房宿北面，象征着有阴、雨，兵乱；月亮出现在房宿南面，是旱是天丧。
English: The moon appears on the north side of the room, symbolizing the presence of shade, rain, and war; the moon appears on the south side of the room, symbolizing drought and doom.

古文：水旱至冲而应，及五星之变，必然之效也。
现代文：水旱的情况发生在其分野之国所对应的地区，等到五星变异出现，以上情况必然有效应。
English: Flood and drought conditions occur in the areas corresponding to the countries in their fields. When the five-star variation appears, the above situation will inevitably be effective.

古文：两军相当，日晕等，力均；厚长大，有胜；薄短小，亡胜。
现代文：两军相对，太阳的光晕相等同，则势均力敌；光晕厚长且大则有胜利；光晕薄短且小，则没有胜利。
English: As opposed to the two armies, if the sun's halo is equal, then the situation is equal; if the halo is thick and long and large, then there is victory; if the halo is thin and short and small, then there is no victory.

古文：重抱，大破亡。
现代文：光晕多重环抱，则有大败的一方。
English: The halo multiple encirclement, then there is a big defeat party.

古文：抱为和，背为不和，为分离相去。
现代文：光晕环抱太阳为和，光晕背向太阳为不和，是兆示着相分离。
English: Embrace, the two armies of the Lord are reconciled; there is a backlash, the army cannot be reconciled, the army is separated from the Lord.

古文：直为自立，立兵破军，若曰杀将。
现代文：光晕直为兆示自己立功，可利军破兵，或者说杀将。
English: The dazzling light was a sign that he had made a contribution, and the Korean army defeated the soldiers, or killed the general.

古文：抱且戴，有喜。
现代文：光晕在上方内环向太阳，预示着有喜。
English: Above, a halo of light encircles the sun, heralding joy.

古文：围在中，中胜；在外，外胜。
现代文：有云气在光环之中，预示城中之军胜；有云气在光环之外预示城外之军胜。
English: When the sun is eclipsed, the besieged is victorious; when the sun is eclipsed, the besieged is victorious.

古文：青外赤中，以和相去；赤外青中，以恶相去。
现代文：光晕青外赤中，战和；赤外青中，两相交恶。
English: If the sun is faint, the outer circle is blue, the inner circle is red, the two sides are reconciled; if the outer circle is red, the inner circle is blue, the two sides are angry.

古文：气晕先至而后去，居军胜。
现代文：光环先出现而后离开，守军胜。
English: The sun's breath or halo appears early and disappears late, and the main army is victorious.

古文：先至先去，前有利，后有病，后至后去，前病后利；后至先去，前后皆病，居军不胜。
现代文：光环先出现先离去，守军开始有利，后来又败；光环后出现后离去，守军前败后利；光环后出现先离去，前后都败，守军不胜。
English: The halo appears first and leaves first, the defenders begin to have an advantage and then lose; the halo appears later and leaves later, the defenders have an advantage before and after losing; the halo appears later and leaves first, they lose both before and after, the defenders are invincible.

古文：见而去，其发疾，虽胜亡功。
现代文：出现即去，这以后会发生怨恨，虽胜无功。
English: Appearances can be fleeting, and then resentment can set in, however futile.

古文：见半日以上，功大。白虹屈短，上下锐，有者下大流血。
现代文：出现半日以上功大，出现白虹弯曲而短，上下尖，这样的情况出现，其下分野之地有血光之灾。
English: If there is more than half a day's work, the white rainbow will be bent and short, and the top and bottom will be pointed. If such a situation occurs, there will be blood and light disaster in the lower field.

古文：日晕制胜，近期三十日，远期六十日。
现代文：晕所兆示的克敌致胜的情况，近期三十日，远期六十日应验。
English: Judging the auspicious and inauspicious by the halo of the sun, the date of fulfillment is close to within thirty days, and far within sixty days.

古文：其食，食所不利；复生，生所利；不然，食尽为主位。
现代文：日食，与亏食起始所在星区相应的分野地不利；与日光复原所在星区相应的分野地有利；不然，日全食应验的是君王。
English: The eclipse of the sun is unfavorable to the sector corresponding to the star region where the eclipse begins; favorable to the sector corresponding to the star region where the sun is restored; otherwise, the total eclipse is the king.

古文：以其直及日所躔加日时，用名其国。
现代文：用日食正当发生的地方和太阳运行的度数加日食发生的时间与分野地对应，用于显示其国。
English: Corresponds to the place where the solar eclipse properly occurs and the degree of solar movement plus the time of occurrence of the solar eclipse and the field, and is used to display its country.

古文：凡望云气，仰而望之，三四百里；平望，在桑榆上，千余里，二千里；登高而望之，下属地者居三千里。
现代文：凡观看云气，昂头向上而观察它，衹三四百里；平视，或向桑树、榆树之上观望，能测千余里、两千里；登高而观望它，向下瞩目地面可达三千里。
English: Anyone who looks at a cloud, holds his head high and observes it, can see up to three or four hundred miles; looking straight ahead, or looking above mulberry and eucalyptus trees, can measure more than a thousand miles, two thousand miles; climbing high and watching it, looking down at the ground can reach three thousand miles.

古文：云气有兽居上者，胜。
现代文：云气有兽状居守在其地上空的，胜。
English: The clouds have all kinds of shapes, and the tops are like animal horns, auspicious.

古文：自华以南，气下黑上赤。
现代文：自华山以南，云气下黑上红。
English: From the clouds south of Mount Hua, the bottom is black and the top is red.

古文：嵩高、三河之郊，气正赤。
现代文：嵩高、三河之郊，云气是正红色。
English: The clouds in the open air around the mountains and the three rivers are bright red.

古文：常山以北，气下黑上青。
现代文：常山以北，云气下黑上青。
English: To the north of Changshan, it is dark above and blue below the clouds.

古文：勃、碣、海、岱之间，气皆黑。
现代文：勃海、碣山、大海、泰山之间，云气都是黑色的。
English: The sea, the clouds between the rocks and the seagulls, are all black.

古文：江、淮之间，气皆白。
现代文：长江、淮河之间，云气都是白色的。
English: The clouds between the Yangtze River and Huai River are all white.

古文：徒气白。
现代文：预示服役的云气色白。
English: The cloud that symbolizes the gathering of the people is white.

古文：土功气黄。
现代文：预示土木工程的云气色黄。
English: The clouds, which symbolize the achievements of the country, are yellow.

古文：车气乍高乍下，往往而聚。
现代文：预示车战的云气忽高忽低，团聚在一起。
English: The cloudiness of the car ride fluctuates from high to low, often coming together.

古文：骑气卑而布。
现代文：预示骑战的云气低下而遍布。
English: The spirit of the cavalry is low and broad.

古文：卒气抟。
现代文：预示步兵之战的云气团聚。
English: Foreshadowing the reunion of the clouds of the infantry battle.

古文：前卑而后高者，疾；前方而后高者，锐；后锐而卑者，却。
现代文：前低而后高的，速进；前方而后高的，士气锐；后尖而低下的，退却。
English: Forward low and then high, fast forward; forward and then high, morale sharp; backward sharp and low, retreat.

古文：其气平者其行徐。
现代文：云气平的行速缓。
English: The clouds are calm and the speed of the train is slow.

古文：前高后卑者，不止而反。
现代文：前高后低的，不止而返。
English: Highs and lows, back and forth.

古文：气相遇者，卑胜高，锐胜方。
现代文：两气相遇，低胜高，尖胜方。
English: Two airs meet, low wins high, sharp wins.

古文：气来卑而循车道者，不过三四日，去之五六里见。
现代文：云气运行向前低而依循车道的，不过三四日，离开五六里的地方显现其征兆。
English: The cloud moves forward low and follows the lane, but on the third or fourth day, it shows signs of leaving a place five or six miles away.

古文：气来高七八尺者，不过五六日，去之十余二十里见。
现代文：云气运行高七八尺者，不过五六日，离开十余二十里显现其征兆。
English: If the cloud reaches a height of seven or eight feet, however, signs of it will appear five or six days later, more than ten to twenty miles away.

古文：气来高丈余二丈者，不过三四十日，去之五六十里见。
现代文：云气运行高一丈多两丈的，不过三四十曰，离开五六十里显现其征兆。
English: The enemy's strength is one to two times higher, but it can take thirty or forty days to arrive, and the enemy's trail can be seen fifty or sixty miles away from me.

古文：捎云精白者，其将悍，其士怯。
现代文：飘荡的云色青白，预示其武将强悍，其士兵软弱。
English: Wafting clouds of blue and white, foretell that his generals are strong and his soldiers are weak.

古文：其大根而前绝远者，战。
现代文：云的根部大而前绝远者，预示有战斗。
English: If the base of the cloud is large and far away, it indicates a battle.

古文：精白，其芒低者，战胜；其前赤而印者，战不胜。
现代文：云气青白色，其芒角低的战胜；前端色赤而上仰者，战不胜。
English: The clouds are bluish-white, and those with a low angle of the cheeks are victorious; those with a reddish front and a high angle of the cheeks are victorious.

古文：陈云如立垣。
现代文：似布阵一般的云像耸立的城墙。
English: The phalanx of clouds resembles a towering city wall.

古文：杼云类杼。
现代文：梭状的云像梭子。
English: The spindly cloud resembles a shuttlecock.

古文：柚云抟而耑锐。
现代文：柚状的云团状两端尖。
English: Teapot-shaped cloud with sharp points at both ends.

古文：杓云如绳者，居前竟天，其半半天。
现代文：杓状的云像绳一样，在前面横亘全天，把天分成两半。
English: Skull-shaped clouds stretched like ropes across the sky ahead, splitting the sky in two.

古文：蜺云者，类斗旗故。
现代文：彩色的云，像是战旗。
English: Coloured clouds, like battle flags.

古文：钩云句曲。
现代文：钩状的云弯钩排列。
English: The hook cloud is curved like a hook.

古文：诸此云见，以五色占。
现代文：这些状态的云出现，用五色去占测。
English: When these clouds appear, it is necessary to use the five colors together for divination.

古文：而泽抟密，其见动人，乃有占；兵必起，合斗其直。
现代文：其中颜色润泽、团状、密实的云，出现很动人，于是有占卜的意义；预示有战争发动，在它分野之地。
English: If the clouds are moist, close-packed, and moving, it is an omen of some kind of event and can be used for divination; if the clouds are ominous, soldiers will rise, and there will be a war in the corresponding region.

古文：王朔所候，决于日旁。
现代文：王朔所做的占卜说是起决于日边的云象。
English: The clouds that Wang Shuo, the optimist, is looking forward to, are all taken from the sun.

古文：日旁云气，人主象。
现代文：太阳边的云气代表入主之象。
English: Compared to other clouds, the cloud around the sun has a dominant meteorology.

古文：皆如其形以占。
现代文：都可以用云的形状来占测。
English: According to the image formed by the cloud, it directly determines the good and bad luck.

古文：故北夷之气如群畜穹闾，南夷之气类舟船幡旗。
现代文：所以北夷的气象如群畜在穹庐，南夷之气像是舟船和帆旗。
English: Therefore, the clouds made by the northern barbarians are like the herds of cattle and the herds of camels, and the clouds made by the southern barbarians are like the boats and the flags.

古文：大水处，败军场，破国之虚，下有积泉，金宝上，皆有气，不可不察。
现代文：大水灾发生之处，败军的战场，破国的城池，地下有古代钱币的地方，金银财宝所在地都有气，不可不察验。
English: The place where the great flood occurred, the battlefield of the defeated army, the ruined city, the place where there are ancient coins underground, the location of gold and silver treasures are all important and must be inspected.

古文：海旁蜃气象楼台，广野气成宫阙然。
现代文：海市蜃楼之云气像楼台，广野之云气成就宫廷的相貌。
English: The clouds of the mirage are like the balcony, and the clouds of the vast fields create the appearance of the court.

古文：云气各象其山川人民所聚积。
现代文：云气的各种气象是地面上的百姓、山川、形势气质所积累的反映。
English: The various meteorological phenomena of clouds are the accumulated reflections of the people, mountains and rivers, and the temperament of the situation on the ground.

古文：故候息耗者，入国邑，视封疆田畴之整治，城郭室屋门户之润泽，次至车服畜产精华。
现代文：所以占候赢盛或者虚耗的情况，深入到国家验看疆土和田陌的整治情况，城郭室屋是否润泽，再看车服畜产是否精良。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to take into account the situation of prosperity or waste, and go deep into the country to inspect the rectification of the territory and paddy fields, whether the castle Muroya is moist, and whether the car clothing and livestock production are excellent.

古文：实息者吉，虚耗者凶。
现代文：气象生长的吉祥，虚耗的凶险。
English: The growth of the weather is auspicious, and the danger of wasting is ominous.

古文：若烟非烟，若云非云，郁郁纷纷，萧索轮囷，是谓庆云。
现代文：若烟非烟，似云非云，郁郁葱葱，萧疏地分布着形如圆形困仓的云气，是所谓庆云。
English: If it's not smoke, it's not a cloud, it's not a cloud, it's a lush, sparse distribution of cloud gas shaped like a round silo, it's a so-called Qingyun.

古文：庆云见，喜气也。
现代文：庆云出现，主有喜气。
English: The clouds of celebration appeared, and the Lord was filled with joy.

古文：若雾非雾，衣冠不濡，见则其城被甲而趋。
现代文：若雾非雾，沾衣不湿的云气，如出现则那个城市有披甲上阵而疾行军的情况。
English: If the fog is not fog, it is a cloud that is not wet, and if it appears, then the city has a situation of marching into battle with armor.

古文：夫雷电、赮虹、辟历、夜明者，阳气之动者也，春夏则发，秋冬则藏，故候书者亡不司。
现代文：雷电、虹霞、霹雳、晚上出现极光的情况是阳气所牵动的气象，春夏则发，秋冬则隐匿，所以占候者与记录者没有不观察它的。
English: Thunder and lightning, rainbow haze, hail, and the appearance of the aurora at night are meteorological phenomena driven by the yang, spring and summer are issued, and autumn and winter are concealed, so the weatherman and the recorder did not observe it.

古文：天开县物，地动坼绝。山崩及，川塞溪垘；水澹地长，泽竭见象。
现代文：在自然现象上，要观察天开所显现的物象，地震造成的地断裂，山崩塌陷，山川堵塞；水在地下涌出，大泽干枯，都有征象。
English: In terms of natural phenomena, it is necessary to observe the objects that appear when the heavens open. Earthquake-caused ground fracture, landslide collapse, mountain and river blockage, water gushing underground, and Osawa drying up are all signs.

古文：城郭门闾，润息槁枯；宫庙廓第，人民所次。
现代文：在人事上要考察城郭巷闾，盈损枯竭；宫庙廊第，百姓居所。
English: In terms of personnel, it is necessary to examine the city walls, lanes and alleys, depletion of profits and losses; palaces, temples, galleries, and people's residences.

古文：谣俗车服，观民饮食。
现代文：民谣、习俗、车骑、服饰，看百姓饮食。
English: With regard to folk tales, customs, vehicles, clothing, etc., it is important to observe the diet of the people.

古文：五谷草木，观其所属。
现代文：五谷草木，观其所属。
English: For grain plants, first observe the category to which they belong.

古文：仓府厩库，四通之路。
现代文：仓府马厩，四通之路。
English: For barns, stables, storerooms, etc., first observe the surrounding traffic roads.

古文：六畜禽兽，所产去就；鱼鳖鸟鼠，观其所处。
现代文：六畜禽兽，物产去留；鱼鳖鸟鼠，观其所处。
English: For the six livestock animals, it is important to observe their origin and use, and for the fish, birds and mice, it is important to observe the environment in which they live.

古文：鬼哭若呼，与人逢栘。
现代文：鬼哭若嚎，与人逢遇。
English: The ghost cries when it meets someone.

古文：讹言，诚然。
现代文：有些差误，但的确如此。
English: There were some mistakes, but that's how it is.

古文：凡候岁美恶，谨候岁始。
现代文：凡占候一年的吉凶，要谨慎观察一年的开始。
English: If you want to predict the fate of the year, you should carefully observe the beginning of the year.

古文：岁始或冬至日，产气始萌。
现代文：一年头一天或者冬至曰，生气开始出现。
English: At the beginning of the year, or the winter solstice, the yang begins to arise.

古文：腊明日，人众卒岁，壹会饮食，发阳气，故曰初岁。
现代文：腊明日，人众开始过年，大家聚会饮宴，这时阳气上升，所以叫初岁。
English: On the morning of New Year's Day, everyone gathers for a banquet. At this time, the yang energy rises, so it is called the first year of the year.

古文：正月旦，王者岁首；立春，四明之始也。
现代文：正月初一是一年开端；是君王规定的岁首。立春，四季的开始。
English: The first day of the first month of the year is the beginning of the year; it is the beginning of the year prescribed by the monarch. The beginning of spring, the beginning of the four seasons.

古文：四始者，候之日。
现代文：这四个开端，是占候的日子。
English: The above four kinds of New Year's Eve are all important days for waiting for the New Year.

古文：而汉魏鲜集腊明正月旦决八风。
现代文：所以汉朝魏鲜在腊明日和正月初一判断八风。
English: However, the Han dynasty people Wei Xian, concentrated on the second day of the wax festival and the wind that arose from the eight directions at dawn on the first day of the first month, judged that year's auspicious and evil.

古文：风从南，大旱；西南，小旱；西方，有兵；西北，戎叔为，小雨，趣兵；北方，为中岁；东北，为上岁；东方，大水；东南，民有疾疫，岁恶。
现代文：风从南来，大旱；西南，小旱；西方，有战争；西北，大豆收成好，小雨，急促起兵；北方为中等收成；东北，为丰年；东方，有大水；东南，百姓有流行病，收成很不好。
English: The wind comes from the south, big drought; the southwest, small drought; the west, there is war; the northwest, good soybean harvest, light rain, hasten to raise an army; the north is medium harvest; the northeast, is a good year; the east, there is heavy water; the southeast, the people have epidemics, the harvest is very bad.

古文：故八风各与其冲对，课多者为胜。
现代文：所以八风各与八个地方相对，考核它们多者为胜。
English: Therefore, each of the eight winds is opposed to eight places, and the assessment of them is the winner.

古文：多胜少，久胜亟，疾胜徐。
现代文：多胜少，长久胜短促，快胜缓。
English: More is better than less, long-term is better than short-term, quick is better than slow.

古文：旦至食，为麦；食至日跌，为稷；跌至晡，为黍；晡至下晡，为叔；下晡至日入，为麻。
现代文：早晨到食时，占测麦子的收成；食时到日映时为占测稷的收成；日映时到晡时为占测黍的收成；晡时到下晡时，为占测大豆的收成；下哺时到曰入时为占测麻的收成。
English: In the morning, when it's time to eat, it's time to measure the harvest of wheat; when it's time to eat, it's time to measure the harvest of strawberries; when it's time to eat, it's time to measure the harvest of strawberries; when it's time to eat, it's time to measure the harvest of soybeans; when it's time to feed, it's time to measure the harvest of hemp.

古文：欲终日有云，有风，有日，当其时，深而多实；亡云，有风日，当其时，浅而少实；有云风，亡日，当其时，深而少实；有日，亡云，不风，当其时者稼有败。
现代文：如果正月初一有云，有风，有太阳，造一年庄稼就茂盛而且丰收；无云，有风曰，那就年景不丰而少籽；有云有风没太阳，预示着庄稼茂盛，但是少实；有太阳，无云，无风，预示当年庄稼歉收。
English: If there is a cloud, wind and sun at the beginning of the first month of the year, the crops will be prosperous and plentiful; if there is no cloud and wind, the year will be poor and there will be few seeds; if there is a cloud, wind and sun, the crops will be prosperous but there will be few seeds; if there is a sun, no cloud and no wind, the crops will be poor.

古文：如食顷，小败；孰五斗米顷，大败。
现代文：如果衹有很短的时间无云、无风，小歉收；如果是蒸五斗米这样长的时间，为大歉收。
English: If there is no cloud or wind for a short time, it is a small harvest failure; if it is steamed for such a long time, it is a big harvest failure.

古文：风复起。有云，其稼复起。
现代文：无风又起风，有云，预示当年庄稼先有损害又有起色。
English: Windless and windy, cloudy, indicating that the crops of that year were first damaged and then improved.

古文：各以其时用云色占种所宜。雨雪，寒，岁恶。
现代文：各用当时云的颜色，占候所适宜耕种的农作物，有雨雪、寒冷，预示当年年景极坏。
English: Each used the color of the clouds at that time to predict the crops that were suitable for cultivation, rain, snow, and cold, indicating that the year was extremely bad.

古文：是日光明，听都邑人民之声。
现代文：当日光明亮时，听城邑中百姓的声音。
English: On the first day of the year, if the weather is fine, the voices of the people of the capital can tell the fortunes of the year.

古文：声宫，则岁美，吉；商，有兵；徵，旱；羽，水；角，岁恶。
现代文：声如宫调，则其年美好，吉；声如商调，有战争；声如征调，其年有旱灾发生；声如羽调，其年有水灾发生；声如角调，其年年景极坏。
English: Sound like the palace tune, the year is beautiful and auspicious; sound like the business tune, there is war; sound like the requisition tune, the year is drought; sound like the feather tune, the year is flood; sound like the horn tune, the year is extremely bad.

古文：或从正月旦比数雨。
现代文：或在正月初一起计数下雨的天数。
English: Or count the number of rainy days together at the beginning of the New Year.

古文：率日食一升，至七升而极；过之，不占。
现代文：一天有雨预示民有一升之食，到七升是极限；过了七天的不在占候之数。
English: One day of rain foretells that the people have one litre of food, up to seven litres is the limit; after seven days, there is no accounting for the number.

古文：数至十二日，直其月，占水旱。
现代文：从初一到十二，可使之与一月到十二月相当，视其晴雨，可占候一年十二个月水灾、旱灾的情况。
English: From the first day to the twelfth day of the month, it can be made comparable to January to December. Depending on the weather, it can account for floods and droughts in the twelfth month of the year.

古文：为其环域千里内占，即为天下候，竟正月。
现代文：这是方圆千里内的象征。要为天下占候，则要在整个正月裹进行。
English: This is a symbol within a radius of a thousand miles. If you want to predict the future of the world, you should do it during the entire first month of the year.

古文：月所离列宿，日、风、云，占其国。
现代文：用月所经过的二十八宿？风、云占候所相对应的国家。
English: The 28 mansions that the moon passes through? The countries that the wind and clouds wait for.

古文：必然察太岁所在。
现代文：但必须察看太岁的所在。
English: But you have to look at where the waste is.

古文：金，穰；水，毁；木，饥；火，旱。
现代文：金星，表示丰收；水星表示歉收；木星表示有饥荒；火星表示有旱灾。
English: Venus, indicates a good harvest; Mercury indicates a bad harvest; Jupiter indicates a famine; Mars indicates a drought.

古文：此其大经也。
现代文：这是大概的情况。
English: The above is the general situation.

古文：正月上甲，风从东方来，宜蚕；从西方来，若旦有黄云，恶。
现代文：正月的第一个甲日，风从东方来，适宜养蚕；风从西方来，如果早晨有黄云，不吉。
English: On the first day of the first month, the wind comes from the east, which is suitable for raising silkworms; the wind comes from the west, if there are yellow clouds in the morning, it is bad luck.

古文：冬至短极，县土炭，炭动，麋鹿解角，兰根出，泉出踊，略以知日至，要决晷景。
现代文：冬至白天最短，冬至前三天，在衡器的一端悬挂炭，另一端悬挂土，令衡器处于平衡状态，当悬挂炭的一端下沉时，或麋鹿脱角、兰根发芽，泉水涌时，可由之大略知道冬至的到来，而关键是测量晷影来确定冬至曰的到来。
English: The winter solstice is the shortest day. Three days before the winter solstice, charcoal is suspended at one end of the scale and soil is suspended at the other end, so that the scale is in a state of equilibrium. When one end of the suspended charcoal sinks, or when the elk is dehorned, the roots of the orchid sprout, and the spring water gushes, the arrival of the winter solstice can be roughly known from it. The key is to measure the mirage to determine the arrival of the winter solstice.

古文：夫天运三十岁一小变，百年中变，五百年大变，三大变一起，三纪而大备，此其大数也。
现代文：天运气数三十年一小变，百年中变，五百年大变，三大变为一纪，三纪为一个完整的周期，此是天道的气数。
English: The number of days of good luck has a small change in thirty years, a medium change in one hundred years, and a great change in five hundred years. The three major ones become one period, and the three periods are a complete cycle. This is the number of days of good luck.

古文：春秋二百四十二年间，日食三十六，彗星三见，夜常星不见，夜中星陨如雨者各一。
现代文：春秋二百四十二年间，日食发生三十六次，彗星三次出现，夜裹恒星不出现，中夜有陨石如雨的情况各一次。
English: During the 242 years of Spring and Autumn, there were 36 solar eclipses, three comets, no stars at night, and meteor showers in the middle of the night.

古文：当是时，祸乱辄应，周室微弱，上下交怨，杀君三十六，亡国五十二，诸侯奔走不得保其社稷者不可胜数。
现代文：当这个时候，祸乱都纷纷显应，周室微弱，臣民怨恨，弑君的情况发生三十六次，国家亡国的情况发生五十二次，诸侯逃亡不能保全其社稷的情况不可胜数。
English: At this time, calamities appeared one after another. The imperial court was weak and the subjects were resentful. Thirty-six times the emperor was deposed, fifty-two times the country was overthrown, and countless times the princes fled because they could not preserve their social power.

古文：自是之后，众暴寡，大并小。
现代文：自此之后，有权势的欺凌势单的，大国兼并小国。
English: Since then, the many have raped the few, and the Great Powers have annexed small countries.

古文：秦、楚、吴、粤，夷狄也，为强伯。
现代文：秦、楚、吴、越本来是夷狄之邦，从此成为强大的诸侯国。
English: Originally, Qin, Chu, Wu, and Yue were states of barbarians, but they became powerful vassal states.

古文：田氏篡齐，三家分晋，并为战国，争于攻取，兵革递起，城邑数屠，因以饥馑疾疫愁苦，臣主共忧患，其察禨祥候星气尤急。
现代文：田氏篡齐，三家分晋，同时形成战国时期，争相攻取，兵戈递进，城邑被数次屠灭，因此饥馑疾疫产生愁苦，君臣全都忧患，那时占卜察验乞求鬼神，候测星气尤为急切。
English: The Tian clan was unified, the three families were divided into Jin, and the Warring States period was formed at the same time. They competed to conquer, the war progressed, and the towns were slaughtered several times. As a result, famine, disease and plague caused sorrow, and the princes and ministers were all worried. At that time, the divination inspection begged for ghosts and gods, and the astrology was particularly urgent.

古文：近世二十诸候七国相王，言从横者继踵，而占天文者因时务论书传，故其占验鳞杂米盐，亡可录者。
现代文：近世春秋十二诸侯，战国七国相王，主张纵横的策士，接踵而至，而从事占候天文的人，顺着当时的形势，记录书写占候的书，所以其占验的记载鱼龙混杂，没有什么可记录的。
English: In modern times, the twelve princes of the Spring and Autumn Period, the kings of the Seven Warring States, and the strategists who advocated the vertical and horizontal, followed one after another, and the people who engaged in divination astronomy, according to the situation at that time, recorded and wrote divination books, so the records of their divination experiments were mixed, and there was nothing to record.

古文：周卒为秦所灭。
现代文：周军为秦军所灭。
English: The Zhou army was destroyed by the Qin army.

古文：始皇之时，十五年间彗星四见，久者八十日，长或竟天。
现代文：秦始皇时代，十五年间彗星四现，最长时出现八十曰，长度或可横过天空。
English: In the era of Qin Shihuang, the comet appeared four times in fifteen years, the longest time was eighty days, and the length could cross the sky.

古文：后秦遂以兵内兼六国，外攘四夷，死人如乱麻。又荧惑守心，及天市芒角，色赤如鸡血。
现代文：后来秦国逐渐用兵在内兼并六国，在外平息四夷，死人如麻，又出现火星留守心宿和在天市垣出现芒角，色赤如鸡血的天象。
English: Later, Qin gradually used soldiers to annex six countries, and quelled the Si Yi outside, the dead were as dead as a doornail, and the Mars appeared to stay in the heart and the celestial elephant with horns and a red color like chicken blood appeared in the sky.

古文：始皇既死，適、庶相杀，二世即位，残骨肉，戮将相，太白再经天。
现代文：秦始皇死后，适逢百姓相互残杀，二世即位，骨肉相残，杀戮将相，金星再次出现经过中天的现象。
English: After the death of Qin Shihuang, the people killed each other, the second emperor ascended to the throne, the flesh and blood fought with each other, the killing was imminent, and the phenomenon of Venus passing through the midheaven appeared again.

古文：因以张楚并兴，失相跆籍，秦遂以亡。
现代文：所以陈胜、吴广等起义并起，军相践踏，秦国于是灭亡。
English: Therefore, Chen Sheng, Wu Guang and other uprisings started at the same time, and the armies trampled on each other. As a result, the Qin State perished.

古文：项羽救巨鹿，枉矢西流。
现代文：项羽援救钜鹿时，枉矢星向西滑过。
English: While Xiang Yu was rescuing Mule Deer, Yaxing Xing slipped to the west.

古文：枉矢所触，天下之所伐射，灭亡象也。
现代文：枉矢星所及之处预示天下有所征战，是灭亡的征象。
English: The place where the arrowhead reaches indicates that there is a war in the world, and it is a sign of destruction.

古文：物莫直于矢，今蛇行不能直而枉者，执矢者亦不正，以象项羽执政乱也。
现代文：万物不能直于箭矢，现在枉矢星蜿蜒划过而弯曲不能直行，象征着拿箭者不正，以此象征项羽政治混乱。
English: All things can not be straight from the arrow, now the arrow and the star are meandering and cannot go straight, symbolizing the injustice of the arrow, and symbolizing the political chaos.

古文：羽遂合从，坑秦人，屠咸阳。
现代文：项羽于是合并军队，坑杀秦兵，屠灭咸阳。
English: Xiang Yu then merged the armies, killed Qin soldiers, and slaughtered Xianyang.

古文：凡枉矢之流，以乱伐乱也。
现代文：凡是枉矢星出现是以乱伐乱的征象。
English: The appearance of any wasted arrow is a sign of disorderly felling.

古文：汉元年十月，五星聚于东井，以历推之，从岁星也。
现代文：汉元年十月，五星聚会于束井宿，以历法推算它，其它四星应跟从岁星。
English: In October of the first year of the Han Dynasty, the Five Stars gathered at the Sokai Inn. Using the calendar to calculate it, the other four stars should follow the star.

古文：此高皇帝受命之符也。
现代文：此是高皇帝授命登基的符兆。
English: This is the sign of Emperor Gao's accession to the throne.

古文：故客谓张耳曰： 东井秦地，汉王入秦，五星从岁星聚，当以义取天下。 
现代文：所以有客人对张耳说： 束井宿的分野之地在秦地，汉王入秦，五星顺从岁星相聚，正当是以义取天下之时。 
English: Therefore, a guest said to Zhang Er: The field of Sakui Lodge is in Qin, the Han king enters Qin, and the five stars are obedient to the stars. It is right to take the world with righteousness.

古文：秦王子婴降于枳道，汉王以属吏，宝器妇女亡所取，闭宫封门，还军次于霸上，以候诸候。
现代文：秦王子婴在枳道投降，汉王嘱咐下属官吏，宝物、妇女丝毫不取，紧闭宫门，回军守于霸上，以迎候项羽等诸侯。
English: Prince Qin surrendered at the pass, and the Han king ordered his subordinate officials not to take any treasure or women, to close the palace gate, and to keep the returning troops at the top of the mountain to welcome the princes such as Xiang Yu.

古文：与秦民约法三章，民亡不归必者，可谓能行义矣，天之所予也。
现代文：与秦国百姓约法三章，百姓没有不生归附之心的，可谓能行义呀，这是天所给予的。
English: He made a three-chapter agreement with the people of Qin, and since the people had no attachment, they could be said to be able to practice righteousness. This was given by heaven.

古文：五年遂定天下，即帝位。
现代文：因此五年就平定天下，登帝位。
English: Therefore, he pacified the world in five years and ascended to the throne.

古文：此明岁星之崇义，东井为秦之地明效也。
现代文：以此可证明岁星是所彰显义的，东井宿预示的是秦地，这是明证。
English: This can be used to prove that the year star is the one that highlights the meaning, and the East Well Inn foreshadows the Qin land, which is a clear proof.

古文：三年秋，太白出西方，有光几中，乍北乍南，过期乃入。
现代文：漠高帝三年秋，金星出现在西方，有星光几乎近身，忽北忽南，逾期才隐入。
English: In the autumn of the third year of Emperor Mogao, Venus appeared in the west, with starlight almost close at hand, flickering north and south, only to disappear after a long time.

古文：辰星出四孟。
现代文：水星出现在四季的第一个月。
English: Mercury appears in the first month of the four seasons.

古文：是时，项羽为楚王，而汉已定三秦，与相距荥阳。
现代文：当时项羽为楚王，而刘邦已经平定三秦地区，在荣阳地区舆之相对。
English: At that time, Xiang Yu was the king of Chu, while Liu Bang had already pacified the Sanqin region, which was the opposite of public opinion in Rongyang region.

古文：太白出西方，有光几中，是秦地战将胜，而汉国将兴也。
现代文：金星出现在西方，有星光几乎近身，是预兆着秦地有征战要取胜，而漠国将兴起。
English: The appearance of Venus in the west, with starlight almost close at hand, is an omen that Qin has a war to win, and a desert country will rise.

古文：辰星出四孟，易主之表也。
现代文：水星出现在四季的第一个月，是改变君王的表征。
English: Mercury, appearing in the first month of the four seasons, is the sign of the changing monarch.

古文：后二年，汉灭楚。
现代文：又过了两年，汉灭楚。
English: Two more years passed, and the Han Dynasty was destroyed.

古文：七年，月晕，围参、毕七重。
现代文：汉高帝七年，月有光晕，围绕着参宿、毕宿，有七层光晕。
English: In the seventh year of Emperor Han Gao, the moon had a halo, and there were seven layers of halos around the Betelgeuse and the Trapezium.

古文：占曰： 毕、昴间，天街也；街北，胡也；街南，中国也。
现代文：占候的人说： 毕宿、昴宿间，是天街；天街北象征着胡地；天街南象征着中原之国。
English: The fortune-teller said: Between Bi and Ya is Tianjie; the north of Tianjie symbolizes Hudi; the south of Tianjie symbolizes the country of Central Plains.

古文：昴为匈奴，参为赵，毕为边兵。 
现代文：昴宿象征匈奴，参宿象征趟国，毕宿象征边疆之军。 
English: 宿 symbolizes the Xiongnu,参宿 symbolizes the wading country,毕宿 symbolizes the frontier army.

古文：是岁高皇帝自将兵击匈奴，至平城，为冒顿单于所围，七日乃解。
现代文：这年高皇帝亲自率领大军击匈奴，到平城，被冒顿单于所围，七日才得解围。
English: This year, Emperor Gao personally led a large army to attack the Xiongnu, and arrived at Pingcheng. He was besieged by the Xiongnu, and it took seven days to break the siege.

古文：十二年春，荧惑守心。
现代文：汉高帝十二年春，火星留守心宿。
English: In the spring of the twelfth year of Emperor Han Gao, Mars stayed at the inn.

古文：四月，宫车晏驾。
现代文：四月，皇帝去世。
English: In April, the emperor died.

古文：孝惠二年，天开东北，广十余丈，长二十余丈。
现代文：孝惠帝二年，天有裂缝在东北，宽十余丈，长二十余丈。
English: In the second year of Emperor Xiao Hui, there was a crack in the sky in the northeast, more than ten meters wide and more than twenty meters long.

古文：地动，阴有余；天裂，阳不足：皆下盛强将害上之变也。
现代文：有地震，是阴气有余；天开裂，是阳气不足：都是显示下臣强盛将要损害主上的变故。
English: If there is an earthquake, it means that there is too much yin; if the sky is cracked, it means that there is not enough yang. All of these are signs that the prosperity of the vassals will harm the Lord's cause.

古文：其后有吕氏之乱。
现代文：后来有吕氏之乱。
English: Later, there was the Lv's Rebellion.

古文：孝文后二年正月壬寅，天夕出西南。
现代文：孝文帝后二年正月壬寅日，天搀星傍晚出现在西南。
English: In the second year of Emperor Xiaowen's reign, on the first day of the first month of the second year of Emperor Xiaowen's reign, the morning star appeared in the evening in the southwest.

古文：占曰： 为兵丧乱。 
现代文：占候的人说： 这是有战争丧乱的征兆。 
English: And the diviners said, This is a sign of great commotion and of war.

古文：其六年十一月，匈奴入上郡、云中，汉起三军以卫京师。
现代文：六年十一月，匈奴入侵上郡、云中，汉朝发起三军以保卫京师。
English: In November of the sixth year, the Huns invaded Shang County and Yunzhong, and the Han Dynasty launched three armies to defend the capital.

古文：其四月乙巳，水、木、火三合于东井。
现代文：这年四月乙巳，水星、木星、火星三星同出现在束井宿。
English: In April of this year, Mercury, Jupiter, and Mars, the three stars, appeared together in Sokai-juku.

古文：占曰： 外内有兵与丧，改立壬公。
现代文：占候的人说： 内外有战争和丧事发生，会改立王公。
English: The soothsayer said, "When there is war and mourning at home and abroad, a new prince will be crowned."

古文：东井，秦也。 
现代文：束井宿兆示的是秦地。 
English: The sign for Sokai-juku indicates the direction of Qin.

古文：八月，天狗下梁野，是岁诛反者周殷长安市。
现代文：八月，天狗星落在梁地，这年在长安诛杀造的人周殷示众。
English: In August, the Tengu star fell in Liangdi. This year, Zhou Yin, the person who killed and built in Chang'an, showed the public.

古文：其七年六月，文帝崩。
现代文：七年六月，文帝去世。
English: In June of the seventh year, Emperor Wen died.

古文：其十一月戊戌，土、水合于危。
现代文：这年十一月戊戌，土星、水星同在危宿出现。
English: In November of that year, Saturn and Mercury appeared together in the House of Danger.

古文：占曰： 为雍沮，所当之国不可举事用兵，必受其殃。
现代文：占候的人说： 是壅塞之兆，与分野对应的国家，不可举事兴兵，否则必会受其殃祸。
English: The fortune-teller said: It is a sign of procrastination, and the country corresponding to the field should not raise an army, otherwise it will suffer its misfortune.

古文：一曰将覆军。
现代文：又一说，将要全军覆没。
English: He also said that the entire army would be wiped out.

古文：危，齐也。 
现代文：危宿，主示齐地。 
English: In a critical situation, the main points are as follows.

古文：其七月，火东行，行毕阳，环毕东北，出而西，逆行至昴，即南乃东行。
现代文：这年七月，火星束行，运行到毕宿之南，又环绕毕宿东北，后运行出毕宿向西，逆行到昴宿，随即向南又向东运行。
English: In July of that year, the planet Mars went retrograde, moving to the south of Bijuku, and then circling the northeast of Bijuku, and then moving west of Bijuku, retrograde to Bijuku, and then moving south and east.

古文：占曰： 为丧死寇乱。
现代文：占候的人说： 是有死丧和盗寇作乱的兆示。
English: The soothsayers say: It is a portent of death and destruction, and of thieves and robbers.

古文：毕、昴，赵也。 
现代文：毕宿、昴宿，兆示趟地。 
English: Bi-juku, Bi-juku, Zhaoshi-waku-chi.

古文：孝景元年正月癸酉，金、水合于婺女。
现代文：孝景元年正月癸酉曰，金星、水星同出现在婺女宿。
English: According to Xiao Jing, on the first day of the first month of the first year of the year, Venus and Mercury both appeared in the Lady Inn.

古文：占曰： 为变谋，为兵忧。
现代文：占候的人说： 为谋变，为兵患之兆。
English: The soothsayers say: It is a sign of trouble for the soldiers.

古文：婺女，粤也，又为齐。 
现代文：婺女宿主示越地，又主示齐地。 
English: The hostess pointed to the other side, and the hostess pointed to the same side.

古文：其七月乙丑，金、木、水三合于张。
现代文：这年七月乙丑，金星、木星、水星同出现在张宿。
English: In July of this year, Venus, Jupiter, and Mercury all appeared in Zhangshu.

古文：占曰： 外内有兵与丧，改立王公。
现代文：占候的人说： 内外有战争和丧事，是改立王公的兆示。
English: The soothsayer said, "War and mourning, both at home and abroad, are signs that the crown prince will be replaced."

古文：张，周地，今之河南也，又为楚。 
现代文：张宿主示周地，是现在的河南，又兆示楚地。 
English: Zhangshu indicated Zhou, which is now Henan, and Zhaozhou indicated Chu.

古文：其二年七月丙子，火与水晨出东方，因守斗。
现代文：二年七月丙子，火星和水星早晨出现在东方，因此留守斗宿。
English: In July of the second year, Mars and Mercury appeared in the east in the morning, so they stayed behind.

古文：占曰： 其国绝祀。 
现代文：占候的人说： 其分野之国，断绝祭祀。 
English: The diviners say: Let the nations be confounded, and let them cease to offer sacrifice.

古文：至其十二月，水、火合于斗。
现代文：到了当年的十二月，水星、火星同出现在斗宿。
English: By December of that year, Mercury and Mars appeared together in Doojuku.

古文：占曰： 为淬，不可举事用兵，必受其殃。 
现代文：占候的人说： 这是淬火，不可举事用兵，否则必受其害。 
English: The diviners said, "This is a campfire. You must not take up arms, or you will be harmed by it."

古文：一曰： 为北军，用兵举事大败。
现代文：又一说： 征示着北方的军队，用兵举事必大败。
English: Another said: "If the northern army is mobilized, it will be defeated.

古文：斗，吴也，又为粤。 
现代文：斗宿，主示吴地，又主示越地。 
English: Duwuzhuang, the main show Wu, but also the main show Yue.

古文：是岁彗星出西南。
现代文：当年彗星出现在西南方。
English: That year, the comet appeared in the southwest.

古文：其三月，立六皇子为王，王淮阳、汝南、河间、临江、长沙、广川。
现代文：三月时，立六皇子为王，镇守淮阳、汝南、河闾、临江、长沙、广川。
English: In March, Prince Lijiao became the king and the town guards of Huaiyang, Runan, Hebei, Linjiang, Changsha and Guangchuan.

古文：其三年，吴、楚、胶西、胶东、淄川、济南、赵七国反。
现代文：三年，吴、楚、胶西、胶束、淄川、济南、趟七国反叛。
English: In three years, Wu, Chu, Jiaoxi, Jiaozuo, Luochuan, Jinan, and other seven provinces rebelled.

古文：吴、楚兵无至攻梁，胶西、胶东、淄川三国攻围齐。
现代文：吴、楚之兵先到攻打梁国，胶西、胶束、淄川三国围攻齐国。
English: The soldiers of Wu and Chu went to attack Liang Province first, and the three provinces of Jiaoxi, Jiaozuo and Beichuan besieged Qi Province.

古文：汉遣大将军周亚夫等戍止河南，以候吴、楚之敝，遂败之。
现代文：汉朝派遣大将军周亚夫等戍守河南，以等候吴、楚之敌露出破绽，于是打败了他们。
English: The Han Dynasty sent the great general Zhou Yafu and others to defend Henan, to wait for the enemies of Wu and Chu to reveal their weakness, and then defeated them.

古文：吴王亡走粤，粤攻而杀之，平阳侯败三国之师于齐，咸伏其辜，齐王自杀。
现代文：吴王逃奔越国，越国攻打他并且杀了他。平阳侯打败了三国的军队在齐地，都惩治了他们的罪行，齐王自杀。
English: King Wu fled to Yue. Yue attacked him and killed him. Pingyang marquis defeated the armies of the three countries in Qi, punished their crimes, and King Qi committed suicide.

古文：汉兵以水攻赵城，城坏，王自杀。
现代文：汉军以水攻打趟国，城破，赵王自杀。
English: The Chinese army attacked the country with water, broke the city, and Zhao Wang committed suicide.

古文：六月，立皇子二人，楚元王子一人为王，王胶西、中山、楚。
现代文：六月，立皇子两人、楚元王的儿子一人为王，镇守胶西、中山、楚国。
English: In June, two princes and one son of King Chu Yuan were made kings, and they became the town guards of Jiaoxi, Zhongshan, and Chu.

古文：徙济北为淄川王，淮阳为鲁王，汝南为江都王。
现代文：改任济北王为淄！王，淮阳王为鲁王，汝南王为江都王。
English: The king of Jibei was changed to the king of Shao, the king of Huaiyang to the king of Lu, and the king of Runan to the king of Jiangdu.

古文：七月，兵罢。
现代文：七月，战争结束。
English: In July, the war ended.

古文：天狗下，占为 破军杀将。
现代文：天狗星落下，占候的人说： 是破军杀将的征兆。
English: When the Dog Star falls, soothsayers say: it's a sign of defeat.

古文：狗，又守御类也，天狗所降，以戒守御。 
现代文：天狗星象征着守御，天狗星所以降临，是以此戒示守御。 
English: The Tengu star symbolizes protection, so the Tengu star descends, and it is a warning to protect.

古文：吴、楚攻梁，梁坚城守，遂伏尸流血其下。
现代文：吴国、楚国攻打梁国，梁国坚守，于是在分野之地有伏尸流血发生。
English: Wu and Chu attacked Liang, but Liang held out, and bloodshed ensued in the field.

古文：三年，填星在娄，几入，还居奎，奎，鲁也。
现代文：三年，土星在娄宿，几乎隐入时又出现，返居于奎宿。
English: In the third year, Saturn was in Okuyado, but reappeared when it was almost hidden, and returned to Kueyado.

古文：占曰： 其国得地为得填。 
现代文：奎宿分野之地是鲁国。占候的人说： 这个国家得地是因为有土星之故。 
English: The place of the field of Kui-juku was the country of Lu. The diviners said: This country got its land because of Saturn.

古文：是岁鲁为国。
现代文：造年鲁王被封国。
English: In the same year, King Lu was enthroned.

古文：四年七月癸未，火入东并，行阴，又以九月己未入舆鬼，戊寅出。
现代文：四年七月癸末日，火星运行入束井宿，行于黄道之北，又在九月己末日运行入舆鬼宿，戊寅运行出宿区。
English: On the last day of July in the year of the Rooster, Mars moved into the Zodiac north of the Zodiac, and on the last day of September, Mars moved into the Zodiac west of the Zodiac, and the Moon moved into the Zodiac east of the Zodiac.

古文：占曰： 为诛罚，又为火灾。 
现代文：占候的人说： 是诛罚的征象，又是火灾的征象。 
English: The diviners say: A sign of a scourge and a sign of a fire.

古文：后二年，有栗氏事。
现代文：后二年，有栗氏的事发生。
English: Two years later, the Kuri clan incident occurred.

古文：其后未央东阙灾。
现代文：后来未央宫束门有火灾。
English: Later, there was a fire at Soku-mon Gate of Miyanomiya.

古文：中元年，填星当在觜觿，参，去居东井。
现代文：孝景中元元年，土星当在觜鹏宿、参宿，却离去居守在东井宿。
English: In the first year of the 13th century, Saturn was supposed to be in Shoupengjuku and Ganjuku, but he left to stay in Dongjingjuku.

古文：占曰： 亡地，不乃有女忧。 
现代文：占候的人说： 亡地，或者有女主之忧。 
English: The soothsayer said: "Perhaps the land is doomed, or perhaps the mistress is worried."

古文：其二年正月丁亥，金、木合于觜觿，为白衣之会。
现代文：二年正月丁亥曰，金星、木星同在觜宿，是有白衣之会的丧事的象征。
English: In the first month of the second year, Ding Hai said that Venus and Jupiter were together in Oshuku, which was a symbol of the funeral of the white-clad party.

古文：三月丁酉，彗星夜见西北，色白，长丈，在觜觿，且去益小，十五日不见。
现代文：三月丁酉日，彗星夜间出现在西北，星光色白，长一丈，在觜鱅宿，离去时越来越小，十五日后不见。
English: The comet appeared in the northwest at night on the third day of the third month. The starlight was white and grew taller and taller. When it left Poyang, it became smaller and smaller. Fifteen days later, it disappeared.

古文：占曰： 必有破国乱君，伏死其辜。
现代文：占候的人说： 必有破国乱君的情况发生，犯罪者伏法。
English: The soothsayer said, "There will definitely be a situation in which the country will be destroyed and the emperor overthrown, and the criminals will be punished."

古文：觜觿，梁也。 
现代文：觜鱅宿，主示梁地。 
English: 宿, mainly refers to Liangdi.

古文：其五月甲午，金、木俱在东进。
现代文：这年五月甲午日，金星、木星都在束井宿。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of May of this year, Venus and Jupiter were both in Sokai-juku.

古文：戊戌，金去木留，守之二十日。
现代文：戊戌日，金星离开，木星留守，留有二十日。
English: On the Ides of March, Venus departs, Jupiter remains, and there are twenty days left.

古文：占曰： 伤成于戊。
现代文：占候的人说： 损伤形成于战斧。
English: The fortune-teller said: The injury is caused by a battle-axe.

古文：木为诸侯，诛将行于诸侯也。 
现代文：木星预示诸侯，诛杀将要实行在诸侯中。 
English: Jupiter foreshadowed vassals, fighting will be carried out in the vassals.

古文：其六月壬戌，蓬星见西南，在房南，去房可二丈，大如二斗器，色白；癸亥，在心东北，可长丈所；甲子，在尾北，可六丈；丁卯，在箕北，近汉，稍小，且去时，大如桃。
现代文：这年六月壬戌，蓬星出现在西南，在房宿南面，离房宿大约有二丈，大如二斗的器具，色白；癸亥日，在心宿东北，长约一丈多；甲子日，在尾宿北面，长约六丈；丁卯日，在箕宿北面，靠近银河，稍小，将离去时，大如桃。
English: In June of this year, Feng Xing appeared in the southwest, in the south of the room, about two meters away from the room, large as two buckets of equipment, white in color; Zhai Hai Day, in the northeast of the heart, about one meter long; Kosi Day, in the north of the tail, about six meters long; Dingwu Day, in the north of the room, close to the Milky Way, slightly smaller, will leave, large as a peach.

古文：壬申去，凡十日。
现代文：壬申曰离去，总共十曰。
English: Jinshin said to leave, a total of ten days.

古文：占曰： 蓬星出，必有乱臣。
现代文：占候的人说： 蓬星出现，必有乱臣。
English: The soothsayer said, "When the phoenix appears, there will be chaos among the ministers."

古文：房、心间，天子宫也。 
现代文：房宿、心宿之间是天子宫。 
English: Between the room and the heart is the womb of heaven.

古文：是时，梁王欲为汉嗣，使人杀汉争臣袁盎。
现代文：这时梁王想做汉的继嗣，派人杀汉朝的诤臣袁盎。
English: At this time, Liang Wang wanted to be the successor of Han, and sent someone to kill Yuan Ang, a vassal of the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉按诛梁大臣，斧戊用。
现代文：汉朝按吏律应诛杀梁大臣，斧铁相加。
English: The Han Dynasty, according to the law of officials, should kill Minister Liang, and the axe should be added.

古文：梁王恐惧，布车入关，伏斧戊谢罪，然后得免。
现代文：梁王恐惧，布车入关，伏法认罪，然后得免。
English: Liang Wang was afraid, the cart was taken into custody, he confessed under duress, and was then pardoned.

古文：中三年十一月庚午夕，金、火合于虚，相去一寸。
现代文：中元三年十一月庚午曰傍晚，金星、火星同在虚宿，相离一寸远。
English: In the late afternoon of the third day of November in the middle of the year, Venus and Mars were in the same place, one inch away from each other.

古文：占曰： 为铄，为丧。
现代文：占候的人说： 是冶炼，是有丧事的象征。
English: The soothsayers say: It is smelting, a symbol of mourning.

古文：虚，齐也。 
现代文：虚宿，分野之地是齐国。 
English: The place of false lodging, the place of discipline is Qi Province.

古文：四年四月丙申，金、木合于东井。
现代文：四年四月丙申，金星、木星同现于束井宿。
English: In April of the fourth year, Venus and Jupiter appeared together in Sokai-juku.

古文：占曰： 为白衣之会。
现代文：占候的人说： 会有白衣之会的丧事。
English: The soothsayer said: There will be a white-robed funeral.

古文：井，秦也。 
现代文：束井宿，分野之地是秦国。 
English: Sokai-juku, the field is located in Qin.

古文：其五年四月乙巳，水、火合于参。
现代文：五年四月乙巳曰，水星、火星同现于参宿。
English: In April of the fifth year, Mercury and Mars appeared together in Betelgeuse.

古文：占曰： 国不吉。
现代文：占候的人说： 其分野之国不吉。
English: The fortune-teller said, "It is not good for a country to be ahead in its field."

古文：参，梁也。 
现代文：参宿，分野之地是梁国。 
English: The place of lodging and the place of discipline is Liang Province.

古文：其六年四月，梁孝王死。
现代文：六年四月，梁孝王去世。
English: In April of the sixth year, Liang Xiaowang passed away.

古文：五月，城阳王、济阴王死。
现代文：五月，城阳王、济阴王去世。
English: In May, the King of Chengyang and the King of Jilin passed away.

古文：六月，成阳公主死。
现代文：六月，成阳公主去世。
English: In June, Princess Chengyang passed away.

古文：出入三月，天子四衣白，临邸第。
现代文：在三个月之中，天子穿丧服四次，莅临府第。
English: In three months, the heavenly son put on mourning clothes four times and came to the capital.

古文：后元年五月壬午，火、金合于舆鬼之东北，不至柳，出舆鬼北可五寸。
现代文：孝景后元年五月壬午曰，火星、金星同在舆鬼宿的东北不到柳宿，出现在舆鬼宿北大约五寸远。
English: On the afternoon of May 1st, after the death of Xiao Jing, Mars and Venus did not reach Yanjuku in the northeast of the ghost town, but appeared about five inches away from the north of the ghost town.

古文：占曰： 为铄，有丧。
现代文：占候的人说： 是冶炼，有丧事发生。
English: The fortune-teller said: It is smelting, and something tragic will happen.

古文：舆鬼，秦也。 
现代文：舆鬼宿，主示秦国。 
English: The ghostly inn, the main character is Qin.

古文：丙戌，地大动，铃铃然，民大疫死，棺贵，至秋止。
现代文：丙戌曰，有大地震发生，铃铃有声，民间有大流行病发生，百姓死亡，棺椁贵，到秋天才停止。
English: He said that there was a major earthquake, the bells were ringing, there was an epidemic among the people, people died, coffins were expensive, and it would not stop until autumn.

古文：孝武建元三年三月，有星孛于注、张，历太微。干紫宫，至于天汉。
现代文：孝武建元三年三月，有彗星见于柳宿、张宿，经过太微垣，侵犯紫宫星区，到了银河。
English: In March of the third year of Xiaowu Jianyuan, a comet was seen in Liuzhu and Zhangshu, passed through Taibugaki, invaded the purple palace star region, and reached the Milky Way.

古文：《春秋》 星孛于北斗，齐、宋、晋之君皆将死乱。 
现代文：《春秋》中说 彗星见于北斗，齐、宋、晋三国的君王都将死于祸乱 。
English: "Spring and Autumn" says that the comet is seen in the Big Dipper, and the kings of Qi, Song and Jin will all die from the calamity.

古文：今星孛历五宿，其后济东、胶西、江都王皆坐法削黜自杀，淮阳、衡山谋反而诛。
现代文：现在彗星经过五宿，这以后济束、胶西、江都王都被牵连获罪削夺王位而自杀，淮阳王、衡山王谋反被诛。
English: Now the comet has passed through Wushan. Since then, the kings of Jizhong, Jiaoxi and Jiangdu have all been implicated in the crime of abdicating the throne and committing suicide, and the kings of Huaiyang and Hengshan have been arrested for plotting rebellion.

古文：三年四月，有星孛于天纪，至织女。
现代文：三年四月，有彗星见于天纪星，行至织女星。
English: In April of the third year, a comet was seen in the celestial calendar, traveling to the star Vega.

古文：占曰： 织女有女变，天幻为地震。 
现代文：占候的人说： 织女星兆示有女主之变，天纪星兆示要发生地震。 
English: The soothsayers say: The Vega star sign indicates a change of mistress, the astrological star sign indicates an earthquake.

古文：至四年十月而地动，其后陈皇后废。
现代文：到了四年十月发生地震，后来陈皇后被废。
English: In October of the same year, an earthquake occurred, after which the Empress Chen was dethroned.

古文：六年，荧惑守舆鬼。
现代文：六年，火星留守舆鬼宿。
English: For six years, Mars stayed at the ghost house.

古文：占曰： 为火变，有丧。 
现代文：占候的人说： 兆示火灾，有丧事。 
English: The soothsayer said, "The omens indicate a fire and a funeral."

古文：是岁高园有火灾，窦太后崩。
现代文：这年汉高帝的陵园有火灾发生，宝太后去世。
English: In that year, a fire broke out in the mausoleum of Emperor Han Gao, and the Empress Dowager Bao passed away.

古文：元光元年六月，客星见于房。
现代文：元光元年六月，新星出现在房宿。
English: In June of the first year of the Genko era, a new star appeared in the rooming house.

古文：占曰： 为兵起。 
现代文：占候的人说： 预示有战争发起。 
English: The soothsayers said: This is a sign that war will break out.

古文：其二年十一月，单于将十万骑入武州，汉遣兵三十余万以待之。
现代文：二年十一月，单于率领十万铁骑入侵武州，汉朝派兵三十余万迎敌。
English: In November of the second year, Shanyu led 100,000 cavalrymen to invade Wuzhou, and the Han Dynasty sent more than 300,000 soldiers to meet the enemy.

古文：元光中，天星尽摇，上以问候星者。
现代文：元光年间，天星全部星光闪动，皇上因此寻问占候星象的人。
English: During the Genko era, all the stars were twinkling, so the emperor sought out a soothsayer.

古文：对曰： 星摇者，民劳也。 
现代文：回答说： 星光闪动的情况预示着劳民。 
English: He replied: The situation of the twinkling stars indicates the laborers.

古文：后伐四夷，百姓劳于兵革。
现代文：后来征讨四夷，百姓因为战争而劳苦。
English: Later, Shii was conquered, and the people had to work hard because of the war.

古文：元鼎五年，太白入于天苑。
现代文：元鼎五年，金星行入天苑星。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Venus entered the Celestial Garden.

古文：占曰： 将以马起兵也。 
现代文：占候的人说： 将有因为马而兴起的战争。 
English: And the diviners said, There shall be wars because of horses.

古文：一曰： 马将以军而死耗。 
现代文：又一说： 马将因为战争而死耗。 
English: Another said: "The horse will be exhausted from the war."

古文：其后以天马故诛大宛，马大死于军。
现代文：后来因为天马的缘故诛杀大宛，马大部分死于战争。
English: Later, because of Tianma, they killed Dawang, and most of the horses died in the war.

古文：元鼎中，劳惑守南斗。
现代文：元鼎年间，火星留守在南斗宿。
English: During the reign of the Yuan Dynasty, Mars stayed in Nandou.

古文：占曰： 荧惑所守，为乱贼丧兵；守之久，其国绝祀。
现代文：占候的人说： 火星留守是有贼乱丧兵的征兆；留守的时间长，其分野之国断绝祭祀。
English: The fortune-teller said: Mars's absence is a sign of the death of soldiers in a band of thieves; if he stays away for a long time, the country of his field will cut off the sacrificial rites.

古文：南斗，越分也。 
现代文：越国是南斗宿的分野之地。 
English: Yueguo is the home of Nandouju.

古文：其后越相吕嘉杀其王及太后，汉兵诛之，灭其国。
现代文：后来越相吕嘉杀了国王及太后，汉起兵诛杀他，灭了越国。
English: Later, Emperor Lujia of Viet Nam killed the king and the empress dowager, and the Han Dynasty raised an army to kill him and destroy Viet Nam.

古文：元封中，星孛于河戍，占曰： 南戍为越门，北戍为胡门。 
现代文：元封年间，有新星见于南河、北河星区中。占候的人说： 南河是越国的门户，北河是胡人的门户。 
English: During the Yuan Dynasty, a new star was seen in the South River and North River star areas. The fortune-tellers said: the South River is the gateway to Yue, and the North River is the gateway to Hu.

古文：其后汉兵击拔朝鲜，以为乐浪、玄菟郡。
现代文：后来汉兵击败减掉朝鲜，以其地为乐浪、玄菟郡。
English: Later, the Han soldiers defeated and reduced Korea, and their land became Lelang and Xuanfan County.

古文：朝鲜在海中，越之象也；居北方，胡之域也。
现代文：朝鲜在海中，越国的门户象征朝鲜；留守在北方，是胡人的区域。
English: North Korea is in the middle of the sea, the gate of Viet Nam symbolizes North Korea; left behind in the north is the region of the Hu people.

古文：太初中，星孛于招摇。
现代文：太初年间，有新星见于招摇星附近。
English: In the early years of the universe, a nova was seen near the Pleiades.

古文：《星传》曰： 客星守招摇，蛮夷有乱，民死君。 
现代文：《星传》中说： 新星留守招摇星，兆示南方少数民族有动乱，百姓将失去国君。 
English: "Star Legend" said: The new star left the country, signaling unrest among ethnic minorities in the south, and the people will lose the king.

古文：其后汉兵击大宛，斩其王。
现代文：后来汉朝出兵攻打大宛，斩首大宛王。
English: Later, the Han Dynasty sent troops to attack Dayuan and beheaded King Dayuan.

古文：招摇，远夷之分也。
现代文：招摇星的分野之地是远方少数民族地区。
English: Faraway ethnic minority areas are the real stars of the show.

古文：孝昭始元中，汉宦者梁成恢及燕王候星者吴莫如见蓬星出西方天市东门，行过河鼓，入营室中。
现代文：孝昭始元年间，汉朝宦官梁成恢和燕王所用的占候星象的人吴莫如，见彗星出现于西方天市垣柬门，运行过河鼓星区，入营室宿中。
English: During the first year of Xiao Zhaozhe, the Han Dynasty eunuch Liang Chenghuai and Wu Moru, the astrologer used by Yan Wang, saw the comet appear in the western sky city of Qikammen, run through the river drum star area, and enter the camp room.

古文：恢曰： 蓬星出六十日，不出三年，下有乱臣戮死于市。 
现代文：梁成恢说： 彗星出现六十天，不出三年，其下分野之地有乱臣被戮杀并且示众。 
English: Liang Chenghuai said: The comet appeared for sixty days, not three years, and in the fields below, there were disorderly ministers who were killed and paraded.

古文：后太白出西方，下行一舍，复上行二舍而下去。
现代文：后来金星出现西方，向下运行一舍，又向上运行二舍后，下行离去。
English: Later, Venus appeared in the west, moving downwards once, moving upwards twice, and then moving downwards.

古文：太白主兵，上复下，将有戮死者。
现代文：金星主示军队，上行又下行，将会有被戮杀的人。
English: Venus rules the troops, up and down, and there will be casualties.

古文：后太白出东方，入咸池，东下入东井。
现代文：后来金星出现在东方，入咸池星，向东进入东井宿。
English: Later, Venus appeared in the east, entered the Hamchi star, and moved eastward into the Higashi Injuku.

古文：人臣不忠，有谋上者。
现代文：预示大臣不忠，有谋上叛乱的人。
English: Foreshadowing a disloyal minister and someone plotting a rebellion.

古文：后太白入太微西籓第一星，北出东籓第一星，北东下去。
现代文：后来金星进入太微垣西边第一星区，向北运行出束边第一星的位置，再向北而东方向离去。
English: Later, Venus entered the first star area on the west side of Taiyuegaki, moved northward to the position of the first star on the edge of the bunch, and then moved northward and eastward.

古文：太微者，天廷也，太白行其中，宫门当闭，大将被甲兵，邪臣伏诛。
现代文：太微垣是天廷的象征，金星运行其中，征示宫门当闭，大将披甲带兵，邪恶之臣伏诛。
English: The great hedge is a symbol of the heavenly court, with Venus running through it, indicating that the palace gates should be closed, the general should wear armor and lead soldiers, and the evil vassal should be put to death.

古文：荧惑在娄，逆行至奎，法曰 当有兵 。
现代文：火星在娄宿，由束而西逆行至奎宿，占法上说 当有战争 。
English: Mars is in Pisces, retrograde from Sagittarius to Cancer. According to the horoscope, there will be a war.

古文：后太白入昴。
现代文：后来金星进入昴宿。
English: Later, Venus entered Pisces.

古文：莫如曰： 蓬星出西方，当有大臣戮死者。
现代文：吴莫如说： 蓬星出现于西方，当有大臣被戮杀的情况。
English: Wu Moru said: "Peng Xing appeared in the west, when there was a situation where a minister was killed.

古文：太白星入东井。太微廷，出东门，没有死将。 
现代文：金星进入东井宿、太微廷，运行出东门，汉将有大将死。 
English: Venus enters the East Well Inn and the Too Wee Court, runs out of the East Gate, and the Han general dies.

古文：后荧惑出东方，守太白。
现代文：后来火星出现在东方，与金星相守。
English: Later, Mars will appear in the east, close to Venus.

古文：兵当起，主人不胜。
现代文：这时应有战争发动，领兵的人不胜。
English: At this time, a war should be launched, and the person leading the troops is invincible.

古文：后流星下燕万载宫极，东去，法曰 国恐，有诛 。
现代文：后有流星陨落燕国万载宫的屋顶向东去，占法上说 国家恐慌，有诛杀 。
English: Later, a meteorite fell from the roof of the Wan Zai Palace in Yan Guo and went to the east. According to the law, the country panicked and there was a battle.

古文：其后左将宫桀、骠骑将军安与长公主、燕刺王谋作乱，咸伏其肆，兵诛乌桓。
现代文：后来左将军上官桀、骠骑将军上官安与长公主、燕剌王刘旦谋乱，都伏罪被杀。有军队讨伐乌桓。
English: Later, the Left General Shang Guanjun and the Cavalry General Shang Guan'an conspired with the First Princess and the Tern King Liu Dan to start a riot, and were both killed for the crime of treachery. An army was sent to fight Wuhuan.

古文：元凤四年九月，客星在紫宫中斗枢极间。
现代文：元凤四年九月，新星在紫宫北斗天枢星与北极之间出现。
English: In September of the year of the phoenix, a new star appeared between the north star of the Big Dipper and the North Pole.

古文：占曰： 为兵。 
现代文：占候的人说： 是战争。 
English: Divination says: The main battle is coming.

古文：其五年六月，发三辅郡国少年谐北军。
现代文：五年六月，征发三辅郡国少年到北军。
English: In June of the same year, the young men of Sanfu County were conscripted into the Northern Army.

古文：五年四月，烛星见奎、娄间。
现代文：五年四月，烛星出现在奎宿、娄宿之间。
English: In April of the fifth year, the candlestick appeared between Kui-juku and Shibu-juku.

古文：占曰： 有土功，胡人死，边城和 。
现代文：占候的人说 预示有土木工程兴起，有胡人死亡，边城和平 。
English: The soothsayers say that it portends the rise of civil engineering, the death of Hu, and peace in the border town.

古文：其六年正月，筑辽东、玄菟城。
现代文：六年正月，修筑辽东、玄菟城。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, Liaodong and Xuanzang City were built.

古文：二月，度辽将军范明支击乌桓还。
现代文：二月，度辽将军范明友击败乌桓国还军。
English: In February, Du Liao's general Fan Mingyou defeated Wu Huan and returned to the army.

古文：元平元年正月庚子，日出时有黑云，状如焱风乱鬊，转出西北，东南行，转而西，有顷亡。
现代文：元平元年正月庚子曰，日出时有黑云山现，其形态好像狂风吹乱头发，运转出西北方向，东南行进，又转向西，一会儿无踪影。
English: Geng Zi, in the first month of the first year of the Yuan Hei era, said that at sunrise, there was a black cloud mountain, its shape was like a wild wind blowing hair, moving from the northwest, traveling southeast, and turning to the west, and for a while there was no trace.

古文：占曰： 有云如众风，是谓风师，法有大兵 。
现代文：占候的入说： 有云如大风，是谓风师，占法记载当有大的战争发动。 
English: The fortune-teller said: "If there is a cloud like a strong wind, it is called a windmaker. The fortune-telling method records when a big war is launched."

古文：其后兵起乌孙，五将征匈奴。
现代文：后来战争在乌孙国发起，五将征讨匈奴。
English: Later, war broke out in the Wusun Kingdom, and the Five Generals went to fight the Xiongnu.

古文：二月甲申，晨有大星如月，有众星随而西行。
现代文：二月甲申日，早晨出现大星有如月亮，有众星跟随它向西运行。
English: On the morning of the third day of the second month, a great star appeared, like the moon, and many stars followed it westward.

古文：乙酉，牂云如狗，赤色，长尾三枚，夹汉西行。
现代文：乙酉曰，烊云形状像狗，红色，有三道长尾，从两面沿着银河向西运行。
English: According to acetylene, the cloud is shaped like a dog, red, with three long tails, and runs westward along the Milky Way from both sides.

古文：大星如月，大臣之象，众星随之，众皆随从也。
现代文：大星如月，是大臣的象征，众星跟随大星预示众人都随从。
English: The great star, like the moon, is the symbol of the minister, and the stars following the great star indicate that everyone is following.

古文：天文以东行为顺，西行为逆，此大臣欲行权以安社稷。
现代文：天文的规定是以从西向东行为顺，从束向西行为逆，这是大臣想要行使权力来安定国家。
English: The astronomical rule is to go from west to east in a clockwise direction, and from east to west in an anti-clockwise direction. This is how the minister wants to exercise his power to stabilize the country.

古文：占曰： 太白散为天狗，为卒起。
现代文：占候的人说： 金星的散气形成天狗星、卒起星。
English: The soothsayers say: The outgassing of Venus forms the Tengu star and the rising star.

古文：卒起见，祸无时，臣运柄。
现代文：卒起星出现，祸患无时不有，大臣玩弄权柄。
English: When the stars appear, disasters are bound to happen, and ministers play with power.

古文：牂云为乱君。 
现代文：烊云为乱君的征兆。 
English: Clouds are a sign of chaos.

古文：到其四月，昌邑王贺行淫辟，立二十七日，大将军霍光白皇太后废贺。
现代文：到了四月，昌邑王刘贺行乱政，即位二十七日，大将军霍光报告皇太后废除了刘贺。
English: In April, Liu He, the king of Changyi, led a chaotic government. On the 27th day of his reign, General Huo Guang reported to the Empress Dowager that Liu He had been abolished.

古文：三月丙戌，流星出翼、轸东北，干太微，入紫宫。
现代文：三月丙戌曰，有流星出现在翼宿、轸宿东北，侵犯太微垣，进入紫宫星区。
English: In March, a meteor appeared in the northeast of Tsubasa-juku and Haku-juku, encroaching on Taiko-gaki and entering the star zone of the Purple Palace.

古文：始出小，且入大，有光。
现代文：开始出现时形状小，后来渐大，有光。
English: It starts out small, then gets bigger and brighter.

古文：入有顷，声如雷，三鸣止。
现代文：进入一会儿，有声如雷，三呜才停止。
English: After entering for a while, there was a thunderous sound, and then it stopped.

古文：占曰： 流星入紫宫，天下大凶。 
现代文：占候的人说： 流星进入紫宫星区，预示天下大凶。 
English: The fortune-teller said: The meteor enters the purple palace star zone, indicating that the world is very dangerous.

古文：其四月癸未，宫军晏驾。
现代文：这年四月癸末日，皇帝去世。
English: At the end of April of that year, the emperor died.

古文：孝宣本始元年四月壬戌甲夜，辰星与参出西方。
现代文：孝宣帝本始元年四月壬戌日初更夜，水星从参宿出现于西方。
English: In April of the first year of Emperor Xiao Xuan's reign, Mercury appeared in the west from Betelgeuse.

古文：其二年七月辛亥夕，辰星与翼出，皆为蚤。
现代文：二年七月辛亥曰傍晚，水星从翼宿出现于西方，都比历算提早。
English: On the evening of July 2nd, Xinhai, Mercury appeared in the west from the constellation of Pleiades, earlier than the calendar predicted.

古文：占曰： 大臣诛。 
现代文：占候的人说： 大臣有被诛杀的。 
English: The soothsayer said: The minister will be killed.

古文：其后荧惑守房之钅句钤，钅句钤，天子之御也。
现代文：后来火星留守在房宿的钩钤星星区。钩铃星是天帝的车驾。
English: Later, Mars stayed in the hooked star area of the room. The hooked star is the driver of the heavenly emperor.

古文：占曰： 不太仆，则奉车，不黜即死也。
现代文：占候的人说： 不是太仆就是奉车都尉，不被罢黜即是处死。
English: The fortuneteller said, "Whether you are a servant or a captain, if you are not dismissed, you will be executed."

古文：房、心，天子宫也。
现代文：房宿、心宿是天子的宫廷。
English: The inn, the inn of the heart, is the court of the Son of Heaven.

古文：房为将相，心为子属也。
现代文：房宿为将相，心宿为儿子之属。
English: The lodgings are for the generals, and the heart lodgings belong to the sons.

古文：其地宋，今楚彭城也。 
现代文：其分野之地是宋，是现在楚国的彭城。 
English: The place of his field of study was Song, in what is now Pengcheng in Chu.

古文：四年七月甲辰，辰星在翼，月犯之。
现代文：四年七月甲辰，水星在翼宿，月亮侵犯它。
English: In the first hour of July in the fourth year, Mercury is in the pterosaur, and the moon encroaches on it.

古文：占曰： 兵起，上卿死，将相也。 
现代文：占候的人说： 有战争起动，有上卿死于将相之位。 
English: The fortune-teller said: A war will start, and a high-ranking official will die.

古文：是日，荧惑入舆鬼天质。
现代文：当日，火星进入舆鬼宿天质星星区。
English: On the same day, Mars entered the zodiacal star zone.

古文：占曰： 大臣有诛者，名曰天贼在大人之侧。 
现代文：占候的人说： 大臣有被诛杀的，称为天贼在君王之侧。 
English: The soothsayer said: The minister has been killed, called the thief in the king's side.

古文：地节元年正月戊午乙夜，月食荧惑，荧惑在角、亢。
现代文：地节元年正月戊午二更夜，月亮遮掩火星，火星在角宿、亢宿。
English: On the night of the first day of the first month of the year, the moon will cover Mars, and Mars will rise in Kakuno-juku and Shibuya.

古文：占曰： 忧在宫中，非贼而盗也。
现代文：占候的人说： 预示有忧患发生在宫中，不是强盗就是小偷。
English: The soothsayer said, "This foretells that there will be trouble in the palace, either a robber or a thief.

古文：有内乱，谗臣在旁。 
现代文：有内乱，谗谀之臣在君王身边。 
English: If there is civil strife, the king's vassals will rally to his side.

古文：其辛酉，荧惑入氐中，氐，天子之宫，荧惑入之，有贼臣。
现代文：辛酉日，火星运行入氐宿中部。氐宿，是天帝的宫廷，火星进入其中，预示有贼臣。
English: On the day of the full moon, Mars moves into the middle of Oshuku. Oshuku is the emperor's court, and Mars enters it, foreshadowing a thief.

古文：其六月戊戌甲夜，客星又居左右角间，东南指，长可二尺，色白。
现代文：这年六月戊戌曰初更夜，有彗星又处于左右角星之间，彗尾指向东南，长约二尺，色白。
English: In June of this year, on the night of the first day of the new year, there was a comet between the left and right angle stars. The tail of the comet pointed to the southeast. It was about two feet long and white in color.

古文：占曰： 有奸人在宫廷间。 
现代文：占候的人说： 预示有奸人在宫廷中。 
English: The soothsayer said, "It is a sign that there is a traitor in the court."

古文：其丙寅，又有客星见贯索东北，南行，至七月癸酉夜入天市，芒炎东南指，其色白。
现代文：到丙寅曰，又有彗星出现在贯索星东北，向南运行，到七月癸酉夜进入天市垣，星光很亮，彗尾指向东南，其色白。
English: According to Hsin Yin, another comet appeared in the northeast of the Kuiper Belt, moving southward, and entered the western sky in the evening of July. The starlight was very bright, and the tail of the comet pointed to the southeast, and its color was white.

古文：占曰： 有戮卿。 
现代文：占候的人说： 预示着戮杀卿士。 
English: The soothsayer said: It portends the slaughter of nobles.

古文：一曰： 有戮王。
现代文：又一说： 有戮杀帝王的预示。
English: And another said, There is a foreshadowing of the slaughter of the emperor.

古文：期皆一年，远二年。 
现代文：时间都是一年，远则二年出现。 
English: The time is always one year, and the farthest is two years.

古文：是时，楚王延寿谋逆自杀。
现代文：当时，楚王延寿谋反自杀。
English: At that time, King Yan Shou of Chu plotted to commit suicide.

古文：四年，故大将军霍光夫人显、将军霍禹、范明友、奉车霍山及诸昆弟宾婚为侍中、诸曹、九卿、郡守皆谋反，咸伏其辜。
现代文：四年，已故大将军霍光的夫人显、将军霍禹、范明友、奉车都尉霍山以及妻弟姻亲中为侍中、诸曹、九卿、郡守都谋反，一起被伏法判罪。
English: In four years, the late General Huo Guang's wife Xian, General Huo Yu, Fan Mingyou, Fengche Captain Huoshan, and his wife's brother-in-laws, including the Chamberlain, Zhu Cao, Jiujing, and the County Governor, all conspired to rebel and were convicted of conspiracy.

古文：黄龙元年三月，客星居王梁东北可九尺，长丈余，西指，出阁道间，至紫宫。
现代文：黄龙元年三月，彗星居留在王梁星东北约九尺，长一丈余，彗尾指向西，运行到阁道星区到紫宫星区。
English: In March of the first year of the Yellow Dragon, the comet stayed in the northeast of Wang Liangxing for about nine feet, with a length of more than one meter, the comet tail pointed west, and it moved to the star area of Gaoduo to the star area of Ziguang.

古文：其十二月，宫车晏驾。
现代文：那年十二月，皇帝去世。
English: That December, the emperor died.

古文：元帝初元元年四月，客星大如瓜，色青白，在南斗第二星东可四尺，占曰： 为水饥。 
现代文：元帝初元元年四月，出现新星形状大如瓜，色青白，出现在南斗第二星束面约四尺处。占候的人说： 预示为水患有饥民。 
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, in April, a new star appeared, the shape of which was as large as a melon, and the color was blue and white. It appeared about four feet from the surface of the second star cluster of the Southern Cross. The soothsayers said: "This portends that the people will suffer from water starvation."

古文：其五月，勃海水大溢。
现代文：五月，渤海海水大泛滥。
English: In May, the waters of the Bohai Sea flooded.

古文：六月，关东大饥，民多饿死，琅邪郡人相食。
现代文：六月，关东出现大饥荒，百姓多饿死，琅邪郡人吃人。
English: In June, there was a great famine in Kanto. Many people died of starvation, and people in Shiji County ate each other.

古文：二年五月，客星见昴分，居卷知东可五尺，青白色，炎长三寸。
现代文：二年五月，有彗星出现在昴宿，守留在卷舌星东约五尺处，色青白，光焰长三寸。
English: In May of the second year, a comet appeared in Oshuku. It stayed about five feet east of the coiled tongue star, with a bluish-white color and a beam three inches long.

古文：占曰： 天下有妄言者。 
现代文：占候的人说： 预示天下有妄言的人。 
English: The soothsayer said, "This foretells that there will be false prophets in the world."

古文：其十二月，巨鹿都尉谢君男诈为神人，论死，父免官。
现代文：这年十二月，钜鹿都尉谢君的儿子骗说自己是神人，被判罪论死，父亲免官。
English: In December of that year, the son of Elk Lieutenant Xie Jun lied that he was a godman, was convicted and sentenced to death, and his father was dismissed.

古文：五年四月，彗星出西北，赤黄色，长八尺所，后数日长丈余，东北指，在参分。
现代文：五年四月，彗星出现在西北，赤黄色，长八尺许，后数日又长为一丈余，彗尾指向东北，在参宿。
English: In April of the fifth year, the comet appeared in the northwest, reddish-yellow, about eight feet long, and in the next few days it grew to more than a meter, with the tail pointing to the northeast, at Betelgeuse.

古文：后二岁余，西羌反。
现代文：后来过了二年多，西羌反叛。
English: More than two years later, Xidi rebelled.

古文：孝成建始元年九月戊子，有流星出文昌，色白，光烛地，长可四丈，大一围，动摇如龙蛇形。
现代文：孝成帝建始元年九月戊子日，有流星出现在文昌星区，色白，星光照地，长约四丈，粗大有一围，行迹摇动如龙蛇形状。
English: In September of the first year of the reign of Emperor Xiaocheng, a meteor appeared in the Wenchang star region. It was white, starlit, about four meters long, large and round, and moved like a dragon and snake.

古文：有顷，长可五六丈，大四围所，诎折委曲，贯紫宫西，在斗西北子亥间，后诎如环，北方不合，留一刻所。
现代文：片刻，长约五六丈，粗大约四围许，蜿蜒曲折，横贯紫宫星区西面，在北斗西北子亥问。后弯如环，北方不闭合，留大约一刻时。
English: A moment, about five or six meters long, about four times as thick, meandering, crossing the west side of the Purple Palace star region, in the northwest of the Big Dipper. The back bend is like a ring, the north is not closed, and it stays for about a moment.

古文：占曰： 文昌为上将贵相。 
现代文：占候的人说： 文昌星为上将贵相。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "Moon Changxing is the general of the army.

古文：是时，帝舅王凤为大将军，其后宣帝舅子王商为丞相，皆贵重任政。
现代文：当时皇帝的舅舅王凤做大将军，后来宣帝的外甥王商为丞相，都是贵胄从政。
English: At that time, the emperor's uncle, Wang Feng, was a great general, and later, Emperor Xuan's nephew, Wang Shang, was the prime minister, both of whom were nobles in politics.

古文：凤妒商，谮而罢之。
现代文：王凤嫉妒王商，弹劾他而被罢免。
English: Wang Feng was jealous of Wang Shang, impeached him and dismissed him.

古文：商自杀，亲属皆废黜。
现代文：王商于是自杀，亲属都被废黜。
English: Wang Shang then committed suicide, and all his relatives were deposed.

古文：四年七月，荧惑逾岁星，居其东北半寸所如连李。
现代文：四年七月。火星逾越岁星，居留在它东北约半寸距离如并蒂连理。
English: In July of the fourth year, Mars overtook the year star, remaining at a distance of about half an inch northeast of it.

古文：时岁星在关星西四尺所，萤惑初从毕口大星东东北往，数日至，往疾去迟。
现代文：当时岁星在天关星西大约四尺处，火星最初跟从毕宿口的大星东面向东北运行，几曰到，来时快去时缓。
English: At that time, the year star was about four feet to the west of the day star, and Mars initially followed the great star east of the zodiac to the northeast, arriving in a few days, coming quickly and going slowly.

古文：占曰： 荧惑与岁星斗，有病君饥岁。 
现代文：占候的人说： 火星与岁星星光相触及，国君有病，年景饥荒。 
English: The soothsayer said: Mars is in contact with the year star, the sovereign is ill, and the year scene is famine.

古文：至河平元年三月，旱，伤麦，民食榆皮。
现代文：到了河平元年三月，有旱灾，损伤麦子的收成，百姓吃榆皮充饥。
English: In March of the first year of Heping, there was a drought that damaged the wheat harvest, and the people ate the bran to satisfy their hunger.

古文：二年十二月壬申，太皇太后避时昆明东观。
现代文：二年十二月壬申曰，太皇太后避时令的忌讳到昆明束观。
English: In December of the second year of Jinshin, the great empress dowager avoided the taboo of the season to Kunming Sokun.

古文：十一月乙卯，月食填星，星不见，时在舆鬼西北八九尺所。
现代文：十一月乙卯日，月亮遮掩土星，土星不见，当时土星在舆鬼宿西北约八九尺处。
English: On November 1st, the moon covered Saturn, and Saturn disappeared. At that time, Saturn was about eighty-nine feet northwest of the ghost town.

古文：占曰： 月食填星，流民千里。 
现代文：占候的人说： 月亮遮掩土星，预示百姓流离千里。 
English: The soothsayers say: The moon hides Saturn, foreshadowing that the people will be displaced thousands of miles.

古文：河平元年三月，流民入函谷关。
现代文：河平元年三月，流亡的百姓进入函谷关。
English: In March of the first year of the Heping era, the exiled people entered Hanyu Pass.

古文：河平二年十月下旬，填星在东井轩辕南大星尺余，岁星在其西北尺所，荧惑在其西北二尺所，皆从西方来，填星贯舆鬼，先到岁星次，荧惑亦贯舆鬼。
现代文：河平二年十月下旬，土星在柬井宿轩辕星南端大星一尺多，木星在它的西北一尺多处，火星在它的西北二尺多处，都从西方运行而来。土星横贯舆鬼宿，先到木星旁边，火星也横贯舆鬼宿。
English: In late October of the second year of Heping, Saturn was more than a foot south of the great star at the southern end of the great star, Jupiter was more than a foot northwest of it, and Mars was more than two feet northwest of it. They all came from the west. Saturn ran across the great star, first to Jupiter, and Mars also ran across the great star.

古文：十一月上旬，岁星、荧惑西去填星，皆西北逆行。
现代文：十一月上旬，木星、火星向西运行离开土星，都向西北逆行。
English: In early November, Jupiter and Mars move westward away from Saturn, both retrograde to the northwest.

古文：占曰： 三星若合，是谓惊位，是谓绝行，外内有兵与丧，改立王公。 
现代文：占候的人说： 三星如果同在一处，称为 惊位，称为 绝行 ，预示内外有战争和丧事并改立王公。 
English: The fortune-teller said: If the three stars are in the same place, it is called "shock" and "completion," which indicates that there will be war and mourning at home and abroad, and the crown prince will be re-established.

古文：其十一月丁巳，夜郎王歆大逆不道，牂柯太守立捕杀歆。
现代文：这年十一月丁巳，夜郎王歆大逆不道，烊柯太守陈立捕杀歆。
English: In November of the same year, Wang Yao, the night watchman, committed an act of high treason, and was captured and killed by Chen Li, the eunuch eunuch.

古文：三年九月甲戌，东郡庄平男子侯母辟兄弟五人群党为盗，攻燔官寺，缚县长吏，盗取印绶，自称将军。
现代文：三年九月甲戌，束郡庄平男子侯母辟兄弟五人结党为强盗，攻焚官寺，捆缚县长吏，抢取印绶，自称将军。
English: In September of the third year, in Jiajing, Zhuoping County, a man, his wife and five brothers formed a gang of robbers, attacked and burned a government temple, tied up county officials, robbed printing money, and called themselves generals.

古文：三月辛卯，左将军千秋卒，右将军史丹为左将军。
现代文：三月辛卯曰，左将军工挞去世，右将军史且为左将军。
English: In March, Xinwu said that the left general Gong Xi passed away, and the right general Shi was the left general.

古文：四年四月戊申，梁王贺薨。
现代文：四年四月戊申曰，攀王型贺去世。
English: In April of the fourth year, Boshin said that Panzhong He passed away.

古文：阳朔元年七月壬子，月犯心星。
现代文：区朔元年七月壬子日，月亮侵犯心宿。
English: In July of the first year of Shuo, on the day of Ren Zi, the moon invaded the heart.

古文：占曰： 其国有忧，若有大丧。
现代文：占候的人说： 它的分野之国有忧患，或有大丧事。
English: The fortune-teller said, "There will be a national calamity, or a great tragedy, in his province."

古文：房、心为宋，今楚地。 
现代文：房宿、宿分野地为宋国，现在是楚地。 
English: The place of lodging was Song, and now it is Chu.

古文：十一月辛未，楚王友薨。
现代文：十一月辛未，楚王刘友去世。
English: In November, King of Chu Liu You passed away.

古文：四年闰月庚午，飞星大如缶，出西南，入斗下。
现代文：四年闰月庚午，有流星大如缶，出现在西南，进入北斗星区下。
English: In the afternoon of the leap month of the fourth year, a meteor as big as a can appeared in the southwest, entering the Beidou star region.

古文：占曰： 汉使匈奴。 
现代文：占候的人说： 汉出使匈躯。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "Han sends out the Hun body."

古文：明年，鸿嘉元年正月，匈奴单于雕陶莫皋死。
现代文：第二年，边塞元年正月，纽扭单于压迪墓皇去世。
English: In the second year, in the first month of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Niu Tuan Shan died in the tomb of Emperor Di.

古文：五月甲午，遣中郎将杨兴使吊。
现代文：五月甲午，派遣中郎将杨兴前往吊唁。
English: On the afternoon of May 1st, a middle-ranking official was dispatched to take Yang Xing to the scene to offer condolences.

古文：永始二年二月癸未夜，东方有赤色，大三四围，长二三丈，索索如树，南方有大四五围，下行十余丈，皆不至地灭。
现代文：永始二年二月癸末日夜，东方有赤色的光出现，粗大三四围，长二三丈，瑟瑟有声像树叶抖动，南方出现赤色的光粗大四五围，向下运行十余丈，都不到地即灭。
English: On the night of the last day of the second month of the second year of the second millennium, a red light appeared in the east, thick and three-four circumference, long and two-three height, and there was a rustling sound like leaves shaking. In the south, a red light appeared thick and four-five circumference, running down more than ten height, and it all disappeared when it reached the ground.

古文：占曰： 东方客之变气，状如树木，以此知四方欲动者。 
现代文：占候的人说： 东方飘来变色的云气，形状如树木，以此知道四方将要动乱。 
English: The soothsayer said: The clouds that come from the east are discolored and shaped like trees, which indicates that there will be turmoil in the four directions.

古文：明年十二月己卯，尉氏男子樊并等谋反，贼杀陈留太守严普及吏民，出囚徒，取库兵，劫略令丞，自称将军，皆诛死。
现代文：第二年十二月己卯曰，尉氏男子樊并等谋反，横杀陈留太守严普以及官吏百姓，释放囚徒，抢夺库中兵器，劫略令丞，自称将军，都被诛杀。
English: In December of the following year, Jiwu said that the men of the 尉 clan plotted a rebellion, killed Chen Liu Taishu Yan Pu and the officials and people, released prisoners, robbed the weapons in the warehouse, and robbed Ling Rong, who claimed to be a general. They were all killed.

古文：庚子，出阳铁官亡徒苏令等杀伤吏民，篡出囚徒，取库兵，聚党数百人为大贼，逾年经历郡国四十余。
现代文：庚子日，山阳铁官所属的逃亡之徒苏令等杀伤官吏百姓，劫放囚徒，抢夺库中兵器，聚党羽数百人为大强盗。第二年经过的郡国有四十余处。
English: On Geng Zi Day, Su Ling, a fugitive belonging to the Shanyang Iron Official, and others killed and injured officials and civilians, kidnapped prisoners, robbed weapons in the warehouse, and gathered hundreds of party members to become great robbers. The following year, there were more than forty counties in the country.

古文：一日有两气同时起，并见，而并、令等同月俱发也。
现代文：一天之内有两种云气同时升起，一并出现，而樊并、苏令等同月俱发。
English: In one day, two kinds of clouds rise at the same time and appear at the same time.

古文：元延元年四月丁酉日餔时，天暒晏，殷殷如雷声，有流星头大如缶，长十余丈，皎然赤白色，从日下东南去。
现代文：元延元年四月丁酉申时，天空晴朗无云，殷殷震动如有雷声，有流星头大如缶，长十余丈，明亮的红白色，从太阳下向东南划去。
English: In April of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the sky was clear and cloudless. The tremors were like thunder, and there was a meteor head as big as a can, more than ten meters long, bright red and white, sweeping away from the sun to the southeast.

古文：四面或大如盂，或如鸡子，耀耀如雨下，至昏止。
现代文：四面散射的小流星，或大如盆，或小如鶸蛋，闪烁如下雨，到黄昏停止。
English: Scattered on all sides are small meteors, either as big as pots or as small as quail's eggs, flashing like rain and stopping by dusk.

古文：郡国皆言星陨。
现代文：郡国百姓都说是星陨。
English: The people of the county all said it was a meteorite.

古文：《春秋》星陨如雨为王者失势诸侯起伯之异也。
现代文：《春秋》中记载星陨如雨是王者失势诸侯起霸业的变异之兆。
English: It is recorded in "Spring and Autumn" that the meteor shower is a sign of change in the hegemony of lords who have lost their power.

古文：其后王莽遂颛国柄。
现代文：后来王莽就专权国柄了。
English: Later, Wang Mang became an autocratic ruler.

古文：王氏之兴萌于成帝时，是以有星陨之变，后莽遂篡国。
现代文：王莽的兴起萌发于盛查时，所以有星陨之变。后来王莽就篡国了。
English: Wang Mang's rise began at the time of the grand inspection, so there was a meteoric change. Later, Wang Mang usurped the country.

古文：绥和元年正月辛未，有流星从东南入北斗，长数十丈，二刻所息。占曰： 大臣有系者。 
现代文：绥和元年正月辛未，有流星从东南划入北斗星星区，长几十丈，大约半小时平息，占候的人说： 预示大臣有被囚禁的。 
English: At the end of the first month of the 1st year of the Heian period, a meteor streaked from the southeast into the Big Dipper star region. It was several tens of meters long and lasted for about half an hour. The fortune-teller said, "This portends that the minister has been imprisoned."

古文：其年十一月庚子，定陵侯淳于长坐执左道下狱死。
现代文：这一年十一月庚子日，宣医堡遵王昼被邪教所牵连下狱处死。
English: In November of the same year, on the day of Geng Zi, Zun Wang Rong of the Xuanji Fort was implicated by a cult and sentenced to death.

古文：二年春，荧惑守心。
现代文：二年春，火星留守心宿。
English: In the spring of the second year, Mars stayed at home.

古文：二月乙丑，丞相翟方进欲塞灾异，自杀。
现代文：二月乙丑曰，丞相翟方进想要制止灾异，自杀。
English: In February, the second month of the year, it was said that the prime minister, Shifang Jin, wanted to stop the disaster and committed suicide.

古文：三月丙戌，宫车晏驾。
现代文：三月丙戌曰，皇帝去世。
English: In March, the emperor died.

古文：哀帝建平元年正月丁未日出时，有著天白气，广如一匹布，长十余丈，西南行，讠雚如雷，西南行一刻而止，名曰天狗。
现代文：哀帝建平元年正月丁未日出时，天空有白色的云气笼罩，广如一匹布，长十余丈，西南走向，喧哗如有雷声，向西南运行一刻钟后停止，称为天狗。
English: At dusk before sunrise on the first day of the first month of the first year of Emperor Jianping, the sky was covered with white clouds, as wide as a horse, more than ten meters long, heading southwest, noisy like thunder, and stopped after running southwest for a quarter of an hour, known as Tengu.

古文：传曰： 言之不从，则有犬祸诗妖。 
现代文：《传》说： 忠言不被采纳，则天狗出现，有妖言惑众。 
English: "Legend" says: If the loyal advice is not accepted, then the Tengu will appear, and there will be magic words to deceive the public.

古文：到其四年正月、二月、三月，民相惊动，讠雚晔奔走，传行诏筹祠西王母，又曰 从目人当来。
现代文：到了四年正月、二月、三月，百姓都惊动了，喧哗奔走，相传有天降韶书筹划祭祀西王母，又说 有眼睛竖着长的人到来 。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, February, and March, the people were alarmed and rushed about noisily. It was rumored that there was a heavenly decree to plan a sacrifice to the Western Queen Mother, and that a person with long eyes was coming.

古文：十二月，白气出西南，从地上至天，出参下，贯天厕，广如一匹布，长十余丈，十余日去。
现代文：十二月，白气出现在西南方，从地上升到天上，出现在参宿下，横贯天厕星区，广如一匹布，长十多丈，十余曰才离去。
English: In December, the white gas appeared in the southwest, rising from the ground to the sky, appearing under the Betelgeuse, across the sky toilet star region, wide as a cloth, more than ten meters long, and more than ten days to leave.

古文：占曰： 天子有阴病。 
现代文：占候的人说： 天子有阴病。 
English: The soothsayer said, "The son of heaven is ill."

古文：其三年十一月壬子，太皇太后诏曰： 皇帝宽仁孝顺，奉承圣绪，靡有解怠，而久病未廖。夙夜惟思，殆继体之君不宜改作。
现代文：三年十一月壬子曰，太皇太后韶告说： 皇帝宽仁孝顺，承奉帝祠，少有懈怠，而久病未愈，曰思夜想，大概继承大统的君王不易改制。
English: In November of the third year, Ren Zi said that the empress dowager obituary said: Emperor Guangren is dutiful and obedient, following the imperial shrine, there is little slackness, and he has not recovered from a long illness, he said, thinking at night, it is not easy to change the monarch who will probably inherit the throne.

古文：《春秋》大复古，其复甘泉泰畤、汾阴后土如故。 
现代文：《春秋》注重复古，在甘泉宫泰时、汾阴后土祠祭祀如以往一样。 
English: The "Spring and Autumn" commentary repeats the ancient, in the Ganquan Palace at the time of peace, after the lunar new year, the earthen shrine ritual is the same as before.

古文：二年二月，彗星出牵牛七十余日。
现代文：二年二月，有彗星出现在牵牛宿七十余曰。
English: In February of the second year, a comet appeared at Tsuneishi-juku for more than seventy days.

古文：传曰： 彗所以除旧布新也。 
现代文：《传》说： 彗星出现预示除旧布新。
English: "Biography" said: The appearance of the comet heralds the removal of the old and the introduction of the new.

古文：牵牛，日、月、五星所从起，历数之元，三正之始。
现代文：牵牛宿，曰、月、五星运行的起始点，计算历数的历元的起始处，天正、地正、人正三正岁首的起始？
English: Cowherd's Inn, the starting point of the operation of the sun, moon, and five stars, the starting point of the calendar element for calculating the calendar, the starting point of the heavenly, earthly, and human years?

古文：彗而出之，改更之象也。
现代文：彗星出现在牵牛宿是更改的征兆。
English: The appearance of the comet in Utsuwa-juku is a sign of change.

古文：其出久者，为其事大也。 
现代文：它出现的时间长，预示其发生之事大。 
English: It has been around for a long time, so it's a good omen.

古文：其六月甲子，夏贺良等建言当改元易号，增漏刻。
现代文：这年六月甲子曰，夏贺良等力主改元易号，增加漏刻。
English: In June of this year, Koji said that Xia He Liang and other leaders changed the name of the Yuan and changed the name, and increased the leaks.

古文：诏书改建平二年为太初元年，号曰 陈圣刘太平皇帝，刻漏以百二十为度。
现代文：皇帝下诏书改建平二年为太初元年，号称陈圣刘太平皇帝，刻漏一日分为一百二十刻。
English: The emperor issued an edict to change the year from the second year of the Heian period to the first year of the Taiping period. He was known as Emperor Chen Shengliu Taiping, and the leap day was divided into one hundred and twenty hours.

古文：八月丁巳，悉复蠲除之，贺良及党与皆伏诛流放。
现代文：八月丁巳日，全部又罢除了，夏贺良及其党羽都伏诛和流放。
English: On August 13th, all of them were abolished, and Xia He Liang and his followers were arrested and exiled.

古文：其后卒有王莽篡国之祸。
现代文：那以后才形成了王莽篡国之祸。
English: Only after that did the calamity of Wang Mang's usurpation take shape.

古文：元寿元年十一月，岁星入太微，逆行干右执法。
现代文：元寿元年十一月，木星进入太微垣，逆行侵犯右执法星。
English: In November of the first year of Yuan Shou, Jupiter entered Taibo, retrograde invading the right law enforcement star.

古文：占曰： 大臣有忧，执法者诛，若有罪。 
现代文：占候的人说： 预示大臣有忧患，做执法官的有杀身之祸，或有罪罚。 
English: The soothsayer said: It foretells that the minister will have sorrow, and the magistrate will be killed or punished.

古文：二年十月戊寅，高安侯董贤免大司马位，归第自杀。
现代文：二年十月戊寅日，高安侯董贤被罢免大司马之职，回家后自杀。
English: On October 2nd, Wu Yin Day, Gao An Hou Dong Xian was removed from the post of chief steward and committed suicide after returning home.

