古文：蔡泽见逐于赵，而入韩、魏，遇夺釜鬲于涂。
现代文：蔡泽被赵国驱逐，逃到韩、魏，在路上又被人抢走炊具。
English: Cai Ze was expelled from Zhao Guo, fled to Han and Wei, and was robbed of cooking utensils on the way.

古文：闻应侯任郑安平、王稽，皆负重罪，应侯内惭，乃西入秦。
现代文：他听说秦相应侯范雎任用郑安平、王稽，可是后来两人都犯下了重罪，以致范雎心里十分惭愧。
English: He heard that Zheng Anping and Wang Qi were appointed by Qin as the corresponding princes of Fan Yu, but later both of them committed serious crimes, so that Fan Yu was very ashamed.

古文：将见昭王，使人宣言以感怒应侯曰： 燕客蔡泽，天下骏雄弘辩之士也。
现代文：蔡泽便决定西行入秦，去拜见秦昭王，事先故意对人发出豪语，以激怒范雎： 燕国大纵横家蔡泽，乃是天下雄辩豪杰之士。
English: Cai Ze then decided to travel west to Qin to pay homage to Qin Zhaowang, and in advance he deliberately uttered high-sounding words to people in order to infuriate Fan Yu: Cai Ze, the grand strategist of Yan, is the world's eloquent hero.

古文：彼一见秦王，秦王必相之而夺君位。 
现代文：只要他一见到秦王，秦王必定任命他为相国，替代范雎的地位。 
English: As long as he sees the Qin King, the Qin King will certainly appoint him as a consort, replacing Fan Jun's status.

古文：应侯闻之，使人召蔡泽。蔡泽入，则揖应侯，应侯固不快；及见之，又倨。应侯因让之曰： 子尝宣言代我相秦，岂有此乎？ 
现代文：范雎听说之后，就派人找来蔡泽，蔡泽见到范雎，并未行礼只是拱了拱手，范雎很不高兴，谈吐之间蔡泽更是倨傲无礼，于是责问他说： 你曾扬言，你将取代我的秦国相国职位，有没有这回事？ 蔡泽回答说： 有。 
English: After hearing the news, Fan Ye sent someone to find Cai Ze. When Cai Ze saw Fan Ye, he did not bow, but only raised his hand. Fan Ye was very unhappy. During the conversation, Cai Ze was even more arrogant and rude. So he scolded him and said, "You once threatened that you would replace my position as Qin's minister of state. Is there such a thing?" Cai Ze replied, "Yes."

古文：对曰： 然。 应侯曰： 请闻其说。 
现代文：范雎说： 那我倒愿意听听这其中的道理？ 
English: Fan Ye said, "Let me hear what you have to say," and Cai Ze said, "Come on!

古文：蔡泽曰： 吁！何君见之晚也。
现代文：蔡泽说： 唉，你为什么这样见识迟钝呢！
English: Cai Ze said: Alas, why are you so obtuse!

古文：夫四时之序，成功者去。
现代文：即使是四季的转移，也是本着 功成身退 的自然法则。
English: Even the shift of the four seasons is a natural law of success.

古文：夫人生手足坚强，耳目聪明，而心圣知，岂非士之所愿与？ 
现代文：一个人活在世界上，手脚健全，耳朵灵敏，眼睛明亮，内心如圣人般贤明智慧，这不是每个人所盼望的吗？ 范雎说： 是的。 
English: Isn't it what everyone hopes for, to live in the world with sound hands and feet, sensitive ears, bright eyes, and sage-like wisdom in one's heart? Fan Ye said: Yes.

古文：应侯曰： 然。 蔡泽曰： 质仁秉义，行道施德于天下，天下怀乐敬爱，愿以为君王，岂不辩智之期与？ 
现代文：蔡泽说： 以仁为礼，以义为则，施行恩德于天下，天下人都会感激崇拜他，并且都希望拥护他为君王，这不也都是雄辩家殷切期望的吗？ 范雎说： 是的。 
English: Cai Ze said: Taking benevolence as a courtesy, taking righteousness as a principle, and practicing benevolence in the world, people all over the world will be grateful and worship him, and they all hope to support him as a king. Isn't this also the ardent expectation of the eloquent? Fan Ye said: Yes.

古文：应侯曰： 然。 蔡泽复曰： 富贵显荣，成理万物，万物各得其所；生命寿长，终其年而不夭伤；天下继其统，守其业，传之无穷，名实纯粹，泽流千世，称之而毋绝，与天下终。岂非道之福，而圣人所谓吉祥善事与？ 
现代文：蔡泽又说： 富裕又显贵，善治万事，使每个人都能享尽天年，每个人都不致夭折。天下人民都能继承他们的传统，维护他们的业绩，世世代代的传下去，名实兼而有之，恩泽流传万年，受人永远赞美，和天地同其始终，虽说这不是施仁义的结果，不也是圣人所说的吉祥善事吗？ 范雎说： 是这样的。 
English: Cai Ze also said: Wealthy and distinguished, they manage everything well, so that everyone can enjoy life to the full, and everyone will not die young. People all over the world can inherit their traditions, maintain their performance, and pass them down from generation to generation. They have both fame and reality. Their grace will be passed down for thousands of years, and they will be praised by people forever, and heaven and earth will always be with them. Although this is not the result of benevolence, is it not also the auspicious good deed that the sage said? Fan Yu said: Yes.

古文：应侯曰： 然。 蔡泽曰： 若秦之商君，楚之吴起，越之大夫种，其卒亦可愿矣。 
现代文：蔡泽说： 例如秦国的商鞅、楚国的吴起、越国的文种，他们最后也都完成了他们愿望了吗？ 
English: Cai Ze said: For example, the merchants of Qin, the Wuqi of Chu, and the literati of Yue, have they finally fulfilled their wishes?

古文：应侯知蔡泽之欲困己以说，复曰： 何为不可？
现代文：范雎知道蔡泽是为了使自己陷入窘境，于是就这一点回答说： 有什么不可以的呢？
English: Fan Yu knew that Cai Ze was trying to embarrass himself, so he answered on this point: What is not allowed?

古文：夫公孙鞅事孝公，极身毋二，尽公不还私，信赏罚以致治，竭智能，示请素，蒙怨咎，欺旧交，虏魏公子，卒为秦禽将，破敌军，攘地千里。
现代文：说起商鞅臣事秦孝公，终身尽忠，绝无二心，公而忘私，赏罚分明，秦国大治，竭尽智能，表露赤心，然而却招致秦国人的怨恨和责怪，他为秦国而欺骗老朋友，俘虏魏公子印，最后终于为秦国擒获魏将而大破魏军，扩充疆土达里之多。
English: Speaking of the merchant Qin Xiaogong, he was loyal throughout his life, had no double-mindedness, was public and selfless, and had clear rewards and punishments. He governed the Qin State with great wisdom and showed his sincerity. However, he incurred the resentment and blame of the Qin people. He deceived his old friends for the sake of the Qin State, captured Wei Gongzihin, and finally defeated the Wei army for the sake of the Qin State. He expanded the territory of the empire.

古文：吴起事悼王，使死不害公，谗不蔽忠，言不取苟合，行不取苟容，行义不图毁誉，必有伯主强国，不辞祸凶。
现代文：吴起臣事楚悼王，绝对不以私损公，更不用谗言来隐蔽忠节，每当遇到应行的大事，就不顾毁誉，一心想要使君王成就霸业，国家富强，而且不畏一切灾祸和邪恶势力。
English: Wu Qizhong always mourned for the king, and never did anything to harm the king for personal gain, much less did he use slander to conceal his loyalty. Whenever he encountered a major event, he did not care about the damage to his reputation, he was determined to make the king achieve hegemony, the country rich and strong, and he was not afraid of all disasters and evil forces.

古文：大夫种事越王，主离困辱，悉忠而不解，主虽亡绝，尽能而不离，多功而不矜，贵富不骄怠。
现代文：大夫文种，臣事越王勾践，当君主陷于困辱惨境时，他忠心爱主而不懈怠，君王虽然被敌人俘虏，仍然竭诚尽智没有背弃国家，而且不夸耀自己的功劳，即使富贵也不骄傲。
English: Dr. Wenzong, ministering beyond the king's practice, when the monarch fell into hardship and humiliation, he loyally loved the Lord and did not slacken. Although the monarch was captured by the enemy, he still did his best not to betray the country, and did not boast of his own merits, even if he was rich and proud.

古文：若此三子者，义之至，忠之节也。
现代文：像以上这三位忠臣，可以说是义行极致和忠贞的典范。
English: Like the above three loyal retainers, it can be said to be a model of extreme righteousness and loyalty.

古文：故君子杀身以成名，义之所在。身虽死，无憾悔，何为不可哉？ 
现代文：所以君子总是牺牲性命来完成名节，只要是大义所在，虽然牺牲生命也无所懊悔，有什么不可以的呢？ 
English: Therefore, a gentleman always sacrifices his life to complete the festival. As long as there is righteousness, although there is no regret for sacrificing life, what is not allowed?

古文：蔡泽曰： 主圣臣贤，天下之福也；君明臣忠，国之福也；父慈子孝，夫信妇贞，家之福也。
现代文：蔡泽说： 君主圣明，臣子贤能，这是国家的福气。父亲慈爱，子女孝顺，丈夫讲信义，妻子有贞节，这是国家的福气。
English: Cai Ze said: The sovereign is holy, the vassal is virtuous, this is the blessing of the country. The father is loving, the children are filial, the husband is faithful, and the wife is chaste, this is the blessing of the country.

古文：故比干忠不能存殷，子胥知不能存吴，申生孝而晋国乱。
现代文：然而比干忠君爱国，却不能让殷朝继续存在，伍子胥虽然贤能，却不能使吴国不能灭亡，申生虽然孝顺，也无法使晋国避免内乱。
English: However, although Bi Gan Zhongjun was patriotic, he could not allow the Yin Dynasty to continue to exist; although Wu Zixuan was capable, he could not prevent the fall of the State of Wu; although Shen Sheng was filial, he could not prevent civil unrest in the State of Jin.

古文：是有忠臣孝子，国家灭乱，何也？
现代文：这就是虽然有忠臣孝子，国家仍然不免灭亡骚乱，这是什么道理呢？
English: This means that even though there are loyal subjects and filial sons, the country is still subject to ruin and turmoil. What is the reason for this?

古文：无明君贤父以听之。
现代文：主要是没有明君、贤父来采纳的缘故。
English: This is mainly due to the fact that there is no wise ruler or wise father to adopt them.

古文：故天下一其君父为戮辱，怜其臣子。
现代文：所以天下因为父不仁不义而蒙羞，臣子也因此而难免受其害。
English: Therefore, the world is shamed because of the father's unkindness and injustice, and the vassal is also difficult to avoid its harm.

古文：夫待死之后可以立忠成名，是微子不足仁，孔子不足圣，管仲不足大也。 
现代文：假如一定等到死才能尽忠成名，恐怕就连微子也不足成为仁人，孔子也不足成为圣人，管仲也不足以成为伟人。 
English: If you have to wait until you die to be loyal and famous, I'm afraid that even a microbe is not enough to become a benevolent person, Confucius is not enough to become a saint, and Guanzhong is not enough to become a great man.

古文：于是应侯称善。
现代文：这时范雎认为蔡泽的话很对。
English: At this time, Fan Rong thought that Cai Ze's words were very right.

古文：蔡泽得少间，因曰： 商君、吴起、大夫种，其为人臣，尽忠致功，则可愿矣。
现代文：蔡泽略为停一会接着说： 商鞅、吴起、文种，他们为人臣能够尽忠立功，这都是出于他们的心愿。
English: Cai Zeliu paused for a moment and then said: Shang Qi, Wu Qi, and Wenzhong, they are able to be loyal and meritorious as a vassal, this is all due to their wishes.

古文：闳夭事文王，周公辅成王也，岂不亦忠乎？
现代文：闳夭大臣事周文王，周公辅佐周成王，难道不是尽忠吗？
English: The late minister Zhou Wenwang and Zhou Chengwang, Zhou Gongfu's assistant, were loyal, weren't they?

古文：以君臣论之，商君、吴起、大夫种，其可愿孰与闳夭、周公哉？ 
现代文：然而就君臣而论，商鞅和吴起、文种等人，当然还不如闳夭、周公。 
English: However, as far as princes and ministers are concerned, Shang Qi and Wu Qi, Wenzhong and others, of course, are not as good as Yao Xiao and Zhou Gong.

古文：蔡泽曰： 今主固亲忠臣，不过秦孝、越王、楚悼。
现代文：蔡泽说： 然而阁下服务的君主与秦孝公、楚悼王、越王勾践相比，究竟谁更慈爱而又信任忠臣、不欺凌故旧呢？ 范雎说： 不知道。 
English: Cai Ze said: However, compared to Qin Xiaogong, Chu Mui Wang, and Yue Wang Gochun, who is the monarch you serve, who is more loving and trusts loyal subjects, and does not bully the old ways? Fan Wei said: I don't know.

古文：君者为主，正乱、披患、折难，广地、殖谷，痼国足家、强主，威盖海内，功章万里之外，不过商君、吴起、大夫种。
现代文：蔡泽说： 当然，阁下的君主并不像秦孝公、越王勾践、楚悼王那样亲信忠臣。而阁下事奉君主，在平定内乱、消除祸患、排除困难。扩充、疆土、发展农业、振兴国家、强化君主等方面，威权压倒全国，功业扬名万里之外，并没有超过商鞅、吴起、文种三位名臣。
English: Cai Ze said: Of course, Your Excellency's monarch is not as close to his loyal subjects as Qin Xiaogong, Yue Wang Kezhen, and Chu Mui Wang. But Your Excellency serves the monarch, and in the areas of quelling civil unrest, eliminating disasters, and eliminating difficulties, expansion, territory, developing agriculture, revitalizing the country, and strengthening the monarch, the authority overwhelms the whole country, and beyond the fame of his achievements, he does not exceed the three eminent ministers of Shang Qi, Wu Qi, and Wenshu.

古文：而君之禄位贵盛，私家之富过于三子，而身不退，窃为君危之。
现代文：但是阁下的地位和俸禄，以及家中的财富都已经超过他们三人，然而阁下还是不隐退，我深为阁下担忧。
English: But Your Excellency's position and salary, as well as the wealth of his family, have already surpassed the three of them. However, Your Excellency still does not retire. I am deeply worried about Your Excellency.

古文：语曰： 日中则移，月满则亏。 
现代文：古谚说得对： 太阳升到正午时就开始落，月亮圆到满盈时就开始亏。 
English: The old saying is right: The sun begins to set when it reaches noon, and the moon begins to wane when it is full.

古文：物盛则衰，天之常数也；进退、盈缩、变化，圣人之常道也。
现代文：万物都是盛极而衰，这乃是自然规律。不论是进还是退，不论是伸还是缩，都随着时间变化，这乃是圣人所认定的常理。
English: All things wax and wane, this is the law of nature. Whether advancing or retreating, whether expanding or contracting, all change with time, this is the common sense recognized by sages.

古文：昔者，齐桓公九合诸侯，一匡天下，至葵丘之会，有骄矜之色，畔者九国。
现代文：蔡泽说： 过去，齐桓公九次会合诸侯，矫正不良风气，使得天下焕然一新，到了葵丘之会的时候，桓公就开始有了骄纵的情形，先后有九个国家背叛了他。
English: Cai Ze said: In the past, Qi Huan Gong held the Nine Meetings of Princes to rectify the bad customs and make the world look brand new. By the time of the Kwai Chiu Meeting, Huan Gong had begun to be arrogant, and nine countries had betrayed him.

古文：吴王夫差无敌于天下，轻诸侯，凌齐、晋，遂以杀身亡国。
现代文：吴王夫差，自认为天下无敌，因此就轻视诸侯，欺凌齐、晋两国，到后来国破身杀。
English: Wu Wangfu was weak and thought he was invincible, so he despised the princes, bullied Qi and Jin, and finally killed himself.

古文：夏育、太史启叱呼骇三军，然而身死于庸夫。
现代文：夏育、太史启，他们曾经一声叱咤能使三军震撼，然而他们本人却死于一般人的手中。
English: Xia Yu and Taishi Qi, they were once able to shake the three armies with a shout, but they themselves died at the hands of ordinary people.

古文：此皆乘至盛不及道理也。
现代文：这都是仗恃威权而不深思事物道理的缘故。
English: This is all the result of relying on authority and not thinking things through.

古文：夫商君为孝公平权衡、正度量、调轻重，决裂阡陌，教民耕战，是以兵动而地广，兵休而国富，故秦无敌于天下，立威诸侯。
现代文：商鞅为秦孝公制度量衡、改革货币。废除井田、重划土地，教民努力耕种和作战，因此大军一出发就拓展疆土，军队凯旋而归使国家富强，所以秦兵无敌于天下，在诸侯之间建立了威权。
English: The Qin soldiers were invincible in the world and established authority among the princes. They abolished the well fields and redistributed the land, and taught the people to cultivate and fight hard. As a result, the great army expanded the territory as soon as it set out, and the army returned in triumph to make the country rich and strong.

古文：功已成，遂以车裂。
现代文：可是成功之后，竟残遭五马分尸之刑。
English: However, after the success, he suffered the punishment of being dismembered by five horses.

古文：楚地方千里，带甲百万，白起率数万之师，以与楚战，一战举鄢、郢，再战烧夷陵，南并蜀、汉，又越韩、魏攻强赵，北坑马服，诛屠四十余万之众，流血成川，沸声若雷，使秦业帝。
现代文：楚国拥有雄兵百万，然而秦将白起仅仅率领几万秦兵，一战便攻陷楚都鄢和郢，再战而焚烧夷陵，往南吞并蜀、汉，此外又越过韩、魏攻打强赵，在北方屠杀马服君及四十多万兵卒，血流成河，凄惨哀嚎之声震憾天地，为建立秦国的霸业立下了汗马功劳。
English: The State of Chu had a million strong soldiers. However, Qin Zhaobai only led a few tens of thousands of Qin soldiers. In the first battle, he invaded and conquered Chu, Tuo, and Shao; in the second battle, he burned the tombs; in the south, he annexed Shu and Han; in addition, he crossed Korea and Wei to attack Qiang Zhao; in the north, he slaughtered Ma Fu Jun and more than 400,000 soldiers. Blood flowed like a river, and the sound of mournful cries shook the world. He made great contributions to establishing the hegemony of the State of Qin.

古文：自是之后，赵、楚慑服，四十余年不敢攻秦者，白起之势也。
现代文：从此以后，赵、楚两国衰弱下去，再也不敢抗拒秦兵，这都是仰仗白起攻下的城池有多座，他虽然为秦国建立了丰伟战功，可是他却在杜邮被秦王赐死。
English: From then on, Zhao and Chu both weakened and no longer dared to resist the Qin soldiers. All of this was due to the fact that there were many cities and towns that were conquered in vain. Although he established a great war achievement for the Qin state, he was given death by the Qin king in Duyong.

古文：身所服者，七十余城。功已成矣，赐死于杜邮。吴起为楚悼罢无能，废无用，损不急之官。塞私门之请，壹楚国之俗，南攻杨越，北并陈、蔡，破横散从，使驰说之士无所开其口。功已成矣，卒支解。
现代文：吴起为楚悼王改革弊政罢免无能的朝臣，撤消无用的机构，废除多余的官吏，杜绝请客说情的风气，改良楚国的风俗，往南攻打杨越，往北攻打陈、蔡，摧毁连横政策，解散合纵之约，游说之士没有开口余地，可算得上是成功了，可怜最后他本人却死于楚人的乱箭之中，然后再把他分尸泄愤。
English: Wu Qi, as the king of Chu, mourned the death of the king, reformed the bad government, dismissed the incompetent courtiers, abolished the useless institutions, abolished the superfluous officials, put an end to the custom of inviting guests to intercede, improved the customs of Chu, attacked Yang Yue to the south, attacked Chen and Cai to the north, destroyed the policy of liaison, dissolved the contract of collusion, and the lobbyists had no room to speak. It can be considered a success. Unfortunately, he himself died in the arrows of the Chu people, and then he was dismembered to vent his anger.

古文：大夫种为越王垦草创邑，辟地殖谷，率四方之士，专上下之力，以禽劲吴，成霸功。勾践终背而杀之。
现代文：越大夫文种，为越王勾践开疆拓土，发展农业，率领四方军队和全国上下的人民，击败吴国生擒吴王夫差，完成了越国霸王功业，可是到头来勾践却把他杀了。
English: Dr. Wenshu of Yue, for the sake of King Guo of Yue, opened up the frontier, developed agriculture, led the four-sided army and the people up and down the country, defeated Wu Guosheng and Wu Wangfuchai, and completed the work of the overlord of Yue, but in the end, Guo of Yue killed him.

古文：此四子者，成功而不去，祸至于此。此所谓信而不能诎，往而不能反者也。
现代文：这四位贤臣，都是因为功成而不退，才为自己招来杀身之祸，这就是所谓 伸而不能屈，往而不能返 。
English: These four wise men, all of whom did not retreat because of their achievements, only invited the disaster of suicide for themselves. This is the so-called "extending but not yielding, going but not returning."

古文：范蠡知之，超然避世，长为陶朱公。君独不观博者乎？
现代文：只有范蠡深知明哲保身之理，于是就以超然的姿态功成身退，远离人间的是非之门，驾轻舟渡海遁世，隐姓埋名经商，而成为巨富陶朱公。难道阁下没有看过赌博的人吗？
English: Only Fan Jie was well aware of the wisdom of self-preservation, so he retired with a transcendent attitude, far away from the world's gate of right and wrong, drove a light boat across the sea, went incognito to do business, and became a very rich Tao Zhu Gong. Have you not seen gambling people?

古文：或欲大投，或欲分功。
现代文：有时想孤注一掷，有时想步步取胜，相信阁下是最清楚的。
English: Sometimes you want to take a gamble, sometimes you want to win step by step, I believe you know best.

古文：此皆君之所明知也。今君相秦，计不下衽席，某不出廊庙，坐制诸侯，利施三川，以实宜阳；决羊肠之险，塞太行之口，又斩范、中行之途，栈道千里于蜀、汉，使天下皆畏秦。秦之欲得矣，君之功极矣。此亦秦之分功之时也！如是不退，则商君、白公、吴起、大夫种是也。
现代文：如今阁下当了秦国相国，为了谋划国家大事而终日忙碌，为了制定策略而不走出朝廷，坐在朝中控制诸侯，威仪施行于三川，借以充实宜阳，打开羊肠之险，封闭太行要塞，切断三晋的道路，修栈道千里通往蜀汉之地，使天下诸侯都畏惧秦国,秦王的欲望得到了满足，您的功勋已无可复加，正是分功之时，此刻如果不知及时隐退，商鞅、吴起、文种之祸不远矣！
English: Now your excellency has become a peer of Qin, he is busy all day long in order to plan national events, he does not leave the imperial court in order to formulate strategies, he sits in the middle of the court to control the princes, the grand ceremony is carried out in Sanchuan, by which he enriches Yiyang, opens the risk of sheep intestines, closes the fortress of Taihang, cuts off the road of Sanjin, repairs the thousands of miles of boardwalk leading to the land of Shu Han, so that the princes of the world are afraid of Qin, and the desire of the King of Qin has been satisfied. Your merit is irreplaceable, it is the time

古文：君何不以此时归相印，让贤者授之，必有伯夷之廉；长为应侯，世世称孤，而有乔、松之寿。
现代文：您为何不在此时纳还相印，虚相国之位以待贤人？这样既可博取伯夷一样的美名，又可长享富贵，世代称孤，更能和仙人王子乔、赤松子一般长寿。
English: Why don't you accept the seal of the emperor at this time, and wait for the wise man in the position of the country of false appearance? In this way, you can not only win the same fame as Bo Yi, but also enjoy wealth for a long time, be called lonely for generations, and live longer than the fairy prince Qiao and the red pine tree.

古文：孰与以祸终哉！
现代文：这些与日后身遭惨祸，自是天壤之别，你的看法又如何呢？ 
English: What is your opinion of this, which is a far cry from the horrors he suffered later in life?

古文：此则君何居焉？ 
现代文：范雎深有同感： 先生的说法太有道理了。 
English: Fan Yu has the same feeling: The professor's argument makes too much sense.

古文：应侯曰善。 乃延入坐为上客。
现代文：于是请蔡泽入座，待以上宾之礼。
English: He then invited Cai Ze to take a seat and wait for the guests to leave.

古文：后数日，入朝，言于秦昭王曰： 客新有从山东来者蔡泽，其人辩士。臣之见人甚众，莫有及者，臣不如也。 
现代文：过了几天，范雎入朝拜见昭王，对他说： 有位新从山东来的客人蔡泽，其人雄辩，臣阅人无数，更无人与之相比，臣自愧不如。 
English: A few days later, Fan Rong came to pay homage to King Zhao and said to him, "There is a new guest from Shandong, Cai Ze. He is an eloquent person and has read countless books. Moreover, there is no one comparable to him. I am ashamed to say that I am not as good as him."

古文：秦昭王召见，与语，大说之，拜为客卿。
现代文：于是昭王召见蔡泽，相与言语，昭王十分赞赏，拜为客卿。
English: Qin Zhao Wang then summoned Cai Ze. After talking with him, he liked him very much and gave him the position of guest minister.

古文：应侯因谢病，请归相印。
现代文：范雎这时自思后路，便称病不朝，并且借病辞官。
English: At this time, Fan Qi thought about his future, he said that he was ill, and resigned from the post.

古文：昭王强起应侯，应侯遂称笃，因免相。
现代文：昭王一再不准，范雎便推言病重。昭王无奈只得允准。
English: Zhao Wang repeatedly refused to grant permission, and Fan Qi then suggested that he was seriously ill. Zhao Wang reluctantly had to grant permission.

古文：昭王新说蔡泽计画，遂拜为秦相，东收周室。
现代文：昭王对蔡泽的计谋十分欣赏，任命他为相。
English: King Zhao appreciated Cai Ze's stratagem very much and appointed him as his consort.

古文：蔡泽相秦王数月，人或恶之，惧诛，乃谢病归相印，号刚成君。
现代文：蔡泽助秦昭王吞并了东周国。蔡泽出任相国没几个月，便有人恶意诽谤他，由于恐招致杀身之祸，便称病辞官，得封为刚成君。
English: Cai Ze assisted Qin Zhaowang in annexing Eastern Zhou. Within a few months of Cai Ze's appointment as consort, someone maliciously slandered him, and because of the fear of inciting suicide, he was called a "sick man" and was given the title of "Gangcheng."

古文：居秦十余年，昭王、孝文王、庄襄王。卒事始皇帝。为秦使于燕，三年而燕使太子丹入质于秦。
现代文：他在秦十多年，历事昭王、孝文王、庄襄王，最后任职于秦始皇皇朝，曾出使燕国，三年之后令太子丹到秦国做人质。
English: He was in Qin for more than ten years, and served as Zhao Wang, Xiaowen Wang, Zhuang Xiang Wang, and finally served in the Qin Dynasty. He was sent to Yan Province, and three years later he sent Prince Dan to Qin Province as a hostage.

