古文：元法僧，魏氏之支属也。
现代文：元法僧，是魏氏的亲属。
English: A former Buddhist monk, he is a relative of the Wei clan.

古文：其始祖道武帝。
现代文：他的始祖是北魏道武帝。
English: His ancestor was Emperor Wu of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：父钟葵，江阳王。
现代文：父亲钟葵，封为江阳王。
English: His father, Zhong Kwai, was crowned King of Jiangyang.

古文：法僧仕魏，历光禄大夫，后为使持节、都督徐州诸军事、徐州刺史，镇彭城。
现代文：法僧在北魏做官，历任光禄大夫，后任使持节、都督徐州诸军事、徐州刺史，镇守彭城。
English: The legal monk was an official in the Northern Wei Dynasty, successively serving as the Guanglu doctor, and later as the envoy, the governor of Xuzhou, the military, the governor of Xuzhou, and the town guard of Pengcheng.

古文：普通五年，魏室大乱，法僧遂据镇称帝，诛锄异己，立诸子为王，部署将帅，欲议匡复。
现代文：普通五年，魏室大乱，法僧便占据彭城称帝，诛锄异己，立诸子为王，布置将帅，想要谋议匡复北魏。
English: In the fifth year of the Wei dynasty, there was a great disturbance in the Wei court, and the legal monks occupied Pengcheng, claiming to be the emperor, suppressing dissent, setting up their sons as kings, appointing generals, and trying to negotiate the restoration of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：既而魏乱稍定，将讨法僧。法僧惧，乃遣使归款，请为附庸，高祖许焉，授侍中、司空，封始安郡公，邑五千户。
现代文：不久北魏内乱稍加平定，将要讨伐法僧，法僧恐惧，便遣使向梁朝表示归服，请成为梁朝的附庸，高祖允许了，授任他侍中、司空，封为始安郡公，食邑五千户。
English: Not long after, the Northern Wei civil war was somewhat calmed down. The monks were afraid that they would have to fight against the monks, so they sent an envoy to the Liang Dynasty to express their submission and ask to become a vassal of the Liang Dynasty. Gao Zu allowed this, and appointed him as a chamberlain, a secretary, and a governor of Shi'an County, with a population of 5,000 households.

古文：及魏军既逼，法僧请还朝，高祖遣中书舍人硃异迎之。
现代文：当北魏军队逼近他时，法僧请求回到梁朝，高祖派中书舍人朱异去迎接。
English: When the Northern Wei army approached him, the monk requested to return to the Liang Dynasty, and Gao Zu sent Zhu Yin, a scholar from the Middle School, to meet him.

古文：既至，甚加优宠。
现代文：来到梁朝，对他极为优宠。
English: When he came to the Liang Dynasty, he was extremely favored.

古文：时方事招携，抚悦降附，赐法僧甲第女乐及金帛，前后不可胜数。
现代文：当时正在招引归来的人，对降附的人亲近友好，赐给法僧宅第女乐及金帛，前后所得不可胜敷。
English: At that time, he was inviting the returnees, and he was friendly with those who had surrendered, and he gave the nun's music and gold ingots to the monks' residence. The income was immeasurable.

古文：法僧以在魏之日，久处疆埸之任，每因寇掠，杀戮甚多，求兵自卫，诏给甲仗百人，出入禁闼。
现代文：法僧因在北魏的时，久任边防的官职，每因侵掠，他杀害的人很多，要求派兵自卫，韶令给他披甲执兵器的卫士百人，出入宫禁。
English: Because he had served as a border guard for a long time during the Northern Wei Dynasty, he killed a lot of people every time he invaded and plundered. He asked for soldiers to be sent to defend himself. He was ordered to give him a hundred guards wearing armor and carrying weapons. He was banned from entering and leaving the palace.

古文：大通二年，加冠军将军。
现代文：大通二年，加任冠军将军。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to Champion General.

古文：中大通元年，转车骑将军。
现代文：中大通元年，转任车骑将军。
English: In the first year of Zhongdaxu, he was transferred to the general of chariot and cavalry.

古文：四年，进太尉，领金紫光禄。
现代文：四年，进升太尉，领金紫光禄。
English: In four years, he was promoted to the rank of captain and received a gold necklace.

古文：其年，立为东魏主，不行，仍授使持节、散骑常侍、骠骑大将军、开府同三司之仪、郢州刺史。
现代文：当年，立为东魏国主，但没有回束魏，便授任使持节、散骑常侍、骠骑大将军、开府同三司之仪、郢州刺史。
English: In that year, he was established as the ruler of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, but without returning to Wei, he was awarded the title of envoy, horseback riding attendant, cavalry general, Kaifu with the ceremony of the three departments, and the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：大同二年，征为侍中、太尉，领军师将军，薨，时年八十三。
现代文：大同二年，征入任侍中、太尉，领军师将军，去世，时年八十三岁。
English: In the second year of Datong, he was conscripted to serve as a chamberlain, lieutenant, and division commander, and died at the age of eighty-three.

古文：二子景隆、景仲，普通中随法僧入朝。
现代文：二子名景隆、景仲，普通年间随法僧入梁朝。
English: His two sons, named Jinglong and Jingzhong, followed the monk into the Liang Dynasty in ordinary years.

古文：景隆封沌阳县公，邑千户，出为持节、都督广、越、交、桂等十三州诸军事、平南将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
现代文：景隆封为沌阳县公，食邑千户，出任持节、都督广越交桂等十三州诸军事、平南将军、乎越中郎将、广州刺史。
English: Jing Longfeng was the public official of Gongyang County, the food of thousands of households in the county, and served as the military commander of the 13 states, the general of Pingnan, the general of Hu Yue, and the historian of Guangzhou.

古文：中大通三年，征侍中、安右将军。
现代文：中大通三年，征入任侍中、安右将军。
English: Three years after graduating from junior high school, he was conscripted to serve as a Samurai Junior High School and General An Yu.

古文：四年，为征北将军、徐州刺史，封彭城王，不行，俄除侍中、度支尚书。
现代文：四年，任征北将军、徐州刺史，封为彭城王，没有赴任，不久除授侍中、度支尚书。
English: In the fourth year, he was appointed as the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, Xuzhou Assassination, and was named the king of Pengcheng. He did not take up the post, but was soon awarded the rank of middle-ranked and high-ranking officials.

古文：太清初，又为使持节、都督广、越、交、桂等十三州诸军事、征南将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史，行至雷首，遇疾卒，时年五十八。
现代文：太清初年，又任使持节、都督广越交桂等十三州诸军事、征南将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史，行至雷首，得病去世，时年五十八岁。
English: In the first year of the Great Qing Dynasty, he was also appointed as the envoy of the military of the Thirteen States, such as the general of the Southern Expedition, the general of the Middle Passage, and the historian of Guangzhou, and died of illness at the age of fifty-eight.

古文：景仲封枝江县公，邑千户，拜侍中、右卫将军。
现代文：景仲封为枝江县公，食邑千户，授任侍中、右卫将军。
English: Jing Zhong was awarded the title of Shejiang County official, the title of food village thousand households, the title of chamberlain, and the title of right guard general.

古文：大通三年，增封，并前为二千户，仍赐女乐一部。
现代文：大通三年，增封食邑，与前一并为二千户，还赐女乐一部。
English: Three years after the completion of the project, the food court was expanded to accommodate 2,000 households, and a women's music club was added.

古文：出为持节、都督广、越等十三州诸军事、宣惠将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
现代文：出任持节、都督广越等十三州诸军事、宣惠将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
English: The military of the 13 prefectures, including Jisetsu, the governor of Guangyue, General Xuan Hui, General Pingyue, and the governor of Guangzhou.

古文：大同中，征侍中、左卫将军。
现代文：左回年间，征入任侍中、左卫将军。
English: During the Zogai era, he was conscripted to serve as a Samurai Middle Rank and General of the Left Division.

古文：兄景隆后为广州刺史。
现代文：兄基隆后也任广州刺史。
English: After his brother Keelung, he also served as the mayor of Guangzhou.

古文：侯景作乱，以景仲元氏之族，遣信诱之，许奉为主。
现代文：侯景作乱，以景仲是元氏家族的人，派使者劝诱他，许诺奉他为国主。
English: Hou Jing caused a disturbance, and sent an envoy to persuade Jing Zhong, a member of the Yuan family, promising to make him the ruler of the country.

古文：景仲乃举兵，将下应景。
现代文：景仲便起兵，将下应侯景。
English: Jing Zhong then raised an army, which was led by Hou Jing.

古文：会西江督护陈霸先与成州刺史王怀明等起兵攻之，霸先徇其众曰： 朝廷以元景仲与贼连从，谋危社稷，今使曲江公勃为刺史，镇抚此州。 
现代文：造时西江督护陈霸先与成州刺史王怀明等起兵进攻景仲，霸先向景仲部下兵众宣示说： 朝廷因为元景仲舆贼南北联合，图谋危害国家，今派曲江公萧勃任刺史，镇抚此州。 
English: At the time of construction, the governor and protector of the West River, Chen Baxian, and the chengzhou governor, Wang Huiming, raised an army to attack Jingzhong. Baxian declared to the soldiers under Jingzhong's command, "The imperial court, because of the north-south alliance of publicists and thieves in the Yuan Dynasty, is plotting to endanger the country, and has now sent the governor of the Qujiang River, Xiao Bo Ren, to attack and subdue this province.

古文：众闻之，皆弃甲而散，景仲乃自缢而死。
现代文：众人听了此言，皆弃甲而散，景仲于是上吊而死。
English: After hearing this, the crowd dispersed, and Kagenaka hanged himself.

古文：元树，字君立，亦魏之近属也。
现代文：元树字君立，也是北魏的近亲。
English: It is also a close relative of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：祖献文帝。
现代文：祖父是献文帝。
English: His grandfather was Emperor Xianwen.

古文：父僖，咸阳王。
现代文：父亲元僖，封为咸阳王。
English: His father, Yuan Shao, was crowned King of Xianyang.

古文：树仕魏为宗正卿，属尔硃荣乱，以天监八年归国，封为鄴王，邑二千户，拜散骑常侍。
现代文：元树在魏朝做官任宗正卿，正值尔硃荣作乱，元树天监八年归国，封为鄴王，食邑二千户，授散骑常侍。
English: In the Wei Dynasty, Yuan Shu was appointed as the official of Zong Zhengqing, at the time of Erqi Rong's rebellion. Yuan Shu returned to China eight years later, and was crowned the king of Qi. He was given the title of the ruler of 2,000 households, and was given the title of the knight of the horse.

古文：普通六年，应接元法僧还朝，迁使持节、督郢、司、霍三州诸军事、云麾将军、郢州刺史，增封并前为三千户。
现代文：普通六年，应接元法僧还朝，迁任使持节、督郢、司、霍三州诸军事、云麾将军、郢州刺史，增封食邑并前为三千户。
English: In the past six years, in response to the succession of the former Buddhist monks to the Qing Dynasty, the envoys and officials of the three states, including the military, the general of Yunnan Province, and the governor of Zhangzhou Province, were transferred, and the food villages were increased to 3,000 households.

古文：讨南蛮贼，平之，加散骑常侍、安西将军，又增邑五百户。
现代文：征讨南蛮贼，平定后，加任散骑常侍、安西将军，又增封食邑五百户。
English: After subduing the Southern barbarian bandits, he was appointed as a knight errant, Anxi general, and 500 households in food villages were added.

古文：中大通二年，征侍中、镇右将军。
现代文：中大通二年，征入任侍中、镇右将军。
English: In the second year of junior high school, he was conscripted to serve as Samurai Junior High School and General Zhenyu.

古文：四年，为使持节，镇北将军，都督北讨诸军事，加鼓吹一部以伐魏，攻魏谯城，拔之。
现代文：四年，任使持节、镇北将军、都督北讨诸军事，加鼓吹一部。让他讨伐韭魏，攻占了坦坚的钟继。
English: In four years, he was appointed to hold the festival, the general of Zhenbei, and the governor of the north to discuss the military, and to preach a part. Let him fight Wei, and conquered Tangjian's Zhongji.

古文：会魏将独孤如愿来援，遂围树，城陷被执，发愤卒于魏，时年四十八。
现代文：遣时韭翘的将领独孤如愿来援助，于是包围了元辔，城陷被捕，发愤死在北魏，时年四十八岁。
English: The war-weary generals who were sent to Yuancheng came to his aid, and encircled Yuancheng. Yuancheng was captured and died angrily in the Northern Wei Dynasty at the age of 48.

古文：子贞，大同中，求随魏使崔长谦至鄴葬父，还拜太子舍人。
现代文：子元贞，大同年间，请求跟随魏国使崔长谦至邺葬父，回来后授任太子舍人。
English: Zi Yuanzhen, in the same year, asked to follow the Wei envoy Cui Changqian to bury his father, and after returning, he was awarded the post of crown prince.

古文：太清初，侯景降，请元氏戚属，愿奉为主，诏封贞为咸阳王，以天子之礼遣还北，会景败而返。
现代文：左渣初年，堡量投降，请远氐戚属，愿奉为国主，韶令封贞为咸阳王，以天子的礼仪送他回北方，那时侯景失败返回。
English: In the first year of Zuo Jia's reign, the castle surrendered, and he invited his distant relatives to come and serve him as the lord of the country, and ordered Fuzhen to be the king of Xianyang, and sent him back to the north with the etiquette of the son of heaven. At that time, Hou Jing failed to return.

古文：元愿达，亦魏之支庶也。
现代文：元愿达，也是魏塾的旁支。
English: Yuan Zhi Da is also a branch of Wei Juku.

古文：祖明元帝。
现代文：祖父是明元帝。
English: His grandfather was Emperor Mingyuan.

古文：父乐平王。
现代文：父亲封为乐干王。
English: His father was given the title of "Logan King."

古文：愿达仕魏为中书令、郢州刺史。
现代文：愿达在北魏做官任中书令、郢赵刺史。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, when he was an official, he was a calligrapher.

古文：普通中，大军北伐，攻义阳，愿达举州献款，诏封乐平公，邑千户，赐甲第女乐。
现代文：普通年间，大军北伐，进攻义阳，愿达献州地归服，诏令封他乐平公，食邑千户，赐给他豪门贵族的宅第及女乐。
English: In an ordinary year, the great army of the Northern Expedition, attacking Yiyang, was willing to surrender to the state, and he was awarded the title of Leping, the food of thousands of households, and he was given the mansions of the aristocrats and the women's music.

古文：仍出为使持节、散骑常侍、都督湘州诸军事、平南将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：随后出任使持节、散骑常侍、都督湘州诸军事、平南将军、湘州刺史。
English: Subsequently, he served as an envoy, horseback riding attendant, military governor of Hunan Province, general of Pingnan Province, and historian of Hunan Province.

古文：中大通二年，征侍中、太中大夫、翊左将军。
现代文：中大通二年，征入任侍中、太中大夫、翊左将军。
English: In the second year of junior high school, he was conscripted to serve as Samurai Junior High School, Tai Junior High School Doctor, and Shiso Shogun.

古文：大同三年，卒，时年五十七。
现代文：大同三年，去世，时年五十七岁。
English: He died three years later at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：王神念，太原祁人也。
现代文：王神念，是太原祁人。
English: Wang Shennian is a native of Taiyuan.

古文：少好儒术，尤明内典。
现代文：年轻时喜好儒术，尤其明晓佛经。
English: When he was young, he liked Confucianism and was especially familiar with Buddhist scriptures.

古文：仕魏起家州主簿，稍迁颍川太守，遂据郡归款。
现代文：在北魏做官起家任州主簿，不久迁升颍川太守，便据郡归款。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, he started his career as an official and was appointed as the chief accountant of the state, and soon moved to the position of the governor of Shichuan, and then he was transferred to the county.

古文：魏军至，与家属渡江，封南城县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：魏军至，与家属渡江，封为南城县侯，食邑五百户。
English: When the Wei army arrived, he and his family crossed the river and became the lord of Nancheng County, with 500 households in the county.

古文：顷之，除安成内史，又历武阳、宣城内史，皆著治绩。
现代文：不久，授任安成内史，又历任武阳、宣城内史，为政皆有显著治绩。
English: Soon, he was assigned to Ancheng Inner History, and successively to Wuyang and Xuancheng Inner History, all of which had remarkable achievements in politics.

古文：还除太仆卿。
现代文：还京师授任太仆卿。
English: He was also awarded the title of Taihuko-kyo by the Emperor of China.

古文：出为持节、都督青、冀二州诸军事、信武将军、青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：出任持节、都督青、冀二州诸军事、信武将军、青冀二州刺史。
English: He served as the military commander of Jizhou, the governor of Qinghai and the two states of Hebei, the general of Xinwu, and the historian of the two states of Qinghai and Hebei.

古文：神念性刚正，所更州郡必禁止淫祠。
现代文：王神念性情刚正，他到过的州郡必禁止滥设的祠庙。
English: Wang Shennian has a righteous disposition, and the prefectures and counties he has visited must prohibit the improper establishment of ancestral temples.

古文：时青、冀州东北有石鹿山临海，先有神庙，妖巫欺惑百姓，远近祈祷，糜费极多。及神念至，便令毁撤，风俗遂改。
现代文：当时青、冀州东北有石鹿山临海，先前有座神庙，妖巫欺惑百姓，远近的人都来祈祷，浪费极多，控金来到遣裹，便令将庙拆毁，风俗于是改变。
English: At that time, in the northeast of Qing and Jizhou, there was Shilu Mountain facing the sea. Previously, there was a temple. Witches and devils deceived the people. People from near and far came to pray. There was a lot of waste. When the money was confiscated, the temple was ordered to be demolished, and the customs changed.

古文：普通中，大举北伐，征为右卫将军。
现代文：普通年间，大举北伐，征入任右卫将军。
English: In ordinary years, he led the Northern Expedition on a large scale and was conscripted as a right guard general.

古文：六年，迁使持节、散骑常侍、爪牙将军，右卫如故。
现代文：六年，迁任使持节、散骑常侍、爪牙将军，右卫照旧。
English: In the sixth year, he was transferred to the position of envoy to hold the festival, horseback riding attendant, minion general, and right guard as before.

古文：遘疾卒，时年七十五。
现代文：得病去世，时年七十五岁。
English: He died of illness at the age of seventy-five.

古文：诏赠本官、衡州刺史，兼给鼓吹一部。
现代文：韶令追赠本官、衡州刺史，兼给鼓吹一部。
English: The imperial edict posthumously awarded him the title of kangan and the history of Hengzhou, and also gave him a part in propaganda.

古文：谥曰壮。
现代文：谧号为壮。
English: The call sign is Zhuang.

古文：神念少善骑射，既老不衰，尝于高祖前手执二刀楯，左右交度，驰马往来，冠绝群伍。
现代文：王神念年轻时善骑射，到老不衰，曾在高祖面前手执二刀盾牌，左右交递，驰马往来，武艺压倒群伍。
English: Wang Shennian was good at riding and shooting when he was young, and he never grew old. He once held a two-blade shield in front of Gao Zu, handed it over left and right, galloped back and forth, and overpowered the crowd with martial arts.

古文：时复有杨华者，能作惊军骑，并一时妙捷，高祖深叹赏之。
现代文：当时又有杨华，能使军骑震惊，都是一时的妙捷，高祖深加叹赏他们。
English: At that time, there was also Yang Hua, who was able to shock the cavalry, all of which were momentary miracles. Gao Zu deeply appreciated them.

古文：子尊业，仕至太仆卿。
现代文：儿子尊业，官至太仆卿。
English: His son, Takanari, rose to the rank of Daihokujyo.

古文：卒，赠信威将军、青、冀二州刺史，鼓吹一部。
现代文：去世后，追赠信威将军、青、冀二州刺史，赐鼓吹一部。
English: After his death, he bequeathed to General Xinwei, the Qing Dynasty, and the two states of Hebei, as well as a part of the propaganda.

古文：次子僧辩，别有传。
现代文：次子僧辩，另有传。
English: The second son, Sofen, is also said to have been a monk.

古文：杨华，武都仇池人也。
现代文：杨华，是武都仇池人。
English: Yang Hua is a native of Quchu, the capital of Wu.

古文：父大眼，为魏名将。
现代文：父亲大眼，是北魏的名将。
English: His father, 大眼, was a famous general in the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：华少有勇力，容貌雄伟，魏胡太后逼通之，华惧及祸，乃率其部曲来降。
现代文：杨华年轻时有勇力，容貌雄伟，北魏胡太后逼迫他通奸，杨华惧怕遭到祸殃，便率他的部曲来降。
English: When Yang Hua was young, he had courage and a majestic appearance. The Empress Dowager Hu of the Northern Wei Dynasty forced him to commit adultery. Yang Hua was afraid of being cursed, so he led his troops to abdicate.

古文：胡太后追思之不能已，为作《杨白华歌辞》，使宫人昼夜连臂蹋足歌之，辞甚忄妻惋焉。
现代文：胡太后追思他不能控制，为他作《杨白华歌辞》，让宫人昼夜连臂蹋足歌唱，歌辞极凄惋。
English: The Empress Dowager Wu pined for him uncontrollably, and composed the "Song of Yang Baihua" for him, so that the courtiers sang it day and night, arm in arm. The song was extremely beautiful.

古文：华后累征伐，有战功，历官太仆卿，太子左卫率，封益阳县侯。
现代文：杨华后参加多次征伐，有战功，历官太仆卿，太子左卫率，封为益阳县侯。
English: After that, Yang Hua participated in many military campaigns, and was awarded the title of "count of Yiyang County."

古文：太清中，侯景乱，华欲立志节，妻子为贼所擒，遂降之，卒于贼。
现代文：太清年间，侯景叛乱，杨华想树立志节，但妻子儿女被贼所擒，便投降了，在贼境去世。
English: During the Qing Dynasty, when Houjing rebelled, Yang Hua wanted to set an aspiration, but his wife and children were abducted by thieves, so he surrendered and died in the land of thieves.

古文：羊侃，字祖忻，泰山梁甫人，汉南阳太守续之裔也。
现代文：羊侃字祖忻，是泰山梁甫人，汉朝南阳太守羊续的后裔。
English: Yang Kan Zi Zu Xi is a descendant of Liang Fu of Mount Tai and Yang Zhuang of Nanyang of the Han Dynasty.

古文：祖规，宋武帝之临徐州，辟祭酒从事、大中正。
现代文：祖父羊规，宋武帝任徐州刺史时，征召他任祭酒从事、大中正。
English: Grandfather Yang Jie, when Emperor Song Wudi was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou, recruited him to be engaged in the sacrificial wine, and he was a junior high school student.

古文：会薛安都举彭城降北，规由是陷魏，魏授卫将军、营州刺史。
现代文：恰值薛安都带堑球投降韭龟，芏捏由此陷在坦壑，韭魏授他卫将军、营州刺史。
English: Just at the right time, Xue An took the ball and surrendered to the tortoise. The tortoise was trapped in the trap, and Wei awarded him the title of Wei general and Yingzhou stabbed history.

古文：父祉，魏侍中，金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：父亲羊祉，在北魏任侍中，金紫光禄大夫。
English: His father, Yang Zhi, was an attendant in the Northern Wei Dynasty, and Jin Zi Guanglu was a doctor.

古文：侃少而瑰伟，身长七尺八寸，雅爱文史，博涉书记，尤好《左氏春秋》及《孙吴兵法》。
现代文：羊侃年轻时状貌魁伟美好，身高七尺八寸，极爱好文史，博涉书籍及书牍奏记，尤其喜好《左氏春秋》及《孙吴兵法》。
English: When he was young, Yang Kan had a magnificent and beautiful appearance. He was seven feet eight inches tall. He was very fond of literature and history, and read a lot of books and calligraphy. He especially liked "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi" and "The Art of War of Sun Wu."

古文：弱冠随父在梁州立功。
现代文：二十岁时随父在梁丛立战功。
English: At the age of twenty, he followed his father to fight in Liangcong.

古文：魏正光中，稍为别将。
现代文：坦基逗韭年问，逐渐升为别将。
English: Tanki has been asked this question for years, and has gradually risen to the top.

古文：时秦州羌有莫遮念生者，据州反，称帝，仍遣其弟天生率众攻陷岐州，遂寇雍州。
现代文：当时秦州羌人莫遮念生，占据州地造反，称皇帝，便遣其弟天生率众攻陷岐州，接着侵犯雍州。
English: At that time, Qin Zhou sent his younger brother Tian Rong to invade Qizhou, and then invaded Yongzhou.

古文：侃为偏将，隶萧宝夤往讨之，潜身巡緌，伺射天生，应弦即倒，其众遂溃。
现代文：羊伹任偏将，隶属芦宣鱼前往讨伐，隐身在壕沟襄巡行，伺机射天生，天生被射中倒下，其兵众立即溃散。
English: Yang Xuan Ren Yeh, subordinate to Lu Xuan Yu, went to the crusade, stealthily marched in the trench, waited for the opportunity to shoot, was shot and fell down, and his soldiers immediately dispersed.

古文：以功迁使持节、征东大将军、东道行台，领泰山太守，进爵钜平侯。
现代文：以功迁任使持节、征束大将军、束道行台，领泰山太守，进升爵位为钜平侯。
English: He was appointed as the envoy of Jichijie Festival, the general of the Conscription, the general of Sokudo, the governor of Mount Tai, and was promoted to the peerage as the lord of Suiping.

古文：初，其父每有南归之志，常谓诸子曰： 人生安可久淹异域，汝等可归奉东朝。 
现代文：当初，他的父亲多次有南归的心愿，常对诸子说： 人一生怎可以长久留在异域，你们应该归奉束朝。 
English: At the beginning, his father often had the desire to return to the south, and often said to his sons: How can a person stay in a foreign land for a long time? You should return to the Shogunate.

古文：侃至是将举河济以成先志。
现代文：羊侃至是将举河济完成父亲心愿。
English: Yang Kan Zhi will raise funds to fulfill his father's wish.

古文：兗州刺史羊敦，侃从兄也，密知之，据州拒侃。
现代文：兖州刺史羊敦，是羊侃的堂兄，暗中得知此事，就依据州地抗拒羊侃。
English: Zhangzhou barber Shi Yangdong, a cousin of Yang Kan, secretly learned of this matter and resisted Yang Kan according to the state.

古文：侃乃率精兵三万袭之，弗克，仍筑十余城以守之。
现代文：羊侃于足率精兵三万人袭击他，没有攻下城，便修筑十余城守卫。
English: Yang Kan attacked him at the rate of thirty thousand foot soldiers. He did not conquer the city, but built more than ten city guards.

古文：朝廷赏授，一与元法僧同。
现代文：朝廷给的赏赐以及所授官职，皆与元法僧相同。
English: The rewards given by the imperial court and the official positions conferred are the same as those of the former monks.

古文：遣羊鸦仁、王弁率军应接，李元履运给粮仗。
现代文：遣羊鸦仁、王弁率军应接他，李元履运给他粮食兵器。
English: The envoys, Raven and Wang Ben, led an army to meet him, and Li Yuanlu transported grain weapons to him.

古文：魏帝闻之，使授侃骠骑大将军、司徒、泰山郡公，长为兗州刺史，侃斩其使者以徇。
现代文：魏帝得知此事，派使者授给羊侃骠骑大将军、司徒、泰山郡公，长为兖州刺史，羊侃斩杀使者示众。
English: When Emperor Wei learned of this, he sent an emissary to confer the title of General of Sheep Cavalry to Yang Kan, Sitou, and Taishan County, who was the governor of Zhangzhou. Yang Kan killed the emissary in public.

古文：魏人大骇，令仆射于晖率众数十万，及高欢、尔硃阳都等相继而至，围侃十余重，伤杀甚众。
现代文：魏人大惊，令仆射于晖率众敷十万，以及高欢、氽朱阳都等人相继而至，包围羊侃内外有十多层，羊侃的士兵被杀伤很多。
English: The Wei people were taken aback, and the soldiers led by Gao Gao, Gao Xuan and Gao Zhuyang arrived one after another. There were more than ten layers inside and outside the encirclement, and many soldiers were killed and injured.

古文：栅中矢尽，南军不进，乃夜溃围而出，且战且行，一日一夜乃出魏境。
现代文：营栅中弓箭已尽，南边的军队未来，便在夜间溃围而出，边战边行，一日一夜才走出魏境。
English: When the bows and arrows were exhausted in the camp, the future army of the south broke out of the encirclement at night, marched along the border, and only one day and one night left the Wei territory.

古文：至渣口，众尚万余人，马二千匹，将入南，士卒并竟夜悲歌。
现代文：至渣口，兵众尚有一万多，战马二千匹，将要进入南朝，士卒一并彻夜悲歌。
English: At Jiekou, there were still more than ten thousand soldiers and two thousand horses, who were about to enter the Southern Dynasty. The soldiers sang a tragic song all night long.

古文：侃乃谢曰： 卿等怀土，理不能见随，幸适去留，于此别异。 
现代文：羊侃便辞谢说： 你们怀念故土，理应不要跟随我，希望决定去留，在此分别。 
English: Yang Kan then thanked him and said: You miss your homeland, you should not follow me, I hope you will decide to stay and separate here.

古文：因各拜辞而去。
现代文：于是士卒行礼辞去。
English: As a result, the officer bowed out.

古文：侃以大通三年至京师，诏授使持节、散骑常侍、都督瑕丘征讨诸军事、安北将军、徐州刺史，并其兄默及三弟忱、给、元，皆拜为刺史。
现代文：羊侃于大通三年至京师，诏令授任使持节、散骑常侍、都督瑕丘征讨诸军事、安北将军、徐州刺史，及其兄羊默三个弟弟羊忱、羊给、羊五，皆授任刺史。
English: Yang Kan studied in Beijing from the third year of Datong, and was awarded the post of envoy to hold the festival, the horseback riding attendant, the military of the general of Anbei, the history of Xuzhou, and his three brothers, Yang Zhen, Yang Jia, and Yang Wu, were all awarded the post of history.

古文：寻以侃为都督北讨诸军事，出顿日城，会陈庆之失律，停进。
现代文：不久任芏皿为都督北讨诸军事，出兵镇守日城，这时陈庆之打仗失利，羊侃兵停进。
English: Soon after, Gongzara was appointed as the military governor of the North, and sent troops to defend Nichijo. At this time, Chen Qingzhi lost the battle, and Yang Kan soldiers stopped in.

古文：其年，诏以为持节、云麾将军、青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：这一年，韶令任他为持节、云麾将军、青冀二州刺史。
English: In the same year, he was appointed by the Emperor to write the history of Jixi, Yunnan, and the two prefectures of Qinghai and Hebei.

古文：中大通四年，诏为使持节、都督瑕丘诸军事、安北将军、兗州刺史，随太尉元法僧北讨。
现代文：中大通四年，韶令任他使持节、都督瑕丘诸军事、安北将军、兖州刺史，随从太尉元法僧北讨。
English: In the fourth year of his junior high school education, he was appointed by the imperial command to dispatch Jishie, the military governor of Kogaoka, the general of Anbei, the governor of Zhangzhou, and the former Buddhist monk Taijun to the north.

古文：法僧先启云： 与侃有旧，愿得同行。 
现代文：迭僧事先启奏说： 我与羊侃有旧谊，希望能和他同行。 
English: Prior to the performance, the monk said, "I have an old friendship with Yang Kan, and I hope to walk with him.

古文：高祖乃召侃问方略，侃具陈进取之计。
现代文：高祖便召见羊侃向他询问北讨的方略，羊侃详细陈述了进取的计谋。
English: Gao Zu then summoned Yang Kan to ask him about the strategy of the Northern Expedition, and Yang Kan detailed the aggressive strategy.

古文：高祖因曰： 知卿愿与太尉同行。 
现代文：高祖因此说： 知道卿愿意与太尉同行。 
English: Gaozu therefore said, "I know that Sir is willing to go along with the captain."

古文：侃曰： 臣拔迹还朝，常思效命，然实未曾愿与法僧同行。
现代文：羊侃说： 臣离开北面回到朝廷，常想为朝廷效命，然而确实没有想与这僧同行。
English: Yang Kan said: The minister left the north and returned to the imperial court. He often wanted to serve the imperial court, but he really did not want to go with this monk.

古文：北人虽谓臣为吴，南人已呼臣为虏，今与法僧同行，还是群类相逐，非止有乖素心，亦使匈奴轻汉。 
现代文：北人虽称臣是呈人，但南人已呼臣是北虏，今舆法僧同行，还是同类人互相跟随，这样不仅背离我的本心，也使匈奴人轻视汉人。 
English: Although the northerners say that their vassals are superior people, the southerners have already called their vassals inferior people. Now, when they walk with the monks, they are still the same kind of people who follow each other. This not only deviates from my original intention, but also makes the Huns despise the Han people.

古文：高祖曰： 朝廷今者要须卿行。 
现代文：直狙说： 朝廷今需要卿同行。 
English: He said point-blank: The Imperial Court now needs you to accompany it.

古文：乃诏以为大军司马。
现代文：于是下韶任茎伹为大军司马。
English: As a result, the lower echelon was appointed to be the leader of the great army.

古文：高祖谓侃曰； 军司马废来已久，此段为卿置之。 
现代文：直担对芏诅说： 军司马职务废置已久，现在为卿专设。 
English: The person in charge said to the eunuch, "The post of army secretary has been abolished for a long time, and it is now reserved for the lord.

古文：行次官竹，元树又于谯城丧师。
现代文：行军至官竹，元塑又在盏球战败丧师。
English: Marching to Guanzhu, Yuan Shou was defeated and killed in the war of marbles.

古文：军罢，入为侍中。
现代文：北讨停止，入任侍中。
English: The Northern Expedition was halted, and he was appointed as a samurai.

古文：五年，封高昌县侯，邑千户。
现代文：五年，封为高昌县侯，食邑千户。
English: Five years later, he was given the title of Gochang County Marquis, and served thousands of households in the county.

古文：六年，出为云麾将军、晋安太守。
现代文：六年，出任云麾将军、置室太守。
English: For six years, he served as the general of Yunnan Province and the governor of Oshitsu Province.

古文：闽越俗好反乱，前后太守莫能止息，侃至讨击，斩其渠帅陈称、吴满等，于是郡内肃清，莫敢犯者。
现代文：国、垄的风俗喜好反乱，前后任职太守未能止息，羊侃至而讨袭，杀了魁首陈称、呈迈等人，于是郡内肃清，没有人敢犯乱了。
English: The customs and customs of the country and the ridges like to rebel, and before and after the post of the governor could not be stopped, the sheep attacked, killed the leader Chen Zhao, Cheng Mai and others, so the county was cleared, and no one dared to commit disorder.

古文：顷之，征太子左卫率。
现代文：不久，征入任太子左卫率。
English: Soon after, he was conscripted into the Prince Left Guards.

古文：大同三年，车驾幸乐游苑，侃预宴。
现代文：大同三年，高祖幸临乐游苑，羊侃参预宴会。
English: In the third year of Datong, Gao Zu Xinglin Pleasure Garden, Yang Kan attended the pre-banquet.

古文：时少府奏新造两刃槊成，长二丈四尺，围一尺三寸，高祖因赐侃马，令试之。
现代文：当时少府上奏新造成两刃稍，长二丈四尺，围一尺三寸，高祖便赐给羊侃马，让他试刃稍。
English: At that time, Shofu Shangsoo Xin made two blades slightly longer, two feet and four feet long, and one foot and three inches in circumference. Gaozhu then gave Yang Kanma a sword to try out.

古文：侃执槊上马，左右击刺，特尽其妙，高祖善之，又制《武宴诗》三十韵以示侃，侃即席应诏，高祖览曰： 吾闻仁者有勇，今见勇者有仁，可谓邹、鲁遗风，英贤不绝。 
现代文：羊侃执捎上马，左右击刺，表演得非常绝妙，高祖称赞他。又撰制《武宴诗》三十韵让羊侃看，羊侃即席应诏作诗，高祖看后说： 我听说有仁德的人有胆量，现在亲见有胆量的人有仁德，可说是孔、孟遣风，英贤没有断绝。 
English: Gao Zu praised Yang Kan for his superb performance. He also composed the "Martial Banquet Poem" with thirty rhymes for Yang Kan to read. Yang Kan promptly responded by composing a poem. After reading it, Gao Zu said, "I heard that people with benevolence have courage, and now I have personally seen that people with courage have benevolence. It can be said that there are holes, monsoon winds, and the virtuous have not been cut off.

古文：六年，迁司徒左长史。
现代文：六年，迁任司徒左长史。
English: Six years later, he was transferred to the post of Stusa Chosho.

古文：八年，迁都官尚书。
现代文：八年，迁任都官尚书。
English: Eight years later, he was transferred to the post of metropolitan government official.

古文：时尚书令何敬容用事，与之并省，未尝游造。
现代文：当时尚书令何敬容当权，同在尚书省，但羊侃未曾拜访他。
English: At that time, Shang Shuling He Jing Rong was in power and was in Shang Shuling Province, but Yang Kan had never visited him.

古文：有宦者张僧胤候侃，侃曰： 我床非阉人所坐。 
现代文：有宦官张僧胤拜访羊侃，羊侃说： 我的床不是闯入所能坐的。 
English: A eunuch, Zhang Soyin, visited Yang Kan. Yang Kan said, "My bed is not for breaking into and sitting on.

古文：竟不前之，时论美其贞正。
现代文：竟不前去接待，时论赞美他贞正。
English: She did not go to the reception, but praised him for his chastity.

古文：九年，出为使持节、壮武将军、衡州刺史。
现代文：九年，出任使持节、壮武将军、衡州刺史。
English: In the ninth year, he served as the envoy of the festival, the general of Zhuangwu, and the history of Hengzhou.

古文：太清元年，征为侍中。
现代文：太清元年，征入任侍中。
English: In the first year of the Taiqing Dynasty, he was conscripted as a samurai.

古文：会大举北伐，仍以侃为持节、冠军，监作韩山堰事，两旬堰立。
现代文：这时朝廷举兵北伐，便任羊侃持节、冠军，监造韩山堰工事，衹用二十天堰就造成。
English: At this time, the imperial court raised an army for the Northern Expedition, and then allowed Yang Kan to hold the festival, champion, supervise the construction of the Hanshan Weir, resulting in the construction of twenty weirs.

古文：侃劝元帅贞阳侯乘水攻彭城，不纳；既而魏援大至，侃频劝乘其远来可击，旦日又劝出战，并不从，侃乃率所领出顿堰上。
现代文：羊侃劝元帅贞阳侯乘水攻彭城，不被采纳；不久束魏的援兵大举到来，羊侃多次劝贞阳侯乘束魏兵远来可进击，第二天早晨又劝他出战，都不听从，羊侃便率领自己的士兵顿守堰上。
English: Yang Kan advised the marshal Zhengyang Hou to attack Pengcheng by water, but he was not accepted; soon a large number of Wei reinforcements arrived. Yang Kan repeatedly advised Zhengyang Hou to use a large number of Wei soldiers to attack far away, and the next morning he advised him to go to war. They did not listen, and Yang Kan led his soldiers to the weir.

古文：及众军败，侃结阵徐还。
现代文：在众军战败后，羊侃的士兵排成阵势慢慢撤回。
English: After the defeat of the army, Yang Kan's soldiers formed a formation and slowly withdrew.

古文：二年，复为都官尚书。
现代文：二年，再任都官尚书。
English: Two years later, he was reappointed to the post of Metropolitan.

古文：侯景反，攻陷历阳，高祖问侃讨景之策。
现代文：侯景反叛，攻陷历阳，高祖问羊侃讨伐侯景的计策。
English: Houjing rebelled, attacked and captured Liyang, and Gaozhu asked Yang Kan for a strategy to fight Houjing.

古文：侃曰： 景反迹久见，或容豕突，宜急据采石，令邵陵王袭取寿春。
现代文：羊侃说： 侯量反叛的迹象早就显露出来，或许他会横冲直撞京师，应急速占据采石，令邵陵王袭取寿春。
English: Yang Kan said: The signs of Houyao's rebellion have long been revealed. Perhaps he will rampage against the capital division, quickly occupy the quarry, and make Shao Ling Wang attack Shuchun.

古文：景进不得前，退失巢窟，乌合之众，自然瓦解。 
现代文：侯量进军不得向前，后退又失去大本营，乌合之众，自然瓦解。 
English: The army must not march forward, retreat and lose the base camp. The crowd will naturally disintegrate.

古文：议者谓景未敢便逼京师，遂寝其策，令侃率千余骑顿望国门。
现代文：议事的人说侯景未敢立即逼近京师，于是搁置他的策略，令羊侃率千余骑驻守望国门。
English: The people at the meeting said that Hou Jing did not dare to immediately approach the Beijing Division, so he put his strategy on hold and had more than a thousand horsemen stationed at Wanguomen.

古文：景至新林，追侃入副宣城王都督城内诸军事。
现代文：谴的军队到了塞眯，追回芏掘入城辅佐宣继王都督城内诸军事。
English: The defeated army arrived at Sai Yeon, and the troops of the military in the city, who had recovered the shovel and dug it into the city, were assisted by the governor of the city, King Seonjo.

古文：时景既卒至，百姓竞入，公私混乱，无复次第。
现代文：当时尽量兵突至，百姓竞相入城，公私人员混乱，没有秩序。
English: At that time, as many soldiers as possible rushed to the scene, the people raced to enter the city, public and private personnel were confused, and there was no order.

古文：侃乃区分防拟，皆以宗室间之。
现代文：羊侃于是加以区分防备，皆任宗室的人监视。
English: Therefore, Yang Kan differentiated and guarded them, and they were all monitored by the people of the family.

古文：军人争入武库，自取器甲，所司不能禁，侃命斩数人，方得止。
现代文：军人争相进入武库，自取兵器鉴甲，主管官员不能禁止，芏坦命令斩杀数人，才得禁止。
English: Military personnel scramble to get into arsenals and take their own weapons to check their armor. The officials in charge can't ban it, but they have to ban it if the commander orders the killing of several people.

古文：及贼逼城，众皆恟惧，侃伪称得射书，云 邵陵王、西昌侯已至近路 。
现代文：及贼逼城，众人都恐惧震动，羊侃假称得到从城外射进的书信，说 邵陵王、西昌侯带的援兵已到附近 。
English: When the thieves besieged the city, everyone was shocked with fear. Yang Kanrong pretended to have received a letter from outside the city, saying that reinforcements from King Shao Ling and the Xichang Marquis had arrived nearby.

古文：众乃少安。
现代文：众人才稍安。
English: The talent pool is slightly smaller.

古文：贼攻东掖门，纵火甚盛，侃亲自距抗，以水沃火，火灭，引弓射杀数人，贼乃退。
现代文：贼进攻束掖门，纵火很旺盛，羊侃亲自指挥抵抗，用水浇火，火减，引弓射杀数人，贼才撤退。
English: Thieves attacked the Sokcho gate, the arson was very strong, Yang Kan personally commanded the resistance, doused the fire with water, reduced the fire, shot several people with a bow, and the thieves retreated.

古文：加侍中、军师将军。
现代文：加任侍中、军师将军。
English: He was also appointed to the posts of chamberlain and general of the army.

古文：有诏送金五千两，银万两，绢万匹，以赐战士，侃辞不受。
现代文：有韶令赠送金五千两，银万两，绢万匹，犒赏战士，羊侃推辞不受。
English: There was an imperial order to give away 5,000 taels of gold, 10,000 taels of silver, and 10,000 taels of horses to reward the soldiers.

古文：部曲千余人，并私加赏赉。
现代文：部曲千余人，都用私财奖赏。
English: More than a thousand people in the troupe were rewarded with their own money.

古文：贼为尖顶木驴攻城，矢石所不能制，侃作雉尾炬，施铁镞，以油灌之，掷驴上焚之，俄尽。
现代文：贼制造尖顶木驴攻城，矢石不能制服它，羊侃就制作雉尾炬，安上铁箭头，用油浇灌它，扔在木驴上燃烧，不久木驴被烧尽。
English: Thieves made a pointed wooden donkey to attack the city, but the arrow and stone could not subdue it. The sheep made an iris torch, attached an iron arrowhead, doused it with oil, and threw it on the donkey to burn it. Soon the donkey was burned out.

古文：贼又东西两面起土山，以临城，城中震骇，侃命为地道，潜引其土，山不能立。
现代文：贼又在城东西两面堆起土山，站在土山上观望城裹，城中人震骇，羊侃又命令在土山下挖地道，暗中把土运走，土山不能堆立。
English: The thieves also piled up mounds of earth on both sides of the city, east and west, and stood on the mounds of earth to watch the city. The people in the city were shocked, and Yang Kan ordered to dig a tunnel under the mounds of earth and secretly transport the soil away. The mounds of earth could not be piled up.

古文：贼又作登城楼车，高十余丈，欲临射城内，侃曰： 车高緌虚，彼来必倒，可卧而观之，不劳设备。 
现代文：贼又制作登城楼车，高有十余丈，想登城向内俯射，羊侃说： 车高而城下沟壕中的土虚，楼车来了一定会倾倒，可卧而观看，不用劳累设防。 
English: The thief also made a tower car to climb the city, which is more than ten feet high. He wanted to climb the city and dive into it. The sheep said: The car is high and the city is in a ditch. When the car comes, it will definitely fall down. You can lie down and watch, without having to work hard to set up defenses.

古文：及车动果倒，众皆服焉。
现代文：当楼车一开动果然倒下，众人皆佩服他。
English: When the car fell down as soon as it started moving, everyone admired him.

古文：贼既频攻不捷，乃筑长围。
现代文：贼既然频攻不能取胜，便修筑长围。
English: Since the bandits could not win by frequent attacks, they built a long enclosure.

古文：硃异、张绾议欲出击之，高祖以问侃，侃曰： 不可。
现代文：硃异、张绾商议想出击贼，高祖征求羊侃的意见，羊侃说： 不行。
English: Dangdai and Zhangye discussed the idea of attacking the thief, Gao Zu solicited Yang Kan's opinion, and Yang Kan said, "No."

古文：贼多日攻城，既不能下，故立长围，欲引城中降者耳。
现代文：贼多日攻城，既然不能攻下，所以修筑长围，想引出城中投降的人。
English: The thieves besieged the city for many days, and since they could not capture it, they built a long enclosure in an attempt to lure those who had surrendered out of the city.

古文：今击之，出人若少，不足破贼，若多，则一旦失利，自相腾践，门隘桥小，必大致挫衄，此乃示弱，非骋王威也。 
现代文：今出击他，出的兵如果少，不能破贼，如果多出兵，则一旦失利，自己人相互腾践，城门窄桥小，必会导致大挫折，此便是向贼示弱，而不是施展王威。 
English: Attacking him now, if the number of soldiers is small, cannot break the thief, if more soldiers are sent, then once the defeat, his own people practice each other, the gate is narrow and the bridge is small, it will surely lead to great setbacks. This is to show weakness to the thief, rather than exerting kingly power.

古文：不从，遂使千余人出战，未及交锋，望风退走，果以争桥赴水，死者太半。
现代文：高祖没有听从他的意见，便派千余人出战，还没有交锋，就望风退败，果然为争遇桥而掉入水中，死者有大半。
English: Gaozu did not listen to his advice, so he sent more than a thousand men to fight. Before the battle, he waited for the wind to die down, and indeed fell into the water while fighting for the bridge. Most of them died.

古文：初，侃长子躭为景所获，执来城下示侃，侃谓曰： 我倾宗报主，犹恨不足，岂复计此一子，幸汝早能杀之。 
现代文：当初，羊侃的长子羊鹭被侯景俘获，现在带到城下让羊侃见面，羊侃对贼说： 我就是覆灭宗族报效国主，还恨不足，难道会在乎此一子，希望你能早杀死他。 
English: At first, Yang Kan's eldest son, Yang Zhao, was captured by Hou Jing, and now he is being brought to the city to meet Yang Kan. Yang Kan said to the thief, "Even if I destroy my family and serve the sovereign, I still don't hate him enough. Would you care about this one son? I hope you can kill him early."

古文：数日复持来，侃谓躭曰： 久以汝为死，犹复在邪？
现代文：遇了几天又带来，羊侃对羊鹭说： 我久以为你自己会死，怎么还活着?
English: A few days later, when he brought it back, Yang Kan said to the shepherd, "I thought you would die for a long time. Why are you still alive?"

古文：吾以身许国，誓死行阵，终不以尔而生进退。 
现代文：吾以身许国，誓死战场，终不能因为你的生死决定我的进退。 
English: I pledge allegiance to my country, and I swear to die on the battlefield. In the end, I cannot decide my advancement or retreat because of your life or death.

古文：因引弓射之。
现代文：因此引弓射他。
English: So he shot him with his bow.

古文：贼感其忠义，亦不之害也。
现代文：贼被羊侃的忠义感动，也就不加害羊鸯。
English: The thief was moved by the loyalty of the sheep and did not harm the sheep.

古文：景遣仪同傅士哲呼侃与语曰： 侯王远来问讯天子，何为闭距，不时进纳？
现代文：侯景遣仪同傅士哲呼唤羊侃舆他说： 侯王远来问候天子，为什么闭门拒绝，不及时接纳?
English: Hou Jingyuan Yi and Fu Shizhe called out to Yang Qianming, saying: Hou Wang has come from afar to greet the Son of Heaven, why did he refuse to close the door and not accept him in time?

古文：尚书国家大臣，宜启朝廷。 
现代文：尚书是国家大臣，应启奏朝廷。 
English: Shangshu was a minister of state, and he was supposed to report to the imperial court.

古文：侃曰： 侯将军奔亡之后，归命国家，重镇方城，悬相任寄，何所患苦？忽致称兵？
现代文：羊侃说： 侯将军从东魏奔亡之后，归顺国家，让他重兵镇守北方长城，担任高官寄以信任，他有什么患苦，忽然导致兴兵?
English: Yang Kan said: After General Hou from the Eastern Wei Dynasty died, he surrendered to the country, let his heavy troops guard the northern Great Wall, and served as a high-ranking official to send trust. What suffering did he have that suddenly led to the rise of the army?

古文：今驱乌合之卒，至王城之下，虏马饮淮，矢集帝室，岂有人臣而至于此？
现代文：今驱赶乌合之众，来到王城下面，让虏马饮淮水，把弓箭指向帝室，难道有人臣这样做的吗?
English: Now drive away the rabble, come to the royal city below, let the horse drink water, point the bow and arrow at the imperial palace, has anyone done so?

古文：吾荷国重恩，当禀承庙算，以扫大逆耳，不能妄受浮说，开门揖盗。
现代文：吾受国家重恩，衹应禀承朝廷的谋略，扫灭大逆不道的人，不能非分接受浮说，开门向强盗行揖礼。
English: I have received a great favor from the state, I should follow the strategy of the imperial court, sweep away the traitors, I cannot but accept the nonsense, open the door and bow to the robbers.

古文：幸谢侯王，早自为所。 
现代文：请你告谢侯王，早点为自己考虑。 
English: Please thank the lord and think about yourself early.

古文：士哲又曰： 侯王事君尽节，不为朝廷所知，正欲面启至尊，以除奸佞，既居戎旅，故带甲来朝，何谓作逆？ 
现代文：士哲又说： 侯王事君尽节，不被朝廷所知道，正想当面启禀至尊，以铲除朝廷中奸佞之臣。既然是在军戎中，所以带甲来朝见，怎么是作? 
English: The scholar also said, "The lord of the manor was at the end of his days, and was not known to the court, and he wanted to meet the emperor face to face in order to root out the traitorous vassals in the court. Since he was in the army, why did he bring armor to the court?

古文：侃曰： 圣上临四海将五十年，聪明睿哲，无幽不照，有何奸佞而得在朝？
现代文：羊侃说： 圣上统治天下将五十年，明察事理，神圣明智，没有幽暗的地方照不到，有谁奸佞而得在朝廷?
English: Yang Kan said, "The Holy One will rule the world for fifty years. He is clear-sighted, holy and wise. He cannot shine where there is no darkness.

古文：欲饰其非，宁无诡说。
现代文：想掩饰自己的罪过，难道能没有诡辩。
English: If you want to cover up your sins, can you do it without sophistry?

古文：且侯王亲举白刃，以向城阙，事君尽节，正若是邪！ 
现代文：而且侯王亲举白刃，指向了京城，事君尽节，正像他这样做吗? 
English: Moreover, the prince raised his white blade and pointed it at the capital city. Is this what he was doing?

古文：士哲无以应，乃曰： 在北之日，久挹风猷，每恨平生，未获披叙，愿去戎服，得一相见。 
现代文：士哲无言以对，便说： 在北方之曰，久仰风采品格，每恨平生，没能获得推诚交谈的机会，希望能脱去军服，得一相见。 
English: Shi Zhe was speechless and said: In the north, people have long admired the style and character, but have never had the opportunity to have a sincere conversation. They hope to take off their military uniforms and meet each other.

古文：侃为之免胄，士哲瞻望久之而去。
现代文：羊侃为他摘去头盔，士哲瞻望很久才离去。
English: Yang Kan took off his helmet for him, and Zhizhe looked around for a long time before leaving.

古文：其为北人所钦慕如此。
现代文：他被北人所钦慕就像这样。
English: He was admired by northerners because of this.

古文：后大雨，城内土山崩，贼乘之垂入，苦战不能禁，侃乃令多掷火，为火城以断其路，徐于里筑城，贼不能进。
现代文：后下大雨，城内土山崩溃，贼乘势将要攻入城，苦战不能禁止，羊侃便下令多掷火把，形成火城以断贼的进路，从容地在裹面筑城，贼不能前进。
English: After that, it rained heavily, the soil and mountains inside the city collapsed, the thieves were about to take advantage of the situation to enter the city, and the bitter battle could not be prohibited. Yang Kan then ordered more torches to be thrown, forming a fiery city to cut off the thief's approach, and building the city in a leisurely manner. The thief could not advance.

古文：十二月，遘疾卒于台内，时年五十四。
现代文：十二月，得病在台内去世，时年五十四岁。
English: In December, he died of illness in Taichung at the age of 54.

古文：诏给东园秘器，布绢各五百匹，钱三百万，赠侍中、护军将军，鼓吹一部。
现代文：诏令赐给显官死后所用的棺木，布绢各五百匹，钱三百万，追赠侍中、护军将军，鼓吹一部。
English: The imperial edict gave the coffin used after the death of the dignitary, five hundred pieces of cloth, three million money, a posthumous gift of a chamberlain, a general of the escort, and a piece of propaganda.

古文：侃少而雄勇，膂力绝人，所用弓至十余石。
现代文：羊侃年轻时英勇威武，体力绝人，所用弓拉力至十余石。
English: When Yang Kan was young, he was heroic and powerful, with incredible physical strength. He used a bow with a pulling force of more than ten stone.

古文：尝于兗州尧庙蹋壁，直上至五寻，横行得七迹。
现代文：曾登兖州尧庙壁，直上至五寻，横行能有七迹。
English: It once climbed the wall of the temple in Loushou, straight up to Wucheng, and there were seven traces of rampant behavior.

古文：泗桥有数石人，长八尺，大十围，侃执以相击，悉皆破碎。
现代文：泗桥有几个石人，高八尺，粗十围，羊侃举起石人相击，全都被撞碎。
English: There are several stone men on the bridge. They are eight feet tall and ten times as thick. Yang Kan held up the stone men and they collided with each other. All of them were crushed.

古文：侃性豪侈，善音律，自造《采莲》、《棹歌》两曲，甚有新致。
现代文：羊侃性情豪侈，擅长音律，自编写《采莲》、《桌歌》两首曲子，很有新意。
English: Yang Kan has a luxurious temperament and is good at music. He has composed two pieces of music, "Lotus Picking" and "Table Song," which are very innovative.

古文：姬妾侍列，穷极奢靡。有弹筝人陆太喜，著鹿角爪长七寸。儛人张净琬，腰围一尺六寸，时人咸推能掌中儛。
现代文：家中姬妾侍列，极尽奢侈靡费；有个弹筝人名陆太喜，手戴拨弦的鹿角爪长七寸；跳舞人名张净琬，腰围祇有一尺六寸，当时人称说此人能在掌中跳舞。
English: There was a kite-player named Lu Taixi, whose antler claws were seven inches long, and who used to play the strings; a dancer named Zhang Jingyao, whose waist was only one foot six inches, and who was said to be able to dance in the palm of one's hand.

古文：又有孙荆玉，能反腰帖地，衔得席上玉簪。
现代文：又有孙型玉，能反腰头贴地，用口衔得席上的玉簪。
English: There is also Sun-type jade, which can stick its head to the ground, and use its mouth to get the jade bowl on the table.

古文：敕赉歌人王娥儿，东宫亦赉歌者屈偶之，并妙尽奇曲，一时无对。
现代文：皇上赏赐他唱歌人王娥儿，太子也赏赐他唱歌人屈，都能唱出绝妙至极的奇曲，当时没有人能与他们对等。
English: The emperor rewarded him with the singer Wang Er, and the prince also rewarded him with the singer Ren Qu, both of whom could sing the most wonderful songs. At that time, no one could match them.

古文：初赴衡州，于两艖符，起三间通梁水斋，饰以珠玉，加之锦缋，盛设帷屏，陈列女乐，乘潮解缆，临波置酒，缘塘傍水，观者填咽。
现代文：当初赴衡州，在两船之间搭起三间通梁的小舍，用珠玉装饰，加上华丽的绘画，盛设帷屏，陈列女乐，乘涨潮时解缆，临水波置酒，沿着池塘水边，观看的人拥挤堵塞。
English: At first, I went to Hengzhou. I built three cormorant cottages between two boats, decorated with jewels and gorgeous paintings, set up curtains, displayed women's music, unraveled cables at high tide, placed wine near the water wave, and crowded with people watching along the edge of the pond.

古文：大同中，魏使阳斐，与侃在北尝同学，有诏令侃延斐同宴。
现代文：大同年间越的使臣旦驴，与差坦在北边曾是同学，有韶命令羊侃请阳斐同宴。
English: In the same year, Yue's envoy, Tan Xie, who had been classmates with Shatan in the north, ordered Yang Kan to invite Yang Fei to the same banquet.

古文：宾客三百余人，器皆金玉杂宝，奏三部女乐，至夕，侍婢百余人，俱执金花烛。
现代文：来的宾客有三百余人，席上的器皿皆是金玉诸色珍宝，演奏三部女乐，到了晚上，侍婢百余人，都举着金花烛。
English: There were more than three hundred guests, and all the dishes on the table were made of gold and precious stones. Three pieces of women's music were played. In the evening, more than a hundred servants and maids were holding golden candles.

古文：侃不能饮酒，而好宾客交游，终日献酬，同其醉醒。
现代文：羊侃不能饮酒，但喜欢与宾客交游，终日相酬酒，与他们同醉醒。
English: Yang Kan can't drink alcohol, but he likes to mingle with guests, drink with them all day long, and get drunk with them.

古文：性宽厚，有器局，尝南还至涟口，置酒，有客张孺才者，醉于船中失火，延烧七十余艘，所燔金帛不可胜数。
现代文：性情宽厚，有才识度量，曾南回至涟口，置酒宴，有个客人叫张孺才，在船上醉了失火，延烧七十余艘船，所烧焚的金帛不可胜敷。
English: Generous in nature, talented and meticulous, he once went south to the estuary to hold a wine banquet. There was a guest named Zhang Yucai, who was drunk on the ship and lost the fire, and burned more than 70 ships. The burned gold ingots cannot be replaced.

古文：侃闻之，都不挂意，命酒不辍。
现代文：羊侃听闻后，全不挂意，命饮酒不停。
English: After listening to Yang Kan, he was completely unconcerned and drank non-stop.

古文：孺才惭惧，自逃匿，侃慰喻使还，待之如旧。
现代文：孺才惭惧，自己逃匿，羊侃宽慰他让他回来，对待他还像从前那样。
English: Shamefaced, he ran away, but the sheep calmed him down, let him come back, and treated him as before.

古文：第三子鹍。
现代文：第三子羊鵾。
English: The third lamb bleats.

古文：鹍字子鹏。
现代文：羊鸥字子鹏。
English: Sheep with the character of Zi Peng.

古文：随侃台内，城陷，窜于阳平。侯景呼还，待之甚厚。
现代文：随羊侃在台内，城陷落，流窜到阳平，侯景呼回他，待他很优厚。
English: With Yang Kan in Tainai, the city fell, and he was exiled to Yangping. Hou Jing called him back and treated him very well.

古文：及景败，鹍密图之，乃随其东走。
现代文：及侯景叛乱失败，羊鵾暗中想图害他，便随他束逃。
English: When Houjing's rebellion failed, Yang Yang secretly plotted to kill him and then fled with him.

古文：景于松江战败，惟余三舸，下海欲向蒙山。
现代文：侯景在松江战败后，衹剩下三条船，下海想去蒙山。
English: After Hou Jing was defeated in Songjiang, he had three boats left and wanted to go to Mengshan.

古文：会景倦昼寝，鹍语海师： 此中何处有蒙山！
现代文：遣时堡景困倦昼寝，羊鵾对海师说： 此中何处有蒙山!
English: After a sleepy nap, the shepherd said to the navigator: Where is Mengshan in this?

古文：汝但听我处分。 
现代文：你但听我处置。 
English: But you'll have to do as I say.

古文：遂直向京口。
现代文：于是将船直开向京口。
English: As a result, the ship headed straight for the port of Kyoto.

古文：至胡豆洲，景觉，大惊，问岸上人，云 郭元建犹在广陵 ，景大喜，将依之。
现代文：至胡豆洲，侯景醒，大惊，问岸上的人，岸上的人说 郭元建还在广陵 ，侯景大喜，将要去投靠。
English: At Hu Dou Zhou, Hou Jing woke up, shocked, asked the people on the shore, the people on the shore said that Guo Yuan Jian was still in Guangling, Hou Jing was overjoyed and would go to the refuge.

古文：鹍拔刀叱海师，使向京口。
现代文：羊鵾拔刀呵斥海师，让他驶向京口。
English: The mutton-chopper drew his sword and shouted at the navigator, ordering him to sail to the capital.

古文：景欲透水，鹍抽刀斫之，景乃走入船中，以小刀抉船，鹍以槊入刺杀之。
现代文：侯景想跳水，羊鵾抽刀斫他，侯景便逃到船中，用小刀戳船，羊鵾用稍刺死他。
English: Hou Jing wanted to dive into the water, the shepherd pulled out a knife and stabbed him. Hou Jing then fled into the boat, stabbed the boat with a knife, and the shepherd stabbed him to death.

古文：世祖以鹍为持节、通直散骑常侍、都督青、冀二州诸军事、明威将军、青州刺史，封昌国县公，邑二千户，赐钱五百万，米五千石，布绢各一千匹，又领东阳太守。
现代文：世祖任羊鵾为持节、通直散骑常侍、都督青冀二州诸军事、明威将军、青州刺史，封为昌国县公，食邑二千户，赐钱五百万，米五千石，布绢各一千匹，又领束阳太守。
English: The ancestor of the world appointed Yang Xuan as the military governor of the two states of Qinghai and Hebei, the general of Mingwei, and the historian of Qingdao, and was awarded the title of the governor of Changguo County, the food village of two thousand households, the money of five million yuan, the rice of five thousand koku, and the cloth of one thousand horses each. He was also given the title of the governor of Zokuyang.

古文：征陆纳，加散骑常侍。
现代文：征讨堕铀，加任散骑常侍。
English: To collect the fallen uranium, he was appointed as a samurai on horseback.

古文：平峡中，除西晋州刺史。
现代文：平定峡生，授任西晋州刺史。
English: He was born in Pingding Gorge and was awarded the title of West Jinzhou History.

古文：破郭元建于东关，迁使持节、信武将军、东晋州刺史。
现代文：在东关打败郭元建，迁任使持节、信武将军、东晋州刺史。
English: He defeated Guo Yuanjian in Dongguan, and was appointed as the envoy of Jichijie, the general of Xinwu, and the governor of East Jinzhou.

古文：承圣三年，西魏围江陵，鹍赴援不及，从王僧愔征萧勃于岭表。闻大尉僧辩败，乃还，为侯瑱所破，于豫章遇害，时年二十八。
现代文：承圣三年，西魏包围江堕，芏鸥赴援没有赶到，就跟从王坦埴在岭童征讨萧勃，得知太尉僧辩打败仗，便返回，被侯填打败，在豫章遇害，时年二十八岁。
English: In the third year of his consecration, the Western Wei Dynasty besieged and conquered the Yangtze River. He did not arrive in time to help, so he followed Wang Tianzhong to Lingdong to fight against Xiao Bo. When he learned that the eunuch Sangye had lost the battle, he returned. He was defeated by Hou Jian and killed in Yuzhang. He was twenty-eight years old.

古文：羊鸦仁，字孝穆，太山钜平人也。
现代文：羊鸦仁字孝穆，是太山钜平人。
English: Yang Rong Ren Zi Xiao Mu is a Tai Shan Xingping person.

古文：少骁果有胆力，仕郡为主簿。
现代文：年轻时勇猛刚毅有胆力，在郡做官任主簿。
English: When he was young, he was brave, courageous, and courageous. He worked as a clerk and chief clerk in the county.

古文：普通中，率兄弟自魏归国，封广晋县侯。
现代文：普通年间，率领兄弟从寸邀归附梁曲，封为广晋县侯。
English: During the ordinary years, he led the brothers from Cun invited to join Liang Qu, and was appointed as the governor of Guangjin County.

古文：征伐青、齐间，累有功绩，稍迁员外散骑常侍、历阳太守。
现代文：征伐青、齐一带，累有功绩，稍迁任员外散骑常侍、历阳太守。
English: He conquered the Qing and Qi regions, and accumulated great achievements. He also transferred some of his subordinates, such as non-commissioned officers, non-commissioned cavalry constables, and the governor of Liyang.

古文：中大通四年，为持节、都督谯州诸军事、信威将军、谯州刺史。
现代文：中大通四年，任持节、都督尽蛆诸军事、信威将军、谯州刺史。
English: In the four years since he graduated from middle school, he has been appointed as a military commander, a trusted general, and the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：大同七年，除太子左卫率，出为持节、都督南、北司、豫、楚四州诸军事、轻车将军、北司州刺史。
现代文：大同七年，授任太子左卫率，出任持节、都督南司北司豫楚四州诸军事、轻车将军、北司州刺史。
English: In the seventh year of Datong, he was awarded the title of Prince of the Left Division of the Guards, and served as the military commander of the Southern Division of the Northern Division, the military commander of the Southern Division of the Northern Division, the military commander of the Southern Division of the Northern Division, the military commander of the Southern Division of the Northern Division, and the military commander of the Southern Division of the Northern Division.

古文：侯景降，诏鸦仁督士州刺史桓和之、仁州刺史湛海珍等精兵三万，趋悬瓠应接景，仍为都督豫、司、淮、冀、殷、应、西豫等七州诸军事、司、豫二州刺史，镇悬瓠。
现代文：侯景投降，诏令鸦仁督率土州刺史桓和之、仁州刺史湛海珍等精兵三万，奔赴悬瓠应接侯景，并任他都督豫司淮冀殷应西豫等七州诸军事、司豫二州刺史，镇守悬瓠。
English: When Houjing surrendered, Emperor Zhao ordered his general, Guo Ren, to lead 30,000 elite soldiers, including Tuzhou general, Guan He, and Renzhou general, Zhan Haizhen, to rush to Xingyao to meet Houjing. He also appointed him as the general of the military of seven states, including Xingyao, as well as the general of two states, and the town guard of Xingyao.

古文：会侯景败于涡阳，魏军渐逼，鸦仁恐粮运不继，遂还北司，上表陈谢。高祖大怒，责之，鸦仁惧，又顿军于淮上。
现代文：这时侯景在涡阳战败，东魏军逐渐逼近，鸦仁恐怕粮运接不上，便还军北司，上表谢罪，高祖大怒，责备他，鸦仁恐惧，就又在淮上驻军。
English: At this time, Hou Jing was defeated in the Turbulent Sun, the East Wei Army was gradually approaching, and Raven was afraid that the grain transportation would not be able to catch up, so he returned to the North Division of the Army, expressed his gratitude, Gao Zu was furious, blamed him, and Raven was afraid, and again stationed troops in Huaiyang.

古文：及侯景反，鸦仁率所部入援。
现代文：当侯景反叛时，鸦仁率领他的部队入援朝廷。
English: When Hou Jing rebelled, Au Ren led his troops to aid the imperial court.

古文：太清二年，景既背盟，鸦仁乃与赵伯超及南康王会理共攻贼于东府城，反为贼所败。
现代文：太清二年，侯景背叛盟约后，鸦仁便与趟伯超及南康王会理共同在束府城向贼进攻，反被贼打败。
English: In the second year of the Taiching Dynasty, after Houjing betrayed the covenant, Auren attacked the thieves in Sokfu Town together with Wabi Bo Chao and Nankang Wang Huili, but was defeated by the thieves.

古文：台城陷，鸦仁见景，为景所留，以为五兵尚书。
现代文：台城失陷，鸦仁会见侯景，被侯景留下，任为五兵尚书。
English: After the fall of Taichung, Raven met with Hou Jing, was left behind by Hou Jing, and was appointed as the leader of the Five Soldiers.

古文：鸦仁常思奋发，谓所亲曰： 吾以凡流，受宠朝廷，竟无报效，以答重恩。
现代文：鸦仁常想有所振作，对他所亲近的人说： 吾以平庸之辈，受到朝廷的恩宠，竟还没有报效，以答谢重恩。
English: Raven often wanted to cheer up and said to those close to him: I am a mediocre generation, I have been favored by the imperial court, but I have not returned the favor, so I would like to thank you.

古文：社稷倾危，身不能死，偷生苟免，以至于今。
现代文：国家倾覆，自己不能去死，苟且偷生，以至于今。
English: When the country was overthrown, I couldn't bring myself to die, so I kept on living, until now.

古文：若以此终，没有余愤。 
现代文：如果现在死去，我没有遣憾。 
English: If I die now, I have no regrets.

古文：因遂泣下，见者伤焉。
现代文：说着便哭泣，看见的人都为他伤心。
English: As he spoke, he wept, and all who saw him were saddened.

古文：三年，出奔江西，其故部曲数百人迎之，将赴江陵，至东莞，为故北徐州刺史荀伯道诸子所害。
现代文：三年，出逃江西，他原来的部曲敷百人迎接他，将赴江陵，至东莞，被故北徐州刺史荀伯道诸子杀害。
English: Three years later, when he fled to Jiangxi Province, he was greeted by hundreds of people from his original hometown. He would go to Jiangling and then to Dongguan, where he was killed by the sons of the late Northern Xuzhou Governor Zhi Bo Dao.

古文：史臣曰：高祖革命受终，光期宝运，威德所渐，莫不怀来，其皆殉难投身，前后相属。
现代文：史臣曰：高祖实施变革以应天命，承受帝位，期望光大国运，威德所浸润，没有不被招来的，他们都为国家舍身殉难，前赴后继。
English: Shichen said: Gao Zu implemented reforms to meet the fate of heaven, to inherit the throne, to expect the great national movement, to be infiltrated by virtue, and not to be invited, they all sacrificed their lives for the country, and went forward one after another.

古文：元法僧之徒入国，并降恩遇，位重任隆，击钟鼎食，美矣。
现代文：元法僧这类人入国，都赐给他们恩遇，他们位重任隆，生活豪华，美呀。
English: When former monks and nuns enter the country, they are given special treatment. They are given important positions, live a luxurious life, and are beautiful.

古文：而羊侃、鸦仁值太清之难，并竭忠奉国。
现代文：而羊侃、鸦仁碰到太清年间的战乱，都能竭忠奉国。
English: On the other hand, Yang Kan and Raven were able to serve the country loyally when they encountered the war during the Taiching Dynasty.

古文：侃则临危不挠，鸦仁守义殒命，可谓志等松筠，心均铁石，古之殉节，斯其谓乎！
现代文：羊侃则临危不屈服，鸦仁守义硕命，可称作志如松竹般坚贞，心如铁石般坚定不移，古代的殉节，就是这样的吧。
English: Sheep do not give in in the face of danger, and ravens guard their lives. It can be said that they are as firm as pine and bamboo, and their hearts are as steadfast as iron and stone. The ancient martyrs' festival is just like this.

