古文：水帝神女刘子光益水酿川石脂水元街泉铜车神牛泉燕原池丹水
现代文：水帝神女刘子光益水酿川石脂水元街泉铜车神牛泉燕原池丹水
English: Water Emperor Goddess Liu Ziguang Yishui Water Brewing River Stone Grease Water Source Street Spring Copper Car Divine Cow Spring Yan Yuan Pond Danshui

古文：陆鸿渐零水龙门漏泽重水湘水暴水仙池渝州滩清潭
现代文：陆鸿渐零水龙门漏泽重水湘水暴水仙池渝州滩清潭
English: Lu Hong gradually zero water tap leaks heavy water Hunan water storm Narcissus Pool Yuzhou Beach Qingtan

古文：驱山铎
现代文：驱山铎
English: 驱山

古文：井乌山龟绿珠井临沅井火井盐井御井王迪贾耽八角井李德裕
现代文：井乌山龟绿珠井临沅井火井盐井御井王迪贾耽八角井李德裕
English: 井乌山龟绿珠井临井火井盐井御井王迪ジャ耽八角井李德裕

古文：永兴坊百姓独孤叔牙柴都濠州井鸡井军井金华令
现代文：永兴坊百姓独孤叔牙柴都濠州井鸡井军井金华令
English: Yongxing Square, Yongxing Town, Yongxing Village, Yongxing Town, Yongxing Town, Yongxing Town, Yongxing Town, Yongxing Town, Yongxing Town

古文：水帝神女
现代文：水帝神女
English: The Water Goddess

古文：《山海经》：洞庭之中，帝之二女居之。
现代文：《山海经》上说，洞庭之中，天帝的两个女儿居住在那里。
English: According to the "Song of Mountains and Seas," in the middle of the cave garden, the two daughters of the Heavenly Emperor live there.

古文：郭璞注云：天帝之二女，处江为神。
现代文：郭璞注释说：天帝的两个女儿，在江中做神仙。
English: Guo Wei commented: The two daughters of the Heavenly Emperor are immortal in the river.

古文：《列仙传》所谓江妃二女也。
现代文：也就是《列仙传》中所说的江妃二女。
English: That is, the two daughters of Empress Dowager Cixi mentioned in "The Legend of the Three Immortals."

古文：《离骚》所谓《湘夫人》， 帝子降分北渚 是也。
现代文：《离骚》里有《湘夫人》， 帝子降兮北渚 说的就是湘夫人。
English: In "Leaving So," there is "Lady Hunan," and Kitanagisa, who plays the role of the emperor, says that she is Lady Hunan.

古文：《河图玉板》云，尧之二女，为舜之妃，死葬于此。
现代文：《河图玉板》上说是尧的两个女儿，也是舜的妃子，死后埋葬在这里。
English: According to the "River Map Jade Plate," it is said that the two daughters of Zou, who was also Zou's concubine, were buried here after their death.

古文：冢在县北一百六十里青草山。
现代文：坟墓在县城北面一百六十里的青草山。
English: The grave is in Qingcaoshan, 160 miles north of the county seat.

古文：刘子光
现代文：刘子光
English: Liu Ziguang

古文：汉刘子光西征，遇山而渴，无水。
现代文：汉朝刘子光西征，遇山而渴，但无水。
English: Liu Ziguang of the Han Dynasty went on a western expedition. He was thirsty in the mountains, but there was no water.

古文：子光在山南，见一石人，问之曰： 何处有水？ 
现代文：刘子光在山南面，见有一石人，问他说： 什么地方有水？ 
English: Liu Ziguang was in the southern part of the mountain. He saw a stone man and asked him, "Where is there water?"

古文：石人不言。
现代文：石人不说话。
English: Stone people don't talk.

古文：乃拔剑斩石人，须臾，穷山水出。
现代文：于是刘子光拨剑砍下石人的头。不一会儿，山水尽出。
English: So Liu Ziguang swung his sword and cut off the stone man's head. Soon, the landscape dried up.

古文：益水
现代文：益水
English: Yishui

古文：益阳县在长沙郡界，益水在其阳。
现代文：益阳县在长沙郡边界，益水在益阳县南面。
English: Yiyang County is on the border of Changsha County, and Yishui is in the south of Yiyang County.

古文：县治东望，时见长沙城隍。人马形色，悉可审辨。
现代文：在县城向东望，时常能见到长沙的护城壕，且人和车马的形状和颜色，都可以分辨出来。
English: Looking eastward from the county seat, the moat of Changsha can often be seen, and the shape and color of people and horses can be distinguished.

古文：或停览瞩，移晷乃渐散灭。
现代文：有时站住观望，随日影移动便渐渐散去消失。
English: Sometimes I stand and watch, and as the shadow moves, it gradually dissipates and disappears.

古文：县去长沙尚三百里，跨越重山，里绝表显，将是山岳炳灵，冥像所传者乎！
现代文：益阳县离长沙有三百里，要跨越重山。在长沙城里看不见的而城外看得很明显。
English: Yiyang County is three hundred miles away from Changsha, and it is necessary to cross heavy mountains. What is invisible in Changsha is clearly visible outside the city.

古文：昔光武中元元年，封太山，禅梁父。
现代文：可能是山岳的灵光，把阴间的景象反射出来了吧。当初光武帝中元元年，祭太山、祭梁父山。
English: It may have been the spiritual light of the mountains that reflected the scene of the underworld. Originally, in the first year of the reign of Emperor Guangwu, the festivals of Mount Tai and Mount Liangzhi were held.

古文：是日，山灵炳象，构成宫室。
现代文：这一天，山中的灵光影象，构成宫殿屋宇。
English: On this day, the reflection of light in the mountains forms the palace building.

古文：昔汉武帝遣方士徐宣浮海采药，于波中，见汉家楼观参差，宛然备瞩，公侯弟宅皆满目。
现代文：过去汉武帝派儒生徐宣漂洋过海采药，在波浪中，徐宣看见汉朝楼台高低不一，好象全都看在眼里。公侯的府弟宅院满眼都是。
English: In the past, Emperor Hanwu sent the Confucian scholar Xu Xuan to sail across the ocean to collect medicines. In the waves, Xu Xuan saw the Han Dynasty buildings of different heights, as if they were all in his eyes. The prince's younger brother, Yakuin, was all over his eyes.

古文：班超在浑耶国，平旦，云霞鲜明，见天际宫阙，馆宇严列，侍臣左右，悉汉家也。
现代文：班超在浑耶国，一天早晨云霞鲜艳明朗，班超见天边现出宫殿，客馆屋宇整齐地排列着，侍臣恭侯在左右，都是汉朝的景象。
English: Banchao was in Hunye Province. One morning, the clouds were bright and clear. Banchao saw a palace appear in the sky, guest houses were neatly arranged, and courtiers and courtiers were on the left and right, all of which were scenes from the Han Dynasty.

古文：如斯之类。难可审论。
现代文：类似这样的事，很难弄明白。
English: It's difficult to understand something like this.

古文：酿川
现代文：酿川
English: Brewing river

古文：沈酿川者，汉郑弘，灵帝时为乡啬夫。
现代文：沉酿川这地方有段故事，汉朝的郑弘，汉灵帝时在乡里做啬夫官，跟随上官进京。
English: There is a story about this place in the Shengwu River. Zheng Hong of the Han Dynasty, who was a miserly official in the countryside when Han Lingdi was emperor, followed the superior officer to Beijing.

古文：从宦入京，未至，夜宿于此。
现代文：还没到京城，夜晚便住在这里。
English: We haven't even arrived in the capital yet, but we're staying here for the night.

古文：逢故人，四顾荒郊，村落绝远。沽酒无处，情抱不申，乃投钱于水中而共饮。
现代文：在这里遇见了以前的朋友，看看四周都是荒凉的郊外，近处根本没有村落，没有地方买酒，从感情上觉得心里很不舒服，就把钱扔到水中以水做酒一起喝。
English: I met my former friends here, looked around at the desolate suburbs, there were no villages nearby, there was no place to buy alcohol, I felt very uncomfortable emotionally, so I threw the money into the water to make wine with water and drink it.

古文：尽夕酣畅，皆得大醉。
现代文：大家畅快地喝了一夜，全部喝得大醉。
English: Everyone had a good night of drinking and got very drunk.

古文：因便名为沈酿川，明旦分首而去。
现代文：因此便把这条河起名叫沈酿川。第二天早晨大家分头离去。
English: Therefore, they named the river the Shen Brew River. The next morning, they all left separately.

古文：弘仕至尚书。
现代文：后来郑弘官至尚书。
English: Later, Zheng Hongguan was promoted to Shangshu.

古文：石脂水
现代文：石脂水
English: Stony water

古文：高奴县石脂水，水腻，浮水上如漆。
现代文：高奴县的石脂水，水中有油，浮在水面上就象油漆一样。
English: There is oil in the water of Gaona County's gypsum water, and it floats on the surface like paint.

古文：采以膏车及燃灯，极明。
现代文：采回去用它润滑车轴和点灯，特别明亮。
English: It is used to lubricate the axles and to light the lamps, which are particularly bright.

古文：元街泉
现代文：元街泉
English: Motomachi-izumi

古文：元街县有泉，泉眼中水，交旋如盘龙。
现代文：元街县有一眼泉，泉眼中的水，交错旋转就象盘旋的龙。
English: There is a spring in Yuanjie County. The water in the spring swirls like a coiled dragon.

古文：或试挠破之，随手成龙状，驴马饮之皆惊走。
现代文：有的人试着把它搅乱，可随着人搅动的手势又成了龙的形状。驴和马饮了泉水后都惊恐地逃走。
English: Some people tried to stir it up, but with a stirring gesture, it turned into the shape of a dragon. Donkeys and horses drank from the spring and fled in terror.

古文：铜车
现代文：铜车
English: Copper car

古文：荆之清水宛口旁，义熙十二年，有儿群浴此水。忽见岸侧有钱，出于流沙，因竞取之。
现代文：荆州的清水河宛曲的入口处，东晋义熙十二年的时候，一群儿童在清水河中洗澡，忽然看见有钱从那里涌出，于是群童都跑去拣钱。
English: At the entrance to the Qingshui River in Jingzhou, in the 12th year of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, a group of children were bathing in the river. Suddenly, they saw money pouring out of the river, so they all ran to collect the money.

古文：手满置地，随复流去。
现代文：手拿满了便放在地上，可是又被流水冲走了。
English: When his hands were full, he put them on the ground, but they were washed away by the flowing water.

古文：乃以襟结之，然后各有所得。
现代文：群童就把钱放到扎起的衣襟里，每个人都得到了一些。
English: The group of children put the money in their tied-up coats, and everyone got some.

古文：流钱中有铜车，铜牛牵车之势甚迅速。
现代文：流钱中有一辆铜车，铜牛拉车的奔势特别快。
English: There is a copper cart in the stream of money, and the rush of the copper ox-drawn cart is particularly fast.

古文：诸童奔逐，掣得车一脚，径可五寸许。
现代文：群童奔跑着去追车，拉到了铜车的一只车轮。
English: A group of children ran after the car and managed to grab one of its wheels.

古文：时沈敞守南阳，求得车脚。钱行时，贯草辄便停破，竟不知所终。
现代文：车轮的直径有五寸左右，中间隆起为猪鼻形，车轮有六根幅条。整个车轮呈黑色，车轮中心的圆孔呈黄色且很细。当时沈敞任南阳太守，寻求到铜车的车轮，把它当作钱币流通时，用草穿轮草便断裂。竟然没有人知道车轮最终的下落。
English: The diameter of the wheel is about five inches, the middle bulge is pig snout-shaped, and the wheel has six widths. The entire wheel is black, and the round hole in the center of the wheel is yellow and very thin. At that time, Shen Zhanren, the governor of Nanyang, sought the wheel of the copper car, and when it was circulated as a coin, it was broken by cutting the wheel with grass. No one knew the final whereabouts of the wheel.

古文：神牛泉
现代文：神牛泉
English: Shingyu Spring

古文：魏《土地记》曰：沮阳城东八十里，有牧牛山，下有九十九泉，即沧河之上源也。
现代文：北魏《土地记》上说，沮阳城东八十里，有座牧牛山，山下有九十九眼泉，是沧河的发源地。
English: The Northern Wei "Land Record" said that eighty miles east of Deyang City, there is a cattle mountain, and there are ninety-nine eye springs under the mountain, which is the birthplace of the Canghe River.

古文：山在县东北三十里，山上有道武皇帝庙。
现代文：牧牛山在县城东北三十里，山上有道武皇帝庙。
English: Mojiushan is 30 miles northeast of the county seat, and there is a temple to Emperor Daowu on the mountain.

古文：耆旧云，山下亦有百泉竞发。
现代文：老人们说，山下有百泉竞发。
English: The old people say that there are hundreds of springs under the mountain.

古文：有一神牛，驳身，自山而降，下导九十九泉，饮泉竭，故山得其名。
现代文：有一头神牛，身体象毛色不纯的马，从山上下来。山下流通的九十九眼泉水，都被神牛喝干。
English: A sacred cow, its body resembling that of an impure horse, came down from the mountain. The sacred cow drank all the water from the ninety-nine springs that flowed down the mountain.

古文：今山下导九十九泉，积以成川，西南流。
现代文：所以这座山便叫做牧牛山。现在山下流通的九十九眼泉水，积蓄成了一条河，流向西南。
English: That's why this mountain is called Mok Niu Mountain. The water from the Ninety-nine Eyes Spring, which now circulates below the mountain, has accumulated into a river that flows to the southwest.

古文：燕原池
现代文：燕原池
English: Yan Yuan Pond

古文：燕原山天池，与桑乾泉通。
现代文：燕原山天池，与桑乾河以泉水相通。
English: Tianchi of Mt.Yan Yuan, connected to the Kuang Qian River by a spring.

古文：后魏孝文帝，以金珠穿鱼七头，于此池放之。
现代文：北魏孝文皇帝，用金珠穿在七条鱼头上，在天池中把鱼放掉。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty put gold beads on the heads of seven fishes and set them free in the Heavenly Pool.

古文：后与桑乾原得穿鱼，犹为不信。
现代文：后来在桑乾河里得到了头上穿着金珠的鱼。
English: Later, a fish with a gold bead on its head was caught in the Sangqian River.

古文：又以金缕拖羊箭射着此大鱼，久之，又与桑乾河得射箭所。
现代文：孝文皇帝还不信，又用金缕拖羊箭射中天池中的一条大鱼。过了很长时间，又在桑乾河中得到了用箭射中的那条鱼。
English: Emperor Xiaowen still didn't believe, and shot a big fish in the Heavenly Pool with an arrow. After a long time, he got the fish shot with an arrow in the Sangkang River.

古文：山在岚州静乐县东北百四十里，俗名天池，曰祁连汭。
现代文：燕原山在岚州静乐县东北一百四十里，那地方俗称天池，其实叫作祁连汭。
English: Yanyuan Mountain is 140 miles northeast of Jingle County, Zhangzhou. The place is commonly known as Tianchi, but is actually called Qilian Mountain.

古文：丹水
现代文：丹水
English: Danshui

古文：怀州北有丹水，其源出长平山。
现代文：怀州北面有条河叫丹水，它的源头出自长平山。
English: There is a river in the north of Waizhou called Danshui. Its source is from Changping Mountain.

古文：传云，秦杀赵卒，其水变赤，因以为名。
现代文：传说，秦将章邯坑杀赵国降卒，这条河的水就变成了红色，所以叫做丹水。
English: According to legend, when the Qin Dynasty killed Zhao's vassal Zhang Yucheng, the water of this river turned red, which is why it is called Danshui.

古文：上在太原知其故，诏改为怀水。
现代文：皇上在太原知道了其中的缘故，便下诏将丹水改名为怀水。
English: In Taiyuan, the emperor found out the reason for this, and issued an edict to change the name of Danshui to Kaisui.

古文：陆鸿渐
现代文：陆鸿渐
English: Lu Hongzhan

古文：元和九年春，张又新始成名，与同恩生期于荐福寺。又新与李德裕先至，憩西廊僧玄鉴室。
现代文：唐元和九年春，张又新刚刚成名，便与同时中举的人约定在荐福寺相聚，张又新和李德裕先到了，便到西厢房的和尚玄鉴的房中休息。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of the Tang and Yuan Dynasties, Zhang Yaxin, who had just become famous, agreed to meet with the people who were simultaneously promoted at the same time at Jianfu Temple. Zhang Yaxin and Li Deyu arrived first, and they went to rest in the room of the monk Xuanzan in the west wing room.

古文：会才有楚僧至，置囊而息，囊有数编书。
现代文：恰巧有个南方和尚走了进来，放下装东西的口袋就躺下休息。口袋里有几编书，张又新随手抽出一本从头至尾地阅读。
English: It just so happened that a Southern monk walked in, put down his bag of things and lay down to rest. There were several books in his pocket, and Zhang Yixin took out a book and read it from beginning to end.

古文：又新偶抽一通览焉，文细密，皆杂记，卷末又题云《煮水纪》。
现代文：文字小而稠密，都是杂记。书的末尾又题《煮水记》。书上说，唐太宗掌朝时，封李季卿为湖州刺史。
English: The text is small and dense, and consists of miscellaneous notes. The end of the book is also titled "Boiling Water Record." The book says that when Emperor Taizong of Tang was in power, Li Jieqing was appointed to write the history of Huzhou.

古文：太宗朝，李季卿刺湖州，至维扬，遇陆处士鸿渐。
现代文：李季卿在上任途中走到维扬，遇见到隐居的陆鸿渐。
English: On his way to take office, Li Jicheng went to Wiyang and met the reclusive Lu Hongzhan.

古文：李素熟陆名，有倾盖之欢，因赴郡。
现代文：李季卿对陆鸿渐的名字一向很熟悉，现在又见到了陆鸿渐本人，真有如老朋友见面一样高兴，于是二人一同前往郡城。
English: Li Jieqing has always been familiar with the name of Lu Hongyan. Now that he has met Lu Hongyan himself, he is really as happy as if he were meeting an old friend. So the two of them went to the county seat together.

古文：抵扬子驿中，将食，李曰： 陆君善茶，盖天下闻，扬子江南零水，又殊绝。
现代文：抵达扬子驿中，快要吃饭的时候，李季卿说： 陆君善于茶道，天下闻名，而扬子江南零水，又特别超乎寻常。
English: When he arrived in Yangzi Yunnan and was about to eat, Li Jicheng said: Lu Jun is good at tea ceremony and is famous all over the world, and the Yangtze River South Zero Water is particularly extraordinary.

古文：今者二妙千载一遇，何旷之乎！ 
现代文：今天你的好茶道和这里的好水，可以说是千年才遇上一次，为什么要放过这次机会呢？ 
English: Today, your good tea ceremony and the good water here can be said to have met only once in a thousand years. Why should you miss this opportunity?

古文：命军士信谨者，挈瓶操舟，深诣南零取水，陆洁器以俟。
现代文：说完便命令诚实谨慎的军士，提着水瓶操着小船，到南零深处去取水。陆鸿渐将茶具擦拭干净在那里等着。
English: After saying this, he ordered the honest and prudent sergeant to take a small boat with a water bottle and go to the depths of South Zero to fetch water. Lu Hongyan wiped the tea set clean and waited there.

古文：俄水至，陆以杓扬水曰： 江则江矣，非南零者，似临岸者。 
现代文：时间不长水到。陆鸿渐用勺子舀水说： 江水倒是江水，但不是南零水，好像江岸边的水。 
English: Lu Hongqian scooped up water with a spoon and said, "The river water is river water, but it's not South Stream water, it's like the water on the river bank."

古文：使曰： 某棹舟深入，见者累百人，敢绐乎？ 
现代文：取水的军士说： 我划船深入，遇见的有上百人，我敢欺哄吗？ 
English: The water-fetching sergeant said, "I rowed deep and met hundreds of people. Do I dare to cheat?

古文：陆不言，既而倾诸盆，至半，陆遽止。又以杓扬之曰： 自此南零者矣。 
现代文：陆鸿渐不言语，把水倒向盆里。倒了一半，陆鸿渐急忙停住，又用勺子舀水说： 从这往下才是南零水。 
English: Without a word, Lu Hongqian poured the water into the basin. After pouring half of it, Lu Hongqian hurriedly stopped, and sprinkled the water with a spoon, saying, "From here on, it's South Clear Water."

古文：使蹶然大骇，驰下曰：某自南零赍齐至岸，舟荡半，惧其尠，挹岸水以增之。
现代文：取水的军士顿时很吃惊，跪下说： 我从南零怀抱水瓶到江岸，因船摇荡而洒去一半。我怕水少，就舀江岸边的水把水瓶加满。
English: The soldier was very surprised when he went to draw water. He knelt down and said, "I carried my water bottle from the south bank to the river bank, and because the boat was rocking, I spilled half of it. I was afraid of the lack of water, so I filled the water bottle with water from the bank of the Li River."

古文：处士之鉴，神鉴也，其敢隐欺乎！ 
现代文：这位处士的鉴别能力，真是神了，谁还敢隐瞒欺骗他吗？ 
English: This clerk's ability to discriminate is truly amazing. Who would dare to hide or deceive him?

古文：李大惊赏，从者数十辈，皆大惊愕。
现代文：李季卿大为惊叹赞赏，跟从的几十个人，都很惊愕。
English: Li Jieqing was greatly surprised and appreciated, and the dozens of people who followed him were very surprised.

古文：李因问陆，既如此，所经历之处，水之优劣可判矣。
现代文：李季卿于是问陆鸿渐说： 既然这样，您所经过地地方，水的好坏就可以判断了 。
English: Li Jieqing then asked Lu Hongqian and said, "Since this is the case, you can judge the quality of the water wherever you go."

古文：陆曰： 楚水第一，晋水最下。 
现代文：他说， 楚水第一，晋水最下等 。
English: He said, Chushui is the first, and Jinshui is the lowest.

古文：李因命口占而次第之。零水
现代文：李季卿便让陆鸿渐口述排列出各处水的等级。零水
English: Li Jieqing then asked Lu Hongqian to verbally list the levels of water everywhere.

古文：赞皇公李德裕，博达士。
现代文：赞皇公李德裕，是个博学通达之人。
English: Li Deyu, who praised the emperor, was an erudite person.

古文：居廊庙日，有亲知奉使于京口，李曰： 还日，金山下扬子江中零水，与取一壶来。 
现代文：在朝廷做官的时候，他有个亲信奉命出使京口，李德裕对那个人说： 你回来时，金山下扬子江中的零水，给我取回来一壶。 
English: When he was an official in the imperial court, he had a close confidant who was ordered to go to Beijing. Li Deyu said to that person: When you come back, go down to the Jinshan Mountain and bring me back a pot of water from the Yangtze River.

古文：其人举棹日，醉而忘之。
现代文：那人乘船回来那天，因喝醉了酒而忘了取水的事。
English: On the day the man returned by boat, he was so drunk that he forgot to fetch water.

古文：泛舟止石城下，方忆。乃汲一瓶于江中，归京献之。
现代文：船到石头城下时，才想起来，就在江中打了一瓶水回到京城献给了李德裕。
English: When the boat arrived at the foot of Stone Town, he remembered, and he filled a bottle of water in the middle of the river and returned to the capital to present it to Li Deyu.

古文：李公饮后，叹讶非常。曰： 江表水味，有异于顷岁矣。
现代文：李公饮后，非常惊讶，就说： 江南水的味道，有异于几年前了。
English: After drinking it, Li Gong was very surprised and said, "The taste of water from the south of the Yangtze River is different from a few years ago.

古文：此水颇似建业石城下水。 
现代文：这水很象建业石头城下的水。 
English: This water is very much like the water under the Jianye Stone City.

古文：其人谢过不隐也。
现代文：那人便向李德裕道歉，不再隐瞒自己的过错。
English: The man then apologized to Li Deyu and no longer concealed his wrongdoing.

古文：龙门
现代文：龙门
English: Longmen

古文：龙门人皆言善游，于悬水，接木上下，如神。然寒食拜埽，必于河滨，终为水溺死也。漏泽
现代文：龙门人都说他们善于游泳。在瀑布中，抱着木头上下，象神仙一样，然而清明节祭拜扫墓，也一定要在河边，还是有人终于被水淹死。漏泽
English: Longmen people say they are good at swimming. In the waterfall, holding the wood up and down, like a fairy, but the Tomb Sweeping Day worship, must also be on the river, or someone finally drowned. Leakage

古文：漏泽，据郦元注水经云，姚墟东有漏泽，方十五里，绿水泓澄。
现代文：漏泽，据郦道元的《水经注》上说，姚墟东面有漏泽，方圆十五里，绿水深广清澈。
English: Leakage, according to the "Water Sutra Note" of Gong Daoyuan, there is a leak on the east side of Yao Hui, with a radius of fifteen miles, and the green water is deep, wide and clear.

古文：凡三大泽，曲际有阜，俗谓之妫亭。
现代文：一共有三个大泽，弯曲的边缘有座土山，当地称它为妫亭。
English: There are a total of three Osawa, and there is a hill on the curved edge. Locally, it is called Shukutei.

古文：侧有三石穴，广员三尺，而有通否，水自盈漏。
现代文：旁边有三个石洞，三尺宽，不管通与不通的，水都自然充满又自然漏掉。
English: Next to it, there are three stone caves, each three feet wide. Regardless of whether they are open or not, the water naturally fills and naturally leaks out.

古文：漏则数夕之中，倾竭陂泽中矣。
现代文：石洞在几个晚上，便将泽中水全部漏干。
English: Over the course of a few nights, the cave drains all the water in the lake.

古文：左右居人，识其将漏，预以水为曲拔物障穴口，鱼鳖异鳞，不可胜载矣。
现代文：在左右居住的人，知道它要漏的时候，预先用东西堵住洞口，捉到的鱼鳖和别的水生物，用车都装不下。
English: The people who live on the left and right, when they know that it is about to leak, block the hole with something in advance. The fish hooks and other aquatic creatures that are caught cannot be loaded by car.

古文：今按此泽漏，凡穴区别，所谓车箱漏、鼓漏、土漏、鸡漏、猪漏。
现代文：今现在按照这些漏穴的样子，可以把它们区别开来，人们分别叫它们车箱漏、鼓漏、土漏、鸡漏、猪漏。
English: Nowadays, according to the appearance of these leaks, they can be distinguished. People call them car box leaks, drum leaks, soil leaks, chicken leaks, and pig leaks.

古文：春夏积水，秋冬漏竭，居人知之，不过三日之中俱尽。
现代文：泽中春夏积水，秋冬漏尽，居住在这里的人都知道，不超过三天全都漏尽。
English: People who live here know that the lake is full of standing water in spring and summer, and drains in autumn and winter, and drains completely in no more than three days.

古文：在今兖州泗水县治东七十里。
现代文：漏泽在现在的兖州泗水县城东七十里。
English: It is located 70 miles east of the present city of Luzhou in Luzhou County.

古文：又兖州东南接沂州界，有陂，周围百里而近。
现代文：又兖州东南和沂州交界的地方，有个大水池，周围有近百里。
English: In the southeast of Luzhou and at the junction of Luzhou, there is a large pool, surrounded by nearly a hundred miles.

古文：恒值夏雨，侧近山谷间流注所聚也，深可袤丈。
现代文：每年夏天的雨水，从附近山谷中流下来注入到这里聚集而成，大约有一丈多深。
English: The annual summer rainwater, which flows down from the nearby valley, is injected and gathered here. It is about a foot deep.

古文：属春雨，即鱼鳖生焉。
现代文：春天的雨水流入池中，立刻有鱼鳖生长。
English: Rainwater from the spring flows into the pond, and immediately fish larvae grow.

古文：或至秋晴，其水一夕悉陷其下而无余。
现代文：到了晴朗的秋天，池中的水一个晚上就全都渗进池底而一点不剩。
English: In the clear autumn, the water in the pool all seeped into the bottom of the pool in one night and there was nothing left.

古文：故彼之乡里，或目之为漏陂，亦谓之陷泽。
现代文：所以水池附近的住户，有的人看到了水池漏水就叫它漏池，也有的人把它叫作陷泽。
English: Therefore, the residents near the pool, some people see the pool leak and call it a leak, and some people call it a trap.

古文：其水将漏，即有声，闻四远数十里分，若风雨之聚也。
现代文：池水要漏的时候，立即发出声响，声响可传到四周几十里远，就象狂风暴雨会聚在一起到来一样。
English: When the pool water is about to leak, it immediately emits a roar, and the sound can be transmitted to tens of miles around, just as if the raging storms would come together.

古文：先回旋若涡势，然后沦入于穴。
现代文：池水先旋转，然后沉入池底的洞穴中。
English: The water swirls around and then sinks into a cavern at the bottom of the pool.

古文：村人闻之日，必具车乘及驴驼，竟拾其鱼鳖，辇载而归。
现代文：村里的人听见水池发出要漏的声响那天，必定准备好车辆以及驴和背囊赶来，拾尽池中的鱼鳖，装满车载满背囊而回。
English: On the day when the people of the village heard the sound of the pool draining, they must have prepared vehicles, donkeys and backpacks to come, pick up the fish bait in the pool, and return with a full load of backpacks.

古文：率一二岁陷，莫知其趋向及穴之深浅焉。重水
现代文：池水大致一二年渗漏一次，不知道水的去向，以及洞穴的深浅。重水
English: The water of the pool leaks approximately once every twelve years, and it is not known where the water goes, or how deep the cave is.

古文：凡物有水，水由土地。
现代文：凡是有水的地方，水质由于土质和地理的不同而不同。
English: Wherever there is water, the quality of the water varies according to the soil and geography.

古文：故江东宜绫纱，宜纸镜，水故也。
现代文：所以江东适宜纺纱织绫，适宜造纸制镜，皆水质的缘故。
English: Therefore, Jiangdong is suitable for spinning and weaving yarns, suitable for making paper and mirrors, all because of the water quality.

古文：蜀人织锦初成，必濯于江水，然后纹彩焕发。
现代文：蜀中的人织成锦缎后必须在江水中洗，上面的花纹和色彩才能焕发。
English: People in Shuzhong have to wash it in river water after weaving it into brocade, so that the patterns and colors on it can shine.

古文：郑人荥水酿酒，近邑水重。斤两与远郊数倍
现代文：郑人用荥水酿酒，距城镇近的地方的水就重，斤两与距城镇远的地方相比重几倍。
English: Zheng people brew wine with brackish water. The water near the town is heavier, several times heavier than the water far away from the town.

古文：湘水
现代文：湘水
English: Honshu

古文：湘水至清，深五六丈，下见底，碎石若樗蒲子，白沙如霜雪，赤岸若朝霞。
现代文：湘水特别清，水深五六丈，能看见下面的水底。水底的碎石象樗蒲子一样多采，白沙象霜雪一样玉洁，赤岸象朝霞一样鲜红。
English: Hunan water is particularly clear, the water depth is five or six feet, and you can see the bottom of the water below. The gravel at the bottom of the water is as plentiful as water lilies, the white sand is as pristine as frost and snow, and the Red Bank is as bright red as morning mist.

古文：暴水
现代文：暴水
English: Flash flooding

古文：青城山，因滞雨崖崩，暴水大至，在丈人观后，高百余丈，殿当其下，将忧摧坏。
现代文：青城山，因雨水积阻而使山崖崩塌，又猛又急的大水因没有了阻挡而冲了过来。到达丈人观后面，大水有一百多丈高，观中的大殿在水的下面，将有摧毁大殿的危险。
English: Qingcheng Mountain, due to the accumulation of rainwater, caused the mountain cliff to collapse, and the violent and rapid water rushed over because there was no barrier. After reaching the father-in-law's observation, the water was more than a hundred feet high, and the hall under the water would be in danger of destroying the hall.

古文：俄有坠石如岸，堰水向东，竟免漂陷。
现代文：顷刻间有一条巨石坠落下来象堤岸一样，拦截大水向东流去，终于免除了大患。
English: In an instant, a huge boulder fell down like an embankment, intercepting the water flowing eastward and finally eliminating the danger.

古文：观中常汲溪水，以供日食，甚以为劳。
现代文：以前观中常年从小河里打水，用来供给日常饮食。
English: In the past, the nuns used to fetch water from a small river all year round to supply their daily diet.

古文：自此暴水出处，常有流泉，直注厨内，其味甘香，冬夏不绝。
现代文：每日打水很是劳累，从这次大水流过的地方，常有流动的泉水，一直流到厨房里。泉水味道甜香，冬夏不绝。
English: It is very tiring to fetch water every day. From the place where this large water flowed, there is often flowing spring water, which flows all the way to the kitchen. The spring water tastes sweet and fragrant, and is incessant in winter and summer.

古文：仙池
现代文：仙池
English: Senchi

古文：渝州仙池，在州西南江津县界，岷江南岸。
现代文：渝州有个仙池，在渝州西南江津县界内，岷江南岸。
English: There is a pond of immortality in Yuzhou, in the southwest of Yuzhou, within Jiangjin County, on the south bank of the Minjiang River.

古文：其池周回二里，水深八尺，流入岷江。
现代文：这个仙池周长二里，水深八尺，池水流入岷江。
English: This pond has a circumference of two miles and a depth of eight feet. Its water flows into the Li River.

古文：古老传者，有仙人姓然，名独角，以其头有角，故表其名。
现代文：古老的传说中说：有一位仙人姓然，名独角，因为他头上有角，所以用来表示他的名字。
English: According to an ancient legend, there was a hermit whose name was Unicorn, and because he had horns on his head, it was used to represent his name.

古文：自扬州来居此。池边起楼，聚香草置楼下。
现代文：仙人从扬州来住在这里，在池边盖起一座楼，收集了很多香草在楼下。
English: The hermit came from Yangzhou to live here, built a building by the pond, and collected a lot of herbs downstairs.

古文：独角忽登楼，命仆夫烧其楼，独角飞空而去，因名仙池。
现代文：有一天然独角忽然登上楼去，命令仆人烧掉这座楼，他从楼上飞向天空而离去。因此把这个水池取名叫仙池。
English: One day, the unicorn suddenly climbed up the stairs, ordered the servants to burn the building, and he flew from the upstairs to the sky and left. Therefore, this pool was called the Fairy Pool.

古文：见有石岩一所，向岷江而见在。
现代文：现有石岩一处，朝岷江方向就能看见它立在那里。
English: There is only one existing stone rock, and it can be seen standing there in the direction of the Lijiang River.

古文：渝州滩
现代文：渝州滩
English: Yuzhou Beach

古文：渝州城滩，在州西南三十里。
现代文：渝州的城滩，在州西南三十里。
English: The city beach of Yuzhou, 30 miles southwest of the state.

古文：江津县东北沿流八十里，岷江水中，波浪沸腾，乍停乍发，多覆舟之患。
现代文：江津县东北，沿水流八十里长，岷江水波浪翻腾，一浪刚停又起一浪，有许多翻船的悲剧发生。
English: In the northeast of Jiangjin County, the water current is 80 miles long, the water of the Li River is churning, one wave has just stopped and another wave has started, and there are many tragedies of shipwrecks.

古文：古老传，昔有仙居和来为巴州刺史，过此滩舟翻，溺水而死。
现代文：古老的传说中说：过去有个叫居和的仙人来做巴州刺史，经过这个水滩时船翻了，居和被水淹没而死。
English: An ancient legend says: In the past, there was a hermit named Juwa who came to make a history of Bazhou. When he passed this water beach, the boat overturned, and Juwa was drowned and died.

古文：和女与兄途行，女有两儿，方稚齿，乃分金珠作二锦囊，缨致儿颈。
现代文：居和的女儿和她哥哥步行奔来。居和的女儿有两个孩子，都很小，于是她把金珠分作两个锦袋，用丝线系在两个孩子的脖颈上。
English: Juhe's daughter and her brother came running on foot. Juhe's daughter had two children, both very small, so she divided the gold beads into two brocade bags and tied them with silk thread around the necks of the two children.

古文：然后乘船至父没处，叫声投水。
现代文：然后乘船到她父亲淹死的地方，呼叫了几声就投身到水中。
English: She then took a boat to the spot where her father had drowned and, after a few cries, threw herself into the water.

古文：凡六日。与兄梦云： 二十一日，与父俱出。 
现代文：过了六天，她给哥哥托梦说： 二十一日，我和父亲一起从水中出来 。
English: Six days later, she told her brother, Tomo, "On the 21st, I came out of the water with my father.

古文：兄令人守之。
现代文：她哥哥便令人守在江边。
English: Her brother was left stranded by the river.

古文：至期，果然俱浮江水而出，今碑在城滩侧。
现代文：到了那一天，父女二人果然从江水中漂浮出来。现在他们的墓碑在城滩的旁边。
English: On that day, the father and daughter did indeed float out of the river, and now their tombstone is next to the city beach.

古文：清潭
现代文：清潭
English: Cheongdam

古文：新康县西百里，有清潭，在章浦。
现代文：新康县西面约一百里远的地方，有个清潭，在章浦。
English: About a hundred miles west of Shinkang County, there is a clear lake in Zhangpu.

古文：溪源极深，常有白龙藏此中。
现代文：这个溪水之源特别深，常有白龙藏身在潭中。
English: The source of this stream is particularly deep, and there are often white dragons hiding in the pool.

古文：天旱，令人取猪羊粪掷潭中，即有大雨暴水。至今有验。
现代文：天旱时，如果让人取来猪羊的粪便扔入潭中，立即就会下起大雨，到现在还很灵验。
English: In times of drought, if someone were to take pig or sheep manure and throw it into the pond, heavy rain would immediately fall, which is still very effective.

古文：宜春界钟山，有峡数十里，其水即宜春江也，回环澄澈，深不可测。
现代文：宜春的边界钟山，有一条几十里长的山峡。山峡中的水就是宜春江，江水宛转清澈，深不可测。
English: On the border of Yichun, Zhongshan, there is a mountain gorge dozens of miles long. The water in the gorge is the Yichun River. The water is crystal clear and unfathomable.

古文：曾有渔人垂钓，得一金锁。
现代文：曾经有个打鱼的人在江中钓鱼，钓到一只金锁。
English: There was once a fisherman who was fishing in the river and caught a golden lock.

古文：引之数百尺，而获一钟，又如铎形。
现代文：牵引到几百尺远，又获得了一口钟，它好象大铃的形状。
English: It was towed a few hundred feet away and given a bell, which was shaped like a large bell.

古文：渔人举之，有声如霹雳，天昼晦，山川振动。钟山一面，崩摧五百余丈，渔人皆沉舟落水。
现代文：打鱼的人把它举起来，有响声象霹雷，天空由晴朗变得晦暗，山川振动，钟山的一面，崩塌了五百多丈，打鱼的人都因船沉而落入水中。
English: The fisherman lifted it up, and there was a noise like thunder. The sky turned from clear to dark. The mountains and rivers vibrated. One side of the bell mountain collapsed more than five hundred meters high. The fisherman all fell into the water due to the sinking of the boat.

古文：其山摧处如削，至今存焉。
现代文：钟山崩塌的地方象刀削的一样，到现在还那样。
English: The place where the bell tower collapsed looked like it had been chiseled, and it still looks like that.

古文：或有识者云，此即秦始皇驱山之铎也。
现代文：有见识的人说，这就是秦始皇驱山的大铃。
English: People with insight say that this is the Great Bell of Qin Shi Huang.

古文：井
现代文：井
English: Well

古文：乌山龟
现代文：乌山龟
English: Black mountain turtle

古文：乌山下无水。
现代文：乌山脚下没有水。
English: There is no water at the foot of the Black Mountain.

古文：魏末，有人掘井五丈，得一石函。函中得一龟，大如马蹄。
现代文：魏末，有人挖井挖到五丈深，得到一个石匣子，从石匣中得到一只龟，像马蹄一样大。
English: At the end of the Wei Dynasty, someone dug a well to a depth of five feet, got a stone box, and from the stone box got a turtle as big as a horseshoe.

古文：积炭五堆于函旁。
现代文：有五堆炭堆积在石匣旁。
English: There are five piles of charcoal piled up next to the stone box.

古文：复掘三丈，遇磐石，下有水流犹湖然。
现代文：又挖了三丈，遇到了磐石，磐石下面有水流动，像是湖泊。
English: He dug three more feet and came across a rock. Under the rock, there was water flowing, like a lake.

古文：遂凿石穿，水北流甚駃。
现代文：于是穿透磐石，见水向北流得很快。
English: So they cut through the rock and saw that the water was flowing north very fast.

古文：俄有一船，触石而至。
现代文：不一会儿有一只船，船头触到磐石而停住。
English: Soon there was a boat, the bow of which hit a rock and stopped.

古文：匠人窥船上，得一杉木板，刻字曰： 吴赤乌二年八月十日子义之船。 
现代文：打井的人向船上看，见到一块杉木板，上面刻的字是：吴赤乌二年八月十日子义之船。
English: The man drilling the well looked at the boat and saw a cedar plank with the words: "Wu Chi Wu, August 10th, 2002, the boat of righteousness."

古文：绿珠井
现代文：绿珠井
English: Green Pearl Well

古文：绿珠井在白州双角山下。
现代文：绿珠井在白州双角山下。
English: The Green Pearl Well is located at the foot of the Shuangjiao Mountain in Baizhou.

古文：昔梁氏之女有容貌，石季伦为交趾采访使，以圆珠三斛买之。
现代文：从前有一户姓梁人家的女儿长得很美。石季伦做交趾采访使的时候，用圆珠三十斗买下了梁家的女儿。
English: Once upon a time, there was a daughter of a family with the surname Liang who was very beautiful. When Shi Jilun was doing an interview, he bought the daughter of the Liang family with a ball of 30 do.

古文：梁氏之居，旧井存焉。
现代文：梁家居住的地方，旧井还在。
English: Where the Liang family lives, the old well is still there.

古文：耆老传云，汲饮此水者，诞女必多美丽。
现代文：听老人讲，喝了这井水的人，生下的女儿必定大多都很美丽。
English: According to the old man, most of the daughters born to people who drink from this well are beautiful.

古文：里闾有识者，以美色无益于时，遂以巨石填之。
现代文：乡里有人知道了，认为美色不利于时运，就用巨大的石块把井填上了。
English: Someone in the village found out about it and, thinking that beauty is not conducive to good luck, filled the well with huge stones.

古文：迩后虽时有产女端严，则七窍四肢多不完全。
现代文：填井之后，虽然也不时有端庄的女孩出生，但七窃和四肢大多不完全。
English: After the filling of the well, although from time to time a modest girl was born, most of the limbs and limbs were incomplete.

古文：异哉！
现代文：奇怪！
English: How strange!

古文：临沅井
现代文：临沅井
English: Linlui Mountain

古文：葛稚川云，余祖鸿胪少时，尝为临沅令。
现代文：葛维川说，他曾任大鸿胪的祖父年轻时，曾经做过临沅县令。
English: Ge Weichuan said that when he was a young man, he had served as the governor of Linyi County.

古文：云，此县有名家，世寿考，或出百岁，或八九十。
现代文：听他祖父说，临沅县有一户有名的家庭，家中的人世代长寿，有的超过一百岁，有的八九十岁。
English: According to his grandfather, there is a famous family in Linyi County. People in the family have been living long lives for generations. Some are over 100 years old, while others are in their 80s and 90s.

古文：后徙去，子孙转多夭折。
现代文：后来迁移到别处，这家的子孙因转换了地方多半过早地死去。
English: Later, they moved to another place, and most of the descendants of this family died prematurely because of the change of place.

古文：他人居其故宅，后累世寿考。
现代文：别的人住了他家原来的房子，以后世代都长寿。
English: Other people lived in his family's original house, and later generations lived longer.

古文：由此乃觉是宅所为，而不知其何故。
现代文：从这件事来看就觉得是住宅所造成的，但不知道这里面有什么原因。
English: From this incident, I think it was caused by the house, but I don't know what the reason is.

古文：疑其井水朱赤，乃试掘井左右，得古人埋丹砂数十斛，去井数尺。
现代文：见他家的井水发红，就试在井的左右挖掘，挖到了古人埋下的丹砂几百斗，离井几尺远。
English: When he saw that the well water in his home was red, he tried digging around the well, and dug up hundreds of barrels of silt that the ancients had buried, a few feet away from the well.

古文：此丹砂汁因泉渐入井，是以饮其水而得寿。
现代文：这些丹砂的汁液凭借泉水渐渐流入井中，因此饮这口井的水才得以长寿。
English: With the help of the spring water, the sap of these sediments gradually flows into the well, so drinking the water from this well allows the sprouts to live longer.

古文：况乃饵炼丹砂而服之乎！
现代文：何况炼制后的丹砂吃下去呢！
English: What's more, you can even eat the refined red bean paste!

古文：火井
现代文：火井
English: Fire pit

古文：火井一所纵，广五尺，深二三丈。
现代文：有一处火井，长宽各五尺，深二三丈。
English: There is a well of fire, five feet in length and width, two or three meters deep.

古文：在蜀都者，时以竹板木投之以取火。
现代文：住在蜀国都城的人，时常用竹子木板和木棍投入井中以取火。
English: People who live in the capital city of Shu often use bamboo planks and sticks to poke into wells to start fires.

古文：诸葛丞相往观视后，火转盛热，以盆著井上煮盐，得盐。
现代文：诸葛亮丞相前去观察后，火势转旺而更热。用盆放到井上煮盐水能得到食盐。
English: After Minister Zhuge Liang went to observe, the fire became hotter and hotter. Salt can be obtained by boiling salt water in a basin and placing it on the well.

古文：后人以家烛火投井中，即灭息，至今不复燃也。
现代文：后来有人把家中的蜡烛火扔到井中，火井立即熄灭，到现在也不再燃烧。
English: Later, someone threw a lit candle from the house into the well, which immediately went out and has not burned since.

古文：盐井
现代文：盐井
English: Yanai district

古文：陵州盐井，后汉仙者沛国张道陵之所开凿。
现代文：陵州的盐井，是东汉仙人沛国的张道陵在那里开凿的。
English: The salt mine in Lingshou was excavated by Zhang Daolu of the Eastern Han Dynasty.

古文：周回四丈，深五百四十尺。
现代文：井口周长有四丈，井深五百四十尺。
English: The perimeter of the wellhead is four meters, and the depth of the well is 540 feet.

古文：置灶煮盐，一分入官，二分入百姓家。
现代文：在井边安置炉灶用井水煮盐，三分之二送入官府，三分之一进了百姓家。
English: Two-thirds of the salt was sent to government offices, and one-third went to people's homes.

古文：因利所以聚人，因人所以成邑。
现代文：因为有利可图，所以这里的人越聚越多，因人越聚越多，所以形成了城镇。
English: Because it was profitable, more and more people gathered here, and because more and more people gathered, a town was formed.

古文：万岁通天二年，右补阙郭文简奏卖水，一日一夜，得四十五万贯。
现代文：武则天称帝后的万岁通天二年，右补阙郭文简上奏请求出卖井水。一天一夜，就卖水得钱四十五万贯。
English: Wu Zetian said, "Long live the Empress!" Two years later, the Right Rev. Guo Wenjian made a request to sell the well water. One day and one night, he sold the water for 450,000 yuan.

古文：百姓贪其利，人用失业。
现代文：百姓贪图井水的利益，人用失业。
English: The people are greedy for the profits of wells and water, and the people are unemployed.

古文：井上又有玉女庙。古老传云，比十二玉女，尝与张道陵指地开井，遂奉以为神。
现代文：盐井上面还有一座玉女庙，古老的传说说：庙中的十二个玉女，曾经为张道陵指引开井的地点，于是把她们奉为神。
English: There is also a Jade Temple above the salt mine. According to an ancient legend, twelve jade maidens in the temple once guided Zhang Daoling to the place where the well was to be dug, and they were worshipped as gods.

古文：又俗称井底有灵，不得以火投及秽污。
现代文：当地的人又说井底有灵，不能往井下扔火和脏东西。
English: Locals also say that there is a spirit at the bottom of the well, and you can't throw fire and dirt down the well.

古文：曾有汲水，误以火坠，即吼沸涌。烟气冲上，溅泥漂石，甚为可畏。
现代文：曾有人去打水，一失手把火坠落下去，立即发出吼声并沸腾起来，烟气往上冲，泥土飞溅，连石头都被水卷了起来，非常可怕。
English: Once, someone went to fetch water and accidentally dropped the fire, which immediately roared and boiled, the smoke rushed up, the dirt splashed, and even the stones were swept up by the water, which was very scary.

古文：或云，泉脉通东海，时有败船木浮出。
现代文：有人说，井水的泉脉通东海。时常有破败的船木从井水中浮出。
English: It is said that the spring of the well water flows to the East Sea. Often, broken ship timbers float up from the well water.

古文：御井
现代文：御井
English: Mii

古文：善和坊旧御井，故老云，非可饮之井，地卑水柔，宜用灌。
现代文：善和坊有一口旧御井。过去的人说，这口井的水不能饮用。
English: There is an old well in Zenpo. People in the past said that the water from this well was undrinkable.

古文：开元中，以骆驼数十，驮入大内，以给六宫。
现代文：因地势低而水柔软，适宜作洗涤之水。开元年间，用几十头骆驼，把这水驮进皇宫，以供六宫洗涤之用。
English: Due to the low-lying land, the water is soft and suitable for washing. During the first year of the year, dozens of camels were used to bring this water into the Imperial Palace for washing.

古文：王迪
现代文：王迪
English: Wang Di

古文：唐贞元十四年，春三月，寿州随军王迪家井，忽然沸溢，十日又竭。
现代文：唐朝贞元十四年，阳春三月，寿州随军王迪家中的井，忽然沸腾水满流出井外，十天后又一点水都没有。
English: In March of Yangchun in the 14th year of Zhenyuan of the Tang Dynasty, the well in the home of Wang Di, a soldier from Shoushou, suddenly filled with boiling water and flowed out of the well. Ten days later, there was no water at all.

古文：见井底有声，如婴儿之声。
现代文：听见井底有声音，象是婴儿的哭声。
English: Heard a noise at the bottom of the well, like a baby crying.

古文：至四月，兄弟二人盲，又一人死。
现代文：到了四月，王迪的兄弟有两个瞎了眼睛，又有一个死了。
English: By April, two of Wang Di's brothers had lost their eyesight and another had died.

古文：家事狼狈之应验。
现代文：从他家中困顿窘迫之状可以看出，这口井有神且灵验。
English: From the distress in his home, it is clear that the well is a powerful and effective one.

古文：贾耽
现代文：贾耽
English: Jia Tan

古文：贾耽在滑台城北，命凿八角井，以镇黄河。
现代文：贾耽在滑台城的北面，令人开凿八角井，以镇制黄河。
English: Jia Tan was in the north of Slide Town, and people dug octagonal wells to control the Yellow River with the town.

古文：于是潜使人于凿所侦之。
现代文：他暗中派人在凿井的地方观察。
English: He surreptitiously sent someone to observe the place where the well was being dug.

古文：有一老父来观，问曰： 谁人凿此井也？ 
现代文：有一位老人前来观看，问道： 这井是谁开的？ 
English: An old man came to watch and asked, "Who dug this well?"

古文：吏曰： 相公也。 
现代文：小吏回答说是贾耽。
English: The petty official replied that it was Jia Tan.

古文：父曰： 大好手，但近东近西近南近北也。 
现代文：老人说： 真是行家里手，只是东西南北距离都太小了。 
English: The old man said, "He really is an expert, but the distance between the east and west and the north and south is too small.

古文：耽问之，曰： 吾是井大夫也。 
现代文：贾耽问老人是谁，老人说： 我是井大夫。 
English: Jia Tan asked who the old man was, and the old man said: I am Doctor Jing.

古文：八角井
现代文：八角井
English: Hakkakui district

古文：景公寺前街中，旧有巨井，俗呼为八角井。
现代文：景公寺前的大街当中，很早以前就有一口大井，当地人都叫它八角井。
English: In the middle of the main street in front of Gyeonggung-ji Temple, there used to be a large well a long time ago. Locals call it Hakkaku-i.

古文：唐元和初，有公主夏中过，见百姓方汲，命从婢以银棱碗，就井承水。
现代文：唐朝元和初年，有位公主夏天时从井边路过，见百姓在井中打水，便命跟从的丫环用银棱碗，去井里取水。
English: In the first and second years of the Tang Dynasty, a princess was passing by a well in the summer. When she saw people drawing water from the well, she ordered her maidservant to use a silver bowl to draw water from the well.

古文：误坠井，经月余，碗出于渭河。
现代文：丫环不小心将银棱碗掉到井里，过了一个多月，银棱碗出现在渭河。
English: A maiden accidentally dropped a silver bowl into a well. More than a month later, the silver bowl appeared in the Li River.

古文：李德裕
现代文：李德裕
English: Li Deyu

古文：李德裕在中书，常饮常州惠山井泉，自毗陵至京，致递铺。
现代文：李德裕任宰相的时候，经常饮用常州惠山井中的泉水，泉水要从毗陵经驿站传递送到京城。
English: When Li Deyu was the prime minister, he often drank spring water from the well in Huishan, Changzhou. The spring water had to be transported from Viling to Beijing via the railway station.

古文：有僧人诣谒，德裕好奇，凡有游其门，虽布素，皆引接。
现代文：有个和尚到李德裕的住处去拜见他。李德裕好接触奇异之事，凡是有人云游到他门前，虽然是布衣素服，全都引进接见。
English: A monk came to Li Deyu's residence to pay him a visit. Li Deyu was fond of strange things, and anyone who wandered up to his door, even if they were in plain clothes, were all brought in for a meeting.

古文：僧谒德裕，曰： 相公在位，昆虫遂性，万汇得所。
现代文：和尚谢过李德裕说： 相公您在位，连昆虫都通达人性，万条江河都有归处。
English: The monk thanked Li Deyu and said, "Son-in-law, you are on the throne, even insects are able to understand human nature, and all rivers have a home.

古文：水递事亦日月之薄蚀，微僧窃有感也。敢以上谒，欲沮此可乎？ 
现代文：递水事只是点小毛病，小僧私下也有感触，才敢来拜见您，想阻止这件事可以吗？ 
English: The water delivery thing is just a minor problem. The boy also had feelings in private before he dared to come to see you. Is it okay to stop this?

古文：德裕颔颐之曰： 大凡为人，未有无嗜欲者。至于烧汞，亦是所短。况三惑博藆弋奕之事，弟子悉无所染。
现代文：李德裕点头说道： 只要做人，没有无嗜好和私欲的，至于烧汞这是我不会的，况且酒色等三惑及赌博下棋之事，弟子我并没有沾染。
English: Li Deyu nodded and said, "As long as you are human, there is no one without hobbies and selfish desires. As for burning mercury, this is something I cannot do. Moreover, my disciples are not contaminated by things such as drinking and gambling and playing chess.

古文：而和尚有不许弟子饮水，无乃虐乎？
现代文：然而和尚不许弟子饮水，这不是残酷吗？
English: However, the monk does not allow his disciple to drink water. Isn't this cruel?

古文：为上人停之，即三惑驰骋，怠慢必生焉。 
现代文：为了您停水，三惑就会立即放纵，而怠慢必然产生。 
English: In order to stop the water for you, the three confusions will immediately indulge, and neglect will inevitably occur.

古文：僧人曰： 贫道所谒相公者，为足下通常州水脉，京都一眼井，与惠山寺泉脉相通。 
现代文：和尚说： 我所以来拜见相公，是因为我熟悉常州水脉。京都有一眼井，与惠山寺的泉脉相通。 
English: The monk said, "I came to see Shoko because I am familiar with the Changzhou water vein. There is a well in Kyoto that is connected to the spring vein of Huishan Temple.

古文：德裕大笑： 真荒唐也。 
现代文：李德裕大笑说： 真荒唐。 
English: Li Deyu laughed loudly and said: What nonsense.

古文：僧曰： 相公但取此井水。 
现代文：和尚说： 相公只管取这井中的水。 
English: The monk said, "Father-in-law can only draw water from this well.

古文：曰： 井在何坊曲？ 
现代文：李德裕说： 井在寺中的什么地方？ 
English: Li Deyu said: Where is the well in the temple?

古文：曰： 在昊天观常住库后是也。 
现代文：和尚说： 在昊天观常住库后面。 
English: The monk said, "Behind Haotianqun's permanent residence."

古文：德裕以惠山一罂，昊天一罂，杂以八缻一类，都十缻，暗记出处，遣僧辨析。
现代文：李德裕用一个小口大肚的瓶子装了一瓶惠山水、一瓶昊天水，和八瓶同一类水掺杂在一起，总共十瓶，暗自记住每瓶水的出处，送给和尚分辨。
English: Li Deyu used a small-mouthed bottle to fill a bottle of Huishan water, a bottle of Haotian water, and eight bottles of the same type of water mixed together, a total of ten bottles, secretly remembering the source of each bottle of water, and giving it to the monk to distinguish.

古文：僧因啜尝，取惠山寺与昊天，余八乃同味。
现代文：和尚于是用口品尝，取出惠山与昊天之水，其余八瓶全都一个味道。
English: The monk then tasted with his mouth, taking out Huishan and Haotian's water, and the remaining eight bottles all tasted the same.

古文：德裕大奇之，当时停其水递，人不告劳，浮议弭焉。
现代文：李德裕非常惊奇，当时就停止递水。人们不再为此辛劳，流传的议论也停止了。
English: Li Deyu was so surprised that he stopped delivering water at that time. People no longer worked hard for it, and the rumor also stopped.

古文：永兴坊百姓
现代文：永兴坊百姓
English: Yongxingfang folk dance

古文：唐开成末，永兴坊百姓王乙掘井，过常井一丈余，无水。
现代文：唐朝开成末年，永兴坊百姓王乙挖井。已经超过正常井一丈多深了，还没水。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, Wang Yi, a citizen of Yongxingfang, dug a well. It was already deeper than the normal well, and there was no water.

古文：忽听向下有人语及鸡声，甚喧闹，近似隔壁。
现代文：忽然听见所挖的井下有人说话和鸡叫的声音，特别嘈杂，就象在隔壁。
English: Suddenly I heard someone talking and a rooster crowing below the excavated shaft. It was particularly noisy, as if it were next door.

古文：井匠惧，不敢扰。
现代文：挖井的工匠害怕，不敢再向下挖。
English: The artisans who dig wells are afraid, and dare not dig down any further.

古文：街司申金吾韦处仁将军。
现代文：街司申报给韦处仁将军，将军认为此事怪异，没有上奏，急忙令将井填塞。
English: The district secretary reported the matter to General Wei Shiren. The general thought the matter was strange, did not report it, and hastily ordered the well to be plugged.

古文：韦以事涉怪异，不复奏，遂令塞之，据《周秦故事》，谒者阁上得骊山本，李斯领徒七十二万人作陵，凿之以章程。三十七岁，因地中井泉。奏曰，已深已极。凿之不入，烧之不燃，叩之空空，如下天状。
现代文：据《周秦故事》中说，有个谒官在阁楼上得到骊山上报的奏章，说李斯带领被罚劳役的七十二万人在骊山修建陵墓，秦始皇三十七年，因遇到了地下的井泉，李斯上奏说：已经开凿到地下最深处，凿不进去，也烧不着火，敲打地下却什么也没有，就好像下边有天。
English: According to the "Zhou Qin Story," a eunuch in the attic received a copy of the report on Lushan, saying that Li Si led the 720,000 people who were sentenced to forced labor to build a mausoleum in Lushan. In the 37th year of the First Emperor of Qin, after encountering an underground well, Li Si said: It has been excavated to the deepest part of the earth, it cannot be dug into or burned, but there is nothing when it is hammered into the ground. It is as if there is a sky below.

古文：抑知厚地之下，或别有天地也。
现代文：或许在深厚的土地下面，又别有天地？
English: Perhaps beneath the deep soil, there is another world?

古文：独孤叔牙
现代文：独孤叔牙
English: Lonely Uncle Tooth

古文：独孤叔牙，常令家人汲水，重不可转，数人助出之，乃人也。戴席帽，攀栏大笑，却坠井中。
现代文：独孤叔牙，曾经令家人到井中打水，觉得很重转不动井绳，好几个人帮助提了出来，原来是个人，头戴草帽，手扶井栏大笑，又退坠井中。
English: A lone uncle once made his family go to the well to fetch water. He felt very reluctant to move the well rope. Several people helped to pull it out. It turned out to be an individual, wearing a straw hat, laughing at the handrail, and falling back into the well.

古文：汲者搅得席帽挂于庭树，每雨所溜处，辄生黄菌。
现代文：打水的人搅到了草帽，挂在庭院前面的树上，每当下雨时草帽上的雨水滴溜到的地方，就生长出黄菌。
English: The man who brought the water stirred up the straw hat and hung it on a tree in front of the courtyard. Whenever it rains, the yellow fungus grows where the raindrops on the straw hat fall.

古文：柴都
现代文：柴都
English: Chai du to

古文：东方有柴都焉，在齐国之山。
现代文：东方有个柴都，在齐国的山上。
English: In the east, there is a firewood capital, in the mountains of Qi.

古文：山有泉水，如井状，深不测。
现代文：山上有一眼泉水，形状象井，不知有多深。
English: There is a spring on the mountain, shaped like a well, I don't know how deep it is.

古文：至春夏时，雹从井中出，出则败五谷。
现代文：到春夏，冰雹就从井中喷出来，出来就砸坏五谷。
English: In spring and summer, hailstones come out of the well and smash the grain.

古文：人常以柴塞之，不塞则雹为患。故号柴都。
现代文：人们经常用柴禾塞井，不塞，冰雹就生祸患，所以称它梁都。
English: People often use firewood to plug wells, but if they don't, hailstorms will be a disaster, so it is called Liangdu.

古文：濠州井
现代文：濠州井
English: Chishui District

古文：戊子岁大旱。
现代文：戊子年大旱。
English: There was a severe drought in the year of the Goat.

古文：濠州酒肆前，有大井，堙塞积久，至是酒家召井工陶浚之。
现代文：濠州城内酒馆前面，有口大井，堙没堵塞了很长时间。到这时酒馆主人便召募井工淘井。
English: In front of a pub in the city of Zhangzhou, there was a large well that had been blocked for a long time. At this time, the owner of the pub called for a well driller.

古文：有工人父子应募者，其子先入，倚锸而卒。
现代文：有井工父子二人前来应召。儿子先入井，倚着铁锹而死。
English: A father and son, both well diggers, came to answer the call. The son went into the well first, leaned on the shovel and died.

古文：其父遽下，亦卒。
现代文：父亲急忙下去，也死去。
English: The father hurried down and also died.

古文：观者如堵，无敢复入。
现代文：围观的人象堵墙，没人敢再下井。
English: The onlookers were like a wall, and no one dared to go down the well again.

古文：引绳出尸，竟不复凿。
现代文：人们用绳子把二人的尸体拉上来，终不再开井。
English: The bodies of the two men were pulled up with ropes, and the well was eventually closed.

古文：鸡井
现代文：鸡井
English: Chicken well

古文：江夏有林主薄，虐而好赌，甚爱一女，好食鸡，里胥日供双鸡。
现代文：江夏有一个姓林的主薄，性情暴虐而且爱好赌博。他非常钟爱的一个女人，喜欢吃鸡，乡里的官吏每天供给她两只鸡。
English: In Jiangxia, there was a chief named Lin, who was violent and fond of gambling. He was very fond of a woman who liked to eat chicken, and the officials in the village provided her with two chickens every day.

古文：一日。将杀鸡，鸡走，其女自逐之。
现代文：有一天，要杀鸡时，鸡逃走，这个女人就自己去追鸡。
English: One day, when it was time to kill a chicken, the chicken ran away, and the woman went after the chicken herself.

古文：鸡入舍北枯井中，女亦入井，遂不见。
现代文：鸡进入房屋北面的枯井中，这个女人也跟着入井，进去就不见了。
English: The chicken went into a dry well on the north side of the house, and the woman followed it into the well and disappeared.

古文：林自往，亦入井不出。
现代文：林主薄亲自去井边，也进入井中不再出来。
English: Lin Shubao himself went to the well, but also entered the well and did not come out.

古文：俄井中黑气腾上如炊。
现代文：一会儿井中有黑气向上升腾，就象炊烟。
English: For a moment there was black gas rising up from the well, like cooking smoke.

古文：其家但临井而哭，无敢入者。
现代文：他家中的人只来到井边痛哭，没有人敢进入井中。
English: His family members only came to the well to cry, and no one dared to go into the well.

古文：有屠者请入视之，但见大釜，汤沸火炽。
现代文：有个屠夫请求进入井中察看，只见井下有一口大锅，锅中的水被炽热的火焰烧得滚开。
English: A butcher asked to look into the well, only to find a large cauldron underneath, the water in the cauldron boiling away in the blazing flames.

古文：有人拒其足曰，事不干汝，不得入而出。
现代文：有人拖住他的脚说： 不干你的事。 屠夫不得进井被人拉出。
English: Someone held him by the feet and said, "That's none of your business. A butcher must not go into a well and be pulled out."

古文：久之，气稍稍而息，井中唯鸡骨一具，人骨二具。
现代文：过了很长时间，黑气逐渐止息，见井中只有一具鸡骨架，两具人骨架。
English: After a long time, the black atmosphere gradually subsided, and there was only one chicken skeleton and two human skeletons in the mine.

古文：此数闻故老言之，不知其何年也。
现代文：这件事不只一次地听老年人说过，但不知道是哪年的事。
English: I heard the elderly man say this more than once, but I don't know what year it was.

古文：军井
现代文：军井
English: Junii district

古文：建州有魏使君宅，兵后焚毁，以为军营，有大井淀塞。
现代文：建州有一座魏使君的住宅，战乱之后被烧毁，用来作为军营。住宅内有口大井被沉淀物堵塞。
English: There was a residence of Wei Zhijun in Jianzhou, which was burned down after the war and used as a military camp. A large well in the residence was blocked by sediment.

古文：壬子岁，军士浚之，入者二人，皆卒，尸亦不获。
现代文：壬子年，兵士开始疏通这口大井。进入井中的两个人，都死了，连尸体都找不到。
English: In the year of the dog, soldiers began to dredge this large well. Two people who entered the well died, and even their bodies could not be found.

古文：有一人请复入，曰： 以绳缒我，我急引绳，即亟出之。 
现代文：有一人请求再入井，说： 用绳子把我拴住，我急促地牵动绳子，就立即把我拉出来。 
English: One person asked to re-enter the well, saying: "Cuff me with a rope. I quickly pulled the rope and immediately pulled me out."

古文：既入久之，忽引绳甚急，即出之，已如痴矣。
现代文：已经入井很长时间了，那人忽然很急促地牵动绳子，上面的人立即把他从井中拉出来，他已经象痴呆了一样。
English: Having been in the well for a long time, the man suddenly pulled the rope very quickly, and the person on top immediately pulled him out of the well. He was already like a demented person.

古文：良久乃能言云： 既入井，但见城郭井邑，人物甚众。
现代文：半天才能讲话说： 我进入井中，只见井下有城郭市镇，人很多。
English: It took him half a day to speak and say: I entered the well, only to see a castle town below, with many people.

古文：其主曰李将军，机务鞅掌，府署甚盛。
现代文：那里的主管叫李将军。公事很繁杂，官府也很气派。
English: The person in charge there is called General Li. The business is very complicated, and the government office is very imposing.

古文：惧而遽出，竟不获二尸。
现代文：我因害怕就急忙出来了，竟然没找到那两个人的尸体。 
English: I panicked and rushed out, but I couldn't find the bodies of the two people.

古文：建州留后朱斥业。使填此井。
现代文：建州的节度留后朱斥业，派人填上了这口井。
English: After the Jianzhou Festival, Zhu Yueye sent someone to fill the well.

古文：金华令
现代文：金华令
English: The Jinhua Decree

古文：王祝从子某，为金华令。
现代文：王祝的一个侄子，在金华做县令。
English: One of Wang Zhu's nephews is a county magistrate in Jinhua.

古文：筑私第于邑中。
现代文：他在城中建造了一座私人住宅。
English: He built a private residence in the city.

古文：夏暴雨大至，水忽奔往东南隅，如灌漏卮，倾刻而尽。
现代文：夏天城中下起了暴雨，忽然雨水奔流向住宅的东南角，就象灌进漏底的酒器里，一会儿水就流尽了。
English: In the summer, there was a rainstorm in the city, and suddenly the rainwater rushed to the southeast corner of the house, just like pouring into a leaky wine container, and the water ran out in a moment.

古文：其地成井，深不可测。
现代文：漏水的地方形成了一眼井，估计不出井有多深。
English: A well was formed at the place of the leak, and it is estimated how deep the well is.

古文：以丝籰缒石以测之，数十丈乃及底。粘一新捻头而上，与人间常食者，无少异也。
现代文：用丝网坠一块石头来测量，几十丈才到底，粘上一个新馓子，与人间经常吃的，没有多少不同。
English: Using a silk screen to measure a stone, tens of feet to the end, sticking a new pair of pliers, and people often eat, not much different.

