古文：景公有马，其圉人杀之。
现代文：原文有个马官杀死了齐景公心爱的马，景公十分生气，拿起戈想要亲手杀了他。
English: According to the original text, an equestrian killed Qi Jinggong's beloved horse. Jinggong was so angry that he picked up Go and wanted to kill him with his own hands.

古文：公怒，援戈将自击之。
现代文：晏子说： 他不知道自己的罪过就死了，请允许我为国君列举他的罪状。 
English: The cripple said, "He died without knowing his sins. Allow me to enumerate his crimes for the king."

古文：晏子曰： 此不知其罪而死，臣请为君数之。 公曰： 诺。 
现代文：景公说： 好。 
English: Jing Gong said: Good.

古文：晏子举戈临之曰： 汝为我君养马而杀之，而罪当死；汝使吾君以马之故杀圉人，而罪又当死；汝使吾君以马故杀圉人，闻于四邻诸侯，而罪又当死。 
现代文：于是晏子举起戈指着那个马官说： 你身为君王的养马官，不好好养马却私自将马杀了，罪该万死；你使君王因为一匹马而杀了养马官，其罪又该死；这件事如果让其他诸侯知道了，让天下诸侯耻笑君王，其罪更是该死。 
English: Then the mule lifted up his heel and pointed to the equestrian and said: "You, as the king's horse breeder, are not good at raising horses, but you killed the horse yourself. The crime is worthy of death; you made the king kill the horse breeder because of a horse, and his crime is worthy of death; if this matter is made known to other princes, it will make the princes of the world laugh at the king, and his crime is worthy of death.

古文：公曰： 夫子释之，勿伤吾仁也。 
现代文：景公立即说： 夫子，你放了他吧，不要损害了我不仁的罪名。 
English: Jing Gong immediately said, "Fu Zi, you should let him go, don't damage my insensitive crime."

古文：后唐庄宗猎于中牟，践蹂民田，中牟令当马而谏。
现代文：后唐庄宗在中牟狩猎的时候，将百姓的田地践踏得面目全非。
English: Later, when Zhuangzong of the Tang Dynasty was hunting in Zhongmou, he trampled the fields of the common people beyond recognition.

古文：庄宗大怒，命叱去斩之。
现代文：中牟县县令挡在庄宗马前谏阻，庄宗听后十分生气，让身边的随从将县令带出去斩首。
English: The county magistrate of Zhongmou County put up resistance in front of Zhuangzong's horse. Zhuangzong was very angry after listening to this and had his entourage take the county magistrate out and behead him.

古文：伶人敬新磨率诸伶走追其令，擒至马前。数之曰： 汝为县令，独不闻天子好田猎乎？
现代文：有个叫敬新磨的伶人立即带着其他伶人去追赶被押走的县令，然后将他带到庄宗的马前说： 你身为本地的县令，难道不知道天子喜欢狩猎吗？
English: A eunuch named Jing Xinma immediately took other eunuchs to chase the county magistrate who was being driven away, and then brought him to Zhuangzong's horse and said: You are the local county magistrate, don't you know that God likes hunting?

古文：奈何纵民稼穑，以供岁赋，何不饥饿汝民，空此田地，以待天子驰逐？
现代文：为什么要纵容百姓辛勤劳作，按时缴纳赋税，你为什么不让百姓忍饥挨饿，让田地荒芜，好让天子能够尽情地追逐野兽呢？
English: Why do you allow the people to work hard and pay their taxes on time? Why don't you let the people go hungry and let the fields go barren, so that the Son of God can chase the beasts to his heart's content?

古文：汝罪当死，亟请行刑! 
现代文：你真是罪该万死，皇上请您立即下令将他处死吧！ 
English: You really deserve to die. Your Majesty, please order his death immediately!

古文：诸伶复唱和，于是庄宗大笑，赦之。
现代文：其他伶人也在一旁唱和，于是庄宗大笑起来，下令赦免了县令。
English: Other eunuchs also sang along, so Zhuangzong laughed loudly and ordered the county magistrate to be pardoned.

