古文：起上章执徐，尽玄黓敦牂，凡三年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。陈文帝天嘉元年
English: a total of three years. In the first year of Emperor Wen's reign,

古文：世祖文皇帝上天嘉元年
现代文：春季正月，癸丑朔，陈朝大赦天下，改换年号为天嘉。
English: In the first month of spring, the Chen dynasty was overthrown, and the era name was changed to Tianjia.

古文：春，正月，癸丑朔，大赦，改元。齐大赦，改元乾明。
现代文：北齐大赦天下，改换年号为乾明。
English: Northern Qi was amnestied and the era name was changed to Qianming.

古文：辛酉，上祀南郊。
现代文：辛酉，陈文帝在南郊祭天。
English: Hsinchu, Chen Wenti in the southern suburbs of the festival.

古文：齐高阳王湜，以滑稽便辟有宠于显祖，常在左右，执杖以挞诸王，太皇太后深衔之。
现代文：北齐高阳王高，因为善于滑稽说笑、曲意奉承而得到文宣帝的宠爱，常常跟在文宣帝左右，拿棍棒殴打诸王，太皇太后对他怀恨很深。
English: Beiqi Gaoyang Wanggao, who was favored by Emperor Wensun because he was good at humorous jokes and flattery, often followed around Emperor Wensun and beat kings with a club. The Empress Dowager held a deep grudge against him.

古文：及显祖殂，湜有罪，太皇太后杖之百馀；癸亥，卒。
现代文：待到文宣帝去世，高犯了罪，太皇太后命令打了他一百多棍。癸亥，伤重而死。
English: After Emperor Wenzhong died, Gao committed a crime, and the Empress Dowager ordered him to be beaten with more than a hundred sticks. He was severely injured and died.

古文：辛未，上祀北郊。
现代文：辛未，陈文帝在北郊祭地。
English: In Xinwei, Chen Wendi is in the northern suburb of the festival.

古文：齐主自晋阳还至鄴。
现代文：北齐国主高殷从晋阳回到邺城。
English: Gao Yin, the ruler of Northern Qi, returned to Lucheng from Jinyang.

古文：二月，乙未，高州刺史纪机自军所逃还宣城，据郡应王琳，泾令贺当迁讨平之。
现代文：二月，乙未，高州刺史纪机从侯的军队里逃回宣城，占据了郡城呼应王琳，泾县县令贺当迁率兵讨平了他。
English: In February of the same year, Gaozhou Jishi Ji Ji fled back to Xuancheng from Hou's army and occupied the county seat, echoing Wang Lin. He Dangyan, the county magistrate of Jixian County, led the troops to defeat him.

古文：王琳至栅口，侯瑱督诸军出屯芜湖，相持百馀日。
现代文：王琳的军队抵达栅口，侯督率各路兵马屯驻于芜湖，两军相持一百多天。
English: Wang Lin's army arrived at the gate, and the viceroy led the soldiers and horses stationed in Wuhu, and the two armies held each other for more than a hundred days.

古文：东关春水稍长，舟舰得通，琳引合肥漅湖之众，舳舻相次而下，军势甚盛。
现代文：东关一带春天水位涨高了一些，船舰可以通航了，王琳就带领合肥、湖一带的部众，乘兵船沿江排列而下，舳舻首尾相连，军势看去很强大。
English: In the spring, the water level in the Dongguan area rose a little, and ships could sail. Wang Lin led the troops from Hefei and the lake area, and they lined up along the river in warships. They were neck and neck, and the military situation looked very strong.

古文：瑱进军虎槛洲，琳亦出船列于江西，隔洲而泊。
现代文：侯向虎槛洲进军，王琳也派出兵船排列在长江西面，隔着虎槛洲停泊下来。
English: Hou marched towards the Tiger's Throat, and Wang Lin also sent warships to line up on the west side of the Yangtze River and anchor down across the Tiger's Throat.

古文：明日，合战，琳军少却，退保西岸。
现代文：第二天，两军交战，王琳的军队稍稍退却，退到长江西岸以自保。
English: The next day, the two armies clashed, and Wang Lin's army retreated a little, retreating to the west bank of the Yangtze River to protect themselves.

古文：及夕，东北风大起，吹其舟舰并坏，没于沙中。浪大，不得还浦。
现代文：到晚上，东北风猛刮，把他的舟舰全刮坏了，搁浅在沙滩上，浪很大，回不了江岸。
English: In the evening, the north-easterly wind blew violently, wiping out his entire boat and stranding it on the beach. The waves were huge, and he was unable to return to the riverbank.

古文：及旦，风静，琳入浦治船，瑱等亦引军退入芜湖。
现代文：到天亮时，风才平静下来，王琳到江边收拾船只，侯等人也带着军队退入芜湖。
English: By dawn, the wind had calmed down, Wang Lin went to the river to pack up the boats, and Hou and others also retreated to Lugu Lake with the army.

古文：周人闻琳东下，遣都督荆、襄等五十二州诸军事、荆州刺史史宁将兵数万乘虚袭郢州，孙瑒婴城自守。
现代文：北周人听到王琳东下进犯陈朝的消息，乘机派都督荆、襄等五十二州诸军事及荆州刺史史宁带兵数万人乘虚袭击郢州，孙环绕城墙设防线而固守。
English: When the people of North Zhou heard the news of Wang Lin's eastward invasion of the Chen Dynasty, they took the opportunity to send the military of the fifty-two states, including the governors of Jing and Xiang, and the statesman of Jing, Shining, to lead tens of thousands of soldiers to attack Zhangzhou. Sun set up a defensive line around the city wall and held fast.

古文：琳闻之，恐其众溃，乃帅舟师东下，去芜湖十里而泊，击柝闻于陈军。
现代文：王琳听到消息，担心自己军心不稳，众人溃散，于是加紧率领水师东下，直到离芜湖十里地才停泊下来，军中敲击木柝报时示警的声音，一直传到陈朝军队里。
English: When Wang Lin heard the news, she was worried that her military spirit was unstable and that everyone would disperse, so she stepped up and led the sailors eastward until she anchored ten miles away from Lugu Lake. The sound of the military sounding the alarm when they knocked on the raft was heard all the way to the Chen Dynasty army.

古文：齐仪同三司刘伯球将兵万馀人助琳水战，行台慕容恃德之子子会将铁骑二千，屯芜湖西岸，为之声势。
现代文：北齐仪同三司刘伯球带兵一万多人帮助王琳水战，行台慕容恃德的儿子慕容子会带领两千名铁骑屯驻在芜湖西岸，声援王琳。
English: Bei Qiyi and Liu Boqiu of the Third Division led more than 10,000 soldiers to help Wang Lin in the naval battle, and Murong Zi, the son of Gangtai Murong Zande, led 2,000 cavalrymen stationed on the west coast of Wuhu to support Wang Lin.

古文：丙申，瑱令军中晨炊蓐食以待之。
现代文：丙申，侯下令军队一早就做饭，在寝席上用饭，严阵以待王琳军队进犯。
English: In other words, Hou ordered the army to cook early in the morning, eat at the bedside, and wait for Wang Lin's army to attack.

古文：时西南风急，琳自谓得天助，引兵直趣建康。
现代文：当时西南风刮得又急又猛，王琳自以为得到天公帮助，便带兵径崐直逼近建康。
English: At that time, the southwesterly wind was blowing fast and furiously. Wang Lin thought she had received divine help, so she led her soldiers to approach Jiankang.

古文：瑱等徐出芜湖蹑其后，西南风翻为瑱用。
现代文：侯等人慢慢地从芜湖出来跟在王琳兵船后头，结果西南风反而被侯利用了。
English: Hou and the others slowly came out of Lugu Lake and followed Wang Lin's warship. As a result, the southwesterly wind was used by Hou.

古文：琳掷火炬以烧陈船，皆反烧其船。
现代文：王琳让士兵扔火炬去烧陈朝军队的兵船，因为逆风，反而烧了自己的兵船。
English: Wang Lin asked the soldiers to throw torches to burn the warships of the Chen Dynasty army, but because of the headwind, they burned their own warships.

古文：瑱发拍以击琳舰，又以牛皮冒蒙冲小船以触其舰，并熔铁洒之。
现代文：侯命令士兵把战船前后的拍竿拿出来拍击王琳的兵船，又用牛皮蒙着有冲击力的小船去撞他的军舰，并用熔化的铁水泼将过去。
English: Hou ordered the soldiers to beat Wang Lin's warship with the paddles in front and behind the warship, and to hit his warship with a small boat covered with cowhide, and to splash it with molten iron water.

古文：琳军大败，军士溺死者什二三，馀皆弃船登岸走，为陈军所杀殆尽。
现代文：王琳军队大败，军士溺水而死的有十分之二、三，其余的都扔下船逃上岸，被陈朝军队拦住，砍杀得几乎一个都不剩了。
English: Wang Lin's army suffered a crushing defeat. Two-thirds of the officers and men drowned. The rest jumped ship and fled ashore. They were intercepted by Chen's army and almost all of them were hacked to death.

古文：齐步骑在西岸者，自相蹂践，并陷于芦荻泥淖中；骑皆弃马脱走，得免者什二三。
现代文：北齐的步军在西岸也乱成一团，自相践踏，全陷入了芦荻泥泞之中；骑兵都扔下马匹逃跑，幸免于死的只有十分之二三而已。
English: On the west bank, the infantry of the Northern Qi also gathered in a disorderly group, trampled on each other, and all fell into the reed mud; the cavalry all threw down their horses and fled, and only two or three out of ten survived.

古文：擒刘伯球、慕容子会，斩获万计，尽收梁、齐军资器械。
现代文：陈朝军队抓获了刘伯球、慕容子会，杀死和俘虏敌军数以万计，梁军和北齐军的军用物资和兵器也全被陈朝军队缴获了。
English: The Chen Dynasty army captured Liu Boqiu and Murongzi Association, killed and captured tens of thousands of enemy troops, and the military supplies and weapons of the Liang Army and the North Qi Army were all captured by the Chen Dynasty army.

古文：琳乘舴艋冒陈走，至湓城，欲收合离散，众无附者，乃与妻妾左右十馀人奔齐。
现代文：王琳乘坐舴艋小船冲出战场逃跑，抵达湓城，想把散失流离的军士收拢来，但再也没有人愿意归附他，于是只好带着妻妾、左右亲信十几个人去逃奔北齐。
English: Wang Lin rushed out of the battlefield to escape in a small boat and arrived in Handan. She wanted to gather the scattered and displaced soldiers, but no one was willing to join him, so she had to take her wife and concubine and more than a dozen close friends to flee to Beiqi.

古文：先是，琳使侍中袁泌、御史中丞刘仲威侍卫永嘉王庄；及败，左右皆散。
现代文：早先，王琳派侍中袁泌、御史中丞刘仲威去做永嘉王萧庄的侍卫，待到兵败，萧庄左右的人也都逃散了。
English: Earlier, Wang Lin had sent Yuan Xiu, the chamberlain, and Liu Zhongwei, the secretary, to guard Yongjia Wang Xiaozhuang. After the defeat, the people around Xiaozhuang also fled.

古文：泌以轻舟送庄达于齐境，拜辞而还，遂来降；仲威奉庄奔齐。
现代文：袁泌用轻舟把萧庄一直送到北齐边境，才拜辞而回，于是就来投降陈朝，刘仲威护卫萧庄逃奔北齐。
English: Yuan Xiu used a light boat to take Xiaozhuang all the way to the North Qi border, only to bow and return, so he came to surrender to the Chen Dynasty, Liu Zhongwei escorted Xiaozhuang to flee to North Qi.

古文：泌，昂之子也。
现代文：袁泌是袁昂的儿子。
English: Yuan Rui is the son of Yuan Ang.

古文：樊猛及其兄毅帅部曲来降。
现代文：樊猛和他的哥哥樊毅也带着部众前来投降陈朝。
English: Yan Meng and his brother Xing Yi also brought their followers to surrender to the Chen Dynasty.

古文：齐葬文宣皇帝于武宁陵，庙号高祖，后改曰显祖。
现代文：北齐把文宣帝葬在武宁陵，庙号为高祖，后来又改称显祖。
English: North Qi buried Emperor Wenxuan in the Tomb of Wu Ning, the temple name was Gao Zu, and later changed to Xian Zu.

古文：戊戌，诏： 衣冠士族、将帅战兵陷在王琳党中者，皆赦之，随材铨叙。 
现代文：戊戌，陈文帝下诏，说： 不论是有身份的士族文官，还是将帅士兵，凡是陷进王琳一党里的，回来了都赦免其罪，按照他们的才能予以选拔任命。 
English: Emperor Wenxuan issued an edict, saying, "Whether it is a high-ranking civil servant or a high-ranking soldier, whoever is caught in Wang Lin's party and comes back will be pardoned, and will be selected and appointed according to their talents.

古文：己亥，齐以常山王演为太师、录尚书事，以长广王湛为大司马、并省录尚书事，以尚书左仆射平秦王归彦为司空，赵郡王睿为尚书左仆射。
现代文：已亥，北齐任命常山王高演为太师、录尚书事，任命长广王高湛为大司马、并省录尚书事，任命尚书左仆射平秦王高归彦为司空，赵郡王高睿为尚书左仆射。
English: At this time, the Northern Qi appointed Changshan Wang Gao Rong as the Grand Master and recorded Shang's records, appointed Changguang Wang Gao Zhan as the Grand Master and recorded Shang's records, appointed Shang's left-hand servant Shaiping Qin Wang Gao Gui Yan as the Secretary, and appointed Zhao Gu Wang Gao Rui as Shang's left-hand servant.

古文：诏： 诸元良口配没入官及赐人者并纵遣。 
现代文：北齐废帝下诏令： 凡是元姓的家庭成员被配入官府为奴和赐人为奴的，全部遣还。 
English: The Emperor of Northern Qi issued a decree: All family members with the surname Yuan who were assigned to the government as slaves or given as slaves should be repatriated.

古文：乙巳，以太尉侯瑱都督湘、巴等五州诸军事，镇湓城。
现代文：乙巳，陈朝任命太尉侯都督湘、巴等五州诸军事，镇守湓城。
English: At this time, the Chen dynasty appointed the lieutenant governor of Hunan, Ba and other five states as military commanders to guard Shicheng.

古文：齐显祖之丧，常山王演居禁中护丧事，娄太后欲立之而不果；太子即位，乃就朝列。
现代文：北齐文宣帝去世以后，常山王高演住在宫禁之中处理丧事，娄太后想立他为帝但没有实现；太子登了皇位之后，高演才到朝廷百官中去就列。
English: After the death of Emperor Xuan of the Northern Qi Dynasty, King Gao Yuan of Changshan lived under palace ban to deal with the funeral. The empress dowager wanted to make him emperor, but it did not happen. After the prince ascended the throne, Gao Yuan only became one of the hundred officials of the imperial court.

古文：以天子谅阴，诏演居东馆，欲奏之事，皆先咨决。
现代文：因为天子居丧，便下诏让高演居住在东馆，大臣们想启奏皇帝的事，都先到高演那儿请示决定。
English: Because the emperor was in mourning, it was decreed that Gao Rong would live in the East Hall. The ministers wanted to reveal the emperor's affairs, so they first went to Gao Rong to ask for a decision.

古文：杨愔等以演与长广王湛位地亲逼，恐不利于嗣主，心忌之。
现代文：杨等人因为高演与长广王高湛地位很高，与皇帝又是亲属关系，恐怕他们对嗣主产生威胁，所以对他们心怀猜忌。
English: Because Gao Yuan and Changguang Wang Gaozhan were of high status and were related to the emperor, Yang and others were afraid that they would pose a threat to the heir, so they were suspicious of them.

古文：居顷之，演出归第，自是诏敕多不关预。
现代文：在东馆住了一阵子之后，高演搬出来回自己的宅第。从此之后，有关诏书敕令的事大多不再干预了。
English: After living in the East Wing for a while, Gao En moved out and returned to his home. From then on, most of the matters related to the imperial edict were no longer interfered with.

古文：或谓演曰： 鸷鸟离巢，必有探卵之患。
现代文：有人对高演说： 凶猛的鸷鸟一旦离开窝巢，鸟蛋就有被掏的危险。
English: Someone said to Gao Ren: Once the fierce ostrich leaves the nest, the bird's eggs are in danger of being torn out.

古文：今日王何宜屡出？ 
现代文：在如今这种形势之下，大王您怎么可以经常外出呢？ 
English: In the current situation, how can you go out so often?

古文：中山太守阳休之诣演，演不见。
现代文：中山太守阳休之去拜见高演，高演托词不见他。
English: Zhongshan Taizhong Yangxue went to see Gao Rong, but Gao Rong made excuses not to see him.

古文：休之谓王友王晞曰： 昔周公朝读百篇书，夕见七十士，犹恐不足。
现代文：阳休之对常山王友王说： 过去周公早上读一百篇书，晚上会见七十个士，还恐怕做得不够。
English: Yang Xiu Zhi said to Wang You Wang of Changshan: In the past, Zhou Gong read a hundred books in the morning and met with seventy scholars in the evening, but I am afraid it is not enough.

古文：录王何所嫌疑，乃尔拒绝宾客！ 
现代文：录王避什么嫌疑，竟这样拒绝宾客？ 
English: What suspicions was Luo Wang trying to avoid by rejecting his guests in this way?

古文：先是，显祖之世，群臣人不自保。
现代文：早先，文宣帝在的时候，群臣人人不能自保。
English: Earlier, when Emperor Wenxuan was in power, all the courtiers could not protect themselves.

古文：及济南王立，演谓王晞曰： 一人垂拱，吾曹亦保优闲。 
现代文：待到济南王立为皇帝，高演对王说： 皇上现在亲自执政了，我们也能托福保住优闲的日子了。 
English: When the king of Jinan was enthroned as emperor, Gao En said to the king, "Now that the emperor is ruling in person, we can also keep our days of leisure.

古文：因言： 朝廷宽仁，真守文良主。 
现代文：因此又说： 皇上宽和施仁，真是能继承基业、光大教化的良主啊。 
English: Therefore, he also said: Emperor Hirohito and Shigenobu, you are truly a good lord who can inherit the inheritance and enlighten the world.

古文：晞曰： 先帝时，东宫委一胡人傅之。
现代文：王回答说： 先帝时，东宫太子那儿还曾委派一个胡人去辅导他呢。
English: The king replied, "In the time of the previous emperor, the Crown Prince of the Eastern Court also appointed a Wu person to advise him.

古文：今春秋尚富，骤览万机，殿下宜朝夕先后，亲承音旨。
现代文：现在皇上年龄还小，骤然承担起处理纷繁的军国大事的重任，殿下正是得早晚陪在他身边，亲自听取皇上的言语圣旨。
English: Now that the Emperor is still young, he has suddenly taken on the important task of dealing with the complicated military and national affairs. His Royal Highness has to accompany him sooner or later and personally listen to the Emperor's words and decrees.

古文：而使他姓出纳诏命，大权必有所归，殿下虽欲守籓，其可得邪！
现代文：如果放任外姓之人去传递诏命，国家大权必然会旁落，那时殿下虽然想守住自己的藩国，还能如愿吗？
English: If people with foreign surnames are allowed to deliver the imperial edict, the power of the state will inevitably fall by the wayside. At that time, although His Imperial Highness wants to keep his own domain, can he do so?

古文：借令得遂冲退，自审家祚得保灵长乎？ 
现代文：即使您能如愿以偿，急流勇退，但请想想，高家的国祚还能够千秋万代永在吗？ 
English: Even if you can fulfill your wish and the rapids recede, but please think about it, can the Gao family's Kunlun still exist forever?

古文：演默然久之，曰： 何以处我？ 
现代文：高演听了，默不作声，想了很久，才问： 那我该怎样自处呢？ 
English: After listening attentively, he fell silent, thought for a long time, and then asked: So how should I handle myself?

古文：晞曰： 周公抱成王摄政七年，然后复子明辟，惟殿下虑之！ 
现代文：王进言说： 过去周公曾抱着成王摄政七年，然后才把政权归还成王，明确表示自身引退，希望殿下好好想想！ 
English: Wang Jinyan said: In the past, Zhou Gong had held the regency of Cheng Wang for seven years, and then returned the power to Cheng Wang, clearly indicating his retirement, I hope Your Highness will think about it!

古文：演曰： 我何敢自比周公！ 
现代文：高演说： 我怎么敢自比为周公呢！ 
English: Gao Ren: How dare I compare myself to Zhou Gong!

古文：晞曰： 殿下今日地望，欲不为周公，得邪？ 
现代文：王回答说： 以殿下今日的地位声望而言，你想不当周公，能行吗？ 
English: The king replied, "In terms of the status and reputation of Your Highness today, do you want to be unfair to Zhou Gong, is it possible?

古文：演不应。
现代文：高演听了没有应声。
English: There was no response after the high-pitched performance.

古文：显祖常使胡人康虎儿保护太子，故晞言及之。
现代文：文宣帝常常派胡人康虎儿保护太子，所以王的话里提到这件事。
English: Emperor Wenxuan often sent Hu Ren Kanghuer to protect the prince, so the king mentioned this matter in his words.

古文：齐主将发晋阳，时议谓常山王必当留守根本之地；执政欲使常山王从帝之鄴，留长广王镇晋阳；既而又疑之，乃敕二王俱从至鄴。
现代文：北齐国主高殷将从晋阳出发去邺城继位，当时的舆论认为常山王高演必定会留守在晋阳这个国家的根本之地；执政者想让常山王跟随高殷去邺城，留下长广王高湛镇守晋阳；不久又对高湛产生了怀疑，于是下令二王都跟从高殷去邺城。
English: Gao Yin, the ruler of Northern Qi, would leave Jinyang to succeed to the throne in Lucheng. At that time, the public opinion believed that King Gao Yuan of Changshan would definitely stay in Lucheng, the fundamental place of the country; the rulers wanted to let King Changshan follow Gao Yin to Lucheng, leaving King Gaotan of Changguang to guard Jinyang. Soon, they had doubts about Gaotan, so they ordered the two kings to follow Gao Yin to Lucheng.

古文：外朝闻之，莫不骇愕。
现代文：朝廷外的人听到这种安排，没有不感到害怕惊愕的。
English: When people outside the court heard of this arrangement, they were not without fear and consternation.

古文：又敕以王晞为并州长史。
现代文：接着又下一道敕令，让王去当并州长史。
English: This was followed by another imperial edict, calling for Wang to become the governor and make history.

古文：演既行，晞出郊送之。
现代文：高演既已出发，王到郊外为他送行。
English: The high performance had already started, and Wang went to the suburbs to see him off.

古文：演恐有觇察，命晞还城，执晞手曰： 努力自慎！ 
现代文：高演恐怕有人暗中窥视监察，命令王快回城去，临别，拉着王的手说： 望你努力自我保重！ 
English: He feared that someone was secretly watching the inspection, ordering Wang to return to the city as soon as possible, saying goodbye, taking Wang's hand and saying, "I hope you will work hard to take care of yourself!"

古文：因跃马而出。
现代文：然后跳上马奔跃而去。
English: Then he jumped on his horse and galloped away.

古文：平秦王归彦总知禁卫，杨愔宣敕留从驾五千兵于西中，阴备非常；至鄴数日，归彦乃知之，由是怨愔。
现代文：平秦王高归彦总管禁卫军，杨宣布敕令，留下随驾的五千名精兵在晋阳，暗中准备对付非常事件。到达邺城几天后，高归彦才知道这种安排，从此对杨产生了怨恨之心。
English: After Yang announced the imperial edict, he left 5,000 elite soldiers behind in Jinyang, secretly preparing to deal with the emergency. A few days after arriving in Lucheng, Gao Guihang learned of this arrangement, and from then on, he harbored a grudge against Yang.

古文：领军大将军可硃浑天和，道元之子也，尚帝姑东平公主，每曰： 若不诛二王，少主无自安之理。 
现代文：领军大将军可朱浑天和，是可朱浑道元的儿子，娶了废帝高殷的姑母东平公主为妻，他总是说： 如果不杀了二王，少主决不可能平安执政。 
English: The general leading the army, Ko Zhuhuntianhe, the son of Ko Zhuhuntian Dogen, married Princess Dongping, the aunt of the deposed Emperor Gao Yan, as his wife. He always said: If the two kings are not killed, the young lord will never be able to rule peacefully.

古文：燕子献谋处太皇太后于北宫，使归政皇太后。
现代文：燕子献谋划着把太皇太后安置到邺城北宫去，使国家政权归皇太后掌管。
English: Swallow devotes himself to plotting to place the great empress dowager in the North Palace of Lucheng, so that the state power would be under the control of the empress dowager.

古文：又自天保八年已来，爵赏多滥，杨愔欲加澄汰，乃先自表解开府及开封王，诸叨窃恩荣者皆从黜免。
现代文：另外，自从天保八年以来，官爵赏赐太多太滥，杨想加以澄清淘汰，于是带头上表请求解除自己开府及开封王的职务，众多沾光窃取皇恩享受荣华的人都跟着被废黜罢免了。
English: In addition, since the 8th year of the Tenpo era, there were too many extravagant rewards given to officials and nobles. Yang wanted to clarify and eliminate them, so he took the lead in requesting that he be relieved of his duties as the head of the government and the king of Kaifeng. Many people who stole the glory of the imperial grace and enjoyed the glory were subsequently deposed and removed.

古文：由是嬖宠失职之徒，尽归心二叔。
现代文：从此那些原来被宠幸但现在失去官职的人，都归心于高演与高湛两位皇叔。
English: Since then, those who were once favored but have now lost their official positions have all turned their hearts to Gao Yuan and Gao Zhan, the two imperial uncles.

古文：平秦王归彦初与杨、燕同心，既而中变，尽以疏忌之迹告二王。
现代文：平秦王高归彦起初和杨、燕子献是一条心，不久中途变志，把杨、燕子献疏远猜忌二王的种种迹象全部密告了二王。
English: At first, King Gao Guihang of the Ping Qin Dynasty was of one mind with Yang and Yan Zi Xian, but he soon changed his mind. He told the two kings all the signs of Yang and Yan Zi Xian's estrangement and suspicion of the two kings.

古文：侍中宋钦道，弁之孙也，显祖使在东宫，教太子以吏事。
现代文：侍中宋钦道是宋弁的孙子。文宣帝派他住在东宫，教育太子熟悉吏事。
English: The chamberlain, Song Qin Dao, was the grandson of Song Ben. Emperor Wenzhong sent him to live in the East Palace to teach the prince to be familiar with government affairs.

古文：钦道面奏帝，称 二叔威权既重，宜速去之。 
现代文：宋钦道当面启奏废帝说： 两位皇叔威权已经很重，应该设法尽快除去他们。 
English: Song Qin Dao said in front of the former emperor: The authority of the two imperial uncles is already very heavy, and we should try to remove them as soon as possible.

古文：帝不许，曰： 可与令公共详其事。 
现代文：废帝不许可，对他说： 你可以和令公杨共同详细了解这件事。 
English: The deposed emperor did not agree and said to him, "You can learn about this matter in detail together with Ling Gongyang."

古文：愔等议出二王为刺史，以帝慈仁，恐不可所奏，乃通启皇太后，具述安危。
现代文：杨等人商议把二王派出去当刺史，但考虑到高殷天性慈爱仁厚，恐怕不会批准他们的奏请，于是就直接启奏皇太后，详尽讲述了二王构成的威胁以及皇上的安危。
English: Yang and the others discussed sending the two kings out to be assassinated, but considering their high nature, mercy and kindness, I'm afraid they wouldn't approve their request, so they directly appealed to the empress dowager and described in detail the threat posed by the two kings and the safety of the emperor.

古文：宫人李昌仪，即高仲密之妻也，李太后以其同姓，甚相昵爱，以启示之；昌仪密启太皇太后。
现代文：宫人李昌仪，是高仲密的妻子。李太后因为她和自己同姓，便和她很亲近，十分喜爱她，就把杨等人递上来的奏折给她看。
English: Li Changyi, a member of the imperial court, was Gao Zhongmi's wife. Empress Dowager Li, because she had the same surname as herself, was very close to her and loved her very much, so she showed her the musical scores submitted by Yang and others.

古文：愔等又议不可令二王俱出，乃奏以长广王湛镇晋阳，以常山王演录尚书事。
现代文：李昌仪便秘密地把奏折的内容报告了太皇太后。杨等人又商议说不能让二王都出去当刺史，于是就启奏，请求让长广王高湛镇守晋阳，任命常山王高演为录尚书事。
English: Li Changyi then secretly reported the contents of the record to the Grand Empress Dowager. Yang and others also discussed that the two kings should not be allowed to go out to make history, so they opened the record and requested that Changguang Wang Gaotan keep Jinyang and appointed Changshan Wang Gaoyuan to record the history.

古文：二王既拜职，乙巳，于尚书省大会百僚。
现代文：二王拜领了官职以后，乙巳，在尚书省会见百官。
English: After the two kings received their official positions, they met with hundreds of officials in Shangshu Province.

古文：愔等将赴之，散骑常侍兼中书侍郎郑颐止之曰： 事未可量，不宜轻脱。 
现代文：杨等人将去赴会，散骑常侍兼中书侍郎郑颐阻止了他们，说： 这事的深浅不可测量，不宜轻率。 
English: Yang and others were about to go to the meeting, but Zheng Yao, the riding attendant and secretary of the Central Committee, stopped them, saying, "This matter is immeasurable and should not be taken lightly.

古文：愔曰： 吾等至诚体国，岂常山拜职有不赴之理！ 
现代文：杨说： 我等对国家一片至诚，岂有常山王拜职而不去赴会的道理！ 
English: Yang said: As long as we are sincere to the country, there is no reason why the king of the mountain should not go to the meeting!

古文：长广王湛，旦伏家僮数十人于录尚书后室，仍与席上勋贵贺拔仁、斛律金等数人相知约曰： 行酒至愔等，我各劝双杯，彼必致辞。
现代文：长广王高湛，一早就在后室中埋伏了几十个家僮，并对参与宴会的勋贵贺拔仁、斛律金等几个人关照说： 敬酒敬到杨等人时，我对他们每个人各劝双杯酒，他们必定起来致辞。
English: Changguang Wang Gaotan, in the morning, ambushed dozens of family members in the back room, and said to several people who participated in the banquet: When toasting Yang and others, I advised each of them to have two glasses of wine, and they would certainly stand up to make a speech.

古文：我一曰 执酒 ，二曰 执酒 ，三曰 何不执 ，尔辈即执之！ 
现代文：我头一次说： 拿酒 ，第二次说： 拿酒 ，第三次说 为什么不拿！ 
English: The first time I said, "Take the wine," the second time I said, "Take the wine," and the third time I said, "Why not?"

古文：及宴，如之，愔大言曰： 诸王反逆，欲杀忠良邪？
现代文：你们就动手把他们抓起来！ 到了宴会时，果真照计划办理。杨被抓时大声说： 诸王造反谋逆，想杀害忠臣良将吗？
English: When it came to the banquet, everything went according to plan. When Yang was arrested, he said in a loud voice, "The kings have plotted a rebellion and want to kill a loyal general?

古文：尊天子，削诸侯，赤心奉国，何罪之有！ 
现代文：我等尊奉天子，削弱诸侯，赤胆忠心为国家，有什么罪！ 
English: What is our sin, that we wait to honor the Son of God, to weaken the princes, and to be loyal to our country?

古文：常山王演欲缓之。
现代文：常山王高演想缓和一点。
English: Changshan Wang Gao envisions easing up a bit.

古文：湛曰： 不可。 
现代文：高湛说： 不行。 
English: Gaotan said, "No."

古文：于是拳杖乱殴，愔及天和、钦道皆头面血流，各十人持之。
现代文：于是拳头棍棒乱打，杨、可朱浑天和、宋钦道都被打的满头满面流血，每人被十个人按住，一点也动弹不得。
English: As a result, fists and clubs were beaten indiscriminately. Yang, Zhu Hun Tian and Song Qin Dao were all beaten with their heads and faces covered in blood. Each of them was held down by ten people and could not move at all.

古文：燕子献多力，头又少发，狼狈排众走出门，斛律光逐而擒之。
现代文：燕子献力气大，头发又很少，一下子挣脱，狼狈地推开众人跑出门去，斛律光追上去捉住了他。
English: The swallow, with great energy and very little hair, suddenly broke free, pushed the crowd away and ran out of the door, and the hawk chased and caught him.

古文：子献叹曰： 丈夫为计迟，遂至于此！ 
现代文：燕子献长叹说： 大丈夫用计迟了一步，终于落到这步田地！ 
English: Swallow gave a long sigh and said, "It's okay, I was one step behind with the calculator, but I finally made it to this step!"

古文：使太子太保薛孤延等执颐于尚药局。
现代文：二王又派太子太保薛孤延等到尚药局去抓郑颐。
English: The two kings also sent the crown prince Taibo Xue Kuyan to the Shang Pharmacy to arrest Zheng Qi.

古文：颐曰： 不用智者言至此，岂非命也！ 
现代文：郑颐说： 这帮人不听智者的话以至于此，这难道不是命吗？ 
English: Zheng Yao said, "These people don't listen to the words of the wise, to such an extent, isn't this life?

古文：二王与平秦王归彦、贺拔仁、斛律金拥愔等唐突入云龙门，见都督叱利骚，招之，不进，使骑杀之。
现代文：常山王高演、长广王高湛与平秦王高归彦、贺拔仁、斛律金推拥着杨等人闯入云龙门，遇见了都督叱利骚，便招呼他过来，他不来，便派骑兵去杀了他。
English: Changshan's King Gao Yuan, Changguang's King Gaotan and Pingqin's King Gao Guihong, He Bajin and Baolujin pushed Yang and others to break into the Yunlong Gate. When they met the governor, they invited him to come. If he did not come, they sent cavalry to kill him.

古文：开府仪同三司成休宁抽刃呵演，演使归彦谕之，休宁厉声不从。
现代文：开府仪同三司成休宁抽出刀来呵斥高演，高演派高归彦去说服他，成休宁声色俱厉地抗议，表示绝不服从。
English: Kaifu Yi and the three divisions of Chengxuning drew their swords to repel Gao Yun, Gao Yun sent Gao Guihong to persuade him, and Chengxuning protested loudly, saying that he would never obey.

古文：归彦久为领军，素为军士所服，皆弛仗，休宁方叹息而罢。
现代文：高归彦长期以来担任领军，军士们一向对他很敬服，这时都放下兵器不再抵抗，成休宁才叹息着让开了。
English: Gao Guihiko had been leading the army for a long time, and the sergeants had always been very respectful of him. At this time, they all put down their weapons and no longer resisted, and Cheng Hui Ning sighed and left.

古文：演入，至昭阳殿，湛及归彦在硃华门外。
现代文：高演进了皇宫，来到昭阳殿，高湛和高归彦停在朱华门外。
English: Gao evolved into the Imperial Palace, came to the Shoyang Palace, Gaotan and Gao Guihang stopped outside the Zhuhua Gate.

古文：帝与太皇太后并出，太皇太后坐殿上，皇太后及帝侧立。
现代文：废帝和太皇太后、皇太后一起走出来，太皇太后坐在宫殿上，皇太后和废帝站在两侧。
English: The Emperor and the Grand Empress Dowager and the Empress Dowager came out together, the Grand Empress Dowager sat on the palace, and the Empress Dowager and the Emperor stood on both sides.

古文：演以砖叩头，进言曰： 臣与陛下骨肉至亲，杨遵彦等欲独擅朝权，威福自己，自王公已下皆重足屏气；共相脣齿，以成乱阶，若不早图，必为宗社之害。
现代文：高演把头抵在殿砖上，边叩头边说： 臣与陛下是至亲骨肉，杨遵彦等人想独自垄断朝廷大权，作威作福，自王公以下的文武百官无不蹑足屏气，莫敢吱声；这帮人互相勾结，串通一气，已经成了动乱的祸根，如果不早日除掉他们，必定会成为宗庙社稷的大害。
English: Gao Yuan rested his head on the bricks of the palace and bowed his head as he said, "Ministers and your majesty are blood relatives. Yang Zunyan and others want to monopolize the power of the imperial court alone and seek glory. All the civil and military officials from the prince down must hold their breath and dare not utter a word. These people have colluded with each other and have become the root cause of the turmoil. If they are not eliminated as soon as possible, they will surely become a great harm to the dzong, the temple and the community.

古文：臣与湛为国事重，贺拔仁、斛律金惜献武皇帝之业，共执遵彦等入宫，未敢刑戮。
现代文：我与高湛以国家安危为重，贺拔仁、斛律金珍惜献武皇帝开创的事业，所以才共同行动，抓住了杨遵彦等人入宫见皇上，我们未敢崐对他们擅自施刑杀戮，现交由皇上处治。
English: Gao Zhan and I attach great importance to the safety of the country, and He Bajin and Yao Liujin cherish the cause created by Emperor Xianwu. That is why we acted together and caught Yang Zunyan and others entering the palace to see the emperor. We did not dare to torture and kill them without authorization, and now they will be dealt with by the emperor.

古文：专辄之罪，诚当万死。 
现代文：我等没有事先请示就行事，专断之罪，实在罪该万死。 
English: If we act without prior request, the crime of arbitrariness, the real crime deserves death.

古文：时庭中及两庑卫士二千馀人，皆被甲待诏。
现代文：当时宫庭中和两边走廊里有卫士二千余人，都披着甲胄、拿着兵器等待废帝的诏令。
English: At that time, there were more than two thousand guards in the palace courtyard and in the corridors on both sides, all wearing armor and holding weapons, waiting for the emperor's edict.

古文：武卫娥永乐，武力绝伦，素为显祖所厚，叩刀仰视，帝不睨之。
现代文：武卫娥永乐，武艺力气超群，过去一向为文宣帝所看重厚待，这时用手敲着刀刃，抬起头来仰视废帝，期待他下令。
English: Wu Wei E Yongle, martial arts strength is superior, in the past has always been valued by Emperor Wenzhong, at this time he tapped the blade with his hand, looked up at the emperor, expecting him to give orders.

古文：帝素吃讷，仓猝不知所言。
现代文：但废帝有意不看他。废帝平素就口吃木讷，这时仓猝之间更不知该说什么好。
English: But Emperor Wutu deliberately did not look at him. Emperor Wutu usually stuttered, and at this time he suddenly did not know what to say.

古文：太皇太后令却仗，不退；又厉声曰： 奴辈即今头落！ 
现代文：太皇太后下令卫兵放下兵器退下，卫士们不退；太皇太后又厉声喝道： 你们这些奴才不听令，立刻就让你们掉脑袋！ 
English: The empress dowager ordered the guards to put down their weapons and retreat, but the guards did not retreat; the empress dowager also shouted: "You slaves do not obey orders, let your heads fall at once!"

古文：乃退。
现代文：卫士们这才退下了。
English: So back off.

古文：永乐内刀而泣。
现代文：娥永乐把刀插入鞘内痛哭起来。
English: E Yongle put the knife into the sheath and cried bitterly.

古文：太皇太后因问： 杨郎何在？ 
现代文：太皇太后这才发问： 杨郎现在在哪里？ 
English: It was only then that the empress dowager asked: Where is Yang Rong now?

古文：贺拔仁曰： 一眼已出。 
现代文：贺拔仁回答说： 他一只眼睛的眼球被打出来了。 
English: He Bajin replied: The eyeball of one of his eyes was knocked out.

古文：太皇太后怆然曰： 杨郎何所能为，留使岂不佳邪！ 
现代文：太皇太后怆然涕下，说： 杨郎能有什么反抗之力呢，留着他以待任命使唤难道不好吗？ 
English: The empress dowager snorted and said, "What resistance can Yang Lang offer? Isn't it better to keep him as a servant until he is appointed?

古文：乃让帝曰： 此等怀逆，欲杀我二子，次将及我，尔何为纵之！ 
现代文：于是责备废帝，说： 这些人心怀叛逆，想杀害我的两个儿子，接着就将要杀害我，你为什么纵容他们？ 
English: Then he reproached the deposed emperor, saying: "These men have a rebellious heart, they want to kill my two sons, and then they are going to kill me. Why do you tolerate them?

古文：帝犹不能言。
现代文：废帝还是说不出话来。
English: The young emperor still did not speak.

古文：太皇太后怒且悲，曰： 岂可使我母子受汉老妪斟酌！ 
现代文：太皇太后既非常生气又悲伤难禁，她说： 怎么可以让我们母子受这汉族老太婆的算计呢！ 
English: The empress dowager was both very angry and sad. She said, "How can we allow our mother and son to be manipulated by this old Han woman?"

古文：太后拜谢。
现代文：皇太后跪下谢罪。
English: The empress dowager knelt down and repented.

古文：太皇太后又为太后誓言： 演无异志，但欲去逼而已。 
现代文：太皇太后又为皇太后发誓说： 高演并没有夺位的异志，只是想除去自身的威胁而已。 
English: The great empress dowager also swore for the empress dowager, saying: Gao En has no ambition to seize the throne, he just wants to remove the threat to himself.

古文：演叩头不止。
现代文：高演在下面不断叩头。
English: The high performer continues to kowtow below.

古文：太后谓帝： 何不安慰尔叔！ 
现代文：皇太后只好对废帝说： 还不赶快安慰你叔叔！ 
English: The empress dowager had no choice but to say to the deposed emperor: Don't hurry to comfort your uncle!

古文：帝乃曰： 天子亦不敢为叔惜，况此汉辈！
现代文：废帝这才说出话来： 我身为天子，都没有把握保住自己的性命，为叔辈所惜，何况这些汉人！
English: It was only then that the emperor uttered these words: As a son of heaven, I did not have the confidence to save my own life. I feel sorry for my uncles, not to mention these Han people!

古文：但匄儿命，儿自下殿去，此属任叔父处分。 
现代文：只要给侄儿一条命，我自己下殿走开，这些人交给叔叔，由你们处治。 
English: Just give my nephew a chance to live, and I'll go away, hand these people over to my uncle, and let you deal with them.

古文：遂皆斩之。
现代文：于是把杨等人全部斩首了。
English: He then beheaded Yang Hui and others.

古文：长广王湛以郑颐昔尝谗己，先拔其舌，截其手而杀之。
现代文：长广王高湛因为记恨郑颐过去曾经在皇帝面前进他的谗言，就特别凌虐他，先把他的舌头割掉，又砍下他的手，然后才杀死他。
English: Changguang Wang Gaotan, because he remembered that Zheng Yi had criticized him in front of the emperor in the past, tortured him in a special way, first cut off his tongue, then cut off his hand, and then killed him.

古文：演令平秦王归彦引侍卫之士向华林园，以京畿军士入守门阁，斩娥永乐于园。
现代文：高演命令平秦王高归彦把原来的侍卫兵士带到华林园去，另换京城一带的军士来宫中担任守卫，娥永乐在华林园被杀害了。
English: Gao Yuan ordered Ping Qin King Gao Guihang to take the original bodyguard soldiers to the Hualing Garden, and to replace the military officers around the capital to guard the palace. E Yongle was killed in the Hualing Garden.

古文：太皇太后临愔丧，哭曰： 杨郎忠而获罪。 
现代文：太皇太后亲自参加杨的丧事，哭着说： 杨郎是因为忠君才获罪的呀！ 
English: When the Empress Dowager was burying Yang Hui, she cried and said, "Yang Lang was punished for being loyal.

古文：以御金为之一眼，亲内之，曰： 以表我意。 
现代文：她让人用御府的金子做了一只眼睛，亲自放到杨眼眶里去，说： 以此来表达我痛惜的心意。 
English: He had an eye made for him from the gold of the royal palace, and he placed it in his own eye, saying: "Use this to show my heart."

古文：演亦悔杀之。
现代文：高演也后悔杀了杨。
English: Gao En also regretted killing Yang.

古文：于是下诏罪状愔等，且曰： 罪止一身，家属不问。 
现代文：于是下诏宣布杨等人的罪状时，加上了这样一句： 这些人的罪由他们个人负责，家属不予问罪。 
English: Therefore, when the indictment of Yang et al. was announced, the following sentence was added: These people are personally responsible for their crimes, and their families will not be held accountable.

古文：顷之，复簿录五家；王晞固谏，乃各没一房，孩幼尽死，兄弟皆除名。
现代文：过一阵子，又根据簿册逮捕杨、可朱浑天和、燕子献、宋钦道、郑颐等五家的人口；王一再劝谏，于是五家各抄斩一房，小孩也斩而不留，兄弟们则全被除名。
English: After a while, according to the book, Yang, Zhu Hun Tianhe, Yan Zi Xian, Song Qin Dao, Zheng Yao and other five families were arrested; Wang repeatedly persuaded them, so each of the five families was beheaded, the children were also beheaded, and the brothers were all expelled.

古文：以中书令赵彦深代杨愔总机务。
现代文：任命中书令赵彦深代替杨总理朝廷机要大事。
English: The appointment of Zhao Yanshen to replace Premier Yang is a major event for the imperial court.

古文：鸿胪少卿阳休之私谓人曰： 将涉千里，杀骐驎而策蹇驴，可悲之甚也！ 
现代文：鸿胪少卿阳休之私下对人说： 这真是将要跋涉千里的时候，却杀掉了骐骏马而换上跛足老驴呀，真是太可悲了！ 
English: Hung Yan Shaoqing Yang Xiu privately said to the people: "It is really very sad when you have to travel thousands of miles, but you have killed a horse and replaced it with a lame donkey!

古文：戊申，演为大丞相、都督中外诸军、录尚书事，湛为太傅、京畿大都督，段韶为大将军，平阳王淹为太尉，平秦王归彦为司徒，彭城王浟为尚书令。
现代文：戊申，封高演为大丞相、都督中外诸军、录尚书事，封高湛为太傅、京亲畿大都督，封段韶为大将军，平阳王高淹为太尉，平秦王高归彦为司徒，彭城王高为尚书令。
English: Wushin, Fong Gao acted as the grand chancellor, the governor of the armies at home and abroad, and recorded the official records; Fong Gaotan was the taifu, the grand governor of Beijing and Kansai; Fong Duanjun was the grand general; Pingyang Wang Gaozhun was the taifu, Pingqin Wang Gao Guihang was the stu, and Pengcheng Wang Gao was the honorary secretary.

古文：江陵之陷也，长城世子昌及中书侍郎顼皆没于长安。
现代文：江陵之陷也，长城世子昌及中书侍郎顼皆没于长安。
English: In the case of the fall of Gangneung, the Great Wall's heir, Zichang, and the Chinese scribe, Lang Yao, both died in Chang'an.

古文：高祖即位，屡请之于周，周人许而不遣。
现代文：高祖即位，屡请之于周，周人许而不遣。
English: When Gao Zu ascended the throne, he repeatedly invited Zhou, but Zhou was reluctant.

古文：高祖殂，周人乃遣昌还，以王琳之难，居于安陆。
现代文：高祖殂，周人乃遣昌还，以王琳之难，居于安陆。
English: Gao Zu's ancestor, Zhou Ren was sent to Chang'an, but due to Wang Lin's hardship, he lived in Anlu.

古文：琳败，昌发安陆，将济江，致书于上，辞甚不逊。
现代文：琳败，昌发安陆；将济江，致书于上，辞甚不逊。
English: Rinfei, Changfa, Anlu; Jijiang, addressed to the above, the words are not inferior.

古文：上不怿，召侯安都从容谓曰： 太子将至，须别求一籓为归老之地。 
现代文：上不怿，召侯安都从容谓曰： 太子将至，须别求一藩为归老之地。 
English: He did not hesitate to call Hou Andu and said: "The prince is coming, you must not ask a clan to be the place to return to."

古文：安都曰： 自古岂有被代天子！
现代文：安都曰： 自古岂有被代天子！
English: Ando said, "Has there ever been a child of heaven since ancient times?

古文：臣愚，不敢奉诏。 
现代文：臣愚，不敢奉诏。 
English: Vassal fools, don't dare to obey the edict.

古文：因请自迎昌。
现代文：因请自迎昌。
English: Please come to Yingchang.

古文：于是群臣上表，请加昌爵命。
现代文：于是群臣们联名上表，请求文帝给陈昌封爵并任命。
English: As a result, the courtiers jointly petitioned Emperor Wen to knight Chen Chang and appoint him.

古文：庚戌，以昌为骠骑将军、湘州牧，封衡阳王。
现代文：庚戌，任命陈昌为骠骑将军、湘州牧，封他为衡阳王。
English: Geng Hui appointed Chen Chang as the general of the cavalry and the governor of Hunan Province, and made him the king of Hengyang.

古文：齐大丞相演如晋阳，既至，谓王晞曰： 不用卿言，几至倾覆。
现代文：北齐大丞相高演到晋阳去，到达之后，对王说： 我当初不听您的话，差点被人扳倒。
English: After arriving in Jinyang, he said to Wang, "I didn't listen to you at first, and I was almost knocked down.

古文：今君侧虽清，终当何以处我？ 
现代文：现在君王身旁的坏人虽然已清除掉了，但我到底应当怎样自处呢！ 
English: Now that the bad guys around the king have been eliminated, how am I supposed to live with myself?

古文：晞曰： 殿下往时位地，犹可以名教出处；今日事势，遂关天时，非复人理所及。 
现代文：王回答说： 殿下过去以自己的地位名望，还可以以根据名教纲常进退出处；看如今天下形势，已经是关系到天时天命，再也不是以人间常理可以处置的了。 
English: The king replied: In the past, His Royal Highness could use his status and reputation to get in and out of places based on his name; it seems that the current situation is already related to time and fate, and can no longer be dealt with by human common sense.

古文：演奏赵郡王睿为左长史，王晞为司马。
现代文：高演奏请任命赵郡王高睿为长史，王为司马。
English: For high performance, please appoint Zhao County's Wang Gaorui as the long history, and Wang as the Sima.

古文：三月，甲寅，诏： 军国之政，皆申晋阳，禀大丞相规算。 
现代文：三月甲寅，北齐废帝下诏说： 凡是军政大事，都要申报到晋阳去，禀告大丞相规划决策。 
English: In March of the year of Jia Yin, the deposed Emperor of Northern Qi issued an edict saying: All military and political events must be reported to Jinyang and reported to the grand chancellor for planning and decision-making.

古文：周军初至，郢州助防张世贵举外城以应之，所失军民三千馀口。
现代文：北周的军队刚到之时，郢州助防张世贵策动外城的军民去接应北周军队，共失踪军民三千多人。
English: When the North Zhou army had just arrived, Zhang Shigui, the defense minister of Zhangzhou, instigated the soldiers and civilians in the outlying cities to meet the North Zhou army. A total of more than 3,000 soldiers and civilians were missing.

古文：周人起土山、长梯，昼夜攻之，因风纵火，烧其内城南面五十馀楼。
现代文：北周人堆起土山，架起长梯，日夜不停地攻城，并乘风纵火，烧掉了郢州内城南面的五十多座楼。
English: The people of Beizhou piled up mounds of earth, set up long ladders, attacked the city day and night, and took advantage of the wind to set fire to more than fifty buildings in the southern part of Zhangzhou Inner City.

古文：孙瑒兵不满千人，身自抚循，行酒赋食，士卒皆为之死战。周人不能克，乃授瑒柱国、郢州刺史，封万户郡公；瑒伪许以缓之，而潜修战守之备，一朝而具，乃复拒守。
现代文：孙手下的士兵不足一千人，但他能亲自安抚慰劳士兵，为士兵散酒送食物，士卒们都愿为他死战，北周人攻城不下，于是便授予孙柱国、郢州刺史之职，封为万户郡公，以诱降他；孙假装答应归顺，以为缓兵之计，而暗地里抓紧修整防御工事，一天之内就修整完备，于是又接着抵抗固守。
English: There were less than a thousand soldiers under Sun's command, but he was able to personally soothe the soldiers and send them food and wine. The soldiers were all willing to fight to the death for him. The Northern Zhou people were unable to attack the city, so they awarded Sun Zhu Guo and Zhang Zhou the post of chief historian and made him the governor of Wanyu County to entice him to surrender. Sun pretended to agree to surrender, thinking it was a delaying tactic, but secretly paid close attention to repairing the fortifications. The repairs were completed within one day, so he continued to resist and hold out.

古文：既而周人闻王琳败，陈兵将至，乃解围去。
现代文：不久北周人听说王琳兵败，陈朝的大军就要过来了，于是就解围走了。
English: Soon, the Northern Zhou people heard that Wang Lin had been defeated and that the great army of the Chen Dynasty was about to come, so they broke the siege and left.

古文：瑒集将佐谓之曰： 吾与王公同奖梁室，勤亦至矣。今时事如此，岂非天乎！ 
现代文：孙把将士官佐们集合在一块，对他们说： 我和王琳一起扶助梁室，也够勤劳辛苦的了；现在时局发展成这样，难道不是天命吗？ 
English: Sun gathered the non-commissioned officers together and said to them: Wang Lin and I have been working hard to support the beam room. Isn't it fate that the current situation has developed into this?

古文：遂遣使奉表，举中流之地来降。
现代文：于是就派使者带上表章，表示愿以长江中游之地来归降陈朝。
English: Therefore, they sent an envoy with a badge to express their willingness to surrender to the Chen dynasty in the middle reaches of the Yangtze River.

古文：王琳之东下也，帝征南川兵，江州刺史周迪、高州刺史黄法帅舟师钭赴之。
现代文：当王琳兵船东下的时候，陈文帝下令征召南川的军队抵抗，江州刺史周迪、高州刺史黄法氍率领水军将要赴敌。
English: When Wang Lin's warship sailed to the east, Chen Wendi ordered the army of Nanchuan to be conscripted to resist, and the naval forces led by Jiangzhou general Zhou Di and Gaozhou general Huang Fahu will go to the enemy.

古文：熊昙朗据城列舰，塞其中路，迪等与周敷共围之。
现代文：熊昙郎占据豫章城池，排开军舰，堵塞了周迪等人的进军路线。周迪等人与周敷一起把熊昙朗包围起来。
English: Xiong Bailang occupied the Yuzhang city pond, lined up warships, and blocked the advance route of Zhou Di and others. Zhou Di and others surrounded Xiong Bailang together with Zhou Shiki.

古文：琳败，昙朗部众离心，迪攻拔其城，虏男女万馀口。
现代文：王琳兵败，熊昙朗的部众人心涣散，周迪乘势攻下了豫章城，俘虏男女人口一万多人。
English: Wang Lin was defeated, all the people in Xiong Yulang's army were scattered, and Zhou Di seized the opportunity to capture Yuzhang City, capturing more than 10,000 men and women.

古文：昙朗走入村中，村民斩之；丁巳，传首建康，尽灭其族。
现代文：熊昙朗逃入村庄之中，村民把他杀了。丁巳，熊昙朗的首级被传送到建康，他的家族全部被斩。
English: Xiong Ronglang fled into the village, and the villagers killed him. Soon after, Xiong Ronglang's head was sent to Jiankang, and his entire family was beheaded.

古文：齐军先守鲁山，戊午，弃城走，诏南豫州刺史程灵洗守之。
现代文：北齐的军队原先据守鲁山，戊午弃城逃跑了，陈文帝下诏派南豫崐州刺史程灵洗去守该城。
English: The army of Northern Qi was originally stationed at Lushan, but abandoned the city at noon and fled. Chen Wendi issued an edict to send Cheng Lingzhi from Southern Yuanzhou to defend the city.

古文：甲寅，置武州、沅州，以右卫将军吴明彻为武州刺史，以孙瑒为湘州刺史。
现代文：甲寅，陈朝设立沅州、武州。任命右卫将军吴明彻为武州刺史，孙为湘州刺史。
English: Jia Yin and Chen Dynasties set up Zhangzhou and Wuzhou, and appointed the right guard general Wu Mingche as the governor of Wuzhou, and Sun as the governor of Hunan.

古文：瑒怀不自安，固请入朝，征为中领军；未拜，除吴郡太守。
现代文：孙心里觉得不安稳，坚决要求在朝中做官，于是征召他当中领军，后来没有拜职，又改任命他为吴郡太守。
English: Sun felt insecure in his heart and resolutely demanded to be an official in the central government, so he conscripted him to lead the army. Later, he did not take up the post, but instead appointed him as the governor of Wuxi County.

古文：壬申，齐封世宗之子孝珩为广宁王，长恭为兰陵王。
现代文：壬申，北齐封文襄帝的儿子高孝珩为广宁王，高长恭为兰陵王。
English: In Jinshin, Gao Xiaojuan, the son of Emperor Wenxiang of Northern Qi, was the king of Guangning, and Gao Changgyong was the king of Lanling.

古文：甲戌，衡阳献王昌入境，诏主书、舍人缘道迎候；丙子，济江，中流，陨之，使以溺告。
现代文：甲戌，衡阳献王陈昌进入陈朝境内，陈文帝诏令主书、舍人们在道路旁迎接等候。丙子，陈昌渡长江，但船到江中就被害死了，使者报告说是淹死了。
English: Chen Chang entered the territory of the Chen dynasty, and Chen Wendi ordered the principal and courtiers to meet and wait by the roadside. Chen Chang crossed the Yangtze River, but the ship was killed in the middle of the river, and the messenger reported that he was drowned.

古文：侯安都以功进爵清远公。
现代文：侯安都因为杀陈昌之功进爵，为清远公。
English: Hou Andu was knighted for killing Chen Chang and became Qingyuan Gong.

古文：初，高祖遣荥阳毛喜从安成王顼诣江陵，梁世祖以喜为侍郎，没于长安，与昌俱还，因进和亲之策。
现代文：当初，陈武帝派荥阳人毛喜跟着安成王陈顼到江陵去，梁元帝任命毛喜为侍郎，也陷没在长安，后来与陈昌一起回来，就向朝廷进献了与北周人和睦亲善的计策。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Chen Wu sent Mao Xi, a native of Shenyang, to Jiangling to follow Chen Xi, King of Ancheng. Emperor Liang Yuan appointed Mao Xi as an attendant, and he was also trapped in Chang'an. Later, when he returned with Chen Chang, he presented to the imperial court the strategy of making peace and friendship with Northern Zhou.

古文：上乃使侍中周弘正通好于周。
现代文：陈文帝便派侍中周弘正去和北周修通友好。
English: Emperor Chen Wen then sent his attendant Zhou Hongzheng to make friends with the Northern Zhou.

古文：夏，四月，丁亥，立皇子伯信为衡阳王，奉献王祀。
现代文：夏季四月，丁亥，陈朝立皇子陈伯信为衡阳王，让他承奉献王陈昌的祭祀。
English: In the summer of April, Dinghai, Chen Buxin, the prince of the Chen Dynasty, became the king of Hengyang, and he was asked to perform the sacrificial rites of King Chen Chang.

古文：周世宗明敏有识量，晋公护惮之，使膳部中大夫李安置毒于糖饣追而进之。
现代文：周明帝英明聪敏，有见识有肚量，晋公宇文护害怕他，便指使膳部中大夫李安在糖饼里放毒药送上去。
English: Zhou Mingdi was intelligent, insightful, and had a big stomach. Jin Gongyu Wenbao was afraid of him, so he ordered Li An, the middle doctor of the diet department, to put poison in the sugar cake.

古文：帝颇觉之，庚子，大渐，口授遗诏五百馀言，且曰： 朕子年幼，未堪当国。
现代文：明帝食用之后就明显有所感觉。庚子，病情恶化，弥留之际，口授遗诏五百多字，而且说： 我的儿子年幼，不能负起治国大任。
English: Emperor Ming clearly felt something after eating it. Geng Zi, whose condition worsened, dictated more than five hundred words of his last will and testament on his deathbed, saying, "My son is young and cannot assume the great responsibility of governing the country."

古文：鲁公，朕之介弟，宽仁大度，海内共闻；能弘我周家，必此子也。 辛丑，殂。
现代文：鲁公，是我的大弟弟，为人宽仁，大度，声望传于海内，能弘扬我家帝业的，一定是这个孩子！ 辛丑，去世。
English: Lu Gong is my elder brother. He is a man of generosity and generosity. His reputation has been passed down within the country. He must be the child who can carry forward my family's imperial cause! Xin Ug, passed away.

古文：鲁公幼有器质，特为世宗所亲爱，朝廷大事，多与之参议；性深沉，有远识，非因顾问，终不辄言。
现代文：鲁公宇文邕自幼就胸怀大志，气度不凡，所以特别受明帝钟爱，凡是朝廷大事，多与他商量。他性格深沉，有远大的识见，不是因为明帝询问，他是不随便说话的。
English: Since he was a child, Lu Gongyu Wenyi had great aspirations and an extraordinary demeanor, so he was especially loved by Emperor Ming. Whenever there was an important event in the imperial court, he often consulted with him. He had a deep character and great insight. It was not because Emperor Ming inquired, he did not speak casually.

古文：世宗每叹曰： 夫人不言，言必有中。 
现代文：世宗每每慨叹说： 这个人要么不说话，一说就必定有切中事理的精辟见解。 
English: "Either this person doesn't speak, but if he does speak, he must have a clear and incisive view of the facts," lamented the world's patriarchs.

古文：壬寅，鲁公即皇帝位，大赦。
现代文：壬寅，鲁公宇文邕即皇帝位，颁发了大赦天下令。
English: In Renin, Lu Gongwu Wenjun, that is, the emperor, issued a general amnesty order.

古文：五月，壬子，齐以开府仪同三司刘洪徽为尚书右仆射。
现代文：五月，壬子，北齐任命开府仪同三司刘洪徽为尚书右仆射。
English: In May, Jinsi, North Qi appointed the Kaifu Yi and the Third Division Liu Honghui as Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：侯安都父文捍为始兴内史，卒官。
现代文：侯安都的父亲侯文捍任始兴内史，死于任上。
English: Hou An Du's father, Hou Wen Han Ren, died in office.

古文：上迎其母还建康，母固求停乡里。
现代文：陈文帝迎接他的母亲回建康，他母亲坚决要求留在乡里。
English: Chen Wenti welcomed his mother back to Jiankang. His mother insisted on staying in the countryside.

古文：乙卯，为置东衡州，以安都从弟晓为刺史；安都子秘，才九岁，上以为始兴内史，并令在乡侍养。
现代文：乙卯，为此在始兴重置东衡州，任命侯安都的堂弟侯晓为东衡州刺史。侯安都的儿子侯秘，才九岁，文帝任命他为始兴内史，并让他在乡下侍奉祖母。
English: To this end, Emperor Wen set up Eastern Hengzhou in Shixing and appointed Hou Xiao, the cousin of Hou Andu, as the governor of Eastern Hengzhou. Hou Andu's son, Hou Bi, was only nine years old, and Emperor Wen appointed him as the governor of Shixing and let him serve his grandmother in the countryside.

古文：六月，壬辰，诏葬梁元帝于江宁，车旗礼章，悉用梁典。
现代文：六月，壬辰，陈文帝诏令把梁元帝埋葬在江宁，丧事中的车旗礼仪，全部采用梁朝旧制。
English: In June, Emperor Chen Wen decreed that Emperor Liang Yuan should be buried in Jiangning, and the funeral car and flag etiquette all used the old Liang Dynasty system.

古文：齐人收永安、上党二王遣骨，葬之。
现代文：北齐人收集永安、上党二王的遗骨埋葬起来。
English: The people of North Qi collected and buried the remains of the two kings of Yongan and Shangdang.

古文：敕上党王妃李氏还第。
现代文：敕令上党王妃李氏回到王府旧宅。
English: The queen consort Ri returned to the former residence of the royal court by royal command.

古文：冯文洛尚以故意，修饰诣之。
现代文：当初李氏被赐给了冯文洛为妾，李氏重回王府之后，冯文洛还以原来的身份，修饰打扮一番去见李妃。
English: At first, Li was given to Feng Wenluo as a concubine. After Li returned to the royal palace, Feng Wenluo went to see Li Fei in her original identity, dressed up.

古文：妃盛列左右，立文洛于阶下，数之曰： 遭难流离，以至大辱，志操寡薄，不能自尽。
现代文：李妃把很多身边人排列成阵势，让冯文洛站在台阶下，责骂他说： 我因遭受大难流离失所，才受到这样大的侮辱，我只恨自己志气节操很差，不能自杀殉夫。
English: Li Fei arranged many people around her into a formation, let Feng Wenluo stand at the bottom of the steps, and scolded him: "I was displaced due to great hardship, so I was subjected to such a great insult. I only hate myself for having poor self-discipline and not being able to commit suicide.

古文：幸蒙恩诏，得反籓闱，汝何物奴，犹欲见侮！ 
现代文：现在幸亏皇上恩典，能够回到藩王的闺闱。你是什么狗奴才，还想来侮辱我！ 
English: Now, thanks to the Emperor's grace, I am able to return to being the courtesan of the lord of the domain. What kind of dog slave are you that you want to insult me!

古文：杖之一百，血流洒地。
现代文：下令打了他一百杖，打得他皮开肉绽，血流满地。
English: He gave the order to beat him with a hundred rods until his skin was raw and blood flowed all over the floor.

古文：秋，七月，丙辰，封皇子伯山为鄱阳王。
现代文：秋季七月，丙辰，陈朝封皇子陈伯山为鄱阳王。
English: In the autumn of July, the Chen dynasty crowned the prince Chen Bozhan as the King of Shenyang.

古文：齐丞相演以王晞儒缓，恐不允武将之意，每夜载入，昼则不与语。
现代文：北齐丞相高演考虑到王儒雅，动作迟缓，担心他不称武将们的心，便每夜用车载他进来议事，白天则不和他说话。
English: Taking into account that Wang Ruya was slow to act and worried that he would not win the hearts of the generals, Minister Gao of North Qizhen brought him in by car every night for discussions, but did not talk to him during the day.

古文：尝进晞密室，谓曰： 比王侯诸贵，每见敦迫，言我违天不祥，恐当或有变起。
现代文：又曾经把王叫进密室，对他说： 近来王侯及诸位贵族每每对我进行敦促逼迫，说我违反天意而不即位，很不吉祥。
English: He also once called the king into a secret room and said to him: "Recently, the princes and nobles have been urging and persecuting me, saying that I violated the will of heaven and did not ascend the throne, which is very inauspicious.

古文：吾欲以法绳之，何如？ 
现代文：恐怕这样下去会有变乱发生；我想依法治他们鼓吹篡逆之罪，你以为如何呢？ 
English: I'm afraid that if this continues, there will be turmoil; I want to follow the rule of law. They are advocating the crime of usurpation. What do you think?

古文：晞曰： 朝廷比者疏远亲戚，殿下仓猝所行，非复人臣之事。
现代文：王回答说： 皇上近来对亲戚非常疏远，殿下不久前仓猝间所实行的诛灭杨等人的举动，已不是为人臣的人该做的事。
English: The king replied, "The emperor has recently been very distant from his relatives. The action of annihilating Yang and others, which His Imperial Highness carried out in a hurry not long ago, is no longer what a subject should do.

古文：芒刺在背，上下相疑，何由可久！
现代文：现在是芒刺在背，上下互相怀疑，这种局面怎么能长久。
English: Now it's a thorn in the side, and everyone is wondering how long this situation can last.

古文：殿下虽欲谦退，粃糠神器，实恐违上玄之意，坠先帝之基。 
现代文：殿下谦逊退让，视国家神器为糠，其实恐怕是违背了上天的旨意，毁坏了先帝留下的基业。 
English: His Imperial Highness humbly conceded and regarded the national artifact as trash, but in fact, he probably violated the will of heaven and destroyed the legacy left by the former emperor.

古文：演曰： 卿何敢发此言，须致卿于法！ 
现代文：高演说： 你怎么敢说这样的话，我要把你按国法论罪！ 
English: Gao Ren said: "How dare you say such a thing, I will judge you according to the national law!"

古文：粃曰： 天时人事，皆无异谋，是以敢冒犯斧钺，抑亦神明所赞耳。 
现代文：王说： 天时人意，都没有不同，所以我才敢冒犯斧钺诛戮来进言，这怕也是神明所赞许的吧！ 
English: The king said, "There is no difference between the will of man and the will of heaven, that is why I dare to offend the axe and chisel to make a speech, which is even praised by the gods!

古文：演曰： 拯难匡时，方俟圣哲，吾何敢私议！
现代文：高演说： 拯救国家于危难，匡扶时世，正等待圣哲出现呢，我怎么敢私下议论呢？
English: Gao said, "How dare I talk about saving the country from danger, saving the world, and waiting for a saint to appear?

古文：幸勿多言！ 
现代文：你就别再多说了！ 
English: Just stop talking!

古文：丞相从事中郎陆杳将出使，握晞手，使之劝进。
现代文：丞相从事中郎陆杳将要出使，握着王的手，让他去劝进。
English: Lu Xun, the middle son of the prime minister, was about to send an envoy to hold the king's hand and persuade him to go.

古文：晞以杳言告演，演曰： 若内外咸有此意，赵彦深朝夕左右，何故初无一言？ 
现代文：王把陆杳的话告诉了高演，高演说： 如果朝廷内外都有这种意思，赵彦深早晚都在我身边，为什么他一句话也不说？ 
English: Wang told Gao Ren to Lu Xuan's words, and Gao Ren said: If both inside and outside the imperial court have this meaning, and Zhao Yanshen is always by my side, why doesn't he say a word?

古文：晞乃以事隙密问彦深，彦深曰： 我比亦惊此声论，每欲陈闻，则口噤心悸。
现代文：于是王利用公事的间隙悄悄探问赵彦深的意思，赵彦深说： 我近来也为这种舆论而吃惊，每每想把自己的意见加以陈述，但临言噤口，心惊肉跳。
English: So Wang took advantage of a break in his official duties to quietly inquire about Zhao Yanshen's meaning. Zhao Yanshen said: I have recently been surprised by this kind of public opinion. I have always wanted to state my own opinions, but I have been afraid to speak out.

古文：弟既发端，吾亦当昧死一披肝胆。 
现代文：现在你既然发端说出来了，我也要冒着一死披露一下肝胆了！ 
English: Now that you've told me the beginning, I'm going to risk my life to reveal the guts!

古文：因共劝演。
现代文：于是与王共同向高演劝进。
English: As a result, he and Wang worked together to persuade the troupe to perform at a higher level.

古文：演遂言于太皇太后。
现代文：高演于是就把群臣劝进的话告诉了太皇太后。
English: Gao En then told the empress dowager what he had said to persuade the courtiers.

古文：赵道德曰： 相王不效周公辅成王，而欲骨肉相夺，不畏后世谓之篡邪？ 
现代文：赵道德在一边说： 相王您不效法周公辅佐成王的往事，而想行骨肉相夺之事，难道不怕后世说你篡逆吗？ 
English: On the one hand, Zhao Daode said, "Siaowang, you do not follow the example of Zhou Gongfu Suo Cheng Wang's past, but want to compete with each other. Aren't you afraid that future generations will say that you are a usurper?

古文：太皇太后曰： 道德之言是也。 
现代文：太皇太后也说： 赵道德说的话是对的。 
English: The Empress Dowager also said, "What Zhao Daode is saying is right.

古文：未几，演又启云： 天下人心未定，恐奄忽变生，须早定名位。 
现代文：过一阵子，高演又去启奏说： 现在天下人心不安定，我担心变乱突然发生，必须早日确定名位。 
English: After a while, Gao En went to the opening ceremony again and said, "Nowadays, people's hearts are unstable all over the world. I'm worried that turmoil will suddenly occur. We must determine the name of the position as soon as possible."

古文：太皇太后乃从之。
现代文：太皇太后这才答应了。
English: It was only then that the Empress Dowager consented.

古文：八月，壬午，太皇太后下令，废齐主为济南王，出居别宫，以常山王演入纂大统，且戒之曰： 勿令济南有他也！ 
现代文：八月，壬年，太皇太后发布敕令，废北齐国主高殷为济南王，让他搬到别宫去住。让常山王高演入朝登基，并且告诫高演说： 可不能让济南王有其他不测之事！ 
English: In August of the following year, the empress dowager issued a royal decree to depose the ruler of North Qi, Gao Yin, as the king of Jinan, and let him move to another palace to live. Let Changshan King Gao Yuan ascend to the throne, and admonished Gao Yuan, saying, "You can't let the king of Jinan have any other unforeseen events!"

古文：肃宗即皇帝位于晋阳，大赦，改元皇建。
现代文：齐孝昭帝高演在晋阳即皇位，大赦天下，改换年号为皇建。
English: Emperor Qixiao Zhaozhou was enthroned in Jinyang, which is the imperial throne, and was pardoned by the emperor, and the era name was changed to Emperor Jian.

古文：太皇太后还称皇太后；皇太后称文宣皇后，宫曰昭信。
现代文：太皇太后恢复皇太后的称号；皇太后则称为文宣皇后，她的宫室叫昭信宫。
English: The empress dowager regained the title of empress dowager; the empress dowager was called Empress Wenxuan, and her palace was called Zhaoxin Palace.

古文：乙酉，诏绍封功臣，礼赐耆老，延访直言，褒赏死事，追赠名德。
现代文：乙酉，北齐孝昭帝下诏介绍封赏功臣，优礼厚赐老人，延揽寻访崐直言之人，褒扬赏励死节之士，一一追赠荣名，表彰他们的道德。
English: At the same time, the Emperor of Northern Qi Xiao Zhao issued an edict to introduce and reward meritorious soldiers, bestow honors on the elderly, extend the search for those who are outspoken, praise and reward the dead, one by one give honours, and commend their morality.

古文：帝谓王晞曰： 卿何为自同外客，略不可见？
现代文：孝昭帝对王说： 你为什么把自己看得和外客一样，经常也见不到面？
English: Xiao Zhaodi said to Wang: Why do you consider yourself the same as a foreigner and often do not see each other?

古文：自今假非局司，但有所怀，随宜作一牒，俟少隙，即径进也。 
现代文：从今以后，有所进言不必假手于局司，只要想到什么，随时写成小简，一有机会就直接送进来。 
English: From now on, if you have any suggestions, you don't have to pretend to be in charge of the bureau. As long as you think of something, you can write it down at any time and send it in directly at the first opportunity.

古文：因敕晞与尚书阳休之、鸿胪卿崔晞等三人，每日职务罢，并入东廊，共举录历代礼乐、职官及田市、征税，或不便于时而相承施用，或自古为利而于今废坠，或道德高俊，久在沉沦，或巧言眩俗，妖邪害政者，悉令详思，以渐条奏。
现代文：于是就敕令王与尚书阳休之、鸿胪卿崔等三人，每天本职公务结束后，就进到东廊共同举列抄录历代在礼乐、职官以及田市、赋税等方面制度沿革的情况。或不适于现今情况却还在继续实行、或自古以来受利而现在却被废除之事，或道德高尚却长久沉沦、或用巧伪言辞眩惑世俗煽起妖邪之风危害政事之人，让他们详细地列举分析，逐条奏闻上来。
English: Therefore, the three of them, including Wang Xuanling, Shang Shuyang Rongzhi, and Hongyuqing Cui, entered the East Corridor every day after the end of their official duties to jointly recite the history of the system in terms of ceremonial music, officials, as well as fields, cities, and taxes. Or it is not suitable for the current situation, but it is still being implemented, or it has been beneficial since ancient times, but now it has been abolished, or morality is high, but it has long been sunk, or people who use clever and false words to dazzle the world and incite evil spirits to endanger political affairs, let them list and analyze in detail,

古文：朝晡给御食，毕景听还。
现代文：早晨和中午都供给御食，天黑后才放他们回家。
English: They are fed in the morning and at noon, and only allowed to go home after dark.

古文：帝识度沉敏，少居台阁，明习吏事，即位，尤自勤励，大革显祖之弊，时人服其明而讥其细。
现代文：孝昭帝气度深沉，识见敏锐，自小就居官于台阁之中，对行政事务非常熟悉，即位后尤其勤勉励志，对文宣帝时代的弊政进行彻底的革除，当时人们佩服他的明察而讥笑他的琐细。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao had a deep temperament and keen insight. He had been a member of the cabinet since he was a child. He was very familiar with administrative affairs. After he ascended the throne, he was especially diligent and motivated to completely eliminate the maladministration of the era of Emperor Wenzhong. At that time, people admired his clear-sightedness and ridiculed his trifles.

古文：尝问舍人裴泽，在外议论得失。
现代文：孝昭帝曾经问舍人裴泽外头对他的施政得失有什么议论。
English: Emperor Xiao Zhaodi once asked Baize, his successor, what the outside world thought of his administration.

古文：泽率尔对曰： 陛下陪明至公，自可远侔古昔；而有识之士，咸言伤细，帝王之度，颇为未弘。 
现代文：裴泽直率地回答说： 陛下耳聪目明，处事极为公道，这方面自然可以比得上远古的圣君。但有识之士，都说您伤于琐细，作为一个帝王的气度，还是不够弘大。 
English: Peize bluntly replied, "Your Majesty's ears are sharp, his eyes are clear, and his actions are extremely fair. In this respect, he can naturally be compared to ancient saints. However, people with insight say that you are hurt by trifles, and as an emperor, your dignity is still not grand enough.

古文：帝笑曰： 诚如卿言。
现代文：孝昭帝笑着说： 确实象你说的那样。
English: Xiao Zhaodi said with a smile: It is indeed as you said.

古文：朕初临万机，虑不周悉，故致尔耳。
现代文：我刚刚亲临万机，老担心不够周到妥贴，所以才造成这种状况。
English: I've just been in the machine, and I'm always worried that I'm not thoughtful enough, so that's what caused this situation.

古文：此事安可久行，恐后又嫌疏漏。 
现代文：这种过细处事的作风怎么可以久行呢，我会酌情改变的，但恐怕将来又会嫌我处事疏漏了。 
English: How can this style of handling things too meticulously be allowed to go on for so long? I will change it as I see fit, but I'm afraid that in the future I will be accused of being negligent in my dealings.

古文：泽由是被宠遇。
现代文：裴泽从此深受孝昭帝宠爱。
English: From then on, Baize was deeply loved by Emperor Xiaozhao.

古文：库狄显安侍坐，帝曰： 显安，我姑之子；今序家人礼，除君臣之敬，可言我之不逮。 
现代文：库狄显安有一次侍坐在孝昭帝身边，孝昭帝说： 库狄显安是我姑母的儿子；今天以家里人的礼节相待，免去君臣之间的那一套恭敬之礼，你可以说说我不足的地方。 
English: Once upon a time, Ku Di Xian was seated at the side of Emperor Xiaozhao. Emperor Xiaozhao said, "Ku Di Xian is my aunt's son. Today, I treated him with the etiquette of a member of my own family. If I were to dispense with the formalities of respect between a prince and a vassal, you could say that I fell short.

古文：显安曰： 陛下多妄言。 
现代文：库狄显安说： 陛下老说虚妄不实的话。 
English: Kudisyanian said, "Your majesty is always saying things that are not true.

古文：帝曰： 何故？ 
现代文：孝昭帝问： 为什么呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "Why?

古文：对曰： 陛下昔见文宣以马鞭挞人，常以为非；今自行之，非妄言邪？ 
现代文：库狄显安回答说： 陛下过去看到文宣帝用马鞭子打人，常常说这是不对的。现在自己也用马鞭子打人，这不是说假话吗？ 
English: Kudisyan replied: "Your Majesty used to see Emperor Wenxuan beating people with a horse whip and often said that it was wrong. Now you yourself are beating people with a horse whip. Isn't that a lie?

古文：帝握其手谢之。
现代文：孝昭帝握住他的手表示感谢。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao shook his hand and thanked him.

古文：又使直言，对曰： 陛下太细，天子乃更似吏。 
现代文：又让他进一步直言，库狄显安说： 陛下太琐细，身为天子，却更象一个具体办事的官吏。 
English: Asking him to be more direct, Kudixian said: "Your majesty is too petty. As the son of heaven, he is more like a bureaucrat who deals with concrete matters.

古文：帝曰： 朕甚知之。
现代文：孝昭帝解释说： 我自己也很知道这一点。
English: Xiao Zhaodi explained: I know this very well myself.

古文：然无法日久，将整之以至无为耳。 
现代文：然而国家缺乏法制已经很久了，我将要整顿它，要达到可以无为而治的地步。 
English: However, the country has lacked the rule of law for a long time, and I am going to rectify it, to reach the point where I can do nothing.

古文：又问王晞，晞曰： 显安言是也。 
现代文：孝昭帝又去问王，王说： 库狄显安说得对。 
English: Emperor Xiaozhao went to ask the king again, and the king said, "Kudixian is right.

古文：显安，干之子也。
现代文：库狄显安是库狄干的儿子。
English: Kudishenian is the son of Kudikan.

古文：群臣进言，帝皆从容受纳。
现代文：朝中群臣进言提意见或建议，孝昭帝都从容地接受采纳。
English: A group of ministers from both sides of the Korean peninsula offered their opinions or suggestions, and Emperor Xiao Zhaotong accepted them without hesitation.

古文：性至孝，太后不豫，帝行不能正履，容色贬悴，衣不解带殆将四旬。
现代文：孝昭帝天性十分孝顺，太后身体不舒适，他急得连走路都歪歪斜斜的，形容憔悴，睡觉也不敢脱衣服，一直守了近四十天。
English: Xiao Zhaodi was very filial by nature, and the empress dowager was not comfortable. He was so anxious that he could barely walk. He described himself as drowsy, and he did not dare to take off his clothes while sleeping. He had been guarding her for nearly forty days.

古文：太后疾小增，即寝伏阁外，食饮药物，皆手亲之。
现代文：太后病一稍微加重，孝昭帝就睡在门外，食物饮水汤药，都亲手侍侯。
English: As soon as the empress dowager's illness worsened slightly, Emperor Xiao Zhaotong slept outside the door. He personally waited on her with food, water, soup and medicine.

古文：太后尝心痛不自堪，帝立侍帷前，以爪掐掌代痛，血流出袖。
现代文：太后有一次心绞痛，痛得不能忍受，孝昭帝站着侍奉在帷帐之前，以指甲掐自己的手掌，想替太后减轻痛苦，竟至于把手掌掐破，鲜血流出袖子。
English: On one occasion, the Empress Dowager was in unbearable pain from angina pectoris. Standing in front of the curtain, Emperor Xiao Zhaotong scratched his palm with his fingernails to relieve the pain for the Empress Dowager. As a result, his palm was broken and blood flowed out of his sleeve.

古文：友爱诸弟，无君臣之隔。
现代文：他对几个弟弟也很友爱，没有君与臣之间常有的那种隔膜。
English: He is also very friendly to his younger brothers, and there is no barrier between him and his ministers.

古文：戊子，以长广王湛为右丞相，平阳王淹为太傅，彭城王浟为大司马。
现代文：戊子，孝昭帝任命长广王高湛为丞相，平阳王高淹为太傅，彭城崐王高为大司马。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao appointed Changguang Wang Gaotan as chancellor, Pingyang Wang Gaodan as taifu, and Pengcheng Yao Wanggao as grand steward.

古文：周军司马贺若敦，帅众一万，奄至武陵；武州刺史吴明彻不能拒，引军还巴陵。
现代文：北周军司马贺若敦，率领部众一万人，突然进犯到武陵，武州刺史吴明彻不能抵抗，带着兵马退回巴陵。
English: The Northern Zhou military commander Ma He Ruodong, leading 10,000 troops, suddenly invaded Wuling. Wu Mingcher, the governor of Wuzhou, could not resist and returned to Baling with his soldiers and horses.

古文：江陵之陷也，巴、湘之地尽入于周，周使梁人守之。
现代文：当初江陵陷落的时候，巴州、湘州一带的土地都归属了北周，北周派梁朝旧人去守卫。
English: At the time of the fall of Jiangling, the lands around Bazhou and Xiangzhou all belonged to the Northern Zhou Dynasty, and the Northern Zhou Dynasty sent the Liang Dynasty old men to guard them.

古文：太尉侯瑱等将兵逼湘州。
现代文：太尉侯等人带兵逼近了湘州。
English: Captain Hou and other soldiers approached Hunan.

古文：贺若敦将步骑救之，乘胜深入，军于湘川。
现代文：贺若敦带步兵骑兵去救援，打败侯，乘胜挥师深入，在湘川驻扎下来。
English: He Ruodong led the infantry cavalry to rescue, defeat Hou, take advantage of the victory of the division, and stationed in Xiangchuan.

古文：九月，乙卯，周将独孤盛将水军与敦俱进。
现代文：九月，乙卯，北周将领独孤盛率水军和贺若敦一起挺进。
English: In September, the Northern Zhou general, Du Du Lone Sheng, led the navy and advanced together with He Ruodong.

古文：辛酉，遣仪同三司徐度将兵会侯瑱于巴丘。
现代文：辛酉，陈朝派仪同三司徐度带兵在巴丘和侯会合。
English: Xin Rong, Chen Dynasty sent Yi with the Third Division of Xu Du to lead the troops to meet in Bachu and Hou.

古文：会秋水泛溢，盛、敦粮援断绝，分军抄掠，以供资费。
现代文：正赶上秋水泛滥，淹没了道路，独孤盛和贺若敦的粮援被切断，只好分散军队去到处抢掠，以供应军队的资费。
English: Just in time for the autumn floods, the roads were inundated, and the food aid to Duolosheng and He Ruodong was cut off. The army had to be dispersed to loot everywhere in order to supply the army's expenses.

古文：敦恐瑱知其粮少，乃于营内多为土聚，覆之以米，召旁村人，阳有访问，随即遣之。
现代文：贺若敦怕侯知道他的粮食少，于是在军营里堆起很多土堆，上面盖上一层米，召集兵营旁边的村人进营，假装找他们了解情况，然后又打发他们走，有意让村人把看到的假米屯说出去。
English: Horoadun was afraid that Hou would know that he was short of food, so he piled up a lot of mounds in the military camp, covered them with a layer of rice, called the villagers next to the military camp into the camp, pretended to find them to understand the situation, and then sent them away again, intending to let the villagers talk about the fake rice.

古文：瑱闻之，良以为实。
现代文：侯听信了，以为他军中粮食很多。
English: Hou believed him and thought there was plenty of grain in his army.

古文：敦又增修营垒，造庐舍为久留之计，湘、罗之间遂废农业。
现代文：贺若敦又增修了很多营垒，建造很多房屋，作出久留之计。湘州、罗州之间因为战事迁延，农业也都荒废了。
English: He Ruodong also built many additional camps, built many houses, and made plans to stay for a long time. Because of the delay of the war between Hunan and Luozhou, agriculture was also devastated.

古文：瑱等无如之何。
现代文：侯等也拿他没办法。
English: There is no choice but to fill the seats.

古文：先是土人亟乘轻船，载米粟鸡鸭以饷瑱军。
现代文：在这以前，当地土人多次驾轻捷小船，载米粟鸡鸭以供应侯的军队。
English: Prior to this, the local natives had repeatedly sailed in small boats, carrying rice, millet, chicken and duck to supply Hou's army.

古文：敦患之，乃伪为土人装船，伏甲士于中。
现代文：贺若敦对此感到担心，于是就伪装成当地土人在船上装货，实际上把甲士埋伏在船舱里。
English: He Ruodong was worried about this, so he disguised himself as a local native to load the goods on the ship, and actually ambushed the warrior in the cabin.

古文：瑱军人望见，谓饷船之至，逆来争取，敦甲士出而擒之。
现代文：侯的军队远远望见，以为运粮饷的船来了，都迎上来争着取东西，这时，贺若敦的甲士突然在船上出现，把来取东西的侯军士兵全抓获了。
English: Hou's army could be seen from far away, and they thought that the ship carrying grain and straw had arrived, and they all came up to fight for things. At this time, Herodong's armourers suddenly appeared on the ship and captured all the soldiers of Hou's army who came to take things.

古文：又敦军数有叛人乘马投瑱者，敦乃别取一马，牵以趣船，令船中逆以鞭鞭之。
现代文：还有，贺若敦的军队多次有叛变的人乘马去投奔侯。贺若敦便另外找来一匹马，牵着它走近船，当马将上船时，就让船上的人迎出来用鞭子抽马。
English: Furthermore, many times in Horodun's army, there were mutineers who rode horses to join the army. Horodun then found another horse, led it close to the ship, and when the horse was about to board the ship, he had the people on the ship come out and whip the horse.

古文：如是者再三，马畏船不上。
现代文：这样再三重复，马见了船就害怕不敢上去。
English: This was repeated again and again, and when the horse saw the boat, it was afraid and did not dare to go up.

古文：然后伏兵于江岸，使人乘畏船马以招瑱军，诈云投附。
现代文：然后在江岸埋下伏兵，让人乘这匹害怕船的马去招呼侯军队，假装说是来投附的。
English: Then they set up an ambush on the riverbank and had someone ride the horse, which was afraid of boats, to hail the imperial army, pretending that it had come to attack.

古文：瑱遣兵迎接，竞来牵马，马既畏船不上，伏兵发，尽杀之。
现代文：侯派士兵来迎接，都争着来牵马，这马既然害怕船，当然不愿上，这时伏兵冒出来，把来接应的士兵全杀了。
English: The soldiers sent by the lord of the manor to meet them all scrambled to lead the horse, which of course did not want to get on since it was afraid of the ship. At that moment, the ambush came out and killed all the soldiers who had come to meet them.

古文：此后实有馈饷及亡降者，瑱犹谓之诈，并拒击之。
现代文：从此以后真正要来送粮饷的船和真正来投降的骑兵，侯也以为是诈骗，干脆都拒绝接受并予以攻击。
English: From then on, the ships that really wanted to deliver grain and horses and the cavalry that really wanted to surrender were also considered to be frauds by the Hou, who simply refused to accept them and attacked them.

古文：冬，十月，癸巳，瑱袭破独孤盛于杨叶洲，盛收兵登岸，筑城自保。
现代文：冬季十月，癸巳，侯在杨叶洲打败了独孤盛的军队。独孤盛收拢败兵登上江岸，修筑城垣以自保。
English: In the winter of October, Emperor Xizong defeated the army of Duolongsheng in Yangyezhou. Duolongsheng gathered the defeated soldiers and climbed the riverbank to build a city wall for self-protection.

古文：丁酉，诏司空侯安都帅众会瑱南讨。
现代文：丁酉，陈朝下诏命令司空侯安都率领军队去和侯会合，向南征讨。
English: Ding Xi, Chen Dynasty issued an edict ordering Sikuo Hou Andu to lead the army to meet Hou and go south to fight.

古文：十一月，辛亥，齐主立妃元氏为皇后，世子百年为太子。
现代文：十一月，辛亥，北齐国主孝昭帝册立妃子元氏为皇后，世子高百年为太子。
English: In November, Xinhai, the ruler of North Qi, Emperor Xiao Zhaotian, appointed Princess Yuan as empress, and the heir to the throne, Prince Gao, as crown prince.

古文：百年时才五岁。
现代文：高百年这时才五岁。
English: He was only five years old at the time.

古文：齐主征前开府长史卢叔虎为中庶子。
现代文：孝昭帝征召前开府长史卢叔虎为中庶子。
English: Emperor Xiao Zhaoyi conscripted the former prefectural governor, Shilu Shuguo, as a middle child.

古文：叔虎，柔之从叔也。
现代文：卢叔虎是卢柔的堂叔。
English: Lu Shuguang is Lu Zhuo's uncle.

古文：帝问时务于叔虎，叔虎请伐周，曰： 我强彼弱，我富彼贫，其势相悬。
现代文：孝昭帝向卢叔虎询问时局和对策。
English: Xiao Zhaodi asked Lu Shuguo about the current situation and countermeasures.

古文：然干戈不息，未能并吞者，此失于不用强富也。
现代文：卢叔虎建议出兵讨伐北周。他说： 我强彼弱，我富彼贫，双方实力相差很大。
English: Lu Shuhe suggested sending troops to fight against the Northern Zhou. He said: I am strong and he is weak, I am rich and he is poor, the strength of the two sides is very different.

古文：轻兵野战，胜负难必，是胡骑之法，非万全之术也。
现代文：然而长期以来两国干戈不息，我国不能把周吞并，这都是不善于发挥我国强大富庶的优势的过失。
English: However, for a long time, the two countries have been at each other's throats, and our country cannot annex Zhou, which is a fault of not being good at exerting our country's strong and abundant advantages.

古文：宜立重镇于平阳，与彼蒲州相对，深沟高垒，运粮积甲。
现代文：以轻骑兵在原野上游动交战，胜负难以预料，这是胡人骑兵的办法，并不是取胜的万全之策。我认为应该在平阳建立一个军事重镇，与对方的蒲州相对抗，开挖深沟，高筑壁垒，储运军粮，屯积兵甲。
English: It is difficult to predict the outcome of the battle with light cavalry swimming on the plain. This is the method of the Hu people's cavalry, not a perfect solution to win. I think it is necessary to build a military stronghold in Pingyang to oppose the other side's Puzhou, dig a deep ditch, build high barriers, store and transport military grain, and amass armor.

古文：彼闭关不出，则稍蚕食其河东之地，日使穷蹙。
现代文：如果对方闭关自守不出来交战，我方就可以逐渐吞食他们的河东地区，使他们的地盘日益缩小。
English: If the other side closes itself off and does not come out to fight, we can gradually swallow up their Hedong region, making their territory smaller and smaller.

古文：若彼出兵，非十万以上，不足为我敌。
现代文：如果对方要出兵交战，那没有十万以上兵马，是不够成为我们的敌手的。
English: If the other side wants to send troops to fight, it is not enough to have more than 100,000 soldiers and horses to become our enemy.

古文：所损粮食咸出关中。
现代文：敌军所需要的粮食，只能全部从关中地区运来。
English: The enemy could only get all the grain they needed from the Guanzhong area.

古文：我军士年别一代，谷食丰饶。
现代文：而我军戍守的士兵一年更换一次，粮食是很丰饶的。
English: But the soldiers of our army are replaced once a year, and the grain is very plentiful.

古文：彼来求战，我则不应；彼若退去，我乘其弊。
现代文：对方来挑战，我方可以不理睬；对方如果退却，我方可以乘机掩袭。
English: If the other side challenges us, we can ignore it; if the other side retreats, we can take the opportunity to cover up.

古文：自长安以西，民疏城远，敌兵来往，实自艰难，与我相持，农业且废，不过三年，彼自破矣。 
现代文：从长安以西，人口稀少，城池相隔很远，敌兵来往，实在很艰难，这样长期和我军相持下去，农业肯定要荒废，超不过三年，敌军一定溃败。 
English: To the west of Chang'an, the population is sparse, the cities are far apart, and it is very difficult for enemy soldiers to come and go. If we continue to hold out against our army for such a long time, agriculture will certainly be devastated. If it is more than three years, the enemy army will certainly be defeated.

古文：帝深善之。
现代文：孝昭帝对他这计策，深以为善。
English: The patriarch thinks he is good at this kind of analysis.

古文：齐主自将击库莫奚，至天池，库莫奚出长城北遁。齐主分兵追击，获牛羊七万而还。
现代文：孝昭帝自己带兵去进攻库莫奚，一直打到天池，库莫奚越过长城往北逃窜了，孝昭帝分兵几路，穷追猛打，缴获牛羊七万头，获胜归来。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao himself led an army to attack Kumoguan and fought it all the way to Tianchi. Kumoguan crossed the Great Wall and fled to the north. Emperor Xiaozhao split his army several ways, chased and fought hard, captured seventy thousand heads of cattle and sheep, and returned victorious.

古文：十二月，乙未，诏： 自今孟春讫于夏首，大辟事已款者，宜且申停。 
现代文：十二月，乙未，陈文帝下诏说： 从今年早春开始到初夏这段时间内，判死刑而且犯人已经服罪的，应该暂时申报停刑。 
English: In December of the same year, Chen Wendi issued an edict: From early spring to early summer of this year, if the death penalty is imposed and the prisoner has already served his sentence, the death penalty should be temporarily suspended.

古文：己亥，周巴陵城主尉迟宪降，遣巴州刺史侯安鼎守之。
现代文：己亥，北周巴陵城主尉迟宪来投降，陈朝派巴州刺史侯安鼎去守卫巴陵。
English: On Ji Hai Day, the captain of Zhoubaling Castle, Chi Xian, came down and sent Ba Zhou's aide-de-camp, Hou Anding, to guard Baling.

古文：庚子，独孤盛将馀众自杨叶洲潜遁。
现代文：庚子，独孤盛带着残兵从杨叶洲悄悄地逃跑了。
English: Geng Zi, the sole survivor, quietly fled from Yang Ye Zhou with the remaining soldiers.

古文：丙午，齐主还晋阳。
现代文：丙午，孝昭帝回到晋阳。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Emperor Xiaozhao returned to Jinyang.

古文：齐主斩人于前，问王晞曰： 是人应死不？ 
现代文：孝昭帝在自己面前把一个人斩首，问王说： 这个人应不应该死？ 
English: Emperor Xiaozhao beheaded a man in front of him and asked the king: "Should this man die?"

古文：晞曰： 应死，但恨死不得其地耳。
现代文：王回答说： 应该处死，但可惜死得不是地方罢了。
English: And the king answered and said, He is worthy to die, and it is not meet that he should die.

古文：臣闻 刑人于市，与众弃之。 殿廷非行戮之所。 
现代文：我听说 处死犯人应该在市集上，表示和众人一起抛弃他 ，宫殿庭院不是杀人的地方。 
English: I have heard it said that the condemned man should be in the market-place, that he should be thrown out with the crowd, that the palace courtyard is no place for a murderer.

古文：帝改容谢曰： 自今当为王公改之。 
现代文：孝昭帝神色庄重起来，带着歉意和感激说： 从今以后我一定为您改正这种做法。 
English: Xiao Zhaodi solemnly stood up and said with apology and gratitude: From now on, I will definitely correct this practice for you.

古文：帝欲以晞为侍郎，苦辞不受。
现代文：孝昭帝想让王当侍中，王苦苦恳辞不答应。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao wanted to make Wang an attendant, but Wang refused.

古文：或劝晞勿自疏，晞曰： 我少年以来，阅要人多矣。得志少时，鲜不颠覆。
现代文：有人劝王不要自己和皇帝疏远起来。王解释说： 我自少年以来，看到的位居显要的人多了，得意了没有多久，很少最后不倒台的。
English: Someone advised Wang not to distance himself from the emperor. Wang explained, "Since I was a boy, I have seen many people in prominent positions, but they don't last long, and very few of them don't eventually fall from power.

古文：且吾性实疏缓，不堪时务，人主恩私，何由可保！
现代文：而且我这个人性子其实很疏懒，举止缓慢，受不了繁重的俗务，皇上的私恩，凭什么去确保长盛不衰呢？
English: Moreover, I am a person with a lazy nature, with a slow demeanor, and I can't stand heavy mundane chores. Why should I rely on the emperor's favor to ensure long-term prosperity?

古文：万一披猖，求退无地。
现代文：万一疏忽大意，想求个退路都没有地方！
English: In case of negligence, there is no place to look for a way out!

古文：非不好作要官，但思之烂熟耳。 
现代文：不是我不爱做权要之官，不过是把进退出处的利害想得烂熟而已。
English: It's not that I don't like being a high-ranking official, it's just that I'm very familiar with the ins and outs of it.

古文：初，齐显祖之末，谷籴踊贵。
现代文：当初，文宣帝末年之时，粮食价格昂贵。
English: At first, when Emperor Wenxuan was in his last years, grain prices were high.

古文：济南王即位，尚书左丞苏珍芝建议修石鳖等屯，自是淮南军防足食。
现代文：济南王当了皇帝，尚书左丞苏珍芝提议在石鳖等地修治屯田，从此淮南一带防守的军队有了足够的粮食。
English: When the king of Jinan became the emperor, Shangshu Zuozhong Su Zhenzhi proposed to build military camps in Shijiazhuang and other places. From then on, the army defending Huainan had enough grain.

古文：肃宗即位，平州刺史嵇晔建议，开督亢陂，置屯田，岁收稻粟数十万石，北境周赡。
现代文：孝昭帝即位后，平州刺史稽晔建议在督亢陂开垦荒地，设置屯田，一年收获稻米几十万石，北方边境的粮食供应也富足了。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozhao, the Pingzhou Historian-Examiner proposed to reclaim the wasteland in Duxun and set up farmlands, harvesting hundreds of thousands of kilos of rice a year, and the grain supply on the northern border was also abundant.

古文：又于河内置怀义等屯，以给河南之费。
现代文：又在河内一带设置怀义等屯田区，以供给河南粮食消费。
English: In addition, in the vicinity of Hanoi, tontian areas such as Huaiyi were set up to supply grain consumption in Henan.

古文：自是稍止转输之劳。
现代文：从此渐渐停止了粮食转运的麻烦。
English: Since then, the problems of grain transportation have gradually stopped.

古文：世祖文皇帝上天嘉二年春，正月，戊申，周改元保定。
现代文：天嘉二年春季正月，戊申，北周改换年号为保定。
English: In the first month of the spring of the second year of Tianjia, Wushin, Beizhou changed its name to Baoding.

古文：以大冢宰护为都督中外诸军事；令五府总于天官，事无巨细，皆先断后闻。
现代文：任命大冢宰宇文护为都督中外诸军事；命令地官、春官、夏官、秋官、冬官等五府全部隶属于天官府，事情无论大小，都可以由宇文护先拍板决定再奏闻皇帝。
English: He appointed the grand eunuch, Uwen Guo, as the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces. He ordered that the five prefectures of local officials, spring officials, summer officials, autumn officials, and winter officials should all be subordinated to the Heavenly Government. No matter how big or small the matter was, it could be decided by Uwen Guo and then reported to the emperor.

古文：庚戌，大赦。
现代文：庚戌，陈朝大赦天下。
English: Geng Xuan, Chen Dynasty amnesty to the world.

古文：周主祀圜丘。
现代文：北周国主在圜丘祭天。
English: The Lord of the Northern Zhou Kingdom is worshipped in the Mengqiu Mountains.

古文：辛亥，齐主祀圜丘；壬子，礻帝于太庙。
现代文：辛亥，北齐孝昭帝在圜丘祭天。壬子，在太庙举行祭。
English: In Xinhai, the Northern Qi Emperor Xiao Zhao held a festival in Shengqiu. In Renzi, a festival was held in Taimiao.

古文：周主祀方丘；甲寅，祀感生帝于南郊；乙卯，祭太社。
现代文：北周孝昭帝在方丘祭地；甲寅，在南郊祭祀感生帝，以祈祷粮食丰收。乙卯，祭太社。
English: North Zhou Emperor Xiao Zhao is at the Fangqiu Festival Grounds; and in the southern suburb, Emperor Guanzheng is worshipped, with prayers for a bumper grain harvest.

古文：齐主使王琳出合肥，召募伧楚，更图进取。
现代文：北齐孝昭帝派王琳从合肥出发，召募北方武人，想求得进一步发展。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao of Northern Qi sent Wang Lin from Hefei to recruit northern warriors, hoping to achieve further development.

古文：合州刺史裴景徽，琳兄珉之婿也，请以私属为乡导。
现代文：陈朝合州刺史裴景徽，是王琳的哥哥王珉的女婿，他请求让他家里的奴仆为王琳充当向导。
English: Chen Chaozhou, the son-in-law of Wang Lin's brother Wang Yao, asked his family's servant to act as a guide for Wang Lin.

古文：齐主使琳与行台左丞卢潜将兵赴之，琳沉吟不决。
现代文：孝昭帝让王琳和行台左丞卢潜带兵一起去策应裴景徽，王琳为了慎重起见，便借口考虑考虑，一直没有作出决定。
English: Xiao Zhaoji asked Wang Lin and Gongtai Zuo Rong to go with the soldiers to deal with Pei Jinghui. Wang Lin, in order to be prudent, used the excuse of considering, and has not made a decision.

古文：景徽恐事泄，挺身奔齐。
现代文：裴景徽担心自己求作内应的事泄漏出去，就挺身而出逃奔了北齐。
English: Pei Jinghui was worried that the things he was supposed to do would leak out, so he stepped forward and fled to Beiqi.

古文：齐主以琳为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史，镇寿阳。
现代文：孝昭帝任命王琳为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史，让他镇守寿阳。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao appointed Wang Lin as the grand general of the imperial cavalry, the third secretary of the Kaifu Rites and Decrees, and the governor of Yangzhou, and made him the governor of Shouyang.

古文：己巳，周主享太庙，班太祖所述六官之法。
现代文：已巳，北周国主在太庙祭拜祖宗，按太祖所定的六官之法进行排列。
English: Already, the Northern Zhou sovereigns worship their ancestors in the temple festival, and they are arranged according to the law of the six offices established by the great ancestor.

古文：辛未，周湘州城主殷亮降，湘州平。
现代文：辛未，北周湘州城主殷亮投降陈国，湘州被平定。
English: Soon after, Zhou Xiangzhou castellan Yin Liang came down, and Xiangzhou was pacified.

古文：侯瑱与贺若敦相持日久，瑱不能制，乃借船送敦等渡江。
现代文：侯与贺若敦两军相持时日越来越长，侯不能取胜，于是就借了一些船只，说是要送贺若敦他们渡过长江回去。
English: The standoff between Hou and Horatio's two armies was getting longer and longer, and Hou could not win, so he borrowed some ships, saying that he wanted to send Horatio back across the Yangtze River.

古文：敦虑其诈，不许，报云： 湘州我地，为尔侵逼；必须我归，可去我百里之外。 
现代文：贺若敦担心其中有诈，没有同意，派人回答侯说： 湘州原是我们的地域，现在遭到你们的侵略威逼；如果要我退兵回去，你们先离开我军一百里之外。 
English: He Ruodong was worried that there was fraud and did not agree, so he sent a man to reply to Hou: "Hangzhou used to be our region, but now we are being threatened by your aggression; if you want me to withdraw, you must first leave our army a hundred miles away.

古文：瑱留船江岸，引兵去之。
现代文：侯把借来的船留在江岸，自己带兵退走了。
English: Hou left the borrowed boat on the riverbank and retreated with his soldiers.

古文：敦乃自拔北归，军士病死者什五六。
现代文：贺若敦这才自己拔营北归，军士中病死的有十分之五六。
English: It was only then that He Ruodong himself pulled out of the camp and returned to the north. Fifty-six out of ten sergeants died of illness.

古文：武陵、天门、南平、义阳、河东、宜都郡悉平。
现代文：武陵、天门、南平、义阳、河东、宜都郡都平定了。
English: Wuling, Tianmen, Nanping, Yiyang, Hedong and Yidu counties have all been pacified.

古文：晋公护以敦失地无功，除名为民。
现代文：晋公宇文护因为贺若敦既失去土地，又没有战功，便把他撤职黜为平民。
English: Jin Gongwu Wengu removed He Ruodong from his post because of his ineffectual performance.

古文：二月，甲午，周主朝日于东郊。
现代文：二月，甲午，北周国主在东郊朝拜日神。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, the ruler of the Northern Zhou Dynasty worshipped the sun god in the eastern suburbs.

古文：周人以小司徒韦孝宽尝立勋于玉壁，乃置勋州于玉壁，以孝宽为刺史。
现代文：北周因为小司徒韦孝宽曾在玉壁建立过功勋，于是就在玉壁设置勋州，任命韦孝宽为刺史。
English: The Northern Zhou Dynasty, because Wei Xiaokuan, a minor disciple, had made meritorious achievements in Yubi, set up an honorary prefecture in Yubi and appointed Wei Xiaokuan as the crown prince.

古文：孝宽有恩信，善用间谍，或齐人受孝宽金货，遥通书疏，故齐之动静，周人皆先知之。
现代文：韦孝宽为人讲信用，善施恩，也善于利用间谍。有的北齐人接受了韦孝宽的金钱财物，远远地寄来情报书信，所以北齐方面的动静，北周人都事先知道得一清二楚。
English: Some Northern Qi people accepted Wei Xiaokuan's money and property and sent intelligence letters from far away, so the movements of Northern Qi and Northern Zhou people knew everything in advance.

古文：有主帅许盆，以所戍城降齐，孝宽遣谍取之，俄斩首而还。
现代文：有一个主帅叫许盆，献出他戍守的城池去投降北齐，韦孝宽派间谍去杀他，不久果然把他斩首，顺利归来。
English: There was a commander named Xu Bon, who gave up the castle he was guarding to surrender to the Northern Qi. Wei Xiaokuan sent spies to kill him, but they soon beheaded him and returned safely.

古文：离石以南，生胡数为抄掠，而居于齐境，不可诛讨。
现代文：离石郡以南，不肯归附的胡人多次来骚扰虏掠，抢了就跑，而他们住在北齐境内，所以不能越境去征讨。
English: To the south of Shishishun, the Hu people who refused to be annexed repeatedly came to harass and plunder, rob and run away, but they lived in the territory of North Qi, so they could not cross the border to collect.

古文：孝宽欲筑城于险要以制之，乃发河西役徒十万，甲士百人，遣开府仪同三司姚岳监筑之。
现代文：韦孝宽想在险要处修筑城垣来制伏他们，于是征发河西一带民工十万人，兵士一百人，派开府仪同三司姚岳去监督修筑。
English: Wei Xiaokuan wanted to build a city wall at the critical point to subdue them, so he conscripted 100,000 migrant workers and 100 soldiers from the Hexi area, and sent Kaifu Yi and the Third Division Yao Yue to supervise the construction.

古文：岳以兵少，惧不改前。
现代文：姚岳因为兵少，心里害怕不敢去。
English: Because of the small number of soldiers, Yao Yue was afraid to go.

古文：孝宽曰： 计此城十日可毕。
现代文：韦孝宽说： 我估计这座城十天就可以修筑完毕。
English: Wei Xiaokuan said: I estimate that this city can be completed in ten days.

古文：城距晋州四百馀里，吾一日创手，二日敌境始知。
现代文：城址离晋州四百多里地，我们第一天开始动工，第二天敌人境内才会得到消息。
English: The site of the city is more than four hundred miles away from Jinzhou. We started construction on the first day, and the next day we received news from the enemy's territory.

古文：设使晋州征兵，三日方集，谋议之间，自稽三日，计其军行，二日不到。我之隍防，足得办矣。 
现代文：假设晋州方面调集军队，三天才能调齐，谋划商议对策，自然得费去两天，计算一下敌军的行军速度，两天是赶不到我们修城的地方的，等他们到来时，我们的城垣壕沟早修成了。 
English: Assuming that the Jinzhou side mobilizes the army, it will take three days to mobilize, and it will take two days to plan and discuss countermeasures. Naturally, it will take two days to calculate the enemy's marching speed. Two days cannot catch up with the place where we build the city. By the time they arrive, our city wall and trench have already been built.

古文：乃令筑之。
现代文：于是就下令开始修筑。
English: So he ordered the construction of a new one.

古文：齐人果至境上，疑有大军，停留不进。
现代文：北齐军队果然来到边境上探望，因怀疑有大军埋伏在民工后头，就停下来不再前进。
English: The North Qi army came to the border to visit, and because they suspected that a large army was lurking behind the migrant workers, they stopped and did not advance any further.

古文：其夜，孝宽使汾水以南傍介山、稷山诸村纵火。齐人以为军营，收兵自固。
现代文：当天晚上，韦孝宽让汾水以南靠着介山、稷山的那些村庄故意纵火，北齐人望见火光，以为那就是军营，赶快收兵，回去自守去了。
English: In the evening of the same day, Wei Xiaokuan deliberately set fire to the villages south of Surabaya along the Kaishan and Lushan. The people of North Qi saw the flames and thought it was a military camp. They quickly gathered their troops and went back to defend themselves.

古文：岳卒城而还。
现代文：姚岳最终把城修好，顺利返回了。
English: Yao Yue finally repaired the city and returned successfully.

古文：三月，乙卯，太尉零陵壮肃公侯瑱卒。
现代文：三月，乙卯，太尉零陵人壮肃公侯去世。
English: In March, E U, Tai Li Zi Ling Ren Zong Su Gong Hou passed away.

古文：丙寅，周改八丁兵为十二丁兵，率岁一月役。
现代文：丙寅，北周把境内原来分为八拨而轮番服役的民丁改分为十二拨，每拨每年服役一个月。
English: Hsin-yin, North Zhou divided the territory into eight piles and the people who served in turn were divided into twelve piles, and each pile served for one month each year.

古文：夏，四月，丙子朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季四月，丙子朔，发生日食。
English: In the summer of April, the solar eclipse occurs.

古文：周以少傅尉迟纲为大司空。
现代文：北周任命少傅尉迟纲为大司空。
English: North Zhou appointed Shao Fu Li Chi Gang as Daishi Kuo.

古文：丙午，周封愍帝子康为纪国公，皇子赟为鲁国公。
现代文：丙午，北周封周愍帝的儿子宇文康为纪国公，皇子宇文为鲁国公。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, Uwen Kang, the son of Emperor Zhou Enlai of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, became the Prince of Ji Province, and Prince Uwen became the Prince of Lu Province.

古文：赟，李后之子也。
现代文：宇文是李后的儿子。
English: Uwen is the son of Empress Dowager Li.

古文：六月，乙酉，周主使御正殷不害来聘。
现代文：六月，乙酉，北周派御正殷不害来陈朝聘问。
English: In June, the Northern Zhou Dynasty sent Emperor Zhengyin to the Chen Dynasty for consultation.

古文：秋，七月，周更铸钱，文曰 布泉 ，一当五，与五铢并行。
现代文：秋季，七月，北周重新铸钱，钱币上的字是 布泉 ，一枚当五枚小钱，与五铢钱一起流通。
English: In the autumn, in July, Northern Zhou re-minted money, the word on the coin was Buquan, one piece was worth five small coins, and circulated together with five yuan coins.

古文：己酉，周追封皇伯父颢为邵国公，以晋公护之子会为嗣；颢弟连为杞国公，以章武公导之子亮为嗣；连弟洛生为莒国公，以护之子至为嗣；追封太祖之子武邑公震为宋公，以世宗之子实为嗣。
现代文：己酉，北周追封皇伯父宇文颢为邵国公，让晋公宇文护的儿子宇文会为其后嗣。封宇文颢的弟弟宇文连为杞国公，让章武公宇文导的儿子宇文亮为其后嗣；宇文连的弟弟宇文洛生为营国公，让宇文护的儿子宇文至为其后嗣；追封太祖文帝的儿子武邑公宇文震为宋公，让世宗明帝的儿子宇文实为其后嗣。
English: At the same time, the Northern Zhou court posthumously made the emperor's uncle, Uwen Zang, the ruler of Shao Province, and made the prince of Jin, Uwen Hui, the son of Uwen Guo, his heir. The brother of Uwen Zang, Uwen Zang, became the ruler of Shao Province, and made the prince of Zhangwu, Uwen Liang, the son of Uwen Guo, his heir; the brother of Uwen Zang, Uwen Lousheng, became the prince of Ying Province, and made the son of Uwen Guo, Uwen Zi, his heir; the prince of Wuyi, U

古文：齐主之诛杨、燕也。许以长广王湛为太弟；既而立太子百年，湛心不平。
现代文：北齐孝昭帝杀杨、燕子献等人时，答应让长广王高湛当太弟，将来接他的皇位。后来却立高百年为太子，高湛心中愤愤不平。
English: When Emperor Xiaozhao of Northern Qi killed Yang, Yan Zi Xuan and others, he promised to make Changguang Wang Gao Zhan the younger brother and take over his throne in the future. Later, Gao was made the crown prince for a hundred years, and Gao Zhan was indignant.

古文：帝在晋阳，湛居守于鄴。
现代文：孝昭帝在晋阳，高湛留守在邺城。
English: Xiao Zhaodi is in Jinyang, Gaotan is staying in Lucheng.

古文：散骑常侍高元海，高祖之从孙也。留典机密。
现代文：散骑常侍高元海，是神武帝的堂孙，留下来掌管机密。
English: Knight-at-arms Gao Yuanhai, a cousin of Emperor Shenwu, was left in charge of the secrets.

古文：帝以领军代人库狄伏连为幽州刺史，以斛律光之弟羡为领军，以分湛权。
现代文：孝昭帝任命领军代郡人库狄伏连为幽州刺史，斛律光的弟弟斛律羡为领军，以此来分散高湛的兵权。
English: Emperor Xiao Zhao appointed the leader of the army, the deputy of the county, Ku Diwulian, as the governor of Yuzhou, and the brother of Gao Liguang, Gao Luxian, as the leader of the army, in order to disperse Gao Zhan's military power.

古文：湛留伏连，不听羡视事。
现代文：高湛留下库狄伏连，不让他到幽州去上任，又不让斛律羡去执行领军的职务。
English: Gaozhan left Cudiwulian behind, and did not allow him to go to Yuzhou to take office, nor did he allow Yao Lu to carry out the duties of leading the army.

古文：先是，济南闵悼王常在鄴，望气者以鄴中有天子气。
现代文：原先，济南闵悼王高殷常住在邺城，一个会望气之术的人说：邺中有天子崐之气笼罩。
English: Originally, Gao Yin, the eulogy king of Jinan, often lived in Lucheng. A person who knew the art of hoping for the wind said: "In Lucheng, there is the wind of the son of heaven.

古文：平秦王归彦恐济南王复立，为己不利，劝帝除之。
现代文：平秦王高归彦怕济南王将来又当孝昭帝，对自己很不利，就劝孝昭帝除去济南王。
English: King Gao Guibin of the Pingqin Dynasty, fearing that King Jinan might become Emperor Xiaozhao again in the future, advised Emperor Xiaozhao to remove King Jinan.

古文：帝乃使归彦至鄴，征济南王如晋阳。
现代文：孝昭帝便派高归彦去邺城，征召济南王到晋阳来。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao then sent Gao Guihang to Lucheng and summoned the King of Jinan to Jinyang.

古文：湛内不自安，问计于高元海。
现代文：高湛因为违抗孝昭帝的任命，心里很不踏实，就向高元海询问计策。
English: Gao Zhan was not sure in his heart about defying Emperor Xiao Zhao's appointment, so he asked Gao Yuanhai for advice.

古文：元海曰： 皇太后万福，至尊孝友异常，殿下不须异虑。 
现代文：高元海说： 皇太后健康长寿，福泽绵长，皇上异常地孝顺友爱，殿下不必有什么异样的考虑。 
English: Gao Yuanhai said, "The empress dowager is healthy and long-lived, her fortune is long-lasting, and the emperor is unusually filial and friendly. There is no need for His Imperial Highness to consider anything unusual.

古文：湛曰： 此岂我推诚之意邪！ 
现代文：高湛听了不高兴，说： 这难道就是我信任你，对你推诚相待的本意吗？ 
English: Gao Zhan was not happy to hear this and said, "Is this really my intention to trust you and treat you with sincerity?

古文：元海乞还省，一夜思之，湛即留元海于后堂。
现代文：高元海要求回到台省中，用一晚上仔细考虑此事，高湛把高元海留在后堂。
English: Gao Yuanhai asked to return to Taizhou Middle School and spent the night carefully considering the matter. Gao Zhan left Gao Yuanhai in the back hall.

古文：元海达旦不眠，唯绕床徐步。
现代文：高元海到天亮还没有入睡，只是绕着床缓缓踱步。
English: By dawn, Gao Yuanhai still hadn't fallen asleep, he was just pacing slowly around the bed.

古文：夜漏未尽，湛遽出，曰： 神算如何？ 
现代文：计算时间的夜漏还没有滴完，高湛突然出来了，问高元海： 你神机妙算的怎样呢？ 
English: The night drip of calculating time had not yet finished dripping, Gao Zhan suddenly came out and asked Gao Yuanhai: What about your brilliant calculation?

古文：元海曰： 有三策，恐不堪用耳。
现代文：高元海回答说： 有三条计策，只是恐怕不中用罢了。
English: Gao Yuanhai replied, "There are three strategies, but I'm afraid they won't work.

古文：请殿下如梁孝王故事，从数骑入晋阳，先见太后求哀，后见主上，请去兵权，以死为限，不干朝政，必保泰山之安。
现代文：请殿下效法汉朝梁孝王的故事，带着几个随从到晋阳去，先去拜见太后，求她哀怜，随后再去求见皇上，请皇上削去你的兵权，一直到死也不再干预朝政，这样必定能使殿下安如泰山，这是上策。
English: Ask Your Imperial Highness to follow the example of the story of the Han Dynasty's Prince Liang Xiao Wang and go to Jinyang with several attendants. First, go to see the empress dowager and ask for her mercy. Then, go to see the emperor. Ask the emperor to remove your military power and never interfere with the imperial government until you die. This will surely make Your Imperial Highness as safe as Mount Tai. This is the best strategy.

古文：此上策也。不然，当具表云，威权太盛，恐取谤众口，请青、齐二州刺史，沉靖自居，必不招物议。
现代文：如果上策不行，那就应该上表，申述因为自己威权太盛，恐怕遭到众口的毁谤，请求任命自己为青、齐二州刺史，沉默安静地住在那儿，这样做必定不会招来议论。
English: If the best policy does not work, then it should be on the table, complaining that because his authority is too strong, he is afraid of being slandered by the public, requesting to appoint himself as a Qing and Qi two-state historian, living there quietly and quietly, and doing so will certainly not attract discussion.

古文：此中策也。 
现代文：这是中策。 
English: This is the middle way.

古文：更问下策。曰： 发言即恐族诛。 
现代文：高湛又问下策又如何呢，高元海回答说： 我说出来怕遭到灭族的灾祸。 
English: Gao Zhan also asked what the next step would be, and Gao Yuanhai replied: "I'm afraid of the disaster of extermination if I speak out."

古文：固逼之，元海曰： 济南世嫡，主上假太后令而夺之。
现代文：高湛再三逼他说出来。高元海这才说： 济南王是先帝的嫡子，主上假托太后的命令夺了他的帝位。
English: Gao Zhan repeatedly forced him to speak out. This is when Gao Yuanhai said: The King of Jinan was the legitimate son of the former emperor, but the order of the empress dowager usurped his imperial throne.

古文：今集文武，示以征济南之敕，执斛律丰乐，斩高归彦，尊立济南，号令天下，以顺讨逆，此万世一时也。 
现代文：现在你不妨把文武大臣召集起来，把皇上征召济南王去晋阳的敕令拿出来让他们看，把斛律丰乐抓起来，把高归彦斩首，尊立济南王为帝，号令天下，以顺讨逆，这是万世一时的大好机会。 
English: Now, you might as well gather the ministers of literature and armed forces, show them the imperial order to summon King Jinan to Jinyang, arrest Bao Lu and Feng Le, behead Gao Guihang, proclaim King Jinan as emperor, and order the whole world to rebel against the emperor. This is a great opportunity of a lifetime.

古文：湛大悦。
现代文：高湛听了这下策，非常高兴。
English: Gao Zhan was very happy to hear this.

古文：然性怯，狐疑未能用，使术士郑道谦等卜之，皆曰： 不利举事，静则吉。 
现代文：但他性格怯懦，犹犹豫豫不能采用，让术士郑道谦等人占卜吉凶，术士们大多说： 举事是不利的，安安静静才是大吉。 
English: But his character is cowardly, hesitating can not be used, let the sorcerer Zheng Daoqian and others divination, sorcerers mostly say: the event is unfavorable, peace and quiet is good luck.

古文：有林虑令潘子密，晓占候，潜谓湛曰： 宫车当晏驾，殿下为天下主。 
现代文：有一个林虑县的县令叫潘子密，通晓占卜观察天象之术，他偷偷对高湛说： 皇帝很快会驾崩，殿下会成为天下之主。 
English: There was a prefectural governor of Linxian County named Pan Zimi, who was familiar with divination and the art of observing celestial phenomena. He secretly said to Gaotan: The emperor will soon die, and his highness will become the lord of the world.

古文：湛拘之于内以候之。
现代文：高湛把他抓来，放在内庭，以验证他的预言。
English: Gaozhan caught him and put him in the inner court to verify his prediction.

古文：又令巫觋卜之，多云 不须举兵，自有大庆 。
现代文：又命令巫觋占卜，大多说： 不用举兵，自然会有大喜事临头。 
English: He also ordered the sorceresses to tell fortunes, and most of them said, "There is no need to raise an army, there will naturally be great joy on the horizon."

古文：湛乃奉诏，令数百骑送济南王至晋阳。
现代文：高湛于是奉诏派数百名骑兵送济南王去晋阳。
English: Gaozhan then sent hundreds of cavalrymen to escort the Jinan king to Jinyang.

古文：九月，帝使人鸩之，济南王不从，乃扼杀之。
现代文：九月，孝昭帝派人送毒酒去毒死济南王，济南王不肯喝，于是就扼其咽喉，将他卡死。
English: In September, Emperor Xiaozhao sent someone to poison the King of Jinan with poisoned wine. The King of Jinan refused to drink it, so he strangled him and choked him to death.

古文：帝寻亦悔之。
现代文：事后孝昭帝又后悔了。
English: After the fact, Xiao Zhaodi regretted it again.

古文：冬，十月，甲戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季十月，甲戌朔，发生日食。
English: In the winter of October, the solar eclipse occurred.

古文：丙子，齐以彭城王浟为太保，长乐王尉粲为太尉。
现代文：丙子，北齐任命彭城王高为太保，长乐王高尉粲为太尉。
English: Cui Zi, Northern Qi appointed Pengcheng Wang Gao as Taibo, and Changle Wang Gao Jun as Taifu.

古文：齐肃宗出畋，有兔惊马，坠地绝肋。
现代文：北齐孝昭帝出外打猎，窜出一只兔子，把他骑的马惊了，他被掀掉在地上，摔断了肋骨。
English: Emperor Beiqi Xiao Zhaoji went out hunting and caught a rabbit. The horse he was riding was spooked and he was thrown to the ground, breaking his ribs.

古文：娄太后视疾，问济南所在者三，齐主不对。
现代文：娄太后来探望他的伤势，再三问起济南王在哪里，齐孝昭帝不回答。
English: The Empress Dowager later visited him to see how he was doing and repeatedly asked where the King of Jinan was, but Emperor Qixiao did not answer.

古文：太后怒曰： 杀之邪？
现代文：娄太后勃然大怒，说： 被你杀了吧？
English: The empress dowager flew into a rage and said: Did you kill her?

古文：不用吾言，死其宜矣！ 
现代文：不听我的话，死了也是活该！ 
English: If you don't listen to me, you deserve to die!

古文：遂去，不顾。
现代文：于是盛怒而去，头都不回。
English: So he went away in a rage and never looked back.

古文：十一月，甲辰，诏以嗣子冲眇，可遣尚书右仆射赵郡王睿谕旨，征长广王湛统兹大宝。
现代文：十一月，甲辰，北齐孝昭帝下诏，说是因为皇太子年纪幼小，可崐以派尚书右仆射赵郡王高睿传旨，征召长广王高湛来继承皇位。
English: In November, Emperor Jia Chen of Northern Qi Xiao Zhao issued an edict, saying that because the crown prince was young, he could send Shang Shu's right-hand man, Zhao Gu Wang Gao Rui, to convey the order to recruit Chang Guang Wang Gaotan to succeed to the throne.

古文：又与湛书曰： 百年无罪，汝可以乐处置之，勿效前人也。 
现代文：又写了封信给高湛，说： 高百年没有罪过，你可以好好处置他，不要学前人的样子。 
English: He also wrote a letter to Gao Zhan, saying: Gao has not sinned for a hundred years, you can treat him well, do not look like a preschooler.

古文：是日，殂于晋阳宫。
现代文：这一天，北齐孝昭帝死在晋阳宫里。
English: On this day, Northern Qi Emperor Xiaozhao died in the Jinyang Palace.

古文：临终，言恨不见太后山陵。
现代文：他临终时，说自己最大的遗憾是不能为太后送终。
English: On his deathbed, he said his biggest regret was not being able to see his mother-in-law die.

古文：颜之推论曰：孝昭天性至孝，而不知忌讳，乃至于此，良由不学之所为也。
现代文：颜之推论曰：孝昭帝的天性是极孝的，但做事不知忌讳，以致才有这样的下场，这实在是因为不学经典的结果。
English: Yan Zhi's deduction said: Xiao Zhao Di's nature is extremely filial, but he does not know the taboo of doing things, so that this is the result. This is really the result of not learning the classics.

古文：赵郡王睿先使黄门侍郎王松年驰至鄴，宣肃宗遗命。
现代文：北齐赵郡王高睿先派黄门侍郎王松年驰马到邺城，宣布孝昭帝的遗命。
English: King Gao Rui of Zhao County in Northern Qi first sent the Yellow Gate attendant Wang Songnian to gallop to Shicheng to announce the death of Emperor Xiaozhao.

古文：湛犹疑其诈，使所亲先诣殡所，发而视之。
现代文：高湛还疑心其中有诈，便派自己的亲信先到停放孝昭帝灵柩的地方，打开棺木看真切了。
English: Gaotan also suspected that there was fraud, so he sent his cronies first to the place where the coffin of Emperor Xiao Zhaodi was parked, and opened the coffin to see for himself.

古文：使者复命，湛喜，驰赴晋阳，使河南王孝瑜先入宫，改易禁卫。
现代文：使者回来汇报，高湛心中大喜，急忙驰马去晋阳，派河南王高孝瑜先进宫去，把宫禁中卫兵全部换了。
English: When the envoy returned to report, Gao Zhan was overjoyed. He hurriedly rode to Jinyang and sent the Henan King Gao Xiaoyu to the front of the palace to change all the guards in the palace.

古文：癸丑，世祖即皇帝位于南宫，大赦，改元太宁。
现代文：癸丑，北齐武成帝高湛在南宫即皇帝位，大赦天下，改换年号为太宁。
English: At that time, the Northern Qi Emperor Gaozhan was enthroned in the Southern Palace, and was pardoned by the emperor, and the era name was changed to Taining.

古文：周人许归安成王顼，使司会上士京兆杜杲来聘。
现代文：北周答应送回安成王陈顼，派司会上士杜杲到陈朝聘问。
English: The Northern Zhou Dynasty agreed to send King Ancheng Chen Yao back to the Northern Zhou Dynasty. The Northern Zhou Dynasty sent Senior Sergeant Du Yao to Chen Dynasty for questioning.

古文：上悦，即遣使报之，并赂以黔中地及鲁山郡。
现代文：陈文帝很高兴，马上派使者去回报，并赠送黔中地区及鲁山郡给北周。
English: Chen Wendi was very pleased and immediately sent an emissary to reciprocate, and presented Bozhong District and Lushan County to Beizhou.

古文：齐以彭城王浟为太师、录尚书事，平秦王归彦为太傅，尉粲为太保，平阳王淹为太宰，博陵王济为太尉，段韶为大司马，丰州刺史娄睿为司空，赵郡王睿为尚书令，任城王湝为尚书左仆射，并州刺史斛律光为右仆射。
现代文：北齐任命彭城王高为太师、录尚书事，平秦王高归彦为太傅，高尉粲为太保，平阳王高淹为太宰，博陵王高济为太尉，段韶为大司马，丰州刺史娄睿为司空，赵郡王高睿为尚书令，任城王高为尚书左仆射，并州刺史斛律光为右仆射。
English: The Northern Qi appointed Pengcheng Wang Gao as the Grand Master and Record Keeper, Pingqin Wang Gao Guihang as the Grand Master, Gaofei Yan as the Grand Master, Pingyang Wang Gaozhong as the Grand Master, Boling Wang Gaoji as the Grand Master, Duan Yu as the Grand Master, Fengzhou Zhi Zhi Rui as the Grand Master, Zhao Gu Wang Gao Rui as the Grand Master, Rencheng Wang Gao as the Grand Master's left-hand man, and Zhou Zhi Zhi Rui as the right-hand man.

古文：娄睿，韶之兄子也。
现代文：娄睿是娄昭的哥哥的儿子。
English: Zha Rui is the son of Zhao Zhao's elder brother.

古文：立太子百年为乐陵王。
现代文：立太子高百年为乐陵王。
English: The crown prince has been the king of the pleasure tombs for over a hundred years.

古文：丁巳，周主畋于岐阳；十二月，壬午，还长安。
现代文：丁巳，北周国主在岐阳打猎。十二月，壬午，回到长安。
English: At that time, the Northern Zhou ruler was hunting in Qiyang. In December, at noon, he returned to Chang'an.

古文：太子中庶子馀姚虞荔、御史中丞孔奂，以国用不足，奏立煮海盐赋及榷酤之科，诏从之。
现代文：陈朝太子中庶子馀姚人虞荔、御史中丞孔奂，因为国家财政紧张，启奏设立征收煮海盐的赋税和设立官府专利卖酒的机构。
English: Because of the state's tight finances, Emperor Chen's illegitimate middle son, Prince Youyao's son-in-law, Emperor Yu Li, and his son-in-law, Emperor Gong Li, initiated the levying of taxes on boiled sea salt and the establishment of an agency to sell government-patented liquor.

古文：初，高祖以帝女丰安公主妻留异之子贞臣，征异为南徐州刺史，异迁延不就。
现代文：文帝下诏采纳了这一建议。当初，陈武帝把陈文帝的女儿丰安公主嫁给留异的儿子留贞臣为妻，征召留异为南徐州刺史，留异拖延着不去就任。
English: Emperor Wen accepted this suggestion in his edict. At the beginning, Emperor Chen married Princess Feng'an, the daughter of Emperor Chen, to Remy's son, Remy Zhenchen, and conscripted Remy to write the history of southern Xuzhou. Remy delayed to take office.

古文：帝即位，复以异为缙州刺史，领东海太守。
现代文：陈文帝即位之后，又任命留异为缙州刺史，兼东阳太守。
English: After Emperor Chen Wen ascended to the throne, he also appointed Liu Yi as the governor of Zhangzhou and the governor of Dongyang.

古文：异屡遣其长史王澌入朝，澌每言朝廷虚弱。
现代文：留异多次派他的长史王澌入朝探听情况，王澌常说朝廷其实很虚弱。
English: He repeatedly sent his chief historian Wang Xun to the imperial court to investigate the situation. Wang Xun often said that the imperial court was actually very weak.

古文：异信之，虽外示臣节，恒怀两端，与王琳自鄱阳信安岭潜通使往来。
现代文：留异相信了，外表上虽然显示出当臣子的本分，但常常怀有二心，便和王琳相勾结，经由鄱阳信安岭的一条秘密通路，暗地里常有使者来往。
English: Remaining different, he believed that although he showed his duty as a courtier on the outside, he often harbored double-mindedness, so he colluded with Wang Lin and passed through a secret passage in Xun'anling, Shenyang. Secretly, there were often envoys coming and going.

古文：琳败，上遣左卫将军沈恪代异，实以兵袭之。
现代文：王琳兵败后，文帝派左卫将军沈恪去取代留异之职，实际上是用兵力去袭击他。
English: After the defeat of Wang Lin's army, Emperor Wen sent the left guard general Shen Jia to replace the position of the second-in-command, and actually attacked him with troops.

古文：异出军下淮以拒恪，恪与战而败，退还钱塘。
现代文：留异把军队开到下淮去抵抗沈恪。沈恪与留异交战兵败，退回钱塘。
English: Rumi led his army to lower Huai to resist Shen Kuk. Shen Kuk lost the battle with Rumi and retreated to Qiantang.

古文：异复上表逊谢。
现代文：留异这才又上表给朝廷表示谢罪。
English: It was only then that he publicly expressed his remorse to the imperial court.

古文：时众军方事湘、郢，乃降诏书慰谕，且羁縻之。
现代文：当时陈朝的军队正用在湘、郢战场上，于是只好降诏书给留异，对他加以慰抚晓谕，暂且牵制笼络着他。
English: At that time, the army of the Chen Dynasty was being used on the battlefields of Hunan and Shandong, so they had no choice but to issue an imperial edict to stay different, comfort him, and temporarily restrain him.

古文：异知朝廷终将讨己，乃以兵戍下淮及建德以备江路。
现代文：留异知道朝廷一腾出兵力，终究会来讨伐他，于是就派兵戍守下淮以及建德，控制住钱塘江的通路。
English: Knowing that the imperial court would eventually come to fight against him as soon as it released its forces, Liu Miao sent soldiers to guard the lower Huai and Jiande to control the passage of the Qiantang River.

古文：丙午，诏司空、南徐州刺史侯安都讨之。
现代文：丙午，文帝下诏派司空、南徐州刺史侯安都去讨伐他。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 3rd month, Emperor Wen issued an edict to send Sikuo and Nan Xuzhou Jishi Hou'an to fight him.

古文：世祖文皇帝上天嘉三年
现代文：春季正月，乙亥，北齐国主武成帝到了邺城。辛巳，在南郊祭天。
English: In the first month of spring, Emperor Wu Chengdi, the ruler of Northern Qi, arrived in Handan. Soon after, a festival was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：春，正月，乙亥，齐主至鄴；辛巳，祀南郊；壬午，享太庙；丙戌，立妃胡氏为皇后，子纬为皇太子。
现代文：壬午，献祭品于太庙。丙戌，立妃子胡氏为皇后，儿子高纬为皇太子。
English: In Renwu, offerings were made at the Imperial Temple. He was enthroned, his daughter Hu Shi became empress, and his son Gao Wei became crown prince.

古文：后，魏兗州刺史安定胡延之之子也。
现代文：皇后是魏国兖州刺史安定人胡延之的女儿。
English: The empress was the daughter of Hu Yanzhi, a member of the Shishi stable in Bozhou, Wei.

古文：戊子，大赦。
现代文：戊子，北齐大赦天下。
English: Peace, peace to all the world.

古文：己亥，以冯翊王润为尚书左仆射。
现代文：己亥，任命冯翊王高润为尚书左仆射。
English: Ji Hai appointed Feng Xuan Wang Gaorun as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：周凉景公贺兰祥卒。
现代文：北周凉景公贺兰祥病逝。
English: North Zhou Liangjing Gong Heranxiang died of illness.

古文：壬寅，周人凿河渠于蒲州，龙首渠于同州。
现代文：壬寅，北周在蒲州开凿河渠，在同州开凿龙首渠。
English: Ren Yin and Beizhou dug canals in Puzhou and Longshou Canal in the same province.

古文：丁未，周以安成王顼为柱国大将军，遣杜果送之南归。
现代文：丁未，北周任命安成王陈顼为柱国大将军，派杜杲送他回南方。
English: Ding Wei, Northern Zhou appointed Ancheng Wang Chen Qi as the general of the pillar country, and sent Du Qi to send him back to the south.

古文：辛亥，上祀南郊，以胡公配天；二月，辛酉，祀北郊。
现代文：辛亥，陈文帝在南郊祭天，同时也配祭胡公。二日辛酉，在北郊祭地。
English: In Xinhai, Chen Wendi in the southern suburbs of the festival, but also with Hu Gong. Two days of Xinhai, in the northern suburbs of the festival.

古文：闰月，丁未，齐以太宰、平阳王淹为青州刺史，太傅、平秦王归彦为太宰、冀州刺史。
现代文：闰月，丁未，北齐任命太宰、平阳王高淹为青州刺史，太傅、平秦王高归彦为太宰、冀州刺史。
English: In the leap month, Ding Wei and Bei Qi appointed Dazai and Pingyang Wang Gao Ruan as Qingzhou scribe, and Taifu and Pingqin Wang Gao Guihang as Dazai and Jizhou scribe.

古文：归彦为肃宗所厚，恃势骄盈，陵侮贵戚。
现代文：高归彦受到北齐孝昭帝的厚待，依恃权势，十分骄横，对贵戚高官随意凌辱。
English: Gao Guihang was treated well by Emperor Xiao Zhao of the Northern Qi Dynasty. He was very arrogant, clinging to power, and insulted high-ranking officials at will.

古文：世祖即位，侍中、开府仪同三司高元海、御史中丞毕义云、黄门郎高乾和数言其短，且云： 归彦威权震主，必为祸乱。 
现代文：北齐武成帝即位后，侍中、开府仪同三司高元海，御史中丞毕义云，黄门郎高乾和多次陈说他的短处，而且说： 高归彦威权太重，震动天子，必定会成为祸乱之源。 
English: After the enthronement of the Northern Qi Emperor Wu Cheng, the Vice-Chamberlain Gao Yuanhai, the Vice-Chamberlain Kaifu Yi, the Third Vice-Chamberlain Gao Yuanhai, the Second Vice-Chamberlain Bi Yiyun, and the Yellow Gate Lord Gao Qianhe repeatedly pointed out his shortcomings, and said: Gao Gui Yan's authority is too heavy, it shakes the heavenly son, and it will surely become the source of disaster.

古文：帝亦寻其反覆之迹，渐忌之。
现代文：武成帝也寻究他反覆无常的劣迹，便渐渐地对他猜忌起来。
English: Emperor Wucheng also investigated his capricious misdeeds and gradually became suspicious of him.

古文：伺归彦还家，召魏收于帝前作诏草，除归彦冀州，使乾和缮写。
现代文：一天，乘着高归彦回家去了，武成帝把魏收叫来起草诏书，任命高归彦为冀州刺史，最后让高乾和抄写。
English: One day, taking Gao Guihang home, Emperor Wu Cheng called Wei Wei to draft an edict, appointing Gao Guihang to write the history of Jizhou, and finally letting Gao Qianhe copy it.

古文：昼日，仍敕门司不听归彦辄入宫。
现代文：天亮后，仍然敕令管门的不放高归彦随便入宫。
English: After daybreak, still under the command of the Emperor to keep the gate closed, Guihang casually entered the palace.

古文：时归彦纵酒为乐，经宿不知。
现代文：当时高归彦在家里纵酒寻欢作乐，整宿酣饮，什么也不知道。
English: At that time, Gao Guihang was at home drinking, looking for fun, drinking, and did not know anything.

古文：至明，欲参，至门知之，大惊而退。
现代文：到天亮想入朝参见皇帝，到宫门口才知道事情有变，自己已被派往冀州了，这才大惊失色，退了回去。
English: At dawn, he wanted to go to the imperial court to see the emperor, but when he arrived at the gate of the palace, he learned that things had changed and he had been sent to Jizhou. He was shocked and retreated back.

古文：及通名谢，敕令早发，别赐钱帛等物甚厚，又敕督将悉送至清阳宫。
现代文：高归彦通报了姓名要向皇帝谢恩，这时宫中又传出敕令，让他早点出发去上任，另外又赏赐了他很多钱帛财物，又敕令督将全部为他送行送到清阳宫。
English: Gao Guihang announced his name to express his gratitude to the emperor. At this time, a royal order was issued in the palace, allowing him to leave early to take office. In addition, he was awarded a lot of money and property, and the governor was ordered to send him all to Qingyang Palace.

古文：拜辞而退，莫敢与语，唯赵郡王睿与之久语，时无闻者。
现代文：高归彦拜辞之后退了下来，没有人敢和他搭话，只有赵郡王高睿和他说了很久，当时没人听到他们说了什么。
English: After Gao Gui Yan bowed, he retreated. No one dared to talk to him, only Zhao Guo Wang Gao Rui talked to him for a long time. At that time, no one heard what they said.

古文：帝之为长广王也，清都和士开发善握槊、弹琵琶有宠，辟为开府行参军，及即位，累迁给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：北齐武成帝还当长广王的时候，清都人和士开因为善于使槊、善于弹琵琶而得到长广王的恩宠，被征召来当了开府行参军。待到长广王即位为帝，和士开多次升迁，已经做到给事黄门侍郎了。
English: When the Northern Qi Emperor Wu Cheng was still the King of Changguang, the people of Qingdu and Shikai were favored by the King of Changguang because they were good at playing the gong and the lute, and were called up to march to the capital to join the army. By the time the King of Changguang ascended to the throne, and Shikai had been promoted many times, he had already achieved the position of Yellow Gate Attendant.

古文：高元海、毕义云、高乾和皆疾之，将言其事。
现代文：高元海、毕义云、高乾和都讨厌他，准备有机会就告发他的劣迹。
English: Gao Yuanhai, Bi Yiyun and Gao Qianhe all hated him and were ready to expose his evil deeds whenever they had the chance.

古文：士开乃奏元海等交结朋党，欲擅威福。乾和由是被疏。
现代文：和士开先下手为强，就向武成帝汇报高元海等人互相勾通，结为朋党，想垄断政权，以便作威作福，高乾和从此被武成帝疏远了。
English: Gao Qianhe was alienated by Emperor Wu Chengdu after Gao Qianhe, who had the upper hand, reported to Emperor Wu Chengdu that Gao Yuanhai and others were colluding with each other, forming a crony party, and wanted to monopolize power in order to dominate and benefit others.

古文：义云纳赂于士开，得为兗州刺史。
现代文：毕义云向和士开进纳贿赂，得到了兖州刺史的职务。
English: Bi Yiyun accepted bribes from He Shikai and obtained the post of Zhangzhou chief historian.

古文：帝征江州刺史周迪出镇湓城，又征其子入朝。
现代文：陈文帝征召江州刺史周迪出镇湓城，又征召他的儿子进朝廷。
English: Chen Wendi conscripted Jiangzhou assassin Zhou Di out of the town of Shicheng, and also conscripted his son into the imperial court.

古文：迪趑且顾望，并不至。
现代文：周迪趄观望，父子两人都不肯动身。
English: Zhou Diyao looked on. Both father and son refused to leave.

古文：其馀南江酋帅，私署令长，多不受召，朝廷未暇致讨，但羁縻之。
现代文：其余南江的各位酋长，都私自代理地方官，也大多不接受朝廷征召，朝廷腾不出手来讨伐，只是对他们采取笼络安抚政策。
English: The rest of the chiefs of the Nanjiang, all acting as local officials in their own right, also mostly did not accept the imperial summons. The imperial court did not free its hands to fight, but only adopted a policy of appeasement towards them.

古文：豫章太守周敷独先入朝，进号安西将军，给鼓吹一部，赐又女妓、金帛，令还豫章。
现代文：豫章太守周敷率先受召进朝，朝廷便给了他一个安西将军的封号，给了他一队鼓吹乐队，还赐给他艺妓、金帛，让他还回豫章去。
English: Emperor Yuanzhang's father-in-law, Zhou Shiki, was the first to be called to the imperial court, and the court gave him the title of Anxi General, gave him a team of trumpeters, and also gave him geisha and gold brooches, so that he could return to Emperor Yuanzhang.

古文：迪以敷素出己下，深不平之，乃阴与留异相结，遣其弟方兴将兵袭敷；敷与战，破之。
现代文：周迪因为周敷一直比自己地位低，而现在受封，所以深感不平，于是暗地里和留异相勾结，派他弟弟周方兴带兵去攻打周敷，周敷与之交战，把周方兴打败了。
English: Zhou Di was deeply dissatisfied because Zhou Shiki had always been lower in status than himself, but now he was given a title, so he secretly colluded with Zhuo Yu, sent his brother Zhou Fangxing to attack Zhou Shiki, Zhou Shiki fought with him, and defeated Zhou Fangxing.

古文：又遣其兄子伏甲船中，诈为贾人，欲袭湓城。
现代文：周迪又派他哥哥的儿子埋伏兵士于船中，假称是商人，想袭击湓城。
English: Zhou Di also sent his brother's son to ambush the soldiers in the ship, pretending to be a merchant, and wanted to attack Handan.

古文：未发，事觉，寻阳太守监江州事晋陵华皎遣兵逆击之，尽获其船仗。
现代文：但还没动手，事情就暴露了，寻阳太守监江州事晋陵人华皎派兵去迎击，把周迪方面的船只兵器全缴获了。
English: However, before they could do anything, the matter was exposed. Huayu, the Guanyang Emperor's overseer of the affairs of Jiangsu Province and the person in charge of the Jin Mausoleum, sent troops to meet the attack and captured all of Zhou Di's ship weapons.

古文：上以闽州刺史陈宝应之父为光禄大夫，子女皆受封爵，命宗正编入属籍。
现代文：陈文帝任命闽州刺史陈宝应的父亲为光禄大夫，陈宝应的子女也都封爵，而且命令宗正把他们的名字编入官府名册。
English: Emperor Chen appointed the father of the Zhangzhou scholar Chen Baoying as the Guanglu doctor. Chen Baoying's children were also knighted, and ordered Zong Zheng to compile their names into the government register.

古文：而宝应以留异女为妻，阴与异合。
现代文：但陈宝应娶了留异的女儿为妻，因此暗地里和留异合作。
English: However, Chen Bao married the daughter of a foreigner, so he secretly cooperated with the foreigner.

古文：虞荔弟寄，流寓闽中，荔思之成疾，上为荔征之，宝应留不遣。
现代文：虞荔的弟弟虞寄，寄居在闽中，虞荔因思念他而病了。陈文帝为虞荔特地向闽中征召虞寄回朝，但陈宝应把人扣着不放。
English: Yu Lai's younger brother, Yu Ying, was living in Shizhong, and Yu Lai fell ill because he missed him. Emperor Wen of Chen specially summoned Yu Ying to Shizhong to send Yu back to the North, but Chen Bao should not let anyone go.

古文：寄尝从容讽以逆顺，宝应辄引它语以乱之。
现代文：虞寄曾经在闲谈中对陈宝应劝谕叛逆和归顺何去何从的道理，但陈宝应一听就把话头引开，打乱虞寄的话。
English: In a casual conversation, Yu Ying had told Chen Bao that he should exhort him to rebel and submit, but Chen Bao should have diverted the conversation and disturbed Yu Ying's words.

古文：宝应尝使人读《汉书》，卧而听之，至蒯通说韩信曰： 相君之背，贵不可言。 蹶然起坐，曰： 可谓智士！ 
现代文：陈宝应曾经让人为他读《汉书》，自己躺着听，当听到蒯通游说韩信时说的话 看你后背的形状，骨相极贵，几乎不便说出 之时，突然坐起来，感叹说： 真可称为智士了！ 
English: Chen Baoying once had someone read "Hanshu" for him, and lay down to listen. When he heard the words of Zhaotong lobbying Han Xin, "Look at the shape of your back, the bone is extremely precious, it is almost inconvenient to say," he suddenly sat up and sighed and said, "I can really be called a wise man!"

古文：寄曰： 通一说杀三士，何足称智！岂若班彪《王命》，识所归乎！ 
现代文：虞寄在一边说： 蒯通这一番游说，造成了郦生被烹、田横失败、韩信骄纵亡身的后果，杀害了三个才俊之士，有什么足以称为智士的呢？这哪比得上班彪在《王命论》中能理解何去何从呢！ 
English: Yu Ying said on one side: "After all this lobbying, resulting in the consequences of the death of Xing Sheng, the failure of Tian Yang, and the death of Han Xin, and the killing of three talented people, what is enough to be called a wise man? This is nothing compared to the understanding of where to go and where to go in "The Theory of the King's Life"!

古文：寄知宝应不可谏，恐祸及己，乃著居士服，居东山寺，阳称足疾。
现代文：虞寄深知陈宝应是劝谏不过来了，担心灾祸降到自己身上，于是就穿上隐居不仕的士人服装，住进了东山寺，假称是脚上有毛病。
English: Yu Ying knew that Chen Bao should be persuaded, but he was worried that the disaster would fall on himself, so he put on the clothes of a hermit and lived in the Dongshan Temple, pretending to have a problem with his feet.

古文：宝应使人烧其屋，寄安卧不动。
现代文：陈宝应派人去烧他所住的房子，虞寄安然躺卧在那儿，一动也不动。
English: Chen Bao sent someone to burn down the house where he lived, but Yu Ying lay there peacefully, not moving at all.

古文：亲近将扶之出，寄曰： 吾命有所悬，避将安往！ 
现代文：身边亲近的人要扶他出来，虞寄说： 我的生命悬在人家手里，躲避了火烧，又能再躲到哪儿去呢？ 
English: People close to him had to help him out, and Yu Ying said: "My life is in other people's hands. After escaping the fire, where can I go to hide?

古文：纵火者自救之。
现代文：结果是放火的人自己把他救出来了。
English: As it turned out, the arsonist rescued him himself.

古文：乙卯，齐以任城王湝为司徒。
现代文：北齐任命任城王高为司徒。
English: North Qi appointed Ren Chengwanggao as a disciple.

古文：齐扬州剌史行台王琳数欲南侵，尚书卢潜以为时事未可。
现代文：北齐扬州刺史行台王琳多次想向南进犯，尚书卢潜认为时机未到，不可轻举妄动。
English: North Qi Yangzhou stabbing history line Taiwan Wang Lin repeatedly wanted to attack the south, Shangshu Lu Qian thought that the time had not come, and he should not act rashly.

古文：上遣移书寿阳，欲与齐和亲。
现代文：陈文帝派人送书信到寿阳，想与北齐和好亲近。
English: Chen Wendi sent people to deliver letters to Shouyang, hoping to be close to Beiqi.

古文：潜以其书奏齐朝，仍上启且请息兵。齐主许之，遣散骑常侍崔瞻来聘，且归南康愍王昙朗之丧。
现代文：卢潜把信呈奏了北齐，仍然启请武成帝允许息兵，武成帝同意了，派散骑常侍崔瞻来陈朝聘问，并把南康愍王陈昙朗的遗体送还给陈朝。
English: Lu Xun presented the letter to Beiqi, and still asked Emperor Wu Chengdu to allow peacekeepers. Emperor Wu Chengdu agreed, and sent his equerry, Cui Zhan, to the Chen Dynasty to ask questions, and sent the body of the Southern Kangxi King Chen Yulang back to the Chen Dynasty.

古文：琳由是与潜有隙，更相表列。
现代文：王琳从此与卢潜产生了嫌隙，相互之间总是争执不已。
English: From then on, Wang Lin and Lu Qian had a rift, and they always quarreled with each other.

古文：齐主征琳赴鄴，以潜为扬州刺史，领行台尚书。
现代文：武成帝征召王琳到邺城去，任命卢潜为扬州刺史，领行台尚书。
English: Emperor Wucheng conscripted Wang Lin to go to Lucheng, appointed Lu Qian as the Yangzhou historian, and led the Taiwan Shangshu.

古文：瞻，凌之子也。
现代文：崔瞻是崔的儿子。
English: Cui Zhan is Cui Zhou's son.

古文：梁末丧乱，铁钱不行，民间私用鹅眼钱。
现代文：梁朝末年政败国乱，铁钱不再流通。民间私自流通着鹅眼钱。
English: At the end of the Liang Dynasty, the government was defeated and the country was in turmoil, and iron money was no longer circulated.

古文：甲子，改铸五铢钱，一当鹅眼之十。
现代文：甲子，改铸五铢钱，一枚五铢钱可兑换十枚鹅眼钱。
English: Jiazi, changed to minting 50 yuan coins, one 50 yuan coin can be exchanged for ten goose-eye coins.

古文：后梁主安于俭素，不好酒色，虽多猜忌，而抚将士有恩。
现代文：后梁国主习惯于节俭朴素，不好酒色，虽然性多猜忌，但却能体贴将士，广施恩惠。
English: Hou Liang, the ruler of the country, was accustomed to frugality and simplicity. He did not like the color of wine. Although he was rather suspicious, he was able to be considerate to his generals and grant them many favors.

古文：以封疆褊隘，邑居残毁，干戈日用，郁郁不得志，疽发背而殂；葬平陵，谥曰宣皇帝，庙号中宗。
现代文：因为国家疆土狭小偏僻，老百姓的住所破败，干戈不断，所以总是郁郁不得志，终于因背疽发作而死，葬在平陵，谥号为宣皇帝，庙号中宗。
English: Because the country's territory is small and remote, the people's residences are dilapidated, and they are constantly fighting, they are always depressed and discouraged. Finally, he died of an attack of gangrene and was buried in Pingling. His posthumous name was Xuan Emperor, and his temple name was Zhongzong.

古文：太子岿即皇帝位，改元天保；尊龚太后为太皇太后，王后曰皇太后，母曹贵嫔为皇太妃。
现代文：太子萧岿即皇帝位，改年号为天保，尊龚太后为太皇太后，王皇后为皇太后，母亲曹贵嫔为皇太妃。
English: Prince Xiao Yao was the emperor, and the year was changed to Tian Bao Yao. His mother, Cao Gui Yao, was the empress dowager, and her mother, Cao Gui Yao, was the crown princess.

古文：三月，丙子，安成王顼至建康，诏以为中书监、中卫将军。
现代文：三月，丙子，安成王陈顼到达建康，陈文帝下诏封他为中书监、中卫将军。
English: In March, King Ancheng's son, Chen Xi, arrived in Jiankang, and Emperor Chen Wen gave him the title of Central Censor and General of the Middle Guard.

古文：上谓杜杲曰： 家弟今蒙礼遣，实周朝之惠；然鲁山不返，亦恐未能及此。 
现代文：陈文帝对杜杲说： 我弟弟现在承蒙你们以礼相待送回来了，这实在是周朝的恩惠，然而我们要是不奉送鲁山城，你们恐怕也不会这样做的。 
English: Chen Wenti said to Du Juan, "My brother has now been returned to me thanks to your courtesy. This is truly a favor from the Zhou Dynasty. However, if we did not send Lu Mountain City, I am afraid you would not do the same.

古文：杲对曰： 安成，长安一布衣耳，而陈之介弟也，其价岂止一城而已哉！
现代文：杜杲回答说： 安成王，不过是长安的一个布衣百姓，但却是陈朝皇帝的弟弟，他的价值岂止一座城池而已！
English: Du Juan replied, "King Ancheng is just a commoner from Chang'an, but he is the younger brother of the emperor of the Chen Dynasty. He is worth more than a city!"

古文：本朝敦睦九族，恕己及物，上遵太祖遣旨，下思继好之义，是以遣之南归。
现代文：我们周朝一向和亲族和睦相处，推己及人地讲求忠恕之道，上遵太祖之遗旨，下思永远和好人信义，因此才把安成王送回南方。
English: We, the Zhou dynasty, have always lived in harmony with our relatives. We have always preached the way of loyalty, adhered to the will of our ancestors, and always thought about being loyal to good people. That is why we sent King Ancheng back to the south.

古文：今乃云以导常之土易骨肉之亲，非使臣之所敢闻也。 
现代文：现在您却说是用寻常的土地换回了骨肉至亲，这可不是我所能同意的。 
English: Now you are saying that you have exchanged ordinary land for your own flesh and blood, which is not something I can agree with.

古文：上甚惭，曰： 前言戏之耳。 
现代文：陈文帝听了很觉惭愧，只好自我嘲解地说： 刚才说的是玩笑话。 
English: Chen Wenti felt very ashamed after listening to this, and had no choice but to self-deprecatingly explain: What I just said was a joke.

古文：待杲之礼有加焉。
现代文：接待杜杲的礼节超过了常规。
English: The cuckoo was received with more than the usual courtesy.

古文：顼妃柳氏及子叔宝犹在穰城，上复遣毛喜如周请之，周人皆归之。
现代文：陈顼的妃子柳氏和儿子陈叔宝还滞留在穰城，陈文帝又派毛喜到北周去请求放还，北周把他们都送回来了。
English: Chen Yu's concubine Liu Shi and his son Chen Shubao were still stranded in Handan. Chen Wendi also sent Mao Xi to Beizhou to request their release, and Beizhou sent them all back.

古文：丁丑，以安右将军吴明彻为江州刺史，督高州刺史黄法、豫章太守周敷共讨周迪。
现代文：丁丑，陈朝任命安右将军吴明彻为江州刺史，指挥高州刺史黄法氍、豫章太守周敷一起去讨伐周迪。
English: According to Ding Xi, the Chen Dynasty appointed An Yu's general Wu Ming Che as the leader of the attack on Jiangzhou, and commanded the attack on Gaozhou by Huang Fahui, and the attack on Zhou Di by Yu Zhang, the governor of Gaozhou.

古文：甲申，大赦。
现代文：甲申，陈朝大赦天下。
English: On the 16th, Sun Liang was pardoned.

古文：留异始谓台军必自钱塘上，既而侯安都步由诸暨出永康，异大惊，奔桃枝岭，于岩口竖栅以拒之。
现代文：留异开头认为朝廷军队一定会从钱塘江溯江而上，后来侯安都却从陆路经由诸暨兵发永康，留异大吃一惊，奔逃到桃枝岭，在山谷的入口处竖起栅栏进行防御。
English: At the beginning, Liu Yi thought that the imperial army would certainly go upstream from the Qiantang River, but later, Hou Andu passed through Zhuji and Yongkang by land. Liu Yi was very surprised and fled to Taoshering, erecting a fence at the entrance of the valley for defense.

古文：安都为流矢所中，血流至踝，乘轝指麾，容止不变。
现代文：侯安都在进攻时被飞箭射中，鲜血一直流到脚踝处，但他坐在车子上指挥士兵，神色举止一点也不变。
English: Hou An was shot by an arrow during the attack, the blood flowed down to his ankles, but he sat on the car and commanded the soldiers, his appearance and demeanor did not change at all.

古文：因其山势，迮而为堰。会潦水涨满，安都引船入堰，起楼舰与异城等，发拍碎其楼堞。
现代文：侯安都又依着山势，贴着山根修起了石堰，正好赶上下大雨，雨水涨满了堰坝，侯安都把船只开入堰内，造成楼房式的高层船舰，和留异修的城垣一般高，坐在船上的士兵使用攻坚器械，击碎了留异城上的墙堞。
English: Hou Andu also built a stone weir along the mountainside, clinging to the roots of the mountain. Just in time for the heavy rain, the rainwater filled the weir. Hou Andu drove the ships into the weir, resulting in a high-rise building-style ship, and the city walls built by Ruyi were generally high. The soldiers sitting on the ship used attack tools to break down the walls of Ruyi.

古文：异与其子忠臣脱身奔晋安，依陈宝应。
现代文：留异和他的儿子留忠臣脱身而逃，到晋安去投靠了陈宝应。
English: Rui Yi and his son Rui Zhongchen escaped and fled to Jin'an to join Chen Baoying.

古文：安都虏其妻及馀子，尽收铠仗而还。
现代文：侯安都俘获了留异的妻子和其余的儿子，把他的铠甲兵器尽数收缴，得胜回朝。
English: Hou Andu captured his estranged wife and the rest of his sons, collected as many of his armor weapons as possible, and returned to the court in triumph.

古文：异党向文政据新安，上以贞毅将军程文季为新安太守，帅精甲三百径往攻之。
现代文：留异的同党向文政占据着新安，陈文帝任命贞毅将军程元季为新安太守，率领精兵三百名轻装前行，去袭击向文政。
English: Xiang Wen Zheng's dissident comrades occupied Xin'an. Emperor Chen appointed General Cheng Yuanzhi as the governor of Xin'an, and he led 300 light-armed soldiers to attack Xiang Wen Zheng.

古文：文政战败，遂降。
现代文：向文政战败，于是就投降了。
English: He was defeated by Wen Zheng, so he surrendered.

古文：文季，灵洗之子也。
现代文：程文季是程灵洗的儿子。
English: Cheng Wenqi is the son of Cheng Lingqin.

古文：夏，四月，辛丑，齐武明娄太后殂。
现代文：夏季，四月，辛丑，北齐武明娄太后去世。
English: In the summer, in April, the Empress Dowager Beiqiwu passed away.

古文：齐主不改服，绯袍如故。
现代文：北齐国主武成帝不改换服装，仍然象往常一样穿着红色袍服。
English: Emperor Wu Chengdu, the ruler of Northern Qi, did not change his clothes, but still wore a red robe as usual.

古文：未几，登三台，置酒作乐，宫女进白袍，帝投诸台下。
现代文：不久，武成帝又登上三台，摆酒崐奏乐，宫女给他送来了白袍子，但他却把它扔到了台下。
English: Not long after, Emperor Wucheng ascended to the three stages again to play music and drink wine. His lady-in-waiting brought him a white robe, but he threw it offstage.

古文：散骑常侍和士开请止乐，帝怒，挝之。
现代文：散骑常侍和士开请求停止奏乐，武成帝勃然大怒，打了他。
English: Emperor Wu Rongcheng was furious and beat him after the errant equerry and the courtier asked him to stop playing the music.

古文：乙巳，帝遣使来聘。
现代文：乙巳，北齐派使者到陈朝聘问。
English: At this time, the Northern Qi sent an envoy to the Chen Dynasty to ask questions.

古文：齐青州上言河水清，齐主遣使祭之，改元河清。
现代文：北齐青州地方官启奏说黄河水变清了，武成帝派使者去祭黄河，并改换年号为河清。
English: The local official of Qingzhou in Northern Qi said that the water of the Yellow River had become clear. Emperor Wucheng sent an envoy to sacrifice the Yellow River and changed the name of the year to Heqing.

古文：先是，周之群臣受封爵者皆未给租赋。
现代文：早先，北周的群臣受封爵时都没有给他们邑地的租赋。
English: Earlier, when Northern Zhou's vassals were knighted, they did not give them the lease of the town.

古文：癸亥，始诏柱国等贵臣邑户，听寄食它县。
现代文：癸亥，才开始下诏规定柱国等享受采邑的贵臣，可以寄食于别的县。
English: It was not until the Heian period that the imperial edict began to stipulate that the dignitaries of the pillar countries, who enjoyed the harvest, could eat in other counties.

古文：五月，庚午，周大赦。
现代文：五月，庚午，北周大赦天下。
English: In May, at noon, the Northern Zhou Dynasty was overthrown.

古文：己丑，齐以右仆射斛律光为尚书令。
现代文：己丑，北齐任命右仆射斛律光为尚书令。
English: As a result, Beiqi appointed his right-hand man, Shaqiao Riguang, as Shang Shuling.

古文：壬辰，周以柱国杨忠为大司空。
现代文：壬辰，北周任命柱国杨忠为大司空。
English: In Imjin, the Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed Yang Zhong, a pillar state, as the Grand Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：六月，巳亥，以柱国蜀国公尉迟迥为大司马。
现代文：六月，己亥，任命柱国蜀国公尉迟迥为大司马。
English: In June, Ji Hai appointed Zhu Guo, Shu Guo's lieutenant, Chi Xi, as the grand steward.

古文：秋，七月，己丑，纳太子妃王氏，金紫光禄大夫周之女也。
现代文：秋季七月，己丑，陈朝为太子娶妃子王氏。王氏是金紫光禄大夫王周的女儿。
English: In July of the autumn, the Chen dynasty married the princess Wang, the daughter of the doctor Wang Zhou of Jin Zi Guanglu, to the prince.

古文：齐平秦王归彦至冀州，内不自安，欲待齐主如晋阳，乘虚入鄴。
现代文：北齐平秦王高归彦到了冀州后，内心很不安定，想等皇帝去晋阳时，乘虚打入邺城。
English: After the Northern Qi Ping Qin King Gao Guihang arrived in Jizhou, his heart was very unstable, and he wanted to wait for the emperor to go to Jinyang and take advantage of the opportunity to enter Shicheng.

古文：其郎中令吕思礼告之。
现代文：他手下的郎中令吕思礼告发了他。
English: His henchman Lü Sili denounced him.

古文：诏大司马段韶、司空娄睿讨之。
现代文：武成帝下诏派大司马段韶、司空娄睿去讨伐他。
English: Emperor Wucheng sent the grand secretaries Ma Duanzhang and Sikuo Jianrui to fight against him.

古文：归彦于南境置私驿，闻大军将至，即闭城拒守。
现代文：高归彦在南边设置了私人驿站以打听消息，听说朝廷大军将到，便关上城门固守抵抗。
English: Takakibiko set up a private post on the south side to inquire about the news, and when he heard that the imperial army was about to arrive, he closed the gate and firmly resisted.

古文：长史宇文仲鸾等不从，皆杀之。
现代文：长史宇文仲鸾等人不服从，都被杀掉了。
English: Chief historian Yu Wenzhong and others disobeyed and were killed.

古文：归彦自称大丞相，有众四万。
现代文：高归彦自称大丞相，有军队四万人。
English: Takakibiko claimed to be the grand chancellor and had an army of forty thousand men.

古文：齐主以都官尚书封子绘，冀州人，祖父世为本州刺史，得人心，使乘传至信都，巡城，谕以祸福，吏民降者相继，城中动静，小大皆知之。
现代文：武成帝考虑到都官尚书封子绘是冀州人，祖父、父亲世代为冀州刺史，很得人心，就派他乘驿马到了信都。封子绘到信都之后，一边巡视城池，一边对城中吏民晓谕避祸趋福的道理。
English: Emperor Wucheng took into account that the city official Shangshu Fuzipo was from Jizhou, and that his grandfather and father's generation were from Jizhou, and he was very popular, so he sent him to Xindu by steed. After Fuzipo arrived in Xindu, while inspecting the city, he told the officials and people in the city how to avoid misfortune and seek happiness.

古文：归彦登城大呼云： 孝昭皇帝初崩，六军百万，悉在臣手，投身向鄴，奉迎陛下。
现代文：官吏和民众相继跑出来投降。城里有什么动静，都有人报告，大事小事全都知道。高归彦登上城头大声呼叫说： 孝昭皇帝刚驾崩时，六路兵马百万余人，都在我手中控制着。我投身到邺城去，奉迎陛下来就皇位。
English: The officials and the people ran out to surrender one after another. Any movement in the city was reported by someone, and all the big and small things were known. Gao Guihang climbed to the top of the city and shouted: "When Emperor Xiao Zhao just passed away, more than a million soldiers and horses from six directions were under my control. I devoted myself to Shicheng to welcome His Majesty to the throne."

古文：当时不反，今日岂反邪！
现代文：当时我都没有造反。今日我这样做，是被逼的，难道是造反吗？
English: At that time, I did not rebel. Today, I am doing this, I am being forced, is it a rebellion?

古文：正恨高元海、毕义云、高乾和誑惑圣上，疾忌忠良，但为杀此三人，即临城自刎。 
现代文：我恨的是高元海、毕义云、高乾和欺骗迷惑皇上，忌恨忠良，只要杀了这三个人，我就在城头自刎以谢天下。 
English: What I hate is Gao Yuanhai, Bi Yiyun, Gao Qianlong and the deception of deceiving the emperor, and I hate Zhongliang. As long as I kill these three people, I will thank the world at the top of the city.

古文：既而城破，单骑北走，至交津，获之，锁送鄴。
现代文：不久城被攻破，高归彦单人匹马向北逃窜，逃到交津时，让抓住了，被用锁链锁上送到了邺城。
English: The city was soon breached, and Gao Guihang fled north alone on horseback. When he escaped to Jiaozuo, he was caught and sent to Shicheng in chains.

古文：乙巳，载以露车，衔木面缚。
现代文：乙未，他被装在没有帷盖的车上，嘴里衔着木棍，被反绑着。
English: B Wei, he was put on a car without a curtain, with a wooden stick in his mouth, and tied backwards.

古文：刘桃枝临之以刃，击鼓随之，并其子孙十五人皆弃市。
现代文：刘桃枝用刀刃比试着他，后面还有人击鼓跟随，高归彦连同他的子孙十五人全部斩首，弃尸市上。
English: Liu Tao Zhi tested him with the blade of a knife, followed by drummers. Gao Gui Yan and his 15 children and grandchildren were all beheaded and their bodies dumped in the city.

古文：命封子绘行冀州事。
现代文：朝廷下令封子绘管理冀州事务。
English: The imperial court ordered the fongzi painting to manage the affairs of Jizhou.

古文：齐主知归彦前谮清河王岳，以归彦家良贱百口赐岳家，赠岳太师。
现代文：武成帝知道高归彦过去陷害过清河王高岳，便把高归彦家里主仆共一百多口人全部赐给了高岳，并赠高岳以太师的称号。
English: Emperor Wucheng knew that Gao Guihang had framed the Qing King Gao Yue in the past, so he gave Gao Yue a total of more than one hundred masters and servants in Gao Guihang's family, and gave Gao Yue the title of ether master.

古文：丁酉，以段韶为太傅，娄睿为司徒，平阳王淹为太宰，斛律光为司空，赵郡王睿为尚书令，河间王孝琬为左仆射。
现代文：丁酉，武成帝任命段韶为太傅，娄睿为司徒，平阳王高淹为太宰，斛律光为司空，赵郡王高睿为尚书令，河间王高孝琬为左仆射。
English: Ding Jun, Emperor Wucheng appointed Duan Jun as Taifu, Zhaorai as Sutor, Pingyang Wang Gaozhun as Dazai, Zhaoriguang as Siku, Zhao Gu Wang Gaorai as Shang Shuling, and Kawama Wang Gao Xiaojun as Zuo Shu.

古文：癸亥，齐主如晋阳。
现代文：癸亥，武成帝到了晋阳。
English: At the end of the year, Emperor Wu Chengdi arrived in Jinyang.

古文：上遣使聘齐。
现代文：陈文帝派使者到齐国聘问。
English: Emperor Chen Wen sent an envoy to Qi to ask questions.

古文：九月，戊辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月，戊辰朔，发生日食。
English: In September, the solar eclipse occurred.

古文：以侍中、都官尚书到仲举为尚书右仆射、丹杨尹。
现代文：陈朝任命侍中、都官尚书到仲举为尚书右仆射、丹杨尹。
English: The Chen Dynasty appointed Shang Shu, a courtier and official of the capital, to be the intermediary for the appointment of Shang Shu's right-hand man, Dang Yang Yin.

古文：仲举，溉之弟子也。
现代文：到仲举是到溉的弟弟的儿子。
English: To Zhonghe is the son of Zuori's younger brother.

古文：吴明彻至临川，攻周迪，不能克。
现代文：吴明彻到临川去攻打周迪，不能取胜。
English: Wu Mingche went to Linchuan to attack Zhou Di, but could not win.

古文：丁亥，诏安成王顼代之。
现代文：丁亥，陈文帝下诏让安成王陈顼去代替他。
English: Dinghai, Chen Wendi issued an edict to let Ancheng Wang Chen Yao go to replace him.

古文：冬，十月，戊戌，诏以军旅费广，百姓空虚，凡供乘舆饮食衣服及宫中调度，悉从减削；至于百司，宜亦思省约。
现代文：冬季十月，戊戌，陈文帝诏令，由于军费开支浩大，老百姓很穷困，所以凡是皇上的车桥饮食衣服以及宫中的日常费用，一概削减。至于朝廷各部门，也应该想到节约。
English: In the winter of October, Emperor Wenli decreed that due to the huge military expenditure and the poverty of the common people, all the emperor's cars, bridges, food, clothing and daily expenses in the palace should be reduced. As for the various departments of the imperial court, they should also think about saving.

古文：十一月，丁卯，周以赵国公招为益州总管。
现代文：十一月，丁卯，北周任命赵国公宇文招为益州总管。
English: In November, Dingwu and Northern Zhou appointed Zhao Guogong Uwenzhao as the general manager of Yizhou.

古文：丁丑，齐遣兼散骑常侍封孝琰来聘。
现代文：丁丑，北齐派兼散骑常侍封孝琰到陈朝聘问。
English: Ding Yuxiu, a member of the Northern Qi faction and horseback rider, often served as a courier to the Chen dynasty.

古文：十二月，丙辰，齐主还鄴。
现代文：十二月，丙辰，武成帝从晋阳回到邺城。
English: In December, Emperor Wu Chengdi returned to Lucheng from Jinyang.

古文：齐主逼通昭信李后，曰： 若不从我，我杀尔儿！ 
现代文：武成帝逼着要和昭信李后通奸，说： 如果不服从我，我就杀了你儿子！ 
English: Emperor Wucheng forced her to commit adultery with Zhaoxin Li, saying, "If you don't obey me, I'll kill your son!"

古文：后惧，从之。
现代文：李后害怕了，就屈从了他。
English: Queen Wenxuan panicked and had to obey.

古文：既而有娠。
现代文：不久李后怀了孕。
English: Soon after, Li Hou became pregnant.

古文：太原王绍德至阁，不得见，愠曰： 儿岂不知邪！
现代文：太原王高绍德入宫到了门口，见不到李后，便生气地说： 孩儿我难道不知道吗？
English: When Gao Shao De, the king of Taiyuan, entered the palace and arrived at the gate, he could not see Li Hou, so he angrily said, "Son, don't I know?

古文：姊腹大，故不见儿。 
现代文：娘是肚子大了，所以才不出来见儿子。 
English: My daughter is pregnant, so she can't come out to see my son.

古文：后大惭，由是生女不举。
现代文：李后十分惭愧，因此生下了女儿后便弄死了。
English: Embarrassed, Li Hou gave birth to a daughter and then killed her.

古文：帝横刀诟曰： 杀我女，我何得不杀尔儿！ 
现代文：武成帝横提着刀大骂： 你杀了我的女儿，我为什么不杀你儿子！ 
English: Wu Chengdi held his sword sideways and shouted: "You killed my daughter, why shouldn't I kill your son!"

古文：对后以刀环筑杀绍德。
现代文：便当着李后用刀砍杀了高绍德。
English: He then slashed Gao Shao De with a knife in front of Li Hou.

古文：后大哭，帝愈怒，裸后，乱挝之。
现代文：李后大哭失声。武成帝更加愤怒，把李后的衣服剥光，乱打了一气。
English: Empress Dowager Li burst into tears and lost her voice. Emperor Wu Rongcheng became even more angry, stripped Empress Dowager Li naked and beat her.

古文：后号天不已，帝命盛以绢囊，流血淋漉，投诸渠水。良久乃苏，犊车载送妙胜寺为尼。
现代文：李后呼天喊地，号哭不断，北齐武成帝命令人把她装在绢袋里，血沥沥拉拉从袋中渗了出来，连人带绢袋扔到渠水中浸泡，过了很久才苏醒过来，便用牛车把她载送到妙胜寺当了尼姑。
English: Empress Dowager Li cried out to the heavens and wailed incessantly. Emperor Wu Cheng of the Northern Qi ordered her to be placed in a coffin bag. The blood seeped out of the bag, and she and the coffin bag were thrown into the canal water to soak. It took her a long time to wake up, and then she was transported to Myosheng Temple in an ox cart to become a nun.

