古文：二十七日雨色已止，而浓云稍开。
现代文：二十七日雨已经停止，浓云稍微散开了些。
English: On the 27th, the rain had stopped and the thick clouds had dispersed a little.

古文：亟饭，逾马蹄石岭，三里，抵玉琯岩之南，觅所期刘姓瑶人，欲为三分石之行。
现代文：我们赶忙吃了饭，翻过马蹄石岭，走三里，抵达玉馆岩的南面，找寻所约定过的姓刘的瑶族人，想作三分石的旅行。
English: We hurriedly ate dinner, turned over the Horseshoe Rock Ridge, walked three miles, arrived at the south side of the Jade Pavilion Rock, looking for the agreed-upon Yi people surnamed Liu, and wanted to make a trip to the three-pointed stone.

古文：而其人以云雾未尽，未可远行，已往他所矣。
现代文：但那人因为云雾未散尽，认为不可远行，已经到其他地方去了。
English: But the man thought that he could not go far because the fog had not dispersed, so he went to another place.

古文：复期以明日。
现代文：这样，又定在第二天去。
English: So we decided to go the next day.

古文：其人虽不在，而同居一人于山中甚熟，惜患疮不能为导，为余言：玉琯乃何侯故居，古舜祠所在，其东南山上为炼丹观故址。
现代文：那人虽然不在，但与他住在一起的一个人对山中的情况很熟悉，可惜他生疮不能作向导，他对我讲：玉馆岩就是何侯的故居、古舜祠所在地，它东南面的山上为炼丹观故址。
English: Although the man was not there, one of the people who lived with him was very familiar with the situation in the mountains. Unfortunately, he had an ulcer and could not serve as a guide. He told me: Tamagatuan Rock is the former residence of Ho Hou and the location of the ancient Ancestral Hall. The mountain to the southeast of it is the site of the Puerh Dan Guan.

古文：由此东行五十里，有三石参天，水分三处，俗呼为舜公石，即三分石也。
现代文：由玉馆岩往东行五十里，有三块石头高高耸入云霄，水从那里分流三处，俗称为舜公石，它就是三分石。
English: Fifty miles eastward from the Jade Pavilion Rock, there are three stones soaring high into the sky, from which the water is diverted to three places, commonly known as the Three Kings Stone. It is the Three Quarters Stone.

古文：由此南行三十里，有孤崖如髻，盘突山顶，欲呼为舜婆石。
现代文：到三分石的路已经湮没。由玉馆岩往南行三十里，有座孤崖如发髻一样，盘绕突立在山顶，俗称为舜婆石。
English: The road to the Three-Pointed Rock has disappeared. Thirty miles south of the Jade Pavilion Rock, there is a lonely cliff like a hairpin, coiled and protruding at the top of the mountain, commonly known as the Sopa Rock.

古文：中道过永福故址，见其南溪甚急，虽西下潇江，而东北南三而皆予所经，未睹来处，乃溯流寻之。则故址之左，石崖倒悬，水由下出，崖不及水者三尺，而其下甚深，不能入也。
现代文：有小路可以通到那里。那人把摘来的新茶奉送了我一些，于是我仍旧返回斜岩。中途经过永福寺故址，见它南面有条溪水流得很急，这条溪虽然是往西流下潇江的，但它的东北南三面都是我已到过的，只是未游览过来处，于是溯流探寻。永福寺故址的左边，石崖倒悬，水从石崖下流出来，崖离水面三尺，但下面很深，不能下去。
English: There is a path that leads there. The man gave me some of the new tea he had picked, so I still returned to the sloping rock. Halfway through the former site of Yongfu Temple, I saw a stream flowing very rapidly to the south of it. Although this stream flows westward down the Xiao River, I have visited all three of its northeastern and southern sides, but I have not visited the place I came from, so I traced the flow. On the left side of the former site of Yongfu Temple, the stone cliff is upside down, and water flows out from under the stone cliff. The cliff is three feet from the water surface, but it is very deep below and cannot

古文：过马蹄石，见岭北水北流，忆昨过圣殿西岭，见岭南水南流，疑其水俱会而东去，因东趋箫韶北麓，见其水又西注者，始知此坞四面之水俱无从出，而杨梅下洞之流为烂泥河者，即此众水之沁地而入者也。
现代文：经过马蹄石时，见到岭北的水往北流，回想起昨天经过圣殿西面的山岭时，见到岭南的水往南流，我怀疑它们都会合在一起而往东流去，于是往东疾行到箫韶峰北麓，但却见到这里的水又往西流注，这才知道这个山坞中四面流来的水都没有出处，而杨梅洞下层洞中汇流成烂泥河的水，就是这众多水流渗到地下而进入洞中去的。
English: When I passed the Horseshoe Rock, I saw the water of the northern part of the ridge flowing northward. When I recalled yesterday when I passed the mountains west of the temple, I saw the water of the southern part of the ridge flowing southward. I suspected that they would all merge and flow eastward. So I raced eastward to the northern foot of the Lushan Peak, but I saw the water here flowing westward. It was only then that I knew that the water flowing in all directions in this dock had no source, and the water that merged into a muddy river in the lower cave of Yangmei Cave was the water of these many streams seeping into the ground and entering the

古文：两岭之间，中有釜底凹向，名山潭，有石穴在桑坞中，僚人耕者以大石塞其穴，水终不蓄。
现代文：两座岭之间，中部有一处如锅底，向下凹陷，名叫山潭。有个石穴位于满是桑树的山坞中，在山坞中耕种的僚人用大石头堵塞石穴，但水始终不能蓄积起来。
English: Between the two ridges, there is a depression in the middle, like the bottom of a pot, called the mountain pool. There is a stone cave in the dockyard full of mulberry trees. The colleagues who cultivate in the dockyard block the stone cave with large stones, but the water can never accumulate.

古文：桑园叶树千株，蚕者各赴采，乃天生而无禁者。
现代文：桑园中有千百棵桑树，养蚕的人各自前往采摘，它们是天然生长的没有采摘禁令。
English: There are thousands of mulberry trees in the mulberry garden, and the silkworm breeders go to pick them individually. They grow naturally and there is no ban on picking them.

古文：月岩第一，道州；紫霞洞第二，九疑；莲花洞第三，江华；狮岩第四，江华；朝阳岩第五，永州；澹岩第六，永州，大佛岭侧岩第七，江华；玉琯岩第八，九疑；华岩第九，道州；月岩南岭水洞第十，道州；飞龙岩第十一，九疑；麻拐岩第十二，江华。
现代文：这天仍旧在斜岩中一边观瀑一边烧柴火烘烤，云气渐渐散开，精神为之爽畅。
English: On this day, I was still watching the waterfall while burning firewood and baking in the sloping rock. The clouds gradually dispersed, and my spirit was refreshed.

古文：此外尚有经而不胜书，胜而不及到者，不罄附于此。
现代文：由此想到我与这个岩洞有机缘，一停留就是几天，而对于在永州府游历过的各洞，也不可不评出个高低等次，于是按位次书写出永州府南境各洞的名称。
English: From this, it occurred to me that I have an affinity with this cave. A stay is a few days, and for each cave I have visited in Yongzhou Prefecture, I cannot help but rate a higher or lower rank, so I wrote the names of each cave in the southern border of Yongzhou Prefecture according to the rank.

古文：二十八日五鼓，饭而候明。仍过玉琯南觅导者。
现代文：二十八日五更时，吃了饭等着天亮，仍然过到玉馆岩南面找那导游。
English: At 5:00 a.m. on the 28th, after eating dinner and waiting for dawn, I still went to the south side of the Tamagatuan Rock to look for the tour guide.

古文：其人始起炊饭，已乃肩火具前行。
现代文：那人刚起来做饭，很快，他便扛了火具往前走。
English: The man just got up to cook, and soon he was carrying the fire and walking forward.

古文：即从东上杨子岭，二里登岭，上即有石，人立而起，兽蹲而龙蝘同 偃 ，即仰面而卧，其上皆盘突。
现代文：随即就从东面上了杨子岭，两里后登上岭头，岭头上有许多石头，有的如人站立一样耸起，有的似蹲踞的野兽、若臣袱的长龙，到处盘曲突兀。
English: Then he went up Yang Ziling from the east, and after two miles he climbed to the top of the ridge. At the top of the ridge, there were many stones, some standing up like people, some like crouching beasts, some like dragons, and everywhere there were twists and turns.

古文：从岭上东南行坳中，地名茅窝。三里，皆奇石也。
现代文：从岭上朝东南往山坳中走，三里路上都是些形态奇异的石头。
English: From the ridge to the southeast to the middle of the mountains, there are some strangely shaped stones on the three-mile road.

古文：下深窝，有石崖嵌削，青玉千丈，四面交流，捣入岩洞，坠巨石而下，深不可测，是名九龟进岩，以窝中九山如龟，其水皆向岩而趋也。
现代文：下到深陷的山窝中，有座石崖岩石张开，若刀削一般，青玉般的瀑布高悬千丈，从四面汇流来，捣入岩洞，从大石头上倾泻而下，深不可测。这里叫九龟进岩，因为山窝中九座山都如同乌龟，山上的水都向岩洞中流淌。
English: Down to the deep mountain cave, there is a stone cliff rock open, if the knife is cut, the jade-like waterfall hangs high, flowing from all sides, breaking into the cave, pouring down from the big stone, unfathomable. Here is called the nine turtles into the rock, because the nine mountains in the mountain cave are like turtles, and the water on the mountain flows into the cave.

古文：其岩西向，疑永福旁透崖而出者，即此水也。
现代文：这个岩洞朝向西面，我怀疑永福寺故址旁穿过崖壁流出的，就是此水。
English: This cave faces west, and I suspect that the water flowing through the cliff wall next to the former site of Yongfu Temple is this water.

古文：又东南二里，越一岭，为蟠龙峒水口。
现代文：又往东南走二里，越过一座岭，为蟠龙炯水口。
English: Another two miles to the south-east, over a ridge, to the mouth of the Dragon's Throat.

古文：峒进东尚深，内俱高山瑶。又登岭一里，为清水潭。
现代文：又朝岭上登一里，为清水潭。
English: In the morning, it climbs a mile up the ridge to become a clear water pool.

古文：岭侧有潭，水甚澄澈。
现代文：岭侧边有个潭，水非常清澈。
English: There is a pool on the side of the ridge, the water is very clear.

古文：又东南二里，渡牛头江。
现代文：从潭东面下岭，是到韭菜原的路。又往东南走两里，渡牛头江。
English: From the lower ridge of the east side of the lake, it is the road to the stew. And walk two miles to the southeast to cross the Niutou River.

古文：江水东自紫金原来，江两崖路俱峭削，上下攀援甚艰，时以流贼出没，必假道于此，土人伐巨枝横截崖道，上下俱从树枝，或伏而穿其胯，或骑而逾其脊。
现代文：江水从东边的紫金原流来，江两边山崖上的路都很峭削，上下攀爬十分艰难。当时因为有流窜的盗贼出没，必须从这里借道走，所以当地人砍伐了些大树枝横阻在山崖间的路中，上和下都从树枝间过，或蹲伏着从树枝下穿过，或骑坐着从树枝背上越过。
English: The water of the river comes from the eastern Zijin Plain. The roads on the cliffs on both sides of the river are very steep, and it is very difficult to climb up and down. At that time, because of the presence of thieves, it was necessary to take a detour from here, so the locals cut down some large branches and stood in the middle of the road between the cliffs, both up and down, passing between the branches, or crouching under the branches, or riding on the back of the branches.

古文：第《志》谓在九疑麓，而此在山顶为异，若山麓则无之。由山上行五里，稍下为狗矢窝。
现代文：渡过牛头江便往东南爬上半边山，半边山东北面的高山为紫金原，西南面的高山为空寮原，再往南为香炉山。从半边山朝上行五里，稍往下走为狗矢窝。
English: After crossing the Niutou River, they climbed up the Mid-Border Mountain to the southeast. The high mountain on the northeast side of the Mid-Border Mountain is Zijin Plain, the high mountain on the southwest side is Kulya Plain, and further south is Incense Burner Mountain. From the Mid-Border Mountain, it is five miles up, and a little further down is Dog Arrow Den.

古文：于是复上，屡度山脊，狭若板筑，屡踄山顶，下少上多，共东南五里而出鳌头山。
现代文：从狗矢窝又往上走，屡次度过山脊，但都狭窄得如一堵土墙，又屡屡从山顶上过，一路下少上多，往东南共走五里便出了鳌头山。
English: From the dog's den, I walked up again and again, repeatedly passing over the ridge, but it was so narrow that it was like an earthen wall. I also repeatedly went over the top of the mountain, and along the way there was less up and more down. After walking five miles to the southeast, I came out of Shantou Mountain.

古文：先是积雾不开，即半边、鳌头诸山，近望不及，而身至辄现。
现代文：这之前积雾未散开，即便是半边、鳌头等各山峰，到了近处都望不见，而身到山间就显现出来。
English: Before this, the cumulus fog had not dispersed, and even the peaks of Hanzhong, Shantou, etc. could not be seen in the vicinity, but they appeared in the mountains.

古文：至是南眺三分石，不知所在。
现代文：等出了鳌头山，往南眺望，三分石不知在哪里。
English: After waiting for Shantou Mountain, looking south, I don't know where the three-pointed stone is.

古文：顷之而浓云忽开，瞥然闪影于高峰之顶，半边、鳌头二山，其东北与紫金夹而为牛头江，西南与空寮夹而为潇源江，即三分石水。此乃两水中之脊也。
现代文：不一会，浓云忽然散去，高高的峰顶上很短暂地闪现了一下三分石的影子，与江山县的江郎山相似。一个是浙江的发源地，一个是潇江的发源地，但江郎山高高矗立在半山间，三分石却悬在众多山峰的最高顶端，这是不同之处。半边、鳌头两山，与东北面的紫金原夹峙，中间为牛头江，与西南面的空寮原和香炉山夹峙，中间为潇源江，我们所在的地方是两条水中间的山脊。
English: After a while, the thick clouds suddenly dispersed, and the shadow of the three-pointed stone briefly flashed on the top of the high peak, similar to Jianglang Mountain in Jiangshan County. One is the birthplace of Zhejiang, and the other is the birthplace of the Xiao River, but Jianglang Mountain stands tall in the middle of the mountain, but the three-pointed stone hangs at the highest peak of many peaks. This is the difference. The half side, the two mountains of Shantou, is sandwiched between the Zijin Plain on the northeast side, the middle is the Niu Tou River, and the southwest side is sandwiched between the Ku Riau Plain and the Incen

古文：二水合于玉琯东南，西下鲁观与蒲江合，始胜如叶之舟而出大洋焉。
现代文：这两条水汇合在玉馆岩东南，往西流下鲁观与蒲江交汇后，才能航行轻便的小船，而流向宽阔的山间平坝中去。
English: The two rivers converge in the southeast of the Jade Pavilion Rock, and after flowing westward down the Lukang River and the Pujiang River, it can only be navigated by light boats, and flows into a wide mountain dike.

古文：由鳌头东沿岭半行，二里始下。
现代文：我们从鳌头山东面沿着半山腰走，两里后才往下行。
English: We walked from the eastern side of Shantou Mountain along the mid-mountain, and it took us two miles to descend.

古文：潇源水侧渡河处倒横一楠，大齐人眉，长三十步不止。
现代文：三里下到烂泥河，才找到水做饭，已经是下午了。我到三分石，下到烂泥河中，便与去高梁原的路分道。
English: It took me three miles down to the Rotten Mud River to find water for cooking, and it was already afternoon. I reached Sanzhongshi, went down to the Rotten Mud River, and parted ways with the road to Gaoliangyuan.

古文：闻二十年前，有采木之命，此岂其遗材耶！
现代文：折往西南走，又攀上一座岭，岭间各种红的、紫的野花争奇斗艳，树木耸入云霄。
English: Turning to the southwest, I climbed another ridge. Between the ridges, all kinds of red and purple wildflowers were fighting for glory, and the trees were soaring into the sky.

古文：上下共五里而抵潇源水。
现代文：忽上忽下共走五里而抵达潇源水边。
English: Suddenly up and suddenly down, we walked a total of five miles and arrived at the water's edge of Xiaoyuan.

古文：其水东南从三分石来，至此西去，而经香炉山之东北以出鲁观者。
现代文：这条水从东南方的三分石流来，到此处向西流去，经过香炉山的东北面而流出鲁观。
English: This water comes from the south-eastern tripoint flow, flows westward here, passes through the north-eastern side of the incense burner mountain and flows out of Lukang.

古文：乃绝流南渡，即上三分岭麓。
现代文：于是我们向南横渡过水流，便上到三分岭麓。
English: So we crossed the stream to the south and went up to the foot of Sanzhuiling.

古文：其岭峻削不容足，细径伏深箐ī细竹中，俯首穿箐而上，即两手挽之以移足。
现代文：那岭高峻陡峭，不容置足，细小的道路隐没在深竹丛中，我们低着头从竹子中穿行而上，用两手拉着竹子以移动脚步。
English: The ridge is so high and steep that it is impossible to set foot on it. The small road is hidden in the deep bamboo thickets. We walk up through the bamboo with our heads down, moving our feet by pulling the bamboo with both hands.

古文：其时箐因夙雾淋漓，既不能矫首其上，又不能平行其下，惟资之为垂空之繘ú练汲水之竹绳，则甚有功焉。
现代文：当时竹林间因为早晨雾未散，小水点不断往下滴，所以既不能昂起头朝上走，又不能平平地从下面通过，只有借助这些深竹作为悬空攀越的绳索，不过这倒很有功效。
English: At that time, because the morning fog had not dispersed and small drops of water continued to fall between the bamboo groves, it was not possible to walk up with your head held high, nor could you pass smoothly from below. The only way was to use these deep bamboos as a rope to climb in the air, but it was very effective.

古文：如是八里，始渐平。
现代文：如此走了八里，路才渐渐平坦。
English: After walking eight miles in this way, the road gradually became flat.

古文：又南行岭上二里。
现代文：又往南从岭上走了两里。
English: I walked another two miles south from the ridge.

古文：时夙雾仍翳，望顶莫辨，而晚色渐合，遂除箐依松，得地如掌。
现代文：这时大雾仍然浓密地遮掩着，向山顶望什么都分辨不清，而夜色渐渐合拢，于是清除掉靠松的细竹，得到巴掌大的一片空地。
English: At this time, the fog is still thickly covered, looking to the top of the mountain everything is indistinguishable, and the night is gradually closing in, so remove the thin bamboo that supports the pine and get a space the size of a palm.

古文：山高无水，有火难炊。
现代文：山高无水，有火也难以做饭。
English: There is no water high in the mountains, and it is difficult to cook with fire.

古文：命导者砍大木积而焚之，因箐为茵，为火为帏，为度宵计。
现代文：我叫导游砍了些大木头堆起来烧着，就着细竹作褥子，将火视为帐子，作过夜的打算。
English: I asked the guide to chop some large logs, pile them up and burn them. I used thin bamboo to make a raft, treated the fire as a curtain, and planned to spend the night.

古文：既瞑，吼风大作，卷火星飞舞空中，火焰游移，倏而奔突数丈，始以为奇观。
现代文：天黑后，大风吼叫，火星被卷起而在空中飞舞，火焰摇曳不定，倏忽间窜起几丈高，开初我把这当作奇观。
English: After dark, when the wind howled, when the marshes were whirled up and danced in the air, when the flames wavered and rose a few feet in the blink of an eye, at first I thought it was a miracle.

古文：既而雾随风阵，忽仰明星，忽成零雨，拥伞不能，拥被渐湿，幸火威猛烈，足以敌之。
现代文：旋即雾气随风阵阵涌来，忽儿仰头是明星满天，忽儿空中飘下零星小雨，撑着伞不能遮挡风雨，裹着被则被子渐被雨水打湿，幸好火势猛烈，足以抵挡风雨的袭击。
English: Suddenly, the mist surged with gusts of wind. Suddenly, the sky was full of stars. Suddenly, sporadic light rain fell in the air. Holding an umbrella could not block the wind and rain. Wrapped in a quilt, the quilt was gradually dampened by the rain. Fortunately, the fire was fierce enough to withstand the attacks of wind and rain.

古文：五鼓雨甚，亦不免淋漓焉。
现代文：五更时雨势大起来，免不了被淋了个透。
English: When the rain intensified on the fifth day, it was inevitable that I would be drenched.

古文：二十九日天渐明，雨亦渐霁。
现代文：二十九日天渐亮时，雨也渐停下。
English: On the 29th, when it was getting light, the rain gradually stopped.

古文：仰见三分，露影在指顾间，辄忍饥冲湿箐而南。
现代文：仰头看见三分石很短暂地露了一下影子，于是就忍着饥饿从潮湿的竹林中朝南而上。
English: Looking up, he saw the trigram briefly cast a shadow, so he hungrily climbed southward through the damp bamboo forest.

古文：又下山二里，始知尚隔一峰也。
现代文：又朝山下走两里，才知道三分石还隔着一座山峰。
English: After another two-mile walk down the mountain, I realized that the three-pointed stone was still separated by a mountain peak.

古文：度坳中小脊，复南上三里，始有巨石盘崖；为导者误。
现代文：越过山坳中的小山脊，又往南朝上走三里，才开始有巨大的石头环绕在山崖上；昨夭上爬下行所经之处都是高峻的土坡，没有石块，被导游带错了路。
English: After crossing a small ridge in the folds of the mountain, and then walking three miles up to the south, huge stones began to surround the cliff. The places I climbed up and down yesterday were all steep slopes, without stones, and I was led the wrong way by the guide.

古文：出其南，又一里，东眺矗顶，已可扪而摩之，但为雾霾，不见真形，进穷磴绝。
现代文：到了巨石盘绕的山崖南面，又走一里，往东眺望高高矗立的山顶，仿佛已经可以摸得到，但被雾掩没，见不到它的真面目，路到尽头石瞪就没有了。
English: When I reached the south face of the mountain cliff surrounded by boulders, I walked another mile and looked eastward at the towering peak. It seemed that I could already touch it, but it was covered by fog and I couldn't see its true face. The road to the end of the rock face was gone.

古文：忽山雨大注，顶踵无不沾濡，乃返。
现代文：忽然，山中大雨倾盆，我们从头到脚都被淋透，于是往回走。
English: Suddenly, it started to rain heavily in the mountains and we were soaked from head to toe, so we headed back.

古文：过巨石崖，见其侧有线路伏深箐中，雨巨不可上，上亦不得有所见。
现代文：经过巨石盘绕的山崖时，见侧面有条若线一样的细路隐没在深竹丛中，但雨很猛不能上去，就算上去也不能见到什么景物。
English: When passing through the mountain cliff surrounded by boulders, I saw a narrow path on the side that was like a thin line, hidden in the deep bamboo thicket. But the rain was so heavy that I couldn't go up, and even if I did, I wouldn't be able to see anything.

古文：遂从故道下，至夜来依火处，拟从直北旧路下，就溪炊米。
现代文：于是从原路往下，到达昨天入夜后依傍着火堆躺卧的地方，打算从正北面来时的路下山，到溪边就着溪水做饭。
English: So he went down from the original path, arrived at the place where the cow was lying next to the fire after nightfall yesterday, and planned to go down the mountain from the road when he was coming from the north, and cook with the stream water when he reached the stream.

古文：而火为雨灭，止存余星，急觅干烬引之，荷而下山。
现代文：然而火被雨浇灭了，只残存一些火星，我们急忙找了些烧剩的干柴引着火，将火把扛着下山。
English: However, the fire was extinguished by the rain, and only a few sticks remained. We hurriedly found some leftover dry firewood, lit it, and carried the torches down the mountain.

古文：乃误从其西，竟不得路。
现代文：但却误走朝西面，竟然没找到路。
English: However, he mistakenly walked towards the west and didn't find his way.

古文：久之得微涧，遂炊涧中，已当午矣。
现代文：许久，见到一条细小的涧流，便在涧中烧火做饭吃，这时已经正午了。
English: After a long time, when he saw a small stream, he lit a fire in the cocoon to cook and eat. By this time, it was noon.

古文：踯躅莽箐中，久之，乃得抵涧，则五涧纵横，交会一处，盖皆三分石西南北三面之水，而向所渡东来一溪在其最北。
现代文：饭后极艰难而缓慢地行进在密草深竹丛中，许久才抵达一条涧流处，那里五条涧流纵横交会到一处，它们大约都是从三分石西、南、北三面流来的水，我们来时所渡的从东面流来的一条溪流在最北面。
English: After the meal, we walked very slowly and with great difficulty through the dense grass and deep bamboo thickets. It took us a long time to reach a streambed, where five streams criss-crossed into one place. They were all water flowing from the west, south and north of Sanjunishi. The stream flowing from the east, which we crossed when we came, was at the northernmost point.

古文：乃舍其一，渡其三，而留最北者未渡。
现代文：于是舍弃其中的一条，渡过三条，而留下最北面的那条没有渡。
English: So he gave up one of them and crossed three, leaving the northernmost one uncrossed.

古文：循其南涯滩流而东，一里，至来时所渡处，始涉而北。
现代文：沿着涧流南边的滩流往东走，一里，到达来时渡河处，这才涉水到了北面。
English: I walked east along the beach current on the south side of the turbulent current for one mile, and when I reached the river crossing, I waded to the north.

古文：从旧道至烂泥，至鳌头偶坐。
现代文：从原路到达烂泥河，到鳌头山时小坐了一会。
English: From the original road to the muddy river, I sat for a while when I reached Shantou Mountain.

古文：闻兰香甚，览之即在坐隅，乃携之行。
现代文：坐下后闻到兰花很香，一寻找，那花就在我旁边的一个角落里，于是摘了它带着走。
English: After sitting down, I smelled the fragrance of the orchid, and when I looked for it, the flower was in a corner next to me, so I picked it and took it with me.

古文：至半边山，下至牛头河，暝色已合，幸已过险，命导者从间道趋韭菜原。盖以此处有高山瑶居上。自此而南，绝无一寮á小屋，直抵高梁原而后有瑶居也。
现代文：到了半边山，下到牛头河边，夜色已经合拢，幸好已经过了危险处。我叫导游领我们从小路直奔韭菜原，因为这地方有高山瑶居住，而从这里往南，绝无一间小屋，要直抵高梁原才有瑶族人家居住。
English: At the halfway point of the mountain, down to the edge of the Niutou River, the night had already closed in, and fortunately, the danger had passed. I asked the guide to lead us from the path straight to the Liangcaiyuan, because this place is inhabited by alpine baboons, and from here to the south, there is no hut, and it is only when we reach the Liangcaiyuan that the Yao people live.

古文：初升犹土山，既入而东下，但闻水声潺潺在深壑。
现代文：开初往上爬时仍是土山，进了山往东朝下走，只听得深谷中水声潺潺。
English: When I climbed up at the beginning, it was still a dirt mountain. When I entered the mountain and walked down to the east, I only heard the sound of water in the deep valley.

古文：暗扪危级而下，又一里，过两独木桥，则见火光荧荧。
现代文：黑暗中摸着高而险的石瞪往下走，又行一里，跨过两座独木桥，就见到微亮的火光闪烁摇曳。
English: In the darkness, I felt for the high and dangerous rocks and walked down. After another mile, I crossed two wooden bridges and saw the faint light of the fire twinkling and swaying.

古文：亟就之，见其伏畦旁，亦不敢问。
现代文：赶忙奔到光亮处，见火光隐伏在田畦旁边，也不敢询问。
English: He hurried to the bright place, saw the firelight lurking next to the rice field, and did not dare to inquire.

古文：已而有茅寮一二重，呼之，一人辄秉炬出，迎归托宿焉。
现代文：随后见到一两间茅草屋，呼喊后，就有一人打着火把出来，迎我们进了他家住下。
English: Then we saw one or two thatched huts. After shouting, a man came out with a torch and welcomed us into his house.

古文：问其畦间诸火，则取乖者，盖瑶人以蛙为乖也。
现代文：问他田畦间那些火把是怎么回事，他说那些人是到田畦间捉乖的，瑶族人称青蛙为 乖 。
English: Ask him what's going on with those torches in the rice paddies. He says that those people go to the rice paddies to catch frogs. The Dong people call frogs frogs.

古文：问其姓为邓，其人年及二十，谈山中事甚熟。
现代文：问后得知他姓邓，年纪二十，他谈论起山中的事来很熟悉。
English: After inquiring, I learned that his surname was Deng, he was 20 years old, and he was familiar with talking about things in the mountains.

古文：余感其深夜迎宿，始知瑶犹存古人之厚也。
现代文：我感激他深夜迎我们住宿，由此我才知道瑶族人中仍保留着古人淳厚的风气。
English: I am grateful to him for welcoming us to stay late at night, from which I learned that the Yao people still retain the ancient and honest culture.

古文：亟烧枝炙衣，炊粥就枕焉。
现代文：进屋后，忙着烧树枝烘烤衣服，并煮了粥，吃后就睡下。
English: After entering the house, he was busy burning twigs, baking clothes, and cooking porridge. After eating, he fell asleep.

古文：三十日以隔宿不寐，平明乃呼童起炊。
现代文：三十日因为前一夜没有睡着，天亮才叫顾仆起来做饭。
English: On the thirtieth day, because he had not fallen asleep the night before, he asked his servant to get up and cook in the morning.

古文：晨餐后行，始见所谓韭菜原，在高山之底，亦若釜焉。
现代文：早餐后出发，才见到所说的韭菜原，它位于高山的底部，也若像一口锅。
English: After breakfast, we set out, only to see the so-called stew plain, which is located at the bottom of the mountain and looks like a pot.

古文：第不知夜来所闻水声潺潺，果入洞，抑出峡也。
现代文：只是未弄清昨夜所听到的那潺潺作响的流水，到底是进了洞中呢还是流出了山峡。
English: But it was not clear whether the rushing water heard last night had actually entered the cave or flowed out of the gorge.

古文：洼中有澄潭一，甚深碧，为龙潭云。
现代文：山洼中有个清澈的水潭，很深很绿，称为龙潭。
English: There is a clear pool in the hollow, very deep and green, called Longtan.

古文：西越一山，共二里过清水潭，又一里半，过蟠龙溪口。
现代文：往西越过一座山，共走两里经过清水潭，又走一里半，经过蟠龙溪口。
English: He crossed a mountain to the west, walked a total of two miles through the Clear Water Pool, and walked another mile and a half through the mouth of the Qilong Creek.

古文：又一里半，逾一岭，过九龟进岩。
现代文：又走一里半，翻过一座岭，经过九龟进岩。
English: I walked another mile and a half, over a ridge, past nine turtles into the rock.

古文：又三里，还饭于斜洞，乃少憩洞中，以所携兰花九头花，共七枝，但叶不长耸，不如建耳。栽洞中当门小峰间石台上以供佛。
现代文：于是朝岭上爬，过茅窝，下杨子岭，共五里，抵达导游家。又走三里，返回斜洞中吃饭。在洞中稍事休息，便将途中带来的兰花栽在洞中对着洞门的小石峰间的石台上以供佛。
English: So he climbed up the morning ridge, over the thatch nest, and down the Yangzi ridge, a total of five miles, to reach the guide's house. He walked another three miles and returned to the sloping cave to eat. After taking a short break in the cave, he planted the orchids he brought on the way on the stone platform between the small stone peaks in the cave opposite the cave door to offer them to the Buddha.

古文：下午始行，北过圣殿西岭，乃西出娥皇、女英二峰间，已转而东北行，共十里，过太平营。
现代文：下午才出发，往北越过圣殿西岭，就向西到了娥皇、女英两峰之间，随即折往东北方向走，共十里，经过太平营。
English: We only set out in the afternoon, and after crossing the West Ridge of the Sacred Temple to the north, we headed west to the area between the two peaks of Eohwang and Yeongyeong, and then turned to the northeast, a total of ten miles, passing through Taiping Camp.

古文：又北五里，宿于路亭。
现代文：又往北走五里，投宿在路亭。
English: We walked another five miles north and stayed in a roadhouse.

古文：九疑洞东南为玉琯岩，乃重四围中起小石峰，岩在其下，西向。
现代文：这天傍晚才见到落日的光辉。九疑洞的东南面为玉棺岩，四周环绕的层层山峦中耸起一座小石峰，岩在石峰下，朝向西面。
English: It was not until the evening of this day that I saw the glow of the setting sun. The southeast face of Jiuzhaigou Cave is Jade Coffin Rock. A small stone peak rises in the surrounding mountains. The rock is under the stone peak, facing west.

古文：有卦山在其西，正当洞门。
现代文：有座卦山位于它的西边，正对着洞门。
English: A mountain called Gua Shan is located to the west of it, directly opposite the cave entrance.

古文：形如茭也，又似儒巾，亦群山中特起者。
现代文：岩洞中平坦宽阔，南北通达，它是古舜祠的基址、所说的何侯升天之处。
English: The cave is flat and wide, with access to the north and south. It is the foundation site of the ancient Ancestral Hall, the place where He Hou ascended to heaven.

古文：其中平央，南北通达，是为古祠基，所称何侯上升处也。由此南三十里为香炉山，东南五十余里为三分石，西三十里为舜母石，又西十里为界头分九，则江华之东界矣。三分石，俱称其下水一出广东，一出广西，一下九疑为潇水，出湖广。
现代文：由此岩往南三十里为香炉山，往东南五十几里为三分石，往西三十里为舜母石，从舜母石又往西十里为界头分九，那里就是江华县的东界了。关于三分石，都说它下面的水一条流往广东，一条流往广西，一条流下九疑山成为潇水，流出湖广。
English: From this rock, the incense burner mountain is 30 miles to the south, the tripoint stone is 50 miles to the southeast, the mother lode stone is 30 miles to the west, and the boundary head is 9 miles from the mother lode stone to the west, which is the eastern boundary of Jianghua County. As for the tripoint stone, it is said that the water under it flows one way to Guangdong, one way to Guangxi, and one way flows down Jiuzhishan to become Xiaoshui, and flows out of the lake.

古文：至其下，乃知为石分三岐耳。
现代文：到了它下面，才知道所谓三分石是石峰分成三支耸起。
English: When we reached the bottom of it, we realized that the so-called "three-pointed stone" is a rock peak divided into three branches.

古文：其下水东北者为潇源，合北、西诸水即五涧交会者，出大洋，为潇水之源。
现代文：三分石下面的水，东北面的是潇水源头，它汇合北面、西面各条水流出宽阔的山间平地中，为潇水的源买。
English: The water below the three-pointed stone is the source of Xiaoshui on the northeast side. It is the confluence of the north and west sides of the water flowing out of the wide mountain plain, and is the source of Xiaoshui.

古文：直东者自高梁原为白田江，经临江所，至蓝山县治，为岿水之源。
现代文：正东面的从高梁原起为白田江，它往东流十五里经过临江所，又往东流二十里到蓝山县城，为岿水的源头。
English: Directly to the east, from Gaoliangyuan, is the Baidai River. It flows eastward for fifteen miles through Linjiang, and then eastward for twenty miles to the county seat of Lanshan, which is the source of Surabaya.

古文：东南者自大桥下锦田，西至江华县，为沲水之源。
现代文：东南面的从高梁原东南十五里的大桥处流下锦田，再往西流到江华县，为拖水的源头。
English: In the southeast, it flows down from the bridge 15 miles southeast of Gaoliangyuan to Jin Tian, and then flows westward to Jianghua County, which is the source of the water.

古文：其不出两广者，以南有锦田水横流为界也。
现代文：这条水之所以不流到两广去，是因为南边有条锦田水横流成为湖广和广东、广西两省的界限。
English: The reason why this water does not flow to the two regions is because there is a transverse stream of Jintian water on the south side, which forms the boundary between the lake and the two provinces of Guangdong and Guangxi.

古文：锦田东有石鱼岭，为广东连州界，其水始东南流，若广西，则上武堡之南为贺县界也。
现代文：锦田东面有座石鱼岭，为广东连州的边界，岭上的水才往东南流入广东省。至于广西，则上武堡的南面就是贺县的边界。
English: There is a stone fish ridge on the east of Jin Tian, which is the border of Lianzhou in Guangdong. The water on the ridge flows southeast into Guangdong Province. As for Guangxi, the south of Shangwubo is the border of He County.

古文：高梁原，为宁远南界、蓝山西界，而地属于蓝，亦高山瑶也，为盗贼渊薮āǒ聚集之地。
现代文：高梁原为宁远县的南界、蓝山县的西界，而地隶属于蓝山县，也是高山瑶聚居的地方，为盗贼聚集的处所。
English: Gaoliang used to be the southern boundary of Ningyuan County and the western boundary of Lanshan County, and the place belongs to Lanshan County. It is also a place where highland baboons live together, and it is a place where thieves gather.

古文：二月间，出永州杀东安县捕官，及杀掠冷水湾、博野桥诸处，皆此辈也。
现代文：二月间，窜出永州府杀掉东安县缉捕官员，洗劫冷水湾、博野桥各地方的，都是这批人。
English: In February, it was this group of people who came out of Yongzhou Prefecture to kill the Dong'an County arresting officer and ransack all parts of Lengshui Bay and Bonobiao.

古文：出入皆由牛头江，必假宿于韭菜原、蟠龙洞，而经九疑峒焉。
现代文：他们出入都从牛头江走，必定在韭菜原、蟠龙洞借宿而经过九疑酮。
English: They all go in and out of the Niutou River, and they must have stayed in Xuancaiyuan and Longdong and passed through Jiuzhaigou.

古文：其党约七八十人，有马二三十匹，创锐罗帜甚备，内有才蓄发者数人，僧两三人，即冷水坳岭上庙中僧。
现代文：这伙约七八十人，有二三十匹马，各种尖利 的器械收集很齐备。他们中才蓄发的有几人，僧人有两三个，又有些做木活的外地人也加入其中。
English: There are about seventy or eighty people in this group, with twenty to thirty horses, and a complete collection of all kinds of sharp instruments. Among them, there are a few people who are just starting out, two or three monks, and some foreigners who do woodwork have also joined them.

古文：韭菜原中人人能言之，而余导者亦云然。
现代文：韭菜原的居民个个能讲述他们的事，我的导游也是这样说的。
English: The residents of Liana Plains all have stories to tell, and so does my guide.

