古文：黄帝问曰：今夫热病者，皆伤寒之类也，或愈或死，其死皆以六七日之间，其愈皆以十日以上者，何也？
现代文：黄帝问道：现在所说的外感发热的疾病，都属于伤寒一类，其中有的痊愈，有的死亡，死亡的往往在六七日之间，痊愈的都在十日以上，这是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di asked: The diseases of external heat that are now being talked about all belong to the same category as typhoid fever. Some of them are cured, and some die. The death is often between six and seven days, and those who are cured are more than ten days. What is the reason for this?

古文：不知其解，愿闻其故。
现代文：我不知如何解释，想听听其中的道理。
English: I don't know how to explain it, I want to hear the reason.

古文：岐伯对曰：巨阳者，诸阳之属也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：太阳经为六经之长，统摄阳分，故诸阳皆隶属于太阳。
English: Qibo replied, "The solar eclipse is the longest of the six eclipses, and it is responsible for setting the sun. Therefore, all the suns belong to the sun.

古文：其脉连于风府，故为诸阳主气也。
现代文：足太阳膀胱经连于风府穴，所以足太阳为诸阳主气，主一身之表。
English: The foot sun's bladder is connected to the wind palace hole, so the foot sun is the main energy of the suns, the main body of the table.

古文：人之伤于寒也，则为病热，热虽甚不死，其两感于寒而病者，必不免于死。
现代文：人感受寒邪以后，就要发热，发热虽重，一般不会死亡；如果阴阳二经表里同时感受寒邪而发病，就容易导致死亡。
English: After a person feels the cold evil, it is necessary to have a fever. Although the fever is severe, it generally does not cause death. If the yin and yang are both affected by the cold evil at the same time, it will easily lead to death.

古文：帝曰：愿闻其状。
现代文：黄帝说：我想知道伤寒的症状。
English: Huang Di said: I want to know the symptoms of typhoid fever.

古文：岐伯曰：伤寒一日，巨阳受之，故头项痛，腰脊强。
现代文：岐伯说：伤寒病，第一日，为足太阳膀胱经感受寒邪。
English: Qi Bo said: typhoid fever, the first day, for the foot sun bladder after feeling the cold evil.

古文：二日，阳明受之，阳明主肉，其脉侠鼻，络于目，故身热目疼而鼻干，不得卧也。
现代文：足太阳膀胱经循行路线，从头下项，侠脊抵腰中，所以出现头项痛、腰脊强直不舒的症状。
English: The foot sun bladder follows the walking route, from the head to the lower part, and the knight's spine to the waist, so the symptoms of head and neck pain and lumbar stiffness and discomfort appear.

古文：三日，少阳受之，少阳主胆，其脉循胁络于耳，故胸胁痛而耳聋。
现代文：第二日，足阳明胃经受病。足阳明胃经主肌肉，其循行路线，挟鼻络于目，所以出现身体发热、眼睛痛、鼻腔干燥、睡眠不安的症状。
English: On the second day, the patient suffered from the disease of bright foot and bright stomach. The bright foot and bright stomach passed through the main muscle, which followed the route and pinched the nose to the eyes, so the symptoms of body fever, eye pain, nasal dryness, and sleep anxiety appeared.

古文：三阳经络皆受其病，而未入于脏者，故可汗而已。
现代文：第三日，足少阳胆经受病。足少阳胆经主骨，其循行路线，过胁肋而上络于耳，所以出现胸肋痛和耳聋的症状。若三条阳经皆受病，但尚未入腑，都可以发汗而愈。
English: On the third day, the feet and legs were affected by the disease. The feet and legs were affected by the disease. The feet and legs were affected by the disease. The feet and legs were affected by the disease. The feet and legs were affected by the disease. The feet and legs were affected by the disease. The feet and legs were affected by the disease.

古文：四日，太阴受之，太阴脉布胃中，络于嗌，故腹满而嗌干。
现代文：第四日，足太阴脾经受病。足太阴脾经循行路线，布于胃中，上络于咽，所以出现腹中胀满和咽干的症状。
English: On the fourth day, her spleen and legs were affected by the disease. The spleen and legs were affected by the disease. The spleen and legs were affected by the disease. The spleen and legs were affected by the disease. The spleen and legs were affected by the disease.

古文：五日，少阴受之，少阴脉贯肾，络于肺，系舌本，故口燥舌干而渴。
现代文：第五日，足少阴肾经受病。足少阴肾经循行路线，贯肾，络肺，上系舌的根部，所以出现口燥、舌干而渴的症状。
English: On the fifth day, Shoshoyin's kidneys suffered from the disease. Shoshoyin's kidneys followed the route, penetrating the kidneys, the lungs, and the root of the upper tongue, so the symptoms of dry mouth and dry tongue appeared.

古文：六日，厥阴受之，厥阴脉循阴器而络于肝，故烦满而囊缩。
现代文：第六日，足厥阴肝经受病。足厥阴肝经循行路线，环绕生殖器，而络于肝，所以出现烦闷和阴囊收缩的症状。
English: On the sixth day, his liver was affected by the disease. His liver followed the route, surrounding the genitals and connecting to the liver, so he had symptoms of boredom and scrotal contraction.

古文：三阴三阳五脏六腑皆受病，荣卫不行，五脏不通则死矣。
现代文：如果三阴三阳经脉和五脏六腑均受病，以致营卫不能运行，五脏之气不通，人就要死亡了。
English: If the three yin and three yang meridians and the five internal organs are all affected by the disease, so that the camp guard cannot operate and the five internal organs cannot breathe, the person will die.

古文：其不两感于寒者：七日，巨阳病衰，头痛少愈；八日，阳明病衰，身热少愈；九日，少阳病衰，耳聋微闻，十日，太阴病衰，腹减如故，则思饮食；十一日，少阴病衰，渴止不满，舌干已而嚏；十二日，厥阴病衰，囊纵，少腹微下，大气皆去，病日已矣。
现代文：如果不是从阴阳表里两条经脉同时感受寒邪的，则第七日，太阳经脉病气衰减，头痛稍愈；第八日，阳明经脉病气衰减，身热稍退；第九日，少阳经脉病气衰减，耳聋将逐渐恢复而能听到声音；第十日，太阴经脉病气衰减，腹满已消，恢复正常，而欲饮食；第十一日，少阴经脉病气衰减，口不渴，不胀满，舌不干，能打喷嚏；第十二日，厥阴经脉病气衰减，阴囊松弛下垂归位，小腹部的拘急疼痛也舒缓了。
English: If you do not feel the cold at the same time from the two meridians in the yin and yang table, then on the seventh day, the solar meridians will be attenuated and the headache will be slightly relieved; on the eighth day, the yang-ming meridians will be attenuated and the body heat will be slightly reduced; on the ninth day, the xiaoyang meridians will be attenuated and the deafness will be gradually restored and the voice can be heard; on the tenth day, the yin-yang meridians will be attenuated, the abdomen will be full and the appetite will return to normal; on the eleven

古文：帝曰：治之奈何？
现代文：由于各条经脉的邪气都已经消退，所以病也逐渐痊愈。
English: Huang Di asked: How to treat it?

古文：岐伯曰：治之各通其脏脉，病日衰已矣。
现代文：黄帝说：怎么治疗呢？岐伯说：治疗的原则是，各自使受邪的脏腑经脉气血通畅，这样就会使病邪日渐衰退而愈。
English: Huang Di said, "How to treat it?" Qi Bo said, "The principle of treatment is to make the evil organs, meridians, qi and blood flow smoothly, so that the disease will gradually decline.

古文：其未满三日者，可汗而已；其满三日者，可泄而已。
现代文：对这类病的治疗原则，一般来说，受病邪未满三日，病邪犹在体表的，可发汗而愈；受病邪已满三日，病邪已入体内的，可以泻下去热而愈。
English: Generally speaking, the treatment principle for this kind of disease is that if the illness lasts less than three days and the disease is still on the surface of the body, it can be cured by sweating; if the illness lasts more than three days and the disease has entered the body, it can be eased and the fever can be cured.

古文：帝曰：热病已愈，时有所遗者，何也？
现代文：黄帝说：有时热病已经痊愈，但还有余热不退的情况发生，这是什么原因呢？
English: Huang Di said: Sometimes the fever has been cured, but there is a situation where the residual heat does not recede. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：诸遗者，热甚而强食之，故有所遗也。
现代文：岐伯说：凡是余热不退的，大多是因为在发热较重的时候勉强进食造成的，所以才有余热遗留在体内。
English: Qi Bo said: Any residual heat that does not recede is mostly caused by reluctantly eating when the fever is heavy, so only the residual heat remains in the body.

古文：若此者，皆病已衰而热有所藏，因其谷气相薄，两热相合，故有所遗也。帝曰：善。
现代文：像这样的情况，都是病势虽然已经衰退，但尚有残余的热邪蕴藏于内，一定会因为水谷不化而生热，再与体内残留的余热相合，必然造成余热不退的情况。黄帝说：好。
English: In cases like this, although the disease has already declined, there are still residual hot spots inside the crane, which will inevitably generate heat due to the stagnation, and then combine with the residual heat remaining in the body, which will inevitably cause the residual heat not to recede. Huang Di said: Good.

古文：治遗奈何？
现代文：怎样治疗余热不退呢？
English: How to treat residual heat that does not go away?

古文：岐伯曰：视其虚实，调其逆从，可使必已矣。
现代文：岐伯说：应诊察病的虚实，或补或泻，予以适当的治疗，可使其病痊愈。
English: Qi Bo said: It is necessary to diagnose the true and false of the disease, or supplement or diarrhea, and give appropriate treatment, which can cure the disease.

古文：帝曰：病热当何禁之？
现代文：黄帝说：发热的病人在护理上有什么禁忌吗？
English: Huang Di said: Are there any nursing taboos for patients with fever?

古文：岐伯曰：病热少愈，食肉则复，多食则遗，此其禁也。
现代文：岐伯说：当病人热势稍衰的时候，吃了肉食，病就会复发；如果饮食过多，则出现余热不退的症状，这都是热病的禁忌。
English: Qi Bo said: When the patient's fever abates slightly, if he eats meat, the disease will relapse; if he eats too much, he will have symptoms of residual fever, which are all contraindications for fever.

古文：帝曰：其病两感于寒者，其脉应与其病形何如？
现代文：黄帝说：表里两条经脉同时伤于寒邪的两感证，其脉象和症状是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di said: The two external meridians are simultaneously affected by the two cold sores. What are the symptoms?

古文：岐伯曰：两感于寒者：病一日则巨阳与少阴俱病，则头痛口干而烦满；二日则阳明与太阴俱病，则腹满身热，不欲食，谵言；三日则少阳与厥阴俱病，则耳聋、囊缩而厥、水浆不入、不知人，六日死。
现代文：岐伯说：阴阳表里两条经脉同时感受寒邪的两感证，第一日，为太阳与少阴两经同时受病，其症状既有太阳的头痛，又有少阴的口干和烦闷；第二日，为阳明与太阴两经同时受病，其症状既有阳明的身热谵言妄语，又有太阴的腹满不欲食；第三日，为少阳与厥阴两经同时受病，其症状既有少阳之耳聋，又有厥阴的阴囊收缩和四肢发冷。如果病势发展至水浆不入，神昏不知人的程度，到第六天便死亡了。
English: Qi Bo said: The two meridians in the yin and yang table simultaneously feel the two signs of cold and evil. On the first day, the sun and the yin and yang meridians are both ill at the same time. The symptoms include the sun's headache, and the yin and yang meridians' dry mouth and boredom. On the second day, the yang and yin meridians are both ill at the same time. The symptoms include the yang's body heat, slurred speech, and the yin's full stomach. On the third day, the yin and yang meridians are both ill at the same time. The symptoms include the yang's

古文：帝曰：五脏已伤，六腑不通，荣卫不行，如是之后，三日乃死，何也？
现代文：黄帝说：病已发展至五脏已伤，六腑不通，荣卫不行，像这样的病况，再过三天以后就死亡，是什么道理呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "The disease has already developed to the point that the five internal organs have been injured, the six gills are blocked, and the honor guard is not working. What is the reason for a disease like this to die after three days?

古文：岐伯曰：阳明者，十二经脉之长也，其血气盛，故不知人。
现代文：岐伯说：足阳明胃经为十二经脉之长，此经脉的气血最盛，所以病人容易神识昏迷。
English: Qi Bo said: The foot-sun-bright stomach meridian is the longest of the twelve meridians, and the qi and blood of this meridian are the most abundant, so the patient is prone to unconsciousness.

古文：三日，其气乃尽，故死矣。
现代文：再过三天以后，足阳明胃经的气血已经竭尽，所以就要死亡。
English: After another three days, the qi and blood of the foot-sun-bright-stomach chanting has been exhausted, so it will die.

古文：凡病伤寒而成温者，先夏至日者为病温，后夏至日者为病暑。
现代文：大凡伤于寒邪而成为温热病的，病发于夏至日以前的就称之为温病，病发于夏至日以后的就称之为暑病。
English: If a person is stricken by the cold and becomes hypothermic, the onset of the disease before the summer solstice is called hypothermia, and the onset after the summer solstice is called heat illness.

古文：暑当与汗皆出，勿止。
现代文：暑病需要让汗发出来，而不要采用止汗的疗法。
English: Heat illness needs to sweat out, and do not use antiperspirant therapy.

