古文：礼上礼仪繁博，与天地而为量。纪国立君，人伦攸始。
现代文：礼仪繁杂广博，可与天地等量齐观，治理国家设立国君，是人伦之始。
English: The etiquette is complex and wide-ranging, and can be equated with heaven and earth. The establishment of a sovereign to govern the country is the beginning of human relations.

古文：三代遗文，略在经诰，盖秦余所亡逸也。
现代文：三代遣留的文字，在经典诰命中很简略，大概是秦末亡佚了。
English: The text of the three generations of emigration is very simple in the classic poem, probably the end of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：汉初叔孙通制汉礼，而班固之志不载。
现代文：汉初叔孙通制订汉礼，然而班固《汉书》的《礼乐志》没有记载。
English: At the beginning of the Han Dynasty, Uncle Sun Tong formulated the Chinese etiquette, however, there is no record of it in the "History of Etiquette" of Banggu's "Chinese Book."

古文：及至东京，太尉胡广撰《旧仪》，左中郎蔡邕造《独断》，应劭、蔡质咸缀识时事，而司马彪之书不取。
现代文：等到束汉洛阳时期，太尉胡广撰写《旧仪》，左中郎蔡邕著作《独断》，应劭、蔡质也都连缀记载时事，然而司马彪的《礼书》没有采用。
English: By the time of the Han and Luoyang dynasties, Taifu Hu Guang wrote "Old Rites," Zuozhonglang Cai Qi wrote "Arbitrariness," and Ying Qi and Cai Qi also recorded current events, but Sima Biao's "Book of Etiquette" was not adopted.

古文：魏氏籍汉末大乱，旧章殄灭，侍中王粲、尚书卫觊集创朝仪，而鱼豢、王沈、陈寿、孙盛并未详也。
现代文：曹魏继漠末大乱之后，旧的典章尽数毁灭，侍中王粲、尚书卫觊汇集创作朝廷礼仪，然而鱼豢、王沈、陈寿、孙盛的著作都没有详细记载。
English: Cao Wei, following the end of the Great Desert Revolt, destroyed as many of the old ceremonials as possible, and the chamberlains Wang Xi and Shang Shuwei Xi collected and created imperial court etiquette. However, the works of Yu Yao, Wang Shen, Chen Shou, and Sun Sheng are not recorded in detail.

古文：吴则太史令丁孚拾遗汉事，蜀则孟光、许慈草建众典。
现代文：吴国是太史令丁孚修补汉代旧典，蜀国是孟光、许慈草创各类典制。
English: Wuzhiguo was Taishi's order to Ding Fu to repair the old Han Dynasty classics, and Shu Province was Meng Guang and Xu Ci Cao's creation of various types of classics.

古文：晋初司空荀摐因魏代前事，撰为《晋礼》，参考今古，更其节文，羊祜、任恺、庾峻、应贞并共删集，成百六十五篇。
现代文：晋初司空荀颉依照曹魏故事，撰写《晋礼》，参考古今，代之以节制修饰，羊祜、任恺、庾峻、应贞都参予删改汇集，编成一百六十五篇。
English: According to Cao Wei's story, the first secretary of the Jin Dynasty, Kuang Zheng, wrote "Jinli," referring to ancient and modern times, and replaced it with moderation. Yang Zheng, Ren Zheng, Gao Jun, and Ying Zhen all participated in the editing and revision of the collection, compiled into one hundred and sixty-five articles.

古文：后挚虞、傅咸缵续此制，未及成功，中原覆没，今虞之《决疑注》是遗事也。
现代文：后来挚虞、傅咸继承此种创制，但还未完成，中原就沦陷了，现在挚虞的《决疑注》，是一项未完成的事业。
English: Later, Zhengyu and Fu Xian inherited this creation, but before it was completed, the Central Plains fell. Now Zhengyu's "Decision Note" is an unfinished business.

古文：江左仆射刁协、太常荀崧，补缉旧文，光禄大夫蔡谟又踵修辑朝故。
现代文：束晋仆射刁协、太常荀崧，补充辑录旧的文字，光禄大夫蔡谟又续修编辑朝廷旧事。
English: Sokjin's servants, Sho and Taejong, supplemented the collection of old texts, and Guanglu's doctor, Zaimu, continued to edit the old affairs of the imperial court.

古文：宋初因循改革，事系群儒，其前史所详，并不重述。
现代文：宋初因循旧礼又加以改革，把事情委托给诸位儒生，那些过去史书详细记载的，都不再重复记述。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, the old rituals were followed and reformed, and matters were entrusted to the Confucian scholars. The details recorded in the past history books were no longer repeated.

古文：永明二年，太子步兵校尉伏曼容表定礼乐。于是诏尚书令王俭制定新礼，立治礼乐学士及职局，置旧学四人，新学六人，正书令史各一人，干一人，秘书省差能书弟子二人。
现代文：永明二年，太子步兵校尉伏曼容上表要求制定礼乐，于是诏令尚书令王俭制定新的礼仪，设立研究礼乐的学士及任所，设置旧学四人，新学六人，正书令史各一人，干一人，秘书省派擅长书写的弟子二人。
English: In the second year of the Yongming era, the prince's foot soldier lieutenant Fu Man Rong made a request for the development of etiquette, so he ordered Shang Shul to order Wang Jian to develop a new etiquette, set up a bachelor and a post to study etiquette, set up four old students, six new students, one official and one cadre, and sent two disciples who were good at writing to the secretary.

古文：因集前代，撰治五礼，吉、凶、宾、军、嘉也。
现代文：于是汇集前代礼仪，撰写研究五礼，即吉礼、凶礼、宾礼、军礼、嘉礼。
English: As a result, he compiled the etiquette of the previous generation and wrote a study on the five rites, namely, auspicious, inauspicious, auspicious, military, and meritorious.

古文：文多不载。
现代文：因为内容太多，不再记载。
English: Its words are many and varied.

古文：若郊庙庠序之仪，冠婚丧纪之节，事有变革，宜录时事者，备今志。
现代文：比如郊祭、庙祭、学校的仪式，冠礼、婚礼、丧礼记载的礼节，事情有演变沿革，应当着录现代之事的，详细记载在现在的礼志中。
English: For example, the etiquette recorded in suburban festivals, temple festivals, school ceremonies, coronations, weddings, and funerals has evolved over time, and should be recorded in detail in the current etiquette.

古文：其舆辂旗常，与往代同异者，更立别篇。
现代文：至于车舆旗帜，和过去的同异，另立篇目。
English: As for the chequered flag, it's the same as before, just a different chapter.

古文：建元元年七月，有司奏： 郊殷之礼，未详郊在何年？
现代文：建元元年七月，主管官吏上奏说： 郊祭、殷祭的礼制，不清楚郊祭应在哪年?
English: In July of the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the responsible official made a report saying: The ceremonial system of the Suburban Festival and the Yin Festival has changed. It is not clear in which year the Suburban Festival should be held.

古文：复以何祖配郊？
现代文：又用哪些祖先配祀郊祭?
English: Which ancestors are associated with the Suburban Festival?

古文：殷复在何时？
现代文：殷祭又在什么时候?
English: When is the Yin Festival?

古文：未郊得先殷与不？
现代文：没有郊祭之前能够先举行殷祭吗?
English: Can the Yin Festival be held before the Suburban Festival?

古文：明堂亦应与郊同年而祭不？若应祭者，复有配与无配？
现代文：明堂也应该与郊同年祭祀不如果应当祭祀，又有没有配祀者?
English: Should Myeongdong also hold a memorial service in the same year as the suburb? If not, is there someone who should be honored?

古文：不祀者，堂殿职僚毁置云何？ 
现代文：如果不祭祀，殿堂及任职僚属的毁弃设置如何规定? 
English: If there is no sacrifice, how will the destruction of the hall of fame and the subordinates be regulated?

古文：八座丞郎通关博士议。
现代文：八座、丞郎、通关博士商讨。
English: Hachiza, chōro, and customs clearance doctor discuss.

古文：曹郎中裴昭明、仪曹郎中孔逷议： 今年七月宜殷祠，来年正月宜南郊明堂，并祭而无配。 
现代文：曹郎中裴昭明、仪曹郎中孔遏议论说： 今年七月应当举行殷祭，明年正月应当举行南郊、明堂祭礼，都是祭祀没有配祀。 
English: Cao Langzhong Pei Zhao Ming and Yi Cao Langzhong Kong Jian argued: the Yin Festival should be held in July this year, and the Southern Suburbs and Myeongdong Festival should be held in the first month of next year, but they are all sacrificial rites without appropriate worship.

古文：殿中郎司马宪议： 南郊无配，飨祠如旧；明堂无配，宜应废祀。
现代文：殿中郎司马宪议论说： 南郊祭礼没有配祀，飨祠与过去相同；明堂祭礼没有配祀，应当废除祭祀。
English: In the middle of the hall, the master of ceremonies, Ma Xian, argued: the southern suburb festival did not have a matching ritual, and the ancestral shrine was the same as in the past; the Myeongdong festival did not have a matching ritual, and the ritual should be abolished.

古文：其殷祠同用今年十月。 
现代文：至于殷祀可同在今年十月举行。 
English: As for the memorial service, it can be held in October of this year.

古文：右仆射王俭议： 案《礼记·王制》，天子先祫后时祭，诸侯先时祭后祫。
现代文：右仆射王俭议论说：依据《礼记。王制》，天子先举行夹祭后举行四时祭祀，诸侯先四时祭祀后夹祭。
English: His right-hand man, Shaowang Jian, commented: According to the "Rituals. The king's system," the emperor first held a pincer festival and then held a four-hour sacrifice, the princes first held a four-hour sacrifice and then held a pincer festival.

古文：《春秋》鲁僖二年祫，明年春禘，自此以后，五年再殷。
现代文：《春秋》载鲁僖公二年夹祭，第二年春拥祭，从此以后，五年殷祭一次。
English: "Spring and Autumn" contains the second year of the Lushan Festival, the second year of the Spring Festival, and from then on, the five-year Yin Festival.

古文：《礼纬·稽命徵》曰： 三年一祫，五年一禘。 
现代文：《礼纬稽命征》说： 三年一次夹祭，五年一次椅祭。 
English: "Li Wei Ji Muxing" said: the three-year clip festival, the five-year chair festival.

古文：《经》《记》所论禘祫与时祭，其言详矣，初不以先殷后郊为嫌。
现代文：《春秋经》、《礼记》所论述的谛祭、拾祭和四时祭祀，说得很详细，早先并不以先殷祭后郊祭为嫌忌。
English: "The Spring and Autumn Classic" and "The Book of Rites" describe in great detail the precepts festival, the gathering festival and the four-hour festival. Earlier, the Yin festival and the suburb festival were not regarded as taboo.

古文：至于郊配之重，事由王迹，是故杜林议云 汉业特起，不因缘尧，宜以高帝配天 。
现代文：至于郊祭配祀的重要，事情要根据王者创业的功绩，因此杜林议论说 汉代帝业的崛起，并非得自尧，应当用高帝配祀天帝 。
English: As for the importance of suburb sacrifice and worship, the matter should be based on the merits of the king's entrepreneurship. Therefore, Du Lin argued that the rise of the Han Dynasty's empire was not self-made, and that Emperor Gao should be used to worship the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：魏高堂隆议以舜配天。
现代文：魏高堂隆建议用舜配祀天帝。
English: Wei Gaodonglong suggested that the god should be worshipped with a yakitori.

古文：蒋济云 汉时奏议，谓尧已禅舜，不得为汉祖，舜亦已禅禹，不得为魏之祖。
现代文：蒋济说 汉代时的奏议，说尧已经把帝位禅让给舜，不能作为漠的祖先，舜也已经把帝位惮让给禹，不能作为魏的祖先。
English: Jiang Jie said that the Han Dynasty's petition, saying that Zang had ceded the imperial throne to Zang, could not be regarded as the ancestor of Mu, and Zang had also ceded the imperial throne to Yu, and could not be regarded as the ancestor of Wei.

古文：今宜以武皇帝配天 。
现代文：现在应当用武皇帝配祀天帝 。
English: It is time for Emperor Wu to be enshrined alongside the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：晋、宋因循，即为前式。
现代文：晋、宋沿袭的即是前面的格式。
English: The Jin and Song dynasties followed the previous format.

古文：又案《礼》及《孝经援神契》并云： 明堂有五室。天子每月于其室听朔布教，祭五帝之神，配以有功德之君。 
现代文：另查考《礼》以及《孝经援神契》都说 明堂有五个房间，天子每月在某个房间听朝治事，施行教化，祭祀五帝的神灵，用有功德的君主配祀 。
English: In addition, an examination of the "Ritual" and the "Ritual of Filial Piety and Assistance to the Gods" both say that the Ming Hall has five rooms, and the heavenly son listens to the government affairs in a certain room every month, carries out enlightenment, sacrifices the gods of the five emperors, and uses the meritorious monarchs for worship.

古文：《大戴礼记》曰： 明堂者，所以明诸侯尊卑也 。
现代文：《大戴礼记》说 明堂，是明确诸侯尊卑的 。
English: "Dadaireiki" says that it is clear that princes are superior and inferior.

古文：许慎《五经异义》曰： 布政之宫，故称明堂。
现代文：许慎《五经异义》说 施布政教的宫室，所以叫做明堂。
English: Xu Shen said in "Five Classics of Heresy" that Shibu is the palace of politics and religion, so it is called Myeongdong.

古文：明堂，盛貌也。 
现代文：明堂，是兴盛的样子 。
English: It's a sign of prosperity.

古文：《周官·匠人职》称明堂有五室。
现代文：《周官。匠人职》说明堂有五个房间。
English: "Zhou Guan. Artisan" explains that the hall has five rooms.

古文：郑玄云： 周人明堂五室，帝一室也。 
现代文：郑玄说 周人的明堂五个房间，帝是一个房间 。
English: Zheng Xuan said that Zhou Ren's Ming Hall has five rooms, and the emperor has one room.

古文：初不闻有文王之寝。
现代文：早先没听说有文王的寝庙。
English: I hadn't heard about King Wen's sleeping temple before.

古文：《郑志》赵商问云： 说者谓天子庙制如明堂，是为明堂即文庙邪？ 
现代文：《郑志》载赵商问道 有人说天子庙的样式像明堂，这是说明堂就是文庙吗 ?
English: "Zheng Zhi" quoted Zhao Shang as asking, "Some people say that the style of Tianzi Temple is similar to that of Ming Temple. Is this to say that the style of Tianzi Temple is that of Wen Temple?

古文：郑答曰： 明堂主祭上帝，以文王配耳，犹如郊天以后稷配也。 
现代文：郑玄回答说 明堂主要祭祀上天，用文王配祀罢了，好比是郊祭天用后稷配祀 。
English: Zheng Xuan replied that the main sacrificial rites of the Ming Hall were dedicated to heaven, and it was just a matter of using the King of Literature to accompany the sacrifice, just like the suburb's sacrificial rites used the Queen of Heaven to accompany the sacrifice.

古文：袁孝尼云： 明堂法天之宫，本祭天帝，而以文王配，配其父于天位则可，牵天帝而就人鬼，则非义也。 
现代文：袁孝尼说 明堂是效法上天的宫室，本是祭祀天帝，而用文王配祀，用其父配祀天是可以的，扯着天帝迁就人鬼，就是不义 。
English: Yuan Hsiao-ni said that the Ming Hall was modeled after the heavenly palace. Originally, it was dedicated to the Heavenly Emperor. However, it was acceptable to use the King of Literature as a deity and his father as a deity. It was unjust to drag the Heavenly Emperor down to the level of ghosts and mortals.

古文：太元十三年，孙耆之议，称 郊以祀天，故配之以后稷；明堂以祀帝，故配之以文王。
现代文：太元三年，孙耆之建议说 郊祭用来祀天，所以用后稷配祀；明堂用来祀帝，所以用文王配祀。
English: In the 3rd year of the Taiyuan era, Sun Yat-sen suggested that the Suburban Festival should be used to worship Heaven, so the Houyi Festival should be used; the Myeongdong Festival should be used to worship the Emperor, so the Wenwang Festival should be used.

古文：由斯言之，郊为皇天之位，明堂即上帝之庙 。
现代文：由此而言，郊祭的是皇天神位，明堂即是上天的神庙 。
English: From this perspective, the suburban festival is the throne of God, and the Ming Hall is the temple of God.

古文：徐邈谓 配之为言，必有神主；郊为天坛，则堂非文庙 。
现代文：徐邈说 既然说到配祀。就一定要有神主；郊祭是天坛，但明堂不是文庙 。
English: Xu Wei said that since it comes to the matching of worship, there must be a god; the suburban festival is the Temple of Heaven, but the Ming Hall is not the Temple of Literature.

古文：《史记》云赵绾、王臧欲立明堂，于时亦未有郊配。
现代文：《史记》说趟绾、王臧想建立明堂。在当时也没有郊祭配祀。
English: "Histories" says that Wang Xi wanted to build a Ming Hall. At that time, there was no suburb festival.

古文：汉又祀汾阴五畤，即是五帝之祭，亦未有郊配。 议者或谓南郊之日，已旅上帝，若又以无配而特祀明堂，则一日再祭，于义为黩。
现代文：汉又在汾阴设五处祭坛祭祀，就是五帝的祭祀，也没有郊祭的配祀。议论者有人说举行南郊祭礼的当天，已经祭上天，如果又因为没有配祀而特别在明堂祭祀，就是一天两次祭祀，逭对道义是个玷污。
English: Han also set up five altars in Jinyin, that is, the sacrifice of the five emperors, and there was no matching sacrifice for the suburb festival. Some commentators said that on the day of the southern suburb festival, it was already sacrificed to heaven, and if it was specially sacrificed in the Ming Hall because there was no matching sacrifice, it was two sacrifices a day, which was a defilement to morality.

古文：案，古者郊本不共日。
现代文：查考古代郊祭本不在同一天。
English: The ancient suburb festival is not on the same day.

古文：蔡邕《独断》曰： 祠南郊。祀毕，次北郊，又次明堂、高庙、世祖庙，谓之五供。 
现代文：蔡邕《独断》说 先在南郊祭祀，祭祀完毕，接着到北郊祭祀，再接着祭祀明堂、高庙、世主困，叫做五供 。
English: Cai Wei's "The Arbitrary Decision" says that the southern suburbs should be sacrificed first, after the sacrifice is completed, the northern suburbs should be sacrificed next, and then the Myeongdong, the high temple, and the world should be sacrificed, which is called the five offerings.

古文：马融云： 郊天之祀，咸以夏正，五气用事，有休有王，各以其时，兆于方郊，四时合岁，功作相成，亦以此月总旅明堂。 
现代文：马融说 郊祭天帝的祭祀，都在夏历正月，五气行事，有的休止有的兴旺，各在相应的时节，举行四六郊祭，四季合成一年，功绩劳作助以形成，也在这月一起总祭明堂 。
English: Ma Rong said that the sacrifices of the Suburban Festival of the Heavenly Emperor are all held in the first month of the summer calendar, with the five elements acting, some resting and some flourishing, each in the corresponding season. Forty-six Suburban Festivals are held, the four seasons are combined into one year, and the merits of labor help to form, and also in this month, the main festival is held together.

古文：是则南郊、明堂各日之证也。
现代文：这就是南郊祭祀、明堂祭祀不在一天的证明。
English: This is proof that the Minami Suburban Festival and the Myodo Festival are not just for one day.

古文：近代从省，故与郊同日，犹无烦黩之疑。
现代文：近代予以简省，所以明堂与郊祭同在一天，还没有繁杂玷污的嫌疑。
English: In modern times, it has been simplified, so the Myeongdong and the suburb festival are the same day, and there is no suspicion of complex defilement.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：其为祭虽同，所以致祭则异。
现代文：因为它们作为祭祀虽然相同，祭祀的对象却不同。
English: Because although they are the same as sacrifices, the object of the sacrifice is different.

古文：孔晁云，言五帝佐天化育，故有从祀之礼，旅上帝是也。
现代文：孔晁有言，说五帝辅佐天帝化育万物，所以有配祀的礼仪，就是祭上天。
English: Confucius once said that the Five Emperors assisted the Heavenly Emperor to transform and nurture all things, so there is a ritual of worship, that is, a sacrifice to the heavens.

古文：至于四郊明堂，则是本祀之所，譬犹功臣从飨，岂复废其私庙？
现代文：至于四郊和明堂，则是原本的祭祀场所，譬如功臣随从帝王享祀，岂能就废弃他们的私庙。
English: As for the four suburbs and Myeongdong, they are the original places of worship. For example, if meritorious vassals follow the emperor to worship, how can they abandon their private temples?

古文：且明堂有配之时，南郊亦旅上帝，此则不疑于共日，今何故致嫌于同辰？
现代文：况且明堂有配祀的时候，南郊也祭上天，这就没有顾虑在同一天，现在为什么嫌弃在同时呢。
English: Moreover, when there was a matching deity in the main hall, the southern suburbs were also dedicated to heaven, so there was no concern on the same day, so why should it be rejected at the same time now?

古文：又《礼记》 天子祭天地、四方、山川、五祀，岁遍 。
现代文：另外《礼记》载 天子祭祀天地、四方、山川、五祀，在一年之中祭祀一遍 。
English: In addition, "Ryoki" records that the Son of Heaven offered sacrifices to heaven and earth, the four directions, mountains and rivers, and five deities, and offered sacrifices once a year.

古文：《尚书·洛诰》 咸秩无文 。
现代文：《尚书尧典》说 都是有秩序而不紊乱 。
English: "Shang Shuxuan" says that everything is orderly and not disorderly.

古文：《诗》云 昭事上帝，聿怀多福 。
现代文：《诗经》说 尊显恭奉上天，怀有求多福之义 。
English: "The Book of Songs" says, "Honor the appearance and pay homage to the heavens, and cherish the righteousness of seeking more blessings."

古文：据此诸义，则四方、山川，犹必享祀，五帝大神，义不可略。
现代文：根据这些意思，四方、山川之神，还是必须享祀，五帝作为大神，在道义上是不能省略的。
English: According to these meanings, the gods of the four directions and the mountains and rivers must still be worshipped, and the five emperors, as great gods, cannot be morally omitted.

古文：魏文帝黄初二年正月，郊天地明堂，明帝太和元年正月，以武皇帝配天，文皇帝配上帝，然则黄初中南郊、明堂，皆无配也。
现代文：魏文帝黄初二年正月，郊祭天地明堂，明帝太和元年正月，用武皇帝配祀天，文皇帝配祀上天，可见黄初年间的南郊明堂祭祀，都没有配祀。
English: In the first month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Weiwen in the first year of the Yellow Emperor, there was a suburb festival at Tianchi Mingtang. In the first month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Ming and the first month of the first year of the Ming Emperor Taizu, Emperor Wu was associated with the worship of heaven, and Emperor Wen was associated with the worship of heaven. It can be seen that during the first year of the Yellow Emperor, there was no associated worship at the suburb festival at Tianchi Mingtang.

古文：又郊日及牲色，异议纷然。
现代文：另外郊祭的日期及牺牲的毛色，意见也多有不同。
English: In addition, the opinions on the date of the suburb festival and the color of the sacrifice are also different.

古文：《郊特牲》云： 郊之用辛，周之始郊也。 
现代文：《郊特牲》说 郊祭用辛日，是从周开始的 。
English: "Countryside Special Animal" said that the "Countryside Festival" was held on a rainy day, and it started on a weekday.

古文：卢植云 辛之为言自新絜也。 
现代文：卢植说 辛的意思是使自己清新洁净 。
English: Lu Zhi said that Xin means to make oneself fresh and clean.

古文：郑玄云： 用辛日者，为人当斋戒自新絜也 。
现代文：郑玄说 采用辛曰，是人应当斋戒使自己清新洁净 。
English: Zheng Xuan said that the use of spices means that people should fast to make themselves fresh and clean.

古文：汉魏以来，或丁或己，而用辛常多。
现代文：汉魏以来，有时采用丁曰有时采用己日，然而采用辛日较多。
English: Since the Han and Wei Dynasties, Ding was sometimes used, sometimes Ji was used, but Xin was used more often.

古文：考之典据，辛日为允。
现代文：查考典籍，辛日是恰当的。
English: It is proper to study classics on a hard day.

古文：《郊特牲》又云，郊牲币宜以正色。
现代文：《郊特牲》又说，郊祭的牺牲缯帛应当采用正色。
English: "Suburban Special Sacrifice" also said that the sacrificial bowl of the suburban festival should use the positive color.

古文：缪袭据《祭法》，云天地絺犊，周家所尚；魏以建丑为正，牲宜尚白。
现代文：缪袭根据《祭法》，说祭天地用红色小牛，是周王室所崇尚的，魏把丑月作为正月，牺牲应是崇尚白色。
English: According to the "Sacrifice Law," it is said that the red calf used to sacrifice heaven and earth is revered by the Zhou royal family. Wei regards the ugly moon as the first month, and the sacrifice should be white.

古文：《白虎通》云，三王祭天，一用夏正，所以然者，夏正得天之数也。
现代文：《白虎通》说，三王祭天，一律用夏历，之所以这样，是因为夏历得到上天的运数。
English: "White Tiger Pass" said that the Three Kings Festival is held according to the lunar calendar. The reason for this is that the lunar calendar has received the number of operations from heaven.

古文：魏用异朔，故牲色不同。
现代文：魏采用不同的历法，所以牺牲的颜色不同。
English: The Wei dynasty used a different calendar, so the colors of the sacrifices were different.

古文：今大齐受命，建寅创历，郊庙用牲，一依晋、宋。
现代文：现在大齐受命于天，采用以寅月为正月的历法，郊祭宗庙祭祀采用的牺牲，一律依照晋、宋。
English: Now, Daqi has been ordered by heaven to adopt the calendar with Yin as the first month, and the sacrifices used in the suburb festival and the ancestral temple are all in accordance with Jin and Song.

古文：谓宜以今年十月殷祀宗庙。
现代文：认为应在今年十月殷祀宗庙。
English: He believes that the family temple should be consecrated in October of this year.

古文：自此以后，五年再殷。
现代文：从此以后，五年殷祀一次。
English: Since then, it has been held once every five years.

古文：来年正月上辛，有事南郊。
现代文：明年正月上辛曰，举行南郊祭祀。
English: Next year, the Southern Suburbs Festival will be held on the first day of the new year.

古文：宜以共日，还祭明堂。
现代文：应该在同一天，回去祭祀明堂。
English: It should be the same day to go back and perform the ritual at Myeongdong.

古文：又用次辛，飨祀北郊。
现代文：另外利用第二个辛曰，飨祀北郊。
English: In addition, the second syllable is used, 祀北郊.

古文：而并无配。
现代文：都没有配祀。
English: None of them have been assigned a deity.

古文：牺牲之色，率由旧章。 
现代文：牺牲的颜色，一律依照旧的典章。
English: Sacrificial colors, all according to the old rules.

古文：诏： 可。
现代文：诏令说 可以。
English: The imperial edict said yes.

古文：明堂可更详 。
现代文：明堂可另外详议 。
English: We can discuss this in detail later.

古文：有司又奏： 明堂寻礼无明文，唯以《孝经》为正。
现代文：主管官吏又上奏说： 明堂在礼中找不出明文规定，衹是以《孝经》为准。
English: The official in charge also made a report, saying, "Mingtang can't find any explicit provisions in the ritual, so the "Filial Piety Sutra" shall prevail."

古文：窃寻设祀之意，盖为文王有配则祭，无配则止。
现代文：私下探寻设立祭祀的本意，大盖是文王作为配祀时就祭祀，不作为配祀就不祭。
English: Privately exploring the original intention of setting up the ritual, the big cover is that when King Wen is a matchmaker, he will sacrifice, and if he is not a matchmaker, he will not sacrifice.

古文：愚谓既配上帝，则以帝为主。
现代文：我们认为既然配祀上天，就要以帝作为神主。
English: We believe that since it is fitting to worship God, it is necessary to worship God as God.

古文：今虽无配，不应阙祀。
现代文：现在虽然没有配祀，也不应不祭祀。
English: Now, although there is no matchmaking, there should not be no sacrifice.

古文：徐邈近代硕儒，每所折衷，其云 郊为天坛，则堂非文庙 ，此实明据。
现代文：徐邈是近代大儒，对礼仪每每有所折衷，他说 郊祭是天坛，那么明堂就不是文王庙，这确实是明显的证据。
English: Xu Xi is a modern great scholar, and he is always compromising on etiquette. He said that if the Suburban Festival is the Temple of Heaven, then the Ming Hall is not the Temple of King Wen. This is indeed clear evidence.

古文：内外百司立议已定，如更询访，终无异说。
现代文：内外百官已经议定，如另加咨询查访，终究不会有不同说法。
English: Hundreds of officials at home and abroad have agreed that if there is another advisory visit, there will not be a different statement after all.

古文：傍儒依史，竭其管见。
现代文：依据儒家和史籍，尽其一管之见。
English: According to Confucianism and historical records, he did his best.

古文：既圣旨惟疑，群下所未敢详，废置之宜，仰由天鉴。 
现代文：既然圣上旨意犹豫，诸位下臣不敢详言，应当废除还是设置，仰仗圣上裁定。 
English: Since the divine will hesitates, your subordinates dare not say in detail whether it should be abolished or established, relying on the divine ruling.

古文：诏 依旧 。
现代文：下韶说 依照旧制 。
English: The lower court said, "Follow the old system."

古文：建元四年，世祖即位。
现代文：建元四年，世祖即位。
English: In the fourth year of the first century, the founder ascended to the throne.

古文：其秋，有司奏： 寻前代嗣位，或仍前郊年，或别更始，晋、宋以来，未有画一。
现代文：这年秋天，主管官吏上奏说： 查考从前各代继承帝位，有的仍旧因循前代的郊祭年次，有的另外开始，晋、宋以来，没有统一的做法。
English: In the autumn of that year, the official in charge made a report, saying, "Looking at the succession to the imperial throne from previous generations, some still follow the annual suburban festival of the previous generation, while others have begun to do so. Since the Jin and Song dynasties, there has been no uniform practice.

古文：今年正月已郊，未审明年应南北二郊祀明堂与不？ 
现代文：今年正月已举行过郊祭，不清楚明年应举行南北郊祭和明堂祭祀不? 
English: A suburb festival was held in the first month of this year, but it is not clear whether the North-South Suburb Festival and Myeongdong Festival should be held next year.

古文：依旧通关八座丞郎博士议。
现代文：依旧交由通关八座丞郎博士商议。
English: It was still left to Dr. Hachizajero to negotiate the clearance.

古文：尚书令王俭议： 案秦为诸侯，杂祀诸畤，始皇并天下，未有定祠。
现代文：尚书令王俭建议：查考秦作为诸侯时，杂乱地祭祀各方天帝，秦始皇统一天下，也没有确定的祠祀。
English: Wang Jian suggested: When the Qin Dynasty was at the height of its power, there was a chaotic worship of the various heavenly emperors, the Qin Emperor was not unified, and there was no definite ancestral shrine.

古文：汉高受命，因雍四畤而起北畤，始畤五帝，未定郊丘。
现代文：汉高祖秉受天命，沿袭雍地的四峙又建造了北时，开始祠祀五帝，但没有确定郊祭坛。
English: Han Gao Zu, adhering to the mandate of heaven, built the Beiji Temple along the four faces of the Yangtze River, and began to worship the Five Emperors, but did not determine the suburb altar.

古文：文帝六年，新垣平议初起渭阳五帝庙。
现代文：文帝六年，根据新垣平提议初建渭阳五帝庙。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Wen, the Five Emperors' Temple of Shenyang was first built according to the proposal of Niigaki Ping.

古文：武帝初至雍郊见五畤，后常三岁一郊祠雍。
现代文：武帝最初到雍地郊祭五时，后来经常三年到雍地郊祭一次。
English: Emperor Wu first went to the five o'clock festival in the suburbs of Yongdi, and later he often went to the three-year festival in the suburbs of Yongdi.

古文：元鼎四年，始立后土祠于汾阴，明年，立太一祠于甘泉，自是以后，二岁一郊，与雍更祠。
现代文：元鼎四年，才在汾阴设立后土祠，第二年，在甘泉设立太一祠，从此以后，两年郊祭一次，与雍地分别祭祀。
English: It was not until the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty that the Hou Tu Ancestral Hall was set up in Suyin, and the second year that the Taiyi Ancestral Hall was set up in Ganquan. From then on, the suburb festival was held once every two years, and the Yongdi festival was held separately.

古文：成帝初即位，丞相匡衡于长安定南北郊。
现代文：成帝刚即位，丞相匡衡在长安确定南北郊祭地点。
English: Emperor Cheng had just ascended to the throne when the prime minister, Kuang Heng, decided on the location of the festival in the northern and southern suburbs of Chang'an.

古文：哀、平之际，又复甘泉、汾阴祠。
现代文：哀帝、平帝之际，又恢复在甘泉、汾阴祠祀。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Ai and Emperor Ping, the shrines at Ganquan and Suyin were restored.

古文：平帝元始五年，王莽奏依匡衡议还复长安南北二郊。
现代文：平帝元始五年，王莽奏请依照匡衡的建议，恢复在长安南北郊祭。
English: In the first five years of the Ping Dynasty, Wang Mangso requested that the festival be resumed in the northern and southern suburbs of Chang'an in accordance with Kuangheng's suggestion.

古文：光武建武二年，定郊祀兆于洛阳。
现代文：光武帝建武二年，确定郊祭的地址在洛阳。
English: In the second year of Emperor Guangwu Jianwu, the address of the suburb festival was determined to be in Luoyang.

古文：魏、晋因循，率由汉典，虽时或参差，而类多间岁。
现代文：魏、晋沿袭，全都依据漠代典制，虽然在时间上有所差别，但大多隔年举行一次。
English: Following the Wei and Jin dynasties, they are all based on the desert era ceremony system. Although there is a difference in time, most of them are held every other year.

古文：至于嗣位之君，参差不一，宜有定制。
现代文：至于继承帝位的国君，参差不统一。应该有确定的制度。
English: As for the sovereign who succeeds to the throne, the differences are not uniform. There should be a definite system.

古文：检晋明帝太宁三年南郊，其年九月崩，成帝即位，明年改元即郊；简文咸安二年南郊，其年七月崩，孝武即位，明年改元亦郊；宋元嘉三十年正月南郊，其年二月崩，孝武嗣位，明年改元亦郊。
现代文：查晋明帝太宁三年举行南郊祭祀，这年九月驾崩，成帝即位，第二年改年号就郊祭；简文帝咸安二年举行南郊祭祀，这年七月驾崩，孝武帝即位，第二年改年号也郊祭；宋元嘉三十年正月举行南郊祭祀，这年二月驾崩，孝武帝继承帝位，第二年改年号郊祭。
English: The Southern Suburbs Festival was held in the third year of the reign of Jia Jin Ming Emperor Taining, who died in September of the same year and was enthroned as emperor, and was renamed the Southern Suburbs Festival in the second year; the Southern Suburbs Festival was held in the second year of the reign of Emperor Jianwen Emperor Xian'an, who died in July of the same year and was enthroned as Emperor Xiaowu, and was renamed the Southern Suburbs Festival in the second year; the Southern Suburbs Festival was held in the first month of the 30th year of the reign of Emperor Song Yuan Jia, who died in February of the same year

古文：此则二代明例，差可依放。
现代文：这是晋、宋两代明确的例证，勉强可依照。
English: This is a clear example of the Jin and Song dynasties, and can be followed reluctantly.

古文：谓明年正月宜飨祀二郊，虞祭明堂，自兹厥后，依旧间岁。 
现代文：认为明年正月应当享祀南北二郊，恭敬地祭祀明堂，自此以后，仍旧隔年祭祀。
English: It is believed that next year's New Year's Day should be dedicated to the two suburbs in the north and south, and the Myodo Hall should be reverently dedicated. From then on, the next year's sacrifice will still be held.

古文：尚书领国子祭酒张绪等十七人并同俭议。诏 可 。
现代文：尚书领国子祭酒张绪等十七人都赞同王俭的意见。
English: Seventeen people, including Shang Shuling, the leader of the National Children's Festival, and Zhang Xu, agreed with Wang Jian's opinion.

古文：永明元年当南郊，而立春在郊后，世祖欲迁郊。
现代文：下诏说 可以 。永明元年应当举行南郊祭祀，可是立春在郊祭曰之后，世祖想更改郊祭期。
English: The following edict said yes. In the first year of the Yongming era, the Southern Suburbs Festival should be held, but after the Spring Festival, the ancestor wanted to change the Suburbs Festival period.

古文：尚书令王俭启： 案《礼记·郊特牲》云： 郊之祭也，迎长日之至也，大报天而主日也。 
现代文：尚书令王俭陈述：查考《礼记。郊特牲》说 郊祭是迎着冬至的来临，隆重地报答天的恩赐，而以冬至日作为主体 。
English: Shang Shuling Wang Jian said: Checking the "Rituals. Suburban Special Sacrifice" says that the Suburban Festival is to welcome the arrival of the winter solstice, grandly repay the gift of heaven, and take the winter solstice as the main body.

古文：《易说》 三王之郊，一用夏正 。
现代文：《易说》 三王的郊祭日期，一律用夏历 。
English: "Easy to Say" The dates of the suburb festival of the Three Kings all use the summer calendar.

古文：卢植云： 夏正在冬至后，《传》曰启蛰而郊，此之谓也。 
现代文：卢植说 夏历是在冬至后，《传》说惊蛰举行郊祭，就是这个意思 。
English: Lu Zhi said that the summer calendar was after the winter solstice, and "Zhuan" said that the suburb festival was held, which is the meaning.

古文：然则圜丘与郊各自行，不相害也。
现代文：那么就是圜丘祭祀与郊祭各自举行，互不妨碍。
English: In that case, the Hinooka Festival and the Suburban Festival will be held separately, and will not interfere with each other.

古文：郑玄云： 建寅之月，昼夜分而日长矣。 
现代文：郑玄说 以寅月为正月，昼夜的划分开始白昼变长 。
English: Zheng Xuan said that with the Yin month as the first month, the division of day and night began to lengthen.

古文：王肃曰： 周以冬祭天于圜丘，以正月又祭天以祈谷。 
现代文：王肃说 周于冬至曰在圜丘祭天，在正月又祭天祈求谷物丰收 。
English: Wang Su said that on the winter solstice, Zhou would pray for a good harvest of grain.

古文：《祭法》称 燔柴太坛 ，则圜丘也。
现代文：《祭法》称 燔柴于太坛 ，就是圜丘祭。
English: "Saiho" (sacrificial rites) says that the firewood is placed on the altar, which is the Hakuoka Festival.

古文：《春秋传》云 启蛰而郊，则祈谷也。
现代文：《春秋传》说 惊蛰郊祭 ，则是祈求谷物丰收。
English: "Spring and Autumn Legend" says that the suburb festival is to pray for a bumper grain harvest.

古文：谨寻《礼》、《传》二文，各有其义，卢、王两说，有若合符。
现代文：谨查检《礼记》《春秋传》二书的文字，各有自己的意思，卢植、王肃二人的说法，就好像是符信相合。
English: If you carefully examine the words of the two books of "Li Ji" and "Chunqiu Chuan," each has its own meaning. Lu Zhi and Wang Su's statements seem to be consistent with each other.

古文：中朝省二丘以并二郊，即今之郊礼，义在报天，事兼祈谷，既不全以祈农，何必俟夫启蛰？
现代文：中朝减省圜丘、祈谷之礼并入南北郊祭，即是现在的郊祭礼，用意在于报答天的恩赐，兼有祈求谷物丰收的意义，既然不全是为了祈求农业丰收，何必非等到惊蛰。
English: When the Chinese and Korean dynasties combined the ceremonies of cutting down and saving the reeds and praying for a good harvest into the North and South Suburban Festival, that is, the present Suburban Festival, the intention was to repay the gift of heaven, and it also had the meaning of praying for a good harvest of grain. Since it was not all about praying for a good agricultural harvest, why not wait until the earthquake?

古文：史官唯见《传》义，未达《礼》旨。
现代文：史官衹看到了《春秋传》的意思，没有懂得《礼记》的含意。
English: Historians saw the meaning of "Spring and Autumn Annals" and did not understand the meaning of "Rituals."

古文：又寻景平元年正月三日辛丑南郊，其月十一日立春；元嘉十六年正月六日辛未南郊，其月八日立春。此复是近世明例，不以先郊后春为嫌。
现代文：另外查检景平元年正月三辛丑举行南郊祭祀，同月十一立春，元嘉十六年正月六日辛未举行南郊祭祀，同月八日立春，这些都是近代明确的例证，并不以先郊祭后立春为嫌。
English: In addition, the inspection of Jingping in the first month of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year

古文：若或以元日合朔为碍者，则晋成帝咸康元年正月一日加元服，二日亲祠南郊。元服之重，百僚备列，虽在致斋，行之不疑。
现代文：如果有人认为正月初一这一时间有所不便，那么晋成帝咸康元年正月初一加冕，初二亲自主持南郊祭祀，加冕典礼重要，百官都要列席，虽然是在洁身清心的致斋之中，照样举行不会有疑虑。
English: If some people think that the time of the first day of the first month of the year is inconvenient, then the coronation of Emperor Jincheng on the first day of the first month of the year, the first two years of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of

古文：今斋内合朔，此即前准。
现代文：现在斋戒期内遇到初一，这就要遵照前面的例子。
English: Now, when the first day of the month comes during the fasting period, it is necessary to follow the previous example.

古文：若圣心过恭，宁在严洁，合朔之日，散官备防，非预斋之限者，于止车门外别立幔省，若日色有异，则列于省前。望实为允，谓无烦迁日。 
现代文：如果圣上之心恭敬有加，务求严格整洁，初天，可让散官预设防备，凡是不参预致斋礼的，在止车门外另立帏帐作为官署，假如天色有异常，就排列在宫署之前，希望上天根据实际情况予以允许，我认为没有必要麻烦更换日期。
English: On the first day of the year, if the Sacred Heart of Jesus is treated with respect and is kept strictly clean, it is possible for the sacristan to make preparations in advance. For those who do not participate in the pre-ritual, a separate tabernacle will be set up outside the door of the bus stop as a government office. If the weather is abnormal, they will be lined up in front of the palace office. I hope that God will allow it according to the actual situation. I think there is no need to bother changing the date.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从了这个意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：永明二年，祠部郎中蔡履议： 郊与明堂，本宜异日。
现代文：永明二年，祠部郎中蔡履提议： 郊祭与明堂祭祀，本来不应在同一天。
English: In the second year of the Yongming era, Cai Li, the priest of the ancestral hall, proposed that the suburb festival and the Myeongdong festival should not be held on the same day.

古文：汉东京《礼仪志》 南郊礼毕，次北郊、明堂、高庙、世祖庙，谓之五供 。
现代文：汉东京《礼仪志》南郊祭礼完毕，依次祭北郊、明堂、高庙、世祖庙，称为五供。
English: According to Han Tokyo's "History of Etiquette," the Southern Suburbs Festival is over, followed by the Northern Suburbs Festival, Myeongdong, Gaomyeong, and Sejongmyeong, known as the Five Offerings.

古文：蔡邕所据亦然。
现代文：蔡邕所依据的也是如此。
English: This is also the case with Cai Wei's theory.

古文：近世存省，故郊堂共日。
现代文：近代减省，所以郊祭与明堂祭祀同在一天。
English: In modern times, the province was reduced, so the suburb festival and the Myeongdong festival were held on the same day.

古文：来年郊祭，宜有定准。 
现代文：明年郊祭，应该有个定准。 
English: Next year's Suburban Festival should have a fixed date.

古文：太学博士王祐议： 来年正月上辛，宜祭南郊，次辛，有事明堂，后辛，飨祀北郊。 
现代文：太学博士王佑建议： 明年正月的第一个辛，应当祭祀南郊，第二个辛曰，举行明堂祭祀，第三个辛，飨祀北郊。 
English: Dr. Wang You, the dean of the university, suggested that the first Sin of the New Year should be dedicated to the southern suburbs, the second Sin to the Myeongdong, and the third Sin to the northern suburbs.

古文：兼博士刘蔓议： 汉元鼎五年，以辛巳行事，自后郊日，略无违异。
现代文：兼博士刘蔓建议： 汉元鼎五年，在辛巳举行祭礼，此后郊祭的期，没有一点不同。
English: Dr. Liu Man suggested: In the fifth year of the Han Dynasty, the festival was held in Xinxi, and the period of the suburb festival after that was no different.

古文：元封元年四月癸卯，登封泰山，坐明堂。
现代文：元封元年四月癸卯，登泰山封惮，连带祭祀明堂。
English: In April of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Mount Tai was sealed off, along with the Ming Hall of Sacrifice.

古文：五年甲子，以高祖配。
现代文：元封五年甲子，用高祖配祀上天。
English: He was born in the 5th year of the Genpo era, and was enshrined in heaven with his ancestors.

古文：汉家郊祀，非尽天子之县，故祠祭之月，事有不同。
现代文：汉王朝的郊祭，不全是在国都举行，所以祭祀的月份，因事而不同。
English: The suburb festivals of the Han Dynasty were not all held in the capital, so the month of the festival varied depending on the event.

古文：后汉永平以来，明堂兆于国南，而郊以上丁，故供修三祀，得并在初月。
现代文：后漠永干以后，明堂建于国都南郊，而郊祭在第一个丁，因此供奉三祀，得以都在正月。
English: After Houba Yonggan, Myeongdong was built in the southern suburb of the national capital, and the suburb festival was on the first ding, so three shrines were dedicated, so that they were all in the first month.

古文：虽郊有常日，明堂犹无定辰。
现代文：虽然郊祭有确定的日期，明堂却还没有一定的时曰。
English: Although the suburb festival has a definite date, the Myeongdong does not yet have a definite time.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：郊丁社甲，有说则从，经礼无文，难以意造，是以必算良辰，而不祭寅丑。
现代文：郊祭在丁曰，社神祭祀在甲，有定说就会遵从，如果经礼没有文字记载，就难以臆造，因此一定要算出吉，不在寅丑日祭祀。
English: Suburban festivals are held on the day of Ding, and the shrine god is worshiped on the day of A. If there is a set saying, it will be followed. If there is no written record of the sutra, it is difficult to make it up. Therefore, it is necessary to calculate the auspiciousness, and not to worship on the day of Yin and Yang.

古文：且礼之奠祭，无同共者，唯汉以朝日合于报天尔。
现代文：而且礼规定的祭献，没有共同享用的，衹有漠代把朝拜太阳与报答上天恩赐合在一起。
English: Moreover, the offerings prescribed by the rite were not for common use, and there was no time when sun-worship was combined with the reward of heavenly gifts.

古文：若依《汉书》五供，便应先祭北郊，然后明堂。
现代文：如果依照《汉书》的五供，就应当先祭北郊，然后祭明堂。
English: According to the Five Offerings of the "Hanshu," the northern suburb should be sacrificed first, and then the Myeongdong.

古文：则是地先天食，所未可也。 兼太常丞蔡仲熊议： 《郑志》云 正月上辛，祀后稷于南郊，还于明堂，以文王配。 
现代文：这就成了地在天之前享用奉献，是不可以的 兼人常丞蔡仲熊建议：《郑志》说 正月第一个辛日，在南郊祭祀后历，回到明堂祭祀，用文王配祀 。
English: This has become a place to enjoy the dedication before the day, it is not allowed 兼人常丞蔡仲熊 suggestion: "Zheng Zhi" said that the first hard day of the new month, in the southern suburb of the sacrificial calendar, back to the Myeongdong sacrificial ritual, with the king of literature.

古文：故宋氏创立明堂，郊还即祭，是用《郑志》之说也。
现代文：所以塞伐创建明堂，郊祭回来后就祭，这是采用《郑志》的说法。
English: Therefore, Seva founded Myeongdong, and the suburb festival was held after he came back, which is a saying from "Zheng Zhi."

古文：盖为《志》者失，非玄意也。
现代文：这大概是作《郑志》的人的错误，不是郑玄的本意。
English: This is probably the mistake of the person who wrote "Zheng Zhi," not the intention of Zheng Xuan.

古文：玄之言曰： 未审周明堂以何月，于《月令》则以季秋。 
现代文：郑玄的话是说 不清楚周代明堂在哪月祭祀，《月令》中是在季秋 。
English: Zheng Xuan's words mean that it is not clear in which month the Zhou Dynasty Myeongdong held the sacrifice, but in the "Monthly Regulation" it was in the autumn.

古文：案玄注《月令》 季秋大飨帝 云 大飨，遍祭五帝 。
现代文：查郑玄注释《月令》季秋大飨帝说 大飨，全面祭祀五帝 。
English: Cha Zhengxuan's commentary on the "Monthly" said that in the autumn and autumn, the five emperors would be sacrificed.

古文：又云 大飨于明堂，以文武配 。
现代文：又说 在明堂的大飨，用文王、武王配祀 。
English: It is also said that in the Great Hall of Myeongdong, King Mun and King Mu are enshrined together.

古文：其时秋也，去启蛰远矣。
现代文：当时是在秋天，离惊蛰还早。
English: It was autumn, too early to panic.

古文：又《周礼·大司乐》 凡大祭祀，宿县 。
现代文：另外《周礼大司乐》记载 凡是举行大的祭祀活动，都在当地住宿 。
English: In addition, the "Weekly Ceremonial Music" records that wherever large sacrificial activities are held, they are accommodated locally.

古文：寻宿县之旨，以日出行事故也；若日暗而后行事，则无假预县。
现代文：查检在当地住宿的意思，是因为日出举行祭祀的缘故；如果天黑之后举行祭祀，就无须预先在当地住宿。
English: Checking the meaning of accommodation in the local area is due to the fact that the festival is held at sunrise; if the festival is held after dark, there is no need to stay in the local area in advance.

古文：果日出行事，何得方俟郊还？
现代文：如果是日出举行祭祀，怎么会要等到郊祭回来。
English: If the ritual is held at sunrise, why do we have to wait until the suburban festival to return.

古文：东京《礼仪志》不记祭之时日，而《志》云： 天郊夕牲之夜，夜漏未尽八刻进熟；明堂夕牲之夜，夜漏未尽七刻进熟。 
现代文：束京《礼仪志》中没有记载祭祀的时间日期，可是《郑志》说 郊祭天帝供奉牺牲的夜晚，夜漏没有流到八刻进献熟品；祭祀明堂供奉牺牲的夜晚，夜漏没有流到七刻进献熟品 。
English: There is no record of the time and date of the sacrifice in the Sokjing "History of Etiquette," but the "Zhengshi" says that on the night of the suburb festival dedicated to the sacrifice of the Heavenly Emperor, the night drain did not flow to eight hours into the offering; on the night of the sacrifice dedicated to the sacrifice, the night drain did not flow to seven hours into the offering.

古文：寻明堂之在郊前一刻，而进献奏乐，方待郊还。
现代文：查考明堂祭祀在郊祭的前一刻，可是进献奏乐。要等到郊祭回来。
English: The Chakao Myeongdong ritual is held just before the suburb festival, but the music is not played until the suburb festival returns.

古文：魏高堂隆表 九日南郊，十日北郊，十一日明堂，十二日宗庙 。
现代文：魏高堂隆上表建议 九日祭南郊，十曰祭北郊，十一日祭明堂，十二日祭宗庙 。
English: Wei Gaodong suggested that the 9th Festival should be held in the southern suburb, the 10th Festival in the northern suburb, the 11th Festival in the Ming Hall, and the 12th Festival in the ancestral temple.

古文：案隆此言，是审于时定制，是则《周礼》、二汉及魏，皆不共日矣。
现代文：查考高堂隆这话，是仔细研究时序而确定的制度，因此《周礼》、两汉及魏，都不在同一天。
English: According to Gao Tonglong, this is a system determined by carefully studying the time sequence, so "Zhou Li," the two Han and Wei, are not on the same day.

古文：《礼》以辛郊，《书》以丁祀，辛丁皆合，宜临时详择。 
现代文：《礼记》在辛日郊祭，《尚书》在丁曰祭祀，辛日丁曰都合适，应该临时谨慎选择。
English: "The Book of Rites" is suitable for the festival in the suburbs of Xinjiang, "The Book of Decrees" is suitable for the festival in Dinghai, and Xinjiang is suitable for the festival in Dinghai. It should be selected with caution.

古文：太尉从事中郎顾宪之议： 《春秋传》以正月上辛郊祀，《礼记》亦云郊之用辛，《尚书》独云丁巳用牲于郊。
现代文：太尉从事中郎顾宪之建议： 《春秋传》在正月第一个辛日郊祭，《礼记》也说在辛日郊祭，惟独《尚书》说丁巳日郊祭供献牺牲。
English: The captain followed the suggestion of the middle-ranking official Gu Xian: "The Spring and Autumn Annals" says that the first day of the first month is the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first month.

古文：先儒以为先甲三日辛，后甲三日丁，可以接事天神之日。
现代文：先儒认为早于甲曰三天的辛，晚于甲日三天的丁曰，是可以迎接供奉天神的日子。
English: The early Confucianists believed that the three days of Yin earlier than the three days of Jia, and the three days of Ding later than the three days of Jia, could welcome the day of offering to the gods.

古文：后汉永平二年正月辛未，宗祀光武皇帝于明堂。
现代文：后汉永平二年正月辛未，在明堂宗奉祭祀光武皇帝。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Later Han Yongping, Emperor Guangwu was worshiped in the Ming Hall.

古文：辛既是常郊之日，郊又在明堂之前，无容不郊而堂，则理应郊堂。 
现代文：辛日既然是常规的郊祭之曰，郊祭又在明堂祭祀之前，不容许不郊祭而祭祀明堂，理应是郊祭明堂祭祀都举行。 
English: Since it is a regular suburb festival, the suburb festival is also held before the Myodo festival, and it is not allowed to hold the Myodo festival without the suburb festival. The Myodo festival should be held before the suburb festival.

古文：司徒西阁祭酒梁王议： 《孝经》郑玄注云 上帝亦天别名 。
现代文：司徒西合祭酒梁王建议： 《孝经》郑玄注说 上帝也就是天的别名 。
English: Liang Wang, a priest at the West Gate Festival, suggested: "Zheng Xuan's commentary in the Filial Piety Sutra says that God is another name for heaven.

古文：如郑旨，帝与天亦言不殊。
现代文：根据郑玄的意思，帝和天说起来没有什么区别。
English: According to Zheng Xuan's meaning, there is no difference between the emperor and heaven.

古文：近代同辰，良亦有据。
现代文：近代同时祭祀，也是很有根据的。
English: The contemporary practice of simultaneous sacrifice is also well-founded.

古文：魏太和元年正月丁未，郊祀武皇帝以配天，宗祀文皇帝于明堂以配上帝，此则已行之前准。 
现代文：毯左扣元年正月丁未，郊祭时用武皇壶配祀天，在明堂宗奉祭祀文皇帝来配祀上帝，这就是遵照从前的规则行事了。 
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year

古文：骁骑将军江淹议： 郊旅上天，堂祀五帝，非为一日再黩之谓，无俟厘革。 
现代文：骁骑将军江淹建议： 郊祭上天，明堂祭祀五帝，不是说一天两次祭祀就玷污了神灵，无须改正。 
English: He suggested that the Suburban Festival should be elevated to heaven, and the Ming Hall should offer sacrifices to the Five Emperors. This is not to say that offering sacrifices twice a day would defile the gods, and there is no need for correction.

古文：尚书陆澄议： 遗文余事，存乎旧书，郊宗地近，势可共日。
现代文：尚书陆澄建议：前人遗留的文字事实，存在于旧的书籍之中，郊祭宗祀地点相近，论情势可同在一天。
English: Shangshu Lucheng suggested: the literary facts left behind by the predecessors exist in old books, the suburb's religious sites are similar, and the situation can be the same.

古文：不共者，义在必异也。
现代文：不能同在一天，说明意义必定不同。
English: It cannot be the same day, so the meaning must be different.

古文：元始五年正月六日辛未，郊高皇帝以配天，二十二日丁亥，宗祀孝文于明堂配上帝。
现代文：元始五年正月六日辛未，郊祭时用高皇帝配祀天，二十二日丁亥，在明堂宗祀孝文帝配祀上帝。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 5th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Gao was worshipped with Heaven at the suburb festival, and on the 22nd day of the 1st month of the 5th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowen was worshipped with God at the Ming Hall.

古文：永平二年正月辛未，宗祀五帝于明堂，光武皇帝配。
现代文：永平二年正月辛未，在明堂宗祀五帝，用光武皇帝配祀。
English: In the first month of the second year of Yongping, Xinwei, the five emperors were enshrined in the Ming Hall, and Emperor Guangwu was also enshrined.

古文：章帝元和二年，巡狩岱宗，柴祭，翌日，祠五帝于明堂。
现代文：章帝元和二年，巡狩岱宗，烧柴祭祀，第二天，在明堂祠祀五帝。
English: In the year and two years of Emperor Zhang, he went on a hunting tour of the Jurchen Sect, burned firewood and offered sacrifices. The next day, he worshiped the Five Emperors at the Ming Hall.

古文：柴山祠地，尚不共日，郊堂宜异，于例益明。
现代文：柴祭山祠祀地，还不在同一天，郊祭与明堂祭祀应当不在同一天，例证就更明确了。
English: For example, the mountain shrine of the Fire Festival should not be held on the same day, and the suburb festival and the Myeongdong festival should not be held on the same day.

古文：陈忠《奏事》云 延光三年正月十三日南郊，十四日北郊，十五日明堂，十六日宗庙，十七日世祖庙 。
现代文：陈忠《奏事》说 延光三年正月十三日祭南郊，十四日祭北郊，十五日祭明堂，十六日祭宗庙，十七日祭世祖庙 。
English: Chen Zhong's "Report" said that the Southern Suburbs Festival was held on the 13th day of the first month of the third year of Yan Guang, the Northern Suburbs Festival was held on the 14th day, the Ming Hall Festival was held on the 15th day, the ancestral temple festival was held on the 16th day, and the ancestral temple festival was held on the 17th day.

古文：仲远五祀，绍统五供，与忠此奏，皆为相符。
现代文：仲远的五祀，绍统的五供，和陈忠的这项奏议，都相符合。
English: Zhongyuan's Five Sacrifices, Shao Tong's Five Offerings, and Chen Zhong's petition are all consistent.

古文：高堂隆表，二郊及明堂宗庙各一日，挚虞《新礼》议明堂南郊间三兆，禋天飨帝共日之证也。
现代文：高堂隆上表，南、北郊祭及明堂祭祀、宗庙祭祀各在一天，挚虞《新礼》建议明堂与南郊祭坛相隔三处坛场，是里祭天飨祀帝同在一天的例证。
English: According to the high altar, the southern and northern suburb festivals and the Myeongdong and ancestral temple festivals are held on the same day. According to the "New Rites," the Myeongdong and the southern suburb altar are separated by three altars, which is an example of the village festival worshipping the emperor on the same day.

古文：又上帝非天，昔人言之已详。
现代文：另外上帝不是天，过去的人说得已经很详细。
English: In addition, God is not a sky, people in the past have said this in great detail.

古文：今明堂用日，宜依古在北郊后。
现代文：现在祭明堂采用的日期，应当依照古制在北郊祭祀之后。
English: The date currently adopted by Saimyodo should be in accordance with the old system, after the Kitakubo ritual.

古文：汉唯南郊备大驾，自北郊以下，车驾十省其二。今祀明堂，不应大驾。 
现代文：汉代衹有南郊祭祀配备大驾，自北郊祭祀以下，皇上车驾省去十分之二，现在祠祀明堂，不应配备大驾。
English: In the Han Dynasty, the southern suburb's sacrificial rites were equipped with a large chariot. From the northern suburb's sacrificial rites onward, the imperial chariot was omitted by two-tenths. Now, the ancestral shrine Myeongdong should not be equipped with a large chariot.

古文：尚书令王俭议： 前汉各日，后汉亦不共辰，魏、晋故事，不辨同异，宋立明堂，唯据自郊徂宫之义，未达祀天旅帝之旨。
现代文：尚书令王俭建议：西汉郊祭明堂祭祀各在不同的日期，东汉也不在同一天，魏、晋沿袭旧制，没有分辨异同，宋代设立明堂，衹是依据从郊祭到明堂祭祀的意思，没有通晓祭祀天地的宗旨为什么呢?
English: Shang Shuling Wang Qian suggested: the Western Han suburb festival Myeongdong sacrificial rites are on different dates, the Eastern Han is not on the same day, Wei and Jin follow the old system, there is no distinction between differences and similarities, the Song Dynasty set up Myeongdong, which is based on the meaning of from suburb festival to Myeongdong sacrificial rites, why is there no understanding of the purpose of sacrificial rites of heaven and earth?

古文：何者？郊坛旅天，甫自诘朝，还祀明堂，便在日昃，虽致祭有由，而烦黩斯甚，异日之议，于理为弘。
现代文：郊祭坛祭天，始自清晨，回到明堂祭祀，便在太阳偏西，虽然奉祀有所根据，然而烦琐简慢的很，不在同一天祭祀的建议，在情理上更有说服力。《春秋感稍符》说 王以天为父，以地为母 。
English: The suburb altar is dedicated to the heavens, starting from the early morning, returning to the Myeongdong for the sacrifice, then in the west of the sun. Although there is a basis for worship, it is very tedious and slow. The suggestion of not sacrificing on the same day is more persuasive in terms of reason. "Spring and Autumn" says that the king is fathered by heaven and mothered by the earth.

古文：《春秋感精符》云 王者父天母地 ，则北郊之祀，应在明堂之先。
现代文：这样北郊祭祀应在明堂祭祀前。
English: In this way, the Kitakubo ritual should end before the Myodo ritual.

古文：汉、魏北郊，亦皆亲奉，晋泰宁有诏，未及遵遂。
现代文：汉、魏时北郊祭祀，也都是皇帝亲自主持，晋泰宁年间有诏书，但未来得及遵行。
English: During the Han and Wei dynasties, the emperor himself presided over the Hokkien sacrificial rites. During the Jin and Taining dynasties, there was an imperial edict, but it was too late to follow it in the future.

古文：咸和八年，甫得营缮，太常顾和秉议亲奉。
现代文：咸和八年，北郊祭坛才得以营建，太常顾和执意由皇帝亲自祭祀。
English: In the eighth year of the Haman period, the northern suburb altar was built, and it was dedicated by the emperor himself.

古文：康皇之世，已经遵用。
现代文：康皇年间，已经遵照采纳。
English: During the reign of Emperor Kang, it was adopted.

古文：宋氏因循，未遑厘革。
现代文：宋代沿袭，没有来得及改革。
English: The Song Dynasty followed suit, and there was no time for reform.

古文：今宜亲祠北郊，明年正月上辛祠昊天，次辛瘗后土，后辛祀明堂，御并亲奉。
现代文：现在应该皇上亲自祭祀地，明年正月第一个辛祭祀皇天，第二个辛曰祭祀后土，最后一个辛祭祀明堂。皇上都是亲自主持。
English: Now it is time for the Emperor to personally perform the ritual. Next year, in the first month of the year, the first Shinto ritual will be held for the Emperor, the second Shinto ritual will be held for the Empress Dowager, and the last Shinto ritual will be held for the Emperor. The Emperor will personally preside over all of them.

古文：车服之仪，率遵汉制。
现代文：车骑服用的仪制，一律遵照选制。
English: The ceremonial dress code for riders and drivers alike is based on a selection system.

古文：南郊大驾，北郊、明堂降为法驾。
现代文：南郊用大驾、北郊明堂降为法驾。
English: In the southern suburbs, it was a large vehicle, while in the northern suburbs, Myeongdong was downgraded to a legal vehicle.

古文：衮冕之服，诸祠咸用。 
现代文：衮衣冠冕等礼服，各祭祀都用。
English: Ceremonial dress, such as robes and crowns, is used for all rituals.

古文：诏 可 。
现代文：诏令说 可以 。
English: The next edict said yes.

古文：建武二年，通直散骑常侍庾昙隆启： 伏见南郊坛员兆外内，永明中起瓦屋，形制宏壮。
现代文：建逮二年，通直散骑常侍座昙隆启奏说：我看见南郊祭坛场地周围，永明年间建造了瓦房，式样宏伟壮丽。
English: In the second year of the construction, Zhaolong Qisong, a regular rider, said: "I saw that around the southern suburb of the altar site, a tile house was built in the middle of the year, with a magnificent style.

古文：检案经史，无所准据。
现代文：查考经史，无所依据。
English: There is no basis for this in historical research.

古文：寻《周礼》，祭天于圜丘，取其因高之义，兆于南郊，就阳位也。
现代文：翻检《周礼》。祭天在圜丘，取其就高之义，在南郊建祭坛，是就着阳位。
English: Review of "Weekly Rituals." The sacrificial altar is located in Mengqiu, which is the highest point, and the altar is built in the southern suburbs, which is the highest point.

古文：故以高敞，贵在上昭天明，旁流气物。
现代文：所以要高大宽敞，贵在昭显上天光明，四周流通气物。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to be tall and spacious, precious in the manifestation of heavenly light, and the circulation of gas around.

古文：自秦、汉以来，虽郊祀参差，而坛域中间，并无更立宫室。
现代文：自秦、汉以来，虽然郊祭多有不同，但祭坛场地中间，并没有另外建宫室。
English: Since the Qin and Han dynasties, although the suburb festivals are mostly different, there is no separate palace room in the middle of the altar site.

古文：其意何也？
现代文：其中用意何在呢?
English: What is the intention behind this?

古文：政是质诚尊天，不自崇树，兼事通旷，必务开远。
现代文：治理国家是质朴虔诚尊奉上天不树立抬高自己，处事要兼通旷达，务求开明长远。
English: To govern the country is to be simple, pious, and respectful of God, not to exalt oneself, and to be open-minded and far-sighted in handling affairs.

古文：宋元嘉南郊，至时权作小陈帐以为退息，泰始薄加修广，永明初弥渐高丽，往年工匠遂启立瓦屋。
现代文：宋元嘉年间南郊祭祀，到时临时设置小的帏帐作为退下来休息的地方，泰始年间稍加修缮扩大，永明初年越加高大壮丽，前些年工匠终于建起了瓦屋。
English: During the Song, Yuan and Jia dynasties, there was a festival in the southern suburbs, and at that time, a small pavilion was temporarily set up as a place to retreat and rest. During the Taizhi era, it was slightly renovated and expanded. In the first year of the Yongming era, it became taller and more magnificent. A few years ago, craftsmen finally built a tile house.

古文：前代帝皇，岂于上天之祀而昧营构，所不为者，深有情意。
现代文：前代的帝王，哪会在祭祀上天时昧心兴建土木，之所以不做，是含有很深的情意。
English: The emperors of the previous generation, who would have been tempted to build civil engineering during the sacrifice to heaven, did not do so because they had very deep feelings.

古文：《记》称 扫地而祭，于其质也，器用陶匏，天地之性也 。
现代文：《记》说 扫地祭祀，在于它的质朴；祭器用陶器匏，是天地的本性 。
English: "Ji" said that the sweeping of the ground in the sacrificial rites was due to its simplicity; the earthenware urns used as sacrificial vessels was the nature of heaven and earth.

古文：故 至敬无文 ， 以素为贵 。
现代文：所以 最高的恭敬没有任何修饰 ， 以朴素为贵 。
English: Therefore, the highest respect is to have no embellishments, and to value simplicity.

古文：窃谓郊事宜拟休偃，不俟高大，以明谦恭肃敬之旨。
现代文：我私下认为郊祭应当初步停建土木，不需要高大，以明确谦恭肃敬为宗旨。
English: Privately, I think that the suburb festival should initially stop the construction of civil engineering, do not need to be tall, with clear modesty and respect as the purpose.

古文：庶或仰允太灵，俯惬群望。 诏 付外详 。
现代文：或许上可以得到上天神灵的准允，下可以满足众人的期望。下诏说 交付外官详议 。
English: Perhaps the above can get the approval of the gods and spirits of heaven, and the below can meet the expectations of many people. The following edict said that it was handed over to the foreign minister for detailed discussion.

古文：国子助教徐景嵩议： 伏寻《三礼》，天地两祀，南北二郊，但明祭取牺牲，器用陶匏，不载人君偃处之仪。
现代文：国子助教徐景嵩建议： 我翻检《三礼》，天地祠祀，南北郊祭，衹是明确祭祀选取的牺牲，祭器所用的陶器匏，没有记载国君休息之处的仪制。
English: Guo Zi's assistant teacher Xu Jingsong suggested: I should re-examine the "Three Rites," the Heaven and Earth Shrine Ritual, the North and South Suburban Festival, the skull is clearly the sacrifice selected for the sacrifice, the pottery used for the sacrificial vessel, and there is no record of the ceremonial system of the ruler's resting place.

古文：今栋瓦之构虽殊，俱非千载成例，宜务因循。 
现代文：现在帏帐与瓦房的结构虽然不同，但都不是千年的成例，应力求沿袭。 
English: Although the structure of the curtain wall and the tile-roofed house are different now, they are not examples of the millennium, and should strive to follow suit.

古文：太学博士贺翙议： 《周礼》 王旅上帝，张毡案，设皇邸 。国有故而祭，亦曰旅。
现代文：太学博士贺踢建议： 《周礼》 王祭上帝，摆放毡案，设置皇邸，国家有变故而举行祭祀，也叫旅祭。
English: Dr. He Kick, the dean of the university, suggested: "Zhou Li" (Weekly Rituals) The king offered sacrifices to the god, the coffin was placed, the royal residence was set up, and sacrifices were held when the country changed, which is also called the journey festival.

古文：毡案，以毡为床于幄中，不闻郊所置宫宇。 
现代文：毡案，是在帏帐中用毡作床，没听说在郊祭坛场设置宫室。 
English: In the case of the cocoon, the cocoon was used as a bed in the cocoon, and it was not heard that a palace room was set up in the suburban altar field.

古文：兼左丞王摛议，扫地而祭于郊，谓无筑室之议。
现代文：兼左丞王撞建议，扫地郊祭上天，认为郊祭坛场没有建筑房屋。
English: Concurrently, Zuo Wang Bang suggested sweeping the ground of the suburban altar to the sky, believing that the suburban altar does not have a building.

古文：并同昙隆。
现代文：都与昙隆意见相同。
English: They all share the same opinion with Gong Long.

古文：骁骑将军虞炎议，以为 诚悫所施，止在一坛。汉之郊祀，飨帝甘泉，天子自竹宫望拜，息殿去坛场既远，郊奉礼毕，旋幸于此。
现代文：骁骑将军虞炎的建议，认为 所施予的诚朴，衹是在一个祭坛，汉代的郊祭，是在甘泉享祀帝，天子从竹宫望拜，休息的殿堂离坛场既然很远，郊祭典礼完毕，旋即驾临此处。
English: According to the suggestion of the general Yu Yan, he thought that the sincerity and simplicity of the offering was from an altar, the suburb festival of the Han Dynasty, the emperor was worshiped in Ganquan, the heavenly son worshiped from the bamboo palace, the resting hall was far away from the altar, and the suburb ceremony was over, so he immediately came here.

古文：瓦殿之与帷宫，谓无简格 。
现代文：瓦房与帏帐，无所谓简慢 。
English: It doesn't matter if it's a brick house or a bank account.

古文：祠部郎李捴议： 《周礼》 凡祭祀张其旅幕，张尸次 。
现代文：祠部郎李揭建议： 《周礼》载 凡是祭祀都要张开旅祭帐幕，陈设尸次 。
English: Li Jie, the head of the ancestral hall, suggested that the tabernacle of the traveling festival should be opened and the dead bodies should be displayed, as recorded in "Weekly Rituals."

古文：尸则有幄。
现代文：有尸次就要有帏帐。
English: Where there's a body, there's a bill.

古文：仲师云 尸次，祭祀之尸所居更衣帐也 。凡祭之文，既不止于郊祀，立尸之言，理应关于宗庙。
现代文：仲师说 尸次，是祭祀的尸所居住的更衣帏帐，凡是有关祭祀的文字，既然不衹是在郊祭方面，设立尸次的言论，理应与宗庙相关。
English: Naka-shi said that the necropolis is the dressing room where the mortuary of the ritual lives. All the words about the ritual, since it is a suburban festival, the establishment of the necropolis should be related to the family temple.

古文：古则张幕，今也房省。
现代文：古代就撑开帐幕，现在非要省去房屋。
English: In ancient times, tents were erected, but now houses must be spared.

古文：宗庙旅幕，可变为栋宇；郊祀毡案，何为不转制檐甍？ 
现代文：宗庙的旅祭帐幕，既然可以改为房屋；郊祭的毡案，为什么不能转变成房檐屋脊? 
English: Since the tabernacle of the traveling festival of the ancestral temple can be changed into a house, why can't the roof of the suburban festival be transformed into a roof?

古文：昙隆议不行。
现代文：昙隆的建议没能实行。
English: H Long's suggestion was never implemented.

古文：建武二年旱，有司议雩祭依明堂。
现代文：建武二年天旱，主管官吏建议雩祭依照明堂礼制。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, due to the drought, the officials in charge suggested that the lighting ceremony should follow the lighting ceremony.

古文：祠部郎何佟之议曰： 《周礼·司巫》云： 若国大旱，则帅巫而舞雩。 
现代文：祠部郎何佟之建议说：《周礼司巫》说 如果国家大旱，就率领巫师歌舞求雨 。
English: "Zhou Li Shi Wu" said that if there is a drought in the country, he will lead the wizards to sing and dance for rain.

古文：郑玄云： 雩，旱祭也。
现代文：郑玄说 雩，是天早时的祭祀。
English: Zheng Xuan said, "This is a ritual from the dawn of time.

古文：天子于上帝，诸侯以下于上公之神。 
现代文：天子对上帝，诸侯以下对上公的神灵 。
English: The heavenly Son to God, princes and others to the divine spirit of the sovereign.

古文：又《女巫》云 旱则舞雩 。
现代文：另外《女巫》说 干旱就歌舞求雨 。
English: In addition, "The Witch" says that drought is a song and dance for rain.

古文：郑玄云： 使女巫舞旱祭，崇阴也。 
现代文：郑玄说 让女巫在干旱时的祭礼上跳舞，是崇拜女阴 。
English: Zheng Xuan said that letting witches dance at a festival during a drought is to worship female genitals.

古文：郑众云： 求雨以女巫。 
现代文：郑众说 用女巫求雨 。《礼记。
English: Zheng Zong said to use witches to ask for rain.

古文：《礼记·月令》云： 命有司为民祈祀山川百原，乃大雩帝，用盛乐。
现代文：月令》说 命令主管官吏为百姓向山川百源祈求祭祀，于是大肆雩祭天帝，用盛大的乐舞。
English: According to the "Monthly Decree," the officials in charge were ordered to pray to the mountains and rivers for sacrifices for the people, so they made a lot of sacrifices to the Heavenly Emperor, with grand music and dance.

古文：乃命百县雩祀百辟卿士有益于民者，以祈谷实。 
现代文：于是命令各地雩祭诸侯、卿、士中有益于百姓者的神灵，祈求谷物丰收 。
English: Therefore, they ordered to make burnt offerings to the gods of the lords, nobles, and officials who were beneficial to the people, and to pray for a good harvest of grain.

古文：郑玄云： 阳气盛而恒旱。
现代文：郑玄说 阳气兴盛就会长期干旱。
English: Zheng Xuan said that if yang qi flourishes, there will be long-term drought.

古文：山川百原，能兴云致雨者也。
现代文：山川百源，是能够产生云雨的地方。
English: There are hundreds of sources of mountains and rivers, which can produce clouds and rain.

古文：众水所出为百原，必先祭其本。
现代文：众多水流产生的地方是百源，一定要先祭祀最根本的。
English: There are a hundred sources of water, and the most fundamental must be sacrificed first.

古文：雩，吁嗟求雨之祭也。
现代文：雩，是感叹求雨的祭祀。
English: , is a ritual of lamenting and praying for rain.

古文：雩帝，谓为坛南郊之旁，祭五精之帝，配以先帝也。
现代文：雩祭上帝，说是在南郊祭坛的旁边，祭祀五精之帝，用先帝配祀。
English: The god of the burnt offering is said to be next to the southern suburb altar, and the god of the five spirits is worshipped, with the former emperor as the co-worshipper.

古文：自鼗鼙至柷敔为盛乐，他雩用歌舞而已。
现代文：从靴鞟到祝敔类乐器是演奏盛大的音乐祭祀，其他的雩祭衹用歌舞。
English: From the shoehorn to the ceremonial gong, musical instruments such as the gong are used to perform grand musical sacrifices, while other ceremonial gongs are used for singing and dancing.

古文：百辟卿士，古者上公以下，谓勾龙、后稷之类也。
现代文：诸侯、卿、士，古代的上公以下，指的是勾龙、后稷之类。
English: Princes, lords, nobles, and those below the rank of shogun in ancient times, referred to as hooked dragons, hind legs, and the like.

古文：《春秋传》曰龙见而雩，雩之正当以四月。 
现代文：《春秋传》说龙出现时举行雩祭，最正式的雩祭应当在四月 。
English: "Spring and Autumn Legend" says that the dragon festival is held when the dragon appears, and the most formal dragon festival should be held in April.

古文：王肃云： 大雩，求雨之祭也。
现代文：王肃说 大雩，是求雨的祭祀。
English: Wang Su said that Daxing is a ritual to pray for rain.

古文：传曰龙见而雩，谓四月也。
现代文：《春秋传》说龙出现时举行雩祭，指的是四月。
English: "Spring and Autumn Legend" says that the dragon festival is held when the dragon appears, which refers to April.

古文：若五月六月大旱，亦用雩，《礼》于五月著雩义也。 
现代文：如果五月六月大旱，也用雩祭，《礼》是在五月裹写明雩祭的意思 。
English: If there is a drought in May or June, the burnt offering is also used. "Li" is written in May to mean the alum offering.

古文：晋永和中，中丞启，雩制在国之南为坛，祈上帝百辟，舞童八列六十四人，歌《云汉》诗，皆以孟夏，得雨报太牢。
现代文：晋永和年间，中丞启奏，雩祭礼制足在国都南郊建坛，祈求上帝诸侯神灵，用八列六十四个童子跳舞，歌唱《云汉》诗，都是在孟夏。得到雨水，用太牢回报。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jin Yongwu, it was in Mengxia that the junior high school students began to play and the sacrificial rites were held in the southern suburb of the national capital to build a altar, pray to God and the gods of the princes, dance with eight rows of sixty-four boys, and sing the "Yunhan" poem.

古文：于时博士议，旧有坛，汉、魏各自讨寻。
现代文：当时博士建议，说原来有祭坛，汉、魏却另加探讨。
English: At that time, the doctor suggested that there was originally an altar, but the Han and Wei dynasties explored it further.

古文：《月令》云 命有司祈祀山川百原，乃大雩 。
现代文：《月令》说 命令主管官吏祈求祭祀山川百源，就是大雩 。
English: The "Monthly Decree" said that the officials in charge were ordered to pray for the sacrifice of mountains and rivers, that is, the great dragonfly.

古文：又云 乃命百县雩祀百辟卿士 。
现代文：又说 于是命令各地雩祭诸侯、卿、士的神灵 。
English: He also said that he then ordered the offering of burnt offerings to the gods of princes, lords, and soldiers to be made in all regions.

古文：则大雩所祭，唯应祭五精之帝而已。
现代文：那么大雩所祭祀的，衹应当是五精之帝罢了。
English: In that case, the god worshipped at the Great God Temple must have been the Emperor of the Five Immortals.

古文：勾芒等五神，既是五帝之佐，依郑玄说，宜配食于庭也。
现代文：勾芒等五位神灵，既然是五帝的助手，依据郑玄的说法，应当在庭中配祀。
English: According to Zheng Xuan, the five deities such as Gu Meng, since they are the assistants of the five emperors, should be enshrined in the court.

古文：郑玄云 雩坛在南郊坛之旁 ，而不辨东西。
现代文：郑玄说 雩祭坛在南郊祭坛的旁边 ，而没分辨东西。
English: Zheng Xuan said that the skull altar was next to the southern suburb altar, but he did not distinguish anything.

古文：寻地道尊右，雩坛方郊坛为轻，理应在左。
现代文：据查有关地的法则是崇尚右，雩祭坛较郊祭坛地位要低，理应在左边。
English: According to the investigation, the relevant local law is to advocate the right, and the altar of the cocoon is lower in status than the altar in the suburbs, and should be on the left.

古文：宜于郊坛之东、营域之外筑坛。
现代文：应当在郊祭坛的东面，坛场的外边建筑雩祭坛。
English: The altar of burnt offering shall be built on the east side of the altar on the outskirts of the court.

古文：既祭五帝，谓坛宜员。
现代文：既然是祭祀五帝，那么雩祭坛的形状应当是圆的。
English: Since it is dedicated to the Five Emperors, the shape of the altar should be round.

古文：寻雩坛高广，《礼》、《传》无明文，案《觐礼》设方明之祀，为坛高四尺，用圭璋等六玉，礼天地四方之神，王者率诸侯亲礼，为所以教尊尊也。
现代文：查考雩祭坛的高度广度，《礼记》、《春秋传》没有明文，依据《觐礼》设置上下四方神明祭祀，筑祭坛高四尺，使用珪璋等六种玉器，礼拜天地四方神明，帝王率领诸侯亲自礼拜，为的是教人崇敬至尊。
English: Checking the height and width of the altar, there is no clear text in the "Rites" and "Spring and Autumn Biography." According to the "Rites," the upper and lower gods of the four directions were set up, the altar was built four feet high, six kinds of jade were used, and the gods of the four directions were worshiped. The emperor led the lords to worship in person, in order to teach people to worship the supreme.

古文：雩祭五帝，粗可依放。
现代文：雩祭五帝，大体上可以仿照。
English: Five emperors were sacrificed, which can be roughly imitated.

古文：谓今筑坛宜崇四尺，其广轮仍以四为度，径四丈，周员十二丈而四阶也。
现代文：就是说现在修筑祭坛应当高四尺，其广度应以四圈为限，直径四丈，周长十二丈，分四层。
English: That is to say, now the altar should be built no higher than four feet, and its width should be limited to four circles, with a diameter of four feet, a circumference of twelve feet, and divided into four layers.

古文：设五帝之位，各依其方，如在明堂之仪。
现代文：陈列五帝的神主，各依照其方位，就像在明堂的礼仪。
English: The display of the five main deities, each according to their position, is like the ritual of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：皇齐以世祖配五精于明堂，今亦宜配飨于雩坛矣。
现代文：皇查用世担在明堂配祀五帝，现在也应当在雩祭坛配祀。
English: The Imperial Inquisitor used the Shitan to accompany the Five Emperors in Myeongdong, and now it should also accompany the Five Emperors at the Gyeongbokgung Altar.

古文：古者，孟春郊祀祈嘉谷，孟夏雩祭祈甘雨，二祭虽殊，而所为者一。
现代文：古代初春时举行郊祭祈求谷物长势旺盛，初夏时举行雩祭祈求雨水好，两种祭祀虽然不同，可目的是一样的。
English: In ancient times, a suburban festival was held at the beginning of spring to pray for strong grain growth, and a burnt offering was held at the beginning of summer to pray for good rain. Although the two rituals are different, the purpose is the same.

古文：礼唯有冬至报天，初无得雨赛帝。
现代文：礼制中衹有冬至曰回报上天，起初没有得到雨水后酬谢帝。
English: In the ritual system, there is a winter solstice saying that the reward goes to heaven. At first, after not getting rain, the reward goes to the emperor.

古文：今虽阙冬至之祭，而南郊兼祈报之礼，理不容别有赛答之事也。
现代文：现在虽然缺少冬至目的祭祀，然而南郊祭祀兼有祈求报答的礼仪，按理不容许另外有酬谢报答之类活动。
English: Although there is currently a lack of winter solstice rituals, the rituals in the southern suburbs have a ritual of prayer and reward, and it is not allowed to have other activities such as reward and thanksgiving.

古文：礼祀帝于郊，则所尚省费，周祭灵威仰若后稷，各用一牲；今祀五帝、世祖，亦宜各用一犊，斯外悉如南郊之礼也。
现代文：礼祀郊祭天帝。所崇尚的是节省费用，周祭祀灵威仰像后稷一样，各用一头牲畜，现在祭祀五帝、世祖，也应当各用一头牛犊，此外完全依照南郊祭祀的礼仪。
English: It is cost-saving that is being advocated, and the Zhou sacrificial rites are held in the same spirit as the Houyi, with one animal for each. Now, when the Five Emperors and the Patriarchs are being sacrificed, one ox should be used for each of them. In addition, it is entirely in accordance with the southern suburb sacrificial rites.

古文：武皇遏密未终，自可不奏盛乐。
现代文：逮皇童时丧期未完，自然可以不演奏盛大的音乐。
English: Since the mourning period was not over at the time of the emperor's death, it is natural that grand music should not be played.

古文：至于旱祭舞雩，盖是吁嗟之义，既非存欢乐，谓此不涉嫌。
现代文：至于天旱时歌舞雩祭，大概是表达感叹之意，既然不是存心欢乐，这就不算是涉嫌。
English: As for the song and dance festival during the drought, it is probably an expression of exclamation, since it is not intended to be joyful, it is not suspected.

古文：其余祝史称辞，仰祈灵泽而已。
现代文：其他如祝史宣读祭辞，衹是祈求上天神灵恩泽罢了。
English: Others, such as the reading of a prayer for history, are nothing more than prayers for the grace of the heavenly spirits.

古文：礼舞雩乃使无阙，今之女巫，并不习歌舞，方就教试，恐不应速。
现代文：礼制中雩祭歌舞是不能缺少的，现在的女巫，都不练习歌舞，临时演练，恐怕无法尽快熟悉。
English: In the ritual system, it is essential to have a wreath-sacrifice song and dance. Today's witches do not practice the song and dance, they practice on an ad hoc basis, and I'm afraid they won't be able to become familiar with it as quickly as possible.

古文：依晋朝之议，使童子，或时取舍之宜也。
现代文：依照晋朝的意见，使用童子，或许是一种适当的选择。
English: In accordance with the opinion of the Jin Dynasty, the use of a child may be an appropriate choice.

古文：司马彪《礼仪志》云雩祀著皂衣，盖是崇阴之义。
现代文：司马彪《礼仪志》说雩祭穿黑衣，大概是崇尚阴的意思。
English: Sima Biao's "History of Etiquette" says that the sacrificial victims wear black clothes, which probably means advocating yin.

古文：今祭服皆缁，差无所革。
现代文：现在祭服都是黑色，差不多没有什么改变。
English: Now the vestments are all black, almost nothing has changed.

古文：其所歌之诗，及诸供须，辄勒主者申摄备辨。 
现代文：祭祀中歌唱的诗，以及各种供品，就让主持者搜求置办。
English: The poetry sung during the ritual, as well as various offerings, are left to the facilitators to search for and purchase.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了这个意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：隆昌元年，有司奏，参议明堂，咸以世祖配。
现代文：隆昌元年，主管官吏上奏，众人商议明堂祭祀，都主张用世祖配祀。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, the officials in charge played the music, and the people discussed the Myeongdong ritual, and all advocated the use of the ancestor.

古文：国子助教谢昙济议： 案《祭法》禘郊祖宗，并列严祀。
现代文：国子助教谢昙济建议： 依照《祭法》郊祭和祖宗祭祀，都是庄严的祭祀。
English: Kuniko Assistant Professor Xie Rongji suggested: According to the "Sacrifice Law," both the suburban festival and the ancestral sacrifice are solemn sacrifices.

古文：郑玄注义，亦据兼飨。
现代文：郑玄注的意思，也是根据二者共享奉祀。
English: The meaning of Zheng Xuan's note is also based on the shared worship of the two.

古文：宜祖宗两配，文、武双祀。 
现代文：应当用祖和宗两人配祀，让文、武双双受祀。 
English: They should use Zu and Zong to be enshrined together, and let Wen and Wu be enshrined together.

古文：助教徐景嵩、光禄大夫王逡之谓宜以世宗文皇帝配。
现代文：助教徐景嵩、光禄大夫王逡之认为应当用世宗文皇帝配祀。
English: Assistant professor Xu Jingsong and Guanglu doctor Wang Xizhi believed that Emperor Sejongwen should be worshipped.

古文：祠部郎何佟之议： 周之文、武，尚推后稷以配天，谓文皇宜推世祖以配帝。
现代文：祠部郎何佟之建议： 周代的文王、武王还推让后稷配祀上天，认为文皇帝应当推让世祖配祀帝。
English: The suggestion of the ancestor's steward, He Xuan: King Wen and King Wu of the Zhou Dynasty also suggested that Emperor Wen should allow the ancestors to be enshrined in heaven.

古文：虽事施于尊祖，亦义章于严父焉。 
现代文：虽然是让尊祖去配祀了，但对圣上父亲也是个荣耀。 
English: Although it is to let the venerable ancestor go to be enshrined, it is also an honor for the holy father.

古文：左仆射王晏议，以为 若用郑玄祖宗通称，则生有功德，没垂尊称，历代配帝，何止于郊邪？
现代文：左仆射王晏的建议，认为 如果采用郑玄的祖宗是通称，那么生前建立功德，死后留下尊称，历代配祀帝的，何止两位?
English: At the suggestion of his left-hand man, Sha Wangtao, he thought that if the ancestor of Zheng Xuan is a common name, then how many more than two people have established merit during their lifetime and left honorifics after their death, and have been worthy of worshiping the emperor?

古文：今殷荐上帝，允属世祖，百代不毁，其文庙乎！诏 可 。
现代文：现在祖宗配祀上帝，应准许用世祖，如果百代不改，明堂岂不变成了文庙! 下韶说 可以 。
English: Now that the ancestors are compatible with the worship of God, they should be allowed to use the ancestors. If hundreds of generations do not change, will the Myeongdong not become a temple of literature! The lower jaw says yes.

古文：至永元二年，佟之又建议曰： 案《祭法》 有虞氏禘黄帝而郊喾，祖颛顼而宗尧 。 周人禘喾而郊稷，祖文王而宗武王 ，郑玄云 禘郊祖宗，谓祭祀以配食也。
现代文：到永元二年，何佟之又建议说：根据《祭法》 有虞氏谛祭黄帝郊祭学，以颛顼为祖，以尧为宗 。 周人樯祀学而郊祭稷，以文王为祖，以武王为宗 。郑玄说 碲、郊、祖宗，是说祭祀时配祀。
English: In the second year of Yongyuan, He Yanzhi also suggested that: according to the "Sacrificial Law," there is a study of the Yu Clan's Gui Festival of the Yellow Emperor's Suburban Festival, with Zhou as the ancestor and Zhou as the ancestor. Zhou Ren's study of worship and the Suburban Festival, with King Wen as the ancestor and King Wu as the ancestor. Zheng Xuan said that "Zhou," "suburban" and "ancestor" are to say that they are worshipped at the time of sacrifice.

古文：此禘谓祀昊天于圜丘也。
现代文：这柿是指在圜丘祭祀吴天。
English: This persimmon is referred to as Wu Tian in the Mengqiu ritual.

古文：祭上帝于南郊曰郊，祭五帝五神于明堂曰祖宗 ， 郊祭一帝，而明堂祭五帝，小德配寡，大德配众 。
现代文：在南郊祭祀上帝叫郊，在明堂祭祀五帝五神叫祖宗 。 郊祭是祭一个上帝，而明堂祭祀五帝，德行小者配少的，德行大者配多的 。
English: In the Southern Suburbs, the god to be worshipped is called the Suburbs, and in the Ming Hall, the Five Gods and Five Gods are called the Ancestors. The Suburban Festival is the sacrifice of a god, while the Ming Hall is the sacrifice of the Five Gods. Those who have little virtue are rewarded with less, and those who have great virtue are rewarded with more.

古文：王肃云 祖宗是庙不毁之名 。
现代文：王肃说 有祖宗之名的庙不毁弃 。
English: Wang Su said that a temple with the name of an ancestor should not be destroyed.

古文：果如肃言，殷有三祖三宗，并应不毁，何故止称汤、契？且王者之后存焉，舜宁立尧、顼之庙，传世祀之乎？
现代文：如果真像王肃说的，殷商有三祖三宗，都不应该毁弃，为什么衹称荡、契况且帝王的后人还在，舜会宁愿为尧、题垣立庙，可世间相沿祭祀他们了吗?
English: If it is true, as Wang Su said, that the Yin merchants have three ancestors and three sects, none of which should be destroyed, why is it that the descendants of the emperors are still alive and the descendants of the emperors are still alive, the Yin would rather build a temple for the Yin, but can the world worship them?

古文：汉文以高祖配泰畤，至武帝立明堂，复以高祖配食，一人两配，有乖圣典。
现代文：连主查用直担配祀叁歧，到汉武帝设立明堂，又用高祖配祀，一个人兼做两处配祀，有违于圣典。
English: Even if the Lord investigates the discrepancy between the direct responsibility of the deity and the deity, it is contrary to the scriptures to go to Emperor Hanwu to set up a Ming hall, and to use a high ancestor for the deity, and one person to do two deities.

古文：自汉明以来，未能反者。
现代文：自汉明帝以来，没有再造样做。
English: Since Emperor Han Ming, there has been no reproduction.

古文：故明堂无兼配之祀。
现代文：所以明堂没有兼做配祀的。
English: That's why Myodo doesn't have a matching shrine.

古文：窃谓先皇宜列二帝于文祖，尊新庙为高宗，并世祖而泛配，以申圣主严父之义。
现代文：我私下认为先帝应将二帝列为祖宗，为高宗建新庙，与世回一起作为一般配祀，以此申明圣主尊父之义。
English: Privately, I think that the former emperor should list the two emperors as his ancestors, build a new temple for Gao Zong, and serve as a general matchmaker with the world, thereby affirming the righteousness of the Holy Father.

古文：先皇于武皇，伦则第为季，义则经为臣，设配飨之坐，应在世祖之下，并列，俱西向。 
现代文：先帝相对于逮皇童，论伦常次第是弟弟，论道义尊卑是臣下，设配祀的位置，应该在世担下面，二人并列，都面朝西。
English: As opposed to the former emperor, the former emperor is a younger brother in terms of morality and ethics, and a subject in terms of moral superiority and inferiority. The position of setting up a place of worship should be under the world, and the two are side by side, both facing west.

古文：国子博士王摛议： 《孝经》 周公郊祀后稷以配天，宗祀文王于明堂以配上帝 。
现代文：国子博士王搞建议： 《孝经》 周公郊祭用后稷配祀天，在明堂宗祭文王配祀上帝 。
English: Dr. Wang suggested: "The Filial Piety Sutra" in the Zhou Gong Suburban Festival, the dowel is used to worship Heaven, while in the Ming Hall, the dowel is used to worship God.

古文：不云武王。
现代文：没说武王。
English: I didn't say King Wu.

古文：又《周颂》 《思文》，后稷配天也 。 《我将》，祀文王于明堂也 。
现代文：另外《周颂》 《思文》，是用后稷配祀天， 《我将》，是在明堂祭祀文王 。
English: In addition, "Zhouxiang" and "Shiwen" use the hind legs to worship the heavens, and "I Will" is dedicated to King Wen in the Ming Hall.

古文：武王之文，唯《执竞》云 祀武王 。
现代文：有关武王的内容，祇有《执竞》说 祭祀武王 。
English: Regarding the content of King Wu, only "Jingye" says "sacrifice King Wu."

古文：此自周庙祭武王诗，弥知明堂无矣。 
现代文：由此周代宗庙祭祀武王诗，更知道明堂没有武王配祀。 
English: As a result, the Zhou Dynasty's ancestral temple enshrined the poem of King Wu, and it is known that the Ming Hall did not have a statue of King Wu.

古文：佟之又议： 《孝经》是周公居摄时礼，《祭法》是成王反位后所行。
现代文：何佟之又建议：《孝经》记的是周公摄政时的礼仪，《祭法》记的是成王归位后所实行的礼仪。
English: He Yanzhi also suggested: "The Filial Piety Sutra" recorded the etiquette during the regency of Zhou Gong, and "The Law of Sacrifice" recorded the etiquette implemented after the enthronement of King Chengwang.

古文：故《孝经》以文王为宗，《祭法》以文王为祖。
现代文：所以《孝经》以文王为宗，《祭法》以文王为祖。
English: That is why the "Book of Filial Piety" is based on King Wen, and the "Law of Sacrifice" is based on King Wen.

古文：又孝莫大于严父配天，则周公其人也。寻此旨，宁施成王乎？
现代文：另外孝顺没有比用尊敬的父亲配祀天更大的了，这说的就是周公自己，查考此中旨意，难道能相对于成王说吗?
English: In addition, there is no greater filial piety than to use a respected father to match the worship of heaven. This is what Zhou Gong himself said. Examining the will in this, can it be said relative to Cheng Wang?

古文：若《孝经》所说，审是成王所行，则为严祖，何得云严父邪？
现代文：如果《孝经》所说的，的确是成王所实行的，那就是尊敬祖，怎能说尊敬的父亲呢?
English: If what the "Book of Filial Piety" says is really practiced by Cheng Wang, that is, to respect one's ancestors, how can one say to respect one's father?

古文：且《思文》是周公祀后稷配天之乐歌，《我将》是祀文王配明堂之乐歌。
现代文：而且《思文》是周公用后稷配祀天的乐歌，《我将》是文王配祀明堂的乐歌。
English: Moreover, "Shiwen" is a song that Zhou Gong used to accompany the worship of heaven, and "I Will" is a song that King Wen accompanied the worship of Ming Tang.

古文：若如摛议，则此二篇，皆应在复子明辟之后。
现代文：如果按照王搞的说法，那么这二篇，都应该在成王归位之后。
English: According to Wang, these two articles should have been written after Chengwang's enthronement.

古文：请问周公祀后稷、文王，为何所歌？
现代文：请问周公祭祀后稷、文王，用什么乐歌?
English: Could you please tell me what music Zhou Gong used to worship Queen Gong and King Wen?

古文：又《国语》云 周人禘喾郊稷，祖文王，宗武王 。
现代文：另外《国语》说 周人谛祭学郊祭后稷，把文王作为祖，把娄工作为宗 。
English: In addition, "National Language" said that Zhou Renxi, after studying the suburb festival of the festival, regarded King Wen as the ancestor, and regarded the work of the festival as the ancestor.

古文：韦昭云 周公时，以文王为宗，其后更以文王为祖，武王为宗 。
现代文：童周说 因公时，把塞工作为宗，其后改为把文王作为祖，把武王作为宗 。
English: Tong Zhou said that because he was in public service, he took the work in Tibet as his family. Later, he changed it to King Wen as his ancestor and King Wu as his family.

古文：寻文王以文治而为祖，武王以武定而为宗，欲明文亦有大德，武亦有大功，故郑注《祭法》云 祖宗通言耳 。
现代文：查考文王是因为文治而被奉为祖，逮王因为武功而被奉为宗，想表明文王也有大德，武王也有大功，所以郑玄注释《祭法》说 祖、宗说起来是相通的 。
English: King Chakao Wen was worshipped as the ancestor because of his military prowess, and King Fang was worshipped as the patriarch because of his martial prowess. He wanted to show that King Wen also had great virtue, and King Wu also had great merit, so Zheng Xuan annotated "Sacrificial Law" to say that the words "ancestor" and "patriarch" are related.

古文：是以《诗》云 昊天有成命，二后受之 。
现代文：因此《诗经》说 吴天已有旨命，二后承受它 。
English: Therefore, the "Song of Songs" says that Wu Tian already has the mission and will inherit it in the second generation.

古文：注云 二后，文王、武王也 。
现代文：注说 二后，是文王、武王 。
English: Note: The next two are King Wen and King Wu.

古文：且明堂之祀，有单有合。
现代文：而且明堂的配祀，有单个的也有一起的。
English: Moreover, Myeongdong's paired shrines are either single or together.

古文：故郑云 四时迎气于郊，祭一帝，还于明堂，因祭一帝，则以文王配 。
现代文：所以郑玄说 四季在国都郊外迎候上天之气，祭祀一帝，回到明堂，顺便祭祀一帝，则是用文王配祀 。
English: Therefore, Zheng Xuan said that the four seasons in the suburbs of the capital are waiting for the breath of heaven, sacrificing an emperor, returning to the Ming Hall, by the way, sacrificing an emperor, is to use King Wen to match the worship.

古文：明一宾不容两主也。 享五帝于明堂，则泛配文、武 。泛之为言，无的之辞。
现代文：表明一位宾客不容有两位主人。 在明堂享祀五帝，一般就用文王、武王配祀 。 泛 的意思，是指没有具体对象。
English: It indicates that a guest is not allowed to have two masters. In Myeongdong, the Five Emperors are worshipped, and the King of Literature and the King of Martial Arts are generally used. The meaning of "broad" is that there is no specific object.

古文：其礼既盛，故祖宗并配。 
现代文：既然礼仪盛大，所以祖、宗都配祀。
English: Since the etiquette is grand, the ancestors and the founder are all enshrined.

古文：参议以佟之为允。
现代文：众人商量以何佟之的意见为准。
English: The opinions of all participants will be taken into consideration.

古文：诏 可 。
现代文：下韶说 可以 。
English: The next edict said yes.

古文：太祖为齐王，依旧立五庙。
现代文：太祖做齐王，依据旧制设立五座宗庙。
English: The great-grandfather was the king of Qi, and he established five ancestral temples according to the old system.

古文：即位，立七庙，广陵府君、太中府君、淮阴府君、即丘府君、太常府君、宣皇帝、昭皇后为七庙。
现代文：即位之后，设立七座宗庙。广陵府君、太中府君、淮阴府君、即丘府君、太常府君、宣皇帝、昭皇后共是七庙。
English: After the enthronement, seven ancestral temples were established, including Guangling Fuchun, Taichung Fuchun, Huaiyin Fuchun, Jiuqiu Fuchun, Taizhong Fuchun, Emperor Xuan and Empress Zhao.

古文：建元二年，太祖亲祀太庙六室，如仪，拜伏竟，次至昭后室前，仪注应倚立，上以为疑，欲使庙僚行事，又欲以诸王代祝令於昭后室前执爵。
现代文：建元二年，太祖亲自祭祀太庙六房，遵照礼仪，叩拜完毕，接着到昭后庙室前，根据礼数应当倚门而立，皇上内心犹疑，想让庙裹的执事去做，又想让诸王代替祝令在昭后庙室前执爵主持。
English: In the second year of the first century, the great-grandfather personally sacrificed the six rooms of the Great Temple, followed the etiquette, completed the worship, and then went to the temple room of Zhao Hou, according to the number of etiquette should stand against the door, the emperor hesitated, wanted to let the deacon of the temple do it, and wanted to let the kings preside over the ceremony in front of the temple room of Zhao Hou.

古文：以问彭城丞刘瓛。
现代文：向彭城丞刘织问这事。
English: Ask Pengcheng Liu Wei about this.

古文：瓛对谓： 若都不至昭后坐前，窃以为薄。
现代文：划职回答说： 如果都不到昭后的神座前，我认为太薄情。
English: Subordinate replied: "I think it would be too mean-spirited if none of them were to appear before the throne of the goddess Shoko.

古文：庙僚即是代上执爵馈奠耳，祝令位卑，恐诸王无容代之。
现代文：庙裹的执事就是代替皇上执爵祭奠，可祝令地位卑下，恐怕诸王不会愿意代替他们。
English: The deacon of the temple is the one who presides over the knightly ceremony in place of the emperor, and may be ordered to lower his status. I am afraid that the kings will not be willing to replace them.

古文：旧庙仪诸王得兼三公亲事，谓此为便。 
现代文：旧的庙祭仪式中诸王可以兼任三公亲自主持，我认为这样比较合适。 
English: In the old temple festival ceremony, the kings could also serve as the three princes, and I think this is more appropriate.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：及太子穆妃薨，卒哭，祔于太庙阴室。
现代文：等到太子穆妃去世，哭祭完毕，拊祭于太庙阴室。
English: After the death of Prince Mu Fei, the wailing ceremony was completed, and the wreath-laying ceremony was held in the antechamber of the Great Temple.

古文：永明十一年，文惠太子薨，卒哭，祔于太庙阴室。
现代文：永明十一年，文惠太子去世，哭祭完毕，拊祭于太庙阴室。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yongming era, Prince Wen Hui died, the wailing ceremony was completed, and the wreath-laying ceremony took place in the antechamber of the Great Temple.

古文：太祖崩，毁广陵府君。
现代文：太祖崩，毁掉广陵府君神主。
English: The great ancestor passed away, destroying the Guangling prefectural god.

古文：郁林即位追尊文帝，又毁太中主，止淮阴府君。
现代文：郁林王即位，追尊文帝，又毁掉太中府君神主，停止祭祀淮阴府君。
English: King Yulin ascended the throne, chased away Emperor Wenzong, destroyed the god of Taichung prefectural government, and stopped the worship of Huaiyin prefectural government.

古文：明帝立，复旧。
现代文：明帝即位，恢复原状。
English: Emperor Ming ascended the throne and restored the status quo ante.

古文：及崩，祔庙，与世祖为兄弟，不为世数。
现代文：等到明帝崩，咐祭于太庙，因为和世祖是兄弟，所以不区分世次
English: When Emperor Ming died, he ordered that the offering be made at the Imperial Temple. Since he was a brother of the founder, there was no difference in the order of succession

古文：史臣曰：先儒说宗庙之义，据高祖已下五世亲尽，故亲庙有四。
现代文：史臣曰：先儒解释宗庙的含义，根据高祖以下五代后亲情断绝，所以与自己有亲情的祖庙有四辈。
English: Shichen said: the first Confucian explained the meaning of the ancestral temple, according to the five generations after Gao Zu, the kinship was severed, so there were four generations of the ancestral temple that had kinship with him.

古文：周以后稷始祖，文、武二祧，所以云王立七庙也。
现代文：周代把后稷作为始祖，文王、武王作为远祖，所以说周王立七个庙。
English: Zhou Dynasty regarded Houyi as the ancestor, King Wen and King Wu as the distant ancestors, so it is said that King Zhou built seven temples.

古文：禹无始祖，汤不先契，夏五殷六，其数如之。
现代文：夏禹没有始祖，商汤不把契作为先祖，夏立五庙殷立六庙，其数字与此相符。
English: Xia Yu did not have an ancestor, Shang Tang did not regard Qi as an ancestor, Xia set up five temples and Yin set up six temples, and their numbers are consistent with this.

古文：汉立宗庙，违经背古。
现代文：汉代设立宗庙，违背经典古制。
English: The establishment of a family temple in the Han Dynasty violated the classic ancient system.

古文：匡衡、贡禹、蔡邕之徒，空有迁毁之议，亘年四百，竟无成典。
现代文：匡衡、责鱼、墓邕等人，空有迁移毁弃的议论，长达四百年，竟然没有完善的制度。
English: Kuang Heng, Guo Yu, and others have been discussing the removal and destruction of empty tombs for as long as four hundred years, but there is no perfect system.

古文：魏氏之初，亲庙止乎四叶，吴、蜀享祭，失礼已多。
现代文：魏代初年，宗亲之庙衹有四代，吴国、蜀国的宗庙祭祀，失礼的地方已经很多。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, there were four generations of ancestral temple rites in the ancestral temples of Wu and Shu, and there were already many places of disrespect.

古文：晋用王肃之谈，以文、景为共世，上至征西，其实六也。
现代文：晋采用王肃的意见，把文帝、景帝作为一代，向上到征西，实际是六个庙。
English: Jin adopted the opinion of Wang Su, and regarded Emperor Wen and Emperor Jing as a generation, and went up to conquer the West. In fact, there were six temples.

古文：寻其此意，非以兄弟为后，当以立主之义，可相容于七室。
现代文：查考其用意，不区分兄弟长幼，应当是为君主立庙，所以同辈可以在七庙相容。
English: Examining his intention, without distinguishing between brothers and elders, it should be for the monarchy to establish a temple, so peers can be compatible in seven temples.

古文：及杨元后崩，征西之庙不毁，则知不以元后为世数。
现代文：等到杨元后崩，征西的庙没有毁掉，就知道没把杨元后列入世次。
English: When Yang Yuan passed away and the Western Conquest Temple was not destroyed, it was clear that Yang Yuan was not included in the line of succession.

古文：庙有七室，数盈八主。
现代文：宗庙有七座庙室，可神主之数满八个。
English: The ancestral temple has seven temples, but the number of deities is eight.

古文：江左贺循立议以后，弟不继兄，故世必限七，主无定数。
现代文：江左贺循提议以后，弟弟不继承哥哥的帝位，所以宗庙的世次必定限制在七辈，神主则没有一定的数字。
English: After the proposal of Jiang Zhaoxuan, the younger brother does not inherit the imperial throne of the elder brother, so the succession of the ancestral temple must be limited to seven generations, and the god master does not have a certain number.

古文：宋台初立五庙，以臧后为世室。
现代文：宋代中央最初设立五庙，把臧后列入宗庙。
English: In the Song Dynasty, the central government initially established five temples, and then included the Xingguo in the ancestral temple.

古文：就礼而求，亦亲庙四矣。
现代文：依据礼义要求，宗亲的庙也就是四个。
English: According to the requirements of etiquette, there are four dzongchen temples.

古文：义反会郑，非谓从王。
现代文：在礼义上反而与郑玄的意思相合，不是说按照王肃的意见。
English: On the contrary, in terms of etiquette, it is consistent with the meaning of Zheng Xuan, not according to the opinion of Wang Su.

古文：自此以来，因仍旧制。
现代文：白此以后，就沿袭旧的制度。
English: Henceforth, the old system prevailed.

古文：夫妻道合，非世叶相承，譬由下祭殇嫡，无关庙数，同之祖曾，义未可了。
现代文：夫妻是半道结合，不是在宗族中世代延续的，好比是对下祭祀夭折的嫡子，与宗庙的数量无关，如果都到祖庙，礼义上没法解释。
English: The husband and wife are a half-way union, not a continuation of generations in the clan, like a legitimate son who died young. It has nothing to do with the number of ancestral temples. If they all go to the ancestral temple, it cannot be explained in terms of etiquette.

古文：若据伊尹之言，必及七世，则子昭孙穆，不列妇人。
现代文：如果照伊尹的话，一定要到七代，那么儿子为昭孙子为穆，不列入妇人。
English: If, according to the words of Yi Yin, it must go up to seven generations, then the son is Zhao, the grandson is Mu, and is not included in the woman.

古文：若依郑玄之说，庙有亲称，妻者言齐，岂或滥享？
现代文：如果依郑玄的说法，宗庙有亲人的称谓，妻的意思是齐，岂能说是胡乱的祭祀。
English: If, according to Zheng Xuan, the ancestral temple has the title of relatives, and the meaning of wife is Qi, can it be said to be a random sacrifice?

古文：且閟宫之德，周七非数，杨元之祀，晋八无伤。
现代文：况且照闳宫的品德，周代七庙没有列入并不就是定数，杨元后享祀，晋代成为八庙也没什么损害。
English: Moreover, according to the character of the Summer Palace, the seven temples in the Zhou Dynasty were not included in the fixed number. They were worshiped after Yang Yuan, and it did not hurt to become eight temples in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：今谓之七庙，而上唯六祀，使受命之君，流光之典不足。
现代文：现在说的七庙，实际祇有六代神主享祀，致使承受天命的国君，造福后世的制度不能完善。
English: The seven temples mentioned now, in fact, only have six generations of deities to worship, resulting in a system that cannot be perfected for the benefit of future generations.

古文：若谓太祖未登，则昭穆之数何继？斯故礼官所宜详也。
现代文：如果说太祖没有列入，那昭穆的数字如何维继，因此礼官应该谨慎。
English: If the great-grandfather is not included, how will the numbers of the great-grandfather be maintained, so the etiquette officer should be cautious.

古文：宋泰豫元年，明帝崩。博士周洽议： 权制：谅闇之内，不亲奉四时祠。 
现代文：末泰豫元年，明帝去世，博士周洽建议： 暂行制度：居丧期间，帝王不亲自主持四季的祭祀。 
English: At the end of the first year of the Taiyuan era, Emperor Ming died, and Dr. Zhou proposed: Provisional system: During the period of mourning, the emperor would not personally preside over the four-season sacrifice.

古文：建元四年，尚书令王俭采晋中朝《谅暗议》奏曰： 权典既行，丧礼斯夺，事兴汉世，而源由甚远。
现代文：建元四年，尚书令王俭根据晋中朝《谅阎议》陈述说：暂行法典实行之后，丧礼就被取代了，事情兴于汉代，可是起源很早。
English: In the fourth year of the first century, Wang Jian, who was appointed by Shang Shuling, stated according to the Jin and Zhong Dynasties' "Forgiveness of Hell" that: After the provisional code was implemented, the funeral was replaced. Things flourished in the Han Dynasty, but the origin was very early.

古文：殷宗谅间，非有服之称，周王即吉，唯宴乐为讥。
现代文：殷商王室居丧，没有丧服之名，周王除去丧服，衹要举行宴饮娱乐就会被讥笑。
English: The Yin merchant royal family is in mourning, there is no name of mourning clothes, the Zhou king removes the mourning clothes, and if he wants to hold a banquet and entertainment, he will be ridiculed.

古文：《春秋》之义，嗣君逾年即位，则预朝会聘享焉。《左氏》云 凡君即位，卿出并聘，践修旧好 。
现代文：《春秋》的礼义，继位的国君过年后即位，预告就要朝见天子聘问进献，《左传》说 凡是国君即位，卿要出访各国，重申旧的友好关系 。
English: According to the etiquette of "Spring and Autumn," the prince who succeeds to the throne will ascend the throne after the first year of the year, and the announcement will be to see the emperor to ask for a donation. "Left Legend" says that whenever the prince ascends the throne, the lord will visit various countries to reaffirm the old friendly relations.

古文：又云 诸侯即位，小国聘焉，以继好结信，谋事补阙，礼之大者 。
现代文：又说 诸侯即位，小国要前来访问，继续结好示信，谋划事情弥补缺漏，这是礼重要的内容 。
English: He also said that princes are enthroned, and small countries should come to visit, continue to make good representations, and plan things to make up for shortcomings. This is an important content of the ceremony.

古文：至于谅暗之内而图婚，三年未终而吉禘，齐归之丧不废搜，杞公之卒不彻乐，皆致讥贬，以明鉴戒。
现代文：至于居丧期间谋划婚事，三年丧期未完就举行谛祭，齐归居丧期间仍旧打猎，杞公居丧不终止奏乐，都导致讥讽批评，应作为明镜引以为戒。
English: As for planning a marriage during the mourning period, holding a wreath-laying ceremony before the three-year mourning period is over, still hunting during the mourning period, and playing music without stopping during the mourning period, all lead to ridicule and criticism, and should be cautioned as a mirror.

古文：自斯而谈，朝聘蒸尝之典，卒哭而备行；婚禘搜乐之事，三载而后举。通塞兴废，各有由然。
现代文：从这些记载来说，朝见、聘问、祭祀等典礼，哭完了之后就要准备举行，婚姻、谛祭、打猎、奏乐等事情，三年之后再举办，通畅堵塞，兴盛废弛，各有缘由。
English: According to these records, ceremonies such as courting, interviewing, and sacrifice should be prepared to be held after the crying is over, and things such as marriage, puja, hunting, and music should be held three years later. There are reasons for the blockage, prosperity, and decline.

古文：又案《大戴礼记》及《孔子家语》并称武王崩，成王嗣位，明年六月既葬，周公冠成王而朝于祖，以见诸侯，命祝雍作颂。
现代文：又据《大戴礼记》及《孔子家语》都称武王去世，成王继位，第二年六月安葬之后，周公为成王加冕而且朝拜祖宗，会见诸侯，命令祝雍创作颂词。
English: In addition, according to "Da Dai Li Ji" and "Confucius Family Language," both of which say that King Wu died and King Cheng succeeded to the throne. After the funeral in June of the following year, Zhou Gong crowned King Cheng and worshiped the ancestors, met with princes, and ordered Zhu Yong to write eulogies.

古文：襄十五年十一月 晋侯周卒 ，十六年正月 葬晋悼公 。平公既即位， 改服修官，烝于曲沃 。
现代文：襄王十五年十一月 晋侯周去世 ，十六年正月 安葬晋悼公 平公即位之后， 更换丧服儆戒百官，祭于曲沃 。
English: In November of the 15th year of King Xiang, Jin Hou Zhou passed away. In the first month of the 16th year, the funeral was held to mourn the death of Jin. After the enthronement of the Taira clan, the funeral attire of hundreds of officials was changed and the funeral was held in Quwo.

古文：《礼记·曾子问》 孔子曰，天子崩，国君薨，则祝取群庙之主而藏诸祖庙，礼也。
现代文：《礼记曾子问》 孔子说，天子去世，国君去世，就要祝告移取各庙的神主藏到祖庙中，这是礼。
English: "Question from a Former Son of the Book of Rites" Confucius said that after the death of the heavenly son and the death of the sovereign, it is necessary to wish for the transfer of the god of each temple to be hidden in the ancestral temple. This is a ritual.

古文：卒哭成事，而后主各反其庙 。
现代文：终止哭泣事情完毕后，各位神主仍迁回自己的庙 。
English: After the crying stopped, the priests moved back to their own temples.

古文：《春秋左氏传》 凡君卒哭而祔，祔而后特祀于主，蒸尝禘于庙 。
现代文：《春秋左氏传 凡是国君哭泣完毕就要拊祭祖庙，拊祭祖庙之后要特别对其神主祭祀，在祖庙中蒸祭、尝祭、棉祭 。
English: "Chunqiu Zuo's Biography" Whenever the sovereign has finished crying, it is necessary to make a burnt offering to the ancestral temple, and after the burnt offering to the ancestral temple, it is necessary to make a special sacrifice to its deity, and in the ancestral temple there are a steaming festival, a tasting festival, and a cotton festival.

古文：先儒云 特祀于主者，特以丧礼奉新亡者主于寝，不同于吉。
现代文：先儒说 特别向其神主祭祀，是指在庙寝中单独用丧礼奉祀新去世的国君神主，不同于吉礼。
English: The early Confucians said that to offer a special sacrifice to one's deity meant to worship the newly deceased sovereign deity with a funeral rite alone in a temple, which was different from the auspicious rite.

古文：蒸尝禘于庙者，卒哭成事，群庙之主，各反其庙。
现代文：在祖庙内蒸祭、尝祭、稀祭，是终止哭泣事情完毕，各庙的神主，各迁回自己的庙中。
English: In the ancestral temple, the steaming festival, the tasting festival, and the rare festival are to stop crying. When the event is over, the gods of each temple will move back to their own temples.

古文：则四时之祭，皆即吉也。
现代文：而一年四季的祭祀，就都是吉礼。
English: However, the festivals held throughout the year are all auspicious.

古文：三年丧毕，吉禘于庙，跻群主以定新主也 。
现代文：三年丧期完毕，在祖庙中举行吉礼的碲祭，升入诸位神主之列，确定新的神主之位 。
English: When the three-year mourning period is over, the auspicious funeral rites are held in the ancestral temple, and the deceased is elevated to the ranks of the gods and confirmed as the new god.

古文：凡此诸义，皆著在经诰，昭乎方册，所以晋、宋因循，同规前典，卒哭公除，亲奉蒸尝，率礼无违，因心允协。
现代文：凡是这些意见，都写在经典诰命，史册中很清楚，所以晋、宋沿袭，都遵照从前的制度，终止哭泣，因身负国家重任除去丧服，亲自主持祭奠，一切按照礼义，内心和洽。
English: All these opinions are written in the classics and are very clear in the annals of history, so the Jin and Song dynasties followed the previous system, stopped crying, removed the mourning clothes due to the heavy responsibility of the state, and personally held the memorial service, all in accordance with etiquette and inner harmony.

古文：爰至泰豫元年，礼官立议，不宜亲奉，乃引 三年之制自天子达 。
现代文：及至泰豫元年，礼官提议，皇上不应亲自主持祭奠，就引用了 居丧三年的制度从天子以下都是通行的 。
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan era, the etiquette official proposed that the emperor should not personally hold a memorial service, citing the "three-year system of residence and mourning" from the emperor down.

古文：又据《王制》称 丧三年不祭，唯祭天地社稷，越绋而行事 。
现代文：又依据《王制》声称 三年丧期内不祭祀，衹有祭祀天地社稷，可以破例举行 。
English: Also, according to the "Royal System," it is claimed that there will be no sacrifices during the three-year mourning period, but there will be sacrifices in heaven, earth and society, which can be held as an exception.

古文：曾不知 自天子达 ，本在至情，即葬释除，事以权夺，委衰袭衮，孝享宜申；越绋之旨，事施未葬，卒哭之后，何绋可越？
现代文：岂不知所谓从天子以下通行，本来就存有至情，安葬之后脱掉丧服，因为事情要权宜处理，放弃丧服穿上皇袍，奉祀尽孝应加以申明， 越绋 的意旨，是指事情在未安葬前施行，哭泣终止之后，还有什么 绋 可越?
English: Don't you know that the so-called passage from the Son of Heaven to the Son of Man, originally there is a supreme sentiment, take off the funeral clothes after the burial, because the matter should be dealt with expediently, give up the funeral clothes and put on the imperial robe, worship and filial piety should be affirmed, the intention of crossing the threshold means that the matter is carried out before the burial, after the crying is terminated, what else can be crossed?

古文：复依范宣之难杜预，谯周之论士祭，并非明据。
现代文：再依照范宣问难杜预，谯周论士人祭礼的意见，都不再是明确的根据。
English: Furthermore, according to Fan Xuanqian, it is difficult to predict, and Zou Zhou's opinion on the scholar's festival is no longer a clear basis.

古文：晋武在丧，每欲存宁戚之怀，不全依谅暗之典；至于四时蒸尝，盖以哀疾未堪，非便顿改旧式。
现代文：晋武帝服丧，每每存有平息悲哀的想法，不完全依照服丧礼制，至于一年四季的祭祀，大都以哀痛不能承受为由，没有马上改变旧的制度。
English: When Emperor Jinwu was in mourning, there was always the idea of calming the grief, but it was not entirely in accordance with the funeral system. As for the sacrifices throughout the year, most of them did not immediately change the old system on the grounds that they could not bear the grief.

古文：江左以来，通儒硕学所历多矣，守而弗革，义岂徒然？
现代文：南迁江左以来，通儒硕学经历得多了，但都谨守旧制不加改革，礼义岂不是空有其名。
English: Since the southward movement of the Yangtze River, there have been many experiences of Confucianism and Confucianism, but they all adhere to the old system without reform, and the etiquette is not empty.

古文：又且即心而言，公卿大夫则负扆亲临，三元告始则朝会万国，虽金石辍响，而簨泬充庭，情深于恒哀，而迹降于凡制，岂曰能安，国家故也。
现代文：再就心情来说，公卿大夫，要亲临官署处理政事，新年伊始，要会见各国使节，虽然乐器停止演奏，可是悬挂乐器的木架仍充斥庭院，用情比恒久的悲哀要深，可是行迹被凡俗的礼制所贬抑，怎能说他们的内心能平静，是为了国家的缘故。
English: As far as their mood is concerned, noble doctor, they have to come to the government office in person to deal with political affairs. At the beginning of the new year, they have to meet with envoys from various countries. Although the musical instruments have stopped playing, the wooden shelves for hanging musical instruments still fill the courtyard. Their feelings are deeper than permanent sadness, but their behavior is demeaned by ordinary etiquette. How can we say that their hearts can be calm? It is for the sake of the country.

古文：宗庙蒸尝，孝敬所先，宁容吉事备行，斯典独废！
现代文：宗庙祭祀，首先是孝敬，怎能容许其他祭事都筹备举行，惟独这一典礼废弃呢?
English: How is it possible to allow the preparation and holding of other religious ceremonies, but this one to be scrapped?

古文：就令必宜废祭，则应三年永阙，乃复同之他故，有司摄礼，进退二三，弥乖典衷。
现代文：就是必须要废弃祭祀，那应该三年一直空缺，然后恢复旧制，可是主管官吏整顿礼制，进退不一，更加违背典制初衷。
English: That is to say, it is necessary to abolish the sacrificial rites, which should have been vacant for three years, and then restore the old system. However, the officials in charge of rectifying the etiquette system are inconsistent, which is even more contrary to the original intention of the ceremony system.

古文：谓宜依旧亲奉。 
现代文：我认为应该依旧山皇上亲自奉祀。
English: I think that the mountain emperor himself should still be worshipped.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了这个意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：永明九年正月，诏太庙四时祭，荐宣帝面起饼、鸭；孝皇后笋、鸭卵、脯酱、炙白肉；高皇帝荐肉脍、俎羹；昭皇后茗、粣、炙鱼：皆所嗜也。
现代文：永明九年正月，诏令太庙四季的祭祀，进献宣帝面起饼、鸭腔，孝皇后笋、鸭蛋、脯酱、炙白肉，高皇帝肉脍、菹羹，昭皇后茗、栅、炙鱼，都是他们喜欢吃的。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of the Yongming era, the imperial edict ordered the four seasons of the temple to offer Xuan Di noodle cakes, duck caviar, Xiao Que's stew, duck eggs, dipping sauce, roasted white meat, Gao Emperor's stew, stew soup, Zhao Que's stew, grate, and roasted fish, all of which they liked to eat.

古文：先是世祖梦太祖曰： 宋氏诸帝尝在太庙，从我求食。可别为吾祠。 
现代文：起先是世祖萝见太祖说： 宋代的各位帝王曾在太庙裹向我要吃的，可另为我建祠庙。 
English: At first, it was the ancestor Luo who saw the ancestor and said: The emperors of the Song Dynasty once wrapped me in the temple to eat, but they can build another temple for me.

古文：上乃敕豫章王妃庾氏四时还青溪宫旧宅，处内合堂，奉祠二帝二后，牲牢服章，用家人礼。
现代文：皇上于是敕令豫章王妃庾氏四季定时回青溪宫旧宅，宅内合为一堂，供奉二帝二后，牺牲服制，采用家人的礼仪。
English: The emperor then ordered Prince Yuzhang Wangfei to return regularly to the old residence of Qingxi Palace in the four seasons. The residence was combined into one, dedicated to the two emperors and two empresses, sacrificed the dress code, and adopted the family's etiquette.

古文：史臣曰：汉氏之庙，遍在郡国，求祀已渎，缘情又疏。
现代文：史臣曰：汉代的宗庙，分布在郡国，有所求才祭祀已经亵渎了神灵，依据情分又疏远了。
English: Shichen said: The ancestral temple of the Han Dynasty, distributed in the county, has desecrated the deities and alienated them according to circumstances.

古文：重檐閟寝，不可兼建，故前儒抗议，谓之迁毁。
现代文：双层房檐的祠堂陵寝，不可建在一起，所以先儒抗议，认为这是迁移毁弃。
English: The ancestral hall mausoleum of the double-storey eaves can not be built together, so the first Confucian protested that this was a relocation and abandonment.

古文：光武入纂，南顿君已上四世，别祠舂陵。
现代文：光武帝承继汉王朝，南蛆昼以上四代，另外在壹陆祠祀。
English: Emperor Guangwu succeeded the Han Dynasty, and has been worshipped in Nanlu for more than four generations. In addition, he is enshrined in an ancestral hall.

古文：建武三年幸舂陵园庙是也。
现代文：建武三年幸临叠医园庙就是证明。
English: The success of the Jianwu three-year auspicious overlapping Iyuan temple is proof.

古文：张衡《南都赋》曰 清庙肃以微微 。
现代文：张冲《南都赋》说 宗庙肃穆幽静 。
English: Zhang Chong's "Nandu Fu" says that the ancestral temple is solemn and quiet.

古文：明帝至于章、和，每幸章陵，辄祠旧宅。
现代文：从明帝到章帝、和帝，每次幸临章陵，就到旧宅祭祀。
English: From Emperor Ming to Emperor Zhang and Emperor He, every time they were lucky enough to visit Zhang's tomb, they went to the old house to offer sacrifices.

古文：建安末，魏氏立宗庙，皆在邺都。
现代文：建安末年，曹魏设立宗庙，都在翅都。
English: In the last years of Jian'an, Cao Wei set up ancestral temples, all of which are in Fengdu.

古文：魏文黄初二年，洛庙未成，亲祠武帝于建始殿，用家人礼。
现代文：魏文帝姜翅二年，这屋宗庙没有建成，亲自在建始殿祭祀鸯童，采用家人的礼仪。
English: In the second year of Emperor Jiangling of Wei and Wen Dynasties, this ancestral temple was not built, and he personally sacrificed a child at the beginning of the construction, using the family's etiquette.

古文：世祖发汉明之梦，肇祀故宫，孝享既申，义合前典，亦一时之盛也。
现代文：世祖生发汉明帝一样的梦，开始在旧的宫殿祭祀，既表明了孝敬奉祀，在礼义上也与从前的制度相合，也是一时的盛事。
English: The ancestor had the same dream as Emperor Han Ming, and began to offer sacrifices in the old palace, which not only showed filial piety, but was also consistent with the previous system in terms of etiquette, and was also a momentous event.

古文：永明六年，太常丞何諲之议： 今祭有生鱼一头，干鱼五头。
现代文：丞塱六年，太常丞坷迺之建议： 现在祭祀有生鱼一条，干鱼五条。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, Emperor Jiajing's suggestion: Now there is one raw fish and five dried fish for sacrifice.

古文：《少牢馈食礼》云 司士升鱼腊肤鱼，用鲋十有五 。
现代文：《少牢颅食礼》说 主祭者献上鱼、腊、肤，用十五条鲋鱼 。
English: According to the "Cranial Ritual of the Young Prisoners," the main celebrant offers fish, wax, and skin, using fifteen eels.

古文：上既云 腊 ，下必是 鲜 ，其数宜同。
现代文：上边既然说 腊，下边必然是 鲜 。其数宇应该相同。
English: Since the top says wax, the bottom must be fresh. Their number should be the same.

古文：称 肤 足知鳞革无毁。
现代文：称 肤，足以知道鳞皮没有毁坏。
English: It is enough to weigh the skin to know that the scales are not destroyed.

古文：《记》云 槁鱼曰商祭，鲜曰脡祭 。郑注 商，量；脡，直也 。寻 商 旨裁截， 脡 义在全。
现代文：《礼记》说 用干负祭祀叫商祭，用鲜鱼祭祀叫艇祭，郑玄注 商，量；艇，直，查考 商 的意思是裁割， 艇 的意思表现在完整。
English: "Rituals" says that the dry-load sacrifice is called the merchant's sacrifice, and the fresh-fish sacrifice is called the boat's sacrifice, Zheng Xuan's note: merchant, quantity; boat, straight, investigation. The meaning of merchant means cutting, and the meaning of boat is expressed in completeness.

古文：贺循《祭义》犹用鱼十五头。
现代文：贺循《祭义》还是用鱼十五条。
English: According to He Xun, "Sacrifice" still uses fifteen fish.

古文：今鲜顿删约，槁皆全用。
现代文：现在鲜的就减省了，干的全部用。
English: Now, fresh produce is reduced, and all dried produce is used.

古文：谓宜鲜、槁各二头，槁微断首尾，示存古义。 
现代文：我认为应该干、鲜各两条干的稍微切断头尾，表示保存古义。 
English: I think that the dried and fresh cucumbers should have their heads and tails slightly cut off, to preserve the ancient meaning.

古文：国子助教桑惠度议： 《记》称尚玄酒而俎腥鱼。
现代文：国子助教粟惠度建议： 《礼记》称崇尚玄酒加工腥鱼。
English: Suggestion from Kuniko Awa, assistant professor: "The Book of Rites" is said to advocate the use of black liquor to process fish.

古文：玄酒不容多，鲜鱼理宜约。
现代文：玄酒不能多，鲜鱼照理应节省。
English: There should not be too much wine, and fresh fish should be spared.

古文：干鱼五头者，以其既加人功，可法于五味，以象酒之五齐也。
现代文：干鱼五条，是因为其加入了人工，可以效法五味，象征五种等级的酒。
English: Five dried fish, because it was added artificially, can imitate five flavors, symbolizing five grades of wine.

古文：今欲鲜、槁各双，义无所法。 
现代文：现在要干、鲜鱼各两条，礼义上没有依据。 
English: There is no basis in etiquette for asking for two fish each of dried and fresh fish.

古文：諲之议不行。
现代文：何谨之的建议未能施行。
English: However, the proposal was not implemented.

古文：十年，诏故太宰褚渊、故太尉王俭、故司空柳世隆、故骠骑大将军王敬则、故镇东大将军陈显达、故镇东将军李安民六人，配飨太祖庙庭。
现代文：永明十年，韶令已故太宰褚渊、已故太尉王俭、已故司空柳世隆、骠骑大将军王敬则、镇束大将军陈显达、已故镇束将军李安民六人，配祀太祖庙庭。
English: In the 10th year of the Yongming era, the late Dazai Shanyuan, the late Taifu Wang Jian, the late Siku Liu Shilong, the late General Wang Jingze, the late General Chen Xianda, and the late General Li Anmin were enshrined in the ancestral temple.

古文：祠部郎何諲之议： 功臣配飨，累行宋世，检其遗事，题列坐位，具书赠官爵谥及名，文不称主，便是设板也。
现代文：祠部郎何谨之建议 功臣配祀，宋代屡次实行，查检其中遣事，题名列位，都写明封蹭的官爵、谧号及名字，文中不称神主，衹是设一个板。
English: According to the suggestion of the minister of the ancestral hall, He Jian, the Song Dynasty implemented the practice of assigning a god to a meritorious subject many times. During the inspection, the official title, the official rank, and the name of the god were all clearly written on the seal. The god was not called in the text, but a board was set up.

古文：《白虎通》云 祭之有主，孝子以系心也 。
现代文：《白虎通》说 祭祀有神主，孝子用它系住自己的心 。
English: "White Tiger Pass" says that there is a god in the sacrifice, and the filial son should use it to bind his heart.

古文：揆斯而言，升配庙廷，不容有主。
现代文：据此而言，升入庙堂配祀，不容许有神主。
English: According to this, it is not allowed to have a Shinto deity to be enshrined in a temple.

古文：宋时板度，既不复存，今之所制，大小厚薄如尚书召板，为得其衷。 
现代文：宋时板的尺度，已不复存在。现在所制作的，大小厚薄像尚书召板，是为了符合其本意 。
English: The scale of the Song Dynasty calligraphy board no longer exists. The size, thickness and thickness of the calligraphy board produced now are similar to that of the Song Dynasty calligraphy board, in order to meet its original intention.

古文：有司摄太庙旧人亦云见宋功臣配飨坐板，与尚书召板相似，事见《仪注》。
现代文：主管官吏召集的太庙旧人也说见到的宋优功臣配祀座位板，与尚书召板相似，事情见于《仪注》。
English: The seat board of Song Yougong's votive offerings to Song Yougong, which was also said to have been seen by the old man of the Great Temple, summoned by the responsible officials, is similar to the Shang call board, and the matter is found in the "Diamond Note."

古文：十一年，右仆射王晏、吏部尚书徐孝嗣、侍中何胤奏： 故太子祔太庙，既无先准。
现代文：永明十一年，右仆射王晏、吏部尚书徐孝题、侍中坦胤陈述： 已故太子拊祭太庙，既然从前没有标准。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yongming era, the right-hand man, Sha Wangqi, the head of the personnel department, Shangshu Xu Xiaoqi, and the chamberlain, Tan Tan, stated: The late crown prince's rite of the Great Temple, since there was no standard before.

古文：检宋元后故事，太尉行礼，太子拜伏与太尉俱。
现代文：查检宋元后旧例，太尉行礼，太子与太尉一起跪拜。
English: After the inspection of Song and Yuan Dynasties, the old example, the captain saluted, and the prince and the captain knelt together.

古文：臣等参议，依拟前典。
现代文：臣等商议，拟依照从前的制度。
English: The vassals and others held a discussion, and it was decided to continue with the previous system.

古文：太常主庙位，太尉执礼祔，太孙拜伏，皆与之俱。正礼既毕，阴室之祭，太孙宜亲自进奠。 
现代文：太常主持太庙神位，太尉主持拊祭礼，太孙跪拜，都与他一起，正式典礼完毕之后，在阴室的祭祀，太孙应该亲自进奠。 
English: The great-grandson often presides over the divine throne of the great-temple, the great-grandson presides over the sacrificial rites, and the great-grandson kneels, all together with him. After the formal ceremony is over, the great-grandson should personally pay tribute to the sacrificial rites in the netherworld.

古文：诏 可 。
现代文：皇上下诏说 可以 。
English: The next edict said yes.

古文：建武二年，有司奏景懿后迁登新庙车服之仪。
现代文：建武二年，主管官吏上奏景懿后迁入新庙的车服仪制。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu period, the officials in charge moved into the new temple after the performance of Jingyi.

古文：祠部郎何佟之议曰： 《周礼》王之六服，大裘为上，衮冕次之。
现代文：祠部郎何佟之建议说：《周礼》中王的六等服装，大裘等级最高，衮冕其次。
English: "The sixth-class costume of the king in "Zhou Li" is the highest grade, followed by the crown.

古文：五车，玉辂为上，金辂次之。
现代文：五等车，玉辂等级最高，金辂其次。
English: Fifth-class car, the highest grade of jade bracelet, followed by gold bracelet.

古文：皇后六服，祎衣为上，褕翟次之。
现代文：皇后的六等服装，桦衣等级最高，褕翟其次。
English: The queen's sixth-class clothing, the highest grade of the dress, followed by the gown.

古文：首饰有三，副为上，编次之。
现代文：首饰有三等，副等级最高，编其次。
English: There are three grades of jewelry, with the highest grade being the sub-grade and the second being the editorial grade.

古文：五车，重翟为上，厌翟次之。
现代文：五等车，重翟等级最高，厌翟其次。
English: The fifth-class car, the highest level of weight, followed by the second-class car.

古文：上公有大裘玉辂，而上公夫人有副及祎衣，是以《祭统》云 夫人副祎立于东房 也。
现代文：上公没有大裘、玉辂，可上公夫人有副以及讳衣，因此《祭统》说 夫人穿戴副及讳衣站在束房 。
English: Shangguo didn't have the great qiu and the jade bowl, but Shangguo's wife had the vice and the tabi, so the "Sacred Tradition" said that the wife wore the vice and the tabi to stand in the shackle room.

古文：又郑云 皇后六服，唯上公夫人亦有祎衣 。
现代文：另外郑玄说 皇后有六等服装，衹是上公夫人也有讳衣 。
English: In addition, Zheng Xuan said that the empress has a sixth-class costume, and even the duchess has a shamrock.

古文：《诗》云 翟茀以朝 。
现代文：《诗经》说 乘坐翟弗上朝 。
English: "The Book of Songs" says, "Ride the dragonfly to the morning."

古文：郑以翟茀为厌翟，侯伯夫人入庙所乘。
现代文：郑玄认为翟荛即厌翟，是侯伯夫人入庙乘坐的。
English: Zheng Xuan thought that the carriage was the one that Hou Bo's wife rode into the temple.

古文：今上公夫人副祎既同，则重翟或不殊矣。
现代文：现在上公夫人的副及裤衣既然与皇后相同，那么乘坐的重翟或许没有不同。
English: Now that the lady-in-waiting's coat and trousers are the same as the Queen's, the weight of the carriage may not be any different.

古文：况景皇懿后礼崇九命，且晋朝太妃服章之礼，同于太后，宋代皇太妃唯无五牛旗为异。其外侍官则有侍中、散骑常侍、黄门侍郎、散骑侍郎各二人，分从前后部，同于王者，内职则有女尚书、女长御各二人，棨引同于太后。
现代文：况且景皇懿后在礼仪上处九等官爵中最高之位。而且晋朝太妃服饰的礼制，和太后相同，宋代皇太妃衹是没有五牛旗这点是不同的，她们的外侍官有侍中、散骑常侍、黄门侍郎、散骑侍郎各二人，分别跟随在前部后部，与王相同；内官有女尚书、女长御各二人，仪仗与太后相同。
English: Moreover, the empress dowager of the Qing Dynasty held the highest position among the nine ranks of officials and nobles in etiquette. Moreover, the etiquette of the dress of the imperial princess of the Jin Dynasty was the same as that of the empress dowager, but the imperial princess dowager of the Song Dynasty did not have the five-cow flag, which was different. Their foreign attendants had two attendants each, a junior attendant, a horseback riding attendant, a Yellow Gate attendant, and a horseback riding attendant, respectively, following the front and back, the same as the king; the inner officials had two ladies' maids of honor,

古文：又魏朝之晋王，晋之宋王，并置百官，拟于天朝。
现代文：另外魏朝的晋王，晋朝的宋王，都设置百官，仿效天子朝廷。
English: In addition, the Jin kings of the Wei Dynasty and the Song kings of the Jin Dynasty set up hundreds of officials, imitating the Heavenly Son's court.

古文：至于晋文王终犹称薨，而太上皇称崩，则是礼加于王矣。
现代文：至于晋文王去世还称薨，太上皇称崩，那是礼仪超出了王。
English: As for the death of King Jinwen, it was also said that he died, and the last emperor was said to have died, that is a etiquette beyond the king.

古文：故前议景皇后悉依近代皇太妃之仪，则侍卫陪乘并不得异，后乘重翟，亦谓非疑也。
现代文：所以前面商议景皇后完全依照近代皇太妃的仪制，那么侍卫随从车驾都不能不同，皇后乘坐重翟，也是无可置疑的。
English: Therefore, in the foregoing discussion, the empress is completely in accordance with the ceremonial system of the modern crown princess, so the guards accompanying the car cannot be different, and the empress is riding in the heavy yoke, which is beyond doubt.

古文：寻齐初移庙，宣皇神主乘金辂，皇帝亲奉，亦乘金辂，先往行礼毕，仍从神主至新庙，今所宜依准也。 
现代文：查检齐初神主迁庙，宣皇神主乘坐金辖，皇帝亲自奉祀，也乘坐金格，先去举行完典礼，仍旧陪从神主到新庙，现在应当依照。
English: At the beginning of the inspection, the deity moved to the temple, and the emperor announced that the deity would be enshrined in gold, and the emperor himself would be enshrined in gold. After the ceremony, he still accompanied the deity to the new temple. Now it should be followed.

古文：从之。
现代文：采纳了这个建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：永泰元年，有司议应庙见不。
现代文：丞台元年，主管官吏商议是否应到宗庙参拜祖先。
English: In the first year of the Joseon Dynasty, the officials in charge discussed whether they should go to the ancestral temple to worship their ancestors.

古文：尚书令徐孝嗣议： 嗣君即位，并无庙见之文；蕃支纂业，乃有虔谒之礼。 
现代文：尚书令徐孝嗣建议： 继承帝位的君主即位，都没有到宗庙参拜祖先的记载，宗族繁衍继承祖业，才有虔诚地谒见宗庙祖庙之礼。 
English: Shang Shuling Xu Xiaozhi suggested: There is no record of the monarchs who succeeded to the throne of the imperial throne visiting their ancestors in the ancestral temple. Only when the clan prospers and inherits the ancestral inheritance can they reverently visit the ancestral temple of the ancestral temple.

古文：左丞萧琛议： 窃闻祗见厥祖，义著《商书》，朝于武宫，事光晋册。
现代文：左丞萧琛建议：我听说恭敬地拜谒自己的祖先，这一礼义明白地写在《商书》中，朝拜武宫，事情光大于晋朝史册。
English: Zuoxing Xiaoqi suggested: I heard that you should respectfully worship your ancestors, this courtesy is clearly written in the "Commercial Book," and worship the Wuxing Palace, the matter is lighter than the history of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：岂有正位居尊，继业承天，而不虔觐祖宗，格于太室？
现代文：哪有登临尊崇的帝位，承受天命继承王业，却不虔诚觐见祖宗，来到太庙。
English: Who has ascended the revered imperial throne, received the heavenly destiny of inheriting the kingship, but is not pious enough to meet the ancestors and come to the Imperial Temple.

古文：《毛诗·周颂》篇曰： 《烈文》，成王即政，诸侯助祭矣也。 
现代文：《毛诗周颂》篇说 《烈文》，是成王即位管理国家，诸侯协同祭祖 。
English: According to the "Mao Shi Zhou Xiang" (Mao's Weekly Homage), the "martyrs" were the kings who ascended to the throne and governed the country, and the princes who jointly worshiped the ancestors.

古文：郑注云： 新王即政，必以朝享之礼祭于祖考，告嗣位也。 
现代文：郑玄注说 新王即位，一定要用朝拜享祀之礼祭祀祖宗，秉告继承帝位 。
English: Zheng Xuan said that when a new king ascends the throne, he must use the ritual of worship to worship the ancestors and uphold the succession to the throne.

古文：又篇曰 《闵予小子》，嗣王朝庙也 。
现代文：另外一篇说 《闵予小子》，是继位国君朝拜宗庙 。
English: Another article said that "Giving birth to a child" is the succession of the sovereign to worship the ancestral temple.

古文：郑注云： 嗣王者，谓成王也。
现代文：郑玄注说 继位国君是指成王。
English: Zheng Xuan noted that the successor to the throne of the country refers to Cheng Wang.

古文：除武王之丧，将始即政，朝于庙也。 
现代文：除去为武王服的丧服，将要开始即位管理国家，朝拜宗庙 。
English: After removing the funeral attire of the warrior king, they will begin to reign the country and worship the ancestral temple.

古文：则隆周令典，焕炳经记，体嫡居正，莫若成王。
现代文：如此看来隆盛周代法典，严明纲纪，身为嫡子居于帝位，没有比得上成王的。
English: From this perspective, the flourishing of the Zhou Dynasty legal code, strict discipline, and being the legitimate son living on the imperial throne, cannot be compared to becoming a king.

古文：又二汉由太子而嗣位者，西京七主，东都四帝，其昭、成、哀、和、顺五君，并皆谒庙，文存汉史；其惠、景、武、元、明、章六君，前史不载谒事，或是偶有阙文，理无异说。
现代文：另外两漠由太子继承帝位者，西京七位，束都四位，其中昭、成、哀、和、从五帝，都拜谒宗庙，有关内容载于汉代史书，其他惠、景、武、元、明、章六帝，前代史书没有记载他们拜谒宗庙的事，或许是史书偶尔有阙文，道理上没有其他解释。
English: In addition, there were seven emperors in the Western Capital and four emperors in the Eastern Capital who succeeded to the imperial throne. Among them, Emperor Zhao, Emperor Cheng, Emperor Ai, Emperor He and Emperor Zong of the Five Emperors all paid homage to the Ancestral Temple of Emperor Xizong. The relevant contents are recorded in the history books of the Han Dynasty. Other emperors including Emperor Hui, Emperor Jing, Emperor Wu, Emperor Yuan, Emperor Ming and Emperor Zhang of the Sixth Dynasty were not recorded in the history books of the previous generation. It may be that the history books occasionally have erroneous texts, but there is no other explanation.

古文：议者乃云先在储宫，已经致敬，卒哭之后，即亲奉时祭，则是庙见，故无别谒之礼。
现代文：议论者说皇上早在束宫做太子时，已经向祖先表示了敬意，终止哭泣之后，当即亲自主持正常的祭祀，造就是在宗庙拜见祖先了，所以没有另外拜谒的礼制。
English: Commentators say that the Emperor had already paid his respects to his ancestors as early as when he was crown prince at Sokoku Palace. After he had finished crying, he immediately held a normal ritual in person, because he had already visited his ancestors at the ancestral temple, so there was no other ritual of worship.

古文：窃以为不然。
现代文：我认为不是这样。
English: I don't think so.

古文：储后在宫，亦从郊祀，若谓前虔可兼后敬，开元之始，则无假复有配天之祭矣。
现代文：作为太子在束宫时，也随从参加郊祭，如果说以前的虔诚可以代替后来的恭敬，新朝代创始，就无须再有配祀上天的祭礼了。
English: When he was crown prince at Sokoku, he also attended the suburb festival. If the piety of the past can replace the deference of the future, when a new dynasty is founded, there will be no need for a ritual to worship the heavens.

古文：若以亲奉时祭，仍为庙见者，自汉及晋，支庶嗣位，并皆谒庙，既同有蒸尝，何为独修繁礼？
现代文：如果认为亲自主持正常祭祀后，再到宗庙拜见是重复，可是从漠到置，庶子继位，都到宗庙拜谒，既然同是有了祭礼，为何衹有庶子继位举行繁杂的礼仪?
English: If it is considered that it is repetitive to visit the ancestral temple again after holding a normal ritual in person, but from birth to death, the illegitimate child's succession, all go to the ancestral temple to worship, since there is a ritual, why does the illegitimate child's succession hold complicated rituals?

古文：且晋成帝咸和元年改号以谒庙，咸康元年加元服，又更谒。
现代文：而且晋成帝咸和元年改年号后，拜谒宗庙，咸康元年加冕，又重新拜谒。
English: Moreover, after Emperor Jincheng changed his name to Xianhe in the first year of the year, he paid homage to the ancestral temple of Emperor Xian, was crowned Emperor Xiankang in the first year of the year, and again paid homage to Emperor Xian.

古文：夫时非异主，犹不疑二礼相因，况位隔君臣，而追返以一谒兼敬。
现代文：时间上没有换君主，还不怀疑两礼重复，何况地位上隔为君臣，却衹用一次拜谒追祭礼敬。
English: There has not been a change of monarch in time, and there is no doubt that the two rites are repeated, not to mention the fact that the position is separated from the monarch and the minister, but they use one time to worship and follow the ritual.

古文：宜远纂周、汉之盛范，近黜晋、宋之乖义，展诚一庙，骏奔万国。 
现代文：应当继承遥远的周、汉的盛大仪范，黜弃近代置、塞的乖异礼仪，朝拜一次宗庙表现的诚信，会迅速传遍万国。
English: It is necessary to inherit the grand rituals of the distant Zhou and Han dynasties, abandon the modern and outdated etiquette, and worship the sincerity of the performance of the ancestral temple, which will quickly spread throughout the world.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏议被许可。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：永明元年十二月，有司奏： 今月三日，腊祠太社稷。
现代文：永明元年十二月，主管官吏上奏： 本月三，腊祭太社稷。
English: In December of the first year of the Yongming era, the responsible official recited: On the third day of this month, La Festival Taisha.

古文：一日合朔，日蚀既在致斋内，未审于社祠无疑不？曹检未有前准。 
现代文：一日日月相会，在斋戒期内发生了食，不知道对社祭有没有妨碍?
English: The sun and moon meet on the same day, and food is eaten during the fasting period. Is there any obstacle to the social festival?

古文：尚书令王俭议： 《礼记·曾子问》 天子尝、禘、郊、社、五礼之祭，簠簋既陈 ，唯大丧乃废。
现代文：官署没有先例依照。 尚书令王俭建议： 《礼记曾子问》 天子举行尝谛郊社等五礼范围的祭祀，篮簋等祭器已经摆好 ，衹有遇到天子或皇后的丧事才废止。
English: There is no precedent for the government office to follow. Wang Jian suggested: "The Book of Rites and Decrees" Tianzi held a five-recipe range of sacrificial rites such as the suburb, the basket and other sacrificial objects have been arranged, and it was only abolished when there was a funeral for the emperor or the queen.

古文：至于当祭之日，火、日蚀则停。
现代文：到正当祭祀的那天，发生火灾以及食就停止。
English: On the day of the proper sacrifice, if there is a fire, the eating stops.

古文：寻伐鼓用牲，由来尚矣，而簠簋初陈，问所不及。
现代文：查考击鼓献祭，由来久远，可是篮簋等祭器刚摆好，没有问到。
English: Investigate the drumming sacrifice, it has a long history, but the basket and other sacrificial objects have just been set up, and they have not been asked.

古文：据此而言，致斋初日，仍值薄蚀，则不应废祭。
现代文：据此来说，斋戒第一天，赶上轻微的日食，就不应当废止祭祀。
English: According to this, on the first day of fasting, when there is a slight eclipse of the sun, the sacrificial rites should not be abolished.

古文：又初平四年，士孙瑞议以日蚀废冠而不废郊，朝议从之。
现代文：另外初平四年，士孙瑞建议因食废止冠礼而不废止郊祭，朝廷的议论采纳了这一建议。
English: In addition, in the first four years of the Heian period, the scholar Sun Rui suggested that the suburb festival should not be abolished due to the abolition of the coronation ceremony, and the discussion of the imperial court adopted this suggestion.

古文：王者父天亲地，郊社不殊，此则前准，谓不宜废。 诏 可 。
现代文：王把天地作为父母，郊祭社祭没有不同，造就是先例，我认为不应废止。 下诏说 可以 。
English: The king regards heaven and earth as his parents, the suburban festival and the social festival are no different, the creation is a precedent, I think it should not be abolished.

古文：永明十一年，兼祠部郎何佟之议： 案《礼记·郊特牲》： 社祭土而主阴气也，君南向于北墉下，答阴之义也。 
现代文：丞塱十一年，兼祠部郎包工驻建议：据《礼记郊特牲》 社祭祭土而以阴气为主，国君面向南立在社坛北墙下，其意是对着阴面 。
English: In the 11th year of the Joseon Dynasty, he was also the steward of the ancestral hall. He suggested that, according to the "Rites of the Suburban Special Sacrifice," the soil of the social festival was mainly gloomy, and the sovereign stood facing south under the north wall of the altar, which meant facing the gloomy side.

古文：郑玄云 答犹对也 。 北墉，社内北墙也 。
现代文：郑玄说 答好比是相对 。 北墉，是社祠内的北墙 。
English: Zheng Xuan said that the answer is relative. Beibei, is the north wall inside the shrine.

古文：王肃云： 阴气北向，故君南向以答之。
现代文：王肃说： 阴气向北，所以国君面向南与之相对。
English: Wang Su said: Yin qi moves northward, so the sovereign faces south to oppose it.

古文：答之为言是相对之称。 
现代文：答之就是与之相对的意思。 
English: Answer means the opposite of what it says.

古文：知古祭社，北向设位，斋官南向明矣。
现代文：由此可知古代祭社，面向北设置神位，斋官面向南，是很清楚的。
English: From this, it is clear that in ancient shrines, the gods were placed facing north, while the priests faced south.

古文：近代相承，帝社南向，太社及稷并东向，而斋官位在帝社坛北，西向，于神背后行礼；又名稷为稷社，甚乖礼意。
现代文：近代沿袭，帝社朝南，太社及稷坛都朝东，斋官的位置在帝社坛北，面向西，在神位背后行礼。又称稷为稷社，非常违背礼的本意。
English: In modern times, the Imperial Shrine faces south, while the Grand Shrine and the main altar face east. The position of the priest is in the north of the Imperial Shrine, facing west, and he performs the ritual behind the altar. It is also known as the "Shrine of the Crucifixion," which is very contrary to the original intention of the ritual.

古文：乃未知失在何时，原此理当未久。
现代文：却不知在何时弄错，追溯其中道理应当不久。
English: But I don't know when I made the mistake, and it won't be long before I find out why.

古文：窃以皇齐改物，礼乐惟新，中国之神，莫贵于社，若遂仍前谬，惧亏盛典。
现代文：我认为皇齐改变前朝文物制度，礼乐都应更新，中原的神灵，没有比社神更尊贵的，如果仍旧沿袭前代的错误，恐怕有损盛大的典礼。
English: I think that the Emperor Qi changed the cultural relics system of the previous dynasty, and the ritual music should be updated. The gods of the Central Plains are no more noble than the social gods. If the mistakes of the previous generation are still followed, I am afraid that the grand ceremony will be damaged.

古文：谓二社，语其义则殊，论其神则一，位并宜北向。
现代文：认为二社，说起其字义是不同，若论其神灵则是相同的，神位都应朝北。
English: It is believed that the two shrines have different meanings, but if their deities are the same, the deities should face north.

古文：稷若北向，则成相背。
现代文：稷神如果朝北，就变成了相互背离。
English: If the two gods face north, they will turn into each other.

古文：稷是百谷之总神，非阴气之主，宜依先东向。
现代文：稷是百谷的总神，不是阴气之主，应依照先前朝束。
English: Zhai is the chief god of the Hundred Valleys, not the lord of Yin, and should follow the previous morning dress.

古文：斋官立社坛东北，南向立，东为上，诸执事西向立，南为上。
现代文：斋官站在社坛东北，面向南站立，束是上位；各位执事面向西站立，南是上位。
English: The sacristan stands in the northeast of the altar, facing south, and the casket is higher; the deacons stand facing west, and the south is higher.

古文：稷依礼无兼称，今若欲尊崇，正可名为太稷耳，岂得谓为稷社邪？
现代文：稷依据礼没有异名，现在如果要尊崇，正可以命名为太稷，怎能说是稷社呢?
English: According to the etiquette, there is no different name. Now, if you want to respect, you can just name it Taiko. How can it be said to be a eunuch society?

古文：腊祠太社日近，案奏事御，改定仪注。 
现代文：腊祭太社日期临近，可依照所奏请的事情处理，改定礼仪制度。
English: As the date of the Lasai Taisha approaches, it is possible to modify the etiquette system in accordance with the request.

古文：仪曹称治礼学士议曰： 《郊特牲》又云 君之南向，答阳也，臣之北向，答君也。 
现代文：仪曹称治礼学士的意见是：《郊特牲》又说 国君面向南，是与阳相对；大臣面向北，是与国君相对 。
English: Yi Cao said that the opinion of the scholar of etiquette is: "The Countryside Special Animal" also says that the sovereign faces south, opposite the sun; the minister faces north, opposite the sovereign.

古文：若以阳气在南，则位应向北，阴气在北，则位宜向南。
现代文：如果认为阳气在南，那么神位应朝北；阴气在北，那么神位应朝南。
English: If yang is considered to be in the south, then the god's seat should face north; if yin is in the north, then the god's seat should face south.

古文：今南北二郊，一限南向，皇帝黑瓒阶东西向，故知坛墠无系于阴阳，设位宁拘于南北？
现代文：现在南北郊祭，一律限定朝南，皇帝持黑瓒站在台阶东部面向西，由此知道祭坛与阴阳无关，设置神位又怎能拘限于南北。
English: Now, the festivals in the southern and northern suburbs are all limited to the south, and the emperor stands on the eastern steps holding a black scepter and facing west. From this, we know that the altar has nothing to do with yin and yang, and how can the setting of the god's throne be limited to the north and south?

古文：群神小祠，类皆限南面，荐飨之时，北向行礼，盖欲申灵祇之尊，表求幽之义。
现代文：众位神灵小的祭祀，大都限定面向南，供奉的时候，面向北行礼大概是想申明神灵的尊贵，表示追求阴幽的含义。
English: The small sacrifices of the gods are mostly limited to the south, and when they are offered, the north-facing salute is probably intended to affirm the dignity of the gods and express the meaning of pursuing the shade.

古文：魏世秦静使社稷别营，称自汉以来，相承南向。
现代文：魏秦静让另外营建社稷，说自汉代以来，相沿朝南。
English: Wei Qin Jing let another build a shrine, saying that since the Han Dynasty, it has been along the south of the dynasty.

古文：汉之于周，世代未远，鄗上颓基，商丘余树，犹应尚存，迷方失位，未至于此，通儒达识，不以为非。
现代文：汉离周年代隔得不远，鄗城荒废的房基，商丘残余的树，应还有遣存，迷失祭坛方位，没到现在这样，博学的儒者知识通达，不认为是错误。
English: The Han Dynasty was not far from the Zhou Dynasty. The abandoned house foundations in Lucheng and the remaining trees on the merchant hill should have been preserved, and the position of the altar should have been lost. This is not the case now. The learned Confucians are knowledgeable and do not think it is a mistake.

古文：庾蔚之昔已有此议，后徐爰、周景远并不同，仍旧不改。 
现代文：庾蔚之从前已有这种意见，后来徐爰、周景远都有不同意见，仍旧没有改变。
English: In the past, Gong Wei Zhi had this opinion, but later, Xu Wei and Zhou Jingyuan had different opinions and still did not change.

古文：佟之议： 来难引君南向答阳，臣北向答君。
现代文：何佟之建议：提出的辩驳引述国君面向南与阳相对，臣下面向北与国君相对。
English: He Xizhi's suggestion: the proposed rebuttal cites that the sovereign faces south to oppose the sun, and the vassal faces north to oppose the sovereign.

古文：敢问答之为言，为是相对？
现代文：敢问 答 的意思，是相对?
English: Is the meaning of "dare to ask and answer" relative?

古文：为是相背？
现代文：还是相背?
English: Or are they estranged?

古文：相背则社位南向，君亦南向，可如来议。
现代文：如果相背则在社神位面向南，国君也面向南，可以同提出的辩驳相符。
English: If the opposite is true, then the shrine is facing south, and the sovereign is also facing south, which can be consistent with the argument put forward.

古文：《郊特牲》云 臣之北向答君 ，复是君背臣。
现代文：《郊特牲》说 臣下面朝北与国君相对 。又成了国君与臣下相背。
English: "Countryside Special Sacrifice" said that the vassals under the Northern Court opposed the sovereign, and the sovereign turned against the vassals.

古文：今言君南臣北，向相称答，则君南不得称答矣。《记》何得云祭社君南向以答阴邪？
现代文：现在说国君朝南臣下朝北，如照前面解释 答 的意思，那么国君朝南就不能称为 答 ，《礼记》怎能说祭社时国君朝南 答 阴面呢?
English: Now, when it is said that the ruler of the country, the Emperor of the South, is subordinate to the Emperor of the North, if the meaning of the answer is as explained above, then the ruler of the country, the Emperor of the South, cannot be called the answer. How can the "Li Ji" say that the ruler of the country, the Emperor of the South, is subordinate to the Emperor of the North at the time of the festival?

古文：社果同向，则君亦宜西向，何故在社南向？
现代文：社神如果朝同一方向，那么国君也应当面向西，为什么在社祭时面向南?
English: If the social deities face the same direction, then the sovereign should also face west. Why should he face south during the social festival?

古文：在郊西向邪？
现代文：在效祭时面向西呢?
English: How about facing west during the graduation ceremony?

古文：解则不然，《记》云，君之南向答阳，此明朝会之时，盛阳在南，故君南向对之，犹圣人南面而听，向明而治之义耳，宁是祈祀天地之日乎？
现代文：我的解释不是如此，《礼记》说，国君面向南与阳相对，这是表明朝廷集会的时候，昌盛的阳气在南，所以国君面向南与之相对，犹如圣人面向南听政，向着光明治理国家的意思，怎能是祈求祭祀天地的太阳呢?
English: This is not my interpretation. The Book of Rites says that the sovereign faces south and opposes the sun, which indicates that when the imperial court gathers, the prosperous yang is in the south, so the sovereign faces south and opposes it, just as the saints face south to listen to politics and govern the country toward the light. How can it be to pray for the sun of heaven and earth to be sacrificed?

古文：知祭社北向，君答故南向，祀天南向，君答宜北向矣。
现代文：由此可知祭社时神位朝北，国君与之相对所以朝南；祭天时神位朝南，国君与之相对应当朝北。
English: From this, it can be seen that when a shrine is dedicated, the god's throne faces north and the sovereign faces south; when a shrine is dedicated to the sun, the god's throne faces south and the sovereign faces north.

古文：今皇帝黑瓒阶东西向者，斯盖始入之别位，非接对之时也。
现代文：现在皇帝持黑瓒站在台阶东面向西，这大概是进入祭场的另外一个位置，不是应接相对时的位置。
English: Now the emperor is standing on the steps holding a black scepter, facing east to west. This is probably another position of entering the festival site, not the position when it is opposite.

古文：案《记》云 社所以神地之道也 。
现代文：据《礼记》说 社祭为的是神化地 。
English: According to the Book of Rites, the purpose of the social festival was to deify the earth.

古文：又云 社祭土而主阴气 。
现代文：又说 社祭祭祀地而主阴气 。
English: It is also said that the social festival is a place of worship and is dominated by gloomy weather.

古文：又云 不用命，戮于社 。
现代文：又说 不听从命令，在社坛处死 。
English: He also said that if they disobeyed orders, they would be executed on the social platform.

古文：孔安国云 社主阴，阴主杀 。
现代文：孔安国说 社祭主阴气，阴气主肃杀 。
English: Kong An Guo said that the main deity of the social festival is yin qi, and the main deity of yin qi is suicidal.

古文：《传》曰 日蚀，伐鼓于社 。
现代文：《传》说： 日食，在社祠击鼓 。
English: "Biography" says: The solar eclipse, drumming in the shrine.

古文：杜预云 责群阴也 。
现代文：杜预说 是谴责各阴气 。
English: To prophesy is to denounce all evil spirits.

古文：社主阴气之盛，故北向设位，以本其义耳。
现代文：社祭执掌阴气的强盛，所以朝北设置神位，以照其本意。
English: The social festival presides over the strength of the yin and yang, so the Northern Dynasty set up a god to fulfill its original intention.

古文：余祀虽亦地祇之贵，而不主此义，故位向不同。
现代文：其他的祭祀虽然也与土地祭祀同样尊贵，可是不具这种意义，所以神位的朝向不同。
English: Although other sacrificial rites are just as precious as the land sacrifice, they do not have the same significance, so the direction of the god's throne is different.

古文：不得见余阴祀不北向，便谓社应南向也。
现代文：不能看到其他的阴祀神位不朝北，便说社祭神位应当朝南。
English: If it is not possible to see that other deities of Yin worship do not face north, then it is said that the deity of Shasai should face south.

古文：案《周礼》祭社南向，君求幽，宜北向，而《记》云君南向，答阴之义，求幽之论不乖欤？
现代文：据《周礼》祭社时神位朝南，国君追求阴幽，应当面向北，可是《礼记》说国君面向南，这与相对阴气的意思，追求阴幽的言论不违背吗?
English: According to the "Weekly Rituals," when the shrine is dedicated, the god's throne faces south, and the sovereign pursues the shade and should face north. However, the "Rituals" say that the sovereign faces south. Doesn't this contradict the relatively gloomy meaning and the pursuit of the shade?

古文：魏权汉社，社稷同营共门，稷坛在社坛北，皆非古制。
现代文：魏临时用汉的社坛，社坛、稷坛同在一处，共用一个门口，稷坛在社坛北面，都不是古制。
English: Wei temporarily used Han's Shatang, Shatang and Gongtan in the same place, sharing a doorway, Gongtan in the north of the Shatang, are not ancient.

古文：后移宫南，自当如礼。
现代文：后迁到皇宫南面，自当是遵照礼制。
English: Later, it was moved to the southern side of the Imperial Palace, where it was expected to follow the etiquette.

古文：如静此言，乃是显汉社失周法，见汉世旧事。
现代文：如果像秦静说的这样，就是显示漠代的社祭失去了周代的法度，可以看到漠代的旧事。
English: If it is like Qin Jing said, it shows that the social festival of the desert generation has lost the law of Zhou Dynasty, and the old things of the desert generation can be seen.

古文：尔时祭社南向，未审出何史籍。
现代文：当时祭社神位朝南，不知出自什么史籍。
English: At that time, the position of the deity of the shrine was in the south, I don't know from what historical record.

古文：就如议者，静所言是祭社位向仍汉旧法，汉又袭周成规，因而不改者，则社稷三座，并应南向，今何改帝社南向，泰社及稷并东向邪？ 
现代文：就是依照议论者提出的秦静所说的祭社位置朝向仍依汉代旧的法度，汉代又是沿袭周代的成规，因而不用更改，那么社稷三座祭坛，都应当朝南，现在为什么改帝社朝南，泰社及稷都朝东呢?
English: That is, according to Qin Jing's argument, the position of the shrine is still based on the old law of the Han Dynasty. The Han Dynasty followed the established rules of the Zhou Dynasty, so it does not need to be changed. Then the three altars of the shrine should face south. Now, why change the emperor's shrine to the south, the Thai shrine and the capital to the east?

古文：治礼又难佟之，凡三往反。
现代文：治礼学士又向何佟之问难，总共往返了三次。
English: The bachelor of etiquette also asked He Yanzhi for advice, and made a total of three round trips.

古文：至建武二年，有司议： 治礼无的然显据。 
现代文：到建武二年，主管官吏提出： 治礼学士没有明确的根据。 
English: In the second year of Jianwu, the responsible officials proposed: There is no clear basis for the bachelor of etiquette.

古文：佟之议乃行。
现代文：何佟之的建议才实行。
English: Only then will the recommendations be implemented.

古文：建武二年，祠部郎何佟之奏： 案《周礼·大宗伯》 以苍璧礼天，黄琮礼地 。郑玄又云 皆有牲币，各放其器之色 。
现代文：建武二年，祠部郎何佟之上奏说：据《周礼大宗伯》 用苍璧祭天，黄琮祭地 郑玄又说 都有牺牲缯帛，各依照祭器的颜色 。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, the priest of the ancestral hall, He Xuan, said in a speech: According to "Zhou Li Da Zong Bo," the heaven was sacrificed with the celestial body, and the yellow skull was sacrificed. Zheng Xuan also said that there were sacrificial skulls, each according to the color of the sacrificial instrument.

古文：知礼天圜丘用玄犊，礼地方泽用黄牲矣。
现代文：此可知在圆丘祭天用黑牛犊，在方泽祭地用黄牲畜。
English: It is known that black oxen are used at the Round Hill Festival and yellow cattle are used at the Fonze Festival.

古文：《牧人》云 凡阳祀用骍牲，阴祀用黝牲 。
现代文：《牧人》说 凡是阳祀都用脐牲畜，阴祀都用黝牲畜 。
English: "The Herdsman" says that all yang worshipers use yakitori livestock, and all yin worshipers use yakitori livestock.

古文：郑玄云 骍，赤；黝，黑也。
现代文：郑玄说 醉，赤色；黝，黑色。
English: Zheng Xuan said: drunk, red; drunk, black.

古文：阳祀，祭天南郊及宗庙。
现代文：阳祀，指南郊祭天以及宗庙祭祀。
English: Yang worship, guide suburb festival heaven and ancestral temple worship.

古文：阴祀，祭地北郊及社稷 。
现代文：阴祀，指北效祭地以及社稷祭祀 。
English: Yin worship, refers to the Beigu Festival and the company's ritual.

古文：《祭法》云 燔柴于泰坛，祭天也。瘗埋于泰折，祭地也。用骍犊 。
现代文：《祭法》说 在泰坛焚烧木柴，是祭天；在泰折挖坑掩埋祭品，是祭地。用赤色牛犊 。
English: The "Sacrificial Law" says that burning firewood at the Thai altar is a sacrifice to the gods; digging a pit to bury the offerings at the Thai altar is a sacrificial ground.

古文：郑云 地，阴祀，用黝牲，与天俱用犊，故连言之耳 。知此祭天地即南北郊矣。
现代文：郑玄说 祭地是阴祀，用黑色牲畜，与祭天一样都用牛犊，所以连在一起说了 由此可知这里祭祀天地就是南北郊祭。
English: Zheng Xuan said that the sacrificial ground is Yin worship, with black livestock, and the same as the sacrificial heaven, they all use oxen, so they said together. From this, it can be seen that the sacrificial heaven and earth here is the North and South Suburban Festival.

古文：今南北两郊同用玄牲，又明堂、宗庙、社稷俱用赤，有违昔典。
现代文：现在南北郊祭都用玄色牲畜，另外明堂、宗庙、社稷祭祀都用赤色，舆从前的礼制不符。
English: Now, both the northern and southern suburb festivals use dark-colored livestock, and in addition, Myeongdong, ancestral temples, and social rites all use red, which does not match the previous etiquette.

古文：又郑玄云 祭五帝于明堂，勾芒等配食 。
现代文：另外郑玄说 在明堂祭祀五帝，勾芒等配祀 。
English: In addition, Zheng Xuan said that the Five Emperors were worshipped in the Ming Hall, and the hooked man was also worshipped.

古文：自晋以来，并圜丘于南郊，是以郊坛列五帝、勾芒等。
现代文：自晋以后，把圜丘并入南郊，因此郊祭坛陈列五帝及勾芒等的神位。
English: After the Jin Dynasty, Mengqiu was incorporated into the southern suburb, so the suburb's altar displays the Five Emperors and other deities.

古文：今明堂祀五精，更阙五神之位，北郊祭地祗，而设重黎之坐，二三乖舛，惧亏盛则。 
现代文：现在明堂祭祀五方之神，更是缺少五神的神位，北郊祭祀地祇，却设置重黎的神位，乖舛不一，恐怕有损盛大的礼典。
English: At present, Myeongdong worships the deities of the five directions, but it lacks the five deities. The deities of the northern suburbs are worshipped, but the deities of the southern suburbs are set up, which is awkward and inconsistent, and I am afraid that it will damage the grand ceremony.

古文：前军长史刘绘议： 《语》云 犁牛之子骍且角，虽欲勿用，山川其舍诸 。未详山川合为阴祀不？
现代文：前军长史刘绘议论说： 《论语》说 牛犊是赤色而且长着整齐的角，即便不想用于祭祀，山川之神难道会舍弃它吗，不知道山川之神应当是阴祀不?
English: Former military commander Shi Liu Peng commented: "The Analects says that the bull's horn is red and has neat horns. Even if you don't want to use it for sacrifice, will the god of mountains and rivers abandon it? Don't you know that the god of mountains and rivers should be worshipped?

古文：若在阴祀，则与黝乖矣。 
现代文：如果属于阴祀，那就舆用黑色不符了。 
English: If it belongs to Yin worship, then the use of black does not match.

古文：佟之又议： 《周礼》以天地为大祀，四望为次祀，山川为小祀。
现代文：何佟之又发表议论： 《周礼》以祭天地为大祀，四望为次祀，祭山川为小祀。
English: He Xizhi also made a comment: "Zhouli" takes the festival of heaven and earth as the major worship, the four directions as the secondary worship, and the festival of mountains and rivers as the minor worship.

古文：周人尚赤，自四望以上牲色各依其方者，以其祀大，宜从本也。
现代文：周人崇尚赤色，自四望以上用的牲畜，各依照其所处方位，因为这些祭祀很重大，应当遵从本色。
English: The people of Zhou worshipped the color red, and the animals that were used from the four directions and above, each according to their position, because these sacrifices were very important and should follow their true colors.

古文：山川以下，牲色不见者，以其祀小，从所尚也。
现代文：祭山以下的祭祀，没有记载牲畜的颜色，因为这些祭祀规模小，依照它们崇尚的颜色。
English: There is no record of the color of the livestock in the sacrificial rites below the sacrificial mountain, because these sacrificial rites are small in scale, according to the color they advocate.

古文：则《论》、《礼》二说，岂不合符？ 
现代文：这样《论语》、《礼记》的两种说法，怎么不相符? 
English: How do these two versions of "Analects" and "Rituals" not match?

古文：参议为允。
现代文：众人商量认为合适。
English: The etiquette officials deemed it appropriate through deliberation.

古文：从之。
现代文：采纳了这一意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：永元元年，步兵校尉何佟之议曰： 盖闻圣帝明王之治天下也，莫不尊奉天地，崇敬日月，故冬至祀天于圜丘，夏至祭地于方泽，春分朝日，秋分夕月，所以训民事君之道，化下严上之义也。故礼云 王者必父天母地，兄日姊月 。
现代文：永元元年，步兵校尉何佟之提议说：听说凡是圣明帝王治理天下，没有不尊奉天地，崇敬月的，所以冬至日在圆丘祭祀天，夏至在方泽祭祀地，春分祭，秋分日拜月，为的是教诲目姓事奉国君的道理，教化下尊敬上的道义所以《礼》说 王一定要以天为父，以地为母，以为兄。以月为姊 。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, infantry lieutenant He Yanzhi proposed: "I have heard that wherever Emperor Shengming rules the world, there is no disrespect for heaven and earth, and reverence for the moon. Therefore, on the winter solstice, the round mound is used to worship the sky, and on the summer solstice, the Fangze worship site, the vernal equinox festival, and the autumnal equinox day, the moon is worshiped. In order to teach the principle of serving the king, and the morality of respect under education, the "Rite" says that the king must take the sky as his father, the earth as his mother, and

古文：《周礼·典瑞》云 王搢大圭，执镇圭，藻藉五采五就以朝日 。
现代文：《周礼典瑞》说 王腰插大圭，手持镇圭，用五色丝绳绕五圈装饰朝拜曰 。
English: "Weekly Rites and Ceremonies" said that Wang inserted a large gourd into his waist, held a spring gourd in his hand, and used five-colored silk ropes to make five circles to decorate the morning worship.

古文：《觐礼》 天子出，拜日于东门之外 。
现代文：屋邈说 天子在春分曰祭，秋分曰拜月 。《觐礼》 天子出束门之外拜曰 。
English: The eavesdropper said that on the vernal equinox, the son of heaven would hold a festival, and on the autumnal equinox, he would pray to the moon.

古文：卢植云 朝日以立春之日也 。郑玄云 端当为冕，朝日春分之时也 。
现代文：卢植 朝拜曰是在立春 。郑玄说 端应当作冕，朝拜是春分的时候 。
English: Lu Zhi said that the morning worship is at the beginning of spring. Zheng Xuan said that the end should be crowned, and the morning worship is at the time of the spring equinox.

古文：《礼记·朝事议》云 天子冕而执镇圭，尺有二寸，率诸侯朝日于东郊，所以教尊尊也 。
现代文：《礼记。朝事议》说 天子头戴礼帽，手持的镇圭，有一尺二寸，率领诸侯到柬郊朝拜，为的是教导国民尊奉天尊 。
English: "Reki. Chosijisho" says that the heavenly son wore a ceremonial cap on his head and held a ceremonial staff with a length of one foot two inches. He led the princes to the outskirts of Cambodia to worship, in order to teach the people to worship the heavenly son.

古文：故郑知此端为冕也。
现代文：所以郑玄知道在这裹端是作冕。
English: So Zheng Xuan knew that it was the crowning at the end of the wrapping.

古文：《礼记·保傅》云 三代之礼，天子春朝朝日，秋暮夕月，所以明有敬也 。
现代文：《礼记保傅》说 三代的礼制，天子春天早晨祭，秋天傍晚拜月，为的是表明有所尊敬 。
English: "Li Ji Bao Fu" said that the three generations of etiquette, Tianzi spring morning festival, autumn evening moon worship, in order to show respect.

古文：而不明所用之定辰。
现代文：而没有说明所用的确切时辰。
English: It did not specify the exact time used.

古文：马、郑云用二分之时，卢植云用立春之日。
现代文：马融、翅玄说是用春分、秋分，卢植说是用立春。
English: Ma Rong and Wing Xuan said to use the vernal and autumnal equinox, while Lu Zhe said to use the first day of spring.

古文：佟之以为日者太阳之精，月者太阴之精。
现代文：我认为日是太阳的精灵，月是太阴的精灵。
English: I consider the sun to be the spirit of the sun, and the moon to be the spirit of the moon.

古文：春分阳气方永，秋分阴气向长。
现代文：春分时阳气刚在上升，秋分时阴气正向上长。
English: At the spring equinox, the yang qi is just rising, and at the autumn equinox, the yin qi is rising.

古文：天地至尊用其始，故祭以二至，日月礼次天地，故朝以二分，差有理据，则融、玄之言得其义矣。
现代文：天地是至尊，要在节气开始时祭祀，所以在冬至、夏至祭祀；曰月在礼仪等级上次于天地，所以在春分、秋分朝拜。有一定的道理和根据，这样马融、郑玄的话就符合其本意。
English: Heaven and earth are supreme, and they should be sacrificed at the beginning of the solar terms, so they should be sacrificed at the winter solstice and summer solstice; the sun and the moon should be worshipped at the vernal and autumnal equinoxes, because they are the last in the etiquette level. There is a certain reason and basis, so the words of Ma Rong and Zheng Xuan are in line with their original intention.

古文：汉世则朝朝日，暮夕月。
现代文：汉代是清晨祭，傍晚拜月。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was an early morning festival and an evening moon-worship.

古文：魏文帝诏曰： 《觐礼》天子拜日东门之外，反礼方明。
现代文：魏文帝下诏说 《觐礼》中天子在东门外朝拜，返回后祭祀上下四方神明。
English: Emperor Weiwen issued an edict saying that in "The Rite of Spring," the heavenly son worshiped outside the east gate, and after returning, he offered sacrifices to the gods of the four directions.

古文：《朝事议》曰天子冕而执镇圭，率诸侯朝日于东郊。
现代文：《朝事议》说天子头戴礼帽，手持镇圭，率领诸侯到束郊朝拜日。
English: "Morning Session" said that the heavenly son wore a ceremonial cap on his head, held a zhengui in his hand, and led the princes to the suburbs to worship the sun.

古文：以此言之，盖诸侯朝，天子祀方明，因率朝日也。
现代文：由此而言，大概在诸侯朝觐时，天子祭祀上下四方神明，因而率领诸侯朝拜曰。
English: Therefore, it is likely that at the time of the vassals' pilgrimage, the heavenly son offered sacrifices to the gods of the four directions, and thus led the vassals in the pilgrimage.

古文：汉改周法，群公无四朝之事，故不复朝于东郊，得礼之变矣。
现代文：汉改变了周的法度，各地王公不再进京朝觐，所以不再到东郊朝拜日，这是符合礼的变化。
English: The Han Dynasty changed the laws of the week. Princes from all over the country no longer went to Beijing for the pilgrimage, so they no longer went to the eastern suburbs to worship the sun. This was a change in accordance with the ritual.

古文：然旦夕常于殿下东向拜日，其礼太烦。
现代文：然而早晚常在宫殿下向东朝拜曰，其礼仪太烦琐。
English: However, he often prayed to the East under the palace in the morning and evening, saying that its etiquette was too cumbersome.

古文：今采周春分之礼，损汉日拜之仪，又无诸侯之事，无所出东郊，今正殿即亦朝会行礼之庭也。
现代文：现在采用周代春分祭的礼仪，减除汉代每朝拜的仪式，又没有诸侯朝觐的事，不去束郊祭祀，现在正殿就是举行朝会仪式的场所，宜每每在春分之于正殿祭曰。
English: Nowadays, the etiquette of the Spring Equinox Festival of the Zhou Dynasty is adopted, the ritual of worshiping every emperor in the Han Dynasty is subtracted, and there is no matter of princes' pilgrimages, and there is no need to go to the suburbs for sacrifices. Now the main hall is the place where the imperial meeting ceremony is held. It is appropriate to say that the main hall festival is held every spring equinox.

古文：宜常以春分于正殿之庭拜日，其夕月文不分明。
现代文：至于祭月，其文不明。这事大家还没有商议提出意见 。
English: As for the month of sacrifice, the text is unclear. This matter has not been discussed and opinions have not been raised.

古文：其议奏。 魏秘书监薛循请论云： 旧事朝日以春分，夕月以秋分。
现代文：魏秘书监薛循请求发表意见说 过去朝拜在春分，祭拜月在秋分。
English: Wei Secretary Supervisor Xue Xun requested to comment that in the past, the morning worship was held on the vernal equinox, and the month of worship was held on the autumnal equinox.

古文：案《周礼》朝日无常日，郑玄云用二分，故遂施行。
现代文：根据《周礼》朝拜没有固定的期，郑玄说要用春分、秋分，所以就施行了。
English: According to the "Weekly Ritual," there is no fixed period for morning worship. Zheng Xuan said that the spring and autumn equinox should be used, so it was implemented.

古文：秋分之夕，月多东潜，而西向拜之，背实远矣。
现代文：秋分的傍晚，月多潜藏在东方天际，却向西方祭拜，背离实际太远了。
English: On the evening of the autumnal equinox, the crescent moon lurks in the eastern sky, but worships the west, which is too far from reality.

古文：谓朝日宜用仲春之朔，夕月宜用仲秋之朔。 
现代文：我认为朝拜应该在仲春的朔日，祭拜月应该在仲秋的朔 。
English: I think that the morning worship should be on the first day of spring, and the worship month should be on the first day of autumn.

古文：淳于睿驳之，引《礼记》云 祭日于东，祭月于西，以端其位 。
现代文：淳于睿反驳他，引用《礼记》的话 在东方祭曰，在西方祭月，端正它们的位置 。
English: Chun Yu Rui refuted him, quoting the words of "Li Ji" In the East Festival, in the West Festival, correct their position.

古文：《周礼》秋分夕月，并行于上世。
现代文：《周礼》中在秋分闩拜月，一直在历代实行。
English: In the "Weekly Rituals," the autumnal equinox falls in the month of wailing, which has been practiced throughout the ages.

古文：西向拜月，虽如背实，亦犹月在天而祭之于坎，不复言背月也。
现代文：向西拜月，虽然似乎背离实际情况，但也好比月挂中天却在坑穴祭祀，不再说是背离月亮。
English: To worship the moon to the west, although it seems to deviate from the actual situation, it is also like worshiping the moon in the pit while the moon hangs in the sky. It is no longer a deviation from the moon.

古文：佟之案《礼器》云 为朝夕必放于日月 。
现代文：据《礼器》记载 划分早晚必须依照月的运行 。
English: According to the records of "Rieki," the division of morning and evening must be according to the movement of the moon.

古文：郑玄云 日出东方，月出西方 ；又云 大明生于东，月生于西，此阴阳之分，夫妇之位也 。
现代文：郑玄说 出东方，月出西方 。又记载 大明生在东方，月生在西方，这是阴阳的区别，夫妇的分位 。
English: Zheng Xuan said that the sun rises in the east and the moon in the west. He also recorded that the sun is born in the east and the moon is born in the west, which is the difference between yin and yang, and the location of the couple.

古文：郑玄云 大明，日也 。知朝日东向，夕月西向，斯盖各本其位之所在耳。
现代文：郑玄说 大明，就是曰 由此可知朝拜向东，祭拜月向西，这大概是各依据自己的方位所在。
English: Zheng Xuan said Daming, that is to say, it can be known from this that the worship of the east, the worship of the moon to the west, which is probably each according to their own position.

古文：犹如天子东西游幸，朝堂之官及拜官者犹北向朝拜，宁得以背实为疑邪？
现代文：好比天子东西巡游，可是朝廷的百官以及被授予宫职的人，还是向北朝拜，怎么能因为背离实际就怀疑呢?
English: It's as if the Son of Heaven is cruising from east to west, but the hundreds of officials of the imperial court and those who have been awarded palace posts are still worshiping to the north. How can they be suspected of deviating from reality?

古文：佟之谓魏世所行，善得与夺之衷。
现代文：我认为魏代所实行的制度，非常符合礼义增删的本意。
English: I think the system implemented in the Wei Dynasty is very much in line with the original intention of adding and deleting etiquette.

古文：晋初弃圜丘方泽，于两郊二至辍礼，至于二分之朝，致替无义。
现代文：晋代初年毁弃圆丘方泽，停止了冬至夏至祭祀天地的礼仪，春分秋分朝拜曰月的仪式，也被替代失去了本意。
English: In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, the round hill of Fangze was abandoned, the ritual of worshipping heaven and earth during the winter solstice and summer solstice was stopped, and the ritual of worshiping the moon during the vernal equinox and autumnal equinox was replaced and lost its original intention.

古文：江左草创，旧章多阙，宋氏因循，未能反古。
现代文：江左南朝草创，旧的典章制度大多未能健全，宋代沿袭前朝，没能恢复古制。
English: The Southern Jiangsu Dynasty was a pioneer, and most of the old award system was not perfect. The Song Dynasty followed the previous dynasty and failed to restore the old system.

古文：窃惟皇齐应天御极，典教惟新，谓宜使盛典行之盛代，以春分朝于殿庭之西，东向而拜日，秋分于殿庭之东，西向而拜月，此即所谓必放日月以端其位之义也。
现代文：我们皇齐承受天命统治天下，礼典教化都要更新，我认为应该让盛大的礼典在昌盛的时代施行，春分曰在宫殿庭院的西部，面向东朝拜，秋分日在宫殿庭院的东部，面向西祭拜月，这就是所谓必须依照曰月的运行端正方位的意思。
English: Our emperors and queens bear the heavenly mandate to rule the world, and the ceremonies and teachings must be updated. I believe that grand ceremonies should be carried out in prosperous times. The vernal equinox is said to be worshiped in the west of the palace courtyard, facing east, and the autumnal equinox is said to be worshiped in the east of the palace courtyard, facing west. This is the so-called meaning that must be in accordance with the correct direction of the moon.

古文：使四方观化者，莫不欣欣而颂美。
现代文：使各地前来观摩教化的人，没有不高兴而且赞美的。
English: The people who have come from all over the country to observe and enlighten are not unhappy, but also praise.

古文：旒藻之饰，盖本天之至质也，朝日不得同昊天至质之礼，故玄冕三旒也。
现代文：天子祭天的礼服不装饰旒藻，大概是依据上天极端质朴的本质，朝拜日不能像祭祀吴天一样用质朴的礼仪，所以戴玄色礼帽装饰三条旒。
English: The ceremonial dress for the Tianzi Festival is not decorated with diatoms, probably based on the extremely simple nature of heaven. The morning worship cannot be done with a simple etiquette like the worship of Wu Tian, so wear a black hat to decorate three stripes.

古文：近代祀天，著衮十二旒，极文章之美，则是古今礼之变也。
现代文：近代祭祀天，穿衮衣礼帽装饰十二旒，极尽花纹色彩的美丽，造就是古今礼制的变化了。
English: Modern sacrificial rituals, the wearing of ceremonial robes and hats decorated with twelve stars, and the beauty of the patterns and colors are the changes in the ancient and modern ceremonial system.

古文：礼天朝日，既服宜有异，顷世天子小朝会，著绛纱袍、通天金博山冠，斯即今朝之服次衮冕者也。窃谓宜依此拜日月，甚得差降之宜也。佟之任非礼局，轻奏大典，实为侵官，伏追惭震。 
现代文：祭祀天与朝拜曰，既然礼服应有所不同，近来天子在小型的朝见中，穿戴绛纱袍、通天金博山冠，这是本朝等级低于衮冕的礼服，我认为应当穿戴这套礼服祭拜日月，它非常适合祭祀等级的依次降低我不在礼局任职，轻率地上奏盛大的礼典，确实是越权，低头追想起来极端惭愧。
English: On the difference between ceremonial attire for worshipping the heavens and worshipping the emperor, he said that since ceremonial attire should be different, recently the emperor has been wearing a gauze robe and a gold crown of Mt. Jinbo, which is a lower rank than the imperial crown, at a small morning meeting. I think that this set of ceremonial attire should be worn to worship the sun and the moon. It is very suitable for the sequential reduction of the level of sacrifice. I am not in the etiquette bureau, and I thoughtlessly performed a grand ceremony. It was indeed exceeding my authority, and I am extremely ashamed to look back on it.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了这一建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：永明三年，有司奏： 来年正月二十五日丁亥，可祀先农，即日舆驾亲耕。 
现代文：永明三年，主管官吏陈奏： 明年正月二十五丁亥，可以祭祀先农，当天御驾亲自耕田。 
English: In the third year of the Yongming era, the responsible official Chen So said: "Next year, on the 25th day of the first month of the year, you can make a sacrifice to the forerunner farmers, and drive yourself to cultivate the fields on that day.

古文：宋元嘉、大明以来，并用立春后亥日，尚书令王俭以为亥日藉田，经记无文，通下详议。
现代文：宋元嘉、大明以后，都是在立春后的亥曰举行，尚书令王俭认为在亥日举行籍田礼，经传中没有文字记载，交给下面详细商议。
English: After Song Yuanjia and Daming, it was held on the day of the boar after the spring. Wang Jian believed that it was held on the day of the boar, and there was no written record in the scriptures. It was handed over to the following for detailed discussion.

古文：兼太学博士刘蔓议： 《礼》，孟春之月，立春迎春，又于是月以元日祈谷，又择元辰躬耕帝藉。
现代文：兼太学博士刘蔓建议： 《礼》记载，孟春之月，立春迎春，又在这月的吉举行祈谷礼，又选择吉利的时曰由皇帝亲自主持籍田礼。
English: Liu Man, who is also a Doctor of Theology, suggested: According to the "Rite," the month of Mengchun, the first day of spring, and the beginning of spring, and the auspicious month of this month held the prayer valley ceremony, and the auspicious time was chosen by the emperor himself to hold the registration field ceremony.

古文：卢植说礼通辰日，日，甲至癸也，辰，子至亥也。
现代文：卢植说礼中的辰、日是相通的，曰，是从甲至癸；辰，是从子至亥。
English: Lu Zhe said that the hours and days in the ceremony are the same, that is, from A to Z; the hours are from Zi to Hai.

古文：郊天，阳也，故以日。
现代文：郊祭天是阳祀，所以用日。
English: The day of the suburb festival is the day of the sun worship, so it is used.

古文：藉田，阴也，故以辰。
现代文：籍田礼是阴祀，所以用辰。
English: Kechiden rei is a Shinto ritual, so it is used.

古文：阴礼卑后，必居其末，亥者辰之末，故《记》称元辰，注曰吉亥。
现代文：阴祀礼卑下靠后，一定是居于末位，亥是辰的最末位，所以礼记》称元辰，注说吉亥。
English: Yin worship and inferior worship are at the bottom, and must be in the last place. Hai is the last place of Chen. Therefore, "Li Ji" calls it Yuan Chen, and notes that it is Ji Hai.

古文：又据五行之说，木生于亥，以亥日祭先农，又其义也。 
现代文：另外根据五行学说，木生在亥，在亥曰祭祀先农，也符合其意。 
English: In addition, according to the doctrine of the five elements, the wood is born in the boar, and in the boar it is said that the first farmers are sacrificed, which is also in line with its intention.

古文：太常丞何諲之议： 郑注云 元辰，盖郊后吉亥也 。
现代文：太常丞何谨之建议： 郑玄注说 吉利的时日，大概就是郊祭之后吉利的亥曰 。
English: Taizang Ronghe suggested: Zheng Xuan said that the auspicious time is probably the boar festival after the suburb festival.

古文：亥，水辰也，凡在垦稼，咸存洒润。
现代文：亥，是辰中的水位，凡是农垦种植，都存有湿润之意。
English: Hai, is the water level in the middle of the chestnut, and all the cultivation of the cormorant has the meaning of wetness.

古文：五行说十二辰为六合，寅与亥合，建寅月东耕，取月建与日辰合也。 
现代文：五行学说认为十二辰组成六个相合，寅与亥相合，正月在束郊耕田，是取月建与日辰相合。 
English: The doctrine of the five elements holds that the twelve hours are composed of six conjunctions, with the tiger and the boar coinciding, the first month being the month of ploughing in the countryside, and the sun and the moon coinciding.

古文：国子助教桑惠度议： 寻郑玄以亥为吉辰者，阳生于子，元起于亥，取阳之元以为生物，亥又为水，十月所建，百谷赖兹沾润毕熟也。 
现代文：国子助教桑惠度建议： 查考郑玄把亥日作为吉利时曰，阳生在子曰，吉利起源于亥日，选取属阳的吉曰创造万物，亥又属水，代表十月，五谷依赖其滋润而成熟。 
English: Kuniko assistant professor Sang Huidu suggested: Check Zheng Xuan's saying that the day of the boar is auspicious, Yang Sheng Zi said that auspiciousness originated from the day of the boar, selecting the yang of auspiciousness to create all things, and the boar is water, representing October, and the grain relies on its moist and mature.

古文：助教周山文议： 卢植云 元，善也。
现代文：助教周山文建议： 卢植说 元，即吉利。
English: Assistant Professor Zhou Shanwen suggested: Lu Zhi said Yuan, that is, Geely.

古文：郊天，阳也，故以日。
现代文：郊祭天是阳祀，所以用曰。
English: The day of the suburb festival is the day of the sun worship, so it is used.

古文：藉田，阴也，故以辰 。蔡邕《月令章句》解元辰云 日，干也。辰，支也。有事于天，用日。
现代文：籍田礼是阴祀，所以用辰 蔡邕《月令章句》解释元辰说 曰是干，辰是支，祭祀天用曰，祭祀地用辰。 
English: The birthplace rite is a yin worship, so the use of 辰 蔡 "Monthly Chapter" explains the origin of 辰, saying that 曰 is stem, 辰 is branch, 祭祀天用曰,祭祀地用辰.

古文：有事于地，用辰 。 助教何佟之议： 《少牢馈食礼》云 孝孙某，来日丁亥，用荐岁事于皇祖伯某 。注云 丁未必亥也，直举一日以言之耳。
现代文：助教何佟之建议： 《少牢镇食礼》说 孝孙某某，明日丁亥，用年节礼祭祀皇祖伯某某 。注说 未必衹有丁亥日，衹是举一天来说明罢了。
English: Assistant Professor He Yanzhi's suggestion: "The Shaoqiao Town Food Festival" says, "Dear grandson, tomorrow is the Dinghai Festival, which is dedicated to the emperor's great-great-grandfather." Note that there may not be a Dinghai Day, but it is just a day to illustrate.

古文：禘太庙礼日用丁亥，若不丁亥，则用己亥、辛亥，苟有亥可也 。
现代文：祭祀太庙的典礼在丁亥日，如果不用丁亥日，就用己亥、辛亥曰，衹要有亥就可以，郑玄又说 必须用丁、己，是取其美名。
English: The ceremony of worshiping the Great Temple is on Dinghai Day. If you don't need Dinghai Day, you can use Ji Hai or Xin Hai. If you want a boar, you can have a boar. Zheng Xuan also said that you must use Ding or Ji to get its beautiful name.

古文：郑又云 必用丁、己者，取其令名，自丁宁自变改，皆为谨敬 。如此，丁亥自是祭祀之日，不专施于先农。
现代文：选用的是叮嘱、改变的意思，都是表示尊敬 。如果这样，丁亥衹是祭祀的日期，不足祭祀先农的专门日期。
English: If so, Dinghai New Year is the date of the sacrifice, and it is not a special date for the sacrifice of the first farmers.

古文：汉文用此日耕藉祠先农，故后王相承用之，非有别义。 
现代文：汉文帝在这天举行籍田礼祭祀先农，所以后世的帝王相沿采用，没有别的意思。 
English: On this day, Emperor Hanwen held a ceremony to commemorate the first farmers, so the later emperors adopted it, there is no other meaning.

古文：殿中郎顾暠之议： 郑玄称先郊后吉辰，而不说必亥之由。
现代文：殿中郎顾马之建议：郑玄称是先举行郊祭后的吉利时曰，可没有说必须是亥曰的理由。
English: The suggestion of the chief chamberlain Gu Ma: Zheng Xuan said that it was auspicious to hold the suburb festival first, but there was no reason to say that it must be the boar festival.

古文：卢植明子亥为辰，亦无常辰之证。
现代文：卢植清楚子到亥是叫辰，但也没有固定用辰的证据。
English: It is said that Lu Zhiqing's son was born in the year of the boar, but there is no evidence of a fixed date.

古文：汉世躬藉，肇发汉文，诏云 农，天下之本，其开藉田 。
现代文：汉代皇帝亲自主持籍田礼，始自汉文帝，他的诏书说 农业是天下的根本，农事活动开始于籍田礼 。
English: Han Dynasty emperors personally held the ceremony, starting with Emperor Hanwen. His edict said that agriculture is the foundation of the world, and agricultural activities began with the ceremony.

古文：斯乃草创之令，末睹亲载之吉也。
现代文：这衹是草就的诏令，没有发现皇帝亲自主持籍田的吉日。
English: This was a hasty edict and did not discover the auspicious day for the emperor to personally hold his fief.

古文：昭帝癸亥耕于钩盾弄田，明帝癸亥耕下邳，章帝乙亥耕定陶，又辛丑耕怀，魏之烈祖实书辛未，不系一辰，徵于两代矣。
现代文：昭帝癸亥日在钩盾管辖的皇家游乐场地耕田，明帝癸亥日在下邳耕田，章帝乙亥曰在定陶耕田，另外辛丑日在坏耕田，魏的至巡照实写明在辛未，不定在一辰，这是两代的证明。
English: The Zhao Emperor Shihai cultivated fields in the royal recreation grounds under the jurisdiction of the Hook Shield, the Ming Emperor Shihai cultivated fields in the Lower Shihai, the Zhang Emperor Yihai cultivated fields in the Ding Tao, and the Xin Ugai cultivated fields in the Bad Shihai, and the Wei Emperor Shihai surveyed fields in the Xin Wei, and the Bad Shihai in the Bad Shihai, which is proof of two generations.

古文：推晋之革魏，宋之因晋，政是服膺康成，非有异见者也。
现代文：推究晋的改变魏，塞的沿袭置，正是信服郑玄的意见，没有不同看法。
English: Investigating Jin's change of Wei, and the succession of Sai, is precisely to convince Zheng Xuan's opinion, there is no different opinion.

古文：班固序亥位云 阴气应亡射，该藏万物，而杂阳阂种 。
现代文：班固排列亥位说 阴气对应仲秋之月就应该收藏万物，然而如杂有阳气就会阻碍播种 。
English: The Chinese zodiac says that everything should be collected in the month of yin corresponding to the middle of autumn, but if there is yang mixed in, it will hinder sowing.

古文：且亥既水辰，含育为性，播厥取吉，其在兹乎？固序丑位云 阴大旅，助黄锺宣气而牙物 。
现代文：而且亥既然是属水的辰，天性化育，播种要选取吉曰，就是这个意思圭匡厘排列丑位说 阴祀五帝辅助仲冬之月渲泄气息萌生万物。 
English: Moreover, since the boar is a water animal, it is natural to breed and breed, and it is necessary to choose good seeds for sowing, that is the meaning of Gui Kuangli's arrangement of ugliness, saying that the worship of the Five Emperors assisted the midwinter moon to deflate the breath and germinate all things.

古文：序未位云 阴气受任，助蕤宾君主种物，使长大茂盛 。
现代文：排列未位说 阴气受命，辅助君主在五月播种万物，使它们长大茂盛 。
English: It is said that Yin Qi was ordered to assist the monarch in sowing all things in May to make them grow and flourish.

古文：是汉朝迭选，魏室所迁，酌旧用丑，实兼有据。 
现代文：因此还伐更选，重蝼改用，参酌从前的用丑，确实都有依据。
English: Therefore, there is indeed a basis for re-cutting and re-selection, re-hoeing and re-using, and taking into account the previous use of ugly.

古文：参议奏用丁亥。
现代文：相互商议奏请用丁亥曰。
English: For mutual consultation, please use Dinghai.

古文：诏 可 。
现代文：下诏说 可以 。
English: The next edict said yes.

古文：建元四年正月，诏立国学，置学生百五十人。
现代文：建元四年正月，下诏建立国学，配置一百五十位学生。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the following edict was issued to establish a Chinese language school with a total of 150 students.

古文：其有位乐入者五十人。
现代文：其中有爵位乐于入学的有五十人。
English: Among them, there are 50 people with peerage who are willing to enter the school.

古文：生年十五以上，二十以还，取王公已下至三将、著作郎、廷尉正、太子舍人、领护诸府司马谘议经除敕者、诸州别驾治中等见居官及罢散者子孙。
现代文：学生十五岁上学，二十岁回家，收取王公以下包括三将、著作郎、廷尉正、太子舍人、领护诸府司马谘议经除敕者、诸州别驾治中等、现在职以及罢职散官的子孙。
English: Students go to school at the age of fifteen, go home at the age of twenty, and receive the descendants of Wang Gong and below, including the three generals, the author's son, the courtier, the prince's son, the prince's son, the prince's son, the prince's son, the prince's son, the prince's son, the prince's son, the prince's son, the prince's son, the prince's son, the prince's son, the prince's son, the prince's son, the prince's son, the prince's son, the prince's son, the prince's son, the prince

古文：悉取家去都二千里为限。太祖崩，乃止。
现代文：选取的学生家离国都都不超过二千里。太祖去世，才停止。
English: The selected students' homes are no more than two thousand miles away from the capital. It only stopped when the great-grandfather passed away.

古文：永明三年正月，诏立学，创立堂宇，召公卿子弟下及员外郎之胤，凡置生二百人。
现代文：永明三年正月，下诏建立学校，创建学堂，招收公卿子弟及员外郎的后代，总共配置学生二百人。
English: In the first month of the third year of the reign of Emperor Yongming, the following edict was issued to establish a school, create a school hall, enroll the children of nobles and the descendants of officials, with a total of 200 students.

古文：其年秋中悉集。
现代文：当年秋季中期全都聚齐。
English: They all gathered in the middle of autumn that year.

古文：有司奏： 宋元嘉旧事，学生到，先释奠先圣先师，礼又有释菜，未详今当行何礼？
现代文：主管官吏上奏： 宋元嘉年问的旧制，学生到校，先用释奠礼祭祀先圣先师，另外有释莱礼，不知道现在应当举行什么礼?
English: The responsible official recited: The old system of the Song and Yuan dynasties is over. When students arrive at school, they first use the memorial service to worship the first priest, and there is also a Shilai ceremony. I don't know what ceremony should be held now?

古文：用何乐及礼器？ 
现代文：用什么乐和礼器? 
English: What music and instruments are used?

古文：尚书令王俭议： 《周礼》 春入学，舍菜合舞 。
现代文：尚书令王俭建议：《周礼》 春天入学，举行释菜礼，伴以乐舞 。
English: Wang Jian suggested: "Zhou Li" Spring enrollment, holding a dish-laying ceremony, accompanied by music and dance.

古文：《记》云 始教，皮弁祭菜，示敬道也 。
现代文：《礼记》说 学校开学头戴皮弁举行释菜礼，表示敬奉道学 。
English: "Li Ji" said that at the beginning of the school year, the school held a dish-splitting ceremony, expressing respect for Taoism.

古文：又云 始入学，必祭先圣先师 。
现代文：又说 刚入学，一定要祭祀先圣先师 。
English: He also said that when you first enter school, you must make a sacrifice to the first priest.

古文：中朝以来，释菜礼废，今之所行，释奠而已。
现代文：中朝以后，释菜礼被废，现在所实行的，衹是释奠礼。
English: After the Middle Kingdom, the exposition of dishes was abolished, and what is practiced now is the exposition of the dead.

古文：金石俎豆，皆无明文。
现代文：使用的乐器礼器，都没有明文记载。
English: The musical instruments and ceremonial objects used are not explicitly recorded.

古文：方之七庙则轻，比之五礼则重。
现代文：如仿效七庙祭礼就轻了，比照五礼就重了。
English: If you follow the example of the Seven Temples Festival, it will be lighter, but if you follow the example of the Five Rites Festival, it will be heavier.

古文：陆纳、车胤谓宣尼庙宜依亭侯之爵；范宁欲依周公之庙，用王者仪，范宣谓当其为师则不臣之，释奠日，备帝王礼乐。
现代文：陆纳、车胤认为宣尼庙应依照亭侯爵位的礼仪；范宁要依照旦公庙，用王的礼仪；茎宣认为应当把他作为先师，而不要作为臣下，举行释奠礼那天，配备帝王专用的音乐。
English: Lu Na and Che Yin believed that the Xuan Ni Temple should follow the etiquette of the Marquis of the Pavilion; Fanning should follow the Dangong Temple and use the king's etiquette; Zhu Xuan believed that he should be used as a pioneer, not as a subject, on the day of the memorial service, equipped with music dedicated to the emperor.

古文：此则车、陆失于过轻，二范伤于太重。
现代文：如此车、陆的主张就失之过轻，二范的主张又失之太重。
English: In this way, the propositions of "car" and "land" are too light, and the propositions of the two standards are too heavy.

古文：喻希云 若至王者自设礼乐，则肆赏于至敬之所；若欲嘉美先师，则所况非备 。
现代文：喻希说 如果达到王的等级自己陈设礼乐，就是在最尊敬的场所滥行奖赏；如果要嘉奖、赞美先师，就是比附得不完备 。
English: Yu Xi said that if you reach the level of the king and set up your own liturgy, you will be rewarded in the most respected place; if you want to praise and praise the teacher, it is incomplete.

古文：寻其此说，守附情理。
现代文：查考这一说法，符合情理。
English: It is reasonable to examine this statement.

古文：皇朝屈尊弘教，待以师资，引同上公，即事惟允。
现代文：皇朝屈尊弘扬教化，用先师之位相待，如同上公，就事而言是恰当的。
English: It is appropriate for the imperial court to deign to promote enlightenment, and to treat each other with the position of the forerunner, just like Shangguo.

古文：元嘉立学，裴松之议应舞六佾，以郊乐未具，故权奏登歌。
现代文：元嘉时建立学校典礼，裴松之提议应跳六佾舞，因为郊祭的乐舞尚未齐备，所以权且演奏登歌。
English: When Yuan Jia established the school ceremony, Pei Song's proposal was to dance the six-string dance, because the music and dance of the suburban festival were not yet ready, so the right to play and sing.

古文：今金石已备，宜设轩县之乐，六佾之舞，牲牢器用，悉依上公。 
现代文：如今乐器已经齐备，应该三面悬挂乐器演奏，跳六佾舞，牺牲物品及器具，全部依照上公。
English: Now that the musical instruments have been prepared, the musical instruments should be hung on three sides and played, the six-limbed dance should be danced, and the sacrificial items and utensils should be sacrificed, all according to Shangguan.

古文：其冬，皇太子讲《孝经》，亲临释奠，车驾幸听。
现代文：这年冬天，皇太子宣讲《孝经》，亲临释奠典礼，御驾也亲临倾听。
English: This winter, the crown prince preached the "Filial Piety Sutra" and attended the memorial service in person, and you also came to listen.

古文：建武四年正月，诏立学。
现代文：建武四年正月，下诏建立学校。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Jianwu era, the school was officially established.

古文：永泰元年，东昏侯即位，尚书符依永明旧事废学。
现代文：永泰元年，束昏侯即位，尚书台依照丞塱年间旧事废除学校。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, when Sok Douhou ascended to the throne, Shang Shudai abolished the school in accordance with the old practice during the Joseon Dynasty.

古文：领国子助教曹思文上表曰： 古之建国君民者，必教学为先，将以节其邪情而禁其流欲，故能化民裁俗，习与性成也。
现代文：领国子助教曹思文上表说：古代建立国家统治百姓的帝王，必定把教学放在首位，用来节制邪恶的情感，禁绝世俗的欲望，所以能教化百姓裁制风俗，养成良好习性。
English: Cao Siwen, the assistant teacher of the leading provincial son, said on the table: The emperors who established the country and ruled the people in ancient times must put teaching in the first place to restrain evil emotions and banish worldly desires, so they can teach the people to control customs and develop good habits.

古文：是以忠孝笃焉，信义成焉，礼让行焉，尊教宗学，其致一也。
现代文：因此忠孝纯一，信义形成，礼让实行，尊重学校教育，其目标是相同的。
English: Therefore, the goals of loyalty, filial piety, the formation of loyalty, the practice of courtesy, and respect for school education are the same.

古文：是以成均焕于古典，虎门炳于前经。
现代文：因此成均鲜明地记载在古代典籍，虎门显赫地记载在前代经典。
English: Therefore, Chengjun is clearly recorded in ancient classics, and Humen is prominently recorded in ancient classics.

古文：陛下体睿淳神，缵承鸿业，今制书既下，而废学先闻，将恐观国之光者，有以拟议也。
现代文：陛下圣明敦厚，承继大业，现在皇命已下，废除学校的消息早就传闻，恐怕观览国家盛德光辉的人，会有所议论。
English: His majesty Saint Mingtung, inheritor of the great cause, now the imperial order has come down, the news of the abolition of the school has long been rumored, I am afraid that those who watch the glory of the country will have some discussion.

古文：若以国讳故宜废，昔汉成立学，爰洎元始，百余年中，未尝暂废，其间有国讳也。
现代文：如果因为国丧的缘故应当废除，当年汉成帝设立学校，白元始年间，一百多年中，未曾有短暂的废除，其间也有国丧。
English: If it should be abolished because of the national mourning, the school was established by Emperor Han Chengdu in that year, and there has never been a short-term abolition in more than a hundred years since the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, during which there was also a national mourning.

古文：且晋武之崩，又其学犹存，斯皆先代不以国讳而废学之明文也。
现代文：而且晋逮童去世时，他设立的学校还是保存着，这些都是前代不因为国丧废除学校的明确记载。
English: Moreover, when Jin Fang Tong died, the school he established was still preserved. These are clear records of the previous generation not abolishing schools because of national mourning.

古文：永明以无太子故废，斯非古典也。
现代文：丞塱年间因为没有太子的缘故，废除学校，这不是古制。
English: During the Joseon Dynasty, schools were abolished because there was no crown prince. This is not the old system.

古文：寻国之有学，本以兴化致治也，天子于以谘谋焉，于以行礼焉。
现代文：查考国家设立学校，本意是兴起教化导致国家太平，天子到学校咨询商议，举行祭礼。
English: The purpose of the establishment of schools by the government was to promote enlightenment and lead the country to peace. The emperor would visit schools to consult and hold festivals.

古文：《记》云 天子出征，受命于祖，受成于学。
现代文：《礼记》说： 天子出征，接受祖先的旨命，接受学校拟订的谋略。
English: "Li Ji" said: The Son of Heaven goes to war, accepts the will and mission of the ancestors, and accepts the strategy drawn up by the school.

古文：执有罪反，释奠于学 。
现代文：抓获有罪的人回来，在学校举行释奠礼。 
English: Those who were caught and found guilty came back and held a release ceremony at the school.

古文：又云 食三老五更于太学，天子袒而割牲，执爵而酳，以教诸侯悌也 。
现代文：又说： 在太学设置三老五更之位赡养老人。天子袒露身体宰割牲畜，持爵献酒，教育诸侯孝悌。 
English: He also said, "Three old men and five younger men should be set up in Taigaku to support the elderly. The heavenly son should show his body to slaughter livestock, hold the peerage to offer wine, and educate the lords and princes.

古文：于斯学，是天子有国之基，教也或以之。
现代文：这学校是天子拥有国家的根基，或用其教化天下。
English: This school is the Son of Heaven possessing the foundation of the country, or using it to enlighten the world.

古文：所言皆太学事也，今引太学不非证也。
现代文：所说的都是太学的事。现在所引用的太学并不是相反的证据。
English: What is being said is a matter of esotericism, and the esotericism now being quoted is not evidence to the contrary.

古文：据臣所见，今之国学，即古之太学。
现代文：据我所见，现在的国学，就是古代的太学。
English: As far as I can see, today's study of Chinese classics is the same as that of ancient times.

古文：晋初太学生三千人，既多猥杂，惠帝时欲辩其泾渭，故元康三年始立国子学，官品第五以上得入国学。
现代文：晋代初年太学生有三干人，多了之后就会杂滥，惠查时想分辨清楚，所以元康三年才设立国子学，第五等官品以上的人能进入国学。
English: In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, there were three groups of students, and if there were more, there would be excesses. When Hui was investigating, he wanted to make a clear distinction, so Yuan Kang only established Guozih School three years later, and people with the fifth rank or higher could enter Guozhi School.

古文：天子去太学入国学，以行礼也。
现代文：天于离大学到国学，是为了举行典礼。
English: Tianyu left the university to study Chinese, in order to hold the ceremony.

古文：太子去太学入国学，以齿让也。
现代文：太子离太学入国学，是为了以年龄大小相让。
English: The prince left Taigaku to study abroad in order to make room for his age.

古文：太学之与国学，斯是晋世殊其士庶，异其贵贱耳。
现代文：分设太学与国学，这是晋代区别士庶，划分贵贱罢了。
English: Taigaku and Kokugaku were set up separately. This was the distinction between scholars and non-scholars during the Jin Dynasty. It was just a division of high and low.

古文：然贵贱士庶，皆须教成，故国学太学两存之也，非有太子故立也。
现代文：然而贵贱士庶，都需要教育化成，所以国学大学两者共存，不是因为有太子所以设立。
English: However, both aristocrats and commoners need to be educated, so the two national universities coexist, not because there is a crown prince.

古文：然系废兴于太子者，此永明之钜失也。
现代文：因此把学校的兴废系在太子身上，这是丞塱时的重大失误。
English: Therefore, it was a major blunder for the crown prince to be responsible for the success or failure of the school.

古文：汉崇儒雅，几致刑厝，而犹道谢三、五者，以其致教之术未笃也。
现代文：巡崇尚儒雅，几次废置刑法，可是还道谢居三老五更位的老人，是因为进行教育的手段没有精深。
English: The patrol revered the sophistication and abolished the criminal law several times, but also thanked the elderly who lived in the third and fifth generation, because the means of education were not sophisticated.

古文：古之教者，家有塾，党有庠，术有序，国有学，以讽诵相摩。
现代文：古代的教育，家庭有私塾，党有庠，术有序，国家有太学，用讽诵相互切磋。
English: Ancient education, the family has a private school, the party has a school, the art is orderly, the country has too much learning, and they use irony to learn from each other.

古文：今学非唯不宜废而已，乃宜更崇尚其道，望古作规，使郡县有学，飨闾立教。
现代文：现在的学校非但不应废除，还应更加崇尚教化之道，依据古代制度，让郡县有学校，乡间实施教化。
English: Not only should the current schools not be abolished, but they should also be more advocating the way of enlightenment, according to the ancient system, so that counties have schools and villages implement enlightenment.

古文：请付尚书及二学详议。 
现代文：请交予尚书台及太学、国学详加审议。
English: Please submit to Shang Shudai and Tai Xue, Chinese Studies for detailed consideration.

古文：有司奏。
现代文：主管官吏陈述。
English: The officials in charge made a statement.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从了这一建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：学竟不立。
现代文：学校最终没有能够设立。
English: The school was never built.

古文：永明五年十月，有司奏： 南郡王昭业冠，求仪注未有前准。 
现代文：丞塱五年十月，主管官吏上奏： 南郡王萧旦皑举行加冠礼，礼制中找不到从前的标准。 
English: In October of the same year, the responsible official recited: King Xiaodan of Nan County held a coronation ceremony, and the previous standard could not be found in the ceremony.

古文：尚书令王俭议： 皇孙冠事，历代所无。礼虽有嫡子无嫡孙，然而地居正体，下及五世。
现代文：尚书令王俭建议：皇孙加冠的事，历代都没有规定，礼典中虽然有嫡子但没有嫡孙，可是帝王位居正统，向下延及五代。
English: Wang Jian suggested: the matter of crowning the emperor's grandson has not been stipulated in previous generations. Although there is a legitimate son but no legitimate grandson in the ceremony, the emperor's throne is legitimate and extends down to five generations.

古文：今南郡王体自储晖，实惟国裔，元服之典，宜异列蕃。
现代文：如今南郡王是皇太子所生，确实是国家的后裔，加冕典礼，应该不同于各位藩王。
English: Today, the King of Nam County is the son of the Crown Prince, and is indeed a descendant of the country. The coronation ceremony should be different from that of the kings of various domains.

古文：案《士冠礼》 主人玄冠朝服，宾加其冠，赞者结缨 。郑玄云 主人，冠者之父兄也 。
现代文：据《士冠礼》， 主人穿戴黑礼帽朝会礼服，主宾为成年者戴上帽子，赞礼者为其系上帽带，郑玄说 主人，是被加冠者的父兄 。
English: According to the "Crowning Ceremony," the host wears a black ceremonial hat and a ceremonial dress, the main guest puts on a hat for an adult, and the praiser ties a hatband for him. Zheng Xuan said that the host is the father and brother of the crowned person.

古文：寻其言父及兄，则明祖在，父不为主也。
现代文：查考这裹说父亲及哥哥，就是表明祖宗的存在，父亲不是作为君主。
English: The mention of a father and an older brother indicates the existence of an ancestor, not the father as monarch.

古文：《大戴礼记·公冠篇》云公冠自为主，四加玄冕，以卿为宾。
现代文：《大戴礼记公冠篇》说公举行加冠礼自己作主人，四次加戴黑色礼帽，把卿作为宾客。
English: "The Great Crowning Ceremony" says that the king holds the crowning ceremony himself as the host, wears a black hat four times, and takes the lord as a guest.

古文：此则继体之君及帝之庶子不得称子者也。
现代文：这是表明继位的国君以及帝王的庶子不能称是继位者。《小戴礼记。
English: This shows that the prince who succeeds to the throne and the emperor's illegitimate son cannot be called the successor.

古文：《小戴礼记·冠义》云 冠于阼，以著代也。
现代文：冠义》说 在主人位上行加冠礼，是显示被加冠者是传宗接代的人。
English: Guanyi" said that the crowning ceremony on the master's throne is to show that the person crowned is the person who inherits the lineage.

古文：醮于客位，三加弥尊，加有成也 。
现代文：又在客位上行醮礼，三次加戴礼帽更显示出尊贵，是勉励其今后有所成就 。
English: He also bowed in the guest's seat, and wearing the ceremonial hat three times showed his dignity and encouraged him to achieve something in the future.

古文：注称 嫡子冠于阼，庶子冠于房 。
现代文：注说 嫡子在束阶主人位举行加冠礼，庶子在房内举行加冠礼 。
English: The note says that the legitimate son holds the crowning ceremony in the position of the sokudai master, and the illegitimate son holds the crowning ceremony in the room.

古文：《记》又云 古者重冠，故行之于庙，所以自卑而尊先祖也 。据此而言，弥与郑注《仪礼》相会。
现代文：《礼记》又说 古代重视加冠礼，所以在宗庙举行，为的是卑下自己尊奉祖先，根据如上记载来说，更和郑玄注释《仪礼》的意思相合。
English: "Li Ji" also said that in ancient times, crowning ceremonies were highly valued, so they were held in ancestral temples in order to humble themselves and honor their ancestors. According to the above records, it is more in line with the meaning of Zheng Xuan's commentary on "Li Ji."

古文：是故中朝以来，太子冠则皇帝临轩，司徒加冠，光禄赞冠。
现代文：因此中朝以来，太子行加冠礼皇帝亲临，由司徒为他加戴礼帽，由光禄赞礼。
English: Therefore, since the Middle Kingdom, the crowning ceremony of the crown prince was performed in person by the emperor, and the ceremonial hat was worn by the prince's father-in-law, and the commendation was given by the emperor.

古文：诸王则郎中加冠，中尉赞冠。
现代文：诸王行加冠礼，则是由郎中加戴礼帽，由中尉赞礼。
English: When kings and queens are crowned, it is the vassal who dons the ceremonial hat and the lieutenant who gives the accolade.

古文：今同于储皇则重，依于诸王则轻。
现代文：现在如果和太子的加冠礼相同，就太重了；如果依照诸王的加冠礼，就太轻了。
English: Now, if it is the same as the crowning of the crown prince, it is too heavy; if it is according to the crowning of kings, it is too light.

古文：又《春秋》之义， 不以父命辞王父命 。
现代文：另外《春秋》的意思， 不因父亲的命令推辞君主的命令。
English: In addition, the meaning of "Spring and Autumn" is not to refuse the monarch's order because of the father's order.

古文：《礼》 父在斯为子，君在斯为臣 。
现代文：《礼》载 父亲在此是儿子，君主在此就是臣下 。
English: "Rite" contains the father here is the son, the monarch here is the vassal.

古文：皇太子居臣子之节，无专用之道。
现代文：皇太子居于臣下、儿子之位，没有专擅礼仪的道理。
English: The crown prince is a subordinate, a son, and has no reason to be an expert in etiquette.

古文：南郡虽处蕃国，非支庶之列，宜禀天朝之命，微申冠阼之礼。
现代文：南郡虽然处于藩国之位，但不同于其他庶子的封地，应该让其禀承朝廷的旨命，略微表示在束阶主位举行加冠的礼仪。
English: Although Nan County is in the position of a feudal domain, it is different from other bastard fiefdoms. It should be allowed to carry out the imperial order, slightly indicating the ceremony of crowning the head of the caste.

古文：晋武帝诏称汉、魏遣使冠诸王，非古正典。
现代文：晋武帝下诏说选、毯派遣使臣给诸王加戴礼帽，不是正规的古制。
English: Emperor Jinwu issued an edict to select and dispatch envoys to the kings to add ceremonial hats, which is not a formal ancient system.

古文：此盖谓庶子封王，合依公冠自主之义，至于国之长孙，遣使惟允。
现代文：这大概说的是庶子、封王，应当依照公举行加冠礼自己作主人的意思，至于国君的长孙，派遣使臣是可以的。
English: This roughly means that an illegitimate child, a crowned king, should be crowned in accordance with the will of the sovereign, and as for the eldest grandson of the sovereign, it is possible to send an envoy.

古文：宜使太常持节加冠，大鸿胪为赞；醮酒之仪，亦归二卿；祝醮之辞，附准经记，别更撰立，不依蕃国常体。
现代文：应当派太常持节前往为其加戴礼帽，大鸿胪作为赞礼人，醮酒的礼仪，也由二入主持，祝酒、醮酒的文辞，按照经书《礼记》，另外撰写，不依照藩国的常规礼仪。
English: It is necessary to send the chief priest to wear a ceremonial cap on the day of the festival, with the great dragon as the eulogist, and the etiquette of drinking wine is also presided over by the second, and the text of the toast and drinking wine is written separately according to the scripture "Rituals," which is not in accordance with the normal etiquette of the domain.

古文：国官陪位拜贺，自依旧章。
现代文：朝廷官员陪席拜贺，自然依照旧的制度。
English: Officials from the Imperial Court were present to offer congratulations, naturally in accordance with the old system.

古文：其日内外二品清官以上，诣止车集贺，并诣东宫南门通笺。
现代文：举行典礼那天，朝廷内外二品以上的清官，都集中到止娄庆贺，并且到束宫南门递送贺辞。
English: On the day of the ceremony, more than two hundred officials from both inside and outside the imperial court gathered to celebrate and send their congratulations to the south gate of the Palace of the Grand Dukes.

古文：别日上礼，宫臣亦诣门称贺，如上台之仪。
现代文：另外一天送礼，宫中大臣也要登门道贺，如同进献台省的礼仪。
English: On another day, when gifts are given, the Minister of the Imperial Household will also visit the door to congratulate, just like the etiquette of presenting Taiwan.

古文：既冠之后，克日谒庙，以弘尊祖之义。
现代文：举行加冠礼之后，限期拜谒宗庙，弘扬尊奉祖先的意义。
English: After the crowning ceremony, they will pay a visit to the Jinsong Temple for a limited period of time to promote the significance of honoring ancestors.

古文：此既大典，宜通关八座丞郎并下二学详议。 
现代文：这既然是大典，应该由通关八座丞郎并交给太学、国学详细计议。
English: Since this is a major document, it should be reviewed in detail by the person in charge of customs clearance and handed over to the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.

古文：仆射王奂等十四人议并同，并撰立赞冠、醮酒二辞。
现代文：仆射王鱼等十四人的建议都相同，并且撰写了赞冠、醮酒两种文辞。
English: The suggestions of the fourteen people, including the kingfishers, were all the same, and they wrote two kinds of words: praise and praise.

古文：诏 可 。
现代文：下诏说 可以 。
English: The next edict said yes.

古文：祝辞曰： 皇帝使给事中、太常、武安侯萧惠基加南郡王冠。 
现代文：祝辞说： 皇帝派给事中、太常、武安侯萧惠基为南逊王加戴礼帽。 
English: The congratulatory speech said: The emperor sent Xiao Huiqi, a middle-ranking official and a lord of Wu'an, to add a ceremonial cap to King Nansun.

古文：祝曰： 筮日筮宾，肇加元服。
现代文：祝文说： 占卜选择期、宾客，举行加冠典礼。
English: The congratulatory message said: divination selection period, guests, crowning ceremony.

古文：弃尔幼志，从厥成德。
现代文：抛弃你年幼时的心志，从此成就德业。
English: Abandon your childhood aspiration, and from now on achieve virtue.

古文：亲贤使能，克隆景福。 
现代文：亲近贤者任用能人，隆盛大的福惠。 
English: Those who are close to sages appoint capable people and enjoy great prosperity.

古文：醮酒辞曰： 旨酒既清，嘉荐既盈。
现代文：醮酒辞说： 美酒已清，嘉肴已满。
English: The wine steward said, "The wine is clear, and the dishes are done."

古文：兄弟具在，淑慎仪形。
现代文：兄弟都在，亲善恭谨，做出表率。
English: The brothers are all friendly and respectful, setting an example.

古文：永届眉寿，于穆斯宁。 
现代文：永远长寿，和睦安宁。 
English: Forever long life, harmony and tranquility.

古文：永明中，世祖以婚礼奢费，敕诸王纳妃，上御及六宫依礼止枣栗腶脩，加以香泽花粉，其余衣物皆停。
现代文：丞塱年间，世担因为婚礼奢侈浪费，命令诸王纳妃妾，包括皇上的御妻和六宫妃嫔，依照礼制衹陪送枣、栗、股脩，加上香泽花粉，其余的衣物之类都停送。
English: During the Joseon Dynasty, because of the extravagance and waste of weddings, the World Bank ordered the emperors' wives and concubines, including the emperor's wife and the concubines of the Sixth Palace, to accompany the dates, chestnuts, ginger, and fragrant pollen in accordance with the etiquette, and the rest of the clothing and the like were stopped.

古文：唯公主降嫔，则止遗舅姑也。
现代文：即便公主出嫁，也衹是送礼给对方父母。
English: Even if the princess marries, it is not a gift to the other parent.

古文：永泰元年，尚书令徐孝嗣议曰： 夫人伦之始，莫重冠婚，所以尊表成德，结欢两姓。
现代文：永泰元年，尚书令徐孝嗣建议说：作为人伦的开始，没有比冠礼、婚礼更重要的了，它们可以使仪表尊贵德业有成，缔结两姓欢好。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, Xu Xiaozhi suggested: As the beginning of human relations, there is nothing more important than the coronation ceremony and wedding ceremony. They can make the honor and virtue of the instrument successful and conclude the friendship between the two surnames.

古文：年代污隆，古今殊则，繁简之仪，因时或异。
现代文：世风因时代而兴衰，古今有不同的准则，礼仪的繁简，根据时代而有所不同。
English: World customs rise and fall with the times. There are different standards from ancient times to the present, and the simplification of etiquette varies according to the times.

古文：三加废于士庶，六礼限于天朝，虽因习未久，事难顿改，而大典之要，深宜损益。
现代文：三次加戴礼帽的冠礼在士人庶民中已经废弃，婚姻的六礼也衹局限在宫廷使用，虽然因袭不久，事情恐怕也难以马上改变，可是大型礼典的关键之处，就是应繁简适当。
English: The three-times-crowning ceremony has been abandoned among the common people, and the six-times-marriage ceremony has been limited to use at the court. Although it has been a short time since the attack, it may be difficult to change things immediately, but the key to large-scale ceremonies is that they should be simple and appropriate.

古文：案《士冠礼》，三加毕，乃醴冠者，醴则唯一而已，故醴辞无二。
现代文：据《士冠礼》，三次加戴礼帽完毕，就要用醴酒宽待主持冠礼的人，宽待醴酒仪式衹有一次，所以醴酒文辞没有二份。
English: According to the "Crowning Ceremony," after the ceremonial cap has been worn three times, the person who presides over the crowning ceremony should be treated generously with wine. The wine ceremony was once treated generously, so there are no two copies of the wine speech.

古文：若不醴，则每加辄醮以酒，故醮辞有三。
现代文：如果不宽待醴酒，那么每加戴一次礼帽就要有醮酒仪式，所以醮酒文辞有三份。
English: If you don't tolerate drunkenness, then every time you wear a ceremonial hat, there must be a drunkenness ceremony, so there are three copies of the drunkenness text.

古文：王肃云 醴本古味，其礼重；酒用时味，其礼轻故也 。
现代文：王肃说 宽待醴酒本是古制，这是很重的礼节，用时鲜的酒，这礼节就轻了，所以如此 。
English: Wang Su said that it is an old custom to be kind to drunkards, which is a very serious etiquette. However, with fresh wine, this etiquette is lighter, so this is the case.

古文：或醴或醮，二三之义，详记于经文。
现代文：或是醴酒或是醮酒，意思不一致，这些都详细记载在经书之中。
English: Either drunkenness or drunkenness, the meaning is not consistent, these are detailed in the scriptures.

古文：今皇王冠毕，一酌而已，即可拟古设醴；而犹用醮辞，实为乖衷。
现代文：如今君王加冠礼结束，祇是酌酒一次，可立即依照古制设醴酒礼。还用醮酒文辞，确实是违背礼的本意。
English: Now that the crowning ceremony of the king is over, it is only necessary to drink wine once, and you can immediately set up a wine ceremony in accordance with the ancient system.

古文：寻婚礼实篚以四爵，加以合卺，既崇尚质之理，又象泮合之义。
现代文：查考婚礼是在篚裹装上四个爵，加上两个剖阙的瓢，既有崇尚质朴的含意，又象征离合的意思。
English: Checking the wedding is to wrap the four jewels in the cocoon and add two cut cocoons, which not only has the meaning of advocating simplicity, but also symbolizes the meaning of clutch.

古文：故三饭卒食，再酳用卺。
现代文：所以用手抓三口饭就不再吃，接下来夫妻各用瓠瓜剖成的瓢饮酒漱口。
English: So they grabbed three mouthfuls of rice with their hands and stopped eating. Next, the husband and wife each rinsed their mouths with a gourd made from a cut-up muskmelon.

古文：先儒以礼成好合，事终于三，然后用卺合。
现代文：先儒认为婚礼是成就合好，事不过三，然后合用瓠瓜剖成的瓢饮酒。
English: Confucius believed that the wedding is the achievement of a good match, nothing more than three, and then drinking gourd wine made from split gourd.

古文：仪注先酳卺，以再以三，有违旨趣。
现代文：礼制先用瓠瓜剖成的瓢饮酒漱口，作为第二第三，有违本意。
English: The ceremonial system first rinses the mouth with gourd alcohol made from split gourd, as the second and third, which is against the original intention.

古文：又《郊特牲》曰 三王作牢用陶匏 。
现代文：另外郊特牲》说 三王用陶器瓠瓜装牲物 。
English: In addition, "Special Livestock in the Suburbs" says that the three kings use pottery to hold livestock.

古文：言太古之时，无共牢之礼，三王作之，而用太古之器，重夫妇之始也。
现代文：说的是远古时候，没有夫妻共吃一盆牲物的礼仪，三王创造了它，用远古的器具，是重视夫妇的初始。
English: It is said that in ancient times, there was no etiquette for a husband and wife to eat a bowl of animal stew together. The three kings created it, using ancient utensils, which was the beginning of valuing the couple.

古文：今虽以方樏示约，而弥乖昔典。
现代文：现在虽然用方标表示节俭，可是更加背离古代典制。
English: Now, although the use of square signs indicates frugality, it deviates even more from the ancient system.

古文：又连卺以锁，盖出近俗。
现代文：另外用锁把两个瓢连在一起，大概是出自近代的习俗。
English: In addition, a lock is used to connect two urns together, probably from a modern custom.

古文：复别有牢烛，雕费采饰，亦亏曩制。
现代文：又另设花烛，费力雕饰，也有损从前制度。
English: In addition, flower candles and elaborate carvings were set up, which also undermined the previous system.

古文：方今圣政日隆，声教惟穆，则古昔以敦风，存饩羊以爱礼，沿袭之规，有切治要，嘉礼实重，宜备旧章。
现代文：当今圣明政治日益隆盛，声名教化务求整肃，那么古代淳朴的世风，保留祭祀宗庙的生羊而爱惜礼义，历代沿袭的制度，关系到治理国家的根本，嘉礼实在重要，应该完备旧的制度。
English: Today's politics of sacredness is increasingly flourishing. In order to rectify it, renown and enlightenment are required. Therefore, the ancient and simple world style, retaining the sacrificial lamb of the ancestral temple and cherishing the rites and rituals, the system inherited from past generations, is related to the fundamentals of governing the country. The ceremony is really important, and the old system should be completed.

古文：谓自今王侯已下冠毕一酌醴，以遵古之义。
现代文：我认为自现在的王侯以下，加冠礼完毕，举行一次醴酒仪式，以此遵行古代的礼义。
English: I think that from the current prince on down, once the crowning ceremony is complete, a wine-pouring ceremony should be held, in order to follow the ancient etiquette.

古文：醴即用旧文，于事为允。
现代文：醴酒仪式就根据旧的记载，对事情是恰当的。
English: The wine-pouring ceremony, according to the old records, was appropriate for the occasion.

古文：婚亦依古，以卺酌终酳之酒，并除金银连锁，自余杂器，悉用埏陶。
现代文：婚礼也依照古制，用瓠瓜剖成的瓢盛最后用来漱口的酒，并且除去金银锁链，其余的各种器物，都用陶器。
English: According to the ancient system, the wedding ceremony also uses the wine that is used to rinse the mouth, and the gold and silver chains are removed, and the rest of the various utensils are made of pottery.

古文：堂人执烛，足充鸑燎，牢烛华侈，亦宜停省。
现代文：殿堂人役手持烛火，完全可供燃烧之用，花烛奢华，也应当停止节省。
English: The hall of fame is holding a candle, which is fully available for burning, and the flower candle is luxurious. It should also stop saving.

古文：庶斫雕可期，移俗有渐。 
现代文：或许去除浮华雕饰可以预期，风俗也会慢慢改变。
English: Perhaps the removal of ornate carvings can be expected, and customs will slowly change.

古文：参议并同。
现代文：商量的意见一致。
English: The participants in the discussion are the same as the discussion of Zhou Shanwen.

古文：奏可。
现代文：上奏被许叮。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：晋武太始二年，有司奏，故事皇后讳与帝讳俱下。
现代文：晋武帝太始二年，主管官吏陈奏，从前的事例是皇后的避讳与皇帝的避讳一起下达。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, the officials in charge played a game. In the past, the queen's shunning was issued together with the emperor's shunning.

古文：诏曰：礼，内讳不出宫，近代讳之也。
现代文：韶令说，礼规定皇后的名讳不出宫内，是近代才避讳的。
English: According to the imperial edict, the etiquette stipulates that the empress's name does not appear in the palace, which is only avoided in modern times.

古文：建元元年，太常上朝堂讳训。
现代文：建元元年，太常上奏议事朝堂的避讳原则。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, the taboo principle of too often reporting the proceedings to the imperial court was established.

古文：仆射王俭议曰： 后讳依旧不立训。
现代文：仆射王俭建议说： 皇后的名讳依据旧的制度不确定避讳原则。
English: Servant Wang Jian suggested: The name of the empress is based on the old system's uncertainty avoidance principle.

古文：礼，天子诸侯讳群祖，臣隶既有从敬之义，宜为太常府君讳。
现代文：礼规定天子诸侯避各位祖先的讳，臣仆既然有随从致敬的意思，应当为太常府君避讳。
English: According to the rules of etiquette, the sons of the gods and lords should shun the sham of their ancestors. Since the vassals have the intention to follow and pay homage, they should shun the sham of the Grand Prince.

古文：至于朝堂榜题，本施至极，既追尊所不及，礼降于在三，晋之京兆，宋之东安，不列榜题。
现代文：至于朝堂的题名榜，本来衹适用于天子，既然够不上追念尊奉，而礼衹施于三代，所以晋代的京兆，宋代的束安，都没有列入题名榜。
English: As for the title list of the morning hall, it was originally applied to the heavenly son, since it was not enough to commemorate the reverence, but the eulogy was given to the three generations, so the Jing Dynasty's Jing Zhao and the Song Dynasty's Sok An were not included in the title list.

古文：孙毓议称京兆列在正庙，臣下应讳，而不上榜。
现代文：孙毓的建议称京兆位列正庙，臣下应当为他避讳，可是没有上题名榜。
English: Sun Yat-sen's suggestion that the temple should be listed as the main temple and that his subjects should shun him, however, did not make it onto the list of titles.

古文：宋初博士司马道敬议东安府君讳宜上榜，何承天执不同，即为明据。 
现代文：宋初博士司马道敬建议束安府君的名讳应该上题名榜，何承天持不同意见，就是明证。 
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, Dr. Sima Daojing suggested that the name of Sokanfukun should be included in the list of titles. The fact that He Chengtian disagreed is clear evidence.

古文：其有人名地名犯太常府君及帝后讳者，皆改。
现代文：凡是有人名、地名触犯太常府君以及皇帝、皇后名讳的，都要改。
English: Any name or place name that offends the name of the Grand Prince and the Emperor and Empress must be changed.

古文：宣帝讳同。
现代文：对宣帝的避讳相同。
English: The shunning of Emperor Xuan is the same.

古文：二名不偏讳。所以改承明门为北掖，以榜有 之 字与 承 并。东宫承华门亦改为宣华云。
现代文：人名、地名不衹避讳一字，所以改承明门为北掖，因为题名榜上有 之 字与 承 字并行避讳，东宫承华门也改为宣华。
English: People's names and place names do not have to avoid the word, so it is best to change the name of the Ming Gate to the North Gate, because there is a word on the title list that avoids the word and the word, and the East Palace Chenghua Gate is also changed to Xuanhua.

古文：汉末，蔡邕立汉《朝会志》，竟不就。
现代文：汉代末年，蔡邕编撰汉《朝会志》，最终没有完成。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, Cai Xuan compiled and compiled the Han Dynasty "Court Journal," which was ultimately not completed.

古文：秦人以十月旦为岁首，汉初习以大飨会，后用夏正，飨会犹未废十月旦会也。东京以后，正旦夜漏未尽七刻，鸣钟受贺，公侯以下执贽来庭，二千石以上升殿称万岁，然后作乐宴飨。
现代文：秦代人把十月初一作为岁首，汉代初年相沿袭大宴宾客，后采用夏历，但仍没有废除十月初一的宴会东汉以后，正月初一夜漏还剩七刻，鸣钟接受拜贺，公侯以下拿着礼物来到庭院，俸禄在二千石以上的官员进殿呼喊万岁，然后奏乐宴饮。
English: The people of the Qin Dynasty regarded the first day of October as the beginning of the year, and the first year of the Han Dynasty followed suit with a grand banquet for guests. Later, the summer calendar was adopted, but the banquet on the first day of October was still not abolished. After the Eastern Han Dynasty, there were still seven hours left in the first night of the first month, the bell rang to accept congratulations, the princes and others came to the courtyard with gifts, and officials with a salary of more than 2,000 koku entered the hall and shouted "long live," and then played music for the banquet.

古文：张衡赋云 皇舆夙驾，登天光于扶桑 。
现代文：张衡赋说 皇帝车舆清晨起驾，日光升上扶桑 。
English: Zhang Hengfu said that the emperor's chariot was driven in the early morning, and the sun rose over Fusang.

古文：然则虽云夙驾，必辨色而行事矣。
现代文：可是虽说清晨起驾，也必须辨明天色后才好进行活动。
English: However, even though we set off early in the morning, we have to wait for the sun to set before we can carry out our activities.

古文：魏武都邺，正会文昌殿，用汉仪，又设百华灯。
现代文：魏武帝建都邺，正月的宴会在文昌殿举行，用汉代礼仪，又摆列百华灯。
English: Emperor Wu of Wei built the Tudor Palace, and the New Year's banquet was held in the Wenchang Hall, using Han Dynasty etiquette and displaying hundreds of Chinese lanterns.

古文：后魏文修洛阳宫室，权都许昌，宫殿狭小，元日于城南立毡殿，青帷以为门，设乐飨会。
现代文：后来魏文帝因修建洛阳宫室，权且建都许吕，宫殿狭小，正月初一在城南设立毡帐宫殿，用青色帷幕作门，演奏音乐大宴宾客。
English: Later, Emperor Weiwen, because of the construction of the Luoyang palace room, had the power to build the capital Xu Lv, the palace was small, and on the first day of the first month, he set up a curtain palace in the south of the city, with a blue curtain as a door, and played music for the guests of the banquet.

古文：后还洛阳，依汉旧事。
现代文：后来还都洛阳，依照汉代旧制。
English: Later, Luoyang was also made the capital, according to the old Han Dynasty system.

古文：晋武帝初，更定朝会仪，夜漏未尽十刻，庭燎起火，群臣集。
现代文：晋武帝初年，重新制订朝廷宴会礼仪，夜漏还剩十刻，在庭院点起火炬照明，群臣会集。
English: In the first year of Emperor Jinmu, the Imperial banquet etiquette was reformulated. With ten hours left in the night, torches were lit in the courtyard, and the courtiers gathered.

古文：傅玄《朝会赋》云 华灯若乎火树，炽百枝之煌煌 。
现代文：傅玄《朝会赋》说 华灯犹如火树，百枝炽烈辉煌 。
English: Fu Xuan said in "Imperial Banquet Fu" that "Chinese lanterns are like fire trees, with a hundred branches blazing brilliantly."

古文：此则因魏仪与庭燎并设也。
现代文：这是因为把魏代礼仪与庭院点火照明同时举行。
English: This is because the Wei Dynasty ceremony was held at the same time as the lighting of the courtyard.

古文：漏未尽七刻，群臣入白贺，未尽五刻，就本位，至漏尽，皇帝出前殿，百官上贺，如汉仪。
现代文：夜漏还剩七刻，群臣入殿道贺，还剩五刻，各就各位，等到夜漏流尽，皇帝出前殿，百官进贺，如同汉代礼仪。
English: There are still seven hours left in the night, and the courtiers are entering the hall to congratulate. There are still five hours left, and everyone is in place. When the night is over, the emperor will leave the front hall, and hundreds of officials will enter to congratulate, just like Han Dynasty etiquette.

古文：礼毕罢入，群臣坐，谓之辰贺。
现代文：仪礼结束停止进入，群臣就座，称为辰贺。
English: At the end of the ceremony, the entry was stopped and the courtiers took their seats, known as shenga.

古文：昼漏上三刻更出，百官奉寿酒，大飨作乐，谓之昼会。
现代文：昼漏上到三刻皇帝再出来，百官奉献寿酒，大宴宾客，演奏音乐，称为昼会。
English: At three o'clock in the afternoon, the emperor came out again, and the dignitaries offered birthday wine, the guests held a grand banquet, and music was played. It was called a luncheon.

古文：别置女乐三十人于黄帐外，奏《房中之歌》。
现代文：另外在黄帐外排列三十位女乐手，演奏《房中之歌》。
English: In addition, thirty female musicians lined up outside the yellow curtain to play "The Song in the Room."

古文：江左多虞，不复晨贺，夜漏未尽十刻，开宣阳门，至平旦始开殿门；昼漏上五刻，皇帝乃出受贺。
现代文：江南多有忧患，不再举行晨贺，夜漏还剩十刻，打开宣阳门，到天亮才打开殿门，昼漏上到五刻，皇帝才出来接受拜贺。
English: In the south of the Yangtze River, there are many troubles, morning greetings are no longer held, there are still ten hours left in the night, open the Xuanyang Gate, open the hall door until dawn, and the emperor will not come out to receive congratulations until five o'clock in the afternoon.

古文：宋世至十刻乃受贺。
现代文：宋代到十刻才接受拜贺。
English: During the Song Dynasty, it took up to ten minutes to receive congratulations.

古文：其余升降拜伏之仪，及置立后妃王公已下祠祀夕牲拜授吊祭，皆有仪注，文多不载。
现代文：其他升降跪拜礼仪，以及设立后妃、分封王公以下官爵、祠祀、夕牲、拜官授官、吊唁、祭祀，都有仪制，内容太多不再记载
English: Other ascending, descending, and kneeling ceremonies, as well as the establishment of the empress dowager, the awarding of titles of nobility to officials below the rank of prince, the shrines, the evening sacrifice, the awarding of officials, the condolences, and the sacrifices, all have a ceremonial system, and too much content is no longer recorded

古文：三月三日曲水会，古禊祭也。
现代文：三月三日的曲水流觞之会，就是古代的楔祭。
English: The March 3rd meeting of the QuShui LiuYuan is the ancient Wedge Festival.

古文：汉《礼仪志》云 季春月上巳，官民皆洁濯于东流水上，自洗濯祓除去宿疾为大洁 。
现代文：选《礼仪志》说 三月上巳曰，官民都到束流的水边洗濯干净，清洗自己消除旧病，是一次大的清洁 。
English: "The Book of Etiquette" said that in March, it was said that the government and the people all went to the water's edge of the stream to wash their clothes and clean themselves to eliminate old diseases. It was a big clean.

古文：不见东流为何水也。
现代文：没有记载东流的是什么河。
English: There is no record of what river flows to the east.

古文：晋中朝云，卿已下至于庶民，皆禊洛水之侧，事见诸《禊赋》及《夏仲御传》也。
现代文：晋中朝载，卿以下至于庶民，都到洛水边行楔礼，事情见于各《楔赋》以及《夏仲御传》。
English: In the reign of Jin, the Chosetsu, as well as the nobles and commoners, all went to the Luoshui River to perform the wedge ceremony. The event is described in the "Wedge Fu" and the "Summer Mid-Autumn Festival."

古文：赵王伦篡位，三日，会天渊池诛张林。
现代文：赵王伦篡位，三日，在天渊池集会杀掉张林。
English: Zhao Wanglun usurped the throne, and on the third day, they gathered in Tianyuan Pool to kill Zhang Lin.

古文：怀帝亦会天渊池赋诗。
现代文：怀帝也在天温迤集会赋诗。
English: Emperor Huai also composed poems at the Tianwenqiao meeting.

古文：陆机云 天渊池南石沟，引御沟水，池西积石为禊堂。跨水，流杯饮酒 。
现代文：陆卷说 玉逦迤南的石沟，引御沟的水，池西堆石成为楔堂，横跨水上，流杯饮酒 。
English: Lu Zhuan said that the stone ditch in the south of Yujing is the water of the diversion ditch, and the rock pile in the west of the pond has become a wedge-shaped hall, spanning the water and drinking in a flowing cup.

古文：亦不言曲水。
现代文：也没有说曲水。
English: There was no mention of Kyokusui either.

古文：元帝又诏罢三日弄具。
现代文：元帝又下诏废除三月三日的游戏用具。
English: On the third day, Emperor Yuan issued an edict banning all kinds of playthings.

古文：今相承为百戏之具，雕弄技巧，增损无常。
现代文：现在相沿成为各种游戏用具，雕琢玩弄技巧，历代增减没有常规。
English: Now the parallel lines have become all kinds of game tools, carving and playing skills, and there is no routine for the increase and decrease of the previous generations.

古文：史臣曰：案禊与曲水，其义参差。
现代文：史臣曰：考察禊和曲水，意思有矛盾。
English: Shichen said: "There is a contradiction in the meaning of the inspection of the Yunnan and Quzhou rivers.

古文：旧言阳气布畅，万物讫出，姑洗洁之也。巳者祉也，言祈介祉也。
现代文：过去说阳气播布流畅，万物萌发，姑且洗洁自己。 巳 就是 祉 ，意思是祈求福惠。
English: In the past, it was said that yang qi spreads smoothly, all things germinate, let alone wash oneself. "Snake" means "welfare," which means to pray for blessings.

古文：一说，三月三日，清明之节，将修事于水侧，祷祀以祈丰年。
现代文：另外一说，三月三日，清明节，将在水边举行仪式，祭祀祈祷丰年。
English: Another said that on March 3, Tomb-Sweeping Day, a ceremony will be held at the water's edge to pray for a prosperous year.

古文：应劭云： 禊者，洁也，言自洁濯也。
现代文：应劭说：  楔，就是 洁 ，意思是自我清洁。
English: Ying Yao said, "Wedge is cleanliness, which means self-cleanliness."

古文：或云汉世有郭虞者，以三月上辰生二女，上巳又生一女，二日中频生皆死，时俗以为大忌，民人每至其日，皆适东流水祈祓自洁濯，浮酌清流，后遂为曲水。 
现代文：有人说漠代有个叫郭虞的人，在三月上辰日生了两个女儿，上巳日又生了一个女儿，两天中接连生的女儿都死了，当时的习俗认为是大忌，百姓每到这天，都到束流的水边祈福清洁自己，在清流中流杯饮酒，后来就形成曲水之会。 
English: Some people say that there was a man named Guo Yu in the desert. He gave birth to two daughters on the first day of the third month, and another daughter on the second day of the third month. The daughters born two days in a row all died. At that time, the custom was considered taboo. Every day, the people went to the water's edge of the stream to pray for good luck and clean themselves. They drank a glass of alcohol in the middle of the clear stream. Later, they formed a water-bending club.

古文：案高后祓霸上，马融《梁冀西第赋》云 西北戌亥，玄石承输。
现代文：据考高后祈福霸上，马融《梁冀西第赋》说 西北戌亥之位，磁石显示坠落。
English: According to Ma Rong's "Liang Ji Xi Di Fu," after the high school entrance examination, he prayed for good luck.

古文：虾蟆吐写，庚辛之域 。
现代文：虾蟆吐泻，庚辛地域 。
English: Prawns vomit diarrhea, Gohsing area.

古文：即曲水之象也。
现代文：就是曲水之会的象征。
English: It is the symbol of the Kyokusui-kai.

古文：今据禊为曲水事，应在永寿之前已有，祓除则不容在高后之后。祈农之说，于事为当。
现代文：现在根据楔礼就是曲水会的事，应该在永寿之前已经有了，祈福消灾就不可能在高后之后，祈求农业丰收的说法，对事情是适当的。
English: Now, according to wedge rites, it is the matter of the Qushui Association, which should have existed before eternal life, and it is impossible to pray for good luck and disaster relief after high school, and it is appropriate to pray for a good agricultural harvest.

古文：九月九日马射。
现代文：九月九举行马射。
English: Horse shooting will be held on September 9.

古文：或说云，秋金之节，讲武习射，像汉立秋之礼。
现代文：有种说法，金秋时节，讲演武艺，练习射箭，像汉代立秋的礼仪。
English: There is a saying that the golden autumn season, the performance of martial arts, the practice of archery, is like the etiquette of the autumn of the Han Dynasty.

古文：史臣曰：案晋中朝元会，设卧骑、倒骑、颠骑，自东华门驰往神虎门，此亦角抵杂戏之流也。
现代文：史臣曰：考察晋代中朝时元旦朝见群臣，设卧骑、倒骑、颠骑等项目，从束华门往神虎门奔驰，这也是角抵之流的杂技游戏。
English: Shichen said: "On New Year's Day, when the Jin Dynasty was in the middle of the dynasty, I saw a group of ministers in the morning. There were projects such as lying down, riding backwards, and riding upside down. From the Sokka-mon Gate to the Shinhomon Gate, this was also an acrobatic game.

古文：宋武为宋公，在彭城，九日出项羽戏马台，至今相承，以为旧准。
现代文：宋武帝为宋公时，在彭城，九月九日出行到项羽戏马台，至今沿袭，作为旧的制度。
English: When Emperor Songwu was Song Gong, he traveled to the Xiangwu Opera House in Pengcheng on September 9, which has been followed to this day as the old system.

