古文：杨涟，字文孺，应山人。
现代文：杨涟，字文孺，应山人。
English: Yang Zhen, Zhi Wen Zhen, Ying Shan Ren.

古文：为人磊落负奇节。
现代文：为人光明磊落，气度非凡。
English: He is a bright and honest person with an extraordinary demeanor.

古文：万历三十五年成进士，除常熟知县。
现代文：万历三十五年成为进士，任命为常熟知县。
English: In the 35th year of Wanli, he became a Jin Shi and was appointed to Changshu Zhixian.

古文：举廉吏第一，擢户科给事中，转兵科右给事中。
现代文：推选廉洁官员，名列第一，提拔户科给事中，转为兵科右给事中。
English: The selection of honest officials ranked first, the promotion of household science to the middle, and the transformation of military science to the right to the middle.

古文：四十八年，神宗疾，不食且半月，皇太子未得见。
现代文：万历四十八年，神宗皇帝病，将近半个月不能进食，皇太子不能够见面。
English: In the 48th year of Wanli, Emperor Shenzong fell ill and was unable to eat for nearly half a month. The crown prince was unable to meet him.

古文：涟偕诸给事、御史走谒大学士方从哲，御史左光斗趣从哲问安。
现代文：杨涟同各给事中、御史前往拜会大学士方从哲，御史左光斗催促方从哲向皇帝请安。
English: In the course of their respective duties, Yang Xuan and Gu Shi went to visit the scholars from Zhe, and Gu Shi and Zuo Guangdou urged Zhe to ask for the emperor's greetings.

古文：从哲曰： 帝讳疾。即问左右，不敢传。 
现代文：方从哲说： 皇帝忌讳染病，即使询问病情，皇帝的人也不敢传达。 
English: Fang Congzhe said, "Emperors are not supposed to get sick. Even if they inquire about the illness, the emperor's people would not dare to tell anyone.

古文：涟曰： 昔文潞公问宋仁宗疾，内侍不肯言。
现代文：杨涟说： 过去文潞公询问宋仁宗的病情，内侍不肯说。
English: Yang Jun said: In the past, Wen Rongong inquired about Song Renzong's illness, but the chambermaid refused to say anything.

古文：潞公曰： 天子起居，汝曹不令宰相知，将毋有他志，速下中书行法。 
现代文：潞公说： 皇帝起居生活，你们不让宰相知道，莫非想图谋不轨，赶快交给中书官法办。 
English: Shao Gong said, "If you don't let the prime minister know that the emperor is living a lavish life, you must be plotting something nefarious. You should immediately hand it over to the legal department of the General Secretariat of the Communist Party of China.

古文：公诚日三问，不必见，亦不必上知，第令宫中知廷臣在，事自济。
现代文：您真心实意地每天问三次，不一定见面，也不一定让皇帝知道，只管叫宫中太监知道还有朝中大臣在，事情就好办了。
English: You sincerely ask three times a day. You don't have to meet, and you don't have to let the emperor know. Just let the eunuch in the palace know that there is a minister in the middle of the DPRK, and things will be easy to do.

古文：公更当宿阁中。 
现代文：您更应该在官署内住宿。 方从哲说： 这没有先例。 
English: You should even stay in the government office. Fang Congzhe said: This is unprecedented.

古文：曰： 无故事。 涟曰： 潞公不诃史志聪，此何时，尚问故事耶？ 
现代文：杨涟说： 潞公不呵斥史志聪，现在是什么时候，还管它有没有先例！ 
English: Yang Zhe said: "Shi Zhi Cong is not to be rebuked, what time is it now, and does it matter if there is no precedent!

古文：越二日，从哲始率廷臣入问。
现代文：过了二天，方从哲开始率领朝臣进宫请安。
English: Two days later, Fang led the courtiers from Zhe to the palace to offer their greetings.

古文：及帝疾亟，太子尚踌躇宫门外。
现代文：等到皇帝病危，太子还在宫外徘徊。
English: By the time the emperor was critically ill, the crown prince was still wandering outside the palace.

古文：涟、光斗遣人语东宫伴读王安： 帝疾甚，不召太子，非帝意。
现代文：杨涟、左光斗派人告诉太子的伴读王安说： 皇帝病危，不召见太子，不是皇帝本意。
English: Yang Hui and Zuo Guangdou sent someone to tell Wang An, the prince's reading companion: "The emperor is critically ill, and it is not the emperor's intention not to summon the prince.

古文：当力请入侍，尝药视膳，薄暮始还。 
现代文：应当极力请求入宫服侍，尝一尝药品，伺候皇帝进餐，傍晚再回来。 
English: You should strongly request to enter the palace to serve, taste the medicine, wait for the emperor to eat, and come back in the evening.

古文：太子深纳之。
现代文：太子完全采纳了。
English: The crown prince deeply adopted his opinion.

古文：无何，神宗崩。
现代文：不久，神宗驾崩。
English: Soon after, Shinso passed away.

古文：八月丙午朔，光宗嗣位。
现代文：八月二十三日天刚亮，光宗即位。
English: At first light on August 23rd, Emperor Guangzong ascended the throne.

古文：越四日，不豫。
现代文：过了四天，生了病。
English: Four days later, she fell ill.

古文：都人喧言郑贵妃进美姬八人，又使中官崔文升投以利剂，帝一昼夜三四十起。
现代文：京城的人喧哗说是郑贵妃进献美女八人，又让宦官崔文升进泄药，皇帝一昼夜起来三四十次。
English: People in Beijing said loudly that Zheng Guifei presented eight beautiful women, and let the eunuch Cui Wen rise into the medicine, and the emperor got up thirty to forty times a day and night.

古文：而是时，贵妃据乾清宫，与帝所宠李选侍相结，贵妃为选侍请皇后封，选侍亦请封贵妃为皇太后。
现代文：而这个时候，郑贵妃占据乾清宫，跟皇帝宠幸的李选侍相勾结。郑贵妃请求皇帝封李选侍为皇后，李选侍也请求皇帝封郑贵妃为皇太后，皇帝舅家王、郭二外戚家，遍访朝廷大臣。
English: At this time, Zheng Guifei occupied the Qianqing Palace and colluded with the emperor's favorite Li Xuan's attendant. Zheng Guifei asked the emperor to make Li Xuan's attendant the empress, Li Xuan's attendant also asked the emperor to make Zheng Guifei the empress dowager, and the emperor's father-in-law Wang and Guo Er's maternal relatives visited the imperial court ministers.

古文：帝外家王、郭二戚畹，遍谒朝士，泣朔宫禁危状，谓： 帝疾必不起，文升药故也，非误也。郑、李交甚固，包藏祸心。 
现代文：杨涟哭泣着控诉宫禁之中危险的情形，说： 皇帝一定是一病不起了，这是崔文升进泄药的缘故，并不是耽误医治，郑、李勾结频繁，实在是居心叵测啊！ 
English: Yang Hui wept and complained about the dangerous situation in the palace ban, saying: The emperor must be very ill, this is the reason why Cui Wen was promoted to the medicine, it is not a delay in treatment, Zheng and Li collude frequently, it is really a deliberate miscalculation!

古文：廷臣闻其语，忧甚。
现代文：朝臣听说了，非常担忧。
English: When Ason heard about this, he was very worried.

古文：而帝果趣礼部封贵妃为皇太后。
现代文：而皇帝果然催促礼部封郑贵妃为皇太后。
English: However, the emperor urged the Ministry of Ceremonies to crown Zheng Guifei as empress dowager.

古文：涟、光斗乃倡言于朝，共诘责郑养性，令贵妃移宫，贵妃即移慈宁。
现代文：杨涟、左光斗在朝廷发表正当的言论，一起责问郑养性，命令郑贵妃移宫，郑贵妃就移到慈宁宫。
English: Yang Hui and Zuo Guangdou made legitimate remarks in the imperial court, and together they reproached Zheng Yao's character, ordered Zheng Guifei to move to the palace, and Zheng Guifei moved to the Jining Palace.

古文：涟遂劾崔文升用药无状，请推问之。
现代文：杨涟于是弹劾崔文升胡乱用药，请求追究查办。
English: Yang Hui then impeached Cui Wensheng for reckless drug use and requested an investigation.

古文：且曰： 外廷流言，谓陛下兴居无节，侍御蛊惑。
现代文：还说： 外廷谣言流传，说陛下生活不节制，受近侍太监的蛊惑。
English: He also said: Rumours are circulating outside the court that His Majesty lives an immoderate life and is being seduced by his eunuch aides.

古文：必文升藉口以掩其用药之奸，文升之党煽布以预杜外廷之口。
现代文：一定是崔文升找借口来掩盖他用药的奸计，崔文升的党羽散布谣言来预防堵塞外廷的议论。
English: It must be Cui Wensheng's trick to find an excuse to cover up his drug use, and Cui Wensheng's party members spread rumors to prevent the blocking of discussions outside the court.

古文：既损圣躬，又亏圣德，罪不容死。
现代文：既损害了皇帝的身体，又败坏了皇帝的名誉，其罪当死。
English: The crime of damaging the emperor's body and ruining the emperor's reputation is punishable by death.

古文：至贵妃封号，尤乖典常。
现代文：至于郑贵妃封皇太后，则尤其违背制度准则。
English: As for Zheng Guifei's investiture as empress dowager, it is especially against the system norms.

古文：尊以嫡母，若大行皇后何？
现代文：尊为嫡母，那么大行皇后怎么办呢？
English: As the legitimate mother, what should the queen do?

古文：尊以生母，若本生太后何？
现代文：尊为生母，那么本生皇后怎么办呢？
English: But what about the queen herself, who is revered as the real mother?

古文：请亟寝前命。 
现代文：请皇帝尽快收回先前的命令。 
English: Ask the emperor to retract the previous order as soon as possible.

古文：疏上，越三日丁卯，帝召见大臣，并及涟，且宣锦衣官校。
现代文：奏疏报告上去，过了三天丁卯日，皇帝召见大臣，包括杨涟，还将宣布锦衣卫官校。
English: According to the report, three days later, the emperor summoned the ministers, including Yang Hui, and announced the establishment of the Jin clothing and defense official school.

古文：众谓涟疏忤旨，必廷杖，嘱从哲为解。
现代文：大家以为杨涟的上疏违抗皇帝旨意，一定受到廷杖的处罚，嘱托方从哲为他解围。
English: Everyone thought that Yang Xuan's Shang So defied the emperor's will and must have been punished by the imperial scepter, and the entrusting party relieved him from Zhe.

古文：从哲劝涟引罪，涟抗声曰： 死即死耳，涟何罪？ 
现代文：方从哲劝杨涟认罪，杨涟高声说： 死就死罢，我杨涟有什么罪？ 
English: Fang Congzhe advised Yang Hui to plead guilty. Yang Hui said in a loud voice: "Let him die. What is Yang Hui's crime?

古文：及入，帝温言久之，数目涟，语外廷毋信流言。
现代文：等进宫后，皇帝说了很多好听的话，好几次拿眼睛看杨涟，说外廷不要相信谣言。
English: After entering the palace, the emperor said a lot of nice words, and several times looked at Yang Hui with his eyes, saying that the court should not believe the rumors.

古文：遂逐文升，停封太后命。
现代文：于是赶走崔文升、收回封太后的命令。
English: So they drove out Cui Wensheng and revoked the Empress Dowager's order.

古文：再召大臣皆及涟。
现代文：以后召见大臣都有杨涟在内。
English: In the future, all summoned ministers will include Yang Jiechi.

古文：涟自以小臣预顾命感激，誓以死报。
现代文：杨涟自以为是小臣参予接受皇帝的遗诏，十分感激，发誓要以死相报。
English: Yang Xuan thought of himself as a junior minister participating in the acceptance of the emperor's will. He was very grateful and vowed to repay the favor with his death.

古文：九月乙亥朔，昧爽，帝崩。廷臣趋入，诸大臣周嘉谟、张问达、李汝华等虑皇长子无嫡母、生母，势孤孑甚，欲共托之李选侍。
现代文：九月初一天刚亮时，皇上去世，朝臣快步进宫，各大臣周嘉谟、张问达、李汝华等人担心皇太子没有嫡母、生母，势力太孤单，想把他托付给李选侍。
English: At dawn on the first day of September, the emperor died, and courtiers quickly entered the palace. The ministers Zhou Jia Mu, Zhang Qida, Li Ruhua and others were worried that the crown prince did not have a legitimate mother, a birth mother, and was too lonely, and wanted to entrust him to Li Xuan.

古文：涟曰： 天子宁可托妇人？
现代文：杨涟说： 天子难道可以托付给女人吗？
English: Yang Hui said: Can the Son of Heaven be entrusted to a woman?

古文：且选侍昨于先帝召对群臣时，强上入，复推之出，是岂可托幼主者？
现代文：况且李选侍昨天在先皇帝召见群臣的时候，强行进宫，又被推了出来，这样的人难道可以把小皇帝托付给她么？
English: Moreover, Li Xuan Samui forced his way into the palace and was pushed out again yesterday when the former emperor summoned his ministers. Could such a person entrust the little emperor to her?

古文：请亟见储皇，即呼万岁，拥出乾清，暂居慈庆。 
现代文：请大家赶快拜见皇太子，马上高喊万岁，拥他出乾清宫，暂时居住慈庆宫。 
English: Please hurry to see the crown prince, shout "long live" immediately, take him out of the Qianqing Palace, and temporarily live in the Cixing Palace.

古文：语未毕，大学士方从哲、刘一燝、韩爌至，涟趣诸大臣共趋乾清宫。阍人持梃不容入，涟大骂： 奴才！
现代文：话还没说完，大学士方从哲、刘一火景、韩火广到，杨涟催促大臣一同前往乾清宫，太监拿着棍子不让进，杨涟大骂道： 奴才！
English: Before the speech was over, university scholars from Zhe, Liu Yiguo, and Han Huo Guang urged the minister to go to the Qianqing Palace together. The eunuch held a stick to prevent them from entering, and Yang Hui scolded: "Slave!

古文：皇帝召我等。
现代文：皇帝召见我等。
English: The Emperor has summoned me.

古文：今已晏驾，若曹不听入，欲何为！ 
现代文：现在皇帝已经去世，尔等小人不让我等进去，想干什么？ 
English: Now that the emperor has passed away, what do these little people want to do by not letting me wait inside?

古文：阍人却，乃入临。
现代文：太监退走，这才进去哭灵。
English: The eunuch retreated, and only then did the weeping spirit enter.

古文：群臣呼万岁，请于初六日登极，而奉驾至文华殿，受群臣嵩呼。
现代文：群臣高喊万岁，请求在初六这一天登皇位，而将皇太子迎接到文华殿，接受群臣三呼万岁。
English: The courtiers shouted "long live" and requested that the enthronement take place on the sixth day of the junior high school year, and the crown prince was welcomed to the Wenhua Hall, where he received three shouts of "long live" from the courtiers.

古文：驾甫至中宫，内竖从寝阁出，大呼： 拉少主何往？
现代文：车子刚到中宫，太监从寝宫中出来，大声叫喊： 拉小主人到哪里去？
English: As soon as the carriage arrived at the Middle Palace, the eunuch came out of his bed and shouted loudly: "Where is the little master going?

古文：主年少畏人！ 
现代文：主人年纪小怕见人！ 
English: The owner is too young to see anyone!

古文：有揽衣欲夺还者。涟格而诃之曰： 殿下群臣之主，四海九州莫非臣子，复畏何人！ 
现代文：有人抓住衣服想夺皇帝回去，杨涟打他并呵斥道： 殿下为群臣的主人，四海九州没有不是他的臣子的，又怕什么人来看！ 
English: Someone grabbed his clothes and tried to take the emperor back. Yang Xuan beat him up and shouted: "Your highness is the master of his vassals. There is no vassal in the four seas of Kyushu that is not his, and he is afraid of anyone coming to see him!"

古文：乃拥至文华殿。
现代文：于是簇拥着到文华殿。
English: As a result, they flocked to the Bunka-den.

古文：礼毕，奉驾入慈庆宫。
现代文：行完礼，迎入慈庆宫。
English: After the salute, welcome to the Cixing Palace.

古文：当是时，李选侍居乾清。
现代文：这时，李选侍居在乾清宫。
English: At this time, Li Xuan's attendant was in the Qianqing Palace.

古文：一燝奏曰： 殿下暂居此，俟选侍出宫讫，乃归乾清宫。 
现代文：刘一火景上奏说： 殿下暂时居住在这里，等李选侍搬出宫后，才能回到乾清宫。 
English: Liu Yiguo said, "Your highness is living here temporarily, and you can only return to the Qianqing Palace after Li Xuan moved out of the palace.

古文：群臣遂退议登极期，语纷纷未定，有请改初三者，有请于即日午时者。
现代文：群臣于是退出来讨论即位的日期，众说纷纭，不能确定。有的请求改在初三，有的请求定在当天午时。
English: The ministers then withdrew to discuss the date of the enthronement. Opinions differed and could not be determined. Some requests were changed to the third day of the first month, while others were set for the afternoon of the same day.

古文：涟曰： 今海宇清晏，内无嫡庶之嫌。
现代文：杨涟说： 现在国家太平，没有嫡长子与庶子的嫌疑。
English: Yang Wei said: Now the country is peaceful, there is no suspicion of the legitimate eldest son and the illegitimate son.

古文：父死之谓何？
现代文：父亲死了该怎么样？
English: But what does his father's death mean?

古文：含敛未毕，衮冕临朝，非礼也。 
现代文：装殓还没有完，就加冕登基，不成体统。 
English: Before the decoration is finished, he will be crowned and enthroned.

古文：或言登极则人心安，涟曰： 安与不安，不在登极早暮。
现代文：有人说登位可以安定人心，杨涟说： 人心是否安定，不在于登位的早晚。
English: Some people say that ascending to the throne can stabilize people's hearts, Yang Wei said: Whether people's hearts are stable does not depend on the time of ascending to the throne.

古文：处之得宜，即朝委裘何害？ 
现代文：处理得当，即使无为而治，又有什么害呢？ 
English: Dealt with properly, even if nothing is done, what is the harm?

古文：议定，出过文华殿。
现代文：商议完，出来经过文华殿。
English: After the discussion, they came out and passed through the Wenhua Hall.

古文：太仆少卿徐养量、御史左光斗至，责涟误大事，唾其面曰： 事脱不济，汝死，肉足食乎！ 
现代文：太仆少卿徐养量、御史左光斗到，斥责杨涟耽误大事，冲着他的脸吐唾沫说： 事情如果不能成，你死了，你的肉够吃吗？ 
English: The servant of Shaoqing, Xu Yangquan, and Gu Shihuangdou arrived, scolded Yang Hui for delaying the big event, spit in his face and said: If things can't be done, you are dead, is your meat enough to eat?

古文：涟为竦然。
现代文：杨涟感到很恐惧。
English: Yang Xuan felt very scared.

古文：乃与光斗从周嘉谟于朝房，言选侍无恩德，必不可同居。
现代文：于是和左光斗一起跟着周嘉谟到朝房，说李选侍无恩无德，一定不能和她同居。
English: So, together with Zuo Guangdou, he followed Zhou Jia Mu to the Imperial Household, saying that Li Xuanmei was ungrateful and immoral, and he must not live with her.

古文：明日，嘉谟、光斗各上疏请选侍移宫。
现代文：第二天，周嘉谟、左光斗各自上疏请李选侍转移宫室。
English: The next day, Zhou Jia Mu and Zuo Guangdou each sent a letter to Li Xuan to transfer the palace.

古文：初四日得俞旨。
现代文：初四得到皇帝同意。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the emperor gave his consent.

古文：而选侍听李进忠计，必欲皇长子同居，恶光斗疏中 武氏 语，议召皇长子，加光斗重谴。
现代文：而李选侍听从李进忠的计谋，一定要同皇长子同居。憎恨左光斗奏疏中有 武氏 的话，议论召见皇长子，严厉谴责左光斗。
English: However, Li Xuanmei listened to Li Jinzhong's stratagem and made sure to live with the eldest son of the emperor. He hated Zuo Guangdou, recited the words of the Wu clan, discussed summoning the eldest son of the emperor, and severely condemned Zuo Guangdou.

古文：涟遇内竖于麟趾门，内竖备言状。
现代文：杨涟在麟趾门遇到宫内太监，太监详细说了这一情况。
English: Yang Hui met the imperial eunuch at Linzi Gate, and the eunuch explained the situation in detail.

古文：涟正色曰： 殿下在东宫为太子，今则为皇帝，选侍安得召？
现代文：杨涟很严肃地说： 殿下在东宫时是太子，现在已经是皇帝，李选侍凭什么召见？
English: Yang Mi said very seriously, "Your highness was a prince when you were in the East Palace, but now you are an emperor. Why did Li Xuan attend you?

古文：且上已十六岁，他日即不奈选侍何，若曹置身何地？ 
现代文：况且皇帝已经十六岁了，不久就会对李选侍不怎么样，你们这帮人又在哪里安身呢？ 
English: Besides, the emperor is already sixteen years old, and he will soon not be good at choosing his attendants. Where are you people going to live?

古文：怒目视之，其人退。
现代文：愤怒地看着他，那人退走了。
English: Looking at him angrily, the man walked away.

古文：给事中惠世扬、御史张泼入东宫门，骇相告曰： 选侍欲垂帘处光斗，汝等何得晏然？ 
现代文：给事中惠世扬、御史张泼进入东宫，吃惊地告诉说： 李选侍想垂帘听政，处置左光斗，你们这些人怎么还像没事儿一样？ 
English: In the middle of the matter, Hui Shiyang and Gu Shi Zhang Pu entered the East Palace and told them in surprise: Li Xuanwu wanted to listen to the government and dispose of Zuo Guangdou. How can you people still act as if nothing had happened?

古文：涟曰： 无之。 
现代文：杨涟说： 没有这回事。 
English: Yang Wei said: There is no such thing.

古文：出皇极门，九卿科道议上公疏，未决。
现代文：走出皇极门，九卿科道议论呈上公疏，未有决定。
English: Out of the imperial gate, the discussions of the nine emperors on science and technology were public, and there was no decision.

古文：初五日传闻欲缓移宫期。
现代文：初五，传说想推迟移宫的日期。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the legend wants to postpone the date of moving the palace.

古文：涟及诸大臣毕集慈庆宫门外，涟语从哲趣之。
现代文：杨涟和各大臣全部在慈庆宫内外集合，杨涟告诉方从哲要去催促。
English: Yang Hui and all the ministers gathered inside and outside the Cixing Palace. Yang Hui told Fang Congzhe to hurry up.

古文：从哲曰： 迟亦无害。 
现代文：方从哲说： 迟一点也没关系。 
English: Fang Congzhe said: It doesn't matter if it's a little late.

古文：涟曰： 昨以皇长子就太子宫犹可，明日为天子，乃反居太子宫以避宫人乎？
现代文：杨涟说： 昨天以皇帝长子的身份居住在太子宫中还可以，明天就是皇帝了，反而还居在太子宫中，是回避宫中的人吗？
English: Yang Hui said, "Yesterday, as the eldest son of the emperor, it was all right to live in the prince's womb. Tomorrow, he will be the emperor. Instead, he is still living in the prince's womb. Is he someone who avoids the palace?

古文：即两宫圣母如在，夫死亦当从子。
现代文：即使两宫皇帝的母亲还健在，丈夫死后也应该听儿子的。
English: Even if the Emperor's mother is still alive, she should listen to her son after her husband's death.

古文：选侍何人，敢欺藐如此！ 
现代文：李选侍是什么人，胆敢如此放肆！ 
English: What kind of person is Lee Sang Sam, daring to be so presumptuous!

古文：时中官往来如织，或言选侍亦顾命中人。涟斥之曰： 诸臣受顾命于先帝，先帝自欲先顾其子，何尝先顾其嬖媵？
现代文：这时宦官们活动频繁，有人说李选侍也是皇帝临终托付遗嘱的人之一，杨涟驳斥说： 各臣受先皇帝的遗诏，先皇帝自然想先照顾他的儿子，莫非先照顾他的宠妾不成？
English: At this time, the eunuchs were very active. Some people said that Li Xuanzhu was also one of the people entrusted with the emperor's will on his deathbed. Yang Zhe refuted that: The ministers received the last emperor's will, the first emperor naturally wanted to take care of his son first, why not take care of his favorite concubine first?

古文：请选侍于九庙前质之，若曹岂食李家禄者？
现代文：请李选侍在九庙之前对质，尔等难道是吃李家的俸禄吗？
English: Asking Li Xuanzhu to confront before the Nine Temples, etc. Is it to eat the Li family's salary?

古文：能杀我则已，否则，今日不移死不去。 
现代文：能杀死我也就罢了，否则的话，今天不移宫，到死也不离开。 
English: If you can kill me, that's all you have to do. Otherwise, if you don't move from the palace today, you won't leave it until you die.

古文：一燝、嘉谟助之，词色俱厉，声彻御前。皇长子使使宣谕，乃退。
现代文：刘一火景、周嘉谟帮着他说话，言词表情都很严厉，声音高亢，在宫殿前回响，皇太子派使者宣读告示，才退下来。
English: Liu Yixing and Zhou Jia Mu helped him to speak. The words and expressions were very severe, the voice was high-pitched and echoed in front of the palace. The crown prince sent an envoy to read out the announcement before he withdrew.

古文：复抗疏言： 选侍阳托保护之名，阴图专擅之实，宫必不可不移。
现代文：又上疏说： 李选侍名义上是受托保护皇太子，实际上是在阴谋篡夺国家大权，非得移宫不可。
English: Shangsuo also said: Li Xuanzhu is nominally entrusted with the protection of the crown prince, but in fact he is plotting to usurp the power of the state, and he must move to the palace.

古文：臣言之在今日，殿下行之在今日，诸大臣赞决之，亦惟今日。 
现代文：臣等议论是在今天，殿下实行各大臣赞成的决定，也只能是在今天。 
English: The discussion among the ministers is today, and it is only today that His Highness will implement the decision approved by the ministers.

古文：其日，选侍遂移宫，居仁寿殿。
现代文：这一天，李选侍搬出乾清宫，住进仁寿殿。
English: On this day, Li Xuan moved out of the Qianqing Palace and moved into the Renshou Palace.

古文：明日庚辰，熹宗即位。
现代文：第二天庚辰，熹宗即位。
English: On the second day of Geng Chen, Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne.

古文：自光宗崩，至是凡六日。
现代文：自从光宗驾崩，到这时共有六天。
English: By this time, it had been six days since Guangzong passed away.

古文：涟与一燝、嘉谟定宫府危疑，言官惟光斗助之，余悉听涟指。
现代文：杨涟与刘一火景、周嘉谟平定国家的危险和疑难。言官只有左光斗协助他，其余的人都听从杨涟的指挥。
English: Yang Hui and Liu Yi were on fire, and Zhou Jia Mo was placating the dangers and difficulties of the country. The speaker was only assisted by Zuo Guangdou, and the rest of the people obeyed Yang Hui's command.

古文：涟须发尽白，帝亦数称忠臣，未几，迁兵科都给事中。御史冯三元等极诋熊廷弼，涟疏谕其事，独持平。
现代文：杨涟的头发、胡子全都白了。皇帝也多次称他为忠臣。不久，提升兵科都给事中，御史冯三元等人极力诋毁熊廷弼。杨涟上疏议论这事，只有他一个不偏不倚。
English: Yang Xuan's hair and beard were all white. The emperor also repeatedly called him a loyal subject. Soon, when the promotion of military science was in question, Goshi Feng Sanyuan and others tried their best to discredit Xiong Tingyao. Yang Xuan casually discussed this matter, and he was the only one who was impartial.

古文：旋劾兵部尚书黄嘉善八大罪，嘉善罢去。
现代文：不久弹劾兵部尚书黄嘉善的八大罪状，黄嘉善罢官离去。
English: Soon after, the Ministry of Military Affairs impeached Huang Jiashan on eight major charges, and Huang Jiashan was dismissed from his post.

古文：当选侍之移宫也，涟即言于诸大臣曰： 选侍不移宫，非所以尊天子。
现代文：当李选侍移宫的时候，杨涟就对各大臣说： 李选侍不移宫，不能表示尊敬天子。
English: When Li Zengzhu moved the palace, Yang Zhe said to the ministers: Li Zengzhu did not move the palace, he could not show respect to the Son of Heaven.

古文：既移宫，又当有以安选侍。
现代文：移宫之后，又应当采取措施安抚李选侍。
English: After moving the palace, measures should also be taken to appease Li Xuanzhu.

古文：是在诸公调护，无使中官取快私仇。 
现代文：这事在于各位的调停处理，不要让宦官利用这事发泄私仇。 
English: It's up to you to mediate. Don't let the eunuchs use this to vent their personal vendettas.

古文：既而诸奄果为流言。
现代文：不久太监果然散布这事的流言蜚语。
English: Soon after, the eunuch spread the rumor.

古文：御史贾继春遂上书内阁，谓不当于新君御极之初，首劝主上以违忤先帝，逼逐庶母，表里交构，罗织不休，俾先帝玉体未寒，遂不能保一姬女。
现代文：御史贾继春于是给内阁上书，说不应当在新皇帝刚登位的时候，首先规劝皇帝违背先皇帝，逼走庶母，内外勾结，不停地罗织罪名，使先皇帝圣体未寒，就不能保护一个他所爱的女子。
English: Therefore, the Grand Historian Jia Jichun wrote a letter to the cabinet, saying that when the new emperor had just ascended the throne, he should not first persuade the emperor to disobey the former emperor, force the stepmother to leave, collude internally and externally, constantly fabricate crimes, and make the former emperor cold before the Eucharist, so that he could not protect a woman he loved.

古文：盖是时，选侍宫奴刘逊、刘朝、田诏等以盗宝系狱，词连选侍父。
现代文：大概在当时，李选侍的宫奴刘逊、刘朝、田诏等人因盗窃宝物被捕，供词牵连到李选侍的父亲。
English: Around that time, Li Xanshi's palace servants Liu Xun, Liu Cha, Tian Zhao and others were arrested for stealing treasures, and their confessions implicated Li Xanshi's father.

古文：诸奄计无所出，则妄言选侍投缳，皇八妹入井，以荧惑朝士。
现代文：太监们想不出别的阴谋，于是就造谣说李选侍投掷绞索，将皇帝的八妹打入井中，以此迷惑朝臣。
English: The eunuchs could not think of any other plot, so they spread a rumor that Li Xuanwu threw a noose and drove the emperor's eighth sister into a well to confuse the courtiers.

古文：继春藉其言，首发难。
现代文：贾继春凭着这说法，首先发难。
English: Jia Jichun, relying on this argument, was the first to launch an attack.

古文：于是光斗上疏述移宫事。
现代文：于是左光斗上疏陈述移宫的事情。
English: As a result, Zuo Guangdou told Shangsuo about the transfer of the palace.

古文：而帝降谕言选侍气殴圣母，及要挟传封皇后，与即日欲垂帘听政语，又言： 今奉养李氏于哕鸾宫，尊敬不敢怠。 
现代文：而皇帝下旨说李选侍生气殴打皇太后，以及要挟皇帝传旨封她为皇后，和当天想垂帘听政的话。又说： 现在哕莺宫中奉养李氏，尊敬她不敢懈怠。 
English: However, the emperor issued an order saying that Li Xuanbei had beaten the empress dowager in anger, as well as threatening the emperor to issue an order to make her the empress, and that he wanted to listen to the government on that day. He also said: Now that the Li clan is being raised in the Imperial Palace, respect her and dare not slack off.

古文：大学士从哲封还上谕。
现代文：大学士方从哲封合上谕，把它还给皇帝。
English: The Daigaku Shikata sent a letter from Tetsufo to return it to the emperor.

古文：帝复降谕言选侍过恶，而自白赡养优厚，俾廷臣知。
现代文：皇帝又降旨说李选侍太坏，而自我表白赡养她很优厚，使朝臣知道。
English: The emperor further decreed that Li Xuan's choice of a lady-in-waiting was too bad, while he declared that he was very generous in supporting her, so that the courtier would know.

古文：未几，哕鸾宫灾。帝谕内阁，言选侍暨皇八妹无恙。
现代文：不久，哕莺宫遭火灾，皇帝告知内阁，说李选侍及皇帝八妹不用担忧。
English: Soon after, the Summer Palace was set on fire, and the emperor told his cabinet that Li Xuan and the emperor's eight sisters did not need to worry.

古文：而是时，给事中周朝瑞谓继春生事，继春与相诋諆，乃复上书内阁，有： 伶仃之皇八妹，入井谁怜；孀寡之未亡人，雉经莫诉 语。
现代文：而这时，给事中周朝瑞说贾继春无事找事。
English: At this time, Zhou Chao Rui said that Jia Jichun was not looking for a job.

古文：朝瑞与辨驳者再。
现代文：贾继春与周朝瑞相互诋毁、欺骗。
English: Jia Jichun and Zhou Chaorui slandered and deceived each other.

古文：涟恐继春说遂滋，亦上《敬述移宫始末疏》，且言： 选侍自裁，皇八妹入井，蜚语何自，臣安敢无言。
现代文：于是又给内阁上书，其中有： 孤独的皇八妹，落入井中有谁可怜，没有丈夫的未亡人，自缢不能诉说 之类的话。
English: So he wrote to the cabinet again, among which were: the lonely eight sisters of the emperor, the pitiful one who fell into the well, the widow without a husband, and the words that he could not tell.

古文：臣宁使今日忤选侍，无宁使移宫不速，不幸而成女后独览文书、称制垂帘之事。 
现代文：周朝瑞第二次跟他辩驳。杨涟担心贾继春的说法会更多，也上奏《敬述移宫始末疏》，并且说： 李选侍自杀，皇八妹落井，流言蜚语来自何方，我不可不说，我宁可今天得罪李选侍，也不愿让移宫不快点进行，不这样的话，就会使得女后独揽大权，造成垂帘听政的事实。 
English: Zhou Chao-Rui argued with him for the second time. Yang Zhe was worried that Jia Jichun's argument would be more, and also played "Honorary Report on the Beginning and End of the Moving of the Palace," and said: Li Xuanzhu committed suicide, the eight sisters of the emperor fell into the well, where did the rumors come from, I must say, I would rather offend Li Xuanzhu today than let the moving of the palace proceed unhappily, otherwise, it would make the empress dowager monopolize power, resulting in the fact of listening to politics.

古文：帝优诏褒涟志安社稷，复降谕备述宫掖情事。
现代文：皇帝下诏褒奖杨涟对安定国家所做的贡献，又降旨详细陈述宫中的事情。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict praising Yang Xuan's contribution to the stability of the country, and also issued an order to make a detailed statement of the situation in the palace.

古文：继春及其党益忌涟，诋涟结王安，图封拜。
现代文：贾继春及其党羽更加忌恨杨涟，诋毁杨涟勾结王安，企图升官封爵。
English: Jia Jichun and his followers hated Yang Hui even more, slandered Yang Hui for colluding with Wang An, and attempted to promote him to the rank of knight.

古文：涟不胜愤，冬十二月抗章乞去，即出城候命。
现代文：杨涟非常愤怒，十二月上疏乞求离职，立即到城外等候命令。
English: Yang Hui was very angry. In December, he begged for resignation and immediately went outside the city to wait for orders.

古文：帝复褒其忠直而许之归。
现代文：皇帝又一次褒奖他的忠诚耿直，却同意他回家。
English: Once again, the emperor praised his loyalty but allowed him to return home.

古文：天启元年春，继春按江西还，抵家，见帝诸谕，乃具疏陈上书之实。
现代文：天启元年春天，贾继春巡按江西回到家中，看见皇帝的各告谕，于是上疏陈述给内阁上书的事实。
English: In the spring of the first year of Tianqi, Jia Jichun returned home after a tour of Jiangxi, saw the emperor's proclamations, and then reported the fact of writing to the cabinet.

古文：帝切责，罢其官。
现代文：皇帝痛切地斥责他，罢了他的官。
English: The emperor reprimanded him severely and dismissed him from his post.

古文：涟、继春先后去，移宫论始息。
现代文：杨涟、贾继春先后离职，移宫的议论也就停息了。
English: Yang Hui and Jia Jichun successively left office, and the discussion of moving the palace also stopped.

古文：天启二年起涟礼科都给事中，旋擢太常少卿。
现代文：天启二年起用杨涟为礼科都给事中，不久提拔太常少卿。
English: From the second year of the Apocalypse, Yang Jie was appointed as the vice-minister of etiquette, and was soon promoted to the position of vice-minister.

古文：明年冬，拜左佥都御史。
现代文：第二年冬天，授官左佥都御史。
English: In the winter of the following year, he was awarded the rank of Zuo Jiu Miyoshi.

古文：又明年春，进左副都御史。
现代文：又过了一年春天，提升为左副都御史。
English: In the spring of the following year, he was promoted to deputy governor of the capital.

古文：而是时魏忠贤已用事，群小附之，惮众正盈朝，不敢大肆。
现代文：这个时候魏忠贤已经掌权，众小人依附他，忌惮满朝都是正直的人，不敢太放肆。
English: At this time, Wei Zhongxian was already in power, and all the villains clung to him, fearing that the whole dynasty was made up of honest people who dared not be too presumptuous.

古文：涟益与赵南星、左光斗、魏大中辈激扬讽议，务植善类，抑憸邪。
现代文：杨涟更加跟赵南星、左光斗、魏大中等人制造舆论，评述政事，培植好人，抑制邪恶的小人。
English: Yang Jie followed Zhao Nansing, Zuo Guangdou, Wei Dai and others in creating public opinion, commenting on political affairs, cultivating good people, and restraining evil villains.

古文：忠贤及其党衔次骨，遂兴汪文言狱，将罗织诸人。事虽获解，然正人势日危。
现代文：魏忠贤及其党羽恨之入骨，于是发起汪文言的案件，想要罗织他们的罪名，事情虽然过去了，然而正人君子的形势一天比一天危险。
English: Wei Zhongxian and his followers hated him to the bone, so they initiated the case of Wang Wenyan, trying to cover up their crimes. Although the incident has passed, the situation of the upright gentleman is becoming more and more dangerous every day.

古文：其年六月，涟遂抗疏劾忠贤，列其二十四大罪，言：
现代文：这年六月，杨涟于是上疏弹劾魏忠贤，列举他的二十四条大罪状说：
English: In June of that year, Yang Hui then went to Shang Zou to impeach Wei Zhongxian, listing his twenty-four major charges and saying:

古文：高皇帝定令，内官不许干预外事，只供掖廷洒扫，违者法无赦。
现代文： 高祖皇帝制定法令，宫内太监不许干预外朝的事情，只准洒扫庭院，违者法办不赦。
English: Emperor Gaozu made a decree that the eunuchs in the imperial court were not allowed to interfere in the affairs of foreign countries, and were only allowed to sweep the courtyard. Violators would be punished.

古文：圣明在御，乃有肆无忌惮，浊乱朝常，如东厂太监魏忠贤者。
现代文：皇帝在上，还有肆无忌惮，扰乱朝纲的，如东厂太监魏忠贤就是这样的人。
English: Above the emperor, there are also unscrupulous people who disrupt the imperial system, such as Wei Zhongxian, the eunuch of the East Factory.

古文：敢列其罪状，为陛下言之。
现代文：我冒昧列举他的罪状，说给陛下听：
English: I venture to enumerate his crimes, and to say to your Majesty:

古文：忠贤本市井无赖，中年净身，夤入内地，初犹谬为小忠、小信以幸恩，继乃敢为大奸、大恶以乱政。
现代文： 魏忠贤原是市井无赖。中年净身，靠关系进入内宫。刚开始装出一副小忠、小信的样子以获得皇帝的恩宠，然后才敢用大奸、大恶来扰乱朝政。
English: Wei Zhongxian was originally a common rogue. He was a middle-aged man of good character who entered the Inner Court through connections. At first, he pretended to be Xiaozhong and Xiaoxin in order to gain the emperor's favor, but then he dared to disrupt the imperial government with high treason and great evil.

古文：祖制，以拟旨专责阁臣。
现代文：祖宗的制度，拟定圣旨专门由内阁负责。
English: Under the patriarchal system, the drafting of the will is the exclusive responsibility of the cabinet.

古文：自忠贤擅权，多出传奉，或径自内批，坏祖宗二百余年之政体，大罪一。
现代文：自从魏忠贤独揽大权以来，圣旨多出自传奉官，或者直接由内宫批准。败坏了祖宗二百多年的政治体制，是大罪之一。
English: Since Wei Zhongxian monopolized power, most of the sacred edicts came from missionaries, or were directly approved by the Inner Court. It is one of the gravest sins to corrupt the political system that has been in place for more than 200 years.

古文：刘一燝、周嘉谟，顾命大臣也，忠贤令孙杰论去。
现代文： 刘一火景、周嘉谟是接受遗命的大臣，魏忠贤叫孙杰将他们判罪，让他们离职。
English: Liu Yiguoqing and Zhou Jia Mu were the ministers who accepted the last rites. Wei Zhongxian asked Sun Jie to convict them and let them leave office.

古文：急于翦己之忌，不容陛下不改父之臣，大罪二。
现代文：急于翦除忌恨自己的人，逼使陛下抛弃父皇的大臣，是大罪之二。
English: It is one of the gravest sins to hasten to get rid of those who hate you, and to force your majesty to abandon the fatherly emperor's ministers.

古文：先帝宾天，实有隐恨，孙慎行、邹元标以公义发愤，忠贤悉排去之。
现代文： 先帝归天，实际上是有遗憾的。孙慎行、邹元标站在公众的立场表达愤怒之情，都被魏忠贤排挤离职了。
English: In fact, it is regrettable. Sun Shengxing and Xing Yuanbiao expressed their anger in the public stand, but were forced out of office by Wei Zhongxian.

古文：顾于党护选侍之沈纮，曲意绸缪，终加蟒玉。
现代文：对维护李选侍的沈翭却很照顾，想尽歪门邪道，终于让他做了大官。
English: However, he was very careful to protect Shen Yao, who was the chosen one of Li, and tried his best to make him a high-ranking official.

古文：亲乱贼而仇忠义，大罪三。
现代文：亲近乱臣贼子而仇视忠诚正直的人，是大罪之三。
English: It is one of the three major sins to be close to a traitor and hate a loyal and honest person.

古文：王纪、钟羽正先年功在国本。
现代文： 王纪、钟羽正早年在维护国家的根本方面立有功勋。
English: In their early years, Wang Ji and Zhong Yazheng made great contributions to safeguarding the fundamentals of the country.

古文：及纪为司寇，执法如山；羽正为司空，清修如鹤。
现代文：等到王纪当司寇，执法如山；钟羽正当司空，清修如鹤。
English: Wait until Wang Ji becomes a scoundrel, law enforcement will be like a mountain; Zhong Yu is a legitimate scoundrel, and purification will be like a crane.

古文：忠贤构党斥逐，必不容盛时有正色立朝之直臣，大罪四。
现代文：魏忠贤结党排斥驱逐他们，竟不能容忍朝中正直的大臣，是大罪之四。
English: It is one of the four major sins that the Party of Wei, Zhongxian and Xianxing could not tolerate the honest ministers of the DPRK and the People's Republic of China.

古文：国家最重无如枚卜。
现代文： 国家最重要的事没有超过选拔官吏的。
English: The most important business of the state does not go beyond the selection of officials.

古文：忠贤一手握定，力阻首推之孙慎行、盛以弘，更为他辞以锢其出。
现代文：魏忠贤一手操纵，极力阻止首先被推举的孙慎行、盛以弘，反而用其他借口禁止他们复出。
English: Wei Zhongxian single-handedly manipulated and tried his best to prevent Sun Shengxing and Sheng Yihong from being elected in the first place. Instead, he used other excuses to prohibit their comeback.

古文：岂真欲门生宰相乎？
现代文：难道真想找一个听话的门生做丞相吗？
English: Do they really want to find an obedient protégé to be prime minister?

古文：大罪五。
现代文：是大罪之五。
English: It's the fifth of the deadly sins.

古文：爵人于朝，莫重廷推。
现代文： 朝廷授予爵位，以在朝廷推举最重要。
English: The most important thing is to be elected by the imperial court.

古文：去岁南太宰、北少宰皆用陪推，致一时名贤不安其位。
现代文：去年南太宰、北少宰都不由朝廷推举，使得一时名士贤臣不能安心于本职工作。
English: Last year, both the Southern Dazai and the Northern Shōzai were not elected by the Imperial Court, which made it impossible for the eminent scholars and sages to do their jobs with peace of mind.

古文：颠倒铨政，掉弄机权，大罪六。
现代文：颠倒选举的政策，玩弄国家大权，是大罪之六。
English: The policy of reversing the election and playing with the power of the state is one of the six major crimes.

古文：圣政初新，正资忠直。
现代文： 陛下新立朝政，正需要忠诚正直的人。
English: Your Majesty's new imperial government is in dire need of a loyal and honest person.

古文：乃满朝荐、文震孟、熊德阳、江秉谦、徐大相、毛士龙、侯震旸等，抗论稍忤，立行贬黜，屡经恩典，竟阻赐环。
现代文：满朝荐、文震孟、熊德阳、江秉谦、徐大相、毛士龙、侯震等人，上疏稍稍违抗，立即被贬斥废黜，多次被皇帝恩典，竟然被阻止赏赐回朝复职。
English: Manchurian recommended, Wen Zhen Meng, Xiong Deyang, Jiang Bingqian, Xu Daso, Mao Shilong, Hou Zhen and others, Shang So slightly defied, was immediately dethroned, was repeatedly by the emperor's grace, and was even prevented from being rewarded back to the government and reinstated.

古文：长安谓天子之怒易解，忠贤之怒难调，大罪七。
现代文：长安人称皇帝发怒了还容易排解，魏忠贤发怒了却难以调解，是大罪之七。
English: The people of Chang'an said that when the emperor was angry, it was easy to resolve, but when Wei Zhongxian was angry, it was difficult to mediate, which was one of the seven deadly sins.

古文：然犹曰外廷臣子也。去岁南郊之日，传闻宫中有一贵人，以德性贞静，荷上宠注。
现代文： 如果说是外廷臣子吧，那么去年城南郊祭那一天，传说皇宫有一个贵人，品性坚贞淑静，承皇上恩幸。
English: If it is a courtier of the Outer Court, then on the day of the Southern Suburbs Festival last year, there was a legend that there was a noble person in the Imperial Palace, whose character was steadfast and serene, and who had been favored by the Emperor.

古文：忠贤恐其露己骄横，托言急病，置之死地。
现代文：魏忠贤害怕她泄露自己的骄横，借口她得了急病，而把她处死了。
English: Wei Zhongxian was afraid that she would reveal his arrogance, so he put her to death on the pretext that she had a sudden illness.

古文：是陛下不能保其贵幸矣，大罪八。
现代文：这是使陛下不能保护自己喜爱的贵人，为大罪之八。
English: It is one of the eight deadly sins to fail to protect a loved one.

古文：犹曰无名封也。裕妃以有妊传封，中外方为庆幸。
现代文： 如果说这是未有封号的人吧，那么裕妃因为怀孕而得到封赏，朝廷内外都为此感到高兴。
English: If this is a person who does not have a seal number, then Yufei was rewarded because she was pregnant, and both inside and outside the court were happy about this.

古文：忠贤恶其不附己，矫旨勒令自尽。
现代文：魏忠贤讨厌她不依附自己，假传圣旨勒令她自尽。
English: Wei Zhongxian hated her for not clinging to herself and ordered her to commit suicide.

古文：是陛下不能保其妃嫔矣，大罪九。
现代文：这是使陛下不能保护自己的嫔妃，为大罪之九。
English: It is one of the nine deadly sins to fail to protect one's betrothed.

古文：犹曰在妃嫔也。中宫有庆，已经成男，乃忽焉告殒，传闻忠贤与奉圣夫人实有谋焉。
现代文： 如果说这是宫廷的嫔妃吧，那么宫中传出皇后有孕的喜讯，已成男形，却忽然传出消息说他又死了，据说是魏忠贤跟奉圣夫人设计陷害的。
English: If this is the court's concubine, then the palace announces the good news that the queen is pregnant and has become a man, but suddenly the news comes out that he has died again. It is said that Wei Zhongxian and Mrs. Feng Sheng designed and framed him.

古文：是陛下且不能保其子矣，大罪十。
现代文：这是使陛下连儿子都不能保护啊！为大罪之十。
English: It is one of the ten deadly sins to make His Majesty unable to protect even his son.

古文：先帝青宫四十年，所与护持孤危者惟王安耳。
现代文： 先帝居住太子宫已四十年，跟他一起共享孤独危难的只有王安。
English: The former emperor has lived in the prince's womb for forty years, and only Wang An shares the loneliness and danger with him.

古文：即陛下仓卒受命，拥卫防维，安亦不可谓无劳。
现代文：即使是陛下仓猝即位，在保卫治安方面，王安也不能说没有功劳。
English: Even if His Majesty came to the throne in a hurry, Wang An cannot be said to be without merit in the protection of public security.

古文：忠贤以私忿，矫旨杀于南苑。
现代文：魏忠贤为了个人的怨恨，假传圣旨在南苑把他杀害。
English: Wei Zhongxian falsely preached the gospel to Nanyuan to kill him out of personal grudge.

古文：是不但仇王安，而实敢仇先帝之老奴，况其他内臣无罪而擅杀擅逐者，又不知几千百也，大罪十一。
现代文：这不仅是仇恨王安，而且实际上是敢于仇视先皇帝的老奴仆，况且其他没有罪行而被他随意杀死随意驱逐的朝臣，又不知道有几百几千了，为大罪之十一。
English: This is not only hatred of Wang An, but also actually daring to hate the former emperor's old servants, moreover, other courtiers who had no crime and were arbitrarily killed and arbitrarily expelled by him, and I don't know how many hundreds of thousands, are the eleventh great sin.

古文：今日奖赏，明日祠额，要挟无穷，王言屡亵。近又于河间毁人居屋，起建牌坊，镂凤雕龙，干云插汉，又不止茔地僣拟陵寝而已，大罪十二。
现代文： 今天受到奖赏的人，明天就为他造祠堂立牌匾，无数的人受到要挟，皇帝的话也多次遭到亵渎，最近又在河间毁坏他人房屋，兴建牌坊，雕龙画凤，耸立云霄，又何止是坟地建制超过制度、拟摹皇帝陵寝呢，这是大罪之十二。
English: Those who are rewarded today will have a memorial hall erected for them tomorrow. Countless people have been blackmailed. The emperor's words have been blasphemed many times. Recently, the houses of others have been destroyed in the middle of the river, the archways have been built, the dragons and phoenixes have been carved, and the clouds have been erected. What's more, the establishment of cemeteries has exceeded the system, and the emperor's tomb has been built. This is the twelfth of the major sins.

古文：今日荫中书，明日荫锦衣。
现代文： 今天荫庇中书官，明天保护锦衣卫。
English: Today, the shadow of the calligrapher, tomorrow the protection of the brocade.

古文：金吾之堂口皆乳臭，诰敕之馆目不识丁。
现代文：国家部门都是乳臭未干之徒，皇帝诏书馆内全为目不识丁之辈。
English: The state departments are all wet-behind-the-ears, and the Emperor's rescript library is full of illiterates.

古文：如魏良弼、魏良材、魏良卿、魏希孔及其甥傅应星等，滥袭恩荫，亵越朝常，大罪十三。
现代文：如魏良弼、魏良材、魏良卿、魏希孔以及他的外甥傅应星等人，沿袭了不是荫封给他们的恩典，亵渎扰乱了朝廷的正常秩序，是大罪之十三。
English: For example, Wei Liangyao, Wei Liangzai, Wei Liangjing, Wei Xikong and his nephew Fu Yingxing, and others, followed the grace that was not given to them by the shadow seal. Blasphemy disrupted the normal order of the imperial court, which is the thirteenth of the major sins.

古文：用立枷之法，戚畹家人骈首毕命，意欲诬陷国戚，动摇中宫。
现代文： 运用立枷的刑法，皇亲国戚低头认命，阴谋陷害皇帝的亲戚，动摇内廷。
English: Using the criminal law of the yoke, the relatives of the emperor bowed their heads and accepted their fate, plotted to frame the emperor's relatives, and shook the inner court.

古文：若非阁臣力持，言官纠正，椒房之戚，又兴大狱矣，大罪十四。
现代文：假若不是内阁大臣极力坚持，言官检举矫正，皇亲国戚又要遭受大狱了，是大罪之十四。
English: If it were not for the strong insistence of the cabinet minister and the correction of the official's accusation, the emperor's relatives and relatives would have to suffer imprisonment, which is the fourteenth of the major crimes.

古文：良乡生员章士魁，坐争煤窑，托言开矿而致之死。
现代文： 良乡的生员章士魁，因争夺煤窑定罪，魏忠贤硬说他开矿而将他处死。
English: Zhang Shikui, a native of Liangxiang, was convicted of competing for a coal kiln, and Wei Zhongxian said that he had opened a mine and put him to death.

古文：假令盗长陵一抔土，何以处之？
现代文：假使偷了长陵一扌不土，又该如何处理？
English: If the theft of the Chungling Tomb is a big deal, how should it be handled?

古文：赵高鹿可为马，忠贤煤可为矿，大罪十五。
现代文：赵高可以指鹿为马，魏忠贤也可以指煤为矿，是大罪之十五。
English: Zhao Gao can refer to a deer as a horse, Wei Zhongxian can also refer to coal as a mine, which is the fifteenth of the major sins.

古文：王思敬等牧地细事，责在有司。
现代文： 王恩敬等人设置牧场的事情，责任在有关部门。
English: Wang Enjing and others set up pastures, the responsibility lies with the relevant departments.

古文：忠贤乃幽置槛阱，恣意搒掠，视士命如草菅，大罪十六。
现代文：魏忠贤竟然暗设陷阱，随意拷打，草菅人命，是大罪之十六。
English: Wei Zhongxian actually set a trap, tortured at will, and wasted human lives, which is the sixteenth of the major crimes.

古文：给事中周士朴执纠织监。忠贤竟停其升迁，使吏部不得专铨除，言官不敢司封驳，大罪十七。
现代文： 给事中中周士濮负责检举监督，魏忠贤竟敢停止他的升迁，使得吏部不能管理官员升迁任免，言官不敢司职封还驳正，是大罪之十七。
English: In this case, Zhou Shijian was responsible for the supervision of the prosecution, and Wei Zhongxian dared to stop his promotion, so that the personnel department could not manage the promotion and appointment of officials, and the spokesman did not dare to administer the post and dismiss the post, which is the seventeenth of the major crimes.

古文：北镇抚刘侨不肯杀人媚人，忠贤以不善锻炼，遂致削籍。
现代文： 北镇抚刘侨不肯杀人来谄媚坏人，魏忠贤以缺乏磨练为罪名，于是剥夺他的官籍。
English: Bei Zhen Fu Liu Qiao refused to kill to flatter the villain, Wei Zhongxian accused him of lacking training, and stripped him of his official registration.

古文：示大明之律令可以不守，而忠贤之律令不敢不遵，大罪十八。
现代文：这不是说大明的律令可以不遵守么？而魏忠贤的律令不能不遵守，是大罪之十八。
English: Isn't it true that the decrees of the Ming Dynasty can be disobeyed, while the decrees of the Wei Dynasty can't be disobeyed, which is the 18th of the major sins?

古文：给事中魏大中遵旨莅任，忽传旨诘责。
现代文： 给事中魏大中遵旨上任，忽然传旨责问他。
English: When Wei Dazhong took office in accordance with the will, he was suddenly summoned and reprimanded.

古文：及大中回奏，台省交章，又再亵王言。
现代文：等到魏大中回报，官府又接连上疏弹劾他，又再次亵渎了皇帝的圣旨。
English: When he returned to Wei University, the government impeached him one after another, and he once again violated the emperor's sacred will.

古文：毋论玩言官于股掌，而煌煌天语，朝夕纷更，大罪十九。
现代文：且不说将言官玩弄于股掌之间，堂堂天子的圣旨，魏忠贤也敢朝令夕改，是大罪之十九。
English: And not to mention playing the spokesman between the palms of the hands, the sacred will of the son of heaven, Wei Zhongxian also dared to change the morning and evening orders, is the nineteenth of the major sins.

古文：东厂之设，原以缉奸。
现代文： 设立东厂，原是用来缉拿奸人。
English: The East Factory was originally set up to catch traitors.

古文：自忠贤受事，日以快私仇、行倾陷为事。
现代文：自从魏忠贤掌管东厂，每天都用它来发泄私人仇恨，危及陷害忠良。
English: Since Wei Zhongxian took charge of the East Factory, he has used it every day to vent his personal hatred and threaten to frame Zhongliang.

古文：纵野子傅应星、陈居恭、傅继教辈，投匦设阱。
现代文：放纵他的养子傅应星、陈居恭、傅继教等人，设置陷阱告发忠良。
English: He indulged his adopted sons Fu Yingxing, Chen Juqiong, Fu Jiguo and others, setting a trap to denounce Zhongliang.

古文：片语稍违，驾帖立下，势必兴同文馆狱而后已，大罪二十。
现代文：如有一言不合，立即招致罪罚，其阵势是一定要制造同文馆那样的大案才肯罢手，是大罪之二十。
English: If there is a discrepancy, it immediately incurs criminal punishment, and its position is that it must create a big case like that of the library before it is willing to stop, which is the 20th of the major crimes.

古文：边警未息，内外戒严，东厂访缉何事？
现代文： 边疆警报没有解除，朝廷内外戒严，东厂缉查什么事情？
English: The frontier alert has not been lifted, martial law is in force inside and outside the imperial court, and the East Factory is under investigation for what?

古文：前奸细韩宗功潜入长安，实主忠贤司房之邸，事露始去。
现代文：先前奸细韩宗功潜入长安，实际的后台主子是魏忠贤，事情暴露才离开。
English: Former spy Han Zongong sneaked into Chang'an, but the real mastermind behind the scenes was Wei Zhongxian, who only left after the affair was exposed.

古文：假令天不悔祸，宗功事成，未知九庙生灵安顿何地，大罪二十一。
现代文：假使上天庇佑他，韩宗功的阴谋得逞，不知道皇上先祖的九庙将安置在何地，是大罪之二十一。
English: If heaven protects him and Han Zongong's plot succeeds, not knowing where the nine temples of the emperor's ancestors will be placed is the twenty-first of the major sins.

古文：祖制，不蓄内兵，原有深意。
现代文： 祖宗的制度，不养内兵，原是有深意的。
English: The system of the ancestors, not to raise domestic soldiers, was originally deeply intended.

古文：忠贤与奸相沈纮创立内操，薮匿奸宄，安知无大盗、刺客为敌国窥伺者潜入其中。
现代文：魏忠贤与奸相沈翭创立内操兵制，窝藏犯法作乱的人，怎么知道就没有大盗、刺客隐藏在里面为敌国刺探军情的呢。
English: How do we know that there are no robbers and assassins hiding in it to spy out the military situation for the enemy country, when Wei Zhongxian, in collusion with traitors, established an internal military system and harbored those who broke the law and caused turmoil?

古文：一旦变生肘腋，可为深虑，大罪二十二。
现代文：一旦宫城近旁发生事变，真叫人担心啊，是大罪之二十二。
English: Once an incident occurs near Miyagi, people are really worried, it's one of the twenty-two major crimes.

古文：忠贤进香涿州，警跸传呼，清尘垫道，人以为大驾出幸。
现代文： 魏忠贤到涿州进香，一路上前呼后拥，声势浩大，飞扬的尘土迷失了道路，一般人还以为是皇帝大驾光临。
English: Wei Zhongxian incense to Ganzhou, along the way forward to embrace, loud, flying dust lost the road, the general public also thought it was the emperor's grand arrival.

古文：及其归也，改驾四马，羽幢青盖，夹护环遮，俨然乘舆矣。
现代文：等到他返回时，改乘四马大车，用羽毛装饰仪仗旗帜，用青蓝色装饰车盖，两旁夹道护送，层层保卫，俨然是皇帝乘车的模样。
English: When he returned, he changed to a four-horse carriage, with feathers decorating the ceremonial flag, with blue and blue decorating the car cover, escorted on both sides, protected layer by layer, resembling the appearance of the emperor riding a car.

古文：其间入幕效谋，叩马献策者，实繁有徒。
现代文：一路上进入幕中策划计谋，在马前马后献计的，实在不乏其人。
English: Along the way into the curtain, there are many people who are planning and plotting.

古文：忠贤此时自视为何如人哉？
现代文：魏忠贤此时自我感觉是什么人啊？
English: Who does Wei Zhongxian feel himself to be at this time?

古文：大罪二十三。
现代文：这是大罪之二十三。
English: This is the twenty-third of the major sins.

古文：夫宠极则骄，恩多成怨。
现代文： 宠爱达到顶点就会骄傲，受恩惠太多就会成怨恨。
English: When favor is at its height, pride arises; when favor is too much, resentment arises.

古文：闻今春忠贤走马御前，陛下射杀其马，贷以不死。
现代文：听说今年春天魏忠贤在皇帝车前跑马，陛下射死了他的马，饶恕他不死。
English: I heard that Wei Zhongxian ran his horse in front of the emperor's carriage this spring. His majesty shot his horse and spared him from death.

古文：忠贤不自伏罪，进有傲色，退有怨言，朝夕堤防，介介不释。
现代文：魏忠贤自己不承认罪行，反而态度傲慢，回去后还满腹牢骚，时刻提防，耿耿于怀。
English: Wei Zhongxian himself did not admit to the crime, but his attitude was arrogant. When he returned, he was still full of complaints. He was always on the alert and worried.

古文：从来乱臣贼子，只争一念，放肆遂至不可收拾，奈何养虎兕于肘腋间乎！
现代文：自古以来的乱臣贼子，若有一念之差不处置他们，就会造成不可收拾的结果，怎能把凶狠的敌人一直养在自己身边呢！
English: Since ancient times, if there is a difference of opinion and they are not dealt with, it will cause irreparable consequences. How can you keep a vicious enemy around you all the time?

古文：此又寸脔忠贤，不足尽其辜者，大罪二十四。
现代文：就是一寸一寸地割魏忠贤的肉，也不足以抵消他的罪孽，为大罪之二十四。
English: Even slicing Wei Zhongxian's flesh inch by inch was not enough to offset his sins, which amounted to twenty-four of the major sins.

古文：凡此逆迹，昭然在人耳目。
现代文： 凡此种种背叛行为，都一一显现在人们面前。
English: All these acts of treachery have come to light.

古文：乃内廷畏祸而不敢言，外廷结舌而莫敢奏。
现代文：但内廷害怕祸害而不敢说出来，外朝表示沉默而不敢上报。
English: However, the Inner Court was afraid to speak out for fear of causing mischief, and the Outer Court was silent and did not dare to report it.

古文：间或奸状败露，则又有奉圣夫人为之弥缝。
现代文：有时罪行败露，则又有奉圣夫人为他掩盖。
English: Sometimes the crime is uncovered, but sometimes Mrs. Bongsan covers up for him.

古文：甚至无耻之徒，攀附枝叶，依托门墙，更相表里，迭为呼应。
现代文：甚至有些无耻之徒，攀附巴结，希望得到他的庇护，更是内外勾结，遥相呼应。
English: There are even some shameless people who cling to Baizuo, hoping to get his protection, and even collude inside and outside, echoing each other.

古文：积威所劫，致掖廷之中，但知有忠贤，不知有陛下；都城之内，亦但知有忠贤，不知有陛下。
现代文：淫威影响所及，使得宫廷里面，只知道有魏忠贤，不知道有陛下；都城之中，也只知道有魏忠贤，不知道有陛下。
English: As far as the influence of sexual arrogance reaches, the court only knows Wei Zhongxian, but not His Majesty; in the capital, they only know Wei Zhongxian, but not His Majesty.

古文：即如前日，忠贤已往涿州，一切政务必星夜驰请，待其既旋，诏旨始下。
现代文：就像前些日子，魏忠贤已经去了涿州，所有的政治事务一定要星夜兼程，赶去向他汇报，等他回朝之后，诏书才开始下发。
English: Just like the previous days, Wei Zhongxian had already gone to Zhangzhou, and all political affairs must be carried out at the same time. He had to rush to report to him. After he returned to the North, the imperial edict began to be issued.

古文：天颜咫尺，忽慢至此，陛下之威灵尚尊于忠贤否邪？
现代文：皇帝近在咫尺，竟敢视而不见。如此不敬，陛下的权威不是还要屈从于魏忠贤吗？
English: The emperor is so close that he dares to turn a blind eye. With such disrespect, shouldn't his majesty's authority be subservient to Wei Zhongxian?

古文：陛下春秋鼎盛，生杀予夺，岂不可以自主？
现代文：陛下正处于鼎盛之年，生杀予夺的权力，难道不能自己决定吗？
English: Your Majesty is in the prime of his life. Can't he decide for himself whether to give or take power?

古文：何为受制幺纻小丑，令中外大小惴惴莫必其命？
现代文：为什么还要受这个跳梁小丑的控制，让朝廷内外的大小臣民小心翼翼地受他的指使呢？
English: Why should we still be under the control of this clown, and allow the small and large subjects inside and outside the court to be carefully guided by him?

古文：伏乞大奋雷霆，集文武勋戚，敕刑部严讯，以正国法，并出奉圣夫人于外，用消隐忧，臣死且不朽。
现代文：卑臣恭敬地乞求陛下振奋皇帝的雷霆之威，召集文武大臣、功勋国戚，下令刑部严加审讯，来维护国家的法令，并且将奉圣夫人逐出内宫，消除隐患，如此，则卑臣死且不朽。 
English: He respectfully begged His Majesty to invigorate the thunderous might of the emperor, to convene the ministers of literature and armed forces and the meritorious relatives of the country, to order the criminal justice department to conduct a strict trial to uphold the laws of the country, and to expel Madame Bong Sheng from the inner palace to eliminate hidden dangers. Thus, Bong Sheng died and became immortal.

古文：忠贤初闻疏，惧甚。
现代文：魏忠贤刚听说这道奏疏，非常恐惧。
English: When Wei Zhongxiangang heard about this, he was very scared.

古文：其党王体乾及客氏力为保持，遂令魏广微调旨切责涟。
现代文：他的党徒王体乾和客氏极力让他保持镇定，于是叫魏广微草拟圣旨痛切地斥责杨涟。
English: His party members Wang Tiegan and Keke tried their best to keep him calm, so they asked Wei Guangwei to draft a holy will and bitterly reprimand Yang Xuan.

古文：先是，涟疏就欲早朝面奏。
现代文：在这之前，杨涟写好奏疏准备在第二天早朝的时候交给皇帝。
English: Prior to this, Yang Hui had prepared a sonnet to present to the emperor early the next morning.

古文：值次日免朝，恐再宿机泄，遂于会极门上之，忠贤乃得为计。
现代文：碰上第二天皇帝不上朝，担心再过一个晚上机密泄露，于是在会极门呈上奏疏，魏忠贤这才能够布置对策，杨涟更加气愤，准备再上疏弹劾他。
English: When the emperor did not go to the imperial court the next day, fearing that the secret would be leaked in another night, Wei Zhongxian was able to arrange a countermeasure. Yang Xuan was even more angry and prepared to impeach him again.

古文：涟愈愤，拟对仗复劾之，忠贤诇知，遏帝不御朝者三日。及帝出，群阉数百人衷甲夹陛立，敕左班官不得奏事，涟乃止。
现代文：魏忠贤刺探知道了，一连三天阻止皇帝上朝。等到皇帝出来，数百名太监内穿铠甲在两旁站立，下令左班官不准奏报任何事情，杨涟只得作罢。
English: When Wei Zhongxian's spies found out, they prevented the emperor from going to the court for three days in a row. When the emperor came out, hundreds of eunuchs in armor stood on both sides and ordered the left-rank officials not to report anything. Yang Xuan had no choice but to stop.

古文：自是，忠贤日谋杀涟。
现代文：从这以后，魏忠贤每天都在想办法杀害杨涟。
English: Since then, Wei Zhongxian has been trying to kill Yang Jun every day.

古文：至十月，吏部尚书赵南星既逐，廷推代者，涟注籍不与。
现代文：到了十月，吏部尚书赵南星已被驱逐，朝廷推举代替他的人，杨涟在家听候处理没有参予。
English: By October, Zhao Nansing, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, had been expelled, and the person elected by the court to replace him, Yang Hui, was at home waiting for the treatment and did not participate.

古文：忠贤矫旨责涟大不敬，无人臣礼，偕吏部侍郎陈于廷、佥都御史左光斗并削籍。
现代文：魏忠贤假传圣旨谴责杨涟的态度很不恭敬，没有做臣子的礼节，连同吏部侍郎陈于廷、佥都御史左光斗一起削籍为平民。
English: Wei Zhongxian denounced Yang Xuan's attitude as disrespectful and lacking the etiquette of a vassal, and together with Chen Yu Ting, the attendant of the cadre department, and Zuo Guangdou, the governor of the capital, he was demoted to a commoner.

古文：忠贤恨不已，再兴汪文言狱，将罗织杀涟。
现代文：魏忠贤还不解恨，又制造汪文言案，准备罗织罪名杀死杨涟。
English: Wei Zhongxian still couldn't get rid of his hatred, so he fabricated the Wang Wenyan case, preparing to fabricate a crime to kill Yang Qi.

古文：五年，其党大理丞徐大化劾涟、光斗党同伐异，招权纳贿，命逮文言下狱鞫之。
现代文：天启五年，魏忠贤的党羽大理丞徐大化弹劾杨涟、左光斗党同伐异，利用职权接受贿赂，下令逮捕汪文言进行审讯。
English: In the fifth year of the apocalypse, Wei Zhongxian's party leader Xu Dahu impeached Yang Xuan and Zuo Guangdou for dissent, used his authority to accept bribes, and ordered the arrest of Wang Wenyan for interrogation.

古文：许显纯严鞫文言，使引涟纳熊廷弼贿。
现代文：许显纯严加拷问汪文言，逼迫他招供杨涟接受熊廷弼的贿赂。
English: Xu Xianjun severely tortured Wang Wenyan and forced him to confess that Yang Jie accepted bribes from Xiong Tingtao.

古文：文言仰天大呼曰： 世岂有贪赃杨大洪哉！ 
现代文：汪文言仰天大叫： 世界上难道有贪赃受贿的杨大洪吗！ 
English: Wang Wenyin shouted to the heavens: Is there a Yang Dahong in the world who is greedy and takes bribes?

古文：至死不承。大洪者，涟别字也。显纯乃自为狱词，坐涟赃二万，遂逮涟。
现代文：到死都不承认，大洪是杨涟的别字，许显纯于是自己写供词，诬告杨涟贪污赃款二万两银子，于是逮捕杨涟。
English: He would not admit to the end of his life that "Dahong" was another name for Yang Hui, so Xu Xianren wrote a confession himself, falsely accused Yang Hui of embezzling 20,000 taels of silver, and arrested Yang Hui.

古文：士民数万人拥道攀号，所历村市，悉焚香建醮，祈祐涟生还。
现代文：几万人站在道路两旁追随哭喊。凡是经过的村镇，全都烧香祭祀，祈求上天保佑杨涟活着回来。
English: Tens of thousands of people stood on both sides of the road following the cries. All the villages and towns that passed by burned incense and made sacrifices, praying for God to bless Yang Xuan to come back alive.

古文：比下诏狱，显纯酷法拷讯，体无完肤。
现代文：等到下诏打入监牢，许显纯用严酷的刑法拷打审问他，杨涟全身上下没有完好的皮肤。
English: After he was sent to prison, Xu Xianren interrogated him with harsh criminal law torture, and Yang Xuan did not have intact skin all over his body.

古文：其年七月遂于夜中毙之，年五十四。
现代文：这年七月的一个晚上死在狱中，时年五十四岁。
English: He died in prison one night in July of that year, at the age of fifty-four.

古文：涟素贫，产入官不及千金。
现代文：杨涟一向贫穷，财产充入官府不足千金。
English: Yang Hui has always been poor, with less than a thousand dollars in property paid to the government.

古文：母妻止宿谯楼，二子至乞食以养。
现代文：母亲、妻子只能住在城楼上，二个儿子竟至于乞讨为生。
English: His mother and wife can only live in a tower block, and his two sons have resorted to begging for a living.

古文：征赃令急，乡人竞出赀助之，下至卖菜佣亦为输助。
现代文：征收赃款的命令紧急，同乡的人争着出钱物帮助他，就连卖菜的雇农也缴纳物品资助他。
English: The order to collect the stolen money was urgent, and his fellow villagers scrambled to help him with money and goods. Even the farmers who sold vegetables also contributed goods to help him.

古文：其节义感人如此。
现代文：他的节操、忠义多么感人。
English: How touching his self-restraint and loyalty.

古文：崇祯初，赠太子太保、兵部尚书，谥忠烈，官其一子。
现代文：崇祯初年，追赠太子太保、兵部尚书，谥号忠烈。荫封他的一个儿子做官。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, he posthumously bestowed the title of Prince Taibo, the title of Minister of Military Affairs, and the title of Loyalist. One of his sons was appointed as an official.

古文：左光斗，字遗直，桐城人。
现代文：左光斗，字遗直，安徽桐城人。
English: Zuo Guangdou, Zi Zhizhi, Tongcheng, Anhui.

古文：万历三十五年进士。除中书舍人。
现代文：万历三十五年进士，授职中书舍人。
English: Thirty-five years later, he was promoted to the rank of scholar.

古文：选授御史，巡视中城。
现代文：选拔担任御史，巡视宫城。
English: He was selected to serve as Imperial Historian and toured Miyagi.

古文：捕治吏部豪恶吏，获假印七十余，假官一百余人，辇下震悚。
现代文：逮捕整治吏部凶狠霸道的官员，缴获假印七十多枚，假官一百多人，震动京师。
English: The vicious and domineering officials of the rectification department were arrested, and more than seventy fake seals and more than one hundred fake officials were seized, shaking the Beijing division.

古文：出理屯田，言： 北人不知水利，一年而地荒，二年而民徙，三年而地与民尽矣。
现代文：派出管理屯田，说： 北方人不知道水利，一年之后土地荒芜，二年之后农民搬家，三年之后土地人民都无利可言了。
English: He said, "Northerners do not know about water conservancy. One year later the land is barren, two years later the farmers have moved, and three years later the people of the land have nothing to show for it.

古文：今欲使旱不为灾，涝不为害，惟有兴水利一法。 
现代文：现在要想天干没有旱灾，长期下雨不遭水灾，只有兴修水利这一条路。 
English: Now, if we want dry weather without droughts and long-term rain without floods, the only way is to build water conservancy.

古文：因条上三因十四议：曰因天之时，因地之利，因人之情；曰议浚川，议疏渠，议引流，议设坝，议建闸，议设陂，议相地，议筑塘，议招徕，议择人，议择将，议兵屯，议力田设科，议富民拜爵。
现代文：于是上书陈述 三因十四议 ：因天时，因地利，因人情；议疏通河流，议开凿渠道，议建筑堤坝，议兴修水闸，议修筑陂塘，议勘探土地，议构筑水池，议招徕人民，议选择人才，议选择将领，议派兵屯田，议按地力确定等级，议将富裕的农民赐给官爵。
English: Therefore, the petition stated that there were three reasons and fourteen reasons: due to the time of day, due to the location, due to the human condition; to dredge rivers, to dig channels, to build dams, to build sluices, to build ponds, to explore land, to build ponds, to recruit people, to select talents, to select generals, to send soldiers to farmland, to determine the grade according to the strength of the land, to give rich farmers a peerage.

古文：其法犁然具备，诏悉允行。
现代文：办法是犁耕与放火烧荒同时并举。下诏都允许他们实行。
English: The method is to carry out ploughing and arson at the same time. They are allowed to carry out both.

古文：水利大兴，北人始知艺稻。
现代文：农田水利大规模地兴修，北方人开始知道种植水稻。
English: Large-scale construction of farmland water conservancy was carried out, and the northerners began to know how to grow rice.

古文：邹元标尝曰： 三十年前，都人不知稻草何物，今所在皆稻，种水田利也。 
现代文：邹元标说： 三十年以前，京城的人民不知道稻草是什么东西，现在到处都是水稻，这是兴修农田水利的功劳。 
English: Hao Yuanbiao said: Thirty years ago, the people of Beijing did not know what straw was. Now, rice is everywhere. This is the merit of building farmland water conservancy.

古文：阉人刘朝称东宫令旨，索戚畹废庄。光斗不启封还之，曰： 尺土皆殿下有，今日安敢私受。 
现代文：宦官刘朝声称有东宫的旨义，索取外戚亲贵的废田，左光斗不拆封退回了，说： 国家的每一尺土地是殿下的，今天怎么敢私人接受。 
English: The eunuch Liu Chao claimed to have the will of the East Palace, and asked for the waste land of his relatives, but Zuo Guangdou returned it without opening it, saying: Every foot of land in the country is your highness, how dare you accept it privately today.

古文：阉人愤而去。
现代文：宦官气忿地离开了。
English: The eunuch left angrily.

古文：光宗崩，李选侍据乾清宫，迫皇长子封皇后。
现代文：光宗驾崩，李选侍占据乾清宫，逼迫皇太子封她为皇后。
English: After the death of Guangzong, Li Xuan occupied the Qianqing Palace and forced the crown prince to make her the empress.

古文：光斗上言： 内廷有乾清宫，犹外廷有皇极殿，惟天子御天得居之，惟皇后配天得共居之。
现代文：左光斗上书说： 内廷的乾清宫，好比是外廷的皇极殿，只有天子控制上天才能够居住，只有皇后作为天子的配偶才能一起居住在那里。
English: Zuo Guangdou wrote: The Qianqing Palace of the Inner Court is like the Imperial Palace of the Outer Court. Only those who are under the control of the Son of Heaven can live there, and only the Empress, as the spouse of the Son of Heaven, can live there together.

古文：其他妃嫔虽以次进御，不得恒居，非但避嫌，亦以别尊卑也。
现代文：其余的嫔妃虽然先后与皇帝同居过但不能长期居住，不仅是为了避嫌，而且是为了区别尊卑的秩序。
English: Although the rest of the concubines lived with the emperor successively, they could not live for a long time, not only to avoid suspicion, but also to distinguish the order of superiority and inferiority.

古文：选侍既非嫡母，又非生母，俨然尊居正宫，而殿下乃退处慈庆，不得守几筵，行大礼，名分谓何？
现代文：李选侍既不是皇帝原配，又不是皇太子的亲生母亲，却堂而皇之地居住在正宫里面，而让殿下退出来居住慈庆宫，不能够举行国宴，实行国家大礼，在名份上怎么说得过去？
English: Li Xuanmei is neither the emperor's original match nor the crown prince's biological mother, but she lives in the main palace, while letting his royal highness withdraw to live in Cixing Palace, unable to hold a state banquet and perform a state grand ceremony. How can it be said in the name?

古文：选侍事先皇无脱簪戒旦之德，于殿下无拊摩养育之恩，此其人，岂可以托圣躬者？
现代文：李选侍服侍先皇帝没有脱去发簪请罪告诫皇上的美德，对于殿下没有照看养育的恩情，这样一个人，难道可以把皇帝托付给她吗？
English: Li Zheng served the previous emperor without taking off the hairpin, pleaded guilty, admonished the emperor's virtue, and did not take care of the upbringing of his highness. Can such a person entrust the emperor to her?

古文：且殿下春秋十六龄矣，内辅以忠直老成，外辅以公孤卿贰，何虑乏人，尚须乳哺而襁负之哉？
现代文：况且皇帝已经有十六岁了，内有忠诚正直、老成持重的大臣辅佐，外有公卿大臣的辅助，何必担心没有人，还要人喝奶，像个婴孩背在身上吗？
English: Besides, the emperor is already sixteen years old, and he has loyal, honest, and long-serving ministers and aides, and he is assisted by nobles and ministers. Why should he worry about not having anyone, and why should he need someone to drink milk and carry him like a baby?

古文：况睿哲初开，正宜不见可欲，何必托于妇人女子之手？
现代文：况且皇帝新登基，正应该不被人牵制，何必一定要交给一个妇人之手呢？
English: Moreover, the new emperor ascended to the throne, just as he should not be restrained by anyone, why must he be handed over to a woman's hand?

古文：及今不早断决，将借抚养之名，行专制之实。武氏之祸再见于今，将来有不忍言者。 
现代文：到现在还不早做决断，将来会被她借抚养的名义，实行专制统治，武则天的祸害今天再现，将来的人又怎么说。 
English: It is still too early to make a decision. In the future, she will use the name of her upbringing to implement autocratic rule. The scourge of Wu Zetian is reappearing today. What will people say in the future?

古文：时选侍欲专大权，廷臣笺奏，令先进乾清，然后进慈庆。
现代文：当时李选侍想控制国家大权。廷臣上书奏议，让她先进乾清宫，然后进慈庆宫。
English: At that time, Li Xuanwu wanted to control the power of the state. The courtiers submitted a petition for discussion, and she was allowed to enter the Qianqing Palace first, and then the Cixing Palace.

古文：得光斗笺，大怒，将加严谴。
现代文：看到左光斗的上书，李选侍非常愤怒，想严加谴责。
English: Seeing Zuo Guangdou's letter, Li Xuan Saming was very angry and wanted to severely condemn him.

古文：数遣使宣召光斗，光斗曰： 我天子法官也，非天子召不赴。
现代文：多次派使者召见左光斗。左光斗说： 我是天子法定的官员，不是天子召见不去。
English: He repeatedly sent emissaries to summon Zuo Guangdou. Zuo Guangdou said, "I am an official appointed by the Son of Heaven, and I cannot be summoned by the Son of Heaven.

古文：若辈何为者？ 
现代文：你们这帮人是干什么的？ 
English: What are you people up to?

古文：选侍益怒，邀熹宗至乾清议之。
现代文：李选侍更加愤怒，邀请熹宗皇帝到乾清宫商议。
English: Li Xianzhong was even more angry and invited Emperor Taizong to the Qianqing Palace for discussion.

古文：熹宗不肯往，使使取其笺视之，心以为善，趣择日移宫，光斗乃免。
现代文：熹宗不肯前往，派使臣拿来左光斗的上书，读它，认为他是好的。催促选择日期移宫，左光斗于是免除处罚。
English: Emperor Taizong did not want to go, so he sent an envoy to take Zuo Guangdou's petition, read it, and thought he was good. He urged him to choose a date to move to the palace, and Zuo Guangdou was exempted from punishment.

古文：当是时，宫府危疑，人情危惧，光斗与杨涟协心建议，排阉奴，扶冲主，宸极获正，两人力为多。
现代文：这个时候，宫廷的形势很微妙，人们的情绪也很紧张，左光斗和杨涟同心协力上疏建议，排斥太监，辅佐年轻的皇帝，明皇室正统得以巩固，二人出力最多。
English: At this time, the situation at the court was very delicate, and people's emotions were also very tense. Zuo Guangdou and Yang Xuan made concerted efforts to make suggestions, expel eunuchs, assist young emperors, and consolidate the legitimacy of the Ming royal family. The two contributed the most.

古文：由是朝野并称为 杨左 。
现代文：由此朝廷内外称之为 杨、左 。
English: For this reason, they were called Yang and Zuo both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：未几，御史贾继春上书内阁，言帝不当薄待庶母。
现代文：不久，御史贾继春给内阁上书，说皇帝不应该轻视自己的庶母。
English: Not long after, Prince Jia Jichun wrote a letter to the cabinet, saying that the emperor should not despise his own stepmother.

古文：故臣于初二日具《慎守典礼肃清宫禁》一疏，宫中震怒，祸几不测。
现代文：左光斗听说，立即上奏说： 先皇帝驾崩，大臣将皇上从乾清宫迎接到慈庆宫，臣等认为不应该回避李选侍，所以我在初二这一天上了道《慎守典礼肃宫禁》疏。宫中感到震惊而愤怒，几乎遭祸。
English: When Zuo Guangdou heard of this, he immediately reported: "The former emperor has passed away, and the minister will welcome the emperor from the Qianqing Palace to the Cixing Palace. The ministers believe that they should not avoid Li Xuan Zhi, so on the second day of the freshman year, I embarked on the path of "Cautious observance of the ceremony, avoiding the palace ban." The palace was shocked and angry, and almost suffered a disaster.

古文：赖皇上保全，发臣疏于内阁。
现代文：幸亏皇上保全，将我的上疏交给内阁讨论。
English: Thanks to the Emperor's protection, I submitted my resignation to the cabinet for discussion.

古文：初五日，阁臣具揭再催，奉旨移宫。
现代文：初五，内阁大臣备文再一次催促，李选侍奉旨移宫。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the cabinet minister once again urged Li Xuan to move to the palace.

古文：至初六日，皇上登极，驾还乾清。
现代文：到了初六，皇上即位，回到乾清宫。
English: On the sixth day of the first month, the emperor ascended to the throne and returned to the Qianqing Palace.

古文：宫禁肃然，内外宁谧。
现代文：皇宫禁中都很恭敬，朝廷内外一片安宁。
English: Everyone in the Imperial Palace was very respectful, and there was peace inside and outside the Imperial Court.

古文：夫皇上既当还宫，则选侍之当移，其理明白易晓。
现代文：皇上既然应该回到乾清宫，那么李选侍就应该搬往别处，这个道理是很明白清楚的。
English: Since the emperor should return to the Qianqing Palace, then Li Xingzhu should move elsewhere, this reason is very clear.

古文：惟是移宫以后，自宜存大体，捐小过。
现代文：只是移宫之后，自然应该保全大体，摒弃小的恩怨。
English: However, after moving to a new palace, it is natural to preserve the general situation and discard minor grudges.

古文：若复株连蔓引，使宫闱不安，即于国体有损。
现代文：假如还不停地追究罪责，使得宫中不得安宁，就是有损于国家。
English: It would be to the detriment of the country if there were to be incessant recriminations, leading to unrest in the palace.

古文：乞立诛盗宝宫奴刘逊等，而尽宽其余。 
现代文：乞求皇帝立即惩罚盗窃宝物的宫奴刘逊等人，对其余的人则一概不予追究。 
English: He implored the emperor to immediately punish Liu Xun and other courtiers who had stolen the treasure, and not to prosecute the others.

古文：帝乃宣谕百官，备述选侍凌虐圣母诸状。及召见，又言： 朕与选侍有仇。 
现代文：皇帝于是宣告百官，一一陈述李选侍侮辱虐待皇帝母亲的种种情形，等到召见大臣时又说： 朕跟李选侍有仇。 
English: The emperor then announced a hundred officials, one by one stating the various circumstances of Li Xuanzhu insulting and abusing the emperor's mother. When he summoned the minister, he said: I have a grudge against Li Xuanzhu.

古文：继春用是得罪去。
现代文：贾继春因为这个原因被定罪离职。
English: Jia Jichun was convicted and removed from office for this reason.

古文：时廷臣议改元。
现代文：这时朝臣们议论改纪年的事情。
English: At this time, the courtiers were discussing the matter of changing the calendar.

古文：或议削泰昌弗纪，或议去万历四十八年，即以今年为泰昌，或议以明年为泰昌，后年为天启。
现代文：有人主张不用泰昌这个年号；有人主张取消万历四十八年，就以今年为泰昌元年；有人主张以明年为泰昌元年，而以后年为天启元年。
English: Some people advocate not using the year name of Taichang; some people advocate canceling the 48th year of Wanli, so this year will be the first year of Taichang; some people advocate using next year as the first year of Taichang, and the year after that as the first year of Tianqi.

古文：光斗力排其说，请从今年八月以前为万历，以后为泰昌，议遂定。
现代文：左光斗力排众议，请求以今年八月为界，这之前为万历，这之后为泰昌，讨论才算结束。
English: Zuo Guangbiao put forward a public discussion, requesting that this August be the boundary, before that it was Wanli, after that it was Taichang, and the discussion was over.

古文：孙如游由中旨入阁，抗疏请斥之。
现代文：孙如游由宫中传旨进入内阁，没有经过外廷，他上疏极力驳斥。
English: Sun Ryu entered the cabinet by imperial order, without going through the outer court, which he strenuously refuted.

古文：出督畿辅学政，力杜请寄，识鉴如神。
现代文：出任京城附近地区的学政，杜绝请客送礼的风气。
English: He served as a school governor in an area near the capital and put an end to the custom of inviting guests to give gifts.

古文：天启初，廷议起用熊廷弼，罪言官魏应嘉等。光斗独抗疏争之，言廷弼才优而量不宏，昔以守辽则有余，今以复辽则不足。
现代文：天启初年，廷议起用熊廷弼，处罚言官魏应嘉等人，左光斗独自一人上疏反对，说熊廷弼很有才干但气量狭小，过去用他驻守辽阳则有余，现在仍用他防守辽阳则不足。
English: In the first year of the apocalypse, the court began to use Xiong Tingyao to punish Wei Yingjia and others. Zuo Guangdou was the only one to oppose it, saying that Xiong Tingyao was very talented but small in stature. In the past, he was used to guard Liaoyang, but now he is still used to defend Liaoyang.

古文：已而廷弼竟败。
现代文：不久熊廷弼果然失败。
English: Soon after, Xiong Tingyao failed.

古文：三年秋，疏请召还文震孟、满朝荐、毛士龙、徐大相等，并乞召继春及范济世。
现代文：天启三年秋天，上疏请求召回文震孟、满朝荐、毛士龙、徐大相等人，并乞求召回贾继春和范济世。
English: In the autumn of the third year of the Apocalypse, Shangsu requested the recall of Wen Zhen Meng, Man Cha Rong, Mao Shilong, Xu Dasong and others, and begged for the recall of Jia Jichun and Fan Jisei.

古文：济世亦论 移宫 事与光斗异者，疏上不纳。
现代文：范济世在议论 移宫 这事上与左光斗意见不合，皇帝没有采纳。
English: Fan Jise disagreed with Zuo Guangdou on the issue of moving the palace, and the emperor did not accept it.

古文：其年擢大理丞，进少卿。
现代文：这年提拔为大理丞，升任少卿。
English: In that year, he was promoted to Daricho and promoted to Shokei.

古文：明年二月拜左佥都御史。
现代文：第二年二月授职左佥都御史。
English: In February of the following year, he was appointed to the post of Zuo Miyoshi.

古文：是时，韩爌、赵南星、高攀龙、杨涟、郑三俊、李邦华、魏大中诸人咸居要地，光斗与相得，务为危言核论，甄别流品，正人咸赖之，而忌者浸不能容。
现代文：这时，韩火广、赵南星、高攀龙、杨涟、郑三俊、李邦华、魏大中等人都占据要害部门，左光斗跟他们很要好，务求做到言辞激烈，评论深刻，鉴别士人才识品行等级，正直的人都依靠他们，而忌恨他们的人逐渐不能容忍。
English: At this time, Han Huoguang, Zhao Nansing, Gao Panglong, Yang Hui, Zheng Sanjun, Li Banghua, Wei Dai and others occupied the key departments. Zuo Guangdou was very good with them, in order to make the rhetoric fierce, the comments profound, the discernment of the talent, the knowledge of the character and the grade, the honest people relied on them, and the people who hated them were gradually intolerant.

古文：光斗与给事中阮大铖同里，招之入京，会吏科都给事中缺，当迁者，首周士朴，次大铖，次大中。
现代文：左光斗跟给事中阮大铖是同乡，招他进入北京。正好吏科都给事中空缺，能够胜任此职的，首推周士朴，其次是阮大铖，再次为魏大中。
English: Zuo Guangdou was a fellow countryman of Nguyn Đc, who invited him to Beijing. It happened that there was a vacancy in the cadre department, and those who were qualified for this position were first recommended by Zhou Shipu, followed by Nguyn Đc, who was once again a middle school student of Wei University.

古文：大铖邀中旨，勒士朴不迁，以为己地。
现代文：阮大铖巴结宦官，勒令周士朴不得升任，将吏科都给事中据为己有。
English: Nguyn Dng ordered Zhou Shipu not to be promoted to the position of eunuch, and he took the position as his own.

古文：赵南星恶之，欲例转大铖，大铖疑光斗发其谋，恨甚。
现代文：赵南星讨厌他，想按惯例将阮大铖迁职，阮大铖怀疑左光斗从中捣鬼，很怀恨他。
English: Zhao Nansing hated him and wanted to transfer Nguyn Daju to another post as usual. Nguyn Daju suspected that Zuo Guangdou was playing a trick on him and hated him very much.

古文：熊明遇、徐良彦皆欲得佥都御史，而南星引光斗为之，两人亦恨光斗。
现代文：熊明遇、徐良彦都想当佥都御史，赵南星却引荐了左光斗，这二人也怀恨左光斗。
English: Xiong Mingyu and Xu Liangyan both wanted to be the capital's imperial historian, but Zhao Nansing recommended Zuo Guangdou. These two also held a grudge against Zuo Guangdou.

古文：江西人又以他故衔大中，遂共嗾给事中傅櫆劾光斗、大中与汪文言比而为奸。
现代文：江西人又因为其他原因怀恨魏大中，于是一起唆使给事中傅魁弹劾左光斗、魏大中跟汪文言狼狈为奸。
English: The people of Jiangxi held a grudge against Wei Daizhong for other reasons, and together they instigated Fu Kui to impeach Zuo Guangdou, and Wei Daizhong to conspire with Wang Wenyan.

古文：光斗疏辨，且诋櫆结东厂理刑傅继教为昆弟。
现代文：左光斗上疏辩解，还揭发傅魁跟东厂理刑傅继教结拜为兄弟。
English: Zuo Guangdou made a feeble excuse, and also revealed that Fu Kui was a brother of the East Factory's head of torture, Fu Jie.

古文：櫆恚，再疏讦光斗。
现代文：傅魁又恨又怒，再次上疏攻击左光斗。
English: Hated and angry, Fu Kui once again attacked Zuo Guangdou.

古文：光斗乞罢，事得解。
现代文：左光斗请求罢官，事情才算完。
English: When Zuo Guangdou asked to be dismissed, the matter was over.

古文：杨涟劾魏忠贤，光斗与其谋，又与攀龙共发崔呈秀赃私，忠贤暨其党咸怒。
现代文：杨涟弹劾魏忠贤，左光斗参与谋划，又跟高攀龙共同揭发崔呈秀私藏赃物，魏忠贤和他的党徒都发怒了。
English: Yang Jie impeached Wei Zhongxian, Zuo Guangdou participated in the plan, and together with Gao Panglong exposed Cui Chenshuu's stolen goods, Wei Zhongxian and his party members were angry.

古文：及忠贤逐南星、攀龙、大中，次将及涟、光斗。
现代文：等到魏忠贤赶走赵南星、高攀龙、魏大中，接下来就该轮到杨涟、左光斗。
English: Wait until Wei Zhongxian chases away Zhao Nansing, Gao Panglong and Wei Dazhong, then it will be the turn of Yang Hui and Zuo Guangdou.

古文：光斗愤甚，草奏劾忠贤及魏广微三十二斩罪，拟十一月二日上之，先遣妻子南还。
现代文：左光斗很气愤，草拟奏疏弹劾魏忠贤和魏广微三十二条死罪，准备在十二月二日上交，先派妻子儿女回到南方。
English: Zuo Guangdou was very angry. He drafted a brief impeachment of Wei Zhongxian and Wei Guangwu with a thirty-two-article death penalty, and was ready to hand it over on December 2. He sent his wife and children back to the south first.

古文：忠贤诇知，先二日假会推事与涟俱削籍。
现代文：魏忠贤刺探知道了，抢先两日利用会推事将杨涟一起削为平民。
English: When Wei Zhongxian's spies found out, they took advantage of the two days' advance notice to use the judges to reduce Yang Yu to a commoner.

古文：群小恨不已，复构文言狱，入光斗名，遣使往逮。父老子弟拥马首号哭，声震原野，缇骑亦为雪涕。
现代文：小人们还不解恨，又制造汪文言案，列入左光斗的名字，派使者前往逮捕他，父老乡亲都拥在马首痛哭，声音在原野上回荡，皇帝的使臣也被感动得流下了眼泪。
English: The little people still couldn't get rid of their hatred, so they fabricated the case of Wang Wenyan, included Zuo Guangdou's name in it, and sent an envoy to arrest him. My father and fellow villagers were all crying bitterly at the horse's head, the sound echoed in the field, and the emperor's envoys were moved to tears.

古文：至则下诏狱酷讯。许显纯诬以受杨镐、熊廷弼贿，涟等初不承，已而恐以不承为酷刑所毙，冀下法司，得少缓死为后图。
现代文：到京后，下诏打入监牢严刑拷问，许显纯诬陷他们接受杨镐、熊廷弼的贿赂。杨涟等人开始不承认，后来担心不承认会被拷打致死，希望把他们交给法司，能够延缓一下然后再做打算，各人都违心服罪。
English: After arriving in Beijing, they were taken to a prison and subjected to severe torture and interrogation. Xu Xianchun framed them for accepting bribes from Yang Hui and Xiong Tingtao. Yang Hui and others initially did not admit it, but later they feared that they would be tortured to death if they did not admit it. They hoped that they would be handed over to the legal department. If they could delay it for a while and then make plans, everyone would confess their sins against their will.

古文：诸人俱自诬服，光斗坐赃二万。
现代文：左光斗被定罪贪赃二万两。
English: Zuo Guangdou was convicted of embezzling 20,000 taels.

古文：忠贤乃矫旨，仍令显纯五日一追比，不下法司，诸人始悔失计。
现代文：魏忠贤于是假传圣旨，仍然命令许显纯五天追问拷打一次，不交给法司，各人开始后悔失策。
English: Wei Zhongxian then forged the imperial edict, and still ordered Xu Xianjun to be interrogated and tortured for five days, but not to be handed over to the magistrate. Everyone began to regret the blunder.

古文：容城孙奇逢者，节侠士也，与定兴鹿正以光斗有德于畿辅，倡议醵金，诸生争应之。
现代文：容城人孙奇逢是一位奇侠之人，跟定兴人鹿正认为左光斗对京城一带有功，倡议凑钱营救，大家争着响应。
English: Sun Qifang, a resident of Yongcheng, is a man of wonder, and he and Ding Xing Renlu are of the opinion that Zuo Guangdou is a great contribution to the capital city, and they are proposing to raise money for the rescue. Everyone is vying for a response.

古文：得金数千，谋代输，缓其狱，而光斗与涟已同日为狱卒所毙，时五年七月二十有六日也，年五十一。
现代文：收集了几千两，商量交给内府，暂缓对他的处罚，而左光斗和杨涟已于同一天被狱卒打死了，这时是天启五年七月二十六日，终年五十一岁。
English: He collected several thousand taels, discussed it with Nefu, and suspended his punishment, while Zuo Guangdou and Yang Qi were beaten to death by their jailers on the same day. It was July 26th in the year of the Apocalypse, and he was 51 years old.

古文：光斗既死，赃犹未竟。
现代文：左光斗已经死了，赃款还没有还尽。
English: Zuo Guangdou is already dead, and the stolen money has not been repaid.

古文：忠贤令抚按严追，系其群从十四人。
现代文：魏忠贤命令抚按官严加追讨，牵连下狱的有十四人。
English: Wei Zhongxian ordered the magistrate to severely pursue the case, and fourteen people were implicated and sent to prison.

古文：长兄光霁坐累死，母以哭子死。
现代文：长兄左光霁受牵连判罪致死，母亲过份悲伤也死了。
English: The eldest brother, Zuo Guangyao, was implicated and sentenced to death, and his mother died of excessive grief.

古文：都御史周应秋犹以所司承追不力，疏趣之，由是诸人家族尽破。
现代文：都御史周应秩还认为有关部门不努力承办追查，上疏催促，因此他的家族都破产了。
English: The Metropolitan Historian Zhou Yingchong also believed that the relevant departments did not make efforts to undertake the investigation, but urged them to do so, so his family went bankrupt.

古文：及忠贤定《三朝要典》， 移宫 一案以涟、光斗为罪魁，议开棺僇尸。有解之者，乃免。
现代文：等到魏忠贤编修《三朝要典》，把杨涟、左光斗定为 移宫案 的首犯，议论打开棺材侮辱他们的尸体，有人说情，才得以幸免。
English: It wasn't until Wei Zhongxian compiled the "Three Dynasties Guidebook" and identified Yang Xuan and Zuo Guangdou as the first culprits in the palace relocation case, discussed opening the coffin and insulting their bodies, and someone interceded, that they were spared.

古文：忠贤既诛，赠光斗右都御史，录其一子。
现代文：魏忠贤死后，追赠左光斗右都御史，录用他的一个儿子。
English: After Wei Zhongxian's death, he posthumously bestowed the title of Zuo Guangdou Yudu Imperial Historian to one of his sons.

古文：魏大中，字孔时，嘉善人。
现代文：不久，又追赠太子少保。南明福王时，追加谥号忠毅。魏大中，字孔中，浙江嘉善人。
English: Not long after, he was posthumously awarded the title of Prince Junior Protector. When he was Minamiming Fuwang, he was given the additional title of Zhongyi. In the middle of the Wei Dynasty, in the middle of the word Kong, he was Zhejiang Jia Shanren.

古文：自为诸生，读书砥行，从高攀龙受业。
现代文：自学成为生员，读书磨练品行，后来跟着高攀龙学习。
English: Self-study to become a student, reading to hone character, and then learning with Gaopanlong.

古文：家酷贫，意豁如也。
现代文：家境赤贫，心胸却十分开阔。
English: His family was extremely poor, but he was very open-minded.

古文：举于乡，家人易新衣冠，怒而毁之。
现代文：乡试中举，家里人为他购置新衣服、新帽子，他气愤地把它烧了。
English: His family bought him new clothes and a new hat for the township's mid-term exam, but he burned them in anger.

古文：第万历四十四年进士，官行人。
现代文：考中万历四十四年进士，授官行人。
English: Passed the middle school entrance examination in the 44th year of Wanli, and was awarded the title of pedestrian.

古文：数奉使，秋毫无所扰。
现代文：多次奉命出使，丝毫也没有扰乱地方。
English: He has been sent out several times on orders and has not disturbed the area in the slightest.

古文：天启元年，擢工科给事中。
现代文：天启元年提拔工科给事中。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, the promotion of engineering was in progress.

古文：杨镐、李如桢既论大辟，以佥都御史王德完言，大学士韩爌遽拟旨减死。
现代文：杨镐、李如祯已被判处死刑，因为有佥都御史王德完说话，大学士韩火广立即草拟诏书减除他的死刑。
English: Yang Hui and Li Ruxuan have been sentenced to death, because after Wang De finished speaking, Han Huiguang, a university scholar, immediately drafted an edict to commute his death sentence.

古文：大中愤，抗疏力争，诋德完晚节不振，尽丧典型，语并侵爌。
现代文：魏大中很气愤，上疏极力争论。诋毁王德完晚节不保，完全丧失了做官的美德，言词牵涉到韩火广。
English: Wei Dazhong was very angry, Shang So vigorously argued. The slander of Wang De was not safe after the evening festival, completely lost the virtue of being an official, and the words involved Han Huo Guang.

古文：帝为诘责大中，而德完恚甚，言曩不举李三才为大中所怒。
现代文：皇帝为之责备魏大中，而王德完更加愤恨他。说先前没有推举李三才，魏大中怀恨在心。
English: The emperor reproached Wei Dazhong for this, and Wang Deguan hated him even more. He said that Li Sancai had not been elected before, and Wei Dazhong held a grudge.

古文：两人互诋讦，疏屡上，爌亦引咎辞位。
现代文：二人互相攻击，多次上疏，韩火广也引咎辞职。
English: The two attacked each other, repeatedly quarreled, and Han Huiguang also resigned.

古文：御史周宗建、徐扬先、张捷、徐景濂、温皋谟，给事中朱钦相右德完，交章论大中，久而后定。
现代文：御史周宗建、徐扬先、张捷、徐景濂、温皋谟，给事中朱钦相支持王德完，轮流上疏议论魏大中，很久才平息。
English: Grand Historians Zhou Zongjian, Xu Yangxian, Zhang Jie, Xu Jingyao, and Wen Rongmu, Zhu Qinshan supported Wang Dekan in the matter, and they took turns to discuss Wei University and Middle School, and it took a long time to calm down.

古文：明年偕同官周朝瑞等两疏劾大学士沈纮，语侵魏进忠、客氏。
现代文：第二年与同事周朝瑞等人一起两次上疏弹劾大学士沈翭，语言涉及魏忠贤、客氏。
English: In the second year, he and his colleague Zhou Chaorui and others twice impeached the university scholar Shen Qi in Shangsuo. The language involved Wei Zhongxian and Hakka.

古文：及议 红丸 事，力请诛方从哲、崔文升、李可灼，且追论郑国泰倾害东宫罪。
现代文：等到讨论 红丸案 ，极力请求杀方从哲、崔文升、李可灼，并且追论郑国泰陷害东宫太子的罪行。
English: Wait until the discussion of the Red Maru case, strongly request the murder of Cong Zhe, Cui Wensheng, Li Keqiao, and pursue the crime of Zheng Guotai framing the East Palace Prince.

古文：持议峻切，大为邪党所仄目。
现代文：态度严厉、言词恳切，宦官小人都非常畏惧他。
English: He is stern in manner and earnest in speech, and the eunuchs are very much afraid of him.

古文：太常少卿王绍徽素与东林为难，营求巡抚，大中恶其人，特疏请斥绍徽，绍徽卒自引去。
现代文：太常少卿王绍徽一向跟东林党人过不去，钻营谋求巡抚的职位。魏大中讨厌这个人，特意上疏请求斥退他，王绍徽最终自动离职。
English: Too often, Wang Shaohui, Shaoqing, always quarreled with the Donglin Party members and tried to seek the post of governor. Wei Dazhong hated this person, and specifically asked Shangsuo to expel him. Wang Shaohui eventually left the post automatically.

古文：再迁礼科左给事中。
现代文：魏大中又被提升为礼科左给事中。
English: Wei University Middle School was also promoted to the middle of the left hand side of the etiquette.

古文：是时恤典冒滥，每大臣卒，其子弟夤缘要路以请，无不如志。
现代文：这时国家抚恤者假冒滥行，每位大臣死，他的兄弟儿子巴结权贵请求封官拜爵，没有得不到满足的。
English: At this time, the state pensioner pretended to be abusive, every minister died, and his brother's son begged for a peerage, which was not unsatisfactory.

古文：大中素疾之，一切裁以典制。
现代文：魏大中一向厌恶这件事，一切都按照典章制度办理。
English: Wei University has always disliked this, and everything is handled in accordance with the disciplinary system.

古文：四年迁吏科都给事中。
现代文：天启四年他被提升为吏科都给事中。
English: In the fourth year of the apocalypse, he was promoted to the position of the head of the administrative department.

古文：大中居官不以家自随，二苍头给爨而已，入朝则键其户，寂无一人。
现代文：魏大中当官不带家属，只带二个奴仆烧火做饭。自己上朝就锁上门，静悄悄地没有一个人。
English: Officials at the Wei University did not bring their families, but only two servants to cook on the fire. They locked the door in the morning and quietly left no one.

古文：有外吏以苞苴至，举发之，自是无敢及大中门者。
现代文：有一个地方官吏拿着财物来贿赂他，被他检举揭发了。自此以后没有人敢进魏大中的门。
English: A local official bribed him with money and property, which he reported. Since then, no one has dared to enter Wei Da Zhong's door.

古文：吏部尚书赵南星知其贤，事多咨访。
现代文：吏部尚书赵南星得知他的贤能，遇事多去向他咨询。
English: When Zhao Nansing, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, learned of his ability, he often consulted him in times of need.

古文：朝士不能得南星意，率怨大中。
现代文：朝廷中人不能得到赵南星的喜欢，全都怨恨魏大中。
English: People in the imperial court couldn't get Zhao Nansing's favor, and they all resented Wei Dazhong.

古文：而是时牴排东林者多屏废，方恨南星辈次骨。东林中，又各以地分左右。
现代文：而这时与东林党作对的人大多被赶出朝廷，就更加对赵南星等人恨之入骨，东林党人中间，又各自以地方的不同划分派系。
English: At this time, most of the people who opposed the Donglin Party were driven out of the imperial court, and they hated Zhao Nansing and others even more. Among the Donglin Party members, they were divided into different local factions.

古文：大中尝驳苏松巡抚王象恒恤典，山东人居言路者咸怒。
现代文：魏大中曾驳斥苏州、松江巡抚王象恒在抚恤官吏家属方面的问题，山东在言路做官的都十分愤怒。
English: Wang Xiangheng, vice-governor of Suzhou and Songjiang, was refuted by Wei Da Zhong on the issue of pensioning the families of officials, and officials in Shandong were very angry.

古文：及驳浙江巡抚刘一焜，江西人亦大怒。
现代文：等到驳斥浙江巡抚刘一火昆，江西人也很不高兴。
English: The people of Jiangxi were not happy until the governor of Zhejiang Province, Liu Yifu Kun, refuted it.

古文：给事中章允儒，江西人也，性尤忮，嗾其同官傅櫆假汪文言发难。
现代文：给事中章允儒是江西人，尤其嫉妒成性，唆使同事傅魁利用汪文言发难。
English: Zhang Yunru, a native of Jiangxi Province, was particularly jealous and instigated his colleague Fu Kui to use Wang Wenzhong to start trouble.

古文：文言者，歙人。
现代文：汪文言是歙县人。
English: Wang Wenyan is from Jixian County.

古文：初为县吏，智巧任术，负侠气。
现代文：刚当县吏的时候，聪明灵巧有谋略，很有豪侠气。
English: When he was just a county official, he was clever, deft and strategic, and very heroic.

古文：于玉立遣入京刺事，输赀为监生，用计破齐、楚、浙三党。
现代文：于玉立派他到京城刺探情报，花钱买了监生，用计谋破坏齐、楚、浙三大派系。
English: Yu Yulong went to Beijing to spy for information, spent money to buy a student guard, and used stratagems to destroy the three major factions of Qi, Chu, and Zhe.

古文：察东宫伴读王安贤而知书，倾心结纳，与谈当世流品。
现代文：观察到东宫太子的伴读王安是个知书达礼的贤才，一心一意地结交他，跟他谈论当代士人的德才品级。
English: Observing that Wang An, the reading companion of the Crown Prince of the Eastern Court, was a scholarly scholar, he single-mindedly befriended him and talked to him about the moral character of contemporary scholars.

古文：光、熹之际，外廷倚刘一燝，而安居中以次行诸善政，文言交关力为多。
现代文：在光宗、熹宗之交时，外廷倚重刘一火景，而王安居内宫，先后实行各种利于国家的政策，汪文言往来出力很大。
English: At the time of the friendship between Guangzong and Shanzong, the Foreign Court focused on Liu Yixing, while Wang An lived in the Inner Court and successively implemented various policies beneficial to the country. Wang Wenyan's contacts had a great impact.

古文：魏忠贤既杀安，府丞邵辅忠遂劾文言，褫其监生。
现代文：魏忠贤杀死王安后，府丞邵辅忠于是弹劾汪文言，剥夺他监生的职位。
English: After Wei Zhongxian killed Wang An, the prefect Shao Shuozhong impeached Wang Wenyan and deprived him of the post of proctor.

古文：既出都，复逮下吏，得末减。
现代文：赶出京城后，又逮捕下狱，最终减除了他的罪行。
English: After being driven out of the capital, he was arrested and sent to prison, and his crime was eventually reduced.

古文：益游公卿间，舆马尝填溢户外。
现代文：更加与公卿们交游，门外来往的车马络绎不绝。
English: He became even more closely associated with the nobles, and there was a never-ending stream of carriages and horses coming and going from his door.

古文：大学士叶向高用为内阁中书，大中及韩爌、赵南星、杨涟、左光斗与往来，颇有迹。
现代文：大学士叶向高起用他为内阁中书，魏大中以及韩火广、赵南星、杨涟、左光斗跟他来往，迹象十分明显。
English: Ye Xianggao, a university scholar, used him as a cabinet secretary, and Wei Da Zhong and Han Huo Guang, Zhao Nansing, Yang Hui and Zuo Guangdou had dealings with him. The signs are very obvious.

古文：会给事中阮大铖与光斗、大中有隙，遂与允儒定计，嘱櫆劾文言，并劾大中貌陋心险，色取行违，与光斗等交通文言，肆为奸利。
现代文：正好给事中阮大铖跟左光斗、魏大中有仇，于是跟章允儒商量计策，嘱咐傅魁弹劾汪文言，并且弹劾魏大中相貌丑陋，为人阴险，表面一套，实际又一套，跟左光斗等人勾结汪文言，谋取私利。
English: It just so happened that during the incident, Nguyn Đc had a grudge against Zuo Quang Tuo and Wei Dai, so he discussed strategies with Zhang Yun Rhu and ordered Fu Kui to impeach Wang Wenyan. He also impeached the ugly-looking and insidious Wei Dai Tuo for colluding with Zuo Quang Tuo and others with Wang Wenyan for personal gain.

古文：疏入，忠贤大喜，立下文言诏狱。
现代文：奏疏递上去，魏忠贤非常高兴，立即下诏逮捕汪文言。
English: Wei Zhongxian was very happy to receive the report and immediately ordered the arrest of Wang Wenyan.

古文：大中时方迁吏科，上疏力辩，诏许履任。
现代文：魏大中此时正好升任吏科，上疏极力辩解，下诏同意他上任。
English: At this time, Wei Dazhong was just promoted to the post of cadre, Shang So vigorously defended, and agreed to his appointment.

古文：御史袁化中、给事中甄淑等相继为大中、光斗辨。
现代文：御史袁化中、给事中甄淑等人相继替魏大中、左光斗辩解。
English: Gu Shi, Yuan Huazhong, Zhen Shu and others successively defended Wei Da Zhong and Zuo Guangdou.

古文：大学士叶向高以举用文言，亦引罪求罢。
现代文：大学士叶向高因为举荐任用汪文言，也请求引罪辞职。
English: Ye Xianggao, a university scholar, was recommended for appointment by Wang Wenyan, and he also asked for his resignation.

古文：狱方急，御史黄尊素语镇抚刘侨曰： 文言无足惜，不可使搢绅祸由此起。 
现代文：形势很危急，御史黄尊素对镇抚刘侨说： 汪文言不值得可惜，不能由这件事祸及到士大夫阶层。 
English: The situation was very critical, and Governor Huang Zongsu said to the governor Liu Qiao: Wang Wenyan is not worth regretting, and this matter should not affect the scholar-official class.

古文：侨颔之，狱辞无所连。
现代文：刘侨点头同意。
English: Liu Qiao nodded in agreement.

古文：文言廷杖褫职，牵及者获免。
现代文：口供没有牵连到其他人，汪文言受廷杖，剥夺职位，受此案牵连的人无罪。
English: The confession did not implicate anyone else. Wang Wenyan was punished by the court with a cane and deprived of his position. The person implicated in this case was not guilty.

古文：大中乃遵旨履任。
现代文：魏大中于是遵旨上任。
English: Wei Dazhong then took office in accordance with the order.

古文：明日，鸿胪报名面恩，忠贤忽矫旨责大中互讦未竣，不得赴新任。
现代文：第二天，鸿胪寺报名答谢皇帝恩赐，魏忠贤忽然假传圣旨指责魏大中互相攻击没有结束，不能够担任新职。
English: The next day, when Hongye Temple registered to thank the emperor for his gift, Wei Zhongxian suddenly falsified the transmission of the holy will and accused Wei Dazhong that the mutual attacks had not ended and he would not be able to hold the new post.

古文：故事，鸿胪报名状无批谕旨者，举朝骇愕。
现代文：按惯例，鸿胪寺报名的情形没有不被批复的，整个朝廷都很惊讶。
English: According to the usual practice, there was no situation in which the registration of Hongye Temple was not approved, and the entire court was very surprised.

古文：櫆亦言中旨不宜旁出，大中乃复视事。
现代文：傅魁也说皇帝的圣意不能更改，魏大中这才重新上任。
English: Fu Kui also said that the emperor's sacred will could not be changed, and Wei Da Zhong did not take office again.

古文：未几，杨涟疏劾忠贤，大中亦率同官上言： 从古君侧之奸，非遂能祸人国也。
现代文：不久，杨涟上疏弹劾魏忠贤，魏大中也率领同事上疏说： 自古皇帝身旁的奸臣，并不能直接危害国家。
English: Not long after, Yang Xuan Shang Suo impeached Wei Zhongxian, and Shang Suo, who led his colleagues at Wei University, said: The treacherous vassals around the emperor since ancient times cannot directly endanger the country.

古文：有忠臣不惜其身以告之君，而其君不悟，乃至于不可救。
现代文：有的忠臣不惜冒着生命的危险告诉皇帝，而皇帝还不觉察，这才到了不可收拾的地步。
English: Some loyal vassals risked their lives to tell the emperor, but the emperor was not aware of it, and it got to the point of no return.

古文：今忠贤擅威福，结党与，首杀王安以树威于内，继逐刘一燝、周嘉谟、王纪以树威于外，近且毙三戚畹家人以树威于三宫。深结保姆客氏，伺陛下起居；广布傅应星、陈居恭、傅继教辈，通朝中声息。
现代文：现在魏忠贤狐假虎威，拉帮结派，先是杀死王安在内宫树立淫威；然后驱逐刘一火景、周嘉谟、王纪在外廷树立淫威；最近还杀死三个外戚亲贵的家属在三宫树立淫威，极力勾结保姆客氏，伺候陛下饮食起居；到处安插傅应星、陈居恭、傅继教等人，窃取朝廷的消息。
English: Now Wei Zhongxian is pretending to be a tyrant and is pulling a gang to form a faction. First, he killed Wang An to establish a tyrannical power in the Inner Court; then he expelled Liu Yiguo, Zhou Jia Mu, and Wang Ji to establish a tyrannical power in the Outer Court; recently, he also killed three close relatives and family members to establish a tyrannical power in the Third Court, and tried his best to collude with the nanny Kaji to wait for His Majesty to eat and live; he placed Fu Yingxing, Chen Jigong, Fu Jiguo and others everywhere to steal information from the imperial court.

古文：人怨于下，天怒于上，故涟不惜粉身碎首为陛下陈。
现代文：真是到了天怒人怨的地步，所以杨涟不惜冒着粉身碎骨的危险极力向陛下陈述。
English: It really got to the point of anger and resentment, so Yang Wei risked his life and limb to present his case to His Majesty.

古文：今忠贤种种罪状，陛下悉引为亲裁，代之任咎。
现代文：当今魏忠贤的种种罪状，陛下全都揽在自己的身上，代他承担责任。
English: His Majesty has taken all of Wei Zhongxian's current crimes upon himself and assumed responsibility on his behalf.

古文：恐忠贤所以得温旨，即出忠贤手，而涟之疏，陛下且未及省览也。
现代文：恐怕魏忠贤之所以能够发号施令，就是因为出自魏忠贤之手的缘故，而杨涟的上疏，陛下尚且没有来得及阅读吧？
English: I am afraid that the reason why Wei Zhongxian was able to give orders is because it came from the hand of Wei Zhongxian, and Yang Xuan's Shang Shu, Your Majesty has not yet had time to read it?

古文：陛下贵为天子，致三宫列嫔尽寄性命于忠贤、客氏，能不寒心？
现代文：陛下贵为天子，把三宫嫔妃的性命全都交给魏忠贤和客氏，怎不让人寒心。
English: Your Majesty is the Son of Heaven, and you have entrusted the lives of the three imperial concubines to Wei Zhongxian and Hakka. How can you not be chilled?

古文：陛下谓宫禁严密，外廷安知，枚乘有言 欲人弗知，莫若弗为 ，未有为其事而他人不知者。
现代文：陛下说宫禁之中严守机密，外廷怎能知晓。枚乘有一句话，说： 想叫别人不知道，不如自己不去做。 没有做了事情别人不知道的。
English: His Majesty said that while the palace ban was strictly kept confidential, how could the outside court know? The card bore a sentence saying: "If you want others not to know, it is better not to do it yourself. Do not do things that others do not know."

古文：又谓左右屏而圣躬将孤立。
现代文：又说把身边的人赶走了，皇帝将会被孤立起来。
English: He also said that if the people around him were driven away, the emperor would be isolated.

古文：夫陛下一身，大小臣工所拥卫，何藉于忠贤？
现代文：陛下的身体，大小臣属都拥护爱戴，何必依靠魏忠贤？
English: His Majesty's body and all the ministers, great and small, are loved and cherished. Why should we rely on Wei Zhongxian?

古文：若忠贤、客氏一日不去，恐禁廷左右悉忠贤、客氏之人，非陛下之人，陛下真孤立于上耳。 
现代文：假使魏忠贤、客氏一天不离开，恐怕宫中左右都是魏忠贤、客氏的人，不是陛下的人，陛下真正在上面被孤立了啊。 
English: If Wei Zhongxian and Hakka did not leave for a day, I am afraid that the palace would be surrounded by Wei Zhongxian and Hakka people, not His Majesty's people. His Majesty is really isolated above.

古文：忠贤得疏大怒，矫旨切让，尚未有以罪也。
现代文：魏忠贤得到奏疏很愤怒，假传圣旨痛切谴责他，还没有给他定罪。
English: Wei Zhongxian was outraged by the slanderous report. He was severely reprimanded by the pseudo-missionary and has yet to be convicted.

古文：大学士魏广微结纳忠贤，表里为奸，大中每欲纠之。
现代文：大学士魏广微巴结魏忠贤，内外勾结，狼狈为奸，魏大中常想检举揭发他。
English: Wei Guangwei, a university scholar, colluded with Wei Zhongxian, both inside and outside, and acted as a traitor. The middle school of Wei University often wanted to investigate and expose him.

古文：会孟冬时享，广微偃蹇后至，大中遂抗疏劾之。
现代文：正好十月冬祭，魏广微傲慢地迟到了，魏大中于是上疏弹劾他。
English: Just in time for the October Winter Festival, Wei Guangwei arrogantly arrived late, and the upper class of Wei University impeached him.

古文：广微愠，益与忠贤合。
现代文：魏广微心里很不高兴，与魏忠贤勾结得更紧了。
English: Wei Guangwei was very unhappy in his heart, and his collusion with Wei Zhongxian became even closer.

古文：忠贤势益张，以廷臣交攻，阳示敛戢，且曲从诸所奏请，而阴伺其隙。迨吏部推谢应祥巡抚山西，广微遂嗾所亲陈九畴劾大中出应祥门，推举不公，贬三秩，出之外，尽逐诸正人吏部尚书赵南星等，天下大权一归于忠贤。
现代文：魏忠贤更加嚣张，由于廷臣交相攻击他，表面装得很收敛，并且按照各人上疏的要求去做，而在暗地里等待时机，等到吏部推举谢应祥巡抚山西，魏广微于是唆使跟他亲近的陈九畴弹劾魏大中是谢应祥的门生，推举不公正，贬了他三级官，派往外地。全部驱逐各正直的人，如吏部尚书赵南星等，国家大权全部归于魏忠贤一人之手。
English: Wei Zhongxian was even more arrogant. As the courtiers attacked him, he pretended to be very restrained on the surface, and did what everyone else demanded, while secretly waiting for the opportunity. When the cadre department nominated Xie Yingxiang as the governor of Shanxi, Wei Guangwei then instigated Chen Jujia, who was close to him, to impeach Wei Dazhong, a protégé of Xie Yingxiang. The nomination was unfair, he was demoted three levels and sent to a foreign country. All honest people were expelled, such as the cadre secretary Zhao Nansing, and all the power of the country was in the hands

古文：明年，逆党梁梦环复劾文言，再下诏狱。
现代文：第二天，魏忠贤的党徒梁梦环再次弹劾汪文言，将他打入监牢。
English: The next day, Liang Menghuan, a party member of Wei Zhongxian, again impeached Wang Wenyan and sent him to prison.

古文：镇抚许显纯自削牍以上，南星、涟、光斗、大中及李若星、毛士龙、袁化中、缪昌期、邹维琏、邓渼、卢化鳌、钱士晋、夏之令、王之寀、徐良彦、熊明遇、周朝瑞、黄龙光、顾大章、李三才、惠世扬、施天德、黄正宾辈，无所不牵引，而以涟、光斗、大中、化中、朝瑞、大章为受杨镐、熊廷弼贿，大中坐三千，矫旨俱逮下诏狱。
现代文：镇抚许显纯自写供词上报，赵南星、杨涟、左光斗、魏大中以及李若星、毛士龙、袁化中、缪昌期、邹维涟、邓氵美、卢化鳌、钱士晋、夏之令、王之寀、徐良彦、熊明遇、周朝瑞、黄龙光、顾大章、李三才、惠世扬、施天德、黄正宾等人，没有不受牵连的，而将杨涟、左光斗、魏大中、袁化中、周朝瑞、顾大章诬陷为接受杨镐、熊廷弼的贿赂，魏大中定罪受贿三千两，假传圣旨全部逮捕下狱。
English: Zhenfu Xu Xianjun's self-written confession was reported, and Zhao Nanxing, Yang Hui, Zuo Guangdou, Wei Dazhong and Li Ruoxing, Mao Shilong, Yuan Huazhong, Miao Changji, Zou Weiqi, Deng Yimei, Lu Huazhong, Qian Shizhong, Xia Zhiling, Wang Zhiqi, Xu Liahong, Xiong Mingyu, Zhou Chaorui, Huang Longguang, Gu Dazhong, Li Sancai, Hui Shiyang, Shi Tiande, Huang Zhengbin and others were not unimplicated, but

古文：乡人闻大中逮去，号泣送者数千人。
现代文：同乡的人听说魏大中被逮捕离开，号哭送他的人有好几千。
English: His fellow townspeople heard that he was arrested and left Wei University, and there were thousands of people who sent him away crying.

古文：比入镇抚司，显纯酷刑拷讯，血肉狼籍。
现代文：等到关进镇抚衙门，许显纯严刑拷问，血肉模糊。
English: When they entered the town of Fuzhou, Xu Xian was brutally interrogated, and his flesh and blood were blurred.

古文：始熊廷弼论死久，帝以孙承宗请，有诏待以不死。
现代文：这年七月，狱卒受人指使，将他跟杨涟、左光斗同一晚上杀死，过了几天才报告。魏大中尸体腐烂，已经辨认不出来了。
English: In July of that year, the jailer was ordered to kill him, Yang Hui, and Zuo Guangdou on the same night, and only reported it a few days later. Wei Datong's body was decomposed and could no longer be identified.

古文：刑部尚书乔允升等遂欲因朝审宽其罪，大中力持不可。及忠贤杀大中，乃坐以纳廷弼贿云。周朝瑞，字思永，临清人。
现代文：庄烈帝即位，魏忠贤被杀，魏广微、傅魁、陈九畴、梁梦环一起附名 逆案 。魏大中被赠封太常卿，谥号忠节，录用他的一个儿子。周朝瑞，字思永，山东临清人。
English: Zhuge Liang ascended to the throne, Wei Zhongxian was killed, and Wei Guangwei, Fu Kui, Chen Juzhong, and Liang Menghuan were all given the title of "reverse case." He was awarded the title of "Tai Changqing" at Wei University, and one of his sons was given the title of "Zhongjie." Zhou Chaorui, also known as Siyong, was from Linying, Shandong Province.

古文：万历三十五年进士。授中书舍人。
现代文：万历三十五年进士，授职中书舍人。
English: Thirty-five years later, he was promoted to the rank of scholar.

古文：光宗嗣位，擢吏科给事中，疏请收录先朝遗直。
现代文：光宗即位，他被提拔为吏科给事中，上疏请求收留录用前朝的忠臣。
English: At the time of Emperor Guangzong's enthronement, he was promoted to be in charge of the civil service. During this time, Shangsu requested to recruit loyal retainers from the previous dynasty.

古文：俄陈慎初三要，曰信仁贤，广德泽，远邪佞。
现代文：不久陈述刚开始执政时应注意的三项要务，即：一、任用仁爱贤能的人；二、推广皇上的恩惠；三、远离邪恶、阿谀奉承的人。
English: He went on to state the three most important tasks to be attended to at the beginning of his reign, namely: first, to appoint people who are benevolent and virtuous; second, to promote the emperor's favors; and third, to stay away from evil and flatterers.

古文：因请留上供金花银，以佐军兴。
现代文：于是请求留下各地上供的金花银，用来帮助军队建设。
English: He then requested that the gold and silver offered by various regions be left behind to help build up the army.

古文：词多斥中贵。
现代文：其中有很多斥责宦官的话。
English: There are many words of rebuke to the eunuch.

古文：中贵皆恶之，激帝怒，贬秩调外，时列谏垣甫四日也。
现代文：宦官都憎恨他，因此刺激皇帝生气，贬低他的官级将他调往外地，这时他才做谏官四天。
English: The eunuchs all hated him, which made the emperor angry, so he demoted him to a lower rank and sent him abroad, where he only served as a eunuch for four days.

古文：未出都而熹宗立，诏复故官。
现代文：他尚未出京城，熹宗即位，下诏恢复他的官职。
English: He had not yet left the capital when Emperor Taizong ascended the throne and restored him to his official position.

古文：疏请容纳直言，又陈考选诸弊。
现代文：上疏请求皇帝容纳直言进谏，又陈述考试选举的各种弊病。
English: Shang Shou asked the emperor to accommodate the outspoken Jin Xuan, and also stated the various ills of the examination election.

古文：日讲将举，进君臣交警之规。
现代文：将要举行日讲，上书陈述君臣之间相互警戒。
English: A Japanese lecture will be held, and a written report will be submitted.

古文：帝并褒纳。
现代文：皇帝都高兴地接受了。
English: The emperor gladly accepted.

古文：贾继春之请安李选侍也，朝瑞力驳之，与继春往复者数四。
现代文：贾继春请求安置李选侍，周朝瑞极力驳斥他，跟贾继春来回交锋三四次。
English: Jia Jichun requested the placement of Li Xuan, Zhou Chao Rui strenuously refuted him, and fought back and forth with Jia Jichun three or four times.

古文：天启元年再迁礼科左给事中。
现代文：天启元年又提升为礼科左给事中，这时辽阳战事危急。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, he was promoted to the left of the etiquette, at which time Liaoyang was in a critical situation.

古文：时辽事方棘，朝瑞请于阁臣中推通晓兵事者二人专司其事，而以职方郎一人专理机宜，给事中二人专主封驳，帝可之。
现代文：周朝瑞请求在内阁大臣中推选二个通晓军事的人专门负责这事，而用职方郎一人专门管理机要事情，给事中二人专门负责来往的公文，皇帝同意了。
English: The emperor agreed to Zhou's request to select two cabinet ministers who were familiar with military affairs to be in charge of this matter, and to appoint one official to be in charge of administrative affairs, and to assign two people to be in charge of official correspondence.

古文：雄县知县王纳谏为阉人所诬，中旨镌秩。
现代文：雄县知县王纳谏被宦官诬告，假传圣旨降了官级。
English: Xiongxian Zhixian Wang Nanyuan was falsely accused by eunuchs, and his official rank was lowered.

古文：给事中毛士龙以纠驳阉人，为府丞邵辅忠所陷，中旨除名。
现代文：给事中毛士龙因此检举驳斥宦官，被府丞邵辅忠陷害，宫廷传旨将他除名。
English: As a result, Mao Shilong, the eunuch accused in the case, was framed by the prefect Shao Shuozhong, and the court issued an order to expel him.

古文：朝瑞并抗疏论列。
现代文：周朝瑞一并上疏一一讨论。
English: Zhou, Chao and Rui had a one-on-one discussion.

古文：十二月辛巳，日上有一物覆压，忽大风扬沙，天尽赤，都人骇愕，所司不以闻。
现代文：十二月十四日，太阳上面覆盖了一个东西，忽然大风吹起狂沙，天空一片火红。都城的人惊吓得不知所措，有关部门不敢报告皇帝。
English: On December 14th, the sun was covered by something, and suddenly a strong wind blew up sand and the sky was red. The people in the capital were overwhelmed with fear, and the relevant departments did not dare to report to the emperor.

古文：朝瑞请帝修省，而严敕内外臣工，毋斗争误国，更诘责所司不奏报之罪，帝纳之。
现代文：周朝瑞请求皇帝修身自省，下诏给朝廷内外的臣属，不要互相斗争耽误国家大事，责问有关部门不上报的罪责，皇帝接受了。
English: Zhou Zongrui asked the emperor to self-cultivate and self-reflect, to issue an edict to his subordinates inside and outside the imperial court not to fight with each other and delay national affairs, and to ask the relevant departments about the guilt of not reporting, and the emperor accepted.

古文：时帝践祚岁余，未尝亲政，权多旁落，朝瑞请帝躬览万机。
现代文：这时皇帝即位一年多了，还不曾亲自主持国家政权，国家大权落在别人手里，周朝瑞请求皇帝亲自处理国家事务。
English: At this time, the emperor had been on the throne for more than a year, and had not personally presided over the state power. The power of the state fell into the hands of others. Zhou Chao-Rui asked the emperor to personally handle state affairs.

古文：帝降旨，言政委阁臣，祖宗旧制不可紊，然其时政权故不在阁也。
现代文：皇帝下旨，说政务交给内阁大臣，祖宗的旧制度不能搞乱了，然而这时国家政权根本不在内阁。
English: The emperor issued a decree, saying that the government affairs were handed over to the cabinet minister, and the old system of the ancestors could not be disrupted. However, at this time, the state power was not in the cabinet at all.

古文：明年二月，广宁失，诏停经筵日讲。
现代文：第二年二月，广宁失陷，下诏停止每天的学习讲读。
English: In February of the following year, Guangning fell and the daily study and lectures were suspended.

古文：朝瑞等上言： 此果出圣意，辅臣当引义争。
现代文：周朝瑞等人上疏说： 这果真是皇帝的意思，辅臣应当据理力争。
English: Zhou Chao Rui and others said: This is really the emperor's intention, and the aide-de-camp should argue with reason.

古文：如辅臣阿中涓意，则其过滋大。
现代文：如果辅臣迎合宦官的意图，那么过失就大了。
English: If the vassal panders to the eunuch's intentions, then the fault is great.

古文：且主上冲龄，志意未定，独赖朝讲不辍，诸臣得一觐天颜，共白指鹿之奸。
现代文：况且皇帝年轻，还没有自己的明确主张，全靠早晨讲解经史的机会，各臣能够一睹皇帝的龙颜，一起揭穿指鹿为马的奸计。
English: Moreover, the emperor was young and did not yet have a clear position of his own. He relied entirely on the opportunity to explain the history of the scriptures in the morning. The ministers were able to catch a glimpse of the emperor's long face, and together they debunked the trick of referring to the deer as a horse.

古文：今常朝已渐传免，倘并讲筵废之，九阍既隔，无谒见时，司马门之报格不入，吕大防之贬不及知，国家大事去矣。 
现代文：现在上朝的机会已逐渐减少，倘若再取消讲解经史，深宫重重阻隔，无法会见，地方司马的报告不能传入，像吕大防一样被贬职而不被人知，国家大事将毁于一旦了。 
English: Now that the opportunity to ascend to the throne has been gradually reduced, if the exposition of the history of scripture is cancelled, the palace is blocked, it is impossible to meet, the report of the local Sima cannot be passed on, and it is demoted without being known like Lv Daguo, the national event will be destroyed.

古文：会礼部亦以为言，乃命日讲如故。
现代文：正好礼部也有同样的说法，于是下令照常举行每天辅助皇帝讲解经史。
English: It so happened that the Ministry of Ceremonies had the same opinion, so it ordered that the Emperor's Auxiliary Lecture on the History of the Bible be held every day as usual.

古文：已，偕诸给事御史惠世扬、左光斗等极论大学士沈纮结中官练兵，为肘腋之贼。
现代文：不久，同各给事御史惠世扬、左光斗等人极力追究大学士沈翭勾结中官操练部队，是窝藏在皇帝身边的内奸。
English: Soon after, Hui Shiyang, Zuo Guangdou, and others, who were assigned to various matters, vigorously investigated the university scholar Shen Yi for colluding with the middle-ranking officer to drill the troops, and was a mole hiding around the emperor.

古文：纮疏辨。
现代文：沈翭上疏辩护。
English: Shen Yuxiangsu defended himself.

古文：朝瑞等尽发其贿交魏进忠、卢受、刘朝、客氏，而末复侵其私人邵辅忠、徐大化。
现代文：周朝瑞等人彻底揭发他贿赂勾结魏忠贤、卢受、客氏，而末尾又涉及他的私党邵辅忠、徐大化。
English: Zhou Zhaozhong and others thoroughly exposed his bribery and collusion with Wei Zhongxian, Lu Shou, and Kake, and at the end he was involved with his private party, Shao Shuozhong and Xu Dahua.

古文：语过激，夺疏首世扬俸。
现代文：语言过于激烈，剥夺了首先上疏的惠世扬的俸禄。
English: The language was too fierce, depriving Hui Shiyang, who was the first to go up, of his salary.

古文：大化尝承要人指，力攻熊廷弼，朝瑞恶之。
现代文：徐大化曾受某个要人的指使，极力攻击熊廷弼，周朝瑞讨厌他。
English: Xu Dahua had been ordered by a certain important person to attack Xiong Tingtao, and Zhou Chao Rui hated him.

古文：无何，王化贞弃广宁逃，大化又请立诛廷弼。
现代文：不久，王化贞丢弃广宁逃跑，徐大化又请求立即杀死熊廷弼。
English: Soon after, Wang Huazhen abandoned Guangning and fled, and Xu Dahua requested that Xiong Tingyao be killed immediately.

古文：朝瑞以廷弼才可用，请令带罪守山海，疏四上，并抑不行。
现代文：周朝瑞认为熊廷弼还有可用之才，请求让他防守山海关，带罪立功。
English: Zhou Chao-Rui thought that Xiong Tingtao still had some useful talent, and asked him to defend the Shanhaiguan Customs and take the blame.

古文：大化遂力诋朝瑞，朝瑞愤，亦丑诋大化，所司为两解之。
现代文：先后上了四次疏，都被扣压没有实行。徐大化于是极力诽谤周朝瑞，周朝瑞被激怒了，也丑化诋毁徐大化。有关部门为他们双方排解。
English: Xu Dahua then tried his best to slander Zhou Chao Rui. Zhou Chao Rui was enraged, and also slandered Xu Dahua. The relevant departments settled the matter for both of them.

古文：通经史百家及内典，于《诗》、《礼》、《仪礼》、《周官》多所发明，他辨驳者复数万言。尝以为宋、元以来述者之事备，学者但当诵而不述，将死，始缮所笺《诗》、《礼》、《庄子》，曰《炳烛斋随笔》云。王之寀，字心一，朝邑人。
现代文：周朝瑞刚被提拔为太仆少卿，而徐大化是魏忠贤的心腹，一定要杀死周朝瑞，将他的名字窜入汪文言案中，跟杨涟等五人一起逮捕，投进镇抚司的监狱，判处胡乱议论 移宫 的事情以及接受熊廷弼贿赂一万两。过了五天再审讯，严刑拷打，竟打死在狱中。崇祯初年，赠大理卿，让他的一个儿子做官。福王时，谥号忠毅。王之寀，字心一，朝邑人。
English: Zhou Chongrui had just been promoted to the position of the servant of Wei Zhongxian, and Xu Dahua was the confidant of Wei Zhongxian. He had to kill Zhou Chongrui, put his name into the Wang Wenyan case, arrest him together with five other people, including Yang Hui, throw him into the prison of the town's magistrate, and sentence him to ten thousand taels of bribes for talking about moving the palace and accepting a bribe from Xiong Tingtao. After five days of further interrogation, he was severely tortured and eventually beaten to death in prison. In the first year of Chongrui, he was given

古文：万历二十九年进士。除清苑知县，迁刑部主事。
现代文：万历二十九年进士，授职清苑知县，调任刑部主事。
English: In the 29th year of the Manchurian calendar, he was promoted to the post of official of Qingyuan County and transferred to the post of the head of the criminal department.

古文：四十三年五月初四日酉刻，有不知姓名男子，持枣木梃入慈庆宫门，击伤守门内侍李鉴。
现代文：万历四十三年五月初四酉时，有一个不知道姓名的男子，手持枣木棍进入慈庆宫，打伤守门的内侍李鉴。
English: In the forty-third year of the Wanli calendar, at four o'clock in the morning of May, there was a man who did not know his name, who entered the Cixing Palace with a jujube stick in his hand and injured the servant Li Jian who was guarding the gate.

古文：至前殿檐下，为内侍韩本用等所执，付东华门守卫指挥朱雄等收之。
现代文：到达前殿的屋檐下面，被内侍韩本用等人抓获，将他交给了东华门守卫指挥朱雄等人。
English: Arriving under the eaves of the vestibule, he was caught by chambermaid Han Benyo and others, who handed him over to the East China Gate guard commander Zhu Xiong and others.

古文：慈庆宫者，皇太子所居宫也。
现代文：慈庆宫是皇太子居住的宫殿。
English: Cixing Palace is the palace where the crown prince lives.

古文：明日，皇太子奏闻，帝命法司按问。
现代文：第二天，皇太子报告，皇帝命令有关部门查问。
English: The next day, the crown prince reported that the emperor ordered the relevant departments to investigate.

古文：巡皇城御史刘廷元鞫奏： 犯名张差，蓟州人。
现代文：巡皇城御史刘廷元将审问的结果上报： 罪犯名叫张差，蓟州人氏。
English: Liu Tingyuan, the inspector of the imperial city, reported the result of the interrogation: The criminal's name is Zhang Zha, from Zhangzhou.

古文：止称吃斋讨封，语无伦次。
现代文：只是声称吃斋乞求封赏，语无伦次。
English: He just claimed to be fasting and begging for a reward. He was incoherent.

古文：按其迹，若涉疯癫，稽其貌，实系黠猾。
现代文：表面上看，好像是患疯癫病。仔细观察，实际上是很奸诈狡猾。
English: On the surface, he appears to be insane. On closer inspection, he is actually very cunning and crafty.

古文：请下法司严讯。 
现代文：请求交给法司严厉审讯。 
English: The request was referred to the Department of Justice for a rigorous hearing.

古文：时东宫虽久定，帝待之薄。
现代文：当时太子虽然确定很长时间，皇帝却很薄待他。
English: At that time, although the crown prince was determined for a long time, the emperor treated him very poorly.

古文：中外疑郑贵妃与其弟国泰谋危太子，顾未得事端，而方从哲辈亦颇关通戚畹以自固。
现代文：朝廷内外怀疑郑贵妃跟她的弟弟郑国泰阴谋危害太子，只不过没有证据，而方从哲等也跟外戚亲贵相勾结以求自保。
English: Both inside and outside the court, Zheng Guifei and her brother Zheng Guotai were suspected of plotting to harm the prince, but there was no evidence, and Fang Congzhe and others also colluded with their relatives in order to protect themselves.

古文：差被执，举朝惊骇，廷元以疯癫奏。
现代文：张差被抓，满朝都感到惊讶，刘廷元的报告说他疯癫了。
English: The whole court was surprised when Zhang Chia was arrested, and Liu Tingyuan reported that he had gone mad.

古文：刑部山东司郎中胡士相偕员外郎赵会桢、劳永嘉共讯，一如廷元指。
现代文：刑部山东司郎中胡士相跟员外郎赵会桢、劳永嘉共同审讯，完全跟刘廷元指出的一样。
English: The joint interrogation conducted by Shandong Division of the Criminal Investigation Department's Siro Chung-hsi and officers Gairo Zhao Huiyan and Lao Yongjia was exactly the same as that pointed out by Liu Tingyuan.

古文：言： 差积柴草，为人所烧，气愤发癫。
现代文：说： 张差堆积的柴草，被人放火烧掉了，气急就疯了。
English: He said: "The firewood and grass that Zhang Chia had piled up was set on fire by someone, and he lost his temper.

古文：于四月内诉冤入京，遇不知名男子二人，绐令执梃作冤状。
现代文：在四月份到北京伸冤，碰到二个不知名的男子，哄骗他拿着棍子装出伸冤的样子。
English: In April, when he went to Beijing to seek redress, he met two unknown men who tricked him into holding a stick and pretending to seek redress.

古文：乃由东华门入，直至慈庆宫门。
现代文：于是从东华门进城，直到慈庆宫门口。
English: So I entered the city from Donghua Gate and walked all the way to the entrance of Cixing Palace.

古文：按律当斩，加等立决。 
现代文：按法律应当斩首，罪加一等立即处决。 
English: According to the law, he should be beheaded, and the first-degree crime should be immediately executed.

古文：稿定未上。
现代文：奏稿写好了没有呈上。
English: The report was written but not submitted.

古文：山东司主治京师事，署印侍郎张问达以属之。
现代文：山东司负责管理京师的事情，署印侍郎张问达把这事交给他们处理。
English: The Shandong Division was responsible for managing the affairs of the Beijing Division, and the official seal clerk Zhang Menda handed the matter over to them.

古文：而士相、永嘉与廷元皆浙人，士相又廷元姻也，疯癫具狱，之寀心疑其非。
现代文：而胡士相、劳永嘉和刘廷元都是浙江人，用疯癫结案，王之寀心里怀疑不是这样的。
English: While Hu Shixiang, Law Yongjia and Liu Tingyuan, all from Zhejiang, were convicted of insanity, Wang Zhixuan suspected that this was not the case.

古文：是月十一日，之寀值提牢散饭狱中，末至差，私诘其实。
现代文：这月十一日，王之寀碰到给牢中送饭的机会，最后送给张差，私自责问他实情。
English: On the 11th day of this month, Wang Zhixuan had the opportunity to send food to the prison, and finally sent it to Zhang Zha. I reproached myself for asking him the truth.

古文：初言 告状 ，复言 凉死罢，已无用 。
现代文：开始说： 告状 ，又说： 拷打死了罢，已经没有用了。 
English: He began by saying, "Complaint," and continued, "It's no use if you're tortured to death."

古文：之寀令置饭差前： 吐实与饭，否则饿死。 
现代文：王之寀让人把饭放在张差面前，说： 说实话给你饭吃，否则饿死你。 
English: Wang Zhaojun had someone put the meal in front of Zhang Zhaojun and said, "Tell the truth and give you something to eat, otherwise you will starve to death."

古文：麾左右出，留二吏扶问之。
现代文：让左右的人出去，留下二个小官吏扶着他，问他。
English: Let the right and left people go out, leaving two petty officials to support him and ask him.

古文：始言： 小名张五儿。
现代文：开始说： 小名叫张五儿。
English: He began by saying: My little name is Zhang Wuer.

古文：有马三舅、李外父令随不知姓名一老公，说事成与汝地几亩。
现代文：马三舅、李外父让我跟着一个不知道姓名的太监，说事成之后给你几亩地。
English: Uncle Ma San and my father-in-law Li asked me to follow a eunuch whose name I didn't know, and to give you a few mu of land after everything was done.

古文：比至京，入不知街道大宅子。
现代文：等到进入北京，进入一个不知道街道的大院子。
English: Wait until you get to Beijing and enter a large courtyard where you don't know the street.

古文：一老公饭我云： 汝先冲一遭，遇人辄打死，死了我们救汝。 
现代文：一个太监请我吃饭说： 你先冲一趟，碰到人就打死他，打死了我们来营救你。 
English: A eunuch invited me to dinner and said: "You go first, and if you meet someone, kill him, kill us to rescue you."

古文：畀我枣木棍，导我由后宰门直至宫门上，击门者堕地。
现代文：给我枣木棍，引导我从后宰门走到宫门前，我把看门人打翻在地。
English: Give me a jujube stick and lead me from the back gate to the front gate of the palace. I will knock the gatekeeper to the ground.

古文：老公多，遂被执。 
现代文：太监太多，于是被抓获了。 
English: There were too many eunuchs and they were caught.

古文：之寀备揭其语，因问达以闻。且言差不癫不狂，有心有胆。
现代文：王之寀拿着张差的供状，告诉了张问达。并且说张差不疯不癫，有胆有识。
English: Wang Zhiqi took Zhang Zha's confession and told Zhang Qida. And he said that Zhang Zha was not crazy, but had courage and sense.

古文：乞缚凶犯于文华殿前朝审，或敕九卿科道三法司会问。
现代文：乞求将凶犯绑到文华殿朝审。或命令九卿科道三法司会同审问。
English: He begged for the murderer to be brought to the court of first instance at the Palace of Literature and Art, or ordered that the nine chiefs of the three departments of science, technology and law should be interrogated together.

古文：疏入未下，大理丞王士昌、行人司正陆大受、户部主事张庭、给事中姚永济等连上疏趣之。
现代文：奏疏呈上去没有下发，大理丞王士昌，行人司正陆大受，户部主事张庭，给事中姚记济等人接连上疏催促。
English: Wang Shichang, the chief magistrate, Zhenglu Daiju, the chief of the Pedestrian Division, Zhangting, the head of the Household Department, and Yao Jiji, who was in charge of the case, successively urged Wang Shichang.

古文：而大受疏有 奸戚 二字，帝恶之，与之寀疏俱不报。
现代文：而陆大受的奏疏中有 奸戚 二个字，皇帝讨厌它，跟王之寀的奏疏一起被扣留。
English: However, there were two words "treacherous relative" in Lu Da Rong's report. The emperor hated it, and it was detained together with Wang Zhi Ya's report.

古文：廷元复请速检诸疏，下法司讯断。
现代文：刘廷元又请求尽快查看各疏，交给法司审讯处理。
English: Liu Tingyuan also requested that the files be inspected as soon as possible and handed over to the legal department for trial.

古文：御史过庭训言祸生肘腋，宜亟翦，亦俱不报。
现代文：御史过庭训说祸灾发生在宫内，应该快点处理，也都被扣留。
English: The magistrate said that the disaster occurred in the palace and should be dealt with quickly, and they were all detained.

古文：庭训遂移文蓟州踪迹之。知州戚延龄具言其致癫始末，言： 贵妃遣珰建佛寺，珰置陶造甓，居民多鬻薪获利者。
现代文：过庭训发布文书到蓟州调查，知州戚延龄详细说明张差疯癫前后的情况，说： 贵妃派太监营建佛寺，太监烧制砖瓦，居民有很多卖柴从中获利的。
English: After the court issued a document to investigate Zhangzhou, Zhizhou's relative Yanling detailed the situation before and after Zhang Chia's insanity, saying: Guifei sent eunuchs to build a Buddhist temple, eunuchs burned bricks and tiles, and residents had a lot of profit from selling firewood.

古文：差卖田贸薪往市于珰，土人忌之，焚其薪。
现代文：张差卖了田地买木柴卖给太监。当地人忌恨他，烧了他的柴草。
English: Zhang Chia sold his fields to buy firewood to sell to the eunuch. The locals hated him and burned his firewood.

古文：差讼于珰，为所责，不胜愤，持梃欲告御状。 
现代文：张差向太监告状，被太监责斥，不胜愤怒，拿着木棍想向皇帝告状。 
English: Zhang Zha sued the eunuch, was rebuked by the eunuch, was furious, and wanted to sue the emperor with a wooden stick.

古文：于是原问诸臣据为口实矣。
现代文：于是原告各臣就把这句当作证据了。
English: So the plaintiff ministers took this sentence as evidence.

古文：二十一日，刑部会十三司司官胡士相、陆梦龙、邹绍光、曾曰唯、赵会祯、劳永嘉、王之寀、吴养源、曾之可、柯文、罗光鼎、曾道唯、刘继礼、吴孟登、岳骏声、唐嗣美、马德沣、朱瑞凤等再审。
现代文：二十一日，刑部会同十三司长官胡士相、陆梦龙、邹绍光、曾曰唯、赵会祯、劳永嘉、王之寀、吴养源、曾之可、柯文、罗光鼎、曾唯道、刘继礼、吴孟登、岳骏声、唐嗣美、马德沣、朱瑞凤等人再次审问。
English: On the 21st, the Criminal Investigation Department, together with the 13 division chiefs, Hu Shixiang, Lu Menglong, Zou Shaoguang, Zeng Yatongwei, Zhao Huiyan, Laoyongjia, Wang Zhiyao, Wu Yaoyuan, Zeng Zhi Ke, Ke Wen, Lu Guangding, Zeng Wei Dao, Liu Jili, Wu Mengden, Yue Yuxin, Tang Zimei, Ma Deyao, Zhu Ruifeng and others were interrogated again.

古文：差供： 马三舅名三道，李外父名守才，不知姓名老公乃修铁瓦殿之庞保，不知街道宅子乃住朝外大宅之刘成。
现代文：张差招供： 马三舅名叫马三道，李外父名叫李守才，不知姓名的太监是修铁瓦殿的庞保，不知街道大院的主人是刘成。
English: Zhang Zha confessed: Ma San's uncle's name was Ma San Dao, Li's father-in-law's name was Li Shoucai, the eunuch of unknown name was Pang Bao who repaired the tile hall, and the owner of the street compound was Liu Cheng.

古文：二人令我打上宫门，打得小爷，吃有，著有。 
现代文：二人让我打入宫门，打小爷，要吃什么有什么。 
English: The two of them let me break into the palace gate, beat the young master, and have whatever I wanted to eat.

古文：小爷者，内监所称皇太子者也。
现代文：所谓 小爷 ，是宫中太监对皇太子的称呼。
English: The so-called Xiao Ye is the name given to the crown prince by the eunuchs at court.

古文：又言： 有姊夫孔道同谋，凡五人。 
现代文：又说： 同谋还有姐夫孔道，一共五个人。 
English: He also said that there were five conspirators, including his brother-in-law, Kong Dao.

古文：于是刑部行蓟州道，提马三道等，疏请法司提庞保、刘成对鞫，而给事中何士晋与从哲等亦俱以为言。
现代文：于是刑部到蓟州道提审马三道等人，上疏请求法司提审庞保、刘成对质。而给事中何士晋跟方从哲等人也都赞成这样做。
English: As a result, the Criminal Investigation Department went to Zhangzhou Road to arraign Ma Sandao and others, and Shangsuo requested the law department to arraign Pang Bao and Liu Cheng as a pair. And in the case, He Shijin and Fang Congzhe and others also agreed to do so.

古文：帝乃谕究主使，会法司拟罪。
现代文：皇帝于是下诏责成主管会同法司拟定罪行。
English: The emperor then issued an edict ordering the head of the association to draw up a crime together with the legal department.

古文：是日，刑部据蓟州回文以上。
现代文：这一天，刑部将蓟州的回复上奏。
English: On this day, the Criminal Investigation Department played back Zhangzhou's reply.

古文：已，复谕严刑鞫审，速正典刑。
现代文：不久，又下诏严刑拷问，尽快绳之以法。
English: Soon after, he was ordered to be severely tortured and brought to justice as soon as possible.

古文：时中外籍籍，语多侵国泰，国泰出揭自白。士晋复疏攻国泰，语具《士晋传》。
现代文：这时朝廷内外议论纷扬，很多话涉及到郑国泰，郑国泰上疏自我辩白，何士晋又上疏攻击郑国泰，详情见《何士晋传》。
English: At this time, there was a lot of discussion inside and outside the imperial court. A lot of words related to Zheng Guotai, Zheng Guotai's self-justification, and He Shizhin's attack on Zheng Guotai. For details, see "The Biography of He Shizhin."

古文：先是，百户王曰乾上变，言奸人孔学等为巫蛊，将不利于皇太子，词已连刘成。
现代文：在这之前，百户王曰乾上疏，说奸邪之人孔学等造谣惑众，将对皇太子不利，言词已牵连到刘成。
English: Prior to this, the rumors spread by the Hundred Household Kings, such as Qian Shangsuo and the traitor Confucius, will be unfavorable to the crown prince, and the words have been implicated in Liu Cheng.

古文：成与保皆贵妃宫中内侍也。
现代文：刘成和庞保都是郑贵妃宫中的太监。
English: Liu Cheng and Pang Bao were both eunuchs in the court of Zheng Guifei.

古文：至是，复涉成。
现代文：到这时，又涉及到刘成。
English: By this time, Liu Cheng was also involved.

古文：帝心动，谕贵妃善为计。
现代文：皇帝心动了，了解到郑贵妃善于用计谋。
English: The emperor was moved and understood that Zheng Guifei was good at using stratagems.

古文：贵妃窘，乞哀皇太子，自明无它；帝亦数慰谕，俾太子白之廷臣。
现代文：郑贵妃很窘迫，哀求皇太子，表白自己没有其他企图。皇帝也几次下诏安慰，让皇太子对廷臣做说明。
English: Embarrassed, Zheng Guifei implored the crown prince to intervene, confessing that he had no other intention. The emperor also issued several consoling edicts, asking the crown prince to explain to the courtiers.

古文：太子亦以事连贵妃，大惧，乃缘帝及贵妃意，期速结。
现代文：太子也因为事情牵连到郑贵妃，感到很害怕。于是依照皇帝和郑贵妃的意图，希望快点结案。
English: The prince also felt very scared because the matter involved Zheng Guifei. Therefore, in accordance with the intention of the emperor and Zheng Guifei, he hoped that the case would be concluded quickly.

古文：二十八日，帝亲御慈宁宫，皇太子侍御座右，三皇孙雁行立左阶下。
现代文：二十八日，皇帝亲自到慈宁宫，皇太子陪在皇帝座位的右边，三个皇孙一字排开站在左边的台阶下。
English: On the 28th, the emperor himself arrived at Cining Palace. The crown prince accompanied him on the right side of the emperor's seat, and the three imperial grandchildren stood in a single file at the bottom of the steps on the left.

古文：召大学士方从哲、吴道南暨文武诸臣入，责以离间父子，谕令磔张差、庞保、刘成，无他及。
现代文：召见大学士方从哲、吴道南以及文武大臣，责备他们离间皇帝父子的感情。下令将张差、庞保、刘成处以肢解分尸的刑法，其他人没有涉及。
English: He summoned the university scholars Fang Congzhe, Wu Daonan, and Minister of Literature and Military Affairs, and reproached them for causing a rift between the feelings of the emperor and his son. He ordered Zhang Zha, Pang Bao, and Liu Cheng to be punished with the criminal law of dismemberment and dismemberment. The others were not involved.

古文：因执太子手曰： 此儿极孝，我极爱惜。 
现代文：于是握着太子的手说： 这个儿子很孝顺，我很爱惜他。 
English: So she shook the prince's hand and said, "This son is very dutiful, I love him very much."

古文：既又手约太子体，谕曰： 自襁褓养成丈夫，使我有别意，何不早更置？
现代文：说完又用手抚摸太子身体说： 从襁褓之中抚养成人，假使我有其他想法，为什么不早就改变更换皇太子。
English: At the end of his speech, he stroked the body of the crown prince with his hand and said, "Raising an adult from an infant. If I had other ideas, why didn't I change and replace the crown prince earlier?"

古文：且福王已之国，去此数千里，自非宣召，能翼而至乎？ 
现代文：况且福王已经回到他的封国，离此地有几千里远，如果不是公开召见他，能插上翅膀飞回来吗？ 
English: Moreover, King Fook has already returned to his fiefdom, thousands of miles away from here. If he is not publicly summoned, can he fly back with wings?

古文：因命内侍引三皇孙至石级上，令诸臣熟视，曰： 朕诸孙俱长成，更何说？ 
现代文：于是命令内侍牵着三皇孙到右边的台阶上，让各大臣熟悉他，说： 我的各个孙子都已长大成人，还有什么可说的？ 
English: Then he ordered the chambermaid to lead the grandchildren of the three emperors to the steps on the right, so that the ministers could get to know him, saying: "My grandchildren have all grown up, what more is there to say?

古文：顾问皇太子有何语，与诸臣悉言无隐。皇太子具言： 疯癫之人宜速决，毋株连。 
现代文：回头问皇太子有什么话，跟各臣都说出来，不要隐瞒，皇太子陈述道： 快把那个疯子处决了，不要牵连其他人。 
English: Turning back to ask the crown prince what he had to say, to speak out to all his ministers, not to hide, the crown prince stated: Quickly execute the madman, do not implicate others.

古文：又责诸臣云： 我父子何等亲爱，而外廷议论纷如，尔等为无君之臣，使我为不孝之子。 
现代文：又责备各臣说： 我们父子是何等亲爱，而外廷却议论纷扬，你们就是没有君王的臣子，使我成为不孝之人。 
English: He also reproached the ministers, saying, "How dear our father and son are to us, and yet there is discord in the outer court. You are ministers without a king, and you have made me an unfilial person."

古文：帝又谓诸臣曰： 尔等听皇太子语否？ 
现代文：皇帝又对各臣说： 你们听皇太子的话吗？ 
English: The emperor also said to his ministers: Do you listen to the words of the crown prince?

古文：复连声重申之。
现代文：又一连重复了好几次。
English: Another series of repetitions.

古文：诸臣跪听，叩头出，遂命法司决差。
现代文：各臣跪在地上听话，叩头退出，于是命令法司处决张差。
English: The ministers knelt on the ground obediently, bowed their heads and withdrew, and then ordered the legal department to execute Zhang Zha.

古文：明日磔于市。
现代文：第二天在市场上肢解分尸。
English: The next day they dismembered the body in the market.

古文：又明日，司礼监会廷臣鞫保、成于文华门。
现代文：又过了一天，司礼监会同廷臣在文华门审问庞保、刘成。
English: A day later, the Commission for the Supervision of Ceremonies, together with courtiers, interrogated Pang Bao and Liu Cheng at the Wenhua Gate.

古文：时已无左证，保、成展转不承。
现代文：这时已经没有证人，庞保、刘成拐弯抹角就是不肯认罪。
English: By this time, there were no witnesses, and Pang Bao and Liu Cheng refused to plead guilty.

古文：会太子传谕轻拟，廷臣乃散去。
现代文：正好太子传令从轻处理，廷臣这才离开。
English: It was just at this time that the courtier left, having been given a lighter sentence by order of the crown prince.

古文：越十余日，刑部议流马三道、李守才、孔道。
现代文：十多天后，刑部议论流放马三道、李守才、孔道。
English: More than ten days later, the criminal department discussed the banishment of Ma Sando, Li Shoucai, and Kong Do.

古文：帝从之，而毙保、成于内廷。
现代文：皇帝采纳了，而将庞保、刘成杀死在宫中。
English: The emperor accepted, but killed Pang Pao and Liu Chengdu in the palace.

古文：其事遂止。
现代文：这事就算了结了。
English: Let's call it a day.

古文：当是时，帝不见群臣二十有五年矣，以之寀发保、成事，特一出以释群臣疑，且调剂贵妃、太子。
现代文：这个时候，皇帝已有二十五年没有召见大臣了，因为王之寀揭发庞保、刘成的事情，特地出来排解大臣们的疑虑，并且调解贵妃与太子之间的矛盾。
English: At this time, the emperor had not summoned a minister for twenty-five years. Because Wang Zhixuan exposed the affairs of Pangbao and Liu Cheng, he came out specially to resolve the doubts of the ministers and mediate the conflict between Guifei and the prince.

古文：念其事似有迹，故不遽罪之寀也。
现代文：考虑到这件事似乎有些根据，所以没有立即怪罪王之寀。
English: Considering that there seemed to be some basis for the incident, there was no immediate accusation against Wang Zang.

古文：四十五年京察，给事中徐绍吉、御史韩浚用拾遗劾之寀贪，遂削其籍。
现代文：万历四十五年京官考核，给事中徐绍吉、御史韩浚利用拾遗纠察机会弹劾王之寀贪财，于是削籍为民。
English: In the 45th year of the man's life, according to the evaluation of Beijing officials, the leaders of the case, Xu Shaoji and Gu Shi Hanjun, used the opportunity of collecting relics to impeach Wang Zhisheng for greed, so they were demoted to the people.

古文：天启初，廷臣多为之讼冤，召复故官。
现代文：天启初年，廷臣多为他伸冤，召回恢复旧职。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, the courtiers mostly redressed his grievances and recalled him to resume his old position.

古文：二年二月上《复仇疏》，曰：
现代文：天启二年二月上《复仇疏》，说：
English: In February of the second year of the Apocalypse, "The Vengeance," said:

古文：《礼》，君父之仇，不共戴天。
现代文： 《礼》，对于弑君杀父之仇，是不共戴天的。
English: "Rei" is an unflinching revenge for the murder of his father.

古文：齐襄公复九世之仇，《春秋》大之。
现代文：齐襄公报了九代之仇，《春秋》称颂它。
English: Qixiang gazetted the Nine Generations' Revenge, and Spring and Autumn praised it.

古文：曩李选侍气殴圣母，陛下再三播告中外，停其贵妃之封，圣母在天之灵必有心安而目瞑者。
现代文：先前李选侍让圣母生气，殴打圣母，陛下三番五次传告朝廷内外，停止封她为贵妃，圣母在天之灵一定会心安瞑目的。
English: Previously, Li Xuanwu had made the Virgin Mary angry and beaten her. Her Majesty sent out a message to the imperial court and beyond three times and five times, telling them to stop making her a princess. The Virgin Mary would be at peace in the spirit of heaven.

古文：此复仇一大义也。
现代文：这是复仇的一大要义。
English: This is the essence of revenge.

古文：乃先帝一生遭逢多难，弥留之际，饮恨以崩。
现代文： 先皇帝一生备遭艰难险阻，弥留之际含恨而终。
English: The former emperor suffered hardships and obstacles throughout his life and died with bitterness.

古文：试问：李可灼之误用药，引进者谁？
现代文：试问：李可灼错误用药，是谁引进的？
English: Question: Who introduced Li Kegui to the wrong medication?

古文：崔文升之故用药，主使者谁？
现代文：崔文升故意用药，是谁主使的？
English: Cui Wensheng intentionally used drugs. Who was the instigator?

古文：恐方从哲之罪不在可灼、文升下。
现代文：恐怕方从哲的罪行还不在李可灼、崔文升之下。
English: I'm afraid that Fang Congzhe's crime is not yet under Li Kegui and Cui Wensheng.

古文：此先帝大仇未复者，一也。
现代文：这是先皇帝大仇未报的第一点。
English: This is the first point that the former emperor did not report.

古文：张差持梃犯宫，安危止在呼吸。
现代文： 张差手持木棍侵犯宫廷，国家的安危只在于呼吸之间。
English: Zhang Chia, armed with a wooden stick, invaded the court, and the safety of the country lay only between breaths.

古文：此乾坤何等时，乃刘廷元曲盖奸谋，以疯癫具狱矣。
现代文：国家到了这等地步，刘廷元还曲意掩护，用疯癫结案。
English: When the country has reached this stage, Liu Tingyuan is still trying to cover his tracks and use insanity to close the case.

古文：胡士相等改注口语，以卖薪成招矣。
现代文：胡士相等人改记口供，用卖木柴作为招供。
English: Hu Shifang and others rewrote their confessions and used selling firewood as a confession.

古文：其后复谳，差供同谋举事，内外设伏多人。
现代文：此后复审，张差招供同谋一起行动的，朝廷内外埋伏有多人。
English: After that, the case was re-examined, Zhang Zha offered to act as a co-conspirator, and there were many people inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：守才、三道亦供结党连谋，而士相辈悉抹去之。
现代文：李守才、马三道也招供他们结成派系，共同谋划，而胡士相等人将这些实情全都抹去。
English: Li Shoucai and Ma Sanliao also confessed that they formed a faction and planned together, while Hu Shifang and others erased all these facts.

古文：当时有内应，有外援。一夫作难，九庙震惊，何物凶徒，敢肆行不道乃尔！
现代文：当时他们有内应，有外援，一人作难，九庙震惊，是何方凶徒，竟敢如此横行霸道，目无法纪！
English: At that time, they had internal support, they had external support, one person made trouble, nine temples were shocked, who is the villain, how dare they be so domineering, lawless!

古文：缘外戚郑国泰私结刘廷元、刘光复、姚宗文辈，珠玉金钱充满其室。
现代文：这是因为外戚郑国泰私自勾结刘廷元、刘光复、姚宗文等人，金银珠宝充满他的房屋。
English: This is because his maternal relative Zheng Guotai colluded with Liu Tingyuan, Liu Guangfu, Yao Zongwen and others, and gold, silver and jewelry filled his house.

古文：言官结舌，莫敢谁何，遂无复顾惮，睥睨神器耳。
现代文：言官沉默，拿他们没办法，于是不再有顾虑和忌惮心理，蔑视国家法律。
English: Officials are silent, there is no way to deal with them, so they no longer have concerns and scruples, and despise national laws.

古文：国泰虽死，罪不容诛。
现代文：郑国泰虽然死了，他的罪行却不能饶恕。
English: Although Zheng Guotai is dead, his crime cannot be pardoned.

古文：法当开棺戮尸，夷其族，赭其宫，而至今犹未议及。
现代文：法官应当打开他的棺材，鞭打他的尸体，绝灭他的三族，把他的宫室涂成红褐色。
English: The judge should open his coffin, flog his corpse, exterminate his three tribes, and paint his palace red-brown.

古文：此先帝大仇未复者，二也。
现代文：但到目前为止还没有提到这事。这是先皇帝大仇未报的第二点。
English: But so far there has been no mention of this. This is the second point that the former emperor did not report.

古文：总之，用药之术，即梃击之谋。
现代文： 总之，用药的方法跟木棍打击的阴谋性质是一样的。
English: In short, the method of administering the drug is of the same conspiratorial nature as the beating with a wooden stick.

古文：击不中而促之药，是文升之药惨于张差之梃也。
现代文：打击不中就用药催促。这是崔文升的药比张差的木棍还要厉害。
English: If the strike does not succeed, they will use medicine to urge it. This is because Cui Wensheng's medicine is more powerful than a wooden stick with poor tension.

古文：张差之前，从无张差；刘成之后，岂乏刘成？
现代文：张差之前，从来没有张差的先例；刘成之后，难道还会少刘成这样的人吗？
English: Before Zhang Zha, there was never a precedent for Zhang Zha; after Liu Cheng, will there be fewer people like Liu Cheng?

古文：臣见陛下之孤立于上矣。
现代文：卑臣以为陛下在上面被孤立了。 又说：
English: The vassal thought his majesty was isolated up there, and said:

古文：又言：郎中胡士相等，主疯癫者也。
现代文： 郎中胡士相等人，是主张疯癫结案的。
English: His son-in-law, Hu Shifang, and others are in favor of closing the insanity case.

古文：堂官张问达，调停疯癫者也。
现代文：堂官张问达，是调停用疯癫结案的。
English: The magistrate Zhang Qida, is to mediate the use of insanity to close the case.

古文：寺臣王士昌疏忠而心佞，评无只字，讼多溢词。
现代文：寺臣王士昌的奏疏貌似忠诚而实际上是巧言谄媚，没有一个字做出评价，辩冤却充满了陈辞滥调。
English: The performance of Wang Shichang, the temple retainer, seems to be loyal, but it is actually flattering. Not a single word is made to evaluate, but the argument is full of clichés.

古文：堂官张问达语转而意圆，先允疯癫，后宽奸宄。
现代文：堂官张问达态度圆滑，先答应是疯癫，后来又宽恕奸人。
English: The court official Zhang Qida's attitude was tactful, first agreeing that it was madness, and later forgiving the traitor.

古文：劳永嘉、岳骏声等同恶相济。
现代文：劳永嘉、岳骏声等人同一鼻孔出气。
English: Laoyongjia, Yue Yuxing and others exhale through the same nostril.

古文：张差招有 三十六头儿 ，则胡士相阁笔；招有 东边一起干事 ，则岳骏声言波及无辜；招有 红封票，高真人 ，则劳永嘉言不及究红封教。
现代文：张差招供有 三十六头儿 时，胡士相停笔。招供有 东边一起举事 时，岳骏声说他波及到无辜。招供有 红封票，高真人 时，劳永嘉说不应该追究红封教。
English: When Zhang Chia confessed that there were thirty-six heads, Hu Shixuan stopped writing. When confessing that the East side raised the matter together, Yue Xuanxuan said that he affected the innocent. When confessing that there were red envelopes and Gao Zhenren, Laoyongjia said that the Red Seal Church should not be investigated.

古文：今高一奎见监蓟州，系镇朔卫人。
现代文：现在高一奎监督蓟州，是镇朔卫人。
English: Now Gao Yikui supervises Zhangzhou and is the guardian of Zhenshuo.

古文：盖高一奎，主持红封教者也；马三道，管给红票者也；庞保、刘成，供给红封教多人撒棍者也。
现代文：大概高一奎是红封教的主持人。马三道是负责分发红票的总管。庞保、刘成是负责供给红封教教众木棍的人。
English: Gao Yikui is probably the leader of the Red Seal Church. Ma Sando is the general manager responsible for distributing red tickets. Pang Bao and Liu Cheng are the people responsible for supplying the Red Seal Church with wooden sticks.

古文：诸奸增减会审公单，大逆不道。
现代文：那些奸人增减会审的公单，大逆不道。 
English: Those traitors' public order to increase or decrease the number of trials is an act of treason.

古文：疏入，帝不问，而先主疯癫者恨次骨。
现代文：奏疏递入，皇帝不过问，而先前主张疯癫结案的对他恨之入骨。
English: The emperor didn't ask about the late submission of the report, but he hated him to the bone for previously advocating that the case be closed on grounds of insanity.

古文：未几，之寀迁尚宝少卿。
现代文：不久，王之寀提升为尚宝少卿。
English: Soon, Wang Zhiqin was promoted to Shang Bao Shaoqing.

古文：逾年，迁太仆少卿，寻转本寺卿。
现代文：过了一年，提升为太仆少卿，不久调任太仆寺卿。
English: A year later, he was promoted to Taichu Shokei, and was soon transferred to Taichu Jikyo.

古文：廷元及岳骏声、曾道唯以之寀侵己，先后疏辨。
现代文：刘廷元和岳骏声、曾道难因为王之寀侵犯他们，先后上疏辩护。
English: Liu Tingyuan and Yue Xuan Sheng and Zeng Daodan defended themselves successively because Wang Zhiqi violated them.

古文：之寀亦连疏力折，并发诸人前议差狱时，分金红庙中，及居间主名甚悉。事虽不行，诸人益疾之。
现代文：王之寀也接连上疏极力驳斥，并揭发各人先前讨论张差官司时，在红庙中分钱及居中调解双方争执的人名很详备，此事虽没得到处理，但这些人更加恨他。
English: Wang Zhiqi also strenuously refuted the rumors one after another, and revealed that when they had previously discussed the Zhangzha lawsuit, the names of the people who divided the money and mediated the dispute between the two sides in the Red Temple were very detailed. Although the matter was not handled, these people hated him even more.

古文：四年秋，拜刑部右侍郎。
现代文：天启四年秋天，他授官刑部右侍郎。
English: In the autumn of the 4th year of the Apocalypse, he was promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Criminal Division.

古文：明年二月，魏忠贤势大张，其党杨维垣首翻 梃击 之案，力诋之寀，坐除名。
现代文：第二年二月，魏忠贤势力嚣张，他的党徒杨维垣首先为 梃击案 翻案，极力诋毁王之寀，将他除名。
English: In February of the following year, Wei Zhongxian's power was at its peak, and his party member Yang Weigaki was the first to overturn Wang Zhiyao's case for "slander," and he was expelled from the party.

古文：俄入之汪文言狱中，下抚按提问。
现代文：不久把他列入汪文言案中，交给抚审问。
English: He was soon included in the Wang Wenyan case and handed over for interrogation.

古文：岳骏声复讦之，且言其逼取郑国泰二万金，有诏追治。
现代文：岳骏声又攻击他，并且说他勒索郑国泰二万两，下诏追查。
English: Yue Yuxin attacked him again, saying that he had extorted 20,000 taels from Zheng Guotai, and ordered an investigation.

古文：及修《三朝要典》，其 梃击 事以之寀为罪首。
现代文：等到编修《三朝要典》， 梃击案 以王之寀为首犯。
English: Wait until the compilation of the "Three Dynasties Guidebook" is completed, and the beating case with Wang Zhixuan as the first offender.

古文：府尹刘志选复重劾之，遂逮下诏狱，坐赃八千，之寀竟瘐死。
现代文：府尹刘志选又弹劾他，于是下诏逮捕入狱，判处窝赃银八千两，王之寀最终死在狱中。
English: The governor Yin Liu Zhi Xuan impeached him again, so he was arrested and sentenced to eight thousand taels of silver. Wang Zhi Xuan eventually died in prison.

古文：崇祯初，复官，赐恤。
现代文：崇祯初年，恢复官职，赐予救济。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, he resumed his official position and was granted relief.

古文：自 梃击 之议起，而 红丸 、 移宫 二事继之。
现代文：自从 梃击 的议论开始， 红丸 、 移宫 二件事接踵而至。
English: Since the start of the debate on "knocking down," "red circle," and "moving the palace," two things have come one after another.

古文：两党是非争胜，祸患相寻，迄明亡而后已。
现代文：两个派系争论是非，相互倾轧排挤，直到明朝灭亡才宣告结束。
English: The two factions argued about the rights and wrongs, pushed each other aside, and did not declare an end until the fall of the Ming Dynasty.

