古文：富人之宅，以一丈之地为内。
现代文：富人的住宅，用一平方丈的地做内室。
English: The houses of the rich are built with a square yard of land for the inner room.

古文：内中所有，柙匮所，缣布丝也。
现代文：内室中所有的箱子柜子都装满了缣布丝绵。
English: All the chests and drawers in the inner room were full of silk scarves.

古文：贫人之宅，亦以一丈为内。
现代文：穷人的住宅，也用一平方丈的地做内室。
English: Poor people's houses also use one square meter of land to make the inner room.

古文：内中空虚，徒四壁立，故名曰贫。
现代文：内室中空空只有四墙壁立在那里，所以叫做穷。
English: The inner chamber is hollow, with only four walls standing there, so it is called poor.

古文：夫通人犹富人，不通者犹贫人也。
现代文：通人就像富人一样，不博通的人就像穷人一样。
English: The learned are like the rich, and the unlearned are like the poor.

古文：俱以七尺为形，通人胸中怀百家之言，不通者空腹无一牒之诵。贫人之内，徒四所壁立也。
现代文：他们都七尺身体，通人胸中怀着各家学说，不博通的人腹中空空连一片木简也没有读过，就像穷人的内室，只有四面墙壁立在那里。
English: They are all seven feet tall, with all the teachings of various schools in their hearts, and they have not read a single piece of wood in their empty stomachs. It is like a poor man's inner room, where only four walls stand.

古文：慕料贫富不相如，则夫通与不通不相及也。
现代文：能看出穷人不如富人，那么就应该知道通人与不通的人不相等。
English: If you can see that the poor are not as good as the rich, then you should know that those who know and those who do not know are not equal.

古文：世人慕富不荣通，羞贫，不贱不贤，不推类以况之也。
现代文：世人羡慕富人而不以通人为荣耀，看不起穷人而不以贤人为低贱，这是不懂得用类推的方法来比较。
English: The world envies the rich, but does not glorify the virtuous; it despises the poor, but does not disparage the wise; it does not know how to compare by analogy.

古文：夫富人可慕者，货财多则饶裕，故人慕之。
现代文：当然，富人可以羡慕，钱财货物多而富裕，所以人们羡慕他们。
English: Of course, the rich can be envied. They have a lot of money and goods and are rich, so people envy them.

古文：夫富人不如儒生，儒生不如通人。
现代文：其实富人不如儒生，儒生不如通人。
English: In fact, the rich are not as good as Confucians, and Confucians are not as good as Tongren.

古文：通人积文，十箧以上，圣人之言，贤者之语，上自黄帝，下至秦、汉，治国肥家之术，刺世讥俗之言，备矣。
现代文：通人积累的书有十箱以上，书上圣人的话，贤人的话，上自黄帝，下至秦、汉时代，治国治家的方法，刺讥世上庸俗的言论，全都具备。
English: There are more than ten boxes of books accumulated by everyone. The words of saints and sages on the books, from the Yellow Emperor to the Qin and Han dynasties, the methods of governing the country and the world, and the vulgar remarks on the world are all available.

古文：使人通明博见，其为可荣，非徒缣布丝也。
现代文：假使一个人通达事理，见识广博，那么他能够引以为荣耀的，就不仅仅是缣、布、丝、绵一类的财物了。
English: If a man is intelligent and well-informed, then it is not only goods such as cocoons, cloth, silk, and cotton that he can take pride in.

古文：萧何入秦，收拾文书，汉所以能制九州者，文书之力也。
现代文：萧何进入秦都咸阳，收集了有关的公文档案和地图，汉所以能控制全国，是这些文书的作用。
English: Xiao He entered the Qin capital of Xianyang and collected the relevant official documents and maps. It was the role of these documents that enabled Han to control the whole country.

古文：以文书御天下，天下之富，孰与家人之财？
现代文：用文书能统治天下，国家的财富，与一家人的财富哪一个多呢？
English: Which is greater, the wealth of a nation or the wealth of a family?

古文：人目不见青黄曰盲，耳不闻宫商曰聋，鼻不知香臭曰痈。
现代文：人的眼睛看不见颜色叫盲，耳朵听不到声音叫聋，鼻子不知道香臭叫痈。
English: The human eye cannot see color and is called blind, the ear cannot hear sound and is called deaf, and the nose cannot smell incense and is called deaf.

古文：痈聋与盲，不成人者也。
现代文：有痈、聋和盲，就成不了健全的人。
English: Having deafness, deafness and blindness does not make you a healthy person.

古文：人不博览者，不闻古今，不见事类，不知然否，犹目盲、耳聋、鼻痈者也。
现代文：人不博览群书，不通古今，不能识别各种事物，不懂得是非，就像眼瞎、耳聋、鼻痈的人一样。
English: People who are not well-versed in books, who are not familiar with the past and the present, who cannot recognize various things, and who do not know right from wrong, are just like those who are blind, deaf, and deaf-mute.

古文：儒生不览，犹为闭暗，况庸人无篇章之业，不知是非，其为闭暗，甚矣！
现代文：儒生不博览群书，尚且是闭塞不明，何况俗人没有读过书，不知道是非，他们就更是闭塞不明了！
English: Confucianism is not well-versed in books, yet it is not clear about the occlusion, not to mention that the laity have not read books, do not know right and wrong, they are even more unclear about the occlusion!

古文：此则土木之人，耳目俱足，无闻见也。
现代文：这就是些泥塑木雕的人，耳朵眼睛都齐全，就是听不见看不见。
English: These are the men of clay and wood, who have ears and eyes, but do not hear or see.

古文：涉浅水者见虾，其颇深者察鱼鳖，其尤甚者观蛟龙。
现代文：淌过浅水的人能看见虾子，淌过稍微深水的人能看见鱼鳖，到过深渊的人能看见蛟龙。
English: Those who have passed through shallow water can see shrimps, those who have passed through slightly deeper water can see fish gills, and those who have passed through the abyss can see dragonflies.

古文：足行迹殊，故所见之物异也。
现代文：脚走的地方不同，所以见到的东西也不一样。
English: The place where you walk is different, so the things you see are also different.

古文：入道浅深，其犹此也，浅者则见传记谐文，深者入圣室观秘书。故入道弥深，所见弥大。
现代文：人掌握先王之道的深浅，那更是这样。浅薄的人就看些传记小说一类的东西；深厚的人就要进到圣人室内读罕见的书籍，因此掌握的先王之道更加深刻，见闻更加广博。
English: This is even more true when it comes to grasping the profundity and shallowness of the Way of the Ancients. Shallow-minded people read things like biographical novels; deep-minded people need to go into the saint's room to read rare books, so the way of the Ancients is more profound and more widely known.

古文：人之游也，必欲入都，都多奇观也。
现代文：人去游玩，肯定想去都市，因为都市有很多新奇的东西看。
English: When people go on vacation, they definitely want to go to the city, because the city has a lot of new things to see.

古文：入都必欲见市，市多异货也。
现代文：进都市一定想去看市场，因为市场上有很多不同的货物。
English: If you go to the city, you will definitely want to visit the market, because there are many different goods on the market.

古文：百家之言，古今行事，其为奇异，非徒都邑大市也。
现代文：各家的学说，是些古往今来的事情，它们非同一般，不只是都市大市场可比。
English: The doctrines of each house are things that have been around since ancient times, they are not ordinary, not just comparable to large urban markets.

古文：游於都邑者心厌，观於大市者意饱，况游於道艺之际哉？
现代文：游都市的人心里感到满足，逛大市场的人心里感到满意，何况是博览、钻研经书的时候呢！
English: People who visit cities feel satisfied in their hearts, people who visit big markets feel satisfied in their hearts, and what's more, when it's time for exposition and studying scriptures!

古文：污大川旱不枯者，多所疏也。
现代文：大河遇旱而不涸，是由于很多干流与它相通。
English: If a large river does not dry up in a drought, it is because many main streams are connected to it.

古文：潢污兼日不雨，泥辄见者，无所通也。
现代文：浅水坑连日不下雨，泥土就会现出来，是由于没有水流与它相通。
English: If it does not rain for days on end, the mud will appear in shallow puddles, because there is no water flow connected to it.

古文：是故大川相间，小川相属，东流归海，故海大也。
现代文：所以大河互相隔着，有小河相互连结，一齐向东流去归大海，因此大海广阔。
English: That is why large rivers separate from each other, and small rivers connect with each other and flow together eastward to the sea, and that is why the sea is vast.

古文：海不通於百川，安得巨大之名？
现代文：大海不与河流相通，怎么会有大海的名称呢？
English: How did the sea get its name if it is not connected to a river?

古文：夫人含百家之言，犹海怀百川之流也，不谓之大者，是谓海小於百川也。
现代文：人胸怀各家的学说，就像大海拥有河流的流水一样，如果不能认为这样的人渊博，那就是认为大海比河流小了。
English: A man with all his doctrines in his heart is like the sea with the running water of a river. If one does not think that such a man is profound, one thinks that the sea is smaller than the river.

古文：夫海大於百川也，人皆知之，通者明於不通，莫之能别也。
现代文：大海比河流广阔，这是人人都知道的，通人比不通的人高明，却没有人能够识别它。
English: The sea is wider than the river, everyone knows that, and the expert is wiser than the inexpert, but no one can identify it.

古文：润下作咸，水之滋味也。
现代文：水向下浸润就产生了咸味，这是水有滋味的缘故。
English: Water infiltrating downwards produces a salty taste, which is due to the fact that water has a savoury taste.

古文：东海水咸，流广大也；西州盐井，源泉深也。
现代文：东海里的水咸，是流水太多的缘故；四川一带的盐井，水源太深。
English: The water in the East China Sea is salty because of too much flowing water; the salt wells around Sichuan are too deep.

古文：人或无井而食，或穿井不得泉，有盐井之利乎？
现代文：人们有的没有井盐可吃，有的打井得不到盐水，这样能得到盐井的好处吗？
English: Some people don't have well salt to eat, and some people can't get salt water by drilling wells. Can they get the benefits of salt wells in this way?

古文：不与贤圣通业，望有高世之名，难哉！
现代文：不跟圣贤弄通学业，想在世上有崇高的名声，困难啊！
English: It's hard not to flirt with the sages to get through school, if you want to have a noble reputation in the world!

古文：法令之家，不见行事，议罪不审。
现代文：司法的官吏，不了解以往的判例，论罪就不可能恰当。
English: It is impossible for judicial officials to properly discuss crimes if they do not know the previous precedents.

古文：章句之生，不览古今，论事不实。
现代文：只懂一家章句的儒生，不通古今，评论事情就不会符合实际情况。
English: A Confucian scholar who only understands one chapter and one sentence, and does not know the past and the present, will not be able to comment on the actual situation.

古文：或以说一经为，何须博览。
现代文：有人以为能解说一种经书就够了，为什么需要博览群书呢？
English: Some people think that it is enough to be able to explain one kind of scripture. Why do they need to read all kinds of books?

古文：夫孔子之门，讲习《五经》。《五经》皆习，庶几之才也。
现代文：孔子学派，要学习五经，五经都学习好了，就接近圣人的才能。
English: Confucius school, to learn the five sutras, the five sutras have been studied, it is close to the saint's talent.

古文：颜渊曰： 博我以文。 
现代文：颜渊说： 用文献知识来丰富我。 
English: Yan Yuan said: Enrich me with literature knowledge.

古文：才智高者，能为博矣。
现代文：才能智慧高的人，才能做到博览古今。
English: Only those who are highly intelligent can be knowledgeable about the past and the present.

古文：颜渊之曰博者，岂徒一经哉？
现代文：颜渊说 博 的意思，难道只指一种经书吗？
English: Does Yan Yuan say that "Bo" means only one kind of scripture?

古文：我不能博《五经》，又不能博众事，守信一学，不好广观，无温故知新之明，而有守愚不览之暗。其谓一经者，其宜也。
现代文：不能通晓五经，又不懂得民众的事，只墨守和相信一家学派，不喜欢广泛阅读，没有复习旧知识获得新体会的聪明，并且具有保守愚蠢不博览的愚昧，这样的人认为只解说一种经书就够了，那是理所当然的。
English: Those who do not have a thorough knowledge of the Five Classics, who do not understand the affairs of the people, who only adhere to and believe in one school of thought, who do not like to read widely, who do not have the wisdom to review old knowledge and gain new experience, and who have the ignorance of being conservative, stupid, and not well-read, take it for granted that it is enough to explain only one scripture.

古文：开户内日之光，日光不能照幽，凿窗启牖，以助户明也。
现代文：开门让阳光进屋，阳光不能照到阴暗的地方，就开个窗户，以便帮助门使屋子更明亮。
English: Open the door to let the sun into the house, the sun can not shine into the dark place, open a window, in order to help the door to make the house brighter.

古文：夫一经之说，犹日明也，助以传书，犹窗牖也。
现代文：对一种经书的解说，就像太阳从门照亮屋子一样；用传书来帮助学习，就像有了窗户一样。
English: The interpretation of a scripture is like the sun shining through a door to illuminate a room; the use of a courier to facilitate learning is like having a window.

古文：百家之言令人晓明，非徒窗牖之开日光之照也。
现代文：各家的学说，能使人通晓道义明白事理，不只是开个窗，让阳光照进屋可比。
English: The teachings of various schools can make people understand morality and reason, not just open a window and let the sun shine into the house.

古文：是故日光照室内，道术明胸中。
现代文：所以阳光照进屋内，就像道义学术照亮了胸中。
English: So the sun shines into the house, just as moral scholarship shines into the chest.

古文：开户内光，坐高堂之上，眇升楼台，窥四邻之廷，人之所愿也。
现代文：打开门让阳光进屋，坐在高大的堂屋里，登上楼台的最高处，看周围人家的庭院，这是人们所希望的。
English: Opening the door to let the sun into the house, sitting in the tall hall, climbing to the top of the staircase, looking at the surrounding courtyards, this is what people want.

古文：闭户幽坐，向冥冥之内，穿圹穴卧，造黄泉之际，人之所恶也。
现代文：闭门静坐，面向黑暗深处，挖个墓穴睡下，去到黄泉的深处，这是人们所厌恶的。
English: To meditate behind closed doors, to face the depths of darkness, to dig a grave to sleep in, to go to the depths of hell, is abhorrent to people.

古文：夫闭心塞意，不高瞻览者，死人之徒也哉！
现代文：闭塞视听，思想僵化，不能高瞻远瞩博览古今，那就是死人之类！
English: Blocking audio-visual, rigid thinking, unable to look ahead and explore the past and the present, that is the dead!

古文：孝武皇帝时，燕王旦在明光宫，欲入所卧，户三尽闭，使侍者二十人开户，户不开，其後旦坐谋反自杀。
现代文：汉武帝时，燕王刘旦在明光宫，想去卧室，三道门都自动关上，叫侍从二十个人去开门，门打不开。那以后，刘旦因为谋反而自杀。
English: At the time of Emperor Hanwu, Yan Wang Liu Dan was in the Mingguang Palace. He wanted to go to the bedroom, but all three doors closed automatically. He asked twenty attendants to open the door, but the door could not be opened. After that, Liu Dan committed suicide because of the conspiracy.

古文：夫户闭，燕王旦死之状也。
现代文：门会自动关上，是燕王刘旦要死的征兆。
English: The door will close automatically, which is a sign that Yan Wang Liu Dan is about to die.

古文：死者，凶事也，故以闭塞为占。
现代文：死，是件不吉利的事情，所以关闭堵塞是预兆。
English: Death is an unlucky thing, so closing the blockage is an omen.

古文：齐庆封不通，六国大夫会而赋诗，庆封不晓，其後果有楚灵之祸也。
现代文：齐国庆封没有学问，六国大夫会盟赋诗，庆封不会，所以他后来果然有被楚灵王杀死的灾祸。
English: Qingfeng of Qi did not have any learning, the doctors of the Six Kingdoms would join together to compose poems, but Qingfeng would not, so he was later killed by King Chuling.

古文：夫不开通於学者，尸尚能行者也。
现代文：可见，没有弄通学问的人，跟行尸走肉一样。
English: You see, people who don't get through their studies are like the walking dead.

古文：亡国之社，屋其上、柴其下者，示绝於天地。
现代文：亡国的社，上面盖了屋顶，下面堵住了出口，表示与天地隔绝。
English: The ruined shrine has a roof on the top and a blocked exit on the bottom, signifying its isolation from heaven and earth.

古文：《春秋》薄社，周以为城。
现代文：《春秋》上说薄社是 亡国之社 ，周朝以它作为借鉴。
English: "Spring and Autumn" said that the Bo Society was the society of the ruined country, and the Zhou Dynasty used it as a reference.

古文：夫经艺传书，人当览之，犹社当通气於天地也。
现代文：经书传书，人们应当经常看它，就像社应该与天地通气一样。
English: People should read it often, just as society should breathe with heaven and earth.

古文：故人之不通览者，薄社之类也。
现代文：所以人没有通晓博览经传，就像薄社之类一样。
English: Therefore, people are not familiar with the exposition of the sutras, just like the Bon sect and the like.

古文：是故气不通者，强壮之人死，荣华之物枯。
现代文：因此不跟天地通气，健康强壮的人会死，正在开花的植物要枯萎。
English: Therefore, if you do not breathe with heaven and earth, healthy and strong people will die, and plants that are blooming will wither.

古文：东海之中，可食之物，集糅非一，以其大也。
现代文：东海中，可吃的东西，混杂不只一种，因此它们很多。
English: In the East China Sea, more than one kind of edible thing is mixed, so there are many of them.

古文：夫水精气渥盛，故其生物也众多奇异。
现代文：海水的精气浓厚旺盛，所以它产生的东西很多都不一般。
English: The essence of seawater is thick and powerful, so it produces many unusual things.

古文：故夫大人之胸怀非一，才高知大，故其於道术无所不包。
现代文：因此通人胸中具有的学问不只一种，由于才智高超，所以他们在道义学问上没有不包括的。
English: Therefore, sages have more than one kind of learning in their hearts. Due to their superior intelligence, they do not exclude anything in moral learning.

古文：学士同门高业之生，众共宗之。
现代文：学生在一个老师门下学习，学业好的学生，大家都尊敬他。
English: A student studies under a teacher, a good student, everyone respects him.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：知经指深，晓师言多也。
现代文：因为他们了解经书的意旨深刻，通晓老师的学说多。
English: Because they have a deep understanding of the meaning of the scriptures and are familiar with the teachings of their teachers.

古文：夫古今之事，百家之言，其为深，多也，岂徒师门高业之生哉？
现代文：但对古今的事情，各家的学说，通人了解得又多又深，难道他们仅仅是老师门下的优秀学生可比吗！
English: But for the things of the past and the present, the doctrines of various schools, sages understand more and deeper, are they just excellent students under the teacher?

古文：甘酒醴不酤饴蜜，未为能知味也。
现代文：只知道甜酒甜，而不知道调入蜜糖更甜，不能算懂得味道。
English: If you only know that sweet wine is sweet, but don't know that adding honey makes it sweeter, you can't be said to know the taste.

古文：耕夫多殖嘉谷，谓之上农夫；其少者，谓之下农夫。
现代文：农夫能多种好谷子，称作上等农夫；那种得少的，称作下等农夫。
English: A farmer who is able to produce a variety of good millet is called a superior farmer; one who produces less is called an inferior farmer.

古文：学士之才，农夫之力，一也。
现代文：读书人的才能，跟农夫的能力，是一样的。
English: The talent of a reader is the same as the ability of a farmer.

古文：能多种谷，谓之上农，能博学问，谓之上儒，是称牛之服重，不誉马速也。
现代文：能多种谷子，称作上等农夫，能有广博学问，不称作鸿儒，这是只称赞牛能负重，而不赞扬马跑得快。
English: To be able to grow a variety of grains is to be called a superior farmer, to be able to have a wide range of knowledge is not to be called a giant. This is only to praise the cow for being able to bear weight, but not to praise the horse for running fast.

古文：誉手毁足，孰谓之慧矣！
现代文：要是有人称赞自己的手，却诋毁自己的脚，谁会说他聪明呢？
English: If a man commend his hands, but despise his feet, who shall say that he is a wise man?

古文：县道不通於野，野路不达於邑，骑马乘舟者，必不由也。
现代文：县城的路不通往农村，农村的路不到城镇，骑马坐船的人，一定不经过它们。
English: The county road does not lead to the countryside, the rural road does not reach the town, and people riding horses and taking boats must not pass through them.

古文：故血脉不通，人以甚病。
现代文：所以血脉不通，人们认为是重病。
English: That's why the bloodline doesn't match, and people think it's a serious illness.

古文：夫不通者，恶事也，故其祸变致不善。
现代文：看来，不通达，是件坏事，因为它向坏的方面变化会导致不好的后果。
English: It seems that not being able to communicate is a bad thing, because if it changes for the worse, it will lead to bad consequences.

古文：是故盗贼宿於秽草，邪心生於无道，无道者，无道术也。
现代文：所以盗贼藏在杂草丛中，邪恶的心出自无道。无道的意思，就是没有道义学术。
English: So the thief hides in the weeds, and the evil heart comes from the wayless. The meaning of the wayless is the absence of moral learning.

古文：医能治一病谓之巧，能治百病谓之良。
现代文：医师能治疗一种病称作巧医，能治疗各种各样的病称作良医。
English: A doctor who can treat one disease is called a skillful doctor, and a doctor who can treat a variety of diseases is called a good doctor.

古文：是故良医服百病之方，治百人之疾；大才怀百家之言，故能治百族之乱。
现代文：所以良医掌握了治各种病的药方，能治各种人的疾病；才能大的人胸怀各家学说，所以能治理各家族、宗族的变乱。
English: Therefore, a good doctor has mastered the prescription for curing all kinds of diseases, and can cure all kinds of people's diseases; a talented person has the heart of each family's doctrine, so he can control the turmoil of each family and clan.

古文：扁鹊之众方，孰若巧之一伎？
现代文：以扁鹊能治各种病的本领，要是跟巧医只治一种病的本领相比，谁高明呢？
English: If the ability to cure all kinds of diseases with the ability to cure only one disease with the ability to cure only one disease with the ability to cure all kinds of diseases with the ability to cure all kinds of diseases with the ability to cure only one disease with the ability to cure all kinds of diseases with the ability to cure all kinds of diseases with the ability to cure only one disease with the ability to cure all kinds of diseases with the ability to cure all kinds of diseases with the ability to cure all kinds of diseases with the ability to cure only one disease with the ability to cure all kinds of diseases with the ability to cure all kinds of diseases with the ability to cure all kinds of diseases with the ability to cure all kinds of diseases

古文：子贡曰： 不得其门而入，不见宗庙之美，百官之富。 
现代文：子贡说： 如果找不到那道门走进去，就看不见宗庙的威严壮丽，各种房舍建筑的多样。 
English: Zigong said: If you can't find the door to enter, you can't see the majesty and splendor of the ancestral temple and the diversity of various buildings.

古文：盖以宗庙百官喻孔子道也。
现代文：这大概是拿宗庙和各种房舍来比喻孔子的学术思想。
English: This is probably to take the ancestral temple and various buildings as a metaphor for Confucius's academic thought.

古文：孔子道美，故譬以宗庙，众多非一，故喻以百官。
现代文：孔子的学术思想精深，所以拿宗庙的威严壮丽来比喻；它博大不是一种，所以拿各种房舍建筑的多样来比喻。
English: Confucius's academic thought was profound, so he used the majesty and magnificence of the ancestral temple as a metaphor; it was not a kind of vastness, so he used the diversity of various buildings as a metaphor.

古文：由此言之，道达广博者，孔子之徒也。
现代文：这样说来，学术思想达到广博的人，都是孔子的学生了。
English: In this way, people with broad academic thinking are all students of Confucius.

古文：殷、周之地，极五千里，荒服、要服，勤能牧之。
现代文：殷、周地域，最远五千里，荒服、要服的边远地区，仅仅能控制它们。
English: Yin and Zhou regions, as far as five thousand miles away, and remote areas that need to be serviced, can only control them.

古文：汉氏廓土，牧万里之外，要荒之地，褒衣博带。
现代文：汉朝扩充疆域，控制到万里以外，就连要服、荒服的边远地区，人们穿衣也宽袍大带。
English: The Han Dynasty expanded its territory and controlled it to thousands of miles away. Even in remote areas where people had to wear formal or informal clothing, they also wore a wide gown with a large belt.

古文：夫德不优者，不能怀远，才不大者，不能博见。
现代文：恩德不优容不能安抚边远地方的人，才智不高的人不会有广博的见识。
English: Neither kindness nor tolerance can placate people in remote areas, and people with low intelligence will not have broad insight.

古文：故多闻博识，无顽鄙之訾；深知道术，无浅暗之毁也。
现代文：所以听闻多见识广，就不会受到愚昧无知的指责；深刻了解道义与学术，就不会受到浅薄愚昧的诋毁。
English: Therefore, if you are well-informed and well-informed, you will not be accused of ignorance; if you have a deep understanding of morality and scholarship, you will not be slandered by shallow ignorance.

古文：人好观图画者，图上所画，古之列人也。
现代文：人们喜欢看图画，是由于图上画的是古代有名气的人。
English: People like to look at pictures because they depict famous people from ancient times.

古文：见列人之面，孰与观其言行？
现代文：观看古代名人的画像，怎么能比得上亲自观察他们的言论和行动呢？
English: How can viewing images of ancient celebrities compare to observing their words and actions in person?

古文：置之空壁，形容具存，人不激劝者，不见言行也。
现代文：把他们的像挂在空白墙上，形体和容貌全在，而人们不被它激励和劝勉的原因，是因为没有见到他们的言论和行为。
English: Hang their likeness on a blank wall, body and visage all present, and the reason people aren't inspired and exhorted by it is because they don't see their words and actions.

古文：古贤之遗文，竹帛之所载粲然，岂徒墙壁之画哉？
现代文：古代圣贤留下来的文章，在竹简帛书上已经记载得明明白白了，难道他们仅仅是墙壁上的图画可比吗！
English: The writings left behind by ancient sages have been recorded so clearly in the Bamboo Scroll, are they merely comparable to pictures on the wall?

古文：空器在厨，金银涂饰，其中无物益於饥，人不顾也。
现代文：空空的器皿放在厨房里，即使涂上金银作装饰，而其中没有食物对消除饥饿有好处，人们是不会理睬的。
English: Empty utensils in the kitchen, even if coated with gold and silver for decoration, and no food in them is good for eliminating hunger, people will not pay attention.

古文：肴膳甘醢，土釜之盛，入者乡之。
现代文：好菜好饭好肉，即使用沙锅装着，看到它的人也会向往。
English: Good dish, good meal, good meat, even if it is placed in a casserole, people who see it will also yearn for it.

古文：古贤文之美善可甘，非徒器中之物也，读观有益，非徒膳食有补也。
现代文：古代圣贤的文章内容形式都很好，能适合读者的口味，不只是餐具中的食物可比；对读者有益处，不只是饭食对身体有滋补可比。
English: The form and content of the ancient sages' articles are all very good, which can suit the reader's taste, not only the food in the tableware can be compared; the benefit to the reader, not only the meal can be compared to the body.

古文：故器空无实，饥者不顾，胸虚无怀，朝廷不御也。
现代文：所以餐具空空没有食物，饥饿的人不会理睬；胸中容虚不具备学问的人，朝廷是不会任用的。
English: Therefore, if the tableware is empty and there is no food, hungry people will not pay attention; if there is a void in the chest and people do not have knowledge, the court will not appoint them.

古文：剑伎之家，斗战必胜者，得曲城、越女之学也。
现代文：擅长击剑的人，争斗打仗一定胜利的原因，是学到了曲成侯、越女的剑术。
English: People who are good at fencing, the reason for the certain victory in battle is that they have learned the swordsmanship of Qu Chenghou and Yue Nian.

古文：两敌相遭，一巧一拙，其必胜者，有术之家也。
现代文：两敌相遇，一个灵巧一个笨拙，其中一定胜利的，是有本领的人。
English: When two opponents meet, one skillful and one clumsy, the one who is sure to win is the one with ability.

古文：孔、墨之业，贤圣之书，非徒曲城、越女之功也。
现代文：孔子和墨子的学业、圣贤的书籍，不仅是曲成侯和越女的作用可比。
English: The study of Confucius and Mozi and the books of sages are not only comparable to the roles of Qu Chenghou and Yue Nian.

古文：成人之操，益人之知，非徒战斗必胜之策也。
现代文：培养人们的德操，增加人们的知识，不仅是打仗一定胜利的刺杀技术可比。
English: Cultivating people's morality and increasing people's knowledge are not only comparable to assassination techniques that ensure victory in war.

古文：故剑伎之术，有必胜之名；贤圣之书，有必尊之声。
现代文：所以击剑的技术，有必定胜利的名声，圣贤的书籍，有必受尊崇的名声。
English: Therefore, fencing techniques have a reputation of certain victory, and the books of sages have a reputation of being respected.

古文：县邑之吏，召诸治下，将相问以政化，晓慧之吏，陈所闻见，将相觉悟，得以改政右文。
现代文：城镇的官吏，把他们调来当自己的部下，地方长官就拿政治和教化的事问他们，聪明点的官吏，就要求他们陈述所看见的所听见的东西，如果地方长官有所觉悟，就会用来改善政事尊崇经传。
English: The local governors ask them about politics and education. The more intelligent officials ask them to report what they have seen and heard. If the local governors have any awareness, they will use it to improve government affairs.

古文：圣贤言行，竹帛所传，练人之心，聪人之知，非徒县邑之吏对向之语也。
现代文：圣贤的言论和行为，古书流传，能使人的心受到感化，使人的智慧变得聪明，这不只是与城镇官吏对答的话可比。
English: The words and deeds of sages and sages, ancient books say, can influence people's hearts and make people wise. This is not only comparable to the words and deeds of town officials.

古文：禹、益并治洪水，禹主治水，益主记异物，海外山表，无远不至，以所闻见作《山海经》。
现代文：禹和伯益共同治理洪水，禹主持治水，伯益负责记与一般不同的东西，海外山外，没有远的地方没到过，就把所见所闻写成了《山海经》。
English: Yu and Bo Yi jointly control floods, Yu presides over water control, Bo Yi is responsible for recording things that are different from the general, overseas mountains, there is no distant place that has not been, he wrote what he saw and heard into "Mountain and Sea Sutra."

古文：非禹、益不能行远，《山海》不造。然则《山海》之造，见物博也。
现代文：不是禹和伯益就不能走那么远，《山海经》也就写不出来了，这样看来，《山海经》能写出来，是伯益见过的东西广博的缘故。
English: It wasn't just Yu and Bo Yi who couldn't go that far, and couldn't write the "Book of Mountains and Seas," so it seems that Bo Yi was able to write the "Book of Mountains and Seas" because of the vastness of what he had seen.

古文：董仲舒睹重常之鸟，刘子政晓贰负之尸，皆见《山海经》，故能立二事之说。
现代文：董仲舒认识重常鸟，刘子政知道贰负的尸骨，都是他们看过《山海经》，所以才能立刻说出这二件事来。
English: Dong Zhongshu knows the heavy common bird, Liu Zimeng knows the dead body, they have all read the "Mountain and Sea Sutra," so they can immediately tell these two things.

古文：使禹、益行地不远，不能作《山海经》；董、刘不读《山海经》，不能定二疑。
现代文：假使禹和伯益走的地方不远，就不能够写出《山海经》；假使董仲舒和刘子政没有读过《山海经》，也不能解决这二个疑难问题。
English: If Yu and Bo Yi did not travel far, they would not be able to write "The Classic of Mountains and Seas"; if Dong Zhongshu and Liu Zizheng did not read "The Classic of Mountains and Seas," they would not be able to solve these two difficult problems.

古文：实沉、台台，子产博物，故能言之；龙见绛郊，蔡墨晓占，故能御之。
现代文：实沉与臺台，由于子产知道的东西多，所以能回答是参宿神与汾水神。龙出现在绛的野外，蔡墨通晓占卜，所以说能饲养它。
English: As the offspring knows more things than the toad, it can answer whether it is the god of the roost or the god of water. The dragon appears in the field of the toad, and Cai Mo is familiar with divination, so he can raise it.

古文：父兄在千里之外，且死，遗教戒之书，子弟贤者，求索观读，服臆不舍，重先敬长，谨慎之也；不肖者轻慢佚忽，无原察之意。
现代文：父亲和兄长在千里以外，快要死了，留下教诲的遗书。儿子贤的，就会要来读，并存在胸中，不肯忘记，尊重先人敬重兄长，所以把它看得非常郑重其事；儿子不贤的，就会随随便便，漫不经心，没有体会了解父兄遗嘱的心思。
English: The father and the elder brother are thousands of miles away, about to die, leaving a testament of instruction. The son who is wise will want to read it and keep it in his heart, unwilling to forget, respecting the ancestors and respecting the elder brother, so he sees it as a very serious matter; the son who is not wise will be casual and careless, without experiencing the thought of understanding the father and brother's will.

古文：古圣先贤，遗後人文字，其重非徒父兄之书也，或观读采取，或弃捐不录，二者之相高下也，行路之人，皆能论之，况辩照然否者不能别之乎？
现代文：古代圣贤遗留给后人的文字，它们的重要不只是父亲兄长的遗嘱可比。有的人能够认真阅读并领会遗嘱的内容，但却有人抛在一边，不予接受，二者之间的好歹，路上的行人，都能评论出来，何况那些能分清是非的人，还不能区别它们吗？
English: The writings bequeathed to posterity by the ancient sages are not only as important as the wills of one's father and brother. Some people can read and understand the contents of the will, but others can not accept it. Whether it is good or bad, pedestrians on the road can comment on it. What's more, those who can distinguish right from wrong, can't distinguish them?

古文：孔子病，商瞿卜期日中，孔子曰： 取书来，比至日中何事乎？ 
现代文：孔子病重，商瞿占卜死期是中午。孔子说： 拿书来，不然到中午有什么事情可干呢？ 
English: Confucius was seriously ill, and the time of his death was noon. Confucius said, "Bring a book, otherwise what can you do until noon?"

古文：圣人之好学也，且死不休，念在经书，不以临死之故，弃忘道艺，其为百世之圣，师法祖修，盖不虚矣！
现代文：圣人好学，快要死了都不休息，还惦念着经书，没有因为快死的缘故，而舍弃忘掉经学，他真算得上世世代代的圣人，被大家效法和学习，大概不假。
English: The sage was eager to learn, and when he was about to die, he did not rest, he was still thinking about the scriptures, and he did not give up and forget the scriptures because he was about to die. He was truly a sage of past generations, and was imitated and learned by everyone, probably not a fake.

古文：自孔子以下，至汉之际，有才能之称者，非有饱食终日无所用心也，不说《五经》则读书传。
现代文：从孔子以下，到汉朝的时候，有才能值得称颂的人，没有一个是整天吃饱了而不用心干事的，不是在讲说五经就是在阅读各种书籍。
English: From the time of Confucius down to the Han Dynasty, no one with praiseworthy talent ate his fill all day long without diligently doing something, whether it was talking about the Five Classics or reading various books.

古文：书传文大，难以备之。
现代文：各种书籍内容庞大，很难全面掌握。
English: The contents of various books are huge, and it is difficult to fully grasp them.

古文：卜卦占射凶吉，皆文、武之道。昔有商瞿能占爻卦；末有东方朔、翼少君，能达占射覆。
现代文：用卜卦占卜来推测凶吉，都是周文王、周武王用过的办法，从前有商瞿能算卦，后代有东方朔、翼少君能通晓占卜射覆。
English: Using divination to predict bad luck is a method used by King Zhou Wen and King Zhou Wu. In the past, there were merchants who could calculate divination, and later generations included Dongfang Shuo and Ying Shao Jun who could understand divination.

古文：道虽小，亦圣人之术也。
现代文：这种办法虽是小伎，但也是圣人的方术，现在人却连这个都不懂。
English: Although this method is a trick, it is also a sage's way, but now people don't even understand this.

古文：曾又不知人生禀五常之性，好道乐学，故辨於物。今则不然，饱食快饮，虑深求卧，腹为饭坑，肠为酒襄，是则物也。
现代文：人生来就承受了仁、义、礼、智、信五常本性，喜爱道义乐于学习，所以区别于其他动物，现在却不是这样，要吃得饱，喝得痛快，稍用心思就想睡觉，肚子成了饭坑，肠子成了酒袋，这就成了一般动物。
English: People are born with the five elements of nature - benevolence, righteousness, propriety, wisdom, and faith. They love morality and righteousness, and are eager to learn. Therefore, they are different from other animals. However, this is not the case now. They need to eat enough, drink enough, and want to sleep after thinking about it for a while. Their stomachs have become food pits, and their intestines have become wine bags. They have become ordinary animals.

古文：倮虫三百，人为之长， 天地之性人为贵，贵其识知也。
现代文：没有羽毛鳞甲的三百六十种动物，人是它们的首领。天地间有生命的东西，人最为宝贵，宝贵在人懂得求知。
English: There are 360 kinds of animals without feathers or scales, and man is their leader. Of all the living things in heaven and earth, man is the most precious. He is precious because he knows how to seek knowledge.

古文：今闭暗脂塞，无所好欲，与三百倮虫何以异？
现代文：如今愚昧无知，对学习没有一点爱好和要求，跟三百六十种没有羽毛鳞甲的动物有什么区别呢？
English: Now, what is the difference between ignorance and stupidity, without any inclination or desire to learn, and the three hundred and sixty species of animals without feathers and scales?

古文：而谓之为长而贵之乎！
现代文：能说他们是无羽毛鳞甲动物的首领而尊贵他们吗？
English: Can it be said that they are the chiefs of the featherless squamates and exalt them?

古文：诸夏之人所以贵於夷狄者，以其通仁义之文，知古今之学也。
现代文：中原地区的人所以比边远地区的人尊贵，是因为他们懂得仁义的规矩，知道古今的学问。
English: The reason why people in the Central Plains are more respected than people in remote areas is because they understand the rules of benevolence and righteousness, and know ancient and modern knowledge.

古文：如徒其胸中之知以取衣食，经厉年月，白首没齿，终无晓知，夷狄之次也。
现代文：如果仅仅凭借他们自身先天的智慧来谋取衣食，经过若干岁月，白头终生，最后没有了智慧，就和边远地区的人同类。
English: If they only rely on their own innate wisdom to feed and clothe themselves, after a few years, they will be white-haired for the rest of their lives, and finally without wisdom, they will be the same as people in remote areas.

古文：观夫蜘蛛之经丝以罔飞虫也，人之用作，安能过之？
现代文：看了蜘蛛织网来捕捉飞虫，那么人使用的欺骗手段怎么能超过它呢？
English: Seeing that a spider weaves a web to catch flying insects, how can the deception used by man surpass it?

古文：任胸中之知，舞权利之诈，以取富寿之乐，无古今之学，蜘蛛之类也。含血之虫，无饿死之患，皆能以知求索饮食也。
现代文：凭借自身先天的智慧，玩弄权利去欺骗，以得到富贵长寿的快乐，没有古今的学问，这跟蜘蛛同类，有血动物，没有饿死的忧虑，都能用自身的智慧来寻找到食物。
English: By virtue of their innate wisdom, they play with the right to deceive in order to obtain the happiness of wealth and longevity, without the knowledge of ancient and modern times, which is the same kind as spiders, blood animals, without the worry of starving to death, can use their own wisdom to find food.

古文：人不通者，亦能自供，仕官为吏，亦得高官，将相长吏，犹吾大夫高子也，安能别之？
现代文：不通的人，也能自己供养自己，做官也能得到高官。地方长官就像齐大夫高子样昏庸，怎么能识别他们呢？
English: People who don't understand can also support themselves, and officials can also get high-ranking officials. Local governors are as dim-witted as Dr. Qi Gaozi, how can you recognize them?

古文：随时积功，以命得官，不晓古今，以位为贤，与文异术，安得识别通人，俟以不次乎？
现代文：他们靠时运积下了些功绩，因为天命当了官，不通古今，由于地位高而被看成贤人，他们与通人当官的手段不一样，怎么才能识别通人并以破格提拔来对待他们呢？
English: They rely on time to accumulate some merits, because they are destined to become officials, and they are not familiar with the past and the present. Because of their high status, they are regarded as sages. They are not the same as the means used by sages to become officials. How can we identify sages and treat them with extraordinary promotion?

古文：将相长吏不得若右扶风蔡伯偕、郁林太守张孟尝、东莱太守李季公之徒，心自通明，览达古今，故其敬通人也如见大宾。
现代文：地方长官没有像右扶风蔡伯偕、郁林太守张孟尝、东莱太守李季公之类人，心中本身通达明白，博览古今，所以他们尊重通人就会见尊贵的客人一样。
English: Local governors do not have people like Zuifeng Cai Boqin, Yulin Governor Zhang Mengyao, Donglai Governor Li Qigong, etc. In their hearts, they are well-informed and knowledgeable about the past and the present, so they respect experts and meet distinguished guests.

古文：燕昭为邹衍拥彗，彼独受何性哉？
现代文：燕昭王为邹衍扫地，那他唯独承受的是什么天性呢？
English: Yan Zhao Wang sweeps the ground for Yan Yan, so what kind of nature is he the only one to bear?

古文：东成令董仲绶知为儒枭，海内称通，故其接人，能别奇。是以锺离产公以编户之民，受圭璧之敬，知之明也。
现代文：东城令董仲绶知识称得上是儒家最杰出的人，海内外都称他是通人，所以他待人时能识别出特别突出的人，因此钟离的产公能以一个普通百姓而受到高度尊重，这是由于董仲绶对产公了解得很清楚。
English: Dongcheng made Dong Zhongya's knowledge to be the most outstanding person in Confucianism. Both at home and abroad, he was said to be a connoisseur, so he could identify particularly outstanding people when he treated people. Therefore, Zhongli's father-in-law could be highly respected as an ordinary citizen. This is because Dong Zhongya knew his father-in-law very well.

古文：故夫能知之也，凡石生光气；不知之也，金玉无润色。
现代文：这样看来，能被了解，普通石头也会发光冒气；不被了解，即使是金玉也没有光泽。
English: In this way, if it can be understood, the ordinary stone will also glow; if it is not understood, even the gold jade has no luster.

古文：自武帝以至今朝，数举贤良，令人射策甲乙之科，若董仲舒、唐子高、谷子云、丁伯玉，策既中实，文说美善，博览膏腴之所生也。
现代文：从汉武帝到本朝，多次举贤良，让人们通过 射策 考试，分甲乙科录取。像董仲舒、唐子高、谷子云、丁伯玉等，竹简上的题目他们全部能准确地回答出来，而且文章内容完善形式优美，这是他们广泛阅读内容丰富的书籍得来的。
English: From Emperor Hanwu to the present day, they have repeatedly raised the virtuous, let people pass the "Shooting Strategy" exam, and score A and B for admission. Like Dong Zhongshu, Tang Zi Gao, Gu Zi Yun, Ding Bo Yu, etc., they can answer all the questions on the bamboo cutter accurately, and the content of the article is perfect and the form is beautiful, which is obtained from their extensive reading of books with rich content.

古文：使四者经徒能摘，笔徒能记疏，不见古今之书，安能建美善於圣王之庭乎？
现代文：假使他们四人读经只能摘录句子，动笔只能给经书作法，没有看过古今的其他书籍，怎么能在圣王的朝庭中写出好文章来呢？
English: If the four of them can only extract sentences when they read the Bible, and they can only practice writing the Bible, and have not read other books from ancient times to the present, how can they write a good article in the court of the holy king?

古文：孝明之时，读《苏武传》，见武官名曰《栘中监》，以问百官，百官莫知。
现代文：汉明帝的时候，他读《汉书·苏武传》，看见武职中有名叫 栘中监 的，以此询问各位官吏，他们没有一个人知道。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanming, he read "The History of the Han Dynasty and the Suwu Dynasty" and saw a well-known person in the military called "Yan Zhongjun," so he asked various officials about it. None of them knew.

古文：夫《仓颉》之章，小学之书，文字备具，至於无能对圣国之问者，是皆美命随牒之人多在官也。 木 旁 多 文字且不能知，其欲及若董仲舒之知重常，刘子政之知贰负，难哉！
现代文：其实《仓颉》是本文字学的书，上面文字都齐备，至于各位官吏不能回答国君提出的问题，这都是因为凭命好和升官簿升迁的人多在朝廷做官的缘故。 木 旁一个 多 字尚且不知道，他们要想达到像董仲舒知道重常鸟，刘子政知道贰负尸，那太难啊！
English: In fact, "Canglu" is a book of philology, the above characters are complete. As for the officials who cannot answer the questions raised by the sovereign, this is because most of the people who are promoted by fate and promotion books are in the imperial court. They still do not know a word next to the tree. If they want to be like Dong Zhongshu who knows the heavy bird, and Liu Zizheng who knows the dead body, that is too difficult!

古文：或曰： 通人之官，兰台令史，职校书定字，比夫太史、太柷，职在文书，无典民之用，不可施设。
现代文：有人说： 通人做官，不过兰台令史，其职校勘书籍删定文字，同太史、太祝一样，职务只在掌握文书，没有治理百姓的才能，不能任用他们。
English: Some people said: There are qualified people to be officials, but the Lantai Rongshi, whose job is to check books and delete words, is the same as Tai Shi and Tai Zhu. Their job is only to master documents. They do not have the ability to govern the people, so they cannot be appointed.

古文：是以兰台之史，班固、贾逵、杨终、傅毅之徒，名香文美，委积不泄，大用於世。 曰：此不继。
现代文：所以兰台令史：班固、贾逵、杨终、傅毅一些人，名香文美，但都停留原职不能升官，不被当世重用。 我说：这不一定。
English: Therefore, the history of the Lantai Rongshi: Ban Gu, Jia Wei, Yang Zhen, Fu Yi, some people are famous for their beauty, but they all stay in their original positions, cannot be promoted, and are not reused in the current world.

古文：周世通览之人，邹衍之徒，孙卿之辈，受时王之宠，尊显於世。
现代文：周代的通人，邹衍、荀况他们，就受到当时君主的宠幸，在社会上有显赫地位。
English: The connoisseurs of Zhou Dynasty, such as Yan Yan, were favored by the monarchs at that time and had a prominent position in the society.

古文：董仲舒虽无鼎足之位，知在公卿之上。
现代文：董仲舒虽然没有三公那样的地位，但知识却在三公九卿之上。
English: Although Dong Zhongshu did not have the same status as the three princes, his knowledge was superior to that of the three princes and nine nobles.

古文：周监二代，汉监周、秦然则兰台之官，国所监得失也。
现代文：周代借鉴夏、商二代的事迹，汉代借要借鉴周、秦的事迹。然而兰台令史是国家要借鉴前代得失的关键。
English: The Zhou Dynasty borrowed from the deeds of Xia and Shang's second generation, and the Han Dynasty borrowed from the deeds of Zhou and Qin. However, the history of Lantai is the key for the country to learn from the gains and losses of the previous generation.

古文：以心如丸卵，为体内藏；眸子如豆，为身光明。
现代文：因为心像丸卵那么小，却是人体主要的内脏器官；瞳仁如豆那么小，却能使人见到光明。
English: Because the heart is as small as a round egg, but it is the main internal organ of the human body; the pupil is as small as a bean, but it can make people see light.

古文：令史虽微，典国道藏，通人所由进，犹博士之官，儒生所由兴也。
现代文：兰台令史虽然地位低微，却掌管着国家的珍贵图书资料，通人就由此进身做官，像博士这样的官，儒生就是由这里开始做起的。
English: Although Lantai Lingshi has a low status, it controls the country's precious books and materials. This is how Tongren became an official. An official like a doctor, this is where Confucianism began.

古文：委积不绁，岂圣国微遇之哉，殆以书未定而职未毕也。
现代文：可见有的道人停留原职没有升官，哪里是朝廷冷遇他们，而大概是因为书还没有校订好，任务还没有完成吧！
English: It can be seen that some Taoists stay in their original positions without promotion, where is the court cold-shouldered them, but probably because the book has not been proofread, the task has not been completed!

