古文：鬼神下李进士侯生袁继谦邵元休周蔼郑起朱拯韦建郑就
现代文：鬼神下李进士侯生袁继谦邵元休周蔼郑起朱拯韦建郑就
English: Li Jinzhi, Hou Sheng, Yuan Zhiqian, Shao Yuanhui, Zhou Qian, Zheng Qi, Zhu Zhengwei, Jian Zheng Rong

古文：梦游上樱桃青衣独孤遐叔
现代文：梦游上樱桃青衣独孤遐叔
English: Sleepwalking on cherry blossoms, a lone uncle in a blue dress

古文：鬼神下
现代文：鬼神下
English: Down with ghosts and gods

古文：李进士
现代文：李进士
English: Li Jinshi

古文：有进士姓李，忘记名。
现代文：有位进士姓李。忘记他叫什么名字了。
English: There was a conscript named Li. I've forgotten his name.

古文：尝梦见数人来追去。
现代文：他曾经梦见不少人追赶自己。
English: He once dreamed that many people were chasing him.

古文：至一城，入门有厅，室宇宏壮。
现代文：他跑到一座城池，走进一道大门，进门就是大厅，敞亮宏壮。
English: He ran to a castle, entered a gate, and the entrance was the hall, spacious and magnificent.

古文：初不见人，李径升堂，侧坐床角。
现代文：开始，没发现有人，他便径直走进去，侧身坐在一张大床的床角上。
English: At first, finding no one, he walked straight in and sat sideways on the corner of a large bed.

古文：忽有一人，持杖击己，骂云：何物新鬼，敢坐王床。
现代文：这时，忽然走出一个人来，操起手杖向他打来，骂道：你是哪来的新鬼，敢坐在大王的床上？
English: At this time, a man suddenly came out, waved his cane at him, and scolded him: "Where did you come from, new ghost, daring to sit on the great king's bed?

古文：李径走出。
现代文：李进士急忙走出门来。
English: Li Jinshi hurried out of the door.

古文：顷之，门内传声王出，因见紫衣人升坐，所由引领人。
现代文：有顷，门内传出大王驾临的喊声，只见一个紫衣人威然落座，身后跟着不少人。
English: Suddenly, a shout of the arrival of the great king came from inside the door, only to see a purple-clad person sitting down in a dignified manner, followed by many people.

古文：王问：其何故盗妹夫钱？
现代文：大王向李进士问道：你因为什么要偷妹夫的钱？
English: The king asked Li Jin: Why did you steal your brother-in-law's money?

古文：初不之悟。
现代文：开始，他莫名其妙。
English: At first, he was baffled.

古文：王曰：汝与他卖马，合得二十七千，汝须更取三十千，此非盗耶？
现代文：大王又说：你卖给你妹夫一匹马，应该卖二十七千钱，你却要他拿出三十千，这不是偷一样吗？
English: The king also said, "You sold your brother-in-law a horse for twenty-seven thousand, and you asked him for thirty thousand. Isn't that stealing?"

古文：须臾，见绯衣人至，为李陈谢：此人尚有命，未合即留住，但令送钱还耳？
现代文：一会儿，来了一个穿红服的人，为李进士向大王道歉：此人还有活命，不能就此留下来，只能命令李进士送钱还给妹夫。
English: After a while, a man in a red suit came and apologized to the king for Li Jin Shih: This man is still alive, he cannot stay like this, he can only order Li Jin Shih to return the money to his brother-in-law.

古文：王限十五日，计会不了，当更追对。
现代文：大王限期十五天，到时候不付钱，更要追究一番的。
English: The king has a deadline of fifteen days. If he doesn't pay by that time, he will be held accountable.

古文：李既觉，为梦是诞事，理不足信。
现代文：李进士醒来之后，认为这梦十分荒唐，哪里有这样的道理嘛！
English: After waking up, Li Jinshi thought that this dream was very absurd, where is the reason for this!

古文：后十余日，有磨镜人至其家，自行善占。
现代文：十几天之后，有位磨镜子的人来到他家，说自己会算卦。
English: A few days later, a mirror-sharpener came to his house and said that he could tell fortunes.

古文：家人使占有验，竞以白李。
现代文：李进士的家人让他算了几卦都挺灵验，就争着把这件事告诉了李进士。
English: Li Jinshi's family asked him to do some calculations, which were quite effective, and they fought to tell Li Jinshi about this.

古文：李亲至其所，问云：何物小人，诳惑诸下。
现代文：李进士亲自来到那位磨镜人的住所，责问道：你是哪来的小人，到这里来诳惑我的下人？
English: Li Jinshi himself came to the residence of the mirror-grinder and asked: Where did you come from, you villain? Did you come here to seduce my subordinates?

古文：磨镜者怒云：卖马窃资，王令计会，今限欲满，不还一钱，王即追君。
现代文：磨镜人也怒目而视道：你卖马骗钱，大王勒令你付钱，今天期限将满，你却不还一个子儿，大王马上还要追查你的。
English: The mirror-grinder also glared angrily and said, "You sold a horse and swindled money, the great king ordered you to pay, and today the deadline is about to expire, but you haven't returned a single dime. The great king will soon track you down."

古文：君何敢骂国士也？
现代文：你怎么还敢骂我这样的国士呢？
English: How dare you call me a statesman?

古文：李惊怪是梦中事，因拜谢之，问何由知此。
现代文：李进士原以为那都是梦中的事情，不相信是真的，遂急忙拜倒谢罪，并问其根由。
English: Li Jinshi originally thought that it was all a dream, and did not believe it was true, so he hurriedly apologized and asked the root cause.

古文：磨镜云：昨朱衣相救者，是君曾祖。
现代文：磨镜人说：前者救你的那个穿朱衣者，乃是你的曾祖父。
English: The mirror-grinder said, "The man in the vermilion robe who saved you from the former is your great-grandfather."

古文：恐君更被追，所以令我相报。
现代文：他担心你再被严加追究，所以派我前来报信。
English: He's worried that you're going to be investigated again, so he sent me to report it.

古文：李言妹夫已死，钱无还所。
现代文：李进士说妹夫已经死了，想还钱也没有地方呀。
English: Li Jinshi said that his brother-in-law had died, and there was no place to return the money.

古文：磨镜云：但施贫丐，及散诸寺，云为亡妹夫施，则可矣。
现代文：磨镜人说：那你就施舍给穷苦人，或者送到寺庙里，并说这是为亡妹夫还愿的，就行了。
English: The mirror-grinder said, "Then you can give alms to the poor, or take it to the temple, and say that it is for the deceased brother-in-law.

古文：如言散钱，亦不追也。
现代文：李进士照他说的那样把那些钱都散出去后，也就没有人再追究他了。
English: After Mr. Li Jinzhi dispersed the money as he said, no one pursued him anymore.

古文：侯生
现代文：侯生
English: Hou Sheng

古文：上谷侯生者，家于荆门。
现代文：上谷郡有一位侯生，家住在荆门县。
English: There is a son-in-law in Shanggu County who lives in Jingmen County.

古文：以明经入仕，调补宋州虞城县。
现代文：他是考中与进士科并列的明经科走上仕途的，后来调补到宋州虞城县任职。
English: He started his career at Mingjing Science, which was ranked in the middle of the examination, and later transferred to Songzhou Yucheng County.

古文：初娶南阳韩氏女，五年矣。
现代文：最初，他娶了南阳一个姓韩的女子作妻子，已有五年了。
English: At first, he had been married to a woman surnamed Han in Nanyang for five years.

古文：韩氏尝夕梦黄衣者数辈召，出其门，偕东行十余里，至一官署。
现代文：一天，韩氏梦见好几个穿黄衣服的人来招呼她，并将她领出门，向东走了十余里，来到一个官署。
English: One day, Ms. Han dreamed that several people in yellow clothes came to greet her, and led her out the door, walked more than ten miles to the east, and came to a government office.

古文：其宇下列吏卒数十辈，轩宇华壮，人物极众。
现代文：这官署华丽壮观，颇有气势，屋檐下站着几十名吏卒，还有很多人。
English: This government office is magnificent and imposing, with dozens of officials and many other people standing under its roof.

古文：又引至一院，有一青衣，危冠方屦，壮甚峻峙。左右者数百，几案茵席，罗列前后。
现代文：她被引到一个院子，看见有个青衣女子，高冠危矗，穿着方鞋，左右跟着好几百人，前后摆着几案和垫子，十分气派。
English: She was led to a courtyard, where she saw a woman in a blue dress, with a high crown, wearing square shoes, followed by several hundred people, with several cases and cushions in front and behind, very elegant.

古文：韩氏再拜。
现代文：韩氏向她拜了拜。
English: Han bowed to her.

古文：俄有一妇人年二十许，身长丰丽，衣碧襦绛袖，以金玉钗为首饰，自门而来，称卢氏。谓韩氏曰：妾与子仇敌且久，子知之乎？
现代文：有顷，又走出一个二十左右岁的妇人，颀长丰满，艳丽无比，衣服是绿色的，袖子却是深红色的，以金玉钗为首饰。她自称卢氏，上前对韩氏说：我与你很早就结下仇了，你知道吗？
English: All of a sudden, a woman in her twenties stepped out, with a long, full, and incredibly glamorous beard. Her dress was green, but her sleeves were crimson, and she was wearing a gold and jade bracelet. She called herself Mr. Lu and said to Mr. Han, "I've had a grudge against you for a long time, you know?

古文：韩氏曰：妾一女子，未尝出深闺，安得有仇敌耶？
现代文：韩氏说：我一个女子，未曾走出深闺，怎么会有仇人呢？
English: Han said: "I'm a woman, I've never been out of my maiden name, how can I have enemies?

古文：卢氏色甚怒曰：我前身尝为职官，子诬告我罪而代之，使吾摈斥草野而死，岂非仇敌乎？
现代文：卢氏沉下脸来怒道：我的前身曾经是职官，你诬告我有罪而取代了我，使我流落郊野冻饿而死，这还不是仇敌吗？
English: Mr. Lu sunk his face in anger and said, "My predecessor used to be a government official. You falsely accused me of a crime and replaced me. You sent me to the countryside to die of cold and hunger. Isn't this still an enemy?

古文：今我诉于上帝，且欲雪前身冤。帝从吾请，汝之死不朝夕矣。
现代文：今天我向天帝提出申诉，想平冤昭雪，天帝听从了我的请求，你在一天之内就得死！
English: Today I appealed to the Heavenly Emperor, wanting to settle the grievance, the Heavenly Emperor listened to my request, you will die within one day!

古文：韩氏益惧，欲以词拒，而卢氏喋喋不已。
现代文：韩氏害怕了，想同她讲理，而卢氏却喋喋不休。
English: Mr. Han was scared and tried to reason with her, but Ms. Lu just kept talking.

古文：青衣者谓卢氏曰：汝之冤诚如是也，然韩氏固未当死，不可为也。
现代文：这时，有位青衣女子对卢氏说：你的冤案诚然应该平反，但是韩氏也不应当马上就处死，不能这么做呀！
English: At this time, a woman in Tsing Yi said to Mr. Lu: It is true that your unjust case should be rectified, but Mr. Han should not be put to death right away. You can't do that!

古文：遂令吏出案牍。吏曰：韩氏余寿一年。
现代文：随即，她让一小吏拿出案卷也就是生死簿，念道：韩氏余寿一年！
English: Immediately, she asked a junior official to take out a file, that is, a life and death book, and read: Han's remaining life is one year!

古文：青衣曰：可疾遣归，无久留也。
现代文：青衣女子说：立即遣送她回去，不要让她久留此地。
English: The woman in blue said: Send her back immediately, don't let her stay here for long.

古文：命送至门。
现代文：并嘱咐把她送出大门。
English: and ordered her to be escorted out the door.

古文：行未数里，忽悸而寤，恶之不敢言。自是神色摧沮，若有疾者。
现代文：韩氏走了不到一里地，忽然一声惊叫醒来。她对这梦又怕又厌，但却不敢讲，自然神色沮丧，恍恍惚惚，象有病的人。
English: Han walked less than a mile and suddenly woke up with a scream. She was scared and disgusted by the dream, but did not dare to talk about it. She naturally looked depressed and dazed, like a sick person.

古文：侯生讯之，具以梦告。
现代文：侯生问她，她只好将此梦告诉了他。
English: When her son-in-law asked her, she had to tell him about the dream.

古文：后数月，韩氏又梦卢氏者至其家，谓韩氏曰：子将死矣。
现代文：数月之后，韩氏又梦见那卢氏来到家中，并对她说：你将死了！
English: A few months later, Han had another dream in which Naru came to her house and told her: "You're going to die!"

古文：韩氏惊寤，由是疾益加，岁余遂卒。
现代文：韩氏惊醒后，病情加重，年底就死了。
English: After Mr. Han woke up, his condition worsened and he died at the end of the year.

古文：侯生窃叹异，未尝告于人。
现代文：侯生暗自惊异，不曾告诉别人。
English: Hou Sheng was secretly surprised and did not tell anyone.

古文：后数年，旅游襄汉，途次富水。
现代文：数年之后，他到襄汉一带旅游，中途经过富春江。
English: A few years later, he traveled to the area around Yanghan, passing the Fuchun River on the way.

古文：郡僚兰陵萧某，慕生之善，以女妻之。
现代文：同僚兰陵县的萧某人，见侯生很善良，就把女儿许配给他作妻子。
English: A colleague of Xiao's in Lanling County, who saw that Hou Sheng was very kind, betrothed his daughter to him as his wife.

古文：及萧氏归，常衣绛袖碧襦，以金玉钗为首饰，而又身长丰丽，与韩氏先梦同。
现代文：侯生带萧氏回到了荆门。这位萧氏经常穿一件绿衣服，袖子却是深红色的，且身材颀长丰满，艳丽无比，也以金玉钗为首饰，与韩氏梦见的那位卢氏女相同。
English: Hou Sheng returned to Jingmen with Ms. Xiao, who often wore a green dress, but the sleeves were deep red, and her body was long, plump, and extremely beautiful. She was also adorned with gold and jade bracelets, just like the Lu woman in Han's dream.

古文：生固以韩氏之梦告焉。
现代文：侯生遂将韩氏的梦讲给她听。
English: Hou Sheng then told her about Han's dream.

古文：萧氏闻之，甚不乐，曰：妾外族卢氏。
现代文：萧氏听了，很不高兴，说：我外祖父姓卢。
English: Mr. Xiao was not happy to hear this and said, "My maternal grandfather's surname is Lu.

古文：妾自孩提时，为伯舅见念，命为己女，故以卢为小字。
现代文：从小，大舅喜欢我就让我做他的女儿，小名就叫卢。
English: From a young age, my uncle liked me to be his daughter, and my nickname was Lu.

古文：则君亡室之梦信矣。
现代文：您亡妻的梦得到了验证了呀！
English: Your late wife's dream has come true!

古文：袁继谦
现代文：袁继谦
English: Yuan Jichian

古文：殿中少监袁继谦，为兖州推官。
现代文：殿中少监袁继谦，做了兖州掌勘问刑狱的推官。
English: Yuan Jichian, a junior inspector in the palace, became the inspector of the prison in Zhangzhou.

古文：东邻即牢城都校吕君之第。
现代文：他的东邻即是牢城都校吕君的府第。
English: His eastern neighbor is the capital of the prison, Lujun's capital.

古文：吕以其第卑湫，命卒削子城下土以培之。
现代文：吕君以他家房子低洼为由，命士兵去挖内城墙下面的土来垫。
English: On the grounds that his family's house was low-lying, Lü ordered soldiers to dig up the soil beneath the inner city wall.

古文：削之既多，遂及城身，稍薄矣。
现代文：挖的越来越多，危及城身，墙也显得薄了许多。
English: More and more are being dug, endangering the city, and the walls are also much thinner.

古文：袁忽梦乘马，自子城东门楼上。
现代文：一日，袁继谦忽然梦见自己骑在马上，从城东的门楼往上登。
English: One day, Yuan Jichen suddenly dreamed that he was riding on a horse, climbing up from the gate tower in the east of the city.

古文：有人达意，请推官登楼。自称子城使也。
现代文：这时，有人招手，并请袁继谦登楼，自称是内城之使。
English: At this time, someone waved and invited Yuan Jichian to climb the building, claiming to be the envoy of the inner city.

古文：与袁揖让，乃谓袁曰：吕君修私第，而削子城之土，此极不可。
现代文：他与袁揖让一番后，对袁说：吕君修私人住宅，而令士兵挖城墙下的土，这是很不应该的！
English: After he and Yuan Shao gave way, he said to Yuan: "It is very improper for Lijun to build a private house and for soldiers to dig the soil under the city wall!

古文：推官盍言之乎？
现代文：你身为推官，怎么不去说说呢？
English: As a promoter, why don't you talk about it?

古文：袁曰：某虽忝宾僚，不相统摄。
现代文：袁继谦说：我虽然是个官，但却管不着他。
English: Yuan Jichen said: Although I am an official, I cannot control him.

古文：又曰：推官既不言，某自处置。
现代文：他又说：推官用不着说话，我自己也会处理好的。
English: He also said, "The magistrate doesn't need to speak, I can handle it myself."

古文：不一年，吕公被军寨中追之，有过禁系，久而停职。
现代文：不到一年，那位吕君被军方追究责任，先是检查，后来便被停职。
English: Less than a year later, that Lv Jun was held accountable by the military, first inspected and then suspended.

古文：其宅今属袁氏，张沅尝借居之。
现代文：他的那个府第现在归属袁继谦，张沆曾经借住过呢。
English: His house now belongs to Yuan Jichian, and Zhang Ye used to live there.

古文：邵元休
现代文：邵元休
English: Shao Yuanhui

古文：晋右司员外郎邵元休，尝说河阳进奏官潘某，为人忠信明达。
现代文：晋代有位右司员外郎叫邵元休，他曾经说河阳进奏官潘某，为人忠厚豁达守信义。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, there was a right secretary's brother-in-law named Shao Yuanxiu. He once said that Pan, the Kawayang envoy, was a loyal and open-minded person who kept faith.

古文：邵与之善，尝因从容话及幽冥，且惑其真伪。
现代文：邵元休与他往来甚密。
English: Shao Yuanxiu was in close contact with him.

古文：仍相要云：异日，吾两人有先物故者，当告以地下事，使生者无惑焉。
现代文：曾经在一起谈到阴间之事，都觉得惑然不解，难辨真假，于是便相约说：到了那一天，咱们两个人有先死的，一定要把地下的事情告诉活的那个人，使生者再不感到疑惑。
English: Once, when they were talking about the things of the underworld together, they both felt confused and puzzled, and it was difficult to distinguish between true and false, so they agreed to say: On that day, if we both die first, we must tell the living person about the underground things, so that the living person would no longer feel doubtful.

古文：后邵与潘别数岁。
现代文：后来，邵元休与潘分别数年。
English: Later, Shao Yuanhui and Pan were separated for several years.

古文：忽梦至一处，稍前进，见东序下，帟幙鲜华，乃延客之所。
现代文：一天，他忽然梦见自己来在一处，朝前没走多远，只见中堂两旁的东墙下，幕幔鲜艳奢华，乃是筵请客人的地方。
English: One day, he suddenly dreamed that he had come to a place. He did not go far ahead, only to see that under the east wall on both sides of the nave, the curtains were bright and luxurious, and it was a place to invite guests.

古文：有数客，潘亦与焉。
现代文：客人有好几位，潘某也在其中。
English: There were several guests, including Pan Mou.

古文：其间一人，若大僚，衣冠雄毅，居客之右。
现代文：中间有一个人，衣冠威凛，坐在客人们的右边，像个大官。
English: In the middle, there is a dignified man, sitting on the right side of the guests, like a dignitary.

古文：邵即前揖。
现代文：邵元休上前揖拜。
English: Shao Yuanhui prostrated himself in front of him.

古文：大僚延邵坐。
现代文：那大官请他落坐。
English: The official invited him to sit down.

古文：观见潘亦在下坐，颇有恭谨之色。
现代文：这时，邵元休看见潘某坐在下面，颇有恭谨之色。
English: At this time, Shao Yuanhui saw Pan sitting below, quite respectful.

古文：邵因启大僚，公旧识潘某耶。
现代文：邵元休禀告那大官，说潘某是他的老朋友。
English: Mr. Shao told the official that Mr. Pan was an old friend of his.

古文：大僚唯而已，斯须命茶。
现代文：那大官只是应了一声，便命人端茶。
English: The official only responded with a shout, and then ordered someone to serve tea.

古文：应声已在诸客之前，则不见有人送至者。
现代文：应声在客人面前，却不见有人端茶来。
English: In front of the guests, there was no one to serve tea.

古文：茶器甚伟。邵将啜之，潘即目邵，映身摇手，止邵勿啜。
现代文：那茶器很大，邵元休要去喝，潘某急忙给他递眼神，并掩起身子朝他摇手，示意他不要喝。
English: The teapot was very large, and Shao Yuanxiu wanted to drink from it. Pan Mou hurriedly gave him a look, and covered his body to shake hands with him, indicating that he should not drink from it.

古文：邵达其旨，乃止。
现代文：邵元休明白他的意思，便没有喝。
English: Shao Yuanxiu understood his meaning and did not drink.

古文：大僚复命酒，亦应声而至诸客之前，亦不见执器者。
现代文：那大官再次命令拿酒上来，也是应声来到各位客人面前，却不见有人倒酒。
English: The magistrate again ordered the wine to be brought up, and also came to the guests in response, but there was no one pouring wine.

古文：罇斝古样而伟。
现代文：那盛酒的樽斝古式古样，非常之大。
English: That bottle of wine is a very large old-fashioned cask.

古文：大僚揖客而饮。
现代文：那大官朝各位揖揖手，便饮下一樽。
English: The high-ranking official shakes hands with everyone in the morning and then drinks a barrel of sake.

古文：邵将饮之，潘复映身摇手而止之，邵亦不敢饮。
现代文：邵元休又要去喝，潘某再次掩其身摇手制止。邵元休便不敢喝。
English: Shao Yuanhui was going to drink again, but Pan once again covered his body and shook his hand to stop him. Shao Yuanhui did not dare to drink.

古文：大僚又食，即有大饼餤下于诸客之前，馨香酷烈。将食，潘又止邵。有顷，潘目邵，令去。
现代文：那大官又大吃起来，诸位客人面前也摆上了香味扑鼻、令人垂涎的大饼等食品。邵元休又要吃，潘某又制止。有顷，潘某给邵递眼神，让他走。
English: The high-ranking official began to eat again, and the guests were also presented with fragrant, mouth-watering cakes and other foods. Shao Yuanxiu wanted to eat again, and Pan Mou stopped him. Suddenly, Pan Mou gave Shao a look and let him go.

古文：邵即告辞。
现代文：邵元休立即告辞。
English: Shao Yuanhui immediately left.

古文：潘白大僚曰：某与邵故人，今欲送出。
现代文：潘某对大官说：我和他是老朋友，今天想送送他。
English: Pan said to the official: I am an old friend with him, and I want to see him off today.

古文：大僚颌而许之。
现代文：那大官颌首准许。
English: The magistrate allowed the dagger to be taken.

古文：二人俱出公署，因言及顷年相邀幽冥之事。邵即问曰：地下如何？
现代文：邵元休和潘某走出公署，因说到当年相约阴间之事，邵元休问潘某：地下怎么样呵？
English: Shao Yuanxiu and Pan walked out of the public office. As they were talking about that year's meeting in the underworld, Shao Yuanxiu asked Pan: What about the underground?

古文：潘曰：幽冥之事，固不可诬。大率如人世，但冥冥漠漠愁人耳。
现代文：潘某说：幽冥之事，固然不能妄言，实事求是地讲，跟人世间大体相同，不过只是空寂得令人惆愁而已。
English: Pan said: Of course, we can't talk about dark and gloomy things, but to be honest, it's pretty much the same as the human world, but it's so empty that it's depressing.

古文：言竟，邵辞而去。
现代文：说完，便辞别而去。
English: Having said this, he bade farewell and left.

古文：及寤，因访潘之存殁，始知潘已卒矣。
现代文：醒来之后，邵元休急忙去打听潘某的消息，方知他已死多日了。
English: After waking up, Shao Yuanhui hurried to inquire about Pan's news, only to find out that he had been dead for several days.

古文：周蔼
现代文：周蔼
English: Zhou Aili

古文：湘湖有大校周蔼者，居常与同门生姻好最厚。
现代文：湘湖有个任大校的周蔼，平时跟他的一个门生也是他的外甥女婿交情很深。
English: In Xianghu, there is a senior high school principal who is very affable and usually has a deep friendship with one of his protégés, who is also his nephew and son-in-law.

古文：每以时人不能理命，致不萧子争财纷诟，列于讼庭，慨此为鉴。
现代文：他看到世上不少人因为生前没有处理好身后之事，才使得死后不萧子孙为争夺遗产大起纠纷，甚至闹到公堂。
English: He saw that many people in the world, because they did not deal with the things behind them before they died, only caused their children and grandchildren to fight over the inheritance, and even went to court.

古文：乃相约曰：吾徒他年，勿遵其辙，倘有不讳，先须区分，俾其不露丑恶，胎责后人也。
现代文：周蔼就对那门生说：你将来可千万不要犯这个错误。倘若有不象话的，先要把财产分好，使他的丑恶难以显露，影响后人。
English: Zhou Ai said to the disciple, "You must not make this mistake in the future. If there is anyone who does not live up to the words, you must first divide the property well, so that his ugliness is difficult to reveal and affect future generations.

古文：他日，同门生奉职襄邸，一夕，周校梦见挥涕告诉曰：姨夫姨夫，某前言已乖，今为异物矣。
现代文：后来，同门生一起去襄阳官府供职。一天晚上，周蔼梦见门生挥泪对他说：姨夫姨夫，你前些日子说的话不幸言中，我现在已经死了。
English: Later, together with his protégé, he went to work at the government office in Xiangyang. One night, Zhou Ai dreamed that his protégé burst into tears and said to him, "Uncle, uncle, what you said a few days ago is unfortunately true, I am now dead."

古文：昨在通衢，急风所中，已至不救。
现代文：昨天在大街上，严重中风，以至不救而亡。
English: Yesterday, on the street, he suffered a severe stroke and died.

古文：但念家事，今且来归，略要处理。
现代文：但考虑到家里的事情，今天暂且回来处理一下。
English: But considering what's going on at home, I'll come back today to deal with it.

古文：周校忽然惊觉，通夕不寐。
现代文：周蔼忽然惊醒，彻夜未眠。
English: Zhou Aili suddenly woke up and did not sleep all night.

古文：迟明，抵其家说之，家人亦梦，不旬日凶问至矣。
现代文：第二天一早，他赶到门生家中一说，家人也说作了同样的梦。不到十天，噩耗传来。
English: Early the next morning, he rushed to his protégé's home and told him that his family had also had the same dream. Less than ten days later, the bad news came.

古文：自是传灵语，均财产，戒子辞妻，言善意勤，殆一月而去，不复再来。
现代文：自然是转达遗嘱，合理分配遗产，告诫其子女如何做人，劝其妻子改嫁他人等，话语是善良的，态度是恳切的。周蔼在他家忙了将近一个月，就不再来了。
English: Naturally, he conveyed his will, rationally distributed his inheritance, admonished his children on how to behave, and advised his wife to marry someone else. His words were kind and his attitude was earnest. Zhou Er was busy at his home for nearly a month, and then he stopped coming.

古文：郑起
现代文：郑起
English: Zheng Qi

古文：进士郑起谒荆州节度高从诲，馆于空宅。
现代文：进士郑起去拜见荆州节度使高从诲时，住在一间空屋子里。
English: When the novice Zheng Qi went to visit the Jingzhou Festival, he lived in an empty house.

古文：其夕，梦一人告诉曰：孔目官严光楚无礼。
现代文：当晚，梦见一个人对他说：当孔目官的严光楚太无礼了！
English: That night, he dreamt that someone said to him: "It's too impolite to be an ornithologist!

古文：意甚不平。
现代文：看样子他很气愤。
English: He looked angry.

古文：比夕又梦。起异其事，召严而说之。
现代文：第二天郑起又作了同样的梦，醒后很奇怪，就把孔目官严光楚找来，把梦中的事情告诉了他。
English: The next day, Zheng Qi had the same dream again. When he woke up, he felt very strange. He went to find the official and told him what had happened in the dream.

古文：严命巫祝祈谢，靡所不至，莫知其由。
现代文：严光楚就让巫师设坛祈祷，请神帮他弄清梦的原因。
English: Yan Guangchu let the sorcerer set up an altar to pray, asking God to help him figure out the reason for the dream.

古文：明年。郑生随计，严光楚爱其宅有少竹径，多方面致之。
现代文：然而怎么祈求梦中人也不出现，不知何故。第二年郑起随高从诲走了。严光楚一直喜欢郑起住的那个宅院，那里有青嫩的新竹夹成的小路，所以总想设法弄到手。
English: However, no matter how he prayed, the dreamer did not appear, for some reason. The next year, Zheng Qi followed Gao Zhenyu and left. Yan Guangchu always liked the house where Zheng Qi lived, where there was a path made of young new bamboo, so he always wanted to try to get hold of it.

古文：才迁居，不日以罪笞而停职，竟不知其故。
现代文：严光楚刚一搬进去，不久就因犯罪遭鞭打而停职，但还是不知道那个梦是什么意思。
English: Yan Guangchu just moved in and was soon suspended for being whipped for a crime, but he still doesn't know what that dream means.

古文：朱拯
现代文：朱拯
English: Zhu Zheng

古文：伪吴玉山主簿朱拯赴选，至扬州。
现代文：五代吴国玉山县的典簿官朱拯去朝廷应选，来在扬州。
English: Zhu Zheng, the bookkeeper of Yushan County in the fifth generation of the State of Wu, went to the imperial court for election and came to Yangzhou.

古文：梦入官署，堂上一紫衣正坐，旁一绿衣。
现代文：一日，他梦见自己来到一座官署，大堂上正中坐着一位穿紫衣服的人，旁边那人则穿着绿衣服。
English: One day, he dreamed that he came to a government office. In the middle of the lobby, there was a person wearing purple, and the person next to him was wearing green.

古文：紫衣起揖曰：君当以十千钱见与。
现代文：那紫衣人急忙站起身，向朱拯一揖道：你应当给我十千钱呵。
English: The man in purple quickly stood up and said to Zhu Zheng, "You should give me ten thousand yuan."

古文：拯拜许诺。
现代文：朱拯揖拜着答应下来。
English: Zhu Zhengbo bowed and agreed.

古文：遂寤。
现代文：他随即醒来。
English: He woke up immediately.

古文：顷之，补安福令。
现代文：不久，他被补任为安福县令。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the Anfu County magistrate.

古文：既至，谒城隍神。
现代文：第二天，他去拜谒城隍庙。
English: The next day, he went to pay homage to the Lushan Temple.

古文：庙宇神像，皆如梦中。
现代文：那庙宇和神像，全同梦中所见一样。
English: The temple and the images were just as I had seen them in my dream.

古文：其神座后屋漏梁坏。拯叹曰：十千岂非此耶？
现代文：这时，他发现神座后面的屋梁已朽并漏雨，不由叹道：十千钱也许就是干这个用的吧？
English: At this time, he found that the roof beam behind the throne was rotten and leaking rain, and could not help but sigh: Ten thousand money may be used for this purpose?

古文：即以私财葺之，费如数。
现代文：当即他自己掏钱将坏梁换了下来，费用正好是十千钱。
English: He immediately paid for the replacement of the broken beam himself, at a cost of exactly ten thousand yuan.

古文：韦建
现代文：韦建
English: Wei Jian

古文：江南戎帅韦建，自统军除武昌节度使。
现代文：江南军队之帅叫韦建。他由统军升任武昌节度使临行之前，梦见一个穿红衣服的人。
English: Wei Jian, the commander of the south of the Yangtze River, dreamed of a man dressed in red before he left for Wuchang.

古文：将行，梦一朱衣人，道从数十，来诣韦曰：闻公将镇鄂渚，仆所居在焉，栋宇颓毁，风雨不蔽，非公不能为仆修完也。韦许诺。
现代文：他来拜见韦建并说道：听说你要去镇守鄂州，那可是我住的地方呵。我的房屋已经颓毁，连风雨都遮不住，只有你才能为我修好了韦建应承下来。
English: He came to visit Wei Jian and said: I heard that you are going to the town of Ezhou, that's where I live. My house has been destroyed, even the wind and rain can't cover it, only you can fix it for me. Wei Jian should take over.

古文：及至镇访之，乃宋无忌庙。
现代文：他到任之后不久，便四处寻访，原来那是宋无忌的庙。
English: Soon after he took office, he searched everywhere, and it turned out to be the temple of Song Mugu.

古文：视其像，即梦中所见。
现代文：看他的像，果然和梦中见到的那人相同。
English: Looking at his likeness, he was indeed the same as the man he had seen in his dream.

古文：常梦一人，自称廉颇，谓己曰：可与屋东握地，取吾宝剑，当令汝富。
现代文：于是，韦建便将这庙修葺一新，不少人来祈福祝祷都特别灵验。郑就寿春有个屠夫叫郑就，家里很穷。他曾经梦见一个人，那人自称廉颇，对自己说道：你可以到房子东边去挖地，把我的宝剑取出来，就会使你富起来。
English: As a result, Wei Jian renovated the temple, and many people came to pray for blessings, and the prayers were particularly effective. Zheng Rongshuchun There was a butcher named Zheng Rong, whose family was very poor. He once dreamed of a man who claimed to be poor, and said to himself: You can go to the east side of the house to dig up the ground, take out my sword, and it will make you rich.

古文：然不得改旧业就如其言，果获之。
现代文：但是，你不能改行干别的。郑就醒来之后就去房子东边挖地，果然得到一把宝剑。
English: However, you can't change your profession to something else. Zheng woke up and went to the east side of the house to dig up the ground, and he got a sword.

古文：逾年遂富。
现代文：过了一年之后，他真的就富起来了。
English: A year later, he was really rich.

古文：后泄其事，于是失剑。
现代文：后来，他把这件事泄露了出去，宝剑便丢失了。
English: Later, he leaked the story and the sword was lost.

古文：梦游上
现代文：梦游上
English: Sleepwalking on

古文：樱桃青衣
现代文：樱桃青衣
English: Cherry blue cheese

古文：天宝初，有范阳卢子，在都应举，频年不第，渐窘迫。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝初年，范阳有位姓卢的人在长安参加科举考试，一连几年都未考中，渐入窘境。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xuanzong's reign, a man surnamed Lu from Fanyang went to Chang'an to take the imperial examination. He had not taken the exam for several years, and gradually fell into a dilemma.

古文：尝暮乘驴游行，见一精舍中，有僧开讲，听徒甚众。
现代文：某日傍晚，他骑着毛驴游荡，看见一座供和尚讲经说法的地方，有位和尚在讲经，听众甚多。
English: One evening, as he was riding his donkey, he saw a place where a monk was giving a sermon. A monk was giving a sermon to a large audience.

古文：卢子方诣讲筵，倦寝，梦至精舍门。
现代文：卢子刚要朝讲坛走去，一阵倦意袭来，便倚在大门口睡着了。
English: Just as Lu Zi was about to walk towards the pulpit, a wave of tiredness hit him, and he fell asleep leaning against the gate.

古文：见一青衣，携一篮樱桃在下坐。
现代文：他梦见一个穿青衣的青年女人，挎着一篮子樱桃坐在山坡下。
English: He dreamed of a young woman in a blue dress, sitting at the foot of a hill with a basket of cherries.

古文：卢子访其谁家，因与青衣同餐樱桃。
现代文：卢子上前询问她家住哪里，然后便同她一起吃樱桃。
English: Lu went up to her and asked her where she lived, and then ate cherries with her.

古文：青衣云：娘子姓卢，嫁崔家，今孀居在城。
现代文：青衣女人说：我姓卢，嫁给了崔家，丈夫去世之后便在城里孀居。
English: The woman in blue said, "My surname is Lu. I married into the Cui family, and after my husband passed away, I lived in the city.

古文：因访近属，即卢子再从姑也。
现代文：于是攀问近亲的家属，她竟是卢子的姑姑！
English: So he asked the family members of his close relatives, and she turned out to be Lu's aunt!

古文：青衣曰：岂有阿姑同在一都，郎君不往起居？
现代文：青衣女人说：岂有与姑姑同在一城，而不去家里看看的道理？
English: The woman in blue said, "Is there any reason why I should stay in town with my aunt instead of going to see her at home?"

古文：卢子便随之。过天津桥，入水南一坊，有一宅，门甚高大。
现代文：卢子便随她而行，过天津桥，入水南一坊有一个大宅院，门非常高大。
English: Lu Zi followed her, crossed the Tianjin Bridge, and entered a large mansion with a very tall door.

古文：卢子立于门下。青衣先入。
现代文：卢子站在门下，青衣女人先自走进去。
English: Lu Zi stood under the door. The woman in blue walked in first.

古文：少顷。有四人出门。与卢子相见。
现代文：少顷，一起走出四个人来，与卢子相见。
English: Suddenly, four people came out together to meet Lu Zi.

古文：皆姑之子也。一任户部郎中、一前任郑州司马、一任河南功曹、一任太常博士。
现代文：他们全是卢子姑姑的儿子：一个任户部郎中，一个前任郑州司马，一个任河南功曹，一个任太常博士。
English: They are all the sons of Lu Zi's aunt: one is appointed as the vice-minister of the household department, one is the former Zhengzhou Sima, one is appointed as the Henan Gong Cao, and one is appointed as the Tai Chang doctor.

古文：二人衣绯，二人衣绿，形貌甚美。
现代文：他们当中，两位穿着粉红色衣服，两位穿着绿色衣服，相貌都很英俊。
English: Two of them were dressed in pink and two in green, and they were very handsome.

古文：相见言叙，颇极欢畅。
现代文：见面之后，他们相互交谈，很是欢畅快乐。
English: After the meeting, they talked to each other and were very happy.

古文：斯须，引入此堂拜姑。
现代文：须臾，卢子被领着去北堂拜见姑姑。
English: So, Lu Zi was led to the North Hall to visit her aunt.

古文：姑衣紫衣，年可六十许。
现代文：姑姑穿着紫衣服，年纪大约六十岁左右，说起话来声音颇响亮。
English: My aunt was wearing a purple dress, was about sixty years old, and spoke in a loud voice.

古文：言词高朗，威严甚肃。卢子畏惧，莫敢仰视。
现代文：也显得很有威严。卢子有点畏惧，不敢抬头去看。
English: He also appeared very dignified. Lu Zi was a little afraid and did not dare to look up.

古文：令坐，悉访内外，备谙氏族。
现代文：姑姑让卢子坐下，问这问那，对家族中的事情了如指掌。
English: My aunt sat Lu Zi down and asked her questions, and she knew everything about the family.

古文：遂访儿婚姻未？卢子曰：未。
现代文：接着，她问卢子结婚没有，卢子说没有。
English: Next, she asked Lu Zi if she was married, and Lu Zi said no.

古文：姑曰：吾有一外甥女子姓郑，早孤，遗吾妹鞠养。
现代文：姑姑说：我有一个外甥女姓郑，很早就成了孤儿，我妹妹把她留在家中抚养。
English: The aunt said, "I have a niece named Zheng, who became an orphan very early, and my sister left her at home to raise her.

古文：甚有容质，颇有令淑。当为儿平章，计必允遂。
现代文：她不但有容貌，而且很贤淑，我想为你筹商一下，想必你会答应的。
English: Not only does she have the looks, but she is also very virtuous. I would like to negotiate for you, and I am sure you will agree.

古文：卢子遂即拜谢。
现代文：卢子当即跪下拜谢。
English: Lu Zi immediately knelt down to offer thanks.

古文：乃遣迎郑氏妹。
现代文：卢子就按照姑姑的安排行事，去迎接这位郑氏妹妹。
English: Lu Zi followed her aunt's arrangement and went to meet this Zheng sister.

古文：有顷，一家并到，车马甚盛。
现代文：有顷，她一家人全到了，来了不少车马，很是气派。
English: One day, her whole family arrived. There were a lot of cars and horses, which was very impressive.

古文：遂检历择日，云：后日大吉。因与卢子定议。
现代文：随即，开始选择良辰吉日，说是后天大吉，便与卢子商议并决定下来。
English: Immediately, he began to choose a good time and a good day, and said that it was the day after tomorrow, and then discussed with Lu Zi and decided to come down.

古文：姑云：聘财函信礼席，儿并莫忧，吾悉与处置。
现代文：姑姑说：聘礼请柬和礼席等，你不要担忧，我可以全部处理、安排。
English: My aunt said, "Don't worry, I can handle and arrange everything, including the invitations and the ceremonial seats.

古文：儿有在城何亲故，并抄名姓，并具家第。
现代文：你在城里有什么亲戚？请把他们的姓名抄下来，写明地址。
English: Do you have any relatives in town? Please write down their names and address.

古文：凡三十余家，并在台省及府县官。
现代文：结果，一共有三十多家，均在各级作官。
English: As a result, a total of more than thirty people, all of whom are officials at all levels, have left.

古文：明日下函，其夕成结，事事华盛，殆非人间。
现代文：第二天下通知，当天晚上举行婚礼，每一步都显得很豪华很讲究，非人间可比。
English: We were notified the next day, and the wedding was held that evening. Every step was very luxurious and exquisite, beyond comparison.

古文：明日拜席，大会都城亲表。
现代文：第二日，双方的亲戚前来拜席，大家相互介绍了一番。
English: On the second day, relatives from both sides came to pay their respects, and everyone introduced themselves to each other.

古文：拜席毕，遂入一院。院中屏帷床席，皆极珍异。
现代文：拜完席后，他们走进一个院子，院子里屏帷床席，全都很珍贵。
English: After the prayer, they went into a courtyard, where there were screens and couches, all very precious.

古文：其妻年可十四五，容色美丽，宛若神仙。卢生心不胜喜，遂忘家属。
现代文：卢子的妻子郑氏年纪十四五岁，姿色美丽，如同仙女，他喜不自禁，连家里人都忘在了脑后。
English: Lu Zi's wife, Zheng Shizhuang, was 14 or 15 years old, with a beautiful appearance, like a fairy. He couldn't help but be overjoyed. He even forgot about his family.

古文：俄又及秋试之时。姑曰：礼部侍郎与姑有亲，必合极力，更勿忧也。
现代文：不久，又到了秋试之时，姑姑对他说：现任礼部侍郎和我有亲戚，必然会鼎力相助，你更不用担忧。
English: Soon, when it was time for the autumn examination, his aunt said to him, "The current etiquette waiter and I are related, so he will surely help you, and you don't have to worry.

古文：明春遂擢第。
现代文：第二年春天，卢子终于中第。
English: In the spring of the following year, Lu Zi finally graduated from middle school.

古文：又应宏词，姑曰：吏部侍郎与儿子弟当家连官，情分偏洽，令渠为儿必取高第。
现代文：又参加宏词科的特科考试，姑姑说：吏部侍郎与你弟弟在一起作官，二人关系甚密，有他相助，你一定会取得好名次。
English: He also took part in the special subject examination of the macro lexical subject, and his aunt said: the clerk of the cadre and your brother are both officials, the two are very close, and with his help, you will definitely get a good rank.

古文：及榜出，又登甲科，授秘书郎。
现代文：发榜时，果然登甲科，被授予秘书郎。
English: When the list was published, he was indeed promoted to the armoury and was awarded the title of secretary.

古文：姑云：河南尹是姑堂外甥，令渠奏畿县尉。
现代文：姑姑说：河南尹是我的堂外甥，我让他为你奏荐京畿范围内的县尉。
English: My aunt said, "Henan Yin is my great-nephew. I asked him to recommend a county officer within Gyeonggi for you.

古文：数月，敕授王屋尉，迁监察，转殿中，拜吏部员外郎。
现代文：几个月之后，果然授卢子为王屋县尉。紧接着，他又升职为监察史，转到殿中侍御史，拜吏部员外郎。
English: A few months later, Lu Zi was indeed promoted to Wangya County Lieutenant. Immediately afterwards, he was promoted to Supervisor of History, transferred to the Palace Attendant of History, and became a member of the Internal Affairs Department.

古文：判南曹，铨毕，除郎中。
现代文：掌判选院结束后，出任郎中。
English: After the election of the presiding judge, he became a roju.

古文：余如故。
现代文：别的依然如故。
English: Everything else remains the same.

古文：知制诰数月，即真迁礼部侍郎。
现代文：他主持起草诏令几个月后，又升任礼部侍郎。
English: A few months after he presided over the drafting of the edict, he was promoted to the position of etiquette officer.

古文：两载知举，赏鉴平允，朝廷称之。
现代文：两年连续主持殿试，颇有眼力且取舍公平，朝廷上下都赞不绝口。
English: He presided over the palace trials for two years in a row. He was quite discerning and fair in his choices. The Imperial Court was full of praise for him.

古文：改河南尹旋属车驾还京，迁兵部侍郎。
现代文：不久，他改任河南尹，刚上任又奉旨还京，升任兵部侍郎。
English: Soon, he was reassigned to Henan Yin, and just after taking office, he returned to Beijing by order and was promoted to Hyobushiro.

古文：扈从到京，除京兆尹。改吏部侍郎。
现代文：随从护驾刚到京城，他出任京兆尹，后又改任吏部侍郎。
English: He had just arrived in the capital with his escort. He served as Jing Zhaoyun, and later he was appointed as a chamberlain of the cadre.

古文：三年掌铨。甚有美誉，遂拜黄门侍郎平章事。
现代文：在主持量才授官的三年中，声誉极佳，随即成为黄门侍郎平章事。
English: In the three years that he presided over the awarding of officials, his reputation was excellent, and he immediately became Huangmen waiter Ping Zhangji.

古文：恩渥绸缪，赏赐甚厚。
现代文：圣上对他赏赐甚厚，皇恩优渥，做了五年相国。
English: His Holiness rewarded him very generously, the Emperor's favor was great, and he became a son-in-law for five years.

古文：作相五年，因直谏忤旨，改左仆射，罢知政事。
现代文：后来因率直谏言有违圣意，改任左仆射，罢免相国之职。
English: Later, because of his outspoken criticisms, which were against the sacred will of the Emperor, he was transferred to the position of Zuo Shu, and removed from his position as consul.

古文：数月，为东都留守、河南尹，兼御史大夫。
现代文：又改任东都留守，河南尹兼御史大夫。
English: He was also transferred to the position of Dongdu Ruzhu, Henan Yin and Goshi Daifu.

古文：自婚媾后，至是经二十年，有七男三女，婚宦俱毕，内外诸孙十人。
现代文：从结婚到这时，已经过去二十年了。他有了七个儿子三个女儿，婚姻和宦途都很满意。现已有孙子孙女及外孙外孙女十个。
English: By this time, twenty years had passed since his marriage. He had seven sons and three daughters, and his marriage and career were very satisfying. He now has ten grandchildren and great-grandchildren.

古文：后因出行，却到昔年逢携樱桃青衣精舍门，复见其中有讲筵，遂下马礼谒。
现代文：一天，他离家出行，却无意中来到当年与那位携樱桃的青衣女子相遇的房舍前，又看见了里面的讲坛，遂下马行礼拜谒。
English: One day, when he was travelling away from home, he inadvertently came across the house where he had met the woman in blue with the cherry tree, saw the pulpit inside, and dismounted to pray.

古文：以故相之尊，处端揆居守之重，前后导从，颇极贵盛。高自简贵，辉映左右。
现代文：以其前相国的尊威，仍受到宰相的待遇，前呼后拥的，颇为隆重，如从前身居高位，深居简出一样。
English: With the dignity of his former partner country, he is still treated by the prime minister, who is calling him forward and embracing him, quite grandly, as if he had previously been in a high position and was out of the ordinary.

古文：升殿礼佛，忽然昏醉，良久不起。
现代文：卢子登上大殿，向佛祖下拜，忽然觉得一阵昏醉，好久都没有站立起来。
English: Lu Zi boarded the main hall, bowed to the Buddha, suddenly felt a wave of intoxication, and did not stand up for a long time.

古文：耳中闻讲僧唱云：檀越何久不起？
现代文：耳中听老和尚唱着问道：施主为何这么久不起来？
English: With the old monk singing in his ear, he asked, "Why is it taking so long for our benefactor to wake up?"

古文：忽然梦觉，乃见著白衫，服饰如故，前后官吏，一人亦无。
现代文：忽然一惊，从梦中醒来。这时，卢子发现自己仍穿着一件白布衫，服饰均无变化。身前身后的官吏们，一个也不见了。
English: Suddenly startled, Lu Zi woke up from his dream. At this time, Lu Zi found himself still wearing a white shirt, with no change in his clothing. The officials in front of him and behind him were all gone.

古文：回遑迷惑，徐徐出门，乃见小竖捉驴执帽在门外立，谓卢曰：人驴并饥，郎君何久不出？
现代文：他不由一阵迷惑惊惶，慢慢走出门来。此刻，只见仆人牵着毛驴拿着帽子站在门口，他对卢子抱怨地说：人和驴都已经饿了，你为何这么久也不出来？
English: He couldn't help but be confused and alarmed, and slowly walked out of the door. At that moment, he saw a servant standing at the door with a donkey and a hat. He complained to Lu Zi, "Both the man and the donkey are already hungry, why haven't you come out for so long?"

古文：卢访其时，奴曰：日向午矣。
现代文：卢子问现在是什么时候，仆人说道：已经快到中午了！
English: Lu Zi asked what time it was, and the servant said, "It's almost noon!"

古文：卢子罔然叹曰：人世荣华穷达，富贵贫贱，亦当然也，而今而后，不更求官达矣！遂寻仙访道，绝迹人世矣。
现代文：卢子茫然地叹了口气，说道：人世间的荣辱兴衰，高低贵贱，也应当顺其自然呵！从此以后，卢子不再追求功名利禄，周游天下，寻仙访道，与尘世绝缘了。
English: Lu Zi sighed in bewilderment and said, "The ups and downs of the human world, the highs and lows, should also follow their natural course! From now on, Lu Zi will no longer pursue fame and fortune, travel around the world, search for immortals, and isolate himself from the world.

古文：独孤遐叔
现代文：独孤遐叔
English: A lonely uncle

古文：贞元中，进士独孤遐叔，家于长安崇贤里，新娶白氏女。
现代文：唐德宗贞元年间，进士独孤遐叔家住在长安城崇贤里。
English: During the reign of Emperor Dezong of the Tang Dynasty in the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of the Tang Dynasty, his uncle's family lived in Chongxian Village, Chang'an City.

古文：家贫下第，将游剑南。与其妻诀曰：迟可周岁归矣。
现代文：他刚娶白氏女为妻，由于度日艰难，应举落第，他想去剑南一带散散心，与妻子告别说最迟一年后回来。
English: He had just married a Bai's daughter. Due to the hard life, he had to make a choice. He wanted to go to the Jianan area to relax and say goodbye to his wife and come back at the latest one year later.

古文：遐叔至蜀，羁栖不偶，逾二年乃归。
现代文：遐叔到了四川由于找故旧不遇，过两年才归来。
English: Uncle Zou did not return to Sichuan until two years later, because he was unable to find his way back.

古文：至鄠县西，去城尚百里，归心迫速，取是夕及家。
现代文：他走到鄠县西，离长安城还有百里多路的时候，归心更加迫切，想于当天晚上到家。
English: When he walked to the west of Lixian County, more than a hundred miles away from Chang'an City, he was more anxious to return to his heart and wanted to get home that evening.

古文：趋斜径疾行。
现代文：于是，他沿近路快速行进，人和驴都累得不行了。
English: So he made his way quickly along the short cut, and both the man and the donkey were exhausted.

古文：人畜既殆，至金光门五六里，天已暝。绝无逆旅。唯路隅有佛堂，遐叔止焉。
现代文：到离金光门还有五六里地的时候，天已经黑下来，又没有旅店，只见路边有一座佛堂，遐叔停了下来。
English: When there were still five or six miles to go from the Golden Gate, it was already dark, there were no hotels, and I saw a Buddhist temple on the side of the road. Uncle Yao stopped.

古文：时近清明，月色如昼。
现代文：当时已经快到清明了，月色很亮，如同白昼。
English: At that time, it was almost clear, and the moon was very bright, like the daytime.

古文：系驴子庭外，入空堂中。
现代文：他把驴系在庭外树上，只身走进佛堂。
English: He tied his donkey to a tree outside the court and walked into the Buddhist temple alone.

古文：有桃杏十余株。
现代文：这里，有桃树和杏树十多棵。
English: Here, there are more than ten peach and almond trees.

古文：夜深，施衾帱于西窗下，偃卧。
现代文：夜已经很深了，佛堂施给他被子和帐子，他便来到西窗下一卧。
English: It was already very late at night. The Buddhist temple gave him a quilt and a curtain, and he came to the west window to lie down.

古文：方思明晨到家，因吟旧诗曰：近家心转切，不敢问来人。至夜分不寐。
现代文：想到自己明天早晨就可以回到家中，他不由吟了一首旧诗：近家心转切，不敢问来人到半夜时分也没有入睡。
English: Thinking that he would be able to return home tomorrow morning, he couldn't help but recite an old poem: "I'm so close to home that I don't dare to ask anyone why I didn't fall asleep until midnight."

古文：忽闻墙外有十余人相呼声，若里胥田叟。将有供待迎接。
现代文：忽然听到墙外有十多个人的相互招呼声，象是街道的小吏和种田的老汉，仿佛要迎接和招待什么人。
English: Suddenly, I heard more than a dozen people outside the wall greeting each other, like street clerks and farmers, as if they wanted to greet and invite someone.

古文：须臾，有夫役数人，各持畚锸箕帚，于庭中粪除讫，复去。
现代文：一会儿，有好几个夫役，有的拿畚箕，有的拿扫帚，还有的拿着掘土的锸，把庭中的粪土除完，然后离去。
English: After a while, several servants, some with shovels, some with brooms, and others with shovels, remove the manure in the yard and then leave.

古文：有顷，又持床席牙盘蜡炬之类，及酒具乐器，阗咽而至。
现代文：有顷，他们又拿来床席、蜡烛、杯盘、酒具和乐器等，吹吹打打而来。
English: At one point, they also brought bedsteads, candles, cups and plates, wine utensils and musical instruments, and began to play.

古文：遐叔意谓贵族赏会，深虑为其斥逐。乃潜伏屏气，于佛堂梁上伺之。
现代文：遐叔还以为这是贵族或有钱人搞什么聚会，担心自己会遭到驱赶，便屏住呼吸藏到佛堂的梁上，偷偷地观察动静。
English: Uncle Zou also thought that this was some kind of gathering of aristocrats or rich people. Fearing that he would be driven away, he held his breath and hid on the beam of the Buddhist hall, secretly observing the movement.

古文：铺陈既毕，复有公子女郎共十数辈，青衣、黄头亦十数人，步月徐来，言笑宴宴。
现代文：那些夫役们布置完毕，又有十几个公子小姐和十几个丫环仆人，踏着月色徐徐而来。他们一一在筵席上就坐，一边谈笑一边吃喝，唱歌献舞，纵欢作乐。
English: After the servants had been set up, more than a dozen young men and women and more than a dozen maidservants arrived in the moonlight. They all sat down at the banquet, ate and drank while chatting, sang and danced, and had fun.

古文：窥之大惊。既下屋袱，稍于暗处，迫而察焉。
现代文：在那些女子当中，有一个相貌风韵均酷似遐叔之妻，她忧伤憔悴，闷闷不乐地坐在角落里。遐叔一看不由吃了一惊，当即从梁上滑下来，悄悄来到近处观察。
English: Among those women, there was one whose appearance and demeanor were all very similar to that of Uncle Zou's wife. She was sad and sullen, sitting in the corner. Uncle Zou was taken aback and immediately slid down from the beam and quietly came close to observe.

古文：乃真是妻也。
现代文：不错，果然是他的妻子！
English: That's right, it was his wife!

古文：方见一少年，举杯瞩之曰：一人向隅，满坐不乐。
现代文：这时，只见一个少年举杯走到他妻子面前，说道：瞧，你一个坐在墙角，弄得大家都不快乐。
English: Just then, a young man walked up to his wife, raised his glass, and said, "Look, you're sitting in the corner all by yourself, and you're making everyone unhappy.

古文：小人窃不自量，愿闻金玉之声。
现代文：小人不自量，想听你唱支歌，如何？
English: Little people don't think too much of themselves. They want to hear you sing a song. How about that?

古文：其妻冤抑悲愁，若无所控诉，而强置于坐也。遂举金爵，收泣而歌曰：今夕何夕，存耶没耶？
现代文：遐叔的妻子冤抑悲愁，但又不敢倾诉，只好强颜欢笑，举起酒杯，收泣而唱道：今兮何兮？存耶没耶？
English: Uncle Zou's wife unjustly suppressed her grief, but she did not dare to talk about it. She had to put on a happy face, raise a glass of wine, weep and sing: What is it now? Is there anything left?

古文：良人去兮天之涯，园树伤心兮三见花。
现代文：良人去兮天之涯！园树伤心兮三见花满座倾听，悄然无声。
English: The garden trees are sad, the flowers are in full bloom, and everyone is listening quietly.

古文：满座倾听，诸女郎转面挥涕。
现代文：听罢她的歌，不少女人都转脸抽泣起来。
English: After listening to her song, many women turned around and sobbed.

古文：一人曰：良人非远，何天涯之谓乎！
现代文：一个人说道：你的丈夫离这不远，为什么要说他去了天之涯呢？
English: One man said, "Your husband is not far from here, so why do you say he has gone to the ends of the earth?"

古文：少年相顾大笑。
现代文：那少年瞅了遐叔妻子一眼，哈哈大笑。
English: The boy took one look at his uncle's wife and burst out laughing.

古文：遐叔惊愤久之，计无所出。乃就阶陛间，扪一大砖，向座飞击。
现代文：遐叔怒不可遏，又无计可施，就在台阶上抓起一块砖头向他猛地砸去。
English: Unable to contain his anger and with nothing else to do, Uncle Zou grabbed a brick from the steps and hurled it at him.

古文：砖才至地，悄然一无所有。
现代文：砖头落地处，竟然什么也没有！
English: Where the bricks landed, there was nothing at all!

古文：遐叔怅然悲惋，谓其妻死矣，速驾而归。
现代文：他惊醒之后，不由一阵怅然悲惋，心想，妻子已必死无疑了。
English: After he woke up, he couldn't help but feel a pang of sadness, thinking that his wife had undoubtedly died.

古文：前望其家，步步凄咽。
现代文：他急忙往回赶，远远望着自己家，他更是悲从中来。
English: He hurried back, looking far away at his home, which made him even sadder.

古文：比平明，至其所居，使苍头先入。
现代文：天亮的时候，遐叔终于来到门前。
English: At dawn, Uncle Zou finally came to the door.

古文：家人并无恙，遐叔乃惊愕，疾走入门。
现代文：他让仆人先进屋看看，说家里人一切都好，遐叔惊愕地冲进门去！
English: He let the servant go to the front of the house to have a look, and said that everything was fine with the family. Uncle Yao rushed to the door in surprise!

古文：青衣报娘子梦魇方寤。
现代文：丫环说，娘子梦魇刚刚醒来。
English: The maidservant said, My daughter Nightmare has just woken up.

古文：遐叔至寝，妻卧犹未兴。良久乃曰：向梦与姑妹之党，相与玩月。出金光门外，向一野寺，忽为凶暴者数十辈，胁与杂坐饮酒。又说梦中聚会言语，与遐叔所见并同。
现代文：遐叔闯进卧室，妻子半躺着，仿佛尚未醒来，好长时间才说道：方才，我梦见和小姑等去赏月，出金光门外来到一座野寺，忽然被几十个暴徒胁迫，陪他们饮酒作乐她在梦中看到的那些事听到的那些话，与遐叔所见所闻完全一样。
English: Uncle Yao broke into the bedroom, his wife was half-lying down, as if she had not yet woken up, and it took her a long time to say: Just now, I dreamed that I and my younger sister went to watch the moon, went out of the Golden Gate to a field temple, and were suddenly coerced by dozens of thugs, drinking and having fun with them. The things she saw in her dream and the words she heard were exactly the same as what Uncle Yao had seen and heard.

古文：又云：方饮次，忽见大砖飞坠，因遂惊魇殆绝。才寤而君至，岂幽愤之所感耶！
现代文：她又说：正饮酒时忽见砖头飞来，猛地惊醒时你就回来了，难道说我的幽愤把你感动了吗？
English: She also said: "I was drinking when I suddenly saw the bricks flying, and when I suddenly woke up, you came back. Did my anger move you?

