古文：太原孝廉李廷光陆康成薛严任自信段文昌刘逸淮孙咸僧智灯王氏左营伍伯宋衎陈昭
现代文：太原孝廉李廷光陆康成薛严任自信段文昌刘逸淮孙咸僧智灯王氏左营伍伯宋衎陈昭
English: Taiyuan Xiaolian Li Ting Guanglu Kangcheng Xue Yan Ren Confident Duan Wenchang Liu Yihai Sun Han monk Zhiguang Wang clan Zuoying Wu Bo Songlu Chen Zhao

古文：太原孝廉
现代文：太原孝廉
English: Taihara Takamori

古文：唐大历中，太原偷马贼诬一孝廉同情，拷掠旬日，苦极强服。
现代文：唐代大历年间，太原盗马贼诬蔑孝廉和他们是同伙，孝廉被拷打了十天。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Taiyuan horse thieves slandered Xiao Lian as their accomplice. Xiao Lian was tortured for ten days.

古文：推吏疑其冤，未具狱。
现代文：因熬不过刑讯的痛苦而屈打成招，但是审案的官员疑心他是冤枉的，没给他戴刑具。
English: Because he could not stand the pain of the interrogation, he succumbed to the torture, but the officials in charge of the case suspected that he was innocent and did not give him the torture equipment.

古文：其人唯念金刚经，其声哀切，昼夜不绝。
现代文：这个人只一心念金刚经，他的声音哀切，昼夜不停。
English: This man just chanted the Diamond Sutra, his voice mournful, day and night.

古文：一日，有竹两节坠狱中，转止其前，他囚争取之。
现代文：一天，有两节竹子落在狱中，转动着止在这位孝廉前面，其他囚犯争着去拿。
English: One day, two pieces of bamboo landed in the prison, spinning and stopping in front of the filial son, and other prisoners scrambled to pick them up.

古文：狱卒意藏刃，破视，内有字两行云： 法尚应舍，何况非法。 
现代文：狱卒怕里边藏着兵刃，破开看，内有两行字是： 犯法的尚且饶恕，何况他并没犯法。 
English: The jailer was afraid that there was a sword hidden inside, and when he opened it, he saw two lines of words: "The offender is still forgiven, and he did not break the law."

古文：书迹甚工，贼首悲悔，具承以旧嫌之故诬之地。
现代文：字写得很工整。贼首悲痛后悔，全都承认因以前跟他有嫌隙的缘故而诬陷他。
English: The letter was neatly written. The ringleaders, full of sorrow and regret, all admitted that they had framed him because they had a grudge against him.

古文：李廷光
现代文：李廷光
English: Li Tingguang

古文：唐李廷光者，为德州司马，敬佛，不茹荤血。
现代文：唐代李廷光，做德州司马。敬信佛教，不吃荤，常常念金刚经。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Li Tingguang was the Texas Sima. He was a devout believer in Buddhism, did not eat quail, and often recited the Diamond Sutra.

古文：常持金刚经，每念经时，即有圆光在前。用心苦至，则光渐大；少怀懈惰，则光渐小暗。
现代文：每当念经的时候，就有一个圆光在前面，专心致志，光就越来越大，稍有懈怠，光就暗而小。
English: Whenever chanting, there is a round light in front of you. If you concentrate, the light will become bigger and bigger. If you slack off, the light will become dim and small.

古文：因此砥励，转加精进。
现代文：因此更加勉励自己，越发努力念经。
English: Therefore, you should encourage yourself more and make more efforts to recite the sutras.

古文：陆康成
现代文：陆康成
English: Lu Kangcheng

古文：唐陆康成尝任京兆府法曹掾，不避强御。
现代文：唐朝陆康成曾任京兆府的法曹椽，就是达官显贵犯了法他也秉公处置。
English: Lu Kangcheng of the Tang Dynasty once served as the legal officer of Jingzhao Prefecture. Even when high-ranking officials violated the law, he dealt with them fairly.

古文：公退，忽见亡故吏抱案数百纸请押，问曰： 公已去世，何得来？ 
现代文：有一天，陆公回家，忽然看见已死亡的下属拿着几百张案卷请他签押。问道： 你已经去世了，为什么能到这里来？ 
English: One day, Lu Gong came home and suddenly saw his dead subordinate holding hundreds of case files for him to sign. He asked: You have passed away, why can you come here?

古文：曰： 此幽府文簿。 
现代文：说： 这是阴曹的文簿。 
English: He said, "This is an evil book.

古文：康成视之，但有人姓名，略无他事。
现代文：康成一看，只见有人的姓名，没有记载其他的事。
English: At first glance, Kangcheng only saw someone's name, and did not record anything else.

古文：吏曰： 皆来年兵刃死者。 
现代文：官吏说： 都是在来年死于兵灾的。 
English: The official said, "They all died in a military disaster the following year."

古文：问曰： 得无我乎，有则检示。 吏曰： 有。 
现代文：陆公问： 难道有我吗？有就拿出来给我看。 官吏说： 有。 
English: Lukong asked, "Do I really exist? If so, please show me." The official said, "Yes."

古文：因大骇曰： 君既旧吏，得无情耶！ 
现代文：于是陆公大惊说： 你既然过去是我的老部下，难道不顾私情吗？ 
English: So Lu Gong was shocked and said: Since you used to be my old subordinate, don't you care about your private feelings?

古文：曰： 故我来启明公耳，唯金刚经可托。 
现代文：回答说： 所以我来禀告你了，只有金刚经可以依托。 
English: He replied, "That's why I've come to denounce you. Only the Diamond Sutra can be relied on."

古文：即允之，乃遂读金刚经，日数十遍。
现代文：就答应了他。于是陆公就读金刚经，每天读几十遍。
English: So Lu Gong studied the Diamond Sutra, reading it dozens of times a day.

古文：明年，朱衎果反，署为御史，康成叱泚曰： 贼臣敢干国士！ 
现代文：第二年，朱泚果然谋反，命陆公做御史，康成叱责朱泚说： 贼臣竟敢污辱国士？ 
English: In the second year, Zhu Xi did indeed plot a rebellion, and ordered Lu Gong to act as imperial historian. Kangcheng scolded Zhu Xi, saying, "How dare a treacherous vassal insult a statesman?

古文：泚震怒，命数百骑环而射之。
现代文：朱泚震怒，命几百骑兵围了陆公，用箭射他。
English: Zhu Rong was furious and ordered several hundred horsemen to surround Lu Gong and shoot him with arrows.

古文：康成默念金刚经，矢无伤者。
现代文：康成就默念金刚经，结果，箭都没有伤着他。
English: Kang was able to recite the Diamond Sutra silently, and as a result, the arrows did not hurt him.

古文：泚曰： 儒以忠信为甲胄，信矣。 
现代文：朱泚说： 儒者以忠信做为自己的甲胄，确实呀。 
English: Zhu Xi said: It is true that Confucians use loyalty as their armor.

古文：乃舍去。康成遂入隐于终南山，竟不复仕。
现代文：于是放他走了，康成于是隐居于南山，竟然不再出来做官。
English: So they let him go, and Kangcheng then went into seclusion in Nanshan, to the point that he no longer came out to work as an official.

古文：薛严
现代文：薛严
English: Xue Yan

古文：唐薛严，忠州司马，蔬食长斋，日念金刚经三十遍。
现代文：唐朝的薛严，做忠州司马，长期吃素食，每天念金刚经三十遍。
English: Xue Yan of the Tang Dynasty, who was the Sima of Chungju, ate vegetarian food for a long time and recited the Diamond Sutra thirty times a day.

古文：至七十二将终，见幢盖音乐来迎。
现代文：到七十二岁将要死时，看见有伞盖音乐来迎接他。
English: When he was about to die at the age of seventy-two, he saw umbrella music coming to meet him.

古文：其妻崔氏，即御史安俨之姑也，属纩次，见严随幢盖冉冉升天而去，呼之不顾，一家皆闻有异香之气。
现代文：他的妻子崔氏，就是御史安俨的姑母。薛严临死的时候，她看见薛严在伞盖的遮护下冉冉升天而去，喊他也不回头，一家人都闻到有特殊的香气。
English: When Xue Yan was about to die, his wife, Cui's aunt, who was also the aunt of Mi Shi Antao, saw Xue Yan rise into the sky under the cover of an umbrella. When she called out to him, he did not turn back. The whole family smelled a special fragrance.

古文：任自信
现代文：任自信
English: Ren Zhengyi

古文：任自信，嘉州人，唐贞元十五年，曾往湖南，常持金刚经，洁白无点。
现代文：任自信，是嘉州人，唐贞元十五年，曾前往湖南，常常念金刚经，洁白而没有污点。
English: Ren confided that he was a native of Jiazhou, 15 years old in Tang Zhenyuan, had traveled to Hunan, often recited the Diamond Sutra, and was clean and white without any blemish.

古文：于洞庭湖中，有异物如云冒舟上，俄顷而散，舟中遂失自信，不知所在。
现代文：在洞庭湖上，有一个奇异的东西像云一样冒出到了船上，不一会就散了，舟上就消失了他，不知他到哪里去了。
English: On Lake Dongting, a strange cloud-like object floated up to the boat. It soon dissipated, and he disappeared from the boat. I don't know where he went.

古文：久之，乃凌波而出。
现代文：很久，才从水中出来。
English: It took me a long time to get out of the water.

古文：云至龙宫，谒龙王，四五人命升殿念金刚经，与珠宝数十事。
现代文：说他到了龙宫，拜见龙王，四五个人命他进殿念金刚经，给他几十件珠宝。
English: He said that he went to the Dragon Palace, met the Dragon King, killed four or five people, went into the temple to recite the Diamond Sutra, and gave him dozens of pieces of jewelry.

古文：二僧相送出宫，一僧凭附少信，至衡岳观音台绍真师付之，云是汝和尚送来，令转金刚经。
现代文：二个和尚送他出宫，一个让他带信，到衡岳观音台绍真师那里，说是你和尚送来的。并让他念金刚经。
English: Two monks escorted him out of the palace, and one asked him to take a letter with him to Hengyue Guanyintai to Shoshen, saying that it was you who sent it, and asked him to recite the Diamond Sutra.

古文：至南岳访僧，果见，云和尚灭度已五六年矣。
现代文：到了南岳访问一下高僧，果然看见，并说那个和尚已经去世五六年了。
English: When I went to Nanyue to visit a high priest, I saw him, and he said that the monk had been dead for five or six years.

古文：段文昌
现代文：段文昌
English: Duan Wenchang

古文：唐贞元十七年，段文昌自蕲入蜀，应南康王韦皋辟命。
现代文：唐朝贞元十七年。段文昌从蕲入蜀，接受南康王韦皋的命令。
English: In the 17th year of the Zhengyuan of the Tang Dynasty, Duan Wenchang entered Shu from Shao and received the order from the king of Nankang, Wei Wei.

古文：韦寻卒，贼辟知留后，文昌旧与辟不合，闻之连夜离县。
现代文：等到韦皋晚年的时候，被贼人辟进谗言构陷，就派他管理灵池县。韦皋不久就去世了。
English: When Wei Yao was in his later years, he was tricked by a thief and sent to administer Lingchi County. Wei Yao died soon after.

古文：至城东门，辟寻有帖，不令诸县官离县，其夕阴风，及返，出郭二里，见火两炬夹道，百步为导。
现代文：贼辟知道他留下后人，因文昌过去与辟不合，听到之后就连夜逃离县城，到了城的东门，贼辟有书信命令，不准各位县官离开县城。那天晚上阴风四起，等到返回，走出外城二里远看见两支火炬夹道，百步内为导引。
English: The thief knew that he was leaving a descendant, because Wenchang had disagreed with him in the past. After hearing this, he fled the county overnight. When he reached the east gate of the city, the thief had a written order not to allow the county officials to leave the county. That evening, the wind was blowing, and when he returned, he saw two torches at a distance of two miles from the outer city, within a hundred steps as a guide.

古文：初意县吏迎候，怪其不前，高下远近不差，欲及县郭方灭。及问县吏，尚未知府帖也。
现代文：起初认为是县吏迎候，责怪他们不前去迎接。高低远近不齐，要到县城时才灭，等问县吏，还不知道有府帖。
English: At first, they thought that the county officials were waiting for them, and blamed them for not going to meet them. The highs and lows were far and near, and they would not die until they reached the county seat. When they asked the county officials, they did not know that there was a prefectural post.

古文：时文昌念金刚经已五六年，数无虚日，信乎志诚必感，有感必应。
现代文：当时文昌念金刚经已五六年了，从没有虚度的日子。确信忠心守志一定感化，有感化就一定有报应。
English: At that time, Wenchang had been reciting the Diamond Sutra for five or six years, and there was never a day of idleness. I was convinced that loyalty and determination would definitely be influenced, and if there was influence, there would definitely be retribution.

古文：向之道左右，乃经所著迹也。
现代文：先前走过的道路的左右，都是经书所保祐的结果。
English: The road previously traveled is the result of the protection of the scriptures.

古文：后辟逆节渐露，诏以袁滋为节度使。
现代文：以后辟的叛逆行为逐渐败露，下诏以袁滋为节度使。
English: Subsequent acts of rebellion gradually came to light, and Yuan Zi was appointed as the regent.

古文：文昌从弟少从军，知左营事，惧及祸，与监军定计，以蜡丸帛书通谋于袁。
现代文：文昌的堂弟年少从军，知道要坏事，害怕被牵连，就和监军定计，用蜡丸在布帛上将此事密告于袁。
English: Wenchang's cousin, who was a young soldier, knew that he wanted to do something bad and was afraid of being implicated, so he made a plan with the supervisor and used a wax ball on a cloth to inform Yuan about the matter.

古文：事旋发，悉为鱼肉，贼谓文昌知其谋于一时。
现代文：事情接着就暴露了，结果都被抓获。贼辟认为文昌知道他们的计谋。
English: The matter was then exposed and they were all arrested. The thieves thought that Wenchang knew about their plot.

古文：文昌念经夜久，不觉困寐，门户悉闭。
现代文：文昌念经夜久，不觉困乏而睡。
English: Wenchang meditated for a long time at night and fell asleep without feeling tired.

古文：忽闻开户而入言 不畏 者再三，若物投案，暴然有声。
现代文：门窗关好，忽然听到开门而进来再三说不怕的，好像有东西投到桌案上，叭叭有声音。
English: The doors and windows were closed. Suddenly, I heard the door open and a man come in and say repeatedly that he was not afraid. It was as if something had been thrown onto the desk, and there was a sound from the horn.

古文：惊起之际，音尤在耳，顾视左右，吏仆皆睡。俾烛桦四索，初无所见，向之门扃，已开辟矣。
现代文：当他惊起之际，声音就在耳边。看左右的人，官吏、仆人都在睡觉，拿着火四下寻找，起初什么也没看见，走向门口，门已开了。
English: When he awoke, the sound was in his ears. He looked around at the sleeping people, officials, and servants. He searched everywhere with a fire. At first, he saw nothing. He went to the door, and the door was open.

古文：文昌受持此经十余万遍，征应孔著。
现代文：文昌受到读这个经书十多万遍的恩惠。
English: Wenchang has been blessed to read this scripture more than one hundred thousand times.

古文：刘逸淮
现代文：刘逸淮
English: Liu Yihai

古文：唐刘逸淮在汴时，韩弘为右厢虞侯，王某为左厢虞侯。
现代文：唐朝刘逸淮在汴京时，韩弘为右厢虞侯，王某为左厢虞侯。
English: When Liu Yihai was in Beijing during the Tang Dynasty, Han Hong was the right-hand governor and Wang Mou was the left-hand governor.

古文：与弘相善。
现代文：和韩弘很好。
English: I get along very well with Hanhiro.

古文：或谓二人取军情，将不利于刘。
现代文：有的人告诉刘说他二人窃取军情，将对刘不利。
English: Some people told Liu that the two of them had stolen military information, which would be unfavorable to Liu.

古文：刘大怒，召俱诘之。
现代文：刘便大怒，召集来责备他俩。
English: Liu then flew into a rage and called them together to reprimand them.

古文：弘即刘之甥，因控地叩首大言，刘意稍解。
现代文：弘是刘的外甥，于是跪在地上磕头说尽好话，刘的怒气稍平。
English: Hong is Liu's nephew, so he kneeled on the ground and bowed his head and said all the right words, which calmed Liu's anger a little.

古文：王某年老股战，不能自辩，刘叱令拉坐，仗三十。
现代文：王某年老大腿发抖，不能自己申辩。刘叱责并令拉他在地，打三十棒。
English: Wang's old thighs trembled and he could not defend himself. Liu reprimanded him and ordered him to be pulled to the ground and beaten with 30 rods.

古文：时新造赤棒，头径数寸，固以筋漆，立之不仆，数五六当死矣。
现代文：当时新制的红棒，棒头直径几寸，用筋漆固定的，立在地上不倒，打了五六棒就应当死了。
English: At that time, the newly-made red rod, the rod head a few inches in diameter, fixed with sinew paint, stood on the ground and did not fall down. If you hit it five or six times, you should die.

古文：韩意其必死，及昏，造其家，怪无哭声。
现代文：韩弘认为他一定会死。等到他昏死过去，抬到他的家中。
English: Han Hong thought he would surely die. When he passed out, he was carried to his home.

古文：又谓其不敢哭，访兵门卒，即云： 大使无恙。 
现代文：对他家没有哭声而感到奇怪，又认为他们不敢哭。询问门口的把守人员，都说： 大使安全无恙。 
English: Surprised that there was no crying in his house, and thinking that they did not dare to cry, they asked the guards at the gate and they all said, "The ambassador is safe and sound."

古文：弘素与熟，遂至卧内，问之，云： 我读金刚经四十年矣，今方得力。
现代文：韩弘一向和他家熟悉，就一直到了他的卧室内。问他，王某说： 我读金刚经四十年了，现在才得到了帮助。
English: Han Hong has always been familiar with his family, all the way to his bedroom. When asked, Wang said: I have been reading the Diamond Sutra for forty years, and only now have I received help.

古文：记初被坐时，见巨手如箕。翕然遮背。 
现代文：记得当初被拉在地上时，看见巨大的手像簸箕一样张开遮住脊背。
English: I remember when I was pulled to the ground, I saw a huge hand covering my back like a cocoon.

古文：因袒示韩，都无挞痕。
现代文：并露出前胸给韩弘看。都没有打伤的痕迹。
English: He exposed his chest for Han Hong to see. There were no signs of injury.

古文：韩旧不好释氏，由此始与僧往来，日自写十纸。
现代文：韩过去不好读佛经，从此才和和尚往来，每天自己写十页。
English: In the past, Han was not good at reading Buddhist scriptures. Since then, he has been in contact with a monk and writes ten pages every day.

古文：及贵，计数百轴矣。
现代文：等到他显贵时，计算已写了几百卷了。
English: By the time he came to prominence, hundreds of volumes of calculations had been written.

古文：后在中书，盛暑，有谏官因事见谒，韩方洽汗写经，谏官怪问之，韩乃具道王某事。
现代文：以后韩在房中写书，正赶上盛夏，有一个谏官因事来拜见韩，看见韩正大汗淋漓地写经书。谏官奇怪并问他。韩就把王某的事全部告诉了他。
English: Later, Han was writing a book in his room, just in time for midsummer. A eunuch came to visit Han for some reason, and saw that Han was sweating profusely as he wrote the book. The eunuch was surprised and asked him. Han told him everything about Wang.

古文：孙咸
现代文：孙咸
English: Son Ham

古文：唐梁崇义在襄州，未阻兵时，有小将孙咸暴卒，信宿却苏。
现代文：唐朝梁崇义在襄州，并未被兵事所阻时。有个小将孙咸突然死了，过了一宿却苏醒过来。
English: When Liang Chongyi of the Tang Dynasty was in Xiangzhou and was not hindered by military affairs, there was a young general, Sun Xian, who died suddenly, but he woke up after one night.

古文：言至一处如王者所居，仪卫甚严，有吏引一僧对事，僧法号怀秀，亡已经年。在生极犯戒，及入冥，无善可录，乃绐云： 我常嘱孙咸写法华经。 
现代文：没有什么善事可记的。于是他欺骗说： 我常常叫孙咸写法华经。 
English: There were no good deeds to remember, so he lied and said, "I often asked Sun Xian to write the Lotus Sutra."

古文：敕咸被追对。初咸不省，僧固执之，经时不决。
现代文：有令追捕孙咸来核对，起初孙咸不知何事，和尚坚持不放过他。
English: An order was given to track down Sun Xian to check. At first, Sun Xian didn't know what was going on, but the monk insisted on not letting him go.

古文：忽见沙门曰： 地藏语云，若弟子招承，亦自获祐。
现代文：很久也不能结案。忽然看见沙门说： 地藏说，如果弟子招认，也可以获释。 
English: The case could not be closed for a long time. I suddenly saw Shamen saying, "Jizang said that if the disciple confesses, he can also be released."

古文：咸乃依言，因得无事。
现代文：孙咸就依照他的话做了，因此太平无事。
English: Sun Xian did as he said, so there was no problem.

古文：又说对勘时，见一戎王，卫者数百，自外来。
现代文：又说到核对的时候，看见一戒王，有几百守卫的人，从外面进来。
English: When it came to the verification, I saw a king with hundreds of guards coming in from the outside.

古文：冥王降阶，齐级升殿。
现代文：冥王下阶，一齐升殿。
English: The lower ranks of the Dark Lord were all promoted to the upper echelons.

古文：坐未久，乃大风卷去。
现代文：坐了不久，就有大风刮去。
English: Soon after we sat down, a strong wind began to blow.

古文：又见一人，被考覆罪福，此人常持金刚经，又好食肉，左边有经数千轴，右边积肉成山，以肉多，将入重论。
现代文：又看见一个人，被审查罪福之事，这个人常念金刚经，又喜好吃肉，左边有经书几千卷，右边堆积的肉成山，因为肉多，将要被重罚。
English: He also saw a man who was being investigated for crimes and blessings. This man often recited the Diamond Sutra and liked to eat meat. On the left there were thousands of scriptures, and on the right there was a mountain of meat. Because there was a lot of meat, he would be severely punished.

古文：俄经堆中有火一星，飞向肉山，顷刻销尽，此人遂履空而去。
现代文：不一会经书中有一火星，飞到肉山上去，顷刻间肉山尽光。这个人便腾空而去。
English: In no time at all, there is a star in the book, flying up to the mountain of flesh, and in an instant the mountain of flesh is exhausted. This person then vacates and goes away.

古文：咸问地藏： 向来外国王风吹何处？ 地藏王云： 彼王当入无间，向来风即业风也。 
现代文：孙咸问地藏刚才来的外国王风吹到哪里去了，地藏王说，他应当进入阴间，刚才的风就是阴间的孽风。
English: Sun Xian asked the King of Tibet where the foreign wind that had just arrived had gone. The King of Tibet said that he should go to the underworld. The wind that had just arrived was the evil wind of the underworld.

古文：因引咸看地狱。
现代文：于是领孙咸看地狱。
English: So the great-grandson Haman saw hell.

古文：及门，烟焰煽赫，声若风雷，惧不敢视。
现代文：到了门口，烟焰四起，声如风雷。恐惧而不敢看。
English: When I got to the door, there were flames everywhere and the noise was like thunder and lightning. I was too scared to look.

古文：临视镬汤，跳沫滴落左股，痛入心髓。
现代文：靠近去看汤镬，飞沫滴落在左大腿上，痛疼入心。
English: When I got closer to see the soup ladle, the droplets fell on my left thigh, and my heart ached.

古文：地藏令一吏送归，不许漏泄冥事。
现代文：地藏叫一官吏送他回去，不许泄露冥间的事。
English: Jizang asked a government official to send him back and not to reveal what had happened in the underworld.

古文：及回如梦，妻儿环泣，已一日矣。
现代文：等到回家如梦初醒，妻子围着哭泣，已死一天了。
English: When I got home, I woke up as if from a dream. My wife was crying all around me. I had been dead for a day.

古文：遂破家写经，因请出家，梦中所滴处成疮，终身不差。
现代文：于是卖掉全部家产写经，请求出家。梦中所滴的地方成了疮，终身不好。
English: So he sold all of his family property, wrote a sutra, and asked to become a monk. The place where the drops fell in his dream turned into sores, and he suffered for the rest of his life.

古文：僧智灯
现代文：僧智灯
English: Zeng Zhiguang

古文：唐贞元中，荆州天崇寺僧智灯，常持金刚经。
现代文：唐朝贞元年中，荆州天崇寺的和尚智灯，常念金刚经。
English: In the middle of the first year of the Zhen year of the Tang Dynasty, the monk Zhi Lan of Jingzhou Tiansong Temple often recited the Diamond Sutra.

古文：遇疾死，弟子启手犹热，不即入木。
现代文：遇病而死，他的弟子用手摸身体还温热，就没有装入棺材。
English: When a disciple died of illness, his body was still warm to the touch, so it was not placed in a coffin.

古文：经七日却活，云：初见冥中若王者，以念经故，合掌降阶。因问讯曰： 更容上人十年在世，勉出生死。 
现代文：过了七天就活了。他说：起初看见冥间的像王的人，因为念金刚经的缘故，合掌下阶，于是安慰说： 再容上人在世十年，免除生死。 
English: After seven days, he was alive. He said: At first, people who saw the image of the king of the underworld, because of the recitation of the Diamond Sutra, clasped their hands together and comforted themselves, saying: Let the deceased live another ten years, and be exempt from life and death.

古文：又问人间众僧中后食薏苡仁及药食，此大违本教。
现代文：又问到人间众和尚中吃薏苡仁及药食，这些都大大地违背了本教的规矩。
English: He also asked about the eating of nuts and medicinal foods among the monks, which greatly violated the rules of this religion.

古文：灯报云： 律中有开遮条如何？ 
现代文：智灯说： 法中有开遮宽赦的么？ 
English: The wisdom lamp said, "Is there anything in the Fa that is forgiving and covering?"

古文：云： 此后人加之，非佛意也。 
现代文：回答说： 这是后人加的，并不是佛教的本意。 
English: He replied: This was added by later generations and was not the original intention of Buddhism.

古文：今荆州僧众中后无有饮药者。
现代文：现在荆州许多和尚中，再也没有吃药的了。
English: Now, many monks in Jingzhou no longer take medicine.

古文：王氏
现代文：王氏
English: The Wang family

古文：公安潺陵村百姓王从贵妹未嫁，常持金刚经。
现代文：公安潺陵村百姓王从贵的妹妹没有出嫁，常常念金刚经。
English: The people of Gong'an Fuling Village, Wang Zonggui's younger sister never married and often recited the Diamond Sutra.

古文：唐贞元中，忽暴病卒。
现代文：唐贞元年中，忽然暴病而死。
English: In the first year of Tang Zhen, she suddenly died of a violent illness.

古文：埋已三日，其家覆墓，闻冢中呻吟，遂发视之，果有气。
现代文：已埋葬了三天。他的家人去下葬，听到坟中有呻吟的声音，于是就挖开坟看，果然还有气。
English: He had been buried for three days. His family went to bury him and heard moaning in the grave, so they dug up the grave and saw that he was still alive.

古文：舁归，数日能言，云： 初至冥间，冥吏以持经功德放还。 
现代文：抬回家后，几天就能说话。她说： 刚到冥间，冥吏因她念经的功德放她回来。 
English: After she was carried home, she was able to speak for a few days. She said, "When I first arrived in the underworld, the underworld officials allowed her to return because of her merits in studying the sutras.

古文：王从贵能治木，尝于公安灵化寺起造，其寺僧曙中尝见从贵说云。
现代文：王从贵能够做木活儿，曾在公安灵化寺开始造寺庙。那里的和尚在天亮时听他说此事的。
English: Wang Congui was able to do woodwork and had begun building a temple at the Public Security Linghua Temple, where monks listened to him at dawn.

古文：左营伍伯
现代文：左营伍伯
English: Zuoying Wu Bo

古文：唐南康王韦皋镇蜀时，有左营伍伯，于西山行营，与同火卒学念金刚经。
现代文：唐朝南康王韦皋镇守蜀地时，有一个左营伍伯。在西山行营，和同火卒学念金刚经。
English: When the Tang Dynasty's Southern Kangwang Emperor Wei Gan Zhen was guarding Shu, there was a left-wing Wu Bo. He camped in the West Mountain and studied the Diamond Sutra with his fellow soldiers.

古文：性顽，初一日才得题目。其夜堡外拾薪，为蕃骑缚去。
现代文：他性情顽劣，第一天只学得题目，当天夜里，在营外捡柴草，被吐蕃的骑兵抓去。
English: He had a bad temperament. On the first day, he only learned the exercises. That night, he was picking up firewood and grass outside the camp and was caught by the cavalry of the Sputniks.

古文：行百余里乃止。
现代文：走了一百多里才停下来。
English: I walked more than a hundred miles before stopping.

古文：天未明，遂踣之于地，以发系橛，覆以驰罽。寝其上。
现代文：天还没亮，就倒在地上，把头发系在木橛上，又用驼毡盖在地上，就睡在那上面。
English: Before it was light, he lay down on the ground, tied his hair to the stump of the tree, covered the ground with a camel's hoof, and slept on it.

古文：此人唯念经题，忽见金一铤，放光止于前。
现代文：这个人只念经的题目，忽然看见一铤黄金，放光并在前面停下来。
English: The man was just chanting a sutra, when he suddenly saw a pot of gold, lit up and stopped in front of him.

古文：试举首动身，所缚悉脱，遂潜起，逐金铤走。计行未得十余里，迟明，不觉已至家，家在府东市。
现代文：他便试着抬头动身，结果所绑的都脱落了。于是就偷偷起身，跟着金铤走，估计走了不到十多里，天还不亮，不知不觉已经到家了，家在府东市。
English: He then tried to lift his head and set off, with the result that everything he had tied came off. So he secretly got up and followed the goldfinch, estimating that he had walked less than ten miles, it was still dark, and he had already arrived home, his home was in Fudong.

古文：妻儿初疑其鬼。
现代文：妻儿起初疑心他是鬼。
English: At first, his wife and children suspected he was a ghost.

古文：具陈来由。到家五六日，行营将方申其逃。
现代文：他就把经过都说了，到家五六天，行营的将官正要在禀告他的逃跑，起初韦不相信。
English: When he arrived home five or six days later, the camp's commanding officer was about to announce his escape. At first, Wei did not believe him.

古文：初韦不信，以逃日与至家日不差，始免之。
现代文：结果从他逃走之日和他到家的日子一点不差，才免了他的罪。
English: As a result, the day he fled and the day he arrived home were exactly the same, which absolved him of his crime.

古文：宋衎
现代文：宋衎
English: Song Tao

古文：宋衎，江淮人，应明经举。
现代文：宋衎，是江淮人，中明经举人。
English: Song Dynasty, is the Jianghuai people, in the Ming Dynasty.

古文：元和初，至河阴县，因疾病废业，为盐铁院书手，月钱两千，娶妻安居，不议他业。
现代文：元和初年，到了河阴县，因病而荒废了学业，做盐铁院的秘书，每月两千钱，娶妻安居乐业。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and the first year, he went to Heyin County. Due to illness, he wasted his studies. He worked as a secretary of the Salt Iron Institute, earning two thousand yuan a month. He married a wife and lived a happy life.

古文：年余，有为米纲过三门者，因不识字，请衎同去，通管簿书，月给钱八千文。
现代文：不考虑其他的行业。一年多，有运米进京路过三门的，因为不识字，就请宋衎一齐去。主管记帐，每月给八千文。
English: Regardless of other industries. For more than a year, there was a rice delivery to Beijing that passed through three gates. Because he could not read, he asked Song Qi to go with him. The supervisor kept the accounts and gave him eight thousand mon a month.

古文：衎谓妻曰： 今数月不得八千，苟一月而致，极为利也。 
现代文：宋衎对妻子说： 而今几个月得不到八千，假如一个月可得，是很有利可图的。 
English: Song Yao said to his wife, "I haven't been able to get eight thousand yuan for a few months, but if I can get it in a month, it will be very profitable.

古文：妻杨氏甚贤，劝不令往，曰： 三门舟路，颇为险恶，身或惊危，利亦何救？ 
现代文：他的妻子杨氏很贤惠，劝他不要去，说： 三门是水路，非常险恶，人身遇到危险，利有什么用呢？ 
English: His wife, Ms. Yang, was very virtuous and advised him not to go, saying, "Sanmen is a waterway, very dangerous. If you are in danger, what is the use of profit?

古文：衎不纳，遂去。
现代文：宋衎不听，就去了。
English: Song Tao didn't listen and went.

古文：至其所，果遇暴风所击，彼群船尽没。
现代文：到了那个地方，果然遇到风暴袭击，那些船都沉没了。
English: When they got there, a storm hit, and the boats sank.

古文：唯衎入水，扔得粟藁一束，渐漂近岸，浮藁以出，乃活，余数十人皆不救。
现代文：只有宋衎进到水里，摸着一捆粟藁，渐渐漂近岸边。浮藁靠岸，于是得救。其余几十人都没得救。
English: Only Song Hao went into the water, touched a bundle of cornflowers, and gradually drifted close to the shore. The raft came ashore, and he was saved. The remaining dozens of people were not saved.

古文：因抱藁以谢曰： 吾之微命，尔所赐也，誓存没不相舍。 
现代文：他抱着藁而拜谢道： 我这小命，是你赐给的，一定要保存，决不抛弃。 
English: He hugged the dragonfly and gave thanks, saying, "This little life of mine, which you have given me, I must preserve and never abandon.

古文：遂抱藁疾行数里，有孤姥鬻茶之所，茅舍两间，遂诣宿焉，具以事白。
现代文：于是抱着藁快走了几里，到一个老妇人卖茶的地方，有两间茅草房，就到那里去住，并把经历的事告诉她。
English: So she walked a few miles with the toad in her arms, to a place where an old woman sold tea. There were two thatched huts, and she went to live there and told her story.

古文：姥悯之，乃为设粥。
现代文：老妇人同情他，于是为他准备了粥饭，等到第二天早晨。
English: The old woman took pity on him and prepared porridge for him to eat until the next morning.

古文：及明旦，于屋南曝衣，解其藁以晒，于藁中得一竹筒。开之，乃金刚经也。
现代文：在屋南面晒衣服，解开藁来晒，在藁中得到一个竹筒，打开，却是金刚经。
English: Dry clothes on the south side of the house, open the basket to dry, get a bamboo tube in the basket, open it, but it is the Diamond Sutra.

古文：寻以讯姥，且不知其详，姥曰： 是汝妻自汝来后，蓬头礼念，写经诚切，故能救汝。 
现代文：过了一会就问老妇人，也不知道那里的详细情况。老妇人说： 这是你的妻子从你出来之后，蓬头礼念，写经的心恳切，所以能救你。 
English: After a while, he asked the old woman, who did not know the details of the situation, and the old woman said: "This is your wife after she came out of you, with her head uncovered, reciting the sutras with a sincere heart, so she can save you."

古文：衎感泣请归，姥指东南一径曰： 但寻此去，校二百里，可以后日到家也。 
现代文：衎感动流泪请求回去，老妇人指着东南一条道说： 只从这走，走二百里，后天就可以到家了。 
English: Moved to tears, Zou asked to go back. The old woman pointed to a road to the southeast and said, "Just walk from here, walk two hundred miles, and you can get home the day after tomorrow."

古文：与米二升，拜谢遂发，果二日达河阴，见妻愧谢。杨媛惊问曰： 何以知之？ 
现代文：并给他二升米。衎便拜谢出发。果然二天到达河阴。看见妻子惭愧谢罪。杨媛惊讶地问： 你怎么知道的？ 
English: He also gave him two liters of rice. He then set off in thanks. He actually arrived in Heyin two days later. Seeing his wife's shameful thanks, Yang Yuan asked in surprise, "How did you know?"

古文：尽述根本。
现代文：衎便从头说起，杨氏感到奇怪。
English: So he started from the beginning. Mr. Yang felt strange.

古文：杨氏怪之，衎乃出经，杨媛涕泣，拜礼顶戴。衎曰： 用何以为记？ 
现代文：衎就拿出经书，杨媛哭泣。顶礼膜拜。衎说： 用什么做记号呢？ 
English: Yao took out a scripture, Yang Yuan wept. He bowed down and worshipped. Yao said, "What should I use as a mark?"

古文：曰： 写时，执笔者误罗汉字，空维上无四，遂诣护国寺禅和尚处请添。和尚年老眼昏，笔点过浓，字皆昏黑。
现代文：说： 写的时候，执笔的人误用罗汉字，空维上没有四，就到护国寺禅和尚那里请添上，和尚年老眼花，笔点很重，字迹都昏黑。
English: He said: "When writing, the writer mistakenly used the Luo Han characters. If there is no four in the sky dimension, he should go to the Zen monk of the National Guard Temple and ask him to add it. The monk's eyes are old, the pen is heavy, and the handwriting is dark.

古文：但十日来，不知其所在。 
现代文：只是十天来，不知道它那里去了。 
English: It's only been ten days, I don't know where it's gone.

古文：验之，果如其说。
现代文：拿出来验证，果然像她说的那样。
English: Take it out and test it, and it will work just as she said.

古文：衎更呜咽拜其妻，每日焚香礼经于净室，乃谓杨媛曰： 河滨之姥，不可忘也。 
现代文：衎更加呜咽拜谢他的妻子。于是每天焚香在静室里拜经，并对杨媛说： 河滨的老妇人，不可以忘了。 
English: So every day he burned incense and prayed in the quiet room, and said to Yang Yuan: "Old woman on the riverbank, you must not forget.

古文：遣使封茶及绢与之。
现代文：就派人拿茶和绢送给她。
English: He sent someone to bring her tea and soup.

古文：使至，其居及人皆不见。诘于牧竖，曰： 比水涨无涯际，何有人鬻茶？ 
现代文：使者到了，那个房子和人都不见了，向牧童打听，说： 已到了水涨无边的时候，哪里有人卖茶？ 
English: When the messenger arrived, the house and the people were gone. He asked the shepherd boy, "When the water has risen to the limit, where is there anyone selling tea?"

古文：复云： 路亦并无，乃神化也。 
现代文：并且说： 并没有什么路，是神的点化。 
English: And he said, "There is no way, but by the inspiration of God."

古文：数岁，相国郑公絪为东都留守，乃召衎及杨媛往，问其本末。
现代文：几年后，相国郑公因做东都留守，才召回衎和杨媛，问他们的经历，并让他把书拿来。
English: A few years later, his father-in-law, Zheng Gong, was away on business, so he called Zou and Yang Yuan back, asked them about their experiences, and asked them to bring him the book.

古文：并令将经来，与其男武职，食月给五千。
现代文：给他儿子武官职位，每月给他五千钱，并向他索取那个经书。
English: He gave his son the post of military attaché, gave him five thousand dollars a month, and asked him for the book.

古文：因求其经，至今为郑氏所尊奉。
现代文：至今被郑氏所供奉。
English: It has been worshipped by the Zheng family ever since.

古文：故岳州刺史丞相弘农公因睹其事，遂叙之，名曰 杨媛徵验 。
现代文：岳州刺史丞相弘农公因目睹了这一事，才讲叙这件事。取名为 杨媛徵验 。
English: It was only after witnessing this event that the minister of Gyeongju Gyeongbokgung, Hong Nonggong, recounted the event. It was called the Yangyuan Enquiry.

古文：陈昭
现代文：陈昭
English: Chen Zhao

古文：唐元和初，汉州孔目典陈昭，因患病，见一人著黄衣至床前云： 赵判官唤尔。 
现代文：唐元和年初，汉州孔目典陈昭，因得病看见一个穿黄衣的人到了床前说： 赵判官叫你。 
English: In the Tang and Yuan Dynasties and at the beginning of the year, Chen Zhao, a Han Chinese Confucian scholar, was taken ill and saw a man in a yellow robe come to his bedside and say, "Judge Zhao is calling for you."

古文：昭问所因，云： 至自冥间，刘辟与窦悬对事，要召为证。 
现代文：昭问原因，答道： 到了冥间刘辟与窦悬对事，要召你为证。 
English: Zhao asked the reason and replied: When it comes to the matter between Liu Bei and Dou, I want to call you as a witness.

古文：昭即留坐，逡巡又一人手持一物如球胞，前吏怪其迟，答曰： 只缘此，候屠行开。 
现代文：昭即留他坐下。徘徊之际来一人手拿一物像球胞，前来的官吏怪他来晚了。答道： 只因为这个，等屠户开门。 
English: Zhao immediately asked him to sit down. While he was wandering around, a cow came with an object in its hand that looked like a cone. The official who came to the door blamed him for being late. Zhao replied, "Just because of this, wait for the butcher to open the door."

古文：因笑谓昭曰： 君勿惧，取生人气，须得猪胞，君可面东侧卧。 
现代文：于是笑着对昭说： 你不要害怕，取生人气，须用猪胞。你可面向东侧趴下。 
English: So he smiled and said to Zhao, "Don't be afraid. To gain popularity, you have to use a pig's udder. You can lie down facing east.

古文：昭依其言，不觉已随二吏行，路甚平。
现代文：昭按他的话做，不知不觉已经随着两个官吏走了，路很平，走了十多里，到了一城。
English: Zhao did as he said, and unknowingly followed the two officials. The road was very flat, and it took more than ten miles to get to a city.

古文：及入，见一人怒容可骇，即赵判官也，语云： 刘辟败东川，窦悬捕牛四十七头，送梓州，称准刘辟判杀。
现代文：大得像府城。甲士守门，等到进去，看见一个人怒色吓人，就是赵判官。说道： 刘辟在东州吃了败仗，窦悬捕牛四十七头，送往梓州，说是刘辟批准宰杀。
English: It was as big as a provincial capital. A knight guarded the gate, and when he got inside, he saw a man with an angry and frightening look, that was Judge Zhao. He said: Liu Bei suffered a defeat in Dongzhou, and Dou suspended the capture of forty-seven heads of cattle and sent them to Zizhou, saying that Liu Bei approved the slaughter.

古文：辟又云： 先无牒 。
现代文：刘辟又说：事先没有命令。
English: Liu Biyi also said: There was no prior order.

古文：君为孔目典，合知事实。 
现代文：你做为孔目典，应当知道事实经过。 
English: As an ornithologist, you should know the facts.

古文：未及对，隔壁闻窦悬呼： 陈昭何在？ 
现代文：还没有来得及对证，听到隔壁的窦悬喊： 陈昭在哪里？ 
English: Before he could cross-examine, he heard Dou next door shouting: Where is Chen Zhao?

古文：及问兄弟妻子存亡。
现代文：并问他兄弟妻子存亡的事，昭就想见他。
English: He also asked him about the fate of his brother's wife. Zhao wanted to see him.

古文：昭即欲参见，冥吏云： 窦使君形容极恶，不欲相见。 昭乃具说杀牛实奉刘尚书委曲，非牒也，纸是麻，见在汉州莱私房架上。
现代文：冥吏说： 窦悬形体面容很丑，不想让你相见。 昭就都说了杀牛的事，确是奉刘尚书的命令，没有文牒，纸是麻的，在汉州某某私房的架上。
English: The official said: Dou Xiangye's face is very ugly, and he does not want you to meet. Zhao said all about the killing of cattle, indeed, it was ordered by Liu Shangshu, there is no document, the paper is hemp, on the shelf of a certain private house in Hanzhou.

古文：即令吏领昭至汉州取之，门馆扃锁，乃于节窍中出入。委曲至，辟乃无言。
现代文：于是就派官吏领昭至汉州去取，门馆上锁，就在节窍中出入，委曲到了，辟无言可对。
English: So he sent officials to take Zhao to Hanzhou, locked the gate, and went in and out in the middle of the festival. When the commission arrived, there was nothing to say.

古文：赵语昭： 尔自有一过知否？
现代文：赵对昭说： 你自己也有一个过失知道吗？
English: Zhao said to Zhao: You yourself also have a fault, do you know?

古文：窦悬所杀牛，尔取一牛头。 
现代文：窦悬所杀的是牛，你取走一牛头 。
English: What Dou Xiang killed was a cow, you take away a cow's head.

古文：昭未及答，赵曰： 此不同人间，不可假也。 
现代文：昭没来得及回答，赵说： 这里不同于人间，不可做假。 
English: Before Zhao could answer, Zhao said, "It's different from the human world here. You can't fake it.

古文：须臾，见一卒挈牛头而至，昭即恐惧求救。
现代文：不一会，看见一个士兵带着牛头到来。昭立刻恐惧求救。
English: After a while, he saw a soldier arrive with a bull's head. Zhao immediately panicked and called for help.

古文：赵令检格，合决一百，考五十日。
现代文：赵命检验规定，应判打一百杖，考五十天。
English: Zhao's life inspection stipulates that he should be sentenced to 100 strokes of the cane and 50 days of examination.

古文：因谓昭曰： 尔有何功德？ 
现代文：于是对昭说： 你有什么功德？ 
English: So he said to Zhao: What are your merits?

古文：昭即自陈： 曾设若干斋，画佛像。 
现代文：昭就自己陈述： 曾设了若干斋戒，画佛像。 
English: Zhao said of himself: He had set up a number of fasts and painted Buddha statues.

古文：赵云： 此来生福耳。 
现代文：赵说： 这是来生的福罢了。 
English: Zhao said: This is just the blessing of the afterlife.

古文：昭又言： 曾于表兄家读金刚经。 
现代文：昭又说： 曾在表兄家读金刚经。 
English: Zhao also said: I once read the Diamond Sutra at my cousin's house.

古文：赵曰： 可合掌请。 
现代文：赵说： 可合掌请经。 
English: Zhao said, "You can pray the sutra with your palms together."

古文：昭如言。有倾。见黄袱箱经自天而下，住昭前，昭取视之，即表兄所借本也，褾有烧处尚在。
现代文：昭按他的话做，过了一会，见黄袱箱经从天而降，落在昭前，昭取而看，就是表兄所借的那本，边上有烧的地方还在。
English: Zhao did as he said. After a while, he saw a yellow trunk descend from the sky and land in front of Zhao. Zhao took it and saw that it was the book borrowed by his cousin. The burned area on the edge was still there.

古文：又合掌，其经即灭。
现代文：又合掌请，那个经书就没了。
English: If you put your hands together again, the book will be gone.

古文：赵曰： 此足以免。 
现代文：赵说： 这足以赦免了你。 
English: Zhao said: This is enough to pardon you.

古文：便放回。
现代文：便放他回去。
English: and let him go.

古文：令昭往一司。曰生录，按检出修短。
现代文：令昭去一司，说他的福禄，拿出来看他寿命的长短，官吏说： 昭本名钊。
English: Ordering Zhao to go to the first division, say his fortune, and take it out to see the length of his life, the officials said: Zhao's real name is Zhao.

古文：吏报云： 昭本名钊，是金旁刀，至某年改为昭，更得十八年。 
现代文：是金旁刀。到了某年改为昭，再得十八年的寿命。 昭听到以后很惆怅。
English: It was a gold side knife. In a certain year, it was changed to Zhao, and it had a lifespan of eighteen years. Zhao was very upset when he heard this.

古文：昭闻惆怅。赵笑曰： 十八年大得作乐事，何不悦乎！ 
现代文：赵笑着说： 十八年可大作乐事，为什么不高兴呢？ 
English: Zhao smiled and said, "I have been able to make a lot of music in the past 18 years. Why am I not happy?

古文：乃令吏送昭，到半道，见一马当路，吏云： 此尔本属，可乘此。 
现代文：于是让官吏送昭。到了半路，看见一匹马挡在路上，官吏说： 这本属于你，可乘上这匹马走。 
English: When he was halfway there, he saw a horse standing in the road, and the official said, "This belongs to you, you can ride this horse."

古文：即骑乃活，死半日矣。
现代文：于是骑上马就复活了。他已死半天了。
English: So he got on his horse and came back to life. He had been dead for half a day.

