古文：吕不韦者，阳翟大贾人也。往来贩贱卖贵，家累千金。
现代文：吕不韦是阳翟的大商人，他往来各地，以低价买进，高价卖出，所以积累起千金的家产。
English: Lu Buwei was an impotent great merchant. He traveled all over the country, buying at low prices and selling at high prices, so he accumulated a lot of money.

古文：秦昭王四十年，太子死。
现代文：秦昭王四十年，太子去世了。
English: Forty years have passed since the reign of King Qin Zhao, and the crown prince has passed away.

古文：其四十二年，以其次子安国君为太子。
现代文：到了昭王四十二年，昭王把他的第二个儿子安国君立为太子。
English: In the 42nd year of King Zhao, King Zhao made his second son, An Guojun, the crown prince.

古文：安国君有子二十馀人。
现代文：而安国君有二十多个儿子。
English: And Ankokukun has more than twenty sons.

古文：安国君有所甚爱姬，立以为正夫人，号曰华阳夫人。
现代文：安国君有个非常宠爱的妃子，立她正夫人，称之为华阳夫人。
English: An Guojun had a very favorite concubine, whom he named Lady Zheng and called Lady Huayang.

古文：华阳夫人无子。
现代文：华阳夫人没有儿子。
English: Mrs. Huayang does not have a son.

古文：安国君中男名子楚，子楚母曰夏姬，毋爱。
现代文：安国君有个排行居中的儿子名叫子楚，子楚的母亲叫夏姬，不受宠爱。
English: An Guojun has a middle-ranking son named Zi Chu, and Zi Chu's mother is called Xia Ji, who is not favored.

古文：子楚为秦质子於赵。
现代文：子楚作为秦子被派到赵国作人质。
English: Zi Chu was sent to Zhao as a hostage.

古文：秦数攻赵，赵不甚礼子楚。
现代文：秦国多次攻打赵国，赵国对子楚也不以礼相待。
English: Qin attacked Zhao many times, and Zhao did not treat Zichu with courtesy.

古文：子楚，秦诸庶孽孙，质於诸侯，车乘进用不饶，居处困，不得意。
现代文：子楚是秦王庶出的孙子，在赵国当人质，他乘的车马和日常的财用都不宽裕，生活困窘，很不得意。
English: Zi Chu is the grandchild of the Qin King's illegitimate son. He was a hostage in Zhao Province. He was not well-off in terms of the car and horse he rode and his daily financial needs. His life was miserable and he was very unhappy.

古文：吕不韦贾邯郸，见而怜之，曰 此奇货可居 。
现代文：吕不韦到邯郸去做生意，见到子楚后非常怜爱他，说： 子楚就像一件奇货，可以囤积起来 。
English: Lu Buwei went to Handan to do business, and after seeing Zi Chu, he was very sympathetic to him, saying: Zi Chu is like a wonder product that can be hoarded.

古文：乃往见子楚，说曰： 吾能大子之门。 
现代文：于是他就前去拜访子楚，对他游说道： 我能光大你的门庭。 
English: So he went to visit his son-in-law and said to him: I can brighten up your courtyard.

古文：子楚笑曰： 且自大君之门，而乃大吾门！ 
现代文：子楚笑着说： 你姑且先光大自己的门庭，然后再来光大我的门庭吧！ 
English: Zi Chu smiled and said, "Let's say you enlarge your own front yard first, and then enlarge my front yard!"

古文：吕不韦曰： 子不知也，吾门待子门而大。 
现代文：吕不韦说： 你不懂啊，我的门庭要等待你的门庭光大了才能光大。 
English: Lü Buwei said, "You don't understand, my courtyard has to wait for your courtyard to become bright before it can become bright."

古文：子楚心知所谓，乃引与坐，深语。
现代文：子楚心知吕不韦所言之意，就拉他一起坐下，深入交谈。
English: Zi Chu Xin knew the meaning of what Lü Buwei said, so he pulled him to sit down together and had an in-depth conversation.

古文：吕不韦曰： 秦王老矣，安国君得为太子。
现代文：吕不韦说： 秦王已经老了，安国君被立为太子。
English: Lu Buwei said, "Qin Wang has grown old, and An Guojun has been made the crown prince.

古文：窃闻安国君爱幸华阳夫人，华阳夫人无子，能立適嗣者独华阳夫人耳。
现代文：我私下听说安国君非常宠爱华阳夫人，华阳夫人没有儿子，能够选立太子的只有华阳夫人一个。
English: I have heard in private that An Guojun is very fond of Mrs. Huayang. Mrs. Huayang has no son, and only Mrs. Huayang can choose the prince.

古文：今子兄弟二十馀人，子又居中，不甚见幸，久质诸侯。即大王薨，安国君立为王，则子毋几得与长子及诸子旦暮在前者争为太子矣。 
现代文：现在你的兄弟有二十多人，你又排行中间，不受秦王宠幸，长期被留在诸侯国当人质，即使是秦王死去，安国君继位为王，你也不要指望同你长兄和早晚都在秦王身边的其他兄弟们争太子之位啦。 
English: Now you have more than twenty brothers, and you rank in the middle. You are not favored by King Qin, and you have been left as a hostage in the provinces for a long time. Even if King Qin dies and Prince An Guojun succeeds to the throne, you should not expect to compete with your eldest brother and other brothers who are around King Qin sooner or later.

古文：子楚曰： 然。
现代文：子楚说： 是这样，但该怎么办呢？ 
English: Zi Chu said: Yes, but what should we do?

古文：为之柰何？ 吕不韦曰： 子贫，客於此，非有以奉献於亲及结宾客也。
现代文：吕不韦说： 你很贫窘，又客居在此，也拿不出什么来献给亲长，结交宾客。
English: Lu Buwei said, "You are very poor and live here as a guest, and you have nothing to offer to your relatives and guests.

古文：不韦虽贫，请以千金为子西游，事安国君及华阳夫人，立子为適嗣。 
现代文：我吕不韦虽然不富有，但愿意拿出千金来替您到西边去游说，侍奉安国君和华阳夫人，让他们立你为太子。 
English: Although I am not rich, I am willing to spend a lot of money to go to the west to lobby for you, to serve An Guo Jun and Huayang Lady, and let them appoint you as the crown prince.

古文：子楚乃顿首曰： 必如君策，请得分秦国与君共之。 
现代文：子楚于是叩头拜谢道： 如果实现了您的计划，我愿意分封秦国的土地跟您共同享有它。 
English: Zi Chu then bowed and said, "If your plan is realized, I am willing to share the land of Qin with you."

古文：吕不韦乃以五百金与子楚，为进用，结宾客；而复以五百金买奇物玩好，自奉而西游秦，求见华阳夫人姊，而皆以其物献华阳夫人。
现代文：吕不韦于是拿出五百金送给子楚，作为日常生活和交结宾客之用；又拿出五百金买珍奇玩物，自己带上这些东西往西去秦国游说，先拜见华阳夫人的姐姐，把带来的东西统统献给华阳夫人。
English: Lu Buwei then took out five hundred gold to give to Zi Chu, as a daily life and for the use of guests; he also took out five hundred gold to buy rare toys, and took these things to the west to lobby Qin. First, he met Mrs. Huayang's sister, and gave everything he brought to Mrs. Huayang.

古文：因言子楚贤智，结诸侯宾客遍天下，常曰 楚也以夫人为天，日夜泣思太子及夫人 。
现代文：顺便谈及子楚聪明贤能，所结交的诸侯宾客，遍及天下，常常说 我子楚把夫人看成天一般，日夜哭泣思念太子和夫人 。
English: By the way, when talking about Zi Chu's wisdom and ability, he said that he had made friends with guests from all over the world. He often said that my son Zi Chu regarded his wife as a saint, and wept day and night thinking about the prince and his wife.

古文：夫人大喜。
现代文：夫人非常高兴。
English: My wife is very happy.

古文：不韦因使其姊说夫人曰： 吾闻之，以色事人者，色衰而爱弛。
现代文：吕不韦乘机又让华阳夫人姐姐劝说华阳夫人道： 我听说用美色来侍奉别人的，一旦色衰，宠爱也就随之减少。
English: Lu Buwei also took the opportunity to let Mrs. Huayang's sister persuade Mrs. Huayang: I heard that if you use beauty to serve others, once your beauty fades, your favor will also decrease.

古文：今夫人事太子，甚爱而无子，不以此时蚤自结於诸子中贤孝者，举立以为適而子之，夫在则重尊，夫百岁之後，所子者为王，终不失势，此所谓一言而万世之利也。
现代文：现在夫人您侍奉太子，甚被宠爱，却没有儿子，不趁这时早一点在太子的儿子中结交一个有才能而孝顺的人，立他为继承人而又像亲生儿子一样对待他，那么，丈夫在世时受到尊重，丈夫死后，自己立的儿子继位为王，最终也不会失势，这就是人们所说的一句话能得到万世的好处啊。
English: Now, madam, you are serving the crown prince, you are greatly loved, but you have no son. If you had not taken advantage of this opportunity earlier to make a talented and dutiful person among the prince's sons, appoint him as an heir and treat him like your own son, then the husband would be respected during his lifetime, and after the death of the husband, the son he himself appointed would succeed to the throne and eventually would not lose power. This is what people say that a word can get eternal benefits.

古文：不以繁华时树本，即色衰爱弛後，虽欲开一语，尚可得乎？
现代文：不在容貌美丽之时树立根本，假使等到容貌衰竭，宠爱失去后，虽然想和太子说上一句话，还有可能吗？
English: If you don't set up the foundation when you are beautiful, if you wait until your looks fail and you lose your favorite, even though you want to have a word with the prince, is it still possible?

古文：今子楚贤，而自知中男也，次不得为適，其母又不得幸，自附夫人，夫人诚以此时拔以为適，夫人则竟世有宠於秦矣。 
现代文：现在子楚贤能，而自己也知道排行居中，按次序是不能被立为继承人的，而他的生母又不受宠爱，自己就会主动依附于夫人，夫人若真能在此时提拔他为继承人，那么夫人您一生在秦国都要受到尊宠啦。 
English: Now that his son, Chu Xian Neng, is in the middle of the line, he knows that he cannot be made the heir according to the order, and his birth mother is not favored, he will actively cling to his wife. If his wife can really promote him as the heir at this time, then his wife will be honored and favored in Qin for the rest of her life.

古文：华阳夫人以为然，承太子间，从容言子楚质於赵者绝贤，来往者皆称誉之。
现代文：华阳夫人听了认为是这样，就在奉承太子的时候，委婉地谈到在赵国做人质的子楚非常有才能，来往的人都称赞他。
English: Mrs. Huayang listened and thought that this was so. While flattering the prince, she euphemistically said that Zi Chu, who was a hostage in Zhao, was very talented, and everyone who came and went praised him.

古文：乃因涕泣曰： 妾幸得充後宫，不幸无子，原得子楚立以为適嗣，以讬妾身。 
现代文：接着就哭着说： 我有幸得以充列后宫，但非常遗憾的是没有儿子，我希望能立子楚为继承人，以便我日后有个依靠。 
English: Then he cried and said, "I am fortunate to be able to fill the harem, but it is very regrettable that I have no son. I hope to be able to set up my son Chu as the heir, so that I can rely on him in the future."

古文：安国君许之，乃与夫人刻玉符，约以为適嗣。安国君及夫人因厚餽遗子楚，而请吕不韦傅之，子楚以此名誉益盛於诸侯。
现代文：安国君答应了，就和夫人刻下玉符，决定立子楚为继承人，安国君和华阳夫人都送了很多东西给子楚，并且请吕不韦当他的老师，因此子楚的名声在诸侯中越来越大。
English: An Guojun agreed and engraved a jade seal with his wife, deciding to make Zi Chu the heir. Both An Guojun and Hua Yang's wife sent many things to Zi Chu, and asked Lü Buwei to be his teacher. As a result, Zi Chu's reputation grew among the princes.

古文：吕不韦取邯郸诸姬绝好善舞者与居，知有身。
现代文：吕不韦娶了邯郸女子中最漂亮而又会歌舞的人，与她同居，知道她怀了孕。
English: Lu Buwei married the most beautiful of the young women, who could also sing and dance, and lived with her, knowing that she was pregnant.

古文：子楚从不韦饮，见而说之，因起为寿，请之。
现代文：子楚有一次和吕不韦一起饮酒，看到此女后非常喜欢，就站起身来向吕不韦祝酒，请求把此女赐给他。
English: Zi Chu once drank alcohol with Lü Buwei, and when he saw that the queen was very fond of this woman, he stood up to make a toast to Lü Buwei and asked that the woman be given to him.

古文：吕不韦怒，念业已破家为子楚，欲以钓奇，乃遂献其姬。
现代文：吕不韦很生气，但转念一想，已经为子楚破费了很多家财，为的借以钓取奇货，于是就献出了这个女子。
English: Lü Buwei was very angry, but on second thoughts, he had already spent a lot of family money for his son, in order to fish for strange goods, so he offered this woman.

古文：姬自匿有身，至大期时，生子政。
现代文：赵姬隐瞒了自己已有身孕的事，到十二个月之后，生下儿子名政。
English: Zhao Ji concealed the fact that she was already pregnant. Twelve months later, she gave birth to her son, Meizheng.

古文：子楚遂立姬为夫人。
现代文：子楚就立此姬为夫人。
English: His son took her as his wife.

古文：秦昭王五十年，使王齮围邯郸，急，赵欲杀子楚。
现代文：秦昭王五十年，派王齮围攻邯郸，情况非常紧急，赵国想杀死子楚。
English: In the fiftieth year of the reign of Qin Zhao, the situation was so urgent that Zhao Guo wanted to kill his son Chu.

古文：子楚与吕不韦谋，行金六百斤予守者吏，得脱，亡赴秦军，遂以得归。
现代文：子楚就和吕不韦密谋，拿出六百斤金子送给守城官吏，得以脱身，逃到秦军大营，才顺利回到了秦国。
English: Zi Chu plotted with Lü Buwei, took out six hundred pounds of gold and gave it to the officials guarding the city. He was able to escape and fled to the Qin army camp before successfully returning to Qin.

古文：赵欲杀子楚妻子，子楚夫人赵豪家女也，得匿，以故母子竟得活。
现代文：赵国又想杀死子楚的妻子和儿子，因子楚的夫人是赵国富豪人家的女儿，才得以隐藏起来，因此母子二人竟得活命。
English: Zhao Guo also wanted to kill Zi Chu's wife and son, but because Zi Chu's wife was the daughter of a wealthy family in Zhao Guo, she was able to hide, so the mother and son were able to survive.

古文：秦昭王五十六年，薨，太子安国君立为王，华阳夫人为王后，子楚为太子。
现代文：秦昭王五十六年去世，太子安国君继位为王，华阳夫人为王后，子楚为太子。
English: Qin Zhao Wang died in the 56th year, Prince An Guojun succeeded as king, Mrs. Huayang as queen, and Zi Chu as prince.

古文：赵亦奉子楚夫人及子政归秦。
现代文：赵国也护送子楚的夫人和儿子嬴政回到秦国。
English: Zhao Guo also escorted Zi Chu's wife and son Yan Zheng back to Qin.

古文：秦王立一年，薨，谥为孝文王。
现代文：秦王继位一年之后去世，谥号为孝文王。
English: Qin Wang died a year after succeeding to the throne, and his posthumous name was Xiaowen Wang.

古文：太子子楚代立，是为庄襄王。
现代文：太子子楚继位，他就是庄襄王。
English: Prince Chu succeeded to the throne, he is the king of Zhuang Xiang.

古文：庄襄王所母华阳后为华阳太后，真母夏姬尊以为夏太后。
现代文：庄襄王尊奉所认的母亲华阳王后为华阳太后，生母夏姬被尊称为夏太后。
English: Zhuang Xiang Wang's mother, Queen Huayang, was revered as the Empress Dowager of Huayang. His birth mother, Queen Xia Ji, was revered as the Empress Dowager of Xia.

古文：庄襄王元年，以吕不韦为丞相，封为文信侯，食河南雒阳十万户。
现代文：庄襄王元年，任命吕不韦为丞相，封为文信侯，将河南洛阳十万户作为他的食邑。
English: In the first year of King Zhuang Xiang, he appointed Lü Buwei as chancellor and crowned him as the prince of letters, and made Luoyang, Henan, a city of 100,000 households, his hometown.

古文：庄襄王即位三年，薨，太子政立为王，尊吕不韦为相国，号称 仲父 。
现代文：庄襄王即位三年之后死去，太子嬴政继立为王，尊奉吕不韦为相国，称他为 仲父 。
English: Three years after his enthronement, King Zhuangxiang died, and his son, the Crown Prince Yongzheng, succeeded him as king. He honored Lü Buwei as his brother-in-law and called him "Middle Father."

古文：秦王年少，太后时时窃私通吕不韦。不韦家僮万人。
现代文：秦王年纪还小，太后常常和吕不韦私通。吕不韦家有奴仆万人。
English: King Qin was still young, and the empress dowager often had illicit relations with Lü Buwei. The Lü Buwei family had tens of thousands of slaves.

古文：当是时，魏有信陵君，楚有春申君，赵有平原君，齐有孟尝君，皆下士喜宾客以相倾。
现代文：在那时，魏国有信陵君，楚国有春申君，赵国有平原君，齐国有孟尝君，他们都礼贤下士，结交宾客。
English: At that time, Xinlingjun of Wei, Chunshenjun of Chu, Pingyuanjun of Zhao, and Mengyakun of Qi were all honored guests.

古文：吕不韦以秦之彊，羞不如，亦招致士，厚遇之，至食客三千人。
现代文：并在这方面要争个高低上下。吕不韦认为秦国如此强大，把不如他们当成一件令人羞愧的事，所以他也招来了文人学士，给他们优厚的待遇，门下食客多达三千人。
English: Lu Buwei thought that the Qin state was so powerful that it was a shame to be inferior to them, so he also invited scholars and gave them generous treatment, with up to three thousand diners under his door.

古文：是时诸侯多辩士，如荀卿之徒，著书布天下。
现代文：那时各诸侯国有许多才辩之士，像荀卿那班人，著书立说，流行天下。
English: At that time, there were many talented debaters in all the principalities and states, like the group of people from Shaoqing, who wrote books and became popular all over the world.

古文：吕不韦乃使其客人人著所闻，集论以为八览、六论、十二纪，二十馀万言。
现代文：吕不韦就命他的食客各自将所见所闻记下，综合在一起成为八览、六论、十二纪，共二十多万言。
English: Lü Buwei ordered his diners to write down what they had seen and heard, and together they became the Eight Commentaries, Six Analects, and Twelve Histories, totaling more than 200,000 words.

古文：以为备天地万物古今之事，号曰吕氏春秋。
现代文：自己认为其中包括了天地万物古往今来的事理，所以号称《吕氏春秋》。
English: He believes that it includes the principles of heaven and earth and all things from ancient times to the present, so it is known as "Lu's Spring and Autumn."

古文：布咸阳市门，悬千金其上，延诸侯游士宾客有能增损一字者予千金。
现代文：并将之刊布在咸阳的城门，上面悬挂着一千金的赏金，遍请诸侯各国的游士宾客，若有人能增删一字，就给予一千金的奖励。
English: And it was published at the city gate of Xianyang, with a reward of one thousand gold hanging above it, inviting guests from all over the country. If anyone could add or delete a word, they would be given a reward of one thousand gold.

古文：始皇帝益壮，太后淫不止。
现代文：秦始皇渐渐长大了，但太后一直淫乱不止。
English: Emperor Qin Shi Huang gradually grew up, but the empress dowager was always promiscuous.

古文：吕不韦恐觉祸及己，乃私求大阴人嫪毐以为舍人，时纵倡乐，使毐以其阴关桐轮而行，令太后闻之，以啗太后。
现代文：吕不韦唯恐事情败露，灾祸降临在自己头上，就暗地寻求了一个阴茎粗大的人嫪毐作为门客，时常放纵淫乐，要嫪毐用他的阴茎贯穿着桐木所做的小车轮行走，并设法让太后知道此事，以此事引诱她。
English: Fearing that the affair would be exposed and that disaster would befall him, Lu Buwei secretly sought out a man with a large penis as a concubine, often indulging in fornication, to walk with his penis through a small wheel made of paulownia, and tried to let the empress dowager know about this and seduce her with it.

古文：太后闻，果欲私得之。
现代文：太后听说之后，果然想要暗中占有他。
English: When the Queen Mother heard about it, she really wanted to possess him secretly.

古文：吕不韦乃进嫪毐，诈令人以腐罪告之。
现代文：吕不韦就进献嫪毐，假装让人告发他犯下了该受宫刑的罪。
English: Lü Buwei then presented a scepter, pretending to have someone denounce him for having committed the crime for which he was to receive the palace punishment.

古文：不韦又阴谓太后曰： 可事诈腐，则得给事中。 
现代文：吕不韦又暗中对太后说： 你可以让嫪毐假装受了宫刑，就可以在供职宫中的人员中得到他。 
English: Lü Buwei also secretly said to the empress dowager: If you can make Zhai pretend to have been subjected to palace punishment, you can get him from the palace staff.

古文：太后乃阴厚赐主腐者吏，诈论之，拔其须眉为宦者，遂得侍太后。
现代文：太后就偷偷地送给主持宫刑的官吏许多东西，假装处罚嫪毐，拔掉了他的胡须假充宦官，这就得以侍奉太后。
English: The empress dowager secretly gave many things to the official who presided over the palace punishment, pretended to punish the eunuch, pulled out his beard to pretend to be a eunuch, and was able to serve the empress dowager.

古文：太后私与通，绝爱之。
现代文：太后暗中和他通奸，特别喜爱他。
English: The empress dowager secretly committed adultery with him and was particularly fond of him.

古文：有身，太后恐人知之，诈卜当避时，徙宫居雍。
现代文：后来太后怀孕在身，担心别人知道，假称算卦不吉，需要换一个环境来回避一下，就迁移到雍地的宫殿中来居住。
English: Later, when the empress dowager was pregnant, she was worried that others would find out, so she moved to a palace in the mountains to live, assuming that it was unlucky to have a miscarriage and that she needed to change the environment to avoid it.

古文：嫪毐常从，赏赐甚厚，事皆决於嫪毐。
现代文：嫪毐总是随从左右，所受的赏赐非常优厚，事事都由嫪毐决定。
English: The dragonfly always follows the right and the left, the rewards it receives are very generous, and everything is decided by the dragonfly.

古文：嫪毐家僮数千人，诸客求宦为嫪毐舍人千馀人。
现代文：嫪毐家中有奴仆几千人。那些为求得官职来当嫪毐家门客的多达一千余人。
English: There are several thousand servants in the family, and more than a thousand people who have become the family's clients in order to obtain official positions.

古文：始皇七年，庄襄王母夏太后薨。
现代文：秦始皇七年，庄襄王的生母夏太后去世。
English: In the seventh year of the First Emperor of Qin, Empress Dowager Xia, the biological mother of King Zhuangxiang, passed away.

古文：孝文王后曰华阳太后，与孝文王会葬寿陵。
现代文：孝文王后叫华阳太后，和孝文王合葬在寿陵。
English: Queen Xiaowen was called Empress Dowager Huayang, and she and King Xiaowen were buried together in Shouling.

古文：夏太后子庄襄王葬芷阳，故夏太后独别葬杜东，曰 东望吾子，西望吾夫。
现代文：夏太后的儿子庄襄王葬在芷阳，所以夏太后另外单独埋葬在杜原的东面，她生前曾说： 向东可以看到我的儿子，向西可以看到我的丈夫。
English: Empress Dowager Xia's son, Zhuang Xiang Wang, was buried in Fenyang, so Empress Dowager Xia was buried separately on the east side of Duyuan. She once said: "To the east you can see my son, to the west you can see my husband."

古文：後百年，旁当有万家邑 。
现代文：在百年之后，旁边定会有个万户的城邑 。
English: In a hundred years, there will certainly be a city of ten thousand households next to it.

古文：始皇九年，有告嫪毐实非宦者，常与太后私乱，生子二人，皆匿之。与太后谋曰 王即薨，以子为後 。
现代文：秦始皇九年，有人告发嫪毐实际并不是宦官，常常和太后淫乱私通，并生下两个儿子，都把他们隐藏起来，还和太后谋议说 若是秦王死去，就拥立我们的儿子继位。 
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Qin Shi Huang, it was reported that Yan Xuan was not actually a eunuch. He often had sexual intercourse with the empress dowager and gave birth to two sons. He hid both of them and plotted with the empress dowager that if King Qin died, he would have our son succeed to the throne.

古文：於是秦王下吏治，具得情实，事连相国吕不韦。
现代文：于是秦始皇令有关官吏严查此事，把事情真相全部弄清，事情牵连到相国吕不韦。
English: As a result, Qin Shihuang ordered the relevant officials to investigate the matter strictly, to clarify the truth of the matter, and the matter was implicated in the neighboring country of Lü Buwei.

古文：九月，夷嫪毐三族，杀太后所生两子，而遂迁太后於雍。
现代文：这年九月，把嫪毐家三族人众全部杀死，又杀太后所生的两个儿子，并把太后迁到雍地居住。
English: In September of that year, he killed all the people of the three ethnic groups of the Xing family, and also killed the two sons born to the empress dowager, and moved the empress dowager to live in Yongdi.

古文：诸嫪毐舍人皆没其家而迁之蜀。
现代文：嫪毐家的食客们都被没收家产，迁往蜀地。
English: The diners of the Ye family all had their property confiscated and moved to Shu.

古文：王欲诛相国，为其奉先王功大，及宾客辩士为游说者众，王不忍致法。
现代文：秦王想杀掉相国吕不韦，但因其侍奉先王功劳极大，又有许多宾客辩士为他求情说好话，秦王不忍心将他绳之以法。
English: King Qin wanted to kill his brother-in-law Lü Buwei, but because he had served the previous king with great merit, and there were many guests and debaters who pleaded for him and said good words, King Qin did not have the heart to bring him to justice.

古文：秦王十年十月，免相国吕不韦。
现代文：秦始皇十年十月，免去了吕不韦的相国职务。
English: In October of the tenth year of the Qin Dynasty, Emperor Qin relieved Lü Buwei of his duties as consort of the emperor.

古文：及齐人茅焦说秦王，秦王乃迎太后於雍，归复咸阳，而出文信侯就国河南。
现代文：等到齐人茅焦劝说秦王，秦王这才到雍地迎接太后，使她又回归咸阳，但把吕不韦遣出京城，前往河南的封地。
English: It was not until the Qin King was persuaded by Maojiao that the Qin King came to Yongdi to meet the Empress Dowager, so that she returned to Xianyang, but sent Lü Buwei out of Beijing to the fief of Henan.

古文：岁馀，诸侯宾客使者相望於道，请文信侯。
现代文：一年多之后，各诸侯国的宾客使者络绎不绝，前来访问吕不韦。
English: More than a year later, an endless stream of guests and emissaries from various states came to visit Lü Bu Wei.

古文：秦王恐其为变，乃赐文信侯书曰： 君何功於秦？
现代文：秦王恐怕他发动叛乱，就写信给吕不韦说： 你对秦国有何功劳？
English: King Qin, fearing that he might start a rebellion, wrote a letter to Lü Buwei, saying: What is your contribution to the Qin state?

古文：秦封君河南，食十万户。
现代文：秦国封你在河南，食邑十万户。
English: Qin Guofeng, you are in Henan, with 100,000 households.

古文：君何亲於秦？
现代文：你跟秦王有什么亲缘关系？
English: How are you related to King Qin?

古文：号称仲父。
现代文：竟号称仲父。
English: In fact, he is known as a matchmaker.

古文：其与家属徙处蜀！ 
现代文：你与家属都一概迁到蜀地去居住！ 
English: You and your family have all moved to live in Shu!

古文：吕不韦自度稍侵，恐诛，乃饮酖而死。
现代文：吕不韦一想到自己已经逐渐被逼迫，害怕日后被杀，就喝下酖酒自杀而死。
English: As soon as Lü Buwei thought that he had been gradually persecuted and feared that he would be killed in the future, he drank the poisoned wine and committed suicide.

古文：秦王所加怒吕不韦、嫪毐皆已死，乃皆复归嫪毐舍人迁蜀者。
现代文：秦王所痛恨的吕不韦、嫪毐都已死去，就让迁徙到蜀地的嫪毐门客全部迁回京都。
English: King Qin's hated Lü Buwei and Xing Du have both died, so he has allowed all the retainers who migrated to Shudi to move back to Kyoto.

古文：始皇十九年，太后薨，谥为帝太后，与庄襄王会葬茝阳。
现代文：秦始皇十九年，太后去世，谥号为帝太后。与庄襄王合葬在芷阳。
English: In the 19th year of Qin Shi Huang, the empress dowager passed away, and her posthumous name was Empress Dowager. She was buried with Zhuang Xiang Wang in Luoyang.

古文：太史公曰：不韦及嫪毐贵，封号文信侯。
现代文：太史公说：吕不韦带及嫪毐贵显，吕不韦封号文信侯。
English: Tai Shikong said: Lü Buwei is a great scholar, and Lü Buwei's seal number is Wenxin Hou.

古文：人之告嫪毐，毐闻之。
现代文：有人告发嫪毐，嫪毐听到此事。
English: Someone tipped me off, and I heard about it.

古文：秦王验左右，未发。
现代文：秦始皇查讯左右，事情还未败露。
English: The First Emperor of Qin investigated the matter, and it has not yet been revealed.

古文：上之雍郊，毐恐祸起，乃与党谋，矫太后玺发卒以反蕲年宫。
现代文：秦王到雍地祭天，嫪毐害怕大祸临头，就和亲信同党密谋，盗用太后的大印调集士兵在蕲年宫造反。
English: King Qin went to the Yangtze River to offer sacrifices to Heaven. Fearing that a great calamity was imminent, he conspired with his close confidants and party members to misappropriate the great seal of the empress dowager and mobilize soldiers to rebel in the Palace of the Year of the Horse.

古文：发吏攻毐，毐败亡走，追斩之好畤，遂灭其宗。
现代文：秦王调动官兵攻打嫪毐，嫪毐失败逃走，追到好畤将其斩首，就把他满门抄斩。
English: King Qin mobilized officers and soldiers to attack and fight the dragonfly. The dragonfly failed and fled. When he caught up with the good dragonfly and beheaded it, he beheaded the whole lot of them.

古文：而吕不韦由此绌矣。
现代文：而吕不韦也由此被贬斥。
English: And Lü Buwei was also denounced for this.

古文：孔子之所谓 闻 者，其吕子乎？
现代文：孔子所说的 闻 ，指的正是吕不韦这样的人吧！
English: When Confucius said "hearing," he was referring to people like Lü Buwei!

