古文：栾侯阳起欧明李高黄原贾逵李宪张璞洛子渊陈虞黄翻阳雍钱祐徐郎丁氏妇阿紫
现代文：栾侯阳起欧明李高黄原贾逵李宪张璞洛子渊陈虞黄翻阳雍钱祐徐郎丁氏妇阿紫
English: 侯阳起欧明李高黄原贾李憲张洛子渊陈虞黄翻阳雍钱祐徐郎丁氏妇阿紫

古文：栾侯
现代文：栾侯
English: 侯

古文：汉中有鬼神栾侯，常在承尘上，喜食鲊菜，能知吉凶。
现代文：汉中郡有个叫栾侯的鬼神，常常住在室内的棚顶上或帐幕后，喜欢吃腌制的鱼类，能卜吉凶。
English: In Hanzhong County, there is a ghost god called Zhouhou, who often lives indoors on the roof of a shed or behind a tent, likes to eat pickled fish, and can tell fortunes.

古文：甘露中，大蝗起，所经处，禾稼辄尽。
现代文：甘露年间，这里闹起了蝗灾，蝗虫经过之处，庄稼全被吃光了。
English: During the years of the nectar, a locust plague raged here. Wherever the locusts passed, the crops were completely eaten up.

古文：太守遣使告栾侯，祀以鲊菜。
现代文：郡守派人将这件事通知了乐侯，并祀奉上不少腌制的鱼类。
English: The county magistrate sent someone to inform Le Hou of the incident, and a lot of salted fish was offered.

古文：侯谓吏曰：蝗虫小事，则当除之。
现代文：栾侯对来人说：小小蝗虫，算不了什么，应当把它们除掉！
English: The mayor said to the man: "Little locusts are nothing, they should be eliminated!"

古文：言讫，翕然飞出。
现代文：说罢，翕然掀动翅膀飞出窗外。
English: Say it, and with a sudden flapping of wings, it flies out the window.

古文：吏仿佛其状类鸠，声如水鸟。
现代文：来的小吏看见他仿佛一只鸠鸟，还发出水鸟的叫声。
English: When the police came, they saw that he looked like an ostrich and made water bird noises.

古文：吏还，具白太守。
现代文：小吏回去后，将此事禀报了郡守。
English: After the minor official returned, he reported the matter to the county governor.

古文：即果有众鸟亿万，来食蝗虫，须臾皆尽。
现代文：当即，果然有成万上亿只鸟来吃蝗虫，顷刻就把它们全除尽了。
English: Immediately, hundreds of millions of birds came to eat the locusts, and they were all wiped out in an instant.

古文：阳起
现代文：阳起
English: Yangqi

古文：河南阳起字圣卿。少时疟疾，于社中得书一卷，《谴劾百鬼法》。
现代文：河南郡有个叫阳起的人，字圣卿，小时候患疟疾，在土神庙祭祀时得到了一部书，书名叫《谴劾百鬼法》。
English: In Henan County, there was a man named Yangqi, also known as Shengqing, who suffered from malaria as a child. During a ritual at a local temple, he received a book called "The Law of Punishing a Hundred Ghosts."

古文：为日南太守。
现代文：后来他做了日南郡的太守。
English: Later he became the governor of Nichinan County.

古文：母至厕上，见鬼，头长数尺。
现代文：一日，他的母亲在厕所里看见一个鬼，光脑袋就有好几尺长。
English: One day, his mother saw a ghost in the toilet. Its head alone was several feet long.

古文：以告圣卿。圣卿曰：此肃霜之神。
现代文：母亲回来后告诉了阳起，阳起说：这是肃霜之神呵。
English: After her mother returned, she told Yangqi. Yangqi said, "This is the god of frost.

古文：劾之来出，变形如奴。
现代文：随即将他喊来。
English: He called after him.

古文：送书京，朝发暮返。
现代文：这位肃霜之神就变做了一个奴仆，去京城送信，早晨出发傍晚就回来了。
English: The frost god became a servant, sending messages to the capital, leaving in the morning and returning in the evening.

古文：作使当千人之力。
现代文：他发威时可以抵挡住千人之力。
English: He can hold his own against a thousand men.

古文：有与忿恚者，圣卿遣神夜往，趣其床头，持两手，张目正赤，吐舌柱地，其人怖几死。
现代文：有一个使阳起愤恨得发怒的人，他便派肃霜之神深夜赶到那人床前，张开两手，眼睛瞪得通红，大舌头拖拉到地上，差一点儿把那人吓死。
English: There was a man who made the sun so angry that it was enraged, so he sent the god of frost to rush to the man's bed in the middle of the night. He opened his hands, his eyes glowed red, and he dragged his big tongue to the ground, almost scaring the man to death.

古文：欧明
现代文：欧明
English: Ominous

古文：庐陵邑子欧明者，从贾客道经彭泽湖。
现代文：庐陵郡郡府里有个男子叫欧明。他常常跟随商人们从彭泽湖边的大道上经过。
English: In the county seat of Fuling County, there is a man named Ou Ming. He often follows the merchants as they pass by on the road along Pengze Lake.

古文：每过，辄以船中所有，多少投湖中。
现代文：每次路过这里，不论船上有什么，都要多少往湖里投一些。
English: Every time I pass by here, no matter what is on the boat, I have to throw some into the lake.

古文：见大道之上，有数吏皆著黑衣，乘车马，云是清洪君使，要明过。
现代文：一次，欧明看见大道上有好几个黑衣吏乘车马而来，并说是清洪君的使者，要欧明跟他们走。
English: Once, Ou Ming saw several black-clad officials coming down the avenue on horses and chariots, saying that they were messengers of Qing Hongjun and asking Ou Ming to follow them.

古文：明知是神，然不敢不往。
现代文：欧明知道他们是神，但又不敢不去。
English: He knows they are gods, but he dares not go there.

古文：吏车载明，须臾见有府舍，门下吏卒。
现代文：黑衣吏们用车载着欧明，顷刻之间来到了一座府院，门口站着小吏和士兵。
English: The black-clad officials carried Ou Ming in a car, and in an instant they arrived at a courthouse, where the officials and soldiers were standing at the door.

古文：吏曰：清洪君感君有礼，故要君。
现代文：小吏说：清洪君被你的彬彬有礼所感动，因此把你请来，要重重地谢你呢！
English: The petty official said, "Qing Hongjun was moved by your courtesy, so he invited you here to thank you very much!"

古文：以重送君，皆勿取，独求如愿耳。
现代文：不过，你什么都不要拿，只要一个如愿。
English: However, you don't have to take anything, as long as one wish comes true.

古文：去，果以缯帛赠之，明不受。但求如愿。
现代文：小吏说完便不见了。欧明进屋之后，清洪君果然送给他不少绫罗绸缎。欧明不要，只要如愿。
English: After Ou Ming entered the house, Qing Hongjun really gave him a lot of silk brocade. Ou Ming did not want it, as long as it was what he wanted.

古文：神大怪明知之，意甚惜之，不得已，呼如愿，使随明去。
现代文：清洪君对他了解自己的情况颇觉奇怪，有些舍不得，不得已，只好唤如愿出来。
English: Qing Hongjun felt rather strange about his understanding of his own situation, and reluctantly had to call him out as he wished.

古文：如愿者，清洪婢，常使取物。
现代文：如愿，原来是清洪君的一个婢女，经常听他的差使。
English: As he wished, it turned out to be one of Qing Hongjun's maidservants, who often listened to his orders.

古文：明将如愿归，所须辄得之，数年成富人。
现代文：清洪君让她随欧明而去。欧明带着如愿返回故里。他需要什么就能够得到什么，几年之后就成了富人。
English: Qing Hongjun asked her to go with Ou Ming. Ou Ming returned to his hometown with his wish. He could get whatever he needed, and after a few years he became rich.

古文：意渐骄盈，不复爱如愿。
现代文：于是，他志得意满，渐渐骄横起来，不再爱如愿了。
English: As a result, he became complacent and gradually arrogant, and no longer loved as he wished.

古文：正月岁朝，鸡初一鸣，呼如愿。
现代文：正月初一天刚亮，小鸡又鸣叫起来。
English: It was just after dawn on the first day of the first month of the year when the chicks began to sing again.

古文：如愿不即起，明大怒，欲捶之。
现代文：欧明喊如愿，如愿没有立即起来，欧明怒气冲天想捶她一顿。
English: Oh Ming shouted as he wished, Oh Ming did not get up immediately as he wished, Oh Ming was furious and wanted to beat her up.

古文：如愿乃走于粪上，有昨日故岁扫除聚薪，足以偃人。
现代文：如愿跑到粪堆上，那里有扫岁清除的柴草，满可以掩人。
English: If you like, you can run to the dung heap, where there is firewood cleared by the sweeper, which is full of camouflage.

古文：如愿乃于此逃，得去。
现代文：如愿就在旁边跑过，方得以脱身。
English: Mr. Ruyi ran by and was able to escape.

古文：明渭逃在积薪粪中，乃以杖捶粪使出。又无出者，乃知不能得。
现代文：欧明认为她钻进了柴草和粪土中，于是就用木棍猛劲捶打，半天不见人影，才知道她不能出来了。
English: Ou Ming thought that she had got into the brushwood and dung, so he beat her hard with a wooden stick. After not seeing anyone for half a day, he knew that she couldn't get out.

古文：因曰：汝但使我富，不复捶汝。
现代文：因此，欧明最后说道：你只要使我富起来，我便不再捶打你。
English: Therefore, Omin finally said, "If you just make me rich, I won't beat you anymore."

古文：今世人岁朝鸡鸣时，辄往捶粪，云：使人富。
现代文：如今，人们都要在大年初一鸡叫时捶打粪堆，并且说：让我富，让我富！
English: Nowadays, people have to beat the dunghill when the rooster crows at the beginning of the year, and say: let me be rich, let me be rich!

古文：李高
现代文：李高
English: Li Gao

古文：王莽时，汉中太守五更往祭神庙，遗其书刀，遣小吏李高还取之。
现代文：王莽当朝的时候，汉中郡太守五更天去祭拜神庙。返回时，他将一把装订书册的刀子忘在庙中，便派小吏李高回去取。
English: During Wang Mang's reign, the governor of Hanzhong County, Wu Gangtian, went to worship at the temple. When he returned, he forgot a knife used to bind books in the temple, so he sent a minor official, Li Gao, to retrieve it.

古文：见刀在庙床上，有一人，著大冠绛袍，谓高曰：勿道我，吾当祐汝！
现代文：李高回到庙中，看见那把刀放在床上，旁边坐着一个穿深红色袍子、戴顶大帽子的人。那人对李高说：不要说见到我，我会保祐你的。
English: When Li Gao returned to the temple, he saw the knife on the bed and a man in a crimson robe and a big hat sitting next to him. The man said to Li Gao, "Don't say you've seen me, I'll protect you."

古文：后仕至郡守。
现代文：后来，李高果然步入仕途，一直升到郡守。
English: Later, Li Gao successfully entered his career path, rising all the way to county governor.

古文：年六十余，忽道见庙神，言毕而此刀刺高心下，须臾而死。
现代文：他六十多岁那年，忽然把在庙中遇神之事讲了出来。话音刚落，那把刀子就刺进了他的心脏，顷刻便死了。
English: When he was in his sixties, he suddenly spoke out about meeting God in the temple. As soon as he spoke, the knife pierced his heart and he died instantly.

古文：莽闻甚恶之。黄原
现代文：王莽听说了这件事，十分厌恶。黄原
English: Wang Mang heard about this and was disgusted. Huangyuan

古文：汉时，泰山黄原，平旦开门，忽有一青犬，在门外伏，守备如家养。
现代文：汉朝的时候，泰山有叫黄原的人。一天天大亮的时候，他打开房门，忽然看见一只黑狗在门口趴着，俨如自家养的守护着门户。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Mount Tai had a man named Huang Yuan. Every day when it was bright, he opened the door and suddenly saw a black dog lying on its back at the door, guarding the door like a pet.

古文：原绁犬，随邻里猎。
现代文：黄原就用绳子将它拴了起来。
English: Huang Yuan tied it up with a rope.

古文：日垂夕，见一鹿，便放犬。
现代文：一天，他跟随邻里去打猎，日头偏西的时候，遇见一只鹿，黄原便放狗去追。
English: One day, he went hunting with his neighbours. When the sun was setting in the west, he met a deer, and Huang Yuan let his dog chase it.

古文：犬行甚迟，原绝力逐，终不及。
现代文：狗跑得太慢，黄原拼命追逐，最后还是没有追上。
English: The dog ran too slowly, and Huang Yuan chased after it desperately, but still couldn't catch up.

古文：行数里，至一穴，入百余步，忽有平衢，槐柳列植，垣墙回匝。
现代文：去了好几里，看见一个山洞。黄原入洞走一百多步远，忽然看见一条平坦的大路，两旁栽着槐树和柳树。
English: He walked several miles and saw a cave. Huangyuan walked more than a hundred steps into the cave and suddenly saw a flat road with eucalyptus and willow trees on both sides.

古文：原随犬入门，列房可有数十间，皆女子，姿容妍媚，衣裳鲜丽，或抚琴瑟，或执博棋。
现代文：前面又闪出蜿蜒的城墙。黄原随那条黑狗进了城门，只见两旁有几十间房子，房子里全是女子，一个个如花似玉，娇艳妩媚。她们有的在弹琴，有的在下棋。
English: The meandering city wall flashed in front of him again. Huangyuan followed the black dog into the city gate, only to see dozens of houses on both sides. The houses were full of women, all of them beautiful and charming. Some of them were playing the piano, some were playing chess.

古文：至北阁，有三间屋，二人侍值，若有所伺。
现代文：到了北边的一座阁楼，只见这里有三间屋，两个女子站在一边，仿佛在等候什么人。
English: When they arrived at an attic on the north side, they saw three rooms with two women standing to one side, as if they were waiting for someone.

古文：见原，相视而笑云：此青犬所引致妙音婿也。
现代文：看见黄原来了，她们相视一笑，说：这黑狗所引来的就是妙音的夫婿了！
English: When they saw Huangyuan coming, they looked at each other with a smile and said, "This black dog has brought me a wonderful husband!"

古文：一人留，一人入阁。
现代文：然后一个留在原地，一个进入阁内。
English: Then one stays where he is and one goes into the attic.

古文：须臾有四婢出，称太真夫人白黄郎，有一女，年已弱笄，冥数应为君妇。
现代文：有顷，四个婢女走了出来，说：太真夫人白黄郎有个女儿，年龄已近二十，按冥数她应当成为你的妻子。
English: Suddenly, four maids came out and said, "Lady Taizhen and Bai Huang Lang have a daughter who is nearly twenty years old. According to my calculations, she should be your wife."

古文：既暮，引原入内。
现代文：天黑之后，她们引黄原入内。
English: After dark, they lured Huangyuan inside.

古文：有南向堂，堂前有池，池中有台，台四角有径尺穴，穴中有光，照映帷席。
现代文：这里有一个方向朝南的大厅，厅前有水池子，水池子里有个平台，平台四角有直径盈尺的孔穴，穴中有光，闪闪烁烁，照映着帷席。
English: There is a hall facing south. In front of the hall there is a pool. In the pool there is a platform. In the four corners of the platform there are holes with a diameter of more than a meter. In the holes there is light, flashing, reflecting the curtains.

古文：妙音容色婉妙，侍婢亦美。
现代文：那妙音姑娘容色美艳，楚楚动人，侍婢们长得也很漂亮。
English: That Miao Yin girl is beautiful and charming, and her attendants and maids are also very beautiful.

古文：交礼既毕，晏寝如旧。
现代文：拜过天地之后，他们便入了洞房。
English: After bowing to heaven and earth, they entered the bridal chamber.

古文：经数日，原欲暂还报家。
现代文：时间一天天过去了。忽然有一天，黄原想暂时离开这里，还家报告一声。
English: Time passed day by day. Suddenly, one day, Huang Yuan wanted to leave here temporarily and called home.

古文：妙音曰：人神道异，本非久势。
现代文：妙音说：人神毕竟不同道呵，你我这夫妻本来就不是长久的呀！
English: Miao Yin said: After all, people and gods are different, you and I are not a long-term couple!

古文：至明日，解佩分袂，临阶涕泗，后会无期，深加爱敬。若能相思，至三月旦，可修斋戒。
现代文：到了明天，咱们互赠玉佩作为离别纪念，下台阶时泪流满面，想到这一朝分手，后会无期，你我都将更加深爱对方你如果还能够思念于我，那么就请你在每年三月的今天斋戒一日。
English: Tomorrow, we will give each other jade jewelry as a parting souvenir. When we walk down the steps, we will be in tears. The thought of breaking up this morning will last forever. You and I will love each other more deeply. If you can still miss me, then please fast for one day every March.

古文：四婢送出门，半日至家。
现代文：四个婢女将他送出门来，他半天便回到家中。
English: Four maidservants escorted him out of the house, and he returned home after half a day.

古文：情念恍惚。每至其期，常见空中有軿车，仿佛若飞。
现代文：从此，黄原神情恍惚，每到三月的那一天，他就会影影绰绰看见一辆女人乘坐的有帷帘的车子，从空中飞一般朝他驶来。
English: Since then, Huangyuan has been in a trance, and every day in March, he would almost see a woman riding in a curtained car, flying through the air and coming towards him.

古文：贾逵
现代文：贾逵
English: Jia Wei

古文：贾逵在豫郡亡，家迎丧去。
现代文：贾逵在豫郡死了，家里人前去迎丧。
English: Jia Wei died in Yu County, and his family members went to mourn.

古文：去后，恒见形于项城。
现代文：迎走之后，人们还经常看到贾逵的影子在项城中晃来晃去。
English: After the welcoming ceremony, people often see Jia Wei's shadow in Xiangcheng.

古文：吏民以其恋慕彼境，因以立庙。庙前有柏树。
现代文：官吏和百姓们都认为他仍留恋这个地方，便为他建起一庙，庙前有柏树。
English: The officials and the people all thought that he was still attached to this place, so they built a temple for him, with a cypress tree in front of the temple.

古文：有人窃来砍伐，始投斧刃，仍著于树中，所著入寻而更生。
现代文：有人偷偷前来砍伐，可是当他们刚举起斧头，那斧刃便砍入树干，所砍之处一会儿就长好了。
English: Some people secretly came to cut it down, but as soon as they lifted the axe, the axe blade cut into the tree trunk, and the place where it was cut grew back in no time.

古文：项城左右人，莫不振怖。
现代文：项城周围的人们无不为之震动、惊恐。
English: People around the city were shocked and frightened.

古文：李宪
现代文：李宪
English: Li Xian

古文：龙舒陵亭，有一大树，高数十丈，黄鸟十数巢其上。
现代文：龙舒陵亭旁边，有一株大树，几十丈高，有十多只黄鸟在上面筑巢。
English: Next to Longshuling Pavilion, there is a large tree, dozens of meters high, with more than ten yellow birds nesting on it.

古文：时久旱，长老共相谓曰：彼树常有黄气，或有神灵，可以祈雨。
现代文：当时久旱不雨，几位长老商议后说：那棵树常有黄气，或许会有神灵，可以向它祈雨。
English: At that time, it had not rained for a long time. After discussion, several elders said, "That tree is often yellow, and it may have a god. You can pray to it for rain."

古文：因以酒脯往。
现代文：于是，人们拿着酒肉等供品前来。
English: As a result, people came with offerings of meat and wine.

古文：亭中有寡妇李宪者，夜起室中，忽见一绣衣妇人曰：我树神也，以汝性洁，佐汝为生。
现代文：亭子里有个寡妇叫李宪，一天半夜起来，在自己房中看见一个穿着绣花衣服的妇人对她说：我是树神呵！由于你洁身自好，所以我想帮助你生活下去。
English: There was a widow in the pavilion named Li Xian. She got up in the middle of the night one day and saw a woman in her room wearing an embroidered dress. She said to her: "I am a tree god! Since you are clean and self-respecting, I want to help you live.

古文：朝来父老皆欲祈雨，吾已求之于帝。
现代文：早晨来的父老乡亲都是来祈雨的，为此我已经向天帝请求过了，天帝也答应下来。
English: The fathers and countrymen who came in the morning came to pray for rain, for which I have already asked the Heavenly Emperor, and the Heavenly Emperor has agreed.

古文：至明日日中，果大雨，遂为立祠。
现代文：到了第二天中午，果然下了一场大雨。人们当即为树神建了个祠堂。
English: At noon the next day, a heavy rain fell. People immediately built a shrine for the tree god.

古文：宪曰：诸卿在此，吾居近水，当致少鲤鱼。
现代文：落成那天，李宪说：各位官员都在这里，我住在水边上，目下却没有鲤鱼。
English: On the day of its completion, Li Xian said: "All the officials are here, I live on the water's edge, but at the moment there are no eels.

古文：言讫，有鲤数十头，飞集堂下。
现代文：她的话音刚落，有十几条鲤鱼，忽然凭空飞落到堂前。
English: Just as she finished speaking, more than a dozen eels suddenly flew out of thin air and landed in front of the hall.

古文：坐者莫不惊悚。
现代文：见状，一旁观看的人们惊慌悚然。
English: Seeing this, the people watching on the sidelines panicked.

古文：如此岁余。
现代文：就这样过了一年多。
English: Just like that, more than a year has passed.

古文：神曰：将有大兵，今辞汝去。
现代文：一日，树神来跟李宪告别说：不久，这里将有一场兵马之争，我今天是来向你辞行的。
English: One day, the tree god came to bid farewell to Li Xian and said, "Soon, there will be a battle here. I have come to leave you today."

古文：留一玉环，曰：持此可以避难。
现代文：然后又留下一只玉环说，拿着它就可以避过此难。
English: Then he left a jade ring, saying that by holding it, he could avoid this difficulty.

古文：后袁术、刘表相攻，龙舒之民皆流去，唯宪里不被兵。
现代文：后来袁术和刘表互相攻打，龙舒的老百姓都被害苦了，逃走了，只有李宪的住处未被打扰。
English: Later, Yuan Shou and Liu Biao attacked each other, the people of Longshu suffered and fled, only Li Xian's residence was not disturbed.

古文：张璞
现代文：张璞
English: Zhang Ye

古文：张璞，字公直，不知何许人也。
现代文：张璞，字公直，不知道究竟是个什么人。
English: Zhang Yao, whose name means "honest," doesn't know who he really is.

古文：为吴郡太守。
现代文：他后来作吴郡太守。
English: He later became the governor of Wu County.

古文：征还，道由庐山。
现代文：后被召还，途经庐山。
English: After being recalled, he passed through Shaoshan.

古文：子女观于祠堂，婢使指像人以戏曰：以此配汝。
现代文：孩子们进祠堂里参观，婢女指着庐君的神像对张璞的女儿开玩笑说：把你许配给他，如何？
English: The children went into the ancestral hall for a tour, and the maid pointed to the statue of the god of Zhai Jun and jokingly said to Zhang Jun's daughter: How about marrying him?

古文：其夜璞妻梦庐君致聘曰：鄙男不肖，感垂采择，用致微意。
现代文：当天夜里，张璞的妻子梦见庐君送来聘礼说：感激您选择我这个不肖男儿为婿，这点东西表示一下我的心意，请您收下。
English: That night, Zhang Ye's wife dreamed that Zou Jun had sent her a betrothal gift, saying, "I am grateful that you have chosen me, an unprepossessing man, as your son-in-law. This is something that expresses my heart's desire. Please accept it."

古文：妻觉怪之。
现代文：张璞的妻子醒来之后，甚觉奇怪。
English: Zhang Yao's wife woke up feeling very strange.

古文：婢言其情。于是妻惧，催璞速发。
现代文：婢女向她道出实情，她感到有些害怕，催促丈夫赶紧离开这里。
English: When the maid told her the truth, she felt a little scared and urged her husband to leave immediately.

古文：中流，舟不为行。阖船震恐。
现代文：他们的船行到江中央，却不动了，全船的人无不感到震惊、恐怖，纷纷把一些东西投入江中。
English: When their boat reached the middle of the river, it stopped moving. Everyone on board was shocked and horrified, and they threw things into the river one after another.

古文：乃皆投物于水，船犹不行。
现代文：然而，那船还是不动地方。
English: Still, the ship did not budge.

古文：或曰：投女则船为进。
现代文：有人对张璞说：你把女儿扔入江中这船才能走呵。
English: Someone said to Zhang Ye: "You can only leave this boat if you throw your daughter into the river."

古文：皆曰：神意已可知也，以一女而灭一门，奈何？
现代文：大家都说；神的意思已经很清楚了。为了一个女孩子而想害死全家，怎么办？
English: Everyone said, "God's will is already clear. How can you want to kill the whole family for the sake of one girl?"

古文：璞曰：吾不忍见之。乃上飞庐卧，使妻沈女于水。
现代文：张璞痛苦万状地说：那就只好牺牲她一个而保全大家了可是我实在不忍心看哪！说完便爬进船顶舱里躺下，示意妻子把女儿沉入水中。
English: Zhang Xuan said painfully, "Then we'll have to sacrifice her to save everyone, but I really can't bear to watch!" After saying that, he climbed into the top cabin of the boat and lay down, signaling his wife to sink their daughter into the water.

古文：妻因以璞亡兄孤女代之。
现代文：妻子不舍得，便用张璞死去的哥哥留下的孤女代替。
English: Reluctant to do so, his wife substituted the orphaned daughter left behind by Zhang Ye's dead brother.

古文：置席水中，女坐其上，船乃得去，即璞见女之在也，怒曰：吾何面目于当世也！
现代文：她把一张席子扔到水中，然后把那孩子放到上面，船终于向前行进了。旋即，张璞看见自己的女儿还在，明白过来，怒气冲冲地对妻子说；你这样做，还让我有什么脸面活在这世上！
English: She threw a mat into the water, then put the child on it, and the boat finally moved forward. Suddenly, Zhang Ye saw that his daughter was still there, understood, and angrily said to his wife; You do this, and let me have some face to live in this world!

古文：乃复投己女。
现代文：说罢，便将女儿也扔入江中。
English: After saying this, he also threw his daughter into the river.

古文：及得度，遥见二女在下。有吏立于岸侧，曰：吾庐君主簿也。
现代文：船渡到对岸，人们远远看见那两个被扔进水中的女孩子正在岸边玩耍呢，且有一个官吏站在她们身边。那官吏上前对张璞说；我是庐君的主簿呵。
English: When the boat reached the opposite shore, the two girls who had been thrown into the water could be seen playing on the shore in the distance, and a government official was standing next to them. The official stepped forward and said to Zhang Ye, "I am the master of Zou Jun."

古文：庐君谢君，知鬼神非匹，又敬君之义，故悉还二女。
现代文：庐君非常感谢你，但他知道，鬼神是不能与你女儿相配的；另外，他还十分敬重你的大义，因此派我把这两个女孩子全还给你。
English: Zou Jun is very grateful to you, but he knows that ghosts and gods cannot be matched with your daughter; in addition, he also respects your great righteousness, so he sent me to return the two girls to you.

古文：问女，言：但见好屋吏卒，不觉在水中也。
现代文：张璞和妻子问那两女孩子，她们说刚才只看见不少漂亮的房屋和众多的吏卒，没有感觉到是在水里面。
English: Zhang Qi and his wife asked the two girls. They said that they had just seen many beautiful houses and many officials, but did not feel that they were in the water.

古文：洛子渊
现代文：洛子渊
English: Loziyuan Mountain

古文：后魏孝昌时，有虎贲洛子渊者，自云洛阳人。孝昌中，戍於彭城。
现代文：南北朝北魏孝昌年间，有个勇士叫洛子渊，自称是洛阳人氏，参军后到彭城戍边。
English: During the Northern and Southern Dynasties and the Northern Wei and Xiaochang Dynasties, there was a warrior named Luo Ziyuan, who claimed to be a Luoyang person. After joining the army, he went to Pengcheng.

古文：其同营人樊元宝，得假还京师，子渊附书一封。云：宅在灵台南，近洛水乡。
现代文：他同一个营里有个人叫樊元宝，请假返回京城，洛子渊求他捎一封信回去，并告诉他说：我的家在灵台南边，离洛水乡不远。
English: There was a man in the same battalion with him, named Yan Yuanbao, who asked for leave to return to Beijing. Luo Ziyuan begged him to send a letter back, and told him: "My home is on the south side of Lingtai, not far from Luo Shui Xiang.

古文：但至彼，家人自出相看。
现代文：只要到了那个地方，家里人自然会出来接你。
English: As soon as you get to that place, your family will naturally come to pick you up.

古文：元宝如其言，至灵台南，见无人家。
现代文：樊元宝按照他说的，来到灵台南边，可一户人家也没有。
English: According to him, Xuan Yuanbao came to the south side of Lingtai, but there was no one there.

古文：徙倚欲去，忽见一老翁，问云：从何而来？
现代文：他徘徊有顷正想离去，忽然看见一个老翁，向他问道：你是从什么地方来的？
English: He had been wandering for a while and was about to leave when he saw an old man who asked him, "Where are you from?"

古文：傍徨于此？
现代文：在这里流连不去？
English: Can't get enough of singing here?

古文：元宝具向道之。
现代文：樊元宝向他说明缘由。
English: Xuan Yuanbao explained the reason to him.

古文：老翁云：是吾儿也。
现代文：老翁笑道：噢，他是我的儿子呵！
English: The old man laughed and said, "Oh, he is my son!"

古文：取书，引元宝入。
现代文：老翁接过洛子渊捎来的书信，引樊元宝进入家门。
English: The old man received the letter from Luo Ziyuan and brought Yuanbao into the house.

古文：遂见馆阁崇宽，屋宇佳丽。
现代文：樊元宝随即看到一漂亮的楼阁，高大而宽敞。落坐之后，老翁让婢女拿酒来。
English: Xuan Yuanbao immediately saw a beautiful mansion, tall and spacious. After sitting down, the old man asked the maid to bring wine.

古文：既坐，命婢取酒，须臾，见婢抱一死小儿而过，元宝甚怪之。
现代文：不一会，只见那婢女抱个死孩儿匆匆而过，樊元宝颇觉奇怪。
English: After a while, he saw the maid hurrying past with a dead child in her arms, and felt strangely attracted to Yu Yuanbao.

古文：俄而酒至，酒色甚红，香美异常。
现代文：这时，酒送上来了，颜色非常之红，却异常香美。
English: At this time, the wine was brought up, the color was very red, but unusually fragrant.

古文：兼设珍羞，海陆备有。
现代文：另外，又端上来一些美味佳肴，山上的海里的全有。
English: In addition, some delicious dishes were served, everything from the mountains to the sea.

古文：饮讫告退。
现代文：喝完酒后，樊元宝起身告辞。
English: After drinking the wine, Yan Yuanbao got up to say goodbye.

古文：老翁送元宝出云：后会难期，以为凄恨。
现代文：老翁送他到门外，并且伤感地说：你我再见面就难了，这该多么遗憾呵！
English: The old man ushered him out the door and said sadly, "It will be hard for you to see me again. What a pity!"

古文：别甚殷勒。
现代文：老翁又送出好远，才转身返回。
English: The old man sent him a long way before he turned around and came back.

古文：老翁还入。元宝不复见其门巷。但见高崖对水，渌波东倾。
现代文：这时，樊元宝却再也看不见那座楼阁和大门，只看见高崖下面的江水，清波滚滚向东流去。
English: At this time, Xuan Yuanbao could no longer see the mansion and the gate, but only saw the river water below the cliff, the clear waves rolling to the east.

古文：一童子可年十四五，新溺死，鼻中血出。方知所饮酒。是其血也。
现代文：岸边，他看见一个十四五岁的男孩儿刚刚淹死，鼻子里流出红红的血来，不由恍然大悟：刚才所喝下的酒，正是这孩子的血呵！
English: On the shore, he saw a fourteen-five-year-old boy who had just drowned, with red blood coming out of his nose, and he suddenly realized: the wine he had just drunk was the blood of this child!

古文：及还彭城，子渊已失矣。
现代文：等到他回到彭城，那洛子渊已不知去向。
English: By the time he returned to Pengcheng, Naro Ziyuan had disappeared.

古文：元宝与子渊同戍三年，不知是洛水之神。
现代文：樊元宝跟他一起戍守三年，却不知道他就是洛水之神呵。
English: Xuan Yuanbao stayed with him for three years, but he did not know that he was the god of Luoshui.

古文：陈虞
现代文：陈虞
English: Chen Yu

古文：陈虞，字君度。
现代文：陈虞字君度，他的妻子是庐江郡的杜氏。
English: Chen Yu Zi Jindu, his wife is the chief brewer of Minjiang County.

古文：妇庐江杜氏，常事鬼子母，罗女乐以娱神。
现代文：这杜氏常常侍奉鬼子母，安排一些歌舞妓供其娱乐。
English: This toji often served the mother of demons, arranging for a number of singing and dancing prostitutes to entertain her.

古文：后一夕复会，弦管无声，歌音凄忾。
现代文：后来一天夜里，一切都安排停当，可那弦管等乐器却发不声来，歌舞妓的嗓音也变得凄凉而悲愤。
English: Then, one night, everything was arranged to stop, but the string instruments and other musical instruments were silent, and the voice of the showgirl became desolate and sad.

古文：杜氏常梦鬼子母，遑遽涕泗云：凶人将来。婢先与外人通，以梯布垣，登之入。
现代文：不久，杜氏梦见那鬼子母，惶惶不安，泪流满面地说：凶恶的人要来了，我先与外人约定好了，把梯子搭在墙上，登着梯子就出去了！
English: Not long after, Du Shi dreamt of the demon mother, panicked and worried, and said with tears streaming down his face: A vicious person is about to come. I made an appointment with the outsider first, put the ladder on the wall, climbed the ladder and went out!

古文：神被服将剥夺毕，加取影像焚剉而去也。黄翻
现代文：说完，神把衣服财物都留了下来，又将她的影像焚烧、磋磨一阵才离去。黄翻
English: After saying this, the god left all of her clothes and belongings behind, and then burned and ground her image for a while before leaving.

古文：汉灵帝光和元年，辽西太守黄翻上书：海边有流尸，露冠绛衣，体貌完全。
现代文：汉灵帝光和元年，辽西郡太守黄翻上书说：海边发现一具被冲上来的尸体，没戴帽子，穿着深红色衣服，肢体完整，容貌也未被损坏。
English: In the first year of Emperor Guangwu's reign, Huang Qian, the governor of Liaoxi County, wrote in a letter: A body was found washed up on the beach, without a hat, wearing dark red clothes, with complete limbs and no damage to the face.

古文：翻感梦云： 我伯夷之弟，孤竹君子也。
现代文：一日，他托梦给我说： 我是商代伯夷的弟弟，也是孤竹君的儿子呵。
English: One day, he told me in a dream: I am the younger brother of Shangdai Bo Yi, and also the son of Lone Bamboo.

古文：海水坏吾棺椁，求见掩藏。
现代文：海水冲坏了我的棺材，请求你把我掩埋了吧！ 
English: The sea has broken my coffin, I beg you to bury me!

古文：民嗤视之，皆无病而死。
现代文：凡是看到这具尸体而讥笑者，全都无病而死了。
English: All those who saw the corpse and laughed died without illness.

古文：阳雍
现代文：阳雍
English: Yangyong

古文：魏阳雍，河南洛阳人。兄弟六人，以佣卖为业。
现代文：南北朝北魏有个人叫阳雍，系河南洛阳人氏，兄弟六个，均以受人雇用、出卖劳动力为生。
English: In the Northern and Southern Dynasties and the Northern Wei Dynasty, there was a man named Yang Yong, who belonged to the Luoyang people of Henan Province. He had six brothers, all of whom made a living by being employed and selling their labor.

古文：公少修孝敬。
现代文：阳雍从小就孝敬父母，远近闻名。
English: Yang Yong has been known for his filial piety to his parents since childhood.

古文：达于遐迩。父母殁，葬礼毕，长慕追思，不胜心目。
现代文：父母双亡，阳雍将他们埋葬之后，一直思念不已，常常伤心落泪。
English: After the death of her parents and their burial by Yang Yong, she has been thinking about them endlessly, often breaking down in tears.

古文：乃卖田宅，北徙绝水浆处，大道峻坂下为居。
现代文：于是，他把房子和地全卖了，迁往北边缺水的地方，在一个大道旁的陡坡下面住下来。
English: So he sold his house and all his land and moved to the north, where there was a shortage of water, and lived at the bottom of a steep slope next to a main road.

古文：晨夜辇水，将给行旅，兼补履，不受其直。
现代文：他天不亮就起来车水，送给过往的行人，而且还给他们补修鞋子，一律免费。
English: He wakes up before dawn to fetch water and give it to passers-by. He also repairs their shoes, all free of charge.

古文：如是累年不懈。
现代文：就这样，他一直坚持数年，从未松懈。
English: In this way, he has been insisting for several years and has never slackened.

古文：天神化为书生，问曰：何故不种菜以给？
现代文：天神变成一个书生，向他问道：你为什么不种菜自己吃呢？
English: Tenjin turned into a scholar and asked him, "Why don't you grow your own vegetables to eat?"

古文：答曰：无种。
现代文：阳雍回答说：没有种子。
English: Yang Yong replied, "There is no seed.

古文：乃与之数升。
现代文：天神给了他几升菜种，阳雍大喜，便种进了地里。
English: Tenjin gave him a few liters of vegetable seeds. Yang Yong was overjoyed and planted them in the ground.

古文：公大喜，种之，其本化为白璧，余为钱。
现代文：结果，长出来的根茎变成了白璧，叶子变成了钱。
English: As a result, the rhizome that grew out turned white and the leaves turned into money.

古文：书生复曰：何不求妇？
现代文：天神又说：你为何不娶个妻子呢？
English: And the angel said unto him, Why hast thou not taken a wife?

古文：答曰：年老，无肯者。
现代文：阳雍回答说：我的年纪大了，没有人肯嫁的。
English: Yang Yong replied, "I am too old, and no one will marry me.

古文：书生曰：求名家女，必得之。
现代文：天神说：你向名门之女求婚，一定能成。
English: Tenjin said, "If you ask a famous woman to marry you, you will surely succeed."

古文：有徐氏，右北平著姓，女有名行，多求不许。
现代文：有一家姓徐的，属右北平郡的大户。他们有个女儿，所作所为颇有些名气，好多来求婚的她均未相中。
English: There is a family with the surname Xu, a large household in Right Beiping County. They have a daughter, who is quite famous for what she does, and many of her marriage proposals have been unsuccessful.

古文：乃试求之。
现代文：阳雍请了个媒婆去试探一下。
English: Yang Yong invited a matchmaker to explore.

古文：徐氏笑之，以为狂僻，然闻其好善，戏笑媒曰：得白璧一双，钱百万者，与婚。
现代文：开始，徐氏女淡淡一笑，认为阳雍太轻狂，或者说太无知；后来得知他多行善事，便对媒婆开玩笑道：如果他能送来一对白璧，一百万钱，我就嫁给他。
English: At first, Xu's daughter smiled faintly, thinking that Yang Yong was too frivolous, or too ignorant; later, when she learned that he did a lot of good deeds, she joked to the matchmaker: If he can send a pair of Bai Bi, one million money, I will marry him.

古文：公即具送。
现代文：第二天，阳雍就把这些作为聘礼送上门去。
English: The next day, Yang Yong sent these as a betrothal gift.

古文：徐氏大愕，遂以妻之。
现代文：徐氏女一看，大惊，只好嫁给阳雍做了妻子。
English: When Xu's daughter saw this, she was so shocked that she had no choice but to marry Yang Yong.

古文：生十男，皆令德俊异，位至卿相。
现代文：他们一共生了十个儿子，全都德才兼备，俊美非常，担任过宰相、公卿等要职。
English: They had a total of ten sons, all of whom were both talented and very handsome, and held important positions such as prime minister and court noble.

古文：今右北平诸阳，其后也。
现代文：眼下，右北平郡里众多姓阳的人家，都是他的后代呵。
English: Right now, many surnamed Yang in Right Beiping County are his descendants.

古文：钱祐
现代文：钱祐
English: Qian Yu

古文：会稽余姚人钱祐，夜出屋后，为虎所取。
现代文：会稽郡余饶县有个叫钱祐的人，半夜到房后解便，被一只老虎叼走了。
English: There was a man named Qian Yu in Yurao County, Hechi County, who defecated in his room in the middle of the night and was chased away by a tiger.

古文：十八日乃自还。
现代文：想不到，十八天之后，他又自己回到了家中。
English: Unexpectedly, eighteen days later, he returned home on his own.

古文：说虎初取时，至一官府，见一人凭几坐，形貌壮伟，侍从四十人。
现代文：他说：老虎把我叼走后，来到一座官府，只看见有个人凭案几而坐，仪表堂堂，高大伟岸，仅侍从就有四十人。
English: He said, "After the tiger took me away, I came to a government office. I only saw a man sitting there with a few documents. He was well-groomed, tall and powerful. There were only forty attendants.

古文：谓曰：吾欲使汝知数术之法。
现代文：他对我说： 我想让你懂得算命之法。
English: He said to me: I want you to know how to tell fortunes.

古文：留十五日，昼夜语诸要术。
现代文：于是，留我住了十五天，天天夜以继日向我传授算命之要领。
English: So they kept me for fifteen days, teaching me the essentials of fortune-telling day and night.

古文：祐受法毕，使人送出。得还家。
现代文：我把这算命之法学成之后，那人派人将我送出大门，我才得以还家。
English: After I had learned this fortune-telling trick, the man sent someone to escort me out of the gate, and I was able to return home.

古文：大知卜占，无幽不验。
现代文：从此，他对占卜算命那一套十分精通，没有不灵验的。
English: From then on, he was well-versed in divination and fortune-telling, and nothing failed him.

古文：经年乃死。
现代文：他又活了好多年才死。
English: He lived for many more years before dying.

古文：徐郎
现代文：徐郎
English: Hsu Lang

古文：京口有徐郎者，家甚褴缕，常于江边拾流柴。
现代文：京口城有位徐郎，家中十分贫困，一次到江边捡大水冲下来的柴禾，忽然看见上游出现几只大船，顺着江面漂来，径直调转船头进了入浦口。
English: In the city of Kyoguchi, there was a man named Xu Lang, whose family was very poor. One day, he went to the river to pick up firewood washed down by the flood. Suddenly, he saw several large ships upstream. They floated down the river, turned their bows straight and entered Urakuchi.

古文：忽见江中连船，盖川而来，迳回入浦，对徐而泊，遣使往云：天女今当为徐郎妻。徐入屋角，隐藏不出。
现代文：船行到徐郎对面停下来，派人来到他身边说：天女今天想做你的妻子。徐郎吓得躲到墙角，隐藏起来不再露面。
English: When the boat came to a stop opposite Xu Lang, he sent someone to his side and said, "Today, a heavenly maiden wants to be your wife." Xu Lang was so scared that he hid in a corner of the wall and never showed his face again.

古文：母兄妹劝励强出，未至舫，先令于别室为徐郎浴。
现代文：母亲、兄长、妹妹又是劝说又是鼓励，徐郎才勉强走出来。未等上船，先有人奉命在别的屋里为他沐浴。
English: After persuasion and encouragement from his mother, brother and sister, Xu Lang reluctantly came out. Before he boarded the boat, someone was ordered to bathe him in another room.

古文：水芬香，非世常有。
现代文：沐浴的芬香无比，非人世间所有。
English: The fragrance of the bath is incomparable. It is like nothing else in the world.

古文：赠以缯绛之衣。
现代文：然后，又送给他一套深红色的绸缎衣服。
English: Then she gave him a crimson silk and satin suit.

古文：徐唯恐惧，累膝床端，夜无醻接之礼。
现代文：徐郎唯唯喏喏，恐惧不已，在床头整整跪了一夜，晚上没有行夫妻之礼。
English: Xu Lang Wei Wei, terrified, kneeled at the head of the bed for a whole night, and there was no wedding ceremony in the evening.

古文：女怒遣之使出。
现代文：他把那套衣物还给天女，便匆匆告退。
English: He returned the set of clothes to the celestial maiden and left in a hurry.

古文：以所赠衣物乞之而退。家大小怨惜煎骂。遂懊叹卒。
现代文：一家老小对他又是责骂又是埋怨，都感到十分惋惜。这种折磨，使徐郎为之懊丧、哀叹，不久便死了。
English: An old family member felt very sorry for him, scolding and complaining at the same time. This kind of torture made Xu Lang sad and regretful, and he died soon after.

古文：丁氏妇
现代文：丁氏妇
English: Ding's Wife

古文：淮南全椒县，有丁新妇者，本丹阳丁氏女。
现代文：在淮南郡全椒县里，有个人刚娶了个妻子，娘家在丹阳，姓丁，年方十六岁。
English: In Quanzhe County, Huainan County, there was a man who had just married a wife. Her family was in Danyang. Her surname was Ding. She was 16 years old.

古文：年十六，适全椒谢家。其姑严酷，使役有程，不如限者，仍便笞捶，不可堪。九月七日自经死。
现代文：她丈夫姓谢，婆婆颇为严厉、冷酷，拿她当奴仆一样使役好些日子，但稍不如意，便棍棒抽打。她苦不堪言，于九月七日这天上吊自尽了。
English: Her husband, surnamed Xie, and her mother-in-law, who was rather strict and cold, used her as a slave for several days, but when she was not satisfied, they beat her with a club. She was so miserable that she hanged herself on September 7.

古文：遂有灵响，闻于民间。
现代文：随即，这位丁氏女便常常在村子里显灵。
English: Soon after, the Ding woman began to appear frequently in the village.

古文：发言于巫祝曰：念人家妇女，作息不倦，使避九月七日勿用作。见形，著缥衣，戴青盖，从一婢，至牛渚津求渡。有两男子共乘船捕鱼，仍呼求载。两男子笑，共调弄之，言：听我为妇。言：当相渡也。
现代文：他们来到朱渚津求渡。这时，有两个男子坐在一只船上撒网捕鱼，那丁氏女向他们呼喊求助，欲登船过江。那两个男子相视一笑，调戏她说：只要你顺从听话，做我们的老婆，我们才能把你送过江去。
English: They came to Zhujiatsin to cross the river. At that time, two men were sitting on a boat casting fishing nets. Nadin's daughter shouted to them for help and wanted to board the boat to cross the river. The two men smiled at each other and teased her, saying, "As long as you obey and be our wife, we can send you across the river."

古文：丁妪曰：谓汝是佳人，而无所知。
现代文：丁氏女说：说你们是好人，而我却一无所知。
English: Ding's daughter said: "He said you were good people, but I didn't know anything about it.

古文：汝是人，当使汝入泥死。是鬼，使汝入水。
现代文：你们如果是人，就让你们入泥而死；你们是鬼，就让你们掉进水里。
English: If you are men, you will sink in the mud and die; if you are spirits, you will fall into the water.

古文：便却入草中。
现代文：那两个男子们吓得急忙躲入草中。
English: Terrified, the two men scurried into the grass.

古文：须臾，有一老翁，乘船载苇，妪从索渡。
现代文：须臾，又有一个老头载着芦苇乘船而来，丁氏女请他帮忙。
English: Soon, another old man carrying reeds came by boat, and Ms. Ding asked him for help.

古文：翁曰：船上无装，岂可露渡。
现代文：老头儿说：船上没有铺垫，怎么能让你们坐在船板上呢？
English: The old man said, "There is no cushion on the boat, so how can you sit on the board?"

古文：恐不中载耳。
现代文：恐怕不能载你们了。
English: I'm afraid I can't give you a lift.

古文：妪言：无苦。翁因出苇半许，安处著船中，径渡之，至南岸。临去语翁曰：吾是鬼神，非人也，自能得过。
现代文：丁氏妇说没关系，老头儿就拿下一半芦苇，把她们安置在船上，径直向对岸渡去。到了南岸，临别时她对老头儿说：我是鬼神，不是人呵。
English: Ding's wife said it didn't matter, so the old man took down half of the reeds, put them on the boat, and went straight across to the opposite shore. When they reached the south shore, she said to the old man as they parted: "I'm a ghost, not a human being."

古文：然宜使民间粗相闻知。翁之厚意，出苇相渡，深有惭感，当有以相谢者。
现代文：我自己当然能够过江的，但却想见见世面，看看人间的一些丑态恶行承老人家的厚意，把自己的苇子卸掉而让我上船，这使我深为惭愧和感动，应当用什么来报答你才是。
English: Of course, I can cross the river myself, but I want to see the world and see some of the ugliness and evil in the world. Following the kindness of the old man, I took off my braids and let me get on the boat. This made me deeply ashamed and moved. What should I use to repay you?

古文：翁速还去，必有所见，亦当有所得也。
现代文：老人家快撑船而返，必有所见，也一定会有所得的。
English: The old people quickly rowed back, they must have seen something, and they must have gained something.

古文：翁曰：愧燥湿不至，何敢蒙谢。
现代文：老头儿说：惭愧！这船上潮湿闷热，怎敢蒙谢？
English: The old man said, "Shame on me! How dare I be thanked for being wet and stuffy on this ship?

古文：翁还西岸，见两少男子覆水中。进前数里，有鱼千数，跳跃水边。风吹置岸上。
现代文：他撑船回到西岸，看见那两个男子漂在水上，又向前走了几里，只见有数千条的鱼儿在江边跳跃，被风一吹，全都落到了岸上。
English: He paddled back to the west bank, saw the two men floating on the water, and walked a few miles further, only to see thousands of fish jumping on the edge of the river. When the wind blew, they all fell to the shore.

古文：翁遂弃苇载鱼以归。
现代文：老头儿随即扔掉芦苇，载着满船的鱼儿回家了。
English: The old man then threw away the reeds and went home with a boatload of fish.

古文：于是丁妪遂还丹阳。江南人皆呼为丁姑。
现代文：于是，丁氏女又回到丹阳，江南人都喊她丁姑。
English: As a result, Ding's daughter returned to Danyang, and people in the south of the Yangtze River called her Ding Gu.

古文：九月七日不用作事，咸以为息日也。
现代文：九月七日不用干活，都把这一天当作休息日。
English: There is no work on September 7th, and everyone treats this day as a day of rest.

古文：今所在祠之。
现代文：现在，那地方已经盖起了一座祠庙。
English: Now, an ancestral temple has been built there.

古文：阿紫
现代文：阿紫
English: Ah Zi

古文：世有紫姑神。
现代文：世上有位紫姑神。
English: There is a god named Zigu in the world.

古文：古来相传是人妾，为大妇所嫉，每以秽事相交役。
现代文：自古以来，人们都传说她本是人家的小妾，遭到了正妻的嫉恨，总是让她干那些最脏的活。
English: Since ancient times, it has been said that she was a concubine who was envied by her real wife, who always made her do the dirtiest jobs.

古文：正月十五日，感激而死。
现代文：正月十五日这天，她由于过份激愤犯心病而死。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month, she died of a heart attack brought on by excessive anger.

古文：故世人以其日作其形，夜于厕间或猪栏旁迎之。祝曰：子胥不在，曹姑亦归去，小姑可出戏。
现代文：所以，人们都在这一天作出她的摹拟像，然后等到夜里拿着它到厕所或猪圈边迎候，并且还要祝祷说：子胥不在，曹姑亦归去，小姑可出戏。
English: Therefore, on this day, people have made her simulacrum, and then wait until the night to take it to the toilet or the pigsty to greet, and also to pray: Zi Yan is not there, Cao Gu has also returned, Xiao Gu can play.

古文：捉者觉重，便是神来。
现代文：提着摹拟像的人感到忽然有些沉重，便是神来了。
English: If the person holding the effigy suddenly feels a little heavy, it means that the gods have come.

古文：奠设酒果，亦觉貌辉辉有色。即跳躞不住。
现代文：于是，大家忙着祭设酒肉瓜果，同时也觉得那摹拟像熠熠生辉，真像要活了一般，当即便手舞足蹈。
English: As a result, everyone was busy with the celebration of wine, meat and melons, and at the same time felt that it was like a radiant glow, as if they really wanted to live, even if they were dancing.

古文：占众事，卜行年蚕桑。
现代文：接着，开始占卜各种事情，如当年的桑情如何，蚕茧是否丰收等等。
English: Next, they began divining various things, such as how the mulberry situation was that year, whether the silkworm cocoon had a good harvest, and so on.

古文：又善射钓。
现代文：然后，把牺牲挂到前面，用射钓占卜。
English: Then, hanging the offering in front of them, they used a fishing rod to tell fortunes.

古文：好则大儛，恶便仰眠。
现代文：如果射中了，大家就狂舞起来；如果没有射中，人们便回家睡觉。
English: If it hits, everyone dances wildly; if it doesn't, people go home to bed.

古文：平昌孟氏恒不信，躬试往捉。便自跃穿屋，永失所在。
现代文：平昌县孟氏总是不相信，躬腰上前试着用手去捉，结果跳穿了屋墙，她本人也不见了踪影。
English: Ms. Meng, from Pyeongchang County, never believed it. She bent forward and tried to catch it with her hands, but ended up jumping through the wall of the house, and she herself disappeared.

