古文：三十年春，王正月，公在乾侯。
现代文：三十年春季，周历正月，鲁昭公在乾侯。
English: In the spring of the thirtieth year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Lu Zhaogong was in Qianhou.

古文：夏六月庚辰，晋侯去疾卒。
现代文：夏季六月庚辰日，晋顷公去世。
English: In the summer of June, on the day of Geng Chen, Jin Hao passed away.

古文：秋八月，葬晋顷公。
现代文：秋季八月，安葬晋顷公。
English: In the autumn of August, Jin Hao was buried.

古文：冬十有二月，吴灭徐，徐子章羽奔楚。
现代文：送机十二月，吴国灭掉徐国，徐国国君逃到楚国。
English: In December, Wu State eliminated Xu State, and the prince of Xu State fled to Chu State.

古文：三十年春，王正月，公在乾侯，不先书郓与乾侯，非公，且征过也。
现代文：三十年春季，周王朝历法的正月，鲁昭公在乾侯。《春秋》以前不记载 公在郓 或 在乾侯 ，这是认为昭公不对，而且说明过错所在。
English: In the spring of the thirtieth year, the first month of the Zhou Dynasty calendar, Lu Zhaogong was in Qianhou. Before "Spring and Autumn," there was no record of Gong in Qianhou or in Qianhou, which was considered to be wrong for Zhaogong and indicated the fault.

古文：夏六月，晋顷公卒。
现代文：夏季，六月，晋顷公死了。
English: In the summer, in June, Jin Hao died.

古文：秋八月，葬。
现代文：秋季，八月，下葬。
English: Autumn, August, burial.

古文：郑游吉吊，且送葬。
现代文：郑国的游吉前去吊唁并送葬。
English: Yuji from Zhengzhou went to pay his condolences and attend the funeral.

古文：魏献子使士景伯诘之曰： 悼公之丧，子西吊，子送葬。
现代文：魏献子让士景伯质问游吉，说： 悼公的丧事，子西吊唁，子?送葬。
English: Wei Xianzi asked Jingbo to question Youji, saying: "In mourning the public funeral, my son is in mourning, and my son is going to the funeral."

古文：今吾子无贰，何故？ 
现代文：现在您只有一个人，是什么缘故？ 
English: Now you are alone. Why?

古文：对曰： 诸侯所以归晋君，礼也。
现代文：游吉回答说： 诸侯所以归服晋国国君，这是认为晋国有礼。
English: Youji replied, "That is why the lords submit to the sovereign of Jin. It is considered a national rite of Jin."

古文：礼也者，小事大，大字小之谓。
现代文：礼这件事，就是说小国事奉大国，大国爱抚小国。
English: This is a matter of courtesy, which means that small countries should serve big countries, and big countries should caress small countries.

古文：事大在共其时命，字小在恤其所无。
现代文：事奉大国在于恭敬地按时执行命令，爱抚小国在于体恤小国的缺乏。
English: To serve a big country is to respectfully execute orders on time, and to caress a small country is to sympathize with the lack of small countries.

古文：以敝邑居大国之间，共其职贡，与其备御不虞之患，岂忘共命。
现代文：由于敝邑处在大国之间，供应它所需的贡品，还要参与战备以防意外，难道能忘了恭敬地执行吊丧送葬的礼节？
English: Since the county is located between the great powers, supplying it with the necessary tribute, and also participating in the war preparations to prevent accidents, can it forget to respectfully carry out the funeral etiquette?

古文：先王之制，诸侯之丧，士吊，大夫送葬。唯嘉好聘享三军之事，于是乎使卿。
现代文：先王的制度：诸侯的丧事，士吊唁，大夫送葬，只有朝会、聘问、宴享、军事行动才派遣卿。
English: The system of the previous king: the funeral of the princes, the condolences of the nobles, the funeral of the doctors, only the imperial court, the invitation, the banquet, and the military action were sent to the nobles.

古文：晋之丧事，敝邑之间，先君有所助执绋矣。
现代文：晋国的丧事，当敝邑闲暇无事，先君曾经亲自来送葬。
English: When there was a funeral in Jin Province, when there was nothing to do in Zouyi, the late emperor himself came to attend the funeral.

古文：若其不间，虽士大夫有所不获数矣。
现代文：如果不得闲暇，即使是士、大夫有时也难于派遣。
English: If you don't have leisure, it's sometimes difficult to dispatch even doctors and nurses.

古文：大国之惠，亦庆其加，而不讨其乏，明厎其情，取备而已，以为礼也。
现代文：大国的恩惠，也会是嘉许敝邑对大国的常礼有所增加，而不责备它的缺乏，明白敝邑的忠诚，只是要求礼仪具备，就可以认为合于礼了。
English: The benevolence of a great power will also be to praise the increase of the etiquette of the county to the great power, without blaming its lack, understand the loyalty of the county, but only require the etiquette to be available, it can be considered appropriate.

古文：灵王之丧，我先君简公在楚，我先大夫印段实往，敝邑之少卿也。
现代文：周灵王的丧事，我们先君简公在楚国，我们先大夫印段前去送葬，他还是敝邑的下卿。
English: At the funeral of King Zhou Ling, we were the first to go to the country of Chu, and we were the first to go to the funeral of Dr. Yin Duan, who was also the lower lord of Zouyi.

古文：王吏不讨，恤所无也。
现代文：天子的官吏并没有责备我们，这是由于体恤敝邑的缺乏。
English: Tianzi's officials didn't reprimand us, which was due to their lack of consideration.

古文：今大夫曰，女盍从旧。
现代文：现在大夫说： 你们为什么不按照过去的礼节办？ 
English: Now, the doctor said, "Why don't you follow past etiquette?"

古文：旧有丰有省，不知所从。
现代文：过去的礼节有隆重有减省，不知道应该按照什么。
English: The etiquette of the past has been either grand or reduced, and I don't know which one to follow.

古文：从其丰，则寡君幼弱，是以不共。
现代文：根据隆重，那么寡君年纪小，因此不能前来。
English: According to the palace, the monarch is too young to attend.

古文：从其省，则吉在此矣。
现代文：根据减省，那么吉在这里了。
English: According to the reduction, then the good news is here.

古文：唯大夫图之。 
现代文：请大夫考虑一下！ 
English: Ask the doctor to think about it!

古文：晋人不能诘。
现代文：晋国人不能再质问了。
English: The people of Jin can no longer ask questions.

古文：吴子使徐人执掩馀，使钟吾人执烛庸。
现代文：吴王让徐国人逮捕掩馀，让钟吾人逮捕烛庸，两个公子逃亡到楚国。
English: The king of Wu ordered the people of Xu to arrest Bai Yu, the people of Zhongwu to arrest Ceng Yong, and the two princes fled to Chu.

古文：二公子奔楚，楚子大封而定其徙。使监马尹大心逆吴公子，使居养。莠尹然、左司马沈尹戌城之，取于城父与胡田以与之。将以害吴也。
现代文：楚昭王大封土地给他们，并确定他们迁居的地方，派监马尹大心迎接吴国公子，让他们住在养地，派莠尹然、左司马沈尹戌在那里筑城，把城父和胡地的土田给他们，准备用他们危害吴国。
English: King Chu Zhao gave them a large amount of land and determined the place where they would move to. He sent the overseer Ma Yin Daxin to meet the noble sons of Wu and let them live in the feeding ground. He sent Yu Yin Ran and Zuo Sima Shen Yin Wei to build a city there, and gave them the soil of the city father and the Huti, preparing to use them to endanger Wu.

古文：子西谏曰： 吴光新得国，而亲其民。视民如子，辛苦同之，将用之也。
现代文：子西劝谏楚昭王说： 吴光新近得到国家，亲爱他的百姓，把百姓看成像儿子一样，和百姓同甘共苦，这是准备使用他们了。
English: Zixi advised Zou Chu Zhao Wang, saying: Wu Guang recently obtained the country, loved his people, regarded the people as his sons, and shared the joys and sorrows with the people. This was preparation for using them.

古文：若好吴边疆，使柔服焉，犹惧其至。
现代文：如果和吴国边境上的人结好，让他们温柔亲服，还恐怕吴军的到来。
English: If you make friends with the people on the border of Wuxi, and let them tenderly kiss, I am afraid that the Wuxi Army will come.

古文：吾又疆其仇以重怒之，无乃不可乎。
现代文：现在我们又让他们的仇人强大，以加重他们的愤怒，恐怕不可以吧！
English: Now we are empowering their enemies to make them even angrier, I'm afraid not!

古文：吴，周之胄裔也，而弃在海滨，不与姬通。今而始大，比于诸华。光又甚文，将自同于先王。
现代文：吴国是周朝的后代，而被抛弃在海边，不能和姬姓各国相往来，现在才开始壮大，可以和中原各国相比，吴光又很有知识，准备使自己和先王一样。
English: Wu is a descendant of the Zhou dynasty, and was abandoned on the coast, unable to interact with countries with the surname of Hime. It is only now that it has begun to grow. It can be compared to the Central Plains countries. Wu Guang is also very knowledgeable and is ready to make himself like the former king.

古文：不知天将以为虐乎，使翦丧吴国而封大异姓乎？
现代文：不知道上天将要使他暴虐，让他灭亡吴国而使异姓之国扩大土地呢？
English: Didn't he know that Heaven would make him a tyrant and let him destroy the State of Wu so that a country with a different name could expand its territory?

古文：其抑亦将卒以祚吴乎？
现代文：还是将最终要保佑吴国呢？
English: Or will Wu finally be blessed?

古文：其终不远矣。
现代文：恐怕它的结果不久可以知道。
English: I'm afraid its outcome will be known soon.

古文：我盍姑亿吾鬼神，而宁吾族姓，以待其归。将焉用自播扬焉？ 
现代文：我们何不姑且安定我们的鬼神，宁静我们的百姓，以等待他的结果，哪里用得着自己辛劳呢？ 
English: Why don't we just let our gods and spirits be stable, and our people be calm, and wait for his results. What need is there for our own toil?

古文：王弗听。
现代文：楚昭王不听子西的谏言。
English: Guoxi Wang did not listen.

古文：吴子怒，冬十一月，吴子执钟吾子，遂伐徐，防山以水之。
现代文：吴王阖庐发怒。冬季，十一月，吴王逮捕了钟吾子。于是就进攻徐国，堵住山上的水再灌入徐国。
English: In the winter, in November, King Wu arrested Zhong Wuzi, so he attacked the State of Hsu, blocked the water from the mountains, and then poured it into Hsu.

古文：己卯，灭徐。
现代文：二十三日，灭亡徐国。
English: On the 23rd, the State of Xu was overthrown.

古文：徐子章禹断其发，携其夫人，以逆吴子。
现代文：徐国国君章禹剪断头发，带着他夫人迎接吴王。
English: Xu Guo Guo Jun Zhang Yu cut his hair and took his wife to meet King Wu.

古文：吴子唁而送之，使其迩臣从之，遂奔楚。
现代文：吴王加以慰问后送走了他，让他的近臣跟着，于是就逃亡到楚国。
English: King Wu sent him away after offering condolences, and let his close vassals follow him, so he fled to Chu.

古文：楚沈尹戌帅师救徐，弗及，遂城夷，使徐子处之。
现代文：楚国的沈尹戌领兵救徐国，没有赶上。于是就在夷地筑城，让徐国国君住在那里。
English: Shen Yunyun of Chu led an army to rescue Xu, but he did not catch up. Therefore, he built a city in Yidi and let Xu Guojun live there.

古文：吴子问于伍员曰： 初而言伐楚，余知其可也，而恐其使余往也，又恶人之有余之功也。
现代文：吴王问伍员说： 当初你说进攻楚国，我知道能够成功，但恐怕他们派我前去，又不愿意别人占了我的功劳。
English: Wu Wang asked the officer: When you said you would attack Chu, I knew you would succeed, but I'm afraid they sent me, and they didn't want others to take the credit.

古文：今余将自有之矣，伐楚何如？ 
现代文：现在我将要自己占有这份功劳了。进攻楚国怎么样？ 
English: Now, few people want to personally lead the army to fight against Chu, what do you think?

古文：对曰： 楚执政众而乖，莫適任患。
现代文：伍员回答说： 楚国执政的人多而不和，没有人敢承担责任。
English: The corporal replied: There are many people in power in the state of Chu, but they are not friendly, and no one dares to take responsibility.

古文：若为三师以肄焉，一师至，彼必皆出。
现代文：如果组织三支部队对楚国来个突然袭击而又迅速撤退，一支部队到那里，他们必然会全军应战。
English: If you organize three units to make a sudden attack on Chu and then quickly retreat, and one unit goes there, they will inevitably challenge the whole army.

古文：彼出则归，彼归则出，楚必道敝。
现代文：他们出来，我们就退回来；他们回去，我们就出动，楚军必定在路上疲于奔命。
English: If they come out, we will retreat; if they go back, we will attack. The Chu army must be exhausted on the road.

古文：亟肄以罢之，多方以误之，既罢而后以三军继之，必大克之。 
现代文：屡次突袭快撤使他们疲劳，用各种方法使他们失误。他们疲乏以后再派三军继续进攻，必定大胜他们。 
English: Repeated raids and quick retreats have made them tired, and various methods have caused them to make mistakes. After they are tired, they will send three armies to continue the attack, and they will surely defeat them.

古文：阖庐从之。楚于是乎始病。
现代文：阖庐听从了他的意见，楚国从此就开始困顿疲乏了。
English: He listened to his advice, and from then on, the state of Chu began to struggle.

