古文：爆竹一声除旧，桃符万户更新。
现代文：爆竹一声除旧岁，新的一年又来临了；门上换上了新的桃符，以迎接新的一年。
English: Firecrackers rang in the old year, and the new year came again; new peach charms were replaced on the door to welcome the new year.

古文：履端是初一元日，人日是初七灵辰。
现代文： 履端 指正月初一，又叫 元旦 ； 人日 是正月初七，是良辰吉日。
English: 履端 refers to the first day of the first month of the year, also known as New Year's Day; 人日 is the seventh day of the first month of the year, and is a good luck day.

古文：元日献君以《椒花颂》，为祝遐龄；元日饮人以屠苏酒，可除疠疫。
现代文：元旦这天，为君王献上一篇《椒花颂》，祝颂他长寿；元旦请人喝屠苏酒，可以去除百病。
English: On New Year's Day, a copy of "Ode to Pepper Blossoms" was presented to the king to congratulate him on his long life; on New Year's Day, people were invited to drink Tu Su wine, which can remove all kinds of diseases.

古文：新岁曰王春，去年曰客岁。
现代文：新的一年叫 王春 ，过去的一年则称 客岁 。
English: The new year is called Wang Chun, and the previous year is called Hakka Year.

古文：火树银花合，谓元宵灯火之辉煌；星桥铁锁开，调元夕金吾之不禁。
现代文： 火树银花合 ，是形容元宵节晚上灯火的灿烂辉煌； 星桥铁锁开 ，是说元宵节这一天开禁，放下吊桥，城内外游人可自由往来观赏灯火。
English: The fire tree and silver blossom match, is to describe the brilliant brilliance of the lanterns at the evening of the Lantern Festival; the star bridge is locked, is to say that the Lantern Festival is banned on this day, and the suspension bridge is put down, and visitors from inside and outside the city can come and go freely to watch the lights.

古文：二月朔为中和节，三月三为上巳辰。
现代文：二月初一是中和节，三月初三是上巳春浴之时。
English: The first day of February is the Mid-Autumn Festival, and the third day of March is the time for the Spring Festival.

古文：冬至百六是清明，立春五戊为春社。
现代文：冬至后第一百零六天是清明节，立春后的第五个戊日叫做春社。
English: The 106th day after the winter solstice is the Qingming Festival, and the fifth day after the beginning of spring is called the Spring Festival.

古文：寒食节是清明前一日，初伏日是夏至第三庚。
现代文：寒食节在清明节的前一天；初伏日则是夏至后第三个庚日。
English: The Cold Food Festival falls on the day before the Tomb-Sweeping Day, and the New Year's Eve falls on the third day after the summer solstice.

古文：四月乃是麦秋，端午却为蒲节。
现代文：四月麦熟所以称为麦秋；端午日饮菖蒲酒所以又称为蒲节。
English: April is known as wheat harvest, so it is called wheat autumn; Dragon Boat Festival is also known as the Dragon Boat Festival, so it is called the Dragon Boat Festival.

古文：六月六日，节名天贶；五月五日，序号天中。
现代文：六月初六是天贶节；五月五日称为天中节。
English: The 6th day of the 6th month of June is the Mid-Autumn Festival; the 5th day of May is called the Mid-Autumn Festival.

古文：端阳竞渡，吊屈原之溺水；重九登高，效桓景之避灾。
现代文：端午节龙舟竞渡，悼念溺水身死的屈原；重阳节登高山插茱萸饮茱萸酒，是效法桓景避灾。
English: Dragon boat race at the Dragon Boat Festival to mourn the death of Qu Yuan who drowned; climbing high mountains to drink wine at the Chung Yeung Festival is to follow the example of Huan Jing to avoid disasters.

古文：五戊鸡豚宴社，处处饮治聋之酒；七夕牛女渡河，家家穿乞巧之针。
现代文： 春社 日，家家户户杀猪宰鸡祭祀土地公神，大家争饮可以医治耳聋的酒。七月初七牛郎织女渡河相会，家家妇女在庭院摆上香案，祭拜织女乞求得到织布绣花的技巧。
English: At the beginning of July, the seven cowherds and the weaver cross the river to meet, the women of the family put incense in the courtyard, worship the weaver and beg to get the skill of weaving embroidered flowers.

古文：中秋月朗，明皇亲游于月殿；九日风高，孟嘉帽落于龙山。
现代文： 中秋 夜月光格外清朗，唐明皇梦游月宫； 重阳节 登龙山，山风将孟嘉的帽子吹落。
English: Mid-Autumn Festival, the moonlight is exceptionally clear at night, Tang Ming Emperor sleepwalks to the Moon Palace; Chung Yeung Festival, climbs Mount Longshan, the mountain wind blows Meng Jia's hat off.

古文：秦人岁终祭神曰腊，故至今以十二月为腊；始皇当年御讳曰政，故至今读正月为征。
现代文：秦人每年岁终祭神称为 腊 ，因此至今日皆称十二月为 腊月 。秦始皇的名字叫嬴政，秦人避讳读正为征，后世便沿用此例读 正月 为 征月 。
English: The Qin people's annual year-end festival god is called "La," so to this day they all call December the "Wax Moon." The name of the first emperor of the Qin Dynasty is "Wang Zheng," the Qin people avoid reading it as "Zheng," and later generations will continue to use this example to read the first month as "Zheng."

古文：东方之神曰太皞，乘震而司春，甲乙属木，木则旺于春，其色青，故春帝曰青帝。
现代文：掌管东方的神叫做 太皞 ，居震位主管春季，天干为甲乙，五行属木，木在春天很旺盛，它的颜色是青色，所以春帝又称为青帝。
English: The god who presides over the East is called Taishan, the ruler of the spring, the celestial stem is A and B, and the five elements belong to wood. Wood is very vigorous in the spring, and its color is blue, so the Spring Emperor is also called the Blue Emperor.

古文：南方之神曰祝融，居离而司夏，丙丁属火，火则旺于夏，其色赤，故夏帝曰赤帝。
现代文：掌管南方的神叫做 祝融 ，居离位主管夏季，天干为丙丁，五行属火，火在夏季很旺盛，它的颜色是赤色，所以夏帝又称为赤帝。
English: The god who presides over the south is called Zhu Rong, who is in charge of the summer. The heavenly stem is Pingting, and the five elements are fire. Fire is very strong in the summer, and its color is red, so Xia Di is also called Red Emperor.

古文：西方之神曰蓐收，当兑而司秋，庚辛属金，金则旺于秋，其色白，故秋帝曰白帝。
现代文：掌管西方的神叫做 蓐收 ，居兑位主管秋季，天干庚辛，五行属金，金在秋季很旺盛，它的颜色是白色，所以秋帝又称为白帝。
English: The god in charge of the West is called 收, the ruler of the autumn, 天干庚辛, the five elements are gold, gold is very strong in the autumn, its color is white, so the Autumn Emperor is also called the White Emperor.

古文：北方之神曰玄冥，乘坎而司冬，壬癸属水，水则旺于冬，其色黑，故冬帝曰黑帝。
现代文：掌管北方的神叫做 颛顼 ，居坎位主管冬季，天干为壬癸，五行属水，水在冬季很旺盛，它的颜色是黑色，所以冬帝又称为黑帝。
English: The god in charge of the north is called, the god in charge of winter, the heavenly stem is 壬, the five elements are water, the water is very strong in winter, its color is black, so the Winter Emperor is also called the Black Emperor.

古文：中央戊己属土，其色黄，故中央帝曰黄帝。
现代文：四方的中央五行属土，它的颜色是黄色，所以掌管中央的神称为黄帝。
English: The four-sided central pentagram belongs to the earth, and its color is yellow, so the god in charge of the center is called the Yellow Emperor.

古文：夏至一阴生，是以天时渐短；冬至一阳生，是以日晷初长。
现代文：夏至节气一过，阴气就启动了，白天的时间渐短。冬至一到，阳气就动起来了，太阳的影子慢慢地长了起来。
English: As soon as the summer solstice passes, the yin begins and the day becomes shorter. As soon as the winter solstice arrives, the yang begins to move and the shadow of the sun slowly grows.

古文：冬至到而葭灰飞，立秋至而梧叶落。
现代文：一到冬至，阳气初动，葭灰就会飞了起来。一到立秋，梧桐树上的叶子就纷纷飘落。
English: As soon as the winter solstice arrives, the yang qi begins to move, and the ashes fly up. As soon as the autumn begins, the leaves on the sycamore trees begin to fall.

古文：上弦谓月圆其半，系初八、九；下弦谓月缺其半，系廿二、三。
现代文：上弦是说月的半圆，就在初八、初九等日；下弦也是这样，就是廿二、廿三等日。
English: The first quarter is said to be the half-circle of the moon, on the eighth and ninth days of the first month; the second quarter is also the same, that is, the 22nd and 23rd days.

古文：月光都尽谓之晦，三十日之名；月光复苏谓之朔，初一日之号；月与日对谓之望，十五日之称。
现代文：完全没有月光，叫做晦，是三十日的别名；月光从无到有，叫做朔，是初一日的称呼；月和日相对，叫做望，是十五日的称呼。
English: If there is no moonlight at all, it is called the wan, which is another name for the 30th day; if the moonlight comes from nowhere, it is called the new moon, which is the name of the first day; and if it is opposite the moon and the sun, it is called the prospect, which is the name of the 15th day.

古文：初一是死魄，初二旁死魄，初三哉生明，十六始生魄。
现代文：初一的月亮像死灰一样，所以叫做死魄；初二的月亮稍微有一点微光，所以叫做旁死魄；初三的月亮才生出光来，所以叫做哉生明；十六的月亮开始有了残缺，所以叫做哉生魄。
English: The first month's moon is like dead ash, so it is called death; the second month's moon has a little bit of faint light, so it is called near death; the third month's moon only produces light, so it is called bright birth; the sixteenth month's moon begins to have defects, so it is called bright birth.

古文：翌日、诘朝，言皆明日；榖旦、吉旦，悉是良辰。
现代文：翌日、诘朝都是指明天；谷旦、吉时都是指好的时辰。
English: The next day, the morning of the first day, refers to tomorrow; the evening of the second day, the morning of the third day, and the evening of the fourth day, all refer to good times.

古文：片晌即谓片时，日曛乃云日暮。
现代文：片晌是说片刻的时候，日曛是说黄昏的时候。
English: "Katakazura" means "moment" and "sundial" means "twilight."

古文：畴昔、曩者，俱前日之谓；黎明、昧爽，皆将曙之时。
现代文：畴昔、曩者都是前日的别称，黎明、昧爽都是天将破晓的时候。
English: In the olden days, the day before was known as the day of the dead, and dawn and dusk were the time when the sky was about to break.

古文：月有三浣：初旬十日为上浣，中旬十日为中浣，下旬十日为下浣；学足三馀：夜者日之馀，冬者岁之馀，雨者晴之馀。
现代文：一个月的时光分为三浣：初旬十日为上浣，中旬十日称为中浣，下旬十日称为下浣；做好学问要充分利用三余的时间，夜晚是白昼之余，冬季是一年之余，下雨天是晴天之余。
English: The time of a month is divided into three periods: the first ten days are called the upper period, the middle ten days are called the middle period, and the last ten days are called the lower period; to do a good job of learning, you should make full use of the three-plus time, the night is the rest of the day, the winter is the rest of the year, and the rainy day is the rest of the day.

古文：以术愚人，曰朝三暮四；为学求益，曰日就月将。
现代文：用诈术骗人，可称之 朝三暮四 ；为学要求日益进步，可称之 日就月将 。
English: Using deception to deceive others, can be called the morning, evening and night; for learning requirements increasingly progress, can be called the day, month and year.

古文：焚膏继晷，日夜辛勤；俾昼作夜，晨昏颠倒。
现代文： 焚膏继晷 ，形容日夜不停，非常勤奋地工作或读书； 俾昼作夜 ，是说把白天和夜晚的作息弄颠倒了。
English: To work or study very diligently, day and night without a break; to make day into night, means to turn the daily and nightly routine upside down.

古文：自愧无成，曰虚延岁月；与人共语，曰少叙寒暄。
现代文：一事无成而自觉惭愧，可以说成虚延岁月。跟他人交谈，则称为少叙寒暄。
English: If you feel ashamed because you have not accomplished anything, you can say that you are wasting your time. If you talk to others, it is called Shoshu Kanzen.

古文：可憎者，人情冷暖；可厌者，世态炎凉。
现代文：最可厌恶、最可憎恨的人情世态是：在别人得势时就热情，在别人失势时就冷淡。
English: The most repugnant and detestable human attitude is to be enthusiastic when others gain power and to be cold-hearted when others lose power.

古文：周末无寒年，因东周之懦弱；秦亡无燠岁，由嬴氏之凶残。
现代文：东周末年政治宽松，周王室太懦弱了，人民感觉不到寒冷的年份。
English: At the end of the year, the political situation was loose, the Zhou royal family was too weak, and the people did not feel the cold.

古文：泰阶星平曰泰平，时序调和曰玉烛。
现代文：秦始皇太凶残了，人民感觉不到温暖的岁月。泰阶的星宿平正，象征国泰民安，称为泰平。四时平和，风调雨顺，则称为玉烛。
English: Emperor Qin Shihuangdao was so cruel that the people could not feel the warm years. The star of Taiji is Pingzheng, symbolizing the safety of the country and the people, and is called Tai Ping. At four o'clock, when the weather is good, it is called Jade Candle.

古文：岁歉曰饥馑之岁，年丰曰大有之年。
现代文：年岁荒歉叫做饥馑之岁，丰收之年叫做大有之年。
English: Years of famine are called years of famine, and years of plenty are called years of plenty.

古文：唐德宗之饥年，醉人为瑞；梁惠王之凶岁，野莩堪怜。
现代文：唐德宗时遇荒年，路上看见一个醉汉，人们便认为是吉祥的征兆；梁惠王时遇大荒灾，城郊野外到处都是饿死的人，实在很可怜。
English: When Tang Dezong had a bad year and people saw a drunken man on the road, they thought it was an auspicious sign; when Liang Hui Wang had a great disaster, there were people starving to death everywhere outside the city and countryside. It was really pitiful.

古文：丰年玉，荒年谷，言人品之可珍；薪如桂，食如玉，言薪米之腾贵。
现代文：丰年玉、荒年谷是形容一个人品德珍贵；薪如桂  食如玉 ，则用来比喻柴米价格高涨。
English: Abundant years and barren years are used to describe the preciousness of a person's character; firewood is like cinnamon and food is like jade are used to compare the soaring price of chai rice.

古文：春祈秋报，农夫之常规；夜寐夙兴，吾人之勤事。
现代文：春耕时祭神是祈求农作物能够丰收，秋收后祭神是报答神明的庇佑，这是农民一定要做的习俗。夜深了才睡，很早就起床，是说我们做事情应该勤勉。
English: During spring ploughing, the deity is worshipped to pray for a good harvest of crops, and after the autumn harvest, the deity is worshipped to repay the gods for their protection. This is a custom that farmers must do. They go to bed late at night and get up very early, which means that we should be diligent in doing things.

古文：韶华不再，吾辈须当惜阴；日月其除，志士正宜待旦。
现代文：美好的时光一去不返，读书人更应当珍惜光阴；时光容易流逝，有志之士应该及时努力。
English: The good times are gone forever, and readers should cherish the time even more; time passes easily, and people with ambition should work hard in a timely manner.

