古文：过卫，卫文公有邢、狄之虞，不能礼焉。
现代文：重耳经过卫国，卫文公因邢人、狄人联合入侵，不能以礼相接待。
English: After passing through the Great Patriotic War, Weiwengong could not be received with formalities due to the joint invasion of the Xiongnu and Di people.

古文：宁庄子言于公曰： 夫礼，国之纪也；亲，民之结也；善，德之建也。
现代文：宁庄子对卫文公说： 礼是国家的纲纪，亲是人民团结的纽带，善是立德的基础。
English: Ning Zhuangzi said to Wei Wen Gong: Rite is the national discipline, pro is the bond of unity of the people, and good is the foundation of morality.

古文：国无纪不可以终，民无结不可以固，德无建不可以立。
现代文：国家没有纲纪不可能长存，人民不团结就不可能坚固，不善也不可能立德。
English: Without discipline, a country cannot exist for a long time. Without the unity of the people, a country cannot be strong, and without goodness, it cannot be virtuous.

古文：此三者，君之所慎也。
现代文：这三者，是国君应该谨慎的。
English: Of these three, it is the sovereign who should be cautious.

古文：今君弃之，无乃不可乎！
现代文：如今君王抛弃它，恐怕不行吧！
English: Now that the king has abandoned it, I'm afraid it won't work!

古文：晋公子善人也，而卫亲也，君不礼焉，弃三德矣。
现代文：晋公子重耳是个贤人，又是卫国的亲属，君主不以礼相待，就是抛弃了以上所说的三种美德。
English: Prince Jin's heavy ear is a wise man, and he is also a relative of the national guard. If the monarch does not treat each other with courtesy, he has abandoned the above-mentioned three virtues.

古文：臣故云君其图之。
现代文：小臣因此说要请君王认真地考虑考虑。
English: The minister therefore said that he would ask the king to seriously consider it.

古文：康叔，文之昭也。
现代文：卫国的祖先康叔，是周文王的儿子。
English: Uncle Kang, the ancestor of the defenders of the country, was the son of King Zhouwen.

古文：康叔，武之穆也。
现代文：晋国的祖先唐叔，是周武王的儿子。
English: Uncle Tang, the ancestor of Jin, was the son of King Zhouwu.

古文：周之大功在武，天祚将在武族。
现代文：为周朝统一天下建立大功的是周武王，上天将保佑周武王的后代子孙。
English: It was King Zhou Wu who made great contributions to the unification of the Zhou Dynasty. Heaven will bless the descendants of King Zhou Wu.

古文：苟姬未绝周室，而俾守天聚者，必武族也。
现代文：只要姬姓的周朝永世不绝，那么守着上天所聚集的财富和民众的，一定是周武王的后代。
English: As long as the Zhou Dynasty with the surname "Hee" continues forever, the descendants of King Zhouwu will be the ones to guard the wealth and people gathered by Heaven.

古文：武族唯晋实昌，晋胤公子实德。
现代文：周武王的后代中，只有晋国繁衍昌盛，晋国的后代中，公子重耳是最有德行的。
English: Among the descendants of King Zhou Wu, only the Jin Dynasty thrived and prospered. Among the descendants of the Jin Dynasty, Prince Chonglu was the most virtuous.

古文：晋仍无道，天祚有德，晋之守祀，必公子也。
现代文：现在晋国的政治仍然无道，上天保佑有德的人，晋国能守住祭祀的人，一定是公子重耳了。
English: Now, the politics of Jin is still without a path. Heaven blesses those who are virtuous, and those who can keep the sacrificial rites in Jin must have the ear of the prince.

古文：若复而修其德，镇抚其民，必获诸侯，以讨无礼。
现代文：如果重耳能够返国复位，修其德行，安抚百姓，必然获得诸侯的拥护，讨伐以前对他无礼的国家。
English: If Chong Er could return to the country and resume his position, improve his virtue, and appease the people, he would inevitably gain the support of the princes and fight against the country that had been disrespectful to him before.

古文：君弗蚤图，卫而在讨。
现代文：君王如果不早作打算，那卫国就不免要遭到讨伐了。
English: If the monarch does not make plans early, then the defense of the country will inevitably be attacked.

古文：小人是惧，敢不尽心。 
现代文：小人因此感到害怕，怎敢不尽心而言呢。 
English: The villain is frightened by this, and dares not speak his mind.

古文：公弗听。
现代文：但是，卫文公听不进宁庄子的话。
English: Zhuang didn't listen.

