古文：李稚廉，赵郡高邑人也。
现代文：李稚廉，赵郡高邑人。
English: Li Chaklian, a resident of Gaoyu, Zhao County.

古文：齐州刺史义深之弟。
现代文：齐州刺史李义深的弟弟。
English: He is the younger brother of Li Yishen.

古文：稚廉少而寡欲，为儿童时，初不从家人有所求请。
现代文：稚廉从小就清心寡欲，还是儿童的时候，从来不对家人提出什么请求。
English: Since he was a child, Chikan has been clean-hearted and abstemious. When he was a child, he never made any requests to his family.

古文：家人尝故以金宝授之，终不取，强付，辄掷之于地。
现代文：有一次家人故意给他金实，他却始终不要，强塞给他，就扔到地上。
English: Once, his family deliberately gave him money, but he still didn't want it. They forced it on him and threw it on the ground.

古文：州牧以其蒙稚而廉，故名曰稚廉。
现代文：州牧看他虽然年纪小却不自私，所以就叫他稚廉。
English: The state herdsman saw that although he was young, he was not selfish, so he called him childish.

古文：聪敏好学，年十五，颇寻览五经章句。
现代文：稚廉聪明好学，十五岁就已经熟读了五经章句。
English: He was young, clever and eager to learn. At the age of fifteen, he had already read the five sutras.

古文：属葛荣作乱，本郡纷扰，违难赴京。
现代文：正赶上葛荣作乱，郡中混乱，来到京城避难。
English: Just in time for Ge Rong to create chaos, chaos in the county, came to the capital to take refuge.

古文：永安中，释褐奉朝请。
现代文：永安年间，初为奉朝请。
English: During the Yong'an era, it was the first time to be invited to the imperial court.

古文：普泰初，开府记室、龙骧将军、广州征南府录事参军，不行。
现代文：普泰初年，授开府记室、龙骧将军、广州征南府绿事参军，没有去上任。
English: In the first year of Putai, he was awarded the opening of the prefectural record office, the general of Longyu, and joined the army in Guangzhou to conquer the southern prefecture, but he did not go to take office.

古文：寻转开府咨议参军事、前将军。
现代文：不久改任开府谘议参军事、前将军。
English: He was soon reappointed as a member of the advisory council for the establishment of the prefectural government, a former general.

古文：天平中，高祖擢为泰州开府长史、平北将军。
现代文：天平年间，高祖提拔稚廉任泰州开府长史、平北将军。
English: During the Tenpyo era, Gaozu promoted Chikkan to be the governor of Taizhou and the general of Pingbei.

古文：稚廉缉谐将士，军民乐悦。
现代文：他与将士们和睦相处，军民关系融洽。
English: He gets along well with the soldiers and the military-civilian relations are harmonious.

古文：高祖频幸河东，大相嗟赏。
现代文：高祖多次到河东，很叹赏他的才干。
English: Gaozu has been to Hedong many times and is very impressed with his talent.

古文：转为世宗骠骑府长史。
现代文：改任世宗骠骑府长史。
English: He was reassigned to the post of Sejong Jeon, the prefectural governor.

古文：诏以济州控带川陆，接对梁使，尤须得人，世宗荐之，除济州仪同长史。
现代文：下诏说，济州是水陆要地，时常接待梁的使者，尤其需要一个得力之人，世宗推荐稚廉，任济州仪同长史。
English: The next edict said that Jeju is an important place on land and water, and often receives the envoys of the beam. In particular, it is necessary to have a capable person, who is recommended by the world and has a long history with the Jeju ceremony.

古文：又迁瀛州长史。
现代文：又改任瀛州长史。
English: He was also reappointed as the governor of Shandong Province.

古文：高祖行经冀州，总合河北六州文籍，商校户口增损。
现代文：高祖经过冀州时，检查河北六州全部的文书簿籍，核对户的增减。
English: When Gaozu passed through Jizhou, he checked all the document books of the six states of Hebei and checked the increase and decrease of households.

古文：高祖亲自部分，多在马上，征责文簿，指景取备，事绪非一。
现代文：这些都是高祖亲自分派布置，骑马行军，检查所需要的簿籍，头绪繁多，却必须立即准备妥当。
English: These were all arranged by Gao Zu himself, marching on horseback, checking the required books, and there were many clues, but they had to be prepared immediately.

古文：稚廉每应机立成，恒先期会，莫不雅合深旨，为诸州准的。
现代文：稚廉能随机应变，马上办好，他经常提前作好准备，与高祖的要求相符合，从而成为其他各州的榜样。
English: With his ability to improvise and get things done quickly, he often prepared ahead of time to meet the requirements of his forefathers, thus becoming a role model for other states.

古文：高祖顾谓司马子如曰： 观稚廉处分，快人意也。 因集文武数万人，令郎中杜弼宣旨慰劳，仍诘诸州长史、守令等，诸人并谢罪，稚廉独前拜恩，观者咸叹美之。
现代文：高祖回头对司马子如说： 看稚廉处理事情，足以让人心情愉快。 于是召集文武几万人，让郎中杜弼宣布皇上的旨意，慰劳稚廉，并且责问各州长史、太守县令等，其他人都一齐谢罪，衹有稚廉上前谢恩，旁观的人都很感叹羡慕。
English: Gao Zu looked back and said to Sima Zi, "It is enough to make a person feel happy to see a childish person handling things." So he gathered tens of thousands of men and women of letters and martial arts, let his vassal Du Xi announce the emperor's will, comfort the childish person, and ask the governor of each prefecture, the governor of the county, etc. The others all thanked the sin, and the childish person came forward to thank, and the onlookers were full of admiration.

古文：其日，赐以牛酒。
现代文：这一天，高祖赏给他牛和酒。
English: On this day, Gao Zu gave him a cow and wine.

古文：高祖还□，以其事告世宗。
现代文：回到并州后高祖把造件事告诉了世宗。
English: After returning to the annexed prefecture, Gaozu told Sejong about the construction.

古文：世宗喜而语人曰： 吾足知人矣。 
现代文：世宗高兴地对别人说： 我可算是善于发现人才了。 
English: Sejong happily told others: I'm pretty good at spotting talent.

古文：世宗嗣事，召诣晋阳，除霸府掾。
现代文：世宗继承高祖后，召稚廉来到晋阳，在自己府中作属官。
English: After Shizong succeeded Gao Zu, he summoned Wechian to come to Jinyang to serve as a subordinate official in his own government.

古文：谓杜弼曰： □州王者之基，须好长史，各举所知。 时互有所称，皆不允。
现代文：世宗对杜弼说： 并州是成就帝业之地，需要有好的长史，你们可以推荐自己了解的人。 
English: Sejong said to Du Juan, "Andingzhou is the land of imperial achievement. It needs to have a good long history. You can recommend people you know.

古文：□人未答。世宗乃谓陈元康曰： 我教君好长史处，李稚廉即其人也。 遂命为□州长史。
现代文：当时各人都推举了自己认为称职的人，不合世宗的意。
English: At that time, everyone voted for the person they thought was the best, regardless of whether or not that person was a member of the Sect.

古文：常在世宗第内，与陇西辛术等六人号为馆客，待以上宾之礼。
现代文：众人一时没有说话。世宗便对陈五尘说： 我告诉你一位优秀的长史，就是李稚麈。 
English: For a moment, no one spoke. Then, Shizong said to Chen Wuchen, "I will tell you about an outstanding historian, Li Zhiguo.

古文：天保初，除安南将军、太原郡守。
现代文：于是任他并州长史。稚廉经常出入世宗的府第，和盐迺圭组等六人并称为馆客，用上宾的礼节招待他们。
English: As a result, he was appointed the governor of Shizuoka Prefecture. Chikakado often went to and from Sejong's residence, and he invited six people, including members of the Shiogama-Kei group, to be his guests, using the etiquette of a guest of honor.

古文：显祖尝召见，问以治方，语及政刑宽猛，帝意深文峻法，稚廉固以为非，帝意不悦。
现代文：丢堡初，任安南将军、主愿型太守。题担曾经召见他，向他咨询治国的方略，谈及政策刑罚宽严，题担主张严刑峻法，歪陨坚持认为遣一主张是错误的，显祖很不高兴。
English: At the beginning of the fall of the fortress, General Annan, the self-willed emperor, was summoned by the chief adviser, who asked him for advice on the strategy of governing the country. He talked about the policy of leniency and severity of punishment. The chief adviser advocated severe punishment. The crooked meteor insisted that the proposal of sending one person was wrong. Emperor Xianzu was very unhappy.

古文：语及杨愔，误称为杨公。
现代文：他说到杨情时，误说成扰公。
English: When he talked about Yang's feelings, he mistakenly said that he was a troublemaker.

古文：以应对失宜，除济阴郡守，带西兖州刺史。
现代文：因为回答不得体，被任命为济阴郡太守，带酉兖州刺史。
English: Because the answer was not appropriate, he was appointed as the governor of Jiyin County, with the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：征拜太府少卿，寻转廷尉少卿，迁太尉长史。
现代文：召入任太府少卿，不久改任廷尉少卿，升太尉长史。
English: He was called up to the post of Taifu Shosho-kyo (Minor Secretary of the Grand Council of State), and was soon promoted to Teijin Shosho-kyo (Minor Secretary of the Grand Council of State), and finally to Taiji Choshi (Major Secretary of State).

古文：肃宗即位，兼散骑常侍、省方大使。
现代文：肃宗即位后，兼散骑常侍、省方大使。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Suzong, he also served as a samurai and provincial ambassador.

古文：行还，所奏多见纳用。
现代文：巡察回来后，他所上的奏章大都被采纳。
English: After returning from the inspection, most of his compositions were accepted.

古文：除合州刺史，亦有政绩，未满，行怀州刺史。
现代文：任金业刺史时，也有政绩，任期未满，又代理坏处刺史。
English: When Kimye was appointed to write history, he also had political achievements, his term of office was not complete, and he also acted as a bad place to write history.

古文：还朝，授兼太仆卿，转大司农卿、赵州大中正。
现代文：回到朝内，授兼太仆卿，改任大司农卿、赵业大中正。
English: Returning to the Imperial Court, he was awarded the title of concurrently Grand Steward and Servant of the Emperor, and was reappointed as Grand Secretary, Minister of Agriculture, and Zhao Ye Da Zhongzheng.

古文：天统元年，加骠骑大将军、大理卿，世称平直。
现代文：玉堑元年，加授骠骑大将军、大理卿，当时以公允正直著称。
English: In the first year of the Jade Emperor's reign, he was awarded the title of General of the Horse Cavalry and the title of Lord of Dali. At that time, he was known for his fairness and honesty.

古文：为南青州刺史，未几，征为□省都官尚书。
现代文：任南青州刺史，时间不长，召入任并州省都官尚书。
English: He served as the history of South Qingzhou for a short period of time, and was called to the post of the provincial capital Shangshu.

古文：武平五年三月，卒于晋阳，年六十七。
现代文：武平五年三月，死于置扰，时年六十七岁。
English: Wu Ping died in March of the fifth year of his reign, at the age of sixty-seven.

古文：赠仪同三司、信义二州刺史、吏部尚书。
现代文：追赠仪同三司，信州、义州刺史，吏部尚书。
English: The posthumous award ceremony was held together with the three divisions, Shinshu and Yishu stabbing history, and personnel department records.

古文：封述，字君义，渤海蓨人也。父轨，廷尉卿、济州刺史。
现代文：挝述，字昼盖，鲤蓝县人。父亲堑轨，任廷尉卿、辽刺史。
English: Lao Zhi, the character of the day cover, was born in Yilan County. His father, Xingluo, was a court lieutenant, and Liao Zhi Shi.

古文：述有干用，年十八为济州征东府铠曹参军。
现代文：挝述有才干，十八岁就做了渣征束府鉴曹参军。
English: Lao Desu was talented, and at the age of eighteen, he was drafted into the army.

古文：高道穆为御史中尉，启为御史。
现代文：高道穆任御史中尉时，启奏朝廷任挝述为御史。
English: When Gao Daomu was appointed lieutenant of the Imperial Historian, the opening of the Imperial Court was described as the Imperial Historian.

古文：迁大司马清河王开府记室参军，兼司徒主簿。
现代文：改任大司马清河王的开府记室参军，兼司徒主簿。
English: He joined the army and was assigned to the Keifu Records Office of the Grand Secretary Ma Qinghe Wang. He was also the chief recorder of the officers.

古文：太昌中，除尚书三公郎中，以平干称。
现代文：太昌年间，任尚书三公郎中，以公正干练著称。
English: During the Taichang period, Ren Shangshu was one of the three princes and was known for his fairness and efficiency.

古文：天平中，增损旧事为麟趾新格，其名法科条，皆述删定。
现代文：天平年间，对过去史实加以增删写成《麟趾新格》，书中的名分和法律条目都是他删定的。
English: During the Tenpyo era, he added to and deleted from the past historical facts to write "Tinji New Style," and he deleted the names and legal items in the book.

古文：梁散骑常侍陆晏子、沈警来聘，以述兼通直郎使梁。
现代文：凿的散骑常侍陆晏子、沈警来访问，朝廷任命封述兼任通直郎出使梁朝。
English: The chisel-sharp horseback cavalry constables, Lu Zizi and Shen Guo, came to visit, and the imperial court appointed the envoy of Liang Chao, who was also the envoy of Tong Nairo.

古文：还，迁世宗大将军府从事中郎，监京畿事。
现代文：回来后，改任世塞大将军府从事中郎，监察京畿事宜。
English: After his return, he was assigned to the General Headquarters of the General Staff of the General Staff of the Korean People's Army to supervise Gyeonggi affairs.

古文：武定五年，除彭城太守、当郡督，再行东徐州刺史。
现代文：武定五年，任彭城太守、本郡都督，两次代理束徐州刺史。
English: In the fifth year of Wuding, he served as the governor of Pengcheng, the governor of the county, and twice acted as the representative of Xuzhou.

古文：武定七年，除廷尉少卿。
现代文：武定七年，任廷尉少卿。
English: In the seventh year of Wu Ding, he was appointed as a court lieutenant and junior secretary.

古文：八年，兼给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：八年，兼任给事黄门侍郎。
English: In the eighth year, he also served as the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：齐受禅，与李□等八人充大使，巡省方俗，问民疾苦。
现代文：齐立国后，封述和李奖等八人充任大使，巡视各地，访问民间疾苦。
English: After the founding of the People's Republic of China, eight people, including Fu Shou and Li Shou, were appointed as ambassadors to inspect various regions and visit the suffering of the people.

古文：天保三年，除清河太守，迁司徒左长史，行东都事，寻除海州刺史。
现代文：天保三年，任清河太守，升司徒左长史，管理束都事宜，不久任海州刺史。
English: In the 3rd year of the Tenpo era, he was appointed as the governor of Qinghe, promoted to the post of the left-long history, managed the affairs of the provincial capital, and soon became the governor of Haizhou.

古文：大宁元年，征授大理卿。
现代文：大宁元年，召入任大理卿。
English: In the first year of the Danying Dynasty, he was called to the post of Dariching.

古文：河清三年，□与录尚书赵彦深、仆射魏收、尚书阳休之、国子祭酒马敬德等议定律令。
现代文：河清三年，命他和录尚书赵彦深、仆射魏收、尚书阳休之、国子祭酒马敬德等人商议制定法律。
English: In the third year of Heqing, he ordered him to consult with Shangshu Zhao Yanshen, Bu Sha Wei Jie, Shangshu Yang Xiu Zhi, Guozhishu Ma Jingde and others to formulate laws.

古文：天统元年，迁度支尚书。
现代文：天统元年，升度支尚书。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Tenjo, the promotion was supported by Imperial edict.

古文：三年，转五兵尚书，加仪同三司。
现代文：三年，改任五兵尚书，加仪同二司。
English: Three years later, he was reassigned to the Fifth Division of the General Staff.

古文：武平元年，除南兖州刺史，更满还朝，除左光禄大夫，又除殿中尚书。
现代文：武平元年，任南兖州刺史，任满回朝，任左光禄大夫，又任殿中尚书。
English: In the first year of Wuping, he was appointed as a historian of Southern Luzhou, appointed to return to the court, appointed as a doctor of the Left Guanglu, and appointed as a scholar in the palace.

古文：述久为法官，明解律令，议断平允，深为时人所称。
现代文：封述长时间担任执法官员，熟悉法律条文，裁断公乎，深受当时人称赞。
English: He served as a law enforcement officer for a long time, was familiar with the provisions of the law, and made public judgments, which was highly praised by the people at the time.

古文：而厚积财产，一无馈遗，虽至亲密友贫病困笃，亦绝于拯济，朝野物论甚鄙之。
现代文：他家中广积财产，非常富有，但丝毫不赠送给别人，即使至亲好友贫病交加，也绝不救济，朝野舆论很鄙弃他的为人。
English: His family amassed a vast amount of wealth and was very wealthy, but they never gave anything away to others. Even if a close relative or friend became poor or ill, there was never any relief. Public opinion, both at home and abroad, despised him as a person.

古文：外貌方整而不免请谒，□避进趋，颇致嗤骇。
现代文：外表方正却免不了攀附权贵，趋炎附势，受到别人的讥笑。
English: Outwardly, Fang Zheng could not avoid clinging to the powerful and influential, and was ridiculed by others.

古文：前妻河内司马氏。一息，为娶陇西李士元女，大输财娉，及将成礼，犹竞悬违。
现代文：他的前妻是河内司马氏，一儿子娶陇西李士元的女儿，送了许多财礼，到快要举行婚礼时，还为相差悬殊而争论不休。
English: His ex-wife was Hanoi Sima, one son married the daughter of Shaanxi Li Shiyuan, sent many gifts, and when the wedding was about to be held, they argued about the disparity.

古文：述忽取供养像对士元打像作誓，士元笑曰： 封公何处常得应急像，须誓便用。 一息娶范阳卢庄之女。
现代文：封述忽然拿出供养的画像对着李士元打画像发誓，士元笑着说： 封公从哪裹弄来的应急像，要发誓便拿出来用。 
English: Fong Su suddenly took out the picture of the offering and swore at Li Shiyuan. Shiyuan smiled and said, "If you want to swear, take out the emergency picture that Fong Gu got wrapped from somewhere and use it."

古文：述又径府诉云： 送□乃嫌□跛，评田则云咸薄，铜器又嫌古废。 皆为吝啬所及，每致纷纭。
现代文：一儿子娶范阳卢庄之的女儿封述又到卢府去诉苦说： 想送给你家骡子吧，又怕你嫌腿跛，送给你们土地，又怕你嫌盐碱地出产不多，送铜器又嫌古老而无用处。 所作所为都极其吝啬，经常被别人议论纷纷。
English: One of his sons married Fan Yang, the daughter of Lu Zhuang, also went to Lu Prefecture to complain bitterly, saying: "If you want to give your family a mule, be afraid that you don't like leg irons, give you land, be afraid that you don't like salt and alkaline land, and don't want to send old and useless bronze ware.

古文：子元，武平末太子舍人。
现代文：儿子封元，武平末年任太子舍人。
English: His son, Fong Yuan, became crown prince at the end of Wu Ping's reign.

古文：述弟询，字景文。魏员外郎，武定中永安公开府法曹，稍迁尚书起部郎中，转三公郎，出为东平原郡太守，迁定州长史，又除河间郡守，入为尚书左丞，又为济南太守。
现代文：封述的弟弟封询，字景文，任魏员外郎，武定年间任永安公开府法曹，升任尚书起部郎中，改任三公郎，出任束平原郡太守，升定州长史，又任河间郡太守，召入任尚书左丞，又任济南太守。
English: The younger brother of Fuzhou, Fuzhou Enquiry, named Jingwen, served as Wei's foreign minister, and during the reign of Wu Ding, he served as Yong'an Public Security Bureau's legal officer, was promoted to Shangshu's first secretary, was reappointed as the third prince, served as the governor of Shu Plains County, was promoted to the governor of Shishi, and also served as the governor of Kawama County, was summoned to serve as Shangshu's left-hand man, and also served as the governor of Jinan.

古文：隋开皇中卒。
现代文：隋开皇年间去世。
English: He died during the reign of Emperor Sui.

古文：询窥涉经史，清素自持，历官皆有干局才具，治郡甚着声绩，民吏敬而爱之。
现代文：封询涉猎经史，清白自守，历任各职都非常有才干，治理地方很有成绩，百姓和官吏都很敬重爱戴他。
English: He is a scholar of history, innocent and self-sacrificing. He has been very talented in all his posts, has made great achievements in local governance, and is respected and loved by the people and officials.

古文：许惇，字季良，高阳新城人也。
现代文：许惇，字季良，高阳新城人。
English: Xu Yao, surnamed Qiliang, from Gaoyang New Town.

古文：父护，魏高阳、章武二郡太守。
现代文：父亲许护，任魏高阳、章武二郡太守。
English: His father, Xu You, held the positions of Wei Gaoyang and Zhangwu Second County Governor.

古文：惇清识敏速，达于从政，任司徒主簿，以能判断，见知时人，号为入铁主簿。
现代文：许惇高见卓识而敏捷，善于从政作官，任司徒主簿，因为善于判断，为人所知，被称为入铁主簿。
English: Xu Ronggao was astute and quick-witted. He was good at being a politician and was appointed as the chief magistrate. He was known as the chief magistrate because he was good at judging.

古文：稍迁阳平太守。
现代文：逐渐升至阳平太守。
English: He gradually rose to the position of Yangping Taishu.

古文：当时迁都邺，阳平即是畿郡，军国责办，赋敛无准，又勋贵属请，朝夕征求，惇并御之以道，上下无怨。
现代文：当时都城迁到邺，阳平成为京畿郡，为满足军队和都城的供应，收取赋税没有标准，而且朝中权贵到处请托征求无度，许惇想尽办法妥善处理，使上下人等都没有怨言。
English: At that time, the capital was moved to Handan, and Yangping became the head of Gyeonggi County. In order to meet the supply of the army and the capital city, there was no standard for collecting taxes. Moreover, the power elite in the DPRK requested and solicited everywhere, and Xu Han tried his best to properly deal with it, so that there were no complaints from the upper and lower ranks.

古文：治为天下第一，特加赏异，图形于阙，诏颁天下。
现代文：阳平郡被治理得成为天下第一，皇上特别加以赏赐，画了他的画像挂在宫裹，并且颁布全国。
English: Yangping County was governed to become the first in the world. The emperor specially rewarded him, painted his picture, hung it in the palace, and promulgated it nationwide.

古文：迁魏尹，出拜齐州刺史，转梁州刺史，治并有声。
现代文：改任魏郡尹，出任齐州刺史，改任梁州刺史，都治理得很有成绩。
English: He was reappointed as Wei County Yin, he was appointed as the governor of Qizhou, and he was appointed as the governor of Liangzhou, all of which were very successful.

古文：迁大司农。
现代文：升任大司农。
English: Promoted to the post of Chief Farmer.

古文：会侯景背叛，王思政入据颍城，王师出讨，惇常督漕，军无乏绝。
现代文：侯景叛乱，王思政进据颖城，朝廷派军队讨伐，许惇负责运粮，使军队的粮食没有短缺。
English: Houjing rebellion, Wang Sizheng marched into Yingcheng, the imperial court sent troops to fight, Xu Wei was responsible for transporting grain, so that there was no shortage of grain for the army.

古文：引洧水灌城，惇之策也。
现代文：引来洧水灌城，就是许惇提出的策略。
English: The strategy proposed by Xu Jun is to draw water to flood the city.

古文：迁殿中尚书。
现代文：改任殿中尚书。
English: There is a record of his appointment to the position.

古文：惇美须髯，下垂至带，省中号为长鬣公。
现代文：许惇的胡须长得很漂亮，一直垂到腰部，尚书省的人都叫他长鬣公。
English: Xu Yao's beard is very beautiful, it hangs down to his waist. People in Shangshu Province call him "Chang Yao Gong."

古文：显祖尝因酒酣，握惇须髯称美，遂以刀截之，唯留一握。
现代文：有一次显祖喝酒喝得高兴，握着他的胡子称赞不已，并用刀割断，衹剩下一把长。
English: On one occasion, Emperor Xianzu was drinking happily, holding his beard in admiration, and he cut it off with a knife, leaving only a long stubble.

古文：惇惧，因不复敢长，时人又号为齐须公。
现代文：许惇害怕了，从此再也不敢留长胡子，人们就又叫他齐须公。
English: Xu Yao was afraid and never dared to grow a long beard again, so people called him Qishu again.

古文：世祖践祚，领御史中丞，为胶州刺史。
现代文：世祖登基后，领御史中丞，任胶州刺史。
English: After the Emperor ascended to the throne, he was appointed as the second-highest-ranking official in the imperial court and the second-highest-ranking official in Jiaozhou.

古文：寻追为司农卿，又迁大理卿，再为度支尚书，历太子少保、少师、光禄大夫、开府仪同三司、尚书右仆射、特进，赐爵万年县子，食下邳郡干。
现代文：不久召入朝廷任司农卿，又改任大理卿，两次任度支尚书，历任太子少保、少师、光禄大夫、开府仪同三司、尚书右仆射、特进，赐爵万年县子，享受下邳郡干禄。
English: He was soon summoned to the Imperial Court to serve as the Secretary of Agriculture, and was later appointed as the Secretary of Dali. He was twice appointed to the post of Shishi Shangshu, and successively served as the Prince's Shobo, Shoshi, Guanglu Dafu, Kaifu Yidong Sanji, Shangshu Ubuzha, and Tokujin. He was given the title of Count for all eternity, and enjoyed the Ganlu of Xiamen County.

古文：以年老致仕于家，三年卒。
现代文：因为年老辞官回家，三年后去世。
English: Because the old lexicographer went home, he died three years later.

古文：惇少纯直，晚更浮动。
现代文：许惇年经时纯真正直，年老后变得很轻浮。
English: She is pure and upright when she is in her late thirties, but becomes very frivolous when she is old.

古文：齐朝体式，本州岛大中正以京官为之。
现代文：齐朝的官制，本州大中正要由京官担任。
English: The official system of the Qi Dynasty, Honshu University was to be headed by a Beijing official.

古文：同郡邢卲为中书监，德望甚高，惇与卲竞中正，遂冯附宋钦道，出卲为刺史，朝议甚鄙薄之。
现代文：和他同郡的邢邵任中书监，德高望重，他为了与邢邵竞争大中正，就去依附宋钦道，使邢邵出任刺史，朝中大臣很鄙视他。
English: In the same county as him, Zou Shao was the middle school librarian. He was held in high esteem. In order to compete with Zou Shao, he followed Song Qin Dao and made Zou Shao the chief librarian. The middle and high ministers despised him.

古文：虽久处朝行，历官清显，与邢卲、魏收、阳休之、崔劼、徐之才之徒比肩同列，诸人或谈说经史，或吟咏诗赋，更相嘲戏，欣笑满堂，惇不解剧谈，又无学术，或竟坐杜口，或隐几而睡，深为胜流所轻。
现代文：许惇虽然长久在朝为官，历任的官职很高，和邢邵、魏收、阳休之、崔劫、徐之才等人并驾齐驱，其他人谈论经史，吟诗作赋，互相开玩笑，欢笑满堂，他却不会激烈辩论，又没有学问，所以有时就默默坐着，有时靠着几案打瞌睡，名流非常轻视他。
English: Although Xu Rong has been an official in the government for a long time, and his successive official positions are very high, he is on a par with Zou Shao, Wei Jie, Yang Xiu Zhi, Cui Rong, Xu Zhicai and others. Others talk about history, chant poems, make fun of each other, and laugh all over the hall. However, he does not debate vigorously and has no knowledge, so he sometimes sits in silence, and sometimes dozes off with a few cases. Celebrities despise him very much.

古文：子文纪，武平末度支郎中。
现代文：儿子许文纪，武平末年任度支郎中。
English: His son, Xu Wenji, was appointed to the position of second-in-command in the last years of the Wu-Ping dynasty.

古文：文纪弟文经，勤学方雅，身无择行，口无戏言。
现代文：文纪弟塞经，勤学苦读，为人方正雅达，从来不做违反法度的事，从来不说开玩笑的话。
English: The disciple of the Book of Discipline abrogated the sutras, studied diligently and diligently, was upright and upright, never did anything against the law, and never said anything in jest.

古文：武平末，殿中侍御史。
现代文：武平末年，任殿中侍御史。
English: In the last years of the Takehira era, he was appointed to the position of palace chamberlain.

古文：隋开皇初侍御史，兼通直散骑常侍，聘陈使副，主爵侍郎。
现代文：隋开皇初，任侍御史，兼通直散骑常侍，做了访问速的副使，主爵侍郎。
English: At the beginning of the Sui Dynasty, he was appointed as an attendant to the emperor, and at the same time, he was a regular attendant to the emperor, made a deputy envoy to visit the emperor, and served as a lord's attendant.

古文：卒于相州长史。
现代文：死时官任扭业长史。
English: At the time of his death, he was a high-ranking official.

古文：惇兄逊，字仲让，有干局，干明中平原太守，卒，赠信州刺史。
现代文：注堡的兄长盏逻，字健让，有才干，划旦年间任垩愿太守，去世，追赠值塑刺史。
English: The elder brother of the castle, Jianluo, who was talented and capable, served as the de facto ruler for several years, died, and was posthumously honored with a statue.

古文：逊子文高，司徒掾。
现代文：他的儿子注塞壶，任司徒掾。
English: His son poured the crockery and left it to him.

古文：羊烈，字信卿，太山巨平人也。
现代文：羊烈，字信卿，泰山钜平人。
English: Yang Rong, Zhixinqing, Taishan Xingpingren.

古文：晋太仆卿琇之八世孙，魏梁州刺史祉之弟子。
现代文：晋太仆卿羊玛第八世孙，魏梁州刺史羊祉弟弟的儿子。
English: He was the eighth-generation grandson of Yangma, a servant of the Jin Dynasty, and the son of Wei Liang Zhou's younger brother, Yang Shi.

古文：父灵珍，魏兖州别驾。
现代文：父亲羊灵珍，任魏兖州别驾。
English: Father Yang Lingzhen, stay away from Wei Bozhou.

古文：烈少通敏，自修立，有成人之风。
现代文：羊烈小时候很聪明，注重自身的修养，有成年人的风范。
English: As a child, Yang Lie was very smart, focused on self-cultivation, and had the demeanor of an adult.

古文：好读书，能言名理，以玄学知名。
现代文：喜好读书，能清谈名理，以玄学知名。
English: He likes to read, can talk about philosophy, and is known for his metaphysics.

古文：魏孝昌中，烈从兄侃为太守，据郡起兵外叛。
现代文：魏孝昌年间，羊烈的堂兄羊侃任太守，割据本郡起兵作乱。
English: During the Wei and Xiaochang dynasties, Yang Li's cousin, Yang Kanren, became the de facto ruler of the county and started a rebellion.

古文：烈潜知其谋，深惧家祸，与从兄广平太守敦驰赴洛阳告难。
现代文：羊烈暗中知道了他的阴谋，害怕会祸及全家，就和堂兄广平太守羊敦骑快马赶到洛阳告发。
English: Yang Lie secretly knew of his plot, and fearing that it would bring disaster to the whole family, he and his cousin Guangping Taishou Yang Dun rode a fast horse to Luoyang to report it.

古文：朝廷将加厚赏，烈告人云： 譬如斩手全躯，所存者大尔，岂有幸从兄之败以为己利乎？ 卒无所受。
现代文：朝廷要重赏他，羊烈对别人说： 造就好比是砍掉自己的手来保住整个身体，保存重要的，岂是藉助堂兄的失败为自己谋利呢? 最终也没接受奖赏。
English: The court wanted to reward him, and Yang Liang said to others: "Building up is like cutting off one's own hand to preserve the whole body, preserving what is important. Isn't it taking advantage of one's cousin's failure for one's own benefit?" In the end, he didn't accept the reward.

古文：弱冠，州辟主簿，又兼治中从事。
现代文：二十岁时，州裹征用他任主簿，兼治中从事。
English: At the age of twenty, he was requisitioned by the state to serve as the chief accountant, while also working as a doctor.

古文：刺史方以吏事为意，以干济见知。
现代文：刺史本来正为吏事忧虑，羊烈凭着办事干练而被信任。
English: Zhishi was originally worried about the officials, and Yang Liang was trusted by virtue of his ability.

古文：释巾太师咸阳王行参军，迁秘书郎。
现代文：开始作官时任太师咸阳王行参军，升任秘书郎。
English: When he began to work as an official, he joined the army as Grand Master Xianyang Wang Xing and was promoted to secretary.

古文：显祖初为仪同三司，开府。仓曹参军事。
现代文：显祖初为仪同三司，开府时，任命羊烈为仓曹参军事。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Xianzu was a member of the Three Departments, and at the time of the founding of the government, he appointed Yang Rong as Cang Cao Sang military.

古文：天保初，授太子步兵校尉、轻车将军，寻迁□省比部郎中，除司徒属，频历尚书祠部，左、右民郎中，所在咸为称职。
现代文：天保初，任太子步兵校尉、轻车将军，不久改任并省比部郎中，任司徒属，屡任尚书祠部，左、右民郎中，都很称职。
English: At the beginning of the Tenpo era, he served as the prince's infantry lieutenant and light vehicle general, and soon he was reassigned to the provincial Hiburō Junior High School, and he was assigned to the Sōtō Junior High School, and he was repeatedly assigned to the Shōshūryō Junior High School, and the Left and Right Minro Junior High Schools, all of which were very competent.

古文：九年，除阳平太守，治有能名。
现代文：九年，任阳平太守，治理以能干出名。
English: For nine years, Yang Ping served as the de facto ruler, and his governance was renowned for its efficiency.

古文：是时，频有灾蝗，犬牙不入阳平境，□书褒美焉。
现代文：这时，各地常发生蝗灾，但阳平境内却一点蝗虫没有，皇上下诏书予以褒奖。
English: At this time, locust plagues often occurred in various regions, but there were no locusts in Yangping. The Emperor issued an edict to commend this.

古文：皇建二年，迁光禄少卿，加龙骧将军、兖州大中正，又进号平南将军。
现代文：皇建二年，升光禄少卿，加龙骧将军、兖州大中正，加号平南将军。
English: In the second year of the Emperor's reign, he was promoted to Shoko Roku Shosho-kyo (Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs), General Garong Jun, Vice President of Jeonju University, and was given the additional rank of General Pingnan.

古文：天统中，除太中大夫，兼光禄少卿。
现代文：天统年间，任太中大夫，兼光禄少卿。
English: During the reign of Emperor Tenmu, he served as Taichung Doctor, and also as Guanglu Shaoqing.

古文：武平初，除骠骑将军、义州刺史，寻以老疾还乡。
现代文：武平初，任骠骑将军、义州刺史，不久因年老多病回家。
English: At the beginning of the Wuping era, he was appointed as the general of the cavalry and the governor of Yizhou Province, but he soon returned home due to old age and illness.

古文：周大象中卒。
现代文：周大象年间去世。
English: Zhou died in the year of the elephant.

古文：烈家传素业，闺门修饰，为世所称，一门女不再醮。
现代文：羊烈家世代操守清白，家庭注重品德修养，受到世人的称赞，家中的女子从来没有改嫁的。
English: For generations, the Yang Li Jia family has kept a clean conscience. The family pays attention to moral cultivation and has been praised by the world. The woman in the family has never remarried.

古文：魏太和中，于兖州造一尼寺，女寡居无子者并出家为尼，咸存戒行。
现代文：魏太和年间，在兖州造了一所尼寺，女子守寡又没有子女的都出家作了尼姑，而且都严守戒律。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei and Empress Dowager Cixi, a nunnery was built in Zhangzhou. Widowed women without children became nuns, and they all strictly observed the precepts.

古文：烈天统中与尚书毕义云争兖州大中正。义云盛称门阀，云我累世本州岛刺史，卿世为我家故吏。
现代文：天统年间，羊烈和尚书毕义云争夺兖州大中正的职位，毕义云是历代公卿世家，所以他说，我家几代任本州刺史，而你家累世都是我家下属。
English: During the reign of Emperor Tenmu, Yang Ye and monk Bi Yiyun competed for the post of the president of Zhangzhou University. Bi Yiyun belonged to a family of court nobles, so he said, "My family has been making history in this state for several generations, while your family has been subordinate to my family for generations."

古文：烈答云： 卿自毕轨被诛以还，寂无人物，近日刺史，皆是疆埸之上彼此而得，何足为言。
现代文：羊烈回答说： 你家自从毕轨被杀以后，就一直没出现过杰出人才，现在的刺史都是战场上征战得来的，你有什么资格说话。
English: Yang Lie replied, "Since your family was killed at the end of the war, there has been no outstanding talent in your family, and the current history is all from the battlefield. What qualifications do you have to speak?

古文：岂若我汉之河南尹，晋之太傅，名德学行，百代传美。
现代文：哪裹比得上我家汉任河南尹，晋任太傅，名声操守、学识品德，流芳百世。
English: What can be compared to our Han family's Henan Yin, Jin Taifu, reputation, ethics, knowledge and morality, and centuries-old tradition.

古文：且男清女贞，足以相冠，自外多可称也。 盖讥义云之帷薄焉。
现代文：况且男人雅正，女子贞节，足以称得上第一，其他方面也都值得大家赞扬。 
English: Moreover, men's elegance and women's chastity are enough to be called the first, and other aspects are also worthy of everyone's praise.

古文：祉子深，魏中书令。
现代文：他这样说是为了讽刺毕义云内室污乱淫秽。羊祉的儿子羊深，任魏中书令。
English: He said this to satirize the filth and obscenity of Bi Yiyun's inner chamber. Yang Sheng, the son of a shepherd, served as Wei Zhong Shuling.

古文：深子肃，以学尚知名，世宗大将军府东合祭酒。
现代文：羊深的儿子羊肃，因学问高深知名于世，任世宗大将军府束合祭酒。
English: Yoshu, the son of Yoshinobu, was known throughout the world for his high level of learning, and he was appointed to the position of Grand Master of the Soka Gakkai.

古文：干明初，冀州治中。
现代文：干明初，任冀州治中。
English: At the beginning of the Ming Dynasty, he was appointed as the Vice-governor of Jizhou.

古文：赵郡王为巡省大使，肃以迟缓不任职解，朝议以肃无罪，寻复之。
现代文：赵郡王为大使巡视时，羊肃被认定做事拖拉不能胜任而解职，朝中大臣讨论后认为他没有罪过，不久又官复原职。
English: When Zhao Guowang was inspecting the ambassador, Yang Su was dismissed because he was considered incompetent for procrastinating. After discussion, the ministers of the two Koreas believed that he was not guilty, and he was soon reinstated.

古文：天统初，迁南兖州长史。
现代文：天统初，升南兖州长史。
English: At the beginning of the reign of heaven, the history of the governor of the Southern Han Dynasty.

古文：武平中，入文林馆撰书，寻出为武德郡守。
现代文：武平年间，进入文林馆编撰书籍，不久出任武德郡太守。
English: During the Wuping era, he entered the Wenlin Museum to compile books, and soon became the governor of Wude County.

古文：烈弟修，有才干，大宁中卒于尚书左丞。
现代文：羊烈的弟弟羊脩，有才干，大宁年间任尚书左丞去世。
English: Yang Rong's younger brother, Yang Xuan, was talented, but died in the middle of the reign of Emperor Dangning.

古文：子玄正，武平末将作丞。
现代文：他的儿子羊玄正，武平末年任将作丞。
English: His son, Yang Xuan Zheng, would become chancellor in Wu Ping's final years.

古文：隋开皇中民部侍郎。
现代文：隋开皇年间任民部侍郎。
English: During the reign of Emperor Sui, he served as a chamberlain in the Ministry of the People.

古文：卒于陇西郡赞治。
现代文：死于陇西郡赞治任。
English: He died in Zanji, Shaanxi County.

古文：源彪，字文宗，西平乐都人也。
现代文：源彪，字文宗，西平乐都人。
English: Geng Biao, Zhiwen Zong, Xiping Le Duan.

古文：父子恭，魏中书监、司空，文献公。
现代文：父亲源子恭，为魏中书监、司空，文献公。
English: His father, Geng Ziqong, was a book supervisor, secretary and bibliographer in the Wei Dynasty.

古文：文宗学涉机警，少有名誉。
现代文：文宗学习机智灵敏，年轻时就有声誉。
English: He has a reputation for being quick-witted and quick-witted when studying literature.

古文：魏孝庄永安中，以父功赐爵临颍县伯，除员外散骑常侍。
现代文：魏孝庄帝永安年间，由于父亲的功绩赐爵临头县伯，任员外散骑常侍。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yongan of the Wei Xiaozhuang Dynasty, he was given the title of Count of Lintou County due to his father's achievements, and he was appointed as a non-commissioned officer.

古文：天平四年，凉州大中正。
现代文：玉垩四年，任痉大中正。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Yushan, he was appointed as the vice-president of Yushan University.

古文：遭父忧去职。
现代文：因为父亲守丧解职。
English: He was forced to resign due to the death of his father.

古文：武定初，服阕，吏部召领司徒记室，加平东将军。
现代文：武定初，服丧期满，吏部征召领司徒记室，加平束将军。
English: At the beginning of Wuding, after the mourning period, the cadre department conscripted the leader of the cadre office, General Ga Pingzhu.

古文：世宗摄选，沙汰台郎，以文宗为尚书祠部郎中，仍领记室。
现代文：世宗负责铨选官吏，淘汰不合格台官，任命文宗为尚书祠部郎中，仍然领记室参军。
English: Shizong was responsible for selecting officials, eliminating unqualified Taiwan officials, and appointing Wenzong as a member of the Shoshu Shrine Department. He still entered the army through the records office.

古文：转太子洗马。
现代文：改任太子洗马。
English: He was appointed Crown Prince Saima.

古文：天保元年，除太子中舍人。
现代文：天保元年，任太子中舍人。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he resigned from the post of crown prince.

古文：干明初，出为范阳郡守。
现代文：干明初，出任范阳郡太守。
English: At the beginning of the Ming Dynasty, he became the governor of Fanyang County.

古文：皇建二年，拜泾州刺史。
现代文：皇建二年，任泾州刺史。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jian, he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：文宗以恩信待物，甚得边境之和，为□人所钦服，前政被抄掠者，多得放还。
现代文：文宗待人很宽厚讲究信义，使边境地区很稳定，受到邻国的敬重，在他任前被掠走的人口，大多都被放了回来。
English: Wen Zong treated people very generously and paid attention to credibility. He made the border areas very stable and respected by neighboring countries. Most of the people who were abducted before he took office were released.

古文：天统初，入为吏部郎中，迁御史中丞，典选如故。
现代文：天魉初年，入朝任吏部郎中，升御史中丞，依旧典选官员。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Tenmu, he entered the imperial court as a junior official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and was promoted to Junior Vice-Minister of History. He was still an elected official.

古文：寻除散骑常侍，仍摄吏部，加骠骑大将军。
现代文：不久改任散骑常侍，仍然摄管吏部，加骠骑大将军。
English: He was soon promoted to straggler, still in charge of the cadre department, and promoted to cavalry general.

古文：属秦州刺史宋嵩卒，朝廷以州在边垂，以文宗往莅泾州，颇着声绩，除秦州刺史，乘传之府，特给后部鼓吹。
现代文：正赶上秦州刺史宋嵩死去，朝廷考虑到秦州是边疆地区，就委派文宗去治理泾州，成绩很突出，任秦州刺史，乘坐驿站车马到府上任，特别赏给他后部鼓吹。
English: Just in time for the death of Song Song, the governor of Qin State, the imperial court, considering that Qin State was a frontier region, appointed Wenzong to govern Zhangzhou. His achievements were outstanding. Appointed governor of Qin State, he took a stagecoach to the capital to take office. He was especially rewarded for his rear propaganda.

古文：文宗为治如在泾州时。
现代文：文宗治理秦州时如同在泾州一样。
English: When the literati governed Qinzhou, it was the same as in Zhangzhou.

古文：李孝贞聘陈，陈主谓孝贞曰： 齐朝还遣源泾州来瓜步，直可谓和通矣。 寻加仪同三司。
现代文：李孝贞访问陈，陈主对他说： 查国派源文宗到瓜步来，我们两国算是真正的通好。 不久加授仪同三司。
English: Li Xiaozhen visited Chen, and Chen said to him, "Chao Guo sent Yuan Wenzong to Guapu, and our two countries are truly friendly.

古文：武平二年，征领国子祭酒。
现代文：武平二年，征入领国子祭酒。
English: In the 2nd year of Wuping, the liquor for the son's festival was requisitioned.

古文：三年，迁秘书监。
现代文：三年，改秘书监。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to secretary superintendent.

古文：陈将吴明彻寇淮南，历阳、瓜步相寻失守。
现代文：陈将吴明彻入侵淮南，历阳、瓜步相继失守。
English: Chen sent Wu Mingche to attack Huainan, and Liyang and Guapu were lost one after another.

古文：赵彦深于起居省密访文宗曰： 吴贼侏张，遂至于此，仆妨贤既久，忧惧交深，今者之势，计将安出？
现代文：在起居省赵彦深暗地向文宗征求意见说： 吴明彻强横跋扈，已经造成了这样的危害，我妨碍贤者之路已久，心中又急又怕，如今的形势该采取什么样的策略呢?
English: In Zhixi Province, Zhao Yan secretly asked Wen Zong for advice and said: Wu Ming Chieh's strong encroachment has already caused such harm. I have hindered the path of sages for a long time, and I am anxious and afraid in my heart. What kind of strategy should be adopted in the current situation?

古文：弟往在泾州，甚悉江、淮间情事，今将何以御之？ 对曰： 荷国厚恩，无由报□，有所闻见，敢不尽言。
现代文：老弟过去在泾州，很熟悉江淮之间的情况，该用什么方法抵抗敌人的入侵呢? 文宗回答说： 我受国家的大恩，没有来得及报答，如果有什么见解，怎么敢不说出来呢。
English: The elder brother used to be in Zhangzhou and is very familiar with the situation between Jianghuai and Zangzhou. What method should be used to resist the invasion of the enemy? Wenzong replied: I have been greatly blessed by the state and have not had time to repay it. If you have any opinion, how dare you not say it.

古文：但朝廷精兵必不肯多付诸将，数千已下，复不得与吴楚争锋，命将出军，反为彼饵。
现代文：衹是朝廷一定不会让将领们有过多的军队，少于几千人，又不能和江南的军队交锋，命令大将出征，反而成了送到对方口中的食物。
English: It is certain that the imperial court will not let the generals have too many troops, less than a few thousand, and cannot fight with the troops south of the Yangtze River, and ordered the general to go to war, but instead became food for the other side.

古文：尉破胡人品，王之所知。
现代文：尉破胡的人品，是皇上所熟知的。
English: The Emperor was well acquainted with the character of 尉破胡.

古文：进既不得，退又未可，败绩之事，匪朝伊夕。
现代文：既不能进军，又不能退兵，惨败的结局，已经指曰可待。
English: Neither able to march, nor able to retreat, the outcome of the fiasco has already been indicated.

古文：王出而能入，朝野倾心，脱一日参差，悔无所及。
现代文：军队出征并且可以班师，这是朝廷内外都很挂心的事情，倘若哪一天出现差错，后悔也来不及了。
English: It is a matter of great concern both inside and outside the Imperial Court that the troops go to war and can be trained. If something goes wrong one day, it will be too late to regret.

古文：以今日之计，不可再三。
现代文：所以如今制定策略，不能连续变动。
English: So the strategy is set now and cannot be changed continuously.

古文：国家待遇淮南，失之同于蒿箭。
现代文：国家重视淮南，稍一不慎就会很快失守。
English: The state treats Huainan as if it were an arrow, and it is not a pity to lose it.

古文：如文宗计者，不过专委王琳，淮南招募三四万人，风俗相通，能得死力，兼令旧将淮北捉兵，足堪固守。
现代文：按照我的计策，不如全权委托给王琳，在淮南招募三四万人，大家风俗习惯相同，自然能够拼死作战，同时派原来的将领到淮北招兵买马，就足以守卫。
English: According to my strategy, it would be better to entrust Wang Lin with full powers to recruit 30,000 to 40,000 people in Huainan. Everyone has the same customs and habits, so they can naturally fight to the death. At the same time, it is enough to send the original general to Huaibei to recruit soldiers and horses.

古文：且琳之于昙顼，不肯北面事之明矣，窃谓计之上者。
现代文：王琳很显然不会投降昙顼，所以我认为这是最好的计谋。
English: It is clear that Wang Lin will not surrender, so I think this is the best strategy.

古文：若不推赤心于琳，别遣余人掣肘，复成速祸，弥不可为。 彦深叹曰： 弟此良图，足为制胜千里，但口舌争来十日，已不见从。
现代文：如果不能推心置腹地对待王琳，派别人去带兵牵制，很快会招来大祸，决不可如此。 彦深叹惜说： 老弟这计谋，足以决胜千里，衹是大家争论了十几天，都不肯听从。
English: If you can't treat Wang Lin from the bottom of your heart and send someone else to lead the troops to restrain her, it will soon lead to a big disaster, and it must not be so.Hiko sighed deeply and said: My brother, this strategy is enough to win thousands of miles, but everyone has been arguing for more than ten days, and they are not willing to listen.

古文：时事至此，安可尽言。 因相顾流涕。
现代文：世事已经到了这一地步，真是一言难尽。 二人相对而泣。
English: The world has come to this stage, it's really hard to say. The two of them wept.

古文：武平七年，周武平齐，与阳休之、袁聿修等十八人同□入京，授仪同大将军、司成下大夫。
现代文：武平七年，周武帝消灭了齐国，源彪和阳休之、袁聿修等十八人同时奉命进京，授仪同大将军、司成下大夫。
English: In the seventh year of Wuping, Emperor Zhou Wudi annihilated the State of Qi. At the same time, 18 people, including Yuan Biao, Yang Xuzhi, and Yuan Shuxiu, were ordered to go to Beijing to receive the ceremony together with the general and Shicheng the junior doctor.

古文：隋开皇初，授莒州刺史，至州，遇疾去官。
现代文：隋开皇初年，任莒州刺史，到州上任，因为生病而解职。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, and was relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：开皇六年卒，年六十六。
现代文：开皇六年去世，时年六十六岁。
English: The emperor died six years later, at the age of 66.

古文：文宗以贵游子弟升朝列，才识敏赡，以干局见知。
现代文：源文宗出身于贵族而在朝中任要职，才识敏捷，因能干受到重用。
English: Yuan Wenzong was born into the aristocracy and held an important position in the dynasty. He was quick-witted and was highly regarded for his ability.

古文：然好游诣贵要之门，故时论以为善于附会。
现代文：但是他喜欢结交权贵，所以当时的人们认为他善于攀龙附凤。
English: But he liked to associate with powerful people, so people at that time thought he was good at climbing the dragon and attaching the phoenix.

古文：子师，少好学，明辨有识悟，尤以吏事知名。
现代文：源彪的儿子源师，小时候就勤奋好学，能明辨是非有见识，尤其以善于处理刑事诉讼知名。
English: As a child, Yuan Biao's son, Yuan Shi, was diligent and eager to learn. He was able to distinguish right from wrong and had insight. In particular, he was known for being good at handling criminal proceedings.

古文：河清初，司空参军事，历侍御史、太常丞、尚书左外兵郎中。
现代文：河清初年，任司空参军事，历任侍御史、太常丞、尚书左外兵郎中。
English: In the first year of the Heqing era, he was appointed as the second-in-command of the Air Force, and served as a military officer, and successively held the positions of chamberlain to the emperor, grand secretary to the emperor, and junior secretary to the emperor.

古文：隋开皇中尚书比部、考功侍郎。
现代文：隋开皇年间，任尚书比部、考功侍郎。
English: During the reign of Emperor Sui, he was appointed as the secretary of Shuhibe and the attendant of Kaogong.

古文：大业初，卒于大理少卿。
现代文：大业初年，死于大理少卿任上。
English: In the first year of his daiei, he died while serving as Dali Shoken.

古文：文宗弟文举，亦有才干，历尚书比部、二千石郎中，定州长史，带中山郡守。
现代文：文宗的弟弟文举，也有才干，历任尚书比部、二千石郎中，定州长史，带中山郡太守。
English: Wenzong's younger brother, Wenzhu, was also talented, and successively held the posts of Shang Shuhibe, 2,000-koku junior minister, governor of Ding Province, and governor of Zhongshan County.

古文：卒于太尉长史。
现代文：死时官任太尉长史。
English: At the time of his death, he held the rank of First Lieutenant.

古文：文宗从父兄楷，字那延，有器干，善草隶书。
现代文：文宗叔伯兄源楷，字那延，有器度才干，擅长草书和隶书。
English: Wenzong's uncle and uncle's brother, Yuan Kai, whose name was Nanyan, was a talented organiser and excelled at cursive and cursive writing.

古文：历尚书左民部郎中、治书侍御史、长乐、中山郡守、京畿长史、黄门郎、假仪同三司。
现代文：历任尚书左民郎中、治书侍御史、长乐、中山郡太守、京畿长史、黄门郎、假仪同三司。
English: Successive incumbents include Shosha Zuominro Junior High School, Shosho Samurai Goshi, Choke, Nakayama County Governor, Gyeonggi Choshi, Hwangmenro, and Kugegi.

古文：齐灭，朝贵知名入周京者：度支尚书元修伯，魏文成皇帝之后，清素寡欲，明识理体。
现代文：齐灭亡后，朝中知名大臣到周的有：度支尚书五恺伯，是塾塞盛皇帝的后代，清心寡欲，明于事理。
English: After the death of Qi, the well-known ministers in the dynasty to Zhou include: Du Zhi Shangshu Wuzhong Bo, a descendant of Emperor Juxu Shesheng, pure-hearted and sober-minded.

古文：少历显职，尚书郎、治书侍御史，司徒左长史、数郡太守、光州刺史，所在皆着声绩。
现代文：年轻时就担任重要官职，如尚书郎、治书侍御史，司徒左长史、数郡太守、光州刺史，每一次任职都能做出成绩。
English: When he was young, he held important official positions, such as Shang Shuro, Jishozamigoshi, Setsuzo Choshi, Kogun Taishu, and Gwangju Sashi, and he was able to make achievements every time he served.

古文：及为度支，属政荒国蹙，储藏虚竭，赋役繁兴。
现代文：任度支尚书时，朝政荒废，国家危难，储备奇缺，赋税繁多。
English: At the time of writing, the imperial government was in ruins, the country was in danger, reserves were scarce, and taxes were numerous.

古文：修伯忧国如家，恤民之劳，兼济时事，询谋宰相，朝夕孜孜，与录尚书唐邕□换取舍，颇有裨益。
现代文：脩伯忧国如忧家，体恤民生疾苦，以拯救天下为己任，孜孜不倦地和宰相谋划，与录尚书唐邕交换意见决定取舍，对国家大有益处。
English: Zou Bo worried about the country as much as he worried about his family. He sympathized with the hardships of the people's livelihood, and took the task of saving the world as his own. He worked tirelessly with the prime minister to plan, and exchanged views with Luo Shangshu Tang Jun to decide on the choice, which was of great benefit to the country.

古文：周朝授仪同大将军、载师大夫。
现代文：周授任他仪同大将军、载师大夫。
English: Zhou awarded him the titles of general and teacher.

古文：其事行史阙，故不列于传。
现代文：他的事迹在史书中缺乏记载。所以不能写入列传。
English: His deeds are not recorded in the history books, so they cannot be included in the chronicles.

古文：齐末又有□省尚书陇西辛□、散骑常侍长乐潘子义并以才干知名。
现代文：北齐末年，还有并州省尚书陇酉圭墨、散骑常侍匡乐荡王盏都以才干知名。
English: In the last years of the Northern Qi Dynasty, there were also Shang Shushun Guimou of Bianzhou Province, and Wang Zhanling, a knight errant, who was well-known for his talent.

古文：入仕周、隋，位历通显云。
现代文：在周、隋二朝都做了大官。
English: He became a high-ranking official in the Zhou and Sui Dynasties.

古文：论曰：李稚廉等以材能器干，所在咸着声名。
现代文：论曰：李稚廉等人才能出众，不同任职都能带来好名声。
English: On the other hand, Li Wechian and others have outstanding talents, and different positions can bring good reputation.

古文：封述聚积财贿，敝于鄙吝，季良以学浅为累，文宗以附会见称。
现代文：封述积聚财产，由于过于吝裔，损害了威望，许季良受学识浅薄的拖累，源文宗因攀附权贵被鄙视。
English: Because he was too miserly, he damaged the prestige of the emperors. Xu Qiliang was dragged down by his shallow learning, and Yuan Wenzong was despised for clinging to power.

古文：然则羊、李二贤足为具美，士人君子可不慎与？
现代文：羊烈、李稚廉二人是具备全面美德的人，君子士大夫对自身的修养怎么能不慎重呢!
English: Yang Rong and Li Wechian are two people with all-round virtues. How can a gentleman doctor not be prudent about his own cultivation?

古文：赞曰：惟兹数贤，干事贞固，生被雌黄，殁存缣素。
现代文：赞曰：这几位贤良大臣，办事忠心耿耿，在生时遭到别人的非议，去世后却显出清白的操守。
English: Zang said: These virtuous ministers, who were loyal to their duties, were criticized by others when they were alive, but after their death, they showed innocent conduct.

古文：封及源、许，终为身蠹。
现代文：挝、逊、盏三人，最终也有了污点。
English: Lao, Xun, and Zhan three people, eventually also have a stain.

