古文：孟春之月，日在营室，昏参中，旦尾中。
现代文：初春正月：太阳运行的位置在营室；黄昏时，参星位于南天正中；拂晓时，尾星位于南天正中。
English: Early spring and the first month of the year: the position of the sun's movement is in the camp room; at dusk, the star is in the middle of the southern sky; at dawn, the tail star is in the middle of the southern sky.

古文：其日甲乙。
现代文：春季的日子是甲乙，于五行属木。
English: The auspicious day in spring is Jia B, and in the Five Elements it is Wood.

古文：其帝大皞，其神句芒。
现代文：主管的帝是木德的太皞，辅佐的神是木官句芒。
English: The revered emperor is the King of Mude's Taibut, and the revered god is Mucan Jumang.

古文：其虫鳞。
现代文：动物中与木相配的是鳞虫。
English: Among the animals that are compatible with wood are scale insects.

古文：其音角，律中大蔟。
现代文：五声中与木相配的是角声，与此月相应的是十二律中的太蔟。
English: Among the five tones, the horn tone corresponding to the wood is the crane, and the taiko among the twelve rhythms corresponds to this month.

古文：其数八。
现代文：与木相配的成数是八。
English: Eight is the number that goes with wood.

古文：其味酸，其臭膻。其祀户，祭先脾。
现代文：水獭将捕到的鱼陈放在岸边，好像在祭祀，大雁从南方飞来。
English: Otters lay the fish they have caught on the shore, as if in a ritual, and geese fly in from the south.

古文：东风解冻，蛰虫始振，鱼上冰，獭祭鱼，鸿雁来。天子居青阳左个。乘鸾路，驾仓龙，载青旗，衣青衣，服仓玉，食麦与羊，其器疏以达。
现代文：这个月，天子居住在明堂东部青阳的北室，乘坐饰有用青凤命名的响铃的车子，车前驾着青色的高马，车上插着绘有青龙的旗子，穿着青色的衣服，佩戴青色的饰玉，吃的是麦与羊，使用的器物纹理粗疏而通达。
English: This month, the heavenly son lived in the north room of Qingyang in the eastern part of the Ming Hall. He rode in a car with a bell decorated with the name of Qingfeng. He drove a blue high horse in front of the car, with a flag painted with a blue dragon on the car, wore blue clothes, wore blue decorative beads, and ate wheat and sheep. The utensils used were coarse and transparent.

古文：是月也，以立春。
现代文：这个月的节气，是立春。
English: This month's solar term is the first day of spring.

古文：先立春三日，大史谒之天子曰：某日立春，盛德在木。
现代文：在立春前三天，太史向天子禀告说： 某日立春，木德当令。 
English: Three days before the first day of spring, Emperor Taishi announced to the Son of Heaven, "A certain day will be the first day of spring.

古文：天子乃齐。
现代文：天子于是开始斋戒，准备迎春。
English: The son of heaven then fasted.

古文：立春之日，天子亲帅三公、九卿、诸侯、大夫以迎春于东郊。
现代文：立春的那天，天子亲自率领三公、九卿、诸侯、大夫到东郊去举行迎春的祭祀。
English: On the day of the first day of spring, the heavenly son himself led the three princes, nine nobles, lords, and doctors to the eastern suburbs to hold a spring festival.

古文：还反，赏公卿、诸侯、大夫于朝。
现代文：祭毕回朝，在朝中赏赐公卿、诸侯、大夫。
English: After the offering, it was taken back to the Imperial Court, where it was given to nobles, lords, and doctors.

古文：命相布德和令，行庆施惠，下及兆民。
现代文：并命令三公发布德教，宣布禁令，实行褒奖，施与恩惠，下及所有百姓。
English: And ordered the three princes to issue moral teachings, announce bans, implement awards, and grant favors to all the people.

古文：庆赐遂行，毋有不当。
现代文：褒奖赏赐之事，都落到实处，没有不恰当的。
English: All the rewards and rewards have been implemented, and there is nothing inappropriate.

古文：乃命大史守典奉法，司天日月星辰之行，宿离不贷，毋失经纪，以初为常。
现代文：于是命令太史遵守六典，执行八法；又命令太史推算日月星辰的运行，太阳所在的位置，月亮所经的地方，都要计算得丝毫不差，不得背离法度，要遵循旧章而不变。
English: Therefore, he ordered Tai Shi to abide by the Six Laws and implement the Eight Laws; he also ordered Tai Shi to calculate the movement of the sun, moon and stars, the position of the sun, and the place where the moon passes, all of which must be calculated exactly, must not deviate from the laws, and must follow the old chapter without changing.

古文：是月也，天子乃以元日祈谷于上帝。
现代文：在这个月里，天子于第一个辛日祭祀上天，祈求五谷丰登。
English: In this month, the Son of Heaven ascends to heaven on the first bitter day of sacrifice, praying for the abundance of grain.

古文：乃择元辰，天子亲载耒耜，措之参保介之御间，帅三公、九卿、诸侯、大夫，躬耕帝藉。
现代文：又于此后的第一个亥日，天子放置耒耜在自己的车上，放置的位置在穿甲衣的车右和御者中间，并率领三公、九卿、诸侯、大夫亲自耕种藉田。
English: On the next day, the first day of the year of the boar, the son of heaven placed a plough on his cart, placing it between the right side of the cart and the driver wearing armor, and led the three princes, nine lords, lords, and doctors to personally cultivate the borrowed fields.

古文：天子三推，三公五推，卿诸侯九推。
现代文：其做法是把来粗推入土里，天子推三下，公推五下，卿和诸侯推九下。
English: The practice is to push the coarse into the soil, the heavenly son pushes three, the public pushes five, and the lord and the lords push nine.

古文：反，执爵于大寝，三公、九卿、诸侯、大夫皆御，命曰：劳酒。
现代文：礼毕返回，天子在路寝举杯宴饮，三公、九卿、诸侯、大夫全部参加陪侍，这次宴饮称为 劳酒 。
English: After returning from the ceremony, Tianzi was sleeping on the road and raised a cup for the banquet. The three princes, nine nobles, lords, and doctors all attended the banquet. This banquet was called "Raw Sake."

古文：是月也，天气下降，地气上腾，天地和同，草木萌动。
现代文：在这个月里，天气往下降，地气往上升，天地之气和合混同，草木开始萌芽生长。
English: In this month, the weather goes down, the earth's atmosphere goes up, the atmosphere of heaven and earth is mixed, and plants begin to sprout and grow.

古文：王命布农事，命田舍东郊，皆修封疆，审端经术。
现代文：天子下令布置春耕之事，命令田官住在东郊，监督农夫整治疆界，审察和修整田间的小路和沟渠。
English: Tianzi ordered the arrangement of spring ploughing, ordered the field officials to live in the eastern suburbs, supervised the farmers to rectify the boundaries, and inspected and repaired the paths and ditches in the fields.

古文：善相丘陵阪险原隰土地所宜，五谷所殖，以教道民，必躬亲之。
现代文：认真地考察丘陵、坡地、原瞩各种土地所适宜种植的作物，以及种植的方法，将这些教导给农民。田官一定要亲自做这些事。
English: Carefully inspect the hills, slopes, and foothills of all kinds of land suitable for planting crops, as well as planting methods, and teach them to farmers. The field officers must do these things themselves.

古文：田事既饬，先定准直，农乃不惑。
现代文：田事都已整饬妥当，是由于事先订立了标准，农事才进行得有条不紊。
English: The fields have been properly prepared, and due to the standards set in advance, the farming can be carried out in an orderly manner.

古文：是月也，命乐正入学习舞。乃修祭典。
现代文：在这个月里，命令乐正到太学教练舞蹈，同时修正祭祀的法典。
English: During this month, he ordered Le Zheng to Taigaku to teach dance and amend the sacrificial code.

古文：命祀山林川泽，牺牲毋用牝。
现代文：下令祭祀山林川泽，但不准许用母畜作祭品。
English: Orders were issued to offer sacrifices to mountains, forests, rivers and lakes, but it was not permitted to use female animals as sacrificial objects.

古文：禁止伐木。
现代文：禁止砍伐树木。
English: The felling of trees is prohibited.

古文：毋覆巢，毋杀孩虫、胎、夭、飞鸟。毋麑，毋卵。
现代文：不许捣毁鸟巢。不许杀害幼虫、已怀胎的母畜、刚出生的小兽、正学飞的小鸟，不许捕捉小兽和掏取鸟卵。
English: It is not allowed to destroy birds' nests, kill larvae, pregnant females, newborn small animals, small birds that are learning to fly, catch small animals and take out bird eggs.

古文：毋聚大众，毋置城郭。
现代文：不得聚集民众，不得修建城郭。
English: No gathering of people, no construction of fortifications.

古文：掩骼埋胔。
现代文：要掩埋枯骨尸骸。
English: We have to bury the dead bodies.

古文：是月也，不可以称兵，称兵必天殃。
现代文：在这个月里，不可以举兵，举兵必定遭到天灾。
English: In this month, it is not allowed to raise an army, and the raising of an army must be accompanied by a natural disaster.

古文：兵戎不起，不可从我始。
现代文：要解甲休兵，更不可由我方发动战争。
English: To lift the armistice truce, it is even more important that we do not start a war.

古文：毋变天之道，毋绝地之理，毋乱人之纪。
现代文：发令行事，不可使阴阳相犯，不可使刚柔相犯，不可使仁义违时。
English: When issuing orders, you must not make yin and yang collide, you must not make hard and soft collide, and you must not make benevolence and righteousness go against time.

古文：孟春行夏令，则雨水不时，草木蚤落，国时有恐。
现代文：春季正月，如果施行夏季的政令，就会造成该下雨时不下雨，草木过早地凋零，国都中常有惊恐之事发生。
English: In the first month of spring, if the summer decree is implemented, it will cause it not to rain when it should rain, the plants and trees will wither prematurely, and there will often be panic in the capital.

古文：行秋令则其民大疫，猋风暴雨总至，藜莠蓬蒿并兴。
现代文：如果施行秋季政令，就会导致在百姓中流行瘟疫，暴风暴雨突然来到，蒺藜、莠草、蓬蒿等野草生长茂盛。
English: If the autumn decree is implemented, it will lead to an epidemic of plague among the people, sudden storms and rain, and the growth of wild grasses such as reeds, rushes, and mosses.

古文：行冬令则水潦为败，雪霜大挚，首种不入。
现代文：如果施行冬季政令，就会导致水涝成灾，雪霜大至，第一茬作物无法种入土中。
English: If the winter decree is implemented, it will lead to floods, heavy snow and frost, and the first crop cannot be planted in the soil.

古文：仲春之月，日在奎，昏弧中，旦建星中。
现代文：春季的第二个月：太阳运行的位置在奎宿；黄昏时，弧星位于南天正中；拂晓时，建星位于南天正中。
English: The second month of spring: The position of the sun's movement is in Kuishuku; at dusk, the arc star is in the middle of the southern sky; at dawn, the founding star is in the middle of the southern sky.

古文：其日甲乙，其帝大皞，其神句芒。
现代文：春季的吉日是甲乙，于五行属木。尊崇的帝是以木德王的太眸，敬奉的神是木官句芒。
English: The auspicious day of spring is A-B, and the five elements are wood. The revered emperor is the god of wood, and the revered god is the god of wood.

古文：其虫鳞。
现代文：动物中与木相配的是鳞虫。
English: Among the animals that are compatible with wood are scale insects.

古文：其音角，律中夹钟。
现代文：五声中与木相配的是角声，与此月相应的音律是夹钟。
English: In the pentatonic scale, the tone that corresponds to the wood is the horn, and the tone that corresponds to this month is the gong.

古文：其数八。
现代文：与木相配的成数是八。
English: Eight is the number that goes with wood.

古文：其味酸，其臭膻，其祀户，祭先脾。
现代文：与木相配的五味是酸，五臭是擅。本月要祭祀户神，祭品中以脾脏为贵。
English: The five tastes that go well with wood are sour, and the five odors are excellent. This month, the house god is to be sacrificed, and the spleen is the most valuable of the offerings.

古文：始雨水，桃始华，仓庚鸣，鹰化为鸠。
现代文：这个月开始下雨，桃树开始开花，黄鹏开始鸣叫，老鹰变成了布谷鸟。
English: This month, it began to rain, the peach trees began to blossom, the yellow peng began to sing, and the eagle became a cuckoo.

古文：天子居青阳大庙，乘鸾路，驾仓龙，载青旗，衣青衣，服仓玉，食麦与羊，其器疏以达。
现代文：这个月，天子居住在东向明堂的正室，乘坐有莺铃的车子，车前驾着青色的高马，车上插着绘有青龙的旗子，穿着青色的衣服，佩戴着青色的饰玉，吃的是麦与羊，使用的器物纹理粗疏而通达。
English: This month, the heavenly son lived in the main room of Dongxiangming Hall, riding in a car with a bell, driving a blue high horse in front of the car, with a flag painted with a blue dragon on the car, wearing blue clothes, wearing blue beads, eating wheat and sheep, and using rough-textured and transparent utensils.

古文：是月也，安萌芽，养幼少，存诸孤。
现代文：在这个月里，不要损害植物发芽，加强对幼儿小孩的养育，慰问抚恤孤儿。
English: During this month, do not damage the germination of plants, strengthen the upbringing of young children, and comfort orphans.

古文：择元日，命民社。
现代文：要选择吉日，让老百姓祭祀土神。
English: It is necessary to choose an auspicious day for the people to offer sacrifices to the local deities.

古文：命有司省囹圄，去桎梏，毋肆掠，止狱讼。
现代文：要命令有关官吏减少监狱中关狎的囚犯，去掉脚镣和手铐，对死囚处决后不要再陈尸示众，不要拷打犯人，要调解纠纷，尽量减少打官司。
English: It is necessary to order the relevant officials to reduce the number of prisoners in the prison, remove the shackles and handcuffs, not to display the bodies of death row prisoners after execution, not to torture prisoners, to mediate disputes, and to minimize litigation.

古文：是月也，玄鸟至。
现代文：这个月，燕子来到。
English: This month, swallows arrived.

古文：至之日，以大牢祠于高禖。
现代文：在燕子来到的那天，用牛羊永三牲祭祀高谋之神。
English: On the day of the swallow's arrival, the god of high strategy was sacrificed with cattle and sheep.

古文：天子亲往，后妃帅九嫔御。
现代文：天子亲自前往，后妃率领后宫所有女眷陪同。
English: The Son of Heaven went there in person, accompanied by the Empress Dowager and all the female members of the Imperial Household.

古文：乃礼天子所御，带以弓韣，授以弓矢，于高禖之前。
现代文：在高谋神前，为怀孕的缤妃举行典礼，给她带上弓套，授给她弓箭，祈求高谋保佑生男。
English: A ceremony was held for the pregnant Empress Dowager Gong in front of the god Gao Mu, and she was given a bow and arrows, and a bow and arrow set for her, and the god Gao Mu blessed her with a baby boy.

古文：是月也，日夜分。
现代文：这个月，昼夜时间一样，开始打雷，开始闪电。
English: This month, day and night are the same time, thunder begins, lightning begins.

古文：雷乃发声，始电，蛰虫咸动，启户始出。
现代文：蛰伏的动物全都开始活动，钻出洞穴，回到地面。
English: All the animals that had been lying dormant began to stir, to crawl out of their burrows and return to the ground.

古文：先雷三日，奋木铎以令兆民曰：雷将发声，有不戒其容止者，生子不备，必有凶灾。
现代文：于春分前三天，摇动木铎向广大人民发布教令说： 将要开始打雷，有人不注意节制房事，生下的儿子就要有生理缺陷，自身也一定会有灾祸。 
English: On the third day before the vernal equinox, the shaking of the wooden stake issued an edict to the broad masses of the people, saying: Thunder will begin to strike, if anyone does not pay attention to temperance, his son will have a physiological defect, and he himself will certainly have a disaster.

古文：日夜分，则同度量，钧衡石，角斗甬，正权概。
现代文：昼夜时间一样长，所以要统一和校正各种度量衡的器具。
English: Day and night are equally long, so it is necessary to unify and calibrate all kinds of measuring instruments.

古文：是月也，耕者少舍。乃修阖扇，寝庙毕备。
现代文：这个月，农夫们暂时有点空闲，要抓紧时间整修门户，庙门和住室的门户都要整修停当。
English: This month, the farmers are a bit idle for the time being. It is necessary to seize the time to renovate the portal. The temple gate and the door of the living room must be renovated.

古文：毋作大事，以妨农之事。
现代文：不要兴兵和兴起大规模的劳役免妨害农事。
English: Don't let soldiers and the rise of large-scale forced labor interfere with farming.

古文：是月也，毋竭川泽，毋漉陂池，毋焚山林。
现代文：这个月，不要把川泽的水全都放完，不要使池塘干涸，不要焚烧山林。
English: This month, don't let all the water in Kawazawa run out, don't let the ponds dry up, and don't burn the mountain forests.

古文：天子乃鲜羔开冰，先荐寝庙。
现代文：天子于是用羊羔祭祀司寒之神，然后开窖取冰，先献给庙中的祖先。
English: The son of heaven then used a lamb to sacrifice to the god of cold, and then opened the cellar to take ice, first dedicated to the ancestors in the temple.

古文：上丁，命乐正习舞，释菜。
现代文：在上旬的丁日，命乐正教练舞蹈，举行释菜礼。
English: On the first day of the month of Ding, Miele was teaching a dance and holding a dish-laying ceremony.

古文：天子乃帅三公、九卿、诸侯、大夫亲往视之。
现代文：天子率领三公、九卿、诸侯、大夫，亲自到太学去观看。
English: The heavenly son led the three princes, nine lords, lords, and doctors, and personally went to Taigaku to watch.

古文：仲丁，又命乐正入学习舞。
现代文：中旬的丁日，又命乐正到太学去教练音乐。
English: In the middle of Ding's day, Meile is going to Taixue to coach music.

古文：是月也，祀不用牺牲，用圭璧，更皮币。
现代文：这个月，一般不用牲畜作祭品，而是用圭璧皮帛来代替。
English: This month, instead of using livestock as a sacrificial offering, people usually use cow hide.

古文：仲春行秋令，则其国大水，寒气总至，寇戎来征。
现代文：仲春二月，如果施行秋季的政令，国家就会发大水，寒气就会突然降临，敌寇就会前来侵犯。
English: In mid-spring and February, if the autumn decree is implemented, the country will flood, the cold will suddenly come, and the enemy will come to invade.

古文：行冬令，则阳气不胜，麦乃不熟，民多相掠。
现代文：此月如果施行冬季的政令，就会导致阳气经受不住阴气的袭击，麦子不能成熟，百姓中频繁发生劫掠之事。
English: If the winter decree is implemented this month, it will lead to yang qi not being able to withstand the attack of yin qi, wheat not being able to mature, and frequent looting among the people.

古文：行夏令，则国乃大旱，暖气早来，虫螟为害。
现代文：此月如果实行夏季的政令，国家就会出现大的干旱，炎热的天气提前到来，虫螟会危害庄稼。
English: If the summer decree is implemented this month, the country will experience a major drought, hot weather will come early, and insect pests will harm crops.

古文：季春之月，日在胃，昏七星中，旦牵牛中。
现代文：季春三月，太阳运行的位置在胃宿；黄昏时，星宿位于南天正中；拂晓时，牵牛星位于南天正中。
English: In the spring and March, the position of the sun's movement is in the stomach; at dusk, the star is in the middle of the southern sky; at dawn, the morning star is in the middle of the southern sky.

古文：其日甲乙。
现代文：春季的吉日是甲乙，于五行属木。
English: The auspicious day in spring is Jia B, and in the Five Elements it is Wood.

古文：其帝大皞，其神句芒。
现代文：尊崇的帝是以木德王的太埠，敬奉的神是木官句芒。
English: The revered emperor is the King of Mude's Taibut, and the revered god is Mucan Jumang.

古文：其虫鳞。
现代文：动物中与木相配的是鳞虫。
English: Among the animals that are compatible with wood are scale insects.

古文：其音角，律中姑洗。
现代文：五声中与木相配的是角声，与此月相应的音律是姑洗。
English: In the pentatonic scale, the coda corresponds to the wood, and the tone corresponding to this month is the wash.

古文：其数八。
现代文：与木相配的成数是八。
English: Eight is the number that goes with wood.

古文：其味酸，其臭膻。
现代文：与木相配的五味是酸，五臭是擅。
English: The five tastes that go with wood are sour, and the five odors are unsuitable.

古文：其祀户，祭先脾。
现代文：本月要祭祀户神，祭品中以脾脏为尊。
English: This month, it is necessary to make a sacrifice to the household gods, and the spleen is revered among the offerings.

古文：桐始华，田鼠化为鴽，虹始见，萍始生。
现代文：悟桐开始开花，田鼠变化为鹤鹑一类的小鸟，天空开始出现虹，水中开始生浮萍。
English: Wotan began to bloom, voles changed into small birds like cranes, a rainbow began to appear in the sky, and duckweed began to grow in the water.

古文：天子居青阳右个，乘鸾路，驾仓龙，载青旗，衣青衣，服仓玉。食麦与羊，其器疏以达。
现代文：这个月天子居住在明堂东部青阳的南室，乘坐有莺铃的车子，车前驾着青色的高马，车上插着绘有青龙的旗子，穿着青色的衣服，佩戴青色的饰玉，吃的是麦与羊，使用的器物纹理粗疏而通达。
English: This month, Tianzi lives in the south room of Qingyang in the eastern part of the Ming Hall. He rides a car with a bell, drives a blue high horse in front of the car, a flag with a blue dragon painted on it is stuck on the car, wears blue clothes, wears blue decorative beads, eats wheat and sheep, and uses objects with a coarse but transparent texture.

古文：是月也，天子乃荐鞠衣于先帝。
现代文：这个月，天子向太皞等先代帝王献上黄色的礼服，以祈求蚕事丰收。
English: This month, the heavenly son presented a yellow dress to the previous emperors such as Taiko to pray for a good harvest.

古文：命舟牧覆舟，五覆五反。乃告舟备具于天子焉，天子始乘舟。荐鲔于寝庙，乃为麦祈实。
现代文：命令主管船只的官员将船翻转过来检查，这样翻来覆去地检查五遍，才向天子报告说舟船准备停当。天子这才开始乘舟，向宗庙进献时鲜的鲟鱼，以祈求麦子丰收。
English: He ordered the officer in charge of the boat to turn the boat over and check it. He did this five times before reporting to the heavenly son that the boat was ready to stop. The heavenly son then began to take the boat to the ancestral temple to offer fresh eels to pray for a good wheat harvest.

古文：是月也，生气方盛，阳气发泄，句者毕出，萌者尽达。
现代文：这个月，生气正旺盛，阳气在发散，拳曲的芽都长了出来，直立的芽也都破土而出。
English: This month, the vitality is strong, the yang is spreading, the buds of the fist are growing, and the upright buds are also breaking out.

古文：不可以内。
现代文：在此阳气发散的月份，不宜聚敛收藏。
English: In this month of yang emanation, it is not appropriate to accumulate and collect things.

古文：天子布德行惠，命有司发仓廪，赐贫穷，振乏绝，开府库，出币帛，周天下。
现代文：天子要施德行惠，命令主管官吏打开粮仓，无偿地分给贫困无依靠的人，救济缺钱少吃的人；打开府库，拿出其中所藏的布帛，周济天下困难者。
English: In order to bestow virtue and benefit, the Son of Heaven ordered the officials in charge to open the granary and distribute it free of charge to the poor and the needy, to the people who lack money and eat less; to open the treasury, to take out the cloth bags hidden in it, and to give aid to the needy around the world.

古文：勉诸侯，聘名士，礼贤者。
现代文：勉励诸侯聘慰问名士，对贤人以礼相待。
English: Encourage the lords to hire celebrities for condolences, and treat the sages with courtesy.

古文：是月也，命司空曰：时雨将降，下水上腾，循行国邑，周视原野，修利堤防，道达沟渎，开通道路，毋有障塞。
现代文：这个月，天子命令司空说： 应时的雨水将要降落，地下水也将向上翻涌。要巡视国都和城邑，普遍地视察原野，整修堤防，疏通沟渠，开通道路，不许有障碍堵塞。
English: This month, the Son of Heaven commanded Siku to say: The timely rainwater will fall, and the groundwater will also surge upward. It is necessary to inspect the capital and cities, generally inspect the fields, repair the dikes, clear the ditches, open the roads, and prevent obstacles from being blocked.

古文：田猎罝罘、罗网、毕翳、餧兽之药，毋出九门。
现代文：打猎所用的捕兽的网、捕鸟的网、长柄的网、隐蔽自身的工具、毒害野兽的毒药，一概不准带出城门。 
English: No animal-catching nets, bird-catching nets, long-handled nets used for hunting, tools for concealing oneself, or poison for poisoning wild animals may be taken out of the city gates.

古文：是月也，命野虞毋伐桑柘。
现代文：这个月，命令主管田野山林的官员禁止人们砍伐桑树拓树。
English: This month, officials in charge of field and mountain forests ordered people not to cut down mulberry trees.

古文：鸣鸠拂其羽，戴胜降于桑。具曲植籧筐。
现代文：斑鸡振翅高飞，戴胜落在桑间，人们准备好蚕箔、蚕箔架、圆的方的采桑筐。
English: The zebra ptarmigan flaps its wings and soars high into the sky, and the hoopoe lands among the mulberry trees. People have prepared silkworm coils, silkworm coils, and round mulberry baskets.

古文：后妃齐戒，亲东乡躬桑。禁妇女毋观，省妇使以劝蚕事。
现代文：后妃们斋戒，亲自到东郊采桑，禁止妇女装饰打扮，减少她们的其他杂务，以鼓励她们有更多时间投入蚕桑之事。
English: The empresses fasted, went to the eastern suburbs to pick mulberry in person, forbade women to dress up, and reduced their other chores to encourage them to have more time to devote to mulberry.

古文：蚕事既登，分茧称丝效功，以共郊庙之服，无有敢惰。
现代文：养蚕的事结束，把蚕茧分给妇女让她们缀丝，然后称量每人缥丝的轻重，以考查各人的成绩。蚕丝是用来供给制作祭天祭祖的祭服的，不得有所怠慢。
English: When the raising of the silkworms was over, the cocoons were divided among the women for them to embroider, and then the weight of each person's cocoon was weighed in order to examine each person's performance. The silk was used to supply the production of the sacrificial clothing for the heavenly ancestors, and must not be neglected.

古文：是月也，命工师令百工审五库之量：金铁，皮革筋，角齿，羽箭干，脂胶丹漆，毋或不良。
现代文：这个月，指令百工之长下令百工仔细检查五库物资的质量：即铜铁库、皮革牛筋库、兽角象牙库、羽毛箭杆库、油脂粘胶朱砂油漆库，不得混入次品。
English: This month, the head of the hundred craftsmen ordered the hundred craftsmen to carefully check the quality of the five warehouses of materials: that is, the copper and iron warehouse, the leather and cowhide warehouse, the horn and ivory warehouse, the feather and arrow warehouse, and the grease and gum and cinnabar paint warehouse. No inferior products may be mixed in.

古文：百工咸理，监工日号；毋悖于时，毋或作为淫巧以荡上心。
现代文：各种工匠都在干活，监工的人每天都要发出警告： 干活不要违背时令节气，不要制造过分奇巧的产品，以至于使天子产生讲奢侈图享受的念头。 
English: All kinds of artisans are at work, and the supervisors of the workers must issue a warning every day: Do not work against the seasonal spirit, do not make products that are too fancy, so that the heavenly son has the idea of talking about luxury and enjoyment.

古文：是月之末，择吉日，大合乐，天子乃率三公、九卿、诸侯、大夫亲往视之。
现代文：这个月的月底，选择吉日，举行大规模的歌舞，天子率领三公、九卿、诸侯、大夫亲临观看。
English: At the end of this month, the auspicious day was chosen to hold a large-scale song and dance, and the heavenly son led the three princes, nine lords, lords, and doctors to watch.

古文：是月也，乃合累牛腾马，游牝于牧。
现代文：这个月，使公牛公马与母牛母马在放牧中进行交配。
English: This month, male bulls and female cows were mated in the pasture.

古文：牺牲驹犊，举，书其数。
现代文：把选作祭祀用的牲畜、小马小牛的数目都记录在案。
English: The number of cattle, ponies, and calves to be sacrificed was recorded.

古文：命国难，九门磔攘，以毕春气。
现代文：命令国都的居民举行驱逐疫鬼的仪式，在每个城门分裂牲体消除邪恶，以除净春时的不正之气。
English: The residents of the capital were ordered to hold a ceremony to expel the pestilence, and to divide the animals at each gate to eliminate the evil, so as to purify the springtime.

古文：季春行冬令，则寒气时发，草木皆肃，国有大恐。
现代文：暮春三月，如果施行冬季的政令，就会导致寒流时时出现，草木枯萎，国都发生大的骚乱。
English: At the end of spring in March, if the winter decree is implemented, it will cause cold snaps to appear from time to time, plants and trees will wither, and there will be great unrest in the capital.

古文：行夏令，则民多疾疫，时雨不降，山林不收。
现代文：如果施行夏季的政令，就会导致百姓多染时疫，该下的雨不下，山陵上的庄稼不收。
English: If the summer decree is implemented, it will cause the people to suffer from seasonal diseases, the rain will not fall, and the crops in the mountains will not be harvested.

古文：行秋令，则天多沉阴，淫雨蚤降，兵革并起。
现代文：此月如果施行秋季的政令，就会导致阴沉的天气增多，秋雨连绵的现象提前来到，战乱四起。
English: If the autumn decree is implemented this month, it will lead to an increase in gloomy weather, the phenomenon of continuous autumn rain will come ahead of schedule, and there will be four wars.

古文：孟夏之月，日在毕，昏翼中，旦婺女中。
现代文：孟夏四月，太阳运行的位置在毕宿；黄昏时，翼宿位于南天正中；拂晓时，婴女星位于南天正中。
English: Mengxia In April, the position of the sun's movement is at the end of the night; at dusk, the pterodactyl is in the middle of the southern sky; at dawn, the baby star is in the middle of the southern sky.

古文：其日丙丁。
现代文：夏季的吉日是丙丁，于五行属火。
English: The auspicious day of summer is Hnding, which belongs to fire in the Five Elements.

古文：其帝炎帝，其神祝融。
现代文：尊崇的帝是以火德王的炎帝，敬奉的神是火官祝融。
English: The revered emperor is the Fire God Emperor, and the worshiped god is the Fire Officer Zhu Rong.

古文：其虫羽。
现代文：动物中与火相配的是羽虫。
English: Among the animals that are compatible with fire are caterpillars.

古文：其音征，律中中吕。
现代文：五声中与火相配的是微声，与此月相应的音律是中吕。
English: In the pentatonic scale, fire corresponds to the microtonal scale, and the corresponding scale for this month is the mid-lu.

古文：其数七。
现代文：与火相配的成数是七。
English: The number corresponding to fire is seven.

古文：其味苦，其臭焦。
现代文：与火相配的五味是苦，五臭是焦。
English: The five tastes that go with fire are bitterness, and the five odors are burning.

古文：其祀灶，祭先肺。
现代文：五祀中祭祀灶神，祭品中以肺脏为尊。
English: Among the five deities, the god of the hearth is worshipped, and the lungs are revered among the offerings.

古文：蝼蝈鸣，蚯螾出，王瓜生，苦菜秀。
现代文：缕蛔开始鸣叫，蛆绷从土里钻出，王瓜开始生长，苦菜开花。
English: The water hyacinth began to sing, the water hyacinth emerged from the soil, the king melon began to grow, and the bitter cabbage began to bloom.

古文：天子居明堂左个，乘朱路，驾赤骝，载赤旗，衣朱衣，服赤玉。食菽与鸡，其器高以粗。
现代文：天子居住在南向明堂的左侧室，乘坐朱红色的车子，车前驾着赤色的马，车上插着绘有赤龙的旗子，穿着朱红色的衣服，佩戴赤色的饰玉，吃的是豆类和鸡，使用的器物高而大。
English: Tianzi lives in the left room of Nanxiangming Hall. He rides in a scarlet car with a red horse in the front, a flag with a red dragon on it, wears scarlet clothes and red ornaments, eats beans and chicken, and uses tall and large utensils.

古文：是月也，以立夏。
现代文：这月有立夏的节气。
English: This month marks the beginning of the summer season.

古文：先立夏三日，大史谒之天子曰：某日立夏，盛德在火。
现代文：在立夏的前三天，太史向天子察告说： 某日立夏，火德当令。 
English: On the first three days of the summer solstice, the Grand Historian reported to the Son of Heaven: A certain summer solstice, fire and virtue are imperative.

古文：天子乃齐。
现代文：天子于是斋戒。
English: The son of heaven then fasted.

古文：立夏之日，天子亲帅三公、九卿、大夫以迎夏于南郊。
现代文：立夏这一天，天子亲率三公、九卿、大夫到南郊迎夏。
English: On the day of the beginning of summer, the heavenly son led the three princes, nine nobles, and doctors to the southern suburbs to welcome the summer.

古文：还反，行赏，封诸侯。庆赐遂行，无不欣说。
现代文：回朝后，颁赏群臣，分封诸侯，该褒奖的褒奖，该赏赐的赏赐，无人不高兴满意。
English: After returning to the imperial court, the awarding of a group of ministers, the allocation of princes, the award of the award, the reward of the award, no one is unhappy and satisfied.

古文：乃命乐师，习合礼乐。
现代文：于是命令乐师将礼和乐合起来练习。
English: So he ordered the musicians to practice combining the rites and music.

古文：命太尉，赞桀俊，遂贤良，举长大，行爵出禄，必当其位。
现代文：命令太尉，举荐俊杰，推荐贤良，选拔身体魁伟的人。分封的爵位，给予的傣禄，一定要和他们的职位相当。
English: Order the captain, recommend the good, recommend the virtuous, and select the physically strong. The knighthoods awarded, and the bonuses given, must be commensurate with their positions.

古文：是月也，继长增高，毋有坏堕，毋起土功，毋发大众，毋伐大树。
现代文：这个月，草木更加茁壮高大，不要毁坏和糟蹋。不要大兴土木，不要征发百姓，不要砍伐大树。
English: This month, the plants and trees are more vigorous and tall, do not destroy and spoil. Do not build large buildings, do not conscript people, do not cut down large trees.

古文：是月也，天子始絺。
现代文：这个月，天子开始穿细葛布做的夏服。
English: This month, Tianzi began to wear a summer dress made of fine cambric cloth.

古文：命野虞出行田原，为天子劳农劝民，毋或失时。
现代文：命令主管田野山林的官离开城邑，到各处田间，代表天子慰劳农夫、鼓励民众，使所有人都不要厌恶农活的时令节气。
English: He ordered the officials in charge of fields and forests to leave the city and go to various fields to comfort the farmers and encourage the people on behalf of the Son of Heaven, so that everyone would not dislike the seasonal spirit of farm work.

古文：命司徒巡行县鄙，命农勉作，毋休于都。
现代文：命令司徒巡视全国各地，命令农夫努力耕作，不可仍留在城邑里休息。
English: Ordered the magistrates to inspect the whole country, ordered the farmers to work hard, and not to stay in the cities and towns to rest.

古文：是月也，驱兽毋害五谷，毋大田猎。
现代文：这个月，要驱赶野兽使其不危害庄稼，不要举行大规模田猎。
English: This month, it is necessary to drive away wild beasts so that they do not harm crops, and do not hold large-scale field hunting.

古文：农乃登麦，天子乃以彘尝麦，先荐寝庙。
现代文：农官进献新麦，天子于是就着猪肉品尝新麦，在品尝之前先献给宗庙。
English: The agronomist offered new wheat, so the heavenly son tasted the new wheat with the pork and offered it to the ancestral temple before tasting it.

古文：是月也，聚畜百药。
现代文：这个月，要采集和收藏各种草药。
English: This month, collect and collect all kinds of herbs.

古文：靡草死，麦秋至。
现代文：荠草枯死，麦子成熟的时节到来。
English: The time has come for the reeds to wither and the wheat to ripen.

古文：断薄刑，决小罪，出轻系。
现代文：对犯有轻罪的人，该审理的要及时审理，该断决的要及时断决，该释放的要及时释放。
English: For a person who has committed a misdemeanor, the case should be tried in a timely manner, the verdict should be decided in a timely manner, and the release should be released in a timely manner.

古文：蚕事毕，后妃献茧。
现代文：蚕桑之事结束，后妃向天子献上蚕茧，并向养蚕的人收取茧税。
English: When the matter of the silkworm mulberry was over, the empress presented the silkworm cocoon to the heavenly son and collected the cocoon tax from the silkworm breeder.

古文：乃收茧税，以桑为均，贵贱长幼如一，以给郊庙之服。
现代文：茧税的多少，以分配给养蚕人桑树的多少为准，无论贵贱长幼都遵照统一标准。以征收的蚕茧，制作祭天祭祖的祭服。
English: The amount of tax levied is based on the number of mulberry trees allocated to silkworm breeders, regardless of whether they are old or young, according to a uniform standard. The collected silkworm cocoons are used to make the sacrificial clothes for the ancestors.

古文：是月也，天子饮酎，用礼乐。
现代文：这个月，天子饮用酣酒，欢宴群臣，既用音乐助兴，又用礼正尊卑。
English: In this month, the Son of Heaven drinks gourd wine and feasts the courtiers, using both music to entertain and etiquette to elevate the lowly.

古文：孟夏行秋令，则苦雨数来，五谷不滋，四鄙入保。
现代文：孟夏四月，如果施行秋季的政令，就会导致多雨成灾，五谷不能生长，边境上的居民因外敌入侵而躲进城堡。
English: Meng Xia April, if the autumn decree is implemented, it will lead to a lot of rain, the grain cannot grow, and the residents on the border will hide in the castle due to the invasion of foreign enemies.

古文：行冬令，则草木蚤枯，后乃大水，败其城郭。
现代文：此月如果施行冬季的政令，就会导致草木提前枯萎，接着发生洪水，毁坏城郭。
English: If the winter decree is implemented this month, it will lead to early withering of plants and trees, followed by flooding and destruction of the city walls.

古文：行春令，则蝗虫为灾，暴风来格，秀草不实。
现代文：此月如果施行春季的政令，就会导致蝗虫为灾，暴风袭来，植物虽然开花却不结籽。
English: If the spring decree is implemented this month, it will lead to locust plagues, storms, and plants that bloom but do not produce seeds.

古文：仲夏之月，日在东井，昏亢中，旦危中。
现代文：仲夏五月，太阳运行的位置在东井；黄昏时，亢星位于南夭的正中；拂晓时，危星位于南天的正中。
English: In mid-summer in May, the position of the sun's movement is in the east well; at dusk, the Pleiades star is in the middle of the southern sky; at dawn, the Pleiades star is in the middle of the southern sky.

古文：其日丙丁。
现代文：夏季的吉日是丙丁，于五行属火。
English: The auspicious day of summer is Hnding, which belongs to fire in the Five Elements.

古文：其帝炎帝，其神祝融。
现代文：尊崇的帝是以火德王的炎帝，敬奉的神是火官祝融。
English: The revered emperor is the Fire God Emperor, and the worshiped god is the Fire Officer Zhu Rong.

古文：其虫羽。
现代文：动物中与火相配的是羽虫。
English: Among the animals that are compatible with fire are caterpillars.

古文：其音征，律中蕤宾。
现代文：五声中与火相配的是微声，与五月相应的音律是袭宾。
English: In the pentatonic scale, the microtones correspond to the fire, and the rhythm corresponding to the month of May is the guest.

古文：其数七。
现代文：与火相配的成数是七。
English: The number corresponding to fire is seven.

古文：其味苦，其臭焦。
现代文：与火相配的五味是苦，五臭是焦。
English: The five tastes that go with fire are bitterness, and the five odors are burning.

古文：其祀灶，祭先肺。
现代文：五祀中祭祀灶神，祭品中以肺脏为尊。
English: Among the five deities, the god of the hearth is worshipped, and the lungs are revered among the offerings.

古文：小暑至，螳蜋生。鵙始鸣，反舌无声。
现代文：小暑来到，蝗娘出生，伯劳开始鸣叫，而百舌鸟却停止了叫二少尸。
English: The summer heat came, the locusts were born, the shrimps began to sing, but the larks stopped calling.

古文：天子居明堂太庙，乘朱路，驾赤骝，载赤旗，衣朱衣，服赤玉，食菽与鸡，其器高以粗。
现代文：天子居住在南向明堂的正室，乘坐朱红色的车子，车前驾着赤色的马，车上插着绘有赤龙的旗子，穿着朱红色的衣服，佩戴赤色的饰玉，吃的是豆类和鸡，使用的器物高而大。
English: Tianzi lives in the main room of Nanxiangming Hall. He rides in a scarlet car with a red horse in the front, a flag with a red dragon on it, wears scarlet clothes and red ornaments, eats beans and chicken, and uses tall and large utensils.

古文：养壮佼。
现代文：顺应本月时气，要收养壮健有力之士。
English: In accordance with the trend of this month, it is necessary to adopt strong and powerful people.

古文：是月也，命乐师修鼗鞞鼓，均琴瑟管箫，执干戚戈羽，调竽笙篪簧，饬钟磬柷敔。
现代文：这个月，命令乐师检修豢擎鼓，调节琴瑟管箫，手持干戚戈羽，调和竿笙旎簧，整饬钟馨祝敲，为向天帝祈雨作好准备。
English: This month, he ordered the musicians to overhaul the gongs and drums, adjust the strings of the harpsichord, hold the gongs and feathers, harmonize the gongs and reeds, and adjust the bells and chimes, in preparation for praying for rain to the heavenly emperor.

古文：命有司为民祈祀山川百源，大雩帝，用盛乐。
现代文：又命令有关官员祭祀名山大川和各条河流的源头为百姓祈雨，并举行大规模地向天帝求雨之祭，各种乐器和文舞武舞一齐登场。
English: He also ordered the relevant officials to pray for rain for the people by offering sacrifices to the famous mountain river and the source of various rivers, and to hold a large-scale rain-praying festival to the Heavenly Emperor. Various musical instruments and martial arts were on stage together.

古文：乃命百县，雩祀百辟卿士有益于民者，以祈谷实。
现代文：于是又命令各地长官也举行求雨之祭，祭祀那些有功于民的前代国君公卿，以求他们保佑使谷粒饱满。
English: Therefore, he ordered the governors of each region to also hold a rain festival, to offer sacrifices to the former sovereigns and nobles who had contributed to the people, in order to ask for their blessing to make the grain full.

古文：农乃登黍。
现代文：农民在这个月进献黍子。
English: This month, farmers are donating hazelnuts.

古文：是月也，天子乃以雏尝黍，羞以含桃，先荐寝庙。
现代文：这个月，天子就配着雏鸡品尝新黍，品尝之前，先献给宗庙，同时进献的还有樱桃。
English: This month, the son of heaven will taste the new eel with the chicks. Before tasting, he will first offer it to the ancestral temple, and at the same time he will also offer cherries.

古文：令民毋艾蓝以染，毋烧灰，毋暴布。
现代文：命令百姓不要割蓝草染布，不要烧灰，不要晒布。
English: The people were ordered not to cut the bluegrass dyed cloth, not to burn the ashes, and not to dry the cloth.

古文：门闾毋闭，关市毋索。
现代文：都门里门不要关闭，关卡和市场不要搜索。
English: Do not close the doors in the capital, and do not search the checkpoints and markets.

古文：挺重囚，益其食。
现代文：这个月对重罪囚犯要表示优待，增加他们的饮食。
English: This month, felony inmates will be given preferential treatment, and their food rations will be increased.

古文：游牝别群，则絷腾驹，班马政。
现代文：放牧时，要把牡马单独分开，把公马系住。
English: When grazing, stallions should be separated individually and stallions should be tethered.

古文：是月也，日长至，阴阳争，死生分。
现代文：颁布关于养马的政令。这个月，白天最长，阳气虽盛，阴气也开始产生，二者形成争斗之势，死生的分界也由此开始。
English: This month, the day is the longest, although the yang is strong, the yin is also beginning to emerge, and the two are forming a struggle, and the demarcation of life and death has begun.

古文：君子齐戒，处必掩身，毋躁。止声色，毋或进。薄滋味，毋致和。节嗜欲，定心气，百官静事毋刑，以定晏阴之所成。
现代文：所以君子要斋戒身心，即使在家也不可赤身露体，不可急躁；要暂停歌乐，不近女色，不要殡妃进御；要吃清淡的食品，不要追求五味俱全；要节制嗜欲，平心静气；各个器官处于安静状态，作事不可贪快，以等待阳阴斗争的结果。
English: Therefore, a gentleman should fast both physically and mentally. Even if he is at home, he should not be naked and impatient. He should suspend singing and music, not be close to women, and not go to funerals. He should eat light food, and not pursue all five tastes. He should restrain his appetite and be calm. All organs should be in a quiet state, and he should not be greedy in his work, so as to wait for the result of the struggle between yin and yang.

古文：鹿角解，蝉始鸣。半夏生，木堇荣。
现代文：这个月，鹿角开始脱落，知了开始鸣叫，半夏出苗，木谨开花。
English: This month, the antlers of the deer began to fall off, they began to chirp, seedlings emerged in midsummer, and the trees began to bloom.

古文：是月也，毋用火南方。
现代文：这个月，不可在南方用火。
English: This month, do not use fire in the south.

古文：可以居高明，可以远眺望，可以升山陵，可以处台榭。
现代文：可以住在高明之处，可以从高处向远处眺望，可以登上山陵，可以住在台榭。
English: You can live in a high place, you can look out from a high place, you can climb a mountain, you can live in a plateau.

古文：仲夏行冬令，则雹冻伤谷，道路不通，暴兵来至。
现代文：道各仲夏五月如果施行冬季的政令，就会导致冰雹冻伤庄稼，路不通，盗贼到来。
English: If the winter decree is implemented in May, it will lead to hail freezing crops, impassable roads, and the arrival of thieves.

古文：行春令，则五谷晚熟，百螣时起，其国乃饥。
现代文：如果施行春季的政令，就会导致五谷晚熟种害虫一时皆起，国家遭到饥荒。
English: If the spring decree is implemented, it will lead to a sudden outbreak of late-ripening pests, and the country will suffer from famine.

古文：行秋令，则草木零落，果实早成，民殃于疫。
现代文：如果施行秋季的政令，就会导致草木凋零，植物提前结实，百姓受到疫疾的祸害。
English: If the autumn decree is implemented, it will lead to the withering of grass and trees, the early establishment of plants, and the people will be plagued by epidemics.

古文：季夏之月，日在柳，昏火中，旦奎中。
现代文：季夏六月，太阳运行的位置在柳宿；黄昏时，火星位于南天的正中；拂晓时，奎星位于南天的正中。
English: In the summer, in June, the position of the sun's movement is in the willow; at dusk, Mars is located in the middle of the southern sky; at dawn, the star Kui is located in the middle of the southern sky.

古文：其日丙丁。
现代文：夏季的吉日是丙丁，于五行属火。
English: The auspicious day of summer is Hnding, which belongs to fire in the Five Elements.

古文：其帝炎帝，其神祝融。
现代文：尊崇的帝是以火德王的炎帝，敬奉的神是火官祝融。
English: The revered emperor is the Fire God Emperor, and the worshiped god is the Fire Officer Zhu Rong.

古文：其虫羽。
现代文：动物中与火相配的是羽虫。
English: Among the animals that are compatible with fire are caterpillars.

古文：其音征，律中林钟。
现代文：五声中与火相配的是徽声，与本月相应的音律是林钟。
English: Among the five tones, the one that matches the fire is the crest tone, and the tone corresponding to this month is the forest bell.

古文：其数七。
现代文：与火相配的成数是七。
English: The number corresponding to fire is seven.

古文：其味苦，其臭焦。
现代文：与火相配的五味是苦，五臭是焦。
English: The five tastes that go with fire are bitterness, and the five odors are burning.

古文：其祀灶，祭先肺。
现代文：五祀中祭祀灶神，祭品中以肺脏为尊。
English: Among the five deities, the god of the hearth is worshipped, and the lungs are revered among the offerings.

古文：温风始至，蟋蟀居壁，鹰乃学习，腐草为萤。
现代文：这个月，温风开始吹起，蟀蟀移居墙壁之下，鸦鹰开始学习飞翔搏击，腐烂的草变为萤火虫。
English: This month, the warm wind began to blow, the crickets moved under the walls, the eagles began to learn to fly and fight, and the rotten grass turned into fireflies.

古文：天子居明堂右个，乘朱路，驾赤骝，载赤旗，衣朱衣，服赤玉。食菽与鸡，其器高以粗。
现代文：天子居住在南向明堂的右侧室，乘坐朱红色的车子，车前驾着赤色的马，车上插着绘有赤龙的旗子，穿着朱红色的衣服，佩戴赤色的饰玉，吃的是豆类和鸡，使用的器物高而大。
English: Tianzi lives in the right-hand room of Nanxiangming Hall. He rides in a scarlet car with a red horse in the front, a flag with a red dragon on it, wears scarlet clothes and red ornaments, eats beans and chicken, and uses tall and large utensils.

古文：命渔师伐蛟取鼍，登龟取鼋。
现代文：命令渔师捕取蛟、髦、龟、奄进献。
English: Fishermen were ordered to catch eel, mackerel, turtle and pollock.

古文：命泽人纳材苇。
现代文：命令泽人进献可以编织器物的苇草。
English: He ordered the people of Za to donate rushes, which can be used to weave objects.

古文：是月也，命四监大合百县之秩刍，以养牺牲。
现代文：这个月，命令主管山林川泽的官员把全国各地按规定应交纳的喂养牲畜的草集中起来，用来饲养牺牲。
English: This month, officials in charge of mountains, forests and rivers were ordered to collect all the grass that should be paid to feed livestock across the country according to regulations, and use it to raise sacrifices.

古文：令民无不咸出其力，以共皇天上帝名山大川四方之神，以祠宗庙社稷之灵，以为民祈福。
现代文：命令百姓人人都要出力，以供给祭祀皇天上帝、名山大川、四方之神之用，以祭祀宗庙和社樱的神灵，以为民求福。
English: He ordered all the people to work hard to provide offerings for the gods of the emperor, famous mountains and rivers, and the gods of the four directions, and to offer sacrifices to the deities of the ancestral temple and the shrine, so that the people could seek blessings.

古文：是月也，命妇官染采，黼黻文章，必以法故，无或差贷。
现代文：这个月，命令妇官将丝帛染成彩色，染的各种颜色和花纹，无论是黑黄苍赤，还是脯敝文章，都要严格地遵循过去的成法，不许有一点差错、这样一来，染出的成品，件件合格，不敢欺骗作假。
English: This month, the gynaecologists ordered the silk cocoons to be dyed into colors. The various colors and patterns dyed, whether black, yellow, red, or indigo, must strictly follow the past methods, and there must not be a single mistake. In this way, the dyed finished products are qualified, and they dare not cheat and forge.

古文：黑黄仓赤，莫不质良，毋敢诈伪，以给郊庙祭祀之服，以为旗章，以别贵贱等给之度。
现代文：染好的丝帛，用来供给制作祭天祭祖的祭服，用来制作各种旗子和各种名号的标志，用来区别贵贱等级的不同。
English: The dyed silk cocoons are used to supply the sacrificial clothing for the ancestors of the Tian Festival, to make various flags and signs of various names, and to distinguish between the different levels of nobility.

古文：是月也，树木方盛，乃命虞人入山行木，毋有斩伐。
现代文：这个月，树木正在生长旺盛。于是命令主管山林的官员入山巡视林木，严禁砍伐。
English: This month, the trees are growing vigorously, so the officials in charge of the mountain forest were ordered to enter the mountain to inspect the trees, and it is strictly forbidden to cut them down.

古文：不可以兴土功，不可以合诸侯，不可以起兵动众，毋举大事，以摇养气。毋发令而待，以妨神农之事也。
现代文：这个月，不可以大兴土工，不可以会合诸侯，不可以兴师动众。不要发动大规模的摇役，以致于动摇生养之气，不要过早地发布摇役之令惊扰民众，以致于妨害土神的工作。
English: This month, it is not allowed to carry out large-scale earthworks, it is not allowed to gather the lords, and it is not allowed to stir up the masses. Do not launch large-scale rocking, so as to shake the vitality, and do not prematurely issue rocking orders to disturb the people, so as to interfere with the work of the soil god.

古文：水潦盛昌，神农将持功，举大事则有天殃。
现代文：这个月雨水充沛，土神将于此时成就农事，如果发动大规模的摇役就会遭到天灾。
English: This month is full of rain, the earth god will achieve agricultural work at this time, and if a large-scale shake-up is launched, it will be hit by natural disasters.

古文：是月也，土润溽暑，大雨时行，烧薙行水，利以杀草，如以热汤。
现代文：这个月，土地湿润，天气湿热，大雨不断，可以把除下的草晒干烧掉，文放水浸泡，这就好像用滚开的水烫过一般，对于消灭杂草十分有利。
English: This month, the land is moist, the weather is hot and humid, and the heavy rain continues. The grass can be dried and burned, and the leaves can be soaked in water. This is like using boiling water to burn, which is very beneficial for eliminating weeds.

古文：可以粪田畴，可以美土疆。
现代文：这样，可以使田地肥沃，可以改善板结的土地。
English: In this way, the fields can be made fertile, and the soil can be improved.

古文：季夏行春令，则谷实鲜落，国多风咳，民乃迁徙。
现代文：季夏六月如果施行春季的政令，谷籽就会未熟先落，国人就会较多地伤风咳嗽，百姓就会迁移搬家。
English: If the spring decree is implemented in June of the summer season, the grain seeds will be unripe and fall first, the Chinese people will have more colds and coughs, and the people will move.

古文：行秋令，则丘隰水潦，禾稼不熟，乃多女灾。
现代文：如果施行秋天的政令，就会高地洼地都出现水灾，庄稼不熟，怀孕的妇女容易流产。
English: If the autumn decree is implemented, floods will occur in all highland depressions, crops will not ripen, and pregnant women will easily miscarry.

古文：行冬令，则风寒不时，鹰隼蚤鸷，四鄙入保。
现代文：如果施行冬季的政令，就会使寒潮不按时令来到，鹰集提前搏击，四境受到侵扰，居民躲入城堡。
English: If the winter decree is implemented, the cold wave will not come on time, the eagles will fight in advance, the four borders will be disturbed, and the residents will hide in the castle.

古文：中央土。其日戊己。
现代文：四时的中间属土：中间的吉日是戊己。
English: The middle of the four o'clock belongs to the earth: the auspicious day in the middle is Wuji.

古文：其帝黄帝，其神后土。
现代文：尊崇的帝是以土德王的黄帝，敬奉的神是土官后土。
English: The revered emperor is the Yellow Emperor of the King of the Turks, and the revered god is the local official Houchi.

古文：其虫裸，其音宫，律中黄钟之宫。
现代文：与土相配的动物是课虫。与土相配的五声是宫，相应的音律是黄钟之宫。
English: The animal that matches the earth is the class insect. The five tones that match the earth are the palace, and the corresponding rhythm is the palace of the yellow bell.

古文：其数五。
现代文：土的生数是五。
English: The number of earthworms is five.

古文：其味甘，其臭香。
现代文：与土相配的五味是甘，五臭是香。
English: The five tastes that match the soil are sweet, and the five odors are fragrant.

古文：其祠中溜，祭先心。
现代文：五祀中祭祀中雷，祭品中以心脏为尊。
English: In the five rites, lightning is worshipped, and the heart is revered in the offerings.

古文：天子居大庙大室，乘大路，驾黄骝，载黄旗，衣黄衣，服黄玉，食稷与牛，其器圜以闳。
现代文：天子居住在明堂中心的太室，乘的是大格，驾车的是黄马，车上插着绘有黄龙的旗子，穿黄色的衣服，佩黄色的饰玉，吃的是谷子和牛肉，使用的器物圆而大。
English: Tianzi lives in the central room of the Ming Hall. He rides a large horse, drives a yellow horse, has a flag with a yellow dragon on it, wears yellow clothes and yellow ornaments, eats corn and beef, and uses round and large utensils.

古文：孟秋之月，日在翼，昏建星中，旦毕中。
现代文：孟秋七月，太阳运行的位置在翼星；黄昏时，建星位于南天正中；拂晓时，毕星位于南天正中。
English: In the autumn and July, the position of the sun's movement is in the wing star; at dusk, the founding star is in the middle of the southern sky; at dawn, the evening star is in the middle of the southern sky.

古文：其日庚辛。
现代文：秋季的吉日是庚辛，于五行属金。
English: The auspicious day in autumn is Genghis Khan, in the five elements it belongs to gold.

古文：其帝少皞，其神蓐收。
现代文：尊崇的帝是以金德王的少眸，敬奉的神是金官薄收。
English: The revered emperor is the young eyes of King Jinde, and the revered god is the gold official.

古文：其虫毛。
现代文：与金相配的动物是毛虫。
English: The animal that goes with gold is the caterpillar.

古文：其音商，律中夷则。
现代文：与金相配的五声是商声，与本月相应的音律是夷则。
English: The five syllables corresponding to gold are business sounds, and the rhythm corresponding to this month is Yi Zhe.

古文：其数九。
现代文：与金相配的成数是九。
English: The number of gold is nine.

古文：其味辛，其臭腥。
现代文：与金相配的五味是辛，五臭是腥。
English: The five flavours that go with gold are spicy, and the five odours are smelly.

古文：其祀门，祭先肝。
现代文：五祀中祭祀门神，祭品中以肝脏为尊。
English: Among the five rites, the door deity is worshipped, and the liver is revered among the offerings.

古文：凉风至，白露降，寒蝉鸣。鹰乃祭鸟，用始行戮。
现代文：这个月，凉风开始吹，露水开始降落，寒蝉开始鸣叫，老鹰于是祭鸟，开始对犯人杀戮处决。
English: This month, the cool wind began to blow, the dew began to fall, the chills began to sing, the eagle became a sacrificial bird, and the killing and execution of prisoners began.

古文：天子居总章左个，乘戎路，驾白骆，载白旗，衣白衣，服白玉，食麻与犬，其器廉以深。
现代文：这个月，天子住在西向明堂的左侧室，乘白色的兵车，驾白马，车上插着绘有白龙的旗子，穿白一色的衣服，佩白色的饰玉，食品是麻籽和狗肉，使用的器物外有棱角内部深邃。
English: This month, the heavenly son lived in the left room of Xixiangming Hall, riding a white chariot, driving a white horse, with a flag painted with a white dragon on the car, wearing white clothes, wearing white ornaments, the food was hemp seed and dog meat, and the utensils used were angular on the outside and deep inside.

古文：是月也，以立秋。
现代文：这个月有立秋的节气。
English: This month marks the beginning of the autumn season.

古文：先立秋三日，大史谒之天子曰：某日立秋，盛德在金。
现代文：立秋前三天，太史察告天子说： 某日立秋，金德当令。 
English: Three days before the beginning of autumn, the Grand Historian told the Son of Heaven, "One day, when autumn comes, Kindness will be the order of the day.

古文：天子乃齐。
现代文：天子于是斋戒，准备迎秋。
English: The son of heaven then fasted.

古文：立秋之日，天子亲帅三公、九卿、诸侯、大夫，以迎秋于西郊。
现代文：立秋那天，天子亲帅三公、九卿、诸侯、大夫，在西郊设坛祭祀白帝少眸。
English: On the day of the beginning of autumn, the three princes, nine nobles, lords, and doctors of the Heavenly Son, set up an altar in the western suburb to worship the young Emperor Paik.

古文：还反，赏军帅武人于朝。
现代文：礼毕回朝，天子在朝堂赏赐将帅和勇士。
English: After returning from the ceremony, the emperor rewarded the generals and warriors in the court.

古文：天子乃命将帅，选士厉兵，简练桀俊，专任有功，以征不义。诘诛暴慢，以明好恶，顺彼远方。
现代文：于是天子命令将帅挑选士卒磨砺武器，精选杰出人才加以训练，专任有功之将，以征讨不义之人，对欺下慢上的人问罪诛杀，以表明爱憎，使远方的人知所归顺。
English: Therefore, the Son of Heaven ordered the generals to select officers and men to sharpen their weapons, to select outstanding talents to train them, and to assign the meritorious generals to solicit the unjust, to accuse and kill those who cheated and slowed down, to show love and hate, and to make the distant people know where to submit.

古文：是月也，命有司修法制，缮囹圄，具桎梏，禁止奸，慎罪邪，务搏执。
现代文：这个月，命令有关官员修习法令制度，修缮监狱，准备脚镣手铐，禁止奸恶之事，警惕犯罪分子，务必逮捕归案。
English: This month, the relevant officials were ordered to study the legal system, renovate the prison, prepare shackles and handcuffs, prohibit evil deeds, be on the lookout for criminals, and be sure to arrest them.

古文：命理瞻伤，察创，视折，审断。决狱讼，必端平。戮有罪，严断刑。
现代文：命令法官亲自察看罪犯的伤、创、折、断情况；判决案件，一定要公正，杀戮有罪，要严肃地量刑。
English: Order the judge to personally inspect the injury, wound, fracture and broken condition of the criminal; the judgment of the case must be fair, the killing is guilty, and the sentencing must be serious.

古文：天地始肃，不可以赢。
现代文：天地之间开始有肃杀之气，不可以宽纵。
English: Between heaven and earth, there began to be a spirit of sternness, which could not be indulged.

古文：是月也，农乃登谷。
现代文：这个月，农民开始收谷。
English: This month, farmers began to harvest the grain.

古文：天子尝新，先荐寝庙。
现代文：天子品尝新谷，首先奉献宗庙。
English: The Son of Heaven tasted Shintani and first dedicated the ancestral temple.

古文：命百官，始收敛。完堤防，谨壅塞，以备水潦。
现代文：命令百官开始施行收敛之政，完善堤防，检查水道有无堵塞，以防备水灾。
English: He ordered officials to implement a policy of restraint, improve dikes, and check waterways for blockages to prevent floods.

古文：修宫室，坏墙垣，补城郭。
现代文：要修缮宫室，加固墙壁，修补城郭。
English: It is necessary to repair the palace, strengthen the walls, and repair the city walls.

古文：是月也，毋以封诸侯、立大官。毋以割地、行大使、出大币。
现代文：这个月，不要分封诸侯，不要委任大官，不要赐予臣下土地，不要向外国派出高级使节，不要馈赠别人厚礼。
English: This month, don't assign princes, don't appoint officials, don't give land to subjects, don't send high-ranking envoys to foreign countries, and don't give gifts to others.

古文：孟秋行冬令，则阴气大胜，介虫败谷，戎兵乃来。
现代文：孟秋七月如果施行冬天的政令，就会导致阴气太盛，甲虫危害谷物，敌兵来侵。
English: If the winter decree is implemented in July, it will lead to too much gloom, beetles will harm grain, and enemy soldiers will invade.

古文：行春令，则其国乃旱，阳气复还，五谷无实。
现代文：如果施行春天的政令，就会导致国家发生旱灾，阳气回归，五谷不会结籽。
English: If the spring decree is implemented, it will lead to drought in the country, the yang will return, and the grain will not set seed.

古文：行夏令，则国多火灾，寒热不节，民多疟疾。
现代文：如果施行夏天的政令，就会导致国内经常发生火灾，冷热不常，百姓多患疟疾。
English: If the summer decree is implemented, it will lead to frequent fires in the country, cold and heat are not common, and people suffer from malaria.

古文：仲秋之月，日在角，昏牵牛中，旦觜觿中。
现代文：仲秋八月，太阳运行的位置在角宿；黄昏时，牵牛星位于南天正中；拂晓时，紫稍星位于南天正中。
English: In mid-autumn and August, the position of the sun's movement is in Kakujuku; at dusk, Altair is in the middle of the southern sky; at dawn, Little Violet is in the middle of the southern sky.

古文：其日庚辛，其帝少皞，其神蓐收。
现代文：秋季的吉日是庚辛，于五行属金。尊崇的帝是以金德王的少眸，敬奉的神是金官募收。
English: The auspicious day in autumn is Genghis Khan, and the top of the five elements belongs to gold. The revered emperor is the young eyes of King Jinde, and the revered god is the gold collector.

古文：其虫毛。
现代文：与金相配的动物是毛虫。
English: The animal that goes with gold is the caterpillar.

古文：其音商，律中南吕。
现代文：与金相配的五声是商，与本月相应的音律，是南吕。
English: The five tones corresponding to gold are Shang, and the corresponding tone for this month is Nan Lv.

古文：其数九。
现代文：金的成数是九。
English: The number of gold is nine.

古文：其味辛，其臭腥。
现代文：与金相配的五味是辛，五臭是腥。
English: The five flavours that go with gold are spicy, and the five odours are smelly.

古文：其祀门，祭先肝。
现代文：五祀中祭祀门神，祭品中以肝脏为尊。
English: Among the five rites, the door deity is worshipped, and the liver is revered among the offerings.

古文：盲风至，鸿雁来，玄鸟归，群鸟养羞。
现代文：这个月，开始刮大风，大雁从北来，燕子归向南方，群鸟储藏食物过冬。
English: This month, a strong wind began to blow, the geese came from the north, the swallows turned south, and the birds stored food for the winter.

古文：天子居总章大庙，乘戎路，驾白骆，载白旗，衣白衣，服白玉，食麻与犬，其器廉以深。
现代文：这个月，天子住在西向明堂的正室，乘白色的兵车，驾白马，车上插着绘有白龙的旗子，穿白色的衣服，佩白色的饰玉，吃麻籽和狗肉，使用的器物外部有棱角而内部深邃。
English: This month, the heavenly son lived in the main room of Xixiangming Hall, riding a white chariot, driving a white horse, with a flag painted with a white dragon on the car, wearing white clothes, wearing white ornaments, eating hemp seeds and dog meat, and using utensils that were angular on the outside and deep inside.

古文：是月也，养衰老，授几杖，行糜粥饮食。
现代文：这个月，要赡养衰老的人，赏给他们几案和手杖，赐予他们稀粥饮食。
English: This month, support the elderly, give them a few cases and canes, and give them a gruel diet.

古文：乃命司服，具饬衣裳，文绣有恒，制有小大，度有长短。衣服有量，必循其故，冠带有常。
现代文：于是命令司服，置备祭服，祭服上的图案，该画的画，该绣的绣，祭服的大小长短，都有一定之规；祭服以外的他服也有规矩，置备时一定要遵循成法。帽子和带子也有常制。
English: So he ordered the priest's vestments, the preparation of the sacrificial vestments, the patterns on the sacrificial vestments, the painting of the painting, the embroidery of the embroidery, the size and length of the sacrificial vestments, all have certain rules; other clothes besides the sacrificial vestments also have rules, and must follow the law when preparing. Hats and belts are also standard.

古文：乃命有司，申严百刑，斩杀必当，毋或枉桡。枉桡不当，反受其殃。
现代文：于是命令有关官员，重申要严肃执行法律，或斩或杀，刑必当罪，不得贪赃枉法，任意轻重；如果贪赃枉法，故出故入，执法者将反坐，也不会有好下场。
English: Then he ordered the relevant officials to reiterate that they should seriously enforce the law, either beheading or killing, the punishment must be a crime, not corrupting the law, any weight; if corrupting the law, for some reason, the law enforcers will sit back, and there will be no good outcome.

古文：是月也，乃命宰祝，循行牺牲，视全具，案刍豢，瞻肥瘠，察物色。必比类，量小大，视长短，皆中度。
现代文：这个月，命令太宰、太祝巡视用以祭祀的牺牲，看它是否完好无损；再检查一下它吃的草料，看它的肥瘦如何；还要察看它的毛色，一定要符合成例和不同种类祭祀的需要；还要衡量它的大小，角的长短，都要符合要求。
English: This month, the Dazai and Taiwu were ordered to inspect the sacrificial animal used for the sacrifice, to see if it was intact; to check the grass it ate, to see how fat and thin it was; to inspect the color of its fur, which must meet the requirements of the tradition and different types of sacrifices; and to measure its size and the length of its horns, which must meet the requirements.

古文：五者备当，上帝其飨。
现代文：牺牲的完整、肥瘦、毛色、大小、长短这五个方面都符合要求，上天才会来飨。
English: The five aspects of sacrifice integrity, fat and thin, hair color, size, and length all meet the requirements, and only the Lord will come.

古文：天子乃难，以达秋气。
现代文：天子于是举行滩祭，以使金秋之气通畅。
English: As a result, the Son of Heaven held a beach festival in order to let the golden autumn air flow freely.

古文：以犬尝麻，先荐寝庙。
现代文：就着狗肉来品尝新收的麻籽，在尝新之前，先敬献宗庙。
English: The newly harvested hemp seeds were tasted with dog meat, and before tasting the new seeds, they were first offered to the ancestral temple.

古文：是月也，可以筑城郭，建都邑，穿窦窖，修囷仓。
现代文：这个月，可以修筑城郭，可以建设都邑，可以挖掘地窖，可以修理粮仓。
English: This month, you can build a castle, you can build a capital city, you can dig a cellar, you can repair a granary.

古文：乃命有司，趣民收敛，务畜菜，多积聚。
现代文：于是命令有关官员，催促农民收获，务必要储存干菜，多积聚些柴米，以备过冬。
English: Therefore, the relevant officials were ordered to urge farmers to harvest, be sure to store dried vegetables, and accumulate more firewood to prepare for the winter.

古文：乃劝种麦，毋或失时。其有失时，行罪无疑。
现代文：鼓励农民种麦，不要错过农时；如果错过农时，严惩不贷。
English: Encourage farmers to grow wheat, do not miss farming time; if you miss farming time, you will be severely punished.

古文：是月也，日夜分，雷始收声。蛰虫坏户，杀气浸盛，阳气日衰，水始涸。
现代文：这个月，白天黑夜一样长，开始停止打雷，蛰伏越冬的动物开始在洞口培土，阴气逐渐旺盛，阳气日趋衰退，河水开始干涸。
English: This month, the day is as long as the night, the thunder begins to stop, the animals that have been hibernating over the winter begin to cultivate the soil at the cave mouth, the yin gradually becomes strong, the yang gradually declines, and the river begins to dry up.

古文：日夜分，则同度量，平权衡，正钧石，角斗甬。
现代文：当此昼夜相等之时，要统一和校正各种度量衡器具。
English: When day and night are equal, all kinds of measuring instruments should be unified and calibrated.

古文：是月也，易关市，来商旅，纳货贿，以便民事。
现代文：这个月，要减轻关卡和市场的税收，招来外地客商，引进各种货物，以便利百姓。
English: This month, it is necessary to reduce taxes on customs and markets, attract foreign merchants, and introduce various goods to facilitate the people.

古文：四方来集，远乡皆至，则财不匮，上无乏用，百事乃遂。
现代文：四方客商云集而来，连穷乡僻壤的人都来交易，这样，财物就不会缺乏，天子用钱不缺，什么事都可以办成。
English: Merchants from all over the country gather here, and even people from poor and remote areas come to trade. In this way, there will be no shortage of goods, there will be no shortage of money, and everything can be done.

古文：凡举大事，毋逆大数，必顺其时，慎因其类。
现代文：凡有重大举动，不可违背自然规律，要顺应阴阳之时，谨慎的因其事类，不可随心妄为。
English: Whenever there is a major move, it must not violate the laws of nature, it must conform to the yin and yang, and when it is prudent, it must not act arbitrarily.

古文：仲秋行春令，则秋雨不降，草木生荣，国乃有恐。
现代文：仲秋八月如果施行春季的政令，就会导致该下的秋雨不下，不该开花的草木又重新开花，国内发生叫百姓惊恐的事。
English: If the spring decree is implemented in mid-autumn in August, it will lead to the autumn rain not falling, the plants that should not bloom will bloom again, and things that frighten people will happen in the country.

古文：行夏令，则其国乃旱，蛰虫不藏，五谷复生。
现代文：如果施行夏季的政令，就会导致其国发生旱灾，蛰虫也不进入洞穴藏身，各种作物又重新生长。
English: If the summer decree is implemented, it will lead to drought in his country, the aphids will not enter the cave to hide, and all kinds of crops will grow again.

古文：行冬令，则风灾数起，收雷先行，草木蚤死。
现代文：如果施行冬季的政令，就会导致风灾屡次发生，雷声提前消失，草木早死。
English: If the winter decree is implemented, it will lead to repeated wind disasters, early disappearance of thunder, and early death of plants and trees.

古文：季秋之月，日在房，昏虚中，旦柳中。
现代文：季秋九月，太阳运行的位置在房宿；黄昏时，虚星位于南天正中；拂晓时，柳星位于南天正中。
English: In the autumn and September, the position of the sun's movement is in the house; at dusk, the imaginary star is in the middle of the southern sky; at dawn, the willow star is in the middle of the southern sky.

古文：其日庚辛。
现代文：秋季的吉日是庚辛，于五行属金。
English: The auspicious day in autumn is Genghis Khan, in the five elements it belongs to gold.

古文：其帝少皞，其神蓐收。
现代文：尊崇的帝是以金德王的少眸，敬奉的神是金官暮收。
English: The revered emperor is the young eyes of King Jinde, and the revered god is the gold official.

古文：其虫毛。
现代文：与金相配的动物是毛虫。
English: The animal that goes with gold is the caterpillar.

古文：其音商，律中无射。
现代文：与金相配的五声是商，与本月相应的音律是无射。
English: The five tones that correspond to gold are quotients, and the corresponding rhythm for this month is no-shooting.

古文：其数九。
现代文：金的成数是九。
English: The number of gold is nine.

古文：其味辛，其臭腥。
现代文：与金相配的五味是辛，五臭是腥。
English: The five flavours that go with gold are spicy, and the five odours are smelly.

古文：其祀门，祭先肝。
现代文：五祀中祭祀门神，祭品中以肝脏为尊。
English: Among the five rites, the door deity is worshipped, and the liver is revered among the offerings.

古文：鸿雁来宾，爵入大水为蛤。鞠有黄华，豺乃祭兽戮禽。
现代文：这个月，大雁继续南飞，雀进入大海变为蛤咧，菊开黄花，豺将捕杀的野兽四面摆放如同祭祀。
English: This month, the geese continue to fly south, the finches enter the sea and turn into chaffinches, the chrysanthemums bloom yellow, and the storks display the animals they have killed on all four sides like a ritual.

古文：天子居总章右个，乘戎路，驾白骆，载白旗，衣白衣，服白玉。食麻与犬，其器廉以深。
现代文：这个月，天子住在西向明堂的右侧室，乘白色的兵车，驾白马，车上插着绘有白龙的旗子，穿白色的衣服，佩白色的饰玉，吃麻籽和狗肉，使用的器物外有棱角而内部深邃。
English: This month, the heavenly son lived in the right side room of Xixiangming Hall, riding a white chariot, driving a white horse, with a flag painted with a white dragon on the car, wearing white clothes, wearing white ornaments, eating hemp seeds and dog meat, and using utensils that were angular on the outside and deep inside.

古文：是月也，申严号令。命百官贵贱无不务内，以会天地之藏，无有宣出。
现代文：这个月，再次严明号令，命令百官不分贵贱都要从事收敛工作，以会合天地的进入收藏时期，不得有宣泄散出的行为。
English: This month, once again, strict orders were issued, ordering all officials, both high and low, to engage in convergence work in order to gather heaven and earth into the collection period, and there must be no act of venting.

古文：乃命冢宰，农事备收，举五谷之要，藏帝藉之收于神仓，祗敬必饬。
现代文：于是命令家宰，在农作物全都收获之后，把各种谷物的产量登记造册，把藉田的收获藏于神仓之中，毕恭毕敬，盖藏完密。
English: He then ordered the steward of the household, after all the crops had been harvested, to register the production of all kinds of grains, and to hide the harvest of the borrowed fields in the sacred vault, with all due respect and to hide the cover completely.

古文：是月也，霜始降，则百工休。
现代文：这个月，开始下霜，各种工匠都停工休息。
English: This month, when it started to frost, all kinds of craftsmen stopped working and rested.

古文：乃命有司曰：寒气总至，民力不堪，其皆入室。
现代文：命令有关官员说： 寒气将突然来到，百姓经受不住，让他们都从野外的庐舍中搬回家里。 
English: The cold weather will come suddenly, and the people will not be able to withstand it, so let them all move back home from the huts in the field.

古文：上丁，命乐正入学习吹。
现代文：上旬的丁日，命令乐正到太学教练吹奏管乐。
English: In the early afternoon of the third day, the command music is coming to the coach of Taigaku to play wind music.

古文：是月也，大飨帝、尝，牺牲告备于天子。
现代文：这个月，天子要遍祭五帝，祭祀宗庙，要向天子察告，牺牲已经备好。
English: This month, the Son of Heaven is going to sacrifice the Five Immortals everywhere, worship the ancestral temple, and report to the Son of Heaven that the sacrifice is ready.

古文：合诸侯，制百县，为来岁受朔日，与诸侯所税于民轻重之法，贡职之数，以远近土地所宜为度，以给郊庙之事，无有所私。
现代文：天子要召集诸侯和各地长官，为他们规定制度，向他们颁授来年的朔日，和诸侯征税于民的轻重之法、向天子交纳贡赋的数量。贡赋的数量，是以各诸侯国距离京师的远近和各诸侯国土地适于生产什么为依据。
English: The emperor wanted to convene the lords and governors of various regions, to establish a system for them, to give them the new year's day, and the law of the importance of the lords' taxation of the people, and the amount of tribute to the emperor. The amount of tribute is based on the distance of each state from Beijing and what the land of each state is suitable for production.

古文：是月也，天子乃教于田猎，以习五戎，班马政。
现代文：这些贡赋，是用来供给祭天、祭祖的，不得以奇裹之物贡献取悦。这个月，天子举行田猎，好借此机会教民战阵，练习五种兵器的使用，并颁布乘马的政令。
English: These tributes are used to provide offerings to the gods and ancestors, and should not be pleased with the contribution of strange things.This month, the Son of Heaven held a field hunt to take this opportunity to teach the people the battle line, practice the use of five weapons, and issue a riding order.

古文：命仆及七驺咸驾，载旌旐，授车以级，整设于屏外。司徒搢扑，北面誓之。
现代文：田猎时，天子命令田仆和七验都把车子驾好，车上分别插有族、旎一类的旗子，分配车辆是按照田猎者的身份等级，车马人众的队列整齐地排列在猎场大门口的屏障之外，司徒腰里插着教鞭，面向北告诫行将田猎的人众。
English: When hunting in the fields, Tian Zi ordered the field servants and the seven inspectors to drive the car well. Flags such as the clan and the dragonfly were separately inserted on the car. The vehicles were assigned according to the identity level of the field hunter. The queue of the chariots and horses was neatly lined up outside the barrier at the gate of the hunting ground. With a teaching whip in his waist, Szeto faced north to admonish the people who were hunting in the fields.

古文：天子乃厉饰，执弓挟矢以猎，命主祠祭禽于四方。
现代文：然后天子身着戎装，弯弓射箭而猎。猎毕，命令主管祭祀的官员，用猎获的鸟兽祭祀四方之神。
English: Then the heavenly son, dressed in military attire, hunted with a bow and arrow. After the hunt, he ordered the official in charge of the sacrifice to use the hunted birds and beasts to sacrifice the gods of the four directions.

古文：是月也，草木黄落，乃伐薪为炭。
现代文：这个月，草枯黄，树叶落，于是砍伐木柴烧炭。
English: This month, the grass withered and the leaves fell, so they cut firewood and burned charcoal.

古文：蛰虫咸俯在内，皆墐其户。
现代文：蛰虫都钻进了洞穴，并都用泥土封塞洞口。
English: The maggots have all burrowed into the cave, and they have all sealed the cave mouth with dirt.

古文：乃趣狱刑，毋留有罪。收禄秩之不当、供养之不宜者。
现代文：于是催促结案和处决囚犯，不可把这些事拖到来年。傣禄和爵位有不适当的，不应由官府供养的，要核实后予以注销。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to speed up the conclusion of cases and the execution of prisoners, and these things should not be delayed until next year. If there are inappropriate salaries and titles that should not be supported by the government, they should be cancelled after verification.

古文：是月也，天子乃以犬尝稻，先荐寝庙。
现代文：这个月，天子就着狗肉来品尝新稻，在尝新之前，先敬献宗庙。
English: This month, the son of heaven came to taste the new rice with dog meat. Before tasting the new rice, he first offered it to the ancestral temple.

古文：季秋行夏令，则其国大水，冬藏殃败，民多鼽嚏。
现代文：季秋九月如果施行夏季的政令，就会导致其国大水，储以过冬的粮食蔬菜腐败，老百姓容易伤风感冒。
English: If the summer decree is implemented in September, it will cause the country to be flooded, the grain and vegetables stored for the winter will be spoiled, and the people will be prone to colds and flu.

古文：行冬令，则国多盗贼，边境不宁，土地分裂。
现代文：如果施行冬天的政令，就会导致国多盗贼，边境不宁，叛者割据土地。
English: If the winter decree is implemented, it will lead to more thieves in the country, border unrest, and rebels seizing land.

古文：行春令，则暖风来至，民气解惰，师兴不居。
现代文：如果施行春季的政令，就会导致暖风吹来，百姓的精神懈怠懒惰，战争兴起。
English: If the spring decree is implemented, it will lead to warm winds blowing, the spirit of the people will be slack and lazy, and wars will arise.

古文：孟冬之月，日在尾，昏危中，旦七星中。
现代文：孟冬十月，太阳运行的位置在尾宿；黄昏时，危星位于南天正中；拂晓时，七星位于南天正中。
English: In winter and October, the position of the sun's movement is in the tail; at dusk, the danger star is in the middle of the southern sky; at dawn, the seven stars are in the middle of the southern sky.

古文：其日壬癸。
现代文：冬季的吉日是壬癸，五行属水。
English: The auspicious day in winter is 壬, and the five elements belong to water.

古文：其帝颛顼，其神玄冥。
现代文：尊崇的帝是以水德王的撷项，敬奉的神是水官玄冥。
English: The revered emperor is the water god, and the revered god is the water officer.

古文：其虫介。
现代文：与水相配的动物是介虫。
English: The animal associated with water is the worm.

古文：其音羽，律中应钟。
现代文：与水相配的五声是羽，与本月相应的音律是应钟。
English: The five sounds corresponding to water are feathers, and the corresponding musical rhythm for this month is the chiming of the bell.

古文：其数六。
现代文：水的成数是六。
English: The number of parts of water is six.

古文：其味咸，其臭朽。
现代文：与水相配的五味是咸，五臭是朽。
English: The five tastes that go with water are salty, and the five odors are rotten.

古文：其祀行，祭先肾。
现代文：五祀中祭祀行神，祭品中以五脏的肾脏为尊。
English: In the five rites, the deities are worshipped, and the kidneys are revered in the offerings.

古文：水始冰，地始冻。雉入大水为蜃。虹藏不见。
现代文：这个月，水开始结冰，地开始上冻，野鸡潜入淮水化为蛤咧，天空中的虹不再出现。
English: This month, the water began to freeze, the ground began to freeze, the pheasants dived into the water and turned into cocoons, and the rainbow in the sky no longer appeared.

古文：天子居玄堂左个，乘玄路，驾铁骊，载玄旗，衣黑衣，服玄玉，食黍与彘，其器闳以奄。
现代文：这个月，天子住在北向明堂的左侧室，乘黑色的车，驾黑色的马，车上插着绘有黑龙的旗子，穿黑色的衣服，佩黑色的饰玉，吃黍米和猪肉，使用的器物中间大而口小。
English: This month, the heavenly son lived in the left room of the Beichuanming Hall, riding a black car, driving a black horse, with a flag painted with a black dragon on the car, wearing black clothes, wearing black ornaments, eating glutinous rice and pork, and using large and small utensils.

古文：是月也，以立冬。
现代文：这个月，有立冬的节气。
English: This month, there is a winter solstice.

古文：先立冬三日，太史谒之天子曰：某日立冬，盛德在水。
现代文：立冬前三天，太史向天子察告说： 某日立冬，水德当令。 
English: Three days before the winter solstice, Taishi reported to the heavenly son: A certain winter solstice, water virtue should be the order.

古文：天子乃齐。
现代文：天子于是斋戒。
English: The son of heaven then fasted.

古文：立冬之日，天子亲帅三公、九卿、大夫以迎冬于北郊，还反，赏死事，恤孤寡。
现代文：立冬这一天，天子亲率三公、九卿、大夫到北郊行迎冬之礼。回朝后，奖赏为国捐躯的人，对死者留下的孤儿寡妇进行抚恤。
English: On the day of the winter solstice, the emperor led the three princes, nine nobles, and doctors to the northern suburbs for a winter greeting. After returning to the imperial court, he rewarded those who died for the country, and gave pensions to the orphans and widows left behind by the dead.

古文：是月也，命大史衅龟策，占兆审卦吉凶，是察阿党，则罪无有掩蔽。
现代文：这个月，命令太卜用牲血涂抹龟甲着草，通过审视兆象卦象来判断吉凶，考察是否有阿谈拍马结党营私的人，使他们的罪行无法掩蔽。
English: This month, he ordered the court lady to smear tortoise-shell grass with animal blood, judge good and bad fortune by examining the signs and symbols, and investigate whether there are people who talk about and slander the party and private, so that their crimes can not be covered up.

古文：是月也，天子始裘。
现代文：这个月，天子开始穿皮衣。
English: This month, Tianzi began to wear a fur coat.

古文：命有司曰：天气上腾，地气下降，天地不通，闭塞而成冬。
现代文：命令主管官吏说： 天气上升 地气下降，天地不通，闭塞而成冬天。 
English: He ordered the officials in charge to say: The weather is getting warmer, the atmosphere is getting colder, the heavens and the earth are impassable, and the country will be blocked off and turn into winter.

古文：命百官谨盖藏。
现代文：命令百官要特别留心府库仓凛的收藏。
English: He ordered the officials to pay special attention to the collection of the prefectural treasury.

古文：命司徒循行积聚，无有不敛。
现代文：命令司徒巡视露天堆放的禾稼、柴草，要把这些东西全部收藏起来。
English: He ordered the magistrates to inspect the piles of grain and firewood in the open air and to collect them all.

古文：坏城郭，戒门闾，修键闭，慎管龠，固封疆，备边竟，完要塞，谨关梁，塞徯径。饬丧纪，辨衣裳，审棺椁之薄厚，茔丘垄之大小、高卑、厚薄之度，贵贱之等级。
现代文：要加固城郭，加强城门里门的戒备，修理门栓门鼻，谨慎保管钥匙，加固印封；要加强边防，缮修要塞，留心关卡桥梁，堵塞小路；要正伤丧事的规定，明辨装硷死者需要用衣的多少，审察内棺外撑的厚薄，营造坟墓的大小、高低、厚薄的尺寸，务使其合乎贵贱的等级。
English: It is necessary to strengthen the city wall, strengthen the guard of the inner gate of the city gate, repair the door bolt and the nose of the door, carefully keep the key, and strengthen the seal; strengthen the border defense, repair the fortress, pay attention to the checkpoint bridge, and block the small road; strictly observe the regulations of the funeral, distinguish the amount of clothing needed to decorate the dead, examine the thickness of the inner coffin and the outer support, and create the size, height, and thickness of the tomb, so as to make it conform to the noble and low grade.

古文：是月也，命工师效功，陈祭器，按度程，毋或作为淫巧以荡上心。
现代文：这个月，命令工师考核百工的成绩，摆出工匠制作的祭器，看，是否合乎法度程式。不得制作过于奇巧之物，以至于使天子产生一讲奢侈图享受的心理。
English: This month, the craftsmen were ordered to evaluate the achievements of the hundred craftsmen and display the sacrificial vessels made by the craftsmen to see if they complied with the legal procedures. It is not allowed to make things that are too fanciful, so that the heavenly son has the mentality of enjoying luxury.

古文：必功致为上。
现代文：一定要以坚固精致者为上等。
English: The firm and delicate cream must be the best.

古文：物勒工名，以考其诚。
现代文：器物要刻上制造者的名字，以便将来考查其有无欺骗行为。
English: The name of the maker should be engraved on the object, so that it can be checked for fraud in the future.

古文：功有不当，必行其罪，以穷其情。
现代文：如果材料精美而器不坚固，必治其罪，并追究其原因。
English: If the material is exquisite and the instrument is not strong, it must be punished and the cause must be investigated.

古文：是月也，大饮烝。
现代文：这个月，天子、诸侯邀集群臣举行大饮，并于姐上放置全牲。
English: This month, the emperor and the princes invited a group of courtiers to hold a big drink, and put all the sacrifices on the sister.

古文：天子乃祈来年于天宗，大割祠于公社及门闾。
现代文：天子祭祀日月星辰以祈求来年的丰收，大量杀牲以祭祀社神及城门里门之神。
English: The son of heaven sacrificed the sun, the moon and the stars to pray for a good harvest in the coming year, and sacrificed a large number of animals to worship the gods of the shrine and the gods of the city gate.

古文：腊先祖五祀，劳农以休息之。
现代文：用猎获的禽兽祭祀先祖和五祀，慰劳农夫并且让他们休息。
English: The hunted animals and animals are used to worship the ancestors and the Five Immortals, to comfort the farmers and let them rest.

古文：天子乃命将帅讲武，习射御角力。
现代文：天子于是命令将帅讲习武备，练习射箭和驾车，比赛普力。
English: Tianzi then ordered the coach to attend military training, practice archery and driving, and compete in the Puli.

古文：是月也，乃命水虞渔师，收水泉池泽之赋。毋或敢侵削众庶兆民，以为天子取怨于下。
现代文：这个月，命令水虞和渔师征收水泉池泽之税，不准借此侵扰盘剥百姓，以致于使百姓归怨于天子。
English: In this month, he ordered the magistrates and fishermen to collect the tax from the water springs and ponds, and not to use it to harass and plunder the people, so that the people would grudge against the Son of Heaven.

古文：其有若此者，行罪无赦。
现代文：如有此种情况发生，严惩不贷。
English: If such a situation occurs, it will be severely punished.

古文：孟冬行春令，则冻闭不密，地气上泄，民多流亡。
现代文：孟冬十月，如果施行春季的政令，就会导致冰封地冻不严密，地下的阳气泄到地面，百姓多所流亡。
English: Meng winter October, if the spring decree is implemented, it will cause the frozen ground to be frozen, the underground yang will leak to the ground, and many people will be exiled.

古文：行夏令，则国多暴风，方冬不寒，蛰虫复出。
现代文：如果施行夏季的政令，就会导致国多暴风，冬季而不寒冷，蛰虫又从地下钻出。
English: If the summer decree is implemented, it will lead to more storms in the country, the winter will not be cold, and the maggots will come out of the ground.

古文：行秋令，则雪霜不时，小兵时起，土地侵削。
现代文：如果施行秋天的政令，就会导致下霜下雪不按时，小的战争不断发生，国土被敌人占领。
English: If the autumn decree is implemented, it will lead to frost and snow not falling on time, small wars will continue to occur, and the country will be occupied by the enemy.

古文：仲冬之月，日在斗，昏东壁中，旦轸中。其日壬癸。
现代文：仲冬十一月，太阳运行的位置在斗宿；黄昏时，东壁星位于南天正中；拂晓时，珍星位于南天正中。 冬季的吉日是壬癸，五行属水。
English: In mid-winter in November, the position of the sun's movement is in Douju; at dusk, the East Wall Star is in the middle of the southern sky; at dawn, the precious star is in the middle of the southern sky.

古文：其帝颛顼，其神玄冥。
现代文：尊崇的帝是以水德王的撷项，敬奉的神是水官玄冥。
English: The revered emperor is the water god, and the revered god is the water officer.

古文：其虫介。
现代文：与水相配的动物是介虫。
English: The animal associated with water is the worm.

古文：其音羽，律中黄锺。
现代文：与水相配的五声是羽，与本月相应的音律是黄钟。
English: The five sounds corresponding to water are feathers, and the corresponding rhythm to this month is the yellow bell.

古文：其数六。
现代文：水的成数是六。
English: The number of parts of water is six.

古文：其味咸，其臭朽。
现代文：与水相配的五味是咸，五臭是朽。
English: The five tastes that go with water are salty, and the five odors are rotten.

古文：其祀行，祭先肾。
现代文：五祀中祭祀行神，祭品中以肾脏为尊。
English: In the five rites, the deities are worshipped, and the kidneys are revered in the offerings.

古文：冰益壮，地始坼。鹖旦不鸣，虎始交。
现代文：这个月，冰结得更厚，地开始被冻裂，鹃旦不再鸣叫，老虎开始交配。
English: This month, the ice grew thicker, the ground began to crack, the crickets stopped chirping, and the tigers began to mate.

古文：天子居玄堂大庙，乘玄路，驾铁骊，载玄旗，衣黑衣，服玄玉。食黍与彘，其器闳以奄。
现代文：这个月，天子住在北向明堂的正室，乘黑色的车，驾黑色的马，车上插着绘有黑龙的旗子，穿黑色的衣服，佩黑色的饰玉，吃黍米和猪肉，使用的器物中间大而口小。
English: This month, the heavenly son lived in the main room of the Beichangming Hall, riding a black car, driving a black horse, with a flag painted with a black dragon on the car, wearing black clothes, wearing black ornaments, eating glutinous rice and pork, and using large and small utensils.

古文：饬死事。命有司曰：土事毋作，慎毋发盖，毋发室屋，及起大众，以固而闭。
现代文：这个月杀气旺盛，所以伤令军士战则必有牺牲的决心。命令有关官员说： 土工活不许做，千万不要打开盖子，不要让房屋露顶及不要调集大批劳力干活，以封固阴气之闭藏。 
English: This month, the murderous spirit is strong, so the wounded soldiers must have the determination to sacrifice. The order to the relevant officials said: Do not do earthworks, do not open the lid, do not let the house open and do not mobilize a large number of laborers to work to seal the gloomy closure.

古文：地气且泄，是谓发天地之房，诸蛰则死，民必疾疫，又随以丧。命之曰畅月。
现代文：如果打开藏物之处的盖子，调集大批劳力干活，地气就将泄漏，这就叫做开启天地用来闭藏万物的房舍。这样一年，各种蛰伏的动物就会死去，百姓也会染上流行性疾病，并导致丧命，这个月就被称之为 畅月 。
English: If you open the lid of the hiding place and mobilize a large number of laborers to work, the earth's gas will leak. This is called opening the heavens and the earth to close the building of all things. In such a year, all kinds of animals will die, and the people will be infected with epidemic diseases, which will lead to death. This month is called the moon.

古文：是月也，命奄尹，申宫令，审门闾，谨房室，必重闭。
现代文：这个月，命令阉尹重申宫中禁令，审视宫内门户，小心宫内房屋，内外的门都要关闭。
English: This month, he ordered Gong Yin to reiterate the ban in the palace, inspect the portals inside the palace, be careful of the buildings inside the palace, and close the doors inside and outside.

古文：省妇事毋得淫，虽有贵戚近习，毋有不禁。
现代文：要减轻妇女的劳动，不许妇女制作过分奇巧之物，即令是皇亲国戚和天子宠幸的，也一律禁止，没有例外。
English: In order to lighten women's labor, women are not allowed to make anything too fancy, even if it is favored by the emperor's relatives and sons, it is prohibited without exception.

古文：乃命大酋，秫稻必齐，曲蘗必时，湛炽必洁，水泉必香，陶器必良，火齐必得，兼用六物。
现代文：命令负责酿酒的官员：用以酿酒的袜稻要选择同时成熟的，酿酒使用的曲一定要及时，浸泡和炊蒸的过程一定要清洁，使用的泉水一定要香甜，使用的陶器一定要精良，火候一定要掌握好。
English: The officials in charge of brewing ordered: the stocking rice used for brewing should be selected to be mature at the same time, the music used for brewing must be timely, the soaking and steaming process must be clean, the spring water used must be sweet, the pottery used must be exquisite, and the heat must be well controlled.

古文：大酋监之，毋有差贷。
现代文：根据以上六点，由负责酿酒的官员监督酿造，不许有任何差错。
English: According to the above six points, the brewing is supervised by the officials in charge of brewing, and no mistakes are allowed.

古文：天子命有司祈祀四海大川名源渊泽井泉。
现代文：天子命令有关官员祭祀四海？大川、大河之源、深渊大泽以及井泉之神，祈求福佑。
English: The heavenly son ordered the relevant officials to offer sacrifices to the gods of the four seas, the great rivers, the source of the great rivers, the abyss Osawa and the well spring, and pray for blessings.

古文：是月也，农有不收藏积聚者、马牛畜兽有放佚者，取之不诘。
现代文：这个月，农民如有未加收藏积聚的禾稼，或将马牛等家畜纵其在外乱跑者，别人可以牵走，官府对此不予追问。
English: This month, if farmers have uncollected grain, or if they let their domestic animals such as horses and cattle run amok outside, others can take them away, and the government will not pursue the matter.

古文：山林薮泽，有能取蔬食、田猎禽兽者，野虞教道之；其有相侵夺者，罪之不赦。
现代文：山林蔽泽之中，有能让百姓采摘草木果实及猎取鸟兽的地方，野虞要给予指导和帮助；如有侵夺他人劳动果实者，定加处罚，决不宽恕。
English: Among the mountains and forests, there are places where people can pick herbs and fruits and hunt birds and beasts. The wild animals should be given guidance and help; if there are people who steal the fruits of others' labor, they will be punished and will never be forgiven.

古文：是月也，日短至。阴阳争，诸生荡。
现代文：这个月，少白天最短，阴气虽盛，阳气也开始产生，二者形成争斗之势，诸物之生气开始动作。
English: In this month, the days are at their shortest, the yin is at its peak, and the yang is also beginning to emerge. The two are forming a potential for conflict, and the anger of all things is beginning to stir.

古文：君子齐戒，处必掩身。身欲宁，去声色，禁耆欲。安形性，事欲静，以待阴阳之所定。
现代文：君子斋戒，居处要深邃，身心要安宁，摒除声色，禁绝嗜欲，安定身心，遇事不急，等待阴阳斗争的结果。
English: When a gentleman fasts, he should live in a profound way, have peace of mind and body, eliminate the voice and color, banish the desire, stabilize the body and mind, not be in a hurry, and wait for the result of the yin and yang struggle.

古文：芸始生，荔挺出，蚯螾结，麋角解，水泉动。
现代文：这个月，芸草始生，荔挺出芽，蛆卿出穴屈首向下，糜鹿的角开始脱落，水泉开始涌动。
English: In this month, geisha grasses began to sprout, lilies sprouted buds, dragonflies emerged from their holes and bowed their heads, elk antlers began to fall off, and water springs began to gush forth.

古文：日短至，则伐木，取竹箭。
现代文：白天最短的月份，宜于砍伐树木和割取箭竹。
English: The month with the shortest day is suitable for cutting down trees and cutting arrow bamboo.

古文：是月也，可以罢官之无事、去器之无用者。
现代文：这个月，可以把闲散无事的冗官免掉，去掉无用的器物。
English: This month, you can get rid of the idle and useless officials, and get rid of useless things.

古文：涂阙廷门闾，筑囹圄，此所以助天地之闭藏也。
现代文：粉刷宫庭的门户，修筑牢狱。这些都是帮助天地闭藏的措施。
English: To whitewash the portals of the palace and to build a prison are all measures to help heaven and earth to be closed.

古文：仲冬行夏令，则其国乃旱，氛雾冥冥，雷乃发声。
现代文：仲冬十一月，如果施行夏季的政令，就会导致国内发生旱灾，雾气嚎嚎，冬天打雷。
English: In the middle of winter in November, if the summer decree is implemented, it will lead to droughts in the country, fog, and thunderstorms in winter.

古文：行秋令，则天时雨汁，瓜瓠不成，国有大兵。
现代文：如果施行秋季的政令，就会导致经常雨雪交加，瓜瓤不收，国内有大战发生。
English: If the autumn decree is implemented, it will lead to frequent rain and snow, the melon will not be harvested, and there will be a major war in the country.

古文：行春令，则蝗虫为败，水泉咸竭，民多疥疠。
现代文：如果施行春天的政令，就会导致蝗虫为灾，河水井水一齐干竭，百姓多患恶疮。
English: If the spring decree is implemented, it will lead to locust plagues, rivers and wells will run dry, and people will suffer from boils.

古文：季冬之月，日在婺女，昏娄中，旦氐中。
现代文：季冬十二月，太阳运行的位置在婴女宿；黄昏时，娄星位于南天正中；拂晓时，氏星位于南天正中。
English: In the winter season and December, the position of the sun's movement is in the Infant's and Maiden's Inn; at dusk, the Pleiades star is in the middle of the southern sky; at dawn, the Lord's Star is in the middle of the southern sky.

古文：其日壬癸。
现代文：冬季的吉日是壬癸，五行属水。
English: The auspicious day in winter is 壬, and the five elements belong to water.

古文：其帝颛顼，其神玄冥。
现代文：尊崇的帝是以水德王的撷项，敬奉的神是水官玄冥。
English: The revered emperor is the water god, and the revered god is the water officer.

古文：其虫介。
现代文：与水相配的动物是介虫。
English: The animal associated with water is the worm.

古文：其音羽，律中大吕。
现代文：与水相配的五声是羽，与本月相应的音律是大吕。
English: The five syllables that correspond to water are feathers, and the corresponding melody for this month is the dragonfly.

古文：其数六。
现代文：水的成数是六。
English: The number of parts of water is six.

古文：其味咸，其臭朽。
现代文：与水相配的五味是咸，五臭是朽。
English: The five tastes that go with water are salty, and the five odors are rotten.

古文：其祀行，祭先肾。
现代文：五祀中祭祀行神，祭品中以肾脏为尊。
English: In the five rites, the deities are worshipped, and the kidneys are revered in the offerings.

古文：雁北乡，鹊始巢。雉雊，鸡乳。
现代文：这个月，大雁向北飞，鹊开始筑巢，野鸡开始鸣叫，鸡开始下蛋。
English: This month, the geese fly north, the storks begin to build their nests, the pheasants begin to sing, and the chickens begin to lay eggs.

古文：天子居玄堂右个。乘玄路，驾铁骊，载玄旗，衣黑衣，服玄玉。食黍与彘，其器闳以奄。
现代文：这个月，天子住在北向明堂的右侧室，乘黑色的车子，驾黑马，车上插着绘有黑龙的旗子，穿黑色的衣服，佩黑色的饰玉，吃黍米与猪肉，使用的器物中间大而口小。
English: This month, the heavenly son lived in the right side room of Beichuanming Hall, riding a black car, driving a black horse, with a flag painted with a black dragon on the car, wearing black clothes, wearing black ornaments, eating glutinous rice and pork, and using large and small utensils.

古文：命有司大难，旁磔，出土牛，以送寒气。
现代文：这个月，命令有关官员举行大规模地驱除疫鬼的仪式，在国都的所有城门分裂牲体以消除邪恶；命令官员制作土牛，用来送走寒气。
English: This month, officials were ordered to hold a large-scale exorcism ceremony, splitting animals at all the gates of the capital to eliminate evil; officials were ordered to make earthen cattle to send away the cold.

古文：征鸟厉疾。
现代文：老鹰凶猛迅捷。
English: The eagle is fierce and swift.

古文：乃毕山川之祀，及帝之大臣，天子神只。
现代文：对名山大川的祭祀，对帝之大臣的祭祀，对天神地祗的祭祀，这个月进行完毕。
English: The rites for the famous mountain stream, the rites for the emperor's ministers, and the rites for the heavenly deities have been completed this month.

古文：是月也，命渔师始渔，天子亲往，乃尝鱼，先荐寝庙。
现代文：这个月，命令渔师开始捕鱼，天子亲往观看。于是天子品尝新捕之鱼，在品尝之前，先敬献宗庙。
English: This month, the fisherman was ordered to start fishing, and the son of heaven went to watch. So the son of heaven tasted the newly caught fish, and before tasting it, he first offered it to the family temple.

古文：冰方盛，水泽腹坚。
现代文：此月冰正厚，无论是流动的水还是不流动的水，都又厚又结实地结成了冰。
English: This month, the ice is thick, whether it is flowing water or still water, it is thick and solidly formed into ice.

古文：命取冰，冰以入。
现代文：于是命令凿取、冰块，存入冰窖。
English: So the order was given to dig up the ice and store it in an ice cellar.

古文：令告民，出五种。命农计耦耕事，修耒耜，具田器。
现代文：命令农官告示百姓，从仓库中取出五谷的种子，细加选择；又命令农官计划藕耕之事，修好来相，准备好一切农具。
English: He ordered the agronomist to inform the people, take out the seeds of grain from the warehouse, and make a detailed selection. He also ordered the agronomist to plan the plowing, repair the landscape, and prepare all the farm tools.

古文：命乐师大合吹而罢。
现代文：命令乐师组织太学生进行一次吹奏乐的大合奏，然后宣布学年结束。
English: Ordered the musicians to organize the students to play a large ensemble of wind music, and then announced the end of the school year.

古文：乃命四监收秩薪柴，以共郊庙及百祀之薪燎。
现代文：命令主管山林川泽的官员，将应征收的薪柴征收上来，用来供给祭天祭祖及其他各种祭祀所用的烧柴及火把的需要。
English: He ordered the officials in charge of the mountains, forests, rivers and lakes to collect the firewood that should be collected and use it to supply the need for firewood and torches used for the Festival of the Ancestors and other various rituals.

古文：是月也，日穷于次，月穷于纪，星回于天。
现代文：这个月，日、月、星都运行了一圈，又回到了老地方。
English: This month, the sun, the moon and the stars have all run a circle and returned to the old place.

古文：数将几终，岁且更始。
现代文：一年三百六十五天，差不多也算过完了，新岁行将开始。
English: The 365 days of the year are almost over, and the New Year is about to begin.

古文：专而农民，毋有所使。
现代文：要让你的农民专心务农，不要派他们干别的活。
English: You should let your farmers concentrate on farming and not send them to do other work.

古文：天子乃与公、卿、大夫，共饬国典，论时令，以待来岁之宜。
现代文：天子和公卿大夫共同整顿国家的常典，讨论适应季节需要的政令，以便适宜于来年实行。
English: The emperor, the emperor's son, and the court noble and doctor will work together to rectify the country's standing orders and discuss the decrees to meet the needs of the season, so that they can be properly implemented next year.

古文：乃命太史次诸侯之列，赋之牺牲，以共皇天、上帝、社稷之飨。
现代文：命令太史把所有的诸侯按国之大小排列出一个名单，以便确定每个诸侯应交纳牺牲的数额，以供祭祀上帝、土神和谷神。
English: He ordered the Grand Historian to make a list of all the lords according to the size of the country, in order to determine the amount of sacrifice each lord should pay to worship the god, the earth god and the valley god.

古文：乃命同姓之邦，共寝庙之刍豢。
现代文：又命令与天子同姓的诸侯，有义务提供祭祀宗庙所需的牺牲。
English: He also ordered that lords with the same surname as the heavenly son were obliged to provide the sacrifices needed to worship the ancestral temple.

古文：命宰历卿大夫至于庶民土田之数，而赋牺牲，以共山林名川之祀。
现代文：又命令小宰编排自卿大夫下至平民各自占有土地的数额，据此向他们征收牺牲，以供给山林名川的祭祀。
English: He also ordered Kozaibanchi to arrange the amount of land occupied by each citizen from the lord doctor down to the commoners, and according to this, to collect sacrifices from them to supply the sacrificial rites of the mountains, forests and famous rivers.

古文：凡在天下九州岛之民者，无不咸献其力，以共皇天、上帝、社稷、寝庙、山林、名川之祀。
现代文：总之，凡是生活在普天之下九州之内的居民，无不贡献他们各自的力量，以供给皇天上帝、社授宗庙、山林名川的祭祀的需要。
English: In short, all the residents living in Kyushu under the whole world contribute their own strength to supply the needs of the worship of the Emperor God, the Shoshu family temple, and the famous mountains and forests.

古文：季冬行秋令，则白露早降，介虫为妖，四鄙入保。
现代文：季冬十二月如果施行秋季的政令，就会导致白露早降，甲虫为祸，四面边境上的居民要进入城堡避敌。
English: If the autumn decree is carried out in the winter quarter and December, it will cause the white dew to fall early, the beetles will be a disaster, and the residents on the four sides of the border will enter the castle to avoid the enemy.

古文：行春令，则胎夭多伤，国多固疾，命之曰逆。
现代文：如果施行春天的政令，就会导致尚未出生的和刚刚出生的小动物多被损伤，国人易患不易治愈的病，这种现象被称作反常。
English: If the spring decree is implemented, it will lead to unborn and newly born small animals being injured, and Chinese people are prone to incurable diseases. This phenomenon is called abnormality.

古文：行夏令，则水潦败国，时雪不降，冰冻消释。
现代文：如果施行夏季的政令，就会导致水灾为害国家，该下雪时反而不下，冰冻融化。
English: If the summer decree is implemented, it will cause floods to harm the country. When it snows, however, it does not fall, and the ice melts.

