古文：传曰： 齐之以礼，有耻且格。 
现代文：传说： 用礼来治理天下，老百姓就会有廉耻而且会纠正过错。 
English: Legend: If the world is governed by etiquette, the common people will be shameless and correct their mistakes.

古文：刑之不可犯，不若礼之不可逾，则昊岁比于牺年，宜有降矣。
现代文：让老百姓不触犯刑法，不如让老百姓不逾越礼法，如此说来，帝吴的时代舆伏牺氏的时代相比，应该说是有所不如了。
English: Let the common people not violate the criminal law, it is better to let the common people not exceed the etiquette, so to speak, compared with the era of Emperor Wu and the era of Mebushi, it should be said that it is somewhat inferior.

古文：若夫穹圆肇判，宵貌攸分，流形播其喜怒，禀气彰其善恶，则有自然之理焉。
现代文：至于天地刚刚形成的时候，万物运动变化其形体就显示出它的喜怒哀乐，承受天地之气而显示出它的善恶，那是含有自然之理的。
English: As for the heavens and the earth, when they were just formed, the movement of all things and the changes in their shape would show their emotions and sorrows, and they would bear the atmosphere of the heavens and the earth to show their good and evil, which contained the principles of nature.

古文：念室后刑，衢樽先惠，将以屏除灾害，引导休和，取譬琴瑟，不忘衔策，拟阳秋之成化，若尧舜之为心也。
现代文：牢狱刑罚被看轻，恩泽仁政先施行，是为了摒除灾害，使老百姓达到安逸和谐，好像琴瑟一样，不忘记准则，类似于春秋化成万物，好像尧舜感化民心。
English: Imprisonment was considered a light punishment, and the benevolent policy was implemented first, in order to eliminate disasters and enable the people to achieve comfort and harmony, like a harp, do not forget the rules, similar to the spring and autumn into everything, like a gong into the hearts of the people.

古文：郊原布肃，轩皇有辔野之师；雷电扬威，高辛有触山之务。
现代文：在郊野之上布列战阵，轩皇有辔野的军队；像雷鸣电闪一样显示威势，这是高辛氏怒撞不周山的事。
English: It is a matter of no small indignation to Mr. Gaucin that the Emperor should have his armies arrayed in the open country, and that he should display his power like thunder and lightning.

古文：陈乎兵甲而肆诸市朝，具严天刑，以惩乱首，论其本意，盖有不得已而用之者焉。
现代文：在战场上摆开阵势杀敌和把罪犯杀死后在市朝陈列示众，都是要严肃天刑，惩罚为首作乱的人，推论他们的本意，大概是有不得已而为之的原因。
English: To kill the enemy on the battlefield and to kill the criminals and then display them to the public in the city are both serious heavenly punishments, punishing those who are the first to make a mess, and inferring their original intention is probably the reason for doing it out of necessity.

古文：是以丹浦兴仁，羽山咸服。
现代文：因此在丹浦兴起仁义之师，羽山一带全部归服。
English: As a result, teachers of benevolence and righteousness arose in Tanpu, and the entire Hasan area submitted to them.

古文：而世属侥幸，事关攸蠹，政失礼微，狱成刑起，则孔子曰： 听讼吾犹人也，必也使无讼乎！ 
现代文：但是世人心存侥幸，世事败坏，国政混乱，礼教衰落，诉讼和刑罚不断出现，于是孔子说： 审理诉讼，我和别人差不多，一定要使诉讼的事件完全消灭了才好! 
English: However, the world's people are lucky, the world is corrupt, national politics is chaotic, etiquette and religion are in decline, and lawsuits and punishments continue to appear, so Confucius said: When hearing lawsuits, I am just like others, and it is better to completely eliminate the incident of litigation!

古文：及周氏龚行，却收锋刃，祖述生成，宪章尧禹，政有膏露，威兼礼乐，或观辞以明其趣，或倾耳以照其微，或彰善以激其情，或除恶以崇其本。
现代文：到了周朝恭敬地履行天命，收藏起各种武器，师法大自然养育人民的原则，效法尧禹的做法，在治理国政中施行恩泽，威权之中含有礼乐，有时是通过观察言词来弄清楚旨趣，有时是通过仔细听取言词来察看言外之意，有时是通过彰明善行来激发真情，有时是通过铲除恶行来推崇根本。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, they fulfilled their destiny with respect, collected all kinds of weapons, learned from the principles of nature to nurture the people, followed the practices of Shanyu, and exercised grace in governing the country. The authority contained ritual music, sometimes by observing the words to clarify the meaning, sometimes by carefully listening to the words to see the hidden meaning, sometimes by highlighting the good deeds to stimulate the true feelings, and sometimes by eradicating the evil deeds to promote the fundamental.

古文：至夫取威定霸，一匡九合，寓言成康，不由凝网，此所谓酌其遗美，而爱民治国者焉。
现代文：至于用威势来确定霸业，把天下纳入正轨，用成王、康王的事来寄托思想，不因循固有的道理，造就是所说的酌取遣存的善行来爱民治国。
English: As for the use of power to determine hegemony, to put the world on the right track, and to rely on the things of kings and kings, it is not based on inherent principles, but on the good deeds of love for the people to govern the country.

古文：若乃化蔑彝伦，道睽明慎，则夏癸之虔刘百姓，商辛之毒四海，卫鞅之无所自容，韩非之不胜其虐，与夫《甘棠》流咏，未或同归。
现代文：至于败坏伦常，行道违背了明察审慎，造就像夏癸残害百姓，商辛祸害四海，卫鞅无容身之地，韩非的暴虐让人无法忍受，与那《甘棠》诗所咏唱的，并没有达到一致。
English: As for corrupt morals and ethics, the street is contrary to clear observation and prudence, the building is like the summer locusts that harm the people, the business pain is the scourge of the four seas, the garrison has no place to live, the tyranny of South Korea and Africa is unbearable, and it is not consistent with that sung in the "Sweet Bean" poem.

古文：秦文初造参夷，始皇加之抽协，囹圄如市，悲哀盈路。
现代文：秦文当初创造了诛减三族的酷刑，秦始皇又增加了抽胁一项，牢狱裹的人多得像集市上一样，路上全都是悲哀的人。
English: Qin Wen originally created the torture of the three ethnic groups, and Qin Shi Huang also added the threat of torture. There were as many people in prison as in the market, and all the people on the road were sad.

古文：汉王以三章之法以吊之，文帝以刑厝之道以临之，于时百姓欣然，将逢交泰。
现代文：汉王刘邦与关中百姓约法三章，用来安抚他们，汉文帝用刑措之道统治，于是百姓欢悦，感到交了好运气。
English: Han King Liu Bang made a three-chapter treaty with the people of Guanzhong to appease them, and Emperor Hanwen ruled by means of punishment. As a result, the people were happy and felt that they had good luck.

古文：而犴逐情迁，科随意往，献琼杯于阙下，徙青衣于蜀路，覆醢裁刑，倾宗致狱。
现代文：但是监狱随着主意的变化而变化，法令和心意一样变动，在宫阙下被迫交出玉杯，皇后宫妃也走在出逃的垦路上，像王迂倒掉肉酱那样悲痛，身被刑罚，全宗族都被系入狱。
English: But the prison changes with the change of mind, the law changes with the change of heart, under the imperial edict, he was forced to hand over the jade cup, and the queen also walked on the escape route, as sad as the king bypassing the meat sauce, he was punished, and the whole family was jailed.

古文：况乃数囚于京兆之夜，五日于长安之市，北阙相引、中都继及者，亦往往而有焉。
现代文：何况是多次晚上被囚禁在京兆，在长安的市肆上被示众五天，朝廷前的囚犯一个跟着一个，京城裹囚犯相继到来，也是经常有的。
English: What's more, he was imprisoned in Beijing's Zhaozhou District many times at night, and was paraded for five days at the market in Chang'an. Prisoners in front of the imperial court followed one after another, and prisoners in Beijing came one after another, which was also a regular occurrence.

古文：而将亡之国，典刑咸弃，刊章以急其宪，适意以宽其网，桓灵之季，不其然欤！
现代文：而在即将灭亡的国家，刑法全都废弃，刊削律条以应法令之急需，为了适意而放宽执法，在涅桓帝、漠灵帝那样的末世，不就是那样的吗!
English: And in a country that is about to perish, the criminal law is all scrapped, the rules are edited to meet the urgent needs of the law, and the law enforcement is relaxed for the sake of convenience. In the end of the world, like Emperor Nirvana and Emperor Maoming, isn't that just like that!

古文：魏明帝时，宫室盛兴，而期会迫急，有稽限者，帝亲召问，言犹在口，身首已分。
现代文：毯明帝时，宫室大规模地兴建，但是施行政令很是严厉，有超过规定期限的，皇帝亲自把那些人召来审问，那些人话还没有说完，脑袋就已经搬了家。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gao Ming, the imperial palace was built on a large scale, but the implementation of the executive order was very strict and exceeded the prescribed time limit. The emperor personally summoned those people for interrogation. Those people had not finished speaking, and their heads had already been moved.

古文：王肃抗疏曰： 陛下之所行刑，皆宜死之人也。
现代文：王肃上疏写道： 陛下按刑罚杀掉的，都是些该死的人。
English: Wang Su Shangshu wrote: Those who were killed by your majesty as punishment were all people who deserved to die.

古文：然众庶不知，将为仓卒，愿陛下下之于吏而暴其罪。
现代文：但是老百姓不了解情况，恐怕会做出叛乱的事来，希望陛下把那些犯人下交给官吏，宣布他们的罪行。
English: But the people do not understand the situation, I am afraid they will rebel, and I hope that His Majesty will hand over those prisoners to the officials and declare their crimes.

古文：均其死也，不污宫掖，不为搢绅惊惋，不为远近所疑。
现代文：这样，同样是处死犯人，但是不弄脏宫廷，不会引起官员们的惊恐和惋惜，不会引起远近的人疑惑。
English: In this way, the same is the execution of the criminal, but it does not pollute the court, does not cause the officials to be alarmed and regretful, and does not cause the doubts of people near and far.

古文：人命至重，难生易杀，气绝而不续者也，是以圣王重之。
现代文：人命最是重要，要杀死容易，要活过来难，气断了就再也接不上了，因此圣人很看重这种事。
English: Human life is the most important thing. It is easy to kill, difficult to survive, and if you run out of breath, you can't catch it again. Therefore, the sage attaches great importance to this kind of thing.

古文：孟轲云： 杀一不辜而取天下者，仁者不为也。  
现代文：盂轲说： 杀死一个无辜而夺得天下，这种事仁者不会去做。 
English: Zou said, "Killing an innocent person to take over the world is not something a benevolent person would do.

古文：世祖武皇帝接三统之微，酌千年之范，乃命有司，大明刑宪。
现代文：世祖武皇帝承接了三统的妙法，采取自古以来的刑法，于是命令有关官员，制定法律。
English: The ancestor of all emperors, Emperor Wu, adopted the three-pronged approach, adopting the criminal law from ancient times, and ordered the relevant officials to formulate laws.

古文：于时诏书颁新法于天下，海内同轨，人甚安之。
现代文：当时下诏书在全国范围内颁布新法，国家统一了法律，人民感到十分安适。
English: At that time, the new law was promulgated nationwide under the imperial rescript, the country unified the law, and the people felt very comfortable.

古文：条纲虽设，称为简惠，仰昭天眷，下济民心，道有法而无败，德俟刑而久立。
现代文：颁布的法律虽然分条纲设立，但是人们说它简明实用，对上昭示了皇帝的眷爱，对下匡救民心，道因为有法律而不衰败，德因为有刑罚而长久建立。
English: Although the law promulgated was divided into articles, it was said to be concise and practical. It showed the emperor's favor to the upper class and saved the people's hearts to the lower class. The way did not decline because of the law, and the virtue was established for a long time because of the punishment.

古文：及晋图南徙，百有二年，仰止前规，挹其流润，江左无外，蛮陬来格。
现代文：到了晋室策划南迁以后，有一百零二年，向往从前的法度，酌取流布的恩泽，江左都不例外，远方的少数民族前来归顺。
English: After the Jin Dynasty planned to move south, there were 102 years of yearning for the former law and taking advantage of the widespread benefits. Jiangzao was no exception. Ethnic minorities from far away came to submit.

古文：孝武时，会稽王道子倾弄朝权，其所树之党，货官私狱，烈祖惛迷，不闻司败，晋之纲纪大乱焉。
现代文：孝武帝时，会稽王司马道子把持朝政，他所树结的党羽，卖宫并私自设狱，烈宗昏庸，不知道吏治败坏，晋室的法度完全乱了套。
English: At the time of Emperor Xiaowu, King Sima Daozi was in charge of the imperial government, and the political party he had built up sold the palace and set up a prison, and the emperors were in a daze, not knowing that the officials were corrupt, and the rules of the imperial court were completely out of order.

古文：传曰 三皇设言而民不违，五帝画象而民知禁 ，则《书》所谓 象以典刑，流宥五刑，鞭作官刑，扑作教刑 者也。
现代文：传说 三皇作出规定后人民不违反，五帝刻画刑罚图像而人民知道了禁令 ，这正是《书》中所说的 在器物上刻画五种常用的刑罚。用流放的办法宽恕犯了五刑的人，用鞭打作为治官的刑罚，用木条打作为学校的刑罚 。
English: Legend has it that after the three emperors made a regulation, the people did not violate it. The five emperors drew the punishment images and the people knew about the ban. This is exactly what the "Book" says. Draw five commonly used punishments on the utensils. Use the method of exile to forgive those who have committed the five punishments, use whipping as a punishment for governors, and use wooden bars as a punishment for schools.

古文：然则犯黥者皁其巾，犯劓者丹其服，犯膑者墨其体，犯宫者杂其屡，大辟之罪，殊刑之极，布其衣裾而无领缘，投之于市，与众弃之。
现代文：这样，那么对犯了罪该施黥刑的人就染黑他的头巾，对该施劓刑的人就染红他的衣服，对该施膑刑的人就染黑他的双脚，对该施宫刑的人就让他的鞋子左右不一样，犯了死罪是最严重的刑罚，用布做衣裾，没有领边，把他扔到市肆上，大家一起唾弃他。
English: In this way, then, the man who has committed the crime for which he is to be flogged will have his turban dyed black, the man for whom he is to be flogged will have his clothes dyed red, the man for whom he is to be flogged will have his feet dyed black, the man for whom he is to be flogged will have his shoes made differently from left to right, and the man who has committed the crime for which he is to be flogged will have the most severe punishment, his clothes will be made of cloth with no collar, and he will be thrown into the marketplace, where everyone will spit on him.

古文：舜命皋陶曰； 五刑有服，五服三就，五流有宅，五宅三居。 
现代文：舜命令皋陶说： 五刑各治其罪，五类治罪分别在野外、市、朝三处执行。
English: He ordered Xun Tao to say: "Each of the five punishments is for a different crime, and the five types of punishments are carried out in three places: outdoors, in the city, and in the morning.

古文：方乎前载，事既参倍。夏后氏之王天下也，则五刑之属三千。
现代文：犯有五刑罪宽判为流放各有处所，分别流放到远近不同的三个地方。 与前代相比起来，刑罚已经多了三倍了。夏后氏统治天下的时候，五刑之类一共有三千种。
English: Committing the five criminal offenses was leniently sentenced to exile in various places, and was exiled to three different places. Compared with the previous generation, the punishment has tripled. When the Xiaguo clan ruled the world, there were a total of three thousand kinds of five punishments.

古文：殷因于夏，有所损益。
现代文：殷朝沿袭夏朝的刑法，但是有增有减。
English: The Yin Dynasty followed the criminal law of the Xia Dynasty, but there were increases and decreases.

古文：周人以三典刑邦国，以五听察民情，左嘉右肺，事均熔造，而五刑之属犹有二千五百焉。
现代文：周朝用轻、中、重三种刑法治理国家，用辞听、色听、气听、耳听、目听这五听来体察民情，门左边立嘉石，右边立肺石，所有事情都精心研究，但是五刑之类尚有二千五百种。
English: The Zhou Dynasty used light, medium and heavy criminal laws to govern the country, and used the five senses of hearing, color, qi, ear and eye to listen to the people. The left side of the door was made of jia stone, and the right side of the door was made of lung stone. Everything was carefully studied, but there were still 2,500 kinds of five punishments.

古文：乃置三刺、三宥、三赦之法：一刺曰讯群臣，再刺曰讯群吏，三刺曰讯万民；一宥曰不识，再宥曰过失，三宥曰遗忘；一赦曰幼弱，再赦曰老旄，三赦曰蠢愚。
现代文：于是设立三刺、三宥、三赦的法律：一刺是问群臣，二刺是问群吏，三刺是问万民；一宥是宽宥不了解，二宥是宽宥过失，三宥是宽宥遣忘；一赦是赦免年幼的人，二赦是赦免年老的人，三赦是赦免愚蠢的人。
English: Therefore, the law of three pricks, three pardons, and three pardons was established: one prick is to ask the ministers, two pricks is to ask the officials, and three pricks is to ask the people; one prick is to forgive ignorance, two pricks is to forgive mistakes, three pricks is to forgive and forget; one pardon is to pardon the young, two pardons are to pardon the old, and three pardons are to pardon the stupid.

古文：《司马法》：或起甲兵以征不义，废贡职则讨，不朝会则诛，乱嫡庶则絷，变礼刑则放。
现代文：《司马法》说：有时是兴起军队征伐不义的人，对不进献的就要讨伐，对不来朝见君主的诸侯或臣属就要诛灭，对搞乱嫡庶顺序的耍拘囚，对变动礼法和刑法的要放逐。
English: "Sima Law" says: Sometimes it is necessary to raise an army to subjugate the unjust, to fight those who do not pay tribute, to annihilate those princes or subjects who do not come to see the monarch, to play with prisoners who mess up the line of succession, and to banish those who change the etiquette and criminal law.

古文：传曰： 殷周之质，不胜其文。 
现代文：传说： 殷朝周朝是朴实不如文采多。 
English: Legend: The Yin and Zhou dynasties were more down-to-earth than literary.

古文：及昭后徂征，穆王斯耄，爰制刑辟，以诘四方，奸宄弘多，乱离斯永，则所谓 夏有乱政而作《禹刑》，商有乱政而作《汤刑》，周有乱政而作《九刑》 者也。
现代文：到了昭后前往征讨，穆王变得昏乱，于是开始制定刑法，用来治理天下，为非作歹的人很多，离乱总是出现，造就是所谓 夏有乱政而创制《禹刑》，直有乱政而创制《汤刑》，固有乱政而创制《九刑》 。
English: When Zhaohua went to collect taxes, King Mu became confused, so he began to formulate a criminal law to govern the world. There were many people who did bad things, and there was always confusion. This is the reason why the so-called "Yu Sentencing" was created due to chaotic politics in summer, "Tang Sentencing" was created due to chaotic politics in spring, and "Nine Sentencing" was created due to inherent chaotic politics.

古文：古者大刑用甲兵，中刑用刀锯，薄刑用鞭扑。
现代文：古时行大刑用兵器，行中刑用刀锯，行轻刑用鞭扑。
English: In ancient times, weapons were used for capital punishment, knives and saws were used for medium punishment, and whips were used for light punishment.

古文：自兹厥后，狙诈弥繁。
现代文：从此以后，诡诈越来越多。
English: Since then, the ruses have increased.

古文：武皇帝并以为往宪犹疑，不可经国，乃命车骑将军、守尚书令、鲁公征求英俊，刊律定篇云尔。
现代文：武皇壶还认为以往的法律可疑，不能拿来治理国家，于是命令车骑将军、守尚书令、鲁公召集精英，刊定法律。
English: Emperor Wu also thought that the laws of the past were dubious and could not be used to govern the country, so he ordered the general of the cavalry, Shushang Shuling, and Lu Gong to gather the elite and publish the laws.

古文：汉自王莽篡位之后，旧章不存。
现代文：汉朝自从王莽篡位之后，原有的典章制度不再存在。
English: During the Han Dynasty, after Wang Mang usurped the throne, the original award system no longer existed.

古文：光武中兴，留心庶狱，常临朝听讼，躬决疑事。
现代文：光武帝中兴以后，注意各种诉讼之事，常常在上朝时听理诉讼，亲自裁决可疑的事情。
English: After Emperor Guangwu was enthroned, he paid attention to all kinds of lawsuits. He often heard lawsuits in the Shang Dynasty and personally adjudicated suspicious cases.

古文：是时承离乱之后，法网弛纵，罪名既轻，无以惩肃。
现代文：当时刚好在离乱之后，刑法松弛，犯人罪名定得轻，没有惩戒罪人的办法。
English: At that time, just after the turmoil, the criminal law was relaxed, prisoners were convicted of minor crimes, and there was no way to discipline criminals.

古文：梁统乃上疏曰：
现代文：梁统于是上疏说：
English: Liang Tong then said to Shang Zuo:

古文：臣窃见元帝初元五年，轻殊刑三十四事，哀帝建平元年尽四年，轻殊死者刑八十一事，其四十二事，手杀人皆减死罪一等，著为常法。
现代文：臣下见到了元帝初元五年，减轻本该处斩首刑罚的法律三十四条，哀帝建平元年到四年间，减轻本该处以斩首刑罚的法令共八十一条，其中四十二条，亲手杀人的都减死罪一等，这已被标定为常法。
English: In the first five years of the Yuan Dynasty, there were thirty-four laws to reduce the penalty of beheading, and between the first year of the Yuan Dynasty and the fourth year of the Qing Dynasty, there were eighty-one decrees to reduce the penalty of beheading, of which forty-two were to reduce the death penalty to the first degree, which has been designated as the common law.

古文：自是以后，人轻犯法，吏易杀人，吏民俱失，至于不羁。
现代文：从此以后，百姓把犯法看得很轻，官吏把杀人看得很平常，官吏和老百姓都做得不当，导致失去了约束。
English: From then on, the people regarded breaking the law as very light, the officials regarded killing as very ordinary, and both the officials and the people did things improperly, leading to the loss of restraint.

古文：臣愚以为刑罚不苟务轻，务其中也。
现代文：臣以为刑罚不能随便地致力于从轻，而要致力于适当。
English: The courtier believed that the punishment should not be arbitrarily lenient, but should be appropriate.

古文：君人之道，仁义为主，仁者爱人，义者理务。
现代文：统治百姓的方法，是以仁义为主，仁者爱人，义者治理事务。
English: The method of ruling the people is based on benevolence and righteousness. Benevolent people love others, and righteous people govern affairs.

古文：爱人故当为除害，理务亦当为去乱。
现代文：爱人就应当为人除害，治理事务也应当除去祸乱。
English: A lover should remove harm from a person, and governance should also remove evil and chaos.

古文：是以五帝有流殛放杀之诛，三王有大辟刻肌之刑，所以为除残去乱也。
现代文：因此，五帝时有流放和诛杀遣样的刑罚，三王时有大辟和刻肌这样的刑罚，其目的就是清除暴虐和祸乱。
English: Therefore, in the Five Dynasties, there were punishments such as banishment and flogging, and in the Three Dynasties, there were punishments such as beheading and goring, the purpose of which was to eliminate tyranny and evil.

古文：故孔子称 仁者必有勇 ，又曰 理财正辞，禁人为非曰义 。高帝受命，制约令，定法律，传之后世，可常施行。
现代文：因此孔子说 仁者必有勇 ，又说 治理财产端正盲辞，禁止人为非作歹就叫义 高帝登基以后，制定约令法律，传给后代，可以经常施行。
English: Therefore, Confucius said that the benevolent must be brave, and also said that the management of property should be correct, and the prohibition of man-made misdeeds should be called righteousness. After Emperor Gao ascended the throne, he formulated the covenant law, passed on to future generations, and could be implemented regularly.

古文：文帝宽惠温克，遭世康平，因时施恩，省去肉刑，除相坐之法，他皆率由旧章，天下几致升平。
现代文：文帝宽厚仁惠，蕴藉自持，值康平时世，顺应时势赐给百姓恩泽，减省肉刑，除去相坐的刑法，其他的都沿袭原来的典章，天下达到太平。
English: Emperor Wen was generous and benevolent. He was self-reliant, valued peace and prosperity, and gave grace to the people in accordance with the current situation. He reduced corporal punishment and removed the criminal law, and the rest followed the original rules, and the world achieved peace.

古文：武帝值中国隆盛，财力有余，出兵命将，征伐远方，军役数兴，百姓罢弊，豪杰犯禁，奸吏弄法，故设遁匿之科，著知纵之律。
现代文：武帝时正赶上中原强盛，财力有余，调兵遣将，征伐远方的敌人，兵役多次征发，百姓羸弱疲困，豪放任侠之士违犯禁令，奸猾的官吏玩弄法律，故意设立遁匿的条律和知纵的法律。
English: Emperor Wu was just catching up with the prosperity of the Central Plains, he had more than enough financial resources, he dispatched troops and sent generals to conquer distant enemies, the military service was conscripted and dispatched many times, the people were weak and exhausted, the warriors were allowed to violate the ban, the treacherous officials played with the law, and deliberately set up the rules of hiding and the laws of indulgence.

古文：宣帝聪明正直，履道握要，以御海内，臣下奉宪，不失绳墨。
现代文：宣帝聪明正直，遵行正道掌握要领，用以统治国家，下臣们奉行法令，都没有失去准则。
English: Emperor Xuan was intelligent and honest, he followed the right path and mastered the essentials to rule the country, and his subordinates followed the laws. They did not lose their principles.

古文：元帝法律，少所改更，天下称安。
现代文：元帝时稍微更改了一些法律，天下安宁。
English: When Emperor Yuan slightly changed some laws, the world was at peace.

古文：孝成、孝哀，承平继体，即位日浅，听断尚寡。
现代文：孝成帝、孝哀帝承袭太平继接皇位，在位的日子短暂，听讼裁夺的时候不多。
English: Emperor Xiaocheng and Emperor Xiaomei succeeded to the throne in the Taiping era. Their reigns were short, and there was not much time for hearings.

古文：丞相王嘉等猥以数年之间，亏除先帝旧约，穿令断律，凡百余事，或不便于政，或不厌人心。
现代文：丞相王嘉等人在数年之间苟且从事，减损先帝原有的法令，牵强地解释法律，共有一百多处，有的对于施政不利，有的不能让百姓称心。
English: For several years, the chancellor Wang Jia and others have been diligently working to derogate from the former emperor's original decrees and forcefully interpret the law. There are more than a hundred points, some of which are unfavorable to governance, and some of which cannot satisfy the people.

古文：臣谨表取其尤妨政事、害善良者，傅奏如左。
现代文：臣下谨上表列举特别妨害政事、危害善良的人们的事情，奏陈如下。
English: My courtiers, I would like to enumerate the things in the above list that are particularly obstructive to political affairs and harmful to good people, and report them as follows.

古文：伏惟陛下苞五常，履九德，推时拨乱，博施济时，而反因循季世末节，衰微轨迹，诚非所以还初反本，据元更始也。
现代文：希望陛下同时拥有五常，履行九德，顺应时务拨乱反正，广施恩惠以救助时艰，然而反过来因循末世的小节，衰微的轨迹，实在不是回复当初反归根本，靠着改元除旧布新的做法。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will simultaneously possess the five constants, fulfill the nine virtues, respond to the current situation and turn the chaos into the right direction, and provide a wide range of favors to help in times of hardship. However, following the signs of the end of the world and the trajectory of decline in turn is really not a return to the original, but a return to the fundamentals, relying on changing the original to remove the old and create a new practice.

古文：愿陛下宣诏有司，悉举初元、建平之所穿凿，考其轻重，察其化俗，足以知政教所处，择其善者而从之，其不善者而改之，定不易之典，施之无穷，天下幸甚。
现代文：希望陛下诏令有关官员，把初元、建平年间的穿凿之处都举出来，考察它们的轻重得失和教化风俗，足以了解政教的处境，选择那些好的采用，选择那些不好的进行改正，制定不可更易的法律，千秋万代施行下去，那么这是天下的幸运。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will issue an order to the relevant officials to list all the problems that occurred in the early years of the Yuan Dynasty and the Jianping Dynasty, and examine their important gains and losses and the customs of enlightenment, so that it is enough to understand the situation of politics and religion, choose those that are good to adopt, choose those that are bad to correct, formulate laws that cannot be changed, and continue to implement them for thousands of generations. Then this is the luck of the world.

古文：事下三公、廷尉议，以为隆刑峻法，非明王急务，不可开许。
现代文：皇帝把梁统的意见下交给三公、廷尉讨论，都认为严刑峻法，不是圣明君王亟须办理的事，不能同意。
English: The emperor submitted Liang Tong's opinion to the three princes and the courtier for discussion, and they all agreed that severe punishment and harsh laws were not urgent matters for the holy king, and they could not agree.

古文：统复上言曰： 有司猥以臣所上不可施行。
现代文：梁统又上书说： 有关官员认为臣下呈上的意见不可施行。
English: Liang Tong also wrote: Relevant officials believe that the opinions submitted by the vassal cannot be implemented.

古文：今臣所言，非曰严刑。
现代文：现在臣下所说的，并不算严刑。
English: What your vassal has just said is not a severe punishment.

古文：窃谓高帝以后，至于宣帝，其所施行，考合经传，此方今事，非隆刑峻法。
现代文：我认为高帝以后，直到宣帝，所施行的刑法，综合经传研究的话，和今天的事情比照，不是严刑峻法。
English: I think that the criminal law that was enforced from the time of Emperor Gao until Emperor Xuan, according to the comprehensive study of scripture, is not a severe punishment.

古文：不胜至愿，愿得召见，若对尚书近臣，口陈其意。 
现代文：我最大的愿望，是希望受到召见，就像回答尚书近臣一样，亲口陈述我的意见。 
English: My greatest wish is to be summoned, just as I was to answer Shangshu's courtiers, to state my opinions in person.

古文：帝令尚书问状，统又对，极言政刑宜改。
现代文：皇帝命令尚书去询问意见，梁统又用同样的意见回答，极言政刑应该改革。
English: The emperor ordered Shang Shu to inquire about the opinion, and Liang Tong replied with the same opinion, saying that the political punishment should be reformed.

古文：议竟不从。
现代文：他的意见最后没有被采纳。
English: His suggestion was ultimately not taken up.

古文：及明帝即位，常临听讼观录洛阳诸狱。
现代文：到了明帝登上皇位时，常常到听讼观省察甄别洛阳各种诉讼。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he often went to Luoyang to listen to lawsuits and investigate various lawsuits.

古文：帝性既明察，能得下奸，故尚书奏决罚近于苛碎。
现代文：明帝天性明察，能够获悉下面奸邪罪恶的情况，所以尚书上奏裁决刑罚接近严峻烦琐。
English: Emperor Ming's nature was clear-sighted, and he was able to learn about the following circumstances of the crime of treachery, so the punishment of the verdict was close to severe and cumbersome.

古文：至章帝时，尚书陈宠上疏曰： 先王之政，赏不僭，刑不滥，与其不得已，宁僭不滥。
现代文：到了章帝的时候，尚书陈宠上疏说： 先王的政令，奖赏不过分，刑罚不过度，与其不得已，宁可过分地奖赏也不可过度用刑。
English: At the time of Emperor Zhang, Shangshu Chen Zhaozhong said: The king's decree, the reward is not excessive, the punishment is not excessive, rather than being forced, it is better to reward excessively than to use excessive punishment.

古文：故唐尧著典曰 流宥五刑，眚灾肆赦 。帝舜命皋陶以 五宅三居，惟明克允 。文王重《易》六爻，而列丛棘之听；周公作《立政》，戒成王勿误乎庶狱。
现代文：因此唐尧著书说 用流放的办法宽恕犯了五刑的人，因过失造成灾害，可以缓刑或赦免，帝舜命令皋陶 五刑罪宽判为流放的分别流放到远近不同的三个地方，都要严明恰当，周文王重演《易》六爻，排出拘禁囚犯地方的断决；周公作《立政》，告诫成王不要在各种狱讼的事情上犯错误。
English: Therefore, Tang Zheng wrote in his book that the person who committed the five punishments could be pardoned by the method of exile, and the punishment could be suspended or pardoned because of the disaster caused by negligence. The imperial edict ordered that those who were pardoned for the five punishments and sentenced to exile should be exiled to three different places far and near, and they should be strict and appropriate. King Zhouwen reenacted "Yi" and "Liuxuan" and issued a ruling on the place of detention of prisoners; Zhou Gong wrote "Lixing Zheng" and warned King Cheng not to make mistakes in various prison affairs.

古文：陛下即位，率由此义，而有司执事，未悉奉承。
现代文：陛下登上皇位以后，沿袭了这些指导思想，但是有关官员在办事过程中，并没有完全奉行。
English: After His Majesty ascended the throne, he followed these guiding principles, but the relevant officials did not fully adhere to them in the course of their duties.

古文：断狱者急于榜格酷烈之痛，执宪者繁于诈欺放滥之文，违本离实，棰楚为奸，或因公行私，以逞威福。
现代文：审理案子的人急于鞭打犯人造成酷烈的痛苦，执法的人多做欺诈放肆的公文，违背事实，依靠拷打做奸邪的事，有的人假公济私，作威作福。
English: The people who tried the case were eager to whip the prisoner, causing severe pain. The people who enforced the law mostly made fraudulent and presumptuous official documents, violated the facts, and relied on torture to do evil things. Some people pretended to be public-spirited and used their power to benefit themselves.

古文：夫为政也，犹张琴瑟，大弦急者小弦绝，故子贡非臧孙之猛法，而美郑侨之仁政。
现代文：治理国政就像把琴弦调紧，大弦太紧了小弦就会断，因此子贡抨击臧孙施行严酷的法令，赞扬郑侨施行仁政。
English: Governing state affairs is like tuning the strings of a harp. If the major chord is too tight, the minor chord will break. Therefore, the tributary criticized the grandson for implementing harsh decrees and praised the overseas Chinese for implementing benevolent policies.

古文：方今圣德充塞，假于上下，宜因此时，隆先圣之务，荡涤烦苛，轻薄棰楚，以济群生，广至德也。 
现代文：当今圣德充盈，施及上下，应该趁着这个时候，光大先前圣王的事业。清除烦法苛政，减轻杖刑，用来济助众生，增广至德。 
English: Today's fullness of holiness extends to all levels, and we should take advantage of this time to magnify the cause of the holy kings of the past, remove the troublesome laws and harsh government, lighten the cane punishment, and use it to help all living beings and increase virtue.

古文：帝纳宠言，决罪行刑，务于宽厚。
现代文：皇帝采纳了陈宠的话，在定罪和行刑时，尽量从宽。
English: The emperor took Chen Qiao's advice to be as lenient as possible in sentencing and execution.

古文：其后遂诏有司，禁绝钻钅赞诸酷痛旧制，解祅恶之禁，除文致之请，谳五十余事，定著于令。
现代文：后来又韶令有关官员，禁绝使用钴钻等各种使人极端痛苦的旧法令，解除妖异邪恶的禁令，消灭舞文弄法使人获罪的情况，议定了五十多个事项，明确地写在条令上。
English: Later, he also ordered the relevant officials to prohibit the use of cobalt drill and other old laws and regulations that caused extreme pain, lift the ban on strange and evil, and eliminate the situation in which people were convicted of cheating. More than 50 matters were agreed upon and clearly written in the regulation.

古文：是后狱法和平。
现代文：此后诉讼秩序稳定。
English: Since then, the litigation order has been stable.

古文：永元六年，宠又代郭躬为廷尉，复校律令，刑法溢于《甫刑》者，奏除之，曰： 臣闻礼经三百，威仪三千，故《甫刑》大辟二百，五刑之属三千。
现代文：永元六年，陈宠又接替郭躬担任廷尉，再次校核律令，凡是有超出《甫刑》的刑法，都上奏请求删除，说道： 臣下听说礼经共有三百种，讲礼仪细节的有三千处，因此《甫刑》上规定了死罪二百种，五刑之类共有三千种。
English: In the sixth year of the Yongyuan era, Chen Jiao succeeded Guo Mian as a court lieutenant, and once again reviewed the legal decrees. Any criminal law that exceeded the "Imperial Penalty" was reported and requested to be deleted, saying: His subjects have heard that there are a total of three hundred kinds of etiquette, and there are three thousand details of etiquette. Therefore, the "Imperial Penalty" stipulates two hundred kinds of capital crimes, and there are a total of three thousand kinds of five punishments.

古文：礼之所去，刑之所取，失礼即入刑，相为表里者也。
现代文：礼中所不要的，正是刑所收入的，礼中去掉的就归到刑中，相为表裹。
English: What is not needed in the ritual is the income of the penal institution, and what is removed in the ritual is returned to the penal institution.

古文：今律令，犯罪应死刑者六百一十，耐罪千六百九十八，赎罪以下二千六百八十一，溢于《甫刑》千九百八十九，其四百一十大辟，千五百耐罪，七十九赎罪。
现代文：现在的律令，犯罪应该处死的有六百一十种，耐罪有一千六百九十八种，赎罪以下有二千六百八十一种，比《甫刑》多出一千九百八十九种，其中死罪多四百一十种，耐罪多一千五百种，赎罪多七十九种。
English: According to the current laws and regulations, there are 610 kinds of crimes that should be punished by death, 1698 kinds of crimes that should be tolerated, 2681 kinds of crimes that should be punished by atonement, and 1989 kinds of crimes that should be punished by death, which is more than the "Final Punishment." Among them, there are 410 kinds of crimes that should be punished by death, 1500 kinds of crimes that should be tolerated, and 79 kinds of sins that should be atoned.

古文：《春秋保乾图》曰： 王者三百年一蠲法。 
现代文：《春秋保干圆》说： 帝王每三百年减免一次刑法。 
English: "Spring and Autumn Protection" said: The emperor reduces and exempts the criminal law once every three hundred years.

古文：汉兴以来，三百二年，宪令稍增，科条无限。
现代文：汉朝建立以来，经历了三百零二年，法令逐渐增加，科条无穷无尽。
English: Since the establishment of the Han Dynasty, it has been three hundred and two years, the laws and regulations have gradually increased, and the subjects are endless.

古文：又律有三家，说各驳异。
现代文：而且法律有三家说法，各家的说法都不一样。
English: Moreover, the law has three interpretations, and each interpretation is different.

古文：刑法繁多，宜令三公、廷尉集平律令，应经合义可施行者，大辟二百，耐罪、赎罪二千八百，合为三千，与礼相应。
现代文：刑法繁多，应该命令三公、廷尉统一律令，应合经义可以施行的，死罪二百种，耐罪、赎罪二千八百种，合计为三千种，典礼相应。
English: There are many kinds of criminal laws. The three princes and courtiers should be ordered to unify the laws and decrees. There should be two hundred kinds of capital crimes, two thousand eight hundred kinds of forbearance and atonement, a total of three thousand kinds, and the corresponding ceremonies.

古文：其余千九百八十九事，悉可详除。
现代文：其余的一千九百八十九条，全部可以删除。
English: The remaining 1,989 articles can all be deleted.

古文：使百姓改易视听，以成大化，致刑措之美，传之无穷。 
现代文：要使百姓改变看法，用以实现广远深入的教化，达到没有人犯法的美好境界，并无穷无尽地流传下去。 
English: It is necessary to make the people change their views, use them to achieve far-reaching and in-depth enlightenment, achieve a beautiful realm where no one breaks the law, and pass them on endlessly.

古文：未及施行，会宠抵罪，遂寝。
现代文：这些建议还没有来得及施行，恰好陈宠抵罪，建议于是无声无息。
English: These proposals have not been implemented in time, just as Chen Zhaotong pleaded guilty, so the proposals are silent.

古文：宠子忠。
现代文：陈宠的儿子是陈忠。
English: Chen Zhao's son is Chen Zhong.

古文：忠后复为尚书，略依宠意，奏上三十三条，为《决事比》，以省请谳之弊。
现代文：陈忠后来又做了尚书，大略依照陈宠的意思，又奏上三十三条，写成《决事比》，用以减除议罪的弊端。
English: Later, Chen Zhong also made a book, roughly in accordance with Chen Zhe's intention, and played thirty-three articles, writing "Decision-making Ratio" to reduce the drawbacks of deliberation.

古文：又上除蚕室刑，解赃吏三世禁锢，狂易杀人得减重论，母子兄弟相代死听赦所代者，事皆施行。
现代文：又上疏请求删除蚕室刑，解除脏吏三世禁锢，因神经失常导致狂暴杀人的可以减重罪，母子兄弟在替对方死时判决赦免替代的人，这些建议都采纳施行。
English: In addition, Shangsuo requested the deletion of the silkworm cell punishment, the lifting of the third-generation imprisonment of the dirty officials, the reduction of the felony of killing people due to nervous disorders, and the pardon of the person who replaced the mother and son when they died. These suggestions were all adopted and implemented.

古文：虽时有蠲革，而旧律繁芜，未经纂集。
现代文：虽然时常有所删除，但是原有的律令繁杂，没有经过纂集。
English: Although there are often deletions, the original ritsuryo are complex and have not been compiled.

古文：献帝建安元年，应劭又删定律令，以为《汉议》，表奏之曰： 夫国之大事，莫尚载籍。
现代文：汉献帝建安元年，应劭又删定律令，编成《汉议》，上奏说： 国家的大事，莫遇于载籍。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, it was necessary to amend and delete laws and regulations to compile the "Han Zhe," which said: The important things of the country can not be recorded.

古文：载籍也者，决嫌疑，明是非，赏刑之宜，允执厥中，俾后之人永有鉴焉。
现代文：载籍这东西，能决断嫌疑，明辨是非，奖赏和刑罚应有之义，是符合不偏不倚的中正之道，使后来的人们永远有所借鉴。
English: This thing of renunciation, which can decide suspicion, distinguish right from wrong, and reward and punish according to the truth, is in line with the unbiased middle way, so that later people can always learn from it.

古文：故胶东相董仲舒老病致仕，朝廷每有政议，数遣廷尉张汤亲至陋巷，问其得失，于是作《春秋折狱》二百三十二事，动以《经》对，言之详矣。
现代文：因而胶束相董仲舒因年老多病辞官回家，朝廷每当讨论政事，总是派廷尉张汤亲自到小巷子裹，向董仲舒询问利弊，董仲舒于是撰作《春秋折狱》二百三十二条，动辄用《春秋经》来回答问题，说得很详尽了。
English: As a result, because of his old age and illness, Dong Zhongshu was sent home. Whenever the imperial court discussed political affairs, it always sent the imperial lieutenant Zhang Tang to personally go to the alley and ask Dong Zhongshu about the pros and cons. Dong Zhongshu then wrote the 232 articles of "Spring and Autumn Prison Break" and often used "Spring and Autumn Classic" to answer questions, which was very detailed.

古文：逆臣董卓，荡覆王室，典宪焚燎，靡有孑遗，开辟以来，莫或兹酷。
现代文：逆臣董卓倾覆王室，典章法律都被焚烧，什么都没有遗留下来，自从开天辟地以来，再也没有比这更残酷的了。
English: The rebel minister, Dong Zhuo, overthrew the royal family, the rules and laws were burned, and nothing was left behind. Since the beginning of the world, there has never been anything more cruel than this.

古文：今大驾东迈，巡省许都，拔出险难，其命惟新。
现代文：现在皇上东行，巡省许都，排除险难，运命更新。
English: Now the emperor is traveling east, inspecting many provinces and capitals, eliminating dangers and difficulties, and renewing his destiny.

古文：臣窃不自揆，辄撰具《律本章句》、《尚书旧事》、《廷尉板令》、《决事比例》、《司徒都目》、《五曹诏书》及《春秋折狱》，凡二百五十篇，蠲去复重，为之节文。
现代文：臣下不自量，特地撰写《律本章句、《尚书旧事》、《廷尉板令》、《决事比例》、《司徒都目》、《五曹诏书》以及《春秋折狱》，共二百五十篇，删除重复，节写成文。
English: The vassals did not measure up, and specially wrote "Chapter of Laws," "History of Laws," "Ordinance of the Court Marshal," "Proportion of Resolutions," "Rule of the Council of Sages," "Decree of the Five Emperors" and "Spring and Autumn Imprisonment," a total of two hundred and fifty articles, deleting duplicates, and writing sections into a document.

古文：又集《议驳》三十篇，以类相从，凡八十二事。
现代文：又集《议驳》三十篇，按照事类编次，共有八十二件事。
English: In addition, 30 articles of "Dispute" were collected, and according to the order of the cases, a total of 82 cases were collected.

古文：其见《汉书》二十五，《汉记》四，皆删叙润色，以全本体。
现代文：其中见于《汉书》的有二十五篇，见于《汉记》的有四篇，全都进行删叙润色，用以保全本来面目。
English: Among them, there are twenty-five articles found in "Hanshu" and four articles found in "Hanshi," all of which have been abridged and embellished in order to preserve their original appearance.

古文：其二十六，博采古今瑰玮之士，德义可观。
现代文：其中的二十六篇，博采古今的奇特之士，道德行止都值得一看。
English: Twenty-six of them are worth a look, including a selection of strange characters from the past and the present, as well as moral behavior.

古文：其二十七，臣所创造。
现代文：其中的二十七篇，是臣下创作的。
English: Twenty-seven of them were written by his subordinates.

古文：《左氏》云： 虽有姬姜，不弃憔悴；虽有丝麻，不弃菅蒯。 盖所以代匮也。
现代文：《左氏》说： 即使有姬姜这样的名门望族，也不舍弃穷苦人；即使有丝麻，也不舍弃茅草，大概是用来在短缺的时候代用的。
English: "Mr. Zuo" said: Even if there is a prestigious family such as Ji Jiang, they will not abandon the poor; even if there is silk, they will not abandon the thatch, which is probably used as a substitute in times of shortage.

古文：是用敢露顽才，厕于明哲之末，虽未足纲纪国体，宣洽时雍。庶几观察，增阐圣德。
现代文：因此臣下斗胆显露愚钝之才，厕身于明哲之士的后面，虽然不足以治理国家，普遍地有利于时世安定，希望加以审视，增加和阐明圣德。
English: Therefore, although it is not enough to govern the country, it is generally conducive to the stability of the times, and it is hoped to examine, increase and clarify the sanctity.

古文：惟因万机之余暇，游意省览。 
现代文：希望陛下在处理纷繁政务的空隙，留心看一看。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will take a look at it while he is dealing with the busy affairs of state.

古文：献帝善之，于是旧事存焉。
现代文：献帝认为很好，于是过去的做法保存了下来。
English: Emperor Xian thought it was good, so the past practice was preserved.

古文：是时天下将乱，百姓有土崩之势，刑罚不足以惩恶，于是名儒大才故辽东太守崔实、大司农郑玄、大鸿胪陈纪之徒，咸以为宜复行肉刑。
现代文：当时天下即将动荡，百姓违背法令就像土崩一样，刑罚已经不足以惩治恶行，于是一批名儒大才如原辽东太守崔蹇、大司农郑玄、大鸿胪陈纪等人，都认为应该恢复肉刑。
English: At that time, the world was about to be in turmoil. People's violation of laws was like a landslide. Punishments were no longer sufficient to punish evil deeds. Therefore, a group of famous Confucian scholars, such as the former Liaodong governor Cui Wei, the chief farmer Zheng Xuan, and the great scholar Chen Ji, all believed that corporal punishment should be restored.

古文：汉朝既不议其事，故无所用矣。
现代文：汉朝既然不商讨这些法令，所以就没有可施行的地方了。
English: Since the Han Dynasty did not discuss these decrees, there was no place to enforce them.

古文：及魏武帝匡辅汉室，尚书令荀彧博访百官，复欲申之，而少府孔融议以为： 古者敦厖，善否区别，吏端刑清政简，一无过失，百姓有罪，皆自取之。
现代文：到了魏武帝辅佐汉室，尚书令荀或广泛地询问百官，打算重新施行古刑法，但是少府孔融认为： 古时人民敦厚笃实，好与坏分得很清楚，官吏政令刑法都很简单，一点儿过失都没有，百姓犯了罪，都主动接受惩罚。
English: When he arrived at Emperor Weiwu's office, he wrote to or extensively questioned hundreds of officials, intending to re-enforce the ancient criminal law, but Shaofu Kong Rong thought: In ancient times, the people were solid and honest, the good and the bad were very clear, the officials and the government ordered the criminal law to be very simple, there was no fault at all, and the people committed crimes and took the initiative to accept punishment.

古文：末世陵迟，风化坏乱，政挠其俗，法害其教。
现代文：末世社会逐步衰落，风化败坏，政令扰乱了民风，法令妨害了教化。
English: The society of the last days is gradually declining, the manners are corrupt, the government decrees have disturbed the people's customs, and the decrees have hindered the enlightenment.

古文：故曰 上失其道，人散久矣 。
现代文：所以说 在高位的不行正道，人心散乱已经很久了 。
English: Therefore, it has been a long time since people's minds have been distracted by those who do not follow the right path in high positions.

古文：而欲绳之以古刑，投之以残弃，非所谓与时消息也。
现代文：现在却想用古刑法来治理人民，用废弃的东西来对付百姓，这不是所谓的和时代一起消长。
English: Now, however, they want to use the ancient criminal law to govern the people, and use discarded things to deal with the people. This is not the so-called changing with the times.

古文：纣斮朝涉之胫，天下谓为无道。
现代文：纣王砍了早晨涉水人的脚胆，天下人都说他无道。
English: The king of the egrets chopped off the sole of the wader's foot in the morning, and everyone in the world said he had no way out.

古文：夫九牧之地，千八百君，若各刖一人，是天下常有千八百纣也，求世休和，弗可得已。
现代文：九州之地，共有一千八百国君，如果每个国君都砍掉一个人的脚，那么天下就常常有一千八百个纣王，寻求天下安宁，这是不能得到的。
English: In the land of Kyushu, there are a total of 1,800 sovereigns. If each sovereign cuts off a person's foot, then there will always be 1,800 tyrants in the world, seeking world peace, which cannot be obtained.

古文：且被刑之人，虑不念生，志在思死，类多趋恶，莫复归正。
现代文：而且遭受刑罚的人，心中再也不想活下去，一门心思想死，大约多是逐渐变坏，再也不可能重返正道。
English: Moreover, those who have been punished never want to live again in their hearts, and with a single heart think of death, and most of them gradually deteriorate and can never return to the right path.

古文：夙沙乱齐，伊戾祸宋，赵高、英布，为世大患。
现代文：旦丝搅乱变玺，坦庭祸害塞厘，蛊遗、茎查成为社会的大祸患。
English: Tantrums are the scourge of society, and tanning, waxing, and waxing have become the scourges of society.

古文：不能止人遂为非也，适足绝人还为善耳。
现代文：不能制止人最终为非作歹。
English: You can't stop people from eventually doing bad things.

古文：虽忠如鬻拳，信如卞和，智如孙膑，冤如巷伯，才如史迁，达如子政，一罹刀锯，没世不齿。
现代文：即使像鳖圣那么忠心，像主塑那么诚信，像逐堕那样足智多谋，像巷伯那样受尽冤屈，像史迁那样有才，像王巫那样达观，一遭受刀锯之刑，就永远被人看不起。
English: Even if you are as loyal as a priest, as honest as a sculptor, as resourceful as a thief, as wronged as a peasant, as talented as a historian, and as wise as a sorcerer, once you are punished, you will always be looked down upon.

古文：是太甲之思庸，穆公之霸秦，陈汤之都赖，魏尚之临边，无所复施也。
现代文：因此太甲思念常道，穆公使秦国称霸，速荡赴任壑整，必镇守边关，都不再施行这种刑罚。
English: Therefore, Taiga thought of the usual way, Mu, the envoy of Qin, claimed hegemony, rushed to the post of rectification, and had to guard the border, and would no longer enforce this kind of punishment.

古文：汉开改恶之路，凡为此也。
现代文：莲塑打开改恶的道路，都是为了这一原因。
English: It is for this reason that Lian Suo opened the road to change.

古文：故明德之君，远度深惟，弃短就长，不苟革其政者也。 
现代文：因此德性完美的国君，深谋远虑，弃短就长，不随便革除政令。 
English: Therefore, the virtuous and perfect sovereign, with forethought and forethought, does not arbitrarily revoke the decree.

古文：朝廷善之，卒不改焉。
现代文：朝廷认为这个意见很好，最终没有改。
English: The Imperial Court thought this was a good idea and did not change it in the end.

古文：及魏国建，陈纪子群时为御史中丞，魏武帝下令又欲复之，使群申其父论。
现代文：到了魏国建立时，陈纪的儿子陈群任御史中丞，魏武帝下令又想恢复肉刑，让陈群申述他父亲的观点。
English: When the Wei Dynasty was established, Chen Qi's son, Chen Qun, was appointed as the middle-ranking official of the imperial court. Emperor Wu of the Wei Dynasty also wanted to resume corporal punishment, and ordered Chen Qun to express his father's views.

古文：群深陈其便。
现代文：速登极力陈说恢复肉刑的好处。
English: Hayden pushed the merits of reinstating corporal punishment.

古文：时钟繇为相国，亦赞成之，而奉常王脩不同其议。
现代文：当时钟逊任相国，也赞同助成这个意见，但是奉常王恺不同意这一观点。
English: At that time, Zhong Xun was the minister of state, and he also agreed with the idea of subsidizing, but Feng Chang Wang Yao did not agree with this view.

古文：魏武帝亦难以籓国改汉朝之制，遂寝不行。
现代文：魏武帝也难以凭一个藩国改变塑目的制度，这一建议就放置起来没有施行。
English: Emperor Wei Wu also found it difficult to change the system of shaping objectives with the help of one domain, and this suggestion was left unimplemented.

古文：于是乃定甲子科，犯釱左右趾者易以木械，是时乏铁，故易以木焉。
现代文：于是就制定甲子科，犯了钳左右脚趾罪的用木刑具代替，当时缺少铁，所以用木来代替。
English: As a result, the discipline of Koshika was established, and those who committed the crime of lameness of the right and left toes were replaced with wooden instruments of torture. At that time, there was a shortage of iron, so it was replaced with wood.

古文：又嫌汉律太重，故令依律论者听得科半，使从半减也。
现代文：又嫌汉朝刑律太重，因此下令凡是依照律令论处的判决可以减半，使罪人按减半判决。
English: He also disliked the fact that the Han Dynasty's criminal law was too heavy, so he ordered that any sentence handed down in accordance with the law could be halved, so that the guilty would be sentenced according to the halved sentence.

古文：魏文帝受禅，又议肉刑。
现代文：魏文帝受挥后，又讨论肉刑问题。
English: After Emperor Weiwen was deposed, the issue of corporal punishment was discussed again.

古文：详议未定，会有军事，复寝。
现代文：仔细讨论还没有结果，适逢有战事，又停下了。
English: The careful discussion had not yet come to a conclusion, when war broke out, and it was stopped again.

古文：时有大女刘硃，挝子妇酷暴，前后三妇自杀，论硃减死输作尚方，因是下怨毒杀人减死之令。
现代文：当时有大女刘朱，拷打儿媳非常狠毒，前后有三个儿媳自杀，判处刘朱减免死刑送到尚方关押起来，因此下了怨毒杀人减免死刑的命令。
English: At that time, Liu Zhu, the eldest daughter, tortured her daughter-in-law very viciously, and three daughters-in-law committed suicide before and after. Liu Zhu was sentenced to commutation of the death penalty and sent to Shangfang for detention. Therefore, an order was issued to commute the death penalty for malice murder.

古文：魏明帝改士庶罚金之令，男听以罚金，妇人加笞还从鞭督之例，以其形体裸露故也。
现代文：魏明帝改变士人庶人罚金的法令，男犯判决罚金，妇人加上鞭笞，按鞭打责罚之例，因为她形体裸露的缘故。
English: Emperor Ming of the Wei Dynasty changed the ordinance of fining commoners, male criminals were sentenced to fines, and women were flogged, according to the example of flogging punishment, because she was naked.

古文：是时承用秦汉旧律，其文起自魏文侯师李悝。
现代文：当时沿用秦汉的旧刑律，刑律的文词是魏文侯的老师李悝起草的。
English: At that time, the old criminal law of the Qin and Han dynasties was still in use. The text of the criminal law was drafted by Wei Wenhou's teacher Li Jun.

古文：悝撰次诸国法，著《法经》。
现代文：李悝编集各国的刑法，着成《法经》。
English: Li Xi compiled the criminal laws of various countries and wrote the "Law Book."

古文：以为王者之政，莫急于盗贼，故其律始于《盗贼》。
现代文：认为帝王治理国政，没有比解决盗贼问题更急迫的，所以他的刑律从《盗贼》开头。
English: He thought that there was nothing more urgent for the emperor to do in governing the country than to solve the problem of thieves, so his penal code began with "Thieves."

古文：盗贼须劾捕，故著《网捕》二篇。
现代文：盗贼必须揭发收捕，所以着《网》《捕》二篇。
English: Thieves must be exposed and arrested, so there are two articles on "network" and "arrest."

古文：其轻狡、越城、博戏、借假不廉、淫侈逾制以为《杂律》一篇，又以《具律》具其加减。
现代文：轻狡、越城、博戏、借假不廉、淫侈、逾制造些问题写成《杂律》一篇，又用《具律》列出增加或减去的条目。
English: He wrote a "Miscellaneous Laws" to solve the problems of light cunning, crossing the city, gambling, borrowing and not being cheap, lascivious, and over-manufacturing, and used the "Law of Addition" to list the items to be added or subtracted.

古文：是故所著六篇而已，然皆罪名之制也。
现代文：因此撰著的衹有六篇而已，但都是关于罪名的法令。
English: As a result, there were only six articles written, but they were all about criminal laws.

古文：商君受之以相秦。
现代文：商君学习了以后，用以辅佐秦国。
English: After the merchant studied, he was used to assist Qin.

古文：汉承秦制，萧何定律，除参夷连坐之罪，增部主见知之条，益事律《兴》、《厩》、《户》三篇，合为九篇。
现代文：汉朝沿袭秦朝的旧制，萧何确定律令，删除参夷连坐的罪名，增加部主见知的律条，加上事律《兴》、《厩》、《户》三篇，合为九篇。
English: The Han Dynasty followed the old system of the Qin Dynasty. Xiao He determined the ritsuryo, deleted the crime of "sitting with the barbarians" and "sitting with the barbarians," increased the number of ritsuryo, and added three articles of the ritsuryo, "Hsing," "Stables" and "Households," making nine articles.

古文：叔孙通益律所不及，傍章十八篇。张汤《越宫律》二十七篇。赵禹《朝律》六篇。合六十篇。
现代文：叔孙通增加旧刑律包含不到的，傍章十八篇，张汤《越宫律》二十七篇，赵禹《朝律》六篇，合计六十篇。
English: Uncles and grandsons have added 18 chapters to the old Criminal Law, 27 chapters to Zhang Tang's "Yue Palace Law" and 6 chapters to Zhao Yu's "Morning Law," for a total of 60 chapters.

古文：又汉时决事，集为《令甲》以下三百余篇，及司徒鲍公撰嫁娶辞讼决为《法比都目》，凡九百六卷。
现代文：又把汉朝的时候判断狱讼，编集为《令甲》以下三百余篇，以及司徒鲍公撰著嫁娶辞讼确定为《法比都目》，共九百零六卷。
English: In addition, he compiled more than three hundred court cases involving prison sentences during the Han Dynasty into the following three volumes of "Ling A," and identified the marriage and resignation case written by Szeto Bao Gong as "Fabidotome," a total of nine hundred and six volumes.

古文：世有增损，率皆集类为篇，结事为章。
现代文：每个朝代都有增减，全都是把同类的结集成篇，把相关的条律编次成章。
English: Each dynasty has its ups and downs, all of which are the same type of combination into a chapter, and the relevant rules are organized into chapters.

古文：一章之中或事过数十，事类虽同，轻重乖异。
现代文：一章之中有的不止数十条律令，事类虽然相同，但是判罪轻重并不一样。
English: There are more than dozens of laws and regulations in one chapter. Although the types of things are the same, the severity of the conviction is not the same.

古文：而通条连句，上下相蒙，虽大体异篇，实相采入。
现代文：而整个的遣词造句，前后相承，虽然总体上看不是同一篇，实际上是把以前的采入了。
English: And the whole word-formation-sentence, back and forth, although the overall view is not the same article, is actually the previous one.

古文：《盗律》有贼伤之例，《贼律》有盗章之文，《兴律》有上狱之法，《厩律》有逮捕之事，若此之比，错糅无常。
现代文：《盗律》有贼伤的条例，《贼律》有盗章的文辞，《兴律》有上狱的法令，《厩律》有逮捕的事，诸如此类，杂糅没有准则。
English: "Theft Law" has regulations on injuries caused by theft, "Thief Law" has the wording on theft of seals, "Heng Law" has the decree on imprisonment, "Stable Law" has the matter of arrest, and so on. There is no standard for miscellaneous matters.

古文：后人生意，各为章句。
现代文：后人发挥文意，各自撰著章句。
English: Subsequent generations played with the meaning of the text and wrote their own chapters and sentences.

古文：叔孙宣、郭令卿、马融、郑玄诸儒章句十有余家，家数十万言。
现代文：叔孙宣、郭令卿、马融、郑玄等儒生撰的章句共有十多家，每家都有数十万字。
English: There are more than ten chapters written by Confucian scholars such as Sun Xuan, Guo Lingqing, Ma Rong and Zheng Xuan, each of which has hundreds of thousands of words.

古文：凡断罪所当由用者，合二万六千二百七十二条，七百七十三万二千二百余言，言数益繁，览者益难。
现代文：凡是判罪所应当遵循的条律共有二万六千二百七十二条。七百七十三万二千二百多字，字敷越来越多，读者阅读的难度越来越大。
English: There are altogether twenty-six thousand, two hundred and seventy-two rules that should be followed to convict a criminal, and more than seven million, three hundred and thirty-two thousand and two hundred words, with more and more characters, making it more and more difficult for readers to read.

古文：天子于是下诏，但用郑氏章句，不得杂用余家。
现代文：天子于是下韶，衹用郑氏的章句，不得杂用其他人的。
English: Tianzi then issued an edict that Zheng's chapter and verse should be used, and no one else's should be used.

古文：卫觊又奏曰： 刑法者，国家之所贵重，而私议之所轻贱；狱吏者，百姓之所悬命，而选用者之所卑下。
现代文：卫觊又上奏说： 刑法是国家很注重，而人们私下评议时所轻贱的；狱吏是老百姓的性命所托，而选用的人看不起的。
English: Wei Wei also said in his report: Criminal law is something that the state attaches great importance to, but that people look down on when they discuss it in private; prison guards are entrusted with the lives of ordinary people, but the people who choose them look down on them.

古文：王政之弊，未必不由此也。
现代文：王政的弊病，未必不是因为这个缘故。
English: This was not necessarily the cause of the maladies of the monarchy.

古文：请置律博士，转相教授。 
现代文：请求设置律博士，一批批地教授学生。 
English: Request to set up a law doctorate, teaching students in batches.

古文：事遂施行。
现代文：这意见很快就施行。
English: This opinion will soon come into force.

古文：然而律文烦广，事比众多，离本依末，决狱之吏如廷尉狱吏范洪受囚绢二丈，附轻法论之，狱吏刘象受属偏考囚张茂物故，附重法论之。
现代文：但是刑律文字繁多，事例数量大，舍本求末，断狱的官吏如廷尉狱吏范洪接受囚犯绢布二丈，就比附轻法论处，狱吏刘象接受属下偏辞拷打囚犯张茂致死，比附重法论处。
English: However, the criminal law has a wide variety of texts and a large number of cases, and officials who abandon the principle and seek the end, such as the courtier prison officer Fan Hong accepting the prisoner 布二丈, will be punished according to the light law, and the prison officer Liu Xiang accepting the subordinate's partiality to torture the prisoner Zhang Mao to death, will be punished according to the heavy law.

古文：洪、象虽皆弃市，而轻枉者相继。
现代文：范洪、刘象虽然都被处死，但是得以从轻或受冤枉的一个接着一个。
English: Although both Fan Hong and Liu Xiang were put to death, they were able to get off lightly or were wronged one after another.

古文：是时太傅钟繇又上疏求复肉刑，诏下其奏，司徒王朗议又不同。
现代文：当时太傅钟繇又上疏请求恢复肉刑，皇帝诏令把这个意见交给下臣讨论，司徒王朗的意见又不相同。
English: At that time, Taifu Zhongye again petitioned Shang Shou to resume corporal punishment, and the emperor issued a decree to discuss this opinion with his vassals. The opinion of Szu Wang Lang was also different.

古文：时议者百余人，与朗同者多。
现代文：当时讨论的有一百多人，意见和王朗相同的居多。
English: There were more than a hundred people in the discussion at the time, and most of them had the same opinion as Wang Lang.

古文：帝以吴蜀未平，又寝。
现代文：皇帝以吴蜀还没有平定为理由，又把这件事压下了。
English: The emperor used the fact that Wu Shu had not yet been defeated as a reason to suppress the matter.

古文：其后，天子又下诏改定刑制，命司空陈群、散骑常侍刘邵、给事黄门侍郎韩逊、议郎庾嶷、中郎黄休、荀诜等删约旧科，傍采汉律，定为魏法，制《新律》十八篇，《州郡令》四十五篇，《尚书官令》、《军中令》，合百八十余篇。
现代文：后来，天子又下令改定刑律，命令司空陈群、散骑常侍刘邵、给事黄门侍郎韩逊、议郎庾嶷、中郎黄休、荀说等删减旧法令，广泛地采用汉朝律令，制定为魏律，创制《新律》十八篇，《州郡令》四十五篇，《尚书官令》、《军中令》，合计一百八十余篇。
English: Later, the Son of Heaven also ordered the revision of the Criminal Law, and ordered the magistrate Kuo Chenqun, the horseback riding attendant Liu Shao, the attendant of the Yellow Gate Han Xun, the negotiator Lang Yao, the middle-ranking official Huang Xiu, and the negotiator Wei Wei to delete the old laws and decrees, extensively adopt the Han Dynasty laws and decrees and make them into Wei laws, and create eighteen "New Laws," forty-five "County and County Laws," and more than one hundred and eighty "Official Documents" and "Military Orders."

古文：其序略曰：
现代文：它们的序言大略是说：
English: Their preamble goes something like this:

古文：旧律所难知者，由于六篇篇少故也。
现代文：从前的律令之所以难以了解，是因为六篇篇少的缘故。
English: The reason why the previous ritsuryo code was difficult to understand was because it had only six articles.

古文：篇少则文荒，文荒则事寡，事寡则罪漏。
现代文：篇少文字就少，文字少事类就少，事类少有的罪行就会被漏掉。
English: If there are fewer articles, there will be fewer words, if there are fewer words, there will be fewer categories, and if there are fewer categories, some crimes will be omitted.

古文：是以后人稍增，更与本体相离。
现代文：因此后人逐渐增加，更与本体相分离。
English: As a result, the number of progeny gradually increased, further separating them from the main body.

古文：今制新律，宜都总事类，多其篇条。
现代文：现在制定新律令，应该包括全部事类，增加篇幅条目。
English: Now, when formulating new laws and regulations, it is necessary to include all types of matters and increase the length of articles.

古文：旧律因秦《法经》，就增三篇，而《具律》不移，因在第六。
现代文：旧刑律沿袭秦朝《法经》，仅仅增加三篇，但是《具律》没有改变，仍在第六。
English: The old criminal law followed the Qin Dynasty "Laws" and only added three articles, but the "Laws" did not change and is still in the sixth.

古文：罪条例既不在始，又不在终，非篇章之义。
现代文：犯罪条例既不在开始，也不在末尾，不是篇章应有之义。
English: The Crimes Ordinance is neither at the beginning nor at the end, it is not the proper meaning of the chapter.

古文：故集罪例以为《刑名》，冠于律首。
现代文：因此编集犯罪条例，写成《刑名》，放在刑律的开头。
English: Therefore, the crime regulations were compiled and written as "Sentence Name" and placed at the beginning of the criminal law.

古文：《盗律》有劫略、恐猲、和卖买人，科有持质，皆非盗事，故分以为《劫略律》。
现代文：《盗律》中有劫略、恐猖、和卖买人，科条中有持质，都不是偷盗的事，所以分开，写成《劫略律》。
English: "The Law of Stealing" has robbing, terrorizing, and selling and buying people, and there are qualities in the discipline, which are not theft, so they are separated and written as "The Law of Robbing."

古文：《贼律》有欺谩、诈伪、逾封、矫制、《囚律》有诈伪生死，《令丙》有诈自复免，事类众多，故分为《诈律》。
现代文：《贼律》中有欺馒、诈伪、逾封、矫制，《囚律》有诈伪生死，《令丙》有诈自复免，事类众多，所以分出《诈律》。
English: "The Law of Thieves" includes bullying, fraud, over-sealing, and coercion, "The Law of Imprisonment" includes fraud and life and death, and "Order C" includes fraud and self-removal. There are many types of things, so "The Law of Fraud" is separated.

古文：《贼律》有贼伐树木、杀伤人畜产及诸亡印，《金布律》有毁伤亡失县官财物，故分为《毁亡律》。
现代文：《贼律》有贼伐树木、杀伤人畜和各种逃亡痕迹，《金布律》中有毁伤亡失县官财物，所以分出《毁亡律》。
English: "The Thief's Law" has thieves cutting down trees, killing people and animals, and various traces of escape. "The Golden Rule" has the destruction of casualties and the loss of county official property, so it is separated from "The Destruction Law."

古文：《囚律》有告劾、传覆，《厩律》有告反逮受，科有登闻道辞，故分为《告劾律》。
现代文：《囚律》有告劾、传覆，《厩律》中有告反逮受，每科中有登闻道辞，所以分出《告劾律》。
English: "Imprisonment Law" has accusation and subpoena, "School Law" has accusation and counter-arrest, and each subject has a speech, so "Impeachment Law" is separated.

古文：《囚律》有系囚、鞫狱、断狱之法，《兴律》有上狱之事，科有考事报谳，宜别为篇，故分为《系讯》、《断狱律》。
现代文：《囚律》有系囚、鞫狱、断狱的方法，《兴律》有上狱的事，科条有考事报谳，应该另外成一篇，所以分为《系讯》、《断狱律》。
English: "Penal Law" has the methods of incarceration, imprisonment, and breaking out of prison, "Enforcement Law" has the matter of going to prison, and the discipline has the examination report, which should be a separate article, so it is divided into "Communication" and "Breaking out of Prison."

古文：《盗律》有受所监受财枉法，《杂律》有假借不廉，《令乙》有呵人受钱，科有使者验赂，其事相类，故分为《请赇律》。
现代文：《盗律》中有受所监受财枉法，《杂律》有假借不廉，《令乙》中有呵人受钱，科条中有使者查验贿赂情况，这些事情相近似，所以分为《请赇律》。
English: In "Theft Law," there is a similar case of a prisoner receiving bribe. In "Miscellaneous Laws," there is a case of fraud. In "Order B," there is a case of a corrupt person receiving bribe. In the Criminal Law, there is a case of an emissary investigating bribery. These cases are similar, so they are divided into "Bribe Laws."

古文：《盗律》有勃辱强贼，《兴律》有擅兴徭役，《具律》有出卖呈，科有擅作修舍事，故分为《兴擅律》。
现代文：《盗律》有勃辱强贼，《兴律》有擅自征发徭役，《具律》有出卖呈，科条中有擅作修舍事，所以分为《兴擅律》。
English: "Theft Law" has the offense of robber, "Promotion Law" has the offense of soliciting without authorization, "Supply Law" has the offense of selling, and "Cultivation Law" has the offense of practicing without authorization, so it is divided into "Promotion Law."

古文：《兴律》有乏徭稽留，《贼律》有储峙不辨，《厩律》有乏军之兴，及旧典有奉诏不谨、不承用诏书，汉氏施行有小愆之反不如令，辄劾以不承用诏书乏军要斩，又减以《丁酉诏书》，《丁酉诏书》，汉文所下，不宜复以为法，故别为之《留律》。
现代文：《兴律》有乏徭稽留，《贼律》有储峙不办，《厩律》有乏军乏兴，以及旧典法中有奉韶不谨、不承用韶书，漠氏施行有小过错不改正不听从命令，每每用不承用诏书乏军腰斩，又用《丁酉诏书》来减罪，《丁酉诏书》是汉文帝颁布的，不应该再用作刑法了，因此另外作为《留律》。
English: "Hengrui" has the meaning of "lack of diligence," "Thief's Law" has the meaning of "do not deal with," "Stable Law" has the meaning of "lack of army," and "Old Code" has the meaning of "not honorable" and "not using the book," "Moshi" has the meaning of "not correcting minor mistakes" and "not obeying orders," "Mei Mei" has the meaning of "not using the imperial edict" and "not using the imperial edict" and "Ding Mei" has the meaning of "mitigating crimes." "Ding Mei" was promulgated by Emperor Hanwen and should

古文：秦世旧有厩置、乘传、副车、食厨，汉初承秦不改，后以费广稍省，故后汉但设骑置而无车马，则律犹著其文，则为虚设，故除《厩律》，取其可用合科者，以为《邮驿令》。
现代文：秦代原来有厩置、乘传、副车、食厨，汉朝初年沿袭秦朝不改，后来因为费用太多逐渐减省，所以后汉祇设置驿骑而没有车马，但是刑律上还写着先前的文字，那么这是形同虚设了，所以删除《厩律》，把其中值得采用和符合法令的撷取出来，写成《邮驿令》。
English: In the Qin Dynasty, there were originally stables, horse-drawn carriages, side cars, and food kitchens. The Han Dynasty followed the Qin Dynasty in the first year and did not change. Later, because the cost was too much, it was gradually reduced. Therefore, after the Han Dynasty, only horse-drawn carriages were set up, but there were no horses and carriages. However, the previous words were still written on the criminal law, so this was nothing more than nothing. Therefore, the "Stables Law" was deleted, and the provisions that were worth adopting and in line with the law were taken out and written into the "Postal Order."

古文：其告反逮验，别入《告劾律》。
现代文：那些控告谋反抓住检验的，另外归入《告劾律》。
English: Those who accuse others of plotting against the seizure and examination are also included in the "Law of Accusation."

古文：上言变事，以为《变事令》，以惊事告急，与《兴律》烽燧及科令者，以为《惊事律》。
现代文：向上反映事变的，写成《变事令》，拿惊人的事向上告急，与《兴律》烽燧以及法令相合的，写成《惊事律》。
English: If it reflects the changes to the top, it is written as the "Order of Changes," if it is urgent to take the surprising thing to the top, it is written as the "Law of Surprise" if it is consistent with the "Law of Rejoicing" and the laws and regulations.

古文：《盗律》有还赃畀主，《金布律》有罚赎入责以呈黄金为价，科有平庸坐赃事，以为《偿赃律》。
现代文：《盗律》有把脏物归还失主，《金布律》有罚赎入责以呈黄金为报偿，法令有平庸坐脏事，把它写成《偿脏律》。
English: "Theft Law" has the return of dirty things to the owner, "Golden Rule" has the penalty of redemption and the obligation to present gold as a reward, the decree has the banality of dirty things, and it is written as "Dirty Law."

古文：律之初制，无免坐之文，张汤、赵禹始作监临部主、见知故纵之例。
现代文：刑律开始创制时，没有免于连坐的条文，张汤、趟禹开始创制监临部主、见知故纵的条例。
English: When the Penal Code was first created, there was no provision exempting people from sitting together. Zhang Tang and Watan Yu began to create regulations for supervising the arrival of the head of the inspection department, and for knowing what to do.

古文：其见知而故不举劾，各与同罪，失不举劾，各以赎论，其不见不知，不坐也，是以文约而例通。
现代文：那些看见而且了解罪犯却故意不检举揭发的，全都与罪犯同罪，罪犯逃跑了不检举揭发的，都按赎罪论处，没看到又不知情的，不算犯罪，因此条文简约但条例宏通。
English: Those who see and know the criminal but deliberately fail to report and expose him are all guilty of the same crime as the criminal. If the criminal escapes without reporting and exposing him, they are all punished according to the atonement theory. If you do not see and do not know, it is not a crime. Therefore, the provisions are simple but the regulations are extensive.

古文：科之为制，每条有违科，不觉不知，从坐之免，不复分别，而免坐繁多，宜总为免例，以省科文，故更制定其由例，以为《免坐律》。
现代文：科令制度中，每条有违科，不知不觉，与免于连坐，不再分别，但是免于连坐的情况很多，应该写一个总的免坐条例，以便少写一些条文，因此又制定坐免的条例，作为《免坐律》。
English: In the system of imperial edicts, there is a violation of science in every article, unconsciously, and it is no longer distinguished from the exemption from sitting together, but there are many cases of exemption from sitting together. A general exemption from sitting should be written in order to write fewer provisions. Therefore, the regulation of exemption from sitting should be formulated as the "Exemption from sitting."

古文：诸律令中有其教制，本条无从坐之文者，皆从此取法也。
现代文：律令中各有教制，本条没有从坐条文的，都从此取法。
English: Each of the ritsuryo codes has its own teaching system. This article is not derived from the sesshin, but from this.

古文：凡所定增十三篇，就故五篇，合十八篇，于正律九篇为增，于旁章科令为省矣。
现代文：确定增补的有十三篇，加上原来的五篇，合起来共十八篇，对正律九章来说算作增加，对旁章科令而言则是减省了。
English: There are 13 articles that have been definitely added, and the addition of the original five articles brings the total to 18 articles, which is an increase for the regular nine chapters, and a reduction for the side chapters.

古文：改汉旧律不行于魏者皆除之，更依古义制为五刑。
现代文：更改汉朝旧律，凡是在魏朝时无法施行的，都废除，另外依据古义制定五刑。
English: The old laws of the Han Dynasty were amended, and those that could not be enforced during the Wei Dynasty were abolished. In addition, five punishments were established according to the ancient meaning.

古文：其死刑有三，髡刑有四，完刑、作刑各三，赎刑十一，罚金六，杂抵罪七，凡三十七名，以为律首。
现代文：死刑有三种，髡刑有四种，完刑、作刑各有三种，赎刑十一种，罚金六种，杂抵罪七种，共三十七种，作为律令的开头。
English: There are three kinds of death penalty, four kinds of flogging, three kinds of complete punishment and three kinds of punishment, eleven kinds of atonement, six kinds of fines, seven kinds of misdemeanors, a total of thirty-seven kinds, as the beginning of the ritsuryo.

古文：又改《贼律》，但以言语及犯宗庙园陵，谓之大逆无道，要斩，家属从坐，不及祖父母、孙。
现代文：又改动《贼律》，衹以言语冒犯宗庙园陵，称为大逆无道，腰斩，家属从坐，但不涉及祖父祖母、孙子。
English: He also amended the "Thieves' Law" to punish those who use words to offend the ancestral temple gardens and tombs, which is called "high treason" and is punishable by beheading, and family members are punished, but it does not apply to grandparents and grandchildren.

古文：至于谋反大逆，临时捕之，或汙潴，或枭菹，夷其三族，不在律令，所以严绝恶迹也。
现代文：至于谋反大逆，则在事发的时候收捕，有的污潴，有的枭菹，诛灭三族，不写在律令中，是为了严格禁绝这种丑恶行为。
English: As for conspiring to commit high treason, they were arrested at the time of the incident. Some of them were for defilement, some for sedition, and some for annihilating the three ethnic groups. This was not written in the ritsuryo in order to strictly prohibit such heinous acts.

古文：贼斗杀人，以劾而亡，许依古义，听子弟得追杀之。
现代文：残杀格斗杀了人，因为被揭发而逃跑，可以依照古义，判决死者的儿子兄弟可以追杀他。
English: In accordance with the ancient meaning, the brother of the son of the deceased may pursue and kill him.

古文：会赦及过误相杀，不得报仇，所以止杀害也。
现代文：赶上赦免和过失杀人，不得报仇，这是用来阻止互相杀害。
English: Catch-up pardons and manslaughter without retribution are used to deter mutual killing.

古文：正杀继母，与亲母同，防继假之隙也。
现代文：惩治杀害继母，和杀害亲母的罪行一样，这是防止与继母闹矛盾。
English: Punishing the crime of killing a stepmother is the same as punishing the crime of killing a biological mother. It is to prevent conflicts with the stepmother.

古文：除异子之科，使父子无异财也。
现代文：删除异子的律条，是要使父子没有异财。
English: The deletion of the rule for illegitimate children is to ensure that the father and son do not have different fortunes.

古文：欧兄姊加至五岁刑，以明教化也。
现代文：殴打哥哥姐姐加到五年的刑罚，用以申明教化。
English: Beating an older sibling carries a five-year sentence and is used as an affirmation of indoctrination.

古文：囚徒诬告人反，罪及亲属，异于善人，所以累之使省刑息诬也。
现代文：囚徒诬告别人谋反，罪行牵涉到亲属，和善人不一样，这是用来为难囚徒，使他减省刑罚不再诬告。
English: Unlike good people, prisoners who falsely accuse others of plotting rebellion and whose crimes involve their relatives, are used to help difficult prisoners, so that they can reduce their sentences and stop making false accusations.

古文：改投书弃市之科，所以轻刑也。
现代文：修改投书弃市的律条，这是为了减轻刑罚。
English: Amending the law on the abandonment of books in order to reduce the penalty.

古文：正篡囚弃市之罪，断凶强为义之踪也。
现代文：订正篡囚弃市的罪行，这是为了断绝凶暴强横做义事的行为。
English: The revision of the crime of tampering with and abandoning the city, which is to cut off the act of doing righteous deeds with ferocity and violence.

古文：二岁刑以上，除以家人乞鞫之制，省所烦狱也。
现代文：二年以上的刑罚，删除家人乞鞫的法令，这是要减省烦琐的狱讼。
English: Penalties of more than two years, the deletion of the family begging law, this is to reduce the cumbersome prison litigation.

古文：改诸郡不得自择伏日，所以齐风俗也。
现代文：修改为各郡不得白行选择伏日，这是要统一风俗。
English: The amendment states that counties may not arbitrarily choose the date of the festival, which is to unify customs.

古文：斯皆魏世所改，其大略如是。
现代文：这些都是魏世所修改的，大略就是这个样子。
English: These were all modified by the Wei dynasty, and roughly look like this.

古文：其后正始之间，天下无事，于是征西将军夏侯玄、河南尹李胜、中领军曹羲、尚书丁谧又追议肉刑，卒不能决。
现代文：在正始年间，天下太平，于是征西将军夏侯玄、河南尹李胜、中领军曹羲、尚书丁谧又追议肉刑，最终也没能有结果。
English: At the beginning of the year, the country was at peace, so the Western Conquest generals Xia Houxuan, Henan Yin Lisheng, and the middle-ranking officers Cao Qi and Shang Shuding also discussed the use of corporal punishment, but in the end, nothing came of it.

古文：其文甚多，不载。
现代文：其中文字非常多，不载录了。
English: There's a lot of text in it, so it's not recorded.

古文：及景帝辅政，是时魏法，犯大逆者诛及已出之女。
现代文：到了景帝辅佐国政，当时的魏法，犯了大逆不道罪的，诛杀范围直到已经嫁出去的女儿。
English: By the time of Emperor Jing's accession to the throne, Wei Fa at that time, those who had committed high treason and crimes of immorality could not be killed until they had married off their daughters.

古文：毋丘俭之诛，其子甸妻荀氏应坐死，其族兄顗与景帝姻，通表魏帝，以匄其命。
现代文：忸丘俭被诛死时，他儿子母丘甸的妻子苟氏应该连坐处死，她的堂兄荀颛和景帝是亲家，上表给魏帝，要求饶她一命。
English: When Gong Qiu Jian was strangled to death, his son's mother, Qudian's wife, Guo Shi, should have been sentenced to death. Her cousin, Gong, who was related to Emperor Jing, went to Emperor Wei and asked for her life to be spared.

古文：诏听离婚。
现代文：皇帝判他们离婚。
English: The emperor ordered them to divorce.

古文：荀氏所生女芝，为颍川太守刘子元妻，亦坐死，以怀妊系狱。
现代文：荀氏所生的女儿册丘芝，是颖川太守刘子元的妻子，也连坐处死，因为怀孕而收捕在狱中。
English: His daughter, Chuan Qiu Zhi, the wife of Liu Ziyuan, the governor of Yingchuan, was also sentenced to death. She was arrested in prison because she was pregnant.

古文：荀氏辞诣司隶校尉何曾乞恩，求没为官婢，以赎芝命。
现代文：荀氏致辞司隶校尉何曾请求开恩，请求没为官婢，用来赎母丘芝的性命。
English: In the speech delivered by Mr. Zou, the captain of the brigade, Col. Ho, asked for mercy, asking not to be used as a servant to redeem the life of his mother, Qiu Zhi.

古文：曾哀之，使主簿程咸上议曰： 夫司寇作典，建三等之制；甫侯修刑，通轻重之法。
现代文：何曾可怜她，让主簿程咸上书说： 司寇修订法典，建立三等的法制；甫侯制定刑法，叙述轻重的法律。
English: He once pitied her and had the master book Cheng Xian write: Scor revised the code and established a third-class legal system; Fuhou formulated the criminal law and described important laws.

古文：叔世多变，秦立重辟，汉又修之。
现代文：衰落的时代变动多，秦朝设立重刑，汉朝又修改了。
English: The era of decline has seen many changes. The Qin Dynasty established severe punishment, and the Han Dynasty revised it.

古文：大魏承秦汉之弊，未及革制，所以追戮已出之女，诚欲殄丑类之族也。
现代文：大魏沿袭秦漠的弊病，没有来得及改革，施行的追加杀戮已经出嫁的女儿之法，实在是想诛灭丑类的亲族。
English: The Great Wei Dynasty followed the evil of the Qin Dynasty, and did not have time to reform. The method of additional killing of daughters who had already married was really an attempt to exterminate ugly relatives.

古文：然则法贵得中，刑慎过制。
现代文：这样，那么法律贵在能够适中，刑罚要注意别超越制度。
English: In this way, the law can be moderate, and the punishment should be careful not to exceed the system.

古文：臣以为女人有三从之义，无自专之道，出适他族，还丧父母，降其服纪，所以明外成之节，异在室之恩。
现代文：臣下认为女人有三从的道义，没有自作主张的道理，出嫁到了别的宗族，回来为父母奔丧时降低服纪，这是用来表明女子出嫁的礼节，区别在室的恩情。
English: Subordinates believe that women have the morality of the three followers, and do not have the principle of self-assertion. When a woman marries into another clan and comes back to grieve for her parents, she will lower her obedience. This is used to show the etiquette of a woman's marriage, distinguishing the grace in the room.

古文：而父母有罪，追刑已出之女；夫党见诛，又有随姓之戮。
现代文：而父母有罪，追加处罚已经出嫁的女儿；丈夫的党族被诛罚，又要跟着受到杀戮。
English: If the parents are guilty, the daughter who is already married will be punished additionally; if the husband is a member of the party, he will be punished and killed.

古文：一人之身，内外受辟。
现代文：一个人的身体，在内在外都受刑罚。
English: A man's body will be punished both inside and out.

古文：今女既嫁，则为异姓之妻；如或产育，则为他族之母，此为元恶之所忽。
现代文：女子既然出嫁，就成了异姓的妻子；如果生了孩子，就做了其他宗族的母亲，这是推究罪恶时所忽视的。
English: When a woman marries, she becomes the wife of a man with a different surname; if she has a child, she becomes the mother of another clan, which is ignored when investigating the crime.

古文：戮无辜之所重，于防则不足惩奸乱之源，于情则伤孝子之心。
现代文：杀戮无辜的高昂代价，对于预防犯罪来说不足以惩戒奸乱的源头，对于情理来说则有伤孝子之心。
English: The high cost of killing innocents is not enough to prevent crime and punish the source of sexual turmoil, but it hurts the feelings of filial piety.

古文：男不得罪于他族，而女独婴戮于二门，非所以哀矜女弱，蠲明法制之本分也。
现代文：男子不因其他宗族而获罪，女子反倒会因两个宗族而被杀戮，追不是用来怜悯柔弱女子，彰明法制的恰当做法。
English: A man is not punished for belonging to another clan, but a woman is killed for belonging to two clans. This is not an appropriate way to show mercy to a weak woman, but to demonstrate the rule of law.

古文：臣以为在室之女，从父母之诛；既醮之妇，从夫家之罚。
现代文：臣下认为还没有结婚的女子，应该跟从父母受诛杀；已经出嫁的妇人，就应当跟从夫家受处罚。
English: The vassals thought that a woman who was not married should be killed for following her parents; a woman who was married should be punished for following her husband.

古文：宜改旧科，以为永制。 
现代文：应该更改原来的法律，并作为永久的制度。 
English: The original law should be amended and made permanent.

古文：于是有诏改定律令。
现代文：于是皇帝下诏改定律令。
English: So the emperor issued an edict to change the law.

古文：文帝为晋王，患前代律令本注烦杂，陈群、刘邵虽经改革，而科网本密，又叔孙、郭、马、杜诸儒章句，但取郑氏，又为偏党，未可承用。
现代文：文帝做晋王时，为前代的律令条文和注释烦杂而发愁，虽然经过了陈群、刘邵删改，但是科条非常繁密，又叔孙、郭、马、杜各儒在作章句时，衹宗法郑玄，又过于偏颇，不能沿用。
English: When Emperor Wen was the king of Jin, he was worried about the previous generation's complicated ritsuryo articles and commentaries. Although Chen Qun and Liu Shao edited and revised them, the articles were very complicated, and when the uncle and grandson, Guo, Ma, and Du Guoru made the chapter and verse, Zheng Xuan's method was too biased and could not be used.

古文：于是令贾充定法律，令与太傅郑冲、司徒荀顗、中书监荀勖、中军将军羊祜、中护军王业、廷尉杜友、守河南尹杜预、散骑侍郎裴楷、颍川太守周雄、齐相郭颀、骑都尉成公绥、尚书郎柳轨及吏部令史荣邵等十四人典其事，就汉九章增十一篇，仍其族类，正其体号，改旧律为《刑名》、《法例》，辨《囚律》为《告劾》、《系讯》、《断狱》，分《盗律》为《请赇》、《诈伪》、《水火》、《毁亡》，因事类为《卫宫》、《违制》，撰《周官》为《诸侯律》，合二十篇，六百二十条，二万七千六百五十七言。
现代文：于是命令贾充改定法律，并命令和太傅郑冲、司徒荀颉、中书监荀勖、中军将军羊祜、中护军王业、廷尉杜友、守河南尹杜预、散骑侍郎裴楷、颍川太守周雄、齐相郭颀、骑都尉成公绥、尚书郎柳塾及吏部令史茔泾等十四人掌管这件事，就龃九章增加十一篇，沿用它的分类，订正它的体例和编列次序，改旧刑律为《刑名》、《法例》，辨正《囚律》为《告劾》、《系讯》、《断狱》，分《盗律》为《请赇》、《诈伪》、《水火》、《毁亡》，依据事类分为《卫宫》、《违制》，撰著《周官》为《诸侯律》，一共二十一篇，六百二十条，二万七千六百五十七字。
English: Therefore, he ordered Jia Chong to amend the law, and ordered 14 people to be in charge of the matter, including Taifu Zhengchong, Sittu Yan, Censors of Chinese Books, General of the Chinese Army Yang Yan, Custodians of the Chinese People's Liberation Army Wang Ye, Courtier Du You, Henan Governor Yin Du Yuan, Sanzhijian Attendant Pei Kai, Zhangchuan Governor Zhou Xiong, Cavalry Lieutenant Cheng Gongyi, Shang Shulang Liu Ju and the Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs Shi Yan. He added 11 articles to the Nine Chapters of the Criminal Law, followed its classification, revised its style and

古文：蠲其苛秽，存其清约，事从中典，归于益时。
现代文：删除了苛刻繁碎的条文，保存了清正简约的，事件采纳法典上的，但以对时事有益为宗旨。
English: The harsh and cumbersome provisions were deleted, and the clear and concise ones were preserved. The cases were adopted from the legal code, but with the aim of being beneficial to current affairs.

古文：其余未宜除者，若军事、田农、酤酒，未得皆从人心，权设其法，太平当除，故不入律，悉以为令。
现代文：其余不宜删除的，如军事、田农、酤酒，没有能够全都遵从人们的意见，权且设立法令，天下太平的时候将要删去，因此不列入刑律，全都作为法令。
English: The rest that are not suitable for deletion, such as the military, farmers, and alcoholics, have not been able to fully comply with people's opinions, and the power to establish legal decrees will be deleted when the world is at peace. Therefore, they are not included in the Criminal Law, and all of them are regarded as decrees.

古文：施行制度，以此设教，违令有罪则入律。
现代文：施行制度时，以此设立教化，违反法令犯了罪的，按刑律论处。
English: When the implementation of the system, the establishment of indoctrination, in violation of the law committed a crime, according to the criminal law.

古文：其常事品式章程，各还其府，为故事。
现代文：其中常事的品式章程，各自归到官署，这有先例。
English: There is a precedent for each of the standing articles of association to be assigned to a government agency.

古文：减枭斩族诛从坐之条，除谋反適养母出女嫁皆不复还坐父母弃市，省禁固相告之条，去捕亡、亡没为官奴婢之制。
现代文：删减枭斩族诛从坐这些条文，删除原有条律，谋反罪嫡母养母已出嫁的女儿都不再因父母被处决而受到牵连，减省勒令不许作官互相告发的条文，删除捕亡、亡没为官奴婢的制度。
English: These articles were deleted, and the original provisions were deleted, such as the provision that a married daughter of a treasonous adoptive mother would no longer be implicated in the execution of her parents, the provisions prohibiting officials from denouncing each other were deleted, and the system of capturing, killing, and dying for official slaves was deleted.

古文：轻过误老少女人当罚金杖罚者，皆令半之。
现代文：小过失和耽误老少女人应当罚款和杖罚的，都下令减半。
English: For minor faults and delays, fines and cane punishments for women of all ages were ordered to be halved.

古文：重奸伯叔母之令，弃市。
现代文：加重奸淫伯母叔母的法令，弃市。
English: Aggravated adultery aunt aunt's decree, abandoned the city.

古文：淫寡女，三岁刑。
现代文：奸淫寡妇的，判三年刑。
English: A man who raped a widow was sentenced to three years in prison.

古文：崇嫁娶之要，一以下娉为正，不理私约。
现代文：尊崇嫁娶的约定，全都以下聘礼为标准，不审理私下约定。
English: To respect and honor the agreement of marriage, all the following wedding gifts shall be the standard, and the private agreement shall not be considered.

古文：峻礼教之防，准五服以制罪也。
现代文：严格礼教大防，以五服为准则裁断罪行。
English: Strict rules of etiquette and etiquette prevention, with the five services as the criterion for adjudicating crimes.

古文：凡律令合二千九百二十六条，十二万六千三百言，六十卷，故事三十卷。
现代文：律令合起来共有二干九百二十六条，十二万六千三百字，六十卷，先例三十卷。
English: Altogether, there are 2926 articles, 126,300 words, 60 volumes, and 30 volumes of precedents.

古文：泰始三年，事毕，表上。
现代文：泰始三年，法律改定完成，上表给皇帝。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, the revision of the law was completed, and the above table was given to the emperor.

古文：武帝诏曰： 昔萧何以定律令受封，叔孙通制仪为奉常，赐金五百斤，弟子百人皆为郎。
现代文：武帝下韶说： 当年芦包因为制定律令受封赏，叔孙通因为制定礼仪做了奉常，赏赐五百斤金，弟子一百人全都作郎。
English: Emperor Wu said: In those days, Lubao was rewarded with a title of nobility for establishing the Ritsuryo, his uncle Sun Tong was rewarded with five hundred kilos of gold for establishing the etiquette, and all of his one hundred disciples became his vassals.

古文：夫立功立事，古今之所重，宜加禄赏，其详考差叙。
现代文：立功立事，是古往今来所看重的，应该加以封赏官禄希望详细考察各人的先后。
English: Meritorious service has been valued from ancient times to the present, and should be rewarded with an official salary. I hope that the success of each person will be examined in detail.

古文：辄如诏简异弟子百人，随才品用，赏帛万余匹。 
现代文：马上依韶书挑选一百名弟子，按照他们的才能授予官职，奖赏帛一万余匹。 
English: He immediately selected one hundred disciples according to the Book of Zhou, granted them official positions according to their talents, and rewarded them with more than ten thousand horses.

古文：武帝亲自临讲，使裴楷执读。
现代文：武帝亲自到场讲授，使裴揩宣读。
English: Emperor Wu himself was present to give a lecture, which was read out by Pei Jun.

古文：四年正月，大赦天下，乃班新律。
现代文：四年正月，大赦天下，于是颁布新法律。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, there was a general amnesty, and a new law was promulgated.

古文：其后，明法掾张裴又注律，表上之，其要曰：
现代文：后来，明法掾张裴又注释刑律，并上表皇帝，大要是说：
English: Later, the legal scholar Zhang Pei also annotated the Criminal Law and presented it to the emperor, saying roughly:

古文：律始于《刑名》者，所以定罪制也；终于《诸侯》者，所以毕其政也。
现代文：刑律从《刑名》开始，是用以确定罪制；到《诸侯》结束，是为了全面反映王政。
English: The criminal law, from the beginning of the "Sentence," is used to determine the criminal system; to the end of "The Princes," it is used to fully reflect the royal government.

古文：王政布于上，诸侯奉于下，礼乐抚于中，故有三才之义焉，其相须而成，若一体焉。
现代文：王政从上面发布，诸侯在下面奉行，礼乐在中间调节，所以有三才的说法，它们相莉相成，好像是一个整体。
English: The king's policy is issued from above, the lords follow it below, and the music is adjusted in the middle, so the saying that there are three talents, they complement each other, seems to be a whole.

古文：《刑名》所以经略罪法之轻重，正加减之等差，明发众篇之多义，补其章条之不足，较举上下纲领。
现代文：《刑名》用来规定罪法轻重，订正加罪减罪的等差，阐明各篇的多种义理，补充条文的不足，大略地举出上下纲领。
English: The "Sentence Name" is used to stipulate the severity of the criminal law, revise the difference between adding and subtracting crimes, clarify the multiple justifications of each article, supplement the deficiencies of the provisions, and outline the upper and lower programs.

古文：其犯盗贼、诈伪、请赇者，则求罪于此，作役、水火、畜养、守备之细事，皆求之作本名。
现代文：凡有犯了盗贼、诈伪、请赇的，都从造裹找到罪行，凡是作役、水火、畜养、守备这些小事，都从中定出恰当的名称。
English: Anyone who has committed theft, fraud, or solicited bribes will find the crime from the work, and all the small things such as work, water and fire, animal husbandry, and guarding will determine the appropriate name from it.

古文：告讯为之心舌，捕系为之手足，断狱为之定罪，名例齐其制。
现代文：控告审讯作它的心舌，收捕拘押作它的手足，断狱为它定罪，名例统一它的体制。
English: Indictment and trial are its heart and soul, arrest and detention are its limbs, imprisonment is its conviction, and its system is unified by famous cases.

古文：自始及终，往而不穷，变动无常，周流四极，上下无方，不离于法律之中也。
现代文：自始至终，往复无穷，变动无常，周转流行到四面八方，或上或下没有一定之规，脱离不开法律之中。
English: From beginning to end, there is endless back-and-forth, change is impermanent, turnover is prevalent in all directions, and there is no certain rule above or below, and it is impossible to break away from the law.

古文：其知而犯之谓之故，意以为然谓之失，违忠欺上谓之谩，背信藏巧谓之诈，亏礼废节谓之不敬，两讼相趣谓之斗，两和相害谓之戏，无变斩击谓之贼，不意误犯谓之过失，逆节绝理谓之不道，陵上僭贵谓之恶逆，将害未发谓之戕，唱首先言谓之造意，二人对议谓之谋，制众建计谓之率，不和谓之强，攻恶谓之略，三人谓之群，取非其物谓之盗，货财之利谓之赃：凡二十者，律义之较名也。
现代文：知法犯法叫做故，心裹认为正确叫做失，不忠心、欺瞒上司叫做馒，背弃信用、内藏奸巧叫做诈，没有礼节叫做不敬，两个诉讼人互相催促叫做斗，友好的两方互相伤害叫做戏，没有变故就斩击叫做贼，无意中误犯叫做过失，违逆节操违反道理叫做不道，欺犯上司僭越而显贵叫做恶逆，将行害人但还没有动手叫做戕，首先倡议叫做造意，二人一起商议叫做谋，指挥众人、提出计策叫做率，不和叫做强，攻击恶人叫做略，三人叫做群，收取了不应属于自己的东西叫做盗，货财中的利益叫做脏：所有这二十种，是律义大略的名称。
English: Knowing the law and breaking the law is called the reason, thinking that the law is right is called the loss, disloyalty, deceiving the boss is called cheating, betraying trust, concealing treachery is called fraud, having no etiquette is called disrespect, two litigants urging each other is called a fight, two friendly parties hurting each other is called a play, without changing the reason it is called a thief, unintentionally committing a crime is called a mistake, disobeying discipline and violating reason is called immorality, cheating the boss is called evil, committing a crime but not yet doing it is called cheating, the first initiative is called creativity, two people discussing together is called

古文：夫律者，当慎其变，审其理。
现代文：刑律，应当慎重地对待修改，审察其中的道理。
English: When making amendments to the Criminal Law, it is necessary to be prudent and examine the reasons for the amendments.

古文：若不承用诏书，无故失之刑，当从赎。
现代文：如果不是承用诏书，又没有故失的刑罚，应当听从赎罪。
English: If the imperial edict is not accepted, and there is no punishment due to negligence, atonement should be made.

古文：谋反之同伍，实不知情，当从刑。
现代文：谋反的同伙，确实不知内情的，应当给予刑罚。
English: The accomplices of the plotters, who really did not know the inside story, should be punished.

古文：此故失之变也。
现代文：这是故失的变例。
English: This is a variation of the fallacy of omission.

古文：卑与尊斗，皆为贼。
现代文：地位低的人与地位高的人争斗，都是贼。
English: A low-ranking person fights with a high-ranking person. Both are thieves.

古文：斗之加兵刃水火中，不得为戏，戏之重也。
现代文：在争斗中使用了兵刃水火的，不能算作戏，比戏严重。
English: The use of the sword, water and fire in the fight, can not be regarded as a play, it is a serious play.

古文：向人室庐道径射，不得为过，失之禁也。
现代文：向别人的房屋或道路上射箭，不能算作遇，这是被禁止的故失。
English: Shooting arrows at someone's house or on the road is not considered a chance, it is a forbidden mistake.

古文：都城人众中走马杀人，当为贼，贼之似也。
现代文：在都城的人群中跑马杀人，应当算作贼，因为与贼相似。
English: He who rides a horse and kills a man in the midst of a crowd in the capital city shall be considered a thief, for he is like a thief.

古文：过失似贼，戏似斗，斗而杀伤傍人，又似误，盗伤缚守似强盗，呵人取财似受赇，囚辞所连似告劾，诸勿听理似故纵，持质似恐猲。
现代文：过失与贼相似，戏与斗相似，斗时杀伤旁人，又舆误相似，盗取伤人财物捆绑看守与强盗相似，呵责人、收取财物与受赇相似，囚徒的言辞所关涉的与告劾相似，各种不听理与故纵相似，劫持人质与恐吓相似。
English: The fault is similar to the thief, the play is similar to the fight, the killing of others during the fight is similar, and the mistake is similar, the theft of the injured person's property and the binding of the guard are similar to the robber, the reproach of the person and the collection of the property are similar to the beating, the prisoner's speech is similar to the accusation, the various disobedience is similar to the prevarication, and the hostage-taking is similar to the intimidation.

古文：如此之比，皆为无常之格也。
现代文：诸如此类，都是没有定规的变格。
English: And so on, all of which are irregular declensions.

古文：五刑不简，正于五罚，五罚不服，正于五过，意善功恶，以金赎之。
现代文：五刑不能核实，就用五罚来补正，五罚不能治罪，就用五过来补正，本意不坏却做了坏事，用金钱赎罪。
English: If the five punishments cannot be verified, the five punishments will be used to make amends. If the five punishments cannot punish the crime, the five punishments will be used to make amends. If the intention is not bad, but the person has done something bad, the money will be used to atone for the crime.

古文：故律制，生罪不过十四等，死刑不过三，徒加不过六，囚加不过五，累作不过十一岁，累笞不过千二百，刑等不过一岁，金等不过四两。
现代文：所以在律制中，生罪不超过十四等，死刑不超过三种，徒加不超过六种，囚加不超过五种，累计不超过十一年，笞刑加起来不超过一千二百种，刑等不超过一年，金等不超过四两。
English: Therefore, in the legal system, there are no more than fourteen kinds of birth crime, no more than three kinds of death penalty, no more than six kinds of punishment, no more than five kinds of imprisonment, no more than eleven years in total, no more than twelve hundred kinds of flogging, no more than one year of punishment, and no more than four years of fine.

古文：月赎不计日，日作不拘月，岁数不疑闰。
现代文：月赎不计零头的天数，日作不拘泥在哪一个月，数年头时不担心闰月。
English: The moon does not count the number of days in a fraction, the day is not rigidly in which month, and there is no worry about the leap month at the beginning of the year.

古文：不以加至死，并死不复加。
现代文：不因为加罪而判死刑，都判死刑的不再加罪。
English: If the death penalty is not imposed for an aggravated crime, it shall not be imposed for any other crime.

古文：不可累者，故有并数；不可并数，乃累其加。
现代文：不能累加，因此有并罚；不能并罚，就累加刑罚。
English: It cannot be cumulative, so it is a concurrent punishment; if it cannot be concurrent, it is a cumulative punishment.

古文：以加论者，但得其加；与加同者，连得其本。
现代文：按累加谕处的，衹能算加起来的罪；与累加等同的，一并算到原来的数额。
English: According to the Accumulation Regulation, the sins that can be added up are those that are equal to the accumulated amount, and the original amount is added together.

古文：不在次者，不以通论。
现代文：不在次序的，不算入总数。
English: If they are not in order, they are not included in the total.

古文：以人得罪与人同，以法得罪与法同。
现代文：因为人而获罪的舆人同，因为违法而获罪的与法同。
English: Those who are guilty because they are human are the same as human beings, and those who are guilty because they violate the law are the same as the law.

古文：侵生害死，不可齐其防；亲疏公私，不可常其教。
现代文：侵害活人损害死人，不能统一处罚；亲疏公私，不能总是一种教训。
English: Infringing on the living and harming the dead cannot be uniformly punished; the separation of public and private cannot always be a lesson.

古文：礼乐崇于上，故降其刑；刑法闲于下，故全其法。
现代文：礼乐受到上面的尊崇，所以颁下刑法；刑法规范下面的行为，所以保全刑法。
English: The criminal law was promulgated because ceremonial music was revered by the upper class; the criminal law regulated the behavior of the lower class, so the criminal law was preserved.

古文：是故尊卑叙，仁义明，九族亲，王道平也。
现代文：因此尊卑有序，仁义彰明，九族亲睦，王道平坦。
English: Therefore, there is an orderly hierarchy, benevolence and righteousness are highlighted, the nine ethnic groups are amicable, and the royal road is smooth.

古文：律有事状相似而罪名相涉者，若加威势下手取财为强盗，不自知亡为缚守，将中有恶言为恐猲，不以罪名呵为呵人，以罪名呵为受赇，劫召其财为持质。
现代文：刑律中有事状相似而罪名相关的，如利用威势下手取财为强盗，不知道自己逃跑为缚守，办事中有恫吓威胁的话为恐吓，不拿罪名呵责为呵人，以罪名呵责为受赇，劫取索要他人的财物为持质。
English: In criminal law, there are cases with similar circumstances and related charges, such as robbers who take advantage of their power to obtain money, criminals who do not know when to run away, intimidation and threats in business, criminals who do not take charges as punishment, criminals who take charges as punishment, and robbers who hold the property of others as a pledge.

古文：此六者，以威势得财而名殊者也。
现代文：这六点，以威势得到财物但名称不同。
English: These six points are all about using one's strength to obtain wealth, but they have different names.

古文：即不求自与为受求，所监求而后取为盗赃，输入呵受为留难，敛人财物积藏于官为擅赋，加欧击之为戮辱。
现代文：即不索求自动给予为受求，先是监求而后索取为盗脏，输入呵责收受钱物为留难，敛取他人财物积藏在官府为擅赋，加上殴打为戮辱。
English: That is to say, not asking for automatic giving is being asked for, first monitoring the request and then asking for it is stealing, inputting and blaming and receiving money is difficult, collecting other people's property and accumulating it in the government is unauthorized, and beating is humiliating.

古文：诸如此类，皆为以威势得财而罪相似者也。
现代文：诸如此类，都是用威势得到财物而罪行相似的。
English: All of these are similar crimes of using one's power to obtain property.

古文：夫刑者，司理之官；理者，求情之机，情者，心神之使。
现代文：刑是掌管理的职官，理是寻求情的器械，情是心神的使者。
English: Punishment is the official in charge of management, reason is the instrument for seeking emotion, and emotion is the messenger of the mind.

古文：心感则情动于中，而形于言？暢于四支，发于事业。
现代文：心中有感应情就在裹面发动，表现到言语上，直通到四肢，宣发到事业。
English: If there is a feeling in the heart, it will be unleashed on the face, expressed in words, through to the limbs, and promulgated to the cause.

古文：是故奸人心愧而面赤，内怖而色夺。
现代文：因此好人心中愧疚而脸红，内心害怕而脸上变色。
English: Therefore, a good person blushes with guilt in his heart, and turns pale with fear in his heart.

古文：论罪者务本其心，审其情，精其事，近取诸身，远取诸物，然后乃可以正刑。
现代文：论罪的人务必推究罪犯内心的真实想法，审察他的情感，知悉他的犯罪事实，近处取法自身，远处取法万物，然后才可以正确运用刑法。
English: Those who discuss crime must investigate the true thoughts of the criminal's heart, examine his emotions, know his criminal facts, take the law itself from the near place, and take everything from the far place, and then they can correctly apply criminal law.

古文：仰手似乞，俯手似夺，捧手似谢，拟手似诉，拱臂似自首，攘臂似格斗，矜庄似威，怡悦似福，喜怒忧欢，貌在声色。
现代文：手心向上与乞讨相似，手心向下与抢夺相似，两手相捧与答谢相似，两手指划与诉说相似，手臂相拱像是要自首，捋起衣袖露出手臂像是要格斗，矜持庄重与威严相近，神情怡悦与幸福相近，喜怒忧欢，表现在声音和脸色上。
English: The upward palm is similar to begging, the downward palm is similar to snatching, the two hands are similar to thanking, the two fingers are similar to telling, the arm is arched as if to surrender, the sleeves are rolled up and the arm is exposed as if to fight, the solemnity is similar to majesty, the mood is similar to happiness, and the emotions are expressed in the voice and face.

古文：奸真猛弱，候在视息。
现代文：是奸是真是强是弱，衹须察看他的目光和呼吸。
English: Whether the traitor is really strong or weak, we have to look at his eyes and breath.

古文：出口有言当为告，下手有禁当为贼，喜子杀怒子当为戏，怒子杀喜子当为贼。
现代文：有话说出口应当是告，动手犯禁应当是贼，喜子杀死怒子应当为戏，怒子杀死喜子应当是贼。
English: There is a saying that the exit should be a complaint, the perpetrator of the ban should be a thief, the killing of anger by anger should be a play, the killing of anger by anger should be a thief.

古文：诸如此类，自非至精不能极其理也。
现代文：诸如此类，除非是极为精通，否则不能完全弄通其中的道理。
English: And so on, and so on, and so on, and so on, and so on, and so on, and so on, and so on.

古文：律之名例，非正文而分明也。
现代文：刑律的名例，不是正文却分明。
English: The famous example of criminal law is not the main text, but it is clear.

古文：若八十，非杀伤人，他皆勿论，即诬告谋反者反坐。
现代文：比如到了八十岁，除了杀伤人，其他都不追究，如果诬告别人谋反要反坐。
English: For example, when you reach the age of eighty, you will not be investigated for anything other than homicide. If you falsely accuse others of plotting to rebel, you will be punished.

古文：十岁，不得告言人；即奴婢捍主，主得谒杀之。
现代文：十岁时，不得告发别人；如果奴婢顶撞主人，主人可以告发杀死他。
English: At the age of ten, it is forbidden to denounce others; if a slave resists his master, the master may denounce and kill him.

古文：贼燔人庐舍积聚，盗赃五匹以上，弃市；即燔官府积聚盗，亦当与同。
现代文：贼人焚烧他人的房屋积聚，偷盗赃物五匹以上的，弃市；如果焚烧官府积聚和偷盗，也应当一样。
English: Thieves burn other people's houses to accumulate, steal stolen goods of five or more, abandon the city; if they burn government offices to accumulate and steal, the same should be done.

古文：欧人教令者与同罪，即令人欧其父母，不可与行者同得重也。
现代文：殴打人和教唆的人罪行相同，如果让人殴打父母，不能和殴打的人等同。
English: The batterer and the instigator are guilty of the same crime. If you let someone beat your parents, you cannot be equated with the person who beat them.

古文：若得遗物强取强乞之类，无还赃法随例畀之文。
现代文：比如得到遣物强取强讨之类，没有归还脏物法随例畀的条文。
English: For example, there is no provision for the return of the dirty goods law, such as forcibly taking and forcibly discussing the stolen goods.

古文：法律中诸不敬，违仪失式，及犯罪为公为私，赃入身不入身，皆随事轻重取法，以例求其名也。
现代文：法律中各种不敬，不合乎礼仪范式，以及犯罪是为公还是为私，脏物是否已被个人占有，都是依照事实轻重采用法律，用事例去找出名称。
English: In the law, all kinds of irreverence, not conforming to the etiquette paradigm, as well as whether the crime is public or private, whether the dirty things have been occupied by individuals, are in accordance with the importance of the facts to adopt the law, and use cases to find the name.

古文：夫理者，精玄之妙，不可以一方行也；律者，幽理之奥，不可以一体守也。
现代文：理这个东西是玄妙之中最玄妙的，不能用一种方法来施行；律这个东西是幽玄之理中最深奥的，不能用一种体制去执行。
English: This thing of reason is the most subtle of the subtle, and cannot be carried out by one method; this thing of law is the most profound of the subtle reason, and cannot be carried out by one system.

古文：或计过以配罪，或化略以循常，或随事以尽情，或趣舍以从时，或推重以立防，或引轻而就下。
现代文：有时是计算过失来定罪，有时是变化法度以遵循常理，有时是依照事实以推究真实情况，有时是有所选择以顺从时宜，有时是加重处罚以防止犯罪，有时是从轻处理以顺从下情。
English: Sometimes it is to calculate the fault to convict, sometimes it is to change the law to follow common sense, sometimes it is to follow the facts to investigate the real situation, sometimes it is to choose to obey the times, sometimes it is to increase the punishment to prevent crime, and sometimes it is to treat lightly to obey the circumstances.

古文：公私废避之宜，除削重轻之变，皆所以临时观衅，使用法执诠者幽于未制之中，采其根牙之微，致之于机格之上，称轻重于豪铢，考辈类于参伍，然后乃可以理直刑正。
现代文：公私废避的大义，削除轻重的变化，都是为了随时察看情况变化，使执法者隐蔽在还没裁决的时候，采集到像根芽这样微小的迹象，把它放到相应规格上，称出极微小事物的轻重，在复杂情况中考察出同一类别，这样以后才可以做到道理充分，判刑得当。
English: The public-private avoidance of justice, and the elimination of changes in weight and importance, are all for the purpose of observing changes in the situation at any time, so that the law enforcers can hide when there is no ruling, collect signs as small as root buds, put it on the corresponding specifications, weigh the weight and importance of very small things, and examine the same category in complex situations, so that later it can be fully justified and sentenced appropriately.

古文：夫奉圣典者若操刀执绳，刀妄加则伤物，绳妄弹则侵直。
现代文：执行法律就好比操持刀和绳墨，刀乱砍就会伤害他物，绳墨乱弹就会影响平直。
English: Enforcing the law is like wielding a knife and a rope of ink. If the knife cuts randomly, it will hurt other things, and if the rope shoots randomly, it will affect the straightness.

古文：枭首者恶之长，斩刑者罪之大，弃市者死之下，髡作者刑之威，赎罚者误之诫。
现代文：枭首说明恶行最烈，斩刑说明罪行大，弃市在死刑之下，髡刑是要体现刑法的威严，赎罚是要惩戒所犯下的过失。
English: Dagger indicates the most violent crime, beheading indicates the most serious crime, abandoning the city is under the death penalty, flogging is to reflect the majesty of criminal law, and atonement is to punish the mistakes committed.

古文：王者立此五刑，所以宝君子而逼小人，故为敕慎之经，皆拟《周易》有变通之体焉。
现代文：君王设立遣五种刑罚，是为了爱护君子，对小人形成压力，因此写出教诫谨慎的经典，都仿拟《周易》有变通的体例。
English: The king established five kinds of punishments, in order to protect the gentleman and put pressure on the villain, so he wrote a cautionary classic, all of which imitated the flexible style of "Zhou Yi."

古文：欲令提纲而大道清，举略而王法齐，其旨远，其辞文，其言曲而中，其事肆而隐。
现代文：要使提纲挈领就能大道清平，标举大略就能王法齐备，它的意思深远，它的文辞优美，它的语言详尽而恰当，它的叙事奔放而含蓄。
English: If you want to make the outline clear, the road will be smooth, and the outline will be complete. Its meaning is far-reaching, its rhetoric is beautiful, its language is detailed and appropriate, and its narrative is unrestrained and subtle.

古文：通天下之志唯忠也，断天下之疑唯文也，切天下之情唯远也，弥天下之务唯大也，变无常体唯理也，非天下之贤圣，孰能与于斯！
现代文：通达天下之志的衹有忠，裁定天下的疑难衹有文，切合天下之情的衹有远，弥合天下的事情衹有大，变化无常态的衹有理，如果不是天下的圣贤，谁能够参与这些事情!
English: If it is not the sages of the world, who can participate in these things? It is the faithful who can reach the world's aspirations, the scholars who can judge the world's difficulties, the far-sighted who can meet the world's feelings, and the great and ever-changing who can bridge the world's affairs.

古文：夫刑而上者谓之道，刑而下者谓之器，化而裁之谓之格。
现代文：形而上的叫做道，形而下的叫做器，化而裁之叫做格。
English: The metaphysical is called the Tao, the metaphysical is called the vessel, and the metaphysical is called the lattice.

古文：刑杀者是冬震曜之象，髡罪者似秋雕落之变，赎失者是春阳悔吝之疵之。
现代文：刑杀是冬天电闪雷鸣之象，犯髡罪就像是秋天草木凋落的变化，赎回过失就好像是春阳悔恨的疵病。
English: Capital punishment is like the thunder and lightning in winter, the crime of slander is like the change of the fall of the grass and trees in autumn, and the redemption of the fault is like the defect of the spring sun remorse.

古文：五刑成章，辄相依准，法律之义焉。
现代文：五刑自成格局，相互依准。造就是法律的大义。
English: The five punishments are self-contained and mutually consistent. The creation is the great justice of the law.

古文：是时侍中卢珽、中书侍郎张华又表： 抄《新律》诸死罪条目，悬之亭传，以示兆庶。 
现代文：当时侍中卢埏、中书侍郎张华又上表； 抄写《新律》各条死罪条目，悬挂到邮亭驿传上，用来宣示亿万百姓。 
English: At that time, Lu Wei, the Vice-President of the CPC, and Zhang Hua, the Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China, went to the table again; they copied all the articles of the "New Law" of the death penalty, hung it on the post office, and used it to proclaim to hundreds of millions of people.

古文：有诏从之。
现代文：皇帝下诏同意。
English: The emperor agreed to this by imperial edict.

古文：及刘颂为廷尉，频表宜复肉刑，不见省，又上言曰：
现代文：到了刘颂做廷尉，多次上表说应该恢复肉刑，没有得到审察，又上表说：
English: When he came to Liu Song as a court lieutenant, he repeatedly said on the table that corporal punishment should be resumed, without being examined, and said on the table:

古文：臣昔上行肉刑，从来积年，遂寝不论。
现代文：臣下从前上表建议施行肉刑，已经多年，终于搁置不予讨论。
English: It has been many years since the vassal recommended the execution of corporal punishment in the previous table, but it has finally been shelved and will not be discussed.

古文：臣窃以为议者拘孝文之小仁，而轻违圣王之典刑，未详之甚，莫过于此。
现代文：臣下私下认为商讨的人拘泥于孝文帝的小仁义，轻忽和违背了圣王的常刑，不审察的严重程度，再没有超过这样的了。
English: Privately, the vassals thought that the negotiators were sticking to the petty benevolence of Emperor Xiaowen, and that they had violated the holy king's capital punishment. The severity of the non-scrutiny did not exceed this.

古文：今死刑重，故非命者众；生刑轻，故罪不禁奸。
现代文：如果死刑太重，所以有很多人死于非命；生刑太轻，所以罪罚无法禁止犯法。
English: If the death penalty is too severe, many people will die a violent death; if the life sentence is too light, the crime will not be prohibited.

古文：所以然者，肉刑不用之所致也。
现代文：出现这种情况的原因，是不施用肉刑造成的。
English: The reason for this is the absence of physical punishment.

古文：今为徒者，类性元恶不轨之族也，去家悬远，作役山谷，饥寒切身，志不聊生，虽有廉士介者，苟虑不首死，则皆为盗贼，岂况本性奸凶无赖之徒乎！
现代文：现在那些服劳役的人，大抵都是本性凶恶的不轨的人，远离家乡，在山谷中做苦役，挨饿受冻，立志不过逭样的生活，即使有廉洁耿介之士，如果想不先死，就都要做盗贼，何况本性奸凶无赖之徒呢!
English: Nowadays, those who serve as forced laborers are mostly evil-natured deviants, far away from home, doing hard labor in the valley, starving and freezing, determined to live a shabby life. Even if there are incorruptible people, if they don't want to die first, they have to be thieves, let alone natural traitors and scoundrels!

古文：又令徒富者输财，解日归家，乃无役之人也。
现代文：又让役徒中富有的交出财物，过些时曰就送回家，成了不服劳役的人。
English: In addition, the rich among the indentured servants were made to hand over their property, and after some time they were sent home and became people who did not accept labor service.

古文：贫者起为奸盗，又不制之虏也。
现代文：贫穷的人起来做奸人盗贼，又是无法制服的虏人。
English: The poor have risen up to be traitors and thieves, and they are a people who cannot be subdued.

古文：不刑，则罪无所禁；不制，则群恶横肆。
现代文：不用严刑，就无法禁止犯罪；不遏制，就有许多凶恶之人为所欲为。
English: Without severe punishment, there is no way to prohibit crime; without restraint, there are many evil people who do whatever they want.

古文：为法若此，近不尽善也。
现代文：制定了这样的法律，是浅陋不完善的。
English: If such a law is enacted, it will be shallow and imperfect.

古文：是以徒亡日属，贼盗日烦，亡之数者至有十数，得辄加刑，日益一岁，此为终身之徒也。
现代文：因此役徒逃跑的天天都有，贼盗一天天增多，逃跑多的时候一天有十多批，随意加重刑罚，逃跑一天劳役增加一年，造就终身是役徒了。
English: As a result, the number of servants running away is increasing day by day, the number of thieves and robbers is increasing day by day, and when there is a lot of running away, there are more than ten batches a day, the punishment is arbitrarily increased, and the labor service is increased by one year a day, resulting in lifelong servants.

古文：自顾反善无期，而灾困逼身，其志亡思盗，势不得息，事使之然也。
现代文：役徒自己考虑归善是遥遥无期的，心中想着逃跑和做盗贼，势必不能停止，这是世事使他们这样的。
English: It is far-fetched for the servants to think about turning to the good. They cannot stop thinking about running away and being thieves. This is what the world has made them do.

古文：古者用刑以止刑，今反于此。
现代文：古时用刑是为了不用刑，现在正与此相反。
English: In the old days, punishment was used to avoid punishment, but now the opposite is happening.

古文：诸重犯亡者，发过三寸辄重髡之，此以刑生刑；加作一岁，此以徒生徒也。
现代文：各个逃跑的重犯，如果头发超过三寸长的，总是重新使用髡刑，这是用刑罚生出刑罚；增加劳役一年，追是用徒役生出徒役。
English: If the hair of a fugitive recidivist is more than three inches long, the flogging will always be repeated, which is to use punishment to produce punishment, increase the labor service by one year, and chase is to use labor service to produce labor service.

古文：亡者积多，系囚猥畜。
现代文：逃跑的人越来越多，抓到的囚徒也大量积聚。
English: More and more people are escaping, and a large number of prisoners have been caught.

古文：议者曰囚不可不赦，复从而赦之，此为刑不制罪，法不胜奸。
现代文：决策者说囚徒不可不赦免，又接着赦免了他们，造就是刑罚不能制止犯罪，刑法治不了奸凶。
English: Policymakers said that prisoners must not be pardoned, and then pardoned them, which means that punishment cannot stop crime, and punishment cannot rule out evil-doers.

古文：下知法之不胜，相聚而谋为不轨，月异而岁不同。
现代文：下面的人知道法律不济事，聚集起来图谋不轨，每月每年都有新情况。
English: The people below know that the law doesn't work, so they gather to plot and scheme. Every month, every year, there is a new situation.

古文：故自顷年以来，奸恶陵暴，所在充斥。
现代文：因此近年以来，奸恶的人欺凌和压迫别人，到处都充斥着。
English: As a result, in recent years, malicious people have been abounding everywhere to bully and oppress others.

古文：议者不深思此故，而曰肉刑于名忤听，忤听孰与贼盗不禁？
现代文：决策者不深思它的原因，而说肉刑从名声上不好听，名声不好听哪裹比得上贼盗禁止不了?
English: Policymakers do not think deeply about the reasons for it, but say that corporal punishment is bad from the point of view of reputation. How can a bad reputation be compared to theft?

古文：圣王之制肉刑，远有深理，其事可得而言，非徒惩其畏剥割之痛而不为也，乃去其为恶之具，使夫奸人无用复肆其志，止奸绝本，理之尽也。
现代文：圣王在制定肉刑的时候，有深刻的道理，这些事是可以说明白的，不衹是惩治罪犯害怕剥皮割肉的痛苦而不敢犯罪，而是要除掉他作恶的工具，使那些奸人无法再为所欲为，遏止奸恶，从根本上断绝，这就是全部的道理。
English: When the holy king instituted corporal punishment, he had a profound reason, and these things can be made clear. It was not to punish the criminal for fear of the pain of skinning and cutting the flesh, so that he would not dare to commit crimes, but to remove his tools of evil, so that those traitors could no longer do whatever they wanted, to stop the evil, and to fundamentally break it off. This is the whole reason.

古文：亡者刖足，无所用复亡。盗者截手，无所用复盗。
现代文：对逃跑的罪犯砍掉他的脚，让他无法再次逃跑。对偷盗者截断他的手，让他无法再偷盗。
English: For the criminal who escapes, cut off his foot so that he cannot escape again; for the thief, cut off his hand so that he cannot steal again.

古文：淫者割其势，理亦如之。
现代文：对奸淫者割掉他的生殖器，道理也是一样。
English: So is it lawful for a fornicator to cut off his genitals.

古文：除恶塞源，莫善于此，非徒然也。
现代文：除恶就要堵住源头，没有比这更好的了，并不是徒劳。
English: To get rid of evil, it is necessary to stop the source. There is nothing better than this, and it is not in vain.

古文：此等已刑之后，便各归家，父母妻子，共相养恤，不流离于涂路。
现代文：这些人经过肉刑之后，就各自回家，让父母妻儿一起抚养他，不让他们流落在外。
English: After the physical torture, these people went home separately, and let his parents, wife and children raise him together, and did not allow them to be exiled.

古文：有今之困，创愈可役，上准古制，随宜业作，虽已刑残，不为虚弃，而所患都塞，又生育繁阜之道自若也。
现代文：今日的困窘，创伤痊愈之后就可以干活，往上看符合古制，又随情况不同而采取相应的行动，虽说已是刑残之人，但也并没有被抛弃，而所担心的祸害全都杜绝。又使得生育繁盛之道不受损害。
English: Today's predicament, after the wound is healed, it is possible to work, look up in accordance with the ancient system, and take corresponding actions according to different situations. Although it is already a disabled person, it has not been abandoned, and the feared scourge has all been eliminated. And the way of fertility and prosperity is not damaged.

古文：今宜取死刑之限轻，及三犯逃亡淫盗，悉以肉刑代之。
现代文：现在应该减轻死刑的限度，以及三犯逃亡、奸淫、偷盗，全都用肉刑代替。
English: Now it is time to reduce the scope of the death penalty, and to replace the three crimes of escape, adultery, and theft with corporal punishment.

古文：其三岁刑以下，已自杖罚遣，又宜制其罚数，使有常限，不得减此。
现代文：服三年以下刑罚的，用杖打自己来惩罚，还应该规定惩罚的数量，使之有一定的限度，不能少于这个限度。
English: If a person serving a sentence of less than three years is punished by beating himself with a cane, the number of punishments should also be stipulated, so that there is a certain limit and cannot be less than this limit.

古文：其有宜重者，又任之官长。
现代文：其中有应该重罚的，又委任给官员。
English: Some of them should be punished severely, and they should be assigned to officials.

古文：应四五岁刑者，皆髡笞，笞至一百，稍行，使各有差，悉不复居作。
现代文：服四五年刑罚的，全都用髡刑和鞭刑，鞭到一百下，渐渐实行，使得各有差别，全部不再罚令服劳役。
English: For those who have served four or five years of punishment, they will all be punished with flogging and whipping, up to 100 lashes, gradually implemented, so that each has a difference, and all will no longer be ordered to serve labor.

古文：然后刑不复生刑，徒不复生徒，而残体为戳，终身作诫。
现代文：这样以后，刑罚不再产生刑罚，徒役不再生出徒役，而残害肢体作为刑辱，成了终身的惩诫。
English: After this, punishment no longer produces punishment, and penal servitude no longer produces penal servitude, but the mutilation of limbs as a punishment and humiliation has become a lifelong discipline.

古文：人见其痛，畏而不犯，必数倍于今。
现代文：人们看见那痛苦的样子，心中害怕不敢犯罪，一定会比现在多数倍。
English: People will see that painful look and be afraid not to commit a crime, and they will certainly be more numerous than they are now.

古文：且为恶者随发被刑，去其为恶之具，此为诸已刑者皆良士也，岂与全其为奸之手足，而蹴居必死之穷地同哉！
现代文：而且作恶的人随著作的恶行受刑，除去了作恶的工具，逭就是说各个受遇刑的人都是好人了，这岂能和保全罪犯作恶的手脚，而一脚把他踢到必死的绝望境地相同呢!
English: Moreover, evil-doers are punished according to their evil deeds, and the instruments of evil-doing are removed, that is to say, all those who are punished are good people. Is this not the same as preserving the criminal's evil hands and feet, and kicking him into a desperate situation where he will die?

古文：而犹曰肉刑不可用，臣窃以为不识务之甚也。
现代文：但是还有人说肉刑不可施行，臣下私下认为这是很不识时务的。
English: However, there were also those who said that corporal punishment should not be carried out. Privately, courtiers thought that this was very out of touch with the times.

古文：臣昔常侍左右，数闻明诏，谓肉刑宜用，事便于政。
现代文：臣下从前常常侍奉在皇上身边，多次听到圣明的诏令，认为肉刑应当采用，此事便于治理国政。
English: In the past, vassals often served at the emperor's side, and many times they heard the Emperor's edict and believed that corporal punishment should be used, which would facilitate the administration of state affairs.

古文：愿陛下信独见之断，使夫能者得奉圣虑，行之于今。
现代文：希望陛下相信见解独到的论断，使那些贤良的人能够遵奉圣明的谋虑，在今天施行。
English: It is to be hoped that His Majesty will have confidence in the wisdom of his judgment, and that those who are wise will act in accordance with his wise counsel today.

古文：比填沟壑，冀见太平。
现代文：全都填塞沟壑，希望见到太平。
English: They are all filling in the ravines, hoping to see peace.

古文：《周礼》三赦三宥，施于老幼悼耄，黔黎不属逮者，此非为恶之所出，故刑法逆舍而宥之。
现代文：《周礼》中有三赦三宥，施用在老年和幼年人身上，黎民百姓不受牵连。是因为这不是产生罪恶的地方，因此刑法反过来宽宥了他们。
English: In the "Weekly Ritual," there are three pardons and three amnesties, which are applied to the elderly and the young, and the Li people are not implicated. Because this is not a place where evil is generated, the criminal law in turn pardoned them.

古文：至于自非此族，犯罪则必刑而无赦，此政之理也。
现代文：至于不属于这种人的，犯了罪一定要用刑罚，不能赦免，这是处理政事的道理。
English: As for those who do not belong to this kind of person, if they commit a crime, they must be punished and cannot be pardoned. This is the principle of handling political affairs.

古文：暨至后世，以时嶮多难，因赦解结，权以行之，又不以宽罪人也。
现代文：到了后世，因为时世多难，趁着赦免解除冤结，苟且施用，又不用来宽宥罪人。
English: In the hereafter, because of the difficulties of the times, forgiveness is used to undo wrongs, but it is not used to forgive sinners.

古文：至今恆以罪积狱繁，赦以散之，是以赦愈数而狱愈塞，如此不已，将至不胜。
现代文：至今常常因为罪犯案件积聚太多，用赦免来分流，因此赦免越频繁案件越多，这种情况不停止，将会导致不能承受。
English: So far, amnesty has often been used to divert the flow of criminals because of the accumulation of too many cases. Therefore, the more frequent the amnesty, the more cases there will be. If this situation does not stop, it will lead to unbearable.

古文：原其所由，内刑不用之故也。
现代文：推究它的原因，是不用肉刑的缘故。
English: The reason for this is that it does not use physical punishment.

古文：今行肉刑，非徒不积，且为恶无具则奸息。
现代文：现在施行肉刑，不但不会增加案件，而且作恶的人没有了作恶能力，奸恶将会止息。
English: Now that corporal punishment is being carried out, not only will there be no increase in the number of cases, but the evil-doers will no longer have the ability to do evil, and the evil-doing will cease.

古文：去此二端，狱不得繁，故无取于数赦，于政体胜矣。
现代文：除去遣两个方面，案件不会增加，因此不用取法于多次赦免，而在政教方面取胜。
English: Excluding the two aspects of expulsion, the cases will not increase, so there is no need to resort to multiple pardons, but to win in politics and religion.

古文：疏上，又不见省。
现代文：疏文奏上，又不见答覆。
English: There was no reply to the letter.

古文：至惠帝之世，政出群下，每有疑狱，各立私情，刑法不定，狱讼繁滋。
现代文：到了惠帝的时候，政令出自大臣，每当有疑难案件的时候，大臣们都各自讲私情，刑法没有定规，诉讼越来越多。
English: When it came to Hui Di, the decree came from the minister. Whenever there was a difficult case, the ministers all talked about their personal feelings. The criminal law was not fixed, and there were more and more lawsuits.

古文：尚书裴頠表陈之曰：
现代文：尚书裴顿上表陈说道：
English: Shangshu Pei suddenly stood up and said:

古文：夫天下之事多涂，非一司之所管；中才之情易扰，赖恆制而后定。
现代文：天下的事情有多方面，不是某种官员可以管得了的；中才之人情志容易被扰乱，依赖永久的制度才能安定。
English: The affairs of the world are multifaceted, and cannot be managed by a certain type of official; the sentiments of middle-class people are easily disturbed, and they can only be stabilized by relying on a permanent system.

古文：先王知其所以然也，是以辨方分职，为之准局。
现代文：先王知道个中原因，所以辨别方位分立官职，划分职责范围。
English: The late king knew the reason for this, so he differentiated the positions, separated the posts, and divided the areas of responsibility.

古文：准局既立，各掌其务，刑赏相称，轻重无二，故下听有常，群吏安业也。
现代文：职责范围划分以后，各自掌管事务，刑罚和奖赏相称，轻重一致，因而理讼有一定的标准，官吏们安于职守。
English: After the division of responsibilities, each of them is in charge of affairs, the punishment and reward are commensurate, and the weight is the same. Therefore, there is a certain standard for litigation, and officials are satisfied with their duties.

古文：旧宫掖陵庙有水火毁伤之变，然后尚书乃躬自奔赴，其非此也，皆止于郎令史而已。
现代文：过去宫掖陵庙遭遇了水火毁伤的变故，这样以后尚书才亲自奔赴，如果不足这样，都是衹到郎令史而已。
English: In the past, the imperial mausoleum and imperial mausoleum were damaged by fire and water, so Shang Shuxu went there in person later. If this is not enough, it is just the history of the lordship.

古文：刑罚所加，各有常刑。
现代文：刑罚所施加，各有常刑。
English: Each of the sentences imposed is a term of imprisonment.

古文：去元康四年，大风之后，庙阙屋瓦有数枚倾落，免太常荀寓。
现代文：元康四年，大风之后，宫庙屋瓦有数枚掉下来，太常荀寓被免职。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Yuan Kang, after a strong wind, several tiles of the palace and temple roof tiles fell down, and Taizhang was dismissed from his post.

古文：于时以严诏所谴，莫敢据正。
现代文：当时因为严厉的诏书所谴责，所以没有人敢据理力争。
English: At that time, no one dared to argue on the basis of reason because it was condemned by a stern edict.

古文：然内外之意，佥谓事轻责重，有违于常。
现代文：但是朝廷内外的意思，都认为事故轻而责罚重，有违于常规。
English: However, both inside and outside the imperial court believed that the accident was light and the punishment was heavy, which was contrary to the norm.

古文：会五年二月有大风，主者惩惧前事。
现代文：适逢五年二月有大风，主管人为从前的事感到惊惧。
English: In February of the same year, there was a strong wind, and the superintendent was alarmed by what had happened.

古文：臣新拜尚书始三日，本曹尚书有疾，权令兼出，按行兰台。
现代文：臣下刚刚拜任尚书三天，本曹尚书有病，权且让臣下兼理，巡行兰台。
English: His vassal had just been appointed to Shangshu for three days, but Ben Cao Shangshu was ill, so he gave his vassal the power and responsibility to lead the parade.

古文：主者乃瞻望阿栋之间，求索瓦之不正者，得栋上瓦小邪十五处。
现代文：主管人于是察看栋梁之间，寻找不端正的瓦片，找到栋梁上歪斜的瓦片十五处。
English: The supervisor then looked between the beams, looking for irregular tiles, and found 15 crooked tiles on the beams.

古文：或是始瓦时邪，盖不足言，风起仓卒，台官更往，太常按行，不及得周，文书未至之顷，便竞相禁止。
现代文：有的是开始砌时瓦就不正，大概是不值得提起，大风突然刮起，台官纷纷前往，太常去巡视，没来得及办周到，文书还没有到，就竞相囚禁。
English: Some began to lay tiles at the wrong time, it is probably not worth mentioning, the wind suddenly blew, the Taiwan officials went to visit, too often to inspect, did not have time to do a thorough job, the documents had not arrived, they competed to be imprisoned.

古文：臣以权兼暂出，出还便罢，不复得穷其事。
现代文：臣下因为权力仓猝交出，交出了便作罢，不再能够推究这件事。
English: Due to the sudden transfer of power, the vassal gave up and was no longer able to investigate the matter.

古文：而本曹据执，却问无已。
现代文：但是本曹紧追不舍，没完没了地询问。
English: But Bencao is in hot pursuit, asking endless questions.

古文：臣时具加解遣，而主者畏咎，不从臣言，禁止太常，复兴刑狱。
现代文：臣下当时全都加以遣散，但是主管人害怕追究责任，不听从臣下的意见，囚禁太常，又大兴刑罚。
English: The subordinates were all dismissed at that time, but the supervisors were afraid of being held responsible, did not listen to the opinions of the subordinates, the imprisonment was too frequent, and the punishment was too severe.

古文：昔汉氏有盗庙玉环者，文帝欲族诛，释之但处以死刑，曰： 若侵长陵一抔土，何以复加？ 
现代文：当年汉朝时有个人偷了太庙中的玉环，汉文帝想减其族，张释之衹处以死刑，说： 如果侵害了长陵的一杯土，还能再增加什么刑罚? 
English: During the Han Dynasty, there was a man who stole a jade ring from the Great Temple. Emperor Wen of Han wanted to reduce his family, so Zhang Xizhi sentenced him to death. He said, "If one cup of earth from Changling is stolen, what punishment can be added?"

古文：文帝从之。
现代文：文帝听从了他的意见。
English: Emperor Wen listened to his advice.

古文：大晋垂制，深惟经远，山陵不封，园邑不饰，墓而不坟，同乎山壤，是以丘阪存其陈草，使齐乎中原矣。
现代文：大晋流传下制度，考虑得深，规划得远，山陵不封植，园邑不整饰，立墓而不建坟，与山上的泥土同在，因此山丘上存留有它的陈草，使和中原的草一起生长。
English: The system passed down from the Great Jin Dynasty was well thought out and far-reaching in its planning. The mountains were not sealed, the gardens were not decorated, the tombs were not built, and the soil on the mountains was the same. As a result, its old grasses remained on the hills, causing the grasses of the Central Plains to grow together.

古文：虽陵兆尊严，唯毁发然后族之，此古典也。
现代文：即使陵墓庄重威严，衹有在毁坏之后才减族，这是古来的典制。
English: Even if the mausoleum is solemn and dignified, it is only after the destruction that the family is reduced, which is an ancient system.

古文：若登践犯损，失尽敬之道，事止刑罪可也。
现代文：如果登上去冒犯，失去了尽敬之道，衹对所犯的罪进行责罚就是了。
English: If you get on board and offend, you have lost the path of respect, and it is up to you to punish the crime committed.

古文：去八年，奴听教加诬周龙烧草，廷尉遂奏族龙，一门八口并命。
现代文：就在八年，奴仆受人教唆诬赖周龙烧草，廷尉于是上奏请求灭周龙一族，一家八日都要杀。
English: In just eight years, the servants were instigated to blame Zhou Long for burning grass, and the courtier then made a request to destroy Zhou Long's family, and the whole family was to be killed in eight days.

古文：会龙狱翻，然后得免。
现代文：适逢周龙的案子真相大白，这样才免于被灭族。
English: The truth of Zhou Long's case came to light at the right time, and only in this way could he be saved from being exterminated.

古文：考之情理，准之前训，所处实重。
现代文：用情理来推究，用古训来衡量，这个处罚是过重了。
English: Using reason to investigate, using ancient teachings to measure, this punishment is too heavy.

古文：今年八月，陵上荆一枝围七寸二分者被斫，司徒太常，奔走道路，虽知事小，而案劾难测，搔扰驱驰，各竞免负，于今太常禁止未解。
现代文：今年八月，陵墓上一枝周长七寸二分粗的荆木被砍掉，司徒太常都为遣件事在路上奔波劳碌，虽然知道事情很小，但是案件处理难以猜测，操劳奔走，各自竞相逃脱责任，到现在太常被囚禁还没有释放。
English: In August of this year, a seven-inch-and-two-quarter-thick thorn tree on the mausoleum was chopped down. Although he knew that the case was small, it was difficult to guess how the case would be handled. They were running around, competing with each other to escape responsibility. To this day, he has been imprisoned and has not been released.

古文：近日太祝署失火，烧屋三间半。
现代文：近太祝的官署失火，烧了三间半房屋。
English: A fire broke out in a government office in Taizhou recently, burning three and a half houses.

古文：署在庙北，隔道在重墙之内，又即已灭，频为诏旨所问。
现代文：官署在太庙北边，隔道在重墙之内，火又已经扑灭，频频地有诏令讯问。
English: The government office is on the north side of the Taimiao, the road is inside the heavy wall, the fire has been extinguished, and there are frequent interrogation orders.

古文：主者以诏旨使问频繁，便责尚书不即案行，辄禁止，尚书免，皆在法外。
现代文：主管人因为韶令讯问频繁，就责罚尚书不立即巡视，动辄被囚禁，尚书被免职，都属非法。
English: Because the person in charge ordered frequent interrogation, he punished Shangshu for not immediately inspecting, he was often imprisoned, and Shangshu was dismissed, all of which were illegal.

古文：刑书之文有限，而舛违之故无方，故有临时议处之制，诚不能皆得循常也。
现代文：刑书的文字有限，但违法的原因没有定规，所以有临时商讨处理办法的制度，确实不能事事都遵守常规处理。
English: The text of the penal code is limited, but the reasons for violating the law are not fixed, so there is a system of temporary discussion of treatment methods. Indeed, it is not possible to comply with conventional treatment in all cases.

古文：至于此等，皆为过当，每相逼迫，不得以理，上替圣朝画一之德，下损崇礼大臣之望。
现代文：至于这些，都不适当，常常互相逼迫，不再讲道理，从上面来说有损圣朝刑法整齐划一的德性，从下面来说有损崇礼大臣的期望。
English: As far as these are concerned, they are not appropriate, often persecute each other, no longer reason, from the above, it is detrimental to the virtue of the uniformity of the Code of Canon Law, and from below, it is detrimental to the expectations of the Minister of Worship.

古文：臣愚以为犯陵上草木，不应乃用同产异刑之制。
现代文：臣愚认为冒犯陵墓上的草木，不应运用同产异刑的制度。
English: Zengwu believed that the same punishment system should not be applied to the plants and trees that offend the mausoleum.

古文：按行奏劾，应有定准，相承务重，体例遂亏。
现代文：巡行奏劾，应有一定的准则，沿袭制度时都尽量从重，体例于是受到损害。
English: In the procession of impeachment, there should be a certain standard, and when the system is followed, it should be emphasized as much as possible, and the style will be damaged.

古文：或因余事，得容浅深。
现代文：有时因为其他事情，可以允许有宽有严。
English: Sometimes, because of other things, it can be allowed to be both broad and strict.

古文：頠虽有此表，曲议犹不止。
现代文：虽然裴颐上了这个奏表，各种偏颇的言论还是没有停息。
English: Although Pei has been put on this report card, all kinds of biased remarks have not stopped.

古文：时刘颂为三公尚书，又上疏曰：自近世以来，法渐多门，令甚不一。
现代文：当时刘颂任三公尚书，又上疏说：自从近代以来，刑法渐渐出于多个部门，法令很不一致。
English: At that time, Liu Song was in charge of three public records, and he said: Since modern times, the criminal law has gradually emerged from multiple departments, and the laws are very inconsistent.

古文：臣今备掌刑断，职思其忧，谨具启闻。
现代文：臣下现在全面执掌刑狱，十分担忧，现在谨陈述出来告知。
English: My subordinates, who are now in full charge of the penal institution, are very worried and would like to make a statement to inform you.

古文：臣窃伏惟陛下为政，每尽善，故事求曲当，则例不得直；尽善，故法不得全。
现代文：臣私下希望陛下处理国政，常能做得完善，因此事事寻求委曲变通，那么就不可能完全符合旧例；做得完善，因此刑法不能面面俱到。
English: Privately, the vassal hopes that His Majesty's handling of state affairs can always be done perfectly, so he seeks to find a compromise in everything, then it is impossible to fully comply with the old rules; if it is done perfectly, the criminal law cannot be comprehensive.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么?
English: Why is that?

古文：夫法者，固以尽理为法，而上求尽善，则诸下牵文就意，以赴主之所许，是以法不得全。
现代文：刑法固然以完全合理为法则，但是上面寻求完善，那么下面就会生拉硬扯文意，用来迁就上面的许诺，因此刑法不能完善。
English: Of course, the criminal law is based on the principle of complete reasonableness, but if the above seeks perfection, then the following will be used to accommodate the above promises. Therefore, the criminal law cannot be perfected.

古文：刑书征文，征文必有乖于情听之断，而上安于曲当，故执平者因文可引，则生二端。
现代文：刑书取证于文，取证于文一定会与情理的断决有乖违，而上面安于委曲变通，因而主持公道的人因有文例可引，造就会生出两种意见。
English: If the punishment book takes evidence from the text, the evidence taken from the text will certainly be contrary to the conclusion of the circumstances, and the above is subject to the vicissitudes of the committee, so the people who preside over justice will have two opinions because they have literature to cite.

古文：是法多门，令不一，则吏不知所守，下不知所避。
现代文：因此法出多门，以致法令不一，那么官吏不知道遵循什么，老百姓不知道应该避免做什么。
English: As a result, there are many laws, so that the decrees are not the same, so the officials do not know what to follow, and the people do not know what to avoid.

古文：奸伪者因法之多门，以售其情，所欲浅深，苟断不一，则居上者难以检下，于是事同议异，狱犴不平，有伤于法。
现代文：奸伪之徒趁着刑法不一致，用以实现他的想法，欲望浅深不一，如果裁断不一致，那么处在上面的人难以约束下级，于是同一件事有不同的说法，牢狱无法治理，对刑法有损害。
English: The traitor takes advantage of the inconsistency of the criminal law to realize his ideas. The desires are different in depth and depth. If the rulings are inconsistent, it is difficult for the people at the top to restrain the subordinates. Therefore, the same thing has different sayings. The prison cannot be governed, which is harmful to the criminal law.

古文：古人有言： 人主详，其政荒；人主期，其事理。 
现代文：古人有这样的话： 入主要求太周详，国政就会荒废；入主要求合理，国事就会治理好。 
English: The ancients had this to say: If the ruler asks for too much detail, state affairs will be wasted; if the ruler asks for reasonableness, state affairs will be well managed.

古文：详匪他，尽善则法伤，故其政荒也。
现代文：周详的结果不是别的，太完善就会伤害刑法，所以国政荒废。
English: The detailed result is nothing else, too perfect will harm the criminal law, so the national policy is useless.

古文：期者轻重之当，虽不厌情，苟入于文，则循而行之，故其事理也。
现代文：期望就是轻重得当，虽然不能尽情理，假如写入了条文，就要遵循它去执行，因此国事能治理好。
English: Expectation is the proper weighting, although it is not reasonable, if it is written in the provisions, it is necessary to follow it to implement, so the state affairs can be well managed.

古文：夫善用法者，忍违情不厌听之断，轻重虽不允人心，经于凡览，若不可行，法乃得直。
现代文：善于运用刑法的人，忍心违背情理上不能满足听断的裁夺，轻重即使不能完全合乎人心，在一般人看来，好像不能施行，法律才能伸张正义。
English: People who are good at using the criminal law are willing to go against the ruling that cannot satisfy the reasonableness of the situation. Even if the weighting cannot fully meet the people's hearts, in the eyes of the general public, it seems that it cannot be enforced, and the law can only achieve justice.

古文：又君臣之分，各有所司。
现代文：而且君臣不同，各有各的职分。
English: Moreover, princes and ministers are different, and each has their own position.

古文：法欲必奉，故令主者守文；理有穷塞，故使大臣释滞；事有时宜，故人主权断。
现代文：法律想一定要奉行，所以让主管人遵守条文；理有不通的时候，所以让大臣疏通阻滞；事情各时情况不同，所以入主灵活裁断。
English: If you want to follow the law, let the person in charge comply with the provisions; when there is a reason, let the minister clear the blockage; things are different at all times, so the owner can make flexible decisions.

古文：主者守文，若释之执犯跸之平也；大臣释滞，若公孙弘断郭解之狱也；人主权断，若汉祖戮丁公之为也。
现代文：主管人遵守条文，就像是张释之公平地处理那个侵犯皇帝车驾将要经过的道路的人一样；大臣疏通阻滞，就好像是公孙弘裁断郭解的狱讼一样；人主灵活地裁断，就好像汉高祖刑戮丁公的作为一样。
English: The person in charge abides by the provisions, just as Zhang Xizhi fairly dealt with the person who violated the road that the emperor's chariot would pass through; the minister clears the blockage, just as Gongsun Hong adjudicates Guo Xie's prison lawsuit; the person in charge adjudicates flexibly, just as Henkel's ancestor tortured and killed Ding Gong.

古文：天下万事，自非斯格重为，故不近似此类，不得出以意妄议，其余皆以律令从事。
现代文：天下万事万物，若非这一法则重在行动，因此不近似这一类，不能出于凭主观想象胡乱议论，其余都按律令从事。
English: All things under heaven, if not this law is in action, so it is not similar to this category, it can not be based on subjective imagination, and the rest are carried out according to the law.

古文：然后法信于下，人听不惑，吏不容奸，可以言政。
现代文：然后法令伸张于下，人们的视听不再疑惑，官吏中容不下奸恶之徒，可以谈论国政了。
English: Then the decree was promulgated, people's audio-visual no longer doubted, officials could not tolerate evil-doers, and it was possible to talk about national politics.

古文：人主轨斯格以责群下，大臣小吏各守其局，则法一矣。
现代文：入主遵循这一法则来约束下臣，大臣小吏各自遵守职责，那么刑法的执行就统一了。
English: If the lord follows this rule to restrain his vassals, and the ministers and minor officials each abide by their duties, then the enforcement of criminal law will be unified.

古文：古人有言： 善为政者，看人设教。 
现代文：古人有这样的话： 善于治理国政的人，看人设立教化。 
English: The ancients had this to say: Those who are good at governing the country, watch others establish enlightenment.

古文：看人设教，制法之谓也。
现代文：看人设立教化，说的是制定法令。
English: To set up an indoctrination center is to enact a law.

古文：又曰： 随时之宜 ，当务之谓也。
现代文：又说 随着不同的时候采取适当的办法 ，这说的是当前应该做的事。
English: He also said that taking appropriate measures as times change is what should be done now.

古文：然则看人随时，在大量也，而制其法。
现代文：这样，那么看人是因时而异，在于度量大，制定法律。
English: Thus, the way people are viewed varies from time to time, depending on the extent to which laws are enacted.

古文：法轨既定则行之，行之信如四时，执之坚如金石，群吏岂得在成制之内，复称随时之宜，傍引看人设教，以乱政典哉！
现代文：法律制定以后，就要施行，施行时像四季更迭一样守信，执法时就像金石一样坚定不移，官吏们岂能在已形成的制度内，再称说随不同的时候采取适当的办法，广泛引用看人设立教化，用来扰乱国政典章呢!
English: After a law is enacted, it must be enforced, and when it is enforced, it must be as faithful as the four seasons, and when it is enforced, it must be as steadfast as a rock. How can officials take appropriate measures within the established system, and even at different times, and widely use the edification of others to disrupt the national political code!

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么?
English: Why is that?

古文：始制之初，固已看人而随时矣。
现代文：在开始制定法律的时候，固然已经因时而异地看人了。
English: At the beginning of the development of the law, of course, people were already viewed differently from time to time.

古文：今若设法未尽当，则宜改之。
现代文：现在如果设立的法律还没有完全恰当，就应该修改。
English: Now, if the established law is not entirely appropriate, it should be amended.

古文：若谓已善，不得尽以为制，而使奉用之司公得出入以差轻重也。
现代文：如果说已经完善，不能完全遵照执行，反而会使奉行的官员公然能执法有差别而使轻重不一。
English: If it is said that it has been perfected, it cannot be fully complied with, but it will make the officials who follow it openly enforce the law differently and give it different weight.

古文：夫人君所与天下共者，法也。
现代文：人君和天下人所共有的，是法律。
English: What all people have in common is the law.

古文：已令四海，不可以不信以为教，方求天下之不慢，不可绳以不信之法。
现代文：已经颁布四海，不能拿不守信用来当作教化，正要寻求天下人不怠慢，不能用没有信用的法律去约束。
English: It has been promulgated all over the world, and it is impossible to take dishonesty as enlightenment. It is necessary to seek the world's people not to be negligent, and it is impossible to use laws without credibility to restrict.

古文：且先识有言，人至遇而不可欺也。
现代文：而且先前的有见识的人说，人到了极端愚蠢时是不能欺骗的。
English: Moreover, the ancients said that when a person is extremely stupid, he cannot be deceived.

古文：不谓平时背法意断，不胜百姓愿也。
现代文：不是说平时违背法律，随意裁断，不能让老百姓满意。
English: This is not to say that they usually violate the law, arbitrarily adjudicate, and cannot satisfy the people.

古文：上古议事以制，不为刑辟。
现代文：上古通过议事做出裁夺，不设立刑法。
English: In ancient times, decisions were made through deliberation, and criminal law was not established.

古文：夏殷及周，书法象魏。
现代文：从夏朝、商朝到周朝，把法律书写好悬挂在象魏上。
English: From the Xia Dynasty, the Shang Dynasty to the Zhou Dynasty, the laws were written and hung on the Zong Wei.

古文：三代之君齐圣，然咸弃曲当之妙鉴，而任征文之直准，非圣有殊，所遇异也。
现代文：三代的国君都圣明，但全都抛弃通过变通来获得适宜的精妙办法，而采用取证于文的准则，并不是圣明的程度有所不同，而是所面对的情况不一样。
English: The three generations of emperors were all sages, but they all abandoned the ingenious method of obtaining the appropriate method by means of flexibility, and adopted the criterion of obtaining evidence in the text. It is not the degree of sagacity that is different, but the situation that is faced is different.

古文：今论时敦朴，不及中古，而执平者欲适情之所安，自托于议事以制。
现代文：现在就时世的敦朴而言，比不上中古，但是主持评议的人想要适从人的感情之所安，寄托于通过议事做出裁夺。
English: Now, in terms of the simplicity of the times, it is not comparable to the Middle Ages, but the person presiding over the review wants to adapt to the comfort of people's feelings, and relies on the deliberation to make a ruling.

古文：臣窃以为听言则美，论理则违。
现代文：臣下心裹认为这话听起来很好，论起理来却不通。
English: His subjects thought it sounded good, but it didn't make sense.

古文：然天下至大，事务众杂，时有不得悉循文如令。
现代文：但是天下太大了，事务繁杂，时常有不能完全遵循条文而符合法令的。
English: However, the world is too big, the affairs are complicated, and it is often not possible to fully follow the provisions and comply with the law.

古文：故臣谓宜立格为限，使主者守文，死生以之，不敢错思于成制之外，以差轻重，则法恆全。
现代文：因此臣下认为应当制定规定来限制，使主管者遵守条文，即使付出生命也要去施行，不敢绕开现有的法律打主意，以使轻重不当，那么法律就能永远保全。
English: Therefore, the vassals believed that regulations should be made to restrict, so that the supervisors would abide by the provisions, even if they had to spend their lives to implement them, and would not dare to circumvent the existing laws and make suggestions, so that the weight would be inappropriate, then the law could be preserved forever.

古文：事无正据，名例不及，大臣论当，以释不滞，则事无阂。
现代文：事情没有确凿的证据和名例中没有论及的，大臣们进行商议，用以疏通阻滞，那么事情就不会有阻隔。
English: If there is no conclusive evidence and the case has not been discussed, the ministers will consult to clear the blockage, then there will be no blockage.

古文：至如非常之断，出法赏罚，若汉祖戮楚臣之私己，封赵氏之无功，唯人主专之，非奉职之臣所得拟议。
现代文：至于超出常规的裁断，超出法令的赏罚，如汉高祖杀戮楚臣以利己，封赏没有功勋的盏乞臣，这衹有入主能够专断，不是奉命办事的大臣所能够拿主意的。
English: As for decisions that go beyond the norm and rewards and punishments that go beyond the law, such as Emperor Gaozong's killing of an important minister for his own benefit and the awarding of rewards to unmeritorious and unworthy ministers, these are decisions that can be made arbitrarily by the emperor, not by a minister acting under orders.

古文：然后情求傍请之迹绝，似是而非之奏塞，此盖齐法之大准也。
现代文：这样以后，说情请求才会绝迹，似是而非的奏章才会被堵住，这大概是整治刑法的大法则。
English: After this, the request for intercession will disappear, and the specious appeal will be blocked, which is probably the great principle of rectifying the criminal law.

古文：主者小吏，处事无常。
现代文：主办的小吏，处理事情反覆无常。
English: Organized by a minor official, the handling of things is capricious.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：无情则法徒克，有情则挠法。
现代文：不讲情义法律就徒然获胜，讲情义又干扰法律的执行。
English: If the law does not pay attention to reason, it will win in vain, and if it does pay attention to reason, it will interfere with the implementation of the law.

古文：积克似无私，然乃所以得其私，又恆所岨以卫其身。
现代文：总是获胜貌似无私，但这才是得以自私的原因，又常常以不自私来保护自己。
English: Always winning seems to be selfless, but this is the reason to be selfish, and often to protect themselves with unselfishness.

古文：断当恆克，世谓尽公，时一曲法，乃所不疑。
现代文：裁断得当就常常获胜，世人认为完全公允，即使一时枉法，也不会有人怀疑。
English: The right decision often wins, the world thinks it is completely fair, and even if it is wrong, no one will doubt it.

古文：故人君不善倚深似公之断，而责守文如令之奏，然后得为有检，此又平法之一端也。
现代文：因此人君不应赞扬证据可靠貌似公允的裁断，而应寻求遵守条文符合法令的奏章，这以后才算得上有法度，这又是整顿法治的一个方法。
English: Therefore, people should not praise the evidence reliable and seemingly fair judgment, but should seek to comply with the provisions in accordance with the law. Only then can it be considered legal. This is another way to rectify the rule of law.

古文：夫出法权制，指施一事，厌情合听，可适耳目，诚有临时当意之快，胜于征文不允人心也。
现代文：抛开法律灵活断定，处理某件事，如果合情受好评，可以满足耳目之需，确实有一时的快意，总比取证于文不得人心要好。
English: Putting aside the flexible conclusion of the law, it is better to deal with a certain matter if it is well received, can meet the needs of the eyes and ears, and indeed has a momentary pleasure, than to collect evidence in a text that is not popular.

古文：然起为经制，经年施用，恆得一而失十。
现代文：但是如果作为永久的法制，终年施行，常常是有一次正确，十次失误。
English: However, if it is implemented as a permanent legal system throughout the year, there is often one correct and ten mistakes.

古文：故小有所得者，必大有所失；近有所漏者，必远有所苞。
现代文：因此小有收获的，一定有大的损失；近处有疏漏的，一定包藏有远处的东西。
English: Therefore, if there is a small gain, there must be a big loss; if there is an omission in the vicinity, there must be something in the distance.

古文：故谙事识体者，善权轻重，不以小害大，不以近妨远。
现代文：因此识得事体的，善于权衡轻重，不因小害大，不因近妨远。
English: Therefore, if you know the facts, you are good at weighing the weight, not because of small harm, not because of near and far.

古文：忍曲当之近适，以全简直之大准。
现代文：忍心通过委曲变通来获得大抵适宜，用以保全简明质朴的大法则。
English: He persevered in obtaining the most suitable by means of a variety of arrangements, in order to preserve the simple and simple principle.

古文：不牵于凡听之所安，必守征文以正例。
现代文：不拘牵于舆论肯定什么，一定要遵守取证于文以端正条例。
English: Regardless of what is affirmed by public opinion, we must comply with the regulations on the collection of evidence in writing.

古文：每临其事，恆御此心以决断，此又法之大概也。
现代文：每当处理这些事情，都用这样的思想去决断，这又是法制的大略。
English: Whenever these matters are dealt with, decisions are made with this in mind. This is the general outline of the legal system.

古文：又律法断罪，皆当以法律令正文，若无正文，依附名例断之，其正文名例所不及，皆勿论。
现代文：而且律法决断罪行，都应当用法律指令正文，如果没有正文，就依靠名例来决断，正文名例没有涉及的，都不论处。
English: Moreover, when the law decides a crime, it should use the text of the legal instruction. If there is no text, it will rely on the name of the case to decide. If there is no name of the case in the text, it will not be dealt with.

古文：法吏以上，所执不同，得为异议。
现代文：法吏以上，所坚持的观点不相同，可以作为异议。
English: The opinions held by legal officials and above are not the same and can be regarded as dissenting opinions.

古文：如律之文，守法之官，唯当奉用律令。
现代文：法律中的正文，执法的官员，衹应当奉用法令。
English: The body of the law, the law enforcement officials, should follow the law.

古文：至于法律之内，所见不同，乃得为异议也。
现代文：至于在法律之内，见解不同，才算得上是异议。
English: As far as the law is concerned, it is only a difference of opinion that can be regarded as dissent.

古文：今限法曹郎令史，意有不同为驳，唯得论释法律，以正所断，不得援求诸外，论随时之宜，以明法官守局之分。
现代文：现在限制法曹郎令史，有不同意见互相辩驳，衹能商讨法律内的内容，用来指正决断的欠妥之处，不得援引法律外的解释，商量临时的权宜办法，以表明法官的职责范围的相应名分。
English: There are now restrictions on the role of lawyers, with different opinions contradicting each other, being able to discuss the content within the law, to point out the shortcomings of the decision, not to invoke extra-legal interpretations, and to discuss temporary expedient measures to indicate the corresponding position of the judge's scope of duties.

古文：诏下其事。侍中、太宰、汝南王亮奏以为： 夫礼以训世，而法以整俗，理化之本，事实由之。
现代文：皇帝把这奏章下交大臣讨论，侍中、太宰、汝南王司马亮上奏认为： 礼是用来教导世人的，法是用来整治风俗的，法律和教化的根本，事情实在是通过这两样。
English: The emperor submitted this piece of music to the minister for discussion, and the attendant, the dazai, and the king of Yunnan, Sima Liang, thought that: Rite is used to teach the world, law is used to rectify customs, and law is the basis of education, things are really through these two.

古文：若断不断，常轻重随意，则王宪不一，人无所错矣。
现代文：像是决断又不决断。常常是轻重随意，那么王法不统一，人们就不知该怎么办了。
English: It's like deciding and not deciding. Often, the weight is arbitrary, so if the royal law is not unified, people don't know what to do.

古文：故观人设教，在上之举；守文直法，臣吏之节也。
现代文：因此看人设教，是皇上做的事；遵守条文法律，是臣吏的职责。
English: Therefore, it is the emperor's duty to see that people are educated; it is the duty of officials to abide by the provisions of the law.

古文：臣以去太康八年，随事异议。
现代文：臣下认为在太康八年，因事不同而有异议。
English: The vassals thought that in the eighth year of Taikang, there were objections due to different reasons.

古文：周悬象魏之书，汉咏画一之法，诚以法与时共，义不可二。
现代文：周朝在象魏悬挂法律文书，汉朝赞叹整齐划一的法律，确实是把法律与时代联系在一起了，从道义上说不可更改。
English: The Zhou Dynasty hung legal documents on the wall like the Wei Dynasty, and the Han Dynasty praised the neat and uniform laws. It is true that the laws are linked to the times and cannot be changed from a moral point of view.

古文：今法素定，而法为议，则有所开长，以为宜如颂所启，为永久之制。 
现代文：现在的法律是向来就定了的，但是受到议论，就有所开启和助长，我认为应该像刘颂所说的那样，作为永久的制度。 
English: The current law has always been determined, but being discussed, it has been opened and promoted. I think it should be, as Liu Song said, as a permanent system.

古文：于是门下属三公曰： 昔先王议事以制，自中古以来，执法断事，既以立法，诚不宜复求法外小善也。
现代文：于是门下省嘱咐三公说： 从前先王按制度议事，自从中古以来，执法断事，既然已经立法，实在不应再寻求法律之外小小的好处。
English: Therefore, the three princes of the province under his tutelage said: In the past, the former king deliberated according to the system, and since ancient times, the law has been enforced. Since it has been legislated, it is really no longer appropriate to seek small benefits outside the law.

古文：若常以善夺法，则人逐善而不忌法，其害甚于无法也。
现代文：如果常常为了好处而侵害法律，那么人们追逐好处而不畏忌法律，危害比没有法律还要大。
English: If the law is often violated for the sake of gain, then the pursuit of gain without fear of the law is more harmful than the absence of law.

古文：案启事，欲令法令断一，事无二门，郎令史已下，应复出法驳案，随事以闻也。 
现代文：断案这种事，想让法令统一，事不出于多门，从郎令史以下，应该再拿出法驳案，随时报告情况。 
English: In order to unify the laws and regulations, it is necessary to take out the case of dismissal of the case again and report the situation at any time.

古文：及于江左，元帝为丞相时，朝廷草创，议断不循法律，人立异议，高下无状。
现代文：到了迁都江左，元帝任丞相时，朝廷草创，官员在断案时不遵循法律，人人都提出不同的意见，上上下下没个样子。
English: When the capital was moved to Jiangzu, when the former emperor was appointed chancellor, the imperial court was the first to create, officials did not follow the law when deciding the case, everyone put forward different opinions, and there was no such thing as up and down.

古文：主簿熊远奏曰： 礼以崇善，法以闲非，故礼有常典，法有常防，人知恶而无邪心。
现代文：主簿熊远上奏说： 礼是用来崇尚善的，法律是用来阻止为非作歹的，因此礼有固定的典章，法有恒常的防范，人们知道恶行，就没有邪恶之心。
English: The main book, Xiong Yuan Shang Rong, said: Rites are used to promote goodness, and laws are used to prevent wrongdoing. Therefore, rites have fixed rules, laws have constant precautions, and if people know about evil deeds, they will not have evil hearts.

古文：是以周建象魏之制，汉创画一之法，故能阐弘大道，以至刑厝。
现代文：因此周朝建立悬法在象魏的制度，汉朝创立划一的法律，所以能弘扬大道，以至于刑法搁置无用。
English: Therefore, the Zhou Dynasty established a system of suspended law similar to that of the Wei Dynasty, and the Han Dynasty created a uniform law, so they could promote the road, so that the criminal law was shelved.

古文：律令之作，由来尚矣。
现代文：律令的创制，由来已经很远了。
English: The creation of the Ritsuryo codes goes back a long way.

古文：经贤智，历夷险，随时斟酌，最为周备。
现代文：经过了贤人智者，经历了平易和险远，随时斟酌，最为周备。
English: After passing through the sages and wise men, experienced the easy and the perilous, at any time, the most thoughtful.

古文：自军兴以来，法度陵替，至于处事不用律令，竞作属命，人立异议，曲适物情，亏伤大例。
现代文：自从战乱以来，法度衰落，以至于处理事情不用律令，竞相下命令，人人都提出异议，委曲地满足人情，损害了法律大例。
English: Since the war, the rule of law has deteriorated to the extent that there is no rule of law to deal with things, orders are issued concurrently, everyone raises objections, and human rights are satisfied arbitrarily, which has damaged the rule of law.

古文：府立节度，复不奉用，临事改制，朝作夕改，至于主者不敢任法，每辄关咨，委之大官，非为政之体。
现代文：州府设立节度，再也不奉用，处理事情随意改变制度，朝令夕改，以致主管人不敢施行法令，每当有人征询时，都推给大官，这不是处理国政的规矩。
English: It is not the way to handle state affairs to set up a system of rules and regulations and then change the system at will, to change the order of the day and the order of the night, so that the person in charge does not dare to enforce the law, and whenever someone asks, it is pushed to the senior officials.

古文：若本曹处事不合法令，监司当以法弹违，不得动用开塞，以坏成事。
现代文：如果本曹处理事情不合法令，监察的官员应当按法律来弹劾，不能动辄改变法律，以免败坏固有的规定。
English: If Bencao orders the handling of the matter illegally, the supervising official should impeach according to the law, and cannot change the law at any time, so as not to corrupt the inherent provisions.

古文：按法盖粗术，非妙道也，矫割物情，以成法耳。
现代文：执法大概是粗疏的手段，不是精妙的方法，改变断绝人情，用以形成法律而已。
English: Law enforcement is probably a crude means, not a sophisticated method, to change the human condition and to form a law.

古文：若每随物情，辄改法制，此为以情坏法。
现代文：如果总是遵从人情，动不动就改变法制，这是用情来败坏法律。
English: If you always follow people's feelings and change the legal system at every turn, this is using feelings to corrupt the law.

古文：法之不一，是谓多门，开人事之路，广私请之端，非先王立法之本意也。
现代文：法律不一致，造就叫多门，开启说情请托的道路，增大私自请谒的机会，逭不是先王立法的本意。
English: The laws are inconsistent, creating many doors, opening the way for intercession, and increasing the opportunity for self-solicitation, which is not the original intention of the legislation of the first king.

古文：凡为驳议者，若违律令节度，当合经传及前比故事，不得任情以破成法。
现代文：凡是进行驳议的，如果违反律令节度，应当符合经传以及从前的先例，不得随意打破现有的法制。
English: Any objection, if it violates the provisions of the law, should be consistent with the scriptures and previous precedents, and should not arbitrarily break the existing legal system.

古文：愚谓宜令录事更立条制，诸立议者皆当引律令经传，不得直以情言，无所依准，以亏旧典也。
现代文：我认为应该让录事再设立条规制度，各个提出异议的都应当引用律令经传，不得衹按情说话，不要其他的依据，而损害原有的典章。
English: In my opinion, the rules and regulations system should be re-established from the record, and all those who raise objections should cite the ritsuryo sutra. They must not speak according to their own feelings, without any other basis, and damage the original regulations.

古文：若开塞随宜，权道制物，此是人君之所得行，非臣子所宜专用。
现代文：如果兴革适宜，灵活地处理事情，这是人君所能施行，不是臣子所应该专用的。
English: If it is appropriate to carry out the reformation and deal with things flexibly, this is something that people can do, not something that should be used exclusively by courtiers.

古文：主者唯当征文据法，以事为断耳。 
现代文：主管人衹应当依据法律条文，按照事实来决断。 
English: The person in charge shall make a decision in accordance with the law and the facts.

古文：是时帝以权宜从事，尚未能从。
现代文：当时皇帝采用权宜之计行事，还没有能够听从。
English: At the time, the emperor was acting as a stopgap measure and had not yet been able to comply.

古文：而河东卫展为晋王大理，考擿故事有不合情者，又上书曰： 今施行诏书，有考子正父死刑，或鞭父母问子所在。
现代文：但是河东卫展为晋王大理，考证出过去的事有不合情的，又上疏说： 现在施行诏书，有用拷打儿子来指证父亲的死刑的，有的鞭打父母审问儿子在什么地方。
English: However, Hedong Weizhan was the king of Jin, and the investigation showed that the past events were unseemly, and Shang Shou said: Now that the edict is implemented, it is useful to torture the son to prove the death of the father, and some whip the parents to interrogate where the son is.

古文：近主者所称《庚寅诏书》，举家逃亡家长斩。
现代文：近来主管人所说的《庚寅诏书》，全家逃亡家长被杀。
English: Recently, in what the supervisor called the "Gengyin Imperial Edict," an entire family of fugitive parents was killed.

古文：若长是逃亡之主，斩之虽重犹可。
现代文：如果家长是逃亡主犯，即使杀了他也可以。
English: If the parent is the main fugitive, you can even kill him.

古文：设子孙犯事，将考祖父逃亡，逃亡是子孙，而父祖婴其酷。
现代文：假如子孙犯了罪，将要拷打祖父逃亡，逃亡是子孙，但是父亲祖父承担了酷刑。
English: If the children and grandchildren commit a crime, they will torture the grandfather to escape, the escape is the children and grandchildren, but the paternal grandfather bears the torture.

古文：伤顺破教，如此者众。
现代文：损伤了道理和教化，这样的情况很多。
English: There are many such cases that have damaged the cause of reason and enlightenment.

古文：相隐之道离，则君臣之义废。君臣之义废，则犯上之奸生矣。
现代文：互相保护的道义被违背，那么君臣的大义就要毁坏；君臣大义毁坏，那么犯上作乱的奸恶行为就滋生了。
English: If the moral principle of mutual protection is violated, then the great righteousness of princes and ministers will be destroyed; if the great righteousness of princes and ministers is destroyed, then the treacherous behavior of committing disorder will breed.

古文：秦网密文峻，汉兴，扫除烦苛，风移俗易，几于刑厝。
现代文：秦朝法网严密文词峻酷，汉朝建立以后，扫除烦杂苛酷的法律，风移俗易，法律几乎可以放置不用。
English: The legal code of the Qin Dynasty was strict and harsh. After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, the cumbersome and harsh laws were swept away, and the customs were easy to change. The laws could almost be put aside.

古文：大人革命，不得不荡其秽匿，通其圮滞。
现代文：帝王改朝换代，不得不荡涤污秽，疏通滞塞。
English: When the emperor changed the dynasty and generation, he had to clean up the filth and unblock the blockage.

古文：今诏书宜除者多，有便于当今，著为正条，则法差简易。 
现代文：现在韶书应该清除旧法的很多，有对今天有利的，就写进正条，那么法律差不多可以简易了。 
English: Now, the imperial edict should clear away many of the old laws. If there are any that are beneficial to today, they should be written into the main article, and then the laws can almost be simplified.

古文：元帝令曰： 礼乐不兴，则刑罚不中，是以明罚敕法，先王所慎。
现代文：元帝下令说： 礼乐不兴盛，就会使刑罚不适当，因此申明处罚整饬法律，是先王所慎重的。
English: Emperor Yuan decreed: "If the rite does not flourish, it will make the punishment inappropriate. Therefore, it is prudent for the former king to affirm the punishment and rectify the law."

古文：自元康已来，事故荐臻，法禁滋漫。
现代文：自从元康以来，事故再三出现，法律越来越多。
English: Since the Yuan Kang, accidents have repeatedly occurred, and laws have become more and more.

古文：大理所上，宜朝堂会议，蠲除诏书不可用者，此孤所虚心者也。 
现代文：大理所上的意见，应该在朝堂上商议，删除诏书中不可施行的，这是孤所向往的。 
English: The opinions raised by Dali should be discussed in the imperial court, and the edict should be deleted as unenforceable. This is what everyone longs for.

古文：及帝即位，展为廷尉，又上言： 古者肉刑，事经前圣，汉文除之，增加大辟。
现代文：到了皇帝登上皇位后，卫展任廷尉，又上疏说： 古代的肉刑，事经前代的圣人，汉文帝废除了，增加大辟。
English: After the emperor ascended to the throne, Wei Zhan was appointed as a court lieutenant, and Shang Shou said: The ancient corporal punishment, after the previous generation of saints, Emperor Hanwen abolished and increased greatly.

古文：今人户凋荒，百不遗一，而刑法峻重，非句践养胎之义也。
现代文：现在人口稀少，一百户剩不了一户，但是刑法非常重，不合勾践养育百姓的思想。
English: Now the population is sparse, with less than one hundred households remaining, but the criminal law is very heavy, which is not in line with the idea of nurturing the people.

古文：愚谓宜复古施行，以隆太平之化。 
现代文：我认为应该恢复古代的肉刑，用以光大太平盛世的教化。 
English: I think that we should restore the ancient corporal punishment and use it to enlighten the world.

古文：诏内外通议。
现代文：皇帝诏令朝廷内外都讨论。
English: The Emperor's edict was discussed both inside and outside the court.

古文：于是骠骑将军王导、太常贺循、侍中纪瞻、中书郎庾亮、大将军咨议参军梅陶、散骑郎张嶷等议，以： 肉刑之典，由来尚矣。
现代文：于是骠骑将军王导、太常贺循、侍中纪瞻、中书郎庾亮、大将军谘议参军梅陶、散骑郎张嶷等商议，认为： 肉刑的制度，由来已经很远了。
English: As a result, the cavalry generals Wang Du, Taizhong He Cun, the chamberlains Ji Zhan, Zhong Shulang Qiliang, the general consults and joins the army Mei Tao, the horseman Zhang Qi and others discuss, and think: The system of corporal punishment has a long history.

古文：肇自古先，以及三代，圣哲明王所未曾改也。
现代文：自从上古开始，到了三代，圣哲明王都没有更改。
English: Since the dawn of time, through three generations, King Saint Germain has not changed.

古文：岂是汉文常主所能易者乎！
现代文：岂能是汉文帝这样的寻常君主能改变的吗!
English: Could it be that an ordinary monarch like Emperor Hanwen could change?

古文：时萧曹已没，绛灌之徒不能正其义。
现代文：当时萧何、曹参已经去世，周勃、灌婴这些人不能端正大义。
English: At that time, Xiao He and Cao San had already passed away, and Zhou Bo and Huan Yu were unable to rectify the situation.

古文：逮班固深论其事，以为外有轻刑之名，内实杀人。
现代文：到了班固深入地论述这件事，认为表面上有轻刑的名声，内裹实际上致人死命。
English: When he got to Bangu, he discussed the matter in depth, and thought that on the surface there was a reputation for light punishment, but inside it actually caused people to die.

古文：又死刑太重，生刑太轻，生刑纵于上，死刑怨于下，轻重失当，故刑政不中也。
现代文：而且死刑太重，生刑太轻，生刑使上面的人放纵，死刑使下面的人怨愤，轻重失当，所以刑政不适中。
English: Moreover, the death penalty is too heavy, the life sentence is too light, the life sentence makes the people above indulge, the death penalty makes the people below resent, the weight is inappropriate, so the criminal policy is not appropriate.

古文：且原先王之造刑也，非以过怒也，非以残人也，所以救奸，所以当罪。
现代文：而且，推究先王制定刑罚，不是用来发泄愤怒的，不是用来残害人的，是用来制止奸恶的，是用来惩罚犯罪的。
English: Moreover, it is inferred that the first king formulated punishments not for venting anger, not for harming people, but for stopping treachery and punishing crimes.

古文：今盗者窃人之财，淫者好人之色，亡者避叛之役，皆无杀害也，则加之以刑。
现代文：现在有小偷窃取别人的财物，有淫贼奸污别人的女子，逃亡的人躲避反叛的徭役，都不杀害，就对他们施加刑罚。
English: Now there are thieves who steal other people's property, there are adulterers who rape and defile other people's women, and there are fugitives who hide from the rebel bailiffs. If they do not kill them, they will be punished.

古文：刑之则止，而加之斩戮，戮过其罪，死不可生，纵虐于此，岁以巨计。
现代文：施加刑罚就可以了，但却要处死，对他所犯的罪来说，处死太重了，死了不能复生，在这方面放纵残暴，每年都有很大的数量。
English: It is enough to inflict punishment, but to put him to death is too severe a punishment for the crime he has committed, and he cannot be brought back to life. In this respect, there is a large number of cases of cruelty every year.

古文：此乃仁人君子所不忍闻，而况行之于政乎！
现代文：这是仁人君子所不忍心听到的，何况在国政上施行呢!
English: This is something that a humane gentleman cannot bear to hear, let alone implement in national politics!

古文：若乃惑其名而不练其实，恶其生而趣其死，此畏水投舟，避坎蹈井，愚夫之不若，何取于政哉！
现代文：至于被名称迷惑而不熟悉实际，憎恶犯人活着而催促他死，这是害怕水而抛弃了船，为避开坎穴而踏入水井中，连愚夫都比不上，对国政来说有什么可取的呢!
English: As for being confused by the name and not familiar with the reality, hating the prisoner alive and urging him to die, this is fear of water and abandoning the ship, stepping into the well to avoid the pit, even fools are not comparable, what is desirable for national politics!

古文：今大晋中兴，遵复古典，率由旧章，起千载之滞义，拯百残之遗黎，使皇典废而复存，黔首死而更生，至义暢于三代之际，遗风播乎百世之后，生肉枯骨，惠侔造化，岂不休哉！
现代文：现在大晋中兴，遵循古代的典制，沿袭过去的章程，发明千年晦涩难解的含义，拯救屡遭残害的百姓，使皇典在遭废除后重新起用，使老百姓死而复生，大义畅行于三代之际，遣风播扬在百世之后，使枯骨长肉，恩惠遍及整个世界，岂不是好!
English: Now, the Grand Jin Zhongxing, following the ancient ceremony system, inherits the past regulations, invents the meaning of the millennium obscure and difficult to solve, rescues the people who have been repeatedly mutilated, makes the imperial edict re-used after being abolished, makes the common people revive from death, the great righteousness is carried out in the occasion of three generations, sends the wind to spread after a hundred generations, makes the dead bones grow flesh, and the grace spreads throughout the whole world, isn't it good!

古文：惑者乃曰，死犹不惩，而况于刑？
现代文：糊涂的人竟然说，杀人还不能惩戒，何况刑罚?
English: How can a stupid person say that murder cannot be punished, let alone punished?

古文：然人者冥也，其至愚矣，虽加斩戮，忽为灰土，死事日往，生欲日存，未以为改。
现代文：但是人是糊涂的，是最愚蠢的，即使杀了他，很快就变为灰土，死亡的事一天天过去，生存的欲望天天都存在，不会因此而改变。
English: But man is stupid, the most stupid of all. Even if you kill him, he will soon turn to dust. The death thing passes day by day. The desire to survive exists every day and will not change because of it.

古文：若刑诸市朝，朝夕鉴戒，刑者咏为恶之永痛，恶者睹残刖之长废，故足惧也。
现代文：如果在市集上用刑，让人们经常能以此为鉴戒，受刑罚的人叹息作恶的长久悔恨，邪恶的人看见了脚被砍后永久的残废，因此值得恐惧。
English: If punishment is used in the market, people can often use it as a warning, the punished person sighs and has a long-term remorse for evil, and the evil person sees the permanent disability after the foot is cut off, so it is worthy of fear.

古文：然后知先王之轻刑以御物，显诫以惩愚，其理远矣。 
现代文：这以后才知道先王用轻刑来统治百姓，用显明的告诫来惩治愚蠢，它的道理是很深刻的。 
English: It was only later that I learned that the former king used light punishments to rule the people, and used explicit admonitions to punish stupidity. The reason for this is very profound.

古文：尚书令刁协、尚书薛兼等议，以为： 圣上悼残荒之遗黎，伤犯死之繁众，欲行刖以代死刑，使犯死之徒得存性命，则率土蒙更生之泽，兆庶必怀恩以反化也。
现代文：尚书令刁协、尚书薛兼等商议，认为： 圣上哀怜处于破败荒凉之处的百姓，痛心犯了死罪的人们，想用刖刑来代替死刑，使犯了死罪的人能够留下性命，那么普天下都会蒙受再生的恩泽，广大百姓必定会感怀恩德而受到感化。
English: Shang Shuling and Xue Jian, Shang Shuling and Xue Jian and others deliberated and held that: the people who are in a dilapidated and desolate place, the people who have committed capital crimes, want to use flogging to replace the death penalty, so that those who have committed capital crimes can leave life, then the whole world will receive the grace of regeneration, and the broad masses of the people will certainly feel the grace and be influenced.

古文：今中兴祚隆，大命惟新，诚宜设宽法以育人。
现代文：现在中兴国运隆盛，大命惟新，确实应该设立宽松的法律来化育人民。
English: Now that the ZTE national movement is flourishing and the great destiny is new, it is indeed necessary to establish a loose law to educate the people.

古文：然惧群小愚蔽，习玩所见而忽异闻，或未能咸服。
现代文：但是害怕小人们愚昧无知。喜好平时看见的，忽视珍贵的消息，有时还不能完全归服。
English: But fearing the stupidity and ignorance of the little people, liking what you usually see, ignoring precious news, sometimes you can't completely surrender.

古文：愚谓行刑之时，先明申法令，乐刑者刖，甘死者杀，则心必服矣。
现代文：我认为行刑的时候，先申明法令，喜欢受刑的就行刖刑，甘心去死的就杀，那么他们的心就一定会归服。
English: I think that when it comes to execution, they should first declare the law, and if they like to be punished, they should be beaten, and if they are willing to die, they should be killed. Then their hearts will surely submit.

古文：古典刑不上大夫，今士人有犯者，谓宜如旧，不在刑例，则进退为允。 
现代文：古代的制度是刑不上大夫，现在的士人如果有犯罪的，我认为应该依旧例，不在行刑之列，那就进退都适当了。 
English: The ancient system was that a doctor could not be executed. If a scholar commits a crime nowadays, I think it should still be the case that he should not be executed. Then it is appropriate to both advance and retreat.

古文：尚书顗、郎曹彦、中书郎桓彝等议，以为： 复肉刑以代死，诚是圣王之至德，哀矜之弘私。
现代文：尚书周颛、郎曹彦、中书郎桓彝等商议，认为： 恢复肉刑来代替死刑，实在是圣王最高尚的道德，哀怜百姓的宽弘和善。
English: Shangshu Zhou Rong, Lang Caohan, Zhongshu Rong Huan Rong and others deliberated and held that: The resumption of corporal punishment to replace the death penalty is really the highest morality of the holy king, and it is a pity for the people's generosity and kindness.

古文：然窃以为刑罚轻重，随时而作。
现代文：但是臣下私下裹认为刑罚的轻重应该随着时间的不同而不同。
English: Privately, however, his subjects believed that the severity of punishment should vary with the passage of time.

古文：时人少罪而易威，则从轻而宽之；时人多罪而难威，则宜化刑而济之。
现代文：当时的人少犯罪而容易震慑，刑罚就应该从轻宽大；当时人犯罪多而且难以震慑，就应该用死刑来济助。
English: At that time, people committed fewer crimes and were easily deterred, so the punishment should be lighter and more lenient; at that time, people committed more crimes and were difficult to deter, so the death penalty should be used to help.

古文：肉刑平世所应立，非救弊之宜也。
现代文：肉刑是太平时世所应该设立的，不是救治弊端所适宜的。
English: Corporal punishment is something that should be established in times of peace, not something that is appropriate to cure evils.

古文：方今圣化草创，人有余奸，习恶之徒，为非未已，截头绞颈，尚不能禁，而乃更断足劓鼻，轻其刑罚，使欲为恶者轻犯宽刑，蹈罪更众，是为轻其刑以诱人于罪，残其身以加楚酷也。
现代文：现在圣化刚刚开始，人们还有很多奸恶，熟习作恶之徒还在不停地为非作歹，砍下他们的头，绞他们的脖子尚且不能禁止，却竟然用砍断脚割掉鼻子来代替，减轻刑罚，使想作恶的人减轻罪行放宽刑罚，犯罪的人会更多，这是用减轻刑罚来引诱人犯罪，残害罪犯的身体来增加他们的痛楚。
English: Now that sanctification has just begun, people still have a lot of treacherous evils. The habitual evildoers are still constantly doing evil. Cutting off their heads and wringing their necks cannot be prohibited, but it has been replaced with cutting off their feet and cutting off their noses to reduce the punishment, so that those who want to do evil can reduce their crimes and relax the punishment, and more people will commit crimes. This is to use reduced punishment to entice people to commit crimes, and to mutilate the bodies of criminals to increase their pain.

古文：昔之畏死刑以为善人者，今皆犯轻刑而残其身，畏重之常人，反为犯轻而致囚，此则何异断刖常人以为恩仁邪！
现代文：从前那些害怕死刑而被看作善人的，现在都触犯轻刑而身受肉刑，害怕重刑的普通人，反而因为犯了轻刑而招致囚禁，这样，那么与砍断普通人的脚却认为是恩德仁义有什么区别呢!
English: In the past, those who feared the death penalty and were regarded as good people, now all commit light punishment and suffer corporal punishment, and ordinary people who fear heavy punishment, on the other hand, are imprisoned for committing light punishment, so what is the difference between chopping off the feet of ordinary people and considering it to be benevolence and justice!

古文：受刑者转广，而为非者日多，踊贵屦贱，有鼻者丑也。
现代文：受刑的人越来越广泛，而为非作歹的人却一天比一天多，踊鞋比鞋子还贵，有鼻子的人成为丑陋的少数。
English: The number of people being punished is becoming more and more extensive, while the number of people committing crimes is increasing day by day. Dancing shoes are more expensive than shoes, and people with noses have become an ugly minority.

古文：徒有轻刑之名，而实开长恶之源。
现代文：空有减轻刑罚的名声，实际上是开启长久作恶的源头。
English: A reputation for leniency is actually a springboard for long-term wrongdoing.

古文：不如以杀止杀，重以全轻，权小停之。须圣化渐著，兆庶易威之日，徐施行也。 
现代文：不如用杀头来制止杀头，有重刑来保存轻刑，权且暂时停止施行，等圣化逐渐显著，广大老百姓容易震慑的时候，再慢慢施行。 
English: It is better to use beheading to stop beheading, to have heavy punishment to preserve light punishment, to have the power to temporarily suspend enforcement, and then to slowly enforce when sanctification is gradually obvious and the broad masses of the people are easily deterred.

古文：议奏，元帝犹欲从展所上。大将军王敦以为： 百姓习俗日久，忽复肉刑，必骇远近。
现代文：商议的结果上奏皇帝，元帝还打算听从卫展奏上的意见，大将军王敦认为： 老百姓习惯现在的风俗很久了，突然间恢复肉刑，一定会使远远近近的人吃惊。
English: The result of the deliberation was reported to the emperor, and the Yuan emperor also intended to listen to the opinion of Wei Zhan. General Wang Dun believed: The common people have been accustomed to the current customs for a long time, and the sudden resumption of corporal punishment will certainly surprise people far and near.

古文：且逆寇未殄，不宜有惨酷之声，以闻天下。 
现代文：而且逆寇还没有消灭，不应该有惨酷的叫声，让天下人都听到。 
English: Moreover, the invaders have not yet been eliminated, and there should be no cruel cries for the world to hear.

古文：于是乃止。
现代文：于是才作罢。
English: That's when I stopped.

古文：咸康之世，庾冰好为纠察，近于繁细，后益矫违，复存宽纵，疏密自由，律令无用矣。
现代文：咸康的时候，庾冰喜欢举发检察，近于琐细，后来更加违背正道，又采用宽松的刑罚，是疏是密随心所欲，律令已经没用了。
English: During the Han and Kang Dynasties, Yan Bing liked to issue procuratorial orders, which were close to being trivial. Later, he violated the righteous path even more, and used lenient punishments. He could be as strict or as lenient as he wanted, and the ritsuryo was no longer useful.

古文：至安帝元兴末，桓玄辅政，又议欲复肉刑斩左右趾之法，以轻死刑，命百官议。
现代文：到了安帝元兴末年，桓玄辅佐国政，又商议打算恢复肉刑斩断左右脚趾的刑法，用来减轻死刑，皇帝命令百官讨论。
English: In the last years of Emperor Yuanxing, when Huan Xuanfu was in charge of state affairs and there was a plan to restore the criminal law of cutting off the right and left toes by physical punishment to reduce the death penalty, the emperor ordered hundreds of officials to discuss the matter.

古文：蔡廓上议曰： 建邦立法，弘教穆化，必随时置制，德刑兼施。
现代文：蔡廓奏上意见说： 建国立法，弘扬教化，一定要根据不同的时候制定政策，仁德刑罚同时施行。
English: Cai Guo said in his speech: the founding legislation and the promotion of enlightenment must formulate policies according to different times, and the benevolent punishment must be implemented at the same time.

古文：长贞一以闲其邪，教禁以检其慢，洒湛露以流润，厉严霜以肃威，虽复质文迭用，而斯道莫革。
现代文：崇尚忠贞用以防备奸邪，教知禁令用以检察怠慢，布洒恩惠来润泽天下，加重刑罚严肃天威，虽然还是质、文更迭起作用，但是这种方法是不会被取代的。
English: Adhering to fidelity to prevent adultery, using the prohibition of teaching and learning to inspect negligence, spreading grace and benefit to enrich the world, and increasing the severity of punishment. Although the quality and text change play a role, this method will not be replaced.

古文：肉刑之设，肇自哲王。
现代文：肉刑的设立，源于圣哲的君王。
English: The institution of corporal punishment goes back to the kings of the sages.

古文：盖由曩世风淳，人多惇谨，图像既陈，则机心直戢，刑人在涂，则不逞改操，故能胜残去杀，化隆无为。
现代文：大概因为前代风俗淳厚，人们大多敦厚谨慎，图像既已陈列，就机心收敛，受刑罚的人走在路上，就不放纵和改变操守，因此能不用刑罚诛杀，无为而教化隆盛。
English: Probably because the customs of the previous generation were simple, people were mostly prudent and cautious. Once the images were displayed, they were tactfully restrained. People who were punished did not indulge and change their behavior when walking on the road. Therefore, they could fight without punishment, and enlightenment flourished without doing anything.

古文：季末浇伪，设网弥密，利巧之怀日滋，耻畏之情转寡。
现代文：衰落的末世风俗浮薄诈伪，法纲设立更加繁密，机巧的思想一天天滋长，羞耻、畏惧的心理变得少了。
English: The customs of the waning last days are flimsy and deceitful, the legal framework is more complex, the clever thoughts are growing day by day, and the psychology of shame and fear has become less.

古文：终身剧役，不足止其奸，况乎黥劓，岂能反于善。
现代文：终身繁重的劳役，不足以制止奸邪，何况刺字和割鼻子，岂能使罪犯返归善道。
English: A lifetime of hard labour is not enough to stop the evil of adultery, let alone the piercing of letters and the cutting of noses, how can the criminals return to the good path.

古文：徒有酸惨之声，而无济俗之益。
现代文：空有悲惨的叫声，却没有匡济时俗的益处。
English: There are cries of woe, but no pleas for austerity.

古文：至于弃市之条，实非不赦之罪，事非手杀，考律同归，轻重均科，减降路塞，钟陈以之抗言，元皇所为留愍。
现代文：至于弃市的条文，若实在不是不赦的罪过，事情不是亲手杀人，刑讯和法律一致，轻刑和重刑判决相同，减降刑罚的道路堵塞，钟陈因此高声抗议，元皇为之怜悯。
English: As for the provision of abandoning the city, if it is not an unpardonable crime, the matter is not homicide by hand, the torture is consistent with the law, the light sentence and the heavy sentence are the same, and the road to reduce the penalty is blocked, Zhong Chen protested loudly, and the emperor took pity on him.

古文：今英辅翼赞，道邈伊周，诚宜明慎用刑，爱人弘育，申哀矜以革滥，移大辟于支体，全性命之至重，恢繁息于将来。 
现代文：现在英才们辅佐国政，行道超越伊尹周，确实应该谨慎用刑，爱惜人民大力繁育，申明哀怜之心用以革除滥刑，改变对人体的大辟之刑，保全至为重要的生命，使将来增加繁殖生息。 
English: Now that great talents are supporting national politics, and the road is beyond Yin Zhou, it is indeed necessary to use punishment cautiously, cherish the people and vigorously breed, affirm the heart of pity to eliminate indiscriminate punishment, change the great punishment to the human body, preserve the most important life, and increase the breeding growth in the future.

古文：而孔琳之议不同，用王朗、夏侯玄之旨。
现代文：但是孔卫旺意见不同，用型目、夏堡直的意见。
English: However, Kong Weiwang's opinion is different, with the opinion of the type and the summer castle.

古文：时论多与琳之同，故遂不行。
现代文：当时的舆论大多和孔琳之相同，因此肉刑没有施行。
English: At that time, most of the public opinion was the same as that of Kong Lin, so corporal punishment was not carried out.

