古文：维王三祀二月丙辰朔，王在鄗，召周公旦曰： 呜呼，敬哉！
现代文：成王亲政三年二月丙辰朔日，成王见周公旦。周公说： 啊呀!
English: In February of the third year of Cheng Wang's reign, Cheng Wang met Zhou Gongdan. Zhou Gongdan said: Ah!

古文：朕闻曰：何修非躬，躬有四位、九德。
现代文：要重视啊!我听说：为何不修养自身?因为人身有四位、九德。
English: Pay attention! I heard: Why not cultivate yourself? Because there are four parts to the human body and nine virtues.

古文：何择非人，人有十奸。
现代文：对人为何不加选择?因为人有十奸。
English: Why don't you make a choice for people? Because there are ten types of people.

古文：何一本谋，谋有十散，不圉我哉。
现代文：为何不完善那计谋?因为谋有十散，谋散就不能约束我了。
English: Why then was the counsel not consummated? for the counsel was divided against itself; and that which was divided against itself could not stand.

古文：何慎非言，言有三信，信以生宝，宝以贵物，物周为器。美好宝物无常，维其所贵信，无不行。
现代文：为何不谨慎地说话?因为言语有三信。信可以生宝，宝可以贵物，物品皆可做器用。美好的宝物并不固定，仅在于它被人看重，信用它就无处不行。
English: Why not speak prudently? Because words have three meanings. A meaning can be a treasure, a treasure can be a precious object, and an object can be used as a tool. A beautiful treasure is not fixed, just because it is valued by people, it can not be trusted anywhere.

古文：行之以神，振之以宝，顺之以事，明众以备，改□以庸，庶格怀患。
现代文：按规律去实行，用宝物去振奋，用事实去顺应，以完备告知民众，按用途攻治它。这样，众人都会来归，而且心怀感激。
English: Implement it according to the law, use the treasure to inspire, use the facts to comply, fully inform the people, and attack it according to the purpose. In this way, everyone will come and go, and they will be grateful.

古文： 四位，一曰定，二曰正，三曰静，四曰敬，敬位丕哉，静乃时非，正位不废，定得安宅。
现代文： 四位所指：一是定居，二是正直，三是安静，四是恭敬。恭敬一位为大为首，安静就是其次，正直一位不失去，定居一位才能安家。
English: The four points are: one is to settle down, two is to be honest, three is to be quiet, and four is to be respectful. One is to be respectful, quiet is next, one is to be honest, and one is to settle down.

古文：九德：一孝子畏哉，乃不乱谋；二悌，悌乃知序，序乃伦，伦不腾上，上乃不崩；三慈惠知长幼，知长幼，乐养老；四忠恕，是谓四仪。
现代文：九德所指：一是孝：儿辈畏惧制裁，就没有不顺父母之心。二是悌：兄弟友善就知次序，有次序才有伦理；伦理不错乱，在上者就不会低下。三是慈惠：慈惠才知养幼；知道养幼，就乐于养老。四是忠恕：这是说自己的仪度；即使流言盛行，也坚定不移。
English: Jiude said: First, filial piety: if children are afraid of being punished, they will not disobey their parents; second, filial piety: if brothers are friendly, they will know the order; if there is an order, there will be ethics; if ethics are not disorderly, they will not be degraded; third, benevolence: if benevolence knows how to raise children; if it knows how to raise children, it will be happy to take care of the elderly; fourth, loyalty: this refers to one's own etiquette; even if rumors are prevalent, it is unswerving.

古文：风言大极，意定不移；五中正，是谓权断，补损知选；六恭逊，是谓容德，以法从权，安上无慝；七宽弘，是谓宽宇准德以义，乐获顺嘏；八温直，是谓明德，喜怒不隙，主人乃服；九兼符，是谓明刑，惠而能忍，尊天大经。
现代文：五是中正不偏：说的是权衡裁断，或补或损知道选择。六是恭敬谦逊：这是说有容有德；按法度去服从权力，主上安稳，无作恶行为。
English: The fifth is to be fair and unbiased: it means to weigh and judge, and to know whether to supplement or damage. The sixth is to be respectful and humble: it means to have tolerance and virtue; to obey power according to the law, to be stable in the Lord, and not to do evil.

古文：九德广备，次世有声。
现代文：七是宽弘：这是说要宽弘大量；德为准则，义为依据，乐于获得大福。
English: The seventh is generosity: this means to have a lot of generosity; virtue as the standard, righteousness as the basis, and to be willing to receive great blessings.

古文：十奸：一穷□干静，二酒行干理，三辩惠干知，四移洁干清，五死勇干武，六展允干信，七比誉干让，八阿众干名，九专愚干果，事愎孤干贞。
现代文：八是温和正直：这是说彰明道德；或喜或怒都不生嫌隙，主人才会重用。九是廉武：这是说的昭示刑法；惠爱而能容忍，这是尊敬上天的大道。九德全面具备，世世代代都有好名声。 十奸是：一，清平居处伤清静；二，酗酒行事伤正理；三，显示聪明伤智慧；四，过分干净伤清洁；五，拼死显勇伤武事；六，展示忠诚伤诚信；七，计较名誉伤谦让；八，迎合众人伤名节；九，愚而自专伤成功；十，自信而孤立伤坚贞。
English: Eight is gentleness and honesty: this is to say that the moral is clear; there is no gap between joy and anger, and the master will reuse it. Nine is integrity: this is to say that the criminal law is revealed; benevolent and tolerant, this is the way to respect heaven. Nine virtues are fully available and have a good reputation for generations. The ten offenses are: First, living in a clean and quiet place; Second, drinking alcohol and acting in a disorderly manner; Third, showing intelligence and wisdom; Fourth, excessive cleanliness and cleanliness; Fifth, fighting bravely and bravely; Sixth, showing loyalty and honesty; Seventh, considering honor and humility; Eighth,

古文：十散：一废□□，□□行乃泄；□□□□，□□□□；三浅薄闲瞒，其谋乃获；四说咷轻意，乃伤营立；五行恕而不愿，弗忧其图；六极言不度，其谋乃费；七以亲为疏，其谋乃虚；八新私虑适，百事乃僻；九愚而自信，不知所守；十不释太约，见利忘亲。
现代文： 十散是：一，废弃口口，他的行动就会泄露；二，口口口口，口口口口；三，考虑肤浅保密不严，他的计谋就会失误；四，马虎大意，就伤害所经营所置立；五，不能以己度人，就不能深入考虑他的计谋；六，说过头话而没有节制，他的计谋必有违事理；七，把亲近的人当外人，他的计谋就会落空；八，心有私念而想把事办妥，结果百事都会偏离；九，愚蠢而自信，必然不知自守；十，不解决主要问题，见到利益就忘了亲人。
English: The ten faults are as follows: First, if he abandons his mouth, his actions will be leaked; second, if he talks too much, his actions will be leaked; third, if he considers secrecy to be superficial and not strict, his strategy will fail; fourth, if he is careless, he will harm his business; fifth, if he cannot live by himself, he will not be able to consider his strategy in depth; sixth, if he talks too much and does not exercise restraint, his strategy will be unreasonable; seventh, if he treats people close to him as outsiders, his strategy will fail; eighth, if he has selfish thoughts and wants to get things done, the result will be that everything will

古文：三信：一春生夏长无私，民乃不迷；二秋落冬杀有常，政乃盛行；三人治百物，物德其德，是谓信极。
现代文： 三信是：一，春生夏长不错乱，百姓就不迷惑；二，秋落冬杀有常规，政教就盛行。三，人主治万民，万民感戴其德，这叫做信极。
English: The three beliefs are: First, the spring and summer are not chaotic, and the people are not confused; Second, the autumn and winter have a routine, and politics and religion are prevalent; Third, people govern the people, and the people feel their virtue, which is called the belief pole.

古文：而其余也，信既极矣，嗜欲□在，在不知义，欲在美好，有义，是谓生宝。 
现代文：信极已经做到了，就只在嗜欲两方面。嗜在于知义，欲在于有义，这叫做生宝。 
English: Belief has been achieved, but only in the two aspects of craving. The craving is for wisdom and righteousness, and the desire is to have righteousness, which is called the treasure of life.

古文：周公拜手稽首兴曰： 臣既能生宝，恐未有子孙其败。
现代文：周公作揖叩头，起来说； 我虽能讲清那个宝，恐怕缺乏仁，子孙将会衰败。
English: Zhou Gong stood up and said, "Although I can clearly explain the treasure, I am afraid that if there is a lack of benevolence, the descendants will decline."

古文：既能生宝，未能生仁，恐无后亲王宝生之，恐失王会，道维其废。 
现代文：即使能讲清什么是宝，未能生仁，恐怕还是没有后继人。王之宝虽然产生，又担心失掉做个好人君的机会，王道就只有废弃了。 
English: Even if you can clearly explain what a treasure is, if you fail to give birth, I'm afraid there will still be no successor. Although the king's treasure is produced, you worry about losing the opportunity to be a good person, and the royal road will only be abandoned.

古文：王拜曰： 格而厣。
现代文：成王行礼，说道： 你的话最好了。
English: Cheng Wang made a bow and said: Your words are the best.

古文：维说余劝之以安位，教之广，用宝而乱，亦非我咎，上设荣禄，不患莫仁。
现代文：为此我要劝勉百姓安以四位，教他们都懂得九德。如果因行用信、义、仁而发生混乱，那就不是我的过错了。上面设置荣誉俸禄，就不怕谁个不仁。
English: For this reason, I would like to urge the people to appoint four people and teach them to understand the nine virtues. If there is confusion due to the practice of faith, righteousness and benevolence, it is not my fault. If there is an honorable salary set above, I am not afraid of anyone's unkindness.

古文：仁以爱禄，允维典程，既得其禄，又增其名，上下咸劝，孰不竞仁。
现代文：行仁而又珍爱俸禄，确实会成为典范。既能得到他的俸禄，又增加了他的名誉，上上下下都相互劝勉，谁能不竞相为仁?
English: He who acts with benevolence and treasures his reward will indeed become a model. He who can both receive his reward and increase his reputation will be exhorted from top to bottom. Who can not compete for benevolence?

古文：维子孙之谋，宝以为常。 
现代文：为子孙后代考虑，这个宝要长久不变。 
English: For the sake of future generations, this treasure should remain unchanged for a long time.

