古文：王至自郑，以阳樊赐晋文公。
现代文：周襄王从郑国回到王城，将阳樊赐给了晋文公。
English: King Zhou Xiang returned to Wangcheng from Zheng and bestowed Impotence on King Jinwen.

古文：阳人不服，晋侯围之。
现代文：阳樊人不肯归附晋国，晋文公派兵包围了阳樊。
English: The Impotents refused to be annexed to Jin, and Jin sent troops to surround the Impotents.

古文：仓葛呼曰： 王以晋君为能德，故劳之以阳樊，阳樊怀我王德，是以未从于晋。
现代文：仓葛大声喊道： 周王因为晋君能布施恩德，所以把阳樊作为犒赏阳樊人怀念周王的恩德，所以不肯归附晋国。
English: Cang Ge shouted loudly: Because King Zhou was able to bestow benevolence on Jin, he regarded impotence as a reward. People who admire impotence miss the benevolence of King Zhou, so they refuse to be annexed to Jin.

古文：谓君其何德之布以怀柔之，使无有远志？
现代文：大家都以为君主将布施什么德惠来感化我们，使人们不生叛离之心。
English: Everyone thought that the monarch would bestow some kind of boon to inspire us, so that people would not have a rebellious heart.

古文：今将大泯其宗祊而蔑杀其民人，宜吾不敢服也！
现代文：现在却要折毁我们的宗庙，杀戮我们百姓，无怪乎我们不敢服从啊。
English: Now they want to destroy our ancestral temple and kill our people. No wonder we dare not obey.

古文：夫三军之所寻，将蛮、夷、戎、狄之骄逸不虔，于是乎致武。
现代文：三军所征讨的应是蛮、夷、戎、狄的骄情不恭行为，因而要动用武力。
English: What the three armies wanted was the insolent behavior of the barbarians, barbarians, barbarians and barbarians, so they had to use force.

古文：此羸者阳也，未狎君政，故未承命。
现代文：我们这些弱小的阳樊人，尚未驯习君主的政令，所以不敢承命称臣。
English: We, weak and impotent men, have not yet learned to obey the sovereign's decrees, and so we dare not obey orders and claim to be his subjects.

古文：君若惠及之，唯官是征，其敢逆命，何足以辱师！
现代文：君主如果施给我们恩惠，只要派遣官吏前来晓喻就可以了，谁敢违抗命令，何必调动大军！
English: If the sovereign were to grant us a favour, it would be enough to send an official to come and inform us. Who would dare to disobey an order, why not mobilise a large army!

古文：君之武震，无乃玩而顿乎？
现代文：君主这般耀武扬威，难道不会滥用武力而使将士团顿吗？
English: With such a display of military prowess, wouldn't the monarch abuse his power to break up the group?

古文：臣闻之曰： 武不可觌，文不可匿。
现代文：臣听说： 武力不可以炫耀，文德不可藏匿。
English: The minister heard that: force cannot be flaunted, and virtue cannot be hidden.

古文：觌武无烈，匿文不昭。 
现代文：炫耀武力就缺少威严，藏匿文德就无法光大。 
English: It is not dignified to flaunt one's power, and it is not dignified to hide one's virtue.

古文：阳不承获甸而祇以觌武，臣是以惧。
现代文：阳樊人既失去了为王室承担甸服的义务，又遇上君主炫耀武陵，臣因此感到寒心。
English: The impotent man not only lost the obligation to bear the ceremonial robes for the royal family, but also encountered the monarch showing off the military mausoleum, so the vassal felt cold.

古文：不然，其敢自爱也？
现代文：否则，谁敢只顾自己而不服从呢？
English: Otherwise, who would dare to be self-centered and disobey?

古文：且夫阳岂有裔民哉，夫亦皆天子之父兄甥舅也，若之何其虐之也？ 
现代文：况且阳樊并没有被放逐的恶民，都是周天子的父兄甥舅，君主对他们为何如此苛待呢？ 
English: Moreover, impotence and impotence are not banished villains, they are Zhou Tianzi's parents, brothers and nephews. Why did the monarch treat them so harshly?

古文：晋侯闻之，曰： 是君子之言也。 
现代文：晋文公听了这些话，说： 这是君子所说的话啊！ 
English: Jinwen Gong listened to these words and said: This is what a gentleman said!

古文：乃出阳民。
现代文：于是让阳樊居民迁出。
English: As a result, the impotent residents were allowed to move out.

