古文：沈麟士字云祯，吴兴武康人也。
现代文：沈麟士字云祯，吴兴武康人。
English: Shen Lin Shi Zi Yun Yao, Wu Xing Wu Kangren.

古文：祖膺期，晋太中大夫。
现代文：祖父沈膺期，是晋朝太中大夫。
English: His grandfather, Shen Xizhi, was a doctor of the imperial court during the Jin Dynasty.

古文：父虔之，宋乐安令。
现代文：父亲沈虔之，在宋朝时作乐安县令。
English: His father, Shen Qianzhi, was the county magistrate of Le'an County during the Song Dynasty.

古文：麟士幼而俊敏，年七岁，听叔父岳言玄。
现代文：麟士从小聪俊，七岁时，听叔父沈岳谈玄理。
English: At the age of seven, Linshi listened to his uncle Shen Yue talk about metaphysics.

古文：宾散，言无所遗失。
现代文：宾客散去以后，他能毫无遗漏地复述叔父的讲解。
English: After the guests had left, he was able to repeat his uncle's explanation in full.

古文：岳抚其肩曰： 若斯文不绝，其在尔乎。 
现代文：沈岳抚摸着他肩膀说： 如果斯文不断绝的话，希望恐怕是在你这儿了。 
English: Shen Yue stroked his shoulder and said, "If Sven keeps dying, I'm afraid the hope is here with you."

古文：及长，博通经史，有高尚之心。
现代文：长大以后，博通经史，有高尚的情怀。
English: When he grows up, he will be well-versed in history and have noble sentiments.

古文：亲亡，居丧尽礼。
现代文：父亲去世，他服丧尽了礼节。
English: When his father died, he lost all sense of propriety.

古文：服阕，忌日辄流泪弥旬。
现代文：丧服期满后，每遇父亲忌日总要流泪十来天。
English: After the mourning period is over, I always shed tears for about ten days every time my father dies.

古文：居贫织帘诵书，口手不息，乡里号爲织帘先生。
现代文：生活贫困，一边织帘一边读书，乡邻们都称他为 织帘先生 。
English: He lived in poverty, knitted curtains and read books at the same time. His neighbors called him Mr. Curtain Knitter.

古文：尝爲人作竹误伤手，便流泪而还。
现代文：曾经给人做竹器弄伤了手，便流着泪回去了。
English: He once hurt his hand making bamboo utensils and went back home in tears.

古文：同作者谓曰： 此不足损，何至涕零。 
现代文：和他一块儿干活的人问他： 这没什么要紧，何至于就哭起来了？ 
English: A co-worker asked him, "It doesn't matter, why are you crying?"

古文：答曰： 此本不痛，但遗体毁伤，感而悲耳。 
现代文：他回答说： 伤本来并不算疼，但毁伤了父母留给我的身体，心里难过才哭罢了。 
English: He replied: "The injury was not painful in the first place, but it damaged the body that my parents left me. I only cried because I was sad.

古文：尝行路，邻人认其所着屐，麟士曰： 是卿屐邪？ 
现代文：曾有一次走在路上，邻居说他穿的鞋是自己的，麟士问： 是你的鞋吗？ 
English: Once when he was walking on the road, a neighbor said that the shoes he was wearing were his own. The hermit asked: Are they your shoes?

古文：即跣而反。
现代文：就脱下来光着脚回家了。
English: I just took off my clothes and went home barefoot.

古文：邻人得屐，送前者还之，麟士曰： 非卿屐邪？ 
现代文：邻居后来找着了自己的鞋，把他的鞋还他，他也只是说： 不是你的鞋吗？ 
English: The neighbor later found his own shoes and returned his shoes to him, and he just said: Aren't they your shoes?

古文：笑而受之。
现代文：笑一笑把鞋收下了事。
English: He accepted the shoes with a smile.

古文：宋元嘉末，文帝令仆射何尚之抄撰五经，访举学士，县以麟士应选。
现代文：宋元嘉末年，文帝令仆射何尚之抄录编辑《五经》，探访举荐有学问的人，县里推荐麟士应选。
English: In the last years of Song Yuan Jia, Emperor Wen ordered his servant, He Shangren, to copy and edit the "Five Classics" and to visit and recommend learned people. The recommended scholars in the county should be selected.

古文：不得已至都，尚之深相接。
现代文：他不得已才到京城，尚之接待他很够礼貌。
English: He had no choice but to come to the capital, but he was received very politely.

古文：及至，尚之谓子偃曰： 山薮故多奇士，沈麟士，黄叔度之流也，岂可澄清淆浊邪。
现代文：他到了以后，尚之对儿子何偃说： 山野中必定多奇异之士，沈麟士，是黄叔度一流的人士，怎能够玉石不辨呢，你应把他作为老师。 
English: After he arrived, Shang Zhi said to his son He Yao: There must be many strange people in the mountains and fields, Shen Lin Shi, is a first-class person in Huang Shudu, how can jade not be distinguished, you should take him as a teacher.

古文：汝师之。 麟士尝苦无书，因游都下，历观四部毕，乃叹曰： 古人亦何人哉。 
现代文：麟士曾苦于无书读，于是到京都游历，遍观四部图书后，感叹道： 古人是什么样的人啊！ 
English: Linshi once suffered from not having any books to read, so he traveled to Kyoto, and after looking at four books, he lamented: What kind of people were the ancients!

古文：少时称疾归乡，不与人物通。
现代文：不久便称病回乡，不与人交往。
English: He soon returned to his hometown, claiming to be ill and refusing to interact with others.

古文：养孤兄子，义着乡曲。
现代文：抚养哥哥留下的遗孤，仁义名扬家乡。
English: He raised the orphaned children left behind by his brother, and his hometown became famous for its benevolence and righteousness.

古文：或劝之仕，答曰： 鱼县兽槛，天下一契。
现代文：有人劝他去作官，他回答说： 鱼被钓起来，兽让关进笼子，天下事各有契机。
English: When someone urged him to become an official, he replied: "Fish are caught, beasts are caged, and everything in the world has its chance.

古文：圣人玄悟，所以每履吉先。
现代文：圣人悟性深刻，所以一举一动都有吉兆。
English: The sage's understanding is profound, so there are auspicious signs in every move.

古文：吾诚未能景行坐忘，何爲不希企日损。 
现代文：我虽然没有高尚的德行，忘世超脱，为什么不能希望逐渐使自己谦退些呢？ 
English: Though I have no lofty virtue, nor am I detached from the world, why should I not hope gradually to humble myself?

古文：乃作玄散赋以绝世。
现代文：于是作《玄散赋》断绝与尘世的来往。
English: As a result, he severed his earthly ties with the world by writing "Hyakusanpu."

古文：太守孔山士辟不应，宗人徐州刺史昙庆、侍中怀文、左率勃来候之，麟士未尝答也。
现代文：太守孔山士征召他作官他不去，同族的徐州刺史沈昙庆、侍中沈怀文、左率沈勃来看望他，麟士都不曾回拜。
English: The daimyō Kongsanshi conscripted him to serve as an official, but he did not go. Fellow Xuzhou clansmen Shishi Shengqing, chamberlain Shen Huaiwen, and left leader Shen Bo came to visit him, but the Linshi never returned the visit.

古文：隐居余不吴差山，讲经教授，从学士数十百人，各营屋宇，依止其侧，时爲之语曰： 吴差山中有贤士，开门教授居成市。 
现代文：他隐居在余不溪吴差山，讲经授徒，来向他求学的有百十来人，各人盖了房舍，住在他近旁，当时人编成一句顺口溜： 吴差山中有贤士，开门教授居成市。 
English: He lived in seclusion in Wu Chai Mountain, Yufu River, lecturing and teaching. There were more than a hundred people who came to study with him, each of whom built a house and lived near him. At that time, people made up a parable: There are sages in Wu Chai Mountain, and the open-door professor lives in Chengshi.

古文：麟士重陆机连珠，每爲诸生讲之。
现代文：麟士推重陆机的《连珠》多次为学生讲解。
English: Linshi pushed the heavy lander's "String of Pearls" and explained it to the students many times.

古文：征北张永爲吴兴，请麟士入郡。
现代文：征北将军张永作吴兴太守，请麟士到郡城中去。
English: Zhang Yong, the general of the Northern Expedition, became the governor of Wu Xing and invited Lin to go to the county seat.

古文：麟士闻郡后堂有好山水，即戴安道游吴兴，因古墓爲山池也。欲一观之，乃往停数月。
现代文：麟士听说郡府后堂有好山水，是戴安世游吴兴时就着古墓修造的山池，想去看看，于是就去那儿住了几个月。
English: Linshi heard that there was a good landscape and water in the county seat's back hall, which was a mountain pond built by Dian Shiyu Wu Xing when he visited the ancient tomb. He wanted to see it, so he went to live there for a few months.

古文：永欲请爲功曹，麟士曰： 明府德履冲素，留心山谷，是以被褐负杖，忘其疲病。
现代文：张永想请他作功曹，麟士说： 太守大人恩德及于远方寒士，关心山野之人，因此我就披衤曷扶杖，忘掉疲惫病痛而前来。
English: Zhang Yong wanted to ask him to do a good deed, and the hermit said: "The Great Guardian is kind to those who are cold and far away, and cares about those who live in the mountains and fields. Therefore, I put on my cane and forgot about my tiredness and illness and came here."

古文：必欲饰浑沌以蛾眉，冠越客于文冕，走虽不敏，请附高节，有蹈东海死耳，不忍受此黔劓。 
现代文：如果一定要给恶兽画上蛾眉，给粗鄙的人戴上文绣的冠冕，在下虽不才，也要学一学高风亮节之士，只有跳东海一死，也不能接受这像刑戮一样难忍的官禄。 
English: If you must paint the evil beasts with moth brows, and wear the crowns embroidered above for coarse people, although you are not talented, you must learn from the high winds and bright festivals. Only if you jump into the East Sea and die, can you not accept this official rank, which is as unbearable as torture.

古文：永乃止。
现代文：张永就不再勉强他。
English: Zhang Yong no longer forced him to leave.

古文：升明末，太守王奂，永明中，中书郎沈约并表荐之，征皆不就。
现代文：太守王奂在升明末年，中书郎沈约在永明年间都上表向朝廷荐举过他，朝廷征召他都不应。
English: In the last years of the Ming Dynasty, the daimyō Wang Zhi was recommended to the imperial court by Chushulang Shen Yu, but the imperial court did not conscript him.

古文：乃与约书曰： 名者实之宾，本所不庶。
现代文：他给沈约写信说： 名本是实的附属物，本非我所愿。
English: He wrote to Shen Yu, saying, "The name is an appendage of the reality, which is not what I want.

古文：中央无心，空勤南北。
现代文：无心于此，空劳四肢。
English: Unintentionally, the limbs are strained.

古文：守操终老，读书不倦。
现代文：自己背柴打水，一天的饭吃两天，到老保持操守，读书不倦。
English: They carry firewood and fetch water by themselves, eat two meals a day, always maintain discipline, and never get tired of reading.

古文：遭火烧书数千卷，年过八十，耳目犹聪明，以反故抄写，火下细书，复成二三千卷，满数十箧。时人以爲养身静默所致。
现代文：遭火灾书被烧掉数千卷。年过八十，还耳聪目明。用旧纸的背面抄录，就着火光仔细书写，又写成二三千卷，装满了几十筐，当时人们认为这是他静默养身才得以有这样的好身体。
English: Thousands of volumes of books were burned in the fire. At the age of over eighty, he was still sharp-eyed. He copied on the back of old paper, wrote carefully when it caught fire, and wrote another two or three thousand volumes, filling dozens of baskets. At that time, people thought that it was because of his quiet health that he was able to have such a good body.

古文：制黑蝶赋以寄意。着周易两系、庄子内篇训。注易经、礼记、春秋、尚书、论语、孝经、丧服、老子要略数十卷。
现代文：作《黑蝶赋》以寄托情怀，著有《周易》两《系传》、《庄子内篇训》，注《易经》、《礼记》、《春秋》、《尚书》、《论语》、《孝经》、《丧服》、《老子要略》数十卷。
English: He wrote "Black Butterfly Fu" with the sentiments of entrustment, and authored "Zhou Yi" and two "Lineage Biographies," "Shang Zi's Inner Canon," annotated "I Ching," "Rituals," "Spring and Autumn," "Shang Shu," "Analects," "Filial Piety," "Funeral Clothes," and "Outline of Lao Zi" in dozens of volumes.

古文：梁天监元年，与何点同征，又不就。
现代文：梁天监元年，与何点同时被征召，又不去赴任。
English: In the first year of Liang Tianjun, he was conscripted at the same time as Deng Xiaoping, but he did not go to work.

古文：二年，卒于家，年八十五。
现代文：二年，死在家里，年八十五。
English: Two years later, he died at home, aged 85.

古文：以杨王孙、皇甫谧深达生死而终礼矫俗，乃自爲终制，遗令： 气绝剔被，取三幅布以覆尸。
现代文：麟士认为杨王孙、皇甫谧能洞察生死的道理而在办丧事时矫正时弊，就自己写下遗书，上面说： 一咽气就把被子掀掉拿走，拿三幅布来盖尸首。
English: Linshi believed that Yang Wangsun and Wangfujing were able to discern the truth of life and death and correct the shortcomings of the time when conducting funerals, so he wrote a suicide note himself, which said: Take away the quilt as soon as the breath is swallowed, and take three pieces of cloth to cover the corpse.

古文：及敛，仍移布于尸下，以爲敛服。
现代文：入殓时，把布铺在身子底下，作为入殓的服装。
English: When entering the cocoon, the cloth is spread under the body as a clothing for entering the cocoon.

古文：反被左右两际以周上，不复制覆被。
现代文：从左右两边反着裹上来，不用再做盖的被子了。
English: Wrap it up from the left and right sides, there is no need to make a cover quilt.

古文：不须沐浴唅珠。以本裙衫、先着褌，凡二服，上加单衣幅巾履枕，棺中唯此。
现代文：不需要沐浴含珠，还用本来的褐衫，原先穿的裤子，总共只要这两件衣服，上面盖件单衣，扎头发的幅巾在下当枕头，棺材里只要这些。
English: No need to bathe with beads, still use the original brown shirt, originally worn trousers, a total of only these two pieces of clothing, the top cover a single piece of clothing, the hair-pulling scarf below as a pillow, the coffin only needs these.

古文：依士安用孝经。
现代文：像士安那样照《孝经》行事。
English: Act according to the "Filial Piety" as Shian did.

古文：既殡不复立灵座，四节及祥，权铺席于地，以设玄酒之奠。
现代文：下葬以后不再立灵位，到四季节气及大小祥祭日，临时在地上铺张席，用清水祭奠。
English: After the burial, there will no longer be a shrine, and on the four seasons and auspicious festival days, a temporary seat will be set up on the ground, and the water will be used for the ceremony.

古文：人家相承漆棺，今不复尔。
现代文：别人家相沿的习惯都要漆棺，如今我不要漆。
English: Other people's families have a habit of painting coffins, but now I don't want to paint.

古文：亦不须旐。
现代文：也不需要招魂幡。
English: There is also no need for a memorial banner.

古文：成服后即葬，作冢令小，后祔更作小冢于滨。合葬非古也。
现代文：衣服一穿好就埋掉，坟墓造得要小，以后附葬的就造得更小点儿埋在一边儿，合葬不合于古制。
English: The clothes are buried as soon as they are worn, the graves are made smaller, and those buried later are made smaller and buried to one side. Burial together is not in accordance with the old system.

古文：冢不须聚土成坟，使上与地平。
现代文：坟墓上边不要用土堆起来，让上面与地平。
English: Do not pile up the top of the grave with soil, let the top be level.

古文：王祥终制亦尔。
现代文：王祥死时就是这样。
English: This is how Wang Xiang died.

古文：葬不须软车、灵舫、魌头也。
现代文：下葬时不需丧车、灵舫、鬼其头面具。
English: There is no need for a hearse, casket, or skull mask during the burial.

古文：不得朝夕下食。
现代文：不许早晚设置食物。
English: Don't put food out too early or too late.

古文：祭奠之法，至于葬，唯清水一杯。 
现代文：祭奠的规矩，到下葬为止，只需清水一杯。 
English: According to the rules of the memorial service, only one glass of water is needed until the burial.

古文：子彜奉而行之，州乡皆称叹焉。
现代文：儿子沈彝遵奉遗教实行，州里乡里人们都称颂感叹不已。
English: His son, Shen Qi, carried out the last teachings, and the people in the state and the countryside all praised and sighed.

古文：阮孝绪字士宗，陈留尉氏人也。
现代文：阮孝绪字士宗，陈留尉氏人。
English: Nguyn Ho Hu was a member of the Nguyn dynasty and a member of the Trn dynasty.

古文：父彦之，宋太尉从事中郎，以清干流誉。
现代文：父亲阮彦之，宋朝时作太尉从事中郎，以廉洁能干闻名。
English: His father, Nguyn Hn Th, was a lieutenant in the Song Dynasty and worked as a middle manager. He was known for his integrity and ability.

古文：孝绪七岁出继从伯胤之，胤之母周氏卒，遗财百余万应归孝绪，孝绪一无所纳，尽以归胤之姊琅邪王晏之母，闻者咸叹异之。
现代文：孝绪七岁时过继给堂伯阮胤之，胤之的母亲周氏去世，留下的财产百余万本应归孝绪，但他一无所取，全都给了胤之的姐姐琅笽王晏的母亲。听说此事的人都感叹惊异。
English: At the age of seven, Xiaoxu was adopted by his cousin, Ruan Yanzhi. Yanzhi's mother, Zhou Ruan, passed away, leaving behind more than one million yuan in property that should have gone to Xiaoxu, but he took nothing and gave it all to the mother of Yanzhi's sister, Zou Wangyao. Everyone who heard about this was surprised and saddened.

古文：乳人怜其传重辛苦，辄窃玉羊金兽等物与之。孝绪见而骇愕，啓彦之送还王氏。
现代文：乳母可怜他作为主持丧礼的嫡孙很辛苦，就私自偷了一些玉羊金兽等物件给他，孝绪见了很是惊怕，就告诉父亲送还给王晏母亲。
English: The nanny felt sorry for him because it was very hard for him as the grandchild who presided over the funeral, so she stole some jade sheep, gold animals and other items to give to him. Xiaoxu was very frightened when he saw it, so he told his father to return it to Wang Yao's mother.

古文：幼至孝，性沈静，虽与童儿游戏，恒以穿池筑山爲乐。年十三，遍通五经。
现代文：从小就非常孝顺，性格沉静，虽然也和小孩子们一块儿玩耍，却总是喜欢玩挖池堆山。十三岁时，便通晓《五经》。
English: He was very dutiful from a young age, with a quiet personality. Although he also played with children, he always liked to dig ponds and build mountains. At the age of thirteen, he was well versed in the Five Classics.

古文：十五冠而见其父彦之，彦之诫曰： 三加弥尊，人伦之始，宜思自勖，以庇尔躬。 
现代文：十五岁时行冠礼去见父亲彦之，彦之训导他说： 冠礼是人生最重要的，是人伦之始，你应努力自勉，来保佑你自己。 
English: At the age of fifteen, he went to see his father, Hikoshi, and was instructed by Hikoshi, who said, "Crowning is the most important thing in life. It is the beginning of human ethics. You should work hard to protect yourself.

古文：答曰： 愿迹松子于瀛海，追许由于穹谷，庶保促生，以免尘累。 
现代文：他回答： 愿学赤松子云游海外，追随许由遁迹山谷，希望能保住短促的人生，不遭尘世连累。 
English: Nguyn Ho Xu replied, "I would like to follow the footprints of the Red Pine Crab to the Bohai Sea and imitate the behavior of Hu Quyên hiding in the deep valley, hoping to save my short life and avoid the drag of the world."

古文：自是屏居一室，非定省未尝出户，家人莫见其面，亲友因呼爲居士。
现代文：从此就避开众人独居一室，不是早晚问候父母便足不出户，家里人也都见不到他，亲友们都称他为居士。
English: From then on, he avoided everyone and lived alone in a room. Instead of greeting his parents in the morning and evening, he did not leave the house. His family members could not see him, and his relatives and friends called him a householder.

古文：年十六，父丧不服绵纩，虽蔬菜有味亦吐之。
现代文：十六岁时，因父亲去世便不穿丝织的衣物，即使是吃到美味的蔬菜也要吐掉。
English: At the age of sixteen, because of the death of his father, he did not wear silk clothes, and even if he ate delicious vegetables, he would vomit.

古文：外兄王晏贵显，屡至其门，孝绪度之必至颠覆，闻其笳管，穿篱逃匿，不与相见。
现代文：表兄王晏官高显赫，多次到他家里来，孝绪估计他将来必定要垮台，听到他仪仗的吹奏声，就钻出篱笆逃避，不和他相见。
English: His cousin, the high-ranking eunuch Wang, came to his house several times. Xiaoxu estimated that he would certainly fall in the future. When he heard the sound of his ceremonial blowing, he climbed out of the fence to escape and not meet him.

古文：曾食酱美，问之，云是王家所得，便吐餐覆酱。
现代文：曾有一次吃酱味道很好，问起来，别人说是从王家弄来的，便把饭吐出来把酱也倒掉。
English: There was once a time when eating sauce tasted very good. When asked, someone said that it was from the royal family, and then spit out the rice and threw away the sauce.

古文：及晏诛，亲戚咸爲之惧。孝绪曰： 亲而不党，何坐之及。 
现代文：等王晏被杀，亲戚们都为此害怕，孝绪却说： 虽是亲戚，却非同党，怎么会受他牵连呢。 
English: When Wang Yao was killed, his relatives were afraid, but Xiaoxu said, "Although he is a relative, he is not a member of the Party. How could he be implicated?"

古文：竟获免。
现代文：居然免于遭祸。
English: Later, I did not fall into this disaster.

古文：梁武起兵围建邺，家贫无以爨，僮妾窃邻人墓樵以继火。
现代文：梁武帝起兵反齐，围攻建邺时，孝绪因家贫没有柴禾做饭，婢女就偷砍邻居坟上的树木来烧火。
English: When Emperor Liangwu raised an army and besieged Jianye, Xiaoxu did not have firewood to cook with due to her family's poverty, so her maidservant secretly cut down trees on her neighbor's grave to make a fire.

古文：孝绪知之，乃不食，更令撤屋而炊。
现代文：孝绪知道后，就不吃饭，又叫扒了房子用木料做饭。
English: After learning of this, Xiaoxu did not eat, and ordered the house to be stripped of its wood to cook with.

古文：所居以一鹿床爲精舍，以树环绕。
现代文：所居书屋只有粗床一张，周围用树作围墙。
English: The bookstore where he lives has only one bunk bed and is surrounded by a wall of trees.

古文：天监初，御史中丞任昉寻其兄履之，欲造而不敢，望而叹曰： 其室虽迩，其人甚远。 
现代文：天监初年，御史中丞任日方来寻访他哥哥阮履之，想来拜访他而不敢去，望着他的住处引《诗经》而叹道： 其室虽近，其人甚远。 
English: In the first year of the Custodian of Heaven, the Custodian of History was looking for Nguyn Trai, the brother of Nguyn Ho Thiệu. He also wanted to visit Nguyn Ho Thiệu, but he did not dare to go. Finally, he looked at Nguyn Ho Thiệu's house and said with admiration: Although the house is close to us, that person's virtue is far more noble than ours.

古文：其爲名流所钦尚如此。
现代文：他就是如此受到名流的钦佩崇敬。
English: That's why he's so admired and revered by celebrities.

古文：自是钦慕风誉者，莫不怀刺敛衽，望尘而息。
现代文：从此仰慕他风采声誉者，莫不怀揣名片整顿衣冠而来，但到此又不得见，只能望尘叹息。
English: Since then, those who admired his style and reputation have come with their business cards to tidy up their clothes, but they can't be seen here, and can only sigh.

古文：殷芸欲赠以诗，昉曰： 趣舍既异，何必相干。 
现代文：殷芸想赠诗给他，任日方说： 志向既然不同，何必互相干扰。 
English: When Yin Ying wanted to give him a poem, the Japanese side said: Since the aspirations are different, why interfere with each other.

古文：芸乃止。
现代文：殷芸才作罢。
English: Stop trying to be clever.

古文：唯与比部郎裴子野交。
现代文：孝绪只和比部郎裴子野交往。
English: Takaoka only associates with Hiburo Keishino.

古文：子野荐之尚书徐勉，言其 年十余岁随父爲湘州行事，不书官纸，以成亲之清白。
现代文：子野把他推荐给尚书徐勉，说他十几岁跟随作湘州刺史的父亲，不用公家的纸写字，以保护父亲的为官清白。
English: Zino recommended him to Shangshu Xu, saying that when he was a teenager, he followed his father, a historian of Hunan Province, and did not use official paper to write, in order to protect his father's official innocence.

古文：论其志行粗类管幼安，比以采章如似皇甫谧 。
现代文：说他的志向品行和管宁差不多，辞采文章好似皇甫谧。
English: He said that his aspirations and behavior were similar to Guanning's, and his words and deeds were similar to those of the emperor.

古文：天监十二年，诏公卿举士，秘书监傅照上疏荐之，与吴郡范元琰俱征，并不到。
现代文：天监十二年，武帝下诏让公卿举荐贤士，秘书监傅照上疏举荐孝绪。他和吴郡范元琰一起被征召，两人都未应征。
English: In the 12th year of the Heaven's Supervision, Emperor Wu issued an edict asking the court noble to recommend a wise man, and the secretary-supervisor to recommend Xiaoxu. He and Wu County Fan Yuanjun were drafted together, but neither of them were drafted.

古文：陈郡袁峻谓曰： 往者天地闭，贤人隐。今世路已清，而子犹遁，可乎？ 
现代文：陈郡袁峻对他说： 从前天地昏暗，贤人隐居，如今世道清明，而你还要出世，合适吗？ 
English: Chen County Yuan Jun said to him, "From the days when heaven and earth were dark and wise men lived in seclusion, today the world is bright, and you still have to be born, is that appropriate?

古文：答曰： 昔周德虽兴，夷、齐不厌薇蕨。
现代文：孝绪回答： 以前周朝虽然有道，但伯夷、叔齐却不食周粟，躲避到山中挖野菜吃。
English: Xiaoxu replied: In the past, although the Zhou Dynasty had Taoism, Bo Yi and Uncle Qi did not eat Zhou millet, but went to the mountains to dig vegetables.

古文：汉道方盛，黄、绮无闷山林。
现代文：汉朝鼎盛时期，夏黄公、绮里季却不感觉山林里寂寞。
English: During the heyday of the Han Dynasty, Xia Huang Gong and Bao Lijie did not feel lonely in the mountains and forests.

古文：爲仁由己，何关人世？
现代文：行仁义各有自己的方式，和世道又有什么关系！
English: Everyone has their own way of practicing benevolence and righteousness, and it has nothing to do with the world!

古文：况仆非往贤之类邪？ 
现代文：何况我又不是先贤一类人呢。 
English: Don't you think that I'm in the same category as the sages of the past?

古文：初，谢朏及伏暅应徵，天子以爲隐者苟立虚名，以要显誉，故孝绪与何胤并得遂其高志。
现代文：起初，谢月出和伏日恒应召出任，天子便认为隐者都是图谋虚名，借此来求取显贵的声誉，所以就没有再理孝绪、何胤他们，二人崇尚的志向便得以成全。
English: At first, Xie Yueyue and Fubitsuhiko were called to serve, and Tianzi thought that the hermits were all trying to make a false name and use it to gain a prestigious reputation. Therefore, there was no longer any need for them to be loyal and filial, and the two men's noble aspirations were fulfilled.

古文：后于锺山听讲，母王氏忽有疾，兄弟欲召之。母曰： 孝绪至性冥通，必当自到。 
现代文：后来孝绪在钟山听讲时，母亲王氏忽然得病，兄弟们要去叫他，母亲说： 孝绪淳厚性情与我暗通，一定会自己来的。 
English: Later, when Xiaoxu was listening to a lecture in Zhongshan, his mother, Wang, suddenly fell ill. His brothers had to call him. His mother said, "Xiaoxu's good nature is secretly connected with me. He will definitely come by himself."

古文：果心惊而反，邻里嗟异之。
现代文：孝绪果然因为心惊返回家中，邻人不禁感叹惊异。
English: Xiaoxu did indeed return home because of the shock, and the neighbors couldn't help but express their surprise.

古文：合药须得生人参，旧传锺山所出。孝绪躬历幽险，累日不逢。
现代文：给母亲配药必须用生人参，以前传说钟山出产，孝绪便进山亲历艰险，但好几天也没找到。
English: He had to use raw ginseng to give medicine to his mother. There was a legend that Zhongshan produced ginseng in the past, so Xiaoxu went into the mountains to experience the hardships, but he didn't find it for several days.

古文：忽见一鹿前行，孝绪感而随后，至一所遂灭，就视，果获此草。
现代文：忽然看到有只鹿在前边走，孝绪心里有感应便随后而行，走到一处鹿不见了踪影，走近一看，果然找到了这种药草。
English: All of a sudden, he saw a deer walking ahead. The doctor seemed to have a feeling, so he followed the deer and walked forward. When he came to a place, the deer suddenly disappeared, and Ruan Xiaoxu caught up with him and found the ginseng grass he wanted.

古文：母得服之遂愈，时皆言其孝感所致。
现代文：母亲得此药吃后病马上痊愈，当时人们都说是他的孝行感动了神灵所致。
English: His mother was cured immediately after taking this medicine, and people said at the time that his filial piety was caused by the gods.

古文：有善筮者张有道曰： 见子隐迹而心难明，自非考之龟蓍，无以验也。 
现代文：有个善于卜筮的张有道对他说： 只见你隐遁形迹而内心难以看出，如不用龟甲耆草来卜一卦，便没有什么证据。 
English: Zhang Youdao, who was good at divination, said to him, "I only see your shadowy figure, but I can't see it in my heart. If you don't use tortoise shell and grass to divination, there is no evidence.

古文：及布卦，既揲五爻，曰： 此将爲咸，应感之法，非嘉遯之兆。 
现代文：布卦时，卜了五爻，说： 这将会是 咸 卦，依应感之法，不是嘉遁之兆。 
English: When he was writing the sutra, he recited the Five Precepts and said, "This will be a salty sutra, according to the law of sensation, not a sign of auspiciousness.

古文：孝绪曰： 安知后爻不爲上九。 
现代文：孝绪说： 怎知下一爻不是上九？ 
English: Xiaoxu said, "How do you know that the next move is not to Shangjiu?"

古文：果成遯卦。
现代文：结果下边果然成 卦 。
English: As a result, the lower edge of the map turned out to be a hexagon.

古文：有道叹曰： 此所谓 肥遯无不利 ，象实应德，心迹并也。 
现代文：有道叹息说： 这就是所谓的 肥无不利 ，卦象应了你的所为，你的内心和行为是一致的。 
English: Someone sighed and said: This is the so-called "fat is not bad," the image corresponds to what you do, your heart and behavior are consistent.

古文：孝绪曰： 虽获遯卦，而上九爻不发，升遐之道，便当高谢许生。 
现代文：孝绪说： 虽然卜得 卦 ，然而如果上九爻不出现的话，隐居之路，我恐怕要拜辞许由先生而走不得了。 
English: Xiaoxu said: Although it's all speculation, if Shang Jiu Jie doesn't appear, I'm afraid I'll have to bow to my master and walk the road of seclusion.

古文：乃着高隐传，上自炎皇，终于天监末，斟酌分爲三品：言行超逸，名氏弗传，爲上篇；始终不耗，姓名可录，爲中篇；挂冠人世，栖心尘表，爲下篇。
现代文：于是著《高隐传》，上自炎皇，终于天监末年，斟酌人物，分为三等：言行超拔高逸，连姓名也没流传下来的，为上篇；一生不曾损害自己的修行，有姓名可录者，为中篇；辞官不干，一心隐居的，为下篇。
English: As a result, "The Legend of Gao Yin" was divided into three parts, starting with the Emperor of Fire and ending with the last years of the Heaven's Prison, according to the characters: those whose words and deeds are superior and lofty, and whose names have not even been passed down, are in the first part; those who have never harmed their own practice in their lifetime, and whose names can be recorded, are in the middle part; those who are not involved in the dictionary and live in seclusion, are in the next part.

古文：湘东王着忠臣传，集释氏碑铭、丹阳尹录、研神记，并先简孝绪而后施行。
现代文：湘东王著《忠臣传》，集佛教碑文、《丹阳尹录》、《研神记》，都先征询孝绪意见而后定稿。
English: "The Biography of a Loyal Subject," a collection of Buddhist inscriptions, "Danyang Yin Lu" and "Study of the Gods" written by the king of eastern Hunan, were all finalized after the opinions of Xiaogu were solicited.

古文：南平元襄王闻其名，致书要之，不赴，曰： 非志骄富贵，但性畏庙堂，若使麏麚可骖，何以异夫骥騄。 
现代文：南平元襄王听说他的名声，写信邀请他，他不去，回信说： 不是我傲视富贵，只是生性畏惧官场，如果獐鹿可以驾车，那和良马还有什么区别呢。 
English: Nanping Yuanxiang Wang heard of his reputation and wrote to invite him, but he did not go. He wrote back: "It is not that I am proud of my wealth, but I am afraid of officialdom. If a mule can drive a car, what is the difference between it and a good horse?"

古文：初，建武末，青溪宫东门无故自崩，大风拔东宫门外杨树，或以问孝绪。孝绪曰： 青溪皇家旧宅，齐爲木行，东爲木位。
现代文：当初齐建武末年，青溪宫的东门无缘无故塌了，大风刮倒了东宫门外杨树，有人拿这事问孝绪，他说： 青溪宫是皇家旧宅，齐朝在五行中属木，东方是木位。
English: At the beginning of Qi Jianwu's last years, the east gate of Qingxi Palace collapsed for no reason. A strong wind blew down the poplar tree outside the gate of the East Palace. Some people asked Xiaoxu about this. He said: Qingxi Palace is a royal old house, Qi Dynasty is a tree in the Five Elements, and the East is a place of wood.

古文：今东门自坏，木其衰矣。 
现代文：如今东门自己塌坏，木怕是要衰亡了。 
English: Now that the East Gate has collapsed on itself, the tree is in danger of withering away.

古文：武帝禁畜谶纬，孝绪兼有其书，或劝藏之。答曰： 昔刘德重淮南秘要，适爲更生之祸，杜琼所谓不如不知，此言美矣。 
现代文：梁武帝禁止收藏谶讳之书，此类书孝绪都有，有人劝他藏起来，他回答说： 从前刘德看重淮南王刘安的《秘要》，致使有刘向之祸，杜琼所谓不如不知道，这话说得好。 
English: Emperor Liangwu forbade the collection of taboo books. Xiaoxu had such books. Some people advised him to hide them. He replied: In the past, Liu De valued the "Secrets" of Liu An, King of Huainan, which led to the misfortune of Liu Xiang. Du Qiong said that it is better not to know. This is a good saying.

古文：客有求之，答曰： 己所不欲，岂可嫁祸于人。 
现代文：有客人向他要这些书，他回答说： 自己不想要，怎能嫁祸于人。 
English: When a guest asked him for the books, he replied: "I don't want them, how can I blame anyone?

古文：乃焚之。
现代文：就把那些书都烧了。
English: They burned all those books.

古文：鄱阳忠烈王妃，孝绪姊也。
现代文：鄱阳忠烈王妃，是孝绪的姐姐。
English: She is the sister of Xiaoxu.

古文：王尝命驾欲就之游，孝绪凿垣而逃，卒不肯见。
现代文：鄱阳王曾乘车来想邀他一起去玩儿，孝绪从院墙上挖洞逃避了。始终不肯见他。
English: Shanyang Wang once came by car to invite him to play together, but Xiaoxu dug a hole in the courtyard wall to escape. He still refused to see him.

古文：王怅然叹息。
现代文：鄱阳王只得怅然叹息。
English: The King of Shenyang could only sigh.

古文：王诸子笃渭阳之情，岁时之贡，无所受纳，未尝相见，竟不之识。
现代文：王的几个儿子重甥舅之情，逢年过节都要给他送些礼物，他什么也不要，也从来不与外甥们见面，竟然一直不认识。
English: Several of the king's sons were very fond of their nephew, and every year they had to give him some gifts for the holidays. He didn't want anything, and he never met his nephews, to the point that he didn't know them.

古文：或问其故，孝绪曰： 我本素贱，不应爲王侯姻戚，邂逅所逢，岂关始愿。 
现代文：有人问他为什么，孝绪说： 我本是贱民百姓，不应作王侯的亲戚，如今不期而遇，并非我的本愿。 
English: When someone asked him why, Xiaoxu said, "I am originally a Dalit people, and I should not be a relative of a prince, but now I have met him unexpectedly, and it was not my original intention.

古文：刘歊曾以米馈之，孝绪不纳，歊亦弃之。
现代文：刘高欠曾送给他米，孝绪不收，刘高欠就也把米扔掉了。
English: Liu Gao Kui once gave him rice, but Xiaoxu didn't accept it, so Liu Gao Kui threw the rice away.

古文：末年蔬食断酒，其恒供养石像先有损坏，心欲补之，罄心敬礼，经一夜忽然完复。
现代文：孝绪晚年素食断酒。他平时供奉的石像原先有些缺损，心想补一下，尽心敬奉，过了一夜忽然石像自己完整无缺了，众人都很惊异。
English: In his later years, Xiaogu became a vegetarian and gave up drinking. The stone statue that he usually offered originally had some defects, and he wanted to make up for it and worship it with all his heart. After one night, the stone statue was suddenly complete, and everyone was surprised.

古文：衆并异之。大同二年正月，孝绪自筮卦， 吾寿与刘着作同年 。
现代文：大同二年正月，孝绪自己卜卦后说： 我的寿限和刘著作同年。 
English: In the first month of the second year of the same year, Xiaoxu said to himself after divination: My lifespan is the same as that of Liu's work.

古文：及刘杳卒，孝绪曰： 刘侯逝矣，吾其几何。 
现代文：等刘杳死，孝绪说： 刘侯已经死了，我也活不了几天了。 
English: After Liu Xuan's death, Xiaoxu said: "Liu Hou is dead, I can't live for a few more days.

古文：其年十月卒，年五十八。
现代文：那年十月去世，享年五十八岁。
English: He died that October, at the age of fifty-eight.

古文：梁简文在东宫，隆恩厚赠，子恕等述先志不受。
现代文：梁简文帝当时为太子，特降恩惠，赏赠优厚，他儿子阮恕按照他的遗愿辞谢不受。
English: At that time, Emperor Liang Jianwen was the crown prince, and his son, Nguyn Xuân, was entitled to special favors and generous gifts, and his son Nguyn Xuân was not allowed to resign in accordance with his last wishes.

古文：顾协以爲恩异常均，议令恭受。
现代文：顾协认为这次对他的恩惠不同寻常，劝说他接受下来。
English: Gu Xie thought that this favor was unusual and persuaded him to accept it.

古文：门徒追论德行，諡曰文贞处士。
现代文：门徒们追论孝绪的德行，送他谥号为 文贞处士 。
English: The disciples followed the virtuous conduct of Xiaoxu and gave him the nickname "Wenzheng."

古文：所着七录、削繁等一百八十一卷，并行于世。
现代文：他所著的《七录》、《削繁》等一百八十一卷，都在世上流行。
English: The 181 volumes of his works, such as "Seven Commentaries" and "Cutting and Pasting," are popular all over the world.

古文：初，孝绪所撰高隐传中篇所载一百三十七人，刘歊、刘吁览其书曰： 昔嵇康所赞，缺一自拟，今四十之数，将待吾等成邪。 
现代文：当初，孝绪所撰的《高隐传》中篇收录了一百三十七人，刘高欠、刘讠于看了以后说： 从前嵇康所赞颂的人物，缺了一篇自赞，如今这四十的整数，是否要我们来凑足它呢。 
English: At first, the middle section of "The Biography of Gao Yin" written by Xiaoxu included 137 people. After reading it, Liu Gao Kui and Liu Zhi Yu said: The person praised by Gao Kang in the past lacked a self-praise, and now this integer of forty, do we want to make up for it?

古文：对曰： 所谓荀君虽少，后事当付锺君。
现代文：孝绪回答说： 这就是所谓荀君虽少，后事当交付钟君。
English: Xiaoxu replied, "This is the so-called Shijun is few, but should be handed over to Zhongjun afterwards."

古文：山内唯闻香气，世未尝有。
现代文：如若你二位一旦辞世，此书就以你二位为结尾。 
English: In the event of your death, this book will end with you two.

古文：武帝后令周舍爲邓玄传，具序其事。
现代文：后来刘高欠、刘讠于果然去世，于是孝绪就增补二传。
English: Later, Liu Gao Kui and Liu Yao passed away, so Xiaoxu added the second biography.

古文：陶弘景字通明，丹阳秣陵人也。
现代文：等孝绪去世，刘讠于的哥哥刘薭把他的一些逸事记录下来编入篇尾，以成绝笔之意。陶弘景字通明，丹阳秣陵人。
English: After the death of Xiaoxu, Liu Shanyu's brother Liu Shanyu recorded some of his anecdotes and compiled them into the end of the article to make it the last word.

古文：祖隆，王府参军。
现代文：祖父陶隆，作王府参军。
English: His grandfather, Tao Long, was a member of the imperial court and joined the army.

古文：父贞，孝昌令。
现代文：父亲陶贞，作孝昌县令。
English: His father, Tao Zhen, was the county magistrate of Xiaochang County.

古文：初，弘景母郝氏梦两天人手执香炉来至其所，已而有娠。
现代文：当初，弘景母亲郝氏梦见两个天神手拿香炉来到她的住处，过后便有了身孕。
English: At first, Hongjing's mother, Ms. Zou, dreamed that two celestial gods came to her home with incense burners in their hands, after which she became pregnant.

古文：以宋孝建三年景申岁夏至日生。
现代文：宋孝建三年即丙申年夏至那天生下弘景。
English: Song Xiao Jian was born in the summer solstice of the third year of Song Dynasty.

古文：幼有异操，年四五岁，恒以荻爲笔，画灰中学书。
现代文：弘景从小操行异于常人，四五岁时，就经常用荻干作笔，在灰上划着学写字。
English: From an early age, Hongjing behaved differently from ordinary people. At the age of four or five, he often used a rattan cane to make a pen, scratching the ashes to learn how to write.

古文：至十岁，得葛洪神仙传，昼夜研寻，便有养生之志。
现代文：到十岁时，得到一本葛洪的《神仙传》，昼夜研读探讨，便产生了养生出世的念头。
English: When he was ten years old, he got a copy of Ge Hong's "Legend of the Immortals" and studied and discussed it day and night.

古文：谓人曰： 仰青云，睹白日，不觉爲远矣。 
现代文：他对别人说： 我仰观青云，目睹太阳，不觉得相距很远。 
English: He said to others: I look up at the clouds and see the sun, and I don't feel very far away.

古文：父爲妾所害，弘景终身不娶。
现代文：父亲被妾害死，弘景于是终身不娶。
English: His father was killed by a concubine, so Hongjing never married.

古文：及长，身长七尺七寸，神仪明秀，朗目疏眉，细形长额耸耳，耳孔各有十余毛出外二寸许，右膝有数十黑子作七星文。
现代文：长大以后，身长七尺七寸，神态仪容明朗秀拔，眉目疏朗，身材颀长，广额耸耳，两个耳朵孔里各露出两寸来长的毛，右膝有几十颗黑痣成北斗七星状排列。
English: When he grew up, he was seven feet and seven inches tall, with a bright and handsome appearance, a sparse brow, a tall and slender body, a broad forehead with pointed ears, two inches of hair growing out of each of his two ear openings, and dozens of black moles on his right knee arranged in the shape of the Big Dipper.

古文：读书万馀卷，一事不知，以爲深耻。
现代文：读书万余卷，只要有一点弄不懂，就深以为耻。
English: After reading thousands of books, if there is anything I don't understand, I feel ashamed.

古文：善琴棋，工草隶。
现代文：善于琴棋，工于草书。
English: He is good at playing the piano and playing chess, and is good at cursive writing.

古文：未弱冠，齐高帝作相，引爲诸王侍读，除奉朝请。
现代文：不到二十岁时，齐高帝为相，招引他去作诸王侍读。任他为奉朝请。
English: When he was less than twenty years old, Emperor Qi Gao invited him to serve as an attendant to the kings.

古文：虽在朱门，闭影不交外物，唯以披阅爲务。
现代文：他虽身在官府，却闭门不与外人交往，一心只披阅诸王文章。
English: Although he was in the government office, he closed the door and did not interact with outsiders. All he wanted to do was read Zhuo Wang's articles.

古文：朝仪故事，多所取焉。
现代文：朝廷礼仪以及涉及前朝的旧事，多要来听取他的意见。
English: He is often consulted on court etiquette and old affairs involving the former imperial court.

古文：家贫，求宰县不遂。永明十年，脱朝服挂神武门，上表辞禄。
现代文：家贫，求作县令未遂，齐永明十年，脱下朝服挂在神武门上，上表辞职。
English: His family was poor, he tried to become a county magistrate, but after ten years, he took off his imperial robe and hung it on the gate of Shenwu, and then resigned from his post.

古文：诏许之，赐以束帛，敕所在月给伏苓五斤，白蜜二升，以供服饵。
现代文：朝廷下诏批准，赐予束帛，下令让他所在处官府每月供给他五斤伏苓，二升白蜜，以供他做饼子吃。
English: The Imperial Court issued an imperial edict approving this, bestowing him with the title of cassock, and ordering the government office where he was stationed to provide him with five kilos of feather duster and two liters of white honey every month, so that he could make cakes to eat.

古文：及发，公卿祖之征虏亭，供帐甚盛，车马填咽，咸云宋、齐以来未有斯事。
现代文：临行时，公卿们在征虏亭为他饯行，搭设了许多帐篷，车马堵塞道路，大家都说自宋、齐以来还没有过这样的事。
English: When he was about to leave, the nobles set up a lot of tents and blocked the roads. Everyone said that nothing like this had happened since the Song and Qi dynasties.

古文：于是止于句容之句曲山。
现代文：于是弘景到了句容的句容山住下。
English: As a result, Tao Hongjing settled in Guqu Mountain in Guanzhong.

古文：恒曰： 此山下是第八洞宫，名金坛华阳之天，周回一百五十里。
现代文：他常说： 这山下面是第八洞宫，叫作金坛华阳之天，周围有一百五十里。
English: Tao Hongjing often said: This mountain is the eighth cave palace, called the Golden Altar Huayang Heaven, with a circumference of one hundred and fifty miles.

古文：昔汉有咸阳三茅君得道来掌此山，故谓之茅山。 
现代文：以前汉朝有咸阳三茅君修炼得道后来掌管这座山，所以又称它为茅山。 
English: Formerly, during the Han Dynasty, Xianyang Sanmaojun mastered the cultivation of this mountain, which is why it is also known as Mao Mountain.

古文：乃中山立馆，自号华阳陶隐居。人间书劄，即以隐居代名。
现代文：于是在山中建起房舍，自己命名为华阳陶隐居，给别人写信，就以 隐居 代替自己姓名。
English: So he built a house in the mountains and named himself Huayang Tao Seclusion. When he wrote to others, he replaced his name with "Seclusion."

古文：始从东阳孙游岳受符图经法，遍历名山，寻访仙药。
现代文：起初他跟随东阳孙游岳学习符图经法，遍游名山，寻找仙药。
English: At first, he followed the Eastern Yang Sun Yue Yue to study the Law of the Four Elements, and traveled around famous mountains in search of elixir.

古文：身既轻捷，性爱山水，每经涧谷，必坐卧其间，吟咏盘桓，不能已已。
现代文：身体轻便灵活，喜欢山水，每次经过溪涧山谷，必定在那里坐卧，吟咏停留，不愿离去。
English: His body is light and flexible, he likes the landscape, and every time he passes through a stream or valley, he must lie down and stay there, unwilling to leave.

古文：谓门人曰： 吾见朱门广厦，虽识其华乐，而无欲往之心。
现代文：他对弟子们说： 我看到那些朱门广厦，虽然也知道它里面的华美享乐，但没有进去的念头。
English: He said to his disciples, "I saw those Zhumen Mansions, and although I knew the splendor and enjoyment inside, I had no intention of going inside.

古文：望高岩，瞰大泽，知此难立止，自恒欲就之。
现代文：眼望着高山大泽，也知道此处难于安家，却总想到这里来。
English: Looking at Takayamadasawa, I also know that it is difficult to make a home here, but I always think of coming here.

古文：且永明中求禄，得辄差舛；若不尔，岂得爲今日之事。
现代文：我在永明年间求官禄，真得到便麻烦了，如不然，怎能像今天这样呢。
English: I've been asking for a promotion for years, and when I actually get it, I'm in trouble. Otherwise, how could it be like this today?

古文：岂唯身有仙相，亦缘势使之然。 
现代文：难道只是我有神仙之相，也是机缘造成的啊。 
English: Isn't it just that I have the appearance of a fairy godmother, also caused by chance?

古文：沈约爲东阳郡守，高其志节，累书要之，不至。
现代文：沈约作东阳郡守，钦佩他的志向情操，屡次写信邀请他，他都不去。
English: Shen agreed to be the Dongyang County Governor, admired his aspiration, and repeatedly wrote to him to invite him, but he did not go.

古文：弘景爲人员通谦谨，出处冥会，心如明镜，遇物便了。
现代文：弘景为人随和通达，谦虚谨慎。进退裕如，心如明镜，什么事一看便内心了然。
English: Hongjing is an easy-going and open-minded person, modest and prudent. Advances and retreats are abundant, the heart is like a mirror, what things are clear to the heart at a glance.

古文：言无烦舛，有亦随觉。
现代文：言谈简明无差错，即使有错也能立时悟出。
English: The speech is concise and accurate, and even if there is a mistake, it can be realized immediately.

古文：永元初，更筑三层楼，弘景处其上，弟子居其中，宾客至其下。
现代文：永元初年，又建了一座三层楼，他住上层，弟子在中间，宾客在下面。
English: In the first year of Yongyuan, he built another three-story building. He lived on the upper floor, his disciples in the middle, and guests below.

古文：与物遂绝，唯一家僮得至其所。
现代文：于是与外界隔绝，只有一个家僮可以到他的住处。
English: As a result, he was cut off from the outside world, and only one family member could get to his place of residence.

古文：本便马善射，晚皆不爲，唯听吹笙而已。
现代文：他本善于骑射，到晚年都不再干了，只听听吹笙而已。
English: He used to be good at horse archery, but in his later years he stopped doing it, and only listened to boasting.

古文：特爱松风，庭院皆植松，每闻其响，欣然爲乐。
现代文：尤其爱听松风，院子里都种了松树，每听到风吹松响，就感觉快乐无比。
English: In particular, he loves to listen to the pine wind. He has planted pine trees in his yard. Whenever he hears the wind blowing, he feels extremely happy.

古文：有时独游泉石，望见者以爲仙人。
现代文：有时候独自在泉边石畔漫步，看到他的人都以为是神仙。
English: Sometimes he walks alone on the rocky shore of the spring, and everyone who sees him thinks he is a god.

古文：性好着述，尚奇异，顾惜光景，老而弥笃。
现代文：生来喜欢著书，爱好奇闻异事，珍惜光阴，老而更甚。
English: I was born with an affinity for books, a love of curiosities, and a cherishing of time, even more so as I got older.

古文：尤明阴阳五行、风角星算、山川地理、方图産物、医术本草，着帝代年历，以算推知汉熹平三年丁丑冬至，加时在日中，而天实以乙亥冬至，加时在夜半，凡差三十八刻，是汉历后天二日十二刻也。
现代文：尤其精于阴阳五行、风角星算、山川地理、地方物产、医术药草。著有《帝代年历》，以推算得知原记汉代熹平三年丁丑日冬至，加时在中午，而实际上应为乙亥日冬至，加时在半夜，一共误差了三十八刻。那么汉历比实际晚了两天十二刻。
English: He was especially proficient in yin and yang five elements, wind angle and star calculation, mountain and river geography, local products, and medical herbs. He was the author of the "Imperial Calendar." According to the calculation, it was found that the winter solstice of Dingwuxi in the third year of the Han Dynasty was originally recorded at noon, but in fact it should be the winter solstice of Yihai, and the extra time was in the middle of the night, a total error of thirty-eight hours. Then the Chinese calendar was two days and twelve hours later than the actual.

古文：又以历代皆取其先妣母后配飨地只，以爲神理宜然，硕学通儒，咸所不悟。
现代文：又指出以前历代都把他们的先妣母后配祭地神，认为按人神对应的情理应该如此，多少有学问的大儒，全都没看出这里的错处。
English: He also pointed out that all previous generations had sacrificed their first mother and then mother to the gods of the earth, and believed that this should be the case according to the principle of human-god correspondence. All learned great men did not see the fault here.

古文：又尝造浑天象，高三尺许，地居中央，天转而地不动，以机动之，悉与天相会。
现代文：又曾造出浑天象，三尺来高，地在中央，天转而地不动，用机关转动它，便全与天象相合。
English: He also once made a three-foot-tall muddy celestial elephant, with the earth in the center and the sky rotating but not moving. He turned it with a mechanism, and it all matched the celestial elephant.

古文：云 修道所须，非止史官是用 。
现代文：他说： 这些东西是修道必须的，不光是史官才用它。 
English: He said: "These things are necessary for monasticism. It is not only historians who use them.

古文：深慕张良爲人，云 古贤无比 。
现代文：他深慕张良的为人，说是 古贤无比 。
English: He deeply admired Zhang Liang as a person, saying that he was an incomparable ancient sage.

古文：齐末爲歌曰 水丑木 爲 梁 字。
现代文：齐末有歌谣说 水丑木 ，应一个 梁 字。
English: At the end of the Heian period, there was a folk song about a water ugly tree.

古文：及梁武兵至新林，遣弟子戴猛之假道奉表。
现代文：等梁武帝兵到新林，弘景派弟子戴猛之抄近道上表以示敬意。
English: When Emperor Liangwu's soldiers arrived in Xinlin, Hongjing sent his disciple Dai Mengzhi to copy the road map to show his respect.

古文：及闻议禅代，弘景援引图谶，数处皆成 梁 字，令弟子进之。
现代文：他听说朝内议论萧衍代齐的消息后，就引据图谶来推演，结果处处都出现 梁 字，他命弟子把此结果去进献给萧衍。
English: After he heard the news that the imperial court was discussing the succession of Xiao Yan, he quoted the graph to deduce the result. As a result, the word "Liang" appeared everywhere. He ordered his disciples to dedicate this result to Xiao Yan.

古文：武帝既早与之游，及即位后，恩礼愈笃，书问不绝，冠盖相望。
现代文：萧衍本来早就和他有交往，等即帝位后，对他更是恩遇，不断地书信问候，去探望他的达官显贵络绎不绝。
English: Xiao Yan had been in contact with him for a long time, and after he ascended the throne, he was even more grateful to him. He constantly sent letters of greetings, and dignitaries visited him in an endless stream.

古文：弘景既得神符秘诀，以爲神丹可成，而苦无药物。
现代文：弘景得了神符秘诀，以为可以炼成神丹，却苦于没有药物。
English: Hongjing got the secret of the divine charm and thought that it could be distilled into Shintan, but he suffered from the lack of medicine.

古文：帝给黄金、朱砂、曾青、雄黄等。
现代文：武帝便供给他黄金、朱砂、曾青、雄黄等。
English: Emperor Wu provided him with gold, cinnabar, zengqing, and xionghuang.

古文：后合飞丹，色如霜雪，服之体轻。
现代文：后来他配炼出来飞丹，色如霜雪，吃了以后身体轻捷。
English: Later, he refined fei dan, the color of which was like frost and snow, and his body felt light after eating it.

古文：及帝服飞丹有验，益敬重之。
现代文：等武帝吃了飞丹产生效用后，就更加敬重他。
English: Emperor Wu respected Fei Dan even more after he had eaten it.

古文：每得其书，烧香虔受。
现代文：每次收到他的信，都要焚香虔诚拜读。
English: Every time you receive a letter from him, you should burn incense and read it religiously.

古文：帝使造年历，至己巳岁而加朱点，实太清三年也。
现代文：武帝让他制定年历，他在己巳年的地方加了红点，那就是后来武帝去世的太清三年。
English: Emperor Wu asked him to draw up a calendar, and he added a red dot in the place of the year of the snake, which was three years after the death of Emperor Wu.

古文：帝手敕招之，锡以鹿皮巾。
现代文：武帝亲笔下诏叫他入朝，赏赐给鹿皮头巾。
English: Emperor Wu personally ordered him to enter the imperial court and presented him with a deerskin turban.

古文：后屡加礼聘，并不出，唯画作两牛，一牛散放水草之间，一牛着金笼头，有人执绳，以杖驱之。
现代文：后来屡次以礼聘请，他都不肯出山，只是画了两头牛，一条牛在水草间悠然自在，一条牛带着金笼头，被一个人牵着缰绳，用棍子驱赶。
English: Later, he was repeatedly invited by courtesy, he refused to go out of the mountain, but drew two cows. One cow was at ease among the water plants, and one cow with a golden cage head was led by a person holding the reins and driven away with a stick.

古文：武帝笑曰： 此人无所不作，欲学曳尾之龟，岂有可致之理。 
现代文：武帝见画笑道： 这个人什么事都做得出来，想学在泥中拖着尾巴自由自由在的乌龟，怎么能办得到。 
English: Seeing the painting, Emperor Wu laughed and said, "This man can do anything. If you want to learn how to be a turtle dragging its tail in the mud, how can you do it?

古文：国家每有吉凶征讨大事，无不前以谘询。
现代文：国家每有吉凶征伐一类大事，无不派人前去他那里咨询。
English: Whenever the country has a major event such as a military campaign, it invariably sends someone to him for consultation.

古文：月中常有数信，时人谓爲山中宰相。
现代文：一月当中常有几次书信来往，当时的人们都称他为山中宰相。
English: There were often several letters between them in January, when people called him the prime minister of the mountains.

古文：二宫及公王贵要参候相继，赠遗未尝脱时。
现代文：皇帝太子以及诸王公显要不断有人去拜访他，赠送东西也从未间断。
English: The emperor, the crown prince, and all the princes and queens apparently wanted to be constantly visited by people, and gifts were never interrupted.

古文：多不纳受，纵留者即作功德。
现代文：弘景大多都不接受，即使留下他都作了功德善事。
English: Most of them did not accept Hongjing. Even if he stayed, he did many meritorious and good deeds.

古文：天监四年，移居积金东涧。
现代文：天监四年，弘景移居到积金东涧。
English: In the fourth year of Tianjun, Tao Hongjing moved to Jiejinzhuan.

古文：弘景善辟谷导引之法，自隐处四十许年，年逾八十而有壮容。
现代文：他善于辟谷导引的法术，自从隐居四十来年，年过八十而看起来像壮年人。
English: He is good at the magic of guiding people out of the valley, and since he has lived in seclusion for forty years, he looks like a man in his eighties.

古文：仙书云： 眼方者寿千岁。 
现代文：仙书上说： 眼方的人有千年之寿。 
English: It is written in the Book of Immortals: "A discerning person will live for a thousand years."

古文：弘景末年一眼有时而方。
现代文：弘景晚年一只眼有时候呈方形。
English: In his later years, Hongjing's one eye sometimes took on a square shape.

古文：曾梦佛授其菩提记云，名爲胜力菩萨。
现代文：曾梦见佛授予他菩提记，封他为胜力菩萨。
English: He once dreamed that the Buddha awarded him the Bodhicitta and named him the Bodhisattva of Victory.

古文：乃诣鄮县阿育王塔自誓，受五大戒。
现代文：于是他到贸阝县阿育王塔下发下誓言，受佛门五大戒。
English: Tao Hongjing then went to the Ayuwang Pagoda in Deng County to swear by himself and receive the five precepts.

古文：后简文临南徐州，钦其风素，召至后堂，以葛巾进见，与谈论数日而去，简文甚敬异之。
现代文：后来简文帝萧纲任南徐州刺史，钦敬他的风范素养，把他召到后堂，自己布衣葛巾来见弘景，和他谈论了好几天，弘景才离去，简文帝很是敬重他。
English: Later, Emperor Jianwen appointed Xiao Gang as the governor of South Xuzhou, admired his manners and qualities, called him to the back hall, came to see Hongjing in his own cloth and cloth, and talked with him for several days. It was only after Hongjing left that Emperor Jianwen respected him very much.

古文：天监中，献丹于武帝。
现代文：天监年间，弘景向武帝献丹。
English: During his time as overseer of heaven, Hongye gave rice to Emperor Wu.

古文：中大通初，又献二刀，其一名善胜，一名威胜，并爲佳宝。
现代文：中大通初年，又献上两把刀，一把名 善胜 ，一把叫 威胜 ，都是宝物。
English: In the first year of junior high school, he also presented two swords, one named "Zen Sheng" and one called "Wei Sheng," both of which are treasures.

古文：无疾，自知应逝，逆克亡日，仍爲告逝诗。
现代文：弘景还没患病，就知道自己要死了，便预先算出死期，写下《告逝诗》。
English: Before he fell ill, Hong King knew that he was going to die, so he calculated the time of death in advance and wrote "Fatal Poem."

古文：大同二年卒，时年八十一。
现代文：大同二年去世，终年八十一岁。
English: He died two years later, at the age of 81.

古文：顔色不变，屈申如常，香气累日，氛氲满山。
现代文：死后脸色不变，关节伸屈如常，香气数日不散，遍山弥漫。
English: After death, the color of the face remains unchanged, the joints flex as usual, the aroma does not dissipate for several days, and pervades the mountains.

古文：遗令： 既没不须沐浴，不须施床，止两重席于地，因所着旧衣，上加生裤裙及臂衣靺冠巾法服。
现代文：遗嘱说： 死后不需沐浴，不需放在床上，只用两层席子铺在地上，身下铺平时穿的旧衣服，上面盖生衤戒裙到手臂，穿袜子，戴头巾，穿袈裟。
English: The will said: After death, there is no need to take a bath, no need to put it on the bed, only spread it on the ground with two layers of mats, lay old clothes worn during peacetime under the body, cover the top with a raw silk skirt to the arm, wear socks, wear a headscarf, wear a scarf.

古文：左肘录铃，右肘药铃，佩符络左腋下。
现代文：左肘悬钅录铃，右肘悬药铃，在左腋下佩符络。
English: Hang a recorder on the left elbow, a medicine bell on the right elbow, and wear a string of beads under the left armpit.

古文：绕腰穿环结于前，钗符于髻上。
现代文：绕腰穿环在前面打结，在发髻上插一张符。
English: Tie a knot in the front around the waist, and put a mark in the bun.

古文：通以大袈裟覆衾蒙首足。
现代文：用大袈裟盖着被子从头裹到脚。
English: Wrapped from head to foot in a large cocoon covered with a quilt.

古文：明器有车马。
现代文：随葬器具有车马模型。
English: The funerary object has a model of a horse and carriage.

古文：道人道士并在门中，道人左，道士右。
现代文：和尚道士都在门内，和尚居左，道士居右。
English: Monk and Taoist are both inside the door, with the monk on the left and the Taoist on the right.

古文：百日内夜常然灯，旦常香火。 
现代文：百日之内夜里点长明灯，白天香火不断。 
English: Within a hundred days, long bright lights will be lit at night, and incense will be lit continuously during the day.

古文：弟子遵而行之。
现代文：弟子遵照他的遗嘱执行。
English: His disciples carried out his will.

古文：诏赠太中大夫，諡曰贞白先生。
现代文：皇帝下诏赠他为太中大夫，谥为 贞白先生 。
English: The emperor gave him the title of Grand Physician to the Empress Dowager, and he was known as Mr. Zhenbai.

古文：弘景妙解术数，逆知梁祚覆没，预制诗云： 夷甫任散诞，平叔坐论空。岂悟昭阳殿，遂作单于宫。 
现代文：弘景善解阴阳术数，预知梁朝将亡，事先写了一首诗说： 夷甫任放诞，平叔坐论空，岂悟昭阳殿，遂作单于宫。 
English: Hongjing was good at solving yin and yang operations, and foresaw the death of the Liang Dynasty. He wrote a poem in advance, saying: "If the Emperors were allowed to celebrate their birthdays, and the Emperors were allowed to talk about the sky, and the Emperors were not allowed to go to the Palace of the Sun, then the Emperors would die in the palace."

古文：诗秘在箧里，化后，门人方稍出之。
现代文：诗秘藏在一个箱子里，死了以后，弟子们慢慢地才找出来。
English: The secret of the poem was hidden in a box, and after his death, his disciples slowly found it.

古文：大同末，人士竞谈玄理，不习武事，后侯景篡，果在昭阳殿。
现代文：大同末年，士大夫们竞相空谈玄理，不习武事，结果侯景篡弑，果然在昭阳殿内。
English: At the end of the Datong era, the scholar-officials competed to talk about metaphysics, but did not practice martial arts. As a result, Hou Jing tampered with it, and it ended up in the Shoyang Palace.

古文：初，弘景母梦青龙无尾，自己升天，弘景果不妻无子。
现代文：当初，弘景的母亲梦见一条青龙没有尾，独自升上天空，弘景果然不娶妻没有儿子。
English: At first, Hongjing's mother dreamed of a blue dragon without a tail, rising up into the sky alone. As it turned out, Hongjing did not marry and did not have a son.

古文：从兄以子松乔嗣。
现代文：堂兄把儿子松乔过继给他。
English: His cousin passed his son, Song Qiao, on to him.

古文：沛国刘瓛深加器异，尝表称之。天监九年，县令管慧辩上言义行，扬州刺史临川王宏辟命，不至。
现代文：他所撰写的书有《学苑》一百卷，《孝经集注》、《论语集注》、《帝代年历》、《本草集注》、《效验方》、《肘后百一方》、《古今州郡记》、《图象集要》及《玉匮记》、《七曜新旧术疏》、《占候》、《合丹法式》，都秘而不传，另外开始撰写还未完稿的又有十部，只有弟子们得到了。
English: The books he wrote, including 100 volumes of "Gakuen," "Compendium of Filial Piety," "Compendium of Anecdotes," "Imperial Calendar," "Compendium of Materia Medica," "Potency Test," "One Hundred and One After Elbow," "County Records of Ancient and Modern China," "Gallery of Images" and "Jade Deficiency," "New and Old Martial Arts on the 7th Day of the 7th Month," "Divination" and "Hattan Method," were all kept secret. In addition, he had begun to write 10 unfinished books, which only his disciples received.

古文：卒于家。庾诜字彦宝，新野人也。
现代文：庾诜字彦宝，新野人。
English: The character of Hikobo, a new wildling, appears.

古文：幼聪警笃学，经史百家，无不该综。
现代文：从小聪明颖悟，专心读书，经史百家，无所不读。
English: From a young age, she was bright, focused on her studies, read hundreds of books on history, and read everything.

古文：纬候书射，棋算机巧，并一时之绝。
现代文：谶纬、占候、书法、射箭、围棋、算术、工艺制作，都是当时的一绝。
English: Confucianism, divination, calligraphy, archery, Go, arithmetic, and craftsmanship were all popular at the time.

古文：而性托夷简，特爱林泉，十亩之宅，山池居半。
现代文：性情恬淡质朴，酷爱山水自然，家中十亩大的宅院，假山池塘占了一半地方。
English: Her disposition is light and simple, and she loves landscape and nature. At home, she has a ten-acre courtyard, and a rockery pond takes up half of the space.

古文：蔬食弊衣，不修産业。
现代文：他吃的是蔬食，穿的是破旧衣服，不治产业。
English: He eats a vegetarian diet, wears worn-out clothes and avoids industry.

古文：遇火，止出书数篑坐于池上，有爲火来者，答云 唯恐损竹 。
现代文：一次家里失火，他只抱出几箱书坐在水池边，有人来救火，问他为什么坐着不动，他回答说是 怕弄坏了竹子 。
English: When a fire broke out in his home, he only took out a few boxes of books and sat by the pool. Someone came to put out the fire and asked him why he was sitting still. He replied that he was afraid of damaging the bamboo.

古文：乘舟从沮中山舍还，载米一百五十石。
现代文：一次坐船从沮中山回家，随船载米一百五十石。
English: Once he took a boat from Shizhongshan to go home, carrying 150 kilos of rice with him.

古文：有人寄载三十石，及至宅，寄载者曰： 君三十斛，我百五十斛。 
现代文：有人乘他的船捎米三十石，等回到家，那人却说： 你的是三十石，我是一百五十石。 
English: There was a man who went out in his boat to gather thirty pebbles, and when he came home, he said, "Thou hast thirty pebbles, and I have a hundred and fifty."

古文：诜默然不言，恣其取足。
现代文：庾诜一句也不争辩，任他随便拿走。
English: The baboon said nothing, and allowed him to take as much as he wanted.

古文：邻人有被诬爲盗，见劾妄款。
现代文：有一个邻居被人诬告为盗贼，被官府拿问，他又无钱。
English: A neighbour was falsely accused of being a thief and was questioned by the authorities. He had no money.

古文：诜矜之，乃以书质钱二万，令门生诈爲其亲，代之酬备。
现代文：庾诜可怜他，便把书典当了二万钱。叫门生假作他的亲戚，代他出钱应付官司。
English: He took pity on him and bet the librarian twenty thousand dollars, asking his protégé to pretend to be his relative and pay the money to settle the lawsuit on his behalf.

古文：邻人获免谢诜，诜曰： 吾矜天下无辜，岂期谢也。 
现代文：邻居获免后来感谢庾诜，他说： 我不过是怜悯天下无辜之人，哪里指望感谢。 
English: After his neighbour was released, he thanked Zou, saying: "I only pity the innocent people in the world. I can't expect any thanks."

古文：梁武帝少与诜善，及起兵，署爲平西府记室参军，诜不屈。
现代文：梁武帝年少时和庾诜关系好，起兵以后，委任他为平西府记室参军，他不去就职。
English: When Emperor Liangwu was young, he had a good relationship with Yao. After he joined the army, he was appointed to join the army of the Pingxi Prefecture Recorder's Office, but he did not go to take office.

古文：平生少所游狎，河东柳恽欲与交，拒而弗纳。
现代文：他平生很少有交往密切的朋友，河东柳恽想和他结交，他拒不来往。
English: He rarely had close friends in his life. Hedong Liuyao wanted to make friends with him, but he refused.

古文：普通中，诏以爲黄门侍郎，称疾不起。
现代文：普通年间，朝廷下诏任他为黄门侍郎，他称病不去。
English: In ordinary years, the imperial court appointed him as the Yellow Gate Attendant, and he said that he would not go because of illness.

古文：晚年尤遵释教，宅内立道场，环绕礼忏，六时不辍。诵法华经，每日一遍。
现代文：到晚年尤其遵奉佛教，在家里设立道场，环绕礼拜忏悔，从不间断，念诵《法华经》，每天一遍。
English: In his later years, he especially followed Buddhism, setting up a dojo at home, praying and repenting all the time, and reciting the Lotus Sutra once a day.

古文：后夜中忽见一道人自称愿公，容止甚异，呼诜爲上行先生，授香而去。
现代文：后来在半夜里忽然见到一个和尚，自称愿公，仪表举止异于常人，称庾诜为上行先生，送给他香以后离去。
English: Later, in the middle of the night, he suddenly saw a monk, who claimed to be a monk, whose appearance and behavior were different from ordinary people, who called him Mr. Shang Xing, gave him incense, and then left.

古文：中大通四年，因寝忽惊觉，曰： 愿公复来，不可久住。 
现代文：中大通四年，庾诜睡觉时忽然醒来，说： 愿公又来了，我不能在此久留。 
English: In the fourth year of his junior high school career, he suddenly woke up while sleeping and said, "May the Lord come again, I can't stay here for long."

古文：顔色不变，言终而亡，年七十八。
现代文：脸色不变，话刚说完就咽了气，享年七十八岁。
English: His face remained unchanged, and he died at the age of seventy-eight, choking on his words.

古文：举室咸闻空中唱 上行先生已生弥陀净域矣 。
现代文：满屋的人都听到空中有声音在唱： 上行先生已经降生在弥净土了。 
English: People all over the house heard a voice in the air singing: Mr. Shanghang has been born in the Pure Land.

古文：武帝闻而下诏，諡贞节处士，以显高烈。
现代文：梁武帝听说后下诏，赠谥为 贞节处士 ，以表彰他的高尚坚贞。
English: Upon hearing of this, Emperor Liangwu issued an edict awarding him the title of "Chastity Officer" in recognition of his noble and steadfastness.

古文：诜所撰帝历二十卷，易林二十卷，续伍端休江陵记一卷，晋朝杂事五卷，总抄八十卷，行于世。
现代文：庾诜撰写的《帝历》二十卷，《易林》二十卷，续伍端休《江陵记》一卷，《晋朝杂事》五卷，《总抄》八十卷，流行于世。
English: The "Imperial Calendar" with 20 volumes, "Yilin" with 20 volumes, "Jiangling Ji" with 1 volume, "Jin Dynasty Miscellaneous Matters" with 5 volumes, and "General Commentary" with 80 volumes, all of which were written by Yao, are popular in the world.

