古文：梨山庙吴延瑫
现代文：梨山庙吴延瑫
English: Lishan Temple of Wu Yanqi

古文：淫祠余光祠鮔父庙鲍君张助著饵石人洛西古墓豫章树狄仁杰檄飞布山庙画琵琶壁山神
现代文：淫祠余光祠鮔父庙鲍君张助著饵石人洛西古墓豫章树狄仁杰檄飞布山庙画琵琶壁山神
English: Yuguang Ancestral Hall Yuguang Ancestral Hall Ancestral Temple Baojun Zhang Zhen stone man Luo Xi ancient tomb Yu Zhang tree Di Ren Jie Feng cloth mountain temple painting pipa wall mountain god

古文：梨山庙
现代文：梨山庙
English: Lishan Temple

古文：建州梨山庙。土人云。故相李回之庙。
现代文：建州梨山庙，当地人说是已故相国李回的庙。
English: Lishan Temple in Jianzhou. Locals say it is the temple of the late Li Hui.

古文：回贬为建州刺史，后卒于临川。
现代文：李回被贬到建州当刺史，后来死在临川。
English: Li Hui was relegated to Jianzhou, and later died in Linchuan.

古文：卒之夕，建安人咸梦四乘白马，入梨山。
现代文：死的那天晚上，建安人都梦见有四乘白马进了梨山。
English: On the night of his death, the people of Jian'an dreamed that four white horses rode into Lishan.

古文：及凶问至。因立祠焉。世传灵应。
现代文：后来果然传来李回的死讯，所以当地人才在梨山给李回修了庙，都说很灵应。
English: Later, the news of Li Hui's death came true, so local people built a temple for Li Hui in Lishan, and they all said that it was very helpful.

古文：王延政在建安，与福州构隙，使其将吴某，帅兵向晋安。
现代文：后来王延政在建安时和福州发生了冲突，派手下一个姓吴的带兵去攻打晋安。
English: Later, Wang Yanzheng clashed with Fuzhou in Jian'an, and sent a soldier named Wu to attack Jin'an.

古文：吴新铸一剑。甚利。将行，携剑祷于梨山庙，且曰：某愿以此剑，手杀千人。
现代文：吴某新铸了一把剑，十分锋利，将出发时，他带着剑到李回庙里祈祷发愿说，我愿用这宝剑杀死一千人！
English: Wu newly cast a sword, very sharp. When he was about to leave, he took the sword to the Li Hui Temple to pray and make a wish, saying, "I am willing to kill a thousand people with this sword!"

古文：其夕，梦人谓己曰：人不当发恶愿，吾祐汝，使汝不死于人之手。
现代文：这天夜里，吴某梦见李回对他说，人祈祷时不应该发恶愿。我将保佑你不死于别人之手。
English: That night, Wu dreamed that Li Hui told him that people should not make evil wishes when praying. I will bless you not to die at the hands of others.

古文：既战败绩，左右皆溃散。
现代文：果然吴某一战大败，手下士兵四散溃逃。
English: Sure enough, Wu suffered a major defeat in a battle, and his soldiers scattered and fled.

古文：追兵将及，某自度不免，即以此剑自刎而死。吴延瑫
现代文：追兵眼看就追上吴某，吴某心想已免不了一死，就用那把宝剑自刎了。吴延瑫
English: The pursuers caught up with Wu Mou as soon as they saw him, and Wu Mou thought that he could not avoid death, so he used the sword to kill himself.

古文：广陵豆仓官吴延瑫者，其弟既冠，将为求妇。
现代文：广陵豆仓官叫吴延瑫，他的弟弟已经成年，就张罗提亲的事。
English: The official of the Guangling Bean Warehouse is named Wu Yanqian. His younger brother, who is already an adult, tells Zhang Luo about his relative.

古文：邻有媒妪，素受吴氏之命。
现代文：邻居有个媒婆，一直受吴延瑫的托付寻找合适的女子。
English: A neighbor has a matchmaker who has been entrusted by Wu Yanqi to find a suitable woman.

古文：一日，有人诣门曰：张司空家使召。随之而去。
现代文：一天，有人敲媒婆家门，说是张司空家有请，媒婆就跟着去了。
English: One day, someone knocked on the door of the matchmaker's house and said that Zhang Si Rong's family had an invitation, and the matchmaker followed.

古文：在政胜寺之东南，宅甚雄壮。
现代文：一看是政胜寺东南的一个府第，很是雄伟壮观。
English: At first glance, it is a prefecture southeast of Shosei-ji Temple, and it is very majestic and spectacular.

古文：妪云：初不闻有张公在是。
现代文：媒婆说，我怎么没听说有张司空这么个人家呢？
English: The matchmaker said, "How come I haven't heard of such a private family as Zhang Sikong?"

古文：其人云：公没于临安之战。故少人知者。
现代文：接她的人说，张司空在临安之战中去世了，所以人们不太知道。
English: The person who picked her up said that Zhang Siku had died in the Battle of Lin'an, so people didn't know much about her.

古文：久知其家陈设炳焕，如王公家。
现代文：进了府门，看见府内的一切陈设都十分华贵，像是王公家。
English: Entering the gate of the palace, I saw that all the furnishings inside the palace were very luxurious, like a royal family.

古文：见一老姥，云是县君，之坐。
现代文：见一个老太太，说是县君。请媒婆坐完后，这家的女儿也出来了。
English: I saw an old lady who said she was the county magistrate. After the matchmaker was seated, the daughter of the family came out.

古文：顷之，其女亦出，姥谓妪曰：闻君谓吴家求婚，吾欲以此女事之。
现代文：老太太对媒婆说，听你说吴家想求婚，我打算把这个女儿许配给吴家公子。
English: The old lady said to the matchmaker, "Listen, you said that the Wu family wants to propose marriage. I plan to marry this daughter to the son of the Wu family.

古文：妪曰：吴氏小吏贫家，岂当与贵人为婚邪？
现代文：媒婆说，吴家官小家贫，怎么敢和你们这样高贵的人家结亲呢？
English: The matchmaker said, "Wu's family is small and poor. How dare they marry into such a noble family as yours?"

古文：女因自言曰：儿以母老。无兄弟。家业既大，事托善人。
现代文：张氏女自己回答说，我母亲年高，我又没弟兄，家业这么大，想托付给一个好人。
English: Zhang's daughter herself replied, "My mother is old, I have no brothers, the family business is so big, I want to entrust it to a good person."

古文：闻吴氏子孝谨可事，岂求高门邪！
现代文：听说吴家公子孝顺恭谨，这就是最合适的人了，我们还求什么高门贵第呢？
English: I heard that the son of the Wu family is filial, obedient and respectful. This is the most suitable person. What do we ask for?

古文：妪曰：诺，将问之。
现代文：媒婆说，好，我回去问问。
English: The matchmaker said, well, I'll go back and ask.

古文：归以告延瑫，异之。未敢言。
现代文：媒婆回到吴家说了这些情况后，吴延瑫心里有些疑惑，没敢说什么。
English: After the matchmaker returned to Wu's home and told her the situation, Wu Yanju had some doubts in her heart and did not dare to say anything.

古文：数日，忽有车舆数乘，诣邻妪之室，乃张氏女与二老俾俱至。
现代文：过了几天，忽然有几辆车来到媒婆家，是张氏女和两个老女仆一起来了。
English: A few days later, several cars suddenly arrived at the matchmaker's house. It was Ms. Zhang and her two old maids.

古文：使召延瑫之妻即席，具酒食甚丰，皆张氏所备也。
现代文：她们请吴延瑫的妻子到媒婆家赴宴，丰盛的酒菜都是张氏女准备的。
English: They invited Wu Yanqi's wife to the matchmaker's house for a banquet. The sumptuous dishes and wine were all prepared by Zhang's daughter.

古文：其女自议婚事，瑫妻内思之，此女虽极端丽，然可年三十余。
现代文：在酒席上，张氏女又自己提婚事。吴延瑫的妻心中暗想，这个女子长得倒是十分端庄美丽，但是看样子有三十多岁了。
English: At the banquet, Zhang's daughter also proposed marriage. Wu Yanqi's wife thought to herself that this woman was very dignified and beautiful, but she looked more than 30 years old.

古文：其小郎年节少，未必欢也。
现代文：我家兄弟岁数太小，不一定合适。
English: My brothers are too young, so it may not be suitable.

古文：其女即言曰：夫妻皆系前定，义知有合，岂老少邪？
现代文：那知张氏女立刻就说，夫妻姻缘是前世所定，如果命该结合在一起，才少又有什么关系！
English: The woman who knew Zhang immediately said that the marriage between husband and wife was determined in a previous life, and if they were meant to be together, it didn't matter how young they were!

古文：瑫妻耸然，不敢复言。
现代文：吴妻心里一惊，不敢再说什么。
English: Wu's wife was shocked and didn't dare to say anything.

古文：女即出红白罗二疋曰：以此为礼，其他赠遗甚多。
现代文：张氏女就拿出红白两疋绸子说，请收下这定礼吧。还给了不少别的礼品。
English: Zhang's daughter took out two red and white silk brocades and said, "Please accept this gift." She also gave many other gifts.

古文：至暮，邀邻妪俱归其家，留数宿，谓妪曰：吾家至富，人不知耳，他日皆吴郎所有也。
现代文：天黑时，张氏女请媒婆和她一块回家，并留住了几天。张氏女说，我家非常富，别人不知道，这一切将来都是吴郎的。
English: When it was dark, Zhang's daughter asked the matchmaker to go home with her and stayed for a few days. Zhang's daughter said that my family is very rich, others do not know, everything will be Wu Lang's in the future.

古文：室中三大厨，其高至屋，因开示之。一厨实以金，二厨实以银。又指地曰：此中皆钱也。即命掘之，深尺余，即见钱充积。
现代文：屋里有三个和屋顶一样高的厨柜，张氏女打开让媒婆看，一个厨装金，一个厨装银，又指指地下说下面全是钱，说完就叫人来挖，才挖了一尺多，就见里面全是钱。
English: There were three kitchen cabinets in the house that were as high as the roof. Zhang's daughter opened them for the matchmaker to see. One was filled with gold and the other with silver. She also pointed to the ground and said that there was money underneath. After saying that, she asked someone to dig, and only after digging more than a foot did she see that there was money inside.

古文：又至外厅，庭中系朱鬣白马，傍有一豕。
现代文：又来到外厅，见庭院拴着一匹红鬃白马，旁边有一只大猪。
English: When he came to the outer hall, he saw a red and white horse galloping in the courtyard, with a large pig next to it.

古文：曰：此皆礼物也。厅之西复有广厦，百工制作毕备。
现代文：庭西面有一个大厅，里面放着各种精致的家具用品，张氏女说都是结婚礼品。
English: There is a hall on the west side of the courtyard, in which there are all kinds of exquisite furniture items, which Ms. Zhang said are all wedding gifts.

古文：曰：此亦造礼物也。至夜就寝，闻豕如有惊，呼诸婢曰：此豕不宜在外，是必为蛇所啮也。
现代文：这天晚上刚睡下，就听院里的猪象受了惊，张氏女就招呼使女们说，那猪不能放在外面，一定是让蛇咬了。媒婆说，蛇还能吃猪吗？
English: That night, just after falling asleep, she was startled to hear that there was a pig in the courtyard. Ms. Zhang called the maids and said, "That pig can't be put outside, it must have been bitten by a snake." The matchmaker said, "Can a snake still eat a pig?"

古文：妪曰：蛇岂食猪者邪？
现代文：张氏女说，这是常有的事。
English: Zhang's daughter said that this is a common occurrence.

古文：女曰：此中常有之。即相与秉烛视之，果见大赤蛇，自地出，萦绕其豕，复入地去，救之得免。
现代文：就拿着蜡烛到院里看，果然有条大红蛇从地下钻出来缠住猪往地下拖，张氏女把猪救了下来。
English: She took a candle and went to the courtyard to have a look, and sure enough, a large red snake emerged from the ground, entangled the pig and dragged it underground. Ms. Zhang rescued the pig.

古文：明日，方与妪别，忽召二青衣，夹侍左右，谓妪曰：吾有故近出，少选当还。
现代文：第二天，张氏正和媒婆告别时，忽然叫来两个使婢站在他左右，对媒婆说，我有事出去一趟，马上就回来，说罢竟和两个使女一齐腾空而去。
English: The next day, when Mr. Zhang was bidding farewell to the matchmaker, he suddenly called two maidservants to stand around him. He said to the matchmaker, "I have to go out for a while, I'll be right back," and said that he and the two maidservants would fly away together.

古文：即与青衣凌虚而去，妪大惊。
现代文：媒婆大惊失色，张老太太说，我女儿暂时上天去一会儿有点事，你别担心，快坐。
English: The matchmaker was shocked and lost her composure. Old Mrs. Zhang said, "There is something wrong with my daughter temporarily going to heaven for a while. Don't worry, just sit down."

古文：其母曰：吾女暂之天上会计，但坐，无苦也。
现代文：有一顿饭工夫张氏女就回来了，微有醉意地说，几位神仙请我喝酒，我说媒婆在家，再三推辞才得脱身。
English: After one meal, Zhang's daughter returned, slightly intoxicated, saying that several gods had invited me to drink, I said that the matchmaker was at home, and I had to repeatedly decline before I could leave.

古文：因妪至葬，葬于杨子县北徐氏村中，尽室往会。徐氏有女，可十余岁。
现代文：媒婆更加吓得说不出话了。一个多月后，张氏女又请媒婆去，说老太太病重，等媒婆赶到，老太太已死，就帮忙料理丧事，葬在杨子县北的徐氏村里，张氏全家都参加了葬礼。
English: More than a month later, Zhang's daughter asked the matchmaker to go again, saying that the old lady was seriously ill. When the matchmaker arrived and the old lady was dead, she helped prepare the funeral and buried her in Xu's village in the north of Yangzi County. Zhang's whole family attended the funeral.

古文：张女抚之曰：此女有相，当为淮北一武将之妻，善视之。
现代文：徐氏有个十几岁的女儿，张氏女爱抚地说，这女孩命相好，将来是淮北一名武将的妻子，你们要好好待他。
English: Mr. Xu has a teenage daughter, Ms. Zhang said caressingly. This girl is a soul mate and will be the wife of a military commander in Huaibei in the future. You should treat her well.

古文：既葬，复后赠妪，举家南去，莫知所之，婚事亦竟不成。
现代文：葬礼之后，张氏女又送给媒婆很多礼品，然后全家都往南迁走了，也不知迁到什么地方，婚事竟也没有成。
English: After the funeral, Zhang's daughter gave the matchmaker a lot of gifts, and then the whole family moved to the south, I don't know where, but the marriage didn't happen.

古文：妪归，访其故居，但里舍数间。
现代文：媒婆回来后，再去找张家的府宅，只有几间很普通的房子。
English: After the matchmaker came back, she went to look for the Zhang family's mansion. There were only a few very ordinary houses.

古文：问其里中，云：住此已久，相传云张司空之居，竟不得其是。
现代文：问村里的人，都说张氏女住在这里很久了，传说那是已故张司空的房子，但究竟是怎么回事到底也没弄清。
English: When asked, people in the village all said that Ms. Zhang had lived here for a long time. The legend says that it was the house of the late Zhang Sikuang, but it is still unclear what exactly happened.

古文：后十年。广陵乱，吴氏之弟归于建业，亦竟无恙。
现代文：十年后，广陵战乱，吴延瑫的弟弟也回了建业，倒也没出什么事。
English: Ten years later, Guangling was in turmoil, and Wu Yanqi's younger brother also returned to Jianye, but nothing happened.

古文：淫祠
现代文：淫祠
English: The Temple of Lust

古文：余光祠
现代文：余光祠
English: Yu Guang Ancestral Hall

古文：汉灵帝初平三年，起裸游馆。
现代文：汉灵帝初平三年。灵帝盖了个裸游馆用作盛夏避暑。
English: At the beginning of the third year of the Heian period, Emperor Lingdi built a naked pavilion to use as a midsummer summer resort.

古文：盛夏避暑，长夜饮宴醉，迷于天晓。
现代文：灵帝整夜的饮酒作乐，天亮了还不知道。
English: Lingdi has been drinking all night, and he still doesn't know what to do when it's dawn.

古文：内官以巨烛投于殿下，帝乃觉悟。
现代文：宫廷的内侍把一个大蜡烛扔在殿下，才把灵帝惊醒。
English: The palace's chambermaid threw a large candle at His Imperial Highness to wake him up.

古文：及董卓破京师，焚其馆宇。
现代文：后来董卓攻破京都，烧了灵帝的馆舍。
English: Later, Dong Zhuo invaded Kyoto and burned down Emperor Ling's residence.

古文：至魏咸熙中，其投烛之所，冥夜有光如星。时人以为神光，于此立室，名曰余光祠，以祈福。
现代文：到魏咸熙年间，当年扔蜡烛的地方深夜有闪闪的光亮，人们说是神光，就在那里盖了个祠，名叫余光祠，以祈祷降福。
English: During the Wei and Han dynasties, people said that the place where the candles were thrown had a sparkling light in the middle of the night, and people said it was a divine light. An ancestral hall was built there, called Yu Guang Ancestral Hall, to pray for blessings.

古文：至明帝末，稍除焉。鮔父庙
现代文：到明帝末年，才渐渐不供这座祠庙了。鮔父庙
English: It was not until the last years of the Ming Dynasty that this ancestral temple was gradually no longer used.

古文：会稽石亭埭，有大枫树，其中朽空。
现代文：会稽县石亭埭，有棵大枫树，树身已经朽空了。
English: There is a large maple tree in Shitei Township, Hefei County. The tree has been hollowed out.

古文：每雨，水辄满。
现代文：每到下雨，树身中就灌满了水。
English: Every time it rains, the tree is filled with water.

古文：有估客携生鮔至此，辄放一头于朽树中。
现代文：有一个商人带着一些鮔鱼路过这里，就把一只活鱼放进树洞里的水中。
English: A trader passing by with some trout put a live fish into the water in a hole in the tree.

古文：村民见之，以鱼鮔非树中之物，咸神之。乃依树起室，宰牲祭祀，未尝虚日，目为鮔父庙。有祷请及秽慢，则祸福立至。
现代文：村民们发现了鱼，认为鱼绝对不能是在树里生长的，都认为这是神，就挨着树修了座庙，并宰牲献祭，天天不断，把这庙叫鮔父庙，说是对鱼神敬奉能得福，不敬就生祸。
English: The villagers discovered the fish and thought that fish absolutely could not grow in trees. They all thought it was a god, so they built a temple next to the tree and slaughtered and sacrificed animals every day. They called this temple the temple of the fish god. They said that worshipping the fish god could bring blessings, but disrespecting it would bring disaster.

古文：后估客复至，大笑，乃求鮔臛食之，其神遂绝。
现代文：后来，那个当初放鱼的商人又路过这里，见此情景哈哈大笑，并把树洞里的鱼取出来作成鱼羹吃了，从此人们才不再进这座假庙了。
English: Later, the merchant who originally set the fish free passed by again, laughed out loud at the scene, and took the fish out of the tree hole to make fish soup and ate it. From then on, people stopped going to this fake temple.

古文：鲍君
现代文：鲍君
English: Bao Jun

古文：昔汝南有人，于田中设绳，以捕獐而得者。
现代文：从前汝南有个人在田野里设下了绳网想捕获猎禽兽。
English: Once upon a time, a man in southern Ryukyu set up a rope net in a field to catch game animals.

古文：其主未觉，有行人见之，因窃取獐去，犹念取之不俟其主，有鲍鱼，乃以一头置罝中而去。本主来，于罝中得鲍鱼，怪之以为神，不敢持归。
现代文：一天，网里套住了一头獐子，本主没发现，一个过路的人偷偷取走了獐子。过路人想想觉得太不够意思，就把带着的鲍鱼放一只在网里。本主来后看见了鲍鱼，惊怪地认为这是神，不敢拿回去。
English: One day, a mule was caught in the net. The owner did not notice that a passer-by had secretly taken the mule. The passer-by thought it was not interesting enough, so he put an abalone in the net. When the owner saw the abalone, he was surprised to think it was a god and did not dare to take it back.

古文：于是村里因共而置屋立庙，号为鲍君。
现代文：村庄里的人们知道后就在得鱼的地方建了个祠庙，叫鲍君神，传说开来，祭祀的人很多。
English: After people in the village found out, they built an ancestral temple in the place where the fish was caught, called Baojun. The legend spread, and there were many people making sacrifices.

古文：后转多奉之者，丹楹藻棁，钟鼓不绝。
现代文：庙的柱子漆成红色，屋梁也画了花纹，日日钟鼓声不断。
English: The pillars of the temple are painted red, the roof beams are also decorated with patterns, and the sound of bells and drums continues day after day.

古文：病或有偶愈者，则谓有神。行道经过，莫不至祠焉。
现代文：有病的人求鲍神后偶然好了，就更说这神特别灵，走路人过庙门也都进去祈祷。
English: Sick people who prayed to Bao God were healed by chance, and it was even said that this god was very spiritual, and people who walked through the temple gate also went in to pray.

古文：积七八年，鲍鱼主后行过庙下，问其故。人具为说。
现代文：七八年后，那个当初往网里放鲍鱼的人经过祠庙，问是怎么回事，村人就如实告诉了他。
English: Seventy-eight years later, the man who originally put the abalone in the net passed by the ancestral temple and asked what was going on. The villagers told him the truth.

古文：乃曰：此是我鲍鱼耳，何神之有？
现代文：这人说，这是我放在网里的鲍鱼呀！
English: The man said, "This is the abalone I put in the net!"

古文：于是乃息。
现代文：从此人们才不再敬奉鲍君了。
English: From then on, people stopped honoring Bao Jun.

古文：张助
现代文：张助
English: Zhang Su

古文：南顿人张助者，耕于田中。种禾，见一李核，乃掘取之，以湿土封其根，置空桑中，遂忘取之。
现代文：南顿有个叫张助的，有一次种田时发现了一棵李子核想带回去，就挖了出来，用湿土培上顺手放在一棵桑树洞里，可是回家时却忘了。
English: There is a man in Nantong named Zhang Su. Once, when he was farming, he found a plum kernel and wanted to take it back. He dug it out, cultivated it with wet soil and placed it in a mulberry tree cave, but he forgot it when he got home.

古文：助后作远职，不在。
现代文：后来张助到外地当差，走了很久。
English: Later, Zhang Sui went to work as a foreign agent and was gone for a long time.

古文：其后里中人见桑中忽生李，谓之神。有病目痛者，荫息此桑下，因祝之，言李君能令我目愈者，谢一豚。
现代文：村里人突然发现桑树上长出了李树，就说是李君神，有一个闹眼病的人来到树下祈祷说，李君如果能让我眼睛好，我就祭祀一头猪。
English: When the villagers suddenly found a plum tree growing on a mulberry tree, they said it was the god Li Jun. A man with an eye disease came to pray under the tree and said, "If Li Jun can make my eyes better, I will sacrifice a pig."

古文：其目偶愈，便杀豚祭之。
现代文：这人眼病碰巧好了，果然用一头猪来谢神。
English: The man's eye disease happened to be cured, and he used a pig to thank God.

古文：传者过差，便言此树能令盲者得视。
现代文：这件事一传就走了样，说是这树能让瞎子复明。
English: As soon as word of this got out, it was said that the tree could restore sight to the blind.

古文：远近翕然，互来请福。其下常车马填溢，酒肉滂沱。
现代文：远近的人就络绎不绝来这棵树下求福，常常是车马堵塞了道路，祭神的酒肉成堆。
English: People from near and far come in droves to seek their fortune under this tree. Often, cars and horses block the roads, and piles of sacrificial meat and wine pile up.

古文：如此数年，张助罢职来还，见之，乃曰：此是我昔所置李核耳，何有神乎？
现代文：过了几年，张助被罢职回家乡，看见了这情形，就说，这李树是我当年放在桑树洞里的呀，哪里有什么神呢？
English: A few years later, Zhang Jue was dismissed from his post and returned to his hometown. Seeing this, he said, "I placed this plum tree in the mulberry tree cave years ago. Where are the gods?"

古文：乃斫去。
现代文：于是把树砍了。
English: So they cut the tree down.

古文：著饵石人
现代文：著饵石人
English: Written by 石人

古文：又汝阳有彭氏墓，近大道，墓口有一石人。
现代文：汝阳县有座彭氏墓，靠近大道。墓口立着个石人。
English: There is a tomb of the Peng family in Ruyang County, close to the main road. A stone man stands at the entrance of the tomb.

古文：田家老母到市，买数片饵以归。天热，过荫彭氏墓口树下，以所买饵，暂著石人头上。及去，忘取之。
现代文：有个农村老太太进城买了几块燋饼回来，天热，就坐在彭氏墓前的树下乘凉，顺手把燋饼放在石人头上，走时忘了拿。
English: A rural old lady went to the city to buy a few pieces of gingerbread and came back exhausted. It was hot, so she sat under a tree in front of Peng's tomb to cool off. She put the gingerbread on the stone man's head and forgot to take it when she left.

古文：后来者见石人头上有饵，求而问之，或人调曰：此石人有神，能治病，病愈者以饵来谢之。
现代文：后面来了几个走路的看见了燋饼，就研究是怎么回事。有人就开玩笑说，大概是这石人有灵，能治病，病好了的拿燋饼来谢神的吧。
English: Some people joked that the stone man probably had a spirit and could heal the sick, and that if they got well, they should thank God with the baked bread.

古文：如此转以相语，云：头痛者，摩石人头。腹痛者，摩石人腹，亦还以自摩，无不愈者。
现代文：这话传来传去，说成头痛的摸石人头，肚子痛的摸石人肚子，摸后再自摸，没有不能好的。
English: This saying has been passed down from person to person, saying that there is nothing wrong with touching a stone person's head for a headache, touching a stone person's stomach for a stomachache, touching it and then touching yourself.

古文：遂千里来就石人治病。
现代文：后来竟有人千里迢迢来求石人治病。
English: Later, someone actually came from thousands of miles away to ask the stone man for a cure.

古文：初具鸡豚，后用牛羊，为立帷帐，管弦不绝。
现代文：起初谢神只用些鸡、小猪，后来都用牛羊了。还给石人搭了帐幕，请来鼓乐祭祀。
English: At first, only chickens and piglets were used to thank the gods, but later they all used cattle and sheep. They also set up a tent for the stone people and invited them to come and perform a drumming ritual.

古文：如此数年，前忘饵母闻之，乃为人说，无复往者。
现代文：这样过了好几年，当初那个忘了燋饼的老太太把事说破了，人们才不再来敬石人了。
English: This went on for several years, until the old lady who had forgotten to make the cake broke the news, and people stopped coming to pay their respects to the stone man.

古文：洛西古墓
现代文：洛西古墓
English: Luoxi Ancient Tomb

古文：洛西有古墓，穿坏多时，水满墓中，多石灰汁。主治疮。
现代文：洛西有座古墓，已经坍塌很久了，里面灌满了水。水里含有石灰，能治疮疖。
English: There is an ancient tomb in Losi, which has been collapsed for a long time, and it is filled with water. The water contains lime, which can cure scabies.

古文：而往买者，又当祭庙中。酒肉不绝，而来者转多。
现代文：夏天走路的人有生了疮的，看见墓里的水清凉，就洗疮，偶然也有好了的，后来传开了，得各种病的人都来洗，还有喝水治肚内病的。
English: People walking in the summer had sores, and when they saw that the water in the tomb was cool, they washed their sores. By chance, some of them got better. Later, word spread, and people with all kinds of illnesses came to wash themselves, as well as drink water to cure stomach ailments.

古文：此水行尽，于是卖者常夜窃运他水以益之。
现代文：古墓附近的人就盖了个庙，专门卖这水。买水的人也必须到庙里祭祀，祭礼不断。
English: People near the ancient tomb built a temple specifically to sell this water. People who buy water must also go to the temple to offer sacrifices, and the rituals continue.

古文：其远道人不能往者，皆因行使，或持器遗信买。于是卖水者大富。
现代文：后来到这里买水的人太多，墓里水快干了，卖水的就夜里偷偷往里灌别处的水。太远的人来不了，就托人带着器具来买，卖水的发了大财。
English: Later, there were too many people who came here to buy water, and the water in the tomb was almost dry, so the water seller secretly poured water from elsewhere at night. People who couldn't come too far asked someone to bring equipment to buy it, and they made a fortune selling water.

古文：或言其水无神，官家禁止，遂填塞之，乃绝。
现代文：后来不少人说那水根本不灵，官府也禁止再卖，把古墓给填了，从此这事才算拉倒。
English: Later, many people said that the water did not work at all, the government also banned the resale, and the ancient tomb was filled. From then on, this was considered a failure.

古文：豫章树
现代文：豫章树
English: Yuanzhangshu

古文：唐洪州有豫章树，从秦至今，千年以上，远近崇敬。
现代文：唐代洪州有棵豫章树，从秦朝到唐朝已活了千年以上。
English: In Hongzhou of the Tang Dynasty, there was a Yuzhang tree that had lived for more than a thousand years from the Qin Dynasty to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：或索女妇，或索猪羊。
现代文：远近的人都视为神树，经常要用妇女或要牛羊祭祀。
English: People from near and far regard it as a sacred tree, and it is often used to sacrifice women or cattle and sheep.

古文：有胡超师，隐于白鹤山中，时游洪府。见猪羊妇女遮列，诉称此神枉见杀害，超乃积薪将焚之，犹惊惧。
现代文：据说有个叫胡超的道士在白鹤山隐居，来到洪州，看见树五罗列着很多猪羊祭品，就对人们说这神见不得杀害牲灵，就堆起柴禾要把树烧掉。
English: It is said that a Taoist named Hu Chao lived in seclusion on Mount Bai He. When he came to Hongzhou, he saw a tree lined with many pig and sheep sacrifices. He told the people that this god was not allowed to kill animals, so he piled up firewood to burn the tree.

古文：其树上有鹳雀窠数十，欲烧前三日，鹳翔空中，徘徊不下。
现代文：大家仍很害怕，这树上有好几十个鸟窝，打算烧树的前三天，鸟儿就在空中绕圈地飞不往树上落。
English: Everyone is still very scared. There are dozens of bird's nests in this tree. Three days before they planned to burn the tree, the birds flew in circles in the air to avoid landing on the tree.

古文：及四边居宅栉比，皆是竹木，恐火延烧。于时大风起，吹焰直上，旁无损害，遂奏其地置观焉。
现代文：树的四周都是房子和竹林，一烧树怕引起火灾。烧树那天刮起了大风，把火直吹上天去，周围没有一点损害。于是就在烧树的地方盖了一座庙。
English: The tree was surrounded by houses and bamboo groves, and the burning of the tree was feared to cause a fire. On the day of the burning of the tree, a strong wind blew, blowing the fire straight up to the sky, without any damage to the surroundings. Therefore, a temple was built in the place where the tree was burned.

古文：狄仁杰檄
现代文：狄仁杰檄
English: Composed by Di Renjie

古文：唐垂拱四年，安抚大使狄仁杰，檄告西楚霸王项君将校等，其略曰：鸿名不可以谬假，神器不可以力争。
现代文：唐垂拱四年，安抚大使狄仁杰写了一篇声讨西楚霸王项羽和项羽手下将校的文章并下令撤除烧毁项羽庙。文章说：伟人的名字不可以冒充，国家的权柄不可以抢夺。
English: In the fourth year of the Tang Dynasty, the pacification ambassador Di Renjie wrote an article criticizing the Western Chu Emperor Xiang Yu and Xiang Yu's officers and ordered the removal and burning of the Xiang Yu Temple. The article said: The name of the great man cannot be impersonated, and the power of the country cannot be robbed.

古文：应天者膺乐推之名，背时者非见几之主。
现代文：应运顺天时的人才会受到推崇，背时逆潮流的没见有几个能成王侯。
English: Only those who respond to the trend of the times will be respected. There are only a few people who can become princes when they go against the trend.

古文：自祖龙御宇，横噬诸侯。任赵高以当轴，弃蒙恬而齿剑。
现代文：从秦始皇当政之后。任命奸臣赵高专权，杀害了忠臣大将蒙恬。
English: After Qin Shi Huang came to power, he appointed a traitorous vassal, Zhao Haoquan, and killed a loyal vassal general, Meng Yao.

古文：沙丘作祸于前，望夷复灭于后。
现代文：焚书坑儒就埋下了祸根，后来六国蜂起的讨伐终于使秦灭亡。
English: Burning books and pitting Confucianism against each other was the root of the evil. Later, the Six-Nation Uprising finally led to Qin's downfall.

古文：七庙隳圮，万姓屠原。鸟思静于飞尘，鱼岂安于沸水。
现代文：那时庙宇被毁塌，百姓被屠杀，鸟儿只能在洁净的天空飞翔，鱼儿怎能在开水里生存。
English: At that time, temples were destroyed, people were slaughtered, birds could only fly in the clear sky, and how could fish survive in boiling water?

古文：赫矣皇汉，受命玄穹。膺赤帝之贞符，当四灵之钦运。
现代文：汉高祖刘邦功德昭彰。他受命于上天，有炎帝的佑护，天时地利人和集于一身。
English: Liu Bang, the progenitor of Henkel, is a man of outstanding merit. He was commanded by heaven, protected by Emperor Yan, and was a man of the right place at the right time.

古文：俯张地纽，彰凤纪之祥；仰缉天纲，郁龙兴之兆。
现代文：他俯问土地，土地显出凤的祥瑞，他仰看上天，天上也出现龙的征兆。
English: He asked the land, and the land showed the auspiciousness of the phoenix. He looked up at the sky, and signs of the dragon appeared in the sky.

古文：而君潜游泽国，啸聚水乡。矜扛鼎之雄，逞拔山之力。
现代文：而你项羽只不过是一个江南泽国的莽汉，在水乡聚集起一些乌合之众，凭着你有扛铁鼎拔山岳的力气，蔑视天意和命运的安排，在关中举事，终于兵败在垓下。
English: But you, Xiang Yu, are nothing but a reckless man from the south of the Yangtze River. You gathered a number of rabble-rousers in the water town, and with your strength to lift mountains, you defied the will of heaven and the arrangement of fate, raised an issue in the pass, and finally suffered a military defeat.

古文：岂合虚承庙食，广费牲牢？仁杰受命方隅，循革攸寄。
现代文：看起来是被刘邦所败，实际上是因为你违背了天意才复灭，白白葬送了你的八千子弟兵应做为鉴戒，多么可惜啊！
English: It seems that you were defeated by Liu Bang, but in fact, you were defeated because you violated the will of heaven. The fact that you sent your eight thousand soldiers to their deaths in vain should serve as a warning. What a pity!

古文：今遣焚燎祠宇，削平台室，使蕙帷销尽，羽帐随烟。君宜速迁，勿为人患。
现代文：你应该老老实实把你的魂魄藏在东方的山中或虚渺的太空里，有什么资格在你的庙里白白享受人间的供奉祭祀呢？我狄仁杰受皇命治理这一方，需要有很多革新和建树。现在我派人烧毁项羽庙，拆除庙中的堂舍，烧毁你的帐幕。你要快快迁走，不许再欺人害人。
English: You should honestly hide your soul in the mountains of the East or in the vastness of space. What qualifications do you have to enjoy human offerings and sacrifices in your temple for free? I, Di Renjie, am governed by the imperial order, which requires a lot of innovation and construction. Now I am sending people to burn down the Xiang Yu Temple, demolish the temple's residence, and burn down your tent. You should quickly move away, and no longer be allowed to bully and harm others.

古文：檄到如律令。
现代文：这篇声讨文章，就代表我的命令。
English: This libelous article represents my order.

古文：飞布山庙
现代文：飞布山庙
English: Feibushan Temple

古文：画琵琶
现代文：画琵琶
English: Painting the pipa

古文：泊船。书生因上山闲步。
现代文：停了船，书生上山闲游。
English: After stopping the boat, the students went for a leisurely walk up the mountain.

古文：入林数十步，上有一坡。
现代文：进了树林几十步，上面有一个坡。
English: After a few dozen steps into the woods, there was a slope.

古文：见僧房院开，中有床。床塌，门外小廊数间，傍有笔砚。
现代文：书生看见庙门开着，僧房里有一张已经塌了的床，门外还有几间小偏厦，旁边放着笔砚。
English: The student saw the temple door open, a collapsed bed in the monk's room, several small outbuildings outside the door, and a pencil case next to it.

古文：书生攻画，遂把笔，于房门素壁上，画一琵琶，大小与真不异。
现代文：书生会画画，就拿起笔来，在房门白墙上画了一只琵琶。大小和真琵琶没什么不同。
English: The student knew how to draw, so he picked up a pen and drew a lute on the white wall by the door. It was the same size as a real lute.

古文：画毕，风静船发。
现代文：画完后，风停了，书生就上船走了。
English: After the painting was finished, the wind died down, and the students boarded the boat and left.

古文：僧归，见画处，不知何人，乃告村人曰：恐是五台山圣琵琶。
现代文：和尚回来后看见墙上的琵琶，不知是谁画的，就对村里人玩笑地说，别是五台山神的圣琵琶吧。
English: When the monk came back, he saw a lute on the wall. He didn't know who had painted it, so he jokingly told the villagers that it must be the sacred lute of the God of the Five Mountains.

古文：当亦戏言，而遂为村人传说，礼施求福甚效。
现代文：这句话被传开后，人们竟信以为真，还说向圣琵琶祈祷求福挺灵。
English: After this saying was spread, people actually believed it to be true, and said that they prayed to St. Pipa for good fortune.

古文：书生便到杨家，入吴经年，乃闻人说江西路僧室，有圣琵琶，灵应非一。
现代文：书生就到杨家，后来又到吴地去了几年，在吴地就听说江西有个庙里有只圣琵琶十分灵应，心里挺怀疑。
English: The student went to Yang's house, and then went to Wu for a few years. In Wu, he heard that there was a sacred pipa in a temple in Jiangxi, which was very helpful, and he was very skeptical.

古文：书生疑之，因还江西时，令船人泊船此处。上访之，僧亦不在。所画琵琶依旧，前幡花香炉。
现代文：后来他又回江西，让船又停下，上岸到庙里去，和尚又不在，墙上琵琶还在，琵琶前供着旗幡香炉。
English: Later, he returned to Jiangxi, let the boat stop again, went ashore to the temple, the monk was not there, the pipa was still on the wall, and there was a flag and incense burner in front of the pipa.

古文：书生取水洗之尽，僧亦未归。
现代文：书生就弄了些水把墙上的琵琶洗掉了，但和尚仍没回来，就回船上睡了。
English: The scholar got some water and washed the pipa off the wall, but the monk still did not return and went back to sleep on the boat.

古文：书生夜宿于船中，至明日又上。僧夜已归，觉失琵琶。以告，邻人大集，相与悲叹。
现代文：第二天书生又上岸到庙里来。昨天夜里和尚回庙后一看墙上琵琶没了，告诉了村里人，村里人都跑来看，十分悲伤，不断感叹。
English: The next day, the scholar came ashore to the temple again. Yesterday evening, after returning to the temple, the monk saw that the pipa on the wall was gone and told the villagers. The villagers all ran to see, very sad and constantly lamenting.

古文：书生故问，具言前验，今应有人背着，琵琶所以潜隐。
现代文：书生故意问他们，他们说，那琵琶十分灵验，一定是有人做了不敬的事，琵琶才离开我们而去。
English: The student asked them about it, and they said, "That lute is very powerful. Someone must have done something disrespectful to make the lute leave us."

古文：书生大笑，为说画之因由，及拭却之由。
现代文：书生大笑起来，向大家说了真相和洗掉它的原因。
English: The student burst out laughing and told everyone the truth and the reason for washing it off.

古文：僧及村人信之，是圣亦绝耳。
现代文：村人和和尚这才恍然大悟，琵琶圣也从此再不灵验了。
English: It was only then that the villagers and the monk suddenly realized that the holy pipa would never work again.

古文：壁山神
现代文：壁山神
English: The God of the Mountains

