古文：贞观初，太宗从容谓侍臣曰： 周武平纣之乱，以有天下；秦皇因周之衰，遂吞六国。
现代文：贞观初年，唐太宗从容地对身边的大臣们说： 周武王平定了商纣王之乱，取得了天下；秦始皇乘周王室的衰微，就吞并了六国。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong calmly said to the ministers around him: King Zhou Wu quelled the War of the Three Kingdoms and gained the whole country; Emperor Qin Shi Huang, taking advantage of the decline of the Zhou royal family, annexed six countries.

古文：其得天下不殊，祚运长短若此之相悬也？ 
现代文：他们取得天下没有什么不同，为什么国运长短如此悬殊呢？ 
English: Their achievements are no different from the rest of the world, so why is there such a disparity in the length of the National Games?

古文：尚书右仆射萧瑀进曰： 纣为无道，天下苦之，故八百诸侯不期而会。
现代文：尚书右仆射萧瑀回答说： 商纣王暴虐无道，天下的人都痛恨他，所以八百诸侯不约而同地来与周武王会师，讨伐纣王。
English: Shangshu's right-hand man, Jie Xiaoqi, replied, "King Shangguo is a ruthless tyrant, and people all over the world hate him. Therefore, eight hundred princes came to join forces with King Zhouwu to fight King Shangguo.

古文：周室微，六国无罪，秦氏专任智力，蚕食诸侯。
现代文：周朝虽然衰微，六国无罪，秦国完全是倚仗智诈暴力，像蚕吃桑叶一样，逐渐吞并诸侯的。
English: Although the Zhou Dynasty was on the wane, the Six Kingdoms were blameless. The Qin Dynasty relied entirely on cunning and violence, gradually absorbing the princes like a silkworm eating mulberry leaves.

古文：平定虽同，人情则异。 
现代文：虽然同是平定天下，人们对待他们的态度却不一样。 
English: Although they are both pacifying the world, people treat them differently.

古文：太宗曰： 不然，周既克殷，务弘仁义；秦既得志，专行诈力。非但取之有异，抑亦守之不同。
现代文：太宗说： 这样的说法不对，周灭殷以后，努力推行仁义；秦国达到目的以后，却一味地施行欺诈和暴力，它们不仅在取得天下的方式上有差别，而且守护天下的方式也不相同。
English: Taizong said, "Such a statement is not correct. After Zhou and Qin conquered Yin, they worked hard to promote benevolence and righteousness; after Qin achieved its goal, it only practiced fraud and violence. They not only differed in the way of acquiring the world, but also differed in the way of protecting the world.

古文：祚之修短，意在兹乎！ 
现代文：国运之所以有长有短，道理大概就在这里吧！ 
English: The reason why there are advantages and disadvantages of the National Games is probably right here!

古文：贞观二年，太宗谓黄门侍郎王珪曰： 隋开皇十四年大旱，人多饥乏。
现代文：贞观二年，唐太宗对黄门侍郎王珪说： 隋朝开皇十四年遇到大旱，百姓大多忍饥挨饿。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to the Yellow Gate waiter Wang Qi: In the 14th year of the Sui Dynasty, there was a drought, and most of the people were starving.

古文：是时仓库盈溢，竟不许赈给，乃令百姓逐粮。
现代文：当时国家粮仓贮存甚丰，可是朝廷竟不肯用粮食拯济灾民，下令让老百姓自己想办法。
English: At that time, the national granary was well stocked, but the imperial court refused to use grain to rescue the victims and ordered the common people to find their own solutions.

古文：隋文不怜百姓而惜仓库，比至末年，计天下储积，得供五六十年。
现代文：隋文帝不爱惜百姓却吝惜粮食，到了隋朝末年，粮仓贮存的粮食，足够五、六十年之需。
English: Sui Emperor Wen did not spare the people, but he was stingy with grain. By the end of the Sui Dynasty, the grain stored in the granary was enough for fifty or sixty years.

古文：炀帝恃此富饶，所以奢华无道，遂致灭亡。
现代文：隋炀帝继承父业，依仗国家富庶，所以挥霍无度，极尽奢侈之能事，终于国破家亡。
English: Sui Xuan Emperor inherited his father's business, relying on the country's wealth, so he was extravagant and extravagant, and finally the country was ruined.

古文：炀帝失国，亦此之由。
现代文：对于国君，首要的任务在于含养民生，不在于充实粮仓。
English: For the sovereign, the primary task is to maintain the people's livelihood, not to enrich the granary.

古文：凡理国者，务积于人，不在盈其仓库。
现代文：古人说： 老百姓不富足，国君又怎么能够富足呢？ 
English: The ancients said: If the common people are not rich, how can the sovereign be rich?

古文：古人云： 百姓不足，君孰与足？ 
现代文：只要仓库的贮备足以对付灾年，再多贮存粮食又有什么用呢？
English: As long as the storage of the warehouse is sufficient to deal with the disaster year, what is the use of storing more grain?

古文：但使仓库可备凶年，此外何烦储蓄！后嗣若贤，自能保其天下；如其不肖，多积仓库，徒益其奢侈，危亡之本也。 
现代文：国君的后代如果贤明，他自然可以保住江山，如果他昏庸，即使粮食满仓，也只是助长他奢侈浪费的习气而已，这是国家危亡的原因。 
English: If the descendant of the sovereign is wise, he can naturally preserve the country. If he is stupid, even if the grain storehouse is full, it will only encourage his extravagant and wasteful habits. This is the reason for the country's peril.

古文：贞观五年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 天道福善祸淫，事犹影响。
现代文：贞观五年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 上天给善人降福、给坏人降祸，事必报应。
English: In the 5th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong said to his attendant ministers: Heaven bestows blessings on the good people and curses the bad people, and there must be retribution.

古文：昔启民亡国来奔，隋文帝不吝粟帛，大兴士众营卫安置，乃得存立。
现代文：当年突厥的启民可汗失国南奔，隋文帝不惜粟帛钱财，动员了大批兵士守卫安置，使他们能够生存下来。
English: At that time, the Turkic Qimin Khan fled south after losing his country. The Sui Emperor spared no expense and mobilized a large number of soldiers to guard and resettle them so that they could survive.

古文：既而强富，子孙不思念报德，才至始毕，即起兵围炀帝于雁门。
现代文：不久突厥富强了，启民可汗的子孙却不想报答恩德。到始毕可汗时，就起兵把隋炀帝围困在雁门关。
English: Soon the Turkic people became rich and powerful, but the descendants of the Qimin Khan did not want to repay the favor. When the Qimin Khan arrived, he raised an army to besiege the Sui and Qin Emperors at Ganmen Pass.

古文：及隋国乱，又恃强深入，遂使昔安立其国家者，身及子孙，并为颉利兄弟之所屠戮。
现代文：等到隋朝大乱，又恃强深入，致使当年帮助启民可汗安家立国的隋朝官员自身和子孙，都遭到颉利可汗兄弟的屠杀。
English: By the time of the great turmoil in the Sui Dynasty, they had become more and more obstinate. As a result, the Sui Dynasty officials who had helped the Qimin Khan to settle down and establish the country, as well as their children and grandchildren, were all slaughtered by the brothers of the Qili Khan.

古文：今颉利破亡，岂非背恩忘义所至也？ 
现代文：如今颉利可汗破灭了，难道不是忘恩负义的下场吗？ 
English: Now that the caliphate is over, isn't that an ungrateful end?

古文：群臣咸曰： 诚如圣旨。 
现代文：大臣们都说： 确实像陛下所说的那样。 
English: The ministers all said, "It is exactly as His Majesty said."

古文：贞观九年，北蕃归朝人奏： 突厥内大雪，人饥，羊马并死。
现代文：贞观九年，北方突厥归顺的人奏疏说： 突厥境内连降大雪，百姓饥荒，羊和马都死了。
English: In the ninth year of Zhenguan, the northern Turks who had surrendered said: Heavy snows fell in Turkey, the people were starving, and the sheep and horses had all died.

古文：中国人在彼者，皆入山作贼，人情大恶。 
现代文：住在那里的汉人都跑到山里做了山贼，民情非常动荡。 
English: The Han Chinese living there all went to the mountains to become bandits, and the people's situation was very turbulent.

古文：太宗谓侍臣曰： 观古人君，行仁义、任贤良则理；行暴乱、任小人则败。
现代文：太宗对侍臣们说： 观察古代的君主，实行仁义、任用贤良就能使国家得以治理；施行暴政、任用小人国家就会败亡。
English: Emperor Taizong said to his courtiers, "If you look at the ancient monarchs, if you practice benevolence and righteousness and appoint virtuous people, you will be able to govern the country; if you practice tyranny and appoint villains, the country will fall.

古文：突厥所信任者，并共公等见之，略无忠正可取者。
现代文：突厥所信任的人，和我们大家所看到的，根本没有忠诚正直的可取之处。
English: The man in whom the Turks put their trust, as we have all seen, has no integrity at all.

古文：颉利复不忧百姓，恣情所为，朕以人事观之，亦何可久矣？ 
现代文：首领颉利又不关心百姓，恣意妄为，我用人情世故来分析，他又怎么可能长久呢？ 
English: The leader, Hao Li, does not care about the people and acts arbitrarily. I use human relations and worldly wisdom to analyze, how can he possibly last long?

古文：魏征进曰： 昔魏文侯问李克： 诸侯谁先亡？ 
现代文：魏徵进言说： 从前魏文侯询问李克： 诸侯之中谁会最先灭亡？ 
English: Wei Zheng said: In the past, Wei Wenhou asked Li Ke: Which of the princes will perish first?

古文：克曰： 吴先亡。 
现代文：李克回答： 吴国先灭亡。 
English: Li Ke replied: Wu will perish first.

古文：文侯曰： 何故？ 
现代文：魏文侯问： 为什么呢？ 
English: Wei Wenhou asked: Why?

古文：克曰： 数战数胜，数胜则主骄，数战则民疲，不亡何待？ 
现代文：李克说： 屡战屡胜，经常胜利就会骄傲，而经常发动战争就会使民生疲弊，不灭亡还等什么呢？ 
English: Li Ke said: Repeated battles and victories, frequent victories will make people proud, and frequent wars will make people's livelihoods exhausted. If we do not perish, what are we waiting for?

古文：颉利逢隋末中国丧乱，遂恃众内侵，今尚不息，此其必亡之道。 
现代文：颉利趁着中原大乱，就依仗自己兵强马壮入侵中原，到今天还不想息战，这就是他必然灭亡的道路。 
English: Haili took advantage of the Central Plains War to invade the Central Plains with his strong army. To this day, he still does not want to stop fighting. This is the path of his inevitable demise.

古文：太宗深然之。
现代文：太宗对此非常赞同。
English: Taizong agrees with this very much.

古文：贞观九年，太宗谓魏征曰： 顷读周、齐史，末代亡国之主为恶多相类也。
现代文：贞观九年，唐太宗对魏徵说： 近来我读北周、北齐的史书，发现末代亡国的君主，所从事的坏事多数都很类似。
English: In the ninth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to Wei Xuan: Recently, I read the history books of Northern Zhou and Northern Qi, and found that most of the bad things done by the last monarchs who lost their country were very similar.

古文：齐主深好奢侈，所有府库用之略尽，乃至关市无不税敛。
现代文：齐主高纬非常奢侈，府库所藏，几乎都被他挥霍光了，以至于关隘市集，没有哪一处不征收赋税的。
English: Gaowei, the lord of Qi, was very extravagant. He squandered almost all the treasures of the prefectural treasury, so much so that there was not a single market in Guanqiao that did not levy taxes.

古文：朕常谓此犹如馋人自食其肉，肉尽必死。
现代文：我常说，这就像嘴馋的人吃自己身上的肉一样，肉吃完了自己也就死了。
English: I used to say that it was like a mealy-mouthed man eating his own flesh, and when he had finished eating his own flesh, he died.

古文：人君赋敛不已，百姓既弊，其君亦亡，齐主即是也。
现代文：君主不停地征敛赋税，百姓既已疲弊，他们的君主也就灭亡了，齐主就是这样的人。
English: Monarchs constantly collect taxes. When the people are exhausted, their monarchs perish. Lord Qi was one such person.

古文：然天元、齐主若为优劣？ 
现代文：然而后周天元皇帝与齐主相比较，谁优谁劣呢？ 
English: However, compared to Emperor Zhou Tianyuan and Lord Qi, who is superior and who is inferior?

古文：征对曰： 二主亡国虽同，其行则别。
现代文：魏徵回答说： 这两个君主虽然同样亡国，他们的做法还是有所区别。
English: Wei Zheng replied, "Although these two monarchs also lost their countries, there is still a difference in their practices.

古文：齐主愞弱，政出多门，国无纲纪，遂至亡灭。
现代文：齐主懦弱，朝廷政令不一，国家没有纲纪，以至灭亡。
English: Emperor Qi was weak, imperial decrees were inconsistent, and the country lacked discipline, leading to its demise.

古文：天元性凶而强，威福在己，亡国之事，皆在其身。
现代文：天元帝生性凶悍好强，作威作福独断专行，国家的灭亡，都由他一手造成的。
English: Emperor Tianyuan was born with a fierce and strong character, he was arrogant and arbitrary, and he single-handedly caused the country's downfall.

古文：以此论之，齐主为劣。 
现代文：从这方面来看，齐后主要劣一些。 
English: From this point of view, Qi Hou is mainly inferior.

