古文：起著雍淹茂，尽重光赤奋若，凡四年。
现代文：起，止，一共四年。
English: A total of four years.

古文：显宗成皇帝中之下咸康四年
现代文：晋成帝咸康四年
English: He has been promoted to Emperor Hamkang for four years

古文：春，正月，燕王皝遣都尉赵槃如赵，听师期。
现代文：春季，正月，前燕王慕容派都尉赵前往后赵国，打听军队出征的日期。
English: In the first month of spring, the former Yan King Murong sent Captain Zhao to the Later Zhao Kingdom to inquire about the date of the army's departure.

古文：赵王虎将击段辽，募骁勇者三万人，悉拜龙腾中郎。
现代文：后赵王石虎准备攻击段辽，招募骁勇善战的士兵三万人，全部拜授为龙腾中郎。
English: Later, Zhao Wang Shihhu prepared to attack Duan Liao and recruited 30,000 soldiers who were brave and good at fighting. All of them were awarded the title of Longteng Zhonglang.

古文：会辽遣段屈云袭赵幽州，幽州刺史李孟退保易京。
现代文：适逢段辽派段屈云进攻赵的幽州，幽州刺史李孟后退保守易京。
English: At the same time, Duan Liao sent Duan Quyun to attack Zhao's Yuzhou, and Yuzhou stabbed Li Meng, who retreated to the conservative Yijing.

古文：虎乃以桃豹为横海将军，王华为渡辽将军，帅舟师十万出漂渝津；支雄为龙骧大将军，姚弋仲为冠军将军，帅步骑七万前锋以伐辽。
现代文：石虎便任命桃豹为横海将军，王华为渡辽将军，率领十万水军由漂渝津出发；又任支雄为龙骧大将军，姚弋仲为冠军将军，率领步兵、骑兵七万人为前锋，前往讨伐段辽。
English: Shihu then appointed Taobao as the general of Henghai, Wang Huai as the general of Du Liao, and led a hundred thousand naval troops to set out from Fuyuyujin; he also appointed Zhi Xiong as the general of Longjing, and Yao Yizhong as the champion general, and led seventy thousand infantry and cavalry as the vanguard to go to the Liao campaign.

古文：三月，赵槃还至棘城。
现代文：三月，赵回到棘城。
English: In March, Zhao returned to Thorn Town.

古文：燕王皝引兵攻掠令支以北诸城。
现代文：前燕王慕容领兵攻掠令支以北的许多城镇。
English: Former Yan Wang Murong led troops to attack and plunder many towns in the north of Shizhu.

古文：段辽将追之。慕容翰曰： 今赵兵在南，当并力御之；而更与燕斗，燕王自将而来，其士卒精锐，若万一失利，将何以御南敌乎！ 
现代文：段辽准备追袭他，慕容翰说： 如今赵的军队在南边，应当集中力量抵御，却又要和燕王相斗！燕王亲自为帅前来，士卒精锐，假如万一失利，又怎么能抵御南边的强敌呢！ 
English: Duan Liao was preparing to pursue him, Muronghan said: Now Zhao's army is on the south side, it should concentrate its strength to resist, but it has to fight with Yan Wang! Yan Wang himself came to be a leader, an elite soldier, in case of defeat, how can it resist the strong enemy on the south side!

古文：段兰怒曰： 吾前为卿所误，以成今日之患，吾不复堕卿计中矣！ 
现代文：段兰发怒说： 我前次被你所误，以至于成为今日的祸患，我不再上你的当了！ 
English: Duan Lan said angrily, "I was fooled by you last time, so much so that I became today's disaster. I won't be fooled by you anymore!"

古文：乃悉将见众追之。
现代文：于是率领手下现有的全部士众追击。
English: He then led all of his subordinates in pursuit.

古文：皝设伏以待之，大破兰兵，斩首数千级，掠五千户及畜产万计以归。
现代文：慕容设下埋伏等候他，大败段兰的军队，斩首数千级，掳掠民众五千户、畜产数以万计返回。
English: Murong set up an ambush to wait for him, defeated Duanlan's army, beheaded thousands of people, plundered five thousand households, and returned tens of thousands of livestock.

古文：赵王虎进屯金台。
现代文：后赵王石虎进军驻屯于金台。
English: Later, Zhao Wang Shihhu marched into the army and stationed in Jintai.

古文：支雄长驱入蓟，段辽所署渔阳、上谷、代郡守相皆降，取四十馀城。
现代文：支雄长驱直入，到达蓟，段辽所任命的渔阳、上谷、代郡地方长官全都归降，攻取四十多个城镇。
English: Zhi Xiong drove straight in and arrived in Handan. Yuyang, Shanggu and the deputy county magistrates appointed by Duan Liao all surrendered and captured more than forty towns.

古文：北平相阳裕帅其民数千家登燕山以自固，诸将恐其为后患，欲攻之。
现代文：北平相阳裕率领民众数千家登上燕山自相拒守，众将领惟恐他成为后患，想要攻击他。
English: Beiping Xiangyang Yu led thousands of people to climb Yanshan Mountain and refused to defend themselves. The generals feared that he would become a scapegoat and wanted to attack him.

古文：虎曰： 裕儒生，矜惜名节，耻于迎降耳，无能为也。 
现代文：石虎说： 阳裕是儒生，珍惜自己的名声气节，这样做不过是耻于投降，不会有什么作为。 
English: Shihu said, "Yang Yu is a Confucian and cherishes his reputation. To do so would only be a shameful capitulation and would not accomplish anything.

古文：遂过之，至徐无。
现代文：于是经过燕山，到达徐无。
English: So we went through Yanshan and arrived in Xuwu.

古文：段辽以弟兰既败，不必复战，帅妻子、宗族、豪大千馀家，弃令支，奔密云山。
现代文：段辽因为兄弟段兰已经战败，不敢再迎战，带领妻子、宗族和当地豪强一千多家，放弃令支，逃奔密云山。
English: Duan Liao, because his brother Duan Lan had already been defeated, did not dare to fight again, and led his wife, clan and more than a thousand local heroes to abandon the county and flee to Miyun Mountain.

古文：将行，执慕容翰手泣曰： 不用卿言，自取败亡。
现代文：临行时拉着慕容翰的手哭泣着说： 没采纳您的建议，自取败亡。
English: When he was about to leave, he took Muronghan's hand and wept, saying, "I didn't take your advice, so I brought about my own downfall."

古文：我固苦心，令卿失所，深以为愧。 
现代文：我固然是咎由自取，让您丧失安身之处，我为此深感惭愧。 
English: Of course, I have only myself to blame for causing you to lose your home, and I am deeply ashamed of this.

古文：翰北奔宇文氏。
现代文：慕容翰向北投奔宇文氏。
English: Muronghan rushed to the North Pole to join the Uwen clan.

古文：辽左右长史刘群、卢谌、崔悦等封府库请降。
现代文：段辽的左右长史刘群、卢谌、崔悦等人封存府库向石虎请降。
English: Duan Liao's left and right long history Liu Qun, Lu Wei, Cui Yue and others sealed the prefectural library to the stone tiger.

古文：虎遣将军郭太、麻秋帅轻骑二万追辽，至密云山。获其母妻，斩首三千级。
现代文：石虎派将军郭太、麻秋率领二万轻骑兵追袭段辽，在密云山抓获段辽的母亲、妻子，斩首三千级。
English: Shihu sent the generals Guo Tai and Ma Qiu, led by 20,000 light cavalry, to pursue Duan Liao, captured Duan Liao's mother and wife in Miyun Mountain, and beheaded 3,000 of them.

古文：辽单骑走险，遣其子乞特真奉表及献名马于赵，虎受之。
现代文：段辽单骑逃往险要之地，派儿子段乞特真向后赵国奉呈上表，并献上名马，石虎接受了。
English: Duan Liao fled to the dangerous place on horseback, sent his son Duan Qian Tezhen to Zhao Guofeng to present the table, and presented a famous horse, which was accepted by Shihu.

古文：虎入令支官，论功封赏各有差。
现代文：石虎进入令支宫室，对将士们论功封赏各有差等。
English: Shihu entered the palace room, and there were different opinions about the rewards for the generals.

古文：徙段国民二万馀户于司、雍、兗、豫四州；士大夫之有才行，皆擢叙之。
现代文：把段国的二万多户民众迁徙到司州、雍州、兖州、豫州。士大夫中有才能、德行的，都予以提拔。
English: More than 20,000 households in Duan were relocated to Sizhou, Yongzhou, Zhangzhou and Yuzhou. Talented and virtuous officials were promoted.

古文：阳裕诣军门降。虎让之曰： 卿昔为奴虏走，今为士人来，岂识知天命，将逃匿无地邪？ 
现代文：阳裕到军门前请求归降，石虎责问他说： 你过去身为奴虏逃走，今天身为士人前来，难道是知晓了天命，想逃匿而无地藏身吗？ 
English: Yang Yu went to the gate of the army to ask for surrender. Shi Hu scolded him and said, "You used to escape as a slave, but today you have come as a scholar. Did you know the fate of heaven and want to escape without a place to hide?

古文：对曰： 臣昔事王公，不能匡济；逃于段氏，复不能全。
现代文：阳裕回答说： 我当初侍奉王浚，不能有所匡助，投奔段氏，又不能保全。
English: Yang Yu replied, "At the beginning, I served Wang Jun, but I couldn't help him. I ran to Mr. Duan, but I couldn't save him.

古文：今陛下天网高张，笼络四海，幽、冀豪杰莫不风从，如臣比肩，无所独愧。
现代文：如今陛下天网高张，控制四海，幽州、冀州的豪杰无不望风归从，像我这样的人比肩接踵，因此我并不特别惭愧。
English: Today, His Majesty's sky net is up high, controlling the four seas, and the heroes of Yuzhou and Jizhou are all obedient to the wind, and people like me are shoulder to shoulder, so I am not particularly ashamed.

古文：生死之命，惟陛下制之！ 
现代文：我的生死，惟听陛下裁决！ 
English: Whether I live or die is up to His Majesty to decide!

古文：虎悦，即拜北平太守。
现代文：石虎喜悦，当即拜授阳裕为北平太守。
English: Shihu was so pleased that he immediately bestowed Yang Yu with the title of Beiping governor.

古文：夏，四月，癸丑，以慕容皝为征北大将军、幽州牧，领平州刺史。
现代文：夏季四月，癸丑晋朝廷任命慕容为征北大将军、幽州牧，兼领平州刺史。
English: In the summer of April, the court of the Qiu Jin Dynasty appointed Murong as the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, the governor of Yuzhou, and the governor of Pingzhou.

古文：成主期骄虐日甚，多所诛杀，而籍没其资财、妇女，由是大臣多不自安。
现代文：成汉国主李期日益骄纵暴虐，多所诛杀，收被杀者的资财和妻女入宫，因此大臣们大多惶恐不安。
English: Li Ji, the ruler of the Han Dynasty, became increasingly arrogant and tyrannical. He killed many people and took the wealth and wives and daughters of those who were killed into the palace. As a result, the ministers were mostly afraid and uneasy.

古文：汉王寿素贵重，有威名，期及建宁王越等皆忌之。
现代文：汉王李寿素来职高位重，享有盛名，李期和建宁王李越等都忌惮他。
English: Han King Li Shou has always been a high-ranking official and enjoys a high reputation. Li Ji and Jianning King Li Yue are all afraid of him.

古文：寿惧不免，每当入朝，常诈为边书，辞以警急。
现代文：李寿害怕自己不能免祸，每逢入宫朝见，常伪作边境告急文书，以警讯紧急为由推辞不来。
English: Li Shou was afraid that he would not be able to avoid the calamity. Whenever he entered the palace in the morning, he often forged a border emergency notification document and refused to leave on the grounds that the warning was urgent.

古文：初，巴西处士龚壮，父、叔皆为李特所杀。壮欲报仇，积年不除丧。
现代文：当初，巴西处士龚壮的父亲、叔父都被李特所杀，龚壮意欲报仇，多年不除丧服。
English: At first, the father and uncle of the Brazilian clerk, Hao Zhuang, were both killed by Little. Hao Zhuang wanted to take revenge and did not remove his mourning clothes for many years.

古文：寿数以礼辟之，壮不应；而往见寿，寿密问壮以自安之策。
现代文：李寿多次按照礼仪征召他为官，龚壮不应召。此时龚壮前往拜见李寿，李寿悄悄地向龚壮询问自我保全的方法。
English: Li Shou repeatedly conscripted him as an official in accordance with etiquette, and Gong Zhuang should not be called. At this time, Gong Zhuang went to meet Li Shou, and Li Shou quietly asked Gong Zhuang about the method of self-preservation.

古文：壮曰： 巴、蜀之民本皆晋臣，节下若能发兵西取成都，称籓于晋，谁不争为节下奋臂前驱者？
现代文：龚壮说： 巴蜀的民众本来都是晋王室的臣民，您如果能够发兵西取成都，向晋朝称臣，谁不争着做您奋臂而起的前驱呢！
English: Hao Zhuang said: The people of Bashu were originally all subjects of the Jin royal family. If you can send troops to the west to take Chengdu and praise the Jin dynasty, who would not compete to be your forerunner!

古文：如此则福流子孙，名垂不朽，岂徒脱今日之祸而已！ 
现代文：这样福泽便可延续到子孙，名垂不朽，哪里只是摆脱今日的祸患而已呢！ 
English: In this way, the blessings can be passed on to future generations, and the name will be immortalized. All that is needed is to get rid of today's ills!

古文：寿然之，阴与长史略阳罗恒、巴西解思明谋攻成都。
现代文：李寿颇以为然，与长史、略阳人罗恒，巴西人解思明秘密商议进攻成都。
English: Li Shou was quite impressed, and secretly discussed the attack on Chengdu with Changshi, Luo Yang, Luo Heng, and Brazilian Xie Siming.

古文：期颇闻之，数遣许涪至寿所，伺其动静；又鸩杀寿养弟安北将军攸。
现代文：李期对此颇有耳闻，多次派许涪到李寿住地观察动静，又毒死李寿的养弟、安北将军李攸。
English: Li Ji had heard a lot about this, and sent Xu Yao to Li Shou's residence several times to observe the situation. He also poisoned Li Shou's adopted brother, Anbei General Li You.

古文：寿乃诈为妹夫任调书，云期当取寿；其众信之，遂帅步骑万馀人自涪袭成都，许赏以城中财物，以其将李弈为前锋。
现代文：李寿于是伪造妹夫任调来信。说李期将要攻取李寿，李寿的部众信以为真。李寿于是率领步、骑兵一万多人由涪地出发，偷袭成都，并许愿用城中财物作为对部众的奖赏。让部将李奕充任前锋。
English: Li Shou then forged a letter from his brother-in-law, Ren Zhao. Li Shou's subordinates believed that Li Shou was going to capture Li Shou. Li Shou then led more than ten thousand foot and cavalry from Shantian to attack Chengdu, and promised to use the city's property as a reward for the subordinates. Let the subordinates take Li Yicheng as a striker.

古文：期不意其至，初不设备。
现代文：李期没料想李寿突然到达，完全没有防备。
English: Li Ji did not expect Li Shou to suddenly arrive, completely unprepared.

古文：寿世子势为翊军校尉，开门纳之，遂克成都，屯兵宫门。
现代文：李寿的世子李势任翊军校尉，打开城门迎接李寿，于是攻克成都，屯兵于宫室门前。
English: Li Shou's heir, Li Xian, a lieutenant of the Renmin Army, opened the city gate to welcome Li Shou, and then conquered Chengdu and stationed troops in front of the palace gate.

古文：期遣侍中劳寿。
现代文：李期派侍中犒劳李寿。
English: Li Zhi sent an attendant to look after Li Shou.

古文：寿奏建宁王越、景骞、田褒、姚华、许涪及征西将军李遐、将军李西等怀奸乱政，皆收杀之。
现代文：李寿奏称建宁王李越、景骞、田褒、姚华、许涪以及征西将军李遐、将军李西等人心怀不轨，扰乱朝政，将他们全部拘捕处决。
English: Li Shousong said that the people of Jianning Wang Li Yue, Jingyao, Tianbo, Yao Hua, Xu Yao, as well as the general of the Western Expedition Li Yao and the general of the Western Expedition Li Xi, had evil intentions, disturbed the imperial government, and all of them were arrested and executed.

古文：纵兵大掠，数日乃定。
现代文：然后放纵士兵大肆劫掠，数日后才平定。
English: Then the soldiers were allowed to loot and pillage, and it took several days for the situation to calm down.

古文：寿矫以太后任氏令废期为邛都县公，幽之别宫。追谥戾太子曰哀皇帝。
现代文：李寿又矫称奉太后任氏令，废黜李期为邛都县公，幽禁在别宫中，追谥戾太子为哀皇帝。
English: Li Shou also pretentiously claimed to be the successor of the Empress Dowager, deposed Li Ji as the governor of Shidu County, imprisoned in Beigu, and chased the Crown Prince as the Emperor of Sorrow.

古文：罗恒、解思明、李弈等劝寿称镇西将军、益州牧、成都王，称籓于晋，送邛都公于建康；任调及司马蔡兴、侍中李艳等劝寿自称帝。
现代文：罗恒、解思明、李奕等劝李寿自称镇西将军、益州牧、成都王，向晋王室称藩，把邛都公李期送到建康，而任调和司马蔡兴、侍中李艳等劝李寿自己称帝。
English: Luo Heng, Xie Siming, Li Yi, etc. advised Li Shou to call himself Zhenxi General, Yizhou Patriarch, Chengdu King, to call the Jin royal family a clan, to send the capital Li to Jiankang, and to reconcile Sima Cai Xing and Li Yan, etc. advised Li Shou to call himself an emperor.

古文：寿命筮之，占者曰： 可数年天子。 
现代文：李寿令人为此占筮，占者说： 可以当几年天子。 
English: Li Shou made people speculate about this, and the speculator said: You can be the son of heaven for a few years.

古文：调喜曰： 一日尚足，况数年乎！ 
现代文：任调高兴地说： 能当一天便可满足，何况几年呢！ 
English: Ren Ting said happily, "I can be satisfied with just one day, let alone several years!"

古文：思明曰： 数年天子，孰与百世诸侯？ 
现代文：解思明说： 几年天子，怎么比得上百世诸侯？ 
English: Xie Siming said, "How can a few years, son of heaven, be compared to a hundred generations of princes?"

古文：寿曰： 朝闻道，夕死可矣。 
现代文：李寿说： 早上听到道义，晚上死了也行。 
English: Li Shou said, "If you hear about morality in the morning, you can die in the evening.

古文：遂即皇帝位，改国号曰汉，大赦，改元汉兴。
现代文：于是即帝位，改国号为汉，实行大赦，改年号为汉兴。
English: As a result, the imperial throne was abolished, the country name was changed to Han, an amnesty was implemented, and the year name was changed to Han Xing.

古文：以安车束帛征龚壮为太师。壮誓不仕，寿所赠遗，一无所受。
现代文：李寿用安车、束帛征召龚壮任太师，龚壮誓死不肯出仕，对李寿所馈赠的礼物，一概不接受。
English: Li Shou used a horse-drawn carriage and a sheaf of straw to recruit Zou Zhuang to serve as grandmaster. Zou Zhuang swore to his death that he would not serve. He did not accept any gifts from Li Shou.

古文：寿改立宗庙，追尊父骧曰献皇帝，母昝氏曰皇太后。
现代文：李寿改立宗庙，追尊父亲李骧为献皇帝，母亲昝氏为皇太后。
English: Li Shou re-established the ancestral temple, named after his father, Li Xi, as the emperor, and his mother, Zou, as the empress dowager.

古文：立妃闫氏为皇后，世子势为皇太子。
现代文：立妃子阎氏为皇后，世子李势为皇太子。
English: He appointed his daughter-in-law, Yan, as empress, and his heir, Li Xiang, as crown prince.

古文：更以旧庙为大成庙，凡诸制度，多所改易。
现代文：又改旧宗庙为大成庙，各种制度，多有更改。
English: In addition, the old ancestral temple was changed to the Taisei temple, and various systems were changed.

古文：以董皎为相国，罗恒为尚书令，解思明为广汉太守，任调为镇北将军、梁州刺史，李弈为西夷校尉，从子权为宁州刺史。
现代文：任命董皎为相国。罗恒为尚书令，解思明为广汉太守，任调为镇北将军、梁州刺史，李奕为西夷校尉，侄子李权为宁州刺史。
English: Luo Heng was appointed as Shang Shuling, Xie Siming as Guanghan Dazhu, Zhenbei General, Liang Zhou as Zhishi, Li Yi as Xiyi Lieutenant, and his nephew Li Quan as Ningzhou Zhishi.

古文：公、卿、州、郡，悉用其僚佐代之；成氏旧臣、近亲及六郡士人，皆见疏斥。
现代文：凡是公卿大臣、州郡长官，都由自己的僚佐接替，成汉的旧臣、近亲以及六郡士人，都遭疏远和贬黜。
English: All court nobles, ministers, and prefectural governors were succeeded by their own aides. Chenghan's former vassals, close relatives, and six county magistrates were alienated and disparaged.

古文：邛都公期叹曰： 天下主乃为小县公，不如死！ 
现代文：邛都公李期叹息说： 天下的人主却成为小小的县公，不如死去！ 
English: Li Zhiguo sighed and said: The world's ruler has become a small county magistrate, it is better to die!

古文：五月，缢而卒。
现代文：五月，自缢而死。
English: In May, he hanged himself and died.

古文：寿谥曰幽公，葬以王礼。
现代文：李寿追赠他谥号为幽公，按诸侯王的礼节入葬。
English: Li Shou posthumously gave him the posthumous title of Yugong, and he was buried according to the etiquette of princes.

古文：赵王虎以燕王皝不会赵兵攻段辽而自专其利，欲伐之。
现代文：后赵王石虎因为前燕王慕容没有会合后赵的军队攻击段辽，却独自占有掳获的民众和畜产，因而打算讨伐他。
English: Later, Zhao Wang Shihhu attacked Duan Liao after Zhao's army attacked Duan Liao because the former Yan Wang Murong did not meet, but he alone occupied the captured people and livestock, and therefore planned to fight him.

古文：太史令赵揽谏曰： 岁星守燕分，师必无功。 
现代文：太史令赵揽劝谏说： 岁星正当燕国的分野，出师必然无功。 
English: Taishi ordered Zhao Zhaobao to persuade Yao to say: "The year star is right in the field of Yan Guo, and it is bound to be useless to become a teacher.

古文：虎怒，鞭之。
现代文：石虎发怒，鞭击他。
English: The stone tiger got angry and whipped him.

古文：皝闻之，严兵设备：罢六卿，纳言，常伯，冗骑常侍官。
现代文：慕容听说此事，调集军队严加设防。废除了六卿、纳言、常伯、冗骑常侍官职。
English: When Murong heard about this, he mobilized the army to set up a strong defense. He abolished the posts of Rikkyo, Nagan, Tsuneo, and Zojiki.

古文：赵戎卒数十万，燕人震恐。
现代文：后赵的军队有数十万人，前燕国民众大为恐慌。
English: After Zhao's army had hundreds of thousands of people, the former Yan people panicked.

古文：皝谓内史高诩曰： 将若之何？ 
现代文：慕容对内史高诩说： 我们将怎么办？ 
English: "What are we going to do?" said Murong to Gao Xi, the Inner Historian.

古文：对曰： 赵兵虽强，然不足忧，但坚守以拒之，无能为也。 
现代文：高诩回答说： 赵军虽然强大，但不值得忧虑，只要坚固防守来抵御，他们便无所作为。 
English: Gao Yao replied: Although the Zhao Army is strong, it is not worth worrying about. As long as they have a solid defense to resist, they will do nothing.

古文：虎遣使四出，招诱民夷，燕成周内史崔焘、居就令游泓、武原令常霸、东夷校尉封抽、护军宋晃等皆应之，凡得三十六城。
现代文：石虎派遣使者四处出动，招纳、诱降各族民众，前燕国的成周内史崔焘，居就县令游弘、武原县令常霸、东夷校尉封抽、护军宋晃等都应从他，共获得三十六城。
English: Shihu dispatched envoys everywhere to recruit and entice people of all ethnic groups. Cheng Zhou of the former Yan State, Zhou Nai Shi Lu, Jiu County Commander You Hong, Wuyuan County Commander Changba, Dongyi Lieutenant Feng Yu, and the escort Song Xiao should all be from him, and a total of 36 cities should be obtained.

古文：泓，邃之兄子也。
现代文：游弘即游邃兄长之子。
English: Yukihiro is the son of Yukimaro's older brother.

古文：冀阳流寓之士共杀太守宋烛以降于赵。
现代文：冀阳的侨居士人共同杀死太守宋烛，投降后赵。
English: Jiyang's expatriate laymen jointly killed the Emperor Song Zeng, and after the surrender, Zhao.

古文：烛，晃之从兄也。
现代文：宋烛即宋晃的堂兄。
English: Song Jian is Song Huan's cousin.

古文：营丘内史鲜于屈亦遣使降赵。武宁令广平孙兴晓谕吏民共收屈，数其罪而杀之，闭城拒守。
现代文：营丘内史鲜于屈也派使者投降后赵，武宁县令、广平人孙兴晓谕官吏和民众，共同执获鲜于屈，历数他的罪状后处死，然后关上城门防守御敌。
English: After Zhao, the governor of Wuning County, and Sun Xing, a commoner, sent envoys to the camp, Zhao, the governor of Wuning County, and Sun Xing, a commoner, sent envoys to the officials and the people. They jointly captured Xian Yu Qu, counted his crimes and executed him, and then closed the gate to defend against the enemy.

古文：朝鲜令昌黎孙泳帅众拒赵。
现代文：朝鲜令、昌黎人孙泳率士众抵抗后赵军，豪强王清等人密谋应从后赵，被孙泳拘捕斩首。
English: After the North Korean order, the Changli people, Sun Yong, led the masses to resist the Zhao army, and the heroic Wang Qing and others conspired to be arrested and beheaded by Sun Yong.

古文：大姓王清等密谋应赵，泳收斩之；同谋数百人惶怖请罪，泳皆释之，与同拒守。
现代文：同谋的几百人惊惶恐惧，向孙泳请罪，孙泳都不予追究，和他们一块儿防守御敌。
English: The hundreds of co-conspirators were terrified and pleaded guilty to Sun Yong, but Sun Yong was not prosecuted, and together they defended against the enemy.

古文：乐浪太守鞠彭以境内皆叛，选乡里壮士二百馀人共还棘城。
现代文：乐浪太守鞠彭因境内士民大多背叛投降，选择同乡勇士二百多人共同回返棘城。
English: Due to the betrayal and surrender of most of the scholars and citizens in the territory, Lelangu Taishou Ju Peng chose more than two hundred fellow warriors to return to Thorn Town together.

古文：戊子，赵兵进逼棘城。
现代文：戊子，后赵军进逼棘城。
English: After that, Zhao's army marched into the impregnable city.

古文：燕王皝欲出亡，帐下将慕舆根谏曰： 赵强我弱，大王一举足则赵之气势遂成，使赵人收略国民，兵强谷足，不可复敌。
现代文：前燕王慕容打算离城逃亡，军中将领慕舆根劝谏说： 现在正当敌强我弱，大王一抬脚那么赵军的气势便养成了。如果让赵人拥有并安定了国民，兵强粮足，就无法再与之抗衡了。
English: Former Yan King Murong planned to escape from the city, and the army's lieutenant general, Mu Yigen, advised him: "Right now, the enemy is strong and I am weak. As soon as the king raises his foot, the Zhao army's momentum will be built up. If the Zhao people are allowed to own and stabilize the people, and the army is strong and well-fed, they will no longer be able to compete with it.

古文：窃意赵人正欲大王如此耳，奈何入其计中乎？
现代文：我私下认为赵人正希望大王这么做，为何中他们的计呢！
English: Privately, I think that the Zhao people are hoping that the king will do this, so why should they be fooled!

古文：今固守坚城，其势百倍，纵其急攻，犹足支持，观形察变，间出求利。
现代文：如今牢牢守住坚固的城堡，气势便增强百倍，纵然赵军猛烈进攻，也还足以支持。再观察形势的变化，伺机出击求取利益。
English: Now, firmly holding the fortified castle, the momentum will increase a hundredfold, even if the Zhao army attacks violently, it is still enough to support. Then observe the changes in the situation and wait for the opportunity to attack for profit.

古文：如事之不济，不失于走，奈何望风委去，为必亡之理乎！ 
现代文：如果事情难以成功，也还可以逃走，为何要望风而逃自己造就必定亡国的局势呢！ 
English: If things are difficult to succeed, you can also escape, why ask the wind to escape and create a situation that will surely ruin the country!

古文：皝乃止，然犹惧形于色。
现代文：慕容这才中止逃亡的计划，但犹豫、恐惧仍然形于颜色。
English: It was only then that Murong suspended his escape plan, but hesitation and fear still loomed large.

古文：玄菟太守河间刘佩曰： 今强寇在外，众心恟惧，事之安危，系于一人。
现代文：玄菟太守、河间人刘佩说： 现在强寇在外，人心恐惧难安，事情的安危，都系于您一人之身。
English: Liu Pei Rong, the governor of Xuanzang and a native of Hebei Province, said, "Nowadays, strong bandits are out there, people's hearts are fearful and uneasy, and the safety of things all depends on you alone.

古文：大王此际无所推委，当自强以厉将士，不宜示弱。
现代文：大王在此时无可推委，应当自我勉励以鼓舞将士，不应当显示出怯弱。
English: At this time, the great king cannot be inferred, he should encourage himself to encourage his soldiers, and should not show cowardice.

古文：事急矣，臣请出击之，纵无大捷，足以安众。 
现代文：现在事情很危急了，我请求出击敌军，即使不能大胜，也足以安定人心。 
English: Now that the situation is critical, I ask you to attack the enemy. Even if you do not win a great victory, it will be enough to calm people's minds.

古文：乃将敢死数百骑出冲赵兵，所向披靡，斩获而还，于是士气百倍。
现代文：于是带领几百名不怕死的骑兵出城冲击后赵军，所向披靡，各有斩获，然后返回，前燕军士气因此大盛。
English: So he led several hundred horsemen who were not afraid of death out of the city to attack the Zhao army, which was invincible and made gains, and then returned. The morale of the former Yan army was therefore great.

古文：皝问计于封弈，对曰： 石虎凶虐已甚，民神共疾，祸败之至，其何日之有！
现代文：慕容向封奕询问对策，封奕回答说： 石虎的凶残暴虐早已过头，人神共愤，灾祸、败亡的降临，指日可待！
English: Murong asked Feng Yi about the countermeasures, and Feng Yi replied: The ferocious brutality of the stone tiger has long been overdone, people and gods are indignant, disaster and defeat are just around the corner!

古文：今空国远来，攻守势异，戎马虽强，无能为患；顿兵积日，衅隙自生，但坚守以俟之耳。 
现代文：现在倾国远来，但进攻和防守的情势并不一样，攻难守易，敌军兵马虽强，但并不能成为祸患。他们在此滞留多日后，矛盾和隔阂就自然产生，我们只需坚守等待而已。 
English: Now we are far away from home, but the situation of attack and defense is not the same. Attack is difficult and defense is easy. Although the enemy soldiers and horses are strong, they cannot become a disaster. After they stay here for many days, contradictions and estrangement will naturally arise. We just have to wait.

古文：皝意乃安。
现代文：慕容这才心安。
English: Murong is relieved.

古文：或说皝降，皝曰： 孤方取天下，何谓降也！ 
现代文：有人劝说慕容投降，慕容说： 孤正要夺取天下，说什么投降！ 
English: Someone persuaded Murong to surrender. Murong said, "If you want to conquer the world, how about surrendering?"

古文：赵兵四面蚁附缘城，慕舆根等昼夜力战，凡十馀日，赵兵不能克，壬辰，引退。
现代文：后赵军从四面如同蚂蚁一样攀登城墙，慕舆根等昼夜力战十几天，后赵军不能取胜。任辰，后赵军退却。
English: Afterward, the Zhao army climbed the city wall from four sides like ants, and fought day and night for ten days. The Zhao army could not win. Afterward, the Zhao army retreated.

古文：皝遣其子恪帅二千骑追击之，赵兵大败，斩获三万馀级。
现代文：慕容派儿子慕容恪率领二千骑兵追袭，后赵军大败，斩获首级三万多。
English: Murong sent his son Murong Ke to lead 2,000 cavalry in pursuit, after which Zhao's army suffered a crushing defeat, losing more than 30,000 soldiers.

古文：赵诸军皆弃甲逃溃，惟游击将军石闵一军独全。
现代文：后赵各路军队都弃甲溃逃，只有游击将军石闵带领的一支军队未遭创伤。
English: After that, all of Zhao's armies abandoned their armor and fled. Only one army, led by the guerrilla general Shi Yan, escaped unharmed.

古文：闵名瞻，内黄人，本姓冉，赵主勒破陈午，获之，命虎养以为子。
现代文：石闵的父亲名瞻，是内黄人，本来姓冉。当年后赵国主石勒攻破陈午，掳获石闵，令石虎把他当作自己的儿子收养。
English: Shige's father, Naizumi, was a member of the Inner Yellow Clan, and his original family name was Ran. Later that year, the Lord of Zhao, Shiller, defeated Chen Wu, captured Shige, and had Shigu adopt him as his son.

古文：闵骁勇善战，多策略。虎爱之，比于诸孙。
现代文：石闵骁勇善战，多计谋，石虎宠爱他，如同对自己的孙子们一样。
English: The stone python is brave and good at fighting, and has many stratagems. The stone tiger loves him as if he were his own grandchildren.

古文：虎还鄴，以刘群为中书令，卢谌为中书侍郎。
现代文：石虎回到邺，任命刘群为中书令、卢谌为中书侍郎。
English: Shihu returned to Zhai and appointed Liu Qun as the secretary of the Central Committee of the CPC and Lu Wei as the secretary of the Central Committee of the CPC.

古文：蒲洪以功拜使持节、都督六夷诸军事、冠军大将军，封西平郡公。
现代文：蒲洪因功拜授使持节、都督六夷诸军事、冠军大将军，封为西平郡公。
English: As a result of his achievements, Puhong was awarded the Commendation of the Commendation of the Commendation of the Commendation of the Commendation of the Commendation of the Commendation of the Commendation of the Commendation of the Commendation of the Commendation of the Commendation.

古文：石闵言于虎曰： 蒲洪雄俊，得将士死力，诸子皆有非常之才，且握强兵五万，屯据近畿；宜密除之，以安社稷。 
现代文：石闵对石虎说： 蒲洪雄武隽迈，得到将士的拼死效力，儿子们又都有非凡的才能，而且拥有强兵五万人，驻屯在都城近处，应当秘密地除掉他们，以安定国家。 
English: Shi Yao said to Shi Hu, "Pu Hongxiong is a great warrior, he has gained the deadly effectiveness of soldiers, his sons have extraordinary talents, and he has 50,000 strong soldiers stationed near the capital, he should secretly get rid of them to stabilize the country.

古文：虎曰： 吾方倚其父子以取吴、蜀，奈何杀之！ 
现代文：石虎说： 我正倚仗他们父子攻取东吴和巴蜀，为何要杀死他们！ 
English: Shihu said: I am relying on their father and son to conquer Dongwu and Bashu, why should I kill them!

古文：待之愈厚。
现代文：给他的待遇愈加优厚。
English: His treatment became more and more generous.

古文：燕王皝分兵讨诸叛城，皆下之。拓境至凡城。
现代文：前燕王慕容分别派军征讨各个背叛的城镇，都获得了胜利，把疆域拓展至凡城。
English: Former Yan King Murong separately sent troops to conquer all the rebellious towns, and they all won victory, expanding their territory to Fancheng.

古文：崔焘、常霸奔鄴，封抽、宋晃、游涨奔高句丽。
现代文：崔焘、常霸逃奔邺，封抽、宋晃、游泓逃奔高句丽。
English: Cui Yao, Chang Bao fled to Goguryeo, while Feng Xuchu, Song Xiang, and You Yao fled to Goguryeo.

古文：皝赏鞠彭、慕舆根等而治诸叛者，诛灭甚众；功曹刘翔为之申理，多所全活。
现代文：慕容奖赏鞠彭、慕舆根等人，对背叛者则依法治罪，诛灭了许多人。由于功曹刘翔从中为他们申辩请求，许多人得以保全性命。
English: Murong rewarded Ji Peng, Mu Yugen and others, and punished the traitors according to the law, annihilating many people. Thanks to Cao Liu Xiang's plea for their defense, many people were able to save their lives.

古文：赵之攻棘城也，燕右司李洪之弟普以为棘城必败，劝洪出避祸。
现代文：后赵进攻棘城时，前燕国右司马李洪的兄弟李普认为棘城必定失败，劝李洪出逃避祸。
English: Later, when Zhao attacked Thorn Town, Li Pu, the brother of Li Hong, the former right secretary of Yan Guo, believed that Thorn Town would certainly fail, and advised Li Hong to escape from the disaster.

古文：洪曰： 天道幽远，人事难知。
现代文：李洪说： 天道幽冥遥远，人事难以预知。
English: Li Hong said: Heaven and hell are far away, and it is difficult to predict people.

古文：且当委任，勿轻动取悔。 
现代文：况且身负委派的责任，不要轻举妄动，自找悔恨！ 
English: Moreover, bear the responsibility of the appointment, do not act rashly, and look for remorse!

古文：普固请不已，洪曰： 卿意见明审者，当自行之。
现代文：但李普却坚持请求，不肯罢休。李洪说： 你认为自己的看法正确、精明，就应当自己去做。
English: But Li Pu persisted in his request and refused to give up. Li Hong said: If you think your opinion is correct and shrewd, you should do it yourself.

古文：吾受慕容氏大恩，义无去就，当效死于此耳。 
现代文：我蒙受慕容氏的大恩，按道义无从取舍，应当在这里以死效忠。 
English: I have received a great favor from Mr. Murong, according to morality, there is no choice, I should be loyal to death here.

古文：与普流涕而诀。
现代文：便与李普洒泪诀别。
English: He bid a tearful farewell to Li Pu.

古文：普遂降赵，从赵军南归，死于丧乱；洪由是以忠笃著名。
现代文：李普随即投降后赵，随从后赵军队南归，后死于丧乱之中。李洪因此以忠诚笃信著名于世。
English: After the surrender of Li Pu, Zhao and his army retreated to the south, and he died in the turmoil. Li Hong was famous for his loyalty.

古文：赵王虎遣渡辽将军曹伏将青州之众戍海岛，运谷三百万斛以给之；又以船三百艘运谷三十万斛诣高句丽，使典农中郎将王典帅众万馀屯田海滨；又令青州造船千艘，以谋击燕。
现代文：后赵王石虎派渡辽将军曹伏带领青州的士众戍守海岛，运送谷物三百万斛供给食用，又用三百艘船运送三十万斛谷物到高句丽，让典农中郎将王典率领一万多部众在海滨垦荒屯田，又下令让青州建造战船一千艘，以备进攻前燕国。
English: Later, King Zhao Shihhu sent the Liao general Cao Fu to Liaoning to lead the Qing soldiers to guard the island, transporting three million mu of grain to supply food, and using three hundred ships to transport three hundred thousand mu of grain to Goguryeo. He also ordered the farmer Wang Dian to lead more than ten thousand troops along the seashore to destroy the wasteland, and ordered Qingzhou to build a thousand warships to prepare for the attack on the former Yan country.

古文：赵太子宣帅步骑二万击朔方鲜卑斛摩头，破之，斩首四万馀级。
现代文：后赵太子石宣率领步、骑兵二万人攻击朔方的鲜卑部斛摩头，打败了他，斩首四万多级。
English: Later, Prince Zhao Shixuan led the way, and 20,000 cavalrymen attacked the head of Shuo Fang's subordinates, defeated him, and beheaded more than 40,000 people.

古文：冀州八郡大蝗，赵司隶请坐守宰。
现代文：冀州八郡发生严重蝗灾，后赵司隶请求将州郡长官治罪。
English: After a serious locust plague occurred in eight counties in Jizhou, Zhao Sili requested that the county governor of the state be prosecuted.

古文：赵王虎曰： 此朕失败所致，而欲委咎守宰，岂罪己之意邪！
现代文：后赵王石虎说： 这是朕朝政有过失所致，却想归罪地方长官，这哪里符合自己知罪的心意呢！
English: Afterward, Zhao Wangshihu said: This is caused by the missteps of my government, but I want to blame the local governor. Where does this fit in with my desire to find someone guilty?

古文：司隶不进谠言，佐朕不逮，而欲妄陷无辜，可白衣领职！ 
现代文：司隶不进陈正直的言论，以便辅助我纠正过失，却想随意陷害无辜之人，应当革除爵位品秩，让他以庶民的身份执行司隶的职务。 
English: In order to help me correct my mistakes, the subordinate should not interfere with Chen's honest speech, but if he wants to frame an innocent person at will, he should be stripped of his peerage and rank, and let him perform the duties of the subordinate as a commoner.

古文：虎使襄城公涉归、上庸公日归帅众戍长安。
现代文：石虎让襄城公石涉归、上庸公石日归率领士众戍守长安。
English: Shihu let Xiangcheng Gongshi Wabu return, and Shangyong Gongshi Nichigai led the soldiers to defend Chang'an.

古文：二归告镇西将军石广私树恩泽，潜谋不轨；虎追广至鄴，杀之。
现代文：二人告发镇西将军石广私自树立恩泽，秘密图谋不轨，石虎把石广召回邺城，杀死石广。
English: The two of them denounced the Zhenxi general Shi Guang for secretly seeking favors and plotting against them. Shi Hu called Shi Guang back to Lucheng and killed him.

古文：乙未，以司徒导为太傅，都督中外诸军事；郗鉴为太尉，庾亮为司空。
现代文：乙未，东晋朝廷任命司徒王导为太傅、都督中外诸军事，任郗鉴为太尉，庚亮为司空。
English: In the second year of the Jin Dynasty, the Eastern Jin Dynasty court appointed Wang Du, a scholar, as taifu, the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, and appointed Yao Jian as taifu, and Geng Liang as tsikong.

古文：六月，以寻为丞相，罢司徒官以并丞相府。
现代文：六月，任王导为丞相，取消司徒的官职，并入丞相府。
English: In June, Wang Du was appointed chancellor, the official position of the secretary was abolished, and he was incorporated into the chancellor's office.

古文：导性宽厚，委任诸将赵胤、贾宁等，多不奉法，大臣患之。
现代文：王导性情宽容仁厚，所委任的许多将领，如赵胤、贾宁等，大多不守法令，大臣们为此忧虑。
English: Wang Du's disposition is tolerant and benevolent, and many generals he has appointed, such as Zhao Tan and Janning, mostly do not abide by the law. The ministers are worried about this.

古文：庾亮与郗鉴笺曰： 主上自八九岁以及成人，入则在宫人之手，出则唯武官、小人，读书无从受音句，顾问未尝遇君子。
现代文：庾亮给郗鉴写信说： 皇上从八九岁以至长大成人，入内则由宫女守护，外出则只有武官、小人们侍从，读书无从学音句，顾视询问则未曾遇见君子。
English: Hao Liang wrote to Xuan Zhan: From the age of eight or nine until he became an adult, the emperor was guarded by his concubine when he entered the palace, when he went out, he was only accompanied by military attachés and commoners, he could not learn a sentence from reading, and he had never met a gentleman when he asked questions.

古文：秦政欲愚其黔首，天下犹知不可，况欲愚其主哉！
现代文：秦始皇想使百姓愚昧，天下人尚且知道不对，更何况有人想使君主愚昧呢！
English: The First Emperor of Qin wanted to make the people stupid, and everyone in the world knew it was wrong, not to mention that someone wanted to make the monarch stupid!

古文：人主春秋既盛，宜复子明辟。
现代文：君主既然正当茂盛的年华，应当还政于贤明的主上。
English: Since the monarch is rightfully in the prime of life, he should return the government to the wise lord.

古文：不稽首归政，甫居师傅之尊，多养无赖之士；公与下官并荷托付之重，大奸不扫，何以见先帝于地下乎！ 
现代文：王导不恭敬地归还政权，却开始自居太师太傅的尊位，豢养许多没有才能的士人，您和我都身负先帝托付佐政的重任，这样的大奸之人不清除，又有什么脸面到地下去见先帝呢！ 
English: Wang Du not respectfully returned to power, but began to hold himself in the dignity of the great master, and fostered many untalented scholars. You and I both bear the heavy responsibility entrusted by the former emperor to Saisei. If such a great traitor is not purged, what is the face to go underground to see the former emperor!

古文：欲共起兵废导，鉴不听。
现代文：因而想一起发兵废黜王导，但郗鉴不同意。
English: Therefore, he wanted to send troops to overthrow Wang Du together, but Gong Jian did not agree.

古文：南蛮校尉陶称，侃之子也，以亮谋语导。或劝导密为之备，导曰： 吾与元规休戚是同，悠悠之谈，宜绝智者之口。
现代文：南蛮校尉陶称是陶侃的儿子，把庾亮的谋议告知王导，有人劝王导秘密地加以防备，王导说： 我和庾亮休戚与共，像这种庸俗的传说，不应当由智慧之人的口中传播。
English: Captain Namban Tao claimed to be the son of Tao Kan, and told Wang Du about Xing Liang's plan. Some people advised Wang Du to secretly prevent it. Wang Du said: I and Xing Liang are in solidarity. Such a vulgar legend should not be spread by the mouth of a wise person.

古文：则如君言，元规若来，吾便角巾还第，复何惧哉！ 
现代文：即使如同你所说，庾亮假使到这儿来，我就头带方巾，归隐还乡，又有什么可惧怕的！ 
English: Even if, as you say, if I were to come here, I would wear a headscarf and return to my hometown, there is nothing to be afraid of!

古文：又与称书，以为： 庾公帝之元舅，宜善事之！ 
现代文：王导又给陶称写信，认为： 庾公是皇上的大舅，你应当好好侍奉他。 
English: Wang Du also wrote a letter to Tao Zhengxuan, saying: Zheng Gong is the emperor's uncle, you should serve him well.

古文：征西参军孙盛密谏亮曰： 王公常有世外之怀，岂肯为凡人事邪！
现代文：征西参军孙盛悄悄地劝谏庾亮说： 王公经常有辞绝政事、优游于尘世之外的愿望，怎么会干俗人所干的事情呢！
English: Sun Sheng, a member of the Western Conquest army, quietly persuaded Zou Liang to say: Wang Gong often has the desire to resign from politics and travel beyond the earthly world. How could he do what ordinary people do?

古文：此必佞邪之徒欲间内外耳。 
现代文：这一定是奸佞邪恶之徒想离间内廷与百官的关系而已。 
English: This must be the work of evil people who want to split the relationship between the imperial court and the officials.

古文：亮乃止。
现代文：庾亮这才作罢。
English: Let's just call it a day.

古文：盛，楚之孙也。
现代文：孙盛即孙楚的孙子。
English: Sun Sheng is the grandson of Sun Chu.

古文：是时亮虽居外镇，而遥执朝廷之权，既据上流，拥强兵，趣势者多归之。
现代文：此时庾亮虽然驻守于外镇，却遥遥控制朝廷大权，权势显赫，又拥有强大的军队，趋炎附势的人大多归附于门下。
English: At this time, although Xing Liang was stationed outside the town, he controlled the power of the imperial court from far away. He was very powerful and had a strong army. Most of the people who gained power were subordinate to him.

古文：导内不能平，常遇西风尘起，举扇自蔽，徐曰： 元规尘污人！ 
现代文：王导心中不平，每当遇到西风扬起尘埃，便举起扇子遮蔽自己，缓缓地说： 庾亮的尘土沾污人！ 
English: Wang Du felt uneasy in his heart. Whenever he encountered the west wind stirring up dust, he held up a fan to cover himself and said slowly: "Bright dust stains people!"

古文：导以江夏李充为丞相掾。
现代文：王导让江夏人李充任丞相佐吏。
English: Wang Du appointed Li Chong, a native of Jiangxia, as chancellor and senior official.

古文：充以时俗崇尚浮虚，乃著《学箴》。
现代文：李充因为当时风俗崇尚浮华空虚，于是撰著《学箴》。
English: Because the customs at that time advocated pomposity and emptiness, Li Chong wrote "Study Proverbs."

古文：以为老子云 绝仁弃义，民复孝慈， 岂仁义之道绝，然后孝慈乃生哉？
现代文：他认为老子所说的 弃绝仁义，百姓返归孝敬慈爱 ，哪里是指崇尚仁义的的道路被断绝，然后才能产生孝敬慈爱呢？
English: He thought that what Lao Zi said about abandoning benevolence and righteousness, and the people returning to filial piety and mercy, where does it mean that the path of advocating benevolence and righteousness is cut off, and only then can there be filial piety and mercy?

古文：盖患乎情仁义者寡，而利仁义者众，将寄责于圣人而遣累乎陈迹也。
现代文：大概是忧虑真心崇尚仁义的少，假借仁义谋私利的多，因而想将责任归罪于圣人的提倡，把问题归咎以往的事情。
English: It is probably due to worry that there are fewer people who sincerely advocate benevolence and righteousness, and more people who seek personal gain by pretending to be benevolent and righteous. Therefore, they want to blame the responsibility on the saint's advocacy, and blame the problem on the past.

古文：凡人见形者众，及道者鲜，逐迹逾笃，离本逾远。
现代文：平庸之人只看到外表的多，真正达到大道的少，追求圣人的业迹越是虔诚，离开圣人的本质也就越远，所以他作《学箴》，用以祛除流弊。
English: Mediocre people only see more of the appearance, and less of the true path. The more devoutly they pursue the saint's deeds, the further they are from the saint's essence. Therefore, he wrote the "Proverbs of Learning" to get rid of vices.

古文：故作《学箴》以祛其蔽曰： 名之攸彰，道之攸废；及损所隆，乃崇所替。
现代文：文中说： 声名所彰显，道德之所以废毁，只有减损显赫的虚名，才能提高被弃废的道德。
English: The article said: Reputation is the cause of the destruction of morality, and only by detracting from the illustrious false reputation can the abandoned morality be improved.

古文：非仁无以长物，非义无以齐耻，仁义固不可远，去其害仁义者而已。 
现代文：没有仁无法使万物生长，没有义无法统一羞耻观念，仁义原本不可以丢弃，只是要除去违害仁义的东西而已。 
English: Without benevolence, all things could not grow; without righteousness, the concept of shame could not be unified. Originally, righteousness could not be discarded, but only things that violated righteousness had to be removed.

古文：汉李弈从兄广汉太守乾告大臣谋废立。
现代文：成汉国李奕的堂兄、广汉太守李乾告发大臣图谋废黜旧君，更立新主。
English: Li Yi's cousin, Li Qian, the governor of Guanghan, denounced the minister for plotting to depose the old ruler and install a new one.

古文：秋，七月，汉主寿使其子广与大臣盟于前殿，徙乾为汉嘉太守；以李闳为荆州刺史，镇巴郡。
现代文：秋季，七月，成汉国主李寿让儿子李广和大臣们在前殿盟誓，改任李乾为汉嘉太守，让李闳出任荆州刺史，镇守巴郡。
English: In the autumn, in July, the lord of Chenghan, Li Shou, made his son Li Guang and his ministers swear an oath in the front hall, and changed Li Qian's position to the governor of Han Jia, and made Li Jie the governor of Jingzhou and the governor of Ba County.

古文：闳，恭之子也。
现代文：李闳即李恭的儿子。
English: Li Yong is the son of Li Gong.

古文：八月，蜀中久雨，百姓饥疫，寿命群臣极言得失。
现代文：八月，蜀地阴雨连绵，百姓饥荒，疫病流行。李寿下令让群臣尽情陈述朝政的得失。
English: In August, it rained incessantly in Shu, the people were starving, and epidemics were prevalent. Li Shou ordered his ministers to give a full account of the gains and losses of the imperial government.

古文：龚壮上封事称： 陛下起兵之初，上指星辰，昭告天地，歃血盟众，举国称籓，天应人悦，大功克集。
现代文：龚壮呈上的密封章奏说： 陛下当初起兵时，上指星辰，明白地求告天地，歃血与士众盟誓，将举国向晋室称臣，上天感应，人民喜悦，这才大功告成。
English: The seal engraving presented by Zou Zhuang said: "When His Majesty raised the army, he pointed to the stars above, clearly appealed to heaven and earth, swore by his blood and the oaths of his soldiers, and pledged the whole country to the Jin family. Heaven felt it, and the people were pleased. This was a great achievement.

古文：而论者未谕，权宜称制。
现代文：但议论者不明其理，以至陛下随从事势即位称制。
English: However, the commentators did not understand the reason, and His Majesty abdicated the throne in accordance with the situation.

古文：今淫雨百日，饥疫并臻，天其或者将以监示陛下故也。
现代文：现在淫雨连绵百日，饥荒和疫病同时降临，这大概是上天想以此向陛下示戒的缘故。
English: Now the rain has been continuous for a hundred days, and famine and pestilence have come at the same time, which is probably due to the fact that God wants to show His Majesty a warning.

古文：愚谓宜遵前盟，推奉建康，彼必不爱高爵重位以报大功；虽降阶一等，而子孙无穷，永保福祚，不亦休哉！
现代文：我认为应当遵守原先的盟誓，推重和尊奉在建康的晋王室，他们必定不会吝惜高厚的爵位、重要的职务来报答您的大功。虽然地位降低一等，但子子孙孙可以永久地保住福祚，不也很好吗！
English: I think that you should abide by the original oath, promote and respect the Jin royal family that is in the process of building a healthy society. They will certainly not begrudge you a high rank and important position to repay your great service. Although the status is reduced by one grade, the children and grandchildren can keep the blessing forever, isn't it great!

古文：论者或言二州附晋则荣，六郡人事之不便。
现代文：论议者中有人说梁州、益州归附晋室可以得到荣宠，其余六郡在人事安排上多有不便。
English: Among the commentators, some people said that the annexation of Liangzhou and Yizhou to the Jin Dynasty could be favored, while the remaining six counties were more inconvenient in terms of personnel arrangements.

古文：昔公孙述在蜀，羁客用事，刘备在蜀，楚士多贵。
现代文：当初公孙述在蜀地，以羁留客居的身份任职；刘备在蜀地，楚国的士人大多显贵。
English: At the beginning, Gongsun Su was in Shudi and served as a guest of honor; Liu Bei was in Shudi, and most of the statesmen in Chu were prominent.

古文：及吴、邓西伐，举国屠灭，宁分客主！
现代文：等到吴汉、邓艾向西征伐，蜀汉全国被屠灭，又怎能分别出客与主？
English: When Wu Han and Deng Ai marched westward and the whole country of Shu Han was slaughtered, how could they separate the guest from the host?

古文：论者不达安固之基，苟惜名位，以为刘氏守令方仕州郡；曾不知彼乃国亡主易，岂同今日义举，主荣臣显哉！
现代文：论议者不明白安定稳固的根本，吝惜已有的名位，认为刘备的守令均任职于州郡，竟然不知道他们是国家灭亡，君主改易，哪里比得上今天的义举，能使君主荣耀，臣下显赫呢！
English: The commentators do not understand the fundamentals of stability and solidity, begrudge the already existing positions, and think that Liu Bei's guard orders are all in the state and county, but they do not know that they are the country's demise, the monarch's change, what is comparable to today's rite, can make the monarch glory, and the vassals prominent!

古文：论者又谓臣当为法正。
现代文：论议者又认为我应当效法法正。
English: The commentator also thought that I should follow the law.

古文：臣蒙陛下大恩，恣臣所安；至于荣禄，无问汉、晋，臣皆不处，复何为效法正乎！ 
现代文：我蒙受陛下的大恩，听任、放纵我安居世外，至于荣耀俸禄，无论是在汉还是在晋，我都不想得到，又为什么要效法法正呢？ 
English: I have received Your Majesty's great favor, allowing and indulging me to live peacefully outside the world. As for the glory and reward, whether in Han or Jin, I do not want to get it. Why should I follow the Fa-rectification?

古文：寿省书内惭，秘而不宣。
现代文：李寿看完奏章后内心惭愧，秘密扣下不予宣示。
English: After Li Shou finished reading the movement, he felt ashamed and kept the secret under wraps.

古文：九月，汉仆射任颜谋反，诛。
现代文：九月，成汉仆射任颜谋反，被杀。
English: In September, Chenghan's servant, Sha Renyan, plotted a rebellion and was killed.

古文：颜，任太后之弟也。
现代文：任颜即任太后的兄弟。
English: Ren Yan is the brother of the empress dowager.

古文：汉主寿因尽诛成主雄诸子。
现代文：成汉国主李寿因此全数诛杀成汉旧主李雄的所有子嗣。
English: As a result, the lord of Chenghan, Li Shou, killed all the sons of the former lord of Chenghan, Li Xiong.

古文：冬，十月，光禄勋颜含以老逊位。
现代文：冬季，十月，光禄勋颜含因年老退位。
English: In winter, October, Guanglu Xunyanhan abdicated due to old age.

古文：论者以 王导帝之师傅，名位隆重，百僚宜为降礼。 
现代文：朝廷论议者认为， 王导是皇帝的师傅，名位高重，百官应当对他行拜礼。 
English: The imperial court's commentators believed that Wang Du was the emperor's master and held a high position, and that all officials should pay homage to him.

古文：太常冯怀以问含。
现代文：太常冯怀就此询问颜含。
English: Feng Huai often asked Yan Han about this.

古文：含曰： 王公虽贵重，理无偏敬。
现代文：颜含说： 王公的名位虽然贵重，但按理不应当特别示敬。
English: Yan Han said: Although the title of the prince is precious, it is not reasonable to show special respect to him.

古文：降礼之言，或是诸君事宜；鄙人老矣，不识时务。 
现代文：行拜礼的说法，或许是你们的事。鄙人已老了，不识时务。 
English: What you call worship is perhaps a matter for you. I am old and out of touch with the times.

古文：既而告人曰： 吾闻伐国不问仁人，向冯祖思问佞于我，我岂有邪德乎！ 
现代文：不久，颜含告诉别人说： 我听说攻伐他国不要询问仁人，方才冯怀拿谄佞之事来问我，我怎能有奸邪的德行呢！ 
English: Before long, Yan Han told others, "I have heard that one should not ask a benevolent person about invading other countries. It was only then that Feng Huai asked me about the matter of the Nazgûl. How could I have the virtue of treachery?"

古文：郭璞尝遇含，欲为之筮。
现代文：郭璞曾经遇见颜含，想为他占筮。
English: Guo Yao once met Yan Han and wanted to be his agent.

古文：含曰： 年在天，位在人。
现代文：颜含说： 寿命在天，职位在人。
English: Yan Han said: Life expectancy depends on the day, position depends on the person.

古文：修己而天不与者，命也；守道而人不知者，性也；自有性命，无劳蓍龟。 
现代文：自我修炼而上天不助，这是命；谨守道德而他人不知，这是性。人自有性命，不需有劳占筮卜龟。 
English: It is life to cultivate oneself without help from heaven; it is sex to observe morality without others knowing. People have their own lives, and there is no need for fortune-tellers.

古文：致仕二十馀年，年九十三而卒。
现代文：颜含辞职二十多年，至九十三岁时去世。
English: Yan Han resigned more than 20 years ago and passed away at the age of 93.

古文：代王翳槐之弟什翼犍质于赵，翳槐疾病，命诸大人立之。
现代文：代王拓跋翳槐的兄弟拓跋什翼犍到后赵做人质，拓跋翳槐病重，命令诸大人立拓跋什翼犍为王。
English: King Tuobao's brother Tuobao Shijiang came to Zhao as a hostage. Tuobao was seriously ill and ordered the adults to make Tuobao Shijiang king.

古文：翳槐卒，诸大人梁盖等以新有大故，什翼犍在远，来未可必；比其至，恐有变乱，谋更立君。
现代文：拓跋翳槐死后，诸大人梁盖等人认为国家新有重大丧事，拓跋什翼犍离得远，来不来不可确定，等到他归来，恐怕会有变乱，因此谋议重新立君。
English: After the death of Tuobao, many people, including Liang Gai, thought that the country had suffered a new great tragedy, that Tuobao was far away and it was uncertain whether he would come or not, and that there would be turmoil when he returned, so they planned to reinstate him.

古文：而翳槐次弟屈，刚猛多诈，不如屈弟孤仁厚，乃相与杀屈而立孤。
现代文：而拓跋翳槐的二弟拓跋屈，刚猛多诈，不如拓跋屈的弟弟拓跋孤仁厚，于是共同杀死拓跋屈，立拓跋孤为君。
English: However, Tuoba's second brother, Tuoba Qu, was more ruthless and deceitful than Tuoba's brother, Tuoba Lone, so they jointly killed Tuoba Qu and made Tuoba Lone king.

古文：孤不可，自诣鄴迎什翼犍，请身留为质；赵王虎义而俱遣之。
现代文：拓跋孤不同意，自己到邺去迎接拓跋什翼犍，请求自己留在后赵为人质。后赵王石虎认为他有道义，把他和拓跋翼犍一同遣返。
English: Tuoba alone did not agree, he went to Handan to meet Tuoba Shijie, and asked to stay as a hostage of Hou Zhao. Hou Zhao Wang Shihou thought he was moral, and sent him back together with Tuoba Shijie.

古文：十一月，什翼犍即代王位于繁时北，改元曰建国，分国之半以与孤。
现代文：十一月，拓跋什翼犍在繁以北即代王位，改年号为建国。又分出国土的一半给拓跋孤。
English: In November, Tuoba Shiguang ascended the throne in the north of Shandong, changed the year to the founding of the country, and allocated half of the land to Tuoba Guo.

古文：初，代王猗卢既卒，国多内难，部落离散，拓跋氏寝衰。
现代文：当初，代王拓跋猗卢死后，国家内乱频仍，部落离散，拓跋氏逐渐衰微。
English: At first, after the death of King Tuoba, the country was still plagued by civil unrest, tribes were scattered, and the Tuoba clan gradually declined.

古文：及什翼犍立，雄勇有智略，能修祖业，国人附之，始置百官，分掌众务。以代人燕凤为长史，许谦为郎中令。
现代文：等到拓跋什翼犍即位，雄健勇悍而有智谋，能够发展祖先遗业，国人都归附他。此时开始设置百官，分别掌管政务，任命代人燕凤为长史，许谦为郎中令。
English: When Tuoba Shih-tzu ascended the throne, he was a strong, brave and resourceful leader who was able to develop the legacy of his ancestors, and the Chinese people all followed him. At this time, he began to set up a hundred officials, who were in charge of government affairs, and appointed the representative Yan Feng as the long history, and Xu Qian as the second-in-command.

古文：始制反逆、杀人、奸盗之法，号令明白，政事清简，无系讯连逮之烦，百姓安之。
现代文：开始制定惩治反逆、杀人、奸盗的法律，法令明了，政事清简，没有囚禁株连的烦扰，百姓安居乐业。
English: Laws to punish treason, homicide, and theft began to be formulated. The laws were clear, the government was simple, there was no disturbance caused by prisoners, and the people lived and worked in peace.

古文：于是东自濊貊，西及破落那，南距阴山，北尽沙漠，率皆归服，有众数十万人。
现代文：于是东边起自貊，西边远及破落那，南方到达阴山，北方直至沙漠，众人全都归服，拥有士众数十万人。
English: As a result, the East began to self-destruct, the West was far and broken, the South reached the gloomy mountains, and the North reached the desert. All people were subjugated and possessed hundreds of thousands of people.

古文：十二月，段辽自密云山遣使求迎于赵；既而中悔，复遣使求迎于燕。
现代文：十二月，段辽从密云山派使者向赵请求允许自己归降；不久又后悔，重新派使者到前燕请求允许自己投降。
English: In December, Duan Liao sent an envoy from Miyun Mountain to Zhao to request permission to surrender; he soon regretted it and sent another envoy to Qianyan to request permission to surrender.

古文：赵王虎遣征东将军麻秋帅众三万迎之，敕秋曰： 受降如受敌，不可轻也。 
现代文：后赵王石虎派征东将军麻秋率领三万士众迎接段辽投降，敕令麻秋说： 受降如同迎敌，不能轻视！ 
English: Afterward, Zhao Wang Shihu sent the eastward conquering general Ma Qiu to lead the 30,000 soldiers to welcome Duan Liao's surrender. He ordered Ma Qiu to say: Accepting the surrender is like welcoming the enemy, and should not be taken lightly!

古文：以尚书左丞阳裕，辽之故臣，使为秋司马。
现代文：因为尚书左丞阳裕是段辽的旧臣，便让他担任麻秋的司马。
English: Since Shangshu Zuozhen Yangyu was a former vassal of Duan Liao, he was appointed as Maqiu's Sima.

古文：燕王皝自帅诸将军迎辽，辽密与燕谋覆赵军。
现代文：前燕王慕容亲自率领各将领迎接段辽，段辽秘密和前燕国谋议颠覆后赵军。
English: Former Yan King Murong personally led the generals to welcome Duan Liao, Duan Liao's secret and former Yan's conspiracy to subvert the Zhao Army.

古文：皝遣慕容恪伏精骑七千于密云山，大败麻秋于三藏口，死者什六七。
现代文：慕容派慕容恪在密云山埋伏七千精锐骑兵，在三藏口大败麻秋的军队，死亡人数达十分之六七。
English: Murong sent Murong to ambush seven thousand elite cavalry in Miyun Mountain, and defeated Maqiu's army in Sanjiakou, with the death toll reaching sixty-seven out of ten.

古文：秋步走得免，阳裕为燕所执。
现代文：麻秋徒步逃脱，阳裕被前燕人擒获。
English: Ma Qiu escaped on foot, while Yang Yu was captured by the former Yan people.

古文：赵将军范阳鲜于亮失马，步缘山不能进，因止，端坐；燕兵环之，叱令起。
现代文：后赵将军范阳人鲜于亮的坐骑丢失，步行登山，难以攀援，随即止步，端正而坐。前燕兵四面包围，叱令他起身。
English: After Zhao's death, General Fan Yang, who was less than bright, lost his mount, climbed on foot, and it was difficult to climb for help. He immediately stopped and sat upright. The former Yan soldiers surrounded him on all sides and scolded him to get up.

古文：亮曰： 身是贵人，义不为小人所屈。
现代文：鲜于亮说： 我是贵人之身，按道义决不被小人所屈服。
English: Mian Yu Liang said: I am the body of a noble person, according to morality, I will never be bowed down by a villain.

古文：汝曹能杀亟杀，不能则去！ 
现代文：你们能杀就赶紧杀我，不能杀我就离开这里！ 
English: Kill me if you can, but if you can't, get out of here!

古文：亮仪观丰伟，声气雄厉，燕兵惮之，不敢杀，以白皝。
现代文：鲜于亮仪表堂堂，身材高大魁伟，声气雄壮凌厉，前燕兵畏惧，不敢进前博杀，便禀报慕容。
English: Less than bright, his appearance is dignified, his stature is tall and powerful, his voice is strong and powerful, the former Yan soldiers are afraid, they dare not go forward to kill, and they report to Murong.

古文：皝以马迎之，与语，大悦，用为左常侍，以崔毖之女妻之。
现代文：慕容带上马匹相迎，与鲜于亮交谈之后，大为喜悦，任用他为左常侍，并把崔毖的女儿许配给他为妻。
English: Murong brought the horses to meet the horse, and after talking with Xian Yu Liang, he was very pleased, appointed him as the left attendant, and promised Cui Yao's daughter to him as his wife.

古文：皝尽得段辽之众。待辽以上宾之礼，以阳裕为郎中令。
现代文：慕容尽数获得段辽的士众，用上宾的礼节对待段辽，任用阳裕为郎中令。
English: Murong did his best to win over Duan Liao's nobles, treated Duan Liao with the etiquette of an honored guest, and appointed Yang Yu as his second-in-command.

古文：赵王虎闻麻秋败，怒，削其官爵。
现代文：后赵王石虎听说麻秋战败，发怒，革除了麻秋的官职和爵位。
English: Later, when Zhao Wang Shihhu heard of Maqiu's defeat, he became enraged and stripped Maqiu of his official position and peerage.

古文：显宗成皇帝中之下咸康五年春，正月，辛丑，大赦。
现代文：咸康五年春季，正月，辛丑，大赦天下。
English: In the fifth year of Hamkang, the spring, the first month, the ugly and the ugly will be amnestied.

古文：三月，乙丑，广州刺史邓岳将兵击汉宁州，汉建宁太守孟彦执其刺史霍彪以降。
现代文：三月，乙丑，广州刺史邓岳率军进攻成汉国宁州，成汉建宁太守孟彦执获同州刺史霍彪投降。
English: In March, in the second month of the year, the Guangzhou statesman Deng Yue led an army to attack Ningzhou of Chenghan Province, and Chenghan Jianning Taishu Meng Yan won the surrender of the statesman Xiu Biao.

古文：征西将军庾亮欲开复中原，表桓宣为都督沔北前锋诸军事、司州刺史，镇襄阳；又表其弟临川太守怿为监梁、雍二州诸军事、染州刺史，镇魏兴；西阳太守翼为南蛮校尉，领南郡太守，镇江陵；皆假节。
现代文：征西将军庾亮想收复中原失地，上表奏请任命桓宣为都督沔北前锋诸军事、司州刺史，镇守襄阳。又上表奏请任命其弟临川太守庾怿为监察梁州、雍州诸军事，梁州刺史，镇守魏兴；任西阳太守庾翼为南蛮校尉，兼领南郡太守，镇守江陵，都假节。
English: In order to recover the lost territories in Central Plains, the general of the Western Conquest, Xing Liang, asked for the appointment of Huan Xuan as the governor of the north, the forward of the military, the secretary of the state, and the town guard of Xiangyang. In addition, he asked for the appointment of his brother Linchuan Dazhong as the inspector of the military of Liangzhou and Yongzhou, the secretary of the state of Liangzhou, and the town guard of Wei Xing; and the appointment of Xiangyang Dazhong Xing as the captain of Nanban, and also the leader of the south county, and the town guard of

古文：又请解豫州，以授征虏将军毛宝。
现代文：又请求分出豫州，用来授予征虏将军毛宝。
English: He also requested the separation of Yuzhou, which would be used to award Mao Bao to the conquering general.

古文：诏以宝监扬州之江西诸军事、豫州刺史，与西阳太守樊峻帅精兵万人戍邾城。
现代文：朝廷下诏任毛宝为监察扬州地段长江以西诸军事、豫州刺史，与西阳太守樊峻率领精兵万人戍守邾城。
English: Under the imperial edict, Mao Bao was appointed to supervise the Yangzhou section of the Yangtze River to the west of the military, the Yuzhou engraving, and the Xiyang governor Zou Jun led thousands of elite soldiers to guard Zoucheng.

古文：以建威将军陶称为南中郎将、江夏相，入沔中。
现代文：又任用建威将军陶称为南中郎将、江夏相，进入沔中。
English: He also appointed General Jianwei Tao as the South Vice Admiral and General Jiang Xia as the Vice Admiral, and he entered the middle ranks.

古文：称将二百人下见亮，亮素恶称轻狡，数称前后罪恶，收而斩之。
现代文：陶称率二百人沿江而下，拜见庾亮，庾亮素来厌恶陶称轻浮狡狯，数落陶称前前后后的罪恶，将他拘捕斩首。
English: Tao claimed to have led two hundred people down the river to meet Jiao Liang. Jiao Liang detested Tao, calling him frivolous and cunning, and accused Tao of all kinds of sins. He was arrested and beheaded.

古文：后以魏兴险远，命庾怿徙屯半洲；更以武昌太守陈嚣为梁州刺史，趣汉中。
现代文：后来因为魏兴地处边远，地势险恶，命令庾怿移屯于半洲，改任武昌太守陈嚣为梁州刺史，赶赴汉中。
English: Later, because Wei Xing was located in a remote area and the terrain was dangerous, he ordered Zou to relocate to Hanzhou. Chen Han, who had been appointed as Wuchang's eunuch, made history in Liangzhou and rushed to Hanzhong.

古文：遣参军李松攻汉巴郡、江阳。
现代文：派参军李松攻打成汉国的巴郡、江阳。
English: Li Song sent troops to attack Ba County and Jiangyang in China.

古文：夏，四月，执汉荆州刺史李闳、巴郡太守黄植送建康。
现代文：夏季，四月，执获成汉国的荆州刺史李闳、巴郡太守黄植，押送至建康。
English: In the summer, in April, the Jingzhou Jishi Li Yan and the Ba County Governor Huang Zhi from Chengdu, China, were captured and escorted to Jiankang.

古文：汉主寿以李弈为镇东将军，代闳守巴郡。
现代文：成汉国主李寿让李奕任镇东将军，替代李闳镇守巴郡。
English: Li Shou, the ruler of the Chenghan Kingdom, appointed Li Yi as the general of Zhendong, replacing Li Jie as the governor of Ba County.

古文：庾亮上疏言： 蜀甚弱而胡尚强，欲帅大众十万移镇石城，遣诸军罗布江、沔为伐赵之规。 
现代文：庾亮上疏说： 蜀地的汉国很弱，而北方胡虏仍然强大，我想率十万大军移徙镇守石头，派遣各军罗列分布在长江、沔水一带，作为北伐赵的准备。 
English: Xing Liang Shang Zuo said: "Shu of China is very weak, while the northern Huns are still strong. I want to lead 100,000 troops to migrate to the town to guard the stone, and send the troops to be distributed in the Yangtze River and Surabaya, as a preparation for the Northern Expedition.

古文：帝下其议。丞相导请许之。大尉鉴议，以为： 资用未备，不可大举。 
现代文：成帝把疏章下交朝廷评论，丞相王导请求允准，太尉郗鉴评议认为： 物资财用不足，不能大举行动。 
English: Emperor Cheng submitted the imperial edict to the imperial court for comment, the chancellor Wang Du requested permission, and the eunuch Yao Jian commented: Insufficient use of materials and resources, unable to take drastic action.

古文：太常蔡谟议，以为： 时有否泰，道有屈伸，苟不计强弱而轻动，则亡不终日，何功之有！
现代文：太常蔡谟议论，认为： 时机有利与不利，道有伸有屈，如果不考虑强弱的形势轻举妄动，那么会迅速败亡，有什么功业！
English: Too often, Cai Miao argued that: the timing is favorable and unfavorable, the road has a stretch and a bend, if you do not consider the situation of strength and weakness, then you will quickly perish, what a feat!

古文：为今之计，莫若养威以俟时。
现代文：当今之计，不如自蓄威势，等待时机。
English: For now, it is better to be bold and wait for the right moment.

古文：时之可否系胡之强弱，胡之强弱系石虎之能否。
现代文：时机的可否在于胡虏的强弱，而胡虏的强弱又在于石虎的能力。
English: Whether the timing is good or not depends on the strength of the crocodile, and the strength of the crocodile depends on the ability of the stone tiger.

古文：自石勒举事，虎常为爪牙，百战百胜，遂定中原，所据之地，同于魏世。
现代文：自从石勒起兵，石虎便经常充当武将，百战百胜，于是平定中原，所占据的地域，与当年的魏国相当。
English: Ever since Shiller raised an army, Shihu has often served as a military commander, winning many battles, thus pacifying the Central Plains, occupying an area comparable to that of Wei.

古文：勒死之后，虎挟嗣君，诛将相；内难既平，剪削外寇，一举而拔金墉，再战而擒石生，诛石聪如拾遗，取郭权如振槁，四境之内，不失尺土。
现代文：石勒死后，石虎挟持继位的君主，诛戮将相。平定内乱之后，又翦灭和削弱外寇，一举攻取金墉，再战便擒获石生，诛杀石聪如同路拾遗物，战胜郭权如同振毁槁木，四周国境之内，不失尺土。
English: After the death of Shi Le, Shi Hu held the throne of the succeeding monarch, and the battle was over. After the civil war was settled, the foreign invaders were annihilated and weakened, the Jin Dynasty was captured in one fell swoop, and Shisheng was captured in the second battle. The killing of Shih Cong was like picking up a relic, and the victory over Guo Quan was like shaking down a maple tree, all within the borders, without losing a foot of soil.

古文：以是观之，虎为能乎，将不能也？
现代文：由此看来，石虎是有才能呢，还是没有才能呢？
English: From this perspective, is Shihu talented or not?

古文：论者以胡前攻襄阳不能拔，谓之无能为。
现代文：论议者因为过去胡虏进攻襄阳不能取胜，便认为他无能为力。
English: Because Hu Rui's attack on Xiangyang could not win in the past, the commentator thought that he was powerless.

古文：夫百战百胜之强而以不拔一城为劣，譬诸射击百发百中而一失，可以谓之拙乎？
现代文：然而百战百胜的强敌却因没有攻取一城就以为低劣，好比射箭的人百发百中，只有一次失误，能够说他拙劣吗？
English: However, a strong enemy with a hundred victories is considered inferior because he has not captured a single city, just like an archer who makes only one mistake out of a hundred shots. Can he be said to be clumsy?

古文： 且石遇，偏师也，桓平北，边将也，所争者疆场之土，利则进，否则退，非所急也。
现代文： 况且，石遇的军队只是赵的偏师，桓宣是位戌边的将领，他们争夺的是疆土的伸缩，有利就进，不利则退，不是紧迫的问题。
English: Moreover, Shifu's army was only Zhao's mentor, while Huan Xuan was a marginal general. What they were fighting for was the expansion and contraction of the territory, advancing when advantageous and retreating when disadvantageous. It was not a pressing issue.

古文：今征西以重镇名贤，自将大军欲席卷河南，虎必自帅一国之众来决胜负，岂得以襄阳为比哉！
现代文：现在征西将军庾亮，以重镇名贤的地位和身份亲自率领大军试图席卷黄河以南，石虎必定亲自率领全国之众前来一决胜负，哪能与襄阳之战相比呢！
English: Now, the general of the Western Conquest is brilliant, leading a large army with the status and identity of a famous person from a major town in an attempt to sweep south of the Yellow River. Shihu must personally lead the people of the whole country to a decisive victory. How can it be compared with the Battle of Xiangyang!

古文：今征西欲与之战，何如石生？
现代文：现在征西将军想与石虎交战，比起石生如何？
English: Now the Western Conquest General wants to fight the Stone Tiger, how does it compare to Stone Son?

古文：若欲城守，何如金墉？
现代文：如果想据城固守，比起金墉城如何？
English: If you want to hold on to the city, how does it compare to Jincheng?

古文：欲阻沔水，何如大江？
现代文：如果想依仗沔水的天险，比起大江又如何？
English: If you want to rely on the natural danger of Surabaya, how about comparing it to the big river?

古文：欲拒石虎，何如苏峻？
现代文：如果想抗拒石虎，比起抗拒苏峻又如何？
English: If you want to resist the stone tiger, how about resisting Su Jun instead?

古文：凡此数者，宜详校之。
现代文：凡此种种，应当仔细考校。
English: All such materials should be carefully proofread.

古文： 石生猛将，关中精兵，征西之战殆不能胜也。
现代文： 石生是猛将，拥有关中的精锐士兵，庾亮若要攻击恐怕难以取胜。
English: Ishio is a fierce general. He has elite soldiers in his entourage. If he were to attack, it would probably be difficult to win.

古文：又当是时，洛阳、关中皆举兵击虎，今此三镇反为其用；方之于前，倍半之势也。
现代文：再说那时洛阳、关中都起兵攻击石虎，现在这三镇反而被石虎所用。比起从前，石虎现在实力有超出一倍的势头。
English: Moreover, at that time, Luoyang and Guanzhong both raised troops to attack Shihhu, but now these three towns are used by Shihhu. Compared with the past, Shihhu now has more than double the strength.

古文：石生不能敌其半，而征西欲当其倍，愚所疑也。
现代文：石生不能抵挡相当现在一半的实力，而征西将军却想抵挡超出当年一倍的力量，这是我所疑惑的。
English: I doubt that Shi Sheng can withstand half of the current strength, while General Zheng Xi wants to resist more than double the strength of that year.

古文：苏峻之强不及石虎，沔水之险不及大江；大江不能御苏峻，而欲以沔水御石虎，又所疑也。
现代文：苏峻的强大比不上石虎，沔水的天险比不上大江，大江都不能阻挡苏峻，却想依靠沔水抵挡石虎，这又是令人怀疑的。
English: Su Jun's power is not as strong as that of the stone tiger, and the natural danger of Surabaya is not as great as that of the big river. The big river cannot stop Su Jun, but he wants to rely on Surabaya to resist the stone tiger, which is doubtful.

古文：昔祖士稚在谯，佃于城北界，胡来攻，豫置军屯以御其外。
现代文：当初祖逖驻守谯，在城北边垦茺种田，担心胡虏来攻，预先设置军屯在外围阻挡。
English: At the beginning, Zhu Xi was stationed in Handan and cultivated fields on the northern edge of the city. Fearing that the Khuriks would attack, he set up military camps in advance to block the periphery.

古文：谷将熟，胡果至，丁夫战于外，老弱获于内，多持炬火，急则烧谷而走。
现代文：谷物快要成熟时，胡虏果真前来，壮丁在外围争战，老弱在内收获，许多人手持火炬，战况紧急时来不及收获，就焚毁庄稼逃走。
English: When the grain is about to ripen, the hooligans really come, the young men fight on the periphery, the old and weak harvest inside, many people hold torches, and when the war situation is urgent, they can't harvest, they burn the crops and run away.

古文：如此数年，竟不得其利。
现代文：如此多年，最终也没有得到屯田的利益。
English: After so many years, they did not get the benefits of tonden.

古文：当是时，胡唯据河北，方之于今，四分之一耳；士稚不能捍其一，而征西欲以御其四，又所疑也。
现代文：在那个时候，胡虏只占据了河北，比起现在，只是四分之一而已。祖逖不能抵御当初的一，而征西将军却想抵御现在的四，又是令人疑惑的。
English: At that time, the Khurids only occupied Hebei Province, which was only a quarter of what it is now. It is puzzling that the Ancestor could not resist the original one, but the Western Conquest General wants to resist the current four.

古文： 然此但论征西既至之后耳，尚未论道路之虑也。
现代文： 然而，这还只是讨论征西将军到达中原以后的情况，还没讨论路途方面的忧虑。
English: However, this is only a discussion of the situation after General Xie Xi arrived in the Central Plains, and has not yet discussed concerns about the route.

古文：自沔以西，水急岸高，鱼贯溯流，首尾百里。
现代文：沔水以西，水急岸高，舟船只能溯流鱼贯而上，往往首尾相衔百里。
English: To the west of Surabaya, the water is rapid and the shore is high. The boat can only follow the fish upstream, and it is often a hundred miles long.

古文：若胡无宋襄之义，及我未阵而击之，将若之何？
现代文：如果胡虏没有宋襄公不攻击半渡之人的仁义之举，乘我方军队尚未列阵时攻击，后果将会怎样？
English: If the Khuriks did not take advantage of Song Xianggong's benevolent act of not attacking the half-crossing people and attacked when our army had not yet lined up, what would be the consequences?

古文：今王土与胡，水陆异势，便习不同；胡若送死，则敌之有馀，若弃江远进，以我所短击彼所长，惧非庙胜之算也。 
现代文：现在我们与胡虏，水陆地势不同，熟悉的技能也不同，胡虏如果前来送死，那么我们战胜他们有余力；如果要放弃长江向远方进发，用我们的短处攻击敌人的长处，恐怕这不是胜于庙堂之中的成算。 
English: Now we are different from the Huns in terms of water and land, and our familiar skills are also different. If the Huns come to kill us, then we have enough power to defeat them; if we want to abandon the Yangtze River to go far away and use our weaknesses to attack the enemy's strengths, I am afraid this is not better than the temple.

古文：朝议多与谟同。
现代文：朝议多与谟同。
English: The number of motions in the morning session is more or less the same.

古文：乃诏亮不听移镇。
现代文：乃诏亮不听移镇。
English: But the emperor did not listen.

古文：燕前军师慕容评、广威将军慕容军、折冲将军慕舆根、荡寇将军慕舆泥袭赵辽西，俘获千馀家而去。
现代文：朝廷的评论大多与蔡谟相同，于是成帝下诏不让庾亮转移镇守地。前燕国前军师慕容评、广威将军慕容军、折冲将军慕舆根、荡寇将军慕舆攻袭赵的辽西，俘获民众一千多家后离去。
English: Most of the comments of the imperial court were the same as those of Zhaimu, so Emperor Cheng issued an edict not to allow Zhailiang to transfer the garrison. The former military division of Yan Province, General Mu Rongping, General Guangwei, General Mu Rongjun, General Oruchong, General Mu Mugen, and General Murong attacked Liaoxi in Zhao, captured more than a thousand people, and left.

古文：赵镇远将军石成、积弩将军呼延晃、建威将军张支等追之，评等与战，斩晃、支首。
现代文：后赵镇远将军石成、积弩将军呼延晃、建威将军张支等人追击，慕容评等同他们交战，斩杀呼延晃和张支。
English: Later, Zhao Zhenyuan's general Shicheng, Jiechi's general Hu Yanqiao, Jianwei's general Zhang Zhi and others pursued them, and Murong Han fought with them and killed Hu Yanqiao and Zhang Zhi.

古文：段辽谋反于燕，燕人杀辽及其党与数十人，送辽首于赵。
现代文：段辽图谋反叛前燕国，前燕人杀死段辽及其门党几十人，把段辽首级送给后赵。
English: Duan Liao plotted to rebel against the former Yan state. The former Yan people killed Duan Liao and dozens of his followers, and gave Duan Liao's head to Hou Zhao.

古文：五月，代王什翼犍会诸大人于参合陂，议都灅源川。
现代文：五月，代王拓跋什翼犍在参合陂会见诸部大人，商议定都于源川。
English: In May, the acting king, Tuoba Shih-tung, met with various adults in Sanghae, and the negotiations were all held in Yuanchuan.

古文：其母王氏曰： 吾自先世以来，以迁徙为业。今国家多难，若城郭而居，一旦寇来，无所避之。 
现代文：母亲王氏说： 我们从祖先开始，就以迁徙为业，现今国家多难，如果修筑城郭定居，一旦敌寇进犯，就没有躲避之处了。 
English: Wang's mother said, "From the time of our ancestors, we have made migration our business. Today, the country is facing many difficulties. If we build fortresses and settle down, once the enemy invades, there will be nowhere to hide.

古文：乃止。
现代文：定都之事便告中止。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：代人谓它国之民来附者皆为乌桓，什翼犍分之为二部，各置大人以监之。
现代文：代国人把别国民众前来归附的都称为乌桓，拓跋什翼犍把他们分成两个部落，各自设置大人监察。
English: The representatives of the countrymen called the people of other countries who came to join them as Wuhuan, and divided them into two tribes, each of which set up adult supervision.

古文：弟孤监其北，子寔君监其南。
现代文：兄弟拓跋孤监察北部，儿子拓跋君监察南部。
English: Brother Tuoba Guo oversees the north, and his son Tuoba Jun oversees the south.

古文：什翼犍求昏于燕，燕王皝以其妹妻之。
现代文：拓跋什翼犍向前燕求婚，前燕王慕容把自己的妹妹嫁给他。
English: Tuoba Shiji proposed to the former Yan, and the former Yan Wang Murong married his sister to him.

古文：秋，七月，赵王虎以太子宣为大单于，建天子旌旗。
现代文：秋季七月，后赵王石虎任太子石宣为大单于，树立天子旌旗。
English: In the autumn of July, the late Zhao Wang Shihhu appointed Prince Shixuan as the grand prince, and set up the banner of the heavenly son.

古文：庚申，始兴文献公王导薨，丧葬之礼视汉博陆候及安平献王故事，参用天子之礼。
现代文：庚申，始兴文献公王导去世，丧葬的礼仪比照汉代博陆侯霍光和安平献王刘孚的旧例，参用天子的礼节。
English: According to Goshun and Shixing Literature, when Prince Wang Du died, the funeral etiquette was compared to the old example of the Han Dynasty Bo Lu Hou Huoguang and Anping Xian Wang Liu Fu, and the etiquette of the heavenly son was used.

古文：导简素寡欲，善因事就功，虽无日用之益而岁计有馀。
现代文：王导清简寡欲，善于顺因事势获取成功，治理国家虽然每日用度没什么宽裕，但每年的费用却有节余。
English: Wang Duqing is simple-minded, good at adapting to the situation to achieve success, and although the daily expenses of governing the country are not abundant, the annual expenses are more than enough.

古文：辅相三世，仓无储谷，衣不重帛。
现代文：他辅佐元帝、明帝、成帝三代君王，担任相职，但自己却仓库无储粮，穿衣不加帛。
English: He assisted three generations of emperors, Emperor Yuan, Emperor Ming, and Emperor Cheng, and served as a consul, but he had no grain reserves in his storehouse, and his clothes were dirty.

古文：初，导与庾亮共荐丹杨尹何充于帝，请以为己副，且曰： 臣死之日，愿引充内侍，则社稷无虞矣。 
现代文：当初，王导和庾亮共同向成帝举荐丹杨尹何充，请求作为自己的副职，并且说： 我死的时候，希望提拔何充到内廷供职，那么国家就无可忧虑了。 
English: At the beginning, Wang Duoduo and Hao Liang jointly recommended Danyang Yin Hecong to Emperor Cheng Rong and asked him to serve as his deputy, and said: When I die, I hope to promote Hecong to serve in the Inner Court, then the country will have nothing to worry about.

古文：由是加吏部尚书。
现代文：因此授予何充吏部尚书。
English: Therefore, he was awarded the honorable mention of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：及导薨，微庾亮为丞相、扬州刺史、录尚书事；亮固辞。
现代文：王导去世后，成帝征召庾亮担任丞相、扬州刺史、录尚书事，庾亮固辞不受。
English: After Wang Du's death, Emperor Chengdu conscripted Yao Liang to serve as chancellor, to write the history of Yangzhou, and to record records. Yao Liang did not accept the appointment.

古文：辛酉，以充为护军将军，亮弟会稽内史冰为中书监、扬州刺史，参录尚书事。
现代文：辛酉，任用何充为护军将军，庾亮的兄弟、会稽内史庾冰任中书监、扬州刺史、参录尚书事。
English: Xin Zhen, He Zheng was appointed as the general of the escorting army, and his brothers were appointed as the supervisors of the internal history of the association, Yan Bing was appointed as the middle librarian, Yangzhou engraved history, and Shang Shuji was recorded.

古文：冰既当重任，经纶时务，不舍昼夜，宾礼朝贤，升擢后进，由是朝野翕然称之，以为贤相。
现代文：庾冰担当重任后，治理政务不分昼夜，对朝廷贤臣彬彬有礼，提拔后进，因此朝野人士都同声称赞，认为他是贤相。
English: After taking on the important task, Hao Bing managed the affairs of state day and night, was courteous to the court's wise men, and was promoted slowly. As a result, people in and out of the court all praised him and considered him to be a wise minister.

古文：初，王导辅政，每从宽恕；冰颇任威刑，丹杨尹殷融谏之。冰曰： 前相之贤，犹不堪其弘，况如吾者哉！ 
现代文：当初，王导辅佐朝政，每每采取宽恕态度。庾冰则时常依靠威严刑令，丹杨尹殷融劝谏他，庾冰说： 凭以前丞相那样的贤良，尚且不能胜任宽弘，何况像我这样人呢！ 
English: At the beginning, Wang Duofu, the assistant of the imperial government, always took a forgiving attitude. Yan Bing often relied on the majesty of the punishment order. Danyang Yin Yin Rong advised him. Yan Bing said, "With such a virtuous person as the former prime minister, I can't be qualified to be a Guanghong, let alone a person like me!

古文：范汪谓冰曰： 顷天文错度，足下宜尽消御之道。 
现代文：范汪对庾冰说： 不久前天象错乱失度，足下应当采取消除、防御的对策。 
English: Fan Wang said to Hao Bing: Not long ago, the weather was chaotic and out of control, and countermeasures should be taken to eliminate and defend.

古文：冰曰： 玄象岂吾所测，正当勤尽人事耳。 
现代文：庾冰说： 玄奥的天象岂是我所能测知的，这正应当勤奋地兢尽人事。 
English: Hao Bing said, "Is it possible for me to know the secrets of the heavens? This is exactly what one should do diligently.

古文：又隐实户口，料出无名万馀人，以充军实。
现代文：庾冰又审度核实户口，清理出没有姓名的人一万多名，用以充实军队。
English: Zou Bing also examined and verified the household registration and cleared out more than ten thousand people without names to enrich the army.

古文：冰好为纠察，近于繁细，后益矫违，复存宽纵，疏密自由，律令无用矣。
现代文：庾冰喜好举发检察，近于繁细，后来矫枉过正，又宽松纵容，更加远离正道。宽松或是严密，均出自己意，因此律令便没有用了。
English: Zou Bing's preference for procuration was close to excessive, and later he overcorrected, and indulged more loosely, further away from the right path. Whether it was loose or strict, it was all his own idea, so the ritsuryo was useless.

古文：八月，壬午，复改丞相为司徒。
现代文：八月，壬午，晋又改丞相官职为司徒。
English: In August, at noon, Jin changed his official position from chancellor to tutor.

古文：南昌文成公郗鉴疾笃，以府事付长史刘遐，上疏乞骸骨，且曰： 臣所统错杂，率多北人，或逼迁徙，或是新附，百姓怀土，皆有归本之心；臣宣国恩，示以好恶，处与田宅，渐得少安。
现代文：南昌文成公郗鉴病重，将幕府事务交给长史刘遐，自己上疏乞求卸职，而且说： 我所统领的人员错综杂乱，一般来说北方人居多，有的是受威逼迁来的，有的是新近归附的，百姓心恋故土，都有归本的心愿。我宣扬国家的恩德，晓谕好恶之别，分给他们田地住宅，这才逐渐换得稍稍的平定。
English: Nanchang Wencheng Gongjun, who was seriously ill, handed over the shogunate affairs to Changshi Liu Wei, and begged to be relieved of his duties, saying, "The personnel under my command is complicated and chaotic. Generally speaking, there are many people living in the north, some of whom were forced to move by threats, and some of whom were newly annexed. The people love their native land and have a desire to return to it. I preached the benevolence of the country, told them the difference between likes and dislikes, and gave them field dwellings. This gradually changed to a slight leveling.

古文：闻臣疾笃，众情骇动，若当北渡，必启寇心。
现代文：听说我病重，众人心情惊骇骚动，如果真的向北渡江，必然引动敌人侵犯的心思。
English: Hearing that I was seriously ill, everyone was shocked and agitated. If I really crossed the river to the north, it would inevitably trigger thoughts of invasion by the enemy.

古文：太常臣谟，平简贞正，素望所归，谓可以为都督、徐州刺史。 
现代文：太常蔡谟平简贞正，为时望所归，我认为可以出任都督及徐州刺史。 
English: Tsai Muping Jianzhenzheng, as the time demands, I think I can serve as the governor and the history of Xuzhou.

古文：诏以蔡谟为太尉军司，加侍中、辛酉，鉴薨，即以谟为征北将军、都督徐、兗、青三州诸军事、徐州刺史，假节。
现代文：成帝下诏任蔡谟为太尉军司，授予侍中。辛酉，郗鉴去世，当即任命蔡谟为征北将军，都督徐州、兖州、青州诸军事，徐州刺史，假节。
English: Emperor Cheng Zhao appointed Jai Mu as the captain of the military department and awarded him the title of chamberlain. After the death of Xin Xuan and Yan Jian, he immediately appointed Jai Mu as the general of the Northern Expedition, the military governor of Xuzhou, Zhangzhou and Qingzhou, the historian of Xuzhou, and the false festival.

古文：时左卫将军陈光请伐赵，诏遣光攻寿阳。谟上疏曰： 寿阳城小而固。自寿阳至琅邪，城壁相望，一城见攻，众城必救。
现代文：当时左卫将军陈光请求伐后赵，成帝下诏派陈光进攻寿阳，蔡谟上疏说： 寿阳城小但坚固，从寿阳至琅邪，城墙互相可以望见，一城受攻，各城必然来救援。
English: At that time, the left guard general Chen Guang requested to attack Zhao, and Emperor Cheng sent Chen Guang to attack Shouyang. Cai Muxiang said: Shouyang City is small but strong, from Shouyang to Shiji, the city walls can be seen from each other. If one city is attacked, all cities will inevitably come to the rescue.

古文：又，王师在路五十馀日，前驱未至，声息久闻，贼之邮驿，一日千里，河北之骑，足以来赴。
现代文：再者，君王的军队在路途上需要五十多天，先驱者还没到达，消息已经传播很久了，敌贼的邮驿，以一日千里的速度传递消息，那么黄河以北的骑兵，就完全可以赶来救援。
English: Furthermore, the king's army needed more than fifty days on the road, the pioneers had not yet arrived, the news had been spreading for a long time, the enemy's postcards transmitted the news at a speed of a thousand miles a day, so the cavalry north of the Yellow River could fully come to the rescue.

古文：夫以白起、韩信、项籍之勇，犹发梁焚舟，背水而阵。
现代文：以白起、韩信、项籍那样的勇将，还要挖断桥梁，焚毁舟船，背水而战。
English: The brave generals like Baiqi, Hanxin and Xiangqi still have to dig up bridges, burn boats and fight against the tide.

古文：今欲停船水渚，引兵造城，前对坚敌，顾临归路，此兵法之所诫。
现代文：现在想把舟船停泊在水渚中备用，领兵前往敌城，前方面对强敌，回头顾望归路，这正是兵法所戒的大忌。
English: Now, if you want to moor your boat in the middle of a shoal to stand by, lead your troops to the enemy city, face the strong enemy in front, and look back for the way back, this is exactly the taboo of the military law.

古文：若进攻未拔，胡骑猝至，惧桓子不知所为而舟中之指可掬也。
现代文：如果进攻不能取胜，胡虏的骑兵突然到达，恐怕中行桓子不知所措、士兵争船渡河，以致被砍断的手指双手可捧的局面又将重演。
English: If the attack does not succeed, and the horsemen of the Hukuru suddenly arrive, I am afraid that the situation in which the middle-ranking hanzi was at a loss, and the soldiers fought to cross the river, so that the fingers that were cut off could be held with both hands, will repeat itself.

古文：今光所将皆殿中精兵，宜令所向有征无战。
现代文：现在陈光统领的都是宫中精兵，应该让他们到哪里都是只有出征但不交战。
English: Now Chen Guang is in command of the palace elite soldiers, they should be allowed to go anywhere only to go to war but not to fight.

古文：而顿之坚城之下，以国之爪士击寇之下邑，得之则利薄而不足损敌，失之则害重而足以益寇，惧非策之长者也。 
现代文：现在却屯兵于坚城之下，用国家的宫中精锐攻击敌人的下等城邑，取胜则得利微小不足以给敌人造成多大伤害，失败则损失惨重足以有利于敌寇，这恐怕不是周全的计策。 
English: Now, however, they are garrisoned under the fortified city, using the elite of the country's palace to attack the enemy's inferior cities. If they win, the gain will be too small to cause much damage to the enemy, and if they fail, the loss will be heavy enough to benefit the enemy. This is probably not a comprehensive strategy.

古文：乃止。
现代文：伐后赵之事这才中止。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：初，陶侃在武昌，议者以江北有邾城，宜分兵戍之。
现代文：当初，陶侃镇守武昌，有人论议，认为长江北岸有邾城，应当分兵戍守。
English: At first, Tao Kan was the garrison of Wuchang, but some people argued that there was a fortified city on the north bank of the Yangtze River, and it should be divided into two garrisons.

古文：侃每不答，而言者不巳。
现代文：陶侃常常不作答复，但总有人提及此事。
English: Tao Kan often doesn't reply, but the matter is always mentioned.

古文：侃乃渡水猎，引将佐语之曰： 我所以设险而御寇者，正以长江耳。
现代文：陶侃于是渡江围猎，召来将佐们告诉他们说： 我之所以设置险阻防御敌寇，正因为有长江而已。
English: Tao Kan then went to the Yangtze River to hunt, and called the generals to tell them: The reason why I set up a perilous obstacle to defend against enemy pirates is precisely because of the Yangtze River.

古文：邾城隔在江北，内无所倚，外接群夷。
现代文：邾城隔在长江北岸，自身没有可以依仗的天险，外部与各夷族接壤，对夷人来说利害关系更大。
English: Lucheng is isolated on the north bank of the Yangtze River, and has no natural danger to rely on. It shares a border with other ethnic groups, so it is of greater interest to the barbarians.

古文：夷中利深，晋人贪利，夷不堪命，必引虏入寇。此乃致祸之由，非御寇也。
现代文：如果我们贪图小利，夷人不能忍受，必定领兵前来侵犯，这正是导致祸乱的根由，不是用以抵御敌寇的好方法。
English: If we are greedy for small profits, and the barbarians can't stand it, we must lead troops to invade. This is the root cause of the calamity, not a good way to resist the enemy.

古文：且吴时戍此城，用三万兵，今纵有兵守之，亦无益于江南；若羯虏有可乘之会，此又非所资也。 
现代文：况且吴国当初戍守此城，动用了三万兵众，现在纵然派兵戍守，对江南来说也没什么太大的好处；如果羯族敌虏有可乘之机，占据邾城又没有什么太大的帮助。 
English: Moreover, at the beginning, the State of Wu guarded the city and mobilized 30,000 soldiers. Now, even if they sent soldiers to guard the city, it would not be of much benefit to the south of the Yangtze River. If there is an opportunity for the enemy of the Yi people to take advantage of, it would not be of much help to occupy the city.

古文：及庾亮镇武昌，卒使毛宝、樊峻戍邾城。
现代文：等到庾亮镇守武昌，最终还是派毛宝、樊峻戍守邾城。
English: After waiting for Zhaoliang to defend Wuchang, they finally sent Mao Bao and Zhaojun to defend the city.

古文：赵王虎恶之，以夔安为大都督，帅石鉴、石闵、李农、张貉、李菟等五将军、兵五万人寇荆、扬北鄙，二万骑攻邾城。
现代文：后赵王石虎憎恶，任用夔安为大都督，率同石鉴、石闵、李农、张貉、李菟五位将军，兵众共五万人侵犯荆州和扬州的北部边境，另派二万骑兵进攻邾城。
English: Later, King Zhao detested Shih Hau and appointed Yan'an as the grand governor. He led the five generals Shijan, Shijun, Li Nong, Zhang Ye and Li Ye, with a total of 50,000 soldiers to invade the northern border of Jingzhou and Yangzhou, and sent another 20,000 cavalry to attack Shicheng.

古文：毛宝求救于庾亮，亮以城固，不时遣兵。
现代文：毛宝向庾亮求救，庾亮认为邾城城池坚固，没有及时派兵。
English: Mao Bao asked Zou Liang for help. Zou Liang thought that Zengcheng was strong and did not send troops in time.

古文：九月，石闵败晋兵于沔阴，杀将军蔡怀；夔安、李农陷沔南；硃保败晋兵于白石，杀郑豹等五将军；张貉陷邾城，死者六千人，毛宝、樊峻突围出走，赴江溺死。
现代文：九月，石闵在沔南打败晋兵，杀死将军蔡怀。夔安、李农攻陷沔南，朱保在白石打败晋兵，杀死郑豹等五位将军。张貉攻下邾城，邾城战死者有六千人。毛宝、樊峻突围出逃，渡江时溺水而死。
English: In September, Shih Kui defeated Jin soldiers in southern Anhui and killed General Cai Huai. Yan'an and Li Nong invaded southern Anhui, and Zhu Bao defeated Jin soldiers in Baishi and killed five generals including Zheng Bao. Zhang Kui conquered Lucheng, and there were six thousand people killed in the battle of Lucheng. Mao Bao and Zou Jun broke out and fled, and drowned when crossing the river.

古文：夔安进据胡亭，寇江夏；义阳将军黄冲、义阳太守郑进皆降于赵。
现代文：夔安进据胡亭，侵犯江夏，义阳将军黄冲，义阳太守郑进都投降赵军。
English: According to Hu Ting, Yan Anjin invaded Jiangxia, Yiyang General Huang Chong, and Yiyang Governor Zheng Jin all surrendered to the Zhao Army.

古文：安进围石城，竟陵太守李阳拒战，破之，斩首五千馀级，安乃退。遂掠汉东，拥七千馀户迁于幽、冀。
现代文：夔安前进包围石城，竟陵太守李阳发兵抵抗，战败夔安，斩首五千多级，夔安这才退走，乘势劫掠汉水以东，挟持民众七千多户迁徙到幽州、冀州。
English: Lian'an advanced to encircle Shicheng, but Li Yang, the governor of Ling, sent troops to resist, defeated Lian'an, and beheaded more than five thousand people. Lian'an then retreated, took advantage of the situation to plunder east of Hanshui, and took more than seven thousand households hostage to migrate to Yuzhou and Jizhou.

古文：是时，庾亮犹上疏欲迁镇石城，闻邾城陷。
现代文：此时庾亮还在上疏想将镇守地移至石城，听说邾城失陷，这才作罢。
English: At this time, Liao Liang was still in Shangshu and wanted to move the town to Shicheng. When he heard that Shicheng had fallen, he had to give up.

古文：乃止。上表陈谢，自贬三等，行安西将军；有诏复位。
现代文：给成帝上表谢罪，自行乞求贬职三等，行安西将军职位。
English: He expressed his gratitude to Emperor Cheng and begged to be demoted to the third class and promoted to the position of General Anxi.

古文：以辅国将军庾怿为豫州刺史，监宣城、庐江、历阳、安丰四郡诸军事，假节，镇芜湖。
现代文：成帝下诏让他恢复原位，任命辅国将军庾怿为豫州刺史，监宣城、庐江、历阳、安丰四郡诸军事，假节，镇守芜湖。
English: Emperor Chengzong issued an edict to restore him to his original position, and appointed the general of the Auxiliary State to be the historian of Yuzhou, supervise the military of the four counties of Xuancheng, Lijiang, Liyang and Anfeng, and guard Lugu Lake.

古文：赵王虎患贵戚豪恣，乃擢殿中御史李巨为御史中丞，特加亲任，中外肃然。
现代文：后赵王石虎忧虑贵戚们狂放恣肆，于是提升殿中御史李巨为御史中丞，特别加以宠爱和信任，朝廷内外为此肃然。
English: Later, King Zhao Shihhu was worried about the reckless behavior of his noble relatives, so he promoted the court historian Li Jiu to be the court historian, and especially loved and trusted him. The court and beyond were awestruck by this.

古文：虎曰： 朕闻良臣如猛虎，高步旷野而豺狼避路，信哉！ 
现代文：石虎说： 我听说良臣如同猛虎，信步行走于旷野，豺狼因此避开行路，的确如此！ 
English: Shihu said: I have heard that a good minister is like a fierce tiger, walking on foot in the wilderness, so the wolf avoids the road, it is true!

古文：虎以抚军将军李农为使持节、监辽西、北平诸军事、征东将军、营州牧，镇令支。
现代文：石虎任命抚军将军李农为使持节，监辽西、北平诸军事，征东将军，营州牧，镇守令支。
English: Shihu appointed Li Nong, the general of the Fuzhou army, as the commander of the military, the commander of the military in West Liao and Beiping, the general of the eastward expedition, the governor of Yingzhou, and the commander of the town guard.

古文：农帅众三万与征北大将军张举攻燕凡城。
现代文：李农率领士众三万人，会同征北大将军张举进攻燕国的凡城。
English: Li Nong, leading 30,000 soldiers, will march together with the general of Peking University to attack the city of Fanchong in Yan Province.

古文：燕王皝以榼卢城大悦绾为御难将军，授兵一千，使守凡城。
现代文：前燕王慕容任用卢城主悦绾为御难将军，调拨士兵一千人，让他守卫凡城。
English: The former Yan King Murong appointed the lord of Lu City, Yuesheng, as the general of tribulation, and dispatched a thousand soldiers to guard the city.

古文：及赵兵至，将吏皆恐，欲弃城走。
现代文：等到后赵军队到达凡城，将吏们都十分恐慌，想弃城而逃。
English: After Zhao's army arrived at Fancheng, the generals were so panicked that they wanted to abandon the city and flee.

古文：绾曰： 受命御寇，死生以之。且凭城坚守，一可敌百，有敢妄言惑众者斩！ 
现代文：悦绾说： 我们受命抵御敌寇，应将生死置之度外，况且据城坚守，一人可以抵挡百人，胆敢妄言惑众的人斩首！ 
English: Etsuko said, "We have been ordered to resist the enemy raiders, and we should put life and death above everything else. Moreover, as long as the city is defended, one person can resist a hundred people, and those who dare to talk nonsense and mislead the public should be beheaded!"

古文：众然后定。绾身先士卒，亲冒矢石；举等攻之经旬，不能克，乃退。
现代文：大家这才安定，悦绾身先士卒，亲身承受流矢飞石。张举等人进攻十多天，不能取胜，于是退军。
English: This was the only way for everyone to be stable, and they gladly took the lead and personally endured the flying stones. Zhang He and others attacked for more than ten days, but could not win, so they withdrew.

古文：虎以辽西迫近燕境，数遭攻袭，乃悉徙其民于冀州之南。
现代文：石虎因为辽西迫近燕国边境，多次遭到攻袭，于是把民众全部迁徙到冀州以南。
English: Because the western part of Liao Province was close to the border of Yan Province, Shihu was attacked many times, so all the people were moved to the south of Jizhou.

古文：汉主寿疾病，罗恒、解思明复议奉晋；寿不从。
现代文：成汉国主李寿病重，罗恒、解思明又论议推奉李晋为储君，李寿不同意。
English: Li Shou, the head of the Chenghan Kingdom, was seriously ill, and Luo Heng and Xie Siming also discussed and recommended Li Jin as the crown prince. Li Shou did not agree.

古文：李演复上书言之；寿怒，杀演。
现代文：李演又上书谈及这件事，李寿发怒，杀死李演。
English: Li Shou got angry and killed Li Yuen after Li Yuen wrote about the incident again.

古文：寿常慕汉武、魏明之为人，耻闻父兄时事，上书者不得言先世政教，自以为胜之也。
现代文：李寿时常仰慕汉武帝、魏明帝的为人，以听到父兄当时的事迹为耻辱，上书的人都不得提及先世的政教业绩，自认为胜过他们。
English: Li Shou often admired Emperor Hanwu and Emperor Ming of Wei as a person. He was ashamed to hear the deeds of his father and brother at that time. The people who submitted the letter were not allowed to mention the political and religious achievements of the previous generation. They thought they were better than them.

古文：舍人杜袭作诗十篇，托言应璩以讽谏。
现代文：舍人杜袭写诗十篇，假托是应琚所作，用婉言隐语来劝谏李寿。
English: Du Hao, a layman, wrote ten poems, pretending that they were written by Ying Zi, and used euphemisms to persuade Zi Li Shou.

古文：寿报曰： 省诗知意。
现代文：李寿回复说： 我审读诗篇，已知其意。
English: Li Shou replied: I am reading a poem, you know what I mean.

古文：若今人所作，乃贤哲之话言；若古人所作，则死鬼之常辞耳。 
现代文：如果是今人所作，确实是贤哲的善言；如果是古人所作，那么不过是死鬼常说的话。 
English: If it is made by modern man, it is indeed the kind words of a sage; if it is made by the ancients, then it is nothing more than the words of a dead ghost.

古文：燕王皝自以称王未受晋命，冬，遣长史刘翔、参军鞠运来献捷论功，且言权假之间，并请刻期大举，共平中原。
现代文：前燕王慕容自认为称王没有受晋王室的任命，冬季，派长史刘翔、参军鞠运前来进献俘虏和战利品、报告功绩，并且说明假摄称王的意愿。又请求约定日期，大举起兵，共同平定中原。
English: The former Yan Wang Murong thought that Wang was not appointed by the Jin royal family. In winter, he sent the commander Shi Liu Xiang and the military commander Qi Yun to come forward to offer captives and trophies, report achievements, and explain the intention of the fake photo to praise Wang. He also requested an appointment date to raise a large army and jointly pacify the Central Plains.

古文：皝击高句丽，兵及新城，高句丽王钊乞盟，乃还。
现代文：慕容攻击高句丽，军队到达新城，高句丽王钊乞求结盟和好，于是前燕军退还。
English: Murong attacked Goguryeo, the army reached Xincheng, Goguryeo Wang Qian begged for alliance and reconciliation, so the former Yan army returned.

古文：又使其子恪、霸击宇文别部。
现代文：慕容又派儿子慕容恪、慕容霸攻击宇文氏的别部。
English: Murong also sent his sons, Murong Ke and Murong Ba, to attack other branches of the Uwen clan.

古文：霸年十三，勇冠三军。
现代文：慕容霸年方十三，勇冠三军。
English: Murong is 13 years old, and he is the champion of three armies.

古文：张骏立辟雍、明堂以行礼。
现代文：张骏设立辟雍、明堂以进行宣教礼仪活动。
English: Zhang Ye set up Biyong and Ming-tang to carry out missionary activities.

古文：十一月，以世子重华行凉州事。
现代文：十一月，让世子张重华兼管凉州事务。
English: In November, he put his son Zhang Chonghua in charge of the affairs of Liangzhou.

古文：十二月，丁丑，赵太保桃豹卒。
现代文：十二月，丁丑，后赵太保桃豹故去。
English: In December, Ding Yuxiu, the heir to Zhao Taibao and Taobao passed away.

古文：丙戌，以骠骑将军琅邪王岳为侍中、司徒。
现代文：丙戌，东晋朝廷任命骠骑将军、琅邪王司马岳为侍中、司徒。
English: At the same time, the Eastern Jin Dynasty court appointed the general of the cavalry and the king of evil, Sima Yue, as an attendant and an attendant.

古文：汉李弈寇巴东，守将劳杨败死。
现代文：成汉国李奕侵犯巴东，守将劳杨战败身死。
English: Li Yi of the Han Dynasty invaded Badong and defeated and killed the warlord Lao Yang.

古文：显宗成皇帝中之下咸康六年春，正月，庚子朔，都亭文康侯庾亮薨。
现代文：咸康六年春季，正月，庚子朔，都亭文康侯庾亮去世。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Xiankang, the first month of the year, Geng Zishuo, Du Tingwen and Kang Houyongliang passed away.

古文：以护军将军、录尚书何充为中书令。
现代文：成帝任用护军将军、录尚书何充为中书令。
English: Emperor Cheng appointed a general to guard the army, and the record of the letter was recorded as a Chinese letter.

古文：庚戌，以南郡太守庾翼为都督江、荆、司、雍、梁、益六州诸军事、安西将军、荆州刺史，假节，代亮镇武昌。
现代文：庾戌，任命南郡太守庾翼为都督江州、荆州、司州、雍州、梁州、益州诸军事及安西将军荆州刺史、假节，代替庾亮镇守武昌。
English: , appointed the governor of Nan County, 翼, as the military governor of Jiangzhou, Jingzhou, Sizhou, Yongzhou, Liangzhou, and Yizhou, and the general of Anxi, Jingzhou Shishi, Fuxi, to replace 亮 as the town guard of Wuchang.

古文：时人疑翼年少，不能继其兄。
现代文：当时人怀疑庾翼年轻，不能继承他兄长庾亮的业绩。
English: At that time, it was suspected that Zou Ying was too young to succeed his elder brother Zou Liang.

古文：翼悉心为治，戎政严明，数年之间，公私充实，人皆称其才。
现代文：庾翼尽心治理，军务和政务都很严明，数年之间，官府和私人资用充实，众人都称赞他的才能。
English: Zou Ying devoted himself to governance, military affairs and government affairs were very strict. In a few years, government and private funds were abundant, and everyone praised his talent.

古文：辛亥，以左光禄大夫陆玩为侍中、司空。
现代文：辛亥，东晋朝廷任用左光禄大夫陆玩为侍中、司空。
English: In Xinhai, the Eastern Jin Dynasty court appointed Dr. Zuo Guanglu as an attendant and Siku.

古文：宇文逸豆归忌慕容翰才名。翰乃阳狂酣饮，或卧自便利，或被发歌呼，拜跪乞食。
现代文：宇文逸豆归妒忌慕容翰的才能、名望，慕容翰便佯装癫狂，终日酣饮，有时躺着就大、小便，有时又披散头发，大声歌呼，跪拜乞食。
English: Uwen Yatzu was jealous of Muronghan's talent and fame. Muronghan pretended to be crazy, drinking all day, sometimes lying down and urinating, sometimes wearing his hair loose, singing loudly, and kneeling to beg.

古文：宇文举国贱之，不复省录，以故得行来自遂，山川形便，皆默记之。
现代文：宇文部全国都看不起他，对他不再检视省察。慕容翰因此可以来往自由，把宇文部的山川形势，都默记在心。
English: The whole country looked down on him and no longer scrutinized him. As a result, Muronghan was free to come and go, and he kept the ups and downs of the Ministry of Education in mind.

古文：燕王皝以翰初非叛乱，以猜嫌出奔，虽在它国，常潜为燕计；乃遣商人王车通市于宇文部以窥翰。
现代文：前燕王慕容因为慕容翰当初并非叛乱，是因为心有猜忌才出逃，虽然居住别国，但经常悄悄地为前燕国打算，于是派商人王车到宇文部经商，借此观测慕容翰的心意。
English: Former Yan King Murong, because Murong Han was not a rebel at the beginning, but fled because he was suspicious. Although he lived in another country, he often secretly planned for the former Yan country, so he sent the merchant Wang Che to the Ministry of Education to do business and observe Murong Han's mind.

古文：翰见车，无言，抚膺颔之而已。
现代文：慕容翰见到王车，不说话，只是捶击胸部颔首而已。
English: When Muronghan saw the royal chariot, he did not speak, but only beat his chest with a dagger.

古文：皝曰： 翰欲来也。 
现代文：慕容说： 慕容翰想回来了。 
English: Murong said: Muronghan wants to come back.

古文：复使车迎之。
现代文：又让王车去迎接他归来。
English: He also sent the royal carriage to meet him on his return.

古文：翰弯弓三石馀，矢尤长大，皝为之造可手弓矢，使画埋于道旁而密告之。
现代文：慕容翰拉弓的力量达三石多，箭身尤为长大，慕容为他制造了可手的弓箭，让王车埋在道路旁边，悄悄告诉慕容翰。
English: The strength of Muronghan's bow is more than three stone, and the arrow body is particularly long. Murong made a handy bow and arrow for him, and let the king's carriage be buried next to the road, and quietly told Muronghan.

古文：二月，翰窃逸豆归名马，携其二子过取弓矢，逃归。
现代文：二月，慕容翰偷出宇文逸豆归的名马，携同两个儿子到路边取出弓箭，上马逃归。
English: In February, Muronghan stole the famous horse of Uwen Itzugui, took his two sons to the roadside to take out the bow and arrow, and fled on the horse.

古文：逸豆归使骁骑百馀追之。翰曰： 吾久客思归，既得上马，无复还理。
现代文：宇文逸豆归派骁勇骑兵一百多人追赶，慕容翰说： 我长久客居他国，现在想回乡，既然已经上马，就再没有回去的道理。
English: Uwen Yatzu sent more than a hundred brave cavalrymen to chase after him. Muronghan said, "I have been a guest in another country for a long time, and now I want to return to my hometown. Since I have already mounted a horse, there is no reason to go back.

古文：吾向日阳愚以诳汝，吾之故艺犹在，无为相逼，自取死了！ 
现代文：我过去每天佯装痴呆欺蒙你们，其实我以往的技艺并未丢失，你们不要逼迫我，那是自寻死路。 
English: In the past, I pretended to be demented every day to deceive you. In fact, my previous skills have not been lost. You should not persecute me. That is a self-defeating way.

古文：追骑轻之，直突而前。
现代文：追来的骑兵小看慕容翰，径直奔驰而来。
English: The pursuing cavalry looked down on Muronghan and rode straight at him.

古文：翰曰： 吾居汝国久恨恨，不欲杀汝；汝去我百步立汝刀，吾射之，一发中者汝可还，不中者可来前。 
现代文：慕容翰说： 我长久居住在你们国家，心存依恋之情，不想杀死你们，你们离开我一百步把刀树立起来，让我用箭射击，如果一发便射中，你们便可以返回；如果射不中，你们便可以前来抓我。 
English: Muronghan said, "I have lived in your country for a long time, and I am attached to you. I don't want to kill you. If you go a hundred paces away from me, set up a knife and let me shoot an arrow. If it hits, you can go back. If it doesn't, you can come and get me."

古文：追骑解刀立之，一发，正中其环，追骑散走。
现代文：追来的骑兵解下佩刀插在地上，慕容翰射出一枝箭，正中刀环，追来的骑兵四散逃走。
English: The pursuing cavalrymen unsheathed their sabers and stuck them in the ground. Muronghan shot an arrow, which hit the saber ring, and the pursuing cavalrymen scattered and fled.

古文：皝闻翰至，大喜，恩遇甚厚。
现代文：慕容听说慕容翰到来，大为喜悦，对他的礼遇很优厚。
English: Murong was overjoyed to hear of Muronghan's arrival and treated him with great courtesy.

古文：庚辰，有星孛于太微。
现代文：庚辰，有异星出现在太微星旁。
English: On the 11th, the comet appeared in the Taimu constellation.

古文：三月，丁卯，大赦。
现代文：三月，丁卯，东晋大赦天下。
English: In March, Dingwu, the East Jin Dynasty was amnestied.

古文：汉人攻拔丹川，守将孟彦、刘齐、李秋皆死。
现代文：成汉人攻占丹川，丹川守将孟彦、刘齐、李秋全都战死。
English: The Han Chinese captured Tanchuan, and Tanchuan's commanders, Meng Yan, Liu Qi, and Li Qiu, all died in the battle.

古文：代王什翼犍始都云中之盛乐宫。
现代文：代王拓跋什翼犍开始建都于云中的盛乐宫。
English: King Tuoba began to build the capital at Shengle Palace in the clouds.

古文：赵王虎遗汉主寿书，欲与之连兵入寇，约中分江南。
现代文：后赵王石虎写信给成汉国主李寿，想和他联军南犯，约定平分江南之地。
English: Later, Zhao Wang Shihhu wrote a letter to the ruler of Chenghan, Li Shou, and wanted to join forces with him to invade the south, agreeing to divide the land south of the Yangtze River equally.

古文：寿大喜，遣散骑常侍王嘏、中常侍王广使于赵；龚壮谏，不听。
现代文：李寿大为高兴，派散骑常侍王嘏、中常侍王广出使赵。龚壮规谏，李寿不听。
English: Li Shou was overjoyed and sent his equerry Wang Qi and his middle-ranking equerry Wang Guang to dispatch Zhao. Zhuang Zhuang did not listen to Li Shou.

古文：寿大修船舰，缮兵聚粮。
现代文：李寿多造舰船，整修兵器，积蓄军粮。
English: Li Shouduo built ships, refurbished weapons, and accumulated military rations.

古文：秋，九月，以尚书令马当为六军都督，征集士卒七万馀人为舟师，大阅于成都，鼓噪盈江；寿登城观之，有吞噬江南之志。
现代文：秋季，九月，任命尚书令马当为六军都督，征集士卒七万多人为水军，在成都举行盛大的阅兵式，鼓噪之声充溢江面。李寿登上城楼检阅，大有吞噬江南的志向。
English: In the autumn, in September, Shang Shuling appointed Ma Dang as the commander-in-chief of the six armies, recruited more than 70,000 soldiers and sailors for the navy, held a grand military parade in Chengdu, and the sound of drums filled the river. Li Shou boarded the city tower to review, with great ambition to devour the south of the river.

古文：解思明谏曰： 我国小兵弱，吴、会险远，图之未易。 
现代文：解思明劝谏说： 我们国家小，军力弱，东吴、会稽相距遥远，地势险恶，想图谋并不容易。 
English: Xie Siming advised Zou: Our country is small, our military is weak, the East and West, and the Audit Commission are far apart, and the terrain is dangerous. It is not easy to plot.

古文：寿乃命群臣大议利害。
现代文：李寿于是命令群臣们广泛论评其中的利害。
English: Li Shou then ordered his courtiers to widely discuss the interests involved.

古文：龚壮曰： 陛下与胡通，孰若与晋通？
现代文：龚壮说： 陛下与胡虏结盟，又怎么比得上与晋王室结盟？
English: Hao Zhuang said: Your Majesty's alliance with the Huns is comparable to the alliance with the Jin royal family.

古文：胡，豺狼也，既灭晋，不得不北面事之；若与之争天下，则强弱不敌，危亡之势也，虞、虢之事，已然之戒，愿陛下熟虑之。 
现代文：胡虏是豺狼之辈，灭晋之后，我们非得北面称臣侍奉他，如果和他们争夺天下，那么强弱不相称，处于危亡的境地。春秋时虞国、虢国的往事，就是以往的教训，希望陛下仔细考虑这件事。 
English: The Khuriks were a generation of jackals. After the destruction of the Jin Dynasty, we had to serve him as his vassals in the north. If we were to compete with them for the world, then our strength and weakness would not be commensurate, and we would be in a state of peril. The past events of the states of Yugo and Shikoku during the Spring and Autumn Periods are lessons from the past. I hope that His Majesty will carefully consider this matter.

古文：群臣皆以壮言为然，叩头泣谏，寿乃止。士卒咸称万岁。
现代文：群臣们都认为龚壮的话有理，李寿于是停止攻伐江南的举动，士卒们都山呼万岁。
English: The group of courtiers all thought that the words of Zhuang Zhuang were reasonable. Li Shou then stopped attacking the southern part of the Yangtze River. The soldiers all shouted "Long live the mountains!"

古文：龚壮以为人之行莫大于忠孝；既报父、叔之仇，又欲使寿事晋，寿不从。
现代文：龚壮认为人的品行最重要的是忠孝，已经为父亲、叔父报仇之后，又想让李寿侍奉晋室，李寿不听。
English: Hao Zhuang believed that loyalty and filial piety were the most important aspects of human conduct. After he had avenged his father and uncle, he wanted Li Shou to serve the Jin court, but Li Shou would not listen.

古文：乃诈称耳聋，手不制物，辞归，以文籍自娱，终身不复至成都。
现代文：龚壮便诈称耳聋，手不能拿东西，辞职归乡，以读书写作自娱，终身不再去成都。
English: Hao Zhuang then falsely claimed to be deaf and unable to hold things, resigned, returned home, amused himself by reading and writing, and stopped going to Chengdu for life.

古文：赵尚书令夔安卒。
现代文：后赵尚书令夔安去世。
English: Later, Zhao Shangshu died.

古文：赵王虎命司、冀、青、徐、幽、并、雍七州之民五丁取三，四丁取二，合鄴城旧兵，满五十万，具船万艘，自河通海，运谷千一百万斛于乐安城。
现代文：后赵王石虎下令让司、冀、青、徐、幽、并、雍七州的民众五个男丁中选取三个，四个中选取两个，连同邺城旧有军队，足足五十万人，准备舟船一万艘，由黄河通往大海，运送谷物一千一百万斛到乐安城。
English: Later, Zhao Wang Shihhu ordered the people of the seven states of Si, Hebei, Qing, Xu, Yu, and Yong to choose three men out of five and two men out of four, together with the former army of Lucheng, a total of 500,000 people, to prepare 10,000 boats, from the Yellow River to the sea, to transport 11 million bushels of grain to Le'an City.

古文：徙辽西、北平、渔阳万馀户于兗、豫、雍、洛四川之地。
现代文：把辽西、北平、渔阳的一万多户民众迁徙到兖州、豫州、雍州、洛州。
English: More than 10,000 households in western Liaoning, Beiping and Yuyang were relocated to Ganzhou, Yuzhou, Yongzhou and Luozhou.

古文：自幽州以东至白狼，大兴屯田。
现代文：从幽州以东到白狼，大举屯田。
English: From the east of Yuzhou to the White Wolf, there is a large number of townships.

古文：悉括取民马，有敢私匿者腰斩，凡得四万馀匹。
现代文：把百姓的马匹全部收缴上来，敢于私自藏匿马匹不交出的人处以腰斩之刑，共得马匹四万多匹。
English: Those who confiscated all the people's horses and dared to hide horses without surrendering them were sentenced to beheading, with a total of more than forty thousand horses.

古文：大阅于宛阳，欲以击燕。
现代文：在宛阳举行盛大阅兵式，准备用来进攻前燕国。
English: A grand military parade was held in Wanyang, preparing to be used to attack the former Yan country.

古文：燕王皝谓诸将曰： 石虎自以乐安城防守重复，蓟城南北必不设备，今若诡路出其不意，可尽破也。 
现代文：前燕王慕容对众将领说： 石虎自以为乐安城的防守力量强大，在蓟城南北必然不加防备，如果现在抄小路出其不意，就可以彻底击败他们。 
English: Former Yan Wang Murong said to the generals: Shihu believed that the defense force of Le'an City was strong, and it was inevitable that they would not take precautions in the north and south of Lucheng. If they took the path by surprise now, they could completely defeat them.

古文：冬，十月，皝帅诸军入自蠮螉塞袭赵，戍将当道者皆禽之，直抵蓟城。
现代文：冬季，十月，慕容率领各路军队从塞攻入，袭击后赵军。后赵军戍守的将领有敢于当道阻挡的全部被擒获，前燕军一直进抵蓟城之下。
English: In the winter, in October, Murong led all the armies to invade from Xi, and attacked the Zhao army. The generals who defended the Zhao army were all captured, and the former Yan army went all the way to the bottom of the city.

古文：赵幽州刺史石光拥兵数万，闭城不敢出。燕兵进破武遂津，入高阳，所至焚烧积聚，略三万馀家而去。
现代文：后赵幽州刺史石光虽然拥有数万兵众，却关闭城门不敢出战，前燕军进而攻破武遂津，进入高阳，所到之处把后赵军积蓄的军资焚毁一空，劫掠民众三万多家离去。
English: After Zhao Yuzhou stabbed Shi Guang, although he had tens of thousands of soldiers, he closed the city gate and dared not go to war. The former Yan army then broke through Wuxi Jin and entered Gaoyang. Everywhere he went, he burned the military resources accumulated by the post-Zhao army and robbed more than 30,000 people to leave.

古文：石光坐懦弱征还。
现代文：石光因临敌懦弱被征召返回。
English: Shi Guang was called back for cowardice in the face of the enemy.

古文：赵王虎以秦公韬为太尉，与太子宣迭日省可尚书奏事，专决赏刑，不复启白。
现代文：后赵王石虎任用秦公石韬为太尉，石韬和太子石宣两人按日轮换省视、裁决尚书的奏事，可以独自决定赏赐或刑罚，不再向石虎禀报。
English: Later, Zhao Wang Shihou appointed Qin Gong Shihou as the first lieutenant. Shihou and Prince Shixuan took turns on a daily basis to supervise and adjudicate the case. They could independently decide on rewards or punishments, and no longer reported to Shihou.

古文：司徒申钟谏曰： 赏刑者，人君之大柄，不可以假人。所以防微杜渐，消逆乱于未然也。
现代文：司徒申钟劝谏石虎说： 赏赐或刑罚，是人君掌握的大权，不能交给别人，这是用以防微杜渐，将逆乱消灭于未然的办法。
English: St. Sheng Zhong advised Zou Shigu to say: Rewarding or punishing is a great power held by people, and cannot be handed over to others. This is a way to prevent micro-eruptions and eliminate rebellions in advance.

古文：太子职在视膳，不当豫政；庶人邃以豫政致败，覆车未远也。
现代文：太子的职责在于侍养父母，不应当参与朝政。庶人石邃因为参与朝政而招致失败，前车之鉴距今不远。
English: The prince's duty is to serve his parents, and he should not be involved in court politics. The commoner Shizuku failed because he was involved in court politics, and the precedent is not far away.

古文：且二政分权，鲜不阶祸。
现代文：而且由二人掌握朝政，权力分散，很少有不发生祸患的。
English: Moreover, with two people in charge of the imperial government and power dispersed, it is rare for a calamity not to occur.

古文：爱之不以道，适所以害之也。 
现代文：爱他们却不知怎么爱，这正是害了他们的根由。 
English: To love them without knowing how to love them is the very root of their evil.

古文：虎不听。
现代文：石虎不听。
English: Shihu didn't listen.

古文：中谒者令申扁以慧悟辩给有宠于虎，宣亦昵之，使典机密。
现代文：中谒者令申扁因为聪明慧悟，能言善辩而被石虎宠爱，石宣也与他关系亲昵，让他典掌机密。
English: Because of his cleverness and eloquence, he was favored by Shihu, and Shi Xuan also had a close relationship with him, allowing him to keep secrets.

古文：虎既不省事，而宣、韬皆好酣饮、畋猎；由是除拜、生杀皆决于扁，自九卿已下率皆望尘而拜。
现代文：石虎既然不过问政事，而石宣，石韬又都喜好酣饮和打猎，因此官员的升免、人员的生杀都由申扁决断，从九卿以下对他都望风而拜。
English: Since Shihu was only in charge of political affairs, and both Shi Xuan and Shi Jiao were fond of drinking and hunting, the promotion and dismissal of officials, as well as the life and death of personnel, were all decided by Shen Bian, and everyone from the ninth lord down looked up to him.

古文：太子詹事孙珍病目，求方于侍中崔约，约戏之曰： 溺中则愈 。
现代文：太子詹事孙珍患眼病，向侍中崔约讨求治病的药方。崔约开玩笑说： 向眼中溺尿便可痊愈。 
English: Prince Zhan Shisunzhen was suffering from an eye disease and asked the chambermaid, Cui You, for a cure. Cui You jokingly said, "If you urinate into your eyes, you will be cured."

古文：珍曰： 目何可溺？ 
现代文：孙珍说： 眼中怎能溺尿？ 
English: Sun Zhen said: How can urine be drowned in the eyes?

古文：约曰： 卿目睕睕，正耐溺中。 
现代文：崔约说： 你眼窝深陷，正适合溺尿。 
English: Cui You said: Your eye sockets are deeply sunken, just right for drowning in urine.

古文：珍恨之，以白宣。
现代文：孙珍为此怀恨崔约，将此事告知石宣。
English: Sun Zhen held a grudge against Cui Rong for this and informed Shi Xuan of the matter.

古文：宣于兄弟中最胡状，目深，闻之怒，诛约父子。
现代文：石宣的面貌在兄弟中最具有胡人的特征，眼窝深陷，听说此事勃然大怒，诛杀崔约父子。
English: Shi Xuan's face is the most characteristic of the brothers, with deep-set eye sockets. When he heard about this, he flew into a rage and killed Cui You and his son.

古文：于是公卿以下畏珍侧目。
现代文：于是公卿以下畏惧孙珍，人人侧目。
English: As a result, the nobles feared Sun Zhen and everyone turned a blind eye.

古文：燕公斌督边州，亦好畋猎，常悬管而入。
现代文：燕公石斌督察北边州郡，也喜欢打猎，经常佩挂城门的钥匙出入。
English: Yan Gong Shi Bin, the inspector of Beibuanzhou County, also likes hunting, and often wears the key to the city gate.

古文：征北将军张贺度每裁谏之，斌怒，辱贺度。
现代文：征北将军张贺度经常规谏他，石斌发怒，羞辱张贺度。
English: Zhang Hedu, the general of the Northern Expedition, often rebuked him. Shi Bin became angry and humiliated Zhang Hedu.

古文：虎闻之，使主书礼仪持节监之。
现代文：石虎听说后，让主书礼仪持符节监察石斌。
English: After hearing about this, Shi Hu asked Shi Bin, the chief scribe of etiquette, to supervise Shi Bin.

古文：斌杀仪，又欲杀贺度，贺度严卫驰白之。
现代文：石斌杀死礼仪，又想杀张贺度，张贺度调集护卫人员驰马禀报石虎。
English: Shi Bin killed the etiquette, and also wanted to kill Zhang He Du, Zhang He Du mobilized the escort personnel to gallop and report to Shi Hu.

古文：虎遣尚书张离帅骑追斌，鞭之三百，免官归第，诛其亲信十馀人。
现代文：石虎派尚书张离率骑兵追赶石斌，打了他三百鞭，解除官职归家，并诛杀他的亲信十多人。
English: Shihu sent Shangshu Zhang's cavalry to chase after Shi Bin, beat him with three hundred lashes, dismissed him from his post and sent him home, and killed more than ten of his cronies.

古文：张骏遣别驾马诜入贡于赵，表辞蹇傲；赵王虎怒，欲斩诜。
现代文：张骏派别驾马诜到赵呈献贡物，上表中言辞冷漠孤傲，石虎发怒，要把马诜斩首。
English: Zhang Qian sent a horse-drawn carriage to Zhao to present the tribute. In the above table, the words were cold and lonely, and the stone tiger was angry and wanted to behead the horse-drawn carriage.

古文：侍中石璞谏曰： 今国家所当先除者，遗晋也。
现代文：侍中石璞劝谏说： 如今国家应当最先除灭的，是晋。
English: The chamberlain, Shi Yao, advised that Jin should be the first to be eliminated by the state.

古文：河西僻陋，不足为意。
现代文：河西地处僻陋，不足介意。
English: The west of the river is in a remote and poor area, so I don't mind the shortage.

古文：今斩马诜，必征张竣，则兵力分而为二，建康复延数年之命矣。 
现代文：现在斩杀马诜，就必定要征伐张骏，那么兵力一分为二，建康就又能延长若干年的寿命了。 
English: Now, if we kill off Matsuo, we will have to conquer Zhangye. Then the army will be divided into two, and Jiankang will be able to extend its lifespan by several years.

古文：乃止。
现代文：石虎于是不杀马诜。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：璞，苞之曾孙也。
现代文：石璞即石苞的曾孙。
English: Ishizuchi is the great-grandson of Ishizuchi.

古文：初，汉将李闳为晋所获，逃奔于赵，汉主寿致书于赵王虎以请之，署曰 赵王石君 。虎不悦，付外议之。
现代文：当初，成汉国将领李闳被晋军擒获，又出逃到后赵国，成汉国主李寿写信给赵王石虎，请求放他归来，信中题署称： 赵王石君 ，石虎不高兴，交付外廷评议。
English: At first, the general of the State of Chenghan, Li Shou, was captured by the Jin army and fled to the State of Hou Zhao. The head of the State of Chenghan, Li Shou, wrote a letter to Zhao Wang Shihu, requesting his return. The letter was signed: Zhao Wang Shijun, Shihu is not happy, delivered to the Foreign Court for review.

古文：中书监王波曰： 今李闳以死自誓曰： 苟得归骨于蜀，当纠帅宗族，混同王化。 若其信也，则不烦一旅，坐定梁、益；若有前却，不过失一亡命之人，于赵何损！
现代文：中书监王波说： 让李闳用性命发誓说： 如果能返回蜀地，将统率宗族，接受大王的教化 ，将来如果他果真这样做，那么我们没用烦劳一支军队，便可安坐平定梁州和益州；如果他心存犹豫，不实践诺言，我们也不过失去一个亡命之人而已，对赵国有什么损伤！
English: Wang Bo, the supervisor of Chinese books, said: Let Li Qian swear with his life: If he can return to Shu, he will lead the clan and accept the enlightenment of the great king. In the future, if he really does this, then we don't have to bother with an army, we can settle down and settle down in Liangzhou and Yizhou. If he hesitates and does not fulfill his promise, we will only lose one exile, what damage to Zhao!

古文：李寿既僭大号，今以制诏与之，彼必酬返，不若复为书与之。 
现代文：李寿既然僭称皇帝之号，如果我们现在用皇帝诏书的形式给他回复，他必定以同样的形式回报我们，不如再以信件的方式答复他。 
English: Since Li Shou falsely claimed to be the emperor, if we now reply to him in the form of an imperial edict, he will surely reply to us in the same form. It would be better to reply to him in the form of a letter.

古文：会挹娄国献楛矢石砮于赵，波因请以遗汉，曰： 使其知我能服远方也。 
现代文：适逢挹娄国向后赵国进献矢石弩，王波乘势请求转送成汉国，说： 让他们知道我们能够使远方的国家降服。 
English: At the same time that Zhao was advancing to conquer Han, Wang Bo took advantage of the situation and requested to be transferred to Han, saying: Let them know that we can subjugate distant countries.

古文：虎从之，遣李闳归，厚为之礼。
现代文：石虎听从他的建议，遣送李闳归国，并且用隆重的礼仪对待他。
English: Shihu followed his advice and sent Li Xuan back to China, treating him with great courtesy.

古文：闳至成都，寿下诏曰： 羯使来庭，贡其楛矢。 
现代文：李闳到达成都，李寿颁布诏书说： 羯虏的使者来朝拜，进贡矢。 
English: When Li Xi arrived at the capital, Li Shou issued an edict saying, "The envoys of the imperial army come to pay homage and pay tribute.

古文：虎闻之，怒，黜王波，以白衣领职。
现代文：石虎听说后，发怒，废黜王波的爵位，让他以平民身份任职。
English: After hearing this, Shihu became angry and dethroned Wang Bo's peerage, allowing him to serve as a commoner.

古文：显宗成皇帝中之下咸康七年
现代文：咸康七年
English: Hamkang seven years old

古文：春，正月，燕王皝使唐国内史阳裕等筑城于柳城之北、龙山之西，立宗庙、宫阙，命曰龙城。
现代文：春季，正月，前燕王慕容让唐国内史阳裕等人在柳城以北、龙山的西面修建城郭，设立宗庙和宫阙，命名为龙城。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the former Yan King Murong asked Shi Yangyu and others in Tang to build a castle north of Liucheng and west of Longshan, set up a family temple and a palace, and named it Longcheng.

古文：二月，甲子朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月，甲子朔，出现日食。
English: In February, at the turn of the year, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：刘翔至建康，帝引见，问慕容镇军平安。
现代文：刘翔到达建康，成帝召见，询问慕容平安与否。
English: Liu Xiang arrived in Jiankang, and Chengdi summoned him to inquire whether Murong was safe.

古文：对曰： 臣受遣之日，朝服拜章。 
现代文：刘翔回答说： 我接受派遣时，他身穿朝服，向南方拜授章表。 
English: Liu Xiang replied: When I accepted the dispatch, he was wearing a court dress and bowing to the south.

古文：翔为燕王皝求大将军、燕五章玺。
现代文：刘翔为前燕王慕容请求大将军及燕王的章玺。
English: Liu Xiang is the former Yan Wang Murong to request the general and the chapter of Yan Wang.

古文：朝议以为； 故事：大将军不处边；自汉、魏以来，不封异姓为王。所求不可许。 
现代文：朝廷论议认为： 按旧例，大将军不委派到边关。从汉、魏以来，不封异姓为王，所请求的事情不能许可。 
English: The imperial court argued that: According to the old practice, the general is not appointed to the border. Since the Han Dynasty and the Wei Dynasty, the king is not given a different surname, and the requested matter cannot be permitted.

古文：翔曰： 自刘、石构乱，长江以北，剪为戎薮，未闻中华公卿之胄有一人能攘臂挥戈、摧破凶逆者也。
现代文：刘翔说： 自从刘氏、石氏作乱，长江以北之地，完全成为战乱渊薮，从未听说华夏公卿的后裔中有一人能够捋袖伸臂，挥动兵戈，摧毁凶逆之徒。
English: Liu Xiang said: Ever since the Liu and Shi clans wreaked havoc, the land north of the Yangtze River has completely become a war-torn wasteland. I have never heard of a descendant of a Chinese nobleman who could roll up his sleeves, wave his arms, and destroy the rebels.

古文：独慕容镇军父子竭力，心存本朝，以寡击众，屡殄强敌，使石虎畏惧，悉徙边陲之民散居三魏，蹙国千里，以蓟城为北境。
现代文：只有慕容氏父子竭尽心力，心怀本朝，以少击多，多次殄灭强敌，使得石虎畏惧，把边陲的民众全部迁徙，让他们散居在魏郡、阳平、广平一带，国土因而缩小千里，以至蓟城成为他们北方的边境。
English: Only Murong's father and son made every effort, thinking of this dynasty, to hit more with less, repeatedly annihilating strong enemies, making the stone tiger afraid, migrating all the people of the borderlands, and letting them live in Wei County, Yangping, and Guangping. As a result, the land shrank by thousands of miles, so that Lucheng became their northern border.

古文：功烈如此，而惜海北之地不以为封邑，何哉！
现代文：慕容功绩如此显赫，朝廷却吝惜渤海以北的土地不让给他作封邑，这是为什么？
English: Murong's achievements are so outstanding, but the imperial court is reluctant to give him the land north of the Bohai Sea as a fiefdom. Why is this?

古文：昔汉高祖不爱王爵于韩、彭，故能成其帝业；项羽刓印不忍授，卒用危亡。
现代文：当初汉高祖不吝啬王位，授予韩信、彭越，所以能够成就帝业；项羽把官印藏到棱角都磨损了也不舍得授人，终于导致危亡。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Gaozu did not begrudge the throne and awarded it to Han Xin and Peng Yue, so he was able to achieve the imperial cause. However, Xiang Yu did not want to give it to anyone because he had worn the official seal to the edges and corners, which finally led to his death.

古文：吾之至心，非敬欲尊其所事，窃惜圣朝疏忠义之国，使四海无所劝慕耳。 
现代文：我的内心，不只是希望能尊奉所奉事的人，私下还为朝廷疏远忠义的边国、使得四海之人无从劝勉和仰慕深感惋惜。 
English: In my heart, I not only hope to honor the people I serve, but also privately feel deep regret for alienating the loyal border countries from the imperial court and making it impossible to persuade and admire people from all over the world.

古文：尚书诸葛恢，翔之姊夫也，独主异议，以为： 夷狄相攻，中国之利。惟器与名，不可轻许。 
现代文：尚书诸葛恢，即刘翔的姐夫，独自持有不同看法，认为： 夷族、狄族互相攻击，这对中原之国有利；只有礼器和名号，不能轻易相许。 
English: Shangshu Zhugewei, Liu Xiang's brother-in-law, independently held a different view, believing that: the barbarians and the Di people attack each other, which is beneficial to the Central Plains country; only the etiquette and the name, can not easily match.

古文：乃谓翔曰： 借使慕容镇军能除石虎，乃是复得一石虎也，朝廷何赖焉！ 
现代文：于是对刘翔说： 假使慕容能够翦除石虎，这是又出现一个石虎，朝廷又能够仰仗谁呢？ 
English: So he said to Liu Xiang, "If Murong can get rid of the stone tiger, then another stone tiger will appear, and who can the imperial court rely on?

古文：翔曰： 嫠妇犹知恤宗周之陨。
现代文：刘翔说： 寡妇尚且知道怜悯宗周的陨灭。
English: Liu Xiang said: The widow still knows the mercy of Zong Zhou's demise.

古文：今晋室阽危，君位侔元、岂，曾无忧国之心邪？
现代文：现在晋室危殆，你职位和高辛氏的八个才子与高阳氏的八个才子相当，难道就没有忧虑国事之心吗？
English: Now that the imperial court is in danger, your position and the eight talents of Mr. Gao Xin are comparable to the eight talents of Mr. Gao Yang. Don't you have any concerns about the state affairs?

古文：向使靡、鬲之功不立，则少康何以祀夏！
现代文：往昔如果靡和有鬲氏的功业不能建立，那儿少康怎能中兴夏朝！
English: In the past, if it was not possible to build upon the achievements of the Meiji and Shun dynasties, how can the Xia dynasty be built upon the achievements of the Shang dynasty?

古文：桓、文之战不捷，则同人皆为左衤任矣。
现代文：齐桓公、晋文公指挥的战争不能取胜的话，那么周朝人都将披发左，沦为异族了。
English: If the war under the command of Lord Qi Huan and Lord Jinwen cannot be won, then the Zhou dynasty will be left with nothing and will be reduced to a foreign race.

古文：慕容镇军枕戈待旦，志殄凶逆，而君更唱邪惑之言，忌间忠臣。
现代文：慕容枕戈待旦，立志翦除凶逆，你却又宣扬偏颇和令人迷惑的言论，妒忌、离间忠臣。
English: While Murong was lying in bed, determined to eliminate the rebels, you were promoting biased and confusing statements, jealousy, and alienating loyalists.

古文：四海所以未壹，良由君辈耳！ 
现代文：天下之所以未能统一，实在是因为有你这样的人！ 
English: The reason why the world has not been unified is really because of people like you!

古文：翔留建康岁馀，众议终不决。
现代文：刘翔留住建康一年多，众人论议始终没有结果。
English: Liu Xiang has retained Jiankang for more than a year, and the discussion among the public has not yielded any results.

古文：翔乃说中常侍彧弘曰： 石虎苞八州之地，带甲百万，志吞江、汉，自索头、宇文暨诸小国，无不臣服；惟慕容镇军翼戴天子，精贯白日，而更不获礼之命，窃恐天下移心解体，无复南向者矣。
现代文：刘翔便游说中常侍弘说： 石虎包揽八州的地城，有甲兵百万人，立志吞噬长江、汉水，从索头、宇文氏以至各个小国，无不臣服。只有慕容氏辅翼和拥戴晋室天子，精诚上通日月，却不能获得异于常礼的任命，我私下恐怕天下人因而改变心意、分崩离析，不再向南方称臣了。
English: Liu Xiang then lobbied Zhongzheng Zhi Hong to say: "The Stone Tiger has occupied the eight prefectures of the eight states, has a million soldiers, and is determined to swallow the Yangtze River and the Han River. From Sokou, the Uwen clan to various small countries, all are submissive. Only the Murong's auxiliary wing and the support of the Jinshitsu heavenly son, earnestly communicate with the sun and the moon, but cannot obtain an appointment that is different from the usual ceremony. I am privately afraid that the world will change their minds and fall apart, and will no longer praise the south.

古文：公孙渊无尺寸之益于吴，吴主封为燕王，加以九锡。
现代文：公孙渊对东吴没有一点点功绩，吴主封他为燕王，加以九锡的礼遇。
English: Gongsunyuan did not do a single bit of merit for East Wu, but Wu made him the King of the Swallows and gave him the courtesy of nine pennies.

古文：今慕容镇军屡摧贼锋，威振秦、陇，虎比遣重使，甘言厚币，欲授以曜威大将军、辽西王；慕容镇军恶其非正，却而不受。
现代文：现在慕容多次挫败敌军精锐，威震秦州、陇上，石虎连续派遣职高位重的使者，言辞动听，币帛厚重，想拜授慕容为曜威大将军、辽西王。慕容厌恶他不是皇室正统，拒绝不受。
English: Now Murong has repeatedly defeated the elite of the enemy army, threatening Qinzhou and Yunnan, and Shigu has successively dispatched high-ranking envoys. The words are beautiful and the money is thick, and he wants to worship Murong as a great general and king of Liaoxi. Murong is disgusted that he is not a legitimate royal, and refuses to accept it.

古文：今朝廷乃矜惜虚名，沮抑忠顺，岂社稷之长计乎！
现代文：现在朝廷却吝惜虚名，排斥和压抑忠顺的臣民，这哪里是国家的长远之计呢！
English: Now, however, the imperial court is sparing false names, excluding and suppressing loyal subjects. Where is the country's long-term strategy in this?

古文：后虽悔之，恐无及己。 
现代文：将来即使后悔，恐怕也来不及了。 
English: In the future, even if you regret it, I'm afraid it's too late.

古文：弘为之入言于帝，帝意亦欲许之。
现代文：弘为他入宫向成帝陈述，成帝心中已准备同意。
English: Hong made a presentation to Emperor Cheng for him to enter the palace, and Emperor Cheng was ready to agree.

古文：会皝上表称： 庾氏兄弟擅权召乱，宜加斥退，以安社稷。 
现代文：适逢慕容上表，内称： 庾氏兄弟专权，导致祸乱，应当斥退，用以安定国家。 
English: It coincided with Murong's speech, in which he said: The exclusive power of the Zou brothers, which has led to disaster, should be repelled and used to stabilize the country.

古文：又与庾冰书，责其当国秉权，不能为国雪耻。
现代文：又写信给庾冰，斥责他占据国家要职，专断权柄，不能够为国家雪耻。
English: He also wrote to Zou Bing, reprimanding him for occupying an important position in the country, arbitrarily wielding power, and not being able to save the country from disgrace.

古文：冰甚惧，以其绝远，非所能制，乃与何充奏从其请。
现代文：庾冰十分恐惧，因为慕容在边远之地，无力钳制，于是和何充上奏同意刘翔的请求。
English: Yu Bing was very afraid, because Murong was in a remote place, unable to control it, so he and He Cheng agreed to Liu Xiang's request.

古文：乙卯，以慕容皝为使持节、大将军、都督河北诸军事、幽州牧、大单于、燕王，备物、典策，皆从殊礼。
现代文：乙卯，朝廷任命慕容为使持节、大将军、都督黄河以北诸军事、幽州牧、大单于、燕王，所用的备物、典策，都以特殊礼节对待。
English: Second, the imperial court appointed Murong as the envoy of the festival, the general, and the military governor north of the Yellow River, Yuzhou Maki, Datan Yu, and Yan Wang. The equipment and tactics used were treated with special etiquette.

古文：又以其世子俊为假节、安北将军、东夷校尉、左贤王；赐军资器械以千万计。
现代文：又任命慕容的世子慕容俊为假节、安北将军、东夷校尉、左贤王。赐给军资器械数千万。
English: He also appointed Murong's heir, Murong Jun, as the False Emperor, Anbei General, Dongyi Lieutenant, and Zuoxian King, and gave tens of millions of dollars in military equipment.

古文：又封诸功臣百馀人。以刘翔为代郡太守，封临泉乡侯，加员外散骑常侍；翔固辞不受。
现代文：又给各有功之臣一百多人加封爵位，任刘翔为代郡太守，封为临泉乡侯，授予员外散骑常侍。刘翔坚持推辞不受。
English: In addition, more than a hundred meritorious officials were given knighthoods, and Liu Xiang was appointed acting county governor, named Linquan Township, and awarded the title of non-commissioned officer. Liu Xiang insisted that he would not be dismissed.

古文：翔疾江南士大夫以骄奢酣纵相尚，尝因朝贵宴集，谓何充等曰： 四海板荡，奄逾三纪，宗社为墟，黎民涂炭，斯乃庙堂焦虑之时，忠臣毕命之秋也。
现代文：刘翔痛恨江南士大夫以骄奢、酣饮、放纵互相推崇，曾经趁着朝廷显贵们宴饮集会之机，对何充等人说： 天下反叛、动荡，已超过三十六年，宗庙社稷化为废墟，万民生灵涂炭，这正是朝廷焦虑的时候，忠臣效命的年代。
English: Liu Xiang hated Jiangnan Shifu's arrogance, drunkenness, and indulgence in promoting each other. He once took the opportunity of the banquet and meeting of the dignitaries of the imperial court to say to He Chong and others: The world has been rebellious and turbulent for more than 36 years. The ancestral temple and shrine have been reduced to ruins, and the lives of all people have been charred. This is precisely the time when the imperial court is anxious, and the era of loyal servants.

古文：而诸君宴安江沱，肆情纵欲，以奢靡为荣，以傲诞为贤；謇谔之言不闻，征伐之功不立，将何以尊主济民乎！ 
现代文：各位君子却在江沱安乐游玩，尽情纵欲，以奢侈靡乱为荣，以桀傲怪诞为贤，忠正耿直的言论不闻于耳，征伐的功绩无从建立，准备靠什么来尊奉主上、救助百姓呢！ 
English: On the other hand, all of you gentlemen have been enjoying the peace and quiet of the Yangtze River, indulging yourselves to the full, taking pride in extravagance and chaos, and being proud of being eccentric. Your words of loyalty and uprightness have fallen on deaf ears, and your conquering exploits cannot be established. What are you going to rely on to honor the Lord and save the people?

古文：充等甚惭。
现代文：何充等人十分惭愧。
English: Ho Chong and the others were very ashamed.

古文：诏遣兼大鸿胪郭烯持节诣棘城册命燕王，与翔等偕北。
现代文：成帝下诏派兼大鸿胪郭持符节到棘城去册封燕王，和刘翔等人偕同北上。
English: Emperor Cheng Zhaozha sent the great and powerful general Guo Jizhi to Spine City to record and seal King Yan, and Liu Xiang and others went to the north together.

古文：公卿饯于江上，翔谓诸公曰： 昔少康资一旅以灭有穷，勾践凭会稽以报强吴；蔓草犹宜早除，况寇仇乎！
现代文：公卿大夫们在江边为他们饯别，刘翔对他们说： 往昔少康凭借一支军队除灭有穷氏，勾践靠会稽向强大的吴国报仇。滋蔓的野草尚且应当尽早除去，何况对敌仇呢！
English: The court nobles and doctors said their farewells at the riverside, and Liu Xiang said to them: In the past, Shao Kang used an army to exterminate the poor clans, and the co-rulers would take revenge on the powerful State of Wu. Wild weeds should be removed as soon as possible, let alone the enemy!

古文：今石虎、李寿，志相吞噬，王师纵未能澄清北方，且当从事巴、蜀。
现代文：现在石虎、李寿，都想互相吞并，王室的军队纵然不能平定北方，斩且应当经营巴、蜀。
English: Now Shihhu and Li Shou both want to annex each other. Even if the royal army cannot pacify the north, it should at least manage Ba and Shu.

古文：一旦石虎先入举事，并寿而有之，据形便之地以临东南，虽有智者，不能善其后矣。 
现代文：一旦石虎抢先起事，兼并李寿并占据其地，依仗地形的便利兵临东南，即使有智慧的人出现，也不能妥善处理了。 
English: Once Shihhu took the initiative, annexed Li Shou and occupied its land, relying on the convenience of the terrain to the southeast, even if a wise person appeared, it could not be properly dealt with.

古文：中护军谢广曰： 是吾心也！ 
现代文：中护军谢广说： 这正是我的心愿。 
English: "This is my heart's desire," said middle-ranking guard Xie Guang.

古文：三月，戊戌，皇后杜氏崩。
现代文：三月，戊戌，皇后杜氏驾崩。
English: In March, the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：夏，四月，丁卯，葬恭皇后于兴平陵。
现代文：夏季，四月，丁卯，恭皇后入葬兴平陵。
English: In the summer, in April, Empress Dingwu and Empress Guo were buried in Xingping Mausoleum.

古文：诏实王公以下至庶人皆正土断、白籍。
现代文：成帝下诏，王公以下至于平民，都确定现居的籍贯，著录于户口版籍。
English: Emperor Cheng issued an edict, and as for the commoners below the prince, they all determined the origin of their current residence, which was recorded in the household registration.

古文：秋，七月，郭烯、刘翔等至燕，燕王皝以翔为东夷护军、领大将军长史，以唐国内史阳裕为左司马，典书令李洪为右司马，中尉郑林为军谘祭洒。
现代文：秋季，七月，郭、刘翔等人到达前燕国，前燕王慕容任命刘翔为东夷护军、兼领大将军长史，任唐国内史阳裕为左司马，典书令李洪为右司马，中尉郑林为军咨祭酒。
English: In the autumn, in July, Guo, Liu Xiang and others arrived in the former Yan Kingdom. The former Yan King Murong appointed Liu Xiang as the leader of the East Yiwu Protectorate and the leader of the General Staff, appointed Shi Yangyu as the left Sima, ordered Li Hong as the right Sima, and Lieutenant Zheng Lin as the military tribute wine.

古文：八月，辛酉，东海哀王冲薨。
现代文：八月，辛酉，东海哀王司马冲去世。
English: In August, Xinlu, the mourning king of the East China Sea, Sima Chong, died.

古文：九月，代王什翼犍筑盛乐城于故城南八里。代王妃慕容氏卒。
现代文：九月，代王拓跋什翼犍在旧城南面八里外修筑盛乐城。代王妃慕容氏去世。
English: In September, the king's deputy Tuoba Shiyong built Shengle City eight miles south of the old city. The queen's deputy Murong died.

古文：冬，十月，匈奴刘虎寇代西部，代王什翼犍遣军逆击，大破之。
现代文：冬季十月，匈奴族刘虎侵犯代国西部，代王拓跋什翼犍发军迎击，大破敌军。
English: In the winter of October, the Hunnic Liu Hu invaded the western part of the country, and the king's troops attacked and defeated the enemy army.

古文：虎卒，子务桓立，遣使求和于代，什翼犍以女妻之。
现代文：刘虎去世，儿子刘务桓继立，派使者向代王求和，拓跋什翼犍把女儿许配给他为妻。
English: Liu Hu passed away, and his son Liu Muhuan succeeded him. He sent an envoy to the king to sue for peace, and Tuoba Shijiang gave his daughter to him as his wife.

古文：务桓又朝贡于赵，赵以务桓为平北将军、左贤王。
现代文：刘务桓又向后赵国朝贡，后赵国任命他为平北将军、左贤王。
English: Liu Muhuan also paid tribute to the Zhao Dynasty, after which the Zhao Dynasty appointed him as the general of Pingbei and the king of Zuoxian.

古文：赵横海将军王华帅舟师自海道袭燕安平，破之。
现代文：后赵国横海将军王华帅水军由海路进攻前燕国安平，获胜。
English: After that, Zhao's general Wang Huashuai's navy attacked Yan's Anping by sea and won.

古文：燕王皝以慕容恪为渡辽将军，镇平郭。
现代文：前燕王慕容任用慕容恪为渡辽将军，镇守平郭。
English: The former Yan Wang Murong appointed Murong Ke to be the general of Watriao and the town guard of Pingguo.

古文：自慕容翰、慕容仁之后，诸将无能继者。及恪至平郭，抚旧怀新，屡破高句丽兵，高句丽畏之，不敢入境。
现代文：自从慕容翰、慕容仁之后，众将领中没有人能够接替他们，等慕容恪到达平郭，抚慰旧属，怀柔新附民，多次击败高句丽的军队。高句丽畏惧幕容恪，不敢再来犯境。
English: Since Muronghan and Murongren, none of the generals have been able to succeed them, until Murong Gua arrived at Pingguo, comforted his former vassals, befriended his new vassals, and repeatedly defeated the army of Goguryeo. Goguryeo was afraid of Shogong Gua and did not dare to invade again.

古文：十二月，兴平康伯陆玩薨。
现代文：十二月，兴平康伯陆玩去世。
English: In December, Xingping Kangbo passed away.

古文：汉主寿以其太子势领大将军、录尚书事。
现代文：成汉国主李寿让太子李势兼领大将军职、录尚书事。
English: Li Shou, the ruler of the Han Dynasty, asked Prince Li Xian to take on the post of commander-in-chief as well, according to the records.

古文：初，成主雄以俭约宽惠得蜀人心。及李闳、王嘏还自鄴，盛称鄴中繁庶，宫殿壮丽；且言赵王虎以刑杀御下，故能控制境内。
现代文：当初，成汉国主李雄因俭约宽厚仁惠得蜀民之心，等到李闳、王嘏从邺城归来，盛赞邺中富庶，宫殿壮观华丽，并且说后赵王石虎靠刑罚杀戮驾驭臣下，所以能控制境内。
English: At first, Li Xiong, the ruler of Chenghan, won the hearts of the Shu people due to his frugality, generosity, and benevolence. When Li Qian and Wang Qian returned from Shicheng, they praised the rich in Shicheng, the palace was spectacular and gorgeous, and said that Queen Zhao Wang Shihhu could control the territory by killing her subjects.

古文：寿慕之，徙旁郡民三丁以上者以实成都，大修宫室，治器玩；人有小过，辄杀以立威。
现代文：李寿为此倾慕，便将邻近州郡的百姓中，凡每家超出三个以上的壮年男丁，都迁徙来充实成都，大修宫室，制造器玩。人有小过失，就处决以建立威仪。
English: Li Shou admired this, so he moved all the people from the neighboring counties to enrich Chengdu, overhauled the palace, and made toys. People with minor faults were executed to establish dignity.

古文：左仆射蔡兴、右仆射李嶷皆坐直谏死。
现代文：左仆射蔡兴、右仆射李嶷都因直言规谏被杀。
English: His left-hand man, Cai Xing, and his right-hand man, Li Ye, were both killed for speaking their minds.

古文：民疲于赋役，吁嗟满道，思乱者众矣。
现代文：百姓因赋税和劳役疲惫不堪，吁嗟叹息声充溢于道路，许多人图谋作乱。
English: The people were exhausted from taxes and labor, and the road was filled with the sound of wailing and sighing. Many people were plotting to cause trouble.

