古文：贤妇徐才人卢氏董氏高睿妻崔敬女李畬母卢献女邓廉妻肃宗朝公主
现代文：贤妇徐才人卢氏董氏高睿妻崔敬女李畬母卢献女邓廉妻肃宗朝公主
English: Lu's wife, Xu Cairen Lu's wife, Dong's wife, Gao Rui's wife, Cui Jing's wife, Li Yan's wife, Lu Xian's wife, Deng Lian's wife, Su Zongchao's wife

古文：潘炎妻刘皇后河池妇人贺氏
现代文：潘炎妻刘皇后河池妇人贺氏
English: Pan Yan's wife Liu Qionghechi's wife He

古文：才妇谢道韫杨容华上官昭容张氏杜羔妻张睽妻关图妹鱼玄机牛肃女
现代文：才妇谢道韫杨容华上官昭容张氏杜羔妻张睽妻关图妹鱼玄机牛肃女
English: CelebritiesCelebrity wivesCelebrity wivesCelebrity wivesCelebrity wivesCelebrity wivesCelebrity wivesCelebrity wives

古文：慎氏薛媛孙氏
现代文：慎氏薛媛孙氏
English: The Shin clan, the Xueyunsun clan

古文：贤妇
现代文：贤妇
English: The Wise Woman

古文：徐才人
现代文：徐才人
English: Xu Cairen

古文：徐氏名惠，坚之女也，生五月能言。
现代文：徐惠是徐坚的女儿，出生后五个月就能说话。
English: Xu Hui, the daughter of Xu Jian, was able to speak five months after birth.

古文：唐太宗以为才人，特迁为充容。
现代文：唐太宗把她选为宫中的才人，又特意将她迁升为随军充容。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang selected her as a talented person in the palace, and specially promoted her to accompany the army.

古文：军旅未宁，上疏谏修宫室，词甚典美。
现代文：在战事尚未平息，军旅生涯尚未结束时，徐惠便给唐太宗上疏，劝谏不要修建宫室。
English: When the war had not yet subsided and his military career had not yet ended, Xu Hui sent an envoy to Tang Taizong to dissuade him from building a palace.

古文：上然之。
现代文：她写的奏章文词极为典雅华美，皇上欣然采纳了她的建议。
English: She wrote a very elegant and beautiful piece of music, and the emperor gladly accepted her suggestion.

古文：卢氏
现代文：卢氏
English: Mr. Lu

古文：狄仁杰之为相也，有卢氏堂姨居于午桥南别墅。
现代文：狄仁杰身为则天女皇的宰相时，有个姓卢的堂姨住在午桥南面的庄园里。
English: When Di Renjie was the prime minister of the Queen of Heaven, there was a cousin named Lu who lived in the manor south of the Mid-Levels Bridge.

古文：姨止有一子，而未尝来都城亲戚家。
现代文：堂姨有个独生儿子，从来没来过都城的亲戚家。
English: My cousin has an only son who has never been to his relatives' home in the capital.

古文：仁杰每伏腊晦朔，修礼甚谨。常经雪后休假，仁杰因候卢姨安否。
现代文：仁杰为皇上办事勤勤恳恳，十分认真，直到年末才能休息几天。
English: Renjie works diligently and conscientiously for the emperor, very seriously, and can only take a few days off until the end of the year.

古文：适表弟挟弓矢，携雉兔而来归，进膳于母，顾揖仁杰，意甚轻简。
现代文：休假之日，仁杰便到庄园看望卢姨，正赶上表弟腋下挟着弓箭手里拎着山雉野兔从外面回家。他进屋后就侍候母亲用饭，一面向旁边的狄仁杰随便地打招呼致意，并不把这位当朝宰相十分放在心上。
English: On the day of the holiday, Renjie went to the manor to visit Aunt Lu, just in time for his cousin to come home from outside with a bow and arrow under his arm and a mountain hare in his hand. After he entered the house, he served his mother dinner and casually greeted Di Renjie next to him, not paying much attention to the former prime minister.

古文：仁杰因启于姨曰：某今为相，表弟有何乐从，愿悉力从其旨。
现代文：仁杰便向堂姨说：我现在是朝廷宰相，表弟喜欢干什么，我一定尽力让他如愿以偿。
English: Renjie then said to his cousin: I am now the prime minister of the imperial court. Whatever my cousin likes to do, I will do my best to make him get what he wants.

古文：姨曰：相自贵。
现代文：卢姨说：宰相的权势自然是极为显贵的。
English: Aunt Lu said, "The power of the prime minister is naturally very conspicuous.

古文：尔姨止有一子，不欲令其事女主。
现代文：你姨只有这么个独生儿子，我不想叫他去侍候女皇。
English: Your aunt only has this one son, and I don't want him to wait on the Queen.

古文：仁杰大惭而退。
现代文：狄仁杰听了，心里十分羞愧。
English: Hearing this, Di Renjie felt very ashamed.

古文：董氏
现代文：董氏
English: Mr. Dong

古文：则天朝，太仆卿来俊臣之强盛，朝官侧目，上林令侯敏偏事之。
现代文：武则天当朝时，太仆卿来俊臣权势显赫，专横拔扈，深为朝廷官员所不满和警惕，而上林令侯敏却偏偏与他靠近。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu Zetian, Taigu Qing Lai Juntian was a powerful and powerful ruler, who was deeply dissatisfied with and wary of the imperial officials, while Shanglinling Hou Min was closer to him.

古文：其妻董氏谏止之曰：俊臣国贼也，势不久。
现代文：侯敏的妻子董氏劝诫他道：来俊臣是个国贼，他的权势不会长久的。
English: Hou Min's wife, Ms. Dong, admonished him: Lai Junchen was a traitor, and his power would not last long.

古文：一朝事坏，奸党先遭。
现代文：有朝一日他垮了台时，他的奸党同伙就要首先遭到制裁。
English: One day, when he falls, his fellow traitors will be the first to be punished.

古文：君可敬而远之。
现代文：您应当对他敬而远之。
English: You should stay away from him.

古文：敏稍稍而退。
现代文：侯敏听信妻子的话，渐渐与来俊臣疏远了。
English: Hou Min listened to his wife's words and gradually distanced himself from Lai Juncheng.

古文：俊臣怒，出为涪州武隆令。
现代文：来俊臣对此十分恼怒，立即将侯敏逐出朝远放涪州武隆县令。
English: Lai Junchen was very angry about this and immediately expelled Hou Min from the court and sent him far away to Wulong County in Ganzhou.

古文：敏欲弃官归，董氏曰：速去，莫求住。
现代文：侯敏不愿赴任，想弃官留在家里，董氏说：要速速离京赴任，不要希求留在这里。
English: Hou Min did not want to take up the post and wanted to resign and stay at home. Mr. Dong said, "You should leave Beijing to take up the post as soon as possible. Don't try to stay here."

古文：遂行。至州，投刺参州将，错题一张纸，州将展看，尾后有字，大怒曰：修名不了，何以为县令？
现代文：侯敏便带着家眷启程，到了涪州府衙，将文书交给参州将。原来文书中另外多写了一页，当州将打开文书看时，看见了正式文书之外的文字，便大怒道：你的名分德性都未修养好，凭什么资格去做县令！
English: Hou Min then set off with his family and arrived at Zhangzhou Fucheng to hand over the document to the county magistrate. There was an extra page written in the original document. When the county magistrate opened the document, he saw the words outside the official document and became very angry: Your reputation and virtue are not well cultivated, what qualifications do you have to be a county magistrate!

古文：不放上。
现代文：便不放他去上任。
English: He was not allowed to take office.

古文：敏忧闷无已。董氏曰：但住，莫求去。
现代文：侯敏非常忧虑和纳闷，妻子董氏说：只管住在这里，不要企求去上任。
English: Hou Min was very worried and puzzled. Mr. Dong's wife said, "Just live here, don't try to take office."

古文：停五十日。忠州贼破武隆，杀旧县令，略家口并尽。
现代文：住了五十天，忠州的叛贼攻破了武隆县城，杀死原来的县令，连他的家眷也大都被抄斩了。
English: After living for fifty days, the traitors of Chungju broke through the county town of Wulong, killed the original county magistrate, and even most of his family members were beheaded.

古文：敏以不计上获全。
现代文：侯敏一家则因未能及时上任而保全了性命。
English: Hou Min and his family were spared because he did not take office in time.

古文：后俊臣诛，逐其党流岭南，敏又获免。
现代文：后来，来俊臣被杀，他的同党也被逐出朝廷流放到岭南，侯敏则因早已与他疏远并被排挤出京城，所以又一次免受灾祸。
English: Later, Lai Junchen was killed, and his fellow party members were also expelled from the imperial court and exiled to Lingnan. Hou Min, on the other hand, was already estranged from him and was pushed out of the capital, so he was once again spared from disaster.

古文：高睿妻
现代文：高睿妻
English: Gao Ruizhe

古文：赵州刺史高睿妻秦氏。
现代文：赵州刺史高睿的妻子是秦氏。
English: The wife of Zhao Zhou's assassin Gao Rui is from the Qin clan.

古文：默啜贼破定州部，至赵州，长史已下，开门纳贼。
现代文：当默啜逆贼攻破定州守兵，兵临赵州城下时，长史以下的官吏都去打开城门，迎接贼兵入城。
English: When the silent traitors broke through the Dingzhou guards and the soldiers approached the city of Zhaozhou, the officials below Long Shi all went to open the city gate to welcome the robbers into the city.

古文：睿计无所出，与秦氏仰药而诈死。
现代文：高睿无计挽回局势，便与妻子秦氏仰卧在床上服药装死。
English: Gao Rui had no way to save the situation, so he and his wife, Ms. Qin, lay on their backs on the bed, took medicine and pretended to be dead.

古文：舁至啜所，良久，啜以金狮子带紫袍示之曰：降，我与尔官，不降即死。
现代文：他俩被抬到默啜的住处，过了好长时间，默啜手持绣着金狮子的授带紫袍展示给他看，说：如果投降，我就给你大官做；不投降就杀死你！
English: The two of them were carried to Minuit's quarters, and after a long time Minuit, holding in his hand a purple robe embroidered with a golden lion, showed it to him and said: "If you surrender, I will make you a grand officer; if you do not surrender, I will kill you!"

古文：睿视而无言，但顾其妇秦氏。
现代文：高睿看了看没有说话，只是转过脸去看着妻子秦氏。
English: Gao Rui did not speak when he looked at her, but only turned his face to look at his wife Qin.

古文：秦氏曰：受国恩，报在此。
现代文：秦氏说：平生蒙受国恩，报答就在此时。
English: Mr. Qin said, "This is the best time for me to repay the nation's kindness that I have received throughout my life."

古文：今日受贼一品，何足为荣？
现代文：今日接受逆贼加封的一品高官，也绝不是什么荣耀的事。
English: It is by no means a matter of glory for a high-ranking official to receive the seal of the traitor today.

古文：俱合眼不语。
现代文：说完后，夫妻两人闭上眼睛一言不发。
English: After that, the couple closed their eyes and did not say a word.

古文：经两日，贼知不可屈，乃杀之。
现代文：过了两天，逆贼知道不能使他们屈服，便把他们杀害了。
English: Two days later, knowing they could not be subdued, the rebels killed them.

古文：崔敬女
现代文：崔敬女
English: Cui Jingnian

古文：唐冀州长史吉懋，欲为男顼娶南宫县丞崔敬女。敬不许。
现代文：唐朝，冀州长史吉茂，要娶南宫县丞崔敬的女儿给儿子吉顼当媳妇，崔敬没有答应。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, the governor of Ji Province, Shi Jimo, wanted to marry the daughter of the Nangu County magistrate, Cui Jing, to be his son's daughter-in-law. Cui Jing did not agree.

古文：因有故。胁以求亲。敬惧而许之。
现代文：吉茂用某种过失威胁崔敬，强行求亲，崔敬害怕了，只好答应这门亲事。
English: Ji Mao used some kind of fault to threaten Cui Jing, and forced him to ask for marriage. Cui Jing was afraid and had to agree to this marriage.

古文：择日下函。并花车。
现代文：吉茂选择良辰吉日下了婚帖，并派花车前来迎亲。
English: Yoshimochi chose Yoshitoki Yoshitoki to write a wedding invitation, and sent a float to welcome the couple.

古文：卒至门首。敬妻郑氏初不知。抱女大哭曰。我家门户底不曾有吉郎。
现代文：花车来到了崔敬的门前，崔敬妻子郑氏原先不知道这回事，便抱着女儿大声哭道：我们家门里从来没有这个姓吉的女婿！
English: The float arrived in front of Cui Jing's door. Originally, Cui Jing's wife, Zheng, did not know about this, so she hugged her daughter and cried loudly: We have never had a son-in-law with the surname Ji in our family!

古文：女坚卧不起。
现代文：要作新娘子的那个女儿则躺在床上坚决不起来。
English: The daughter who was to be the bride lay on the bed and refused to get up.

古文：其小女白其母曰。父有急难。杀身救解。
现代文：这时，崔敬的小女儿便对母亲说：父亲如今着急为难，我们应当舍身解救。
English: At this time, Cui Jing's little daughter said to her mother: "My father is now in a desperate situation, we should give our lives to save him."

古文：姊若不可。儿自当之。
现代文：说完便登上花车走了。
English: After saying this, he boarded the float and left.

古文：遂登车而去。顼迁平章事。贤妻达节。
现代文：吉顼迁升为平章事，贤惠的妻子通达礼节，人们交口称赞他们的美满姻缘，以为是夫贵妻荣。
English: The virtuous wife is the most courteous, and people praise their happy marriage, thinking that they are husband and wife.

古文：谈者荣之。顼坐与河内王武懿宗争竞。出为温州司马而卒。
现代文：吉顼后来因与河内王武懿宗争权获罪被贬，离开朝廷出任温州司马，最后死在那里。
English: Ji Xuan was later condemned for the crime of competing with King of Hanoi, Emperor Wu Rongzong, and left the imperial court to serve as Sima of Wenzhou, where he eventually died.

古文：李畬母
现代文：李畬母
English: Li Yimou

古文：监察御史李畬母清素贞洁。
现代文：监察御史李畬的母亲为人清白正派。
English: The mother of the supervising magistrate, Li Yan, is a pure and decent person.

古文：畬请禄，米送至宅，母遣量之，剩三石。问其故，令史曰：御史例不概。
现代文：一次，李畬发放奉禄，禄米由差役送到家里，母亲令人按照标准过数，结果多出三石，询问多出来的原因时，差役说：御史的禄米出库时一向不将高出斗口的部分刮平。
English: On one occasion, Li Yao issued a reward, and the reward was sent to his home by the attendant. His mother asked the attendant to count the reward according to the standard, and the result was an extra three stones. When inquiring about the reason for the extra stone, the attendant said, "When the reward is taken out of the storehouse, the attendant always does not scrape the part that is higher than the mouth of the bucket.

古文：又问：车脚钱几？又曰：御史例不还脚车钱。
现代文：母亲又问应付多少车脚钱，差役又说：给御史家送禄米一向不收车脚钱。
English: The mother also asked how much fare should be paid. The attendant also said, "We never charge fare for sending rice to the historian's family."

古文：母怒，令送所剩米及脚钱以责畬。
现代文：李母生气了，命令差役送还多出的禄米与应付的车脚钱，以此表示对李畬的责备。
English: Li Muang got angry and ordered the policeman to return the extra lumens and the fare to show his reproach to Li Yao.

古文：畬乃追仓官科罪。
现代文：李畬得知后便追问仓库官员，并且治了他的罪。
English: After learning of this, Li Yan questioned the warehouse official and punished him.

古文：诸御史皆有惭色。
现代文：各位御史见此情景，脸上都现出羞愧的颜色。
English: Gentlemen of history, you see this scene, and the color of shame appears on your faces.

古文：卢献女
现代文：卢献女
English: Lu Xianwen

古文：文昌左丞卢献第二女，先适郑氏。其夫早亡，誓不再醮。
现代文：文昌左丞卢献的二女儿原先许配给一个姓郑的，丈夫早早去世，她便立誓不再改嫁。
English: Wenchang Zuoren Lu's second daughter was originally betrothed to a man surnamed Zheng, but when her husband died early, she vowed never to remarry.

古文：姿容端秀，颜调甚高。
现代文：她姿色秀丽容貌端正，格调十分高雅。
English: She is beautiful, has a perfect face, and is very elegant.

古文：姊夫羽林将军李思冲，姊亡之后，奏请续亲，许之。
现代文：她有个姐夫叫李思冲，是羽林军将领，姐姐去世之后他便奏请续弦，卢献的二女儿便许给了他。
English: She had a brother-in-law named Li Sichong, who was a general of the Yulin Army. After her sister's death, he asked for a second string, and Lu Xian's second daughter gave it to him.

古文：兄弟并不敢白。
现代文：兄弟们知道此事后，谁也不敢对她说。
English: When the brothers found out, no one dared to tell her.

古文：思冲择日备礼，贽币甚盛，执致就宅。卢氏拒关，抗声詈曰：老奴，我非汝匹也。
现代文：李思冲选好日子置备了丰厚的聘礼，带上聘礼登门送去时，卢献二女儿却把他拒之于门外，并且高声骂道：老奴才，我可不是你的配偶！
English: Li Sychong chose a good day and prepared a rich betrothal gift. When he brought the betrothal gift to the door, Lu Xian's second daughter shut him out of the door and shouted: "Old slave, I am not your spouse!"

古文：乃逾垣至所亲家，截发。
现代文：于是跳墙出去，到了亲戚家，剪去了满头秀发。
English: So he jumped over the wall, went to a relative's house, and cut off a full head of hair.

古文：冲奏之，敕不夺其志。
现代文：李思冲将此事奏禀皇上，皇上的敕令不改变她矢志不嫁的决心。
English: Li Sichong reported the matter to the emperor, and the emperor's edict did not change her determination not to marry.

古文：后为尼，甚精进。
现代文：后来她出家当了尼姑，潜心修行，十分虔诚。
English: Later, she became a nun and devoted herself to spiritual practice. She was very devout.

古文：邓廉妻
现代文：邓廉妻
English: Deng Liang's wife

古文：沧州弓高邓廉妻李氏女，嫁未周年而廉卒。
现代文：沧州弓高人邓廉娶妻李氏，结婚不满一年邓廉就去世了。
English: Deng Lian married his wife, Ms. Li, in Cangzhou Bow High School. Less than a year after the wedding, Deng Lian died.

古文：李年十八，守志，设灵几，每日三上食临哭，布衣蔬食六七年。
现代文：李氏年方十八，矢志守节，为丈夫的亡灵摆设牌位，每天三时供奉饭菜并在灵前哀哭，一连六七年总是身穿布衣素服不吃腥荤。
English: In the 18th year of Li's reign, on the Day of the Dead, she put up plaques for her husband's dead body. Every day at three o'clock, she offered food and wept in front of the body. For 67 years, she always wore cloth and plain clothes and did not eat bitter gourd.

古文：忽夜梦一男子。容止甚都，欲求李氏为偶，李氏睡中不许之。
现代文：忽于一夜梦见一位男子，容貌举止甚为端庄笃诚，欲求李氏作自己的配偶，李氏在梦中没有应许他。
English: Suddenly, one night, he had a dream about a man who looked and behaved very dignified and sincere. He wanted Ms. Li to be his wife, but Ms. Li did not promise him in the dream.

古文：自后每夜梦见，李氏竟不受。
现代文：从此以后，李氏每天夜晚都能梦见他，但始终未接受他的请求。
English: Since then, Mr. Li has been able to dream of him every night, but has never accepted his request.

古文：以为精魅，书符咒禁，终莫能绝。
现代文：李氏以为他是个精魂鬼魅，便写了符咒驱除他，结果未能除掉。
English: Mr. Li thought he was a spirit ghost and wrote a spell to drive him away, but it failed.

古文：李氏叹曰：吾誓不移节，而为此所挠，盖吾容貌未衰故也。
现代文：李氏感慨地说：我要矢志不变节，却为此事屡屡干扰。大概是我的容貌尚未衰老的缘故吧。
English: Mr. Li said with emotion: "I want to make a commitment to the unchanging festival, but I am repeatedly disturbed by this matter. It is probably because my appearance has not aged.

古文：乃援刀截发，麻衣不謵，蓬鬓不理，垢面灰身。
现代文：于是用刀割掉了秀发，身上的麻布衣服从不洗涤，鬓角蓬乱也不梳理，脸上身上布满了尘垢。
English: As a result, she cut off her hair with a knife, never washed the linen clothes on her body, did not comb her unkempt sideburns, and her face was covered with dirt.

古文：其鬼又谢李氏曰：夫人竹柏之操，不可夺也。
现代文：那个鬼魅便在梦中向李氏称谢道：夫人的节操真如松竹一般坚贞，实在不能使你改变呀！
English: The ghost thanked Ms. Li in his dream, saying, "Your wife's self-restraint is as steadfast as a pine tree, and you really can't change her!"

古文：自是不复梦见。
现代文：从此再也梦不见他了。
English: I never dreamed of him again.

古文：郡守旌其门闾，至今尚有节妇里。
现代文：沧州太守为了表彰李氏的贞节，在她的门前修建了牌坊，至今仍有贞节牌坊矗立在那里。
English: In order to commend Ms. Li's chastity, the governor of Cangzhou built a plaque in front of her door. The chastity plaque still stands there.

古文：肃宗朝公主
现代文：肃宗朝公主
English: Princess Susoncho

古文：肃宗宴于宫中，女优弄假戏，有绿衣秉简为参军者。
现代文：唐肃宗在宫中聚会宴乐，由歌女们化妆扮演戏剧，剧中有个身穿绿衣手持简板的参军。
English: When Emperor Su Zong of the Tang Dynasty held a banquet for his courtiers in the palace, there were female entertainers at the banquet to add to the entertainment. One of them was dressed in green and holding a simple placard, imitating the performance of joining the army.

古文：天宝末，蕃将阿布恩伏法，其妻配掖庭，善为优，因隶乐工，是以遂令为参军之战。
现代文：天宝末年时，有位蕃将阿布恩被判了刑，他的妻子被充侍在掖庭，此人擅长歌舞，便被分配在歌妓队里。
English: At the end of the Tenpo era, there was an eunuch named Abun who was sentenced to prison. His wife was served in the eunuch's court. This man was good at singing and dancing, so he was assigned to the geisha troupe.

古文：公主谏曰：禁中妓女不少，何必须得此人？
现代文：这次宴乐演戏时，肃宗便让她来扮演参军的角色。公主劝告肃宗道：皇宫里的歌妓很多，为什么偏要这个人来扮演。
English: During this banquet performance, Su Zong asked her to play the role of joining the army. The princess advised Su Zong: There are many geishas in the palace, why should this person play?

古文：使阿布恩真逆人耶，其妻亦同刑人，不合近至尊之座。
现代文：如果阿布恩真是叛逆的话，他妻子也是同样受刑的人，不宜于靠近皇上身边。
English: If Abun is indeed a traitor, his wife is also a victim of the same crime and should not be allowed near the emperor.

古文：若果冤横，又岂忍使其妻与群优杂处，为笑谑之具哉？
现代文：如果他是冤枉的，那又怎能忍心让他妻子与歌妓们混在一起，充当笑乐的工具呢！
English: If he has been wronged, how can he bear to have his wife mixed up with the courtesans and used as an instrument of laughter!

古文：妾虽至愚，深以为不可。
现代文：我虽然非常愚昧，但深以此事不合情理。
English: The vassal and the concubine, although stupid, still deeply believed that this should not be done.

古文：上亦悯恻，遂罢戏而免阿布恩之妻。由是贤重公主。
现代文：皇上听了，也动了恻隐之心，于是停止演戏，赦免了阿布恩的妻子，并由此敬重公主的贤惠。
English: The emperor listened and was moved by compassion, so he stopped the play, pardoned Abun's wife, and thus respected the virtue of the princess.

古文：潘炎妻
现代文：潘炎妻
English: Pan Yan's wife

古文：潘炎侍郎。德宗时为翰林学士，恩渥极其异。
现代文：侍郎潘炎在唐德宗时任翰林学士。受到极为深厚的恩宠。
English: Attendant Pan Yan was a scholar of Hanlin at the time of Tang Dezong. He was deeply favored.

古文：妻刘晏女也。
现代文：他妻子是刘晏的女儿。
English: His wife is Liu Wei's daughter.

古文：京尹某有故伺候，累日不得见。乃遗阍者三百缣。
现代文：一位京尹有事要见潘炎，一连几天未能见到，便向守门人赠送了三百匹细绢。
English: A Jing Yin wanted to see Pan Yan for some reason, but after not being able to see him for several days, he presented the gatekeeper with three hundred fine horses.

古文：夫人知之，谓潘曰：岂为人臣，而京尹愿一谒见，遗奴三百缣。
现代文：夫人知道此事后，对潘炎说道：哪有身为大臣，连京尹想要见面都要送给守门人三百匹细绢的道理！
English: After learning about this, his wife said to Pan Yan: "As a minister, there is no reason why even if Jing Yin wants to meet, he must give the gatekeeper three hundred fine horses!"

古文：其危可知也。
现代文：官场的可怕与身居高位的危险由此可知。
English: The horrors of officialdom and the perils of high office are revealed.

古文：遽劝潘公避位。
现代文：她急劝丈夫潘炎辞去官位。
English: She urged her husband, Pan Yan, to resign from his post.

古文：子孟阳初为户部侍郎，夫人忧惕，谓曰：以尔人材，而在丞郎之位，吾惧祸必之至也。
现代文：儿子孟阳刚被任命为户部侍郎时，夫人非常担忧，对他说：以你的人才而得坐侍郎职位，我真害怕有灾祸临头啊！
English: When Meng Yanggang's son was appointed as a steward of the household, his wife was very worried and said to him, "With your talent, you have been appointed as a steward. I'm really afraid of a disaster!

古文：户部解喻再三，乃曰：不然，试会尔同列，吾观之。
现代文：户部衙门再三催促孟阳上任，夫人便道：不行，不能马上就位。
English: The head of the household repeatedly urged Meng Yang to take office, but his wife said, "No, I can't take office right away."

古文：因遍招深熟者。
现代文：你先把你的同学同辈请来聚会一下，由我观察观察看看。
English: First of all, invite your classmates to a party, and let me observe.

古文：客至，夫人垂帘视之。既罢会，喜曰：皆尔俦也，不足忧矣。
现代文：儿子便将交往深厚的同僚都找了来，客人来到后，夫人垂下帘子在一旁仔细观察了一番。聚会结束后，夫人高兴地对儿子说：他们都是和你一类的人，用不着担忧了。
English: After the guests arrived, his wife hung down the curtain and carefully observed the guests. After the party, she happily said to her son, "They are all people like you, so there is no need to worry."

古文：问：末座惨绿少年何人也？曰：补阙杜黄裳。
现代文：夫人问及坐在未位的那位身着惨绿衣服的少年是谁，孟阳答道：那是补阙杜黄裳。
English: When asked by his wife who the boy in the gloomy green robe was, Meng Yang replied, "It's Shuangdu Huangxiang."

古文：夫人曰：此人全别，必是有名卿相。
现代文：夫人说：这个人跟别人都不一样，将来一定是位有名的卿相。
English: His wife said, "This man is different from others. He will surely be a famous prime minister in the future."

古文：刘皇后
现代文：刘皇后
English: Empress Liu

古文：后唐太祖至州上源驿之变，太祖愤恨，欲回军攻之，刘皇后时随军行，谓太祖曰：公为国讨贼，而以杯酒私忿。若攻城，即曲在于我，不如回师，自有朝廷可以论列。
现代文：后唐太祖至州上源驿之变，太祖十分恼火，便要让部队掉过头来去攻打对方。刘皇后当时正随军行进，便对太祖说：您是在为国讨伐贼寇，若以杯酒之微的个人恩怨而去攻城，过错就在我们一边，不如收兵回师，是非功过自有朝廷判定。
English: After the Emperor Taizu of the Tang Dynasty went to the state of Shangyuan, the Emperor was very annoyed and wanted to make the troops turn around and attack the other side. Empress Liu was marching with the army at that time, and said to Emperor Taizu: You are fighting the bandits for the country. If you attack the city with a glass of wine and a slight personal grudge, the fault is on our side. It is better to withdraw the troops and return to the division. The court will judge the merits and demerits.

古文：于是班师。
现代文：太祖于是收兵回师。
English: The great-grandfather then withdrew his troops and returned to his division.

古文：天复中，周德威为汴军所败，三军溃散。汴军乘我，太祖危惧。
现代文：天复年间，周德威的守军被汴军打败，部队四散溃逃，汴军从而进逼城下。
English: During the Tianfu era, Zhou Dewei's defenders were defeated by the Wei army, the troops scattered and fled, and the Wei army entered and forced the city.

古文：与德威议出保云州。刘皇后曰：妾闻王欲弃城而入外藩。谁为此画？
现代文：太祖临危恐惧，便与德威商量出城去守云州，刘皇后说：我听说国王要弃城而去边外藩镇，这是谁的主意？
English: Fearing imminent danger, the great-grandfather discussed with Dewey leaving the city to defend Yunnan. Empress Liu said, "I heard that the king was going to abandon the city and go to a town outside the province. Whose idea was this?

古文：曰：存信辈所言。
现代文：太祖道：这是存信他们的意见。
English: Taizu said, "This is their opinion.

古文：刘后曰：存信本北蕃牧羊儿也，焉顾成败？
现代文：刘皇后说：存信本是北蕃的牧羊小儿，哪管我们的成败。
English: Empress Liu said, "This letter is from a shepherd boy in Beilun. It doesn't matter whether we succeed or fail.

古文：王常笑王行瑜弃城失势，被人屠割，今复欲效之也？
现代文：国王常常耻笑当初王行瑜因为弃城而丢掉了根基，结果被人宰割，如今竟要效法起他来。
English: The king often laughed with shame that Wang Xingyu had lost his foundation by abandoning the city, and as a result had been slaughtered, but now he wanted to emulate him.

古文：王顷岁避难达靼，几遭陷害。赖遇朝廷多事，方得复归。
现代文：国王曾经年避难于鞑靼，几乎遭到陷害，幸因朝廷多事，才得重新返回来。
English: The king once took refuge in Tartary, was almost framed, and fortunately had to return again because of the many problems in the court.

古文：今一旦出城，便有不测之变。焉能远及北蕃？
现代文：如今一旦出城，就会发生难以预料的变故，怎么能去遥远的北蕃云州呢？
English: Nowadays, once you leave the city, there will be unpredictable changes. How can you go to the distant Beibuyunzhou?

古文：遂止。
现代文：太祖于是放弃了出城的计划。
English: So he stopped short of killing him.

古文：居数日，亡散之士复集，军城安堵。
现代文：过了几天，逃散的人又渐渐聚集了起来，守军将城池把守得严严的。
English: After a few days, the people who had fled gradually gathered again, and the defenders kept the castle tightly guarded.

古文：刘后之力也。
现代文：这乃是刘皇后的功劳。
English: This is the merit of Empress Liu.

古文：河池妇人
现代文：河池妇人
English: "Kawachi Woman"

古文：梁祖攻围歧陇之年，引兵至于凤翔。
现代文：当年梁祖攻打歧陇的时候，领兵来到凤翔。
English: When Liang Zu was fighting against the schism, he led his soldiers to Fengxiang.

古文：秦师李茂贞，遣戎校李继朗统众救之，至则大捷，生降七千余人。
现代文：秦军李茂员派戎校李继朗率众救援，秦军一到即获大捷，活捉梁兵七千余人。
English: Li Maozhong of the Qin Army sent Li Jilang of the Military Academy to lead the rescue. The Qin Army won a great victory as soon as they arrived, capturing more than 7,000 Liang soldiers alive.

古文：及旋军，于河池县掠获一少妇，甚有颜色。
现代文：李继朗率兵凯旋途中，在河池县抢到一位少妇，很有姿色。
English: On the way back from the battlefield, Li Jilang and his soldiers captured a young woman in Hechi County. She was very beautiful.

古文：继朗悦之，寝处于兵幕之下。
现代文：继郎很喜欢她，把她放军营之中，往西行进了十五余里路程。
English: The stepfather liked her very much, put her in the military camp, and traveled more than fifteen miles to the west.

古文：西迈十五余程，每欲逼之，即云：我姑严夫妬，请以死代之。
现代文：每当逼她就范之时她便说：我婆婆管束极严，丈夫嫉妒心极重，我愿以死来代替对我的侮辱。
English: Whenever she was forced to comply, she would say: "My mother-in-law is very strict and my husband is very jealous. I would rather die than be humiliated."

古文：戎师怒，胁力以威，终莫能屈。
现代文：秦军官兵非常恼怒，强行胁迫其就范，但一直没能使她屈服。
English: The Qin officers and soldiers were very angry and forced her to submit, but they have not been able to make her surrender.

古文：师笑而悯之，竟不能犯。使人送还其家。
现代文：官兵转怒为笑，并对她表示同情怜惜，最终未能冒犯她；派人将她送回了家。
English: The officers and soldiers turned their anger into laughter and expressed their sympathy and pity for her, and finally failed to offend her; they sent someone to take her back home.

古文：贺氏
现代文：贺氏
English: The He clan

古文：兖州有民家妇姓贺氏，里人谓之织女。
现代文：兖州有一户平民百姓，妇媳姓贺，邻里叫她织女。
English: There is a family of commoners in Zhangzhou. Their daughter-in-law's surname is He, and the neighbors call her Weaver Woman.

古文：父母以农为业。
现代文：贺氏的父母以务农为生。
English: Mr. He's parents made their living as farmers.

古文：其丈夫则负担贩卖，往来于郡。
现代文：丈夫是挑担的商贩，常年往来于郡城之间。
English: Her husband is a merchant who travels back and forth between the county towns.

古文：贺初为妇，未浃旬，其夫出外。
现代文：贺氏初嫁为新妇时，未满十天丈夫就外出经商。
English: When Ms. He married for the first time as a bride, her husband left for business less than ten days later.

古文：每出，数年方至，至则数日复出。
现代文：每次外出都是一连几年才回家，在家里住不了几天就又外出了。
English: Every time I go out, it takes me several years to get home, and I can't live at home for more than a few days before I go out again.

古文：其所获利，蓄别妇于他所，不以一钱济家。
现代文：他用经商挣来的钱在外面养了别的女人，不给家接济一个钱。
English: He used the money he earned from his business to support other women outside, and did not give a penny to support his family.

古文：贺知之，每夫还，欣然奉事，未尝形于颜色。
现代文：贺氏知道这件事后，每当丈夫回家，他依然殷勤侍奉，脸上没有丝毫不快的颜色。
English: After Mr. He learned about this, whenever his husband came home, he still served him diligently, and there was no unhappy color on his face.

古文：夫惭愧不自得，更非理殴骂之，妇亦不之酬对。
现代文：丈夫无可挑剔，心中不免有些惭愧，后来又无缘无故地辱骂贺氏，贺氏亦从不生气与他对骂。
English: Her husband was impeccable, and she felt a little ashamed. Later, he abused Ms. He for no reason. Ms. He never got angry and scolded him.

古文：其姑已老且病，凛馁切骨。
现代文：婆婆已经年老而且有病，经受着饥寒的煎迫。
English: My mother-in-law is old and sick and is suffering from cold and hunger.

古文：妇傭织以资之，所得傭值，尽归其姑，已则寒馁。
现代文：媳妇贺氏便给人家织布挣钱接济家用，挣得的工钱如数交给婆婆，宁可自己挨冻受饿。
English: His daughter-in-law, Ms. He, began to weave cloth to earn money to support the family. She gave all the money she earned to her mother-in-law, preferring to freeze and starve herself.

古文：姑又不慈，日有凌虐。
现代文：婆婆又不知心疼儿媳，天天虐待她。
English: The mother-in-law did not know how distressed her daughter-in-law was and abused her every day.

古文：妇益加恭敬，下气怡声，以悦其意，终无怨叹。
现代文：贺氏生怕老人生气，更加毕恭毕敬，整日低声下气，和颜悦色，以遂其心意，讨她喜欢，自己从无怨言。
English: He was afraid that the old man would be angry, so he was more respectful and respectful. He was subdued all day long, and he had a pleasant face. He tried his best to please her, and he never complained.

古文：夫尝挈所爱至家，贺以女弟呼之，略无愠色。
现代文：丈夫时常把情人领到家里，贺氏便以妹妹相称，脸上毫无怨恨的表示。
English: Her husband often brought his lover to the house, and Ms. He took her sister's place, with no sign of resentment on her face.

古文：贺为妇二十余年，其夫无半年在家，而能勤力奉养，始终无怨，可谓贤孝矣。
现代文：贺氏为媳妇二十多年了，丈夫没有在家里住上半年，而她仍能勉力奉养老人侍候丈夫，从来没有怨言，堪称贤惠孝顺的女人啊！
English: Ms. He has been a daughter-in-law for more than 20 years. Her husband did not live at home for the first half of the year, but she still managed to support the elderly and serve her husband. She has never complained. She is a virtuous and filial woman!

古文：才妇
现代文：才妇
English: Talented women

古文：谢道韫
现代文：谢道韫
English: Xie Daojun

古文：王凝之妻谢道韫。
现代文：王凝之的妻子谢道韫。
English: Wang Xunzhi's wife Xie Daojun.

古文：王献之与客谈义不胜，道韫遣婢白曰：请与小郎解围。
现代文：一天，王献之在家里与一位客人谈论文理，始终辩论不过这位客人。道韫打发使女告诉献之道：请让我来为小郎解围。
English: One day, Wang Xianzhi was at home talking with a guest about the theory, but the guest was always debating. Daojun sent a maid to tell Xianzhi the way: Please let me relieve Xiao Lang.

古文：乃施青绫步障自蔽，与客谈，客不能屈。
现代文：于是用青色绫缎当做幛子遮住了自己，隔着幛子与客人辩论起来，这位客人无论如何也不能辩论过她。
English: So she covered herself with the blue satin as a curtain, and through the curtain she argued with the guest, who in any case could not have argued with her.

古文：杨容华
现代文：杨容华
English: Yang Yonghua

古文：杨盈川侄女曰容华。幼善属文。
现代文：杨盈川的侄女叫杨容华，自幼善长诗文。
English: Yang Yingchuan's niece, Yang Ronghua, has been good at poetry since she was a child.

古文：尝为《新妆》诗，好事者多传之。
现代文：容华曾写过一首表现年青女子新妆情景的诗，喜欢这首诗的人都争相传诵。
English: Yonghua once wrote a poem depicting the scene of a young woman putting on new makeup, and people who like this poem are eager to recite it.

古文：诗曰：宿鸟惊眠罢，房栊乘晓开。
现代文：这首诗写道：宿鸟惊眠罢，房栊乘晓开。
English: The poem reads: "Let the nightingale sleep, let the rooster crow."

古文：凤钗金作缕，鸾镜玉为台。
现代文：凤钗金作缕，鸾镜玉为台。
English: The phoenix chrysanthemum is made of gold, and the enameled mirror bead is the base.

古文：妆似临池出，人疑月下来。
现代文：妆似临池出，人疑月下来。
English: The make-up looks like it's coming out of a pond, and people are suspicious.

古文：自怜终不见，欲去复徘徊。
现代文：自怜终不见，欲去复徘徊。
English: The self-pity is finally gone, the desire to go back lingers.

古文：上官昭容
现代文：上官昭容
English: Superintendent Shoyoung

古文：唐上官昭容之方娠，母郑氏梦神人畀之大秤，以此可秤量天下。
现代文：唐朝的上官昭容，在母亲刚怀了她时，梦见有个神仙投给她一杆极大的秤，用它可以秤量天下。
English: Zhaorong, the supreme official of the Tang Dynasty, dreamt that when her mother was pregnant with her, a fairy threw her a huge scale, with which she could weigh the world.

古文：生弥月，郑弄之曰：尔非秤量天下乎？
现代文：出生满月之时，母亲郑氏逗弄她道：你就是秤量天下的人吗？
English: When she was born at the full moon, her mother, Zheng, teased her: "Are you the one who weighs the world?

古文：孩哑应之曰：是。
现代文：小孩咿咿哑哑地答道：是。
English: The child mumbled a reply: "Yes."

古文：襁中遇家祸，入掖庭。
现代文：孩提之时家中遇难，上官昭容便随母郑氏配入掖庭。
English: When he was a child, he was killed at home, and his mother, Zheng, was assigned to the imperial court.

古文：年十四，聪达敏识，才华无比。
现代文：十四岁时，聪明颖达敏捷博识，显示出无比的才华。
English: At the age of fourteen, she was smart, agile and knowledgeable, showing unparalleled talent.

古文：天后闻而试之，援笔立成，皆如宿构。
现代文：则天皇后听说后便要考考她，只见她提笔即书，文章立成，全像早有成竹在胸一般。
English: When the Empress heard of this, she wanted to examine her. She picked up a pen and began to write, and the article was completed. It was as if she had been studying for it for a long time.

古文：自通天后，建景龙前，恒掌宸翰。
现代文：自从武周通天年间以后，在建立景龙文馆之前，她一直掌管则天女皇的诏命文告工作。
English: Since the time of Wu Zhou Tongtian, she has been in charge of the Zetian Empress's imperial decree work before the establishment of the Jinglong Museum.

古文：其军国谋猷，杀生大柄，多其决。
现代文：朝廷的军国大计，生杀大事，多由她来裁决。
English: The court's military and national plans, life-and-death matters, were mostly decided by her.

古文：至若幽求英隽，郁兴词藻。
现代文：至若搜求英俊人才，网罗擅长文辞的词客强人，她更是竭尽其力。
English: If she is looking for handsome people, if she is looking for a lyricist who is good at rhetoric, she will do her best.

古文：国有好文之士，朝希不学之臣。
现代文：一时间，国内多有好文之士，朝廷少有不学之臣。
English: For a while, there were many good writers in the country, and few uneducated courtiers in the imperial court.

古文：二十年间，野无遗逸，此其力也。
现代文：一连二十余年，民间出现路无拾遗的升平景象，这是上官昭容善于辅佐朝政的功劳。
English: For more than 20 years in a row, there has been an unprecedented rise in the level of civil society. This is the merit of Shangguan Zhaorong's ability to assist the government.

古文：而晚年颇外通朋党，轻弄权势，朝廷畏之矣。玄宗平难，被诛。
现代文：然而晚年之时她却多与宫外朋党沟通，玩弄权术，成为朝廷的危险人物，唐玄宗平息祸乱时，上官昭容被杀掉了。
English: However, in her later years, she mostly communicated with friends outside the palace and played power games, becoming a dangerous figure in the imperial court. When Emperor Xuanzong of Tang quelled the calamity, the superior officer Zhaorong was killed.

古文：张氏
现代文：张氏
English: Mr. Zhang

古文：燕文贞公张说，其女嫁卢氏。
现代文：燕文贞公张说的女儿嫁给了一家姓卢的。
English: Yan Wenzhen said Zhang's daughter married a Lu family.

古文：尝谓舅求官，候父朝下而问焉。
现代文：她说过要给公公求一个官职，等到父亲退朝回家时便向他打听。
English: She said that she would ask her father-in-law for an official position, and when her father returned home, she would ask him.

古文：父不语，但指搘床龟而示之。女拜而归室，告其夫曰：舅得詹事矣。
现代文：父亲不说话，只是指着支撑床的龟向她示意，女儿张氏便领悟其意，拜谢父亲回到自己屋里，告诉丈夫说：公公得到了詹事的官位。
English: The father did not speak, but only pointed to the turtle supporting the bed and gestured to her. Ms. Zhang's daughter understood his meaning, thanked her father, returned to her room, and told her husband: "My father-in-law got the official rank of Zhanjie."

古文：杜羔妻
现代文：杜羔妻
English: Du Lam's Wife

古文：杜羔妻刘氏善为诗。
现代文：杜羔的妻子擅长写诗。
English: Du Lam's wife is good at writing poetry.

古文：羔累举不中第，乃归。
现代文：杜羔屡次参加科举考试没有及第，打算作罢回家。
English: Du Lam has repeatedly failed to pass the imperial examinations, and plans to go home on strike.

古文：将至家，妻即先寄诗与之曰：良人的的有奇才，何事年年被放回。
现代文：快要回到家时，妻子便先写好一首诗寄给他，激励他重返考场。诗中写道：良人的的有奇才，何事年年被放回。
English: When he was about to return home, his wife first wrote a poem and sent it to him, encouraging him to return to the examination room. The poem wrote: My beloved has a wonderful talent, but he is put back year after year.

古文：如今妾面羞君面，君到来时近夜来。
现代文：如今妾面羞君面，君到来时近夜来。
English: Now the concubine's face is shy, but when you come, you come late at night.

古文：羔见诗，即时回去，竟登第。
现代文：杜羔看了此诗，立即返回京城，终于考中了。
English: Du Lam read this poem, immediately returned to Beijing, and finally passed the exam.

古文：张睽妻
现代文：张睽妻
English: Zhang Yizhong

古文：会昌中，边将张睽防戍十有余年。其妻侯氏，绣回文作龟形诗，诣阙进上。
现代文：唐武宗会昌年间，边将张睽戍守边防长达十几年未能回家，妻子侯氏绣回文作龟形诗，表达自己思念征夫的心情，绣成之后进宫献给皇上。
English: During the Tang Wuzong Huichang period, the border general Zhang Ye guarded the border for more than a dozen years and failed to return home. His wife, Hou, embroidered a tortoise-shaped poem to express her feelings of missing her husband, and after embroidering it, she presented it to the emperor.

古文：诗曰：睽离已是十秋疆，对镜哪堪重理妆。
现代文：诗中写道：睽离已是十秋疆，对镜哪堪重理妆。
English: He wrote in the poem: "Separation is already the tenth autumn, which mirror can withstand heavy make-up."

古文：闻雁几回修尺素，见霜先为制衣裳。
现代文：闻雁几回修尺素，见霜先为制衣裳。
English: Smell the goose several times to fix the scales, see the frost first to make clothes.

古文：开箱迭练先垂泪，拂杵调砧更断肠。
现代文：开箱迭练先垂泪，拂杵调砧更断肠。
English: Out of the box, the repetitive practice first tears, whisks, adjusts, and then breaks the gut.

古文：绣作龟形献天子，愿教征客早还乡。
现代文：绣作龟形献天子，愿教征客早还乡。
English: Embroidered in the shape of a turtle, it is dedicated to the child of heaven, and is said to encourage guests to return home early.

古文：敕赐绢三百疋，以彰才美。
现代文：皇上为了表彰她的才华，敕令赐绢三百匹。关图妹
English: In order to commend her talent, the emperor gave her three hundred horses.

古文：关图妹关图有一妹甚聪惠，文学书札，罔不动人。
现代文：关图有个妹妹天资十分聪明，所写的文章和书信，无不情辞并茂生动感人。
English: Guan Tu had a younger sister who was gifted with great intelligence. The articles and letters she wrote were merciless and moving.

古文：图常语同僚曰：某家有一进士，所恨不栉耳。
现代文：关图常常跟同事们说：我家有个进士，可惜不爱梳理。
English: Guantu often said to his colleagues: I have a new member of my family, but unfortunately he doesn't like to comb his hair.

古文：后寓居江陵。
现代文：后来关图家客居江陵。
English: Later, Guan Tu's family lived in Gangneung.

古文：有鹾贾常某者，囊畜千金，三峡人也，亦家于江陵。
现代文：有个姓常的盐贩子，积蓄了很多钱，是三峡人，也定居在江陵。
English: There is a salt trader surnamed Chang, who has saved a lot of money, is a Three Gorges man, and has also settled in Gangneung.

古文：深结讬图，图亦以长者待之。数载，常公殂。
现代文：此人与关图交情深厚，关图也把他当长辈对待。几年之后，这位常某去世了。
English: This person had a deep friendship with Guan Tu, and Guan Tu also treated him as an elder. A few years later, this Chang Mou died.

古文：有一子，状貌颇有儒雅之风纪，而略晓文墨，图竟以其妹妻之。
现代文：他有个儿子，相貌风度颇为儒雅，而且略通文墨，关图就把自己的妹妹给他做了妻子。
English: He had a son, whose appearance and manners were quite refined, and who was also somewhat literate. Guan Tu made his sister his wife.

古文：则常修也。
现代文：此人就是后来很有名气的常修。
English: This was the man who later became famous as a regular practitioner.

古文：关氏乃与修读书，习二十余年，才学优博，越绝流辈。
现代文：关图妹妹嫁过去后，便与常修一起读书，刻苦修习二十余年，常修的才学十分渊博，远远超过了同辈人。
English: After Guantu's younger sister got married, she went to school with a regular student and studied hard for more than 20 years. The regular student was very knowledgeable and far exceeded his peers.

古文：咸通六年登科，座主司空李公蔚也。
现代文：咸通六年科举及第，主考官是司空李公蔚。
English: In the sixth year of Hamdangdong Science Education Examination, the chief examiner was Siku Li Gongwei.

古文：初江东罗隐下第东归，有诗别修云：六载辛勤九陌中，却寻歧路五湖东。
现代文：江东举子罗隐落第之后返回故乡，临别有诗赠常修道：六载辛勤九陌中，却寻歧路五湖东。
English: He returned to his hometown after winning the title of the East Jiangsu Province. At the end of his farewell, he gave a poem to his fellow monks: After six years of hard work in nine foreign countries, he found his way to the east of the five lakes.

古文：名惭桂苑一枝绿，绘忆松江满棹红。
现代文：名惭桂苑一枝缘，绘忆松江满棹红。
English: The famous Shakei-en Garden is just a stone's throw away, painting the memory of Matsue in bright red.

古文：浮世到头须适性，男儿何必尽成功。
现代文：浮世到头须适性，男儿何必尽成功。
English: The world needs fitness, so why do men have to be successful.

古文：惟应鲍叔深知我，他日蒲帆百尺风。
现代文：惟应鲍叔深知我，他日蒲帆百尺风。
English: However, Uncle Bao knew me well, and he had a hundred feet of wind in his sail.

古文：又《广陵秋夜读修所赋三篇》，复吟寄修云：入蜀还吴三首诗，藏于箧笥重于师。
现代文：他还有一首《广陵秋夜读修所赋三篇》，同样流露出对常修才华的敬重，写成之后也寄给了常修，诗中写道：入蜀还吴三首诗，藏于箧笥重于师。
English: He also had another poem, "Three Poems from the Guangling Autumn Evening Reading and Training Center," which also showed his respect for Changshu's talent. After it was written, he also sent it to Changshu. In the poem, he wrote: I returned three poems to Wu in Shu, and they are more important to me than to my teacher.

古文：剑关夜读相如听，瓜步秋吟炀帝悲。
现代文：剑关夜读相如听，瓜步秋吟炀帝悲。
English: Reading Kenguan at night is like listening to the melon walk, the autumn chant, and the emperor's lament.

古文：物景也知输健笔，时情谁不许高枝。
现代文：物景也知输健笔，时情谁不许高枝。
English: The scene is also known to lose a healthy pen, the current situation who does not allow high branches.

古文：明年二月东风里，江岛闲人慰所思。
现代文：明年二月东风里，江岛闲人慰所思。
English: In the east wind in February next year, Jiangdao idle people will think of consolation.

古文：修名望若此，关氏亦有助焉。
现代文：常修的名望如此之高，与妻子关氏的帮助和影响大有关系。
English: The fact that the reputation of regular practitioners is so high has a lot to do with the help and influence of his wife, Guan.

古文：后修卒，关氏自为文祭之。时人竟相传写。
现代文：后来常修去世，关氏亲自动笔写了一篇祭文，此文被当时人竞相传抄。
English: Later, after the death of Joshu, Guan wrote an offering in his own handwriting, which was copied by others at the time.

古文：鱼玄机
现代文：鱼玄机
English: Fish mystery solved

古文：女道士鱼玄机字惠兰，甚有才思。
现代文：女道士鱼玄机，字惠兰，很有文才。
English: Female Taoist fish mystery, the word Huilan, is very literate.

古文：咸通中，适李亿补阙。
现代文：唐懿宗咸通年间，她嫁给了补缺李亿。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianzong of Tang Dynasty, she was married to Li Yuansong.

古文：后爱衰下山，隶咸宜观为道士。
现代文：后因丈夫不再爱她，便下山到咸宜观当了道士。
English: Later, because her husband no longer loved her, she went down the mountain to Hamgyi and became a Taoist.

古文：诗曰：易求无价宝，难得有心郎。又云：蕙兰销歇归春圃，杨柳东西绊客舟。
现代文：她曾写诗悲叹自己的身世道：易求无价宝，难得有心郎；蕙兰销歇归春圃，杨柳东西绊客舟。
English: She once wrote a poem lamenting her own way of life: easy to seek priceless treasures, rare to have a beloved; the lily of the valley returns to the spring garden, and the willow tree stumbles between the east and west.

古文：自是纵怀，乃倡妇也。
现代文：自此之后，她放浪情怀，是一个娼妇。
English: Since then, she's been on the prowl, a prostitute.

古文：竟以杀侍婢，为京尹温璋杀之，有集行于世。
现代文：后来竟然亲手杀死侍婢，结果被京尹温璋杀掉了。鱼玄机有诗文集流行于世。
English: Later, he went so far as to kill a maidservant with his own hands, and as a result, he was killed by Emperor Jing Yin.

古文：牛肃女
现代文：牛肃女
English: Cow sucking woman

古文：牛肃长女曰应贞，适弘农杨唐源。
现代文：牛肃的长女叫应贞，嫁给了弘农杨高源。
English: The eldest daughter of Gansu was called Ying Zhen, and she married Yang Gaoyuan, a Hongnong farmer.

古文：少而聪颖，经耳必诵。年十三，凡诵佛经三百余卷，儒书子史又数百余卷，亲族惊异之。
现代文：应贞在少年时期就特别聪明，好像有特异功能似的，有的人是过目不忘，她则能够经耳必诵。十三岁时，就能背诵佛经三百余卷，正有儒家经书及诸子、史书等一百多卷，亲族对此非常惊异。
English: At the age of thirteen, she was able to recite more than three hundred volumes of Buddhist scriptures, including more than one hundred volumes of Confucian scriptures and historical books. Her relatives were very surprised by this.

古文：初应贞未读《左传》。方拟授之。而夜初眠中，忽诵《春秋》。起惠公元妃孟子卒，终智伯贪而复，故韩魏反而丧之，凡三十卷，一字无遗，天晓而毕。
现代文：应贞以前未读过《左传》，正要教授给她，而她却在一天夜晚刚刚睡下时，忽然背诵起《春秋》来，从鲁惠公元妃孟子卒开始，直背到智伯贪而复，故韩魏反而丧之为止，共计三十卷，一字不漏地背诵出来，一直背到天亮才停止。
English: Ying Zhen had not read "Zhuan" before, and was about to teach it to her, but one night, when she had just fallen asleep, she suddenly began to recite "Spring and Autumn," starting from Lu Hui, the Empress Meng Zizou, straight back to Zhibo's greedy revenge, so Han Wei died instead, a total of thirty volumes, recited word for word, and did not stop until dawn.

古文：当诵时，若有教之者，或相酬和。
现代文：当她在背诵的时候，好像有人在一句一句地教她，或者是跟谁在对谈。
English: When she's reciting, it's as if someone is teaching her sentence by sentence, or having a conversation with someone.

古文：其父惊骇，数呼之，都不答。
现代文：父亲非常震惊，几次喊叫她，一直不回答，直到背完了才醒过来。
English: Shocked, he called out to her several times, but she didn't answer until he had finished.

古文：诵已而觉，问何故，亦不知。
现代文：问她为什么能够这样，她也不知道。
English: Ask her how she does it and she doesn't know.

古文：试令开卷，则亦精熟矣，问不答。
现代文：打开原书试验她时，背过的部分她已经十分精熟了，再问她什么她也不回答。
English: When I opened the original book to test her, she had already mastered the parts she had memorized, and she wouldn't answer any more questions.

古文：著文章百余首。
现代文：应贞共写下文章一百余篇。
English: Ying Zhen wrote more than one hundred articles.

古文：后遂学穷三教，博涉多能。
现代文：后来，她所学习的范围，穷极孺、释、道三教，文泛涉猎，博识多能。
English: Later, the scope of what she studied included the three teachings of Confucianism, Buddhism and Taoism, and she was well-read and knowledgeable.

古文：每夜中眠熟，与文人谈论文，皆古之知名者，往来答难，或称王弼、郑玄、王衍、陆机，辩论烽起；或与文人论文，皆古之知名者；或论文章、谈名理、往往数夜不已。
现代文：每到夜晚熟睡时，就在睡眠中与文人谈论文学理论，交谈的对方都是从前的知名人物，她就与这些人互相对答，而且时时出现辩论的高潮，这些人有王弼、郑玄、王衍、陆机等。有时则与从前的知名人物谈论文章的得失。就这样，有时论文章、有时谈理论；一谈就是数夜不止。
English: Whenever she falls asleep at night, she talks about literary theory with writers in her sleep. The conversation partners are all well-known figures from the past. She answers each other with these people, and there is always a climax of debate. These people are Wang Qian, Zheng Xuan, Wang Yan, Lu Ji, etc. Sometimes she talks about the gains and losses of articles with well-known figures from the past. In this way, sometimes she talks about articles, sometimes about theory; the talk is more than a few nights.

古文：年二十四而卒。
现代文：应贞在二十四岁时就去世了，也就是英年早逝。
English: Ying Zhen died at the age of twenty-four, that is, she died young.

古文：今采其文《魍魉问影赋》。著干篇。其序曰：庚辰岁，予婴沉痛之疾，不起者十旬。毁顿精神，赢悴形体。
现代文：现在收集到她的文章《魍魉问影赋》若干章，此文的序言写道：庚辰之年，我患重病在床，长达一百天之久不能下地走动，疾病使我精神萎靡不振，身体疲弱憔悴。
English: Now, several chapters of her article, "Questions and Reflections," have been collected. The preface to this article reads: In the year of Geng Chen, I was seriously ill in bed, unable to walk for up to one hundred days. The illness made me mentally weak and physically weak.

古文：药物救疗，有加无瘳。
现代文：利用药物治疗，又使病痛有增无减。
English: The use of drug treatment has also increased the pain.

古文：感庄子有魍魉责影之义，故假之为赋，庶解疾焉。
现代文：有感于《庄子》曾有 魍魉责影 之义，因成《魍魉问影》之赋，借此也许能够解除一些病痛吧。
English: I feel that "Shang Zi" once had the meaning of "blame the shadow," and because it became the endowment of "question the shadow," it may be possible to relieve some of the pain.

古文：魍魉问于予影曰：君英达之人，聪明之子，学包六艺，文兼百氏，赜道家之秘言，探释部之幽旨；既虔恭于中馈，又希慕于前史；不矫枉以干名，不毁物而成已。
现代文：赋的正文如下：魍魉问我的影子道：你乃英达之人，聪明之子，学问包揽六艺，文章兼通百家，深谙道家之秘言，探得释教之幽旨；既谨守着为妇之道，又希慕于治国安邦的大道理；不矫前人之枉获取殊名，不毁现成之物显露自己。
English: The text of the Fu is as follows: The shadow asked me: You are a brilliant person, a clever son, a scholar of six arts, a writer of hundreds of articles, a deep understanding of the secret of the Taoist, and a search for the hidden meaning of the interpretation of the teachings; you respect the way of being a woman, and long for the great principle of governing the country; you do not abuse your predecessors to gain a special name, and do not destroy the finished product to reveal yourself.

古文：伊淑德之如此，即精神之足恃。何故赢厥姿貌，沮其精神，烦冤枕席，憔悴衣巾。
现代文：如此贤淑忠恕之德，足可为精神之支柱，为何这样姿貌疲弱、精神沮丧，以至烦冤于枕席之上、憔悴于衣巾之中呢？
English: So virtuous, loyal, and forgiving is the pillar of one's spirit. Why does one look so weak and depressed, and why does anger and resentment linger on the pillow and in one's clothes?

古文：子惟形兮是寄，形与子兮相亲。
现代文：身为影子，你只能寄身于形何，形何与你相亲相依。
English: As a shadow, you can only attach yourself to the form, and the form is related to you.

古文：何不诲之以崇德，而教之以自伦。异莱妻之乐道，殊鸿妇之安贫。
现代文：你为什么不教形体崇尚德性，自享天伦之乐，而使它不通于莱妻之乐道、鸿妇之安贫呢？
English: Why do you not teach the body to be virtuous and to enjoy the pleasures of the heavenly home, so that it will not be able to enjoy the pleasures of a wife and the poverty of a great woman?

古文：岂痼疾而无生赖，将微贱而欲忘身。
现代文：难道痼疾缠身就不想生存，身处微贱就想轻生吗？
English: Don't you want to live if you're riddled with diseases, and want to live lightly if you're poor?

古文：今节变岁移，腊终春首。照晴光于郊甸，动暄气于梅柳。水解冻而绕轩，风扇和而入牖。
现代文：如今节令变移，冬去春回，阳光普照大地，暖气吹拂梅柳，冰雪融化为春水在房前潺潺流淌，空气煽动着和风徐徐送进窗里。
English: Nowadays, the seasons change, winter goes to spring, the sun shines on the earth, the heating blows the plum willow, the ice and snow melt and the spring water flows in front of the house, and the air stirs up the wind and slowly sends it into the window.

古文：固可蠲忧释疾，怡神养寿。
现代文：所有这些均能消除忧愁减轻病痛，怡悦精神延年益寿。
English: All of these can eliminate sadness, reduce pain, and prolong life.

古文：何默尔无营，自贻伊咎。
现代文：你为什么沉默不语、无所事事，给形体造成痛苦呢？
English: Why are you silent and inactive, causing suffering to the form?

古文：仆于是勃然而应曰：子居于无人之域，游乎魑魅之乡。形既图于夏鼎，名又著于蒙庄。
现代文：听了魍魉对影子这一通责问，我便愤然而起，与它争辩道：你居住在无人的地方，游荡在鬼魅的故乡；你的形状图画在夏鼎上面、名字记载于《庄子》的篇章。
English: After listening to the general question of the baboon to the shadow, I got angry and argued with it: You live in a deserted place, wandering in the hometown of ghosts; your shape drawing is on the summer dinghy, and your name is recorded in the chapter of "Zhuangzi."

古文：何所见之不博，何所谈之不长。
现代文：你的见闻怎这么不够广博，言谈怎这么不漂亮！
English: Your knowledge is not extensive enough, and your speech is not beautiful!

古文：夫影依日而生，像因人而见。岂言谈之足晓，何节物之能辨。
现代文：影因有了日光而生，像因有了本人而现；这里的微妙道理岂是言谈能说清的，哪能以节令与气象的变辨辩得明呢？
English: The shadow is born because of the sun, just as it appears because of the person; is the subtle truth here something that can be explained in words, or can it be explained by distinguishing between the seasons and the weather?

古文：随晦明以兴灭，逐形骸以迁变。
现代文：影子随着日光的晦与明而或灭或兴，跟着形体的变更而变易。
English: As the sunlight fades and brightens, the shadow fades and brightens, and changes with the change of shape.

古文：以愚夫畏影，而蒙鄙之性以彰；智者视阴，而迟暮之心可见。伊美恶兮由己，影何辜而遇谴。
现代文：愚人怕见影而愚昧不明之劣性得以显扬，智者看到影则迟暮之心顿生，或赞美或厌恶，全因各人自己而定，影本身有何过错而受你谴责？
English: Fools are afraid of the shadow, and the inferiority of ignorance is revealed. Wise people see the shadow, and their hearts are awakened, or praise or disgust, all depending on each person. What is the fault of the shadow itself, and is it condemned by you?

古文：且予闻至道之精窈兮冥，至道之极昏兮默。
现代文：况且，我听说，至道之精神在于深邃奥妙，至道之极致在于只能意会不能言传。
English: Moreover, I have heard that the spirit of the Tao is profound and profound, and the ultimate of the Tao is that it can only be understood and cannot be passed on.

古文：达人委性命之修短，君子任时运之通塞。悔吝不能缠，荣耀不能惑。丧之不以为丧，得之不以为得。
现代文：通达之人听任性命之或长或短，有识之士不在乎时运之顺利或阻塞；他们不为苦恼所纠缠，不为荣耀所迷惑，失掉什么不以为失，得到什么不以为得。
English: Those who are well-informed will allow their lives to be long or short, and those who are insightful do not care about the smoothness or obstruction of time; they are not entangled by suffering, not confused by glory, and do not consider what they have lost as lost, and what they have gained as gained.

古文：君子何乃怒予之不赏芳春，责予之不贵华饰。
现代文：你为什么竟然对我不赏芳春而恼怒，对我不看重华饰而加以谴责！
English: Why are you so angry with me for not appreciating Fangchun, and condemn me for not valuing ornaments!

古文：且吾之秉操，奚子智之能测。
现代文：另外，我的志向和操守，哪是你的智力所能理解的。
English: Besides, my ambition and integrity are beyond what your intellect can comprehend.

古文：言未卒，魍魉惕然而惊，叹而起曰：仆生于绝域之外，长于荒遐之境，未晓智者之处身，是以造君而问影。
现代文：我的话还没说完，魍魉便惊讶地站了起来，叹道：我生于没有人烟的境外，长在荒远的地方，根本不懂得智者处身的志向和操守，所以前来问影。
English: Before my words were finished, the baboon stood up in surprise and sighed, "I was born in a foreign country where there is no smoke, grew up in a desolate place, and do not understand the aspirations and ethics of a wise man, so I came to ask."

古文：既谈玄之至妙，请终身以藏屏。
现代文：您既然谈到玄理如此深奥微妙，我愿意终生藏匿，不再出面骚扰。
English: Since you have spoken of the metaphysics so deeply and subtly, I am willing to hide for the rest of my life and no longer come forward to harass.

古文：初应贞梦裂书而食之，每梦食数十卷，则文体一变。如是非一，遂工为赋颂。
现代文：当年，应贞在夜晚睡眠时，梦到自己把书撕碎了吞食下去，每次做梦能吞食几十卷，下次做梦则又换一种文体来吞食，这样的梦做了不知有多少次，于是她便能写很漂亮的赋、颂等文章。
English: That year, when Ying Zhen was sleeping at night, she dreamed that she tore up the book and swallowed it. Each time she dreamed, she could swallow dozens of volumes, and the next time she dreamed, she changed a style to swallow. I don't know how many times she had such a dream, so she could write very beautiful fu, ode and other articles.

古文：文名曰遗芳。
现代文：她的笔名叫遗芳。
English: Her pen name is Wu Fang.

古文：慎氏
现代文：慎氏
English: Mr. Shin

古文：慎氏，北陵虔亭儒家之女也。三史严灌夫因游览，遂结姻好，同载归蕲春。
现代文：慎氏是北陵虔亭一书香门第的女儿，当三史严灌夫来此旅游时，两人相识并结为美好夫妻，同年一起回到了蕲春。
English: Ms. Shen is the daughter of a well-known poet in Hokuryo Kentei. When San Shiyan Guanfu came here on a tour, the two met and became a beautiful couple. They returned to Hunchun together in the same year.

古文：经十余年无嗣息，灌夫乃拾其过而出妻，令归二浙。
现代文：过了十多年，慎氏没有生儿育女，灌夫便挑她的过错将其休了，让她回到二浙老家。
English: After more than ten years, when Ms. Shen did not give birth to a child, Mr. Guan picked her fault and dismissed her, letting her return to her hometown in Zhejiang.

古文：慎氏慨然登舟，亲戚临流相送，妻乃为诗以诀灌夫。
现代文：慎氏慨然登上舟船，亲属们来到江边送别。此时慎氏题诗一首，赠于灌夫以抒尚别之情。
English: Reluctantly, Shinji boarded the boat, and his relatives came to the river to see him off. At this time, Shinji wrote a poem and gave it to Ganfu to express his farewell.

古文：灌夫览之凄感，遂为妇道如初。
现代文：灌夫看了此诗深受感动，于是撕毁休书，夫妻和好如初。
English: Kanfu was deeply moved when he read this poem, so he tore up the book and the couple reconciled.

古文：慎氏诗曰：当时心事已相关，雨散云飞一饷间。
现代文：慎氏的这首诗写道：当时心事已相关，雨散云飞一饷间。
English: This poem by Shinji wrote: At that time, my mind was already concerned, and the rain scattered the clouds and flew away.

古文：便是孤帆从此去，不堪重上望夫山。
现代文：便是孤帆从此去，不堪重上望夫山。
English: It was from here that Lone Sail set out, unable to bear the weight of climbing Mount Mofu.

古文：薛媛
现代文：薛媛
English: Xue Yuan

