古文：《史记•有若传》云： 孔子没，弟子以若状似孔子，立以为师。
现代文：《史记》中的《有若传》说： 孔子亡故，弟子们因为有若的相貌近似孔子，就立他为老师。
English: The "Biography of You Ruo" in the "History" says: After the death of Confucius, his disciples appointed You Ruo as their teacher because his appearance was similar to that of Confucius.

古文：他日，进问曰： 昔夫子当行，使弟子持雨具，已而果雨。
现代文：后来，向他请问说： 从前夫子要出行，让弟子拿着雨具，后来果然下雨。
English: Later, I asked him, "Once upon a time, when a master wanted to travel, he asked his disciple to take a raincoat with him. Later, it rained.

古文：弟子问何以知之，夫子曰：《诗》不云乎？月离于毕，俾滂沱矣。
现代文：弟子问怎么知道是这样的，夫子说： 《诗经》上不是说过，月亮挨着毕宿，就会大雨滂沱。
English: When the disciple asked how he knew this, the teacher said, "Didn't the Book of Songs say that when the moon is full, there will be heavy rain?"

古文：昨暮月不宿毕乎，他日，月宿毕，竟不雨。
现代文：昨天晚上月亮不是挨着比宿吗？后来月亮挨着比宿，竟然没有下雨。
English: Last night, wasn't the moon right next to Bijuku? Later, the moon was right next to Bijuku, and it didn't rain.

古文：商瞿年长无子，孔子曰瞿年四十后当有五丈夫子，已而果然。
现代文：商瞿年纪大了而没有儿子，孔子说商瞿四十岁以后会有五个男孩子，以后果然如此。
English: Shang Kuo was old and had no son. Confucius said that Shang Kuo would have five sons after the age of forty, and this was indeed the case.

古文：敢问何以知此？ 
现代文：请问夫子是怎么知道这样的。 
English: Excuse me, but how did the master know about this?

古文：有若无以应。
现代文：有若没能回答。
English: However, he failed to answer.

古文：弟子起曰： 有子避之，此非子之座也！  
现代文：弟子们站起来说： 有子躲开这里吧，这不是您的位置。  
English: The students stood up and said: "Sir, you should get out of here, this seat is not for you!"

古文：予谓此两事殆近于星历卜祝之学，何足以为圣人，而谓孔子言之乎？
现代文：我认为这两件事近乎天文学和占卜学，就凭这些哪里足以是圣人，而还非要说成是孔子的话呢？
English: I think that these two things are close to astronomy and divination, so how can these be enough to be saints, but still have to be said to be the words of Confucius?

古文：有若不能知，何所加损，而弟子遽以是斥退之乎？
现代文：有若不能知道，对他又有什么损害，难道师兄弟们因此就立刻斥退他吗？
English: If there is no way of knowing what damage has been done to him, will his teachers and brothers immediately reject him for this?

古文：《孟子》称： 子夏、子张、子游，以若似圣人，欲以所事孔子事之，曾子不可 ，但言 江、汉秋阳不可尚 而已。
现代文：《孟子》中称： 子夏、子张、子游认为有若像圣人，想用侍奉孔子的礼节侍奉他，曾子不同意 ，也只是说 孔子的道德学问就像在长江、汉水中洗涤过，没有杂质，就像在盛夏的太阳底下晒过，光明洁白，没有能够赶得上的 ，如是而已，也没有进行严厉的批评。
English: "Mencius" said: Zixia, Zizhang and Ziyou thought that there was a saint-like saint and wanted to serve him with the etiquette of serving Confucius. Zengzi disagreed, but only said that Confucius's moral knowledge was like being washed in the Yangtze River and Chinese water, without impurities, like being exposed to the mid-summer sun, bright and white, and not being able to catch up. That was all, and there was no harsh criticism.

古文：未尝深诋也。《论语》记诸善言，以有子之言为第二章，在曾子之前；使有避坐之事，弟子肯如是哉？
现代文：《论语》是部记录孔门师徒美好的言论的书，把有子的一段话排在第一章的第二段，在曾子的前面；假如真有离开座位的事情，弟子们肯这样编排吗？
English: "The Analects" is a book that records the beautiful words of Confucius's teachers and disciples. Ariko's words are arranged in the second paragraph of the first chapter, in front of Zengzi. If there is really a matter of leaving the seat, will the disciples arrange it like this?

古文：《檀弓》载有子闻曾子 丧欲速贫，死欲速朽 两语，以为 非君子之言 ，又以为 夫子有为言之 。
现代文：《礼记•檀弓》记载有子听到曾子转述的 丢失官位、流亡他国之人还是尽快穷下来的好，人死了还是快快腐烂了好 两句话，认为 这不是有道德的人说的话 ，又认为 这是老师有所指而发的义愤之辞 。
English: "Riki • Dangyu" records two sentences that the son heard his great-grandson paraphrase: "It is good for a person who lost his official position and fled to another country to become poor as soon as possible, and it is good for a person to die or quickly rot." He thought that these were not the words of a moral person, and also thought that this was the teacher's pointed righteous indignation.

古文：子游曰： 甚哉！有子之言似夫子也。 
现代文：子游了解老师说话的背景，慨叹道： 有子的意见多么像老师的啊！ 
English: Ziyu understood the background of the teacher's speech, and sighed: "Aiko's opinion is so much like the teacher's!"

古文：则其为门弟子所敬久矣。
现代文：那么，有子被师兄弟们尊敬亦非一朝一夕之事。
English: So, it's not an overnight thing for Ariko to be respected by her brothers.

古文：太史公之书，于是为失矣。
现代文：太史公的《史记》，在这件事上的记述是错的。
English: The "Historical Records" of the Grand Historian are wrong in this matter.

古文：且门人所传者道也，岂应以状貌之似而师之邪？
现代文：况且徒弟所传承的是老师的道德学问，哪能因为相貌像孔子就以他为师呢？
English: Moreover, what the apprentice inherits is the moral knowledge of the teacher. How can he be a teacher just because he looks like Confucius?

古文：世所图《七十二贤画像》，其画有若遂与孔子略等，此又可笑也。
现代文：世人所画《七十二贤画像》，他们画的有若就跟孔子像大致相同，这又是很可笑的。
English: It is ridiculous that the world paints the "Portrait of the Seventy-two Sages," and if they do, it is roughly the same as the portrait of Confucius.

