古文：始封殷王，领冀州大都督、单于大都护。
现代文：睿宗，名旦，高宗之第八子。起初，被封为殷王，领受冀州大都督、单于大都护衔职。
English: Ruizong, Mingtang, the eighth son of Gaozong. At first, he was given the title of Yin Wang, received the title of Jizhou Daduo, and the title of Daduo.

古文：长而温恭好学，通诂训，工草隶书。
现代文：成年后，谦恭好学，通晓训诂之学，擅长草隶书法。
English: After he became an adult, he was eager to learn, well-versed in the study of exegesis, and good at calligraphy.

古文：徙封豫王，又封冀王，累迁右金吾卫大将军、洛州牧。
现代文：后改封为豫王，又封为冀王，官职升至右金吾卫大将军、洛州牧。
English: Later, his title was changed to Yu Wang, and then to Ji Wang, and his official position was raised to the Right King Uwei General, and the Loshou Pastoral.

古文：徙封相王，复封豫王。
现代文：后又改封为相王，再又封为豫王。
English: Later, his title was changed to King So and then to King Yu.

古文：武后废中宗，立为皇帝，其改国号周，以为皇嗣，居于东宫。
现代文：武后废黜中宗，将他立为皇帝；她改国号为 周 ，以李旦为皇位继承人，居住东宫。
English: Wu Hou deposed Zhongzong and made him emperor; she changed the country's name to Zhou, with Li Dan as the heir to the throne, living in the East Palace.

古文：中宗自房州还，复为皇太子，武后封皇嗣为相王，授太子右卫率。
现代文：中宗自房州还都，复位为皇太子；武后将李旦封为相王，授职太子右卫率。
English: Zhongzong from Fuzhou to Dadu was reinstated as crown prince; Wu Wu designated Li Dan as crown prince and promoted him to the rank of crown prince.

古文：累迁右羽林卫大将军、并州牧、安北大都护、诸道元帅。
现代文：官职升至右羽林卫大将军、并州牧、安北大都护、诸道元帅。
English: He rose to the rank of General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, as well as the provincial governor, the Anbei metropolitan guard, and the marshal of all the provinces.

古文：中宗复位，进号安国相王。
现代文：中宗恢复皇位，将李旦加号为安国相王。
English: Zhongzong restored the imperial throne, and renamed Li Dan as the An Guoxiang Wang.

古文：景云元年六月壬午，韦皇后弑中宗，矫诏立温王重茂为皇太子。
现代文：景云元年六月初二，韦皇后杀害中宗，诈传伪诏立温王李重茂为皇太子。
English: On the 2nd day of the 6th month of the 1st year of Jingyun, Empress Wei killed Zhongzong and falsely proclaimed Wen Wang Li Chongmao as the crown prince.

古文：以刑部尚书裴谈、工部尚书张锡同中书门下三品；吏部尚书张嘉福、中书侍郎岑羲、吏部侍郎崔湜同中书门下平章事。
现代文：委任刑部尚书裴谈、工部尚书张锡为同中书门下三品；吏部尚书张嘉福、中书侍郎岑羲、吏部侍郎崔为同中书门下平章事。
English: It was decided to appoint Shangshu Pei Dan from the Department of Criminal Law and Shangshu Zhang Xi from the Department of Engineering as the three vice-chancellors of the same school; Shangshu Zhang Jiafu from the Department of Administration, Shangshu Langyi from the Department of Administration, and Shangshu Cui from the Department of Administration as the vice-chancellors of the same school.

古文：发诸府兵五万屯京师，以韦温总知内外兵马。
现代文：调遣各府军士五万人驻扎京城，以韦温总掌宫廷内外兵马。
English: He dispatched 50,000 military officers from various prefectures to be stationed in the capital, with Wei Wen in overall charge of the soldiers and horses inside and outside the palace.

古文：甲申，乃发丧。
现代文：初四，才发讣告。
English: An obituary notice was only issued in the fourth year of junior high school.

古文：又矫遗诏，自立为皇太后。
现代文：韦氏又诈传伪诏，自立为皇太后。
English: The Wei clan also fraudulently promulgated a false edict and established itself as empress dowager.

古文：皇太子即皇帝位，以睿宗参谋政事，大赦，改元曰唐隆。
现代文：皇太子李重茂登皇帝位，委任睿宗参谋政事，施行大赦，改年号为唐隆。
English: Crown Prince Li Chongmao ascended to the throne, appointed Ruizong as a political advisor, implemented an amnesty, and changed his era name to Tanglong.

古文：太后临朝摄政，罢睿宗参谋政事，以为太尉。
现代文：太后韦氏当朝摄政后，罢免睿宗参谋政事，委任他为太尉。
English: After Empress Dowager Wei became regent, she dismissed Ruizong's political advisor and appointed him as a lieutenant.

古文：封嗣雍王守礼为邠王，寿春郡王成器宋王。
现代文：封嗣雍王李守礼为王，寿春郡王李成器为宋王。
English: The heir of Yong Wang, Li Shouli, was the king, and the king of Shuchun County, Li Chengi, was the king of Song.

古文：丁亥，温王妃陆氏为皇后。
现代文：初七，册立温王李重茂妃陆氏为皇后。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Emperor Wen and Empress Li Chongmao were proclaimed empresses.

古文：壬辰，纪处讷、张嘉福、岑羲持节巡抚关内、河南北。
现代文：十二日，纪处讷、张嘉福、岑羲持朝廷节符巡抚关内、河南、河北诸道。
English: On the 12th, Guan Nai, Zhang Jiafu, and Zhang Jiafu were appointed as the inspectors of Guanai, Henan, and Hebei provinces.

古文：庚子，临淄郡王隆基率万骑兵入北军讨乱，诛韦氏、安乐公主及韦巨源、马秦客、附马都尉武延秀、光禄少卿杨均。
现代文：二十日，临淄郡王李隆基率领万骑兵进入北军讨平逆乱，杀了韦氏、安乐公主及韦巨源、马秦客、驸马都尉武延秀、光禄少卿杨均。
English: On the 20th, Li Longji, the king of Linyi County, led ten thousand cavalrymen into the Northern Army to quell the rebellion, and killed the Wei clan, Princess Anle and Wei Jiuyuan, Ma Qin Ke, Hema Captain Wu Yanxiu, and Guanglu Shaoqing Yang Jun.

古文：辛丑，睿宗奉皇帝御安福门，大赦。
现代文：二十一日，睿宗侍奉皇帝李重茂至安福门，颁行大赦。
English: On the twenty-first day, Ruizong went to Anfu Gate to serve the emperor Li Chongmao and issued an amnesty.

古文：赐文武官阶、勋、爵，免天下岁租之半。
现代文：赐给文武官员官阶、勋官、爵位，免除全国年租的一半。
English: Civil and military officials were given official ranks, decorations, and peerages, and half of the national annual rent was exempted.

古文：进封隆基为平王。
现代文：晋封李隆基为平王。
English: The enthronement of Li Longji as the King of Ping.

古文：朝邑尉刘幽求为中书舍人，苑总监钟绍京为中书侍郎，参知机务。
现代文：朝邑尉刘幽求为中书舍人，苑总监钟绍京为中书侍郎，参掌军政机密要务。
English: Liu Yuqiu, the commander of the Morning Post, was the keeper of the Chinese books, and Zhong Shaojing, the superintendent of the garden, was the attendant of the Chinese books. He was in charge of the confidential military and political affairs.

古文：壬寅，绍京及黄门侍郎李日知同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十二日，绍京与黄门侍郎李日知加同中书门下三品。
English: On the 22nd, Shao Jing and the Yellow Gate waiter Li Rizhi added three dishes under the door of Zhongshu.

古文：纪处讷、韦温、宗楚客、将作大匠宗晋卿、司农卿赵履温伏诛。
现代文：纪处讷、韦温、宗楚客、将作大匠宗晋卿、司农卿赵履温伏法处死。
English: Wei Wen, Zong Chuk, Zong Jin, and Zhao Rui Wen, who were disciplined, were sentenced to death.

古文：贬汴王邕为沁州刺史，萧至忠许州刺史，韦嗣立宋州刺史，赵彦昭绛州刺史，崔湜华州刺史。
现代文：将汴王李邕贬为沁州刺史，萧至忠贬为许州刺史，韦嗣立贬为宋州刺史，赵彦昭贬为绛州刺史，崔贬为华州刺史。
English: He relegated Gong Wang Lijun to the history of Ganzhou, Xiao Zhizhong to the history of Huzhou, Wei Zili to the history of Songzhou, Zhao Yanzhao to the history of Ganzhou, and Cui to the history of Huazhou.

古文：癸卯，太白昼见。
现代文：二十三日，白天出现太白星。
English: On the 23rd, a very white star appeared during the day.

古文：平王隆基同中书门下三品，钟绍京行中书令。
现代文：平王李隆基加同中书门下三品，钟绍兼中书令。
English: The king of Ping, Li Longji, was promoted to the third grade of the same school, and Zhong Shao was promoted to the second grade of the same school.

古文：张嘉福伏诛。
现代文：张嘉福伏法处死。
English: Zhang Jiafu was executed by hanging.

古文：甲辰，安国相王即皇帝位于承天门，大赦，长流、长任及流人未达者还之。
现代文：二十四日，安国相王李旦在承天门登皇帝位，施行大赦，准许长期流放、长服劳役及被流放尚未到达服刑地的人员返回原地。
English: On the 24th, the Minister of the State of An, Wang Li Dan, ascended to the throne of Emperor He Tianmen, and implemented an amnesty, allowing long-term exile, long-term labor service, and those who had been exiled and had not yet arrived at the place of serving their sentence to return to their original place.

古文：赐内外官阶、爵。
现代文：赐予宫廷内外官员官阶、爵位。
English: Officials both inside and outside the court were given official ranks and peerages.

古文：复重茂为温王。
现代文：恢复李重茂为温王。
English: Li Shigemo was reinstated as the King of Wen.

古文：乙巳，钟绍京罢。
现代文：二十五日，钟绍京被免职。
English: On the 25th, Zhong Shaojing was removed from office.

古文：丙午，太常少卿薛稷为黄门侍郎，参豫机务。
现代文：二十六日，太常少卿薛稷任黄门侍郎，参预军机要务。
English: On the 26th, Xue Yu, the too-frequent minor lord, was appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and took part in the preliminary military preparations.

古文：丁未，立平王隆基为皇太子。
现代文：二十七日，立平王李隆基为皇太子。
English: On the 27th, the king of Ping, Li Longji, was appointed crown prince.

古文：复则天大圣皇后号曰天后。
现代文：恢复则天大圣皇后号为天后。
English: After the restoration, Tendai Sainte Empress became the Queen of Heaven.

古文：戊申，许州刺史姚元之为兵部尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十八日，许州刺史姚元之任兵部尚书、同中书门下三品。
English: On the 28th, Xu Zhou stabbed Yao Yuan's appointment to the military department of Shang Shu, and the next three products of the same school.

古文：韦嗣立、萧至忠为中书令，赵彦昭为中书侍郎，崔湜为吏部侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：韦嗣立、萧至忠任中书令，赵彦昭任中书侍郎，崔任吏部尚书，并加同中书门下平章事。
English: Wei Sili and Xiao Zhitong were appointed as the secretary, Zhao Yan Zhao was appointed as the secretary's servant, Cui was appointed as the clerk's secretary, and the subordinate subordinate secretary was added to the secretary.

古文：七月庚戌，进封衡阳郡王成义为申王，巴陵郡王隆范岐王，彭城郡王隆业薛王。
现代文：七月初一，晋封衡阳郡王李成义为申王，巴陵郡王李隆范为岐王，彭城郡王李隆业为薛王。
English: On the first day of July, Li Chengyi, the king of Hengyang County, Jinfeng, became the king of Shen, Li Long Fan, the king of Baling County, became the king of Qi, and Li Longye, the king of Pengcheng County, became the king of Xue.

古文：癸丑，兵部尚书崔日用为黄门侍郎，参豫机务。
现代文：初四，兵部尚书崔日用任黄门侍郎，参预军机要务。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, he was assigned to the Yellow Gate as a waiter in the military department of the Shangshu Cui Rong, and was given the important duty of participating in the pre-military training.

古文：丁巳，洛州长史宋璟检校吏部尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：初八，洛州长史宋瞡任检校吏部尚书、同中书门下三品。
English: In the eighth year of junior high school, the governor of Los Angeles, Shi Songlian, appointed Shang Shu as the inspector of the school, and he was the third grade of the same middle school.

古文：岑羲罢。
现代文：岑羲被免职。
English: He was dismissed from his post.

古文：壬戌，贬萧至忠为晋州刺史，韦嗣立许州刺史，赵彦昭宋州刺史，张锡绛州刺史。
现代文：十三日，贬萧至忠为晋州刺史，韦嗣立为许州刺史，赵彦昭为宋州刺史，张锡为绛州刺史。
English: On the 13th, Xiao Zhizhong was appointed as the prefect of Jinzhou, Wei Zili as the prefect of Huzhou, Zhao Yanzhao as the prefect of Songzhou, and Zhang Xi as the prefect of Zhangzhou.

古文：崔湜罢。
现代文：崔被免职。
English: Choi was removed from office.

古文：丙寅，贬李峤为怀州刺史。
现代文：十七日，贬李峤为怀州刺史。
English: On the seventeenth day, Li Jie was demoted to be the chief historian of Waizhou.

古文：姚元之兼中书令，苏瑰为尚书左仆射。
现代文：姚元之兼中书令，苏瑰任尚书左仆射。
English: Yao Yuanzhi was also the chief scribe, while Su Jizhen was the second-in-command.

古文：丁卯，唐休３〗璟、张仁亶罢。
现代文：十八日，唐休瞡、张仁被免职。
English: On the 18th, Tang Xiuyong and Zhang Ren were dismissed.

古文：己巳，大赦，改元，赐内外官及子为父后者勋一转。
现代文：二十日，施行大赦，改年号为景云。赐予宫廷内外官员以及官位在其父之下者勋官一级。
English: On the 20th, an amnesty was implemented, and the era name was changed to Jingyun. Officials inside and outside the court, as well as those whose official rank was below their father's, were awarded the first class of the Order of Merit.

古文：崔日用、薛稷罢。
现代文：崔日用、薛稷被免职。
English: Cui Rinyi and Xue Qi were removed from their posts.

古文：乙亥，废崇恩庙、昊陵、顺陵。
现代文：二十六日，废止崇恩庙、昊陵、顺陵。
English: On the 26th, Chong'en Temple, Hao Mausoleum and Shun Mausoleum were abolished.

古文：追废皇后韦氏为庶人，安乐公主为勃逆庶人。
现代文：追废皇后韦氏为平民，安乐公主为悖逆平民。
English: Queen Wei is a commoner, and Princess Anle is a rebellious commoner.

古文：八月庚寅，谯王重福及汴州刺史郑愔反，伏诛。
现代文：八月十二日，谯王李重福与汴州刺史郑忄音反叛，伏法处死。
English: On August 12th, the king of Shan, Li Chongfu, rebelled against the governor of Shan State, Zheng Yuyin, and was executed.

古文：癸巳，罢墨敕斜封官。
现代文：十五日，罢免不合法定规程的手书墨敕斜封的官员。
English: On the 15th, the officials who illegally sealed the handwritten and ink-stamped documents were removed from office.

古文：贬裴谈为蒲州刺史。
现代文：将裴谈贬为蒲州刺史。
English: Pei Dan will be relegated to the dustbin of history.

古文：九月辛未，太子少师致仕唐休璟为朔方道行军大总管，以备突厥。
现代文：九月二十三日，已辞官居家的太子少师唐休瞡任朔方道行军大总管，以防备突厥来犯。
English: On September 23rd, the prince's apprentice Tang Xiuqi, who had resigned from his post and was living at home, was appointed the general manager of the march of the Shuo Fang Road to prevent the Turks from coming.

古文：十月乙未，追号天后曰大圣天后。
现代文：十月十八日，追赠天后号为大圣天后。
English: On October 18th, she was posthumously given the posthumous title of the Most Holy Mother of God.

古文：癸卯，出义宗于太庙。
现代文：二十六日，将义宗神位迁出太庙。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, he moved the Yoshimune Shinto shrine out of the Imperial Temple.

古文：十一月戊申，姚元之为中书令。
现代文：十一月初一，姚元之任中书令。
English: On the first day of November, Yao Yuan's letter of appointment was issued.

古文：己酉，葬孝和皇帝于定陵。
现代文：初二，将孝和皇帝中宗葬于定陵。
English: On the second day of the first month, Emperor Zhongzong and Emperor Xiao were buried together in the Dingling Mausoleum.

古文：壬子，苏瑰、韦安石罢。
现代文：初五，苏瑰、韦安石被免职。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Su Gui and Wei Anshi were dismissed.

古文：宋王成器为尚书左仆射。
现代文：宋王李成器任尚书左仆射。
English: Song King Licheng's weapon was a left-handed shotgun.

古文：丁卯，赦灵驾所过。
现代文：二十日，对中宗灵车所经之地施行赦免。
English: On the 20th, an amnesty was implemented for the places where the funeral car of the Chinese Church passed.

古文：己巳，宋王成器为司徒。
现代文：二十二日，宋王李成器任司徒。
English: On the 22nd, Song King Li Chengji was appointed as an apprentice.

古文：二年正月己未，太仆卿郭元振、中书侍郎张说同中书门下平章事。
现代文：景云二年正月十三日，太仆卿郭元振、中书侍郎张说加同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the second year of Jingyun, Guo Yuan Zhen, the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch

古文：甲子，徙封重茂为襄王。
现代文：十八日，改封李重茂为襄王。
English: On the 18th, Li Chongmao's title was changed to the King of Xiang.

古文：乙丑，追册妃刘氏、窦氏为皇后。
现代文：十九日，追封皇妃刘氏、窦氏为皇后。
English: On the 19th, Empress Dowager Liu and Dowager Dou were enthroned as empresses.

古文：二月丁丑，皇太子监国。
现代文：二月初二，皇太子李隆基代理国政。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, Crown Prince Li Longji took over as acting head of state.

古文：甲申，贬姚元之为申州刺史，宋璟楚州刺史。
现代文：初九，贬姚元之为申州刺史，宋瞡为楚州刺史。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, Yao Yuanzhong was designated as the state historian of Shenzhou, and Song Xi as the state historian of Chuzhou.

古文：丙戌，太子少保韦安石为侍中。
现代文：十一日，太子少保韦安石任侍中。
English: On the 11th day, Prince Shobo Wei Anshi became a chamberlain.

古文：刘幽求罢。
现代文：刘幽求被免职。
English: Liu Yucui was removed from his post.

古文：复墨敕斜封官。
现代文：恢复手书墨敕斜封人员的官职。
English: Restore the official position of the person in charge of handwriting, ink and calligraphy.

古文：辛卯，禁屠。
现代文：十六日，禁止屠宰。
English: On the 16th, the slaughter was banned.

古文：三月癸丑，作金仙、玉真观。
现代文：三月初八，建造金仙观、玉真观。
English: On the 8th day of the 3rd month of the year, the Golden Immortal View and the Jade Immortal View were built.

古文：四月甲申，韦安石为中书令。
现代文：四月初九，韦安石任中书令。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month, Wei Anshi was appointed as a middle-ranking official.

古文：宋王成器罢。
现代文：宋王李成器被免职。
English: Song King Li Chengqi was removed from office.

古文：辛卯，李日知为侍中。
现代文：十六日，李日知任侍中。
English: On the 16th, Li Ruchi was appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：壬寅，大赦，赐文武官阶、勋、爵，民酺三日。
现代文：二十七日，施行大赦，赐予文武官员官阶、勋官、爵位，赐许百姓聚饮三日。
English: On the 27th, an amnesty was implemented, civil and military officials were given official ranks, orders and titles, and the people were allowed to gather for three days.

古文：甲辰，作玄元皇帝庙。
现代文：二十九日，建造玄元皇帝庙。
English: On the 29th, the construction of the Emperor Xuan Yuan Temple began.

古文：五月庚戌，复昊陵、顺陵，置官属。
现代文：五月初六，恢复昊陵、顺陵，设置护陵官吏。
English: On the sixth day of the fifth lunar month, the Hao Mausoleum and the Shun Mausoleum were restored, and officials for the protection of the mausoleums were set up.

古文：壬戌，殿中监窦怀贞为左御史台大夫、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十八日，殿中监窦怀贞任左御史台大夫、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 18th, the palace supervisor, Dou Huai Zhen, was appointed as the left-hand historian, and the book keeper of the same school, Xia Ping, was appointed.

古文：八月乙卯，大赦，赐酺三日。
现代文：八月十三日，施行大赦，赐许聚饮三日。
English: On August 13th, an amnesty was implemented, granting permission to gather and drink for three days.

古文：丁巳，皇太子释奠于国学。
现代文：十五日，皇太子李隆基到国学祭祀先师。
English: On the 15th, the crown prince, Li Longji, came to teach the national studies and rituals.

古文：庚午，韦安石为尚书左仆射、同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十八日，韦安石任尚书左仆射、同中书门下三品。
English: On the 28th, Wei'an Shishi appointed Shang Shuxi as the left-handed archer, and sent three prizes to him.

古文：九月乙亥，窦怀贞为侍中。
现代文：九月初三，窦怀贞任侍中。
English: On the third day of the ninth month, Dou Huai Zhen was appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：十月甲辰，吏部尚书刘幽求为侍中，右散骑常侍魏知古，太子詹事崔湜为中书侍郎：同中书门下三品；中书侍郎陆象先同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十月初三，吏部尚书刘幽求任侍中，右散骑常侍魏知古，太子詹事崔任中书侍郎，并加同中书门下三品。中书侍郎陆象先加同中书门下平章事。
English: At the beginning of October 3rd, Liu Yuqiu, the Secretary of the General Staff, was appointed as the Junior Chamberlain, Wei Zhigu, the Right-Handed Cavalryman, was appointed as the Junior Chamberlain, and Prince Zhan Zhi Cui was appointed as the Junior Chamberlain, and was awarded the Third Class of the Junior Chamberlain. Lu Xiang, the Junior Chamberlain, was first awarded the Junior Chamberlain.

古文：韦安石、李日知、郭元振、窦怀贞、张说罢。
现代文：韦安石、李日知、郭元振、窦怀贞、张说被免职。
English: Wei Anshi, Li Rizhi, Guo Yuan Zhen, Dou Huai Zhen and Zhang Said were dismissed.

古文：十二月丁未，作泼寒胡戏。
现代文：十二月初七，演西域乐舞 泼寒胡戏 。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th lunar month, the Western music and dance performance "Plunging Cold" will be held.

古文：先天元年正月辛未，享于太庙。
现代文：先天元年正月初一，睿宗祭祀太庙。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year before yesterday, Ruizong held a ceremony at the Grand Temple.

古文：甲戌，并、汾、绛三州地震。
现代文：初四，并、汾、绛三州地震。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, three earthquakes occurred in three prefectures.

古文：辛巳，有事于南郊。
现代文：十一日，睿宗在京城南郊祭天。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Ruizong held a divine service in the southern suburb of Beijing.

古文：戊子，耕籍田。
现代文：十八日，在籍田上举行躬耕礼仪。
English: On the 18th, a ceremony was held at the registered farm.

古文：己丑，大赦，改元曰太极。
现代文：十九日，施行大赦，改年号为 太极 。
English: On the 19th, an amnesty was implemented, and the name of the year was changed to Taiji.

古文：赐内外官阶、爵，民酺五日。
现代文：赐予宫廷内外官员官阶、爵位，百姓聚饮五日。
English: Officials both inside and outside the court were given official ranks and peerages, and the people gathered for five days to drink.

古文：版授九十以上下州刺史，八十以上上州司马。
现代文：授予九十岁以上老人下等州刺史、八十岁以上老人上等州司马的荣衔。
English: Awarding the 90-year-old or older with the title of lower-ranking state magistrate and the 80-year-old or older with the title of higher-ranking state magistrate.

古文：辛卯，幸安福门，观酺三日夜。
现代文：二十一日，睿宗至安福门，观看百官欢宴夜以继日。
English: On the twenty-first day, Ruizong went to the Anfu Gate to watch the officials feast night after night.

古文：壬辰，陆象先同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十二日，陆象先加同中书门下三品。
English: On the 22nd, Lu Xiang first added three products from Zhongshumen.

古文：乙未，户部尚书岑羲、左御史台大夫窦怀贞同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十五日，户部尚书岑羲、左御史台大夫窦怀贞并加同中书门下三品。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the head of the household, Shang Shuxuan, and the left-wing historian, Dou Huai Zhen, were also added to the three prizes under the Zhongshumen.

古文：二月丁巳，皇太子释奠于国学。
现代文：二月十八日，皇太子李隆基到国学祭奠先师。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, Crown Prince Ri Hong returned to his position as a preceptor in the national school of religious rites.

古文：是春，旱。
现代文：本年春季干旱。
English: This spring, there was a drought.

古文：五月戊寅，有事于北郊。
现代文：五月初十，睿宗在京城北郊祭地。
English: On the tenth day of the fifth lunar month, Ruizong appeared at the festival site in the northern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：辛巳，大赦，改元曰延和。
现代文：十三日，施行大赦，改年号为 延和 。
English: On the 13th, an amnesty was implemented, and the name of the year was changed to Yanhe.

古文：赐内外官陪礼者勋一转，民酺五日。
现代文：赐予宫廷内外官员陪行祭礼者加勋官一级，百姓聚饮五日。
English: Officials from both inside and outside the court were given the rank of first-class officers to accompany the celebrants, and the people gathered for five days.

古文：六月癸丑，岑羲为侍中。
现代文：六月十五日，岑羲任侍中。
English: On June 15, he was appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：乙卯，追号大圣天后为天后圣帝。
现代文：十七日，追赠大圣天后号为天后圣帝。
English: On the 17th, she was posthumously given the title of the Great Holy Mother of God.

古文：辛酉，刑部尚书郭元振为朔方道行军大总管，以伐突厥。
现代文：二十三日，刑部尚书郭元振任朔方道行军大总管，以讨伐突厥。
English: On the 23rd, Guo Yuanzhen, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, appointed Shuo Fang as the general manager of the march to fight the Turks.

古文：甲子，幽州都督孙佺、左武卫将军李楷洛、左威卫将军周以悌及奚战于冷陉山，败绩。
现代文：二十六日，幽州都督孙亻全、左骁卫将军李楷洛、左威卫将军周以悌在冷陉山与奚族军交战，大败。
English: On the 26th, Yuzhou's governor Sun Bingquan, Zuoying's general Li Kailuo, and Zuoying's general Zhou Yijun fought against the Yao army in Lengyaoshan, and were soundly defeated.

古文：七月辛未，有彗星入于太微。
现代文：七月初四，有彗星流入太微垣天区。
English: On the fourth day of the seventh lunar month, a comet streaked into the Taibeigaki region.

古文：兵部尚书李迥秀为朔方道后军大总管。
现代文：兵部尚书李迥秀任朔方道后军大总管。
English: Li Yuxiu, the head of the military department, was appointed as the general manager of the military academy after Shuo Fangdao.

古文：乙亥，窦怀贞为尚书右仆射、平章军国重事。
现代文：初八，窦怀贞任尚书右仆射、平章军国重事。
English: In the eighth year of his junior high school, Dou Huai Zhen was appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man and shot, and Ping Zhang was assigned to important military affairs.

古文：己卯，幸安福门观乐，三日而止。
现代文：十二日，睿宗至安福门观赏乐舞，连续多日。
English: On the 12th, Ruizong went to Anfu Gate to watch the music and dance, which lasted for several days.

古文：丙戌，以旱减膳。
现代文：十九日，因旱灾减少膳食。
English: On the 19th, meals were reduced due to drought.

古文：八月庚子，立皇太子为皇帝，以听小事；自尊为太上皇，以听大事。
现代文：八月初三，睿宗立皇太子李隆基为皇帝，由他处理小事，自奉为太上皇，以裁处大事。
English: On the 3rd day of the 8th month, Emperor Ruizong appointed Crown Prince Li Longji as the emperor. He was to deal with minor matters, and he considered himself to be the last emperor to deal with major matters.

古文：壬寅，追号天后圣帝为圣后。
现代文：初五，追称天后圣帝号 圣后 。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, she was posthumously given the title "Holy Empress."

古文：甲辰，大赦，改元，赐内外官及五品以上子为父后者勋、爵，民酺五日。
现代文：初七，施行大赦，改年号为 先天 ，赐予宫廷内外官员以及五品以上官员勋官、爵位在其父之下者以勋官、爵位，百姓聚饮五日。
English: On the first day of the seventh month, an amnesty was carried out, the year was changed to the previous day, and officials inside and outside the palace, as well as officials with five or more pins, were awarded orders and ranks, and those who were below their fathers were awarded orders and ranks, and the people gathered for five days.

古文：丁未，立皇太子妃王氏为皇后。
现代文：初十，册立皇太子李隆基的妃子王氏为皇后。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Crown Prince Li Longji's concubine Wang Shi was proclaimed empress.

古文：戊申，封皇帝子嗣直为剡王，嗣谦郢王。
现代文：十一日，封李隆基之子嗣直为郯王，嗣谦为郢王。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the son of Li Longji was given the title of King of Jiaozhou, and King of Jiaozhou was given the title of King of Jiaozhou.

古文：己酉，宋王成器为司徒。
现代文：十二日，宋王李成器任司徒。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Song King Li Chengji appointed him as his disciple.

古文：庚戌，窦怀贞为尚书左仆射，刘幽求守尚书右仆射：同中书门下三品；魏知古为侍中，崔湜检校中书令。
现代文：十三日，窦怀贞任尚书左仆射，刘幽求代理尚书左仆射，并加同中书门下三品；魏知古任侍中，崔任检校中书令。
English: On the 13th, Dou Huai Zhen was appointed as the left-hand servant of Shang Shu, and Liu Yucui was appointed as the left-hand servant of Shang Shu, and was awarded the third prize in the middle school; Wei Chigu was appointed as a waiter, and Cui was appointed as a school inspector.

古文：戊午，流刘幽求于封州。
现代文：二十一日，将刘幽求流放至封州。
English: On the 21st, Liu Yucui was exiled to Fuzhou.

古文：九月丁卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of September, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：甲午，封皇帝子嗣升为陕王。
现代文：二十八日，封李隆基之子嗣升为陕王。
English: On the 28th, the son of Emperor Li Longji was elevated to the throne of Shaanxi.

古文：十月辛卯，猎于骊山。
现代文：十月辛卯日，睿宗到骊山打猎。
English: In October, Ruizong went hunting in Shaoshan.

古文：十一月丁亥，诰遣皇帝巡边。
现代文：十一月二十二日，睿宗颁诰：皇帝李隆基巡视边境。
English: On November 22nd, Emperor Ruizong issued an edict: Emperor Li Longji inspected the border.

古文：甲午，幽州都督宋璟为左军大总管，并州长史薛讷为中军大总管，兵部尚书郭元振为右军大总管。
现代文：二十九日，幽州都督宋瞡任左军大总管，并州长史薛讷任中军大总管，兵部尚书郭元振任右军大总管。
English: On the 29th, the governor of Yuzhou, Song Jun, was appointed as the general manager of the Left Army, the governor of Yuzhou, Shi Xue Ne, was appointed as the general manager of the Central Army, and the commander of the military department, Shang Shuxu Guo Yuan Zhen, was appointed as the general manager of the Right Army.

古文：二年正月乙亥，吏部尚书萧至忠为中书令。
现代文：先天二年正月十一日，吏部尚书萧至忠任中书令。
English: On the 11th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year before yesterday, Shang Shuxiao of the Personnel Department was promoted to Zhong Shuling of Zhong Ren.

古文：二月，追作先天元年酺。
现代文：二月，补行先天元年的欢宴。
English: In February, the New Year's Eve banquet was held.

古文：六月辛丑，以雨霖避正殿，减膳。
现代文：六月初九，睿宗因久雨避离正殿，减少膳食。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month, because of the continuous rain, Ruizong had to leave the main hall and cut down on meals.

古文：丙辰，郭元振同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十四日，郭元振加同中书门下三品。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Guo Yuanzhen added three products to the same middle school.

古文：七月甲子，大赦。
现代文：七月初三，施行大赦。
English: On the third day of the seventh month, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：乙丑，诰归政于皇帝。
现代文：初四，睿宗颁诰：将主政权力归还皇帝李隆基。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Ruizong issued an edict: the sovereign power was returned to Emperor Li Longji.

古文：开元四年六月，崩于百福殿，年五十五，谥曰大圣真皇帝。
现代文：开元四年六月，睿宗在百福殿逝世，终年五十五岁，谥号 大圣真皇帝 。
English: In June of the fourth year of the first century, Ruizong died in Baifu Palace, at the age of fifty-five, with the title of the Great Holy Emperor.

古文：天宝十三载，增谥玄真大圣大兴孝皇帝。
现代文：天宝十三载，加赠谥号 玄真大圣大兴孝皇帝 。
English: In the 13th year of the Heavenly Treasure era, Emperor Xuan Zhen Da Sheng Da Xing Xiao was given a posthumous title.

古文：玄宗至道大圣大明孝皇帝讳隆基，睿宗第三子也。
现代文：玄宗，名隆基，睿宗李旦之第三子。母亲是昭成皇后窦氏。
English: The third son of Xuanzong, Mei Longji, and Ruizong Li Dan. His mother was the Empress Dou of Zhao Chenggong.

古文：母曰昭成皇后窦氏。性英武，善骑射，通音律、历象之学。
现代文：气质英俊威武，擅长骑马射箭，精通音律、天文星象之术。
English: He is handsome and powerful by temperament, good at riding and archery, and proficient in music theory and astronomy.

古文：始封楚王，后为临淄郡王。
现代文：最初被封为楚王，后为临淄郡王。
English: He was first named King of Chu and later King of Linyi County.

古文：累迁卫尉少卿、潞州别驾。
现代文：官职升至卫尉少卿、潞州别驾。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards and given the title of Junior Secretary of the Imperial Guards.

古文：景龙四年，朝于京师，遂留不遣。
现代文：景龙四年，玄宗到京都朝见君主，便被留在京城不让返回。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jinglong, Emperor Xuanzong went to Kyoto to meet the emperor, but was kept in the capital and not allowed to return.

古文：庶人韦氏已弑中宗，矫诏称制。
现代文：韦氏弑害中宗后，诈传伪诏行使皇权。
English: After the Wei clan plotted to kill the Chinese Emperor, they issued a fraudulent edict to exercise imperial power.

古文：玄宗乃与太平公主子薛崇简、尚衣奉御王崇晔、公主府典签王师虔、朝邑尉刘幽求、苑总监钟绍京、长上折冲麻嗣宗、押万骑果毅葛福顺李仙凫、道士冯处澄、僧普润定策讨乱。
现代文：玄宗即与太平公主之子薛崇简、尚衣奉御王崇晔、公主府典签王师虔、朝邑尉刘幽求、苑总监钟绍京、长上折冲麻嗣宗、押万骑果毅葛福顺、李仙凫、道士冯处澄、僧人普润定计讨乱。
English: Xuanzong, together with Xue Chongjian, the son of Princess Taiping, Shangyi Bongi Wang Chongyun, Wang Shikian, the signer of the princess's palace, Liu Yuqiu, the lieutenant of the morning village, Zhong Shaojing, the director of the garden, Changzhang Erchong Masizong, Guo Fushun, the rider of the horse, Li Xianqi, the Taoist priest Feng Zhancheng, and the monk Purun determined to fight the disturbance.

古文：或请先启相王，玄宗曰： 请而从，是王与危事；不从，则吾计失矣。 
现代文：有人请先将讨乱之事禀告相王李旦，玄宗说： 禀报，父王同意，就是他参与了凶险之事；他不同意，我们的计谋就落空了。 
English: Someone asked him to first report the disturbance to the minister Wang Lidan, and Xuanzong said: Report it, father Wang agrees, that is, he participated in the dangerous thing; if he does not agree, our plan will fail.

古文：乃夜率幽求等入苑中，福顺、仙凫以万骑兵攻玄武门，斩左羽林将军韦播、中郎将高嵩以徇。
现代文：即连夜率领刘幽求等进入宫中林园，葛福顺、李仙凫带领万骑兵攻打玄武门，砍杀了左羽林将军韦播、中郎将高嵩，夺取了玄武门。
English: That is to say, he led Liu Yucui and others into the palace forest at night, and Ge Fushun and Li Xianyao led the cavalry to attack the Xuanwu Gate, cut down General Wei Banning of the Left Feather Forest and Vice Admiral Gao Tak, and captured the Xuanwu Gate.

古文：左万骑由左入，右万骑由右入，玄宗率总监羽林兵会两仪殿，梓宫宿卫兵皆起应之，遂诛韦氏。
现代文：左万骑由左入宫，右万骑由右入宫，玄宗率领总监羽林兵会合两仪殿，中宗灵柩的值夜卫兵尽都奋起响应，终于诛除了韦氏。
English: The left-hand rider entered the palace from the left, the right-hand rider entered the palace from the right, Xuanzong led the director general of the Ulin Corps to the two halls, and the night guards on duty for Zhongzong's coffin all rose to respond, finally excluding Wei.

古文：黎明，驰谒相王，谢不先启。
现代文：黎明，玄宗快马奔往谒见相王，自领未先禀告之过。
English: At dawn, Emperor Xuanzong's fast horse rushed to the imperial palace to see the emperor, and he apologized for not informing the emperor in advance.

古文：相王泣曰： 赖汝以免，不然，吾且及难。 
现代文：相王李旦落泪说： 有赖你使我避免凶险，否则，我将遭难。 
English: Li Dan, the king's son-in-law, shed tears and said, "It is up to you to help me avoid the danger, otherwise, I will be in trouble."

古文：乃拜玄宗殿中监，兼知内外闲厩、检校陇右群牧大使，押左右万骑，进封平王，同中书门下三品。
现代文：于是朝廷委任玄宗为殿中监，兼掌管宫内外车马的闲厩使、检校陇右群牧大使，押左右万骑兵，晋封为平王，同中书门下三品。
English: As a result, the imperial court appointed Xuanzong as the palace middle overseer, the idle stable servant who was also in charge of the chariots and horses inside and outside the palace, the ambassador for the inspection of schools and the right group of herdsmen, the commander of the left and right cavalry, the promotion to the king of Taira, and the three prizes under the middle school.

古文：睿宗即位，立为皇太子。
现代文：睿宗李旦登基，立玄宗为皇太子。
English: Ruizong Li Dan ascended to the throne, and Xuanzong became crown prince.

古文：景云二年，监国，听除六品以下官。
现代文：景云二年，玄宗代理国政，处置、任命六品以下的官员。
English: In the second year of Jingyun, Xuanzong acted as the agent of state affairs, disposing of and appointing officials below the sixth grade.

古文：延和元年，星官言： 帝坐前星有变。 
现代文：延和元年，观测天象的官员称： 帝王座前星象有灾异。 
English: In the first year of the Yanwa era, an official who observed the celestial bodies said: "There is a disaster in the celestial bodies in front of the Imperial Throne."

古文：睿宗曰： 传德避灾，吾意决矣。 
现代文：睿宗说： 传位给贤德之人以避免灾异，我的心意定了。 
English: Ruizong said, "I am determined to pass on my position to a virtuous person to avoid disasters.

古文：七月壬辰，制皇太子宜即皇帝位。
现代文：七月二十五日，下制令：皇太子李隆基当登皇位。
English: On July 25th, an order was issued: Crown Prince Li Longji should ascend to the throne.

古文：太子惶惧入请，睿宗曰： 此吾所以答天戒也。 
现代文：皇太子惶恐不安，进宫请免，睿宗说： 这是我应合上天示警的举措。 
English: The crown prince was panicked and uneasy, and asked to be excused from entering the palace. Ruizong said, "This is a measure I should take to send a warning to heaven.

古文：皇太子乃御武德殿，除三品以下官。
现代文：李隆基才到武德殿，委任三品以下官员。
English: It was not until Li Longji came to the Wu De Palace that he appointed officials below the third grade.

古文：八月庚子，即皇帝位。
现代文：八月初二，玄宗登基。
English: On August 2nd, Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne.

古文：先天元年十月庚子，享于太庙，大赦。
现代文：先天元年十月初四，玄宗祭祀太庙，施行大赦。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of the year before yesterday, the Emperor Xuanzong's memorial service was held at the Great Temple, and a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：开元元年正月辛巳，皇后亲蚕。
现代文：开元元年正月十七日，皇后王氏举行躬践蚕事典礼。
English: On the 17th day of the first month of the first year of the year, the Empress Wang held a ceremony for the practice of sericulture.

古文：七月甲子，太平公主及岑羲、萧至忠、窦怀贞谋反，伏诛。
现代文：七月初三，太平公主与岑羲、萧至忠、窦怀贞谋反，伏法处死。
English: On the third day of the seventh month, Taiping Princess conspired with Zou, Xiao Zhizhong, and Dou Huai Zhen to rebel, and was sentenced to death.

古文：乙丑，始听政。
现代文：初四，玄宗开始处理朝政。
English: In the fourth year of his junior high school, Hyunjong began to deal with court politics.

古文：丁卯，大赦，赐文武官阶、爵。
现代文：初六，施行大赦。赐给文武官员官阶、爵位。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, a general amnesty was implemented, and civil and military officials were granted official ranks and peerages.

古文：庚午，流崔湜于窦州。
现代文：初九，将崔流放至窦州。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, he exiled Cui to Douzhou.

古文：甲戌，毁天枢。
现代文：十三日，毁除武后设置象征武周政权的天柩。
English: On the 13th, after the removal of Wu, the Tianyao Tower, a symbol of the Wu Zhou regime, was destroyed.

古文：乙亥，尚书右丞张说检校中书令。
现代文：十四日，尚书右丞张说任检校中书令。
English: On the 14th, Shang Shuxu Rongcheng Zhang said that the inspection of the school was ordered.

古文：庚辰，陆象先罢。
现代文：十九日，陆象先被免职。
English: On the 19th, Lu Zhexian was removed from office.

古文：八月癸巳，刘幽求为尚书右仆射，知军国大事。
现代文：八月初二，刘幽求任尚书右仆射，执掌军国大事。
English: On the second day of August, Liu Yu asked to be appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man to take charge of military affairs.

古文：壬寅，宋王成器为太尉，申王成义为司徒，邠王守礼为司空。
现代文：十一日，宋王李成器任太尉，申王李成义任司徒，王李守礼任司空。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Song Wang Licheng Ji was appointed as the captain, Shen Wang Licheng Yi was appointed as the steward, and Wang Li Shouli was appointed as the steward.

古文：九月丙寅，宋王成器罢。
现代文：九月初六，宋王李成器被免职。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, Song Wang Licheng was dismissed from his post.

古文：庚午，刘幽求同中书门下三品，张说为中书令。
现代文：初十，刘幽求加同中书门下三品，张说任中书令。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, Liu Yuqiu added the next three prizes to the Chinese calligraphy door, and Zhang said that he would be appointed as the Chinese calligrapher.

古文：十月，姚隽蛮设姚州，都督李蒙死之。
现代文：十月，姚蛮族侵扰姚州，都督李蒙死难。
English: In October, the Yao barbarians invaded Yaozhou, and the governor Li Meng died.

古文：己亥，幸温汤。
现代文：初九，玄宗去温泉。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, Xuanzong went to the hot spring.

古文：癸卯，讲武于骊山。
现代文：十三日，在骊山讲习武事。
English: On the 13th, a martial arts class was held in Shaoshan.

古文：流郭元振于新州，给事中唐绍伏诛。
现代文：将郭振元流放新州，给事中唐绍伏法处死。
English: Guo Zhenyuan was exiled to Xinzhou, and Tang Shaofu was sentenced to death.

古文：免新丰来岁税，赐从官帛。
现代文：免除新丰县来年的租税，赐给随行侍从官布帛。
English: Xinfeng County will be exempted from tax for the coming year, and the attendant attendant will be given a cloth bag.

古文：甲辰，猎于渭川。
现代文：十四日，在渭川打猎。
English: On the 14th, they went hunting in the Li River.

古文：同州刺史姚元之为兵部尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：同州刺史姚元之任兵部尚书、同中书门下三品。
English: In the same state, Yao Yuan, a military historian, was awarded the third prize in military literature and the second prize in Chinese literature.

古文：乙巳，至自渭川。
现代文：十五日，玄宗自渭川返回京城。
English: On the fifteenth day, Emperor Xuanzong returned to the capital from Li River.

古文：十一月乙丑，刘幽求兼侍中。
现代文：十一月初五，刘幽求兼侍中。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, Liu Yucui was also a chambermaid.

古文：戊子，群臣上尊号曰开元神武皇帝。
现代文：二十八日，群臣给玄宗进献尊号为 开元神武皇帝 。
English: On the 28th, the courtiers gave Xuanzong the honorific title of Emperor Kaiyuan Shenwu.

古文：十二月庚寅，大赦，改元，赐内外官勋。
现代文：十二月初一，施行大赦，改年号为 开元 ，赐予宫内外官员勋官。
English: On the first day of December, an amnesty was implemented, the year name was changed to Kaigen, and officials inside and outside the palace were awarded.

古文：改中书省为紫微省，门下省为黄门省，侍中为监。
现代文：改中书省为紫微省、门下省为黄门省、侍中改为监。
English: The book ministry in the middle was changed to the purple and micro ministry, the subordinate ministry was changed to the yellow door ministry, and the chamberlain was changed to the inspector.

古文：甲午，吐蕃请和。
现代文：初五，吐蕃求和。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the lunar year, the Tuyu tribe sued for peace.

古文：巳亥，禁泼寒胡戏。
现代文：初十，禁演 泼寒胡戏 。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, it is forbidden to perform the cold play.

古文：壬寅，姚崇兼紫微令。
现代文：十三日，姚崇兼紫微令。
English: On the 13th, Yao Chong and Zi Weiling were promoted.

古文：癸丑，刘幽求罢。
现代文：二十四日，刘幽求被免职。
English: On the 24th, Liu Yucui was removed from office.

古文：贬张说为相州刺史。
现代文：将张说贬为相州刺史。
English: Zhang Xian was relegated to a footnote in history.

古文：甲寅，黄门侍郎卢怀慎同紫微黄门平章事。
现代文：二十五日，黄门侍郎卢怀慎加同紫微黄门平章事。
English: On the 25th, Lu Huaixin, the Yellow Gate's chamberlain, and Zi Wei, the Yellow Gate's secretary, were promoted to the same rank.

古文：二年正月壬午，以关内旱，求直谏，停不急之务，宽系囚，祠名山大川，葬暴骸。
现代文：开元二年正月二十三日，因关内旱灾，玄宗要求直言谏奏，停止不急的事务，宽免在押的囚犯，祭祀名山大川，埋葬暴露的尸骸。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the second year of the first millennium, due to the drought in Guanzhong, Xuanzong demanded to speak out, stop non-urgent matters, pardon prisoners in custody, sacrifice famous mountains and rivers, and bury exposed corpses.

古文：甲申，并州节度大使薛讷同紫微黄门三品，以伐契丹。
现代文：二十五日，并州节度使薛讷加同紫微黄门三品，以攻打契丹。
English: On the 25th day of the month, and in accordance with the state festival, Xue Ne plus Zi Wei Huangmen won three prizes for attacking Khitan.

古文：二月壬辰，避正殿，减膳，彻乐。
现代文：二月初四，玄宗避离正殿，减少膳食，停止演奏音乐。
English: On the fourth day of the second month, Xuanzong left the main hall, cut down on meals, and stopped playing music.

古文：突厥寇北庭，都护郭虔瓘败之。
现代文：突厥进犯北庭，都护郭虔馞打败突厥军。
English: The Turks invaded the Northern Court, and Duo Guo Qianqian defeated the Turkish army.

古文：己酉，虑囚。
现代文：二十一日讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: The prisoner's charges were recorded on the 21st.

古文：三月己亥，碛西节度使阿史那献执西突厥都担。
现代文：三月十二日，碛西节度使阿史那献俘获西突厥的都担。
English: On March 12th, the Shaanxi Festival made Ashina dedicate the captured Western Turkic capital.

古文：四月辛未，停诸陵供奉鹰犬。
现代文：四月十五日，停止诸陵园供养鹰犬。
English: On April 15th, all cemeteries stopped providing eagle dogs.

古文：五月辛亥，魏知古罢。
现代文：五月二十五日，魏知古被免职。
English: On May 25, Wei Zhigu was dismissed from his post.

古文：六月，京师大风拔木。
现代文：六月，京城大风拔起树木。
English: In June, high winds uprooted trees in the capital.

古文：甲子，以太上皇避暑，徙御大明宫。
现代文：初九，因太上皇李旦避暑，迁至大明宫。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the Empress Dowager Litan moved to the Daming Palace to spend the summer.

古文：七月乙未，焚锦绣珠玉于前殿。
现代文：七月初十，在前殿焚烧锦绣珠玉。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month, the jade and brocade were burned in the vestibule.

古文：戊戌，禁采珠玉及为刻镂器玩、珠绳帖绥服者，废织锦坊。
现代文：十三日，禁止采集珠玉及制作雕刻玩器、珠绳帖纟舀服，废除织锦坊。
English: On the 13th, the collection of precious stones and the production of carved toys and beaded clothing were banned, and the brocade workshop was abolished.

古文：庚子，薛讷及奚、契丹战于滦河，败绩。
现代文：十五日，薛讷在滦河与奚、契丹交战，大败。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Xue Ne went into battle with Yao and Qidan in Luohe, and was soundly defeated.

古文：丁未，襄王重茂薨，追册为皇帝。
现代文：二十二日，襄王李重茂去世，追封他为皇帝。
English: On the 22nd, the King of Xiang, Li Chongmao, died, and he was crowned emperor.

古文：八月壬戌，禁女乐。
现代文：八月初七，禁设歌舞伎。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month, Kabuki is banned.

古文：乙亥，吐蕃寇边，薛讷摄左羽林军将军，为陇右防御大使，右骁卫将军郭知运为副，以伐之。
现代文：二十日，吐蕃侵犯边境，薛讷兼左羽林军将军，任陇右防御大使，右骁卫将军郭知运任副大使，攻打吐蕃。
English: On the 20th day of the month, Tubo invaded the border, and General Xue Ne and General Zuo Yulin, who was appointed as the right defense ambassador, and the right defense general Guo Zhiyun, who was appointed as the deputy ambassador, attacked Tubo.

古文：九月庚寅，作兴庆宫。
现代文：九月初六，建造兴庆宫。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, the construction of Xingqing Palace was completed.

古文：丁酉，宴京师侍老于含元殿庭，赐九十以上几、杖，八十以上鸠杖，妇人亦如之，赐于其家。
现代文：十三日，玄宗在含元殿庭上宴请京城的贤德老人，赐给九十岁以上的老人几案与手仗，八十岁以上老人赐给刻有鸠形杖头的手杖，老年妇人也一样，送至其家。
English: On the 13th, Emperor Xuanzong held a banquet in the courtyard of the Han Yuan Palace for the wise and virtuous old people of Beijing. He gave the elderly over the age of ninety several cases and hand-tools, the elderly over the age of eighty were given a cane with a skull-shaped cane head, and the elderly woman was also sent to her home.

古文：戊申，幸温汤。
现代文：二十四日，玄宗去温泉。
English: On the 24th, Xuanzong went to the hot spring.

古文：十月戊午，至自温汤。
现代文：十月初四，玄宗自温泉返回京城。
English: On the 4th of October, Xuanzong returned to Beijing from the hot springs.

古文：甲子，薛讷及吐蕃战于武阶，败之。
现代文：初十，薛讷与吐蕃军在武阶交战，打败吐蕃。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Xue Ne and the Tubo army fought in the military ranks and defeated Tubo.

古文：十二月乙丑，封子嗣真为鄫王，嗣初鄂王，嗣玄鄄王。
现代文：十二月十二日，玄宗封其子嗣真为曾阝王，嗣初为鄂王，嗣玄为鄄王。
English: On December 12th, Emperor Xuanzong made his son Zeng Zi the king, his son Huan the king, and his son Xuanzong the king.

古文：三年正月丁亥，立郢王嗣谦为皇太子。
现代文：开元三年正月初四，立郢王李嗣谦为皇太子。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the third year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the third year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the third year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the third year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year

古文：降死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：给死罪以下囚犯减刑，宽免流放罪以下的犯人。
English: Prisoners sentenced to death will have their sentences commuted, and those sentenced to banishment or less will be pardoned.

古文：赐酺三日。
现代文：赐许臣民聚饮三日。
English: Allow three days for your subjects to gather and drink.

古文：癸卯，卢怀慎检校黄门监。
现代文：二十日，卢怀慎任检校黄门监。
English: On the 20th, Lu Huaixin was appointed as the yellow gate supervisor of the school inspection.

古文：二月辛酉，赦囚非恶逆、造伪者。
现代文：二月初九，赦免非恶逆罪、造伪罪的囚犯。
English: On February 9, prisoners convicted of non-evil treason and forgery were pardoned.

古文：四月庚申，突厥部三姓葛逻禄来附。
现代文：四月初九，突厥管辖的三姓葛逻禄前来归附。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month, three clans under the jurisdiction of the Turks came to annex it.

古文：右羽林军大将军薛讷为源州镇军大总管，源州都督杨执一副之；右卫大将军郭虔瓘为朔州镇军大总管，并州长史王晙副之。以备突厥。
现代文：右羽林军大将军薛讷任凉州镇军大总管，凉州都督杨执一任副大总管；右卫大将军郭虔馞任朔州镇军大总管，并州长史王任副大总管，以防备突厥来犯。
English: General Xue Ne of the Right Uhlin Army served as the commander-in-chief of the Liangzhou Town Army, Yang Xiu, the governor of Liangzhou, served as the deputy commander-in-chief; General Guo Qianya of the Right Wei Army served as the commander-in-chief of the Shuozhou Town Army, and Governor Shi Wang served as the deputy commander-in-chief to prevent the Turks from coming.

古文：五月丁未，以旱录京师囚。
现代文：五月二十七日，玄宗因旱灾讯察京城的记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On May 27th, due to the drought, Xuanzong inspected the criminal records of the prisoners in Beijing.

古文：戊申，避正殿，减膳。
现代文：二十八日，避离正殿，减少膳食。
English: On the 28th, avoid the main hall and reduce meals.

古文：七月庚辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：七月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of July, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：十月辛酉，巂州蛮寇边，右骁卫将军李玄道伐之。
现代文：十月十三日，州蛮族侵扰边境，右骁卫将军李玄道前往征伐。
English: On October 13th, the state barbarians invaded the border, and the right guard general Li Xuandao went to the conquest.

古文：壬戌，薛讷为朔方道行军大总管，太仆卿吕延祚、灵州刺史杜宾客副之。
现代文：十四日，薛讷任朔方道行军大总管，太仆卿吕延祚、灵州刺史杜宾客任副大总管。
English: On the 14th, Xue Ne was appointed as the general superintendent of the march of the Shuo Fang Road, and the Great Servant Lu Yanqi and Lingzhou Jishi Dubin were appointed as the deputy general superintendents.

古文：癸亥，如眉阝，赦所过徒罪以下，赐侍老九十以上及笃疾者物。
现代文：十五日，玄宗去县，赦免所经过地方判服劳役罪以下的罪犯，赐给九十岁以上贤德老人与重症病人杂帛。
English: On the 15th, Xuanzong went to the county and pardoned the criminals who had been sentenced to forced labor or less, and gave them a mixture of virtuous old people over 90 years old and seriously ill patients.

古文：甲子，如凤泉汤。
现代文：十六日，去凤泉汤。
English: On the 16th, I went to Fengquan Tang.

古文：戊辰，降大理系囚罪。
现代文：二十日，对大理寺所关押的囚犯减刑。
English: On the 20th, the sentence of the prisoners held in Dali Temple was reduced.

古文：十一月己卯，至自凤泉汤。
现代文：十一月初一，玄宗自凤泉汤返回京城。
English: On the first day of November, Xuanzong returned to Beijing from Fengquan Tang.

古文：乙酉，幸温汤。
现代文：初七，去温泉。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, go to a hot spring.

古文：丁亥，相州人崔子岩反，伏诛。
现代文：初九，相州人崔子岩反叛，伏法处死。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Choi Jiam, a resident of Sangju, rebelled and was sentenced to death.

古文：甲午，至自温汤。
现代文：十六日，玄宗自温泉返回京城。
English: On the 16th, Xuanzong returned to Beijing from the hot springs.

古文：乙未，禁白衣长发会。
现代文：十七日，禁止帝室有丧事的公卿素服长发朝会君主。
English: On the 17th, the court nobles who had funerals in the imperial palace were forbidden to wear the robe of the emperor.

古文：十二月乙丑，降凤泉汤所过死罪以下。
现代文：十二月十七日，对去凤泉汤所经地方死罪以下囚犯减刑。
English: On December 17th, the sentence of a prisoner who went to Fengquan Soup Kitchen and was convicted of a local capital crime was reduced.

古文：四年正月戊寅，朝太上皇于西宫。
现代文：开元四年正月初一，玄宗到西宫朝见太上皇睿宗。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of the first month of the year, Xuanzong went to the Western Palace to see the Emperor Ruizong.

古文：二月丙辰，幸温汤。
现代文：二月初九，玄宗去温泉。
English: On February 9th, Xuanzong went to the hot spring.

古文：辛酉，吐蕃寇松州，廓州刺史盖思贵伐之。
现代文：十四日，吐蕃军进犯松州，廓州刺史盖思贵前往征伐。
English: On the 14th, the Tubo army invaded Songzhou, and Guozhou's Zhang Shige Sgui went to the conquest.

古文：丁卯，至自温汤。
现代文：二十日，玄宗自温泉返回京城。
English: On the 20th, Xuanzong returned to Beijing from the hot springs.

古文：癸酉，松州都督孙仁献及吐蕃战，败之。
现代文：二十六日，松州都督孙仁献与吐蕃军交战，打败吐蕃。
English: On the 26th, the Songzhou governor, Sun Renkan, fought against the Tubo army and defeated Tubo.

古文：六月甲子，太上皇崩。
现代文：六月二十日，太上皇睿宗逝世。
English: On June 20th, the Emperor Reizei passed away.

古文：辛未，京师、华陕二州大风拔木。
现代文：二十七日，长安及华、陕二州大风拔起树木。
English: On the 27th, high winds uprooted trees in Chang'an and Hwa, Shaanxi.

古文：癸酉，大武军子将郝灵佺杀突厥默啜。
现代文：二十九日，大武军子将郝灵亻全杀死突厥的默啜。
English: On the 29th, the great warriors killed the Turkic silence.

古文：七月丁丑，吐蕃请和。
现代文：七月初三，吐蕃求和。
English: On the third day of the seventh lunar month, Tubo sued for peace.

古文：丁酉，洛水溢。
现代文：二十五日，洛水泛滥。
English: On the 25th, the Luo River was flooded.

古文：八月辛未，奚、契丹降。
现代文：八月二十八日，奚、契丹投降。
English: On August 28, Chiang Kai-shek and Khitan surrendered.

古文：十月庚午，葬大圣真皇帝于桥陵。
现代文：十月二十八日，将睿宗葬于桥陵。
English: On October 28th, Ruizong was buried in the bridge mausoleum.

古文：十一月己卯，卢怀慎罢。
现代文：十一月初七，卢怀慎被免职。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, Lu Huaixin was removed from office.

古文：丁亥，选中宗于酉庙。
现代文：十五日，将中宗神位迁入西庙。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Chinese sect's deity was moved to the West Temple.

古文：丙申，尚书左丞源乾曜为黄门侍郎、同紫微黄门平章事。
现代文：二十四日，尚书左丞源乾曜任黄门侍郎、同紫微黄门平章事。
English: On the 24th, Shangshu Zuo Jiao, Yuan Qianyou, was appointed as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain, and the same as Zi Wei Yellow Gate's Taira Shoji.

古文：十二月乙卯，定陵寝殿火。
现代文：十二月十三日，定陵正殿失火。
English: On December 13, the main hall of the Dingling Mausoleum caught fire.

古文：丙辰，幸温汤。
现代文：十四日，玄宗去温泉。
English: On the 14th, Xuanzong went to the hot spring.

古文：乙丑，至自温汤。
现代文：二十三日，自温泉返回京城。
English: On the 23rd, he returned to Kyoto from the hot springs.

古文：闰月己亥，姚崇、源乾曜罢。
现代文：闰十二月二十八日，姚崇、源乾曜被免职。
English: On December 28, Yao Chong and Yuan Qianyou were dismissed from their posts.

古文：刑部尚书宋璟为吏部尚书兼黄门监，紫微侍郎苏颋同紫微黄门平章事。
现代文：刑部尚书宋瞡任吏部尚书兼黄门监，紫微侍郎苏耮加同紫微黄门平章事。
English: The head of the criminal investigation department, Song Jun, was appointed the head of the criminal investigation department and the inspector of the Yellow Gate, and the servant of Zi Wei, Su Jun, was added to Zi Wei and the Yellow Gate.

古文：五年正月癸卯，太庙四室坏，迁神主于太极殿，素服避正殿，辍视朝五日。
现代文：开元五年正月初二，太庙的四室毁坏，将诸帝神位迁入太极殿，玄宗着丧服避离正殿，停止临朝听政五日。
English: On the second day of the first month of the fifth year of the first month of the year, the four rooms of the Great Temple were destroyed, and the gods of the emperors were moved into the Taiji Hall. Xuanzong wore mourning clothes to avoid the main hall, and stopped listening to politics for five days.

古文：己酉，享于太极殿。
现代文：初八，到太极殿献祭。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, they went to the Taiji Hall to offer sacrifices.

古文：辛亥，如东都。
现代文：初十，玄宗去东都。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Xuanzong went to Dongdu.

古文：戊辰，大雾。
现代文：二十七日，大雾。
English: On the 27th, the fog lifted.

古文：二月甲戌，大赦，赐从官帛，给复河南一年，免河南北蝗、水州今岁租。
现代文：二月初三，施行大赦，赐给随行侍从官布帛，免除河南道徭役一年及河南、河北二道遭受蝗灾、水灾各州的本年租赋。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, an amnesty was carried out, and the attendants accompanying the emperor were given cloth bags. Henan Province was exempted from one year of forced labor, and the provinces of Henan and Hebei suffered from locusts and floods this year.

古文：三月丙寅，吐蕃请和。
现代文：三月二十六日，吐蕃求和。
English: On March 26th, Tubo sued for peace.

古文：四月甲申，毁拜洛受图坛。
现代文：四月十五日，毁除武后设置的拜洛受图坛。
English: On the 15th of April, the Bailuo Hall, which had been set up after the war, was destroyed.

古文：己丑，子嗣一卒。
现代文：二十日，玄宗之子李嗣一死去。
English: On the 20th, Xuanzong's son, Li Siyi, died.

古文：五月丙辰，诏公侯子孙袭封。
现代文：五月十七日，下诏：公侯的子孙承袭父、祖的封爵。
English: On the 17th of May, the following edict was issued: the descendants of the dukes would inherit the titles of their fathers and grandfathers.

古文：七月壬寅，陇右节度使郭知运及吐蕃战，败之。
现代文：七月初五，陇右节度使郭知运与吐蕃交战，打败吐军。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month, Guo Zhiyun was defeated by Guo Zhiyun.

古文：九月壬寅，复紫微省为中书省，黄门省为门下省，监为侍中。
现代文：九月初六，恢复紫微省为中书省，黄门省为门下省，监为侍中。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, Ziwei Province was restored as the Chinese Literature Province, Huangmen Province as the subordinate province, and the supervisor as the attendant.

古文：十月戊寅，祔神主于太庙。
现代文：十月十二日，在太庙附祭睿宗神位。
English: On October 12th, the enthronement ceremony of Ruizong Sheng took place in the Great Temple.

古文：甲申，命史官月奏所行事。
现代文：十八日，命令史官每月呈报朝廷所做的事。
English: On the 18th, the historian was ordered to submit a monthly report on the activities of the imperial court.

古文：六年正月辛丑，突厥请和。
现代文：开元六年正月初六，突厥求和。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the sixth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Turkey sued for peace.

古文：二月壬辰，朔方道行军大总管王睃伐突厥。
现代文：二月二十七日，朔方道行军大总管王攻打突厥。
English: On February 27th, Shuo Fang marched his army to attack the Turks.

古文：六月甲申，瀍水溢。
现代文：六月二十一日，鏶水泛滥。
English: On the 21st of June, Surabaya was flooded.

古文：八月庚辰，以旱虑囚。
现代文：八月十八日，玄宗因旱灾讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On August 18th, due to the drought, Xuanzong inspected and recorded the prisoners' criminal records.

古文：十月癸亥，赐河南府、怀汝郑三州父老帛。
现代文：十月初三，赐给河南府及怀、汝、郑三州父老布帛。
English: On the third day of the first month of October, Henan Prefecture and Huai, Ru, Zheng, the father of Sanzhou, were given the cloth.

古文：十一月辛卯，至自东都。
现代文：十一月初一，玄宗自东都返回京城。
English: On the first day of November, Xuanzong returned to Beijing from Dongdu.

古文：丙申，享于太庙。
现代文：初六，到太庙献祭。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, they went to the Imperial Temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：元皇帝以上三祖枝孙失官者授五品京官。皇祖妣家子孙在选者甄择之。
现代文：对元皇帝李炳以上三代先祖的非嫡传的庶出孙儿后代失去官职者，授予五品京官；先皇祖母家的子孙在够格授官之列者，甄别取录。
English: For the illegitimate grandchildren and great-grandchildren of the three or more generations of the ancestors of the former emperor Li Xi who lost their official positions, they will be awarded five-star Beijing officials; if the grandchildren of the former emperor's grandmother's family are among the qualified officials, they will be screened for admission.

古文：免知顿及旁州供承者一岁租税。
现代文：免除专管供应帝王、百官、藩侯旅途食宿、旅行所需之物的地方及供给奉养的其他各州一年的租税。
English: Exempt from tax for one year the places that exclusively supplied the emperor, the hundred officials, and the lords and ladies of the domains with food, lodging, and travel necessities, as well as the other states that supplied them with sustenance.

古文：乙巳，改传国玺曰 宝 。
现代文：十五日，将帝王的传国玺改称为 宝 。
English: On the fifteenth day, the emperor's imperial edict was renamed "treasure."

古文：是月，突厥执单于副都护张知运。
现代文：本月，突厥军俘虏了单于副都护张知运。
English: This month, the Turkish army captured the vice-governor of the capital, Zhang Zhiyun.

古文：七年五月己丑朔，日有食之，素服，彻乐，减膳，中书门下虑囚。
现代文：开元七年五月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀；玄宗身著白衣，停止演奏音乐，减少膳食，令中书、门下省讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the first day of the fifth month of the seventh year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the sun and the moon were new, and there was a solar eclipse. Dressed in a white robe, Xuanzong stopped playing music, reduced meals, and ordered the Central Bureau of Investigation and the Provincial Bureau of Investigation under him to record the crimes of prisoners.

古文：六月戊辰，吐蕃请和。
现代文：六月十一日，吐蕃求和。
English: On June 11, Tubo sued for peace.

古文：闰七月辛巳，以旱避正殿，彻乐，减膳。
现代文：闰七月二十五日，玄宗因旱灾避离正殿，停止奏乐，减少膳食。
English: On the 25th day of the 7th month, Xuanzong avoided the main hall due to drought, stopped playing music, and reduced meals.

古文：甲申，虑囚。
现代文：二十八日，讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 28th, the investigation recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：八月丙戌，虑囚。
现代文：八月初一，再次讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the first day of August, the criminal status of prisoners was once again inspected.

古文：九月甲戌，徙封宋王宪为宁王。
现代文：九月十九日，将宋王李宪改封为宁王。
English: On September 19, Li Xian, King of Song, was renamed King of Ning.

古文：十月，作义宗庙于东都。
现代文：十月，在东都建造义宗庙。初七，玄宗去温泉。
English: In October, Yizong Temple was built in Dongdu. On the seventh day of the first month, Xuanzong went to the hot spring.

古文：辛卯，幸温汤。
现代文：十九日，自温泉返回京城。
English: On the 19th, he returned to Kyoto from the hot springs.

古文：癸卯，至自温汤。十一月乙亥，皇太子入学齿胄，赐陪位官及学生帛。
现代文：十一月二十一日，皇太子李嗣谦入太学，与公卿之子按年龄长幼论次序，赐予陪席官员及太学生布帛。
English: On November 21st, Crown Prince Li Shih-hien entered the Imperial Academy, and together with the sons of nobles, he bestowed cloth coats on the officials and students of the Imperial Academy in order of seniority.

古文：八年正月辛巳，宋璟、苏颋罢。
现代文：开元八年正月二十八日，宋瞡、苏耮被免职。
English: On the 28th day of the first month of the eighth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Song Xi and Su Xi were dismissed.

古文：京兆尹源乾曜为黄门侍郎，并州大都督府长史张嘉贞为中书侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：京兆尹源乾曜任黄门侍郎，并州大都督府长史张嘉贞任中书侍郎，并加同中书门下平章事。
English: Jing Zhaoyuan Yin Qian You served as the Yellow Gate attendant, and Zhang Jiazhen, the prefect of the State Grand Duchy, served as the Chushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushush

古文：二月戊戌，子敏卒。
现代文：二月十五日，玄宗之子李敏死去。
English: On February 15, Li Min, the son of Xuanzong, died.

古文：三月甲子，免水旱州逋负，给复四镇行人家一年。
现代文：三月十二日，免除遭水、旱灾害各州拖欠的租税，免除四镇出征人家的徭役一年。
English: On March 12th, the tax arrears of the states affected by floods and droughts were exempted, and the four towns were exempted from conscription for one year.

古文：五月丁卯，源乾曜为侍中，张嘉贞为中书令。
现代文：五月十六日，源乾曜任侍中，张嘉贞任中书令。
English: On May 16th, Yuan Qianyou was appointed as a junior attendant, and Zhang Jiazhen was appointed as a junior secretary.

古文：六月庚寅，洛、瀍、谷水溢。
现代文：六月初九，洛水、鏶水、水泛滥。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month of the year, there were floods in Luoshui, Shishui and other places.

古文：九月，突厥寇甘、凉，凉州都督杨敬述及突厥战，败绩。
现代文：九月，突厥军进犯甘、凉二州。凉州都督杨敬述与突厥交战，大败。
English: In September, the Turkish army invaded the two states of Gan and Liang. Yang Jingsu, the governor of Liangzhou, fought with the Turks and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：丙寅，降京城囚罪，杖以下原之。
现代文：十七日，对京城囚犯减刑，宽免杖刑以下的犯人。
English: On the 17th, the sentence of prisoners in Beijing was reduced, and those who were sentenced to less than caning were pardoned.

古文：壬申，契丹寇边，王晙检校幽州都督、节度河北诸军大使，黄门侍郎韦抗为道朔方行军大总管，以伐之。
现代文：二十三日，契丹侵犯边境，王任检校幽州都督、节度河北道诸军大使，黄门侍郎韦抗任朔方道行军大总管，以征伐契丹。
English: On the 23rd, the Khitan invaded the border, and Wang was appointed as the governor of Yuzhou, the ambassador of the armies of Hebei Province, and Huangmen waiter Wei Yan was appointed as the general manager of the march of Shuo Fang Road to conquer the Khitan.

古文：甲戌，中书门下虑囚。
现代文：二十五日，中书、门下省讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 25th, the Criminal Investigation Bureau of the People's Republic of China and the Provincial Investigation Bureau of the People's Republic of China recorded the criminal charges of the prisoners.

古文：壬午，猎于下邽。
现代文：十月初二，玄宗去长春宫。初三，在下圭阝打猎。
English: On the second day of the first month of October, Xuanzong went to the Changchun Palace. On the third day of the first month, he went hunting in the Lower Guizhou Mountains.

古文：庚寅，幸温汤。
现代文：十一日，去温泉。
English: On the 11th day, I went to a hot spring.

古文：十一月乙卯，至自温汤。
现代文：十一月初七，自温泉返回京城。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, he returned to Kyoto from the hot springs.

古文：九年正月，括田。
现代文：开元九年正月，清查田亩。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the inspection of fields was completed.

古文：丙寅，幸温汤。乙亥，至自温汤。
现代文：十九日，玄宗去温泉；二十八日，自温泉返京。
English: On the 19th, Xuanzong went to the hot springs; on the 28th, he returned to Beijing from the hot springs.

古文：二月丙戌，突厥请和。
现代文：二月初九，突厥求和。
English: On February 9, the Turks sued for peace.

古文：丁亥，免天下七年以前逋负。
现代文：初十，免除全国各地七年以前的拖欠租税。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, tax arrears up to seven years old will be exempted throughout the country.

古文：四月庚寅，兰池胡康待宾寇边。
现代文：四月十四日，兰池胡的康待宾侵犯边境。
English: On April 14, a group of well-wishers of Lanchihu encroached on the border.

古文：五月庚午，原见囚死、流罪随军郊力、徒以下未发者。
现代文：五月二十四日，宽恕在押被判处死刑及流放的囚犯随军效力，宽免判处拘禁服劳役以下刑罚尚未执行的囚犯。
English: On May 24, prisoners sentenced to death and exiled prisoners were pardoned for serving in the military, and prisoners sentenced to imprisonment for less than forced labor were pardoned.

古文：七月己酉，王晙执康待宾。
现代文：七月二十四日，王俘获康待宾。
English: On July 24th, Wang Zifu received a hospitable welcome.

古文：八月，兰池胡康愿子寇边。
现代文：八月，兰池胡的康愿子侵犯边境。
English: In August, the Kangyan son of Lanchi Hu violated the border.

古文：九月乙巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一，日月合朔，有日食。
English: On the first day of September, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：癸亥，天兵军节度大使张说为兵部尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：十九日，天兵军节度大使张说任兵部尚书、同中书门下三品。
English: On the 19th, Zhang, the ambassador of the Day of the Heavenly Armies, said that he would be promoted to the Third Rank of the Third Rank of the Third Rank of the Third Rank of the Third Rank.

古文：十一月庚午，大赦，赐文武官阶、爵，唐隆、先天实封功臣坐事免若死者加赠，赐民酺三日。
现代文：十一月二十七日，施行大赦，赐予文武官员官阶、爵位。给唐隆、先天年间，授予封户以食租税的功臣免予治罪而死者，追赠官爵荣衔，赐许百姓聚饮三日。
English: On November 27th, an amnesty was carried out, awarding civil and military officials with official ranks and peerages. For Tanglong, in the year of the day before yesterday, it was awarded to the heroes who died in the year of the day before yesterday, who were exempted from punishment, and the honorary titles of officials and nobles were posthumously awarded, and the people were allowed to gather and drink for three days.

古文：十二月乙酉，幸温汤。
现代文：十二月十三日，玄宗去温泉。
English: On December 13, Xuanzong went to the hot spring.

古文：壬辰，至自温汤。
现代文：二十日，自温泉返京。
English: On the 20th, he returned to Kyoto from the hot springs.

古文：是冬，无雪。
现代文：本年冬季无雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：十年正月丁巳，如东都。
现代文：开元十年正月十五日，玄宗去东都。
English: On the 15th day of the first month of the 10th year of the founding of the Republic of China, Xuanzong went to Dongdu.

古文：二月丁丑，次望春顿，赐从官帛。
现代文：二月初六，歇驻望春顿，赐给随行侍从官员布帛。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, he stopped at Wang Chun Tong and gave the attendant officials cloth bags.

古文：四月己亥，张说持节朔方军节度大使。
现代文：四月二十九日，张说任持节朔方军节度大使。
English: On April 29, Zhang said that he was appointed as the ambassador of the Chinese People's Liberation Army for the Spring Festival.

古文：五月戊午，突厥请和。
现代文：五月十八日，突厥求和。
English: On 18 May, Turkey sued for peace.

古文：辛酉，伊、汝水溢。
现代文：二十一日，伊水、汝水泛滥。
English: On the 21st, flooding occurred in Yishui and Ruru.

古文：闰月壬申，张说巡边。
现代文：闰五月初二，张说巡视边境。
English: On the second day of the fifth lunar month, Zhang said that he would inspect the border.

古文：六月丁巳，河决博、棣二州。
现代文：六月十八日，黄河洪水漫溢博、棣二州。
English: On June 18th, the Yellow River flooded and flooded two provinces.

古文：七月庚辰，给复遭水州。
现代文：七月十一日，免除遭水灾各州的徭役。
English: On July 11, flood-hit states were exempted from flood relief work.

古文：丙戌，安南人梅叔鸾反，伏诛。
现代文：十七日，安南人梅督鸾反叛，伏法处死。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the Annamite Meidugye rebelled and was put to death.

古文：九月，张说败康愿子于木盘山，执之。己卯，京兆人权梁山反，伏诛。
现代文：九月，张说在木盘山打败并生俘康愿子。二十一日，京兆人权梁山反叛，伏法处死。
English: In September, Zhang said that he had defeated and captured Kang Yanzi alive in Mupanshan. On the 21st, the human rights of Beijing and Shandong rebelled in Liangshan, and he was sentenced to death.

古文：癸未，吐蕃攻小勃律，北庭节度使张孝嵩败之。
现代文：十五日，吐蕃军进攻小勃律，北庭节度使张孝嵩打败吐军。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Tubo army attacked Xiao Boru, and Beiting Jiedu led Zhang Xiaosong to defeat the Tubo army.

古文：十月甲寅，如兴泰宫，猎于上宜川。
现代文：十月十七日，玄宗去往兴泰宫，在上宜川打猎。
English: On October 17th, Xuanzong went to Xingtai Palace to go hunting in the Shangyi River.

古文：庚申，如东都。
现代文：二十三日，去东都。
English: On the 23rd, I went to Dongdu.

古文：十二月，突厥请和。
现代文：十二月，突厥求和。
English: In December, Turkey sued for peace.

古文：十一年正月丁卯，降东都囚罪，徙以下原之。
现代文：开元十一年正月初一，对东都的囚犯减刑，处以杖刑以下的犯人免刑。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eleventh year of the first month of the year, the sentence of the prisoners in Dongdu was reduced, and the prisoners who were sentenced to a cane or less were pardoned.

古文：赐侍老物。庚辰，次潞州，赦囚，给复五年，以故第为飞龙宫。
现代文：初三，玄宗去并州，对囚犯减刑，判处流放的犯人免刑。赐给贤德的老人杂帛。十四日，歇驻潞州，赦免囚犯，免除该州徭役五年，将故居定为飞龙宫。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Xuanzong went to Anhui Province, commuted the sentences of prisoners, and sentenced the exiled prisoners to be pardoned. He gave the virtuous old man chowder. On the 14th day, he stayed in Anhui Province, pardoned prisoners, exempted the state's corvee service for five years, and designated the former residence as the Flying Dragon Palace.

古文：辛卯，次并州，改并州为北都。
现代文：二十五日，歇驻并州，将并州改为北都。
English: On the 25th, he left Jianzhou and changed Jianzhou into the northern capital.

古文：癸巳，赦太原府，给复一年，下户三年元从家五年。
现代文：二十七日，对太原府施行赦免，免除该府徭役一年，贫民户免徭役三年，原随从反隋起义人家免徭役五年。
English: On the 27th, an amnesty was implemented for Taiyuan Prefecture, exempting the prefecture from forced labor for one year, poor households from forced labor for three years, and those who originally followed the anti-Sui uprising from forced labor for five years.

古文：版授侍老八十以上上县令，妇人县君；九十以上上州长史，妇人郡君；百岁以上上州刺史，妇人郡夫人。
现代文：授予八十岁以上的贤德老人上等县县令荣衔，八十岁以上老妇人授予县君荣衔；九十岁以上老人授予上等州长史荣衔，九十岁以上老妇授予郡君荣衔；百岁以上老翁授予上等州刺史荣衔，百岁老妇人授予郡夫人荣衔。
English: The virtuous elderly over the age of eighty were awarded the honorary title of senior county magistrate, and the elderly women over the age of eighty were awarded the honorary title of senior county official; the elderly over the age of ninety were awarded the honorary title of senior governor, and the elderly women over the age of ninety were awarded the honorary title of senior county official; the elderly men over the age of one hundred were awarded the honorary title of senior state magistrate, and the elderly women over the age of one hundred were awarded the honorary title of senior county official.

古文：二月己酉，贬张嘉贞为幽州刺史。
现代文：二月十三日，贬张嘉贞为豳州刺史。
English: On February 13th, Zhang Jiazhen was demoted to the status of the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：壬子，如汾阴，祠后土，赐文武官阶、勋、爵、帛。
现代文：十六日，玄宗去汾阴，祭祀地神；赐给文武官员官阶、勋衔、爵位、布帛。
English: On the 16th, Xuanzong went to Jinyin to offer sacrifices to the earth god; he gave civil and military officials official ranks, honors, peerages, and cloth coats of arms.

古文：癸亥，张说兼中书令。
现代文：二十七日，张说兼中书令。
English: On the 27th, Zhang said and the Chinese calligraphy order came out.

古文：三月辛未，至自汾阴，免所过今岁税，赦京城。
现代文：三月初六，玄宗自汾阴返京，免除所经过地方的本年赋税，对京城施行赦免。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, Xuanzong returned to Beijing from Shiyan, exempted from this year's taxes in the places he passed through, and pardoned Beijing.

古文：四月甲子，张说为中书令。
现代文：四月三十日，张说任中书令。
English: On April 30th, Zhang said that he was appointed as a middle-ranking official.

古文：吏部尚书王晙为兵部尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：吏部尚书王任兵部尚书、同中书门下三品。
English: He was appointed to be the third-ranked official in the Ministry of Education and the third-ranked official in the Ministry of War.

古文：五月乙丑，复中宗于太庙。
现代文：五月初一，恢复中宗在太庙的神位。
English: On the first day of May, the throne of Zhongzong in the Great Temple was restored.

古文：己丑，王晙持节朔方军节度大使。
现代文：二十五日，王任持节朔方军节度大使。
English: On the 25th, Wang was appointed as the ambassador of the Chinese People's Liberation Army.

古文：辛卯，遣使分巡天下。
现代文：二十七日，派遣使臣分别巡视全国各地。
English: On the 27th, envoys were sent to inspect all parts of the country.

古文：六月，王晙巡边。
现代文：六月，王巡视边境。
English: In June, Wang inspected the border.

古文：八月戊申，追号宣皇帝曰献祖，光皇帝曰懿祖。
现代文：八月十五日，追赠宣皇帝谥号为献祖，光皇帝为懿祖。
English: On August 15th, Emperor Xuan was posthumously awarded the title of "Dedicated Ancestor" and Emperor Guang was awarded the title of "Honored Ancestor."

古文：十月丁酉，幸温汤，作温泉宫。
现代文：十月初一，玄宗去温泉，建造温泉宫。
English: On the first day of October, Xuanzong went to the hot springs to build a hot spring palace.

古文：甲寅，至自温汤。
现代文：二十二日，自温泉返京。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, I returned to Kyoto from the hot springs.

古文：十一月戊寅，有事于南郊，大赦。
现代文：十一月十六日，玄宗在京城南郊祭天，施行大赦。
English: On November 16th, Emperor Xuanzong held an amnesty in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：赐奉祠官阶、勋、爵，亲王公主一子官，高年粟帛，孝子顺孙终身勿事。
现代文：赐予敬奉祭祀的官员官阶、勋衔、爵位，授予诸亲王、公主一个儿子官职，高龄老人赐给粮食布帛，孝子顺孙终身不受役使。
English: Official ranks, honors and titles of nobility were bestowed on officials who honored the sacrificial rites, princes and princesses were granted the official position of a son, the elderly were given grain cloth, and filial sons and grandsons were exempted from service for life.

古文：天下酺三日，京城五日。
现代文：赐许全国各地聚饮三日，京城聚饮五日。
English: Allow three days for drinking parties across the country, and five days for drinking parties in the capital.

古文：十二月甲午，如凤泉汤。
现代文：十二月初三，玄宗去凤泉汤。
English: On the third day of December, Xuanzong went to Fengquan Tang.

古文：戊申，至自凤泉汤。
现代文：十七日，自凤泉汤返京。
English: On the 17th, he returned to Beijing from Fengquan Tang.

古文：庚申，贬王晙为蕲州刺史。
现代文：二十九日，将王贬为蕲州刺史。
English: On the 29th, Wang was relegated to a footnote in the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：十二年四月壬寅，诏傍继国王礼当废而属近者封郡王。
现代文：开元十二年四月十三日，下诏：依照承袭封地若已中止王者礼仪而宗属关系近密者封其为郡王。
English: On April 13th of the 12th year of the first century, the following edict was issued: According to the inheritance of the fief, if the king's etiquette has been suspended and the clan is closely related, it will be named the county king.

古文：七月己卯，废皇后王氏为庶人。
现代文：七月二十二日，将皇后王氏废为平民。
English: On July 22, the Empress Wang was abolished as a commoner.

古文：十月，庶人王氏卒。
现代文：十月，被废为平民的原皇后王氏死去。
English: In October, the former Empress Wang, who had been abolished as a commoner, died.

古文：十一月庚午，如东都。
现代文：十一月十四日，玄宗去东都。
English: On November 14, Xuanzong left for Dongdu.

古文：庚辰，溪州首领覃行章反，伏诛。
现代文：二十四日，溪州首领覃行章反叛，伏法处死。
English: On the 24th, the leader of Xizhou, Xing Xingzhang, rebelled and was put to death.

古文：辛巳，申王捴薨。
现代文：二十五日，申王李扌为去世。
English: On the 25th, Shen Wang Lijun passed away.

古文：闰十二月丙辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：闰十二月初一，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of leap December, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：十三年正月戊子，降死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：开元十三年正月初三，对死刑罪犯减刑，判处流放以下的罪犯免刑。
English: On the third day of the first month of the 13th year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the 13th year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the

古文：遣使宣慰天下。
现代文：派遣使臣安抚全国各地。
English: Dispatching envoys to pacify the whole country.

古文：壬子，葬朔方陇右河西战亡者。
现代文：二十七日，安葬朔方、陇右、河西的阵亡者。
English: On the 27th, the war dead from the Shuo side, the Zhou side, and the Hexi side were buried.

古文：三月甲午，徙封郯王潭为庆王，陕王浚忠王，鄫王洽棣王，甄王滉荣王。封子涺为光王，潍仪王，沄颍王，泽永王，清寿王，洄延王，沐盛王，溢济王。
现代文：三月初十，玄宗改封郯王李潭为庆王，陕王李浚为忠王，曾阝王李洽为棣王，鄄王李为荣王；封其子李氵居为光王，李潍为仪王，李氵云为颍王，李泽为永王，李清为寿王，李洄为延王，李沐为盛王，李溢为济王。
English: On the 10th day of the 3rd month, Emperor Xuanzong changed the titles of King Li Tan of Shensi to King Qing, King Li Jun of Shensi to King Zhong, King Li Cha of Zeng, King Li of Zeng, King Li of Zeng, King Li of Zeng, King Li of Zeng, King Li of Zeng, King Li of Zeng, King Li of Zeng, King Li of Zeng, King Li of Zeng, King Li of Zeng, King Li of Zeng, King Li of Zeng, King Li of Zeng, King Li of Zeng, King Li of Zeng, King Li of Zeng, King Li of Z

古文：九月丙戌，罢奏祥瑞。
现代文：九月初六，停止进奏祥瑞征兆。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month of the year, stop playing the auspicious signs.

古文：十月辛酉，如兗州。
现代文：十月十一日，玄宗去兖州。
English: On October 11, Xuanzong went to Zhangzhou.

古文：庚午，次濮州，赐河南、北五百里内父老帛。
现代文：二十日，歇驻濮州，赐给黄河南、北五百里之内地区的父老布帛。
English: On the 20th, he stopped in Bozhou and bestowed the title of "Father of Bozhou" to the fathers of Bozhou in the south and north of the Yellow River.

古文：十一月庚寅，封于泰山。
现代文：十一月初十，玄宗在泰山筑坛祭天。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month, Xuanzong went to the altar-raising ceremony in Mount Tai.

古文：辛卯，禅于社首。
现代文：十一日，在社首祭祀山川土地。
English: On the 11th day, a ceremony was held at the company's head office to celebrate the land of mountains and rivers.

古文：壬辰，大赦。
现代文：十二日，施行大赦。
English: On the 19th, there was a general amnesty.

古文：赐文武官阶、勋、爵，致仕官一季禄，公主、嗣王、郡县主一子官，诸蕃酋长来会者一官。
现代文：赐给文武官员官阶、勋衔、爵位，已辞官归居的官员赐给俸禄一季，赐给公主、嗣王、郡主县主一个儿子官职，诸蕃国酋长来朝见者赐予官职一个。
English: The civil and military officials were given official ranks, honors and titles, the officials who had resigned and returned home were given a quarter of the salary, the princess, the crown prince and the county head's son were given an official post, and the chiefs of various states who came to see the emperor were given an official post.

古文：免所过一岁、兗州二岁租。
现代文：免除所经地方一年的租赋，兖州免租二年。
English: One year's rent allowance will be exempted for the places visited, and two years' rent allowance will be exempted for Zhangzhou.

古文：赐天下酺七日。
现代文：赐许全国聚饮七日。
English: Allow the whole country to drink together for seven days.

古文：丙申，幸孔子宅，遣使以太牢祭其墓，给复近墓五户。
现代文：十六日，去孔子府宅，派使臣以太牢三牲祭孔子墓，免除墓旁五户人家的徭役。
English: On the 16th, he went to Confucius' mansion and sent an envoy to hold a three-day sacrifice at the tomb of Confucius, exempting five households next to the tomb from the funeral service.

古文：丁酉，赐徐、曹、毫、许、仙、豫六州父老帛。
现代文：十七日，赐给徐、曹、亳、许、仙、豫六州父老布帛。
English: On the seventeenth day, it was given to Xu, Cao, Yao, Xu, Xian, and Yu of the six states.

古文：十二月己巳，如东都。
现代文：十二月二十日，去东都。
English: On December 20th, I went to Dongdu.

古文：十四年二月，邕州獠梁大海反，伏诛。
现代文：开元十四年二月，邕州僚人梁大海反叛，伏法处死。
English: In February of the 14th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Liang Haiya, a member of the provincial government of Zhangzhou, rebelled and was sentenced to death.

古文：四月丁巳，户部侍郎李元纮为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：四月初九，户部侍郎李元任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month, the Household Attendant Li Yuan was appointed as the Junior Secretary of the Middle School and the Junior Secretary of the Middle School was appointed as the Junior Secretary of the Middle School.

古文：庚申，张说罢。
现代文：十二日，张说被免职。
English: On the 12th, Zhang said that he was dismissed.

古文：丁卯，岐王范薨。
现代文：十九日，岐王李范去世。
English: On the 19th, King of Qi Li Fan passed away.

古文：六月戊午，东都大风拔木。
现代文：六月十二日，东都大风拔起树木。
English: On June 12, high winds uprooted trees in Dongdu.

古文：壬戌，诏州县长官言事。
现代文：十六日，玄宗诏令州县长官议论朝政。
English: On the 16th, Emperor Xuanzong ordered the prefectural governors to discuss the imperial government.

古文：七月癸未，瀍水溢。
现代文：七月初八，鏶水泛滥。
English: On the eighth day of the seventh month, floodwaters began to rise.

古文：八月丙午，河决魏州。
现代文：八月初一，黄河水漫魏州。
English: On the first day of August, the Yellow River flowed through Weizhou.

古文：九月己丑，碛西节度使杜暹检校黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：九月十五日，碛西节度使杜暹任检校黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On September 15th, the Shaanxi Festival made Du Sie the attendant of the Yellow Gate of the inspection school and the lower level of the middle school.

古文：十月甲寅，太白昼见。
现代文：十月初十，白昼出现太白星。
English: On the tenth day of the tenth month, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：庚申，如广成汤。
现代文：十六日，玄宗去广成汤。
English: On the 16th, Xuanzong went to Guangcheng Tang.

古文：己巳，如东都。
现代文：二十五日，去东都。
English: On the 25th, I went to Dongdu.

古文：十二月丁巳，猎于方秀川。
现代文：十二月十四日，玄宗在方秀川打猎。
English: On December 14, Xuanzong went hunting in Fangxiu River.

古文：十五年正月辛丑，河西、陇右节度使王君奂及吐蕃战于青海，败之。
现代文：开元十五年正月二十八日，河西、陇右节度使王君耯在青海打败与其交战的吐蕃军。
English: On the 28th day of the first month of the 15th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Wang Junya defeated the warring Tubo army in Qinghai.

古文：七月甲戌，震兴教门观，灾。
现代文：七月初四，雷劈兴教门楼观，起火。
English: On the fourth day of the seventh month, lightning struck the gate tower of Xing Jiao, causing a fire.

古文：庚寅，洛水溢。
现代文：二十日，洛水泛滥。
English: On the 20th, the Luo River was flooded.

古文：己亥，降都城囚罪，徒以下原之。
现代文：二十九日，对都城的囚犯减刑，处以拘禁劳役的犯人免刑。
English: On the 29th, the sentences of the prisoners in the capital were reduced, and the prisoners sentenced to forced labor were pardoned.

古文：八月，涧、谷溢，毁渑池县。
现代文：八月，涧水、谷水泛滥，毁坏渑池县。
English: In August, floods in Surabaya and Gusui devastated Surabaya County.

古文：己巳，降天下死罪、岭南边州流人，徒以下原之。
现代文：初五，对全国死罪囚犯，流放至岭南边州的犯人减刑，判处拘禁劳役的犯人免刑。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the sentence of the national death-row prisoners and the prisoners exiled to Lingnan Border State will be reduced, and the prisoners sentenced to forced labor will be exempted from punishment.

古文：九月丙子，吐蕃寇瓜州，执刺史田元献。
现代文：九月初九，吐蕃军进犯瓜州，俘虏了刺史田元献。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the 9th month, the Tubo army invaded Guazhou and captured Zhaotian Yuanxian.

古文：闰月庚子，寇安西，副大都护赵颐贞败之。
现代文：闰九月初二，吐蕃军进犯安西，副大都护赵颐贞打败吐军。
English: On the second day of the second month of September, the Tubo army invaded Anxi, and the vice-governor Zhao Yuzhen defeated the Tubo army.

古文：庚申，回纥袭甘州，王君奂死之。
现代文：二十二日，回纥军袭击甘州，王君耯死难。
English: On the 22nd, the Uighur army attacked Gansu, and Wang Junxuan was killed.

古文：十月己卯，至自东都。
现代文：十月十一日，玄宗自东都返京。
English: On October 11, Xuanzong returned to Beijing from Dongdu.

古文：十一月丁卯，猎于城南。
现代文：十一月二十九日，在京城长安城南打猎。
English: On November 29th, I went hunting in the south of Chang'an, Beijing.

古文：十二月乙亥，幸温泉宫。
现代文：十二月初八，玄宗去温泉宫。
English: On the eighth day of the twelfth month, Xuanzong went to the hot spring palace.

古文：丙戌，至自温泉宫。
现代文：十九日，自温泉宫返京。
English: On the 19th, he returned to Kyoto from the Onsen Palace.

古文：十六年正月壬寅，赵颐贞及吐蕃战于曲子城，败之。
现代文：开元十六年正月初五，赵颐贞与吐蕃军在曲子城交战，打败吐军。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the 16th year of the first century, Zhao Yuzhen and the Tubo army fought in Quzi City and defeated the Tubo army.

古文：乙卯，泷州首领陈行范反，伏诛庚申，许徒以下囚保任营农。
现代文：十八日，泷州首领陈行范反叛，伏法处死。二十三日，准许处以拘禁劳役的犯人取保务农谋生。
English: On the 18th, Chen Xingfan, the leader of Zhangzhou, rebelled and was sentenced to death. On the 23rd, he was allowed to work as a farm laborer.

古文：三月辛丑，免营农囚罪。
现代文：三月初五，对务农囚犯免刑。
English: On the 5th of March, agricultural prisoners were exempted from punishment.

古文：七月，吐蕃寇瓜州，刺史张守珪败之。
现代文：七月，吐蕃军进犯瓜州，刺史张守王圭打败吐军。
English: In July, the Tubo army invaded Guazhou, and Zhang Shou Wang Gui defeated the Tubo army.

古文：乙巳，陇右节度使张志亮、河西节度使萧嵩克吐蕃大莫门城。
现代文：十一日，陇右节度使张志亮、河西节度使萧嵩攻克吐蕃大莫门城。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhang Zhiliang was sent by the right festival and Xiao Song was sent by the west festival to conquer the Momen City of Tubo.

古文：八月辛卯，及吐蕃战于祁连城，败之。
现代文：八月二十八日，与吐军在祁连城交战，打败吐军。
English: On August 28th, they fought against the Tu army in Qilian City and defeated the Tu army.

古文：九月丙午，以久雨降囚罪，徒以下原之。
现代文：九月十三日，因久雨不停，对囚犯减刑，对处以拘禁劳役的犯人免刑。
English: On September 13th, due to the incessant rain, the sentence of the prisoner was reduced, and the sentence of the prisoner sentenced to forced labor was pardoned.

古文：十月己卯，幸温泉宫。己丑，至自温泉宫。
现代文：十月十七日，玄宗去温泉宫；二十七日，自温泉宫返京。
English: On October 17th, Xuanzong went to the Onsen Palace; on the 27th, he returned to Beijing from the Onsen Palace.

古文：十一月癸巳，萧嵩为兵部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十一月初一，萧嵩任兵部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the first day of November, Xiao Song was appointed to the military department of Shangshu and the school of the same school.

古文：甲辰，弛陂泽禁。
现代文：十二日，解除对山泽的禁令。
English: On the 12th, the ban on Yamazawa was lifted.

古文：戊申，幸宁王宪第。庚戌，至自宁王宪第。
现代文：十六日，玄宗到宁王李宪府宅；十八日，从宁王府回宫。
English: On the 16th, Xuanzong went to the residence of King Lixian of Ning; on the 18th, he returned to the palace from the palace of King Ning.

古文：十二月丁卯，幸温泉宫。丁丑，至自温泉宫。
现代文：十二月初六，玄宗去温泉宫；十六日，自温泉宫返京。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, Xuanzong went to the Onsen Palace; on the 16th day, he returned to Beijing from the Onsen Palace.

古文：十七年二月丁卯，隽州都督张审素克云南昆明城、盐城。
现代文：开元十七年二月初六，州都督张审素攻克云南昆明城、盐城。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the 17th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Zhang Qiusu, the provincial governor, conquered Kunming City and Yancheng City in Yunnan Province.

古文：三月戊戌，张守珪及吐蕃战于大同军，败之。
现代文：三月初八，张守王圭与吐蕃军在大同交战，打败吐军。
English: On the 8th day of the 3rd month, Zhang Shou Wang Gui and the Tubo army fought in Datong and defeated the Tubo army.

古文：四月癸亥，降死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：四月初三，对死刑罪犯减刑，流放犯免刑。
English: On the third day of the fourth lunar month, the sentences of the death penalty criminals were commuted, and the exiles were pardoned.

古文：乙亥，大风，震，蓝田山崩。
现代文：十五日，大风、巨雷、蓝田山崩。
English: On the 15th, high winds, heavy thunder, and landslides in Lantian.

古文：六月甲戌，源乾曜、杜暹、李元罢纮。
现代文：六月十五日，源乾曜、杜暹、李元被免职。
English: On June 15, Yuan Qianyou, Du Siam and Li Yuan were dismissed.

古文：萧嵩兼中书令。
现代文：萧嵩兼中书令。
English: Xiao Song is also a Chinese calligrapher.

古文：户部侍郎宇方融为黄门侍郎，兵部侍郎裴光庭为中书侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：户部侍郎宇文融任黄门侍郎，兵部侍郎裴光庭任中书侍郎，并加同中书门下平章事。
English: The Household Attendant, Uwen Rong, was appointed as the Yellow Gate Attendant, and the Military Attendant, Pei Guangting, was appointed as the Chushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushush

古文：九月壬子，贬宇文融为汝州刺史。
现代文：九月二十五日，贬宇文融为汝州刺史。
English: On September 25th, Yu Wenyong was declared a historical person in Ruzhou.

古文：十月戊午朔，日有食之。
现代文：十月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of October, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：十一月庚寅，享于太庙。
现代文：十一月初四，玄宗祭祀太庙。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, the ceremony for the enthronement of Emperor Xuanzong took place.

古文：丙申，拜桥陵，赦奉先县。
现代文：初十，祭拜桥陵，免除奉先县租赋。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the worship of the bridge and mausoleum is exempt from Fengxian County rent.

古文：戊戌，拜定陵。
现代文：十二日，祭拜定陵。
English: On the 12th, the Dingling Mausoleum was dedicated.

古文：己亥，拜献陵。
现代文：十三日，祭拜献陵。
English: On the 13th, the memorial service and the dedication of the tomb began.

古文：壬寅，拜昭陵。
现代文：十六日，祭拜昭陵。
English: On the 16th, the Zhao Mausoleum was dedicated.

古文：乙巳，拜乾陵。
现代文：十九日，祭拜乾陵。
English: On the 19th, the Qianling Mausoleum was dedicated.

古文：戊申，至自乾陵，大赦。免今岁税之半。赐文武官阶、爵，侍老帛。
现代文：二十二日，自乾陵返京，施行大赦，减免本年一半税赋；赐予文武官员官阶、爵位；赐给贤德老人布帛。
English: On the 22nd, he returned to Beijing from the Qianling Mausoleum, implemented an amnesty, reduced and exempted half of this year's taxes; granted civil and military officials official ranks and peerages; and gave cloth coats to virtuous old people.

古文：旌表孝子顺孙、义夫节妇，终身勿事。
现代文：表彰孝子顺孙、义夫节妇，终身不服徭役。
English: To commend the filial sons and grandsons of filial sons and grandsons of filial sons and grandsons of filial sons and grandsons of filial sons and grandsons of filial sons and grandsons of filial sons.

古文：唐隆两营立功三品以上予一子官。
现代文：授予唐隆年左、右羽林军立功在三品以上官员一个儿子官职。
English: Tang Long awarded one official position to the son of an official of the Left and Right Uebayashi Army who had distinguished himself in more than three prizes.

古文：免供顿县今岁税。赐诸军行人勋两转。
现代文：免除供应帝王、百官、蕃侯旅途食宿及旅行所需之物的各县本年赋税。赐予诸军出征官员勋官两级。
English: Exempt the counties that supply the emperor, centurions, and vassals with food, lodging, and travel necessities from paying taxes this year, and award two ranks of honor to the army's dispatching officers.

古文：十二月辛酉，幸温泉宫。壬申，至自温泉宫。
现代文：十二月初五，玄宗去温泉宫；十六日，自温泉宫返京。
English: On the fifth day of the twelfth month, Xuanzong went to the Hot Spring Palace; on the sixteenth day, he returned to Beijing from the Hot Spring Palace.

古文：是冬，无雪。
现代文：本年冬季无雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：十八年正月辛卯，裴光庭为侍中。
现代文：开元十八年正月初六，裴光庭任侍中。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the eighteenth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Pei Guangting was appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：二月丙寅，大雨，雷震左飞龙厩，灾。
现代文：二月十一日，大雨，雷击左飞龙的马棚，起火。
English: On February 11, heavy rain and lightning struck Zuo Feilong's stables, causing a fire.

古文：辛未，免囚罪杖以下。
现代文：十六日，免除判处杖刑以下囚犯的刑罚。
English: On the 16th, prisoners sentenced to caning or less were exempted from punishment.

古文：四月乙卯，筑京师外郭。
现代文：四月初一，建筑京城的外城。
English: On the first day of April, the construction of the outer city of Beijing began.

古文：五月己酉，奚、契丹附于突厥。
现代文：五月二十六日，奚、契丹依附突厥。
English: On the 26th of May, the KMT and the Khitan sided with the Turks.

古文：六月甲子，有彗星出于五车。
现代文：六月十一日，有彗星在天区 五车 五星之间出现。
English: On June 11, a comet appeared in the sky between the constellations.

古文：癸酉，有星孛于华、昂。
现代文：二十日，在毕、昴二宿之间出现彗星。二十二日，鏶水泛滥。
English: On the 20th, a comet appeared between Bi and Xing Erju, and on the 22nd, the Xing River flooded.

古文：乙亥，瀍水溢。丙子，忠王浚为河北道行军元帅。壬午，洛水溢。
现代文：二十三日，忠王李浚任河北道行军元帅。二十九日，洛水泛滥。
English: On the 23rd, Prince Li Jun was appointed as the marshal of the march in Hebei Province. On the 29th, Luo was flooded.

古文：九月丁巳，忠王浚兼河东道诸军元帅。
现代文：九月初六，忠王李浚兼河东道诸军元帅。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month of the year, the loyal king, Li Junqian, became the marshal of the host army.

古文：十月戊子，吐蕃请和。
现代文：十月初七，吐蕃求和。
English: On the seventh day of the tenth month, Tubo sued for peace.

古文：庚寅，如凤泉汤。癸卯，至自凤泉汤。
现代文：初九，玄宗去凤泉汤；二十二日，自凤泉汤返京。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Xuanzong went to Fengquan Tang; on the 22nd day, he returned to Beijing from Fengquan Tang.

古文：十一月丁卯，幸温泉宫。
现代文：十一月十七日，玄宗去温泉宫。
English: On November 17th, Xuanzong went to the hot spring palace.

古文：丁丑，至自温泉宫。
现代文：二十七日，自温泉宫返京。
English: On the 27th, he returned to Kyoto from the Onsen Palace.

古文：十九年正月，杀瀼州别驾王毛仲。
现代文：开元十九年正月，杀襄州别驾王毛仲。
English: In the first month of the 19th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, do not kill Wang Maozhong in Xiangzhou.

古文：丙子，耕于兴庆宫。
现代文：二十七日，玄宗在兴庆宫举行躬耕典礼。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Xuanzong held a wading ceremony at the Xingqing Palace.

古文：己卯，禁捕鲤鱼。
现代文：三十日，禁止捕鲤鱼。
English: On the 30th, cod fishing was banned.

古文：四月壬午，降死罪以下。
现代文：四月初四，对死罪以下囚犯减刑。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of April, prisoners sentenced to less than the death penalty had their sentences commuted.

古文：丙申，立太公庙。
现代文：十八日，建立太公庙。
English: On the 18th, the Tai Gong Temple was established.

古文：六月乙酉，大风拔木。
现代文：六月初八，大风拔起树木。
English: On the eighth day of the sixth month, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：七月癸丑，吐蕃请和。
现代文：七月初七，吐蕃求和。
English: On the seventh day of the seventh month of July, Tubo sued for peace.

古文：八月辛巳，以千秋节降死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：八月初五，因千秋节一一一玄宗诞辰，对死罪囚犯减刑，流放罪以下的囚犯免刑。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month, due to the coming of the Thousand-Autumn Festival and the birthday of Xuanzong, the death penalty was commuted for prisoners, and prisoners with less than the crime of banishment were pardoned.

古文：十月丙申，如东都。
现代文：十月二十一日，玄宗去东都。
English: On October 21, Xuanzong left for the Eastern Capital.

古文：十一月乙卯，次洛城南，赐从官帛。
现代文：十一月初十，歇驻洛城南，赐给随行侍从官员布帛。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month of the first month, he left his residence in the south of the city of Luo and gave cloth bags to the officials accompanying him.

古文：是岁，扬州穞稻生。
现代文：本年，扬州长出不种自生的稆稻。
English: This year, Governor Yang brought out the self-sown indica rice.

古文：二十年正月乙卯，信安郡王祎为河东、河北道行军副元帅，以伐奚、契丹。
现代文：开元二十年正月十一日，信安郡王李任河东道、河北道行军副元帅，征伐奚、契丹。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of the 20th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Li Renhe, the king of Xin'an County, became the host and deputy marshal of the march in Hebei Province.

古文：二月甲戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of February, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：壬午，降囚罪，徒以下原之。
现代文：初九，对囚犯减刑，被判处拘禁劳役的罪犯免刑。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the sentence of prisoners will be reduced, and the criminals sentenced to forced labor will be exempted from punishment.

古文：三月己巳，信安郡王祎及奚、契丹战于蓟州，败之。
现代文：三月二十六日，信安郡王李与奚、契丹在蓟州交战，打败敌军。
English: On March 26th, Wang Li of Xin'an County fought with Yao and Qidan in Zhangzhou and defeated the enemy army.

古文：五月戊申，忠王浚俘奚、契丹以献。
现代文：五月初六，忠王李浚将奚与契丹俘虏献给朝廷。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month of the year, the loyal king, Li Jun, presented Zou and the Khitan captives to the imperial court.

古文：六月丁丑，浚为司徒。
现代文：六月初六，李浚任司徒。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month.

古文：八月辛未朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月初一，日月合朔，有日食。
English: On the first day of August, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：九月乙巳，渤海靺鞨寇登州，刺史韦俊死之，左领军卫将军盖福慎伐之。
现代文：九月初五，渤海的军进犯登州，刺史韦俊死难，左领军卫将军盖福慎攻打军。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, the army of the Bohai Sea invaded the state, stabbed Shi Weijun to death, and the left leader of the army, General Gaifu Shen, attacked the army.

古文：戊辰，以宋、滑、衮、郓四州水，免今岁税。
现代文：二十八日，因宋、滑、兖、郓四州遭水灾，免除本年赋税。
English: On the 28th, due to the floods in the four states of Song, Nanning, Handan and Handan, this year's tax was exempted.

古文：十月壬午，如潞州。
现代文：十月十二日，玄宗去潞州。
English: On October 12, Xuanzong went to Zhangzhou.

古文：丙戌，中书门下虑巡幸所过囚。
现代文：十六日，中书、尚书、门下三省讯察玄宗出外地巡视所经各地记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 16th, Xuanzong sent inspectors from Zhongshu, Shangshu and his three subordinate provinces to record the crimes of prisoners in all regions visited by the inspectors.

古文：辛卯，赦潞州，给复三年，赐高年粟帛。
现代文：二十一日，对潞州施行赦免，免除该州三年徭役，赐给高龄老人粮食布帛。
English: On the 21st, an amnesty was implemented for Zhangzhou, exempting the state from three years of corvee, and giving grain cloth to the elderly.

古文：十一月辛丑，如北都。
现代文：十一月初二，玄宗去北都。
English: On November 2nd, Xuanzong went to Beijing.

古文：癸丑，赦北都，给复三年。
现代文：十四日，对北都施行赦免，免除该州三年徭役。
English: On the 14th, an amnesty was granted to Beidou, exempting the state from three years of forced labor.

古文：庚申，如汾阴，祠后土，大赦。
现代文：二十一日，去汾阴祭祀地神，施行大赦。
English: On the twenty-first day, they went to Jinyin to offer sacrifices to the gods of the earth, and a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：免供顿州今岁税。
现代文：免除供应帝王、百官、蕃侯旅途食宿及旅行所需之物的各州本年赋税。
English: The states which supply the emperor, the eunuchs, and the courtiers with food, lodging, and the necessaries of travel, are exempt from taxation this year.

古文：赐文武官阶、勋、爵，诸州侍老帛，武德以来功臣后及唐隆功臣三品以上一子官。
现代文：赐给文武官员官阶、勋衔、爵位，赐给各州贤德老人布帛，授予高祖武德年以来功臣的后代以及少帝唐隆年的三品以上的功臣的儿子一人官职。
English: It bestowed official ranks, decorations, and peerages on the civil and military officials, and cloth caps on the wise and virtuous old men in each prefecture, and conferred official posts on the descendants of the meritorious soldiers since the time of Emperor Gao and the sons of the meritorious soldiers with three or more court ranks since the time of Emperor Tanglong.

古文：民酺三日。
现代文：赐许百姓聚饮三日。
English: Give the people three days to gather and drink.

古文：十二月辛未，至自汾阴。
现代文：十二月初二，玄宗自汾阴返京。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, Xuanzong returned to Beijing from Suyin.

古文：二十一年正月丁巳，幸温泉宫。
现代文：开元二十一年正月十八日，玄宗去温泉宫。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of the 21st year of the Heian period, Xuanzong went to the hot spring palace.

古文：二月丁亥，至自温泉宫。
现代文：二月十九日，自温泉宫返京。
English: On February 19, he returned to Kyoto from Onsen-gu Shrine.

古文：三月乙巳，裴光庭薨。
现代文：三月初七，裴光庭去世。
English: On March 7, Pei Guangting passed away.

古文：甲寅，尚书右丞韩休为黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十六日，尚书右丞韩休任黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 16th, Shang Shuyuan Han was relieved of his duties as Yellow Gate Attendant, and the same happened with Zhong Shumen Shimohei.

古文：闰月癸酉，幽州副总管郭英杰及契丹战于都山，英杰死之。
现代文：闰三月初六，幽州副总管郭英杰在都山与契丹交战，阵亡。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month of the leap year, Guo Yingjie, the deputy head of Yuzhou, fought with Khitan in Duoshan and was killed.

古文：四月乙卯，遣宣慰使黜陟官吏，决击囚。
现代文：四月十九日，派遣宣慰使赴各地考察，降、升官吏，裁处在押囚犯。
English: On April 19th, the propaganda and consolation envoys were dispatched to various regions to investigate, demote and promote officials, and detain prisoners in courts.

古文：丁巳，宁王宪为太尉，薛王业为司徒。
现代文：二十一日，宁王李宪任太尉，薛王李业任司徒。
English: On the twenty-first day, Ning Wang Lixian was appointed as a captain, and Xue Wang Liye was appointed as an apprentice.

古文：五月戊子，以皇太子纳妃，降死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：五月二十二日，因皇太子纳妃，对死罪囚犯减刑，判处流放以下刑罚的罪犯免刑。
English: On May 22nd, due to the intervention of Crown Prince Na Fei, the death penalty was commuted for death row prisoners, and the criminals who were sentenced to exile and received the following sentences were pardoned.

古文：七月乙丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：七月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of July, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：九月壬午，封子沔为信王，泚义王，漼陈王，澄丰王，潓恒王，漩凉王，滔深王。
现代文：九月十八日，玄宗封其子李沔为信王，李氵此为义王，李氵崔为陈王，李澄为丰王，李氵惠为恒王，李漩为凉王，李滔为深王。
English: On September 18th, Emperor Xuanzong appointed his son Li Qian as the Prince of Faith, Li Qigong as the Prince of Righteousness, Li Qicui as the Prince of Chen, Li Cheng as the Prince of Feng, Li Qian Hui as the Prince of Heng, Li Yueh as the Prince of Cool, and Li Tao as the Prince of Deep.

古文：十月庚戌，幸温泉宫。己未，至自温泉宫。
现代文：十月十七日，玄宗去温泉宫；二十六日，自温泉宫返京。
English: On October 17th, Xuanzong went to the Onsen Palace; on the 26th, he returned to Beijing from the Onsen Palace.

古文：十二月丁巳，萧嵩、韩休罢。
现代文：十二月二十四日，萧嵩、韩休被免职。
English: On December 24, Xiao Song and Han Xiu were dismissed from their posts.

古文：京兆尹裴耀卿为黄门侍郎，中书侍郎张九龄：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：京兆尹裴耀卿任黄门侍郎，中书侍郎张九龄，并加同中书门下平章事。
English: Jing Zhao Yin Pei Yaoqing was appointed as the Yellow Gate Attendant, Zhang Julin as the Chinese Calligraphy Attendant, and he was also appointed as the Chinese Calligraphy Attendant.

古文：二十二年正月己巳，如东都。
现代文：开元二十二年正月初六，玄宗去东都。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the 22nd year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Xuanzong went to Dongdu.

古文：二月壬寅，秦州地震，给复压死者家一年，三人者三年。
现代文：二月初十，秦州地震，免除死者家徭役一年，死三人家免徭役三年。
English: At the beginning of February, the 10th, Qinzhou earthquake, exempted the deceased family from forced labor for one year, and the three dead families were exempted from forced labor for three years.

古文：四月甲辰，降死罪以下。
现代文：四月十三日，对死罪以下囚犯减刑。
English: On April 13th, prisoners sentenced to less than the death penalty had their sentences commuted.

古文：甲寅，北庭都护刘涣谋反，伏诛。
现代文：二十三日，北庭都护刘涣谋反，伏法处死。
English: On the 23rd, the Beiyuan tutelary Liu Xuan plotted a rebellion and was put to death.

古文：五月戊子，裴耀卿为侍中，张九龄为中书令，黄门侍郎李林甫为礼部尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：五月二十八日，裴耀卿任侍中，张九龄任中书令，黄门侍郎李林甫任礼部尚书、同中书门下三品。
English: On May 28, Pei Yaoqing was appointed as an attendant, Zhang Jiuling was appointed as a secretary, and Li Linfu, a Yellow Gate attendant, was appointed as a ceremonial secretary and a junior secretary.

古文：是日，大风拔木。
现代文：此日，大风拔起树木。
English: On this day, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：六月壬辰，幽州节度使张守珪俘奚、契丹以献。
现代文：六月初三，幽州节度使张守王圭将奚与契丹的俘虏献给朝廷。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, the Yuzhou Festival made Zhang Shou Wang Gui dedicate the captives of Zou and Qidan to the imperial court.

古文：七月己巳，薛王业薨。
现代文：七月初十，薛王李业去世。
English: On July 10, Xue Wang Liye passed away.

古文：十一月甲戌，免关内、河南八等以下户田不百亩者今岁租。
现代文：十一月十七日，免除关内、河南道八等以下农户田地不足百亩者本年租税。
English: On November 17th, this year's tax will be exempted for farmers with less than 100 mu of farmland in Guanai and Henan Province.

古文：十二月戊子朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of December, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：乙巳，张守珪及契丹战，败之，杀其王屈烈。
现代文：十八日，张守王圭打败契丹军，杀契丹王屈烈。
English: On the 18th, Zhang Shou Wang Gui defeated the Khitan army and killed the Khitan king, Qurei.

古文：二十三年正月乙亥，耕藉田。
现代文：开元二十三年正月十八日，玄宗在籍田上举行躬践农耕的仪式。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of the 23rd year of the Heian period, Xuanzong held a ceremony to practice farming on the farm where he was born.

古文：大赦。
现代文：施行大赦。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：侍老百岁以上版授上州刺史，九十以上中州刺史，八十以上上州司马。
现代文：授予百岁以上的贤德老人上等州刺史荣衔，九十岁以上者中等州刺史荣衔，八十岁以上者上等州司马荣衔。
English: Awarded to the virtuous old people over the age of one hundred the title of senior state senator, those over the age of ninety the title of junior state senator, and those over the age of eighty the title of senior state senator.

古文：赐陪位官勋、爵。
现代文：赐给陪席官员勋衔、爵位。
English: The officials who were present at the banquet were given honorary titles and peerages.

古文：征防兵父母年七十者遣还。
现代文：遣返父母七十岁的远行边防士卒。
English: The seventy-year-old long-distance border guard who repatriated his parents.

古文：民酺三日。
现代文：赐许百姓聚饮三日。
English: Give the people three days to gather and drink.

古文：八月戊子，免鳏寡惸独今岁税米。
现代文：八月初五，豁免鳏寡孤独本年的税米。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month, this year's tax rice will be exempted for widows and orphans.

古文：十月戊申，突骑施寇边。
现代文：十月二十六日，突骑施侵犯边境。
English: On the 26th of October, the Sze breached the border.

古文：闰十一月壬午朔，日有食之。
现代文：闰十一月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of the leap month of November, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：是冬，东都人刘普会反，伏诛。
现代文：本年冬，东都人刘普会反叛，伏法处死。
English: This winter, Liu Pu, a Dongduan, rebelled and was sentenced to death.

古文：二十四年正月丙午，北庭都护盖嘉运及突骑施战，败之。
现代文：开元二十四年正月二十六日，北庭都护盖嘉运与突骑施交战，打败突骑施军。
English: On the twenty-sixth day of the first month of the twenty-fourth year of the Chinese calendar, the Northern Court of Zhuo Jia and Zhuo Jia fought and defeated the Zhuo Jia army.

古文：四月丁丑，降死罪以下。
现代文：四月二十八日，对死罪以下囚犯减刑。
English: On April 28th, prisoners sentenced to less than the death penalty had their sentences commuted.

古文：五月丙午，醴泉人刘志诚反，伏诛。
现代文：五月二十七日，醴泉人刘志诚反叛，伏法处死。
English: On May 27th, Liu Zhicheng, a native of Jiuquan, rebelled and was sentenced to death.

古文：八月甲寅，突骑施请和。
现代文：八月初七，突骑施求和。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, the rider suddenly appeared.

古文：乙亥，汴王璥薨。
现代文：二十八日，汴王李去世。
English: On the 28th, Gong Wang Li passed away.

古文：十月戊申，京师地震。
现代文：十月初二，京城长安地震。
English: On the second day of October, the Beijing Chang'an earthquake occurred.

古文：甲子，次华州，免供顿州今岁税，赐刺史、县令中上考。
现代文：十八日，玄宗歇驻华州，免除供应其旅途食宿与旅行所需之物的各州本年赋税，赐予该州刺史、县令的考绩为最上等级。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Xuanzong stayed in Huazhou, exempted the states that supplied his travel accommodation and travel necessities from tax this year, and gave the state the highest grade for the performance of history and county.

古文：降两京死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：对长安、东都的死罪囚犯减刑，判流放以下刑罚的囚犯免刑。
English: The death sentences of death-row prisoners in Chang'an and Dongdu will be commuted, and those sentenced to exile will be pardoned.

古文：丁卯，至自东都。
现代文：二十一日，玄宗自东都返京。
English: On the 21st, Xuanzong returned to Beijing from Dongdu.

古文：十一月辛丑，东都地震。
现代文：十一月二十六日，东都地震。
English: On November 26th, the Dongdu earthquake occurred.

古文：壬寅，裴耀卿、张九龄罢。
现代文：二十七日，裴耀卿、张九龄免职。
English: On the 27th, Pei Yaoqing and Zhang Jiuling were dismissed.

古文：李林甫兼中书令，朔方军节度副大使牛仙客为工部尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：李林甫兼中书令，朔方军节度副大使牛仙客任工部尚书、同中书门下三品。
English: Li Linfu was also the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and Niu Xianqi, the vice-ambassador of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, was the secretary of the Ministry of Works and the third grade of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：十二月戊申，庆王琮为司徒。
现代文：十二月初三，庆王李琮任司徒。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, Qing Wang Lijun was appointed as a disciple.

古文：二十五年三月乙酉，张守珪及契丹战于捺禄山，败之。
现代文：开元二十五年三月十一日，张守王圭与契丹在捺禄山交战，打败契军。
English: On March 11th, the 25th day of the first month of the year, Zhang Shou Wang Gui and Khitan fought in the Qilu Mountains and defeated the Chechen army.

古文：辛卯，河西节度副大使崔希逸及吐蕃战于青海，败之。
现代文：十七日，河西节度副大使崔希逸与吐蕃在青海交战，打败吐军。
English: On the 17th, the deputy ambassador of the Hexi Festival, Cui Xiyi, fought with Tubo in Qinghai and defeated the Tubo army.

古文：四月辛酉，杀监察御史周子谅。
现代文：四月十七日，杀监察御史周子谅。
English: On April 17th, the overseer of the imperial court, Zhou Zi, was assassinated.

古文：乙丑，废皇太子瑛及鄂王瑶、光王琚为庶人，皆杀之。
现代文：二十一日，废黜皇太子李瑛及郓王李瑶、光王李琚为平民，杀了他们。
English: On the twenty-first day, he deposed the crown prince Li Ying, as well as the warlord Li Yan and the general Li Yan as civilians and killed them.

古文：十一月壬申，幸温泉宫。乙酉，至自温泉宫。
现代文：十一月初二，玄宗去温泉宫；十五日，自温泉宫返京。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, Xuanzong went to the Onsen Palace; on the fifteenth day, he returned to Beijing from the Onsen Palace.

古文：十二月丙午，惠妃武氏薨。
现代文：十二月初七，惠妃武氏去世。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month, Hui Fei Wu died.

古文：丁巳，追册为皇后。
现代文：十八日，追命武氏为皇后。
English: On the 18th, she became the empress in accordance with her father's command.

古文：二十六年正月甲戌，潮州刺史陈思挺谋反，伏诛。
现代文：开元二十六年正月初五，潮州刺史陈思挺谋反，伏法处死。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 26th year of the Heian period, the Chaozhou assassin Chen Sittang plotted a rebellion and was sentenced to death.

古文：乙亥，牛仙客为侍中。
现代文：初六，牛仙客任侍中。
English: In his sixth year of junior high school, Niu Xianku became a chamberlain.

古文：丁丑，迎气于东郊。
现代文：初八，玄宗在京城东郊祭迎天神青帝、句芒，祈求丰年。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Xuanzong celebrated the festival in the eastern suburb of Beijing to welcome the heavenly deities Qingdi and Jumang and to pray for a prosperous year.

古文：降死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：对死罪囚犯减刑，判流放刑罚以下的囚犯免刑。
English: Prisoners sentenced to death will have their sentences commuted, and those sentenced to banishment or less will be pardoned.

古文：以京兆稻田给贫民，禁王公献珍物，赐文武官帛。
现代文：将京兆的稻田赐给贫民，禁止王公进献珍贵物品，赐给文武官员布帛。
English: He gave the rice paddies of Jingzhao to the poor, prohibited Wang Gongjin from donating precious items, and gave cloth bags to civil and military officials.

古文：壬辰，李林甫兼陇右节度副大使。
现代文：二十三日，李林甫兼陇右节度副大使。
English: On the 23rd, Li Linfu, Vice-Ambassador of the State Council of the People's Republic of China.

古文：二月乙卯，牛仙客兼河东节度副大使。
现代文：二月十七日，牛仙客兼河东节度副大使。
English: On February 17th, Niu Xianke and Vice-Ambassador of Hedong Festival passed away.

古文：三月丙子，有星孛于紫微。
现代文：三月初八，在天区紫微垣出现彗星。
English: On the 8th day of the 3rd month, a comet appeared in the sky.

古文：癸巳，京师地震。
现代文：二十五日，长安地震。
English: On the 25th, the Chang'an earthquake occurred.

古文：吐蕃寇河西，崔希逸败之，鄯州都督杜希望克其新城。
现代文：吐蕃军进犯河西，崔希逸将其打败，鄯州都督杜希望攻克吐蕃的新城。
English: The Tubo army invaded Hexi, and Cui Xiyi defeated it. Du, the governor of Zhangzhou, hoped to conquer the new city of Tubo.

古文：四月己亥，有司读时令。
现代文：四月初一，朝廷官署宣读 月令 。
English: On the first day of April, the Imperial Household Agency announced the monthly order.

古文：降死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：对死罪囚犯减刑，判流放刑罚以下的囚犯免刑。
English: Prisoners sentenced to death will have their sentences commuted, and those sentenced to banishment or less will be pardoned.

古文：五月乙酉，李林甫兼河酉节度副大使。
现代文：五月十八日，李林甫兼河西节度副大使。
English: On May 18th, Li Linfu, deputy ambassador of the Hexi Festival, left.

古文：六月庚子，立忠王玙为皇太子。
现代文：六月初三，立忠王李耰为皇太子。
English: On the third day of the sixth month, Prince Lijun became crown prince.

古文：七月己巳，大赦。
现代文：七月初二，施行大赦。
English: On the second day of July, the amnesty went into effect.

古文：赐文武九品以上及五品以上子为父后者勋一转，侍老粟帛，加版授。
现代文：赐予文武官员九品以上和五品以上官员勋官在其父之下者勋官一级，贤德老者赐给粮食布帛，授予荣衔。
English: Civil and military officials with nine or more pins and officials with five or more pins were awarded the first level of the order of merit. Those who were under their fathers were awarded the first level of the order of merit.

古文：免京畿下户今岁租之半。
现代文：免除京畿贫民本年租税一半。
English: The poor in Gyeonggi Province will be exempted from paying half of their taxes this year.

古文：赐民酺三日。
现代文：赐许百姓聚饮三日。
English: Give the people three days to gather and drink.

古文：九月丙申朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of September, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：庚子，益州长史王昱及吐蕃战于安戎城，败绩。
现代文：初五，益州长史王昱在安戎城与吐蕃军交战，大败。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Governor Shi Wangya fought against the Tubo army in An Rongcheng and was soundly defeated.

古文：十月戊寅，幸温泉宫。
现代文：十月十四日，玄宗去温泉宫。
English: On October 13th, Xuanzong went to the hot spring palace.

古文：壬辰，至自温泉宫。
现代文：二十八日，自温泉宫返京。
English: On the 28th, he returned to Kyoto from the Onsen Palace.

古文：二十七年正月壬寅，荣王琬巡按陇右。
现代文：开元二十七年正月初九，荣王李琬考察陇右。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the 27th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Rongwang Lijun inspected the right side of the Great Wall.

古文：二月己巳，群臣上尊号曰开元圣文神武皇帝，大赦。
现代文：二月初七，群臣给玄宗敬献尊号为开元圣文神武皇帝，施行大赦。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month of the year, a group of courtiers granted an amnesty to Emperor Xuanzong, who was given the title of Emperor Shenwu of the Qianlong Dynasty.

古文：免今岁税。
现代文：免除本年赋税。
English: exempt from this year's tax.

古文：赐文武官阶、爵。
现代文：赐予文武官员官阶、爵位。
English: Civil and military officials were given official ranks and peerages.

古文：版授侍老百岁以上下州刺史，妇人郡君；九十以上上州司马，妇人县君；八十以上县令，妇人乡君。
现代文：授予贤德老人百岁以上者下等州刺史荣衔，妇人授郡君荣衔；九十岁以上者授予上等州司马荣衔，妇人授予县君荣衔；八十岁以上者授县令荣衔，妇人授乡君荣衔。
English: The virtuous old people who are over 100 years old are awarded the honorable title of county magistrate, and the women are awarded the honorable title of county magistrate; those who are over 90 years old are awarded the honorable title of county magistrate, and the women are awarded the honorable title of county magistrate; those who are over 80 years old are awarded the honorable title of county magistrate, and the women are awarded the honorable title of township magistrate.

古文：赐民酺五日。
现代文：赐许百姓聚饮五日。
English: Give the people five days to gather and drink.

古文：八月乙亥，碛西节度使盖嘉运败突骑施于贺逻岭，执其可汗吐火仙。
现代文：八月十五日，碛西节度使盖嘉运在贺逻岭打败突骑施，俘获其可汗吐火仙。
English: On August 15th, the Shaanxi Festival made Gai Jiayun defeat Tujia Shi in Heluoling and capture his khan Tuxian.

古文：壬午，吐蕃寇边河西、陇右节度使萧炅败之。
现代文：二十二日，吐蕃军侵犯边境，河西、陇右节度使萧炅打败吐军。
English: On the 22nd, the Tubo-Qing army invaded the border, and Hexi and Shiyu sent troops to Xiaoqi to defeat the Tubo army.

古文：十月丙戌，幸温泉宫。十一月辛丑，至自温泉宫。
现代文：十月二十七日，玄宗去温泉宫；十一月十三日，自温泉宫返京。
English: On October 27th, Xuanzong went to the Onsen Palace; on November 13th, he returned to Beijing from the Onsen Palace.

古文：二十八年正月癸巳，幸温泉宫。庚子，至自温泉宫。
现代文：开元二十八年正月初六，玄宗去温泉宫；十三日，自温泉宫返京。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the 28th year of the founding of the Republic of China, Xuanzong went to the Hot Spring Palace; on the 13th day, he returned to Beijing from the Hot Spring Palace.

古文：三月丁亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of March, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：壬子，益州司马章仇兼琼败吐蕃，克安戎城。
现代文：二十六日，益州司马章仇兼琼打败吐蕃军，攻克安戎城。
English: On the 26th, Sima, Zhang, Qian and Qiong of Yizhou defeated the Tubo army and conquered An Rong City.

古文：五月癸卯，吐蕃寇安戎城，兼琼又败之。
现代文：五月十八日，吐蕃攻打安戎城，章仇兼琼再次打败吐军。
English: On May 18th, Tubo attacked An Rong City, and Zhang Qian Qiong defeated the Tubo army again.

古文：十月甲子，幸温泉宫。
现代文：十月十一日，玄宗去温泉宫。
English: On October 11, Xuanzong went to the Hot Spring Palace.

古文：以寿王妃杨氏为道士，号太真。
现代文：将寿王妃杨氏转为道士，号太真。
English: He converted the Dowager Empress Dowager Yang into a Taoist priest, and called himself Taizhen.

古文：戊辰，以徐、泗二州无蚕，免今岁税。
现代文：十五日，因徐、泗二州无蚕，免除本年赋税。
English: On the 15th, because of the absence of silkworms in the two states of Xu and Handan, this year's tax was exempted.

古文：辛巳，至自温泉宫。
现代文：二十八日，自温泉宫返京。
English: On the 28th, he returned to Kyoto from the Onsen Palace.

古文：十一月，牛仙客罢朔方、河东节度副大使。
现代文：十一月，免去牛仙客朔方、河东节度副大使职务。
English: In November, he was relieved of his duties as deputy ambassador to Niu Xianke Shuo Fang and Hedong Festival.

古文：二十九年正月癸巳，幸温泉宫。
现代文：开元二十九年正月十一日，玄宗去温泉宫。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of the 29th year of the founding of the Republic of China, Xuanzong went to the Hot Spring Palace.

古文：丁酉，立玄元皇帝庙，禁厚葬。
现代文：十五日，建立玄元皇帝庙，禁止重财厚礼办丧葬。
English: On the fifteenth day, the temple of Emperor Xuan Yuan was established, and it was forbidden for the wealthy to hold funerals.

古文：庚子，至自温泉宫。
现代文：十八日，玄宗自温泉宫返京。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Xuanzong returned to Beijing from the Onsen Palace.

古文：五月庚戌，求明《道德经》及《庄》、《列》、《文子》者。
现代文：五月初一，征召通晓《道德经》及《庄子》、《列子》、《文子》的学者。
English: On the first day of May, scholars who are well versed in the "Dao De Jing" and "Zhuang Zi," "Lie Zi" and "Wen Zi" were conscripted.

古文：降死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：对死罪囚犯减刑，判流放刑罚以下的罪犯免刑。
English: Prisoners sentenced to death will have their sentences commuted, and those sentenced to banishment or less will be pardoned.

古文：七月乙亥，伊、洛溢。
现代文：七月二十七日，伊水、洛水泛滥。
English: On July 27th, the Yishui River and the Luo River flooded.

古文：九月丁卯，大雨雪。
现代文：九月十九日，大雨夹雪。
English: September 19th, heavy rain and snow.

古文：十月丙申，幸温泉宫。
现代文：十月十九日，玄宗去温泉宫。
English: On October 19th, Xuanzong went to the hot spring palace.

古文：戊戌，遣使黜陟官吏。
现代文：二十一日，派使臣赴各地考察并降、升官吏。
English: On the 21st, he sent envoys to inspect various regions and promoted and demoted officials.

古文：十一月庚戌，邠王守礼薨。
现代文：十一月初三，王李守礼去世。
English: On November 3, Wang Li Shouli passed away.

古文：辛酉，至自温泉宫。
现代文：十四日，玄宗自温泉宫返京。
English: On the 14th, Xuanzong returned to Beijing from the Onsen Palace.

古文：己巳，雨木冰。
现代文：二十二日，雨水着树成冰。
English: On the 22nd, the rain turned the trees to ice.

古文：辛未，宁王宪薨，追册为皇帝，及其妃元氏为皇后。
现代文：二十四日，宁王李宪去世，追立他为皇帝，其妃元氏为皇后。
English: On the 24th, Li Xian, the king of Ning, died, and he was made emperor, with his wife Yuan as empress.

古文：十二月癸未，吐蕃陷石堡城。
现代文：十二月初六，吐蕃军攻破石堡城。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, the Tubo army broke through Shibao City.

古文：天宝元年正月丁未，大赦，改元。
现代文：天宝元年正月初一，施行大赦，更改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of Tianbao in the first year of the year, an amnesty was implemented and the year name was changed.

古文：诏京文武官材堪刺史者自举。
现代文：诏令京都文武官员中能胜任刺史者向朝廷自荐。
English: The imperial edict ordered that the most competent of Kyoto's literary and military officials should recommend themselves to the imperial court.

古文：赐侍老八十以上粟帛，九品以上勋两转。
现代文：赐给八十岁以上的贤德老人粮食、布帛，九品以上官员加勋官两级。
English: The virtuous old people over the age of eighty were given grain and cloth, and officials above the ninth grade were given two levels of honors.

古文：甲寅，陈王府参军田同秀言： 玄元皇帝降于丹凤门通衢。 
现代文：初八，陈王府参军田同秀声言： 在丹凤门的大道上玄元皇帝降临。 
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Chen Wangfu, a member of Tian Tongxiu's army, proclaimed: Emperor Xuanyuan has arrived on the avenue of Danfeng Gate.

古文：二月丁亥，群臣上尊号曰开元天宝圣文神武皇帝。
现代文：二月十一日，群臣敬献玄宗尊号为 开元元宝圣文神武皇帝 。
English: On February 11th, a group of courtiers paid their respects to Emperor Xuanzong and gave him the honorific title of Emperor Shenwenshuwu, the founder of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：辛卯，享玄元皇帝于新庙。甲午，享于太庙。
现代文：十五日，在新建的庙宇祭祀玄元皇帝李耳。十八日，祭祀太庙列祖。
English: On the 15th, the newly built temple was dedicated to Emperor Xuan Yuan Li Er. On the 18th, the temple was dedicated to the ancestors.

古文：丙申，合祭天地于南郊，大赦。
现代文：二十日，在京城南郊合祭天地，施行大赦。
English: On the 20th, an amnesty was implemented in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：侍老加版授，赐文武官阶、爵。
现代文：授予贤德老人荣衔，赐予文武官员官阶、爵位。
English: The title of honor was awarded to the virtuous old man, and the civil and military officials were given official ranks and peerages.

古文：改侍中为左相， 中书令为右相，东都为东京，北都为北京，州为郡，刺史为太守。
现代文：将侍中改称左相，中书令称右相，东都改名东京，北都改名北京，州改称郡，刺史改称太守。
English: He changed the name of Samurai-chū to Zuisho, Chushirei to Utsusho, Dongdo to Tokyo, Hokuto to Beijing, Shū to Gun, and Sashi to Taishu.

古文：七月癸卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：七月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of July, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：辛未，牛仙客薨。
现代文：二十九日，牛仙客去世。
English: On the 29th, Niu Xianke passed away.

古文：八月丁丑，刑部尚书李适之为左相。
现代文：八月初五，刑部尚书李适之任左相。
English: On the 5th of August, the Minister of Justice, Li Shizhi, was appointed as the Minister of the Left.

古文：十月丁酉，幸温泉宫。
现代文：十月二十六日，玄宗去温泉宫。
English: On October 26th, Xuanzong went to the hot spring palace.

古文：十一月己巳，至自温泉宫。
现代文：十一月初四，自温泉宫返京。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, I returned to Kyoto from the Onsen Palace.

古文：十二月戊戌，陇右节度使皇甫惟明及吐蕃战于青海，败之。
现代文：十二月二十七日，陇右节度使皇甫惟明在青海与吐蕃军交战，打败吐军。
English: On the 27th day of December, the right-hand festival brought the Emperor Fu Weiming into battle with the Tubo army in Qinghai, defeating the Tubo army.

古文：庚子，河西节度使王倕克吐蕃渔海、游奕军。
现代文：二十九日，河西节度使王亻垂攻破吐蕃的渔海城及巡逻营堡。
English: On the 29th, the Hexi Festival made Wang Bingli break through the fishing city and the patrol camp fort of Tubo.

古文：朔方军节度使王忠嗣及奚战于紫乾河，败之，遂伐突厥。
现代文：朔方军节度使王忠嗣在紫乾河打败奚军，趁势征伐突厥。
English: The festival of the Shuo army made Wang Zhongzhi defeat the Han army in the Zikang River and take advantage of the situation to conquer the Turks.

古文：是冬，无冰。
现代文：本年冬季无冰。
English: There is no ice this winter.

古文：二年正月乙卯，作升仙宫。
现代文：天宝二年正月十五日，建造升仙宫。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the second year of the Heavenly Treasure, the construction of Shosen Palace began.

古文：丙辰，加号玄元皇帝曰大圣祖。
现代文：十六日，给玄元皇帝加号为大圣祖。
English: On the 16th, Emperor Xuan Yuan gave him the additional title of the Great Patriarch.

古文：三月壬子，享于玄元宫，追号大圣祖父周上御大夫敬曰先天太皇，咎繇曰德明皇帝凉武昭王曰兴圣皇帝。
现代文：三月十二日，在玄元宫祭祀，追赠大圣祖的父亲、周朝上御大夫李敬尊号为先天太皇。皋陶为德明皇帝，凉武昭王为兴圣皇帝。
English: On March 12th, a ceremony was held at the Xuan Yuan Palace, and the posthumous name of Li Jing Zun, the father of the Great Sage Ancestor and the Zhou Dynasty's chief physician, was given to him as the Ancestral Great Emperor. Jintao was the Emperor Deming, and King Liangwu Zhao was the Emperor Xingsheng.

古文：改西京玄元宫曰太清宫，东京曰太微宫。
现代文：将西京长安的玄元宫改名为太清宫，东京洛阳的玄元宫改名为太微宫。
English: The Xuan Yuan Palace in Chang'an, West Beijing, was renamed the Taiqing Palace, and the Xuan Yuan Palace in Luoyang, Tokyo, was renamed the Taiwei Palace.

古文：四月己卯，皇甫惟明克吐蕃洪济城。
现代文：四月初十，皇甫惟明攻破吐蕃的洪济城。
English: On the 10th day of the 4th month of the year, Emperor Fuxi marched to break through the city of Hongji in Tujia.

古文：六月甲戌，震东京应天门观，灾。
现代文：六月初六，雷击东京应天门楼观，起火。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the year.

古文：十月戊寅，幸温泉宫。
现代文：十月十三日，玄宗去温泉宫。
English: On October 13th, Xuanzong went to the hot spring palace.

古文：十一月乙卯，至自温泉宫。
现代文：十一月二十日，自温泉宫返京。
English: On November 20th, he returned to Beijing from the Onsen Palace.

古文：十二月壬午，海贼吴令光寇永嘉郡。
现代文：十二月十七日，海贼吴令光劫掠永嘉郡。
English: On December 17, pirates led by Wu Lingguang looted Yongjia County.

古文：是冬，无雪。
现代文：本年冬季无雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：三载正月丙申，改年为载。
现代文：天宝三载正月初一，将 年 改为 载 。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third lunar month of Tianbao, the year was changed to "载."

古文：降死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：对死罪囚犯减刑，判流放刑罚以下罪犯免刑。
English: Prisoners sentenced to death will have their sentences commuted, and those sentenced to banishment or less will be pardoned.

古文：辛丑，幸温泉宫。
现代文：初六，玄宗去温泉宫。
English: At the age of six, Xuanzong went to the hot spring palace.

古文：辛亥，有星陨于东南。
现代文：十六日，有陨星落向东南。
English: On the 16th, a meteorite fell to the southeast.

古文：二月庚午，至自温泉宫。
现代文：二月初六，玄宗自温泉宫返京。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, Emperor Xuanzong returned to Beijing from the Onsen Palace.

古文：丁丑，河南尹裴敦复、晋陵郡太守刘同升、南海郡太守刘巨鳞讨吴令光。
现代文：十三日，河南尹裴敦复、晋陵郡太守刘同升、南海郡太守刘巨鳞讨伐吴令光。
English: On the 13th, Yin Pei Dunfu of Henan Province, Liu Tongsheng, the governor of Jinling County, and Liu Juxian, the governor of Nanhai County, led a crusade against Wu Lingguang.

古文：闰月，令光伏诛。
现代文：闰二月，吴令光被处死。
English: In February, Wu Lingguang was executed.

古文：三月壬申，降死罢，流以下原之。
现代文：三月初八，对死刑囚犯减刑，判流放刑罚以下的罪犯免刑。
English: On the eighth day of the third month of the year, the sentences of death-row prisoners were commuted, and criminals sentenced to less than the penalty of banishment were pardoned.

古文：八月丙午，拔悉蜜攻突厥，杀乌苏米施可汗，来献其首。
现代文：八月十六日，拔悉蜜攻打突厥，杀其首领乌苏米施可汗，来朝献其首级。
English: On August 16th, he attacked the Turks and killed their leader, Usumish Khan, and came to present his head to the emperor.

古文：十月甲午，幸温泉宫。
现代文：十月初五，玄宗去温泉宫。
English: On October 5th, Xuanzong went to the hot spring palace.

古文：十一月丁卯，至自温泉宫。
现代文：十一月初八，自温泉宫返京。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of November, he returned to Kyoto from the Onsen Palace.

古文：十二月癸丑，祠九宫贵神于东郊，大赦。
现代文：十二月二十四日，在京城东郊筑坛祭祀九宫贵神，施行大赦。
English: On December 24th, an altar was built in the eastern suburbs of Beijing to worship the Nine Palace Gods, and an amnesty was implemented.

古文：诏天下家藏《孝经》。
现代文：诏令全国家家必备《孝经》。
English: The imperial edict ordered that every family in the country should have a copy of the Filial Piety Sutra.

古文：赐文武官阶、爵，侍老粟帛，民酺三日。
现代文：赐予文武官员官阶、爵位，赐给贤德老人粮食布帛，百姓聚饮三日。
English: Civil and military officials were given official ranks and titles, virtuous old people were given grain and cloth, and the people gathered to drink for three days.

古文：四载正月丙戌，王忠嗣及突厥战于萨河内山，败之。
现代文：天宝四载正月二十八日，忠王李嗣与突厥军在萨河内山交战，打败突军。
English: On the 28th day of the first month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the Heavenly Treasure, King Lisi and the Turkic army fought in the mountains of Sakha and defeated the Turkic army.

古文：三月壬申，以外孙独孤氏女为静乐公方，嫁于契丹松漠都督李怀节；杨氏女为宜芳公主，嫁于奚饶乐都督李廷宠。
现代文：三月十四日，将外孙独孤氏的女儿作为静乐公主，嫁给契丹松漠都督李怀节；杨氏的女儿作为宜芳公主，嫁给奚的饶乐都督李延宠。
English: On March 14th, the daughter of the grandson of Du Guo as Jingle Princess was married to the governor of Qidan Songpo, Li Huaijie; the daughter of Yang as Yifang Princess was married to the governor of Yao, Li Yanjie.

古文：八月壬寅，立太真为贵妃。
现代文：八月十七日，玄宗立杨玉环为贵妃。
English: On August 17th, Emperor Xuanzong made Yang Yuhuan a noble consort.

古文：九月，契丹、奚皆杀其公主以叛。
现代文：九月，契丹、奚都杀了唐朝嫁来的公主，反叛。
English: In September, Qidan and Zou both killed a princess who had married into the Tang Dynasty and rebelled.

古文：甲申，皇甫惟明及吐蕃战于石堡城，副将褚誗死之。
现代文：三十日，皇甫惟明与吐蕃军在石堡城交战，副将褚讠利阵亡。
English: On the 30th, Emperor Fu Weiming fought with the Tubo army in Shibao City, and Vice Admiral Xili was killed.

古文：十月戊戌，幸温泉宫。
现代文：十月十四日，玄宗去温泉宫。
English: On October 20th, I went to the Onsen Palace.

古文：十二月戊戌，至自温泉宫。
现代文：十二月十五日，自温泉宫返京。
English: On December 15, he returned to Beijing from the Onsen Palace.

古文：五载正月乙亥，停六品以下员外官。
现代文：天宝五载正月二十三日，停止六品以下的员外官。
English: On the 23rd day of the 1st month of the 5th month of the Tianbao year, the appointment of foreign officials below the 6th grade was suspended.

古文：三月丙子，遣使黜陟官吏。
现代文：三月二十四日，派使臣赴各地考察并降、升官吏。
English: On March 24th, envoys were sent to various regions to investigate and demote and promote officials.

古文：四月庚寅，李适之罢。
现代文：四月初八，李适之被免职。
English: On April 8, Li Shizhi was removed from his post.

古文：丁酉，门下侍郎陈希烈同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十五日，门下侍郎陈希烈加同中书门下平章事。
English: On the fifteenth day, Chen Xilei, a servant of the disciple, and Zhongshu, a disciple of the disciple, signed the document.

古文：五月壬子朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of May, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：七月，杀括苍郡太守韦坚、播川郡太守皇甫惟明。
现代文：七月，杀括苍郡太守韦坚、播川郡太守皇甫惟明。
English: In July, Wei Jian, the grand marshal of Cang County, and Wang Fu Weiming, the grand marshal of Bitchuan County, were killed.

古文：十月戊戌，幸温泉宫。
现代文：十月二十日，去温泉宫。
English: On October 20th, I went to the Onsen Palace.

古文：十一月乙巳，至自温泉宫。
现代文：十一月二十八日，自温泉宫返京。
English: On November 28th, he returned to Beijing from the Onsen Palace.

古文：十二月甲戌，杀赞善大夫杜有邻、著作郎王曾、左骁卫兵曹参军柳勣、左司御率府仓曹参军王脩己、右武卫司戈卢宁、左威卫参军徐徵。
现代文：十二月二十七日，杀赞善大夫杜有邻、著作郎王曾、左骁卫兵曹参军柳责力、左司御率府仓曹参军王己、右武卫司戈卢宁、左威卫参军徐徵。
English: On December 27th, the assassins killed Dr. Du Yuzhong, the author Wang Zeng, the left-arm guard Cao Sangjun Liu Liuli, the left-arm guard Cao Sangjun Wang Ji, the right-arm guard Goluning, and the left-arm guard Cao Sangjun Xu Zheng.

古文：六载正月辛巳，杀北海郡太守李邕、淄川郡太守裴敦复。
现代文：天宝六载正月初五，杀北海郡太守李邕、淄川郡太守裴敦复。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the sixth month of the Tianbao year, the governor of Beihai County, Li Jun, and the governor of Luochuan County, Pei Dunfu, were killed.

古文：丁亥，享于太庙。
现代文：十一日，在太庙祭祀。
English: On the 11th day, a religious service was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：戊子，有事于南郊，大赦，流人老者许致仕，停立仗鋜。
现代文：十二日，在京城南郊祭天，施行大赦，准许被流放的年老官员辞官归居，停止对老者锁足。
English: On the 12th, in the southern suburb of Beijing, an amnesty was carried out, allowing the exiled old officials to return to their residences, and to stop locking the feet of the elderly.

古文：赐文武官阶、爵，侍老粟帛，民酺三日。
现代文：赐予文武官员官阶、爵位，贤德老人粮食、布帛，百姓聚饮三日。
English: Civil and military officials were given official ranks and titles, virtuous old people were given grain and cloth, and the people gathered to drink for three days.

古文：三月甲辰，陈希烈为左相。
现代文：三月二十八日，陈希烈任左相。
English: On March 28, Chen Xili was appointed Minister of the Left.

古文：七月乙酉，以旱降死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：七月十一日，因旱灾对死刑囚犯减刑，流放以下的罪犯免刑。
English: On July 11th, due to the drought, prisoners sentenced to death had their sentences commuted, and those sentenced to exile or less were pardoned.

古文：十月戊申，幸华清宫。
现代文：十月初六，玄宗去华清宫。
English: On the 6th of October, Xuanzong went to the Huaqing Palace.

古文：十一月丁酉，杀户部侍郎杨慎矜及其弟少府少监慎馀、洛阳令慎名。
现代文：十一月二十五日，杀户部侍郎杨慎矜及其弟少府少监杨慎余、洛阳令杨慎名。
English: On November 25th, Yang Shengya, a steward of the Household Division, and his younger brother, Yang Shenyu, a minor magistrate in Luoyang, were killed.

古文：十二月癸丑，至自华清宫。
现代文：十二月十二日，玄宗自华清宫返京。
English: On December 12, Xuanzong returned to Beijing from the Huaqing Palace.

古文：是岁，安西副都护高仙芝及小勃律国战，败之。
现代文：本年，安西副都护高仙芝与小勃律国交战，打败小勃律军。
English: This year, Anxi Vice-Capital Guard Gao Xianzhi fought against Xiao Borui and defeated the Xiao Borui army.

古文：七载五月壬午，群臣上尊号曰开元天宝圣文神武应道皇帝，大赦，免来载租、庸。
现代文：天宝七载五月十三日，群臣给玄宗敬献尊号为开元天宝圣文神武应道皇帝。施行大赦，免除次年的租赋及丁口法定的力役。
English: On the 13th day of May in the seventh month of the Heavenly Treasure era, a group of courtiers gave Xuanzong the honorific title of the founding emperor of the Heavenly Treasure, Shenwen Shimbudo Emperor. An amnesty was carried out, exempting him from the next year's rent and the legal forced labor.

古文：以魏、周、隋为三恪。
现代文：将西魏、北周、隋朝宗室后代作王、侯对待。
English: The descendants of the Western Wei, Northern Zhou and Sui dynasties were treated as kings and princes.

古文：赐京城父老物人十段。
现代文：赐给京城父老每人杂帛十段。
English: Give every resident of Beijing 10 dashes of miso soup.

古文：七十以上版授本县令，妇人县君，六十以上县丞。
现代文：授予七十岁以上的老人本县县令荣衔、老妇人本县县郡荣衔；六十岁以上老人县丞荣衔。
English: Award the title of county magistrate of the county to the elderly over seventy years old, the title of county magistrate of the county to the elderly woman, and the title of county magistrate of the county to the elderly over sixty years old.

古文：天下侍老百岁以上上郡太守，妇人郡君；九十以上上郡司马，妇人县君；八十以上县令，妇人乡君。
现代文：全国贤德老人，百岁以上的老翁、老妇分别授予上等郡太守、郡君荣衔；九十岁以上的分别授予上等郡司马、县君荣衔；八十岁以上的分别授予县令、乡君荣衔。
English: Throughout the country, virtuous old people, old men and old women over the age of 100 were awarded the honorary titles of superior county magistrate and county king respectively; over the age of 90, they were awarded the honorary titles of superior county magistrate and county king respectively; over the age of 80, they were awarded the honorary titles of county magistrate and township king respectively.

古文：赐文武官勋两转，民酺三日。
现代文：赐予文武官员勋官二级，百姓聚饮三日。
English: The civil and military officials were awarded second-class honors, and the people gathered to drink for three days.

古文：十月庚戌，幸华清宫。
现代文：十月十三日，玄宗去华清宫。
English: On October 13, Xuanzong went to the Huaqing Palace.

古文：十二月辛酉，至自华清宫。
现代文：十二月二十五日，自华清宫返京。
English: On December 25, he returned to Beijing from the Huaqing Palace.

古文：八载四月，杀咸宁郡太守赵奉璋。
现代文：天宝八载四月，杀咸宁郡太守赵奉璋。
English: In April, eight years after Tianbao, Zhao Fengya, the governor of Xianning County, was assassinated.

古文：六月乙卯，陇右节度使哥舒翰及吐蕃战于石堡城，败之。
现代文：六月二十二日，陇右节度使哥舒翰与吐蕃军在石堡城交战，打败吐军。
English: On the 22nd of June, the right-hand festival caused Goshukhan and the Tubo army to fight in Shibao City, defeating the Tubo army.

古文：闰月丙寅，谒太清宫，加上玄元皇帝号曰圣祖大道玄元皇帝，增祖宗帝后谥。
现代文：闰六月初四，玄宗拜谒太清宫，给玄元皇帝加献尊号为圣祖大道玄元皇帝，给列祖列宗的皇帝、皇后增赠谥号。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th lunar month, Emperor Xuanzong paid homage to Emperor Taizong of the Qing Dynasty, Emperor Xuanzong gave Emperor Xuanzong the honorary title of the Holy Ancestor, Emperor Xuanzong, and Emperor Xuanzong and Empress Xuanzong gave Emperor Xuanzong the honorary title of the Holy Ancestor.

古文：郡臣上尊号曰开元天地大宝圣文神武应道皇帝，大赦，男子七十、妇人七十五以上皆给一子侍，赐文武官阶、爵，民为户者古爵，酺三日。
现代文：群臣给玄宗敬献尊号为开元天地大宝圣文神武应道皇帝。施行大赦，男子七十岁、妇人七十五岁以上者均让其有一个儿子在身边奉养父母，赐予文武官员官阶、爵位，平民立门户者赐予古爵衔，聚饮三日。
English: In the implementation of the amnesty, men over the age of seventy and women over the age of seventy-five were allowed to have a son to support their parents, civil and military officials were given official ranks and peerages, and civilians who built portals were given ancient peerages, and they gathered for three days.

古文：十月乙丑，幸华清宫。
现代文：十月初四，玄宗去华清宫。
English: On the 4th of October, Xuanzong went to the Huaqing Palace.

古文：是月，特进何履光率十道兵以伐云南。
现代文：本月，特进何履光率领十个道调集的军队征讨云南。
English: This month, the special envoy He Liguang led the army of ten provinces to invade Yunnan.

古文：十一月丁巳，幸御史中丞杨钊庄。
现代文：十一月二十七日，玄宗亲临御史中丞杨钊的庄园。
English: On November 27th, Xuanzong personally visited the manor of the Grand Historian Yang Xi.

古文：九载正月己亥，至自华清宫。
现代文：天宝九载正月初十，玄宗自华清宫返京。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the ninth month of the heavenly treasure, Xuanzong returned to Beijing from the Huaqing Palace.

古文：丁巳，诏以十一月封华岳。
现代文：二十八日，下诏：拟于十一月在华岳筑坛祭天。
English: On the 28th, the following edict was issued: It is planned to hold the altar-raising ceremony in Huatake in November.

古文：三月辛亥，华岳庙灾，关内旱，乃停封。
现代文：三月二十三日，华岳庙火灾，关内旱灾，因而停止华岳祭天事。
English: On March 23rd, Huayue Temple was destroyed by fire, and Guanzhong suffered from drought. As a result, the Huayue Festival was suspended.

古文：五月庚寅，虑囚。
现代文：五月初三，讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the third day of the fifth month, the inmate's criminal record was recorded.

古文：九月辛卯，以商、周、汉为三恪。
现代文：九月初六，将商、周、汉三朝的王室后代作为王、侯对待。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, the royal descendants of the Shang, Zhou and Han dynasties were treated as kings and princes.

古文：十月庚申，幸华清宫。
现代文：十月初五，玄宗去华清宫。
English: On the 5th of October, Xuanzong went to the Huaqing Palace.

古文：太白山人王玄翼言： 玄元皇帝降于宝仙洞。 
现代文：太白山隐士王玄翼声称： 玄元皇帝在宝仙洞降临。 
English: The Taibai Mountain hermit Wang Xuan Ying claimed: Emperor Xuan Yuan descended on Baoshen Cave.

古文：十二月乙亥，至自华清宫。
现代文：十二月二十日，玄宗自华清宫返京。
English: On December 20, Xuanzong returned to Beijing from the Huaqing Palace.

古文：是岁，云南蛮陷云南郡，都督张虔陀死之。
现代文：本年，云南蛮族军攻占云南郡，都督张虔陀身亡。
English: This year, the Yunnan barbarian army occupied Yunnan County, and the governor Zhang Xindu died.

古文：十载正月壬辰，朝献于太清宫。癸巳，朝享于太庙。
现代文：天宝十载正月初八，玄宗在太清宫举行由人代表受祭者食用祭品的 朝献 祭礼仪式。初九，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the 10th year of the Heavenly Treasure, Xuanzong held a morning offering ceremony at the Taiqing Palace, in which the sacrificial offerings were eaten on behalf of the sacrificial victims. On the 9th day of the 1st month, the sacrifices were held at the Grand Temple.

古文：甲午，有事于南郊，大赦，赐侍老粟帛，酺三日。
现代文：初十，在京城南郊祭天，施行大赦，赐给贤德的老人粮食、布帛，聚饮三日。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, in the southern suburb of Beijing, there will be a heavenly sacrifice, an amnesty will be carried out, and the virtuous old people will be given grain, cloth, and drink for three days.

古文：丁酉，李林甫兼朔方军节度副大使、安北副大都护。
现代文：十三日，李林甫兼朔方军节度副大使、安北副大都护。
English: On the 13th, Li Linfu, the vice-ambassador of the Chinese People's Liberation Army and the vice-protector of Anbei.

古文：己亥，改传国宝为 承天大宝 。
现代文：十五日，将传国玉玺改称为 承天大宝 。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Jade Scepter was renamed as the Treasure of Heaven.

古文：戊申，安西四镇节度使高仙芝执突骑施可汗及石国王。
现代文：二十四日，安西四镇节度使高仙芝俘获突骑施可汗与石国王。
English: On the 24th, the Anxi Four Towns Festival made Gao Xianzhi capture Shikhan and Shi Wang.

古文：四月壬午，剑南节度使鲜于仲通及云南蛮战于西洱河，大败绩，大将王天运死之，陷云南都护府。
现代文：四月三十日，剑南节度使鲜于仲通在西洱河与云南蛮族军交战，失败惨重，大将王天运阵亡，云军攻占云南都护府。
English: On April 30th, the Jian'nan Festival caused Shian Yu Zhongtong to fight with the Yunnan barbarian army in the West Minhe River, and failed miserably. General Wang Tianyun was killed in the battle, and the Yunnan army captured the Yunnan capital.

古文：七月，高仙芝及大食战于恒逻斯城，败绩。
现代文：七月，高仙芝在恒逻斯城与大食军交战，大败。
English: In July, Gao Xianzhi fought against the big food army in Hengluos City and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：八月，范阳节度副大使安禄山及契丹战于吐护真河，败绩。
现代文：八月，范阳节度使安禄山在吐护真河与契丹军交战，大败。初五，广陵海潮泛滥。
English: In August, the Fanyang Festival caused Anlu Mountain to fight against the Khitan army in Tujujing River, resulting in a crushing defeat. In the fifth month of the year, the Guangling tides flooded.

古文：丙辰，武库灾。
现代文：初六，武库失火。
English: On the sixth day of the new school year, the arsenal caught fire.

古文：十月壬子，幸华清宫。
现代文：十月初三，玄宗去华清宫。
English: On the third day of October, Xuanzong went to the Huaqing Palace.

古文：十一月乙未，幸杨国忠第。
现代文：十一月十六日，玄宗去到杨国忠府第。
English: On November 16th, Xuanzong went to Yang Guozhong's residence.

古文：十一载正月丁亥，致自华清宫。
现代文：天宝十一载正月初九，自华清宫返京。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the eleventh lunar month, Tianbao returned to Beijing from Huaqing Palace.

古文：二月庚午，突厥部落阿布思寇边。
现代文：二月二十二日，突厥部落阿布思侵犯边境。
English: On February 22, the Turkish tribe of Abs violated the border.

古文：三月乙巳，改尚书省八部名。
现代文：三月二十八日，改换尚书省八个部的名称。
English: On March 28, the names of eight departments in Shangshuo were changed.

古文：四月乙酉，户部郎中王銲、京兆人邢縡谋反，伏诛。
现代文：四月初九，户部郎中王钅旱、京兆人邢纟宰谋反，被处死。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the year, the head of the household, Wang Shaoshan, was executed for plotting a rebellion.

古文：丙戌，杀御史大夫王鉷。
现代文：初十，杀御史大夫王钅共。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, they killed Wang Xizhe, a doctor of history.

古文：李林甫罢安北副大都护。
现代文：免去李林甫安北副大都护职务。
English: Li Linfu'an was relieved of his duties as vice-governor of the North.

古文：五月戌申，庆王琮薨。
现代文：五月初三，庆王李琮去世。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, Qing Wang Lijun passed away.

古文：甲子，东京大风拔木。
现代文：十九日，东京大风拔起树木。
English: High winds uprooted trees in Tokyo on the 19th.

古文：六月壬午，御史大夫兼剑南节度使杨国忠败吐蕃于云南，克故洪城。
现代文：六月初七，御史大夫兼剑南节度使杨国忠在云南打败吐蕃军，攻克故洪城。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th lunar month, Yang Guozhong defeated the Tubo army in Yunnan and conquered the former Hongcheng.

古文：十月戊寅，幸华清宫。
现代文：十月初五，玄宗去华清宫。
English: On October 11, Xuanzong went to the Huaqing Palace.

古文：十一月乙卯，李林甫薨。
现代文：十一月十二日，李林甫去世。
English: On November 12, Li Linfu passed away.

古文：庚申，杨国忠为右相。
现代文：十七日，杨国忠任右相。
English: On the 17th, Yang Guotong was appointed Minister of the Right.

古文：十二月丁亥，至自华清宫。
现代文：十二月十五日，玄宗自华清宫返京。
English: On December 15, Xuanzong returned to Beijing from the Huaqing Palace.

古文：十二载五月己酉，复魏、周、隋为三恪。
现代文：天宝十二载五月初九，恢复魏、北周、隋三朝帝王子孙、王侯的地位。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month of the 12th year of the Heavenly Treasure, the status of princes and princes of the three dynasties of Wei, North Zhou and Sui was restored.

古文：六月，阿布思部落降。
现代文：六月，突厥的阿布思部落投降。
English: In June, the Turkish tribe of Abu Si surrendered.

古文：八月，中书门下虑囚。
现代文：八月，中书省、门下省讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: In August, the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Education and Culture and its subordinate provinces began to investigate and record the crimes of prisoners.

古文：九月甲寅，葛逻禄叶护执阿布思。
现代文：九月十六日，葛逻禄族的叶护官控制阿布思。
English: On September 16th, the Ge Luo Luo clan's Ye guardsmen took control of Absi.

古文：十月戊寅，幸华清宫。
现代文：十月十一日，玄宗去华清宫。
English: On October 11, Xuanzong went to the Huaqing Palace.

古文：十三载正月丙午，至自华清宫。
现代文：天宝十三载正月初十，自华清宫返京。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the 13th lunar month, Tianbao returned to Beijing from Huaqing Palace.

古文：二月壬申，朝献于太清宫，加上玄元皇帝号曰大圣祖高上大道金厥玄元天皇大帝。
现代文：二月初六，玄宗在太清宫举行由人代表受祭者享用祭品的 朝献 祭礼，给玄元皇帝敬加尊号为大圣祖高上大道金阙玄元天皇大帝。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the year, Emperor Xuanzong held a morning offering ceremony at the Taiqing Palace, in which the offerings were enjoyed on behalf of the sacrificial victims. Emperor Xuanzong was given the honorific title of Emperor Xuanzong the Great.

古文：癸酉，朝享于太庙，增祖宗谥。
现代文：初七，祭祀太庙，给先祖增加谥号。
English: On the first day of the seventh month, the temple is dedicated, and the surnames of the ancestors are added.

古文：甲戌，群臣上尊号曰开元天地大宝圣文神武证道孝德皇帝，大赦，左降官遭父母丧者听归。
现代文：初八，群臣给玄宗敬献尊号为开元天地大宝圣文神武证道孝德皇帝；施行大赦，降职官员遭逢父母丧事者听其返里。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, a group of courtiers gave Emperor Xuanzong the honorary title of "Emperor of filial piety, the great treasure of heaven and earth, the embodiment of the holy scriptures and martial arts." An amnesty was carried out, and officials who had been demoted were listened to by those who had lost their parents.

古文：赐孝义旌表者勋两转。
现代文：赐给因孝义受表彰者加勋官两级。
English: Those who were awarded for their filial piety were given two additional ranks.

古文：侍老百岁以上版授本郡太守，妇人郡夫人；九十以上郡长史，妇人郡君；八十以上县令，妇人县君。
现代文：授予贤德老人荣衔：百岁以上者分别荣称本郡太守、郡夫人；九十岁以上者荣称郡长史、郡君；八十岁以上者，荣称县令、县君。
English: Awarding honorary titles to virtuous old people: those who are over 100 years old are respectively honored as the county governor and the county lady; those who are over 90 years old are honored as the county mayor and the county governor; those who are over 80 years old are honored as the county magistrate and the county governor.

古文：太守加赐爵一级，县令勋两转，民酺三日。
现代文：太守加赐爵位一级，县令加勋官两级，百姓聚饮三日。
English: The governor-general was given a first-class knighthood, the county magistrate was given a second-class honor, and the people gathered for a three-day drinking party.

古文：丁丑，杨国忠为司空。
现代文：十一日，杨国忠任司空。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Yang Guotong took up the post of Sifu.

古文：是日，雨土。
现代文：此日，天空降土如雨。
English: On this day, the sky rained down like rain.

古文：三月，陇右、河西节度使哥舒翰败吐蕃，复河源九曲。
现代文：三月，陇右、河西节度使哥舒翰打败吐蕃，收复河源、九曲。
English: In March, during the festival in Shiyu and Hexi, Goshukhan defeated Tubo and recovered Heyuan and Jiuqu.

古文：辛酉，大风拔木。
现代文：二十五日，大风拔起树木。
English: On the 25th, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：五月壬戌，观酺于勤政楼，北庭都护程千里俘阿布思以献。
现代文：五月二十七日，玄宗在勤政楼观看聚宴，北庭都护程千里俘获阿布思献给朝廷。
English: On May 27th, Emperor Xuanzong watched a banquet at the Gongzheng Building. The Northern Court Guard captured and presented to the imperial court the Abusir.

古文：六月乙丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of June, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：剑南节度留后李宓及云南蛮战于西洱河，死之。
现代文：剑南节度留后李宓在西洱河与云南蛮军交战，阵亡。
English: After the Jian'nan Festival, Li Yao fought with the Yunnan barbarian army in the Xidi River and was killed.

古文：八月丙戌，陈希烈罢。
现代文：八月二十三日，陈希烈被免职。
English: On August 23, Chen Xilei was removed from his post.

古文：文部侍郎韦见素为武部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：文部侍郎韦见素任武部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
English: Wei Wei, a chamberlain of the Ministry of Education, was appointed as the secretary of Takebe Hisanobu, and he was also a disciple of Takebe's disciple, Shitahira Shoji.

古文：是秋，瀍、洛水溢。
现代文：本年秋季，鏶、洛二水泛滥。
English: In the autumn of this year, Shandong and Liaoning provinces were flooded.

古文：十月乙酉，幸华清宫。十二月戊午，至自华清宫。
现代文：十月二十三日，玄宗去华清宫；十二月二十八日，自华清宫返京。
English: On October 23rd, Xuanzong went to Huaqing Palace; on December 28th, he returned to Beijing from Huaqing Palace.

古文：十四载三月壬午，安禄山及契丹战于潢水，败之。
现代文：天宝十四载三月二十三日，安禄山与契丹军在潢水交战，打败契丹军。
English: On March 23 of the 14th year of the Heavenly Treasure, Anlu Mountain fought with the Khitan army in Surabaya, defeating the Khitan army.

古文：五月，天有声于浙西。
现代文：五月，在浙西，天空有异声。
English: In May, in western Zhejiang, there was a strange sound in the sky.

古文：八月辛卯，降死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：八月初四，对死刑囚犯减刑，流放以下罪犯免刑。
English: On August 4th, the sentences of death row prisoners were commuted, and the following exiled criminals were pardoned.

古文：免今载租、庸半。
现代文：免除本年租赋、丁口力役一半。
English: Exempt from this year's rent, half of Dingkou Liyu.

古文：赐侍老米。
现代文：赐给老人米。
English: Give the old man some rice.

古文：十月庚寅，幸华清宫。
现代文：十月初四，玄宗去华清宫。
English: On the 4th of October, Xuanzong went to the Huaqing Palace.

古文：十一月，安禄山反，陷河北诸郡。
现代文：十一月，安禄山反叛，攻占河北诸郡。
English: In November, Anlu Mountain rebelled and occupied counties in Hebei Province.

古文：范阳将何千年杀河东节度使杨光翙。
现代文：范阳将领何千年杀了河东节度使杨光岁羽。
English: General Fan Yang killed thousands of years of Hedong Festival to make Yang Guang years old.

古文：壬申，伊西节度使封常清为范阳、平卢节度使，以讨安禄山。
现代文：十七日伊西节度使封常清任范阳、平卢节度使，以讨伐安禄山。
English: On the seventeenth day of the Issi Festival, the envoys of Fong Changqing appointed Fan Yang and Pinglu Festival envoys to fight against Anlu Mountain.

古文：丙子，至自华清宫。
现代文：二十一日，玄宗自华清宫返京。
English: On the 21st, Xuanzong returned to Beijing from the Huaqing Palace.

古文：九原郡太守郭子仪为朔方军节度副大使，右羽林军大将军王承业为太原尹，卫尉卿张介然为河南节度采访使，右金吾大将军程千里为上党郡长史，以讨安禄山。
现代文：九原郡太守郭子仪任朔方军节度副大使，右羽林大将军王承业任太原尹，卫尉卿张介然任河南节度采访使，右金吾大将军程千里任上党郡长史，以讨伐安禄山。
English: Guo Ziyi, the governor of Jiuyuan County, was appointed the deputy ambassador of the Shao Fang Army for the festival, Wang Chengye, the right-wing general, was appointed the ambassador of the Taiyuan Yin Army for the festival, Zhang Jialan, the lieutenant general, was appointed the envoy of the Henan Festival for the festival, and Cheng Qili, the right-wing general, was appointed the party chief of the county to fight against Anlu Mountain.

古文：丁丑，荣王琬为东讨元帅，高仙芝副之。
现代文：二十二日，荣王李琬任东讨元帅，高仙芝任东讨副元帅。
English: On the 22nd, Rong Wang Lijun was appointed as the marshal of the Eastern Expedition, and Gao Xianzhi was appointed as the deputy marshal of the Eastern Expedition.

古文：十二月丁亥，安禄山陷灵昌郡。
现代文：十二月初二，安禄山攻破灵昌郡。
English: On the second day of December, Anlu Mountain broke through Lingchang County.

古文：辛卯，陷陈留郡，执太守郭纳，张介然死之。
现代文：初六，攻破陈留郡，俘虏太守郭纳，张介然身亡。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Chenliu County was conquered, Guo Na, the grand marshal, was taken prisoner, and Zhang Jieran was killed.

古文：癸巳，安禄山陷荥阳郡，太守崔无诐死之。
现代文：初八，安禄山攻破荥阳郡，太守崔元讠皮殉难。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Anlu Mountain defeated Poyang County, and the governor Cui Yuanpi was martyred.

古文：丙申，封常清及安禄山战于甕子谷，败绩。
现代文：十一日，封常清在子谷与安禄山交战，大败。
English: On the 11th day, Fuzhongqing fought with Anlu Mountain in Zidani and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：丁酉，陷东京，留守李憕、御史中丞卢弈、判官蒋清死之。
现代文：十二日，叛军攻破东京，留守李忄登、御史中丞卢弈、判官蒋清殉难。
English: On the 12th, the rebel army broke through Tokyo, leaving Li Shouden, Gu Shi Zhongzheng Lu Yi, and judge Jiang Qing as martyrs.

古文：河南尹达奚珣叛降于安禄山。
现代文：河南尹达奚繤叛变投降安禄山。
English: Anlu Mountain, Henan Province, surrendered to Yin Dazhao's mutiny.

古文：己亥，恒山郡太守颜杲卿败何千年，执之，克赵、钜鹿、广平、清河、河间、景城、乐安、博平、博陵、上谷、文安、信都、魏、鄴十四郡。
现代文：十四日，恒山郡太守颜杲卿打败并俘获何千年，攻克赵、钜鹿、广平、清河、河间、景城、乐安、博平、博陵、上谷、文安、信都、魏、邺十四个郡。
English: On the 14th, the governor of Hengshan County, Yan Bingqing, defeated and captured thousands of years, and conquered fourteen counties including Zhao, Menglu, Guangping, Qinghe, Hema, Jingcheng, Le'an, Boping, Boling, Shanggu, Wen'an, Xindu, Wei and Handan.

古文：癸卯，封常清、高仙芝伏诛。
现代文：十八日，封常清、高仙芝被处死。
English: On the 18th, Fong Changqing and Gao Xianzhi were executed.

古文：哥舒翰持节统领处置太子先锋兵马副元帅，守潼关。
现代文：哥舒翰持朝廷符节统领处置太子先锋兵马副元帅，守潼关。
English: Goshukhan, holding the imperial insignia, commanded the disposition of the prince's vanguard, the deputy marshal of the soldiers and horses, and guarded Shaoguan.

古文：甲辰，郭子仪及安禄山将高秀岩战于河曲，败之。
现代文：十九日，郭子仪在河曲与安禄山部将高秀岩交战，将其打败。
English: On the 19th, Guo Ziyi fought Gao Xiuyan in the mountains of Anlu in Hequ and defeated him.

古文：戊申，荣王琬薨。
现代文：二十三日，荣王李琬去世。
English: On the 23rd, Rongwang Li Yong passed away.

古文：壬子，济南郡太守李随、单父尉贾贲、濮阳人尚衡以兵讨安禄山。
现代文：二十七日，济南郡太守李随、单父尉贾贲、濮阳人尚衡率军讨伐安禄山。
English: On the 27th, Li Zui, the governor of Jinan County, Jia Yao, and Shang Heng, a native of Shenyang, led an army to fight against Anlu Mountain.

古文：是月，平原郡太守颜真卿、饶阳郡太守卢全诚、司马李正以兵讨安禄山。
现代文：本月，平原郡太守颜真卿、饶阳郡太守卢全诚、司马李正率军讨伐安禄山。
English: This month, Plain County Governor Yan Zhenqing, Raoyang County Governor Lu Quancheng, and Sima Li Zheng led the army to fight against Anlu Mountain.

古文：十五载正月乙卯，东平郡太守嗣昊王祗以兵讨安禄山。
现代文：天宝十五载正月初一，东平郡太守嗣吴王李祗率军讨伐安禄山。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 15th year of the Heavenly Treasure, Wu Wang Lijun, the governor of Dongping County, led an army to fight against Anlu Mountain.

古文：丙辰，李隋为河南节度使，以讨安禄山。
现代文：初二，李随任河南节度使，以讨伐安禄山。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, Li accompanied the Henan Festival envoy to fight against Anlu Mountain.

古文：壬戌，禄山陷恒山郡，执颜杲卿、袁履谦，陷鄴、广平、钜鹿、赵、上谷、博陵、文安、魏、信都九郡。
现代文：初八，安禄山攻破恒山郡，俘虏颜杲卿、袁履谦；攻破邺、广平、钜鹿、赵、上谷、博陵、文安、魏、信都九个郡。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Mount Anlu conquered Hengshan County, and captured Yan Yuqing and Yuan Luqian. It also conquered nine counties, including Handan, Guangping, Menglu, Zhao, Shanggu, Boling, Wen'an, Wei and Xindu.

古文：癸亥，朔方军节度副使李光弼为河东节度副大使，以讨禄山。
现代文：初九，朔方军节度副使李光弼任河东节度副大使讨伐安禄山。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Li Guangyao, the deputy envoy of the Suo Fang Army for the Eastern Song Festival, was appointed as the deputy ambassador of the Eastern Song Festival to fight against Anlu Mountain.

古文：甲子，南阳郡太守鲁炅为南阳节度使，率岭南、黔中、山南东道兵屯于叶县。
现代文：初十，南阳郡太守鲁炅任南阳节度使，率岭南、黔中、山南东道军队驻扎叶县。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Nanyang County Governor Lu Wei was appointed as the Nanyang Festival envoy, and led the host army of Lingnan, Luzhong and Shannan to be stationed in Ye County.

古文：乙丑，安庆绪寇潼关，哥舒翰败之。
现代文：十一日，安庆绪进攻潼关，哥舒翰将其打败。
English: On the 11th day, An Qingxu attacked Shaoguan, and Goshukhan defeated him.

古文：丁丑，真源令张巡以兵讨安禄山。
现代文：二十三日，真源令张巡率兵讨伐安禄山。
English: On the 23rd, Zhenyuan ordered Zhang Jun and his soldiers to attack Anlu Mountain.

古文：二月己亥，嗣吴王祗及禄山将谢元同战于陈留，败之。
现代文：二月十五日，嗣吴王李祗在陈留与安禄山部将谢元同交战，将其打败。
English: On February 15th, the King of Wu, Li Xi, fought with the Anlu mountain general Xie Yuan in Chenliu and defeated him.

古文：李光弼克常山郡，郭子仪出井陉会光弼，及安禄山将史思明战，败之。
现代文：李光弼攻克常山郡，郭子仪出并州与李光弼会合，与安禄山部将史思明交战，将其打败。
English: Li Guangyao conquered Changshan County, Guo Ziyi went out and joined Li Guangyao, and fought with Shi Siming, the commander of Anlu Mountain, and defeated him.

古文：庚子，贾贲战于雍丘，死之。三月，颜真卿克魏郡。
现代文：十六日，贾贲在雍丘阵亡。三月，颜真卿攻破魏郡。
English: On the 16th, Jia Wei died in battle at Yongqiu. In March, Yan Zhenqing conquered Wei County.

古文：史思明寇饶阳、平原。
现代文：史思明进攻饶阳、平原。
English: Shi Siming attacked Raoyang and Pingyuan.

古文：乙卯，张巡及安禄山将令狐潮战于雍丘，败之。
现代文：初二，张巡在雍丘与安禄山的部将令狐潮交战，打败令狐潮。
English: On the second day of junior high school, Zhang Jun fought against the leader of Anlu Mountain in Yongqiu and defeated the leader of Lingfuchao.

古文：丙辰，杀户部尚书安思顺、太仆卿安元贞。
现代文：初三，杀户部尚书安思顺、太仆卿安元贞。
English: In the third year of junior high school, An Shishun, a homicide investigator, and An Yuanzhen, a courtier, star.

古文：乙丑，李光弼克赵郡。
现代文：十二日，李光弼攻克赵郡。
English: On the 12th, Li Guangya attacked Zhao County.

古文：四月乙酉，北海郡太守贺兰进明以兵救平原。
现代文：四月初二，北海郡太守贺兰进明率兵救平原。
English: On the second day of April, the governor of Beihai County, Heran Jinming, led troops to rescue the plain.

古文：丙午，太子左赞善大夫来瑱为颍川郡太安、兼招讨使。
现代文：二十三日，太子左赞善大夫来調任颍川郡太守兼招讨使。
English: On the 23rd, Prince Zuo Zanzan, a doctor, was transferred to the post of Shichuan County Governor and Recruiting Envoy.

古文：五月丁巳，鲁炅及安禄山战于滍水，败绩，奔于南阳。
现代文：五月初四，鲁炅在氵蚩水与安禄山交战，大败，逃往南阳。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month, Lu Wei fought with Anlu Shan in Surabaya. He was soundly defeated and fled to Nanyang.

古文：戊辰，嗣虢王巨为河南节度使。
现代文：十五日，嗣虢王李巨任河南节度使。
English: On the 15th, the heir to the throne, King Li Jiu, was appointed the Henan Festival envoy.

古文：六月癸未，颜真卿及安禄山将袁知泰战于堂邑，败之。
现代文：六月初一，颜真卿在堂邑与安禄山部将袁知泰交战，打败袁军。
English: On the first day of June, Yan Zhenqing fought Yuan Zhitai in Dongyue and Anlu Mountain and defeated Yuan's army.

古文：贺兰进明克信都。
现代文：贺兰进明攻克信都。
English: Helan Jinming conquers Xindu.

古文：丙戌，哥舒翰及安禄山战于灵宝西原，败绩。
现代文：初四，哥舒翰与安禄山在灵宝西原交战，大败。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Goshukhan fought with An Lushan in Lingbao West Plains, and was soundly defeated.

古文：是日，郭子仪、李光弼及史思明战于嘉山，败之。
现代文：此日，郭子仪、李光弼与史思明在嘉山交战，将其打败。
English: On this day, Guo Ziyi, Li Guangyao and Shi Siming fought in Jiashan and defeated him.

古文：辛卯蕃将火拔归仁执哥舒翰叛降于安禄山，遂陷潼关、上洛郡。
现代文：初九，蕃将火拔归仁抓了哥舒翰叛变投降安禄山，从而攻破潼关及上洛郡。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 9th month of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9

古文：甲午，诏亲征。
现代文：十二日，玄宗诏令亲征。
English: On the 12th, Emperor Xuanzong issued an edict to personally enlist.

古文：京兆尹崔光远为西京留守、招讨处置使。
现代文：京兆尹崔光远任西京留守、招讨处置使。
English: Jing Zhao, Yin Cui Guang, was stationed in West Beijing as an envoy to solicit and resolve disputes.

古文：丙申，行在望贤宫。
现代文：十四日，玄宗设置望贤宫。
English: On the 14th, Emperor Xuanzong set up the Palace of the Wise Men.

古文：丁酉，次马嵬，左龙武大将军陈玄礼杀杨国忠及御史大夫魏方进、太常卿杨暄。
现代文：十五日，歇驻马嵬，左龙武大将军陈玄礼杀了杨国忠与御史大夫魏方进、太常卿杨暄。
English: On the fifteenth day, he was stationed in Ma'an, and General Chen Xuanli killed Yang Guozhong, Grand Historian Wei Fangjin, and First Secretary Yang Jie.

古文：赐贵妃杨氏死。
现代文：玄宗赐贵妃杨玉环死。
English: Emperor Xuanzong bestowed Yang Yuluan, a noble consort, with immortality.

古文：是日，张巡及安禄山将翟伯玉战于白沙埚，败之。
现代文：此日，张巡在白沙埚与安禄山部将翟伯玉交战，将其击败。
English: On this day, Zhang Jun fought Zou Boyu in Baishabu and Anlu Mountain and defeated him.

古文：己亥，禄山陷京师。
现代文：十七日，安禄山攻破京城长安。
English: On the 17th, Anlu Mountain broke through the capital Chang'an.

古文：辛丑，次陈仓。
现代文：十九日，玄宗歇驻陈仓。
English: On the 19th, Xuanzong left Chencang.

古文：闲厩使任沙门叛降于禄山。
现代文：闲厩使任沙门叛变投降安禄山。
English: Leisure stables make Ren Shamen mutiny and surrender to Anlu Mountain.

古文：丙午，次河池郡。
现代文：二十四日，玄宗歇驻河池郡。
English: On the 24th, Xuanzong left Hechi County.

古文：剑南节度使崔圆为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章昌事。
现代文：剑南节度使崔圆任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: The Jian'nan Festival made Cui Yuan serve as the junior secretary of the middle school and the junior secretary of the middle school.

古文：七月甲子，次普安郡。
现代文：七月十二日，玄宗歇驻普安郡。
English: On July 12, Xuanzong left Pu'an County.

古文：宪部侍郎房琯为文部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：宪部侍郎房任文部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
English: Fusa, the attendant of the Ministry of Constitution, was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Education, and Shoji NAKAHIRA was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Education.

古文：丁卯，皇太子为天下兵马元帅，都统朔方、河东、河北、平卢节度使，御史中丞裴冕、陇酉郡司马刘秩副之。
现代文：十五日，皇太子李亨任天下兵马元帅，都统朔方、河东、河北、平卢节度使，御史中丞裴冕、陇西郡司马刘秩任其副职。
English: On the 15th, the crown prince Li Heng was appointed as the world's field marshal of the army and horses. He was appointed as the chief of the military governor of Shuofang, Hedong, Hebei, and Pinglu, and the vice-commander of the military governor of Guizhong, Fei Guan, and the county magistrate of Shaanxi, Ma Liu Zicheng.

古文：江陵大都督永王璘为山南东路黔中江南西路节度使，盛王琦为广陵郡都督、江南东路淮南道节度使，丰王珙为武威郡都督、河西陇右安西北庭节度使。
现代文：江陵大都督永王李瞞任山南东路、黔中、江南西路节度使，盛王李琦任广陵郡都督，江南东路、淮南道节度使，丰王李珙任武威郡都督，河西、陇右、安西、北庭节度使。
English: Yong Wang Lixi, the governor of Jiangling, was appointed as the chief delegate of Shannan East Road, Guizhong Road and Jiangnan West Road; Sheng Wang Lijun was appointed as the governor of Guangling County, Jiangnan East Road and Huainan Road; Feng Wang Lijun was appointed as the governor of Wuwei County, and was appointed as the chief delegate of Hexi, Guizhong, Anxi and Beiting.

古文：庚午，次巴西郡。
现代文：十八日，玄宗歇驻巴西郡。
English: On the 18th, Xuanzong left for Brazil County.

古文：以太守崔涣为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事，韦见素为左相。
现代文：以太守崔涣任门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事，韦见素为左相。
English: With the governor of Taiyuan, Cui Yao, serving as his attendant, and the chancellor of the same school, Xia Ping, as his secretary, Wei Xiansu became his left-hand man.

古文：庚辰，次蜀郡。
现代文：二十八日，歇驻蜀郡。
English: On the 28th, he left Shu County.

古文：八月壬午，大赦，赐文武官阶、爵，为安禄山胁从能自归者原之。
现代文：八月初一，施行大赦，赐予文武官员官阶、爵位，被安禄山胁迫随从能自拔来归者给予宽免。
English: On the first day of August, an amnesty was implemented, civil and military officials were given official ranks and peerages, and those who were forced to follow An Lushan and were able to return voluntarily were granted clemency.

古文：癸巳，皇太子即皇帝位于灵武，以闻。
现代文：十二日，皇太子李亨在灵武登基，奏报玄宗。
English: On the 12th, Crown Prince Li Heng ascended to the throne in Lingwu, reporting to Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：庚子，上皇天帝诰遣韦见素、房琯、崔涣奉皇帝册于灵武。
现代文：十九日，玄宗颁诰派韦见素、房、崔涣将皇帝册书奉送至灵武。
English: On the 19th, Xuanzong sent Wei Mingsu, Fang, and Cui Yao to deliver the imperial record to Lingwu.

古文：十一月甲寅，宪部尚书李麟同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十一月初四，宪部尚书李麟加同中书门下平章事。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, Li Lin of the Constitutional Department and Zhong Shumen of the General Office of the People's Republic of China signed an agreement.

古文：十二月甲辰，永王璘反，废为庶人。
现代文：十二月二十五日，永王李瞞反叛，被废黜为平民。
English: On December 25th, Yong Wang Li Zhe rebelled and was deposed as a commoner.

古文：至德二载正月庚戌，诰求天下孝悌可旌者。
现代文：至德二载正月初一，玄宗颁诰向全国招求孝亲敬兄可予表彰者。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second month of the year, Xuanzong issued a notice to the whole country to invite those who could be commended for filial piety and respect.

古文：甲子，剑南健儿贾秀反，伏诛。
现代文：十五日，剑南的勇士贾秀反叛，被处死。
English: On the 15th, Jia Xiu, a warrior from Jianan, rebelled and was executed.

古文：三月庚午，通化郡言玄元皇帝降。
现代文：三月二十二日，通化郡传言玄元皇帝降临。
English: On March 22nd, Emperor Xuanyuan is rumored to have arrived in Tonghua County.

古文：五月庚申，诰追册贵嫔杨氏为皇后。
现代文：五月十三日，玄宗行文追立贵妃杨玉环为皇后。
English: On May 13th, Emperor Xuanzong issued an edict to crown Yang Yuhuan as empress.

古文：七月庚戌，行营健儿李季反，伏诛。
现代文：七月初四，行营的勇军士李季反叛，被处死。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month, the camp's brave sergeant Li Ji rebelled and was executed.

古文：庚午，剑南健儿郭千仞反，伏诛。
现代文：二十四日，剑南勇士郭千仞反叛，被处死。
English: On the 24th, Guo Qianqian, a warrior from Jianan, rebelled and was executed.

古文：十月丁巳，皇帝复京师，以闻。
现代文：十月十三日，肃宗李亨收复京城长安，禀报玄宗。
English: On October 13th, Su Zong Li Heng recovered the capital Chang'an, and reported to Xuanzong.

古文：诰降剑南囚罪，流以下原之。
现代文：玄宗颁诰对剑南的囚犯减刑，流放刑罚以下的罪犯免刑。
English: Xuanzong issued an edict to commute the sentences of the prisoners in Jian'nan, and exempted the criminals with less than the sentence of banishment.

古文：十二月丁未，至自蜀郡，居于兴庆宫。
现代文：十二月初四，玄宗自蜀郡返回京城，居住兴庆宫。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, Xuanzong returned to Beijing from Shu County and lived in the Xingqing Palace.

古文：三载，上号曰太上至道圣皇天帝。
现代文：至德三载，肃宗给玄宗进献尊号为太上至道圣皇天帝。
English: After three years of asceticism, Emperor Su Zong gave Emperor Xuanzong the honorary title of the Supreme Emperor of Heaven.

古文：上元元年，徙居于西内甘露殿。
现代文：上元元年，玄宗迁居于西内甘露殿。
English: In the first year of the Shang Dynasty, Xuanzong moved to the Shinnai Nectar Hall.

古文：元年建巳月，崩于神龙殿，年七十八。
现代文：本年四月，玄宗在神龙殿逝世，终年七十八岁。
English: In April of this year, Emperor Xuanzong passed away in the Dragon Hall at the age of 78.

古文：赞曰：睿宗因其子之功，而在位不久，固无可称者。
现代文：评说：睿宗依靠其子玄宗之功登基，而在位又不久，因而没有可评述的事。
English: Comment: Emperor Ruizong ascended to the throne on the merits of his son Emperor Xuanzong, and his reign was short, so there is nothing to comment on.

古文：呜呼，女子之祸于人者甚矣！
现代文：可叹哪，女子对人的祸害太厉害了！
English: Alas, women are such a scourge to mankind!

古文：自高祖至于中宗，数十年间，再罹女祸，唐祚既绝而复续，中宗不免其身，韦氏遂以灭族。
现代文：自高祖到中宗，数十年间，一再遭受女子干政之祸，李唐皇位断而复续，中宗身不免祸，韦氏因此灭族。
English: From Gao Zu to Zhong Zong, for decades, they repeatedly suffered from the misfortune of women entering politics, the reign of Emperor Li Tang was intermittent and repeated, Zhong Zong was not immune to misfortune, and the Wei clan was thus exterminated.

古文：玄宗亲平其乱，可以鉴矣，而又败以女子。
现代文：玄宗亲自平靖韦氏之乱，实在值得以其为鉴了，却又毁于女子。
English: Xuanzong's personal pacification of the Wei Rebellion is truly worthy of emulation, but it was ruined by a woman.

古文：方其励精政事，开元之际，几致太平，何其盛也！
现代文：当他振作精神治理国政，开元之际，近于太平治世，那是何等兴盛呵！
English: When he invigorated the spirit to govern the country, at the beginning of the year, close to the Taiping reign, what a prosperity!

古文：及侈心一动，穷天下之欲不足为其乐，而溺其所甚爱，忘其所可戒，至于窜身失国而不悔。
现代文：到他放纵之心一动，竭尽天下之所好也不能满足其享乐，又沉溺于宠爱的人，忘了值得警戒的教训，乃至于逃命失国而不改。
English: When his licentious heart is moved, and he is unable to satisfy his pleasures by doing all that is good in the world, and he indulges in his beloved, he forgets the lessons that are worth guarding, and even flees for his life and country without changing.

古文：考其始终之异，其性习之相远也至于如此。
现代文：考察他从开始到最后的差异，其禀性因习染而相距之远竟达到了如此地步。
English: Look at the difference in him from start to finish, his resilience through adversity and how far he's come.

古文：可不慎哉！
现代文：能不谨慎吗！
English: You can't be too careful!

古文：可不慎哉！
现代文：能不谨慎吗！
English: You can't be too careful!

