古文：刘第五班王李刘晏，字士安，曹州南华人。
现代文：刘晏的字叫士安，曹州南华县人。
English: Liu Wei's Chinese name is Shi'an. He is from Nanhua County, Caozhou.

古文：玄宗封泰山，晏始八岁，献颂行在，帝奇其幼，命宰相张说试之，说曰： 国瑞也。 
现代文：唐玄宗在泰山封禅，刘晏才八岁，献颂文到皇帝驻处，皇帝对他年幼能文感到惊奇，令宰相张说考查他，张说称： 是国宝。 
English: Tang Xuan Zong was only eight years old when he went to the emperor's residence to offer a tribute to the emperor. The emperor was surprised at his young ability to write, so the prime minister Zhang said that he would examine him. Zhang said that he was a national treasure.

古文：即授太子正字。
现代文：当即封为太子正字官。
English: He was immediately appointed to the post of crown prince.

古文：公卿邀请旁午，号神童，名震一时。
现代文：大官们纷纷邀请，号称神童，名声轰动一时。
English: Invited by dignitaries one after another, known as a child prodigy, his fame was sensational.

古文：天宝中，累调夏令，未尝督赋，而输无逋期。
现代文：天宝中期，多次升官后任夏县县令，没有督缴过赋税，但缴纳没有违期的。
English: In the middle of the Tianbao period, after being promoted several times, he served as the county magistrate of Xia County. He did not supervise the payment of taxes, but the payment was not overdue.

古文：举贤良方正，补温令，所至有惠利可纪，民皆刻石以传。
现代文：被推举为贤良方正，授任温县县令，任职处都有善政可供记载，人民都刻碑传诵。
English: He was elected as the virtuous Fang Zheng, and was appointed as the county magistrate of Wenzhou County. All the offices have good governance records, and the people have inscribed monuments and recited them.

古文：再迁侍御史。
现代文：又升任侍御史。
English: He was also promoted to the position of Samurai Historian.

古文：禄山乱，避地襄阳。
现代文：安禄山叛乱，他避乱到襄阳。
English: Anlu Mountain rebellion, he fled to Xiangyang.

古文：永王璘署晏右职，固辞。
现代文：永王李瞞任命刘晏为高官，他坚决推辞了。
English: Yong Wang Li secretly appointed Liu Wei as a high-ranking official, and he firmly refused.

古文：移书房琯，论封建与古异， 今诸王出深宫，一旦望桓、文功，不可致。 
现代文：他写信给房，谈论分封和古代不同： 现众王从宫廷到外面去任职，一下子希望建齐桓、晋文公的功劳，不可能！ 
English: He wrote to Fong, talking about the difference between the division of the fief and the ancient times: Now the kings go from the court to the outside to serve, and suddenly hope to build Qihuan, the merit of Jin Wenguang, impossible!

古文：诏拜度支郎中，兼侍御史，领江淮租庸事。
现代文：有诏任命他为度支郎中，兼任侍御史，管理江淮租庸事务。
English: An imperial edict appointed him as the second-ranking official in the imperial household, and he also served as an attendant to the emperor, managing the affairs of the Jianghuai and Renyong dynasties.

古文：晏至吴郡而璘反，乃与采访使李希言谋拒之。
现代文：刘晏到吴郡遇李瞞反叛，就和采访使李希言谋划抵御他。
English: When Liu Bei encountered Li Xizhe's rebellion in Wu County, he and Li Xiyan plotted to resist him.

古文：希言假晏守余杭，会战不利，走依晏。
现代文：李希言请刘晏守余杭，他战败后，逃来依靠刘晏。
English: Li Xijin asked Liu Bei to guard Yuhang. After his defeat, he fled to rely on Liu Bei.

古文：晏为陈可守计，因发义兵坚壁。
现代文：刘晏告诉他可以守御的办法，因此召募义军坚守营垒。
English: Liu Bei told him that there was a way to defend the fortress, so he called for volunteers to defend the fortress.

古文：会王败，欲转略州县，闻晏有备，遂自晋陵西走。
现代文：后来李瞞战败，想回头攻占各州县，听说刘晏有防备，就从晋陵西逃。
English: Later, Li Xie was defeated and wanted to turn back to conquer the states and counties. Hearing that Liu Bei was prepared, he fled west from Jinling.

古文：终不言功。
现代文：刘晏从不谈自己的功劳。
English: Liu Wei never talks about his own merits.

古文：召拜彭原太守，徙陇、华二州刺史，迁河南尹。
现代文：皇帝召回他任命为彭原太守，后调任陇、华两州刺史，升任河南府尹。
English: The emperor recalled him and appointed him as the governor of Pengyuan. Later, he was transferred to be the governor of Shandong Province, the governor of Hualien Province, and the governor of Henan Province.

古文：时史朝义盗东都，乃治长水。
现代文：当时史朝义占据着洛阳，就治理长水县。
English: At that time, Shi Chaoyi occupied Luoyang and governed Changshui County.

古文：进户部侍郎，兼御史中丞、度支铸钱盐铁等使。
现代文：又升任户部侍郎，兼任御史中丞，度支、铸钱、盐铁等使。
English: He was also promoted to the position of household chamberlain, concurrently serving as goshi chujo, doshi, minted money, salt iron and other envoys.

古文：京兆尹郑叔清、李齐物坐残挚罢，诏晏兼京兆尹。
现代文：京兆尹郑叔清、李齐物因残暴贪婪被罢免，有诏命刘晏兼任京兆尹。
English: Jing Zhaoyin, Zheng Shuqing, and Li Qiming were removed from office for cruelty and greed, and Liu Qi was also appointed to the post of Jing Zhaoyin.

古文：总大体不苛，号称职。
现代文：总体看认真，号称称职。
English: On the whole, they are conscientious and claim to be competent.

古文：会司农卿严庄下狱，已而释，诬劾晏漏禁中语，宰相萧华亦忌之，贬通州刺史。
现代文：遇到司农卿严庄被关进监狱，不久释放了，诬奏刘晏泄漏宫中的话，宰相萧华也妒忌他，贬任通州刺史。
English: When he met the Secretary of Agriculture Yan Zhuang, he was put in prison and soon released. He falsely accused Liu Bei of leaking the words from the palace. The Prime Minister Xiao Hua was also jealous of him and demoted him to the position of Tongzhou assassin.

古文：代宗立，复为京兆尹、户部侍郎，领度支、盐铁、转运、铸钱、租庸使。
现代文：唐代宗登基，重任京兆尹，户部侍郎，任度支、盐铁、转运、铸钱、租庸使。
English: Emperor Zong of the Tang Dynasty ascended to the throne, and he was given the important posts of Jing Zhaoyun, Household Attendant, and the posts of tributary, salt and iron, transportation, minting money, and renting yo-yo.

古文：晏以户部让颜真卿，改国子祭酒。
现代文：刘晏将户部侍郎让给颜真卿，被改封国子祭酒。
English: Liu Ye ceded the position of household attendant to Yan Zhenqing, and was given the title of the son of the country.

古文：又以京兆让严武，即拜吏部尚书、同中书门下平章事，使如故。
现代文：他又将京兆尹让给严武，马上被任命为吏部尚书、同中书门下平章事，使职仍旧。
English: He also ceded Jingzhao Yin to Yanwu, and was immediately appointed as the head of the personnel department, Shangshu, and the head of the middle school, Xia Pingzhang. He still holds the post.

古文：坐与程元振善，罢为太子宾客。
现代文：因与程元振关系好，被免职任太子宾客。
English: Due to his good relationship with Cheng Yuan Zhen, he was removed from his post as the crown prince's guest.

古文：俄进御史大夫，领东都、河南、江淮转运、租庸、盐铁、常平使。
现代文：不久升任御史大夫，任东都、河南、江淮转运、租庸、盐铁、常平使。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of chief historian, and served as the envoy to Dongdu, Henan, Jianghuai transshipment, Xianyong, Salt and Iron, and Changping.

古文：时大兵后，京师米斗千钱，禁膳不兼时，甸农挼穗以输。
现代文：当时大战之后，京城米价每斗一千钱，皇宫厨房没有一个季度的积蓄，靠郊县农民搓谷穗来供应。
English: At that time, after the World War II, the price of rice in Beijing was 1,000 yuan per barrel, and the kitchen of the Imperial Palace did not have a single quarter of savings, relying on the farmers in the suburbs to supply the rice.

古文：晏乃自按行，浮淮、泗，达于汴，入于河。
现代文：刘晏就亲自巡视，从淮河、泗河乘船，抵达汴河，进入黄河。
English: Liu Wei personally inspected, took a boat from the Huaihe River and the Fenhe River, arrived at the Fenhe River and entered the Yellow River.

古文：右循底柱、硖石，观三门遗迹；至河阴、巩、洛，见宇文恺梁公堰，厮河为通济渠，视李杰新堤，尽得其病利。
现代文：向西经过砥柱、硖石，观察三门渠道渡口的遗址；到达河阴、巩县、洛阳，看到宇文恺修建的梁公堰，分黄河水入通济渠，观察李杰修建的新堤，知道了它们所有的弊病和好处。
English: Heading west, he passed through the pillars and boulders to observe the ruins of the Three-Gate Channel Ferry Port. When he arrived at Heyin, Gongxian and Luoyang, he saw the Lianggong Weir built by Yu Wenzhong, the branch of the Yellow River into the Tongji Canal, and observed the new dike built by Li Jie. He knew all their drawbacks and benefits.

古文：然畏为人牵制，乃移书于宰相元载，以为： 大抵运之利与害各有四：京师三辅，苦税入之重，淮、湖粟至，可减徭赋半，为一利；东都雕破，百户无一存，若漕路流通，则聚落邑廛渐可还定，为二利；诸将有不廷，戎虏有侵盗，闻我贡输错入，军食丰衍，可以震耀夷夏，为三利；若舟车既通，百货杂集，航海梯峤，可追贞观、永徽之盛，为四利。
现代文：但担心受人干涉，就发函给宰相元载，认为： 大体漕运的有利和困难各有四点：京城关中，为赋税繁重苦恼，淮河、洞庭的粮食运到，可减一半赋役，是有利的第一点；洛阳残破，幸存户不到百分之一，如漕运开通，那么村镇会逐渐恢复，这是有利的第二点；藩镇中有叛意的，异族中有想入侵的，也听说我国贡品、货物纷纷进京，军粮充足，这能镇服中外，这是有利的第三点；如运输畅通，各种物资汇集，海边山上都有交通往来，可接近贞观、永徽盛世，这是有利的第四点。
English: However, fearing interference, he sent a letter to the prime minister, Yuan Zang, saying: Generally speaking, there are four advantages and difficulties in rowing transportation. The first advantage is that the grain shipped from the Huaihe River and Dongting can be reduced by half; Luoyang is ruined, and the surviving households are less than one percent. If the rowing transportation is opened, then the villages and towns will gradually recover. This is an advantageous second point. There are rebellious people in the towns, and there are foreign people who want to invade. It is also heard that our tributes and goods have entered Beijing one after another, and there is plenty of military food. This can serve both China

古文：起宜阳、熊耳，虎牢、成皋五百里，见户才千余，居无尺椽，爨无盛烟，兽游鬼哭，而使转车輓漕，功且难就，为一病；河、汴自寇难以来，不复穿治，崩岸灭木，所在廞淤，涉泗千里，如罔水行舟，为二病；东垣、底柱，渑池、北河之间六百里，戍逻久绝，夺攘奸宄，夹河为薮，为三病；淮阴去蒲坂，亘三千里，屯壁相望，中军皆鼎司元侯，每言衣无纩，食半菽，輓漕所至，辄留以馈军，非单车使者折简书所能制，为四病。 
现代文：从宜阳、熊耳，到虎牢、成皋五百里中，现有住户才一千多，居住没有房屋，做饭没有炊烟，野兽出没冤鬼哭泣，而要派人驾车拉纤，事情将难办，这是困难的第一点；黄河、汴河从叛乱以后，没再疏浚，冲塌堤岸，卷走树木，到处淤塞，泗河航道千里，犹如在没水的河中行船，这是困难的第二点；东垣、底柱、渑池、北河之间六百里地，久无军队驻防巡逻，抢劫违法，黄河两岸强盗出没，这是困难的第三点；淮阴到蒲坂，连绵三千里，驻军密集，统帅都是三公王侯，常说缺衣穿、粮食不够，运船经过，就扣留货物供军用，不是一位使臣凭公文能制止的，这是困难的第四点。 
English: Of the five hundred miles from Yiyang, Xiong'er, Cangzhou, and Chengdu, there are only a thousand or so existing households. There are no houses to live in, no smoke to cook with, no wild animals to haunt, no evil spirits to weep, and it will be difficult to send people to drive and pull the fiber. This is the first point of difficulty. The Yellow River and the Min River have not been dredged since the rebellion, the embankments have been washed away, trees have been swept away, and there are blockages everywhere. The thousands of miles of the Min River channel are like sailing in a river without water. This is the second point of

古文：载方内擅朝权，既得书，即尽以漕事委晏，故晏得尽其才。
现代文：因元载正在朝中专权，接函后，就将漕运事务全部交给刘晏，因此刘晏能完全发挥才干。
English: Because Yuan Zang was in the exclusive power of the DPRK and China, after receiving the letter, he handed over all the rowing business to Liu Ye, so Liu Ye could fully exert his talents.

古文：岁输始至，天子大悦，遣卫士以鼓吹迓东渭桥，驰使劳曰： 卿，朕酂侯也。 
现代文：货物一到，皇帝很高兴，派卫士奏乐在东渭桥迎接，又派使者慰劳说 ：你是我的萧何。 
English: As soon as the goods arrived, the emperor was delighted, and sent guards to play music to welcome them at Donglu Bridge. He also sent an emissary to console them, saying, "You are my Xiao He."

古文：凡岁致四十万斛，自是关中虽水旱，物不翔贵矣。
现代文：总计每年运粮四十万斛，从此关中虽遭旱涝灾，物价也不上涨了。
English: A total of 400,000 baht of grain is transported annually. Since then, although Guanzhong has been affected by drought and floods, prices have not risen.

古文：再迁吏部尚书，又兼益湖南、荆南、山南东道转运、常平、铸钱使，与第五琦分领天下金谷。
现代文：又升任吏部尚书，增任湖南、荆南、山南东道转运、常平、铸钱使，和第五琦分掌全国钱粮。
English: He was also promoted to Shangshu of the Personnel Department, and was appointed to the posts of Hunan, Jingnan and Shannan host and transshipment, Changping, mint envoy, and the fifth maggot in charge of the national money grain.

古文：又知吏部三铨事，推处最殿分明，下皆忄習伏。
现代文：又掌管吏部官吏选拔、授职、考查，审查处理优劣分明，下属都敬重他。
English: He is also in charge of the selection, appointment and examination of officials in the Personnel Department, and the examination and treatment of merits and demerits are clear. His subordinates respect him.

古文：元载得罪，诏晏鞫之。
现代文：元载被治罪，有诏命刘晏审讯。
English: Yuan Zai was convicted, and Liu Ye was ordered to stand trial.

古文：晏畏载党盛，不敢独讯，更敕李涵等五人与晏杂治。
现代文：刘晏害怕元载同党势力大，不敢单独审讯，又任命李涵等五人和刘晏一起审讯。
English: Liu Hui was afraid that Yuan Zhao and the Party had too much power, so he did not dare to interrogate him alone. He also appointed Li Han and five others to interrogate him together with Liu Hui.

古文：王缙得免死，晏请之也。
现代文：王缙得以免除死罪，是刘晏请求的。
English: Wang Yao was exempted from the death penalty at Liu Yao's request.

古文：常衮执政，忌晏有公望，乃言晏旧德，当师长百僚，用为左仆射，实欲夺其权。
现代文：常衮当权，妒忌刘晏有威望，就称颂刘晏过去的功劳，认为应当作为百官的师表，任命为左仆射，实际想夺他的权。
English: Chang Kuo was in power and envious of Liu Kuo's prestige, so he praised Liu Kuo's past achievements and thought that he should be appointed as the mentor of a hundred officials. He actually wanted to seize his power.

古文：帝以计务方治，诏以仆射领使如旧。
现代文：皇帝因为管理工作才上路，下诏任命左仆射兼管旧的使职。
English: The emperor only went on the road because of his administrative work, and under the imperial edict, he appointed Zuo Shu to take charge of the old post.

古文：初，晏分置诸道租庸使，慎简台阁士专之。
现代文：当初刘晏分派各道租庸使，慎重选择朝中官吏专管。
English: At the beginning, Liu Bei sent envoys to each province, and carefully selected officials from the central government to be in charge.

古文：时经费不充，停天下摄官，独租庸得补署，积数百人，皆新进锐敏，尽当时之选，趣督倚办，故能成功。
现代文：当时因经费不充裕，停止任用全国的一切辅佐官，只有租庸使能补充官员，增加到几百人，都是资历浅、有才干的，且都是一代英才，他督促、依靠他们办事，所以能建成功业。
English: At that time, due to insufficient funds, he stopped appointing all aides across the country, and only hired vassals to supplement officials, increasing to several hundred. They were all junior, talented, and a generation of talents. He urged and relied on them to work, so he could build a successful career.

古文：虽权贵干请，欲假职仕者，晏厚以禀入奉之，然未尝使亲事，是以人人劝职。
现代文：即使有权势的人要求想为人求职，刘晏给予高薪，但不让管事，因此人人办事勤勉。
English: Even if a powerful person asks you to find a job for him, Liu Ye will give you a high salary, but he will not let you take care of things, so everyone will work diligently.

古文：尝言： 士有爵禄，则名重于利；吏无荣进，则利重于名。 
现代文：他曾说 ：官员有爵位俸禄，因此名誉重于获利。小吏没有地位不能升迁，因此获利重于名誉。 
English: He once said: "Officials have titles and salaries, so honor is more important than profit. Petty officials have no status and cannot be promoted, so profit is more important than honor."

古文：故检劾出纳，一委士人，吏惟奉行文书而已。
现代文：因而审查收付，都任用官员，小吏只是按吩咐办事。
English: As a result, officials are appointed to check receipts and payments, and minor officials merely do as they are told.

古文：所任者，虽数千里外，奉教令如目前，频伸谐戏不敢隐。
现代文：他任用的人，即是在几千里外，听从命令像在眼前，生病开玩笑也不敢隐瞒。
English: His appointees, even thousands of miles away, obey orders as if they were right in front of their eyes and do not dare to hide their illness.

古文：惟晏能行之，它人不能也。
现代文：只有刘晏能做到这样，别人都不行。
English: Only Liu Wei can do this, no one else can.

古文：代宗尝命考所部官吏善恶，刺史有罪者，五品以上辄系劾，六品以下杖然后奏。
现代文：唐代宗曾命他考查辖下官吏的好坏，刺史如有罪，五品以上的就关押审判。六品以下的先用杖刑再上报。
English: The Tang Dynasty Emperor Zong had ordered him to examine the quality of officials under his jurisdiction, and if they were found guilty, they would be sentenced to five or more years of imprisonment. Those with less than six years of imprisonment would be punished with a cane before being reported.

古文：李灵耀反，河南节帅或不奉法，擅征赋，州县益削。
现代文：李灵耀反叛，河南道节度使有的不遵守法纪，擅自征收赋税，交赋税的州县更少了。
English: Li Lingyao's rebellion and Henan Province's festivals have caused some people to not abide by laws and regulations, and to collect taxes without authorization. Fewer states and counties have paid taxes.

古文：晏常以羡补乏，人不加调，而所入自如。
现代文：刘晏常常用盈余补足，百姓不增加赋税，但国家收入一样多。
English: Liu Wei often used the surplus to supplement, the people did not increase taxes, but the national income increased as much.

古文：第五琦始权盐佐军兴，晏代之，法益密，利无遗入。
现代文：从第五琦开始专卖食盐帮助发展军队，刘晏接替他，制度更加周密，管理没有漏洞。
English: From the fifth generation, he began to sell salt to help develop the army, and Liu Wei succeeded him. The system is more thorough, and there are no loopholes in management.

古文：初，岁收缗钱六十万，末乃什之，计岁入千二百万，而榷居太半，民不告勤。
现代文：开始，每年收入六十万贯钱，末了是这的十倍，总计国家收入一千二百万贯钱，盐业占了大半，人民没有怨言。
English: At the beginning, the annual income was 600,000 crowns, and eventually it was ten times that, with a total national income of 12 million crowns. The salt industry accounted for the majority, and the people did not complain.

古文：京师盐暴贵，诏取三万斛以赡关中，自扬州四旬至都，人以为神。
现代文：京城盐价暴涨，有诏调三万斛补充关中，从扬州四十天就到了京城，人们认为他有神通。
English: The price of salt in Beijing skyrocketed, and there was a supplement of 30,000 baht in imperial money. He arrived in Beijing in forty days from Yangzhou, and people thought he had supernatural powers.

古文：至湖峤荒险处，所出货皆贱弱，不偿所转，晏悉储淮、楚间，贸铜易薪，岁铸缗钱十余万。
现代文：湖泊山区荒凉陡峭的地方，出产的货物价廉利少，抵不过运费，刘晏都储存在淮河、楚地，换铜和柴每年铸钱十多万贯。
English: In the desolate and steep places of the lakes and mountainous areas, the goods produced are cheap and less profitable, but they can not meet the shipping costs. Liu Wei is stored in Huaihe and Chudi, and the exchange of copper and firewood makes more than 100,000 yuan per year.

古文：其措置纤悉如此。
现代文：他的安排细致到这样。
English: This is how meticulous his arrangements are.

古文：诸道巡院，皆募驶足，置驿相望，四方货殖低昂及它利害，虽甚远，不数日即知，是能权万货重轻，使天下无甚贵贱而物常平，自言如见钱流地上。
现代文：各道的巡院，都招募快骑。隔不远就设驿站，各地物价高低，和其他情报，在很远，不几天就知道了，这样就能够调节物价高低，让全国物价没有大起大落而保持平稳，他自称如同看见钱在全国流动。
English: Patrol stations are set up not far from each other, and the high and low prices of various regions and other information are known far away, within a few days. In this way, it is possible to adjust the high and low prices, so that the national prices do not have large ups and downs and remain stable. He said that he saw money flowing across the country.

古文：每朝谒，马上以鞭算。
现代文：每次上朝，骑在马上都用鞭计算。
English: Every morning, riding on a horse is calculated with a whip.

古文：质明视事，至夜分止，虽休澣不废。
现代文：天一亮就办公，到半夜才休息。即使休假也不停止。
English: He starts working at dawn and doesn't stop until midnight. Even when he's on vacation, he doesn't stop.

古文：事无闲剧，即日剖决无留。
现代文：公事不论紧急与否，当天处理没有遗留。
English: Regardless of whether the matter is urgent or not, there is nothing left to be dealt with on the same day.

古文：所居修行里，粗朴庳陋，饮食俭狭，室无媵婢。
现代文：住在修行里，朴素简陋，伙食俭朴，家中没有小妾婢女。
English: Living in the practice, plain and simple, the food is frugal, there is no concubine in the family.

古文：然任职久，势轧宰相，要官华使多出其门。自江淮茗橘珍甘，常与本道分贡，竞欲先至，虽封山断道，以禁前发，晏厚赀致之，常冠诸府，由是媢怨益多。
现代文：但任要职时间长了，威信相当宰相，高官显职多是他的门生，长江淮河一带的茶叶、柑橘、奇珍、美味，常常和当地分别进贡，抢着想先送到，虽然当地截断交通，禁止在本地进贡前运出。刘晏出高价买到，常抢到各地之前。因此妒忌怨恨的人更多了。
English: However, he has held important positions for a long time, his prestige is equivalent to that of a prime minister, and many high-ranking officials are his protégés. Tea, citrus, rare and delicious products from the Yangtze River and Huaihe River area are often paid separately from the local tribute, and they are eager to be sent first, although the local traffic is cut off and it is forbidden to transport them before the local tribute. Liu Wei bought them at a high price and often got them before other places. Therefore, there are more people who are jealous and resentful.

古文：馈谢四方有名士无不至，其有口舌者，率以利啖之，使不得有所訾短。
现代文：各地有名人士他没有不赠送答谢的，其中敢说话的，他都给以好处，使他们不会说坏话。
English: Famous people from all over the country came to thank him, and those who dared to speak were given benefits so that they would not speak ill of him.

古文：故议者颇言晏任数固恩。
现代文：因此议论多数说刘晏耍弄权术保持地位。
English: Therefore, most commentators say that Liu Bei is playing power games to maintain his position.

古文：大历时政因循，军国皆仰晏，未尝检质。
现代文：大历年间沿用旧政，国家军队行政开支都靠刘晏，不曾检点节制。
English: During the Great Calendar, the old regime continued to be used, and the administrative expenses of the national army were all supported by Liu Bei, and there was no checkpoint control.

古文：德宗立，言者屡请罢转运使，晏亦固辞，不许。
现代文：唐德宗即位，进谏的多次请求撤销转运使，刘晏也坚决辞职，皇帝不答应。
English: When Emperor Tang Dezong ascended to the throne, Emperor Jinjun repeatedly requested that the envoy be revoked, and Emperor Liu Bei also resolutely resigned. Emperor Jinjun did not agree.

古文：又加关内河东三川转运、盐铁及诸道青苗使。
现代文：又加封为关内、河东、三川的转运、盐铁使和各道青苗使。
English: In addition, additional seals were added for the transshipment of Guanai, Hedong, and Sanchuan, and the envoy of salt and iron, and the envoy of young seedlings.

古文：始，杨炎为吏部侍郎，晏为尚书，盛气不相下。
现代文：当初，杨炎任吏部侍郎，刘晏任吏部尚书，都斗气不买账。
English: At first, Yang Yan, who served as the clerk of the personnel department, and Liu Wei, who served as the clerk of the personnel department, did not buy it.

古文：晏治元载罪，而炎坐贬。
现代文：刘晏审讯元载案件，杨炎被牵连贬官。
English: Liu Wei was put on trial for the original case, and Yang Yan was implicated and demoted.

古文：及炎执政，衔宿怒，将为载报仇。
现代文：到杨炎掌权，记旧仇，想为元载报仇。
English: When Yang Yan came to power, he remembered the old vendetta and wanted to take revenge for Yuan Zang.

古文：先是，帝居东宫，代宗宠独孤妃，而爱其子韩王。
现代文：此前，唐德宗做太子时，唐代宗宠爱独孤妃，因此宠爱她的儿子韩王。
English: Previously, when Emperor Dezong of the Tang Dynasty was crown prince, Emperor Dezong of the Tang Dynasty favored Du Guifei, and therefore favored her son Han Wang.

古文：宦人刘清潭与嬖幸请立妃为后，且言王数有符异，以摇东宫。
现代文：宦官刘清潭和皇帝亲信请求立独孤妃为皇后，并说韩王多次有吉兆，想废黜太子。
English: The eunuch Liu Qingtan and the emperor's cronies requested that the lonely princess be made queen, and said that King Han had many auspicious signs and wanted to depose the crown prince.

古文：时妄言晏与谋。
现代文：当时流言说刘晏参与了谋划。
English: At the time, it was rumored that Liu Ye was involved in the plot.

古文：至是，炎见帝流涕曰： 赖祖宗神灵，先帝与陛下不为贼臣所间，不然，刘晏、黎干摇动社稷，凶谋果矣。
现代文：到这时，杨炎拜见皇帝流着眼泪说： 靠祖宗有灵，先皇和皇帝没有被奸臣离间，不是这样，刘晏、黎危害国家的阴谋就得逞了。
English: At this time, Yang Yan paid a tearful homage to the emperor and said, "The ancestors have the spirit. The first emperor and the emperor were not separated by treacherous vassals. This is not the case. Liu Bei and Li's plot to endanger the country has succeeded."

古文：今干伏辜而晏在，臣位宰相，不能正其罪，法当死。 
现代文：现黎治罪但刘晏还在任，我任宰相，不能惩罚他的罪恶，罪该万死。 
English: Now Li is in charge of the crime, but Liu Ye is still in office, I am the prime minister, I can't punish his crime, the crime deserves death.

古文：崔祐甫曰： 陛下已廓然大赦，不当究飞语，致人于罪。 
现代文：崔甫说： 皇上已大赦天下，不应听信谗言，判人有罪。 
English: Cui Fu said, "The emperor has pardoned the whole world, and we should not listen to the insinuations and find people guilty.

古文：硃泚、崔宁力相解释，宁尤切至。
现代文：朱氵此、崔宁也极力帮他说话，崔宁尤其话说得重。
English: Zhu Xi and Cui Ning also tried their best to help him speak, with Cui Ning being particularly eloquent.

古文：炎怒，斥宁于外，遂罢晏使。
现代文：杨炎发怒，把崔宁贬出京城，于是罢免了刘晏的使职。
English: Yang Yan flew into a rage and banished Cui Ning from the capital, thus removing Liu Ye from his post.

古文：坐新故所交簿物抗谬，贬忠州刺史，中官护送。
现代文：又因呈交账簿和实物不合，被贬为忠州刺史，由宦官押送。
English: Also, because the submitted account books did not match the physical objects, he was relegated to the status of a historian of Chungju and was escorted by eunuchs.

古文：炎必欲傅其罪，知庾准与晏素憾，乃擢为荆南节度使。
现代文：杨炎一心要罗织他的罪状，知道庾准和刘晏有旧仇，就提升他任荆南节度使。
English: Yang Yan was bent on covering up his crime. Knowing that Gong Jun and Liu Ye had an old feud, he promoted him to the post of Jingnan Festival envoy.

古文：准即奏晏与硃泚书，语言怨望，又搜卒，擅取官物，胁诏使，谋作乱。
现代文：庾准就奏报刘晏给朱氵此写信，有很多不满的话，又选练军队，擅自拿走公物，威胁传诏使者，想反叛。
English: Zeng Jun reported Liu Bei's letter to Zhu Xi to Zhu Xi, saying that he was dissatisfied with many things, that he had selected and trained an army, that he had taken public property without authorization, that he had threatened the messenger, and that he wanted to rebel.

古文：炎证成之。
现代文：杨炎作证使罪状成立了。
English: Yang Yan's testimony made the charges stick.

古文：建中元年七月，诏中人赐晏死，年六十五。
现代文：建中三年七月，有诏命宦官处死刘晏，享年六十五岁。
English: In July of the third year of Jianzhong, an imperial edict ordered the eunuchs to execute Liu Yao, who died at the age of sixty-five.

古文：后十九日，赐死诏书乃下，且暴其罪。家属徙岭表，坐累者数十人，天下以为冤。
现代文：死后十几天，处死刘晏的诏书才发出，并宣布了他的罪状，他家亲人被发配到岭南，朝中受牵连的有几十人，全国都认为冤枉。
English: A dozen days after his death, the edict to execute Liu Wei was issued, and the charges against him were announced. His family members were sent to Lingnan. Dozens of people were implicated by the North Korean government, and the whole country believed that they had been wronged.

古文：时炎兼删定使，议籍没，众论不可，乃止。
现代文：当时杨炎兼任删定使，提议没收家产，众人认为不应该，才不提了。
English: At that time, Yang Yan concurrently served as the deletion envoy and proposed the confiscation of family property. Everyone thought it was not appropriate, so he did not mention it.

古文：然已命簿录其家，唯杂书两乘，米麦数斛，人服其廉。
现代文：但已经命官员清点了家产，只有各种书两车，粮食几斛，人们都佩服刘晏的清廉。
English: However, officials have been ordered to count the family's property, and there are only two cars of various books and a few bags of grain. People admire Liu Wei's integrity.

古文：淄青节度使李正己表诛晏太暴，不加验实，先诛后诏，天下骇惋，请还其妻子。
现代文：淄青节度使李正己上奏说杀刘晏太过分，没有验证事实，先杀后下诏，全国人都吃惊惋惜，请求把他的妻子儿女接回来。
English: During the Qing Dynasty, Li Zhenggi made a speech saying that the killing of Liu Ye was too excessive, without verifying the facts, killing first and then issuing an edict. The whole country was surprised and regretful, and asked for his wife and children to be brought back.

古文：不报。
现代文：没有答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：兴元初，帝浸寤，乃许归葬。
现代文：兴元初年，皇帝渐渐醒悟，才准许她们回来安葬刘晏。
English: In the first year of the Xingyuan, the emperor gradually woke up and allowed them to come back and bury Liu Xuan.

古文：贞元五年，遂擢晏子执经为太常博士，宗经秘书郎。
现代文：贞元五年，又任命刘晏的儿子刘执经为太常博士、刘宗经为秘书郎。
English: In the fifth year of the Zhengyuan era, he also appointed Liu Zhen's son Liu Xingjing as Taizang Doctor and Liu Zongjing as Secretary.

古文：执经还官，求追命，有诏赠郑州刺史，又加司徒。
现代文：刘执经捐出官职，请求追赠父亲，皇帝下诏追赠刘晏为郑州刺史，又加封为司徒。
English: Liu Cengjing donated his official position and asked for the posthumous gift of his father. The emperor issued an imperial edict to posthumously bestow Liu Ye with the title of Zhengzhou historian and the additional title of scholar.

古文：晏殁二十年，而韩洄、元琇、裴腆、李衡、包佶、卢徵、李若初继掌财利，皆晏所辟用，有名于时。
现代文：刘晏死后二十年，韩氵回、元、裴腆、李衡、包佶、卢徵、李若初相继执掌财权，都是刘晏提拔的，在当时都有名气。
English: Twenty years after Liu Bei's death, Han Yuhui, Yuan, Pei Yu, Li Heng, Bao Yu, Lu Zheng and Li Ruochu successively held financial power. They were all promoted by Liu Bei and were all famous at that time.

古文：晏既被诬，而旧吏推明其功。
现代文：刘晏被诬陷后，旧日部下称赞他的功劳。
English: After Liu Wei was framed, his former subordinates praised him.

古文：陈谏以为管、萧之亚，著论纪其详，大略以 开元、天宝间天下户千万，至德后残于大兵，饥疫相仍，十耗其九，至晏充使，户不二百万。
现代文：陈谏认为他是管仲、萧何以后第一人，写文章详细论述，大意是： 开元、天宝年间全国住户一千万，至德年后因大战乱，饥荒瘟疫，十去其九，到刘晏任使职，住户不到二百万。
English: Chen Qi believed that he was the first person after Guanzhong and Xiao He to write a detailed article on the topic, to the effect that: in the years of Kaiyuan and Tianbao, there were ten million households in the whole country, and after the German Revolution, due to the war, famine and plague, there were nine to ten, and when Liu Qi took office, there were less than two million households.

古文：晏通计天下经费，谨察州县灾害，蠲除振救，不使流离死亡。
现代文：刘晏全盘考虑全国开支，细心考察州县灾情，免赋赈灾，不让人民逃荒死亡。
English: Liu Wei comprehensively considered the national expenditure, carefully examined the state and county disaster situation, and did not allow the people to flee the famine and die.

古文：初，州县取富人督漕輓，谓之 船头 ；主邮递，谓之 捉驿 ；税外横取，谓之 白著 。
现代文：起初，州县派富户督办漕运，称作 船头 ；掌管传递，称作 捉驿 ；在赋税之外乱收刮，称作 白著 。
English: At first, the prefectures and counties sent rich households to supervise rowing transport, known as boatmen; to take charge of passing, known as catching; to collect and scrape indiscriminately in addition to taxation, known as white.

古文：人不堪命，皆去为盗贼。
现代文：人民忍受不了欺压，都跑去当强盗。
English: The people could not bear the oppression, and they all ran away to become robbers.

古文：上元、宝应间，如袁晁、陈庄、方清、许钦等乱江淮，十余年乃定。
现代文：像上元、宝应年间，袁晁、陈庄、方倩、许钦等人在江淮造反，十几年才平定。
English: Like Shangyuan and Baoying, Yuan Qi, Chen Zhuang, Fang Yao, Xu Qin and others rebelled in the Yangtze River and Huai River, and it took more than ten years to subdue them.

古文：晏始以官船漕，而吏主驿事，罢无名之敛，正盐官法，以裨用度。
现代文：从刘晏开始用官船漕运，命官吏主持驿站事务，免除杂税，制定了食盐专卖制度，来补充收入。
English: Starting with Liu Bei, government vessels were used to transport goods, officials were appointed to preside over station affairs, miscellaneous taxes were exempted, and a salt monopoly system was established to supplement income.

古文：起广德二年，尽建中元年，黜陟使实天下户，收三百余万。
现代文：从广德二年到建中元年，黜陟使调查天下户数，增加了三百多万。
English: From the second year of Guangde to the first year of Jianzhong, the number of households in the world increased by more than three million.

古文：王者爱人，不在赐与，当使之耕耘织纴，常岁平敛之，荒年蠲救之，大率岁增十之一。
现代文：帝王爱护人民，不在于赏赐，应让他们能耕种纺织，丰年平价收购，灾年免赋赈灾，大约每年增加户数十分之一。
English: The emperor's love for the people is not a reward, but should allow them to cultivate textiles, purchase them at a fair price in good years, be exempt from disasters in bad years, and increase the number of households by about one tenth each year.

古文：而晏尤能时其缓急而先后之。
现代文：刘晏尤其能掌握紧急与否来安排先后。
English: In particular, Liu Wei can grasp whether it is urgent or not to arrange successively.

古文：每州县荒歉有端，则计官所赢，先令曰： 蠲某物，贷某户。 
现代文：每当州县饥荒减产的苗头出现，就根据官府的盈余，先行命令说 ：免某种赋，免某类户的赋。 
English: Whenever there is a hint of famine or reduced production in a prefecture or county, according to the surplus of the government, the pre-emptive order says: waive a certain amount, waive the amount of a certain type of household.

古文：民未及困，而奏报已行矣。
现代文：人民没有到困境，而报告已送上了。
English: The people are not in distress and the report has been submitted.

古文：议者或讥晏不直赈救，而多贱出以济民者，则又不然。
现代文：有议论批评刘晏不直接赈灾，而多半贱卖来救济人民，这是不对的。
English: It is wrong to criticize Liu Wei for not directly aiding the disaster, but mostly selling at a low price to help the people.

古文：善治病者，不使至危惫；善救灾者，勿使至赈给。
现代文：善于治病的，不让病人到危险状态；善于救灾的，也不让人民到需要赈救的地步。
English: If you are good at curing diseases, you will not let the patients get into a dangerous state; if you are good at disaster relief, you will not let the people get to the point of needing rescue.

古文：故赈给少则不足活人，活人多则阙国用，国用阙则复重敛矣；又赈给近侥幸，吏下为奸，强得之多，弱得之少，虽刀锯在前不可禁。
现代文：因赈救少不能养活灾民，救治的人多，国家用度又缺乏了，国家用度缺乏又需要收重赋税；再说赈救近似白拿，下级官吏做手脚，强者所得多，弱者所得少，即使摆着刑具也不能阻止。
English: Because there are fewer rescuers, the victims cannot be fed, there are more people to treat, the state expenditure is insufficient, and the lack of state expenditure requires the collection of heavy taxes; in addition, the rescue is almost free, lower-level officials are doing their best, the strong earn more, the weak earn less, and even if the torture equipment is displayed, it cannot be stopped.

古文：以为二害。
现代文：可认为有两大弊病。
English: It can be said that there are two major drawbacks.

古文：灾沴之乡，所乏粮耳，它产尚在，贱以出之，易其杂货，因人之力，转于丰处，或官自用，则国计不乏；多出菽粟，恣之粜运，散入村闾，下户力农，不能诣市，转相沾逮，自免阻饥，不待令驱。
现代文：受灾的地方，缺乏的只是粮食，其他出产还有，贱卖粮食，买当地各种产品，利用人力，运到丰收地区，或者当地官府自己使用，国家开支不致缺乏；可以多支出粮食，让商人贩卖，分散进入村镇，贫穷的农户，不能上集市，辗转也能得到好处，自然免除了阻隔和饥饿，不需命令。
English: In the disaster-affected areas, what is lacking is only grain, but there are other products, such as selling grain at a low price, buying various local products, using manpower, transporting them to high-yield areas, or the local government itself using them, so there will be no shortage of state expenditure; it is possible to spend more grain, let merchants sell, disperse into villages and towns, poor farmers can not go to the market, and they can get benefits by walking around, naturally eliminating obstacles and hunger, without orders.

古文：以功加检校尚书右仆射。卒，赠司空。
现代文：可认为有两大优点。刘晏又采用了常平法，丰年就高价收购，灾年就低价卖出，一般各州都曾储存粮食三百万斛。
English: It can be considered to have two major advantages. Liu Wei also adopted the normal method, buying at a high price in a good year and selling at a low price in a bad year. Generally, each state used to store three million baht of grain.

古文：第五琦，字禹珪，京兆长安人。
现代文：这难道不是人们所说的对国家有功劳的人吗！ 第五琦字禹珪，京兆长安人。
English: Isn't this what people call a person who has made contributions to the country? The fifth letter of the alphabet is Ufan, and he was from Beijing-Shanghai-Chang'an.

古文：少以吏干进，颇能言强国富民术。
现代文：年轻时就以任职干练而被提拔，颇能谈论强国富民的大道理。
English: When he was young, he was promoted for his ability in office, and he is quite able to talk about the great principle of a strong country and rich people.

古文：天宝中，事韦坚。
现代文：天宝年间，在韦坚手下任职。
English: During the Tenpo era, he served under Wei Jian.

古文：坚败，不得调。
现代文：后韦坚被陷害，第五琦也不得升调。
English: After Wei Jian was framed, the fifth generation was not allowed to be promoted.

古文：久之，为须江丞，太守贺兰进明才之。
现代文：过了很久才当上了须江县丞，太守贺兰进明颇器重他的才能。
English: It took him a long time to become the governor of Sujiang County, and the governor, Horan Jinming, clearly valued his talent.

古文：安禄山反，进明徙北海，奏琦为录事参军事。
现代文：安禄山反叛，贺兰进明调驻北海，向玄宗奏请，提升第五琦为录事参军。
English: Anlu Mountain rebelled, Heran Jinmingdiao stationed in the North Sea, asked Xuanzong to play, and promoted the fifth son to join the army.

古文：时贼已陷河间、信都，进明未战，玄宗怒，遣使封刀趣之，曰： 不亟进兵，即斩首。 
现代文：此时安禄山已攻陷河间、信都等地，贺兰进明未派兵抗御，玄宗大怒，派遣使臣持刀赶来宣旨说 ：你若不火速发兵，立即斩首。 
English: At this time, Mt. Anroku had already been conquered by places such as Kawama and Shinto. When Horan Jinmyo did not send troops to resist, Emperor Xuanzong was furious and sent an envoy with a sword to declare: "If you do not send troops immediately, behead me immediately."

古文：进明惧，不知所出。
现代文：贺兰进明十分恐惧，不知道该怎么办。
English: Horan Jinming was very scared and didn't know what to do.

古文：琦劝厚以财募勇士，出贼不意。如其计，复收所陷郡。
现代文：第五琦便建议用厚金招募勇士，出其不意奇袭贼军，贺兰进明采用其计，果然收复了失陷的郡县。
English: The fifth magistrate then proposed to use the money to recruit warriors to surprise the bandits. Horan Jinming adopted his plan and successfully recovered the lost counties.

古文：肃宗驻彭原，进明遣琦奏事，既谒见，即陈： 今之急在兵，兵强弱在赋，赋所出以江淮为渊。
现代文：肃宗驻彭原时，贺兰进明派第五琦上朝奏事，肃宗接见了他，他陈奏道 ：现在是朝廷急需用兵之时，然而军队的强弱在于赋税，赋税多出于江淮一带。
English: When Su Zong was stationed in Pengyuan, He Lan Jinming sent a report to the Emperor on the 5th day of the 5th month. Su Zong received him, and he said: Now is the time when the imperial court urgently needs soldiers, but the strength and weakness of the army lies in taxation. Taxation mostly comes from the Jianghuai area.

古文：若假臣一职，请悉东南宝赀，飞饷函、洛，惟陛下命。 
现代文：倘若能授我一职，我可以收尽东南的财富，立即支援函、洛前线，只待陛下下令。 
English: If I am given a position, I can collect the wealth of Southeast Asia, immediately support letter, Luo front, only to be ordered by His Majesty.

古文：帝悦，拜监察御史、句当江淮租庸使。
现代文：肃宗听后大喜，拜授第五琦为监察御史、兼江淮租庸使。
English: Su Zong was overjoyed after listening to the lecture, and he was awarded the fifth rank of inspector general of history, as well as the second rank of Jianghuai rent yong envoy.

古文：迁司虞员外郎、河南等五道支度使。
现代文：又提升他为虞员外郎、河南等五道支度使。
English: In addition, he was promoted to the position of a member of the imperial court, and the five-way preparatory envoy to Henan Province.

古文：迁司金郎中，兼侍御史、诸道盐铁铸钱使。
现代文：后再升迁司金郎中，兼御史、诸道盐铁铸钱使。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of junior secretary of the Ministry of Gold and Iron, concurrently serving as the Minister of History and the Minister of Salt and Iron Foundry.

古文：盐铁名使，自琦始。
现代文：盐铁收税官，从第五琦开始。
English: Salt and Iron Tax Collector, starting from the 5th row.

古文：进度支郎中，兼御史中丞。
现代文：之后他又升任度支郎中，兼御使中丞。
English: After that, he was promoted to Doshiro no chujo (Junior Secretary of the Privy Council) and concurrently to Miyoshi no chujo (Junior Secretary of the Privy Council).

古文：当军兴，随事趣办，人不益赋而用以饶，于是迁户部侍郎、判度支，河南等道支度、转运、租庸、盐铁、铸钱、司农、太府出纳、山南东西、江西、淮南馆驿等使。
现代文：当时正处于战争年代，他遇事速办，使人民不增加负担而国家费用宽裕，于是迁升为户部侍郎、判度支，河南等道支度、转运、租庸、盐铁、铸铁、司农、太府出纳，山南东西二道、江西、淮南馆驿等使。
English: At that time, it was a time of war, and he was able to deal with matters quickly, so that the people would not be burdened and the state expenses would be more than sufficient. He was then promoted to the position of household attendant, judgment branch, Henan and other road preparation, transshipment, rent yong, salt iron, cast iron, farmer, Taifu cashier, Shannan East and West two provinces, Jiangxi, Huainan Pavilion and other envoys.

古文：乾元二年，进同中书门下平章事。
现代文：乾元二年，又升迁为中书门下平章事。
English: In the 2nd year of Qianyuan, it was promoted to Zhongshumen Shimo Pingzhangji.

古文：初，琦请铸乾元重宝钱，以一代十。
现代文：当初，第五琦请奏铸造乾元重宝钱，以一个钱代替十个钱用。
English: Originally, the fifth gong was used to mint Qianyuan heavy treasure money, replacing ten coins with one coin.

古文：既当国，又铸重规，一代五十。
现代文：当他做了国家大臣之后，又铸造了更大的钱币，以一个钱代替五十个钱。
English: When he became Minister of State, he also minted larger coins, replacing fifty pennies with one.

古文：会物价腾踊，饿馑相望，议者以为非是，诏贬忠州长史。
现代文：适逢当时物价猛涨，百姓饥馑，怨声载道，非议者认为是他的过错。皇帝于是下诏将他贬为忠州长史。
English: At the time, prices were soaring, the people were starving, and there was a lot of grumbling. Critics thought it was his fault. The emperor then decreed that he would be relegated to the history of loyal governors.

古文：会有告琦纳金者，遣御史驰按，琦辞曰： 位宰相，可自持金邪？
现代文：接着又有人控告第五琦接受贿赂，皇帝便派御史火速赶来查究。第五琦申辩说 ：我身为宰相，难道自己还贪污受贿吗？
English: Next, someone accused the fifth son of accepting bribes, and the emperor sent the imperial historian to investigate. The fifth son argued: As prime minister, am I still corrupt and accepting bribes?

古文：若付受有状，请归罪有司。 
现代文：如果你能拿出行贿受贿的证据，请有关官员定我的罪。 
English: If you can come up with evidence of bribery, please ask the relevant officials to convict me.

古文：御史不晓，以为具服，狱上之，遂长流夷州。
现代文：御史不明真相，以为他全部招认，就将他定了罪，送到夷州长期流放。
English: As he did not know the truth and thought he had confessed everything, he was convicted and sent to Yizhou for long-term exile.

古文：宝应初，起为朗州刺史，有异政，拜太子宾客。
现代文：宝应初年，第五琦被起用为朗州刺史，政绩突出，又授官为太子宾客。
English: In the first year of Baoying, the fifth generation was appointed as the chief historian of Lanzhou, with outstanding political achievements, and was also awarded the title of prince's guest.

古文：吐蕃盗京师，郭子仪表为粮料使，兼御史大夫、关内元帅副使。
现代文：吐蕃偷袭京都，郭子仪举荐他为粮料使，兼御史大夫、关内元帅副使。
English: Tubo made a sneak attack on Kyoto, and Guo Ziyi recommended him to be the Grain Envoy, as well as the Chief Historian, and the Deputy Envoy to Marshal Guanai.

古文：改京兆尹。俄加判度支、铸钱、盐铁、转运、常平等使。
现代文：后又改任京兆尹，不久又加封他为判度支、铸钱、盐铁、转运、常平等使。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Jing Zhaoyun, and soon he was also appointed as the envoy of the Judiciary, the Mint, the Salt and Iron, the Transportation, and the Customs.

古文：累封扶风郡公。
现代文：加封他为扶风郡公。
English: He was additionally appointed as the governor of Fufeng County.

古文：复以户部侍郎兼京兆尹。
现代文：又以户部侍郎兼京兆尹。
English: He also played the role of the head of the household and Keizhoin.

古文：坐与鱼朝恩善，贬括州刺史。
现代文：后由于他和鱼朝恩关系密切，受株连贬为括州刺史。
English: Later, because of his close relationship with Yucho En, he was demoted to the status of a state-level official.

古文：徙饶、湖二州。
现代文：先后转调饶、湖二州刺史。
English: The story of the lake and the two prefectures goes back and forth.

古文：复为太子宾客、东都留守。
现代文：后又任太子宾客、东都留守。
English: Later, he was also a guest of the Crown Prince, and Tōdō stayed away.

古文：德宗素闻其才，将复用，召之。
现代文：德宗久闻第五琦的才干，打算再用他，便下诏书召他回京。
English: Emperor Dezong had long heard of the talent of the fifth son and, intending to use him again, issued an imperial edict summoning him back to Beijing.

古文：会卒，年七十一，赠太子少保。
现代文：不料他却去世了，享年七十一岁，追赠他为太子少保。
English: Unexpectedly, however, he passed away at the age of seventy-one, and was posthumously granted the title of Crown Prince Junior Protector.

