古文：乡饮酒之礼。主人就先生而谋宾、介。
现代文：乡饮酒的礼仪：主人至先生处商定宾、介的人选。
English: Township drinking etiquette: The host and hostess agree on the guests and hostesses.

古文：主人戒宾，宾拜辱；主人答拜，乃请宾。
现代文：主人前往告请宾；宾拜谢主人屈尊驾临。
English: The host goes to invite the guests; the guests thank the host for coming.

古文：宾礼辞，许。
现代文：主人对宾答拜，于是致辞请宾赴席。
English: The host bowed to the guests, and then gave a speech inviting them to attend.

古文：主人再拜，宾答拜。
现代文：宾推辞一番，许诺。主人两拜，宾答拜。
English: The guest should decline first and make a promise. The host should bow twice and the guest should bow in return.

古文：主人退，宾拜辱。
现代文：主人告退，宾拜谢主人的屈尊来临。
English: The host retreated, and the condescension of the host came.

古文：介亦如之。
现代文：主人请介的仪式亦与此相同。
English: The ceremony of the host's introduction is also the same.

古文：乃席宾、主人、介、众宾之席，皆不属焉。
现代文：于是为宾、主人、介布席。众宾之席，相互独立，不相连接。
English: As a result, the guests, the host, and the hostess are seated separately. The seats of the guests are independent of each other and are not connected.

古文：尊两壶于房户间，斯禁，有玄酒，在西。
现代文：在东房与室两户间布设两只酒壶，壶下以斯禁相承。玄酒在西边。
English: Two wine jugs are placed between the east room and the two rooms, with the ban on drinking alcohol under the jug. The black wine is on the west side.

古文：设篚于禁南，东肆，加二勺于两壶。
现代文：在酒禁南朝东设置一篚。两只壶上各放置一只酒勺。
English: In the East and South of the Prohibition, there is a rack. A wine spoon is placed on each of the two pots.

古文：设洗于阼阶东南，南北以堂深，东西当东荣。
现代文：在东阶的东南方设洗，洗南北的长度与堂深相等，东西与屋的东翼相对。
English: In the southeast of the east steps, there is a wash, the length of the wash from north to south is equal to the depth of the hall, and the east and west are opposite to the east wing of the house.

古文：水在洗东，篚在洗西，南肆。
现代文：水设置在洗东边，篚在洗西边，向南陈放。
English: The water is set up on the east side of the wash, the straw on the west side of the wash, and it is released to the south.

古文：羹定，主人速宾，宾拜辱，主人答拜。
现代文：肉已煮熟。主人前往召请宾，宾拜谢主人的屈尊驾临，主人对宾答拜。
English: The meat is cooked. The host goes to invite the guests, the guests bow to thank the host for coming, and the host bows to the guests.

古文：还，宾拜辱。
现代文：退出时，宾又一次拜谢主人的屈驾来临。
English: When exiting, the guest once again bowed to the host.

古文：介亦如之。宾及众宾皆从之。
现代文：召请介的仪式亦与此相同，宾和众宾随后面至。
English: The invitation ceremony is the same, followed by the arrival of the guests.

古文：主人一相迎于门外，再拜宾，宾答拜；拜介，介答拜；揖众宾。
现代文：主人与一位相礼人到乡学的大门外迎宾，对宾两拜，宾答拜。拜迎介，介答拜。又对众宾一揖。
English: The host and a courtesan greeted the guests outside the gate of the village school. They bowed twice to the guests, and the guests bowed back. They bowed to the ushers, and the ushers bowed back. They also bowed to the guests.

古文：主人揖，先入。
现代文：主人揖请诸宾客后，先进大门入内。
English: After the host had invited all the guests, he went inside through the front door.

古文：宾厌介，入门左；介厌众宾，入；众宾皆入门左；北上。
现代文：宾长揖请介，从门西侧入内。
English: Please enter from the west side of the gate.

古文：主人与宾三揖，至于阶，三让。
现代文：主人与宾相对三揖，到达阶前。
English: The host and the guest stand opposite each other, reaching the front of the steps.

古文：主人升，宾升。
现代文：相互谦让三番，主人上堂，宾亦上堂。
English: The host enters the hall, and the guests also enter the hall.

古文：主人阼阶上当楣北面再拜。
现代文：主人在阼阶上方对着屋前梁的地方面朝北两拜。
English: The owner is facing north at the top of the steps, opposite the front beam.

古文：宾西阶上当楣北面答拜。
现代文：宾则在西阶上方对着屋前梁的地方面朝北答拜。
English: The guests bowed to the north at the top of the west steps in front of the front beam.

古文：主人坐取爵于篚，降洗。
现代文：主人坐下，从篚中取酒爵，下堂洗爵。
English: The host sits down, takes a bottle of wine from the urn, and goes down the hall to baptize.

古文：宾降。
现代文：宾亦下堂。
English: The guests also left the hall.

古文：主人坐奠爵于阶前，辞。宾对。
现代文：主人在阶前坐下，把酒爵放置地上，辞谢宾下堂，宾亦致辞作答。
English: The host sat down in front of the steps, placed the wine goblet on the ground, and thanked the guests as they left the hall. The guests also gave a speech in reply.

古文：主人坐取爵，兴，适洗，南面坐，奠爵于篚下，盥洗，宾进东，北面辞洗。
现代文：主人坐下拿起酒爵，站起。到洗跟前，面朝南坐下，把酒爵放置于篚下，盥手洗爵。宾向东前行，面朝东北辞谢主人为己洗爵。
English: The host sits down, picks up the wine goblet, and stands up. Before washing, he sits down facing south, places the wine goblet under his armpit, and washes the wine goblet with his hands. The guest walks eastward, facing northeast to thank the host for his baptism.

古文：主人坐奠爵于篚，兴对。
现代文：主人坐下，把爵放置于篚中，站起来对宾作答。
English: The host sits down, places the knight in the urn, and stands up to answer the guest.

古文：宾复位，当西序，东面。
现代文：宾复归原位，在对着西序的地方面朝东站立。
English: The guests returned to their original positions and stood facing the west row of seats, facing east.

古文：主人坐取爵，沃洗者西北面。
现代文：主人坐下拿起酒爵，沃洗人面朝西北为主人浇水盥洗。
English: The host sits down, picks up the wine goblet, and the washer, facing northwest, pours water and rinses the host.

古文：卒洗，主人壹揖，壹让。
现代文：洗爵完毕，主人与宾相对一揖，谦让一番，然后上堂。
English: After the christening, the host and the guests bowed to each other, humbly conceded, and then went into the hall.

古文：升。宾拜洗。
现代文：宾拜谢主人为己洗爵。
English: By the way, thank you for making me a knight.

古文：主人坐奠爵，遂拜。
现代文：主人坐下，把爵放在地上，对宾一拜，下堂洗手。
English: The host sat down, put the sword on the ground, bowed to the guests, and went down to wash his hands.

古文：降盥。
现代文：宾下堂，主人辞谢。
English: In the hall of guests, the host is giving up.

古文：宾降，主人辞；宾对，复位，当西序。
现代文：宾对主人作答，复归原位，站在对着西序的地方。
English: The guest replied to the host and returned to his original position, standing in front of the west row.

古文：卒盥，揖让升。
现代文：主人洗完手，与宾相互作揖、谦让然后上堂。
English: After the host has washed his hands, he and his guests exchange pleasantries, make small talk, and then go to the hall.

古文：宾西阶上疑立。
现代文：宾在西阶的上方凝神端正站立。
English: The guest stands at the top of the west steps.

古文：主人坐取爵，实之宾之席前，西北面献宾。
现代文：主人坐下取爵，斟满酒，到宾的席前面朝西北献宾。
English: The host sits down, takes a knighthood, pours wine, and waves to the guests in front of the table.

古文：宾西阶上拜，主人少退。宾进受爵，以复位。
现代文：宾在西阶上方拜谢主人，主人稍稍退后，宾前行接过酒爵退回原位。
English: The guest bowed to the host at the top of the west staircase, the host stepped back a little, and the guest walked forward to take over the bartender and return to his original position.

古文：主人阼阶上拜送爵，宾少退。
现代文：主人在阼阶上方拜送爵，宾稍稍退后。
English: The host bade farewell at the top of the stairs, and the guest stepped back slightly.

古文：荐脯醢。
现代文：有司把脯醢进置席前。
English: The steward put the bowl in front of his seat.

古文：宾升席，自西方。乃设折俎。
现代文：宾从西边即席。有司设折俎于席前。
English: The guests are seated immediately from the west. A steward is kneeling in front of the seats.

古文：主人阼阶东疑立。
现代文：主人在阼阶东边端正站立。
English: The owner is standing upright on the east side of the stairs.

古文：宾坐，左执爵，祭脯醢，奠爵于荐西，兴；右手取肺，却左手执本，坐，弗缭，右绝末以祭，尚左手，哜之，兴；加于俎，坐梲手，遂祭酒，兴；席末坐，啐酒，降席，坐奠爵，拜，告旨，执爵兴。
现代文：下席，坐下把爵置于地上，一拜。口称美酒，手持爵站起。
English: Take a seat, sit down, put the gong on the floor, bow for a moment, sip the wine, and stand up with the gong in hand.

古文：主人阼阶上答拜。
现代文：主人在阼阶的上方对宾答拜。
English: The host then stands up, holding the sash in his hand, and bows to the guests at the top of the stairs.

古文：宾西阶上北面坐，卒爵，兴；坐奠爵，遂拜，执爵兴。
现代文：宾在西阶上方面向北坐下，干杯，起立。复又坐下将爵放置地上，随即一拜。
English: The guest sits facing north on the west side of the steps, makes a toast, and stands up. He then sits down again, places the medal on the ground, and immediately bows.

古文：主人阼阶上答拜。
现代文：然后手持爵起立。主人在阼阶上方对宾答拜。
English: The host then stands up, holding the sash in his hand, and bows to the guests at the top of the stairs.

古文：宾降洗，主人降。
现代文：宾下堂洗爵，主人随之下堂。
English: The guest is christened in the hall and the host follows in the hall.

古文：宾坐奠爵，兴辞，主人对。
现代文：宾坐下将爵置于地上，站起辞谢主人，主人对宾作答。
English: The guest sits down, places the ring on the ground, stands up to thank the host, and the host responds to the guest.

古文：宾坐取爵，适洗南，北面。
现代文：宾坐下取爵在手，至洗的南边，面朝北方。
English: The guest sits down with the dagger in his hand, on the south side of the laver, facing north.

古文：主人阼阶东，南面辞洗。宾坐奠爵于篚，兴对。
现代文：主人在阼阶的东边面朝南致辞，谢宾洗爵，宾坐下把爵置于篚中，站起致答辞。
English: The host gave a speech facing south on the east side of the stairs. Xie Bin was baptized. The guest sat down and placed the medal in the urn, and then stood up to give a speech.

古文：主人复阼阶东，西面。
现代文：主人回到阼阶东边，面朝西站立。
English: The master returned to the east side of the stairs and stood facing west.

古文：宾东北面盥，坐取爵，卒洗，揖让如初，升。主人拜洗。
现代文：宾面朝东北洗手，然后从篚中取爵在手，洗爵完毕，像主人献宾时一样，与主人相互一揖一让，上堂。
English: The guest washes his hands facing the northeast, and then takes the sash from the urn in his hand. After the sash is washed, he and the host bow to each other and go to the hall, just like when the host is presenting the guest.

古文：宾答拜，兴，降盥，如主人礼。宾实爵主人之席前，东南面酢主人。
现代文：主人拜宾对它的洗爵表示感谢。宾答拜主人，站起，下堂洗手，其仪节与主人献宾时相同。宾斟满酒，至主人席前面朝东南酢主人。
English: The host thanks the guest for his or her knighthood. The guest thanks the host, stands up, and washes his or her hands. The ceremony is the same as when the host presents the guest. The guest pours the wine and walks to the front of the host's table, facing southeast.

古文：主人阼阶上拜，宾少退。
现代文：主人在阼阶上方拜宾，宾稍稍后退。
English: The host bowed to the guest at the top of the stairs, and the guest stepped back slightly.

古文：主人进受爵，复位，宾西阶上拜送爵。
现代文：主人进前接过酒爵，回到自己的位子上。宾在西阶上方拜送爵。
English: The host stepped forward to receive the baron and returned to his seat. The guest waited for the baron at the top of the west steps.

古文：荐脯醢。
现代文：有司把脯醢进置主人席前。
English: The steward put the bowl in front of his seat.

古文：主人升席自北方。
现代文：主人从北边即席。
English: The host is seated immediately to the north.

古文：设折俎。
现代文：有司将折俎进放主人席前。
English: A steward places the folding basket in front of the host's seat.

古文：祭如宾礼，不告旨。
现代文：祭酒、祭脯醢之仪与宾相同，不称赞酒美。
English: The ritual of offering wine and food to the deities is the same as for the guests, and the beauty of the wine is not praised.

古文：自席前适阼阶上，北面坐卒爵，兴，坐奠爵，遂拜，执爵兴。
现代文：主人从席前至阼阶上方，面朝北坐下，干杯，站起。复又坐下放爵在地，随即一拜，然后手持爵起立。
English: The host moves from the front of the table to the top of the stairs, sits down facing north, makes a toast, and stands up. He then sits down again, lays his sword on the ground, immediately bows, and then stands up with the sword in his hand.

古文：宾西阶上答拜。
现代文：宾在西阶上方答拜主人。
English: The guests bow to their host at the top of the West Steps.

古文：主人坐奠爵于序端，阼阶上北面再拜崇酒。
现代文：主人在东序端坐下，将爵放置地上，在阼阶上方面朝北两拜，把酒壶添满。
English: The host sits down at the east end of the row, places the goblet on the ground, bows twice to the north on the steps, and fills the wine jug.

古文：宾西阶上答拜。
现代文：宾在西阶上方答拜主人。
English: The guests bow to their host at the top of the West Steps.

古文：主人坐取觯于篚，降洗。
现代文：主人在篚中取觯在手，下堂洗觯。
English: The owner took the bowl in his hands and went down to wash it.

古文：宾降，主人辞降。
现代文：宾随主人下堂，主人辞谢宾。
English: The guest follows the host down the hall, and the host thanks the guest.

古文：宾不辞洗，立当西序，东面。
现代文：宾不辞谢主人洗爵，在堂下对着西序的地方面朝东站立。
English: The guest thanked the host profusely and stood in front of the west row of seats facing east.

古文：卒洗，揖让升。
现代文：主人洗觯完毕，与宾相互揖让上堂。
English: After the host has washed the dishes, he and his guests let each other into the hall.

古文：宾西阶上疑立。
现代文：宾在西阶上方端正站立。
English: The guest stands at the top of the west steps.

古文：主人实觯酬宾，阼阶上北面坐奠觯，遂拜，执觯兴。
现代文：主人斟酒酬宾，在阼阶上方面朝北坐下，放觯在地，随即一拜，然后手持觯起立。
English: The host pours wine for the guests, sits down facing north on the stairs, puts the gong on the ground, immediately bows, and then stands up with the gong in hand.

古文：宾西阶上答拜。
现代文：宾在西阶上方答拜主人。
English: The guests bow to their host at the top of the West Steps.

古文：坐祭，遂饮，卒觯，兴；坐奠觯，遂拜，执觯兴。
现代文：主人坐下祭酒，然后饮酒，干杯后站起。坐下，置觯在地，随即一拜，手持觯起立。
English: The host sits down to drink the sacrificial wine, then drinks, stands up after the toast, sits down, places the yoke on the ground, immediately bows, and stands up holding the yoke.

古文：宾西阶上答拜。
现代文：宾在西阶上方答拜主人。
English: The guests bow to their host at the top of the West Steps.

古文：主人降洗；宾降辞，如献礼，升，不拜洗。
现代文：主人下堂洗觯，宾随之下堂并辞谢，其仪式与献礼相同，上堂，不拜谢主人洗觯。
English: The host goes down the hall to wash the bowl, and the guest goes down the hall to thank the host. The ceremony is the same as the offering, and the guest goes up the hall to wash the bowl without thanking the host.

古文：宾西阶上立；主人实觯宾之席前，北面；宾西阶上拜；主人少退，卒拜进，坐奠觯于荐西；宾辞，坐取觯，复位；主人阼阶上拜送；宾北面坐奠觯于荐东，复位。
现代文：宾在西阶上方站定。主人斟满酒，到宾席前面朝北站立。宾在西阶上方拜主人。主人稍稍后退，待宾拜毕，前行，然后坐下，把觯放置于脯醢西边的地上。宾致辞谢主人，坐下，取觯在手，回到自己的位子。主人在阼阶上方拜送觯。宾面朝北坐下，把觯放于脯醢东边地上，然后回到自己的位子上。
English: The guests stand at the top of the west steps. The host pours the wine and stands facing north in front of the guests. The guests bow to the host at the top of the west steps. The host retreats a little, waits for the guests to bow, walks forward, then sits down and places the gong on the ground to the west of the gong. The guests thank the host, sit down, take the gong in their hands and return to their seats. The host bows to the guests at the top of the steps. The guests sit down facing north, place the gong on the ground to the east of the gong, and then return to their seats.

古文：主人揖，降。
现代文：主人揖宾，下堂。
English: The host and his guests leave the hall.

古文：宾降立于阶西，当序，东面。
现代文：宾下堂站立在西阶西侧正对西序的地方，面朝东。
English: The guest hall stands on the west side of the west steps, facing east.

古文：主人以介揖让升，拜如宾礼。
现代文：主人在东序端坐下，取爵在手，下堂洗爵。
English: The master sits down at the east end of the row, takes the knighthood in his hand, and goes down the hall to be knighted.

古文：主人坐取爵于东序端，降洗；介降，主人辞降；介辞洗，如宾礼，升，不拜洗。
现代文：介下堂，主人辞谢介下堂，介辞谢主人洗爵，都与献宾之仪相同。介不拜谢主人洗爵。
English: The procession down the hall, the host's speech of thanksgiving, and the speech of thanksgiving for the host's knighthood are all the same as the ceremony of dedication.

古文：介西阶上立。
现代文：介在西阶上方站立。
English: It stands above the west transept.

古文：主人实爵介之席前，西南面献介。
现代文：主人斟满酒，到介的席前面朝西南献介。
English: The host pours in the wine, and in front of the seat of the hostess, presents the hostess with a bowl of soup.

古文：介西阶上北面拜，主人少退；介进，北面受爵，复位。主人介右北面拜送爵，介少退。
现代文：介在西阶上方面朝北拜主人，主人稍稍后退。介前行，面朝北接爵，回到自己的位子，主人在介右边面朝北拜送爵，介稍后退。
English: On the west side of the steps, the mediator faces north to bow to the host, and the host steps back slightly. The mediator walks forward, faces north to receive the peerage, and returns to his seat. The host, on the right side of the mediator, faces north to bow to the peerage, and the mediator steps back slightly.

古文：主人立于西阶东。
现代文：主人站立于西阶东边。
English: The owner stands on the east side of the west staircase.

古文：荐脯醢。
现代文：有司把脯醢进置介的席前。
English: The steward put the bowl in front of his seat.

古文：介升席自北方，设折俎。
现代文：介从北边即席，有司设折俎。
English: From the north side, there is an impromptu seat, with a steward setting up a folding screen.

古文：祭如宾礼，不哜肺，不啐酒，不告旨，自南方降席，北面坐卒爵，兴，坐奠爵，遂拜，执爵兴。
现代文：介祭脯醢、祭肺、祭酒，与宾仪节相同，但不尝肺，不尝酒，不称赞酒美。从南边下席，面朝北坐下，干杯后起立。坐下，置爵于地上，随即一拜，手执爵站起。
English: The pre-feast meal, the lung offering, and the wine offering are the same as that of the Festival of Dedication, but there is no tasting of the lung, no tasting of the wine, and no praise of the wine. From the south side of the lower seat, sit down facing north, and stand up after the toast. Sit down, place the knight on the ground, and then bow once, and stand up holding the knight's hand.

古文：主人介右答拜。
现代文：主人在介右边对介答拜。
English: The owner bowed to the assistant on the right side.

古文：介降洗，主人复阼阶，降辞如初。卒洗，主人盥。
现代文：介下堂洗爵。主人回到阼阶的位置，下堂辞谢，其仪节与宾醉主人时相同。
English: The ceremony is the same as when the host is drunk. The host returns to his place on the dais and bows his head in thanks.

古文：介揖让升，授主人爵于两楹之间。
现代文：介洗爵完毕，主人洗手。介与主人一揖一让上堂，在堂上两楹之间把爵授与主人。
English: Once the assistant has finished baptizing the host, the host washes his hands. The assistant and the host are allowed to enter the hall one by one, and the host is awarded the title between the two doors.

古文：介西阶上立。
现代文：介立在西阶的上方。
English: It stands above the west transept.

古文：主人实爵，酢于西阶上，介右坐奠爵，遂拜，执爵兴。
现代文：主人斟酒，酢于西阶上方。主人在介右边坐下，把爵置于地上，随即一拜，手持爵起立。
English: The host pours the wine and places the vinegar on top of the west steps. The host sits down on the right side of the room, places the gong on the ground, then bows and stands up with the gong in hand.

古文：介答拜。
现代文：介答拜主人。
English: You answer to your master.

古文：主人坐祭，遂饮，卒爵，兴；坐奠爵，遂拜，执爵兴。
现代文：主人坐祭酒，随即饮酒，干杯后起立。坐下，把爵放置地上，随之一拜，执爵起立。
English: The host sips the sacrificial wine, then drinks, stands up after the toast, sits down, places the chalice on the ground, bows, and stands up.

古文：介答拜。
现代文：介答拜主人。
English: You answer to your master.

古文：主人坐奠爵于西楹南，介右再拜崇酒；介答拜。
现代文：主人坐下，把爵放置于西楹南边，在介右边两拜，往壶中添酒。介答拜主人。
English: The master sat down, placed the jar on the south side of the west pillar, bowed twice on the right side, and added wine to the jug. He bowed to the master.

古文：主人复阼阶，揖降，介降立于宾南。
现代文：主人回到阼阶的位置，揖，下堂。介下堂站立在宾的南边。
English: The host returns to the position of the front steps, and the lower hall. The lower hall stands on the south side of the guest.

古文：主人西南面三拜众宾，众宾皆答壹拜。
现代文：主人面朝西拜众宾三次，众宾皆答主人一拜。
English: The host faced west and bowed to the guests three times, and the guests all bowed to the host once.

古文：主人揖升，坐取爵于西楹下；降洗，升实爵，于西阶上献众宾。
现代文：主人揖，上堂，在西楹下坐下，取爵在手，下堂洗爵，然后上堂斟酒，在西阶的上方献众宾。
English: The host goes into the hall, sits down under the west gallery, takes the knighthood in his hand, goes down the hall to be knighted, and then goes into the hall to pour the wine and present it to the guests at the top of the west steps.

古文：众宾之长升拜受者三人，主人拜送。
现代文：众宾中年长者三人上堂拜受爵，主人拜送爵。
English: Among the guests, three elderly people came to the hall to be knighted, and the host was knighted.

古文：坐祭，立饮，不拜既爵；授主人爵，降复位。
现代文：这三人坐着祭祀，站立饮酒，干杯后不拜，将空爵还授与主人，下堂回到原位。
English: The three of them sat for the sacrifice, stood up to drink, and after the toast, they did not bow, but awarded the empty knighthood to the host, and then returned to their original seats.

古文：众宾献，则不拜受爵，坐祭，立饮。
现代文：主人献众宾，众宾则不拜而受爵，坐着祭祀，站立饮酒。
English: The host dedicates the guests, the guests do not bow and receive a knighthood, sit for the sacrifice, stand to drink.

古文：每一人献，则荐诸其席。
现代文：主人对众宾年长者三人中每一人献酒，有司都要把脯醢进置其席前。
English: The host offered a drink to each of the three elderly guests, and all of them had to place their goblets in front of their seats.

古文：众宾辩有脯醢。
现代文：其他众宾亦都要荐脯醢。
English: Other guests should also recommend it.

古文：主人以爵降，奠于篚。
现代文：主人持爵下堂，把爵放置篚中。
English: The host came down the hall with the sword and placed it in the urn.

古文：揖让升，宾厌介升，介厌众宾升，众宾序升，即席。
现代文：主人与宾揖让上堂，宾长揖请介上堂，介亦长揖请众宾上堂，众宾依序上堂，即席。
English: The host and the guest are to go to the hall, the guest is to go to the hall, the guest is to go to the hall, the guest is to go to the hall, the guest is to go to the hall, the guests are to go to the hall, the guests are to go to the hall.

古文：一人洗，升，举觯于宾。
现代文：主人之吏一人洗觯，升堂举觯授宾。
English: One of the host's clerks washes the dishes and goes up to the hall to present the dishes to the guests.

古文：实觯，西阶上坐奠觯，遂拜，执觯兴，宾席末答拜；坐祭，遂饮，卒觯，兴，坐奠觯，遂拜，执觯兴，宾答拜。
现代文：举觯者斟酒，在西阶上方坐下，放觯在地，随即一拜，持觯起立。宾在席末端答拜，举觯者坐下祭酒，然后饮酒，干杯后站起。夏又坐下，放觯在地，随即一拜，执觯站起。宾答拜。
English: The host pours the wine, sits down at the top of the west steps, places the gong on the ground, then bows once and stands up holding the gong. The guests bow at the end of the meal, the host sits down and drinks the sacrificial wine, then drinks, and stands up after the toast. Xia sits down again, places the gong on the ground, then bows once, and stands up holding the gong. The guests bow.

古文：降洗，升，实觯，立于西阶上宾拜；进坐奠觯于荐西，宾辞，坐受以兴。
现代文：宾辞谢，坐下接受觯，持静起立。
English: Thank the guests, sit down to receive the candy, and stand up quietly.

古文：举觯者西阶上拜送，宾坐奠觯于所。
现代文：举觯者在西阶上方拜送觯。宾坐下，把觯放置于脯醢西边。
English: The person who raises the gong bows at the top of the west steps. The guest sits down and places the gong on the west side of the gong.

古文：举觯者降。
现代文：举觯人下堂。
English: The curtain is raised and everyone leaves the hall.

古文：设席于堂廉，东上。
现代文：在堂的侧边设席，以东为上首。
English: Seats are set up on the side of the hall, with the east end at the top.

古文：工四人，二瑟，瑟先。
现代文：乐工四人，其中二人鼓瑟，鼓瑟者在前。
English: There are four musicians, two of whom play the drums, with the drummer at the front.

古文：相者二人，皆左何瑟，后首，挎越，内弦，右手相。
现代文：相者二人，皆左手荷瑟，瑟首在后，把手指伸进瑟下孔中持瑟，瑟弦朝里，以右手扶持乐工。
English: The two partners, both left-handed, hold their hands behind their heads, stick their fingers into the lower hole to hold it, hold the strings in the morning, and support the musicians with their right hands.

古文：乐正先升，立于西阶东。
现代文：乐正先上堂，站立在西阶上东边。
English: Le is the first to enter the hall, standing on the upper east side of the west steps.

古文：工入，升自西阶。北面坐。
现代文：乐工入内，从西阶上堂，面朝北坐下。
English: Musicians enter, walk up the hall from the west steps, face north and sit down.

古文：相者东面坐，遂授瑟，乃降。
现代文：相者面朝东坐下把瑟授与鼓瑟的乐工，然后下堂。
English: The other party sat down facing east, bowed to the musicians playing the drums, and then left the hall.

古文：工歌《鹿鸣》、《四牡》、《皇皇者华》。
现代文：乐工演唱《鹿鸣》、《四牡》、《皇皇者华》。
English: Musicians sing "Deer Song," "Four Horses" and "Emperor's Flower."

古文：卒歌，主人献工。
现代文：演唱毕，主人向乐工献酒。
English: After the singing, the host offered wine to the musicians.

古文：工左瑟，一人拜，不兴，受爵。
现代文：乐工把瑟放在左边，乐工中为首者一人拜主人，不起立，受爵。
English: The musicians put their cymbals on the left, and the leader of the musicians bowed to his master, did not stand up, and received a knighthood.

古文：主人阼阶上拜送爵。
现代文：主人在阼阶上方拜送爵。
English: The master is receiving a knighthood at the top of the stairs.

古文：荐脯醢。
现代文：有司把脯醢进置其席前。
English: The steward put the bowl in front of his seat.

古文：使人相祭。
现代文：使相者赞助他祭酒、祭脯醢。
English: Make the celebrant sponsor the sacrificial wine and gong.

古文：工饮，不拜既爵，授主人爵。众工则不拜，受爵，祭，饮辩有脯醢，不祭。
现代文：乐工饮酒干杯后不拜，把空爵还授主人，其余众乐工则不拜，受爵，祭酒后饮之。每人献时都有脯醢，但不祭脯醢。
English: Musicians do not bow after drinking a toast, and give the empty knighthood back to the host, while the rest of the musicians do not bow, receive a knighthood, and drink it after the sacrificial wine. Each person has a gong when they offer it, but they do not offer a gong.

古文：大师则为之洗。
现代文：其中若有大师，则为他洗爵。
English: If there is a master among them, he will be given a knighthood.

古文：宾、介降，主人辞降。
现代文：宾介要随从主人下堂，主人辞谢宾介下堂。
English: The guest should follow the host down the hall, and the host should thank the guest for coming down the hall.

古文：工不辞洗。
现代文：乐工不辞激主人洗爵。
English: Musicians do their best to get their masters knighted.

古文：笙入堂下，磬南，北面立，乐《南陔》、《白华》、《华黍》。
现代文：吹笙人入内，站立在堂下击磐者南边，面朝北。吹笙人演奏《南陔》、《白华》、《华黍》。
English: The trumpeters enter and stand on the south side of the rock under the hall, facing north. The trumpeters play "Nanjing," "Baihua" and "Huaqi."

古文：主人献之于西阶上。
现代文：主人在西阶上献吹笙人。
English: On the west staircase, the owner is offering a blow job.

古文：一人拜，尽阶，不升堂，受爵，主人拜送爵。
现代文：吹笙人中长者一人拜谢主人，上到最上一级台阶，不上堂，接过酒爵，主人拜送爵。
English: One of the elders among the boasters thanked the host, climbed to the top step, did not go to the hall, received the wine baron, and the host sent the baron away.

古文：阶前坐祭，立饮，不拜既爵，升授主人爵。
现代文：在阶前坐下祭酒、祭脯醢，站起饮酒，不拜，干杯后上台阶把空爵还授主人。
English: Sit down in front of the steps to drink the sacrificial wine, the sacrificial bowl, stand up to drink, do not bow, after the toast, go up the steps to return the empty knighthood to the host.

古文：众笙则不拜，受爵，坐祭，立饮；辩有脯醢，不祭。
现代文：其余众吹笙人接爵不拜，坐下祭酒，起立饮之。献其余众吹笙人时都要进脯醢，但不祭脯醢。
English: The rest of the trumpeters do not bow, but sit down and drink the sacrificial wine. The rest of the trumpeters go into the furnace when it is offered, but they do not offer the furnace.

古文：乃间歌《鱼丽》，笙《由庚》；歌《南有嘉鱼》，笙《崇丘》；歌《南山有台》，笙《由仪》。
现代文：接着，演唱与吹奏交替进行：演唱《鱼丽》，吹奏《由庚》；演唱《南有嘉鱼》，吹奏《崇丘》；演唱《南山有台》，吹奏《由仪》。
English: Next, the singing and blowing alternated: singing "Fish" and blowing "Yu Geng"; singing "Nan You Jiayu" and blowing "Chongqiu"; singing "Nanshan Yudai" and blowing "Yu Yi."

古文：乃合乐：《周南·关雎》、《葛覃》、《卷耳》，《召南·鹊巢》、《采蘩》、《采苹》。
现代文：然后，堂上歌、瑟，堂下笙、磬一齐演奏《周南·关雎》、《葛覃》、《卷耳》和《召南·鹊巢》、《采繁》、《采蘋》诸诗篇。
English: Then, songs and serenades at the beginning and end of the performance, as well as gongs and cymbals at the end of the performance, performed together the poems "Zhou Nan Guanzhang," "Ge Zheng," "Rolling Ear" and "Zhanan Guanzhong," "Zhe Sheng" and "Zhe Ping."

古文：工告于乐正曰： 正歌备。 
现代文：乐工报告乐正说： 正歌已演奏完毕。 
English: Musicians report to Le Zheng: The main song has been performed.

古文：乐正告于宾，乃降。
现代文：乐正以此告宾，然后下堂。
English: Le Zheng announced the guests with this, and then left the hall.

古文：主人降席自南方，侧降；作相为司正。
现代文：主人从南侧下席，独自一人下堂，使相行司正之事。
English: The host, seated on the south side of the room, left the room alone to make the matter right.

古文：司正礼辞，许诺。
现代文：司正推辞一番，答应了。
English: Sisho declined, but agreed.

古文：主人拜，司正答拜。
现代文：主人拜谢，司正答拜。
English: The host bows, the secretary bows.

古文：主人升，复席。
现代文：主人上堂，回至席上。
English: The host enters the hall and returns to his seat.

古文：司正洗觯，升自西阶，阼阶上北面受命于主人。主人曰： 请安于宾。 
现代文：司正洗觯，从西阶上堂，在阼阶上方面朝北接受主人的命令。主人说： 请宾安止。 
English: The steward, Zheng Zai, went up the hall from the west side, and received the master's order from the north side of the hall. The master said: Please stop.

古文：司正告于宾，宾礼辞，许。
现代文：司正告知宾，宾推辞一番，许诺。
English: The host informs the guest, the guest declines, and the host promises.

古文：司正告于主人。
现代文：司正告知主人。
English: The steward is informing the master.

古文：主人阼阶上再拜，宾西阶上答拜。
现代文：主人在阼阶上方两拜谢宾，宾在西阶上方答拜主人。
English: The master bows twice to Xie Bin at the top of the rung, and Bin bows to the master at the top of the west rung.

古文：司正立于楹间以相拜，皆揖，复席。
现代文：司正斟酒，执觯从西阶下堂，在两阶之间面朝北坐下，放觯在地。
English: The steward is pouring the wine, holding the gourd down from the west step, sitting down between the two steps facing north, and putting the gourd on the ground.

古文：司正实觯，降自西阶，阶间北面坐奠觯；退共，少立；坐取觯，不祭，遂饮，卒觯兴，坐奠觯，遂拜；执觯兴，盥洗；北面坐奠觯于其所，退立于觯南。
现代文：退后拱手站立片刻。坐下取觯在手，不祭酒而饮之，干杯后站起。坐下放觯在地，随即一拜。执觯起立，盥手洗觯。面朝北坐下，把觯放置在其位地上，然后退后在觯南边站立。
English: Stand back and stand for a moment. Sit down, take the gong in your hand, drink it without offering wine, stand up after the toast. Sit down, put the gong on the ground, then bow. Hold the gong, stand up, wash your hands. Sit down facing north, place the gong on the ground in its place, and then stand back on the south side of the gong.

古文：宾北面坐取俎西之觯，阼阶上北面酬主人。
现代文：宾面朝北坐下，拿起放置于俎西边的觯，在阼阶上方面朝北酬主人。
English: The guest sits down facing north, picks up the gong placed on the west side of the gong, and greets the host facing north on the gong step.

古文：主人降席，立于宾东。
现代文：主人下席，站立在宾的东边。
English: The host takes a seat and stands to the east of the guests.

古文：宾坐奠觯，遂拜，执觯兴，主人答拜。
现代文：宾坐下将觯放置在地上，随即一拜。持觯站起，主人答拜。
English: The guest sits down, places the gong on the ground, and then bows. The host stands up, holding the gong, and bows.

古文：不祭，立饮，不拜，卒觯，不洗，实觯，东南面授主人。
现代文：宾不祭酒，立而饮之，不拜。干杯，不洗觯。然后斟酒，面朝东南将觯授与主人。
English: The guests do not offer wine, they drink it standing up, they do not bow, they make a toast, they do not wash the gong. Then they pour the wine, face southeast and award the gong to the host.

古文：主人阼阶上拜，宾少退。
现代文：主人在阼阶上方拜谢宾，宾稍稍退后。
English: The host bowed to the guest at the top of the stairs, and the guest stepped back slightly.

古文：主人受觯，宾拜送于主人之西。宾揖，复席。
现代文：主人接受觯，宾在主人西边拜送觯。宾揖，即席。
English: The host receives the gong, and the guest presents the gong on the west side of the host.

古文：主人西阶上酬介。
现代文：主人在西阶上方酬介。
English: The owner lives above the west staircase.

古文：介降席自南方，立于主人之西，如宾酬主人之礼。
现代文：介从南侧下席，站立在主人西边，其仪节与宾酬主人相同。
English: From the south side of the lower seat, standing on the west side of the host, the ceremony is the same as that of the host.

古文：主人揖，复席。
现代文：主人揖，即席。
English: The host, impromptu.

古文：司正升相旅，曰： 某子受酬。 
现代文：司正上堂主持旅酬的仪式，说： 某某先生受酬。 
English: Shizheng went to the hall to preside over the ceremony of travel remuneration, saying: Mr. So-and-so received remuneration.

古文：受酬者降席。
现代文：受酬者下席。
English: The honorees take their seats.

古文：司正退立于序端，东面。
现代文：司正退后站立在序端，面朝东。
English: Shizeng stepped back and stood at the front of the line, facing east.

古文：受酬者自介右，众受酬者受自左，拜、兴、饮，皆如宾酬主人之礼。
现代文：受酬者在介东边接受介的酬酒，以下众受酬者则在酬者西边受酬。其下拜、起立、饮酒，都与宾酬主人的仪节相同。
English: The recipient of the reward receives the reward wine from the mediator on the east side of the mediator, and the following recipients receive the reward wine from the mediator on the west side of the recipient. Their bowing, standing up, and drinking are all the same as the ceremony of the host of the reward.

古文：辩，卒受者以觯降，坐奠于篚。
现代文：旅酬已遍及众宾，最后一名受酬者执觯下堂，坐下将觯放置篚中。
English: The travel reward has been distributed to all the guests. The last recipient of the reward walks down the hall, sits down and places the reward in the urn.

古文：司正降，复位。
现代文：司正下堂，回到他原来的位置。
English: Shi Zheng walked down the hall and returned to his original position.

古文：使二人举觯于宾、介，洗，升，实觯于西阶上，皆坐奠觯，遂拜，执觯兴。
现代文：使主人之吏二人举觯授宾和介，洗觯后，上堂斟酒。举觯者都在西阶上方坐下，放觯于地，随即一拜，持觯起立。
English: Have two of the host's officials hold up the gong to confer with the guests and the mediators. After washing the gong, go to the hall to pour the wine. Those who hold the gong sit down at the top of the west steps, put the gong on the ground, immediately bow, and stand up holding the gong.

古文：宾、介席末答拜。
现代文：宾和介在席尾端答拜。
English: The guests and ushers bowed at the end of the meal.

古文：皆坐祭，遂饮，卒觯兴，坐奠觯，遂拜，执觯兴，宾、介席末答拜。
现代文：举觯者都坐下祭酒，然后饮酒，干杯后起立。坐下放觯于地，随即一拜，执觯站起。宾和介在席末端答拜。
English: Everyone who raises the gong sits down to drink the sacrificial wine, then drinks, stands up after the toast. Sit down and put the gong on the ground, then bow, and stand up holding the gong. The guests and mediators bow at the end of the meal.

古文：逆降，洗，升，实觯，皆立于西阶上。
现代文：举觯者下堂，次序正与其上堂时相反。洗觯毕，上堂斟酒，都站立在西阶上方。
English: Those who raise the gong go down the hall in the opposite order to when they came up. After washing the gong and pouring the wine, they all stand at the top of the west steps.

古文：宾、介皆拜。
现代文：宾和介皆拜谢。
English: Thank you to all the guests and staff.

古文：皆进，荐西奠之，宾辞，坐取觯以兴。
现代文：举觯者一起前行，一人至宾席前将觯放置于脯醢西边，宾辞谢，坐下取觯在手起立。
English: The person who raises the gong goes forward together, and one person places the gong on the west side of the gong before the guest seat. The guest says thank you, sits down, picks up the gong and stands up.

古文：介则荐南奠之，介坐受以兴。
现代文：另一人则至介席前把觯放置于脯醢南边，介坐下接受觯，站起。
English: The other person went to the front of the seat to place the bowl on the south side of the bowl, sat down to receive the bowl, and stood up.

古文：退，皆拜送，降。
现代文：举觯者退后，皆拜送觯，然后下堂。
English: Those who had raised the cymbals retreated, everyone bowed to see the cymbals off, and then left the hall.

古文：宾、介奠于其所。
现代文：宾把觯放置于其席前脯醢西边，介则把觯放置于其脯醢的南边。
English: The guest places the gong on the west side of the gong in front of his seat, while the server places the gong on the south side of his gong.

古文：司正升自西阶，受命于主人。
现代文：司正从西阶上堂，至主人前受命。
English: The steward was ordered to come up from the west steps and stand before his master.

古文：主人曰： 请坐于宾。 
现代文：主人说： 请宾安坐。 
English: The host said, "Please be seated."

古文：宾辞以俎。
现代文：宾以俎未撤为由推辞。
English: The guest declined on the grounds that the gong had not been removed.

古文：主人请彻俎，宾许。
现代文：主人请求撤俎，宾许诺。
English: The host asked for a withdrawal, and the guest agreed.

古文：司正降阶前，命弟子俟彻俎。
现代文：司正下堂至西阶前，命弟子准备伺候撤俎。
English: Sijo went down to the west front of the hall, and the disciples prepared to wait for the evacuation.

古文：司正升，立于序端。
现代文：司正上堂，站立在西序端。
English: Tsukasa enters the hall and stands at the west end of the row.

古文：宾降席，北面。
现代文：宾下席，面朝北方。
English: Seated guests, facing north.

古文：主人降席，阼阶上北面。
现代文：主人下席，面朝北立在阼阶上方。
English: The owner sits in the lower seat, faces north and stands at the top of the stairs.

古文：介降席，西阶上北面。
现代文：介下席，在西阶上方站立，面朝北。
English: In the middle seat, stand above the west steps, facing north.

古文：遵者降席，席东南面。
现代文：遵者下席，面朝南立于席东边。
English: Follow the lower seat, face south and stand on the east side of the seat.

古文：宾取俎，还授司正；司正以降，宾从之。
现代文：宾取俎，转身授与司正，司正持俎下堂，宾亦随之下堂。
English: The guest takes the gong, turns to present it to the host, the host holds the gong, and the guest follows.

古文：主人取俎，还授弟子；弟子以降自西阶，主人降自阼阶。
现代文：主人取俎，转身授与弟子，弟子持俎从西阶下堂，主人则从阼阶下堂。
English: The master takes the gong, turns around to award the disciple, the disciple holds the gong and goes down the hall from the west steps, while the master goes down the hall from the north steps.

古文：介取俎，还授弟子；弟子以降，介从之。
现代文：介取俎，转身授与弟子，弟子持俎下堂，介亦随之下堂。
English: The deacon takes the gong, turns around to give it to the disciple, the disciple holds the gong and steps down the hall, and the deacon steps down the hall.

古文：若有诸公、大夫，则使人受俎，如宾礼。
现代文：如果有诸公大夫在场，则使公士接俎，其仪节与宾彻俎时相同。
English: If Zhu Gongdafu is present, then the prince will be made to take the reins, and the ceremony will be the same as that of Binche.

古文：众宾皆降。
现代文：众宾都下堂。
English: All the guests have left the hall.

古文：说屦，揖让如初，升，坐。
现代文：众人在堂下脱掉鞋子，像开始一样，宾主揖让升堂，坐下。
English: Everyone takes off their shoes in the hall, and as in the beginning, the guests leave the hall and sit down.

古文：乃羞。
现代文：有司摆上菜肴。
English: A server sets out the dishes.

古文：无算爵。无算乐。宾出，奏《陔》。
现代文：宾主欢饮，爵行无数，歌乐不限，尽欢而止。宾退出，奏《陔夏》。
English: The guests drink with joy, there are countless parties, the songs are unlimited, and the fun is over. The guests leave, and "Midsummer" is played.

古文：主人送于门外，再拜。
现代文：主人送至大门外，两拜。
English: The host escorted him outside the gate, and he bowed twice.

古文：宾若有遵者：诸公、大夫，则既一人，举觯，乃入。
现代文：来客中如有遵者，行礼至 一人举觯 后，诸公大夫可以入内。
English: If there are followers among the guests, Zhu Gongdafu can enter after bowing and one person raises the gong.

古文：席于宾东，公三重，大夫再重。
现代文：在宾席的东边为遵者设席，公席三层，大夫两层。
English: On the east side of the guest seats, seats are set up for the followers. The public seats are on the third floor and the doctors are on the second floor.

古文：公如大夫，入，主人降，宾、介降，众宾皆降，复初位。
现代文：公与大夫一样，入内时，主人下堂，宾介下堂，众宾都要下堂，回到原来的位子。
English: Just like a doctor, when entering a room, the host should leave, the guests should leave, and all the guests should leave and return to their original seats.

古文：主人迎，揖让升。
现代文：主人迎于门内，相互揖让上堂。
English: The host greets them at the door, and they let each other into the hall.

古文：公升如宾礼，辞一席，使一人去之。
现代文：公上堂，其仪节都与宾相同，公辞去一层席，使一人撤下。
English: In the public hall, the ceremony is the same as that of the guests, and the official resigns from the first-floor seat, causing one person to be removed.

古文：大夫则如介礼，有诸公，则辞加席，委于席端，主人不彻；无诸公，则大夫辞加席，主人对，不去加席。
现代文：对大夫的礼节，则与介相同。如有诸公在场，大夫则要辞去上一层席，卷而放置于席端，主人不使人撤下。如无诸公在场，则大夫辞上一层席时，主人作答，不撤去其上一层席。
English: For a doctor, the etiquette is the same as that of an assistant. If there are nobles present, the doctor will resign from the upper seat, and the roll will be placed at the end of the seat, and the owner will not let anyone remove it. If there are no nobles present, when the doctor resigns from the upper seat, the owner will answer, and will not remove his upper seat.

古文：明日，宾服乡服以拜赐，主人如宾服以拜辱。主人释服，乃息司正。
现代文：第二天，宾身穿朝服至主人处拜谢主人对自己的礼遇，主人身着与宾相同的礼服拜谢宾屈驾来临。主人卸去朝服而服玄端，于是犒劳司正。
English: The next day, the guest, dressed in a court dress, went to the host to thank the host for his courtesy, and the host, dressed in the same dress as the guest, bowed down to thank the guest. The host removed his court dress and bowed to the mysterious side, so the host was very happy.

古文：无介，不杀，荐脯醢，羞唯所有。
现代文：不用介，不杀牲，有脯醢，菜肴视其所有而进，客人因其所欲而请。
English: There is no need to meddle, no killing of animals, there are maggots, dishes are served according to what they have, and guests are invited because of what they want.

古文：征唯所欲，以告于先生、君子可也。
现代文：乡中致仕的卿大夫、盛德的君子，邀请与否亦随其所愿。
English: The village's honorary doctor, the grand gentleman, can invite whomever he wishes.

古文：宾、介不与。
现代文：宾和介不参加。
English: The guests and mediators will not attend.

古文：乡乐唯欲。
现代文：《国风》中诸篇，亦可因其所欲而演唱。
English: Various parts of "Kokufu" can also be sung as desired.

古文：记。乡，朝服而谋宾、介，皆使能，不宿戒。
现代文：乡大夫身着朝服议定宾、介的人选，因宾介都是乡中贤能之士，因而不必预告习礼。
English: The village doctor, dressed in imperial robes, decides on the guests and mediators. Since the mediators are all capable people in the village, there is no need to announce the ceremony in advance.

古文：蒲筵，缁布纯。
现代文：设筵用以黑布镶边的蒲席。
English: There is a cushion with a rim made of black cloth.

古文：尊綌幂，宾至彻之。
现代文：酒尊上盖粗葛布盖巾，宾到时撤去。
English: Cover the sake with a coarse burlap cloth, and remove it when the guest arrives.

古文：其牲，狗也。亨于堂东北。
现代文：牲用狗，在堂外东北边烹煮。
English: Cattle dogs are cooked outside the hall on the northeast side.

古文：献用爵，其他用觯。
现代文：献酒用爵，其他用觯。
English: Dedicate the wine with a girdle, the rest with a pestle.

古文：荐脯，五挺，横祭于其上，出自左房。
现代文：所进脯五条，另有半条横置其上以供祭祀。
English: There are five yakitori in total, and half of them are placed horizontally on top of the yakitori for sacrifice.

古文：俎由东壁，自西阶升。
现代文：脯预先陈放在东房中。俎，用时从东壁移至西阶，从西阶上堂设置于席前。
English: The table was placed in the east room in advance. It was then moved from the east wall to the west steps, and from the west steps up to the hall, it was placed in front of the seats.

古文：宾俎，脊、胁、肩、肺。主人俎，脊、胁、臂、肺。介俎，脊、胁、肫、胳、肺。
现代文：宾俎所载的肉食有：脊、胁、肩、肺；主人俎所载的肉食有：脊、胁、臂、肺；介俎所载的肉食有：脊、胁、肫、胳、肺。
English: The meat contained in the guest eel includes: spine, gill, shoulder, and lung; the meat contained in the host eel includes: spine, gill, arm, and lung; the meat contained in the intermediate eel includes: spine, gill, gill, arm, and lung.

古文：肺皆离。
现代文：肺都要割离开。
English: The lungs have to be cut away.

古文：皆右体，进腠。
现代文：牲都用右体，肉皮向上。
English: The animals are all slaughtered with the right side of the body, with the skin facing upwards.

古文：以爵拜者不徒作。
现代文：为干杯而下拜者不空起立，起立即要酢主人。
English: Those who prostrate themselves for the sake of a toast should not stand up empty-handed, but should immediately ask their host for vinegar.

古文：坐卒爵者拜既爵，立卒爵者不拜既爵。凡奠者于左，将举于右。
现代文：坐着干杯的人干杯后要拜；站着干杯的人干杯后则不拜。大凡酒杯不用，放置于左边；将要举以献酬，则放置于右边。
English: Those who toast while sitting should bow after toasting; those who toast while standing should not bow after toasting. The large wine cup is not needed and should be placed on the left; if you want to offer a gift, it should be placed on the right.

古文：众宾之长，一人辞洗，如宾礼。
现代文：众宾长者三人之中，只有一位尊者辞洗，其仪节与宾相同。
English: Of the three elderly guests, only His Holiness resigned from baptism, with the same ceremony as the guests.

古文：立者东面北上；若有北面者，则东上。
现代文：堂下站立的众宾，面朝东，以北为上首，如有面朝北站立的，则以东为上首。
English: All guests standing in the hall should face east, with north at the top. If they face north, they should face east at the top.

古文：乐正与立者，皆荐以齿。
现代文：乐正与堂下众宾皆依序受酬，进脯醢。
English: Le Zheng and all the guests in the hall received their rewards in order and entered the hall.

古文：凡举爵，三作而不徒爵。乐作，大夫不入。
现代文：凡举爵献宾、献大夫、献乐工，都要进脯醢。已开始奏乐，大夫便不可再入内。
English: All guests, doctors and musicians are required to enter the hall. If the music has already begun, the doctor is not allowed to re-enter.

古文：献工与笙，取爵于上篚；既献，奠于下篚。
现代文：给乐工和吹笙人献酒，要从上篚取爵；献毕，要把空爵放在下篚中。
English: When you pour out wine to the musicians and to the flute players, you shall take the mark of the cup from off the bowl; and when you have poured it out, you shall put the mark of the cup in the bottom of the bowl.

古文：其笙，则献诸西阶上；磬，阶间缩霤，北面鼓之。
现代文：主人献吹笙人，在西阶上拜送。磬，东西向设在两阶之间，击磬人面朝北击磬。
English: The master presented the cymbals and sent them off on the west steps. The cymbals are placed in the east-west direction between the two steps, and the cymbals are struck with the cymbals facing north.

古文：主人、介，凡升席自北方，降自南方。
现代文：主人、介，都从北侧即席，从南侧降席。
English: Both the host and the assistant were seated immediately from the north side, and were relegated from the south side.

古文：司正，既举觯而荐诸其位。
现代文：司正既举觯旅酬，要把脯醢进置其位。
English: Sizheng not only raised the yakitori travel fee, but also put the yakitori in its place.

古文：凡旅，不洗。
现代文：凡旅酬，不洗觯。
English: When traveling, do not wash your socks.

古文：不洗者，不祭。
现代文：不洗觯则不祭酒。
English: If you don't wash the yakitori, you don't get the sake.

古文：既旅，士不入。
现代文：已开始旅酬之仪，则士便不可再入内。
English: If they have already begun their journey, they are not allowed to re-enter.

古文：彻俎：宾、介，遵者之俎，受者以降，遂出授从者；主人之俎，以东。
现代文：撤俎：宾、介、遵者之俎，接俎的人持俎下堂后，即出门授与他们的随从人员；主人之俎，则由弟子至东壁收起来。
English: Withdrawal of the gong: the gong of the guest, the assistant, and the follower. After the person receiving the gong leaves the hall with the gong, they go out and give it to their attendants. The gong of the master is put away by the disciple to the east wall.

古文：乐正命奏《陔》，宾出，至于阶，《陔》作。
现代文：乐正命奏《陔夏》，宾告退，宾退到台阶时，《陔夏》乐声起。
English: During the music, "Summer" was played, and the guests retired. When the guests retired to the steps, the music of "Summer" began.

古文：若有诸公，则大夫于主人之北，西面。
现代文：若有诸公在场，则大夫的位置在主人北边，面朝西。
English: If Zhu Gong is present, the doctor's position is on the north side of the master, facing west.

古文：主人之赞者，西面北上，不与，无算爵，然后与。
现代文：主人的赞者面朝西，以北为上，不献酒，不酬酒，至无算爵之后，就可以参与饮酒了。
English: The owner's admirers face west, with north as the top, do not offer wine, do not reward wine, and after there is no count, they can participate in drinking.

