古文：起强圉大渊献，尽重光单阏，凡五年。
现代文：起，止，一共五年。晋孝武帝太元十二年
English: It lasted a total of five years, starting in the twelfth year of the reign of Emperor Jinxiao Wu.

古文：列宗孝武皇帝中之下太元十二年春，正月，乙巳，以硃序为青，兗二州刺史，代谢玄镇彭城；序求镇淮阴，许之。
现代文：春季正月，乙已，东晋任命朱序为青、兖二州剌史，代替谢玄镇守彭城；朱序请求改镇淮阴，得到了朝廷的允许。
English: In the first month of the spring, the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed Zhu Xue as the second and third governor of the two states to replace Xie Xuan as the governor of Pengcheng; Zhu Xue requested to change the town to Huaiyin and received permission from the imperial court.

古文：以玄为会稽内史。
现代文：朝廷任命谢玄为会稽内史。
English: The imperial court appointed Xie Xuan as the auditor of the internal history of the association.

古文：丁未，大赦。
现代文：丁未，东晋大赦天下。
English: On March 11th, the general amnesty came into effect.

古文：燕主垂观兵河上，高阳王隆曰： 温详之徒，皆白面儒生，乌合为群，徒恃长河以自固，若大军济河，必望旗震坏，不待战也。 
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂在黄河之上阅兵，高阳王慕容隆说： 温详这些人，都是白面儒生，乌合之众，只是依靠长河之险来保护自己；如果大军渡过黄河，他们一定会望旗自溃，不用一战。 
English: After the military parade on the Yellow River, Mu Ronglong, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, said: "These gentle people, all white-faced Confucians, only rely on the danger of the Long River to protect themselves. If a large army crosses the Yellow River, they will certainly defeat themselves without a fight.

古文：垂从之。
现代文：慕容垂同意他的话。
English: Murong Du accepted his suggestion.

古文：戊午，遣镇北将军兰汗、护军将军平幼于碻磝西四十里济河，隆以大众陈于北岸。
现代文：戊午，慕容垂派遣镇北将军兰汗、护军将军平幼率军在以西四十里的地方渡黄河，慕容隆则把更多的军队布署在河的北岸。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, Murongdol dispatched Zhenbei General Lan Han and the escorting general Pingyao to cross the Yellow River 40 miles to the west, while Muronglong deployed more troops on the north bank of the river.

古文：温攀、温楷果走趣城，平幼追击，大破之。
现代文：温攀、温楷等果然向东阿城逃去。平幼跟踪追击，把这支败军打得打败。
English: Wen Pang, Wen Kai, etc. fled to Donga City. Pingyao followed and pursued, and defeated the defeated army.

古文：详夜将妻子奔彭城，其众三万馀户皆降于燕。
现代文：温详则趁夜携带妻子儿女逃奔彭城，他的部众三万多户都投降了后燕。
English: Wen Jie took advantage of the night to flee Pengcheng with his wife and children. More than 30,000 of his subordinates surrendered to Houyan.

古文：垂以太原王楷为兗州刺史，镇东阿。
现代文：慕容垂任命太原王慕容楷为兖州剌史，镇守东阿城。
English: Murong Li appointed the King of Taiyuan, Murong Kai, as the governor of Bozhou and the town guard of Dong'a City.

古文：初，垂在长安，秦王坚尝与之交手语，垂出，冗从仆射光祚言于坚曰： 陛下颇疑慕容垂乎？
现代文：当年，慕容垂在长安的时候，秦王苻坚曾经与他握手交谈，冗从仆射光祚曾对苻坚说： 陛下您很顾虑慕容垂吗？
English: In that year, when Murongdiao was in Chang'an, Qin King He Jian once shook hands with him and had a conversation. His reticent servant Shiguangyao once said to He Jian: Your Majesty, are you very concerned about Murongdiao?

古文：垂非久为人下者也。 
现代文：慕容垂可不是一个久居人下的人啊。 
English: Murongdere is not a person who has lived under the radar for a long time.

古文：坚以告垂。
现代文：苻坚却把光祚这番话告诉了慕容垂。
English: However, Yu Jian told this to Murong Zhuo.

古文：及秦主丕自鄴奔晋阳，祚与黄门侍郎封孚、巨鹿太守封劝皆来奔。
现代文：前秦国主苻丕从邺城逃奔晋阳后，光祚和黄门侍郎封孚、钜鹿太守封劝都来投奔东晋。
English: After the former Qin sovereign Yan fled from Shicheng to Jinyang, Guangyi, Huangmen's retainer Fufu, and Elk's overlord Fuzhou were all persuaded to flee to East Jin.

古文：劝，弈之子也。
现代文：封劝是封奕的儿子。
English: Feng Xuan is the son of Feng Yi.

古文：垂之再围鄴也，秦故臣西河硃肃等各以其众来奔。
现代文：慕容垂再次兵围邺城，前秦老臣西河的朱肃等人都各自率自己的部众来归顺东晋。
English: Murongdari once again besieged Lucheng, and Zhu Su, the former Qin elder statesman Xihe, and others each led their own followers to return to Shun Dongjin.

古文：诏以祚等为河北诸郡太守，皆营于济北、濮阳，羁属温详；详败，俱诣燕军降。
现代文：朝廷下诏任命光祚等人为河北等几个郡的太守，都在济北、濮阳等处驻扎，羁縻从属于温详；温详失败后，他们都向后燕军投降。
English: Under the imperial edict, the imperial court appointed Guangyao and others as the governors of several counties including Hebei, and they were stationed in Jibei, Fenyang and other places. Guiyang was subordinate to Wenzhe; after Wenzhe's defeat, they all surrendered to Houyan's army.

古文：垂赦之，抚待如旧。
现代文：慕容垂赦免了他们，并像过去一样安抚厚待他们。
English: Murongtli pardoned them and treated them kindly as in the past.

古文：垂见光祚，流涕沾衿，曰： 秦主待我深，吾事之亦尽；但为二公猜忌，吾惧死而负之，每一念之，中宵不寐。 
现代文：慕容垂看见光祚也在其中，于是痛哭流涕，泪湿衣襟，说： 秦王苻坚待我恩深，我也尽自己全力为他办事；但是受到苻丕、苻晖二公的猜忌，我因为怕死才背叛了他们。现在每一想起这些，半夜也睡不着觉。 
English: Murongdiao saw that Guangyao was also among them, so he wept bitterly and his clothes were wet with tears, saying: Qin Wang Yao treated me with deep kindness, and I also did my best to work for him; but because of the suspicion of Yao and Zou, I betrayed them for fear of death. Now every time I think about this, I can't sleep in the middle of the night.

古文：祚亦悲恸。
现代文：光祚也很悲恸。
English: Guangyao is also very sad.

古文：垂赐祚金帛，祚固辞，垂曰： 卿犹复疑邪？ 
现代文：慕容垂赐给光祚金钱布帛，光祚坚决辞谢不收，慕容垂说： 您现在还怀疑我吗？ 
English: Murongdiao gave Guangyao money and cloth, but Guangyao resolutely refused to accept it. Murongdiao said: Do you still doubt me now?

古文：诈曰： 臣昔者惟知忠于所事，不意陛下至今怀之，臣敢逃其死？ 
现代文：光祚说： 我过去只知道忠于我所侍奉的主人，想不到陛下您今天还把我这事挂在心上，我怎么能逃过死罪啊！ 
English: Kwang-soo said, "In the past, I only knew how to be loyal to the master I served. I can't imagine, Your Majesty, that you still hold this matter of mine close to your heart today. How could I have escaped the death penalty?"

古文：垂曰： 此乃卿之忠，固吾求也，前言戏之耳 。
现代文：慕容垂说： 这是你的一片忠心，正是我所企求的，刚才那句话不过是玩笑罢了。 
English: Murong said, "This is a piece of your loyalty. It's exactly what I've been looking for. That sentence just now was just a joke."

古文：待之弥厚，以为中常侍。
现代文：从此，慕容垂对待光祚更加优厚，任命他为中常侍。
English: From then on, Murongdiao treated Guangyao more generously, appointing him as a middle-ranking attendant.

古文：翟辽遣其子钊寇陈、颍，硃序遣将军秦膺击走之。
现代文：丁零部酋长翟辽派遣他的儿子翟钊进犯东晋的属地陈留、颍川郡。朱序派将军秦膺击退翟钊。
English: Ding Zhibu chieftain Gong Liao sent his son Xing to invade the East Jin territory of Chenliu and Yingchuan County. Zhu Xiuxuan sent General Qin Xing to repel Xing.

古文：秦主登立妃毛氏为皇后，勃海王懿为太弟。
现代文：前秦国主苻登册立王妃毛氏为皇后，封勃海王苻懿为皇太弟。
English: Before the Qin Dynasty, the Prince and Empress Mao was registered as the empress, and the Prince and Empress Bo Hai was registered as the crown prince.

古文：后，兴之女也。
现代文：毛皇后是毛兴的女儿。
English: Empress Mao is Mao Xing's daughter.

古文：遣使拜东海王纂为使持节、都督中外诸军事、太师、领大司马，封鲁王，纂弟师奴为抚军大将军、并州牧，封朔方公。
现代文：苻登派遣使节拜封东海王苻纂为使持节、都督中外诸军事、太师、兼大司马，并封为鲁王；任命苻纂的弟弟苻师奴为抚军大将军、并州牧，并封为朔方公。
English: Xudeng sent envoys to pay homage to the East Sea King Xizang as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, the Grand Master, and the Grand Master, and was named the King of Lu; appointed Xizang's younger brother Xizang as the General of the Fuzhou Army, and the State Pastor, and was named the Governor of Shuo.

古文：纂怒谓使者曰： 勃海王，先帝之子，南安王何以不立而自立乎？ 
现代文：苻纂生气地对使节说： 勃海王苻懿是先帝苻丕的儿子，南安王苻登为什么不拥立他做皇帝，而却自己登上宝座呢？ 
English: Zuo Zhuang angrily said to the envoys: Bo Hai Wang Quan is the son of the former Emperor Quan, why didn't Nan'an Wang Quan Deng make him emperor and ascend the throne himself?

古文：长史王旅谏曰： 南安已立，理无中改；今寇虏未灭，不可宗室之中自为仇敌也。 
现代文：长史王旅劝他说： 南安王既已做了皇帝，按道理便不能半途改变了；现在贼寇盗匪还没有消灭，皇族宗室之中不能自己先互相成为仇敌。 
English: Changshi Wang Lu advised him: Nan'an's king has already become an emperor, so he can't change halfway. Now that the bandits and thieves haven't been eliminated, the royal families can't become enemies with each other.

古文：纂乃受命。
现代文：苻纂才接受了任命。
English: It was only then that he accepted the appointment.

古文：于是卢水胡彭沛谷、屠各董成、张龙世、新平羌雷恶地等皆附于篡，有众十馀万。
现代文：从此，卢水的胡人彭沛谷，屠各人董成、张龙世，新平羌人雷恶地等便都归附于苻纂，苻纂的部众达到十余万人。
English: Since then, Peng Peigu, the Hu people of Lu Shui, Tong Cheng, Zhang Longshi, the Xinping people, and so on have all been attached to Zhudao, and the members of Zhudao have reached more than 100,000 people.

古文：后秦主苌徙秦州豪杰三万户于安定。
现代文：后秦国主姚苌，把秦州的强族豪门之士三万户强行送到安定居住。
English: Later, the ruler of Qin, Yao Wei, forcibly sent thirty thousand families of powerful people from Qin State to stable residences.

古文：初，安次人齐涉聚众八千馀家据新栅，降燕，燕主垂拜涉魏郡太守。
现代文：当初，安次人齐涉聚集当地的民众八千余家，占据新栅归后燕，后燕国主慕容垂任命齐涉为魏郡太守。
English: At first, more than eight thousand local people gathered to occupy Xinzha and return to Houyan, and the lord of Houyan Province, Murong Liao, appointed Qi Zhan as the governor of Wei County.

古文：既而复叛，连张愿，愿自帅万馀人进屯祝阿之甕口，招翟辽，共应涉。
现代文：不久，齐涉又反叛后燕，与东晋叛将张愿联合。张愿统率一万多人进驻屯扎在祝阿的瓮口，并联络翟辽，共同呼应齐涉。
English: Soon after, Qidang rebelled against Houyan again, and united with the East Jin rebel Zhang Jian. Zhang Jian led more than ten thousand people into the garrison stationed at the junction of Zhu'a, and contacted Zou Liao to jointly echo Qidang.

古文：高阳王隆言于垂曰： 新栅坚固，攻之未易猝拔。
现代文：高阳王慕容隆对慕容垂报告说： 新栅城池坚固，如果进攻，不容易马上攻破。
English: Goyang King Murong Long reported to Murong Du: Xinzha Chengchi is solid, if attacked, it is not easy to break through immediately.

古文：若久顿兵于其城下，张愿拥帅流民，西引丁零，为患方深。
现代文：如果长时间屯兵在那座城下，张愿裹胁率领他的流民部众，又从西方引来丁零部落的翟辽，可能会给我们造成深重的祸患。
English: If troops were stationed under that city for a long time, and Zhang Zhan led his exiled people under duress, and brought Ding Zi's tribe from the west, it could cause us a serious disaster.

古文：愿众虽多，然皆新附，未能力斗。
现代文：张愿的兵虽然多，但都是新近才归附的，不能替张愿奋力死战。
English: Although there are many soldiers of Zhang Jian, they are all newly attached, and they cannot fight to the death for Zhang Jian.

古文：因其自至，宜先击之。
现代文：应该趁他自己找上门来，先对他发动攻击。
English: He should take advantage of the fact that he found the door and launch an attack on him first.

古文：愿父子恃其骁勇，必不肯避去，可一战擒也。
现代文：张愿父子依仗他们自己骁勇善战，一定不肯躲避而走，因此可以在一次战斗之中把他们擒住。
English: Zhang hoped that the father and son would rely on their own bravery and good fighting, and would not be willing to evade, so they could catch them in a battle.

古文：愿破，则涉自不能存矣。 
现代文：张愿被击败，齐涉就不能独自存在。 
English: Zhang Jian was defeated and Qi Tang could not exist on its own.

古文：垂从之。
现代文：慕容垂接受了他的建议。
English: Murong Du accepted his suggestion.

古文：二月，遣范阳王德、陈留王绍、龙骧将军张崇帅步骑二万会隆击愿。
现代文：二月，慕容垂派范阳王慕容德、陈留王慕容绍、龙骧将军张崇等统领步、骑兵二万人，会合慕容隆一起攻击张愿。
English: In February, Murong Lue sent Fan Yang Wang Murong De, Chen Liu Wang Murong Shao, Longjing General Zhang Chong and others to lead the way, with 20,000 cavalry, and Murong Long attacked Zhang Jian together.

古文：军至斗城，去甕口二十馀里，解鞍顿息。
现代文：大军抵达斗城，距瓮口二十里，下马解鞍，暂时休整。
English: The large army arrived at Doucheng, twenty miles from the mouth of the river, dismounted, dismounted, and temporarily rested.

古文：愿引兵奄至，燕人惊遽，德军退走，隆勒兵不动。
现代文：而张愿带兵突然袭击，后燕兵马惊慌失措，慕容德的部队撤退而走，慕容隆则压住阵脚不动。
English: But Zhang Xian suddenly attacked with his soldiers, after which Yan's soldiers and horses panicked, Murongde's troops retreated and left, while Muronglong held his ground and did not move.

古文：愿子龟出冲陈，隆遣左右王末逆击，斩之。
现代文：张愿的儿子张龟出马冲掠慕容隆的兵阵，慕容隆派身边将领王末迎上前去厮杀，杀了张龟。
English: Zhang Zhen's son, Zhang Gui, rode out to attack Murong Long's army. Murong Long sent his general, Wang Mue, to fight and kill Zhang Gui.

古文：隆徐进战，愿兵乃退。
现代文：慕容隆慢慢挥军掩杀，张愿的军队才撤了回去。
English: Murong Long slowly waved his army to cover up the killing, and only then did Zhang Xian's army withdraw.

古文：德行里馀，复速兵还，与隆合，谓隆： 贼气方锐，宜且缓之。 
现代文：慕容德奔逃一里多远，重新整顿兵马，回来与慕容隆会合，对慕容隆说： 贼寇的气势正盛，我们应该暂时缓进。 
English: Murong De ran as far as one mile away, reorganized the soldiers and horses, came back to meet with Murong Long, and said to Murong Long: The bandits are in full swing, we should slow down for the time being.

古文：隆曰： 愿乘人不备，宜得大捷；而吾士卒皆以悬隔河津，势迫之故，人思自战，故能却之。
现代文：慕容隆说： 张愿趁我们不加防备的时候，进行突然进攻，理应取得大胜；而我们的将士都因为被隔在黄河渡口的南岸，迫于形势，每个人都想到只有死战，所以才能把敌兵击退。
English: Muronglong said: Zhang is willing to take advantage of our unprepared time to make a sudden attack, and should win a great victory; and our soldiers are forced by the situation because they are separated on the south bank of the Yellow River ferry, and everyone thinks that there is only a death battle, so they can repel the enemy soldiers.

古文：今贼不得利，气竭势衰，皆有进退之志，不能齐奋，宜亟待击之。 
现代文：现在敌兵没有得到便宜，士气衰竭、声势败微，进退战守都有各自的打算，因此不能齐心奋战，应该迅速去攻击他们。 
English: Now that the enemy soldiers have not been taken advantage of, their morale is exhausted, their strength is weak, and they have their own plans for advancing and retreating. Therefore, they cannot fight together, and we should quickly attack them.

古文：德曰： 吾唯卿所为耳。 
现代文：慕容德说： 我完全听你的指挥。 
English: Murong De said: I am completely at your command.

古文：遂进，战于甕口，大破之，斩首七千八百级，愿脱身保三布口。
现代文：于是开始进攻，在瓮口与敌兵会战，大破张愿的部队，杀死七千八百多人；张愿逃脱，退保三布口。
English: He then launched an attack, clashed with enemy soldiers at Hekou, defeated Zhang Jian's troops, and killed more than 7,800 people; Zhang Jian escaped and withdrew to Sanbukou.

古文：燕人进军历城，青、兗、徐州郡县壁垒多降。
现代文：后燕军队开进历城，青州、兖州、徐州等郡县与一些民堡，大多数投降。
English: After Yan's army marched into Licheng, Qingzhou, Zhangzhou, Xuzhou and other counties and counties and some civilian forts, most of them surrendered.

古文：垂以陈留王绍为青州刺史，镇历地。
现代文：慕容垂任命陈留王慕容绍为青州刺史，镇守历城，慕容德等班师回朝。
English: Murongdeli appointed Chen Liu Wang Murongshao as the Qingzhou chief historian, the town guard of Licheng, and Murongde and other class teachers returned to the North.

古文：德等还师，新栅人冬鸾执涉送之。
现代文：新栅人冬鸾抓住齐涉，押送到后燕。
English: The person from Xinzha grabbed Qi Zhan and escorted him to Houyan.

古文：垂诛涉父子，馀悉原之。
现代文：慕容垂下诏诛斩齐涉父子，其他的人都赦免。
English: Murong issued an edict to execute the father and son, and the others were pardoned.

古文：三月，秦主登以窦冲为南秦州牧，杨定为益州牧，杨壁为司空、梁州牧，乞伏国仁为大将军、大单于、苑川王。
现代文：三月，前秦国主苻登任命窦冲为南秦州牧，杨定为益州牧，杨壁为司空、梁州牧，封乞伏国仁为大将军、大单于、苑川王。
English: In March, the former ruler of Qin, Yu Deng, appointed Dou Chong as the governor of South Qin Province, Yang as the governor of Yizhou Province, Yang Bi as the governor of Siku and Liang as the governor of Zhoushou Province, Feng Qiubu Guoren as the general, Datan Yu as the governor of Shandong Province, and Yuanchuan Wang as the governor of Quanzhou Province.

古文：燕上谷人王敏杀太守封戢，代郡人许谦逐太守贾闰，各以郡附刘显。
现代文：后燕上谷郡人王敏袭杀了太守封，代郡人许谦驱逐了太守贾闰，各自举郡城归顺匈奴部落的刘显。
English: After Yan, Wang Min, a resident of Shanggu County, attacked and killed the Tai Shoufeng, and on behalf of the county people, Xu Qian expelled the Tai Shou Jia Ye, and they each gave the county seat to Liu Xian of the Shun Hun tribe.

古文：燕乐浪王温为尚书右仆射。
现代文：后燕乐浪王慕容温被任为尚书右仆射。
English: Later, Yan Le Lang Wang Murong Wen was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：夏，四月，戊辰，尊帝母李氏为皇太妃，仪服如太后。
现代文：夏季，四月，戊辰，孝武帝司马曜尊封他的母亲李氏为皇太妃，仪礼服饰如同皇太后。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Wu of the Eastern Wu Dynasty honored his mother, Empress Dowager Li, with a ceremonial dress similar to that of an empress dowager.

古文：后秦征西将军姚硕德为杨定所逼，退过泾阳。
现代文：后秦征西将军姚硕德由于受到前秦益州牧杨定的逼迫，撤退到泾阳据守。
English: After the Qin conquest of the West, the general Yao Shuo De was forced by the former Qin governor of Yizhou, Mu Yang Ding, to retreat to Fenyang.

古文：定与秦鲁王纂共攻之，战于泾阳，硕德大败。
现代文：杨定与前秦鲁王苻纂一起攻击姚硕德，在泾阳决战，姚硕德大败。
English: Yang Ding attacked Yao Shuo De together with the former King of Qin Lu, and Yao Shuo De suffered a crushing defeat in the decisive battle in Fenyang.

古文：后秦主苌自阴密救之，纂退屯敷陆。
现代文：后秦国主姚苌从阴密赶来援救，苻纂退到敷陆屯守。
English: Later, the ruler of Qin, Yao Zang, came from Yinmi to rescue them, and Zangzang retreated to Shilutun.

古文：燕主垂自碻磝还中山，慕容柔、慕容盛、慕容会来自长子。
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂从回到中山。慕容柔、慕容盛、慕容会也从长子县赶回。
English: After that, Murong Du, the ruler of Yan Province, returned to Zhongshan. Murong Rou, Murong Sheng, and Murong Hui also rushed back from Changzi County.

古文：庚辰，垂为之大赦。
现代文：庚子，慕容垂因为他们重新回到都城，下令大赦。
English: Geng Zi and Murong Diao, because they returned to the capital, ordered an amnesty.

古文：垂问盛： 长子人情如何？为可取乎？ 
现代文：慕容垂问慕容盛说： 长子那个地方人们的心情怎么样，可以争取吗？ 
English: Murong asked Murong Sheng: Eldest son, what is the mood of the people in that place, can we fight for it?

古文：盛曰： 西军扰扰，人有东归之志，陛下唯当修仁政以俟之耳。
现代文：慕容盛说： 西方常有军事搔扰，因此，人们都有归顺东部的意思，陛下您只应当施行仁政、耐心等待时机罢了。
English: Murong Sheng said: The West often has military interference, so people have the will to submit to the East. Your Majesty should only implement benevolent policies and patiently wait for the right time.

古文：若大国一临，必投戈而来，若孝子之归慈父也。 
现代文：如果大军一旦逼临，他们一定会拿着武器前来归顺，就像孝顺的儿子归附仁慈的父亲那样。 
English: If an army should come against them, they would certainly take up arms and surrender, as a dutiful son surrenders to a merciful father.

古文：垂悦。
现代文：慕容垂大喜。
English: Murong is overjoyed.

古文：癸未，封柔为阳平王，盛为长乐公，会为清河公。
现代文：癸未，慕容垂封慕容柔为阳平王，慕容盛为长乐公，慕容会为清河公。
English: At that time, Murong Zhuofu Murong Rong was the Yangping King, Murong Sheng was the Changle King, and Murong Hui was the Qinghe King.

古文：高平人翟畅执太守徐含远，以郡降翟辽。
现代文：高平人翟畅抓住了太守徐含远，并率全郡投降了翟辽。
English: Gaoping's men captured the supreme warlord Xu Han Yuan, and led the whole county to surrender to Gongliao.

古文：燕主垂谓诸将曰： 辽以一城之众，返覆三国之间，不可不讨。 
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂对各位将领说： 翟辽只不过凭借着一个城池的部众，却在三个国家之间反复归叛，不能不去讨伐。 
English: Afterward, Mu Rongtai, the lord of Yan, said to the generals: Gongliao only relied on a small army, but he repeatedly rebelled between the three countries and could not help but fight.

古文：五月，以章武王宙监中外诸军事，辅太子宝守中山，垂自帅诸将南攻辽，以太原王楷为前锋都督。
现代文：五月，慕容垂命令章武王慕容宙为监中外诸军事，辅佐太子慕容宝镇守都城中山；慕容垂则亲自统率各位将领向南进攻翟辽。他任命太原王慕容楷为前锋都督。
English: In May, Murong Du ordered Zhangwu King Murong Cao to supervise the military in and out of the capital, assisted by Crown Prince Murong Bao Zhen guarding the capital Zhongshan; Murong Du personally led the generals to attack the south of Liaoning Province. He appointed Taiyuan King Murong Kai as the vanguard governor.

古文：辽众皆燕、赵之人，闻楷至，皆曰： 太原王子，吾之父母也！ 
现代文：翟辽的部众都是燕赵一带的人，听说慕容楷率军到了，都说： 太原王的儿子，是我们的父母！ 
English: The leaders of the Liao Dynasty were all from the areas around Yan Zhao. When they heard that the army led by Murong Kai had arrived, they all said, "The son of King Taiyuan is our father and mother!"

古文：相遇归之。
现代文：于是都互相带领着归顺慕容楷。
English: As a result, they all led each other to submit to Murong Kai.

古文：辽惧，遣使请降。
现代文：翟辽恐惧异常，派遣使节到后燕军中请求投降。
English: Qianliao was extremely afraid and sent an envoy to the Huo Yan army to ask for surrender.

古文：垂以辽为徐州牧，封河南公；前至黎阳，受降而还。
现代文：慕容垂任命翟辽为徐州牧，并封为河南公，并往黎阳地方，办理受降后，班师回朝。
English: Mu Rongtui appointed Gong Liao as the governor of Xuzhou, and made him the governor of Henan Province, and sent him to Liyang Province, and after he was demoted, he returned to the imperial court.

古文：井陉人贾鲍，招引北山丁零翟遥等五千馀人，夜袭中山，隐其外郭。
现代文：井陉人贾鲍，招引来北山丁零部落翟遥等五千多人，趁黑夜偷袭后燕都城中山，攻陷了中山的外城。
English: Jia Bao, a man from Jingye, attracted more than five thousand people from the Dingye Tribe of Beishan to take advantage of the night to sneak into Zhongshan, the capital of Yan, and captured the outer city of Zhongshan.

古文：章武王宙以奇兵出其外，太子宝鼓噪于内。合击，大破之，尽俘其众，唯遥、鲍单马走免。
现代文：章武王慕容宙派遣一支奇兵在外边攻击，太子慕容宝在城内擂鼓呐喊呼应，内外合击，把丁零部打得大败，全部俘虏敌军，只有翟遥、贾鲍二人单骑逃走幸免。
English: Zhangwu Wang Murong sent a miracle soldier to attack outside, Prince Murong Bao beat the drum and shouted in the city, and the two sides clashed inside and outside, defeating Ding Ruibe and capturing all the enemy troops. Only Gongyao and Jia Bao escaped on horseback.

古文：刘显地广兵强，雄于北方。
现代文：匈奴都首领刘显属地广大、兵马强壮，在北方称雄。
English: Liu Xian, the leader of the Xiongnu capital, had a vast territory and strong soldiers and horses, and was a hero in the north.

古文：会其兄弟乖争，魏长史张兗言于魏王珪曰： 显志在并吞，今不乘其内溃而取之，必为后患。
现代文：正巧遇到兄弟之间发生权力争斗，北魏长史张兖便对魏王拓跋说： 刘显这个人的志向就是要吞并我们，现在如果不趁他们内部崩溃而消灭他们，一定会成为我们的后患。
English: When a power struggle occurred between the brothers, Zhang Ye, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, said to Wei Wang Tuoba, "Liu Xian's ambition is to annex us. If we don't take advantage of their internal collapse and eliminate them now, they will definitely become our posterity."

古文：然吾不能独克，请与燕共攻之。
现代文：但是我们又没有能力自己战胜他们，不妨请燕国和我们一起进攻他。 
English: But we don't have the ability to defeat them on our own, so we might as well ask Yan Guo to attack him with us.

古文：珪从之，复遣安同乞师于燕。
现代文：拓跋听从了他的话，又派安同去后燕国请求出兵。
English: Tuoba obeyed his words, and sent An Tong to Yan Guo to request the dispatch of troops.

古文：诏征会稽处士载逵，逵累辞不就；郡县敦逼不已，逵逃匿于吴。
现代文：孝武帝下诏征召会稽郡的隐士戴逵，戴逵几次推辞不肯接受。郡里县里的人敦促逼迫不停，戴逵无奈，只好逃到吴郡去藏了起来。
English: Emperor Xiaowu issued an edict to conscript Dai Quan, a hermit from Jixian County, but he refused to accept several refusals. The people in the county urged him to persecute them incessantly, but he had no choice but to flee to Wuxian County and hide.

古文：谢玄上疏曰： 逵自求其志，今王命未回，将罹风霜之患。
现代文：谢玄上奏章说： 戴逵自己追求他那隐居的志向，现在您下的征召他的命令没有收回，将要使他承受在外流浪的风霜之苦。
English: Xie Xuan said in the preamble: Dai Ye himself pursued his reclusive ambition, and now your order to conscript him has not been withdrawn, which will make him suffer the hardships of wandering outside.

古文：陛下既已爱而器之，亦宜使其身名并存；请绝召命。 
现代文：陛下您既然已经爱惜他又器重他，就应该使他的身体与声名一同存在，请您收回征召他的命令。 
English: Your Majesty, since you have loved him and valued him, you should let his body exist with his reputation, please withdraw the order to conscript him.

古文：帝许之。
现代文：孝武帝答应了他的请求。
English: Emperor Daowu agreed.

古文：逵，之兄也。
现代文：戴逵是戴的哥哥。
English: Dai Xuan is Dai's older brother.

古文：秦主登以其兄同成为司徒、守尚书令，封颍川王；弟广为中书监，封安成王；子崇为尚书左仆射，封东平王。
现代文：前秦国主苻登任命他的哥哥苻同成为司徒、守尚书令，封颍川王。任命他的弟弟苻广为中书监，封为安成王。任命他的儿子苻崇为尚书左仆射，封为东平王。
English: Former Qin sovereign Yu Deng appointed his elder brother Yu Tong to be a scholar, the Keeper of Shangshu, and crowned the King of Shichuan; appointed his younger brother Yu Guang to be the Central Censor, and crowned the King of Ancheng; appointed his son Yu Chong to be the Left Servant of Shangshu, and crowned the King of Dongping.

古文：燕主垂自黎阳还中山。
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂从黎阳回到中山。
English: Later, the lord of the Yan Kingdom, Murongdiao, returned to Zhongshan from Liyang.

古文：吴深杀燕清河太守丁国，章武人王祖杀太守白钦，勃海人张申据高城以叛；燕主垂命乐浪王温讨之。
现代文：后燕叛将吴深杀了后燕清河太守丁国，章武人王祖杀了太守白钦，勃海人张申占据高城反叛，慕容垂命令乐浪王慕容温发兵去讨伐他们。
English: After Yan's rebellion, Wu Sheng killed Ding Guo, the governor of Qinghe, Zhang Wu's son Wang Zu killed Bai Qin, the governor of Qinghe, Zhang Shen occupied Gaocheng and rebelled, and Murong Li ordered Murong Wen, the king of Le Lang, to send troops to fight them.

古文：苑川王国仁帅骑三万袭鲜卑大人密贵、裕苟、提伦三部于六泉。
现代文：西秦苑川王乞伏国仁统领骑兵三万人袭击鲜卑部落的首领密贵、裕苟、提伦等三部所据守的六泉。
English: In Western Qin Dynasty, King Yuanchuan entreated the benevolence of the state and led 30,000 cavalry to attack the Six Springs, which was defended by three tribes, including the leaders of the Xianbei tribe, Migi, Yugo, and Tirun.

古文：秋，七月，与没弈干、金熙战于渴浑川。没弈干、金熙大败，三部皆降。
现代文：秋天，七月，乞伏国仁与前秦安定都尉没弈干、金熙，在渴浑川展开大战，没弈干、金熙大败，鲜卑三个部落也都归降了西秦。
English: In the autumn, in July, Guoren and the former Qin governor, Jin Xi, fought a great battle in Qihun River. Jin Xi was defeated and the three tribes of Xianbei also surrendered to the Western Qin.

古文：秦主登军于瓦亭，后秦主苌攻彭沛谷堡，拔之，谷奔杏城。
现代文：前秦国主苻登在瓦亭集结军队，后秦国主姚苌进攻卢胡人彭沛谷的堡垒，攻破后，彭沛谷逃奔杏城。
English: The former Qin sovereign Yu Deng assembled his army in Wateing, and the later Qin sovereign Yao Tong attacked the fortress of the Luhu people Pengpei Valley. After breaking through, Pengpei Valley fled to Ancheng.

古文：苌还阴密，以太子兴镇长安。
现代文：姚苌则还兵阴密，派太子姚兴镇守长安。
English: On the other hand, Yao Xing sent his son Yao Xing to guard Chang'an.

古文：燕赵王麟讨王敏于上谷，斩之。
现代文：后燕赵王慕容麟发兵去上谷讨伐变民首领王敏，并杀了他。
English: Later, Yan Zhao Wang Muronglin sent troops to Shanggu to fight against Wang Min, the leader of the mutineers, and killed him.

古文：刘卫辰献马于燕，刘显掠之。
现代文：朔方部落首领刘卫辰向后燕进献马匹，被刘显抢走。
English: Liu Weichen, the head of the Shuo tribe, presented horses to Houyanjin and was robbed by Liu Xian.

古文：燕主垂怒，遣太原王楷将兵助赵王麟击显，大破之。
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂勃然大怒，派遣太原王慕容楷率领兵马协助赵王慕容麟进攻刘显，把刘显打得大败。
English: Afterward, the lord of Yan, Murongdiao, flew into a rage and dispatched the Taiyuan king, Murongkai, to lead the soldiers and horses to assist Zhao Wang Muronglin to attack Liu Xian and beat Liu Xian badly.

古文：显奔马邑西山，魏王引兵会麟击显于弥泽，又破之。
现代文：刘显逃奔到马邑的西部山区。魏王拓跋又带领兵马与慕容麟一起在弥泽攻击刘显，再一次打败了他。
English: Liu Xian fled to the western mountains of Ma'e. Wei Wang Tuoba led the soldiers and horses together with Murong Lin to attack Liu Xian in Yaze and defeated him again.

古文：显奔西密，麟悉收其部众，获马牛羊以千万数。
现代文：刘显走投无路，投奔西燕。慕容麟接收了刘显残留下来的全部兵马，缴获马、牛、羊等战利品成千上万。
English: Liu Xian was cornered and fled to Xiyan. Murong Lin received all the soldiers and horses left behind by Liu Xian and captured thousands of horses, cattle, sheep and other trophies.

古文：吕光将彭晃，徐炅攻张大豫于临洮，破之。
现代文：后凉吕光带领彭晃、徐炅在临洮进攻张大豫，大破张大豫军。
English: Later, Liang Liguang led Peng Xiang and Xu Xi to attack Zhang Dayu in Linyi, and defeated Zhang Dayu's army.

古文：大豫奔广武，王穆奔建康。
现代文：张大豫逃奔广武，长史王穆逃奔建康。
English: Zhang Dayu fled to Guangwu, Changshi Wang Mu fled to Jiankang.

古文：八月，广武人执大豫送姑臧，斩之。
现代文：八月，广武人擒获张大豫押送到姑臧之后斩首。
English: In August, Guangwu was beheaded by Zhang Dayu after being sent to Guzheng.

古文：穆袭据酒泉，自称大将军、凉州牧。
现代文：王穆则攻袭占据了酒泉，自称为大将军、凉州牧。
English: Wang Mu then attacked and occupied Jiuquan, calling himself the great general, Liangzhou Mu.

古文：辛巳，立皇子德宗为太子，大赦。
现代文：辛已，立皇子司马德宗为太子，宣布大赦。
English: Xin has already made the prince Sima Dezong the crown prince and announced an amnesty.

古文：燕主垂立刘显弟可泥为乌桓王，以抚其众，徙八千馀落于中山。
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂封立刘显的弟弟刘可泥为乌桓王，来安抚他残余的部众，把八千多帐落的人迁到中山。
English: Later, the lord of the Yan Kingdom, Murong Du, appointed Liu Xian's brother, Liu Kegui, as the king of Wuhuan to appease his remaining followers, and moved more than eight thousand people to Zhongshan.

古文：秦冯翊太守兰椟帅众二万自频阳入和宁，与鲁王纂谋攻长安。
现代文：前秦冯翊太守兰椟率领军队二万人，从频阳到和宁驻扎，跟鲁王苻纂谋划攻取长安。
English: Former Qin emperor Feng Yu, the governor of Lanzhou, led an army of 20,000 men, stationed from Fengyang to Haining, and plotted with Lu Wang Xizang to invade Chang'an.

古文：纂弟师奴劝纂称尊号，纂不从。
现代文：苻纂的弟弟苻师奴劝苻纂登极称尊当皇帝，苻纂没有听从。
English: Zengzang's younger brother Zang Shinu advised Zengzang to ascend to the highest level and become emperor, but Zengzang did not listen.

古文：师奴杀纂而代之，椟遂与师奴绝。
现代文：苻师奴杀了苻纂，取代了他的权位，兰椟于是与苻师奴断绝了来往。
English: The eunuch killed the eunuch and took his place, so Lan Lan broke off relations with the eunuch.

古文：西燕主永攻椟，椟遣使请救于后秦。
现代文：西燕国主慕容永进攻兰椟，兰椟派人到后秦求救，后秦国主姚苌想要亲自带兵去救兰椟。
English: Mu Rongyong, the ruler of the State of West Yan, attacked Lanyu. Lanyu sent someone to Houqin to ask for help. Houqin's ruler, Yao Jun, wanted to personally lead an army to rescue Lanyu.

古文：后秦主苌欲自救之，尚书令姚旻，左仆射尹纬曰： 苻登近在瓦亭，将乘虚袭吾后。 
现代文：尚书令姚、左仆射尹纬对姚苌说： 苻登大军就屯聚在离我们最近的瓦亭，势将乘虚袭击我们的背后。 
English: Shang Shuling ordered Yao and his left-hand man, Sha Yinwei, to say to Yao Xuan: "Xuan Deng's large army has gathered in the nearest tile pavilion, and is about to attack us from behind.

古文：苌曰； 苻登众盛，非旦夕可制；登迟重少决，必不能轻军深入。
现代文：姚苌说： 苻登的军队虽然强大，不是一两天内就可以到达的。苻登为人反应迟钝滞重而缺乏决断力，一定不会轻易地指挥大军迅速深入袭击我们。
English: Yao Yao said, "Though powerful, Xingden's army can't be reached within a day or two. Xingden is a person who is slow to react and lacks decisiveness. He won't easily command a large army to quickly attack us.

古文：比两月间，吾必破贼而返，登虽至，无能为也。 
现代文：差不多两个月之内，我一定会打败贼兵慕容永而返回，那时虽然苻登兵到，也已没有什么可作为了。 
English: In about two months, I will surely defeat the bandit Murong and return forever. At that time, even if I join the army, there is nothing I can do.

古文：九月，苌军于泥源。
现代文：九月，姚苌率兵来到泥源。
English: In September, Yao Jun and his soldiers arrived at the mud source.

古文：师奴逆战，大败，亡奔鲜卑。
现代文：苻师奴迎战，被打得大败，逃命到鲜卑。
English: His apprentice fought back, was soundly defeated, and fled for his life.

古文：后秦尽收其众，屠各董成等皆降。
现代文：后秦收编了他的部众，屠各人董成等也都投降。
English: After Qin collected his subordinates, all of them, including Dong Cheng, also surrendered.

古文：秦主登进据胡空堡，戎、夏归之者十馀万。
现代文：前秦国主苻登进兵据守胡空堡，戎族人与汉人前来归附的有十多万人。
English: Former Qin Emperor Shandong's soldiers were garrisoned at Hukong Fort, and more than one hundred thousand Eunuchs and Han Chinese came to join them.

古文：冬，十月，翟辽复叛燕，遣兵与王祖、张申寇抄清河、平原。
现代文：冬季，十月，翟辽又一次反叛后燕，派兵与王祖、张申的军队配合，在清河、平原一带烧杀抢劫。
English: In the winter, in October, Gongliao rebelled against Houyan again, and sent troops to cooperate with Wang Zu and Zhang Shen's army to burn, kill and rob in Qinghe and the plains.

古文：后秦主苌进击西燕主永于河西，永走。
现代文：后秦国主姚苌率兵挺进，在河西一带袭击西燕国主慕容永的部队。慕容永撤退。
English: Later, the Qin sovereign, Yao Jun, advanced with his troops and attacked the troops of the Western Yan sovereign, Murong Yong, in the west of the river. Murong Yong withdrew.

古文：兰椟复列兵拒守，苌攻之，十二月，禽椟，遂如杏城。
现代文：兰椟又排开兵阵拒守，姚苌又来攻击他。十二月，姚苌生擒兰椟，于是进入杏城。
English: Lan Lan again lined up his troops and refused to defend, and Yao Yao attacked him again. In December, Yao Yao was born in Lan Lan, and entered Ancheng.

古文：后秦姚方成攻秦雍州刺史徐嵩垒，拔之，执嵩而数之。
现代文：后秦将领姚方成进攻前秦雍州刺史徐嵩的寨垒，攻克后抓住徐嵩，历数他的罪恶。
English: Later, the Qin general Yao Fangcheng attacked the fortress of the former Qin Yongzhou assassin Xu Song, captured and captured Xu Song, and counted his sins.

古文：嵩骂曰： 汝姚苌罪当万死，苻黄眉欲斩之，先帝止之。授任内外，荣宠极矣。
现代文：徐嵩大骂说： 你们姚苌才是罪该万死，当初苻黄眉打算杀了他，幸亏先帝苻坚阻止，救了他一命，还任命他担任朝廷和地方的重要官职，荣耀宠爱都达到极点。
English: Xu Song scolded: "You, Yao Wei, are the ones who deserve to die. At the beginning, Zou Huangmei planned to kill him. Fortunately, the former emperor Zou Jian stopped him and saved his life. He also appointed him to important positions in the imperial court and local government. The glory and favoritism have reached the extreme.

古文：曾不如犬马识所养之恩，亲为大逆。
现代文：可是姚苌却不如犬马那般知道被主人养育的恩德，亲自做出大逆不道的事。
English: However, Yao Yao was not as aware of the benefits of being raised by his master as the dog and horse, and he personally committed a heinous act.

古文：汝羌辈岂可以人理期也！
现代文：你们这些羌人怎么可以用做人道理来要求呢？
English: How can you scoundrels demand this as a matter of course?

古文：何不速杀我，早见先帝取姚苌于地下治之！ 方成怒，三斩嵩，悉坑其士卒，以妻子赏军。
现代文：为什么不快来杀我！ 姚方成恼羞成怒，分三次斩杀徐嵩，把徐嵩的士卒全部推到坑里活埋，又把这些士卒的妻子女儿赏给自己的军卒。
English: Why are you so unhappy to kill me! Yao Fang was so angry that he killed Xu Song three times, pushed all of Xu Song's soldiers into a pit and buried them alive, and gave the soldiers' wives and daughters to his own soldiers.

古文：后秦主苌掘秦主坚尸，鞭挞无数，剥衣倮形，荐之以棘，坎土而埋之。
现代文：后秦国主姚苌把他的恩主、前秦国主苻坚的尸首挖出来，用皮鞭抽打不计其数，并且剥掉了他的衣服，露出尸体，用荆棘再包起来，挖了一个坑埋了起来。
English: Later Qin Emperor Yao Jian dug up the corpse of his benefactor, former Qin Emperor Xu Jian, beat him with whips countless times, stripped off his clothes, exposed the body, wrapped it in thorns, and dug a pit to bury it.

古文：凉州大饥，米斗直钱五百，人相食，死者大半。
现代文：凉州发生了严重饥荒，普通的谷米每斗竟然值五百钱。人们饥饿难忍，出现了人吃人的事。
English: There was a severe famine in Liangzhou. Ordinary grain rice was worth 500 yuan per bucket. People were so hungry that cannibalism occurred.

古文：吕光西平太守康宁自称匈奴王，杀河湟太守强禧以叛。
现代文：死亡的人超过总人口的一半。吕光的西原太守康宁，自称为匈奴王，刺杀了湟河太守强禧后叛变。
English: More than half of the total population died. Kang Ning, the governor of Western Hara in Lugu, who called himself the king of the Xiongnu, assassinated the governor of the Min River, Qiang Xiyi, who had rebelled.

古文：张掖太守彭晃亦叛，东结康宁，西通王穆。
现代文：张掖太守彭晃也相继反叛，向东结交康宁，向西通好王穆。
English: Zhangye's eunuch Peng Ao also rebelled one after another, befriending Kangning to the east and Wang Mu to the west.

古文：光欲自击晃，诸将皆曰： 今康宁在南，伺衅而动。若晃、穆未诛，康宁复至，进退狼狈，势必大危。 
现代文：吕光想亲自带兵去袭击彭晃，各位将领都说： 现在康宁在南方，等待着机会动手，如果彭晃、王穆还没有被诛，康宁又带兵杀到，我们就会进退两难，处境狼狈，局势一定会非常危险。 
English: Lv Guang wanted to personally lead an army to attack Peng Xiang, and all the generals said: Now Kang Ning is in the south, waiting for an opportunity to take action. If Peng Xiang and Wang Mu have not yet been captured, and Kang Ning leads an army to kill them, we will be in a dilemma, in a confused situation, and the situation will certainly be very dangerous.

古文：光曰： 实如卿言。
现代文：吕光说： 确实像你们所说的那样。
English: Luguang said, "It is as you said.

古文：然我今不往，是坐待其来也。
现代文：但是我们现在如果不去打败他们，就是坐在这里等待他们来打我们。
English: But right now, if we don't beat them, we're sitting here waiting for them to beat us.

古文：若三寇连兵，东西交至，则城外皆非吾有，大事去矣。
现代文：如果这三支匪寇联合起来，东西夹攻我们，城外就都不会属于我们所有了，大事也就无法挽救了。
English: If these three groups of bandits unite and attack us from both sides, nothing outside the city will belong to us, and we will not be able to salvage the situation.

古文：今晃初叛，与宁、穆情契未密，出其仓猝，取之差易耳。 
现代文：现在彭晃刚刚叛变，与康宁、王穆在感情联络上还不亲密，我们采取出乎他们意料的进攻，使他们处于仓猝之境，战胜他们就比较容易了。 
English: Now that Peng Huan has just mutinied and is not yet close to Kang Ning and Wang Mu in terms of emotional connection, we have taken an unexpected attack on them, put them in a sudden situation, and it is relatively easy to defeat them.

古文：乃自帅骑三万，倍道兼行。既至，攻之二旬，拔其城，诛晃。
现代文：当初，王穆聚众起兵时，曾经派使节征召敦煌的隐士郭，郭叹息说： 现在黎民就要像戎人那样穿左边开襟的衣服了，我怎么能忍心不去拯救他们呢！ 
English: At the beginning, when Wang Mu gathered the troops, he had sent an envoy to summon the Dunhuang hermit Guo. Guo sighed and said, "Now the Li people will have to wear left-collared clothes like the Rong people. How can I bear not to save them!"

古文：初，王穆起兵，遣使招敦煌处士郭瑀，运粟三万石以饷之。
现代文：于是他与同郡人索嘏一起拉起队伍响应王穆，并给王穆运送去三万石粮食用来款待他的部队。
English: So he and his fellow county resident, So Yeon, pulled together a team to respond to Wang Mu, and sent 30,000 kilos of grain to Wang Mu to be used to entertain his troops.

古文：穆以瑀为太府左长史、军师将军，嘏为敦煌太守。
现代文：王穆任命郭为太府左长史、军师将军，任命索嘏为敦煌太守。
English: Wang Mu appointed Guo as Taifu Zuochangshi, general of the military division, and appointed Sokun as the governor of Dunhuang.

古文：既而穆听谗言，引兵攻嘏，瑀谏不听，出城大哭，举手谢城曰： 吾不复见汝矣！ 
现代文：不久王穆便听信谗言，率领部队去进攻索嘏。郭尽力劝阻，王穆不听，郭只好辞职离城，挥泪大哭，并举起手来向城谢罪说： 我恐怕不会再看见你了！ 
English: Guo tried his best to dissuade him, but Wang Mu would not listen. Guo had no choice but to resign and leave the city, weeping profusely and raising his hand to thank the city, saying, "I'm afraid I won't see you again!"

古文：还而引被覆面，不与人言，不食而卒。
现代文：回到家后，郭拉开被子盖住自己的脸面，不跟别人说一句话，绝食而死。
English: After returning home, Guo pulled back the quilt to cover his face, did not say a word to others, and died of starvation.

古文：吕光闻之，曰： 二虏相攻，此成擒也，不可以惮屡战之劳而失永逸之机也。 
现代文：吕光听到这个消息之后说： 两个匪寇自己互相攻击，这样就已成被捉之势了。我们万万不可因为害怕不断战斗的劳苦而失去一劳永逸的良机。 
English: After hearing this news, Lü Guang said, "Two bandits attacked each other on their own, so there is already a possibility of being caught. We must never lose a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for fear of the toil of constant fighting."

古文：遂帅步骑二万攻酒泉，克之，进屯凉兴；穆引兵东还，未至，众溃，穆单骑走，骍马令郭文斩其首送之。
现代文：于是，他亲自统率步、骑兵二万人进攻酒泉，攻克后，又进军在凉兴集结。王穆见势只好带着自己的部队向东撤退，还没有跑回自己的老巢，部众便溃不成军。王穆只身单骑逃走，马县令郭文砍下他的首级送给了吕光。
English: As a result, he personally led 20,000 cavalry to attack Jiuquan, and after conquering it, he marched into Liangxing to assemble. Wang Mu saw the situation and had to retreat to the east with his troops. Before he could run back to his old nest, his followers could not form an army. Wang Mu fled alone on horseback, and Ma County ordered Guo Wen to cut off his head and give it to Luguang.

古文：列宗孝武皇帝中之下太元十三年春，正月，康乐献武公谢玄卒。
现代文：太元十三年春季，正月，东晋会稽郡太守、康乐献武公谢玄去世。
English: In the spring of the 13th year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, in the first month of the year, Xie Xuan, the governor of Jixi County of the Eastern Jin Dynasty and a devoted martial artist, passed away.

古文：二月，秦主登军朝那，后秦主苌军武都。
现代文：二月，前秦国主苻登驻军朝那，后秦国主姚苌驻军武都。
English: In February, the former Qin sovereign Yao Sheng stationed troops there, and the later Qin sovereign Yao Sheng stationed troops in Wudu.

古文：翟辽遣司马眭琼诣燕谢罪；燕主垂以其数反覆，斩琼以绝之。
现代文：翟辽派遣司马眭琼，前往后燕认罪。后燕国主慕容垂因为他几次反复，便斩了眭琼，拒绝他的请求。
English: Gongliao dispatched Sima Qianqiong to go to Houyan to plead guilty. The ruler of Houyan, Mu Rongtui, because of his repeated actions, beheaded Qianqiong and refused his request.

古文：辽乃自称魏天王，改元建光，置百官。
现代文：翟辽于是自称为魏天王，改年号为 建光 ，设立文武百官。
English: Gong Liao then called himself Wei Tianwang, changed his name to Jianguang, and established a hundred civil and military officials.

古文：燕青州刺史陈留王绍为平原太守辟闾浑所逼，退屯黄巾固。
现代文：后燕青州刺史陈留王慕容绍受到东晋平原太守辟闾浑的逼迫，退兵到黄巾固驻扎。
English: After Yan Qingzhou, Chen Liu Wang Murong Shao was forced to retreat to Huanghuagu by the East Jin Plain's great warlord Niji, and was stationed there.

古文：燕主垂更以绍为徐州刺史。
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂调任慕容绍为徐州刺史。
English: Later, Murong Zhui, the ruler of Yan Province, transferred Murong Shao to be the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：浑，蔚之子也。因苻氏乱，据齐地来降。
现代文：辟闾浑是辟闾蔚的儿子，因为苻氏内部混乱，趁机占据故齐国的地域投降东晋。
English: Because of the internal turmoil within the Min clan, the son of the founder of the Eastern Jin dynasty, Bibi Shuhun, seized the opportunity to occupy the area of the former Qi kingdom and surrendered to the Eastern Jin.

古文：三月，乙亥，燕主垂以太子宝录尚书事，授之以政，自总大纲而已。
现代文：三月，乙亥，后燕国主慕容垂命太子慕容宝任录尚书事，把政事交付给他，自己不过在总体上把握而已。
English: In March, Yihai, after the death of Emperor Murong, Prince Murong Bao Ren recorded the records and handed over the political affairs to him, but he only grasped the overall situation.

古文：燕赵麟击许谦，破之，谦奔西燕。
现代文：后燕赵王慕容麟攻击许谦，把他们打得大败，许谦逃奔西燕。
English: Later, Yan Zhao Wang Muronglin attacked Xu Qian, defeated them, and Xu Qian fled to Xiyan.

古文：遂废代郡，悉徙其民于龙城。
现代文：后燕于是取消了代郡，把这里的居民统统迁到龙城。
English: Therefore, Houyan cancelled the deputy county and moved all the residents here to Longcheng.

古文：吕光之定凉州也，杜进功居多。光以为武威太守，贵宠用事，群僚莫及。
现代文：后凉吕光当初平定凉州的时候，杜进所立的功劳最多，吕光任命他为武威太守，他受蒙宠专权。其他同僚都赶不上。
English: Later, when Liangyang Emperor Liguang conquered Liangzhou, Du Jin received the most credit. Liguang appointed him as the military governor, and he was favored with exclusive power. Other colleagues could not keep up with him.

古文：光甥石聪自关中来，光问之曰： 中州人言我为政何如？ 
现代文：吕光的外甥石聪从关中地方前来，吕光问他说： 中州那里的人说我治理朝政怎么样？ 
English: Luguang's nephew Shi Cong came from Guanzhong. Luguang asked him, "What do the people in Zhongzhou think of me running the government?

古文：聪曰： 但闻有杜进耳，不闻有舅。 
现代文：石聪说： 只听说有一个杜进罢了，没听说有舅舅。 
English: Shi Cong said: I only heard that there was a Du Jin Ruo, but I didn't hear that there was an uncle.

古文：光由是忌进而杀之。
现代文：吕光因此忌恨杜进而借故把他杀了。
English: As a result, Lü Guang hated Du and killed him.

古文：光与群寮宴，语及政事，参军京兆段业曰： 明公用法太峻。 
现代文：吕光跟一些幕僚聚餐，谈到朝政方面的事，参军京兆人段业说： 明公您施用刑法太严峻了。 
English: Luguang had a meal with some staff members, and when talking about the affairs of the court and government, he said, "Ming Gong, your application of criminal law is too severe.

古文：光曰： 吴起无恩而楚强，商殃严刑而秦兴。 
现代文：吕光说： 吴起当年刻薄寡恩，但楚国因此强大，商鞅当年刑律森严，但秦国因此振兴。 
English: Lu Guang said: Wu Qiming was mean and ungrateful, but Chu State was strong as a result. Shang Han was strict in his punishment, but Qin State was revitalized as a result.

古文：业曰： 起丧其身，鞅亡其家，皆残酷之致也。
现代文：段业说： 吴起自己被杀、商鞅全家遭到屠戮，都是因为他们残酷到了极点。
English: Duan Ye said: Wu Qi himself was killed, Shangyu's entire family was slaughtered, all because they were extremely cruel.

古文：明公方开建大业，景行尧、舜，犹惧不济，乃慕起、鞅之为治，岂此州士女所望哉？ 
现代文：明公您才刚刚开始创建大业，效法学习尧、舜还恐怕不能成功，竟然去仰慕吴起、商鞅那样的治理方法，这难道是本州的百姓所期望的吗！ 
English: My lord, you have only just begun to create a great cause, and I am afraid that you will not be able to succeed in following the example of learning  and, and even admire the governance methods of Wuqi and Shangyuan. Is this what the people of this state expect?

古文：光改容谢之。
现代文：吕光肃然变色，感谢段业的这番衷告。
English: Luguang suddenly changed color, thanking Duan for this heartfelt message.

古文：夏，四月，戊午，以硃序为都督司、雍、梁、秦四州诸军事、雍州刺史，戍洛阳。
现代文：夏季，四月，戊午，东晋任命朱序为都督司、雍、梁、秦四州诸军事和雍州刺史，戍守洛阳。
English: In the summer, in April, at noon, the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed Zhu Xun as the governor of the capital, Yong, Liang, Qin and four states of the military and Yongzhou stabbed history, and kept Luoyang.

古文：以谯王恬代为都督兗、冀、幽、并诸军事、青、兗二州刺史。
现代文：任命谯王司马恬代替朱序为都督兖、冀、幽、并等州诸军事和青、兖二州刺史。
English: He appointed Wang Simak to replace Zhu Xiu as the military governor of the three provinces of Shandong, Hebei, and Yunnan, as well as the governor of the two provinces of Qinghai and Fujian.

古文：苑川王国仁破鲜卑越质叱黎于平襄，获其子诘归。
现代文：西秦苑川王乞伏国仁在平襄击败鲜卑越质叱黎，俘获他的儿子越质诘归。
English: The Western Qin Dynasty's King Yuanchuan begged and submitted to Guoren in Pingxiang to defeat the inferior superior superior superior superior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior inferior

古文：丁亥，燕主垂立夫人段氏为皇后，以太子宝领大单于。
现代文：丁亥，后燕国主慕荣垂册立他的夫人段氏为皇后，命太子慕容宝兼任大单于。
English: After the death of Emperor Dinghai, the ruler of Yan Province, Mu Ronglian, appointed his wife, Duan, as empress, and the crown prince, Murong Bao, concurrently served as daidan.

古文：段氏，右光禄大夫仪之女；其妹适范阳王德。
现代文：段氏是右光禄大夫段仪的女儿；他的妹妹嫁给了范阳王慕容德。
English: Mr. Duan was the daughter of Dr. Duan Yi of Uguanglu; his sister was married to King Mu Rongde of Fanyang.

古文：仪，宝之舅也。
现代文：段仪是慕容宝的舅舅。
English: Duan Yi is Murong Bao's uncle.

古文：追谥前妃段氏为成昭皇后。
现代文：慕容垂追尊以前的妃子段氏为成昭皇后。
English: Murong Du's former concubine Duan was the Empress Cheng Zhao.

古文：五月，秦太弟懿卒，谥曰献哀。
现代文：五月，前秦皇太弟苻弟苻懿去世，谥号为献哀。
English: In May, the former Qin Emperor's younger brother died, and his posthumous name was Shanmo.

古文：翟辽徙屯滑台。
现代文：翟辽迁往滑台驻扎。
English: Zou Liao moved to the slide and stationed there.

古文：六月，苑川王乞伏国仁卒，谥曰宣烈，庙号烈祖。
现代文：六月，西秦苑川王乞伏国仁去世，谥号宣烈，庙号为烈祖。
English: In June, West Qin Yuanchuan Wang Beiwu Guoren passed away, his posthumous name was Xuan Rong, and his temple name was Rong Zu.

古文：其子公府尚幼，群下推国仁弟乾归为大都督、大将军、大单于、河南王，大赦，改元太初。
现代文：他的儿子乞伏公府还很幼小，因此，属下百官拥推乞伏国仁的弟弟乞伏乾归为大都督、大将军、大单于、河南王，并下令大赦，改年号为太初。
English: His son, Kuibukongfu, was still very young. Therefore, his younger brother, Kuibukian, who was supported by hundreds of subordinate officials, was given the titles of grand governor, general, great ruler, and king of Henan, and an amnesty was ordered, and the year was changed to Taichung.

古文：魏王珪破库莫奚于弱落水南。
现代文：魏王拓跋在弱落水的南岸将库莫奚打得大败。
English: Wei Wang Tuoba defeated Kumo Yao in the south bank of the weak falling water.

古文：秋，七月，库莫奚复袭魏营，珪又破之。
现代文：秋天，七月，库莫奚又来袭击魏营，拓跋再次打败了他。
English: In the autumn, in July, Cuomo attacked Weiying again, and Tuoba defeated him again.

古文：库莫奚者，本属宇文部，与契丹同类而异种，其先皆为燕王皝所破，徙居松漠之间。
现代文：库莫奚本来属于宇文部落，跟契丹同是一个民族但不是一个支派，他们的祖先都曾被前燕王慕容打败，迁移到松漠一带居住。
English: The Kumo tribe originally belonged to the Uwen tribe, which is a nation but not a tribe like the Khitan. Their ancestors were all defeated by the former King of the Terns, Murong, and moved to live in the Songpan area.

古文：秦、后秦自春相持，屡战，互有胜负，至是各解归。
现代文：前秦与后秦从春天开始相持不下，交战了好几次，互有胜败，这时各自罢兵返回。
English: From the spring, the former Qin and the latter Qin could not stand each other, and fought several times, with mutual victories and defeats. At this time, each side withdrew and returned.

古文：关西豪杰以后秦久无成功，多去而附秦。
现代文：关西的一些英雄豪杰因为后秦兴起这么久而仍不能成功，有很多便离去而归附了前秦。
English: Some heroes and heroines in Kansai could not succeed because of the rise of the post-Qin for so long, and many left and joined the pre-Qin.

古文：河南王乾归立其妻边氏为王后；置百官，仿汉制，以南川侯出连乞都为丞相，梁州刺史悌眷为御史大夫，金城边芮为左长史，东秦州刺史秘宜为右长史，武始翟勍为左司马，略阳王松寿为主簿，从弟轲弹为梁州牧，弟益州为秦州牧，屈眷为河州牧。
现代文：西秦河南王乞伏乾归册立他的妻子边氏为王后；设置文武百官，摹仿汉族的制度，任命南川侯出连乞都为丞相，梁州刺史悌眷为御史大夫，金城人边芮为左长史，东秦州刺史秘宜为右长史，武始人翟为左司马，略阳人王松寿为主簿，任命他的堂弟乞伏轲弹为梁州牧，他的弟弟乞伏益州为秦州牧，乞伏屈眷为河州牧。
English: Western Qin and Henan King Qibuxian recorded the return of his wife, Bianji, as his queen; set up a hundred civil and military officials, imitated the Han system, appointed Nanchuan Marquis Dairen Qiddu as the prime minister, Liangzhou Zishi Qigong as the chief historian, Jincheng people's Bianqi as the left long history, East Qin State's Zishi Jiayi as the right long history, Wuxi people's Qigong as the left Sima, and Liangyang people's Wang Songshou as the main book, appointed his cousin Qibuxi as the Liangzhou pastor, his brother Q

古文：八月，秦主登立子崇为皇太子，弁为南安王，尚为北海王。
现代文：八月，前秦国主苻登立自己的儿子苻崇为皇太子，苻弁为南安王，苻尚为北海王。
English: In August, the former ruler of Qin, Zou Deng, appointed his son, Zou Chong, as crown prince, Zou Ben as the king of Nan'an, and Zou Shang as the king of the North Sea.

古文：燕护军将军平幼会章武王宙讨吴深，破之，深走保绎幕。
现代文：后燕护军将军平幼会同章武王慕容宙一起讨伐并打败吴深，吴深逃到绎幕固守。
English: Later, the general of the Yan Protection Army, Ping Youhui, together with the warlord Mu Rongxiu, fought and defeated Wu Sheng, and Wu Sheng fled to the Yidu Curtain to hold fast.

古文：魏王珪密有图燕之志，遣九原公仪奉使至中山，燕主垂诘之曰： 魏王何以不自来？ 
现代文：魏王拓跋暗中有图谋后燕的野心，派遣九原公拓跋仪担任使者来到后燕都城中山。后燕国主慕容垂盘问他说： 魏王为什么不自己来？ 
English: Wei King Tuoba secretly had the ambition of plotting Houyan, and sent Kuyuan Gong Tuoba as an envoy to Houyan's capital, Zhongshan. Houyan's sovereign, Murong Lian, asked him: Why didn't Wei King come himself?

古文：仪曰： 先王与燕并事晋室，世为兄弟，臣今奉使，于理未失。 
现代文：拓跋仪说： 我们的先王与燕国的祖先曾经一起为晋朝的帝室作事，世世代代情同兄弟。我今天奉使前来，在情理上没有失误。 
English: Tuoba Yi said: Our forefather Wang and the ancestors of Yan Guo once worked together for the imperial family of the Jin Dynasty, and they have been brothers for generations. I have been sent here today, and there is no mistake in terms of reason.

古文：垂曰： 吾今威加四海，岂得以昔日为比！ 
现代文：慕容垂说： 今天我的威望，已经传播影响到四面八方去了，怎么能够与过去相比呢！ 
English: Murongdeli said: Today, my prestige has spread and influenced all directions, how can it be compared to the past!

古文：仪曰： 燕若不修德礼，欲以兵威自强，此乃将帅之事，非使臣所知也。 
现代文：拓跋仪说： 后燕如果不遵守道德，不循奉礼仪，而只打算依靠军事威力使自己强大，那只是将帅们的事情，不是我这个作使臣的人所知道的。 
English: Tuoba said, "If Houyan does not abide by morality and etiquette, but only intends to rely on military power to make himself strong, it is only a matter for the generals, not for me as an envoy.

古文：仪还，言于珪曰； 燕主衰老，太子暗弱，范阳王自负材气；非少主臣也。
现代文：拓跋仪回国后，对拓跋说： 后燕国主慕容垂已经年老体衰，太子慕容宝又庸碌懦弱，范阳王慕容德对自己的才干气质非常自负，绝不是将来少主的臣下。
English: After Tuoba Yi returned to China, he said to Tuoba: After Yan Guozhong Mu Rongtai has become old and weak, Prince Mu Rongbao is mediocre and weak, Fan Yang Wang Mu Rongde is very proud of his talent and temperament, and is by no means a future vassal of the young lord.

古文：燕主既没，内难必作，于明乃可图也，今则未可。 
现代文：慕容垂一旦死去，内部一定会发生争斗，到那个时候才可以图谋他们。现在却还不行。 
English: Once Murongdiao dies, there will definitely be a struggle within, and only then can they be plotted against. But not yet.

古文：珪善之。
现代文：拓跋对他的看法大为称赞。
English: Tuoba was full of praise for his opinion.

古文：仪，珪母弟翰之子也。
现代文：拓跋仪是拓跋叔父拓跋翰的儿子。
English: Tuoba Yi is the son of Tuoba's uncle, Tuoba Han.

古文：九月，河南王乾归迁都金城。
现代文：九月，西秦河南王乞伏乾归把都城迁到金城。
English: In September, Western Qin's King of Henan begged Emperor Qian to return and moved the capital to Jincheng.

古文：张申攻广平，王祖攻乐陵；壬午，燕高阳王隆将兵讨之。
现代文：后燕张申率领部众进攻广平，王祖率兵进攻乐陵。壬午，后燕高阳王慕容隆率兵讨伐他们。
English: After Yan, Zhang Shen led the troops to attack Guangping, and Wang Zu led the troops to attack Le Ling. In the afternoon, after Yan, Gaoyang King Murong Long led the troops to fight them.

古文：冬，十月，后秦主苌还安定。
现代文：冬季，十月，后秦国主姚苌返回安定。
English: In the winter, in October, the late Qin Emperor Yao Xi returned to the stable.

古文：秦主登就食新平，帅众万馀围苌营，四面大哭；苌命营中哭以应之，登乃退。
现代文：前秦国主苻登前往新平谋取军粮，率领一万多兵众围住姚苌的军营，在四面放声大哭。姚苌也命令军营中的士卒用哭来回应他们，苻登的军队才退去。
English: Former Qin Emperor Xingden went to Xinping to get military rations, and led more than ten thousand soldiers to surround Yao Xing's military camp, crying loudly on all sides. Yao Xing also ordered the soldiers in the camp to respond to them with crying, and Xingden's army retreated.

古文：十二月，庚子，尚书令南康襄公谢石卒。
现代文：十二月，庚子，东晋尚书令、南康襄公谢石去世。
English: In December, Geng Zi, Eastern Jin Shang Shuling, and Southern Kang Xiang Gong Xie Shi passed away.

古文：燕太原王楷、赵王麟将兵会高阳王隆于合口，以击张申；王祖帅诸垒共救之，夜犯燕军，燕人逆击走之。
现代文：后燕太原王慕容楷、赵王慕容麟，率领兵马在合口与高阳王慕容隆会合，来攻击张申。王祖率领各个堡垒的兵卒一起赶来救张申，趁夜袭击后燕军营，后燕部队迎战，王祖败走。
English: After Yan Taiyuan King Murong Kai and Zhao King Murong Lin, led the soldiers and horses to meet with Goyang King Murong Long at the junction to attack Zhang Sheng. Wang Zu led the soldiers from various fortresses to rescue Zhang Sheng, took advantage of the night to attack the Houyan military camp, the Houyan troops met the battle, and Wang Zu was defeated.

古文：隆欲追之，楷、麟曰： 王祖老贼，或诈走而设伏，不如俟明。 
现代文：慕容隆想要追击，慕容楷、慕容麟说： 王祖那个老贼，恐怕他假败却在外设下伏兵，不如等到明天天亮再说。 
English: Murong Long wanted to pursue, but Murong Kai and Murong Lin said, "That old thief Wang Zu, I'm afraid he's faking defeat and setting up an ambush outside. It's better to wait until dawn tomorrow."

古文：隆曰： 此白地群盗，乌合而来，徼幸一决，非素有约束，能壹其进退也。
现代文：慕容隆说； 他们不过是一群穷土地上的盗匪，乌合在一起而来，只希望偶然的机会一战而胜，不是训练有素能够统一步调进退的。
English: Murong Long said; They are just a group of bandits in a poor country. They come together hoping to win a battle by chance. They are not well-trained to advance and retreat in unison.

古文：今失利而去，众莫为用；乘势追之，不过数里，可尽禽也。
现代文：现在他们没有捞到好处而退走，部众已不能再接受指挥。如果现在趁势追击，不超过几里路，就可以全部抓获。
English: Now that they have retreated without having gained any advantage, the troops can no longer be commanded. If they now take advantage of the situation to pursue, no more than a few miles away, they can all be captured.

古文：申之所恃，惟在于祖，祖破，则申降矣。 
现代文：张申所依仗的，也只有王祖，王祖被打败，那么张申就得投降了。 
English: Zhang Shen only had Wang Zu to rely on. If Wang Zu was defeated, Zhang Shen would have to surrender.

古文：乃留楷、麟守申垒，隆与平幼分道击之，比明，大获而还，悬所获之首以示申。
现代文：于是留下慕容楷、慕容麟困守张申的堡垒，慕容隆与平幼分两路带人追击王祖。等到天亮，他们获得大胜回来，把所砍下的王祖兵士的脑袋悬挂起来向张申等部众展示。
English: So Murong Kai and Murong Lin were left to defend Zhang Shen's fortress, while Murong Long and Ping You split up to lead the pursuit of Wang Zu. At dawn, they returned victorious and hung up the severed heads of Wang Zu's soldiers to show to Zhang Shen and the others.

古文：甲寅，申出降，祖亦归罪。
现代文：甲寅，张申出城投降，王祖也回来投降请罪。
English: Jia Yin, Zhang Shen left the city to surrender, and Wang Zu also came back to surrender and plead guilty.

古文：秦以颍川王同成为太尉。
现代文：前秦任命颍川王苻同成为太尉。
English: The former Qin Dynasty appointed Wang Xuntong of Luochuan to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：列宗孝武皇帝中之下太元十四年
现代文：太元十四年
English: Founded in 14th year of the Taiyuan era

古文：春，正月，燕以阳平王柔镇襄国。
现代文：春季，正月，后燕命令阳平王慕容柔镇守襄国。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Houyan ordered Yangping King Murong Rongzhen to defend Xiangguo.

古文：辽西王农在龙城五年，庶务修举，乃上表曰： 臣顷因征即镇，所统将士安逸积年，青、徐、荆、雍遗寇尚繁，愿时代还，展竭微效，生无馀力，没无遗恨，臣之志也。 
现代文：辽西王慕容农驻守龙城五年。庞杂的事务处理得很得法，于是上奏章说： 我当年因为征讨敌军，就顺便镇守在这里，我所统领的将帅士卒已经过了几年安定闲逸的生活，然而青州、徐州、荆州、雍州等地的遗留的匪寇还很多，我希望能够早日派人来接替我的职务，让我回去，尽量施展我微弱的能力来报效国家，使我在活着的时候不遗留未使出之力，死后也没有什么遗憾，这就是我的愿望！ 
English: Liaoxi King Murong Nong was stationed in Longcheng for five years. The huge and complicated affairs were handled very well, so the last chapter said: I used to stay here by the way because I was recruiting enemy troops. The generals and soldiers under my command have been living a stable and leisurely life for several years. However, there are still many remaining bandits in Qingzhou, Xuzhou, Jingzhou, Yongzhou and other places. I hope to be able to send someone to take over my duties as soon as possible, let me go back, and try my best to show my weak ability to serve the country, so that I do not waste my efforts while I am alive, and

古文：庚申，燕主垂召农为侍中、司隶校尉。以高阳王隆为都督幽、平二州诸军事、征北大将军、幽州牧，建留台于龙城，以隆录留台尚书事。
现代文：庚申，后燕国主慕容垂召回慕容农，任命为侍中、司隶校尉，又任命高阳王慕容隆为都督幽、平二州诸军事，征北大将军和幽州牧。在龙城建立留台，任命慕容隆为留台录尚书事。
English: Goshun, after the lord of Yan, Murongliao, recalled Murongnong and appointed him as a chamberlain and a lieutenant of the regiment. He also appointed Goyang King Muronglong as the governor of Yu, the military of the two states of Ping, the general of the North and the herdsman of Yu. He established a residence in Longcheng and appointed Muronglong as a residence to record the records.

古文：又以护军将军平幼为征北长史，散骑常侍封孚为司马，并兼留台尚书。
现代文：又任命护军将军平幼为征北长史，散骑常侍封孚为司马，并兼任龙城留台尚书。
English: He also appointed the general of the escort, Pingyao, as the chief historian of the Northern Expedition, the knight errant, the equerry, Fufu, as the steward, and also served as the governor of Longcheng.

古文：隆因农旧规，修而广之，辽、碣由是遂安。
现代文：慕容隆遵循、保留了慕容农的旧的规章制度，加以修订扩充，于是，辽水、碣石一带更加安定。
English: Muronglong adhered to and preserved the old rules and regulations of Murong farmers, and revised and expanded them. As a result, the Liaoshui and Shanshi areas are more stable.

古文：后秦主苌以秦战屡胜，谓得秦王坚之神助，亦于军中立坚像而祷之曰： 臣史襄敕臣复仇，新平之祸，臣行襄之命，非臣罪也。
现代文：后秦国主姚苌因为前秦军队屡次获胜利，以为那是得到了前秦国主苻坚的神灵帮助的结果，因此也在军营中竖立苻坚的神像，并且像他祷告说： 我的哥哥姚襄临死时嘱咐我为他报仇，那次在新平城缢死您的祸事，就是我在执行哥哥姚襄的遗命，不是我的罪过呀。
English: Because the former Qin army was repeatedly victorious, the later Qin ruler Yao Wei thought that it was the result of the help of the former Qin ruler Yao Jian's spirit, so he also erected a statue of Yao Jian's spirit in the military camp, and prayed like him: My brother Yao Xiang ordered me to avenge him when he was about to die. The evil of stabbing you to death in Xinping City is that I am carrying out the last wish of my brother Yao Xiang, not my fault.

古文：苻登，陛下疏属，犹欲复仇，况臣敢忘其兄乎？
现代文：苻登，不过是陛下您的比较疏远的亲属，还想着为您复仇，何况我是弟弟，怎么敢忘掉哥哥的大仇呢？
English: Shoden, who is only a distant relative of Your Majesty, still wants to take revenge for you. Besides, I am a younger brother, how dare I forget my elder brother's big grudge?

古文：且陛下命臣以龙骧建业，臣敢违之？
现代文：况且陛下您又命令我以龙骧将军的身分建立大业，我又怎敢违背您的教诲？
English: Moreover, Your Majesty, you also ordered me to build a great career as a dragon dragon general, how dare I go against your teachings?

古文：今为陛下立像，陛下勿追计臣过也。 
现代文：今天我为陛下您立这尊神像，希望陛下不要再追究计较臣下我的过错。 
English: Today, I set up this statue for Your Majesty, and I hope that Your Majesty will no longer find fault with me for neglecting my subjects.

古文：秦主登升楼，遥谓苌曰： 为臣弑君，而立像求福，庸有益乎？ 
现代文：前秦国主苻登爬上军营中的指挥楼，从远处告诉姚苌说： 作为臣子而杀害了自己的君主，却又立像求福，能有什么好处呢！ 
English: The former Qin sovereign Zheng Deng climbed to the command post in the military camp and told Yao Yao from a distance: As a vassal, you killed your own monarch, but you still stand up to seek blessings. What good can it do?

古文：因大呼曰： 弑君贼姚苌何不自出？
现代文：因此，他又大声呼喊说： 杀害了自己君主的奸贼姚苌为什么不自己出来！
English: Therefore, he shouted loudly: "Why doesn't the traitor Yao Tong, who killed his own monarch, come out himself!

古文：吾与汝决之！ 
现代文：我和你决一死战！ 
English: I'll fight you to the death!

古文：苌不应。
现代文：姚苌不答应。
English: Yao Yao did not agree.

古文：久之，以战未有利，军中每夜数惊，乃斩像首以送秦。
现代文：可是，时间一长，因为在交战时并没有得到什么好处，而他自己在军营中每夜都要受几次惊吓，所以，姚苌才把神像的头斩了下来送给了前秦。
English: However, it took a long time, because he did not gain any benefits during the war, and he himself was scared several times a night in the military camp, so Yao Wei cut off the head of the statue and gave it to Qian Qin.

古文：秦主登以河南王乾归为大将军、大单于、金城王。
现代文：前秦国主苻登任命河南王乞伏乾归为大将军、大单于，封为金城王。
English: The former Qin sovereign Yu Deng appointed the king of Henan, Qibuxian, to be a general, and the king of Jincheng, Datan Yu.

古文：甲寅，魏王珪袭高车，破之。
现代文：甲寅，魏王拓跋袭击位于北方的高车部落，大破高车军。
English: A Yin, Wei King Tuoba attacked the Gaochu tribe located in the north, and defeated the Gaochu army.

古文：二月，吕光自称三河王，大赦，改元麟嘉，置百官。
现代文：二月，后凉吕光自称为三河王，实行大赦，改年号为麟嘉，设置文武百官。
English: In February, Hou Liang Liguang called himself the King of the Three Rivers, implemented an amnesty, changed the year name to Linjia, and set up a hundred civil and military officials.

古文：光妻石氏、子绍、弟德世自仇池来至姑臧，光立石氏为妃，绍为世子。
现代文：吕光的妻子石氏、儿子吕绍、弟弟吕德世从仇池来到姑臧。吕光册立石氏为王妃，吕绍为世子。
English: Lu Guang's wife Shi, his son Lu Shao, and his brother Lu Deshi came to Gushan from Qiu Chi. Lu Guang made Shi his wife and Lu Shao his son.

古文：癸巳，魏王珪击吐突邻部于女水，大破之，尽徙其部落而还。
现代文：癸巳，魏王拓跋在女水攻击吐突邻部，把他们打得大败，又强行将这个部落全部迁走，才班师回朝。
English: At this time, Wei King Tuoba attacked the neighboring part of Tutuyu in Nianshui, defeated them, and forcibly moved the whole tribe away, so that they could return to the North.

古文：秦主登留辎重于大界，自将轻骑万馀攻安定羌密造保，克之。
现代文：秦国主苻登把部队的一些需要搬运的笨重物资留在大界，亲自率领一支一万多人的轻装骑兵部队进攻据守安定的羌族密造保，并攻克了他们的地域。
English: The ruler of Qin, Qian Deng, left some of the troops' bulky materials that needed to be transported in Taiye, and personally led a light cavalry force of more than ten thousand people to attack the well-guarded and stable Yi people's secret fortress, and conquered their region.

古文：夏，四月，翟辽寇荥阳，执太守张卓。
现代文：夏季，四月，翟辽侵犯荥阳，抓住了荥阳太守张卓。
English: In the summer, in April, Gongliao invaded Shenyang and captured Zhang Zhuo, the governor of Shenyang.

古文：燕以长乐公盛镇蓟城，修缮旧宫。
现代文：后燕派遣长乐公慕容盛镇守蓟城，修理整顿旧有宫殿。
English: Later, Yan dispatched Changle Prince Murong Sheng to guard Lucheng and repair and reorganize the old palace.

古文：五月，清河民孔金斩吴深，送首中山。
现代文：五月，清河人孔金杀死了后燕的叛官吴深，并把他的首级送到了后燕的都城中山。
English: In May, Kong Jin, a native of Qinghe, killed Wu Sheng, a traitor of Houyan, and sent his head to Zhongshan, the capital of Houyan.

古文：金城王乾归击侯年部，大破之。
现代文：西秦金城王乞伏乾归袭击侯年部落，并把侯年部落打得大败。
English: The king of Jincheng in Western Qin attacked the Hounian tribe, and defeated the Hounian tribe.

古文：于是秦、凉、鲜卑、羌、胡多附乾归，乾归悉授以官爵。
现代文：从此秦州、凉州的百姓以及鲜卑人、羌人、胡人等大多数都归附了乞伏乾归，乞伏乾归对他们中的头目都加授官爵。
English: From then on, most of the people in Qinzhou and Liangzhou, as well as the Xianbei, Yao and Hu people, all joined the Qianbei, and the leaders of the Qianbei were given official titles.

古文：后秦主苌与秦主登战，数败，乃遣中军将军姚崇袭大界。
现代文：后秦国主姚苌和前秦国主苻登会战，多次失败，于是就派中军将军姚崇突袭大界。
English: After the Qin Emperor Yao Jian and the former Qin Emperor Yao Jian went to war, they failed many times, so they sent the Chinese army general Yao Chong to raid the world.

古文：登邀击之于安丘，又败之。
现代文：苻登在安丘把他截住厮杀，又一次把他们打败。
English: Zouden intercepted and killed him in Anqiu and defeated them again.

古文：燕范阳王德、赵王麟击贺讷，追奔至勿根山，讷穷迫请降，徙上之上谷，质其弟染干于中山。
现代文：后燕范阳王慕容德、赵王慕容麟袭击贺兰部落的贺讷，将他打跑并追到勿根山。贺讷走投无路，只好请求投降，并把部众调遣到上谷，把自己的弟弟染干送到中山去当人质。
English: Later, Fan Yang Wang Murongde and Zhao Wang Muronglin attacked the Horan tribe's Horne, ran him off and chased him to Baigen Mountain. Horne had no choice but to surrender, and dispatched his subordinates to Shanggu, and sent his younger brother Dangdang to Zhongshan to be a hostage.

古文：秋，七月，以骠骑长史王忱为荆州刺史、都督荆、益、宁三州诸军。
现代文：秋季七月，东晋任命骠骑长史王忱为荆州刺史，都督荆、益、宁三州诸军事。
English: In the autumn of July, the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed the commander-in-chief Shi Wangzhen as the governor of Jing Province, and the military governors of Jing, Yixing and Ning Provinces.

古文：忱，国宝之弟也。
现代文：王忱是王国宝的弟弟。
English: Wang Zhen is the younger brother of Wang Guobao.

古文：秦主登攻后秦右将军吴忠等于平凉，克之。
现代文：前秦国主苻登在平凉进攻后秦右将军吴忠等人，攻克了平凉。
English: After the former Qin sovereign Yu Deng attacked Pingliang, the Qin Right General Wu Zhong and others took the lead in conquering Pingliang.

古文：八月，登据苟头原以逼安定。
现代文：八月，苻登守苟头原，以此威逼安定。
English: In August, he ascended to the position of the governor of Gozu Plain, in order to maintain stability.

古文：诸将劝后秦主苌决战，苌曰： 与穷寇竞胜，兵家之忌也，吾将以计取之。 
现代文：几位将军劝说后秦主姚苌与前秦决一死战，姚苌说： 和走投无路的强盗在战场上争胜，是用兵人的大忌。我准备用计谋战胜他。 
English: Several generals persuaded the post-Qin lord Yao Jun to fight to the death with the former Qin. Yao Jun said: "It is a great taboo for soldiers to fight a cornered robber on the battlefield. I am prepared to use stratagems to defeat him."

古文：乃留尚书令姚旻守安定，夜，帅骑三万袭秦辎重于大界，克之，杀毛后及南安王弁、北海王尚，擒名将数十人，驱掠男女五万馀口而还。
现代文：于是留下尚书令姚镇守安定，自己在深夜率领骑兵三万人直奔大界，偷袭前秦等待搬运的粮草等笨重物资，果然攻克了大界，杀死了毛皇后以及南安王苻弁、北海王苻尚，俘获名将几十人，并且驱赶、掠走男女兵丁五万余人，凯旋而归。
English: So he left Shang Shu to keep Yao Town stable. In the middle of the night, he led 30,000 cavalrymen straight to Taiji, and secretly attacked the grain and grass and other bulky materials that the former Qin Dynasty was waiting to be transported. He successfully conquered Taiji, killed Queen Mao, as well as Nan'an Wang Yu Ben and Beihai Wang Yu Shang, captured dozens of famous generals, and drove away and plundered more than 50,000 men and women soldiers, and returned triumphantly.

古文：毛氏美而勇，善骑射。后秦兵入其营，毛氏犹弯弓跨马，帅壮士数百力战，杀七百馀人。
现代文：毛皇后貌美而勇武，善于骑马射箭，后秦的兵马冲进她的营帐的时候，毛氏还曾跨上马匹，弯弓反击，带领指挥几百个壮健的兵士死战。
English: Queen Mao was beautiful and brave. She was good at riding horses and archery. When the Qin soldiers and horses stormed into her camp, Mao also mounted his horses, bent his bow to fight back, and led and commanded hundreds of strong soldiers to fight to the death.

古文：众寡不敌，为后秦所执。
现代文：但是寡不敌众，被后秦俘获。
English: However, he was outnumbered and captured by Hou Qin.

古文：苌将纳之，毛氏骂且哭曰： 姚苌，汝先已杀天子，今又欲辱皇后。皇天后土，宁汝容乎？ 
现代文：姚苌有意收她为妾，毛氏边哭边骂着说： 姚苌，你先前就已经杀害了天子，今天又想来侮辱皇后，皇天后土，怎么还能容你！ 
English: Yao Yao intentionally took her as a concubine. Mr. Mao cried and cursed as he said, "Yao Yao, you have already killed the Son of Heaven, and today you want to insult the Empress, the Queen of Heaven and Earth. How can you be tolerated!

古文：苌杀之。
现代文：姚苌杀了毛皇后。
English: Yao Xuan killed Queen Mao.

古文：诸将欲因秦军骇乱击之，苌曰： 登众虽乱，怒气犹盛，未可轻也。 
现代文：他部下众将想趁前秦军惊骇混乱之机继续攻击，姚苌说： 苻登的部众虽然一时陷于混乱，但是激愤之气还仍然很大，不可轻敌。 
English: His subordinates will want to take advantage of the former Qin Army's shock and confusion to continue the attack, Yao Wei said: Although the subordinates of Xudeng are temporarily in chaos, their anger is still very strong, and they should not take the enemy lightly.

古文：遂止。
现代文：于是停止继续进攻。
English: So he stopped short of killing him.

古文：登收馀众屯胡空堡。
现代文：苻登也集结残兵败将，屯聚在胡空堡。
English: Xingtang also gathered the remnants of the defeated soldiers and gathered in Hukuang Fort.

古文：苌使姚硕德镇安定，徙安定千馀家于阴密，遣其弟征南将军靖镇之。
现代文：姚苌派遣姚硕德镇守安定，并把安定居民一千余家迁到阴密，又派他的弟弟征南将军姚靖到阴密镇守。
English: Yao Yu sent Yao Shuode to guard Yinmi, and moved more than a thousand residents of Yinmi to Yinmi. He also sent his younger brother, the general Yao Jing, to guard Yinmi.

古文：九月，庚午，以左仆射陆纳为尚书令。
现代文：九月，庚午，东晋擢升左仆射陆纳为尚书令。
English: In September, at noon, Dong Jin promoted his left-hand man, Sho Lu Na, to Shang Shuling.

古文：秦主登之东也，后秦主苌使姚硕德置秦州守宰，以从弟常戍陇城，邢奴戍冀城，姚详戍略阳。
现代文：前秦国主苻登向东退守时，后秦国主姚苌命令姚硕德选拔任命秦州的一些守宰。姚硕德于是便派他的堂弟姚常戍守陇城，邢奴戍守冀城，姚详戍守略阳。
English: When the former Qin Emperor Xingden retreated to the east, the later Qin Emperor Yao Xi ordered Yao Shuo De to select and appoint some guards in Qin State. Yao Shuo De then sent his cousin Yao Changyu to guard Shicheng, Yan Niu to guard Jicheng, and Yao Jiayu to guard Liangyang.

古文：杨定攻陇、冀，克之，斩常，执邢奴，详弃略阳，奔阴密。
现代文：杨定发兵攻破陇城、冀城，斩杀了姚常，擒获了邢奴，姚详则放弃略阳，逃奔阴密。
English: Yang Ding sent troops to break through Shicheng and Jicheng, slaughtered Yao Chang, and captured Xiongnu, while Yao Zhe abandoned Liangyang and fled to Yinmi.

古文：定自称秦州牧、陇西王，秦因其所称而授之。
现代文：于是杨定便自称为秦州牧、陇西王。前秦后来也就按照他所自称的，委任他官职。
English: As a result, Yang Ding called himself the Qin State Patriarch and the King of Shaanxi. Former Qin later appointed him to an official position in accordance with his self-proclaimed position.

古文：冬，十月，秦主登以窦冲为大司马、都督陇东诸军事、雍州牧，杨定为左丞相、都督中外诸军事、秦、梁二州牧，杨壁为都督陇右诸军事，南秦、益二州牧，约与共攻后秦；又约监河西诸军事、并州刺史杨政、都督河东诸军事、冀州刺史杨楷各其众会长安。政、楷皆河东人。
现代文：冬季，十月，前秦国主苻登任命窦冲为大司马、都督陇东诸军事，雍州牧；杨定为左丞相、都督中外诸军事及秦、梁二州牧，约定一起进攻后秦。苻登又分别通知监河西诸军事、并州刺史杨政，都督河东诸军事、冀州刺史杨楷，各自统率他们的军队在长安会师。
English: In the winter, in October, the former Qin ruler, Yu Deng, appointed Dou Chong as the grand steward, the military governor of the Eastern Qin, and the military governor of Yongzhou; Yang was appointed as the left prime minister, the military governor of the Central and Western Qin, and the military governor of the Second Qin, Liang, and agreed to attack the Western Qin. Yu Deng also separately notified the military governor of the Western Qin, the military governor of the Eastern Qin, Yang Zheng, the military governor of the Eastern Qin, and Yang Kai, the military governor of the Southern Qin, to lead their armies in Chang'an.

古文：秦主丕既败，政、楷收集流民数万户，政据河西，楷据湖、陕之间，遣使请命于秦，登因而授之。
现代文：杨政、杨楷都是河东人，前秦国主苻丕当年失败的时候，杨政、杨楷招集收容逃亡的难民几万户，杨政占据河西，杨楷占据湖县、陕城一带地方，并派遣信使向前秦请求任命官职，苻登按照他们的功劳分别授给官职。
English: Yang Zheng and Yang Kai were both from the eastern part of the river. When the former Qin ruler Yan Tuo failed that year, Yang Zheng and Yang Kai called for tens of thousands of refugee families to take in the fugitives. Yang Zheng occupied the west of the river, Yang Kai occupied the areas around Huxian and Shaanxi City, and sent messengers to the former Qin to request the appointment of officials, and Yan Tuo awarded the officials according to their merits.

古文：燕乐浪悼王温为冀州刺史，翟辽遣丁零故堤诈降于温，为温帐下，乙酉，刺温，杀之，并其长史司马驱，帅守兵二百户奔西燕。
现代文：后燕乐浪悼王慕容温任冀州刺史，翟辽派遣部下丁零人故堤去慕容温帐下诈降。乙酉，故堤刺杀了慕容温和他的长史司马驱，然后带着守卫部队的二百户人家逃奔西燕。
English: After Yan Le Lang mourned the death of Wang Murongwen, who was appointed as the governor of Jizhou, Zhao Liao sent his subordinate Ding Ziren to the old dike to defraud Murongwen's account. However, the dike assassinated Murongwen and his governor Sima Fu, and then fled to Xiyan with two hundred families of the guard troops.

古文：辽西王农邀击于襄国，尽获之，惟堤走免。
现代文：后燕辽西王慕容农在襄国拦击参预刺杀司马温的人，并且全部抓获，只有故堤逃走而幸免。
English: Later, King Murong Nong of West Yan Liao Province stopped the person who participated in the pre-assassination of Sima Wen in Xiangguo Province, and all of them were captured. Only the former embankment escaped and was spared.

古文：十一月，枹罕羌彭奚念附于乞伏乾归，以奚念为北河州刺史。
现代文：十一月，罕部落羌人首领彭奚念归附乞伏乾归，乞伏乾归便任命彭奚念为北河州刺史。
English: In November, Peng Xunneng, the leader of the Han people of the Han tribe, was annexed by the Qianfu, and the Qianfu appointed Peng Xunneng as the governor of Beihe Prefecture.

古文：初，帝既亲政事，威权己出，有人主之量。
现代文：当初，孝武帝亲自处理国家的政事后，权力与威望出自己手，很有君主的气度。
English: At first, after Emperor Xiaowu personally dealt with the country's political affairs, power and prestige came from his own hand, and he had the air of a monarch.

古文：已而溺于酒色，委事于琅邪王道子。
现代文：但不久便沉溺于美酒和女色之中，把朝廷的政事统统推给琅邪王司马道子代管。
English: However, he soon became addicted to wine and women, and delegated all the political affairs of the imperial court to Sima Daozi, the evil king.

古文：道子亦嗜酒，日夕与帝以酣歌为事。
现代文：但司马道子也是嗜好喝酒，从早到晚都和孝武帝一起把高歌狂饮当成主要事情。
English: However, Sima Daozi also had a penchant for drinking. From morning to night, he and Emperor Xiaowu would drink to high-pitched songs.

古文：又崇尚浮屠，穷奢极费，所亲昵者皆甘姆、僧尼。
现代文：孝武帝又迷信佛教，极端奢侈挥霍，浪费在这方面的钱财很多。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was also superstitious about Buddhism and extremely extravagant, wasting a lot of money in this regard.

古文：左右近习，争弄权柄，交通请托，贿赂公行，官赏滥杂，刑狱谬乱。
现代文：他所亲近的人又都是三姑六婆、和尚尼姑，所以他左右的侍从人员，便乘机争权夺利，互相勾结，公开进行贿赂，封官加赏又杂又滥，刑罚惩诫混乱冤错。
English: The people he was close to were nuns, monks and nuns, so the attendants around him took advantage of the opportunity to compete for power and profit, colluded with each other, openly bribed, rewarded and rewarded officials, and punished and disciplined confusion and injustice.

古文：尚书令陆纳望宫阙叹曰： 好家居，纤儿欲撞坏之邪？ 
现代文：尚书令陆纳遥望着皇宫叹息着说道： 这么好的一个家，小孩子要把它折腾坏呀！ 
English: Shang Shuling Lu Na looked into the distance at the imperial palace and sighed and said: Such a good home, a child would want to destroy it!

古文：左卫领营将军会稽许营上疏曰： 今台府局吏、直卫武官及仆隶婢儿取母之姓者，本无乡邑品第，皆得为郡守县令，或带职在内，及僧尼乳母，竞进亲党，又受货赂；辄临官领众，政教不均，暴滥无罪，禁令不明，劫盗公行。
现代文：左卫领营将军会稽人许营呈上一道奏章说： 现在朝廷小吏、军中武官，下至男仆女奴那些不知生父只取母姓的人，本来没有经过官府的考察举荐，却都能当上郡守县令，甚至进入朝中当官，至于那些和尚、尼姑、乳娘等人，更是争先恐后地引进他们的亲朋好友，接受财物贿赂。以至于任用官吏、管辖百姓、政治与教化都没有标准，对无罪之人滥施暴行，当禁当行的法令不明确公布，抢劫、偷盗却公然横行。
English: The inspector of the General Headquarters of the Left Guards, Xu Ying, submitted a report saying, "Nowadays, the minor officials of the imperial court, the military attachés, and even the servants and maidservants of those who do not know their biological father but only take their mother's surname, have not been investigated and recommended by the government, but they can all become county governors and even officials in the central government. As for those monks, nuns, and wet nurses, they are scrambling to bring in their relatives and friends and accept financial bribes. So much so that there is no standard for appointing officials, governing the people, politics, and education, and there are no standards

古文：昔年下书敕群下尽规，而众议兼集，无所采用。
现代文：过去，陛下也曾下令命臣属们知无不言，尽可以规劝讽谏，但是等大家把建议提出来集中到一起呈给陛下时，却没有一个建议被采用。
English: In the past, His Majesty had also ordered his ministers to know everything and to do their best to persuade him, but when the suggestions were brought together and presented to His Majesty, none of the suggestions were adopted.

古文：臣闻佛者清远玄虚之神，今僧尼往往依傍法服，五诫粗法尚不能遵，况精妙乎？
现代文：我听说佛是一个清淡、玄妙虚旷的神祗，但是现在的这些和尚尼姑往往虽穿着僧服，却连佛义中最粗浅的教义不淫、不盗、不杀、不说谎、不酗酒这五戒也还不能遵守，更何况精妙的佛法了！
English: I have heard that the Buddha is a light, subtle, and elusive deity, but these monks and nuns today, although they often wear monk's robes, cannot even observe the most shallow teachings of Buddhism, such as the five precepts of not committing adultery, not stealing, not killing, not lying, and not drinking alcohol, let alone the subtle Dharma!

古文：而流惑之徒，竞加敬事，又侵渔百姓，取材为惠，亦未合布施之道也。 
现代文：而那些受流行的歪风迷惑的人，更是一方面纷纷争相拜佛，一方面又欺凌搜刮黎民百姓，以掠夺来的财产作为实惠，这也不符合佛家布施 的道理。 
English: On the other hand, those who are confused by the prevailing perverse wind, on the one hand, they are competing to worship Buddha, on the other hand, they are bullying and robbing the people of Lai, using the plundered property as real benefits, which is also not in line with the principle of Buddhist charity.

古文：疏奏，不省。
现代文：奏章呈上之后，没有回音。
English: There's no chorus.

古文：道子势倾内外，远近奔凑。
现代文：司马道子的权势在朝廷内外都达到极点，远近官员也都前来投靠。
English: Sima Daozi's influence reached its peak both inside and outside the imperial court, and officials from near and far came to his aid.

古文：帝渐不平，然犹外加优崇。
现代文：孝武帝的心里渐渐有些不高兴，但在表面上对司马道子还是多加优待尊崇。
English: Emperor Xiaowu gradually became a little unhappy in his heart, but on the surface he still treated Sima Daozi with a great deal of favor and respect.

古文：侍中王国宝以谗佞有宠于道子，扇动朝众，讽八座启道子宜进位丞相、扬州牧，假黄钺，加殊礼。
现代文：侍中王国宝奸佞而善于谄媚，得到了司马道子的宠爱。他在背地里鼓动朝中众臣，暗示八座重要大臣联名上奏章给孝武帝，请求擢升司马道子为丞相兼任扬州牧，赐给他皇帝诛杀时专用的铜斧，并加以特别尊崇的礼节等。
English: He secretly incited all the courtiers in the imperial court, suggesting that eight important ministers jointly present a medal to Emperor Xiaowu, requesting that Sima Daozi be promoted to chancellor and Yangzhou magistrate, and that he be given a special bronze axe to use when fighting and killing the emperor, as well as special etiquette.

古文：护军将军南平车胤曰： 此乃成王所以尊周公也。
现代文：护军将军、南平人车胤说： 这是周成王姬诵尊敬他叔父周公姬旦的办法。
English: "This is Zhou Chengwang's way of paying respect to his uncle Zhou Gongjidan," said Nanping Rencheyin, a military escort general.

古文：今主上当阳，非成王之比。相王在位，岂得为周公乎？ 
现代文：而现在主上在位，不能和成王相比，相王处在这地位怎么能成为周公呢！ 
English: But now that the Lord is on the throne, he cannot be compared to King Cheng. How can King Siowang become King Zhou in this position?

古文：乃称疾不署。
现代文：于是托辞有病，没在奏章上签名。
English: So he used the excuse that he was ill and did not sign his name on the score.

古文：疏奏，帝大怒，而嘉胤有守。
现代文：这个奏章呈上后，孝武帝勃然大怒，而夸奖车胤有自己的节操。
English: After this record was presented, Emperor Xiaowu flew into a rage, and praised Cheyin for his self-restraint.

古文：中书侍郎范宁、徐邈为帝所亲信，数进忠言，补正阙失，指斥奸党。
现代文：中书侍郎范宁、徐邈深受孝武帝信任亲近。他们几次进献忠言，弥补修正朝中错误遗漏的地方，当面指责痛斥奸邪之辈。
English: Fanning and Xu Xi, the attendants of the imperial secretary, were trusted by Emperor Xiaowu and were close to him. They offered their loyal advice several times, corrected the mistakes and omissions of the imperial secretary, and criticized and rebuked the evil generation in person.

古文：王国宝，宁之甥也。宁尤疾其阿谀，劝帝黜之。
现代文：王国宝是范宁的外甥，范宁尤其痛恨他阿谀谄媚的行径，劝说孝武帝罢免革除王国宝的官职。
English: Wang Guobao was Fanning's nephew. Fanning especially hated his sycophantic behavior and persuaded Emperor Xiaowu to remove Wang Guobao from his post.

古文：陈郡袁悦之有宠于道子，国宝使悦之因尼克妙音致书于太子母陈淑媛云： 国宝忠谨，宜见亲信。 
现代文：陈郡人袁悦之也受司马道子的宠爱，王国宝让袁悦之请尼姑妙音写信给太子司马德宗的母亲陈淑媛，说： 王国宝忠实而又谨慎，可以亲近信任。 
English: Yuan Yuezhi, a resident of Chen County, was also favored by Sima Daozi. The treasure of the kingdom asked Yuan Yuezhi to ask the nun Miaoyin to write to Chen Shuyuan, the mother of the prince Sima Dezong, saying: The treasure of the kingdom is faithful and prudent, and can be trusted.

古文：帝知之，发怒，托以他事斩悦之。
现代文：孝武帝知道这件事后，大发雷霆，借口别的事杀了袁悦之。
English: After Emperor Xiaowu learned of this, he flew into a rage and killed Yuan Yuezhi on the pretext of something else.

古文：国宝大惧，与道子共谮范宁出为豫章太守。
现代文：王国宝异常恐惧，和马司道子一起诬陷范宁，并把他逐出朝廷，贬为豫章太守。
English: Wang Guobao was extremely afraid, and together with Ma Si Daozi, he framed Fanning and expelled him from the imperial court, demoting him to Yuzhang Dazhu.

古文：宁临发，上疏言： 今边烽不举而仓库空匮。
现代文：范宁临走的时候，呈上一道奏章说： 现在边疆并没有点起战争的烽火，但是国家的府库也还是空乏。
English: As Fanning was leaving, he presented a report saying: Now the frontier has not ignited a bonfire of war, but the country's treasury is still empty.

古文：古者使民岁不过三日，今之劳扰，殆无三日之休。
现代文：古代的统治者征召民工应差，一年内不超过三天。
English: The ancient rulers conscripted migrant workers to do odd jobs for no more than three days in a year.

古文：至有生儿不复举养，鳏寡不敢嫁娶。臣恐社稷之忧，厝火积薪，不足喻也。 
现代文：现在百姓所遭受的辛劳搔扰，一年内几乎没有三天休息，致使百姓中竟有生下男孩不敢抚养哺育，独身的男子和寡妇也不敢再迎娶出嫁的现象。这是用柴堆之下点火也不足以形容的危机呀！ 
English: The toil and trouble to which the people are now subjected, with scarcely three days' rest in the year, have brought it about that among the people there are actually boys born whom they dare not bring up and nurse, and single men and widows who dare not remarry. This is a crisis that cannot be described by lighting a fire under a woodpile!

古文：宁又上言： 中原士民流寓江左，岁月渐久，人安其业。
现代文：范宁又上奏章说： 北方中原一带的民众士子当初逃难，流亡江南并在这里居住下来，时间已经比较久了，他们也都渐渐地安居乐业。
English: Fanning also said in his report: It has been a relatively long time since the people and scholars in the northern Central Plains area fled the disaster, exiled to the south of the Yangtze River and settled down here. They are also gradually living and working in peace.

古文：凡天下之人，原其先祖，皆随世适移，何至于今而独不可？
现代文：凡是在天底下生活的人，追溯他们的祖先，都能随着世情的变化而迁徙移动，为什么单单到了今天，反而不允许呢？
English: Anyone who lives under the sky can trace their ancestors and move with the changes in the world. Why is it not allowed today?

古文：谓宜正其封疆，户口皆以土断。
现代文：我认为应该确定他们拥有的土地，确认户籍乡里也都按照他们现在居住的地域断定办理。
English: I think that the land they own should be determined, and it should be confirmed that the household registration townships are also determined according to the area where they currently live.

古文：又，人性无涯，奢俭由势；今并廉之室，亦多不赡，非其财力不足，盖由用之无节，争以靡丽相高，无有亦限极故也。
现代文：另外，人的性情也是没有一定限度的，无论豪奢还是节俭，都是由于环境和形势决定的。现在，那些曾经兼并过别人财产的豪门大族，也已大多数不能维持，这并不是因为他们财力不足，主要是因为他们花销没有节制，争着以奢靡豪华来比试高下，根本没有限度的缘故。
English: In addition, there is no certain limit to human temperament. Whether it is luxury or frugality, it is determined by the environment and the situation. Nowadays, most of the big families that once annexed other people's property can no longer sustain themselves. This is not because they lack financial resources, but mainly because they spend without restraint, competing with extravagance and luxury, and there is no limit.

古文：礼十九为长殇，以其未成人也。
现代文：古代的礼法规定，十九岁的时候死了，称做长殇，因为他还没有成年。
English: According to the ancient etiquette, if a person died at the age of nineteen, he would be called a Nagase, because he was not yet an adult.

古文：今以十六为全丁，十三为半丁，所任非复童幼之事，岂不伤天理、困百姓乎？
现代文：现在把十六岁的孩子就作为全丁，十三岁的孩子就作为半丁，他们所承担的事不再是孩童的事，这岂不是伤天害理，虐待人民吗？
English: To treat a sixteen-year-old child as a whole child and a thirteen-year-old child as a half-child, and the things they are responsible for are no longer children's affairs, is this not a violation of heaven and reason, and an abuse of the people?

古文：谓宜以二十为全丁，十六为半丁，则人无夭折，生长繁滋矣。 
现代文：我认为应该规定二十岁的人当全丁，十六岁的人当半丁，那样的话就不会再有人因此而夭折，人口才能正常生长繁衍。 
English: In my opinion, it should be stipulated that a 20-year-old should be a full-term baby, and a 16-year-old should be a half-term baby. In that case, no one will die prematurely, and the population can grow and reproduce normally.

古文：帝多纳用之。
现代文：他的这些建议，孝武帝有很多都采纳施用了。
English: Many of his suggestions were adopted and implemented by Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：宁在豫章，遣十五议曹下属城，采求风政，并吏假还，讯问官长得失。
现代文：范宁在豫章任上，派遣十五名官吏分别下到十五个属城去，探采访求当地的风俗习惯及治理情况。
English: When Fanning was in charge of Yuzhang, he sent fifteen officials to fifteen subordinate cities to investigate local customs and governance.

古文：徐邈与宁书曰： 足下听断有允，庶事无滞，则吏慎其负，而人听不惑矣，岂须邑至里诣，饰其游声哉！
现代文：遇到官吏回来休假时，他就仔细问询民间对官长的评价与反应。徐邈给范宁写信说： 你审理官司，明正公允，日常的很多杂事小事也不积压，这样，官员自然对他职权份内应负责任的事更加谨慎，而人们的心里也就不再觉得迷惑不解了，何必还要到乡里村落听取伪饰的虚名呢？
English: When an official returns from vacation, he carefully inquires about the people's evaluation and reaction to the official. Xu Xi wrote a letter to Fanning, saying: When you hear a lawsuit, you are clear and fair, and there is no backlog of many daily chores and trifles. In this way, the official is naturally more cautious about the things he should be responsible for in his position, and people's hearts will no longer feel confused. Why do you have to go to the countryside and villages to listen to false names?

古文：非徒不足致益，乃实蚕渔之所资，岂有善人群子而干非其事，多所告白者乎！
现代文：那样做，不仅无助于获得好处，实际上是为掠夺百姓提供了可乘之机。哪有正人君子对于不是他的事，而愿意说长道短的？
English: Doing so not only does not help to gain benefits, but actually provides an opportunity to plunder the people. Which honest gentleman is willing to say the long and short of things that are not his business?

古文：自古以来，欲为左右耳目者，无非小人，皆先因小忠而成其大不忠，先藉小信而成其大不信，遂使谗诌并进，善恶倒置，可不戒哉？
现代文：自古以来，愿意当别人左右耳目的人，没有不是小人的，都是先依靠小小的忠心而逐渐获得方便时机，酿成他的大不忠，先是凭借小小的信义蒙骗别人，最后才得以干出大不信的丑事的。于是就使谗害别人和谄媚别人的人并进，也使善恶混淆，岂可不加以特别警惕！
English: Since ancient times, there is no one who is not a villain who is willing to be the eyes and ears of others. He first relies on small loyalty and gradually gains convenient opportunities, leading to his great disloyalty. First, he uses small faith to deceive others, and finally he is able to do the ugly thing of great disbelief. So he will make people who harm others and people who flatter others go hand in hand, and also confuse good and evil. Shouldn't we be particularly vigilant?

古文：足下慎选纲纪，必得国土以摄诸曹，诸曹皆得良吏以掌文按，又择公方之人以为监司，则清浊能否，与事而明，足下但平心处之，何取于耳目哉？
现代文：你能谨慎地选择任用部属下官，一定能够找到经国济世的栋梁之才来领导各个部门，各部门都能有优秀的官吏来掌管主持事务，再遴选公允方正廉明的人来担任监督，那么，这个机构的清廉污浊、有才能与否，在办事过程中便可了解清楚。你只平心静气地泰然自若处理事务，何必要借耳目而来访查呢！
English: If you can carefully choose to appoint subordinate subordinates, you will surely be able to find a pillar of talent to lead each department. Each department can have excellent officials to manage and preside over affairs, and then select a fair, upright and honest person to serve as a supervisor. Then, you can clearly understand whether this organization is clean, dirty and talented in the process of doing business. You only deal with affairs calmly and calmly. Why do you need to use your eyes and ears to investigate?

古文：昔明德马后未尝顾左右与言，可谓远识，况大丈夫而不能免此乎！ 
现代文：从前，汉代明德皇后马氏从来没有跟左右侍从的人员谈论公事，可以说是有远见卓识，何况身为大丈夫反而不能避免这样呢？ 
English: Once upon a time, the Han Dynasty Mingde Empress Ma never talked about business with the attendants of the left and right, which can be said to be far-sighted, not to mention the fact that she was fine but could not avoid this?

古文：十二月，后秦主苌使其东门将军任瓫诈遣使招秦主登，许开门纳之。
现代文：十二月，后秦国主姚苌命令他的东门将军任诈降前秦国主苻登，并派信使给苻登送信，答应打开城门把苻登放进来。
English: In December, the late Qin Emperor Yao Jian ordered his East Gate general to defraud the former Qin Emperor Joden, and sent a messenger to Joden, promising to open the city gate to let Joden in.

古文：登将从之，征东将军雷恶地将兵在外，闻之，驰骑见登，曰： 姚苌多许，不可信也！ 
现代文：苻登打算接受。征东将军雷恶地带领部队在外驻防，听说了这个消息，骑着马飞快地跑来晋见苻登说： 姚苌诡计多端，绝不可以相信。 
English: Xingden intended to accept. The general of the eastward expedition led the troops to garrison outside the city, and when he heard the news, he ran on horseback to see Jin Xingden and said: Yao Xing is scheming, and must not be trusted.

古文：登乃止。
现代文：苻登才停了下来。
English: It was only then that he paused.

古文：苌闻恶地诣登，谓诸将曰： 此羌见登，事不成矣！ 
现代文：姚苌听说雷恶地返营拜见苻登，就对各位将领说： 这个羌人见了苻登，我的计划就不能成功了。 
English: When Yao Wei heard that Zou Deng had returned to the camp to meet him, he said to the generals: "This Zou person has met Zou Deng, my plan cannot succeed."

古文：登以恶地勇略过人，阴惮之。
现代文：苻登因为雷恶地勇猛和韬略都超过常人，因此心中暗暗忌惮。
English: Because of his lightning-fast courage and bravery, and because he is slightly taller than ordinary people, he has a secret fear in his heart.

古文：恶地惧，降于后秦，苌以恶地为镇军将军。
现代文：雷恶地为此很恐惧，就投降了后秦，姚苌任命他为镇军将军。
English: Furious and fearful of this, he surrendered to Houqin, and Yao Jun appointed him as the general of the town army.

古文：秦以安成王广为司徒。
现代文：前秦任命安成王苻广为司徒。
English: Former Qin appointed Ancheng Wang Qiguang as a disciple.

古文：列宗孝武皇帝中之下太元十五年春，正月，乙亥，谯敬王恬薨。
现代文：序追至白水，会翟辽谋向洛阳，序乃引兵还，击走之；留鹰扬将军朱党戍石门，使其子略督护洛阳，以参军赵蕃佐之，身还襄阳。
English: The order was pursued to Baishui, the order was for Zhu Liao to plan to Luoyang, the order was to lead the troops back and drive them away; the order was to keep the eagle Yang general Zhu Dangshimen, to make his son slightly supervise Luoyang, and to join the army of Zhao Yingzai, and he was still in Xiangyang.

古文：西燕主永引兵向洛阳，硃序自河阴北济河，击败之，永走还上党。
现代文：西燕国主慕容永率领部队直奔洛阳，东晋雍州刺史朱序从河阴向北渡过黄河迎战，并把他们打败。
English: Murong Yong, the lord of Xiyan, led his troops straight to Luoyang, and Zhu Xun, the governor of Yongzhou in East Jin, crossed the Yellow River from Heyin to the north to meet the battle, and defeated them.

古文：序追至白水，会翟辽谋向洛阳，序乃引兵还，击走之，留鹰扬将军硃党戍石门，使其子略督护洛阳，以参军赵蕃佐之，身还襄阳。
现代文：朱序追击败退的西燕残兵到达白水，正好翟辽此时正打算进攻洛阳，所以朱序才带着部队赶回，打跑了翟辽。朱序留下鹰扬将军朱党守卫石门，又派他的儿子朱略镇守洛阳，并让参军赵蕃辅佐帮助他，自己回到襄阳。
English: Zhu Sequence chased the retreating Xiyan remnants to reach Baishui. It was just at this time that Gong Liao was planning to attack Luoyang, so Zhu Sequence rushed back with the troops and ran away from Gong Liao. Zhu Sequence left the Eagle Yang General Zhu Party to guard Shimen, and sent his son Zhu Liao Zhen to guard Luoyang, and let the army Zhao Ying Yue to help him, and returned to Xiangyang himself.

古文：琅邪王道子恃宠骄恣，侍宴酣醉，或亏礼敬。
现代文：琅邪王司马道子依仗自己得到孝武帝的宠爱而骄横强蛮，过于放纵自己，每次陪同孝武帝宴饮，都喝得酩酊大醉，有时竟然有失对孝武帝的礼节与尊敬。
English: The evil king, Sima Daozi, relied on the favor of Emperor Xiaowu and was arrogant and strong. He indulged himself too much. Every time he accompanied Emperor Xiaowu to a banquet, he got very drunk. Sometimes he even lost his courtesy and respect for Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：帝浸不能平，欲选时望为籓镇以潜制道子，问于太子左卫率王雅曰： 吾欲用王恭、殷仲堪，何如？
现代文：孝武帝越发不满，因此打算遴选几位在当时有名望的人充任地方上的权要，暗地里节制司马道子，于是，他向太子左卫率王雅问道： 我想重用王恭、殷促堪，你看怎么样？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowu was increasingly dissatisfied, so he planned to select several people who were famous at the time to serve as local dignitaries and secretly restrain Sima Daozi. Therefore, he asked Wang Ya, the leader of Prince Zuo: I want to reuse Wang Qiong and Yan Xukan, what do you think?

古文：雅曰： 王恭风神简贵，志气方严；仲堪谨于细行，以文义著称。
现代文：王雅说： 王恭风度神韵优雅高贵，志向气质端方严肃；殷仲堪则小心谨慎、行为检点，他的文章道义被人广泛称道。
English: Wang Ya said: Wang Gong's demeanor is graceful and noble, and his aspiration and temperament are simple and serious; Yin Zhongkan is cautious and prudent, and his articles are widely praised for their morality.

古文：然皆峻狭自是，且干略不长，若委以方面，天下无事，足以守职；若其有事，必为乱阶矣！ 
现代文：然而他们都心胸狭窄，自以为是，而且缺乏干才谋略。如果让他们独当一面，天下太平没变乱时，尽可以忠于职守，但如果一旦有事，就一定会成为祸乱的根源！ 
English: However, they are all narrow-minded, self-righteous, and lack the ability to strategize. If they are left alone, they can be loyal to their duties when the world is peaceful, but if something happens, they will surely become the source of disaster!

古文：帝不从。
现代文：孝武帝没有信从他的话。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：恭，蕴之子；仲堪，融之孙也。
现代文：王恭是王蕴的儿子。殷仲堪是殷融的孙子。
English: Wang Qiong is the son of Wang Yun. Yin Zhongkan is the grandson of Yin Rong.

古文：二月，辛巳，以中书令王恭为都督青、兗、幽、并、冀五州诸军事、兗、青二州刺史，镇京口。
现代文：二月，辛巳，孝武帝任命中书令王恭为都督青、兖、幽、并、冀五州诸军事，兖、青二州刺史，镇守京口。
English: In February, Emperor Xiaowu appointed Wang Qiong as the military governor of the five prefectures of Qing, Yan, Yu, and Hebei, the governor of the two prefectures of Yan and Qing, and the town guard of Jingkou.

古文：三月，戊辰，大赦。
现代文：三月，戊辰，东晋宣布大赦。
English: In March, the Eastern Jin Dynasty announced a general amnesty.

古文：后秦主苌攻秦扶风太守齐益男于新罗堡，克之，益男走。
现代文：后秦国主姚苌在新罗堡进攻前秦扶风太守齐益男，攻克之后，齐益男逃走。
English: Later, the Qin sovereign Yao Wei attacked Qin Fufeng before Qin Fufeng's eunuch Qi Yixiong, after the attack, Qi Yixiong fled.

古文：秦主登攻后秦天水太守张业生于陇东，苌救之，登引去。
现代文：而前秦国主苻登又在陇东进攻后秦天水太守张业生，姚苌赶去解救他，苻登率兵退去。
English: However, after the former Qin Emperor Shoden attacked Shandong, Zhang Yansheng, the Qin Emperor's Vicegerent of Tianshui, Yao Wei rushed to rescue him, and Shoden led his troops to retreat.

古文：夏，四月，秦镇东将军魏揭飞自称冲天王，帅氐、胡攻后秦安北将军姚当成于杏城；镇军将军雷恶地叛应之，攻镇东将军姚汉得于李润。
现代文：夏季，四月，前秦镇东将军魏揭飞自称为冲天王，率领着氐人、胡人组成的部队，在杏城向后秦安北将军姚当成发起攻击。镇军将军雷恶地此时也叛变后秦响应魏揭飞，在李润镇袭击后秦镇东将军姚汉得。
English: In the summer, in April, Wei Jiefei, the former Qin Zhendong general, claimed to be the king of Chongtian, and led the troops composed of Xiang people and Hu people to attack Yao Dangcheng, the former Qin Anbei general, in Xiancheng. The general of the town army also rebelled at this time in response to Wei Jiefei, and Yao Hande, the former Qin Zhendong general, attacked Li Run Town.

古文：后秦主苌欲自击之，群臣皆曰： 陛下不忧六十里苻登，乃忧六百里魏揭飞，何也？ 
现代文：后秦国主姚苌打算自己亲自率军攻击魏揭飞，众大臣说： 陛下不担心近在六十里的强敌苻登，却在忧虑远在六百里以外的魏揭飞，这是为什么？ 
English: After the Lord of Qin, Yao Jie, planned to personally lead an army to attack Wei Jiefei, the ministers said: His Majesty is not worried about the strong enemy Jiefen, which is nearly sixty miles away, but he is worried about Wei Jiefei, which is six hundred miles away. Why is this?

古文：苌曰： 登非可猝灭，吾城亦非登所能猝拔。
现代文：姚苌说： 苻登不是马上就可消灭的，我的城池也不是苻登马上可以攻破的。
English: Yao Yao said: Xudeng is not something that can be eliminated immediately, and my city is not something that Xudeng can break through immediately.

古文：恶地智略非常，若南引揭飞，东结董成，得杏城、李润而据之，长安东北非吾有也。 
现代文：但是雷恶地智谋韬略非常人可比，如果他向南结交魏揭飞，向东结交董成，而且占领杏城、李润，并据守不去，那么，长安东北的一带就不是我们的了。 
English: But his cunning stratagems are very human. If he makes friends with Wei Jiefei in the south, and with Dong Cheng in the east, and occupies Xiangcheng and Lirun, and is unable to defend them, then the northeastern part of Chang'an will no longer be ours.

古文：乃潜引精兵一千六百赴之。
现代文：于是，姚苌秘密率领一支一千六百人的精锐部队奔赴那里。
English: As a result, Yao Wei secretly led an elite force of 1,600 men to rush there.

古文：揭飞、恶地有众数万，氐、胡赴之者首尾不绝。
现代文：魏揭飞、雷恶地拥有部众几万人，而且氐人、胡人前往投军的络绎不绝。
English: Wei Jiefei boasted tens of thousands of followers, and there was an endless stream of Han and Wu people going to join the army.

古文：苌每见一军至，辄喜。
现代文：姚苌每次看到一支军队前来，总是十分高兴。
English: Every time Yao Wei saw an army coming, he was always very happy.

古文：群臣怪而问之，苌曰： 揭飞等扇诱同恶，种类甚繁，吾虽克其魁帅，馀党未易猝平。
现代文：他手下的大臣都觉得奇怪，问他为什么高兴，姚苌说： 魏揭飞等人煽动诱惑那些一样险恶的贼人共同作恶，但他们的种族和部落却繁多纷乱，我虽然能够制服他们的首领主帅，但是他们的余党却不容易一下子铲除。
English: The ministers under him all felt strange. Asked why he was happy, Yao Jun said: Wei Jiefei and others incited and tempted those equally sinister thieves to work together to commit evil, but their races and tribes were diverse and chaotic. Although I was able to subdue their leader, it was not easy to eradicate the rest of their party at once.

古文：今乌集而至，吾乘胜取之，可一举无馀也。 
现代文：现在他们像乌鸦一样聚合到这里，我乘胜而来消灭他们，可以一网打尽没有遗漏。 
English: Now that they have gathered here like crows, I will take advantage of my victory to wipe them out. I can wipe them out without missing a beat.

古文：揭飞等见后秦兵少，悉众攻之。
现代文：魏揭飞等人发现后秦军的人数很少，便全军出动攻击他们。
English: Wei Jiefei and others found that the number of the post-Qin army was small, so the whole army attacked them.

古文：苌固垒不战，示之以弱，潜遣其子中军将军崇帅骑数百出其后。
现代文：姚苌则固守自己的堡垒，不与对方接战，把自己的力量微弱的假象有意暴露给敌方，又暗地里派自己的儿子中军将军姚崇率领骑兵几百名迂回到敌兵的背后，进行偷袭。
English: Yao Tong, on the other hand, held fast to his fortress, did not engage in battle with the other side, deliberately exposed the feeble illusion of his strength to the enemy, and secretly sent his son, the Chinese general Yao Chong, to lead several hundred cavalrymen to sneak back behind the enemy soldiers and carry out a sneak attack.

古文：揭飞兵扰乱，苌遣镇远将军王超等给兵击之，斩揭飞及其将士万馀级。
现代文：魏揭飞的部队霎时乱作一团。姚苌趁机派镇远将军王超等人发动所有的兵力进行攻击，斩杀魏揭飞以及他所属的将士一万多人。
English: Wei Jiefei's troops suddenly formed a disorderly group. Yao Yu took the opportunity to send Zhenyuan General Wang Chao and others to launch all the troops to attack, killing Wei Jiefei and more than 10,000 soldiers belonging to him.

古文：恶地请降，苌待之如初，恶地谓人曰： 吾自谓智勇杰出上时，而每遇姚翁辄困，固其分也！ 
现代文：雷恶地请求投降，姚苌对待他像当初一样。雷恶地对人说： 我自己以为我的智谋勇力在目前是高出常人的，但是每次遇到姚翁就难以施展，这一定是我的命运！ 
English: He asked for surrender angrily, and Yao Yan treated him as he did at the beginning. He said angrily to the man: I myself thought that my wisdom and courage were higher than ordinary people at present, but every time I met Yao Weng, it was difficult to exert myself. This must be my fate!

古文：苌命姚当成于所营之地，每栅孔中辄树一木以旌战功。
现代文：姚苌命令姚当成在他的营地的每个栅栏小孔中都立一个木牌，用来表彰战功。
English: Yao Zhe ordered Yao Dangcheng to place a wooden plaque in each of the small holes in the fence of his camp to commend his war service.

古文：岁馀，问之，当成曰： 营地太小，已广之矣。 
现代文：一年多后，姚苌问这事怎么样了，姚当成说： 因为表功的木牌太多，因此显得营地就太小了，我已经把营地扩大了。 
English: More than a year later, when Yao Tong asked him how things were going, Yao Dangcheng said, "Because there are too many wooden plaques, it seems that the camp is too small. I have expanded the camp."

古文：苌曰： 吾自结发以来，与人战，未尝如此之快，以千馀兵破三万之众，营地惟小为奇，岂以大为贵哉！ 
现代文：姚苌说： 我从成人以来，跟别人作战，从来没有像现在这么痛快，用一千多名兵卒击破三万多人的敌军，这真是军营只因为其小才是奇迹，怎么能够以军营大为可贵呢？ 
English: Yao Yao said: "Since I became an adult, I have been fighting with others, and I have never been so happy as I am now. With more than a thousand soldiers, I defeated an enemy army of more than thirty thousand people. This is really a military camp, just because it is small, it is a miracle. How can a military camp be valuable?

古文：吐谷浑视连遣使献见于金城王乾归，乾归拜视连沙州牧、白兰王。
现代文：吐谷浑汗国可汗慕容视连派遣使节晋见西秦金城王乞伏乾归。乞伏乾归任命慕容视连为沙州牧，封白兰王。
English: The khan of Tugu Hunhan State, Murong Simlian, sent an envoy to the Western Qin King Jincheng to beg for his return. The king appointed Murong Simlian as the governor of Shazhou and crowned him the King of Bran.

古文：丙寅，魏王珪会燕赵王麟于意辛山，击贺兰、纥突邻、纥奚三部，破之，纥突邻、纥奚皆降于魏。
现代文：丙寅，魏王拓跋与后燕赵王慕容麟在意辛山会合，共同进攻贺兰、纥突邻、纥奚三个部落，把他们全部打得大败。纥突邻、纥奚两个部落都向拓跋投降。
English: Hsin Yin, Wei Wang Tuoba and Hou Yan Zhao Wang Muronglin met in Yixing Mountain and jointly attacked the three tribes of Helan, Xingtu Neighborhood, and Yan, and defeated them all. Both Xingtu Neighborhood and Yan tribes surrendered to Tuoba.

古文：秋，七月，冯诩人郭质起兵于广乡以应秦，移檄三辅曰： 姚苌凶虐，毒被神人。
现代文：秋季，七月，冯翊人郭质在广乡聚众起兵，来响应投靠前秦，并向三辅的百姓发布檄文说： 姚苌这个家伙凶恶残暴，他的祸害遍及天神和民众。
English: In the autumn, in July, Feng Ye's human guo qi gathered a large number of soldiers in Guangxiang to respond to the former Qin's defection, and issued a proclamation to the people of Sanfu, saying: "This guy Yao Ye is vicious and cruel, and his scourge has spread to the gods and the people.

古文：吾属世蒙先帝尧、舜之仁，非常伯、纳言之子，即卿校、牧守之孙也。
现代文：我们世世代代蒙受先帝苻坚像尧和舜那样的恩德仁政，即使不是侍中、尚书一类官的儿子，那么也应该是卿、校、牧、守之类的地方官员的孙子了。
English: From generation to generation, we have been subjected to the benevolent policies of the previous emperor, Jian Jian, like Yu and Zhou. Even if they are not the sons of officials such as attendants and officials, they should be the grandsons of local officials such as lords, schoolmasters, shepherds and guardians.

古文：与其含耻而存，孰若蹈道而死！ 
现代文：与其忍受屈辱活着，不如为追求正义而死。 
English: It is better to die in the pursuit of justice than to live in humiliation.

古文：于是三辅壁垒皆应之；独郑县人苟曜不从，聚众数千附于后秦。
现代文：于是，三辅一带所有的民堡都起兵响应他的号召，惟独郑县人苟曜召集部众数千人去归附了后秦。
English: As a result, all the people's fortresses in the Sanfu area raised troops in response to his call, but only the people of Zheng County gathered thousands of people to join Houqin.

古文：秦以质为冯翊太守；后秦以曜为豫州刺史。
现代文：前秦任命郭质为冯翊太守。后秦则任命苟曜为豫州刺史。
English: The former Qin Dynasty appointed Guo Jian as the governor of Fenghuang. The latter Qin Dynasty appointed Guo You as the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：刘卫辰遣子直力鞮攻贺兰部，贺讷困急，请降于魏。
现代文：受后秦、西燕封爵的匈奴部落首领刘卫辰，派遣自己的儿子刘直力进攻贺兰部落。贺兰部落首领贺讷处境窘急，请求向魏投降。
English: Liu Weichen, the leader of the Xiongnu tribe, who had been knighted by Emperor Qin and Emperor Xiyan, sent his son Liu Zhili to attack the Horan tribe. Horan tribe leader Hene was in a desperate situation and requested to surrender to Wei.

古文：丙子，魏王珪引兵救之，直力鞮退。
现代文：丙子，魏王拓跋亲自率兵前去解救他，打退了刘直力。
English: However, Wei Wang Tuoba personally led an army to rescue him and beat back Liu Zhili.

古文：鞮徙讷部落，处之东境。
现代文：拓跋于是迁移贺讷的部洛，把它安排在东部边境一带。
English: Tuoba then moved the capital of Herne and placed it along the eastern border.

古文：八月，刘牢之击翟钊于鄄城，钊走河北；又败翟辽于滑台，张愿来降。
现代文：八月，东晋刘牢之在鄄城袭击翟钊的部队，翟钊逃到了黄河以北。刘牢之又在滑台击败了翟辽军。叛将张愿重新回来投降。
English: In August, Liu Dolezhi of the Eastern Jin Dynasty attacked Yan's troops in Shicheng, and Yan fled to the north of the Yellow River. Liu Dolezhi defeated the Liao army in the landslide. The traitor Zhang Jian returned to surrender.

古文：九月，北平人吴柱聚众千馀，立沙门法长为天子。破北平郡，转寇广都，入白狼城。
现代文：九月，北平人吴柱聚集一千多人的部队，拥立一名叫法长的佛门和尚为天子，攻破了北平郡，转而进攻广都，突进了白狼城。
English: In September, Wu Zhu, a Beiping man, gathered more than a thousand troops, supported a Buddhist monk named Fuchang as the son of heaven, broke through Beiping County, turned to attack Guangdu, and rushed into White Wolf City.

古文：燕幽州牧高阳王隆方葬其夫人，郡县守宰皆会之。众闻柱反，请隆还城，遣大兵讨之。
现代文：后燕幽州牧高阳王慕容隆此时正在安葬他的妻子，各郡县的官员都聚集在这里参加葬礼，大家一听说吴柱武装叛乱，纷纷请求慕容隆回城，派遣大部队前去讨伐吴柱。
English: At that time, Murong Long, the king of Mu Gaoyang in Houyan Yanzhou, was burying his wife. Officials from all counties gathered here to attend the funeral. As soon as they heard of Wuzhu's armed rebellion, they asked Murong Long to return to the city and send a large force to fight against Wuzhu.

古文：隆曰： 今闾阎安业，民不思乱。柱等以诈谋惑愚夫，诱胁相聚，无能为也。 
现代文：慕容隆说： 现在，老百姓都安居乐业，并不希望发生战乱，吴柱等人用谎言和诈骗来迷惑愚昧的民众，在诱骗和裹胁之下，他们才能暂时聚在一起，根本没有什么作为。 
English: Muronglong said, "Nowadays, the common people are living and working in peace and do not want war to break out. Wu Zhu and others use lies and deception to confuse the ignorant people. They can only get together temporarily under deception and threats, and there is nothing they can do.

古文：遂留葬讫，遣广平太守、广都令先归，继遣安昌侯进将百馀骑趋白狼城。
现代文：于是仍然留下来安葬完妻子，派遣广平太守、广都令先行返回，接着又派安昌侯慕容进带领一百余名骑兵奔袭白狼城。
English: Therefore, he still stayed behind to bury his wife, sent Guangping Taishou and Guangdu Ling to return first, and then sent Anchang Hou Murongjin to lead more than a hundred cavalry to attack White Wolf City.

古文：柱众闻之，皆溃；穷捕，斩之。
现代文：吴柱的部众听说慕容隆派兵前来，霎时溃散。慕容进严密搜捕吴柱，把他抓到后便斩了。
English: Wuzhu's subordinates heard that Muronglong had sent troops, and they immediately dispersed. Murongjin searched for Wuzhu, captured him, and beheaded him.

古文：以侍中王国宝为中书令，俄兼中领军。
现代文：东晋任命侍中王国宝为中书令，不久，又兼任中领军。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed the attendant middle kingdom treasure as the middle secretary, and soon he also served as the middle leader.

古文：丁未，以吴郡太守王珣为尚书右仆射。
现代文：丁未，东晋又调任吴郡太守王为尚书右仆射。
English: Ding Wei, the Eastern Jin Dynasty was also transferred to the Wu County Governor Wang Weishu.

古文：吐谷浑视连卒，子视罴立。
现代文：吐谷浑可汗、白兰王慕容视连去世，他的儿子慕容视罴继位。
English: The Khan of Tugu, the Bran King Murong Ziliang, died, and his son Murong Ziliang succeeded to the throne.

古文：视罴以其父祖慈仁，为四邻所侵侮，乃督厉将士，欲建功业。
现代文：慕容视罴认为他的父亲、祖父由于秉性仁慈和善，而受到四周邻国的侵略欺侮，于是，他常常督促激励将士，加强军事训练，打算以此建立功业。
English: Considering that his father and grandfather were subjected to aggression and bullying by neighboring countries due to their benevolent and kind nature, Murong Shijun often urged his soldiers to strengthen their military training in order to build up their career.

古文：冬，十月，金城王乾归遣使拜视罴沙州牧、白兰王，视罴不受。
现代文：冬季，十月，西秦金城王乞伏乾归派遣使者委任慕容视罴为沙州牧，并封白兰王，慕容视罴拒绝接受。
English: In the winter, in October, the King of Jincheng, West Qin, begged Qian Rong to send an envoy to appoint Murong as the governor of Shazhou, and crowned him as the King of Brandy. Murong refused to accept.

古文：十二月，郭质及苟曜战于郑东，质败，奔洛阳。
现代文：十二月，郭质的部队与苟曜的部队在郑县东部展开激战。郭质战败，逃奔洛阳。
English: In December, Guo Jie's troops and Guo You's troops fought a fierce battle in the eastern part of Zheng County. Guo Jie was defeated and fled to Luoyang.

古文：越质诘归据平襄，叛金城王乾归。
现代文：西秦国鲜卑部落首领越质诘归据守平襄，背叛了金城王乞伏乾归。
English: The leader of the Xianbei tribe in the West Qin State, Yue Jie, betrayed the King of Jincheng and fled to Pingxiang.

古文：列宗孝武皇帝中之下太元十六年
现代文：太元十六年
English: 16th year of the Taiyuan era

古文：春，正月，燕置行台于蓟，加长乐公盛录行台文书事。
现代文：春季，正月，后燕在蓟城设置行台，任命长乐公慕容盛录行台尚书事。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Houyan set up a guild in Shicheng and appointed Changle Gong Murong Sheng to record the guild records.

古文：金城王乾归击越质诘归，诘归降，乾归以宗女妻之。
现代文：西秦金城王乞伏乾归进攻刚刚反叛的鲜卑首领越质诘归，越质诘归再度归降。乞伏乾归把本族的一位女儿嫁给了越质诘归。
English: In Western Qin Dynasty, the King of Jincheng, Qianfu Qiangui, attacked the newly rebellious leader Yueqing Qiangui, who surrendered again. Qianfu Qiangui married a daughter of his own clan to Yuequality Qiangui.

古文：贺染干谋杀其兄讷，讷知之，举兵相攻。
现代文：贺兰部落的贺染干准备谋杀亲哥哥贺讷，贺讷得知后派兵攻打。
English: The headman of the Horan tribe, Hezengan, is preparing to murder his brother, Horne. When Horne finds out, he sends his soldiers to attack.

古文：魏王珪告于燕，请为乡导以讨之。
现代文：魏王拓跋把这个消息告诉后燕，请求担任向导而带兵去讨伐他们。
English: Wei King Tuoba told this news to Houyan and asked him to act as a guide and lead troops to fight them.

古文：二月，甲戌，燕主垂遣赵王麟将兵击讷，镇北将军兰汗帅龙城之兵击染干。
现代文：二月，甲戌，后燕国主慕容垂派遣赵王慕容麟带领部队去袭击贺讷，又派镇北将军兰汗统率龙城的守军去袭击贺染干。
English: In February, Mu Rongtai, the ruler of Jiajing and Houyan, dispatched Zhao Wang Muronglin to lead his troops to attack Herne, and also sent Zhenbei General Lan Han to lead the defenders of Longcheng to attack Hezhengan.

古文：三月，秦主登自雍攻后秦安东将军金荣于范氏堡，克之。
现代文：三月，前秦国主苻登从雍城出发，去范氏堡进攻后秦安东将军金荣，攻克了范氏堡。
English: In March, the former Qin sovereign Yu Deng set out from Yongcheng to attack Fan's Fort, after which the Qin general Jin Rong conquered Fan's Fort.

古文：遂渡渭水，攻京兆太守韦范于段氏堡，不克，进据曲牢。
现代文：于是，苻登又渡过渭水，去进攻京兆太守韦范所据守的段氏堡，没有攻克。苻登因此进入并据守曲牢。
English: As a result, Shoden crossed Surabaya again to attack Duan's Fort, which was held by Wei Fan, the governor of Jingzhao, but failed to conquer it. As a result, Shoden entered and held Qu Prison.

古文：夏，四月，燕兰汗破贺染干于牛都。
现代文：夏季，四月，后燕兰汗在牛都将贺染干的部队打败。
English: In the summer, in April, after Yan Lanhan defeated the troops of He Dyeing and Drying in Niu.

古文：苟曜有众一万，密召秦主登，许为内应。
现代文：苟曜拥有一万部众，秘密招请前秦国主苻登来，并答应作为内应。
English: Gouyou has ten thousand followers. He secretly invited the former Qin sovereign Zou Deng to come, and promised to act as a middleman.

古文：登自曲牢向繁川，军于马头原。
现代文：苻登从曲牢向繁川开进，把部队集结在马头原。
English: Shoden marched from Qudong to Shingchuan and gathered his troops at Maduyuan.

古文：五月，后秦主苌引兵逆战，登击破之，斩其右将军吴忠。
现代文：五月，后秦国主姚苌带领大部队前来迎战，苻登击退了他的进攻，并且斩杀了他的右将军吴忠。
English: In May, Yao Xuan, the ruler of the Later Qin Dynasty, led a large force to meet the enemy. Xuan Deng repulsed his attack and killed his right-hand general Wu Zhong.

古文：苌收众复战，姚硕德曰： 陛下慎于轻战，每欲以计取之，今战失利而更前逼贼，何也？ 
现代文：姚苌收集余下的兵卒重新战斗，姚硕德说： 陛下一向十分谨慎，避免轻率地出战，常常希望能够用计策夺取胜利，今天一战已经失利，但是却要更加奋勇上前逼战贼兵，这是什么原因？ 
English: Yao Yu gathered the remaining soldiers to fight again, Yao Shuo De said: His Majesty has always been very cautious, avoiding rashly going to war, often hoping to be able to use strategies to win victory. Today, the first battle has been lost, but he has to be more courageous to force the war thieves. What is the reason for this?

古文：苌曰： 登用兵迟缓，不识虚实。
现代文：姚苌说： 苻登本来调配部队一向迟缓，不了解敌人的虚实。
English: Yao Wei said: Zheng Deng has always been slow to deploy troops, and does not understand the truth of the enemy.

古文：今轻兵直进，遥据吾东，此必苟曜竖子与之有谋也。
现代文：今天他能不顾一切，派遣轻装部队长驱直入，一下子远远地扼守住了我们的东部，这一定是苟曜这小子和他暗中有预谋的。
English: Today, he could, against all odds, send a lightly armed troop commander to drive straight in, and at once hold our east at a distance. This must have been secretly planned by this boy and him.

古文：缓之则其谋得成，故及其交之未合，急击之，以败散其事耳。 
现代文：如果我们的攻势稍缓，他们的阴谋就要得逞，因此我要在他们还没有得以汇合的时候，就急速袭击他们，而打破他们的计划啊！ 
English: If our attack is a little slow, their plot will succeed, so I will attack them quickly and break their plan before they are able to converge!

古文：遂进战，大破之。
现代文：于是，他们又进逼死战，将苻登打得大败。
English: As a result, they once again entered a fight to the death, and inflicted a crushing defeat on Xudeng.

古文：登退屯于郿。
现代文：苻登则退到县屯兵据守。
English: Xingtang retreated to the county garrison.

古文：秦兗州刺史强金槌据新平，降后秦，以其子逵为质。
现代文：前秦兖州刺史强金槌在新平据守，投降了后秦，并把他的儿子强逵送到后秦去做人质。
English: Former Qin general Qiang Shizhou besieged Qiang Jinzhu in Xinping, surrendered to him, and sent his son Qiang Yao as a hostage to him.

古文：后秦主苌将数百骑入金槌营。
现代文：后秦国主姚苌仅带领几百名骑兵直接进入强金槌的兵营，他的部属们纷纷劝阻他。
English: Later, the ruler of Qin, Yao Wei, only led a few hundred cavalry directly into Qiang Jinmao's camp, and his subordinates tried to dissuade him.

古文：群下谏之，苌曰： 金槌既去苻登，又欲图我，将安所归乎？
现代文：姚苌说： 强金槌既然已经背叛了苻登，而如果又打算谋害我的话，那么他要到哪里去安身呢？
English: Yao Yao said: Since Qiang Jinmao has already betrayed Zheng Deng, and if he intends to murder me, then where will he go?

古文：且彼初来款附，宜推心以结之，奈何复以不信疑之乎？ 
现代文：况且他又是刚刚前来归附我，我更应该推心置腹地来结讷他，为什么还要不信任他而使他怀疑呢？ 
English: Moreover, he has just come to join me. I should have put my heart and soul into marrying him. Why should I not trust him and make him suspicious?

古文：既而群氐欲取苌，金槌不从。
现代文：姚苌入强金槌大营后，氐人都要抓姚苌，强金槌没有听从。
English: After Yao Hao entered Qiang Jinmao's encampment, everyone wanted to catch Yao Hao, but Qiang Jinmao did not listen.

古文：六月，甲辰，燕赵王麟破贺讷于赤城，禽之，降其部落数万。
现代文：六月，甲辰，后燕赵王慕容麟在赤城大破贺讷的部队，活捉了贺讷。贺讷的部落几万人投降。
English: In June, Emperor Zhao Wang Muronglin defeated the troops of Herne in Akagi, capturing Herne alive. Tens of thousands of Herne's tribe surrendered.

古文：燕主垂命麟归讷部落，徙染干于中山。
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂命令慕容麟将贺讷送回他的部落，并把贺染干迁移到中山去。
English: Later, the lord of the Yan Kingdom, Murong Diao, ordered Murong Lin to send He Ne back to his tribe, and to move He Zeng Gan to Zhongshan.

古文：麟归，言于垂曰： 臣观拓跋珪举动，终为国患，不若摄之还朝，使其弟监国事。 
现代文：慕容麟回来后，告诉慕容垂说： 我观察拓跋的一举一动，他终究要成为我们的祸患，不如强行让他前来都城，让他的弟弟代他处理魏国的大事。 
English: After Muronglin returned, he told Murongtai, "I have observed Tuoba's every move. After all, he is going to become our scourge. It would be better to force him to come to the capital and let his brother deal with the important affairs of Wei on his behalf."

古文：垂不从。
现代文：慕容垂没有答应。
English: Murong Zhu did not agree.

古文：西燕主永寇河南，太守杨佺期击破之。
现代文：西燕国主慕容永进犯东晋的河南郡，太守杨期率守兵打败了慕容永。
English: Murong Yong, the ruler of Xiyan, invaded Henan County in the Eastern Jin Dynasty. Yang Cui, the eunuch, led the defenders and defeated Murong Yong.

古文：秋，七月，壬申，燕主垂如范阳。
现代文：秋季，七月，壬申，后燕国主慕容垂来到范阳。
English: In the autumn, in July, in Jinshin, the lord of Houyan, Mu Rongtui, came to Fanyang.

古文：魏王珪遣其弟觚献见于燕，燕主垂衰老，子弟用事，留觚以求良马。
现代文：魏王拓跋派遣他的弟弟拓跋觚到后燕去进贡晋见。后燕国主慕容垂年老体衰，他的子弟掌权，扣留拓跋觚，要求拓跋用好马来赎。
English: Wei King Tuoba sent his younger brother Tuobao to Houyan to pay tribute to Jin. The ruler of Houyan, Murong, was old and weak, and his son seized power, detained Tuobao, and demanded that Tuobao use a good horse to ransom him.

古文：魏王珪弗与，遂与燕绝，使长史张衮求好于西燕。
现代文：魏王拓跋没有给他们良马，于是便和后燕断绝了交往。拓跋派使节长史张兖去向西燕请求和好。
English: Wei King Tuoba did not give them a good horse, so he broke off contact with Houyan. Tuoba sent an envoy, the head of the section, Zhang Ye, to ask Xiyan for reconciliation.

古文：觚逃归，燕太子宝追获之，垂待之如初。
现代文：拓跋觚逃走，又被后燕太子慕容宝追上抓获，慕容垂对待他仍与过去一样。
English: Tuoba fled, and was caught by Prince Murong Bao of Houyan. Murong Bao still treated him the same as before.

古文：秦主登攻新平，后秦主苌救之，登引去。
现代文：前秦国主苻登进攻新平，后秦国主姚苌率兵赶去解救。
English: Former Qin sovereign Yu Deng attacked Xinping, and later Qin sovereign Yao Tong led troops to rescue.

古文：秦骠骑将军没弈干以其二子为质于金城王乾归，请共击鲜卑大兜。
现代文：苻登带兵退走。前秦骠骑将军没弈干，把他的两个儿子当人质送到金城王乞伏乾归处，请求他发兵共同袭击鲜卑部落的首领大兜。
English: The former Qin general did not hesitate, and sent his two sons as hostages to King Jincheng to beg for his return, asking him to send troops to jointly attack the leader of the Xianbei tribe, Daibao.

古文：乾归与没弈干攻大兜于鸣蝉堡，克之。
现代文：乞伏乾归和没弈干一起进攻大兜所据守的鸣蝉堡，攻克了它。
English: Kaifu Qian Gui and Mogao Qian attacked the Ming Cimeng Fortress, which was defended by Daibao, and conquered it.

古文：兜微服走，乾归收其部众而还，归没弈干二子。
现代文：大兜换上平民的衣服逃跑了。乞伏乾归收编了大兜的部众班师回朝，并且把没弈干的两个儿子送了回去。
English: Daibu changed into civilian clothes and ran away. He gathered his subordinates and sent them back to the North, and also sent his two sons who had not done so.

古文：没弈干寻叛，东合刘卫辰。
现代文：没弈干不久就反叛了乞伏乾归，又向东与刘卫辰联合起来。
English: He soon rebelled, begged to be allowed to return, and allied himself with Liu Weichen in the East.

古文：八月，乾归帅骑一万讨没弈干，没弈干奔他楼城，乾归射之，中目。
现代文：八月，乞伏乾归率领一万骑兵讨伐没弈干，没弈干逃奔到他楼城，乞付乾归用箭射没弈干，射中了他的眼睛。
English: In August, he led ten thousand cavalrymen in a crusade against the Qianbei, but he did not succeed. He fled to his palace, but the Qianbei shot him with an arrow and hit him in the eye.

古文：九月，癸未，以尚书右仆射王珣为左仆射，太子詹事谢琰为右仆射。
现代文：九月，癸未，东晋任命尚书右仆射，王为左仆射，太子詹事谢琰为右仆射。
English: In September, the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed Shang Shu as the right-hand man, Wang as the left-hand man, and Prince Zhan Zhi Xie as the right-hand man.

古文：太学博士范弘之讼殷浩宜加赠谥，因叙桓温不臣之迹。
现代文：太学博士范弘之提议殷浩应该追加谥号，又顺便述说了桓温叛逆的事情。
English: Dr. Fan Hong, the dean of the university, suggested that Yin Hao should add a nickname, and also mentioned the rebellion of Kuan Wen.

古文：是时桓氏犹盛，王珣，温之故吏也，以为温废昏立明，有忠贞之节；黜弘之为馀杭令。
现代文：这个时候，桓氏家族的气势仍然很大，王以前也是桓温的属官，认为桓温废黜昏君，拥立明君，是具有忠贞的节操的，因此，便把范弘之逐出京都，贬为余杭令。
English: At this time, the power of the Huan family was still great, and the king had also been a subordinate officer of Huan Wen. He thought that Huan Wen's dethronement of Shoujun and establishment of Mingjun was a loyal act, so he expelled Fan Hongzhi from Kyoto and relegated him to Yuhangling.

古文：弘之，汪之孙也。
现代文：范弘之是范汪的孙子。
English: Fan Hongzhi is Fan Wang's grandson.

古文：冬，十月，壬辰，燕主垂还中山。
现代文：冬季，十月，壬辰，后燕国主慕容垂回到中山。
English: In winter, in October, in Imjin, the lord of Houyan, Mu Rongtui, returned to Zhongshan.

古文：初，柔然部人世服于代，其大人郁久闾地粟袁卒，部落分为二：长子匹候跋继父居东边，次子缊纥提别居西边。
现代文：当初，柔然部落世世代代都臣服于代国。后来，部落首领郁久闾地粟袁死了，这个部落便一分为二：他的长子郁久闾匹候跋继承父位，居住在东部；他的二儿子郁久闾纥提住在西部。
English: At first, the Juran tribe was subjugated to the state for generations. Later, when the tribal leader, Ikukyu Shiji Moku Yuan, died, the tribe was divided into two: his eldest son, Ikukyu Shibi, lived in the east to succeed his father, and his second son, Ikukyu Shiti, lived in the west.

古文：秦王坚灭代，柔然附于刘卫辰。
现代文：前秦苻坚消灭代国以后，柔然部落便转而归附刘卫辰。
English: After the former Qin Dynasty was destroyed by Qian Jian, the Juran tribe turned to Liu Weichen.

古文：及魏王珪即位，攻击高车等，诸部率皆服从，独柔然不事魏。
现代文：魏王拓跋登上王位后，攻击高车等部落，这些部落大多数都甘心臣服，只有柔然部落拒不接受北魏的指使。
English: After Wei King Tuoba ascended the throne, he attacked Gao Che and other tribes. Most of these tribes were willing to submit, but only the Zhu Ran tribe refused to accept the instructions of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：戊戌，珪引兵击之，柔然举部遁走，珪追奔六百里。
现代文：戊戌，拓跋带兵前来攻打柔然部落，柔然部落全部一起逃走。拓跋带兵追击奔跑六百里。
English: In Wuyi, Tuoba led an army to attack the Zhuoran tribe, and the Zhuoran tribe all fled together. Tuoba led an army to chase and run for six hundred miles.

古文：诸将因张衮言于珪曰： 贼远粮尽，不如早还。 
现代文：北魏各将领委托张衮向拓跋请求说： 贼匪已逃得太远，而我们的粮草也已断绝，不如早些回去吧。 
English: The Northern Wei generals entrusted Zhang Xuan to make a request to Tuoba, saying: The bandits have fled too far, and our grain and grass have been cut off. It is better to go back earlier.

古文：珪问诸将： 若杀副马，为三日食，足乎？ 
现代文：拓跋问各位将领： 如果宰杀备用的马匹充当粮草，当做三天的粮食，够不够？ 都说： 足够。 
English: Tuoba asked the generals, "If we slaughtered the spare horses to use as grain, would it be enough for three days of grain?" They all said, "It's enough."

古文：皆曰： 足。 
现代文：于是，他们又更加倍地快速追击逃敌。
English: As a result, they were able to pursue the fleeing enemy twice as fast.

古文：乃复倍道追之，及于大碛南床山下，大破之，虏其半部，匹候跋及别部帅屋击各收馀众遁走。
现代文：追到大碛南床山下的时候，果然追上，并且把柔然部落逃兵打得大败，俘虏了他们的一半人。郁久闾匹候跋和他的另一支部落的首领屋击各自收拾残兵逃走。
English: When he chased them to the foot of the mountain in the southern part of Dalian, he finally caught up with them and defeated the deserters from the Juran tribe, capturing half of them. Ikuhisa and the leader of his other tribe, Yuchi, each picked up the remaining soldiers and fled.

古文：珪遣长孙嵩、长孙肥追之。
现代文：拓跋又派长孙嵩、长孙肥继续追击。
English: Tuoba also sent Chosun Song and Chosun Hui to continue the pursuit.

古文：珪谓将佐曰： 卿曹知吾前问三日意乎？ 曰： 不知也。 
现代文：拓跋告诉左右的将佐说： 你们知道我前几天问三天粮食的话的意思了吗？ 众将领说： 不知道。 
English: Tuoba said to the generals around him, "Do you know what I meant when I asked for three days of grain a few days ago?" The generals said, "I don't know."

古文：珪曰： 柔然驱畜产奔走数日，至水必留；我以轻骑追之，计期道里，不过三日及之矣。 
现代文：拓跋说： 柔然部落驱赶家畜等奔逃几天，到了有水的地方一定滞留。我用轻装骑兵去追赶他们，计算道路的远近，我料定不超过三天一定能赶上他们。 
English: Tuoba said, "The Zhuoran tribe chased away the livestock and ran away for several days, and when they reached a place with water, they must have stayed. I chased them with light cavalry, calculated the distance of the road, and I expected to catch up with them in no more than three days.

古文：皆曰： 非所及也！ 
现代文：大家都说： 这不是我们所能想到的。 
English: Everyone said, "We didn't think of that."

古文：嵩追斩屋击于平望川。
现代文：长孙嵩赶到平望川，追上并斩杀了屋击。
English: The eldest grandson, Song, rushed to the Pingwang River, caught up with and killed the antelope.

古文：肥追匹候跋至涿邪山，匹候跋举从降，获缊纥提之子曷多汗、兄子社仑、斛律等宗党数百人。
现代文：长孙肥追击郁久闾匹候跋来到涿邪山，郁久闾率领余下的部众投降，并抓获了郁久闾纥提的儿子郁久闾曷多汗、侄儿郁久闾社仑、郁久闾斛律等亲属亲友几百人。
English: The eldest grandson, Fei, chased Ikuhisao's waiting horses and came to Shanzha Mountain. Ikuhisao led the remaining followers to surrender, and captured Ikuhisao's son, Ikuhisao Dokan, his nephew, Ikuhisao Sharen, Ikuhisao Ritsu, and hundreds of relatives and friends.

古文：缊纥提将奔刘卫辰，珪追及之，缊纥提亦降，珪悉徙其部众于云中。
现代文：郁久闾纥提打算投奔刘卫辰，拓跋也追上了他。郁久闾纥提也投降了。拓跋把柔然部落的居民部众全部迁移到云中郡。
English: Ikukyu Kotei planned to run to Liu Weichen, and Tuoba also caught up with him. Ikukyu Kotei also surrendered. Tuoba moved all the residents of the Juran tribe to Yunzhong County.

古文：翟辽卒，子钊代立，改元定鼎。
现代文：翟辽去世，他的儿子翟钊继位，改年号为定鼎。
English: Gong Liao died and was succeeded by his son Gong, who changed his name to Ding Ding.

古文：攻燕鄴城，燕辽西王农击却之。
现代文：翟钊攻击后燕邺城，后燕辽西王慕容农把他击退。
English: After Yanyan attacked Yancheng City, Murong Nong, the king of West Liao Province, fought him off.

古文：三河王光遣兵乘虚伐金城王乾归，乾归闻之，引兵还，光兵亦退。
现代文：后凉三河王吕光趁西秦国内虚空而派遣部队征伐。乞伏乾归听了这个消息之后，马上从讨伐没弈干的战场上带兵赶回都城。吕光的部队也退了回去。
English: After the cooling, the king of the Three Rivers, Luguang, took advantage of the emptiness in Western Qin to send troops to conquer. After listening to this news, Qian immediately rushed back to the capital with soldiers from the battlefield where there was no fighting. Luguang's troops also retreated back.

古文：刘卫辰遣子直力鞮帅众八九万攻魏南部。
现代文：刘卫辰派遣他的儿子刘直力统率兵卒八九万人进攻魏南部。
English: Liu Weichen dispatched his son Liu Zhili to lead 890,000 soldiers to attack southern Wei.

古文：十一月，已卯，魏王珪引兵五六千人拒之，壬午，大破直力鞮于铁岐山南，直力鞮单骑走。
现代文：十一月，己卯，魏王拓跋带兵五六千人迎战。壬午，拓跋在铁岐山以南将刘直力打得大败。
English: In November, Wei King Tuoba led an army of five or six thousand soldiers to fight. At noon, Tuoba defeated Liu Zhili in the south of Tieqi Mountain.

古文：乘胜追之，戊子，自五原金津南济河，径入卫辰国，卫辰部落骇乱。
现代文：刘直力匹马逃走。北魏部队乘胜追击，戊子，从五原金津向南渡过黄河，径直进入刘卫辰的国界。刘卫辰部落惊骇异常，顿时大乱。
English: Liu Jiali fled on horseback. The Northern Wei forces took advantage of the victory to pursue, and Wu Zi crossed the Yellow River from Wuhuan Jinjin to the south and directly entered Liu Weichen's national border. Liu Weichen's tribe was shocked and panicked.

古文：辛卯，珪直抵其所居悦跋城，卫辰父子出走。
现代文：辛卯，拓跋直接抵达刘卫辰所居住的悦跋城，刘卫辰父子仓惶逃走。
English: Xinwu and Tuoba arrived directly at Yueba City, where Liu Weichen lived. Liu Weichen and his son fled in panic.

古文：壬辰，分遣诸将轻骑追之。
现代文：壬辰，拓跋分别派遣将领率领轻装骑兵追击。
English: Imjin and Tubo separately dispatched generals to lead light cavalry in pursuit.

古文：将军伊谓禽直力珪于木根山，卫辰为其部下所杀。
现代文：将军伊谓在木根山生擒刘直力，刘卫辰则被他自己的部下杀死。
English: General Ip is said to have stabbed Liu Zhili in the Mugen Mountains, while Liu Weichen was killed by his own men.

古文：十二月，珪军于盐池，诛卫辰宗党五千馀人，皆投尸于河。
现代文：十二月，拓跋在盐池驻扎，诛杀刘卫辰的家属亲戚以及同事朋友等五千多人，把这些人的尸体全部扔进黄河。
English: In December, the Tuoba stationed in Yanchi killed more than 5,000 people, including Liu Weichen's relatives, colleagues and friends, and threw their bodies into the Yellow River.

古文：自河以南诸部悉降，获马三十馀万匹，牛羊四百馀万头，国用由是遂饶。
现代文：从些，黄河以南各部落便全部投降，北魏缴获三十多万匹马，牛羊四百多万头。北魏国的经济财力因此强大充裕起来。
English: As a result, all the tribes south of the Yellow River surrendered, and the Northern Wei captured more than 300,000 horses and more than 4 million cattle and sheep. As a result, the economic and financial resources of the Northern Wei state became strong and abundant.

古文：卫辰少子勃勃亡奔薛干部，珪使人求之，薛干部帅太悉伏出勃勃以示使者曰： 勃勃国破家亡，以穷归我，我宁与之俱亡，何忍执以与魏！ 
现代文：刘卫辰最小的儿子刘勃勃，逃奔到薛干部落，拓跋派人到薛干部落去索要刘勃勃。薛干部落的首领太悉仗把刘勃勃叫出来让使者看着说： 刘勃勃国破家亡，因为无路可走才跑到我这里来，我宁可和他一起死，怎么能够忍心抓住他送给魏呢！ 
English: Liu Weichen's youngest son, Liu Gong, fled to the Xuegan tribe, and Tuoba sent someone to the Xuegan tribe to ask for Liu Gong. The leader of the Xuegan tribe was too afraid to call Liu Gong out and let the messenger look at him and say: Liu Gong's country was destroyed, because there was no way out, so he came to me. I would rather die with him, how could I bear to catch him and give him to Wei!

古文：乃送勃勃于没弈干，没弈干以女妻之。
现代文：于是，又把刘勃勃护送到没弈干那里去。没弈干把自己的女儿嫁给了刘勃勃。
English: As a result, they escorted Liu Gongren to Mengye Gan. Mengye Gan married her daughter to Liu Gongren.

古文：戊申，燕主垂如鲁口。
现代文：戊申，后燕国主慕容垂来到鲁口。
English: After Wushin, Mu Rongtai, the ruler of Yan, came to Lukou.

古文：秦主登攻安定，后秦主苌如阴密以拒之，谓太子兴曰： 苟曜闻吾北行，必来见汝，汝执诛之。 
现代文：前秦国主苻登进攻安定，后秦国主姚苌来到阴密对抗他的进攻，他对太子姚兴说： 苟曜听说我向北进军，一定会来晋见你，你趁机把他抓住杀了。 
English: Former Qin Emperor Shoden's attack was stable, and later Qin Emperor Yao Zheng came to secretly oppose his attack. He said to Prince Yao Xing: I heard that I was marching north on Saturday, I will definitely come to Jin to see you. You took the opportunity to catch and kill him.

古文：曜果见兴于长安，兴使尹纬让而诛之。
现代文：得姚苌走后，苟曜果然到长安来见姚兴。姚兴派尹纬责问并杀掉了苟曜。
English: After Yao Yao left, Guo You really came to Chang'an to see Yao Xing. Yao Xing sent Yin Yu to interrogate and kill Guo You.

古文：苌败登于安定城东，登退据路承堡。苌置酒高会，诸将皆曰： 若值魏武王，不令此贼至今，陛下将牢太过耳。 
现代文：姚苌笑着说： 我赶不上我死去的哥哥的地方有四个：第一是不像他那样身高有八尺五寸，两臂下垂长过膝盖，让人一看就要畏惧他。
English: Yao Yao said with a smile, "There are four reasons why I can't keep up with my dead brother: First, I'm not as tall as he was, I'm eight feet five inches tall, and my arms hang down past my knees, so people are afraid of him at first glance.

古文：苌笑曰： 吾不如亡兄有四：身长八尺五寸、臂垂过膝，人望而畏之，一也；将十万之众，与天下争衡，望麾而进，前无横隈，二也；温古知今，讲论道艺，收罗英隽，三也；董帅兄众，上下咸悦，人尽死力，四也。
现代文：第二是不像他那样能统领十万人那样庞大的部队，与天下所有的英雄争高低、相抗衡，手下的将士望见军旗所指的方向，奋勇冲杀，没有人可以阻挡。第三是不像他那样可以通晓历史，了解时势，讲解论说道理和艺文，并能广泛招览、集结贤能英才。第四是不能像他那样统帅大军，使上下全部都心悦诚服，人人能尽死力而战斗。
English: Second, it is not like him to be able to command a huge army of 100,000 people and compete with all the heroes in the world. The soldiers under his command can see the direction indicated by the flag and rush to kill, and no one can stop them. Third, it is not like him to be familiar with history, understand the current situation, explain theories and theories, and arts and literature, and be able to widely recruit and gather talents. Fourth, it is not like him to command a large army, make everyone happy and satisfied, and everyone can fight to the death.

古文：所以得建立功业、驱策群贤者，正望算略中有片长耳。 
现代文：我之所以还能够建立一些功业，领导指挥你们这么多俊杰，正是还算在计谋策略上有那么一点长处罢了。 
English: The reason why I have been able to build up some achievements and lead and command so many outstanding people is that I have a little strength in strategy.

古文：群臣咸称万岁。
现代文：文武大臣都口称万岁。
English: Both the Minister of Education and the Minister of the Armed Forces said "long live."

