古文：高宗宣皇帝中之上太建七年
现代文：起，止，一共两年。陈宣帝太建七年
English: a total of two years. Chen Xuandi has been in power for seven years.

古文：春，正月，辛未，上祀南郊。
现代文：春季，正月，辛未，陈宣帝到南郊祭天。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, and the middle of the year, Chen Xuandi went to the southern suburbs to hold a festival.

古文：癸酉，周主如同州。
现代文：癸酉，北周国主去同州。
English: At that time, the ruler of Northern Zhou went to Tongzhou.

古文：乙亥，左卫将军樊毅克潼州。
现代文：乙亥，陈朝左卫将军樊毅攻克潼州。
English: In Eihei, Chen Zhaowei's general Zou Yi conquered Zhangzhou.

古文：齐主还鄴。
现代文：北齐后主回邺城。
English: After the Northern Qi, the main route was back to Lucheng.

古文：辛巳，上祀北郊。
现代文：辛巳，陈宣帝到北郊祭地。
English: Soon, Chen Xuandi arrived at the north suburb festival site.

古文：二月，丙戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月，丙戌朔，出现日食。
English: In February, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：戊申，樊毅克下邳、高栅等六城。
现代文：戊申，陈朝樊毅攻克下邳、高栅等六座城池。
English: Wushin and Chen Zhaohui conquered six castles, including the Lower Castle and the High Castle.

古文：齐主言语涩呐，不喜见朝士，自非宠私昵狎，未尝交语。
现代文：北齐后主说话迟钝口吃，不喜欢见朝廷的官员，如果不是宠爱亲近的人，从不和别人交谈。
English: The Queen of Northern Qi spoke slowly and stuttered. She did not like to meet officials of the imperial court, and if she did not like someone close to her, she would never talk to anyone else.

古文：性懦，不堪人视，虽三公、令、录奏事，莫得仰视，皆略陈大指，惊走而出。
现代文：性格懦弱，不愿意别人看他，尽管是三公、尚书令、录尚书事等大官向他奏事，不能抬头看他，都是简要地说一些大概情形，便惊恐地离去。
English: He had a weak character and did not want others to look at him. Even though the three great officials, Shang Shurong, Shang Shurong, and Shang Shurong were reporting to him, they could not look up at him. They only briefly mentioned some general situations, and then left in fear.

古文：承世祖奢泰之馀，以为帝王当然，后宫皆宝衣玉食，一裙之费，至直万匹。竞为新巧，朝衣夕弊。
现代文：后主继承了武成帝奢侈过度的余风，以为这是帝王理所应当的享受，后宫的妃嫔都是锦衣玉食，一条裙子的费用，甚至值一万匹绢帛的价钱；宫人们在衣着的新奇精巧上相互竞赛，早上的新衣服到晚上就被当作旧衣服。
English: The queen-in-waiting inherited the extravagant excesses of Emperor Wucheng, thinking that this was the emperor's rightful enjoyment. The concubines of the harem were all richly clothed, and the cost of a skirt was even worth the price of ten thousand horses; the palace people competed with each other in the novelty and finesse of clothing, and the new clothes in the morning were treated as old clothes in the evening.

古文：盛修宫苑，穷极壮丽。所好不常，数毁又复。
现代文：大事修建宫室园林，壮丽到了极点；对所喜好的反复无常，屡次毁坏后又重新修复。
English: The palace gardens were built with great care and reached the peak of their splendour; they were repeatedly destroyed and then restored again, in accordance with his capricious preferences.

古文：百工土木，无时休息，夜则然火照作，寒则以汤为泥。
现代文：从事土木建筑的各种工匠，没有一时的休息，夜里点起火把照明工作，天冷时用热水和泥。
English: All kinds of craftsmen engaged in civil construction, without a moment's rest, lit torches at night to illuminate the work, and used hot water and mud when it was cold.

古文：凿晋阳西山为大像，一夜然油万盆，光照宫中。
现代文：开凿晋阳的西山建成巨大的佛像，一夜间点燃万盆油灯，灯光可以照到宫中。
English: The West Mountain of Jinyang was excavated to build a huge Buddha statue, and thousands of oil lamps were lit overnight, and the lights could shine into the palace.

古文：每有灾异寇盗，不自贬损，唯多设斋，以为修德。
现代文：国家有灾异和寇盗，从不谴责自己，只是多设斋饭向僧徒施舍，以为这才是修行积德。
English: The country has disasters and robberies, but it never condemns itself. It just sets up more fasts to give alms to the monks, thinking that this is the way to accumulate virtues.

古文：好自弹琵琶，为《无愁》之曲，近侍和之者以百数，民间谓之 无愁天子 。
现代文：喜欢自己弹琵琶，谱成名叫《无愁》的乐曲，周围跟着唱和的侍从多到上百人，民间百姓称他为 无愁天子 。
English: He liked to play the pipa himself, and composed a piece of music called "No Sorrow," surrounded by more than a hundred attendants singing and chanting. The common people called him the Son of No Sorrow.

古文：于华林园立贫儿村，帝自衣蓝缕之服，行乞其间为乐。
现代文：后主在华林园设立贫儿村，自己穿了破烂的衣服，在村中以行乞为乐趣。
English: The latter set up a village for poor children in Hualin Garden. He wore tattered clothes and enjoyed begging in the village.

古文：又写筑西鄙诸城，使人衣黑衣攻之，帝自帅内参拒斗。
现代文：又画下西部边境一些城池的图样，依照图样仿造，派人穿了黑衣募仿北周的士兵进攻城池，后主自己率领宫里的太监假装在城里抵抗作战。
English: He also drew a pattern of some castles on the western border, and according to the pattern of imitation, he sent people dressed in black to recruit soldiers to attack the castle, and he himself led the eunuchs in the palace to pretend to fight in the city.

古文：宠任陆令萱、穆提婆、高阿那肱、韩长鸾等宰制朝政，宦官邓长颙、陈德信、胡儿何洪珍等并参预机权，各引亲党，超居显位。
现代文：后主宠信任用陆令萱、穆提婆、高阿那肱、韩长鸾等主宰朝政，宦官邓长、陈德信、胡人何洪珍等都参预机要的权柄，各自引荐亲戚朋党，高居显赫的官位。
English: Later, Lu Lingjun, Mutiwa, Gao Ananyan, Han Changjun and others were trusted by their masters to preside over the imperial government. Eunuchs such as Deng Chang, Chen Deshin, and Hu Ren He Hongzhen were all involved in important positions of power, and each of them introduced relatives and friends to the party, and held prominent official positions.

古文：官由财进，狱以贿成，竞为奸谄，蠹政害民。
现代文：向他们奉纳钱财可以做官，进行贿赂可以制造冤狱，相互争着对后主欺诈谄媚，败坏朝政祸害百姓。
English: Offering them money and wealth can make them officials, bribing can create unjust imprisonment, competing with each other to deceive and flatter the successor, corrupting the government and harming the people.

古文：旧苍头刘桃枝等皆开府封王，其馀宦官、胡儿、歌舞人、见鬼人、官奴婢等滥得富贵者，殆将万数，庶姓封王者以百数，开府千馀人，仪同无数，领军一时至二十人，侍中、中常侍数十人，乃至狗、马及鹰亦有仪同、郡君之号，有斗鸡，号开府，皆食其干禄。
现代文：从前是奴仆的刘桃枝等人都开府封王，其他的宦官、胡人、歌舞的艺人、巫师、官府的奴婢等轻易地得到富贵的，大概将近崐上万人，外姓被封王的有上百人，开府的有一千多人，封为仪同的不计其数，领军一时达到二十人，侍中、中常侍有几十人，甚至狗、马、猎鹰等禽兽也有仪同、郡君的封号，有的斗鸡被封为开府，享受相应等级的俸禄。
English: Former slaves such as Liu Tao Zhi and others were all crowned kings, and other eunuchs, hu people, song and dance artists, wizards, slaves and maidservants of the government easily became rich. There are probably more than ten thousand people. There are hundreds of people who have been crowned kings. There are more than a thousand people who have been crowned kings. There are countless numbers of people who have been crowned kings and queens. The leaders of the army reached twenty at one time. There are dozens of attendants and middle attendants. Even dogs, horses, falcons and other animals have crowns and county titles. Some fighting cocks were crowned kings and que

古文：诸嬖幸朝夕娱侍左右，一戏之赏，动逾巨万。
现代文：一些受到宠幸的卑鄙小人早晚在后主周围侍候取乐，一次游戏的费用，动辄超过一万。
English: Some of the favored scumbags wait for entertainment around the queen mother morning and evening, and the cost of a game often exceeds ten thousand.

古文：既而府藏空竭，乃赐二三郡或六七县，使之卖官取直。
现代文：既而国库空竭，便赐给这些人二三个郡或六七个县，让他们出售官爵收取钱财。
English: When the treasury was exhausted, two or three counties, or sixty-seven counties, were given to these people, who sold their titles to obtain money.

古文：由是为守令者，率皆富商大贾，竞为贪纵，赋繁役重，民不聊生。
现代文：因此担任守令的，大都是富商大贾，争相贪污放纵，民不聊生。
English: Therefore, most of those who serve as guards are rich businessmen and women, competing for corruption and indulgence, and the people are not interested in life.

古文：周高祖谋伐齐，命边镇益储偫，加戍卒；齐人闻之，亦增修守御。
现代文：北周武帝计划征讨北齐，下令边镇增加储备，增添防守的士兵；北齐听到这一消息，也增加修整守御点。
English: The Northern Zhouwu Emperor planned to conquer Northern Qi, and ordered the border towns to increase their reserves and add defensive soldiers; when Northern Qi heard this news, it also increased the number of repairing and guarding points.

古文：柱国于翼谏曰： 疆场相侵，互有胜负，徒损兵储，无益大计。
现代文：北周的柱国于翼向北周武帝劝说道： 相互侵犯国界，各有胜负，白白地损失军队和储备，对大计没有益处。
English: The pillar state of Northern Zhou, Yu Ying, advised Emperor Wu of Northern Zhou: Mutual violations of national borders, each with its own victory and defeat, and the loss of troops and reserves in vain, are of no benefit to the overall plan.

古文：不如解严继好，使彼懈而无备，然后乘间，出其不意，一举可取也。 
现代文：不如解除紧急状态保持友好关系，使对方松懈而没有准备，然后寻找机会，出其不意，就能一举而取。 
English: It would be better to lift the state of emergency, maintain friendly relations, make the other side slack and unprepared, and then look for opportunities to take them by surprise.

古文：周主从之。
现代文：北周武帝听从了他的意见。
English: The Northern Zhou Emperor followed his advice.

古文：韦孝宽上疏陈三策。其一曰： 臣在边积年，颇见间隙，不因际会，难以成功。
现代文：韦孝宽上疏武帝陈述三条计策：第一是： 臣在边地多年，曾见到不少可乘之机，但不及时利用，难以成功。
English: Wei Xiaokuan presented three strategies to Emperor Wu of Shangzhu: The first is: The minister has been on the periphery for many years and has seen many opportunities, but if he does not use them in time, it will be difficult to succeed.

古文：是以往岁出军，徒有劳费，功绩不立，由失机会。
现代文：所以往年军队出征，只有劳累耗费，没有树立功绩，都是由于失掉机会。
English: Therefore, in previous years, when the army went to war, it was only exhausted and spent, and did not establish merits. It was all due to lost opportunities.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么？
English: Why is that?

古文：长淮之南，旧为沃土，陈氏以破亡馀烬，犹能一举平之；齐人历年赴救，丧败而返。
现代文：淮河以南，以前是肥沃的地方，陈氏收拾起梁朝破亡后的残余力量，还能一举将它讨平；齐人每年去那里援救，都遭到失败而归。
English: South of the Huai River, which used to be a fertile area, the Chen clan gathered the remaining strength after the collapse of the Liang Dynasty, and could even level it in one fell swoop; the Qi people went there every year to rescue, but were defeated and returned.

古文：内离外叛，计尽力穷，雠敌有衅，不可失也。
现代文：现在齐国内有离心外有叛乱，计尽力穷，仇敌之间有了破绽，这种机会不能失掉。
English: At present, there are internal and external centrifuges in Qi, there is a rebellion, the strategy is poor, and there is a gap between the enemies. This opportunity cannot be lost.

古文：今大军若出轵关，方轨而进，兼与陈氏共为掎角，并令广州义旅出自三鸦，又募山南骁锐，沿河而下，复遣北山稽胡，绝其并、晋之路。
现代文：现在大军如果发兵轵关，两车并行地前进，兼而与陈氏共同夹击敌人，并下令广州的义军从三鸦出兵，另外征募山南的勇猛锐利之士，沿黄河而下，再派遣北山的稽胡，截断对方并州、晋州的通道。
English: Now, if the great army sends troops to Shaoguan, the two vehicles will advance in parallel, and at the same time, they will jointly attack the enemy with the Chen clan, and order the Guangzhou rebels to send troops from the three ravens, and recruit the brave and sharp men from Shannan to go down along the Yellow River, and then send the Qihu from the North Mountain to cut off the other side's access to and from the state and Jinzhou.

古文：凡此诸军，仍令各募关、河之外劲勇之士，厚其爵赏，使为前驱。
现代文：以上这些军队，仍旧命令各自征募关、河以外的强壮勇敢之士，给予优厚的爵位和赏赐，派他们作为先驱。
English: The above-mentioned armies still ordered their respective armies to recruit strong and brave men from beyond the pass and the river, to give them generous titles and rewards, and to send them as pioneers.

古文：岳动川移，雷骇电激，百道俱进，并趋虏庭。
现代文：山动河移，像雷电般地惊动激烈，从许多道路并头前进，直趋敌人的内庭。
English: The mountains and rivers are moving, and they are shaking violently like thunder and lightning, and they are advancing from many roads side by side, straight towards the enemy's inner courtyard.

古文：必当望旗奔溃，所向摧殄，一戎大定，实在此机。 
现代文：敌人一定望旗奔逃溃败，我军所向之处，敌军都会挫败消灭，一次征伐就能使天下大定，确实在于这次机会。 
English: The enemy will certainly run to the flag to escape and be defeated. Wherever our army goes, the enemy army will be defeated and eliminated. A single conquest can make the world stable. This opportunity really lies.

古文：其二曰： 若国家更为后图，未即大举，宜与陈人分其兵势。
现代文：第二是： 如果国家进一步为以后谋划，一时还没有大举进攻，最好和陈朝一同分散齐国的兵势。
English: The second is: If the country plans further for the future, and there is no large-scale attack at the moment, it is best to disperse the troops of Qi together with the Chen dynasty.

古文：三鸦以北，万春以南，广事屯田，预为贮积，募其骁悍，立为部伍。
现代文：三鸦以北，万春以南一带地方，广为屯田，预先储备军粮，招募勇猛强悍的人组成部队。
English: In the areas north of the Three Ravens and south of the Spring Festival, the vast majority of the land is occupied by military camps. The army reserves grain in advance and recruits brave and strong people to form the army.

古文：彼既东南有敌，戎马相持，我出奇兵，破其疆场。
现代文：齐国的东南有陈朝和它为敌，双方的军队对峙，我方派出奇兵，就能突破齐国的国界。
English: In the southeast of Qi, there was a confrontation between the armies of the Chen Dynasty and its enemy. If we sent a special force, we could break through the national border of Qi.

古文：彼若兴师赴援，我则坚壁清野，待其去远，还复出师。
现代文：对方如果派军队来增援，我们可以坚壁清野，等他们远去以后，重又出兵。
English: They are like the relief of the Hing Division, our army is a solid wall and a clear field. When they go far away, our army will come out to fight again.

古文：常以边外之军，引其腹心之众。
现代文：我们经常以边界一带的军队，调动对方心腹之间的军事主力。
English: Always use troops on the border to lure their domestic troops out.

古文：我无宿舂之费，彼有奔命之劳，一二年中，必自离叛。
现代文：我方不须准备隔夜的粮草，对方却有疲于奔命的劳累，一二年中，对方内部必定出现离心而叛变。
English: Our side does not need to prepare overnight grain and grass, but the other side is tired of running for their lives. In a year or two, there will surely be a centrifugal and mutiny within the other side.

古文：且齐氏昏暴，政出多门，鬻狱卖官，唯利是视，荒淫酒色，忌害忠良，阖境嗷然，不胜其弊。
现代文：况且齐氏昏庸暴虐，政出多门，鬻狱卖官，唯利是图，荒淫酒色，忌害忠良，全国哀号，不胜其弊。
English: Moreover, the Qi Dynasty was oppressive and tyrannical, with many political leaders, jailers, profiteers, drunkards, traitors, and mourners from all over the country.

古文：以此而观，覆亡可待，然后乘间电扫，事等摧枯。 
现代文：由此看来，灭亡指日可待。然后寻找空隙发起迅雷不及掩耳的攻击，等于摧枯拉朽，腐朽的敌人很容易被打垮。 
English: From this point of view, destruction is just around the corner. Then, looking for a gap to launch a lightning-fast attack is tantamount to destroying decay. A decaying enemy is easily defeated.

古文：其三曰： 昔勾践亡吴，尚期十载；武王取纣，犹烦再举。
现代文：第三是： 古代的勾践要灭亡吴国，尚且为期十年，周武王征讨商纣，还曾再次出兵。
English: The third is: The ancient conspiracy to destroy the State of Wu lasted for ten years. King Zhou Wu called for negotiations and once again sent troops.

古文：今若更存遵养，且复相时，臣谓宜还崇邻好，申其盟约，安民和众，通商惠工，蓄锐养威，观衅而动。斯乃长策远驭，坐自兼并也。 
现代文：现在如果能在乱世暂时退隐，等待时机，臣认为应当重新表示尊重友邻，重申盟约，安抚百姓和睦大众，互通贸易优惠工匠，养精蓄锐增加声威，等待机会而行动，这好比是用长长的马鞭远远地驾驭拉车的马匹，可以坐待兼并对方。 
English: Now, if it is possible to retreat temporarily in the turbulent world and wait for the right time, the minister believes that it is necessary to re-express respect for friends and neighbors, reaffirm the covenant, appease the people and reconcile the public, exchange trade privileges and craftsmen, nurture and increase the prestige, and wait for the opportunity to act. This is like using a long whip to drive the horses pulling the cart far away. You can wait for the annexation of the other side.

古文：书奏，周主引开府仪同三司伊娄谦入内殿，从容谓曰： 朕欲用兵，何者为先？ 
现代文：韦孝宽的奏书呈上以后，北周君主把开府仪同三司伊娄谦召进内殿，从容地问他： 朕要用兵，以谁为最先的对象？ 
English: After Wei Xiaokuan's report was submitted, the Northern Zhou monarch summoned Kaifu Yi and the three I Chens into the inner hall, and calmly asked him: I want to use soldiers, who is the first target?

古文：对曰： 齐氏沈溺倡优，耽昏麹蘖。
现代文：伊娄谦答道： 齐国的执政者沉缅在欣赏歌舞杂耍之中，酷嗜饮酒。
English: Yi Sun Qian replied: The ruler of Qi is engrossed in enjoying the song and dance show, and is addicted to alcohol.

古文：其折冲之将斛律明月，已毙于谗口。
现代文：他们冲锋陷阵的勇将斛律明月，已经死在谗言之中。
English: Their daredevil leader, Bao Li Ming Yue, who charged into the fray, has died amidst the criticism.

古文：上下离心，道路以目。
现代文：上下离心离德，百性慑于暴政，在路上相见时不敢交谈，只能以目示意。
English: Up and down, centrifugal separation from morality, all-round deterrence from tyranny, dare not talk when meeting on the road, can only indicate with eyes.

古文：此易取也。 
现代文：这是最容易攻取的。 
English: It's the easiest to capture.

古文：帝大笑。
现代文：武帝大笑。
English: The Emperor roared with laughter.

古文：三月，丙辰，使谦与小司寇元卫聘于齐以观衅。
现代文：三月，丙辰，派伊娄谦和小司寇元卫访问北齐，借此观察有什么可以利用的机会。
English: In March, Xi Jinping sent Yi Junqian and Xiao Scor Yuanwei to visit North Qi to observe what opportunities could be taken advantage of.

古文：丙寅，周主还长安。
现代文：丙寅，北周国主回长安。
English: Cui Yin, the ruler of Northern Zhou, returned to Chang'an.

古文：夏，四月，甲午，上享太庙。
现代文：夏季四月，甲午，陈宣帝到太庙祭祀。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the fourth month of summer, Chen Xuandi went to the Great Temple for a ritual.

古文：监豫州陈桃根得青牛，献之，诏遣还民。
现代文：陈朝的监豫州陈桃根得到青牛，献给皇帝，宣帝下诏还给百姓。
English: Chen Taogen, the overseer of Yuzhou in the Chen Dynasty, received a young bull and dedicated it to the emperor, who then returned it to the people.

古文：又表上织成罗文锦被各二百首，诏于云龙门外焚之。
现代文：陈桃根又上表献上丝织的罗纹锦被两种各二百件，宣帝下诏在云龙门外将锦被全部焚毁。
English: Chen Taogen also presented two hundred pieces of silk brocade ribbed brocade on the table, and all the brocade was burned outside the Yunlong Gate.

古文：庚子，齐以中书监阳休之为尚书右仆射。
现代文：庚子，北齐任命中书监阳休之为尚书右仆射。
English: Geng Zi and Bei Qi appointed Yang Xiu, the supervisor of Chinese calligraphy, as his right-hand man of calligraphy.

古文：六月，壬辰，以尚书右仆射王瑒为左仆射。
现代文：六月，壬辰，陈朝任命尚书右仆射王为左仆射。
English: In June, in Imjin, the Chen dynasty appointed Shangshu's right-hand man Sha Wang as his left-hand man.

古文：甲戌，齐主如晋阳。
现代文：甲戌，北齐后主去晋阳。
English: After Jiajing and Beijie, the main force went to Jinyang.

古文：秋，七月，丙戌，周主如云阳宫。
现代文：秋季七月，丙戌，北周国主去云阳宫。
English: In the autumn of July, the Northern Zhou sovereign went to the Yunyang Palace.

古文：大将军杨坚姿相奇伟。
现代文：大将军杨坚姿容相貌奇特壮美。
English: The great general Yang Jian looks strangely magnificent.

古文：畿伯下大夫长安来和尝谓坚曰： 公眼如曙星，无所不照，当王有天下，愿忍诛杀。 
现代文：畿伯下大夫长安来和曾经对杨坚说： 您的眼睛象晨星，无所不照，当为天下之王，希望您能克制诛杀。 
English: Dr. Chang An Lai Tong, the lower doctor of Kibo, once said to Yang Jian: Your eyes are like the morning star, they see everything, you should be the king of the world. I hope you can refrain from fighting.

古文：周主待坚素厚，齐王宪言于帝曰： 普六茹坚，相貌非常，臣每见之，不觉自失。恐非人下，请早除之！ 
现代文：北周国主武帝一向厚待杨坚，齐王宇文宪对武帝说： 普六茹坚，相貌异常，臣每次看到他，不觉茫无所措；恐怕他不会甘居人下，请及早把他除掉！ 
English: Emperor Wu, the ruler of Northern Zhou, had always treated Yang Jian kindly. King Wu Wenxian of Qi said to Emperor Wu: "Puru Rujian, his appearance is abnormal. Every time I see him, I feel overwhelmed; I'm afraid he won't be content to live under others. Please get rid of him as soon as possible!"

古文：帝亦疑之，以问来和。和诡对曰： 随公止是守节人，可镇一方。若为将领，陈无不破。 
现代文：武帝也怀疑杨坚，向来和询问，来和却欺骗说： 随公杨坚是个信守名分、注意节操的人，可以镇守一方；如果当将领，将会无坚不摧。 
English: Emperor Wu was also suspicious of Yang Jian. He had always asked about him, but he lied and said, "Comrade Yang Jian is a person who keeps his title and pays attention to discipline. He can guard one side; if he becomes a general, he will be indestructible."

古文：丁卯，周主还长安。
现代文：丁卯，北周国主回长安。
English: Dingwu, the ruler of Northern Zhou, returned to Chang'an.

古文：先是，周主独与齐王宪及内史王谊谋伐齐，又遣纳言卢韫乘驲三诣安州总管于翼问策，余人皆莫之知。
现代文：起先北周国主独自和齐王宇文宪、内史王谊策划征伐北齐，又派纳言卢韫乘驿车三次到安州总管于翼那里询问计策，别人都不知道这事。
English: At first, the Northern Zhou sovereign alone with the Qi King Yuwen Xian and the Inner History King Yi planned to conquer the Northern Qi, and also sent the Nagan Lu to the Anzhou Governor Yu Ying three times to inquire about the strategy. Others did not know about this.

古文：丙子，始召大将军以上于大德殿告之。
现代文：丙子，武帝才在大德殿召集大将军以上所有官员并告诉他们。
English: However, Emperor Wu summoned all officials above the rank of general to Daede Hall and told them.

古文：丁丑，下诏伐齐，以柱国陈王纯、荥阳公司消难、郑公达奚震为前三军总管，越王盛、周昌公侯莫陈崇、赵王招为后三军总管。
现代文：丁丑，北周武帝下诏征讨北齐，任命柱国陈王宇文纯、荥阳公司马消难、郑公达奚震为前三军总管，越王宇文盛、周昌公侯莫陈崇、赵王宇文招为后三军总管。
English: Ding Gou, the Northern Zhouwu Emperor issued an edict to recruit and recruit the Northern Qi, and appointed the pillar states Chen Wang Yu Wenzhong, Shanyang Company Ma Qidang, and Zheng Gong Dazhen as the former three military chiefs, and Yue Wang Yu Wensheng, Zhou Chang Prince Mo Chen Chong, and Zhao Wang Yu Wenshu as the latter three military chiefs.

古文：齐王宪帅众二万趋黎阳，随公杨坚、广宁公薛迥将舟师三万自渭入河，梁公侯莫陈芮帅众二万守太行道，申公李穆帅众三万守河阳道，常山公于翼帅众二万出陈、汝。
现代文：齐王宇文宪率领二万人进军黎阳。随公杨坚、广宁公薛迥率领水军三万人从渭水进入黄河，梁公侯莫陈芮率领二万人在太行道防守，申公李穆率领三万人在河阳道防守，常山公于翼率领二万人进军陈州、汝州。
English: Qi Wang Yuwen Xian led 20,000 people to march into Liyang. With Gong Yang Jian and Guangning Gong Xue Qi leading the naval force of 30,000 people from Surabaya into the Yellow River, Liang Gong Mo Chen Qi led 20,000 people to defend Taihang Road, Shen Gong Li Mu led 30,000 people to defend Heyang Road, Changshan Gong Yu Ying led 20,000 people to march into Chenzhou and Ruzhou.

古文：谊，盟之兄孙；震，武之子也。
现代文：王谊是王盟哥哥的孙子；达奚震是达奚武的儿子。
English: Wang You is the grandson of Wang Meng's older brother; Dafu Zhen is the son of Dafu Wu.

古文：周主将出河阳，内史上士宇文弼曰： 齐氏建国，于今累世；虽曰无道，籓镇之任，尚有其人。
现代文：北周国主将进军河阳，内史上士宇文说： 齐氏建国至今，已经有好几代；虽说君主无道，但是胜任藩镇职守的，还大有人在。
English: The head of the Northern Zhou Kingdom will march into Hebei, and the historian Wu Wen said: Since the founding of the Qi Dynasty, there have been several generations; although the monarch has no way, there are still many people who are competent to perform the duties of the clan and town.

古文：今之出师，要须择地。
现代文：现在出兵，必须选择进攻的地点。
English: Now that the troops have been dispatched, it is necessary to choose a place for the attack.

古文：河阳冲要，精兵所聚，尽力攻围，恐难得志。
现代文：河阳地处要冲，是精兵集中的地方，全力加以围攻，恐怕难以达到目的。
English: As Hayao is located at a strategic point and is a place with a concentration of elite soldiers, it will be difficult to achieve the goal if it is besieged with all its might.

古文：如臣所见，出于汾曲，戍小山平，攻之易拔。
现代文：以臣的看法，汾曲一带地方，北齐防守的军队既少，地势平坦，攻打那里容易攻克。
English: According to the opinion of the minister, in the area around Zongqu, there are few troops defending North Qi, the terrain is flat, and it is easy to attack and conquer there.

古文：用武之地，莫过于此。 
现代文：用兵的地点，以这里为最好。 
English: This is the best place to use troops.

古文：民部中大夫天水赵煚曰： 河南、洛阳，四面受敌，纵得之，不可以守。
现代文：民部中大夫天水人赵说： 河南、洛阳，四面容易遭到敌方的攻击，即使得到这些地方，很难防守。
English: Zhao Tianshui, a doctor at the Ministry of Civil Affairs, said: Henan and Luoyang are vulnerable to enemy attacks on all sides, and even if they get these places, it is difficult to defend.

古文：请从河北直指太原，倾其巢穴，可一举而定。 
现代文：请从河北直指太原，捣毁齐国的巢穴，可以一举而定。 
English: Please go straight to Taiyuan from Hebei and destroy the lair of Qi, you can do it in one fell swoop.

古文：遂伯下大夫鲍宏曰： 我强齐弱，我治齐乱，何忧不克！
现代文：遂伯下大夫鲍宏说： 我国强盛各国衰弱，我国安定各国混乱，何必担心攻不克呢！
English: Subordinate doctor Baohong said: Our country is strong, other countries are weak, our country is stable, and other countries are in chaos. Why worry about attacking others?

古文：但先帝往日屡出洛阳，彼既有备，每用不捷。
现代文：但是先帝在世时屡次进军洛阳，因为对方早有防备，所以常常不能取胜。
English: However, when the former emperor was alive, he repeatedly marched into Luoyang, but because the other side was already prepared, he often could not win.

古文：如臣计者，进兵汾、潞，直掩晋阳，出其不虞，似为上策。 
现代文：按臣的计策，向汾川、潞川进兵，直扑晋阳，出其不备，似乎是上策。 
English: According to the vassal's strategy, he marched troops to Shichuan, Shichuan, and directly attacked Jinyang. However, it seemed to be the best strategy.

古文：周主皆不从。
现代文：北周国主不听他们的意见。
English: The ruler of North Zhou did not listen to their opinions.

古文：宏，泉之弟也。
现代文：鲍宏是鲍泉的弟弟。
English: Bao Hong is the younger brother of Bao Quan.

古文：壬午，周主帅众六万，直指河阴。
现代文：壬午，北周国主率领六万人，直指河阴。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, the ruler of the Northern Zhou Dynasty led 60,000 people to march straight to Heyin.

古文：杨素请帅其父麾下先驱，周主许之。
现代文：杨敷的儿子杨素请求率领父亲部下充当先头部队，得到国主的准许。
English: Yangshiki's son, Yang Su, requested permission from the sovereign to lead his father's men as the vanguard.

古文：八月，癸卯，周遣使来聘。
现代文：八月，癸卯，北周派使者到陈朝聘问。
English: In August, the Northern Zhou Dynasty sent an envoy to the Chen Dynasty for consultation.

古文：周师入齐境，禁伐树践稼，犯者皆斩。
现代文：北周军队进入北齐境内，下令禁止砍伐树木践踏庄稼，违反者一律斩首。
English: The Northern Zhou army entered the territory of Northern Qi, ordered a ban on cutting down trees and trampling crops, and all violators were beheaded.

古文：丁未，周主攻河阴大城，拔之。
现代文：丁未，北周国主进攻河阴大城，攻克。
English: Ding Wei, the ruler of Northern Zhou attacked and conquered the great city of Heyin.

古文：齐王宪拔武济；进围洛口，拔东、西二城，纵火焚浮桥，桥绝。
现代文：齐王宇文宪攻克武济；进围洛口，攻克东、西二城，放火烧毁浮桥，桥断。
English: The king of Qi, Yuwen Xian, attacked Kwuzi; he besieged Lokou, conquered the two cities in the east and west, set fire to the pontoon bridge, and broke the bridge.

古文：齐永桥大都督太安傅伏，自永桥夜入中潬城。
现代文：北齐的永桥大都督太安傅伏，趁夜晚从永桥进入中城。
English: Northern Qi's Yongqiao Grand Duke Ta'an Fu Fu took advantage of the night to enter Zhongcheng from Yongqiao.

古文：周人既克南城，围中氵单，二旬不下。
现代文：北周攻克南城以后，包围中城，二十天也没能攻克。
English: After conquering Nancheng in the northern circuit, they besieged Zhongcheng and were unable to conquer it for twenty days.

古文：洛州刺史独孤永业守金墉，周主自攻之，不克。
现代文：北齐的洛州刺史独孤永业镇守金墉，北周国主亲自进攻，也没有攻克。
English: In the history of the Northern Qi, Luozhou was the only one to have a permanent town guard in Jinqiao. The Northern Zhou sovereign personally attacked, but did not conquer.

古文：永业通夜办马槽二千，周人闻之，以为大军且至而惮之。
现代文：独孤永业连夜赶制二千只马槽，北周人听说，以为北齐的大军将要来到，感到畏惧。
English: Lone Yongye rushed to make two thousand manger overnight, and the people of North Zhou heard that they thought that the great army of North Qi would come, and they were afraid.

古文：九月，齐右丞高阿那肱自晋阳将兵拒周师。
现代文：九月，北齐右丞高阿那肱从晋阳率军抵御北周的军队。
English: In September, Northern Qi U.S. general Gao Ananyu led an army from Jinyang to resist the army of Northern Zhou.

古文：至河阳，会周主有疾，辛酉夜，引兵还。
现代文：他们到达河阳，正巧北周国主生病，辛酉，晚上，率军回国。
English: They arrived in Hayao, just as the ruler of Northern Zhou fell ill and died. In the evening, he led his army back to the country.

古文：水军焚其舟舰。
现代文：北周水军焚烧了自己的船只。
English: The Northern Zhou navy burned its own ships.

古文：傅伏谓行台乞伏贵和曰： 周师疲弊，愿得精骑二千追击之，可破也。 
现代文：傅伏对行台乞伏贵和说： 北周军队疲惫不堪，我愿意率领二千精骑追击他们，可以打败他们。 
English: Fu Fu said to Xiangtai, begging Fu Gui and saying: Beizhou's army is exhausted, I am willing to lead two thousand horsemen to chase them, I can defeat them.

古文：贵和不许。
现代文：乞伏贵和不准许。
English: Begging and begging are not allowed.

古文：齐王宪、于翼、李穆，所向克捷，降拔三十余城，皆弃而不守。
现代文：齐王宇文宪、于翼、李穆，矛头所向都打了胜仗，投降的和攻克的有三十多座城池，然而都弃城不夺。
English: The spearheads of the Qi kings, Yuwen Xian, Yu Ying, and Li Mu, all fought victorious battles. They surrendered and conquered more than thirty cities, but they all abandoned the city without taking it.

古文：唯以王药城要害，令仪同三司韩正守之，正寻以城降齐。
现代文：唯独王药城地处要害，命令仪同三司韩正在这里镇守，韩正不久就举城向北齐投降。
English: However, Wang Yecheng was at a critical point. The commander and the three Korean generals were on guard here. Han Zheng soon surrendered the city to the Northern Qi.

古文：戊寅，周主还长安。
现代文：戊寅，北周国主回长安。
English: Wu Yin, the ruler of Northern Zhou, returned to Chang'an.

古文：庚辰，齐以赵彦深为司徒，斛阿列罗为司空。
现代文：庚辰，北齐任命赵彦深为司徒，斛阿列罗为司空。
English: Geng Chen, North Qi appointed Zhao Yanshen as a scholar, and Zou Aliero as a scholar.

古文：闰月，车骑大将军吴明彻将兵击齐彭城；壬辰，败齐兵数万于吕梁。
现代文：闰月，陈朝车骑大将军吴明彻率军攻打北齐彭城；壬辰，在吕梁打败几万齐兵。
English: In the intercalary month, Chen Chao Che and General Wu Ming Che led the army to attack North Qipeng City; Imjin defeated tens of thousands of Qipeng soldiers in Luliang.

古文：甲午，周主如同州。
现代文：甲午，北周国主去同州。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the month, the ruler of Northern Zhou went to Tongzhou.

古文：冬，十月，己巳，立皇子叔齐为新蔡王，叔文为晋熙王。
现代文：冬季十月，己巳，陈朝立皇子陈叔齐为新蔡王，陈叔文为晋熙王。
English: In the winter of October, Chen Shouqi, the son of Emperor Chen, became the new King Cai, and Chen Shouwen became King Jinxi.

古文：十二月，辛亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月，辛亥朔，出现日食。
English: In December, Xinhai New Year, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：壬戌，以王瑒为尚书左仆射，太子詹事吴郡陆缮为右仆射。
现代文：壬戌，陈朝任命王为尚书左仆射，太子詹事吴郡陆缮为右仆射。
English: In Jin Dynasty, the Chen Dynasty appointed Wang as Shang Shuxu's left footman, and Prince Zhan Zhi Wu County Lu Xuan as his right footman.

古文：庚午，周主还长安。
现代文：庚午，北周国主回长安。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the head of the Northern Zhou Dynasty returned to Chang'an.

古文：高宗宣皇帝中之上太建八年春，正月，癸未，周主如同州；辛卯，如河东涑川；甲午，复还同州。甲寅，齐大赦。
现代文：太建八年春季，正月，癸未，北周国主去同州；辛卯，去河东涑川；甲午，再回同州。甲寅，北齐大赦全国。
English: In the spring of the 8th year of Tai Jian, in the first month of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of

古文：乙卯，齐主还鄴。
现代文：乙卯，北齐国主回邺城。
English: Second, the ruler of Northern Qi returned to Lushan City.

古文：二月，辛酉，周主命太子巡抚西土，因伐吐谷浑，上开府仪同大将军王轨、宫正宇文孝伯从行。
现代文：二月，辛酉，北周国主命太子去西部巡抚，因而讨伐吐谷浑，上开府仪同大将军王轨、宫正宇文孝伯跟随太子同行。
English: In February, Northern Zhou's ruler, the crown prince, went to the west as an inspector, and as a result, he fought against Tuyugun. Shang Kaifu Yi accompanied the crown prince along with the general Wang Luo and Gong Zheng Uwen Xiao Bo.

古文：军中节度，皆委二人，太子仰成而已。
现代文：军队的调度，都委托这二人，太子只是坐享其成。
English: The dispatch of the army was entrusted to these two men, and the prince just sat back and enjoyed their success.

古文：齐括杂户未嫁者悉集，有隐匿者，家长坐死。
现代文：北齐搜求因犯罪没官当奴婢的 杂户 中女子尚未出嫁的，全部集中起来，凡是把这种人隐藏起来的，家长处死。
English: Beiqi searches for miscellaneous households of unmarried middle-aged women who have no official position to serve as slaves due to crime, all of them are concentrated. If anyone hides such a person, the parents will be executed.

古文：壬申，以开府仪同三司吴明彻为司空。
现代文：壬申，陈朝任命开府仪同三司吴明彻为司空。
English: In Jinshin, the Chen dynasty appointed Kaifu Yi and the third secretary Wu Mingcher as the secretary.

古文：三月，壬寅，周主还长安；夏，四月，乙卯，复如同州。
现代文：三月，壬寅，北周国主回长安；夏季，四月，乙卯，又去同州。
English: In March, Ren Yin, the head of the northern Zhou Guozhong returned to Chang'an; in summer, in April, Yi Wu, he went to Tongzhou again.

古文：己未，上享太庙。
现代文：己未，陈宣帝到太庙祭祀。
English: Before long, Chen Xuandi went to the Great Temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：尚书左仆射王瑒。
现代文：陈朝的尚书左仆射王死。
English: Shang Shuxu's left-hand man in the Chen Dynasty, Shaowang, died.

古文：五月，壬辰，周主还长安。
现代文：五月，壬辰，北周国主回长安。
English: In May, in Imjin, the head of the Northern Zhou Dynasty returned to Chang'an.

古文：六月，戊申朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月，戊申朔，出现日食。
English: In June, the waxing gibbous moon, a solar eclipse.

古文：辛亥，周主享太庙。
现代文：辛亥，北周国主到太庙祭祀。
English: In Xinhai, the ruler of the Northern Zhou Dynasty went to the Imperial Temple for a ritual.

古文：初，太子叔宝欲以左户部尚书江总为詹事，令管记陆瑜言于吏部尚书孔奂。
现代文：当初，陈朝太子陈叔宝要任命左户尚书江总为太子詹事，派管记陆瑜告诉了吏部尚书孔奂。
English: At the beginning, Chen Shubao, the prince of the Chen Dynasty, wanted to appoint Zuo Shang Shujiang as the prince of Zhanji, and sent Guan Ji Lu Yu to tell the personnel department Shang Shujiang.

古文：奂谓瑜曰： 江有潘、陆之华而无园、绮之实，辅弼储宫，窃有所难。 
现代文：孔奂对陆瑜说： 江总有潘岳、陆机那样的文采，却没有园公、绮里季那样的真实才能，如果派江总辅佐太子，我有所为难。 
English: Confucius said to Lu Yu, "Jiang has the literary talent of Pan Yue and Lu Ji, but he does not have the real talent of Yuan Gong and Bao Liji. If I were to send Jiang to assist the crown prince, I would be in trouble.

古文：太子深以为恨，自言于帝。
现代文：太子对此很痛恨，便自己向皇帝提出要求。
English: The prince hated this very much and made his own request to the emperor.

古文：帝将许之，奂奏曰： 江总，文华之士。
现代文：宣帝将要答允他，孔奂上奏说： 江总，是有才华的人。
English: Emperor Xuan will agree with him, Kong Yao said, "President Jiang is a talented person.

古文：今皇太子文华不少，岂藉于总！
现代文：现在皇太子才华不少，难道还要依靠江总！
English: Now that the crown prince has a lot of talent, do we still have to rely on Jiang Chong!

古文：如臣愚见，愿选敦重之才，以居辅导之职。 
现代文：按臣的看法，希望挑选敦厚稳重的人才，担任辅导皇太子的职务。 
English: According to the minister, he hopes to select a strong and stable person to serve as a tutor to the crown prince.

古文：帝曰： 即如卿言，谁当居此？ 
现代文：宣帝说： 按你所说，谁能担任这个职务？ 
English: Gao Zong said: According to what you said, who is suitable for this position?

古文：奂曰： 都官尚书王廓，世有懿德，识性敦敏，可以居之。 
现代文：孔奂说： 都官尚书王廓，世代都有美德，才识和性格忠厚聪明，可以担任。 
English: Kong Yu said: The metropolitan government official is still a scholar, he has been virtuous for generations, he is kind-hearted and intelligent, and he can hold this position.

古文：太子时在侧，乃曰： 廓，王泰之子，不宜为太子詹事。 
现代文：皇太子当时正在旁边，便说： 王廓是王泰的儿子，不宜做太子詹事。 
English: The crown prince, who was nearby at the time, said: "Wang Kuo is the son of Wang Tai. It is not appropriate for him to be a prince.

古文：奂曰： 宋朝范晔即范泰之子，亦为太子詹事，前代不疑。 
现代文：孔奂说： 宋朝的范晔，是范泰的儿子，也是太子詹事，前代也没有因为避讳而产生怀疑。 
English: Kong Yu said: Fan Yu of the Song Dynasty was the son of Fan Tai and also the son of Prince Zhan Zhi. The previous generation did not have doubts because of shunning.

古文：太子固争之，帝卒以总为詹事。
现代文：太子坚持力争，宣帝最终还是任命江总为太子詹事。
English: The prince persisted in his efforts, and Emperor Xuan finally appointed Jiang Zong as the prince Zhan Zhi.

古文：总，斅之曾孙也。
现代文：江总是江的曾孙。
English: He is the great-grandson of Jiang Yanzhang.

古文：甲寅，以尚书右仆射陆缮为左仆射。
现代文：甲寅，陈朝任命尚书右仆射陆缮为左仆射。
English: A Yin, Chen Dynasty appointed Shang Shu's right-hand man Lu Shu as his left-hand man.

古文：帝欲以孔奂代缮，诏已出，太子沮之而止；更以晋陵太守王克为右仆射。
现代文：宣帝要孔奂代替陆缮尚书右仆射的职务，诏令已经发出，被太子从中阻止而作罢；改派晋陵太守王克为尚书右仆射。
English: Emperor Xuan wanted Kong Xi to replace Lu Zuo as Shangshu's right-hand man. The imperial decree had already been issued, but was stopped by the prince from doing so; Wang Ke, the governor of Jinling, was reassigned as Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：顷之，总与太子为长夜之饮，养良娣陈氏为女；太子亟微行，游总家。
现代文：不久，江总和太子彻夜饮酒，收养女官陈氏为女儿；太子屡次便装外出，到江总家里游玩。
English: Soon, President Jiang and the crown prince were drinking all night and adopted a female official, Ms. Chen, as their daughter. The crown prince often went out in plain clothes to visit President Jiang's home.

古文：上怒，免总官。
现代文：宣帝大怒，免掉江总的官职。
English: Emperor Xuan was enraged and removed General Jiang from his post.

古文：周利州刺史纪王康，骄矜无度，缮修戎器，阴有异谋。
现代文：北周利州刺史纪王宇文康，骄傲没有节制，整修兵器，暗中有造反的阴谋。
English: Wang Yuwenkang, a member of the North Zhoulizhou Provincial History Society, had unbridled pride, refurbished weapons, and secretly plotted a rebellion.

古文：司录裴融谏止之，康杀融。
现代文：司录裴融对他规劝阻止，宇文康将裴融杀死。
English: The registrar, Pei Rong, tried to dissuade him, but Uwen Kang killed Pei Rong.

古文：丙辰，赐康死。
现代文：丙辰，北周武帝将宇文康赐死。
English: In the 4th century, Emperor Wu of the Northern Zhou Dynasty put Uwen Kang to death.

古文：丁巳，周主如云阳。
现代文：丁巳，北周国主去云阳。
English: Just then, the ruler of Northern Zhou went to Yunyang.

古文：庚申，齐宜阳王赵彦深卒。
现代文：庚申，北齐宜阳王赵彦深死。
English: Goshun, the king of Yiyang in North Qi, Zhao Yan, died.

古文：彦深历事累朝，常参机近，以温谨著称。
现代文：赵彦深历经几个君主，经常参预机密，以温顺谨慎著称。
English: Zhao Yanshen experienced several monarchs, often participated in pre-secrets, and was known for his meekness and prudence.

古文：既卒，朝贵典机密者，唯侍中、开府仪同三司斛律孝卿一人而已，其余皆嬖幸也。
现代文：他死之后，朝贵中主管机密的，只有侍中、开府仪同三司斛律孝卿一人而已，其余的都是受后主宠爱的幸臣。
English: After his death, there was only one person in charge of secrets among the court nobles, namely, the Chamberlain, the Keifu, and the Third Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, Ritsutaka Kyo, and the rest were privileged retainers favored by the Empress Dowager.

古文：孝卿，羌举之子，比于馀人，差不贪秽。
现代文：斛律孝卿是斛律羌举的儿子，和别人比较，不那么贪婪秽乱。
English: Compared with others, Gong Lyu Xiaoqing, the son of Gong Lyu Zhihu, is not so greedy and filthy.

古文：秋，八月，乙卯，周主还长安。
现代文：秋季八月，乙卯，北周国主回长安。
English: In the autumn of August, the Northern Zhou Emperor returned to Chang'an.

古文：周太子伐吐谷浑，至伏俟城而还。
现代文：北周太子征讨吐谷浑，到达伏俟城以后就返回了。
English: The Northern Zhou princeling enlisted to fight against Tuyagun, and returned after arriving at Fuxi City.

古文：宫尹郑译、王端等皆有宠于太子。
现代文：太子宫尹郑译、王端等人，都得到太子的宠爱。
English: Prince Consort Yin Zheng, Wang Duan and others were all favored by the prince.

古文：太子在军中多失德，译等皆预焉。
现代文：太子在军中有许多缺德恶劣的事，郑译等都是参预者。
English: There were many immoral and evil things that the prince did in the army, and Zheng Yue and others were all participants.

古文：军还，王轨等言之于周主。
现代文：军队还朝，王轨等告诉了北周国主。
English: The army returned to the court, and Wang Luo and others told the North Zhou sovereign.

古文：周主怒，杖太子及译等，仍除译等名，宫臣亲幸者咸被谴。
现代文：国主勃然大怒，棒打了太子和郑译等人，将郑译等除名，宫臣和亲幸者都受到谴责。
English: The sovereign flew into a rage, beat up the prince and Zheng Zhan and others, removed Zheng Zhan and others from the list, and condemned the palace courtiers and relatives.

古文：太子复召译，戏狎如初。
现代文：太子重新把郑译召来，一同游玩亲近如初。
English: The prince summoned Zheng again, and they toured together, as close as ever.

古文：译因曰： 殿下何时可得据天下？ 
现代文：郑译因此说： 殿下什么时候可以得到天下？ 
English: Zheng thus said, "When will Your Highness be able to rule the world?"

古文：太子悦，益昵之。
现代文：太子听了很高兴，对他更加亲近。
English: The prince was delighted to hear this and became even closer to him.

古文：译，俨之兄孙也。
现代文：郑译是郑俨哥哥的孙子。
English: Zheng Yue is the grandson of Zheng Yao's brother.

古文：周主遇太子甚严，每朝见，进止与群臣无异，虽隆寒盛暑，不得休息；以其耆酒，禁酒不得至东宫；有过，辄加捶挞。尝谓之曰： 古来太子被废者几人？
现代文：北周国主武帝对太子很严格，太子每次朝见，行动进退和群臣一样，尽管是严冬盛夏，不能得到休息；因为太子嗜酒，禁止送酒到东宫；太子有过错，动辄用拳头或棍棒责打，曾经对太子说： 自古以来太子被废掉的有多少人？
English: Emperor Wu, the ruler of the Northern Zhou, was very strict with the prince. Every time the prince saw him, his movements were the same as those of the courtiers, even though it was the middle of summer in the dead of winter, and he could not get any rest. Because the prince was an alcoholic, it was forbidden to bring alcohol to the East Palace. The prince was at fault and was often beaten with fists or clubs. He once said to the prince: How many princes have been abolished since ancient times?

古文：余儿岂不堪立邪！ 
现代文：除了你以外我其他的儿子难道不能立为太子吗！ 
English: Couldn't my other sons be crowned prince in addition to you?

古文：乃敕东宫官属录太子言语动作，每月奏闻。
现代文：便命令东宫的官员记录太子的言语动作，每月向武帝报告。
English: He ordered the officials of the East Palace to record the prince's speech and actions and report to Emperor Wu every month.

古文：太子畏帝威严，矫情修饰，由是过恶不上闻。
现代文：太子害怕武帝的威严，对自己的真情加以掩饰，因此太子的过失和恶行没有让武帝知道。
English: The prince was afraid of Emperor Wu's majesty and tried to cover up his true feelings. Therefore, he did not let Emperor Wu know about the prince's mistakes and misdeeds.

古文：王轨尝与小内史贺若弼言： 太子必不克负荷。 
现代文：王轨曾经和小内史贺若弼说： 太子一定不能胜任负荷。 
English: Wang Lu once said to He Ruoxuan, a minor official: The prince must not be able to handle the load.

古文：弼深以为然，劝轨陈之。
现代文：贺若弼很以为然，劝王轨向北周武帝奏明情况。
English: Horakado also thought it was right, and advised him to play for Emperor Wu.

古文：轨后因侍坐，言于帝曰： 皇太子仁孝无闻，恐不了陛下家事。
现代文：王轨后来因为在武帝身边侍奉，因此对武帝说： 人们并没有听说皇太子仁孝，恐怕他不能解决陛下的家事。
English: Wang Luo later said to Emperor Wu, because he had served beside Emperor Wu, "People have not heard of Crown Prince Ren Xiao, I am afraid he cannot solve Your Majesty's family affairs.

古文：愚臣短暗，不足可信。
现代文：愚臣我见识短浅不明，说的话不足为信。
English: Foolish minister, my knowledge is shallow and unclear, and what I say lacks credibility.

古文：陛下恒以贺若弼有文武奇才，亦常以此为忧。 
现代文：陛下一向认为贺若弼有文武奇才，他也常常因这件事而担忧。 
English: His Majesty has always believed that He Ruoxuan is a literary and martial arts genius, and he is often worried about this.

古文：帝以问弼，对曰： 皇太子养德春宫，未闻有过。 
现代文：武帝便问贺若弼，贺若弼回答道： 皇太子在东宫修养自身的品德，没有听到有什么过失。 
English: Emperor Wu then asked He Ruoqian, and He Ruoqian replied, "The crown prince cultivated his own character in the East Palace, and I have not heard of any wrongdoing."

古文：既退，轨让弼曰： 平生言论，无所不道，今者对扬，何得乃尔反覆？ 
现代文：他退出以后，王轨责备贺若弼说： 你平生言论，无所不说，为什么今天面对皇上，却如此反复无常？ 
English: After he withdrew, Wang Lu reproached He Ruojun and said, "You have said everything in your life, why are you so capricious today in the face of the emperor?

古文：弼曰： 此公之过也。
现代文：贺若弼说： 这就是您的过错了。
English: Herakazu said, "It's your fault."

古文：太子，国之储副，岂易发言！
现代文：太子，是国家未来的君主，怎么能随便发言！
English: How can the crown prince, the country's future monarch, speak so casually!

古文：事有蹉跌，便至灭族。
现代文：如果事情有差错，便会遭到灭族的下场。
English: If things go wrong, they will be annihilated.

古文：本谓公密陈臧否。
现代文：本以为您只是向皇上密陈对太子的意见，怎能公开明说！ 
English: I thought you were just whispering your opinion about the prince to the emperor, how can you say it openly!

古文：何得遂至昌言！ 轨默然久之，乃曰： 吾专心国家，遂不存私计。
现代文：王轨沉默了很久，便说： 我一心为了国家，所以没有考虑自己个人的利害得失。以前当着大家说这件事，确实不妥当。 
English: Wang Luo was silent for a long time, and then said: I am single-minded for the country, so I did not consider my personal gains and losses. It was really inappropriate to say this in front of everyone before.

古文：向者对众，良实非宜。 后轨因内宴上寿，捋帝须曰： 可爱好老公，但恨后嗣弱耳。 
现代文：后来王轨因为参加宫中的饮宴，对武帝祝寿，用手捋着武帝的胡须说： 可爱的好老头，只是遗憾继承人太弱了。 
English: Later, Wang Luo, because he was attending a banquet at the palace, congratulated Emperor Wu on his birthday. He put his hand on Emperor Wu's beard and said, "Dear old man, it's just a pity that the heir is too weak."

古文：先是，帝问右宫伯宇文孝伯曰： 吾儿比来何如？ 
现代文：原先，武帝曾经问右宫伯宇文孝伯道： 我的儿子近来怎么样？ 
English: Originally, Emperor Wu once asked the Right Empress Dowager Bo Yuwen: How is my son these days?

古文：对曰： 太子比惧天威，更无过失。 
现代文：宇文孝伯答道： 太子近来害怕陛下的天威，更加没有犯过失。 
English: Uwen Xiao Bo replied, "The prince has been afraid of your majesty's divine power recently, and he has not made any mistakes.

古文：罢酒，帝责孝伯曰： 公常语我云： 太子无过。 
现代文：于是武帝停止饮酒，责备宇文孝伯说： 您常常对我说： 太子没有过失。 
English: So Emperor Wu stopped drinking and reproached Prince Uwen, saying, "You often said to me, 'The crown prince did nothing wrong.'

古文：今轨有此言，公为诳矣。 
现代文：现在王轨对我这样说，可见您是在说谎话。 
English: Now that Wang Lu has said this to me, it is clear that you are lying.

古文：孝伯再拜曰： 臣闻父子之际，人所难言。
现代文：宇文孝伯向武帝两次拜说： 父子之间，别人很难说什么。
English: Uwen Xiao Bo bowed twice to Emperor Wu and said: Between father and son, it is difficult for others to say anything.

古文：臣知陛下不能割慈忍爱，遂尔结舌。 
现代文：臣知道陛下不能割慈忍爱，所以就不敢说话了。 
English: The vassal knew that his majesty could not be merciful, so he did not dare to speak.

古文：帝知其意，默然久之，乃曰： 朕已委公矣，公其勉之。 
现代文：武帝知道了他的意思，沉默了很久，便说： 朕已经委托给您了，希望您能尽力而为！ 
English: Emperor Wu knew what he meant, was silent for a long time, and then said, "I have entrusted this to you, and I hope you will do your best!"

古文：王轨骤言于帝曰： 皇太子非社稷主。
现代文：王轨突然对武帝说： 皇太子不配做一国之主。
English: Wang Luo suddenly said to Emperor Wu: The crown prince is not worthy of being the ruler of a country.

古文：普六茹坚貌有反相。 
现代文：普六茹坚面貌有反相。 
English: Pu'erujujian's appearance is reversed.

古文：帝不悦，曰： 必天命有在，将若之何！ 
现代文：武帝听了很不高兴，说： 这是天命所决定的，那又怎么办！ 
English: Emperor Wu was very unhappy to hear this, and said, "This is determined by fate, so what should we do?

古文：杨坚闻之，甚惧，深自晦匿。
现代文：杨坚听说后，十分害怕，自己竭力隐蔽自己，不出头露面。
English: After hearing this, Yang Jian was very scared and tried his best to conceal himself and not show his face.

古文：帝深以轨等言为然，但汉王赞次长，又不才，余子皆幼，故得不废。
现代文：武帝深深感到王轨等人的话很对，但是汉王宇文赞是第二个儿子，同样不成材，其他儿子年纪又小，所以皇太子没有被废掉。
English: Emperor Wu deeply felt that the words of Wang Luo and others were right, but Han Wang Yu Wenzan was the second son, and he was also a failure. The other sons were young, so the crown prince was not discarded.

古文：丁卯，以司空吴明彻为南兗州刺史。
现代文：丁卯，陈朝任命司空吴明彻为南兖州刺史。
English: Dingwu, the Chen Dynasty appointed Sikuo Wu Mingcher as the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：齐主如晋阳。
现代文：北齐后主去晋阳。
English: After Beiqi, the master went to Jinyang.

古文：营邯郸宫。
现代文：兴建邯郸宫。
English: the construction of the Summer Palace.

古文：九月，戊戌，以皇子叔彪为淮南王。
现代文：九月，戊戌，陈朝封皇子陈叔彪为淮南王。
English: In September, Chen Shu Biao, the crown prince of the Chen Dynasty, became the king of Huainan.

古文：周主谓群臣曰： 朕去岁属有疾疹，遂不得克平逋寇。
现代文：北周国主对群臣说： 朕去年因为生病，所以没有能平定逃亡在外的盗贼。
English: The North Zhou sovereign said to his courtiers: Last year, because I was ill, I was not able to subdue the fleeing thieves.

古文：前入齐境，备见其情，彼之行师，殆同儿戏。
现代文：以前进入齐的国境，见到对方的所有情况，他们指挥军队，简直同小孩子玩游戏那样。
English: Previously, entering the border of Qi, seeing all the conditions of the other side, they commanded the army, just like playing games with children.

古文：况其朝廷昏乱，政由群小；百姓嗷然，朝不谋夕。
现代文：何况朝廷昏聩混乱，朝政被一帮小人操纵，老百姓都在哀号，朝不保夕。
English: What's more, the imperial court is in a daze of confusion, the government is being manipulated by a gang of villains, and the common people are wailing.

古文：天与不取，恐贻后悔。
现代文：上天赐给我们而不去谋取，恐怕会留下后悔。
English: If you do not accept God's gift, I am afraid you will regret it in the future.

古文：前出河外，直为拊背，未扼其喉。
现代文：去年进军河阴，只如同用手拍打对方的后背，没有扼住对方的喉咙。
English: Last year, marching into the river Yin was just like slapping each other's backs with hands, without strangling each other's throats.

古文：晋州本高欢所起之地，镇摄要重，今往攻之，彼必来援；吾严军以待，击之必克。
现代文：晋州原先是高欢起兵发迹的地方，也是镇守统辖要害重地，现在我们去进攻晋州，对方一定要派兵来救援；我们的军队严阵以待，发起攻击后一定可以攻克。
English: Originally, Jinzhou was the place where Gao Huan's troops made their mark, and it was also the place where the town's defenders had to suffer. Now that we are going to attack Jinzhou, the other side must send troops to rescue us. Our troops are in a tight formation, and they can certainly be defeated after launching an attack.

古文：然后乘破竹之势，鼓行而东，足以穷其巢穴，混同文轨。 
现代文：然后借着破竹之势，大张旗鼓地向东进攻，足以捣平他们的巢穴，统一天下。 
English: Then, using the momentum of breaking the bamboo, they attacked the east with great fanfare, which was enough to raze their nests and unify the country.

古文：诸将多不愿行。
现代文：将领们都不愿意行动。
English: The generals are reluctant to act.

古文：帝曰： 机不可失。
现代文：武帝说： 机不可失。
English: Emperor Wu said, "We must not lose this opportunity."

古文：有沮吾军者，当以军法裁之！ 
现代文：凡阻滞我军事行动的人，一定按军法制裁！ 
English: Anyone who obstructs my military operations will be punished according to military law!

古文：冬，十月，己酉，周主自将伐齐，以越王盛、杞公亮、随公杨坚为右三军，谯王俭、大将军窦泰、广化公丘崇为左三军，齐王宪、陈王纯为前军。
现代文：冬季十月，己酉，北周国主亲自率军队征伐北齐，任命越王宇文盛、杞公宇文亮、随公杨坚为右三军，谯王宇文俭、大将军窦泰、广化公丘崇为左三军，齐王宇文宪、陈王宇文纯为前军。
English: In the winter of October, the Northern Zhou Guozhong personally led the army to conquer Northern Qi, and appointed Yue Wang Uwen Sheng, Shigong Uwen Liang, and Guozhong Yang Jian as the right three armies, Shigong Wang Uwen Jian, Grand General Dou Tai, and Guanghua Gongyue Chong as the left three armies, and Qi Wang Uwen Xian and Chen Wang Uwen Chun as the former army.

古文：亮，导之子也。
现代文：宇文亮是宇文导的儿子。
English: Uwen Liang is the son of Uwen Du.

古文：丙辰，齐主猎于祁连池；癸亥，还晋阳。
现代文：丙辰，北齐后主在祁连池狩猎；癸亥，回晋阳。
English: Hsin-Chen, the queen of Northern Qi, went hunting in Qilian Pond; Zou Hai, went back to Jinyang.

古文：先是，晋州行台左丞张延隽公直勤敏，储偫有备，百姓安业。
现代文：起先，晋州行台左丞张延隽公正廉明，勤劳聪敏，储备待用的物资很充足，老百姓安居乐业，边境一带不用担忧。
English: At first, Zhang Yanqi, the left-hand man of the Jinzhou line, was fair and honest, diligent and intelligent, the reserves of materials to be used were sufficient, the people lived and worked in peace, and there was no need to worry about the border area.

古文：疆场无虞。诸嬖幸恶而代之，由是公私烦扰。
现代文：一些受后主宠爱亲近的小人由于痛恨张延隽派人取而代之，从此公私之间的纠葛纷扰不已。
English: Some villains, who were close to and loved by the empress dowager, hated Zhang Yanzhong so much that they sent someone to replace him. From then on, the entanglement between the public and private spheres continued unabated.

古文：周主至晋州，军于汾曲，遣齐王宪将精骑二万守雀鼠谷，陈王纯步骑二万守千里径，郑公达奚震步骑一万守统军川，大将军韩明步骑五千守齐子岭，焉氏公尹升步骑五千守鼓钟镇，凉城公辛韶步骑五千守蒲津关，赵王招步骑一万自华谷攻齐汾州诸城，柱国宇文盛步骑一万守汾水关。
现代文：北周国主抵达晋州，陈兵在汾曲，派齐王宇文宪领兵二万在雀鼠谷驻守，陈王宇文纯率步骑兵二万人在千里径驻守，郑公达奚震率步骑兵一万人在统军川驻守，大将军韩明率步骑兵五千人在齐子岭驻守，焉氏公尹升率步骑兵五千人在鼓钟镇驻守，凉城公辛韶率步骑兵五千人在蒲津关驻守，赵王宇文招率步骑兵一万从华谷攻打北齐汾州的一些城池，柱国宇文盛率步骑兵一万人在汾水关驻守。
English: The Northern Zhou ruler arrived in Jinzhou, Chen Bing was stationed in Jiuqu, Qi Wang Uwen sent 20,000 gendarmes to garrison the Sparrow Mouse Valley, Chen Wang Uwen Chun led 20,000 infantry and cavalry to garrison the Thousand-Mile Road, Zheng Gong Dazhong led 10,000 infantry and cavalry to garrison the United Army River, General Han Ming led 5,000 infantry and cavalry to garrison the Qi Ziling, Yan Zi Gong Yin Sheng led 5,000 infantry and cavalry to garrison the Gulou Zhong Town, Liangcheng Gong Xin Zheng led 5,000 infantry and cavalry to garrison the Pudong Pass, Zhao Wang Uwen led

古文：遣内史王谊监诸军攻平阳城。
现代文：派内史王谊监督各路军队进攻平阳城。
English: The faction of Inner History Wang Yi oversaw the various armies attacking Pingyang City.

古文：齐行台仆射海昌王尉相贵婴城拒守。
现代文：北齐的行台仆射海昌王尉相贵据城抵抗。
English: Northern Qi's pro-Taiwan minion, Emperor Haichang's lieutenant Wang Zanggui, led the resistance.

古文：相贵，相愿之兄也。
现代文：甲子，北齐军队聚集在晋祠。
English: In Jiuzhaigou, the North Qi army gathered in Jin Temple.

古文：甲子，齐集兵晋祠。
现代文：庚午，北齐后主从晋阳率领各路军队向晋州进发。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the Empress Dowager of Northern Qi led all the armies from Jinyang to Jinzhou.

古文：庚午，齐主自晋阳帅诸军趣晋州。
现代文：北周国主当天从汾曲来到晋州城下督战，城中情况危急。
English: On the same day, the Lord of the North Zhou Kingdom came from Xingqu to supervise the battle of Jinzhou Castle. The situation in the city was critical.

古文：周主日自汾曲至城下督战，城中窘急。
现代文：庚午，北齐的行台左丞侯子钦出城向北周投降。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Hou Ziqin, the governor of Northern Qi, went out of the city to surrender to Northern Zhou.

古文：庚午，行台左丞侯子钦出降于周。壬申，晋州刺史崔景嵩守北城，夜，遣使请降于周，王轨帅众应之。
现代文：壬申，晋州刺史崔景嵩防守北城，晚上，派使者出城向北周请求投降，王轨率领众军响应崔景嵩。
English: In Jinshin, Jinzhou stabbed Cui Jingsong in defense of Beicheng. In the evening, he sent an envoy out of the city to North Zhou to request surrender. Wang Luo led the troops to respond to Cui Jingsong.

古文：未明，周将北海段文振，杖槊与数十人先登，与景嵩同至尉相贵所，拔佩刀劫之。
现代文：天还没有亮，北周将领北海人段文振，手持长矛和几十人先行登上城头，和崔景嵩一同到尉相贵那里，拔出佩刀向他砍去。
English: It was not yet dawn when the Northern Zhou general, the North Sea man Duan Wenzhen, armed with a spear and a few dozen men, climbed to the top of the city first. Together with Cui Jingsong, he went to Fuxianggui and drew his saber to cut him down.

古文：城上鼓噪，齐兵大溃，遂克晋州，虏相贵及甲士八千人。
现代文：城上呼喊骚乱，齐兵大溃，于是攻克晋州，俘虏了尉相贵和他部下的甲士八千人。
English: The city cried out for a riot, and the Qi soldiers were routed, so they conquered Jinzhou and captured the lieutenant Zeng Gui and eight thousand of his subordinates.

古文：齐主方与冯淑妃猎于天池，晋州告急者，自旦至午，驿马三至。
现代文：北齐后主正和冯淑妃在天池狩猎，晋州告急的人，从早晨到中午，骑驿马来了三次。
English: After the Northern Qi Dynasty, the lord was hunting with Feng Shufei in Tianchi. Jinzhou's desperate people rode horses three times from morning to noon.

古文：右丞相高阿那肱曰： 大家正为乐，边鄙小小交兵，乃是常事，何急奏闻！ 
现代文：右丞相高阿那肱说： 皇上正在取乐，边境有小小的军事行动，这是很平常的事，何必急着来奏报！ 
English: The Minister of the Right, Gao Ananyuan, said: "The Emperor is having fun, there is a small military operation on the border, this is a very common thing, why hurry to report it!

古文：至暮，使更至，云 平阳已陷 ，乃奏之。
现代文：到傍晚，告急的使者再次到来，说 平阳已经陷落， 这才向君主奏报。
English: In the evening, an urgent messenger arrived again, saying that Pingyang had fallen, and this was reported to the monarch.

古文：齐主将还，淑妃请更杀一围，齐主从之。
现代文：北齐国主准备回去，冯淑妃却要求君主再围猎崐一次，北齐国主听从了她的要求。
English: The ruler of Northern Qi was preparing to return, but Feng Shuxi asked the monarch to encircle and hunt dragonflies once more. The ruler of Northern Qi complied with her request.

古文：周齐王宪攻拔洪洞、永安二城，更图进取。
现代文：北周的齐王宇文宪攻下洪洞、永安二座城池，准备进一步攻取其他地方。
English: Qi Wang Yuwen Xian of the North Zhou captured Hongdong and Yongan two castles, and prepared to further capture other places.

古文：齐人焚桥守险，军不得进，乃屯永安。
现代文：北齐焚烧了桥梁据险防守，北周的军队无法前进，便驻屯在永安。
English: North Qi burned the bridges and defended themselves dangerously. The army of North Zhou could not advance, so it was stationed in Yong'an.

古文：使永昌公椿屯鸡栖原，伐柏为庵以立营。
现代文：派永昌公宇文椿在鸡栖原驻屯，砍伐柏树建造小屋作为军营。
English: He sent Yongchang Gong Yu Wenqin to stay in Jixi Plain, cut down cypress trees and build a hut as a military camp.

古文：椿，广之弟也。
现代文：宇文椿是宇文广的弟弟。
English: Uwen Tsubaki is Uwen Hiroshi's younger brother.

古文：癸酉，齐主分军万人向千里径，又分军出汾水关，自帅大军上鸡栖原。
现代文：癸酉，北齐后主分出一万军队向千里径进发，又分出军队向汾水关，自己统率大军上鸡栖原。
English: At that time, after the Northern Qi, the lord sent out ten thousand troops to advance a thousand miles, and also sent out troops to Surabaya, and led the army to the chicken field.

古文：宇文盛遣人告急，齐王宪自救之。
现代文：宇文盛派人告急，齐王宇文宪自己率领军队去救援。
English: Yu Wensheng sent someone to report the emergency, and Qi Wang Yu Wensheng himself led the army to the rescue.

古文：齐师退，盛追击，破之。
现代文：北齐军队退走，宇文盛在后面追击，将北齐军队打败。
English: The North Qi army retreated, and Yu Wensheng chased after them and defeated the North Qi army.

古文：俄而椿告齐师稍逼，宪复还救之。
现代文：不多久宇文椿报告北齐军队逐渐逼近，宇文宪又返回救援。
English: Not long after, Uwenqin reported that the North Qi army was gradually approaching, and Uwenxian returned to the rescue.

古文：与齐对陈，至夜不战。
现代文：他的军队列阵和北齐军队对峙，到夜晚时还不跟对方作战。
English: His army lined up and confronted the Beiqi army, and did not fight with the other side until the evening.

古文：会周主召宪还，宪引兵夜去。
现代文：恰巧北周国主召宇文宪回去，他便领着军队在晚上撤退。
English: It so happened that the head of the Northern Zhou Kingdom summoned Uwen Xian to return, and he led the army to retreat in the evening.

古文：齐人见柏庵在，不之觉。明日，始知之。
现代文：北齐方面看到柏树的小房子还在，所以没有发觉，到第二天，才知道宇文宪的军队撤走了。
English: The Beiqi side saw that the small house in the cypress tree was still there, so they did not notice it. It was not until the next day that they knew that the army of Uwen Xian had withdrawn.

古文：齐主使高阿那肱将前军先进，仍节度诸军。
现代文：北齐后主派高阿那肱率领前军先行进发，仍旧节制调度其他军队的行动。
English: After the Northern Qi, the master sent Gao Anaxun to lead the front army to advance first, and still restrained the movement of other armies.

古文：甲戌，周以上开府仪同大将军安定梁士彦为晋州刺史，留精兵一万镇之。
现代文：甲戌，北周任命上开府仪同大将军安定人梁士彦为晋州刺史，留下一万精兵在这里镇守。
English: Bei Zhou appointed Shang Kaifu Yi and the great general and stabilizer Liang Shihang as the governor of Jinzhou, leaving ten thousand elite soldiers to guard the town.

古文：十一月，己卯，齐主至平阳。
现代文：十一月，己卯，北齐后主到平阳。
English: In November, Jiwu, the queen of North Qi, came to Pingyang.

古文：周主以齐兵新集，声势甚盛，且欲西还以避其锋。
现代文：北周国主认为北齐军队刚刚集结，声势很盛，打算向西面回去避开对方的锋芒。
English: The North Zhou sovereign thought that the North Qi army had just assembled and was very strong, and planned to go back to the west to avoid the other side's edge.

古文：开府仪同大将军宇文忻谏：曰 比陛下之圣武，乘敌人之荒纵，何患不克；若使齐得令主，君臣协力，虽汤、武之势，未易平也。
现代文：开府仪同大将军宇文忻劝说道： 以陛下的圣明威武，乘敌人的荒淫放纵，何必担心不能攻克他们！如果齐国出现一个好的君主，君臣同心协力，那么就是有商汤、周武王的声势，也不易讨平对方。
English: Kaifu Yi, together with the great general Yu Wenyi, said: "With your majesty's sanctity and might, taking advantage of the enemy's wild indulgence, why worry about not being able to conquer them! If a good monarch appears in Qi, and the monarchs and ministers work together, then even if there is the influence of Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu, it is not easy to level the other side.

古文：今主暗臣愚，士无斗志，虽有百万之众，实为陛下奉耳。 
现代文：现在齐国的君主昏庸、臣僚愚蠢，军队没有斗志，虽有百万之众，实际上是送给陛下的。 
English: Now the monarch of Qi is dull, the ministers are stupid, and the army has no fighting spirit. Although there are millions of people, it is actually given to His Majesty.

古文：军正京兆王纮曰： 齐失纪纲，于兹累世。
现代文：军正京兆王说： 齐国的纲纪败坏，到目前已经有两代了。
English: The military governor of Beijing, Zhao Wang, said: The discipline of Qi has been corrupted for two generations.

古文：天奖周室，一战而扼其喉。
现代文：上天庇护嘉奖我们周王室，经过一战而扼住对方的咽喉。
English: Heaven protect and reward our Zhou royal family, who have been at each other's throats since the First World War.

古文：取乱侮亡，正在今日。
现代文：古人说的攻取动乱欺凌败亡之国，正在今天。
English: The country that the ancients said would be destroyed by turmoil and bullying is being conquered today.

古文：释之而去，臣所未谕。 
现代文：放过他们而自己退走，臣实在不能理解。 
English: It is incomprehensible to me that he should have left them alone and retreated.

古文：周主虽善其言，竟引军还。
现代文：北周国主虽然认为他的话有理，但还是带领军队返回了。
English: Although the Northern Zhou ruler thought his words were reasonable, he still led the army back.

古文：忻，贵之子也。
现代文：宇文忻是宇文贵的儿子。
English: Uwen Zang is the son of Uwen Gui.

古文：周主留齐王宪为后拒，齐师追之，宪与宇文忻各将百骑与战，斩其骁将贺兰豹子等，齐师乃退。
现代文：北周国主留下齐王宇文宪作为后面的阻击部队，北齐军队追来，宇文宪和宇文忻各领一百名骑兵和他们战斗，杀死北齐的勇将贺兰豹子等人，北齐军队便退走。
English: The northern Zhou sovereign left the Qi king, Uwen Xian, behind as a blocking force. The northern Qi army chased after them. Uwen Xian and Uwen Yao each led a hundred cavalry and fought with them, killing the brave general of northern Qi, Helan Leopards and others. The northern Qi army then retreated.

古文：宪引军渡汾，追及周主于玉壁。
现代文：宇文宪带领军队度过汾水，在玉壁追上了北周国主。
English: Uwen Xian led the army through Surabaya and caught up with the North Zhou sovereign in Yubi.

古文：齐师遂围平阳，昼夜攻之。
现代文：北齐军队便围困了平阳，昼夜发起进攻。
English: The Northern Qi army then besieged Pingyang and launched an attack day and night.

古文：城中危急，楼堞皆尽，所存之城，寻仞而已。
现代文：城里形势危急，城上的敌楼和矮墙都被夷平，残存的城墙，只有六七尺高。
English: The situation in the city is critical. The enemy towers and low walls on the city have been razed. The remaining walls are only six or seven feet high.

古文：或短兵相接，或交马出入。外援不至，众皆震惧。
现代文：双方或是短兵相接，或是马匹可以随意从城墙上进出，城外的援兵不来，人们都感到震惊害怕。
English: Either the two sides were short of soldiers, or horses could enter and leave the city walls at will, and reinforcements from outside the city would not come. People were shocked and afraid.

古文：梁士彦忼慨自若，谓将士曰： 死在今日，吾为尔先。 
现代文：梁士彦慷慨从容，对将士们说： 如果今天战死，我一定先你们而死。 
English: Liang Shih-yan generously and calmly said to the soldiers: "If I die in battle today, I will certainly die before you.

古文：于是勇烈齐奋，呼声动地，无不一当百。
现代文：于是大家激昂奋起，喊声动地，无不以一当百。
English: As a result, everyone excitedly rose to their feet, shouting loudly, all in unison.

古文：齐师少却，乃令妻妾、军民、妇女，昼夜修城，三日而就。
现代文：北齐军队稍稍后退，梁士彦下令妻妾、军民、妇女崐，昼夜修城，三天修好。
English: The North Qi army retreated a little later, and Liang Shihang ordered his wives and concubines, soldiers and civilians, and women to rebuild the city day and night, and to complete the repair in three days.

古文：周主使齐王宪将兵六万屯涑川，遥为平阳声援。
现代文：北周国主派齐王宇文宪率兵六万驻屯在涑川，远远地为平阳声援。
English: The ruler of northern Zhou dispatched Qi Wang Uwen Gendarme and his 60,000 soldiers to be stationed in Beichuan to show solidarity with Pingyang from afar.

古文：齐人作地道攻平阳，城陷十余步，将士乘势欲入。
现代文：北齐挖掘地道进攻平阳，城下陷了好几丈，将士们乘势准备进入城内。
English: Beiqi dug a tunnel to attack Pingyang, the castle fell several meters, and the generals prepared to enter the city.

古文：齐主敕且止，召冯淑妃观之。
现代文：北齐后主下令暂时停止，把冯淑妃召来一同观看。
English: The empress dowager of Beiqi ordered a temporary halt, and summoned Feng Shufei to watch the performance.

古文：淑妃妆点，不时至。周人以木拒塞之，城遂不下。
现代文：冯淑妃穿衣打扮，没有及时到来，北周人用木头堵住了下陷的地方，平阳城便没有被攻克。
English: Feng Shufei dressed up and did not arrive in time. The North Zhou people blocked the sagging place with wood, and Pingyang City was not conquered.

古文：旧俗相传，晋州城西石上有圣人迹，淑妃欲往观之。
现代文：旧俗相传，晋州城西的石头上有圣人的遗迹，冯淑妃想去那里观看。
English: According to the folklore of the past, there are relics left by saints on the stone in the west of the city of Jinzhou. Feng Shufei wants to go and see them.

古文：齐主恐弩矢及桥，乃抽攻城木造远桥。
现代文：北齐后主恐怕对方的箭会射到桥上，便抽调用来攻城的大木头在离城较远的地方造了一座桥。
English: After the battle, the lord was afraid that the other side's arrows would hit the bridge, so he drew the big wood used to attack the city and built a bridge in a place far away from the city.

古文：齐主与淑妃度桥，桥坏，至夜乃还。
现代文：北齐后主和冯淑妃过桥时，桥梁损坏，到晚上才返。
English: When the Empress Dowager of Northern Qi and Feng Shufei crossed the bridge, the bridge was damaged, and they did not return until the evening.

古文：癸巳，周主还长安。
现代文：癸巳，北周国主回长安。
English: At this time, the head of the Northern Zhou Kingdom returned to Chang'an.

古文：甲午，复下诏，以齐人围晋州，更帅诸军击之。
现代文：甲午，再次下诏，因为北齐围困晋州，又统率军队前往攻打。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, he again issued an edict, because the Northern Qi besieged Jinzhou, and led the army to attack.

古文：丙申，纵齐降人使还。
现代文：丙申，释放北齐的投降者让他们回去。
English: Bishin, release the North Qi's surrenders and let them go back.

古文：丁酉，周主发长安；壬寅，济河，与诸军合。
现代文：丁酉，北周国主从长安出发；壬寅，渡过黄河，和各路军队会合。
English: Ding Xi, the ruler of Northern Zhou, set out from Chang'an; Ren Yin, crossed the Yellow River, and met with various armies.

古文：十二月，丁未，周主至高显，遣齐王宪帅所部先向平阳。
现代文：十二月，丁未，北周国主到高显，派齐王宇文宪率领部下的军队先向平阳进发。
English: In December, Ding Wei, the Northern Zhou sovereign went to Gaoxian, and sent Qi Wang Yuwen Xian to lead the troops under his command to Pingyang.

古文：戊申，周主至平阳，庚戌，诸军总集，凡八万人，稍进，逼城置陈，东西二十余里。
现代文：戊申，北周国主到平阳。庚戌，各路军队一齐集中，有八万人，逐渐向前推进，兵临城下摆开阵势，东西绵延有二十多里地。
English: Wushin, the ruler of Northern Zhou, went to Pingyang. Geng Zheng, the armies of all directions were concentrated together, with eighty thousand people, and gradually pushed forward. The soldiers set up a position under the city, stretching more than twenty miles from east to west.

古文：先是齐人恐周师猝至，于城南穿堑，自乔山属于汾水；齐主大出兵，陈于堑北，周主命齐王宪驰往观之。
现代文：起先北齐恐怕北周的军队突然来到，在城南凿通护城河，从乔山连接到汾水；北齐后主派出大批军队，在护城河的北面列阵，北周国主命令齐王宇文宪驰马去那里观察。
English: At first, the army of Northern Qi, probably Northern Zhou, suddenly came and dug a moat in the south of the city, connecting Qiaoshan to Surabaya; the ruler of Northern Qi sent a large number of troops and lined up on the north side of the moat. The ruler of Northern Zhou ordered the king of Qi, Yu Wenxian, to ride there to observe.

古文：宪复命曰： 易与耳，请破之而后食。 
现代文：宇文宪回来报告说： 这很好对付，请先攻破然后吃饭。 
English: Yu Wenxian came back and reported: "This is a good countermeasure, please break through first and then eat."

古文：周主悦，曰： 如汝言，吾无忧矣！ 
现代文：北周国主很高兴，说： 如果象你所说的那样，我就不担心了！ 
English: Master Bei Zhou was very pleased and said, "If it is as you say, I won't worry about it!"

古文：周主乘常御马，从数人巡陈，所至辄呼主帅姓名慰勉之。
现代文：北周国主骑着平时所用的马匹，由几个人跟随到来到阵前巡视，所到之处就称呼主帅的姓名予以慰问鼓励。
English: The head of the North Zhou State, riding a horse normally used, was followed by several people who came to inspect the front of the battle. Wherever they went, they called the name of the head coach to offer condolences and encouragement.

古文：将士喜于见知，咸思自奋。
现代文：将士们对被国君了解信任感到很高兴，都想奋勇作战。
English: The soldiers were happy to be trusted by the sovereign and wanted to fight bravely.

古文：将战，有司请换马。
现代文：临战前，随从官员请君主换马。
English: When war was imminent, the officials in charge asked Emperor Wu to change horses.

古文：周主曰： 朕独乘良马，欲何之！ 
现代文：北周国主说： 朕独自一人骑着骏马，要到哪里去！ 
English: The North Zhou sovereign said: I am riding alone on a donkey, where should I go?

古文：周主欲薄齐师，碍堑而止。自旦至申，相持不决。
现代文：北周国主要逼近北齐军队，由于有护城河的阻碍而停下来，从早上直到下午，双方相持不下。
English: From the morning until the afternoon, the two sides could not keep up with each other.

古文：齐主谓高阿那肱曰： 战是邪？
现代文：北齐后主对高阿那肱说： 是打对？
English: After Bei Qi, the master said to Gao Anaxun: Is it right to fight?

古文：不战是邪？ 
现代文：还是不打对？ 
English: Or not to play right?

古文：阿那肱曰： 吾兵虽多，堪战者不过十万，病伤及绕城樵爨者复三分居一。
现代文：高阿那肱说： 我们军队的人数虽多，但能作战的不过十万人，其中生病负伤和在城四周打柴做饭的又占三分之一。
English: Gao Ananyuan said: Although the number of our troops is large, only one hundred thousand can fight, of which one-third are sick and injured and those who gather firewood around the city to cook.

古文：昔攻玉壁，援军来即退。
现代文：从前攻打玉壁时，援军一到就马上退走。
English: In the past, when attacking the Jade Wall, reinforcements would retreat as soon as they arrived.

古文：今日将士，岂胜神武时邪！
现代文：今天的将士，怎能胜过神武皇帝时代的将士！
English: How can today's soldiers be better than the soldiers of the time of Emperor Jimmu!

古文：不如勿战，却守高梁桥。 
现代文：倒不如不打，退守高梁桥。 
English: It would be better not to play and retreat to Takahashi Bridge.

古文：安吐根曰： 一撮许贼，马上刺取，掷著汾水中耳！ 
现代文：安吐根说： 一小撮贼人，只不过是在马背上刺杀捉住他们，然后扔在汾水中而已！ 
English: Antugen said: A small group of thieves, just stabbing and catching them on horseback, and then throwing them into the brackish water!

古文：齐主意未决。
现代文：北齐后主还是犹豫不决。
English: After the Northern Qi, the Lord still hesitated.

古文：诸内参曰： 彼亦天子，我亦天子。
现代文：一些太监们说： 他是天子，陛下也是天子。
English: Some eunuchs said, "He is the Son of Heaven, and His Majesty is also the Son of Heaven."

古文：彼尚能远来，我何为守堑示弱！ 
现代文：他尚且能从老远的地方来，我们为什么只是守着护城河表示出怯弱！ 
English: If he can come from so far away, why do we only guard the moat out of cowardice!

古文：齐主曰： 此言是也。 
现代文：北齐国主说： 这话说得对。 
English: The ruler of Northern Qi said: This is right.

古文：于是填堑南引。
现代文：于是填塞了护城河把水引向南面。
English: So they filled in the moat and diverted the water to the south.

古文：周主大喜，勒诸军击之。
现代文：北周国主听到后非常高兴，统率各路军队发起攻击。
English: Upon hearing this, the ruler of the Northern Zhou was very pleased and led the troops to launch an attack.

古文：兵才合，齐主与冯淑妃并骑观战。
现代文：双方军队刚接触，北齐后主和冯淑妃一起骑着马去观战。
English: The two armies had just come into contact, and the Empress of Northern Qi and Feng Shuhui rode together to watch the battle.

古文：东偏小却，淑妃怖曰： 军败矣！ 
现代文：东面的部分军队稍稍后退，冯淑妃害怕说： 我们的军队打败了！ 
English: The eastern part of the army retreated a little. Feng Shufei was afraid to say: Our army has been defeated!

古文：录尚书事城阳王穆提婆曰： 大家去！
现代文：录尚书事城阳王穆提婆说： 皇上快离开！
English: Recorded in a book, Chengyang Wang Mutiwa said: Emperor, leave quickly!

古文：大家去！ 
现代文：皇上快离开！ 
English: Emperor, get out!

古文：齐主即以淑妃奔高梁桥。
现代文：北齐后主就和冯淑妃退奔高梁桥。
English: After the Northern Qi, the lord and Feng Shufei retreated to Gaoliang Bridge.

古文：开府仪同三司奚长谏曰： 半进半退，战之常体。
现代文：开府仪同三司奚长向后主劝阻说： 军队半进半退，是作战时的常规。
English: Kaifu Yi, together with the three division commanders, tried to dissuade his subordinates, saying, "It is normal for an army to advance and retreat in half during a battle.

古文：今兵众全整，未有亏伤，陛下舍此安之！
现代文：目前士兵们都完全整齐，没有受到挫折死亡，陛下离开这里又到哪里去！
English: So far, the soldiers are in perfect order, no setbacks and no deaths. Where will His Majesty go from here?

古文：马足一动，人情骇乱，不可复振。
现代文：马脚一动，人的情绪就会惊恐混乱，不能重新振作。
English: As soon as the horse's feet move, people's emotions will be panicked and confused, unable to cheer up again.

古文：愿速还安慰之！ 
现代文：希望陛下迅速回去安慰他们！ 
English: May His Majesty quickly return to comfort them!

古文：武卫张常山自后至，亦曰： 军寻收讫，甚完整。
现代文：武卫张常山从后面赶到，也说： 军队很快就收拢完毕，非常完整。
English: Zhang Changshan, an armed guard, arrived from behind and also said: The army was quickly assembled and was very complete.

古文：围城兵亦不动。
现代文：围城的士兵也没有动摇。
English: The besieging soldiers did not waver.

古文：至尊宜回。
现代文：天子最好返回。
English: You'd better go back.

古文：不信臣言，乞将内参往视。 
现代文：如果不相信我的话，请求天子领太监去巡看。 
English: If you don't believe me, ask the Son of Heaven to send a eunuch to investigate.

古文：齐主将从之。
现代文：北齐后主将按他所说的去做。
English: After Beiqi, the master will do as he says.

古文：穆提婆引齐主肘曰： 此言难信。 
现代文：穆提婆却拉着北齐后主的胳膊说： 他的话难以相信。 
English: But Muti's wife tugged at the arm of Beiqi's master and said, "It's hard to believe what he said.

古文：齐主遂以淑妃北走。
现代文：北齐后主便带冯淑妃向北退走。
English: After the Northern Qi, the lord took Feng Shufei and retreated to the north.

古文：齐师大溃，死者万馀人，军资器械，数百里间，委弃山积。
现代文：北齐军队大败溃散，死了一万多人，军用物资器械，在几百里间被遗弃的堆积如山。
English: The Beiqi army was defeated and dispersed, more than ten thousand people died, military supplies and equipment were abandoned and piled up for hundreds of miles.

古文：安德王延宗独全军而还。
现代文：唯有安德王高延宗全军而回。
English: Only King Ando Gao Yanzong's entire army returned.

古文：齐主至洪洞，淑妃方以粉镜自玩，后声乱，唱贼至，于是复走。
现代文：北齐后主到了洪洞，冯淑妃正对着镜子涂脂抹粉自我欣赏，后面的声音嘈杂，高喊敌人已经到来，于是她再次逃走。
English: When Bei Qi's master arrived in Hongdong, Feng Shufei was smearing herself with grease and powder in front of the mirror and admiring herself. A noisy voice behind her shouted that the enemy had arrived, so she ran away again.

古文：先是齐主以淑妃为有功勋，将立为左皇后，遣内参诣晋阳取皇后服御祎翟等。
现代文：原先北齐后主以为冯淑妃有功勋，准备立她为左皇后，派太监到晋阳去取皇后所穿的礼服等。
English: Originally, the Empress Dowager of Northern Qi thought that Feng Shuxi had meritorious service, and was prepared to make her the Left Empress, and sent eunuchs to Jinyang to retrieve the gowns worn by the Empress.

古文：至是，遇于中涂，齐主为按辔，命淑妃著之，然后去。
现代文：这时，他们在途中相遇，北齐后主拉紧马缰绳慢步走，叫冯淑妃穿上礼服，然后离去。
English: At this time, they met on the way. Bei Qi's master tightened the reins of the horse and walked slowly, told Feng Shuxi to put on a dress, and then left.

古文：辛亥，周主入平阳。
现代文：辛亥，北周国主进入平阳。
English: In Xinhai, the ruler of the Northern Zhou Dynasty entered Pingyang.

古文：梁士彦见周主，持周主须而泣曰： 臣几不见陛下！ 
现代文：梁士彦见到周主，用手握着周主的胡须哭泣说： 臣几乎见不到陛下了！ 
English: When Liang Shih-yan saw Lord Zhou, he held his hand over Lord Zhou's beard and wept, saying, "I can hardly see Your Majesty!

古文：周主亦为之流涕。
现代文：北周国主也动情流泪。
English: The North Zhou sovereign was also moved to tears.

古文：周主以将士疲倦，欲引还。
现代文：北周国主由于将士疲乏困倦，准备率军回朝。
English: As his soldiers were tired and sleepy, the ruler of Northern Zhou prepared to lead his army back to the imperial court.

古文：士彦叩马谏曰： 今齐师遁散，众心皆动。因其惧而攻之，其势必举。 
现代文：梁士彦勒住周主的马规劝说： 现在齐国的军队败退逃散，人心浮动，乘他们恐惧时发起进攻，一定可以打败他们。 
English: Liang Shihyan held Zhou Shou's horse to persuade him: Now that Qi's army has been defeated and dispersed, people's hearts are floating. If you take advantage of their fear and launch an attack, you can definitely defeat them.

古文：周主从之，执其手曰： 余得晋州，为平齐之基，若不固守，则大事不成。
现代文：北周君主听从了他的意见，握住他的手说： 我得到晋州，这是平定齐国的基础，如果不坚决守住，就会大事不成。
English: The Northern Zhou monarch listened to his advice, shook his hand and said: I have gained Jinzhou, which is the foundation for the pacification of Qi. If I do not resolutely hold on to it, I will not be able to achieve much.

古文：朕无前忧，唯虑后变，汝善为我守之！ 
现代文：朕没有前忧，只忧虑后变，你好好为我守住这里！ 
English: I'm not worried about the future, I'm only worried about the future. You'd better stay here for me!

古文：遂帅诸将追齐师。
现代文：于是率领将士们追赶北齐军队。
English: So he led the generals to chase after the Northern Qi army.

古文：诸将固请西还，周主曰： 纵敌患生。
现代文：将领们坚持请周主西归，北周国主说： 放走乱人，祸患就会发生。
English: The generals insisted that Lord Zhou should return to the West. Lord Zhou of the North said, "Let the disorderly go, and calamity will occur."

古文：卿等若疑，朕将独往。 
现代文：你们如果有怀疑，朕将独自前去。 
English: If you have any doubts, I'll go alone.

古文：诸将乃不敢言。
现代文：将领们于是不敢再说。
English: The generals did not dare to say any more.

古文：癸丑，至汾水关。
现代文：癸丑，到了汾水关。
English: 丑, to 水关.

古文：齐主入晋阳，忧惧不知所之。
现代文：北齐后主进入晋阳，担忧害怕得不知怎么办。
English: After Beiqi, the master went to Jinyang. He was so worried and scared that he didn't know what to do.

古文：甲寅，齐大赦。
现代文：甲寅，北齐大赦全国。
English: Jia Yin, North Qi amnesty throughout the country.

古文：齐主问计于朝臣，皆曰： 宜省赋息役，以慰民心；收遗兵，背城死战，以安社稷。 
现代文：北齐后主向朝臣们询问计策，朝臣们都说： 应该减少赋税，停止劳役，以安慰民心；收拾残存的士兵，背城拼死作战，以稳定国家。 
English: The empress dowager of Northern Qi asked the courtiers about the strategy, and the courtiers all said: It is necessary to reduce taxes, stop labor service, to comfort the people's hearts; collect the remaining soldiers, fight to the death behind the city, to stabilize the country.

古文：齐主欲留安德王延宗、广宁王孝珩守晋阳，自向北朔州。若晋阳不守，则奔突厥，群臣皆以为不可，帝不从。
现代文：北齐后主要把安德王高延宗、广宁王高孝珩留下镇守晋阳，自己去北朔州，如果晋阳失守，就投奔突厥，群臣们都认为不能这样，后主不听。
English: After the Northern Qi Dynasty, Ando Wang Gao Yan Zong and Guangning Wang Gao Xiaojun were mainly left to guard Jinyang, and they went to Beishuozhou. If Jinyang was lost, they would go to Turkey. The courtiers all thought that this was not possible, and the empress did not listen.

古文：开府仪同三司贺拔伏恩等宿卫近臣三十余人西奔周军，周主封赏各有差。
现代文：开府仪同三司贺拔伏恩等宿卫近臣三十多人向西投奔北周军队，北周国主对他们分别封赏。
English: Kaifu Yi, together with more than 30 close vassals of the Three Guards, such as He Ba Fuen, rushed to the west to join the Northern Zhou army. The Lord of Northern Zhou rewarded them separately.

古文：高阿那肱所部兵尚一万，守高壁，余众保洛女砦。
现代文：北齐的高阿那肱部下还有一万军队，在高壁镇守，其余的军队保卫洛女寨。
English: Northern Qi Gao Anaxun's subordinates still had ten thousand troops, guarding the town of Gaoqi, and the rest of the army defended Luo Jiazhai.

古文：周主引军向高壁，阿那肱望风退走。
现代文：北周国主率领军队指向高壁，高阿那肱望风退走。
English: The north Zhou sovereign led the army to point at the high wall, and the Gao An looked at the wind and retreated.

古文：齐王宪攻洛女砦，拔之。
现代文：齐王宇文宪攻打洛女寨，攻克。
English: Qi Wang Yuwen Xian attacked Luo Jiazhai and defeated it.

古文：有军士告称阿那肱遣臣招引西军，齐主令侍中斛律孝卿检校，孝卿以为妄。
现代文：北齐有军士举告高阿那肱招引西面的北周军队，北齐后主命令侍中斛律孝卿去检查核实，斛律孝卿认为是胡说。
English: A sergeant in North Qi reported that Gao Ananzhang had invited the North Zhou army in the west, and the ruler of North Qi ordered the chamberlain, Yao Lv Xiaoqing, to check and verify the report. Yao Lv Xiaoqing thought it was nonsense.

古文：还，至晋阳，阿那肱腹心复告阿那肱谋反，又以为妄，斩之。
现代文：他回到晋阳，高阿那肱的心腹又向他崐举告高阿那肱谋反，斛律孝卿又认为这是胡说，将举告人杀死。
English: When he returned to Jinyang, Gao Anaxun's confidant again reported Gao Anaxun's rebellion to him. Gong Lv Xiaoqing thought this was nonsense and killed the whistleblower.

古文：乙卯，齐主诏安德王延宗、广宁王孝珩募兵。
现代文：乙卯，北齐后主诏令安德王高延宗、广宁王高孝珩征兵。
English: At the same time, the Empress Dowager of Northern Qi ordered Ando King Gao Yanzong and Guangning King Gao Xiaojun to conscript soldiers.

古文：延宗入见，齐主告以欲向北朔州，延宗泣谏，不从，密遣左右先送皇太后、太子于北朔州。
现代文：高延宗进见北齐后主，后主告诉他自己要去北朔州，高延宗哭着劝阻，后主不听，秘密地派左右先把皇太后、太子送到北朔州。
English: Gao Yanzong went to see the Empress Dowager of Northern Qi. The Empress Dowager told him that she was going to Beishuozhou. Gao Yanzong cried to dissuade him. The Empress Dowager did not listen and secretly sent the Empress Dowager and the Prince to Beishuozhou.

古文：丙辰，周主与齐王宪会于介休。
现代文：丙辰，北周后主和齐王宇文宪在介休会合。
English: Hsin Chen, North Zhou Hou Lord and Qi Wang Yuwen Xian are mediating the adjournment meeting.

古文：齐开府仪同三司韩建业举城降，以为上柱国，封郇公。
现代文：北齐开府仪同三司韩建业举城投降，被北周任命为上柱国，封为郇公。
English: The Northern Qi capitulated together with the Third Division of the Korean Construction Industry, and was appointed by the Northern Zhou as the upper pillar country, and was crowned as the crown prince.

古文：是夜，齐主欲遁去，诸将不从。
现代文：当天晚上，北齐国主准备逃走，将领们都不肯跟从。
English: In the evening of the same day, the ruler of Northern Qi prepared to flee, but the generals refused to follow.

古文：丁巳，周师至晋阳。
现代文：丁巳，北周军队到晋阳。
English: At that time, the Northern Zhou army arrived in Jinyang.

古文：齐主复大赦，改元隆化。
现代文：北齐后主再次大赦全国，把年号改为隆化。
English: After the Northern Qi, the Lord once again amnestied the whole country, and changed the year to Longhua.

古文：以安德王延宗为相国、并州刺史，总山西兵，谓曰： 并州兄自取之，儿今去矣！ 
现代文：任命安德王高延宗为相国、并州刺史，总辖山西的军队，对他说： 并州请兄长自己取走，我现在就要离开这里！ 
English: He appointed Gao Yanzong, the king of the Andean Kingdom, as his consort and the governor of Shanxi Province, and gave him overall command of the troops in Shanxi Province. He said to him, "The governor of Shanxi Province asked my elder brother to remove himself, so I will leave here now!"

古文：延宗曰： 陛下为社稷勿动。
现代文：高延宗说： 陛下应该替国家着想不要走。
English: Gao Yanzong said, "For the sake of the country, Your Majesty should not go."

古文：臣为陛下出死力战，必能破之。 
现代文：臣愿意为陛下拼死作战，一定能把他们打败。 
English: My vassal is willing to fight to the death for His Majesty, and will surely defeat them.

古文：穆提婆曰： 至尊计已成，王不得辄沮！ 
现代文：穆提婆说： 天子大计已定，安德王不能屡加阻挠！ 
English: Muti said, "God's plan has been determined, and King Ando cannot repeatedly obstruct it!"

古文：齐主乃夜斩五龙门而出，欲奔突厥，从官多散。
现代文：北齐后主便在晚上破五龙门出走，要投降突厥，随从的官员纷纷散去。
English: After the Northern Qi, the master broke through the Five Dragon Gate in the evening and fled, wanting to surrender to the Turks. The officials who followed him dispersed one after another.

古文：领军梅胜郎叩马谏，乃回向鄴。
现代文：领军梅胜郎勒住后主的马加以规劝，这才返回邺城。
English: The leader of the army, Mei Sheng Lang, restrained the master's horse and persuaded him, and then returned to Lucheng.

古文：时唯高阿那肱等十余骑从，广宁王孝珩、襄城王彦道继至，得数十人与俱。
现代文：当时只有高阿那肱等十几人骑马跟随，广宁王高孝珩、襄城王高彦道相继来到，只有几十人和后主在一起。
English: At that time, only more than a dozen people such as Gao Anaxun followed on horseback. Guangning King Gao Xiaojun and Xiangcheng King Gao Yandao came one after another. Only a few dozen people were with the queen mother.

古文：穆提婆西奔周军，陆令萱自杀，家属皆诛没。
现代文：穆提婆向西投奔北周军队，陆令萱自杀，她的家属都被诛杀。
English: Muti went west to join the Northern Zhou army, Lu Lingya committed suicide, and her family members were all killed.

古文：周主以提婆为柱国、宜州刺史。
现代文：北周国主任命穆提婆为柱国、宜州刺史。
English: The ruler of North Zhou appointed Muti as a pillar state and Yizhou as a pillar state.

古文：下诏谕齐群臣曰： 若妙尽人谋，深达天命，官荣爵赏，各有加隆。
现代文：下诏告示北齐的群臣说： 如果能竭力献计献策，深深通晓上天的意旨，就能授官赏爵，各有所加。
English: The following edict was issued to the ministers of the Northern Qi, saying: "If you can do your best to come up with ideas and suggestions, and have a deep understanding of God's will, you will be able to be awarded positions and knighthoods, each with its own advantages."

古文：或我之将卒，逃逸彼朝，无问贵贱，皆从荡涤。 
现代文：如果我们的将领士兵，逃到齐朝，不论贵贱，一律加以扫荡歼灭。 
English: If our generals and soldiers flee to the Qi Dynasty, no matter how high or low they are, they will be swept away and annihilated.

古文：自是齐臣降者相继。
现代文：因此北齐官吏都相继向北周投降。
English: Therefore, the Northern Qi officials all surrendered to the Northern Zhou successively.

古文：初，齐高祖为魏丞相，以唐邕典外兵曹，太原白建典骑兵曹，皆以善书计、工簿帐受委任。
现代文：当初，神武帝高欢是东魏丞相，任命唐邕主管外兵曹，太原人白建主管骑兵曹，两人都因善于文字筹算、精于管理账目册籍而被委任。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Gao Huan was the Prime Minister of the Eastern Wei Dynasty. He appointed Tang Jun as the chief foreign petty officer and Taiyuan man Bai Jian as the chief cavalry petty officer. Both men were appointed because they were good at word calculation and good at managing account books.

古文：及齐受禅，诸司咸归尚书；唯二曹不废，更名二省。
现代文：等到北齐禅受东魏的帝位以后，其他部门都归入尚书省；只有上述二曹没有废除，而是改名外兵省、骑兵省。
English: By the time Northern Qi was enthroned by Eastern Wei, all other departments had been incorporated into Shangshu; only the above-mentioned two Cao were not abolished, but were renamed Gaofeng and Cavalry.

古文：邕官至录尚书事，建官至中书令，常典二省，世称 唐、白 。
现代文：唐邕当官到录尚书事，白建当官到中书令，常常主管这二省，当时被人称为 唐、白 。
English: Tang and Bai were called Tang and Bai at that time, because Tang and Bai officials were often in charge of these two provinces.

古文：邕兼领度支，与高阿那肱有隙，阿那肱谮之，齐主敕侍中斛律孝卿总知骑兵、度支。
现代文：唐邕兼管度支省，与高阿那肱有矛盾，高阿那肱便向齐主说唐邕的坏话，北齐后主敕令侍中斛律孝卿总知骑兵省、度支省。
English: There was a conflict between Tang Di and Gao Ananzhang, who was also in charge of the Dodu Prefecture. Gao Ananzhang spoke ill of Tang Di to the Qi master, while Northern Qi's master's second-in-command, Zou Lixiaoqing, was in charge of the Cavalry Prefecture and the Dodu Prefecture.

古文：孝卿事多专决，不复询禀。
现代文：斛律孝卿处理事情往往独断专行，不再征求唐邕的意见。
English: Gong Ritsu Xiaoqing often handled things arbitrarily, and no longer solicited Tang Xuan's opinion.

古文：邕自以宿旧习事，为孝卿所轻，意甚郁郁。
现代文：唐邕自以为熟悉这二省的情况，因为被斛律孝卿轻视，心里非常抑郁。
English: Tang Yao thought he was familiar with the situation in these two provinces, but he was very depressed because he was despised by Yao Lv Xiaoqing.

古文：及齐主还鄴，邕遂留晋阳。
现代文：到北齐国主回到邺城以后，唐邕便留在晋阳。
English: After the ruler of Northern Qi returned to Lucheng, Tang Xuan stayed in Jinyang.

古文：并州将帅请于安德王延宗曰： 王不为天子，诸人实不能为王出死力。 
现代文：并州的将帅请求安德王高延宗说： 您不当天子，大家实在不能为您安德王出死力。 
English: Gao Yanzong, the marshal of Yanzhou, pleaded with King Ando, saying, "You are not a son of heaven, we really cannot do our best for you, King Ando.

古文：延宗不得已，戊午，即皇帝位。
现代文：高延宗不得已，戊午，即位当皇帝。
English: Gao Yanzong was forced to abdicate and Wu Wu became emperor.

古文：下诏曰： 武平孱弱，政由宦竖，斩关夜遁，莫知所之。
现代文：下诏书崐说： 当今皇帝懦弱无能，朝政由宫里的小人把持，破关在晚上逃遁，不知去了哪里。
English: The next imperial edict said: "Today's emperor is weak and incompetent. The imperial government is controlled by villains in the palace. He broke out of prison and fled in the evening. I don't know where he went."

古文：王公卿士，猥见推逼，今祗承宝位。 
现代文：辱承王公卿士推戴相强，现在只得继承皇帝的大位。 
English: The princes and nobles who supported the succession to the throne of the emperor were humiliated, and now the emperor's throne had to be inherited.

古文：大赦，改元德昌。
现代文：大赦全国，改年号为 德昌 。
English: The whole country was amnestied, and the name of the year was changed to Dechang.

古文：以晋昌王唐邕为宰相，齐昌王莫多娄敬显、沭阳王和阿干子、右卫大将军段畅、开府仪同三司韩骨胡等为将帅。敬显，贷文之子也。
现代文：任命晋昌王唐邕为宰相，齐昌王莫多娄敬显、沭阳王右卫大将军段畅、开府仪同三司韩骨胡等人为将帅。莫多娄敬显是莫多娄贷文的儿子。
English: He appointed Jinchang King Tang Jun as prime minister, Qichang King Modo Jun Jing Xian, Shenyang King Uwei General Duan Chang, Kaifu Yi and Sanji Han Jia Hu as generals. Modo Jun Jing Xian was the son of Modo Jun Jiwen.

古文：众闻之，不召而至者，前后相属。
现代文：大家听到消息，不召而来的人，前后连续不断。
English: Everyone heard the news, and people who were not invited kept coming back and forth.

古文：延宗发府藏及后宫美女以赐将士，籍没内参十余家。
现代文：高延宗散发王府中的储藏和后宫里的美女赏赐给将士们，查抄没收了十几家太监。
English: Gao Yan Zong distributed the treasures in the royal palace and the beautiful women in the harem to the soldiers, and confiscated more than a dozen eunuchs.

古文：齐主闻之，谓近臣曰： 我宁使周得并州，不欲安德得之。 
现代文：北齐后主听说后，对近臣说： 我宁愿让周朝得到并州，不愿让安德王得到它。 
English: After hearing this, the Empress Dowager of Northern Qi said to her vassal, "I would rather let the Zhou Dynasty get the annexed prefecture than let King Ando get it."

古文：左右曰： 理然。 
现代文：左右的近臣说： 理当如此。 
English: Close advisers on both sides said: of course.

古文：延宗见士卒，皆亲执手称名，流涕呜咽，众争为死；童儿女子，亦乘屋攘袂，投砖石以御敌。
现代文：高延宗看见士兵时，都亲自握住他们的手称呼他们的姓名，众人流泪悲泣出声，争着为他效死；儿童妇女，也都登上房顶捋起衣袖，投掷砖头石块抵抗敌人。
English: When Gao Yanzong saw the soldiers, he personally held their hands and called their names. People shed tears and cried out, fighting to die for him. Children and women also climbed onto the roofs, rolled up their sleeves, and threw bricks and stones to resist the enemy.

古文：己未，周主至晋阳。
现代文：己未，北周国主到晋阳。
English: Before long, the ruler of Northern Zhou arrived in Jinyang.

古文：庚申，齐主入鄴。
现代文：庚申，北齐后主进入邺城。
English: After Koshin and Northern Qi, the Lord entered Shicheng.

古文：周军围晋阳，四合如黑云。
现代文：北周军队包围了晋阳，他们的军衣和旗帜都是黑色，所以城的四面就像黑云一般。
English: The Beizhou army surrounded Jinyang. Their uniforms and flags were all black, so the four sides of the city were like black clouds.

古文：安德王延宗命莫多娄敬显、韩骨胡拒城南，和阿干子、段畅拒城东，自帅众拒齐王宪于城北。
现代文：安德王高延宗命令莫多屡敬显、韩骨胡在城南抵抗，和阿干子、段畅在城东抵抗，自己率领众军在城北抵抗北周的齐王宇文宪。
English: King Gao Yanzong of the Andean Kingdom ordered Modu to repeatedly show respect, Han Jianhu to resist in the south of the city, and Aganzi and Duan Chang to resist in the east of the city, and he himself led the army in the north of the city to resist Qi Wang Yuwen Xian in the northern periphery.

古文：延宗素肥，前如偃，后如伏，人常笑之。
现代文：高延宗身体肥胖，前看象仰面朝天，后看像俯伏在地，人们常常取笑他的模样。
English: Gao Yan lived in a fat body. In front, he looked like he was looking up to the sky, and behind, he looked like he was prostrate on the ground. People often made fun of his appearance.

古文：至是，奋大槊往来督战，劲捷若飞，所向无前。
现代文：这时，他挥舞长矛来回督战，强劲有力敏捷得象飞一般，指向哪里，谁也抵挡不住。
English: At this time, he waved his spear back and forth to supervise the battle, strong, powerful and agile as a fly, and no one could resist where to point.

古文：和阿干子、段畅以千骑奔周军。
现代文：和阿干子、段畅率领一千骑兵直奔北周的军队。
English: and Aganzi and Duan Chang led a thousand cavalry straight to the army of Beizhou.

古文：周主攻东门，际昏，遂入之，进焚佛寺。
现代文：北周国主进攻晋阳的东门，当时天色昏暗，便进到城里，放火焚烧城里的佛庙。
English: When the Northern Zhou attacked the East Gate of Jinyang, it was dark, so they entered the city and set fire to the Buddhist temple in the city.

古文：延宗、敬显自门入，夹击之。周师大乱，争门，相填压，塞路不得进。
现代文：高延宗、莫多屡敬显从城门进入，两面夹击，北周军队大乱，争着逃出城门，城门间人群填塞挤压，堵住了道路无法前进。
English: Gao Yanzong and Modo Jianxing repeatedly entered from the city gate, clamped on both sides, the north perimeter army was in turmoil, fighting to escape from the city gate, the crowd between the city gates was crowded, blocking the road and unable to advance.

古文：齐人从后斫刺，死者二千余人。
现代文：北齐人从后刀砍矛刺，北周军队死了二千多人。
English: The Northern Qi people stabbed the spear from the back, and more than two thousand Northern Zhou troops died.

古文：周主左右略尽，自拔无路。
现代文：北周国主左右的人几乎都已死散，自己走投无路。
English: The people around the northern Zhou sovereign were almost all dead, and they had no choice but to surrender.

古文：承御上士张寿牵马首，贺拔伏恩以鞭拂其后，崎岖得出。
现代文：承御上士张寿牵着马头，贺拔伏恩用鞭子抽打马的后部，困难艰险地出了城。
English: Senior Sergeant Zhang Shou led the horse by the head, while He Ba Fuen whipped the horse's hindquarters, and they made their way out of the city with difficulty.

古文：齐人奋击，几中之。
现代文：齐人奋勇追击，几乎打中了他。
English: The team chased hard and almost hit him.

古文：城东道厄曲，伏恩及降者皮子信导之，仅得免，时已四更。
现代文：晋阳城东的道路狭隘弯曲，贺拔伏恩和投降北周的皮子信在前面带路，这才幸免于死，这时已经是深夜四更。
English: The road to the east of Jinyang City is narrow and curved. He Bafun and Pizixin, who had surrendered to Beizhou, led the way in front, only to be spared from death. By this time, it was already late at night.

古文：延宗谓周主为乱兵所杀，使于积尸中求长鬣者，不得。
现代文：高延宗以为北周国主已经被乱兵所杀，派人在堆积的尸体中寻找留有长胡须的人，没有找到。
English: Gao Yan Zong thought that the ruler of Northern Zhou had been killed by the soldiers, and sent people to look for people with long beards among the piled-up corpses, but they were not found.

古文：时齐人既捷。入坊饮酒，尽醉卧，延宗不复能整。
现代文：当时北齐人打了胜仗，到街坊间饮酒，都喝醉了睡在地上，高延宗无法整理队伍。
English: At that time, the Northern Qi people won the war, drank alcohol in the neighborhood, got drunk and slept on the ground, and Gao Yanzong could not organize the team.

古文：周主出城，饥甚，欲遁去，诸将亦多劝之还。
现代文：北周国主出城以后，非常饥饿，想逃走，将领们也多劝他回去。
English: After the Northern Zhou sovereign left the city, he was very hungry and wanted to escape, and the generals often advised him to go back.

古文：宇文忻勃然进曰： 陛下自克晋州，乘胜至此。
现代文：宇文忻发怒变色而进言： 陛下从攻克晋州以来，乘胜到了这里。
English: Yu Wenzhong's anger turned to anger and he said, "Since His Majesty conquered Jinzhou, he has come here by taking advantage of victory.

古文：今伪主奔波，关东响震，自古行兵，未有若斯之盛。
现代文：现在各国的伪主劳碌奔逃，关东一带响声震天，自古以来用兵，没有像这次的盛大。
English: Nowadays, the pseudo-lords of various countries are busy running away, the Kanto region is resounding, and soldiers have been used since ancient times. There is no grand parade like this one.

古文：昨日破城，将士轻敌，微有不利，何足为怀！
现代文：昨天破城时，由于将士轻敌，所以遭受一点挫折，这又何必放在心上！
English: When we broke through the city yesterday, we suffered a little setback due to the fact that our soldiers treated the enemy lightly. Why should we take this to heart?

古文：丈夫当死中求生，败中取胜。
现代文：大丈夫应当从死中求生，败中取胜。
English: A good man should survive death and win in defeat.

古文：今破竹之势已成，奈何弃之而去！ 
现代文：现在破竹之势已经形成，为什么要放弃它而离去！ 
English: Now the momentum has been formed, why give it up and leave!

古文：齐王宪、柱国王谊亦以为去必不免，段畅等又盛言城内空虚。
现代文：齐王宇文宪、柱国王谊也认为不能放弃离开，段畅又极力说晋阳城里已经空虚。
English: Qi Wang Yuwen Xian and Zhu King Rui also believed that they could not give up leaving, and Duan Chang also insisted that the city of Jinyang was already empty.

古文：周主乃驻马，鸣角收兵，俄顷复振。
现代文：北周国主于是勒马停止后撤，吹响号角集合军队，不多久军势重新振作。
English: Therefore, the ruler of Northern Zhou stopped retreating, blew the horn to gather the army, and soon the army was re-energized.

古文：辛酉，旦，还攻东门，克之。
现代文：辛酉，早晨，返回攻打东门，终于攻克。
English: Xin Yao, in the morning, returned to attack the East Gate, and finally defeated.

古文：延宗战力屈，走至城北，周人擒之。
现代文：高延宗在作战中力量用尽，跑到城北，被北周军队捉住。
English: Gao Yanzong exhausted his strength in the battle, ran to the north of the city, and was caught by the North Zhou army.

古文：周主下马执其手，延宗辞曰： 死人手，何敢迫至尊！ 
现代文：北周国主下马握住他的手，高延宗辞谢说： 我是死人的手，怎敢靠近天子！ 
English: The northern Zhou sovereign dismounted and held his hand. Gao Yanzong thanked him and said: "I am the dead man's hand, how dare I approach the Son of Heaven!

古文：周主曰： 两国天子，非有怨恶，直为百姓来耳。终不相害，勿怖也。 
现代文：北周国主说： 两个国家的天子，并非有怨仇憎恨，都是为了救老百姓而来的，我终究不会加害于您，不必害怕。 
English: The ruler of the North Zhou said, "The sons of heaven of the two countries do not have any grudge or hatred. They have all come to save the people. After all, I will not harm you. You do not have to be afraid."

古文：使复衣帽而礼之。
现代文：请他重新穿戴起衣帽而待之以礼。
English: Ask him to put his coat and hat back on and wait for a salute.

古文：唐邕等皆降于周。
现代文：唐邕等都投降了北周。
English: Tang Xuan and others all surrendered to the Northern Zhou Dynasty.

古文：独莫多娄敬显奔鄴，齐主以为司徒。
现代文：只有莫多屡敬显逃奔到邺城，北齐后崐主任命他为司徒。
English: Only Mordo ran away to Shicheng repeatedly, and the lord of the Northern Qi later appointed him as a tutor.

古文：延宗初称尊号，遣使修启于瀛州刺史任城王湝，曰： 至尊出奔，宗庙事重，群公劝迫，权主号令。
现代文：高延宗刚称皇帝时，派人写了书札给瀛州刺史任城王高，信里说： 天子出奔，国家的事情繁重，我因为王公们的劝说相强，暂时主持国家的号令。
English: When Gao Yanzong had just proclaimed himself emperor, he sent someone to write a letter to Rencheng Wanggao, the governor of Zhangzhou. The letter said, "The Son of Heaven has fled, the affairs of the country are heavy, and I am temporarily presiding over the proclamation of the country due to the persuasiveness of the princes."

古文：事宁，终归叔父。 
现代文：事情安定以后，皇位最终会还给叔父。 
English: The throne will eventually be returned to his uncle once things have stabilised.

古文：湝曰： 我人臣，何容受此启！ 
现代文：高说： 我只是一个臣子，怎能容许接受这样的书札！ 
English: Gao said, "I am just a courtier, how can I accept such a bookplate!"

古文：执使者关送鄴。
现代文：把使者捉起来送到邺城。
English: Arrest the envoy and send him to Lucheng.

古文：壬戌，周主大赦，削除齐制。
现代文：壬戌，北周国主大赦全国，取消北齐的制度。
English: At the same time, the Northern Zhou Emperor granted amnesty to the whole country and abolished the Northern Qi system.

古文：收礼文武之士。
现代文：招收并礼遇文武之士。
English: to recruit and treat with courtesy men of letters and martial arts.

古文：初，鄴伊娄谦聘于齐，其参军高遵以情输于齐，齐人拘之于晋阳。
现代文：当初北周的伊娄谦聘问北齐，他的参军高遵把北周将征伐北齐的情报通报北齐，北齐便把伊娄谦扣留在晋阳。
English: At the beginning, Northern Zhou's I Kun Qian asked Northern Qi for help. Gaozun, who had joined the army, informed Northern Qi of the information that Northern Zhou would conquer Northern Qi. Northern Qi then detained I Kun Qian in Jinyang.

古文：周主既克晋阳，召谦，劳之。
现代文：北周国主武帝攻下晋阳以后，召见伊娄谦，对他加以慰问。
English: After Emperor Wu of the Northern Zhou conquered Jinyang, he summoned Yi Sunqian to offer his condolences.

古文：执遵付谦，任其报复。
现代文：捉了高遵交给伊娄谦，让他进行报复。
English: Gaozhun was captured and handed over to I Rongqian, who ordered him to take revenge.

古文：谦顿首，请赦之，周主曰： 卿可聚众唾面，使其知愧。 
现代文：伊娄谦对北周武帝叩头，请求赦免高遵，武帝说： 您可以召集大家向他脸上吐口水，使他知道羞愧。 
English: Yixuanqian kowtowed to the Northern Zhouwu Emperor and asked for the pardon of Gaozun. Emperor Wu said: You can gather everyone to spit on his face to make him feel ashamed.

古文：谦曰： 以遵之罪，又非唾面可责。 
现代文：伊娄谦说： 以高遵的罪行，不是向脸上吐口水所能责备的。 
English: Yixuan Qian said: Gaozun's crime is not something that can be reproved by spitting in his face.

古文：帝善其言而止。
现代文：武帝认为他的话很对而没有责罚高遵。
English: Emperor Wu thought his words were right and did not punish Gaozong.

古文：谦待遵如初。
现代文：尹娄谦对待高遵一如既往。
English: Yin Yuqian treated Gaozun as before.

古文：臣光曰：赏有功，诛有罪，此人君之任也。
现代文：臣司马光曰：赏有功，诛有罪，这是君主的责任。
English: The vassal Sima Guang said, "It is the monarch's responsibility to reward the meritorious and punish the guilty."

古文：高遵奉使异国，漏泄大谋，斯叛臣也。周高祖不自行戮，乃以赐谦，使之复怨，失政刑矣！
现代文：高遵奉命出使异国，泄漏重大的机密，这就是叛臣；北周高祖不是自己下令加以处死，却把他送给伊娄谦，使他报复怨恨，有失刑赏的教化！
English: Gaozhun was ordered to send an envoy to a foreign country and divulge important secrets, which is a traitor; Bei Zhou Gaozhu did not order his own death, but sent him to Yi Xuan, so that he could avenge his grudge and receive the reward of enlightenment!

古文：孔子谓以德报怨者，何以报德？为谦者，宜辞而不受，归诸有司，以正典刑。
现代文：孔子所说的以德报怨者用什么来报德，作为伊娄谦，应当推掉而不接受，把高遵送交官府，明正典刑。
English: Confucius said that those who repay evil with virtue should repay virtue with what, and as Yixian Qian, they should be rejected and not accepted, and Gaozong should be sent to the government, and the formal punishment should be made clear.

古文：乃请而赦之以成其私名，美则美矣，亦非公义也。
现代文：他却请求君主对高遵赦免以取得个人的好名声，美倒是美了，但并不符合公义。
English: However, he asked the monarch to pardon Gaozhun in order to gain a good personal reputation. Beauty is beautiful, but it is not consistent with justice.

古文：齐主命立重赏以募战士，而竟不出物。
现代文：北齐后主命令立重赏来征募战士，而竟然不拿出东西来。
English: After the Northern Qi, the lord ordered to raise a reward to recruit soldiers, but he did not come up with anything.

古文：广宁王孝珩请 使任城王湝将幽州道兵入土门，扬声趣并州，独孤永业将洛州道兵入潼关，扬声趣长安，臣请将京畿兵出滏口，鼓行逆战。
现代文：广宇王高孝珩请求： 派任城王高率领幽州道的士兵开进土门关，扬言进取并州，独孤永业率领洛州道的士兵开进潼关，扬言进取长安，臣请求率领京畿的士兵出滏口，击鼓前进迎战。
English: Guanyu Wang Gao Xiaojun requested: to send Cheng Wang Gao to lead the soldiers of Yuzhou Road into Dumen Pass and threaten to annex the state; to send Dukuo Yongye to lead the soldiers of Luzhou Road into Shaoguan and threaten to invade Chang'an; to request the minister to lead the soldiers of Gyeonggi out of Shaoguan and march into battle with drums.

古文：敌闻南北有兵，自然逃溃。 
现代文：敌人听到南北有兵，自然逃走溃散。 
English: When the enemy heard that there were soldiers from the north and south, they naturally fled and dispersed.

古文：又请出宫人珍宝赏将士，齐主不悦。
现代文：又请求取出宫女和珍宝赏给将士。北齐后主很不高兴。
English: He also requested that the palace maids and precious treasures be taken out and given to the soldiers. The Empress Beibei was very unhappy.

古文：斛律孝卿请齐主亲劳将士，为之撰辞，且曰： 宜慷慨流涕，以感激人心。 
现代文：斛律孝卿请北齐国主亲自慰劳将士，替后主撰写文辞，并且说： 应该慷慨流泪，以感动激励人心。 
English: Gong Ruling Xiaoqing asked the ruler of North Qi to personally comfort the soldiers and write a speech for the empress, and said: It is necessary to shed tears generously to move and inspire people.

古文：齐主既出，临众，将令之，不复记所受言，遂大笑，左右亦笑。
现代文：北齐后主走出来，面对大家将要发布号令，却忘记了斛律孝卿告诉他的话，便大笑起来，左右的人也笑。
English: Bei Qi walked out, facing everyone about to issue an order, but forgetting what Gong Lv Xiaoqing had told him, he burst out laughing, as did the people around him.

古文：将士怒曰： 身尚如此，吾辈何急！ 
现代文：将士们发怒说： 他们自身还这样，我们何必着急！ 
English: The officers angrily said: They are still like this themselves, why should we be in a hurry!

古文：皆无战心。
现代文：都没有打仗的心思。
English: There was no thought of war.

古文：于是自大丞相已下，太宰、三师、大司马、大将军、三公等官，并增员而授，或三或四，不可胜数。
现代文：于是只好从大丞相以下，太宰、三师、大司马、大将军、三公等高官，都增加编制授给官职，或者三人或者四人，多到不可胜数。
English: As a result, it was necessary to increase the number of high-ranking officials from Dazaifu, Sanseishi, Daisima, Daishoin, Sanko, and so on down to Dazaijo and Daijo, or three or four people, an immeasurable number.

古文：朔州行台仆射高劢将兵侍卫太后、太子，自土门道还鄴。
现代文：朔州行台仆射高劢带兵侍卫太后、太子，从土门关一路回到邺城。
English: Shuozhou's governor Gao Ying took soldiers to guard the empress dowager and the prince, and they went all the way back to Lucheng from Dumen Pass.

古文：时宦官仪同三司苟子溢犹恃宠纵暴，民间鸡彘，纵鹰犬搏噬取之；劢执以徇，将斩之；太后救之，得免。
现代文：当时宦官仪同三司苟子溢等人还依仗君主的宠受放纵横暴，老百姓的鸡猪，被他们放出的猎鹰和猎狗搏击啮咬然后抢走；高劢捉住他们当众宣布，将要把他们处死崐；太后说情求救，得到赦免。
English: At that time, eunuchs such as the eunuch Yi and the eunuch Gao Zixi still relied on the monarch's favor to indulge in violence. The people's chickens and pigs were killed and bitten by the falcons and hunting dogs they released and then snatched away; Gao Yao caught them and announced in public that they would be put to death; the empress dowager pleaded for help and was pardoned.

古文：或谓劢曰： 子溢之徒，言成祸福，独不虑后患邪？ 
现代文：有人对高劢说： 苟子溢之流，说话能使人遭祸得福，你难道不担心后患吗？ 
English: Someone said to Gao Yao, "Speaking can bring misfortune and good fortune. Don't you worry about the consequences?

古文：劢攘袂曰： 今西寇已据并州，达官率皆委叛，正坐此辈浊乱朝廷。
现代文：高劢捋起衣袖说： 现在西面的敌寇已经占领了并州，显贵的大臣们都弃职叛逃，正因为这帮家伙把朝廷搞得污浊混乱。
English: Gao Qi lifted up his sleeves and said, "Now that the enemy invaders from the west have occupied the Anhui Province, the eminent ministers have all resigned and defected. It is precisely because of these guys that the imperial court has become dirty and chaotic.

古文：若得今日斩之，明日受诛，亦无所恨！ 
现代文：如果我能在今天把他们杀掉，自己明天被处死，也没有遗憾！ 
English: If I could kill them today and be executed tomorrow, I would have no regrets!

古文：劢，岳之子也。
现代文：高劢是高岳的儿子。
English: Gao Yao is the son of Gao Yue.

古文：甲子，齐太后至鄴。
现代文：甲子，北齐太后到邺城。
English: The Empress Dowager Beibei came to Lucheng.

古文：丙寅，周主出齐宫中珍宝服玩及宫女二千人，班赐将士，加立功者官爵各有差。
现代文：丙寅，北周国主取出北齐宫中的珍宝服用和玩赏的物品以及二千个宫女，颁赐给将士，对立功者按等级加官爵。
English: Hsin-yin, the Lord of the Northern Zhou Dynasty took out the treasures of the Northern Qi Palace, the best items to use and play with, as well as two thousand courtesans, and awarded them to the soldiers. Those who made outstanding contributions were given official titles according to their ranks.

古文：周主问高延宗以取鄴之策，辞曰： 此非亡国之臣所及。 
现代文：北周国主向高延宗询问夺取邺城的计策，高延宗推辞说： 这不是亡国之臣所能回答的。 
English: The head of the Northern Zhou asked Gao Yanzong about the plan to capture Shicheng. Gao Yanzong declined, saying, "This is not for a defeated vassal to answer."

古文：强问之，乃曰： 若任城工据鄴，臣不能知。
现代文：强迫他回答，高延宗才说： 如果是任城王据守邺城，那么臣无法知道。
English: Forcing him to answer, Gao Yan Zongcai said: If it is the king of the city who is in charge of the city, then the minister cannot know.

古文：若今主自守，陛下兵不血刃。 
现代文：如果是当今齐主自己据守，那么陛下可以不经交锋就取得胜利。 
English: If today's Qi masters defend themselves, then His Majesty can win without a fight.

古文：癸酉，周师趣鄴，命齐王宪先驱，以上柱国陈王纯为并州总管。
现代文：癸酉，北周军队进取邺城，命令齐王宇文宪为先驱，任命上柱国陈王宇文纯为并州总管。
English: At the same time, the Northern Zhou army entered Shicheng and ordered Qi Wang Yuwen as the forerunner, and appointed Chen Wang Yuwenjun from Shangju Guo as the chief administrator of the annexed state.

古文：齐主引诸贵臣入硃雀门，赐酒食，问以御周之策，人人异议，齐主不知所从。
现代文：北齐后主领着显贵大臣进朱雀门，赐给他们酒食，询问抵御北周的计策，各人的说法不一，北齐后主不知听谁的好。
English: After the Northern Qi, the master led the distinguished minister into the Suzaku Gate, gave them wine and food, and inquired about the strategy to resist the Northern Zhou. Each person's explanation was different, and the Northern Qi master did not know who to listen to.

古文：是时人情恟惧，莫有斗心，朝士出降，昼夜相属。
现代文：这时人们的心情恐惧，没有打仗的心思。朝中的士官出城投降，白天黑夜接连不断。
English: At this time, the mood of the people was one of fear, and there was no thought of war. The officers of the imperial court left the city and surrendered. Day and night followed one another.

古文：高劢曰： 今之叛者，多是贵人，至于卒伍，犹未离心。
现代文：高劢说： 现在的叛徒，很多是显贵，至于一般的士兵，还没有离心。
English: Gao Wei said: Many of the current traitors are dignitaries, but as for ordinary soldiers, they have not yet been centrifuged.

古文：请追五品已上家属，置之三台，因胁之以战，若不捷，则焚台。
现代文：请追回五品以上官员的家属，安置在三台，并强迫他们参加打仗，如果不能取胜，就焚烧他们家属所在的三台。
English: Please bring back the families of officials above the fifth grade, place them in Sandai, force them to take part in the war, and if they cannot win, burn Sandai where their families are.

古文：此曹顾惜妻子，必当死战。
现代文：这种人都顾惜自己的老婆孩子，一定会拼死作战。
English: This kind of people all take care of their wives and children, and will fight to the death.

古文：且王师频北，贼徒轻我，今背城一决，理必破之。 
现代文：况且我们的军队频频败北，敌人一定轻视我们，现在背城决一死战，按理一定能打败他们。 
English: Moreover, our army has been defeated so often that the enemy must despise us. Now that we are fighting a war to the death, we should be able to defeat them.

古文：齐主不能用。
现代文：北齐后主不采纳高劢的意见。
English: After the Northern Qi, the Lord did not accept Gao Yao's opinion.

古文：望气者言，当有革易。
现代文：懂星象变化的人说，朝廷将会有变革更易。
English: People who understand the changes in the stars say that it will be easier for the imperial court to make changes.

古文：齐主引尚书令高元海等议，依天统故事，禅位皇太子。
现代文：北齐后主叫来尚书令高元海等人商议，决定按照武成帝禅位给他的做法，把帝位传给皇太子。
English: After the Northern Qi, the lord called Shang Shuling Gao Yuanhai and others to discuss, and decided to pass the throne to the crown prince in accordance with the practice of Emperor Wu Cheng's Zen.

