古文：古人无忌讳。
现代文：古代的人没有忌讳。
English: Ancient people had no taboos.

古文：如季武子成寝，杜氏之葬在西阶之下，请合葬焉，许之。
现代文：例如季武子建成陵寝，杜氏原来就葬在寝殿西边台阶之下。
English: For example, Ji Mushi built a mausoleum, but Du Shi was originally buried under the steps on the west side of the mausoleum.

古文：入宫而不敢哭，武子命之哭。
现代文：杜氏后人请求将其先人合葬在季氏寝陵之中，季武子同意了这个请求。
English: The descendants of the Du clan requested that their ancestors be buried together in Ji's mausoleum, and Ji Takeko agreed to this request.

古文：曾子与客立于门侧，其徒有父死，将出哭于巷者，曾子曰： 反，哭于尔次。 
现代文：杜氏家人进入夜殿却不敢哭，季武子让他们哭。曾子跟客人站立在大门旁边，他有个弟子父亲死了，想出门到巷中哭悼，曾子说： 回去到你的住处哭吧。 
English: Du's family members did not dare to cry when they entered the night hall, but Ji Wu Zi let them cry. Zeng Zi and his guests stood next to the gate. A disciple's father had died, and he wanted to go out to the alley to mourn. Zeng Zi said, "Go back to your place and cry."

古文：北面而吊焉。
现代文：并且面向北悼念他。
English: And face north to mourn him.

古文：伯高死于卫，赴于孔子，孔子曰： 夫由赐也见我，吾哭诸赐氏。 
现代文：伯高死在卫国，有人向孔子报丧，孔子说； 这是因为端木赐才来见我，我要对着端木踢哭悼。 
English: When the death of Bogo was announced to Confucius, he said, "It is because I was given this piece of wood that I have come to see you. I will kick the piece of wood and weep and mourn."

古文：遂哭于子贡寝门之外，命子贡为之主，曰： 为尔哭也，来者拜之。 
现代文：于是在子贡的内室门外哭，让子贡作这件事的当事人，说： 这是为你的缘故而哭悼伯高的，来慰问你的人应该拜见他。 
English: So she wept outside the door of Zigong's inner chamber, and called Zigong, who was the one responsible for the matter, and said, "It is for your sake that I weep and mourn for Boqo, and those who come to console you should visit him."

古文：夫以国卿之寝阶，许外人入哭而葬；已所居室，而令门弟子哭其亲；朋友之丧，而受哭于寝门之外；今人必不然者也。圣贤所行，固为尽礼，季孙宿亦能如是。以古方今，相去何直千万也。
现代文：身为公卿的人的寝殿阶下，允许外人进来哭悼甚至安葬；自己所住的居室内，能让门下学生哭悼他的父亲；朋友有丧事的时候，能在内室门外接受哭悼；现在的人一定不会象这样圣明的贤人所作所为，当然是全都符合礼数，连季孙宿也能这样，用古代来跟当今相比，相差何止千千万万。
English: Under the steps of a nobleman's bed, outsiders are allowed to come in to mourn and even bury him; in the living room where he lives, he can let his students mourn his father; when a friend has a funeral, he can receive mourning outside the inner door; people today will certainly not do what such a holy sage has done, of course, all in accordance with the number of ceremonies, even the grandson can do so. In ancient times, compared to today, there are thousands and thousands of differences.

