古文：周嘉谟，字明卿，汉川人。
现代文：周嘉谟，字明卿，汉川人。
English: Zhou Jia Mu, nicknamed Mingqing, was from Hanchuan.

古文：隆庆五年进士。除户部主事，历韶州知府。
现代文：隆庆五年进士，授官户部主事，担任韶州知府。
English: In the fifth year of the Longqing era, he was promoted to the post of the head of the household department and served as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：万历十年迁四川副使，分巡泸州。
现代文：万历十年调任四川副使，分道巡按泸州。
English: In the tenth year of Wanli, he was transferred to the post of vice-envoy of Sichuan, and went on a separate patrol to Bozhou.

古文：穷治大猾杨腾霄，置之死。
现代文：彻底惩处大奸大猾的杨腾霄，将他处死。
English: thoroughly punish the great traitor Yang Tengxiao and put him to death.

古文：建武所兵燔总兵官沈思学廨，单车谕定之。
现代文：建武所士兵放火焚烧总兵官沈思学的官署，周嘉谟只身前往平息了这件事。
English: The soldiers of the Institute of Martial Arts set fire to the office of the chief military officer, Shen Siyu, and Zhou Jia Mu went alone to quell the incident.

古文：寻抚白草番。
现代文：不久巡抚少数民族地区白草。
English: Soon after, he became the governor of the ethnic minority region of Baigao.

古文：督兵邛州、灌县，皆有方略。
现代文：统兵邛州、灌县，都有计谋策略。
English: The unified army of Bozhou and Guan County has a strategy.

古文：居五年，进按察使，移疾归。
现代文：过了五年，提升按察使，上书称病引退。
English: After five years, he was promoted to inspector and retired in a letter saying he was ill.

古文：久之，起故官。
现代文：一段时期后，重新被起用，官复原职。
English: After a long time, he was appointed to the same post again.

古文：榷税中官邱乘云播虐，逮系相属。
现代文：榷税中官丘乘云肆虐，又是逮捕又是囚禁。
English: The middle-ranking official in charge of taxation, Qiu Rongyun, wreaked havoc, and was arrested and imprisoned.

古文：嘉谟檄所司拒绝，而搒杀奸民助虐者，乘云为戢。
现代文：周嘉谟发布檄文给有关部门予以拒绝，并且鞭打杀死那些奸诈狡猾、助纣为虐的人，丘乘云也就收敛了。
English: Zhou Jia Meng issued a notice to the relevant departments to refuse, and whipped and killed those who were treacherous and cunning, and assisted in the abuse, and Qiu Rongyun also retreated.

古文：就迁左布政使。擢右副都御史，巡抚云南。
现代文：调任左布政使，后提升右副御史，巡抚云南。
English: He was transferred to the post of Zuo Bu political envoy, and later promoted to the post of Right Vice-Minister of History, and became the governor of Yunnan.

古文：陇川宣抚多安民叛，入缅，据蛮湾。
现代文：陇川宣抚多安民叛乱，逃入缅甸，占据蛮湾。
English: Xuanchuan Xuanfu fuelled the rebellion of the Doan people, fled to Burma, and occupied Savage Bay.

古文：嘉谟讨擒之，立其弟安靖而还。
现代文：周嘉谟讨伐并抓获了他，立他的弟弟安靖，然后返回。
English: Zhou Jiaomu crusaded and captured him, set up his brother Anjing, and then returned.

古文：进兵部右侍郎，巡抚如故。
现代文：晋升为兵部右侍郎，仍旧巡抚云南。
English: He was then promoted to the position of the right-hand man of the military department, and remained as the inspector.

古文：黔国公沐昌祚侵民田八千余顷，嘉谟劾治之，复劾其孙启元罪状。
现代文：黔国公沐昌祚侵占百姓的田地八千多顷，周嘉谟揭发并惩处他，又揭发他的孙子沐启元的罪状。
English: Zhou Jiaomu exposed and punished the crime of Mu Changyuan, the lord of the State of Shan, who occupied more than eight thousand hectares of people's fields, and his grandson, Mu Qiyuan.

古文：久之，改督两广军务兼巡抚广东。
现代文：过了一段时期，改任统领两广的军务，兼广东巡抚。
English: After a period of time, he was appointed as the commander of the military affairs of the two provinces, as well as the governor of Guangdong.

古文：满考，加右都御史。
现代文：考核期满，担任右都御史。
English: At the end of the assessment period, he assumed the post of Utsunomiya governor.

古文：广西土酋引交址兵内犯，官军拒退之，嘉谟为增兵置戍。
现代文：广西少数民族首领勾引交趾的部队侵犯内地，政府军队打退了他们。周嘉谟为此增加了兵力、增设了军事据点。
English: Guangxi ethnic minority leaders lured friendly troops to invade the mainland, and the government army repulsed them. Zhou Jia Mu increased the number of troops and military strongholds for this purpose.

古文：南海、三水、高要、四会、高明诸邑大水，坏圩岸，留赎鍰筑之。
现代文：南海、三水、高要、四会、高明等城镇遭大水，冲坏堤防河岸，周嘉谟留下赎刑的钱来修筑堤防。
English: Nankai, Sanshui, Gaoyou, Sihui, Gaoming and other towns were flooded, the river banks were washed away, and Zhou Jia Mu left the ransom money to build the dike.

古文：迁南京户部尚书，寻召拜工部尚书。
现代文：改任南京户部尚书，不久被召见授官工部尚书。
English: He was appointed to the post of the head of the household department in Nanjing, and was soon called to the post of the head of the engineering department.

古文：孝定后丧，内廷宣索不赀。
现代文：孝定皇后去世，内廷利用皇帝的谕旨向官府索取的钱财，不可胜计。
English: After the death of Empress Xiaoding, the Inner Court used the emperor's edict to demand money from the government.

古文：嘉谟言丧礼有中制，不当信左右言，妄耗国帑，不纳。
现代文：周嘉谟说丧礼有一定的制度，不能听信左右的谗言，随便耗费国家钱财，因而不接受索取。
English: Zhou Jia Mu said that the funeral has a certain system, can not listen to the left and right criticism, casually spend state money, and therefore do not accept the request.

古文：俄改吏部尚书。
现代文：没多久改任吏部尚书。
English: Not long after, he was reassigned to the personnel department.

古文：四十八年七月，神宗崩。
现代文：四十八年七月，神宗皇帝驾崩。
English: In July, 48 A.D., Emperor Shenzong passed away.

古文：八月丙午朔，光宗即位。郑贵妃据乾清宫，且邀封皇太后。
现代文：八月二十三日天刚亮时，光宗皇帝即位，郑贵妃占据乾清宫，并且请求封为皇太后。
English: At first light on August 23, Emperor Guangzong ascended to the throne. Empress Zheng Guifei occupied the Qianqing Palace and requested to be named empress dowager.

古文：嘉谟从言官杨涟、左光斗等言，以大义责贵妃从子养性，示以利害。
现代文：周嘉谟听从言官杨涟、左光斗等人的意见，用君臣大义谴责郑贵妃的养子郑养性，让郑贵妃晓得其中的利害。
English: Zhou Jiaomu listened to the opinions of the spokesmen Yang Hui, Zuo Guangdou and others, and condemned the adopted son of Zheng Guifei with the dignity of a monarch and a minister, so that Zheng Guifei knew the interests.

古文：贵妃乃移慈宁宫，封后事亦寝。
现代文：郑贵妃于是移到慈宁宫，封太后的事也不再提了。
English: Zheng Guifei then moved to the Cining Palace, and the matter of the empress dowager was no longer mentioned.

古文：外廷皆言贵妃进侍姬八人，致帝得疾。
现代文：外廷大臣都说郑贵妃进献八名侍女，从而导致皇帝患病。
English: The foreign ministers all said that Empress Zheng Gui presented eight maids, which caused the emperor to fall ill.

古文：二十六日，嘉谟因召见，以寡欲进规，帝注视久之，令皇长子谕外廷： 传闻不可信。 
现代文：二十六日，周嘉谟趁被皇帝召见之机，规劝皇帝节制自己的欲望。皇帝长时间注视周嘉谟，然后命令皇长子向外廷宣布： 传闻之辞不可轻信。 
English: On the 26th, Zhou Jia Mu took the opportunity of being summoned by the emperor to persuade the emperor to restrain his desires. The emperor stared at Zhou Jia Mu for a long time, and then ordered the eldest son of the emperor to announce to the court: The rumored words should not be trusted.

古文：诸臣乃退。
现代文：各大臣于是退朝。
English: The ministers then withdrew from the imperial court.

古文：二十九日，帝疾大渐，嘉谟偕大学士方从哲、刘一燝、韩爌等受顾命。
现代文：二十九日，皇帝的病情愈发加重。周嘉谟偕同大学士方从哲、刘一火景、韩火广等接受皇帝的遗诏。
English: On the 29th, the emperor's condition became worse and worse. Zhou Jia Muxuan accepted the emperor's last will and testament together with Zhu Zhe, Liu Yi Huo Jing, Han Huo Guang and other university scholars.

古文：其夕，帝崩。
现代文：当天晚上，皇帝去世。
English: That evening, the Emperor passed away.

古文：质明，九月乙亥朔，光宗遗诏皇长子嗣位，而李选侍专制宫中，势颇张，廷臣虑不测。
现代文：九月二十六日天刚亮时，光宗皇帝的遗诏让皇长子即位。这时李选侍在宫廷内独断横行，势力很嚣张。
English: At first light on September 26th, Emperor Guangzong's last will and testament made the emperor's eldest son ascend to the throne. At this time, Li Xuanmei was arbitrarily rampant in the court, and his power was very arrogant.

古文：既入临，请见皇长子，呼万岁，奉至文华殿受朝，送居慈庆宫。
现代文：朝中大臣担心出现意外，进门哭吊之后，请求朝见皇长子，高喊万岁，把他迎奉到文华殿接受大臣们的朝拜，送他到慈宁宫居住。
English: Fearing an accident, the ministers of the two Koreas, after entering the door and crying, asked to see the eldest son of the emperor, shouted "long live," welcomed him to the Wenhua Hall to receive the ministers' worship, and sent him to live in the Jining Palace.

古文：嘉谟奏言： 殿下之身，社稷是托，出入不宜轻脱。
现代文：周嘉谟上奏说： 陛下担负着国家社稷的重任，进出应该慎重。
English: Zhou Jia Meng said: Your Majesty is responsible for the important task of the national society, and you should be careful when entering and leaving.

古文：大小殓，朝暮临，须臣等至乃发。 
现代文：大小装殓，早晚的哭临，应该等大臣们到达后才进行。 
English: Decoration, big or small, should wait until the ministers arrive before crying.

古文：皇长子颔之。
现代文：皇长子点头同意了。
English: The eldest son nodded and agreed.

古文：诸大臣定议：皇长子以九月六日即位。选侍居乾清自如，且欲挟皇长子同居。
现代文：各大臣商议协定，皇长子在九月六日即位，李选侍照旧居在乾清宫，还想挟持皇长子同她住在一起。
English: The ministers discussed the agreement. The eldest son of the emperor ascended to the throne on September 6. Li Xuan lived in the Qianqing Palace and wanted to take the eldest son of the emperor to live with her.

古文：嘉谟亟草疏率廷臣请移宫，光斗、涟继之。
现代文：周嘉谟急忙起草奏疏带着朝中大臣请求皇帝转移宫室，左光斗、杨涟跟着上疏。
English: Zhou Jia Mu hurriedly drafted a report and took the ministers of the two Koreas to request the emperor to move the imperial palace, and Zuo Guangdou and Yang Xi followed suit.

古文：五日，选侍始移哕鸾宫。
现代文：五日，李选侍才移到仁寿殿。
English: On the fifth day, Li Xuan only moved to Renshou Hall.

古文：时大故频仍，国势杌隉，首辅从哲首鼠两端，一燝、爌又新秉政，嘉谟正色立朝，力持大议，中外倚以为重。
现代文：这时重大事故接连不断，国家很不安定，首辅方从哲迟疑不决，刘一火景、韩火广又是第一次主持朝政，周嘉谟在朝中执政，主持大议，朝廷内外十分倚重他。
English: At this time, major accidents continued one after another, the country was very unstable, the chief aides were hesitant and indecisive, Liu Yihuoqing and Han Huogang presided over the imperial government for the first time, Zhou Jia Mu ruled in the DPRK and presided over major discussions, and he was very important inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：神宗末，齐、楚、浙三党为政，黜陟之权，吏部不能主。
现代文：神宗皇帝末年，齐、楚、浙三个派系执掌朝政，控制贬谪、提拔官吏的权力，吏部都做不了主。
English: In the last years of Emperor Shenzong, the three factions of Qi, Chu, and Zhe took control of the imperial government, controlling the power to demote and promote officials. The Ministry of Personnel could not be the master.

古文：及嘉谟秉铨，惟才是任。
现代文：等到周嘉谟主管选拔权，只任用那些有才干的人。
English: Wait for Zhou Jia Mu to take over the power of selection, and only appoint those who are talented.

古文：光、熹相继践祚，嘉谟大起废籍，耆硕满朝。
现代文：光宗、熹宗相继登位。周嘉谟大规模起用被废免的官员，朝廷之中全是年长而有德望的人。
English: Gwangjong and Jangjong ascended to the throne one after another. Zhou Jia Moo made extensive use of officials who had been removed from office, and those who rose to the top in the imperial court were all elderly and respected.

古文：向称三党之魁及朋奸乱政者，亦渐自引去，中朝为清。
现代文：一向被称作三大派系的首领和结党乱政的人，也渐渐自行引退，朝中的污浊之风也为之一清。
English: The leaders of the three major factions and those who formed parties to disrupt the government, as they have always been called, have also gradually retired on their own.

古文：已，极陈吏治敝坏，请责成抚、按、监司。
现代文：此后，极力陈述吏治衰败，请求指定让巡抚、按察使、监司等部门办好这件事。
English: After that, he tried his best to explain the decline of officialdom, and requested that the inspector, inspectors, supervisors and other departments be designated to handle this matter.

古文：上官注考，率用四六俪语，多失实，嘉谟请以六事定官评：一曰守，二曰才，三曰心，四曰政，五曰年，六曰貌。
现代文：报告官员的政绩，大多用四六骈体语，不能反映实情。周嘉谟请求用六件事作为评定官员的标准：一为操守，二为才干，三为心术，四为政绩，五为年限，六为相貌。
English: Zhou Jia Mu requested that six things be used as the criteria for evaluating officials: one is conduct, two is ability, three is mental skill, four is political performance, five is seniority, and six is appearance.

古文：各注其实，毋饰虚词。
现代文：各自按实注明，不要用空洞的言辞装饰。
English: Each of you should indicate the facts, and do not decorate with empty words.

古文：帝称善，行之。
现代文：皇帝认为很好，加以实行。
English: The emperor thought it was a good idea and implemented it.

古文：天启元年，御史贾继春得罪，其同官张慎言、高弘图疏救，帝欲并罪之。
现代文：天启元年，御史贾继春获罪。他的同事张慎言、高弘图上疏开脱他的罪责，皇帝想把他们一起治罪。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, the imperial official Jia Jichun was found guilty. His colleagues Zhang Shenyan and Gao Hongtu were exonerated of his guilt, and the emperor wanted to punish them together.

古文：嘉谟等力为解，乃夺慎言、弘图俸而止。
现代文：周嘉谟等人极力为他们说情，于是只停发张慎言、高弘图的俸禄而已。
English: Zhou Jiaomu and others tried their best to intercede for them, so they only stopped the salary of Zhang Shengyan and Gao Hongtu.

古文：朱钦相、倪思辉被谪，嘉谟亦申救。
现代文：朱钦相、倪思辉被贬，周嘉谟也为他们伸张正义。
English: Zhu Qinxiang and Ni Sihui were demoted, and Zhou Jiaomu also advocated justice for them.

古文：给事中霍维华希魏忠贤指劾王安，置之死。
现代文：给事中霍维华希求魏忠贤指责弹劾王安，把他弄死。
English: During the incident, Howe asked Wei Zhongxian to accuse Wang An of impeachment and kill him.

古文：嘉谟恶之，出维华于外。
现代文：周嘉谟憎恶他，把霍维华放逐到外地。
English: Zhou Jia Mo detested him and banished him to a foreign land.

古文：忠贤怒，嗾给事中孙杰劾嘉谟受刘一燝属为安报仇，且以用袁应泰、佟卜年等为嘉谟罪。
现代文：魏忠贤很恼怒，唆使给事中孙杰弹劾周嘉谟受刘一火景的嘱托为王安报仇，并且以任用袁应泰、佟卜年等人作为周嘉谟的罪过。
English: Wei Zhongxian was very angry. He instigated Sun Jie to impeach Zhou Jia Mu, who was instructed by Liu Yiguo to avenge Wang An. He also considered Zhou Jia Mu's crime to be the appointment of Yuan Yingtai, Zou Buren and others.

古文：嘉谟求退，忠贤矫旨许之。
现代文：周嘉谟请求辞职，魏忠贤假传圣旨答应了他。
English: Zhou Jia Mu requested to resign, and Wei Zhongxian agreed to his fake will.

古文：大学士叶向高等请留嘉谟竣大计事，不听。
现代文：大学士叶向高等人请求留用周嘉谟继续完成百官考察之事，不听。
English: Ye, a university scholar, did not listen to the higher-ranking person's request to retain Zhou Jia Mu to continue to complete the inspection of 100 officials.

古文：明年，广宁陷，嘉谟忧愤，驰疏劾兵部尚书张鹤鸣主战误国罪。
现代文：第二年，广宁失陷。周嘉谟备感忧愤，立即上疏弹劾兵部尚书张鹤鸣主战误国的罪行。
English: The next year, Guangning fell. Zhou Jia Mubi felt sad and angry, and immediately went to Shang Su to impeach the military for the crime of misleading the country.

古文：五年秋，忠贤党周维持复劾嘉谟曲庇王安，遂削籍。
现代文：天启五年的秋天，魏忠贤的党徒周维持再次弹劾周嘉谟有意庇护王安，于是周嘉谟被削籍为平民。
English: In the autumn of the fifth year of the Apocalypse, Zhou Jia Meng, a party member of Wei Zhongxian, once again impeached Zhou Jia Meng for his intention to shelter Wang An. As a result, Zhou Jia Meng was reduced to a commoner.

古文：崇祯元年，荐起南京吏部尚书，加太子太保。
现代文：崇祯元年被推荐起用为南京吏部尚书，加封太子太保。
English: In the first year of the year, Chongzhen was recommended to be appointed as the official of the Nanjing cadre department, and was awarded the title of crown prince.

古文：明年，卒官，年八十四。赠少保。
现代文：第二年，死在任上，时年八十四岁，赠为少保。
English: The following year, he died in office, at the age of eighty-four, and was given the title of Junior Public Security Officer.

古文：张问达，字德允，泾阳人。
现代文：张问达，字德允，陕西泾阳人。
English: Zhang Qida, the character Dezhong, is a native of Shenyang, Shaanxi.

古文：万历十一年进士。历知高平、濰二县，有惠政。
现代文：万历十一年进士，历任高平县、潍县知县，有德政。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 11th year of the lunar calendar, and successively served in Gaoping County and Zhixian County.

古文：征授刑科给事中。
现代文：征召授官刑科给事中。
English: The criminal investigation department is in the process of recruiting and assigning positions.

古文：宁夏用兵，请尽蠲全陕逋赋，从之。
现代文：宁夏打仗时，请求全部免去整个陕西省拖欠的赋税，皇帝答应了。
English: When Ningxia was at war, it requested that the entire province of Shaanxi be completely exempted from tax arrears, and the emperor agreed.

古文：父丧除，起故官，历工科左给事中。
现代文：服完父亲的丧礼后复官，担任工科左给事中。
English: After attending his father's funeral, he was reinstated and served as a middle-ranking official in the engineering department.

古文：帝方营建两宫，中官利乾没，复兴他役，问达力请停止，不纳。
现代文：皇帝正在营造宫殿，朝内太监从侵吞公款中获益，又兴建其他项目。张问达极力请求停工，皇帝不采纳。
English: The emperor was building a palace, and the imperial eunuchs were benefiting from embezzling public funds and building other projects. Zhang Banda strongly requested a work stoppage, but the emperor did not accept it.

古文：俄陈矿税之害，言： 阉尹一朝衔命，辄敢纠弹郡守，甚且纠抚按重臣。
现代文：不久陈述收取矿税的弊病，说： 宦官一旦奉了皇帝的命令，就敢于举发弹劾地方长官的过失，甚而至于督抚、按察使等重臣。
English: He soon stated the drawbacks of collecting mineral taxes, saying: Once eunuchs received the emperor's order, they dared to report and impeach the faults of local governors, even as far as supervisors, inspectors and other senior ministers.

古文：而孙朝所携程守训、陈保辈，至箠杀命吏，毁室庐，掘坟墓。
现代文：而孙朝与程守训、陈保一帮人相勾结，竟达到将朝廷差遣官鞭打至死，毁坏房屋，挖掘坟墓的地步。
English: However, the Sun Dynasty, in collusion with Cheng Shouxun, Chen Bao and others, actually reached the point of whipping the imperial envoy to death, destroying houses, and digging graves.

古文：不一按问，若万方怨恫何！ 
现代文：皇帝如果不详细追查，将怎样安抚全国各地的不满情绪啊！ 
English: If the emperor does not investigate in detail, how will he appease the discontent throughout the country!

古文：典试山东，疏陈道中饥馑流离状，请亟罢天下矿税，皆不报。
现代文：主持山东的科举考试，上疏陈述沿途饥馑的老百姓流离失所的情形，请求赶快废除全国的矿税，都没有上报给皇帝。
English: He presided over the imperial examinations in Shandong, reported on the displacement of starving people along the way in Shangxo, and requested the speedy abolition of the national mineral tax, but none of this was reported to the emperor.

古文：已，巡视厂库。
现代文：不久，巡视厂库。
English: Soon, the inspection of the warehouse began.

古文：故事，令商人办内府器物，佥名以进，谓之佥商。
现代文：过去的惯例，让商人承办内府的器物，都要签名然后送进去，叫作佥商。
English: In the past, it was customary for merchants to sign and then send in their goods to be used in the construction of government buildings. This practice was known as "sham merchants."

古文：而诸高赀者率贿近幸求免，帝辄许之。
现代文：可是各有钱的富商大多贿赂皇帝身旁的人请求将自己的名字免除，皇帝也总是予以同意。
English: However, most of the rich merchants bribed the people around the emperor to ask for their names to be exempted, and the emperor always agreed.

古文：问达两疏争执，又极论守训罪，并寝不行。
现代文：张问达两次上疏争执，又极力论证程守训的罪行，全都如石沉大海，没有消息。
English: Zhang Erda's two disputes with Shang Shou, and his strenuous efforts to prove Cheng Shouxun's crimes, have all sunk like a stone into the sea, and there is no news.

古文：进礼科都给事中。
现代文：提升礼科都给事中。
English: Guowei was later promoted to vice-minister of etiquette.

古文：劾晋江李贽邪说惑众，逮死狱中。
现代文：弹劾晋江李贽邪说惑众，逮捕了他，后来死在狱中。
English: Impeached Jinjiang Lijuan for misleading the public with evil theories, arrested him, and later died in prison.

古文：贽事具《耿定向传》。
现代文：李贽的事迹收在《耿定向传》中。
English: The story of Li Qiye is included in "The Biography of Geng Dingren."

古文：三十年十月，星变，复请尽罢矿税。
现代文：万历三十年十月，星象发生变化，张问达又请求全部废除矿税。
English: In October of the 30th year of Wanli, the situation changed, and Zhang Binda again requested the complete abolition of the mineral tax.

古文：时比年日食皆在四月，问达以纯阳之月其变尤大，先后疏请修省，语极危切，帝终不纳。
现代文：当时连年日食都集中在四月，张问达以为纯阳之月出现这一情况预示灾变尤其大，先后请求皇帝修身反省，语词极为不安而中肯，皇帝最终没有接受。
English: At that time, the annual solar eclipses were concentrated in April. Zhang Qida thought that the occurrence of the month of the pure sun foreshadowed a particularly great catastrophe. He successively requested the emperor to improve himself and reflect. The words were extremely uneasy but pertinent. The emperor ultimately did not accept.

古文：寻迁太常少卿，以右佥都御史巡抚湖广。
现代文：不久调任太常寺少卿，以右佥都御史的身份巡抚湖广。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Shokei (Junior Secretary) of the Taijo-ji Temple, and became the governor of Hoko as the right-hand governor of the capital.

古文：所部水灾，数请蠲贷。
现代文：湖广境内发水灾，多次请求免除借债。
English: Floods occurred in the territory of Huguang, and they repeatedly requested to be exempted from debt.

古文：帝方营三殿，采木楚中，计费四百二十万有奇，问达多方拮据，民免重困。
现代文：皇帝正在营造三座宫殿，在湖广采集木材，共耗资四百二十多万两银子。张问达多方辛劳，使百姓免于多重困苦。
English: The emperor was building three palaces and collecting wood in Hukang, at a total cost of more than 4.2 million taels of silver. Zhang Mian did a lot of hard work to save the people from multiple hardships.

古文：久之，召拜刑部右侍郎，署部事兼署都察院事。
现代文：一段时间后，征召授官刑部右侍郎，除在本部办公外，还兼理都察院的事情。
English: After a period of time, the Right Attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, in addition to the office of this department, was also in charge of the affairs of the Duza Academy.

古文：四十三年五月，谳问张差梃击事。
现代文：万历四十三年五月，审理张差 梃击案 。
English: In May of the year of forty-three, the trial of Zhang Zhaojun's assault case began.

古文：问达从员外郎陆梦龙言，令十三司会讯，词连郑贵妃宫监庞保、刘成。
现代文：张问达听从员外郎陆梦龙的话，命令十三司会审，所得供词与郑贵妃宫中的太监庞保、刘成有牵连。
English: Zhang Erda listened to the words of Lu Menglong, a foreign eunuch, and ordered the 13th Division to investigate. The confession obtained was implicated with the eunuchs Pang Bao and Liu Cheng in the palace of Zheng Guifei.

古文：中外籍籍，疑贵妃弟国泰为之。
现代文：朝廷内外议论纷扬，怀疑是郑贵妃的弟弟郑国泰所主使。
English: Controversy raged inside and outside the imperial court. It was suspected that Zheng Guotai, the younger brother of Zheng Guifei, was the chief envoy.

古文：问达等奏上差狱。
现代文：张问达等上奏请求将张差下狱。
English: Zhang Qida waited for the request to be sent to prison.

古文：帝见保、成名，留疏不下。
现代文：皇帝看见有庞保、刘成的名字，留下奏疏不下发。
English: When the emperor saw the names of Pang Bao and Liu Cheng, he couldn't help but smile.

古文：寻召方从哲、吴道南及问达等于慈宁宫，命并磔二人。
现代文：不久在慈宁宫召见方从哲、吴道南、张问达等人，下令将庞保、刘成二人车裂分尸。
English: Not long after, Fang Zongzhe, Wu Daonan, Zhang Manda and others were summoned to the Cining Palace and ordered the bodies of Pang Bao and Liu Cheng to be dismembered.

古文：甫还宫，帝意复变，乃先戮差，令九卿三法司会讯保、成于文华门。
现代文：刚回到宫中，皇帝又改变主意，于是先杀张差，命令九卿、三法司在文华门会审庞保、刘成。
English: Just after returning to the palace, the emperor changed his mind again, so he killed Zhang Zha first and ordered the nine nobles and three magistrates to try Pang Bao and Liu Cheng at the Wenhua Gate.

古文：保、成供原姓名曰郑进、刘登云，而不承罪。
现代文：庞保、刘成招供原来的姓名叫郑进、刘登云，却不肯服罪。
English: Pang Bao and Liu Cheng confessed that their original names were Zheng Jin and Liu Dengyun, but refused to plead guilty.

古文：方鞫时，东宫传谕曰： 张差情实风癫，误入宫门，击伤内侍，罪不赦。
现代文：正审讯期间，东宫传旨说： 张差的情形实在是患疯癫病，误入宫门，打伤内侍，罪在不赦。
English: During the trial, the Eastern Court sent a message saying: Zhang Chiaxuan's situation is really suffering from insanity, mistakenly entering the palace gate, injuring the servant, and the crime is unforgivable.

古文：后招保、成系内官，欲谋害本宫。
现代文：后来招供内宫的庞保、刘成想谋害本宫。
English: Later, Pang Bao of the Inner Court confessed that Liu Chenggang wanted to assassinate the Inner Court.

古文：彼何益，当以仇诬，从轻拟罪。 
现代文：这对他有什么好处，是他诬告报仇，当从轻定罪。 
English: What's in it for him, he falsely accused to get revenge and get a lighter sentence.

古文：问达等以鞫审未尽，上疏曰： 奸人闯宫，事关宗社。
现代文：张问达等人以审讯没有结束为由，上疏说： 奸邪之人闯入内宫，事关国家安危。
English: Zhang Menda and others, on the grounds that the trial had not ended, said: A traitor broke into the inner palace, which is a matter of national security.

古文：今差已死，二囚易抵饰。
现代文：现在张差已死，庞、刘二犯容易抵赖。
English: Now that Zhang Zha is dead, it is easy for Pang and Liu to deny their crimes.

古文：文华门尊严之地，臣等不敢刑讯，何由得情？
现代文：文华门是崇高庄严的地方，我等不敢拷打审问，怎么得到实情？
English: Wenhua Gate is a lofty and solemn place. I don't dare to torture and interrogate, how can I get the truth?

古文：二囚偏词，何足为据？
现代文：二犯偏执一词，怎么能成为证据？
English: How can the term "paranoia of double criminality" be used as evidence?

古文：差虽死，所供词故在，其同谋马三道等亦皆有词在案，孰得而灭之？
现代文：张差虽然死了，他的供词还原封不动地保存着，他的同谋马三道等人也都有供词在案，谁能够视而不见呢？
English: Although Zhang Chia is dead, his confession has been preserved intact, and his accomplice Ma Sandao and others also have confessions on file. Who can turn a blind eye to this?

古文：况慈宁召对，面谕并决。
现代文：况且慈宁宫召见时，皇帝当面告诉我等要将他们一起处决。
English: Moreover, when I was summoned to the Jining Palace, the emperor told me face to face that they would be executed together.

古文：煌煌天语，通国共闻。
现代文：煌煌天子的话，全国上下都听得到。
English: The words of the Glorious Son of Heaven can be heard throughout the country.

古文：若不付之外庭，会官严鞫，安肯输情？
现代文：如果不把他们交给外廷，会同有关部门严加审讯，他们如何肯说出真实情况？
English: How can they tell the truth if they are not handed over to the court and severely interrogated together with the relevant departments?

古文：既不输情，安从正法？
现代文：既然不肯说出实情，又如何将他们绳之以正法？
English: Since they refuse to tell the truth, how can they be brought to justice?

古文：祖宗二百年来，未有罪囚不付法司，辄令拟罪者。且二人系内臣。
现代文：自我朱明开朝二百年来，没有罪犯不交司法部门审讯就下令定罪的，况且他二人身系内臣。
English: Since the beginning of the Ming Dynasty in 200 years, no criminal has been convicted without submitting to the judicial department for trial. Moreover, they are both vassals.

古文：法行自近，陛下尤当严其衔辔，而置之重辟。
现代文：法律应从皇帝身边开始执行，陛下尤其应当严格执法，将他们处以重罚。
English: The law should be enforced from the emperor's side, and His Majesty, in particular, should strictly enforce the law and punish them severely.

古文：奈何任彼展辨，不与天下共弃之也。 
现代文：怎么能让他们胡说八道，而不同天下人一道抛弃他们呢。 
English: How can you let them talk nonsense and not abandon them all together?

古文：帝以二囚涉郑氏，付外庭，议益滋，乃潜毙之于内，言皆以创重身死。
现代文：皇帝因为二犯涉及到郑氏，若交给外廷，议论会更多，于是悄悄地在宫内将他们杀死了。
English: Because the two crimes involved the Zheng family, if they were handed over to the outside court, there would be more discussion, so the emperor quietly killed them in the palace.

古文：而马三道等五人，命予轻比坐流配。其事遂止。
现代文：对外则说他们都是由于受讯时重伤致死的。而对马三道等五个人，只命令给予较轻的定罪，流放发配充边，这事才算结束。
English: To the outside world, it was said that they all died as a result of being seriously injured during interrogation, while for five people, including Ma Sandao, only a lighter conviction, banishment and punishment were ordered, and that was the end of it.

古文：是年解都察院事。
现代文：这年他被解除都察院的职务。
English: This year he was relieved of his duties at the Duka.

古文：久之，迁户部尚书，督仓场。
现代文：不久，调任户部尚书，督察仓场。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the Household Department as the inspector of warehouses.

古文：寻兼署刑部，拜左都御史。
现代文：不久，兼管刑部，授职左都御史。
English: Before long, he was also in charge of the Penal Department, and was given the post of Left Metropolitan Historian.

古文：光宗疾大渐，同受顾命。
现代文：光宗皇帝病危时，与他人一起接受遗诏。
English: When Emperor Guangzong was critically ill, he received the imperial edict together with others.

古文：天启元年冬，代周嘉谟为吏部尚书。
现代文：天启元年冬天，代替周嘉谟成为吏部尚书。
English: In the winter of the first year of Tianqi, he replaced Zhou Jia Mu as the leader of the cadres.

古文：连掌内外大计，悉叶公论。
现代文：掌管朝内朝外的大事，处理公众的议论都很融洽。
English: They manage major affairs inside and outside the DPRK and handle public discussions in a harmonious manner.

古文：当是时，万历中建言诖误获谴诸臣弃林下久，死者已过半。
现代文：这时，万历年间上书提意见而受牵连遭到谴责的各大臣蒙冤已经很久了，有的大多都已死去。
English: At this time, the ministers who were implicated and condemned for submitting their opinions in the Wanli years have long since suffered injustice, and most of them have died.

古文：问达等定议：以廷杖、系狱、遣戍者为一等，赠官荫子；贬窜、削籍者为一等，但赠官。
现代文：张问达等人规定：受廷杖刑、关进监狱、流放充边的人定为一等，追赠官职，封荫他们的后代；贬职流放、削官职为平民的人定为一等，只追赠他们的官职。
English: Zhang Wenda and others stipulated that: those who were punished by the imperial scepter, imprisoned, and exiled to the edge were designated as first-class, and their descendants were given official positions; those who were demoted, exiled, and reduced to civilians were designated as first-class, and only their official positions were given.

古文：获恤者七十五人。
现代文：受到保护的有七十五人。
English: Seventy-five people are under protection.

古文：会孙慎行、邹元标追论 红丸 ，力攻方从哲。
现代文：同孙慎行、邹元标一起追查 红丸案 ，极力攻击方从哲。
English: Together with Sun Shengxing and Xuan Yuanbiao, he investigated the Red Maru case, and tried his best to attack Zhe.

古文：诏廷臣集议，与议者百十余人。
现代文：下诏让朝中大臣们讨论，参加讨论的有一百十几号人。
English: The lower edict called for the ministers of North Korea and China to discuss the issue, and more than a hundred people attended the discussion.

古文：问达既集众议，乃会户部尚书汪应蛟等上疏曰：
现代文：张问达把大家的议论收集起来之后，于是会同户部尚书汪应蛟等人上疏说：
English: After collecting everyone's comments, Zhang Erda, together with Shang Shu, Wang Yingyao and others from the Household Department, said:

古文：按慎行奏，首罪李可灼进红丸。
现代文： 按照孙慎行的奏疏，首犯李可灼进献红丸。
English: According to the record of Sun Shengxing, the first offender, Li Ke Yingjin, presented red pills.

古文：可灼先见从哲，臣等初未知。
现代文：李可灼先会见方从哲，我等各臣当初并不知道。
English: Li Keqiao first met with Fang Congzhe, we and other ministers did not know at the beginning.

古文：及奉召进乾清宫，候于丹墀，从哲与臣等共言李可灼进药，俱慎重未决。
现代文：等到奉召进入乾清宫，在宫殿台阶前的空地上等候，方从哲与我等一起说李可灼进献药丸的事，都很慎重，没有做决定。
English: When I was called to enter the Qianqing Palace and waited in the open space in front of the palace steps, Fang Congzhe and I were very cautious and did not make a decision.

古文：俄宣臣等至宫内跪御前，先帝自言 朕躬虚弱 ，语及寿宫，并谕辅陛下为尧、舜，因问 可灼安在 。
现代文：片刻之后，宣诏我等各臣到宫内皇帝面前下跪，先皇帝自己说： 我身体虚弱。 当说到寿宫时，并宣谕辅佐陛下成为圣明的君主。于是问道： 李可灼在哪里？ 
English: After a while, I announced that all the courtiers should kneel in front of the emperor inside the palace, and the emperor himself said, "I am physically weak." When it came to the palace, he also announced that he would support his majesty to become the monarch of the holy land. So he asked, "Where is Li Keqiao?"

古文：可灼趋入，和药以进，少顷又进。
现代文：李可灼快步上前，将药丸进献给皇帝，过了一会儿又进献一次。
English: Li Ke Yue quickly stepped forward and presented the pill to the emperor, and then presented it again a short while later.

古文：圣躬安舒就寝。
现代文：皇帝安然就寝。
English: The emperor went to bed peacefully.

古文：此进药始末，从哲及文武诸臣所共见者。
现代文：这就是进献药丸的经过，方从哲及文武各大臣是有目共睹的。
English: This is the process of the pill donation, which was witnessed by Fang Congzhe and the ministers of literature and armed forces.

古文：是时群情仓惶，凄然共切，弑逆二字，何可忍言。
现代文：当时群情惶惑，都沉浸在悲痛之中。 弑逆 这二字，怎么说得出口？
English: At that time, the crowd was bewildered and immersed in grief. How can these two words, "rebellious," be uttered?

古文：在诸臣固谅从哲无是心，即慎行疏中亦已相谅。
现代文：各大臣固然原谅方从哲无加害先帝之心，即使是孙慎行的奏疏中也原谅了他。
English: Although the ministers certainly forgave Fang for harming the former emperor, even Sun Sheng Rong forgave him.

古文：若可灼轻易进药，非但从哲未能止，臣与众人亦未能止，臣等均有罪焉。
现代文：李可灼轻易进献药丸，不仅方从哲没有能够制止，我等与各大臣也没有能够制止，我等大臣在这件事上都是有罪的。
English: Li Keqiao could easily donate the pills. Not only did Fang Congzhe fail to stop it, we and other ministers also failed to stop it. We and other ministers are all guilty in this matter.

古文：及御史王安舜等疏论可灼，从哲自应重拟，乃先止罚俸，继令养疾，则失之太轻。
现代文：等到御史王安舜等人上疏议论李可灼，方从哲自然应该重新定罪，于是先停发他的俸禄，然后让他回家养病，这样的判决未免太轻了。
English: When Wang Anqian and others discussed Li Keqiang, Fang Congzhe should have been re-sentenced. Therefore, his salary was suspended first, and then he was allowed to go home to recuperate. Such a sentence was too light.

古文：今不重罪可灼，何以慰先帝而服中外之心？
现代文：现如今不判李可灼重罪，怎么可以告慰先皇帝在天之灵，使朝廷内外信服啊。
English: Now that Li Kegui has not been convicted of a serious crime, how can we comfort the former emperor in the spirit of heaven and convince both inside and outside the court?

古文：宜提付法司，正以刑辟。
现代文：应该交付司法部门，将他绳之以法。
English: He should be handed over to the judiciary to be brought to justice.

古文：若崔文升妄投凉药，罪亦当诛。
现代文：像崔文升胡乱投放凉药，罪行应该杀头。
English: Like Cui Wensheng's indiscriminate dispensing of cold medicine, the crime should be executed.

古文：请并下法司，与可灼并按。
现代文：请求皇帝把他们一同交给司法部门处理。
English: He asked the emperor to hand them all over to the judicial authorities.

古文：从哲则应如其自请，削去官阶，为法任咎，此亦大臣引罪之道宜然，而非臣等所敢议也。
现代文：方从哲则应该按照他自己的请求，剥夺他的官职。身为执法人员，放任罪犯逃脱，这本身也是大臣的罪过，并不是我等一定要追究这事。
English: Fang Congzhe should be stripped of his official position in accordance with his own request. As a law enforcement officer, allowing criminals to escape is in itself the minister's fault, and it is not up to us to investigate this matter.

古文：至选侍欲垂帘听政，群臣初入临，阍者阻不容入，群臣排闼而进。
现代文： 等到李选侍想垂帘听政，大臣们初次进去哭吊，太监阻拦不让进去，大臣们推门一拥而入。
English: When Li Xuanwu wanted to hang the curtain to listen to the government, the ministers went in for the first time crying and hanging, the eunuchs blocked them from entering, and the ministers pushed the door open and rushed in.

古文：哭临毕，奉圣躬至文华殿，行朝谒嵩呼礼，复奉驾还慈庆宫。
现代文：哭吊完毕，奉送皇帝到文华殿，行朝见跪拜皇帝的礼节，又奉送圣驾回到慈宁宫。
English: After the crying and hanging, the emperor was sent to the Wenhua Hall, and the courtesy of kneeling before the emperor was carried out, and the carriage was sent back to the Cining Palace.

古文：因议新主登极，选侍不当复居乾清。
现代文：于是讨论新皇帝已登位，李选侍不应当还居住乾清宫。
English: Therefore, it was discussed that since the new emperor had ascended to the throne, Li Xuanbei should not still live in the Qianqing Palace.

古文：九卿即公疏请移，言官继之，从哲始具揭奏请，选侍遂即日移宫。
现代文：九卿及各大臣上疏请求移宫，言官跟着上疏，方从哲这才开始一起上奏，李选侍于是在当天迁出乾清宫。
English: The nine nobles and the ministers of Shangzhu requested to move to the palace, the officials followed Shangzhu, Fang Congzhe began to play together, and Li Xuanwu moved out of the Qianqing Palace on the same day.

古文：然舆论犹憾从哲之奏，不毅然为百僚倡。
现代文：然而朝中舆论对方从哲的奏疏仍有遗憾，说他身为首辅，却不能毅然倡导百官。
English: However, the public opinion in the DPRK and China still regrets that the other side did not follow Zhe's advice, saying that he, as a chief aide, could not resolutely advocate for a hundred officials.

古文：倘非诸臣共挟大义，连章急趋，则乾清何地，犹然混居，令得假窃魁柄，将如陛下登极还宫何！
现代文：倘若不是各大臣共持大义，接连上疏，那么乾清宫这等重要的地方，还如此混杂，使李选侍能够窃取国家大权，这将对陛下的登位还宫造成多大影响啊！ 
English: If it were not for the fact that all the ministers shared the great cause and were successively promoted, then important places such as the Qianqing Palace would still be so mixed that Li Xuanwu could steal the power of the state, which would have a great impact on His Majesty's accession to the throne and return to the palace!

古文：疏入，帝谓从哲心迹自明，不当轻议，止逮可灼下吏。文升已安置南京，弗问。
现代文：奏疏呈上，皇帝以为方从哲已经表明自己的心迹，不应当轻易再加讨论。只是将李可灼逮捕下狱，崔文升已在南京安置，不过问。
English: According to the report, the emperor thought that Fang Congzhe had already shown his intentions and should not be easily discussed again. However, Li Keqiao was arrested and sent to prison, and Cui Wensheng was resettled in Nanjing.

古文：问达历更大任， 梃击 、 红丸 、 移宫 三大案并经其手。
现代文：张问达屡担重任， 梃击 、 红丸 、 移宫 三件大案都由他经手处理。
English: Zhang Minda has repeatedly shouldered heavy responsibilities, and handled three major cases, including the attack, the red circle, and the relocation of the palace.

古文：持议平允，不激不随。
现代文：持论公正，不偏激，也不随波逐流。
English: to be fair-minded, not to be extreme, and not to go with the flow.

古文：先以秩满，加太子太保，至是乞休，疏十三上。
现代文：起先因官级已到顶，加封太子太保，到此乞求退休，上十三道疏。
English: At first, due to the official level has reached the top, plus the crown prince Taibo, come here to beg for retirement, the top thirteen are sparse.

古文：诏加少保，乘传归。
现代文：皇帝下诏加封少保，乘着驿车回了家。
English: The emperor issued an edict to add the title of Minor Protector, and he returned home in a carriage.

古文：五年，魏忠贤擅国。
现代文：天启五年，魏忠贤当政。
English: In the fifth year of the Apocalypse, Wei Zhongxian came to power.

古文：御史周维持劾问达力引王之寀植党乱政，遂削夺。
现代文：御史周维持弹劾张问达极力引荐王之肕树立派系，搞乱朝政，于是剥夺张问达的官职。
English: The Imperial History Week upheld the impeachment of Zhang Qianda, who tried his best to introduce Wang's Banyan tree lineage, and disrupted the imperial government, thus depriving Zhang Qianda of his official position.

古文：御史牟志夔复诬问达赃私，请下吏按问。
现代文：御史牟志夔又诬告张问达窝藏私款，请求下狱追察。
English: Mishimushi also falsely accused Zhang Qida of hiding private money, and requested that he be released from prison for investigation.

古文：命捐赀十万助军兴。
现代文：皇帝命令张问达捐钱十万两银子资助军事建设。
English: The emperor ordered Zhang Banda to donate 100,000 taels of silver to fund military construction.

古文：顷之，问达卒。
现代文：不久，张问达去世。
English: Not long after, Zhang Menda passed away.

古文：以巡抚张维枢言，免其半，问达家遂破。
现代文：因巡抚张维枢的请求，减免捐款的一半。张问达家由此破产。
English: At the request of the governor Zhang Weizhu, half of the donations were reduced and exempted. As a result, Zhang Erda's family went bankrupt.

古文：崇祯初，赠太保，予一子官。
现代文：崇祯初年，赠太保，荫封他的一个儿子做官。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, he bestowed the title of grand tutor, and one of his sons became an official.

古文：陆梦龙，字君启，会稽人。
现代文：陆梦龙，字君启，浙江会稽人。
English: Lu Menglong, also known as Junqi, is the auditor of the Zhejiang Association.

古文：万历三十八年进士。
现代文：万历三十八年进士。
English: In the thirty-eighth year of Wanli, he became a priest.

古文：授刑部主事，进员外郎。
现代文：任命为刑部主事，晋升员外郎。
English: He was awarded the position of the head of the Criminal Investigation Department and promoted to the position of a member of the outer circle.

古文：张差狱起，引凡向宫殿射箭、放弹、投砖石等律当以斩。
现代文：张差案发，引据法律凡是向宫中射箭、放弹、投掷砖石的等一律处以死刑。
English: According to the law, anyone who shoots arrows, bombs, or throws masonry into the palace will be sentenced to death.

古文：狱具，提牢主事王之寀奏差口词甚悉，乞敕会问，大理丞王士昌亦上疏趣之。
现代文：官司初审结束，提牢主事官王之肕报告张差的口供十分详细，乞求皇帝下诏会审。大理寺丞王士昌也上疏催促。
English: At the end of the first trial, the presiding officer Wang Zhixuan reported that Zhang Zha's testimony was very detailed, and he begged the emperor for a trial by imperial edict. Wang Shichang, the president of Dali Temple, also urged the emperor.

古文：时梦龙以典试广东杜门，主事邢台傅梅过之曰： 人情庇奸，而甘心储皇。
现代文：当时陆梦龙因主持广东科举考试而闭门谢客，主事官邢台人傅梅责备他说： 现在人心庇护奸臣，而情愿太子受连累。
English: At that time, Lu Menglong closed the door to thank the guests for presiding over the Guangdong Science Examination. Fu Mei, the leading official of Xingtai, reproached him, saying, "Nowadays, people protect their treacherous vassals, but they would rather the crown prince be implicated."

古文：吾虽恤刑山右，当上疏极论，君能共事乎？ 
现代文：我虽然是山西的恤刑官，但应该上疏极力辩论，您能与我一起行动吗？ 
English: Although I am Shanxi's disciplinary officer, I should vigorously debate with Shangxo. Can you work with me?

古文：梦龙曰： 张公遇我厚，遽上疏，若张公何？
现代文：陆梦龙说： 张公问达厚待于我，不和他打招呼就上疏，张公怎么办？
English: Lu Menglong said: Zhang Gong is very kind to me. If I don't say hello to him, I will be ostracized. What should Zhang Gong do?

古文：当力争之耳。 
现代文：应当极力争取他。 
English: He should be wooed.

古文：乃偕见问达。
现代文：于是二人一起去见张问达。
English: So the two of them went to see Zhang Qudao.

古文：时郎中胡士相等不欲再鞫，趣问达具疏请旨，以疏入必留中，其事可遂寝。
现代文：这时郎中胡士相等人不想再审讯，催促张问达上疏请求皇帝下旨，以为奏疏呈上后一定会被留在禁中，不交大臣们讨论，这事可就了结了。
English: At this time, Hu Shixiang and others in the court did not want to hear the case again, so they urged Zhang to ask Dazhangso for the emperor's permission, thinking that after the case was submitted, Dazhangso would definitely be kept in confinement and would not be discussed by the ministers, and the matter would be over.

古文：梦龙得其情，止勿复请。
现代文：陆梦龙得知这情况，劝张问达不要再请旨。
English: When Lu Menglong learned of this situation, he advised Zhang Qida not to make any more requests.

古文：众曰： 提马三爷、李外父辈，非得旨不可。 
现代文：大家说： 提审马三爷、李外父这样的人，非得有皇帝的圣旨不可。 
English: Everyone said: The emperor's edict is indispensable for the arraignment of people like Ma Sanye and Li Waifu.

古文：梦龙曰： 堂堂法司，不能捕一编氓，须天子诏耶？
现代文：陆梦龙说： 堂堂司法部门，不能逮捕一个登籍在户的平民，何须天子的诏书？
English: Lu Menglong said: The judicial department can't arrest a civilian who is registered at home. Why do they need a decree from God?

古文：差所供，必当讯实。 
现代文：张差的供词，一定要审讯查实。 
English: Zhang Chia's confession must be verified through interrogation.

古文：问达以为然。
现代文：张问达以为应该这样。
English: Zhang Erda thought it should be like this.

古文：明日，会讯，士相、永嘉、会祯、梦龙、梅、之寀及邹绍先凡七人，惟之寀、梅与梦龙合。
现代文：第二天，会审，胡士相、劳永嘉、赵会祯、陆梦龙、傅梅、王之肕及邹绍先共七人，只有王之肕、傅梅与陆梦龙相合。
English: On the second day of the trial, Hu Shisang, Lao Yongjia, Zhao Huizhang, Lu Menglong, Fu Mei, Wang Zhiyao and Gong Shaoxuan were the first seven people to be tried. Only Wang Zhiyao, Fu Mei and Lu Menglong were found guilty.

古文：将讯，众咸嗫嚅。
现代文：快要审讯，大家都窃窃私语。
English: It's almost time for the trial and everyone is whispering.

古文：梦龙呼刑具三，无应者，击案大呼，始具。
现代文：陆梦龙三次传呼刑具，没有人反应。拍案大叫，才将刑具备齐。
English: Lu Menglong called for the torture device three times, but there was no response. It was only after shouting for the case to be accepted that the punishment was carried out.

古文：差长身骈胁，睨视傲语，无风癫状。
现代文：张差身材高大，长有并列的双肋，目光斜视，语态傲慢，没有疯癫的症状。
English: Zhang Zha is tall, with parallel double ribs, squinting eyes, arrogant tone, and no symptoms of insanity.

古文：梦龙呼纸笔，命画所从入路。
现代文：陆梦龙叫上纸笔，命令他画出进入宫中的路线。
English: Lu Menglong called for a pen and paper and ordered him to draw a route into the palace.

古文：梅问： 汝何由识路？ 
现代文：傅梅问道： 你是怎么认得道路的？ 
English: Fu Mei asked: How did you recognize the road?

古文：差言： 我蓟州人，非有导者，安得入？ 
现代文：张差说： 我是蓟州人，没有人引导，怎么能进入宫中？ 
English: Zhang Zha said, "I am from Zhangzhou and have no guide. How can I enter the palace?"

古文：问： 导者谁？ 
现代文：问： 是谁引导的？ 
English: Question: Who led it?

古文：曰： 大老公庞公，小老公刘公。 
现代文：答： 大太监庞公公，小太监刘公公。 
English: A: Grand eunuch Pangonggong and Little eunuch Liugongong.

古文：且曰： 豢我三年矣，予我金银壶各一。 
现代文：还说： 他们培养我有三年了，给我金壶、银壶各一件。 
English: He also said, "They have trained me for three years. They gave me a gold pot and a silver pot.

古文：梦龙曰： 何为？ 
现代文：陆梦龙问： 让你干什么？ 
English: Lu Menglong asked: What do you want me to do?

古文：曰： 打小爷。 
现代文：张差答： 谋害太子。 
English: Zhang Shada: The plot to kill the crown prince.

古文：于是士相立推坐起曰： 此不可问矣。 
现代文：这时胡士相推开座位站起来说： 这不能再问了。 
English: At this time, the goose relative pushed away the seat, stood up and said, "I can't ask this anymore.

古文：遂罢讯。
现代文：于是停止审讯。
English: The trial was then halted.

古文：梦龙必欲得内竖名。
现代文：陆梦龙一定要查出宫内太监的名字。
English: Lu Menglong must find out the name of the imperial eunuch.

古文：越数日，问达再令十三司会审，差供逆谋及庞保、刘成名，一无所隐。
现代文：过了几天，张问达又让十三司会审，张差招供同谋以及庞保、刘成的名字，一点也不隐瞒。
English: A few days later, Zhang Qida was again put on trial by the 13th Division, and Zhang Shiba admitted his complicity and did not conceal the names of Pang Bao and Liu Cheng at all.

古文：士相主笔，踌躇不敢下，郎中马德沣趣之，永嘉复以为难。
现代文：胡士相做记录，犹豫着不敢下笔，郎中马德沣催促他。永嘉又以为有困难。
English: Hu Shixiang makes a record, hesitates to write it down, and his assistant, Ma Deyao, urges him. Yongjia also thinks there is a problem.

古文：梦龙咈然曰： 陆员外不肯匿，谁敢匿？ 
现代文：陆梦龙很不高兴地说： 陆员外不愿意隐瞒，谁还敢隐瞒？ 
English: Lu Menglong said unhappily, "If non-combatants are not willing to conceal, who would dare to do so?"

古文：狱乃具。
现代文：官司这才结案。
English: The case is now closed.

古文：给事中何士晋遂疏诋郑国泰。
现代文：给事中何士晋于是上疏诋毁郑国泰。
English: In the course of the affair, He Shizhin went so far as to defame Zheng Guotai.

古文：帝于是毙保、成于内，而弃差市，梅虑其潜易，躬请监刑。
现代文：皇帝此时将庞保、刘成杀于宫内，而将张差弃市。傅梅担心他偷偷换人，请求亲自监督行刑。
English: At this time, the emperor killed Pang Bao and Liu Cheng in the palace, and sent Zhang away. Fu Mei was worried that he secretly changed people, and asked to personally supervise the execution.

古文：当是时，自梦龙、之寀、梅、德沣外，鲜不为郑氏地者。
现代文：这个时候，除陆梦龙、王之肕、傅梅、马德沣之外，很少没有站在郑氏一边的。
English: At this time, with the exception of Lu Menglong, Wang Zhiyao, Fu Mei, and Ma Deyao, there were very few who did not stand on the side of Zheng.

古文：已而之寀、德沣悉被罪，梅以京察罢官。
现代文：不久王之肕、马德沣全都获罪，傅梅因考绩而丢了官。
English: Soon Wang Zhiqi and Ma Deqi were all found guilty, and Fu Mei lost his position due to performance evaluation.

古文：梦龙赖问达力获免，由郎中历副使。
现代文：陆梦龙全靠张问达大力保护才得以幸免，由郎中改任副使。
English: Lu Menglong could only be spared thanks to Zhang Mengda's vigorous protection, and he was changed from a retainer to a deputy envoy.

古文：天启四年，贵州贼未靖，总督蔡复一荐梦龙知兵，改右参政，监军讨贼，安邦彦犯普定。
现代文：天启四年，贵州地方叛乱没有平定，总督蔡复一因陆梦龙懂军事，举荐他任右参政，监督部队攻打叛乱武装。安邦彦进犯普定。
English: In the fourth year of the Apocalypse, the local rebellion in Guizhou was not quelled. Governor Cai Fuyi, because Lu Menglong understood military affairs, recommended him to be appointed as a right-wing politician to supervise the troops attacking the insurgent armed forces. An Bangyan attacked Puding.

古文：梦龙偕总兵黄钺以三千人御之。
现代文：陆梦龙同总兵黄钺一道率三千人防御他。
English: Lu Menglong, together with the general Huang Qi, led three thousand people to defend him.

古文：晓行大雾中，直前薄贼，贼大败。
现代文：清晨在大雾中行军，向前猛扑敌营，叛军大败。
English: Early in the morning, marching through the fog, they swooped down on the enemy camp. The rebels were soundly defeated.

古文：三山苗叛，思州告急。
现代文：三山苗民叛乱，思州告急。
English: Sanzhan Miao people rebelled, Shizhou was in a hurry.

古文：梦龙夜遣中军吴家相进捣贼巢，挝苗鼓，声振山谷，苗大奔溃，焚其巢而还。
现代文：陆梦龙夜晚派遣中军吴家相前进直捣叛军的大本营，击苗鼓，声振山谷。苗民四处逃跑，放火烧了苗民的大本营然后还师。
English: In the evening, Lu Menglong sent the Chinese army of Wu Jiaxiang to advance straight to the base camp of the rebels, beat Miao drums, and sounded the valley. Miao people fled everywhere, set fire to Miao people's base camp and then returned.

古文：寻改湖广监军，迁广东按察使。
现代文：不久改任湖广监军，提拔为广东按察使。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Hunan and Guangxi Supervision Army and promoted to the post of Guangdong Inspector.

古文：上官建忠贤祠，列梦龙名，亟遣使铲去之。
现代文：长官修建魏忠贤祠堂，其中有陆梦龙的名字，急忙派人删掉了。
English: The superintendent of Wei Zhongxian's ancestral hall, which included Lu Menglong's name, hurriedly sent someone to delete it.

古文：崇祯元年大计，忠贤党犹用事，镌二级调任。
现代文：崇祯元年对官吏进行考核，魏忠贤的党羽还操纵着朝政，降了他二级官。
English: In the first year of the Chongzhen era, officials were evaluated, and Wei Zhongxian's followers also manipulated the imperial government and demoted him to a second-grade official.

古文：三年起副使，以故官分巡东兖道。
现代文：三年起用为副使，以原来的官职分道出巡东兖道。
English: From the third year onwards, he was used as a deputy envoy, and went on a tour of the East China Sea with his original official position.

古文：盗起曹、濮间，讨斩其魁，余众悉降。
现代文：曹、濮一带农民起义，杀了他们的领袖，其余的都投降了。
English: The peasants revolted around Cao and Handan, killed their leaders, and the rest surrendered.

古文：迁右参政，守固原。
现代文：提升右参政，留守固原。
English: Promoted to the right to participate in politics, left for Gohara.

古文：梦龙慷慨好谈兵，以廓清群盗自负。
现代文：陆梦龙为人慷慨，喜欢谈论兵法，以镇压农民起义而自负。
English: Lu Menglong is a generous person, likes to talk about military tactics, and is proud of suppressing the peasant uprising.

古文：七年夏，贼来犯，击却之。
现代文：七年夏天，起义军进攻固原，打退了他们。
English: In the summer of the seventh year, the rebels attacked Guhara and drove them back.

古文：闰八月，贼陷隆德，杀知县费彦芳，遂围静海州。
现代文：闰八月，起义军攻占隆德，杀死知县费彦方，于是围攻静宁州。
English: In leap August, the insurgents captured Lund, killed Feihang of Zhixian, and then besieged Jingning Prefecture.

古文：梦龙率游击贺奇勋、都司石崇德御之，抵老虎沟。
现代文：陆梦龙率游击贺奇勋、都司石崇德抵抗，进抵老虎沟。
English: Lu Menglong led the guerrilla attack against He Qixun and the resistance of Dushi Shi Chongde, and arrived in Tigergou.

古文：贼初不满千，已而大至。
现代文：起义军刚开始不到一千人，不一会儿来了很多人。
English: At first there were less than a thousand insurgents, but soon there were many.

古文：梦龙所将止三百余人，被围数重，贼矢石如雨，突围不得出。
现代文：陆梦龙所部只有三百多人，被重重包围了，起义军射箭投石像下雨一样，陆梦龙等突围不出去。
English: There are only more than three hundred people in Lu Menglong's headquarters, which is heavily surrounded. The insurgents are shooting arrows and throwing stones like rain, and Lu Menglong and others can't break out.

古文：二将抱梦龙泣，梦龙挥之曰： 何作此妇孺态！ 
现代文：二个将领抱着陆梦龙大哭。陆梦龙推开他们说： 怎能如此婆婆妈妈的！ 
English: Two generals hugged Lu Menglong and burst into tears. Lu Menglong pushed them away and said, "How could you do this to your mother-in-law!

古文：大呼奋击，手馘数人，与二将俱战死。
现代文：大喊着冲进敌围，亲手杀死数人，同二位将领一起战死了。
English: Shouting, he rushed into the enemy encirclement, killed several people with his own hands, and died with the two generals.

古文：事闻，赠太仆卿。
现代文：事情传到京城，追赠他为太仆卿。
English: The matter was reported to the capital, and he was posthumously awarded the title of Taihoku-kyo.

古文：而傅梅，崇祯中历台州知府，解职归。
现代文：至于傅梅，崇祯年间担任台州知府，被解职归田。
English: As for Fu Mei, she served as governor of Taizhou during the reign of Chongzhen, but was dismissed and returned to the fields.

古文：十五年冬，捐金佐知府吉孔嘉守城。
现代文：十五年冬天捐助金钱辅佐知府吉孔嘉守城。
English: In the winter of 2015, a donation of money was made to support the defense of Jikongjia Castle in Sachifu.

古文：城破殉难，赠太常少卿。
现代文：城破殉难，赠太常寺少卿。
English: He was martyred in the destruction of the city, and was given the title of Shokei of the Taijo-ji Temple.

古文：汪应蛟，字潜夫，婺源人。
现代文：汪应蛟，字潜夫，江西婺源人。
English: Wang Yingyao, the subterranean man, is Jiangxi's legendary hero.

古文：万历二年进士。授南京兵部主事，历南京礼部郎中。
现代文：万历二年进士，任命为南京兵部主事，担任南京礼部郎中。
English: He entered the priesthood in the second year of Wanli, was appointed as the head of the Nanjing Military Department, and served as the vice-chairman of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department.

古文：给由入都，值吏部侍郎陆光祖与御史江东之等相讦，应蛟不直光祖，抗疏劾之，于政府多所讥切。
现代文：到北京上报本部官员的履历资料时，正好赶上吏部侍郎陆光祖和御史江东久等人相互攻击。汪应蛟不信任陆光祖，上疏弹劾他，对于政府多有痛切的进谏。
English: When he went to Beijing to report the biographical information of the officials of the headquarters, it was just in time for Lu Guangzu, the secretary of the personnel department, and Jiang Dongjiu, the minister of history, to attack each other. Wang Yingtao did not trust Lu Guangzu, Shang So impeached him, and there were many bitter attacks on the government.

古文：累迁山西按察使。
现代文：积官至山西按察使。
English: He was sent to Shanxi Province as an inspector.

古文：治兵易州，陈矿使王虎贪恣状，不报。
现代文：在易州练兵，向皇上陈述矿使王虎贪婪放肆的情形，没有得到批复。
English: He trained soldiers in Yizhou and reported to the emperor that the mines had made Wanghu greedy and reckless, but he received no reply.

古文：朝鲜再用兵，移应蛟天津。
现代文：第二次朝鲜战役，改派汪应蛟到天津。
English: During the Second Korean War, Wang Yingxuan was reassigned to Tianjin.

古文：及天津巡抚万世德经略朝鲜，即擢应蛟右佥都御史代之，屡上兵食事宜，扼险列屯，军声甚振。
现代文：等到天津巡抚万世德改任朝鲜经略，立即提拔汪应蛟为右佥都御史代替他。屡次上书有关军粮的问题，在险要的地方派兵屯戍，军队很有声誉。
English: When the governor of Tianjin, Wan Shide, was transferred to the post of North Korea's economic strategist, Wang Yingtao was immediately promoted to the post of the right-hand governor of the capital to replace him. He repeatedly submitted letters on the issue of military food, sent soldiers to camp in critical places, and the army was very reputable.

古文：税使王朝死，帝将遣代。
现代文：税使王朝死后，皇帝准备派人代替他。
English: After the death of the tax collector Dynasty, the emperor is preparing to send someone to replace him.

古文：应蛟疏请止之，忤旨，切责。
现代文：汪应蛟上疏请求不再设税使，违抗圣旨，遭到皇帝严厉责备。
English: At the request of Zhang Shangsu, Wang disobeyed the imperial edict and was severely reprimanded by the emperor.

古文：朝鲜事宁，移抚保定。
现代文：朝鲜战役结束，改任保定巡抚。
English: After the Korean War, he was appointed governor of Baoding.

古文：岁旱蝗，振恤甚力。
现代文：遇到旱灾、蝗灾，大力发放粮食，赈济贫民。
English: In the face of droughts and locust plagues, vigorously distribute grain and help the poor.

古文：已，极言畿民困敝，请尽罢矿税。
现代文：不久，尽情说出京都附近老百姓贫穷困苦的情况，请求皇帝全部免除矿税。
English: Soon, he spoke out about the poverty and hardship of the people near Kyoto, and asked the emperor to completely exempt them from the mineral tax.

古文：会奸人柳胜秋等妄言括畿辅税可得银十有三万，应蛟三疏力争，然仅得减半而已。
现代文：适逢奸诈之徒柳胜秋等谎称搜括京都附近的畿辅地区矿税可获得十三万两银子。汪应蛟三次上疏极力争辩，然而仅仅只减矿税的一半而已。
English: At the same time, the treacherous villain Liu Shengqiu and others falsely claimed that the mining tax in the Kiyosu region near Kyoto could be increased to 130,000 taels. Wang Yingtao argued strenuously three times, but only half of the mining tax was reduced.

古文：三十年春，帝命停矿税，俄中止。
现代文：万历三十三年春天，皇帝下令停收矿税，不久又恢复了矿税。
English: In the spring of the 33rd year of the Wanli calendar, the emperor ordered the suspension of the collection of mining tax, which was soon restored.

古文：应蛟复力争，不纳。
现代文：汪应蛟再次大力抗争，皇帝不采纳。
English: Wang Yingtao once again vigorously protested, but the emperor did not accept it.

古文：应蛟在天津，见葛沽、白塘诸田尽为污莱，询之土人，咸言斥卤不可耕。
现代文：汪应蛟在天津的时候，看到葛沽、白塘等地的田地都积满污水、长满荒草，询问当地人，都说是斥卤之地不能耕种。
English: When Wang Yingtao was in Tianjin, he saw that the fields in Gefen, Baitang and other places were full of sewage and overgrown with weeds. When he asked the locals, they all said that it was impossible to farm in the halogen-free land.

古文：应蛟念地无水则碱，得水则润，若营作水田，当必有利。
现代文：汪应蛟心想土地没有水就会成为盐碱地，有水就会滋润，如果兴修水利，一定能够获得丰收。
English: Wang Yingxuan thought that without water, the land would become saline, and with water, it would be moist. If water conservancy is built, it will definitely be able to obtain a bumper harvest.

古文：乃募民垦田五千亩，为水田者十之四，亩收至四五石，田利大兴。
现代文：于是召集农民开垦荒地五千亩，其中十分之四为水田，每亩收成可达四到五石，农田之利大兴。
English: As a result, farmers were summoned to reclaim five thousand mu of wasteland, of which four tenths were rice paddies, with a harvest of up to four to five koku per mu.

古文：及移保定，乃上疏曰： 天津屯兵四千，费饷六万，俱敛诸民间。
现代文：等到移官保定，于是上疏说： 天津有军队四千人，军饷要六万两银子，都来自民间，没有耗费国库。
English: After the transfer to Baoding, Shangsuo said, "Tianjin has an army of four thousand soldiers, and the military pay is sixty thousand taels of silver, all of which comes from the people and does not cost the national treasury.

古文：留兵则民告病，恤民则军不给，计惟屯田可以足食。
现代文：驻扎军队则当地老百姓负担过重，体谅农民则军粮供应又得不到保障，想来想去只有屯田可以两全。
English: The local people are overburdened by the stationed troops, and the military grain supply is not guaranteed if the farmers are considerate. If you think about it, only the military cantonment can do both.

古文：今荒土连封，蒿莱弥望，若开渠置堰，规以为田，可七千顷，顷得谷三百石。
现代文：现在荒芜的土地很多，一眼望去全是蒿莱野草，如果开凿沟渠修筑堤堰，把它规划改造为农田，可得七千顷，每顷可收谷三百石。
English: There is a lot of barren land now. At a glance, it is all wild grass. If we dig a ditch and build a dike, and plan to transform it into farmland, we can get seven thousand hectares, and each hectare can be harvested for three hundred koku.

古文：近镇年例，可以兼资，非独天津之饷足取给也。 
现代文：附近城镇粮食丰收了，可以互相补济，不仅仅天津的军饷足够补给。 
English: The nearby towns had a bumper grain harvest, so they could supplement each other's supplies. It was not only the military supplies from Tianjin that were sufficient.

古文：因条画垦田丁夫及税额多寡以请，得旨允行。
现代文：于是分门别类地规划垦田、劳动力和税额的多少，然后请示皇帝，获得皇帝允许后实行。
English: As a result, they planned the number of fields to be plowed, the labor force, and the amount of taxes, and then petitioned the emperor and obtained the emperor's permission.

古文：已，请广兴水利。略言： 臣境内诸川，易水可以溉金台，滹水可以溉恒山，溏水可以溉中山，滏水可以溉襄国，漳水来自邺下，西门豹尝用之，瀛海当诸河下流，视江南泽国不异。
现代文：不久，请求大力兴修农田水利，大意说： 我管辖区域内的各河流，易水可以灌溉金台，滹水可以灌溉恒山，溏水可以灌溉中山，滏水可以灌溉襄国。漳水流经邺下，西门豹曾治理过。瀛海位于各河流的下游，与江南水乡泽国没有差别。
English: Soon, he asked for vigorous construction of farmland water conservancy, to the effect that: I have jurisdiction over the rivers in the region, and the fresh water can irrigate Jintai, the brackish water can irrigate Hengshan, the brackish water can irrigate Zhongshan, and the brackish water can irrigate Xiangguo. The brackish water flows through the lower part of the river, and Ximenpiao once managed it. The Bohai Sea is located in the lower reaches of the rivers, and there is no difference between it and the southern water town of Zeguo.

古文：其他山下之泉，地中之水，所在而有，咸得引以溉田。
现代文：其他山下的泉水、地下水，也很丰富，都可以引水溉田。
English: Other mountain springs and groundwater are also plentiful and can be diverted to irrigate fields.

古文：请通渠筑防，量发军夫，一准南方水田之法行之。
现代文：请求沟通渠道，修筑堤防，派遣军队，完全按照南方水田的标准执行。
English: Requesting communication channels, building dykes, sending troops, all in accordance with the standards of the southern paddy fields.

古文：所部六府，可得田数万顷，岁益谷千万石，畿民从此饶给，无旱潦之患。即不幸漕河有梗，亦可改折于南，取籴于北。 
现代文：国家可得田数万顷，每年增加千万石谷，京城的人民从此富足，不用担心水旱灾害，即使不幸运河漕运被阻塞，也可以改道于南，取粮于北。 
English: The country can obtain tens of thousands of hectares of fields and increase ten million koku of valleys every year. The people of Beijing will be rich from now on, and do not have to worry about floods and droughts. Even if the unlucky river is blocked, it can be diverted to the south and grain can be taken from the north.

古文：工部尚书杨一魁亟称其议，帝亦报许，后卒不能行。
现代文：工部尚书杨一魁对此大为赞赏，皇帝也答复同意，后来终于没有实行。
English: Yang Yikui, the secretary of the Ministry of Works, greatly appreciated this, and the emperor also replied in agreement, but it was eventually not implemented.

古文：召为工部右侍郎，未上，予告去。
现代文：征召授官工部右侍郎，没有上任，告退。
English: He was called up to serve as the right hand man of the Ministry of Industry, but did not take up the post and resigned.

古文：已，进兵部左侍郎，以养亲不出。
现代文：不久，提升兵部左侍郎，以照顾父母为由不出任。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the Left Attendant of the Military Department, but did not take up the post on the grounds that he had to take care of his parents.

古文：亲没，竟不召。
现代文：父母去世，居然没有征召。
English: His parents died, but he was not drafted.

古文：光宗立，起南京户部尚书，天启元年改北部。
现代文：光宗皇帝即位，起用为南京户部尚书。天启元年改任北京户部尚书。
English: When Emperor Guangzong ascended to the throne, he appointed Shang Shu as the head of the Nanjing Household. In the first year of the Apocalypse, he was appointed the head of the Beijing Household.

古文：东西方用兵，骤加赋数百万。
现代文：东方和西方都在打仗，一下子增加了好几百万赋税。
English: With East and West at war, millions of tax dollars were suddenly on the line.

古文：应蛟在道，驰疏言： 汉高帝称萧何之功曰： 镇国家，抚百姓，给饷馈不绝，吾不如萧何。 
现代文：汪应蛟还在赴任途中，马上上疏说： 汉高祖称颂萧何的功劳说： 安定国家，安抚百姓，保障粮饷供应不断，我赶不上萧何。 
English: Wang Yingtao was still on his way to the post, and immediately said: "Han Gao Zu praised the merits of Xiao He and said: "I can't keep up with Xiao He in stabilizing the country, pacifying the people, and ensuring a continuous supply of grain and rice.

古文：夫给馈饷而先以抚百姓，故能兴汉灭楚，如运诸掌也。
现代文：保障粮饷的供应以安抚百姓为前提，所以能够轻而易举地建立汉朝，灭掉西楚霸王。
English: Ensuring the supply of grain and rice was based on the premise of appeasing the people, so it was easy to establish the Han Dynasty and eliminate the Western Chu Emperor.

古文：今国家多难，经费不支，势不得缓催科，然弗爱养民力，而徒竭其脂膏，财殚氓穷，变乱必起，安得不预为计？ 
现代文：现在国家变故不断，经费不够支出，这种形势下，赋税的征收一定不能放松；然而不爱惜老百姓，只是去收搜民脂民膏，使得财尽民贫，就一定会发生动乱，怎么能不预先考虑呢。 
English: Now that the country is constantly changing, and the funds are not enough to spend, under this situation, the collection of taxes must not be relaxed; however, if you do not spare the people, but only collect the people's money and make the people poor, there will definitely be turmoil. How can you not consider it in advance?

古文：因列上爱养十八事，帝嘉纳焉。
现代文：于是条列十八件爱民养民的事例，皇帝高兴地采纳了。
English: So he listed eighteen cases of love for the people and support for the people, which the emperor gladly accepted.

古文：熊廷弼建三方布置之策，需饷千二百万，应蛟力阻之。
现代文：熊廷弼计划布署三方的防御，需要一千二百万两粮饷，汪应蛟极力阻止这件事。
English: Xiong Tingtao planned to deploy a three-pronged defense, requiring twelve million taels of grain. Wang Yingtao tried his best to stop this.

古文：廷议 红丸 事，请置崔文升、李可灼于法，而斥方从哲为编氓。
现代文：朝廷讨论 红丸案 ，汪应蛟请求将崔文升、李可灼正法，而将方从哲斥退为平民。
English: The imperial court discussed the Red Marbles case, and Wang, at the request of Zhou, legalized Cui Wensheng and Li Keyao, while expelling Fang from Zhe as a commoner.

古文：应蛟为人，亮直有守，视国如家。
现代文：汪应蛟为人正直，高风亮节有操守，视国如家。
English: Wang Yingyao is an honest person. He has high morals and regards the country as his home.

古文：谨出纳，杜虚耗，国计赖之。
现代文：开支和收入很谨慎，杜绝无谓的消耗，使国家财政正常运转。
English: Expenditures and revenues are prudent, eliminating unnecessary consumption, and making the country's finances operate normally.

古文：帝保母客氏求墓地逾制，应蛟持不予，遂见忤。
现代文：皇帝的养母客氏找的墓地超过了有关规定，汪应蛟坚持不批准，由此得罪了皇帝。
English: The cemetery for the emperor's foster mother, the Kaks, exceeded the relevant regulations, and Wang Yingtao insisted on not approving it, thereby offending the emperor.

古文：会有言其老不任事者，力乞骸骨。
现代文：正赶上有人讲他年纪大了不能管事，于是极力请求告老还乡。
English: He was catching up with someone who said he was too old to be in charge, so he made a strong plea to return to his hometown.

古文：诏加太子少保，驰传归。
现代文：皇帝下诏赠太子少保，乘着驿车回了家。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to bestow the title of shoho (minor protector) on the prince, and he returned home in a carriage.

古文：陛辞，疏陈圣学，引宋儒语，以宦官、宫妾为戒。
现代文：闭门谢客，钻研儒家学说，引用宋朝儒生的话，以宦官、宫妾为戒。
English: Thanking guests behind closed doors, studying Confucianism, quoting the words of Confucius during the Song Dynasty, and avoiding eunuchs and concubines.

古文：久之，卒于家。
现代文：很久之后，死在家中。
English: Some time later, Chen Bozhi passed away at home.

古文：应蛟学主诚敬，其出处辞受一轨于义。
现代文：汪应蛟的学问真诚而严肃，著书立说全都符合君子的道德行为。
English: Wang Yingtao's learning is sincere and serious, and his writings and sayings are all in line with the moral behavior of a gentleman.

古文：里居，谢绝尘事，常衣缊枲。王纪，字惟理，芮城人。
现代文：居在乡里，谢绝俗务，常常穿着粗麻衣服。王纪，字惟理，芮城人。
English: He lived in the countryside, eschewed worldly affairs, and often wore coarse linen clothes. Wang Ji, the character of truthfulness, was a native of Lucheng.

古文：万历十七年进士。授池州推官。入为祠祭主事，历仪制郎中。
现代文：万历十七年进士，任命为池州推官，进入朝廷担任祠祭主事、仪制郎中。
English: He entered the priesthood in the seventeenth year of the Wanli era, was appointed the Chishu magistrate, and entered the imperial court to serve as the chief of the ancestral shrine festival and the ceremonial steward.

古文：秉礼持正，时望蔚然。
现代文：持礼公正无私，为一时众望所归。
English: His courtesy, fairness and selflessness made him a popular figure for a while.

古文：二十九年，帝将册立东宫，数迁延不决，纪抗疏极论。
现代文：二十九年，皇帝要册立太子，变动了几回老是决定不下来。王纪上疏极力辩论。
English: In the 29th year, the emperor wanted to appoint a crown prince. He changed his mind several times, but he could not decide. Wang Jiazhong vigorously debated.

古文：其冬，礼成，擢光禄少卿，引疾去。
现代文：这年冬天，完成礼节仪式，提升为光禄少卿，称病辞官。
English: In the winter of that year, he completed the etiquette ceremony and was promoted to Guanglu Shaoqing, known as the "sickness officer."

古文：四十一年，自太常少卿擢右佥都御史，巡抚保定诸府。
现代文：万历四十一年，从太常少卿提拔为右佥都御史，巡抚保定各府。
English: In the 41st year of the lunar calendar, he was promoted from Taijo Shokei to Ukyo Miyoshi, the governor of Baoding Prefecture.

古文：连岁水旱，纪设法救荒甚备。
现代文：连年水旱灾害，王纪想方设法救济灾荒十分周到。
English: After years of floods and droughts, Wang Ji was very thoughtful in trying to find ways to alleviate the disaster.

古文：税监张晔请征恩诏已蠲诸税，纪两疏力争，晔竟取中旨行之。
现代文：税监张晔请求征收皇恩已经免除的各税，王纪两次上疏力争，张晔竟然接受内宫旨意实行了。
English: Zhang Ye, the tax inspector, requested the collection of various taxes that had been exempted by the imperial grace, and Wang Ji twice fought for the exemption, and Zhang Ye actually accepted the will of the Inner Court and implemented it.

古文：纪劾晔抗违诏书，沮格成命，皆不报。
现代文：王纪弹劾张晔违抗诏书，阻止皇帝的命令，都没有批复。
English: Wang Ji's impeachment of Zhang Ye for defying the imperial edict and blocking the emperor's order was not approved.

古文：居四年，部内大治，迁户部右侍郎，总督漕运兼巡抚凤阳诸府。
现代文：过了四年，辖境内治理得很好，提升户部右侍郎，总督运河漕运兼巡抚凤阳各府。
English: After four years, the territory under his jurisdiction was well governed, and he was promoted to the right-hand man of the household, the governor of the canal and the governor of Fengyang.

古文：岁大凶，振救如畿辅。
现代文：庄稼欠收，采取在保定时的措施赈灾救贫。
English: Crops failed to harvest, and measures taken at the time of Baoding to relieve the disaster and alleviate poverty.

古文：光宗立，召拜户部尚书，督仓场。
现代文：光宗皇帝即位，征召授官户部尚书，督察仓场。
English: Emperor Kwangjong ascended the throne. He was called up to be an official of the Household Department and inspect the warehouse.

古文：天启二年，代黄克缵为刑部尚书。
现代文：天启二年代替黄克缵成为刑部尚书。
English: In the second half of the 19th century, he replaced Huang Kegui as the head of the criminal investigation department.

古文：时方会议 红丸 事，纪偕侍郎杨东明署议，言： 方从哲知有贵妃，不知有君父。
现代文：这时正在议论 红丸案 的事情，王纪同侍郎杨东明一道共同上奏，说： 方从哲只知道有贵妃，不知道有皇帝、父母。
English: At this time, the matter of the Red Marbles case was being discussed, and Wang Ji, together with the steward Yang Dongming, jointly played the piano and said: Fang Congzhe only knows that there is a noble consort, but does not know that there is an emperor and parents.

古文：李可灼进药驾崩，反慰以恩谕，赉之银币，国典安在？
现代文：李可灼进献药丸，皇帝驾崩，反而用皇帝的恩示来安慰他，送给他银币，这哪里还有国法？
English: Li Ke could burn a pill for the emperor's death, but he used the emperor's blessing to comfort him and give him silver coins. Where is the national law in this?

古文：不逮可灼，无以服天下；不逮崔文升，无以服可灼；不削夺从哲官阶禄荫，无以泄天地神人之愤。 
现代文：不逮捕李可灼，不能叫天下人心服；不逮捕崔文升，不能叫李可灼心服；不剥夺方从哲的官职俸禄，不能够发泄天地神人的愤慨。 
English: Without arresting Li Kegui, it is impossible to win the hearts and minds of the world; without arresting Cui Wensheng, it is impossible to win the hearts and minds of Li Kegui; without depriving Fang Zhe of his official salary, it is impossible to vent the indignation of the gods and mortals of heaven and earth.

古文：议出，群情甚竦。
现代文：奏议发出，大家感情非常肃敬。
English: The report was issued, and everyone's feelings were very solemn.

古文：主事徐大化者，素无赖，日走魏忠贤门，构陷善类，又显劾给事中周朝瑞、惠世扬。
现代文：主事徐大化这个人，一向是个无赖。每天奔走于魏忠贤的门下，阴谋陷害好人，又十分卖力地弹劾给事中周朝瑞、惠世扬。
English: The person in charge, Xu Dahu, has always been a scoundrel. Every day, he runs under Wei Zhongxian's door, plotting to frame good people, and working very hard to impeach Zhou Chaorui and Hui Shiyang in the middle of the matter.

古文：纪愤甚，劾大化溺职状，因言： 大化诚为朝廷击贼，则大臣中有交结权珰，诛锄正士，如宋蔡京者，何不登弹文，而与正人日寻水火。 
现代文：王纪非常气愤，揭发徐大化渎职的情形。于是说： 徐大化确实是朝廷痛击的贼臣，而大臣中有的结交有权势的太监，谋害忠良，就像宋朝的蔡京，为什么不进呈奏疏弹劾他，而跟正直的人一天天势同水火。 
English: Wang Ji was very angry and exposed Xu Dahua's dereliction of duty. He then said: Xu Dahua is indeed a thieving vassal of the imperial court, and some of the ministers have made friends with powerful eunuchs and plotted to kill Zhong Liang, just like Cai Jing of the Song Dynasty. Why not impeach him in a speedy manner, but with honest people day by day?

古文：其言大臣，指大学士沈纮也。
现代文：他所说的大臣，是指大学士沈翭。
English: The minister he was talking about was university professor Shen Qi.

古文：大化由此罢去，而纮及忠贤深憾之。
现代文：徐大化因此罢官离开，而沈翭及魏忠贤深感遗憾。
English: As a result, Xu Dahu was dismissed and left the post, while Shen Rong and Wei Zhongxian felt deep regret.

古文：御史杨维垣与大化有连，且素附纮，遂助纮诋纪，言纪所劾大臣无主名，请令指实。
现代文：御史杨维垣与徐大化有牵连，而且一向依附沈翭，于是帮助沈翭诋毁王纪，说王纪弹劾的大臣没有真名实姓，请求皇帝下令指实。
English: Gu Shiyang Vigaki was involved with Xu Dahua, and had always been attached to Shen Yi, so he helped Shen Yi to defame Wang Ji, saying that the minister impeached by Wang Ji did not have a real name, and asked the emperor to order the verification.

古文：纪遂直攻纮，言： 纮与京，生不同时，而事实相类。
现代文：王纪于是直接攻击沈翭，说： 沈翭与蔡京，生不同时，但性质相同。
English: Wang Ji then directly attacked Shen Rong, saying: Shen Rong and Cai Jing were not born at the same time, but they are of the same nature.

古文：其结纳魏忠贤，与京之契合童贯同也；乞哀董羽宸，与京之恳款陈瓘同也；要盟死友邵辅忠、孙杰，与京之固结吴居厚同也；逐顾命元臣刘一燝、周嘉谟，与安置吕大防、苏轼同也；斥逐言官江秉谦、熊德阳、侯震旸，与贬谪安常民、任伯雨同也。
现代文：他勾结魏忠贤，跟蔡京投合童贯相同。哀求董羽宸，跟蔡京恳请陈馞相同。结盟死党邵辅忠、孙杰，跟蔡京交结吴居厚相同。驱逐顾命大臣刘一火景、周嘉谟，跟排挤吕大防、苏轼相同。排斥言官江秉谦、熊德阳、侯震，跟贬职流放安常民、任伯雨相同。
English: He colluded with Wei Zhongxian, which is the same as Cai Jing's voting and conciliation. He implored Dong Yuqi, which is the same as Cai Jing's entreaty to Chen Qi. He allied with the dead party members Shao Shuozhong and Sun Jie, which is the same as Cai Jing's meeting with Wu Juohuo. He expelled the ministers Liu Yiguoqing and Zhou Jiamou, which is the same as the expulsion of Lv Dadong and Su Xi. He rejected the officials Jiang Bingqian, Xiong Deyang and Hou Zhen, which is the same as the dismissal and exile of An Changmin and

古文：至于贿交妇寺，窃弄威权，中旨频传而上不悟，朝柄阴握而下不知，此又京迷国罔上，百世合符者。 
现代文：至于贿赂勾结宫女太监，玩弄职权，由宫中传旨不让皇帝知晓，阴谋纂权欺骗朝中大臣，这又跟蔡京欺上瞒下，扰乱国家，虽隔百年仍然是很相符的。 
English: As for bribing and colluding with palace eunuchs, playing with authority, passing orders from the palace without letting the emperor know, and scheming to defraud the middle and middle ministers, this is still very consistent with Cai Jing deceiving and disturbing the country, although it is a hundred years later.

古文：客、魏闻之怒，为纮泣诉帝前。
现代文：客氏、魏忠贤听见后很生气，替沈翭在皇帝面前哭着诉苦。
English: After hearing this, Kachi and Wei Zhongxian were very angry, and they cried and complained in front of the emperor on behalf of Shen Yu.

古文：帝谓纪烦言，加谯责焉。
现代文：皇帝嫌王纪口罗嗦，严加谴责他。
English: The emperor disliked Wang Jikou and severely condemned him.

古文：初，李维翰、熊廷弼、王化贞下吏，纪皆置之重辟。
现代文：当初，李维翰、熊廷弼、王化贞下狱，王纪都处以极刑。
English: At first, Li Weihan, Xiong Tingtao and Wang Huazhen were sent to prison, while Wang Ji was sentenced to capital punishment.

古文：而与都御史、大理卿上廷弼、化贞爰书，微露两人有可矜状，而言不测特恩，非法官所敢轻议。
现代文：又同都御史、大理寺卿呈上熊廷弼、王化贞二人刑事卷宗，稍微显露二人有可怜的情形，却说没有皇帝特别恩准，不是法官所能够从轻论处的。
English: He also submitted the criminal files of Xiong Tingtao and Wang Huazhen together with the Metropolitan Historian and the Lord of Dali Temple, slightly revealing that the two were in a pitiful situation, but said that without the emperor's special approval, it was not possible for the judge to treat them lightly.

古文：有千总杜茂者，赍登莱巡抚陶郎先千金，行募兵，金尽而兵未募，不敢归，返蓟州僧舍，为逻者所获，词连佟卜年。
现代文：有千总叫杜茂的，携带着登州、莱州巡抚陶郎先的一千金，去召募士兵。钱用完了士兵却没有召募到，不敢回京城，返回蓟州和尚庙里，被巡逻的人抓获，供词牵连到佟卜年。
English: There was a man named Du Mao, who went to recruit soldiers with a thousand gold coins from Dengzhou and Laizhou governor Tao Rongxian. When the money ran out, the soldiers were not recruited, and they did not dare to return to Beijing. They returned to Zhangzhou and Shangmiao. They were caught by the patrols, and their confessions were implicated in the Year of the Rooster.

古文：卜年，辽阳人，举进士，历知南皮、河间，迁夔州同知，未行，经略廷弼荐为登莱监军佥事。
现代文：佟卜年，辽阳人，中进士，历任南皮、河间知县，调任夔州同知，没去上任，经略熊廷弼举荐为登、莱监军佥事。
English: He was from Liaoyang, graduated from middle school, served in Nampi and Kawama counties, and was transferred to Bozhou County. He did not take up the post, but was recommended by Xiong Tingtao to be the military inspector of Deng and Lai.

古文：逻者搒掠。
现代文：巡逻人鞭打他。
English: The patrolmen whipped him.

古文：茂言尝客于卜年河间署中三月，与言谋叛，因挟其二仆往通李永芳。
现代文：杜茂说曾经在佟卜年河间县衙做了三个月的客，同他商量策划叛乱，于是带着二个仆从去沟通李永芳。
English: Du Mao said that he had been a guest for three months in Luo, Houma County, and discussed with him the planning of the rebellion, so he took two servants to communicate with Li Yongfang.

古文：行边尚书张鹤鸣以闻。鹤鸣故与廷弼有隙，欲藉卜年以甚其罪。
现代文：行边尚书张鹤鸣听说这件事，张鹤鸣原来跟熊廷弼有仇，想借佟卜年这事来加重熊廷弼的罪行。
English: Zhang Heming, who was walking by, heard about the incident. Zhang Heming had a grudge against Xiong Tingyao and wanted to use the matter of the Year of the Boar to aggravate Xiong Tingyao's crime.

古文：朝士皆知卜年冤，莫敢言。
现代文：朝廷中人都知道佟卜年是冤枉的，没有人敢说话。
English: Everyone in the imperial court knew that the Year of the Rooster was unjustified, and no one dared to speak out.

古文：及镇抚既成狱，移刑部，纪疑之，以问诸曹郎。
现代文：等到镇抚已将官司了结，交给刑部时，王纪怀疑此案，向曹郎询问这件事。
English: When the magistrate had finished the case and handed it over to the criminal investigation department, Wang Ji became suspicious of the case and asked Cao Lang about it.

古文：员外郎顾大章曰： 茂既与二仆往来三千里，乃拷讯垂毙，终不知二仆姓名，其诬服何疑，卜年虽非间谍，然实佟养真族子，流三千里可也。 
现代文：员外郎顾大章说： 杜茂既然与二仆从来往奔走三千里，又是审讯拷打时致死的，终于无法知道二仆从的姓名，他无辜服罪有什么疑问？佟卜年虽然不是间谍，可终究是佟养真的族人，可把他流放三千里。 
English: Gu Daizhang, a member of the Foreign Affairs Committee, said: "Since Du Mao ran 3,000 miles with his two servants and died under torture during the trial, and finally could not know the names of his two servants, what doubt is there that he is innocent? Although Zou Bunian is not a spy, he may ultimately be a member of the Zou Yangzhen ethnic group, and he may be exiled 3,000 miles away.

古文：纪议从之。
现代文：王纪奏议听从了。
English: Wang Ji obeyed the suggestion.

古文：逻者又获奸细刘一巘，忠贤疑刘一燝昆弟，欲立诛一谳与卜年，因一谳以株连一燝。
现代文：巡逻官又抓到奸细刘一山献。魏忠贤怀疑是刘一火景和佟卜年，用刘一山献来陷害刘一火景。王纪都没执行。
English: The patrol officers also caught Liu Yishan Xian, a spy. Wei Zhongxian suspected Liu Yishan Xian to be Liu Yishan Xian and Zou Bu Nian, and used Liu Yishan Xian to frame Liu Yishan Xian. Wang Ji did not execute either.

古文：纪皆执不可。纮遂劾纪护廷弼，缓卜年等狱，为二大罪。
现代文：沈翭于是弹劾王纪保护熊廷弼，推迟佟卜年等人的官司，是二大罪状。
English: As a result, Shen Yi impeached Wang Ji for protecting Xiong Tingtao, and postponed the lawsuit of Zou Bu Nian and others. These are the two major charges.

古文：帝责纪陈状，遂斥为民。
现代文：皇帝责成王纪陈述详情，于是把他贬斥为平民。
English: The emperor ordered Wang Ji to give details, and then dismissed him as a commoner.

古文：以侍郎杨东明署部事，坐卜年流二千里。
现代文：让侍郎杨东明管理刑部的事情，定罪佟卜年流放二千里。
English: He let his personal attendant Yang Dongming manage the affairs of the criminal department, and he was convicted and exiled 2,000 miles away.

古文：狱三上三却。
现代文：官司上报了三次退回了三次。
English: The lawsuit was reported three times and sent back three times.

古文：给事中成明枢、张鹏云、沈惟炳，卜年同年生也，为发愤，摭他事连劾东明。
现代文：给事中成明枢、张鹏云、沈惟柄，跟佟卜年同年进士，为了发泄愤怒，摘取其他的事情连累弹劾杨东明。
English: In order to vent their anger, they took out other things to impeach Yang Dongming, including Cheng Mingchu, Zhang Pengyun, and Shen Weigang.

古文：卜年获长系，瘐死，而东明遂引疾去。
现代文：佟卜年被长期拘囚，最后死在狱中，而杨东明也称病离职。
English: Zou Buyan was detained for a long time and eventually died in prison, while Yang Dongming also resigned from his post, saying he was ill.

古文：天启中，累迁刑部右侍郎。
现代文：王纪已经被贬斥，大学士叶向高、何宗彦、史继偕上疏挽救他，皇帝都不听。
English: Wang Ji had already been denounced, and the emperor did not listen to the university scholars Ye Xianggao, He Zongyan, and Shi Jixuan, who tried to save him.

古文：既归，遂卒。崇祯初，赠刑部尚书。
现代文：后来阉党罗织罪名打击好人，王纪已经死了，得以幸免。崇祯元年，恢复官阶，赠少保、荫庇一个儿子、谥号 庄毅 。
English: Later, the CCP fabricated charges against a good man, Wang Ji, who was already dead, was spared. In the first year of the Chongzhen era, he was restored to his official rank, and was given a son, Shao Bao, and a shadow, and the nickname Zhuang Yi.

古文：孙玮，字纯玉，渭南人。
现代文：孙玮，字纯玉，陕西渭南人。
English: Sun Yat-sen, nicknamed "Pure Jade," was from southern Shaanxi Province.

古文：万历五年进士。授行人，擢兵科给事中。
现代文：万历五年进士，任命为行人，提升兵科给事中。
English: After five years of hard work, he was promoted to sergeant and appointed as a pedestrian. He is in the process of being promoted to sergeant.

古文：劾中官魏朝及东厂办事官郑如金罪，如金坐下诏狱。
现代文：弹劾中官魏及、东厂办事官郑如金的罪行，郑如金被皇帝下诏定罪。
English: The impeachment of Vice Admiral Wei and East Factory Officer Zheng Rukin for crimes, Zheng Rukin was convicted by the emperor.

古文：二人皆冯保心腹也。
现代文：二人都是冯保的心腹。
English: Both are close confidants of Feng Bao.

古文：初，张居正以刑部侍郎同安洪朝选轻辽王罪，衔之。
现代文：当初，张居正因为刑部侍郎同安洪朝选减轻辽王的罪责而怀恨在心。
English: At first, Zhang Ju harbored a grudge against Tong Anhong, the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, for lessening Liao Wang's culpability.

古文：后劳堪巡抚福建，希居正意，讽同安知县金枝捃摭朝选事，堪飞章奏之。命未下，捕置之狱，绝其饭食三日，死，禁勿殓，尸腐狱中。
现代文：后来劳堪巡抚福建，迎合张居正的意图，含蓄地暗示同安知县金枝搜集摘取洪朝选的事情，劳堪赶紧上奏奏明，命令还没有下达，就将他逮捕关进了监牢，三天不让他吃饭，饿死了，禁止装殓，尸体在牢狱里腐烂了。
English: Later, Laocan, the governor of Fujian Province, pandered to Zhang Juzheng's intention and implicitly hinted at the collection of Jinzhi in Anchi County for the election of the Hong Dynasty. Laocan hurriedly sent a report. Before the order was issued, he was arrested and put in prison. He was not allowed to eat for three days, starved to death, forbidden to decorate, and his body rotted in prison.

古文：堪寻召为左副都御史，未至京而居正卒。
现代文：劳堪不久征召升为左副都御史，人还没有到北京张居正就已死了。
English: Laokhan was soon drafted and promoted to the left vice-governor of the capital. Zhang Jizheng had not yet arrived in Beijing when he died.

古文：朝选子都察院检校竞诉冤阙下，堪复飞书抵冯保，削竞籍，廷杖遣归。
现代文：洪朝选的儿子、都察院佥校洪竞到城门下叫冤，劳堪又飞快写信给冯保，剥夺了洪竞的官籍，受廷杖刑然后遣送回家。
English: Hong Jing, the son of Hong Dynasty's chosen one and the tutor of Duzha Academy, went to the city gate to appeal for justice. Laocan quickly wrote to Feng Bao, stripped Hong Jing of his official registration, sentenced him to the cane and then sent him home.

古文：至是，玮白发其事，并及堪诸贪虐状，堪免官。
现代文：直到此时，孙玮向皇帝揭发了这件事以及劳堪各种贪婪暴虐的情形，免了劳堪的官。
English: Up to this time, Sun Yat-sen revealed this matter to the emperor, as well as the various greedy and tyrannical situations of Laocen, and exempted Laocen officials.

古文：未几，朝选妻诉冤，邱橓亦为讼，竞复援胡槚、王宗载事，请与堪俱死，乃遣堪戍。
现代文：不多久，洪朝选的妻子上诉冤屈，丘木舜也为他申诉，洪竞又援引胡木贾、王宗载的故事，请求和劳堪一起死，于是将劳堪流放戍边。
English: Not long after, the wife of Hong Chaoren appealed the grievance, Qiu Muxuan also appealed for him, Hong Jing also invoked the stories of Humujia and Wang Zongzai, and asked to die with Laokan, so Laokan was exiled to Lopian.

古文：当是时，厂卫承冯保余威，滥受民讼；抚按访察奸猾，多累无辜；有司断狱，往往罪外加罚；帝好用立枷，重三百余斤，犯者立死。
现代文：这个时候，厂卫继承冯保的余威，随便接受老百姓的诉讼官司；巡抚巡按官员寻访察问奸情，大多连累无辜的人；有关部门断案，往往在本罪之外加重刑罚，皇帝喜欢用 立枷 ，重达三百多斤，受这刑的人马上就死。
English: At this time, the guards inherited Feng Bao's influence and casually accepted lawsuits from the common people; the inspectors and officials visited and investigated adulterous affairs, mostly involving innocent people; the relevant departments decided the case, often increasing the punishment in addition to the crime. The emperor liked to use the standing yoke, weighing more than three hundred pounds, and the person who suffered this punishment would die immediately.

古文：玮皆极陈其害。
现代文：孙玮都极力陈述它们的危害。
English: Sun Yudu tried his best to explain their harm.

古文：诏立枷如故，余从玮言。
现代文：下诏除 立枷 照原样外，其余的都按孙玮说的改了。
English: The following edict excepts the standing yoke as it was, and the rest has been changed according to what Sun Yat-sen said.

古文：以母病，不候命擅归，坐谪桃源主簿。
现代文：因为母亲病了，不等皇帝命令就擅自跑回家，被定罪贬职为桃源县主簿。
English: Because his mother was ill, he did not wait for the emperor's order and ran home without authorization. He was convicted and demoted to the position of Taoyuan County's chief clerk.

古文：久之，历迁太常卿。
现代文：过了很久，调任提升为太常寺卿。
English: After a long time, he was promoted to the post of Lord of Taijo-ji Temple.

古文：三十年，以右副都御史巡抚保定。
现代文：万历三十年以右副都御史的身份巡抚保定。
English: He served as the governor of Baoding for 30 years as the right vice-governor.

古文：朝鲜用兵，置军天津，月饷六万，悉派之民间。
现代文：朝鲜战争期间驻兵天津，每月六万两粮饷，都从民间征集。
English: During the Korean War, soldiers stationed in Tianjin collected 60,000 taels of grain per month from civilians.

古文：先任巡抚汪应蛟役军大治水田，以所入充饷。
现代文：前任巡抚汪应蛟役使士兵大修水田，收获所得充为军饷。
English: The previous governor, Wang Yingtao, sent soldiers to overhaul the paddy fields, and the harvest income was used as military pay.

古文：玮踵行之，田益垦，遂免加派，岁比不登，旱蝗、大水相继，玮多方振救，帝亦时出内帑佐之。
现代文：孙玮继承他，开垦田地更多，从而免除另外加派赋税。连年遭灾，不是旱灾、蝗灾就是大水，庄稼歉收，孙玮想方设法赈救灾民，皇帝也时常从国库拿钱出来帮助他。
English: Sun Yat-sen succeeded him and cultivated more fields, thereby exempting him from additional taxation. After years of suffering from disasters, whether droughts, locust plagues or floods, and poor harvests, Sun Yat-sen tried his best to help the victims. The emperor also often took money from the treasury to help him.

古文：所条荒政，率报允。
现代文：上报救荒措施，都答应了。
English: All of the reported measures to relieve the famine have been approved.

古文：畿辅矿使倍他省，矿已竭而搜凿不已，至岁责民赔纳。
现代文：京城附近的矿使是其他省份的一倍，矿开采完了搜刮却没有停止，到了每年责备百姓赔偿贡纳的地步。
English: The number of miners in the vicinity of the capital is double that of other provinces, and mining has been scrounged but not stopped, to the point of blaming the people for compensation every year.

古文：玮累疏陈其害，且列天津税使马堂六大罪，皆不省。
现代文：孙玮多次上疏陈述它的危害，并且条列了天津税使马堂的六大罪状，皇帝都不省悟。
English: Sun Yat-sen repeatedly explained the harm of it, and listed the six major crimes of the Tianjin Taxation Horse Hall, but the emperor did not understand.

古文：就进兵部侍郎，召为右都御史，督仓场。
现代文：升任兵部侍郎，征召任命为右都御史，监督仓场。
English: He was promoted to the position of attendant of the military department, was conscripted and appointed as the governor of the right capital, and supervised the warehouse.

古文：进户部尚书，督仓场如故。
现代文：提拔为户部尚书，依旧监督仓场。
English: He was promoted to head of the household department and still oversees the warehouse.

古文：大僚多缺，命署戎政。
现代文：大官多有空缺，命令他代理军政。
English: There were many vacancies for high-ranking officials, and he was ordered to act as military governor.

古文：已，又兼署兵部。
现代文：不久，又兼理兵部。
English: Soon after, he was also appointed to the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：玮言： 陛下以累累三印悉畀之臣，岂真国无人耶？
现代文：孙玮说： 陛下把国家的三个大印都交给卑职，难道国家真的没有人才吗？
English: Sun Yat-sen said, "Your Majesty has given all three great seals of the state to menial positions. Does the country really have no talent?

古文：臣所知大僚则有吕坤、刘元震、汪应蛟，庶僚则有邹元标、孟一脉、赵南星、姜士昌、刘九经，台谏则有王德完、冯从吾辈，皆德立行修，足备任使。
现代文：据卑职所知，大官就有吕坤、刘元震、汪应蛟，一般的官僚就有邹元标、孟一脉、赵南星、姜士昌、刘九经，台谏官就有王德完、冯从吾等一批人，都是道德品行双美之士，足以担当重任。
English: According to the knowledge of the lower ranks, the high-ranking officials include Lyu Kun, Liu Yuan Zhen, and Wang Ying Tong, the general bureaucrats include Xuan Yuan Biao, Meng Yiming, Zhao Nansing, Jiang Shichang, and Liu Jiu Jing, and the Taiwanese eunuchs include Wang Dehan, Feng Cong Wei and a group of people. All of them are moral and virtuous people, enough to take on heavy responsibilities.

古文：苟更阅数年，陛下即欲用之，不可得矣。 
现代文：假使再过几年，陛下想要用他们，已经不能够了。 
English: In a few years, if His Majesty wants to use them, he won't be able to.

古文：弗听。
现代文：皇帝不听。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：都御史自温纯去后，八年不置代。
现代文：都御史自从温纯离开后，已经空缺八年了。
English: The position of Metropolitan Governor has been vacant for eight years since the departure of On Chun.

古文：至四十年十二月，外计期迫，始命玮以兵部尚书掌左都御史事。
现代文：等到万历四十年十二月，在外官员的考期临近，才命令孙玮以兵部尚书的身份掌管左都御史的事情。
English: It was not until December of the 40th year of Wanli, when the examination period for foreign officials was approaching, that Sun Yat-sen was ordered to take charge of the affairs of Zuodou Imperial History as the secretary of the Military Department.

古文：玮素负时望，方欲振风纪，而是时朋党势成，言路大横。会南畿巡按御史荆养乔与提学御史熊廷弼相讦，玮议廷弼解职候勘。
现代文：孙玮的声誉一向很好。正准备整顿纪律，但这时朋党势力已经形成，言路势力强盛，赶上南畿巡按御史荆养乔同提学御史熊廷弼相互攻讦，孙玮奏议将熊廷弼解职，等候调查。
English: Sun Yat-sen's reputation had always been good. They were preparing to rectify the discipline, but at this time, the power of the fraternal party had already been formed, and the power of speech was strong. When they caught up with each other, Sun Yat-sen proposed to dismiss Xiong Tingyong from his post, pending an investigation.

古文：廷弼党官应震、吴亮嗣辈遂连章攻玮。
现代文：熊廷弼的同伙官应震、吴亮嗣等一帮人于是接连上疏攻击孙玮。
English: Xiong Tingyao's associates, such as officers Ying Zhen and Wu Liang Zhi, then attacked Sun Yat-sen one after another.

古文：玮累疏乞休，帝皆慰留。
现代文：孙玮多次上疏乞求辞职，皇帝都安慰他让他留下来。
English: Sun Yat-sen repeatedly begged Shang Su to resign, and the emperor consoled him and allowed him to stay.

古文：无何，吏部以年例出两御史于外，不关都察院。玮以失职，求去益力，疏十余上。
现代文：没过多久，吏部按每年惯例派二御史外出，没有告知都察院，孙玮以为自己失职，便更加请求离职，上了十多道疏。
English: Not long after, according to the annual practice, the cadre department sent two officials to go out and did not inform the Duka Academy. Sun Yat-sen thought that he had failed in his duty, so he requested to leave his post even more, and he was fired from more than ten positions.

古文：明年七月稽首文华门，出郭候命。
现代文：第二年七月在文华门磕头，到城门外等候命令。
English: In July of the following year, they marched to Wenhua Gate in Shantou and waited for orders outside the city gate.

古文：至十月，始予告归。
现代文：到了十月份，才批准告老还乡。
English: It was not until October that he was allowed to return home.

古文：天启改元，起南京吏部尚书，改兵部，参赞机务。
现代文：天启元年，起用为南京吏部尚书，改任兵部，参赞机要事务。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, he was appointed as the secretary of the Nanjing Personnel Department, and was reassigned to the Military Department, where he was in charge of important affairs.

古文：三年，召拜刑部尚书。
现代文：三年征召授职刑部尚书。
English: Three years of conscription to the Ministry of Justice.

古文：囚系众，狱舍至不能容，玮请近畿者就州县分系。
现代文：拘囚的罪犯太多，以至于监狱都容纳不下。孙玮请求让京都附近的州县就地拘囚。
English: There were so many criminals in custody that the prisons could not hold them all. Sun Yat-sen requested that the states and counties around Kyoto be allowed to detain prisoners on the spot.

古文：内使王文进杀人，下司礼议罪，其余党付法司。
现代文：内使王文进杀人，交给司礼判罪，他的同谋交给法律部门。
English: Wang Wenzhong, an internal affairs officer, was convicted of homicide and handed over to the procuratorate, while his accomplice was handed over to the legal department.

古文：玮言一狱不可分两地，请并文进下吏，不听。
现代文：孙玮说一件案子不能分在两个地方，请求将王文进一起下狱，皇帝不听。
English: Sun Yat-sen said that a case cannot be divided into two places, and requested that Wang Wenjin be sent to prison together. The emperor did not listen.

古文：其冬，以吏部尚书再掌左都御史事，累以老疾辞，不允。
现代文：这一年冬天，以吏部尚书的身份又一次执掌左都御史的事情，多次以年老多病相推辞，不准。
English: In the winter of that year, he was once again in charge of the left capital's imperial history in the capacity of the secretary Shang Shu, but he was not allowed to resign because he was too old and sick.

古文：明年秋，疾笃，上疏曰： 今者天灾迭见，民不聊生。
现代文：第二年秋天，病重，上疏说： 现在天灾不断，民不聊生。
English: In the autumn of the second year, when she was seriously ill, Shang Suo said: Now natural disasters continue, people do not want to live.

古文：内而城社可忧，外而牖户未固。
现代文：对内则国家堪忧，对外则边防不稳。
English: Internally, the country is worried, and externally, the border defense is unstable.

古文：法纪凌迟，人心瓦解。
现代文：法纪松弛，人心涣散。
English: Law and order are slack, and people's morale is low.

古文：陛下欲图治平，莫如固结人心；欲固结人心，莫如登用善类。
现代文：陛下想要国家太平，应该先安定民心，要想安定民心，应该先起用好人。
English: If His Majesty wants peace in the country, he should first stabilize the people's hearts. If he wants to stabilize the people's hearts, he should first employ good people.

古文：旧辅臣刘一燝，宪臣邹元标，尚书周嘉谟、王纪、孙慎行、盛以弘、钟羽正等，侍郎曹于汴，词臣文震孟，科臣侯震旸，台臣江秉谦，寺臣满朝荐，部臣徐大相，并老成蹇谔，跧伏草野，良可叹惜。
现代文：原来的辅臣刘一火景，宪臣邹元标，尚书周嘉谟、王纪、孙慎行、盛以弘、钟羽正等，侍郎曹于汴，词臣文震孟，科臣侯震，台臣江秉谦，寺臣满朝荐，部臣徐大相，都是老成持重、品行正直的人，却埋没民间，多么令人感叹、惋惜。
English: The former aide-de-camp Liu Yiguo, the gendarme Xuan Yuanbiao, the scholars Zhou Jia Mu, Wang Ji, Sun Sheng Xing, Sheng Yihong, Zhong Yu Zheng, the attendant Cao Yuxuan, the poet Wen Zhen Meng, the scholar-in-training Hou Zhen, the scholar-in-training Jiang Bingqian, the priest-in-training Manchu Chao, and the minister-in-training Xu Dasong, were all men of long standing and integrity, but they buried the people. How regrettable and pitiful it is.

古文：倘蒙简擢，必能昭德塞违，为陛下收拾人心。
现代文：倘若蒙陛下选拔起用，一定能够发扬美德、杜绝邪恶，替陛下安抚民心。
English: If selected and appointed by His Majesty, he will surely be able to promote virtue, eliminate evil, and appease the people's hearts for His Majesty.

古文：尤望寡欲以保圣躬，勤学以进主德，优容以广言路，明断以揽大权。
现代文：卑臣恳切希望陛下节制欲望以保养圣体，勤奋学习以增进美德，态度宽厚以增广言路，决断英明从而掌握国家大权。
English: He earnestly hopes that His Majesty will restrain his desires in order to preserve the sacred body, study diligently in order to improve his virtue, be generous in his attitude in order to broaden his speech, and make wise decisions in order to grasp the power of the state.

古文：臣遘疾危笃，报主无期，敢竭微忱，用当尸谏。 
现代文：臣患病太重，没有机会报答皇上，冒昧地竭尽我微小的心意，权当以死劝谏。 
English: My vassal is too ill to have the opportunity to repay the emperor, so I have the temerity to exhaust my small mind and persuade him to die.

古文：遂卒，赠太子太保。
现代文：不久逝世，赠为太子太保。
English: He died soon after and was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：魏忠贤用事，陕西巡抚乔应甲劾玮素党李三才、赵南星，不当叨冒恩恤。
现代文：魏忠贤当权，陕西巡抚乔应甲弹劾孙玮平素与李三才、赵南星结党，不应当贪图冒领皇上的恩恤。
English: When Wei Zhongxian was in power, the governor of Shaanxi Province, Qiao Yingjia, impeached Sun Yuping and Li Sancai, and Zhao Nansing formed a party. They should not covet the emperor's favor.

古文：诏追诰命，夺其荫。
现代文：皇上下诏将诰命收回，剥夺他的荫庇。
English: The Emperor's edict revoked his death sentence, depriving him of his shadow.

古文：崇祯初，复之。
现代文：崇祯初年又予以恢复。
English: It was restored in the first year of Chongzheng.

古文：后谥庄毅。
现代文：后来谥号为 庄毅 。
English: Later, his nickname was Zhuang Yi.

古文：钟羽正，字叔濂，益都人。
现代文：钟羽正，字叔濂，山东益都人。
English: Zhong Yu Zheng, also known as Zhu Xi, is from Yidu, Shandong Province.

古文：万历八年进士。除滑县知县。甫弱冠，多惠政，征授礼科给事中。
现代文：万历八年进士，授职滑县知县，刚刚二十来岁，就很有惠政，征召任命为礼科给事中。
English: In the eighth year of Wanli, he was promoted to the rank of scholar. He was just in his twenties when he was appointed to the post of a scholar of etiquette.

古文：疏言朝讲不宜辍，张鲸不宜赦，不报。
现代文：上疏说皇帝上朝不应该停顿，张鲸不应该赦免，奏疏送上，没有回音。
English: Shang Zhao said that the emperor should not pause, Zhang Wei should not be pardoned, and there was no response.

古文：迁工科左给事中，出视宣府边务。
现代文：调任工科左给事中，出巡宣府边防事务。
English: He was transferred to the Engineering Division of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and was assigned to patrol the border defense affairs of the Propaganda Department.

古文：又劾罢副总兵张充实等，而悉置诸侵盗军资者于理。
现代文：哈剌慎、老把都各部要挟增加互市赏钱二十七万多两银子。钟羽正建议削减它。又弹劾罢免了副总兵张允实等人，而将各侵吞盗用军用物资的人交给法官处理。
English: Haruchishin, who has long been threatening the various ministries of the capital to increase the market reward money to more than 270,000 taels of silver. Zhong Yu is proposing to reduce it. He also impeached and dismissed the vice-commander Zhang Yunshi and others, and handed over to the judge those who had stolen and misused military materials.

古文：还为吏科都给事中。
现代文：回到北京当吏科都给事中。
English: Back in Beijing, all the officials were busy.

古文：劾礼部侍郎韩世能，蓟辽总督蹇达，大理少卿杨四知、洪声远不职，四知、声远坐贬谪。
现代文：弹劾礼部侍郎韩世能，蓟、辽总督蹇达，大理寺少卿杨四知、洪声远不尽职守，杨四知、洪声远被定罪贬职流放。
English: Impeachment of the attendant of the ceremonial department, Han Shimeneng, and the governor of Liaoning Province, Yan Da; the junior secretary of Dali Temple, Yang Shizhi, and Hong Xiangyuan, for not performing their duties; Yang Shizhi and Hong Xiangyuan were convicted, demoted and exiled.

古文：时当朝觐，请禁馈遗，言： 臣罪莫大于贪。
现代文：这时正是上朝的时候，请求禁止馈赠，说： 做臣子的罪过没有比贪财更严重的。
English: It was at this time, when he ascended the throne, that he asked for a ban on gifts, saying: "The sin of being a courtier is no more serious than greed.

古文：然使内臣贪而外臣不应，外臣贪而内臣不援，则尚相顾畏莫敢肆。
现代文：然而倘使朝内大臣贪财但朝外的大臣不响应，朝外大臣贪财但朝内大臣不予勾结援手，那么还可以相互制约而不至于太放肆。
English: However, if the Minister of the Imperial Household is greedy for money but the ministers outside the Imperial Household do not respond, or the Minister of the Imperial Household is greedy for money but the Minister of the Imperial Household does not lend a helping hand, then it is possible to control each other without being too presumptuous.

古文：今内以外为府藏，外以内为窟穴，交通赂遗，比周为奸，欲仕路清、世运泰，不可得也。 
现代文：现在朝内的把朝外的当作库府，朝外的把朝内的当作窖穴，相互勾结贿赂，结党营私，想要为官之途清廉，世风好转，已经不可能了。 
English: Nowadays, it is no longer possible for those inside the government to treat those outside the government as a treasury, and for those outside the government to treat those inside the government as a pit, to collude with each other in bribery, to form parties to serve one's own interests, and to seek a clean career and a better world.

古文：帝善其言，敕所司禁之。且命阁部大臣公事议于朝房，毋私邸接宾客。
现代文：皇帝认为说得好，下诏让有关部门禁止，并且命令阁部大臣公事在朝廷讨论，不要在私人住所接待宾客。
English: The emperor thought it was well said, and issued an edict to the relevant departments to ban it, and ordered the cabinet minister to discuss business at the imperial court, and not to receive guests at private residences.

古文：吏部推孟一脉应天府丞，蔡时鼎江西提学，副以吕兴周、马犹龙。
现代文：吏部推举孟一脉为应天府丞，吕兴周为他副手，蔡时鼎为江西提学，马犹龙为他的副官。
English: The cadre department nominated Meng Yizheng as Ying Tianfu Zeng, Lv Xing Zhou as his deputy, Cai Shiding as Jiangxi Ti Xue, and Mayulong as his adjutant.

古文：帝恶一脉、时鼎尝建言，皆用副者。
现代文：皇帝讨厌孟一脉、蔡时鼎曾提过意见，都任用副官。
English: The emperor disliked Meng Yizhen and Cai Shiding, both of whom had raised objections, and appointed them as aides-de-camp.

古文：羽正率同列上言： 陛下不用一脉、时鼎，中外谓建白之臣，不惟一时见斥，而且复进无阶，销忠直之气，结谏诤之舌，非国家福。 
现代文：钟羽正率同僚上疏说： 陛下不任用孟一脉、蔡时鼎，朝廷内外以为曾提过意见的大臣，不仅被斥退一时，而且再次提升的机会也没有，打击忠诚正直的风气，直言的规劝者无法开口，不是国家的福气。 
English: Zhong Yu Zheng led his colleague Shang Zuo to say: His Majesty did not appoint Meng Yizheng and Cai Shiding, and the ministers who were thought to have raised opinions both inside and outside the court were not only dismissed for a while, but also had no opportunity to be promoted again. It is not a blessing for the country to attack the loyal and honest culture, and the straight-talking persuaders cannot open their mouths.

古文：疏入，忤旨，夺俸有差。
现代文：奏疏呈上，违反圣旨，剥夺各人的俸禄不等。
English: In violation of the Holy Will, the salary of each person was not equal.

古文：二十年正月，偕同官李献可等请皇长子出阁豫教。帝怒，谪献可官。
现代文：万历二十年正月，跟同僚李献可等人一起请求皇太子出宫就学，皇帝生气，贬李献可的官职。
English: In the first month of the 20th year of the Wanli calendar, together with his colleague Li Xianke and others, he asked the crown prince to leave the palace to study. The emperor was angry and demoted Li Xianke's official position.

古文：羽正以己实主议，请与同谪，竟斥为民。
现代文：钟羽正认为实际上是自己的主意，请求与李献可一起贬官，竟然被贬斥为平民。
English: Zhong Yu Zheng thought that it was actually his own idea and asked to be demoted together with Li Xian Ke, but he was actually demoted to a commoner.

古文：杜门读书，士大夫往来其地，率辞不见。
现代文：闭门读书，士大夫经过他住的地方，一概推辞不会见。
English: Studying behind closed doors, the scholar-bureaucrat passes by his place of residence, and there is never a refusal.

古文：林居几三十年。
现代文：在乡野居住了近三十年。
English: He has lived in the countryside for nearly thirty years.

古文：光宗立，起太仆少卿。
现代文：光宗即位，起用为太仆寺少卿。
English: When Mitsumune ascended the throne, he was appointed to the post of Daju-ji Shokei.

古文：未至，进本寺卿。
现代文：未到任，提升为太仆寺卿。
English: Before taking office, he was promoted to the position of Taipo Jikyo.

古文：天启二年，吏部将用为左副都御史，羽正辞曰： 冯公从吾佥院已久，吾后入先之，是长竞也。
现代文：天启二年，吏部将任命他为左副都御史，钟羽正推辞说： 冯从吾先生做佥都御史已经很长时间了。
English: In the second year of the Apocalypse, the Ministry of Personnel appointed him as the Left Deputy Metropolitan Historian. Zhong Yu Zheng declined, saying: "It has been a long time since Mr. Feng has been the Metropolitan Historian.

古文：西台何地，可以是风有位乎？ 
现代文：我是后来人，排在他前面，是助长争逐之风。西御史台是什么地方，难道有这种风气存在的位置？ 
English: I'm a latecomer, ahead of him in the queue, and I'm contributing to the competitive spirit. What is West Midtown, and is there a place for this kind of spirit to exist?

古文：乃受佥都御史而让从吾为副。
现代文：于是接受佥都御史而让冯从吾当左副都御史。
English: As a result, he accepted the post of deputy governor-general and let Feng Congwu become deputy governor-general.

古文：甫入署，即言： 方从哲进药议谥，封后移宫，无谋鲜断，似佞似欺，宜免其官秩，使为法受过。
现代文：刚进入官署，就说： 方从哲进献药丸讨论谥号，封太后迁移宫室，没有谋略而少决断，既巧言媚上又妄言欺下，应该免除他的官级，让他接受法律的惩罚。
English: As soon as he entered the government office, he said: Fang Zhejin offered pills to discuss the title of the emperor, the empress dowager moved the palace, there was no strategy but little decision-making, both cleverly flattering and deceiving, he should be exempted from his official rank and let him accept legal punishment.

古文：沈纮结内援，招权贿，宜遄决其去。 
现代文：沈翭与宫内相勾结，揽权行贿，应该立即把他赶走。 
English: Shen Rong is colluding with palace courtiers to seize power and pay bribes. He should be expelled immediately.

古文：群小多不悦。
现代文：朝中邪佞之辈都不高兴。
English: The evil people in the imperial court are not happy.

古文：熊廷弼、王化贞之狱，众议纷呶。
现代文：熊廷弼、王化贞的官司，大家议论纷扬。
English: The court cases of Xiong Tingyao and Wang Huazhen have caused a lot of discussion.

古文：羽正言： 向者开原、铁岭之罪不明，致失辽阳；辽阳之罪不明，致失广宁。
现代文：钟羽正说： 以前开原、铁岭的罪责不明，导致丧失了辽阳，辽阳的罪责不明，导致丧失了广宁。
English: Zhong Yuzheng said: Previously, the unknown culpability of Kaiyuan and Tieling led to the loss of Liaoyang, and the unknown culpability of Liaoyang led to the loss of Guangning.

古文：朝廷疆土，堪几番败坏！ 
现代文：国家的疆土，怎么经受得起三番五次地丢失。 
English: How can a country's territory afford to be lost again and again?

古文：由是二人皆坐大辟。
现代文：由此这二人都被定罪处以重刑。
English: As a result, both men were convicted and sentenced to heavy prison terms.

古文：会朱童蒙以讲学击邹元标及从吾，羽正言书院之设，实为京师首善劝，不当议禁，因自劾乞休。
现代文：正好朱童蒙用讲学的事情来攻击邹元标及冯从吾，钟羽正说书院的设置，实在是北京城里的第一好事，不应该禁止，于是请求退休。
English: Just as Zhu Tongmeng was using the issue of lectures to attack Zou Yuanbiao and Feng Congwu, Zhong Yu Zheng said that the establishment of the college was really the first good thing in Beijing and should not be banned, so he asked to retire.

古文：顷之，代从吾为左副都御史，俄改户部右侍郎，督仓场。
现代文：没多久，代替冯从吾当左副都御史，后改任户部右侍郎，监督仓场。
English: Not long after, he replaced Feng Zongerdang as the left vice-governor of the capital, and later he was appointed as the right attendant of the household, supervising the warehouse.

古文：明年春，拜工部尚书。
现代文：第二年春天，授官工部尚书。
English: In the spring of the following year, he was awarded a post in the engineering department.

古文：故事，奄人冬衣隔岁一给。是夏六月，群奄千余人请预给，蜂拥入署，碎公座，殴掾吏，肆骂而去。
现代文：太监隔一年发一次冬衣。这年夏天六月份，众太监一千多人请求预领冬衣，蜂拥入官署，打碎办公桌椅，殴打办事员，谩骂着离开了。
English: Eunuchs are issued winter coats once every other year. In June of this summer, more than a thousand eunuchs requested to receive winter coats in advance, swarmed into the government office, smashed desks and chairs, beat clerks, and left with abuse.

古文：盖忌羽正者嗾奄使发难也。
现代文：大概是忌恨钟羽正的人唆使太监故意与钟羽正为难。
English: It was probably someone who hated Zhong Yu Zheng who instigated the eunuch to deliberately get into trouble with Zhong Yu Zheng.

古文：羽正疏闻，因求罢。
现代文：钟羽正因为这事上疏请求辞职。
English: It is precisely because of this matter that Zhong Yu requested to resign.

古文：诏司礼太监杖谪群奄，而谕羽正出视事。
现代文：皇帝下诏让司礼太监棒打众闹事太监，把他们贬职，谕示钟羽正出来处理事务。
English: The emperor decreed that the eunuchs who had caused trouble should be beaten by the eunuchs in charge of ceremony and etiquette, and that they should be demoted. He also ordered Zhong Yu to come out to deal with the matter.

古文：羽正求去益坚，因言： 今帑藏殚虚，九边壮士日夜荷戈寝甲，弗获一饱；庆陵工卒负重乘高，暴炎风赤日中，求佣钱不得；而独内官请乞，朝至夕从。
现代文：钟羽正请求离职更加坚定，于是说： 现在国库空虚，九边的战士日夜枕戈待旦，却吃不到一顿饱饭。庆陵的工人登高负重，顶烈日冒酷暑，却得不到工钱。唯独宫内的官员有什么请求，早上报告打上来，晚上就批准了。
English: Zhong Yu was asking for a firmer resignation, so he said: Now the treasury is empty, the soldiers on the nine sides are waiting day and night, but they can't eat a full meal. The workers in Qingling are carrying heavy loads, braving the scorching sun and heat, but they don't get paid. However, if the officials in the palace have any requests, the report is typed up in the morning and approved in the evening.

古文：此辈闻之，其谁不含愤？
现代文：这事传扬出去，哪个不愤慨？
English: Spread the word, who wouldn't be outraged?

古文：臣奉职不称，义当罢黜。 
现代文：卑臣不能克尽职称，按理应该罢官免职。 
English: If the Bechuan cannot fulfill his duties, he should be removed from office.

古文：复三疏自引归。
现代文：又上了三道奏疏，自行引退了。
English: He also joined Sando Sonosho and retired on his own.

古文：逾年，逆党霍维华追理三案，言羽正委身门户，遂削夺。
现代文：过了一年，阉党霍维华追查三案，说钟羽正投身于帮派之中，于是剥夺了他的官级。
English: A year later, the Kuomintang Hovei Hua investigated three cases, saying that Zhong Yu was devoting himself to the gang, and deprived him of his official rank.

古文：崇祯初，复官。
现代文：崇祯初年，恢复他的官级。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, his official rank was restored.

古文：久之，卒。赠太子太保。
现代文：不久去世，赠太子太保。
English: He died soon after and was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo.

