古文：漯水出雁门阴馆县，东北过代郡桑乾县南，漯水出于累头山，一曰治水。
现代文：漯水发源于雁门郡阴馆县，往东北流过代郡桑干县南，漯水发源于累头山，又名治水。
English: Surabaya's water originates in Yinyuan County, Yanmen County, and flows to the northeast through the south of Sanggan County, Dayi County. Surabaya's water originates from Mt. Yuetou, also known as Jianshui.

古文：泉发于山侧，沿波历涧，东北流出山，径阴馆县故城西。
现代文：泉水从山边涌出，扬着轻波流过山涧，往东北流出山间，从阴馆县老城西面流过。
English: The spring water gushes out from the mountainside, flows through the foothills with light waves, flows out of the mountains to the northeast, and flows through the west of the old city of Yinyuan County.

古文：漯水又东北径白狼堆南，魏烈祖道武皇帝于是遇白狼之瑞。故斯阜纳称焉。
现代文：漯水又往东北流经白狼堆南。魏烈祖道武帝在这里遇到白狼，认为是吉兆，所以就称这里为白狼堆。
English: The Wei Emperor Daowu encountered a white wolf here and considered it to be a good omen, so it was called the White Wolf Mound.

古文：阜上有故宫，庙楼榭基雉尚崇，每至鹰隼之秋，羽猎之日，肆阅清野，为升眺之逸地矣。
现代文：山上有一座旧宫庙，楼榭的台基和墙垣还相当高，到秋天带了鹰华去打猎，放眼眺望空旷的原野，这里真是登高望远的胜地。
English: There is an old palace temple on the mountain. The foundation of the tower and the walls are still quite high. In the autumn, I took Yinghua to go hunting and looked out over the open fields. This is truly a place of scenic beauty.

古文：漯水又东流四十九里，东径巨魏亭北，又东，崞川水注之，水南出崞县故城南，王莽之崞张也。
现代文：漯水又往东流了四十九里，东经巨魏亭北边，又东流，有哼川水注入。哼川水发源于哼县老城南边，这就是王莽时的哼张。
English: Surabaya water flowed eastward for another forty-nine miles, eastward to the north of the Giant Wei Pavilion, and eastward again, with Hem River water injected. Hem River water originated from the south of Hem County Old Town, which is the Hem Zhang of Wang Mangshi.

古文：县南面玄岳，右背崞山，处二山之中，故以崞张为名矣。
现代文：县城南面朝向玄岳山，右边靠着哼山，位于二山之－间，因此以哼张为名。
English: The southern side of the county seat faces Genrokuyama, and the right side leans against Hemuyama, which is located between the two mountains, hence the name Hemjang.

古文：其水又西出山。谓之崞口，北流径繁畤县故城东，王莽之当要也。
现代文：哼川水又西流出山―山口叫哼口―往北流经繁峙县老城东准就是王莽时的当要。
English: The water of the Hem River flows out of the mountain in the west - Yamaguchi is called Hemguchi - and flows northward through the old city of Shanzhai County. The east junction is the most important when Wang Mang is on the move.

古文：又北径巨魏亭东，又北径剧阳县故城西，王莽之善阳也。
现代文：又往北流经巨魏亭东面，又往北流经剧阳县老城西面，这就是王莽时的善阳。
English: It also flows northward through the east of the Giant Wei Pavilion, and northward through the west of the old city of Yuyang County. This is the good yang of Wang Mang.

古文：按《十三州志》曰：在阴馆县东北一百三里。
现代文：《十三州志》说：剧阳县在阴馆县东北一百零三里。
English: "The History of the Thirteen Provinces" says: Duyang County is 103 miles northeast of Yinyuan County.

古文：其水又东注于漯水，漯水又东径班氏县南，如浑水注之，水出凉城旋鸿县西南五十余里，东流径故城南，北俗谓之独谷孤城，水亦即名焉。
现代文：哼川水又往东流注入漯水。漯水又往东流经班氏县城南，如浑水注入。如浑水发源于凉城郡旋鸿县西南五十多里，往东流经老城南，北方人俗称独谷孤城，水也以此为名。
English: The water of the Hem River flows eastward into the water of the Yangtze River. The Yangtze River flows eastward through the south of the city of Banji County, and the water of the Yangtze River flows into the muddy water. The muddy water originates more than fifty miles southwest of Xuanhong County, Liangcheng County, and flows eastward through the south of the old city. The northerners are commonly known as the lonely city of the valley, and the water is also named after this.

古文：东合旋鸿池水，水出旋鸿县东山下，水积成池，北引鱼水，水出鱼溪，南流注池。
现代文：如浑水往东流与旋鸿池水汇合。
English: As muddy water flows eastward, it merges with the waters of Zhenhong Pond.

古文：池水吐纳川流，以成巨沼，东西二里，南北四里，北对凉川城之南池，池方五十里，俗名乞伏袁池。
现代文：池水接纳了溪流，成为很大的池沼，东西宽二里，南北长四里，北面与凉川城的南池相对。南池方圆五十里，俗名乞伏袁池。
English: The pond water absorbed the stream and became a large pond. It is two miles wide from east to west, and four miles long from north to south. It faces the South Pond of Liangchuan City to the north. The South Pond has a circumference of fifty miles. It is popularly known as Begging Yuan Pond.

古文：虽隔越山阜，鸟道不远，云霞之间常有。
现代文：二池虽然有山相隔，但从崎岖的山径过去，也并不远。
English: Although Futaki is separated by mountains, it is not far from the rugged mountain trails.

古文：西南流径旋鸿县南，右合如浑水。
现代文：水往西南流经旋鸿县南面，在右边与如浑水汇合，两条水都可称为如浑水。
English: The water flows to the southwest through the south of Zhunhong County, and merges with the muddy water on the right. Both waters can be called muddy water.

古文：是总二水之名矣。
现代文：如浑水又往东南流经永固县。
English: The turbid water then flows southeast through Yonggu County.

古文：历诸池沼，又南径虎圈东，魏太平真君五年，成之以牢虎也。
现代文：永固县是太和年间按照一所山堂的名字来命名的。如浑水在右边汇合了羊水。羊水发源于平城县西苑外的武州塞，北流出塞，再向东转，流经燕昌城南面。据《燕书》载，建兴十年为关虎而建的。
English: Yonggu County was named after the name of a mountain temple in Tahe years. For example, muddy water is joined by amniotic fluid on the right. The amniotic fluid originates from the Wuzhou dam outside the West Garden in Pingcheng County, flows out of the dam to the north, then turns east and flows through the south of Yanchang City. According to "The Book of Swallows," it was built for Guanhu after ten years of construction.

古文：季秋之月，圣上亲御圈上。
现代文：九月间皇上亲临虎圈之上，命令勇士在下面圈中奋力制伏猛虎，就同勇士高奔戎的事迹相仿。
English: In September, the emperor personally visited the tiger enclosure and ordered the warriors to fight and subdue the tigers in the lower enclosure, which was similar to the deeds of the warriors of Gaoban Rong.

古文：敕虎士效力于其下，事同奔戎，生制猛兽，即《诗》所谓袒裼暴虎，献于公所也。故魏有《捍虎图》也。又径平城西郭内，魏太常七年所城也。
现代文：正如《诗经》所描写的：赤膊徒手把猛虎捉住，把它进献于公的住处。因此魏时有《捍虎图》。水又流经平城西侧城内，此城为魏泰常七年所建。
English: As described in the "Song of Songs," a shirtless man captured a tiger with his bare hands and presented it to the official residence. Therefore, there was a "Tiger Defense Map" in the Wei Dynasty. The water also flowed through the west side of Pingcheng City, which was built by Wei Taichang in the seventh year.

古文：城周西郭外有郊天坛，坛之东侧有《郊天碑》，建兴四年立。
现代文：西边城郭外有郊天坛，天坛东边有郊天碑，是建兴四年所立。
English: On the west side of the castle, there is the Suburban Temple of Heaven, and on the east side of the Temple of Heaven, there is the Suburban Sky Monument, which was built in four years.

古文：其水又南屈，径平城县故城南。
现代文：水又往南转弯流经平城县旧城南面。
English: The water turned south again and flowed south of the old city of Pingcheng County.

古文：《史记》曰：高帝先至平城。
现代文：《史记》说：汉高祖先到平城。
English: "Histories" says: Henkel's ancestors came to Pingcheng.

古文：《史记音义》曰在雁门，即此县矣。
现代文：《史记音义》说：平城县属雁门郡，就指此县。
English: "Historical Notes" says: Pingcheng County belongs to Ganmen County, so it refers to this county.

古文：为匈奴所围处，孙畅之《述画》曰：汉高祖被围七日，陈平使能画作美女，送与冒顿，阏氏恐冒顿胜汉，其宠必衰，说冒顿解围于此矣。其水又径宁先宫东，献文帝之为太上皇，所居故宫矣。宫之东次，下有两石柱，是石虎邺城东门石桥柱也。
现代文：王莽时称为平顺。魏天兴二年所立，以洛阳八风谷的黑石琢成。太和殿东北面和紫宫寺相接，南对承贤门，门南就是皇信堂。皇信堂四周，绘有古代圣人、忠臣、烈士的肖像，旁边有题记，是辩章郎彭城张僧达、乐安蒋少游的手笔。皇信堂南面与白台相对，这座台又高又大，台基四周砌了墙壁，有阁道从里面上登，国家的图册和秘藏典籍，都存放在下面。白台的西面就是朱明阁，是值班的官员出入所经过的地方。
English: Wang Mang was called Ping Shun at the time. It was built in the second year of Wei Tian Xing, and was carved from the black stone of Luoyang's Eight Wind Valley. The northeast side of the Taihe Hall is adjacent to the Purple Palace Temple, and the south is the Chengxian Gate, and the south of the gate is the Emperor's Letter Hall. Around the Emperor's Letter Hall, there are portraits of ancient saints, loyal servants, and martyrs, and there are inscriptions on the side, which are the handwriting of Zhang Zongda, Le'an Jiang Shao You, who was a disputant of Lang Pengcheng. The south side of

古文：按柱勒赵建武中造，以其石作工妙，徙之于此。
现代文：水从御街两侧往南流经蓬台西面。魏神端三年所造，因石柱制作精致美妙，才搬移到这里来的。
English: Water flows south from both sides of the main street through the west side of the pavilion. Wei Shenduan was built three years ago, and it was moved here because of the exquisite and beautiful stone pillars.

古文：余为尚书祠部，与宜都王穆罴同拜北郊，亲所经见，柱侧悉镂云矩，上作蟠螭，甚有形势，信为工巧，去《子丹碑》则远矣。
现代文：我任尚书祠部时，与宜都王穆黑在北郊祭拜，曾亲眼看到过。柱侧雕刻云朵，上有蟠龙，气势磅礴，确实精巧，但与《子丹碑》相比却差得远了。
English: When I was in charge of the Shangshu Ancestral Shrine, I worshipped with King Mu Hei of Yidu in the northern suburbs, and I saw it with my own eyes. The clouds carved on the side of the pillar, with dragons on them, were magnificent and truly exquisite, but they were far from being comparable to the "Zidan Monument."

古文：其水又南径平城县故城东，司州代尹治皇都洛阳，以为恒州。
现代文：水又往南流经平城县老城东西，这是司州代尹的治所。迁都洛阳后，把司州改为恒州。
English: The water also flowed southward through the old city of Pingcheng County from east to west, which was the seat of Sizhou Daiyin. After the capital was moved to Luoyang, Sizhou was changed to Hengzhou.

古文：水左有大道坛庙，始光二年，少室道士寇谦之所议建也。
现代文：左岸有大道坛庙，这是始光二年，少室道士寇谦之倡议修建的。
English: On the left bank, there is a large altar temple, which was built in the second year of the Heian period on the initiative of a minor Taoist priest, Kou Qian.

古文：兼诸岳庙碑，亦多所署立，其庙阶三成，四周栏槛上阶之上，以木为圆基，令互相枝梧，以版砌其上，栏陛承阿上圆，制如明堂，而专室四户，室内有神坐，坐右列玉磬，皇舆亲降，受箓灵坛，号曰天师，宣扬道式，暂重当时。
现代文：还有其他诸岳的庙碑，也都是他所立，并亲笔题字。大道坛庙石阶有三层，四周围以栏槛，上层石阶之上，用木头做成圆形底基，一根根相抵支撑着，上面用木板铺砌，四角栏槛与石阶相连。上呈圆形，格式与明堂相似，小室有四门，室内有神座，神座的右边陈设玉馨。皇帝亲自来到灵坛上接受天书，尊寇谦之为天师。寇谦之宣扬道教，举行仪式，当时很受尊重。
English: There are other temple monuments in Zhuge that were also erected by him and inscribed with his own handwriting. The stone steps of the boulevard altar of the temple have three layers, surrounded on all four sides by sills. On the upper stone steps, a round base is made of wood, supported by a buttress. The top is paved with wooden planks, and the four-cornered sill is connected to the stone steps. The top is round, the format is similar to that of the Ming Hall, there are four doors in the small room, there is a shrine in the room, and the right side of the shrine is decorated with jade. The emperor himself came to the altar to receive the

古文：如浑水又东南流注于漯水。
现代文：坛的东北面，从前有静轮宫，是魏神康四年建造，可与柏梁台媲关。
English: On the northeast side of the altar, there used to be the Jinglun Palace, which was built by Wei Shenkang in four years and is comparable to the Bai Liang Terrace.

古文：漯水又东径平邑县故城南，赵献侯十三年，城平邑。《地理志》属代，王莽所谓平胡也。
现代文：台榭十分高大宽广，高耸云霄，就像要招引天上的神仙，远离尘世的纷扰。到太平真君十一年在平邑筑城。《地理志》以为平邑属代郡，王莽时称为平胡。
English: The platform is very tall and wide, towering above the clouds, as if to attract the gods of heaven, away from the turmoil of the world. In the eleventh year of Taiping Zhenjun, he built a city in Ping'eup. "Geography" thought that Ping'eup belonged to Dai County, and Wang Mang was called Pinghu.

古文：《十三州志》曰：城在高柳南百八十里。北俗谓之丑寅城。
现代文：《十三州志》说：县城在高柳以南一百八十里，北方人俗称丑寅城。
English: "The History of the Thirteen States" said: the county seat is 180 miles south of Gaoliu, and the northerners are commonly known as Ushi Tora City.

古文：漯水又东径沙陵南，魏金田之地也，事同曹武邺中走矣。
现代文：漯水又往东流经沙陵南面。沙陵是魏时的银矿，同曹操在邺都所定机构相似。
English: Surabaya also flows eastward to the south of Saling. Saling was a silver mine in the Wei Dynasty, similar to the organization established by Cao Cao in Xindu.

古文：漯水又东径狋氏县故城北，王莽更名之曰狋聚也。
现代文：漯水又往东流经标氏县老城北面，王莽时更名标聚。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the north of the old city of Boji County, and Wang Mangshi renamed it Boji.

古文：《十三州志》曰：县在高柳南百三十里，俗谓之苦力干城矣。
现代文：《十三州志》说：标氏县在高柳以南一百三十里，俗称苦力干城。
English: "The History of the Thirteen States" said: Boji County is one hundred and thirty miles south of Gaoliu, commonly known as the coolie city.

古文：漯水又东径道人县故城南，《地理志》，王莽之道仁也。
现代文：漯水又往东流经道人县老城南面。《地理志》说：道人就是王莽时的道仁。
English: Surabaya also flows eastward through the southern part of the old town of Daojin County. "Geography" said: Daojin is the Daojin of Wang Mang.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：初筑此城，有仙人游其地，故因以为城名矣。
现代文：《地理风俗记》说：开始筑城时，有仙人来这里嬉游，城就因此得名。
English: "Geography and Customs" says: When the construction of the city began, there were hermits who came here to play, hence the name of the city.

古文：今城北有渊，潭而不流，故俗谓之为平湖也。
现代文：现在城北有个深潭，潭水平静不流，因此俗称平湖。
English: Now there is a deep lake to the north of the city. The lake is calm and does not flow, so it is commonly known as Pinghu.

古文：《十三州志》曰：道人城在高柳东北八十里，所未详也。
现代文：《十三州志》说：道人城在高柳东北八十里，不知是否如，此。
English: "The History of the Thirteen Provinces" says: Daojincheng is eighty miles northeast of Goryu, I don't know if it's like this.

古文：漯水又东径阳原县故城南，《地理志》，代郡之属县也，北俗谓之比狋州城。
现代文：漯水又往东流经阳原县老城南面。《地理志》以为阳原县是代郡的属县，北方人俗称比那州城。
English: Surabaya also flows eastward to the south of the old city of Yangwon County. "Geography" thought that Yangwon County was a county belonging to Dai County, and people in the north are commonly known as Binazhou City.

古文：耆彦云：有潜龙出于兹浦，形类青牛焉，故渊潭受名矣。潭深不恻，而水周多莲藕生焉。
现代文：漯水又往东流，安阳水注入。安阳水发源于阳原县东北的一个水潭，北方人俗称太拔回水，水从潭中往东南流，注入漯水。
English: Surabaya water flows to the east, and Anyang water is injected. Anyang water originates from a water pond in the northeast of Yangyuan County. People in the north commonly call it "too-pull-back water." Water flows from the pond to the southeast, and is injected into Surabaya water.

古文：祁夷水又北径一故城西，西去代城五十里，又疑是代之东城，而非所详也。
现代文：漯水又往东流经东安阳县老城北面，赵惠文王三年讨伐乌丸，进入琢郡，向北追击到桑干，就是这个地方。漯水文东流，有祁夷水注入。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the old city of Donganyang County to the north. Zhao Huiwen Wang fought against the Wu Maru for three years, entered Taku County, and chased north to Sangan, which is this place. Surabaya water flows eastward, and is infused with the water of the Yi people.

古文：又径昌平郡东，魏太和中置，西南去故城六十里。
现代文：祁夷水发源于平舒县，往东流经平舒县老城南面的沼泽中。《史记》载，赵孝成王十九年设置，西南离老城六十里。
English: The Qiyi Water originates in Pingshu County and flows eastward through the swamps south of the old city of Pingshu County. According to "Histories," it was set up in the 19th year of King Zhao Xiaocheng and is 60 miles southwest of the old city.

古文：又北，连水入焉，水出瞀瞀县东，西北流，径瞀瞀县故城南，又西径广昌城南。
现代文：水又北流，有连水注入毛连水发源于雄督县东部，往西北流经雄督县老城南面，又往西流经广昌城南面。
English: The water also flows to the north, and continuous water is injected into it. The Maolian Water originates in the eastern part of Xiongdu County, flows to the northwest through the southern part of the old city of Xiongdu County, and flows to the west through the southern part of Guangchang City.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：代南二百里有广昌城，南通大岭。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：代城以南二百里有广昌城，南通大岭。
English: "Wei Guoji Ji" said: There are two hundred Guangchang cities in the south of the city, and Nantong Daling is the best.

古文：即实非也。
现代文：其实不是如此。
English: That's actually not true.

古文：《十三州记》曰：平舒城东九十里有广平城，疑是城也。
现代文：《十三州记》说：平舒城东面九十里有广平城，可能就是此城。
English: "The Chronicle of the Thirteen Provinces" says: "There is a Guangping City ninety miles east of Pingshu City, which may be this city."

古文：寻其名状，忖理为非。
现代文：但从地名孕实地情况来看，又似乎不像。
English: However, judging from the names of places and the situation on the ground, it does not seem to be the case.

古文：又西径王莽城南，又西，到刺山水注之，水出到刺山西。山甚层峻，未有升其巅者。
现代文：祁夷水又往西流，经王莽城南面，又西流，有到刺山水注入。到刺山水发源于到刺山西面，山势高峻，没有人能攀上山顶。
English: The Qinyi River also flows westward, passing through the south side of Wang Mangcheng and flowing westward again, where it is injected into the Qishan River. The Qishan River originates in the west side of Qishan Mountain, which is so high that no one can climb to the top.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：代城东五十里有到刺山，山上有佳大黄也。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：代城东五十里有到刺山，山上生有优质大黄。
English: "Wei Shui Ji" said: There are thorny mountains in the east 50 of the city, and there are high-quality rhubarb on the mountain.

古文：其水北流径一故亭东，城北有石人，故世谓之石人城，西北注连水。
现代文：到刺山水往北流经一个老亭东面，城北有石人，因此俗称石人城。到刺山水往西北流注入连水。
English: To the north, the stream flows through an old pavilion to the east, and there is a stone man in the north of the city, so it is commonly known as the stone man city. To the northwest, the stream flows into Lianshui.

古文：连水又北径当城县故城西，高祖十二年，周勃定代，斩陈稀于当城，即此处也。
现代文：连水又往北流经当城县老城西面。汉高祖十二年俘虏了赵王，就把赵国改设为郡。
English: Lianshui also flowed northward through the west side of the old city of Dangcheng County. In the twelfth year of Emperor Gaozu's reign, he captured King Zhao and changed Zhao Province into a county.

古文：应劭曰：当桓都山作城，故曰当城也。又径故代东而西北流注祁夷水。
现代文：王莽时称厌狄。建武十九年，世祖把这地方封给代国宰相堪，立为侯国，过去牵招就在这里杀掉韩忠。
English: In the 19th year of the Jianwu era, the founder of the dynasty gave this place to the acting prime minister, Kan, and established it as a vassal state. In the past, Han Zhong was killed here.

古文：祁夷水西有随山，山上有神庙，谓之女郎祠，方俗所祠也。
现代文：此城在平城东南六七十里，对代城来说是在西北面。雁门水又往东南流，转弯流过一座老城，老城背靠山冈，面对沼泽，北方人俗称叱险城。
English: This city is sixty or seventy miles southeast of Pingcheng, which is in the northwest for the modern city. The water of the Wild Goose Gate flows to the southeast, turning and flowing through an old city. The old city backs up against the mountains and faces the swamp. People in the north commonly call it the city of danger.

古文：祁夷水又北径桑乾故城东。
现代文：雁门水又往东南流，折向东北，积成一片湖荡。
English: The water of the Wild Goose Gate flows to the southeast, turns to the northeast, and accumulates into a lake.

古文：而北流注于漯水。
现代文：湖形斜长而不方正，东北向长约二十多里，宽十五里，芦苇丛生。
English: The lake is oblique rather than square, about twenty miles long and fifteen miles wide in a north-easterly direction, with reeds.

古文：《地理志》曰：祁夷水出平舒县，北至桑乾入漯是也。
现代文：有敦水注入。敦水发源于西北少咸山南麓，往东流经参合县老城南。《地理风俗记》说：道人城以北五十里有参合乡，从前是县。
English: There is Dunshui injection. Dunshui originates from the south foot of the northwest Shaoxian Mountain, and flows eastward through the old city south of Sanhe County. "Geography and Customs" said: There is a Sanhe Township in the north of Dojincheng, and it used to be a county.

古文：漯水又东北径石山水口，水出南山，北流径空侯城东，《魏土地记》曰：代城东北九十里有空侯城者也。其水又东北流注漯水。
现代文：敦水又东流，有法水注入。谐水发源于东阜山下，往西北流经老城北面，民间称为和堆城。又北流，汇合敦水，往东北乱流，注入雁门水。
English: The harmonic water originates at the foot of the Dongfu Mountain, flows northwest through the north side of the old city, and is popularly known as the He Dui City. The north flow, the confluence of the Dun water, and the turbulent flow to the northeast, inject the wild goose water.

古文：漯水又东径潘县故城北，东合协阳关水，水出协溪。
现代文：因此《山海经》说：敦水发源于少咸之山，东流注入雁门之水。郭景纯说：雁门水发源于雁门山，说的就是这条水。
English: Therefore, the "Sanghaikyo" said: Dun water originated from Shao Xian Mountain, and the east flow injected the water of the Wild Goose Gate. Guo Jingshun said: The Wild Goose Gate water originated from the Wild Goose Gate Mountain, and it was this water that was said.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：下洛城西南九十里有协阳关，关道西通代郡。其水东北流，历笄头山，阚駰曰：笄头山在潘城南。
现代文：雁门水又往东北流进阳门山，称为阳门水，与神泉水汇合。神泉水发源于苇壁山北麓，水很灵验。碰到浓云密布，却不降雨，久旱无雨的时候，人们常来求雨。
English: The water of the Wild Goose Gate flows to the northeast into the Yangmen Mountain, known as the Yangmen Water, and merges with the divine spring water. The divine spring water originates from the northern foot of the Lijiang Mountain, and the water is very effective. When there are thick clouds, but no rain, when there is no rain for a long time, people often come to ask for rain.

古文：即是山也。
现代文：神泉水有两条，人们称为比连泉。
English: It is this mountain that is spoken of.

古文：又北径潘县故城，左会潘泉故渎，渎旧上承潘泉于潘城中，或云，舜所都也。
现代文：一条往东北流经一座老城东面，人们称为石虎城，往东北流，注入阳门水。又往东流经三会亭北面，又往东流，经西伺道城北面，又往东流，托台谷水注入。
English: A stream flows to the northeast through the east of an old city, known as Shihu City, and flows to the northeast, injecting Yangmen water. It also flows to the east through the north of Sanhui Pavilion, and flows to the east, through the west to the north of the city, and flows to the east, injecting Todai Valley water.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：下洛城西南四十里有潘城，城西北三里，有历山，山上有虞舜庙。《十三州记》曰：广平城东北百一十里有潘县。
现代文：托台谷水上流在苇壁北面承接神泉，往东流经阳门山南的托台谷，称为托台水。这条水汇合了山泉小溪，波滔滚滚地向东流去，中间行人要经过十多个渡日，往东流经三会亭南面，又往东流经托台亭北面，又往东北流，经马头亭北面，往东北注入雁门水。
English: The upstream water of the Totai Valley receives the divine spring on the north side of the ridge wall, and flows eastward through the Totai Valley south of Yangmen Mountain, known as the Totai Water. This water merges with the mountain spring creek and flows eastward in waves, and pedestrians in the middle have to pass through more than ten days. It flows eastward through the south side of the Sankai Pavilion, eastward through the north side of the Totai Pavilion, and northeastward, through the north side of the Matou Pavilion, and into the northeast of the Ganmen Water.

古文：《地理志》曰：王莽更名树武。
现代文：雁门水又往东流，经大宁郡北面。
English: The water of the Wild Goose Gate also flows eastward, passing through the northern part of Daining County.

古文：其泉从广十数步，东出城，注协阳关水，雨盛则通注，阳旱则不流，惟洴泉而已。关水又东北流，注于漯水。
现代文：大宁郡是魏太和年间所置。有情水注入。《山海经》所说的情水东流注入雁门水，就指这条水。《地理志》有于延水，而没有雁门水、惰水等名；《山海经》有雁门水的名目，而没有述及于延河。
English: Danying County was established during the Wei and Taiping Dynasties. It was infused with geyser water. The geyser water that was infused with geyser water by the eastward flow of geyser water mentioned in the "Song of Mountains and Seas" refers to this water. The "Geography" refers to Yan Shui, but there are no names such as the geyser water and the stagnant water; the "Song of Mountains and Seas" has the name of the geyser water, but does not mention the Yan River.

古文：漯水又东径雍洛城南，《魏土地记》曰：下洛城西南二十里有雍洛城，桑乾水在城南东流者也。漯水又东径下洛县故城南，王莽之下忠也，魏燕州广宁县广宁郡治。
现代文：自大宁郡以下，这条水也就通称于延水了。水边有桑林，因此，当时人们也把它称为萦桑河。这是因为北方很少有桑，看到这里有这么多的桑树，因而就以萦桑为水名了。于延水又往东流经冈城南面。据《史记》载，蔡泽是燕国人，因病辞去相位，被秦国封为冈成君。
English: From the county of Taining downwards, this water is also commonly known as Yu Yan Shui. There is a mulberry forest on the water's edge, so at that time people also called it the Yuxiang River. This is because there is very little mulberry in the north, and seeing so many mulberry trees here, the water is named after Yuxiang. Yu Yan Shui also flows eastwards through the south of Okancheng. According to "Histories," Cai Ze was a native of Yan, who resigned his position due to illness, and was given the title of Okanchengjun by the Qin state.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：去平城五十里，城南二百步有尧庙。漯水又东径高邑亭北，又东径三台北，漯水又东径无乡城北。《地理风俗记》曰：燕语呼毛为无，今改宜乡也。
现代文：这里可能就是蔡泽的封邑，人们称为武冈城。于延水又东流，向左流与宁川水汇合。宁川水发源于西北，往东南流经小宁县老城西面，往东南流，注入于延水。于延水又往东流经小宁县老城南面，这就是《地理志》所说的宁县，是西部都尉治所，王莽时称为博康。《魏土地记》说：大宁城以西二十里有小宁城。
English: This may be the fiefdom of Cai Ze, known as WuGang City. It flows east from YanShi, and merges with the Ning River to the left. The Ning River originates in the northwest, flows southeast to the west of the old town of Xiaoning County, and flows southeast into YanShi. It flows east from YanShi to the south of the old town of Xiaoning County. This is the Ning County mentioned in "Geography," which is the capital of the west, and was called BoKang in Wang Mang's time. "Land Records of Wei" said: There is Xiaoning City twenty west of DaNing City.

古文：漯水又东，温泉水注之，水上承温泉于桥山下。
现代文：过去本城人班丘仲家住水滨，在宁城一带卖药，活到一百多岁，人们都以为他很长寿，后来在一次地震中房屋倒塌，班丘仲和邻居兀十家都被压死了。
English: In the past, Banqiu Zhong, a native of the city, lived on the waterfront and sold medicine in the Ningcheng area. He lived to be more than a hundred years old. People thought he had a long life. Later, in an earthquake, the house collapsed, and Banqiu Zhong and thirty neighbors were crushed to death.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：下洛城东南四十里有桥山，山下有温泉，泉上有祭堂，雕檐华字，被于浦上，石池吐泉，汤汤其下，炎凉代序，是水灼焉，无改能治百疾，是使赴者若流。
现代文：有个乡民将他的尸体丢到于延水中，拿了他的药去卖。
English: A villager dumped his body in a stream and took his medicine to sell.

古文：池水北流，人于漯水。
现代文：班丘仲穿着皮衣跟上来责问他，那人吓坏了，叩头哀求宽恕。
English: The man was terrified and bowed his head begging for forgiveness as Banchuzhong, dressed in a fur coat, came up to him and scolded him.

古文：漯水又东，左得于延水口，水出塞外柔玄镇西长川城南小山。《山海经》曰：梁渠之山，无草木，多金玉，修水出焉。东南流径且如县故城南，应劭曰：当城西北四十里有且如城，故县也。
现代文：班丘仲说：我并不恨你，只是特地要让人们知道我罢了。我去了里后来他做了夫余王的使者来到宁城，这一带人称他为滴仙。于延水又东流，有黑城川水注入。这条水有三个源头，发源于黑土城的西北，三源合为一流，往东南流经黑土城西面，又往东南流经大宁县西边，往南注入延河。延河又往东流，经大宁县老城南面。《地理志》说：大宁就是广宁，王莽时叫广康。《魏土地记》说：下洛城西北一百三十里有大宁城。
English: Banqiu Zhong said, "I don't hate you, I just want to let people know about me." After I went there, he became the emissary of King Yu and came to Ningcheng. People in this area called him a drop of immortality. The Yanshui River also flows eastward, and the Heicheng River water flows into it. This water has three sources, originating in the northwest of the Black Earth City, and the three sources are combined into one. It flows southeastward through the west of the Black Earth City, and southeastward through the west of Daning County, and southward into the Yan River. The Yan River also flows eastward, through the south of the

古文：代称不拘名号变改。校其城郭，相去远矣。
现代文：于延水又往东南流经茹县老城北面，就是王莽时的毁武，世人称为如口城。《魏土地记》说：如口城在鸣鸡山以西十里，南面有一条大路，西面直达宁川。
English: At Yanshui, the water flowed to the southeast and passed through the north of the old city of Ru County, that is, the destruction of Wang Mang, the world is known as Rukou City. "Wei Shiji Ji" said: Rukou City is ten miles west of Mingji Mountain, there is a highway in the south, and the Ning River is directly to the west.

古文：《地理志》曰：中部都尉治。
现代文：于延水又往东南流经鸣鸡山西面。《魏土地记》说：下洛城东北三十里有延河，往东流，北有鸣鸡山。
English: The "Wei Shiji Ji" (Diary of the Wei Dynasty) says: There is the Yanhe River in the northeast of the city of Lower Liao, flowing to the east, and the Mingji Mountain in the north.

古文：于延水出县北塞外，即修水也。
现代文：《史记》说：赵襄子在夏屋杀掉代王，吞并了他的国土。
English: "History" says: Zhao Xiangzi killed the acting king in the summer house and annexed his land.

古文：修水又东南径马城县故城北，《地理志》曰：东部都尉治。
现代文：襄子派人到代城接回自己的姐姐。他的姐姐是代王的夫人，她到了这里，说道：代国已经灭亡了，我到哪里去呢？
English: When his sister, the wife of the acting king, got here, she said, "The acting kingdom has been destroyed, where am I going to go?"

古文：《十三州志》曰：马城在高柳东二百四十里，俗谓是水为河头，河头出戎方。
现代文：就拔下头上的替子在山石上磨利自杀了。代国百姓同情她，在这里为她立祠，因此把这座山叫磨笋山。
English: On behalf of the people of the country, they sympathized with her and built a shrine for her here, so this mountain was called the grinding mountain.

古文：土俗变名耳。
现代文：每夜有成群的野鸡在祠庙上鸣叫，所以又称鸣鸡山。
English: Every night, there are flocks of pheasants singing on the ancestral temple, so it is also called "Song Chicken Mountain."

古文：又东径零丁城南，右合延乡水，水出县西山，东径延陵县故城北。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：代城东南二十五里有马头山，山边有钟乳石溶洞。
English: "Wei Shui Ji" said: There is Mount Ma Tou in the 25th southeast of Daicheng, and there are stalactite caves on the mountainside.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：当城西北有延陵乡，故县也。俗指为琦城。
现代文：赵襄子杀害了代王，派人接回姐姐。他的姐姐是代王的夫人。
English: Zhao Xiangzi killed the acting king and sent someone to get his sister back. His sister was the acting king's wife.

古文：又东径罗亭，又东径马城南，又东注修水，又东南于大宁郡北，右注雁门水。《山海经》曰：雁门之水，出于雁门之山。
现代文：夫人说：为了弟弟而怠慢丈夫，是不仁；为了丈夫而怨恨弟弟，是不义。于是就磨替自杀了。派去的使者也自杀了。老百姓同情她，就在山边为她立庙，因此名为磨笋之山。
English: The wife said, "It is unkind to neglect one's husband for the sake of one's younger brother; it is unjust to resent one's younger brother for the sake of one's husband." So the miller committed suicide. The messenger who was sent also committed suicide. The common people sympathized with her and built a temple for her on the edge of the mountain, hence the name, Mill Hill.

古文：未详孰是。于延水又南径且居县故城南，王莽之所谓久居也。其水东南流，注于漯水。
现代文：不知哪一种说法正确。于延水又往南流经且居县老城南面，就是王莽时的久居。于延水往东南流，注入漯水。
English: I don't know which one is correct. Yu Yan Shui flows south again and flows south of the county's old town, which is where Wang Mangshi lived for a long time. Yu Yan Shui flows to the southeast and injects Surabaya.

古文：《地理志》曰：于延水东至广宁入沽。
现代文：《地理志》说：于延水东流到广宁才注入沽水，这是弄错了。
English: "Geography" said: it was a mistake to inject Surabaya water from the eastward flow of Yan Shui to Guangning.

古文：又东过涿鹿县北，涿水出涿鹿山，世谓之张公泉，东北流径涿鹿县故城南，王莽所谓抪陆也。
现代文：又往东流过涿鹿县北面，琢水发源于涿鹿山，世人称为张公泉，往东北流经涿鹿县老城南面，就是王莽时的柿陆。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern side of Elk County. Taku Water originates from Mount Elk, known to the world as Zhang Gong Spring. It flows northeastward through the southern side of the old city of Elk County, which is Wang Mangshi's persimmon land.

古文：黄帝与蚩尤战于涿鹿之野，留其民于涿鹿之阿，即于是也。
现代文：黄帝与蛋尤在涿鹿的郊野交战，黄帝战败童尤后，将他的百姓安置在涿鹿的山边，说的就是这里。
English: The Yellow Emperor and the Egg Emperor fought in the countryside of Mule Deer. After the Yellow Emperor defeated Tong Yu, he placed his people on the mountain side of Mule Deer. This is where it is said.

古文：其水又东北与阪泉合，水导源县之东泉。
现代文：琢水又往东北流，与阪泉汇合，这条水发源于县内的东泉。
English: Taku-mizu also flows to the northeast, merging with Han-sen, which originates from Higashi-sen in the prefecture.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：下洛城东南六十里有涿鹿城，城东一里有阪泉，泉上有黄帝祠。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：下洛城东南六十里，有涿鹿城，城东一里有阪泉，泉上有黄帝祠。
English: "Wei Guoji Ji" said: sixty miles southeast of the city of Xiaoluo, there is the Elk City, in the east of the city there is the Han Spring, and there is the Yellow Emperor's Shrine on the spring.

古文：《晋太康地理记》曰：阪泉亦地名也。
现代文：晋《太康地理记》说：阪泉也是地名。
English: Jin "Taikang Geography" said: Hanquan is also a place name.

古文：泉水东北流与蚩尤泉会，水出蚩尤城，城无东面。
现代文：泉水往东北流，与蛋尤泉汇合。蛋尤泉出自蛋尤城，东面没有城墙。
English: The spring water flows to the northeast, merging with the Egg-Yu Spring. The Egg-Yu Spring comes from Egg-Yu City, and there is no city wall to the east.

古文：《魏土地记》称，涿鹿城东南六里有蚩尤城。泉水渊而不流，霖雨并则流注，阪泉乱流，东北入涿水。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：涿鹿城东南六里有蛋尤城，泉水很深，但不外流，大雨连绵，泉水满溢就注入阪泉，往东北乱流注入琢水。
English: "Diary of the Wei Dynasty" says: There is an egg-shaped city in the southeast sixth of Elk City. The spring water is very deep, but it does not flow out. Heavy rain is continuous. When the spring water overflows, it is injected into the Han spring, and the turbulent flow to the northeast injects melted water.

古文：涿水又东径平原郡南，魏徙平原之民置此，故立侨郡，以统流杂。
现代文：琢水又往东流经平原郡南面，魏时将平原居民迁过来安顿在这里，所以设立侨郡，用来收留流民杂户。
English: Taku-mizu also flows eastward through the south of Pingyuan County. In the Wei Dynasty, the residents of Pingyuan were moved and settled here, so Qiao County was established to accommodate the displaced people and miscellaneous households.

古文：涿水又东北径祚亭北，而东北入漯水。
现代文：琢水又往东北流经柞亭北面，往东北注入深水。
English: Taku-mizu also flows to the northeast through the northern side of Shutei, and injects deep water to the northeast.

古文：亦云涿水枝分入匈奴者，谓之涿邪水。地理潜显，难以究昭，非所知也。
现代文：也有说琢水分支流入匈奴的叫琢邪水的，但地理情况有隐有显，很难搞清楚，这就不知道了。
English: There is also talk of a branch of the Taku water flowing into the Huns' so-called Taku evil water, but the geographical situation is unclear, it is difficult to figure out, and this is not known.

古文：漯水又东南，左会清夷水，亦谓之沧河也。
现代文：豫水又往东南流，在左边汇合清夷水，又称沧河。
English: The Yanshui River flows to the southeast and merges with the Qingyishui River, also known as the Canghe River, on the left.

古文：水出长亭南，西径北城村故城北，又西北，平乡川水注之，水出平乡亭西，西北流注清夷水。
现代文：清夷水发源于长亭南面，往西流经北城村老城北面，又往西北流，有平乡川水注入。平乡川水发源于平乡亭西面，往西北流，注入清夷水。
English: Qingshi Water originates from the south of Changting, flows westward through the north of the old town of Beicheng Village, and flows to the northwest, injecting Pingxiang River water. Pingxiang River water originates from the west of Pingxiang Pavilion, flows to the northwest, injecting Qingshi Water.

古文：清夷水又西北径阴莫亭，在居庸县南十里。
现代文：清夷水又往西北流经阴莫亭，亭在居庸县以南十里。
English: Qingyishui also flows northwest through Yinmo Pavilion, which is located ten miles south of Juyong County.

古文：清夷水又西会牧牛山水。
现代文：清夷水又往西流，汇合了牧牛山水。
English: The Qingyi River also flows to the west, merging with the pastoral cattle landscape.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：沮阳城东八十里有牧牛山，下有九十九泉，即沧河之上源也。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：在沮阳城东面八十里有牧牛山，山下有九十九泉，这就是沧河的源头。
English: "Wei Shui Ji" said: in the east of Deyang City, there are eighty cattle pastures and ninety-nine springs under the mountain, which is the source of the Canghe River.

古文：西南流，谷水与浮图沟水注之，水出夷舆县故城西南，王莽以为朔调亭也。其水俱西南流，注于沧水。
现代文：牧牛山在居庸县城东北三十里，山上有道武皇帝庙。老年人说，山下也有许多泉眼同时并涌而出，有一头毛色斑驳的神牛，下山喝干了泉水，山也因此得名。现在山下流出的九十九泉汇成一溪，往西南流，有谷水与浮图沟水注入。这两条水都发源于夷舆县老城的西南面，王莽时称为朔调亭。两水都经西南流，注入沧水。
English: Mu Niu Mountain is located 30 miles northeast of the city of Juyong County. There is a temple of Emperor Daowu on the mountain. Elderly people said that there are also many springs gushing out at the same time under the mountain. There is a mottled-haired sacred cow, which went down the mountain to drink the spring water, hence the name of the mountain. Now, the ninety-nine springs flowing out of the mountain have merged into a stream, flowing to the southwest, with water from the valley and water from the floating ditch. Both of these waters originate from the southwest side of the old city of Yiming County, known as Shuo Tuning Pavilion. Both

古文：沧水又西南，右合地裂沟，古老云，晋世地裂，分此界间成沟壑。
现代文：沧水又往西南流，在右边汇合地裂沟。据老人说，晋时发生地裂，这里就形成了沟壑。
English: The vicissitudes of the water flowed to the southwest, merging with the ground fissure on the right. According to the old man, the ground fissure occurred in Jin, and a gully was formed here.

古文：有小水，俗谓之分界水，南流入沧河。
现代文：有一条小溪，俗称分界水，往南流入沧河。
English: There is a small stream, commonly known as the boundary water, flowing south into the Canghe River.

古文：沧河又西径居庸县故城南，魏上谷郡治。
现代文：沧河又往西流经居庸县老城南面，那就是魏时的上谷郡治。
English: The Canghe River also flows westward through the southern part of the old city of Juyong County, which was Shanggu County in the Wei Dynasty.

古文：昔刘虞攻公孙瓒不克，北保此城，为瓒所擒。
现代文：从前刘虞攻打公孙攒不能取胜，向北撤退坚守此城，为公孙攒所擒。
English: Once upon a time, Liu Yu couldn't win the battle against Gongsun Bao, so he retreated to the north and held on to the city, leaving Gongsun Bao in the lurch.

古文：有粟水入焉。水出县下城西，枕水又屈径其县南，南注沧河。
现代文：沧河到这里又汇合了粟水，粟水发源于居庸县境，县城西面濒水，又转弯流经县南，往南注入沧河。
English: At this point, the Canghe River is joined by the poppy water. The poppy water originates from the border of Juyong County, the west side of the county seat is near the water, and it flows through the south of the county and flows south into the Canghe River.

古文：沧河又西，右与阳沟水合，水出县东北，西南流径居庸县故城北，西径大翮、小翮山南，高峦截云，层陵断雾，双阜共秀，竟举群峰之上，郡人王次仲，少有异志，年及弱冠，变苍颔旧文为今隶书。
现代文：沧河又西流，向右流与阳沟水汇合。阳沟水发源于居庸县东北面，往西南流经居庸县老城北面，往西流经大翩山和小翩山南面。高耸的峰峦拦住飞云；层沓的丘陵，隔断朝雾，这两座高峰风姿秀丽，凌驾于群峰之上。郡人王次仲，年少时就胸怀大志，到了二十来岁，将苍领的古文字改为现今的隶书。
English: The Yanggou River originates in the northeast of Juyong County, flows to the southwest through the north of the old city of Juyong County, and flows to the west through the south of Daping Mountain and Xiaoping Mountain. Towering peaks stop flying clouds; rugged hills, separated by morning mist, these two peaks are beautiful and dominate the peaks. The county man Wang Jizhong, when he was young, had a great ambition, and when he was in his twenties, he changed the ancient script of Canglian to the current script.

古文：秦始皇时官务烦多，以次仲所易文简便，于事要奇而召之，三征而辄不至。
现代文：秦始皇时，政务繁忙，因为王次仲所改的文字简易，便于书写，以为他是个奇才，下令召他入朝。然而接连召了三次他都不去。
English: At the time of the First Emperor of Qin, the government was busy, because the characters changed by Wang Qizhong were simple and easy to write. Thinking that he was a genius, he ordered to summon him to the court. However, he did not go after three consecutive summonses.

古文：次仲履真怀道，穷数术之美。
现代文：王次仲遵循着真性，怀藏着道心，研究数术到了最完美的境地。
English: Wang Jizhong followed the truth, cherished the Taoist spirit, and studied the art of mathematics to the most perfect state.

古文：始皇怒其不恭，令槛车送之。
现代文：秦始皇对次仲的不恭非常恼怒，下令用囚车押送他前来。
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang was very angry at Jizhong's insolence, and ordered him to be escorted to the palace in a prison wagon.

古文：次仲首发于道，化为大鸟，出在车外，翻飞而去，落二翮于斯山，故其峰峦有大翮、小翮之名矣。
现代文：囚车刚刚上路，王次仲便化作一只大鸟奋飞而去。他掉下两片羽毛，落在这座山上，所以山峰就有大翩、小翩的名字了。
English: As soon as the cart was on the road, Wang Cizhong turned into a big bird and flew away. He dropped two feathers and landed on this mountain, so the mountain has the names of Dapian and Xiaopian.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：沮阳城东北六十里有大翮、小翮山，山上神名大翮神，山屋东有温汤水口。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：沮阳城东北六十里有大翩山和小翩山，山上的神抵叫大翩神，神庙以东有温汤水口。
English: "Wei Shiji Ji" said: There are Dapian Mountain and Xiaopian Mountain in the northeast sixty of Deyang City. The god on the mountain is called Dapian God, and there is a hot water outlet east of the temple.

古文：其山在县西北二十里，峰举四十里，上庙则次仲庙也。
现代文：这座山在居庸县西北二十里，山峰高达四十里，山上的庙就是王次仲庙。
English: This mountain is located 20 miles northwest of Juyong County, and its peak is 40 miles high. The temple on the mountain is the Wangzizhong Temple.

古文：右出温汤，疗治万病，泉所发之麓，俗谓之土亭山。
现代文：山的右面有温泉，可治百病，涌出温泉的山麓，俗称土亭山。
English: On the right side of the mountain, there is a hot spring, which can cure all diseases, at the foot of the hot spring, commonly known as Duting Mountain.

古文：此水炎热倍甚诸汤，下足便烂人体。
现代文：这里要比其他各地的温泉加倍烫热，把脚踏进去便会烫烂。
English: The hot springs here are twice as hot as those in other parts of the country, and if you step into them, you will be scalded.

古文：疗疾者要须别引消息用之耳，不得言。
现代文：治病的人必须先把泉水引到别处，待稍凉后再用。
English: Those who treat the sick must first divert the spring water to another place and wait for it to cool down before using it.

古文：大翮山东，其水东南流，左会阳沟水，乱流南注沧河。
现代文：说温泉在大翩山以东是弄错了。温泉水往东南流，在左边汇合了阳沟水，往南乱流注入沧河。
English: It is a mistake to say that the hot springs are to the east of the Dapanshan. The hot spring water flows to the southeast, merges with the Yanggou water on the left, and flows southward into the Canghe River.

古文：沧河又左得清夷水口。
现代文：沧河的左边有清夷水口。
English: On the left side of the Canghe River is the Qingyi water outlet.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：牧牛泉西流，与清夷水合者也。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：牧牛泉往西流，与清夷水汇合。
English: "Diary of the Wei Dynasty" said: the cattle spring flows westward and merges with the Qingshi River.

古文：自下二水互受通称矣。
现代文：自此以下两水可以互相通称。
English: Since then, the following two waters can be called each other.

古文：清夷水又西，灵亭水注之，水出马兰西泽中，众泉泻溜归于泽，泽水所钟，以成沟读。
现代文：清夷水又西流，灵亭水注入。灵亭水来自马兰西泽，许多山泉汇集到西泽中来，泽中的水形成沟渠流出。
English: Qingyi water also flows west, and Lingting water is injected. Lingting water comes from Malan West Lake, many mountain springs come together in West Lake, and the water in the lake forms a ditch and flows out.

古文：渎水又左与马兰溪水会，水导源马兰城，城北负山势，因阿仍溪，民居所给，惟仗此水，南流出城，东南入泽水。
现代文：渠水又在左边与马兰溪水汇合。这条水发源于马兰城，扒北背山，依着山弯，靠近小溪，城内居民饮用的水全是来自溪中。溪水从城南流出，往东南注入泽水。
English: On the left, the canal water merges with the water of the Malan Creek. This water originates in Malan City, on the north side of the mountain, along the mountain bend, near the creek. The water that the residents of the city drink all comes from the creek. The stream water flows out of the south of the city and flows into the lake water to the southeast.

古文：泽水又南径灵亭北，又屈径灵亭东，次仲落鸟翮于此，故是亭有灵亭之称矣。
现代文：泽水又往南流经灵亭北面，又转弯流经灵亭东面，王次仲就在这里落下鸟毛，所以这座亭有灵亭之称。
English: The lake water flows southward through the north side of the pavilion, and then turns to flow through the east side of the pavilion. Wang Qizhong drops bird feathers here, so this pavilion is known as the spiritual pavilion.

古文：其水又南流，注于清夷水。
现代文：马兰溪水又南流，注入清夷水。
English: The water of Malan Creek also flows south, and is infused with Qingyi water.

古文：清夷水又西与泉沟水会，水导源川南平地，北注清夷水。
现代文：清夷水又西流，与泉沟水汇合，泉沟水来自川南平地，往北注入清夷水。
English: Kiyoshi-mizu also flows west, merging with the water of the spring ditch. The spring ditch water comes from the south of the river and flows north into Kiyoshi-mizu.

古文：清夷水又西南得桓公泉，盖齐桓公霸世，北伐山戎，过孤竹西征，束马悬车，上卑耳之西极，故水受斯名也。
现代文：清夷水又往西南流，汇合了桓公泉。齐桓公称霸时，曾北伐山戎，西征时又途经孤竹，停车从崎岖险阻的山径登上卑耳山最西的山峰，所以水就得到这个名字。
English: Qingshi Water also flows to the southwest, merging with Huan Gong Spring. When Qi Huan was at the top, he cut down the mountains in the north, and when he went to the west, he passed through the Lone Bamboo, stopping from the rugged and dangerous mountain path to climb the westernmost peak of Mount Bear, so the water got this name.

古文：水源出沮阳县东，而西北流入清夷水。
现代文：桓公泉发源于沮阳县以东，往西北流入清夷水。
English: Kankong Spring originates in the east of Deyang County and flows into Qingyishui to the northwest.

古文：清夷水又西径沮阳县故城北，秦上谷郡治此，王莽改郡曰朔调，县曰沮阴。
现代文：清夷水又往西流经沮阳县老城北面，秦时的上谷郡，治所就设在这里，王莽时改都名为朔调，县名为沮阴。
English: Qingyishui also flowed westward through the north of the old city of Deyang County, Qin Dynasty's Shanggu County, the government office was located here, Wang Mangshi changed the name to Shuo Tun, and the county was named Deyang.

古文：阚駰曰：涿鹿东北至上谷城六十里。
现代文：阐胭说：涿鹿县东北到上谷城六十里。
English: Elucidated: It is sixty miles from the northeast of Elk County to Uetani City.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：城北有清夷水西流也。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：城北有清夷水，往西流。
English: "Wei Shui Ji" said: North of the city there is clear water, flowing to the west.

古文：其水又屈径其城西，南流注于源水。
现代文：这条水又转弯流过城边，往西南流注入漯水。
English: This water then turns around and flows past the edge of the city, flowing to the south-west and filling up with brackish water.

古文：漯水南至马陉山，谓之落马洪。
现代文：漯水南流到马隆山，又叫落马洪。
English: Surabaya's water flows south to Mount Malong, also known as Lokmahon.

古文：又东南出山，漯水又南出山，瀑布飞梁，悬河注壑，漰湍十许丈，谓之落马洪，抑亦孟门之流也。
现代文：又往东南流出山间，漯水又南流出山，瀑布从高崖飞流直下，注入深壑，轰鸣的急流下泻十几丈，称为落马洪，也和孟门这样的险流差不多。
English: It also flows out of the mountains to the southeast, and the rushing water flows out of the mountains to the south. The waterfall flies straight down from the high cliff and injects the deep, roaring torrent down more than ten heights, called Lok Ma Hong, and is also similar to the dangerous stream such as Mengmen.

古文：漯水自南出山，谓之清泉河，俗亦谓之曰干水，非也。
现代文：漯水从南边出山后，叫清泉河，民间也称千水，其实不对。
English: After the Surabaya water comes out of the mountain from the south, it is called the Qingquan River, and the people also call it the Qianshui River, which is actually incorrect.

古文：漯水又东南径良乡县之北界，历梁山南，高梁水出焉。
现代文：漯水又往东南流经良乡县北面，流过梁山南面，高梁水就从这里流出。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the southeast through the north of Liangxiang County and flows through the south of Liangshan, and Gaoliang water flows out from here.

古文：过广阳蓟县北，漯水又东径广阳县故城北。谢承《后汉书》曰：世祖与铫期出蓟至广阳，欲南行，即此城也，谓之小广阳。
现代文：流过广阳郡蓟县北面，漯水又往东流经广阳县老城北面，谢承《后汉书》说：光武帝与姚期从蓟县出发到广阳，想往南边去，指的就是此城，叫小广阳。
English: It flows through the north of Lu County, Guangyang County, and the Surabaya River flows eastward through the north of the old city of Guangyang County. Xie Cheng of the "Hou Han Shu" said: Emperor Guangwu and Yao Ji set out from Lu County to Guangyang, and wanted to go to the south, referring to this city, called Xiao Guangyang.

古文：漯水又东北径蓟县故城南，《魏土地记》曰蓟城南七里有清泉河，而不径其北，盖《经》误证矣。
现代文：漫水又往东北流经蓟县老城南面。《魏土地记》说：蓟城以南七里有清泉河，河水并不流过城北，《水经》弄错了。
English: The floodwaters also flowed northeast to the south of the old city of Handan County. "Wei Guoji" said: There are seven clear spring rivers south of Handan City, and the river water does not flow through the north of the city. "Shui Jing" was mistaken.

古文：昔周武王封尧后于蓟，今城内西北隅有蓟丘，因丘以名邑也。犹鲁之曲阜、齐之营丘矣。
现代文：从前周武王将蓟分封给尧的后裔，现在城内西北角有蓟丘，就是按丘名来取城名的，正像鲁国的曲阜，齐国的营丘一样。
English: Once upon a time, King Zhouwu assigned the fief of Yao to Yao's descendants. Now, in the northwest corner of the city, there is Yao Hill, which is named after the hill, just like Qufu in the country of Lu and Yingqiu in the country of Qi.

古文：武王封召公之故国也，秦始皇二十三年灭燕，以为广阳郡，汉高帝以封卢绾为燕王，更名燕国，王莽改曰广有，县曰代戎。
现代文：这里就是周武王封给召公的诸侯国。秦始皇二十三年灭了燕国，设立广阳郡；汉高祖把这地方封给卢给，号为燕王，改名为燕国；王莽时改为广有，县名叫代戎。
English: This is the vassal state of Zhouwu Wang, which was given to Zhao Gong. In 23rd year of the reign of Qin Shi Huang, Emperor Qin destroyed Yan Province and established Guangyang County. Emperor Gaozu of Han Dynasty gave this place to Lu Qi, called it Yan Wang, and renamed it Yan Province. Emperor Wang Mang changed it to Guangyuan, and the county was named Dai Rong.

古文：城有万载宫、光明殿，东掖门下，旧慕容俊立铜马像处。
现代文：城内有万载宫、光明殿，东掖门下面，是从前慕容俊设立铜马像的地方。
English: Within the city, there is the Wanzai Palace and the Komyo-den Hall. Below the East Gate is the place where the bronze horse statue was set up by Murongjun.

古文：晋司隶校尉王密表靖，功加于民，宜在祀典，以元康四年九月二十日刻石建碑，扬于后叶矣。
现代文：过去慕容魔有一匹骏马，毛色红白相间，相貌奇特有神力。到光寿元年九月二十日刻石立碑，扬名于后世。
English: In the past, Murongma had a beautiful horse, with red and white fur and a strange appearance and supernatural power. On September 20th of the first year of Guangshou, he carved a stone monument, which became famous in later generations.

古文：漯水又东与洗马沟水合，水上承蓟水，西注大湖。
现代文：漯水又东流，与洗马沟水汇合，洗马沟水上流承接蓟水，往西注入大湖。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward, merging with the water of Shima ditch. The upstream water of Shima ditch receives Surabaya water and pours into the Great Lake to the west.

古文：湖有二源，水俱出县西北平地，导源流结西湖，湖东西二里，南北三里，盖燕之旧池也。
现代文：大湖有两条水源，都出自蓟县西北面的平地，泉水流积形成西湖，湖东西宽二里，南北长三里，是燕国的古池。
English: There are two sources of water in the Great Lake, both of which come from the flatlands in the northwest of Handan County. The flow of spring water forms the West Lake. The lake is two miles wide from east to west and three miles long from north to south. It is an ancient pond in Yan Province.

古文：绿水澄澹，川亭望远，亦为游瞩之胜所也。
现代文：湖中绿水澄碧，轻波荡漾，登亭望远，也是游览观光的好去处。
English: The green water in the lake is clear and blue, the light waves are rippling, and the pavilion is far away. It is also a good place for sightseeing.

古文：湖水东流为洗马沟，侧城南门东注，昔铫期奋戴处也。
现代文：湖水往东流出称洗马沟，沿着南门城边往东流注，从前姚期骑马奋戟驱赶聚观的百姓，就在这地方。
English: The outflow of the lake water to the east is called Shima ditch. It flows along the south gate of the city to the east. From the former Yao period, it was in this place that people rode horses to drive away the spectators.

古文：其水又东入漯水，漯水又东径燕王陵南，陵有伏道，西北出蓟城中。
现代文：洗马沟又往东流，注入漯水。漯水又往东流经燕王陵南面。陵墓有条暗道，向西北通到蓟城外。
English: The horse-washing ditch also flows eastward, injecting salty water. The salty water also flows eastward through the south of the Yan Wang Mausoleum. The mausoleum has a dark path that leads to the northwest outside the city of Handan.

古文：景明中造浮图建刹，穷泉掘得此道，王府所禁，莫有寻者。
现代文：景明年间，建造佛寺及佛塔，挖地基时发现了这条暗道。这里是王府的禁地，没人会来寻找。
English: During the construction of a Buddhist temple and a pagoda, Jing Ye discovered this secret passage while digging the foundation. This is a forbidden area of the royal palace, and no one will come looking for it.

古文：通城西北大陵，而是二坟，基趾磐固，犹自高壮，竟不知何王陵也。
现代文：暗道通向蓟城西北的大陵，这是两座坟墓。墓基庞大坚固，至今还很高大，竟不知是哪一位帝王的陵墓。
English: A secret path leads to the Great Mausoleum in the northwest of Lucheng. These are two tombs. The foundation of the tomb is huge and solid, and it is still very tall. It is not known which emperor's mausoleum it is.

古文：漂水又东南，高梁之水注焉，水出蓟城西北平地，泉流东注，径燕王陵北，又东径蓟城北，又东南流。
现代文：漯水又往东南流，有高梁之水注入，高梁之水发源于蓟城西北平地，泉水往东流经燕王陵北面，又往东流经蓟城北面，又往东南流。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the southeast, with water injected by high beams. The water of the high beams originates from the northwest flatland of Surabaya, and the spring water flows eastward through the north of Yan Wangling, then eastward through the north of Surabaya, and then southeastward.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：蓟东十里有高梁之水者也。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：蓟城东面十里有高梁之水。
English: "Wei Guoji Ji" said: There are ten high-beams of water in the east of Lucheng.

古文：其水又东南入漯水。
现代文：高梁之水又往东南流，注入漯水。
English: The water of the Gaoliang River flows to the southeast and is filled with brackish water.

古文：又东至渔阳雍奴县西，入笥沟。
现代文：又往东流到渔阳郡雍奴县西面，注人筒沟。
English: It also flows eastward to the west side of Yongnu County, Yuyang County, and flows into the Shennan culvert.

古文：汉光武建武二年，封颖川太守寇恂为雍奴侯。
现代文：汉光武建武二年，封颖川太守寇峋为雍奴侯。
English: In the second year of the reign of Han Guangwu Jianwu, the feudal governor of Yingchuan, Guo Wei, became Yongnuo.

古文：魏遣张、乐进围雍奴，即此城矣。
现代文：魏国派遣张合队乐进围攻雍奴，指的就是此城。
English: It was this city that Wei dispatched Zhang Hejun Lejin to besiege Yongnu.

古文：笥沟，潞水之别名也。
现代文：筒沟是潞水的别名。
English: "Suzugou" is another name for Surabaya.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：清泉河上承桑乾河，东流与潞河合。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：清泉河上流承接桑干河，往东流与潞河汇合。
English: "Wei Zhi Ji" said: The upper reaches of the Qingquan River are connected to the Sanggan River, and the eastward flow merges with the Wei River.

古文：漯水东入渔阳，所在枝分，故俗谚云：高梁无上源，清泉无下尾。
现代文：漯水往东流入渔阳，到处分流四散，因此俗谚说：高梁水没有上源，清泉河没有下流。
English: Surabaya water flows eastward into Yuyang, and is diverted and dispersed everywhere. Therefore, there is a saying: Gaoliang water has no upstream source, and Qingquan River has no downstream.

古文：盖以高梁微涓浅薄，裁足津通，凭藉涓流，方成川甽。
现代文：因为高梁水流小浅，只够流通，凭着涓涓的细流才形成田间的沟渠。
English: Because the water flow of the high girder is shallow, it is only enough to circulate, and it is only with the trickle of water that the ditches in the fields are formed.

古文：清泉至潞，所在枝分，更为微津，散漫难寻故也。
现代文：清泉水流到潞县，分流四散，水流更细，以至找都找不到了。
English: The clear spring water flows to Lixian County, the diversion is scattered, the water flow is thinner, and it is even impossible to find it.

