古文：凡与敌战，若便利之地，敌先结阵而据之，我后去趋战，则我劳而为敌所胜。
现代文：凡是对敌作战，如果有利地形已经被敌人抢先占领，我军在后匆忙赶去交战，就会因为疲劳被动而被敌人打败。
English: Whenever fighting against the enemy, if the favorable terrain has been preemptively occupied by the enemy, and our army rushes to engage in battle, it will be defeated by the enemy due to fatigue.

古文：法曰： 后处战地而趋战者劳。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 后到战场仓促应战的就疲劳被动。 
English: As stated in the Art of War: Those who rush into battle after arriving at the battlefield will become fatigued and passive.

古文：晋司空刘琨遣将军姬澹率兵十余万讨石勒。
现代文：西晋时期，司空刘琨派遣将军姬澹率兵十余万进攻石勒。
English: During the Western Jin Dynasty, the Empress Dowager Liu Bei dispatched the general Ji Jun to lead more than one hundred thousand soldiers to attack Shile.

古文：勒将拒之，或谏曰： 澹兵马精盛，其锋不可当，且深沟高垒以挫其锐，攻守势异，必获万全。
现代文：石勒将要率兵抵抗，有人向他建议说： 姬澹兵马装备整齐，攻势很强，难于阻挡，因此我们应当固守深沟高垒以挫折敌人锋锐，从而促使双方攻守形势发生变化，这样必定可以获得全胜。 
English: Shi Le was going to lead the troops to resist. Someone suggested to him, "The Hebei soldiers and horses are neatly equipped, the offensive is very strong, and it is difficult to block. Therefore, we should stick to the high base of the deep ditch to frustrate the enemy's sharpness, thus promoting the change of the offensive and defensive situation of both sides. In this way, we can definitely win a complete victory."

古文：勒曰： 澹军远来，体疲力竭，犬马乌合，号令不齐，一战可擒也，何强之有！
现代文：但石勒却说： 姬澹部队远道而来，已经精疲力竭，实属乌合之众，缺乏统一号令，可以一战将其擒获，哪里还称得上精锐强盛！
English: However, Shiller said: "Himeji's troops have come a long way, they are exhausted, they really belong to the rabble, they lack a unified command, they can be captured in one battle, where else can they be called elite and powerful!

古文：援又垂至，胡可舍去，大军一动，岂易中还！
现代文：现在敌人已经到了，怎么能放弃这个好机会呢？况且大军一经行动，又怎么容易中途退还！
English: Now that the enemy has arrived, how can we give up this good opportunity? Moreover, how easy it is for a large army to retreat halfway through an operation!

古文：若澹乘我之退，顾乃无暇，焉得深沟高垒乎！
现代文：倘若姬澹乘我们退还之机而袭击我们，我们将处于自顾不暇的困难境地，哪里还能构筑深沟高垒以抗御敌人！
English: If the honeysuckle takes advantage of our retreat and attacks us, we will be in a difficult situation of self-sufficiency, where we can build deep ditches and high walls to resist the enemy!

古文：此谓不战而自取灭亡之道。 
现代文：你的这个建议实质是个不战而自取灭亡的办法。 
English: In essence, your proposal is a way to self-destruct without a fight.

古文：遂斩谏者。以孔苌为前锋都督，令三军后出者斩。
现代文：石勒说完便杀了提建议的人，然后派遣孔苌为前锋都督，命令全军凡是后出战者一律处斩。
English: After Shi Le finished speaking, he killed the person who made the suggestion, and then dispatched Kong Yao as the vanguard governor, ordering the entire army to behead all those who went to war later.

古文：设疑兵于山下，分为二伏。
现代文：于是抢先于山上设置疑兵迷惑敌人，又埋伏两支部队。
English: As a result, suspicious soldiers were placed on the mountain ahead of time to confuse the enemy, and two troops were ambushed.

古文：勒率兵与澹战，伪收众而北。
现代文：石勒亲率骑兵正面迎战姬澹军，刚一交战就伪装兵败后退。
English: The cavalry led by Shi Le's relatives confronted the Hime army head-on, and just after the battle, the camouflaged soldiers were defeated and retreated.

古文：澹纵兵追之，伏发，夹击，澹大败而退。
现代文：姬澹挥军随后追击，石勒所设伏兵前后奋起，实施夹击，打得姬澹军猝不及防，大败而逃。
English: Himeji's army then chased after them, and the ambush set up by Shi Le got up and carried out a pincer attack. Himeji's army was caught off guard and fled in defeat.

