古文：凡战法必本于政胜，则其民不争，不争则无以私意，以上为意。
现代文：一般说来，战争的策略必须以政治上的胜利为根本。有政治上的胜利，人民才不争夺。人民不争夺，才不逞个人的意志，以君上的意志为意志。
English: Generally speaking, the strategy of war must be based on political victory. If there is political victory, the people will not fight for it. If the people do not fight for it, they will not follow their own will, but the will of the sovereign.

古文：故王者之政，使民怯于邑斗，而勇于寇战。
现代文：所以成就王业的国君的政治，使人民乡里械斗就胆怯，和敌人作战就勇敢。
English: Therefore, the politics of the sovereign, who has accomplished the king's cause, makes the people in the countryside timid to fight, and brave to fight the enemy.

古文：民习以力攻难，故轻死。
现代文：人民习惯于用力量攻打凶险的地方和强悍的敌军，所以没有怕死的心情。
English: The people are accustomed to using force to attack dangerous places and strong enemy forces, so they are not afraid of death.

古文：见敌如溃，溃而不止，则免。
现代文：看见敌兵像水决一般地崩溃，奔跑不停，那就放他跑吧！
English: If you see an enemy soldier collapse like a drowning man and keep running, then let him run!

古文：故兵法： 大战胜，逐北无过十里。
现代文：兵法曾说： 大战打胜了，追赶败兵，不要超过十里。
English: The art of war once said: When a great battle is won, do not pursue the vanquished for more than ten miles.

古文：小战胜，逐北无过五里。 
现代文：小战打胜了，追赶败兵，不要超过五里。 
English: If you win a skirmish, do not chase the loser more than five miles.

古文：兵起而程敌，政不若者勿与战；食不若者勿与久；敌众勿为客；敌尽不如，击之勿疑。
现代文：军队一动，先要衡量敌国。我们的政治赶不上敌国，就不要和它作战；我们的粮食赶不上敌国多，就不要和它相持；敌人的数量多于我们，不要主动袭击敌人；敌国一切都赶不上我们，我们就向它进攻，不必犹豫。
English: If our politics cannot keep up with the enemy country, we should not fight against it; if our food cannot keep up with the enemy country, we should not fight against it; if the number of the enemy is more than ours, we should not actively attack the enemy; if everything of the enemy country cannot keep up with us, we should attack it without hesitation.

古文：故曰：兵大律在谨，论敌察众，则胜负可先知也。
现代文：所以说：用兵的重大法则在于谨慎，研究敌情，考察双方兵力的多少，或胜或败，是可以预先知道的。
English: Therefore, it is said that the important rule of using troops is to be cautious, study the enemy situation, examine the number of troops on both sides, and win or lose, which can be known in advance.

古文：王者之兵，胜而不骄，败而不怨。
现代文：称霸天下国家的军队，打了胜仗不骄傲，打了败仗不抱怨。
English: The army of the country that dominates the world is not proud when it wins a battle, and does not complain when it loses a battle.

古文：胜而不骄者，术明也；败而不怨者，知所失也。
现代文：打了胜仗不骄傲，是因为战术高明，打了败仗不抱怨，是因为知道了打败仗的原因。
English: If you are not proud after winning a battle, it is because you are tactically astute. If you do not complain after losing a battle, it is because you know the reason why you lost the battle.

古文：若兵敌强弱，将贤则胜，将不如则败。
现代文：如果敌我双方军队实力强弱相当，将领的水平超过敌人的就能获胜，将领的水平不如敌人的就会打败仗。
English: If the strength of the two armies of the enemy and ours is equal, the level of the general who surpasses the enemy can win, and the level of the general who is not as good as the enemy will lose the war.

古文：若其政出庙算者，将贤亦胜，将不如亦胜。
现代文：假如战前的决策出朝廷的谋划，将领超过对方的会取胜，将领不如对方也能取胜。
English: If the pre-war decision-making was the result of the imperial court's planning, generals superior to the other side would win, and generals inferior to the other side could also win.

古文：政久持胜术者，必强至王。
现代文：在政治上长期掌握获胜的战术，国家就一定能强大。直到称王天下。
English: In politics, if you master the winning tactics for a long time, the country will surely be strong, until it becomes the king of the world.

古文：若民服而听上，则国富而兵胜，行是，必久王。
现代文：如果民众服从并听信君主的治理，那么国家就会富强，而且军队打胜仗，执行这一原则，就一定能长期称王天下。
English: If the people obey and believe in the governance of the monarch, then the country will be rich and strong, and the army will win the war, implementing this principle, it will certainly be able to reign for a long time.

古文：其过失，无敌深入，偕险绝塞，民倦且饥渴，而复遇疾，此其道也。
现代文：用兵的错误，要害是轻敌冒进，使军队背靠险地，渡过边塞，使众人疲倦而饥渴交加，再加上遇到疾病流行，这是错误的用兵方法。
English: The key to the mistake of using soldiers is to rush into the battlefield with a light enemy, make the army's back dangerous, cross the border, make everyone tired and thirsty, and encounter an epidemic of disease. This is the wrong way to use soldiers.

古文：故将使民者乘良马者，不可不齐也。
现代文：所以将领役使民众，像骑一匹马似的，不能不小心啊。
English: Therefore, the general leading the people, like riding a horse, must not be careless.

