古文：○高宗四二年春正月癸巳朔，帝在绍兴府，率百官遥拜二帝，不受朝贺。
现代文：绍兴二年春正月初一，高宗在绍兴府，率文武百官遥拜徽、钦二帝，不接受大臣们的朝拜和祝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Shaoxing's spring, Gaozong arrived at Shaoxing Prefecture, leading hundreds of civil and military officials to worship Hui and Qin Erdi, and did not accept the worship and congratulations of the ministers.

古文：甲午，诏复置贤良方正直言极谏科。
现代文：初二，下诏重新设置贤良方正直言极谏科。
English: On the second day of the new year, the following edict was issued to re-establish the virtuous party's honesty as the most important discipline.

古文：丙申，赐杨邦乂谥曰忠襄。
现代文：初四，赐给杨邦溢号为忠襄。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Yang Bang was given the nickname "Loyal Brother."

古文：韩世忠围建州。
现代文：韩世忠包围建州。
English: Han Shizhong surrounded Jianzhou.

古文：丁酉，蠲诸路元年逋税。
现代文：初五，免除各路绍兴元年拖欠的赋税。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, all roads in Shaoxing were exempted from the tax arrears in the first year.

古文：庚子，陕西叛将白常围岷州，关师古率兵破之。
现代文：初八，陕西叛将白常围攻崛州，关师古率兵攻破白常。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, the Shaanxi rebels besieged Bai Chang and attacked Jorizhou, and Guan Shigu led the troops to defeat Bai Chang.

古文：辛丑，韩世忠拔建州，范汝为自焚死，斩其二弟，余党悉平。
现代文：初九，韩世忠攻取建州，范汝为自焚而死，斩杀他的二个弟弟，余党全部平定。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Han Shizhong captured Jianzhou, Fan Ru died of self-immolation, killed his two younger brothers, and the rest of the party was all pacified.

古文：壬寅，帝发绍兴。
现代文：初十，高宗从绍兴出发。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Gaozong set out from Shaoxing.

古文：曹成释向子諲。
现代文：曹成释放向子研。
English: Cao Cheng released Xiangzi R&D.

古文：丙午，帝至临安府。
现代文：十四日，高宗到达临安府。
English: On the 14th, Gaozong arrived at Lin'an.

古文：壬子，遣韩世清捕石陂贼。
现代文：二十日，派遣韩世清捕获石破贼。
English: On the 20th, Han Shiching was dispatched to capture the stone thief.

古文：癸丑，以张浚检校少保、定国军节度使。
现代文：二十一日，任命张浚为检校少保、定国军节度使。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zhang Jun was appointed as the school inspector and the commander of the national army.

古文：刘豫遣兵犯伊阳县，翟兴及其将李恭合击败之。
现代文：刘豫派兵攻打伊阳县，翟兴及其将领李恭联合击败伪齐军队。
English: Liu Yu sent troops to attack Iyang County, and He Xing and his general Li Gong jointly defeated the pseudo-Qi army.

古文：曹成犯郴州永兴县。
现代文：曹成攻打郴州永兴县。
English: Cao Cheng attacked Yongxing County of Luzhou.

古文：己未，修临安城。
现代文：二十七日，修筑临安城。
English: On the 27th, Lin'an City was built.

古文：辛酉，遣内侍任源抚问张浚。
现代文：二十九日，派遣内侍官任源抚恤慰问张浚。
English: On the 29th, Zhang Jun was sent a letter of condolence from the First Secretary of the Ministry of the Interior.

古文：江西副总管杨惟忠以杨勍虽就招安，复谋作乱，诱诛之。
现代文：江西副总管杨惟忠因汤葡虽然屈服招安，却又策划叛乱，因而诱杀了汤葡。
English: Yang Weizhong, vice-governor of Jiangxi Province, lured Tang Guo to his death by plotting a rebellion, although Tang Guo had yielded to peace overtures.

古文：二月甲子，杨华复叛，扰鼎、澧、潭三州。
现代文：二月初二，杨华又叛乱，骚扰鼎、遭、潭三州。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, Yang Hua rebelled again, harassing, harassing and harassing the three states.

古文：诏立赏禽捕首领，赦贷胁从。
现代文：下诏悬赏俘获叛乱首领，赦免逼迫胁从的部众。
English: He issued an edict offering a reward for the capture of the rebel leader, and pardoned his subordinates who had been coerced into obedience.

古文：丙寅，命刘光世将锐卒万人屯扬州，经理淮东。
现代文：初五，命令刘光世率领精锐部队一万人屯驻扬州，治理淮东。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, he ordered Liu Guangzhe to lead an elite force of ten thousand people stationed in Yangzhou to govern Huaidong.

古文：庚午，以李纲为观文殿学士、湖广宣抚使。
现代文：初九，任命李纲为观文殿学士、湖广宣抚使。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Li Gang was appointed as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism and the envoy of Hukang.

古文：仍命岳飞率马友、李宏、韩京、吴锡等共讨曹成诸盗。
现代文：命令岳飞率领马友、李宏、韩京、吴锡等共同讨伐曹成等盗。
English: He ordered Yuefei to lead Ma You, Li Hong, Han Jing, Wu Xi and others to jointly fight against Cao Cheng and other thieves.

古文：甲戌，以吏部尚书李光为淮西招抚使，王燮副之。
现代文：十三日，任命吏部尚书李光为淮西招抚使，王镬为副使。
English: On the 13th, Li Guang, the Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed as the Huaixi Sending Envoy, and Wang Qi was appointed as the Deputy Envoy.

古文：乙亥，雨雹。
现代文：十四日，降冰雹。
English: On the 14th, hail fell.

古文：丙子，以施逵、谢向、陆棠党范汝为，逵除名、婺州编管，向、棠械赴行在，俱道死。
现代文：十五日，因施连、谢向、陆棠参与范汝为叛乱，施连被除名，姿州编管；谢向、陆棠被拘禁押往行在，都在途中死去。
English: On the 15th, because Shi Lian, Xie Xiang, and Lu Tang participated in Fan Ru's rebellion, Shi Lian was removed from the list and put in charge of Zizhou; Xie Xiang and Lu Tang were detained and forced to travel, and they all died on the way.

古文：丁丑，分崔增、李捧、邵青、赵延寿、李振、单德忠、徐文所部兵为七将，名御前忠锐军，隶步军司，非枢密奉旨，不许调遣。
现代文：十六日，崔增、李捧、邵青、赵延寿、李振、单德忠、徐文所部兵分为七将，称作御前忠锐军，隶属步军司，除非枢密院奉皇帝命令，不许调遣。
English: On the 16th, the soldiers of Cui Zeng, Li Tuo, Shao Qing, Zhao Yan Shou, Li Zhen, Shan Dezhong, and Xu Wen were divided into seven generals, called the Imperial Loyal Army, and subordinated to the Infantry Division, unless the Privy Council was ordered by the emperor not to deploy.

古文：减淮南营田岁租三之二，俟三年复旧。
现代文：减少淮南营田每年租税三分之二，三年后恢复原来的数目。
English: Huainan Yingtian will reduce the annual tax by two-thirds, and the original amount will be restored after three years.

古文：己卯，刘光世入见，同执政对内殿，谕以进屯扬州，光世迄不行。
现代文：十八日，刘光世到朝廷晋见高宗，与执政一起在内殿回答高宗的问题，高宗下命刘光世进屯扬州，刘光世最终没有前往。
English: On the 18th, Liu Guangzhe went to the imperial court to meet Gao Zong, and answered Gao Zong's questions together with the government in the inner hall. Gao Zong ordered Liu Guangzhe to go to Yangzhou, but Liu Guangzhe ultimately did not go.

古文：庚辰，诏监司避本贯。
现代文：十九日，下诏监司任职回避自己的家乡。
English: On the 19th, he resigned from his post as deputy superintendent to avoid his hometown.

古文：壬午，程昌寓遣杜湛募兵攻贼周伦，破之。
现代文：二十一日，程昌辨派遣杜湛募兵攻打贼周伦，打败周伦。
English: On the twenty-first day, Cheng Changbin sent Du Zhan to recruit soldiers to attack the thief Zhou Lun and defeat Zhou Lun.

古文：甲申，以工部员外郎滕茂实死节于代州，赠龙图阁直学士。
现代文：二十三日，因工部员外郎滕茂实在代州为国捐躯，赠给龙图阁直学士之职。
English: On the 23rd, due to the death of his son-in-law, Teng Maocheng, who was a member of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, he was awarded the post of Longtu Ge's direct bachelor.

古文：丙戌，初置著作官二员修《日历》。
现代文：二十五日，开始设置著作官二员撰修《日厉。
English: On the 25th, it began to set up two authors to write "Nisshi."

古文：己丑，复荆湖东、西为荆湖南、北路，南路治潭，北路仍治鄂。
现代文：二十八日，恢复荆湖东、西路为荆湖南、北路，南路治所设在潭州，北路治所仍然设在鄂州。
English: On the 28th, the East and West roads of Jinghu were restored to the South and North roads of Jinghu. The South Road Administration Center was set up in Tanzhou, and the North Road Administration Center was still set up in Ezhou.

古文：申禁福建路私有、私造兵器。
现代文：再次禁止福建路私自拥有、私自制造兵器。
English: Fujian again banned the private ownership and manufacture of weapons.

古文：是月，知商州董先叛入刘豫。
现代文：这个月，商州知州董先叛降刘豫。
English: In this month, Shangzhou Zhizhou's Dong Xian capitulated to Liu Yu.

古文：金人陷庆阳府，执杨可升，降之。
现代文：金军攻陷庆阳府，俘获杨可升，杨可升投降金军。
English: The Chinese army invaded Qingyang, captured Yang Kesheng, and Yang Kesheng surrendered to the Chinese army.

古文：三月壬辰朔，命襄、邓镇抚使桑仲收复陷没诸郡，仍命诸镇抚使互相应援。
现代文：三月初一，命令襄、邓镇抚使桑仲收复丧失陷没各郡，仍命令各镇抚使互相应援。
English: On the first day of March, Xiang and Deng Zhenfu ordered Sangzhong to recover the lost and trapped counties, and still ordered the town officials to support each other.

古文：再贬徐秉哲惠州，吴开南雄州，莫俦韶州，并居住。
现代文：再次贬降徐秉哲惠州居住、昊开南雄州居住、莫侍韶州居住。
English: Once again, Xu Bingzhe's residence in Huizhou, Hao Kai's residence in Nanxiong, and Mo Zhi's residence in Zhangzhou were downgraded.

古文：水贼翟进袭汉阳军，杀守臣赵令戣。
现代文：水贼翟进袭击汉阳军，杀死守臣赵邻戈。
English: Water thieves broke into and attacked the Hanyang army, killing the shogun Zhao Zhigo.

古文：李光执韩世清于宣州以归。
现代文：李光在宣州捉住韩世清并带回朝廷。
English: Li Guang captured Han Shiching in Xuanzhou and brought him back to the imperial court.

古文：虔化县贼李敦仁及其徒皆授官，隶诸军。
现代文：虔化县贼李敦仁及其部众都授给官职，分别隶属各军。
English: The thief of Qianhua County, Li Dunren, and his subordinates were all given official positions and were affiliated with various armies.

古文：乙未，复置江阴军。
现代文：初四，重新设置江阴军。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the Jiangyin army was re-established.

古文：罢福建路武尉。
现代文：罢除福建路武尉。
English: The Fujian Road Military Lieutenant was dismissed.

古文：戊戌，叶梦得罢。
现代文：初七，叶梦得罢官。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Ye Meng was dismissed.

古文：以李光为江东安抚大使，兼滁、濠等六州宣抚使。
现代文：任命李光为江东安抚大使，兼任滁、壕等六州宣抚使。
English: Li Guang was appointed as the ambassador of pacification of the East River, and also served as the envoy of the six states including Jiangxi and Jiangxi.

古文：罢江、淮发运司。
现代文：罢除江、淮发运司。
English: Jiang and Huai were dismissed from the Department of Shipping.

古文：桑仲如郢州调兵，守将霍明以仲将谋逆，杀之，以其事闻。
现代文：桑仲到郑州调兵，守将霍明因桑仲将要策划叛乱，杀死了桑仲，把这件事报告朝廷。
English: Sangzhong transferred troops to Zhengzhou, and guard general Homing killed Sangzhong because Sangzhong was planning a rebellion, and reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：庚子，金人攻方山原，陕西统制杨政援之，金兵引去。
现代文：初九，金军进攻方山原，陕西统制杨政前往救援，金军退走。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the gold army attacked Fang Shan Yuan, and Yang Zheng, the governor of Shaanxi, went to the rescue, and the gold army retreated.

古文：辛丑，又犯陇安县，吴璘等击走之。
现代文：初十，金军又侵犯陇安县，吴瞒等率兵击退金军。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the Chinese army invaded Lu'an County again, and Wu Zhen and other soldiers led the troops to repel the Chinese army.

古文：淮南营田副使王寔括闲田三万顷给六军耕种。
现代文：淮南营田副使王算搜括三万顷闲田给六军耕种。
English: Wang Chuan, deputy envoy of Huainan Yingtian, collected 30,000 hectares of idle fields for the six armies to cultivate.

古文：丙午，复置中书门下省检正官，省枢密院检详官。
现代文：十五日，重新设置中书门下省检正官，撤销枢密院检详官。
English: On the 15th, the provincial procuratorate under Zhongshumen was re-established, and the procuratorate of the Privy Council was revoked.

古文：己酉，以神武右军中部统制杨沂中为神武中军统制。
现代文：十八日，任命神武右军中部统制杨沂中为神武中军统制。
English: On the 18th, Yang Xizhong, the leader of the Central Command of the Shenwu Right Army, was appointed as the Central Command of the Shenwu Middle Army.

古文：癸丑，河南镇抚使翟兴为部将杨伟所杀。
现代文：二十二日，河南镇抚使翟兴被部将杨伟杀死。
English: On the 22nd day of the month, the Henan town marshal, Hao Xing, was killed by the general Yang Wei.

古文：甲寅，金人复自水洛城来攻，杨政等又败之。
现代文：二十三日，金军又从水洛城进攻宋军，杨政等人又打败金军。
English: On the 23rd, the Jin Army attacked the Song Army from Shuilocheng, and Yang Zheng and others defeated the Jin Army.

古文：庚申，曹成寇贺州清水砦，守臣刘全弃城去。
现代文：二十九日，曹成攻打贺州清水寨，守臣刘全弃城逃走。
English: On the 29th, Cao Cheng attacked Hezhou Qingshui Zhai, and Liu Quan abandoned the city and fled.

古文：是月，知寿春府陈卞及钤辖陈宝等举兵复顺昌府，寻引兵归，为伪齐所逐，并寿春失之。
现代文：这个月，寿春知府陈卞和铃辖陈宝等率兵收复顺昌府，不久率兵退归，被伪齐军追击，连同寿春府一起失陷。
English: This month, Chen Yu and Chen Bao of Shouchun Prefecture led the troops to recapture Shunchang Prefecture. Soon after, the troops retreated and were pursued by the pseudo-Qi army. They fell together with Shouchun Prefecture.

古文：夏四月甲子，曹成陷贺州。
现代文：夏四月初三，曹成攻陷贺州。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of summer, Cao Cheng attacked and occupied Hezhou.

古文：陈颙围循州，焚龙川县，命江西安抚司遣将捕之。
现代文：陈围攻循州，焚烧龙川县，命令江西安抚司派遣将领捕获。
English: Chen besieged and attacked Xuzhou, burned Longchuan County, and ordered the Jiangxi Pacification Division to dispatch generals to capture Xuzhou.

古文：丙寅，赐礼部进士张九成以下二百五十九人及第、出身。
现代文：初五，赐礼部进士张九成等二百五十九人及第出身。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, two hundred and fifty-nine people including Zhang Jiucheng, a member of the Ceremonial Department, were born.

古文：庚午，以翰林学士承旨翟汝文参知政事。
现代文：初九，任命翰林学士承旨翟汝文为参知政事。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi Qian Ruwen was appointed as a member of the Council of State.

古文：壬申，释福建诸州杂犯死罪以下囚。
现代文：十一日，释放福建各州杂犯死罪以下囚犯。
English: On the 11th, all the states of Fujian released the prisoners below the death penalty.

古文：江西军贼赵进寇瑞昌县，杨惟忠讨降之。
现代文：江西军贼赵进攻打瑞昌县，杨惟忠讨伐并使他们投降。
English: Zhao, the Jiangxi bandit, attacked Ruichang County, and Yang Weizhong led a crusade and forced them to surrender.

古文：戊寅，伪齐统领王资率兵来归。
现代文：十七日，伪齐军统领王资率兵归宋。
English: On the 17th, the leader of the pseudo-Qi army, Wang Zu, led his soldiers back to Song.

古文：富顺监男子李勃伪称徐王，召赴行在。
现代文：富顺监男子李勃伪称徐王，召赴行在。
English: Li Bo, a man from Fushun Prison, falsely claimed to be Xu Wang, and was summoned to travel there.

古文：壬午，诏内外侍从、监司、守臣各举中原流寓士大夫三二人，以备任使。
现代文：二十一日，下诏内外侍从、监司、守臣各自推举中原流寓士大夫二名或三名，预备朝廷任用。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, the emperor issued an edict that the attendants, supervisors, and retainers at home and abroad should each nominate two or three fabulist doctors of the Central Plains School to prepare for appointment to the imperial court.

古文：癸未，诏曰： 朕登庸二相，倚遇惟均。
现代文：二十二日，下诏说： 肤举用二相，都一样信赖，一样对待。
English: On the 22nd, the next edict said, "Using two aspects, we should trust them equally and treat them equally."

古文：其所荐用之人，不得偏私离间，朋比害政。 
现代文：他们所荐举任用的人，不得出于私情，袒护一方，从中挑拨离间，结成朋党，危害国家大政。 
English: The person they recommend for appointment must not, out of personal interest, favor one side, sow discord among them, form a crony party, and endanger national politics.

古文：谥孙傅曰忠定。
现代文：孙傅的溢号为忠定。
English: Sun Fu's posthumous name was Zhongding.

古文：乙酉，李纲始拜命，置司福州。
现代文：二十四日，李纲开始接受朝廷任命，福州置司。
English: On the 24th, Li Gang began to accept the appointment of the imperial court, Fuzhou Division.

古文：是夜，太平州军士陆德据城叛，囚守臣张錞，杀当涂县令钟大猷。
现代文：这天晚上，太平州军士陆德据城叛乱，囚禁守臣张淳，杀死当涂县令钟大酞。
English: In the evening of the same day, Lu De, a military sergeant from Taiping, rebelled in Guzheng, imprisoned the retainer Zhang Jun, and killed the Tangtu County governor Zhong Daxuan.

古文：戊子，命吕颐浩都督江、淮、荆、浙诸军事。
现代文：二十七日，命令吕颐浩都督江、淮、荆、浙各地军事。
English: On the 27th, he ordered Lv Yinghao, the governor of Jiang, Huai, Jing and Zhejiang provinces, to mobilize the military.

古文：庚寅，刘豫徙居汴京。
现代文：二十九日，刘豫迁居汁京。
English: On the 29th, Liu Yu moved to Beijing.

古文：是月，王彦大破董先于马岭关，复商州。
现代文：这个月，王彦在马岭关大败董先，收复商州。
English: This month, Wang Yan defeated Dong Xian in Ma Lingguan and recovered Shangzhou.

古文：闰月癸巳，高丽遣使入贡。
现代文：闰四月初三，高丽派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the third day of the fourth lunar month, Korea sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：乙未，知池州王进讨陆德，诛之。
现代文：初五，池州知州王进讨伐陆德，杀死陆德。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Chizhou Wangjin of Chizhou attacked Lu De and killed Lu De.

古文：丙申，岳飞击破曹成于贺州。
现代文：初六，岳飞在贺州打败曹成。
English: In the sixth grade of junior high school, Yuefei defeated Cao Cheng in Hezhou.

古文：置都督府随军转运司。
现代文：设置都督府随军转运司。
English: The Transportation Division of the Governor-General's Office was established.

古文：丁酉，左朝奉郎孙觌坐前知临安府赃污，贷死除名、象州羁管。
现代文：初七，左朝奉郎孙规因前任临安知府贪污获罪，免死除名，象州羁管。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the new year, Zuochang Bonglang Sun Gui was convicted of embezzlement by his predecessor Lin'an prefectural government, was exempted from death, and was removed to the custody of Xiangzhou.

古文：罢后苑工作。
现代文：罢后苑工役。
English: Go back to work as a gardener.

古文：辛丑，韩世清以狂悖伏诛。
现代文：十一日，韩世清因狂妄背理，处以死刑。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Han Shiching was sentenced to death for insolence.

古文：丙午，岳飞败曹成于桂岭县，成走连州，遣统制张宪追击，破之，又走郴州，入邵州。
现代文：十六日，岳飞在桂岭县打败曹成，曹成退走连州，派遣统制张宪追击，打败曹成，曹成又退走郴州，进人邵州。
English: On the 16th, Yuefei defeated Cao Chengdu in Guiling County, Cao Chengdu retreated to Lianzhou, sent Zhang Xian to chase and defeat Cao Chengdu, Cao Chengdu retreated to Ganzhou, and entered Shaoshou.

古文：丁未，赐福建宣抚司赏军钱十万缗。
现代文：十七日，赐给福建宣抚司十万络赏军钱。
English: On the 17th, a reward of 100,000 rupees in military money was given to the Fujian Provincial Propaganda Department.

古文：听朱胜非自便。
现代文：听任朱胜非按己意行动。
English: Zhu Sheng was ordered to act against his own will.

古文：乙卯，诏诸镇抚使非奉朝旨，毋擅出兵。
现代文：二十五日，下诏各镇抚使除非接到朝廷命令，都不得擅自出兵。
English: On the 25th, it was decreed that all town officials were not allowed to send troops without authorization unless they received an order from the imperial court.

古文：刘光世闻父丧去官，特命起复。
现代文：刘光世听到父亲去世的消息后，离去官职，守丧期未满，朝廷特地下令重新起用。
English: After Liu Guangshi heard the news of his father's death, he left his official post, and before the mourning period was over, the court issued a special order to reinstate him.

古文：己未，诏自今明堂专祀昊天上帝，以太宗配。
现代文：二十九日，下诏自今以后明堂专门用来祭祀昊天上帝，用太宗配享。
English: On the 29th, the following edict was issued: From now on, Myeongdong will be used exclusively to worship Haotian God, and will be shared with Taejong.

古文：是月，张浚命利、夔制置使王庶与知成都府王似两易其职。
现代文：这个月，张浚命令利、夔制置使王庶与成都知府王似两人更换官职。
English: This month, Zhang Jun ordered Wang Shiao and Chengdu Governor Wang Xi to change their official positions.

古文：襄、邓副都统制李横、同副都统制李道合兵围郢州，霍明遁去。
现代文：襄、邓副都统制李横、同副都统制李道联合出兵进攻郑州，翟明逃跑。
English: Xiang and Deng's vice-governor, Li Yang, and vice-governor, Li Dao, jointly sent troops to attack Zhengzhou, and Yu Ming fled.

古文：五月辛酉，以兵部尚书权邦彦签书枢密院事，以枢密将领赵琦所部兵为忠锐第八将。
现代文：五月初二，任命兵部尚书权邦彦签书枢密院事，命令枢密将领赵琦所率领的军队为忠锐第八将。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, he appointed the Minister of Military Affairs, Shang Shuquan, to sign the document of the Privy Council, and ordered the army led by the Privy General, Zhao Jun, to be the loyal eighth general.

古文：癸亥，吕颐浩出师，以神武后军及忠锐两将从行，百官班送。
现代文：初四，吕颐浩出兵，神武后军和忠锐两将跟随前往，文武百官列队送行。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Lü Biao dispatched troops. The Shenwu Rear-Army and the Zhongrui two armies followed, and hundreds of civil and military officials lined up to see them off.

古文：甲子，以霍明权襄、邓、随、郢州镇抚使。
现代文：初五，任命霍明暂代襄、邓、随、呈阵州镇抚使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he appointed Homing to temporarily replace Xiang, Deng, Sui, and Zhenjun as the provincial governor.

古文：诏观察使已上各荐可备将帅者二人。
现代文：下诏观察使以上官员各自推举可以担任将帅的人才二名。
English: The observation of the following edict enabled the above officials to independently nominate two talents who could serve as generals.

古文：丁卯，罢两浙转运司回易库。
现代文：初八，罢除两浙转运司回易库。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the two Zhejiang transshipment departments were removed and returned to the warehouse.

古文：己巳，废绍兴府余姚、上虞县湖田为湖，溉民田。
现代文：初十，废除绍兴府余姚县、上虞县湖田为湖，灌溉民田。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Yuyao County and Shangyu County of Shaoxing Prefecture were abolished as lakes, and irrigation of people's fields was allowed.

古文：庚午，诏修建康行宫。
现代文：十一日，下诏修建建康行宫。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the edict to build the Jiankang Palace was issued.

古文：辛未，选宗室子偁之子伯琮育于禁中。
现代文：十二日，挑选宗室赵子翱的儿子赵伯琼到皇宫中培养。
English: On the 12th, Zhao Beiqiong, the son of Zhao Zixuan, the matriarch, was selected to be educated in the imperial palace.

古文：丙子，吕颐浩总师至常州，前军将赵延寿兵叛于吕城镇。
现代文：十七日，吕颐浩率领军队到常州，前军将领赵延寿的军队在吕城镇叛乱。
English: On the 17th, Lv Yinghao led the army to Changzhou, and the army of the former army general Zhao Yanshou rebelled in Lv Town.

古文：丁丑，延寿犯金坛县，杀知县胡思忠。
现代文：十八日，赵延寿攻打金坛县，杀死知县胡思忠。
English: On the 18th, Zhao Yanshou attacked Jintan County and killed Zhixian Hu Sizhong.

古文：颐浩称疾不进。
现代文：吕颐浩称病不再前进。
English: Lv Yinghao said that the disease was no longer progressing.

古文：戊寅，海州贼王山犯涟水军，总领苏复、副统制刘靖会兵击败之。
现代文：十九日，海州贼王山攻打涟水军，总领苏复、副统制刘靖联合出兵，打败王山。
English: On the 19th day of the month, the mountain bandit Wang Shan of Haizhou attacked the Yunnan Navy. The commander-in-chief Su Fu and the deputy commander-in-chief Liu Jing jointly dispatched troops to defeat Wang Shan.

古文：庚辰，临安府火。
现代文：二十一日，临安府发生火灾。
English: On the 21st, a fire broke out in Lin'an Prefecture.

古文：癸未，置御前军器所。
现代文：二十四日，设置御前军器所。
English: On the 24th, the Imperial Armory was established.

古文：甲申，亲虑囚，自是岁如之。
现代文：二十五日，高宗亲自讯察囚犯罪状，从此以后每年如此。
English: On the 25th, Gaozong personally inquired about the criminal status of the prisoners, and this has been the case every year since then.

古文：罢行在权官。
现代文：罢除行在暂代职务的官员。
English: remove the acting officials from their posts.

古文：乙酉，刘光世遣王德追赵延寿叛兵至建平县，悉诛之。
现代文：二十六日，刘光世派遣王德追击赵延寿叛兵到建平县，全部诛杀了叛兵。
English: On the 26th, Liu Guangxi sent Wang De to chase Zhao Yanshou's rebels to Jianping County, and killed all the rebels.

古文：丙戌，置修政局，命秦桧提举。
现代文：二十七日，设置修政局，命令秦桧提举。
English: On the 27th, the Political Reform Bureau was set up, and Qin Hui was ordered to be promoted.

古文：诏侍从、台省寺监官、监司、守令条具省费裕国强兵息民之策。
现代文：下诏侍从、台省寺监官、监司、守令，陈述节省经费、富国强兵、休养生息的办法。
English: The attendants of the imperial edict, the supervisors of temples in Taiwan Province, the supervisors, and the guardians of the edict stated the measures for saving money, enriching the country, strengthening the army, and recuperating.

古文：丁亥，以中书门下省检正官仇悆为沿海制置使。
现代文：二十八日，任命中书门下省检正官仇昵为沿海制置使。
English: On the 28th, the provincial procurator of the People's Republic of China, Zhou Ni, was appointed as the coastal special envoy.

古文：戊子，手诏用建隆故事，命百官日轮一人转对。
现代文：二十九日，亲笔书写诏书，采用建隆实行的制度，命令文武百官每天轮流一人向朝廷陈述时政。
English: On the 29th, he wrote an imperial edict in his own handwriting, adopting the system implemented by Jianlong, and ordered one hundred civil and military officials to take turns each day to present the current political situation to the imperial court.

古文：两浙转运副使徐康国献销金屏障，诏有司毁之，夺康国二官。
现代文：两浙转运副使徐康国献上金子装饰的屏障，高宗下诏有关部门毁掉，削夺徐康国二级官职。
English: The two Zhejiang transshipment vice envoys presented the gold-decorated barrier to Xu Kangguo, and Gao Zong issued an edict to the relevant departments to destroy it and deprive Xu Kangguo of the second-level official post.

古文：蠲太平州被贼之家夏税。
现代文：免除太平州遭贼破坏百姓家的夏税。
English: Taiping County was exempted from the summer tax after thieves destroyed people's homes.

古文：是月，张浚以参赞军事刘子羽知兴元府，黜王庶，复以王似知成都府。
现代文：这个月，张浚任命参赞军事刘子羽为兴元知府，罢除王庶，又任命王似为成都知府。
English: This month, Zhang Jun appointed the military counselor Liu Zi Yu as the governor of Xingyuan, dismissed Wang Shiao, and appointed Wang Nian as the governor of Chengdu.

古文：韩世忠至洪州，遣董旼招曹成，成听命赴行在。
现代文：韩世忠到洪州，派遣董寞招降曹成，曹成接受命令前往行在。
English: Han Shizhong went to Hongzhou and sent Dong Xian to invite Cao Cheng to surrender. Cao Cheng accepted the order and left.

古文：六月庚寅朔，李宏引兵入潭州，执马友，杀之。
现代文：六月初一，李宏率兵进人潭州，捉住马友，杀死了他。
English: On the first day of June, Li Hong and his soldiers marched into Ren Tan Zhou, captured Ma You and killed him.

古文：甲午，李纲领兵三千发福州。
现代文：初五，李纲率领军队三千人从福州出发。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Li Gang led an army of three thousand people to set out from Fuzhou.

古文：戊戌，诏孟庾、韩世忠班师。
现代文：初九，下诏孟庚、韩世忠班师。
English: At the beginning of the ninth grade, Meng Geng and Han Shizhong are the class teachers.

古文：岳飞屯驻江州。
现代文：岳飞屯驻江州。
English: Yue Fei-tun is stationed in Jiangzhou.

古文：庚子，以刘光世为宁武、宁国军节度使，韩世忠为太尉，移屯建康府。
现代文：十一日，任命刘光世为宁武、宁国军节度使，韩世忠为太尉，移屯建康府。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Liu Guangshi was appointed as the Ningwu and Ningguo Military Festival envoy, and Han Shizhong was appointed as the first lieutenant, and moved to Jiankangfu.

古文：辛丑，以李横为襄、郢镇抚使，李道邓、随镇抚使。
现代文：十二日，任命李横为襄、呈阵镇抚使，李道为邓、随镇抚使。
English: On the 12th, Li Yang was appointed as Xiang, Zhenzhen Fuzhi, and Li Dao was appointed as Deng, Su Zhen Fuzhi.

古文：壬寅，翟汝文罢。
现代文：十三日，翟汝文罢官。
English: On the 13th, Gong Ruwen was dismissed.

古文：孔彦舟叛降伪齐。
现代文：孔彦舟叛降伪齐。
English: Kong Yanzhou's defection is fake.

古文：乙巳，以权邦彦兼权参知政事。
现代文：十六日，任命权邦彦暂代参知政事。
English: On the 16th, Kwon Kunihiko was appointed as the interim governor.

古文：戊申，仇悆兼制置福建路。
现代文：十九日，任命仇昵兼福建路制置使。
English: On the 19th, Xi Nian and Fujian Road Construction Envoy were appointed.

古文：辛亥，免台谏官轮对。
现代文：二十二日，免除台谏官轮对奏事。
English: On the 22nd, the Taiwanese officials were exempted from filing a complaint.

古文：甲寅，召吕颐浩赴行在，令参谋官傅崧卿权主管都督府事。
现代文：二十五日，召吕颐浩到行在，命令参谋官傅裕卿代理主管都督府事。
English: On the 25th, he summoned Lyu Binhao and ordered the staff officer Fu Yuqing to be the acting head of the governor's office.

古文：诏两浙、江、淮守臣，令存抚东北流寓人。
现代文：下诏两浙、江、淮守臣，命令他们慰问抚恤东北流寓百姓。
English: He issued the following edict to the two Zhejiang, Jiang and Huai statesmen, ordering them to pay condolences and pensions to the northeastern people.

古文：乙卯，韩世忠遣统制解元、巨振入潭州，执李宏以归。
现代文：二十六日，韩世忠派遣统制解元、巨振进人潭州，捕获李宏带回朝廷。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, Han Shizhong dispatched the general system to dissolve Yuan and Jiu into Tanzhou, captured Li Hong and brought him back to the imperial court.

古文：秋七月辛酉，悉蠲福建诸州被兵之家田税。
现代文：秋七月初三，全部免除福建各州遭受兵火战乱百姓家的田税。
English: On the third day of autumn and the beginning of July, all the states in Fujian were exempted from the rice field tax.

古文：壬戌，复置湖北提举茶盐司。
现代文：初四，重新设置湖北提举茶盐司。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, the Hubei Tea and Salt Department was re-established.

古文：甲子，罢福建提举市舶司。
现代文：初六，罢除福建提举市舶司。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the shipping department of Fujian Cangzhou Shipbuilding Industry Development Zone was dismissed.

古文：己巳，起复翟琮为河南府、孟汝唐州镇抚使。
现代文：十一日，重新起用翟琼为河南府和孟、汝、唐州镇抚使。
English: On the 11th day, Zou Qiong was reappointed as the Henan Prefecture and Meng, Ru and Tangzhou township envoy.

古文：甲戌，罢淮东路提点刑狱司。
现代文：十六日，罢除淮东路提点刑狱司。
English: On the 16th, the director of the Huaidong Road Detention Center was dismissed.

古文：丙子，马友党郝通率兵五万归宣抚司。
现代文：十八日，马友的同伙郝通率兵五万人归降宣抚司。
English: On the 18th, Ma You's comrade Zhaotong led 50,000 soldiers to surrender to the Generalissimo.

古文：戊寅，知庐州王亨复安丰、寿春县。
现代文：二十日，庐州知州王亨收复安丰、寿春县。
English: On the 20th, Wang Heng of Zhangzhou Chizhou recovered Anfeng and Shuchun counties.

古文：己卯，吕颐浩入见。
现代文：二十一日，吕颐浩到朝廷进见高宗。
English: On the twenty-first day, Lü Binghao went to the imperial court to see Gao Zong.

古文：庚辰，韩世忠讨刘忠，驻兵于岳州之长乐渡，大破之，忠走淮西。
现代文：二十二日，韩世忠讨伐刘忠，军队屯驻在岳州的长乐渡，大败刘忠，刘忠退走淮西。
English: On the 22nd, Han Shizhong fought Liu Zhong, the army stationed in Yuezhou, Changle Du, defeated Liu Zhong, and Liu Zhong retreated to Huaxi.

古文：丁亥，诏编次建炎以来谱牒。
现代文：二十九日，下诏编撰建炎以来谱碟。
English: On the 29th, the following preamble was compiled and compiled since the fire.

古文：八月壬辰，以孟庾兼权同都督江、淮、荆、浙诸军事。
现代文：八月初五，任命孟庚兼代理同都督江、淮、荆、浙地区的军事事务。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month, Meng Geng was appointed as the acting governor of Jiangsu, Huai, Jing and Zhejiang military affairs.

古文：癸巳，顺昌县贼余胜等作乱，通判南剑州王元鼎捕杀之。
现代文：初六，顺昌县贼余胜等人叛乱，南剑州通判王元鼎捉住后杀死了余胜。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Yu Sheng, a thief from Shunchang County, and others rebelled. Wang Yuanding, a magistrate from Southern Jianzhou, caught and killed Yu Sheng.

古文：甲午，安定郡王令话薨。
现代文：初七，安定郡王令话逝世。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the new year, Prince Anzai passed away.

古文：丙申，诏郡守除罢赴阙，皆得引对。
现代文：初九，下诏：郡守除罢到朝廷，都要回答皇上的问题。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, the following edict was issued: In addition to the county governors, the imperial court must answer the emperor's questions.

古文：临安府火。
现代文：临安府发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out in Lin'an Prefecture.

古文：以知江州刘绍先为沿淮防遏使。
现代文：任命江州知州刘绍先为沿淮防遏使。
English: Jiangzhou Chizhou Liu Shaoxian was appointed as the first envoy to prevent and contain the spread of the typhoon.

古文：戊戌，命朱胜非提举醴泉观兼侍读，日赴朝堂议事。
现代文：十一日，命令朱胜非提举醛泉观兼侍读，每天到朝堂商议国事。
English: On the 11th day, Zhu Shengfei was ordered to raise the formaldehyde spring view and attend the reading, and to go to the morning hall every day to discuss state affairs.

古文：沿海州县籍民海舶，每岁一更，守海道险要。
现代文：沿海州县籍没百姓海船，每年更换一次，守卫海道险要地方。
English: Coastal states and counties do not have people's ships, and they are replaced once a year, guarding the highway is a very important place.

古文：振福建饥民。
现代文：贩济福建饥民。
English: Feeding the hungry in Fujian.

古文：己亥，停傅雱官、英州羁管。
现代文：十二日，停傅稣官职，英州羁管。
English: On the 12th, he was suspended from his official duties and taken into custody in Yingzhou.

古文：庚子，诏孟庾、韩世忠总大兵至建康，进赴行在。
现代文：十三日，下诏孟庚、韩世忠率领大军到建康，进赴行在。
English: On the 13th, Meng Geng and Han Shizhong led a large army to Jiankang.

古文：戊申，给事中胡安国以论朱胜非罢，宰执、台谏上疏留之，皆不报。
现代文：二十一日，给事中胡安国因议论朱胜非罢官，宰执、台谏上疏留用胡安国，都没有得到回答。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, there was no answer to the question of whether Zhu Shengfei had removed Juan Guo from his post, or whether he had been removed from his position as the leader of Zhu Shengfei, or whether Juan Guo had been kept away from the podium.

古文：江西统制傅枢讨平南雄贼张忠、邓庆、刘军一等。
现代文：江西统制傅枢讨伐平定南雄贼吴忠、邓庆、刘军一等。
English: Wu Zhong, Deng Qing, and Liu Jun were the first-class leaders of the Jiangxi centralized system.

古文：己酉，赐吴玠田。
现代文：二十二日，赐给吴田地。
English: On the 22nd, Wu Tian Di was given to him.

古文：甲寅，秦桧罢。
现代文：二十七日，秦桧罢官。
English: On the 27th, Qin Yu was dismissed.

古文：给事中程瑀等坐论驳朱胜非，疑其党桧，并落职主宫观。
现代文：给事中程裂等人因论驳朱胜非，被怀疑追随秦桧，都被罢官，主管宫观。
English: Due to their criticism of Zhu Shengfei, people such as Zhongcheng Rift were suspected of following Qin Hui. They were all dismissed from their posts and put in charge of the court.

古文：彗出胃。
现代文：彗星出现在胃宿。
English: The comet appears in the stomach.

古文：乙卯，减膳，戒辅臣修阙政，罢修建康行宫。
现代文：二十八日，减少饮食，告诫大臣们齐修缺政，停罢修建建康行宫。
English: On the 28th, he reduced his diet, admonished the ministers to make amends for the lack of politics, and stopped the construction of the Jiankang Palace.

古文：九月戊午朔，落秦桧职。己未，罢修政局。
现代文：九月初一，秦桧罢职。初二，罢除修政局。
English: On the first day of September, Qin Rong stepped down from his post. On the second day of the month, he was removed from the Political Bureau.

古文：辛酉，以彗出，大赦，许中外臣民直言时政，陕西诸叛将许令自新。
现代文：初四，因彗星出现举行大赦，允许朝廷内外大臣和百姓上书直言时政，陕西叛降金朝的将领允许悔过自新。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, an amnesty was held due to the appearance of the comet, allowing the Minister of the Interior and the Minister of the Interior of the Imperial Court and the people to write a letter to speak frankly about the current government, and the generals who rebelled against the Kim dynasty in Shaanxi were allowed to repent and reform.

古文：壬戌，王伦自金国使还入见。
现代文：初五，王伦出使金国回到朝廷，进见高宗。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Wang Lun sent Jin Guo back to the imperial court to see Gao Zong.

古文：遣潘致尧等为金国军前通问使，附茶药金币进两宫。
现代文：派遣潘致尧等人为金国军前通问使，带去茶药金币献给徽、钦二帝。
English: He sent Pan Zhiyong and others as envoys to the front of the Chinese army to bring tea and gold coins to present to Hui and Qin II.

古文：甲子，以直徽猷阁郭伟为淮西巡抚使。
现代文：初七，任命直徽酞阁郭伟为淮西巡抚使。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Guo Wei, the governor of Huaixi Province, was appointed.

古文：乙丑，复以朱胜非为尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼知枢密院事。
现代文：初八，重新任命朱胜非为尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼知枢密院事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Zhu Shengfei was reappointed as the right-hand man of Shang Shuxu and the subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate.

古文：戊辰，司空山贼李通出降，以为都督府亲军统领。
现代文：十一日，司空山贼李通投降朝廷，命令他为都督府亲军统领。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Li Tong, the governor of the mountain, surrendered to the imperial court and was ordered to lead the pro-government troops.

古文：癸酉，以右朝请大夫吕源为浙东、福建沿海制置使，治定海县。
现代文：十六日，任命右朝请大夫吕源为浙东、福建沿海制置使，治所设在定海县。
English: On the 16th, Dr. Lyu Yuan was appointed as the envoy of the Eastern Zhejiang and Fujian coasts by the Right Court, and the government office was set up in Dinghai County.

古文：知建昌军朱芾击石陂贼余照，禽斩之。甲戌，彗没。
现代文：建昌知军朱莆攻打石破贼余照，俘获后杀掉了他。
English: The Jianchang army of Zhu Xi attacked the stone-breaker, captured him and killed him.

古文：丙子，复以郭仲荀为武泰军节度使。
现代文：十七日，彗星消失。十九日，又任命郭仲荀为武泰军节度使。
English: On the seventeenth day, the comet disappeared. On the nineteenth day, Guo Zhongyao was appointed as the military envoy of the Thai army.

古文：诏墨敕有不当者，许三省、枢密院奏禀，给事中、中书舍人缴驳，台谏论列，有司申审。
现代文：下诏： 皇帝亲笔书写、不经外廷直接下达的命令有不恰当的地方，允许三省、枢密院上奏陈述，给事中、中书舍人辩论是非，台谏议论条列评定，有关部门仔细考虑后向上申报。 
English: The following edict: There is something inappropriate about an order written by the emperor himself and not directly issued by the foreign court. The three provinces and the Privy Council are allowed to submit a statement, and the people in the middle and the Chinese writers are allowed to debate the rights and wrongs, and the Taiwan authorities are allowed to discuss and evaluate the articles, and the relevant departments are allowed to report to the top after careful consideration.

古文：庚辰，命福建提举茶盐官兼领市舶司。
现代文：二十三日，命令福建提举茶盐官兼领市舶司。
English: On the 23rd, he ordered Fujian to raise the tea and salt official and leader of the city's shipping department.

古文：辛巳，以韩世忠为江南东、西路宣抚使，他帅臣称宣抚使者并罢。
现代文：二十四日，任命韩世忠为江南东、西路宣抚使，其他帅臣称为宣抚使的人一律罢除。
English: On the 24th, Han Shizhong was appointed as the special envoy to the south, east and west of the Yangtze River, and all other courtiers who were appointed as special envoys were dismissed.

古文：壬午，遣监察御史明橐等五人宣谕江、浙、湖、广、福建诸路，仍降诏谕官吏以遣使按察、劝惩、诛赏之意。
现代文：二十五日，派遣监察御史明真等五人到江、浙、湖、广、福建各路传布解释皇帝的命令。还下诏告谕官吏，朝廷要派遣使臣视察考核、劝善惩恶、诛杀赏赐地方官吏。
English: On the 25th, five people, including the inspector Mi Shi Mingzhen, were dispatched to the provinces of Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Hunan, Guangxi and Fujian to explain the emperor's order. An edict was also issued to inform officials that the imperial court would send envoys to inspect, examine, advise, punish and reward local officials.

古文：癸未，新作行宫南门成。
现代文：二十六日，新建行宫南门成功。
English: On the 26th, the newly-built South Gate of the Imperial Palace was successfully completed.

古文：甲申，提辖榷货务张纯峻立淮、浙盐法，增其算。
现代文：二十七日，提辖榷货务张纯严格淮、浙盐法，增收盐税。
English: On the 27th day of the month, Zhang Chun and Zhejiang salt laws were strictly enforced, and the salt tax was increased.

古文：总领四川财赋赵开初变四川盐法，尽榷之。
现代文：总领四川财赋赵开开始变通四川盐法，全部禁榷。
English: Zhao Kai, the leader of Sichuan's financial resources, began to deviate from the Sichuan salt method, and all of them were imprisoned.

古文：乙酉，太白昼见。
现代文：二十八日，太白星白天出现。
English: Acetylene, too white Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：丙戌，以知兴元府王似为川、陕宣抚处置副使。
现代文：二十九日，任命兴元知府王似为川、陕宣抚处置副使。
English: On the 29th, Wang Lian, the governor of Xingyuan, was appointed as the deputy envoy for the treatment of the Sichuan and Shaanxi provinces.

古文：丁亥，封右监门卫大将军、荣州防御使令畤为安定郡王。
现代文：三十日，封右监门卫大将军、荣州防御使令畦为安定郡王。
English: On the 30th, he was appointed as the grand general of the gate guards and the defense envoy of Rongzhou, and became the king of the stable county.

古文：是月，韩世忠遣统制解元袭击刘忠于蕲阳，大破之。
现代文：这个月，韩世忠派遣统制解元在薪阳袭击刘忠，大败刘忠。
English: This month, Han Shizhong dispatched a command unit to attack Liu Zhong in Zhuoyang, defeating Liu Zhong.

古文：忠奔刘豫。
现代文：刘忠逃奔刘豫。
English: Liu Zhong fled to Liu Yu.

古文：冬十月戊子朔，置牧马监于饶州。
现代文：冬十月初一，在饶州设置牧马监。初三，李勃被处以死刑。
English: On the first day of October in winter, a horse herding inspector was set up in Raozhou. On the third day of the first month, Li Bo was sentenced to death.

古文：庚寅，李勃伏诛。丙申，初置江、浙、荆湖、广南、福建路都转运使。
现代文：初九，初次设置江、浙、荆湖、广南、福建路都转运使。
English: At the beginning of the ninth century, Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Jinghu, Guangnan and Fujian roads were set up for the first time.

古文：甲辰，潘致尧至楚州，通判州事刘晏劫其礼币奔刘豫，守臣柴春战死。
现代文：十七日，潘致尧到楚州，通判州事刘晏劫掠他带的礼币逃奔刘豫，守臣柴春战死。
English: On the 17th, Pan Zhisheng went to Chuzhou to pass judgment on the provincial magistrate Liu Yao, who robbed him of the gift money he brought and fled to Liu Yu. The retainer Chai Chun was killed in the battle.

古文：戊申，以知平江府赵鼎为江东安抚大使。
现代文：二十一日，任命平江知府赵鼎为江东安抚大使。
English: On the 21st, Zhao Ding of Pingjiang Prefecture was appointed as the ambassador of Jiangdong pacification.

古文：丙辰，禁温、台二州民结集社会。
现代文：二十九日，禁止温州、台州百姓结集社会。
English: On the 29th, the people of Wenzhou and Taizhou were prohibited from social gathering.

古文：班度量权衡于诸路，禁私造者。
现代文：在各路颁布度量权衡，禁止私自制造。
English: Measures and trade-offs will be promulgated in all sectors, and private manufacturing will be prohibited.

古文：是月，颜孝恭招降石陂余贼李宝等。
现代文：这个月，颜孝恭招降石破残留贼李宝等人。
English: This month, Yan Xiaogong invited Li Bao and others to break the remaining thieves.

古文：十一月辛酉，陈颙陷汀州武平县，犯梅、循二州。
现代文：十一月初四，陈攻陷汀州武平县，攻打梅、循二州。
English: At the beginning of November 4th, Chen attacked Dingzhou Wuping County, and attacked Mei and Xun Erzhou.

古文：乙丑，初榷明州卤田盐。
现代文：初八，初次禁榷明州卤田盐。
English: At the age of eight, he was banned for the first time from eating halogenated salt from Mingzhou.

古文：辛未，议将抚师江上，召侍从官条具利害。
现代文：十四日，议高宗将到长江上抚慰军队，召侍从官陈述利弊。
English: On the 14th, Emperor Gaozong will go to the Yangtze River to comfort the troops and summon officials to present the pros and cons.

古文：甲戌，命李纲、刘洪道、程昌寓、解潜会兵捕讨湖寇杨太。
现代文：十七日，命令李纲、刘洪道、程昌辨、解潜联合出兵捕获讨伐湖寇杨太。
English: On the 17th, he ordered Li Gang, Liu Hongdao, Cheng Changbin, and the submarine to jointly dispatch troops to capture Yangtai, the lake's fighting koi.

古文：戊寅，范汝为余党范忠掠龙泉县。
现代文：二十一日，范汝为余党范忠攻掠龙泉县。
English: On the twenty-first day, Fan Ru attacked and plundered Longquan County for Fan Zhong.

古文：庚辰，诏宣谕五使，焚所至州县建炎以前已蠲税籍。
现代文：二十三日，下诏宣谕五使，焚烧所到州县建炎以前已经免除赋税的册子。
English: On the 23rd, the fifth envoy issued an edict, and the booklets that had been exempted from taxation before the incineration plant was built in Zhoushan County.

古文：癸未，临安大火。
现代文：二十六日，临安发生大火灾。
English: On the 26th, a large fire broke out in Lin'an.

古文：是月，关师古败伪齐兵于抹邦山。
现代文：这个月，关师古在抹邦山打败伪齐军队。
English: This month, Guan Shigu defeated the pseudo-Qi army in Mt.

古文：马友党步谅诣李纲降，纲入潭州，其党郝晸降王进，吴锡禽王浚。
现代文：马友的同伙步谅到李纲军中投降，李纲率兵进人潭州，马友的同伙郝向王进投降，吴锡俘获王浚。
English: Ma You's comrades-in-arms surrendered to Li Gang's army, Li Gang led the army into Ren Tan Zhou, Ma You's comrades-in-arms surrendered to Wang Jin, and Wu Xi captured Wang Jun.

古文：湖南盗贼悉平。
现代文：湖南盗贼全部镇压。
English: All the thieves in Hunan have been suppressed.

古文：十二月丁亥朔，命神武前军领申世景等讨捕范忠。
现代文：十二月初一，命令神武前军统领申世景等人讨伐范忠。
English: On the first day of December, he ordered Shenwu's former army commander Shen Shijing and others to fight Fan Zhong.

古文：己丑，伪称荣德帝姬易氏伏诛。
现代文：初三，冒称荣德帝姬的易氏被处以死刑。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Yi, who pretended to be a virtuous person, was sentenced to death.

古文：范忠犯处州。
现代文：范忠攻打处州。
English: Fan Zhong attacked Zhouzhou.

古文：巨师古引兵入庐州，执王亨送行在。
现代文：巨师古率兵进人庐州，俘获王亨送往行在。
English: The great master Gu Gu led his soldiers into Bozhou, captured Wang Heng and sent him to Xuanwu.

古文：甲午，李纲罢。
现代文：初八，李纲罢职。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Li Gang resigned.

古文：临安府火。
现代文：临安府发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out in Lin'an Prefecture.

古文：丙申，振被火家。
现代文：初十，贩济遭火灾的家庭。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the family of a street vendor suffered a fire.

古文：罢浙东沿海制置司。
现代文：罢除浙东沿海制置司。
English: The East Zhejiang Coastal System Establishment Division was abolished.

古文：丁酉，岳飞遣统领徐庆、王贵讨禽萍乡贼高聚。
现代文：十一日，岳飞派遣统领徐庆、王贵讨伐捕获萍乡贼高聚。
English: On the 11th day, Yuefei dispatched commanders Xu Qing and Wang Gui to fight and capture the Pingxiang bandits.

古文：己亥，以胡舜陟为庐、寿等州镇抚使。
现代文：十三日，任命胡舜陆为庐、寿等州镇抚使。
English: On the 13th, Hu Yulun was appointed as the provincial governor of Shandong and Shou Provinces.

古文：金人侵熙、秦，关师古击败之。
现代文：金军侵犯熙、秦二州，关师古率兵打败金军。
English: The gold army invaded the two states of Xi and Qin, and Guan Shigu led the troops to defeat the gold army.

古文：庚子，遣驾部员外郎李愿抚谕川、陕。
现代文：十四日，派遣驾部员外郎李愿抚恤慰问川、陕地区。
English: On the 14th, the driver's son, Li Xiang, was dispatched to comfort the Sichuan and Shaanxi regions.

古文：江西兵马副钤辖张忠彦坐纵暴不法，斩于潭州。
现代文：江西兵马副铃辖张忠彦因骄横跋启，无法无天，在潭州被斩杀。
English: Zhang Tadahiko, deputy commander of the Jiangxi Terracotta Warriors and Horses, was beheaded in Tanzhou for arrogance and lawlessness.

古文：辛丑，程昌寓遣杜湛讨杨钦等，败之，杀三千余人。
现代文：十五日，程昌辨派遣杜湛讨伐杨钦等，打败杨钦，并斩杀三千多人。
English: On the 15th, Cheng Changbin sent Du Zhan to fight against Yang Qin and others, defeating Yang Qin and killing more than 3,000 people.

古文：癸卯，川、陕宣抚司类试陕西发解进士，得周谟等十三人，以便宜赐进士出身。
现代文：十七日，川、陕宣抚司类试陕西发解进士，得周漠等十三人。没有上奏，自行决定赐给他们进士出身。
English: On the 17th, Chuan and Shaanxi Xuanfu Division tried to be promoted to Shaanxi Fadu Division, and thirteen people, including Zhou Ma, were promoted. They were not promoted, and they were promoted to Shaanxi Fadu Division at their own discretion.

古文：甲辰，罢张浚宣抚处置使，仍知枢密院。
现代文：十八日，罢除张浚宣抚处置使职务，仍然为知枢密院。
English: On the 18th, Zhang Jun was removed from his post, but he was still a member of the Privy Council.

古文：以知夔州卢法原为川、陕宣抚处置副使，及王似同治司事。
现代文：任命夔州知州卢法原为川、陕宣抚处置副使，与王似同治宣抚处置司事务。
English: Appointed Luzhou Chizhou Lu Fa Yuan as the deputy envoy for the treatment of the Sichuan and Shaanxi provinces, and Wang Nian Tongzhi as the director of the Department for the Treatment of the Sichuan Province.

古文：己酉，遣司封员外郎周随亨同抚谕川、陕。
现代文：二十三日，派遣司封员外郎周随亨同抚谕川、陕。
English: On the 23rd, he dispatched Zhou Zu Heng, a member of the imperial guard, to Sichuan and Shaanxi.

古文：庚戌，孟庾自建康来朝。
现代文：二十四日，孟庚从建康来朝见高宗。
English: On the 24th, Meng Geng came from Jiankang to see Gao Zong in the morning.

古文：辛亥，金人犯商州，守将邵隆退屯上津。
现代文：二十五日，金军攻打商州，守将邵隆退守上津。
English: On the 25th, the Chinese army attacked Shangzhou, and the commander Shao Long retreated to Shangjin.

古文：李横败伪齐兵，复汝州。
现代文：李横打败伪齐军队，收复汝州。
English: Li Heng defeated the pseudo Qi army and recovered Ruzhou.

古文：甲寅，命孟庾同都督江、淮、荆、浙诸军事。
现代文：二十八日，命令孟庚同都督江、淮、荆、浙各地军事。
English: On the 28th, Meng Geng ordered the governors of Jiang, Huai, Jing, and other regions of Zhejiang to join the military.

古文：诏都督府总治江东西、湖北、浙西帅臣经画屯田。
现代文：下诏都督府统一管理江东西、湖北、浙西帅臣经营屯田。
English: According to the edict, the prefectural government should uniformly manage the east and west of the Yangtze River, and the Hubei and West Zhejiang provinces should manage the military garrisons.

古文：张浚承制以归州隶夔州路。
现代文：张浚秉承皇帝命令把归州划归夔州路。
English: Zhang Jun adhered to the emperor's order to transfer Guizhou to Zhangzhou Road.

古文：是冬，金人犯和尚原，将士乏食自溃，吴璘拔砦弃去。
现代文：这年冬天，金军攻打和尚原，将士缺乏军食溃败，吴瞒放弃占领的山寨。
English: This winter, the Golden Army attacked Monchohara, the soldiers were defeated due to a lack of food, and Wu Zhen abandoned the occupied village.

古文：虔贼谢达犯惠州。
现代文：虔州贼谢达攻打惠州。
English: Qianzhou thief Xie Da attacked Huizhou.

古文：三年春正月丁巳朔，帝在临安，率百官遥拜二帝，不受朝贺。
现代文：绍兴三年春正月初一，高宗在临安，率文武百官遥拜徽、钦二帝，不接受大臣们的朝拜和祝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Shaoxing, Gaozong was in Lin'an. He led hundreds of civil and military officials to worship Hui and Qin Erdi, and did not accept the worship and congratulations of the ministers.

古文：江西将李宗谅诱戍兵叛，寇筠州，统领赵进击却之。
现代文：江西将令李宗谅诱惑守卫的士兵叛乱，攻打箔州，统领赵进击退他们。
English: Jiangxi General Li Zongren tempted the soldiers on guard to rebel and attack Foozhou, leading Zhao Jin to repel them.

古文：翟琮入西京，禽伪齐留守孟邦雄。
现代文：翟琼进人西京，俘获伪齐留守孟邦雄。
English: Zou Qiong entered West Beijing and captured the remaining pseudo-Qi, Meng Bangxiong.

古文：命诸路宪臣兼提举常平司。
现代文：命令各路宪臣兼提举常平司。
English: He ordered all gendarmes to nominate and promote Jang Hee-sik.

古文：庚申，金人犯上津。
现代文：初四，金军攻打上津。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Golden Army attacked Kamitsu.

古文：李横破颍顺军，伪齐知军兰和降。
现代文：李横攻破颖顺军，伪齐知军兰和投降。
English: Li Yang attacked and defeated Ying Shun's army, and the pseudo-Qizhi army surrendered.

古文：壬戌，金人犯金州洵阳县。
现代文：初六，金军攻打金州询阳县。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the Chinese army attacked Zhengyang County in Jinzhou.

古文：以仇悆为福建、两浙、淮东路沿海制置使。
现代文：任命仇昵为福建、两浙、淮东路沿海制置使。
English: Appointment of Qunyi as the Fujian, Zhejiang and Huaiyang East Coastal Construction Envoy.

古文：癸亥，陈颙围潮州不下，引兵趋江西。
现代文：初七，陈围攻潮州不下，率兵前往江西。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Chen besieged Chaozhou and led his troops to Jiangxi.

古文：甲子，李横复颍昌府。
现代文：初八，李横收复颖昌府。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Li Xiangrui recovered Yingchangfu.

古文：乙丑，诏中外刑官各务仁平，台宪检察，月具所平反以闻，岁终考察殿最。
现代文：初九，下诏中外主管刑罚的官员处理案件必须仁义公平，台宪检察，每月列出所平反的案件报告朝廷，作为岁终考察好坏的根据。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, it was decreed that officials in charge of criminal punishment at home and abroad must deal with cases in a benevolent and fair manner. Taiwan's constitutional procuratorate will list the cases that have been rehabilitated every month and report to the imperial court, as a basis for the year-end inspection.

古文：金人陷金州，镇抚使王彦焚积聚，退保西乡。
现代文：金军攻陷金少，镇抚使王彦焚烧积聚的财粮，退保西乡。
English: The gold army was short of money, and the governor ordered Wang Yan to burn the accumulated grain and money and withdraw to Xixiang.

古文：庚午，罢行在宗正司，命嗣濮王仲湜兼判大宗正事。
现代文：十四日，罢除行在宗正司，命令嗣攫王赵仲兼判大宗正事。
English: On the 14th, he dismissed the lineage of Zong Zheng, and ordered the successor of Zong Zheng, Zhao Zhong, to adjudicate the affairs of Zong Zheng.

古文：辛未，震电雨雹。
现代文：十五日，打雷闪电，降冰雹。
English: On the fifteenth day, there was thunder, lightning, and hail.

古文：造浑天仪。
现代文：制造浑天仪。
English: Manufacture of armillary sphere.

古文：李通为其徒王全所杀。
现代文：李通被他的部众王全杀死。
English: Li Tong was killed by all of his subordinates.

古文：壬申，命西外宗正移司福州。
现代文：十六日，命令西外宗正移司福州。
English: On the 16th, he ordered Saigai Zongzheng to be transferred to Fuzhou.

古文：癸酉，复祭大火。
现代文：十七日，又发生大火。
English: On the 17th, another fire broke out.

古文：以汤东野为淮东安抚使。
现代文：任命汤东野为淮东安抚使。
English: Tang Dongye was appointed as the East Huai appeasement envoy.

古文：乙亥，以李横为襄阳府、邓随郢州镇抚使。
现代文：十九日，任命李横为襄阳府，邓随为即州镇抚使。
English: On the 19th, Li Yang was appointed as the governor of Xiangyang Prefecture, and Deng Sui was appointed as the provincial governor.

古文：丁丑，登、莱山砦统制范温率部兵泛海来归。
现代文：二十一日，登、莱州山寨统制范温率所部士兵渡海来归顺。
English: On the twenty-first day, soldiers from the headquarters of the Tang and Laizhou Shanzhai Dynasties crossed the sea to surrender.

古文：庚辰，诏春秋望祭诸陵。
现代文：二十四日，下诏春秋望日祭祀祖宗陵。
English: On the 24th, the Spring and Autumn Lantern Festival was held to worship the ancestral mausoleum.

古文：张浚论奏王似不可为副，因引罪求罢，不报。
现代文：张浚上奏论列王似不可以为副使，因而引咎要求罢职，高宗没有同意。
English: Gaozong did not agree to Zhang Jun's report that the emperors did not seem to be able to be deputy envoys, and therefore demanded that Gaozong be dismissed.

古文：癸未，诏民复业者，视垦田多寡定租额赋役。
现代文：二十七日，下诏：百姓恢复农业生产的，视他们垦田多少确定租额赋役。
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued: If the people resume agricultural production, the amount of rent to be paid will be determined according to how much land they have cultivated.

古文：乙酉，减淮、浙蚕盐钱。
现代文：二十九日，减少淮、浙地区蚕盐钱。
English: On the 29th, the reduction of silkworm salt money in Huai and Zhejiang regions.

古文：二月丁亥朔，升桂州为静江府。乙丑，权邦彦薨。
现代文：二月初一，升桂州为静江府。初三，权邦彦逝世。
English: On the first day of February, Guizhou was upgraded to Shizuoka Prefecture. On the third day of the month, Quan Kunihiko passed away.

古文：浙东贼彭友犯龙泉县。
现代文：浙东贼彭友攻打友泉县。
English: The East Zhejiang thief Peng You attacked Youquan County.

古文：辛卯，李通余党刘德围舒州。
现代文：初五，李通余党刘德围攻舒州。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Liu De of the Li Tongyu Party besieged Shuzhou.

古文：吴玠遇金人于饶风关，王彦自西乡来会，金人分兵攻关，统制郭仲败走。
现代文：吴在饶风关与金军相遇，王彦从西乡来增援，金军分兵攻关，统制郭仲失败退走。
English: Wu met the Golden Army at Raofeng Pass, Wang Yan came from Xixiang to reinforce, the Golden Army split up to attack the pass, and Guozhong retreated in defeat.

古文：丁酉，饶风关破，玠趣西县，彦奔达州，四川大震。
现代文：十一日，饶风关被攻破，吴退到西县，王彦逃奔达州，四川大震。
English: On the 11th day, Rao Feng Pass was breached, Wu retreated to Xixian, Wang Yan fled to Dazhou, and the Sichuan earthquake occurred.

古文：张浚被罢职之命，以诸军方溃，因秘不行，复具奏审。
现代文：张浚被罢职的命令，因各军刚刚溃败，因而秘而不宣，又重新陈述朝廷，等候审批。
English: The order for Zhang Jun to be dismissed from his post was not made public due to the fact that the armies had just been defeated, so it was re-submitted to the imperial court for approval.

古文：己亥，金帅撒离曷入兴元府，经略使刘子羽焚其城走三泉县，吴玠退屯仙人关。
现代文：十三日，金军统帅撒离易进人兴元府，经略使刘子羽焚烧府城，退走三泉县，吴退兵屯驻仙人关。
English: On the 13th, the commander-in-chief of the Jin Army, Sa Li Yi, marched into Xingyuanfu and ordered Liu Zi Yu to burn the capital city. He then withdrew to Sanquan County, while Wu Di stationed his troops in Xianrenguan.

古文：庚子，以宗子伯琮为和州防御使，赐名瑗，寻改贵州。
现代文：十四日，任命宗子赵伯琼为和州防御使，赐名缓，不久改为贵州防御使。
English: On the 14th, Zhao Boqiong, the eldest son, was appointed as the defense envoy of He Prefecture, and his name was given a delay, and was soon changed to the defense envoy of Guizhou Province.

古文：辛丑，蠲广东诸州被贼民家税。
现代文：十五日，免除广东各州遭贼破坏百姓家的赋税。
English: On the 15th, all the states in Guangdong were exempted from paying taxes for the destruction of people's homes by thieves.

古文：壬寅，郑州兵马钤辖牛皋、彭率兵与李横会，横以便宜命皋为蔡、唐州镇抚使，知汝州。
现代文：十六日，郑州兵马铃辖牛皋、彭已率兵与李横会合，李横不上奏，自行决定任命牛皋为蔡、唐州镇抚使，彭卫为汝州知州。
English: On the 16th, the Zhengzhou Terracotta Warriors and Horses under the jurisdiction of the bell, Niulong and Pengye led the troops to meet with Li Yang, Li Yang did not play, and decided to appoint Niulong as Cai, Tangzhou Zhen Fuxi, and Peng Wei as Ruzhou Zhizhou.

古文：乙巳，翟琮遣统制李吉败伪齐兵于伊阳，又歼其将梁进之众。
现代文：十九日，翟琼派遣统制李吉在伊阳打败伪齐军队，又歼灭伪齐将领梁进的部队。
English: On the 19th, Gong Qiong sent Li Ji to defeat the pseudo-Qi army in Yiyang and annihilate the troops of the pseudo-Qi general Liang Jin.

古文：丁未，王似始受宣抚副使之命。
现代文：二十一日，王似开始接受宣抚副使的命令。
English: On the twenty-first day, Wang Xi began to receive orders from the vice-envoy.

古文：戊申，虔贼周十隆犯循、梅、汀州，诏统制赵祥等合兵捕之。
现代文：二十二日，虔州贼周十隆攻打循、梅、汀州，下诏统制赵样等联合出兵捕获他。
English: On the 22nd, the Kenzhou thief Zhou Shilong attacked Shun, Mei, and Tingzhou, and the next commander Zhao Samye and others jointly dispatched troops to capture him.

古文：庚戌，以李横为神武左军副统制、京西招抚使。
现代文：二十四日，任命李横为神武左军副统制、京西招抚使。
English: On the 24th, Li Yang was appointed as the deputy commander of the Shenwu Leftist Army and the Beijing and Western Zhaofu Envoy.

古文：改胡舜陟为淮西安抚使。
现代文：改任胡舜险为淮西安抚使。
English: Hu Bingran was reappointed as the Huaixi pacification envoy.

古文：辛亥，以工部尚书席益参知政事，翰林学士徐俯签书枢密院事。
现代文：二十五日，任命工部尚书席益为参知政事，翰林学士徐俯为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 25th, Shang Shuxi of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce was appointed as a member of the Council of State, and Hanlin Scholar Xu Qian was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：壬子，王全犯庐州。
现代文：二十六，王全攻打庐州。
English: On the 26th, Wang Quan attacked Bozhou.

古文：甲寅，诏守臣至官半年，具上民间利害或边防五事。
现代文：二十八日，下诏守臣到任半年，向朝廷陈述民间利害或边防五事。
English: On the 28th, the next Zhao Shouwen arrived in office for half a year, and presented five matters of civil interest or border defense to the imperial court.

古文：李横遣人奏颍昌之捷，诏许横便宜行事。
现代文：李横派人向朝廷报告颖昌之捷，下诏允许李横不上奏自行决断处理政事。
English: Li Heng sent someone to the imperial court to report the success of Yingchang, and the imperial edict allowed Li Heng not to make a report and to deal with political affairs at his own discretion.

古文：乙卯，刘光世遣郦琼等屯兵泗州为李横声援。
现代文：二十九日，刘光世派遣哪琼等人率兵屯驻泅州，作为李横进兵的后援。
English: On the 29th, Liu Guangxi dispatched Ne Qiong and others to lead the troops stationed in Zhangzhou to support Li Yangjun.

古文：是月，张浚复以王庶为参谋官，往巴州措置。
现代文：这个月，张浚又任命王庶为参谋官，前往巴州处理有关事务。
English: This month, Zhang Jun also appointed Wang Shiao as a staff officer and went to Bazhou to deal with related matters.

古文：时金兵深入至金牛镇，疑有伏，由褒斜谷引兵还兴元，吴玠、刘子羽追击其后，杀获甚众。
现代文：当时金军深人到金牛镇，怀疑有埋伏，于是从褒斜谷退兵到兴元，吴、刘子羽跟随金军追击，杀死、俘获不少金军。
English: At that time, the gold army was deeply entrenched in Jinniu Town and suspected of an ambush, so they retreated from Boheshi Valley to Xingyuan. Wu and Liu Zihua followed the gold army to pursue and killed and captured many gold soldiers.

古文：三月己未，诏岳飞捕虔贼。
现代文：三月初四，下诏岳飞捕获虔州贼。
English: On the fourth day of March, Yuefei captured the Kenzhou thief.

古文：壬戌，申命统制巨师古部兵万人屯扬州。
现代文：初七，重新命令统制巨师古率兵一万人进屯扬州。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he re-ordered the commanding grandmaster Gu to lead ten thousand soldiers into Tun Yangzhou.

古文：胡舜陟至庐州，王全降。
现代文：胡舜陆到庐州，王全投降。
English: Hu Binglu went to Zhangzhou, and Wang Quan surrendered.

古文：甲子，以赵鼎为江西安抚大使。
现代文：初九，任命赵鼎为江西安抚大使。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, Zhao Ding was appointed as the ambassador of Jiangxi pacification.

古文：李横传檄诸军收复东京。
现代文：李横发布命令，各军联合收复东京。
English: Li Heng issued an order that the armies should jointly recapture Tokyo.

古文：己巳，金人遣兵援刘豫，李横败走，颍昌复陷。
现代文：十四日，金军派遣兵力援助刘豫，李横败退，颖昌又失陷。
English: On the 14th, the Golden Army dispatched troops to aid Liu Yu, Li Heng was defeated and retreated, and Yingchang fell again.

古文：壬午，以韩世忠为淮南东路宣抚使。
现代文：二十七日，任命韩世忠为淮南东路宣抚使。
English: On the 27th, Han Shizhong was appointed as the envoy of Huainan East Road.

古文：李纲遣兵击降李宗谅，诏戮于市。
现代文：李纲派兵攻击李宗谅，迫使他投降，下诏在闹市杀死。
English: Li Gang sent soldiers to attack Li Zongren, forced him to surrender, and then killed him in downtown.

古文：夏四月丁亥，朱胜非以母丧去位。
现代文：夏四月初三，朱胜非因母亲逝世离职守丧。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, Zhu Shengfei left his post due to the death of his mother.

古文：伪齐知虢州董震及其统制董先来归，以震权商、虢、陕州镇抚使。
现代文：伪齐貌州知州董震及其统制董先来归顺，任命董震代理商、貌、陕州镇抚使。
English: The pseudo-Qizhou Maozhou Zhizhou Dong Zhen and its leader, Dong Zhen, were the first to surrender, and the agents of Dong Zhen, Maozhou and Shaanxi Zhenfu were appointed.

古文：己丑，诏江东西、湖北、浙西募民佃荒田，蠲三年租。
现代文：初四，下诏江东西、湖北、浙西招募百姓佃耕荒田，免除三年租税。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, people were recruited to plow wasteland in the eastern and western parts of the Zhejiang River, Hubei Province, and western Zhejiang Province, and they were exempted from taxes for three years.

古文：辛卯，以刘光世为检校太傅、江南东路宣抚使。
现代文：初六，任命刘光世为检校太傅、江南东路宣抚使。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Liu Guangshi was appointed as the inspector of the school and the prompter of Jiangnan East Road.

古文：金人去兴元。
现代文：金军离开兴元。
English: The Chinese army left Xingyuan.

古文：壬辰，徙都督府于镇江。
现代文：初七，都督府迁移到镇江。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the prefectural government moved to Zhenjiang.

古文：岳飞军次虔州。
现代文：岳飞军屯驻虔州。
English: Yuefei's army was stationed in Gyeongju.

古文：甲午，伪齐知唐州胡安中来归。
现代文：初九，伪齐唐州知州胡安中来归顺。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the pseudo-Qi Tang Zhou Zhizhou Juan Zhong came to submit.

古文：丙申，伪齐李成攻陷虢州，董先、牛皋奔襄阳。
现代文：十一日，伪齐李成攻陷貌州，董先、牛皋逃奔襄阳。
English: On the 11th day, the pseudo Qi Li Cheng invaded Manchukuo, and Dong Xian and Niu Xuan fled to Xiangyang.

古文：己亥，改谥昭慈献烈皇后为昭慈圣献。
现代文：十四日，昭慈献烈皇后溢号改为昭慈圣献。
English: On the 14th, the empress's posthumous name was changed to Zhaoji Shengjian.

古文：复举五帝日月之祀。
现代文：又实行五帝日月祭祀。
English: In addition, the Five Emperors, Sun and Moon Festival is also held.

古文：庚子，增文武小官奉。
现代文：十五日，增加文武小官棒禄。
English: On the 15th, the bonus for civil and military petty officers was increased.

古文：辛丑，荆南统制罗广率兵至鼎州。
现代文：十六日，荆南统制罗广率兵到鼎州。
English: On the 16th, Luo Guang, the regent of Jingnan, led an army to Dingzhou.

古文：杨太众益盛，自号大圣天王，立钟相少子子义为太子，广等不克讨而还。
现代文：杨太部众更加盛大，自称大圣天王，立钟相少子钟子义为太子，罗广等没能镇压而退回荆南。
English: Yang Taibe's followers were even more grandiose, claiming to be the Great Saint Heavenly King, setting up Zhong Xiang's younger son Zhong Zi Yi as the prince, and Luo Guang, who could not be suppressed, returned to Jingnan.

古文：丁未，岳飞遣统领张宪、王贵击彭友，禽斩之。
现代文：二十二日，岳飞派遣统领张宪、王贵攻击彭友，擒斩彭友。
English: On the 22nd, Yuefei sent commanders Zhang Xian and Wang Gui to attack Peng You and behead him.

古文：刘忠为部下王林所杀，传首行在。
现代文：刘忠被部下王林杀死，首级被送往行在。
English: Liu Zhong was killed by his subordinate Wang Lin, and his head was sent to Xingye.

古文：戊申，以浙西兵马钤辖史康民所部兵为忠锐第九将。
现代文：二十三日，任命浙西兵马铃辖史康民统率的部队为忠锐第九将。
English: On the 23rd, the troops under the command of Shi Kangmin under the jurisdiction of West Zhejiang Terracotta Warriors and Horses were appointed as the loyal ninth general.

古文：己酉，张浚奏王庶、王似、卢法原威望素轻，乞命刘子羽、吴玠并为判官，不报。
现代文：二十四日，张浚上奏王庶、王似、卢法原威望向来不高，请求命令刘子羽、吴为判官，高宗没有答复。
English: On the 24th, Zhang Jun appealed to Wang Shizhu, Wang Xi, and Lu Fahyuan, whose prestige had not always been high, and requested that Liu Zi Yu and Wu be appointed as judges. Gaozong did not reply.

古文：辛亥，徐文叛奔伪齐。
现代文：二十六日，徐文叛变逃奔伪齐。
English: On the 26th, Xu Wen mutinied and fled to the pseudo-Qi.

古文：五月丙辰，以翟琮为河南府、孟汝郑州镇抚使，董先为副使。
现代文：五月初二，任命翟琼为河南府、孟汝郑州镇抚使，董先为副使。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, Zou Qiong was appointed as the Henan Prefecture, Meng Ru as the Zhengzhou Town Envoy, and Dong Xian as the Deputy Envoy.

古文：丁巳，遣枢密计议官任直清抚谕襄阳、商、虢、河南诸镇。
现代文：初三，派枢密计议官任直清抚谕襄阳、商、貌、河南各镇。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, he sent the privy councilor Zhiqing to govern the towns of Xiangyang, Shang, Maoming and Henan.

古文：己未，命杨沂中招捕严州盗贼。
现代文：初五，命令杨沂中招降捕获严州盗贼。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, he ordered Yang Xizhong to recruit and capture the thief from Yanzhou.

古文：辛酉，建睦亲宅。
现代文：初七，修建睦亲宅。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the Mutsukin residence was built.

古文：以董先为商、虢、陕州镇抚使。
现代文：任命董先为商、貌、陕州镇抚使。
English: He appointed Dongxian as Shang, Maozhou and Shaanxi Zhenfu envoy.

古文：征河南布衣王忠民为宣教郎，至行在，辞不受。
现代文：征召河南布衣王忠民为宣教郎，到行在，推辞不接受。
English: Wang Zhongmin of Henan Province was conscripted to be a missionary. He went to the front, but his resignation was not accepted.

古文：壬戌，潘致尧还，言金人欲重臣通使以取信，遂寝出师之议。
现代文：初八，潘致尧回国，报告说金朝要南宋朝廷重臣出使用以取信，于是停罢出兵的议论。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Pan Zhiyao returned to the country and reported that the Kim dynasty wanted the Southern Song Dynasty's senior courtiers to go out to collect letters, thus stopping the discussion of sending troops.

古文：乙丑，罢诸州在任守臣所辟通判。
现代文：十一日，罢除各州在任守臣的所征召的通判。
English: On the 11th day of the month, all the judges in the states who had been conscripted as retainers were dismissed.

古文：丁卯，以韩肖胄等充金国军前通问使。
现代文：十三日，任命韩肖青等人担任金国军前通问使。
English: On the 13th, Han Xiaoqing and others were appointed as former envoys of the Chinese People's Liberation Army.

古文：安化蛮犯边，广西经略使许中发兵击之。
现代文：安化蛮攻打边境，广西经略使许中发兵还击。
English: Anhua brutally attacked the border, and Guangxi sent troops to counterattack.

古文：戊辰，杨沂中招降严州贼缪罗等，捕斩其徒百人，魔贼平。
现代文：十四日，杨沂中招降严州贼缪罗等，捕斩他的部众一百人，魔贼平定。
English: On the 14th day of the month, Yang Xizhong recruited and subdued Mu Luo, a thief from Yanzhou, and captured and killed a hundred of his subordinates. The thief was subdued.

古文：庚午，以岳州数被兵，免今年税役。
现代文：十六日，因岳州多次遭受兵火，免除今年的赋役。
English: On the 16th, he was exempted from this year's military service due to Yuezhou repeatedly suffering from military fire.

古文：壬申，诏守、令、尉、佐，境内妖民聚集不能觉察致乱者，并坐罪。
现代文：十八日，下诏守、令、尉、佐，辖境内妖民聚集而没能发觉导致叛乱的，一律连坐获罪。
English: On the 18th day of the following year, the magistrate, the governor, the lieutenant, and the assistant magistrate, all of whom failed to discover that the evil people had gathered in the territory under their jurisdiction and led to the rebellion, were all convicted.

古文：知建昌军朱芾讨南丰县贼，禽诛其魁黄琛。
现代文：建昌知军朱莆讨伐南丰县贼，擒获斩杀魁首黄深。
English: The army of Jianchang and Zhucheng fought against the thieves in Nanfeng County, and won the victory of killing the leader Huang Sheng.

古文：乙亥，以方与金国议和，禁边兵犯齐境。
现代文：二十一日，因刚刚与金国议和，禁止边境部队攻打伪齐边境。
English: On the twenty-first day, border troops were prohibited from attacking the pseudo-Zi border because they had just made peace with Kim.

古文：丙子，王彦复金州，金兵弃均、房去。
现代文：二十二日，王彦收复金州，金军放弃均州、房州退去。
English: On the 22nd, Wang Yan recovered Jinzhou, and the Chinese army abandoned Junzhou and left Fangzhou.

古文：韩世忠请以大军还镇江。
现代文：韩世忠请求率大军还屯镇江。
English: Han Shizhong requested to lead a large army to occupy Zhenjiang.

古文：己卯，诏淮南统制解元戍泗州，余屯江北。
现代文：二十五日，下诏淮南统制解元守卫泅州，其余军队屯驻江北。
English: On the 25th, Huainan unified and disbanded the former guards of Bozhou, and the remaining troops were stationed in the north of the river.

古文：周随亨、李愿宣押王似、卢法原至阆州，张浚始解使事。
现代文：周随亨、李愿奉命押送王似、卢法原至间州，张浚始解除宣抚使职务。
English: Zhou Zuiheng and Li Xian were ordered to escort Wang Xi and Lu Farah to Mezhou, and Zhang Junchi was relieved of his duties as envoy.

古文：时已论金牛之功，以吴玠为利州路、阶成凤州制置使，刘子羽为宝文阁直学士，王彦为保大军承宣使，僚属将帅第赏有差。
现代文：当时已经讨论奖赏金牛之功，任命吴为利州路、阶成凤州制置使，刘子羽为宝文阁直学士，王彦为保大军承宣使，僚属将帅得到不等的赏赐。
English: At that time, it was already discussed to reward the merits of the Golden Bull, and Wu was appointed as the Lizhou Road, Jia Cheng Fengzhou system envoy, Liu Zi Yu as the direct bachelor of Baowen Pavilion, Wang Yan as the propaganda envoy of the Baodai Army, and his colleagues and generals received different rewards.

古文：庚辰，浚及子羽、王庶、刘锡等赴行在。
现代文：二十六日，张浚及刘子羽、王庶、刘锡等到行在。
English: On the 26th, Zhang Jun and Liu Zi Yu, Wang Shiao, Liu Xi waited for the procession.

古文：诏李横等收军还镇。
现代文：下诏李横等收军还镇。
English: Li Yang and the others gathered their forces and returned to the town.

古文：辛巳，罢宣抚司便宜黜陟。
现代文：二十七日，罢除宣抚司自行决定官员升降之权。
English: On the 27th, the right to promote and demote officials at the discretion of the Publicity Department was revoked.

古文：六月甲申朔，统制巨师古坐违韩世忠节制，除名、广州编管。
现代文：六月初一，统制巨师古因违背韩世忠节制的规定，被除名，广州编管。
English: On the first day of June, for violating the regulations of Han Shizhong's temperance, the commanding officer Gu was removed from the list and transferred to Guangzhou.

古文：丙戌，复置六部架阁库。
现代文：初三，重新设置六部架阁库。
English: On the third day of junior high school, the six-part loft library was re-established.

古文：丁亥，禁诸路招纳淮北人及中原军来归者。
现代文：初四，禁止各路招降接纳淮北人及中原军队来归顺的人。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, it was forbidden to recruit and accept people from Huaibei and the Central Plains army.

古文：戊子，复元祐宰相吕大防官职，赠谥。
现代文：初五，恢复元宰相吕大防的官职，赠给溢号。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the former prime minister Lv Dago was restored to his official position and given a surplus number.

古文：庚寅，诏降川、陕死罪囚，释流以下。
现代文：初七，减轻川、陕死刑囚犯罪刑，释放流刑以下的罪犯。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, commute the criminal sentences of death row prisoners in Sichuan and Shaanxi, and release criminals who have been sentenced to less than exile.

古文：赏吴玠、关师古将士。
现代文：奖赏吴、关师古军队将士。
English: Reward Wu, Guan Shigu ancient army soldiers.

古文：壬辰，张浚至绵州，复奏王似不可任。
现代文：初九，张浚到绵州，又上奏王似不能任用。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, Zhang Jun went to Mianzhou, and it seemed that Wang Xianguo could not be appointed.

古文：甲午，命王燮率诸军讨杨太。
现代文：十一日，命令臼燮率各军讨伐杨太。
English: On the 11th day, he ordered Usuki to lead all the armies to fight Yang Tai.

古文：己亥，罢沿海制置司。
现代文：十六日，罢除沿海制置司。
English: On the 16th, the Coastal System Establishment Division was abolished.

古文：丁未，置国子监及博士弟子员。
现代文：二十四日，设置国子监及博士弟子员。
English: On the 24th, the State Supervisor of Children and the Doctoral Disciple were set up.

古文：戊申，以王林所部兵为忠锐第十将。
现代文：二十五日，命令王林所率领的军队为忠锐第十将。
English: On the 25th, he ordered the army led by Wang Lin to become the loyal tenth general.

古文：己酉，岳飞自虔州班师。
现代文：二十六日，岳飞从虔州班师。
English: On the 26th, Yuefei graduated from the Qianzhou class.

古文：辛亥，发兵屯驻虔、广二州，弹压盗贼，州各三千人。
现代文：二十八日，命令出兵屯驻虔、广二州，镇压盗贼，每州三千人。
English: On the 28th, he ordered troops to be stationed in Qian and Guangzhou, two provinces, to suppress thieves, with 3,000 troops in each province.

古文：是月，金人围方山原，王似命吴玠发兵救之。
现代文：这个月，金军围攻方山原，王似命令吴出兵救援。
English: This month, when the Chinese army besieged Fangshan Plain, Wang Li ordered Wu to send troops for rescue.

古文：秋七月己未，复置博学宏词科。
现代文：秋七月初六，重新设置博学宏词科。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the erudite and grand vocabulary course was re-established.

古文：初许任子就试。
现代文：开始允许恩荫子弟参加考试。
English: He began to allow Enyin's younger son to take the exam.

古文：甲子，以久旱，偿州县和市民物之直。
现代文：十一日，因长期干早，偿还州县和市百姓财物没付的钱。
English: On the 11th day, due to the long-term drought, the unpaid money for the property of the state, county and city people was repaid.

古文：丁卯，诏访求累朝勋臣曹彬等三百人子孙，以备录用。
现代文：十四日，下诏访问寻求历朝勋臣曹彬等三百人子孙，准备录用。
English: On the 14th, he made an official visit to look for 300 descendants of Cao Bin, the most honored vassal of all dynasties, to prepare for employment.

古文：戊辰，王燮以舟师发行在。
现代文：十五日，臼燮率领水师从行在出发。
English: On the fifteenth day, Usuki led the leading sailors to set off.

古文：己巳，诏减膳，禁屠，弛工役，罢苛娆，命两浙及诸路宪臣亲按部录囚。
现代文：十六日，下诏减少饮食，禁止屠杀生灵，宽缓工役，罢除骚扰百姓的苛征，命令两浙及各路宪臣亲自讯察辖区内囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 16th, he decreed to reduce the diet, prohibit the slaughter of living beings, relax the labor service, cancel the harsh taxation that harassed the people, and ordered the gendarmes in Zhejiang and other provinces to personally investigate the crimes of prisoners in their jurisdiction.

古文：辛未，蠲绍兴二年和市絁帛。
现代文：十八日，免除绍兴二年和买帛。
English: On the 18th, Shaoxing was exempted from the second year of buying and selling.

古文：癸酉，吕颐浩等以旱乞罢政，帝赐诏曰： 与其去位，曷若同寅协恭，交修不逮，思所以克厌天心者。 
现代文：二十日，吕颐浩等因早灾请求罢去职务，高宗赐给诏书说： 与其离开职位，倒不如君臣同心协力，共同修养，改正缺陷，想想办法怎样克服早灾带来的困难。 
English: On the 20th, Lv Yinghao and others requested to be relieved of their duties due to the early disaster. Gao Zongzhi said in his edict: "Instead of leaving the post, it would be better for the monarchs and ministers to work together, cultivate together, correct the defects, and think about how to overcome the difficulties caused by the early disaster."

古文：颐浩等乃复视事。
现代文：吕颐浩等才又开始处理政事。
English: It was not until Lv Yinghao and others that they began to deal with politics again.

古文：乙亥，朱胜非起复。
现代文：二十二日，朱胜非守丧未满三年，被朝廷重新起用。
English: On the 22nd, Zhu Shengfei was reappointed by the imperial court after less than three years of service.

古文：丙子，泉州水溢，坏城。
现代文：二十三日，泉州江水溢出，毁坏州城。
English: On the 23rd, the Quanzhou River overflowed, destroying the city.

古文：丁丑，遣中使逆趣张浚于道。
现代文：二十四日，高宗派遣中使在途中催促张浚。
English: On the 24th, Gaozong sent an envoy to urge Zhang Jun on the way.

古文：是月，四川霖雨、地震。
现代文：这个月，四川接连降大雨，发生地震。
English: This month, Sichuan was hit by a succession of heavy rains and an earthquake.

古文：八月己丑，诏岳飞赴行在，留精兵万人戍江州。
现代文：八月初七，下诏岳飞到行在，留下精锐部队一万人戍守江州。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month, Xiaozhaoyue flew to the line, leaving 10,000 elite troops to guard Jiangzhou.

古文：翟琮率兵突围奔襄阳，诏屯驻其地。
现代文：翟琼率兵突出重围退奔襄阳，下诏屯驻襄阳。
English: Zou Qiong led the troops to retreat from Xiangyang after the heavy siege, and settled in Xiangyang.

古文：癸卯，罢诸路输禁军阙额钱。
现代文：二十一日，罢除各路输纳禁军缺额钱。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the shortfall in the amount of money to be paid to the Forbidden Army by each province was eliminated.

古文：甲辰，以雨旸不时，苏、湖地震，求直言。
现代文：二十二日，因天气阴晴不定，苏州、湖州发生地震，下诏寻求直言。
English: On the 22nd, due to the uncertain weather, an earthquake occurred in Suzhou and Huzhou, and the following edict sought to speak frankly.

古文：乙巳，复置史馆修撰、直馆检讨官，命郎官兼领著作郎及佐郎。
现代文：二十三日，重新设置史馆修撰、直馆检讨官，命令郎官兼任著作郎及著作佐郎。
English: On the 23rd, he re-established the official in charge of editing the history museum and reviewing the museum directly, and ordered the official to also serve as the official in charge of writing and the official in charge of writing.

古文：戊申，罢都转运司。
现代文：二十六日，罢除都转运司。
English: On the 26th, the Metropolitan Transportation Bureau was abolished.

古文：己酉，诏湖南丁米三分之二均取于民田，其一取之丁口。
现代文：二十七日，下诏：湖南丁米三分之二平均在民田中征取，三分之一按丁口征收。
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued: two-thirds of Hunan Dingmi was levied on average in private fields, and one-third was levied according to Dingkou.

古文：辛亥，孟庾自军中来朝。
现代文：二十九日，孟庚从军队中来朝见。
English: On the 29th, Meng Geng came from the army to see the emperor.

古文：九月戊午，吕颐浩罢。
现代文：九月初七，吕颐浩罢职。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, Lv Yinghao resigned.

古文：诏凡遇水旱灾异，监司、郡守即具奏毋隐。
现代文：下诏：凡是遇到水早灾害变异情况，监司、郡守就可以上奏陈述反映情况，不必隐瞒。
English: The following edict: Whenever there is a sudden change in water-related disasters, the supervisors and county governors can submit a report to reflect the situation, and there is no need to conceal it.

古文：庚申，岳飞自江州来朝。
现代文：初九，岳飞从江州来朝见。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Yue Fei came from Jiangzhou to see the emperor.

古文：川、陕统领官吴胜败伪齐兵于黄堆砦。
现代文：川、陕统领官吴胜在黄堆寨打败伪齐军队。
English: River, Wu Sheng, the leading official of Shaanxi Unification, defeated the pseudo-Qi army in Huangduizhai.

古文：丙寅，以赵鼎为江西安抚制置大使。
现代文：十五日，任命赵鼎为江西安抚制置大使。
English: On the 15th, Zhao Ding was appointed as the ambassador of Jiangxi pacification system.

古文：壬申，诏中书舍人、给事中，凡制敕非军期机速，必先书押而后报行。
现代文：二十一日，下诏中书舍人、给事中，凡皇帝下的命令，除非军事形势要求急速、机要，一定要先过目画押，而后宣布实行。
English: On the twenty-first day of the following month, the Emperor issued the following edict: In all cases, unless the military situation requires rapidity and urgency, all orders issued by the Emperor must first be signed and sealed, and then announced for implementation.

古文：甲戌，伪齐王彦先寇徐、宿二州。
现代文：二十三日，伪齐王彦先攻打徐、宿二州。
English: On the 23rd, the pseudo-Qi Wangyan first attacked Xu and Shuku Nizhou.

古文：乙亥，以刘光世为江东、淮西宣抚使，置司池州；韩世忠为镇江建康府、淮南东路宣抚使，置司镇江府；王燮为荆南府、岳鄂潭鼎澧黄州汉阳军制置使，置司鄂州；岳飞为江南西路、舒蕲州制置使，置司江州；主管殿前司郭仲荀知明州，兼沿海制置使，神武中军统制杨沂中兼权殿前司。
现代文：二十四日，任命刘光世为江东、淮西宣抚使，在池州设置宣抚司；韩世忠为镇江、建康府和淮南东路宣抚使，宣抚司设在镇江府；巨燮为荆南府、岳鄂潭鼎遭黄州、汉阳军制置使，制置司设在鄂州；岳飞为江南西路、舒薪州制置使，制置司设在江州；主管殿前司郭仲荀为明州知州，兼沿海制置使；神武中军统制杨沂中兼代理殿前司主管职务。
English: On the 24th, Liu Guangshi was appointed as the envoy of Jiangdong and Huaixi, and the office of the envoy was set up in Chizhou; Han Shizhong was appointed as the envoy of Zhenjiang, Jiankang and Huainan East Road, and the office of the envoy was set up in Zhenjiang; Jiuzhaigou was appointed as the envoy of Jingnan, Yue Otan Ding was appointed as the envoy of Huangzhou and Hanyang, and the office of the envoy was set up in Ezhou; Yue Fei was appointed as the envoy of Jiangnan West Road and Shizhu, and

古文：己卯，吴胜克莲花城。
现代文：二十八日，吴胜攻克莲花城。
English: On the 28th, Wu Sheng conquered the Lotus City.

古文：冬十月癸未，朱胜非上《重修吏部七司敕令格式》。
现代文：冬十月初二，朱胜非呈上重修吏部七司救令格鸯。
English: On the second day of October in winter, Zhu Shengfei submitted to the Supreme People's Procuratorate of the People's Republic of China.

古文：庚寅，加吴玠检校少保。
现代文：初九，加官吴为检校少保。
English: In the ninth grade of junior high school, Wu was promoted to the rank of junior security guard.

古文：壬辰，趣王燮进兵。
现代文：十一日，催促臼燮进兵。
English: On the 11th, he urged Usuki to enter the army.

古文：诏宽私盐重法。
现代文：下诏放宽私盐重法。
English: The lower edict relaxes the law on the weight of salt.

古文：甲午，却大理国入贡。
现代文：十三日，拒绝大理国进贡。
English: On the 13th, Dali refused to pay tribute.

古文：丁酉，残破州县视户口增损立守令考课法。
现代文：十六日，遭兵火残破州县按户口的增加或减少确立守令考课法。
English: On the 16th, the remaining states and counties affected by the war established the order-keeping examination method according to the increase or decrease of household registration.

古文：己亥，禁州县擅增置税场。
现代文：十八日，禁止州县擅自增加设置收税场务。
English: On the 18th, prefectures and counties were prohibited from increasing the number of tax collection stations without authorization.

古文：伪齐李成陷邓州。
现代文：伪齐李成攻陷邓州。
English: False Qi and Li Cheng invaded and occupied Dangzhou.

古文：辛丑，南丹蛮莫公晟围观州，焚宝积监，杀知监陈烈。
现代文：二十日，南丹蛮莫公晨围攻观州，焚烧宝积监，杀死知监陈烈。
English: On the 20th day of the month, the Nandan barbarians besieged Ganzhou in the morning, burned the treasure storage center, and killed Chen Lie.

古文：壬寅，伪齐兵逼襄阳，李横以粮尽，弃城奔荆南，知随州李道亦弃城去。
现代文：二十一日，伪齐军队攻逼襄阳，李横因军粮断绝弃城退奔荆南，随州知州李道也弃城逃走。
English: On the twenty-first day, the pseudo-Qi army attacked and besieged Xiangyang. Li Yangtou abandoned the city and fled to Jingnan due to the refusal of military food. Li Dao from Zhizhou also abandoned the city and fled.

古文：甲辰，王燮讨湖贼，战于鼎口，不利。
现代文：二十三日，臼剪寸伐湖贼，在鼎口交战，没获胜利。
English: On the 23rd, the Muxian Cun Lake Thieves fought in Dingkou, but did not win.

古文：伪齐陷郢州，守臣李简弃城去。
现代文：伪齐军攻陷即州，守臣李简弃城逃走。
English: The pseudo-Qi army captured Zhoushou, and the guardian Li Jian abandoned the city and fled.

古文：申禁私役战士。
现代文：重申禁止私自役使战士的命令。
English: To reiterate the order prohibiting soldiers from engaging in self-service.

古文：丁未，命三省除铨曹奸弊。
现代文：二十六日，命令三省除掉锉曹选任官吏的奸弊。
English: On the 26th, he ordered the three provinces to get rid of the malpractice of Cao Cao's election of officials.

古文：戊辰，罢诸路类省试。
现代文：戊辰日，罢除各路类省试。
English: On the day of Pentecost, provincial tests of all types of roads were abolished.

古文：统制石世达及杜湛合兵大破湖贼黄诚于龙阳洲。
现代文：统制石世达和杜湛联合出兵在龙阳洲大败洞庭湖贼黄诚。
English: Shi Sheda and Du Zhan jointly dispatched troops in Longyangzhou and defeated Huang Cheng, the thief of Dongting Lake.

古文：庚戌，复置宗正少卿及寺监诸丞。
现代文：二十九日，重新设置宗正少卿及寺监各承。
English: On the 29th, the positions of Sosho Shokyo and the supervisor of the temple were re-established.

古文：是月，王彦先引兵至北寿春，将渡淮。
现代文：这个月，王彦先率军到北寿春，准备渡过淮河。
English: This month, Wang Yan led the army to North Shuchun to prepare to cross the Huai River.

古文：刘光世驻军建康，扼马家渡；又遣郦琼驻无为军，为庐、濠声援。
现代文：刘光世驻军建康，控扼马家渡；又派遣哪琼驻兵无为军，作为庐州、壕州的声援力量。
English: Liu Guangxing stationed troops in Jiankang to control Juma Jiaodu. He also dispatched soldiers stationed in Neqian to act as a solidarity force for Zhangzhou and Hezhou.

古文：贼乃还。
现代文：伪齐军才退回。
English: It was only then that the fake Qi army retreated.

古文：十一月己未，以右文殿修撰王伦为都督府参议官。
现代文：十一月初八，任命右文殿修撰王伦为都督府参议官。
English: On the 8th day of the 11th month of the year, Wang Lun was appointed as a councillor of the prefectural government.

古文：癸亥，诏监司、帅守察内外宗子病民害政者以闻。
现代文：十二日，下诏监司、帅守观察朝廷内外宗室子弟为害百姓和政治的情况报告朝廷。
English: On the 12th day of the following month, the inspector of the imperial edict and the military commander observed the situation inside and outside the imperial court, and reported to the imperial court that the sons and daughters of the imperial family were harming the people and politics.

古文：崔增、吴全遇湖贼于阳武口，死之。
现代文：崔增、吴全在阳武口与洞庭湖贼相遇，战死。
English: Cui Zeng and Wu Quan met the Dongting Lake bandits at Yangwukou and were killed in battle.

古文：甲子，韩肖胄等使还。
现代文：十三日，韩肖青等出使回国。
English: On the 13th, Han Xiaoqing and other emissaries returned to China.

古文：乙丑，禁沿淮诸砦兵擅侵齐境。
现代文：十四日，禁止沿淮各寨民兵擅自侵人伪齐境内。
English: On the 14th, the militias along Huaijiazhai were prohibited from encroaching on the territory of pseudo-Qizhou.

古文：庚午，临安府火。
现代文：十九日，临安府发生火灾。
English: On the 19th, a fire broke out in Lin'an Prefecture.

古文：甲戌，禁掠卖生口入蛮夷嵠峒及以铜钱出中国。
现代文：二十三日，禁止掠买人口到蛮夷溪酮及铜钱出境。
English: On the 23rd, it was forbidden for people to go to Baran Yixi to buy ketones and copper coins.

古文：乙亥，复元祐十科举士法。
现代文：二十四日，恢复元十科举士法。
English: On the 24th, the method of appointing officials for the 10 disciplines of the Yuan Dynasty was restored.

古文：丁丑，命宾、横、宜、观四州市战马。
现代文：二十六日，命令宾、横、宜、观四州买战马。
English: On the 26th, he ordered Bin, Yang, Yi, and Guan to go to Shizhou to buy war horses.

古文：戊寅，王燮自鼎州引兵还鄂，留统领王渥等四军听程昌寓节制。
现代文：二十七日，臼燮从鼎州率兵退还鄂州，留下统领王握等四军听从程昌辨指挥。
English: On the 27th, Usuki led his troops from Dingzhou back to Ezhou, leaving four armies under the command of Cheng Changben.

古文：己卯，蠲南剑州所负民间献纳钱十六万缗。
现代文：二十八日，免除南剑州所欠负民间的献纳钱十六万络。
English: On the 28th, 160,000 rupees of donation money owed by the people of Southern Jianzhou was exempted.

古文：省淮南州县文武官。
现代文：减少淮南州县文武官员。
English: Reduce the number of civil and military officials in Huainan County.

古文：十二月辛巳朔，降敕书抚谕吴玠及川、陕将士。
现代文：十二月初一，发布命令抚谕吴及少、陕将士。
English: On the first day of December, an order was issued to punish Wu and Shao and Shaanxi generals.

古文：乙酉，临安府火。
现代文：初五，临安府发生火灾。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, a fire broke out in Lin'an Prefecture.

古文：戊子，又火。
现代文：初八，又一次发生火灾。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, another fire broke out.

古文：朱胜非以屡火求罢，不允。
现代文：朱胜非因多次火灾请求罢职，没有得到允许。
English: Zhu Shengfei requested to resign from his post due to multiple fires and was not allowed to do so.

古文：丙申，王似承制废通远军。
现代文：十六日，王似秉承朝命废罢通远军。
English: On the 16th, Wang Ni, adhering to the order of the imperial court, abandoned the long-distance army.

古文：己酉，金国元帅府遣李永寿、王翊来见。
现代文：二十九日，金国元帅府派遣李永寿、王诩来朝见。
English: On the 29th, the Marshal of the Korean People's Army sent Li Yongshou and Wang Qi to the Imperial Court.

古文：是岁，海寇黎盛犯潮州，焚民居毁城去。
现代文：这一年，海寇黎盛攻打潮州，焚烧百姓房屋、毁坏州城退走。
English: In this year, Haikolisheng attacked Chaozhou, burned people's houses, destroyed the city and retreated.

古文：四年春正月辛亥朔，帝在临安，率百官遥拜二帝。
现代文：绍兴四年春正月初一，高宗在临安，率文武百官遥拜徽、钦二帝。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of Shaoxing Spring, Gao Zong was in Lin'an, leading hundreds of officers and men to worship Hui and Qin Erdi.

古文：乙卯，增淮、浙路盐钞贴纳钱。
现代文：初五，增加淮、浙路盐钞贴纳钱。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Huai and Zhejiang Road salt banknotes will be increased.

古文：遣章谊等为金国通问使。
现代文：派遣章谊等人为金国通问使。
English: Zhang Rui and others were sent as envoys to ask for information from Kim.

古文：己未，程昌寓遣杜湛、王渥攻杨太皮真砦，破之。
现代文：初九，程昌辨派遣杜湛、王握进攻杨太皮真寨，攻破它。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Cheng Changbin sent Du Zhan and Wang Jia to attack Yang Taipi Zhenzhai and break it.

古文：己巳，诏谕王似、卢法原、吴玠，使之协和。
现代文：十九日，下诏告诫王似、卢法原、吴，要通力合作。
English: On the 19th, Wang Xi, Lu Fahyuan, and Wu were admonished to work together.

古文：金人犯宕昌、临江砦及花石峡，关师古遣统领刘戬分兵拒却之。
现代文：金军攻打宕昌、临江寨及花石峡，关师古派遣统领刘哉分兵打退金军。
English: The Chinese army attacked Tangchang, Linjiangzhai and Huashe Gorge, and Guan Shigu dispatched Liu Yaibun, the commander of the division, to repel the Chinese army.

古文：庚午，诏诸路将帅毋以两国通使辄弛边备，淮南州郡津渡尤慎讥察。
现代文：二十日，下诏各路将帅不要因为宋、金两国有使臣往还就放松边防的准备，淮南州郡各地的渡口尤其要重视侦察。
English: On the 20th, it was decreed that generals should not relax the preparation of border defense because there were envoys from Song and Kim. In particular, they should pay attention to reconnaissance at the ferry ports in various parts of Huainan County.

古文：甲戌，罢州县新置弓手。
现代文：二十四日，罢除州县新设置的弓手。
English: On the 24th, the archers newly set up by prefectures and counties were removed.

古文：乙亥，蠲循、梅、潮、惠四州被兵家租赋。
现代文：二十五日，免除循、梅、潮、惠四州遭受兵火家的租赋。
English: On the 25th, the four prefectures of Shun, Mei, Chaozhou and Hui were exempted from the rent of soldiers and firefighters.

古文：丙子，申敕三省、枢密院，除官并遵旧制，毋相侵紊，除拜、罢免皆明示黜陟之由。
现代文：二十六日，再次命令三省、枢密院，授官一律遵循原来的典章制度，不要互相抵触紊乱，授官、罢免都要明确指出升降罢免的理由。
English: On the 26th, he once again ordered the three provinces and the Privy Council to all follow the original award system, not to conflict with each other, and to clearly point out the reasons for promotion and demotion.

古文：戊寅，金人犯神坌砦，沿北岭至大散关。
现代文：二十八日，金军攻打神璧寨，沿北岭至大散关一线侵犯。
English: On the 28th, the Chinese army attacked Shen Bi Zhai, invading the first line along Beiling to Dasanguan.

古文：临安府火。
现代文：临安府发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out in Lin'an Prefecture.

古文：己卯，韩肖胄罢。
现代文：二十九日，韩肖青罢职。
English: On the 29th, Han Xiaoqing resigned.

古文：二月壬午，诏赃罪至死者仍籍其赀。
现代文：二月初二，下诏：贪赃罪被处死的还要籍没赃物。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the following edict was issued: the crime of embezzlement was to be punished by death even if there was no stolen property.

古文：癸未，作建康府行宫。
现代文：初三，建造建康府行宫。
English: In the third year of junior high school, the Jiankang Palace was built.

古文：席益罢。
现代文：席益被罢免。
English: Saimasu was removed from office.

古文：乙酉，以徐俯兼参知政事。
现代文：初五，任命徐俯兼参知政事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Xu Pui was appointed to the post of vice-premier.

古文：丙戌，禁川、陕诸将招纳北军。
现代文：初六，禁止川、陕各位将领招纳金军士兵。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the generals of Sichuan and Shaanxi were forbidden to recruit soldiers from the Golden Army.

古文：湖北军贼檀成犯长阳县，解潜遣统领胡勉捕斩之。
现代文：湖北军贼檀成攻打长阳县，解潜派遣统领胡勉捕获斩杀。
English: The Hubei bandits attacked Changyang County, and the commander of the anti-submarine dispatch, Hu Mian, was captured and killed.

古文：群盗田政自襄阳犯峡州。
现代文：群盗田政从襄阳进犯峡州。
English: The bandits of Tian Zheng invaded Xiaozhou from Xiangyang.

古文：己丑，解潜遣统制王恪击政，斩之。
现代文：初九，解潜派遣统制王烙击败田政，斩杀田政。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Wang Yao, the commanding officer of the submarine dispatch, defeated and killed Tian Zheng.

古文：庚寅，金人犯两当县。
现代文：初十，金军攻打两当县。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the gold army attacked two counties.

古文：丙子，以王似为资政殿学士、川陕宣抚使，卢法原为端明殿学士，与吴玠并充副使，关师古为熙河兰廓路安抚制置使。
现代文：十五日，下诏孟庚前往行在。十九日，下诏三衙管军及将帅观察使以上官员，推举忠勇智略可以代替自己职位的人才一名。二十一日，金军攻打仙人关。二十三日，下诏用射殿代替景灵宫，一年四季设立神位祭祀。三月二十六日，任命王似为资政殿学士、川陕宣抚使，卢法原为端明殿学士，与吴一起担任宣抚副使，关师古为熙河兰廓路安抚制置使。
English: On the 15th, the next emperor Meng Geng went there. On the 19th, the next emperor San Xuan Guanjun and General Shuai observed the above officials, and elected a talented person who could replace his position. On the 21st, the Golden Army attacked Xianrenguan. On the 23rd, the next emperor used the Hall of Fire to replace the Jingling Palace, and set up the divine sacrifice throughout the year. On the 26th of March, Wang Xi was appointed as the scholar of the Hall of Investment and Commerce, and the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy

古文：夏四月庚辰朔，命赵开再任总领四川财赋。
现代文：夏四月初一，命令赵开再次担任总领四川财赋。
English: On the first day of April in the summer, he ordered Zhao Kai to once again serve as the general leader of Sichuan's financial resources.

古文：诏谕川、陕官吏兵民，以张浚失措当示远窜，犹嘉其所用吴玠等能御大敌，许国一心，止从薄责。
现代文：下诏告谕川、陕官吏兵民，因张浚指挥措施失当本应该流放远方，但考虑到他所任用的吴能抗御金军，忠心为国，所以只是从轻发落。
English: The following edict told the officials, soldiers and people of Sichuan and Shaanxi that they should have been exiled far away due to Zhang Jun's improper command measures, but considering that Wu, who was appointed by him, was able to resist the Jin army and was loyal to the country, he was only lightly punished.

古文：仍令宣抚司讲求谘访，凡扰民咈众之事，速厘革之。
现代文：还命令宣抚司注意听取意见，凡是骚扰民众的事，迅速改正。
English: He also ordered the Publicity Department to pay attention to and listen to opinions, and to promptly correct any harassment of the public.

古文：癸未，刘子羽白州安置。
现代文：初四，刘子羽贬为白州安置。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Liu Zi Yu was relegated to Baizhou.

古文：乙酉，诏明堂用皇祐典礼，兼祀天皇大帝、神州地祇以下诸神。
现代文：初六，下诏明堂祭礼采用皇典礼，兼祭祀天皇大帝、神州地抵以下各神。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the Imperial ceremony was adopted for the next Zhao Ming Hall festival, and the Emperor and the deities below were also worshipped.

古文：丙戌，吴玠败金兵，复凤、秦、陇州。
现代文：初七，吴打败金军，收复凤、秦、陇州。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Wu defeated the Jin army and recovered Feng, Qin and Zhangzhou.

古文：诏特旨处死情法不相当者，许大理奏审。
现代文：下诏：特别下达命令，情法不相当而被判处死刑的，允许大理寺上奏复审。
English: The following edict was issued: A special order was issued that if the circumstances and law were not appropriate and the person was sentenced to death, he was allowed to appeal to Dali Temple for a retrial.

古文：蠲淮南州军上供钱一年。
现代文：免除淮南州军上供钱一年。
English: Exempt Huainan from the military subsidy for one year.

古文：庚寅，置孳生牧马监于临安府。甲午，罢广西提举茶盐司。
现代文：十一日，在临安府设置繁殖牧马监。十五日，罢除广西提举茶盐司。
English: On the 11th, a breeding and horse-breeding supervisor was set up in Lin'an. On the 15th, the tea and salt department of Guangxi was removed.

古文：关师古叛，以洮、岷二州降伪齐，吴玠并将师古军。
现代文：关师古叛变，据姚、山民二州投降伪齐，吴合并关师古军队。
English: Guan Shigu mutinied, according to Yao, the mountain people of the two states surrendered to the pseudo-Qi, and Wu merged with the Guan Shigu army.

古文：乙未，诏诸路岁上户口。
现代文：十六日，下诏各路每年上报户口。
English: On the 16th, it was announced that all households would report their household registration every year.

古文：丁酉，罢诸州回易库。
现代文：十八日，罢除各州回易库。
English: On the 18th, the withdrawal of the states from the Bank of Japan.

古文：庚子，命刘光世遣兵巡边。
现代文：二十一日，命令刘光世派遣士兵巡视边境。
English: On the 21st, he ordered Liu Guangxi to send soldiers to patrol the border.

古文：辛丑，保静州夷人入贡。
现代文：二十二日，保静州夷人来进贡。
English: On the 22nd, the Bo Jingzhou barbarians came to pay tribute.

古文：丙午，徐俯罢。
现代文：二十七日，徐俯罢职。
English: On the 27th, Xu Di stepped down from his post.

古文：是月，王似承制废符阳军。
现代文：这个月，王似秉承朝廷命令废罢符阳军。
English: This month, Wang Xi abided by the order of the imperial court to abolish the Yangjun Army.

古文：知寿春府罗兴叛降伪齐。
现代文：寿春知府罗兴叛降伪齐。
English: Shoushun prefectural governor Luo Xing rebelled and was forced to resign.

古文：五月庚戌朔，以岳飞兼黄复二州、汉阳军、德安府制置使。
现代文：五月初一，任命岳飞兼黄、复二州和汉阳军、德安府制置使。
English: On the first day of May, appointed Yuefei and Huang, Fuzhou and Hanyang army, De'an prefectural government.

古文：癸丑，以范冲为宗正少卿兼直史馆，重修神宗哲宗《正史》、《实录》。
现代文：初四，任命范冲为宗正少卿兼直史馆，重新修撰神宗、哲宗证史、侠录。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Fan Chong was appointed as the Zongzheng Shaoqing and Zongzheng History Museum, and re-compiled the history of the Shinshu Sect, the Zhe Sect and the Chivalry.

古文：甲寅，诏淮南帅臣兼营田使，守令以下兼管营田。
现代文：初五，下诏淮南帅臣兼营田使，守令以下兼管营田。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Huainan Shuaiwen and Yingtan envoy issued the following edict, and Yingtan was also in charge of following the order.

古文：岳飞复郢州，斩伪齐守荆超。
现代文：岳飞收复即州，斩杀伪齐守将荆超。
English: Yuefei recovered Zhoushou, and defeated the pseudo-champion Jing Chao.

古文：甲子，以孟庾兼权枢密院事。
现代文：十五日，任命孟庚兼任代理枢密院事。
English: On the 15th, Meng Geng was appointed acting Privy Councillor.

古文：乙丑，赐李横军绢万匹。
现代文：十六日，赐给李横军队一万匹绢。
English: On the 16th, 10,000 yakitori were given to Li Yang's army.

古文：丙寅，李成弃襄阳去，岳飞复取之。
现代文：十七日，李成放弃襄阳退走，岳飞收复襄阳。
English: On the 17th, Li Cheng abandoned Yangyang and retreated, and Yue Fei recovered Yangyang.

古文：金人攻金州，镇抚使王彦遣统制许青等与战于汉阴，败之。
现代文：金军攻打金州，镇抚使王彦派遣统制许青等在汉阴与金军交战，打败金军。
English: The gold army attacked Jinzhou, and the governor sent Wang Yan to dispatch the governor Xu Qing to fight with the gold army in Hanyin and defeat the gold army.

古文：罢诸县武尉。
现代文：罢废各县武尉。
English: The county military attachés were abolished.

古文：壬申，裁省三省、枢密细务，责六曹长贰专决。
现代文：二十三日，裁省三省、枢密院繁琐事务，责成六曹正副长官专门处理。
English: On the 23rd, the three provinces and the Privy Council were relieved of cumbersome affairs, and six Cao Zheng and vice-chiefs were specially assigned to deal with them.

古文：癸酉，以国史日历所为史馆。
现代文：二十四日，以国史日历所为史馆。
English: On the 24th, the Institute of National Historical Calendars was opened as a historical museum.

古文：伪齐收李成余众，益兵驻新野，岳飞与别将王万夹击，复大败之。
现代文：伪齐收李成余兵，又增加一些士兵，屯驻新野，岳飞与配合作战的将领王万出兵夹攻，又大败伪齐军。
English: Pseudo Qi collected Li Cheng's remaining soldiers, and added some soldiers, stationed in Xinye, Yuefei and the general Wang Wan, who cooperated in the war, sent troops to attack, and defeated the pseudo Qi army.

古文：乙亥，王彦数败金兵于洵阳县。
现代文：二十六日，王彦在询阳县多次打败金军。
English: On the 26th, Wang Yan defeated the Jin army several times in Qianyang County.

古文：丙子，复选宗室子彦之子伯玖育于禁中。
现代文：二十七日，又挑选宗室子彦的儿子伯玖在皇宫内养育。
English: On the 27th, the son of So Murotsuhiko, Hoki, was also selected to be raised in the Imperial Palace.

古文：六月壬申，复命川、陕类试。
现代文：六月壬申日，又命令川、陕举行类省试。
English: In June, on Jinshin Day, he also ordered Sichuan and Shaanxi to hold similar provincial trials.

古文：乙未，太白昼见经天。
现代文：十七日，太白星白天出现，历时整整一天。
English: On the 17th, the white star appeared in the daytime, lasting a whole day.

古文：戊戌，诏神武军、神武副军统制、统领官并隶枢密院。
现代文：二十日，下诏神武军、神武副军统制、统领官一律隶属枢密院。
English: On the 20th, it was decreed that the commanding and leading officers of the Jinwu Army and the Jinwu Vice-Army would all be subordinate to the Privy Council.

古文：庚子，以霖雨，罢不急之役。
现代文：二十二日，因长期连续降大雨，罢除不急需的劳作工程。
English: On the 22nd, due to the long-term continuous heavy rain, labor projects that were not urgently needed were cancelled.

古文：壬寅，诏三省、枢密院，凡奉干请墨敕，许执奏不行。
现代文：二十四日，下诏三省、枢密院，凡是遇到出自个人所求而请更改皇帝诏命，允许执奏不予实行。
English: On the 24th, the three provinces and the Privy Council issued the following edict: In the event of a request from an individual, please change the emperor's edict and allow the performance not to be carried out.

古文：置史馆校勘官。
现代文：设置史馆校勘官。
English: An inspector will be set up at the history museum.

古文：作明堂行礼殿于教场。
现代文：在教场修建明堂行礼殿。
English: Construction of the Myodo Ceremonial Hall in the schoolyard.

古文：甲辰，禁诸军强刺平人为兵，已刺者皆释之。
现代文：二十六日，禁止各军强行刺配平民充军，已经刺配的都释放。
English: On the 26th, all armies were prohibited from forcibly recruiting civilians into the army, and those who had already been recruited were released.

古文：吴玠乞宫观，不允。
现代文：吴请求辞职任宫观，没有得到允许。
English: Wu requested the resignation of Gongguan, but was not allowed.

古文：是月，荧惑犯南斗。
现代文：这个月，荧惑星侵犯南斗星。
English: This month, the fluorescent planet will encroach upon the Southern Dipper.

古文：岳飞将牛皋复随州，执伪齐守王嵩，磔之。
现代文：岳飞军将领牛皋收复随州，俘获伪齐守官王篙，将他碎尸万段。
English: The general of Yuefei's army, Niu Yao, recovered Suizhou, captured the pseudo Qi governor Wang Yao, and dismembered his body.

古文：秋七月戊申朔，曲敕虔州。
现代文：秋七月初一，因特殊情况赦免虔州。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, Kenzhou was pardoned due to special circumstances.

古文：以吏部尚书胡松年签书枢密院事。
现代文：任命吏部尚书胡松年为签书枢密院事。
English: The appointment of officials was made by the Privy Council in the year of Emperor Songzong.

古文：庚戌，以湖南安抚席益为安抚制置大使。
现代文：初三，任命湖南安抚使席益为安抚制置大使。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Hunan's pacification envoy Xi Yi was appointed as the ambassador of pacification.

古文：建昌军军卒修达等作乱，杀守臣刘滂，江西制置使胡世将遣参谋侯悫、统制丘赟讨之。
现代文：建昌军士卒修达等人叛乱，杀死守臣刘谤，江西制置使胡世将派遣参谋官侯意、统制丘贾讨伐修达。
English: Jianchang's sergeant-at-arms Zou Da and others rebelled and killed the guard Liu Zhao, and the establishment of Jiangxi Province made Hu Shi dispatch the staff officer Hou Yi to control Qiu Jia and fight Zou Da.

古文：壬子，命吴玠通信夏国。
现代文：初五，命令吴与夏国通信。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Wu was ordered to communicate with Xia Guo.

古文：癸丑，湖贼杨钦等破社木砦，官军败却，小将许筌战殁。
现代文：初六，洞庭湖贼杨钦等人攻破社木寨，官军败退，小将许荃战死。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Yang Qin, the thief of Dongting Lake, and others broke through the Shemuzhai, the government army was defeated, and the young general Xu Tsuen died in battle.

古文：丙辰，赏仙人关之功，以吴玠为检校少师、奉宁保静军节度使，吴璘、杨政以下论赏有差。
现代文：初九，奖赏仙人关战役战功，任命吴为检校少师、奉宁保静军节度使，吴瞒、杨政以下将官都得到不等的奖赏。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Wu was awarded for his war service in the Battle of Xiandenguan, and was appointed as a junior inspector of the school, and the commander of the Bongning Peace Preservation Army. Generals such as Wu Zhen and Yang Zheng received different rewards.

古文：丁巳，命左右司岁考郎官功过治状以为赏罚。
现代文：初十，命令左右司每年考核郎官功过治绩情况作为赏罚的根据。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the Left and Right Departments were ordered to annually assess the performance of officials as the basis for rewards and punishments.

古文：庚申，复曲端、赵哲官。
现代文：十三日，恢复曲端、赵哲官职。
English: On the 13th, Qu and Zhao Zhe were reinstated as officials.

古文：壬戌，岳飞遣统制王贵、张宪击败李成及金兵于邓州之西，复邓州，禽其将高仲。
现代文：十五日，岳飞派遣统制王贵、张宪在邓州之西打败李成和金军，收复邓州，俘获将领高仲。
English: On the 15th, Yuefei dispatched commanders Wang Gui and Zhang Xian to defeat Li Cheng and the Jin army in the west of Denzhou, recover Denzhou, and capture General Gao Zhong.

古文：丙寅，侯悫引兵入建昌军，执修达等十三人，斩之。
现代文：十九日，侯意率兵进人建昌军，俘获并斩杀修达等十三人。
English: On the 19th, Hou Yi led his soldiers into Jianchang's army, captured and killed thirteen people including Xiuda.

古文：罢建州腊茶纲。
现代文：罢除建州腊茶纲。
English: The establishment of the Jianzhou La Cha Gang was cancelled.

古文：诏江东安抚司招水军千五百人。
现代文：下诏江东安抚司招收水军一千五百人。
English: The next edict of the Jiangdong Pacification Division called for the enlistment of 1,500 sailors.

古文：己巳，湖贼万余人诣鼎、澧二州降。
现代文：二十二日，洞庭湖贼一万多人到鼎、遭二州投降。
English: On the 22nd, more than 10,000 Dongting Lake bandits came to Ding and were surrendered by two states.

古文：刘光世来朝。
现代文：刘光世来朝见高宗。
English: Liu Guangye came to see Gao Zong in the morning.

古文：庚午，王贵、张宪破金、齐兵，复唐州及信阳军，襄汉悉平。
现代文：二十三日，王贵、张宪打破金、伪齐联军，收复唐州和信阳军，襄汉地区全部收复。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Gui and Zhang Xian defeated the Jin and pseudo-Qi allied forces, recovered Tang Prefecture and the Xinyang Army, and recovered all of Xianghan District.

古文：辛未，章谊、孙近使还入见，粘罕致书约淮南毋得屯兵。
现代文：二十四日，章谊、孙近出使金国回国朝见高宗，粘罕致书宋朝，要求不在淮南屯驻军队。
English: On the 24th, Zhang Rong and Sun Qian sent envoys from Jin to Gao Zong and Gui Han to the Song Dynasty to request that troops not be stationed in Huainan.

古文：八月庚辰，以赵鼎知枢密院事，充川、陕宣抚处置使。
现代文：八月初三，任命赵鼎为知枢密院事，担任川陕宣抚处置使。
English: On the third day of August, Zhao Ding was appointed as a member of the Privy Council, and served as the envoy for the settlement of the Sichuan-Shaanxi issue.

古文：湖贼夏诚等犯枝江县，解潜遣将蒋定舟与战，败之。
现代文：洞庭湖贼夏诚攻打枝江县，解潜派遣将领蒋定舟与夏诚交战，打败夏诚。
English: Xia Cheng, the thief of Dongting Lake, attacked Shejiang County, and the submarine dispatching general Jiang Dingzhou fought with Xia Cheng and defeated Xia Cheng.

古文：辛巳，吴玠遣统领姚仲攻陇城县，克之。
现代文：初四，吴派遣统领姚仲进攻陇城县，攻克县城。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Wu dispatched commander Yao Zhong to attack Shicheng County and conquer the county seat.

古文：壬午，王燮以讨贼无功，降光州观察使。
现代文：初五，王镬因讨伐盗贼无功，贬降为光州观察使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Wang Qi was demoted to the position of Gwangju observation envoy due to his ineffectiveness in fighting thieves.

古文：戊子，改命赵鼎都督川、陕、荆、襄诸军事。
现代文：十一日，改命赵鼎都督川、陕、荆、襄地区军事。
English: On the 11th, Zhao Ding changed his name to the military governor of Sichuan, Shaanxi, Jing and Xiang regions.

古文：乙未，遣魏良臣等充金国通问使。
现代文：十八日，派遣魏良臣等担任金国通问使。
English: On the 18th, Wei Liangchen and others were dispatched to serve as envoys of the Chinese envoy.

古文：丙申，毁王安石舒王告。
现代文：十九日，毁掉封王安石为舒王的浩命。
English: On the 19th, the great life of Wang Anshi as the King of Shu was destroyed.

古文：己亥，周十隆出降，为官军所掠，复遁去，犯汀、循州。
现代文：二十二日，周十隆出降，为官军攻掠，又逃走，攻打汀、循州。
English: On the 22nd, Zhou Shilong surrendered, attacked and plundered for the government army, and fled, attacking Ting and Xuzhou.

古文：壬寅，王似罢。
现代文：二十五日，王似被罢免。
English: On the 25th, Wang Xi was removed from office.

古文：以岳飞为清远军节度使、湖北荆襄潭州制置使，代王燮讨湖贼。
现代文：任命岳飞为清远节度使、湖北荆襄潭州制置使，代替王镬讨伐洞庭湖贼。
English: Appointed Yuefei as the Qingyuan Provincial Party Secretary and the Hubei Jingyangtan Provincial Party Secretary to fight the Dongting Lake bandits in place of Wang Hui.

古文：癸卯，以襄阳府、随、郢、唐、邓州、信阳军六郡为襄阳府路。
现代文：二十六日，以襄阳府、随即唐邓州、信阳军六郡建为襄阳府路。
English: On the 26th, six counties of Xiangyang Prefecture, Tang and Deng Prefecture, and Xinyang Army were built as Xiangyang Prefecture Road.

古文：九月戊申，减淮、浙路盐钞所增贴纳钱。
现代文：九月初二，减去淮、浙路盐钞所增贴纳钱。
English: On the second day of September, subtract the additional discounted money from Huai and Zhejiang Road salt banknotes.

古文：壬子，夏诚遣将李全功犯公安军，解潜遣统制林闰等击斩之。
现代文：初六，夏诚派遣将领李全功攻打公安军，解潜派遣统制杜闰等人出击，斩杀了李全功。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Xia Cheng dispatched the general Li Quan Gong to attack the public security army, and sent Du Yue and others to attack, killing Li Quan Gong.

古文：安定郡王令畤薨。
现代文：安定郡王令逝世。
English: Wang Rong of Anding County passed away.

古文：辛酉，合祭天地于明堂，大赦，蠲襄阳等六郡三年租税。
现代文：十五日，在明堂合祭天地，大赦，免除襄阳等六郡三年租税。
English: On the 15th, there was an amnesty at the Ming Hall, and six counties, including Xiangyang, were exempted from three years of tax.

古文：庚午，朱胜非罢。
现代文：二十四日，朱胜非被罢免。
English: On the 24th, Zhu Shengfei was removed from office.

古文：金、齐合兵自淮阳分道来犯。
现代文：金、伪齐联合出兵从淮阳分道来进攻。
English: Jin and pseudo-Qi jointly sent troops to attack from Huaiyang.

古文：壬申，渡淮，楚州守臣樊叙弃城去。
现代文：二十六日，联军渡过淮河，楚州守臣樊叙弃城逃走。
English: On the 26th, the allied forces crossed the Huaihe River, and the Chuzhou provincial governors abandoned the city and fled.

古文：韩世忠自承州退保镇江府。
现代文：韩世忠从承州退保镇江府。
English: Han Shizhong returned to Zhenjiang from Zhengzhou.

古文：癸酉，以赵鼎为尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼知枢密院事，吏部尚书沈与求参知政事。
现代文：二十七日，任命赵鼎为尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼知枢密院事，吏部尚书沈与求为参知政事。
English: On the 27th, Zhao Ding was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, and Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：冬十月丙子朔，与赵鼎定策亲征，命张俊以军援淮东，刘光世移军建康，车驾择日进发。
现代文：冬十月初一，高宗与赵鼎制定亲征规划，命令张俊率军救援淮东，刘光世把军队迁移到建康，高宗车驾等选好日子就出发。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Gao Zong and Zhao Ding worked out a plan for their own conscription. They ordered Zhang Jun to lead the army to rescue Huadong, Liu Guangxi to relocate the army to Jiankang, and Gao Zong to drive the car and choose a good day to set off.

古文：丁丑，以孟庾为行宫留守，留统制王进一军及神武中军五百人隶之。
现代文：初二，任命孟庚为行宫留守，留下统制王进一军及神武中军五百人隶属孟庚。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, Meng Geng was appointed to stay at the palace, leaving Wang Jin's First Army and the 500-member Jinwu Middle Army under the command of Meng Geng.

古文：百司不预军旅之务者，听从便避兵。
现代文：有关部门不参与军事战争的允许自由地回避战火。
English: The fact that the relevant departments do not participate in military war allows them to freely avoid the flames of war.

古文：己卯，韩世忠自镇江率兵复如扬州。
现代文：初四，韩世忠从镇江率兵又到扬州。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, Han Shizhong led his soldiers from Zhenjiang to Yangzhou.

古文：金人犯滁州。
现代文：金军攻打滁州。
English: The Chinese army attacked Bozhou.

古文：以张俊为浙西、江东宣抚使。
现代文：任命张俊为浙西、江东宣抚使。
English: Zhang Jun was appointed as the west Zhejiang and east Jiangsu propaganda envoy.

古文：金人围亳州。
现代文：金军围攻毫州。
English: The Chinese army besieged Wanzhou.

古文：席益遣统制吴锡率兵讨徭贼杨再兴，大破之。
现代文：席益派遣统制吴锡率兵讨伐瑶贼杨再兴，大败杨再兴。
English: Shi Yixin dispatched the governor Wu Xi to lead troops to fight the bandit Yang Zaixing, and Yang Zaixing was defeated.

古文：壬午，伪齐兵犯安丰县。
现代文：初七，伪齐军队攻打安丰县。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the pseudo Qi army attacked Anfeng County.

古文：癸未，复以张浚为资政殿学士、提举万寿观兼侍读。
现代文：初八，重新任命张浚为资政殿学士、提举万寿观兼侍读。
English: On the eighth day of the new year, Zhang Jun was re-appointed as a scholar of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace.

古文：甲申，复以王燮为建武军承宣使、江西沿江制置使。
现代文：初九，重新任命王镬为建武军承宣使、江西沿江制置使。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Wang Xi was reappointed as the ambassador of the Jianwu army and the ambassador of the Jiangxi riverside system.

古文：丙戌，命胡松年诣江上，会诸将议进兵。
现代文：十一日，命令胡松年到长江上与各位将领一起商议出兵事宜。
English: On the 11th day, Hu Song was ordered to go to the Yangtze River to discuss the issue of sending troops with the generals.

古文：戊子，韩世忠邀击金人于大仪镇，败之，又遣将董旼败之于天长县鸦口桥。
现代文：十三日，韩世忠在大仪镇阻击金军，打败金军，又派遣将领董寞在天长县鸦口桥打败金军。
English: On the 13th, Han Shizhong blocked the Chinese army in Dayi Town and defeated the Chinese army. He also dispatched General Dong Lian to defeat the Chinese army in the bridge of Raukou, Tianchang County.

古文：己丑，金人攻承州，韩世忠遣将成闵、解元合兵击于北门，败之。
现代文：十四日，金军攻打承州，韩世忠派将领成阂、解元联合出兵在城北门抵抗金军，打败金军。
English: On the 14th, the Chinese army attacked Chenzhou, and the Han Shizhong faction, led by the generals Cheng Yi and Lu Yuan, jointly dispatched troops to resist the Chinese army at the north gate of the city and defeat the Chinese army.

古文：金人围濠州。
现代文：金军围攻壕州。
English: The Chinese army besieged Trench County.

古文：甲午，遣秘书正字杨晨持诏抚谕四川。
现代文：十九日，派遣秘书正字杨晨带着诏书抚谕四川。
English: On the 19th, secretary Zheng Zi Yang Chen was dispatched to Sichuan with an imperial edict.

古文：遣侍御史魏工、监察御史田如鳌诣刘光世、张俊军中计事，光世始移军太平州。
现代文：派遣侍御史称乙、监察御史田如鳌到刘光世、张俊军中商议军事情况，刘光世开始移军到太平州。
English: He dispatched his attendant, Grand Historian Zheng B, and his inspector, Grand Historian Tian Ruxuan, to Liu Guangzhe and Zhang Jun's army to discuss the military situation, and Liu Guangzhe began to move his army to Taiping.

古文：丙申，命后宫自温州泛海如泉州。
现代文：二十一日，命令后宫从温州涉海到泉州。
English: On the 21st, the harem was ordered to sail from Wenzhou to Quanzhou.

古文：金人陷濠州，守臣寇宏弃城走。
现代文：金军攻陷壕州，守臣寇宏弃城逃走。
English: The Chinese army besieged Trench State, and the guardian, Kou Hong, abandoned the city and fled.

古文：丁酉，诏州县团教弓手、土兵。
现代文：二十二日，下诏州县集中教阅训练弓手、土兵。
English: On the 22nd, the next Zhaozhou County concentrated on teaching and training archers and local soldiers.

古文：戊戌，帝御舟发临安，刘锡、杨沂中以禁兵扈从。
现代文：二十三日，高宗船从临安出发，刘锡、杨沂中率领禁兵护卫跟随。
English: On the 23rd, Gao Zong's ship departed from Lin'an, accompanied by Liu Xi and Yang Xuan, who led the guards.

古文：己亥，韩世忠捷奏至，命收瘗战死将士，仍令胡松年致祭。
现代文：二十四日，韩世忠军捷报送到朝廷，命令收埋战死士兵尸体，还命令胡松年前往祭奠。
English: On the 24th, Han Shizhong's army victory report was sent to the imperial court, ordering the bodies of the dead soldiers to be buried, and also ordering Hu Song to go to the memorial.

古文：庚子，张俊率兵发镇江，如建康。
现代文：二十五日，张俊率兵从镇江出发，到达建康。
English: On the 25th, Zhang Jun and his soldiers set out from Zhenjiang and arrived in Jiankang.

古文：壬寅，帝次平江。
现代文：二十七日，高宗停留平江。
English: On the 27th, Gaozong stopped at Pingjiang.

古文：加赠陈东、欧阳澈秘阁修撰，官其子孙二人，各赐田一顷，且追咎汪伯彦落观文殿学士，黄潜善更不追复。
现代文：加赠陈东、欧阳澈秘阁修撰官，他们的子孙二人各赐给十顷土地，而且追贬汪伯彦观文殿学士，黄潜善更不追复。
English: In addition, Chen Dong and Ouyang Chieh were given the title of secret cabinet scribes, and their two sons and grandsons were each given ten hectares of land. Moreover, Wang Bohian was expelled from the Academy of Confucianism, and Huang Xuanzen was not punished.

古文：命韩世忠、杨沂中分兵控扼沿海要地。
现代文：命令韩世忠、杨沂中分兵控制沿海要地。
English: Han Shizhong and Yang Hui Zhong ordered their detachments to control important coastal areas.

古文：癸卯，焚决淮东闸堰。
现代文：二十八日，焚烧开决淮东闸堰。
English: On the 28th, the Huai Dong sluice weir was burned.

古文：赐扈从诸军钱。
现代文：赐给启从各军钱。
English: Give money to the armies of the emissaries.

古文：乙巳，仇悆遣将孙晖击金人于寿春，败之，复霍丘、安丰二县。
现代文：三十日，仇昵派遣将领孙晖在寿春攻击金军，打败金军，收复霍丘、安丰二县。
English: On the 30th, General Sun Yat-sen was dispatched to attack the Chinese army in Shouchun, defeating the Chinese army and recovering Huoqiu and Anfeng counties.

古文：是月，借江、浙坊场钱一界，以备军费。
现代文：这个月，借江、浙坊场钱一界，用来准备军费。
English: This month, the Laijiang and Zhejiang provinces were the first in the world to spend money to prepare for military expenses.

古文：十一月戊申，太白昼见。
现代文：十一月初三，太白星白天出现。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：庚戌，赏承州水砦首领徐康等要击金兵之功，转官有差，仍蠲承、楚、泰州水砦民兵赋役十年。
现代文：初五，奖赏承州水寨首领徐康等人阻击金军之功，升官不等，并且免除承、楚、泰州水寨民兵赋役十年。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the year, Xu Kang, the leader of the Chengzhou Water Town, and others were rewarded for their achievements in blocking the Golden Army. They were promoted to various positions, and the Chengzhou, Chu and Taizhou Water Town militias were exempted from military service for ten years.

古文：置沿江烽火，放浙东诸郡防城丁夫。
现代文：在沿江设置烽火台，除放浙东各郡防守城市丁夫。
English: Bonfires were set up along the river, and all counties in eastern Zhejiang were put on alert to defend the city of Dingfu.

古文：壬子，始下诏声刘豫逆罪，论亲讨之旨，以厉六师。
现代文：初七，开始下诏声讨刘豫叛逆罪行，宣布亲自讨伐的旨意，用来激励六军。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, he began to denounce Liu Yu's crime of rebellion and announced his intention to personally fight, which was used to motivate the six armies.

古文：吴玠遣统制杨从仪等率兵败金人于腊家城。
现代文：吴派遣统制杨从仪等率兵在腊家城打败金军。
English: Wu dispatched Yang Congyi, the regent, and other soldiers to defeat the Jin army in Lajia City.

古文：癸丑，玠乞纳节赎刘子羽罪，遂听子羽自便。
现代文：初八，吴请求纳还朝廷赐给自己的族节用来赎刘子羽之罪，于是命令给刘子羽自由。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Wu requested to redeem Liu Zi Yu's sin with a family festival, which was also given to him by the imperial court, and ordered Liu Zi Yu to be set free.

古文：金人入光州。
现代文：金军进人光州。
English: The Golden Army marched into Gwangju.

古文：甲寅，伪齐知光州许约破石额山砦，遂据之。
现代文：初九，伪齐光州知州许约攻破石额山寨，于是占据此寨。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the pseudo-Qiguangzhou Zhizhou Xu Yu broke through the stone cottage, and then occupied the cottage.

古文：乙卯，韩世忠遣兵夜劫金人营于承州，破之。
现代文：初十，韩世忠派兵在承州夜劫金军军营，获得成功。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Han Shizhong sent soldiers to raid the camp of the Jin Army in Chengzhou at night, and they were successful.

古文：金人犯六合县，丙辰，掠全椒县三城湖。
现代文：金军攻打六合县。十一日，金军攻掠全椒县三城湖。
English: The Chinese army attacked Liuhe County. On the 11th, the Chinese army attacked and plundered Sancheng Lake in Quanzhe County.

古文：丁巳，戒诸路大小臣僚借贷催科纵吏奸扰民，及务绝盗贼之伺隙者。
现代文：十二日，戒令除去各路大小臣僚借贷催科、纵容官吏骚扰百姓的奸弊，以及必须杜绝盗贼发生的蛛丝马迹。
English: On the 12th, the edict removed the evils of ministers of all ranks, big and small, borrowing money to promote science, conniving with officials to harass the people, and the need to prevent the occurrence of thieves.

古文：命董旼、赵康直总领淮东水砦。
现代文：命令董寞、赵康直总领淮东水寨。
English: He ordered Dong Xian and Zhao Kang Zhi to be the leaders of Huadong Water Village.

古文：戊午，以胡松年兼权参知政事。
现代文：十三日，任命胡松年兼代理参知政事。
English: On the 13th, Hu Songnian was appointed acting vice-governor.

古文：金人陷滁州。
现代文：金军攻陷滁州。
English: The Chinese army invaded and occupied Ganzhou.

古文：刘光世移军建康，韩世忠移军镇江，张俊移军常州。
现代文：刘光世移军建康，韩世忠移军镇江，张俊移军常州。
English: Liu Guangshi moved his army to Jiankang, Han Shizhong moved his army to Zhenjiang, and Zhang Jun moved his army to Changzhou.

古文：己未，复命张浚知枢密院事，以其尽忠竭节诏谕中外。
现代文：十四日，重新任命张浚为知枢密院事，因为他对朝廷竭尽忠诚，下诏向朝廷内外宣布。
English: On the 14th, Zhang Jun was reappointed as a member of the Privy Council, because he was extremely loyal to the imperial court, and the following edict was announced to the imperial court and beyond.

古文：庚申，宴犒守江将士。
现代文：十五日，设宴搞赏守江士兵、将领。
English: On the 15th, a banquet was held to reward the soldiers and generals who guarded the river.

古文：癸亥，刘光世遣统制王德击金人于滁州之桑根，败之。
现代文：十八日，刘光世派统制王德在滁州的桑根击败金军。
English: On the 18th, Wang De, the leader of Liu Guangxing's faction, defeated the Golden Army in Sanggen, Zhangzhou.

古文：揭黄榜招谕湖贼。
现代文：张贴黄榜招谕洞庭湖贼。
English: Posting of a yellow notice inviting thieves to Dongting Lake.

古文：甲子，命滁、和诸州移治保聚。
现代文：十九日，命令滁、和各州迁移州治保存力量，聚积财物。
English: On the 19th, he ordered the emperor and all the states to transfer the state government to preserve power and accumulate wealth.

古文：乙丑，金人犯滁口。
现代文：二十日，金军攻打滁口。
English: On the 20th, the Chinese army attacked Hukou.

古文：己巳，刘光世遣统制王师晟等率兵夜入南寿春府袭金人，败之，执伪齐知府王靖。
现代文：二十四日，刘光世派遣统制王师晨等人率兵进人南寿春府夜袭金军，获得成功，俘虏伪齐知府王靖。
English: On the 24th, Liu Guangxing dispatched Wang Shichen, the regent, and others to attack the Jin army at night in Nanshuchunfu. They were successful and captured Wang Jing, the pseudo-chifu.

古文：广贼区稠围韶州乐昌县，钤辖韩京遣兵击斩之。
现代文：广贼区稠围攻韶州乐昌县，铃辖韩京派兵击杀区稠。
English: Guangye District was heavily besieged in Lechang County, Luzhou Province, and the area where Han Jing sent troops to kill them was also heavily besieged.

古文：诏张浚视师江上。
现代文：下诏张浚到长江视察军队。
English: Zhang Jun went to the Yangtze River to inspect the troops.

古文：十二月乙亥朔，魏良臣、王绘还自泗州军前入见。
现代文：十二月初一，魏良臣、王绘从泅州军前来朝见高宗。
English: On the first day of December, Wei Liangchen and Wang Peng came from the Zhangzhou Army to see Gao Zong.

古文：戊寅，命都督府右军统制李贵部兵屯扼福山镇。
现代文：初四，命令都督府右军统制李贵率兵屯控福山镇。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Li Gui, commander of the right army of the prefectural government, was ordered to take control of the town of Fukuyama.

古文：辛巳，命中军统制王进屯兵泰州，防拓通、泰。
现代文：初七，命令中军统制王进屯兵泰州，防守通、泰州。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he ordered the Chinese army to control Wang Jin and the garrison of Taizhou, and to defend Tong and Taizhou.

古文：壬午，以枢密都承旨马扩为江西沿江制置副使。
现代文：初八，任命枢密都承旨马扩为江西沿江制置副使。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Ma Zhan, the Privy Councillor of Zhengzhi, was appointed as the Deputy Envoy of Jiangxi Province.

古文：丙戌，吴伦遣兵攻腊家城，破之。
现代文：十二日，吴伦派兵攻打腊家城，攻破它。
English: On the twelfth day, Wu Lun sent troops to attack the city of Lajia and break it.

古文：丁亥，听两淮避兵民耕种所在闲田。
现代文：十三日，允许两淮回避兵火的百姓耕种所在地区的荒闲田地。
English: On the 13th, the two Huai allowed the people who evaded the war to cultivate the idle fields in the area.

古文：壬辰，金、齐兵逼庐州，仇悆婴城固守，岳飞所遣统制徐庆、牛皋援兵适至，败走之。
现代文：十八日，金、伪齐军逼近庐州，仇昵据城坚守，岳飞派遣统制徐庆、牛皋率领的援兵恰好赶到，打退金、伪齐联军。
English: On the 18th, the Jin and pseudo-Qi armies approached Zhangzhou, and Yuefei dispatched reinforcements under the command of Xu Qing and led by Niu Yao, who arrived just in time to beat back the Jin and pseudo-Qi allied forces.

古文：刘光世亦遣统制靳赛战于慎县。
现代文：刘光世也派统制靳赛在慎县作战。
English: Liu Guangxu also sent the commanding 赛 to fight in Shen County.

古文：张俊遣统制张宗颜击败金人于六合。
现代文：张俊派统制张宗颜在六合击败金军。
English: Zhang Zongyan, leader of the Zhang Jun faction, defeated the Golden Army in the round of six.

古文：诏江、浙、荆湖十四郡各募水军五百人，名横江军。
现代文：下诏江、浙、荆湖十四郡分别招募水军五百人，称作横江军。
English: The following fourteen counties of Zhaojiang, Zhejiang and Jinghu separately recruited five hundred sailors, known as the Hengjiang Army.

古文：两浙十郡沿江海州县招捕巡检土军。
现代文：两浙十郡沿江海州县招捕巡检土军。
English: Two of the ten counties in Zhejiang along the Yangtze River, Haizhou County, recruited and inspected the Turkish army.

古文：甲午，程昌寓遣杜湛、彭筠合击杨钦，破之。
现代文：二十日，程昌辨派杜湛、彭箔联合攻击杨钦，打败杨钦。
English: On the 20th, Cheng Changbai sent Du Zhan and Peng Foil to jointly attack Yang Qin and defeat Yang Qin.

古文：己亥，以来年正旦日食，下诏修阙政，求直言。
现代文：二十五日，因第二年正月一日有日食出现，下诏修治缺政，寻求直言。
English: On the 25th, due to the occurrence of a solar eclipse on the first day of the first month of the second year, the following edict was issued to rectify the lack of government and seek direct speech.

古文：庚子，金人退师。
现代文：二十六日，金军退兵。
English: On the 26th, the Golden Army withdrew.

古文：辛丑，诏葬祭浙西、江东二军之死事者。
现代文：二十七日，下诏埋葬、祭奠浙西、江东二军为国捐躯的士兵。
English: On the 27th, the soldiers of the two armies in western Zhejiang and eastern Jiangsu who sacrificed their lives for the country were buried and commemorated.

古文：壬寅，省淮南转运司。
现代文：二十八日，罢除淮南转运司。
English: On the 28th, the Huainan Transportation Department was dismissed.

古文：遣胡松年往常熟县、江阴军沿江计议军事。
现代文：派遣胡松年前往常熟县、江阴军沿江，商议军事。
English: Hu Song was sent to Changshu County and Jiangyin along the Yangtze River to discuss military affairs.

古文：癸卯，金人去滁州。
现代文：二十九日，金军离退滁州。
English: On the 29th, the Chinese army left and retreated to Zhangzhou.

