古文：张介福，字子祺，自怀庆徙吴中。
现代文：张介福，字子祺，自怀庆迁至吴中。
English: Zhang Jifu, known as Zi Zi, moved to Wuzhong in celebration.

古文：少受学于许衡。
现代文：年少时受业于许衡。
English: When he was young, he was engaged in Xu Heng.

古文：二亲早终，遂无仕进意。
现代文：双亲早逝，无出仕求官的意愿。
English: His parents died young, and he had no intention of running for public office.

古文：家贫，冬不能具夹襦，或遗以纻絮，不受，纤介必以礼。
现代文：家境贫穷，冬天连短袄也没有，有人送他絮，不肯接受。有时别人送一点小东西他也要还礼。
English: His family was poor, and in the winter they didn't even have a short straw. When someone gave him a piece of straw, he wouldn't accept it. Sometimes when someone gave him a little something, he had to return the favor.

古文：张士诚入吴，有卒犯其家，危坐不为起。
现代文：张士诚占据苏州，兵士骚扰他家，他端坐不动。
English: Zhang Shicheng occupies Suzhou, soldiers harass his home, he sits still.

古文：刀斫面，仆地，醒复取冠戴之，坐自若。
现代文：士卒将他砍伤，仆倒在地。当他醒过来时，戴上帽子，重又坐着，若无其事。
English: The officer slashed him and he fell to the ground. When he woke up, he put on his hat and sat down again, as if nothing had happened.

古文：卒怪，以为异物，走去。
现代文：士卒感到奇怪，以为遇上异物，走开了。
English: The officer felt strange, thought he was encountering a foreign object, and walked away.

古文：介福恐发其先墓，往庐焉。
现代文：介福怕他们去掘其祖先坟墓，先去守着。
English: Kaifuku is afraid that they will dig up his ancestor's grave, so he goes first to guard it.

古文：士诚闻而欲致之，不可。
现代文：士诚闻知此人，请他去，他不肯。
English: Shicheng heard of this man and invited him to go, but he refused.

古文：使其弟往问，答曰： 无乐乱，无贪天祸，无忘国家。 
现代文：又派其弟去请，介福说： 不要因图享乐而乱其言行，不要因贪婪而招致灾祸，不要忘了国家。 
English: He also sent his younger brother to invite him, and Jiefu said, "Don't let your words and deeds be disturbed by seeking pleasure, don't invite disaster by being greedy, and don't forget the country."

古文：馈之，力辞。
现代文：送他礼物，他坚决不收。
English: If you give him a present, he won't accept it.

古文：已，病革，谓其友曰： 吾志希古人，未能也。
现代文：病危时，对朋友说： 我一生希望像古代贤人那样，但未做到。
English: When he was critically ill, he said to a friend: All my life I wanted to be like the ancient sages, but I couldn't do it.

古文：惟无污于时，庶几哉。 
现代文：但我对现时也不曾有过污点，这也就差不多了。 
English: But I've never had a bad word to say about the present, so that's pretty much it.

古文：遂卒。
现代文：说罢即逝。
English: It's over as soon as you say it.

古文：倪瓒，字元镇，无锡人也。
现代文：倪瓒，字元镇，常州府无锡人。
English: Ni Ying, Zhiyuan Town, Changzhou Prefecture, Wuxi.

古文：家雄于赀，工诗，善书画。四方名士日至其门。
现代文：家颇有资财，工于诗，善书法和绘画，四方名士差不多每天都有人来拜访。
English: The family had considerable wealth and was good at poetry, calligraphy and painting. Famous people from the four directions came to visit almost every day.

古文：所居有阁曰清閟，幽迥绝尘。
现代文：所居之阁，叫 清阁 ，十分幽静，如脱离尘世。
English: The pavilion he lives in, called the Ching Pavilion, is very quiet, as if detached from the world.

古文：藏书数千卷，皆手自勘定。
现代文：藏书数千卷，都是他亲手勘定的。
English: The thousands of volumes in the library were all counted by his own hand.

古文：古鼎法书，名琴奇画，陈列左右。四时卉木，萦绕其外，高木修篁，蔚然深秀，故自号云林居士。
现代文：古鼎、字画、名琴，陈列于阁内两边，四时花木，萦绕其外，高大树木，挺直的竹林，绿荫葱葱，故自号 云林居士 。
English: Ancient tripods, calligraphy and paintings, and famous pianos are displayed on both sides of the pavilion. At four o'clock, flowers and trees surround it, as well as tall trees, upright bamboo groves, and verdant greenery. This is why he calls himself Yunlin Householder.

古文：时与客觞咏其中。
现代文：常与客在此饮酒咏诗。
English: He often has drinks with his guests here.

古文：为人有洁癖，盥濯不离手。
现代文：倪瓒有个爱清洁的怪癖，一天不停地洗手。
English: Ni Hao has a strange habit of loving cleanliness, washing his hands non-stop all day long.

古文：俗客造庐，比去，必洗涤其处。
现代文：一般客人来，走后他必把客人坐立的地方加以洗刷。
English: Ordinary guests come, and after they leave, he must wash the place where the guests sit and stand.

古文：求缣素者踵至，瓒亦时应之。
现代文：不断有人来求他的书画，瓒也随时给予。
English: People kept coming to ask for his calligraphy and paintings, and he was always ready to give them.

古文：至正初，海内无事，忽散其赀给亲故，人咸怪之。
现代文：元至正初年，海内无事，倪瓒突然将其家财散给亲戚朋友，人们都感到奇怪。
English: In the first year of the Yuan to Zheng dynasties, when there was no trouble at sea, Ni Ying suddenly distributed his family wealth to relatives and friends. People were surprised.

古文：未几兵兴，富家悉被祸，而瓒扁舟箬笠，往来震泽、三泖间，独不罹患。
现代文：不久战乱兴起，富家都遭到兵乱之祸，而瓒却乘小舟，戴箬笠，往来于震泽、三泖之间，毫无忧患。
English: Soon after, war broke out, and the rich suffered from the scourge of war, but the cormorants rode in small boats, wore cormorant hats, and went back and forth between Shizawa and Sanba, without any worries.

古文：张士诚累欲钩致之，逃渔舟以免。
现代文：张士诚多次要请他去，他乘渔舟逃避。
English: Zhang Shicheng repeatedly asked him to go, but he fled in a fishing boat.

古文：其弟士信以币乞画，瓒又斥去。
现代文：士诚之弟士信以重金向瓒求画，瓒又将士信斥走。
English: Shicheng's younger brother Shixin asked Yu for a painting with a large sum of money, and Yu drove Shixin away.

古文：士信恚，他日从宾客游湖上，闻异香出葭苇间，疑为瓒也，物色渔舟中，果得之。抶几毙，终无一言。
现代文：士信怀怨于心。有天士信与宾客游于湖上，闻异响出于芦苇之间，以为是倪瓒。到渔船中去找，果然是他，把他几乎打死，但瓒始终无一言。
English: Shixin harbored a grudge. One day, Shixin was swimming with guests on the lake. He heard strange noises coming from between the reeds and thought it was Ni Ying. When he went to look for him in the fishing boat, it turned out to be him, and he was almost beaten to death, but he never said a word.

古文：及吴平，瓒年老矣，黄冠野服，混迹编氓。
现代文：太祖平吴，瓒已年老，头戴黄帽，身穿平民服装，夹杂于平民之中。
English: The great-grandfather Ping Wu, who was already old, wore a yellow cap, wore civilian clothes, and mingled with the civilians.

古文：洪武七年卒，年七十四。
现代文：洪武七年逝世，年七十四岁。
English: Hongwu died seven years later, at the age of 74.

古文：徐舫，字方舟，桐庐人。
现代文：徐舫，字方舟，浙江桐庐人。
English: Xu Xi, Zha Fang Zhou, Zhejiang Tong Xi Ren.

古文：幼轻侠，好击剑、走马、蹴踘。
现代文：自幼轻财好侠义，喜欢击剑、骑马、踢球。
English: He has been chivalrous since he was a child, and likes fencing, horse riding, and playing football.

古文：既而悔之，习科举业。
现代文：后来失悔，转而读书应科举考试。
English: Later, he regretted it and switched to reading for the entrance examination.

古文：已，复弃去，学为歌诗。
现代文：以后又弃科举而学诗歌。
English: Later, he dropped out of school to study poetry.

古文：睦故多诗人，唐有方干、徐凝、李频、施肩吾，宋有高师鲁、滕元秀，号睦州诗派，舫悉取步聚之。
现代文：浙江睦州原多诗人，唐代有方干、徐凝、李频、施肩吾，宋代有高师鲁、滕元秀，号称 睦州诗派 ，徐舫都学他们的诗作。
English: There were many poets in Muzhou, Zhejiang Province. In the Tang Dynasty, there were Fang Gan, Xu Rong, Li Ping, and Shi Shouwu. In the Song Dynasty, there were Gao Shilu and Teng Yuanxiu, known as the Muzhou Poetry School. Xu Rong studied their poems.

古文：既乃游四方，交其名士，诗益工。
现代文：他漫游四方，交结名士，其诗写得更好。
English: He roamed far and wide, befriended famous people, and wrote better poetry.

古文：行省参政苏天爵将荐之，舫笑曰： 吾诗人耳，可羁以章绂哉。 
现代文：行省参政苏天爵要举荐他为官，舫笑着回答说： 我是诗人，岂能让蟒袍玉带把我羁绊住。 
English: Su Tianjie, a member of the provincial party committee, wanted to recommend him for the post, and replied with a wry smile: "I am a poet, how can I let the robe and jade belt tie me down.

古文：竟避去。
现代文：终于走了。
English: He finally left.

古文：筑室江皋，日苦吟于云烟出没间，翛然若与世隔，因自号沧江散人。
现代文：筑室于江边，每日咏诗做歌，出没于云烟间，自由自在，如同与世隔绝，因自号 沧江散人 。
English: He lives by the river, composes poems and songs every day, and haunts the clouds. He is free and at ease, as if he were isolated from the world, because he calls himself "Cangjiang Sanren."

古文：宋濂、刘基、叶琛、章溢之赴召也，舟溯桐江，忽有人黄冠鹿裘立江上，招基而笑，且语侵之。
现代文：宋濂、刘基、叶琛、章溢奉太祖之诏赴南京，乘船溯桐江而上，忽见有人黄冠鹿裘立于江上，笑着向刘基招手，还说了些不好听的话。
English: Song Qi, Liu Qi, Ye Qi and Zhang Yiyi went to Nanjing in accordance with their grandfather's edict and sailed up the Tongjiang River. Suddenly, they saw a yellow-crowned deer standing on the river, waving to Liu Qi with a smile and saying some unpleasant words.

古文：基望见，急延入舟中。琛、溢竞欢谑，各取冠服服之，欲载上黟川，其人不可乃止。
现代文：刘基忙把他请入舟中，叶琛、章溢都同他开玩笑，拿冠服给他穿戴，还要他一起去黟川。此人不肯。
English: Liu Ji hurriedly invited him into the boat, Ye Ye and Zhang Yue both joked with him, gave him a ceremonial robe to wear, and asked him to go to the Fenchuan River. The man refused.

古文：濂初未相识，以问。
现代文：宋濂因是初见，不相识，问是何人。
English: As it was the first time they met, Song Tao did not know them, so he asked who they were.

古文：基曰： 此徐方舟也。 
现代文：刘基说 ：这就是徐方舟。 
English: Liu Ji said: This is Xu Fangzhou.

古文：濂因起共欢笑，酌酒而别。
现代文：濂便起身与他一起有说有笑，酌酒而别。
English: The baboon got up, talked and laughed with him, drank some wine and left.

古文：舫诗有《瑶林》、《沧江》二集。
现代文：舫的诗作有《瑶林》、《沧江》二集。
English: Zou's poems include "Yulin" and "Cangjiang" in two collections.

古文：年六十八，丙午春，卒于家。杨恒，字本初，诸暨人。
现代文：丙午年春逝于家中，享年六十八岁。杨恒，字本初，浙江诸暨人。
English: Yang Heng died at home in the spring of the year of the Horse, at the age of sixty-eight. Yang Heng, originally from Zhuji, Zhejiang.

古文：外族方氏建义塾，馆四方游学士，恒幼往受诸经，辄领其旨要。
现代文：外族方氏建立义学，请四方游学之士来任教，恒年幼时便上这义学学习儒家经典，很快就能领悟其中心思想。
English: The foreign Fang clan established Yixing, and invited scholars from the four directions to teach. When he was very young, he went to this Yixing to study Confucian classics, and soon he was able to understand its central idea.

古文：文峻洁，有声郡邑间。
现代文：他文章写得好，在本郡县还颇有名声。
English: His articles are well written, and he has quite a reputation in this county.

古文：浦江郑氏延为师，阅十年退居白鹿山，戴棕冠，披羊裘，带经耕烟雨间，啸歌自乐，因自号白鹿生。
现代文：浦江郑氏请他去为师，他在那里教十年书后退居于白鹿山，头戴棕榈帽，身穿羊皮袄，随带经书，耕耘于烟雨之中，啸歌自乐，因自号 白鹿生 。
English: Pujiang Zheng asked him to be his teacher. After teaching there for ten years, he retired to White Deer Mountain, wearing a palm hat, wearing a sheepskin coat, carrying scriptures, working in the smoke and rain, singing and enjoying himself, because he was called White Deer.

古文：太祖既下浙东，命栾凤知州事。
现代文：太祖占有浙东后，命栾凤为诸暨州知州。
English: After the great-grandfather occupied the eastern part of Zhejiang, Zhuji and Zhizhou were named Zhuji and Zhizhou respectively.

古文：凤请为州学师，恒固让不起。
现代文：凤聘请杨恒为本州学师，恒坚决推辞。
English: Feng hired Yang Heng as a local scholar, but Heng resolutely refused.

古文：凤乃命州中子弟即家问道。
现代文：凤又命本州子弟到他家中请教。
English: Feng also ordered Honshu's son to go to his home to ask for advice.

古文：政有缺失，辄贻书咨访。
现代文：政务有失误或不周全的地方，便写信去咨询。
English: If there are mistakes or imperfections in government affairs, they will write to consult.

古文：后唐铎知绍兴，欲辟起之，复固辞。
现代文：后唐铎为绍兴知府，也想聘用他，他还是坚决辞谢。
English: After Tang Xuan became the governor of Shaoxing, he also wanted to hire him, but he still firmly declined.

古文：宋濂之为学士也，拟荐为国子师，闻不受州郡辟命，乃已。
现代文：宋濂为学士时，也打算举荐他为国子师，但听说州郡聘他都不肯就任，也就算了。
English: When Song Tao was a bachelor, he also planned to recommend him as a tutor, but heard that he did not want to take up the post even if he was hired by the state or county.

古文：所居近大溪，多修竹，自号竹溪逸民。
现代文：恒禀性厚道诚恳，与人讲话，句句是肺腑之言，从不欺诳别人。
English: He is always kind, sincere, and speaks with people, his words are sincere, and he never bullies others.

古文：常乘小艇，吹短箫，吹已，叩舷而歌，悠然自适。宋濂俱为之传。杨引，吉水人。
现代文：若事与名不符合，他便严厉指斥。家无隔夜之粮，但面对钱财毫不动心，同乡人把他奉为楷模。杨引，江西吉水人。
English: If something doesn't match his reputation, he will severely reprimand it. His family doesn't have enough food to last the night, but when it comes to money, he doesn't care. His fellow villagers hold him up as a role model. Yang Bing, Jishui, Jiangxi Province.

古文：好学能诗文，为宋濂、陶安所称。
现代文：好学，能诗能文，为宋濂、陶安所称赞。
English: He is good at learning and can write poetry and prose, which was praised by Song Tao and Tao An.

古文：驸马都尉陆贤从受学，入朝，举止端雅。
现代文：驸马都尉陆贤从他授业，入朝时，举止端庄。
English: Lu Xian, the captain of the imperial horse, received his education from him, and behaved with dignity when he entered the imperial court.

古文：太祖喜，问谁教者，贤以引对，立召见，赐食。
现代文：太祖甚喜，问是谁所教，陆贤说是杨引。太祖便立即召见杨引，赐饮食。
English: The great-grandfather was very pleased and asked who had taught him, but Lu Xian said it was Yang Bing. The great-grandfather immediately summoned Yang Bing and gave him food.

古文：他日，贤以亵服见，引太息曰： 是其心易我，不可久居此矣。 
现代文：有一天，陆贤穿着便服来见老师，杨引叹息说： 他内心已没有我这个老师了，不可久居于此。 
English: One day, Lu Xian came to see his teacher in civilian clothes. Yang sighed and said, "He doesn't have me, the teacher, in his heart anymore. He can't stay here for long."

古文：复以纂修征，亦不就。
现代文：朝廷征他为纂修，他不肯。
English: The imperial court asked him to become a scholar, but he refused.

古文：其教学者，先操履而后文艺。
现代文：他教学是修养品行道德，然后才学文艺。
English: His teaching is to cultivate moral character and ethics, and then study literature and art.

古文：尝揭《论语乡党》篇示人曰： 吾教自有养生术，安事偃仰吐纳为。 
现代文：曾对人讲《论语？乡党》时说： 我教学中自有养生之术，何必去仰卧、呼吸新鲜空气，吐出污浊之气。 
English: He once said to someone when he was giving a lecture on "The Analects of Confucius and the Rural Party," "My teaching has its own way of keeping fit. Why do I have to lie on my back, breathe fresh air, and exhale the foul air?

古文：乃节饮食，时动息，迄老视听不衰。
现代文：平时节制饮食，按时作息，虽年老而视力听力都不衰。
English: He usually eats and drinks moderately and has a regular schedule. Although he is old, his eyesight and hearing are still good.

古文：既殁，安福刘球称其学探道原，文范后世，去就出处，卓然有陶潜、徐穉之风。
现代文：死后，安福人刘球称其学说是探求 道 的本原，文章为后世模范，言行举止有陶潜、徐稚的风度。
English: After his death, Liu Qiu, a person of Anfu, said that his doctrine was the origin of the quest for the Tao, the article was a model for future generations, and his words and deeds had the demeanor of Tao Qian and Xu Zhi.

古文：吴海，字朝宗，闽县人。
现代文：吴海，字朝宗，福建闽县人。
English: Wu Hai, surnamed Chaozong, a native of Min County, Fujian Province.

古文：元季以学行称。
现代文：元代末期以学问德行称著于世。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, he was famous for his scholarly virtues.

古文：值四方盗起，绝意仕进。
现代文：当时反元的烈火燃遍各地，海因而决心不去做官。
English: At that time, the flames of anti-Yuanism were burning all over the country, so Hai decided not to become an official.

古文：洪武初，守臣欲荐诸朝，力辞免。
现代文：洪武初，当地官员要将他举荐于朝廷，他极力推辞。
English: In the early days of Hongwu, local officials wanted to recommend him to the imperial court, but he strenuously declined.

古文：既而徵诣史局，复力辞。
现代文：其后又召他入朝任史局修纂，他又坚决辞谢。
English: Later, he was invited to join the Imperial History Bureau as a revisionist, but he firmly declined.

古文：尝言： 杨、墨、释、老，圣道之贼，管、商、申、韩，治道之贼，稗官野乘，正史之贼，支词艳说，文章之贼。
现代文：曾说： 杨子、墨子、佛子、老子都是圣道之贼；管仲、商鞅、申不害、韩非都是治道之贼；小说野史是正史之贼；华丽词句是文章之贼。
English: He once said: Yang Zi, Mo Zi, Buddha Zi, and Lao Zi are all thieves of the holy path; Guanzhong, Shang Zi, Shen Bozhong, and Han Fei are all thieves of the righteous path; novel field history is a thief of the righteous history; gorgeous words and sentences are a thief of the article.

古文：上之人，宜敕通经大臣，会诸儒定其品目，颁之天下，民间非此不得辄藏，坊市不得辄粥。
现代文：朝廷应令通经大臣，与诸儒一起商定书目，颁布于天下，不是所规定的书，民间不能收藏，坊市不准卖。
English: The imperial court should order the Minister of Economic Affairs, together with the Confucianists, to agree on a book list and promulgate it to the world. If it is not a prescribed book, the people cannot collect it, and the market is not allowed to sell it.

古文：如是数年，学者生长不涉异闻，其于养德育才，岂曰小补。 
现代文：像这样在若干年后，学生听不到异端邪说，其于培养他们的德才大有益处。 
English: In this way, after a few years, students do not hear heresy, which is of great benefit in cultivating their virtues.

古文：因著书一编曰《书祸》，以发明之。
现代文：为此，他著书一编，题目《书祸》。
English: To this end, he has written a book, entitled "Book Disaster."

古文：与永福王翰善。
现代文：吴海与永福王翰相友善。
English: Wu Hai is friendly with Yongfu Wanghan.

古文：翰尝仕元，海数劝之死，翰果自裁。
现代文：翰曾在元朝做过官，入明以后，海多次劝翰守节而死，翰果真自杀。
English: Han had served as an official in the Yuan Dynasty. After he entered the Ming Dynasty, Hai repeatedly urged Han to observe the festival and die. Han eventually committed suicide.

古文：海教养其子偁，卒底成立。
现代文：海把翰之子王翶教养成人。
English: Hai brought up Wang Yao, the son of Han, into adulthood.

古文：平居虚怀乐善，有规过者，欣然立改，因颜其斋曰闻过。为文严整典雅，一归诸理，后学咸宗仰之。
现代文：海平时虚怀若谷，乐善好施，有人指出他的过错，他立即改正，把他的书斋题名为 闻过 ，其文严整典雅，最后是讲明理学。后世学者都仰慕他。
English: In ordinary times, Hai was vain and greedy, but when someone pointed out his mistake, he immediately corrected it, and named his study "Hearing," which was strict and elegant, and finally he lectured on logic. Later generations of scholars all admired him.

古文：有《闻过斋集》行世。
现代文：其著作有《闻过斋集》流行于世。
English: One of his works, "Wangguo Zaishu" is popular in the world.

古文：刘闵，字子贤，莆田人。
现代文：刘闵，字子贤，福建莆田人。
English: Liu Yu, Zixian, Fujian Putian people.

古文：生而纯悫。
现代文：生性纯正忠厚。
English: They are pure and loyal by nature.

古文：早孤，绝意科举，求古圣贤禔躬训家之法，率而行之。
现代文：父亲早逝，他决意不参加科举考试，只求深刻理解古圣贤训家之法，并亲身实践。
English: After his father's early death, he decided not to take the imperial examinations, but to deeply understand the teachings of the ancient sages and to practice them himself.

古文：祖母及父丧未举，断酒肉，远室家。
现代文：祖母及父亲死，服丧未毕，不食酒肉，不回房与妻同居，三年都是这样。
English: My grandmother and father died before they were buried, so I didn't eat meat or drink wine, and I didn't go back to live with my wife. This went on for three years.

古文：训邻邑，朔望归，则号哭殡所，如是三年。
现代文：其妻不受母亲喜欢，便把她休掉，由他一人奉养。
English: His wife was not liked by his mother, so he divorced her and raised her by himself.

古文：妇失爱于母，出之，独居奉养，疾不解衣。母或恚怒，则整衣竟夕跪榻前。
现代文：母亲生病，他夜不解衣精心护理。母亲生气，他衣冠整齐地终日跪在母亲榻前。
English: When his mother was ill, he stayed up all night to take good care of her. When she was angry, he knelt all day in front of her bed, neatly dressed.

古文：祭享奠献，一循古礼，乡人莫不钦重。
现代文：凡祭祀都遵循古礼，同乡邻里都敬重他。
English: All sacrificial rites follow the ancient rites, and his fellow villagers and neighbors respect him.

古文：副使罗璟立社学，构养亲堂，延闵为师。
现代文：副使罗瞡设立社学，建造 养亲堂 ，聘刘闵为师。
English: Vice-Minister Luo Wei set up a social science department, built a "family rearing hall" and hired Liu Wei as a teacher.

古文：提学佥事周孟中捐俸助养。
现代文：提学佥事周孟中将自己俸禄来帮助他奉养母亲。
English: Zhou Meng raised his salary to help support his mother.

古文：知府王弼每祭庙社，必延致斋居，曰： 此人在座，私意自消。 
现代文：知府王弼每祭祀庙社，都要把他请到自己的书斋来，并对别人说： 此人在座，私念自消。 
English: The prefectural governors of Wangye invited him to their study whenever there was a religious service at a temple or shrine, and said to others, "This person is here, so I'll forget about it."

古文：置田二十余亩赡之，并受不辞。
现代文：为闵置田二十余亩作为他赡养母亲之用，他辞而不受。
English: He couldn't turn down the offer to set aside more than 20 mu of farmland to support his mother.

古文：及母殁，即送田还官，庐墓三年。
现代文：母亲去世后，他立即把田还官，在母坟墓边盖草屋守孝三年。
English: After his mother's death, he immediately returned the field to the official, and built a grass hut next to his mother's grave for three years.

古文：弟妇求分产，闵阖户自挝，妇感悟乃已。
现代文：弟媳提出要分家，刘闵自己打自己，弟媳受到感动，再不提分家之事。
English: My brother-in-law proposed to separate the family, Liu Ye beat himself, my sister-in-law was moved, and did not mention the separation of the family.

古文：弘治中，佥都御史林俊上言： 伏见皇太子年逾幼学，习处宫中，罕接外傅，豫教之道似为未备。
现代文：弘治年间，佥都御史林俊上书说： 伏见皇太子已过幼年，长居于宫中，很少受到师傅的教导。
English: During the reign of Emperor Kōji, the Empress Dowager Shī Linjun wrote: The Crown Prince Fushimi has passed the age of infancy, has lived in the palace for a long time, and has rarely been taught by a master.

古文：今讲读侍从诸臣固已简用，然百司众职，山林隐逸，不谓无人。
现代文：如今原讲读侍从诸臣已另任用，然百官之中，山林隐居者，不能说没有适当人选。
English: Nowadays, the original reading attendants have been appointed by the ministers, but among the hundreds of officials, those who live in seclusion in the mountains and forests cannot be said to have no suitable candidates.

古文：以臣所知，则礼部侍郎谢铎、太仆少卿储巏、光禄少卿杨廉，可备讲员。
现代文：以臣所知，如礼部侍郎谢铎、太仆少卿储耇、光禄寺少卿杨廉，都充任讲官。
English: As far as is known to the courtier, such as the attendant of the ceremonial department, Xie Jun, the servant of the junior secretary, Zuo Jun, and the junior secretary of the Guanglu Temple, Yang Ren, all served as lecturers.

古文：其资序未合，德行可取者二人，则致仕副使曹时中、布衣刘闵是也。
现代文：若论资历还不够，而其德行可取者，则有退休副使曹时中、平民刘闵。
English: If qualifications are not enough, but their virtues are desirable, there are retired vice-envoy Cao Shizhong and civilian Liu Wei.

古文：闵，臣县人，恭慎醇粹，孝行高古。
现代文：闵是臣的同县人，其言行恭俭、谨慎、纯正，有很高孝行。
English: He is a peer of the county. His words and deeds are frugal, prudent, pure, and he has a high degree of filial piety.

古文：日无二粥，身无完衣，处之晏如。
现代文：他虽每日连两餐稀饭也吃不上，没有一件完好衣裳，但处之泰然。
English: Although he can't even eat two meals of porridge every day, and none of his clothes are intact, he is at peace.

古文：监司刘大夏、徐贯等恒敬礼之。
现代文：监司刘大夏、徐贯等时常尊敬他，以礼相待。
English: Supervisors Liu Daxia, Xu Jun and others often respect him and treat each other with courtesy.

古文：臣谓可礼致时中为宫僚，闵以布衣入侍，必能涵育薰陶，裨益睿质。 
现代文：臣认为可以礼聘请时中为宫官，闵以平民入宫侍奉皇太子，皇太子必能受到涵养与熏陶，有益增进聪明才智。 
English: The vassal believed that it was possible to hire a court official from among the commoners to serve the crown prince, and that the crown prince would be nurtured and influenced, which would be beneficial to enhance his intelligence.

古文：时不能用。
现代文：这意见未被采纳。
English: The recommendation was not implemented.

古文：其后，巡按御史宗彝、饶瑭欲援诏例举闵经明行修，闵力辞。
现代文：其后，巡按御史宗彝、饶瑭都愿奉诏向朝廷介绍刘闵的学问和德行修养，荐举他为官，闵极力辞谢。
English: After that, the inspector generals Zong Xi and Rao Xi both wanted to introduce Liu Xi's learning and moral cultivation to the imperial court, recommend him as an official, and Xi tried his best to thank him.

古文：知府陈效请遂其志，荣以学职。
现代文：知府陈效奏请皇帝授闵以学职。
English: The prefect Chen effectively asked the emperor to grant him a post as a scholar.

古文：正德元年，遥授儒学训导。
现代文：所以在正德元年授儒学训导。
English: Therefore, in the first year of Zhengde, the teaching of Confucianism was given.

古文：杨黼，云南太和人也。
现代文：杨黼，云南太和人。
English: Yang Hui, Yunnan Taihe people.

古文：好学，读《五经》皆百遍。
现代文：好学，《五经》读了百遍。
English: He is eager to learn and has read the Five Classics a hundred times.

古文：工篆籀，好释典。
现代文：工于篆文，好佛典。
English: It was written in Chinese, and it is a good Buddhist text.

古文：注《孝经》数万言，证群书，根性命，字皆小篆。
现代文：有人劝他参加科举考试，他笑笑而已。庭前有棵大桂树，他在树上绑一块板子，题名 桂楼 ，躺在上面，做诗咏歌，怡然自乐。注《孝经》数万言，旁征博引，字皆小篆。
English: Someone advised him to take the imperial examinations, but he just smiled. In front of the courtyard there was a large laurel tree, and he tied a board to the tree, with the title "Katsura," lay on it, wrote poems and songs, and enjoyed himself.

古文：所用砚乾，将下楼取水，砚池忽满，自是为常，时人咸异之。
现代文：所用砚池干涸，准备下楼取水，砚池忽然水满，当时人们都感到惊异。
English: When the pond they were using dried up and they were about to go downstairs to fetch water, the pond suddenly filled up and everyone was surprised.

古文：父母殁，为佣营葬毕，入鸡足，栖罗汉壁石窟山十余年，寿至八十。
现代文：父母去世，他去为人做佣工，以所得工钱来办理父母丧事。他到了鸡足，住在罗汉壁石窟山中十余年，直到八十高寿时子孙才把他接回家中。
English: When his parents died, he went to work as a domestic helper, using the money he earned to pay for his parents' funerals. When he reached the chicken's feet, he lived for more than ten years in the mountains of the Luohanbei Grottoes, until his 80th birthday, when his children and grandchildren took him home.

古文：子逊迎归，一日沐浴，令子孙拜，曰： 明日吾行矣。 
现代文：有天洗完澡，令子孙向他叩头。他说 ：明天我就走了。 
English: One day, after taking a bath, he made his children and grandchildren bow to him. He said, "I'll be gone tomorrow."

古文：果卒。
现代文：第二天果然去世。
English: Sure enough, he died.

古文：孙一元，字太初，不知何许人，问其邑里，曰： 我秦人也。 
现代文：孙一元，字太初，不知何地之人，问他籍贯，他说： 我是秦人。 
English: Sun Yat-sen, a man of unknown origin, asked him where he was from. He said, "I am from Qin."

古文：尝栖太白之巅，故号太白山人。
现代文：曾住于太白之巅，故自号 白山人 。
English: He used to live on the top of Taibai Mountain, so he called himself a Baishan person.

古文：或曰安化王宗人，王坐不轨诛，故变姓名避难也。
现代文：有人说他是安化王的宗族，安化王因谋反被诛，他便改姓易名，避难他乡。
English: Some people say that he is a descendant of King Anhua, who was imprisoned for plotting rebellion, so he changed his surname and changed his name and fled his hometown.

古文：一元姿性绝人，善为诗，风仪秀朗，踪迹奇谲，乌巾白帢，携铁笛鹤瓢，遍游中原，东逾齐、鲁，南涉江、淮，历荆抵吴越，所至赋诗，谈神仙，论当世事，往往倾其座人。
现代文：一元天资聪敏过人，善为诗，风度翩翩，行踪捉摸不定，乌巾白帽，携铁笛鹤瓢，遍游中原，东到齐、鲁，南过江、淮，经荆州到吴越，所到之处，或赋诗，或谈神仙，或论当世之事，往往倾倒所有听他谈论的人。
English: He was gifted with superior intelligence, was good at poetry, had a charming personality, and his whereabouts were unpredictable. He wore a black turban and a white cap, and carried an iron flute and a pickaxe. He traveled all over the Central Plains, east to Qi and Lu, south to the Yangtze River and Huai River, and through Jingzhou to Wuyue. Wherever he went, whether to compose poems, or to talk about the immortals, or to discuss current affairs, he often overwhelmed all those who listened to him.

古文：铅山费宏罢相，访之杭州南屏山，值其昼寝，就卧内与语。
现代文：铅山的费宏罢相，到杭州南屏山访问一元，正逢他昼寝，就在卧室内与他交谈。
English: Fei Hong of Lead Mountain left the scene and visited Nanping Mountain in Hangzhou for one yuan. Just as he was taking a nap, he talked to him in the bedroom.

古文：送之及门，了不酬答。
现代文：当他把客人送到门口，也不表示谢意。
English: He doesn't even acknowledge his guests when he brings them to the door.

古文：宏出语人曰： 吾一生未尝见此人。 
现代文：宏出来对别人说 ：我一生未曾见过这样的人。 
English: Hiroshi came out and said to others: I have never seen such a person in my life.

古文：时刘麟以知府罢归，龙霓以佥事谢政，并客湖州，与郡人故御史陵昆善，而长兴吴珫隐居好客，三人者并主于其家。
现代文：知府刘麟罢官归家，佥事龙虎辞职闲居，二人都到了湖州，他们与同郡人故御史陆昆关系很好，而长兴的吴王充隐居好客，麟、霓、昆人都在吴王充家做客。
English: Liu Lin, the governor of the prefecture, resigned from his post and returned home. Anecdotes of dragons and tigers resigned and lived idly. Both of them went to Huzhou. They had a good relationship with the late Lu Kun, who was from the same county, while Changxing's Wu Wangchong lived in seclusion and was hospitable. Lin, Yao and Kun were all guests at Wu Wangchong's home.

古文：珫因招一元入社，称 苕溪五隐 。
现代文：王充把一元也招来入社，共称 苕溪五隐 。
English: Wang Cheng also invited one yuan to join the company, collectively known as "Buxi Wujin."

古文：一元买田溪上，将老焉。
现代文：一元在苕溪种了一块田，准备终老于此。
English: One yuan planted a field in Luoxi, preparing to stay here forever.

古文：举人施侃雅善一元，妻以妻妹张氏，生一女而卒，年止三十七。
现代文：举人施侃与一元很友好，把自己的妻妹配给一元为妻，生一女。一元三十七岁去世。
English: He was very friendly with one yuan, and gave one yuan to his wife and sister as a wife, giving birth to a daughter. One yuan died at the age of 37.

古文：珫等葬之道场山。
现代文：王充等把他葬于道场山。
English: Wang Chong and others buried him on Dojo Mountain.

古文：沈周，字启南，长洲人。
现代文：沈周，字启南，苏州府长洲县人。
English: Shen Zhou, surnamed Qinan, was from Changzhou County, Suzhou.

古文：祖澄，永乐间举人材，不就。
现代文：祖父沈澄，永乐年间推举人材，他不去应举。
English: Grandfather Shencheng, Yongle years to nominate talent, he did not go to the top.

古文：所居曰西庄，日置酒款宾，人拟之顾仲瑛。
现代文：他居住的地方叫 西庄 ，每日置酒款待宾客，人们把他比作顾仲瑛。
English: The place where he lives is called Xizhuang, and he treats guests to wine every day. People compare him to Gu Zhongying.

古文：伯父贞吉，父恒吉，并抗隐。构有竹居，兄弟读书其中。工诗善画，臧获亦解文墨。
现代文：伯父沈员吉，父亲恒吉，都隐居不出，建 有竹居 ，兄弟二人读书其中，工诗善画，其奴仆也知书习文。
English: His uncle, Shen Jianji, and his father, Hengji, could not live in seclusion. They built a bamboo house, in which the two brothers studied. They were good at poetry and painting, and their servants also knew how to read and write.

古文：邑人陈孟贤者，陈五经继之子也。
现代文：同县人陈孟贤，是陈五经过继的儿子。
English: Chen Mengxian, from the same county, is Chen Wu's son.

古文：周少从之游，得其指授。
现代文：沈周年少时向他求教，得到他的指教。
English: When he was young, Shen Yiming sought his advice and received it.

古文：年十一，游南都，作百韵诗，上巡抚侍郎崔恭。
现代文：十一岁时游南京，做诗百韵，呈给巡抚侍郎崔恭。
English: At the age of eleven, he traveled to Nanjing, composed a hundred rhymes, and presented them to Choe Kyong, the governor's chamberlain.

古文：面试《凤凰台赋》，援笔立就，恭大嗟异。
现代文：恭要他当面做《凤凰台赋》，周提笔立即写成，恭大为惊异。
English: Gong Da asked him to do "Phoenix Stage Fu" in person, and Zhou Jianpen immediately wrote it down, which surprised Gong Da.

古文：及长，书无所不览。文摹左氏，诗拟白居易、苏轼、陆游，字仿黄庭坚，并为世所爱重。
现代文：长大后，无书不读，做文摹仿《左传》；字诗则摹仿白居易、苏轼、陆游；写字则摹仿黄庭坚。其文、诗、字都为当世人所珍爱。
English: When he grew up, he did not read any books, and his writings were modeled after Zuo Zhuan; his words and poems were modeled after Bai Juyi, Su Shi, and Lu You; and his handwriting was modeled after Huang Tingjian. His writings, poems, and calligraphy are treasured by the world today.

古文：尤工于画，评者谓为明世第一。
现代文：尤工于画，评论家认为是明代第一。
English: Especially skilled in painting, critics believe that it is the first in the Ming Dynasty.

古文：郡守欲荐周贤良，周筮《易》，得《遁》之九五，遂决意隐遁。
现代文：郡守要荐举沈周为贤良，周以《易》来占卦，得《遁》卦，于是决心隐遁。
English: The county magistrate wanted to recommend Shen Zhou as a virtuous person. Zhou used "Yi" to calculate the divisor and got "Zi" divisor, so he decided to keep it secret.

古文：所居有水竹亭馆之胜，图书鼎彝充牣错列，四方名士过从无虚日，风流文彩，照映一时。
现代文：所居之地有水、竹、亭、馆，有图书、鼎彝。四方名士天天与他往来，风流文采，照映一时。
English: The place where he lives has water, bamboo, pavilions, pavilions, books, and pinnacles. Famous people from all over the country come and go with him every day, and his style of writing is a reflection of the times.

古文：奉亲至孝。父殁，或劝之仕，对曰： 若不知母氏以我为命耶？
现代文：周对父母至孝，父去世后，有人劝他出来做官，他说： 你不知道我母亲以我为命吗？
English: Zhou was very devoted to his parents. After his father's death, someone urged him to become an official, and he said: "Don't you know that my mother is my life?

古文：奈何离膝下。 
现代文：为何要离开她？ 
English: Why leave her?

古文：居恒厌入城市，于郭外置行窝，有事一造之。
现代文：很不愿在城市中居住，在城外置一房屋，有事就去居住。
English: They are reluctant to live in the city, preferring to rent a house outside the city and move in when the need arises.

古文：晚年，匿迹惟恐不深，先后巡抚王恕、彭礼咸礼敬之，欲留幕下，并以母老辞。
现代文：晚年隐居惟恐不深。巡抚王恕、彭礼先后都以礼敬重他，欲留他于幕下。周都以母老为理由而推辞。
English: He lived in seclusion in his later years, but he was not afraid. The governors Wang Shou and Peng Lai respected him and wanted to keep him behind the scenes. Zhou refused on the grounds of his mother.

古文：有郡守征画工绘屋壁。里人疾周者，入其姓名，遂被摄。
现代文：有个郡守征集画工为他做壁画，同里忌妒沈周的人，把他的名字报了上去，因而作为画工而被征去服役。
English: A county magistrate conscripted a painter to do a mural for him. A jealous villager reported his name, and he was conscripted to serve as a painter.

古文：或劝周谒贵游以免，周曰： 往役，义也，谒贵游，不更辱乎！ 
现代文：有人劝他去拜谒贵族以免其役，周说： 去服役，这是义务，去拜谒贵族，岂不更加耻辱！ 
English: Someone advised him to go and pay homage to the nobles to avoid having to serve them. Zhou said, "To serve is an obligation, but to pay homage to the nobles is even more humiliating!"

古文：卒供役而还。
现代文：终去服役而还。
English: He eventually went into the service and was reinstated.

古文：已而守入觐，铨曹问曰： 沈先生无恙乎？ 
现代文：其后，郡守入京朝见皇帝，吏部官员问郡守 ：沈先生还好吗？ 
English: After that, the county governor went to Beijing to see the emperor. An official from the personnel department asked the county governor, "Is Mr. Shen all right?"

古文：守不知所对，漫应曰： 无恙。 
现代文：郡守不知说什么好，随便说： 还好。 
English: The county governor didn't know what to say, so he casually said, "It's okay."

古文：见内阁，李东阳曰： 沈先生有牍乎？ 
现代文：见内阁，李东阳问郡守 ：沈先生有信吗？ 
English: After seeing the cabinet, Li Dongyang asked the county governor, "Do you have a letter for Mr. Shen?"

古文：守益愕，复漫应曰： 有而未至。 
现代文：守臣更加惊慌，又应声说： 有信，但还未到。 
English: The retainer was even more alarmed and replied, "I have faith, but it hasn't arrived yet."

古文：守出，仓皇谒侍郎吴宽，问 沈先生何人？ 
现代文：郡守出来，仓皇地去拜谒侍郎吴宽，问 ：沈先生何人？ 
English: The county guard came out and hurriedly went to pay his respects to Wu Kuan, Mr. Shen's steward, and asked, "How many people does Mr. Shen have?"

古文：宽备言其状。
现代文：宽详细地把沈周的形象告诉他。
English: Kuan told him the image of Shen Zhou in detail.

古文：询左右，乃画壁生也。
现代文：他询问左右，才知是为他做壁画的画工。
English: He asked around until he found the artist who did the mural for him.

古文：比还，谒周舍，再拜引咎，索饭，饭之而去。周以母故，终身不远游。
现代文：回郡之后便去拜谒沈周，向他表示歉疚。周因母在堂，终身不远游。
English: After returning to the county, he went to visit Zou Shen Zhou and expressed his remorse to him. Zhou did not travel far because his mother was in school.

古文：母年九十九而终，周亦八十矣。又三年，以正德四年卒。
现代文：母年九十九而终，这时周也是八十高龄，过了三年，于正德四年寿终。
English: My mother died at the age of ninety-nine. She was also eighty years old at the time. Three years later, she died in Zhengde four years later.

古文：陈继儒，字仲醇，松江华亭人。
现代文：陈继儒，字仲醇，松江府华亭人。
English: Chen Jiru, alias Zhongyong, is from Huating, Songjiang.

古文：幼颖异，能文章，同郡徐阶特器重之。
现代文：自幼即聪明异常，能写文章，同郡徐阶特别器重他。
English: Since he was a child, he has been unusually clever and can write articles. He is especially valued by the county's Xu Ju.

古文：长为诸生，与董其昌齐名。
现代文：长大成人为生员，与董其昌齐名。
English: He grew up to be a member of the living, and is on a par with Dong Qichang.

古文：太仓王锡爵招与子衡读书支硎山。
现代文：太仓王锡爵延请继儒去与其子王衡共读书于支硎山。
English: Wang Xizhe of Taicang extended an invitation to his successor, Zhu, to study with his son, Wang Heng, in Shikunshan.

古文：王世贞亦雅重继儒，三吴名下士争欲得为师友。
现代文：王世贞也非常重视继儒，三吴名士都争着与他结为师友。
English: Wang Shizhen also attaches great importance to the succession of Confucius, and the three famous Wu scholars are competing with him to become his teacher and friend.

古文：继儒通明高迈，年甫二十九，取儒衣冠焚弃之。
现代文：继儒刚二十九岁时把儒士衣冠都焚烧掉，隐居于昆山之南，建庙祭祀 二陆 。
English: At the age of twenty-nine, following the example of Confucius and Gang, he burned all the Confucian robes and crowns, lived in seclusion in the south of Kunshan, and built a temple for worship in Erlu.

古文：隐居昆山之阳，构庙祀二陆，草堂数椽，焚香晏坐，意豁如也。时锡山顾宪成讲学东林，招之，谢弗往。
现代文：有草堂数间，在那里焚香安坐，心胸宽广。当时锡山的顾宪成讲学于东林，聘请继儒，继儒谢绝不去。
English: At that time, Gu Xiancheng of Xishan was lecturing in Donglin. He hired a successor to Confucius, but the successor, Confucius Xie, never went.

古文：亲亡，葬神山麓，遂筑室东佘山，杜门著述，有终焉之志。
现代文：父母去世，葬于神山麓，他筑室于东佘山，闭门著述，决心终老于此。
English: His parents died and were buried at the foot of Shenshan Mountain. He built a room in Donglu Mountain, wrote behind closed doors, and was determined to stay here forever.

古文：工诗善文，短翰小词，皆极风致，兼能绘事。
现代文：继儒工诗善文，短文小词都非常风雅。还会绘画。
English: Following Confucian poetry and good literature, short sentences and small words are very elegant. He can also paint.

古文：又博文强识，经史诸子、术伎稗官与二氏家言，靡不较核。
现代文：他博闻强记，凡经、史、诸子百家、技艺、小说与二氏家言，无不研究。
English: He is well-versed in the classics, history, various schools of thought, arts, novels, and family sayings of the second generation, all of which he studies.

古文：或刺取琐言僻事，诠次成书，远近竞相购写。
现代文：或摘取其中语录和不常见的故事，编辑成书，远近争相购买抄写。
English: or extract quotations and unusual stories from them, edit them into books, and compete with each other to buy copies.

古文：征请诗文者无虚日。
现代文：请他写诗做文的人每日不断。
English: People keep asking him to write poetry every day.

古文：性喜奖掖士类，屦常满户外，片言酬应，莫不当意去。
现代文：继儒喜好鼓励士子，来求见他的人常常满座，只听他几句话就满意而去。
English: Confucius' successor liked to encourage scholars, and those who came to see him were often a full house, satisfied with just a few words from him.

古文：暇则与黄冠老衲穷峰泖之胜，吟啸忘返，足迹罕入城市。
现代文：闲暇之时就与老和尚们欣赏山水景色，咏诗唱歌，流连忘返，足迹很少留在城市。
English: In their leisure time, they enjoy the landscape scenery with the old monks, sing poems, linger and forget, and rarely leave footprints in the city.

古文：其昌为筑来仲楼招之至。
现代文：董其昌请他去，并专为他筑 来仲楼 。
English: Dong Qichang invited him to visit and built Zhonglou specifically for him.

古文：黄道周疏称 志尚高雅，博学多通，不如继儒 ，其推重如此。
现代文：黄道周上疏说 ：论志尚高雅、博学多通，谁都不如继儒。 他们对继儒的推崇如此之高。
English: It is said on the Zodiac that no one is better than Confucius, who is so highly respected, if they have high ideals and are well-educated.

古文：侍郎沈演及御史、给事中诸朝贵，先后论荐，谓继儒道高齿茂，宜如聘吴与弼故事。
现代文：侍郎沈演及御史、给事中等朝中大臣，先后举荐，都说继儒道德高尚，年富力强，应像聘用吴与弼那样征聘他。
English: He was recommended successively by his chamberlain, Shen Yuan, and the Minister of History, who was a middle-ranking official in the Middle Kingdom, and they all said that he should be recruited as Wu and Xing had been recruited, because he was a man of high moral standards and was rich and powerful.

古文：屡奉诏征用，皆以疾辞。
现代文：朝廷多次下诏征用，继儒都借口有病而推辞。
English: The imperial court requisitioned the imperial rescript several times, but successive Confucian emperors refused to do so on the pretext that they were ill.

古文：卒年八十二，自为遗令，纤悉毕具。
现代文：终年八十二岁。滑寿，字伯仁，先世本襄城人，迁居仪真，后又迁到浙江余姚。
English: He was eighty-two years old at the end of the year. He was born in Nuxiu and his family name was Baoren. He was from Benxiang City in his previous life. He moved to Yizhen and later to Yuyao, Zhejiang Province.

