古文：二十有一年春，王正月。
现代文：二十一年春季，周历正月，无事。
English: In the spring of the twenty-first year, the first month of the lunar calendar, nothing happened.

古文：夏五月辛酉，郑伯突卒。
现代文：夏季五月辛酉日，郑厉公突去世。
English: On a hot summer day in May, Zheng Ligong suddenly passed away.

古文：秋七月戊戌，夫人姜氏薨。
现代文：秋季七月戊戌，夫人姜氏去世。
English: In the autumn of July, Mrs. Jiang passed away.

古文：冬十有二月，葬郑厉公。
现代文：冬季十二月，安葬郑厉公。
English: Zheng Liguo was buried in winter December.

古文：二十一年春，胥命于弭。
现代文：二十一年春季，郑厉公和虢公在弭地会谈。
English: In the spring of the 21st year, Zheng Liguo and Zou Gong held talks in Handan.

古文：夏，同伐王城。
现代文：夏季，一起攻打王城。
English: In the summer, we attack the royal city together.

古文：郑伯将王，自圉门入，虢叔自北门入，杀王子颓及五大夫。
现代文：郑厉公拥着惠王从圉门入城，虢叔从北门入城。杀了王子穨和五个大夫。
English: Holding Hui Wang in his arms, Zheng Liguang entered the city through the South Gate, and his uncle entered the city through the North Gate. They killed the prince and five doctors.

古文：郑伯享王于阙西辟，乐备。
现代文：郑厉公在宫门口西阙设宴招待惠王，全套乐舞齐备。
English: Zheng Li Gong held a banquet at the west gate of the palace to invite Hui Wang. A full set of music and dance was prepared.

古文：王与之武公之略，自虎牢以东。
现代文：惠王赐给他郑武公时代从虎牢以东的土地。
English: King Hui gave him the land east of the Tiger's Lair in Zheng Wukong's time.

古文：原伯曰： 郑伯效尤，其亦将有咎。 
现代文：原伯说： 郑伯学了做坏事，恐怕也会招致祸患。 
English: Genbo said, "If Zhengbo learns to do bad things, I'm afraid it will also bring disaster.

古文：五月，郑厉公卒。
现代文：五月，郑厉公突去世。
English: In May, Zheng Ligong suddenly passed away.

古文：王巡虢守。虢公为王宫于玤，王与之酒泉。
现代文：周惠王巡视虢公防守的土地，虢公为惠王在玤地建造了行宫，惠王就把酒泉赐给他。
English: King Zhou Hui inspected the land defended by the Duke of Xing. The Duke of Xing built a palace for King Hui in Xing, and King Hui gave him the spring.

古文：郑伯之享王也，王以后之鞶鉴予之。
现代文：以前当郑厉公设宴招待惠王的时候，惠王把王后的鞶鉴赐给了他。
English: In the past, when Zheng Li Gong held a banquet to invite Hui Wang, Hui Wang gave him the Queen's gong.

古文：虢公请器，王予之爵。
现代文：虢公也请求赏赐器物，惠王就把青铜酒杯赐给了他。
English: Prince Yan also asked for a gift of utensils, and King Hui gave him a bronze goblet.

古文：郑伯由是始恶于王。
现代文：由于鞶鉴没有青铜酒杯贵重，郑厉公从此怨恨周惠王。
English: Since the gongjian was not as valuable as the bronze cup, Zheng Liguo resented Zhou Hui Wang from then on.

古文：冬，王归自虢。
现代文：冬季，周惠王从虢国回到成周。
English: In winter, Zhou Hui Wang returned to Cheng Zhou from Shandong Province.

