古文：完颜匡完颜纲完颜定奴
现代文：完颜匡本名撒速，始祖九世孙。
English: Yan Kuang's real name was Sahao, and he was the ninth generation descendant of the founder.

古文：完颜匡，本名撒速，始祖九世孙。
现代文：他曾替豳王允成干事，做他府上教读。
English: He once served as an official for King Gong Yuncheng and taught reading at his palace.

古文：事豳王允成，为其府教读。大定十九年，章宗年十余岁，显宗命詹事乌林答愿择德行淳谨、才学该通者，使教章宗兄弟。阅月，愿启显宗曰： 豳王府教读完颜撒速、徐王府教读仆散讹可二人，可使教皇孙兄弟。 
现代文：大定十九年，章宗十多岁了，显宗命詹事乌林答愿挑选品行忠厚谨慎、才学完备渊博的人，让他教章宗兄弟。过了月余，愿报告显宗说： 豳王府教读完颜撒速、徐王府教读仆散讹可二人，可派去教皇孙兄弟。 
English: In the 19th year of Dadu, when Zhang Zong was more than 10 years old, Zhan Shih Wulin, the preceptor of Emperor Xuanzong, promised to select a person with a loyal and prudent character and a complete and profound learning, and let him teach Zhang Zong's brothers. After more than a month, he would report to Emperor Xuanzong that: "There are only two people who can be sent to the Pope, Sun brothers: Yan Zazhao, who has finished teaching at the King's Palace, and Zan Xuan, who has been teaching at the King's Palace."

古文：显宗曰： 典教幼子，须用淳谨者。 
现代文：显宗说： 主管教幼子，须用忠厚谨慎的人。 
English: Han Zong said: Those who are in charge of teaching young children should be loyal and prudent.

古文：已而召见于承华殿西便殿。显宗问其年，对曰： 臣生之岁，海陵自上京迁中都，岁在壬申。 
现代文：不久，在承华殿西便殿召见撒速，显宗问他的年龄，回答说： 臣生的那年，海陵从上京迁往中都，时间在壬申。 
English: Soon after, Sasako was summoned to the West Ben Hall of the Chenghua Palace, where Emperor Xuanzong asked him how old he was. He replied, "In the year I was born, the imperial mausoleum was moved from Shangjing to Zhongdu, and the time was in Jinshin.

古文：显宗曰： 二十八岁尔，詹事乃云三十岁何也？ 
现代文：显宗说： 二十八岁了，詹事却说三十岁，为什么呢？ 
English: Hentong said: Twenty-eight years old, but Zhan Zhi said he was thirty years old. Why?

古文：匡曰： 臣年止如此，詹事谓臣出入宫禁，故增其岁言之耳。 
现代文：匡说： 臣年龄只是这样大，詹事说臣要出入皇上居住的地方，故意加几岁说说罢了。 
English: Kuang said, "A vassal's age is just this big. If a vassal wants to go in and out of the place where the emperor lives, it's just a matter of deliberately adding a few years.

古文：显宗顾谓近臣曰： 笃实人也。 
现代文：显宗回头对近臣说 ：忠厚老实人啊！ 
English: Hidemune turned to his close vassal and said: "Loyal and honest man!

古文：命择日，使皇孙行师弟子礼。
现代文：下令选日子，让皇孙行弟子对老师礼。
English: Ordered to choose the day, let the emperor's grandson do the disciple to the teacher.

古文：七月丁亥，宣宗、章宗皆就学，显宗曰： 每日先教汉字，至申时汉字课毕，教女直小字，习国朝语。 
现代文：七月丁亥，宣宗、章宗都上了学。显宗说： 每天先教汉字，至申时汉字课上完，教女真小字，学习国朝语。 
English: In July, Dinghai, Xuan Zong and Zhang Zong both went to school. Xian Zong said: I teach Chinese characters every day, and when the Chinese character class is over, I teach the girls real small characters and learn the Korean language.

古文：因赐酒及彩币。
现代文：于是赏赐酒及彩色丝织品。
English: They were rewarded with wine and colorful silk fabric.

古文：顷之，世宗诏匡、讹可俱充太子侍读。
现代文：不久，世宗诏令匡、讹可一起任太子侍读。
English: Soon after, King Sejong issued an edict that both Kuang and Ye could serve as the prince's attendants.

古文：寝殿小底驼满九住问匡曰： 伯夷、叔齐何如人？ 
现代文：寝殿小底驼满九住问匡说： 伯夷、叔齐是怎样的人？ 
English: The bedchamber was small and crammed with nine residents, who asked Kuang: "Pei, what kind of person is Uncle Qi?"

古文：匡曰： 孔子称夷、齐求仁得仁。 
现代文：匡说： 孔子曾赞许夷、齐追求仁得到仁。 
English: Kuang said: Confucius once praised and praised the Yi, and the Qi pursued benevolence and obtained benevolence.

古文：九住曰： 汝辈学古，惟前言是信。
现代文：九住说： 你们学习古书的，只要前人说的话就信。
English: Jiuzhu said, "You study ancient books, so long as you believe what the ancients said.

古文：夷、齐轻去其亲，不食周粟饿死首阳山，仁者固如是乎？ 
现代文：夷、齐随便离开他的亲人，不吃周朝的饭饿死在首阳山，讲仁的人原来就是这样吗？ 
English: Yi and Qi casually left his relatives, did not eat the Zhou Dynasty meal, and starved to death on Shouyang Mountain. Is this how people with benevolence are?

古文：匡曰： 不然，古之贤者行其义也，行其道也。
现代文：匡说 ：不是，古代道德高尚的人维护他们的道义，推行他们的主张。
English: Kuang said, "No, in ancient times, people with high morals upheld their morals and promoted their ideas.

古文：伯夷思成其父之志以去其国，叔齐不苟从父之志亦去其国。
现代文：伯夷想实现父亲的意愿别离他的国家，叔齐重视他叔父的志向告别他的国家。
English: Bo Yi wanted to realize his father's wish to say goodbye to his country, Uncle Qi valued his uncle's aspiration to say goodbye to his country.

古文：武王伐纣，夷、齐叩马而谏。
现代文：武王讨伐纣王，夷、齐牵住马规劝。
English: King Wu fought against King Zou, and the Emperors Yan and Qi held the horses together to persuade him.

古文：纣死，殷为周，夷、齐不食周粟，遂饿而死。
现代文：纣王死，殷变成周，夷、齐不吃周朝的饭终于因饿而死。
English: King Zou died, Yin became Zhou, Yi and Qi refused to eat the food of Zhou Dynasty, and finally died of starvation.

古文：正君臣之分，为天下后世虑至远也，非仁人而能若是乎！ 
现代文：像这样明确君臣的名分，为天下后人考虑得如此周全且又深远，不是道德高尚的人能做到吗？ 
English: Isn't it possible for a person of high moral standards to have such a clear understanding of the roles of ruler and subject, and to have thought about it so thoroughly and far-reaching for future generations?

古文：是时，世宗如春水，显宗从，二人者马上相语遂后。显宗迟九住至，问曰： 何以后也？ 
现代文：此时，世宗到春水，显宗同随，九住与匡在马上相互说着慢慢落到队伍后面了，显宗怪九住迟到，问道 ：为什么掉队？ 
English: At this time, Shizong went to Chunshui, Hanzong accompanied him, and Jiuzhu and Kuang immediately said to each other that they had slowly fallen behind the team. Hanzong suspected Jiuzhu of being late and asked: Why did you fall behind?

古文：九住以对，显宗叹曰： 不以女直文字译经史，何以知此。主上立女直科举，教以经史，乃能得其渊奥如此哉。 
现代文：九住把与匡对话的事报告了他，显宗感叹说： 不用女真文翻译经史，凭什么知道这些，世宗建立女真科举制度，用经史做教材，才能了解到它的如此深奥呵。 
English: Jiuzhu reported the matter of the dialogue with Kuang to him, and Xuan Zong sighed and said, "Without translating the history of scripture with Nianzhen text, how can we know these things? Shizong established the Nianzhen examination system and used the history of scripture as a teaching material in order to understand how profound it is."

古文：称善者良久，谓九住曰： 《论语》 知之为知之，不知为不知，是知也 。
现代文：他连连称赞好，对九住说 ：《论语》上说 ：知之为知之，不知为不知，是知也。 
English: He praised them one after another, saying to Jiuzhu, "The Analects says, 'To know is to know, to not know is to not know, and to know is to know.'

古文：汝不知不达，务辩口以难人。由是观之，人之学、不学，岂不相远哉。 
现代文：你不知道不豁达，强词夺理责难人，从这看来，人们学和不学，难道不相差很大吗？ 
English: Don't you know that it's not open-minded to criticize others with strong words? From this point of view, isn't there a big difference between people who study and those who don't?

古文：显宗尝谓中侍局都监蒲察查刺曰： 入殿小底完颜讹出、侍读完颜撒速，与我同族，汝知之乎？ 
现代文：显宗曾对中侍局都监蒲察查剌说： 入殿小底完颜讹出、侍读完颜撒速，与我同族，你知道此事吗？ 
English: Emperor Xuanzong once said to Pu Zhaojun, the superintendent of the Central Attendance Bureau: Do you know this?

古文：对曰： 不知也。 
现代文：回答说： 不知道。 
English: Meng Wubo replied, "I don't know.

古文：显宗曰： 撒速，始祖九世孙。
现代文：显宗说： 撒速，是始祖九代孙。
English: Hentong said, "Sazao is the ninth generation descendant of the founder.

古文：讹出，保活里之世也。
现代文：讹出，是保活里后代。
English: They are descendants of the Hokuryo tribe.

古文：始祖兄弟皆非常人，汝何由知此。 
现代文：始祖兄弟都不是平凡人，你怎能知道这呢！ 
English: The founding brothers were not ordinary people, how could you know that!

古文：显宗命匡作《睿宗功德歌》，教章宗歌之，其词曰： 我祖睿宗，厚有阴德。国祚有传，储嗣当立。
现代文：显宗命匡做睿宗功德歌，教章宗唱它。歌词说： 我祖睿宗，积有厚德。国福有传，储君当立。
English: The lyrics say: My ancestor Ruizong has accumulated virtues. National blessings have been passed down, and a crown prince has been enthroned.

古文：满朝疑惧，独先启策。
现代文：满朝疑惧，独他决策。
English: Doubts abound in the imperial court, and decisions are made by others alone.

古文：徂征三秦，震惊来附。
现代文：征伐三秦，慑敌归降。
English: Conquering the Sanqin and deterring the enemy from surrendering.

古文：富平百万，望风奔仆。
现代文：富平百万，望风奔仆。
English: Buping million, watch the wind rushing servant.

古文：灵恩光被，时雨春旸。
现代文：神恩光大，时雨春阳。
English: God's grace is so great that when it rains, the sun shines.

古文：神化周浃，春生冬藏。 
现代文：神化遍润，春生冬藏。 
English: The deification of Henrun, the spring birth of Dongzang.

古文：盖取宗翰与睿宗定策立熙宗，及平陕西大破张浚于富平也。
现代文：大概取自宗翰与睿宗商定立熙宗为帝，及平定陕西在富平大败张浚的故事。
English: Probably taken from the story of Zong Han and Ruizong agreeing to make Xi Zong the emperor, and the defeat of Zhang Jun in Fuping.

古文：二十三年三月万春节，显宗命章宗歌此词侑觞，世宗愕然曰： 汝辈何因知此？ 
现代文：二十三年三月万春节，显宗叫章宗唱此歌进酒。世宗惊讶地问 ：你们这些人怎么知道此事？ 
English: On the 23rd of March, the Spring Festival, Emperor Xuanzong asked Emperor Zhangzong to sing this song while drinking wine. Emperor Shizong asked in surprise, "How do you people know about this?"

古文：显宗奏曰： 臣伏读《睿宗皇帝实录》，欲使儿子知创业之艰难，命侍读撒速作歌教之。 
现代文：显宗回报说 ：我读《睿宗皇帝实录》，想让儿子知道创业的艰难，命侍读撒速创作歌词教他们。 
English: Hentong said in return: I read "Emperor Ruizong's Record," I want my son to know the difficulties of starting a business, I must read and write lyrics quickly to teach them.

古文：世宗大喜，顾谓诸王侍臣曰： 朕念睿宗皇帝功德，恐子孙无由知，皇太子能追念作歌以教其子，嘉哉盛事，朕之乐岂有量哉。
现代文：世宗大喜，对着诸王侍臣说： 我怀念睿宗皇帝功德，担心子孙没法知道，皇太子能怀念过去做歌曲教育他的儿子，真是大好事，我高兴透了。
English: Sejong was overjoyed and said to the attendants of the kings: "I miss the merits of Emperor Ruizong, and I am worried that my children and grandchildren will not be able to know. It is a great thing that the crown prince can miss teaching his son songs in the past. I am overjoyed."

古文：卿等亦当诵习，以不忘祖宗之功。 
现代文：你们也应该反复练习背诵，来纪念祖宗的功劳。 
English: You should also practice reciting it over and over again to commemorate the achievements of your ancestors.

古文：命章宗歌数四，酒行极欢，乙夜乃罢。
现代文：叫章宗反复唱了四遍，酒喝得极欢，一夜才结束。
English: He asked Zhang Zong to repeat the song four times. He drank the wine with great pleasure, and the night was over.

古文：二十五年，匡中礼部策论进士。
现代文：二十五年，完颜匡考中礼部策论进士。
English: Twenty-five years later, after passing the Yan Kuang Examination, he became a member of the Ceremonial Policy Department.

古文：是岁，世宗在上京，显宗监国。
现代文：这年，世宗在上京，显宗监国。
English: That year, Sejong went to Kyoto, and Hentong became the supervisor of the country.

古文：三月甲辰，御试，前一日癸卯，读卷官吏部侍郎李晏、棣州防御使把内刺、国史院编修官夹谷衡、国子助教尼庞古鉴进禀，策题问 契敷五教，皋陶明五刑，是以刑措不用，比屋可封。
现代文：三月甲辰，皇宫组织考试，前一日癸卯，读卷官吏部侍郎李晏、棣州防御使把内剌、国史院编修官夹谷衡、国子助教尼庞古鉴到朝禀报，考题问： 契敷五教，皋陶明五刑，是以刑措不用、比屋可封。
English: In the first hour of March, the imperial palace organized an examination. On the day before the exam, Li Yan, the attendant of the cadre department of the cadre department, Zhiya Heng, the editor-in-chief of the National History Academy, and Guo Zi, the assistant teacher of the Nepang ancient book, read the paper. The examination question was: The five teachings of the imperial edict and the five punishments of Tao Ming are not used as punishments, and the house can be sealed.

古文：今欲兴教化，措刑罚，振纪纲，施之万世，何术可致？ 
现代文：今欲兴教化，措刑罚，振纪纲，施之万世，何术可致？ 
English: Now you want to promote edification, impose punishments, shake up the discipline system, and apply it for all eternity. What can you do?

古文：匡已试，明日入见，显宗问对策云何，匡曰： 臣熟观策问敷教、措刑两事，不详 振纪纲 一句，只作两事对，策必不能中。 
现代文：匡考完试，第二天入见，显宗问对策说什么，匡说： 我熟读策题问实施教育及施行刑法两事，不清楚 振纪纲 一句，只对两事做了对策，策一定不会选中。 
English: After passing the entrance examination, the next day, Xianzong asked what the countermeasures were, and Kuang said: I am familiar with the reading of the countermeasures on the implementation of education and the enforcement of criminal law, but I am not clear about the one sentence of the curriculum. I only made countermeasures for two things, and the measures will not be selected.

古文：显宗命匡诵所对策，终篇，曰： 是亦当中。 
现代文：显宗叫匡背所对的策，背完，说 ：这样也应算符合要求。 
English: Hsien Zong asked Kuang Pai to recite the countermeasures, and when he had finished, he said, "This should also be considered to meet the requirements."

古文：匡曰： 编修衡、助教鉴长于选校，必不能中。 
现代文：匡说： 编修衡、助教鉴专长选校，一定不会选中。 
English: Kuang said: Editing, revising and grading, and teaching assistant expertise in the selection of schools will not be selected.

古文：已而匡果下第。显宗惜之，谓侍臣曰： 我只欲问教化、刑罚两事，乃添振纪纲一句，命删去，李晏固执不可，今果误人矣。 
现代文：事后，匡果然落榜，显宗爱惜他，对侍臣说 ：我只想问教化刑罚两事，却添振纪纲一句，命删去，李晏固执不同意，如今果然误人了。 
English: After the event, Kuang was indeed removed from the list, and Emperor Xuanzong felt sorry for him and said to his attendant: "I only wanted to ask about two things, i.e. punishment and education, but he added a sentence of discipline and deleted a sentence of life, and Li Gan stubbornly disagreed, and now he has indeed misled the people."

古文：谓侍正石敦寺家奴、唐括曷答曰： 侍读二十一年府试不中，我本不欲侍读再试，恐伤其志，今乃下第，使人意不乐。 
现代文：对侍正石敦寺家奴、唐括曷答说： 侍读二十一年府试不中，我本不想叫他再试，怕伤其志，今天却落了榜，让人心中不痛快。 
English: To the attendant, the servant of the Shidunji family, Tang Buyeo replied, "I didn't want to ask him to try again, for fear of hurting his aspirations, but today he fell off the list, which made people unhappy.

古文：是岁初取止四十五人，显宗命添五人，仆散讹可中在四十五人，后除书画直长。
现代文：这年初只取四十五人，显宗命添五人，仆散讹可考中第四十五名，以后被授职书画直长。
English: At the beginning of this year, only forty-five people were taken, and five people were added by the order of Emperor Xuanzong, and 45 people were selected for the middle school examination. Later, he was awarded the post of the chief of painting and calligraphy.

古文：匡与讹可俱为侍读，匡被眷遇特异，显宗谓匡曰： 汝无以讹可登第怏怏，但善教金源郡王，何官不可至哉。 
现代文：匡与讹可都担任侍读，匡特别受到宠爱。显宗对匡说： 你不必因为讹可考取了不高兴，只要好好教金源郡王，什么官不能来呢！ 
English: Both Kuang Kuang and Yao Kuang served as attendants, and Kuang Kuang was especially loved. Emperor Xuanzong said to Kuang Kuang: You don't have to be unhappy because Yao Kuang won the exam, just teach King Jinyuan County well, what official can't come!

古文：是岁，显宗薨，章宗判大兴尹，封原王，拜右丞相，立为皇太孙。
现代文：这年，显宗去世，章宗兼任大兴尹，封为原王，授右丞相职，立为皇太孙。
English: In the same year, Emperor Xuanzong died, and Emperor Zhangzong concurrently held the post of Daxingyin, was named the original king, was awarded the post of Minister of the Right, and was established as the emperor's grandson.

古文：匡仍为太孙侍读。
现代文：匡仍做太孙侍读。
English: Kyo still serves as the grandchild's chauffeur.

古文：二十八年，匡试诗赋，漏写诗题下注字，不取，特赐及第，除中都路教授，侍读如故。 
现代文：二十八年，匡参加诗赋考试，漏写诗题下注字，没有考中，特别被赏赐为考取，任命担任中都路教授，仍担任侍读。
English: In the 28th year, Kuang participated in the poetry exam, missed the writing under the poem question, did not take the middle school exam, was specially rewarded for the exam, appointed as a professor of Zhongdu Road, and still served as a reader.

古文：章宗即位，除近侍局直长，历本局副使、局使，提点太医院，迁翰林直学士。
现代文：章宗即位后，授职近侍局直长，历任本局副使、局使、提点太医院，升为翰林直学士。
English: After Emperor Zhang Zong ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the post of the immediate secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, and successively served as the deputy envoy of this agency, the envoy of the agency, and the Taiyuan Hospital, and was promoted to the Hanlin immediate bachelor.

古文：使宋，上令权更名弼，以避宋祖讳，事载《本纪》。
现代文：出使宋国，皇上命令暂改名为弼，以避宋祖名讳，此事载《本纪》。
English: Sent by the Song Dynasty, the emperor ordered to temporarily change the name to, in order to avoid the name of the Song ancestor, this matter is recorded in the "Chronicle."

古文：迁秘书监，仍兼太医院、近侍局事，再兼大理少卿。
现代文：匡升任秘书监，仍兼太医院、近侍局事，再兼大理少卿。
English: Kuang was promoted to superintendent of secretaries, and was also in charge of the Tai Hospital and the Privy Council, as well as the Junior Secretary of the Grand Council of State.

古文：迁签书枢密院事，兼职如故。
现代文：升任签书枢密院事，兼职如前。
English: Promoted to the post of Privy Counsellor, part-time as before.

古文：承安元年，行院于抚州。
现代文：承安元年，行院在抚州。
English: In the first year of Cheng'an, the hospital was in Fuzhou.

古文：河北西路转运使温昉行六部事，主军中馈饷，屈意事匡，以马币为献，及私以官钱佐匡宴会费，监察御史姬端修劾之，上方委匡以边事，遂寝其奏。
现代文：河北西路转运使温窻代理六部事，负责军中的伙食管理和军饷发放，屈意待匡，把马和钱送给匡，还私下用公款补助匡的宴会费。监察御史姬端修告发这件事，而皇上正要把边事委托给匡，就把他的奏折扣住不发。
English: Hebei West Road Transportation Co., Ltd. appointed Wen Kun as the agent of six departments, responsible for the management of food in the army and the distribution of military pay, bowed down to Kuang Quan, gave the horse and money to Kuang Quan, and also privately subsidized Kuang Quan's banquet expenses with public funds. The inspector, Gu Ji Duan Xiu, reported this matter, and the emperor was about to entrust the border affairs to Kuang Quan, but he could not keep his discount.

古文：三年，入奏边事，居五日，还军。
现代文：三年，匡入奏边事，住五天，回到军队。
English: Three years later, he was drafted into the military, lived there for five days, and returned to the army.

古文：寻入守尚书左丞，兼修国史，进《世宗实录》。
现代文：不久回朝等到了尚书左丞的空缺，兼撰写国史，进献《世宗实录》。
English: Soon after returning to Japan, he waited for a vacancy in the position of Shoshu-zojo, and also wrote a national history, presenting "Sejong Shitsuroku."

古文：章宗立提刑司，专纠察黜陟，当时号为外台，匡与司空襄，参政揆奏： 息民不如省官，圣朝旧无提刑司，皇统、大定间每数岁一遣使廉察，郡县称治。
现代文：章宗设置提刑司，专管督察官员的贬退和提拔，当时号为外台。匡与司空襄、参政揆上奏说： 息民不如减官，我朝过去没有提刑司，皇统、大定期间每几年派遣官员下去查访考察，郡县治理得好。
English: Zhang Zong set up the Criminal Investigation Division, which was in charge of the demotion and promotion of inspector officials. At that time, it was called the outside stage. Kuang and Sikyo, Sanzheng and Shangso said: It is better to reduce the number of officials. I did not raise the Criminal Investigation Division in the past. During the period of imperial unification and Datong, officials were sent to visit and inspect counties every few years. The counties were well managed.

古文：自立此官，冀达下情，今乃是非混淆，徒烦圣听。
现代文：自立此官，希望能下情上达，如今却是非混淆，白麻烦您处理。
English: This officer, hoping to get to the bottom of the situation, is now confused, why bother you to deal with.

古文：自古无提点刑狱专荐举之权者，若陛下不欲遽更，不宜使兼采访廉能之任。
现代文：从古无提点刑狱专掌举荐之权的，如皇上不想匆忙变更，不应使其兼有采访不贪和有才人的职责。
English: If the emperor does not want to hastily change the right to recommend from the ancient no-naming-points-to-prisoners-expert, he should not make it both the duty of interviewing the greedy and the talented.

古文：岁遣监察体究，仍不时选使廉访。 
现代文：每年派人监察亲自检查，仍不定期派人访廉。 
English: Every year, inspectors are sent to inspect in person, and people are still sent to visit corrupt officials from time to time.

古文：上从其议，于是监察体访之使出矣。
现代文：章宗听从了他们的意见，于是有了监察体访官。
English: Zhang Zong listened to their opinions, so he had the inspector visit him.

古文：初，匡行院于抚州，障葛将攻边境，会西南路通事黄掴按出使乌都碗部知其谋，奔告行院为之备，迎击障葛，败其兵。按出与八品职，迁四官。
现代文：当初，匡在抚州执掌院务，障葛将攻边境，正好西南路通事黄掴按出让乌都鰕部知道了敌人的阴谋，迅速报告行院做好准备，迎击障葛，将其打败，按出被授予八品官，升四级。
English: At the beginning, Kuang was in charge of the affairs of the hospital in Fuzhou, and the bogies were about to attack the border. It was just then that Huang Po, the secretary of the Southwest Road, announced that he had made the enemy's plot known to the Udu Department, and quickly reported that the hospital was ready to meet the bogies and defeat them. He was awarded eight grades and promoted to the fourth grade.

古文：匡迁三官。
现代文：匡升三级。
English: He was promoted to the third grade.

古文：匡奏乞以所迁三官让其兄奉御赛一，上嘉其义，许之。
现代文：匡上书请求将所升三级让给其兄奉御赛一。皇帝赞赏他的行为，同意他的请求。
English: Kuang submitted a letter requesting that the three-level promotion be given to his brother, Bongosai I. The emperor appreciated his actions and agreed to his request.

古文：改枢密副使，授世袭谋克。
现代文：匡改任枢密副使，授予世袭谋克之爵位。
English: Kuang was appointed Privy Vice-Minister and awarded the hereditary title of Grand Marshal.

古文：宋主相韩侂胄。
现代文：宋主让韩胄任丞相。
English: Lord Song appointed Han Xuan as chancellor.

古文：侂胄尝再为国使，颇知朝廷虚实。
现代文：胄曾多次为国使，颇知我朝虚实。
English: He had served as a state envoy many times, so he was well aware of the truth and falsehood of our government.

古文：及为相，与苏师旦倡议复仇，身执其咎，缮器械，增屯戍，初未敢公言征伐，乃使边将小小寇钞以尝试朝廷。
现代文：等到为丞相，与苏师旦一起倡议报仇，并亲身执行其罪恶计划，修补军械，增加兵力，始不敢公开声称征伐，只是用边疆小小骚扰以试探朝廷。
English: He waited until he became chancellor, advocated revenge together with Su Shidan, and personally carried out his evil plan, repaired the ordnance, and increased the number of troops. At first, he did not dare to publicly claim the conquest, but only used the small harassment of the frontier to test the imperial court.

古文：泰和五年正月，入确山界夺民马。
现代文：泰和五年正月，侵入确山地区夺民马。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Taihe era, they invaded the Jishan area to capture Minma.

古文：三月，焚平氏镇，剽民财物，掠邓州白亭巡检家赀，持其印去。
现代文：三月，烧平氏镇，抢劫百姓财物，夺取邓州白亭巡检家的钱财，拿走官印逃跑。
English: In March, he burned down Ping's Town, robbed people of their property, seized the money and property of Dengzhou Baiting's inspector, took away the official seal and fled.

古文：遂平县获宋人王俊，唐州获宋谍者李忤，俊襄阳军卒，忤建康人。
现代文：遂平县抓获宋人王俊，唐州俘获宋朝间谍李忤。俊是襄阳的士兵，忤是建康人。
English: Suiping County captured the Song man Wang Jun, and Tangzhou captured the Song Dynasty spy Li Jun. Jun was a soldier from Xiangyang, and Jun was a Jiankang man.

古文：俊言宋人於江州、鄂、岳屯大兵，贮甲仗，修战舰，期以五月入寇。
现代文：俊说宋人在江州、鄂、岳等地聚集重兵，储备甲仗，整修战舰，约定在五月进攻。
English: Jun said that the Song people gathered heavy troops in Jiangzhou, Hubei, Yue and other places, stockpiled armor, refurbished warships, and agreed to attack in May.

古文：忤言侂胄谓大国西北用兵连年，公私困竭，可以得志，命修建康宫，劝宋主都建康节制诸道。
现代文：忤说胄称金朝在西北连年用兵，国困民竭，可以得遂北伐意愿，并让修建建康宫，劝宋主建都建康节制各道。
English: He said that the Kim dynasty had been using soldiers in the northwest for many years, the country was in trouble and the people were exhausted, and he could achieve the intention of the Northern Expedition, and had the Kang Palace built, and persuaded the Song master to build the Kang Palace to control all roads.

古文：河南统军司奏请益兵为之备。
现代文：河南统军司奏请增兵戒备。
English: Henan United Army Division asked for more soldiers to be on alert.

古文：诏平章政事仆散揆为河南宣抚使，籍诸道兵，括战马，临洮、德顺、秦、巩各置弓手四千人。
现代文：诏令平章政事仆散揆为河南宣抚使，登记各道兵丁，搜求战马，在临洮、德顺、秦、巩等地各安置弓手四千人。
English: Pingzhang's political and administrative servant, Sanzhong, was appointed as Henan's envoy, registered soldiers from each province, searched for horses, and placed 4,000 archers in Linyi, Deshun, Qin, Gong and other places.

古文：诏揆遗书宋人曰： 奈何兴兵？ 
现代文：诏令揆送公文给宋人问 ：为什么要动兵？ 
English: The imperial edict sent an official document to the Song people asking: Why mobilize?

古文：宋人辞曰： 盗贼也。
现代文：宋人托辞说 ：因为有盗匪。
English: Song Ren said, "Because there are robbers."

古文：边臣不谨，今黜之矣。 
现代文：边臣没处理好，今已贬退。 
English: The vassal did not handle it well and has now been demoted.

古文：宋人将启边衅，太常卿赵之杰、知大兴府承晖、中丞孟铸皆曰： 江南败衄之余，自救不暇，恐不敢败盟。 
现代文：宋人开始有犯边境的征兆，太常卿赵之杰、知大兴府承晖、中丞孟铸都说： 江南兵败以后，自救不暇，恐怕不会毁约。 
English: The Song people began to show signs of transgressing the border. Zhao Zhijie, the First Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, Xingfu Chengyi, the Chief of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army of China, and Meng Shidu, the Vice-President of the People's Republic of China, said: After the defeat of the Southern Jiangsu, we have no time to save ourselves, and I am afraid we will not break the treaty.

古文：匡曰： 彼置忠义保捷军，取先世开宝、天禧纪元，岂忘中国者哉。 
现代文：匡说 ：对方设置忠义保捷军，拿先世开宝、天禧做年号，怎么会忘统一中国呢？ 
English: Kuang said: "The other side has set up a loyal Porsche army, and has taken the previous Kaibao and Tianxi anniversaries as the year number. How can they forget to unify China?"

古文：大理卿畏也曰： 宋兵攻围城邑，动辄数千，不得为小寇。 
现代文：大理卿畏也说： 宋兵攻围城邑，动辄数千人，不能视为小骚扰。 
English: Dali Qingyi also said: Song soldiers besieging towns, thousands of people at a time, cannot be regarded as minor harassment.

古文：上问参政思忠，思忠极言宋人败盟有状、与匡、畏也合，上以为然。
现代文：皇上问参政思忠，思忠极力诉说宋人毁约的罪状，与匡、畏力的意见一样，皇上认为是这样。
English: The emperor asked Sanzheng Sizhong. Sizhong tried his best to accuse the Song people of breaking the treaty. The emperor agreed with Kuang and Dai Li's opinion.

古文：及河南统军使纥石烈子仁使宋还，奏宋主修敬有加，无他志。
现代文：等到河南统军使纥石烈子仁出使宋国回来，报告宋主以礼相待，并无异志。
English: When the United Front of Henan sent the envoy of Zou Shi Ren Zi Ren back to Song, he reported that the Lord of Song treated him with courtesy, and there was no difference.

古文：上问匡曰： 于卿何如？ 
现代文：皇上询问匡 ：你认为怎么样？ 
English: The Emperor asked Kuang: What do you think?

古文：匡曰： 子仁言是。 
现代文：匡曰 ：子仁说得对。 
English: Kuwana said, "Tsunehito is right.

古文：上愕然曰： 卿前议云何，今乃中变邪？ 
现代文：皇上吃惊地说 ：你先前怎么主张的，如今中途变卦了！ 
English: The Emperor said in surprise, "What you previously advocated has now changed mid-stream!"

古文：匡徐对曰： 子仁守疆圉，不妄生事，职也。
现代文：匡缓答道： 子仁防守边界，不乱生事，是他的职责。
English: Kuang Bao replied: It is Ziren's duty to defend the border and not cause trouble.

古文：《书》曰 有备无患 ，在陛下宸断耳。 
现代文：《书》说 有备无患 ，在于陛下的圣断。 
English: "The Book" says that it is up to Your Majesty to be prepared.

古文：于是罢河南宣抚司，仆散揆还朝。
现代文：于是，撤销河南宣抚司，仆散揆还朝。
English: As a result, the Henan Proclamation Office was revoked, and the minions scattered and returned to the imperial court.

古文：六年二月，宋人陷散关，取泗州、虹县、灵璧。
现代文：六年二月，宋人攻陷散关，夺取泗州、虹县、灵壁。
English: In February of the sixth year of the Song Dynasty, the Song people invaded Sankuan and captured Luzhou, Hongxian and Lingbi.

古文：四月，复诏仆散揆行省事于汴，制诸军。
现代文：四月再次诏仆散揆在汴京行省事，节制各军。
English: In April, Zhaodu Sanzhong once again conducted provincial affairs in Beijing and restrained the armies.

古文：顷之，以匡为右副元帅。
现代文：不久，用匡为右副元帅。
English: Soon, Ying Kuang was promoted to vice marshal of the right.

古文：揆请匡先取光州，还军悬瓠，与大军合势南下。
现代文：揆请匡先攻取光州，还军悬瓠，与大军合力南下。
English: He asked Kuang Kuang to capture Gwangju first, and then return to Korea to join forces with the main army to go south.

古文：匡奏： 仆散揆大军渡淮，宋人聚兵襄、沔以窥唐、邓，汴京留兵颇少，有掣肘之患，请出唐、邓。 
现代文：匡上奏说： 仆散揆大军渡淮，宋人聚兵襄、沔观察唐、邓动静，汴京守兵很少，有被牵制之患，请发唐、邓兵。 
English: Kuang Shangsoo said: The Song people gathered soldiers to observe the movements of Tang and Deng, while Kuang Shangsoo's army was dispersed to the Huai River. There were very few soldiers guarding Beijing, and there was a risk of being held back. Please send Tang and Deng soldiers.

古文：从之。遣前锋都统乌古论庆寿以骑八千攻枣阳，遣左翼提控完颜江山以骑五千取光化，右翼都统乌古孙兀屯取神马坡，皆克之。
现代文：皇帝同意，派前锋都统乌古论庆寿带八千骑兵攻枣阳，派左翼提控完颜江山以五千骑兵取光化，右翼都统乌古孙兀屯取神马坡，都攻克了。
English: The emperor agreed, and sent the vanguard to attack Zaoyang with eight thousand cavalry, the left wing to take control of Yanjiangshan and take Guanghua with five thousand cavalry, and the right wing to attack Shenmabo with eight thousand cavalry.

古文：匡军次白虎粒，都统完颜按带取随州，乌古论庆寿扼赤岸，断襄、汉路。
现代文：匡军驻扎白虎粒，都统完颜按带取随州，乌古论庆寿扼守赤岸，截断襄汉道路。
English: The Kuang army stationed the White Tiger Grain, took Suizhou after the unification of the country, guarded the Red Bank during the celebration of the ancient festival, and cut off the Xianghan Road.

古文：宋随州将雷大尉遁去，遂克随州。
现代文：宋随州守将雷太尉逃跑，就攻克了随州。
English: When Song Zuizhou's garrison commander, Lieutenant Lei, fled, he conquered Suizhou.

古文：于是宋邓城、樊城戍兵皆溃。
现代文：于是，宋邓城、樊城守兵都溃败。
English: As a result, the Song, Dengcheng and Lucheng defenders were all defeated.

古文：赐诏奖谕，戒诸军毋虏掠、焚坏城邑。
现代文：皇帝下诏勉励，告诫各军不得掳掠焚毁城邑。
English: The emperor issued an edict of encouragement, admonishing the armies not to plunder and burn the cities.

古文：匡进兵围德安，分遣诸将徇下安陆、应城、云梦、汉川、荆山等县，副统蒲察攻宜城县取之。
现代文：匡进军围困德安，分派各将巡行占领安陆、应城、云梦、汉川、荆山等县，副统蒲察攻宜城县取了它。
English: Kuang marched into and besieged De'an, assigning each general to patrol and occupy Anlu, Yingcheng, Yunmeng, Hanchuan, Jingshan and other counties, while the vice-commander Putsa took Yicheng County.

古文：十二月，败宋兵二万人于信阳之东，诏曰： 卿总师出疆屡捷，殄寇抚降，日辟土宇。
现代文：十二月击败宋军二万人于信阳东，下诏说： 你统帅军队出兵境外屡打胜仗，消灭了敌兵，安抚了降者，日日开辟疆土。
English: In December, he defeated the Song army of 20,000 people in the east of Xinyang, and issued the following edict: You have commanded the army to send troops abroad to repeatedly win wars, eliminate enemy soldiers, pacify those who have surrendered, and open up the territory day by day.

古文：彼恃汉、江以为险阻，箠马而渡，如涉坦途，荆、楚削平，不为难事，虽天佑顺，亦卿筹画之效也。
现代文：对方凭借汉、江作为险阻，而你鞭马而渡，如履平地，平定荆楚，已不是难事，虽是上天保佑如此顺利，也有你谋划的功劳。
English: The other side relies on the Han Dynasty and the Yangtze River as dangerous obstacles, while you are riding a horse to get across. If you walk on level ground, it is not difficult to pacify the Yangtze River. Although it is blessed by heaven to be so smooth, you also have the merit of planning.

古文：益宏远图，以副朕意。 
现代文：更要考虑远大些，来合我的心意。 
English: I need to be more ambitious to meet my heart's desire.

古文：匡进所获女口百人。
现代文：匡进献俘获女子百人。
English: Kuang Jin dedicated to capture one hundred women.

古文：诏匡权尚书右丞，行省事，右副元帅如故。
现代文：诏令匡暂代尚书右丞，行省事，仍任右副元帅。
English: Zhao Lingyuan temporarily replaced Shang Shuxu Yu Rong, conducted the affairs of the province, and still served as the right deputy marshal.

古文：吴曦以蜀、汉内附，诏匡先取襄阳以屏蔽蜀、汉。
现代文：吴曦带领蜀汉归附，诏令匡先攻取襄阳做蜀汉屏障。
English: Wu Xi led Shu Han to annexation, and ordered Kuang Kuang to capture Yangyang as a barrier to Shu Han.

古文：完颜福海破宋援襄阳兵于白石峪，遂取谷城县。
现代文：完颜福海在白石石谷打败宋援助襄阳的兵马，接着攻取谷城县。
English: After Yan Fu Hai defeated the soldiers and horses of Song Aid Xiangyang in Shiroishi Shidani, he went on to conquer Gucheng County.

古文：仆散揆得疾，遂班师，至蔡，疾革，诏右丞相宗浩代之。
现代文：仆散揆得病，军队返回，到蔡，病重，诏令右丞相宗浩代之。
English: When his servant Sanzang fell ill and the army returned to Cai, he was gravely ill and was ordered by the emperor to be replaced by the chancellor of the right, Zong Hao.

古文：七年二月，揆薨。
现代文：七年二月，揆病逝。
English: In February of the seventh year, Zou died of illness.

古文：匡久围襄阳，士卒疲疫，会宗浩至汴，匡乃放军朝京师，转左副元帅，赐宴于天香殿，还军许州。
现代文：匡久围襄阳，士卒疲惫，瘟疫流行，恰巧宗浩到汴，匡这才解脱军务到京师朝见，转任左副元帅，皇帝在天香殿赐宴，回军许州。
English: Kuang Jiu encircled Xiangyang for a long time, the soldiers were exhausted, the plague was prevalent, and it just so happened that Zonghao came to Shandong. Kuang was relieved of his military duties and went to Beijing to see the emperor, and was transferred to the post of left deputy marshal. The emperor gave a banquet at Tianxiang Palace and returned to the army in Xu Province.

古文：九月，宗浩薨，匡为平章政事，兼左副元帅，封定国公，代宗浩总诸军，行省于汴京。
现代文：九月，宗浩去世，匡任平章政事，兼左副元帅，封定国公，代宗浩统帅诸军，在汴京行省。
English: In September, Zonghao died, and Kuang was appointed as the political affairs of Pingzhang, concurrently the left vice-marshal, the crown prince, and the commander-in-chief of the army on behalf of Zonghao, and went to the province in Beijing.

古文：初，仆散揆初至汴，既定河南诸盗，乃购得韩侂胄族人元靓，使行间于宋。
现代文：当初，仆散揆刚至汴，平定河南各匪，这才重金收买了韩胄族人元靓，让他到宋朝行反间计。
English: At the beginning, his servant, Sanzang, had just arrived in Shandong to subdue the bandits in Henan. It was only then that he paid a large sum of money to bribe the Han and Qiang people, the Yuan and Qiang, to let him go to the Song Dynasty for a counter-attack.

古文：元靓渡淮，宋督视江、淮兵马事丘灊奏之宋主。
现代文：元靓渡过淮河，宋督视江、淮兵马事岳宗山报告了宋主。
English: When Yuan Shao crossed the Huai River, Song governor Qijiang and Huai general Yue Zongshan reported to Song.

古文：是时，宋主、侂胄见兵屡败以为忧，欲乞盟无以为请，得密奏，即命遣人护元靓北归，因请议和。
现代文：这时，宋主、胄见兵屡败而为之忧虑，想求和又没有借口，得到宗山的奏章，即命派人护元靓北归，请求议和。
English: At this time, Lord Song and Emperor Song were worried about the repeated defeats of the soldiers, and there was no excuse for seeking peace. They received a petition from Zongshan, that is, they were ordered to send a person to protect Yuan and return to the north to request peace.

古文：密使其属刘佑送元靓申和议于揆，揆曰： 称臣割地，献首祸之臣，然后可。 
现代文：宗山派部下刘送元靓向揆陈述议和的想法，揆说： 称臣割地，献出首先挑起事端之臣，然后才能议和。 
English: Zongshan sent his subordinate Liu Zongyuan to present his idea of negotiating peace to Zong. Zongyuan said, "Tell the vassal to divide the land, and offer the vassal who first provoked the incident, and then negotiate peace."

古文：宋主因密谕丘灊，使归罪边将以请焉。
现代文：宋主因而密令岳宗山，叫他归罪边将以请求和议。
English: As a result, Emperor Song secretly ordered Yue Zongshan to take the blame, while requesting and negotiating.

古文：及宗浩代揆，方信孺至，宗浩以方信孺轻佻不可信，移书宋人，果欲请和当遣朱致和、吴琯、李大性、李璧来。
现代文：等到宗浩代揆，方信孺到，宗浩认为方信孺轻佻不可信，传书宋人，果真想请和，当派朱致知、吴、李大性、李璧来。
English: When Fang Xinyu arrived in Zonghao's time, Zonghao thought that Fang Xinyu was too flippant and could not be trusted. He sent Zhu Zhizhi, Wu, Li Daxi, and Li Bi to invite Song people who really wanted to make peace.

古文：侂胄得报大喜过望，乃召张岩于建康，罢为福建观察使，归罪苏师旦，贬之岭南。
现代文：胄得报大喜过望，于是在建康召见张岩，降为福建观察使，归罪苏师旦，贬到岭南。
English: He was overjoyed at the news, so he summoned Zhang Yan from Jiankang, reduced him to Fujian Observer, blamed Su Shidan, and demoted him to Lingnan.

古文：是时，李璧已为参政，不可遣。
现代文：这时李璧已为参政，不可派。
English: At this time, Li Bi was already in politics and could not be sent.

古文：朱致知、吴琯已死，李大性知福州，道远不能遽至。
现代文：朱致知、吴已死，李大性知福州，道远不能立即赶来。
English: Zhu Zhizhi, Wu is dead, Li Daxing knows Fuzhou, and it is too far to come immediately.

古文：乃遣左司郎中王柟来，至濠州，匡使人责以称臣等数事，柟以宋主、侂胄情实为请，依靖康二年正月请和故事，世为伯侄国，增岁币为三十万两、匹、犒军钱三百万贯，苏师旦等俟和议定当函首以献。
现代文：就派左司郎中王籹来，到濠州，匡派人询问称臣等几件事落实情况。籹以宋主、胄真心求和相告并因此请求，按靖康二年正月请和的例子，世为伯侄国，增年贡银、绢三十万两、匹，犒军钱三百万贯，等到议和定下来后即函送苏师旦等的首级。
English: He sent his left-hand man, the middle-ranked Wang Xing, to Zhangzhou to inquire about the status of the implementation of several matters such as vassals. With Song Lord and Zou Zhen sincerely asking for peace and therefore requesting, according to the example of inviting peace in the first month of the second year of Jingkang, the world was Bo's nephew country, the annual tribute of silver was increased by 300,000 taels, and Zou's military money was increased by 3 million taels. When the peace was settled, he immediately sent Su Shidan and other first-class officials.

古文：柟至汴，以侂胄书上元帅府，匡复诘之，柟恳请曰： 此事实出朝旨，非行人所专。 
现代文：籹到汴，把胄的书信递交元帅府，匡再次责问之，籹恳请说 ：此事实在出自朝廷的旨意，不是我能做主的。 
English: When Kuang arrived, he handed Kuang's letter to the marshal's office. Kuang again reprimanded him, imploring him to say, "This fact comes from the will of the imperial court. It is not up to me.

古文：匡察其不妄，乃具奏。
现代文：匡看他不是乱说，于是全奏明了皇上。
English: Kuang saw that he was not speaking out of turn, so he reported everything to the emperor.

古文：章宗诏匡移书宋人，当函侂胄首赎淮南地，改犒军钱为银三百万两。
现代文：章宗诏令匡传书宋人，应当函送胄头赎淮南地，改犒军钱为银三百万两。
English: Emperor Zhang Zong decreed that the Song people should send a letter to Shantou to redeem Huainan, and change the military money to silver three million taels.

古文：于是，宋吏部侍郎史弥远定计杀韩柟胄，弥远知国政，和好自此成矣。
现代文：于是宋吏部侍郎史弥远定计杀韩胄，弥远掌管国政，和好从此成了。
English: As a result, Shi Yanyuan, an attendant of the Song cadre, plotted to kill Han Zheng, and Yanyuan took charge of state affairs. From then on, there was peace.

古文：于是，廷议诸军已取关隘不可与。
现代文：在这时，朝廷商议各军已攻取的关隘不可归还宋朝。
English: At this time, the imperial court deliberated on the fact that the Song Dynasty could not return Guanxi, which had been captured by various armies.

古文：王柟以宋参政钱象祖书来，略曰：
现代文：王籹带宋参政钱象祖书信来。大意说：
English: Wang Yao brought a letter from Song Sanzheng Qian Xiang Zu. It said something like:

古文：窃惟昔者修好之初，蒙大金先皇帝许以画淮为界。
现代文： 我私下想到从前和好时，得到大金先皇帝准许以淮河为界。
English: Privately, I thought of the past and the good times, when I was allowed by the Emperor Daqinsian to use the Huaihe River as a boundary.

古文：今大国遵先皇帝圣意，自盱眙至唐、邓画界仍旧，是先皇帝惠之于始，今皇帝全之于后也。
现代文：今贵国遵循先皇帝圣意，依旧是从盱眙至唐、邓划界，这是已故皇帝先施以恩惠，当今皇帝予以成全的结果。
English: Today, your country is still following the wishes of the former emperor to delimit the border from Shandong to Tang and Deng. This is the result of the late emperor's benevolence and the present emperor's accomplishment.

古文：然东南立国，吴、蜀相依，今川、陕关隘，大国若有之，则是撤蜀之门户，不能保蜀，何以固吴？
现代文：然我们在东南立国，吴蜀相依，如今川陕关隘贵国如果占有它，则是撤蜀之门户，不能保蜀，用什么来巩固吴？
English: However, when we established our country in Southeast China, Wushu was dependent on it. Today, if your country occupies Shenshan Pass, it will be the gateway to withdraw Shu. If you can't keep Shu, what will you use to consolidate Wushu?

古文：已增岁币至三十万，通谢为三百万贯，以连岁师旅之余，重以丧祸，岂易办集。
现代文：现已增加岁币到三十万，表达歉意的钱三百万贯，在连年战争之后，严重的人亡天灾，这钱难道容易置办聚集？
English: Now the annual allowance has been increased to 300,000 yuan, and the apology money has increased to 3 million yuan. After years of war and serious natural disasters, is it easy to collect this money?

古文：但边隙既开和议，区区悔艾之实，不得不黾勉遵承。
现代文：但边界裂痕已开始和议，小小的表示悔过的钱，不得不努力遵旨承办。
English: However, the border rift has begun to be reconciled, a small amount of money to express remorse, and we had to work hard to comply with the order.

古文：又蒙圣画改输银三百万两，在本朝宜不敢固违，然倾国资财，竭民膏血，恐非大金皇帝弃过图新，兼爱南北之意也。
现代文：更承蒙皇上改划为输银三百万两，在我朝应不敢因此违反，然而竭尽我国钱财，取完人民血汗，恐怕不是大金皇帝抛弃过去成见策划未来、互爱南北的心意吧！
English: Furthermore, thanks to the emperor's approval, it was converted into three million taels of silver, which our dynasty did not dare to violate. However, after exhausting our country's money and resources and taking the people's blood and sweat, I am afraid that it was not the emperor Daikin's intention to abandon past prejudices, plan the future, and love the South and the North!

古文：主上仁慈宽厚，谨守信誓，岂有意于用兵。
现代文： 主上仁慈宽厚，谨守信誓，怎么会有用兵的意图？
English: How can the Lord, who is merciful and gracious, and keeps his oath, be a man of war?

古文：止缘侂胄启衅生事，迷国罔上，以至地斯。
现代文：仅因为胄引发的罪过造成事端，迷国欺君，以至于如此。
English: Just because of the crime caused by the shackles, it caused an accident, deceived the country and the king, and so on.

古文：是以奋发英断，大正国典，朋附之辈，诛斥靡贷。
现代文：因此皇帝奋发英断，大力纠正国法，对结党之徒处死、贬斥而不宽恕。
English: Therefore, the emperor made strenuous efforts to correct the national law, and executed and disparaged those who formed a party, but did not pardon them.

古文：今大国欲使斩送侂胄，是未知其已死也。
现代文：今贵国欲使斩送胄是不知他已死了。
English: Now your country wants to send him to the gallows without knowing that he is dead.

古文：侂胄实本庸愚，怙权轻信，有误国事，而致侂胄误国者，苏师旦也。
现代文：胄确实本来就平庸愚蠢，依仗权势偏听偏信使国家受害，而导致胄误国的人是苏师旦。
English: It is true that Su Shidan was originally mediocre and stupid, relying on power to listen to the messenger to make the country suffer, and the person who led the country astray was Su Shidan.

古文：师旦既贬，侂胄尚力庇之，嘱方信孺妄言已死，近推究其事，师旦已行斩首。
现代文：师旦已被贬斥，胄还尽力庇护他，嘱托方信孺谎报他已死，最近追究这事，师旦已执行斩首。
English: Shi Dan has been denounced, Zou also tried his best to shelter him, entrusting the letter to Zou falsely reported that he was dead, recently investigated this matter, Shi Dan has been executed beheading.

古文：傥大国终惠川、陕关隘，所画银两悉力祗备，师旦首函亦当传送，以谢大国。
现代文：假如贵国最终给予川陕关隘的优惠，所改划的银两当尽力齐备，师旦首级也会传送来，以感谢贵国。
English: If your country finally gives the preferential treatment to Sichuan, Shaanxi and Guanzhou, the converted silver and gold should be ready as much as possible, and the head of the division will also send it to thank your country.

古文：本朝与大国通好以来，譬如一家叔侄，本自协和，不幸奴婢交斗其间，遂成嫌间。
现代文： 本朝与贵国通好以来，譬如一家叔侄，本来应当融洽，不幸下面人在这之间争斗，于是造成隔阂。
English: Since this government has been friendly with your country, for example, an uncle and a nephew should have been harmonious, but unfortunately the following people fought between them, thus causing estrangement.

古文：一旦犹子翻然改悟，斥逐奴隶，引咎谢过，则前日之嫌便可销释，奚必较锱铢毫末，反伤骨肉之恩乎？
现代文：一日好比侄子幡然悔悟，斥退奴仆，引咎谢罪，那么先前的怨仇便可消失，如果斤斤计较，反伤骨肉之情。
English: One day, it is as if the nephew suddenly repents, repels the slave, and blames and thanks for the sin, then the previous grudge can disappear, and if there is a dispute, it will hurt the flesh and blood.

古文：惟吴、蜀相为首尾，关隘系蜀安危，望敢备奏，始终主盟，使南北遂息肩之期，四方无兵革之患，不胜通国至愿。
现代文：只吴蜀相互为头尾，关隘关系蜀的安危，所以冒昧地详加说明，始终坚持盟约，使南北有卸除重负之期，四方没有战乱的祸患，是我们整个国家最大愿望。 
English: Wu and Shu are only the beginning and the end of each other, and the safety of Shu is at stake in the relationship between the narrow and the narrow. Therefore, it is the greatest wish of our entire country to venture to explain in detail and always adhere to the covenant, so that the north and the south have a period of time to remove the heavy burden, and the four sides do not have the scourge of war.

古文：是时，陕西宣抚司请增新得关隘戍兵万人。
现代文：这时，陕西宣抚司请求增派新得关隘守兵万人。
English: At this time, the Shaanxi Propaganda and Guidance Bureau requested that an additional 10,000 soldiers be sent to guard Shindiguan Pass.

古文：王柟状禀，如蒙归川、陕关隘，韩侂胄首必当函送，遵上国之命。
现代文：王籹陈述说：如蒙归还川陕关隘，韩胄头必当函送，遵从上国的命令。
English: Wang Hui said: "If Sichuan-Shaanxi Pass is returned to China, Han Shantou must send a letter and obey the order of the host country.

古文：匡奏曰： 关隘之事，臣初亦惑之，今当增戍万人，壁垒之役，馈餫之劳，费用必广。
现代文：匡上奏说： 关隘之事，臣开始也疑惑，如今要增守兵万人，军营内外的劳役，食物军饷的慰劳，费用必广。
English: Kuang Shangsoo said, "Since the matter is sensitive, the minister began to have doubts. Now we have to increase the number of soldiers, the labor service inside and outside the military camp, the comfort of food and military pay, and the cost will be extensive.

古文：祖宗所以取者，以关隘仅能自保耳，非有益于战也。
现代文：祖宗所以不攻取的原因，因为关隘只能保住自己罢了，非有益于战。
English: The reason why the ancestors did not attack, because Guanqiao could only save themselves, was not beneficial to the war.

古文：设能入寇，纵之平地，以铁骑蹂之，无一得脱。
现代文：假设能够入侵，放在平地，用精锐骑兵践踏，没有一个能逃脱。
English: Supposing we could invade them, put them on level ground, and trample them with an elite cavalry, not one of them could escape.

古文：彼哀祈不已者，以前日负固尚且摧覆，今遂失之，是无一日之安也。
现代文：对方一再哀求归还的原因，因为以前依仗其坚固还被摧毁，现在居然失去，这样感到无一日之安。
English: The reason why the other side has repeatedly pleaded for its return is because it was previously destroyed on the basis of its solidity, but now it has been lost, so I feel no day's peace.

古文：必谓兵力得之不可还赐，则汉上诸郡皆膏腴耕桑之地，枣阳、光化归顺之民数万户，较之陕右轻重可知，独在陛下决之耳。 
现代文：一定要说兵力夺得不可赐还，那汉上各郡都是肥沃宜农宜桑之地，枣阳、光化归顺之民有数万户，与陕右比较轻重可知，只不过在皇上的一句话罢了。 
English: It must be said that military power cannot be given back, that all counties in the Han Dynasty are fertile and suitable for agriculture and mulberry fields, and that there are tens of thousands of people who have converted to Zaoyang and Guanghua, which is more important than Shaanxi and Zhejiang, but it is just a word from the emperor.

古文：诏报曰： 侂胄渠魁，既请函首，宋之悔服，可谓诚矣。 
现代文：诏书答复说： 胄，敌之巨头，既然被函送首级，宋悔过服从可称得上诚心。 
English: The edict replied: "You, the enemy's giant, since you have been sent to the head by letter, Song's repentance and obedience can be said to be sincere.

古文：匡乃遣王柟还，复书曰： 宋国负渝盟之罪，自陈悔艾，主上德度如天，不忍终绝，优示训谕，许以更成，所以覆护镇抚之恩，至深至厚。
现代文：匡于是遣送王籹回去，又写信说 ：宋国承担背叛盟约的罪责，自己表明悔过，我主德行度量宽广如天，不忍心最终与宋断绝，宽容地予以教诲，准许再成和议，用来爱护安定宋朝的恩惠至深至厚。
English: Kuang then sent Wang Hui back, and also wrote: Song assumed the guilt of betraying the treaty, and expressed his remorse. My lord's virtue is as broad as the sky, and he could not bear to finally break with Song. He taught him with tolerance, allowed him to make peace again, and used it to protect the stability of the Song Dynasty.

古文：昨奉圣训，如能斩送韩侂胄，徐议还淮南地。
现代文：昨日尊奉皇上指示，如能斩送韩胄，慢慢商议归还淮南地。
English: Yesterday, I honored the emperor's instruction, if I can send Han Xuan, I will slowly discuss the return of Huainan.

古文：来书言韩侂胄已死，将以苏师旦首易之，饰辞相绐如此。
现代文：来信说韩胄已死，将用苏师旦头换之，竟这样掩饰欺骗。
English: The letter said that Han Xuan was dead and would be replaced with Su Shi's severed head, which was actually a way of concealing the deception.

古文：至于犒军银两欲俟归关隘然后祗备，是皆有咈圣训。
现代文：至于犒军银两要等到归还关隘之后再尽心筹集，这些都违我皇的训示。
English: As for the imperial army and silver, they should wait until after the return of Guanqiao and then do their best to raise them. These are all contrary to the instructions of my emperor.

古文：及王柟状禀，如蒙归还川、陕关隘，其韩侂胄首必当函送。
现代文：到王籹上书报告，如蒙归还川陕关隘，那韩胄的头一定函送。
English: Report to Wang Qian in writing, if he is returned to Sichuan-Shanxi Pass, then Han Qian's head must send a letter.

古文：圣训令斩送侂胄首者，本欲易淮南地，陕西关隘不预焉。
现代文：皇上指示斩送胄首级时，本欲换淮南地，不给陕西关隘。
English: When the emperor gave the order to behead him, he wanted to be transferred to South Huai Province, not to Shaanxi Guanxi Province.

古文：王柟所陈亦非元画事理，不敢专决，具奏。
现代文：王籹所陈述的也不是开始谈好的事理，我不敢专断，全部报告了皇上。
English: What Wang Yao stated is not the reason for starting to talk about good things. I dare not arbitrarily, I reported everything to the emperor.

古文：奉旨 朕以生灵为念，已贳宋罪，关隘区区岂足深较，既能函送韩侂胄首，陕西关隘可以还赐 。
现代文：接受如下旨意： 我从百姓着想，已赦免宋朝的罪行，小小关隘怎么值得计较，既然能函送韩胄的头，陕西关隘可以赐还。 
English: Accept the following will: I have pardoned the crimes of the Song Dynasty for the sake of the people, how can the small Guanqiao be worth considering, since I can send a letter to the head of the Han Dynasty, the Shaanxi Guanqiao can be returned.

古文：今恩训如此，其体大国宽仁矜恤曲从之意，追修誓书，赍遣通谢人使赴阙。 
现代文：如今皇上这样仁爱的教导，体现我国宽厚仁慈怜悯体恤委曲求全的心意，立即修订盟书，携带文本、礼物让赔罪的人到朝廷来。 
English: Today, the Emperor's benevolent teachings reflect the desire of our country's Committee for Compassionate Treatment of the Generous, the Merciful, and the Compassionate to seek perfection, to immediately revise the covenant, and to bring the text and gifts to allow the person who has made reparation to come to the Imperial Court.

古文：王柟之归也，匡要以先送叛亡驱掠，然后割赐淮南、川、陕，及彼誓书草本有犯庙讳字及文义有不如体制者，谕令改之。
现代文：王籹走时，匡要求先送叛逃驱掠的人，然后割还淮南、川、陕，又对方盟书草本中有犯庙讳的文字和文意不得体的，下令改掉。
English: When Wang Qian left, Kuang demanded that the defectors and plunderers be sent first, and then Huainan, Sichuan and Shaanxi should be returned. He also ordered that the words and meaning of the other party's alliance book should be changed.

古文：宋人以叛亡驱掠散在州县，一旦拘刷，未易聚集。
现代文：宋人提出叛亡驱掠的人散在州县，一时行文拘拿，不易聚集。
English: The Song people proposed that the people who rebelled and drove away the bandits were scattered in the prefectures and counties, and they were temporarily detained. It was not easy to gather them.

古文：今已四月，农事已晚，边民连岁流离失所，扶携道路，即望复业，过此农时，遂失一岁之望。
现代文：今已四月，农事已晚，边民连年流离失所，扶老携幼，奔走在路上，盼望恢复生产，过这农时，就失去一年希望。
English: Now it is April, farming is too late, border residents have been displaced for years, helping the elderly with their children, running on the road, hoping to resume production. After this farming time, they will lose a year of hope.

古文：岁币犒军物多，非旬月可办。
现代文：岁币犒军钱财很多，非十天半月可办。
English: There is a lot of money in the army, and it can be done in less than a month and a half.

古文：钱象祖复以书来，略曰： 窃见大金皇帝前日圣旨，如能斩送韩侂胄首，沿淮之地并依皇统、大定已画为定。
现代文：钱象祖又上书来，大致说： 私下见到大金皇帝前日圣旨，如能斩送韩胄首，沿淮之地一起按皇统、大定年间确定的边界为定。
English: Qian Xiangzu wrote again, saying roughly: Privately, I saw the sacred edict of the Daqin Emperor the day before. If I can cut off Han's dagger and send it to him, then the border along the Huai River will be determined according to the boundaries determined during the reign of Emperor Taizong and Taizong.

古文：又睹今来圣旨，既能送侂胄首，陕西关隘可并还赐。
现代文：又看今来圣旨，既能送胄首，陕西关隘可一起赐还。
English: Also, according to the present holy will, not only can the dagger be sent, but it can also be returned together with Shaanxi Guanxi.

古文：以此仰见圣慈宽大，初无必待发遣驱掠官兵，然后退兵交界之语。
现代文：由此看到皇上仁慈宽大，开始并没有说一定等到发送了被驱掠的官兵，才退兵交界之语。
English: From this, we can see that the emperor was merciful and lenient, and did not say at the beginning that he would definitely wait until the officers and soldiers who had been driven away were sent before withdrawing from the border.

古文：誓书草本添改处，先次录本赍呈，并将侂胄首函送，及管押纳合、道僧、李全家口一并发还。
现代文：誓书草本添改的地方，先后抄录后携本呈上，并将胄首函送，和管押纳合、道僧、李全家人一起送还。
English: In the place where the oath was amended, the copy was copied and submitted, and the dagger letter was sent, and it was returned together with the governor, the Taoist monk and the whole Li family.

古文：欲望上体大金皇帝画定圣旨，先赐行下沿边及陕西所属，候侂胄首至界上，即便抽回军马，归还淮南及川、陕关隘地界。
现代文：希望您按大金皇帝划定旨意，下令行下沿边界和陕西之地属，等候胄首到达边界，即便调回军马，归还淮南和川、陕关隘地界。
English: I hope that you will follow the will of the Daikin Emperor and order your troops to march along the border and Shaanxi's territory, wait for the dagger to reach the border, even if you have to bring back the horses, and return Huainan, Hechuan and Shaanxi.

古文：所有驱掠官兵，留之何益，见已从实刷勘，发还，其使人礼物岁币等已起发至真、扬间，伺候嘉报，迤逦前去界首，以俟取接。 
现代文：所有驱掠官兵留下有什么好处，现已据实行文查问发送。那使者礼物岁币等已出发到真、扬间，等候喜报，绵延不断送往边界，等你们接取。 
English: According to the implementation document, the envoys have been sent to inquire about the benefits of leaving behind all the officers and soldiers who have been driven away. The envoys have sent gifts, coins, etc. to Zhen and Yang, waiting for the good news, and have been continuously sent to the border, waiting for you to receive them.

古文：匡得钱象祖书，即具奏，诏报曰： 朕以生灵之故，已从所请，称臣割地，尚且阔略，区区小节，何足深较。
现代文：匡得钱象祖书信，马上详细做了汇报。皇上下诏说 ：我因为百姓的缘故顺从请求，称臣割地尚且放宽，区区小节何足深较。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict saying, "For the sake of the people, I have complied with the request to relax the land allotment to the vassals.

古文：其侂胄、师旦首函及诸叛亡至濠州，即听通谢人使入界，军马即当彻还，川、陕关隘，俟岁币犒军银纲至下蔡，画日割赐。 
现代文：那胄、师旦首级及各叛逃官兵到濠州，即听任赔罪的使者入界，军队当马上撤还，川陕关隘等岁币犒军银队列到下蔡，再商量日子归还。 
English: Then, the leaders of the army, the division, and all the defected officers and soldiers went to Bozhou, and immediately allowed the emissary to enter the border to make reparation. The army was immediately withdrawn, and the soldiers of the Sichuan and Shaanxi Guanxi armies and the silver of the Yuan Dynasty went to Lower Cai, and then discussed the date of return.

古文：匡得诏书，即以谕宋人，使如诏书从事。
现代文：匡得诏书，马上通知宋人，让他们按诏书办。
English: If Kuang got the imperial edict, he should immediately inform the Song people and let them do business according to the imperial edict.

古文：泰和八年闰四月乙未，宋献韩侂胄、苏师旦首函至元帅府，匡遣平南抚军上将军纥石烈贞以，侂胄、师旦首函露布以闻。
现代文：泰和八年闰四月乙未，宋献韩胄、苏师旦首级到元帅府，匡派平南抚军上将军纥石烈贞带着胄、师旦首级和捷报报告皇上。
English: In the intercalary month of April in the eighth year of the Taihe era, Song Xian, Han Zheng and Su Shitan went to the marshal's office, and Kuang sent the general of the Pingnanfu army, Zou Shi Renzhen, to report the victory to the emperor with the scepter, the head of the Shitan and the victory report.

古文：五月丁未，遣户部尚书高汝砺、礼部尚书张行简奏告天地，武卫军都指挥使徒单镛奏告太庙，御史中丞孟铸告社稷。
现代文：五月九日，派户部尚书高汝砺、礼部尚书张行简奏告天地，武卫军都指挥使徒单镛奏告太庙，御史中丞孟铸奏告社稷。
English: On May 9th, Gao Rucheng of the Household Ministry and Zhang Xingjian of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies were dispatched to announce to the world, and the military guards commanded the apostles to announce to the imperial temple, and Meng Jingsong of the Military History Department announced to the public.

古文：是日，上御应天门，立黄麾仗，受宋馘。
现代文：这天，皇上驾临应天门，立黄麾仗，接受胄、师旦的左耳。
English: On this day, the emperor arrived at the gate of heaven, set up a yellow crossbow battle, and received the crossbow and the left ear of Shidan.

古文：尚书省奏露布，亲王百官起居上表称贺。
现代文：尚书省报告捷报，亲王百官起坐上表祝贺。
English: Shangshu's report was a success, and hundreds of officials congratulated the prince.

古文：献馘庙社，以露布颁中外。
现代文：献左耳于庙社，把报捷文书公布中外。
English: He donated his left ear to the temple and shrine, and published the documents of the newspaper to the public at home and abroad.

古文：竿侂胄、师旦首并二人画像于通衢，百姓纵观，然后漆其首，藏之军器库。
现代文：在要道上用竹杆高挑胄、师旦头和两人画像，百姓任意观看，然后油漆他们的头藏到军器库。
English: On the main road with a bamboo pole high defiance, Shidan head and two people picture, the people watch at will, and then paint their heads hidden to the armory.

古文：丙辰，匡朝京师，进官两阶，赐玉带、金一百两、银一千五百两，重币三十端。罢元帅府仍为枢密院。
现代文：丙辰，匡到京师入朝，升官两级，赐玉带、金一百两、银一千五百两、绢三十段，免去元帅府职位，仍到枢密院供职。
English: Hsin-Chen, Kuang-Kuang went to Beijing to enter the imperial court, was promoted two levels, was given a jade belt, one hundred and two gold, one thousand five hundred and two silver, and thirty taels of silver, was exempted from the position of marshal, and still served in the Privy Council.

古文：六月癸酉，宋通谢使许弈、吴衡等入见。
现代文：六月五日，宋赔罪使者许奕、吴衡等入见。
English: On June 5th, Xu Yi and Wu Heng, the emissaries of the Song Dynasty to atone for the sins of the Song Dynasty, came to visit.

古文：癸未，以宋人请和诏天下。
现代文：癸未，以宋人请和，诏告全国。
English: At that time, the Song Dynasty called for peace and issued an edict to the whole country.

古文：十一月丙辰，章宗崩，匡受遗诏，立卫绍王。
现代文：十一月二十日，章宗去世，匡接受遗诏，立卫绍王为帝。
English: On November 20, Zhang Zong passed away, and Kuang accepted his last will and testament, and established Wei Shao Wang as emperor.

古文：其遗诏略曰： 皇叔卫王，承世宗之遗体，钟厚庆于元妃，人望所归，历数斯在。
现代文：其遗诏大致说： 皇叔卫王，接续世宗的血脉，从元妃处集聚了厚福，人望所归，天命也轮到他了。
English: His last will and testament said in general: Emperor Uncle Wei Wang, who succeeded the bloodline of the dynasty, gathered a lot of blessings from the former empress. He was respected by the people, and it was his turn to have a heavenly destiny.

古文：今朕上体太祖皇帝传授至公之意，付畀宝祚，即皇帝位于柩前。
现代文：现在我根据太祖皇帝传位于极公正的人的意思，给他帝位，在我灵柩前即皇帝位。
English: Now I give him the imperial throne according to the meaning of the great-grandfather emperor as a very fair person, and before my coffin, the imperial throne.

古文：载惟礼经有嫡立嫡、无嫡立庶，今朕之内人见有娠者两位，已诏皇帝，如其中有男当立为储贰，如皆是男子，择可立者立之。 
现代文：《礼经》记载有嫡立嫡、无嫡立庶，如今我的宫人怀孕的有两位，已告之新帝，如其中有男孩当立为太子，如都是男子，选择可立的立之。 
English: "The Book of Rites and Decrees" states that there are legitimate heirs and illegitimate heirs. Currently, there are two pregnant members of my Imperial Household who have been announced as the new emperor. If one of them is a boy, he should be crowned as the crown prince. If they are both men, they can be crowned as they choose.

古文：丁巳，卫绍王即位。
现代文：二十一日，卫绍王即位。
English: On the twenty-first day, King Weishao ascended the throne.

古文：戊午，章宗内人范氏胎气有损。
现代文：二十二日，章宗宫人范氏伤了胎气。
English: On the 22nd, Zhang Zongguo's concubine Fan fell pregnant.

古文：大安元年四月，平章政事仆散端、左丞孙即康奏： 承御贾氏产期已出三月，有人告元妃李氏令贾氏诈称有身。 
现代文：大安元年四月，平章政事仆散端、左丞孙即康上奏： 承御贾氏产期已过三月，有人告元妃李氏叫贾氏假说有孕。 
English: In April of the first year of the Taian era, Pingzhang's political servant, Zanfang, and his left-hand grandson, Jia Kang, reported: Emperor Jia's childbearing period had passed in March, and someone had accused Empress Dowager Li of telling Jia that she was pregnant.

古文：诏元妃李氏、承御贾氏皆赐死。
现代文：下令赐死元妃李氏和承御贾氏。
English: The order ordered the death of Empress Yi and Emperor Jia.

古文：初，章宗大渐，匡与元妃俱受遗诏立卫王，匡欲专定策功，遂构杀李氏。
现代文：当初，章宗病重，匡与元妃同受遗诏立卫王，匡想独占决定册立的功劳，于是陷害李氏至死。
English: At the beginning, Zhang Zong was seriously ill, Kuang and Yuanfei jointly received the imperial edict to set up a royal guard. Kuang wanted to take exclusive credit for the decision to set up the guard, so he framed Li until his death.

古文：数日，匡拜尚书令，封申王。
现代文：几天后，匡被授予尚书令，封申王。
English: A few days later, Kuang was awarded the title of Shang Shuling (尚書令).

古文：大安元年十二月，薨。
现代文：大安元年十二月，去世。
English: In December of the first year of the Taian era, he passed away.

古文：匡事显宗，深被恩遇。
现代文：匡侍奉显宗，深受恩遇。
English: Kuang served Emperor Xuanzong and was treated very well.

古文：自章宗幼年，侍讲读最亲幸，致位将相，怙宠自用，官以贿成。
现代文：从章宗幼年，匡任侍讲读与他最亲近，列位将相，依仗宠幸刚愎自用，以贿赂给人官做。
English: From the time Zhang Zong was a child, Kuang was the closest person to him, serving as an attendant and lecturing, and he was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：承安中，拨赐家口地土，匡乃自占济南、真定、代州上腴田，百姓旧业辄夺之，及限外自取。
现代文：承安中，调配赏赐人口土地，匡竟擅自占有济南、真定、代州上等好田，百姓原有产业都要夺到手，并在限制以外自己另取。
English: In Cheng'an, the allocation of land rewards to the population, but actually occupied Jinan, Zhending, Daizhou and other good fields without authorization. The original property of the people should be seized, and in addition to the restrictions, they should take it themselves.

古文：上闻其事，不以为罪，惟用安州边吴泊旧放围埸地、奉圣州在官闲田易之，以向自占者悉还百姓。
现代文：皇帝知道这事，不以为罪，只用安州边吴泊旧放围场地、奉圣州官府闲田交换，在以前自占土地产业的全应还给百姓。
English: The emperor knew about this and didn't think it was a crime. He only exchanged the old fenced-in site at Wubo on the edge of Anzhou and the idle farmland of the government office in Fengxianzhou. All of the previously occupied land and industry should be returned to the people.

古文：宣宗尝谓侍臣曰： 撒速往年尝受人玉吐鹘，然后与之官，此岂宰相所为哉？ 
现代文：宣宗曾对侍臣说 ：撒速过去曾接受别人的玉吐鹘，然后给那人官职，这怎么是宰相做的事呢？ 
English: Emperor Xuanzong once said to a courtier: "In the past, Sahao had accepted someone else's jade spittoon and then given that person an official post. How could this be done by the prime minister?

古文：完颜纲，本名元奴，字正甫。
现代文：完颜纲本名元奴，字正甫。
English: His real name is Yuan Rong, but he goes by Zheng Fu.

古文：明昌中，为奉御，累官左拾遗。
现代文：明昌年间，成为奉御，层层升官为左拾遗。
English: During the Ming and Ch'ang dynasties, he was promoted to the position of Fengguo, and he was promoted to Zuo Zhi Rui successively.

古文：诏三叉口置捺钵。纲上疏谏，疏中有云： 贼出没其间 ，诏尚书省诘问，所言不实，章宗以纲谏官，不之罪。
现代文：皇帝下令在三叉口建出行住所，纲上疏劝谏，疏文有这句话 贼出没其间 ，诏令尚书省追问，查明他说的不实，章宗因纲为谏官，不加惩处。
English: The emperor ordered a travel residence to be built at the junction of the three roads. Zhang Zong was advised to stay away from the area. In the notice, there was this sentence: "Thieves haunt the area." He was ordered to investigate and find out if what he said was untrue. Since Zhang Zong was a eunuch, he was not punished.

古文：迁刑部员外郎，纲言： 诸犯死罪除名移推相去二百里，并犯徒罪连逮二十人以上者并令就问，曾经所属按察司审谳者移推别路，官亦依上就问。
现代文：纲升为刑部员外郎，说： 各死囚及除名罪移推相距二百里，共犯徒罪以下连捕二十以上的案并令所委官到后审判定罪。曾经所属按察司审理定罪移推到别路，所委官也根据上述做法就近审定。
English: Gang Sheng, who is a member of the Criminal Investigation Department, said: Each death row prisoner and delisting crime is moved 200 miles away from each other, and more than 20 cases of consecutive arrest under the crime of accomplice are arrested and convicted by the appointed officer after the trial. Those who once belonged to the investigation department were transferred to other roads, and the appointed officer was also determined according to the above-mentioned practice.

古文：凡告移推之人皆已经本路按察审讫，即当移推别路。
现代文：凡请求移推之人都已经本路按察审完，即刻应当移推别路。
English: Anyone who requests to be moved has already completed this road according to the inspection and examination, and should immediately be moved to another road.

古文：按察司部分广阔，如上京路移推临潢路，最近亦往复二三千里，北京留守司移推西北路招讨司，最近亦须数月。
现代文：按察司部分广阔，如上京路移推临潢路，最近也往返二、三千里，北京留守司移推西北路招讨司，最近也须数月。
English: According to the inspector's part, it is vast. For example, if the Shangjing Road is moved to push the Linyi Road, it has recently traveled two or three thousand miles, and the Beijing Left-behind Division is moved to push the Northwest Road to attract inspectors, and recently it takes several months.

古文：乞依旧制，令移推官司追取其人归问。 
现代文：请求按照以往制度，令移推官司追索人犯返回问罪。 
English: According to the previous system, the request is to transfer the criminal to the court for prosecution and the criminal to return for questioning.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：故事，使夏国者夏人馈赠礼物，视书几道以为多寡。
现代文：成例，出使夏国的使者收夏国人馈赠礼物，看写几道文书决定礼物的多少。
English: As a rule, the envoys sent to Xia received gifts from the people of Xia, and the number of gifts was decided by reading several documents.

古文：泰和元年，纲为赐夏主生日使，章宗命赍三诏，左司员外郎孙椿年奏诏为一道，寻自陈首，上责宰臣曰： 椿年忽略，卿等奈何不奏也。 
现代文：泰和元年，纲成为赐夏主生日使，章宗命携带三道诏书，左司员外郎孙椿年上书说诏书为一道，不久自陈有罪，皇帝责问宰臣说： 椿年疏忽，你们为什么不进言呢？ 
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Zhang Zong became the envoy to celebrate the birthday of Emperor Xia. Zhang Zong was ordered to carry three imperial rescripts. The left-hand clerk, Wa Lang Sun Tsubaki, wrote that the imperial rescripts were one and the same. Soon after, he was found guilty. The emperor scolded the vice-minister, saying: Tsubaki was negligent, why didn't you speak up?

古文：转工部郎中，上言： 太府监官兼尚食局官，乞于少府监依此例，注能干官一员兼仪鸾局官，仪鸾局官一员兼少府监官，相须检治。 
现代文：纲转任工部郎中，上书说： 太府监官兼尚食局官，请求对少府监也按此例办，登记能干的官员一名兼任议鸾局官，仪鸾局官一名兼任少府监官，相互约束节制。 
English: Gang was transferred to the position of junior vice-minister of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, and the petition said: "The superintendent of Taifu is also the official of Shang Food Bureau, and it is requested that the superintendent of Shophu also follow this example, and one of the registered competent officials also serves as the official of the Bureau of Discussions and Deliberations, and one of the officials of the Bureau of Ceremonies also serves as the superintendent of Shophu, with mutual restraint and restraint.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：四年，诏纲与乔宇、宋元吉编类陈言文字，纲等奏： 凡阙涉宫庭及大臣者摘进，其余以省台六部各为一类。 
现代文：四年，下令纲与乔宇、宋元吉分类编撰进言文字，纲等奏： 凡牵涉宫廷和大臣的摘要写上，其余按省台六部分各归一类。 
English: In the fourth year, he ordered Guan and Qiao Yu and Song Yuanji to classify and compile the preamble, and Guan et al. to play: All summaries involving the court and ministers should be written, and the rest should be classified into one category according to the six parts of the province and Taiwan.

古文：凡二十卷。
现代文：共二十卷。
English: A total of twenty volumes.

古文：迁同签宣徽院事。
现代文：迁任同签宣徽院事。
English: The transfer of the same signature to the Xuan Hui Academy.

古文：六年，与宋连兵，陕西诸将颇相异同，以纲为蜀汉路安抚使、都大提举兵马事，与元帅府参决西事，调羌兵之未附者。
现代文：六年，与宋朝交战，陕西诸将的表现很有不同，用纲为蜀汉路安抚使、都大提举兵马事，和元帅府共同参与决定西部事务，调羌兵中未附宋朝的。
English: In the sixth year of war with the Song Dynasty, the performance of the generals in Shaanxi was very different. They used the Shu-Han Road to pacify the envoys, the capital to raise troops and horses, and the marshal's office to participate in the decision of the western affairs. The Song Dynasty was not included in the transfer of troops.

古文：于是，知凤翔府事完颜昱、同知平凉府事蒲察秉铉分驻凤翔诸隘，通远军节度使承裕、秦州防御使完颜璘屯成纪界，知临洮府事石抹仲温驻临洮，同知临洮府事术虎高琪、彰化军节度副使把回海备巩州诸镇，乾州刺史完颜思忠扼六盘，陕西路都统副使斡勒牙刺、京兆府推官蒲察秉彝戍虢华、扼潼关蒲津，陕西都统完颜忠本名袅懒、同知京兆府事乌古论兖州守京兆要害，以凤翔、临洮路蕃汉弓箭手及绯翮翅军散据边陲。绯翮翅，军名也。
现代文：在这时，知凤翔府事完颜昱、同知平凉府事蒲察秉铉分别驻扎在凤翔各关隘，通远军节度使承裕、秦州防御使完颜瞞屯军成纪边界，知临洮府事石抹仲温驻军临洮，同知临洮府事术虎高琪、彰化军节度副使把回海防备巩州各镇，乾州刺史完颜思忠扼守六盘，陕西路都统副使斡勒牙剌、京兆府推官蒲察秉彝戍卫虢华、扼守潼关蒲津，陕西都统完颜忠本名袅懒和同知京兆府事乌古论兖州防守京兆要害，用凤翔、临洮路少数民族和汉族弓箭手及绯鬲羽翅军分散占据边境。 绯鬲羽翅 是军队的名称。
English: At this time, Zhifeng Xiangfu was stationed in Yan'an, Tongzhi Pingliangfu was stationed in Putuo, Tongyuan Army was stationed in Chengyu, Qinzhou Defense was stationed in Chengji, Zhongwen Garrison was stationed in Lin'an, Zhifeng Xiangfu was stationed in Zhongwen, Tongzhi Pingliangfu was stationed in Putuo, Tongzhi Pingliangfu was stationed in Chengyu, Tongyuan Army was stationed in Chengyu, Qinzhou Defense was stationed in Chengji, Tongyuan Army was stationed in Chengyu, Zhongwen Garrison was stationed in Lin'an, Tongzhi Linyi

古文：元帅右临军充右都监蒲察贞分总其事。
现代文：元帅右监军充右都监蒲察贞分管他们的事务。
English: The marshal, the right supervisor of the army, and the right supervisor of the capital, Puchazhen, were in charge of their affairs.

古文：宋吴曦以兵六千攻盐川，巩州戍将完颜王善、队校仆散六斤、猛安龙延常击走之，斩首二百级。
现代文：宋吴曦用六千兵攻打盐州，巩州守将完颜王善、队校仆散六斤、猛安龙延常击退宋军，斩首二百级。
English: Song Wuxi used six thousand soldiers to attack Yanzhou, and Gongzhou's defenders, Wang Zhen, Zhan Liujin, and Anlong Yanchang, defeated the Song army and beheaded two hundred soldiers.

古文：七月，吴曦兵五万由保坌、姑苏等路寇秦州，承裕、璘以骑千余击之，曦兵大败，追奔四十里。
现代文：七月，吴曦兵五万从保坌、姑苏等路侵犯秦州，承裕、瞞用骑兵千余人攻击他们，曦军大败，追奔四十里。
English: In July, Wu Xi's army of fifty thousand invaded Qinzhou from Bozhuang, Gusu and other routes, and more than a thousand cavalry attacked them from Chengyu and Shizhu. Xi's army was defeated and chased for forty miles.

古文：曦别兵万人入来远镇，术虎高琪破之。
现代文：吴曦另一支万人军队进入来远镇，术虎高琪打败了他们。
English: Wu Xi sent another army of ten thousand men into Laiyuan Town, and was defeated by Zhihu Gaoqi.

古文：青宜可者，吐蕃之种也。
现代文：青宜可，是吐蕃人的后代。
English: Qing Yi Ke, is a descendant of the Spujing people.

古文：宋取河湟，夏取河西四郡，部落散处西鄙，其鲁黎族帅曰冷京，据古叠州，有四十三族、十四城、三十余万户，东邻宕昌，北接临洮、积石，南行十日至笋竹大山，盖蛮境也。
现代文：宋攻取河湟，夏攻取河西四郡，部落散处西部边远地区，其中鲁黎族帅叫冷京，占据古时的叠州，有四十三族、十四城、三十余万户人家，东邻宕昌，北接临洮、积石，南行十日到笋竹大山，是少数民族区域。
English: The Song Dynasty conquered Hebei, the Xia Dynasty conquered the four counties in the west of Hebei, and the tribes were scattered in the western outlying areas. Among them, the Luli tribe was called Lengjing, occupying the ancient state of Meizhou. There are forty-three ethnic groups, fourteen cities, more than 300,000 households. The eastern neighbor is Gaochang, the northern neighbor is Linyi and Jishan, and the southern neighbor is the tenth day to the mountain of Lianzhu. It is a minority area.

古文：西行四十日至河外，俗不论道里，而以日计之云。
现代文：西行四十日到达黄河外，习惯不说道路的里数而用走多少天来计算。
English: It takes forty days to travel westward to reach the other side of the Yellow River. It is customary to calculate how many days it takes to travel without mentioning the number of miles on the road.

古文：冷京卒，子耳骨延嗣，宋不能制，縻以官爵。
现代文：冷京死后，子耳骨延为继承人，宋朝不能控制，用官爵来束缚他。
English: After the death of Lengjing, Zi Er Bone Yan became the successor. The Song Dynasty could not control him and used the title of official to bind him.

古文：传六世至青宜可，尤劲勇得众，以宋政令不常，有改事中国之意。
现代文：传位六代到青宜可，更坚强勇猛得人心，认为宋朝政令常变，有改为侍奉我国的意思。
English: Six generations of emperors have been passed down from generation to generation, and the stronger and more courageous ones have won the hearts of the people. They think that the Song Dynasty's decrees are constantly changing, and they have the intention to serve our country.

古文：曹佛留为洮州刺史。
现代文：曹佛留是洮州刺史。
English: Cao Foryu is the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：佛留材武有智策，能结诸羌。
现代文：佛留有军事才能并机智讲策略，能结交各羌部落。
English: Foryu had military talent and tact, and was able to make friends with various clans.

古文：青宜可畏慕佛留，以父呼之，请举国内附。朝廷以宋有盟不许，厚赐金帛以抚之。
现代文：青宜可敬服佛留，称他为父，请求全国归附，朝廷因与宋有盟不许，厚赐金帛安抚他。
English: Qingyi can respectfully obey Buddha, call him his father, request the whole country to be annexed, the imperial court does not allow him to have an alliance with Song, and generously gives Jin Yong to appease him.

古文：明昌间，属羌已彪杀郡佐反，是时纲为奉御，奉诏与曹佛留计事，因召青宜可会兵击破已彪。
现代文：明昌年间，部属羌已彪杀郡佐反叛，这时纲担任奉御，接诏和曹佛留谋划此事，就叫青宜可合兵击败已彪。
English: During the Ming and Ch'ang dynasties, his subordinate, Ya Ya Biao, killed the rebels in Guanzha County. At that time, he served as a minister, and he and Cao Fulu planned the matter, so they called Qingyi to join forces to defeat Ya Ya Biao.

古文：曹佛留迁同知临洮尹，兼洮州刺史。
现代文：曹佛留升同知临洮尹，兼洮州刺史。
English: Cao Fosheng stayed with his friend Linyi Yin, who was also the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：子普贤为洮州管内巡检使。
现代文：子普贤是洮州管内巡检使。
English: His son, Pu Xian, is the inspector of Zhangzhou.

古文：纲屡以事至洮，佛留每谓纲言青宜可愿内属，出其至情，纲辄奏之，上终不纳。
现代文：纲多次因事到洮，佛留每次都对他说青宜可愿意隶属，出于青宜可的真心，纲就报告皇帝，始终不被接纳。
English: When the matter was brought to the emperor's attention many times, the Buddha always told him that the youth could be willing to be subordinate. Out of the youth's sincerity, the youth reported to the emperor and was never accepted.

古文：及纲部署陕西，上密敕经略西事。
现代文：等到完颜纲安排陕西事务，皇帝秘密令他处理西部事情。
English: After Yan Gang finished arranging the affairs of Shaanxi, the emperor secretly ordered him to deal with the western affairs.

古文：于是，曹佛留已死，普贤为怀羌巡检使。
现代文：在这时，曹佛留已死，普贤任怀羌巡检使。
English: At this time, Cao Foryu had already died, and Pu Xian was appointed as the inspector of Huaiyi.

古文：纲至洮，驰召普贤摄同知洮州事。
现代文：纲到洮，急召普贤代理同知洮州事。
English: When the group arrived in Handan, Pu Xian's agent Tong Zhizhi was urgently summoned to Handan.

古文：普贤传箭入羌中，青宜可大喜，率诸部长，籍其境土人民，诣纲请内属。
现代文：普贤用箭传信到羌中，青宜可大喜，率各部落首领，登记其境土、人民，到纲那儿请求归属。
English: Pu Xian used arrows to send a message to Yuzhong, and the youth were overjoyed. He led the leaders of each tribe to register their territory and people, and to go there to request belonging.

古文：纲奏其事，上以青宜可为叠州副都总管，加广威将军。
现代文：纲上奏其事，皇上用青宜可任叠州副都总管，加授广威将军。
English: According to the plan, the emperor could appoint Qingyi as the vice-governor of the State of Yamanashi and grant him the title of Guangwei general.

古文：诏青宜可曰： 卿统有部人，世为雄长，向风慕义，背伪归朝，愿效纯诚，恒输忠力，缅怀嘉瞩，式厚褒旌。
现代文：下诏对青宜可说 ：你统帅族人，世为杰出首领，敬仰道义，背伪归朝，愿报效真诚，长输忠力，缅怀美好的期望应予厚奖。
English: The following edict can be said to Qingyi: You, commander of the clan, are the most outstanding leader in the world, respect morality, turn back to the North, are willing to reward sincerity, long-term loyalty, and cherish good expectations should be given a high award.

古文：览卿进上所受伪牌，朝廷之驭诸蕃固无此例，欲使卿有以镇抚部族、增重观望，是以特加改命，赐金牌一、银牌二，到可祗承，服我新恩，永为藩卫。 
现代文：看你进献接受的伪朝金牌，朝廷管理各少数民族本来没有这个先例，想使你有此用来安定部族，增重威望，因此特加命令改变，赏金牌一面、银牌两面，送到要恭敬接受，信服我的新恩，永当藩国，以卫边关。 
English: Looking at the pseudo-royal gold medal you presented and accepted, the imperial court's management of ethnic minorities did not have this precedent. They wanted you to use this to stabilize the tribe and increase your prestige. Therefore, the special order was changed. One side of the gold medal and two sides of the silver medal were sent to be respectfully accepted. Convince me of my new grace, always be a feudal state, and guard the border.

古文：曹普贤真授同知洮州事，纲迁拱卫直都指挥使，迁三阶，安抚，都大提举如故。
现代文：曹普贤实授同知洮州事，纲任拱卫直都指挥使，升三级，安抚、都大提举的官职与以前一样。
English: Cao Pu Xianshi conferred the state affairs of Zhisheng with his colleagues, and appointed Gongwei Zhizhong as the commander and envoy of the capital, and promoted him to the third level. The official posts of pacifying and promoting the capital were the same as before.

古文：以商州刺史乌古论兖州领、曹普贤押领、青宜可勾当。
现代文：用商州刺史乌古论兖州统率，曹普贤执掌，青宜可主管。
English: On the basis of the Shang and Zhou dynasties, Zhengzhou was in charge, Cao Puxian was in charge, and Qingyi was in charge.

古文：诏曰： 完颜纲，初行时汝未知朝廷有青宜可之事，独言可以招抚，必获其用，既而果来效顺。
现代文：诏说： 完颜纲，刚去时你不知道朝廷有青宜可事，独说可以招抚，一定有其用处，不久他果然来效力归顺。
English: Zhao said: After the examination, when you first went there, you didn't know that the imperial court had something to do with youth, so to speak, it can be caressed, it must have its use, and soon he really came to surrender.

古文：今汝勿以青宜可兵势重大，卑屈失体，亦勿以蕃部而藐视之。 
现代文：如今你不要以为青宜可军势重大，卑屈失礼，也不要以为是少数民族部队而轻视他。 
English: Now, don't think that the Qing Yi can have a large army and be disrespectful, and don't think that it is an ethnic minority army and despise him.

古文：九月，诏安慰陕西，略曰： 京兆、凤翔、临洮三路，应被宋兵逼胁，背国从伪，或没落外境，若能自归者，官吏依旧勾当，百姓各令复业，元抛地土依数给付。
现代文：九月，诏令他安抚陕西，大致说 ：京兆、凤翔、临洮三路，应对被宋兵胁迫、背叛国家跟从伪朝或流落国外如能自己回来的，当官的仍做原官，百姓各自让恢复家业，原来丢弃的土地按数付给。
English: In September, the emperor ordered him to pacify Shaanxi, roughly saying: Jingzhao, Fengxiang, Linyi three roads, in response to being coerced by Song soldiers, betraying the country and following the pseudo-Dynasty or living abroad, if they can return themselves, the officials will still be the original officials, the people will each restore their family business, and the original abandoned land will be paid according to the number.

古文：及受宋人旗榜结构等，或值惊扰因而避役逃亡，未发觉者，许令所在官司陈首，并行释免，更不追究，军前可用之人随宜任使。
现代文：涉及接受宋人旗帜告示与之勾结等，或遇惊扰乘机躲避服役逃亡，没有被发现的，允许到所在官府自首，都执行免罪释放，再不追究，军中可用的人听任按需任命使用。
English: Those who were involved in accepting the Song banner announcement and colluding with it, or taking the opportunity to evade service and escape in case of alarm, and were not discovered, were allowed to surrender to the relevant government office, and were all exonerated and released without further investigation. Those available in the military were allowed to be appointed and used as needed.

古文：限外不首，复罪如初。
现代文：限定期间不自首的，恢复定罪与前一样。 
English: If they do not turn themselves in within a limited period of time, their convictions will be reinstated as before.

古文：宋程松遣别将曲昌世袭方山原，自率兵数万分道袭和尚原、西山寨、龙门等关。
现代文：宋程松派副将曲昌世袭击方山原，自领兵数万分路进攻和尚原、西山寨、龙门等关。
English: Song Chengsong sent Vice-General Qu Changshi to attack Fangshan Plain, and led tens of thousands of soldiers to attack Monzhangyuan, Xishanzhai, Longmen and other passes.

古文：是日，大雾四塞，既又暴雨，和尚原、西山寨，龙门关戍兵不知宋兵来，松遂据之。
现代文：这天，大雾遍布，又有暴雨，和尚原、西山寨、龙门关的守兵不知宋兵来，程松于是占领三处。
English: On this day, there was heavy fog all over and torrential rain. The guards at Monchohara, Nishi-Shanzhai, and Longmenguan did not know that the Song soldiers were coming, so Chengmong occupied three places.

古文：蒲察贞遣行军副统裴满阿里、同知陇州事完颜孛论以兵千人伏方山原下，万户奥屯撒合门、美原县令术虎合沓别将壮士五百，取间道潜登，出宋兵上，自高而下，宋兵大骇，伏兵合击，遂破之。
现代文：蒲察贞派行军副统裴满阿里、同知陇州事完颜孛论用兵千人埋伏在方山原下，万户奥屯撒合门、美原县令术虎合沓另率五百壮士，取小道偷偷登山出现在宋军上方，从高而下，宋军大惊，伏兵合击，就打败了宋军。
English: Putsazhen sent the deputy commander of the march, Pei Man Ali, and the leader of the march, Tongzhi Xizhou, to lie in ambush at the foot of Fangshan Plain with a thousand soldiers. Another five hundred strong soldiers led by Wanhu Otunzahamen and Meihara County's commander Zhaohuaguan took the path to sneak up the mountain and appeared above the Song Army. From high to low, the Song Army was shocked and ambushed, and defeated the Song Army.

古文：贞乃分遣术虎合沓、部将完颜出军奴率兵千人出黄儿谷取和尚原，同知会州事女奚列南家、押军猛安粘割撒改率兵千人出大宁谷取西山寨，贞自以兵七百由中路取龙门等关。
现代文：贞于是分派术虎合沓、部将完颜出军奴率兵千人出黄儿谷攻和尚原，同知会州事女奚列南家、押军猛安粘割撒改率兵千人出大宁谷攻西山寨，贞自己用七百兵由中路攻龙门等关。
English: Therefore, Zhen dispatched the following troops: the commander, Guan Yan, led a thousand soldiers out of Huangye Valley to attack Shangyuan; the councillor, Gu Zhen, led a thousand soldiers out of Danying Valley to attack Xizangzhai; Zhen himself led seven hundred soldiers to attack Longmen from the middle; and so on.

古文：程松已焚阁道，贞且修道且进兵。至小关，松将杨廷据险注射，贞不得前，令行军副统裴满阿里为疑兵，潜遣猛安胡信率甲士五十人绕出其后，反击之，宋兵大乱，遂斩廷于阵。
现代文：程松已烧阁道，贞边修道边进兵，到小关，宋将杨廷据险集中射箭，贞不得前进，令行军副统裴满阿里为疑兵，秘密派猛安胡信率甲士五十人绕出其后，从后攻击他们，宋兵大乱，于是在阵中斩杀廷。
English: Cheng Song had set fire to the pavilion road, Zhen Bian and the monks marched into the army, to Xiaoguan, Song concentrated Yang Ting to shoot arrows, Zhen could not advance, made the deputy commander of the march, Pei Man Ali, a suspect soldier, secretly sent the fierce An Hu Xin and led fifty soldiers to go around and attack them from behind, the Song soldiers were in chaos, so they killed Ting in the battle.

古文：宋兵走二里关，复败。
现代文：宋兵逃到二里关，又败。
English: Song soldiers fled to the two-mile pass and were defeated again.

古文：宋将彭统领宋兵走龙门，追击，大破之。
现代文：宋将彭统带领宋兵逃到龙门，我军追击大败他们。
English: Song general Peng Tong led the Song soldiers to flee to Longmen, and our army chased and defeated them.

古文：合沓乘夜潜登和尚原绝顶，宋人惊以为神，皆散走，破其众二千，生获数十人。
现代文：合沓乘夜偷登和尚原最高峰，宋人惊以为神，都四散逃走，打败这二千人，生俘数十人。
English: A group of hikers took the night to climb the highest peak in Monzangyuan. The people of Song panicked and fled in all directions, defeating the two thousand people and taking dozens of prisoners alive.

古文：南家斩木开道以登西山，再与宋兵遇，皆败之，遂尽复故地。
现代文：南家斩木开道登上西山，再与宋兵遇，都打败了他们，于是失地全部收复。
English: The Nan family cut a path to climb the West Mountain, and then met with the Song soldiers, defeated them, and then recovered all the lost land.

古文：宋吴曦将冯兴、杨雄、李珪以步骑八千人入赤谷，将寇秦州。
现代文：宋吴曦部将冯兴、杨雄、李皀用步骑八千人入侵赤谷，将侵犯秦州。
English: Song Wuxi's troops led by Feng Xing, Yang Xiong, and Li Xuan invaded Aka Valley with eight thousand men on horseback and invaded Qinzhou.

古文：承裕、完颜璘、河州防御使蒲察秉铉逆击，破之。
现代文：承裕、完颜瞞、河州防御使蒲察秉铉迎击，打败了他们。
English: Choe Yoo, complete deception, and the defense of Hezhou made Pucha Bingyao counterattack and defeat them.

古文：宋步兵趋西山，骑兵走赤谷。
现代文：宋步兵奔向西山，骑兵逃往赤谷。
English: The Song infantry ran to the West Mountain, and the cavalry fled to Akaya.

古文：承裕分兵蹑宋步兵，宋步兵据山搏战，部将唐括按答海率二百骑驰击之，甲士蒙葛挺身先入其阵，众乘之，宋步兵大溃，杀数百人，追者至皂郊城，斩首二千级。
现代文：承裕分兵跟踪宋步兵，宋步兵占据山头搏斗，我军部将唐括按答海率二百骑兵飞驰攻击，甲士蒙葛挺身先入其阵，众人追随他，宋步兵大乱，杀数百人，追的人到皂郊城，斩首二千个。
English: Cheng Yu's detachment followed the Song infantry, the Song infantry occupied the hilltop and fought, our military department attacked the Tang Dynasty at the rate of two hundred cavalrymen at high speed, the cavalryman Meng Ge stepped forward first and everyone followed him, the Song infantry was in turmoil, killing hundreds of people, and the pursuers went to the outskirts of the soap city and beheaded two thousand people.

古文：猛安把添奴追宋骑兵，杀千余人，冯兴仅以身免，杨雄、李珪皆为金军所杀。
现代文：猛安把添奴追击宋骑兵，杀千余人，冯兴只自己免去一死。杨雄、李皀都被金军所杀。
English: Meng'an sent Tien Nong to chase the Song cavalry, killing more than a thousand people, while Feng Xing only escaped death himself. Yang Xiong and Li Qian were both killed by the Jin army.

古文：十月，纲以蕃、汉步骑一万出临潭，充以关中兵一万出陈仓，蒲察贞以岐、陇兵一万出成纪，石抹仲温以陇右步骑五千出盐川，完颜璘以本部兵五千出来远。
现代文：十月，纲以蕃、汉步骑一万出临潭，充以关中兵一万出陈仓，蒲察贞以岐陇一万出成纪，石抹仲温以陇右步骑兵五千出盐川，完颜瞞以本部兵五千出来远。
English: In October, Gang rode out of Lintan with ten thousand soldiers on donkeys and horse-drawn carriages, Fong rode out of Chencang with ten thousand soldiers from Guanzhong, Puchazhen rode out of Chengji with ten thousand soldiers on donkeys and horse-drawn carriages, Shimpazhongwen rode out of Yanchuan with five thousand cavalrymen on donkeys and horse-drawn carriages, and Guanzhong rode out of Chencang with ten thousand soldiers.

古文：初，吴玠、吴璘俱为宋大将，兄弟父子相继守西土，得梁、益间士众心。
现代文：当初，吴、吴瞞都是宋朝大将，兄弟父子相继防守西部领土，得梁、益间士民心。
English: At the beginning, Wu and Wu Jie were both generals of the Song Dynasty, and the brothers and their father successively defended the western territory, winning the hearts of the people.

古文：璘孙曦太尉、昭武军节度使、成都潼川府夔利等州路宣抚副使，泰和六年出兵兴元，有窥关、陇之志，诱募边民为盗，遣谍以利饵凤翔卒温昌，结三虞候军为内应。
现代文：瞞孙吴曦官太尉、昭武军节度使、成都潼川府、夔利等州路宣抚副使，泰和六年从兴元发兵，有图关、陇的志向，诱惑招募边民为盗，派间谍用利引诱凤翔士兵温昌，结交三虞候军做内应。
English: He deceived Sun Wu Xi, the officer-lieutenant, the commander-in-chief of the Shouwu army, and the vice-envoys of the Chengdu Xichuanfu and Xili and other state roads, and sent troops from Xingyuan to Taihe for six years. He had the ambition of Tugan and Zou, tempted and recruited the border people as thieves, sent spies to lure the soldiers of Fengxiang to Wenchang with profits, and made friends with the Sangu army.

古文：昌诣府上变。
现代文：昌前往府上突发兵变。
English: Chang went to the capital to instigate a sudden mutiny.

古文：曦遣诸将出秦、陇间，与纲等诸军相拒。
现代文：曦派各将出秦、陇间，与纲等各军对抗。
English: Xi sent his generals to Qin and Jurchen states to fight against the Gangs and other armies.

古文：上闻韩侂胄忌曦威名，可以间诱致之，梁、益居宋上游，可以得志于宋，封曦蜀国王，铸印赐诏，诏纲经略之。其赐曦诏曰：
现代文：皇帝听说韩胄忌恨曦的威名，可以离间诱招他，梁、益居宋上游，可以得志于宋，封曦蜀国王，铸印赐诏，下诏纲策划处理这事，那赐曦诏书说：
English: The emperor heard that Han Yu hated Xi's prestige and could entice him away, that Liang and Yi lived in the upper reaches of the Song Dynasty and could win the favor of the Song Dynasty, that the king of Shu should be sealed, and that an imperial edict should be issued to deal with the matter. The imperial edict said:

古文：宋自佶、桓失守，构窜江表，僣称位号，偷生吴会，时则乃祖武安公玠捍御两川。
现代文： 宋自赵佶、赵桓失守，赵构窜逃江外，越分称帝，在吴、会苟且偷生，那时就是你祖武安公守卫两川。
English: Song dynasty lost Zhao Wei and Zhao Huan, Zhao Jie Wei fled across the river, Yue Duan proclaimed himself emperor, and Wu, Guoguo, and Guanzhong were born. At that time, it was your ancestor Wu Angong who guarded the two rivers.

古文：洎武顺王璘嗣有大勋，固宜世胙大帅，遂荒西土，长为藩辅，誓以河山，后裔纵有栾黡之汰，犹当十世宥之。
现代文：到武顺王瞞随后建大功，本来应世代享有大帅封爵，让那远方西土，长为藩属辅助国家，并对河山发誓，后代即使有栾的逾发，还应当十代宽宥他。
English: To King Wushun for his subsequent great achievements, he should have enjoyed the title of grand marshal for generations, let the distant West Land become a subsidiary state of the domain, and swear to the rivers and mountains that future generations should forgive him even if he has a bad haircut.

古文：然威略震主者身危，功盖天下者不赏，自古如此，非止于今。
现代文：可是威望谋略震主者身危，功盖天下者不赏，自古如此，不仅现在是这样。
English: However, the master of the prestige strategy is in danger, and the achievement is not appreciated by the world. This has been the case since ancient times, and it is not only the case now.

古文：卿家专制蜀汉，积有岁年，猜嫌既萌，进退维谷，代之而不受，召之而不赴，君臣之义，已同路人，譬之破桐之叶不可以复合，骑虎之势不可以中下矣。
现代文： 你专断蜀汉，积好些年了，猜忌已经发生，进退两难，代替你不接受，召见你不前往，君臣之义已和陌生人一样，譬如破桐之叶不可复合，骑上虎背中途难下。
English: You have been arbitrarily ruling Shu and Han for several years. Suspicion has already occurred. You are in a dilemma. You will not accept a substitute, and you will not go to a summons. The righteousness of princes and ministers has become the same as that of strangers. For example, it is impossible to combine the leaves of a broken paulownia tree, and it is difficult to get off the back of a tiger.

古文：此事流传，稔于朕听，每一思之，未尝不当馈叹息，而卿犹偃然自安。
现代文：此事流传，我已熟听，每次一想没有不在进食时叹息的，而你还偃然自安。
English: I've heard this story so many times, and every time I think about it, I can't help but sigh when I'm eating, and you feel so relieved.

古文：且卿自视翼赞之功孰与岳飞？
现代文：况且你自己看看辅助的功劳与岳飞比怎么样？
English: Besides, how about you take a look at the ratio between the auxiliary credit and the Yuefei?

古文：飞之威名战功暴于南北，一旦见忌，遂被叁夷之诛，可不畏哉。
现代文：岳飞之威名战功显露于南北，一旦见忌，竟被诛灭三族，不可怕吗？
English: Yuefei's great fame and war exploits were revealed in the north and south. Once he was seen as a bogey, he was actually annihilated by the three ethnic groups. Isn't that terrible?

古文：故智者顺时而动，明者因机而发，与其负高世之勋见疑于人，惴惴然常惧不得保其首领，曷若顺时因机，转祸为福，建万世不朽之业哉！
现代文：因此聪明人顺应时机行动，明智的人凭借机遇兴起，与其背着高世之勋被猜疑，惴惴然常担心不能保住自己性命，何不顺时乘机，转祸为福，建万世不朽之业呢！
English: Therefore, clever people act in accordance with the time, and wise people rise up by virtue of opportunities. Instead of being suspected of carrying high honors, they often worry about not being able to save their lives. Why not take advantage of the opportunity, turn misfortune into blessing, and build an immortal career for all ages!

古文：今赵扩昏孱，受制强臣，比年以来，顿违誓约，增屯军马，招纳叛亡。
现代文： 如今赵扩昏庸懦弱，被有势力的臣子控制，接连几年违背舍弃盟约，增聚军马，招纳叛变逃亡的人。
English: Today, Zhao Zhan is weak and feeble, controlled by powerful courtiers. For several years in a row, he has violated and abandoned the covenant, amassed troops, and recruited renegades and fugitives.

古文：朕以生灵之故，未欲遽行讨伐，姑遣有司移文，复因来使宣谕，而乃不顾道理，愈肆凭陵，虔刘我边陲，攻剽我城邑。
现代文：我因百姓的缘故，不想急着讨伐，姑且派有司传递文书予以谴责，又趁宋使到来表明态度，而他们竟不顾道理，更加放肆欺凌，劫掠我的边境，攻抢我的城镇。
English: For the sake of the people, I did not want to rush into a crusade, so I sent an officer to deliver a document to condemn them, and took advantage of the arrival of the Song Dynasty to show their attitude, but they did not care about reason, and became more arrogant and bullying, plundering my border and attacking my town.

古文：是以忠臣扼腕，义士痛心，家与为仇，人百其勇，失道至此，虽欲不亡得乎？
现代文：为此忠臣扼腕、义士痛心，家家视宋朝为敌，人人百倍激发勇气，失道至此，虽想不亡国能办到吗？
English: For this reason, loyal vassals wrung their hands, the righteous were heartbroken, families regarded the Song Dynasty as the enemy, everyone inspired courage a hundred times, and lost their way to this point, although they wanted to not lose their country, could they do it?

古文：朕已分命虎臣，临江问罪，长驱并骛，飞渡有期，此正豪杰分功之秋也。
现代文：我已分头命令勇武之臣，临江问罪，以不可阻挡之势向南急速挺进，飞渡长江为时不远，这正是英雄争功的时期。
English: I have ordered our brave and valiant vassals to march southward with irresistible momentum. It is not far to fly across the Yangtze River. This is the time for heroes to compete for merits.

古文：卿以英伟之姿，处危疑之地，必能深识天命，洞见事机。若按兵闭境，不为异同，使我师并力巢穴，而无西顾之虞，则全蜀之地，卿所素有，当加封册，一依皇统册构故事。
现代文： 你以英伟之姿，处危疑之地，必然深识天命，洞见成就事业的机会，如按兵闭境不以我军为敌，使我师齐力进入敌人巢穴而无西顾之忧，那么全蜀之地你一向占有的地方，当加封册，一如皇统年封赵构的做法。
English: If you, with your heroic appearance, are in a place of danger and doubt, you must be deeply aware of the fate of the world and have insight into the opportunities for achieving your cause. If you do not take our army as the enemy, and let our division enter the enemy's lair without worrying about the West, then the place you have always occupied in the land of Shu should be sealed, just like the practice of Zhao Zhe in the Year of the Emperor.

古文：更能顺流东下，助为掎角，则旌麾所指，尽以相付。
现代文：进一步能顺流东下，助我为掎角，则军旗指向的地方都交给你。
English: If you can follow the river further to the east and help me to get to the corner, then you will be given the place where the military flag points.

古文：天日在上，朕不食言。
现代文：天日在上，我不食言。
English: Day in and day out, I keep my word.

古文：今送金宝一钮，至可领也。
现代文：今送金宝印一钮，到达后可以领去。 
English: Send a gold stamped button now, and you can take it with you when you arrive.

古文：纲次临江被诏，进至水洛，访得曦族人端，署为水洛城巡检使，遣持诏间行谕曦。
现代文：纲临时驻扎在临江受诏，前进到水洛，访得曦族人端，暂任水洛城巡检使，派他持诏走小道去告诉曦。
English: Gang was temporarily stationed in Linjiang to receive the edict, and then proceeded to Shuiluo to visit the Xi people. He was temporarily appointed as the Shuiluo City patrol inspector, and sent him to hold the edict and walk along the trail to tell Xi.

古文：曦得诏意动，程松尚在兴元，未敢发，诈称杖杀端，以蔽匿其事。
现代文：曦得诏意动，程松还在兴元，未敢发难，诈称杖杀端，来掩盖这事。
English: Xi got his wish, Cheng Song was still in Xingyuan, and before he dared to make trouble, he pretended to be a murderer to cover up the matter.

古文：松兵既败，曦乃遣掌管机宜文字姚圆与端奉表送款。
现代文：松军既然失败，曦于是派掌管机宜文字姚圆和吴端到纲处进表送款。
English: Since the Song army failed, Xi then sent Yao Yuan and Wu Duan, who were in charge of the machine, to the station to send money.

古文：纲遣前京北府录事张仔会吴曦于兴州之置口，曦言归心朝廷无他，张仔请以告身为报，曦尽出以付之，仍献阶州。
现代文：纲派前京兆府录事张仔与吴曦在兴州的置口相会，曦说归心朝廷无其他想法，张仔请求用授官的凭信作为答复，曦全都拿出来交了，还献了阶州。
English: Zhang Zi and Wu Xi met at the gate of Xingzhou in the records of the former Beijing Zhao Prefecture of the Gang School. Xi said that he had no other idea but to return to the imperial court. Zhang Zi requested to use the certificate of investiture as a reply. Xi took it all out and handed it over, and also presented Chaozhou.

古文：朝廷以曦初附，恃中国为援，欲先取襄阳以为蜀汉屏蔽，乃诏右副元帅匡先攻襄阳，诏略曰： 陕西一面虽下四州，吴曦之降朕所经略。
现代文：朝廷因吴曦初归附，需依靠中国为援，想先攻下襄阳作为蜀汉的屏障，于是令右副元帅匡先攻襄阳，诏令大致说： 陕西方面虽攻克四州，吴曦的投降是我策划处理。
English: Since Wu Xi was annexed at the beginning, the imperial court had to rely on China for assistance. They wanted to capture Yangyang first as a barrier to Shu Han, so they ordered the Right Vice-Marshal Kuang to attack Yangyang first. The imperial decree said roughly: Although the Shaanxi side conquered the four states, Wu Xi's surrender was planned and handled by me.

古文：自大军出境，惟卿所部力战为多，方之前人无所愧谢。
现代文：从大军出境，只有你统率的部队打硬仗多，与前人相比并不逊色。
English: Since the departure of the great army, only the troops under your command have fought more hard battles, which is not inferior to their predecessors.

古文：今南伐之事责成卿等，区区俘获不足羡慕，果能为国建功，岂止一身荣宠，后世子孙，亦保富贵。 
现代文：如今讨伐宋朝的事要你们完成，小小的擒获不值得羡慕，果能为国建功，怎么会仅一身荣宠，后世子孙也会保富贵的。 
English: Today, you are expected to complete the crusade against the Song Dynasty. Small gains are not worthy of admiration. If you succeed in building the country, how can you be the only one to be honored? Future generations will also be rich.

古文：匡得诏，乃移兵趋襄阳。
现代文：匡得诏，就转移军队直奔襄阳。
English: When Kuang received the edict, he diverted the army to go straight to Xiangyang.

古文：十二月，曦遣果州团练使郭澄、仙人关使任辛奉表及蜀地图志、吴氏谱牒来上。
现代文：十二月，吴曦派果州团练使郭澄、仙人关使任辛献上降表、蜀地图及吴氏家谱。
English: In December, Wu Xi sent Guo Cheng and Ren Xin to Guozhou Rehearsal to present the declination table, Shu map and Wu family tree.

古文：七年正月，召纲赴京师，以为陕西宣抚副使，进三阶。
现代文：泰和七年正月，召完颜纲前往京城，任陕西宣抚副使，升三级。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of the Taihe era, Yan Gang went to Beijing after being summoned, and was appointed the deputy envoy of the Shaanxi Proclamation, and was promoted to the third level.

古文：还军，吴曦遣郭澄进谢恩表、誓表、贺全蜀归附三表，亲王百官称贺，朝廷以诏答之，并赐誓诏。
现代文：还军，吴曦派郭澄进献谢恩表、誓表、贺全蜀归附三表，亲王百官祝贺，朝廷用诏书答复，并赐给誓诏。
English: After the return of the troops, Wu Xi sent Guo Chengjin to present a letter of thanks, a letter of oath, and three letters of congratulation to He Quan Shu. The prince congratulated hundreds of officials, and the imperial court replied with an imperial rescript and gave an imperial rescript.

古文：郭澄朝辞，谕澄曰： 汝主效顺，以全蜀归附，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：郭澄到朝廷辞别，皇上告诉澄说： 你主效忠顺从，拿全蜀归附，我非常赞许这做法。
English: When Guo Cheng went to the imperial court to bid farewell, the emperor told Cheng: "Your lord is loyal and obedient, and you should return all of Shu to him. I highly approve of this approach."

古文：然立国日浅，恐宋兵侵轶，人心不安，凡有当行事务已委宣抚完颜纲移文计议。
现代文：然而立国时间短，恐怕宋军侵犯袭击，人心不安，凡有要办的事务都已经委托宣抚副使完颜纲通过文书往来计议。
English: However, the time of the founding of the country was short, I am afraid that the Song Army invaded and attacked, the people were uneasy, and all matters that needed to be done had been entrusted to the Vice-Minister of Propaganda and Foreign Affairs through the exchange of documents.

古文：或有紧急，即差人就去讲究。
现代文：或有紧急情况，我马上差人前去研究。
English: If there is an emergency, I will send someone to investigate immediately.

古文：大定间，汝主尝以事入觐，今亦多岁，朕嘉汝主之义，怀想不忘，欲得其绘像，如见其面。
现代文：大定年间，你主曾因事朝见，至今已多年，我赞赏你主之义，怀念不忘，想得到他的画像，如见其面。
English: During the Dadu years, your lord had to see the emperor due to an incident. It has been many years since then. I appreciate your lord's righteousness, remember him fondly, and want to get a picture of him, such as seeing his face.

古文：今已遣使封册，俟回日附进。
现代文：如今派使臣去封他爵位，等回来时把画像带回。
English: Now he is sending an envoy to bestow a title on him, and when he returns, he will bring the picture back with him.

古文：可以此意归谕汝主。 
现代文：可把这意思回去告诉你主。 
English: But go back and tell your master what you meant.

古文：诏以同知临洮府事术虎高琪为封册使，翰林直学士乔宇副之。
现代文：诏用同知临洮府事术虎高琪为封册使，翰林直学士乔宇为副使。
English: He used his acquaintance with the Linyi prefectural government, Hu Gaoqi, as the envoy, and Hanlin Zhiabiao Qiao Yu as the deputy envoy.

古文：诏高琪曰： 卿以边面宣力，加之读书，蜀人识卿威名，勿以财贿动心，失大国体。
现代文：诏高琪说： 你在边境上效力，加上宣读诏书，蜀人知道你的威名，不要因为贿赂动心，失大国体面。
English: Zhao Gaoqi said: You have served on the border, plus read the edict, the people of Shu know your prestige, don't lose the dignity of a great country because of bribery.

古文：检制随去奉职，勿有违枉生事。 
现代文：检制跟去履行职务，不要违背办事准则惹起事端。 
English: Prosecutors should carry out their duties in accordance with the prosecution system, and should not cause trouble in violation of the code of conduct.

古文：顷之，宋安丙杀吴曦。
现代文：不久，宋安丙杀吴曦。
English: Soon after, Song Anhui killed Wu Xi.

古文：上闻曦死，遣使责纲，诏曰： 曦之降，自当进据仙人关，以制蜀命，且为曦重。
现代文：皇上听说曦死，派使责问纲，诏书说： 曦投降后，你应当进占仙人关，来控制蜀的局势，且这也是因为曦的重要。
English: When the emperor heard of Xi's death, he sent an envoy to ask questions. The imperial edict said: "After Xi's surrender, you should invade and occupy Xianren Pass to control the situation in Shu, and this is also because of Xi's importance.

古文：既不据关，复撤兵，使丙无所惮，是宜有今日也。 
现代文：又不占据关口，又撤去部队，使丙无所害怕，这样就会有今日的后果。 
English: He did not occupy the pass and withdrew the troops, so that C would have nothing to fear, which would have led to today's consequences.

古文：于是，诏赠曦太师，命德顺州刺史完颜思忠招魂葬于水洛县。
现代文：于是下诏追封曦为太师，命德顺州刺史完颜思忠招魂葬在水洛县。
English: Therefore, he issued an edict to enthrone Xi as the Grand Master, and ordered that he be buried in Shuiluo County.

古文：以曦族兄端之子为曦后。
现代文：以曦族兄端之子作为曦的后代。
English: Take the son of the elder brother of the Xi tribe as the descendant of Xi.

古文：诏谕陕西军士，略曰： 汝等爰自去冬，出疆用命，擐披甲胄，冒涉艰险，直取山外数州，比之他军实有勤效。
现代文：下诏告诉陕西军士，大致说： 你们从去年冬天开出边境执行命令，穿戴着铠甲、头盔，不顾经历艰险，直取山外数州，比起他军实在是尽力效劳。
English: He issued the following edict to the Shaanxi sergeant-at-arms, saying roughly: Since last winter, you have come out of the border to carry out orders, wearing armor and helmets, and despite the hardships and dangers, you have directly taken several states outside the mountains. Compared to other armies, you are really trying your best to serve.

古文：界外屯驻日久，负劳苦，恩赏未行，有司申奏不明，以致如此。
现代文：边界外驻扎时间长，遭受劳苦，却恩赏没有拿到，是有司报告得不明白，才导致这样。
English: They have been stationed outside the border for a long time, they have suffered hardships, but they have not received any reward. It is because they do not understand the report of the division that has led to this.

古文：朕已令增给赏物，以酬尔劳。
现代文：我已令赠给赏物，用来酬报你们的辛劳。
English: I have decreed a reward for your efforts.

古文：惟是余贼未殄，犹须经略。
现代文：只是余贼未灭，还需要经营谋划。
English: However, the remaining thieves are not extinct, and business planning is still needed.

古文：眷我师徒，久役未解，深怀悯念，寤寐弗忘。
现代文：眷念我军士，长久服役没有解除，深怀怜悯思念，日夜不忘。
English: Thinking of my sergeant, long-term service has not been lifted, with deep compassion and longing, day and night do not forget.

古文：汝等益思体国之忠，奋敌忾之勇，协心毕力，建立功勋；高爵厚禄，朕所不吝。 
现代文：你们更应想着对国家的忠心，发扬抗击敌人的勇气，齐心协力，建立功勋；给高官厚禄，我是不吝惜的。 
English: You should think more about loyalty to the country, promote the courage to resist the enemy, work together to build merit; I will not begrudge high-ranking officials a generous reward.

古文：宋人复陷阶州、西和州，纲至凤翔，诏彻五州之兵退保要害，五州之民愿徙内地者厚抚集之。以近侍局直长为四川安慰使。
现代文：宋人再次攻破阶州、西和州，纲到凤翔，下诏撤出五州的军队退保要害，五州的百姓愿迁内地的厚抚他们，把他们聚集起来，用近侍局直长为四川安慰使。
English: The Song people once again broke through Chaozhou, Xihezhou, and Fengxiang, and ordered the withdrawal of the troops from the five states to retreat to the key point. The people of the five states were willing to move them to the hinterland, gather them together, and use the immediate chief of the courtier bureau as the Sichuan consolation envoy.

古文：蒲察贞撤黄牛戍，宋安丙乘之，连兵来袭，遂陷散关，巩州钤辖兀颜阿失死之。
现代文：蒲察贞撤向黄牛戍，宋安丙追逐他们，派兵来袭，于是丢失散关，巩州钤辖兀颜阿失死在那里。
English: Puchazhen retreated to Huang Niuqi, Song An Huan chased them, sent troops to attack, and then lost Sankuan, and Gongzhou Xizhi Yingyan Ah lost his life there.

古文：诏夺纲官一阶，降兵部侍郎，权宣抚副使。
现代文：下诏削纲官一级，降兵部侍郎，代理宣抚副使。
English: The following edict reduced the rank of officials to the first grade, demoted attendants of the military department, and acting deputy envoys.

古文：遣户部侍郎尼庞古怀忠按治纲以下将吏。
现代文：派户部侍郎尼庞古怀忠照章惩处纲以下将吏。
English: He dispatched Nie Pang Gu Huai Zhong, the head of the Household Division, to punish the following generals.

古文：怀忠未至陕西，纲、贞遣兵潜自昆谷西山养马涧入，四面攻之，复取散关，斩宋将张统领、于团练。
现代文：怀忠未到陕西，纲、贞派兵悄悄地从昆谷西山养马涧进入，四面攻之，再攻取了散关，斩杀宋将张统领、于团练。
English: Before Huaizhong arrived in Shaanxi, Zang and Zhen quietly sent soldiers from the West Kungu Mountain to raise horses and enter, attack it from all sides, and then capture Sankuan, kill Song general Zhang, and train in the regiment.

古文：纲遣使奏捷，诏书奖谕，贞等释不问。
现代文：纲派使报捷，下诏通报表彰，蒲察贞等人放下不再追究。
English: The Guan faction made the report successful, the lower edict made the report successful, and the people such as Puchazhen were put down and no longer investigated.

古文：八年，宋献韩侂胄、苏师旦首，诏以陕西关隘还之，宋罢兵。
现代文：泰和八年，宋朝献上韩胄、苏师旦的首级，下诏用陕西关隘归还，宋停止军事行动。
English: In the 8th year of the Taihe era, the Song Dynasty presented the heads of Han Xuan and Su Shidan to the emperor. In the following year, the emperor returned the heads of Guanqiao in Shaanxi Province, and the Song Dynasty stopped military operations.

古文：纲还京师。
现代文：纲还京师。
English: The program returned to the Beijing division.

古文：是岁，章宗崩，卫绍王即位，除陕西路按察使，累官尚书左丞。
现代文：这年，章宗去世，卫绍王即位，任纲为陕西路按察使，逐步升为尚书左丞。
English: In the same year, Zhang Zong died and King Weishao ascended to the throne. He was appointed as Shaanxi Road Inspector and gradually rose to the position of Shang Shuzhanzheng.

古文：至宁元年，纲行省事于缙山，徒单镒使人谓纲曰： 高琪驻兵缙山甚得人心，士皆思奋，与其行省亲往，不若益兵为便。 
现代文：至宁元年，纲到缙山行省事，徒单镒派人对他说 ：高琪驻兵缙山很得人心，士气很高，与其行省亲自前去，不如给他增兵为好。 
English: In the first year of the Ning Dynasty, when Gang went to Lushan to govern the province, people said to him: Gao Qi's garrison in Lushan is very popular and has high morale. Instead of going to the province in person, it would be better to give him more soldiers.

古文：纲不听。
现代文：纲不听。
English: They don't listen.

古文：徒单镒复使人止之曰： 高琪措画已定，彼之功即行省之功。 
现代文：徒单镒又派人制止他说： 高琪策划已定，他的功就是行省的功。 
English: Tushan Zang also sent someone to stop him and said: Gao Qi's plan has been decided, his achievement is the achievement of the province.

古文：纲不从。
现代文：纲仍不听从。
English: The programme remains unimplemented.

古文：纲至缙山，遂大败。
现代文：纲到缙山就大败。
English: It was a crushing defeat when they reached Shaoshan.

古文：胡沙虎斩关入中都，迁卫绍王于卫邸，命纲子安和作家书，使亲信人召纲。
现代文：胡沙虎杀进关口进入中都，放逐卫绍王到卫王府，命纲子安和写家信，派亲信人召回纲。
English: Hu Shaogu entered the gate into the capital, banished Wei Shao Wang to Wei Wangfu, wrote a letter to his family, and sent his relatives to recall him.

古文：纲至，囚之悯忠寺，明日，押至市中，使张霖卿数以失四川、败缙山之事，杀之。
现代文：纲一回来，拘禁到悯忠寺，第二天，押到市中，派张霖卿列举失掉四川、败在缙山的事情，杀了他。
English: As soon as Gang came back, he was detained in Mitizhong Temple. The next day, he was taken to the middle of the city, and Zhang Linqing was sent to enumerate the events of losing Sichuan and the defeat in Lushan, and he was killed.

古文：贞祐四年，纲子权复州刺史安和上书讼父冤，略曰： 先臣纲在章宗时，招怀西羌青宜可等十八部族，取宋五州，吴曦以全蜀归朝。
现代文：贞四年，纲子代理复州刺史安和上书为父辩冤，大致说： 先臣纲在章宗时，招收安抚了西羌青宜可等十八部族，攻取宋国五州，吴曦用全蜀归附朝廷。
English: In the fourth year of Zhen's reign, Nanzi's agent, the Fuzhou-based scholar Shi Anhe, wrote a letter defending his father's wrongdoings, saying roughly: When Nanzi was Zhang Zong, he recruited and pacified eighteen tribes including the Western Han, Qing Yi Ke, and conquered the five states of Song. Wu Xi used all of Shu to annex it to the imperial court.

古文：胡沙虎无故见杀，夺其官爵。 
现代文：被胡沙虎无故杀死，夺去官爵。 
English: He was killed without reason by the Hoosier tiger and deprived of his title.

古文：诏下尚书省议： 谨按元年诏书云，胡沙虎屡害良将，正谓纲辈也。 
现代文：诏令放到尚书省议论 ，严格按元年诏书说，胡沙虎屡害良将，正好说的是完颜纲这批人 。
English: The imperial edict was discussed in Shangshu Province, and strictly according to the imperial edict of the first year, it was said that Hu Shaohu repeatedly harmed good generals, just saying that this group of people were finished.

古文：乃追复尚书左丞。
现代文：于是追复纲为尚书左丞。
English: As a result, the reinstatement plan was shelved.

古文：弟定奴。
现代文：纲的弟弟叫定奴。
English: Gang's younger brother is called Ding Nong.

