古文：右徵与少徵，调右手太阳上。
现代文：对于火音中的右徵和少徵类型的人，应调治右侧手太阳小肠经的上部。
English: For right-handers and people with few symptoms, the upper part of the solar small intestine in the right hand should be adjusted.

古文：左商与左徵，调左手阳明上。
现代文：对于金音中的左商和火音中的左徵类型的人，当调治左侧手阳明大肠经的上部。
English: For the left-hand merchants in the golden tone and the left-hand types in the fire tone, the upper part of the left-hand yangming colonic meridian should be adjusted.

古文：少徵与大宫，调左手阳明上。
现代文：对于火音中的少徵和土音中的太宫类型的人，应当调治左侧手阳明经脉的上部。
English: For those who are of the Tai Gong type, the upper part of the Yang Ming meridian on the left hand should be regulated.

古文：右角与大角，调右手少阳下。
现代文：对于木音中的右角和太角类型的人，调治右侧足少阳胆经的下部。
English: For right-angled and wide-angled people in the wooden sound, adjust the lower part of the right foot.

古文：大徵与少徵，调左手太阳上。
现代文：对于火音中的太徵和少徵类型的人，调治左侧手大肠经的上部。
English: For people with too many symptoms and too few symptoms in the fire sound, adjust the upper part of the left hand colorectal meridian.

古文：众羽与少羽，调右足太阳下。
现代文：对于水音中的众羽和少羽类型的人，调治右侧足太阳膀胱经的下部。
English: For people with many feathers and few feathers in the water sound, adjust the lower part of the solar plexus of the right foot.

古文：少商与右商，调右手太阳下。
现代文：对于金音中的少商和右商类型的人，调治右侧手太阳小肠经的下部。
English: For the right-handed and right-handed people in the golden tone, adjust the lower part of the small intestine of the right hand.

古文：桎羽与众羽，调右足太阳下。
现代文：对于水音中的桎羽和众羽类型的人，调治右侧足太阳膀胱经的下部。
English: For those who are of the feather and wing types in the water sound, adjust the lower part of the solar plexus of the right foot.

古文：少宫与大宫，调右足阳明下。
现代文：对于土音中的少宫和太宫类型的人，调治右侧足阳明胃经的下部。
English: For people of the Shogu and Taiyu types in the tone, adjust the lower part of the right foot Yang Ming stomach meridian.

古文：判角与少角，调右足少阳下。
现代文：对于木音中的判角和少角类型的人，调治右侧足少阳胆经的下部。
English: For the woodwinds in the angle and the type of people with fewer angles, adjust the lower part of the right foot less yang and yang.

古文：釱商与上商，调右足阳明下。
现代文：对于金音中的釱商和上商类型的人，调治右侧足阳明胃经的下部。
English: For the merchants and merchants in the golden tone, adjust the lower part of the right foot Yang Ming stomach meridian.

古文：釱商与上角，调左足太阳下。
现代文：对于金音中的釱商和木音中的上角类型的人，调治左侧足太阳膀胱经的下部。
English: For those who are of the gold tone and the upper horn type in the wood tone, adjust the lower part of the solar plexus of the left foot.

古文：上徵与右徵，同谷麦、畜羊、果杏，手少阴，脏心，色赤、味苦，时夏。
现代文：上徵与右徵属于火音类型的人，同样适用五谷中小麦、五畜中的羊肉、五果中的杏子等苦味食物调养，在五脉对应手少阴心经，在五脏对应心脏，适合于五色中的红色食物、五味中的苦味食物，适应五季的夏季气候。
English: For those who belong to the fire sound type, the upper and right signs are also suitable for the cultivation of bitter foods such as wheat and wheat, lamb in the five animals, and apricot in the five fruits. In the five veins, it corresponds to the heart, and in the five organs, it corresponds to the heart. It is suitable for the red food in the five colors and the bitter food in the five flavors, and it is suitable for the summer climate in the five seasons.

古文：上羽与大羽，同谷大豆、畜彘、果栗，足少阴，脏肾，色黑、味咸，时冬。
现代文：上羽与太羽属于水音类型的人，同样适用五谷中的大豆、五畜中的猪肉、五果中的栗子等咸味的食物调养，在五脉对应足少阴肾经，在五脏对应肾脏，适合于五色中的黑色食物、五味中的咸味食物，适应五季的冬季气候。
English: The upper feather and the great feather belong to the water sound type of people, and are also suitable for the cultivation of salty foods such as soybeans in the grain, pork in the livestock, and chestnuts in the fruit. In the five veins, it corresponds to the foot and kidney meridian, and in the five viscera, it corresponds to the kidney. It is suitable for the black food in the five colors, and the salty food in the five flavors. It is suitable for the winter climate of the five seasons.

古文：上宫与大宫，同谷稷、畜牛、果枣，足太阴，脏脾，色黄、味甘，时季夏。
现代文：上宫与太宫属于土音类型的人，同样适用五谷中的稷米、五畜中的牛肉、五果中的大枣等甜味食物调养，在五脉对应足太阴脾经，在五脏对应脾脏，适合于五色中的黄色食物、五味中的甜味食物，适应五季的夏季第三个月的气候。
English: Shangguo and Taiguo belong to the earth tone type of people, and are also suitable for the cultivation of sweet foods such as glutinous rice in the grain, beef in the livestock, and jujube in the fruit. They correspond to the foot yin and yang in the five veins, and to the spleen in the viscera. They are suitable for yellow foods in the five colors and sweet foods in the five flavors, and are suitable for the climate of the third month of summer in the five seasons.

古文：上商与右商，同谷黍、畜鸡、果桃，手太阴，脏肺，色白、味辛，时秋。
现代文：上商与右商属于金音类型的人，同样适用五谷中的黍米、五畜中的鸡肉、五果中的桃子等辛味的食物调养，在五脉对应手太阴肺经，在五脏对应肺脏，适合于五色中的白色食物、五味中的辛味食物，适应五季的秋季气候。
English: Shang Shang and Right Shang belong to the gold tone type of people, and are also suitable for the cultivation of spicy foods such as glutinous rice in the five grains, chicken in the five animals, and peaches in the five fruits. They correspond to the palms in the five veins, and the lungs in the five viscera. They are suitable for white foods in the five colors, and spicy foods in the five flavors, and are suitable for the autumn climate in the five seasons.

古文：上角与大角，同谷麻、畜犬、果李，足厥阴，脏肝，色青、味酸，时春。
现代文：上角与太角属于木音类型的人，同样适用五谷中的芝麻、五畜中的狗肉、五果中的李子等酸味的食物调养，在五脉对应足厥阴肝经，在五脏对应肝脏，适合于五色中的青色食物、五味中的酸味食物，适应五季的春季气候。
English: The upper horn and the thick horn belong to the wood sound type of people, and are also suitable for the cultivation of sour foods such as sesame in the grain, dog meat in the livestock, and plums in the fruit. In the five veins, it corresponds to the foot and the liver, and in the five viscera, it corresponds to the liver. It is suitable for the blue food in the five colors, and the sour food in the five flavors. It is suitable for the spring climate of the five seasons.

古文：大宫与上角，同右足阳明上。
现代文：土音的太宫与木音的上角类型的人，都可以调治右侧足阳明胃经的上部。
English: People of the earth tone and wood tone can adjust the upper part of the right foot yang bright stomach meridian.

古文：左角与大角，同左足阳明上。
现代文：木音的左角与太角类型的人，都可以调治左侧足阳明胃经的上部。
English: The left angle of the wooden sound and the type of person with a wide angle can both adjust the upper part of the left foot sun and stomach meridian.

古文：少羽与大羽，同右足太阳下。
现代文：水音的少羽和太羽类型的人，都可以调治右侧足太阳膀胱经的下部。
English: Both short-feathered and long-feathered people can adjust the lower part of the solar plexus of the right foot.

古文：左商与右商，同左手阳明上。
现代文：金音的左商与右商类型的人，都可以调治左侧手阳明大肠经的上部。
English: Both left-handed and right-handed people can regulate the upper part of the large intestine on the left hand.

古文：加宫与大宫，同左足少阳上。
现代文：土音的加宫与太宫类型的人，都可以调治左侧足少阳胆经的上部。
English: People with the earthy sound and those with the Tai Gong type can adjust the upper part of the left foot with less yang and gall.

古文：质判与大宫，同左手太阳下。
现代文：火音中的质判和土音中的太宫类型的人，都可以调治左侧手太阳小肠经的下部。
English: People with the quality judgment in the fire sound and the palace type in the earth sound can adjust the lower part of the small intestine of the left hand.

古文：判角与大角，同左足少阳下。
现代文：木音中判角与太角类型的人，都可以调治左侧足少阳胆经的下部。
English: Those who are of the wood-tone, medium-angle and wide-angle types can adjust the lower part of the left foot.

古文：大羽与大角，同右足太阳上。
现代文：水音中的太羽与木音中的太角类型的人，调治右侧足太阳膀胱经的上部。
English: For people who are too feathery in the water tone and too angular in the wood tone, adjust the upper part of the solar plexus of the right foot.

古文：大角与大宫，同右足少阳上。
现代文：木音的太角与土音的太宫类型的人，调治右侧足少阳胆经的上部。
English: For those who are of the wood-sounding Tai Kok and earth-sounding Tai Kung types, adjust the upper part of the right foot Shao Yang Yi Jing.

古文：右徵、少徵、质徵、上徵、判徵。
现代文：右徵、少徵、质徵、上徵、判徵，是火形、徵音人的五种类型。
English: There are five types of right-hand, right-hand, left-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand, right-hand

古文：右角、釱角、上角、大角、判角。
现代文：右角、釱角、上角、太角、判角，是木形、角音人的五种类型。
English: Right angle, bevel angle, top angle, wide angle, and bevel angle are the five types of wooden and square speakers.

古文：右商、少商、釱商、上商、左商。
现代文：右商、少商、釱商、上商、左商，是金形、商音人的五种类型。
English: There are five types of merchants: right merchants, low merchants, middle merchants, upper merchants, and left merchants.

古文：少宫、上宫、大宫、加宫、左角宫。
现代文：少宫、上宫、太宫、加宫、左宫，是土形、宫音人的五种类型。
English: Shogu, Jogu, Taigu, Kagu, and Samogu are the five types of Tsuchigata and Miyaonjin.

古文：众羽、桎羽、上羽、大羽、少羽。
现代文：众羽、桎羽、上羽、太羽、少羽，是水形、羽音人的五种类型。
English: Many feathers, feathered feathers, upper feathers, too many feathers, too few feathers, are the five types of water-shaped and feather-sounding people.

古文：黄帝曰：妇人无须者，无血气乎？
现代文：黄帝问：女性不长胡须，是没有血气的缘故吗？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: If women do not grow beards, is it because they have no blood?

古文：岐伯曰：冲脉、任脉皆起于胞中，上循背里，为经络之海。
现代文：岐伯答道：冲脉和任脉都起于胞中，沿脊背里侧向上循行，是经脉和络脉气血汇聚的大海。
English: Qi Bo replied, "All the arteries and veins originate in the middle of the cell, and run along the dorsal side of the spine. It is a sea of meridians and choroids.

古文：其浮而外者，循腹右上行，会于咽喉，别而络唇口。
现代文：循行外部表浅部位者，循腹部上行，在咽喉部交会，其中的一个分支，别出咽喉，环口、唇循行。
English: For those who follow the external superficial parts, follow the abdomen up, meet at the throat, one of the branches, do not follow the throat, ring mouth, lips.

古文：血气盛则充肤热肉，血独盛者澹渗皮肤，生毫毛。
现代文：血气充盛则肌肤得到气血温煦和濡养而肌肉丰满，皮肤润泽，只有营血亢盛且渗灌到皮肤中，毫毛才会生长。
English: When the blood qi is full, the skin gets the qi and blood temperature and moisture, while the muscles are plump and the skin is moist. Only when the blood is full and permeates into the skin, the hairs will grow.

古文：今妇人之生，有余于气，不足于血，以其数脱血也。冲任之脉，不荣口唇，故须不生焉。
现代文：但是，女性的生理特点是气有余而血不足，因为每月都有经血排出体外，冲、任两脉的血气，不足以营养口唇周围，所以女性不生胡须。
English: However, the physiological characteristics of women are excess qi and insufficient blood, because menstrual blood is excreted every month, and the blood of any two veins is not enough to nourish around the lips, so women do not grow beards.

古文：黄帝曰：士人有伤于阴，阴气绝而不起，阴不用，然其须不去，其故何也？
现代文：黄帝又问道：男性中有人损伤了阴器，造成阳痿而不能勃起，丧失了性功能，但他的胡须仍然继续生长是什么原因呢？
English: Huang Di also asked: What is the reason why some men have damaged the genitals, caused impotence and can not get an erection, and lost sexual function, but his beard still continues to grow?

古文：宦者独去何也？
现代文：而宦者的胡须因受阉割便不再生长了，这又是什么原因呢？
English: And what is the reason that the moustache of the moustachioed man no longer grows due to castration?

古文：愿闻其故。
现代文：请你讲讲其中的道理。
English: I want to know why.

古文：岐伯曰：宦者去其宗筋，伤其冲脉，血泻不复，皮肤内结，唇口内荣，故须不生。
现代文：岐伯回答说：宦官受阉割是将睾丸切除，伤及冲脉而使冲脉之血外泄，伤口愈合后皮肤干结，阻断了冲任二脉血液的正常循行路线，致使口唇周围得不到血液荣养，所以不再生胡须。
English: Qibo replied: The castration of eunuchs is to remove the testicles, injure the artery and cause the blood of the artery to leak out. After the wound heals, the skin dries, blocking the normal follow-up route of the blood of the two arteries. As a result, the blood around the lips is not nourished, so the beard is no longer born.

古文：黄帝曰：其有天宦者，未尝被伤，不脱于血，然其须不生，其故何也？
现代文：黄帝问：有的人是天阉，阴茎没受外伤，也不像女性那样定期排出经血，但是也不长胡须，这是什么原因呢？
English: Huang Di asked: Some people are celibate, the penis is not traumatized, and it does not discharge menstrual blood regularly like a woman, but it does not grow a beard. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：此天之所不足也，其任冲不盛，宗筋不成，有气无血，唇口不荣，故须不生。
现代文：岐伯回答说：这属于先天性生理缺陷，这类人冲脉和任脉都不充盛，阴茎和睾丸都没有发育健全，导致宗筋无势，所以虽然有气而血不足，不能上行荣养口唇四周，因此也不能生长胡须。
English: Qi Bo replied: "This is a congenital physiological defect. This type of person has no fullness of the pulses and any pulses. The penis and testicles are not fully developed, resulting in a weak paternal cord. Therefore, although there is qi, there is not enough blood, and it is not possible to go up and nourish around the lips. Therefore, it is not possible to grow a beard.

古文：黄帝曰：善乎哉！
现代文：黄帝说：讲得太好了！
English: Huang Di said: It was a great speech!

古文：圣人之通万物也，若日月之光影，音声鼓响，闻其声而知其形，其非夫子，孰能明万物之精。
现代文：具有高度智慧的人能通晓万事万物，就像日月的光芒，立其竿就能见其影；擂鼓作响，听到声音就能知道它的形状，由此可以知彼，除先生你之外，又有谁还能明达万事万物的精妙之理。
English: A highly intelligent person can understand all things, just like the light of the sun and the moon, you can see its shadow immediately; when the gong and the drum are beating, you can know its shape by hearing the sound, and thus you can know who else can understand the subtlety of all things except you.

古文：是故圣人，视其颜色，黄赤者多热气，青白者少热气，黑色者多血少气。
现代文：所以有才智的人，看到他人容颜和气色的变化，便知道体内气血的盛衰：面色黄赤，便知体内气血有热；面色青白，就是气血有寒；面呈黑色，是多血少气。
English: Therefore, an intelligent person, seeing the changes in the face and complexion of others, will know the rise and fall of qi and blood in the body: if the face is yellow and red, it will know that the qi and blood in the body are hot; if the face is blue and white, it means that the qi and blood are cold; if the face is black, it is more blood and less qi.

古文：美眉者太阳多血，通髯极须者少阳多血，美须者阳明多血。
现代文：眉目清秀是太阳经多血，须髯很长是少阳经多血，胡须美好是阳明经多血。
English: A clear brow is the sun through much blood, a long beard is the sun through much blood, and a beautiful beard is the sun through much blood.

古文：此其时然也。
现代文：实际情况，常常就是这样的。
English: In practice, this is often the case.

古文：夫人之常数，太阳常多血少气，少阳常多气少血，阳明常多血多气，厥阴常多气少血，少阴常多血少气，太阴常多血少气，此天之常数也。
现代文：人体经脉，气血分布有一定比数：太阳经通常是多血少气，少阳经一般是多气少血，阳明经多血多气，厥阴经多气少血，少阴经多血少气，太阴经也常是多血少气，这是人体正常的生理规律。
English: There is a certain ratio in the distribution of qi and blood in the meridians of the human body: the solar meridian is usually more blood and less qi, the minor yang meridian is generally more qi and less blood, the yangming meridian is more blood and more qi, the juyin meridian is more qi and less blood, the minor yin meridian is more blood and less qi, and the major yin meridian is also often more blood and less qi, which is a normal physiological law of the human body.

