古文：虞舜侧微，尧闻之聪明，将使嗣位，历试诸难，作《舜典》。
现代文：虞舜出身微寒。尧听说他智慧豁达，明辨事理，想让他承继大位，用很多难题对他进行考验。作了《舜典》记录这些情况。
English: Yuxuan came from a humble background. Yuxuan heard that he was intelligent and open-minded, and that he was able to discern between right and wrong. He wanted him to succeed to the throne, and tested him with many difficult problems. He made "Yuxuan" to record these situations.

古文：曰若稽古，帝舜曰重华，协于帝。
现代文：考察古代的历史，帝舜名叫重华，圣明与帝尧相合。
English: Examining the history of ancient times, the emperor's name was Chonghua, and Shengming coincided with the emperor.

古文：浚哲文明，温恭允塞，玄德升闻，乃命以位。
现代文：他智慧深邃，温和谦逊的美德充满天地之间，他潜心加强自身道德修养，朝堂上的官员都听说过他，于是他被授予官职。
English: His wisdom was profound, his gentle and humble virtues filled heaven and earth, he devoted himself to strengthening his moral cultivation, the officials in the court had heard of him, and he was awarded an official post.

古文：慎徽五典，五典克从；纳于百揆，百揆时叙；宾于四门，四门穆穆；纳于大麓，烈风雷雨弗迷。
现代文：舜真诚善意地履行父义、母慈、兄友、弟恭、子孝这五种伦理道德规范，使人们都能遵循这五种伦理道德规范。尧又命舜总理部落联盟一切政务，各种政务都处理的井井有条。又命舜在明堂门口欢迎觐见的四方部落首领，来朝的宾客都肃然起敬。又让舜深入大山丛林中，他在暴风雷雨中也不迷失道路，君主尧说： 来吧，舜！
English: He also ordered the prime minister of the tribal alliance to carry out all government affairs, and all kinds of government affairs were handled in an orderly manner. He also ordered the tribal chiefs of the four directions to welcome him at the entrance of the Ming Hall, and the guests who came to the DPRK were awestruck. He also let him go deep into the mountain jungle, and he did not lose his way in the storms and thunderstorms, and the monarch said: Come on, you!

古文：帝曰： 格！
现代文：三年来我询问了你的政事活动，考察了你的言论，我认为你可以取得功业，可以继承帝位了。 
English: Shen Di said: Come on!

古文：汝舜。询事考言，乃言厎可绩，三载。汝陟帝位。 
现代文：舜谦让于有德的人，不肯继承帝位。
English: He humbly yielded to the virtuous and refused to succeed to the imperial throne.

古文：舜让于德，弗嗣。
现代文：正月初一，舜在尧的太庙接受了禅让的册命。
English: He felt that he was not virtuous enough, so he wanted to give it to a virtuous person, but he did not want to inherit it.

古文：正月上日，受终于文祖。在璇玑玉衡，以齐七政。
现代文：舜继位后，他观察了北斗七星的运行规律，列出了七项政事。
English: After his succession, he observed the operation of the Big Dipper and listed seven political affairs.

古文：肆类于上帝，禋于六宗，望于山川，遍于群神。
现代文：接着，举行祭天大典，向天帝报告继承帝位的事，又祭祀了天地四时，祭祀山川和群神。
English: Next, a grand ceremony of offering sacrifices to the heavens was held to report to the heavenly emperor on the matter of succession to the imperial throne. In addition, sacrifices were offered to the heavens and the earth at four o'clock, as well as to the mountains, rivers and deities.

古文：辑五瑞，既月乃日，觐四岳群牧，班瑞于群后。
现代文：随后又聚敛了诸侯的五种圭玉，选择吉月吉日，召见四方诸侯，把圭玉颁发给各位君长。
English: Subsequently, the five kinds of gems of the princes were collected, the auspicious month and day were selected, the princes of the four directions were summoned, and the gems were awarded to the monarchs.

古文：岁二月，东巡守，至于岱宗，柴，望秩于山川。
现代文：这年二月，舜来到东方巡视，在泰山举行了祭祀泰山之礼。
English: In February of this year, Zou came to the East to inspect, and held a ceremony to worship Mount Tai.

古文：肆觐东后，协时月正日，同律度量衡。
现代文：对于其他山川，都按地位尊卑依次举行了祭祀，然后，接受了东方诸侯君长的朝见。
English: For other mountains and rivers, they all held sacrifices according to their status, and then received an audience with the Eastern princes.

古文：修五礼、五玉、三帛、二生、一死贽。
现代文：协调春夏秋冬四时的月份，确定天数，统一音律、度、量、衡。
English: Coordinate the months of spring, summer, autumn and winter at four o'clock, determine the number of days, and unify the rhythm, degree, quantity and weight.

古文：如五器，卒乃复。五月南巡守，至于南岳，如岱礼。
现代文：制定了公侯伯子男朝聘的礼节、五种瑞玉、三种不同颜色的丝绸、活羊羔、活雁、死野鸡，分别作为诸侯、卿大夫和士朝见时的贡物。而五种瑞玉，朝见完毕后，仍然还给诸侯。
English: He established the etiquette for court nobles, five kinds of gems, three different colors of silk, live lambs, live geese, and dead pheasants, respectively, as tributes for princes, court doctors, and nobles when meeting with the emperor. And five kinds of gems, after the morning meeting, are still returned to the princes.

古文：八月西巡守，至于西岳，如初。
现代文：五月，舜又来到南方巡视，到达南岳，举行了和祭祀泰山一样的祭祀礼。
English: In May, Zou again came to the south to inspect, and when he arrived at Nanyue, he held a ritual similar to the one for Mount Tai.

古文：十有一月朔巡守，至于北岳，如西礼。
现代文：八月，舜到西方巡视，在华山举行了和泰山一样的祭祀礼。
English: In August, Zou went on a tour to the west and held a ritual similar to that of Mount Tai in Huashan.

古文：归，格于艺祖，用特。
现代文：十一月初一，舜到北方巡视，所行的礼节同在西岳一样。
English: On the first day of November, cormorants went to the north for inspection, and the etiquette was the same as that of the western cormorants.

古文：五载一巡守，群后四朝。
现代文：回来后，到尧的太庙祭祀，用一头牛作祭品。之后就每五年巡视一次，诸侯在四岳朝见天子。
English: After returning, they went to the Imperial Temple in Handan to make a sacrifice, using a cow as an offering. After that, they made an inspection once every five years, and the lords met the Son of Heaven in the morning of the fourth lunar month.

古文：敷奏以言，明试以功，车服以庸。
现代文：向天子报告自己的业绩；天子也认真地考察诸侯国的政治得失，把车马衣服赐予那些有功的诸侯。
English: They report their performance to the heavenly son; the heavenly son also carefully examines the political gains and losses of the vassal states, and bestows chariots, horses, and clothing on the meritorious vassals.

古文：肇十有二州，封十有二山，浚川。
现代文：舜划定十二州的疆界，在十二州的名山上封土为坛举行祭祀，又疏通了河道。
English: He delineated the boundaries of the twelve prefectures, held a ceremony to enshrine the famous mountains of the twelve prefectures, and dredged the rivers.

古文：象以典刑，流宥五刑，鞭作官刑，扑作教刑，金作赎刑。
现代文：舜又在器物上刻画五种常用的刑罚。用流放的办法宽恕犯了五刑的罪人，用鞭打作为官的刑罚，用木条打作为学校的刑罚，用铜作为赎罪的刑罚。
English: It is stipulated that the law should be enforced according to the normal punishments, and the five punishments of thorny characters, cutting noses, breaking feet, castration, and beheading should be mitigated by the method of banishment, the government should punish with whip, the school should punish with yardstick, and the punishment with gold can be used as atonement.

古文：眚灾肆赦，怙终贼刑。
现代文：因过失犯罪，就赦免他；有所依仗不知悔改，就要施加刑罚。
English: If anyone sins unintentionally, he is forgiven, but if he does not repent, he is punished.

古文：钦哉，钦哉，惟刑之恤哉！
现代文：谨慎啊，谨慎啊，刑罚要慎重啊！
English: Be careful, be careful, be careful with the punishment!

古文：流共工于幽州，放欢兜于崇山，窜三苗于三危，殛鲧于羽山，四罪而天下咸服。
现代文：于是把共工流放到幽州，把驩兜流放到崇山，把三苗驱逐到三危，把鲧流放到羽山，并命令他至死不得回朝。
English: So he exiled the co-worker to Yuzhou, the puppet to Chongshan, the three seedlings to Sanwei, and the puppet to Hasan, and ordered him not to return to the imperial court until his death.

古文：二十有八载，帝乃殂落。
现代文：这四个人处罚了，天下的人都心悦诚服。舜辅助尧帝二十八年后，尧帝逝世了。
English: These four people were punished, and people all over the world were sincerely convinced. Twenty-eight years after he assisted Emperor Xuan, Emperor Xuan passed away.

古文：百姓如丧考妣，三载，四海遏密八音。
现代文：人们好象死了父母一样地悲痛，三年间，全国上下停止了乐音。
English: People grieved as if their parents had died, and for three years the music stopped up and down the country.

古文：月正元日，舜格于文祖，询于四岳，辟四门，明四目，达四聪。 咨，十有二牧！ 
现代文：明年正月的一个吉日，舜到了尧的太庙，与四方诸侯君长谋划政事，打开明堂四门宣布政教，使四方见得明白，听得通彻。 啊，十二州的君长！ 
English: On a auspicious day in the first month of the next year, he arrived at the Imperial Temple in Handan, planned political affairs with the princes of the four provinces, and opened the four doors of the hall to announce the government and religion, so that the four provinces could see clearly and listen thoroughly. Ah, princes of the twelve states!

古文：曰， 食哉惟时！
现代文：舜帝说： 生产民食，必须依时！
English: Emperor Qian said: The production of folk food must be in accordance with the time!

古文：柔远能迩，惇德允元，而难任人，蛮夷率服。 
现代文：安抚远方的臣民，爱护近处的臣民，亲厚有德的人，信任善良的人，而又拒绝邪佞的人，这样，边远的外族都会服从。 舜帝说： 啊！
English: To pacify subjects far away, to love subjects near at hand, to be kind to those who are virtuous, to trust those who are good, and to reject those who are evil, in this way, the outlying foreign peoples will all obey.

古文：舜曰： 咨，四岳！有能奋庸熙帝之载，使宅百揆亮采，惠畴？ 佥曰： 伯禹作司空。 
现代文：四方诸侯的君长！有谁能奋发努力、发扬光大尧帝的事业，使居百揆之官辅佐政事呢？ 都说： 伯禹现在作司空。 
English: Princes and lords of the four directions! Who can make strenuous efforts and carry forward the cause of Emperor Gaozong, and make the officials of hundreds of counties assist and support the government? They all said: Bo Yu is now the secretary of the sky.

古文：帝曰： 俞，咨！
现代文：舜帝说： 好啊！
English: Hao Di said: Good!

古文：禹，汝平水土，惟时懋哉！ 
现代文：禹，你曾经平定水土，还要努力做好百揆这件事啊！ 
English: Yu, you used to level the land and water, and you still have to work hard to do a good job in this matter!

古文：禹拜稽首，让于稷、契暨皋陶。
现代文：禹跪拜叩头，让给稷、契和皋陶。
English: Yu kneeled and kowtowed, leaving it to Yao, Qi, and Shao Tao.

古文：帝曰： 俞，汝往哉！ 
现代文：舜帝说： 好啦，还是你去吧！ 
English: Hao Di said: All right, you can go!

古文：帝曰： 弃，黎民阻饥，汝后稷，播时百谷。 
现代文：舜帝说： 弃，人们忍饥挨饿，你主持农业，教人们播种各种谷物吧！ 
English: Emperor Xuan said: Abandon, people are starving, you preside over agriculture, teach people to sow all kinds of grains!

古文：帝曰： 契，百姓不亲，五品不逊。
现代文：舜帝说： 契，百姓不亲，父母兄弟子女都不和顺。
English: Emperor Qian said: Qi, the people are not relatives, parents, brothers and children are not harmonious.

古文：汝作司徒，敬敷五教，在宽。 
现代文：你作司徒吧，谨慎地施行五常教育，要注意宽厚。 
English: You should be a disciple, carefully carry out the five-year education, and pay attention to being generous.

古文：帝曰： 皋陶，蛮夷猾夏，寇贼奸宄。
现代文：舜帝说： 皋陶，外族侵扰我们中国，抢劫杀人，造成外患内乱。
English: Emperor Xuan said: "Xuan Tao, foreigners have invaded our China, robbed and killed people, and caused civil unrest.

古文：汝作士，五刑有服，五服三就。
现代文：你作狱官之长吧，五刑各有使用的方法，五种用法分别在野外、市、朝三处执行。
English: You should be the head of the prison officers. Each of the five punishments has its own method of use. The five methods of use are carried out in the field, in the city, and in the morning.

古文：五流有宅，五宅三居。
现代文：五种流放各有处所，分别住在三个远近不同的地方。
English: Each of the five types of exile has its own place, and they live in three different places, far and near.

古文：惟明克允！ 
现代文：要明察案情，处理公允！ 
English: We must examine the case and deal with it fairly!

古文：帝曰： 畴若予工？ 佥曰： 垂哉！ 
现代文：舜帝说： 谁能当好掌管我们百工的官？ 都说： 垂啊！ 
English: Emperor Xuan said, "Who can be a good official in charge of our hundred craftsmen?" They all said, "Dangling!"

古文：帝曰： 俞，咨！
现代文：舜帝说： 好啊！
English: Hao Di said: Good!

古文：垂，汝共工。 
现代文：垂，你掌管百工的官吧！ 
English: Dang, you're in charge of a hundred craftsmen!

古文：垂拜稽首，让于殳斨暨伯与。 
现代文：垂跪拜叩头，让给殳斨和伯与。
English: Kneel down, bow down, and give in to the yoke and the yoke.

古文：帝曰： 俞，往哉！
现代文：舜帝说： 好啦，去吧！
English: Hao Di said: All right, let's go!

古文：汝谐。 
现代文：你同他们一起去吧！ 
English: You go with them!

古文：帝曰： 畴若予上下草木鸟兽？ 佥曰： 益哉！ 
现代文：舜帝说： 谁掌管我们的山丘草泽的草木鸟兽呢？ 都说： 益啊！ 
English: Emperor Xuan said, "Who is in charge of our hills, grass, trees, birds, and animals?" They all said, "Yi ah!"

古文：帝曰： 俞，咨！
现代文：舜帝说： 好啊！
English: Hao Di said: Good!

古文：益，汝作朕虞。 
现代文：益，你担任我的虞官吧。 
English: Yik, you can be my magistrate.

古文：益拜稽首，让于朱虎、熊罴。
现代文：益跪拜叩头，让给朱虎和熊罴。
English: Yixing knelt down and bowed to Zhu Hu and Xiong Yao.

古文：帝曰： 咨！
现代文：舜帝说： 啊！
English: Hao Di said: Ah!

古文：四岳，有能典朕三礼？ 佥曰： 伯夷！ 
现代文：四方诸侯的君长，有谁能主持我们祭祀天神、地祗、人鬼的三礼呢？ 都说： 伯夷！ 
English: Princes and lords of the four quarters, who can preside over the three rites of our sacrifice to the gods, the earth, and the human spirit? They all say, "Bo Yi!"

古文：帝曰： 俞，咨！
现代文：舜帝说： 好啊！
English: Hao Di said: Good!

古文：伯，汝作秩宗。
现代文：伯，你作掌管祭祀的礼官吧。
English: Count, you should be the etiquette officer in charge of the ritual.

古文：夙夜惟寅，直哉惟清。 
现代文：要早晚恭敬行事，又要正直、清明。 
English: Sooner or later, we must behave respectfully, and we must be honest and clear-headed.

古文：伯拜稽首，让于夔、龙。
现代文：伯夷跪拜叩头，让给夔和龙。
English: Bo Yi kneeled and bowed, yielding to the dragon and dragon.

古文：帝曰： 俞，往，钦哉！ 
现代文：舜帝说： 好啦，去吧！要谨慎啊！ 
English: Hao Di said: All right, go ahead! Be careful!

古文：帝曰： 夔！
现代文：舜帝说： 夔！
English: Emperor Zou said: "Poof!

古文：命汝典乐，教胄子，直而温，宽而栗，刚而无虐，简而无傲。
现代文：我现在任命你为主持乐官，教导年轻人，让他们正直温和，宽大坚栗，刚毅不粗暴，简约不傲慢。
English: I now appoint you to preside over the music, to teach the young men to be honest and gentle, broad and strong, tough and not rough, simple and not arrogant.

古文：诗言志，歌永言，声依永，律和声。
现代文：诗是表达思想感情的，歌是唱出来的语言，五声是根据所唱而制定的，六律是和谐五声的。
English: A poem is an expression of thoughts and feelings, a song is a sung language, the five voices are based on what is sung, and the six laws are a harmony of five voices.

古文：八音克谐，无相夺伦，神人以和。 夔曰： 于！
现代文：八类乐器的声音可以和谐演奏，不使它们乱了次序，如此，即便天地之人听到也会感到和谐、快乐。 夔说： 啊！
English: The sounds of the eight types of musical instruments can be played in harmony, without causing them to be out of order, so that even if people in heaven and earth hear it, they will feel harmony and happiness.

古文：予击石拊石，百兽率舞。 
现代文：让我们敲着石磬，奏起乐来，让那些无知的鸟兽们都跳起来吧！ 舜帝说： 龙！
English: Let's strike the flint and make music, and make those ignorant beasts and birds jump! The Dragon Emperor said, "Dragon!"

古文：帝曰： 龙，朕谗说殄行，震惊联师。命汝作纳言，夙夜出纳朕命，惟允！ 帝曰： 咨！
现代文：我厌恶谗毁的言论和贪残的行为，会使我的民众震惊。我任命你做纳言的官，早晚传达我的命令，转告下面的意见，应当真实！ 舜帝说： 啊！
English: I detest destructive speech and greedy behavior, which will shock my people. I appoint you to be a high-ranking official, to convey my orders sooner or later, to convey the following opinion, it should be true! Emperor Gong said: Ah!

古文：汝二十有二人，钦哉！
现代文：你们二十二人，要谨慎啊！
English: You twenty-two, be careful on your way out!

古文：惟时亮天功。 
现代文：要好好领导天下大事啊！ 
English: It's important to lead the world well!

古文：三载考绩，三考，黜陟幽明，庶绩咸熙。
现代文：舜帝三年考察一次政绩，考察三次后，罢免昏庸的官员，提拔贤明的官员，于是，许多工作都兴办起来了。
English: Emperor Qian inspected the performance of the government once every three years. After three inspections, he dismissed the dull officials and promoted the wise officials. As a result, a lot of work was carried out.

古文：分北三苗。
现代文：又分别对三苗之族作了安置。
English: In addition, the three seedlings were divided and disintegrated.

古文：舜生三十征，庸三十，在位五十载，陟方乃死。
现代文：舜三十岁时被征召，施政二十年，在帝位五十年，在巡狩南方时才逝世。
English: He was conscripted at the age of thirty, governed for twenty years, reigned for fifty years, and died while on a hunting expedition in the south.

