古文：良缘由夙缔，佳偶自天成。
现代文：美满的姻缘，是由前世的缘分所缔结的；佳妙的配偶，是由上天所撮合的。
English: A happy marriage is concluded by the fate of the previous life; a wonderful spouse is matched by heaven.

古文：蹇修与柯人，皆是煤妁之号；冰人与掌判，悉是传言之人。
现代文：蹇修与柯人都是媒妁的别号；冰人和掌判是指传言的媒人。
English: 修 and 柯人 are aliases for matchmakers;冰人 and掌判 refer to rumored matchmakers.

古文：礼须六礼之周，好合二姓之好。
现代文：礼仪必须做到六礼周全，这样才能使两姓结合成美满的婚姻。
English: The etiquette must be perfect, so that the two surnames can be combined into a happy marriage.

古文：女嫁曰于归，男婚曰完娶。
现代文：女子出嫁称做 于归 ，男子结婚称 完娶 。
English: When a woman gets married, she says "I'm home," but when a man gets married, he says "I'm married."

古文：婚姻论财，夷虏之道；同姓不婚，周礼则然。
现代文：婚姻用财产衡量是野蛮落后民族的愚昧行为，同姓不结婚，从周代起便是如此。
English: Using property to measure marriage is a foolish act of a barbaric and backward nation. People do not marry people with the same surname, and this has been the case since the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：女家受聘礼，谓之许缨；新妇谒祖先，谓之庙见。
现代文：女方接受聘礼，称为许缨；新妇初入家门，到家庙谒见祖先称为庙见。
English: The woman receiving the betrothal gift is called the bridegroom; the bride entering the family for the first time and going to the family temple to meet the ancestors is called the temple meeting.

古文：文定纳采，皆为行聘之名；女嫁男婚，谓了子平之愿。
现代文： 文定  纳采 ，都是男方送聘礼的名称；女儿出嫁，儿子娶妻，就称了却 子平之愿 。
English: Wending, natchai, are the names of the man's gift; when a daughter marries, or a son marries, it is called the wish of the concubine.

古文：聘仪曰雁币，卜妻曰凤占。
现代文：行聘的礼物叫 雁币 ，占卜婚姻吉凶叫 凤占 。
English: The gifts for the wedding are called "wild goose coins," and the fortune-telling for marriage is called "phoenix fortune-telling."

古文：成婚之日曰星期，传命之人曰月老。
现代文：成亲的那一天称为星期，成亲有了日子，就预先订立吉期；传达两家的意见，完全要靠媒妁之人从中牵引。
English: The day of the wedding is called a week, and if there is a day for the wedding, the auspicious period is set in advance; it is entirely up to the matchmaker to convey the opinions of the two families.

古文：下采即是纳币，合卺系是交杯。
现代文： 下采 就是男方送礼给女方去求婚， 合卺 是指新婚之夜新郎新娘在洞房内合饮交杯酒。
English: "Shimotsuke" means that the man gives a gift to the woman to propose marriage, and "hagoe" means that on the wedding night, the bride and groom share a drink and a glass of wine in the wedding hall.

古文：执巾栉，奉箕帚，皆女家自谦之词；娴姆训，习《内则》，皆男家称女之说。
现代文：侍奉梳洗的事情，亲自操持洒扫的工作，是出嫁女儿的自谦之词；娴熟女师的教训，勤习内室的礼仪，是帮助丈夫的贤德，是男家称赞对方女儿的赞语。
English: To attend to the matter of combing and washing, and to personally perform the work of sweeping and mopping, are words of self-effacement for a daughter who is getting married; to be familiar with the lessons of a female teacher, and to diligently study the etiquette of the inner room, is the virtue of helping her husband, and is the praise of a man's praise for the other daughter.

古文：绿窗是贫女之室，红楼是富女之居。
现代文：绿影遮蔽窗前，可怜悯的是贫穷人家的女子；红楼之间夹着道路，夸张的是富有人家的女儿。
English: In front of the green shadow covering the window, it is the poor woman who is pitiful; between the red building and the road, it is the rich man's daughter who is exaggerated.

古文：桃夭谓婚姻之及时，摽梅谓婚期之已过。御沟题叶，于祐始得宫娥；绣幕牵丝，元振幸获美女。
现代文：盛开的桃花，姿容是少见的美好，色泽鲜明，男女成婚，正合仲春的时令；梅树上的梅子都已落了下来，只剩下了七个，又只剩下了三个，未婚的女子感叹，已过了出嫁的吉期。通过御沟传递彼此红叶上题写的诗句，于祐和宫女韩夫人终成眷属；在绣幕外牵着红丝线，郭元振有幸娶得美女为妻。
English: Peach blossoms in full bloom, the appearance is rare and beautiful, the color is bright, men and women are married, it is the season of mid-spring; the plums on the plum tree have all fallen, only seven are left, and only three are left, the unmarried woman laments, has passed the auspicious period of marriage. Passing the poems inscribed on the red leaves to each other through the gutter, Yu Yu and the princess Mrs. Han finally become relatives; holding the red silk thread outside the embroidery curtain, Guo Yuan Zhen had the honor of marrying a beautiful woman.

古文：汉武与景帝论妇，欲将金屋贮娇；韦固与月老论婚，始知赤绳系足。
现代文：汉武帝儿时曾对景帝说： 若得阿娇，当以金屋贮之。 韦固与月老谈起婚姻事，才知道一根红线即能促成姻缘。
English: When Emperor Hanwu was a child, he said to Emperor Jing, "If you get Agyeong, you should keep it in a gold house." When Wei Gu and Yue Lao talked about marriage, they knew that a red thread could lead to marriage.

古文：朱陈一村而结好，秦晋两国以联姻。
现代文：朱、陈两姓居一村，代代结成好姻缘。秦晋两国交好，世世通婚。
English: The two surnames of Zhu and Chen lived in the same village and had a good marriage relationship from generation to generation. The two countries of Qin and Jin had a good friendship and intermarried.

古文：蓝田种玉，雍伯之缘；宝窗选婚，林甫之女。
现代文：蓝田种玉，杨雍伯缔结美妙的姻缘；李林甫为了给六个女儿良人，在墙上开了一个暗窗，让她们自己选择。
English: Lantian seed jade, Yang Yongbo concluded a wonderful marriage; Li Linfu, in order to give his six daughters lovers, opened a dark window on the wall and let them choose for themselves.

古文：架鹊桥以渡河，牛女相会；射雀屏而中目，唐高得妻。
现代文：喜鹊在银河上架设浮桥，牛郎和织女才能渡河相会；连续两箭射中屏风上孔雀的眼睛，唐高祖李渊因而娶得窦毅之女为妻。
English: The magpie erects a floating bridge on the Milky Way, so that the cowherd and the weaver can cross the river and meet. Two arrows in a row hit the eyes of the peacock on the screen, and Li Yuan, the ancestor of Tang Gao, married Dou Yi's daughter.

古文：至若礼重亲迎，所以正人伦之始；《诗》首好逑，所以崇王化之原。
现代文：至于说古礼重视亲迎，这是因为婚姻是人伦之始，必须端正；《诗经》将君子好逑列为首篇，正是为了崇尚王道教化的基本源流。
English: As for the ancient rite's emphasis on kinship, this is because marriage is the beginning of human relations and must be correct; the "Song of Songs" lists the gentleman's good manners as the first chapter, precisely in order to advocate the basic source of royal education.

