古文：凡战，所谓人者，推人士而破妖祥也。
现代文：凡是战争中所说的 人战 ，是指发挥人的能动作用，破除各种影响士气的迷信邪说的问题。
English: The so-called people's war in any war refers to the issue of giving play to people's active role and eliminating all kinds of superstitions and heresies that affect morale.

古文：行军之际，或枭集牙旗，或杯酒变血，或麾杆毁折，唯主将决之。
现代文：在行军过程中，或是遇到恶鸟群集主帅旗竿上，或呈出现杯中酒变成血红色，或是发生指挥旗竿突然折断等怪异现象时，只有主将作出正确决断，才能稳定军心。
English: In the process of marching, or encountering a flock of evil birds on the flagpole of the commander-in-chief, or showing a strange phenomenon such as the wine in the cup turning blood red, or the command flagpole suddenly breaking, only the commander-in-chief can make the right decision in order to stabilize the military spirit.

古文：若以顺讨逆，以直伐曲，以贤击愚，皆无疑也。
现代文：如果所进行的战争，是以正义攻讨叛逆，以正直征伐邪曲，以贤能进击愚顽，都应坚信必胜无疑。
English: If the war to be waged is to fight against rebellion with justice, to conquer evil with honesty, and to attack stupidity with wisdom, we should firmly believe that victory is inevitable.

古文：法曰： 禁祥去疑，至死无所之。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 要禁绝迷信，消除疑惑，部队才能至死不会逃跑。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: Superstition must be banned and doubts must be eliminated so that the troops will not run away until they die.

古文：唐武德六年，辅公佑反，诏赵郡王李孝恭等讨之。
现代文：唐朝武德六年，淮南道行台尚书左仆射辅公祏据丹阳举兵反唐，高祖李渊诏命赵郡王李孝恭等人率军讨伐他。
English: Six years into the reign of Emperor Wu of the Tang Dynasty, Danyang's right-hand man, Shao Fu Gong, who ruled the southern province of Huainan, raised an army against the Tang Dynasty, and Emperor Wu's great-great-grandfather, Li Yuan, ordered Zhao Guo Wang, Li Xiaogong and others to lead an army to fight against him.

古文：将发，与将士宴集，命取水，忽变为血，在座皆失色，孝恭自若曰： 毋疑，此乃公佑授首之征也。 
现代文：出发前，孝恭与士兵聚集一堂共进饮筵，当他命人取来一杯水酒欲饮之时，杯中白酒突然变成血红色，在座的人都大惊失色，但孝恭举止却坦然自若。他慢慢举起酒杯对大家解释说： 祸福本无门径可入，唯有人们自己召来。大家不要犯疑惑，这正是公祏要掉脑袋的征兆！ 
English: Before the departure, Xiao Yang and the soldiers gathered together to have a drink. When he ordered someone to fetch a glass of water and wine to drink, the white wine in the glass suddenly turned blood red. Everyone present was shocked, but Xiao Yang behaved calmly. He slowly raised his glass and explained to everyone: There is no way for evil and good to enter, only for people to call for themselves. Everyone should not be in doubt, this is exactly the sign of a public official who wants to lose his head!

古文：遂饮而尽之，众心为安。
现代文：说完，一饮而尽，众人仰视，惊惧不安的情绪终于平静下来。
English: After saying this, everyone looked up as soon as they had finished drinking, and their feelings of fear and anxiety finally calmed down.

古文：先是，贼将拒险邀战，孝恭坚壁不出，以奇兵绝其粮道。
现代文：两军对阵后，辅公祏军先是企图凭据险要地形诱使唐军来战而截击之，孝恭却令唐军坚守壁垒而不主动出战，暗中派出奇兵截断敌人粮道。
English: After the confrontation between the two armies, the Auxiliary Public Security Force first attempted to induce the Tang Army to fight by intercepting it on the basis of the dangerous terrain. However, Xiaogang ordered the Tang Army to hold on to the barrier without taking the initiative to fight, and secretly sent a special soldier to cut off the enemy's food supply.

古文：贼饥，夜薄李营，孝恭坚卧不动。
现代文：致使敌人在陷入缺粮挨饿的情况下，又乘夜进迫李孝恭，孝恭仍然安卧营中不动。
English: As a result, the enemy forced Li Xiaogong to march at night when he was starving due to lack of food. Li Xiaogong was still lying motionless in the camp.

古文：明日，以羸兵扣贼营挑战，别选骑裨以待。
现代文：第二天，派老弱残兵到敌营挑战，另外挑选出精锐骑兵严阵以待。
English: The next day, he sent the old and weak remnants to challenge the enemy camp, and selected the elite cavalry to wait.

古文：俄而羸兵却，贼追北且嚣，遇祖尚，薄战，遂败。
现代文：不一会，孝恭所派的老弱残兵退却下来，辅军紧追不舍，气焰异常嚣张，与卢祖尚骑阵相遭遇，被唐军打得大败。
English: Not long after, the old and weak remnants of the troops sent by Xiaogang retreated, the auxiliary troops followed closely, their arrogance was extremely arrogant, and they encountered Lu Zu Shang's cavalry, and were defeated by the Tang army.

古文：赵郡王乘胜破其别阵，辅公佑穷走，追骑生擒之。
现代文：李孝恭乘胜又夺取敌方别的阵地。辅公祏逃跑后走投无路，被李孝恭的骑兵活捉了。
English: Li Xiaogong took advantage of the victory to seize other enemy positions. After escaping, Fu Gongtao was cornered and captured alive by Li Xiaogong's cavalry.

