古文：起上章涒滩，尽重光作噩，凡二年。
现代文：起上章涒滩，尽重光作噩，一共两年。
English: It took a total of two years to raise Zhangye Beach and make the most of it.

古文：昭宗圣穆景文孝皇帝中之中光化三年春，正月，宣州将康儒攻睦州，钱镠使其从弟銶拒之。
现代文：唐昭宗光化三年春季正月，宣州将领康儒进攻睦州，镇海节度使钱命令他的堂弟钱率兵抵御。
English: In the first month of the spring of the third year of Tang Zhaozong's reign in Guanghua, Xuanzhou general Kang Rong attacked Muzhou, and Zhenhai Jiedu ordered his cousin Qian Qian to lead the troops to resist.

古文：二月，庚申，以西川李度使王建兼中书令。
现代文：二月庚申，朝廷任命四川节度使王建兼中书令。
English: In February of Goshun, the imperial court appointed Wang Jianken as the Sichuan festival envoy.

古文：壬申，加威武节度使王审知同平章事。
现代文：壬申，朝廷加封威武节度使王审知为同平章事。
English: According to Jinshin, the Imperial Court's addition of the title of "Mighty Warrior" made Wang Xizhi a peer.

古文：壬午，以吏部尚书崔胤同平章事，充清海节度使。
现代文：壬午，朝廷任命吏部尚书崔胤为同平章事，充任清海节度使。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, the imperial court appointed the official, Shangshu Cuiyin, to be the same level as the official, and he served as the Qinghai Festival envoy.

古文：李克用大发军民治晋阳城堑，押牙刘延业谏曰： 大王声振华、夷，宜扬兵以严四境，不宜近治城堑，损威望而启寇心。 
现代文：李克用大举征发军士百姓修理晋阳城的城墙壕沟，押牙刘延业劝告说： 大王的声威震动华夏和四夷，应该分派军队整肃四方边境，不应修治眼前的城墙壕沟，既损害自己的威望，又开启敌人的侵犯之心。 
English: Li Ke conscripted and dispatched soldiers and civilians to repair the city walls and trenches of Jinyang City, and sent Liu Yanye to advise: The great king's prestige has shaken Huaxia and Shiyi, and the army should be dispatched to clean up the four-sided border, and the city walls and trenches should not be repaired in front of him, which would not only damage his own prestige, but also open the enemy's heart of aggression.

古文：克用谢之，赏以金帛。
现代文：李克用向他表示感谢，并赏给金银绢帛。
English: Li Ke used it to thank him and awarded him gold and silver ingots.

古文：夏，四月，加定难军节度使李承庆同平章事。
现代文：夏季，四月，朝廷加封定难军节度使李承庆为同平章事。
English: In the summer, in April, the imperial court and the festival to commemorate the defeat of the enemy troops made Li Chengqing a matter of equal importance.

古文：硃全忠遣葛从周帅兗、郓、滑、魏四镇兵十万击刘仁恭，五月，庚寅，拔德州，斩刺史傅公和。己亥，围刘守文于沧州。
现代文：朱全忠派遣葛从周率领兖州、郓州、滑州、魏州四镇的十万军队攻打卢龙节度使刘仁恭，五月庚寅攻克德州，斩杀德州剌史傅公和，己亥把刘守文围困在沧州。
English: Zhu Quanzhong dispatched a hundred thousand troops led by Ge Zhou to four towns in Luzhou, Luzhou, Slanting and Weizhou to attack Lulong. In May, he sent Liu Rengong to attack Luzhou, in May, he sent Geng Yin to invade Dezhou, he killed Zhou general Fu Gonghe, and he besieged Liu Shouwen in Cangzhou.

古文：仁恭复遣使卑辞厚礼求救于河东，李克用遣周德威将五千骑出黄泽，攻邢、洺以救之。
现代文：刘仁恭派遣使者用卑恭的言辞、丰厚的礼品到河东请求援助。于是，李克用派遣周德威率领五千骑兵出黄泽关，进攻邢州、州来救援刘仁恭。
English: Liu Rengong sent an envoy with humble words and rich gifts to Hedong to request assistance. Therefore, Li Ke sent Zhou Dewei to lead five thousand cavalry out of Huangze Pass to attack Zhangzhou and Zhoushou to rescue Liu Rengong.

古文：邕州军乱，逐节度使李钅岁。
现代文：邕州军队发生叛乱，驱逐了节度使李。
English: There was a mutiny in the Zhangzhou army, which expelled the commander Li.

古文：钅岁借兵邻道讨平之。
现代文：李向领道借兵讨伐平定叛乱。
English: Li lent soldiers to the leader to fight and quell the rebellion.

古文：六月，癸亥，加东川节度使王宗涤同平章事。
现代文：六月癸亥，朝廷加封东川度使王宗涤为同平章事。
English: In June, the Imperial Court awarded Dongchuan Province to Wang Zongya as a matter of equal importance.

古文：司空、门下侍郎、同平章事王抟，明达有度量，时称良相。
现代文：司空、门下侍郎、同平章事王抟，明白通达，宽宏大量，当时称为良相。
English: Siku, a subordinate attendant, and Tongping Zhangjiwang, were clear-sighted and magnanimous, and were known as good-looking at that time.

古文：上素疾宦官枢密使硃道弼、景务修专横，崔胤日与上谋去宦官，宦官知之。
现代文：昭宗一向痛恨宦官枢密使宋道弼、景务修专断强横，崔胤天天与昭宗商量除去宦官，宦官也知道他们的行动。
English: Zhaozong always hated the eunuchs Song Daojun and Jingwu Xiu, the eunuchs' confidential envoys, for being arbitrary and domineering. Cui Yin consulted with Zhaozong every day to remove the eunuchs, and the eunuchs also knew about their actions.

古文：由是南、北司益相憎嫉，各结籓镇为援以相倾夺。
现代文：因此，南司和北司更加相互憎恨嫉妒，各自交结藩镇以为援助，互相倾轧争夺。
English: As a result, the Southern Division and the Northern Division hated and envied each other even more. Each of them made contact with the towns of the domain for assistance and fought with each other.

古文：抟恐其致乱，从容言于上曰： 人君当务明大体，无所偏私。
现代文：王抟担心这样会招致变乱，就从容不迫地向唐昭宗进言说： 君主行事，应当致力于申明大局，没有偏心私情。
English: Wang Xi was worried that this would cause turmoil, so he calmly advised Tang Zhaozong: When acting as a monarch, one should be committed to clarifying the overall situation, and should not have any personal bias.

古文：宦官擅权之弊，谁不知之！
现代文：宦官专权的弊病，谁不知道呢！
English: Who does not know the evils of the eunuch's autocracy!

古文：顾其势未可猝除，宜俟多难渐平，以道消息。
现代文：但是他们的势力不可能急速除掉，应当等候各种灾难渐渐平息，通过正当途径逐渐消灭。
English: However, their forces cannot be eliminated quickly. We should wait for various disasters to gradually subside, and gradually eliminate them through legitimate means.

古文：愿陛下言勿轻泄以速奸变。 
现代文：希望陛下说话不要轻易泄漏，以免加速奸邪小人的变乱。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty's words will not leak out easily, so as not to accelerate the treacherous villain's upheaval.

古文：胤闻之，谮抟于上曰： 王抟奸邪，已为道弼辈外应。 
现代文：崔胤听说这话，就向昭宗诬陷王抟说： 王抟奸诈邪恶，已经成为宋道弼等的外应。 
English: When Cui Yan heard this, he accused Wang Yao of being a traitor to Zhaozong and said, "Wang Yao is treacherous and evil. He has become the external equivalent of Song Daoxuan and others."

古文：上疑之。
现代文：昭宗怀疑他的话是否真实。
English: The Emperor had misgivings about this.

古文：及胤罢相，意抟排己，愈恨之。
现代文：等到崔胤被罢免了宰相职务，就猜想是王抟排斥自己，更加痛恨他。
English: When Cui Yin was removed from the post of prime minister, it was assumed that Wang Yao rejected him and hated him even more.

古文：及出镇广州，遗硃全忠书，具道抟语，令全忠表论之。
现代文：及至崔胤奉命离京师去镇守广州，他就送书信给朱全忠，原原本本地讲了王抟说过的话，让朱全忠进呈表章来辩论是非。
English: When Cui Yan was ordered to leave Beijing to guard Guangzhou, he sent a letter to Zhu Quanzhong, who had originally said what Wang Yao had said, and asked Zhu Quanzhong to present a badge to debate the rights and wrongs.

古文：全忠上言： 胤不可离辅弼之地，抟与敕使相表里，同危社稷。 
现代文：朱全忠于是上表说： 崔胤不能离开辅佐陛下的宰相之位，王抟与敕使互为表里，内外勾结，危害国家。 
English: Zhu Quanzhong then made the following statement: Cui Yin could not leave the position of his majesty's aide-de-camp and prime minister. Wang Qian and the aide-de-camp were colluding with each other, inside and outside the country, and endangering the country.

古文：表连上不已。
现代文：朱全忠的表章接连呈进，继续不停。
English: Zhu Quanzhong's epaulettes came in one after another, and they kept coming.

古文：上虽察其情，迫于全忠，不得已，胤至湖南复召还。
现代文：昭宗虽然察觉其中实情，但迫于朱全忠，也无可奈何，在崔胤行至湖南时又召他回京师。
English: Although Akimune was aware of the true situation, he was forced to act by Zhu Quanzhong and had no choice but to call Cui Yin back to Beijing when he went to Hunan.

古文：丁卯，以胤为司空、门下侍郎、同平章事，抟罢为工部侍郎。
现代文：丁卯，昭宗任命崔胤为司空、门下侍郎、同平章事，王抟被罢免司空、门下侍郎、同平章事降为工部侍郎。
English: At the same time, Akimune appointed Choi Tan to the posts of Jikku, Monk-in-Waiting, and Tonghei, while Wang Xi was dismissed from the posts of Jikku, Monk-in-Waiting, and Tonghei and demoted to the post of Worker-in-Waiting.

古文：以道弼监荆南军，务修监青州军。
现代文：命宋道弼出任荆南监军，景务出任青州监军。
English: Song Daojun was appointed as the inspector of Jingnan, and Jingwu was appointed as the inspector of Qingzhou.

古文：戊辰，贬抟溪州刺史；己巳，又贬崖州司户。道弼长流欢州，务修长流爱州。
现代文：戊辰，贬王抟为溪州刺史。己巳，又贬王抟为崖州司户；宋道弼流放州，景务修流放爱州。
English: In Boshen, Wang Qian was demoted to the position of the chief historian of Xizhou. In Ji Mei, Wang Qian was demoted to the position of the secretary of Yalang Prefecture; Song Daojun was exiled to Xizhou, and Jingwu Shulan was exiled to Aizhou.

古文：是日，皆赐自尽。
现代文：当天，三人都被赐令自杀。
English: On the same day, all three were ordered to commit suicide.

古文：抟死于蓝田驿，道弼、务修死于霸桥驿。
现代文：王抟死在蓝田驿，宋道弼、景务死在霸桥驿。
English: Wang Yao died in Lantian, Song Dao Yao and Jing Mu died in Baxia.

古文：于是胤专制朝政，势震中外，宦官皆侧目，不胜其愤。
现代文：于是，崔胤操纵朝廷政权，势力威震朝野，宦官都怒目而视，非常愤慨痛恨。
English: As a result, Cui Yan manipulated the power of the imperial court, and his influence dominated the court and the country. The eunuchs all looked at him angrily and hated him with great indignation.

古文：刘仁恭将幽州兵五万救沧州，营于乾宁军。
现代文：刘仁恭率领五万幽州军队前去援救沧州，在乾宁军扎营。
English: Liu Renyong led fifty thousand Yuzhou troops to rescue Cangzhou and camped in the Qianning Army.

古文：葛从周留张存敬、氏叔琮守沧州寨，自将精兵逆战于老鸦堤，大破仁恭，斩首三万级，仁恭走保瓦桥。
现代文：葛从周留下张存敬、氏叔琮守卫沧州营寨，自己率领精锐部队在老鸦堤迎战刘仁恭，大败刘仁恭的军队，斩杀首级三万。刘仁恭逃走，退守瓦桥。
English: Ge left Zhang Cunqin and his uncles and aunts to guard the Cangzhou encampment from Zhou. He led the elite troops to meet Liu Renkong at Laowadi, defeated Liu Renkong's army, and killed the first class of thirty thousand. Liu Renkong fled and retreated to the tile bridge.

古文：秋，七月，李克用复遣都指挥使李嗣昭将兵五万攻邢、洺以救仁恭，败汴军于内丘。
现代文：秋季，七月，李克用再派都指挥使李嗣昭率领五万军队攻打邢州、州来救援刘仁恭，在内丘打败汴州军队。
English: In the autumn, in July, Li Ke used his second-in-command to send Li Shizhao to lead 50,000 troops to attack Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou to rescue Liu Rengong and defeat the Zhangzhou army in Neiqiu.

古文：镕遣使和解幽、汴，会久雨，硃全忠召从周还。
现代文：王熔派遣使者在幽州刘仁恭、汴州朱全忠之间进行调解，适逢长久下雨，朱全忠召回葛从周。
English: Wang Rong dispatched an envoy to mediate between Yuzhou Liu Rengong and Zhangzhou Zhu Quanzhong. When it rained for a long time, Zhu Quanzhong recalled Ge Zhou.

古文：庚戌，以昭义留后孟迁为节度使。
现代文：庚戌，朝廷任命昭义留后孟迁为昭义节度使。
English: After Meng Qian's death, the imperial court appointed Meng Qian as the official envoy of the Shouyi Festival.

古文：甲寅，以西川节度使王建兼东川、信武军两道都指挥制置等使。
现代文：甲寅，朝廷任命西川节度使王建兼东川、信武军两道都指挥制置等使。
English: At the same time, the imperial court appointed Wang Jian and Dongchuan, both commanders of the Xichuan and Xinwu armies, as envoys to the Xichuan Festival.

古文：八月，李嗣昭又败汴军于沙门河，进攻洺州。
现代文：八月，李嗣昭又在沙门河打败汴州军队，率军进攻州。
English: In August, Li Shizhao defeated the Zhangzhou army in Shamenhe and led the army to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：乙丑，硃全忠引兵救之，未至，嗣昭拔洺州，擒刺史硃绍宗。
现代文：乙丑，朱全忠率兵援救州，还没有到达，李嗣昭已攻克州，擒获州刺史朱绍宗。
English: Second Ugly, Zhu Quanzhong led the troops to rescue the state, has not yet arrived, Li Shizhao has conquered the state, captured the state chief Zhu Shaosong.

古文：全忠命葛从周将兵击嗣昭。
现代文：朱全忠命令葛从周率领军队前去攻击李嗣昭。
English: Zhu Quanzhong ordered Ge Zhou to lead an army to attack Li Shizhao.

古文：宣州将康儒食尽，自清溪遁归。
现代文：宣州将领康儒由于军粮吃完，从清溪逃归宣州。
English: Kang Ru, the general of Xuanzhou, ran away from Qingxi and returned to Xuanzhou after he had finished eating the army rations.

古文：九月，葛从周自鄴县渡漳水，营于黄龙镇。硃全忠自将中军三万涉洺水置营。
现代文：九月，葛从周率领军队自邺县渡过漳水，在黄龙镇扎营；朱全忠亲自统帅三万中军渡过水，安营扎寨。
English: In September, Ge Cong Zhou led an army from Min County to cross the Yanshui River and set up camp in Huanglong Town; Zhu Quanzhong personally led 30,000 Chinese troops to cross the river and set up camp.

古文：李嗣昭弃城走，从周设伏于青山口，邀击，大破之。
现代文：李嗣昭舍弃州城逃走，葛从周在青山口布置伏兵，进行拦击，把李嗣昭的军队打得大败而逃。
English: Li Shizhao abandoned the state capital and fled. Ge Zhou arranged an ambush at Qingshankou, conducted a counterattack, defeated Li Shizhao's army and fled.

古文：崔胤以太保、门下侍郎、同平章事徐彦若位在己上，恶之。彦若亦自求引去。
现代文：崔胤因为太保、门下侍郎、同平章事徐彦若的地位在自己之上，从而憎恨他；徐彦若也自己请求引退去职。
English: Cui Yan hated Xu Yanruo because he was higher than him in the position of eunuch, servant, and peer; Xu Yanruo also asked to retire from his post.

古文：时籓镇皆为强臣所据，惟嗣薛王知柔在广州，乃求代之。
现代文：当时藩镇都被强臣占据，只有嗣薛王李知柔在广州任清海节度使，于是请求让自己代替他。
English: At that time, all the towns of the domain were occupied by strong ministers, and only the heir of Xue Wang, Li Zhirou, served as the Qinghai Festival envoy in Guangzhou, so he asked Zhuo to replace him.

古文：乙巳，以彦若同平章事，充清海节度使。
现代文：乙巳，朝廷任命徐彦若以同平章事衔，充任清海节度使。
English: At this time, the imperial court appointed Xu Yan as the Qinghai Festival envoy with the title of Tongpingzhang.

古文：初，荆南节度成汭以澧、朗本其巡属，为雷满所据，屡求割隶荆南。朝廷不许，汭颇怨望。
现代文：当初，荆南节度成以澧州、朗州本来是他的属地，被雷满占据，屡次请求割出来隶属葬荆南，朝廷不允许，成很是怨恨。
English: At the beginning, the Jingnan Festival was held in Bozhou and Langzhou, which were originally his territories. They were occupied by Lei Man. He repeatedly requested to be assigned to Jingnan, but the imperial court did not allow it. He was very resentful.

古文：及彦若过荆南，汭置酒，从容以为言。
现代文：等到徐彦若路过荆南，成摆酒招待，从容不迫地说起澧、朗二州的归属旧事。
English: When Xu Yan passed through Jingnan, he invited everyone to have a drink with him and casually talked about the old days of the two states of Lu and Lang.

古文：彦若曰： 令公位尊方面，自比桓、文，雷满小盗不能取，乃怨朝廷乎？ 
现代文：徐彦若说： 令公是一方长官，职位尊崇，向来自比为齐桓公、晋文公，连雷满这样一个小强盗都不能攻取，还要怨恨朝廷吗！ 
English: If Xu Yan said: "Ling Gong is a superior officer, the position is respected, compared to Qi Huan Gong and Jinwen Gong, even a small robber like Lei Man cannot be captured, do you still resent the imperial court!"

古文：汭甚惭。
现代文：成听了非常惭愧。
English: Cheng was very ashamed to hear this.

古文：丙午，中书侍郎兼吏部尚书、同平章事崔远罢守本官，以刑部尚书裴贽为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：丙午，朝廷免除中书侍郎兼史部尚书、同平章事崔远同平章事等职，仍署理本官职务；任命刑部尚书裴贽为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, the imperial court exempted Cui Yuan, the secretary of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, from the posts of the secretary of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, the secretary of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, and the secretary of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs. He still assumed the duties of the head of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs; appointed the secretary of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, Pei Jun, as the secretary of the General Office

古文：贽，坦之弟子也。
现代文：裴贽，是裴坦之弟弟的儿子。
English: Pei Xuan is the son of Pei Tan's younger brother.

古文：升桂管为静江军，以经略使刘士政为节度使。
现代文：朝廷将桂州管区升为静江军，任命经略使刘士政为静江军节度使。
English: The imperial court promoted the Guizhou region to the Jingjiang Army and appointed Liu Shizheng, the military governor of Guizhou, as the military governor of the Jingjiang Army.

古文：硃全忠以王镕与李克用交通，移兵伐之，下临城，逾滹沱，攻镇州南门，焚其关城。
现代文：朱全忠因王熔与李克用相互勾结，就从州移兵去讨伐他，攻下临城，渡过滹沱河，攻打镇州南门，把关城烧毁。
English: Because of the collusion between Wang Rong and Li Ke, Zhu Quanzhong transferred troops from the state to fight against him, captured Lincheng, crossed the Li River, attacked the southern gate of Zhenzhou, and burned Guancheng.

古文：全忠自至元氏，镕惧，遣判官周式诣全忠请和。
现代文：朱全忠亲自率军到元氏，王熔害怕，忙派判官周式到朱全忠营中请求和解。
English: Zhu Quanzhong personally led the army to the Yuan Dynasty. Wang Rong was afraid and quickly sent the judge Zhou Shi to Zhu Quanzhong's camp to request a reconciliation.

古文：全忠盛怒，谓式曰： 仆屡以书谕王公，竟不之听！
现代文：朱全忠勃然大怒，对周式说： 我屡次送书信去晓谕王公，他竟然不听！
English: Zhu Quanzhong flew into a rage and said to Zhou Shi: I have repeatedly sent letters to tell the prince, but he did not listen!

古文：今兵已至此。期于无舍！ 
现代文：现在我兵已经到此，决定不能舍弃！ 
English: Now that our soldiers have arrived here, we decided not to give up!

古文：式曰： 镇州密迩太原，困于侵暴，四邻各自保，莫相救恤，王公与之连和，乃为百姓故也。
现代文：周式说： 镇州紧靠太原，处在被侵犯损害的境地，四邻各求自我保全，不相互援救体恤，王公与李克用交好联合，是为了百姓免受灾难的缘故。
English: Zhenzhou is close to Taiyuan and is in a situation of being invaded and damaged. All four neighbors seek self-preservation and do not help each other. Wang Gong and Li Ke use friendship and alliance to protect the people from disaster.

古文：今明公果能为人除害，则天下谁不听命，岂惟镇州！
现代文：现在您果真能够为人们除去祸害，那么天下谁不听从您的命令，岂止一个镇州！
English: Now that you are really able to remove the scourge for people, then who in the world will not obey your orders, let alone more than one township!

古文：明公为唐桓、文，当崇礼义以成霸业。
现代文：您是大唐的齐桓公、晋文公，应当崇尚礼义，以使成就霸业。
English: You are the Qi Kuan Gong and Jin Wen Gong of the Great Tang Dynasty. You should advocate courtesy and righteousness in order to achieve hegemony.

古文：若但穷威武，则镇州虽小，城坚食足，明公虽有十万之众，未易攻也！
现代文：如果只是竭尽武力，一味征讨，那么，镇州虽小，但城池坚固，粮食充足，您虽有十万之众，也不容易攻下的！
English: If all you do is to exhaust your forces and go on a campaign of conquest, then, although the town and county are small, the castle is strong and there is plenty of grain. Even if you have a hundred thousand people, it will not be easy to conquer them!

古文：况王氏秉旄五代，时推忠孝，人人欲为之死，庸可冀乎！ 
现代文：况且王氏执掌兵权已经五代，时常推广忠孝，人人想要为王氏去死，难道可以希望攻下吗！ 
English: Moreover, the Wang clan has been holding military power for five generations, often promoting loyalty and filial piety. Everyone wants to die for the Wang clan. Can we hope to capture it?

古文：全忠笑揽式袂，延之帐中，曰： 与公戏耳！ 
现代文：朱全忠笑着挽起周式的衣袖，请进营帐之中，说： 与您开玩笑哩！ 
English: Zhu Quanzhong smiled and rolled up his Zhou-style sleeves. Please enter the tent and say: I'm joking with you!

古文：乃遣客将开封刘捍入见镕，镕以其子节度副使昭祚及大将子弟为质，以文缯二十万犒军。
现代文：于是，朱全忠派遣客将开封人刘捍进入镇州城内见王熔，王熔将他的儿子节度副使王昭祚及大将子弟作为人质，以花绢二十万犒劳朱全忠的军队。
English: As a result, Zhu Quanzhong dispatched Liu Han, a person from Kaifeng, to enter the city of Zhenzhou to see Wang Rong. Wang Rong took his son, deputy envoy Wang Zhaojun, and the general's younger brother as hostages, and paid Zhu Quanzhong's army 200,000 baht.

古文：全忠引还，以女妻昭祚。
现代文：朱全忠领兵返回，并将女儿嫁给王昭祚为妻。
English: Zhu Quanzhong led the soldiers back and married his daughter to Wang Zhaojun.

古文：成德判官张泽言于王镕曰： 河东，勍敌也，今虽有硃氏之援，譬如火发于家，安能俟远水乎！
现代文：成德判官张泽向王建议说： 河东李克用是个劲敌，现在虽然有朱氏的援助，但譬如家中起火，哪里能够等待远水呢！
English: Chengde magistrate Zhang Ze suggested to Wang: "Hedong Li Kebong is a strong rival. Although he has Zhu's assistance now, if there is a fire at home, where can he wait for the distant water?

古文：彼幽、沧易定。犹附河东，不若说硃公乘胜兼服之，使河北诸镇合而为一，则可以制河东矣。 
现代文：那幽州刘仁恭、沧州刘守文、易州定州王郜，仍然依附河东，不如劝说朱公乘胜一并降服他们，使河北诸镇合而为一，就可以制服河东了。 
English: Liu Renkong of Youzhou, Liu Shouwen of Cangzhou, and Wang Yao of Dingzhou of Yizhou still cling to Hedong. It would be better to persuade Zhu Gongren to defeat and subjugate them, so that the towns of Hebei can be unified and Hedong can be subdued.

古文：镕复遣周式往说全忠。
现代文：王熔再派周式前去劝说朱全忠。
English: Wang Rong sent Zhou Shi to persuade Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：全忠喜，遣张存敬会魏博兵击刘仁恭，甲寅，拔瀛州；冬，十月，丙辰，拔景州，执刺史刘仁霸；辛酉，拔莫州。
现代文：朱全忠听后很高兴，就派遣张存敬会同魏博的军队前去攻打刘仁恭。甲寅，张存敬等攻克瀛州；冬季，十月丙辰，攻占景州，捉住了景州刺史刘仁霸；辛，又夺取了莫州。
English: Zhu Quanzhong was very pleased to hear this, and sent Zhang Cunjian and Wei Bo's army to attack Liu Rengong. Gao Yin and Zhang Cunjian conquered Zhangzhou; in the winter, in October, they captured Jingzhou and captured Liu Renga, the ruler of Jingzhou; and Xin captured Mozhou.

古文：静江节度使刘士政闻马殷悉平岭北，大惧，遣副使陈可璠屯全义岭以备之。
现代文：静江节度使刘士政听说马殷全部平定了岭北，非常害怕，派副使陈可率军领驻扎在全义岭防备马殷侵犯。
English: The Jingjiang Festival made Liu Shizheng heard that Ma Yin had completely leveled the northern part of Ling, and he was very afraid. He sent the deputy envoy Chen Ke to lead the army stationed in Quanyi Ling to guard against Ma Yin's encroachment.

古文：殷遣使修好于士政，可璠拒之。
现代文：马殷派遣使者向刘士政谋求和好，陈可拒绝了他。
English: Ma Yin sent an envoy to Liu Shizheng to seek reconciliation, but Chen Ke rejected him.

古文：殷遣其将秦彦晖、李琼等将兵七千击士政。
现代文：于是，马殷派遣他的部将秦彦晖、李琼等率领七千军队，前去攻打刘士政。
English: As a result, Ma Yin dispatched his subordinate generals Qin Yanqi, Li Qiong and others, leading seven thousand troops, to attack Liu Shimei.

古文：湖南军至全义，士政又遣指挥使王建武屯秦城。
现代文：马殷的湖南军队抵达全义岭，刘士政又派遣指挥使王建武驻守秦城。
English: Ma Yin's Hunan army arrived in Quan Yiling, and Liu Shizheng sent Wang Jianwu to garrison Qincheng.

古文：可璠掠县民耕牛以犒军，县民怨之，请为湖南乡异，曰： 此西南有小径，距秦城才五十里，仅通单骑。 
现代文：陈可掠虏县民的耕牛来犒劳将士，县民非常怨恨他，请求做湖南军队的向导，说： 这西南有小路，距离秦城才五十里，路径狭窄仅能单骑通过。 
English: Chen could plunder the county people's cattle to reward the hard-working soldiers. The county people resented him very much and asked him to be a guide for the Hunan army, saying: There is a small road in the southwest, only fifty miles from Qincheng, the path is narrow and can only be passed by riding alone.

古文：彦晖遣李琼将骑六十、步兵三百袭秦城，中宵，逾垣而入，擒王建武，比明，复还，纟斥之以练，造可璠壁下示之，可璠犹未之信。
现代文：秦彦晖派遣李琼率领骑兵六十、步兵三百突袭秦城，半夜里越过城墙而入，擒住王建武，等到天明又回来，用布带将王建武捆缚起来，到陈可的营垒下给他看视。
English: Qin Yanqi sent Li Qiong to lead sixty cavalrymen and three hundred infantrymen to raid Qin City. In the middle of the night, he broke through the city wall and captured Wang Jianwu. When he returned at dawn, he tied Wang Jianwu with a cloth belt and went to Chen Ke's camp to show him around.

古文：斩其首，投壁中，桂人震恐。
现代文：陈可看见后还不相信是王建武，李琼又命斩下王建武的脑袋，投入陈可的营垒之中，桂州军队一片震惊恐慌。
English: Chen Ke did not believe that it was Wang Jianwu after seeing it. Li Qiong ordered to cut off Wang Jianwu's head and threw it into Chen Ke's camp. The Guizhou army was shocked and panicked.

古文：琼因勒兵击之，擒可璠，降其将士二千，皆杀之。
现代文：李琼趁机率兵发起攻击，擒获可，并将投降的二千将士全部杀死。
English: Li Qiong took the opportunity to lead the soldiers to launch an attack, captured, and killed all the two thousand soldiers who surrendered.

古文：引兵趣桂州，自秦城以南二十馀壁皆望风奔溃，遂围桂州。
现代文：然后，李琼等率军奔赴桂州，自秦城以南二十余座桂州营垒全都望风逃散，于是将桂州包围。
English: Then, Li Qiong and others led the army to rush to Guizhou. From the south of Qincheng, more than 20 Guizhou camps all fled to escape the wind, thus encircling Guizhou.

古文：数日，士政出降，桂、宜、岩、柳、象五州皆降于湖南。
现代文：过了几天，刘士政出城投降，桂、宜、岩、柳、象五州全都归降了湖南。
English: A few days later, Liu Shizheng left the city to surrender, and the five prefectures of Gui, Yi, Yan, Liu, and Zeng all surrendered to Hunan.

古文：马殷以李琼为桂州刺史，未几，表为静江节度使。
现代文：马殷任命李琼为桂州刺史；不久，马殷又上表请朝廷任命李琼为静江节度使。
English: Ma Yin appointed Li Qiong as the chief historian of Guizhou; soon after, Ma Yin petitioned the imperial court to appoint Li Qiong as the special envoy to the Jingjiang Festival.

古文：张存敬攻刘仁恭，下二十城，将自瓦桥趣幽州，道泞不能进，乃引兵西攻易定，辛巳，拔祁州，杀刺史杨约。
现代文：张存敬攻打刘仁恭，连克二十个城池，将要从瓦桥驿奔赴幽州，因道路泥泞不能前进，于是率领军队向西进攻易州。辛巳，张存敬攻克祁州，杀死祁州刺史杨约。
English: Zhang Cunjing attacked Liu Rengong and captured twenty cities. He was about to rush from the shingle bridge to Yuzhou, but could not advance because of the muddy road, so he led the army to the west to attack Yizhou. At the same time, Zhang Cunjing attacked Kejiuzhou and killed Yangyou, the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：癸未，以保义留后硃友谦为节度使。
现代文：癸未，朝迁任命保义留后朱友谦为保义节度使。
English: In the meantime, Zhu Youqian was appointed as the special envoy of loyalty after the appointment of loyalty to the imperial court.

古文：张存敬攻定州，义武节度使王郜遣后院都知兵马使王处直将兵数万拒之。
现代文：张存敬进攻定州，义武节度使王郜派遣后院都知兵马使王处直率兵数万进行抵抗。
English: Zhang Cunjing attacked Dingzhou, and the Yiwu Festival made Wang Yao send tens of thousands of courteous soldiers to resist.

古文：处直请依城为栅，俟其师老而击之。
现代文：王处直请依城建筑栅栏，等到张存敬的军队疲乏懈怠，再发起攻击。
English: The king directly asked Yicheng to build a fence, and waited until Zhang Cun Rong's army was tired and slack, and then launched an attack.

古文：孔目官梁汶曰： 昔幽、镇兵三十万攻我，于时我军不满五千，一战败之。
现代文：孔目官梁汶说： 从前幽州、镇州的三十万军队攻我，当时我军不满五千，一战便打败了他们。
English: Confucius official Liang Wen said: "Once, 300,000 troops from Yuzhou and Zhenzhou attacked me. At that time, our army was less than 5,000, and we defeated them in one battle.

古文：今存敬兵不过三万，我军十倍于昔，奈何示怯，欲依城自固乎！ 
现代文：现在张存敬的军队不过三万，我军是当年的十倍，怎么表示怯懦，想要依城自我固守呢！ 
English: Now Zhang Cun Rong's army is only thirty thousand, our army is ten times that of that year, how can you say that you are cowardly and want to defend yourself?

古文：郜乃遣处直逆战于沙河，易定兵大败，死者过半，馀众拥处直奔还。
现代文：王郜于是派遣王处直率兵在沙河迎战，结果易定军队被打得大败，死者过半，乘余的将士簇拥着王处直逃奔而回。
English: Wang Yao then dispatched Wang Zuo's forthright soldiers to meet the battle at the Shahe River. As a result, Yiding's army was badly defeated, with more than half of the dead. The rest of the soldiers gathered around Wang Zuo and ran straight back.

古文：甲申，王郜弃城奔晋阳，军中推处直为留后。
现代文：甲申，王郜弃城投奔晋阳，军中将士推举王处直为留后。
English: In Jiaxing, Wang Xi abandoned the city and rushed to Jinyang. The lieutenant generals recommended Wang Shizhi to stay behind.

古文：存敬进围定州，丙申，硃全忠至城下，处直登城呼曰： 本道事朝廷尽忠，于公未尝相犯，何为见攻？ 
现代文：张存敬进兵包围定州，丙申，朱全忠到定州城下；王处直登城高呼道： 本道侍奉朝廷竭诚尽忠，对您未曾冒犯，为什么被攻击？ 
English: Zhang Cunxing marched into the army to encircle Dingzhou. Bishen and Zhu Quanzhong marched to the foot of Dingzhou Castle. Wang Zuo marched straight to the castle and shouted, "I have served the imperial court wholeheartedly and loyally. I have never offended you. Why was I attacked?

古文：全忠曰： 何故附河东？ 
现代文：朱全忠说： 依附河东是什么缘故？ 
English: Zhu Quanzhong said: What is the reason for the attachment to Hedong?

古文：对曰： 吾兄与晋王同时立勋，封疆密迩，且婚姻也，修好往来，乃常理耳，请从兹改图。 
现代文：王处直回答说： 我哥哥与晋王一同讨平黄巢立功，辖地疆界贴近，并且是儿女亲家，谋求和好，互相往来，乃是通常情理；请从此以后改变主意。 
English: Wang Shanzhi replied, "My brother and the King of Jin have made great achievements together in leveling the Yellow Nest, the borders of the jurisdiction are close, and they are sons and daughters of the same family. It is common sense to seek reconciliation and interact with each other. Please change your mind from now on."

古文：全忠许之。
现代文：朱全忠应允与他和好。
English: Zhu Quanzhong agreed.

古文：乃归罪于梁汶而族之，以谢全忠，以缯帛十万犒师。
现代文：于是，王处直把罪过归在梁汶身上并杀了他的全家，用来告谢朱全忠，又拿出绢帛十万犒劳朱全忠的军队。
English: As a result, the king's office directly attributed the crime to Liang Wen and killed his whole family, which was used to thank Zhu Quanzhong, and took out the army of Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：全忠乃还，仍为处直表求节钺。
现代文：朱全忠于是率兵回去，并奏进表章请求授予王处直节度使。
English: Zhu Quanzhong then led his soldiers back, and sent a petition to the emperor requesting that he grant him the title of imperial envoy.

古文：处直，处存之母弟也。
现代文：王处直是王处存的同母弟弟。
English: Wang Shanzhong is the younger brother of Wang Shanzhuang.

古文：刘仁恭遣其子守光将兵救定州，军于易水之上。全忠遣张存敬袭之，杀六万馀人。
现代文：刘仁恭派遣他的儿子刘守光率兵救援定州，驻扎在易水之上；朱全忠派遣张存敬袭击刘守光，杀死六万余人。
English: Liu Rengong sent his son Liu Shuguang to rescue Dingzhou with soldiers stationed on the Yishui River; Zhu Quanzhong sent Zhang Cunqian to attack Liu Shuguang, killing more than 60,000 people.

古文：由是河北诸镇皆服于全忠。
现代文：从此，河北诸镇全都降服了朱全忠。
English: Since then, all the towns in Hebei Province have surrendered to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：先是王郜告急于河东，李克用遣李嗣昭将步骑三万下太行，攻怀州，拔之，进攻河阳。
现代文：在这之前，王郜向河东告急，李克用派遣李嗣昭率领步兵、骑兵三万人马，直下太行，进攻并拔取怀州，进而攻打河阳。
English: Prior to this, Wang Hui was in a hurry to go to the east of the river. Li Ke used the dispatch of Li Shizhao, who led 30,000 infantry and cavalry, to go straight to Taihang, attack and take Huai Zhou, and then attack Heyang.

古文：河阳留后侯言不意其至，狼狈失据，嗣昭坏其羊马城。
现代文：河阳留后侯言没想到河东军队突然到达，十分狼狈，窘迫无依。李嗣昭破坏了河阳城外的羊马城。
English: Houyan did not expect the sudden arrival of the Hedong army after he stayed in Kheyang. He was very confused and distressed. Li Shizhao destroyed Yangma City outside Kheyang City.

古文：会佑国军将阎宝引兵救之，力战于壕外，河东兵乃退。
现代文：适逢佑国军将领阎宝领兵前来救援，在护城河外奋力战斗，河东军队才退走。
English: At the right time, Yan Bao, the general of the Yu Guo Army, came to the rescue and fought hard outside the moat, and the Hedong Army retreated.

古文：宝，郓州人也。
现代文：阎宝是郓州人。
English: Yan Bao is from Zhangzhou.

古文：初，崔胤与上密谋尽诛宦官，及宋道弼、景务修死，宦官益惧。
现代文：当初，崔胤与唐昭宗秘密谋划全部杀死宦官，等到宋道弼、景务死后，宦官更加恐惧。
English: At first, Cui Yan and Tang Zhaozong secretly planned to kill all the eunuchs, but when Song Daoxuan and Jing Mu died, the eunuchs were even more afraid.

古文：上自华州还，忽忽不乐，多纵酒，喜怒不常，左右尤自危。
现代文：唐昭宗自华州回到京城以后，精神恍惚，抑郁不乐，常常纵情饮酒，喜怒无常，左右的人尤其人人自危。
English: After Tang Zhaozong returned to Beijing from Huazhou, he was in a trance, depressed and unhappy, often indulged in drinking, moody, and everyone around him was especially at risk.

古文：于是左军中尉刘季述、右宫中尉王仲先、枢密使王彦范、薛齐偓等阴相与谋曰： 主上轻佻多变诈，难奉事；专听任南司，吾辈终罹其祸。
现代文：于是，左军中尉刘季述、右军中尉王仲先、枢密使王彦范、薛齐等暗中共同商量说： 主上轻浮而多机变欺诈，难于侍奉；并且凡事专听任宰相办理，我等终究要遭受他的祸害。
English: As a result, the left-wing lieutenant Liu Jishu, the right-wing lieutenant Wang Zhongxian, the confidential envoy Wang Yanfan, Xue Qi and others secretly discussed together and said: The master is frivolous and deceptive, difficult to serve; and he listens to the prime minister in everything, and we will eventually suffer his evil.

古文：不若奉太子立之，尊主上为太上皇，引岐、华兵为援，控制诸籓，谁能害我哉！ 
现代文：不如立太子为皇帝，尊主上为太上皇，招岐州李茂贞、华州韩建的军队为援助，控制各个藩镇，谁还能加害我们呢！ 
English: It would be better to establish the crown prince as the emperor, the revered lord as the supreme emperor, invite the armies of Li Maozhen of Quizhou and Han Jian of Huazhou for assistance, and control the various townships. Who else can harm us?

古文：十一月，上猎苑中，因置酒，夜，醉归，手杀黄门、侍女数人。
现代文：十一月，唐昭宗在禁苑中打猎，因此摆酒纵饮，夜里大醉回宫，亲手杀死宦官、侍女数人。
English: In November, Emperor Zhaozong of Tang went hunting in the Forbidden City, so he drank a lot of wine and returned to the palace drunk at night, where he killed several eunuchs and maids with his own hands.

古文：明旦，日加辰巳，宫门不开。
现代文：天明时分，已经是辰巳左右，宫门还没有开。
English: At dawn, it was already around midnight, and the palace gate had not yet opened.

古文：季述诣中书白崔胤曰： 宫中必有变，我内臣也，得以便宜从事，请入视之。 
现代文：刘季述到中书省告诉崔胤说： 宫中一定有了变故，我是内臣，能够根据实际情况自行斟酌处理，请进宫察看发生了什么事情。 
English: Liu Ji recounted that the Chinese Ministry of Education told Choi In that: There must have been a change in the palace, I am a vassal, I can deal with it at my own discretion according to the actual situation, please enter the palace to see what happened.

古文：乃帅禁兵千人破门而入，访问，具得其状。
现代文：于是，率领宫禁警卫一千人破门而入，经过访查讯问，获得具体情况。
English: As a result, he led a thousand palace guards to break into the door, and after investigation and interrogation, he obtained the specific situation.

古文：出，谓胤曰： 主上所为如是，岂可理天下！
现代文：刘季述出来对崔胤说： 主上所为如此，岂可管理国家！
English: Liu Ji recounted it to Cui Yin and said: If the Lord does such things, how can He manage the country!

古文：废昏立明，自古有之，为社稷大计，非不顺也。 
现代文：废黜昏君，拥立明主，自古就这样做，为了国家大计，这样做不是叛逆。 
English: It is not treason to depose the dim prince and support the bright lord. This has been done since ancient times, for the sake of the country.

古文：胤畏死，不敢违。
现代文：崔胤害怕被杀，不敢违抗。
English: Afraid of being killed, Cui Yan did not dare to disobey.

古文：庚寅，季述召百官，陈兵殿庭，作胤等连名状，请太子监国，以示之，使署名。
现代文：庚寅，刘季述召集文武百官到来，在殿庭布置了军队，起草崔胤等请太子代管国事的联名状，出示给文武官员看，让他们签名。
English: Geng Yin and Liu Ji Su summoned hundreds of civil and military officials to come, arranged the army in the palace courtyard, drafted a joint letter from Cui Yan and others to ask the prince to take charge of state affairs, showed it to the civil and military officials, and asked them to sign.

古文：胤及百官不得已皆署之。
现代文：崔胤及文武百官不得已，都签了名。
English: As a last resort, Cui Yin and hundreds of civil and military officials all signed their names.

古文：上在乞巧楼，季述、仲先伏将士千人于门外，与宣武进奏官程岩等十馀人入请对。
现代文：昭宗在乞巧楼，刘季述、王仲先在门外埋伏一千名全武装的将士，与宣武进奏官程岩等十余人进楼请求奏对。
English: Zhaozong was in the Beggar's House, Liu Jizhu and Wang Zhongxian were outside the door waiting for a thousand fully armed soldiers, and more than ten people, including Xuanwu marching officer Chengyan, entered the building to request a duel.

古文：季述、仲先甫登殿，将士大呼，突入宣化门，至思政殿前，逢宫人，辄杀之。
现代文：刘季述、王仲先刚登殿，将士大声呼喊，突然冲入宣化门，到思政殿前，遇到宫人就杀。
English: Liu Ji said that Wang Zhongxian had just arrived at the palace, the soldiers shouted loudly, suddenly rushed into the Xuanhua Gate, to the front of the Shizheng Palace, and killed the palace people.

古文：上见兵入，惊堕床下，起，将走，季述、仲先掖之令坐。
现代文：昭宗看见军队闯入，被惊吓得掉到床下，起来将要逃走，刘季述、王仲先架着让他坐下。
English: When Zhaozong saw the army breaking in, he was so frightened that he fell under the bed. He got up and was about to run away. Liu Jizhong and Wang Zhong stood in front of him and told him to sit down.

古文：宫人走白皇后，后趋至，拜请曰： 军容勿惊宅家，有事取军容商量。 
现代文：宫人跑去禀报皇后，何皇后快步走来，向刘季述等拜请说： 军容使不要惊吓皇上，有事求军容使商量。 
English: The courtiers ran to inform the Empress, and the Empress Ho walked quickly to tell Liu Ji, and so on. Please say, "Military commissioners, don't frighten the Emperor. If you have any questions, ask the military commissioners to discuss it."

古文：季述等乃出百官状白上，曰： 陛下厌倦大宝，中外群情，愿太子监国，请陛下保颐东宫。 
现代文：刘季述等于是拿出文武百官的联名状，禀告昭宗说： 陛下厌倦帝位，内外群情希望太子代行管理国家事务，请陛下在东宫颐养天年。 
English: Liu Ji's description is tantamount to taking out a joint letter from hundreds of civil and military officials, obituary Shozong said: His Majesty is tired of the imperial throne, and the public at home and abroad hope that the crown prince will act as an agent to manage state affairs, and ask His Majesty to live a long life in the East Palace.

古文：上曰： 昨与卿曹乐饮，不觉太过，何至于是！ 
现代文：昭宗说： 昨天与卿等玩乐饮酒，不觉喝得太多。怎么能弄到这种地步！ 
English: Akimune said, "Yesterday, I had fun drinking alcohol with my friends, and I unintentionally drank too much. How could I have gotten to this point!

古文：对曰： 此非臣等所为，皆南司众情，不可遏也。
现代文：刘季述等回答说： 这联名状不是我等所定，都是南司百官群情激昂，不能阻止啊！
English: Liu Jishu and others replied: This joint letter was not decided by us, but by the hundreds of officials of the Nanshi District, who are very passionate and cannot be stopped!

古文：愿陛下且之东宫，待事小定，复迎归大内耳。 
现代文：请陛下暂且前去东宫，等到事情稍微安定，再迎陛下回归正宫来罢了。 
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty to go to the East Palace for the time being, wait until things are a little more stable, and then welcome Your Majesty back to the main palace.

古文：后曰： 宅家趣依军容语！ 
现代文：何皇后说： 皇上赶快依从军容使的话！ 
English: What did the empress say: Emperor, quickly obey the words of the envoy!

古文：即取传国宝以授季述，宦官扶上与后同辇，嫔御侍从者才十馀人，适少阳院。
现代文：立即取出传国玺印授与刘季述。宦官扶持昭宗与何皇后同乘一车，与嫔御侍从十余人往少阳院去。
English: The eunuch Fu Zong rode in a carriage with Empress He and more than ten attendants went to Shao Yang Academy.

古文：季述以银楇画地数上曰： 某时某事，汝不从我言，其罪一也。 
现代文：刘季述用银画地，数落昭宗说： 某时某事，你不听从我的话，这是一条罪。 
English: Liu Ji recounted with a silver brush, a few drops of Zhaozong said: sometime, something, you do not listen to my words, this is a crime.

古文：如此数十不止。
现代文：这样数十下还不停止。
English: Dozens of such attacks have not stopped.

古文：乃手锁其门，熔铁锢之，遣左军副使李师虔将兵围之，上动静辄白季述，穴墙以通饮食，凡兵器针刀皆不得入，上求钱帛俱不得，求纸笔亦不与。
现代文：于是，刘季述亲手锁了少阳院的门，熔化铁水将锁灌实，派遣左军副使李师虔带兵将少阳院包围，昭宗一有动静就禀报刘季述，凿出墙洞来递送饮食。凡是兵器针刀都不能入内，昭宗要些钱帛全不成，要些纸笔也不给。
English: As a result, Liu Jishu locked the door of Shao Yang Academy with his own hands, filled the lock with molten iron and water, and sent the deputy envoy of the Left Army, Li Shikian, to surround Shao Yang Academy with soldiers. As soon as there was any movement, Zhaozong falsely reported to Liu Jishu and cut out a hole in the wall to deliver food. All weapons, needles and knives could not enter, and Zhaozong could not get any money, nor could he get any paper and pens.

古文：时大寒，嫔御公主无衣衾，号哭闻于外。
现代文：当时天气十分寒冷，嫔御公主没有衣被，号哭之声传到墙外。
English: At that time, the weather was very cold, and the princess did not have a quilt, and the sound of her crying was heard outside the walls.

古文：季述等矫诏令太子监国，迎太子入宫。
现代文：刘季述等假传昭宗的诏书，令太子代管国事，迎太子入宫。
English: Liu Qizhong recounts the fake Emperor Zhaozong's imperial edict ordering the crown prince to be in charge of state affairs and welcoming the crown prince to the palace.

古文：辛卯，矫诏令太子嗣位，更名缜。
现代文：辛卯，刘季述等又假传昭宗的语书，令太子继承皇位，更名李缜。
English: Xinwu, Liu Jizhu, and others also falsely transmitted the language book of Zhaozong, ordering the prince to succeed to the throne and changing his name to Li Xi.

古文：以上为太上皇，皇后为太上皇后。
现代文：于是，以昭宗为太上皇，何皇后为太上皇后。
English: As a result, Akimune became the Retired Emperor and Ho the Empress became the Retired Empress.

古文：甲午，太子即皇帝位，更名少阳院曰问安宫。
现代文：甲，太子即皇帝位，把少阳院改名叫问安宫。
English: A, the prince, that is, the emperor, changed the name of Shao Yang Court to Qian'an Palace.

古文：季述加百官爵秩，与将士皆受优赏，欲以求媚于众。
现代文：刘季述给百官加封爵位，参与将士都受到优厚的赏赐，想要以此向众人讨好。
English: Liu Ji said that he wanted to please everyone by giving knighthoods to hundreds of officials and generous rewards to soldiers who participated.

古文：杀睦王倚，凡宫人、左右、方士、僧、道为上所宠信者，皆榜杀之。
现代文：杀了睦王李倚，凡被唐昭宗宠信的宫人、侍臣、方士、僧侣、道人等，都用木棍打死。
English: He killed King Mutsu Riis, and all the courtiers, attendants, magicians, monks, Taoists, etc. who were favored by Tang Zhaozong were beaten to death with wooden sticks.

古文：每夜杀人，昼以十车载尸出，一车或止一两尸，欲以立威。
现代文：每夜所杀之人，白天用十辆车载着尸体送出，一车有时只一两具尸体，想要用此树立淫威。
English: People who were killed every night were sent out during the day in ten cars carrying the bodies, sometimes only one or two bodies per car, with the intention of using this to establish their authority.

古文：季述等欲杀崔胤，而惮硃全忠，但解其度支监督铁转运使而已。
现代文：刘季述等将要杀司天监胡秀林，秀林说： 军容使幽禁君父，还想要多杀无辜吗！ 
English: Liu Qishu and others are going to kill the Heavenly Judge Hu Xiulin, Xiulin said: The military has imprisoned your father, do you still want to kill more innocent people!

古文：崔胤密致书全忠，使兴兵图返正。
现代文：刘季述畏惧他话的刚正而住手。刘季述想要杀崔胤，但畏惧朱全忠，于是就只解除了崔胤的度支盐铁转运使而已。
English: Liu Jishu was afraid of his words and stopped his hand. Liu Jishu wanted to kill Cui Yin, but he was afraid of Zhu Quanzhong, so he only relieved Cui Yin of the post of salt and iron transportation.

古文：左仆射致仕张浚在长水，见张全义于洛阳，劝之匡复，又与诸籓镇书劝之。
现代文：左仆射张浚退休后住在长水，他到洛阳拜见张全义，劝他匡复君位；又给各藩镇写信进行劝说。
English: His left-hand man, Zhang Jun, lived in Changshui after his retirement. He went to Luoyang to meet Zhang Quanyi and persuade him to restore the throne; he also wrote letters to various towns to persuade them.

古文：进士无棣李愚客游华州，上韩建书，略曰： 仆每读书，见君臣父子之际，有伤教害义者，恨不得肆之市朝。
现代文：进士无棣人李愚客居华州，给韩建上书，大要说： 我每读书，见父子君臣之间，有伤教化害礼义的，恨不得将他杀死并陈尸于市。
English: Li Yuki, a member of the Immortals, who lived in Huazhou, sent a letter to Han Jianlu, saying: Every time I read, I see a father-son relationship that is harmful to education, harmful to courtesy, and I can't help but kill him and display his corpse in the city.

古文：明公居近关重镇，君父幽辱月馀，坐视凶逆而忘勤王之举，仆所未谕也。
现代文：韩公居守临近潼关的重镇，皇上被幽禁受辱一月有余，坐视凶恶叛逆而不出兵救援王室，我实在不能理解。
English: I really can't understand why Han Gong lived in a major town near Shaoguan, where the emperor was imprisoned and humiliated for more than a month, and watched the vicious rebellion without sending troops to rescue the royal family.

古文：仆窃计中朝辅弼，虽有志而无权；外镇诸侯，虽有权而无志。
现代文：我私下算计，朝中的辅弼之臣，虽然有志向，但没有实权；京外的藩镇强臣，虽然有实权，但没有志向。
English: I thought to myself, a person who is an aide to the emperor has ambition but no power; a provincial lord has power but no ambition.

古文：惟明公忠义，社稷是依。
现代文：只有韩公忠贞仁义，是国家的依靠。
English: Only your loyalty is the country's reliance.

古文：往年车辂播迁，号泣奉迎，累岁供馈，再复庙、朝，义感人心，至今歌咏。
现代文：往年皇上流离迁徒，您痛哭流涕，奉迎皇上驻跸华州，多年供给馈赠，重新恢复宗庙、朝廷，义感人心，至今歌颂。
English: In previous years, the emperors displaced the migrants, you cried bitterly, welcomed the emperors stationed in Shandong Huazhou, provided gifts for many years, restored the ancestral temple and the imperial court, impressed the people with righteousness, and have been singing praises to this day.

古文：此时事势，尤异前日，明公地处要冲，位兼将相。
现代文：现在的事态形势，尤其与往日不同：韩公地处要冲，位兼将相。
English: The current state of affairs is especially different from that of the past: Han Gongdi is in a position of both confrontation and confrontation.

古文：自宫闱变故，已涉旬时，若不号令率先以图反正，迟疑未决，一朝山东侯伯唱义连衡，彭行而西，明公求欲自安，其可得乎！
现代文：自宫中发生变故，至今已过十天，如果不首先号令天下带头谋划归复正道，迟疑不决，一旦山东侯伯举义联合，发兵西进，韩公想要求得自安，难道能够得到吗！
English: It has been ten days since the change occurred in the palace. If we do not first order the world to take the lead in planning the return to the right path, we will hesitate to make a decision. Once Shandong Hou Bo united and sent troops to the west, Han Gong wanted to ask for peace, can we get it?

古文：此必然之势也。
现代文：这是必然之势。
English: This is an inevitable trend.

古文：不如驰檄四方，谕以逆顺，军声一振，则元凶破胆，旬浃之间，二竖之首传于天下，计无便于此者。 
现代文：不如迅速传檄四方，使他们知道逆顺，这样，军队声威一振，首恶丧胆，十天左右，刘季述、王仲先两个内宫小臣的脑袋将传递于天下，没有比这更为便利的计策了。 
English: It would be better to quickly spread the news to the four quarters, so that they would know the ups and downs. In this way, the army's prestige would be boosted, the first evil would be discouraged, and in about ten days, the heads of Liu Jishu and Wang Zhongxian, two inner palace ministers, would be passed to the world. There is no more convenient strategy than this.

古文：建虽不能用，厚待之，愚坚辞而去。
现代文：韩建虽然不采用李愚的计策，却给他优厚的待遇。李愚坚决推辞而去。
English: Although Han Jian did not adopt Li Gu's strategy, he gave him generous treatment. Li Gu firmly declined and left.

古文：硃全忠在定州行营，闻乱，丁未，南还。十二月，戊辰，至大梁。
现代文：朱全忠在定州巡视军营，听到京城发生变乱，于丁未南下返回，十二月戊辰到达大梁。
English: Zhu Quanzhong inspected the military camp in Dingzhou, heard that there was a riot in Beijing, returned to Dingwei in the south, and arrived in Dalian in December.

古文：季述遣养子希度诣全忠，许以唐社稷输之；又遣供奉官李奉本以太上皇诰示全忠。
现代文：刘季述派养子刘希度到大梁晋见朱全忠，答应把大唐社稷献纳给他；又派供奉官李奉本拿太上皇唐昭宗的诰命给朱全忠看。
English: Liu Jishu sent his adopted son Liu Xidu to Daliangjin to see Zhu Quanzhong, and promised to donate the Great Tang Dynasty medal to him; he also sent the offering officer Li Bongben to show Zhu Quanzhong the medal ordered by Empress Dowager Tang Zhaozong.

古文：全忠犹豫未决，会僚佐议之，或曰： 朝廷大事，非籓镇所宜预知。 
现代文：朱全忠犹豫未决，会同僚佐商议，有的说： 朝廷大事，不是藩镇应当于预的。 
English: Zhu Quanzhong hesitated to make a decision, and his colleagues in the guild discussed the matter. Some said, "Imperial affairs should be decided by the imperial court, not by the town."

古文：天平节度副使李振独曰： 王室有难，此霸者之资也。
现代文：唯独天平节度副使李振说： 王室有难，这是成就霸业的资本。
English: However, Li Zhen, vice-minister of the balance of power, said: The royal family is in difficulty, which is the capital to achieve hegemony.

古文：今公为唐桓、文，安危所属。
现代文：现在您是大唐的齐桓公、晋文公，安危所系。
English: Now you are the Qiguan and Jinwen princes of the Great Tang Dynasty, and your lineage is in danger.

古文：季述一宦竖耳，乃敢囚废天子，公不能讨，何以复令诸侯！
现代文：刘季述不过是一个宦官罢了，竟敢囚禁废黜天子，您不能讨伐，用什么再号令诸侯！
English: Liu Jishu is nothing more than a eunuch, how dare he imprison the dethroned emperor, you can't fight, how can you order the princes!

古文：且幼主位定，则天下之权尽归宦官矣，是以太阿之柄授人也。 
现代文：况且幼主君位确定，那么国家政权就全归宦官了，这是把太阿剑柄交给他们啊！ 
English: Moreover, if the position of the young lord is confirmed, then the state power will be entirely in the hands of the eunuchs, which is like handing them the hilt of the sword!

古文：全忠大悟，即囚希度、奉本，遣振如京师诇事。
现代文：朱全忠大悟，立即把刘希度、李奉本囚禁，派李振到京师去探察事态。
English: Realizing this, Zhu Quanzhong immediately imprisoned Liu Xidu and Li Bongbon and sent Li Zhen to Beijing to investigate the situation.

古文：即还，又遣亲吏蒋玄晖如京师，与崔胤谋之；又召程岩赴大梁。
现代文：李振回到大梁以后，朱全忠又派遣新吏蒋玄晖至京师，与崔胤密谋策划，又召宣武进奏官程岩赶赴大梁。
English: After Li Zhen returned to Daliang, Zhu Quanzhong also sent a new official, Jiang Xuanzhang, to Beijing Division, to conspire with Cui Yin, and also summoned Xuanwu marching officer Cheng Yan to go to Daliang.

古文：清海节度使薛王知柔薨。
现代文：清海节度使薛王李知柔去世。
English: The Qinghai Festival caused the death of Xue Wang Li Zhirou.

古文：是岁，加杨行密兼侍中。
现代文：这一年，淮南节度使杨行密加封兼侍中。
English: This year, the Huainan Festival made Yang Xingming a close aide and attendant.

古文：睦州刺史陈晟卒，弟询自称刺史。
现代文：睦州刺史陈晟死，他的弟弟陈询自称剌史。
English: Mutsuzhou assassin Chen Zhi died, his brother Chen Zhe inquired and claimed to be Zhi Zhi.

古文：太子即位累旬，籓镇笺表多不至。
现代文：太子即位几十天，各藩镇例应奏进的笺表大多不到。
English: The crown prince has been on the throne for dozens of days, and most of the imperial rescripts that should have been submitted by each domain and town have not been received.

古文：王仲先性苛察，素知左、右军多积弊，及为中尉，钩校军中钱谷，得隐没为奸者，痛捶之，急征所负，将士颇不安。
现代文：右军中尉王仲先性情苛刻细察，向来知道左、右军积弊很多，等到担任中尉，查考校核军中钱谷，查到隐没钱谷为奸的人，就痛加鞭打，紧急征索所欠；将士很不安宁。
English: Wang Zhongxian, a lieutenant of the Right Army, was a strict and meticulous character. He always knew that the Left and Right Armies had accumulated many defects. When he became a lieutenant, he investigated Qian Gu in the nuclear army of the school, and when he found that Qian Gu was a traitor, he whipped him severely and urgently collected what he owed. The soldiers were very uneasy.

古文：有盐州雄毅军使孙德昭为左神策指挥使，自刘季述等废立，常愤惋不平。
现代文：有盐州雄毅军使孙德昭，担任左神策指挥使，自刘季述废黜唐昭宗、强立太子之后，经常愤惋不平。
English: There was Sun Dezhao, the envoy of Yanzhou Xiongyi Army, who served as the envoy of Zuo Sheng, and since Liu Qishu deposed Tang Zhaozong and installed Qiang as the crown prince, he was often angry.

古文：崔胤闻之，遣判官石戬与之游。
现代文：崔胤听说后，派遗度支盐铁判官石戬与孙德昭交游。
English: After Cui Yan heard about it, he sent Shi Jun and Sun Dezhao to visit Shi Jun and Sun Dezhao.

古文：德昭每酒酣必泣，戬知其诚，乃密以胤意说之曰： 自上皇幽闭，中外大臣至于行间士卒，孰不切齿！
现代文：孙德昭每次饮酒到酣畅时，一定哭泣，石戬知道他诚实，就秘密按照崔胤的意思劝说他，说： 自太上皇幽禁以来，内外大臣以至于军队士卒，谁不咬牙切齿！
English: Every time Sun Dezhao drank until he was drunk, he would weep. Shi Yan knew that he was honest, and secretly persuaded him according to Cui Yin's intention, saying: Since the Emperor's confinement, the Minister of the Interior and the Minister of the Interior, and even the soldiers, who do not grit their teeth!

古文：今反者独季述、仲先耳，公诚能诛此二人，迎上皇复位，则富贵穷一时，忠义流千古；苟狐疑不决，则功落他人之手矣！ 
现代文：如今造反的只有刘季述、王仲先二人而已，您如果能杀死这两个人，迎太上皇复位，就会富贵穷极一时，忠义流传千古；如果犹豫不决，就要功落他人之手了！ 
English: Now, only Liu Jishu and Wang Zhongxian are rebelling. If you can kill these two people and restore the emperor, you will be rich beyond measure, and your loyalty will be passed down through the ages. If you hesitate, you will fall into the hands of others!

古文：德昭谢曰： 德昭小校，国家大事，安敢专之！
现代文：孙德昭叩谢说： 德昭不过是个小军官，国家大事，岂敢专擅！
English: Sun Dezhao bowed and said: Dezhao is just a petty officer, a national event, how dare he be an expert!

古文：苟相公有命，不敢爱死！ 
现代文：如果相公有命令，德昭不敢惜死。 
English: If there is an order from Sangong, De Zhao will not hesitate to die.

古文：戬以白胤。
现代文：石戬把孙德昭的情况禀报了崔胤。
English: Shi Hao falsely reported Sun Dezhao's situation to Cui Yin.

古文：胤割衣带，手书以授之。
现代文：崔胤割下衣带，亲笔书写命令，交给孙德昭。
English: Cui Yan cut off his belt, wrote the order in his own handwriting, and handed it to Sun Dezhao.

古文：德昭复结右军清远都将董彦弼、周承诲，谋以除夜伏兵安福门外以俟之。
现代文：孙德昭又结交右军清远都将董彦弼、周承诲，商量在除夕夜里伏兵安福门外，俟机行事。
English: Sun Dezhao also made friends with right-wing Qing Dynasty generals Dong Yanqi and Zhou Chengyi, and they discussed setting up an ambush outside the Anfu Gate on New Year's Eve.

古文：昭宗圣穆景文孝皇帝中之中天复元年
现代文：天复元年
English: in the first year of the Tianfu era

古文：春，正月，乙酉朔，王仲先入朝，至安福门，孙德昭擒斩之，驰诣少阳院，叩门呼曰： 逆贼已诛，请陛下出劳将士。 
现代文：春季正月，乙酉，右军中尉王仲先入宫朝见，行至安福门，孙德昭将他捉住杀死，随即快马奔赴少阳院，敲门高喊道： 逆贼王仲先已被杀死，请陛下出来慰劳将士。 
English: In the first month of spring, the right-wing army lieutenant Wang Zhong first entered the palace to see the morning, went to the Anfu Gate, Sun Dezhao caught him and killed him, then the fast horse rushed to the Shaoyang Courthouse, knocked on the door and shouted: The rebel Wang Zhong has been killed, please Your Majesty come out to comfort the laborers.

古文：何后不信，曰： 果尔，以其首来！ 
现代文：何皇后听了不相信，说： 果然这样，将他的首级拿来！ 
English: When the queen heard this, she did not believe it and said, "That's right, bring me his head!"

古文：德昭献其首，上乃与后毁扉而出。
现代文：孙德昭献上王仲先的首级，昭宗才与何皇后毁坏门扇出来。
English: Sun Dezhao presented Wang Zhongxian's head to the emperor, and it was only after the emperor and the empress broke down the door that they came out.

古文：崔胤迎上御长乐门楼，帅百官称贺。
现代文：崔胤迎接昭宗登上长乐门楼，率领文武百官称颂庆贺。
English: Cui Yan greeted Akimune on the top of the Changle Gate and led hundreds of military and civilian officials in praise and celebration.

古文：周承诲擒刘季述、王彦范继至，方诘责，已为乱梃所毙。
现代文：这时，周承诲捉获刘季述、王彦范接着到达，昭宗刚责问他们的谋逆罪行，就已被乱棍打死了。
English: At this time, Liu Jizhu and Wang Yanfan were captured by Zhou Chengyi and arrived next. As soon as Zhaozong accused them of treason, they were beaten to death with a club.

古文：薛齐偓赴井死，出而斩之。
现代文：薛齐投井淹死，被捞出来斩了首级。
English: Xue Qi threw himself into a well and drowned. He was fished out and beheaded.

古文：灭四人之族，并诛其党二十馀人。
现代文：杀灭王仲先、刘季述、王彦范、薛齐四人全家，并把他们的党羽二十余人处死。
English: They killed the entire families of Wang Zhongxian, Liu Jisutsu, Wang Yanfan and Xue Qi, and executed more than 20 of their followers.

古文：宦官奉太子匿于左军，献传国宝。
现代文：宦官侍奉太子藏在左军之中，把传国宝玺献了出来。
English: The eunuch serving the crown prince hid among the left-wing troops and presented the national treasure to them.

古文：上曰： 裕幼弱，为凶竖所立，非其罪也。 
现代文：昭宗说： 李裕年幼懦弱，被凶恶小人立为皇帝，不是他的罪过。 
English: Zhaozong said: Li Yu was young and weak, and it was not his fault that he was made emperor by a vicious villain.

古文：命还东宫，黜为德王，复名裕。
现代文：命令他回东宫废黜为德王，并恢复旧名李裕。
English: He was ordered to return to the East Palace to be dethroned as the German king and to restore his old name, Li Yu.

古文：丙戌，以孙德昭同平章事，充静海节度使，赐姓名李继昭。
现代文：丙戌，唐昭宗任命孙德昭为同平章事，担任静海节度使，赐姓名为李继昭。
English: Sun Dezhao was appointed by the Tang Zhaozong as Tongping Zhengji and served as the Jinghai Festival envoy, and was given the surname Li Jizhao.

古文：丁亥，崔胤进位司徒，胤固辞。
现代文：丁亥，朝廷进升崔胤为司徒，崔胤坚决推辞。
English: Dinghai, the imperial court promoted Cui Yan as a disciple, Cui Yan resolutely refused.

古文：上宠待胤益厚。
现代文：从此，昭宗对崔胤的宠信待遇更加深厚。
English: From then on, Shozong treated Choi In more favourably.

古文：己丑，硃全忠闻刘季述等诛，折程岩足，械送京师，并刘希度、李奉本等皆斩于都市，由是益重李振。
现代文：己丑，朱全忠听说刘季述等人被杀，就把程岩的双脚折断，戴上刑具解送到京师长安，连同刘希度、李奉本等，都在闹市上处死，朱全忠因此越发看重李振。
English: When Zhu Quanzhong heard that Liu Jishu and others had been killed, he broke Chengyan's legs and sent him to the capital Chang'an wearing a torture device. Together with Liu Xidu, Li Fengben and others, they were all executed in the busy market. Zhu Quanzhong therefore valued Li Zhen more and more.

古文：庚寅，以周承诲为岭南西道节度使，赐姓名李继诲，董彦弼为宁远节度，赐姓李，并同平章事；与李继昭俱留宿卫，十日乃出还家，赏赐倾府库，时人谓之 三使相 。
现代文：庚寅，朝廷任命周承诲为岭南西道节度使，赐姓名为李继诲，任命彦弼为宁远节度使，赐姓李，并为同平章事；与李继昭都留在宫中直宿警卫，十天才出宫回家休息一日，并尽国库所有赏赐他们，当时人称他们为 三使相 。
English: In Geng Yin, the imperial court appointed Zhou Shenya as the festival envoy of Lingnan West Road and gave him the surname Li Shenya, appointed Yan Xuan as the festival envoy of Ningyuan and gave him the surname Li, and made him a peer; he and Li Jizhao both stayed in the palace as guards, and left the palace after ten days to go home for a day of rest, and gave them all the rewards of the national treasury. At that time, they were called the three envoys.

古文：癸巳，进硃全忠爵东平王。
现代文：癸巳，朱全忠进爵为东平王。
English: Soon after, Zhu Quanzhong was knighted as the King of Dongping.

古文：丙午，敕： 近年宰臣延英奏事，枢密使侍侧，争论纷然。既出，又称上旨未允，复有改易，桡权乱政。
现代文：丙午，昭宗颁布敕书： 近年来宰相在延英殿奏陈事情，枢密使在帝侍立，争论不休；出来后，又说皇上旨意尚未允准，又有更改变动，篡权乱政。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Emperor Zhaozong issued an imperial edict: In recent years, the prime minister has made a report at the Yan Ying palace, and the confidential envoy has stood at the emperor's side, arguing endlessly; after coming out, he also said that the emperor's will has not yet been approved, and there has been a change of movement, usurping power and disrupting the government.

古文：自今并依大中旧制，俟宰臣奏事毕，方得升殿承受公事。 
现代文：自今以后，依照大中年间的旧制，等到宰相奏事完毕，枢密使才能进殿接受公事。 
English: From now on, in accordance with the old system during the university and junior high school years, until the prime minister's report is completed, the confidential envoy can enter the hall to accept public affairs.

古文：赐两军副使李师虔、徐彦孙自尽，皆刘季述之党也。
现代文：赐令左、右两军副使李师度、徐彦孙自尽，因为他们都是刘季述的党羽。
English: He ordered Li Shidu and Xu Yansun, the deputy envoys of the left and right armies, to commit suicide, because they were all the party members described by Liu Ji.

古文：凤翔、彰义节度使李茂贞来朝；加茂贞守尚书令，兼侍中，进爵歧王。
现代文：凤翔、彰义节度使李茂贞前来入朝；朝廷加封李茂贞守尚书令，兼任侍中，并进爵为岐王。
English: The Fengxiang and Zhangyi festivals made Li Maozhen come to the imperial court; the imperial court additionally appointed Li Maozhen to keep the imperial edict, concurrently served as an attendant, and was knighted as the King of Qi.

古文：刘季述、王仲先既死，崔胤、陆扆上言： 祸乱之兴，皆由中官典兵。
现代文：刘季述、王仲先已死，崔胤、陆向昭宗进言说： 祸乱的发生，都是由于宦官主管军队。
English: Liu Ji said that Wang Zhongxian was dead, and Cui Yin and Lu Xiangzong said: The occurrence of the calamity was due to the eunuch in charge of the army.

古文：乞令胤主左军，扆主右军，则诸侯不敢侵陵，王室尊矣。 
现代文：请救皇上让胤主管左军，陆主管右军，这样，诸侯就不敢侵犯欺负，朝廷就尊崇了。 
English: Please save the emperor and let the emperor be in charge of the left army and the land in charge of the right army. In this way, the lords would not dare to encroach and bully, and the court would respect them.

古文：上犹豫两日未决。
现代文：昭宗犹豫了二天，没有作出决断。
English: Shozong hesitated for two days and did not make a decision.

古文：李茂贞闻之，怒曰： 崔胤夺军权未得，已欲翦灭诸侯！ 
现代文：李茂贞听说这件事，勃然大怒说： 崔胤夺军权没有得到，已经想要消灭诸侯了！ 
English: When Li Maozhen heard about this, she flew into a rage and said, "Cui Yin did not succeed in seizing military power, and now he wants to eliminate the princes!"

古文：上召李继昭、李继诲、李彦弼谋之，皆曰： 臣等累世在军中，未闻书生为军主；若属南司，必多所变更，不若归之北司为便。 
现代文：昭宗召集李继昭、李继诲、李彦弼商量，都说： 我等数世在军队中任职，没有听说过书生担任军队的主帅，如果把军队隶属于南司，一定会有很多变易更张，不如把军队归北司掌管较为方便。 
English: Zhaozong summoned Li Jizhao, Li Jizhen, and Li Yanqi for consultation, and they all said: We have served in the army for several generations, and have not heard of a scholar serving as the commander of the army. If the army is subordinated to the South Division, there will certainly be many changes. It would be more convenient to return the army to the North Division.

古文：上乃谓胤、扆曰： 将士意不欲属文臣，卿曹勿坚求。 
现代文：昭宗于是对崔胤、陆说： 将士们的意见不愿隶属于文臣，卿等不要再坚决要求了。 
English: Zhaozong then said to Cui Yin and Lu: "The opinions of the generals do not want to be subordinated to the civil servants, so don't insist on it.

古文：于是以枢密使韩全诲、凤翔监军使张彦弘为左、右中尉。
现代文：于是，昭宗任命枢密使韩全诲左军中尉，凤翔监军使张彦弘为右军中尉。
English: As a result, Akimune appointed the privy envoy Han Quan Er as the lieutenant of the left army, and Feng Xiang as the lieutenant of the right army.

古文：全诲亦前凤翔监军也。
现代文：韩全诲为左军中尉，凤翔监军。
English: Han Quanzhong was a lieutenant of the Left Army, and Feng Xiang was a supervisor of the army.

古文：又征前枢密使致仕严遵美为两军中尉、观军容处置使。
现代文：朝廷又征召告老在家的前枢密使严遵美为左、右两军中尉、观军容处置使。
English: The imperial court also conscripted Yan Zunmei, a former privy councilor who had been at home for a long time, as a lieutenant of the left and right armies, and an envoy for the disposition of the appearance of the troops.

古文：遵美曰： 一军犹不可为，况两军乎！ 
现代文：严遵美说： 一军况且不能掌管，何况两军呢！ 
English: Yan Zunmei said, "I can't control one army, let alone two!

古文：固辞不起。
现代文：坚决辞谢不出。
English: Resolute resignation is not an option.

古文：以袁易简、周敬容为枢密使。
现代文：朝廷任命袁易简、周敬容为枢密使。
English: The Imperial Court appointed Yuan Yizhen and Zhou Jingrong as Privy Councilors.

古文：李茂贞辞还镇。
现代文：李茂贞告辞返回镇所。
English: Li Maozhen bade farewell and returned to the town hall.

古文：崔胤以宦官典兵，终为肘腋之患，欲以外兵制之，讽茂贞留兵三千于京师，充宿卫，以茂贞假子继筠将之。
现代文：崔胤认为宦官主管军队，终究是身边的祸患，想用藩镇的军队遏制他们，就婉言劝说李茂贞在京师留驻三千军队，充任皇宫的宿值警卫，由李茂贞的养子李继筠率领。
English: Cui Yin thought that the eunuchs in charge of the army were ultimately a scourge around him, and wanted to use the troops of the towns to contain them, so he gently persuaded Li Maozhen to station three thousand troops in the capital, to act as guards of the imperial palace, led by Li Maozhen's adopted son Li Jizhen.

古文：左谏议大夫万年韩偓以为不可，胤曰： 兵自不肯去，非留之也。 
现代文：左谏议大夫万年人韩认为这样做不行，崔胤说： 士兵自己不肯回去，不是我挽留他们。 
English: Zuo Yao argued that Dr. Wan Ren Ren Han did not think this was possible, and Cui Yin said: The soldiers themselves did not want to go back, it was not I who held them back.

古文：偓曰： 始者何为召之邪？ 
现代文：韩说： 开始为什么召请李茂贞前来京师呢？ 
English: Han said: Why did you invite Li Maozhen to come to Beijing in the first place?

古文：胤无以应。
现代文：崔胤没法回答。
English: Cui Yin could not answer.

古文：偓曰： 留此兵则家国两危，不留则家国两安。 
现代文：韩又说： 留下这些军队，家庭和国家都有危险，不留下这些军队，家庭和国家都会平安。 
English: Han also said, "If we leave these troops behind, our families and country will be in danger. If we don't leave these troops behind, our families and country will be safe."

古文：胤不从。
现代文：崔胤不从。
English: Choi In did not listen to Han's advice.

古文：硃全忠既服河北，欲先取河中以制河东。己亥，召诸将谓曰： 王珂驽材，恃太原自骄汰。
现代文：朱全忠已经降服河北，想要先夺取河中来控制河东，己亥召集属下诸将说道： 王珂是个才能平庸的人，仗恃太原李克用是他的岳丈，骄横奢侈。
English: Zhu Quanzhong had already surrendered Hebei and wanted to seize the middle of the river first to control the east of the river. Ji Hai gathered his subordinate generals and said: Wang Ke is a man of mediocre talent. The warlord Taiyuan Li Ke used to be his father-in-law, arrogant and extravagant.

古文：吾今断长蛇之腰，诸君为我以一绳缚之。 
现代文：我现在要攻取河中，砍断长蛇的腰，诸位替我用一根绳索把它捆绑起来！ 
English: I'm going to attack the river now, cut off the snake's waist, you tie it up with a rope for me!

古文：庚子，遣张存敬将兵三万自汜水度河出舍山路以袭之，全忠以中军继其后。
现代文：庚子，朱全忠派遣张存敬率领三万大军，自汜水渡过黄河，从含山路进发袭击河中，朱全忠统率中军跟在后面。
English: Geng Zi and Zhu Quanzhong dispatched Zhang Cunqian to lead a 30,000-strong army, crossed the Yellow River from Shishui, and attacked the river from the mountain road. Zhu Quanzhong led the Chinese army behind.

古文：戊申，存敬至绛州。
现代文：戊申，张存敬率领大军抵达绛州。
English: Wushin, Zhang Cunjing led a large army to arrive in Zhangzhou.

古文：晋、绛不意其至，皆无守备，庚戌，绛州刺史陶建钊降之；壬子，晋州刺史张汉瑜降之。全忠遣其将侯言守晋州，何絪守绛州，屯兵二万以扼河东援兵之路。
现代文：绛州刺史陶建钊、晋州刺史张汉瑜没想到张存敬率军突然来到，都没有防守戒备，遂于庚戌、壬子相继投降。朱全忠派遣他的部将侯言留守晋州，何留守绛州，驻军二万，用来把守河东李克用增援军队的通行道路。
English: Zhu Quanzhong sent his subordinate general Hou Yan to stay in Jinzhou and He to stay in Zhangzhou, and stationed 20,000 troops to guard the access road for Li Ke's reinforcement army in the east of the river.

古文：朝廷恐全忠西入关，急赐诏和解之；全忠不从。
现代文：朝廷恐怕朱全忠的军队向西攻入潼关，急忙颁赐诏书，调解他们重归和好，朱全忠不从。
English: The imperial court feared that Zhu Quanzhong's army would advance westward into Shaoguan, and hastily issued an edict to mediate their return to peace. Zhu Quanzhong did not comply.

古文：珂遣间使告急于李克用，道路相继，克用以汴人先据晋、绛，兵不得进。
现代文：王珂连续派遣密使向李克用告急求救，使者在路上接连不断；李克用由于朱全忠的汴州军队先已占据了晋州、绛州，援兵不能前进。
English: Wang Ke continuously sent secret envoys to Li Keqin to appeal for help, and the envoys kept arriving one after another on the road; Li Keqin could not advance with reinforcements because Zhu Quanzhong's Zhangzhou army had already occupied Jinzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：珂妻遗克用书曰： 儿旦暮为俘虏，大人何忍不救！ 
现代文：王珂的妻子李氏送信给李克用说： 女儿早晚就要成为俘虏了，父亲大人怎么忍心不来援救！ 
English: Wang Ke's wife, Ms. Li, sent a letter to Li Kegui, saying: "Sooner or later, my daughter will become a prisoner. How can my father not come to the rescue!

古文：克用报曰： 今贼兵塞晋、绛，众寡不敌，进则与汝两亡，不若与王郎举族归朝。 
现代文：李克用回信说： 现在贼兵已经堵塞晋州、绛州，我兵寡不敌众，前进就要与你同归于尽，不如与王郎带领合族回到朝廷来。 
English: Li Ke replied in a letter, "Now that the robber soldiers have blocked Jinzhou and Zhangzhou, I am outnumbered. If we advance, we will die with you. It would be better to return to the imperial court with Wang Lang leading our compatriots."

古文：珂又遗李茂贞书，言： 天子新返正，诏籓镇无得相攻，同奖王室。
现代文：王珂又送信给李茂贞，说： 天子刚恢复君位，诏命藩镇不得互相攻杀，共同辅助朝廷。
English: Wang Ke also sent a message to Li Maozhen, saying, "The Emperor has just restored the imperial throne, and he has ordered that the provinces and towns should not attack and kill each other, but should jointly assist the imperial court.

古文：今诸公不顾诏命，首兴兵相加，其心可见。
现代文：现在朱公不顾天子的命令，首先发兵攻击在下，他的心思用意可以想见。
English: Now Zhu Gong disregarded the order of the heavenly son and first sent troops to attack the enemy. His thoughts and intentions can be imagined.

古文：河中若亡，则同华、邠、岐俱不自保。
现代文：河中如果沦亡了，那么，同华、州、岐州就都不能自保了。
English: If Hezhong were to fall, then Tonghua, Zhou and Qizhou would not be able to protect themselves.

古文：天子神器拱手授人，其势必然矣。
现代文：这样，天子的政权拱手给予朱全忠，就势所必然了。
English: In this way, it was inevitable that Zhu Quanzhong would be given the power of the heavenly son.

古文：公宜亟帅关中诸镇兵，固守潼关，赴救河中。
现代文：您应当赶快统帅关中各藩镇的军队，坚决守卫潼关，前去援救河中。
English: You should quickly command the troops of all the provinces and towns in Guanzhong, resolutely guard Guanzhong, and go to the rescue of Hezhong.

古文：仆自知不武，愿于公西偏授一小镇，此地请公有之。
现代文：在下自知不勇武，情愿在您的西边给予一个小镇，此地请归您所有。
English: I'd rather give you a small town to the west of you, if you don't mind. You can have it.

古文：关中安危，国祚修短，系公此举，愿审思之！ 
现代文：关中的安危，国运的长短，全仰赖您此举了，希望详慎考虑！ 
English: The safety of Guanzhong, the length of the National Games, all depend on your move, I hope you will consider it carefully!

古文：茂贞素无远图，不报。
现代文：李茂贞向来没有长远的计划，没有答复。
English: Li Maozhen has never had a long-term plan and did not reply.

古文：二月，甲寅朔，河东将李嗣昭攻泽州，拔之。
现代文：二月甲寅朔，河东大将李嗣昭攻打泽州，将泽州攻克。
English: In February, Li Shizhao, the general of Hedong, attacked and conquered Zhezhou.

古文：乙卯，张存敬引兵发晋州；己未，至河中，遂围之。
现代文：乙卯，张存敬率领大军从晋州出发，己未到达河中，就把城池包围了起来。
English: Second, Zhang Cunjing led a large army from Jinzhou. Before reaching the middle of the river, he surrounded the city.

古文：王珂势穷，将奔京师，而人心离贰，会浮梁坏，流澌塞河，舟行甚难，珂挈其族数百人欲夜登舟，亲谕守城者，皆不应。
现代文：王珂处境危急，将要逃奔京师，但人心离散，恰巧浮桥坏了，流水堵塞了黄河，船行非常困难。王珂携带亲族数百人，想要乘夜上船渡河逃走，亲自告诉守城将士，都不答应。
English: Wang Ke was in a critical situation and was about to flee to the capital, but his people were scattered. It just so happened that the floating bridge was broken and the Yellow River was blocked by flowing water, making navigation very difficult. Wang Ke was carrying hundreds of relatives and wanted to cross the river by boat at night to escape. He personally told the soldiers guarding the city, but they did not agree.

古文：牙将刘训曰： 今人情扰扰，若夜出涉河，必争舟纷乱，一夫作难，事不可知。
现代文：牙将刘训说： 现在人情纷扰骚动，如果夜里出城渡河，一定争抢上船，出现混乱，一人作乱，事情就难以预料了。
English: Liu Xun, a dental officer, said, "Nowadays, people's emotions are turbulent. If you go out of the city to cross the river at night, there will be a scramble to get on the boat, there will be chaos, one person will make a mess, and things will be unpredictable.

古文：不若且送款存敬，徐图向背。 
现代文：不如暂且向张存敬表示投诚，慢慢考虑归顺还是反抗。 
English: It would be better to show your sincerity to Zhang Cun Rong for the time being, and slowly consider whether to surrender or resist.

古文：珂从之。
现代文：王珂听从了刘训的主意。
English: Wang Ke listened to Liu Xun's idea.

古文：壬戌，珂植白幡于城隅，遣使以牌印请降于存敬。
现代文：壬戌，王珂在城角坚起白旗，派遣使者拿着牌印向张存敬请求投降。
English: At the same time, Wang Ke put up a white flag at the corner of the city and sent an envoy with a seal to Zhang Cunxian to request him to surrender.

古文：存敬请开城，珂曰： 吾于硃公有家世事分，请公退舍，俟硃公至，吾自以城授之。 
现代文：张存敬请王珂打开城门，王珂说： 我对于朱公有家世亲谊情分，请您退却，等候朱公到了，我自然把城池给予他。 
English: Zhang Cun Rong asked Wang Ke to open the gate. Wang Ke said, "I have a family affinity for Zhu Gong. Please retreat and wait for Zhu Gong to arrive. I will naturally give him the castle."

古文：存敬从之，且使走白全忠。
现代文：张存敬依从了王珂，并且派人前去禀告朱全忠。
English: Zhang Cunjing obeyed Wang Ke and sent someone to report Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：乙丑，全忠至洛阳，闻之喜，驰往赴之。
现代文：乙丑，朱全忠到达洛阳，听说王珂等他前去受降非常欢喜，就驰往河中赴王珂之约。
English: When Zhu Quanzhong arrived in Luoyang, he was very happy to hear that Wang Ke was waiting for him to surrender, so he rode to the middle of the river to meet Wang Ke.

古文：戊辰，至虞乡，先哭于重荣之墓，尽哀；河中人皆悦。
现代文：戊辰，朱全忠到了虞乡，先到王珂之父王重荣的墓前哭奠，竭尽哀恸，河中人都很喜悦。
English: When Wu Chen and Zhu Quanzhong arrived at Yu Township, they first went to the tomb of Wang Ke's father, Wang Chung Rong, to weep and mourn, and the people in the river were very happy.

古文：珂欲面缚牵羊出迎，全忠遽使止之曰： 太师舅之恩何可忘！
现代文：王珂想要反绑双手牵羊出城迎接，朱全忠急忙派人阻止他，说： 太师舅父的恩情怎能忘记！
English: Wang Ke wanted to tie up his hands and lead the sheep out of the city to meet him, but Zhu Quanzhong hurriedly sent someone to stop him, saying, "How can I forget the kindness of my great-uncle!

古文：若郎君如此，使仆异日何以见舅于九泉！ 乃以常礼出迎，握手歔欷，联辔入城。
现代文：公子您这样做，使我日后在九泉之下怎么见舅父！ 于是，王珂以常礼出城迎接朱全忠，二人握手叹息，然后并驾进城。
English: My lord, if you do this, how will I be able to see my uncle in the future! So, Wang Ke went out of the city to meet Zhu Quanzhong with the usual ceremony, the two shook hands and sighed, and then drove into the city.

古文：全忠表张存敬为护国军留后，王珂举族迁于大梁。
现代文：朱全忠上表请以张存敬为护国军留后，并将王珂全族迁往大梁。
English: Zhu Quanzhong asked Zhang Cunqian to stay behind as the national guard, and moved Wang Ke's entire family to Daliang.

古文：其后全忠遣珂入朝，遣人杀之于华州。
现代文：其后，朱全忠派遣王珂进京入朝，又派人在华州将他杀死。
English: After that, Zhu Quanzhong sent Wang Ke to Beijing to enter the imperial court, and also sent someone to kill him in Huazhou.

古文：全忠闻张夫人疾亟，遽自河中东归。
现代文：朱全忠听说妻子张夫人病危，急忙从河中向东返回。
English: When Zhu Quanzhong heard that his wife, Mrs. Zhang, was critically ill, he hurried from the middle of the river to the east.

古文：李克用遣使以重币请修好于全忠；全忠虽遣使报之，而忿其书辞蹇傲，决欲攻之。
现代文：李克用派遣使者给朱全忠送去厚礼，请求重归和好。朱全忠虽然派遣使者前去答复，但是忿恨李克用的书信词语傲慢，决定要派兵去攻打他。
English: Li Ke sent an envoy to Zhu Quanzhong to send a gift and ask for a return to peace. Although Zhu Quanzhong sent an envoy to reply, he was angry with Li Ke's arrogant letter and decided to send troops to attack him.

古文：以翰林学士、户部侍郎王溥为中书侍郎、同平章事。以吏部侍郎裴枢为户部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：朝廷任命翰林学士、户部侍郎王溥为中书侍郎、同平章事，任命吏部侍郎裴枢为户部侍郎、同平章事。
English: The Imperial Court appointed Hanlin Baccalaureate and Household Attendant Wang Zeng as Chusho Attendant and Tonghei Officer, and appointed Liibu Attendant Baizhu as Household Attendant and Tonghei Officer.

古文：溥，正雅之从孙也，常在崔胤幕府，故胤引之。
现代文：王溥是王正雅的从孙，常在崔胤的幕府行走，所以崔胤引荐他。
English: Wang Yao was the great-grandson of Wang Zhengyia and often visited Cui Yin's shogunate, so Cui Yin recommended him.

古文：赠谥故睦王倚曰恭哀太子。
现代文：朝廷给被宦官杀害了的睦王李倚追曾谥号，称为恭哀太子。
English: The imperial court gave Prince Mutsu, who was killed by a eunuch, the posthumous title of Prince Zengzong, known as the Prince of Condolences.

古文：加幽州节度使刘仁恭、魏博节度使罗绍威并兼侍中。
现代文：朝廷加封幽州节度使刘仁恭、魏博节度使罗绍威兼任侍中。
English: The imperial court also appointed Liu Rengong to the Yuzhou Festival and Luo Shaowei to the Weibo Festival, both of whom also served as chamberlains.

古文：三月，癸未朔，硃全忠至大梁。
现代文：三月，癸未朔，朱全忠从河中回到大梁。
English: In March, before the new year, Zhu Quanzhong returned to Dalian from the river.

古文：癸卯，遣氏叔琮等将兵五万攻李克用，入自太行，魏博都将张文恭入自磁州新口，葛从周以兗、郓兵会成德兵入自土门，洺州刺史张归厚入自马岭，义武节度使王处直入自飞狐，权知晋州侯言以慈、隰、晋、绛兵入自阴地。
现代文：癸卯，朱全忠派遣氏叔琮率兵五万前去攻打李克用，从太行山进军，魏博都将张文恭从磁州新口进军，葛从周率领兖州、郓州军队会同成德军队从土门进军，州刺史张归厚率军从马岭进军，义武节度使王处直率军从飞狐进军，暂为晋州刺史侯言率领慈州、隰州、晋州、绛州军队从阴地关进军。
English: At the same time, Zhu Quanzhong sent Zhang Wengong and his 50,000 soldiers to attack Li Kegui from Taihang Mountain, Weibo sent Zhang Wengong and his 50,000 soldiers to attack Li Kegui from Magizhou New Port, Ge Zhou and his 50,000 soldiers to attack Zhang Zhou and his 50,000 soldiers to attack Zhengde from Dumen, Zhi Shi Zhang Gui Hou and his 50,000 soldiers to attack Ma Ling, Yi Wu Jiedu and his 50,000 soldiers to attack Wang Zuo and his 50,000 soldiers to attack Li Keguin from Taihang Mountain, Wei Bo sent Zhang Wengong and his 50,000 soldiers to attack Zhengzhou New Port, Ge Zhou and his

古文：叔琮入天井关，进军昂车。
现代文：氏叔琮入天井关，向泽州昂车关进军。
English: Ujitsugu entered the ceiling pass and marched into the Zezhou Angzhe pass.

古文：辛亥，沁州刺史蔡训以城降。
现代文：辛亥，沁州刺史蔡诃献城投降。
English: Xinhai, Zhangzhou, Zhangshi, Caijing surrendered the city.

古文：河东都将盖璋诣侯言降，即令权知沁州。
现代文：河东都将盖玮向侯言投降，就令他暂为沁州刺史。
English: All of Hedong surrendered Gaizhu to Houyan, making him temporarily the ruler of Zhangzhou.

古文：壬子，叔琮拔泽州，刺史李存璋弃城走。
现代文：壬子，氏叔琮攻克泽州，刺史李存璋弃城逃走。
English: Imoko, Ujitsuna, and others attacked Kesho, and Li Cunxu abandoned the city and fled.

古文：叔琮进攻潞州，昭义节度使孟迁降之。
现代文：氏叔琮进攻潞州，昭义节度使孟迁投降。
English: Ujitsushuko attacked Bozhou, and Shouyi Jiedu forced Mengqian to surrender.

古文：河东屯将李审建、王周将步军一万、骑二千诣督琮降。叔琮进趣晋阳。
现代文：河东驻军将领李审建、王周率领步军一万、骑兵一千向氏叔琮投降，氏叔琮率领大军进赴晋阳。
English: Li Xianjian and Wang Zhou, the generals of the Hedong Garrison, led an infantry force of ten thousand and a cavalry force of one thousand to surrender to Uji Shuxuan, and Uji Shuxuan led a large army into Jinyang.

古文：夏，四月，乙卯，叔琮出石会关，营于洞涡驿。
现代文：夏季，四月乙卯，氏叔琮率军出石会关，在洞涡驿扎营。
English: In the summer, in April, Ujitsuba led his army out of Shishi-kaigaseki and set up camp in Dokurubo.

古文：张归厚引兵至辽州，丁巳，辽州刺史张鄂降。
现代文：州刺史张归厚率领军队到达辽州，丁巳，辽州刺史张鄂归降。
English: Zhang Gui Hou, the governor of Liaozhou, led the army to Liaozhou. Ding Si and Zhang E, the governor of Liaozhou, surrendered.

古文：别将白奉国会成德兵自井陉入，己未，拔承天军，与叔琮烽火相应。
现代文：别将白奉国会同成德军队自井陉攻入，已未攻克承天军，与氏叔琮的军队烽火相呼应。
English: Don't let the army of Bai Fengkai and Chengde invade from the well, they have not defeated the heavenly army, echoing the army bonfire of Uji Shuxuan.

古文：甲戌，上谒太庙。
现代文：甲戌，唐昭宗到太庙拜谒。
English: Armor, Tang Zhaozong went to the Great Temple to pay homage.

古文：丁丑，赦天下，改元。雪王涯等十七家。
现代文：丁丑，大赦天下，改年号为天复，朝廷为王涯等十七家平反昭雪。
English: Ding Yuxiu, amnesty to the world, change the year name to Tian Fu, the court to Wang Ya and other seventeen families of Ping Fang Zhao Xue.

古文：初，杨复恭为中尉，借度支卖曲之利一年以赡两军，自是不肯复归。
现代文：当初，杨复恭任中尉，借用度支使卖酒曲一年所得的利润来供给左右两军的需用，从此不再愿意归还。
English: At first, Yang Fuxiong was appointed as a lieutenant, and he borrowed the profits from selling liquor for a year to supply the needs of the left and right armies. Since then, he was no longer willing to return it.

古文：至是，崔胤草赦，欲抑宦官，听酤者自造曲，但月输榷酤钱。两军先所造曲，趣令减价卖之，过七月无得复卖。
现代文：至此，崔胤起草赦免文告，想要裁抑宦官，听任卖酒的人自己制造酒曲，只是每月交纳卖酒税；左右两军先前所造酒曲，促令减价卖掉，过了七月不能再卖。
English: At this point, Cui Yan drafted an amnesty announcement, wanting to restrain the eunuchs, allowing the sellers to make their own liquor, but paying a monthly liquor tax; the liquor previously made by the left and right armies was sold at a reduced price, and could not be sold after July.

古文：东川节度使王宗涤以疾求代，王建表马步使王宗裕为留后。
现代文：东川节度使王宗涤因为患病请求派人替代，西川节度使王建上表请以马步使王宗裕为留后。
English: The East River Festival asked Wang Zongya to send someone to replace him due to illness, and the West River Festival asked Wang Jian to go to the table and ask Wang Zongyu to stay behind.

古文：氏叔琮等引兵抵晋阳城下，数挑战，城中大恐。
现代文：氏叔琮等率领大军抵达晋阳城下，多次叫阵挑战，城内军民非常恐慌。
English: When the large army led by Uji Shukun and others arrived at the foot of Jinyang City, they repeatedly challenged the troops. The soldiers and civilians in the city were very panicked.

古文：李克用登城备御，不遑饮食。
现代文：李克用登城戒备守御，来不及喝水吃饭。
English: Li Ke used to go to the city to be on the alert, but he did not have time to drink water and eat.

古文：时大雨积旬，城多颓坏，随加完补。
现代文：当时连续下了十来天大雨，城墙多处坍塌毁坏，李克用命令随时加以垒砌修补。
English: At that time, it rained heavily for ten days in a row, and many parts of the city wall collapsed and were destroyed. Li Ke ordered that the walls be repaired at any time.

古文：河东将李嗣昭、李嗣源凿暗门，夜出攻汴垒，屡有杀获。
现代文：河东将领李嗣昭、李嗣源从城内挖凿暗门密道，乘夜冲击攻袭氏叔琮军队的营垒，屡次袭击都有杀伤俘获。
English: The generals of Hedong, Li Shizhao and Li Shiyuan, dug a secret passage from inside the city and stormed the camp of the army of Mr. Xiong Yao at night. They were killed and captured in many attacks.

古文：李存进败汴军于洞涡。
现代文：同时，李存进也在洞涡驿打败汴州军队。
English: At the same time, Li Cunjin also defeated the Bozhou army in the cave vortex.

古文：时汴军既众，刍粮不给，久雨，士卒疟利，全忠乃召兵还。
现代文：当时，攻打晋阳的汴州军队众多，粮草供给不足，又长时间下雨，兵士患疟疾拉痢，朱全忠于是把军队召回。
English: At that time, there were many troops from Zhangzhou attacking Jinyang, the supply of grain and grass was insufficient, it rained for a long time, and soldiers suffered from malaria and dysentery. Zhu Quanzhong then recalled the troops.

古文：五月，叔琮等自石会关归，诸道军亦退。
现代文：五月，氏叔琮等率军由石会关返回，其他各道军队也都退师。
English: In May, the army led by Ujitsukune and others returned from Shikai Pass, and other armies from various provinces also withdrew.

古文：河东将周德威、李嗣昭以精骑五千蹑之，杀获甚众。
现代文：河东将领周德威、李嗣昭率领五千精锐骑兵跟踪追击，杀伤俘获汴州军队很多。
English: Hedong generals Zhou Dewei and Li Shizhao led five thousand elite cavalry in pursuit, killing and capturing a lot of Zhangzhou troops.

古文：先是，汾州刺史李瑭举州附于汴军，克用遣其将李存审攻之，三日而拔，执瑭，斩之。
现代文：原先，汾州刺史李瑭以全州归附汴州军队，这时，李克用派遣他的部将李存审率兵攻打李瑭，三天攻克汾州，逮住李瑭，把他斩首。
English: At that time, Li Ke dispatched his subordinate Li Cunxu to lead the troops to attack Li Shizhou, captured Li Shizhou in three days, and beheaded Li Shizhou.

古文：氏叔琮过上党，孟迁挈族随之南徙。
现代文：氏叔琮经过上党，孟迁带领全族人口跟随南迁。
English: After Uji Shukun became a member of the party, Meng Qian led the whole population to move south.

古文：硃全忠遣丁会代守潞州。
现代文：于是，朱全忠派遣丁会代守潞州。
English: As a result, Zhu Quanzhong dispatched the Ding Association to take over the defense of Zhangzhou.

古文：硃全忠奏乞除河中节度使，而讽吏民请己为帅。
现代文：朱全忠奏请任命河中节度使，同时暗示官吏百姓请让自己为主帅。
English: Zhu Quanzhong called for the appointment of an envoy to the mid-river festival, and at the same time suggested that officials and commoners should make themselves the chief marshals.

古文：癸卯，以全忠为宣武、宣义，天平、护国四镇节度使。
现代文：癸卯，朝廷任命朱全忠为宣武、宣义、天平、护国四镇节度使。
English: At the same time, the imperial court appointed Zhu Quanzhong as the four-town festival envoy of proclamation of martial law, proclamation of righteousness, balance, and protection of the country.

古文：己酉，加镇海、镇东节度使钱镠守侍中。
现代文：已酉，朝廷加封镇海、镇东节度使钱为侍中。
English: After his death, Zhenhai and Zhendong Jiedu were awarded the title of Chamberlain by the imperial court.

古文：崔胤之罢两军卖麹也，并近镇亦禁之。
现代文：崔胤在停止左右两军卖酒曲的时候，连同附近各藩镇的专卖权利也禁止了。
English: When Cui Yin stopped the left and right armies from selling liquor, he also banned the monopoly rights of the nearby towns.

古文：李茂贞惜其利，表乞入朝论奏，韩全诲请许之。
现代文：凤翔、彰义节度使李茂贞舍不得卖酒曲的利益，上表恳求入朝论奏。左军中尉韩全诲请求允许他进京。
English: Due to the Fengxiang and Zhangyi festivals, Li Maozhen was reluctant to sell the benefit of the wine song, and pleaded with the upper table to play in the morning. Han Zhengyu, a lieutenant of the Left Army, requested permission to enter Beijing.

古文：茂贞至京师，全诲深与相结。
现代文：李茂贞到京师，韩全诲与他深相交结。
English: When Li Maozhen came to Beijing to teach, Han Quanzhang became deeply intertwined with him.

古文：崔胤始惧，阴厚硃全忠益甚，与茂贞为仇敌矣。
现代文：崔胤这才害怕起来，暗中对朱全忠更加推重厚待，与李茂贞成为仇敌。
English: This is when Cui Yin became afraid. He secretly treated Zhu Quanzhong with more importance and became enemies with Li Maozhen.

古文：以佑国节度使张全义兼中书令。
现代文：朝廷以佑国节度使张全义兼任中书令。
English: The Imperial Court used the occasion of the National Day to appoint Zhang Quanyi as the second-in-command.

古文：六月，癸亥，硃全忠如河中。
现代文：六月癸亥，朱全忠前往河中。
English: In June, Zhu Quanzhong went to the river.

古文：上之返正也，中书舍人令狐涣、给事中韩偓皆预其谋，故擢为翰林学士，数召对，访以机密。
现代文：唐昭宗归复君位中书舍人令狐涣、给事中韩都参预密谋，所以都被擢升为翰林学士，并多次召见问答，谘询机密大事。
English: When Emperor Zhaozong of the Tang Dynasty restored the throne, the scribes and scholars conspired to overthrow him. As a result, both China and Korea participated in the conspiracy, and they were all promoted to the rank of Hanlin Baccalaureate. They were also summoned to Q&A sessions many times to consult on confidential matters.

古文：涣，綯之子也。
现代文：令狐涣是唐宣宗时宰相令狐的儿子。
English: Ling Fuxiong was the son of Ling Fuxiong, the prime minister at the time of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang.

古文：时上悉以军国事委崔胤，每奏事，上与之从容，或至然烛。宦官畏之侧目，事无大小，皆咨胤而后行。
现代文：当时，昭宗把军国政务全都委任崔胤办理，每次奏陈事情，唐昭宗与他从容商量，有时直到天黑点燃蜡烛的时候，宦官害怕崔胤不敢正视他，凡事先询问崔胤以后，再去办理。
English: At that time, Emperor Zhaozong entrusted all the military and political affairs to Cui Yan to handle. Every time a matter was reported, Emperor Zhaozong of Tang would calmly discuss it with him. Sometimes, when lighting candles in the dark, the eunuchs were afraid of Cui Yan and dared not look directly at him. If they asked Cui Yan in advance, they would handle it later.

古文：胤志欲尽除之，韩偓屡谏曰： 事禁太甚。
现代文：崔胤立志要把宦官全部除掉，韩屡次直言规劝，说： 事情禁忌做得太过份。
English: Cui Yan was determined to get rid of all eunuchs, and Han repeatedly and bluntly admonished him, saying, "You've gone too far with the taboo.

古文：此辈亦不可全无，恐其党迫切，更生他变。 
现代文：宦官也不可能完全没有，恐怕他们的同党被迫过深，再生出其他变故。 
English: It is not possible to do without eunuchs completely, and I am afraid that their fellow party members will be forced to dig too deep and reproduce other aberrations.

古文：胤不从。
现代文：崔胤不听韩的劝告。
English: Choi In did not listen to Han's advice.

古文：丁卯，上独召偓，问曰： 敕使中为恶者如林，何以处之？ 
现代文：丁卯，唐昭宗单独召见韩，问道： 宦官敕使之中做坏事的像林木一样多，用什么办法处置他们？ 
English: However, Tang Zhaozong summoned Han separately and asked: There are as many eunuchs and emissaries doing bad things as there are trees in the forest, how should they be dealt with?

古文：对曰： 东内之难，敕使谁非同恶，处之当在正旦，今已失其时矣。 
现代文：韩答道： 东宫之变，这些人中哪一个不是同恶相济！处置他们应当在元旦诛杀刘季述等人的时候，现在已经失去惩治他们的时机了。 
English: Han replied, "In the East Palace Incident, which one of these people is not an accomplice of evil! When they should have dealt with and killed Liu Jishu and others on New Year's Day, the time to punish them has now passed.

古文：上曰： 当是时，卿何不为崔胤言之？ 
现代文：昭宗说： 当时，爱卿为什么不向崔胤说呢？ 
English: Zhaozong said: At that time, why didn't Ai Qing say anything to Cui Yin?

古文：对曰： 臣见陛下诏书云， 自刘季述等四家之外，其馀一无所问。 
现代文：韩答道： 我见陛下的诏书说： 自刘季述等四家之外，其余的人一个也不问罪。 
English: Han replied, "I have seen Your Majesty's edict, which says: Apart from the four families including Liu Jishu, none of the others will be held accountable.

古文：夫人主所重，莫大于信，既下此诏，则守之宜坚。若复戮一人，则人人惧死矣。
现代文：对皇上来说，最重要的莫大于信誉，既然已经颁布这样的诏书，就应该坚决遵守；如果再杀一个，就人人自危了。
English: For the emperor, nothing is more important than credibility. Since such an edict has been issued, it should be strictly observed; if one more person is killed, everyone will be in danger.

古文：然后来所去者已为不少，此其所以忷忷不安也。
现代文：可是后来除去的人已经不少了，这就是他们所以吵嚷不安的原因。
English: But there have been a lot of removals since then, which is why they are so upset.

古文：陛下不若择其尤无良者数人，明示其罪，置之于法，然后抚谕其余曰： 吾恐尔曹谓吾心有所贮，自今可无疑矣。 
现代文：陛下不如挑选他们之中尤为不善的几个人，明白宣示他们的罪行，依法惩治，然后安抚晓谕其余的人说： 我担心你们说我怀恨在心，从今天开始可以没有疑虑了。 
English: Your Majesty had better select a few of them who are particularly bad, clearly declare their crimes, punish them according to the law, and then pacify the rest of them, saying: I am afraid you say I have a grudge, from today I can have no doubts.

古文：乃择其忠厚者使为之长。
现代文：于是选择那些忠厚老实的人担任他们的头领。
English: So they chose men who were honest and trustworthy to be their leaders.

古文：其徒有善则奖之，有罪则惩之，咸自安矣。
现代文：其余众人有善行的就奖励，有罪过的就惩罚，这样就全都各自相安无事了。
English: The rest of the people will be rewarded for their good deeds and punished for their bad deeds, so that everyone will be at peace with each other.

古文：今此曹在公私者以万数，岂可尽诛邪！
现代文：现在宦官在官府和私家的有数万人，哪里能够全部杀死呢！
English: Now there are tens of thousands of eunuchs in government offices and private homes. Where can we kill them all?

古文：夫帝王之道，当以重厚镇之，公正御之，至于琐细机巧，此机生则彼机应矣，终不能成大功，所谓理丝而棼之者也。
现代文：陛下对待的办法，应当是用优厚待遇安定他们，用公正无私驾驭他们，至于琐细机巧之举，此生彼应，终究不能成就大功业，这就是所谓理丝反而更加纷乱。
English: His Majesty's approach should be to stabilize them with generous treatment, and to control them with fairness and selflessness. As for trivial and clever moves, in this life, they should not be able to achieve great achievements. This is the so-called divorce, but it is more chaotic.

古文：况今朝廷之权，散在四方。苟能先收此权，则事无不可为者矣。
现代文：况且现在朝廷的权力，分散在四方藩镇手中；如果能够先收回这些权力，那么，事情就没有不可以办的了。 
English: Moreover, the power of the imperial court is now dispersed in the hands of the four provinces and townships; if we can first recover these powers, then there is nothing we cannot do.

古文：鄙仙钜晕滑曰： 此事终以属卿。 
现代文：昭宗深以韩所讲为然，说： 这件事终究要交付卿来办理。 
English: Akimune was taken aback by what Han said and said, "After all, this matter should be handed over to the lord to handle."

古文：李克用遣其将李嗣昭、周德威将兵出阴地关，攻隰州，刺史唐礼降之。进攻慈州，刺史张瑰降之。
现代文：李克用派遣他的部将李嗣昭、周德威率领军队出阴地关，攻打隰州，刺史唐礼投降；进攻慈州，刺史张投降。
English: Li Ke used to send his subordinates Li Shizhao and Zhou Dewei to lead the army out of Yinyi Pass, attack Zhangzhou, stab Tangli and surrender; attack Cizhou, stab Zhang and surrender.

古文：闰月，以河阳节度使丁会为昭义节度使，孟迁为河阳节度使，从硃全忠之请也。
现代文：闰六月，朝廷采纳了朱全忠的请求，任命河阳节度使丁会为昭义节度使，任命孟迁为河阳节度使。
English: In the intercalary month of June, the imperial court accepted Zhu Quanzhong's request and appointed Ding Heyang Festival Envoy as Shao Yi Festival Envoy and Meng Qian as Heyang Festival Envoy.

古文：道士杜从法以妖妄妄诱昌、普、合三州民作乱，王建遣行营兵马使王宗黯将兵三万会东川、武信兵讨之。
现代文：道士杜从法用妖法妄言诱使昌州、普州、合州的百姓起事，西川节度使王建派遣行营兵马使王宗黯统率三万兵马会同东川、武信的军队前入征讨。
English: The moralist Du Congfa used the magic spell to induce the people of Changzhou, Puzhou and Hezhou to rise up, and the West River Festival caused Wang Jian to send troops and horses to make Wang Zongyun lead 30,000 soldiers and horses to join the army of Dongchuan and Wuxin to go to the front for conscription.

古文：宗黯，即吉谏也。
现代文：王宗黯就是王吉谏。
English: Wang Zongyun is Wang Jizhe.

古文：崔胤请上尽诛宦官，但以宫人掌内诸司事。
现代文：崔胤奏请昭宗把宦官全部处死，只用宫人掌管内廷各司的事务。
English: Cui Yansong asked Akimune to execute all the eunuchs and use only palace officials to manage the affairs of the inner court.

古文：宦官属耳，颇闻之，韩全诲等涕泣求哀于上，上乃令胤： 有事封疏以闻，勿口奏。 
现代文：宦官耳闻，听到了一些，韩全诲等哭泣着向昭宗乞求哀怜。昭宗于是指示崔胤， 有事要密封奏疏报告，不要口奏 。
English: The eunuch listened and heard some things, and Han Zhengyu and others cried and begged for mercy from Zhaozong. Zhaozong then instructed Cui Yin to seal the report and not to play it.

古文：宦官求美女知书者数人，内之宫中，阴令诇察其事，尽得胤密谋，上不之觉也。
现代文：宦官寻找识字的美女数人送进内宫，暗中叫她们侦察刺探这件事，全部掌握了崔胤的秘密计划，昭宗却没有觉察到。
English: The eunuch sent several beautiful women into the inner palace in search of literate women, and secretly asked them to investigate and spy on the matter. They all grasped Cui Yin's secret plan, but Zhaozong did not notice it.

古文：全诲等大惧，每宴聚，流涕相诀别，日夜谋所以去胤之术。
现代文：韩全诲等知道崔胤的计划后非常害怕，每次宴饮聚会，都流着眼泪相互诀别，日夜谋划能够除去崔胤的办法。
English: Han Quanzhang and others were very afraid after learning of Choi In's plan. At every banquet and party, they said goodbye to each other with tears, and day and night they plotted ways to remove Choi In.

古文：胤时领三司使，全诲等教禁军对上喧噪，诉胤减损冬衣。
现代文：崔胤当时兼任户部、度支、盐铁三司使，韩全诲等教唆警卫宫禁的军队向唐昭宗喧哗叫嚷，申诉崔胤减少将士的冬季衣服。
English: At that time, Cui Yan concurrently served as the three envoys of the Household Department, the Department of Finance, and the Salt and Iron Department, and Han Quanzhang and others instigated the guards to shout loudly to Tang Zhaozong, complaining that Cui Yan had reduced the winter clothes of the soldiers.

古文：上不得已，解胤盐铁使。
现代文：唐昭宗无可奈何，只得解除崔胤的盐铁使职务。
English: Tang Zhaozong had no choice but to relieve Cui Yin of his duties as salt and iron envoy.

古文：时硃全忠、李茂贞各有挟天子令诸侯之意，全忠欲上幸东都，茂贞欲上幸凤翔。
现代文：其时，朱全忠、李茂贞各有挟制天子以号令诸侯的意图，朱全忠想要唐昭宗驾临东都洛阳，李茂贞想要唐昭宗驾临凤翔。
English: At that time, Zhu Quanzhong and Li Maozhen each had the intention of coercing Tianzi to order the princes, Zhu Quanzhong wanted Tang Zhaozong to drive to the eastern capital Luoyang, Li Maozhen wanted Tang Zhaozong to drive to Fengxiang.

古文：胤知谋泄，事急，遗硃全忠书，称被密诏，令全忠以兵迎车驾，且言： 昨者返正，皆令公良图，而凤翔先入朝抄取其功。
现代文：崔胤知道谋杀宦官的计划已经泄露，事情急迫，就送信给朱全忠，假称奉有秘密诏书，令朱全忠派遣军队迎接皇上车驾，并且说： 前次恢复皇上君位都是您朱公的妙计，可是李茂贞先进京入朝夺取其功。
English: Knowing that the plan to murder the eunuch had been leaked and that the matter was urgent, Cui Yan sent a message to Zhu Quanzhong, pretending to have received a secret edict, ordering Zhu Quanzhong to send troops to meet the emperor's chariot, and said: The previous restoration of the emperor's throne was your Zhu Gong's brilliant plan, but Li Maozhen advanced to Beijing to enter the dynasty to seize its merit.

古文：今不速来，必成罪人，岂惟功为他人所有，且见征讨矣！ 
现代文：这次您再不立即来京，必定成为有罪之人，岂止功劳为他人所有，并且要被征讨了！ 
English: If you do not come to Beijing immediately this time, you will surely become a guilty person, not only will the credit be owned by others, but it will also be collected!

古文：全忠得书，秋，七月，甲寅，遽归大梁发兵。
现代文：朱全忠收到书信，秋季，七月，甲寅，急忙回大梁发兵。
English: Zhu Quanzhong received the letter, and in the autumn, in July, Jia Yin hurriedly returned to Daliang to send troops.

古文：西川龙台镇使王宗侃等讨杜从法，平之。
现代文：西川龙台镇使王宗侃等讨伐道士杜从法，平定叛乱。
English: Longtai Town of West Sichuan sent Wang Zongkan and others to fight the Taoist Du Cong Fa and quell the rebellion.

古文：八月，甲申，上问韩偓曰： 闻陆扆不乐吾返正，正旦易服，乘小马出启夏门，有诸？ 
现代文：八月，甲申，昭宗问韩： 听说陆不乐意恢复君位，在元旦那天换了衣服，骑着小马出了启夏门，有这件事吗？ 
English: In August, in Jiaxing, Zhaozong asked Han: I heard that Lu was not happy to resume the throne, changed his clothes on New Year's Day, and rode a pony out of the summer gate, is there such a thing?

古文：对曰： 返正之谋，独臣与崔胤辈数人知之，扆不知也。
现代文：韩回答说： 恢复君位的计划，只有我与崔胤几个人知道，陆不知道。
English: Han replied, "Only I and Choi In, a few people, know about the plan to restore the throne, but Lu does not know.

古文：一旦忽闻宫中有变，人情能不惊骇！
现代文：一旦忽然听说宫中有变故，人之常情岂能不惊慌害怕！
English: Once you suddenly hear that there has been a change in the palace, how can you not panic and be afraid!

古文：易服逃避，何妨有之！
现代文：换了衣服逃跑躲避，有什么妨碍呢！
English: What's the harm in changing your clothes and running for cover?

古文：陛下责其为宰相无死难之志则可也，至于不乐返正，恐出于谗人之口，愿陛下察之。 
现代文：陛下责备他身为宰相没有遇难挺身而死的志气是可以的，至于说他不乐意皇上恢复君位，恐怕出自谗佞小人之口，希望陛下明察！ 
English: It is all right for His Majesty to reproach him for not having the courage to stand up and die when he was prime minister. As for saying that he is not happy with the Emperor's restoration of the throne, I am afraid that it comes from the mouth of a small man. I hope that His Majesty will see it clearly!

古文：上乃止。
现代文：昭宗这才停止了查究。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：韩全诲等惧诛，谋以兵制上，乃与李继昭、李继诲、李彦弼、李继筠深相结，继昭独不肯从。
现代文：韩全诲等害怕被杀，密谋用武力挟制昭宗，于是与李继昭、李继海、李彦弼、李继筠深相交结，只有李继昭不肯依从。
English: Han Quanzhong and others were afraid of being killed and plotted to use force to blackmail Zhaozong, so they were deeply intertwined with Li Jizhao, Li Jihai, Li Yanjuan, and Li Jizhen. Only Li Jizhao refused to comply.

古文：它日，上问韩偓： 外间何所闻？ 
现代文：一天，昭宗问韩： 外边听到了什么吗？ 
English: One day, Shozong asked Han: Did you hear anything outside?

古文：对曰： 惟闻敕使忧惧，与功臣及继筠交结，将致不安，亦未知其果然不耳。 
现代文：韩答道： 只听说宦官们担扰害怕，与功臣李继昭、李继诲、李彦弼及李继筠交结，将要招致不安，也不知道他们是否果真这样呢。 
English: Han replied, "I only heard that the eunuchs were worried and afraid that associating with the meritorious vassals Li Jizhao, Li Jizhe, Li Yanqi and Li Jizhe would cause uneasiness, but I don't know if they are really like that.

古文：上曰： 是不虚矣。
现代文：昭宗说： 这事不假哩！
English: Shozong said, "It's true!

古文：比日继诲、彦弼辈语渐倔强，令人难耐。
现代文：近日李继海、李彦弼等说话逐渐固执强硬，令人难以忍耐。
English: Recently, Li Jihai, Li Yanqi and others have become increasingly stubborn and tough in their speech, which is hard to tolerate.

古文：令狐涣欲令朕召崔胤及全诲等于内殿，置酒和解之，何如？ 
现代文：令狐涣想要朕在内殿召见崔胤及韩全诲等人，摆酒使他们和解，怎么样？ 
English: What if the fox wanted me to summon Choi In and Han Chun Yang and others to the inner hall and offer them wine to make peace?

古文：对曰： 如此则彼凶悖益甚。 
现代文：韩答道： 这样做，韩全诲他们就会更加凶恶狂悖了。 昭宗说： 拿他们怎么办呢？ 
English: Han replied, "If you do that, they will become even more vicious and rebellious." Zhaozong said, "What should we do with them?"

古文：上曰： 为之奈何？ 对曰： 独有显罪数人，速加窜逐，馀者许其自新，庶几可息。
现代文：韩答道： 只有公开治几个人的罪，迅速将他们放逐，其余的人允许他们改过自新，也许还可以平息。
English: Han replied: Only by publicly punishing a few people, quickly expelling them, and allowing the rest of them to reform, may it be possible to calm down.

古文：若一无所问，彼必知陛下心有所贮，益不自安，事终未了耳。 
现代文：如果一个也不问罪，韩全诲他们一定知道陛下怀恨在心，更加不能自己相安，事情终究没有了结。 昭宗说： 好！ 
English: If no one is to blame, Han Zhencheng said, they must know that His Majesty is holding a grudge, and they can't even be at peace with each other, and the matter is not over after all.

古文：上曰： 善！ 
现代文：过了不久，宦官自恃党援已经结成，逐渐不遵诏令。
English: Emperor Wu said: You said it well!

古文：既而宦官自恃党援已成，稍不遵敕旨；上或出之使监军，或黜守诸陵，皆不行，上无如之何。或告杨行密云，钱镠为盗所杀。
现代文：昭宗或者把他派出去作监军，或者把他贬斥去守陵寝，都不去，昭宗也无可奈何。有人告诉淮南节度使杨行密说，镇海节度使钱被盗贼杀死。
English: Zhaozong either sent him out to supervise the troops, or scolded him to guard the tomb, but he did not go, and Zhaozong was helpless. Someone told Huainan Jiedu to make Yang Xingmi say that Zhenhai Jiedu had the money killed by thieves.

古文：行密遣步军都指挥使李神福等将兵取杭州，两浙将顾全武等列八寨以拒之。
现代文：杨行密派遣步军都指挥使李神福等率兵攻取杭州，两浙将领顾全武等扎列八个营寨进行抗拒。
English: Yang Xingmi dispatched the infantry to command Li Shenfu and other soldiers to conquer Hangzhou, and the two Zhejiang generals led by Gu Quanwu and others lined up eight camps to resist.

古文：九月，癸丑，上急召韩偓，谓曰： 闻全忠欲来除君侧之恶，大是尽忠，然须令与茂贞共其功。
现代文：九月癸丑，昭宗紧急召见韩，对他说： 听说朱全忠想要来京师清除朕身边的恶人，确是竭尽忠诚，但是必须叫他与李茂贞同举此功。
English: At the end of September, Zhaozong urgently summoned Han and said to him: I heard that Zhu Quanzhong wanted to come to Beijing to purge the evildoers around me. It is true that he is loyal to the end, but he must be asked to do this work together with Li Maozhen.

古文：若两帅交争，则事危矣。
现代文：如果他们二帅相互争半，那么事情就危险了。
English: If they play two strikers against each other, then it's dangerous.

古文：卿为我语崔胤，速飞书两镇，使相与合谋，则善矣。
现代文：卿替我告诉崔胤，立即飞速送信给朱全忠和李茂贞，使他们共同策划，那就好了。 
English: Sir, tell Cui Yin for me, and immediately send it to Zhu Quanzhong and Li Maozhen, so that they can plan together, then it's fine.

古文：比尚绗上又谓偓曰： 继诲、彦弼辈骄横益甚，累日前与继筠同入，辄于殿东令小儿歌以侑酒，令人惊骇。 
现代文：壬戌昭宗又对韩说： 李继海、李彦弼等骄傲专横得更加厉害，多日以前与李继筠到内宫来，就在殿东令宫中杂役唱歌劝酒，令人惊慌害怕。 
English: Rinpoche also said to Han, "The arrogance of Li Jikai, Li Yanjun and others is even more powerful. Many days ago, when I came to the Inner Palace with Li Jikai, I was surprised and frightened by the fact that the attendants were singing and serving wine in the East Hall of the Imperial Palace.

古文：对曰： 臣必知其然，兹事失之于初。
现代文：韩答道： 我知道他们必然会这样。这件事失策在当初。
English: Han replied, "I knew they would do this. This was a mistake from the beginning."

古文：当正旦立功之时，但应以官爵、田宅、金帛酬之，不应听其恣出入禁中。
现代文：当元旦他们立功的时候，只应该用官爵、田宅、金帛酬劳他们，不应该听任他们出入宫禁。
English: When they perform meritorious deeds on New Year's Day, they should only be rewarded with a title of nobility, a farmhouse, and a golden scepter. They should not be allowed to enter or leave the palace.

古文：此辈素无知识，数求入对，或妄论朝政，或僭易荐人，稍有不从，则生怨望。况惟知嗜利，为敕使以厚利雇之，令其如此耳。
现代文：这帮人向来没有知识，屡次要求入朝奏对，有的僭越更改荐举人选，稍有不从，就生怨恨；况且只知道贪财，被宦官用厚利雇佣收买，致使他们这样了。
English: These people never had any knowledge. They repeatedly asked to be admitted to the imperial court, and some of them repeatedly changed their recommendation. If they did not comply, resentment would arise. Moreover, they only knew greed, and they were bribed by eunuchs with huge profits. This led them to be like this.

古文：崔胤本留卫兵，欲以制敕使也，今敕使、卫兵相与为一，将若之何！
现代文：崔胤原来留下卫兵，是要用来遏制宦官，现在宦官、卫兵相互结为一体，将怎么办呢！
English: Cui Yin originally left guards to be used to contain the eunuchs, but now the eunuchs and guards have become one, what will happen?

古文：汴兵若来，必与岐兵斗于阙下，臣窃寒心。 
现代文：朱全忠的汴州军队如果到京师长安来，一定会与李茂贞的岐州军队在宫前争斗，我暗中失望痛心。 
English: If Zhu Quanzhong's Bozhou army came to Beijing and attacked Chang'an, it would certainly fight with Li Maozhen's Qizhou army in front of the palace. I was secretly disappointed and heartbroken.

古文：上但愀然忧沮而已。
现代文：唐昭宗只能忧愁沮丧而已。
English: Tang Zhaozong could only be sad and depressed.

古文：冬，十月，戊戌，硃全忠大举兵发大梁。
现代文：冬季十月，戊戌，朱全忠率领大军从大梁出发，前往京师长安。
English: In the winter of October, Zhu Quanzhong led an army from Daliang to Beijing's Chang'an.

古文：李神福与顾全武相拒久之，神福?窈挤枿使出入卧内。
现代文：李神福与顾全武两军相拒很久，李神福获杭州俘虏，使他出入卧室。
English: Li Shenfu and Gu Quanwu opposed each other for a long time. Li Shenfu was captured in Hangzhou and confined to his bedroom.

古文：神福谓诸将曰： 杭兵尚强，我师且当夜还。 
现代文：李神福对属下诸将说： 杭州军队还很强大，我军暂且在今夜撤退。 
English: Li Shenfu said to his subordinate generals: Hangzhou's army is still very strong, our army will temporarily withdraw tonight.

古文：杭俘走告全武，神福命勿追，暮遣羸兵先行，神福为殿，使行营都尉吕师造伏兵青山下。
现代文：杭州俘虏逃走报告顾全武，李神武命令不要追赶。傍晚李神福派遣老弱残兵先行撤走，自己殿后，并令行营都尉吕师造率领精锐部队埋伏在青山下。
English: Gu Quanwu reported the escape of the Hangzhou prisoners, and Li Shenwu ordered not to chase them. In the evening, Li Shenfu sent the old and weak remaining soldiers to withdraw first, and after his own palace, he ordered the camp commander Lu Shizhu to lead the elite troops to ambush under the Qingshan Mountain.

古文：全武素轻神福，出兵追之。神福、师造夹击，大破之，斩首五千级，生擒全武。
现代文：顾全武向来瞧不起李神福，率军追赶；李神福、吕师造两军前后夹击，大败顾全武的军队，斩杀五千人，活捉顾全武。
English: Gu Zhenwu always looked down on Li Shenfu and led his army to chase after him; Li Shenfu and Lü Shizhu made the two armies fight back and forth, defeated Gu Zhenwu's army, killed five thousand people, and captured Gu Zhenwu alive.

古文：钱镠闻之，惊泣曰： 丧我良将！ 
现代文：钱听到这个消息，又吃惊又痛心，流着泪说： 我的良将丧失了！ 
English: When Qian heard the news, he was surprised and saddened, and said with tears: My good friend is lost!

古文：神福进攻临安，两浙将秦昶帅众三千降之。
现代文：李神福进攻临安，两浙将领秦昶率领三千军队投降李神福。
English: Li Shenfu attacked Lin'an, and the two Zhejiang generals Qin Hui led three thousand troops to surrender to Li Shenfu.

古文：韩全诲闻硃全忠将至，丁酉，令李继诲、李彦弼等勒兵劫上，请幸凤翔，宫禁诸门皆增兵防守，人及文书出入搜阅甚严。
现代文：韩全诲听说朱全忠针要到达，丁酉命令李继筠、李彦弼等率领卫兵劫持唐昭宗，强请驾临凤翔，并增兵防守皇宫各门，人及文书出入搜查检阅非常严格。
English: Han Quanzhong heard that Zhu Quanzhong's needle was about to arrive. Ding Xi ordered Li Jizhong, Li Yanqi and other guards to kidnap Tang Zhaozong, force him to drive to Fengxiang, and increase the number of soldiers to guard the palace doors. The search and inspection of people and documents was very strict.

古文：上遣人密赐崔胤御札，言皆凄怆，末云： 我为宗社大计，势须西行，卿等但东行也。惆怅！惆怅！ 
现代文：昭宗派人秘密地给崔胤送去亲笔书信，言语都很凄凉，末尾说： 我为了宗庙社稷的大计，势必西去凤翔，卿等只管东行。惆怅！惆怅！ 
English: Zhaozong secretly sent a letter to Cui Yan in his own handwriting, and the words were very desolate. At the end, he said: "For the sake of the grand plan of the Zong Temple Society, I am bound to go west to Fengxiang. Sir, just go east." Ha! Ha!

古文：戊戌，上遣赵国夫人出语韩偓： 朝来彦弼辈无礼极甚，欲召卿对，其势未可。 
现代文：戊戌，唐昭宗派遣赵国夫人出宫到翰林院告诉韩： 早晨以来，李彦弼等无礼之极，想要召卿入宫答对，形势不许可了。 
English: Wuzhen, Tang Zhaozong sent Lady Zhao Guo out of the palace to Hanlin Court to tell Han: Since the morning, Li Yanqi and others have been extremely rude. If you want to invite the lord into the palace, the situation is not allowed.

古文：且言： 上与皇后但涕泣相同。 
现代文：并且说： 皇上与皇后只是相对哭泣。 
English: And he said: The Emperor and Empress are only crying relatively.

古文：自是，学士不复得对矣。
现代文：从此翰林学士不再能进宫应对了。
English: From then on, the scholar of Hanlin could no longer enter the palace.

古文：癸卯，全诲等令上入阁召百官，迫寝正月丙午敕书，悉如咸通以来近例。
现代文：癸卯，韩全诲等命令唐昭宗入阁召见百官，宣布停止执行正月丙午颁布的敕书，完全恢复咸通以来 宰臣奏事，枢密使侍侧 的近例。
English: Han Zhengyi and others ordered Tang Zhaozong to enter the cabinet, summon a hundred officials, announce the suspension of the execution of the imperial edict issued on the afternoon of the first day of the first month, and fully restore the recent example of Zhaisen Soji, Privy Councilor's attendant since Hamdang Tong.

古文：是日，开延英，全诲等即侍侧，同议政事。
现代文：当天，打开延英殿，韩全诲等在旁侍立，共同商议政事。
English: On the same day, Yan Ying Dian was opened, and Han Zhengyu and others stood by to discuss political affairs.

古文：丁未，神策都指挥使李继筠遣部兵掠内库宝货、帷帐、法物，韩全诲遣人密送诸王、宫人先之凤翔。
现代文：丁未，神策都指挥使李继筠派遣属下兵士虏掠内廷仓库的珍宝财货、帷帐、皇帝车驾礼器，韩全诲派人秘密送诸王、宫人先往凤翔。
English: Ding Wei, the divine strategist, ordered Li Jizhe to send his soldiers to loot the treasures, curtains, and imperial carriage and etiquette of the inner court warehouse. Han Quanzhang sent someone to secretly send the kings and courtiers to Fengxiang first.

古文：戊申，硃全忠至河中，表请车驾幸东都，京城大骇，士民亡窜山谷。
现代文：戊申，朱全忠到河中，上表章请昭宗大驾去东都洛阳，京城大惧，士民逃往山谷之中。
English: Wushin, Zhu Quanzhong went to the middle of the river, and the upper chapter asked Zhaozong to drive to the eastern capital Luoyang. The capital was terrified, and the scholars and commoners fled to the valley.

古文：是日，百官皆不入朝，阙前寂无人。
现代文：这日，文武百官都不入朝，宫门前寂静无人。
English: On this day, all civil and military officials do not enter the imperial court, and there is no one in front of the palace gate.

古文：十一月，己酉朔，李继筠等勒兵阙下，禁人出入，诸军大掠。
现代文：十一月，已酉朔，李继筠等领兵在宫门之下，禁止人出入，诸军大肆虏掠。
English: In November, Li Jizhe and other leaders of the troops were already under the palace gate, prohibiting people from entering and leaving, and the troops began to loot and plunder.

古文：士民衣纸及布襦者，满街极目。
现代文：士民穿纸短布衣的，满街都是，望不到边。
English: The streets are full of people wearing paper ponchos, and you can't see the sides.

古文：韩建以幕僚司马鄴知匡国留后。
现代文：韩建以幕僚司马邺主持匡国留后。
English: Han Jian stayed behind to preside over Kuangguo with his staff member Sima Yu.

古文：硃全忠引四镇兵七万趣同州，鄴迎降。
现代文：朱全忠带领四镇的七万军队，奔赴同州，司马邺开城迎降。
English: Zhu Quanzhong led 70,000 troops from four towns and rushed to Tongzhou, and Sima Qiaocheng surrendered.

古文：韩全诲等以李继昭不与之同，遏绝不令见上。
现代文：韩全诲等因李继昭不与他们共同行事，就阻止他不准见唐昭宗。
English: Han Quanzhang and others prevented Li Jizhao from seeing Tang Zhaozong because he did not act jointly with them.

古文：时崔胤居第在开化坊，继昭帅所部六十馀人及关东诸道兵在京师者共守卫之。百官及士民避乱者，皆往依之。
现代文：当时，崔胤的府第在开化坊，李继昭率领属下六千余人及关东各道在京师的军队共同守卫着，百官及士民中避乱的都前往依附。
English: At that time, Cui Yin's residence was in Kaifeng, Li Jizhao led more than six thousand subordinates and the troops of all provinces of Guangdong to jointly guard the Beijing Division, and hundreds of officials and citizens who fled the turmoil went to attach.

古文：庚戌，上遣供奉官张绍孙召百官，崔胤等皆表辞不至。
现代文：庚戌，唐昭宗遣供奉官张绍孙召集文武百官，崔胤等都上表辞却不到。
English: Geng Xuan, Tang Zhaozong sent Zhang Shaosun, the official in charge of offerings, to gather hundreds of officials from the civil and military fields, but Cui Yan and others did not come up with the right words.

古文：壬子，韩全诲等陈兵殿前，言于上曰： 全忠以大兵逼京师，欲劫天子幸洛阳，求传禅。
现代文：壬子，韩全诲等在殿前布置军队，向唐昭宗说： 朱全忠率大军进副京师，想要劫持天子前往洛阳，要求在把帝位禅让给他。
English: Ren Zi, Han Quan Li and others arranged the army in front of the hall and said to Tang Zhaozong: Zhu Quanzhong led the army into the Second Capital Division and wanted to kidnap Tian Zi and go to Luoyang to demand that the imperial throne be given to him.

古文：臣等请奉陛下幸凤翔，收兵拒之。 上不许，杖剑登乞巧楼。
现代文：我等请求陛下驾临凤翔，收集军队进行抵抗。 唐昭宗不允许，持剑登乞巧楼。
English: We asked His Majesty to come to Fengxiang and gather an army to resist, but he was not allowed by Tang Zhaozong, so he went to the Beggar's House with a sword.

古文：全诲等逼上下楼，上行才及寿春殿，李彦弼已于御院纵火。
现代文：韩全诲等逼迫唐昭宗下楼，唐昭宗刚走到寿春殿，李彦弼已经在后院放火。
English: Han Quanzhang and others forced Tang Zhaozong to go downstairs. Just as Tang Zhaozong walked to Shuchun Hall, Li Yanju had already started a fire in the backyard.

古文：是日冬至，上独坐思政殿，翘一足，一足蹋栏干，庭无群臣，旁无侍者。
现代文：这天是冬至，唐昭宗独自坐在思政殿，翘着一只脚，另一只脚踏着栏杆，院里没有文武官员，旁边没有侍奉之人。
English: It was the winter solstice, and Tang Zhaozong was sitting alone in Shizheng Hall, with one foot cocked and the other foot on the railing. There were no civil or military officials in the courtyard, and no attendants nearby.

古文：顷之，不得已，与皇后、妃嫔、诸王百馀人皆上马，恸哭声不绝，出门，回顾禁中，火已赫然。
现代文：过了一会儿，不得已，与皇后、妃嫔、诸王等百余人全都上马，恸哭之声不停，出门回顾宫中，已是大火熊熊燃烧。
English: After a while, as a last resort, more than a hundred people, including the queen, the concubines, and the kings, all got on horses. The wailing continued, and when they went out to look back at the palace, it was already a raging fire.

古文：是夕，宿鄠县。
现代文：这天晚上，在县住宿。
English: That night, we stayed in the county.

古文：硃全忠遣司马鄴入华州，谓韩建曰： 公不早知过自归，又烦此军少留城下矣。 
现代文：朱全忠派遣司马邺入华州，对韩建说： 您不能早知过错自己归降，又要烦劳这支军队稍稍滞留城下了。 
English: Zhu Quanzhong sent Sima Ye into Huazhou and said to Han Jianwu, "You can't make the mistake of surrendering too early, and you have to make this army stay under the city for a while.

古文：是日，全忠自故市引兵南渡渭，韩建遣节度副使李巨川请降，献银三万两助军，全忠乃西南趣赤水。
现代文：这一天，朱全忠自故市领兵南渡渭河，韩建派遣节度副使李巨川请求归降，进献白银三万两资助军需，朱全忠于是率领军队向西南奔赴赤水。
English: On this day, Zhu Quanzhong led the troops from the former city of Nandu to Luhe, and Han Jian dispatched the vice-envoy of the festival, Li Juchuan, to request the surrender and donated 30,000 taels of silver to support the military. Zhu Quanzhong then led the army to the southwest to Chishui.

古文：癸丑，李茂贞迎车驾于田家硙，上下马慰接之。
现代文：癸丑，李茂贞在田家迎接车驾，唐昭宗下马慰问接待。
English: Ugly, Li Maozhen in the field to meet the driver, Tang Zhaozong dismounted to receive condolences.

古文：甲寅，车驾至盩厔；乙卯，留一日。
现代文：甲寅，唐昭宗的车驾到，乙卯，留住一日。
English: A Yin, Tang Zhaozong's car arrived, B Yu, stay for a day.

古文：硃全忠至零口西，闻车驾西幸，与僚佐议，复引兵还赤水。
现代文：朱全忠到达零口西边，听说唐昭宗西行，与僚佐商议，又率兵回赤水。
English: When Zhu Quanzhong arrived at the west side of the pass, he heard that Tang Zhaozong was heading west. He discussed the matter with his colleagues and returned to Chashui with his army.

古文：左仆射至仕张浚说全忠曰： 韩建，茂贞之党，不先取之，必为后患。
现代文：退休家居的左仆射张浚劝告朱全忠说： 韩建是李茂贞的同党，不先攻取他，必为后患。 
English: Retired left-hand man Zhang Jun advised Zhu Quanzhong: "Han Jian is the same party as Li Maozhen. If you don't capture him first, you will suffer later.

古文：比椅沤擫斜砣疤熳有曳锵璎乃引兵逼其城。
现代文：朱全忠听说韩建有表章劝说唐昭宗驾临凤翔，于是率军副近华州。
English: Zhu Quanzhong heard that Han Jian had a sign to persuade Tang Zhaozong to come to Fengxiang, so he led the army to the vicinity of Huazhou.

古文：建单骑迎谒，全忠责之，对曰： 建目不知书，凡表章书檄，皆李巨川所为。 
现代文：韩建单骑迎接拜竭，朱全忠责问他，韩建回答说： 韩建目不识丁，凡表章书檄，都是李巨川所为。 
English: Han Jian rode alone to greet the prostration, Zhu Quanzhong scolded him, and Han Jian replied: Han Jian is illiterate, all the watches, seals and books are made by Li Juchuan.

古文：全忠以巨川常为建画策，斩之军门。
现代文：朱全忠以李巨川常为韩建运筹策划，将他在军门斩首。
English: Zhu Quanzhong used Li Juchuan as a strategist for the Korean construction campaign and beheaded him at the military gate.

古文：谓建曰： 公许人，可即往衣锦。 
现代文：朱全忠又对韩建说： 公是许州人，可以立即衣锦还乡了。 
English: Zhu Quanzhong also said to Han Jian: Gong is a native of Huzhou, he can immediately return to his hometown.

古文：丁巳，以建为忠武节度使，理陈州，以兵援送之；以前商州刺史李存权知华州，徙忠武节度使赵珝为匡国节度使。
现代文：丁巳，朱全忠以韩建担任忠武节度使，驻守陈州，并派兵护送赴任。以前商州刺史李存权为华州刺史，调任忠武节度使赵为匡国节度使。
English: At that time, Zhu Quanzhong appointed Han Jian as the envoy of Zhongwu Festival, stationed him in Chenzhou, and sent soldiers to escort him to the post. Previously, Li Cunquan, the governor of Shangzhou, was the governor of Huazhou, and Zhao, the governor of Kuangguo, was appointed as the envoy of Zhongwu Festival.

古文：车驾之在华州也，商贾辐凑，韩建重征之，二年，得钱九百万缗。
现代文：乾宁三年、四年唐昭宗在华州的时候，商贾集聚，韩建重征税额，二年得钱九百万缗。
English: Qianning three years, four years of Tang Zhaozong in Huazhou, merchants gathered, Han Jian heavy taxation, two years of money up to nine million baht.

古文：至是，全忠尽取之。
现代文：到这个时候，朱全忠全部取为已有。
English: By this time, Zhu Quanzhong had already taken everything.

古文：是时京师无天子，行在无宰相，崔胤使太子太师卢渥等二百馀人列状请硃全忠西迎车驾，又使王溥至赤水见全忠计事。全忠复书曰： 进则惧胁君之谤，退则怀负国之惭，然不敢不勉。 
现代文：这时候，京城里没有皇帝。皇帝所到之处没有宰相。崔胤让太子太师卢渥等二百余人列状请朱全忠西迎昭宗，又派遣王溥到赤水见朱全忠商议迎驾事宜。朱全忠复信说： 前进怕胁迫君王之谤毁，后退又怀辜负国家之羞愧。然而不敢不努力。 
English: At this time, there was no emperor in Beijing. There was no prime minister wherever the emperor went. Cui Yin asked the prince's father-in-law Lu Wo and more than two hundred other people to petition Zhu Quanzhong Xi Ying Zhaozong, and sent Wang Wei to Chishui to see Zhu Quanzhong to discuss the matter of welcoming him. Zhu Quanzhong replied, "Going forward is afraid of the destruction of the king's slander by coercion, and retreating is ashamed of the country. However, I dare not not not work hard."

古文：戊午，全忠发赤水。
现代文：戊午，朱全忠从赤水出发。
English: At noon, Zhu Quanzhong set off from Chashui.

古文：辛酉，以兵部侍郎卢光启权句当中书事。
现代文：辛酉，以兵部侍郎卢光启暂时办理中书事务。
English: Xin Zhen, with Lu Guangqi, the attendant of the military department, temporarily handling the Chinese book affairs.

古文：车驾留岐山三日，壬戌，至凤翔。
现代文：唐昭宗留居岐山三日，壬戌，到达凤翔。
English: Tang Zhaozong stayed in Qishan for three days and arrived at Fengxiang.

古文：硃全忠至长安，宰相帅百官班迎于长乐坡。
现代文：朱全忠到长安，宰相带领文武百官列队在长乐坡迎接。
English: Zhu Quanzhong arrived in Chang'an, and the prime minister led a procession of 100 civil and military officials to meet him at Changlepo.

古文：明日行，复班辞于临皋驿。
现代文：第二天，朱全忠西行，崔胤率文武百官又在临泉驿列队送别。
English: The next day, Zhu Quanzhong left for the west, and Cui Yan led hundreds of military and civilian officials to see him off in a procession in Linquan.

古文：全忠赏李继昭之功，初令权知匡国留后，复留为两街制置使，赐与甚厚，继昭尽献其兵八千人。
现代文：朱全忠赏识李继昭保卫崔胤及文武百官之功，起初让他暂时主持匡国留后，然后又留为两街制置使，赏赐很多。李继昭全部献出他属下的将士八千人。
English: Zhu Quanzhong appreciated Li Jizhao's efforts to protect Cui Yin and hundreds of civil and military officials. At first, he allowed him to temporarily preside over Kuang Guo, and then left him as a two-street system envoy, and rewarded him a lot. Li Jizhao sacrificed all eight thousand soldiers under him.

古文：全忠使判官李择、裴铸入奏事，称： 奉密诏及得崔胤书，令臣将兵入朝。 
现代文：朱全忠派遣羞官李择、裴铸入凤翔奏事，称： 奉到秘密诏令及接崔胤书信，命令我带领军队进京朝见。 
English: Zhu Quanzhong dispatched the shameful officials Li Zhe and Pei Ji into Fengxiang to report, saying: I have received a secret imperial decree and a letter from Cui Yan, ordering me to lead the army to Beijing to meet the emperor.

古文：韩全诲等矫诏答以： 朕避灾至此，非宦官所劫，密诏皆崔胤诈为之，卿宜敛兵归保土宇。 
现代文：韩全诲等假传诏令回答说： 朕避灾到这里，不是被宦官劫持。秘密诏令都是崔胤假托的，卿应该收兵回师，保卫属地的田宅领土。 
English: Han Quanzhang replied, "I came here to escape the disaster, not to be kidnapped by eunuchs. The secret imperial edicts were all faked by Cui Yan. You should gather your troops and return to your division to defend the farmland of your territory."

古文：茂贞遣其将符道昭屯武功以拒全忠，癸亥，全忠将康怀贞击破之。
现代文：李茂贞派遣他的部将符道昭驻守武功，抗拒朱全忠。癸亥，朱全忠的部将康怀贞率军攻破武功。
English: Li Maozhen dispatched his subordinate Fu Daozhao to garrison Wugong and resist Zhu Quanzhong. Later, Zhu Quanzhong's subordinate Kang Huaizhen led an army to defeat Wugong.

古文：丁卯，以卢光启为右谏议大夫，参知机务。
现代文：丁卯，卢光启被任命为右谏议大夫，参知机务。
English: Dingwu, Lu Guangqi was appointed as the right-hand man of the council, and he was in charge of the consultation mechanism.

古文：戊辰，硃全忠至凤翔，军于城东。
现代文：戊辰，朱全忠率兵抵达凤翔，在城东驻扎。
English: In Boshin, Zhu Quanzhong and his soldiers arrived in Fengxiang and stationed in the east of the city.

古文：李茂贞登城谓曰： 天子避灾，非臣下无礼，谗人误公至此。 
现代文：李茂贞登上城楼，对城外的朱全忠说： 天子避灾来到这里，并非臣下无礼劫持来的。说坏话的人误你前来。 
English: Li Maozhen went up to the castle tower and said to Zhu Quanzhong outside the city: "The Son of Heaven came here to escape the disaster, it was not rudely abducted by his vassals. Those who speak ill of you have come by mistake.

古文：全忠报曰： 韩全诲劫迁天子，今来问罪，迎扈还宫。
现代文：朱全忠答复说： 韩全诲劫迁天子，我今来问罪，迎接扈从天子回宫。
English: Zhu Quanzhong replied: Han Quanzhong, the son of Heaven, I have come to ask for forgiveness and welcome you back to the palace from the Son of Heaven.

古文：岐王苟不预谋，何烦陈谕！ 
现代文：岐王如果没有参预策划，何烦陈说表白！ 
English: If Qi Wang did not participate in the pre-planning, why bother to make a statement!

古文：上屡诏全忠还镇，全忠乃拜表奉辞。
现代文：昭宗屡次诏令朱全忠返回镇所，朱全忠于是上表受命。
English: Zhaozong repeatedly ordered Zhu Quanzhong to return to the town hall, and Zhu Quanzhong was ordered to go to the table.

古文：辛未，移兵北趣邠州。
现代文：辛未，朱全忠率领军队转移，向北奔赴州。
English: Soon after, Zhu Quanzhong led the army to move north to Zhoushou.

古文：甲戌，制：守司空兼门下侍郎、同平章事崔胤责授工部尚书，户部侍郎、同平章事裴枢罢守本官。
现代文：甲戌，颁布制书：守司空兼门下侍郎、同平章事崔胤受责改授工部尚书，户部侍郎、同平章事裴枢免同平章事，署守本官。
English: Armor-piercing, promulgation of book-making: Guo Jikku and his subordinate Jiro, Tongping Zhangji Cuiyan were ordered to be re-awarded the title of the Ministry of Industry, Hubei Jiro, Tongping Zhangji Peizhu were exempted from Tongping Zhangji, and Zeng Shou was assigned to this post.

古文：乙亥，硃全忠攻邠州。
现代文：乙亥，朱全忠攻打州。
English: Eihei, Zhu Quanzhong attack the state.

古文：丁丑，静难节度使李继徽请降，复姓名杨崇本。
现代文：丁丑，静难节度使李继徽请求归降，恢复原姓名杨崇本。
English: Ding Yuxiu and Jing Nanjie made Li Jihui request to surrender and restore the original name Yang Chongben.

古文：全忠质其妻于河中，令崇本仍镇邠州。
现代文：朱全忠以他的嫡妻作为人质迁居河中，令杨崇本仍然镇守州。
English: Zhu Quanzhong took his legitimate wife as a hostage and moved to the middle of the river, leaving Yang Chong to remain in charge of the state.

古文：全忠之西入关也，韩全诲、李茂贞以诏命征兵河东，茂贞仍以书求援于李克用。
现代文：朱全忠西入潼关的时候，韩全诲、李茂贞以诏命向河东征调军队，李茂贞并送书信给李克用请求救援。
English: When Zhu Quanzhong entered Shaoguan in the west, Han Quanzhong and Li Maozhen ordered troops to be sent to the east of the river. Li Maozhen also sent a letter to Li Ke to request rescue.

古文：克用遣李嗣昭将五千骑自沁州趣晋州，与汴兵战于平阳北，破之。
现代文：李克用派遣李嗣昭率领五千骑兵自沁州驰赴晋州，与汴州军队在平阳北面交战，把汴州军队打败。
English: Li Ke dispatched Li Shizhao to lead five thousand cavalrymen from Zhangzhou to Jinzhou, and fought with the Zhangzhou army in the north of Pingyang, defeating the Zhangzhou army.

古文：乙亥，全忠发邠州。戊寅，次三原。
现代文：乙亥，朱全忠从州出发，戊寅在三原安营驻扎。
English: Eihei and Zhu Quanzhong set out from Shuzhou, while Wu Yin camped in Mihara.

古文：十二月，癸未，崔胤至三原见全忠，趣之迎驾。
现代文：十二月，癸未，崔胤到三原会见朱全忠，催促他迎驾。
English: In late December, Cui Yin went to Mihara to meet Zhu Quanzhong and urged him to come.

古文：乙丑，全忠遣硃友宁攻盩厔，不下。
现代文：已丑，朱全忠遣朱友宁进攻，没有攻下。
English: Already ugly, Zhu Quanzhong sent Zhu Youning to attack, but he did not attack.

古文：戊戌，全忠自往督战，盩厔降，屠之。
现代文：戊戌，朱全忠亲自前去督战。的军队投降，被全部屠杀了。
English: Wuzhen, Zhu Quanzhong personally went to supervise the battle. The troops surrendered and were all massacred.

古文：全忠令崔胤帅百官及京城居民悉迁于华州。
现代文：朱全忠叫崔胤带领文武百官及京城的居民全部迁往华州。
English: Zhu Quanzhong ordered Cui Yin to lead all the civil and military officials and residents of Beijing to move to Huazhou.

古文：诏以裴贽充大明宫留守。
现代文：诏令任命裴贽充任大明宫留守。
English: The imperial edict appointed Pei Xuancheng to stay at the Daming Palace.

古文：清海节度使徐彦若薨，遗表荐行军司马刘隐权留后。
现代文：清海节度使徐彦若去世，遗表荐举行军司马刘隐代理留后。
English: After the Qinghai Festival, when Xu Yanru passed away, the military commander Ma Liuyin recommended that the funeral be held.

古文：李神福知钱镠定不死，而临安城坚，久攻不拔，欲归，恐为镠所邀，乃遣人守卫镠祖考丘垄，禁樵采，又使顾全武通家信。
现代文：李神福知道钱肯定没有死，而临安城池坚固，久攻不克，想要返回，又担心被钱拦截堵击，于是派人守卫钱祖父、父亲的坟墓，禁止砍伐柴草，又令顾全武通报家信。
English: Li Shenfu knew that Qian was definitely not dead, and Lin'an City Pool was solid and had not been attacked for a long time. He wanted to return, and was worried about being blocked by Qian. Therefore, he sent someone to guard Qian's grandfather and father's grave, forbade the cutting of firewood and grass, and ordered Gu Quanwu to report the family letter.

古文：镠遣使谢之。
现代文：钱派遣副使者向他致谢。
English: Qian sent a deputy envoy to thank him.

古文：神福于要路多张旗帜为虚寨，镠以为淮南兵大至，遂请和。
现代文：李神福在重要道路上多张旗帜，佯作营寨，钱以为淮南军队大批到来，就请求停战讲和。
English: On an important road, Li Shenfu put up several flags, pretending to be a camp. Thinking that a large number of Huainan troops had arrived, Qian requested an armistice to talk peace.

古文：神福受其犒赂而还。
现代文：李神福接受钱的犒赏贿赂而回。
English: Li Shenfu accepted the money as a reward and bribe and returned.

古文：硃全忠之入关也，戎昭节度使冯行袭遣副使鲁崇矩听命于全忠。
现代文：朱全忠入潼关的时候，戎昭节度使冯行袭派遣副使鲁崇矩听从朱全忠的命令。
English: When Zhu Quanzhong entered Shaoguan, the military commander Zhao Jiedu ordered Feng Xing to attack and dispatched the deputy envoy Lu Chongzhen to obey Zhu Quanzhong's order.

古文：韩全诲遣中使二十馀人分道征江、淮兵屯金州，以胁全忠，行袭尽杀中使，收其诏敕送全忠。
现代文：韩全诲派遣宦官二十余人，分道征召江、淮的军队驻扎金州，以便胁迫朱全忠；冯行袭将宦官全部杀死，并收缴他们携带的诏令和敕书，送给朱全忠。
English: Han Quanzhong dispatched more than 20 eunuchs and separately conscripted the armies of Jiang and Huai to be stationed in Jinzhou in order to coerce Zhu Quanzhong; Feng Xingran killed all the eunuchs, confiscated the imperial edict and imperial edict they were carrying, and sent them to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：又遣中使征兵于王建，硃全忠亦遣使乞师于建。
现代文：韩全诲又派遣使者向王建征兵，朱全忠也派遣使者向王建请求派遣军队协助。
English: Han Quanzhong also sent an envoy to Wang Jian to recruit soldiers, and Zhu Quanzhong also sent an envoy to Wang Jian to request the dispatch of troops to assist.

古文：建外修好于全忠，罪状李茂贞，而阴劝茂贞坚守，许之救援。以武信节度使王宗佶、前东川节度使王宗涤等为扈驾指挥使，将兵五万，声言迎军驾，其实袭茂贞山南诸州。
现代文：王建表面上与朱全忠亲善友好，把罪状归到李茂贞身上，而暗地里劝说李茂贞坚持固守，答应他派兵救援；并以武信节度使王宗佶、前东川节度使王宗涤为扈驾指挥使，率领五万军队，声言迎接天子车驾，其实偷袭李茂贞的山南各州。
English: On the surface, Wang Jian was on friendly terms with Zhu Quanzhong. He pinned the blame on Li Maozhen, but secretly persuaded Li Maozhen to hold fast and promised to send troops to rescue him. He appointed Wang Zongyao and Wang Zongyao, the former Dongchuan governor respectively, as his commanders and led 50,000 troops. They claimed to welcome the heavenly son, but in fact, they secretly attacked Li Maozhen's Shannan states.

古文：江西节度使钟传将兵围抚州刺史危全讽，天火烧其城，士民欢惊。
现代文：江西节度使钟传率领军队围困抚州刺史危全讽，天火烧了抚州城，士民喧扰惊恐。
English: At the Jiangxi Festival, Zhong Chuan led the army to besiege Fuzhou, and the city of Fuzhou was burned by fire. The scholars and the people were alarmed by the noise.

古文：诸将请急攻之，传曰： 乘人之危，非仁也。 
现代文：诸将请求急速攻城，钟传说： 乘人之危，是不仁慈的。 
English: The generals pleaded for a quick attack on the city, and the bell said: "It is not merciful to take advantage of human danger."

古文：乃祝曰： 全讽之罪，无为害民。 
现代文：于是祈祷说： 都是全讽的罪过，不要殃及百姓。 
English: And he prayed and said, These are the sins of the whole nation: let not the people be guiltless.

古文：火寻止。
现代文：火不久熄灭了。
English: The fire was soon extinguished.

古文：全讽闻之，谢罪听命，以女妻传子匡时。
现代文：危全讽听说此事自认有罪，听从命令，并把女儿嫁给钟传的儿子钟匡时为妻。
English: Hearing of this, Ke Quanzhen ironically pleaded guilty, obeyed the order, and married his daughter to Zhong Kuang's son, Zhong Kuang.

古文：传少时尝猎，醉遇虎，与斗，虎搏其肩，而传亦持虎腰不置。旁人共杀虎，乃得免。
现代文：钟传年轻时曾经打猎，有一次醉后遇见老虎，与之搏斗，老虎扑击他的肩膀，他也抱住老虎的腰不放，旁人共同把老虎杀死，才幸免于难。
English: When he was young, Zhong Chuan used to hunt. Once, after getting drunk, he met a tiger and fought with it. The tiger pounced on his shoulder. He also hugged the tiger's waist, and the others killed the tiger together, only to survive.

古文：既贵，悔之，常戒诸子曰： 士处世贵智谋，勿效吾暴虎也。 
现代文：钟传显贵之后，对这件事很悔恨，经常教戒诸子说： 士人处世以智谋为贵，不要效法我空手与老虎搏斗啊。 
English: After Zhong Chuan's rise to prominence, he was very remorseful about this, and often admonished his sons, saying: "Scholars should treat the world with wisdom and strategy. Don't follow my example of fighting a tiger with empty hands."

古文：武贞节度使雷满薨，子彦威自称留后。
现代文：武贞节度使雷满去世，他的儿子雷彦威自称留后。
English: Wu Zhengdou caused the death of Lei Man, and his son Lei Yanwei claimed to be his successor.

