古文：神武下
现代文：神武纪
English: The Shinto Code

古文：天平元年正月壬辰，神武西伐费也头虏纥豆陵伊利于河西，灭之，迁其部于河东。
现代文：天平元年正月，神武率军前往河西，征讨费也头人纥豆陵伊利，取胜后，将其部众迁往河东。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Tianping era, Shenwu led the army to Hexi to collect fees from the headman, Peasling Yili. After winning, he moved his subordinates to Hedong.

古文：二月，永宁寺九层浮图灾。
现代文：二月，永宁寺九层佛塔火灾。
English: In February, the nine-story pagoda of Yongning Temple caught fire.

古文：既而人有从东莱至，云及海上人咸见之于海中，俄而雾起乃灭。
现代文：灾后有人从东莱来，谈到火烧佛塔时海上人都在海中看到过，由于很快起雾此景消逝的情况。
English: After the disaster, someone came from Donglai and talked about the burning of the pagoda, which people at sea had seen in the sea. Due to the rapid onset of fog, this scene disappeared.

古文：说者以为天意若曰：永宁见灾，魏不宁矣；飞入东海，渤海应矣。
现代文：有人认为这是天意，好像是说永宁生灾，魏不安宁，飞入东海，渤海回应了。
English: Some people think that this is God's will, as if to say that Yongning is plagued, Wei is uneasy, flying into the East Sea, and the Bohai Whale responded.

古文：魏帝既有异图，时侍中封隆之与孙腾私言，隆之丧妻，魏帝欲妻以妹。
现代文：魏帝已有异图，时侍中封隆之私底下对孙腾说，隆之妻亡，魏帝想把妹妹嫁给他。
English: Emperor Wei already had a different plan. At that time, Fong Long's servant privately told Sun Teng that Long's wife had died and Emperor Wei wanted to marry his sister to him.

古文：腾亦未之信，心害隆之，泄其言于斛斯椿。
现代文：孙腾不太相信，但内心生起嫉妒，就把这件事偷偷地告诉了斛斯椿。
English: Sun Teng didn't quite believe it, but jealousy arose in his heart, and he secretly told this to Yao Shizhuan.

古文：椿以白魏帝。
现代文：斛斯椿向魏帝做了报告。
English: Gao Shizhong made a report to Emperor Wei.

古文：又孙腾带仗入省，擅杀御史。
现代文：另外孙腾带兵器进禁省，擅自杀了御史。
English: In addition, Sun Teng brought weapons into the forbidden province and committed suicide.

古文：并亡来奔。称魏帝挝舍人梁续于前，光禄少卿元子干攘臂击之，谓腾曰： 语尔高王，元家儿拳正如此。 
现代文：两人同时逃走，投奔神武而来，向神武诉说魏帝在自己面前殴打舍人梁续，光禄少卿元子干捋袖伸臂跑来帮忙，并对孙腾说： 告诉你的高王，元家儿拳就这个样子。 
English: The two of them fled at the same time and ran to Shenwu. He told Shenwu that Emperor Wei had beaten Liang Zhai in front of him. Guanglu Shaoqing Yuan Zi ran to help and said to Sun Teng: "Tell your Gao Wang, this is what Yuan Jia'er's fist looks like."

古文：领军娄昭辞疾归晋阳。
现代文：领军娄昭托病回到晋阳。
English: The leader, Zou Zhao, used illness as an excuse to run back to Jinyang.

古文：魏帝于是以斛斯椿兼领军，分置督将及河南、关西诸刺史。
现代文：魏帝就让斛斯椿兼任领军，分别安排诸将以及河南、关西等地刺史。
English: Emperor Wei let Jiesqin also serve as the leader of the army, and arranged for the generals and Henan, Kansai and other places to write history separately.

古文：华山王鸷在徐州，神武使邸珍夺其管籥。
现代文：华山王鸷在徐州，神武派邸珍夺走了他的钥匙。
English: Huashan Wang Yao in Xuzhou, the Shenwu faction residence Zhen took away his key.

古文：建州刺史韩贤、济州刺史蔡俊皆神武同义，魏帝忌之。
现代文：建州刺史韩贤、济州刺史蔡俊协同神武举义，魏帝很是仇视他们。
English: Jianzhou stabber Han Xian and Jeju stabber Cai Jun cooperated with Shenwu to bring about righteousness. Emperor Wei was very hostile to them.

古文：故省建州以去贤，使御史中尉綦俊察俊罪，以开府贾显智为济州。
现代文：因此裁撤建州以剥夺韩贤的官职，命令御史中尉綦俊侦察蔡俊的犯罪事实，派开府贾显智做济州刺史。
English: Therefore, Jianzhou was abolished in order to deprive Han Xian of his official position, ordered the lieutenant of the imperial history, Jun Jun, to investigate the criminal facts of Cai Jun, and sent Jia Xianzhi from Kaifu to do the history of Jeju.

古文：俊拒之，魏帝逾怒。
现代文：蔡俊不服，魏帝更加恼怒。
English: Cai Jun was not satisfied, and Emperor Wei was even more angry.

古文：五月下诏，云将征句吴，发河南诸州兵，增宿卫，守河桥。
现代文：五月魏帝下诏，称要征讨句吴，调集河南各州兵士，增加皇宫宿卫，派人守护河桥。
English: In May, Emperor Wei issued an edict, saying that he would solicit the help of Emperor Wu, mobilize soldiers from all the states in Henan, increase the number of palace guards, and send people to guard the river bridge.

古文：六月丁巳，魏帝密诏神武曰： 宇文黑獭自平破秦、陇，多求非分，脱有变诈，事资经略。
现代文：六月，魏帝秘密诏令神武： 宇文黑獭自从平定秦、陇之后，多有非分之求，倘有变动欺诈，务请策划处理。
English: In June, Emperor Wei issued a secret edict to Shenwu: "Since the suppression of the Qin and Qin Dynasties, there have been many unreasonable demands on the part of Uwen Heihe. If there are any fraudulent changes, please plan to deal with them."

古文：但表启未全背戾，进讨事涉抃抃，遂召群臣，议其可否。
现代文：不过，宇文氏的表、启之中还没有暴露出彻底的反叛之心，攻讨之事不可匆匆决定，因此召集大臣，商议是否可行。
English: However, Mr. Uwen's actions and declarations have not yet revealed a complete spirit of rebellion, and the matter of attacking cannot be decided in haste. Therefore, the ministers were convened to discuss whether it was feasible.

古文：佥言假称南伐，内外戒严，一则防黑獭不虞，二则可威吴楚。 
现代文：都说以南伐为名，内外戒严，一来防备黑獭突然起事，二来可以威逼吴、楚。 
English: It is said that in the name of the Southern Expedition, martial law was imposed both at home and abroad. On the one hand, it was to prevent the sudden rise of the Black Kite, and on the other hand, it was to intimidate Wu and Chu.

古文：时魏帝将伐神武，神武部署将帅，虑疑，故有此诏。
现代文：此时魏帝准备攻打神武，正在调兵遣将，担心神武怀疑，所以下诏解释。
English: At this time, Emperor Wei was preparing to attack Shenwu, and was in the process of mobilizing troops and dispatching generals. He was worried about Shenwu's suspicions, so he issued an edict to explain.

古文：神武乃表曰： 荆州绾接蛮左，密迩畿服，关陇恃远，将有逆图。
现代文：神武则上书说： 荆州同蛮地相接，距离畿服不远，关陇依仗边远，欲有逆谋。
English: Shenwu then wrote: "Jingzhou is adjoined to Manchukuo, not far from Guifu, Guanzhong is far away from the battlefield, and there is a counter-strategy.

古文：臣今潜勒兵马三万，拟从河东而渡；又遣恒州刺史厍狄干、瀛州刺史郭琼、汾州刺史斛律金、前武卫将军彭乐拟兵四万，从其来违津渡；遣领军将军娄昭、相州刺史窦泰、前瀛州刺史尧雄、并州刺史高隆之拟兵五万，以讨荆州；遣冀州刺史尉景、前冀州刺史高敖曹、济州刺史蔡俊、前侍中封隆之拟山东兵七万、突骑五万，以征江左。
现代文：臣现在悄悄地领兵三万，拟从河东渡过黄河；又命令恒州刺史厍狄干、瀛州刺史郭琼、汾州刺史斛律金、前武卫将军彭乐统兵四万，从来违律渡河；派遣领军将军娄昭、相州刺史窦泰、前瀛州刺史尧雄、并州刺史高隆之率兵五万，攻打荆州；调集冀州刺史尉景、原冀州刺史高敖曹、济州刺史蔡俊、前侍中封隆之带山东之兵七万、突骑五万，进军江左。
English: The minister now quietly led an army of 30,000 soldiers, intending to cross the Yellow River from the east of the river; he also ordered the commanding officers of Hengzhou Zhishuo Dikan, Zhangzhou Zhishuo Guoqiong, Zhangzhou Zhishuo Liujin, and the former Wuwei general Peng Le to lead 40,000 soldiers, never crossing the river against the law; sent the leading generals Zou Zhao, Xiangzhou Zhishuo Dou Tai, former Zhangzhou Zhishuo Shixiong, and the commanding officer of Zhangzhou Zhishuo Gaolong to attack Jingzhou with 50,000 soldiers; mobilized the troops of Jiz

古文：皆约所部，伏听处分。 
现代文：都必须严格约束部众，认真听从指挥。 
English: They must all strictly control their subordinates and earnestly follow orders.

古文：魏帝知觉其变，乃出神武表，命群官议之，欲止神武诸军。
现代文：魏帝感觉有变，就拿出神武的上表，命令百官评议，希望能制止神武各路兵马的行动。
English: Emperor Wei felt that something had changed, so he took out Shenwu's report card and ordered hundreds of officials to review it, hoping to stop the actions of Shenwu's soldiers and horses.

古文：神武乃集在州僚佐，令其博议，还以表闻。
现代文：神武也马上召集在州郡的僚佐，请他们广泛发表意见，再以表的形式上奏魏帝。
English: Shenwu also immediately summoned his colleagues in the state and county, asked them to widely express their opinions, and then played Emperor Wei in the form of a table.

古文：仍以信誓自明忠款曰： 臣为嬖佞所间，陛下一旦赐疑，今猖狂之罪，尔朱时讨。
现代文：依然用真诚的誓言表白自己的忠心： 臣遭小人离间，陛下一旦怀疑，其桀骜不驯之罪，就会像尔朱氏那样受到诛讨。
English: He still expresses his loyalty with a sincere oath: His Majesty, once he suspects that his vassal has been betrayed by a villain, will be punished for his crime of insubordination, just like the Lzhu clan.

古文：臣若不尽诚竭节，敢负陛下，则使身受天殃，子孙殄绝。
现代文：臣如果不尽诚竭节，胆敢辜负陛下的话，那么就使身受天祸，断子绝孙。
English: If a vassal does not do his best, if he dares to fail his majesty, then he will suffer the scourge of heaven and lose his son and grandson.

古文：今天下户口减半，未宜穷兵极武。
现代文：陛下如果相信臣的赤心，使干戈不兴，就该将一二佞臣逐出朝廷。 
English: If His Majesty believed in the sincerity of his vassals, he should expel one or two vassals from the Imperial Court.

古文：朕既暗昧，不知佞人是谁，可列其姓名，令朕知也。
现代文：二十二日，魏帝选录在京文武大臣的议论再次回答神武，让舍人温子升起草诏令，子升迟疑不决，未敢动笔。魏帝坐在胡床上，变了脸色，拔出长剑威胁。
English: On the 22nd, Emperor Wei once again replied to Shenwu in the discussion of the Minister of Culture and Military Affairs in Beijing, and asked his subordinate Wen Zisheng to draft the edict. Zisheng hesitated and did not dare to write. Emperor Wei sat on the sofa, changed his face, and pulled out a long sword to threaten.

古文：如闻厍狄干语王云： 本欲取懦弱者为主，王无事立此长君，使其不可驾御，今但作十五日行，自可废之，更立余者。 
现代文：子升这才拿起笔来草诏：朕愚昧蠢笨，不知小人是谁，王可指名道姓，令朕明白。如厍狄干对王讲： 本打算挑选懦弱之人做皇帝，王却拥立此人为君，致使不能驾御，现在只作十五天的打算，自然可以废除，再立他人。 
English: It was only then that Zi Sheng picked up a pen and scribbled: "I am too stupid and ignorant to know who the villain is. The king can give me a surname to make me understand. For example, Zi Dikang told the king: Originally, the plan was to choose a weak person to be the emperor, but the king supported this person as the ruler, so that he could not rule. Now, the plan is only for fifteen days. Of course, it can be abolished and another person can be appointed.

古文：如此议论，自是王间勋人，岂出佞臣之口？
现代文：这样的议论，出自王身边的功臣之口，佞臣小人是讲不出来的。
English: Such an argument, coming from the mouth of a meritorious vassal around the king, could not be uttered by a lowly vassal.

古文：去岁封隆之背叛，今年孙腾逃走，不罪不送，谁不怪王！
现代文：去年封隆之背叛，今年孙腾逃走，王却不能依法处罚，也不押解送还朝廷，王袒护封、孙，谁都想加以指责！
English: Last year, Fong Long betrayed, this year, Sun Teng fled, but Wang could not be punished according to law, nor was he sent back to the imperial court. Wang Xi protected Fong and Sun. Everyone wanted to blame them!

古文：腾既为祸始，曾无愧惧，王若事君尽诚，何不斩送二首。
现代文：孙腾已为祸始，王却毫无愧惧之色。王若对朕忠心，为何不送二人首级来京？
English: Sun Teng has already become the beginning of evil, but the king has no shame. If the king is loyal to me, why not send the two heads to Beijing?

古文：王虽启图西去，而四道俱进，或欲南度洛阳，或欲东临江左，言之者犹应自怪，闻之者宁能不疑？
现代文：王虽率部西征，但又布署四面进攻，或者南进洛阳，或者东临江左，讲出进攻的话语应该自我责备，听到进攻的言辞哪能不加怀疑？
English: Although Wang led the western expedition, but also deployed four-sided attacks, or south to Luoyang, or east to the left of the river, he should reproach himself for speaking offensive words. How can you hear the offensive words without doubt?

古文：王若守诚不贰，晏然居北，在此虽有百万之众，终无图彼之心。
现代文：王若忠诚不二，就当静静地屯驻北地，虽拥有百万之众，终无害人之心。
English: If the king is loyal, he should quietly settle in the north. Although he has a million people, he is ultimately harmless.

古文：王脱信邪弃义，举旗南指，纵无匹马只轮，犹欲奋空拳而争死。
现代文：王若信邪弃义，挥师南进，纵无匹马只轮，还想赤手空拳去争一死。
English: Wang Ruoxin abandoned his faith, marched southward with his army, rode without a horse, and wanted to fight to the death with his bare hands.

古文：朕本寡德，王已立之，百姓无知，或谓实可。
现代文：朕本寡德，王已立之，百姓无知，诚可谅解。
English: I am a widower, the king has already been established, the people are ignorant, and sincerity can be understood.

古文：若为他所图，则彰朕之恶，假令还为王杀，幽辱齑粉，了无遗恨。
现代文：若有他图，则是彰明朕的罪恶，假如被王诛杀，或幽禁凌辱，或粉身碎骨，而毫无遗憾。
English: If there is any other plan, it is to highlight my sins. If I am killed by the king, or imprisoned and humiliated, or crushed, I have no regrets.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么？
English: Why is that?

古文：王既以德见推，以义见举，一朝背德舍义，便是过有所归。
现代文：王既然德被人称，义为人道，一旦背德舍义，便是失信于民。
English: Since the king is called virtue by the people, and righteousness is called humanity, once he betrays virtue and forsakes righteousness, he will lose the trust of the people.

古文：本望君臣一体，若合符契，不图今日，分疏到此。
现代文：本指望君臣一体，如契与符合，没料到今日竟如此疏远。
English: I had expected the unity of ruler and subject, like a contract and agreement, but I didn't expect it to be so distant today.

古文：古语云： 越人射我，笑而道之；吾兄射我，泣而道之。 
现代文：古语云： 越人射我，笑而道之；我兄射我，泣而道之。 
English: There is an old saying: "If my brother shoots me, I will laugh; if he shoots me, I will cry."

古文：朕既亲王，情如兄弟，所以投笔拊膺，不觉歔欷。
现代文：朕爱王亲王，情同手足，所以投笔拍胸，禁不住地发出哀叹。
English: I love the prince with all my heart, so I beat my breast and cannot help lamenting.

古文：初，神武自京师将北，以为洛阳久经丧乱，王气衰尽，虽有山河之固，土地褊狭，不如邺，请迁都。
现代文：当初，神武从京师出发拟将北行，认为洛阳久经战乱，王气已尽，即便有山河之险可守，但土地狭窄，赶不上邺地，因此请求迁都。
English: At first, Shenwu planned to go north from Beijing Division, thinking that Luoyang had been through the war and was exhausted. Even if there were mountains and rivers to defend, the land was narrow and could not catch up with Handan, so he requested to move the capital.

古文：魏帝曰： 高祖定鼎河洛，为永永之基，经营制度，至世宗乃毕。
现代文：魏帝道： 高祖定鼎河洛，为永久的基地，规划营建，一直到世宗朝才告结束。
English: Wei Di Road: Gao Zu Ding Ding He Luo, as a permanent base, planning and construction, until the end of the Sejong Dynasty.

古文：王既功在社稷，宜遵太和旧事。 
现代文：王既然有功于国，就应该遵从太和旧典。 
English: Since the king has rendered great services to the country, he should obey the emperor and the ancient scriptures.

古文：神武奉诏，至是复谋焉。
现代文：神武听从了诏令，到这个时候，又旧事重提。
English: Shenwu obeyed the edict, and at this time, the old matter was brought up again.

古文：遣三千骑镇建兴，益河东及济州兵，于白沟虏船不听向洛，诸州和籴粟运入邺城。
现代文：调遣三千骑兵镇守建兴，增益河东及济州的军队，规定以白沟为界，所有船只不准入洛，各州和籴粮食全部运送邺城。
English: Three thousand cavalrymen were dispatched to defend Jianxing, and the armies of Hedong and Jeju were increased. It was stipulated that Baigou would be the boundary, all ships would not be allowed to enter Luo, and all grain from the provinces and counties would be transported to Jiecheng.

古文：魏帝又敕神武曰： 王若厌伏人情，杜绝物议，唯有归河东之兵，罢建兴之戍，送相州之粟，追济州之军，令蔡俊受代，使邸珍出徐，止戈散马，各事家业。
现代文：魏帝又诏令神武： 王若顺从民心，杜绝议论，只有撤退河东之兵，罢除建兴之戍，送归相州之粟，追还济州之军，命令蔡俊辞职，打发邸珍离徐，止戈散马，各治家业，所需粮食，另请转送。
English: Emperor Wei also ordered Shenwu: If the king obeys the people's will and shuts down the discussion, the only thing to do is to withdraw the soldiers from Hedong, revoke Jianxing's edict, send them back to Soshu's poppy, recover the army from Jeju, order Cai Jun to resign, send his residence to Zhen and leave Xu, stop the fighting and disperse the horses, each to manage the family business, and the required grain, and please forward it.

古文：脱须粮廪，别遣转输，则谗人结舌，疑悔不生。王高枕太原，朕垂拱京洛，终不举足渡河，以干戈相指。
现代文：那么小人就会闭口，怀疑也就不会产生了。王在太原高枕无忧，朕在京洛无为而治，永不举足渡河，互不再动干戈。
English: Then the villain will shut up, and suspicion will not arise. The king in Taiyuan will have no worries, and I will do nothing in Beijing. We will never cross the river, and we will never fight each other.

古文：王若马首南向，问鼎轻重，朕虽无武，欲止不能，必为社稷宗庙出万死之策。
现代文：王若挥军南进，问鼎轻重，朕虽不武，欲止不能，一定要为社稷宗庙考虑，筹划出最好的计策。
English: If Wang Rongwu marches south, it is of great importance. Although I am not a military man, I can't stop myself. I must consider and plan the best strategy for the Shifang ancestral temple.

古文：决在于王，非朕能定，为山止篑，相为惜之。 
现代文：决策由王，非朕所能定夺，造山止篑，实在可惜。 
English: It is a pity for all of us that the last basket of soil is not enough to make a mountain.

古文：魏帝时以任祥为兼尚书左仆射，加开府，祥弃官走至河北，据郡待神武。
现代文：此时魏帝让任祥兼任尚书左仆射，加开府仪同三司，任祥弃官逃到河北，占据地盘等候神武。
English: At this time, Wei Emperor let Ren Xiang concurrently serve as Shang Shushi's left-hand man, and add Kaifu ceremony and three departments. Ren Xiang abandoned his post and fled to Hebei to occupy the site and wait for Shenwu.

古文：魏帝乃敕文武官北来者任去留，下诏罪状神武，为北伐经营。
现代文：魏帝于是下令凡是北方的文武官员去留听便，下诏公布神武罪行，为北伐筹划营谋。
English: Emperor Wei then ordered all the civil and military officials in the north to stay and listen, and issued an edict to announce the divine and military crimes, and to plan and strategize for the Northern Expedition.

古文：神武亦勒马宣告曰： 孤遇尔朱擅权，举大义于四海，奉戴主上，义贯幽明。横为斛斯椿谗构，以诚节为逆首。
现代文：神武也停马宣言，说： 我见尔朱氏专权，便在天下举起义旗，辅佐皇上，义贯幽明，反被斛斯椿诬陷，把忠诚说成了叛逆。
English: Shenwu also stopped his horse to make a declaration, saying, "When I saw the Zhu family's absolute power, I raised the banner of righteousness in the world, assisted the emperor, and followed the path of righteousness. However, I was slandered by Gong Shizhu, and my loyalty was said to be treason.

古文：昔赵鞅兴晋阳之甲，诛君侧恶人，今者南迈，诛椿而已。 
现代文：古代赵鞅兴晋阳之兵，诛杀君侧的恶人。今日南进，只不过是声讨斛斯椿而已。 
English: In ancient times, Zhao Bingxing was a soldier of Jinyang, fighting and killing the villains on the emperor's side. Today's southward march is nothing more than a protest against Zhang Shizhuang.

古文：以高昂为前锋，曰： 若用司空言，岂有今日之举！ 
现代文：委任高昂为前锋，说： 如果听了司空的话，那会有今日的举措！ 
English: Appointing Gao Ang as a striker, saying: If you listen to Sku, there will be today's move!

古文：司马子如答神武曰： 本欲立小者，正为此耳。 
现代文：司马子如回答说： 原本打算立一弱小者为帝，今天的行动就是为了这个目的。 
English: Sima Ziyu replied: Originally, it was planned to make a weakling emperor, and today's action is for this purpose.

古文：魏帝征兵关右，召贺拔胜赴行在所，遣大行台长孙承业、大都督颍川王斌之、斛斯椿共镇武牢，汝阳王暹镇石济，行台长孙子彦帅前恒农太守元洪略镇陕，贾显智率豫州刺史斛斯元寿伐蔡俊。
现代文：魏帝向关右征兵，召请贺拔胜赶往行所，派遣大行台长孙承业、大都督颍川王斌之、斛斯椿一同镇守武牢，汝阳王暹守石济，行台长孙子彦率领前恒农太守元洪略镇陕，贾显智带豫州刺史斛斯元寿讨伐蔡俊。
English: Emperor Wei conscripted soldiers to Guan Yu, summoned He Basseng to rush to the garrison, and dispatched Sun Chengye, the Grand Governor of Guan Yu, Wang Binzhi, the Grand Governor of Luochuan, and Gao Shizhuan to guard Wujiang together, Ruyang Wang Siam to guard Shiji, the Governor of Guan Yu, Sun Zihang led the former Hengnong Governor Yuan Ryo Zhen Shan, and Jia Xian Zhi led the Governor of Yuzhou Province, Gao Shizhu, to fight against Cai Jun.

古文：神武使窦泰与左厢大都督莫多娄贷文逆显智，韩贤逆暹。
现代文：神武指派窦泰和左厢大都督莫多娄贷文迎击显智，韩贤抵挡汝阳王暹。
English: Shenwu assigned Dou Tai and the left wing grand governor Modo Jianwen to attack Xian Zhi, and Han Xian to resist Ruyang Wang Sie.

古文：元寿军降。
现代文：斛斯元寿部投降。
English: Shusuan Shoubu surrenders.

古文：泰、贷文与显智遇于长寿津，显智阴约降，引军退。
现代文：窦泰、贷文在长寿津与贾显智相遇，显智秘密谈妥了投降事宜，就率众撤走。
English: Dou Tai and Guibin met with Jia Xianzhi in Changshoujin. Xianzhi secretly negotiated the surrender and led the crowd away.

古文：军司元玄觉之，驰还。请益师。
现代文：军司元玄发觉后，赶回行所，请求增兵。
English: After discovering this, the military commander, Yuan Xuan, rushed back to his post to request more troops.

古文：魏帝遣大都督侯几绍赴之。战于滑台东，显智以军降，绍死之。
现代文：魏帝调遣大都督侯几绍奔赴前线，两军便在滑台东侧大战，显智带领兵士投降，侯几绍阵亡。
English: Emperor Wei dispatched the grand governor Hou Kishao to rush to the front, and the two armies fought a great battle on the east side of the plateau. Xian Zhi led the soldiers to surrender, and Hou Kishao was killed.

古文：七月，魏帝躬率大众屯河桥。
现代文：七月，魏帝亲自带领大军屯驻河桥。
English: In July, Emperor Wei personally led a large army to settle in Heqiao.

古文：神武至河北十余里，再遣口申诚款，魏帝不报。
现代文：神武在距河北十余里的地方，再次派人表明诚意，魏帝没有理睬。
English: At a place more than ten miles away from Hebei, Shenwu once again sent someone to express his sincerity, but Emperor Wei did not pay attention.

古文：神武乃引军渡河。
现代文：神武就率军渡过黄河。
English: Shenwu led the army across the Yellow River.

古文：魏帝问计于群臣，或云南依贺拔胜，或云西就关中，或云守洛口死战。
现代文：魏帝向群臣问计，有的说往南投奔贺拔胜，有的说往西占据关中，有的说固守洛口决一死战。
English: Emperor Wei asked his ministers about their plans. Some said they would go to Nantou to win the war, some said they would go to the west to occupy Guanzhong, and some said they would hold on to Luokou and fight to the death.

古文：未决。
现代文：何去何从，无法决定。
English: I can't decide where to go from here.

古文：而元斌之与斛斯椿争权不睦，斌之弃椿径还，绐帝云： 神武兵至。 
现代文：元斌之与斛斯椿因争权夺利，关系不洽，斌之留下斛斯椿抄小路跑到行所，蒙骗魏帝说： 神武的兵来了！ 
English: Yuan Binzhi was not on good terms with Wu Shizhun due to their competition for power and profit. After leaving Binzhi, Wu Shizhun took a shortcut and ran to the guesthouse. He deceived Wei Di and said, "Shenwu's soldiers have arrived!"

古文：即日，魏帝逊于长安。
现代文：当天，魏帝逃往长安。
English: On the same day, Emperor Wei fled to Chang'an.

古文：己酉，神武入洛阳，停于永宁寺。
现代文：二十九日，神武进洛阳，暂居永宁寺。
English: On the 29th, Shenwu entered Luoyang and temporarily stayed at Yongning Temple.

古文：八月甲寅，召集百官，谓曰： 为臣奉主，匡救危乱，若处不谏争，出不陪随，缓则耽宠争荣，急便逃窜，臣节安在？ 
现代文：八月初四，神武召集百官会议，说： 为臣事主，拯救危乱，如果居于臣位而不谏诤，出门不相跟随，国家安宁时沉溺于荣华富贵，危急时如鸟兽奔散，臣节在哪里！ 
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month, Shenwu convened a meeting of a hundred officials and said: To be a vassal, save the crisis, if you live in a vassal and do not obey, do not follow when you go out, indulge in glory and wealth when the country is peaceful, and scatter like birds and beasts when it is in crisis, where is the vassal festival!

古文：遂收开府仪同三司叱列延庆、兼尚书左仆射辛雄、兼吏部尚书崔孝芬、都官尚书刘廞、兼度支尚书杨机、散骑常侍元士弼并杀之，诛其贰也。士弼籍没家口。
现代文：于是捕获开府仪同三司叱列延庆、兼尚书左仆射辛雄、兼吏部尚书崔孝芬、都官尚书刘、兼度支尚书杨机、散骑常侍元士弼等人，并全部处死，原因是他们对皇上不能尽忠，士弼籍没家人。
English: As a result, Kaifu Yi was captured, along with Yanqing of the Third Division of the Scolding Column, Shao Xinxiong of the Third Division of the Scolding Column, Cui Xiaofeng of the Third Division of the Scolding Column, Liu Shangshu of the Capital, Yangji of the Third Division of the Scolding Column, and Zangji of the Cavalry, and all of them were executed because they could not be loyal to the emperor and had no family.

古文：神武以万机不可旷废，乃与百僚议以清河王亶为大司马，居尚书下舍而承制决事焉。
现代文：神武认为好时机不可错过，便同百官商议，任命清河王为大司马，居尚书下舍而秉承意旨来决断大事。
English: Shenwu thought that it was a good opportunity that could not be missed, so he consulted with hundreds of officials and appointed Qinghe Wang as the chief steward to make decisions based on his will.

古文：王称警跸，神武丑之。
现代文：王出入称警跸，神武极为讨厌。
English: Wang Rides in and out like a sentinel, and Shenwu is extremely annoying.

古文：神武寻至恒农，遂西克潼关，执毛洪宾。
现代文：不久，神武抵达恒农，于是向西攻下了潼关，活捉了毛洪宾。
English: Soon, Shenwu arrived at Hengnong, and then attacked Shaoguan to the west, capturing Mao Hongbin alive.

古文：进军长城，龙门都督薛崇礼降。
现代文：进军长安，龙门都督薛崇礼投降。
English: Marching into Chang'an, Longmen Governor Xue Chongli surrendered.

古文：神武退舍河东，命行台尚书长史薛瑜守潼关，大都督库狄温守封陵。
现代文：神武率部后退，驻扎河东，命令行台尚书长史薛瑜守潼关，大都督厍狄温守封陵。
English: Shenwu led the troops to retreat and stationed in the east of the river. He ordered the governor of Taiwan, Shang Shuchang Shi Xue Yu, to guard Shaoguan, and the grand governor, Di Wen, to guard Fengling.

古文：于蒲津西岸筑城，守华州，以薛绍宗为刺史，高昂行豫州事。
现代文：筑城于蒲津西岸以守华州，便命令薛绍宗做刺史。高昂行豫州刺史事。
English: He ordered Xue Shao Zong to make a survey of Yuzhou after he had built the city on the west coast of Putian to defend Huazhou. Gao Ao went to the survey of Yuzhou.

古文：神武自发晋阳，至此凡四十启，魏帝皆不答。
现代文：神武从晋阳出发，到此时为止已向魏帝致函四十余件，都没有得到答复。
English: Starting from Jinyang, Shenwu had sent more than forty letters to Emperor Wei by this time, but received no reply.

古文：九月庚寅，神武还于洛阳，乃遣僧道荣奉表关中，又不答。
现代文：九月初十，神武返回洛阳，又打发僧人道荣奉表入送关中，还是没有答复。
English: At the beginning of September 10th, Shenwu returned to Luoyang, and sent the monk Duan Rongbong form to the customs office, but there was still no reply.

古文：乃集百僚四门耆老，议所推立。
现代文：于是聚集百官、四门耆老，议论立谁为帝。
English: So they gathered together hundreds of officials and the elders of the four tribes to discuss who should be the emperor.

古文：以为自孝昌丧乱，国统中绝，神主靡依，昭穆失序。永安以孝文为伯考，永熙迁孝明于夹室，业丧祚短，职此之由。
现代文：神武认为从孝昌丧乱开始，国脉中断，神主无依，昭穆失序，永安帝以孝文帝为伯考，永熙帝迁孝明帝神主于夹室，功业丧失福佑短浅，根源就在这里。
English: Shenwu believed that from the beginning of the death of Xiaochang, the country's lineage was interrupted, the god was without a ruler, and Shomu was out of order. Yongan Emperor took Xiaowen Emperor as his tutor, Yongxi Emperor moved the god of Xiaoming Emperor to the anteroom, and the cause of the loss of merits and blessings was short-sighted. The root cause was here.

古文：遂议立清河王世子善见。
现代文：因此决定立清河王长子元善见。
English: Therefore, it was decided to appoint the eldest son of the King of Qinghe, Yuan Zenshin.

古文：议定，白清河王。
现代文：大家意见一致，便向清河王报告。
English: Everyone agreed and reported to Qinghe Wang.

古文：王曰： 天子无父，苟使儿立，不惜余生。 
现代文：王说： 天子无父，若立我儿，我会毫不悯惜自己的生命。 
English: And the king said, God is my father: if thou wilt give me a son, then will I not lay down my life for him.

古文：乃立之，是为孝静帝。
现代文：元善见即位，这就是东魏史上的孝静帝。
English: The enthronement of Yuan Zenshin is the Xiao Jing Emperor in the history of the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏于是始分为二。
现代文：从这时起，魏一分为二了。
English: From then on, Wei was divided into two parts.

古文：神武以孝武既西，恐逼崤、陕，洛阳复在河外，接近梁境，如向晋阳，形势不能相接，乃议迁邺，护军祖莹赞焉。
现代文：神武考虑到魏帝跑到了关中，担心他进逼崤、陕，洛阳又在黄河之外，接近梁境，如若进攻晋阳，两边不能很好衔接，就建议迁都于邺，护军祖莹赞同。
English: Shenwu took into account that Emperor Wei ran to Guanzhong, worried that he would be forced to enter Shandong and Shaanxi, and that Luoyang was outside the Yellow River and close to Liangjing. If he attacked Jinyang, the two sides would not be well connected, so he suggested moving the capital to Shandong, which was approved by the guardian Zu Ying.

古文：诏下三日，车驾便发，户四十万狼狈就道。
现代文：诏书下达三日，车驾出发，户口四十万也狼狈上路。
English: The edict was issued on the third day, the car set off, and the 400,000 households were also on the road.

古文：神武留洛阳部分，事毕还晋阳。
现代文：神武留在洛阳处理事务，事情办完后就回到了晋阳。
English: Shenwu stayed in Luoyang to deal with the matter, and returned to Jinyang after the matter was over.

古文：自是军国政务，皆归相府。
现代文：从此开始，军政大事，全归相府处理。
English: From then on, all military and political affairs were handled by the cabinet of ministers.

古文：先是童谣曰： 可怜青雀子，飞来邺城里，羽翮垂欲成，化作鹦鹉子。 
现代文：早些时候有童谣说： 可怜青雀子，飞到邺城里，翅膀快长成，变成鹦鹉子。 
English: Earlier, there was a nursery rhyme that said: Poor young sparrow, fly to the city of Zoucheng, your wings will soon grow and you will turn into a parrot.

古文：好事者窃言，雀子谓魏帝清河王子，鹦鹉谓神武也。
现代文：好事者私下议论，说雀子是魏帝清河王的儿子，鹦鹉是神武。
English: The good-doers discuss it in private, saying that the sparrow is the son of Wei Emperor Qinghe Wang, and the parrot is Shenwu.

古文：初，孝昌中，山胡刘螽升自称天子，年号神嘉，居云阳谷，西土岁被其寇，谓之胡荒。
现代文：当初，即孝昌年中，山胡刘蠡升自称天子，年号神嘉，住居在云阳谷，魏的西部每年都要遭受寇掠，人们呼之为 胡荒 。
English: At the beginning, that is, in the middle of the Xiaochang period, Sanhu Liu Yansheng claimed to be the son of heaven, the year name was Shenjia, and he lived in the Yunyang Valley. The western part of Wei suffered from robberies every year, and people called it Huarao.

古文：二年正月，西魏渭州刺史可朱浑道元拥众内属，神武迎纳之。
现代文：天平二年正月，西魏渭州刺史可朱浑道元率众归附，神武接纳了他们。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Tenpyo era, Zhu Hun Douyuan led the people of West Wei's Bozhou Province to join, and Shenwu accepted them.

古文：壬戌，神武袭击刘螽升，大破之。
现代文：十五日，神武袭击刘蠡升，获全胜。
English: On the 15th, Shenwu attacked Liu Xinsheng and won a complete victory.

古文：己巳，魏帝褒诏，以神武为相国，假黄钺，剑履上殿，入朝不趋。
现代文：二十二日，魏帝下诏褒奖，任命神武为相国，授假黄钺，佩剑着鞋进宫殿，朝见不快步地走。
English: On the 22nd, Emperor Wei issued an imperial edict of commendation, appointing Shenwu as a partner country, bestowing the title of Huang Di, entering the palace with a sword and shoes, and walking briskly in the morning.

古文：神武固辞。
现代文：神武坚辞不受。
English: Divine intervention is not acceptable.

古文：三月，神武欲以女妻螽升太子，候其不设备，辛酉，潜师袭之。
现代文：三月，神武计划嫁女予刘蠡升的长子为妻，候其麻痹大意，十五日，偷偷地派出军队突袭。
English: In March, Shenwu planned to marry his daughter to the eldest son of Liu Shusheng, expecting him to be paralyzed, and secretly sent troops to raid on the 15th.

古文：其北部王斩螽升首以送。
现代文：蠡升子北部王砍下其父脑袋送给神武。
English: The son of the Northern King cut off his father's head and gave it to Shenwu.

古文：其众复立其子南海王，神武进击之，又获南海王及其弟西海王、北海王、皇后公卿已下四百余人，胡、魏五万户。
现代文：蠡升的部众又拥立其子南海王为帝，神武再次进攻，活捉了南海王及其弟弟西海王、北海王、皇后公卿等四百余人，得胡、西魏户五万多。
English: Shenwu attacked again and captured alive more than four hundred people, including Nanhai Wang, his brother West Sea King, North Sea King, and Empress Dowager, as well as more than fifty thousand people from Dehu and West Wei.

古文：壬申，神武朝于邺。
现代文：二十六日，神武朝于邺。
English: On the 26th, the Jinwu Dynasty arrived in Yunnan.

古文：四月，神武请给迁人廪各有差。
现代文：四月，神武请求按等供应迁户粮食。
English: In April, Jinwu requested equal supply of grain for resettlement.

古文：九月甲寅，神武以州郡县官多乖法，请出使问人疾苦。
现代文：九月十四日，神武认为州郡县官吏多有违法乱纪行为，请求派出使臣访问民间疾苦。
English: On September 14th, Shenwu believed that most of the state, county and county officials had illegal and undisciplined behavior, and requested that an envoy be sent to visit the suffering of the people.

古文：三年正月甲子，神武帅厍狄干等万骑袭西魏夏州，身不火食，四日而至。
现代文：三年正月二十二日，神武统领厍狄干等万余骑兵偷袭西魏的夏州，不吃熟食，四天就赶到了。
English: On the 22nd day of the first month of the third year, more than ten thousand cavalrymen led by Shenwu's general Zou Dikang and others raided West Wei's Xiazhou, did not eat cooked food, and arrived four days later.

古文：缚槊为梯，夜入其城，禽其刺史费也头斛拔俄弥突，因而用之。
现代文：捆绑长矛做成云梯，深夜攻进城里，活捉了刺史费也头人斛拔俄弥突，仍然委任他做刺史。
English: He tied up spears to make a ladder, stormed into the city in the middle of the night, and captured alive the assassin Fei Ya headman, still appointing him as the assassin.

古文：留都督张琼以镇守，迁其部落五千户以归。
现代文：留都督张琼镇守夏州，将其部落五千多户迁往东魏。
English: Zhang Qiong, the governor-in-residence, guarded Xiazhou and moved more than 5,000 households of his tribe to the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：西魏灵州刺史曹泥与其婿凉州刺史刘丰遣使请内属。
现代文：西魏灵州刺史曹泥及其女婿凉州刺史刘丰派遣使者请求内属。
English: Cao Di, the governor of West Wei Lingshou, and his son-in-law Liu Feng, the governor of Liangzhou, sent an envoy to request their subordinates.

古文：周文围泥，水灌其城，不没者四尺。
现代文：周文包围了曹泥，用大水灌注灵州府城，只有四尺见方的地方没有被淹。
English: Zhou Wen surrounded Cao Di and flooded the capital city of Lingshou with large amounts of water. Only a four-meter square area was not flooded.

古文：神武命阿至罗发骑三万径度灵州，绕出西军后，获马五十匹，西师乃退。
现代文：神武命令阿至罗带骑兵三万从小路经过灵州，绕到西魏军的后背，缴获战马五十匹，西魏军才被迫撤退。
English: Shenwu ordered Ah Zhi Luo to lead 30,000 cavalry from a small road through Lingshou, around the back of the West Wei army, and captured 50 horses. The West Wei army was forced to retreat.

古文：神武率骑迎泥、丰生，拔其遗户五千以归，复泥官爵。
现代文：神武亲率骑士迎接曹泥、刘丰，选拔五千遗户带回东魏，并且恢复了曹泥的官爵。
English: Shenwu relatives led the knights to welcome Cao Di and Liu Feng, selected five thousand surviving families to bring back to the Eastern Wei Dynasty, and restored Cao Di's official title.

古文：魏帝诏加神武九锡，固让乃止。
现代文：魏帝下诏赐给神武九锡，因坚决推辞才作罢。
English: Emperor Wei issued an edict to grant Jinwu Jiuxi, but it was only because of his resolute refusal that it was stopped.

古文：二月，神武令阿至罗逼西魏秦州刺史建忠王万俟普拨，神武以众应之。
现代文：二月，神武下令阿至罗威逼西魏秦州刺史建忠王万俟普拨，神武随即率部应接。
English: In February, Shenwu ordered A Zhi Luo Wei to force West Wei Qinzhou to assassinate Jianzhong Wang Wanzhong Pu Zhi, and Shenwu immediately led the troops to respond.

古文：六月甲午，普拨与其子太宰受洛干、豳州刺史叱干宝乐、右卫将军破六韩常及督将三百余人拥部来降。
现代文：六月二十五日，普拨与其子太宰受洛干、豳州刺史叱干宝乐、右卫将军破六韩常以及督将三百多人率众投降。
English: On June 25th, Pu Zhi and his son Dazai led more than 300 people to surrender, including Luo Gan, Zhangzhou Zishi, Guan Baole, Yu Wei, and Guo Zheng.

古文：八月丁亥，神武请均斗尺，班于天下。
现代文：八月十八日，神武请求魏帝统一斗、尺，颁行天下。
English: On August 18th, Shenwu requested Emperor Wei to unify the dou and the shaku and issue them to the whole country.

古文：九月辛亥，汾州胡王迢触、曹贰龙聚众反，署立百官，年号平都。
现代文：九月初四，汾州胡人王迢触、曹贰龙等聚众造反，建立百官，年号平都。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, Wang Xizhong and Cao Yulong, the Hu people of Zhangzhou, gathered together to rebel and established a hundred officials, and the year was named Pingdu.

古文：神武讨平之。
现代文：神武派兵进行了镇压。
English: Shenwu sent troops to suppress them.

古文：十二月丁丑，神武自晋阳西讨，遣兼仆射行台汝阳王暹、司徒高昂等趣上洛，大都督窦泰入自潼关。
现代文：十二月十一日，神武从晋阳出发进行西征，命令兼仆射行台汝阳王暹、司徒高昂等人急赴上洛，大都督窦泰进入潼关。
English: On December 11, Shenwu set out from Jinyang for the Western Expedition, and ordered the concurrently dispatched Tai Ruyang Wang Siam, Siu Gaoang and others to rush to Shangluo, and the Grand Duke Dou Tai entered Shaoguan.

古文：四年正月癸丑，窦泰军败自杀。
现代文：四年正月十七日，窦泰因军败而自杀。
English: On the 17th day of the first month of the fourth year, Dou Tai committed suicide due to military defeat.

古文：神武次蒲津，以冰薄不得赴救，乃班师。
现代文：神武宿营蒲津，因冰薄不能渡河无法支援，便班师回归。
English: Due to the thin ice, they were unable to cross the river and were unable to provide support, so the patrol division returned.

古文：高昂攻克上洛。
现代文：高昂攻克上洛。
English: Gao Long conquered Shangluo.

古文：二月乙酉，神武以并、肆、汾、建、晋、东雍、南汾、泰、陕九州霜旱，人饥流散，请所在开仓赈给。
现代文：二月二十二日，由于并、肆、汾、建、晋、东雍、南汾、泰、陕九州霜旱，民饥流浪，神武请求各州开仓救济。
English: On February 22nd, due to the drought in the provinces of Anhui, Zhuhai, Shandong, Jian, Jin, Dongyong, Nanxi, Tai and Shaanxi, and the people's hunger and wandering, Shenwu requested the states to open warehouses for relief.

古文：六月壬申，神武如天池，获瑞石，隐起成文曰 六王三川 。
现代文：六月初八日，神武前往天池，得一瑞石，石面隐约有文字，曰 六王三川 。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, Shenwu went to Tianchi and obtained a piece of stone. The stone had writing on it, saying "six kings, three rivers."

古文：十月壬辰，神武西讨，自蒲津济，众二十万。
现代文：十月初二，神武西讨，从蒲津渡河，有众二十万。
English: At the beginning of October 2nd, the West Jinwu Crusade crossed the river from Putuo, with a crowd of two hundred thousand.

古文：周文军于沙苑。
现代文：周文在沙苑布阵。
English: Zhou Wen in Sha Yuan.

古文：神武以地厄少却，西人鼓噪而进，军大乱，弃器甲十有八万，神武跨橐驼，候船以归。
现代文：因地形险峻，神武率部稍作退却，西魏军呐喊着发起冲锋，东魏军大败，丢弃武器盔甲十八万余件，神武骑着骆驼逃跑，又坐船回到了黄河东岸。
English: Due to the steep terrain, Shenwu's leading unit retreated slightly, the West Wei army shouted and launched a charge, the East Wei army was defeated, and more than 180,000 pieces of weapons and armor were discarded. Shenwu fled on a camel and returned to the east bank of the Yellow River by boat.

古文：元象元年三月辛酉，神武固请解丞相，魏帝许之。
现代文：元象元年三月初二，神武坚决要求解除丞相之职，魏帝同意了。
English: On the second day of the third month of the first year of Yuan Xiang, Shenwu firmly demanded the dismissal of the post of chancellor, and Emperor Wei agreed.

古文：四月庚寅，神武朝于邺，壬辰，还晋阳。请开酒禁，并赈恤宿卫武官。
现代文：四月初二，神武朝邺。初四，回晋阳，请解除酒禁，还请求救济宿卫的武官。
English: On the second day of the fourth lunar month, back to Jinyang, please lift the ban on alcohol, and also request relief from the military attaché of the innkeeper.

古文：七月壬午，行台侯景、司徒高昂围西魏将独孤信于金墉，西魏帝及周文并来赴救。
现代文：七月初六，行台侯景、司徒高昂在金墉围住了西魏大将独孤信，西魏帝以及周文都跑来救助。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month, the Western Wei generals Du Guoxin, the Western Wei Emperor and Zhou Wen all came to the rescue of the marching Tai Houjing and Szeto Gaoang who had surrounded them in Jinyu.

古文：大都督厍狄干帅诸将前驱，神武总众继进。
现代文：大都督厍狄干率领诸将作为前锋，神武统众紧随其后。
English: The great viceroy Zhi Dikang led the generals as the vanguard, closely followed by the entire Shenwu army.

古文：八月辛卯，战于河阴，大破西魏军，俘获数万。
现代文：八月初四日，战于河阴，东魏大败西魏军，俘虏数万。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month, the battle was fought in Heyin. The East Wei defeated the West Wei army, and tens of thousands of prisoners were taken.

古文：司徒高昂、大都督李猛、宋显死之。
现代文：司徒高昂、大都督李猛、宋显阵亡。
English: Sittu Gaoang, Grand Dictator Li Meng, and Song Hsien all died in the battle.

古文：西师之败，独孤信先入关，周文留其都督长孙子彦守金墉，遂烧营以遁。
现代文：西魏军失败，独孤信率先跑入关内，周文命令都督长孙子彦保守金墉，烧燃军营后就逃走了。
English: The Western Wei army failed, and Du Guoxin was the first to run into Guanzhong. Zhou Wen ordered the governor, Sun Zihong, to keep the gold ingots, burn the military camp, and then escape.

古文：神武遣兵追奔，至崤，不及而还。
现代文：神武派人追赶到崤，没有追上就回来了。
English: Shenwu sent men to chase them to Shao, but they did not catch up and returned.

古文：初，神武知西师来侵，自晋阳帅众驰赴，至孟津，未济，而军有胜负。
现代文：早些时候，神武估计西魏军会来侵犯，率众从晋阳出发，抵孟津，还没有渡过黄河，交战时候有胜有负。
English: Earlier, Shenwu estimated that the West Wei army would invade, and led the crowd from Jinyang to Mengjin. He had not yet crossed the Yellow River, and there were both winners and losers in the war.

古文：既而神武渡河，子彦亦弃城走，神武遂毁金墉而还。
现代文：不久，神武过河，长孙子彦弃城逃走，因此神武毁掉了金墉城。
English: Soon after, Shenwu crossed the river, and his eldest grandson Yan abandoned the city and fled. As a result, Shenwu destroyed Jinshan City.

古文：十一月庚午，神武朝于京师。
现代文：十一月初八，神武入京师朝见。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of November, Jinmu entered Beijing to see the emperor.

古文：十二月壬辰，还晋阳。
现代文：十二月三十日，回到晋阳。
English: On December 30, he returned to Jinyang.

古文：兴和元年七月丁丑，魏帝进神武为相国、录尚书事，固让乃止。
现代文：兴和元年七月二十五日，魏帝进神武为相国、录尚书事，坚决推辞才止。
English: On July 25, the first year of the Xinghe era, Emperor Wei entered Shenwu as a sister country, recorded the record, and resolutely refused to resign.

古文：十一月乙丑，神武以新宫成，朝于邺。
现代文：十一月十五日，因新宫建成，神武朝邺。
English: On November 15th, due to the completion of the new palace, the Jinwu Dynasty was overthrown.

古文：魏帝与神武燕射，神武降阶称贺，又辞渤海王及都督中外诸军事，诏不许。
现代文：魏帝与神武聚宴行射礼，神武走下台阶祝贺，又请求辞去渤海王和都督中外诸军事职，诏令不许。
English: Emperor Wei and Shenwu gathered for a banquet and performed a salute, and Shenwu walked down the steps to congratulate him. He also asked Shenwu to resign from his military posts as the king of the Bohai Sea and the governor of the capital, which was not allowed by the imperial edict.

古文：十二月戊戌，神武还晋阳。
现代文：十二月十八日，神武回晋阳。
English: On December 18, Shenwu returned to Jinyang.

古文：二年十二月，阿至罗别部遣使请降。
现代文：二年十二月，阿至罗的一部遣使请求归降。
English: In December of the second year, a group of envoys from Ajiro requested surrender.

古文：神武帅众迎之，出武州塞，不见，大猎而还。
现代文：神武率众出迎，出武州塞，没有碰到，狩猎而归。
English: Shenwu led the crowd to meet, went out of Wuzhou, did not meet, went hunting and returned.

古文：三年五月，神武巡北境，使使与蠕蠕通和。
现代文：三年五月，神武出巡北境，派出使者同蠕蠕结好。
English: In May of the third year, Shenwu went on a tour of the northern border and sent an envoy to make peace with Crum.

古文：四年五月辛巳，神武朝邺，请令百官每月面敷政事，明扬侧陋，纳谏屏邪，亲理狱讼，褒黜勤怠；牧守有愆，节级相坐；椒掖之内，进御以序；后园鹰犬，悉皆弃之。
现代文：四年五月十五日，神武朝邺，请求魏帝下令百官每月面陈政事，明扬侧陋，纳谏去邪，亲理狱讼，奖勤罚惰；牧守有过，逐级相坐；后宫之内，进御有序；御花园中的鹰犬全部放掉。
English: On the 15th day of the fifth month of the fourth year of the Jinwu Dynasty, Emperor Wei was asked to order the officials to face the political affairs every month, to expose the evils, to remove the evils, to deal with the prisoners, to reward the diligent and to punish the lazy; the shepherds had been there before, and they were seated one by one; within the harem, they entered the imperial palace in an orderly manner; and all the eagle dogs in the imperial garden were released.

古文：六月甲辰，神武还晋阳。
现代文：六月初十，神武回晋阳。
English: On the tenth day of the sixth month, Shenwu returned to Jinyang.

古文：九月，神武西征。
现代文：九月，神武西征。
English: In September, the Western Expedition of Jinmu began.

古文：十月己亥，围西魏仪同三司王思政于玉壁城，欲以致敌，西师不敢出。
现代文：十月初六，在玉壁城包围了西魏仪同三司王思政，接连挑战，西师不出。
English: At the beginning of October 6th, the Western Wei Dynasty and the Three Kingdoms encircled the Three Kingdoms in the Jade Walled City.

古文：十一月癸未，神武以大雪士卒多死，乃班师。
现代文：十一月二十一日，天下大雪，士卒多冻死，神武才下令撤退。
English: On November 21st, heavy snow fell all over the country, and many soldiers froze to death. It was only then that Shenwu ordered a retreat.

古文：武定元年二月壬申，北豫州刺史高慎据武牢西叛。
现代文：武定元年二月十二日，北豫州刺史高慎占据武牢投奔西魏。
English: On February 12th of the first year of Wuding, Gao Sheng, the governor of North Henan Province, occupied Wuding Prison and fled to West Wei.

古文：三月壬辰，周文率众援高慎，围河桥南城。
现代文：三月初二，周文率众援助高慎，包围了河桥南城。
English: On the second day of March, Zhou Wen led the crowd to aid Gao Sheng and encircled the southern city of Hebiao.

古文：戊申，神武大败之于芒山，擒西魏督将已下四百余人，俘斩六万计。
现代文：十八日，神武在芒山打败了周文，擒获西魏督将以下四百余人，俘虏斩杀六万多人。
English: On the 18th, Shenwu defeated Zhou Wenlu in Mangshan, captured the following four hundred people, and killed more than sixty thousand prisoners.

古文：是时军士有盗杀驴者，军令应死，神武弗杀，将至并州决之。
现代文：这时有一个偷杀驴的军士，依军令罪当处死，神武没有杀他，准备带回并州处理。
English: At this time, there was a sergeant who stole and killed a donkey. According to the military order, he was to be put to death. However, Shenwu did not kill him, but prepared to take him back and deal with him.

古文：明日复战，奔西军，告神武所在。
现代文：第二天交战，这个军士逃到西魏军那里，报告了神武的所在。
English: The next day of fighting, the sergeant fled to the West Wei army and reported the whereabouts of Shenwu.

古文：西师尽锐来攻，众溃，神武失马，赫连阳顺下马以授神武，与苍头冯文洛扶上俱走，从者步骑六七人。
现代文：西魏军集中了全部的精锐发动猛攻，打垮了东魏军，神武的坐骑丢失，赫连阳顺把自己的战马送给了神武，和苍头冯文洛将神武扶上马后一块逃跑，跟随的步骑只有六七人。
English: The West Wei army concentrated all the elite to launch an onslaught and defeated the East Wei army. Shenwu's mount was lost. Kherian Yangshun gave his warhorse to Shenwu. He and Cangzhou Feng Wenluo put Shenwu on a horse and fled together. There were only six or seven horsemen following.

古文：追骑至，亲信都督尉兴庆曰： 王去矣，兴庆腰边百箭，足杀百人。 
现代文：敌人的追兵迫近，神武的亲信都督尉兴庆叫道： 王快跑，兴庆身上有箭百支，可以射杀百个敌人。 
English: The enemy's pursuers were approaching, and Shenwu's trusted lieutenant, Xing Qing, shouted: "Run fast, Xing Qing has a hundred arrows on his body and can shoot a hundred enemies."

古文：神武勉之曰： 事济，以尔为怀州，若死，则用尔子。 
现代文：神武鼓励他说： 事成之后，让你做怀州刺史，如果你死了，就用你的儿子。 
English: Shenwu encouraged him, saying, "After the matter is settled, let you be the leader of Waizhou, and if you die, use your son."

古文：兴庆曰： 儿小，愿用兄。 
现代文：兴庆回答说： 儿子还小，就给我的兄弟吧。 
English: Xingqing replied, "My son is still young, let me give him to my brother."

古文：许之。
现代文：神武答应了。
English: The customs officer allowed him to pass through.

古文：兴庆斗，矢尽而死。
现代文：兴庆与敌搏斗，箭尽战死。
English: Xingqing fought with the enemy and died in the battle.

古文：西魏太师贺拔胜以十三骑逐神武，河州刺史刘丰射中其二。
现代文：西魏太师贺拔胜带十三骑追赶神武，河州刺史刘洪徽射死了其中的两个。
English: Western Wei Grand Master He Baxing chased Shenwu with thirteen horsemen, and Hezhou assassin Liu Honghui shot and killed two of them.

古文：胜槊将中神武，段孝先横射胜马殪，遂免。
现代文：贺拔胜的长矛即将刺中神武，段孝先从旁边射倒了贺拔胜的坐骑，遂免于难。
English: He Baxing's spear was about to pierce Shenwu, but Duan Xiao first shot down He Baxing's horse from the side, and was thus spared.

古文：豫、洛二州平。
现代文：平定豫、洛二州。
English: Pingdingyuan, Luo Erzhou.

古文：神武使刘丰追奔，拓地至弘农而还。
现代文：神武派遣刘丰追击敌人，将领土一直扩展到弘农才返回。
English: Shenwu sent Liu Feng to pursue the enemy and expanded the territory all the way to Hongnong before returning.

古文：七月，神武贻周文书，责以杀孝武之罪。
现代文：七月，神武写信给周文，谴责他杀死了孝武帝。
English: In July, Shenwu wrote a letter to Zhou Wen, condemning him for killing Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：八月辛未，魏帝诏神武为相国、录尚书事、大行台，余如故，固辞乃止。
现代文：八月十三日，魏帝诏令神武为相国、录尚书事、大行台，其余官爵依旧，坚决推辞才止。
English: On August 13th, Emperor Wei decreed that Shenwu was a sister country, recorded the records, and made a grand march. The remaining officials and nobles remained the same, and only then did they firmly refuse.

古文：是月，神武命于肆州北山筑城，西自马陵戍，东至士隥，四十日罢。
现代文：是月，神武下令在肆州北山筑城，一直向西抵达马陵戍，向东到土阝登，四十天后才罢止。
English: In the same month, Shenwu ordered the construction of a city in the Beishan Mountains of Wuzhou, reaching as far west as Malingyu and as far east as Tonglu, only to stop forty days later.

古文：十二月己卯，神武朝京师，庚辰，还晋阳。
现代文：十二月二十二日，神武朝京师，二十三日，回晋阳。
English: On December 22nd, Shenwu left for Beijing, and on the 23rd, he returned to Jinyang.

古文：二年三月癸巳，神武巡行冀、定二州，因朝京师。
现代文：二年三月初九，神武巡视冀、定二州，顺道朝京师。
English: On the ninth day of the third month of the second year, Shenwu inspected Hebei and Ding two states, and went to Beijing.

古文：以冬春亢旱，请蠲悬责，赈穷乏，宥死罪以下。
现代文：因冬春干旱，请求减免租税，赈济困乏，宽免死罪以下囚犯。
English: Due to the winter and spring drought, they asked for tax relief, relief for the poor, and pardon for prisoners under the death penalty.

古文：又请授老人板职各有差。四月丙辰，神武还晋阳。
现代文：又请求依照等级授给高龄老人官职。四月初一日，神武回洛阳。
English: On the first day of April, Shenwu returned to Luoyang.

古文：十一月，神武讨山胡，破平之，俘获一万余户口，分配诸州。
现代文：十一月，神武讨山胡，获胜，俘捉一万余户，分往诸州安置。
English: In November, Shenwu won the battle of the mountain goose, captured more than 10,000 households, and resettled them in various states.

古文：三年正月甲午，开府仪同三司尔朱文畅、开府司马任胄、都督郑仲礼、中府主簿李世林、前开府参军房子远等谋贼神武，因十五日夜打簇，怀刃而入，其党薛季孝以告，并伏诛。
现代文：三年正月十七日，开府仪同三司尔朱文畅、开府司马任胄、都督郑仲礼、中府主簿李世林、前开府参军房子远等人企图谋害神武，想借十五夜晚做 打簇 游戏的机会，身藏利刃入府，同伙薛季孝向神武作了报告，这些人全被处死。
English: On the 17th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3

古文：丁未，神武请于并州置晋阳宫，以处配口。
现代文：二十八日，神武请求在并州筑造晋阳宫，以安置配口。
English: On the 28th, Shenwu requested that Jinyang Palace be built in Bianzhou to accommodate the consort.

古文：三月乙未，神武朝邺，丙午，还晋阳。
现代文：三月十六日，神武朝邺，二十六日，回晋阳。
English: On the 16th of March, the imperial court of Jinwu departed, and on the 26th, it returned to Jinyang.

古文：十月丁卯，神武上言，幽、安、定三州北接奚、蠕蠕，请于险要修立城戍以防之，躬自临覆，莫不严固。
现代文：十月二十二日，神武上书，称幽、安、定三州北接奚、蠕蠕，请在险要之处修立城戍进行防守，并亲自监工，因此没有一处不坚固。
English: On October 22nd, Shenwu sent a letter saying, "Yu, An, Ding, Sanzhou, Bejie, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun, Cun,

古文：乙未，神武请释芒山俘桎梏，配以民间寡妇。
现代文：二十六日，神武请求解除芒山俘虏的脚镣手铐，允许他们同民间的寡妇婚配。
English: On the 26th, Shenwu requested that the shackles be removed from Mengshan's captives and that they be allowed to marry local widows.

古文：四年八月癸巳，神武将西伐，自邺会兵于晋阳。
现代文：四年八月二十三日，神武拟将西伐，率兵从邺来到晋阳集中。
English: On August 23rd of the 4th year, Shenwu planned to make a westward march, and led his troops from Handan to concentrate in Jinyang.

古文：殿中将军曹魏祖曰： 不可。今八月西方王，以死气逆生气，为客不利，主人则可。
现代文：殿中将军曹魏祖进谏说： 不行啦，本年八月是西方王，以死气迎生气，对客人不吉利，对主人还可以。
English: Cao Wei Zu Jin Yu, a general in the palace, said, "No, this August is the King of the West, and he will be angry with death, which is unlucky for the guests, but okay for the host."

古文：兵果行，伤大将军。 
现代文：真有行动的话，会伤大将军。 
English: If there is any real action, it will hurt the general.

古文：神武不从。
现代文：神武置之不理。
English: Gao Huan was not adopted.

古文：自东、西魏构兵，邺下每先有黄黑蚁阵斗，占者以为黄者东魏戎衣色，黑者西魏戎衣色，人间以此候胜负。
现代文：自从东、西魏交战后，邺下常有黄黑蚂蚁各自为阵进行搏斗，占卜的人认为黄色是东魏士兵的戎装，黑色为西魏军卒的衣服，民间便以此占验吉凶胜负。
English: Since the East and West Wei Dynasty were at war, there were often yellow and black ants under the ants to fight each other. The soothsayers believed that yellow was the military uniform of the East Wei soldiers and black was the clothing of the West Wei soldiers, and the people used this to predict the outcome of the battle.

古文：是时黄蚁尽死。
现代文：此时，黄蚁全死。
English: At this time, the yellow ants are all dead.

古文：九月，神武围玉壁以挑西师，不敢应。
现代文：九月，神武围困玉壁向西魏军挑战，西师不敢应。
English: In September, Shenwu besieged Yubi and challenged the Western Wei Army. The Western Division did not dare to respond.

古文：西魏晋州刺史韦孝宽守玉壁，城中出铁面，神武使元盗射之，每中其目。
现代文：西魏晋州刺史韦孝宽守玉壁，从城中放出蒙着铁面的人来，神武命令元溢射击，每次都射中了铁面人的眼睛。
English: In the Western Wei Dynasty, the ruler of Jinzhou, Shi Wei Xiaokuan, guarded the Jade Wall and released the man with the iron mask from the city. Shenwu ordered Yuan Yue to shoot, and each time he shot the man with the iron mask in the eye.

古文：用李业兴孤虚术，萃其北。
现代文：采纳术士李业兴的 孤虚法 ，将士众聚集到玉壁城的北边。
English: Adopting the sorcerer Li Ye Xing's "solitary method," he gathered the warriors to the north side of the Jade Walled City.

古文：北，天险也。
现代文：北边为天险。
English: The north side of the city is a very dangerous place, deep in the mountains and valleys.

古文：乃起土山，凿十道，又于东面凿二十一道以攻之。
现代文：于是堆起土山，挖掘十条地道，同时又在东边开挖了二十一条地道作为攻城的手段。
English: As a result, he piled up mounds of earth and dug ten tunnels, while at the same time digging twenty-one tunnels on the east side as a means of attacking the city.

古文：城中无水，汲于汾。神武使移汾，一夜而毕。
现代文：玉壁城内无水，须于汾河取用，神武截断汾河，不让流入城中，一夜功夫就做成了。
English: There was no water in the city of Yubi, so it had to be taken from the Wei River. Shenwu cut off the Wei River, preventing it from flowing into the city, and the work was done overnight.

古文：孝宽夺据土山，顿军五旬，城不拔，死者七万人，聚为一冢。
现代文：韦孝宽将神武兵卒堆造的土山夺了过去。围城五十多天，没能攻下，却死了七万多人，神武下令将死者集中埋在一个大冢中。
English: Wei Xiaokuan overran the mounds of earth built up by Shenwu's soldiers. He besieged the city for more than fifty days, but failed to capture it. However, more than seventy thousand people died. Shenwu ordered the dead to be buried in a large urn.

古文：有星坠于神武营，众驴并鸣，士皆詟惧。
现代文：流星坠落到神武军营，军营中的驴子一齐鸣叫，兵众恐惧。
English: A meteor crashes into the Jinwu army camp. The donkeys in the camp bray in unison, and the soldiers are terrified.

古文：神武有疾。
现代文：神武重病。
English: Jinwu is seriously ill.

古文：十一月庚子，舆疾班师。
现代文：十一月初一，神武抱病乘车返归。
English: On the first day of November, Jinwu fell ill and returned by car.

古文：庚戌，遣太原公洋镇邺。
现代文：十一日，调遣太原公高洋镇守邺城。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Taiyuan Duke Gao Yang was dispatched to defend the city.

古文：辛亥，征世子澄至晋阳。
现代文：十二日，召世子高澄回晋阳。
English: On the 12th, he called his son, Takasumi, back to Jinyang.

古文：有恶乌集亭树，世子使斛律光射杀之。
现代文：有恶鸟栖息在亭树上，高澄指派斛律光用箭射死。
English: A malevolent bird was perched on a tree in the pavilion, and Gaocho assigned the eagle to shoot it dead with an arrow.

古文：己卯，神武以无功，表解都督中外诸军事，魏帝优诏许之。
现代文：十六日，因无战功，神武上表请求解除都督中外诸军事职，魏帝特地下诏批准。
English: On the 16th, because of his lack of war merit, Shenwu requested the table above to relieve the military duties of the governor, and Wei Di Te issued an underground edict for approval.

古文：是时西魏言神武中弩，神武闻之，乃勉坐见诸贵，使斛律金作《敕勒歌》，神武自和之，哀感流涕。
现代文：这时，西魏都说神武围玉壁时被箭射伤，神武听到报告后，就强打精神与诸贵人相见，还让斛律金高唱《敕勒歌》，神武在一旁和唱，唱得泪流满襟。
English: At this time, the Western Wei Dynasty all said that Shenwu was wounded by an arrow when he was surrounding the Jade Wall. After hearing the report, Shenwu forced his spirit to meet with the nobles. He also let Gong Li Jin Gao sing "Song of Zhele," and Shenwu sang along, singing with tears streaming down his face.

古文：侯景素轻世子，尝谓司马子如曰： 王在，吾不敢有异，王无，吾不能与鲜卑小儿共事。 
现代文：侯景一向小看太子，曾对司马子如说： 王在，我不敢有非分之举；王无，我不能与鲜卑小孩共事。 
English: Hou Jing had always looked down on the crown prince, and once said to Sima Zi: "If the king is present, I dare not have a non-nominated person; if the king is absent, I cannot work with a lowly child."

古文：子如掩其口。
现代文：子如赶紧捂住了他的口。
English: Sima Ziru quickly covered Hou Jing's mouth.

古文：至是，世子为神武书召景。
现代文：此时，太子代神武修书征召侯景。
English: At this time, the prince's successor, Jinwu Shuxu, conscripted Houjing.

古文：景先与神武约：得书，书背微点，乃来。
现代文：侯景先前与神武有约，得信函，若信函背面有小黑点，才来看望。
English: Hou Jing previously had an appointment with Shenwu, received a letter, and only came to visit if there was a small black spot on the back of the letter.

古文：书至，无点，景不至。又闻神武疾，遂拥兵自固。
现代文：信到，无约定的记号，侯景未来，又听说神武病重，便拥兵自守。
English: Believing that there was no sign of an agreement, Hou Jing's future, and hearing that Shenwu was seriously ill, they rallied their troops to defend themselves.

古文：神武谓世子曰： 我虽疾，尔面更有余忧色，何也？ 
现代文：神武对太子说： 我虽然病重，可是你的脸上却有更多的忧虑之色，为什么？ 
English: Shenwu said to the prince, "Although I am seriously ill, your face is more worried. Why?

古文：世子未对。
现代文：太子没有回答。
English: The prince did not answer.

古文：又问曰： 岂非忧侯景叛耶？ 
现代文：神武又问： 难道不是担忧侯景反叛？ 答： 是的。 
English: Shenwu also asked: Isn't the worry about Houjing's rebellion? Answer: Yes.

古文：曰： 然。神武曰： 景专制河南十四年矣，常有飞扬跋扈志，顾我能养，岂为汝驾御也！
现代文：神武说： 侯景专制河南十四年，常怀飞扬跋扈之志，只有我能调养，他岂能让你驾驭！
English: Shenwu said, "Houjing has ruled Henan for fourteen years, and has always cherished the aspiration of flying high. I am the only one who can train him. How can he be controlled by you?"

古文：今四方未定，勿遽发哀。
现代文：如今天下未定，千万不要匆匆发布我死的消息。
English: Right now, the world is not stable. If I die, don't go into mourning right away.

古文：厍狄干鲜卑老公，斛律金敕勒老公，并性遒直，终不负汝。
现代文：厍狄干是鲜卑老人，斛律金为敕勒老人，两人性格耿直，是不会背弃你的。
English: Zhi Dikang is a humble old man, Bao Li Jin is an arrogant old man. Both of them are straightforward and will not betray you.

古文：可朱浑道元、刘丰生远来投我，必无异心。
现代文：可朱浑道元、刘丰生从远道来投奔我，无疑没有异心。
English: But Zhu Hun Dogen and Liu Fengsheng came from far away to join me, no doubt with the same intention.

古文：贺拔焉过儿朴实无罪过。
现代文：贺拔焉过儿朴实而且很少有过失。
English: He Banyan is down-to-earth and rarely makes mistakes.

古文：潘乐本作道人，心和厚，汝兄弟当得其力。
现代文：潘相乐原本是个道人，心地善良而且宽厚，我们弟兄会得他的帮助。
English: Pan Xiangle was originally a Taoist, kind-hearted and generous, our brothers will get his help.

古文：韩轨少戆，宜宽借之。
现代文：韩轨少戆，应该宽容。
English: Han Rong is a bit of a fool. You should treat him with tolerance.

古文：彭乐心腹难得，宜防护之。
现代文：彭相乐难得真心实意，应该提防着他。
English: It's hard to guess what's in Peng Le's heart, so you should beware of him.

古文：少堪敌侯景者唯有慕容绍宗，我故不贵之，留以与汝，宜深加殊礼，委以经略。 
现代文：稍微能与侯景抗衡的只有慕容绍宗，因此我不让他富贵，留下给你，你必须殊礼相待，委以重任。 
English: Only Murong Shaozong can slightly compete with Houjing, so I will not let him be rich and leave it to you. You must treat him with special courtesy and entrust him with important tasks.

古文：五年正月朔，日蚀，神武曰： 日蚀其为我耶，死亦何恨。 
现代文：五年正月初一，日蚀，神武说： 日蚀是为了我哟，死也没有什么遗憾的了。 
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year, the solar eclipse, Shenwu said: The solar eclipse is for me, and there is nothing to regret about death.

古文：丙午，陈启于魏帝。
现代文：初八日，向魏帝呈送书启。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he presented Emperor Wei with a copy of the book.

古文：是日，崩于晋阳，时年五十二，秘不发丧。
现代文：是日，崩于晋阳，时年五十二岁，秘不发丧。
English: He died in Jinyang on the same day, at the age of fifty-two.

古文：六月壬午，魏帝于东堂举哀，三日，制缌衰。诏凶礼依汉大将军霍光、东平王苍故事；赠假黄钺、使持节、相国、都督中外诸军事、齐王玺绂，辒辌车、黄屋、左纛、前后羽葆、鼓吹、轻车、介士，兼备九锡殊礼，谥献武王。
现代文：六月十七日，魏帝在东堂致哀，第三天，制作丧服，诏令丧礼依照汉大将军霍光、东平王苍规格办理；赠假黄钺、使持节、相国、都督中外诸军事、齐王玺绶，赐车京车、黄屋、左纛、前后羽葆、鼓吹、轻车、介士，兼备九锡殊礼，谥号献武王。
English: On June 17th, Emperor Wei offered his condolences in the East Hall. On the third day, the funeral clothes were made, and the funeral ceremony was carried out according to the specifications of the Han Dynasty General Huo Guang and Dongping Wang Cang; the fake Huang Xuan, the Envoy Festival, the neighboring countries, the military and foreign governors, the Qi Wang Xuan, the Beijing car, the Huangya, the Zuo Xuan, the front and rear feather car, the propaganda, the light car, the attendant, and the Jiuxi special gift, the nickname of King Wu.

古文：八月甲申，葬于邺西北漳水之西，魏帝临送于紫陌。
现代文：八月二十日，葬在邺西北漳水的西侧，魏帝送丧至紫陌。
English: On August 20th, he was buried on the west side of Surabaya, northwest of Handan. Emperor Wei was sent to Shimo.

古文：天保初，追崇为献武帝，庙号太祖，陵曰义平。
现代文：天保初年，追封为献武帝，庙号太祖，陵为义平。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was given the posthumous title of Emperor Xianwu, the temple name was Taizu, and the mausoleum was Yiping.

古文：天统元年，改谥神武皇帝，庙号高祖。
现代文：天统元年，改谥号神武皇帝，庙号高祖。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Tenmu, he changed his name to Emperor Shenwu and his temple name to Gaozu.

古文：神武性深密高岸，终日俨然，人不能测。机权之际，变化若神。至于军国大略，独运怀抱，文武将吏，罕有预之。
现代文：神武性情深沉缜密傲岸严肃，整天表情庄重，别人不能揣测他的内心，策划谋略的时候，变化多端如同神人，至于军事和国家的重大方针，独到地运用自己的思考，文官武将很少能预知。
English: The nature of a samurai is profound, he is proud and serious, his expression is solemn all day long, others cannot speculate on his heart, when planning and strategizing, he is as changeable as a godman. As for the military and national major policies, civil officials and military commanders can rarely predict by using their own thinking.

古文：统驭军众，法令严肃，临敌制胜，策出无方。
现代文：统领指挥军队，法令严肃，面对敌人夺取胜利，制定策略没有一定之规。
English: There are no set rules for leading and commanding an army, for enacting laws and regulations, for winning victory in the face of the enemy, and for formulating strategies.

古文：听断昭察，不可欺犯。
现代文：听讼断案明察是非，不可欺蒙。
English: The hearing and adjudication of the case shall be transparent and shall not be deceived.

古文：知人好士，全护勋旧。
现代文：善于鉴识人的才能喜欢和士人交往，周全保护立遇功勋的人。
English: He is good at recognizing people's talents, likes to interact with scholars, and thoroughly protects those who have made meritorious contributions.

古文：性周给，每有文教，常殷勤款悉，指事论心，不尚绮靡。
现代文：性格周密善辩，每当有礼乐教化的事情，常常关注备至，阐述事理倾心交谈，不崇尚华丽奢侈。
English: He is a meticulous and well-spoken person. Whenever there is a matter of etiquette and music education, he often pays attention to the preparation, explains the facts and engages in heart-to-heart conversation, and does not advocate luxury.

古文：擢人授任，在于得才，苟其所堪，乃至拔于厮养，有虚声无实者，稀见任用。
现代文：提拔人员授予官职，在于得到人才，如果他能够胜任，甚至到奴仆中选拔，徒有虚名而无实际才能的，很少得到任用。
English: To promote a man to an office is to obtain a man of talent, if he be capable, and even to select him from among slaves; but he who has a false name and no real talent is seldom appointed.

古文：诸将出讨，奉行方略，罔不克捷，违失指画，多致奔亡。
现代文：各将领出外征讨，照着他的策略做的，无不取胜报捷，违背他的指挥的，大多导致失败逃亡。
English: The generals led foreign expeditions, and those who followed his strategy invariably won victories, while those who disobeyed his orders mostly failed and fled.

古文：雅尚俭素，刀剑鞍勒无金玉之饰。
现代文：十分崇尚俭朴，刀剑鞍辔上没有金玉的饰物。
English: Gao Huan usually prefers to be frugal and simple. The swords, saddles and bridles he uses are not decorated with gold and silver jewelry.

古文：少能剧饮，自当大任，不过三爵。
现代文：年轻时酒量很大，自从担当重任后，每次不超过三杯。
English: A heavy drinker in his youth, he has not had more than three drinks since taking office.

古文：居家如官。
现代文：住在家裹就和在官府一样。
English: Living at home is just like living in a government office.

古文：仁恕爱士。
现代文：仁慈宽容地爱护士人。
English: Love the nurse with benevolence and tolerance.

古文：始，范阳卢景裕以明经称，鲁郡韩毅以工书显，咸以谋逆见擒，并蒙恩置之第馆，教授诸子。
现代文：开始范阳人卢景裕以明晓经义受人称道，叠郡人垄堑以擅长书法声名显扬，他们都因谋反被抓，一并蒙受恩德安置在府宅裹，教神武的儿子们。
English: At the beginning, Lu Jingyu from Fanyang was praised for his knowledge of scripture and righteousness, and Ren Zheng from Jiaxing County was famous for his proficiency in calligraphy. Both of them were arrested for plotting rebellion, and together they were placed in a mansion and taught the sons of Shenwu.

古文：其文武之士尽节所事，见执获而不罪者甚多。
现代文：他的文人武士尽心去做事，因遇错被抓起来而不加惩罚的有很多。
English: His literati samurai do their best to do things, and there are many who are arrested without punishment for making a mistake.

古文：故遐迩归心，皆思效力。
现代文：所以远近都心悦诚服地归附他，都想为他出力效命。
English: Therefore, people from near and far have wholeheartedly adhered to him and want to work hard for him.

古文：至南威梁国，北怀蠕蠕，吐谷浑、阿至罗咸所招纳，获其力用，规略远矣。
现代文：以至于南面慑服凿国，北面安抚竖坚，丝主避、厘至罗全都招引接纳，得到他们的人力物用，规划谋略考虑得远啊。
English: So much so that the south is deterred from subjugating the country, the north is appeased, the north is appeased, the south is avoided, and the north is accepted, and their manpower and material resources are used, and the planning and strategy are far from being considered.

