古文：柳公绰，字宽，京兆华原人。
现代文：柳公绰字宽，京兆华原县人。
English: Liu Gongpo has a broad vocabulary and is from Beijing's Hualien County.

古文：始生三日，伯父子华曰： 兴吾门者，此儿也。 
现代文：才出生三天，他的伯父子华说： 光大我柳家门庭的，是这个儿子。 
English: Just three days after his birth, his uncle Zihua said: "This son is the shining star of my Liu family."

古文：因小字起之。
现代文：因而小时的字叫起之。
English: Thus the word hour is evoked.

古文：幼孝友，性质严重，起居皆有礼法。
现代文：年幼时，对父母孝顺，对兄弟友爱，性格严整，品质庄重，行为都有礼法。
English: When they are young, they are filial to their parents and fraternal to their brothers. Their character is strict, their quality is solemn, and their behavior is respectful.

古文：属文典正，不读非圣书。
现代文：写的文章文雅不俗，不是圣贤的书不读。
English: The articles written are elegant, not the books of sages do not read.

古文：举贤良方正直言极谏，补校书郎。
现代文：推荐为贤良方正直言极谏科，任命为校书郎。
English: He was recommended as a virtuous and honest person, and was appointed as a school scribe.

古文：间一年，再登其科，授渭南尉。
现代文：隔了一年，第二次考中这个科，任命为渭南县尉。
English: A year later, he passed the second examination in this subject and was appointed as the lieutenant of Yinan County.

古文：岁歉馑，其家虽给，而每饭不过一器，岁丰乃复。
现代文：荒年歉收，他家虽然丰衣足食，但每餐饭他不超过一碗，到丰年才恢复饭量。
English: In years of poor harvests, although his family was well-fed, he did not eat more than one bowl of rice per meal, and only resumed eating in years of plenty.

古文：或问之，答曰： 四方病饥，独能饱乎？ 
现代文：有人问他，他回答说： 四方的人都困苦饥饿，我能一个人吃饱吗？ 
English: When he was asked about it, he replied: "People in all four directions are poor and hungry. Can I alone eat my fill?

古文：累迁开州刺史，地接夷落，寇常逼其城，吏曰： 兵力不能制，愿以右职署渠帅。 
现代文：经连续提升，任开州刺史。开州土地连着夷族部落，敌军经常逼近开州城袭扰，他属下的一个官员说： 我们的兵力不能阻止他们，希望暂时任他们的首领担任重要官职。 
English: An official under him said, "Our troops can't stop them, but we hope to temporarily appoint their leaders to important official positions."

古文：公绰曰： 若同恶邪？
现代文：公绰说 ：你与他们同流合污吗？
English: He said: "Are you in cahoots with them?

古文：何可挠法！ 
现代文：怎么能违犯法律？ 
English: How can you break the law?

古文：立诛之，寇亦引去。
现代文：立即杀了他，敌军也就领军退走了。
English: He was killed instantly, and the enemy army retreated in retreat.

古文：迁侍御史、吏部员外郎。
现代文：公绰被提升为侍御史、吏部员外郎。
English: Kinnosuke was promoted to the position of Samurai-goshi (chamberlain to the Shogun) and the position of a member of the administrative department, Wairo.

古文：时武元衡节度剑南，与裴度俱为判官，尤相引重。
现代文：当时武元衡任剑南节度使，公绰与裴度都任节度府判官，武元衡特别推重他们。
English: At that time, Wu Yuanheng was appointed as the Jiannan Festival envoy, and both Guozhu and Baidu were appointed as the judges of the Festival, and Wu Yuanheng especially promoted them.

古文：召为吏部郎中。
现代文：召回朝任吏部郎中。
English: He was recalled to the Imperial Court as a junior member of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：宪宗喜武功，且数出游畋，公绰奏《太医箴》以讽曰： 天布寒暑，不私于人。
现代文：宪宗爱好武功，并且多次外出游猎，柳公绰上奏章《太医箴》来讽谏皇帝，说： 上天排定寒暑次序，对人不讲私情。
English: Xianzong was fond of martial arts, and went out hunting many times. Liu Gong wrote the musical composition "The Great Physician" to satirize the emperor, saying: Heaven has arranged the order of cold and heat, and does not talk about personal feelings to people.

古文：品类既一，高卑以均。人谨好爱，能保其身。清静无瑕，辉光以新。
现代文：品类既然完全，用高贵低贱平衡，人要限制嗜好，才能保护身体，清静没有污染，光色才会鲜明。
English: Since the category is complete, it is balanced with nobility and lowliness. People need to limit their hobbies to protect their bodies. If there is no pollution, the light color will be bright.

古文：寒暑满天地，浃肌肤于外；好爱在耳目，诱心知于内。
现代文：严寒暑热满天地，在外面感染肌肤，嗜好偏爱经耳目，对内诱惑心智。
English: Extreme cold and heat fill the world, infecting the skin on the outside, favoring hobbies through the ears and eyes, and tempting the mind on the inside.

古文：端洁为堤，奔射犹败。
现代文：品行端正是堤防，追欢寻乐会溃决。
English: The end of the line is the dike, and the pursuit of pleasure will end.

古文：气行无间，隙不在大。
现代文：元气运行不闲，裂隙漏洞不在很大。
English: The energy is not idle, and the cracks are not large.

古文：谓天高矣，氛蒙晦之；谓地厚矣，横流溃之。
现代文：说天很高吧，云遮雾盖使它昏暗；说地很厚吧，洪水将它冲得糟乱。
English: Say the sky is high, and clouds obscure it with a veil of mist; say the earth is thick, and floods devastate it.

古文：饮食资身，过则生患；衣服称德，侈则生慢。
现代文：饮食滋养身体，过度享受就会生病。穿衣打扮表现人的品德，华丽奢侈就会产生懈怠。
English: Eating nourishes the body, but over-indulgence will make you sick. Dressing up shows one's character, and opulent luxury will produce slackness.

古文：唯过与侈，心必随之。
现代文：只要过度享乐和奢侈，就一定会使人心智放纵。
English: As long as there is excessive pleasure and luxury, it will certainly make people indulge their minds.

古文：气与心流，疾乃伺之。
现代文：元气和心神丧失，疾病就会乘虚而入。
English: If you lose your energy and spirit, illness will take advantage of the situation.

古文：畋游恣乐，流情荡志。
现代文：狩猎游乐没有节制，就会丧失志气。
English: If hunting and recreation are not controlled, people will lose their morale.

古文：驰骋劳形，叱吒伤气。
现代文：骑马奔驰损耗身体，呼喝就损伤元气。
English: Riding a horse consumes the body, and shouting damages one's vitality.

古文：不养其外，前脩所忌。
现代文：不保养肌肤，是前面修养方法忌讳的。
English: It is taboo not to take care of one's skin, as is the case with the previous cultivation methods.

古文：人乘气生，嗜欲以萌。气离有患，气完则成。
现代文：人凭着元气生存，嗜好欲念从它产生，元气离开身体就会有病有灾，元气充盈就心舒体泰。
English: People rely on vitality to survive, and cravings arise from it. If the vitality leaves the body, there will be illness and disaster. If the vitality is full, the heart will be comfortable.

古文：巧必丧真，智实诱情。
现代文：机巧必定会丧失真诚，智慧实在会诱导性情。
English: Cleverness inevitably loses sincerity, and wisdom actually induces temperament.

古文：医之上者，理于未然。
现代文：医生的最好的对策，应该防患于未然。
English: A doctor's best course of action is to prevent problems in the first place.

古文：患居虑后，防处事先。
现代文：弊病在于生了病才考虑防治，防治应当在生病之前才是正确的。
English: The drawback is that prevention and control should be considered only after getting sick, and prevention and control should be correct before getting sick.

古文：心静乐行，体和道全。
现代文：心情安适沉静又喜欢运动，就会身体和顺道德完美。
English: If you are calm and peaceful and like sports, your body and morality will be perfect.

古文：克施万物，以享亿年。
现代文：能施舍于万物，靠此能享受万年寿命。
English: By being able to give charity to all things, one can enjoy a life of a thousand years.

古文：圣人在上，各有攸处。臣司太医，敢告诸御。 
现代文：圣人高高在上，各有各的归宿，我执掌太医之职，斗胆报告皇上。 
English: Saints are high above, each has its own destination. I am in charge of the post of the Imperial Physician, and I dare to report to the Emperor.

古文：天子高其才，遣使谓曰： 卿言 气行无间，隙不在大 ，爱朕深者，当置之坐隅。 
现代文：皇帝认为他是高才，派使者对他说： 你说的 元气运行不闲，裂隙漏洞不在大 ，这是对我的厚爱，应该把它作为座右铭。 
English: The emperor thought he was a great talent and sent an envoy to him saying, "What you said about your energy not being idle and the cracks not being large, this is your deep love for me, and it should be your motto.

古文：逾月，拜御史中丞。
现代文：过了一个月，任命公绰为御史中丞。
English: A month later, he was appointed to the post of Goshi chujo.

古文：公绰本与裴垍善，李吉甫复当国，出为湖南观察使。
现代文：柳公绰本来与裴耹交情好，李吉甫再次主持朝政，让公绰出任湖南观察使。
English: Liu Gongzhu was originally on good terms with Pei Xuan. Li Jifu once again presided over the imperial court and appointed Gongzhu as the Hunan observation envoy.

古文：以地卑湿，不可迎养，求分司东都，不听。
现代文：因湖南潮湿荒僻，不能迎养父母，请求在东都洛阳设立办事处，没有批准。
English: Due to the wet and desolate Hunan, unable to support his parents, he requested to set up an office in the eastern capital Luoyang, but it was not approved.

古文：后徙鄂岳观察使。
现代文：后来调任鄂岳观察使。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of E-Mount observation envoy.

古文：时方讨吴元济，诏发鄂岳卒五千，隶安州刺史李听。
现代文：当时正征讨吴元济，皇帝命令征调五千鄂岳地区的士兵，隶属安州刺史李听。
English: At that time, Wu Yuanji was being conscripted, and the emperor ordered the conscription of five thousand soldiers from the Eryu region, belonging to Anzhou Jishi Li He.

古文：公绰曰： 朝廷谓吾儒生不知兵邪！ 
现代文：公绰说 ：朝廷说我是儒生，不懂得行军打仗？ 
English: He said, "The imperial court says I am a Confucian, but I don't know how to march and fight.

古文：即请自行，许之。
现代文：就请求亲自带兵上前线，朝廷批准了。
English: The Imperial Court approved his request to personally lead soldiers to the front.

古文：引兵度江，抵安州，听以军礼迎谒。
现代文：带兵渡过长江到达安州，李听用军队的礼节迎接并会见他。
English: After leading the soldiers across the Yangtze River to Anzhou, Li Xun used the etiquette of the army to greet and meet him.

古文：公绰谓曰： 公所以属鞬负弩，岂非兵事邪？
现代文：公绰说： 您之所以背弓插箭，难道不是因为战争吗？
English: "Wasn't it because of the war that you decided to go into politics?

古文：若褫戎容，则两郡守耳，何所统壹哉？
现代文：如果去掉戎装，不过是两个郡守罢了，怎么统一指挥呢？
English: If the military uniforms are removed and there are only two county governors, how can there be a unified command?

古文：以公世将晓兵，吾且欲署职，以兵法从事。 
现代文：因为您家世代是将帅，懂得兵法，我只想在您的府衙任职，按军队的法规跟随您服务。 李听说 ：听从您的吩咐。 
English: Because your family's generation is a generation of generals and knows the laws of war, I only want to serve in your government and follow you to serve according to the laws of the army.Li Heard: Obey your orders.

古文：听曰： 唯命。 即以都知兵马使、中军先锋、行营都虞候三牒授之，选兵六千属焉，戒诸校曰： 行营事一决都将。 
现代文：就把都知兵马使、中军先锋、行营都虞候三张任命书交给他，挑选六千精兵交他统帅，告诫众校尉说： 行营事务一切由都将决断。 
English: He gave him three letters of appointment for the messenger of the Tudor soldiers and horses, the vanguard of the Chinese army, and the commander of the encampment, selected six thousand elite soldiers and gave them to him as commander-in-chief, and warned the captains: "All matters related to the encampment will be decided by me."

古文：听被用畏威，遂尽力，当时服其知权。
现代文：李听因为外表威严，因此都很尽力，当时的人都佩服他会运用权力领导部下。
English: Li He listened because his appearance was majestic, so he did his best. At that time, people admired that he would use power to lead his subordinates.

古文：军出，公绰数省问其家，疾病生死厚给之，妇人敖荡者，沉之江。
现代文：军队出发，公绰多次到下级官兵家探访慰问，害病、生孩子、死了人，都给很多抚恤金，妻子嬉游放荡的，就把她沉到江里去。
English: When the army was deployed, the general paid many visits to the homes of lower-ranking officers and soldiers to offer condolences. Those who fell ill, gave birth to children, or died were all given a lot of pensions. If a wife went on a spree, he would sink her in the river.

古文：军中感服曰： 中丞为我知家事，敢不死战！ 
现代文：官兵都很感激并且服从他，说： 中丞为我们操持家事，还能不拼命作战吗？ 
English: The officers and soldiers were all grateful and obeyed him, saying, "Chung Joo manages our household chores for us, how can he not fight hard?

古文：故鄂军每战辄克。
现代文：所以鄂军每战必胜。
English: Therefore, the Hun army is sure to win every battle.

古文：元和十一年，为李道古代还，除给事中。
现代文：元和十一年，李道古代替了公绰的职务，公绰回到京都，任命为给事中。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, Li Daodu took the place of Gongchao, and Gongchao returned to Kyoto and was appointed to be in charge of affairs.

古文：李师道平，遣宣谕郓州，复命，拜京兆尹。
现代文：李师道叛乱平定后，派他到郓州宣读朝廷的文告，回朝复命，任命为京兆尹。
English: After Li Shidao's rebellion was put down, he sent him to Zhangzhou to read out the imperial proclamation and reply to the imperial command, and he was appointed as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：方赴府，有神策校乘马不避者，即时搒死。
现代文：公绰正去府衙途中，有一个神策军军校骑马不回避，立即用棍打死。
English: While he was on his way to the capital, he was beaten to death with a stick by a horseback rider from the Shinsaku Military Academy.

古文：帝怒其专杀，公绰曰： 此非独试臣，乃轻陛下法。 
现代文：皇帝因为他不经请示而杀人发了怒。公绰说 ：这不只是称量我的权威，更是轻视陛下的法规。 
English: The emperor was enraged that he had killed without being asked, and the duke said, "This is not only a measure of my authority, but also a contempt of your majesty's law."

古文：帝曰： 既死，不以闻，可乎？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 已经处死了，不向我报告，对吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "He has been executed, but he won't report it to me, right?"

古文：公绰曰： 臣不当奏。在市死，职金吾；在坊死，职左右巡使。 
现代文：公绰说： 这事不应该我报告，在大街上打死了人，向上报告是金吾的职责；在街坊间打死了人，向上报告是左右巡使的职责。 
English: Gongpo said, "I should not have reported this. I killed someone on the street, and it is Kingo's duty to report it to the higher authorities. I killed someone in the neighborhood, and it is the duty of the left and right guards to report it to the higher authorities."

古文：帝乃解。
现代文：皇帝才不追究。
English: That's when Taizong lost his temper.

古文：以母丧去官。服除，为刑部侍郎，领盐铁转运使，转兵部，兼御史大夫。
现代文：公绰因为守母亲的丧辞去官职，守丧期满，任刑部侍郎，兼任盐铁转运使。后又调兵部侍郎兼任御史大夫。
English: Due to the death of his mother, he resigned from his post, and at the end of his term of mourning, he was appointed as the attendant of the criminal department, and concurrently served as the salt and iron transportation envoy. Later, he was transferred to the attendant of the military department and concurrently served as the chief historian.

古文：长庆元年，复为京兆尹。
现代文：长庆元年，公绰又任京兆尹。
English: In the first year of Changqing, Gongpu was also appointed as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：时幽、镇用兵，补置诸将，使驿系道。
现代文：当时幽州、镇州在交战，任免诸将领，使者骑着驿马在路上接连不断。
English: At that time, Yuzhou and Zhenzhou were at war, generals were appointed and dismissed, and envoys rode horses on the road one after another.

古文：公绰奏曰： 比馆递匮乏，驿置多阙。敕使衣绯紫者，所乘至三四十骑；黄绿者，不下十数。吏不得视券，随口辄供。驿马尽，乃掠夺民马。怨嗟惊扰，行李殆绝。
现代文：公绰上奏说 ：经考查，馆驿邮传缺乏，差很多驿马，穿着红色和紫色服装的宫廷使者，骑的驿马达到三、四十匹，穿黄色和绿色服装的使者，骑的驿马也不下十匹，驿官不能查验证件，宫廷使者随口向馆驿索要供给，驿马用完了，就抢民间的马匹，百姓怨恨他们惊扰，路上行人差不多断绝了。
English: The eunuch said: After investigation, there was a shortage of postage stamps and a shortage of horses. The courtiers in red and purple robes rode thirty to forty horses, the messengers in yellow and green robes rode no less than ten horses, the eunuchs could not check the certificates, and the courtiers asked the courtiers for supplies. When the courtiers ran out of horses, they robbed the people's horses. The people resented them for disturbing them, and pedestrians on the road were almost cut off.

古文：请著定限，以息其弊。 
现代文：请求朝廷规定使者数额，用来制止弊端。 
English: Request the Imperial Court to stipulate the amount of the envoy to be used to stop the abuses.

古文：有诏中书条检定数，由是吏得纾罪。
现代文：皇帝又命令中书省制定法规，因此驿官解除了处罚。
English: The emperor also ordered the Central Book Ministry to formulate regulations, so the eunuch was relieved of punishment.

古文：宦官共恶疾之。
现代文：宦官都憎恨他。
English: The eunuchs hated him.

古文：改吏部侍郎，迁御史大夫。
现代文：公绰被改任吏部侍郎，升任御史大夫。
English: He was transferred to the position of a chamberlain in the cadre department and was promoted to the position of a goshi taifu.

古文：韩弘病，自河中还，诏百官问疾，弘遣子辞不能见，公绰谓曰： 上使百司省候，是谓异礼，宜力疾以见公卿，安可卧令子姓传言耶？ 
现代文：韩弘病重，从河中郡回京，皇帝命令百官去探望他，他派儿子推辞说病重不能接待。公绰对他说： 皇帝派百官来问候你，这是特殊的礼遇，应该支撑病体去会见公卿，怎么能卧病在床派儿辈传达一句话就了事呢？ 
English: Han Hong was seriously ill and returned to Beijing from Hechong County. The emperor ordered a hundred officials to visit him. He sent his son to decline, saying that he was seriously ill and could not receive him. The courtier said to him: The emperor sent a hundred officials to greet you. This is a special courtesy. You should support your sick body to meet the nobles. How can you be sick in bed and send your children to convey a single word?

古文：弘惧，挟扶以出。
现代文：韩弘害怕，让人扶着出来面谢百官。
English: Han Hong was afraid, so he asked someone to help him come out and thank the officials.

古文：改礼部尚书，以祖讳换左丞。
现代文：公绰改任礼部尚书，因避祖父的讳改任左丞。
English: He was assigned to the ceremonial department of the Imperial Household Agency, but because of his grandfather's disapproval, he was reassigned to the office of the Left Junior Secretary.

古文：俄检校户部尚书、山南东道节度使。
现代文：不久，任命为检校户部尚书、山南东道节度使，巡视到邓县考察刑事案件审判情况。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the inspector of the Household Department of Shangshu, the host of the Shannan Festival, and visited Deng County to inspect the trial of criminal cases.

古文：行部至邓，县吏有纳贿、舞文二人同系狱，县令以公绰素持法，谓必杀贪者，公绰判曰： 赃吏犯法，法在；奸吏坏法，法亡。 
现代文：县有两个县吏都囚禁在狱中，其中一个接受贿赂，一个玩弄法律条文行奸使诈。县令因为公绰一向秉公执法，认为一定会杀死贪污的县吏。公绰断案说 ：贪污的县吏犯法，法律还在；奸猾的县吏毁法，法律就灭亡了。 
English: There are two county officials in the county who are both imprisoned in prison, one of whom accepted bribes, and one of whom played with the provisions of the law and committed treachery. Because the county government has always enforced the law impartially, it believes that it will definitely kill the corrupt county officials. The public verdict said: the corrupt county officials break the law, the law is still there; the treacherous county officials destroy the law, and the law will perish.

古文：诛舞文者。
现代文：就杀死了玩弄法律行奸使诈的县吏。
English: and killed the county official who was playing with the law and committing treachery.

古文：其厩马害圉人，公绰杀之。
现代文：他马厩里的马咬伤踢伤养马的仆人，公绰就杀掉了那匹马。
English: The horse in his stable bit and kicked a servant who was tending the horse, and the servant killed the horse.

古文：或言良马可爱，曰： 安有良马而害人乎？ 
现代文：有人说这是一匹良马，公绰说 ：哪有良马而伤害人的呢？ 
English: Some people say it's a good horse, but I say: what good horse would hurt someone?

古文：宝历元年，就迁检校左仆射。
现代文：宝历元年，公绰就任检校左仆射。
English: In the first year of the Horyo era, Gongpo was appointed as the inspector of the school.

古文：牛僧孺罢政事，为武昌节度使，公绰具军容伏谒，左右谏止之，答曰： 奇章始去台宰，方镇重宰相，所以尊朝廷也。 
现代文：牛僧孺被罢免了宰相，出任武昌节度使。公绰用军中仪仗和礼节参见他，亲信的幕僚劝阻他，公绰回答说： 奇章公才离开宰相职位，方镇尊重宰相，就是尊重朝廷呀！ 
English: Niu Xiangyao was removed from the post of prime minister and appointed as the envoy of the Wuchang Festival. Gongyao used military honor and etiquette to see him off. His trusted staff members dissuaded him. Gongyao replied, "Kizhang Gongcai has just left the post of prime minister. If Fangzhen respects the prime minister, it means he respects the imperial court!"

古文：有道士献丹药，问所从来，曰： 自蓟门。 
现代文：有一个道士进献丹药，公绰问是从哪里得到的，道士回答说： 在蓟门。 
English: A Taoist priest brought in a gift of herbal medicine, and when asked where he got it, the priest replied, "At the gate."

古文：时硃克融方叛，遽曰： 惜哉，药自贼境来，虽验何益！ 
现代文：当时朱克融刚叛乱，公绰立即说： 可惜呀！药是从叛贼境内得到的，即使灵验有什么用处？ 
English: At that time, Zhu Ronggang rebelled, and the official immediately said: What a pity! The medicine was obtained from the territory of the traitors, even if it is effective, what is the use?

古文：即弃药而逐道士。
现代文：就倒掉丹药，驱逐了道士。
English: and expelled the Taoists.

古文：入为刑部尚书，俄拜邠宁节度使。
现代文：公绰回朝廷任刑部尚书，不久又任命为宁节度使。
English: Gongpo returned to the imperial court as the secretary of the Department of Criminal Law, and was soon appointed as the special envoy of the Ning Dynasty.

古文：先是神策诸镇列屯部中，不听本道节制，故虏得窥间。公绰论所宜，因诏屯营缓急悉受节度。
现代文：前段时间，神策军驻扎在各军镇的部队，不听驻地军政长官的命令，指挥不动，所以敌军能钻空子袭扰边塞。
English: Some time ago, the troops of the Shen Zhe Army stationed in each military town did not listen to the orders of the resident military and political superintendent, and the command did not move, so the enemy was able to drill holes and attack the border fortress.

古文：复为刑部尚书。
现代文：公绰又回朝任刑部尚书。
English: Gongpo returned to the imperial court and was appointed to the Ministry of Justice.

古文：京兆狱有姑鞭妇至死者，府欲杀之。
现代文：京兆府狱中关押的一个婆婆用鞭子打死了媳妇，京兆府要将她判处死刑。
English: A mother-in-law detained in a prison in Keizhao Prefecture killed her daughter-in-law with a whip, and Keizhao Prefecture wants to sentence her to death.

古文：公绰曰： 尊殴卑，非斗也；且子在，以妻而戮其母，不顺。 
现代文：公绰说 ：尊长打晚辈，不是斗殴，况且她的儿子在，因妻子而杀死他的母亲，在礼法上说不过去。 
English: He said: "Respecting elders and beating younger generations is not a brawl, moreover, her son is present, and killing his mother because of his wife is not acceptable in etiquette.

古文：遂减论。
现代文：因此从宽判刑。
English: Therefore, the sentence is lenient.

古文：太和四年，为河东节度。遭岁恶，撙节用度，辍宴饮，衣食与士卒钧。
现代文：大和四年，公绰出任河东节度使，碰到荒年，他节约开支，停止宴请，吃穿与士兵一样。
English: In the four years of the Great Harmony, Gongpo served as the Hedong Festival envoy. In the face of a lean year, he saved expenses, stopped banquets, and ate and dressed like a soldier.

古文：北虏遣梅禄将军李畅以马万匹来市，所过皆厚劳，饬兵以防袭夺。
现代文：北方的部族派梅禄将军李畅赶一万匹马来做生意，所经过的地方都热情地招待他，公绰又命令部队，防止部队袭夺马匹。
English: The northern tribes sent the Mero general Li Chang to catch 10,000 horses to do business, and all the places he passed were warmly invited to him. The general also ordered the troops to prevent the troops from attacking and seizing horses.

古文：至太原，公绰独使牙将单骑劳问，待以至意，辟牙门，令译官引谒，宴不加常。畅德之，出涕，徐驱道中，不妄驰猎。
现代文：李畅到达太原，公绰只派牙将一人一骑去慰劳，用极友好的态度接待他，设立衙门，命令翻译官引导他参见公绰，宴席不超过常规，李畅感激他的恩德，流下眼泪，马群在路上慢慢行进，不随便奔驰打猎。
English: Li Chang arrived in Taiyuan. The governor sent only one horse to comfort him, received him with a very friendly attitude, set up a gate, ordered the translator to guide him to see the governor, the banquet did not exceed the normal, Li Chang was grateful for his kindness, shed tears, the horses slowly marched on the road, and did not casually gallop to hunt.

古文：陉北有沙陀部，勇武喜斗，为九姓、六州所畏。
现代文：陉北有沙陀部族，勇武喜好争斗，九姓、六州等部族都怕它。
English: In the north of Shandong Province, there is the Shado tribe. They are brave and like to fight. The Nine Families, Six Provinces and other tribes are afraid of them.

古文：公绰召其酋硃邪执宜，治废栅十一，募兵三千留屯塞上，其妻、母来太原者，令夫人饮食问遗之。沙陀感恩，故悉力保鄣。
现代文：公绰召来沙陀酋长宁邪执宜，修理废弃的十一处塞栅，招募三千兵留驻在塞栅上，他的妻子、母亲到太原，公绰让夫人慰问和招待他们，并赠送礼品，沙陀部族感谢他的恩德，所以全力保护边塞。
English: He summoned the chief of Shatou, Ning Yuxi, to come and repair the eleven abandoned barricades and recruit three thousand soldiers to stay on the barricades. His wife and mother came to Taiyuan, and he asked his wife to console and invite them and give gifts. The Shatou tribe thanked him for his kindness, so he did his best to protect the border fortress.

古文：以病乞代，授兵部尚书，不任朝请。
现代文：公绰因为生病请求朝廷派人代替他，回朝被任命为兵部尚书，可以不上朝班行参见礼。
English: Because of his illness, he asked the imperial court to send someone to replace him, and he was appointed as the military secretary to return to the imperial court. He could not go to the imperial court to perform the memorial service.

古文：忽顾左右召故吏韦长，众谓属诿以家事。
现代文：忽然命亲随人召来老部下韦长，大家认为公绰要把家事托付给他。
English: All of a sudden, his father-in-law summoned his old subordinate Wei Chang, and everyone thought that he should be entrusted with the housework.

古文：及长至，乃曰： 为我白宰相，徐州专杀李听亲吏，非用高瑀不能安。 
现代文：到韦长来了，竟对他说： 替我报告宰相，徐州专门杀害李听的亲信部下，除非任用高蠫镇守徐州，否则不能安宁。 
English: When Wei Chang came, he actually said to him: Report to the Prime Minister for me, Xuzhou specifically killed Li He's trusted subordinates, and unless Gaozhu Town is appointed to guard Xuzhou, there can be no peace.

古文：因瞑目不复语，后二日卒，年六十八。
现代文：接着闭上眼睛不再说话，过了两天就去世了，享年六十八岁。
English: Then he closed his eyes and stopped talking. Two days later he died, aged 68.

古文：赠太子太保，谥曰元。
现代文：追封为太子太保，追赠谥号 元 。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Crown Prince Taibo and posthumously given the posthumous name Yuan.

古文：公绰居丧毁慕，三年不澡沐。
现代文：公绰服孝守丧因哀伤过度而身体瘦弱，三年不洗澡。
English: Due to excessive grief, the body is thin and does not take a bath for three years.

古文：事后母薛谨甚，虽姻属不知非薛所生。
现代文：奉养后母薛氏很小心孝顺，即使是他的亲家也不知道他不是薛氏亲生的。
English: Mr. Xue's foster mother is very careful and filial. Even his relatives do not know that he is not Mr. Xue's biological son.

古文：外兄薛宫早卒，为育其女嫁之。
现代文：舅兄薛宫很早就死了，公绰把他的女儿抚养成人出嫁。
English: His uncle Xue Gong died a long time ago, and he raised his daughter to adulthood and marriage.

古文：尝曰： 吾莅官未尝以私喜怒加于人，子孙其昌乎！ 
现代文：他曾经说 ：我当官不曾因为私事把喜怒强加于人。我的子孙会昌盛吧？ 
English: He once said: "When I was an official, I never imposed my emotions on others for personal reasons. Will my children and grandchildren prosper?

古文：与钱徽、蒋乂、杜元颖、薛存诚善，取士如许康佐、郑朗、卢简辞、崔玙、夏侯孜、李拭、韦长，皆知名显贵云。
现代文：与钱徽、蒋耣、杜元颍、薛存诚交情很好，他选拔的人才如许康佐、郑朗、卢简辞、崔、夏侯孜、李拭、韦长，都显贵闻名。
English: He had a very good friendship with Qian Hui, Chiang Kai-shek, Du Yuanzhang and Xue Cunrong. The talents he selected, such as Xu Kangzao, Zheng Lang, Lu Jianji, Cui, Xia Houzhe, Li Wu and Wei Chang, are all famous.

古文：子仲郢，字谕蒙。
现代文：公绰的儿子叫柳仲郢。柳仲郢字谕蒙。
English: Gongpo's son is named Liu Zhongyao.

古文：母韩，即皋女也，善训子，故仲郢幼嗜学，尝和熊胆丸，使夜咀咽以助勤。
现代文：母亲韩氏，就是韩皋的女儿，善于教育儿子，所以仲郢年幼酷爱读书，曾经和制熊胆丸，让仲郢夜里吃它补养疲劳的身体。
English: His mother, Han, the daughter of Han Zheng, was good at educating her son, so Zhong Zheng loved to read when he was young. She used to make bear bile pills and let Zhong Zheng eat it at night to replenish his tired body.

古文：长工文，著《尚书二十四司箴》，为韩愈咨赏。
现代文：长大后擅长写文章，著有《尚书二十四司箴》一书，被韩愈叹赏。
English: When he grew up, he was good at writing articles. He was the author of the book "Shangshu Twenty-four Proverbs," which was admired by Han Yu.

古文：元和末，及进士第，为校书郎。
现代文：元和末年，考中进士科，任命为校书郎。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, he passed the junior high school entrance examination and was appointed as a school scribe.

古文：牛僧孺辟武昌幕府，有父风矩，僧孺叹曰： 非积习名教，安及此邪？ 
现代文：牛僧孺征召他到武昌幕府任职，有他父亲的风范，牛僧孺叹息说： 不是积久而成的习惯和受名家教育，哪能达到这样的成就？ 
English: Niu Sang Hui called him to serve in the Wuchang Shogunate, and he had the demeanor of his father. Niu Sang Hui sighed and said, "If it wasn't for long-established habits and being educated by a famous family, how could I have achieved such an accomplishment?"

古文：入为监察御史，迁侍御史。
现代文：朝廷任他为监察御史，提升为侍御史。
English: The Imperial Court appointed him as the Inspector of Imperial History, and he was promoted to the position of Imperial Historian.

古文：有禁卒诬里人斫父墓柏，射杀之，吏以专杀论，而中尉护免其死，右补阙蒋系争，不省。
现代文：有一名禁卫军诬陷他家乡的一个人砍他父亲坟墓上的柏树，用箭射死了那个乡人。县吏以专横杀人要判他的罪，但中尉袒护他，免去死罪，右补阙蒋系争论，但中尉不追查。
English: A member of the imperial guard falsely accused a person in his hometown of cutting down the cypress tree on his father's grave, and shot the villager with an arrow. The county official wanted to convict him of arbitrary killing, but the lieutenant protected him and exempted him from the death penalty. The right-hand side of the Jiang family argued, but the lieutenant did not investigate.

古文：仲郢监罚，执曰： 贼不死，是乱典刑。 
现代文：仲郢监督处罪，逮捕他说： 杀人者不处死，这会败坏国家法律。 
English: "Killers will not be executed, which will corrupt the country's laws," he said.

古文：有诏御史萧杰监之，杰复争。
现代文：又命令御史肖杰监督处理这案子，肖杰又争论依法处理。
English: Xiao Jie was also ordered to supervise the handling of the case, and Xiao Jie also argued that it should be handled according to law.

古文：遂独诏京兆杖之，不监。
现代文：但竟只命令京兆府处以杖刑，不坐牢。
English: However, he was only ordered by the Beijing Municipal Government to be punished with a cane, not to go to prison.

古文：朝廷嘉其守。
现代文：朝廷赞许仲郢坚持法律。
English: The imperial court commended Zhongguo for sticking to the law.

古文：会昌初，累转吏部郎中。
现代文：会昌初年，连续转任吏部郎中。
English: In the first year of the Heisho era, he was successively transferred to the position of junior secretary.

古文：时诏减官冗长者，仲郢条简浃日，损千二百五十员，议者厌伏。
现代文：当时皇帝命令裁减多余闲散官员，仲郢清查了十天，裁减了一千二百五十人，议论的人心服。
English: At that time, the emperor ordered the reduction of superfluous idle officials. Zhong Xuan investigated for ten days and reduced twelve hundred and fifty people. The discussion was convincing.

古文：迁左谏议大夫。
现代文：升任左谏议大夫。
English: Promoted to Doctor of the Left Division of Political Science.

古文：武宗延方士，筑望仙台，累谏谆切，帝遣中人愧谕。
现代文：武宗皇帝请道士修建望仙台，仲郢多次直言诤谏，谆谆劝告，皇帝派宦官告诉仲郢说已知道做得不好。
English: Emperor Wuzong asked Taoists to build the Hope of Sendai, Zhongyi repeatedly spoke frankly and advised, and the emperor sent an eunuch to tell Zhongyi that he already knew that it was not done well.

古文：御史崔元藻以覆按吴湘狱得罪，仲郢切谏，宰相李德裕不为嫌，奏拜京兆尹。
现代文：御史崔元藻因复查吴湘的案子犯了罪，仲郢恳切地劝说，宰相李德裕不认为讨嫌，上奏皇帝任命仲郢为京兆尹。
English: Guo Shi Cui Yuanmao committed a crime by re-examining the case of Wu Xiang. Zhong Xi earnestly persuaded the Prime Minister Li Deyu that he did not think it was objectionable, and the Emperor appointed Zhong Xi as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：置权量于东西市，使贸易用之，禁私制者。
现代文：仲郢在东西市安放标准的衡器，让做买卖的人使用，禁止私制不标准的衡器。
English: Zhonglu will install standard weighing instruments in the east and west of the city, let the people who do business use them, and prohibit non-standard measuring instruments.

古文：北司吏入粟违约，仲郢杀而尸之，自是人无敢犯，政号严明。
现代文：北司的衙役买粟违犯禁令，仲郢杀死他并在街上露尸示众。从此以后，没有人敢违犯禁令了，法纪号令严明。
English: When Hokusai's attendant violated the ban on buying poppies, Nakamaro killed him and displayed his body in the street. From then on, no one dared to violate the ban, and the law was strictly enforced.

古文：会废浮屠法，尽坏铜象为钱。
现代文：碰到废除浮屠法，把铜像全部销毁铸钱。
English: When it came to abolishing the floating slaughter law, the bronze statues were all destroyed to make money.

古文：仲郢为铸钱使，吏请以字识钱者，不答。
现代文：仲郢任铸钱使，官员请示铸字做钱的标志，仲郢没有答复。
English: The official asked the official to make the sign of the money, but the official did not reply.

古文：既，淮南铸会昌字，久之，僧反取为钟钹云。
现代文：事后，淮南在钱上铸 会昌 字样，过了一段时间，和尚反而用这些钱铸钟钹。
English: Afterwards, Huainan stamped the word "Hui Chang" on the money. After a while, the monk used the money to make a bell instead.

古文：中书舍人纥干柷诉甥刘诩殴其母，诩为禁军校，仲郢不待奏，即捕取之，死杖下，宦官以为言，改右散骑常侍，知吏部铨。
现代文：中书舍人控告外甥刘诩殴打他母亲，刘诩任禁卫军军校，仲郢不等上奏朝廷，就逮捕了他，打死在刑杖下。宦官报告了皇帝，仲郢改任右散骑常侍，主持吏部工作。
English: The Chinese scribe accused his nephew Liu Yao of beating his mother. Liu Yao was assigned to the Imperial Guard Military Academy. Zhong Yao did not wait to report to the imperial court before arresting him and beating him to death with a cane. The eunuch reported to the emperor, and Zhong Yao was reassigned to the Right Hand Cavalry, presiding over the work of the cadre.

古文：德裕颇抑进士科，仲郢无所徇。
现代文：李德裕很是压制进士科，仲郢没有顺从他。
English: Li Deyu very much suppressed Jin Shike, and Zhonglu did not obey him.

古文：是时，以进士选，无受恶官者。
现代文：这时，选拔进士，没有任命坏官。
English: At this time, the selection of recruits, not the appointment of bad officials.

古文：又当调者，持阙簿令自阅，即拟唱，吏无能为奸。
现代文：又应当调任的，拿缺额的名册让他自己看，立即拟定名单高声宣布，下属官吏不能作弊。
English: And for those who should be transferred, let them see the roster of vacancies for themselves, immediately draw up a list and loudly announce that subordinate officials must not cheat.

古文：宣宗初，德裕罢政事，坐所厚善，出为郑州刺史。
现代文：宣宗皇帝初年，李德裕被罢免了宰相，德裕信任和重用的人受到连累，仲郢被调出京城任郑州刺史。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xuanzong, Li Deyu was removed from the post of prime minister, people who were trusted and used by Deyu were implicated, and Zhongyao was transferred from Beijing to Zhengzhou.

古文：周墀镇滑，而郑为属郡，高其绩；及入相，荐授河南尹，召拜户部侍郎。
现代文：周墀任滑州节度使，但郑州是滑州的属郡，周墀高度评价他的政绩，到周墀回朝任宰相，推荐仲郢任河南尹。朝廷召他回京任户部侍郎。
English: Zhou Jun was the festival envoy of the State of Nanzhou, but Zhengzhou was a subordinate county of the State of Nanzhou. Zhou Jun highly praised his political achievements. When Zhou Jun returned to the imperial court, he was appointed the prime minister and recommended Zhong Jun to be the Henan Yin. The imperial court called him back to Beijing to be the steward of the household.

古文：墀罢，它宰相恶仲郢，左迁秘书监。
现代文：周墀被罢免了宰相后，别的宰相不喜欢仲郢，降职任秘书监。
English: After Zhou Jun was dismissed as prime minister, other prime ministers did not like Zhong Jun and demoted him to the position of secretary.

古文：数月，复出河南尹，以宽惠为政。
现代文：几个月后，又出任河南尹，改用宽厚仁德来处理政务。
English: A few months later, he was reappointed as the Henan Yin, and he used leniency and benevolence to deal with government affairs.

古文：或言不类京兆时，答曰： 辇毂之下，先弹压；郡邑之治，本惠养。
现代文：有人说这不像在京兆府时处理政务，仲郢回答说： 在皇帝脚边处理政务，以弹压为先。治理郡县，要用仁德养护百姓。
English: Some people said that this was not like dealing with government affairs when he was in the Beijing and Shanghai government. Zhonglu replied: Dealing with government affairs at the emperor's feet, with pressure first. To govern counties, we must use benevolence to protect the people.

古文：乌可类乎？ 
现代文：怎么能一样呢？ 
English: How can it be the same?

古文：擢剑南东川节度使。
现代文：升任剑南东川节度使。
English: Promoted to the post of Jian'nan Dongchuan Setsudo envoy.

古文：大吏边章简挟势肆贪，前帅不能制，仲郢因事杀之，官下肃然。
现代文：大吏边章简利用权势贪婪无度，前任主帅制服不了他，仲郢借事杀死了他，下级官吏都整肃起来。
English: The high-ranking official, Bianzhangjian, used his power and greed to excess. The former coach could not subdue him. Zhongyao killed him on the pretext. The lower-ranking officials were all purged.

古文：居五年，召为吏部侍郎，俄改兵部，领盐铁转运使。
现代文：过了五年，召回朝任吏部侍郎兼任盐铁转运使。
English: Five years later, he was recalled to the imperial court to serve as an attendant of the personnel department and concurrently as a salt and iron transport envoy.

古文：有刘习者，以药术进，诏署盐官。仲郢以为医有本色官，若委钱谷，名分不正。
现代文：有一个叫刘习的人，依靠制药的技术升官，皇帝安排他当盐官，仲郢认为医务有本业官，若委任他管钱粮，名不正，言不顺。
English: There was a man named Liu Xi, who relied on pharmaceutical technology to be promoted. The emperor arranged for him to be a salt official. Zhong Wei believed that medical affairs had its own official. If he was appointed to manage money and grain, his name would be dishonest and his words would not go down well.

古文：帝悟，乃赐缣遣还。
现代文：皇帝明白过来，就赐给刘习细绢送他回家乡了。
English: The emperor came to understand and gave Liu Xi Xi to send him back to his hometown.

古文：大中十二年，辞疾，以刑部尚书罢使，转户部，封河东县男，为山南西道节度使。
现代文：大中十二年，因病辞官，免去了盐铁转运使，任刑部尚书，转任户部尚书，封为河东县男，任山南西道节度使。
English: In his 12th year of high school, due to illness, he resigned from his post, was exempted from the salt and iron transport envoy, was appointed as the criminal department's official secretary, was transferred to the household department's official secretary, was appointed as the man of Hedong County, and was appointed as the festival envoy of Shannan West Road.

古文：南郑令权弈以罪，仲郢杖之，六日死，贬雷州刺史。
现代文：南郑县令权弈因犯罪，仲郢用杖责打他，六天后权弈死了，仲郢被降职调到雷州任刺史。
English: For committing a crime, the commander of Nan Zheng County, Quan Yi, was beaten with a cane by Zhong Yao. Six days later, Quan Yi died, and Zhong Yao was demoted and transferred to Leizhou to be in charge of stabbing history.

古文：顷之，以太子宾客分司东都，起为虢州刺史，以检校尚书左仆射东都留守。
现代文：不久以太子宾客的官职在东都设立办事衙门，起用为虢州刺史，任检校尚书左仆射、东都留守。
English: Soon, the official post of the guest of the Etheric Son was set up in Dongdu, and he was appointed as the official historian of Zhangzhou, and he was appointed as the inspector of the school, but he left the school and stayed in Dongdu.

古文：会盗发父墓，弃官归华原。徙华州刺史，不拜。
现代文：碰到强盗掘开了他父亲的坟墓，放弃官职回到华州，调任华州刺史，没有接受任命。
English: When he encountered robbers digging up his father's grave, he gave up his post and returned to Washington. He was transferred to the office of the state historian of Washington, but did not accept the appointment.

古文：咸通五年，为天平节度使。
现代文：咸通五年，任天平节度使。
English: Hamdangtong five years, appointed by the balance of power.

古文：初，仲郢为谏议大夫，后每迁，必乌集升平第，庭树戟架皆满，五日乃散。
现代文：当初，仲郢任谏议大夫，后来每次升官，喜鹊就必定会飞集升平里家宅，庭园的树上、戟架上都落满了，五天才飞散。
English: At first, Zhongyao was appointed as a magistrate. Later, every time he was promoted, magpies would fly into his family's house. They would land on the trees in the garden and on the gill racks, and it would take five days for them to fly away.

古文：及是不复集。
现代文：到这时喜鹊再不飞来了。
English: By this time the magpies had stopped coming.

古文：卒于镇。
现代文：病故在天平节度使任上。
English: Illness in the balance of the season made the appointment.

古文：仲郢方严，尚气义，事亲甚谨。
现代文：仲郢为人正派威严，崇尚气节仁义，侍奉父母很恭谨。
English: Zhongyao is a dignified and dignified person, advocating the virtue of benevolence, and serving his parents very respectfully.

古文：李德裕贬死，家无禄，不自振；及领盐铁，遂取其兄子从质为推官，知苏州院。
现代文：李德裕死后，家里没有朝廷俸禄不能自己振作起来；到仲郢兼任盐铁转远使，就起用他兄长的儿子李从责任推官，执掌苏州院。
English: After the death of Li Deyu, there was no imperial stipend in the family, so he couldn't cheer himself up. When Zhonglu also served as the salt and iron envoy, he appointed his elder brother's son, Li Cong, as the responsible officer to take charge of the Suzhou court.

古文：宰相令狐綯持不可，乃移书开谕綯，綯感悟，从之。
现代文：宰相令狐坚持不同意，仲郢就送信给令狐解释说明，令狐感动并理解他，就答应了。
English: Prime Minister Ling Foo insisted that he did not agree, so Zhong Yi sent an explanation to Ling Foo, which moved him and made him understand, and he agreed.

古文：每私居内斋，束带正色，服用简素。
现代文：每逢自己住在内书斋，系上单色带子，衣服用具简单朴素。
English: Whenever he lived in the inner study, he wore a monochrome belt, and his clothes were simple and plain.

古文：父子更九镇，五为京兆，再为河南，皆不奏瑞，不度浮屠。
现代文：父子两代人担任过九任节度使，五次任京兆尹，两次任河南尹，都不向朝廷报告认为是吉祥的传闻和事物，也不让人出家当和尚。
English: For two generations, father and son have served as nine-time festival envoys, five times as Jingzha Yin, and twice as Henan Yin. They do not report rumors and things that they consider to be auspicious to the imperial court, nor do they allow people to become monks.

古文：急于摘贪吏，济单弱。
现代文：对撤除贪官污吏很急切，救济势单力弱的人。
English: People who are very eager to remove corrupt officials and who have little power to help.

古文：每旱潦，必贷匮蠲负，里无逋家。
现代文：每逢旱涝灾害，一定贷款给穷人，免除欠的赋税，乡间没有欠赋税的家庭。
English: Whenever there is a drought or flood disaster, a certain amount of loans will be given to the poor, tax arrears will be exempted, and there will be no tax arrears in the countryside.

古文：衣冠孤女不能自归者，斥禀为婚嫁。
现代文：男女孤儿长大无力成家的，官府资助他们结婚或出嫁。
English: When male and female orphans grow up and are unable to start a family, the government subsidizes their marriage or betrothal.

古文：在朝，非庆吊不至宰相第。
现代文：在朝廷，不是红白喜事不到宰相家宅。
English: In the imperial court, it is not the red and white glad tidings that come to the chancellor's home.

古文：其迹略相同。
现代文：他们父子的事迹大略相同。
English: The story of their father and son is roughly the same.

古文：家有书万卷，所藏必三本：上者贮库，其副常所阅，下者幼学焉。
现代文：家中藏有万卷书，所藏的每种书一定有三本：最好的藏在书库，中等的是平常阅读的，下等的是孩童学习用的。
English: There are tens of thousands of books in the home, and there must be three books of each kind: the best is hidden in the library, the medium is for ordinary reading, and the inferior is for children to learn.

古文：至于孝慈、友悌、忠信、笃行，乃食之醢酱，可一日无哉？其大概如此。公权，字诚悬，公绰弟也。
现代文：仲郢曾经亲自抄写了《六经》，司马迁、班固、范晔著的史书都各抄写了一部，魏、晋和南北朝的史书各抄写了两部，又像这样抄的其他书共三十篇，取书名为《柳氏自备》，旁边登记了很多仙佛一类的书，都用精美端正的小楷字抄写，没有用行书。柳公权字诚悬，是公绰的弟弟。
English: Zhong Xi once copied the "Six Classics" by himself. The history books written by Sima Qian, Banggu and Fan Zhen were copied one each, the history books of Wei, Jin and the Northern and Southern Dynasties were copied two each, and there were a total of thirty other books copied like this. The book was called "The Liu Clan's Own" and many books such as the "Senn Buddha" were registered next to it. They were all copied with exquisite and neat small block letters, and no books were used. Liu Gongquan's character "诚悬" is the younger brother of Gongyao.

古文：年十二，工辞赋。元和初，擢进士第。
现代文：十二岁就精辞赋，元和初年，选拔为进士。
English: At the age of twelve, he was awarded the Distinguished Speech Award, and in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was selected as a scholar.

古文：李听镇夏州，表为掌书记。
现代文：李听任夏州节度使，上表朝廷推荐他任掌书记，因而回朝向皇帝上奏章。
English: Li was appointed as the delegate of the Xiazhou Festival, and was recommended by the imperial court to be the secretary, so he returned to the North to present the medal to the emperor.

古文：因入奏，穆宗曰： 朕尝于佛庙见卿笔迹，思之久矣。 
现代文：穆宗皇帝说： 我曾在佛庙看到过你的书法，想念你很久了。 
English: Emperor Muzong said, "I once saw your calligraphy in a Buddhist temple, and I have missed you for a long time.

古文：即拜右拾遗、侍书学士，再迁司封员外郎。
现代文：就任命他为右拾遗、侍书学士。又两次提升，任司封员外郎。
English: He was appointed to the post of Right Reverend, Bachelor of Letters, and promoted twice to the post of Secretary of the Board of Trustees.

古文：帝问公权用笔法，对曰： 心正则笔正，笔正乃可法矣。 
现代文：皇帝向公权询问写字的技法，公权回答说 ：心术端正运笔就端正，运笔端正就可以学会书法了。 
English: The emperor asked Gongquan about the technique of writing. Gongquan replied, "If you can get your mind right and your pen right, then you can learn calligraphy."

古文：时帝荒纵，故公权及之。帝改容，悟其以笔谏也。
现代文：当时皇帝荒淫放纵，所以公权说了上面这些话，皇帝改变了颜色，懂得他是借谈书法劝谏他。
English: At that time, the emperor was wild and indulgent, so the public authority said the above words, the emperor changed his color, and understood that he was using calligraphy to persuade him.

古文：公绰尝寓书宰相李宗闵，言家弟本志儒学，先朝以侍书见用，颇类工祝，愿徙散秩。乃改右司郎中、弘文馆学士。
现代文：柳公绰曾经寄信给宰相李宗闵，说自己的弟弟立志研究儒学，前朝皇帝任他为侍书，很像工祝，希望担任散官，于是改任右司郎中、弘文馆学士。
English: Liu Gongchao once sent a letter to Prime Minister Li Zongtao, saying that his younger brother was determined to study Confucianism. The former emperor appointed him as an attendant, much like Gongzhu, and hoped to serve as a sanzhan, so he was reassigned to the position of junior secretary of the Right Division and scholar of the Hongwen Library.

古文：文宗复召侍书，迁中书舍人，充翰林书诏学士。
现代文：文宗皇帝又召他任侍书学士，升为中书舍人。充任翰林院写诏书的学士。
English: Emperor Wenzong also called him to serve as an attendant scholar and promoted him to a scholar of Chinese literature. He served as a scholar of Hanlin Academy to write the imperial edict.

古文：尝夜召对子亭，烛穷而语未尽，宫人以蜡液濡纸继之。
现代文：曾经在夜晚于子亭回答皇帝的咨询，蜡烛烧完了但话还没谈完，宫女用蜡油浸纸烧着照明。
English: Once, in the evening, Yu Ziting answered the emperor's inquiry. The candle was burned out, but the conversation was not over. The lady-in-waiting lit the lamp with wax-soaked paper.

古文：从幸未央宫，帝驻辇，曰： 朕有一喜，边戍赐衣久不时，今中春而衣已给。 
现代文：随侍皇帝到未央宫，皇帝停住车驾说： 我有一件喜事，守卫边塞的将士的服装很长一个时期不能按时运去，今年在春季中间就运去了。 
English: Accompanying the emperor to Weiyang Palace, the emperor stopped the car and said: I have a happy event. The clothing of the soldiers guarding the border fortress could not be shipped on time for a long time, and this year it was shipped in the middle of spring.

古文：公权为数十言称贺，帝曰： 当贺我以诗。 
现代文：公权写几十个字的文章祝贺称颂，皇帝说： 应该写诗祝贺我。 
English: The public authority wrote a few dozen words of congratulation and praise, and the emperor said, "You should write a poem to congratulate me."

古文：宫人迫之，公权应声成，文婉切而丽。
现代文：宫女们催促他，公权应声吟诗，切题而且婉丽，皇帝令他第二次赋诗，又不加思索随口吟诗。
English: The ladies-in-waiting urged him, and the public authority responded by reciting a poem, which was to the point and elegant. The emperor ordered him to compose a poem for the second time, and he recited the poem without thinking.

古文：诏令再赋，复无停思，天子甚悦，曰： 子建七步，尔乃三焉。 常与六学士对便殿，帝称汉文帝恭俭，因举袂曰： 此三澣矣！ 
现代文：皇帝高兴地说： 曹子建七步吟诗，你竟只需三步。 常常与六位学士在便殿回答皇帝的咨询，皇帝称赞汉文帝谦恭节俭，就举起衣袖说 ：这件衣服已洗过三次了。 
English: The emperor said happily: Cao Zi built seven steps to chant a poem, but you only need three steps. He often answered the emperor's consultation with six bachelors in the toilet hall. The emperor praised Emperor Hanwen for his modesty and frugality, and held up his sleeves and said: This dress has been washed three times.

古文：学士皆贺，独公权无言。
现代文：学士们都赞颂，只有公权一人不做声。
English: The bachelors are all praising, only the public authority is silent.

古文：帝问之，对曰： 人主当进贤退不肖，纳谏诤，明赏罚。
现代文：皇帝问他，他回答说： 皇上应当选拔贤臣，罢免没有才德的人，采纳臣子的劝谏，赏罚分明。
English: The emperor asked him, and he answered: The emperor should select wise ministers, dismiss those without talent, accept the advice of ministers, and reward and punish clearly.

古文：服澣濯之衣，此小节耳，非有益治道者。 
现代文：穿洗过的衣服，这是小节，对治理国家益处不大。 
English: Wearing washed clothes, it is said, is of little use in governing a country.

古文：异日，与周墀同对，论事不阿，墀为惴恐，公权益不夺，帝徐曰： 卿有诤臣风，可屈居谏议大夫。 
现代文：另一天，与周墀一起回答皇帝的咨询，公权评论政事得失不迎合皇帝的好恶，周墀为他惴惴不安，公权更加镇定不慌。皇帝慢吞吞地说 ：你有诤谏臣子的风范，可以屈居谏议大夫。 
English: On another day, together with Zhou Qi, he answered the emperor's consultation. The public authority did not cater to the emperor's likes and dislikes by commenting on the merits and demerits of political affairs. Zhou Qi was uneasy for him, and the public authority was more calm and not panicked. The emperor said slowly: You have the demeanor of a courtiers, you can stoop to be a doctor of discussion.

古文：乃自舍人下迁，仍为学士知制诰。
现代文：竟从中书舍人降了职，但仍任学士，掌管写诏书。
English: In fact, the junior high school teacher was demoted, but he was still a bachelor in charge of writing the imperial edict.

古文：开成三年，转工部侍郎。
现代文：开成三年，公权转任工部侍郎。
English: After three years, Kinkon was transferred to the position of a chamberlain in the Ministry of Works.

古文：召问得失，因言： 郭旼领邠宁，而议者颇有臧否。 
现代文：皇帝召他询问政事的得失，他趁机说 ：郭日文任宁节度使，议事官很有褒贬。 
English: The emperor called him to inquire about the merits and demerits of government affairs, and he took the opportunity to say: Guo Rimin was appointed as the envoy to the Qing Dynasty, and the councilor was very complimentary.

古文：帝曰： 旼，尚父从子，太皇太后季父，官无玷邮，自大金吾位方镇，何所更议？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 郭日文是尚父郭子仪的侄子，太皇太后的叔父，做官没有过失，从大金吾任方镇节度使，又有什么值得议论的呢？ 
English: The emperor said: Guo Rimin is the nephew of Guo Ziyi, Shang Shang's father, and the uncle of the grand empress dowager. He has done no wrong in his career as an official, and he has been appointed as the envoy of the great king and ruler of Fangzhen. What is there worth discussing?

古文：答曰： 旼诚勋旧，然人谓献二女乃有是除，信乎？ 
现代文：公权回答说 ：郭日文的确是功勋旧臣，但人们说是给皇宫进献了两个女子才有这项任命，是真有这事吗？ 
English: The public authority replied: Guo Rimin is indeed a meritorious old minister, but it is said that two women were presented to the imperial palace for this appointment, is this really the case?

古文：帝曰： 女自参承太后，岂献哉？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：两个女子自己参见侍候太后，怎么能说是进献的呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "Two women can serve the empress dowager by themselves. How can they be said to have made an offering?"

古文：公权曰： 疑嫌间不可户晓。 
现代文：公权说 ：应远离嫌疑不让传播。 
English: Public authority said: it should be kept away from suspicion and not allowed to spread.

古文：因引王珪谏庐江王妃事。
现代文：就引王王圭劝谏庐江王王妃的事做例子。
English: Let's take the example of Wang Wanggui's persuasion of Wang Wangfei of the Li River.

古文：是日，帝命中官自南内送女还旼家。
现代文：当天，皇帝命令宦官从南内宫送两个女子回到郭日文家。
English: On the same day, the emperor ordered the eunuch to send two women from the Southern Palace back to Guo's home.

古文：其忠益多类此。
现代文：公权对朝廷忠心耿耿的事例很多是这样的。
English: This is the case in many instances where the public authorities are deeply loyal to the imperial court.

古文：迁学士承旨。
现代文：升公权任学士承旨。
English: The right to be promoted to public office and appointed as a bachelor.

古文：武宗立，罢为右散骑常侍。
现代文：武宗当了皇帝，免去了他的学士承旨，任右散骑常侍。
English: When Wu Zong became emperor, he was exempted from his bachelor's order and was appointed as a right-hand horseman.

古文：宰相崔珙引为集贤院学士，知院事。
现代文：宰相崔珙引荐他任集贤院学士，主持集贤院事务。
English: He was recommended by Prime Minister Choe Son to be appointed as the academician of Jixian Academy and presided over the affairs of Jixian Academy.

古文：李德裕不悦，左授太子詹事，改宾客。
现代文：李德裕不高兴，降为太子詹事，又改任太子宾客。
English: Li Deyu was not happy. He was demoted to the position of the prince's attendant, and then to the position of the prince's guest.

古文：累封河东郡公，复为常侍，进至太子少师。
现代文：经连续几次晋升，封为河东郡公，又任常侍，升至太子少师。
English: After several consecutive promotions, he was appointed as the county magistrate of Hedong County, and was also appointed as a regular attendant, and was promoted to the prince's junior teacher.

古文：大中十三年，天子元会，公权稍耄忘，先群臣称贺，占奏忽谬，御史劾之，夺一季俸，议者恨其不归事。
现代文：大中十三年，皇帝在元旦举行朝会，公权因老迈健忘，在群臣之先向皇帝称颂祝贺，口中致词应答皇帝出现错误，御史弹劾他，扣除了一个季节的俸禄，议事官恨他不退休。
English: In the thirteenth year of the middle school, the emperor held a court meeting on New Year's Day. The public authority, due to old age and forgetfulness, praised and congratulated the emperor ahead of the ministers. The emperor made a mistake in his speech, the imperial historian impeached him, deducted a season's salary, and the councilor hated him for not retiring.

古文：咸通初，乃以太子太保致仕。卒，年八十八。
现代文：咸通初年，才以太子太保的职位辞官退休。
English: It was not until the first year of Hamdang Tong that the post of Taiho Etsuko was retired.

古文：赠太子太师。
现代文：病故，享年八十八岁，追赠太子太师。
English: He died of illness at the age of 88, and was posthumously awarded the title of Crown Prince and Grand Master.

古文：公权博贯经术，于《诗》、《书》、《左氏春秋》、《国语》、庄周书尤邃，每解一义，必数十百言。
现代文：公权学识渊博，贯通经学，对于《诗经》、《书经》、《左氏春秋》、《国语》、《庄周》更是精通，每解释一个意义，一定几十上百字。
English: He is well-versed in the study of public power and has a thorough understanding of the study of classics. He is even more proficient in "The Book of Songs," "The Book of Songs," "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi," "The Chinese Language" and "Zhuang Zhou." He can explain the meaning of dozens of words.

古文：通音律，而不喜奏乐，曰： 闻之令人骄怠。 
现代文：精通音乐理论和技艺，但不喜欢奏乐，说： 听它令人骄纵懈怠。 
English: He is well versed in music theory and techniques, but does not like playing music, saying: Listening to it makes you lazy.

古文：其书法结体劲媚，自目一家。
现代文：他的书法结构形体遒劲秀丽，自成一家，文宗皇帝曾经召他参加联句的文学活动。
English: Emperor Wenzong once invited him to take part in the literary activity of writing couplets.

古文：文宗尝召与联句，帝曰： 人皆苦炎热，我爱夏日长。 
现代文：皇帝出句说 人皆苦炎热，我爱夏日长 。
English: The emperor said that everyone is bitterly hot, and I love the long summer days.

古文：公权属曰： 薰风自南来，殿阁生微凉。 
现代文：公权续写道： 薰风自南来，殿阁生余凉。 
English: Public authority continued to write: The breeze comes from the south, and it is cool in the palace.

古文：它学士亦属继，帝独讽公权者，以为词情皆足，命题于殿壁，字率径五寸，帝叹曰： 钟、王无以尚也！ 
现代文：其他的学士也接着联句，皇帝只背诵公权的联句，认为词美情足，命令公权写在宫殿的墙壁上，字的大小都是五寸，皇帝赞叹道： 钟繇、王羲之的书法也没有超过他呀！ 
English: Other bachelors also followed the couplet. The emperor only recited the couplet of public power, thinking that the words were beautiful and sufficient. He ordered the public power to write on the walls of the palace. The size of the characters was five centimeters. The emperor praised: Zhong Xi and Wang Xi's calligraphy did not surpass him!

古文：其迁少师，宣宗召至御座前，书纸三番，作真、行、草三体，奇秘，赐以器币，且诏自书谢章，无限真、行。
现代文：升为太子少师时，宣宗召他到御座前写字，在纸上写了三次，用楷书、行书、草书三种字体写成，皇帝认为是瑰宝秘藏起来，赐给他珍宝玉器。并且命令他自己写谢恩表章，不限制用楷书还是行书。
English: When he was promoted to the position of prince's apprentice, Emperor Xuanzong called him to write in front of the throne. He wrote three times on a piece of paper, using three fonts: standard Chinese, cursive Chinese and cursive Chinese. The emperor thought it was a hidden treasure and gave him a precious jade object. He also ordered him to write a thank you sign on his watch, with no restriction on whether to use standard Chinese or cursive Chinese.

古文：当时大臣家碑志，非其笔，人以子孙为不孝。
现代文：当时大臣家的碑志，不是公权写的字，人们认为子孙不孝顺。
English: At that time, the epitaph on the minister's house was not written by public authority, and people thought that the descendants were not filial.

古文：外夷入贡者，皆别署货贝曰： 此购柳书。 
现代文：外族人来朝进贡，都在另外一份珍宝上写着 ：这是买柳公权的书法作品的。 
English: Foreigners who came to pay tribute to the North wrote on another precious treasure: This is a calligraphy work bought by Liu Gongquan.

古文：尝书京兆西明寺《金刚经》，有钟、王、欧、虞、褚、陆诸家法，自为得意。
现代文：曾经书写京兆西明寺《金刚经》，其中有钟繇、王羲之、欧阳询、虞世南、褚遂良、陆贽的书法，公权认为自己的是得意之作。
English: He once wrote the "Diamond Sutra" of Beijing Ximing Temple, including the calligraphy of Zhong Xuan, Wang Xizhi, Ouyang Xuan, Yu Shennan, Zou Suiliang, and Lu Yao, and the public authority considered it to be a good work.

古文：凡公卿以书贶遗，盖钜禹，而主藏奴或盗用。
现代文：统计公卿间的题赠，公权数以万计，但主人收藏，奴仆有人盗走。
English: According to statistics, there are tens of thousands of titles and gifts of public power between nobles, but the master collects them, and the servants steal them.

古文：尝贮杯盂一笥，縢识如故而器皆亡，奴妄言叵测者，公权笑曰： 银杯羽化矣！ 
现代文：公绰曾经贮藏一筐杯盂，封记与原来一样，但器皿都丢失了，奴仆七扯八拉的搪塞，公权笑着说： 银杯自己长翅飞了。 
English: He had once stored a basket of goblets. The seal was the same as before, but all the vessels were lost. The servants had made all sorts of excuses. He smiled and said, "The silver goblets have flown away by themselves."

古文：不复诘。唯研、笔、图籍，自鐍秘之。
现代文：不再追究，只是砚台、毛笔、图画、书法、典籍亲自锁着秘藏起来。
English: He no longer investigated, but he personally locked and hid the inkstand, brushes, pictures, calligraphy, and classics.

