古文：高祖高祖神尧大圣大光孝皇帝姓李氏，讳渊。
现代文：高祖神尧大圣大光孝皇帝姓李，名渊。
English: Gao Zu Sheng, the great saint, Emperor Guangxiao, surnamed Li, and his name is Yuan.

古文：其先陇西狄道人，凉武昭王暠七代孙也。暠生歆。
现代文：祖先是陇西狄道人。他是西凉武昭王李暠的七世孙，李暠生歆。
English: He was the seventh-generation grandson of King Li Yu of the Western Liang and Wu Zhao Dynasties, Li Yu Shenglu.

古文：歆生重耳，仕魏为弘农太守。
现代文：歆生重耳，出仕魏国任弘农太守。
English: He was born with a heavy ear, and served as Wei Guo Ren Hongnong Taishu.

古文：重耳生熙，为金门镇将，领豪杰镇武川，因家焉。
现代文：重耳生熙，为金门镇将，率领豪杰镇守武川，因而在武川定居安家。
English: He was born in Shigefusa, and was the commander of Kinmen Town, and led the heroic warriors to defend the town of Bukawa. Therefore, he settled in Bukawa.

古文：仪凤中，追尊宣皇帝。
现代文：仪凤中期，追尊为宣皇帝。
English: In the middle of the Yi and Feng dynasties, Dui Zun became Emperor Xuan.

古文：熙生天锡，仕魏为幢主。
现代文：熙生天，出任魏国任宿卫统兵的武官幢主。
English: He was born in Xi'an, and served as the military attaché of the general guard of Wei.

古文：大统中，赠司空。
现代文：大统中期，赠司空。
English: In the mid-period of the Great Reunification, it was given the status of an empty space.

古文：仪凤中，追尊光皇帝。
现代文：仪凤中期，追尊为光皇帝。
English: In the middle of the Yi and Feng dynasties, Dui Zun became the Emperor of Light.

古文：皇祖讳虎，后魏左仆射，封陇西郡公，与周文帝及太保李弼、大司马独孤信等以功参佐命，当时称为 八柱国家 ，仍赐姓大野氏。
现代文：亡祖名虎，是后魏左仆射，封为陇西郡公，与周文帝及太保李弼、大司马独孤信等因为功臣参与辅佐创业，当时称为 八柱国 ，仍然赐姓为大野氏。
English: The late great-grandfather Meihu, who was a left-hand man of the late Wei Dynasty, was given the title of the governor of Shaanxi County, along with Emperor Zhou, the Imperial Guard Li Xi, and the Grand Master Ma Du Guoxin, because his meritorious soldiers participated in supporting entrepreneurship. At that time, it was known as the Eight Pillars of the State, and the surname was still given to the Ohno clan.

古文：周受禅，追封唐国公，谥曰襄。
现代文：周朝接受禅让称帝，追封李虎为唐国公，谥号为襄。
English: The Zhou Dynasty accepted Zen Zhen as emperor, posthumously crowned Li Hu as the prince of Tang, and gave him the posthumous name of Xiang.

古文：至隋文帝作相，还复本姓。
现代文：到隋文帝为相国，还复本姓为李。
English: To the Sui Emperor as a country, but also a copy of the surname of Li.

古文：武德初，追尊景皇帝，庙号太祖，陵曰永康。
现代文：武德初年，追尊为景皇帝，庙号太祖，陵墓称作永康。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wu De, Dui Zun was named Emperor Jing, the temple was called Taizu, and the mausoleum was called Yongkang.

古文：皇考讳昞，周安州总管、柱国大将军，袭唐国公，谥曰仁。
现代文：亡父名日丙，周朝时任安州总管、柱国大将军，袭封唐国公，谥号曰仁。
English: His deceased father's name was Nichihi, and during the Zhou Dynasty, he served as the Governor-General of Anzhou and the Grand General of Zhu Guo, and was given the title of Tang Guogong. His posthumous name was Jin.

古文：武德初，追尊元皇帝，庙号世祖，陵曰兴宁。
现代文：武德初年，追尊为元皇帝，庙号世祖，陵墓称作兴宁。
English: In the first year of Wude, Tsuizun was the former emperor, the temple was called the founder, and the mausoleum was called Xingning.

古文：高祖以周天和元年生于长安，七岁袭唐国公。
现代文：高祖李渊在周朝天和元年生于长安，七岁袭封唐国公。
English: The great-great-grandfather Li Yuan was born in Chang'an in the first year of the Zhou Dynasty, and became the prince of Tang at the age of seven.

古文：及长，倜傥豁达，任性真率，宽仁容众，无贵贱咸得其欢心。
现代文：等到年长，性格洒脱，胸怀坦荡，真诚率直，宽厚仁爱能容纳众人，不论贵贱都能得到他的宠爱。
English: When he is older, his personality will be easy-going, his heart will be open, sincere and straightforward, and his generous and benevolent love will be able to accommodate everyone, regardless of whether they are noble or lowly, they can get his favor.

古文：隋受禅，补千牛备身。
现代文：隋朝称帝，李渊补为君王宿卫的千牛备身的职务。
English: The Sui Dynasty proclaimed him emperor, and Li Yuanfu was appointed to the post of the king's bodyguard.

古文：文帝独孤皇后，即高祖从母也，由是特见亲爱，累转谯、陇、岐三州刺史。
现代文：隋文帝的独孤皇后，就是李渊的姨母，由于这个原因特别被亲近宠爱，历任谯、陇、岐三州刺史。
English: The lone empress of the Sui Dynasty, who was Li Yuan's aunt, was especially loved for this reason. Successive emperors of the Han, Song and Qi dynasties made history in Sanzhou.

古文：有史世良者，善相人，谓高祖曰： 公骨法非常，必为人主，愿自爱，勿忘鄙言。 
现代文：有个叫史世良的，善于为人看相，他对李渊说 ：您的骨骼非同一般，必定会成为帝王，希望您保重，不要忘记我的话。 
English: There was a man named Shi Sheliang, who was good at reading people. He said to Li Yuan, "Your bones are extraordinary, you will surely become emperor. I hope you take good care of yourself and don't forget my words."

古文：高祖颇以自负。
现代文：高祖很以此自负。
English: Gaozu is very proud of this.

古文：大业初，为荥阳、楼烦二郡太守，征为殿内少监。
现代文：大业初年，高祖做荥阳、楼烦二郡太守，召为殿内少监。
English: In the first year of his career, Gao Zu became the governor of two counties, Shiyang and Loudui, and was called to be a junior inspector in the palace.

古文：九年，迁卫尉少卿。
现代文：大业九年，升为卫尉少卿。
English: After nine years of hard work, he was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guard.

古文：辽东之役，督运于怀远镇。
现代文：辽东之战，在怀远镇督运粮草。
English: During the Battle of Liaodong, he was in charge of transporting grain and grass in Huaiyuan Town.

古文：及杨玄感反，诏高祖驰驿镇弘化郡，兼知关右诸军事。
现代文：等到杨玄感造反，诏令高祖驿马飞驰镇守弘化郡，兼主持关右所有军事工作。
English: When Yang Xuanxuan rebelled, he ordered Gao Zuanma Feiqi to guard Honghua County and preside over all military work in Guanzhong.

古文：高祖历试中外，素树恩德，及是结纳豪杰，众多款附。
现代文：高祖历任朝廷内外官职，一贯树立恩德，这时结纳豪杰，大都诚心归附。
English: Gao Zu has served as an official in and out of the imperial court, and has consistently established benevolence. At this time, he was awarded the title of hero, and most of them sincerely adhered to him.

古文：时炀帝多所猜忌，人怀疑惧。
现代文：当时隋炀帝非常猜忌，人们怀着疑虑和恐惧。
English: At that time, the Sui and Qian Dynasties were very suspicious, and people were full of doubts and fears.

古文：会有诏征高祖诣行在所，遇疾未谒。
现代文：恰值有诏令召高祖到天子巡幸的所在地，高祖正有疾病而没有前往谒见。
English: At the right time, there was a decree calling Gao Zu to the location of the heavenly son's pilgrimage. Gao Zu was ill and did not go to the audience.

古文：时甥王氏在后宫，帝问曰： 汝舅何迟？ 
现代文：当时李渊的外甥女王氏在后宫，炀帝问道 ：你舅舅为何迟迟不来？ 
English: At that time, Li Yuan's nephew, the Queen, was in the harem. Emperor Qian asked, "Why is your uncle late in coming?"

古文：王氏以疾对，帝曰： 可得死否？ 
现代文：王氏以有疾病对答，炀帝曰： 病得可能死吗？ 
English: Wang replied that he had an illness, and Emperor Qian said: Is it possible to die from illness?

古文：高祖闻之益惧，因纵酒沉湎，纳贿以混其迹焉。
现代文：高祖听了越发恐惧，因而沉溺放纵饮酒，进行贿赂来蒙混隐瞒自己的真情。
English: Hearing this, Gaozhu became more and more afraid, so he indulged in heavy drinking and bribery to cover up his true feelings.

古文：十一年，炀帝幸汾阳宫，命高祖往山西、河东黜陟讨捕。
现代文：大业十一年，炀帝驾到汾阳宫，命令高祖前往山西、河东升降处置官员并讨伐捕获贼人。
English: In the eleventh year of the reign of Emperor Taiye, Emperor Gao drove to the Poyang Palace and ordered Gao Zu to go to Shanxi and Hedong to promote and demote officials and to fight and capture thieves.

古文：师次龙门，贼帅母端兒帅众数千薄于城下。
现代文：军队临时驻扎龙门，贼首母端儿率领数千之众进逼到城下。
English: Troops were temporarily stationed at Longmen, and thousands of people, led by thieves, forced their way under the city.

古文：高祖从十余骑击之，所射七十发，皆应弦而倒，贼乃大溃。
现代文：高祖率领十余个骑兵打击他们，射箭七十发，贼人都随着弓弦响声而中箭倒地，贼众这才崩溃。
English: Gaozhu led more than ten cavalrymen to attack them, shooting seventy arrows, and the thieves all fell to the ground with the sound of the bowstring, and the thieves collapsed.

古文：十二年，迁右骁卫将军。
现代文：大业十二年，高祖升为骁卫将军。
English: In the twelfth year of Daye's reign, Gaozu was promoted to general of the Imperial Guards.

古文：十三年，为太原留守，郡丞王威、武牙郎将高君雅为副。
现代文：大业十三年，高祖为太原留守，郡丞王威、武牙郎将高君雅为副留守。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Taiei era, Gao Zu was left behind by Taiyuan, and the county magistrate Wang Wei and the warlord Wu Ya were left behind by Gao Junya.

古文：群贼蜂起，江都阻绝，太宗与晋阳令刘文静首谋，劝举义兵。
现代文：群贼蜂起造反，江都被阻绝，太宗李世民与晋阳县令刘文静首先倡议，鼓励高祖兴兵起义。
English: When a group of thieves revolted and the river was blocked, Emperor Taizong Li Shimin and Jinyang County Governor Liu Wenzhing were the first to take the initiative and encourage Gaozhu Xingbing to revolt.

古文：俄而马邑校尉刘武周据汾阳宫举兵反，太宗与王威、高君雅将集兵讨之。
现代文：不久，马邑校尉刘武周占据汾阳宫举兵造反，太宗与王威、高君雅将集合军队讨伐他。
English: Soon, Ma's lieutenant Liu Wuzhou occupied the Poyang Palace and raised an army to rebel. Emperor Taizong, Wang Wei, and Gao Junya gathered an army to fight against him.

古文：高祖乃命太宗与刘文静及门下客长孙顺德、刘弘基各募兵，旬日间众且一万，密遣使召世子建成及元吉于河东。
现代文：高祖于是命令太宗与刘文静及门下客长孙顺德、刘弘基分头招募新兵，十日之间招募新兵众将近一万，密派使者召世子建成及元吉到河东。
English: Gaozu then ordered Taizong, Liu Wenzhing, and his protégés Sun Shunde and Liu Hongji to recruit new soldiers separately. Within ten days, nearly ten thousand new soldiers were recruited, and envoys were secretly sent to summon Jiaochen and Yuanji to Hedong.

古文：威、君雅见兵大集，恐高祖为变，相与疑惧，请高祖祈雨于晋祠，将为不利。
现代文：王威、高君雅见军队大量集中，怕高祖为此发动祸乱，二人怀疑恐惧，请高祖到晋祠求雨，将对高祖发动袭击。
English: Wang Wei and Gao Junya saw a large concentration of troops and feared that Gao Zu would launch a calamity for this reason. The two suspected fear and asked Gao Zu to go to Jin Temple to pray for rain, and they would launch an attack on Gao Zu.

古文：晋阳乡长刘世龙知之，以告高祖，高祖阴为之备。
现代文：晋阳乡长刘世龙知道这个阴谋，以此报告高祖，高祖暗中做了防备。
English: Liu Shilong, the mayor of Jinyang Township, knew about the plot and reported it to Gao Zu. Gao Zu secretly took precautions.

古文：五月甲子，高祖与威、君雅视事，太宗密严兵于外，以备非常。
现代文：五月十五日，高祖与王威、高君雅到职工作，太宗李世民秘密在外面埋伏精锐之兵，以防意外。
English: On May 15, Gao Zu, Wang Wei, and Gao Junya arrived at work, and Emperor Li Shimin secretly ambushed the elite soldiers outside to prevent accidents.

古文：遣开阳府司马刘政会告威等谋反，即斩之以徇，遂起义兵。
现代文：派遣开阳府司马刘政会告发王威等人谋反，就杀了他们示众，于是就开始起义。
English: He dispatched Ma Liu, the secretary of Kaiyang Government, to inform Wang Wei and others that they were plotting a rebellion, and then killed them in front of the public, and the uprising began.

古文：甲戌，遣刘文静使于突厥始毕可汗，令率兵相应。
现代文：五月二十五日，派遣刘文静出使到突厥始毕可汗之处，令他发兵响应。
English: On May 25th, Liu Wenzhing was dispatched to the place where the Turkic Began to Khan, and he sent troops to respond.

古文：六月甲申，命太宗将兵徇西河，下之。
现代文：六月五日，命令太宗率兵巡行西河并下达起义的命令，攻下了西河。
English: On June 5, he ordered Taizong and his soldiers to patrol the West River and issued an order for an uprising, capturing the West River.

古文：癸巳，建大将军府，并置三军，分为左右：以世子建成为陇西公、左领大都督，左统军隶焉；太宗为敦煌公、右领大都督，右统军隶焉。
现代文：六月十四日，建立大将军府，并设置三军，分为左右：以世子建成为陇西公、左领大都督，左统军隶属他；太宗为火敦煌公、右领大都督，右统军隶属他。
English: On June 14, the Great General's Office was established, and the three armies were set up, divided into left and right: the heir to the throne became the prince of Shaanxi, the left-collar grand governor, and the left-unified army was subordinate to him; Taizong was the fire of Dunhuang, the right-collar grand governor, and the right-unified army was subordinate to him.

古文：裴寂为大将军府长史，刘文静为司马，石艾县长殷开山为掾，刘政会为属，长孙顺德、刘弘基、窦琮等分为左右统军。
现代文：裴寂为大将军府长史，刘文静为司马，石艾县长殷开山为正职属官，刘政会为副职属官，长孙顺德、刘弘基、窦琮等人分别为左统军和右统军。
English: Peizhang is the prefectural governor of the general, Liu Wenzhing is the secretary, Yin Kaishan, the governor of Shiai County, is the official subordinate officer, Liu Zhenghui is the deputy official subordinate officer, and the eldest grandson Shunde, Liu Hongji, Dou Qi and others are the left and right unified army respectively.

古文：开仓库以赈穷乏，远近响应。
现代文：开仓库来救济穷困贫乏的人，远近的人都响应起义。
English: People from near and far responded to the uprising by opening warehouses to help the poor and destitute.

古文：秋七月壬子，高祖率兵西图关中，以元吉为镇北将军、太原留守。
现代文：秋七月四日，高祖率兵向西去谋取关中，以元吉为镇北将军、太原留守。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of autumn, Gao Zu led his troops to the west to seek Guanzhong, with Genji as the general of Zhenbei and Taiyuan left behind.

古文：癸丑，发自太原，有兵三万。
现代文：七月五日，军队从太原出发，有兵三万。
English: On July 5, the army set out from Taiyuan with 30,000 soldiers.

古文：丙辰，师次灵石县，营于贾胡堡。
现代文：七月八日，军队驻扎灵石县，在贾胡堡建营垒。
English: On July 8, the army stationed in Lingshi County and set up a camp at Jahu Fort.

古文：隋武牙郎将宋老生屯霍邑以拒义师。
现代文：隋朝武牙郎将宋老生屯兵霍邑以抗拒义军。
English: Wu Ya Lang of the Sui Dynasty sent Song Laosheng's garrison to Huo'i to resist the rebels.

古文：会霖雨积旬，馈运不给，高祖命旋师，太宗切谏乃止。
现代文：恰值连续十天久雨不止，运输的粮食不能供给，高祖命令回军，太宗直言极谏高祖才停止回军。
English: Just as it rained for ten days in a row, the transported grain could not be supplied, Gaozu ordered to return to the army, and Taizong bluntly told Gaozu to stop returning to the army.

古文：有白衣老父诣军门曰： 余为霍山神使谒唐皇帝曰： 八月雨止，路出霍邑东南，吾当济师。 
现代文：有一位白衣老人到军门道 ：我被霍山神派来谒见唐皇帝道 ：八月份雨止，军队从霍邑东南出发，我当救助军队。  
English: An old man in a white robe came to the military gate. He said, "I was sent by Huoshan God to see Emperor Tang." He said, "It stopped raining in August, and the army set out from the southeast of Huoyu. I should rescue the army."

古文：高祖曰： 此神不欺赵无恤，岂负我哉！ 
现代文：高祖道 ：霍山神不欺骗赵无恤，难道会对不起我吗？ 
English: Gao Zu Dao: If Huoshan God did not deceive Zhao without mercy, would He feel sorry for me?

古文：八月辛巳，高祖引师趋霍邑，斩宋老生，平霍邑。
现代文：八月三日，高祖引军急攻霍邑，杀了宋老生，平定了霍邑。
English: On August 3rd, Gao Zu led an army to attack Huoyu, killed Song Laosheng, and pacified Huoyu.

古文：丙戌，进下临汾郡及绛郡。
现代文：八月八日，进军攻下临汾郡及绛郡。
English: On August 8th, the army marched into and captured Linfen County and Handan County.

古文：癸巳，至龙门，突厥始毕可汗遣康稍利率兵五百人、马二千匹，与刘文静会于麾下。
现代文：八月十五日，到龙门，突厥始毕可汗派康稍利率兵五百人，马二千匹，与刘文静在高祖大旗下会合。
English: On August 15th, at Longmen, the Turks led by Khan sent 500 soldiers and 2,000 horses to meet Liu Wenzhing under the banner of Gaozuda.

古文：隋骁卫大将军屈突通镇河东，津梁断绝，关中向义者颇以为阻。
现代文：隋骁卫大将军屈突通镇守河东，桥梁断绝，关中奔向义军的人认为是障碍。
English: Sui and Yan Wei's general Qutututong guarded the east of the river, bridges were cut off, and people in Guanzhong who were rushing to the rebels were considered to be obstacles.

古文：河东水滨居人，竞进舟楫，不谋而至，前后数百人。
现代文：河东水边居住的人，争着乘船渡河，不谋而合投到义军，前后有数百人。
English: Hundreds of people living along the water's edge east of the river fought to cross the river by boat and joined the rebels.

古文：九月壬寅，冯翊贼帅孙华、士门贼帅白玄度各率其众送款，并具舟楫以待义师。
现代文：八月二十四日，冯翊贼酋孙华、土门贼酋白玄度各率领部众、钱款，并且准备了舟船而等待义军。
English: On August 24th, Sun Hua, the chief of the Fengye bandits, and Bai Xundu, the chief of the Tsuchimen bandits, led their troops, money, and prepared boats to wait for the rebels.

古文：高祖令华与统军王长谐、刘弘基引兵渡河。
现代文：高祖令孙华与统军王长谐、刘弘基引兵渡河。
English: Gao Zu ordered Sun Hua to lead troops across the river with Wang Changhong and Liu Hongji of the United Front.

古文：屈突通遣其武牙郎将桑显和率众数千，夜袭长谐，义师不利。
现代文：屈突通派遣他的武牙郎将桑显和率众数千人，夜袭长谐，义军不利。
English: Qu Jutong dispatched thousands of troops led by his son-in-law, Sang Xianhe. The night attack went smoothly, and the rebels were at a disadvantage.

古文：太宗以游骑数百掩其后，显和溃散，义军复振。
现代文：太宗用数百游动骑兵突袭贼人后部，桑显和军溃败，义军军威重振。
English: Taizong used hundreds of roving cavalry to raid the rear of the thieves, Sangxian and the army were defeated, and the rebel army's prestige was reinvigorated.

古文：丙辰，冯翊太守萧造以郡来降。
现代文：九月八日，冯翊太守萧造率他的州郡来投降。
English: On September 8th, Feng Rong's regent Xiao Zuo led his county to surrender.

古文：戊午，高祖亲率众围河东，屈突通自守不出，乃命攻城，不利而还。
现代文：九月十日，高祖亲率众围河东，屈突通自己坚守不出，高祖于是命令攻城，不胜而回。
English: On September 10th, Gao Zu's relatives led the crowd to encircle the eastern part of the river, but Qu Jutong could not hold out on his own. Gao Zu then ordered to attack the city, but was defeated and had to return.

古文：文武将吏请高祖领太尉，加置僚佐，从之。
现代文：文武将吏请高祖兼任太尉，加设属官，高祖同意了。
English: The literati generals asked Gao Zu to serve concurrently as a captain and to add subordinate officers, and Gao Zu agreed.

古文：华阴令李孝常以永丰仓来降。
现代文：华阴令李孝常以永丰仓城来投降。
English: Hua Yin ordered Li Xiaochang to surrender Yongfeng Cangcheng.

古文：庚申，高祖率军济河，舍于长春宫。
现代文：九月十二日，高祖率军渡过黄河，住在长春宫。
English: On September 12, Gao Zu led his army across the Yellow River and lived in Changchun Palace.

古文：三秦士庶至者日以千数，高祖礼之，咸过所望，人皆喜悦。
现代文：三秦地方的士子和百姓前来投奔的每天有上千人，高祖对他们加以礼遇，礼遇都超过他们所希望的程度，人人都很喜悦。
English: Every day, thousands of nobles and commoners from the Sanqin region came to the capital. Gaozu treated them with courtesy, and the courtesy exceeded their expectations. Everyone was very pleased.

古文：丙寅，遣陇西公建成、司马刘文静屯兵永丰仓，兼守潼关，以备他盗。
现代文：十八日，派陇西公建成、司马刘文静屯兵在永丰仓城，并同时守卫潼关，以防备其他人偷盗抢劫。
English: On the 18th, the Shaanxi Public Security Bureau and Liu Wenjing, Secretary of the Communist Party of China, sent troops to Yongfeng Cangcheng, and at the same time guarded Shaoguan to prevent other people from stealing and robbing.

古文：太宗率刘弘基、长孙顺德等前后数万人，自渭北徇三辅，所至皆下。
现代文：太宗率领刘弘基、长孙顺德等前后数万人从渭北向三辅进攻并宣告命令，义军所到之处，全部攻下。
English: Taizong led Liu Hongji, his eldest son Shunde and tens of thousands of others to attack Sanfu from the north of Shandong Province and announced an order to capture all the places where the rebels went.

古文：高祖从父弟神通起兵鄠县，柴氏妇举兵于司竹，至是并与太宗会。
现代文：高祖的堂弟神通从县起兵，柴氏之妻从司竹起兵，至此都与太宗会合。
English: Gaozu's cousin Shintoku raised an army from the county, and Chai's wife raised an army from Shichiku. At this point, they all joined Taizong.

古文：郿县贼帅丘师利、李仲文，盩厔贼帅何潘仁等，合众数万来降。
现代文：县贼酋丘师利、李仲文、銩稨、贼酋何潘仁等，聚集数万之众来投降。
English: County bandits Chul Shili, Li Zhongwen, Zou, bandit chief He Panren, etc. gathered tens of thousands of people to surrender.

古文：乙亥，命太宗自渭汭屯兵阿城，陇西公建成自新丰趣霸上。
现代文：二十七日，命令太宗从渭出发屯军阿城，陇西公建成从西丰急攻霸上。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Taizong ordered troops to set out from Handan to occupy the city of Acheng. West Gongcheng of Handan launched an attack from Xifengyu.

古文：高祖率大军自下邽西上，经炀帝行宫园苑，悉罢之，宫女放还亲属。
现代文：高祖率大军从下圭阝西上，经过隋炀帝行宫园苑，将它们全部撤除，宫女放还给亲属。
English: Gao Zu led a large army from the lower Guizhou to the west, through the Sui and Qian Dynasties to the palace garden, removed them all, and returned the palace maids to their relatives.

古文：冬十月辛巳，至长乐宫，有众二十万。
现代文：冬十月四日，到长乐宫，有部众二十万。
English: On the 4th of October in winter, 200,000 people flocked to Changle Palace.

古文：京师留守刑部尚书卫文升、右翊卫将军阴世师、京兆郡丞滑仪挟代王侑以拒义师。
现代文：京师留守刑部尚书卫文升、右翊卫将军阴世师、京兆郡丞滑仪挟持代王侑而抗拒义军。
English: Shoshuwei Wensheng of the Penal Department of the Beijing Division, Gen. Yin Shishi of the Right Division of the Beijing Division, and Keizhao County Jianlu Yi of the Right Division of the Beijing Division stayed behind to resist the rebel army by holding Wang Xi in place of him.

古文：高祖遣使至城下，谕以匡复之意，再三皆不报。
现代文：高祖派遣使者到城下，以挽救危亡国家之义忠告他们，反复再三，三人都拒不答复。
English: Gaozu sent emissaries to the outskirts of the city to advise them to save the endangered nation, but all three repeatedly refused to respond.

古文：诸将固请围城。
现代文：诸将坚决请求包围城池。
English: The generals firmly requested to encircle the city.

古文：十一月丙辰，攻拔京城。
现代文：十一月九日，攻克了隋朝京城。
English: On November 9th, the Sui Dynasty conquered Beijing.

古文：卫文升先已病死，以阴世师、滑仪等拒义兵，并斩之。
现代文：卫文升先已病死，因为阴世师、滑仪等人抗拒义军，都斩首。
English: Wei Wen Shengxian had already died of illness, because Yin Shishi, Niu Yi and others resisted the rebels and were beheaded.

古文：癸亥，率百僚，备法驾，立代王侑为天子，遥尊炀帝为太上皇，大赦，改元为义宁。
现代文：十六日，率领百官，准备好天子乘舆车驾，立隋之代王侑为天子，远远地尊奉隋炀帝为太上皇，大赦，改年号为义宁。
English: On the 16th, he led hundreds of officials to prepare for the heavenly son to ride in a public car, to establish the Sui Dynasty's Wang Xi as the heavenly son, to honor the Sui Dynasty's Emperor Xuanzong as the supreme emperor from afar, to grant amnesty, and to change the year name to Yining.

古文：甲子，隋帝诏加高祖假黄钺、使持节、大都督内外诸军事、大丞相，进封唐王，总录万机。
现代文：十七日，隋帝下诏赐予高祖假黄钺之生杀大权，使他持节做大都督总管朝廷内外所有军事事宜，做大丞相，晋封为唐王，总领所有国家日常事务。
English: On the 17th, Emperor Sui issued an edict giving Gao Zu the power of life and death, making him the grand governor in charge of all military affairs inside and outside the imperial court, the grand minister of war, the king of Tang, and the leader of all national daily affairs.

古文：以武德殿为丞相府，改教为令。
现代文：以武德殿为丞相府，改变出于皇上的 教 ，为行使于下的 令 。
English: With the Wude-den as the prime minister's office, the change was due to the emperor's teachings, and was carried out by the following order.

古文：以陇西公建成为唐国世子；太宗为京兆尹，改封秦公；姑臧公元吉为齐公。
现代文：以陇西公建成为唐国世子；太宗为京兆尹，改封为秦公；姑臧公元吉为齐公。
English: Gong Jian of Shaanxi became the heir of Tang; Taizong became Jing Zhaoyun and changed his title to Qin Gong; Gu Xi became Qi Gong.

古文：十二月癸未，丞相府置长史、司录已下官僚。
现代文：十二月七日，丞相府设置长史、司录等以及以下的官员。
English: On December 7, the Prime Minister's Office set up a long history, a register, and the following officials.

古文：金城贼帅薛举寇扶风，命太宗为元帅击之。
现代文：金城贼首薛举入侵扶风，命太宗为元帅攻打他。
English: The leader of the Jincheng bandits, Xue, raised the invasion wind and ordered Taizong to attack him as a marshal.

古文：遣赵郡公孝恭招慰山南，所至皆下。
现代文：派遣赵郡公孝恭在山南招安抚慰，所到之处，全部接受招安。
English: Zhao County sent Gongxiaoqiong to Shannan to recruit pacifiers. Everywhere he went, he received pacifiers.

古文：癸巳，太宗大破薛举之众于扶风。
现代文：十七日，太宗在扶风大破薛举的部众。
English: On the 17th, Emperor Taizong defeated the army led by Xue Zhe in Fufeng.

古文：屈突通自潼关奔东都，刘文静等追擒于阌乡，虏其众数万。河池太守萧瑀以郡降。
现代文：屈突通从潼关向东都逃窜，刘文静等在阌乡将其追上擒获，俘虏贼众数万人，河池太守萧王禹率州郡归降。
English: Qu Jutong fled from Shiguan to the east, Liu Wenzhing and others caught up with him in Shixiang, captured tens of thousands of thieves, and Xiao Wangyu, the governor of Hechi, surrendered the county.

古文：丙午，遣云阳令詹俊、武功县正李仲衮徇巴蜀，下之。
现代文：三十日，派云阳县令詹俊、武功县正李仲衮进军巴蜀并宣布政令，攻下了巴蜀。
English: On the 30th, he sent Zhan Jun, the governor of Yunyang County, and Zheng Li Zhongyao, the governor of Wugong County, to march into Bashu and announce the decree, and they successfully captured Bashu.

古文：二年春正月戊辰，世子建成为抚宁大将军、东讨元帅，太宗为副，总兵七万，徇地东都。
现代文：义宁二年春正月二十二日，世子建成为抚宁大将军、东讨元帅，太宗为副，共领兵七万，攻打东都并宣布政令。
English: On the 22nd day of the first month of the second year of the Spring of Yining, the heir Jian became the general of Fuxing, the marshal of the East, and Taizong was the deputy, leading a total of seventy thousand soldiers, attacking the eastern capital and announcing the government decree.

古文：二月，清河贼帅窦建德僭称长乐王。
现代文：二月，清河贼酋窦建德超越本分号称为长乐王。
English: In February, Dou Jiande, the chief of the Qing River bandits, surpassed this semicolon to become known as the Changle King.

古文：吴兴人沈法兴据丹阳起兵。
现代文：吴兴人沈法兴占据丹阳起兵。
English: Wu Xing and Shen Fa Xing occupied Danyang and raised an army.

古文：三月丙辰，右屯卫将军宇文化及弑隋太上皇于江都宫，立秦王浩为帝，自称大丞相。
现代文：三月十一日，右屯卫将军宇文化及在江都宫杀隋太上皇炀帝，立秦王浩为皇帝，自称为大丞相。
English: On March 11th, U Tunwei's general Yu Wenjun and killed the Emperor Sui in the Jiangdu Palace, and established Qin Wanghao as the emperor, calling himself the grand chancellor.

古文：徙封太宗为赵国公。
现代文：迁徙改封太宗为赵国公。
English: Emperor Taizong was transferred to Zhao Guogong.

古文：戊辰，隋帝进高祖相国，总百揆，备九锡之礼。
现代文：二十三日，隋帝晋高祖为相国，总领百官政务，准备赐给高祖九种神器，以示尊宠。
English: On the 23rd, Sui Emperor Jin Gaozu, as a relative of the country and the leader of hundreds of government officials, prepared to give Gaozu nine sacred objects to show his respect and favor.

古文：假手真人，俾除丑逆，济济多士，明知朕意。仍敕有司，凡有表奏，皆不得以闻。遣使持节、兼太保、邢部尚书、光禄大夫、梁郡公萧造，兼太尉、司农少卿裴之隐奉皇帝玺绶于高祖。
现代文：十四日，隋帝遣使持节、兼太保、刑部尚书、光禄大夫、梁郡公萧造，兼太尉、司农少卿裴之隐捧皇帝玉玺给高祖。
English: On the 14th, Emperor Sui sent emissaries to Gao Zu, including Ji Jie, concurrently with Taibo, Shang Shu of the Criminal Division, Guang Lu, Liang Gu Gong Xiao Zuo, concurrently with Taifu, and Pei Zhiyin, Sino-Minor Secretary of Agriculture, to present Emperor Yushan to Gao Zu.

古文：高祖辞让，百僚上表劝进，至于再三，乃从之。
现代文：高祖辞让，百官上表章敦请高祖登位，以至于两次、三次敦请高祖登位，这才听从众议。
English: Gao Zu resigned, hundreds of officials on the table urged Gao Zu to ascend the throne, so that two or three times urged Gao Zu to ascend the throne, this is to listen to the public opinion.

古文：隋帝逊于旧邸。
现代文：隋帝退居旧代王官邸。
English: Emperor Sui retreated to the former royal residence.

古文：改大兴殿为太极殿。
现代文：改大兴殿为太极殿。
English: Dakeiden was changed to Taiji-den.

古文：甲子，高祖即皇帝位于太极殿，命刑部尚书萧造兼太尉，告于南郊，大赦天下，改隋义宁二年为唐武德元年。
现代文：二十日，高祖在太极殿即皇帝位，任命刑部尚书萧造兼任太尉，在南郊祭祀天地，大赦天下，改隋朝义宁二年为唐朝武德元年。
English: On the 20th, Gao Zu was enthroned as emperor in the Taiji Hall. He appointed Shang Shu and Xiao Zou of the Department of Criminal Law to serve concurrently as first lieutenants. In the southern suburbs, he sacrificed heaven and earth and pardoned the whole world. He changed the second year of the Sui Dynasty Yining to the first year of the Tang Dynasty Wude.

古文：官人百姓，赐爵一级。
现代文：官吏都赐爵一级。
English: All officials were given a first-class knighthood.

古文：义师所行之处，给复三年。
现代文：义军所到之处，免除赋税徭役三年。
English: Wherever the rebels went, they were exempt from taxes and military service for three years.

古文：罢郡置州，改太守为刺史。
现代文：撤销郡而设置州，改太守为刺史。
English: County was abolished and replaced with prefecture, and Taishu was changed to Shishi.

古文：丁卯，宴百官于太极殿，赐帛有差。
现代文：二十三日，在太极殿宴请百官，按官阶等级赐予绸缎。
English: On the 23rd, hundreds of officials were invited to a banquet in the Taiji Hall, and silk robes were given to them according to their rank.

古文：东都留守官共立隋越王侗为帝。
现代文：东都留守官共同立隋越王侗为帝。
English: The officials left behind in the eastern capital jointly established the Sui and Yue kings as emperors.

古文：壬申，命相国长史裴寂等修律令。
现代文：二十八日，命相国长史裴寂等人修订法令。
English: On the 28th, the minister of state, Shi Peizhang, and others revised the decree.

古文：六月甲戌，太宗为尚书令，相国府长史裴寂为尚书右仆射，相国府司马刘文静为纳言，隋民部尚书萧瑀、相国府司录窦威并为内史令。
现代文：六月一日，太宗为尚书令，相国府长史裴寂任尚书右仆射，相国府司马刘文静为纳言，隋民部尚书肖王禹、相国府司录窦威二人都任内史令。
English: On June 1st, Emperor Taizong was appointed as the official historian, the prefect of the State Council, Shi Peijia, was appointed as the official historian's right-hand man, the secretary of the State Council, Ma Liu Wenjing, was appointed as the chief adviser, and the official historian of the Ministry of the People's Republic of China, Xiao Wangyu, and the secretary of the State Council, Dou Wei, were both appointed as the official historian.

古文：废隋《大业律令》，颁新格。
现代文：废除隋朝《大业律令》，颁布新的法律条令。
English: The "Law of Cause and Effect" of the Sui Dynasty was abolished, and a new law was promulgated.

古文：己卯，备法驾，迎皇高祖宣简公已下神主，祔于太庙。
现代文：六日，准备皇帝的车驾，迎接皇高祖宣简公以下君主牌位，附祭于太庙。
English: On the sixth day, the emperor's chariot was prepared to welcome the monarchs below the emperor's great-great-grandfather, Emperor Xuanjian, and the ceremony was held in the Great Temple.

古文：追谥妃窦氏为太穆皇后，陵曰寿安。
现代文：追谥妃窦氏为太穆皇后，陵墓称作寿安。
English: The mausoleum is called Shouan and is dedicated to Empress Taimu.

古文：庚辰，立世子建成为后太子。
现代文：七日，立世子建成为皇太子。
English: On the 7th, Prince Ritsuko became crown prince.

古文：封太宗为秦王，齐国公元吉为齐王。
现代文：封太宗为秦王，齐国公元吉为齐王。
English: Emperor Taizong was the king of Qin, and King Ji of Qi was the king of Qi.

古文：封宗室蜀国公孝基为永安王，柱国公道玄为淮阳王，长平公叔良为长平王，郑国公神通为永康王，安吉公神符为襄邑王，柱国德良为长乐王，上开府道素为竟陵王，上柱国博乂为陇西王，奉慈为渤海王。
现代文：封宗室蜀国公孝基为永安王，柱国道玄为淮阳王，长平公叔良为长平王，郑国公神通为永康王，安吉公神符为襄邑王，柱国德良为长乐王，上开府道素为竟陵王，上柱国博为陇西王，奉慈为渤海王。
English: The empress dowager of Shu was Yongan Wang, that of Zhu was Huaiyang Wang, that of Changping was Changping Wang, that of Zheng was Yongkang Wang, that of Anji was Xiangyi Wang, that of Zhu was Changle Wang, that of Shangkaifu was Jingling Wang, that of Shangping was Shaoxing Wang, that of Shangping was Shaoxing Wang, and that of Fengqi was Erhai Wang.

古文：诸州总管加号使持节。
现代文：诸州总管加封号为使持节。
English: The number of the seal added by the State Administration of Press and Publication of the People's Republic of China is Zhizhi Festival.

古文：癸未，封隋帝为酅国公。
现代文：十日，封隋帝为餋国公。
English: On the 10th, Emperor Sui was enthroned as the Duke of An.

古文：薛举寇泾州，命秦王为西讨元帅征之。
现代文：薛举入侵泾州，命令秦王李世民为西讨元帅征讨他。
English: Xue Qiu invaded Zhangzhou and ordered Qin King Li Shimin to recruit him as the Western Field Marshal.

古文：改封永康王神通为淮安王。
现代文：改封永康王神通为淮安王。
English: He changed his title from Yongkang Wang Shentong to Huai'an Wang.

古文：壬辰，加秦王雍州牧，余官如故。
现代文：十九日，加秦王为雍州牧，其余官职依旧。
English: On the 19th, Qin Wang was promoted to Yongzhou herdsman, and the rest of the official positions remained the same.

古文：辛丑，内史令窦威卒。
现代文：二十八日，内史令窦威去世。
English: On the 28th, Dou Wei passed away.

古文：秋七月丙午，刑部尚书萧造为太子太保。
现代文：秋七月三日，刑部尚书萧造为太子太保。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of autumn, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shangshu Xiaozong, became the Crown Prince.

古文：追封皇子玄霸为卫王。
现代文：追封已故皇子玄霸为卫王。
English: The late Prince Henba was enthroned as the King of Wei.

古文：西突厥遣使内附。
现代文：西突厥派遣使者前来表示归附。
English: The West Turks sent emissaries to the region to express their allegiance.

古文：秦王与薛举大战于泾州，我师败绩。
现代文：秦王与薛举在泾州大战，我军大败。
English: Qin Wang and Xue Jiu were at war in Zhangzhou, and our army suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：八月壬午，薛举死，其子仁杲复僭称帝，命秦王为元帅以讨之。
现代文：八月十日，薛举死，其子薛仁杲再次超越本分而称帝，命令秦王为元帅讨伐他。
English: On August 10, Xue Jiu died, and his son Xue Renyi once again overstepped his duty and proclaimed himself emperor, ordering the Qin King to fight him as a marshal.

古文：丁亥，诏曰： 隋太常卿高颎、上柱国贺若弼，并抗节不阿，矫枉无挠；司隶大夫薛道衡、刑部尚书宇文弼、左翊卫将军董纯，并怀忠抱义，以陷极刑：宜从褒饰，以慰泉壤。
现代文：十五日，高祖下诏书道： 隋太常卿高赹、上柱国贺若弼，都坚持节操，不依附权贵，矫正错误，百折不挠；司隶大夫薛道衡、刑部尚书宇文、左翊卫将军董纯，都怀抱忠义，以至于陷入死刑：应该表扬赞美，以安慰死者于黄泉之下。
English: On the 15th, Gao Zu issued the following edict: The Sui Dynasty's First Secretary Gao Qi and the First Secretary of the State of Hebei, He Ruoqi, both adhered to the principle of self-restraint, did not cling to the powerful, corrected their mistakes, and persevered in their endeavors; the Sili Doctor Xue Daoheng, the Criminal Investigation Department's Shang Shuyuan, and the Zuo Wei General Dong Chun, all cherished loyalty, so much so that they were sentenced to death. They should be commended and praised, so as to comfort the dead under the yangquan.

古文：颎可赠上柱国、郯国公，弼赠上柱国、杞国公，各令有司加谥；道衡赠上开府、临河县公，赠上开府、平昌县公，纯赠柱国、狄道县公。 
现代文：高赹可赠予上柱国、郯国公，贺若弼赠予上柱国、杞国公，各令有关官员加给谥号；薛道衡赠予上开府、临河县公，宇文赠上开府、平昌县公，董纯赠柱国、狄道县公。 
English: Gao Wei can be given to Shangzhu Province and Shandong Province, He Ruo Wei can be given to Shangzhu Province and Shandong Province, and the relevant officials will give him a posthumous title; Xue Daoheng can be given to Shangkaifu and Linhe County, Uwen can be given to Shangkaifu and Pyeongchang County, and Dong Chun can be given to Shangzhu Province and Dido County.

古文：又诏曰： 隋右骁卫大将军李金才、左光禄大夫李敏，并鼎族高门，元功世胄，横受屠杀，朝野称冤。
现代文：又下诏道： 隋右骁卫大将军李金才、左光禄大夫李敏、都是豪门贵族，世代大功，意外地遭到屠杀，朝廷内外都说冤枉。
English: He also issued the following edict: Li Jincai, General of the Sui and Ryukyuan Right Guards, and Li Min, Doctor of the Left Guanglu, were both high-ranking aristocrats who had made great contributions for generations. They were unexpectedly slaughtered, and both inside and outside the imperial court said that they had been wronged.

古文：然李氏将兴，天祚有应，冥契深隐，妄肆诛夷。
现代文：然而李氏将要兴起，上天赐福已有应验，而且暗相契合，潜藏无形，可随意杀戮平定无道。
English: However, the Li clan will rise, the blessing of heaven has been fulfilled, and they are secretly compatible, hidden and invisible, and can be killed at will.

古文：朕受命君临，志存刷荡，申冤旌善，无忘寤寐。
现代文：朕接受天命统治全国，存着洗刷荡涤污垢的志向，洗雪冤屈，表扬善良，寝卧不忘。
English: I accept the mandate of heaven to rule the whole country, with the aspiration of washing and wiping away the dirt, washing away the grievances, praising the kindness, and sleeping and not forgetting.

古文：金才可赠上柱国、申国公，敏可赠柱国、观国公。
现代文：李金才可赠上柱国、申国公，李敏可赠柱国、观国公。
English: Li Jincai can present Shangzhu Guo and Shen Guo Gong, Li Min can present Zhuo Guo and Guo Guo Gong.

古文：又前代酷滥，子孙被流者，并放还乡里。 
现代文：另外前代隋朝施用酷刑没有节制，子孙被流放者，都放回乡里。 
English: In addition, the previous Sui Dynasty used torture without restraint, and the descendants of the exiles were sent back to the countryside.

古文：凉州贼帅李轨以其地来降，拜凉州总管，封凉王。
现代文：凉州贼酋李轨以他的土地来归降，任命他为凉州总管，封为凉王。
English: Li Liao, the chief thief of Liangzhou, used his land to surrender, appointed him as the general manager of Liangzhou, and was crowned the king of Liangzhou.

古文：九月乙巳，亲录囚徒，改银菟符为铜鱼符。
现代文：九月三日，高祖亲自审察并记录犯人的罪状；改银菟符为铜鱼符。
English: On September 3rd, Gaozu personally examined and recorded the criminal's guilt; changed the silver seal to the bronze fish seal.

古文：辛未，追谥隋太上皇为炀帝。
现代文：二十九日，追加谥号给隋太上皇帝为炀帝。
English: On the 29th, an additional imperial title was given to the Empress Dowager of the Sui Dynasty as Empress Dowager.

古文：宇文化及至魏州，鸩杀秦王浩，僭称天子，国号许。
现代文：宇文化及到魏州，用鸩毒杀秦王浩，超越本分号称为天子，国号为许。
English: Yu culture and to Weizhou, with the pestle poison to kill Qin Wanghao, beyond this semicolon known as the son of heaven, the country is allowed.

古文：冬十月壬申朔，日有蚀之。李密率众来降。
现代文：冬十月一日，有日蚀。李密率部众来归降。
English: On the first day of October in winter, there was a solar eclipse. Li Mi led his subordinates to surrender.

古文：封皇从父弟襄武公琛为襄武王，黄台公瑗为庐江王。
现代文：封堂弟襄武公琛为襄武王，黄台公瑗为卢江王。
English: His cousin, Prince Xiangwu, was named King of Xiangwu, and Prince Huangdai was named King of the Lu River.

古文：癸巳，诏行傅仁均所造《戊寅历》。
现代文：二十二日，诏令施行傅仁均所造《戊寅历》。
English: On the 22nd, the "Wu Yin Calendar" created by Fu Renkun was implemented by imperial decree.

古文：十一月己酉，以京师谷贵，令四面入关者，车马牛驴各给课米，充其自食。
现代文：十一月八日，因为京师谷价昂贵，命令四面八方入关的人，车马牛驴分别给予课税之米，充当他们自己的粮食。
English: On November 8th, because of the high price of grain in Beijing, the people who entered the customs in all directions were ordered to separately give the taxed rice to the horses, oxen and donkeys to serve as their own grain.

古文：秦王大破薛仁杲于浅水原，降之，陇右平。
现代文：秦王在浅水原大破薛仁杲，迫使他归降，陇右平定。
English: The king of Qin defeated Xue Renzhen in the shallow water plain, forced him to surrender, and defeated Xue Renzhen.

古文：乙巳，凉王李轨僭称天子于凉州。
现代文：四月，凉王李轨在凉州超越本分号称为天子。
English: In April, Liangwang Li Rail in Liangzhou surpassed this semicolon to become known as Tianzi.

古文：诏颁五十三条格，以约法缓刑。
现代文：诏令颁布五十三条法律，以简要法令，宽缓刑法。
English: The imperial edict promulgated fifty-three laws, and the criminal law was relaxed by means of a brief decree.

古文：十二月壬申，加秦王太尉、陕东道大行台。
现代文：十二月二日，加秦王为太尉和陕东道大行台。
English: On December 2nd, King Jiaqin became the Taifu and the host of the grand parade in Shaanxi.

古文：丁丑，封上柱国李孝常为义安王。
现代文：七日，封上柱国李孝常为义安王。
English: On the seventh day, Li Xiaojang, the pillar state, was crowned King of Yian.

古文：庚子，李密反于桃林，行军总管盛彦师追讨斩之。
现代文：三十日，李密在桃林造反，行军总管盛彦师追逐讨伐将他斩首。
English: On the 30th, Li Mi rebelled in Taolin, and the commander-in-chief of the march, Morihiko Shi, chased him and beheaded him.

古文：二年春正月乙卯，初令文官遭父母丧者听去职。
现代文：武德二年春正月十五日，开始命令文官遭遇父母的丧事者听任其离职办丧事。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the second year of Wude, he began to order civil servants who had suffered the death of their parents to let them handle the funeral after leaving office.

古文：黄门侍郎陈叔达兼纳言。
现代文：黄门侍郎陈叔达兼任纳言。
English: Huangmen waiter Chen Shuda concurrently held the post of Nagan.

古文：二月丙戌，诏天下诸宗人无职任者，不在徭役之限，每州置宗师一人，以相统摄。
现代文：二月十六日，诏令天下与皇帝同宗族的人而没有官职者，不在徭役范围之内，每州设立宗师一人，加以统辖。
English: On February 16th, the imperial edict decreed that people of the same clan as the emperor who did not hold any official position were not within the scope of the eunuch service, and that there should be one eunuch in each state to supervise them.

古文：丁酉，窦建德攻宇文化及于聊城，斩之，传首突厥。
现代文：二十七日，窦建德在聊城攻打宇文化及，斩了他，在突厥传首级示众。
English: On the 27th, Dou Jiande attacked and killed U Bunyan in Liaocheng, and made a public demonstration at the first level of Turkic transmission.

古文：闰月辛丑，刘武周侵我并州。
现代文：闰二月一日，刘武周侵犯我并州。
English: On February 1, Liu Wuzhou invaded and annexed my province.

古文：己酉，李密旧将徐世勣以黎阳之众及河南十郡降，授黎州总管，封曹国公，赐姓李氏。
现代文：九日，李密旧将徐世责力率黎阳部众及河南十郡归降，授予他黎州总管，封曹国公，赐姓李。
English: On the 9th, Li Mihong made Xu Shi responsible for leading the people of Liyang and the ten counties of Henan to surrender, and awarded him the title of General Manager of Lizhou, the title of Cao Guogong, and the surname of Li.

古文：庚戌，上微行都邑，以察氓俗，即日还宫。
现代文：十日，高祖在都城隐蔽身份，改装出行，以考察民俗，即日回宫。
English: On the 10th, Gao Zu disguised himself in the capital city, traveled in disguise to investigate folk customs, and returned to the palace the same day.

古文：甲寅，贼帅硃粲杀我使散骑常侍段确，奔洛阳。
现代文：十四日，贼酋朱粲杀我使者散骑常侍段确，逃往洛阳。
English: On the 14th, the bandit chief Zhu Xi killed my messenger, the horseback rider, the attendant, and fled to Luoyang.

古文：夏四月乙巳，王世充篡越王侗位，僭称天子，国号郑。
现代文：夏四月七日，王世充篡夺了越王侗的王位，超越本分号称天子，国号为郑。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the summer, Wang Shichong usurped the throne of Yue Wangtao. He was called Tianzi and his country name was Zheng.

古文：辛亥，李轨为其伪尚书安兴贵所执以降，河右平。
现代文：十三日，凉王李轨被他的伪尚书安兴贵所捕捉而归降高祖，河右平定。
English: On the thirteenth day, Li Liao, the king of Liang, was captured by his pseudo-Shang Shu An Xinggui and returned to Gaozu, and He Rongping was defeated.

古文：突厥始毕可汗死。
现代文：突厥始毕可汗死去。
English: The Turkic Khan is dead.

古文：五月己卯，酅国公薨，追崇为隋帝，谥曰恭。
现代文：五月十二日，餋国公去世，追尊为隋皇帝，谥号曰恭。
English: On May 12th, the Duke of Yan passed away and was succeeded as Emperor of the Sui Dynasty. His posthumous name was Jing.

古文：六月戊戌，令国子学立周公、孔子庙，四时致祭，仍博求其后。
现代文：六月一日，令国子学建立周公、孔子庙，四时致以祭祀，仍然广泛地寻访他们的后人来继承。
English: On the first day of June, he ordered his sons to build the Zhou Gong and Confucius Temples, and they were dedicated at four o'clock. He still extensively searched for their descendants to succeed him.

古文：癸亥，尚书右仆射裴寂为晋州道行军总管，以讨刘武周。
现代文：二十六日，尚书右仆射裴寂为晋州道行军总管，以讨伐刘武周。
English: On the 26th, Shangshu's right-hand man, Sha Peijia, became the head of the Jinzhou Road marching army to fight Liu Wuzhou.

古文：秋七月壬申，置十二军，以关内诸府分隶焉。
现代文：秋七月六日，设置十二军，以关内诸府分别隶属十二军。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, the 12th army was set up, with the provinces of Guan separately belonging to the 12th army.

古文：王世充遣其将罗士信侵我谷州，士信率其众来降。
现代文：王世充派遣他的大将罗士信入侵我谷州，士信率他的部众前来归降。
English: Wang Shichong sent his general, Luo Shixin, to invade our valley, and Shixin led his men to surrender.

古文：西突厥叶护可汗及高昌并遣使朝贡。
现代文：西突厥叶护可汗及高昌都派使者前来朝贡。
English: The Western Turk Yegor Khan and Gochang both sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：九月辛未，贼帅李子通据江都，僭称天子，国号吴。
现代文：九月六日，贼酋李子通占据江都，超越本分号称天子，国号为吴。
English: On September 6th, Li Zi Tong, the bandit chief, occupied Jiangdu, and he was called Tianzi and his country name was Wu.

古文：沈法兴据毗陵，僭称梁王。
现代文：沈法兴占据毗陵，超越本分号称梁王。
English: Shen Faxing occupied Viling, and beyond this semicolon, he was known as King Liang.

古文：丁丑，和州贼帅杜伏威遣使来降，授和州总管、东南道行台尚书令，封楚王。
现代文：十二日，和州贼酋杜伏威派使者前来归降，授予和州总管、东南道行台尚书令，封为楚王。
English: On the twelfth day, Du Fuwei, the chief of the state thieves, sent an envoy to Tsurumo to surrender, and granted Shang Shuling, the governor of the state and the governor of Southeastern Province, the title of King of Chu.

古文：裴寂与刘武周将宋金刚战于介州，我师败绩，右武卫大将军姜宝谊死之。
现代文：裴寂与刘武周的大将宋金刚在介州作战，我军大败，右武卫大将军姜宝谊战死。
English: Peizhang and Liu Wuzhou's general Song Jingang fought in Jingzhou, our army was defeated, and the right guard general Jiang Baoyi died in battle.

古文：并州总管、齐王元吉惧武周所逼，奔于京师，并州陷。
现代文：并州总管、齐王元吉害怕被刘武周所逼，奔逃到京师，并州陷落。
English: And the head of the prefecture, Qi Wang Yuanji, afraid of being forced by Liu Wu Zhou, fled to Beijing and the prefecture fell.

古文：乙未，京师地震。
现代文：三十日，京都地震。
English: On the 30th, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：冬十月己亥。封幽州总管罗艺为燕郡王，赐姓李氏。
现代文：冬十月四日，封幽州总管罗艺为燕郡王，赐姓李。
English: On October 4th in winter, Luo Yiyi, the head of Fengyuzhou, was named the King of Yan County and given the surname Li.

古文：黄门侍郎杨恭仁为纳言。
现代文：黄门侍郎杨恭仁任纳言。
English: The Yellow Gate's chamberlain, Yang Kyung-in, was appointed as prime minister.

古文：杀民部尚书、鲁国公刘文静。
现代文：杀了民部尚书、鲁国公刘文静。
English: He killed the Minister of the People's Republic of China, Liu Wenzhing.

古文：乙卯，讨刘武周，军于蒲州，为诸军声援。
现代文：二十日，秦王李世民讨伐刘武周，在蒲州驻扎，为诸军声援。
English: On the 20th, Qin King Li Shimin led a crusade against Liu Wuzhou and stationed in Puzhou to support the troops.

古文：壬子，刘武周进围晋州。
现代文：十七日，刘武周进攻围困晋州。
English: On the 17th, Liu Wuzhou attacked and besieged Jinzhou.

古文：甲子，上亲祠华岳。
现代文：二十九日，皇上亲自祭祀华岳。
English: On the 29th, the emperor himself came to offer sacrifices to Huatake.

古文：十一月丙子，窦建德陷黎阳，尽有山东之地。
现代文：十一月十一日，窦建德攻陷黎阳，全部占有山东之地。
English: On November 11, Dou Jiande invaded Liyang and occupied all of Shandong.

古文：淮安王神通、左武候大将军李世勣皆没于贼。
现代文：淮安王神通、左武侯大将军李世责力都被贼人所俘虏。
English: Huai'an Wang Shentong and Zuowu grand marshal Li Shileili were both captured by the thieves.

古文：十二月丙申，永安王孝基、工部尚书独孤怀恩、总管于筠为刘武周将宋金刚掩袭，并没焉。
现代文：十二月一日，永安王孝基、工部尚书独孤怀恩、总管于筠被刘武周的大将宋金刚偷袭，都被俘。
English: On December 1st, Yongan Wang Xiaoqi, Shang Shuling of the Ministry of Industry, and Yu Qi, the general manager, were attacked by Liu Wuzhou's general Song Jingang, and were all captured.

古文：甲辰，狩于华山。
现代文：九日，高祖在华山打猎。
English: On the 9th, Gao Zu went hunting in Huashan.

古文：壬子，大风拔木。
现代文：十七日，大风拔起了树木。
English: On the 17th, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：三年春正月辛巳，幸蒲州，命祀舜庙。
现代文：武德三年春正月十七日，高祖驾到蒲州，命令祭祀舜庙。
English: On the 17th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the Wude era, Gao Zu drove to Puzhou and ordered the temple to be dedicated.

古文：癸巳，至自蒲州。
现代文：二十九日，从蒲州回来。
English: On the 30th, he returned to Kyoto from Pushu.

古文：甲午，李世勣于窦建德所自拔归国。
现代文：三十日，李世责力从窦建德处自己脱险回归唐朝。
English: On the 30th, Li Shili took the responsibility to escape from Dou Jiande and return to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：建德僭称夏王。
现代文：窦建德超越本分号称为夏王。
English: Dou Jiande beyond this semicolon is called Xia Wang.

古文：二月丁酉，京师西南地有声如山崩。
现代文：二月三日，京都西南地方有响声像山崩一般。
English: On February 3rd, there was a rumbling sound like a landslide in the southwestern part of Kyoto.

古文：庚子，幸华阴。
现代文：六日，高祖驾到华阴。
English: On the sixth day, Gao Zu drove to Huayin.

古文：工部尚书独孤怀恩谋反，伏诛。
现代文：工部尚书独孤怀恩谋反，伏法被杀。
English: Shang Shu of the Ministry of Works conspired to rebel, and was killed.

古文：三月癸酉，西突厥叶护可汗、高昌王曲伯雅遣使朝贡。
现代文：三月十日，西突厥叶护可汗、高昌王麴伯雅派使者来朝贡。
English: On March 10th, the Western Turk Yegu Khan and the Gochang King Zibo Ya sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：突厥贡条支巨鸟。
现代文：突厥进贡条支大鸟。
English: The Turkic tributary is a large bird.

古文：己卯，改纳言为侍中，内史令为中书令，给事郎为给事中。
现代文：十六日，改纳言为侍中，内史令为中书令，给事郎为给事中。
English: On the 16th, Kaienagon was promoted to Samurai, Naishi was promoted to Chushiro, and Nisshiro was promoted to Nisshiro.

古文：甲戌，内史侍郎封德彝兼中书令。封贼帅刘孝真为彭城王，赐姓李氏。
现代文：十一日，内史侍郎封德彝兼任中书令，封贼酋刘孝真为彭城王，赐姓李。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Fong Deyu, the official in charge of the internal history, also served as the middle-ranking official, and Liu Xiaozhen, the chief official, became the king of Pengcheng, and was given the surname Li.

古文：夏四月壬寅，至自华阴。
现代文：夏四月九日，高祖从华阴到来。
English: Summer On April 9, Gao Zu arrived from Huayin.

古文：于益州置行台尚书省。
现代文：在益州设置行台尚书省。
English: The Ministry of Education and Culture was set up in Yizhou.

古文：甲寅，加秦王益州道行台尚书令。
现代文：二十一日，加授秦王为益州道行台尚书令。
English: On the twenty-first day, Qin Wang was awarded the honorary title of "Yizhou Dao Xing Tai Shang Shu Ling."

古文：秦王大破宋金刚于介州，金刚与刘武周俱奔突厥，遂平并州。
现代文：秦王在介州大破宋金刚，宋金刚与刘武周都逃奔到突厥，于是平定了并州。
English: Qin Wang defeated Song King Kong in Jiezhou, and both Song King Kong and Liu Wuzhou fled to Turkestan, thus ending the annexation of Jiezhou.

古文：伪总管尉迟敬德、寻相以介州降。
现代文：伪朝总管尉迟敬德、寻相率介州投降。
English: The pseudo-chancellor's chief lieutenant, Chi Jingde, surrenders at the head of the search party.

古文：六月壬辰，徙封楚王杜伏威为吴王，赐姓李氏，加授东南道行台尚书令。
现代文：六月一日，迁徙改封楚王杜伏威为吴王，赐姓李，加授东南道行台尚书令。
English: On June 1, Du Fuwei, the King of Chu, was moved and renamed King of Wu. He was given the surname Li, and was also awarded the honorific title of Shang Shuling (尚書令) of Xiangtai, Southeastern Province.

古文：丙午，亲录囚徒。
现代文：十五日，高祖亲自审查并记录囚徒的罪状。
English: On the 15th, Gaozu personally reviewed and recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：封皇子元景为赵王，元昌为鲁王，元亨为酆王；皇孙承宗为太原王，承道为安陆王，承乾为恆山王，恪为长沙王，泰为宜都王。
现代文：封皇子元景为赵王，元昌为鲁王，元亨为酆王；皇孙承宗为太原王，承道为安陆王，承乾为恒山王，恪为长沙王，泰为宜都王。
English: The crown prince, Yuanqing, was the king of Zhao, Yuanchang was the king of Lu, and Yuanheng was the king of Shao; the emperor's grandson, Chengzong, was the king of Taiyuan, Chengdao was the king of Anlu, Chengyan was the king of Hengshan, Ke was the king of Changsha, and Tai was the king of Yidu.

古文：秋七月壬戌，命秦王率诸军讨王世充。
现代文：秋七月一日，命秦王率领各军讨伐王世充。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, King Qin was ordered to lead all the armies to fight Wang Shichong.

古文：遣皇太子镇蒲州，以备突厥。
现代文：派皇太子镇蒲州，以防备突厥。
English: Send the crown prince to Puzhou to prevent the Turks from coming.

古文：丙申，突厥杀刘武周于白道。
现代文：八月六日，突厥在白道杀了刘武周。
English: On the 17th, the Turks killed Liu Wu Zhou in Baidoa.

古文：冬十月庚子，怀戍贼帅高开道遣使降，授蔚州总管，封北平郡王，赐姓李氏。
现代文：冬十月十一日，怀戎贼酋高开道派使者前来归降，授予他蔚州总管，封北平郡王，赐姓李。
English: In winter, on October 11, Gao Kaido, the chief of the Wai Rong bandits, sent an envoy to him to surrender and granted him the title of the governor-general of Ulju, the title of the king of Beiping County, and the surname Li.

古文：四年春正月丁卯，窦建德行台尚书令胡大恩以大安镇来降，封定襄郡王，赐姓李氏。
现代文：四年春正月九日，窦建德行台尚书令胡大恩率大安镇来归降，封定襄郡王，赐姓李。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of the Spring, Dou Jiande marched to Tai Shang and ordered Hu Da'en to lead Da'an Town to surrender. He was crowned the King of Xiang County and given the surname Li.

古文：辛巳，命皇太子总统诸军讨稽胡。
现代文：二十三日，命皇太子统领全部的军队讨伐稽胡。
English: On the 23rd, he ordered the crown prince to lead the entire army to fight against Hu Jia.

古文：三月，徙封宜都王泰为卫王。
现代文：三月，迁徙改封宜都王泰为卫王。
English: In March, Yidu Wang Tai was transferred to Wei Wang.

古文：窦建德来援王世充，攻陷我管州。
现代文：窦建德来援王世充，攻陷我管州。
English: Dou Jiande came to the aid of Wang Shichong and invaded Guanzhou.

古文：夏四月甲寅，封皇子元方为周王，元礼为郑王，元嘉为宋王，元则为荆王，元茂为越王。初置都护府官员。
现代文：夏四月二十七日，封皇子元方为周王，元礼为郑王，元嘉为宋王，元则为荆王，元茂为越王，开始设置都护府官员。
English: On the 27th day of the 4th month of the summer, Yuan Fang, the prince of the Yuan Dynasty, became King Zhou, Yuan Li became King Zheng, Yuan Jia became King Song, Yuan Zet became King Jing, and Yuan Mao became King Yue, and officials of the Capital Protectorate were set up.

古文：五月己未，秦王大破窦建德之众于武牢，擒建德，河北悉平。
现代文：五月二日，秦王在武牢大破窦建德之部众，活捉窦建德，河北全部平定。
English: On May 2, Qin Wang defeated Dou Jiande's subordinates in the military prison, captured Dou Jiande alive, and pacified all of Hebei.

古文：丙寅，王世充举东都降，河南平。
现代文：九日，王世充以整个东都投降。河南平定。
English: On the 9th, Wang Shichong surrendered with the entire Dongdu. Henan was pacified.

古文：秋七月甲子，秦王凯旋，献俘于太庙。
现代文：秋七月九日，秦王凯旋，在太庙献俘。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of autumn, King Qin made a triumphant return and offered a sacrifice in the Great Temple.

古文：丁卯，大赦天下。
现代文：十二日，大赦天下。
English: On the 12th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：废五铢钱，行开元通宝钱。
现代文：废除五铢钱，通行开元通宝钱。
English: Abolish the 50 baht coin and introduce the yuan-denominated treasure money.

古文：斩窦建德于市；流王世充于蜀，未发，为仇人所害。
现代文：在市场上将窦建德斩首。流放王世充到蜀，还未出发，王世充即被仇人所杀。
English: Dou Jiande was beheaded in the market. Wang Shicheng, who had been exiled to Shu, was killed by his enemies before he could leave.

古文：甲戌，建德余党刘黑闼据漳南反。置山东道行台尚书省于洺州。
现代文：十九日，窦建德余党刘黑闼占据南漳谋反，在州设置山东道行台尚书省。
English: On the 19th, Liu Heixuan of the Dou Jiande Yu Party occupied Nanluo to plot a rebellion and set up the Shanhaotangdai Shangshuo Province in the prefecture.

古文：八月，兗州总管徐圆朗举兵反，以应刘黑闼，僭称鲁王。
现代文：八月，兖州总管徐圆朗起兵造反，以响应刘黑闼，超越本分号称鲁王。
English: In August, the governor of Zhangzhou, Xu Yuanlang, rebelled in response to Liu Heyao, and became known as the King of Lu.

古文：冬十月己丑，加秦王天策上将，位在王公上，领司徒、陕东道大行台尚书令；齐王元吉为司空。
现代文：冬十月五日，加秦王天策上将，地位在王公之上，并兼任司徒、陕东道大行台尚书令；齐王元吉为司空。
English: On the 5th day of October in winter, Qin Wang Tianze was promoted to the rank of admiral, which was higher than that of the prince, and he also served as the tutor, the host of the Great March of Shaanxi; Qi Wang Yuanji was the tutor of the sky.

古文：乙巳，赵郡王孝恭平荆州，获萧铣。
现代文：二十一日，赵郡王孝恭平定荆州，俘虏了萧铣。
English: On the 21st, Wang Xiaogong of Zhao County defeated Dingding of Jingzhou and captured Xiao Yu.

古文：十一月甲申，于洺州置大行台，废洺州都督府。
现代文：十一月一日，在州设置大行台，废除州都督府。
English: On November 1, a grand parade was set up in the state, and the state governor's office was abolished.

古文：庚寅，焚东都紫微宫乾阳殿。
现代文：七日，焚烧东都紫微宫乾阳殿。
English: On the seventh day, the Qianyang Hall of the East Palace was burned.

古文：会稽贼帅李子通以其地来降。
现代文：会稽贼帅李子通以会稽来归降。
English: Li Zi, the great thief of the party committee, surrendered through the party committee.

古文：十二月丁卯，命秦王及齐王元吉讨刘黑闼。
现代文：十二月十五日，命秦王世民及齐王元吉讨伐刘黑闼。
English: On December 15, he ordered Qin Wang Shimin and Qi Wang Yuanji to fight Liu Heyao.

古文：壬申，徙封宋王元嘉为徐王。
现代文：二十日，改封迁移宋王元嘉为徐王。
English: On the 20th, Song Wang Yuanjia was transferred to Xu Wang.

古文：五年春正月丙申，刘黑闼据洺州，僭称汉东王。
现代文：五年春正月十四日，刘黑闼占据州，超越本分号称汉东王。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, Liu Heyao occupied the state, and was called the King of the East Han Dynasty.

古文：三月丁未，秦王破刘黑闼于洺水上，尽复所陷州县，黑闼亡奔突厥。
现代文：三月二十六日，秦王在水上打败刘黑闼，全部恢复陷落的州县，刘黑闼亡命逃奔到突厥。
English: On March 26th, the Qin King defeated Liu Hefei on the water, and all the states and counties that had fallen were restored. Liu Hefei fled for his life to Turkey.

古文：蔚州总管、北平王高开道叛，寇易州。
现代文：蔚州总管、北平王高开道叛变，入侵易州。
English: The governor of Ulshu, Beiping Wang Gao, rebelled and invaded Yizhou.

古文：夏四月庚戌，秦王还京师，高祖迎劳于长乐宫。
现代文：夏四月，秦王回京师，高祖在长乐宫迎接慰劳。
English: In the summer of April, Qin Wang returned to Beijing to teach, and Gao Zu met him at the Changle Palace.

古文：壬申，代州总管、定襄郡王大恩为虏所败，战死。
现代文：四月二十一日，代州总管、定襄郡王李大恩被敌人所败，战死。
English: On April 21, Li Daing, the Daizhou governor and the king of Dingxiang County, was defeated by the enemy and died in battle.

古文：六月，刘黑闼引突厥寇山东。
现代文：六月，刘黑闼引突厥入侵山东。
English: In June, Liu Hefei led the Turks to invade Shandong.

古文：置谏议大夫官员。
现代文：设置谏议大夫官员。
English: Set up a doctor's consultation officer.

古文：秋七月丁亥，吴王伏威来朝。
现代文：秋七月八日，吴王伏威来朝见。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of autumn, Wu Wang Fuwei came to see the emperor.

古文：隋汉阳太守冯盎以南越之地来降，岭表悉定。
现代文：隋汉阳太守冯盎率南阳之地来归降。岭表全部平定。
English: The Sui and Han Dynasties Yang di-governor Feng Un led the Nanyang land to fall. The Ling tables were all pacified.

古文：八月辛亥，以洺、荆、并、幽、交五州为大总管府。
现代文：八月二日，以、荆、并、幽、交五州为大总管府。
English: On August 2nd, the five prefectures of Jing, Bin, Yu and Jiaotong were designated as the major headquarters.

古文：改封恆山王承乾为中山王。
现代文：改封恒山王承乾为中山王。
English: He changed the title of Hengshan King Chengyan to Zhongshan King.

古文：葬隋炀帝于扬州。丙辰，突厥颉利寇雁门。
现代文：在扬州葬隋炀帝。七日，突厥颉利入侵雁门。
English: On the seventh day, the Turkic Khari invaded the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：己未，进寇朔州。
现代文：十日，入侵朔州。
English: On the 10th, it invaded Shuozhou.

古文：遣皇太子及秦王讨击，大败之。
现代文：派皇太子及秦王讨伐打击他们，将他们打得大败。
English: He sent the crown prince and the king of Qin to fight against them and defeated them.

古文：冬十月癸酉，遣齐王元吉击刘黑闼于洺州。
现代文：冬十月二十五日，派齐王元吉在州打击刘黑闼。
English: On the 25th day of winter in October, Qi Wang Yuanji sent troops to attack Liu Heyao in Zhouzhou.

古文：时山东州县多为黑闼所守，所在杀长吏以应之。
现代文：当时山东州县大多被刘黑闼所据守，刘黑闼所到之处的地方都杀当地地位较高官员来响应。
English: At that time, most of the counties in Shandong Province were defended by Liu Hefei. Wherever Liu Hefei went, high-ranking local officials were killed in response.

古文：行军总管、淮阳王道玄与黑闼战于下博，道玄败没。
现代文：行军总管、淮阳王道玄与刘黑闼在下博作战，道玄战败被俘。
English: The general manager of the march, Huaiyang Wang Daoxuan, fought with Liu Heyao in Shibo, and Daoxuan was defeated and captured.

古文：十一月甲申，命皇太子率兵讨刘黑闼。
现代文：十一月七日，命皇太子率兵讨伐刘黑闼。
English: On November 7th, he ordered the crown prince to lead an army to fight Liu Heyao.

古文：丙申，幸宜州，简阅将士。
现代文：十九日，皇上到宜州，检查、挑选将士。
English: On the 19th, the emperor went to Yizhou to inspect and select soldiers.

古文：十二月丙辰，校猎于华池。
现代文：十二月九日，在华池用木栏杆围阻猎取野兽。
English: On December 9th, wooden railings were used to block the hunting of wild beasts in Huaike.

古文：庚申，至自宜州。
现代文：十三日，皇上从宜州来。
English: On the 13th, the Emperor came from Yizhou.

古文：皇太子破刘黑闼于魏州，斩之，山东平。
现代文：皇太子在魏州打败刘黑闼，斩了他，山东平定。
English: The crown prince defeated Liu Heixuan in Weizhou, beheaded him, and Shandong was pacified.

古文：六年春正月，吴王杜伏威为太子太保。
现代文：六年春正月，吴王杜伏威为太子太保。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of the Spring, King Du Fuwei of Wu became the Crown Prince.

古文：二月辛亥，校猎于骊山。
现代文：二月五日，在骊山用木栏杆围阻猎取野兽。
English: On February 5th, in Lushan, wooden railings were used to block the hunting of wild animals.

古文：三月乙未，幸昆明池，宴百官。
现代文：三月十九日，驾到昆明池，宴请百官。
English: On March 19th, he drove to Kunming Lake and held a banquet for hundreds of officials.

古文：夏四月己未，旧宅改为通义宫，曲赦京城系囚，于是置酒高会，赐从官帛各有差。
现代文：四月十四日，旧宅改为通义宫，特赦京城里关押的囚犯，于是设置酒宴举行盛会，又按官员品级等差赐给侍从官员绸缎。
English: On April 14, the old residence was changed to Tongyi Palace, and prisoners held in the capital were pardoned, so a banquet was held, and silk and satin were given to the officials' attendants according to their rank.

古文：癸酉，以尚书右仆射、魏国公裴寂为左仆射，中书令、宋国公萧瑀为右仆射，侍中、观国公杨恭仁为吏部尚书。
现代文：二十八日，以尚书右仆射、魏国公裴寂为左仆射，中书令、宋国公萧王禹为右仆射，侍中、观国公杨恭仁为吏部尚书。
English: On the 28th, Shang Shu's right-hand man, Wei Guo Gong Pei Jia, was appointed as the left-hand man, the Chinese Shurei, Song Guo Gong Xiao Wang Yu, was appointed as the right-hand man, and the attendant, Guo Guo Gong Yang Guoren, was appointed as the official.

古文：秋七月，突厥颉利寇朔州，遣皇太子及秦王屯并州以备之。
现代文：秋七月，突厥颉利入侵朔州，派皇太子及秦王屯兵并州以防备他。
English: In autumn and July, the Turks invaded Shuozhou, and sent the crown prince and Qin Wang to garrison Shuozhou to prevent them.

古文：八月壬子，东南道行台仆射辅公祏据丹阳反，僭称宋王，遣赵郡王孝恭及岭南道大使、永康县公李靖讨之。
现代文：八月九日，东南道行台仆射辅公纏占据丹阳谋反，越权号称宋王，派赵郡王孝恭及岭南道大使、永康县公李靖讨伐他。
English: On August 9, Danyang was occupied and rebelled by the south-eastern province's pro-Taiwan minion Shaifu, known as King Song, who sent Zhao County's Wang Xiaogong, the ambassador of Lingnan Province, and Yongkang County's Gong Li Jing to fight against him.

古文：丙寅，吐谷浑内附。
现代文：二十三日，吐谷浑归附。
English: On the 23rd, he returned to his hometown.

古文：九月丙子，突厥退，皇太子班师。
现代文：九月三日，突厥败退，皇太子得胜班师回朝。
English: On September 3, the Turks were defeated and retreated, and the crown prince's victorious team returned to the imperial court.

古文：改东都为洛州。
现代文：改东都为洛州。
English: To the east is the city of Luozhou.

古文：高开道引突厥寇幽州。
现代文：高开道勾引突厥入侵幽州。
English: Gao Kaido lured the Turks to invade Yuzhou.

古文：冬十月，幸华阴。
现代文：冬十月，驾幸华阴。
English: Winter in October, driving fortune Huayin.

古文：十一月，校猎于沙苑。
现代文：十一月，在沙苑用木栏杆围猎野兽。
English: In November, they used wooden railings to hunt wild beasts in Sha Yuan.

古文：十二月乙巳，以奉义监为龙跃宫，武功宅为庆善宫。
现代文：十二月四日，以奉义监为龙跃宫，武功宅为庆善宫。
English: On December 4th, the Long Yue Palace was named after Feng Yi Guan, and the Wu Gong House was named after Qing Zhen Palace.

古文：甲寅，至自华阴。
现代文：十三日，皇上从华阴归来。
English: On the 13th, Gaozu returned to Beijing from Huayin.

古文：七年春正月己酉，封高丽王高武为辽东郡王，百济王扶余璋为带方郡王，新罗王金真平为乐浪郡王。
现代文：七年春正月十四日，封高丽王高武为辽东郡王，百济王扶余璋为带方郡王，新罗王金真平为乐浪郡王。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the seventh year of the Spring, Gaowu, the King of Goryeo, was named the King of Liaodong County, Fuyu, the King of Baekje, was named the King of Taifang County, and Jin Zhenping, the King of Silla, was named the King of Lelang County.

古文：二月，高开道为部将张金树所杀，以其地降。
现代文：二月，高开道被部将张金树所杀，率整个地方归降。
English: In February, Gao Kaido was killed by the general Zhang Jinshu, leading the entire region to surrender.

古文：丁巳，幸国子学，亲临释奠。
现代文：十七日，驾到国子学，亲自驾临陈设酒食以祭奠先圣先师。
English: On the seventeenth day, he drove to Kuniko-gaku and personally came to set up food and wine to pay tribute to the holy forerunner.

古文：改大总管府为大都督府。
现代文：改大总管府为大都督府。
English: The General Administration Office was changed to the Governor-General's Office.

古文：吴王伏威薨。
现代文：吴王伏威去世。
English: Wu Wang Fuwei passed away.

古文：三月戊寅，废尚书省六司侍郎，增吏部郎中秩正四品，掌选事。
现代文：三月八日，废除尚书省六司侍郎，增加吏部郎中正四品的俸禄，掌管科举选拔之事。
English: On March 8th, the Sixth Secretary of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology was abolished, and the salary of the Fourth Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology was increased.

古文：戊戌，赵郡王孝恭大破辅公祏，擒之，丹阳平。
现代文：二十八日，赵郡王孝恭大破辅公纏，俘虏了他，丹阳平定。
English: On the 28th, Zhao County's Wang Xiaogong defeated Fu Gong and captured him, and Danyang was pacified.

古文：夏四月庚子，大赦天下，颁行新律令。
现代文：夏四月一日，大赦天下，颁布施行新的法令。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of summer, the country was amnestied, and a new law was promulgated and implemented.

古文：以天下大定，诏遭父母丧者听终制。
现代文：因为天下十分安定，诏命遭遇父母丧事的人听任他们守满三年之丧。
English: Because the world is very stable, those who have suffered the death of their parents are allowed to observe a three-year mourning period.

古文：五月，造仁智宫于宜州之宜君县。
现代文：五月，在宜州之宜君县建造仁智宫。
English: In May, the construction of the Ren Zhi Palace began in Yijun County, Yizhou.

古文：李世勣讨徐圆朗，平之。
现代文：李世责力讨伐徐圆朗，平定了他。
English: Li Shiliang fought against Xu Yuanlang and subdued him.

古文：六月辛丑，幸仁智宫。
现代文：六月三日，驾到仁智宫。
English: On June 3rd, I drove to the Nizhi Palace.

古文：秋七月甲午，至自仁智宫。
现代文：秋七月二十六日，皇上从仁智宫归来。
English: On the 26th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the Emperor returned from Nanzhi Palace.

古文：巂州地震山崩，江水咽流。
现代文：山隽州地震山崩，江水阻塞流淌。
English: A landslide caused by the earthquake in Shanxi Province blocked the flow of river water.

古文：八月戊辰，突厥寇并州，京师戒严。
现代文：八月一日，突厥入侵并州，京师戒严。
English: On August 1, the Turks invaded and annexed the prefecture, and the capital was placed under martial law.

古文：壬午，突厥退。
现代文：十五日，突厥退兵。
English: On the 15th, the Turks withdrew.

古文：乙未，京师解严。
现代文：二十八日，京师解除戒严。
English: On the 28th, martial law was lifted in Beijing.

古文：冬十月丁卯，幸庆善宫。
现代文：冬十月一日，驾到庆善宫。
English: On the first day of October in winter, I drove to Qingzengong.

古文：癸酉，幸终南山，谒老子庙。
现代文：七日，驾到终南山，晋谒老子庙。
English: On the seventh day, we drove to the end of the Nanshan Mountain, and drove to the Jinshan Lao Zi Temple.

古文：十一月戊辰，校猎于高陵。庚午，至自庆善宫。
现代文：十二月三日，在高陵用木栏杆围阻打猎。五日，从庆善宫归来。
English: On December 3rd, he went hunting in Goryeong using a wooden fence. On the 5th, he returned from Kyongsang Palace.

古文：八年春二月己巳，亲录囚徒，多所原宥。
现代文：八年春二月五日，皇上亲自审查并记录囚徒的罪状，大多宽恕。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, on February 5, the emperor personally reviewed and recorded the prisoners' crimes, and most of them were pardoned.

古文：夏四月，造太和宫于终南山。六月甲子，幸太和宫。
现代文：夏四月，在终南山造太和宫。六月二日，驾到太和宫。
English: In the summer of April, the Taihegu Shrine was built at the end of Nanshan Mountain. On June 2, I drove to the Taihegu Shrine.

古文：突厥寇定州，命皇太子往幽州，秦王往并州，以备突厥。
现代文：突厥入侵定州，命令皇太子前往幽州，秦王前往并州，以防备突厥。
English: The Turks invaded Dingzhou and ordered the crown prince to go to Yuzhou and the Qin king to go to Anhui Province to be prepared for the Turks.

古文：八月，并州道总管张公谨与突厥战于太谷，王师败绩，中书令温彦博没于贼。
现代文：八月，并州道总管张公瑾与突厥战于太谷，唐王朝军队大败，中书令温彦博被俘。
English: In August, Zhang Gongyi, the chief of the State Highway Administration, fought with the Turks in Taiyuan, the Tang Dynasty army was defeated, and the Chinese general Wen Yanbo was captured.

古文：九月，突厥退。
现代文：九月，突厥退兵。
English: In September, the Turks withdrew.

古文：冬十月辛巳，幸周氏陂校猎，因幸龙跃宫。
现代文：冬十月二十，皇上在周氏陂设木栏围捕野兽，因趁便驾到龙跃宫。
English: In winter, on October 20th, the emperor set up a wooden fence to round up the wild beasts in Zhou's palace, and took the opportunity to drive to Longyue Palace.

古文：十一月辛卯，幸宜州。
现代文：十一月一日，驾到宜州。
English: On November 1st, I drove to Yizhou.

古文：庚子，讲武于同官县。
现代文：十日，在同官县讲习武事。
English: On the 10th, a martial arts workshop was held in Dongguan County.

古文：改封蜀王元轨为吴王，汉王元庆为陈王。
现代文：改封蜀王元轨为吴王，汉王元庆为陈王。
English: Shu King Yuanlu was renamed King Wu, and Han King Yuanqing was renamed King Chen.

古文：加授秦王中书令，齐王元吉侍中。
现代文：加授秦王中书令，齐王元吉为侍中。
English: Qin Wang Zhong Shuling was additionally awarded, and Qi Wang Yuanji was promoted to attendant.

古文：天策上将府司马宇文士及权检校侍中。
现代文：天策上将府司马宇文士及暂时代理检校侍中。
English: General Tensaku was accompanied by the prefectural governor, Ma Yu Wenshi, and, for the time being, the vice-president of the Physical Examination School.

古文：十二月辛酉，至自宜州。
现代文：十二月一日，皇上从宜州归来。
English: On December 1, the emperor returned from Yizhou.

古文：九年春正月丙寅，命州县修城隍，备突厥。
现代文：九年春正月，命令州县修城墙及护城河，防备突厥。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of the Spring, he ordered the prefectures to build city walls and moats to guard against the Turks.

古文：事竟不行。
现代文：尚书左仆射、魏国公裴寂为司空。
English: In the end, this did not happen.

古文：六月庚申，秦王以皇太子建成与齐王元吉同谋害己，率兵诛之。
现代文：二月一日，加授齐王元吉为司徒。十九日，皇上亲自祭祀土神和谷神。三月三日，驾到昆明池。六月四日，秦王因为皇太子建成与齐王元吉同谋陷害自己，率兵将他们诛杀。
English: On the 19th, the emperor himself offered sacrifices to the earth god and the valley god. On the 3rd of March, he drove to Kunming Lake. On the 4th of June, King Qin, because Crown Prince Jiancheng had conspired with King Qi Yuanji to frame him, led his soldiers to kill them.

古文：诏立秦王为皇太子，继统万机，大赦天下。
现代文：皇上诏命立秦王为皇太子，继续管理国家纷繁的政务，大赦天下。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict appointing Qin Wang as the crown prince, continuing to manage the country's complex political affairs, and pardoning the world.

古文：八月癸亥，诏传位于皇太子。
现代文：八月八日，诏命传位给皇太子秦王。
English: On August 8, the imperial edict passed the throne to Crown Prince Qin Wang.

古文：尊帝为太上皇，徙居弘义宫，改名太安宫。
现代文：尊皇帝为太上皇，移居弘义宫，改名太安宫。
English: His Majesty the Emperor became the Retired Emperor, moved into the Hongyi Palace, and changed his name to the Tai'an Palace.

古文：贞观八年三月甲戌，高祖宴西突厥使者于两仪殿，顾谓长孙无忌曰： 当今蛮夷率服，古未尝有。 
现代文：贞观八年三月二日，高祖在两仪殿宴请西突厥使者，回头对长孙无忌道： 当今蛮夷顺服，古代未曾有过。 
English: On March 2nd of the 8th year of Zhenguan, Gao Zu invited the Western Turkic emissaries to a banquet at the Two Ceremonial Hall. He turned to his eldest grandson and said, "Today, barbarians obey, which was never the case in ancient times."

古文：无忌上千万岁寿。
现代文：无忌祝高祖千万岁寿。
English: I sincerely wish Gao Zu a long life.

古文：高祖大悦，以酒赐太宗。
现代文：高祖大悦，以酒赐太宗。
English: Gao Zu Dayue gave the emperor wine.

古文：太宗又奉觞上寿，流涕而言曰： 百姓获安，四夷咸附，皆奉遵圣旨，岂臣之力！ 
现代文：太宗又捧酒杯为太上皇祝寿，流泪道 ：百姓获得安康，四边少数民族都归附，都是我尊奉太上皇之圣旨才办到的，难道是我的力量吗？ 
English: Emperor Taizong also held a wine glass to celebrate the birthday of the Empress Dowager, and shed tears, saying, "The people have gained health and well-being, and the ethnic minorities on all four sides have been incorporated. All of this was made possible by me honoring the sacred will of the Empress Dowager. Is it my power?

古文：于是太宗与文德皇后互进御膳，并上服御衣物，一同家人常礼。
现代文：于是太宗与文德皇后交相进献给太上皇饭食，并献上太上皇使用的衣服器用，完全同一家人的家常礼节。
English: As a result, Emperor Taizong and Empress Wende exchanged gifts of food for the Emperor, as well as gifts of clothing and utensils used by the Emperor, all with the same family etiquette.

古文：是岁，阅武于城西，高祖亲自临视，劳将士而还。
现代文：这一年，在城西检阅军队，高祖亲自驾临视察，慰劳将士而归。
English: In the same year, Gaozu himself came to inspect the troops on parade in the west of the city, consoling the returning soldiers.

古文：置酒于未央宫，三品已上咸侍。
现代文：太宗在未央宫设酒，三品以上官员都参加侍从。
English: Emperor Taizong set up a liquor store in the Summer Palace, and more than three officials participated in the attendants.

古文：高祖命突厥颉利可汗起舞，又遣南越酋长冯智戴咏诗，既而笑曰： 胡、越一家，自古未之有也。 
现代文：高祖命突厥颉利可汗起舞，又命越南酋长冯智戴咏诗，过了一会儿笑道 ：胡、越与唐一家，从古以来就没有这种事。 
English: Gao Zu ordered the Turk Geli Khan to dance, and also ordered the Vietnamese chieftain Feng Zhidaishi, and after a while he laughed: Hu, Yue and Tang family, there has been no such thing since ancient times.

古文：太宗奉觞上寿曰： 臣早蒙慈训，教以文道；爰从义旗，平定京邑。
现代文：太宗捧酒杯祝福道 ：臣很早就蒙受慈父教训，用六艺文章及思想道德教我；于是随从高祖起义大旗，平定京城。
English: Holding a wine glass, Taizong said in his blessing, "I learned from my father very early on, and he taught me the six arts and ethics. Therefore, I followed Gao Zu's banner of uprising and conquered the capital city.

古文：重以薛举、武周、世充、建德，皆上禀睿算，幸而克定。
现代文：加之由于薛举、刘武周、王世充、窦建德叛乱，都秉承高祖明智的谋划，幸而能够制胜平定。
English: In addition, because Xueju, Liu Wuzhou, Wang Shichong, Dou Jiande rebellion, all adhering to Gao Zu's wise planning, fortunately able to win and pacify.

古文：三数年间，混一区宇。
现代文：三四年之间，统一全国。
English: Between three and four years, the whole country will be unified.

古文：天慈崇宠，遂蒙重任。
现代文：父皇推重信任，于是我承担了重任。
English: My father, the emperor, put a lot of trust in me, so I took on this important task.

古文：今上天垂祐，时和岁阜，被发左衽，并为臣妾。
现代文：现在上天降福，时世和平。年成丰收，披头散发和衣襟向左开的少数民族，都已经成了大唐的臣民。
English: Now, heaven has bestowed blessings, and the world is at peace. The ethnic minorities with abundant harvests every year, with their heads bowed and their collars turned to the left, have all become the subjects of Datang.

古文：此岂臣智力，皆由上禀圣算。 
现代文：这难道是臣之力？都是由于秉承高祖圣明的谋划。 
English: Is this the power of a vassal? It's all due to adhering to Gao Zu Shengming's plan.

古文：高祖大悦，群臣皆呼万岁，极夜方罢。
现代文：高祖大悦，群臣都呼喊万岁，直到深夜才散。
English: Gao Zu Daye, the ministers all shouted hooray, and did not disperse until late at night.

古文：九年五月庚子，高祖大渐，下诏： 既殡之后，皇帝宜于别所视军国大事。
现代文：贞观九年五月六日，高祖病危，下诏： 已经殡葬以后，皇帝应该在别的地方临朝掌管军国大事。
English: On May 6 of the ninth year of Zhenguan, Gao Zu, who was critically ill, issued the following edict: After the funeral, the emperor should take charge of the military affairs in another place.

古文：其服轻重，悉从汉制，以日易月。
现代文：丧服的轻重，完全按照汉朝的制度，日夜守丧。
English: The importance of mourning clothes, in full accordance with the Han Dynasty system, day and night vigil.

古文：园陵制度，务从俭约。 
现代文：坟墓园陵的修建务必从节俭的立场进行。 
English: The construction of tomb gardens must be carried out from a position of frugality.

古文：是日，崩于太安宫之垂拱前殿，年七十。
现代文：这一日，高祖在太安宫之垂拱前殿逝世，享年七十。
English: On this day, Gao Zu passed away at the age of seventy in the front hall of the Tai'an Palace.

古文：群臣上谥曰大武皇帝，庙号高祖。
现代文：群臣上谥号曰大武皇帝，庙号高祖。
English: The senior vassal's posthumous name is Daiwu Emperor, and his temple name is Gaozu.

古文：十月庚寅，葬于献陵。
现代文：十月二十七日，葬在献陵。
English: On October 27th, he was buried in the mausoleum.

古文：高宗上元元年八月，改上尊号曰神尧皇帝。
现代文：高宗上元元年八月，改上尊号曰 神尧皇帝 。
English: In August of the 1st year of the reign of Emperor Gaozong, he changed his honorific title to "Emperor Shenyu."

古文：天宝十三载二月，上尊号神尧大圣大光孝皇帝。
现代文：天宝十三年二月，上尊号为神尧大圣大光孝皇帝。
English: In February of the 13th year of Tianbao, Emperor Guangxiao, who was given the title of "Shenzhen Da Sheng Da Guangxiao," was enthroned.

古文：史臣曰：有隋季年，皇图板荡，荒主燀燎原之焰，群盗发逐鹿之机，殄暴无厌，横流靡救。
现代文：史臣曰：隋朝末年，国家混乱，荒淫的隋炀帝燃起了燎原的大火，群盗发起了争夺天下的先兆！
English: Shichen said: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, the country was in chaos. The lewd Sui and Qian emperors ignited a great fire in the plains, and the bandits initiated the prelude to the battle for the world!

古文：高祖审独夫之运去，知新主之勃兴，密运雄图，未伸龙跃。
现代文：隋朝灭绝残害没有满足，放纵泛滥而不挽救。高祖确实知道独夫民贼隋炀帝命运已去，知道新的天子将勃然兴起，秘密地施展雄图大略，然而没有伸展出众的才华。
English: Gaozu was not satisfied with the extinction and destruction of the Sui Dynasty, and indulged in overflowing without saving. Gaozu indeed knew that the fate of the autocrat and people's thief, the Sui Dynasty, had gone, and knew that a new heavenly son would rise up, secretly exerting a grand plan, but did not extend the talent of the masses.

古文：而屈己求可汗之援，卑辞答李密之书，决神机而速若疾雷，驱豪杰而从如偃草。
现代文：而且委曲求全取得可汗的援助，用低下的言辞回答李密的来信，但决断神机却迅速得像迅雷，驱使豪杰们顺从就像倒下的小草。
English: Moreover, Gui Qu Quan asked for the Khan's assistance and answered Li Mi's letter with low words, but the decision-making mechanism was as fast as lightning, driving the heroes to obey like fallen grass.

古文：洎讴谣允属，揖让受终，刑名大刬于烦苛，爵位不逾于珝轴。
现代文：等到歌谣恰当属实，隋朝灭亡拱手禅让，这是由于刑法比繁法苛政还大，爵位赏赐却不能超过脱离饥饿和疾病。
English: When the ballad was proved to be true, the Sui Dynasty was doomed to collapse. This was because the criminal law was harsher than the traditional laws, but the reward of a title of nobility could not exceed freedom from hunger and disease.

古文：由是攫金有耻，伏莽知非，人怀汉道之宽平，不责高皇之慢骂。
现代文：从此以后偷取金子者感到耻辱，做草莽强盗知道是错误，人们怀念汉朝的宽大平和，不苛责刘邦对人的轻视侮辱。
English: From then on, those who stole gold felt humiliated, those who were reckless robbers knew it was a mistake, people missed the magnanimity and peace of the Han Dynasty, and did not scold Liu Bang for his contempt and insult to people.

古文：然而优柔失断，浸润得行，诛文静则议法不从，酬裴寂则曲恩太过。
现代文：然而高祖李渊做事犹豫而失去决断，谗言得以畅行；杀刘文静则是议定的法律而不遵从；酬劳裴寂又曲意加恩大为过分。
English: However, the great ancestor Li Yuan hesitated in doing things and lost his determination, and the slander was allowed to go unimpeded; the killing of Liu Wenzhing was an agreed-upon law and was not followed; the reward and punishment were excessive.

古文：奸佞由之贝锦，嬖幸得以掇蜂。献公遂间于申生，小白宁怀于召忽。
现代文：奸邪谄媚之人从此进诬陷之谗言，宠爱狎昵的小人得以离间骨肉，像晋献公那样在儿子申生身上被离间，又像齐桓公小白那样宁可怀念忠于公子纠的忠臣召忽。
English: From now on, those who are treacherous, evil, and charming will be slandered, and those who love and flatter will be able to separate the flesh and blood. Like Jin Xianguo, they will be separated in the body of his son Shen Shensheng, and like Qi Kuan Guo Xiaobai, they would rather miss the loyal servants who are loyal to the prince Guo.

古文：一旦兵交爱子，矢集申孙。
现代文：有这么一天兵权交给宠爱之子，弓箭便集射在兄弟身上。
English: On such a day, the military power was handed over to the favorite son, and the bow and arrow were concentrated on the brother.

古文：匈奴寻犯于便桥，京邑咸忧于左衽。
现代文：匈奴不久向便桥进犯，京城又都担忧少数民族的入侵。
English: The Xiongnu soon attacked Benqiao, and the capital was worried about the invasion of ethnic minorities.

古文：不有圣子，王业殆哉！
现代文：没有圣贤的儿子太宗，帝王大业可就危险了啊！
English: Without Taizong, the son of a sage, the emperor's great cause would be in danger!

古文：赞曰：高皇创图，势若摧枯。
现代文：赞曰：高祖创业国家，其势像摧毁枯木一样。
English: Zang said: Gao Zu entrepreneurial country, its potential is like destroying dead wood.

古文：国运神武，家难圣谟。
现代文：治国运用英明威武，治家却难于用圣明的谋划。
English: It is wise and powerful to govern a country, but it is difficult for a ruler to plan wisely.

古文：言生床笫，祸切肌肤。
现代文：吟咏《诗经·鸱号鸟》，对我大唐无损也。
English: Singing "Song of Songs, Bird of the Ploughshare," the Great Tang Dynasty did not harm me.

