古文：王仲宣好驴鸣。
现代文：王仲宣生前非常喜欢听驴叫。
English: Wang Zhongxuan was very fond of listening to donkey calls when he was alive.

古文：既葬，文帝临其丧，顾语同游曰： 王好驴鸣，可各作一声以送之。 
现代文：等到他下葬那一天，魏文帝曹丕去参加他的葬礼，回头对往日同游的人说： 王仲宣喜欢听驴叫，每人应该学一声驴叫来送他。 
English: On the day of his burial, Cao Pi, the Wei Emperor, went to attend his funeral and said to his former fellow travelers: "Wang Zhongxuan likes to hear donkeys bray. Everyone should learn a donkey bray to see him off."

古文：赴客皆一作驴鸣。
现代文：于是去吊丧的客人每人学了一声驴叫。
English: So each of the guests who went to the funeral learned a donkey call.

古文：王浚冲为尚书令，著公服，乘轺车，经黄公酒垆下过，顾谓后车客： 吾昔与嵇叔夜、阮嗣宗共酣饮于此垆，竹林之游，亦预其末。
现代文：王浚冲担任尚书令时，身着官服，坐着轻车，从黄公酒垆旁经过。触景生情，他回头对后车的客人说： 我以前和嵇康、阮嗣宗一起在这个酒肆中畅饮美酒。竹林中的交游，我也跟在后面。
English: When Wang Junchong served as Shang Shuling, he was dressed in an official uniform and sat in a light car, passing by Huang Gong's liquor store. Touching the scene, he turned to the guests in the car behind and said: I used to enjoy drinking fine wine in this liquor store with Yu Kang and Ruan Jizong. I am also following the travel in the bamboo forest.

古文：自嵇生夭、阮公亡以来，便为时所羁绁。
现代文：自从嵇康早去世、阮公亡故后，我就被时势纠缠住了，再不能像从前一样了。 
English: Since the untimely death of Nie Kanghuang and the death of Nguyen Quang, I have been entangled in the current situation and can no longer be the same as before.

古文：今日视此虽近，邈若山河。 
现代文：今天看着这间酒肆，虽然近在眼前，但是想到从前岁月，却像隔着山河一样遥远。 
English: Looking at this brewery today, although it is close to my eyes, when I think of the past, it seems as far away as across the mountains and rivers.

古文：孙子荆以有才，少所推服，唯雅敬王武子。
现代文：孙子荆倚仗自己才能过人，很少推重并敬佩他人，只是很尊敬王武子。
English: Grandson Jing relies on his own talent to surpass others, rarely pushing and admiring others, but he respects Wang Wu Zi.

古文：武子丧时，名士无不至者。
现代文：王武子去世时，当时有名望的人都来吊唁。
English: When Wang Wu Zi passed away, many famous people came to offer their condolences.

古文：子荆后来，临尸恸哭，宾客莫不垂涕。
现代文：孙子荆后到，对着遗体痛哭，宾客都感动得流泪。
English: Grandson Jing arrived later and wept bitterly over the body. The guests were moved to tears.

古文：哭毕，向灵床曰： 卿常好我作驴鸣，今我为卿作。 
现代文：他哭完后，朝着灵床说： 你平时喜欢听我学驴叫，现在我为你学一学。 
English: After he had finished crying, he turned to the hearse and said: "You usually like to listen to me learn to howl like a donkey, now I'll learn a lesson for you.

古文：体似真声，宾客皆笑。
现代文：学的声音就像真的一样，宾客们都笑了。
English: It sounded like the real thing, and the guests laughed.

古文：孙举头曰： 使君辈存，令此人死！ 
现代文：这时候孙子荆抬起头说： 怎么就让你们这类人活着，却让这个人死了！ 
English: At this time, Sun Tzu looked up and said, "How can you let people like this live, but let this man die!"

古文：王戎丧儿万子，山简往省之，王悲不自胜。
现代文：王戎的儿子万子去世了，山简去探望他，王戎哀痛万分。
English: Wang Rong's son Wanzi passed away. Shan Jian went to visit him, and Wang Rong was overwhelmed with grief.

古文：简曰： 孩抱中物，何至于此？ 
现代文：山简说： 只是一个婴儿罢了，怎么能悲痛到这个地步！ 
English: Mountain Jane said: "I'm just a baby, how can I be so sad!

古文：王曰： 圣人忘情，最下不及情；情之所钟，正在我辈。 
现代文：王戎说： 圣人不动情，最下等的人谈不上有感情；感情最专注的，正是我们这一类人。 
English: Wang Rong said, "Sages are impassive, and the lowest people can't talk about feelings; it's people like us who are the most emotionally focused.

古文：简服其言，更为之恸。
现代文：山简很敬佩他的话，更加为他悲痛。
English: Mountain Jane admired his words, even more sad.

古文：有人哭和长舆曰： 峨峨若千丈松崩。 
现代文：有人哭吊和长舆，说： 好像巍峨的千丈青松倒下来了。 
English: Some people cried and wailed, saying, "It's as if the towering Chizho Aomatsu has fallen down."

古文：卫洗马以永嘉六年丧，谢鲲哭之，感动路人。
现代文：太子洗马卫玠在永嘉六年去世，谢鲲去吊丧，哭声让路人听了都动容。
English: Prince Zima Weichen died in Yongjia six years ago. Xie Jun went to mourn, and the cries moved passers-by.

古文：咸和中，丞相王公教曰： 卫洗马当改葬。
现代文：咸和年间，丞相王导发表文告说， 卫洗马今当改葬。
English: During the Haman and Heian periods, the prime minister, Wang Du, issued a proclamation saying that Weishima's funeral should be changed.

古文：此君风流名士，海内所瞻，可脩薄祭，以敦旧好。 
现代文：此君是风雅名流，受众人仰慕，大家应该整治薄祭，以示我们对旧友的怀念。 
English: This gentleman is a style celebrity, admired by many people, we should rectify the thin festival to show our nostalgia for old friends.

古文：顾彦先平生好琴，及丧，家人常以琴置灵床上。
现代文：顾彦先平生喜欢弹琴，他去世以后，他的家人就总是把琴放在灵座上。
English: Gu Yanxian liked to play the piano in his lifetime. After his death, his family always placed the piano on the hearse.

古文：张季鹰往哭之，不胜其恸，遂径上床，鼓琴，作数曲竟，抚琴曰： 顾彦先颇复赏此不？ 
现代文：张季鹰去吊丧，非常悲痛，便径直坐在灵座上弹琴，弹完了几曲，抚摩着琴说： 顾彦先还能再欣赏这个吗？ 
English: Zhang Jiying went to the funeral, was very sad, and then sat directly on the throne to play the piano. After playing a few songs, he stroked the piano and said: Can Gu Yanxian enjoy this again?

古文：因又大恸，遂不执孝子手而出。
现代文：于是又悲痛万分，竟没有握孝子的手就出去了。
English: As a result, he was so grief-stricken that he went out without shaking his son's hand.

古文：庾亮儿遭苏峻难遇害。
现代文：庾亮的儿子庚会在苏峻的叛乱中被杀。
English: Gong Liang's son Geng Jie was killed in Su Jun's rebellion.

古文：诸葛道明女为庾儿妇，既寡，将改适，与亮书及之。
现代文：诸葛道明的女儿是庾会的妻子，守寡后，将要改嫁，诸葛道明写信给庚亮谈到这件事。
English: Zhuge Daoming's daughter is the wife of the Dragon Boat Association. After being widowed, she is going to remarry. Zhuge Daoming wrote to Geng Liang about this.

古文：亮答曰： 贤女尚少，故其宜也。
现代文：庾亮回信说： 令爱还年轻，这样做自然合适。
English: Hao Liang replied in a letter, "It is a natural fit for you to do so, since you are still young.

古文：感念亡儿，若在初没。 
现代文：只是感念死去的孩儿，就像他刚刚去世一样。 
English: Just thinking about the dead kid, like he just died.

古文：庾文康亡，何扬州临葬云： 埋玉树箸土中，使人情何能已已！ 
现代文：质亮逝世，扬州刺史何充去送葬，说： 把玉树埋到土里，使人的感情无法平静下去啊！ 
English: When Qiao Liang passed away, Yangzhou chief historian He Chengwu went to the funeral and said, "Burying the jade tree in the ground makes people's emotions unable to calm down!"

古文：王长史病笃，寝卧镫下，转麈尾视之，叹曰： 如此人，曾不得四十！ 
现代文：长史王濛病重的时候，在灯下躺着，转动着拂尘，一边看，一边叹息说： 这样的人，竟然连四十岁都活不到！ 
English: When Changshi Wang Yao was gravely ill, he lay under a lamp and whisked the dust, looking at it and sighing, "Such a person can't even live to be forty years old!"

古文：及亡，刘尹临殡，以犀柄麈尾箸柩中，因恸绝。
现代文：到他死后，丹阳尹刘惔去参加大殓礼，把带犀角柄的拂尘放到棺材里，于是痛哭得昏死过去。
English: After his death, Danyang Yin Liuyi went to the grand funeral ceremony, put the brush with the rhino horn handle into the coffin, and then cried herself to death.

古文：支道林丧法虔之后，精神霣丧，风味转坠。
现代文：支道林失去法虔以后，精神委靡不振，风度也日渐丧失。
English: After losing its religious belief, the spirit of the tributary forest was depressed and its demeanor was gradually lost.

古文：常谓人曰： 昔匠石废斤于郢人，牙生辍弦于钟子，推己外求，良不虚也！
现代文：他常对人说： 从前匠石因为郢人死去就不再用斧子，伯牙因为钟子期死去而终止鼓琴，推己及人，确实不假。
English: He often said to people, "Once upon a time, the smiths no longer used axes because the smiths died, and the coppersmiths no longer used the coppersmiths because the coppersmiths died, and the coppersmiths no longer used the coppersmiths because the coppersmiths died.

古文：冥契既逝，发言莫赏，中心蕴结，余其亡矣！ 
现代文：知己已经去世，说话再也无人欣赏，心里郁结难解，我大概要死了！ 
English: My friend has passed away, no one appreciates my words anymore, my heart is heavy, I'm probably dead!

古文：却后一年，支遂殒。
现代文：过后一年，支道林便死了。
English: A year later, Shindo Lin died.

古文：郗嘉宾丧，左右白郗公 郎丧 ，既闻，不悲，因语左右： 殡时可道。 
现代文：郗嘉宾死了，手下的人禀告郗惜说： 大郎死了。 郗愔听了，并不悲伤，随即告诉手下人说： 入殓时可以告诉我。 
English: When his guest died, one of his subordinates lamented and said, "Dairo is dead." He did not feel sad when he heard this, and immediately told his subordinate, "You can tell me when you enter the palace."

古文：公往临殡，一恸几绝。
现代文：等到入殓的时候，郗愔去参加大殓礼，顿时悲痛欲绝。
English: When it was time to enter the coffin, she went to take part in the grand funeral ceremony and was overcome with grief.

古文：戴公见林法师墓，曰： 德音未远，而拱木已积。
现代文：戴逢看见支道林的坟墓，说： 那高明的言谈还在耳边回响，可是墓旁的树木已经连成一片了。
English: Dai Fang saw the grave of the branch forest and said: That clever speech still echoes in my ears, but the trees around the grave have become one.

古文：冀神理绵绵常，不与气运俱尽耳！ 
现代文：但愿您那精湛的玄理能够流传下去，不会和寿数一起终结啊！ 
English: I hope that your exquisite metaphysics can be passed on and will not end with the number of years of life!

古文：王子敬与羊绥善。
现代文：王子敬和羊绥关系很好。
English: Prince Kei has a good relationship with Sheep and Goat.

古文：绥清淳简贵，为中书郎，少亡。
现代文：羊绥清廉敦厚。俭朴尊贵，曾任中书郎，很年轻就去世了。
English: Sheepherd clean and honest. Frugal and honorable, he was once a middle school teacher, and died very young.

古文：王深相痛悼，语东亭云： 是国家可惜人！ 
现代文：王子敬痛切地悼念着他，曾对东亭侯王珣说： 他是整个国家最值得痛惜的人！ 
English: The prince mourned him with deep respect. He once said to Dongting Hou Wangyao: "He is the most pitiable person in the whole country!"

古文：王东亭与谢公交恶。
现代文：东亭侯王珣和谢安结有仇怨。
English: Dongting marquis Wang Yao and Xie An have a grudge.

古文：王在东闻谢丧，便出都诣子敬道： 欲哭谢公。 
现代文：王殉在东边听说谢安去世，就到京都去见王于敬，说他想去哭吊谢安。
English: Wang Zhidi heard about Xie An's death in the east, so he went to Kyoto to see Wang Yujing, saying that he wanted to cry and hang Xie An.

古文：子敬始卧，闻其言，便惊起曰： 所望于法护。 王于是往哭。
现代文：子敬本是躺着，听到他的话惊讶地站起来说： 这是我对你的希望。 王于是就去哭吊。
English: Zi Jing, who had been lying down, was surprised to hear his words and stood up and said, "This is my hope for you." The king then went off to cry.

古文：督帅刁约不听前，曰： 官平生在时，不见此客。 
现代文：谢安帐下的督帅刁约不让他上前，说： 大人活着的时候，从来不见这个客人。 
English: The superintendent under Xie's supervision, Zou Yu, did not allow him to come forward, saying, "When I was alive, I never saw this guest.

古文：王亦不与语，直前，哭甚恸，不执末婢手而退。
现代文：王珣也不理他，径直上前哭吊，哭得非常伤心，结果没有按常礼握谢琰的手就退出来了。
English: Wang Yao also ignored him and went straight to the front to cry, crying very sad. As a result, he did not shake Xie Yao's hand according to the usual etiquette and withdrew.

古文：王子猷、子敬俱病笃，而子敬先亡。
现代文：王子猷和王子敬都病得很重，子敬先去世。
English: Both Prince Zou and Prince Jing were seriously ill, and Prince Jing died first.

古文：子猷问左右： 何以都不闻消息？
现代文：一天子猷问侍候的人说： 为什么一点也没有听到子敬的音讯？
English: One day, Zi Yao said to the waiter: "Why haven't we heard anything about Zi Jing?"

古文：此已丧矣！ 
现代文：这是已经去世了！ 
English: It's already passed away!

古文：语时了不悲。
现代文：说话时一点也不悲伤。
English: There is no sadness at all when he speaks.

古文：便索舆来奔丧，都不哭。
现代文：于是就要车去奔丧，一点也没有哭。
English: So I had to drive to the funeral, and I didn't cry at all.

古文：子敬素好琴，便径入坐灵床上，取子敬琴弹，弦既不调，掷地云： 子敬！子敬！人琴俱亡。 
现代文：子敬平时喜欢弹琴，子猷便一直进去坐在灵座上，拿过子敬的琴来弹，琴弦怎么也调不好，就把琴扔到地上说： 子敬，子敬，人和琴都不在了！ 
English: Zi Jing usually liked to play the piano, so Zi Yan always went in and sat on the throne. He took Zi Jing's piano and played it. The strings could not be tuned well, so he threw the piano to the ground and said: Zi Jing, Zi Jing, the people and the piano are gone!

古文：因恸绝良久，月余亦卒。
现代文：说完就悲痛得昏了过去，很久才醒过来。
English: After saying that, I blacked out from grief, and it took me a long time to wake up.

古文：孝武山陵夕，王孝伯入临，告其诸弟曰： 虽榱桷惟新，便自有黍离之哀！ 
现代文：过了一个多月他也去世了。晋孝武帝去世，夕祭的时候，王孝伯进京哭祭，对他的几个弟弟说： 虽然陵寝是新的，却让人感到有《黍离》之悲。 
English: After more than a month, he also passed away. When Emperor Jin Xiaowu passed away, at the time of the evening festival, Wang Xiaobo went to Beijing to cry and said to his brothers: Although the mausoleum is new, it makes people feel the sadness of "separation."

古文：羊孚年三十一卒，桓玄与羊欣书曰： 贤从情所信寄，暴疾而殒，祝予之叹，如何可言！ 
现代文：羊孚三十一岁时死了，桓玄给羊欣的信上说： 贤堂兄是我所信赖的，友情所寄托的人，突然暴病而死；天将亡我之叹，怎么能用言语来表达！ 
English: Yang Fu died at the age of thirty-one, and Huan Xuan said in a letter to Yang Xin: "Cousin Xian is a person I trust, who is entrusted to me by my friends. He died suddenly of a violent illness. How can I express my sigh of heaven's doom in words!

古文：桓玄当篡位，语卞鞠云： 昔羊子道恒禁吾此意。
现代文：桓玄将要篡位的时候，对卞鞠说： 以前羊子道经常不容许我有这种意图。
English: When Kuan Xuan was about to usurp the throne, he said to Gong Mu: "In the past, the Yang Zi Way often did not allow me to have such an intention.

古文：今腹心丧羊孚，爪牙失索元，而匆匆作此诋突，讵允天心？ 
现代文：现在我的心腹里头死了羊孚，助手里头又失去了索元，在这种情况下，却要匆匆忙忙做这种冒犯君上的事，难道能符合天意？ 
English: Now my heart is filled with the death of Yang Fu and the loss of Su Yuan in my assistant. Under these circumstances, would it be in accordance with God's will to rush into doing something that would offend my lord?

