古文：庞阿马势妇无名夫妇王宙郑齐婴柳少游苏莱郑生韦隐齐推女郑氏女裴珙舒州军史
现代文：庞阿马势妇无名夫妇王宙郑齐婴柳少游苏莱郑生韦隐齐推女郑氏女裴珙舒州军史
English: The unknown couple Wang Zhou Zhengqi baby Liu Shao You Sulai Zheng Sheng Wei Yin Qi pushing daughter Zheng's daughter Pei Yan Shuzhou military history

古文：庞阿
现代文：庞阿
English: Bonga Town

古文：钜鹿有庞阿者，美容仪。
现代文：钜鹿县有个叫庞阿的，生得英俊潇洒。
English: In Elk County, there is a man named Pang Ah who was born handsome and dashing.

古文：同郡石氏有女，曾内睹阿，心悦之。
现代文：同郡石氏家有个女儿，曾偷偷看见过庞阿，暗暗爱上了他。
English: There is a daughter of the Shi family in the same county who once secretly saw Pang Ah and secretly fell in love with him.

古文：未几，阿见此女来诣阿。阿妻极妒，闻之。使婢缚之，遂还石家。中路，遂化为烟气而灭。
现代文：不久，石氏女突然来看庞阿，庞阿的妻子非常嫉妒，命婢女把石氏女捆了起来送回石家，半路上，石氏女突然化成一股烟消失了。
English: Soon after, the Stone Lady suddenly came to see Pang-a. Pang-a's wife was very jealous. The maid tied up the Stone Lady and sent her back to the Stone House. Halfway there, the Stone Lady suddenly disappeared in a puff of smoke.

古文：婢乃直诣石家，说此事，石氏之父大惊曰：我女都不出门，岂可毁谤如此。
现代文：婢女就直接找到石家报告这件事。石氏的父亲听后大吃一惊说，我的女儿根本就没出去过，你们为什么这样诽谤她！
English: The maid went directly to the Shih family to report the incident. Upon hearing this, Shih's father was taken aback and said, "My daughter never went out at all, why are you slandering her like this!"

古文：阿妇自是常加意伺察之，居一夜，方值女在斋中，乃自拘执，以诣石氏。
现代文：庞阿的妻子从此特别注意观察庞阿的居室。这天晚上，庞妻发现石氏女又来到庞阿的屋里，就又把石氏女绑起来送回石家。
English: From then on, Pang's wife paid special attention to observing Pang's living room. That evening, Pang's wife found that Shi's daughter had come to Pang's house again, so she tied up Shi's daughter and sent her back to Shi's house.

古文：石氏父见之，愕贻曰：我适从内来，见女与母共作，何得在此？
现代文：石氏女的父亲看见后，更加惊愕地说，我刚从后屋来，明明看见我女儿和她母在一起坐着，怎么能被你们绑到这里来了呢？
English: After seeing this, the father of Ms. Shi was even more surprised and said, "I just came from the back room and saw my daughter sitting with her mother. How could you tie her up here?"

古文：即令婢仆，于内唤女出，向所缚者，奋然灭焉。父疑有异，故遣其母诘之，女曰：昔年庞阿来厅中，曾窃视之，自尔仿佛，即梦诣阿。
现代文：石氏父亲说，天下竟有这样的怪事！原来人的精神和感情太执著时，神灵就会离开身体，当初庞阿妻子捆起的石氏女，其实是她的灵魂。
English: Shi's father said that there is such a strange thing in the world! Originally, when a person's spirit and emotions are too persistent, the spirit will leave the body. The Shi's daughter, who was originally tied up by Pang's wife, was actually her soul.

古文：乃入户，即为妻所缚。
现代文：后来石氏女发誓不嫁人。
English: Later, Shi's daughter swore never to marry.

古文：石曰：天下遂有如此奇事。
现代文：过了一年，庞阿的妻子忽然得了邪病，吃什么药都无用，终于死了。
English: A year later, Pang's wife suddenly fell ill with an incurable disease. No amount of medicine could help, and she eventually died.

古文：夫精情所感，灵神为之冥著，灭者盖其魂神也。既而女誓心不嫁。经年，阿妻忽得邪病，医药无徵，阿乃授币石氏女为妻。
现代文：庞阿就送了财礼娶了石氏女。
English: Pona sent a gift of money and married a daughter of the Ishii clan.

古文：马势妇
现代文：马势妇
English: Horsewoman

古文：吴国富阳人马势妇，姓蒋，村人应病死者，蒋辄恍惚，熟眠经日。见人人死，然后省觉，则具说，家中不信之。
现代文：吴国富阳县有人叫马势，妻子姓蒋。村里只要有人得了重病，蒋氏就会恍恍惚惚神志不清熟睡一天，等那得重病的人死了，蒋氏才能清醒过来，而且向人们讲述那病死者的情形。家里人都不相信。
English: In Fuyang County, Wu Province, there was a man named Ma Xiang, whose wife's surname was Jiang. Whenever someone in the village fell seriously ill, Mr. Jiang would fall into a trance and sleep for a day. When the seriously ill person died, Mr. Jiang would wake up and tell people what had happened to the person who had died. His family didn't believe him.

古文：语人云：某中病，我欲杀之，怒强魂难杀。
现代文：有一次她又对人们说，某人得了重病，我打算去杀死他，他的魂灵太厉害，我很难下手。
English: On another occasion she told people that someone was seriously ill and I was going to kill him because his spirit was too powerful for me to handle.

古文：未即死，我入其家内。架上有白米饭几种鲑，我暂过灶下戏。婢无故犯我，我打眷甚，使婢当时闷绝，久之乃苏。
现代文：他还没死时我就进了他家，见他家厨房架上有白米饭和鲑鱼，我跑到炉灶前玩，他家的婢女无故冒犯我，我狠狠打了她一顿，那婢女当时就昏过去了，很久才苏醒。
English: When he was still alive, I went to his house. I saw white rice and salmon on his kitchen shelf. I ran to the stove to play. His maid offended me for no reason. I beat her severely. The maid fainted at that time and did not wake up for a long time.

古文：其兄病，有乌衣人令杀之，向其请乞，终不下手。
现代文：有一次，蒋氏的哥哥病了，来了个黑衣人命令蒋氏把她哥哥杀死。蒋氏再三向黑衣人求情，终于没有下手。
English: Once, when Ms. Jiang's brother was ill, a man in black came and ordered Ms. Jiang to kill her brother. Ms. Jiang repeatedly pleaded with the man in black, but he did not do it.

古文：醒语兄云，当活。
现代文：蒋氏苏醒后对她哥哥说，你不会死了。
English: After Ms. Jiang regained consciousness, she told her brother, "You won't die.

古文：无名夫妇
现代文：无名夫妇
English: Unknown couple

古文：有匹夫匹妇，忘其姓名。
现代文：有一对普通的夫妻，忘了姓名叫什么了。
English: There was an ordinary couple, I forget their names.

古文：居一旦，妇先起，其夫寻亦出外。某谓夫尚寝，既还内，见其夫犹在被中。
现代文：有一天早晨，妻子先起床出外，接着丈夫也出去了，妻子回屋以后，以为丈夫还在睡觉，就进了寝室，见丈夫还在被窝里。
English: One morning, the wife got up and went out first, then the husband also went out. After the wife returned home, she thought that her husband was still sleeping and went into the bedroom to find her husband still under the covers.

古文：既而家童自外来云：即令我取镜。
现代文：这时他家的童仆从外面进来说，男主人让我来取镜子。
English: At this time, his family's child servant came in from outside and said that the man's master asked me to fetch a mirror.

古文：妇以奴诈，指床上以示奴，奴云：适从郎处来也。
现代文：妻子见丈夫明明睡在床上，认为童仆在骗人，就指指床上的丈夫让童仆看。童仆吃惊的说，我真是刚从主人那里来呀！
English: When the wife saw that her husband was sleeping on the bed, she thought that the servant was lying, so she pointed to her husband on the bed and asked the servant to look at him. The servant was surprised and said, "I really just came from my master!"

古文：乃驰告其夫，夫大愕。
现代文：说罢就跑出去找男主人。
English: As soon as I said that, I ran out to find my husband.

古文：径入示之，遂与妇共观，被中人高枕安眠，真是其形，了无一异。
现代文：丈夫一听大吃一惊，赶快跑回屋里，和妻子一起往床上看，只见被窝里的人高枕安眠，和丈夫一模一样。
English: The husband was taken aback and quickly ran back into the house. He and his wife looked at the bed and saw that the person under the covers was sleeping soundly, just like their husband.

古文：虑是其魂神，不敢惊动，乃徐徐抚床，遂冉冉入席而灭，夫妇惋怖不已。
现代文：丈夫心想这床上的大概是自己的真魂，不敢惊动，就慢慢抚摸床上的人，那人才慢慢进入了床席消失了。夫妻俩看到这情景又惊又怕。
English: The husband thought to himself that what was on the bed was probably his true soul, and not daring to startle it, he slowly stroked the person on the bed, and the person slowly entered the bed and disappeared. The husband and wife were shocked and afraid to see this scene.

古文：经少时，夫忽得疾，性理乖误，终身不愈。
现代文：不久以后，丈夫忽然得了病，脾气变得暴躁古怪，一生都没治好。
English: Soon after, her husband suddenly fell ill, his temper became irascible and erratic, and he never recovered.

古文：王宙
现代文：王宙
English: "Wang Chao"

古文：天授三年，清河张镒因官家于衡州。
现代文：唐天授三年，清河人张镒因在衡州作官，把家也搬到了衡州。
English: In the third year of Tang Tianju, Zhang Xuan, a native of Qinghe, moved his family to Hengzhou because he was an official in Hengzhou.

古文：性简静，寡知友。
现代文：张镒性情好静，不爱交友，没有儿子，有两个女儿。
English: Zhang Qian is a quiet person, does not like to make friends, has no son, and has two daughters.

古文：无子，有女二人，其长早亡，幼女倩娘，端妍绝伦。镒外甥太原王宙，幼聪悟，美容范，镒常器重，每曰：他时当以倩娘妻之。
现代文：长女早就死了，次女叫倩娘，生得端庄秀丽。张镒的外甥王宙，从小就十分聪明，长得也很英俊，张镒对这个外甥也非常器重，常常说，将来你长大了，我把倩娘许给你当媳妇。
English: The eldest daughter had died a long time ago, and the second daughter was called Zou Niang, and she was born dignified and beautiful. Zhang Ye's nephew, Wang Chao, was very smart and handsome from a young age. Zhang Ye also held this nephew in high esteem. He often said, "In the future, when you grow up, I will let you marry Zou Niang."

古文：后各长成，宙与倩娘，常私感想于寤寐，家人莫知其状。
现代文：后来，倩娘和王宙都长大了，两个人也有情有意，常常互相思念，夜不能寐，但这些事家里人都不知道。
English: Later, both of them grew up, and the two of them also had love and affection. They often missed each other and couldn't sleep at night, but no one in the family knew about these things.

古文：后有宾僚之选者求之，镒许焉。
现代文：后来，张镒的同僚中有一个赴官选的求娶倩娘，张镒就答应了。
English: Later, one of Zhang Ye's colleagues who was running for office asked to marry Ye's daughter, and Zhang Ye agreed.

古文：女闻而郁抑，宙亦深恚恨。托以当调，请赴京，止之不可，遂厚遣之。
现代文：倩娘听说后，心里十分痛苦，王宙知道后也十分怨恨，以将调官为由到京城去，张镒劝阻，王宙也不听，张镒只好给了王宙很厚的礼金，送他赴京。
English: After hearing the news, Zou's daughter was very distressed, and Wang Chou was also very resentful after learning about the transfer. He tried to dissuade Zhang Ye from going to Beijing on the grounds that he would be transferred, but Wang Chou would not listen. Zhang Ye had no choice but to give Wang Chou a very large gift and send him to Beijing.

古文：宙阴恨悲恸，决别上船。日暮，至山郭数里。夜方半，宙不寐，忽闻岸上有一人行声甚速，须臾至船。问之，乃倩娘，徒行跣足而至。
现代文：王宙含恨忍泪上了船，这时，天色将晚，船走到离一个山城几里的地方，正是半夜，王宙睡不着觉，忽然听见岸上有一个人急匆匆地赶来，片刻就来到船上，王宙一问，竟是倩娘，原来她是光着脚从家里跑出来的。
English: Wang Chao boarded the ship with tears in his eyes. At that time, it was getting late, and the ship was a few miles away from a mountain town. It was the middle of the night. Wang Chao could not sleep. Suddenly, he heard a man on the shore hurrying to the ship. He came to the ship in a few moments, and Wang Chao asked, "Is that your daughter? She ran away from home barefoot."

古文：宙惊喜若狂，执手问其从来，泣曰：君厚意如此，寝食相感，今将夺我此志，又知君深倩不易，思将杀身奉报。是以亡命来奔。
现代文：王宙惊喜交加，拉着倩女的手问她怎么跑出来的，倩娘哭着说，你对我的深情使我深深感动。现在我抛开了一切顾虑，我知道郎君对我的深情坚定不移，决心豁出性命也要报答郎君，所以就从家中私奔而来。
English: Wang Cao was surprised and asked the little girl how she ran away. The little girl cried and said, "I was deeply moved by your deep love for me. Now I have cast aside all my concerns. I know that my husband's deep love for me is unwavering. I am determined to give my life to repay my husband, so I ran away from home."

古文：宙非意所望，欣跃特甚，遂匿倩娘于船，连夜遁去。倍道兼行，数月至蜀。
现代文：王宙大喜过望，就把倩娘藏在船中，连夜逃走。王宙带着倩娘日夜兼程，几个月后到了四川。
English: Overjoyed, Wang Chao hid his daughter in the boat and fled during the night. Wang Chao and his daughter traveled day and night, and a few months later they arrived in Sichuan.

古文：凡五年，生两子。
现代文：五年后，他们生了两个儿子，和张镒断绝了音信。
English: Five years later, they had two sons and broke off communication with Zhang Ye.

古文：与镒绝信，其妻常思父母，涕泣言曰：吾曩日不能相负，弃大义而来奔君。向今五年，恩慈间阻。
现代文：然而，倩娘越来越思念双亲，一次哭着对王宙说，当年我为了不辜负郎君真情，离家和你私奔，如今已过去五年了，和父母远隔天涯，我的一颗心怎能安生呢？
English: However, the little girl missed her parents more and more, and once cried and said to Wang Qiu, "Back then, in order to live up to my husband's true feelings, I ran away from home and eloped with you. Now it has been five years, and I am far away from my parents. How can my heart live in peace?"

古文：覆载之下，胡颜独存也？
现代文：父母的养育像天覆盖我地载着我，我怎么有脸不管双亲自己独自生存呢？
English: My parents' upbringing is like the sky covering me and carrying me. How can I have the face to survive on my own, regardless of my parents?

古文：宙哀之曰：将归无苦。
现代文：王宙也悲伤地说，你别难过，我们就一同回去吧。
English: Wang Cao also said sadly, "Don't be sad, let's go back together."

古文：遂俱归衡州。既至，宙独身先至镒家，首谢其事，镒曰：倩娘病在闺中数年，何其诡说也？
现代文：回到家乡衡州后，王宙首先来到张镒家，见到张镒后，首先谢罪，说不该领着倩女逃到四川。张镒大惊，说，倩娘病在闺房中好几年了，你胡说些什么呀？
English: After returning to his hometown Hengzhou, Wang Zhou first came to Zhang Ye's home. After seeing Zhang Ye, he first apologized and said that he should not have led Ye to escape to Sichuan. Zhang Ye was shocked and said, Ye's daughter has been ill in the boudoir for several years, what are you talking about?

古文：宙曰：见在舟中。
现代文：王宙说，倩娘现在就在船上。
English: Wang Chou said, "My daughter is on the boat right now.

古文：镒大惊，促使人验之。果见倩娘在船中，颜色怡畅，讯使者曰：大人安否？
现代文：张镒更加吃惊，就派仆人到船上去看，一看倩娘果然在船上，神色非常吃惊，问仆人说我二老身体安康吗？
English: Zhang Ye was even more surprised, so he sent his servant to the ship to take a look. When he saw that his daughter was indeed on the ship, he looked very surprised and asked the servant, "Are you and I healthy?"

古文：家人异之，疾走报镒。
现代文：仆人十分惊异，赶快跑回家向张镒报告。
English: The servant was very surprised and quickly ran home to report to Zhang Ye.

古文：室中女闻，喜而起，饰妆更衣，笑而不语，出与相迎，翕然而合为一体，其衣裳皆重。
现代文：闺房中生病的女儿听说后，顿时高兴地起了床，梳妆更衣，只笑而不说话。梳汝完毕，她出门去迎正往家来的倩娘，两个倩娘突然轻轻合成了一体，只有衣服是两套重迭在一起。
English: After hearing the news, the sick daughter in the boudoir got out of bed with joy, put on make-up and changed her clothes, only smiling but not speaking. After finishing her make-up, she went out to meet the little girl who was on her way home. The two little girls suddenly and gently merged into one, only the clothes were two sets overlapping.

古文：其家以事不正，秘之，惟亲戚间有潜知之者。
现代文：家中人认为这事太邪，一直保守秘密，只有亲戚有暗中知道的。
English: The family thought it was too evil and kept it a secret, only relatives knew about it in secret.

古文：后四十年间，夫妻皆丧，二男并孝廉擢第，至丞尉。
现代文：过了四十年后，王宙夫妻去世，他们的两个儿子都被举为孝廉，官作到丞尉。
English: Forty years later, Mr. and Mrs. Wang Chao passed away. Their two sons were both promoted to the rank of filial piety, and were promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：事出陈玄祐《离魂记》云。玄祐少常闻此说，而多异同，或谓其虚。
现代文：这件事陈玄祐从少年时候就听说过这个故事，但有很多相似和不同之处，有人说这件事是虚假的。
English: Chen Xuanyu has heard the story since he was a boy, but there are many similarities and differences. Some people say the story is fake.

古文：大历末，遇莱芜县令张仲覸，因备述其本末。
现代文：大历末年，陈玄祐遇见莱芜县令张伸覸，张仲覸详细地讲述了这个故事。
English: At the end of the year, Chen Xuanyou met Zhang Shengyao, the governor of Laiwu County, and Zhang Zhongyao recounted the story in detail.

古文：镒则仲覸堂叔，而说极备悉，故记之。
现代文：张镒是张仲覸的堂叔，说得特别详细，所以就记下来了。
English: Zhang Xuan is Zhang Zhongyao's uncle. He spoke in great detail, so I wrote it down.

古文：郑齐婴
现代文：郑齐婴
English: Zheng Qibing

古文：郑齐婴，开元中，为吏部侍郎河南黜陟使。
现代文：唐代开元年间，任吏部侍郎、河南黜陟使的郑齐婴回家乡去。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Zheng Qibing, who was a chamberlain of the cadre department and an envoy to Henan Province, went back to his hometown.

古文：将归，途次华州，忽见五人，衣五方色衣，诣厅再拜。
现代文：他路经华州时，忽然有五个人，穿着东西南北中五个方位颜色的衣服来拜见。
English: While he was passing through the state of Washington, he was suddenly visited by five people dressed in the five colors of the compass.

古文：齐婴问其由，答曰：是大使五藏神。
现代文：郑齐婴问，你们从哪儿来？回答说，我们是你身体里的五藏神。
English: Zheng Qibing asked, "Where did you come from?" and answered, "We are the Five Gods of Tibet in your body."

古文：齐婴问曰：神当居身中，何故相见？
现代文：郑齐婴说，五藏神应该在我身体里呆着，为什么出来见我？
English: Zheng Qiying said that the five gods should stay in my body, why did they come out to see me?

古文：答曰：是以守气，气竭当散。
现代文：回答说，我们在你身守气，气如果快要枯竭了，我们自然就散了。
English: He replied, "We keep our breath with you. If our breath is about to run out, we will naturally disperse.

古文：婴曰：审如是，吾其死乎？
现代文：郑齐婴说，这样看来，我是不是就要死了？
English: Zheng Qi said, "So it looks like I'm about to die?"

古文：曰：然。
现代文：回答说，是的。
English: The general said yes.

古文：婴仓卒求延昝刻，欲为表章及身后事，神言还至后衙则可。
现代文：郑齐婴急忙哀求暂缓一下死期，因为有些奏章还没写好，身后事也没有安排。神说，那你就到后衙去办吧。
English: Zheng Qibing hurriedly begged to postpone the time of death, because some musical pieces had not yet been written, and there was no arrangement for the afterlife. God said, then you should go to Houyi to do it.

古文：婴为设酒馔，皆拜而受。
现代文：郑齐婴为五藏神摆下酒宴，神仙拜谢领受了。
English: Zheng Qibing set up a wine banquet for the Five Gods of Tibet, and the gods received the thanks.

古文：既修表，沐浴，服新衣，卧西壁下，至时而卒。
现代文：郑齐婴写好奏章，洗了澡，换上新衣服，然后躺在西墙下的床上，到时辰，就死去了。
English: Zheng Qi Rong wrote the music, took a shower, put on new clothes, and then lay down on the bed under the west wall. At that time, he died.

古文：柳少游
现代文：柳少游
English: by Shoryu Yanagi

古文：柳少游善卜筮，著名于京师。
现代文：柳少游很善于算卦，在京城颇有名气。
English: Liu Shaoyou is very good at counting and divination, and is quite famous in Beijing.

古文：天宝中，有客持一缣，诣少游。
现代文：唐天宝年间，有人拿着一匹绢绸来拜见少游。
English: During the reign of Emperor Tianbao, someone came to visit Shao Yu with a silkworm.

古文：引入问故，答曰：愿知年命。
现代文：请进来问那人有什么事，回答说，想知道我的天年寿数。
English: Please come in and ask the man what's the matter, he replied, wanting to know how old I am.

古文：少游为作卦，成而悲叹曰：君卦不吉，合尽今日暮。
现代文：少游立刻给客人算了一卦，然后悲伤地叹口气说，您的卦很不吉利，今天晚上就会死。
English: Shao Yu immediately calculated a fortune for the guest, and then said with a sad sigh, your fortune is very unlucky, and you will die tonight.

古文：其人伤叹久之，因求浆，家人持水至，见两少游，不知谁者是客。
现代文：那客人也悲叹了半天，要求喝口水。家人拿了水来，见屋里竟有两个柳少游，分不清醒谁是客人。
English: The guest also lamented for half a day, asking for a sip of water. The family brought water, but there were actually two Liu Shaoyu in the house, and it was unclear who the guest was.

古文：少游指神为客，令持与客，客乃辞去，童送出门，数步遂灭。
现代文：少游指着神说，他是客人，让把水端给他，客人就告辞走了，童仆送客出门，转眼间客人就消失了。
English: Shao You pointed to God and said, "He is a guest, let me give him the water." The guest left, the servant took the guest out, and the guest disappeared in the blink of an eye.

古文：俄闻空中有哭声，甚哀，还问少游：郎君识此人否？
现代文：这时突然空中传来哭声，十分悲哀，并问少游，你认得刚才那个客人是谁吗？
English: At this time, a cry suddenly came from the sky, very sad, and asked Shao You, do you recognize who that guest was just now?

古文：具言前事，少游方知客是精神。
现代文：并说了刚才拜访、算卦的事，这时少游才知道那个来求卦的客人就是自己的灵魂。
English: He also said that he had just paid a visit to see a fortune teller. It was only then that Shao You knew that the guest who came to ask for a fortune was his own soul.

古文：遽使看缣。乃一纸缣尔，叹曰：神舍我去，吾其死矣。
现代文：少游赶快去看客人送的绢绸，原来是纸作的，悲叹地说，我的神魂已经离我而去，我就要死了。
English: Xiaoyu hurried to see the satin cloth sent by the guest, which was originally made of paper, and lamented that my soul had left me, and I was going to die.

古文：日暮果卒。
现代文：到了晚上，柳少游果然就死了。
English: In the evening, Liu Shaoyou died.

古文：苏莱
现代文：苏莱
English: Sulay

古文：天宝末，长安有马二娘者，善于考召。
现代文：唐代天宝末年，长安有个马二娘会召魂术。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty's Tenpo era, there was a sorceress in Chang'an who could summon spirits.

古文：兖州刺史苏诜，与马氏相善。初诜欲为子莱求婚卢氏，谓马氏曰：我唯有一子，为其婚娶，实要婉淑。
现代文：兖州刺史苏诜，和马二娘很好，苏诜想为儿子苏莱向卢氏求婚，就对马二娘说，我只有一个儿子，想给他娶一个贤惠的媳妇。
English: Suzhou's leading scholar, Su Shi, was on good terms with Ma Er's daughter. Su Shi wanted to propose marriage to Lu for her son, Sulai, so she said to Ma Er's daughter, "I only have one son, and I want him to marry a virtuous daughter-in-law."

古文：卢氏三女，未知谁佳，幸为致之，一令其母自阅视也。
现代文：卢家有三个女儿，不知哪一个最好呢？你能不能把她们都召来，让我妻子挑选一下？
English: The Lu family has three daughters. I don't know which one is the best. Can you bring them all and let my wife choose?

古文：马氏乃于佛堂中，结坛考召。
现代文：马二娘就在佛堂里设坛召魂。
English: Ma Er's daughter set up an altar in the Buddhist hall to summon the spirits.

古文：须臾，三女魂悉至，莱母亲自看。
现代文：不大一会儿，卢家三个女儿的魂就都被召来了。
English: In no time at all, the spirits of the three Lu daughters were summoned.

古文：马云：大者非不佳，不如次者，必当为刺史妇。
现代文：苏莱的母亲一个一个地端详，马二娘说，卢家大女儿也不错，但不如次女，我看她将来能成为刺史夫人。
English: Sulai's mother looked at them one by one. Ma Er's daughter said, "The eldest daughter of the Lu family is also good, but not as good as the second daughter. I think she can become Mrs. Zhishi in the future."

古文：苏乃娶次女。
现代文：苏莱就娶了卢家二女儿。
English: Sule married the second daughter of the Lu family.

古文：天宝末，莱至永宁令，死于禄山之难，其家惩马氏失言。
现代文：天宝末年，苏莱任永宁县令，死于安禄山造反的战乱中，苏家怪罪马二娘当初胡说。
English: At the end of the Tenpo era, when Sulai was the governor of Yongning County and died in the war caused by the Anlu Mountain Rebellion, the Su family initially blamed Ma Er's daughter for saying nonsense.

古文：洎二京收复，有诏赠莱怀州刺史焉。
现代文：后来安禄山之乱平息，东西二京收复，皇帝下诏，追授苏莱为怀州刺史，马二娘当初的话并没说错。
English: Later, the Anlu Mountain Rebellion subsided, the eastern and western parts of Beijing were recovered, and the emperor issued an imperial edict, posthumously awarding Sulai as the crown prince of Waizhou. Ma Er's original words were not wrong.

古文：郑生
现代文：郑生
English: Zheng Sheng

古文：郑生者，天宝末，应举之京。
现代文：唐天宝末年，有一位郑生进京赶考。
English: In the last years of Tang Tianbao, there was a Zheng student who went to Beijing to catch up with the examination.

古文：至郑西郊，日暮，投宿主人。主人问其姓，郑以实对。
现代文：天将黑时至郑州西郊，到一个人家里投宿。这家主人问他贵姓，他说姓郑。
English: He went to the western suburb of Zhengzhou in the dark and stayed at a person's home. The owner asked him his surname, and he said his surname was Zheng.

古文：内忽使婢出云：娘子合是从姑。
现代文：这时里屋忽然出来一个婢女对郑生说，我家娘子应该是你的堂姑哩。
English: At this time, a maid suddenly came out of the inner room and said to Zheng Sheng, my daughter should be your cousin.

古文：须臾，见一老母，自堂而下。郑拜见，坐语久之，问其婚姻，乃曰：姑有一外孙女在此，姓柳氏，其父见任淮阴县令，与儿门地相埒。今欲将配君子，以为何如？
现代文：接着就见一个老妇从堂屋里出来，郑生连忙拜见向堂姑问安，二人坐着谈论了很久，堂姑问郑生结婚没有，郑生说没结婚，堂姑就说，我有个外孙女在这里，姓柳，她父亲是淮阴县令，和你门第相当，我想把她许给你为妻，你看如何？
English: Next, he saw an old woman coming out of the hall. Zheng Sheng hurried to say hello to his aunt and cousin. The two sat and talked for a long time. The aunt asked Zheng Sheng if he was married. Zheng Sheng said that he was not married. The aunt then said, "I have a granddaughter here, surnamed Liu. Her father is the county magistrate of Huaiyin County, and is of the same lineage as you. I want to marry her to you. What do you think?"

古文：郑不敢辞，其夕成礼，极人世之乐。
现代文：郑生不敢推辞，就答应了。这天晚上，郑生和柳氏就举行了婚礼，入了洞房，二人十分称心如意。
English: Zheng Sheng did not dare to refuse, so he agreed. That evening, Zheng Sheng and Mr. Liu held a wedding ceremony and entered the wedding hall. The two were very satisfied.

古文：遂居之数月，姑为郑生，可将妇归柳家。
现代文：住了几个月后，堂姑对郑生说，你可以带着你媳妇去一趟柳家看看你岳父母。
English: After living there for a few months, the cousin said to Zheng Sheng, "You can take your daughter-in-law to visit Liu Jia to see your parents-in-law."

古文：郑如其言，携其妻至淮阴。
现代文：郑生就带着柳氏去了淮阴。
English: Zheng took Liu to Huaiyin.

古文：先报柳氏，柳举家惊愕。
现代文：到淮阴后，郑生派人先去柳氏家通报，柳家一听都十分惊愕。
English: After arriving in Huaiyin, Zheng Sheng sent someone to inform Liu's family first. Liu's family was very surprised.

古文：柳妻意疑令有外妇生女，怨望形言。
现代文：柳县令的妻子甚至怀疑丈夫是不是和别的女人生下的女儿，十分怨怒。
English: Liu Xianling's wife even suspected that her husband had fathered a daughter with another woman, and she was very angry.

古文：俄顷，女家人往视之，乃与家女无异。
现代文：不一会，柳家派人出去看，见来的女子和家中的女儿一模一样。
English: After a while, the Liu family sent someone out to look, and the woman they saw was exactly the same as the daughter at home.

古文：既入门下车，冉冉行庭中。内女闻之笑，出视，相值于庭中，两女忽合，遂为一体。
现代文：柳氏进门下车后慢慢走进院中，家里那个女儿也笑着走出来，两个柳氏女在院中相遇之后，忽然合成了一个。
English: After entering the door and getting off the bus, Ms. Liu slowly walked into the hospital. The daughter at home also walked out with a smile. After the two Ms. Liu met in the hospital, they suddenly became one.

古文：令即穷其事，乃是妻之母先亡，而嫁外孙女之魂焉。
现代文：柳县令追察这件事，才知道原来是自己死了很久的岳母把她外孙女柳氏的魂许给了郑生。
English: Liu County ordered to investigate the matter, only to find out that it was his long-dead mother-in-law who had promised her granddaughter Liu's soul to Zheng Sheng.

古文：生复寻旧迹，都无所有。
现代文：后来郑生再去寻找郑州西郊他曾投宿过的地方，那里已什么都没有了。
English: Later, Zheng Sheng went to look for the place where he had stayed in the western suburb of Zhengzhou, but there was nothing there.

古文：韦隐
现代文：韦隐
English: Wayin' Up

古文：大历中，将作少匠韩晋卿女，适尚衣奉御韦隐。
现代文：唐代宗大历年间，在宫内尚衣局当侍御的韦隐，娶了宫内将作府的少匠韩晋卿之女为妻。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Wei Yin, who served as an attendant in the Imperial Household's Clothing Bureau, married the daughter of Han Jinqing, a minor craftsman who worked in the Imperial Household.

古文：隐奉使新罗，行及一程，怆然有思，因就寝。乃觉其妻在帐外，惊问之，答曰：愍君涉海，志愿奔而随之，人无知者。
现代文：后来韦隐奉诏出使新罗国，上路走了一程后，心里觉得很难过，就睡下了，忽然发现妻子在帐外，惊讶地询问怎么会来这里，妻子说，你渡海远行我实在不放心，所以跑来跟你一齐走，别人不会知道的。
English: Later, Wei Yin sent an envoy to Silla, and after walking for a while, he felt very sad and fell asleep. Suddenly, he found his wife outside the tent, and was surprised to ask how he could come here. His wife said, "I really don't feel at ease when you travel far across the sea, so I came to walk with you, others won't know."

古文：隐即诈左右曰：俗纳一妓，将侍枕席。人无怪者。
现代文：韦隐就骗手下人说他收了个妓女在身边侍护他，人们都没怀疑。
English: Wayne lied to his staff and told them he had hired a prostitute to wait on him, and no one suspected a thing.

古文：及归，已二年，妻亦随至。隐乃启舅姑，首其罪，而室中宛存焉。
现代文：两年后，韦隐带着妻子回到家中，韦隐先向岳父岳母陪罪，一看屋里还有个妻子，两个妻子走近后合成了一体。
English: Two years later, Wei Yin and his wife returned home. Wei Yin first accompanied his father-in-law and mother-in-law. At first glance, there was still a wife in the house. When the two wives approached, they became one.

古文：及相近，翕然合体，其从隐者乃魂也。
现代文：原来跟韦隐去新罗的，是妻子的魂魄。
English: Originally, it was his wife's ghost that went to Silla with Wei Yin.

古文：齐推女
现代文：齐推女
English: Women pushing in unison

古文：元和中，饶州刺史齐推女，适陇西李某。
现代文：唐宪宗元和年间，饶州刺史齐推的女儿，嫁给了陇西的李某。
English: In the years of Tang Xian Zongyuan and Tang Xian Zongyuan, the daughter of Raozhou Zi Shi married Li Mou from Shaanxi.

古文：李举进士，妻方娠，留至州宅。
现代文：李某去考进士时，他的妻子已经怀孕，就留在了家里。
English: When Li went to take the entrance examination, his wife, who was already pregnant, stayed at home.

古文：至临月，迁至后东阁中。
现代文：将临产时，妻子迁到后院的东阁里。
English: When she was about to give birth, her wife moved to the backyard's east pavilion.

古文：其夕，女梦丈夫，衣冠甚伟，瞋目按剑叱之曰：此屋岂是汝腥秽之所乎？
现代文：这天夜里，妻子忽然梦见一个大汉穿着很威严的衣服，怒目圆睁手按宝剑地喝道：这间屋子是你生孩子的地方吗？快搬走！
English: That night, his wife suddenly dreamed of a big man dressed in very dignified clothes, glowering, waving his sword and shouting: "Is this the room where you gave birth to your child? Move out!

古文：亟移去。
现代文：不然会遭到大祸！
English: Otherwise, it will be a big disaster!

古文：不然，且及祸。明日告推，推素刚烈，曰：吾忝土地主，是何妖孽，能侵耶？
现代文：妻子第二天就把这梦告诉了父亲齐推，齐推性情刚毅暴烈，生气地说，这府宅是我家的，哪里的妖魔竟跑到这里兴妖作怪？不搬！
English: The next day, the wife told this dream to her father, Zhi Xiu, who was stubborn and violent, and said angrily, "This mansion belongs to my family. Where did the demon come from to create a monster here? I won't move!"

古文：数日，女诞育，忽见所梦者，即其床帐乱殴之。有顷，耳目鼻皆流血而卒。
现代文：几天后，妻子分娩了，忽然看见曾梦着过的那个大汉闯了进来，扑到床上就乱打起来，把妻子打得七窃流血死在了床上。
English: A few days later, when his wife gave birth, he suddenly saw the big man he had been dreaming about burst in, threw himself on the bed and started to fight. He beat his wife so badly that she bled to death on the bed.

古文：父母伤痛女冤横，追悔不及。
现代文：齐推为女儿的死极为悲痛，追悔莫及，派人急速去告诉赶考的李某。
English: Qi Shuxu was extremely saddened by her daughter's death and was beyond remorse. She sent someone to quickly tell Li Mou, who was rushing to take the exam.

古文：遣遽告其夫，俟至而归葬于李族。
现代文：并把女儿暂时葬在郡城西北十几里的官道旁，打算等李某回来再改葬到李某家的族坟去。
English: He also temporarily buried his daughter next to the official road a dozen miles northwest of the county seat, intending to wait for Li to return and then re-bury her in the family grave of Li's family.

古文：遂于郡之西北十数里官道，权瘗之。
现代文：李某在京城落了榜，正要回去，听见妻子的死讯就急忙奔丧回家，到家后，妻子已下葬半年了。
English: Li fell off the list in Beijing and was about to go back. When he heard of his wife's death, he hurried home. When he got home, his wife had been buried for half a year.

古文：李生在京师，下第将归，闻丧而往。比至饶州，妻卒已半年矣。
现代文：李某已知道妻子奇怪的死因，又痛又恨，想为妻子昭雪冤恨弄清真相。
English: Li Mou already knew the strange cause of his wife's death, and he felt both pain and hatred. He wanted to find out the truth for his wife, Zhao Xue.

古文：相见悲泣，妻曰：且无涕泣，幸可复生。俟君之来，亦已久矣。大人刚正，不信鬼神，身是妇女，不能自诉。今日相见，事机校迟。
现代文：走到饶州城外，天色已晚，忽然在旷野上看见一个女子，看服饰打扮不像是乡下人，心里很疑惑，停下马来细看，那女子走进树丛里不见了，追上去一看，竟是已死去的妻子，两人抱头痛哭。妻子说，你先不要哭，我还能够复活。我等你回来已等了很久，我父亲为人刚烈不信鬼神，我身为女子也不好自己向阴间陈述，你现在回来，赶快去办，不要迟误了时机。
English: I walked to the outskirts of Raozhou. It was late in the day. Suddenly, I saw a woman in the wilderness. Looking at her clothes, she didn't look like a villager. I was puzzled. I stopped my horse to take a closer look. The woman disappeared into the bushes. When I followed her, I saw that she was actually my dead wife. The two of them were holding their heads and crying. My wife said, "Don't cry first, I can still come back to life. I've been waiting for you to come back for a long time. My father was a man who didn't believe in ghosts and gods. As a woman, it's

古文：李曰：为之奈何？
现代文：李某问我该作些什么呢？
English: Li asked me what I should do next?

古文：女曰：从此直西五里鄱亭村，有一老人姓田，方教授村儿，此九华洞中仙官也，人莫之知。
现代文：妻子说，从这里一直往西走五里地有个鄱亭村，村里有个教书先生姓田，他是天界九华洞里的仙官，人们都不知道。
English: My wife said that five miles west of here, there is a village called Fengting. In the village, there is a teacher named Tian. He is a magus in the Heaven Realm Jihua Cave, but people don't know about him.

古文：君能至心往来，或异谐遂。
现代文：如果你能和他真诚交往，也许他能帮你实现心愿。
English: If you can have a sincere relationship with him, he may be able to help you achieve your dreams.

古文：李乃径访田先生，见之，乃膝行而前，再拜称曰：下界凡贱，敢谒大仙。
现代文：李某直接去找田先生，见面后，他跪着走到田先生面前，一再地叩拜后才说，我这下界的凡夫俗子特来拜见大仙。
English: Mr. Li went directly to Mr. Tian. After meeting him, he knelt down in front of Mr. Tian and repeatedly bowed before saying, "I, an ordinary man from the lower world, have come to meet the Great Immortal."

古文：时老人方与村童授经，见李惊避曰：衰朽穷骨，旦暮溘然。郎君安有此说？
现代文：当时田先生正在教村童读书，见李某这样，立刻惊慌地躲在一边说，我不过是个朝不保夕又糟又朽的老头子，郎君怎么能这样？
English: At that time, Mr. Tian was teaching village children to read. Seeing Li like this, he immediately panicked and hid to one side, saying, "I'm just an old man who is insecure, bad and rotten. How can my son-in-law be like this?"

古文：李再拜，扣头不已，老人益难之。
现代文：李某不说话，只是不断地叩头，老人现出更加为难的样子。
English: Li did not speak, but bowed his head continuously. The old man looked even more puzzled.

古文：自日宴至于夜分，终不敢就坐，拱立于前。
现代文：从中午到晚上，李某始终不敢在田先生面前就坐，一直垂手合掌站着。
English: From noon to evening, Li always dared not to sit in front of Mr. Tian, and stood with his hands clasped.

古文：老人俯首良久曰：足下诚恳如是，吾亦何所隐焉。
现代文：后来，田先生低头沉思了很久才说，你这样诚恳，我也就不向你隐瞒身份了。
English: Later, Mr. Tian bowed his head and pondered for a long time before saying, "Since you are so sincere, I won't hide my identity from you."

古文：李生即顿首流涕，具云妻枉状。
现代文：李某立刻哭着跪下叩头，诉说了妻子惨死的情形。
English: Li immediately fell to his knees in tears, bowed his head and recounted the circumstances of his wife's tragic death.

古文：老人曰：吾知之久矣，但不蚤申诉。
现代文：田先生说，我早就知道了，你为什么不早来申诉呢？
English: Mr. Tian said, "I already knew, why didn't you come to complain earlier?"

古文：今屋宅已败，理之不及。
现代文：现在屋子已经毁败，说理也不好说了。
English: Now that the house has been destroyed, it's hard to say.

古文：吾向拒公，盖未有计耳。
现代文：刚才我拒绝你，也是因为我一时想不出计策来。
English: I refused you just now because I couldn't think of a plan.

古文：然试为足下作一处置。
现代文：现在我给你出个主意吧。
English: Now let me give you a piece of advice.

古文：乃起从北出，可行百步余，止于桑林，长啸。
现代文：说罢就起身出屋，往北走了一百多步，来在一个桑林里，仰天长啸了一声，顿时出现了一个很大的府署，殿宇环绕，仪仗警卫十分森严，很像一座王府。
English: As soon as he said that, he got up and went out of the house, walked more than a hundred steps to the north, came to a mulberry grove, and shouted to the heavens. Suddenly, a large government office appeared, surrounded by palaces, with a very strict honor guard, very much like a royal palace.

古文：倏忽见一大府署，殿宇环合，仪卫森然，拟于王者，田先生衣紫帔，据案而坐，左右解官等列侍，俄传教呼地界。须臾，十数部各拥百余骑，前后奔驰而至。
现代文：只见田先生穿着紫袍在大殿的公案后面坐着，左右站立着两排差官随从。田先生传令，让把各方的地界神召来，片刻间先后有十几队骑士来到大厅外。
English: I saw Mr. Tian wearing a purple robe and sitting behind the altar in the main hall, with two rows of police officers standing to his right and left. Mr. Tian gave the order to summon the gods of the land boundary of each side, and in a few moments, more than a dozen teams of knights came outside the hall.

古文：其帅皆长丈余，眉目魁岸，罗列于门屏之外。整衣冠，意绪苍惶，相问今有何事。须臾，谒者通地界、庐山神、江渎神、彭蠡神等，皆趣入。
现代文：每队骑士都有一百多名，领头的都是身高一丈多魁伟英武的巨人，他们站在门外整理衣冠，看样子都很惊惶，互相打听把他们紧急召来有什么事，然后进厅拜见田先生，各自报出自己的名字和所管辖的地界，其中有庐山神、江渎神、彭蠡神等。
English: Each team of knights has more than a hundred members, and the leaders are giants who are as tall as they are strong. They stand outside the door and sort out their crowns, looking very frightened. They ask each other what has brought them here urgently. Then they go into the hall to see Mr. Tian, and each of them reports their name and the territory under their jurisdiction. Among them are the gods of Lushan, Jiangzhu, and Penghu.

古文：田先生问曰：比者此州刺史女，因产为暴鬼所杀。
现代文：田先生在上面说，现有本州刺史齐推的女儿，在分娩时被暴鬼所杀。
English: Mr. Tian said above that the daughter of the current head of Honshu stabbing Shi Qidong was killed by a violent ghost during childbirth.

古文：事甚冤滥，尔等知否？
现代文：那女子死得实在冤枉，这件滥杀无辜的事，你们知道吗？
English: That woman died really unjustly, this indiscriminate killing of innocents, do you know?

古文：皆府伏应曰：然。
现代文：地界神仙都伏在地上说知道。
English: All the deities of the realm prostrated themselves on the ground and said that they knew.

古文：又问：何故不为申理？
现代文：田先生说，即然知道，为什么不处理也不上报？
English: Mr. Tian said that even if he knew, why not deal with it or report it?

古文：又皆对曰：狱讼须有其主，此不见人诉，无以发摘。
现代文：大家回答说，审理案件必须有人控告，此案一直无人申诉，所以我们没法子立案处理。
English: They all replied that in order for a case to be heard, someone must file a complaint. Since no one has filed a complaint in this case, there is no way for us to file a case.

古文：有问知贼姓名否，有一人对曰：是西汉鄱县王吴芮。今刺史宅，是芮昔时所居。
现代文：田先生又问谁知道那杀人犯的姓名，有一个地界神回答说，杀人的是西汉年间的鄱县王，名叫吴芮，现在饶州刺史齐推的府宅就是当年吴芮的房子。
English: Mr. Tian also asked who knew the name of the murderer. A local deity answered that the murderer was the king of Ye County during the Western Han Dynasty, named Wu Ye. The mansion now in the city of Raozhou is the house of Wu Ye.

古文：至今犹恃雄豪，侵占土地，往往肆其暴虐，人无奈何。
现代文：现在吴芮常常蛮横强暴，侵占土地，横行霸道，谁也不敢惹他。
English: Nowadays, Wu Gan is often very domineering and violent, seizing land and acting like a tyrant. No one dares to provoke him.

古文：田先生曰：即追来。
现代文：田先生说，马上把吴芮给我抓来！
English: Mr. Tian said, "Bring Wu Yao to me at once!"

古文：俄顷，缚吴芮至。先生诘之，不伏，乃命追阿齐。良久，见李妻与吴芮庭辩。
现代文：不一会儿吴芮就被绑上大厅，田先生审问，吴芮不服，田先生又让把李某的妻子传来，李妻就和吴芮在大堂上辩理。
English: Within a short time, Wu Gan was tied up in the lobby, interrogated by Mr. Tian, and Wu Gan was not satisfied. Mr. Tian asked for Li's wife to be brought in, and Li's wife argued with Wu Gan in the lobby.

古文：食顷，吴芮理屈，乃曰：当是产后虚弱，见某惊怖自绝，非故杀。
现代文：过了半天，吴芮理屈辞穷，但仍狡辩说，李妻产后身子虚弱，看见我以后由于惊恐而吓死，不是我杀死的。
English: After half a day, Wu Yili made a poor excuse, but still cunningly argued that Li Zhe's body was weak after giving birth, and when he saw me, he died of fright. I didn't kill him.

古文：田先生曰：杀人以挺与刃，有以异乎？
现代文：田先生说，用木棍与用刀杀人又有什么区别？
English: Mr. Tian said, what is the difference between using a wooden stick and killing with a knife?

古文：遂令执送天曹。
现代文：就命令把吴芮绑送天曹治罪。
English: He ordered that Wu Yao be tied up and sent to Tian Cao to be punished.

古文：回谓：速检李氏寿命几何？
现代文：接着田先生又让手下人查看李妻的寿数是多少。
English: Mr. Tian then asked his subordinates to find out how long Li's wife would live.

古文：顷之，吏云：本算更合寿三十二年，生四男三女。
现代文：不一会儿，一个官员报告说，李妻的寿数还有三十二年，应该生四男三女。
English: Soon after, an official reported that Li's wife had another 32 years to live and should have four sons and three daughters.

古文：先生谓群官曰：李氏寿算长，若不再生，议无厌伏。
现代文：田先生对官员们说李妻还有很长的寿命，如果不让她还阳，恐怕会引起非议，你们看该怎么办？
English: Mr. Tian told the officials that his wife still had a long life expectancy, and if they didn't let her have another child, they would probably be criticized. What do you think they should do?

古文：公等所见何如？有一老吏前启曰： 。东晋邺下有一人横死，正与此事相当。
现代文：这时一位年老的官员上前说，东晋的邺下有一个人暴亡，正好让李妻借尸还魂。
English: At this time, an old official came forward and said that a person had died violently at the instigation of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, just in time for Li Zhe to borrow the corpse and return the soul.

古文：前使葛真君，断以具魂作本身，却归生路。饮食言语，嗜欲追游，一切无异。但至寿终，不见形质耳。
现代文：当时的审案官员是葛真君，他判决那邺下暴死人以 具魂 的办法返回阳间，返回后虽然饮食、言语和走路都和生人一样，但一直到他寿终也没有成为人形。
English: The case officer at the time was Ge Zhenjun, who sentenced the man who died violently under his command to return to the sun by means of a soul. After returning, although his diet, speech and walking were the same as that of a living person, he did not become a doll until the end of his life.

古文：田先生曰：何谓具魂？
现代文：田先生问什么叫作 具魂 呢？
English: Mr. Tian asked what is called "getting a soul"?

古文：吏曰：生人三魂七魄，死则散离，本无所依。
现代文：官人说，阳间的人都有三魂七魄，死后则魂魄离人而散，无所依托。
English: The official said that everyone in the world has three souls and seven bodies, but after death, the soul is separated from the person and has nothing to rely on.

古文：今收合为一体，以续弦胶涂之。大王当街发遣放回，则与本身同矣。
现代文：如果把人的魂魄和肉体收在一起，用续弦胶粘好，再由大王发送回阳世，那就是一个完整的生人了。田先生说，很好。
English: If you put a person's soul and body together, stick them together with string glue, and then send them back to the sun by the great king, that is a complete living person. Mr. Tian said, very good.

古文：田先生曰善，即顾谓李妻曰：作此处置，可乎？李妻曰：幸甚。
现代文：转身问李妻说，我就用这办法让你还阳，你看如可？李妻说，太好了。
English: He turned to his wife and said, "I'm going to use this method to give you your yang back. What do you think?" His wife said, "That's great.

古文：俄见一吏，别领七八女人来，与李妻一类，即推而合之。有一人，持一器药，状似稀饧。即于李妻身涂之。
现代文：这时就有一个官员领了七八个女人上堂来，田先生找了一个和李妻相似的女子，把两个女人往一起推，就合成了一个，又有一个官员拿着一罐药，好像是稀糖水，涂在李妻身上。
English: At this time, an official brought seven or eight women into the courtroom. Mr. Tian found a woman similar to Li Zhe, pushed the two women together, and made one. Another official held a can of medicine, which seemed to be diluted sugar water, and applied it to Li Zhe's body.

古文：田先生顾谓李谓下李下原俱有先字，据明抄本补并删。
现代文：李妻突然觉得像是从半空中落到了地上，起初还迷迷胡胡，天亮后什么也没有了，只见田先生和李某加上自己三个人在桑树林中。
English: Mr. Li's wife suddenly felt as if she had fallen to the ground from the middle of the sky. At first, she was bewildered. After dawn, there was nothing left but Mr. Tian, Mr. Li and the three of them in the mulberry forest.

古文：生曰：相为极力，且喜事成，便可领归。
现代文：田先生对李某说，我费了很大的力量给你办，幸喜办成了，你把妻子领回去吧。
English: Mr. Tian said to Mr. Li, "I spent a lot of energy to do this for you, and I'm glad it's done. You can take your wife back."

古文：见其亲族，但言再生，慎无他说。
现代文：回去以后，只对人说的妻子死而复活就行了，别的事千万不要说，我今后也要消失了。
English: When I return, I'll only tell people that my wife died and came back to life. Don't say anything else. I'll disappear in the future.

古文：吾亦从此逝矣。李遂同归至州，一家惊疑，不为之信。
现代文：李某领着妻子回到家里，全家十分惊疑，不敢相信。
English: Li led his wife back home, the whole family was very surprised and couldn't believe it.

古文：久之，乃知实生人也。
现代文：过了很久才相信李妻不是鬼，是真的复活了。
English: It took me a long time to believe that Mrs. Li was not a ghost and had really come back to life.

古文：自尔生子数人，其亲表之中，颇有知者，云：他无所异，但举止轻便，异于常人耳。
现代文：后来李妻又生了好几个儿女。他们的亲戚中有些人知道真实的情况，说李妻还阳后跟过去没什么不同，只是举止行动十分轻快，这一点和常人有些不同。
English: Later, Li Zhe gave birth to several more children. Some of their relatives knew the true situation, saying that Li Zhe was no different from the past after returning to the sun, but his behavior was very brisk, which was somewhat different from ordinary people.

古文：郑氏女
现代文：郑氏女
English: Zheng's daughter

古文：通州有王居士者，有道术。
现代文：通州有位王居士会道木。
English: In Tongzhou, there is a street tree of the Wang Guosi Association.

古文：会昌中，刺史郑君有幼女，甚念之，而自幼多疾，若神魂不足得。
现代文：唐武宗会昌年间，刺史郑某有个小女儿，他非常喜爱这个孩子，然而这个女孩从小就多灾多病，好像先天就精气不足似的，郑某就把王居士请来给看看。
English: During the Tang and Wu Dynasties, Zheng Mou had a little daughter. He loved this child very much. However, this girl had been plagued by illness since childhood, as if she was born with a lack of energy. Zheng Mou invited Wang Jushi to come and see her.

古文：郑君因请居士，居士曰：此女非疾，乃生魂未归其身。
现代文：居士说，这孩子不是有病，而是她的魂没有附在她身上。
English: The householder said that the child was not ill, but her soul was not attached to her.

古文：郑君讯其事，居士曰：某县令某者，即此女前身也。当死数岁矣，以平生为善，以幽冥祐之，得过期，今年九十余矣。
现代文：郑某问到底是怎么回事，居士说，某县的一个县令，就是你小女儿的前身，他几年前就该死了，但由于他平生作了很多好事，阴间佑护他，才使他的阳寿过了期。今年他已有九十多了。
English: Zheng asked what was going on. The householder said that a county magistrate in a certain county was the predecessor of your little daughter. He should have died a few years ago, but because he had done a lot of good things in his life, the underworld protected him, and only then did his birthday pass. This year he is more than ninety.

古文：令殁之曰，此女当愈。
现代文：这个县令去世的那天，你小女儿就立刻会好起来。
English: The day this magistrate dies, your little girl will get better immediately.

古文：郑君急发人驰访之，其令果九十余矣，后月。其女忽若醉寤，疾愈。
现代文：郑某忙派人赶到居士所说的那个县里去察访，那县令果然九十岁了。一个月后，郑女忽像大醉后醒来，非常精神。
English: Zheng hurriedly sent someone to visit the county mentioned by the layman, and the county magistrate was indeed ninety years old. A month later, Zheng suddenly woke up after being very drunk and was very energetic.

古文：郑君又使往验，令果以女疾愈之日，无疾卒。
现代文：郑某又派人去看那老县令，果然在女孩病好的那天没有任何病就死了。
English: Zheng also sent someone to see the old county magistrate, and sure enough, on the day when the girl was well, she died without any illness.

古文：裴珙
现代文：裴珙
English: Baekhyun

古文：孝廉裴珙，家洛阳。
现代文：有一位孝廉叫裴珙，家住洛阳。
English: There is a filial piety called Pei Yao, who lives in Luoyang.

古文：仲夏，自郑西归，及端午以觐亲焉。
现代文：这年初夏他从郑州往洛阳走，打算端午节到家看望双亲。
English: At the beginning of this summer, he went from Zhengzhou to Luoyang, planning to visit his parents at home for the Dragon Boat Festival.

古文：日晚。方至石桥，忽有少年，骑从鹰犬甚众。
现代文：这天黄昏时他走到一座石桥上，遇见一个少年带着很多随从，架着鹰带着狗迎面而来。
English: At dusk that day, he walked onto a stone bridge and encountered a young boy with a large entourage, carrying an eagle and a dog.

古文：顾珙笑曰：明旦节日，今当蚤归，何迟迟也。
现代文：少年对裴珙笑着说，明天就是端午节了，你该早点回家，为什么走得慢慢腾腾的？
English: The boy said to Pei Yao with a smile, tomorrow is the Dragon Boat Festival, you should go home early, why are you walking slowly?

古文：乃以后乘借之。
现代文：我把备用的快马借给你吧。
English: Let me lend you my spare horse.

古文：珙甚喜，谓二童曰：尔可缓驱，投宿于白马寺西表兄窦温之墅，明日徐归可也。
现代文：裴珙很高兴，对两个仆人说，你们可以慢点儿走，到了洛阳就投宿到白马寺西面我表兄温窦的别墅，明天再慢慢回家来就行了。
English: Pei Yao was very happy and said to the two servants, "You can walk a little slower. When you get to Luoyang, you can stay at my cousin Wen Dou's villa west of the White Horse Temple. Just come home slowly tomorrow."

古文：因上马疾驱，俄顷，至上东门，归其马，珍重而别。
现代文：交待完了就上马飞驰起来。不一会儿，就到了洛阳的上东门，把马还给那少年，庄重地和少年道谢告别。
English: After the confession, he got on his horse and galloped away. In a short while, he arrived at the east gate of Luoyang, returned the horse to the boy, and solemnly said goodbye to the boy.

古文：珙居水南，促步而进，及家暝矣。
现代文：裴珙住在河南，急忙往家赶，到家已黄昏时分了。
English: Pei Wei, who lives in Henan Province, hurried to get home. It was already dusk when she arrived home.

古文：入门，方见其亲与珙之姊妹张灯会食。珙乃前拜，曾莫瞻顾。
现代文：进家后，见父母姐妹们正在张灯宴会，裴珙忙在堂屋的台阶下高声拜见父母说：儿子从外地赶回来了！
English: After entering the house, he saw that his parents and sisters were holding a lantern banquet. Pei Hao hurriedly greeted his parents in a loud voice at the bottom of the hall steps and said, "My son has come back from abroad!"

古文：因俯阶高语曰：珙自外至。
现代文：然而堂上的双亲好像没听见。
English: However, the parents in the hall did not seem to hear.

古文：即又不闻。珙即大呼弟妹之辈，亦无应者。
现代文：裴珙又大声喊兄弟姐妹的名字，也没有人答应。
English: Pei Yao also shouted out the names of his brothers and sisters, but no one answered.

古文：珙心神忿感，思又极呼，皆亦不知。但见其亲叹曰：珙那今日不至也。
现代文：裴珙心里很奇怪，也有些生气，就又大声地呼喊，屋里的人仍然不理他，而且听见父母叹息说，珙儿到今天怎么还不回来呢？
English: The people in the house still ignored him, and he heard his parents sigh and say, "Why hasn't my daughter come back yet today?"

古文：遂涕下，而坐者皆泣。
现代文：说着就哭起来了，兄弟姊妹们也都跟着落泪。
English: As she spoke, she began to cry, and her brothers and sisters also shed tears.

古文：珙私怪曰：吾岂为异物邪？
现代文：这时裴珙才暗想，难道我成了鬼了吗？
English: At this time, Pei Yao only thought to himself, have I become a ghost?

古文：因出至通衢，徘徊久之，有贵人导从甚盛，遥见珙，即以鞭指之曰：彼乃生者之魂也。
现代文：就来到街上，徘徊了半天。这时有一个带着很多随从的大官从街上经过，用鞭子指指裴珙说，那是活人的魂灵。
English: He came to the street and wandered around for half a day. At that time, a high-ranking official with many followers passed by the street and pointed a whip at Pei Yao, saying that it was the soul of a living person.

古文：俄有佩橐鞬者，出于道左，曰：地界启事，裴珙孝廉，命未合终。
现代文：接着有一个佩着箭囊的人来到道旁对他说，地界神特别通知，孝廉裴珙寿数未尽。
English: Next, a man wearing a quiver of arrows came to the side of the road and told him that the god of the earth had made a special announcement that Xiaolian Pei's lifespan was not over.

古文：遇昆明池神七郎子，案鹰回，借马送归，以为戏耳。
现代文：由于他走路时遇见了昆明池神的七公子放鹰归来，七公子把马借给他送他回家，那是和他开了个玩笑。
English: As he was walking, he met the seven sons of Kunming's pond god returning from releasing an eagle. The seven sons lent him a horse to take him home, which was a joke with him.

古文：今当领赴本身。
现代文：现在他的魂魄可以归回本体了。
English: Now his soul can return to his body.

古文：贵人微哂曰：小儿无理，将人命为戏。明日与尊父书，令笞之。
现代文：那个大官生气的说，七公子太淘气了，拿别人的性命当儿戏，明天我给昆明池神写封信，让他好好管教他那七公子。
English: The official said angrily, "The seven boys are too naughty, taking other people's lives as child's play. Tomorrow I will write a letter to the god of Kunming Lake, asking him to properly discipline his seven boys."

古文：既至而橐鞬者招珙，复出上东门，度门隙中，至窦庄。方见其形僵仆，二童环泣呦呦焉。
现代文：那佩箭囊的神领着裴珙又出了上东门，从门缝走过去来到窦庄，裴珙才看见自己的尸体僵卧在地上，两个仆人正围在旁边哭泣。
English: The god with the quiver of arrows led Pei Yao out of the Upper East Gate, walked through the cracks in the door and came to Douzhuang. Only then did Pei Yao see his dead body lying on the ground, with two servants weeping nearby.

古文：橐鞬者令其闭目，自后推之，省然而苏。
现代文：神让裴珙闭上眼睛，从身后推了他一下，裴珙的尸体才复苏活了过来。
English: God asked Pei Yao to close his eyes and gave him a push from behind. Only then did Pei Yao's body come back to life.

古文：其二童皆云：向者行至石桥，察郎君疾作，语言大异，惧其将甚，投于此。既至，则已绝矣。
现代文：后来两个仆人说，刚才走到石桥上时，我们看见你突然发作了急病，说话也迥然区别于平时，我们十分害怕，便赶奔这里，来到这儿，你已断了气。
English: Then two of the servants said, "Just now, when we came to the stone bridge, we saw that you were suddenly taken ill, and your speech was very different from usual. We were very frightened, and we ran here, and here you are, dead."

古文：珙惊叹久之少顷无恙。
现代文：裴珙惊叹了很久，过了一会就完全恢复正常了。
English: Pei Yao was amazed for a long time. After a while, she completely recovered.

古文：舒州军吏
现代文：舒州军吏
English: Shuzhou Military Official

古文：王琪为舒州刺史，有军吏方某者，其家忽有鬼降。
现代文：王琪任安徽舒州刺史时，有个姓方的军官家里忽然降下个鬼。
English: When Wang Qi was in Shuzhou, Anhui Province, making history, a ghost suddenly descended on the home of an officer with the surname Fang.

古文：自言：姓杜，年二十，广陵富家子，居通泗桥之西。
现代文：鬼自称姓杜，二十岁，是广陵富家子弟，住在广陵通泗桥西。
English: The ghost claimed to be surnamed Du, twenty years old, a son of a Guangling rich family, living in the west of Guangling Tongluqiao.

古文：前生欠君钱十万，今地府使我为神神，偿君此债尔。
现代文：鬼说，我前生欠了你十万钱，现在地府到你家来设神坛施法术，帮助你来还你的债。
English: The ghost said, "I owed you a hundred thousand dollars in my previous life, and now I'm coming to your house to set up a shrine and cast spells to help you pay off your debt."

古文：因为人占候祸福，其言多中。
现代文：后来鬼就为人算吉凶，所说的都很准。
English: Later, ghosts were considered good luck or bad luck, and what they said was very accurate.

古文：方以家贫告琪，求为一镇将。因问鬼：吾所求可得否？鬼曰：诺，吾将问之。
现代文：姓方的军官曾以家贫为理由，请求刺史王琪提升他当镇将，这时方某就问让自己当镇将的事能不能成。鬼说，好吧，我去问问王琪。
English: An officer with the surname Fang once asked Wang Qi to promote him to town marshal on the grounds that his family was poor. At this time, Fang asked if he could make himself town marshal. The ghost said, "Okay, I'll ask Wang Qi."

古文：良久乃至曰：必得之，其镇名一字正方，他不能识矣。
现代文：过了很久鬼回来了，对方某说，你一定会当上镇将，你镇守的地方，名字是一个方方的口，其他字我不认识。
English: After a long time, the ghost came back, and the other party said, "You will definitely be the town marshal, the place you guard, the name is a square mouth, I don't know the other words."

古文：既而得双港镇将，以为其言无验。
现代文：不久方某被任命为双港镇将，心想鬼说的也不对呀。
English: Soon after, Fang Mou was appointed as the mayor of Shuanggang Town. What he thought was not right.

古文：未及之任，忽谓方曰：适得军牒，军中令一人来为双港镇将，吾今以尔为皖口镇将。
现代文：然而他还没去双港上任，就传来军事公文，王琪在公文中说，我已另派一个人到双港上任，现在派你当皖口的镇将。
English: However, before he went to Shuanggang to take office, he received a military document. Wang Qi said in the document, I have sent another person to Shuanggang to take office, and now I am sending you to be the town marshal of Hekou.

古文：竟如其言，凡岁余，鬼忽言曰：吾还君债足。
现代文：果然像鬼所预言的那样，方某当镇将的地名有个口字。一年多后，鬼忽然对方某说，我已还清你的债了。
English: Sure enough, as the ghost had predicted, there was a mouthful of the place name of the town's mayor. More than a year later, the ghost suddenly said to the other party, I have paid off your debt.

古文：告别而去，遂寂然。
现代文：鬼就告别而去，以后再也没来。
English: The ghost said goodbye and left, never to return.

古文：方后至广陵，访得杜氏，问其弟子。云：吾弟二子，顷忽病，如痴人，岁余愈矣。
现代文：方某后来到广陵，访问鬼说过的那个杜家，问他弟弟有几个儿子，回答说，我弟弟的次子前些时忽然得了病，像个呆子，一年后才好。
English: Afterward, Fang went to Guangling to visit the Du family mentioned by the ghost, asked him how many sons his brother had, and replied that my brother's second son had suddenly fallen ill some time ago, like an idiot, and only got better a year later.

