古文：薛居正，字子平，开封浚仪人。
现代文：薛居正字子平，开封浚仪人。
English: Xue Ju Zi Ping, the person responsible for opening the seal.

古文：父仁谦，周太子宾客。
现代文：其父薛仁谦任后周太子宾客。
English: His father, Xue Renqian, later became a guest of Prince Zhou.

古文：居正少好学，有大志。
现代文：居正年轻时好学，有远大志向。
English: When he was young, Ju Zheng was eager to learn and had lofty aspirations.

古文：清泰初，举进士不第，为《遣愁文》以自解，寓意倜傥，识者以为有公辅之量。
现代文：清泰初年，参加进士考试未被录取，写了一篇《遣愁文》来自我解嘲，其文寓意卓越豪迈，观者认为有公辅大臣的器量。
English: In the first year of Qing Tai, he was not admitted to the entrance examination, and wrote a "Sorrowful Sentence" to self-deprecate. Its moral is outstanding and heroic, and the audience believes that it has the ability of the Minister of Public Affairs.

古文：逾年，登第。
现代文：过一年，登进士第。
English: A year later, he was promoted to professor.

古文：晋天福中，华帅刘遂凝辟为从事。
现代文：晋天福年间，华帅刘遂凝召他为从事。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jintianfu, the Chinese general Liu Sui called him to engage in sumo.

古文：遂凝兄遂清领邦计，奏署盐铁判官。
现代文：刘遂凝之兄刘遂清管理国家财经大事，上奏任命他为盐铁巡官。
English: Liu Suiqing, the elder brother of Liu Sui Rong, managed the national financial and economic affairs, and was appointed as the salt and iron inspector.

古文：开运初，改度支推官。
现代文：开运初年，改任度支推官。
English: In the first year of operation, he was transferred to the post of governor.

古文：宰相李崧领盐铁，又奏署推官，加大理寺直，迁右拾遗。
现代文：宰相李崧领管盐铁，又上奏任他为推官，加任大理司直，升为右拾遗。
English: The Prime Minister, Li Xi, was in charge of salt and iron, and he was also appointed as a pusher, and he was also appointed as Dali Sizhi, and promoted to the right to collect relics.

古文：桑维翰为开封府尹，奏署判官。
现代文：桑维翰任开封府尹时，又上奏任他为判官。
English: When Sang Wai Han was appointed as the governor of Kaifeng, he was also appointed as a magistrate.

古文：汉乾祐初，史弘肇领侍卫亲军，威权震主，残忍自恣，无敢忤其意者。
现代文：后汉乾初年，史弘肇统率侍卫亲军，威权震动皇上，为人残忍自傲，没有人敢忤逆他的命令。
English: In the first year after the Han Dynasty, Shi Hongzhao led the troops of the imperial guards. The emperor was shocked by the authority, he was cruel and proud, and no one dared to disobey his orders.

古文：其部下吏告民犯盐禁，法当死。
现代文：他的部下官吏控告百姓违犯盐禁，论法当死。
English: His subordinate officials accused the people of violating the salt ban and were sentenced to death.

古文：狱将决，居正疑其不实，召诘之，乃吏与民有私憾，因诬之，逮吏鞫之，具伏抵法。
现代文：讼狱将要决断，薛居正怀疑其罪不实，召来这个百姓讯问，原来这个官吏与他有私怨，因此诬告他。逮捕这个官吏来讯问，他供认不讳，被处罚。
English: The court martial was about to decide. Xue Ju, suspecting that his crime was not true, summoned this citizen for interrogation. It turned out that the official had a personal grudge against him, so he falsely accused him. The official was arrested for interrogation. He confessed and was punished.

古文：弘肇虽怒甚，亦无以屈。
现代文：史弘肇虽然很恼怒，但又不能救助。
English: Although Shi Hongzhao was very angry, he couldn't help.

古文：周广顺初，迁比部员外郎，领三司推官，旋知制诰。
现代文：后周广顺初年，迁升为比部员外郎，统领三司推官，不久任知制诰。
English: Later, in the first year of Zhou Guangshun's reign, he was promoted to the position of a member of the higher-ranking division, the leader of the three sub-officers, and was soon appointed to the position of the intellectual superior.

古文：周祖征兖州，诏居正从行，以劳加都官郎中。
现代文：周太祖征伐兖州，诏令薛居正跟从前往，因为功劳加任都官郎中。
English: Emperor Zhou's ancestor conquered Bozhou, and Emperor Zhao ordered Xue Jiusheng to go with him, and he was appointed as one of the official courtiers because of his merits.

古文：显德三年，迁左谏议大夫，擢弘文馆学士，判馆事。
现代文：显德三年，迁升为左谏议大夫，擢任为弘文馆学士、判馆事。
English: After three years of study, Hende was promoted to the position of doctor of the Left Division of the Supreme People's Court, and was appointed as a scholar of the Hongwen Museum and a librarian.

古文：六年，使沧州定民租。
现代文：六年，出使沧州核定民租。
English: Six years later, he was sent to Cangzhou to approve the people's rent.

古文：未几，以材干闻于朝，擢刑部侍郎，判吏部铨。
现代文：不久因为他的才干扬名朝廷，擢升为刑部侍郎、判吏部铨。
English: Soon, his talent made him famous in the imperial court, and he was promoted to the position of a chamberlain in the criminal investigation department and a chief of the criminal investigation department.

古文：宋初，迁户部侍郎。
现代文：宋初，调任户部侍郎。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, he was transferred to the position of household attendant.

古文：太祖亲征李筠及李重进，并留司三司，俄出知许州。
现代文：太祖亲自征讨李筠及李重进，管理留司三司，不久出任许州知州。
English: The great-grandfather personally recruited Li Xi and Li Chongjin, managed the three departments, and soon became the governor of Huzhou.

古文：建隆三年，入为枢密直学士，权知贡举。
现代文：建隆三年，到朝廷任枢密直学士，权知贡举。
English: In the third year of Jianlong's reign, he was appointed as a privy direct bachelor to the imperial court, and was given the title of gongzhi.

古文：初平湖湘，以居正知朗州。
现代文：湖湘刚平定，朝廷任命居正知朗州。
English: As soon as Hunan was pacified, the imperial court appointed Ju Zhengchi as the governor of Lanzhou.

古文：会亡卒数千人聚山泽为盗，监军使疑城中僧千余人皆其党，议欲尽捕诛之。
现代文：正遇逃兵数千人聚结山泽为盗，监军使怀疑城中僧侣一千多人都是同伙，准备全部捕杀。
English: They were encountering thousands of deserters who had gathered in Yamazawa to steal, and the supervisors suspected that more than a thousand monks in the city were accomplices and were preparing to kill them all.

古文：居正以计缓其事，因率众剪灭群寇，擒贼帅汪端，诘之，僧皆不预，赖以全活。
现代文：居正用计迟缓捕杀，于是率领军队消灭群寇，擒俘盗贼主帅汪端，讯问他，得知僧侣们并未参预其事，僧侣们得以存活下来。
English: Ju Zheng used delaying tactics to catch and kill, so he led the army to destroy the bandits. Wang Duan, the commander of the bandits, interrogated him and learned that the monks did not participate in the incident, and the monks were able to survive.

古文：乾德初，加兵部侍郎。
现代文：乾德初年，加任兵部侍郎。
English: In the first year of Kende's reign, he was appointed to the position of Hyobushojiro.

古文：车驾将亲征太原，大发民馈运。
现代文：皇帝将要亲自征伐太原，大量发动百姓运送粮草。
English: The emperor will personally invade Taiyuan and mobilize a large number of people to transport grain and grass.

古文：时河南府饥，逃亡者四万家，上忧之，命居正驰传招集，浃旬间民尽复业。
现代文：当时河南府闹饥荒，逃亡者四万家，皇上为此感到忧虑，命居正乘驿马招集百姓，十天后百姓都恢复生业。
English: At that time, Henan Province was suffering from famine, and 40,000 families had fled. The emperor was worried about this, and he was riding his horse to summon the people. Ten days later, the people resumed their livelihoods.

古文：以本官参知政事。
现代文：朝廷命居正以本官参知政事。
English: The Imperial Court has ordered him to take part in government affairs as an official.

古文：五年，加吏部侍郎。
现代文：五年，加任吏部侍郎。
English: Five years later, he was appointed as a chamberlain of the cadre.

古文：开宝五年，兼淮南、湖南、岭南等道都提举三司水陆发运使，又兼门下侍郎，监修国史；又监修《五代史》，逾年毕，锡以器币。
现代文：开宝五年，兼任淮南、湖南、岭南等道提举三司水陆发运使事，又兼判门下侍郎事，监修国史；又监修《五代史》。过一年后，皇上赐给他器币。
English: In the fifth year of Kaibao's reign, he was also appointed as the envoy of the three departments of land and water transportation for Huainan, Hunan and Lingnan provinces, and was also appointed as the attendant of his disciple, supervising the national history; and supervising the "History of the Five Dynasties." A year later, the emperor gave him coins.

古文：六年，拜门下侍郎、平章事。
现代文：六年，任门下侍郎、平章事。
English: In the sixth year, he was appointed as a subordinate attendant, Taira Shoji.

古文：八年二月，上谓居正等曰： 年谷方登，庶物丰盛，若非上天垂祐，何以及斯。
现代文：八年二月，皇上对居正等人说： 年岁丰登，万物丰盛，如果不是上天保佑，哪里能这样。
English: In February of the eighth year, the emperor said to Ju Zheng and others: The years are bountiful, everything is bountiful, if it is not God's blessing, where can this be.

古文：所宜共思济物，或有阙政，当与振举，以成朕志。 居正等益修政事，以副上意焉。
现代文：应当共思济物，如果政事有失，应当予以拯救，来实现我的志向。 居正等愈发勤修政事，来符合皇上的意愿。
English: It is necessary to think together about what to give, and if there are mistakes in government affairs, it is necessary to save them in order to realize my ambition. Ju Zheng and others should be more diligent in government affairs to meet the emperor's wishes.

古文：太平兴国初，加左仆射、昭文馆大学士。
现代文：太平兴国初年，加任左仆射、昭文馆大学士。
English: In the first year of the Taiping Xingguo, he was appointed as a left-handed shooter and a scholar of the Shouwen Museum.

古文：从平晋阳还，进位司空。
现代文：随从皇帝平定晋阳回来后，进官位为司空。
English: After returning from the Emperor Pingding Jinyang, he was promoted to the position of Siku.

古文：因服丹砂遇毒，方奏事，觉疾作，遽出。
现代文：由于吃了丹砂中毒，正在上奏政事时，发觉毒发，于是出了殿堂。
English: As a result of eating red bean paste poisoning, when he was attending a government meeting, he found a poisonous hair and left the hall of fame.

古文：至殿门外，饮水升余，堂吏掖归中书，已不能言，但指庑间储水器。
现代文：到殿门外，喝了一升多水，堂吏把他扶到中书省，已经不能说话，只是指着廊庑间的储水器。
English: He drank more than a liter of water outside the palace gate, and the palace officials helped him to the Chinese Literature Department. He was no longer able to speak, but only pointed to the water storage tank between the corridors.

古文：左右取水至，不能饮，偃阁中，吐气如烟焰，舆归私第卒，六年六月也，年七十。
现代文：身边的人把水取来，不能喝，吐气像烟雾，用车载回家里去世，时为太平兴国六年六月，终年七十岁。
English: People around him fetched water, he couldn't drink, he exhaled like smoke, he was taken home in a car, and he died in June of the sixth year of Taiping Xingguo, at the age of 70.

古文：赠太尉、中书令，谥文惠。
现代文：追赠太尉、中书令，赐谥号为文惠。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Taijun and Chushirei, and given the posthumous name of Wenhui.

古文：居正气貌瑰伟，饮酒至数斗不乱。
现代文：薛居正气质容貌伟岸，喝酒喝到几斗还能不醉。
English: Xue Ju Zheng's temperament and appearance are great, and he can drink up to several buckets without getting drunk.

古文：性孝行纯，居家俭约。
现代文：秉性孝顺行为善良，居家生活节俭。
English: Uphold filial piety, act with kindness, and live a frugal life at home.

古文：为相任宽简，不好苛察，士君子以此多之。
现代文：任宰相时处事宽厚，不喜欢苛察，士大夫对此很为赞许。
English: When he was appointed prime minister, he was lenient in his dealings and did not like to be criticized, which was highly praised by the scholar.

古文：自参政至为相，凡十八年，恩遇始终不替。
现代文：从参政到任宰相，一共十八年，皇帝对他的恩宠始终不减。
English: From his participation in politics to his appointment as prime minister, a total of eighteen years, the emperor's favor to him has not diminished.

古文：先是，太祖尝谓居正曰： 自古为君者鲜克正己，为臣者多无远略，虽居显位，不能垂名后代，而身陷不义，子孙罹殃，盖君臣之道有所未尽。
现代文：先前，太祖曾经对居正说： 自古帝王很少能够正己，臣子大多没有远略，虽然身居显位，不能垂名后世，而身陷不义之名，子孙遭殃，因为君臣没能尽行其道啊。
English: Previously, the great-grandfather had said to Ju Zheng: Since ancient times, emperors have rarely been able to be righteous, and most of the courtiers have not been far-sighted. Although they are in prominent positions, they cannot be named in the future, but they are trapped in the name of injustice, and their descendants suffer, because the monarchs and courtiers have not been able to do their best.

古文：吾观唐太宗受人谏疏，直诋其非而不耻。
现代文：我看唐太宗接受大臣谏议，直接指出他的过错而不以为耻。
English: I think Tang Taizong was not ashamed to accept the minister's advice and directly pointed out his mistakes.

古文：以朕所见，不若自不为之，使人无异词。
现代文：在我看来，不如自己不做错事，使别人没有指责。
English: In my opinion, it is better not to do anything wrong, so that others do not blame.

古文：又观古之人臣多不终始，能保全而享厚福者，由忠正也。 开宝中，居正与沈伦并为相，卢多逊参知政事，九年冬，多逊亦为平章事。
现代文：又观古代的大臣很多不能慎终如始，能够得以保全而且享受厚福的人，是由于忠正啊。 开宝年间，薛居正与沈伦一起任宰相，卢多逊任参知政事。九年冬天，卢多逊也任平章事。
English: Also, many ministers in ancient times who could not be as cautious as before, and who were able to preserve and enjoy good fortune, were due to loyalty. During the Kaibao era, Xue Juzheng served as prime minister together with Shen Lun, and Ludoson served as a political advisor to the governor. In the winter of the ninth year, Ludoson also served as a civil servant.

古文：及居正卒，而沈伦责授，多逊南流，论者以居正守道蒙福，果符太祖之言。
现代文：到居正死后，沈伦被贬官，卢多逊流放南方，议论的人说薛居正坚守臣道受福，果然符合太祖之言。
English: After the death of Zu Zu Zheng, Shen Lun was demoted, and Ludoson was exiled to the south. The commentators said that Xue Ju Zheng adhered to the vassal road and was blessed, which was indeed in line with the words of the great ancestor.

古文：惟温后至秘书丞；惟清娶密王女宜都县主，至内殿承制。
现代文：薛居正喜好读书，写文章落笔不能停止。其子薛惟吉把他的文章编集为三十卷送给皇上，皇上赐集名为《文惠集》。
English: Xue Juzheng liked to read and could not stop writing articles. His son Xue Weiji compiled his articles into thirty volumes and presented them to the emperor. The emperor gave the collection the name "Wenhui Collection."

古文：卢多逊，怀州河内人。
现代文：咸平二年，朝廷诏令薛居正附祀于太宗庙。卢多逊，怀州河内人。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, the imperial court decreed that Xue Juzheng be enshrined in Taizong Temple.

古文：曾祖得一、祖真启皆为邑宰。
现代文：他的曾祖父得一，祖父真启都任过县令。
English: His great-grandfather was one, and his grandfather, Zhenqi, was a county magistrate.

古文：父亿，字子元，少笃学，以孝悌闻。
现代文：他的父亲卢亿字子元，年轻时好学，以孝悌闻名。
English: His father, Lu Yi Zi Yuan, was studious when he was young and was known for his filial piety.

古文：举明经，调补新乡主簿。
现代文：考中明经科，调补任新乡主簿。
English: Passed the middle school entrance examination, majored in Chinese classics, and became the chief accountant of Xinxiang.

古文：秩满，复试进士，校书郎、集贤校理。
现代文：任职期满，又考中进士，任校书郎、集贤校理。
English: At the end of his term of office, he was promoted to junior high school exam examiner, appointed as school scribe, and school administrator.

古文：晋天福中，迁著作佐郎，出为郓州观察支使。
现代文：后晋天福年间，升任著作佐郎，出京任郓州观察支使。
English: Later, during the reign of Emperor Tenfu, he was promoted to Shososaro, and went to Beijing to serve as an observer of Bozhou.

古文：节帅杜重威骄蹇黩货，幕府贿赂公行，唯亿清介自持。
现代文：节度使杜重威骄纵贪财，幕府办理公事时贿赂成风，只有卢亿清介自持。
English: Du Chong was arrogant, greedy for money, and the shogunate made bribery a common practice when handling public affairs. Only Luyun Qingzuo was self-supporting.

古文：会景延广镇天平，表亿掌书记；留守西洛，又表为判官。
现代文：景延广镇守天平时，上表推荐卢亿任掌书记；留守西洛时，又上表推荐他任判官。
English: When Jing Yan Guang Zhen was in Tianping, the above table recommended that Lu Yuan serve as secretary; when he stayed in Shiloh, the above table recommended that he serve as judge.

古文：时国用窘乏，取民财以助军，河南府计出二十万缗，延广欲并缘以图羡利，增为三十七万缗。
现代文：当时国家费用贫乏，收取民财以助军用，河南府应出钱二十万缗，延广打算趁机谋取余利，增到三十七万缗。
English: At that time, the state was short of funds and needed to collect money from the people to help the military. Henan Province was supposed to pay 200,000 baht, but Yanguang planned to take advantage of the opportunity to make extra profit and increase the amount to 370,000 baht.

古文：亿谏曰： 公位兼将相，既富且贵。
现代文：卢亿谏阻说 ：你已将位兼将相，既富又贵。
English: Lu Yuanzhang said, "You have become both rich and valuable.

古文：今国帑空竭，不得已而取资于民，公何忍利之乎？ 延广惭而止。
现代文：现在国库空虚，不得已取用民财，你又怎么忍心谋取余利呢？ 延广惭愧而作罢。
English: Now that the treasury is empty and you have no choice but to use people's money, how can you bear to seek extra profit?

古文：汉初，以魏王承训为开封尹，授亿水部员外郎，充推官。
现代文：后汉初期，朝廷以魏王承训为开封尹，授任卢亿为水部员外郎，充任推官。
English: At the beginning of the Later Han Dynasty, the imperial court took Wei Wang Chengxun as the Kaifeng Yin, and appointed Lu Yuan as the water minister's brother-in-law, and served as the magistrate.

古文：时侍卫诸军骄恣，朝廷姑息之，军士成美以驴负盐入都门，阍者不敢执，反擒平民孟柔送侍卫司。
现代文：当时侍卫诸军骄纵，朝廷迁就姑息，军士成美用驴驮盐进入都城城门，守门人不敢捉拿，反而擒得平民孟柔送到侍卫司。
English: At that time, the guards of the army were arrogant, and the imperial court tolerated them. Sergeant Cheng Mei entered the capital city gate with a donkey carrying salt. The gatekeeper did not dare to catch him, but instead had the civilian Meng Rou sent to the guards.

古文：柔自诬伏，论当弃市。
现代文：孟柔自屈招认，按律应当杀头。
English: Meng Rong confessed, and according to the law, he should be beheaded.

古文：亿察其冤，言于汉祖而释之。
现代文：卢亿察觉他的冤屈，对汉祖说明放了他。
English: Lu Yun, aware of his grievances, explained to Han Zu and released him.

古文：周初，为侍御史。
现代文：后周初期，任侍御史。
English: In the early part of the following week, he assumed the post of Samurai Governor.

古文：汉末兵乱，法书亡失。
现代文：后汉末年战乱，法律书籍都散失了。
English: After the war in the late Han Dynasty, the law books were lost.

古文：至是，大理奏重写律令格式，统类编敕。
现代文：到这时，大理寺奏请重写律令格式，统类编辑。
English: At this time, Dali Temple requested to rewrite the format of the ritsuryo and edit the classification.

古文：乃诏亿与刑部员外郎曹匪躬、大理正段涛同加议定。
现代文：于是诏令卢亿与刑部员外郎曹匪躬、大理正段涛同加议定。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered Lu Rong and the members of the criminal department, Wai Lang Cao Gang Bi and Dali Zheng Duan Tao, to come to an agreement.

古文：旧本以京兆府改同五府，开封、大名府改同河南府，长安、万年改为次赤县，开封、浚仪、大名、元城改为赤县。
现代文：旧本把京兆府改同五府，开封、大名府改同河南府，长安、万年改为次赤县，开封、浚仪、大名、元城改为赤县。
English: The old version changed Keizhao Prefecture to be the same as the five prefectures, Kaifeng and Daimyo Prefecture to be the same as Henan Prefecture, Chang'an and Wanli to be the same as Suba County, and Kaifeng, Dongyi, Daimyo and Yuancheng to be the same as Aka County.

古文：又定东京诸门薰风等为京城门，明德等为皇城门，启运等为宫城门，升龙等为宫门，崇元等为殿门。
现代文：又定东京诸门薰风等为京城门，明德等为皇城门，启运等为宫城门，升龙等为宫门，崇元等为殿门。
English: In addition, it was decided that the gates of Tokyo such as "Kyo-jo-mon," "Mingde-mon," "Imperial gates," "Miyagi-mon," "Shoryu-mon," and "Sogen-mon" would be the gates of the Imperial Palace.

古文：庙讳书不成文，凡改点画及义理之误字二百一十有四。
现代文：庙讳书不成文，经改正点画及义理之错字一共二百一十四处。
English: The Temple Taboo is unwritten, and after correction, there are a total of 214 dotted and dashed words.

古文：又以晋、汉及周初事关刑法敕条者，分为二卷，附编敕，自为《大周续编敕》，诏行之。
现代文：又把后晋、后汉及后周初年有关刑法敕条，分为二卷，附在编敕后，独立成为《大周续编敕》，诏令实行。
English: In addition, the relevant articles of the Criminal Law of the Later Jin, Later Han and the early years of the Later Zhou were divided into two volumes and attached to the compilation, and independently became the "Large Zhou Continuation," and the edict was implemented.

古文：俄以本官知杂事，加左司员外郎，迁主客度支郎中，并兼弘文馆直学士。
现代文：不久以本官知杂事，加任左司员外郎，升任主客度支郎中，并兼任弘文馆直学士。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of assistant secretary of the left, promoted to the post of chief guest secretary, and concurrently served as a direct bachelor of the Hongwu Museum.

古文：世宗晏驾，为山陵判官，出为河南令。
现代文：世宗去世，任山陵判官，出京任河南令。
English: After the death of King Sejong, he was appointed as the judge of mountains and tombs, and went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Henan Province.

古文：宋初，迁少尹。
现代文：宋朝初期，升任少尹。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, he was promoted to Shao Yin.

古文：亿性恬退，闻其子多逊知制诰，即上章求解。
现代文：卢亿性情恬淡，听说自己的儿子卢多逊知制诰，就上表请求解职。
English: Lu Yuanzhong's temper was light, and when he heard that his son, Lu Dosun, knew how to control his temper, he asked for his dismissal.

古文：乾德二年，以少府监致仕。
现代文：乾德二年，以少府监职衔退休。
English: Two years later, he retired with the title of Junior Prefectural Supervisor.

古文：多逊，显德初，举进士，解褐秘书郎、集贤校理，迁左拾遗、集贤殿修撰。
现代文：卢多逊，显德初期考中进士，授任秘书郎、集贤校理，升为左拾遗、集贤殿修撰。
English: Ludoson, the winner of the middle school entrance examination at the beginning of the Hende period, was appointed secretary and editor of the collection of sages, and was promoted to the left of the collection and editor of the collection of sages.

古文：建隆三年，以本官知制诰，历祠部员外郎。
现代文：建隆三年，以本官知制诰，历任祠部员外郎。
English: In the third year of Jianlong's reign, he used his knowledge as a magistrate to rule the country, succeeding the members of the ancestral hall.

古文：乾德二年，权知贡举。
现代文：乾德二年，权知贡举。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Qiande, the tribute to Quanzhi was raised.

古文：三年，加兵部郎中。
现代文：乾德三年，加任兵部郎中。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to the position of Hyobusho-roju.

古文：四年，复权知贡举。
现代文：乾德四年，又任权知贡举。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Qiande, he was also appointed to the position of Quan Zhi Gongzhu.

古文：六年，加史馆修撰、判馆事。
现代文：乾德六年，加任史馆修撰、判馆事。
English: Six years later, he was appointed to the post of editor and judge of the history museum.

古文：开宝二年，车驾征太原，以多逊知太原行府事。
现代文：开宝二年，太祖征讨太原，任命多逊为知太原行府事。
English: In the second year of the Kaibao era, the great ancestor conquered Taiyuan and appointed Doson to run the government affairs for Chitaiyuan.

古文：移幸常山，又命权知镇州。
现代文：太祖移到常山，又任命他为权知镇州。
English: The great-grandfather moved to Changshan and appointed him as the governor of Zhenzhou.

古文：师还，直学士院。
现代文：军队回师后，在学士院值班。
English: After returning from the army, he was on duty at the academy.

古文：三年春，复知贡举。
现代文：开宝三年春天，又主持贡举。
English: In the spring of the third year of Kaibao, he also presided over the tribute.

古文：四年冬，命为翰林学士。
现代文：开宝四年冬天，朝廷任命他为翰林学士。
English: In the winter of the fourth year of Kaibao, the imperial court appointed him as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：六年，使江南还，因言江南衰弱可图之状。
现代文：开宝六年，出使南唐回朝，因此对皇上述说南唐衰弱可以攻取的形势。
English: Six years after the discovery of the treasure, Emperor Gaozong sent Nantang back to the imperial court. Therefore, he told the emperor that Nantang's weakness was a situation that could be conquered.

古文：受诏同修《五代史》，迁中书舍人、参知政事。
现代文：受诏与人同修《五代史》，升任中书舍人、参知政事。
English: After receiving the imperial edict, he began to study the Five Dynasties together with others, and was promoted to the posts of middle school teacher and government official.

古文：丁外艰，数日起复视事。
现代文：遭父丧，几天后被朝廷起用处理政事。
English: A few days after his father's death, he was appointed by the imperial court to handle political affairs.

古文：会史馆修撰扈蒙请复修时政记，诏多逊专其事。
现代文：史馆修撰扈蒙请求恢复修撰时政记，诏令多逊专门负责这件事。
English: The History Museum requested the restoration of the compilation of the chronicles of the government at the request of the author of the collection, and issued a decree that Doson was specifically responsible for this matter.

古文：金陵平，加吏部侍郎。
现代文：金陵平定后，加任吏部侍郎。
English: After the subjugation of Jinling, he was also appointed as a chamberlain of the cadre department.

古文：太平兴国初，拜中书侍郎、平章事。
现代文：太平兴国初年，授任中书侍郎、平章事。
English: In the first year of the Taiping Restoration, he was appointed to the posts of Chusho-ziroro and Taira-shoji.

古文：四年，从平太原还，加兵部尚书。
现代文：太平兴国四年，跟从太宗征讨太原回来，加任兵部尚书。
English: In the fourth year of Taiping Xingguo, he came back from Taiyuan with the Taizong's enlistment, and was appointed to the military department of Shangshu.

古文：多逊博涉经史，聪明强力，文辞敏给，好任数，有谋略，发多奇中。
现代文：多逊博涉经史，聪明强记，文辞敏捷，喜欢任用术数，有谋略，计谋常常成功。
English: He is a prolific student of history, has a strong memory, is quick with words, likes to use numbers, has a strategy, and his strategies are often successful.

古文：太祖好读书，每取书史馆，多逊预戒吏令白己，知所取书，必通夕阅览，及太祖问书中事，多逊应答无滞，同列皆伏焉。
现代文：太祖喜欢读书，每次到史馆取书，多逊预先诫令史馆官吏告诉自己，知道太祖所拿的书，一定通宵阅读，到太祖问到书中事时，多逊回答流畅，同僚们都佩服他。
English: Taizu liked to read. Every time he went to the history museum to pick up a book, Doson warned the officials of the history museum in advance to tell themselves that if they knew the book that Taizu was holding, they would read it all night. When they asked Taizu about the book, Doson answered fluently, and his colleagues all admired him.

古文：先是，多逊知制诰，与赵普不协，及在翰林日，每召对，多攻普之短。
现代文：从前，多逊主持制诰，与赵普不和，在翰林院时，每次召对，常常攻击赵普的短处。
English: Once upon a time, Doson presided over the imperial edict system and was at odds with Zhao Pu. When he was in Hanlin Academy, every time he was summoned, he often attacked Zhao Pu's shortcomings.

古文：未几，普出镇河阳。
现代文：不久，赵普出京镇守河阳。
English: Soon after, Zhao Pu left Beijing to guard the city of Heyang.

古文：太宗践祚，普入为少保。
现代文：太宗即皇帝位，赵普入朝任少保。
English: Taizong was the emperor, and Zhao Puri was appointed as a minor protector.

古文：数年，普子承宗娶燕国长公主女，承宗适知泽州，受诏归阙成婚礼。
现代文：几年后，赵普的儿子承宗娶燕国长公主的女儿，承宗当时正任知潭州，受诏回朝举行婚礼。
English: A few years later, Zhao Pu's son, Chengzong, married the daughter of the Governor of Yan Province, Chengzong, who was then in charge of Zhitan Prefecture, received the imperial edict and returned to the North to hold the wedding.

古文：未逾月，多逊白遣归任，普由是愤怒。
现代文：不满月，多逊要求太宗让他回到任所，赵普从此对多逊愤怒在心。
English: Dissatisfied, Doson asked Taizong to let him return to his post, and Zhao Pu was angry with Doson from then on.

古文：初，普出镇河阳，上言自诉云： 外人谓臣轻议皇弟开封尹，皇弟忠孝全德，岂有间然。
现代文：当初，赵普出京镇守河阳，上言自辩说 ：外人说我妄自议论皇弟开封尹，皇弟忠孝全德，哪里有间隙！
English: At first, Zhao Pu went to the capital to guard Kheyang, and defended himself by saying, "Outsiders say that I am presumptuous to talk about the emperor's younger brother Kaifeng Yin, the emperor's younger brother Zhongxiao Quande, where is the gap!

古文：矧昭宪皇太后大渐之际，臣实预闻顾命。
现代文：况且昭宪皇太后临终时，我实际上参与接受遗命。
English: Moreover, when the Empress Dowager Shoken was on her deathbed, I actually participated in accepting her will.

古文：知臣者君，愿赐昭鉴。 太祖手封其书，藏于宫中。
现代文：知我者是你，希望你明鉴。 太祖亲手封上这封信，藏在宫中。
English: You are the one who knows me, and I hope you will read it. My great-grandfather sealed this letter with his own hand and hid it in the palace.

古文：至是，普复密奏： 臣开国旧臣，为权幸所沮。 因言昭宪顾命及先朝自诉之事。
现代文：到这时，赵普又秘密上奏说： 我是开国旧臣，被权幸大臣中伤。 于是说到昭宪遗命以及先朝上书自辩之事。
English: At this time, Zhao Pu also secretly reported: I am a former minister of the founding of the country, who was slandered by the Minister of State Security, and then talked about the last will and testament of Zhao Zhen and the matter of self-defense in writing to the previous government.

古文：上于宫中访得普前所上表，因感悟，即留承宗京师。
现代文：太宗在宫中访得赵普先前上的奏表，因此感悟，就把承宗留在京城。
English: Emperor Taizong visited Zhao Pu in the palace and was impressed by Zhao Pu's previous performance, so he left Chengzong in Beijing.

古文：未几，复用普为相，多逊益不自安。
现代文：不久，重新起用赵普为宰相。多逊越发感到不安。
English: Soon, Zhao Pu was reappointed as prime minister. Doson became increasingly uneasy.

古文：普屡讽多逊，令引退，多逊贪固权位，不能决。
现代文：赵普多次劝告多逊引退，多逊贪图权位，不能决断。
English: Zhao Pu repeatedly advised Dosun to retire. Dosun was greedy for power and could not make a decision.

古文：会有以多逊尝遣堂吏赵白交通秦王廷美事闻，太宗怒，下诏数其不忠之罪，责授守兵部尚书。
现代文：正好因为多逊曾经派堂吏赵白勾结秦王廷美的事被告发，太宗大怒，下诏一一列举他不忠的罪过，贬授为兵部尚书。
English: It was precisely because he had sent the court official Zhao Bai to collude with Qin Wang Tingmei that he was accused, and Tai Zong was so angry that he issued an edict enumerating his sins of disloyalty and demoting him to the rank of military secretary.

古文：明日，以多逊属吏，命翰林学士承旨李昉、学士扈蒙、卫尉卿崔仁冀、膳部郎中知杂事滕中正杂治之。
现代文：第二天，把多逊交给官吏审问，命令翰林学士承旨李日方、学士扈蒙、卫尉卿崔仁冀、膳部郎中知杂事滕中正一同审讯。
English: The next day, he handed Doson over to the officials for interrogation, and ordered Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi Li Yifang, Scholar Zeng Meng, Guards Lieutenant Cui Renji, and the head of the Catering Department, Lang Zhizhong, to be interrogated together.

古文：狱具，召文武常参官集议朝堂，太子太师王溥等七十四人奏议曰： 谨案兵部尚书卢多逊，身处宰司，心怀顾望，密遣堂吏，交结亲王，通达语言，咒咀君父，大逆不道，干纪乱常，上负国恩，下亏臣节，宜膏斧钺，以正刑章。
现代文：案情审结，召文武常参官在朝堂集议，太子太师王溥等七十四人上奏议论说 ：谨按兵部尚书卢多逊，身任宰相，心怀怨望，秘密派遣堂吏，勾结亲王，互通声气，咒诅君父，大逆不道，败坏纲纪，上负国家恩宠，下亏为臣之节，应当予以诛罚，以正法律。
English: At the conclusion of the case, the civil and military counsellors were summoned to gather in the imperial court for discussion, and the seventy-four people, including the prince and grandmaster Wang Xi, made a report on the discussion, saying: "According to the military department's inscriptions, Ludosun, who served as prime minister, harbored grudges, secretly sent courtiers, colluded with princes, communicated with each other, cursed the king and father, rebelled against the Tao, corrupted discipline, lost the favor of the state, and became a vassal, should be punished, and the law should be enforced.

古文：其卢多逊请依有司所断，削夺在身官爵，准法诛斩。
现代文：请把卢多逊交给有关部门处理，削夺一切官爵，依法诛斩。
English: Please hand over Ludoson to the relevant departments for handling, deprive him of all titles, and behead him in accordance with the law.

古文：秦王廷美，亦请同卢多逊处分，其所缘坐，望准律文裁遣。 
现代文：秦王廷美，也请同卢多逊一起作出处理，其他牵连犯罪的人，希望按法律惩治。 
English: Qin Wang Tingmei, please also work with Ludoson to deal with it. I hope that other people implicated in the crime will be punished according to the law.

古文：遂下诏曰： 臣之事君，贰则有辟，下之谋上，将而必诛。
现代文：于是太宗下诏说： 臣子奉事君主，如果一臣事二主就是邪僻，臣下谋害皇上，必定遭到诛杀。
English: Therefore, Emperor Taizong issued an edict saying, "If a vassal serves the sovereign, if one vassal serves two masters, it is wickedness. If a vassal plots to kill the emperor, he will certainly be killed.

古文：兵部尚书卢多逊，顷自先朝擢参大政，洎予临御，俾正台衡，职在燮调，任当辅弼。
现代文：兵部尚书卢多逊，从先朝提升参知政事，到我登位，让他正位宰相，职在协调，任当辅弼。
English: Ludoson Shangshu, head of the military department, was promoted to the post of senator from the previous dynasty, and when I ascended to the throne, he became the prime minister, in charge of coordination, and was appointed as an assistant minister.

古文：深负倚毗，不思补报，而乃包藏奸宄，窥伺君亲，指斥乘舆，交结藩邸，大逆不道，非所宜言。
现代文：身付重托，不思报答，反而包藏奸心，窥伺君位，指斥皇帝，勾结藩王，大逆不道，不宜备述。
English: To entrust oneself with a heavy trust, not to think of repaying, but to harbor a treacherous heart, to spy on the throne, to rebuke the emperor, to collude with the king of the domain, and to commit high treason are unethical and should not be described.

古文：爰遣近臣，杂治其事，丑迹尽露，具狱已成，有司定刑，外廷集议，佥以枭夷其族，污潴其宫，用正宪章，以合经义。
现代文：派遣身边大臣，一同处治他的案件，丑迹全部暴露，案件审结后，有关部门定刑，处廷集中议论，处以夷灭全族，毁灭他的住宅，以正法律，以合经义。
English: He dispatched the ministers around him to jointly handle his case, and all the dirty deeds were exposed. After the case was concluded, the relevant departments set the sentence, the court held a concentrated discussion, and the punishment was to annihilate the whole family, destroy his house, and use the correct law to meet the requirements of the law.

古文：尚念尝居重位，久事明廷，特宽尽室之诛，止用投荒之典，实汝有负，非我无恩。
现代文：还顾念他曾经身居重位，长期事奉朝廷，特地免除诛杀全族，只处以流放，确实是你有负于我，不是我没有恩情。
English: Also, considering that he once held a high position and served the imperial court for a long time, he was specially exempted from killing the whole family and was only punished with exile. It is true that you are indebted to me, not that I have no gratitude.

古文：其卢多逊在身官爵及三代封赠、妻子官封，并用削夺追毁。
现代文：卢多逊所任一切官爵以及三代祖先的封赠、妻子的官封，一并削夺追毁。
English: All the titles of nobility that Ludoson held, as well as the titles of three generations of ancestors and the official title of his wife, were seized and destroyed.

古文：一家亲属，并配流崖州，所在驰驿发遣，纵经大赦，不在量移之限。
现代文：全家人口，一同流放到崖州，所到各地由驿马遣送，即使有大赦，也不在宽赦之列。
English: Even if there is an amnesty, the whole family, exiled together to Yazhou and sent by pack horse to various places, is not included in the amnesty.

古文：期周已上亲属，并配隶边远州郡。
现代文：期周以上亲戚，一并刺配流放到边远州郡。
English: Relatives who were more than a week overdue were exiled to outlying prefectures.

古文：部曲奴婢纵之。
现代文：宾客奴仆都放走。
English: All the guests' servants were let go.

古文：余依百官所议。
现代文：其余的依照百官所议处理。
English: The rest will be dealt with in accordance with the decision of the hundred officials.

古文：中书吏赵白、秦王府吏阎密、王继勋、樊德明、赵怀禄、阎怀忠并斩都门外，仍籍其家，亲属流配海岛。
现代文：中书吏赵白、秦王府吏阎密、王继勋、樊德明、赵怀禄、阎怀忠一并在都门外处斩，并籍没他们的家财，亲属流放到海岛。 
English: Zhao Bai, the chief secretary of the CPC Central Committee, and Yan Mi, Wang Jixun, Yu Deming, Zhao Huailu, and Yan Huai Zhongyi, the officials of the Qin Dynasty, were executed outside the capital, and their family wealth was confiscated, and their relatives were exiled to the island.

古文：阎密初给事廷美左右，太宗即位，补殿直，仍隶秦邸，恣横不法。
现代文：阎密当初在秦王廷美身边做事，太宗即位后，补任他为殿直，仍隶属于秦王府，恣横不法。
English: At the beginning, Yan Mi worked at the side of Qin King Tingmei. After Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, he was appointed as a courtier. He was still subordinate to the Qin royal court, and was arbitrary and illegal.

古文：王继勋尤廷美所亲信，尝使求访声妓，继勋因怙势以取货贿。
现代文：王继勋尤其受廷美信任，曾经被派去访求声妓，继勋因此恃势强取贿赂。
English: Wang Jixun was especially trusted by Tingmei. He was once sent to visit a call girl, and as a result, Jixun took bribes.

古文：德明素与赵白游处，多逊因之传达机事，以结廷美。
现代文：德明历来与赵白交游，多逊让他传达机密事情，以勾结廷美。
English: Deming had always been friends with Zhao Bai, and Doson asked him to pass on confidential information in order to collude with Ting Mei.

古文：又累遣怀禄私召同母弟军器库副使赵廷俊与语。
现代文：又多次派怀禄私下召见他的同母弟弟军器库副使赵廷俊来谈话。
English: He also repeatedly sent Wairoo to privately summon his younger half-brother Zhao Tingjun, the vice-envoy of the Armory, to talk with him.

古文：怀忠尝为廷美使诣淮海国王钱俶遗白金、扣器、绢扇等，廷美又尝遣怀忠赍银器、锦彩、羊酒诣其妻父潘璘营宴军校。
现代文：怀忠曾经替廷美出使去见淮海国王钱亻叔，送给他白金、扣器、绢扇等，廷美又曾经派怀忠拿着银器、锦彩、羊酒到他的岳父潘王军营中宴请军校。
English: Huai Zhong once sent an envoy on behalf of Ting Mei to see the king of Huaihai, Qian Qian, and gave him platinum, buckles, fans, etc. Ting Mei also sent Huai Zhong with silverware, brocade, and sheep wine to his father-in-law Pan Wang's military camp for a banquet to invite the military school.

古文：至是皆伏罪。
现代文：到此时都伏诛。
English: By this time, they had all fled.

古文：多逊累世墓在河面，未败前，一夕震电，尽焚其林木，闻者异之。
现代文：多逊历代祖先坟墓在河内，没有失势前，一天晚上雷电把坟墓边的树木都烧完了，听说的人都感到惊异。
English: The tombs of many generations of ancestors in Hanoi were not about to lose their power, but one night, lightning struck and burned down all the trees around the tombs, surprising everyone who heard about it.

古文：多逊至海外，因部送者还，上表称谢。
现代文：多逊到海外，托遣送他的使者回朝时带奏表给朝廷谢恩。
English: When Emperor Taosun went overseas, he sent his envoy back to the court with a report card to thank the court.

古文：雍熙二年，卒于流所，年五十二。
现代文：雍熙二年，在流所去世，终年五十二岁。
English: In the second year of the reign of Yongxi, he died in exile at the age of 52.

古文：诏徙其家于容州，未几，复移置荆南。
现代文：诏令他家迁徙到容州，不久，又迁徙安置在荆南。
English: The imperial edict ordered his family to move to Yongzhou, and they were soon resettled in Jingnan.

古文：端拱初，录其子雍为公安主簿，还其怀州籍没先茔。
现代文：端拱初年，录用他的儿子卢雍为公安主簿，把他家被籍没的怀州墓地还给他。
English: In the first year of the end of the arch, his son Lu Yong was hired as the public security chief, and his family's lost Huaizhou cemetery was returned to him.

古文：雍卒，诸弟皆特敕除州县官。
现代文：卢雍去世后，他的弟弟们都特敕授任州县官。
English: After Lu Yong's death, his younger brothers were all specially appointed as county and prefectural officials.

古文：初，亿性俭素，自奉甚薄。
现代文：当初，卢亿为人俭朴，自己消费很节俭。
English: At the beginning, Lu Yi was a frugal person, and his own consumption was very frugal.

古文：及多逊贵显，赐赉优厚，服用渐侈，愀然不乐，谓亲友曰： 家世儒素，一旦富贵暴至，吾未知税驾之所。 后多逊果败，人服其识。
现代文：多逊显贵后，赏赐丰厚，消费渐渐奢侈，他忧愁不乐，对亲友说 ：我家世代儒素，一旦富贵突然到来，我不知日后葬身之地啊。 后来多逊果然败落，人们叹服他的见识。
English: After he became rich and famous, he was richly rewarded, and his spending became more and more extravagant. He was sad and unhappy, and said to his relatives and friends, "My family is of the Confucianism generation. If I suddenly become rich, I don't know where I will be buried in the future." Later, he was defeated, and people were impressed by his insight.

古文：咸平五年，又录雍弟宽为襄州司士参军。
现代文：咸平五年，又录用卢雍的弟弟卢宽为襄州司士参军。
English: In the fifth year of Xianping, Lu Yong's younger brother Lu Guang was recruited to join the army as a Xiangzhou sergeant.

古文：宽弟察，中景德进士，将廷试，特诏授以州掾。
现代文：卢宽的弟弟卢察，考中景德进士，将要廷试时，特诏授任他为州掾。
English: Lu Kuan's younger brother, Lu Cha, a candidate of Jingdezhen Middle School, was awarded the title of State Councillor when he passed the court examination.

古文：大中祥符二年，始改簿尉。
现代文：大中祥符二年，才改任簿尉。
English: It was two years into his junior high school career before he was promoted to bookkeeper.

古文：三年，察奉多逊丧归葬襄阳，又诏本州赐察钱三十万。
现代文：大中祥符三年，卢察护送多逊丧柩回葬襄阳，又诏令本州赐给他钱三十万。
English: In the third year of his junior high school career, Lu Cha escorted Doson back to Yangyang for his funeral. He also ordered the state to give him 300,000 yuan.

古文：四年，仍录其孙又元为襄州司士。
现代文：四年，仍录用多逊的孙子又玄为襄州司士。
English: Four years later, Duosun's grandson Ma Xuan was still employed as a magistrate in Xiangzhou.

