古文：凡刺之道，毕于《终始》。
现代文：凡是关于针刺的理论和方法，都在上古的《终始》篇中有了详尽而明了的阐述。
English: All the theories and methods of acupuncture are described in detail and clearly in the ancient "The Beginning and the End."

古文：明知《终始》，五脏为纪，阴阳定矣。
现代文：明确掌握了《终始》篇的内容和含义，再以五脏为纲领，就可以确定阴阳十二经脉的关系。
English: Having clearly grasped the content and meaning of "The Beginning and the End," and then taking the five internal organs as the program, it is possible to determine the relationship between the yin and yang twelve meridians.

古文：阴者主臓，阳者主腑，阳受气于四末，阴受气于五脏。
现代文：手足三阴经为五脏所主，手足三阳经为六腑所主，阳经所禀受的脉气来自于四肢末梢，阴经所禀受的脉气来自于五脏。
English: The three yin meridians of the hands and feet are governed by the five viscera, and the three yang meridians of the hands and feet are governed by the six glands. The qi of the yang meridians comes from the extremities of the limbs, and the qi of the yin meridians comes from the five viscera.

古文：故泻者迎之，补者随之，知迎知随，气可令和。
现代文：因此，泻法是逆着脉气的来向而进针，以夺其势；补法是顺着脉气的去向而进针，以充其势，懂得顺逆补泻的方法，就可以使脉气得以调和。
English: Therefore, the laxation method is to enter the needle against the direction of the pulse gas to capture its potential; the supplementation method is to enter the needle along the direction of the pulse gas, with the best potential, knowing the method of reverse supplementation and laxation, the pulse gas can be reconciled.

古文：和气之方，必通阴阳，五脏为阴，六腑为阳。
现代文：要想掌握调和脉气的方法，就必须通晓阴阳的含义和规律，五脏在内而属阴，六腑在外而属阳。
English: If you want to master the method of harmonizing the pulse qi, you must be familiar with the meaning and laws of yin and yang. The five internal organs are yin, while the six external glands are yang.

古文：传之后世，以血为盟。敬之者昌，慢之者亡。
现代文：要将这种理论流传到后世，以造福百姓，学习者必须歃血盟誓，郑重地去对待它，痛下决心去钻研它，惟有如此，才能使它发扬光大。
English: If this theory is to be passed on to future generations for the benefit of the people, students must take a blood oath, treat it seriously, and make a hard decision to study it. Only in this way can it flourish.

古文：无道行私，必得夭殃。
现代文：所谓平人，就是没有得病的正常人。
English: The so-called layman is a normal person who does not get sick.

古文：谨奉天道，请言《终始》。终始者，经脉为纪。持其脉口人迎，以知阴阳有余不足，平与不平，天道毕矣。所谓平人者不病，不病者，脉口人迎应四时也，上下相应而俱往来也，六经之脉不结动也，本末之寒温之相守司也。形肉血气必相称也，是谓平人。
现代文：没有得病的正常人，其脉口和人迎的脉象都是与四季的阴阳盛衰相适应的；其脉气也是上下呼应而往来不息的；其手足六经的脉搏，既没有结涩不足，也没有动疾有余等病象；其属于本的内在脏气与属于末的外在肌肤，都能在寒温之性上保持协调一致；而其外表的形体肌肉与体内的血气也都能够均衡相称。这样的人就被称做 平人 。
English: In a normal person without any disease, the pulse of his or her mouth and the pulse of the person he or she greets are all compatible with the waxing and waning of the yin and yang of the four seasons; his or her pulse qi also echoes up and down and comes and goes incessantly; the pulse of his or her hands and feet has no symptoms such as insufficient knots or excessive motility; his or her internal dirty gas and external skin, which belong to the end, can maintain coordination in the nature of cold and temperature; and his or her external body muscles and internal blood gas can also be balanced and commensurate. Such a person is called a commoner.

古文：少气者，脉口人迎俱少，而不称尺寸也。
现代文：元气虚少的病人，寸口和人迎之处都会出现虚弱无力的脉象，且脉搏的长度也达不到应有的尺寸。
English: In patients with low energy, weak and feeble pulses will appear at the base of the neck and at the point of greeting people, and the length of the pulse will not reach the proper size.

古文：如是者，则阴阳俱不足，补阳则阴竭，泻阴则阳脱。
现代文：倘若出现这种情况，就说明患者的阴阳都已不足，这时，如果补其阳气，就会使阴气衰竭；如果泻其阴气，就会使阳气脱陷。
English: If this happens, it means that the patient's yin and yang are both deficient. At this time, if the yang qi is replenished, the yin qi will be exhausted; if the yin qi is sapped, the yang qi will fall off.

古文：如是者，可将以甘药，不可饮以至剂，如此者弗灸。
现代文：对于这种情况，就只能用性味甘温的药物来调和它，而不能用大补大泻的汤剂去进行治疗。像这种情况的，也不能施行灸法。
English: In this case, you can only use the medicine with sweet and warm taste to adjust it, but you can't use the decoction to treat it. In this case, you can't perform the moxibustion method.

古文：不已者因而泻之，则五脏气坏矣。
现代文：误用灸法就会耗竭真阴。倘若因为病患日久不愈，就改用泻法，那么就会使五脏的精气受到损坏。
English: If the moxibustion method is misused, the true yin will be depleted. If the laxative method is used because the patient has not healed for a long time, the essence of the internal organs will be damaged.

古文：人迎一盛，病在足少阳，一盛而躁，病在手少阳。
现代文：人迎脉大于寸口脉一倍的，是病在足少阳胆经；大一倍且兼有躁动的，是病在手少阳三焦经。
English: If a person's pulse is more than double the pulse at the base of the neck, it is a disease of the inferior third meridian in the foot; if it is double the size and is also agitated, it is a disease of the inferior third meridian in the hand.

古文：人迎二盛，病在足太阳，二盛而躁，病在手太阳。
现代文：人迎脉大于寸口脉两倍的，是病在足太阳膀胱经；大两倍且兼有躁动的，是病在手太阳小肠经。
English: If the pulse is more than twice the pulse at the base of the foot, it is the solar bladder meridian in the foot; if it is twice the size and has agitation, it is the solar small intestine meridian in the hand.

古文：人迎三盛，病在足阳明，三盛而躁，病在手阳明。
现代文：人迎脉大于寸口脉三倍的，是病在足阳明胃经；大三倍且兼有躁动的，是病在手阳明大肠经。
English: If a person's pulse is more than three times the pulse at the base of the neck, the disease is in the foot Yang Ming stomach meridian; if it is three times the size and has agitation, the disease is in the hand Yang Ming large intestine meridian.

古文：人迎四盛，且大且数，名曰溢阳，溢阳为外格。脉口一盛，病在足厥阴；一盛而躁，在手心主。脉口二盛，病在足少阴；二盛而躁，在手少阴。
现代文：人迎脉大于寸脉四倍，且其脉象大而且快的，是六阳经的脉气偏盛到了极点而盈溢于外的表现，这种情况就叫做溢阳；出现溢阳时，由于阳气偏盛至极，就会格拒阴气而使之不能外达，以致出现阳气不能与阴气相交的情况，所以此时的情形就称为外格。寸口脉大于人迎脉一倍的，是病在足厥阴肝经；大一倍且兼有躁动的，是病在手厥阴心包络经。寸口脉大于人迎脉两倍的，是病在足少阴肾经；大两倍且兼有躁动的，是病在手少阴心经。
English: When a person's Yang Kuk pulse is four times larger than the Sun Kuk pulse, and the pulse is large and fast, it is a manifestation of the Yang Kuk pulse being extremely strong and overflowing. This situation is called Yang Kuk overflow. When the Sun Kuk pulse occurs, because the Yang Kuk pulse is extremely strong, it will reject the Yin Kuk pulse and make it unable to reach the Sun Kuk pulse, resulting in a situation where the Yang Kuk pulse cannot intersect with the Yin Kuk pulse, so the situation at this time is called a superposition. When the Sun Kuk pulse is twice as large as the Sun Kuk pulse, it is a disease

古文：脉口三盛，病在足太阴；三盛而躁，在手太阴。
现代文：寸口脉大于人迎脉三倍的，是病在足太阴脾经；大三倍且兼有躁动的，是病在手太阴肺经。
English: If the pulse at the base of the neck is three times greater than the pulse at the base of the body, it is the disease in the foot too yin spleen; if it is three times greater and has agitation, it is the disease in the hand too yin lung.

古文：脉口四盛，且大且数者，名曰溢阴。溢阴为内关，内关不通，死不治。人迎与太阴脉口俱盛四倍以上，名曰关格。
现代文：寸口脉大于人迎脉四倍，且其脉象大而且快的，是六阴经的脉气偏盛到了极点而盈溢于内的表现，这种情况就叫做溢阴；出现溢阴时，由于阴气偏盛至极，就会使阳气不能内入，而出现阴气不能与阳气相交的情况，所以此时的情形就称为内关。
English: The pulse at the base of the chin is four times larger than the pulse at the base of the head, and its pulse is large and fast. This is a manifestation of the pulse gas of the six yin chants being overflowed to the extreme and overflowing inside. This situation is called overflowing yin. When overflowing yin occurs, because the yin gas is overflowing to the extreme, the yang gas cannot enter, and the yin gas cannot intersect with the yang gas, so the situation at this time is called inner pass.

古文：关格者，与之短期。
现代文：出现内关，就说明阴阳表里已隔绝不通，这是难以治疗的死症。
English: The appearance of internal septum indicates that the yin and yang table has been cut off, which is a fatal disease that is difficult to treat.

古文：人迎一盛，泻足少阳而补足厥阴，二泻一补，日一取之，必切而验之，疏取之上，气和乃止。人迎二盛，泻足太阳补足少阴，二泻一补，二日一取之，必切而验之，疏取之上，气和乃止。人迎三盛，泻足阳明而补足太阴，二泻一补，日二取之，必切而验之，疏取之上，气和乃止。
现代文：人迎处与手太阴肺经所属的寸口处所出现的脉象都大于平常脉象四倍以上的，是阴阳两气都偏盛到了极点以致阴阳隔绝相互格拒的表现，这种情况被称做关格；诊察到了关格的脉象，就可以断定患者将在短期内死亡。人迎脉大于寸口脉一倍的，是病在足少阳胆经，治之当泻足少阳胆经，而胆与肝相表里，胆实则肝虚，故当同补足厥阴肝经。取两个用泻法的穴位，同时再取一个用补法的穴位来进行治疗，每天针刺一次。此外，在治疗的同时还必须按切人迎与寸口的脉象以测验病势的进退，疗效的有无；倘若此时切按到了躁动不安的脉象，就要取用胆经和肝经之脉气所出部位的穴位来进行针刺，等到脉气调和了以后，针刺才能停止。人迎脉大于寸口脉两倍的，是病在足太阳膀胱经，治之当泻足太阳膀胱经，而膀胱与肾相表里，膀胱实则肾虚，故当同补足少阴肾经。取两个用泻法的穴位，同时再取一个用补法的穴位来进行治疗，每两天针刺一次。
English: If the pulse of the person's pulse is more than twice the pulse of the person's pulse, it is a sign that the pulse of the person's pulse is more than four times that of the normal pulse. This is a sign that the yin and yang qi are both overflowing to the extreme, so that the yin and yang are cut off from each other. This situation is called a junction. If the pulse of the junction is diagnosed, it can be concluded that the patient will die in a short period of time. If the pulse of the person's pulse is more than twice the pulse of the person's pulse, the disease is in the foot-less yang and

古文：脉口一盛，泻足厥阴而补足少阳，二补一泻，日一取之，必切而验之，疏而取上，气和乃止。
现代文：此外，在治疗的同时还必须按切人迎与寸口的脉象以测验病势的进退，疗效的有无；倘若此时切按到了躁动不安的脉象，就要取用膀胱经和肾经之脉气所出部位的穴位来进行针刺，等到脉气调和了以后，针刺才能停止。
English: In addition, at the same time of treatment, it is also necessary to check the progress of the disease according to the pulse image of the cut person and the incision to test whether there is any curative effect; if the pulse image of restlessness is pressed at this time, it is necessary to use the point position of the part of the bladder and the kidney to carry out acupuncture. The acupuncture can be stopped only after the pulse has been adjusted.

古文：脉口二盛，泻足少阴而补足太阳，二补一泻，二日一取之，必切而验之，疏取之上，气和乃止。
现代文：人迎脉大于寸口脉三倍的，是病在足阳明胃经，治之当泻足阳明胃经，而胃与脾相表里，胃实则脾虚，故当同补足太阴脾经。取两个用泻法的穴位，同时再取一个用补法的穴位来进行治疗，每天针刺两次。
English: If a person's pulse is greater than three times the pulse at the base of the foot, the disease is in the foot-yang-bright-stomach meridian, and the treatment should be to relieve the foot-yang-bright-stomach meridian, while the stomach and spleen are on the surface, and the stomach is actually splenic, so it should be supplemented with the foot-yang-spleen meridian. Take two points using the laxation method, and at the same time take another point using the supplement method for treatment. Acupuncture twice a day.

古文：脉口三盛，泻足太阴而补足阳明，二补一泻，日二取之，必切而验之，疏而取之上，气和乃止。
现代文：此外，在治疗的同时还必须按切人迎与寸口的脉象以测验病势的进退，疗效的有无；倘若此时切按到了躁动不安的脉象，就要取用胃经和脾经之脉气所出部位的穴位来进行针刺，等到脉气调和了以后，针刺才能停止。
English: In addition, at the same time of treatment, it is also necessary to check the progress of the disease according to the pulse image of the cut person and the incision to test whether there is any curative effect; if the pulse image of restlessness is pressed at this time, it is necessary to use the acupuncture point of the part of the pulse gas from the gastric and splenic meridians to carry out acupuncture, and the acupuncture can only be stopped after the pulse gas is adjusted.

古文：所以日二取之者，太阳主胃，大富于谷气，故可日二取之也。
现代文：寸口脉大于人迎脉一倍的，是病在足厥阴肝经，治之当泻足厥阴肝经，而肝与胆相表里，肝实则胆虚，故当同补足少阳胆经。
English: If the pulse at the base of the foot is more than double that of a person's pulse, the disease is in the foot-yang-hepatic meridians, and the treatment should be to relieve the foot-yang-hepatic meridians, while the liver and gallbladder are on the surface, and the liver is actually gallbladder deficiency, so it is necessary to supplement the foot-yang-hepatic meridians.

古文：人迎与脉口俱盛三倍以上，命曰阴阳俱溢，如是者不开，则血脉闭塞，气无所行，流淫于中，五脏内伤。
现代文：取两个补法的穴位，同时再取一个泻法的穴位来进行治疗，每天针刺一次。此外，在治疗的同时还必须按切人迎与寸口的脉象以测验病势的进退，疗效的有无；倘若此时切按到了躁动不安的脉象就要取肝经和胆经之脉气讲行针刺，等到脉气调和了以后，针刺才能停止。
English: Take two points of the method of supplementation, and at the same time take another point of the method of laxation to carry out the treatment, needling once a day. In addition, at the same time of treatment, it is also necessary to check the progress of the disease according to the pulse of the incision and the incision to test the progress of the disease, and whether there is any curative effect; if at this time the pulse of the restless pulse is pressed, it is necessary to take the pulse of the hepatic and biliary meridians for needling, and wait until the pulse is adjusted, and the needling can be stopped.

古文：如此者，因而灸之，则变易而为他病矣。
现代文：寸口脉大于人迎脉两倍的，是病在足少阴肾经，治之当泻足少阴肾经，而肾与膀胱相表里，肾实则膀胱虚，故当同补足太阳膀胱经。
English: If the pulse at the incision is more than twice as large as the person's pulse, the disease is in the foot-less yin kidney meridian, and the treatment should be the foot-less yin kidney meridian, while the kidney and the bladder are in phase, and the kidney is actually the bladder deficiency, so it is necessary to supplement the foot-solar bladder meridian.

古文：凡刺之道，气调而止，补阴泻阳，音气益彰，耳目聪明。
现代文：取两个补法的穴位，同时再取一个泻法的穴位来进行治疗，每两天针刺一次。
English: Take two acupressure points, and at the same time take another laxative point to carry out the treatment, needling once every two days.

古文：反此者，血气不行。所谓气至而有效者，泻则益虚，虚者，脉大如其故而不坚也，坚如其故者，适虽言故，病未去也。
现代文：此外，在治疗的同时还必须按切人迎与寸的脉象以测验病势的进退，疗效的有无;倘若此时切按到了躁动不安的脉象，就要取肾经和膀胱经之脉气所出部位的穴位来进行针刺，等到脉气调和了以后，针刺才能停止。寸口脉大于人迎脉三倍的，是病在足太阴脾经，治之当泻足太阴脾经，而脾与胃相表里，脾实则胃虚，故当同补足阳明胃经。
English: In addition, at the same time of treatment, it is also necessary to test the progress and decline of the disease according to the pulse image of the person and the inch to test the curative effect; if the pulse image of restlessness is pressed at this time, it is necessary to take the acupuncture point of the part of the pulse of the kidney and bladder to perform acupuncture. After the pulse is adjusted, the acupuncture can be stopped. If the pulse of the inch is more than three times the person's pulse, the disease is in the foot and foot and foot and foot and foot and foot and foot and foot and foot and foot and foot and foot and foot and foot and foot and foot and foot and

古文：补则益实，实者，脉大如其故而益坚也；夫如其故而不坚者，适虽言快，病未去也。故补则实、泻则虚，痛虽不随针，病必衰去。必先通十二经脉之所生病，而后可得传于《终始》矣。
现代文：取两个补法的穴位，同时再取一个泻法的穴位来进行治疗，每天针刺两次。此外，在治疗的同时还必须按切人迎与寸口的脉象以测验病势的进退，疗效的有无；倘若此时切按到了躁动不安的脉象，就要取脾经和胃经之脉气所出部位的穴位来进行针刺，等到脉气调和了以后，针刺才能停止。
English: Take two points of the method of supplementation, and at the same time take another point of the method of laxation to carry out the treatment, needling twice a day. In addition, at the same time of treatment, it is also necessary to check the progress of the disease according to the pulse of the incision and the incision to test the progress of the disease, whether there is any curative effect; if the pulse of restlessness is pressed at this time, it is necessary to take the point of the spleen and the stomach to carry out the needling, and wait until the pulse is adjusted, and the needling can be stopped.

古文：故阴阳不相移，虚实不相倾，取之其经。凡刺之属，三刺至谷气，邪僻妄合，阴阳易居，逆顺相反，沉浮异处，四时不得，稽留淫泆，须针而去。
现代文：之所以每天能够进行两次针刺治疗，主要是因为足太阴脾经和足阳明胃经的脉气都来源于位居中焦而主水谷之消化与吸收的胃，其所受纳的水谷精微之气最为丰富，而其脉气也最为充盛的缘故；因此在脾胃二经上每天可以进行两次针刺治疗。
English: The reason why acupuncture treatment can be performed twice a day is mainly due to the fact that the pulse qi of the psoas-pancreatic meridian and the psoas-pancreatic meridian both originate from the stomach, which is located in the middle of the coke and absorbs the digestion and absorption of the main water valley. It receives the most abundant water valley fine qi, and its pulse qi is also the most abundant. Therefore, acupuncture treatment can be performed twice a day on the spleen-stomach meridian.

古文：故一刺则阳邪出，再刺则阴邪出，三刺则谷气至，谷气至而止。
现代文：人迎与寸口部位所出现的脉象都比平常的脉象大三倍以上的，是阴阳两气都偏盛至极而盈溢于脏腑的表现，叫做阴阳俱溢。
English: The pulsations at the base of the chin and the base of the cheeks are more than three times larger than normal pulsations, indicating that both yin and yang are extremely abundant and overflowing in the internal organs. This is called yin and yang overflowing.

古文：所谓谷气至者，已补而实，已泻而虚，故以知谷气至也。
现代文：出现这样的病证，就会内外不能开通；内外不能相通，就会使血脉闭塞，气机不通，真气无处可行而流溢于内，并内伤五脏。
English: If such a symptom appears, the internal and external cannot be opened; if the internal and external cannot be connected, the blood vessel will be blocked, the qi machine will not work, the true qi will flow inside without any place to go, and the five internal organs will be injured.

古文：邪气独去者，阴与阳未能调，而病知愈也。
现代文：像这种情况，如果认为灸法可以开通内外，而妄用灸法进行治疗，就会使病机转化而形成其他的疾患。
English: As in this case, if the moxibustion method is considered to be able to open the internal and external, and the moxibustion method is used for treatment, it will cause the pathogen to transform and form other diseases.

古文：故曰： 补则实，泻则虚，痛虽不随针，病必衰去矣。 阴盛而阳虚，先补其阳，后泻其阴而和之。
现代文：大凡针刺的原则，都是以使阴阳之气调和为最终目的；通过治疗而已经使阴阳之气调和的，就要停止针刺，不能太过，过则生变。
English: The principle of acupuncture is that the ultimate goal is to harmonize the yin and yang. If you have already harmonized the yin and yang through treatment, you should stop acupuncture. You should not go too far, otherwise you will change.

古文：阴虚而阳盛，先补其阴，后泻其阳而和之。三脉动于足大趾之间，必审其实虚。
现代文：内为阴，外为阳，补其内在的正气，泻其外来的邪气，就能使五脏精气充实、功能健全，而出现声音洪亮、中气充足、耳聪目明等身体健康的表现。
English: Inside is yin, outside is yang, replenishing its internal virtuous qi and reducing its external evil qi, it can make the five viscera full of essence and function soundly, and there will be a loud voice, sufficient central qi, clear ears and eyes and other physical health performance.

古文：虚而泻之，是谓重虚。重虚病益甚。
现代文：相反的，如果泻其在内的正气，补其在外的邪气，或是治疗太过，都会使血气不能正常运行。
English: On the contrary, if the virtuous qi contained within it is sapped, the evil qi outside it is replenished, or if the treatment is excessive, the blood qi will not be able to run normally.

古文：凡刺此者，以指按之，脉动而实且疾者疾泻之，虚而徐者则补之。
现代文：治疗重舌病，应当取用剑形的铍针，针刺舌下的大筋，并排出恶血。手指弯屈而不能伸直的，它的病位在筋，是筋病；手指伸直而不能弯屈的，它的病位在骨，是骨病。
English: For the treatment of hypoglossal disease, a sword-shaped acupuncture needle should be used to prick the large muscle under the tongue and expel the bad blood. If the finger is bent and cannot be straightened, its location is in the muscle, it is myopathy; if the finger is straight and cannot be bent, its location is in the bone, it is osteopathy.

古文：反此者，病益甚。其动也，阳明在上，厥阴在中，少阴在下。
现代文：病位在骨的，就应当治骨，而不可误治于筋；病位在筋的，就应当治筋，而不可误治于骨。
English: If the disease is in the bones, it should be treated in the bones, but not mistakenly in the muscles; if the disease is in the muscles, it should be treated in the muscles, but not mistakenly in the bones.

古文：膺俞中膺，背俞中背。肩膊虚者，取之上。
现代文：针刺时，施用补法还是泻法，都必须根据脉象的虚实来确定。
English: When needling, whether to apply the filling method or the laxative method must be determined according to the factuality of the pulse.

古文：重舌，刺舌柱以铍针也。手屈而不伸者，其病在筋；伸而不屈者，其病在骨，在骨守骨，在筋守筋。补须一方实，深取之，稀按其痏，以极出其邪气。一方虚，浅刺之，以养其脉，疾按其痏，无使邪气得入。
现代文：脉象坚实有力的，治疗时，就应当用深刺的方法去针刺，出针后也不要立即按闭针孔，以使邪气尽量外泄。脉象虚弱无力的，治疗时，就应当用浅刺的方法去针刺，以调养脉气，使之不过于损耗，出针后还应急速地按闭针孔，不使邪气再行侵入。
English: If the pulse is firm and powerful, it should be pricked with a deep prick method during treatment. Do not press the closed needle hole immediately after the needle is released, so that the evil gas can be released as much as possible. If the pulse is weak and weak, it should be pricked with a shallow prick method during treatment, in order to raise the pulse gas, so that it is not more than the loss. After the needle is released, it should also be rapidly pressed to close the needle hole, so that the evil gas does not re-enter.

古文：邪气来也紧而疾，谷气来也徐而和。
现代文：邪气侵袭，来势正盛的时候，脉象的表现是坚紧而疾速的；谷气到来，正气渐盛的时候，脉象的表现是徐缓而平和的。
English: When the evil spirit invades and is at its peak, the pulse is firm and rapid; when the grain spirit arrives and the righteous spirit is gradually on the rise, the pulse is slow and peaceful.

古文：脉实者深刺之，以泄其气；脉虚者，浅刺之，使精气无泻出，以养其脉，独出其邪气。
现代文：所以，脉象坚实的，就是邪气正盛的表现，应当用深刺的针法，以疏泄邪气；脉象虚弱的，就是正气虚弱的表现，应当用浅刺的针法，以使精气不得外泄，脉气得以滋养，而仅将邪气排出。
English: Therefore, when the pulse is firm, which is the manifestation of the ascendancy of evil, the deep-pierced needle method should be used to release the evil; when the pulse is weak, which is the manifestation of the weakness of the righteous, the shallow-pierced needle method should be used to prevent the essence from leaking out, nourish the pulse, and only expel the evil.

古文：刺诸痛者，其脉皆实。
现代文：针刺治疗各种疼痛的病证，都应当采用泻法，因为它们的脉象表现都是坚实的。
English: Acupuncture for the treatment of various painful pathologies should always use the laxative method, because their pulse manifestations are solid.

古文：从腰以上者，手太阴阳明皆主之；从腰以下者，足太阴阳明皆主之。
现代文：根据循经近刺的取穴原则，腰部以上的各种病证，都在手太阴肺经和手阳明大肠经的主治范围之内；腰部以下的各种病证，都在足太阴脾经和足阳明胃经的主治范围之内。
English: According to the principle of picking holes according to the meridian, all kinds of pathologies above the waist are within the scope of the treatment of the hand yin lung meridian and hand yang bright large intestine meridian; all kinds of pathologies below the waist are within the scope of the treatment of the foot yin spleen meridian and foot yang bright stomach meridian.

古文：病在上者下取之，病在下者高取之，病在头者取之足，病在腰者取之腘。
现代文：根据循经远刺的取穴原则，病患在身体上半部的，可以取用身体下半部的腧穴来进行治疗；病患在身体下半部的，可以取用身体上半部的腧穴来进行治疗；病患在头部的，可以取用足部的腧穴来进行治疗；病患在腰部的，可以取用胭窝部的腧穴来进行治疗。
English: According to the principle of taking acupoints along the meridian, patients in the upper half of the body can take acupoints in the lower half of the body for treatment; patients in the lower half of the body can take acupoints in the upper half of the body for treatment; patients in the head can take acupoints in the foot for treatment; patients in the waist can take acupoints in the armpit for treatment.

古文：病生于头者，头重；生于手者，臂重；生于足者，足重。
现代文：病患始生于头部的，其头必重；病患始生于手部的，其臂必重；病患始生于足部的，其足必重。
English: If the disease begins in the head, the head must be heavy; if the disease begins in the hand, the arm must be heavy; if the disease begins in the foot, the foot must be heavy.

古文：治病者，先刺其病所从生者也。
现代文：在治疗这些疾病的时候，根据治病求本的治疗原则，都首先要针刺其病患最初发生的部位，以治其本。
English: In the treatment of these diseases, according to the treatment principle of treating the disease to cure the disease, it is first necessary to acupuncture the site where the disease first occurred in order to cure the disease.

古文：春气在毛，夏气在皮肤，秋气在分肉，冬气在筋骨。刺此病者，各以其时为齐。
现代文：邪气侵袭人体，往往因季节不同而有深浅的差别，春天阳气生发，病邪伤人，多在表浅的皮毛；夏天阳气充盛，病邪伤人，多在浅层的皮下；秋天阳气收敛，病邪伤人，多在肌与肉之间；冬天阳气闭藏，病邪伤人，多在深部的筋骨。
English: Evil spirits invade the human body, often due to different seasons and have different depths. In spring, yang is generated, and diseases and evil spirits hurt people, mostly in the superficial fur; in summer, yang is abundant, and diseases and evil spirits hurt people, mostly under the superficial skin; in autumn, yang is convergent, and diseases and evil spirits hurt people, mostly between the skin and the flesh; in winter, yang is hidden, and diseases and evil spirits hurt people, mostly in the deep sinews and bones.

古文：故刺肥人者，以秋冬之齐；刺瘦人者，以春夏之齐。病痛者，阴也，痛而以手按之不得者，阴也，深刺之。病在上者阳也，病在下者阴也。
现代文：患疼痛病证的，多因寒邪凝滞不散所致，其病性属阴；在疼痛的部位用手去按压而没有压痛感的，是病邪隐藏在深处，其病性也属阴，对于这些阴证，治疗时都应该深刺。阳主升，病患在身体上半部的，就属于阳证；阴主降，病患在身体下半部的，就属于阴证。
English: If you suffer from pain symptoms, it is mostly caused by cold and stagnation, and its pathogenicity is Yin; if you press the painful area with your hand without a feeling of pressure and pain, the disease is hidden in the depths, and its pathogenicity is also Yin. For these negative symptoms, treatment should be deep stabbing. If the patient is in the upper half of the body, it is Yang; if the patient is in the lower half of the body, it is Yin.

古文：痒者，阳也，浅刺之。
现代文：患者感到痒的，是病邪居于皮肤的浅表，其病性属阳，治疗时应当浅刺。
English: If the patient feels itchy, it is because the disease resides on the superficial surface of the skin. Its pathological nature is masculine, and it should be treated with a superficial prick.

古文：病先起阴者，先治其阴，而后治其阳；病先起阳者，先治其阳，而后治其阴。
现代文：疾病先起于阴经而后传于阳经的，治疗时，应当先治阴经，以治其本，然后再治阳经，以治其标；反之，疾病先起于阳经而后传于阴经的，治疗时，应当先治阳经，以治其本，然后再治阴经，以治其标。
English: If the disease is caused by the Yin and then transmitted to the Yang, the treatment should first treat the Yin to treat the root, and then the Yang to treat the target; on the other hand, if the disease is caused by the Yang and then transmitted to the Yang, the treatment should first treat the Yang to treat the root, and then the Yang to treat the target.

古文：刺热厥者，留针反为寒；刺寒厥者，留针反为热。
现代文：针刺治疗热厥病时，倘若留针过久，就反而会使病性由热转寒；针刺治疗寒厥病时，倘若留针过久，就反而会使病性由寒转热。
English: When acupuncture is used to treat heat illness, if the needles are left in too long, the pathology will turn from hot to cold; when acupuncture is used to treat cold illness, if the needles are left in too long, the pathology will turn from cold to hot.

古文：刺热厥者，二阴一阳；刺寒厥者，二阳一阴。所谓二阴者，二刺阴也；一阳者，一刺阳也。
现代文：针刺治疗热厥病时，为了能使阴气盛而阳邪退，就应当用补法针刺阴经二次，同时再用泻法针刺阳经一次；而针刺治疗寒厥病时，为了能使阳气盛而阴邪退，就应当用补法针刺阳经二次，同时再用泻法针刺阴经一次。所谓 二阴 的意思，就是指在阴经上针刺二次； 一阳 的意思，就是指在阳经上针刺一次。
English: When acupuncture is used to treat febrile illness, in order to make the yin qi flourish and the yang qi wane, the yang qi should be pricked twice with a supplemental needle and once with a laxative needle; and when acupuncture is used to treat cold illness, in order to make the yang qi flourish and the yang qi wane, the yang qi should be pricked twice with a supplemental needle and once with a laxative needle. The so-called two yin means to prick twice on the yin qi; the meaning of one yang means to prick once on the yang qi.

古文：久病者，邪气入深。
现代文：患病日久的，病邪必深入于内。
English: If you have been ill for a long time, the disease must have penetrated deep inside.

古文：刺此病者，深内而久留之，间日而复刺之，必先调其左右，去其血脉，刺道毕矣。
现代文：针刺治疗这类宿疾，必须深刺，并长时间地留针，才能消除隐伏于深层的病邪。同时还需每隔一日就再刺一次，连续地针刺，直到病患痊愈才能停止。
English: For acupuncture to treat this kind of long-standing disease, it is necessary to make a deep puncture and keep the needle for a long time in order to eliminate the hidden disease. At the same time, it is necessary to re-pierce every other day, continuously needling until the patient is cured.

古文：凡刺之法，必察其形气。形肉未脱，少气而脉又躁，躁厥者，必为缪刺之，散气可收，聚气可布。
现代文：此外，由于经脉之气是左右互贯的，所以还要审察病邪在人体左右的偏盛情况，并在治疗时首先使其调和；而对于有瘀血存在的，还要在治疗时先使用泻血法，祛除其血脉中的郁结，只有这样，才能取得良好的疗效。熟悉了以上这些方法，针刺的道理也就大体上能够掌握了。
English: In addition, since the qi of the meridians is continuous from left to right, it is also necessary to examine the prevalence of the disease around the human body and first reconcile it during treatment; and for the presence of blood stasis, it is necessary to first use the method of laxation to remove the stagnation in the blood vessels during treatment. Only in this way can good curative effect be achieved. Familiar with the above methods, the principle of acupuncture can be generally grasped.

古文：深居静处，占神往来，闭户塞牖，魂魄不散，专意一神，精气之分，毋闻人声，以收其精，必一其神，令志在针。浅而留之，微而浮之，以移其神，气至乃休。
现代文：大凡针刺的法则，都要求医者必须要诊察患者形体的强弱与元气的盛衰。倘若患者的形体肌肉并未脱陷，只是元气衰少而脉象躁动，那么对于这种气虚脉躁而厥逆的病证，就必须采取左病刺右、右病刺左的缪刺法，由此才可以使耗散的精气收敛，聚积的邪气散去。在施用针法时，医者需要神定气静，就像深居于幽静的处所一样，以便能够体察到患者神气的活动情况。
English: All the rules of acupuncture require that the doctor must diagnose the strength and weakness of the patient's body and the rise and fall of vitality. If the patient's body muscles are not prolapsed, but the vitality is reduced and the pulse is agitated, then for this symptom of qi deficiency and agitation, it is necessary to take the method of pinching the left and right thorns. Only in this way can the dissipated qi converge and the accumulated evil qi dissipate. When applying the needle method, the doctor needs to be calm and quiet, just like living in a quiet place, in order to be able to experience the activity of the patient's qi.

古文：男内女外，坚拒勿出，谨守勿内，是谓得气。
现代文：同时，医者还要精神内守，就像把门窗都关上而使内外隔绝一样，从而使医者的思想集中到一点而不分散，以便能够体察到患者精气的分合变化。
English: At the same time, the doctor also needs to be inward-looking, just like closing the doors and windows and isolating the inside and outside, so that the doctor's thoughts are concentrated to a point and not dispersed, so as to be able to experience the change of the patient's essence.

古文：凡刺之禁：新内勿刺，新刺勿内；已醉勿刺，已刺勿醉；新怒勿刺，已刺勿怒；新劳勿刺，已刺勿劳；已饱勿刺，已刺勿饱；已饥勿刺，已刺勿饥；已渴勿刺，已刺勿渴；大惊大恐，必定其气乃刺之。
现代文：在针刺时，医者不应去留意旁人的声音，以便能够收敛意念；意念收敛之后，就一定要使精神集中，并将注意力集中在针刺的操作上，此后才可以开始进行针刺的治疗。对于初次接受针刺治疗或是对针刺有畏惧心理的患者，要用浅刺并留针的方法来进行治疗。倘若患者仍有不适的感觉，就要更加轻微地捻针，并将针尖提至皮下，以转移患者的注意力，缓解其紧张情绪。
English: At the time of acupuncture, the doctor should not pay attention to the voice of others in order to be able to converge the idea; after the idea is converged, it is necessary to concentrate the mind and focus on the operation of acupuncture, after which the acupuncture treatment can begin. For patients who are receiving acupuncture treatment for the first time or who are afraid of acupuncture, it is necessary to use the method of shallow pricking and retaining the needle. If the patient still feels uncomfortable, it is necessary to twist the needle more lightly and raise the needle tip under the skin to divert the patient's attention and relieve their tension.

古文：乘车来者，卧而休之，如食顷乃刺之。
现代文：此后，医者就要耐心行针，直到针下有了得气的感觉才能停止针刺。
English: After that, the doctor has to be patient with the needles until there is a sense of relief under the needle to stop the needling.

古文：出行来者，坐而休之，如行千里顷乃刺之。凡此十二禁者，其脉乱气散，逆其营卫，经气不次，因而刺之，则阳病入于阴，阴病出为阳，则邪气复生。
现代文：在针刺前后，病人都要谨守禁忌，即男子忌入内室，女子忌出外房；也就是指女子坚决地拒绝行房而不出内室，男子谨慎地固守精气而不入内室，以避免房事。倘若能这样谨守禁忌，就能使真气易于康复，也就是所谓的 得气 。凡使用针刺进行治疗，都要遵守以下禁忌：行房后不久的，不可以针刺；而已经针刺完的，亦不可以行房。已经醉酒的，不可以针刺；而已经针刺完的，亦不可以醉酒。
English: Before and after acupuncture, patients must observe taboos, that is, men should not enter the inner room, and women should not leave the outer room; that is, women should resolutely refuse to enter the room without leaving the inner room, and men should carefully adhere to the qi without entering the inner room to avoid the room. If you can observe the taboos in this way, you can make the true qi easy to recover, that is, the so-called lucky qi. Anyone who uses acupuncture for treatment must abide by the following taboos: If it is soon after the sexual intercourse, it is not possible to acupuncture; and if it has been acupuncture, it is also not possible to

古文：粗工勿察，是谓伐身，形体淫乱，乃消脑髓，津液不化，脱其五味，是谓失气也。
现代文：刚发完怒的，不可以针刺；而已经针刺完的，亦不可以发怒。刚劳累过的，不可以针刺；而已经针刺完的，亦不可以劳累。
English: If you have just finished being angry, you should not do acupuncture; if you have just finished being angry, you should not do acupuncture; if you have just finished being tired, you should not do acupuncture; and if you have just finished being tired, you should not do acupuncture.

古文：太阳之脉，其终也。
现代文：已经吃饱饭的，不可以针刺；而已经针刺完的，亦不可以吃得过饱。
English: If you have had enough to eat, you should not have acupuncture; and if you have finished acupuncture, you should not overeat.

古文：戴眼，反折，瘈瘲，其色白，绝皮乃绝汗，绝汗则终矣。
现代文：已经感到饥饿的，不可以针刺；而已经针刺完的，亦不可以受饥挨饿。
English: If you are already hungry, you should not prick yourself; and if you have already pricked yourself, you should not starve.

古文：少阳终者，耳聋，百节尽纵，目系绝，目系绝一日半则死矣。其死也，色青白，乃死。
现代文：出现了这种眼珠不能转动的病象，就表明病人还有一天半的时间就会死亡；在病人临死的时候，倘若其面色由青而转白，那就表明其马上就要死亡了。
English: The appearance of this disease, in which the eyeballs cannot turn, indicates that the patient has a day and a half to die; when the patient is about to die, if his face turns from blue to white, it indicates that he is about to die.

古文：阳明终者，口目动作，喜惊、妄言、色黄；其上下之经盛而不行，则终矣。
现代文：手足阳明经之脉气将绝之时，病人会出现口眼抽动并牵引歪斜，时作惊惕，胡言乱语，以及面色发黄等症状。手阳明经所属之动脉在上，足阳明经所属之动脉在下，当这上下两处之动脉出现躁动而盛的脉象时，就表明其胃气已绝而脉气不行，此时病人就会死亡。
English: When the pulse of the hand and foot Yang Ming Jing is exhausted, the patient will have symptoms such as mouth and eye twitching and traction skewed, sometimes startled, gibberish, and yellowing of the face. The artery belonging to the hand and foot Yang Ming Jing is on the top, and the artery belonging to the foot Yang Ming Jing is on the bottom. When the pulses of these two arteries appear, it indicates that the stomach is exhausted and the pulse is not good. At this time, the patient will die.

古文：少阴终者，面黑，齿长而垢，腹胀闭塞，上下不通而终矣。
现代文：手足少阴经之脉气将绝之时，病人会出现面色发黑，牙龈短缩而使牙齿露出的部分变长并积满垢污，腹部胀满，以及气机闭塞，上下不能相通等症状而死亡。
English: When the pulse of the hands and feet with less yin is about to die, the patient will have a blackened complexion, short gums, and the exposed part of the teeth will become longer and accumulate dirt, the abdomen will swell, and the gas engine will be blocked, and the upper and lower parts will not be able to communicate with each other.

古文：厥阴终者，中热溢干，喜溺，心烦，甚则舌卷，卵上缩而终矣。
现代文：手足厥阴经之脉气将绝之时，病人会出现胸中发热，咽喉干燥，小便频数，以及心中烦躁等症状；再严重的就会出现舌卷、睾丸上缩等症状而死亡。
English: When the pulse of the hands and feet is exhausted, the patient will have symptoms such as fever in the chest, dry throat, frequency of urination, and irritability in the heart; if it is more serious, symptoms such as tongue curl and testicular shrinkage will occur and death will occur.

古文：太阴终者，腹胀闭，不得息，气噫，善呕，呕则逆，逆则面赤，不逆则上下不通，上下不通则面黑，皮毛憔而终矣。
现代文：手足太阴经之脉气将绝之时，病人会出现腹部胀满闭塞以致呼吸不利，以及时常暖气、呕吐等症状。呕吐就会使气上逆，气上逆就会有面色红赤的表现，气逆则会使气不能上下通行，气不能上下通行则会使病人出现面色发黑、皮毛枯焦等症状而死亡。
English: When the pulse of the hands and feet is too yin and the qi is exhausted, the patient will have symptoms such as abdominal distension and obstruction, resulting in poor breathing, as well as frequent warming and vomiting. Vomiting will cause the qi to reverse, the qi to reverse will have a reddish appearance, the qi to reverse will make the qi unable to pass up and down, and the qi unable to pass up and down will cause the patient to appear with symptoms such as blackened complexion and charred fur, leading to death.

