古文：武侯问曰： 车坚马良，将勇兵强，卒遇敌人，乱而失行，则如之何？ 
现代文：武侯问： 战车坚固，马匹驯良，将领勇敢，士卒强壮，突然遭遇敌人，乱得不成行列，该怎么办? 
English: Wuhou asked: The chariot is sturdy, the horses are tame, the generals are brave, and the soldiers are strong. What should we do if we suddenly encounter an enemy and are too disorganized to form a line?

古文：吴起对曰： 凡战之法，昼以旌旗幡麾为节，夜以金鼓笳笛为节。
现代文：吴起答： 一般作战的方法，白天用旌旗幡麾来指挥，夜间用金鼓笳笛来指挥。
English: Wu Qida: The general method of combat is to use the flag to command during the day, and the golden drum and flute to command at night.

古文：麾左而左，麾右而右。
现代文：指挥向左就向左，指挥向右就向右。
English: If the conductor goes to the left, he goes to the left; if he goes to the right, he goes to the right.

古文：鼓之则进，金之则止。
现代文：擂鼓就前进，鸣金就停止。
English: The cymbals advance, and the trumpets stop.

古文：一吹而行，再吹而聚。不从令者诛。
现代文：第一次吹笳笛就出动，第二次吹笳苗就会合，不听号令的就杀。
English: The first blast of the gong will start the attack, the second blast of the gong will close the circle, and those who do not obey the command will be killed.

古文：三军服威，士卒用命，则战无强敌，攻无坚陈矣。 
现代文：三军畏服威严，士卒听从命令，这样，就没有打不败的强敌，没有攻不破的坚阵。 
English: In this way, there is no invincible strong enemy, no impenetrable stronghold.

古文：武侯问曰： 若敌众我寡，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武侯问： 如果敌众我寡，怎么办呢? 
English: Wuhou asked: What if I have few enemies?

古文：起对曰： 避之于易，邀之于阨。故曰：以一击十，莫善于阨；以十击百，莫善于险；以千击万，莫善于阻。
现代文：吴起答： 在平坦地形上避免和它作战，而要在险要地形上截击它，所以说，以一击十，最好是利用狭窄隘路；以十击百，最好是利用险要地形；以千击万，最好是利用阻绝地带。
English: Wu Qian replied: It is best to avoid fighting with it on flat terrain, and to intercept it on dangerous terrain. Therefore, it is best to use a narrow path to hit it with one hit; it is best to use dangerous terrain to hit it with ten hits; and it is best to use a blocking zone to hit it with a thousand hits.

古文：今有少卒起，击金鼓于阨路，虽有大众，莫不惊动。
现代文：如果用少数兵力，突然出击，在狭隘道路上击鼓鸣金，敌人虽多，也莫不惊慌骚动。
English: If you suddenly attack with a small number of troops, beating drums and chanting gold on a narrow road, although there are many enemies, there will be panic and commotion.

古文：故曰：用众者务易，用少者务隘。 
现代文：所以说，使用众多兵力，务必选择平坦地形；使用少数兵力，务必选择险要地形。 
English: Therefore, when using a large number of troops, it is necessary to choose a flat terrain; when using a small number of troops, it is necessary to choose a dangerous terrain.

古文：武侯问曰： 有师甚重，既武且勇，背大险阻，右山左水，深沟高垒，守以强驽，退如山移，进如风雨，粮食又多，难与长守， 
现代文：武侯问： 敌人很多，既有良好训练，又很勇敢，背高山，前临险要，右依山，左水；深沟高全，强弩守备，后退稳如山移，前进急如风雨，粮食又很充足，很难与它长久相持，应该怎么办呢? 
English: Wuhou asked: There are many enemies. They are well-trained and very brave. They have high mountains behind them, and they are in great danger in front of them. They rely on the mountains on the right and the water on the left. They have deep trenches and strong defences. They retreat steadily like a mountain, and advance rapidly like wind and rain. They also have plenty of food. It is difficult to keep up with them for a long time. What should we do?

古文：对曰： 大哉问乎！
现代文：吴起答： 您提的问题很大啊!
English: Wu Qida: The question you raised is a big one!

古文：此非车骑之力，圣人之谋也。
现代文：这不能单车骑的力量，而要高明的计谋才能取胜的。
English: It's not the strength of the cyclist, it's the clever strategy that wins.

古文：能备千乘万骑，兼之徒步，分为五军，各军一衢。夫五军五衢，敌人必惑，莫之所加。
现代文：如能准备战车十辆，骑兵万人，加上步兵，区分为五支军队，每支军队担任一个方向，五支军队分为五个方向，敌人必然发生迷惑，不知我将要打它哪里。
English: If I can prepare ten chariots, ten thousand horsemen, plus infantry, divided into five armies, each army serving one direction, five armies divided into five directions, the enemy will inevitably be confused, I do not know where I am going to hit it.

古文：敌人若坚守以固其兵，急行间谍以观其虑。
现代文：如果敌人坚强防守，以巩固它的军队，我就立刻派出军使去摸清它的意图。
English: If the enemy makes a strong defense in order to strengthen his army, I will immediately send an envoy to ascertain his intentions.

古文：彼听吾说，解之而去；不听吾说，斩使焚书。
现代文：假如故人听我劝说而撤兵，我也撤兵离开。如不听劝告，反而杀我使节，烧我的书信，就五路进攻。
English: If he listens to my advice and withdraws, I will also withdraw. If he does not listen to my advice, but kills my envoys and burns my letters, I will launch a five-pronged attack.

古文：分为五战，战胜勿追，不胜疾归。
现代文：战胜不要追击，不胜就迅速撤回。
English: If you win, don't pursue, if you don't win, withdraw quickly.

古文：如是佯北，安行疾斗，一结其前，一绝其后，两军衔枚，或左或右，而袭其处。
现代文：如果要假装败退，引诱敌人，就应以一军稳妥地行动，急剧地战斗，其它四军，一军牵制敌人前方，一军断绝敌人后路，另以两军秘密行动，从左右两侧，袭击敌人据守的地方。
English: If you want to pretend to retreat and lure the enemy, you should use one army to act steadily and fight sharply, the other four armies, one army to hold back the enemy's front, one army to cut off the enemy's back way, and the other two armies to act secretly, from the left and right sides, to attack the enemy's fortified place.

古文：五军交至，必有其。此击强之道也。 
现代文：五军合击，公然形成有利态势，这就是打击强敌的方法。 
English: This is the way to deal with a strong enemy: the five armed forces should make a joint attack and openly create a favorable situation.

古文：武侯问曰： 敌近而薄我，欲去无路，我众甚惧，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武侯问道： 敌人接近，迫我交战，我想摆脱它而没有去路，军心很恐惧，应该怎么办呢？ 
English: Wuhou asked, "The enemy is approaching, forcing me to fight. I want to get rid of it, but there is no way. The soldiers are afraid. What should I do?"

古文：对曰： 为此之术，若我众彼寡，各分而乘之；彼众我寡，以方从之，从之无息，虽众可服。 
现代文：吴起答： 解决这一问题的方法，如果我众敌寡，可以分兵包围敌人，如果敌众我寡，可以集令兵力袭击敌人，不断地袭击它，敌人虽多也可制服。 
English: Wu Qian replied: The way to solve this problem is that if we have a small number of enemies, we can surround the enemy with a small number of troops. If we have a small number of enemies, we can attack the enemy with a large number of troops and attack it continuously. Although there are many enemies, they can be subdued.

古文：武侯问曰： 若遇敌于溪谷之间，傍多险阻，彼众我寡，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武侯问： 如在溪谷之间和敌人遭遇，两旁都是险峻地形，而且敌众我寡，应该怎么办呢? 
English: Wuhou asked: If you encounter an enemy between the valleys, both sides are steep terrain, and there are few enemies, what should you do?

古文：起对曰： 诸丘陵、林谷、深山、大泽，疾行亟去，勿得从容。
现代文：吴起答： 遇到丘陵、森林、谷地、深山、大泽等不利地形，都应迅速通过，不要迟缓。
English: Wu Qida: When encountering hills, forests, valleys, deep mountains, Osawa and other unfavorable terrain, you should pass quickly, do not delay.

古文：若高山深谷，卒然相遇，必先鼓噪而乘之，进弓与弩，且射且虏。审察其政，乱则击之无疑。 
现代文：如果在高山深谷突然与敌遭遇，必先击鼓呐喊，乘势冲乱敌人，再把弓弩手挺进到前面，一面戒备，一面考虑计谋，并观察敌人的阵势是否混乱，如发现敌军混乱，就毫不迟疑地全力发起进攻。 
English: If you suddenly encounter the enemy in the high mountains and deep valleys, you must first beat the drums and shout, take advantage of the situation to disrupt the enemy, and then advance the bowman to the front, while being alert, consider the strategy, and observe whether the enemy's position is chaotic. If you find that the enemy army is chaotic, do not hesitate to launch a full-scale attack.

古文：武侯问曰： 左右高山，地甚狭迫，卒遇敌人，击之不敢，去之不得，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武侯问： 左右是高山，地形很狭窄，突然与敌遭遇，既不敢进攻，又不能退走，应该怎么办呢? 
English: Wuhou asked, "There are high mountains to the left and right, and the terrain is very narrow. Suddenly, we encountered the enemy. We neither dared to attack nor retreat. What should we do?

古文：起对曰： 此谓谷战，虽众不用。募吾材士与敌相当，轻足利兵以为前行，分车列骑隐于四旁，相去数里，无见其兵，敌必坚陈，进退不敢。
现代文：吴起答： 这叫谷地战，兵力虽多也用不上，应挑选精锐士卒与敌对抗，用轻捷善走的士卒持锐利的武器作为前锋，而把车骑分散隐蔽在四周，与前锋距离几里，不要暴露自己的兵力，这样敌人必然坚守阵地，不敢前进，也不敢后退。
English: Wu Qian replied: This is called valley warfare. Although there are a lot of troops, they are of no use. Elite soldiers and foot soldiers should be selected for confrontation with the enemy. Light and agile soldiers with sharp weapons should be used as the vanguard, while the chariots and horses should be dispersed and concealed all around, a few miles away from the vanguard. Do not expose your own troops. In this way, the enemy will inevitably hold their positions and will not dare to advance or retreat.

古文：于是出旌列旆，行出山外营之，敌人必惧。车骑挑之，勿令得休。
现代文：这时，张列旗帜，走出山外，迷惑扰乱敌人，敌人必然恐惧，然后再用车骑向敌挑战，使其不得休息。
English: At this time, put up banners, go out of the mountain, confuse and disturb the enemy, the enemy will inevitably be afraid, and then challenge the enemy with a ride, so that it can not rest.

古文：此谷战之法也。 
现代文：这就是谷地战的方法。 
English: This is the way of valley warfare.

古文：武侯问曰： 吾与敌相遇大水之泽，倾轮没辕，水薄车骑，舟楫不设，进退不得，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武侯问道： 我与敌相遇于大水汇聚的地方，水势倾陷了车轮，淹没了车辕，车骑都有被洪水吞没的危险，又没有准备船只，前进后退都困难，应该怎么办呢? 
English: Wuhou asked, "I met the enemy at a place where a large body of water was converging. The water overturned the wheels and submerged the carriages. Both the carriages and the horses were in danger of being engulfed by the flood. The ships were not prepared, and it was difficult to move forward and backward. What should I do?"

古文：起对曰： 此谓水战，无用车骑，且留其傍。
现代文：吴起答： 这叫水战，车骑无法使用，暂且把它留在岸边。
English: Wu Qida: This is called a water fight. The bicycle cannot be used, so leave it on the shore for the time being.

古文：登高四望，必得水情，知其广狭，尽其浅深，乃可为奇以胜之。
现代文：登高观察四方，一定要弄清水情，了解水面的宽窄，查明水的深浅，才可以出奇制胜。
English: Climbing high to observe the four directions, we must clarify the water conditions, understand the width and narrowness of the water surface, and identify the depth of the water, so that we can make a surprise victory.

古文：敌若绝水，半渡而薄之。 
现代文：敌人如果渡水而来，就乘其半渡打击它。 
English: If the enemy comes across the water, take advantage of his half-crossing to strike at him.

古文：武侯问曰： 天久连雨，马陷车止，四面受敌，三军惊骇，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武侯问道： 阴雨连绵，车马难行，四面受敌，全军惶恐，应该怎么办? 
English: Wuhou asked, "What should we do when it rains incessantly, it is difficult to travel by car or horse, we are attacked from all sides, and the whole army is in panic?

古文：起对曰： 凡用车者，阴湿则停，阳燥则起；贵高贱下，驰其强车；若进若止，必从其道。
现代文：吴起答： 凡是用战车作战的，阴雨泥泞就停止，天晴地干就行动，要选择高处避开低处行动。要使战车迅速行驶，不论前进或停止，都必须利用道路。
English: Wu Qian replied, "Anyone who fights with chariots should stop when it's raining or muddy, and take action when it's sunny. They should choose the high ground and avoid the low ground. To make the chariot move quickly, they must use the road regardless of whether they advance or stop.

古文：敌人若起，必逐其迹。 
现代文：如果有敌人战车行动，就可以沿着它的车迹行动。 
English: If an enemy chariot moves, you can follow its tracks.

古文：武侯问曰： 暴寇卒来，掠吾田野，取吾牛羊，则如之何？ 
现代文：武侯问道： 强暴的敌人，突然到来，掠夺我的庄稼，抢劫我的牛羊，该怎么办呢? 
English: Wuhou asked, "What should I do if a violent enemy suddenly comes and plunders my crops, steals my cattle and sheep?

古文：起对曰： 暴寇之来，必虑其强，善守勿应。彼将暮去，其装必重，其心必恐，还退务速，必有不属。
现代文：吴起答： 强暴的敌人前来，必须考虑它的强大，应严加防守，不要应战，待敌人傍晚撤走时，它的装载必然沉重，心理必然恐惧，退走力求迅速，必有互不联系的地方。
English: Wu Qian replied: When a violent enemy comes, we must consider its strength. We should strictly defend ourselves and not fight. When the enemy withdraws in the evening, its load must be heavy, its psychology must be fearful, and it must retreat quickly. There must be a place where there is no contact.

古文：追而击之，其兵可覆。 
现代文：这时进行追击，就可歼灭它。 
English: If you pursue it, you can destroy it.

古文：吴子曰： 凡攻敌围城之道，城邑既破，各入其宫，御其禄秩，收其器物。
现代文：吴起说： 一般围攻敌城的原则，是城邑既被攻破，就分别进驻它的官府，控制和使用其原来的官吏，没收它的器材物资。
English: Wu Qi said, "The general principle of besieging an enemy city is that once a city or town has been breached, it is necessary to separately enter its government office, control and use its original officials, and confiscate its equipment and materials.

古文：军之所至，无刊其木、发其屋，取其粟、杀其六畜、燔其积聚，示民无残心。
现代文：军队所到之处，不准砍伐树木、毁坏房屋、擅取粮食、宰杀牲畜、焚烧仓库，以表明对民众无残暴之心。
English: Wherever the troops go, they are not allowed to cut down trees, destroy houses, seize grain, slaughter livestock, and burn warehouses to show that they are not cruel to the people.

古文：其有请降，许而安之。
现代文：如有请降的，应允许并安抚他们。 
English: If there are offers of surrender, they should be allowed and appeased.

