古文：厥头痛，面若肿起而烦心，取之足阳明、太阴。
现代文：经脉邪气上逆于头而引发的头痛为厥头痛，若表现为面部浮肿、心烦等症状，可以选取足阳明胃经和足太阴脾经的穴位针刺治疗。
English: If the headache is caused by the evil of the menstrual flow, which is against the head, it is referred to as Jue headache. If it manifests itself as facial puffiness, upset and other symptoms, it can be treated with acupuncture at the points of the foot-yang bright stomach meridian and foot-taiyin spleen meridian.

古文：厥头痛，头脉痛，心悲，善泣，视头动脉反盛者，刺尽去血，后调足厥阴。
现代文：厥头痛，若表现为头部血络胀痛，心情悲忧，常常哭泣，诊察其头部络脉搏动明显的实邪处，针刺放血，然后取足厥阴肝经的腧穴进行调和。
English: Jue headache, if it manifests itself as pain in the blood circulation of the head, sad mood, often crying, examine the obvious abnormalities in the blood circulation of the head, prick the blood, and then take the anus of the foot Jue Yin liver to reconcile.

古文：厥头痛，贞贞头重而痛，泻头上五行，行五，先取手少阴，后取足少阴。
现代文：厥头痛，若表现为头部眩晕并有沉重感，痛得厉害，应采用针刺的泻法，选取头上纵行排列的五条经脉的穴位，每行在头部都有五个穴位，然后再先取手少阴心经腧穴、后取足少阴肾经腧穴进行调治。
English: If the headache is manifested as dizziness and heaviness in the head, and the pain is severe, the acupuncture method should be used to select the acupoints of the five meridians longitudinally arranged on the head, each line has five acupoints in the head, and then first take the hand to adjust the heart via the anus, and then take the foot to adjust the kidney via the anus.

古文：厥头痛，意善忘，按之不得，取头面左右动脉，后取足太阴。
现代文：厥头痛，表现为记忆力减退，头痛时用手按头，却找不到疼痛的具体位置，治疗时可以取头面左右的动脉进行针刺，泻其邪气，然后可以再针刺足太阴脾经加以调理。
English: Acute headache, manifested as memory loss. When you have a headache, press your head with your hand, but you can't find the specific location of the pain. During treatment, you can take the arteries on the left and right sides of the head for acupuncture to relieve its evil, and then you can acupuncture the feet and the spleen to regulate it.

古文：厥头痛，项先痛，腰脊为应，先取天柱，后取足太阳。
现代文：厥头痛，表现为项部先痛，随后腰脊相应作痛，治疗时应先以泻法针刺足太阳膀胱经的天柱穴，然后再取该经其他相应穴位治疗。
English: Headache, manifested as neck pain first, followed by corresponding pain in the lumbar spine. In the treatment, it should first be treated with a laxative needle to pierce the solar plexus through the solar plexus, and then it should be treated through other corresponding points.

古文：厥头痛，头痛甚，耳前后脉涌有热，泻出其血，后取足少阳。
现代文：厥头痛，表现为头痛严重，耳前后的脉络发热，治疗时应先刺破脉络以放其血，然后取足少阳胆经的腧穴进行调治。
English: Jue headache, manifested as a severe headache, the anterior and posterior ear veins are hot. When treating, the vein should first be punctured to release its blood, and then the foot should be taken to the anus of the Shaoyang gallbladder for adjustment.

古文：真头痛，头痛甚，脑尽痛，手足寒至节，死不治。
现代文：真头痛，疼痛剧烈，如果整个头都很痛，手足冰冷到肘膝关节的，为不治之死证。
English: If the whole head is in pain, and the hands and feet are cold to the elbows and knees, it is a death certificate.

古文：头痛不可取于腧者，有所击堕，恶血在于内，若肉伤，痛未已，可则刺，不可远取也。
现代文：头痛不可以取远端腧穴治疗的是，被击伤或摔伤，致使淤血在体内，如果是肌肉受伤而疼痛不止，在这种情况下可以在伤痛部位侧刺，不可选取远距离的腧穴刺治。
English: Headache can not be treated with a distant acupoint. For example, if you are injured or fall, causing congestion in the body, if the muscle is injured and the pain does not stop, in this case, you can stab the pain at the site of the injury. It is not possible to select a distant acupoint for treatment.

古文：头痛不可刺者，大痹为恶，日作者，可令少愈，不可已。
现代文：头痛不能使用针刺方法治疗的是，严重的痹证造成的头痛，若是每天都发作，针刺之后可以暂时缓解症状，但是不能根治。
English: Headaches that cannot be treated with acupuncture are headaches caused by severe paralysis. If they occur every day, acupuncture can temporarily relieve the symptoms, but cannot cure them completely.

古文：头半寒痛，先取手少阳、阳明，后取足少阳、阳明。
现代文：头一侧发冷的偏头痛，而治疗时可以先选取手少阳三焦经、手阳明大肠经的腧穴，再选取足少阳胆经、足阳明胃经的腧穴针刺治疗。
English: Migraine with chills on the side of the head, and in the treatment, you can first select the acupuncture points of Shao Yang Sanjiao meridian and Shao Yang Ming large intestine meridian, and then select the acupuncture points of Shao Yang Yili meridian and Shao Yang Ming stomach meridian.

古文：厥心痛，与背相控，善瘈，如从后触其心，伛偻者，肾心痛也，先取京骨、昆仑；发狂不已，取然谷。
现代文：由五脏气冲逆所致的为厥心痛，牵引到后背，拘急抽掣，如同从背后撞击心脏一样，病人痛得弯腰曲背，这是肾经邪气上犯于心的心痛病，故名为肾心痛，治疗应先取足太阳膀胱经的京骨穴和昆仑穴；若针后痛仍不止，再取足少阴肾经的然谷穴。
English: Caused by the five viscera of qi rushing against each other, it is jue heartache, traction to the back, urgent convulsions, as if hitting the heart from behind, the patient is bent over backwards with pain. This is a heartache disease caused by the evil qi of the kidney, so it is called kidney heartache. The treatment should first take the foot of the sun bladder through the Beijing bone hole and the Kunlun hole; if the pain after the needle is still not over, then take the foot of the Shaoyin kidney through the valley hole.

古文：厥心痛，腹胀胸满，心尤痛甚，胃心痛也，取之大都、大白。
现代文：厥心痛，腹胀，胸中满闷，心痛十分严重的，属于胃经的邪气犯心的病症，故名胃心痛，治疗应取足太阴脾经的大都、太白二穴。
English: Heartache, bloating, chest tightness, heartache is very serious, is a disease of the stomach meridian, so it is called gastric heartache. The treatment should be to take the foot too much yin and the spleen meridian, too much white.

古文：厥心痛，痛如以锥针刺其心，心痛甚者，脾心痛也，取之然谷、太溪。
现代文：厥心痛，其痛如同锥子刺心一般剧烈，心痛十分严重，这是脾气犯心所致，故名为脾心痛，治疗应取足少阴肾经的然谷、太溪两穴。
English: Jue heartache, the pain is as sharp as a cone piercing the heart, and the heartache is very serious. This is caused by temper tantrum, so it is called spleen heartache. The treatment should be taken from the two holes of Shaoyin Kidney Sutra in Zhangu and Taixi.

古文：厥心痛，色苍苍如死状，终日不得太息，肝心痛也，取之行间、太冲。
现代文：厥心痛，面色苍青如同死灰一般，不能深呼吸，这是肝气犯心所致，故名为肝心痛，治疗应取足厥阴肝经的行间、太冲二穴。
English: Jie Xin pain, the face is as pale as ashes, unable to take a deep breath, this is caused by the liver qi, hence the name Jie Xin pain, the treatment should be taken between the lines of the foot Jie Yin and liver meridian, too flush two holes.

古文：厥心痛，卧若徒居，心痛间，动作痛益甚，色不变，肺心痛也，取之鱼际、太渊。
现代文：厥心痛，卧床休息或是闲暇安静的时候疼痛不甚，一旦有所动作，疼痛就会加剧，面色不变，这是肺气逆乱犯心所致，故名为肺心痛，治疗时应取手太阴肺经的鱼际、太渊穴。
English: When you are in bed, resting, or having a quiet time, the pain is not so bad. Once you move, the pain will intensify and your complexion will not change. This is caused by the disturbance of the lung qi, hence the name "pulmonary heartache." When treating, you should take the fishes and abysses that are too deep for the lungs.

古文：真心痛，手足清至节，心痛甚，旦发夕死，夕发旦死。
现代文：真心痛，发作的时候手足冰冷，直至肘膝部位，心痛极其严重，经常是早上发作到晚上就死亡，或者晚上发作早上就死亡了。
English: Real heartache, cold hands and feet up to the elbows and knees when the attack occurs, the heartache is extremely severe, it often occurs in the morning and dies in the evening, or occurs in the evening and dies in the morning.

古文：心痛不可刺者，中有盛聚，不可取于腧。
现代文：心痛但不能使用针刺疗法的症候是，体内有瘀血和积聚的实证，为有形的实邪，不能用针刺腧穴以调理经气的方法来治疗。
English: The symptom of heartache that cannot be treated with acupuncture is that there is positive evidence of congestion and accumulation of blood in the body, which is a tangible real evil and cannot be treated with acupuncture by adjusting the meridians.

古文：肠中有虫瘕及蛟蛕，皆不可取以小针。心肠痛，憹作痛，肿聚，往来上下行，痛有休止，腹热喜渴，涎出者，是蛟蛕也。
现代文：肠中有虫聚集成块或有蛔虫病者，治疗的时候不能使用小针；寄生虫病引起的心腹疼痛，表现为心中烦闷不舒，或者腹中有积聚之肿块，可以上下移动，时痛时止，腹内发热，口渴而流涎，是肠中有蛔虫活动所致。
English: Small needles should not be used to treat people with intestinal worms that are clumped together or those with tapeworm disease; the pain in the abdomen and heart caused by the parasitic disease manifests itself as a dull and uncomfortable feeling in the heart, or there is a lump in the abdomen that can move up and down, the pain is intermittent, fever in the abdomen, thirst and diarrhea are caused by the activity of the tapeworm in the intestine.

古文：以手聚按而坚持之，无令得移，以大针刺之，久持之，虫不动，乃出针也。
现代文：治疗时，用手按住肿块或者疼痛的地方，使蛔虫不能移动，用大针刺入，直到蛔虫不再动了之后再拔出针。
English: During treatment, hold the lump or painful area with your hand so that the tapeworm cannot move, and insert a large needle until the tapeworm stops moving and then remove the needle.

古文：㤣腹憹痛，形中上者。
现代文：只要出现满腹疼痛，烦闷不舒，腹中肿物上下移动的病症，就用这种方法治疗。
English: As long as there is pain in the abdomen, irritation and discomfort, and the disease of the tumour moving up and down in the abdomen, it is treated with this method.

古文：耳聋无闻，取耳中。
现代文：耳聋，听不到声音，针刺位于耳中的穴位。
English: Deafness, can't hear, pins and needles in the ear.

古文：耳鸣，取耳前动脉。
现代文：耳鸣，针刺耳前动脉。
English: Tinnitus, pins and needles in the anterior aorta.

古文：耳痛不可刺者，耳中有脓。
现代文：耳痛而不能针刺的情况是，耳中有脓。
English: In the case of ear pain that can't be treated with acupuncture, it's because there's pus in the ear.

古文：若有干耵聍，耳无闻也。
现代文：如果耳垢太多堵塞耳道，也会导致听不到声音。
English: If too much earwax blocks the ear canal, it can also lead to hearing loss.

古文：耳聋取手小指、次指爪甲上与肉交者，先取手，后取足。
现代文：治疗耳聋应针刺手足无名指指甲上方与肉交界处的穴位，先刺手上的穴位，后刺足部的穴位。
English: For the treatment of deafness, the acupuncture points should be at the point where the top of the ring finger nail and the flesh meet, the first point should be at the point on the hand, and the second point should be at the foot.

古文：耳鸣取手中指爪甲上，左取右，右取左，先取手，后取足。
现代文：耳鸣应取手足中趾的趾甲上方的穴位，左耳鸣取右侧手足穴位，右耳鸣取左侧手足穴位，先取手上的穴位，后取足部的穴位。
English: The tinnitus should be taken from the point above the nail of the middle toe of the hand and foot, the left tinnitus should be taken from the point of the right hand and foot, the right tinnitus should be taken from the point of the left hand and foot, the point on the hand should be taken first, and the point on the foot should be taken later.

古文：足髀不可举，侧而取之，在枢合中，以员利针，大针不可刺。病注下血，取曲泉。
现代文：脚及大腿不能屈伸活动，令病人侧卧，取大转子处的环跳穴，使用九针中的员利针，不要使用大针。因肝不藏血而便血如注的，针刺曲泉穴治疗。
English: The feet and thighs can not be flexed and stretched, so the patient should lie on his side, take the ring jump hole at the large rotor, use one of the nine needles, do not use a large needle.

古文：风痹淫砾，病不可已者，足如履冰，时如入汤中。
现代文：下肢风痹而酸痛无力，发展到不可治愈的情况，双足就会有时像踏在冰块上一样寒冷，有时又像浸泡在滚烫的热水中一样。
English: The paralysis of the lower limbs and the soreness and weakness develop to an incurable condition, and the feet are sometimes as cold as stepping on ice, and sometimes as if immersed in scalding hot water.

古文：股胫淫砾，烦心，头痛，时呕，时悗，眩已汗出，久则目眩，悲以喜恐，短气，不乐，不出三年死也。
现代文：下肢的酸痛无力不可久立的症状，如果厥气上逆就会出现心烦、头痛、呕吐、满闷的症状，还有目眩之后马上出汗，时间长了目眩更甚，情绪波动，有时悲伤，有时喜悦，有时恐惧，有时气短，心中不悦，这样发展下去，不出三年，就会死亡。
English: Soreness in the lower limbs, symptoms of weakness that can't be sustained, if the opposite happens, there will be upset, headache, vomiting, and symptoms of depression, as well as dizziness followed immediately by sweating, dizziness for a long time, mood swings, sometimes sadness, sometimes joy, sometimes fear, sometimes shortness of breath, and unhappiness in the heart. If this continues, it will take less than three years to die.

