古文：起昭阳大渊献，尽阏逢困敦，凡二年。
现代文：起，止，一共两年。晋纪七晋惠帝太安二年
English: It lasted for a total of two years, from the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Jinji to the second year of Emperor Hui's reign

古文：孝惠皇帝中之下太安二年
现代文：春季，正月，李特偷渡过江攻打罗尚，水上驻防的军队都溃散而逃。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Little sneaked across the river to attack Roshan, and the troops stationed on the water broke up and fled.

古文：春，正月，李特潜渡江击罗尚，水上军皆散走。
现代文：蜀郡太守徐俭献出少城投降，李特进城据守，只索取马匹以供军需，并不掠取其他财物。
English: Xu Jian, the governor-general of Shu County, offered to surrender Shaocheng, and Li Te entered the city to defend it. He only asked for horses for military supplies, and did not plunder other property.

古文：蜀郡太守徐俭以少城降，特入据之，惟取马以供军，馀无侵掠，赦其境内，改元建初。
现代文：在境内赦免罪犯，改年号为建初。
English: Pardoned criminals in the territory, and changed the year to Jianchu.

古文：罗尚保太城，遣使求和于特。
现代文：罗尚在太城据守，派使者向李特求和。
English: Luo Shang held out in Taicheng and sent an envoy to Li Tsering to sue for peace.

古文：蜀民相聚为坞者，皆送款于特，特遣使就抚之；以军中粮少，乃分六郡流民于诸坞就食。
现代文：修筑土堡以自保的各蜀民聚居点都向李特表示归顺，李特派使者抚慰他们，又因为军队中粮食不够，就把六郡流民分到各个土堡吃饭。
English: All the Shu people's settlements, which had built earthen forts for self-protection, surrendered to Li Te. Li Te sent emissaries to comfort them, and because there was not enough food in the army, he divided the six counties of displaced people into various earthen forts to eat.

古文：李流言于特曰： 诸坞新附，人心未固，宜质其大姓子弟，聚兵自守，以备不虞。 
现代文：李流对李特说： 各土堡都是刚刚归附，人心还不稳，应当把其中的大户子弟作为人质，集中一些兵力自卫防守，以准备应付不曾意料的事变。 
English: Li Liu said to Li Te: Each earthen fort has just been annexed, and people's hearts are still unstable. It is necessary to take the eldest son of one of them as a hostage, and concentrate some forces on self-defense and defense in order to prepare for unexpected events.

古文：又与特司马上官惇书曰： 纳降如待敌，不可易也。 
现代文：李流又给李特的司马上官去信说： 接受前来投降的人就像面对敌人一样，戒备不能改变。 
English: Li Liu also sent a letter to Li Te's magistrate, saying: "Accepting those who come to surrender is like facing the enemy, the alert cannot be changed.

古文：前将军雄亦以为言。
现代文：前将军李雄也持同样的说法。
English: Former general Li Xiong also holds the same view.

古文：特怒曰： 大事已定，但当安民，何为更逆加疑忌，使之离叛乎！ 
现代文：李特生气说： 大事已经成功，只该使人民安定，为什么反而这样对他们怀疑猜忌，是让他们离开我们去叛乱吗？ 
English: Little said angrily: The important thing has been successful, it should only make the people stable, why instead are they so suspicious and suspicious of them, is it to let them leave us to rebel?

古文：朝廷遣荆州刺史宗岱、建平太守孙阜帅水军三万以救罗尚。
现代文：朝廷派荆州刺史宗岱、建平太守孙阜带领三万水军去救罗尚。
English: The imperial court sent Jingzhou statesman Zong Xi and Jianping Empress Dowager Sun Fu to lead 30,000 sailors to rescue Luo Shang.

古文：岱以阜为前锋，进逼德阳。
现代文：宗岱让孙阜为前锋，迫近德阳。
English: Zonglu let Sun Fu be the striker, closing in on Deyang.

古文：特遣李荡及蜀郡太守李璜就德阳太守任臧共拒之。
现代文：李特派李荡和蜀郡太守李璜一起与德阳太守任臧共同抗拒宗岱、孙阜。
English: Li Teh sent Li Hang and Li Jie, the governor of Shu County, together with Deyang's governor, Ren Jie, to jointly resist Zong Yi and Sun Fu.

古文：岱、阜军势甚盛，诸坞皆有贰志。
现代文：宗岱、孙阜军队势力强大，各个土堡都有了二心。
English: Zonglu and Sunfu's armies were powerful, and each earthen fort had two hearts.

古文：益州兵曹从事蜀郡任睿言于罗尚曰： 李特散众就食，骄怠无备，此天亡之时也。
现代文：益州兵曹从事、蜀郡人任睿对罗尚说： 李特让部众分散去吃饭，骄傲懈怠没有防备，这是上天让他灭亡的时候。
English: Engaged in the Yizhou petty officer, Ren Rui, a resident of Shu County, said to Luo Shang: Li Te let his subordinates disperse to eat, pride slackness unprepared, this is the time for heaven to let him perish.

古文：宜密约诸坞，刻期同发，内外击之，破之必矣！ 
现代文：应当与各土堡秘密约定，到时候同时发动，内外夹攻，一定能够击溃他。 
English: A secret agreement should be made with each of the earthen fortresses, and when the time comes, they should be launched simultaneously, both inside and outside, and they will surely be able to defeat him.

古文：尚使睿夜缒出城，宣旨于诸坞，期以二月十日同击特。
现代文：罗尚让任睿在夜里从绳子上溜下城，到各土堡宣布旨意，约定在二月十日共同攻击李特。
English: Luo Shang let Ren Rui slip down from the city on a rope in the night and announce his will at each earthen fort, agreeing to jointly attack Li Te on February 10.

古文：睿因诣特诈降。
现代文：任睿就到李特那里假装投降。
English: Ren Rui went to Li Te and pretended to surrender.

古文：特问城中虚实，睿曰： 粮储将尽，但馀货帛耳。 
现代文：李特向他问城里的情况，任睿说： 粮食储备快要用完了，只剩下一些钱和布匹而已。 
English: When Li Te asked him about the situation in the city, Ren Rui said: The grain reserves are about to run out, only some money and cloth are left.

古文：睿求出省家，特许之，遂还报尚。
现代文：任睿请求出营看望家人，李特允许了。于是任睿回城向罗尚报告。
English: Ren Rui asked to leave the camp to visit his family, and Li Te allowed it. So Ren Rui went back to the city to report to Roshan.

古文：二月，尚遣兵掩袭特营，诸坞皆应之，特兵大败，斩特及李辅、李远，皆焚尸，传首洛阳。
现代文：二月，罗尚派兵袭击李特的兵营，各土堡全都响应，李特的军队惨败，罗尚斩杀李特和李辅、李远，焚烧了他们的尸体，将首级传报洛阳，流民非常惊惧。
English: In February, Luo Shang sent troops to attack Li Te's barracks, and all the earthen fortifications responded. Li Te's army suffered a crushing defeat. Luo Shang beheaded Li Te, Li Shuo, and Li Yuan, burned their bodies, and sent their heads to Luoyang. The exiles were very alarmed.

古文：流民大惧，李流、李荡、李雄收馀众还保赤祖。流自称大将军、大都督、益州牧，保东宫，荡、雄保北营。
现代文：李荡、李雄收容残余部众退保赤祖。李流自称大将军、大都督、益州牧，守护东营；李荡、李雄守护北营。
English: Li Hang and Li Xiong sheltered the remnants of the retreating Red Ancestors. Li Liu claimed to be the general, the grand governor, and the shepherd of Yizhou, and guarded the east camp; Li Hang and Li Xiong guarded the north camp.

古文：孙阜破德阳，获寋硕，任臧退屯涪陵。
现代文：孙阜攻破德阳，抓获硕、任臧撤退到涪陵驻扎。
English: Sun Fu broke through Deyang, captured Shuo, and Ren Xi retreated to stay in Fuling.

古文：三月，罗尚遣督护何冲、常深等攻李流，涪陵民药绅等亦起兵攻流。
现代文：三月，罗尚派督护何冲、常深进攻李流，涪陵人药绅也组织兵士攻打李流。
English: In March, Luo Shang sent supervisors He Chong and Chang Sheng to attack Li Lv, and the Fuling medicine men also organized soldiers to attack Li Lv.

古文：流与李骧拒深，使李荡、李雄拒绅。何冲乘虚攻北营，氐苻成、隗伯在营中，叛应之。
现代文：李流与李骧抵御药绅，何冲乘虚攻打北营，氐人符成、隗伯在北营里叛变而响应何冲。
English: Li Liu and Li Yan resisted the medicine gentry, He Chong attacked the North Camp by taking advantage of the deception, and Yan Ren, Fucheng, and Zibo rebelled in the North Camp and responded to He Chong.

古文：荡母罗氏擐甲拒战，伯手刃伤其目，罗氏气益壮；营垂破，会流等破深、绅，引兵还，与冲等战，大破之，成、伯帅其党突出诣尚。
现代文：李荡的母亲罗氏穿上甲袍参与战斗，隗伯的兵刃刺伤了罗氏的眼睛，而罗氏斗志更加旺盛。这时李流等人打败了常深、药绅，率兵回来，也加入到与何冲的战斗中，何冲惨败。符成、隗伯带领自己的人马突围投奔罗尚。
English: Li Hang's mother, Luo Shi, put on a suit of armor and participated in the battle. Zibo's sword pierced Luo Shi's eyes, and Luo Shi's fighting spirit was even more vigorous. At this time, Li Liu and others defeated Changshin and Yaxuan, led the soldiers back, and also joined the battle with He Chong, and He Chong was defeated. In Fucheng, Zibo led his men to break out and rush to Luoshan.

古文：流等乘胜进抵成都，尚复闭城自守。荡驰马逐北，中矛而死。
现代文：李流等人乘胜进攻抵达成都，罗尚又关闭城门防守，李荡跃马扬鞭追击败逃之敌，中矛而死。
English: Li Liu and others took advantage of the successful attack to reach the capital, Luo Shang closed the city gate to defend, Li swinging the horse and whip to chase and defeat the fleeing enemy, and died in the middle of the spear.

古文：朝廷遣侍中燕国刘沈假节统罗尚、许雄等军，讨李流。
现代文：朝廷派侍中刘沈用符节统一指挥罗尚、许雄等人的军队，讨伐李流。
English: The imperial court sent Liu Shen, an aide-de-camp, to unite the armies of Luo Shang, Xu Xiong and others with the use of symbols to fight against Li Liu.

古文：行至长安，河间王颙留沈为军师，遣席薳代之。
现代文：走到长安，河间王司马把刘沈留下来作军师，派席代替他。
English: When they got to Chang'an, Kawama Wang Sima kept Liu Shen as his military instructor and assigned seats in his place.

古文：李流以李特、李荡继死，宗岱、孙阜将至，甚惧。
现代文：李流因为李特、李荡相继死去，而宗岱、孙阜即将攻来，非常恐惧。
English: Li Liu was very afraid because Li Te and Li Hang had died one after another, while Zong Yao and Sun Fu were about to attack.

古文：李含劝流降，流从之；李骧、李雄迭谏，不纳。
现代文：李含劝李流投降，李流采纳了这个建议。李骧、李雄接连劝谏，李流没有听取。
English: Li Han advised Li Ryu to surrender, and Li Ryu accepted the advice. Li Zhe and Li Xiong advised him one after another, but Li Ryu did not listen.

古文：夏，五月，流遣其子世及含子胡为质于阜军；胡兄离为梓潼太守，闻之，自郡驰还，欲谏不及。
现代文：夏季，五月，李流派他儿子李世和李含的儿子李胡到孙阜的军中作人质。李胡的哥哥李离为梓潼太守，听到这消息，急忙骑马从郡中赶回来，想劝阻却没有赶上。
English: In the summer, in May, Li Liang sent his son Li Shih and Li Han's son Li Hu to Sun Fu's army to be a hostage. Li Hu's brother Li Li, who was the governor of Zizhou, heard the news and hurried back from the county on horseback to dissuade him, but he did not catch up.

古文：退，与雄谋袭阜军，雄曰： 为今计，当如是；而二翁不从，奈何？ 
现代文：退回来，与李雄商议袭击孙阜的军队，李雄说： 为眼前考虑，应当这样，但李流、李含二翁不听从，怎么办？ 
English: Returning, he discussed with Li Xiong the attack on Sun Fu's army. Li Xiong said: Considering the present situation, it should be like this, but if Li Liu and Li Han didn't listen, what should we do?

古文：离曰： 当劫之耳！ 
现代文：李离说： 应该用武力强制住他们！ 
English: Li Li said: They should be forcibly detained by force!

古文：雄大喜，乃共说流民曰： 吾属前已残暴蜀民，今一旦束手，便为鱼肉。惟有同心袭阜，以取富贵耳！ 
现代文：李雄非常高兴，于是一起到流民中说： 我们过去残暴对待过蜀民，现在一旦束手投降，就成为任其宰割的鱼、肉，只有同心协力袭击孙阜，来夺取富贵！ 
English: Li Xiong was very happy, so he said to the exiles: "In the past, we treated the Shu people cruelly. Now, once we surrender, we will become fish and meat for them to slaughter. Only by working together can we attack Sun Fu and seize wealth and riches!"

古文：众皆从之。
现代文：大家都听从了他们。
English: Everyone listened to Smalen.

古文：雄遂与离袭击阜军，大破之。
现代文：李雄于是与李离袭击孙阜的军队，把孙阜打得惨败。
English: So Li Xiong and Li Li attacked Sun Fu's army and defeated Sun Fu.

古文：会宗岱卒于垫江，荆州军遂退。
现代文：这时宗岱在垫江死去，荆州的军队于是退走了。
English: At this time, Zonglu died in the Mat River, and Jingzhou's army retreated.

古文：流甚惭，由是奇雄才，军事悉以任之。
现代文：李流非常羞惭，从此认为李雄的才能奇异，军中事务全部都交给李雄处理。
English: Li Liu was very ashamed, and from then on he thought Li Xiong's talent was extraordinary, and all military affairs were left to Li Xiong to handle.

古文：新野庄王歆，为政严急，失蛮夷心，义阳蛮张昌聚党数千人，欲为乱。
现代文：新野庄王司马歆，处理政事严厉急躁，失去蛮、夷的信任，义阳蛮人张昌聚集了几千人，想叛乱。
English: Wang Sima, the ruler of Xinyangzhuang, was harsh and hasty in handling political affairs and lost the trust of the barbarians and barbarians. Zhang Chang, a barbarian from Yiyang, gathered several thousand people and wanted to rebel.

古文：荆州以壬午诏书发武勇赴益州讨李流，号 壬午兵 。
现代文：荆州根据壬午诏书，征发武士乡勇到益州讨伐李流，号称 壬午兵 。
English: According to the Imperial Edict of Renhuang, Jingzhou conscripted and dispatched samurai warriors from Xiangyong to Yizhou to fight Li Li, known as the Renhuang soldiers.

古文：民惮远征，皆不欲行。
现代文：这些百姓害怕远征，都不想出行。
English: These people are afraid of the expedition and do not want to travel.

古文：诏书督遣严急，所经之界停留五日者，二千石免官。由是郡县官长皆亲出驱逐；展转不远，辄复屯聚为群盗。
现代文：但诏书的督促严厉急迫，在经过的一个地方耽搁五天，该地的二千石官员就要罢免官职，因此郡县负责官员都亲自出去驱逐催促，这些被征发的人辗转行军没有多远，便聚合又成为新的强盗群体。
English: However, the supervision of the imperial edict was severe and urgent. If there was a delay of five days in a place that had passed, the 2,000-stone officials in that place would be removed from office. Therefore, the responsible officials of counties and counties went out in person to expel and urge. These conscripted people did not have far to march, and then they gathered and became a new group of robbers.

古文：时江夏大稔，民就食者数千口。
现代文：当时江夏粮食大丰收，百姓到此求生的有几千人。
English: At that time, Jiangxia had a bumper grain harvest, and several thousand people came here to survive.

古文：张昌因之诳惑百姓，更姓名曰李辰，募众于安陆石岩山，请流民及避戍役者多往从之。
现代文：张昌因此欺骗迷惑百姓，自己改换姓名叫李辰，在安陆石岩山招募百姓，各方流民和逃避戍守劳役的人大多都投靠了他。
English: As a result, Zhang Chang deceived and confused the people. He changed his name to Li Chen and recruited people in Shiyan Mountain, Anlu. Most of the displaced people from all sides and those who were escaping from forced labor joined him.

古文：太守弓钦遣兵讨之，不胜。
现代文：太守弓钦派兵讨伐张昌，没有成功。
English: The daimyō Yuchin sent troops to fight Zhang Chang without success.

古文：昌遂攻郡，钦兵败，与部将硃伺奔武昌，歆遣骑督靳满讨之，满复败走。
现代文：张昌于是攻打郡城，弓钦的军队失败，弓钦就与部下将领朱伺逃奔武昌，司马歆派骑督靳满征讨张昌，结果靳满又失败逃走。
English: Zhang Chang then attacked the county seat, and Yuchin's army failed. Yuchin fled to Wuchang with his subordinate general Zhu Bei. Sima Yi sent his cavalry commander Shuman to conquer Zhang Chang. As a result, Shuman again failed and fled.

古文：昌遂据江夏，造妖言云： 当有圣人出为民主。 
现代文：张昌于是占据江夏，制造煽动人心的妖言说： 该有圣人出现为百姓作主。 
English: Zhang Chang then occupied Jiangxia, creating incendiary gossips saying: A saint should appear to rule the people.

古文：得山都县吏丘沈，更其姓名曰刘尼，诈云汉后，奉以为天子，曰： 此圣人也。 
现代文：招得山都县小官吏丘沈，并把他的姓名改为刘尼，假托说是汉朝皇室的后代，尊奉为天子，说： 这就是圣人。 
English: He invited Qiu Shen, a minor official of Shandong County, and changed his name to Liu Ni, pretending to be a descendant of the Han Dynasty royal family and revered as the son of heaven, saying: This is a saint.

古文：昌自为相国，诈作凤皇、玉玺之瑞，建元神凤；郊礼、服色，悉依汉故事。
现代文：张昌自封为相国，伪造凤凰、玉玺等祥瑞吉兆，立年号为神凤。郊祀礼仪、服装颜色装饰，全都按照汉代过去的程式。
English: Zhang Chang proclaimed himself as a relative of the country, forged auspicious signs such as the phoenix and the jade dragon, and the founding year was named Shen Feng. The suburb worship etiquette, clothing color decoration, all according to the program of the Han Dynasty.

古文：有不应募者，族诛之，士民莫敢不从。
现代文：有不接受招募的人，就对他处以灭族的惩罚，士绅百姓没有谁敢不服从。
English: If anyone refused to be recruited, he was punished with extermination. No gentry or commoner dared to disobey.

古文：又流言： 江、淮已南皆反，官军大起，当悉诛之。 
现代文：又散布流言说： 长江、淮水以南地区都造反了，官军都出动了，将要把他们全部诛杀。 
English: They also spread the rumor that the regions south of the Yangtze River and Huai Shui River had all rebelled, and the government troops had been dispatched to kill them all.

古文：互相扇动，人情惶惧。
现代文：百姓们互相煽动，人们的心情都很惶惑惊恐。
English: People were instigating each other. People were very confused and frightened.

古文：江、沔间所在起兵以应昌，旬月间众至三万，皆著绛帽，以马尾作髯。
现代文：长江、沔水地区都起兵响应张昌，一月之间聚众达三万，士卒都戴深红色的帽子，用马尾当作须髯。
English: The Yangtze River and Surabaya regions all raised an army in response to Zhang Chang. Between January and March, a crowd of up to 30,000 gathered. The soldiers all wore crimson hats, with horse tails as whiskers.

古文：诏遣监军华宏讨之，败于障山。
现代文：朝廷下诏书派监军华宏讨伐张昌，结果在障山被打败。
English: The imperial edict under the imperial court sent Hua Hong to fight against Zhang Chang, and he was defeated in Shaoshan.

古文：歆上言： 妖贼犬羊万计，绛头毛面，挑刀走戟，其锋不可当。请台敕诸军三道救助。 
现代文：司马歆给朝廷上言说： 妖孽盗贼聚众数以万计，深红的头长毛脸，挥刀舞戟，锐不可当，请求朝廷命令各军分三路救援。 
English: Sima Yi sent a petition to the imperial court, saying: "The sorcerers and thieves have gathered in tens of thousands, with crimson heads and long hairy faces, waving swords and dancing, and are extremely fierce. I request the imperial court to order the various armies to divide the rescue into three routes.

古文：朝廷以屯骑校尉刘乔为豫州刺史，宁塑将军沛国刘弘为荆州刺史。
现代文：朝廷让屯骑校尉刘乔任豫州刺史，宁朔将军沛国人刘弘任荆州刺史。
English: The imperial court appointed Liu Qiao, a cavalry captain from Tuncun, as the historian of Yuzhou, and Liu Hong, a general from Ningshuo, as the historian of Jingzhou.

古文：又诏河间王颙遣雍州刺史刘沈将州兵万人，并征西府五千人出蓝田头以讨昌。
现代文：又诏令河间王司马派雍州刺史刘沈带领一万州兵，加上在西府征发的五千人从蓝田关出兵讨伐张昌。
English: He also ordered Liu Shen, the governor of Yongzhou, to dispatch 10,000 soldiers from the provincial army, together with 5,000 soldiers conscripted in Xifu, to fight Zhangchang from Lantian Pass.

古文：颙不奉诏；沈自领州兵至蓝田，颙又逼夺其众。
现代文：司马不听从诏令，刘沈带领州兵到蓝田，司马又强行剥夺了他的部众。
English: Sima disobeyed the edict, Liu Shen led the National Guard to Lantian, and Sima forcibly deprived his subordinates.

古文：于是刘乔屯汝南，刘弘及前将军赵骧、平南将军羊伊屯宛。
现代文：这样刘乔在汝南屯兵，刘弘和前将军赵骧、平南将军羊伊在宛地屯兵。
English: In this way, Liu Qiao stationed troops in Runan, and Liu Honghe, former general Zhao Wei, and Pingnan general Yang Yi stationed troops in the destination.

古文：昌遣其将黄林帅二万人向豫州，刘乔击却之。
现代文：张昌派他的部将黄林率领两万人进发豫州，被刘乔派兵打败。
English: Zhang Chang sent his general Huang Lin with 20,000 men to attack Yuzhou, but was defeated by Liu Qiao's troops.

古文：初，歆与齐王冏善，冏败，歆惧，自结于大将军颖。
现代文：当初，司马歆与齐王司马要好，司马失败了，司马歆害怕，便主动与大将军司马颖结交。
English: At first, Sima Ye and Qi Wang Sima wanted to be good, Sima Ye failed, Sima Ye was afraid, so he took the initiative to make friends with General Sima Ying.

古文：及张昌作乱，歆表请讨之。
现代文：等到张昌作乱，司马歆上表请求讨伐。
English: When Zhang Chang started a riot, Sima Yu went to the table to request a crusade.

古文：时长沙王乂已与颖有隙，疑歆与颖连谋，不听歆出兵，昌众日盛。
现代文：这时长沙王司马已经和司马颖产生了怨隙，怀疑司马歆与司马颖共同密谋，因此不接受司马歆出兵的要求，这样张昌的部众势力日益扩大。
English: At this time, Changsha King Sima already had a grudge with Sima Ying, suspected that Sima Yu and Sima Ying were conspiring together, and therefore did not accept Sima Yu's request to send troops, so Zhang Chang's subordinate forces were expanding day by day.

古文：从事中郎孙洵谓歆曰： 公为岳牧，受阃外之托，拜表辄行，有何不可！
现代文：从事中郎孙洵对司马歆说： 您是一方之主，接受统兵在外的使命，您上表以后就行动，有什么不可以的。
English: Sun Yat-sen, who was engaged in the middle, said to Sima Yu: You are the master of one side, accept the mission of the soldiers outside, you will act after the table, what is not allowed.

古文：而使奸凶滋蔓，祸衅不测，岂籓翰王室、镇静方夏之义乎！ 
现代文：而现在使得奸凶强盗滋长蔓延，灾祸不可测度，这难道是保卫王室，使国家安定的道理吗？ 
English: But now that the villainous bandits have grown and spread, and the disaster is immeasurable, is this the reason for protecting the royal family and stabilizing the country?

古文：歆将出兵，王绥曰： 昌等小贼，偏裨自足制之，何必违诏命，亲矢石也！ 
现代文：司马歆将要出兵，王绥说： 张昌等小小贼寇，属将自然足以制服他们，为什么一定要违抗诏命，亲自去经受箭矢与飞石呢？ 
English: Sima Yao was about to send troops, Wang Yao said: Zhang Chang and other petty thieves and robbers would naturally be enough to subdue them, so why did he have to defy the imperial edict and personally endure the arrows and flying stones?

古文：昌至樊城，歆乃出拒之。众溃，为昌所杀。
现代文：张昌到达樊城，司马歆就出去阻击，部众溃散，司马歆也被张昌杀死。
English: When Zhang Chang arrived at Lucheng, Sima Yao went out to block the attack. The troops dispersed, and Sima Yao was also killed by Zhang Chang.

古文：诏以刘弘代歆为镇南将军，都督荆州诸军事。
现代文：朝廷诏令刘弘代替司马歆为镇南将军、都督荆州诸军事。
English: The imperial court ordered Liu Hong to replace Sima Ye as the general of Zhenan and the military governor of Jingzhou.

古文：六月，弘以南蛮长史庐江陶侃为大都护，参军蒯恒为义军督护，牙门将皮初为都战帅，进据襄阳。
现代文：六月，刘弘让南蛮长史陶侃任大都护，参军蒯恒任义军督护，牙门将皮初任都战帅，进军据守襄阳。
English: In June, Liu Hong made Nanban chieftain Shi Tao Kan to serve as the major protector of the capital, joined the army and served as the inspector of the rebel army, and appointed the first commander of the capital, and marched into the defense of Xiangyang.

古文：张昌并军围宛，败赵骧军，杀羊伊。
现代文：张昌用全部兵力包围宛城，打败赵骧的军队，杀死羊伊。
English: Zhang Chang encircled Wancheng with all his forces, defeated Zhao Yao's army, and killed Yang Yi.

古文：刘弘退屯梁。
现代文：刘弘撤退，屯兵梁县。
English: Liu Hong withdraws, and the garrison of Liang County is formed.

古文：昌进攻襄阳，不克。
现代文：张昌进攻襄阳，没有成功。
English: Zhang Chang attacked Yangyang, but without success.

古文：李雄攻杀汶山太守陈图，遂取郫城。
现代文：李雄进攻并杀死汶山太守陈图，于是占取郫城。
English: Li Xiong attacked and killed the governor of Wenshan, Chen Tu, and then occupied Lucheng.

古文：秋，七月，李流徒屯郫。蜀民皆保险结坞，或南入宁州，或东下荆州。
现代文：秋季，七月，李流迁到郫城驻扎，蜀地百姓都修筑土堡据险自守，有的向南进入宁州，有的东去进入荆州。
English: In the autumn, in July, Li Liu moved to Shicheng and stayed there. The people of Shu built earthen fortifications to protect themselves from danger. Some went south to Ningzhou, and some went east to Jingzhou.

古文：城邑皆空，野无烟火，流虏掠无所得，士众饥乏。
现代文：城镇乡邑都走空了，没有人烟。李流的军队没有掳掠到一点儿东西，兵士部众饥饿疲惫。
English: The towns and villages were empty, there was no one. Li Liu's army did not capture anything, and the soldiers were exhausted from hunger.

古文：唯涪陵千馀家，依青城山处士范长生；平西参军涪陵徐舆说罗尚，求为汶山太守，邀结长生，与共讨流。
现代文：只有涪陵的一千多户人家，依附于青城山隐士范长生。平西参军涪陵人徐对罗尚说： 我请求担任汶山太守，邀请联合范长生，相与共同讨伐李流。
English: Only more than a thousand households in Fuling are attached to the Qingcheng Mountain hermit Fan Changsheng. Xu, a Fuling man who joined the army in Pingxi, said to Luo Shang: I request to serve as the governor of Wenshan and invite Fan Changsheng to jointly fight against Li Li.

古文：尚不许，舆怒，出降于流，流以舆为安西将军。
现代文：罗尚不允许。徐一生气，出去投降了李流，李流让徐担任安西将军。
English: Luo Shang did not allow it. Xu became angry and went out to surrender to Li Liu, who made Xu the general of Anxi.

古文：舆说长生，使资给流军粮，长生从之。流军由是复振。
现代文：徐劝说范长生，让他给李流资助粮食，范长生接受了他的劝说，李流的军队因此而重新振作起来。
English: Xu persuaded Fan Changsheng to let him subsidize grain for Li Liu. Fan Changsheng accepted his persuasion, and Li Liu's army was reinvigorated.

古文：初，李含以长沙王乂微弱，必为齐王冏所杀，因欲以为冏罪而讨之，遂废帝，立大将军颖，以河间王颙为宰相，己得用事。
现代文：当初，李含以为长沙王司马力量微弱，一定会被齐王司马杀掉，所以想借讨伐司马罪行为名，废黜惠帝，拥立大将军司马颖，让河间王司马任宰相，这样自己便得以执掌大权。
English: At first, Li Han thought that the power of Changsha Wang Sima was weak and would definitely be killed by Qi Wang Sima, so he wanted to use the name of the crime of fighting Sima, depose Hui Emperor, support the general Sima Ying, and let Kawama Wang Sima serve as prime minister, so that he could hold power.

古文：既而冏为乂所杀，颖、颙犹守籓，不如所谋。
现代文：但不久司马却被司马杀掉，司马颖、司马仍然镇守藩地，不像自己所谋划的那样。
English: However, Sima was killed by Sima soon after, and Sima Ying and Sima still guarded the domain, unlike what they had planned.

古文：颖恃功骄奢，百度弛废，甚于冏时；犹嫌乂在内，不得逞其欲，欲去之。
现代文：此后，司马颖居功自傲，朝政各方面荒废松弛，比司马时还要严重，司马颖尤其不能忍受司马在禁城之内，使自己不能随心所欲，打算除掉司马。
English: After that, Sima Ying became proud of his achievements, and all aspects of court politics were wasteful and slack, which was even more serious than when Sima was in power. In particular, Sima Ying couldn't stand Sima being in the Forbidden City, so he couldn't do whatever he wanted, and planned to get rid of Sima.

古文：时皇甫商复为乂参军，商兄重为秦州刺史。
现代文：当时皇甫商又重新任司马的参军，皇甫商的哥哥皇甫重担任秦州刺史。
English: At that time, Emperor Fushang was re-appointed as Sima's conscript, and Emperor Fushang's brother Emperor Fushong served as the Qin State Historian.

古文：含说颙曰： 商为乂所任，重终不为人用，宜早除之。
现代文：李含对司马说： 皇甫商被司马任用，皇甫重终究不会被别人所用，应该尽快除掉。
English: Li Han said to Sima: The imperial official was appointed by Sima. After all, the imperial official would not be used by others, and should be removed as soon as possible.

古文：可表迁重为内职，因其过长安执之。 
现代文：可以表奏建议把皇甫重提升到朝廷中任职，趁他经过长安时把他抓住。 
English: You can make a proposal to promote the emperor to the imperial court, and seize him when he passes through Chang'an.

古文：重知之，露檄上尚书，发陇上兵以讨含。
现代文：皇甫重知道了李含的阴谋，向尚书公布檄文，纠集陇上军队讨伐李含。
English: Emperor Fushong learned of Li Han's plot, published an imperial edict to Shangshu, and gathered an army to fight Li Han.

古文：乂以兵方少息，遣使诏重罢兵，征含为河南尹。
现代文：司马因军队刚刚稍事休息，就派使者带诏书命令皇甫重取消这次军事行动，并征调李含去担任河南尹。
English: Because the army had just taken a short break, Sima sent an envoy with an imperial edict ordering the emperor to cancel the military operation and transfer Li Han to serve as Henan Yin.

古文：含就征而重不奉诏，颙遣金城太守游楷、陇西太守韩稚等合四郡兵攻之。
现代文：李含接受征调而皇甫重却不服从诏令，司马派金城太守游楷、陇西太守韩稚等人联合四个郡的军队去攻打皇甫重。
English: Li Han accepted conscription, but Emperor Fuzhong disobeyed the imperial edict. Sima sent Yu Kai, the governor of Jincheng, and Han Zhi, the governor of Shaanxi, and other troops from four counties to attack Emperor Fuzhong.

古文：颙密使含与侍中冯荪、中书令卞粹谋杀乂；皇甫商以告乂，收含、荪、粹，杀之。
现代文：司马又秘密派遣李含与侍中冯荪、中书令卞粹谋杀司马，皇甫商得知后告诉司马，拘捕并杀掉了李含、冯荪、卞粹。
English: Sima also secretly dispatched Li Han and his aides-de-camp, Feng Qi and Zhongshu Ling, to murder Sima. After learning this, the imperial official told Sima that he had arrested and killed Li Han, Feng Qi and Zhi Qi.

古文：骠骑从事琅邪诸葛玫、前司徒长史武邑牵秀皆出奔鄴。
现代文：骠骑从事琅邪人诸葛玫，前司徒长史武邑人牵秀都出城投奔邺城。
English: Zhuge Mei, a wicked man from Zhuge, who was engaged in horse-riding, and Shumu, a man from the former Shituchang, both went out of the city and rushed to Shicheng.

古文：张昌党石冰寇扬州，败刺史陈徽，诸郡尽没；又攻破江州，别将陈贞等攻武陵、零陵、豫章、武昌、长沙，皆陷之，临淮人封云起兵寇徐州以应冰。
现代文：张昌党羽石冰进犯扬州，打败刺史陈徽，扬州各属郡全部陷落。石冰又攻陷江州，属将陈贞攻打武陵、零陵、豫章、武昌、长沙，全部攻陷，临淮人封云也起兵进犯徐州来响应石冰。
English: Zhang Chang's party, Fei Shibing, invaded Yangzhou, defeated the assassin Chen Hui, and all the subordinate counties of Yangzhou fell. Shibing also invaded Jiangzhou, and Chen Zhen attacked Wuling, Ziling, Yuzhang, Wuchang, and Changsha, all of which were conquered. Linhuai's people, Fengyun, also marched into Xuzhou to respond to Shibing.

古文：于是荆、江、扬、豫、徐五州之境，多为昌所据。
现代文：这样，荆、江、徐、扬、豫等五个州的辖境，大多被张昌占据。
English: Thus, most of the territories under the jurisdiction of the five states of Jing, Jiang, Xu, Yang, and Yu were occupied by Zhang Chang.

古文：昌更置牧守，皆桀盗小人，专以劫掠为务。
现代文：张昌重新派设州牧郡守等地方长官，这些人都是行凶盗窃之类的小人，专门以抢劫掠夺为职业。
English: Zhang Chang reassigned local governors such as the governor of Zhumu County, all of whom were petty thieves who specialized in robbery and plunder.

古文：刘弘遣陶侃等攻昌于竟陵，刘乔遣其将李杨等向江夏。
现代文：刘弘派遣陶侃等人在竟陵攻打张昌，刘乔派遣部将李扬等向江夏进发。
English: Liu Hong dispatched Tao Kan and others to attack Zhang Chang in Jingling, and Liu Qiao dispatched Li Yang and others to Jiangxia.

古文：侃等屡与昌战，大破之，前后斩首数万级，昌逃于下俊山，其众悉降。
现代文：陶侃等人屡次与张昌发生战斗，大败张昌，前后斩杀几万人，张昌逃窜到下山，部众全部投降。
English: Tao Kan and others repeatedly fought with Zhang Chang, defeated Zhang Chang, killed tens of thousands of people, Zhang Chang fled down the mountain, and all his subordinates surrendered.

古文：初，陶侃少孤贫，为郡督邮。
现代文：当初，陶侃年轻时丧父，家境贫寒，担任郡督邮。
English: At first, Tao Kan lost his father when he was young, his family was poor, and he served as the county postmaster.

古文：长沙太守万嗣过庐江，见而异之，命其子结友而去。
现代文：长沙太守万嗣经过庐江，见到陶侃后，对他的德行和才能感到惊异，就让自己的儿子与陶侃结为朋友才离开。
English: After passing the Li River and seeing Tao Kan, the ruler of Changsha, Wanshi, was surprised by his virtue and talent. He let his son make friends with Tao Kan before leaving.

古文：后察孝廉，至洛阳，豫章国郎中令杨晫荐之于顾荣，侃由是知名。
现代文：后来察举孝廉，陶侃到洛阳，豫章国郎中令杨把陶侃推荐给顾荣，陶侃因此而有了名望。
English: Later, Xiao Lian, a high-ranking official, recommended Tao Kan to Luoyang, and Yang, the middle son of Yu Zhang Guo, recommended Tao Kan to Gu Rong. As a result, Tao Kan gained fame.

古文：既克张昌，刘弘谓侃曰： 吾昔为羊公参军，谓吾后当居身处，今观卿，必继老夫矣。 
现代文：等到打败了张昌，刘弘对陶侃说： 我过去担任羊公的参军，说我日后一定能有到他地位，今天看到你，一定能够继承老夫我。 
English: After defeating Zhang Chang, Liu Hong said to Tao Kan: I used to serve as a sheepdog to join the army, saying that I would certainly be able to reach his position in the future. Seeing you today, I will definitely be able to inherit my old husband.

古文：弘之退屯于梁也，征南将军范阳王虓遣前长水校尉张奕领荆州。
现代文：刘弘当时退兵驻扎到梁县，征南将军范阳王司马派前长水校尉张奕统领荆州。
English: At that time, Liu Hong was stationed in Liang County after retiring from the army. General Fan Yang Wang Sima sent Zhang Yi, a former captain of Changshui, to lead Jingzhou.

古文：弘至，奕不受代，举兵拒弘。弘讨奕，斩之。
现代文：刘弘到了以后，张奕不同意接替，率军队抗拒刘弘，刘弘讨伐并杀掉了张奕。
English: After Liu Hong arrived, Zhang Yi did not agree to take over, led the army to resist Liu Hong, Liu Hong fought and killed Zhang Yi.

古文：时荆部守宰多缺，弘请补选，诏许之，弘叙功铨德，随才授任，人皆服其公当。
现代文：当时荆州所辖各地的长官的位置大多空缺，刘弘请求补选。
English: At that time, most of the positions of the governors of the regions under the jurisdiction of Jingzhou were vacant, and Liu Hong requested a by-election.

古文：弘表皮初补襄阳太守，朝廷以初虽有功而望浅，更以弘婿前东平太守夏侯陟为襄阳太守。
现代文：朝廷诏书批准。刘弘论评功劳，铨量德行进行选拔，按照才能安排职务，大家都佩服他处事公正得当。刘弘表奏皮初补任襄阳太守，朝廷因为皮初虽然有功但是名望太浅，换刘弘的女婿前东平太守夏侯陟为襄阳太守。
English: The imperial decree was approved. Liu Hong evaluated the merits, weighed the virtues and made the selection, and arranged the positions according to the talents. Everyone admired him for handling things fairly and properly. Liu Hong played the role of the first to fill the position of the Yangyang governor, but the court, because although he had merits at the beginning, his reputation was too shallow, and replaced Liu Hong's son-in-law, the former Dongping governor Xia Houyi, with the Yangyang governor.

古文：弘下教曰： 夫治一国者，宜以一国为心，必若姻亲然后可用，则荆州十郡，安得十女婿然后为政哉！ 
现代文：刘弘向下发布告示说： 治理一个国家的人，应当从整个国家来考虑，如果一定要亲戚或姻亲然后才能使用，那么荆州十郡，哪里来十个女婿，然后才能处理州的政务呢？ 
English: Liu Hong posted a notice below, saying: The person who governs a country should consider the whole country. If relatives or in-laws must be used, then where are the ten sons-in-law from the ten counties of Jingzhou to handle the state's government affairs?

古文：乃表： 陟姻亲，旧制不得相监；皮初之勋，宜见酬报。 
现代文：就又上奏表说： 夏侯陟是姻亲，按过去的制度是不能互相监领的。皮初的功勋应当给以酬劳和待遇。 
English: He also submitted a report saying: Xia Houjun is a relative by marriage, and according to the previous system, they cannot supervise each other. Pichu's merits should be rewarded and treated.

古文：诏听之。
现代文：朝廷下诏书同意了他的奏表。
English: The Imperial Court issued an Imperial Rescript approving his report.

古文：弘于是劝课农桑，宽刑省赋，公私给足，百姓爱悦。
现代文：刘弘于是在任上勉力督促农桑之业，放宽刑罚减免赋税。官府与百姓都经济充裕，他赢得百姓的爱戴和喜悦。
English: Liu Hong then tried his best to supervise the agricultural mulberry industry, relax penalties and reduce taxes. The government and the people are economically abundant, and he won the love and joy of the people.

古文：河间王颙闻李含等死，即起兵讨长沙王乂。
现代文：河间王司马听说李含等人已被杀死，当即起兵征讨长沙王司马。
English: When Kawama Wang Sima heard that Li Han and others had been killed, he immediately raised an army to recruit Changsha Wang Sima.

古文：大将军颖上表请讨张昌，许之；闻昌已平，因欲与颙共攻乂。
现代文：大将军司马颖上奏表请求讨伐张昌，得到允许。司马颖又听说张昌叛乱已经平定，因而想与司马共同攻打司马。
English: Major General Sima Ying submitted a petition to fight Zhang Chang and was granted permission. Sima Ying also heard that Zhang Chang's rebellion had been quelled, so he wanted to fight Sima together with Sima.

古文：卢志谏曰： 公前有大功而委权辞宠，时望美矣。
现代文：卢志劝谏说： 您以前立了大功勋却交出权力辞谢天子的恩宠，当时声望很好。
English: Lu Zhi Xuan said: You have made great achievements in the past, but you surrendered your power and thanked the grace of the Son of Heaven. At that time, your reputation was very good.

古文：今宜顿军关外，文服入朝，此霸主之事也。 
现代文：现在如果把军队安顿在城关之外，身着文官服饰进京朝见，这是成为霸主的基础。 
English: Now, if the army is settled outside the city gates and dressed in civilian clothes to go to the imperial court in Beijing, this is the basis for becoming a hegemon.

古文：参军魏郡邵续曰： 人之有兄弟，如左右手。明公欲当天下之敌而先去其一手，可乎！ 
现代文：参军魏郡人邵续说： 人有兄弟，如同左右手，您想抵挡天下的敌人而先砍掉一只手，能这样吗？ 
English: People have brothers and sisters, just like their right and left hands. If you want to resist the world's enemies, can you cut off one hand first?

古文：颖皆不从。
现代文：司马颖全都不听。
English: Sima Ying did not listen at all.

古文：八月，颙、颖共表： 乂论功不平，与右仆射羊玄之、左将军皇甫商专擅朝政，杀害忠良，请诛玄之、商，遣乂还国。 
现代文：八月，司马、司马颖共同上奏表： 司马论评功劳不公平，与右仆射羊玄之、左将军皇甫商独揽朝政大权，杀害忠良之人。请诛杀羊玄之、皇甫商，遣送司马回他的封国。 
English: In August, Sima and Sima Ying jointly submitted a report: Sima commented on the unfairness of merit, and together with his right-hand servant, Emperor Yang, and his left-hand general, Emperor Fusang, monopolized the power of imperial government and killed loyal people. Please kill Emperor Yang and Emperor Fusang and send Sima back to his fief.

古文：诏曰： 颙敢举大兵，内向京辇，吾当亲帅六军以诛奸逆。
现代文：惠帝下诏说： 司马如果敢于兴兵，矛头指向京都帝辇，我将亲自率领六军诛讨为奸叛乱的人。
English: Emperor Hui issued an edict saying, "If Sima dares to raise an army and point it at the Imperial Palace in Kyoto, I will personally lead six armies to crush the traitorous rebels."

古文：其以乂为太尉，都督中外诸军事以御之。 
现代文：任用司马为太尉、都督中外诸军事以抵御他们。 
English: He appointed Sima to the rank of lieutenant general and military governor in order to fend them off.

古文：颙以张方为都督，将精兵七万，自函谷东趋洛阳。
现代文：司马让张方任都督，带领七万精锐军队，从函谷关向东，直指洛阳。
English: Sima had Zhang Fang appointed as the capital, and he led seventy thousand elite troops from the Huan Valley Pass to the east, straight to Luoyang.

古文：颖引兵屯朝歌，以平原内史陆机为前将军、前锋都督、督北中郎将王粹、冠军将军牵秀、中护军石超等军二十馀万，南向洛阳。
现代文：司马颖带领军队在朝歌驻扎，让平原内史陆机为前将军、前锋都督，统领中郎将王粹、冠军将军牵秀、中护军石超等军队二十多万人，向南逼临洛阳。
English: Sima Ying led the troops stationed in the morning song, and let the more than 200,000 troops of the former general, the forward governor, the commander of the middle-ranking general Wang Qi, the champion general Tu Xiu, and the middle-guard army Shi Chao in the plain's history land machine, and pushed southward to Luoyang.

古文：机以羁旅事颖，一旦顿居诸将之右，王粹等心皆不服。
现代文：陆机在司马颖门下寄居充任幕僚，位置一下突然居于各将领之首，王粹等人心里都不服气。
English: The land machine lived under Sima Ying as a staff officer, and suddenly found itself at the head of the generals. Wang Qi and others were not convinced.

古文：白沙督孙惠与机亲厚，劝机让都督于粹。
现代文：白沙督孙惠与陆机一向亲近，交情深厚，劝说陆机将都督的职位让给王粹。
English: Baisha Governor Sun Hui has always been close to the land machine and has a deep friendship. He persuaded the land machine to give the post of governor to Wang Zi.

古文：机曰： 彼将谓吾首鼠两端，适所以速祸也。 遂行。
现代文：陆机说： 这样他们将说我迟疑不决，正好加速招致灾祸。 于是出行。
English: The lander said, "That way they'll say I'm indecisive, just speeding up and inviting disaster," and took off.

古文：颖列军自朝歌至河桥，鼓声闻数百里。
现代文：司马颖排列的军队从朝歌直到河桥，战鼓声几百里外都能听见。
English: Sima Ying's troops lined up from the morning song to the river bridge, and the sound of war drums could be heard hundreds of miles away.

古文：乙丑，帝如十三里桥。
现代文：乙丑，惠帝到十三里桥。
English: Second ugly, Hui Di to thirteen bridge.

古文：太尉乂使皇甫商将万馀人拒张方于宜阳。
现代文：太尉司马派皇甫商带领一万多人在宜阳阻击张方。
English: Captain Sima sent more than ten thousand people led by Emperor Fu Shang to block Zhang Fang in Yiyang.

古文：己已，帝还军宣武场，庚午，舍于石楼。
现代文：己巳，惠帝把军队撤到宣武场。庚午，在石楼住宿。
English: At this time, Emperor Hui withdrew his army to the battlefield. In the afternoon, he stayed at the Stone House.

古文：九月，丁丑，屯于河桥。
现代文：九月，丁丑，惠帝将兵驻扎在河桥。
English: In September, Dingwuxi, Hui Di stationed soldiers in Heqiao.

古文：壬子，张方袭皇甫商，败之。
现代文：壬子，张方袭击皇甫商，并将皇甫商打败。
English: In Jinsi, Zhang Fang attacked the imperial merchants and defeated the imperial merchants.

古文：甲申，帝军于芒山。
现代文：甲申，惠帝在芒山驻军。
English: On the 13th, Emperor Hui stationed troops in Mangshan.

古文：丁亥，帝幸偃师；辛卯，舍于豆田。
现代文：丁亥惠帝到偃师。辛卯，在豆田住宿。
English: Dinghai Huidi went to Shishi. Xinwu went to stay in Doudian.

古文：大将军颖进屯河南，阻清水为垒。
现代文：大将军司马颖进军于黄河以南驻扎，阻隔清水作为壁垒。
English: General Sima Ying marched to the south of the Yellow River and stationed there, blocking the clear water as a barrier.

古文：癸巳，羊玄之忧惧而卒，帝旋军城东；丙申，幸缑氏，击牵秀，走之。大赦。
现代文：癸巳，羊玄之忧郁恐惧而死，惠帝回师城东。丙申，惠帝到缑氏，攻击牵秀，并把他打跑，宣布大敕。
English: Soon after, Yang Xuan's melancholy and fear died, and Hui Di returned to the east of Shicheng. In response, Hui Di went to the Shun clan, attacked Tuxiu, and ran him away, declaring a grand ban.

古文：张方入京城，大掠，死者万计。
现代文：张方进入京城，大肆抢掠，死者数以万计。
English: Zhang Fang entered Beijing and plundered the city. Tens of thousands of people died.

古文：李流疾笃，谓诸将曰： 骁骑仁明，固足以济大事；然前军英武，殆天所相，可共受事于前军。 
现代文：李流病危，对众部将说： 骁骑将军李骧仁德精明，本来足以成就大事。但是前将军李雄英俊勇武，大概是上天的选择，可以一起接受前将军的命令。 
English: Li Liu, who was critically ill, said to the generals: "General Li Xunrende, the commander of the cavalry, was shrewd and capable of accomplishing great things. However, the former general Li Xiong, who was handsome and brave, was probably chosen by heaven and could accept the former general's orders together.

古文：流卒，众推李雄为大都督、大将军、益州牧、治郫城。
现代文：李流去世，大家推举李雄为大都督、大将军、益州牧，治所设在郫城。
English: After the death of Li Liu, everyone elected Li Xiong as the grand governor, general, and governor of Yizhou, and the government office was set up in Lucheng.

古文：雄使武都朴泰绐罗尚，使袭郫城，云己为内应。
现代文：李雄派武都人朴泰欺骗罗尚，让他袭击郫城，声称自己可当内应。
English: Li Xiong sent a Wu Du man, Pak Tai, to deceive Luo Shang and let him attack Lucheng, claiming that he could handle the situation.

古文：尚使隗伯将兵攻郫，泰约举火为应，李骧伏兵于道，泰出长梯于外。
现代文：罗尚派隗伯带兵攻打郫城，朴泰约定以举火为信号，李骧在路旁埋伏了军队，朴泰把长梯送出城外。
English: Luo Shang sent Zibo to attack the city, and Pak Tai agreed to set fire as a signal. Li Yao ambushed the army on the roadside, and Pak Tai sent the long ladder out of the city.

古文：隗伯兵见火起，争缘梯上，骧纵兵击，大破之。
现代文：隗伯的军队看到火起，争相攀缘长梯登城。李骧指挥军队出击，大败隗伯。
English: When Zibo's army saw the fire, they scrambled to climb the long ladder to the city. Li Jun led the army to attack and defeated Zibo.

古文：追奔夜至城下，诈称万岁，曰： 已得郫城矣！ 
现代文：追击奔驰，连夜到达成都城下，假装呼喊万岁，说： 已经取得郫城！ 
English: He chased after Benzi and reached the capital city at night, pretending to shout "Long live Benzi!" and saying, "We've taken Shicheng!"

古文：入少城，尚乃觉之，退保太城。
现代文：于是进入了少城，罗尚发觉中计，连忙退到太城守卫。
English: So he entered the small town, and when Rocham discovered the trick, he hurriedly retreated to Taicheng to stand guard.

古文：隗伯创甚，雄生获之，赦不杀。
现代文：隗伯身负重伤，被李雄活捉，赦免而没有杀。
English: Zou Bo was seriously injured and was captured alive by Li Xiong. He was pardoned but not killed.

古文：李骧攻犍为，断尚运道。获太守龚恢，杀之。
现代文：李骧攻打犍为，截断罗尚运送物资的道路，抓住并杀死太守龚恢。
English: Li Yan attacked and cut off the road for Luo Shang to transport supplies, and caught and killed the grand marshal Yan Hui.

古文：石超进逼缑氏。
现代文：石超进军逼临缑氏。
English: Shi Chao marched in and forced the Linyi clan to surrender.

古文：冬，十月，壬寅，帝还宫。
现代文：冬季，十月，壬寅，惠帝回到皇宫。
English: In winter, October, Ren Yin, Hui Di returned to the palace.

古文：丁未，败牵秀于东阳门外。
现代文：丁未，在东阳门外击败牵秀。
English: Ding Wei defeated Tsui Xiu Rong outside Dongyang Gate.

古文：大将军颖遣将军马咸助陆机。
现代文：大将军司马颖派将军马咸协助陆机。
English: General Sima Ying sent General Ma Xian to assist the land plane.

古文：戊申，太尉乂奉帝与机战于建春门。
现代文：戊申，太尉司马尊奉帝命与陆机在建春门战斗。
English: Wushin, Lieutenant Sima Zun fought with the land plane at Jianchun Gate on the emperor's orders.

古文：乂司马王瑚使数千骑系戟于马，以突咸陈，咸军乱，执而斩之。
现代文：司马的司马王瑚派几千骑兵把戟系在马上，冲击马咸的兵阵，马咸军队混乱，捉住马咸杀掉了。
English: Sima's Sima Wanghong sent several thousand cavalrymen to tie ropes to horses, stormed the army line of Ma Xian, Ma Xian's army was in chaos, caught Ma Xian and killed him.

古文：机军大败，赴七里涧，死者如积，水为之不流。
现代文：陆机军队惨败，退到七里涧，死尸堆积，把水流都堵塞住了。
English: The army of land machines failed miserably and retreated seven miles away. Dead bodies piled up and blocked the water flow.

古文：斩其大将贾崇等十六人，石超遁去。
现代文：王瑚杀死陆机的大将贾崇等十六人，石超逃遁离去。
English: Wang Hui killed the general of the land machine, Jia Chong, and sixteen others, and Shi Chao fled.

古文：初，宦人孟玖有宠于大将军颖，玖欲用其父为邯郸令，左长史卢志等皆不敢违，右司马陆云固执不许，曰： 此县，公府掾资，岂有黄门父居之邪！ 
现代文：当初，宦官孟玖受到大将军司马颖的宠信，孟玖想让他父亲担任邯郸县令，左长史卢志等人都不敢违背，只有右司马陆云坚持不同意，说： 这个县，历来是有公府掾的资格的人担任，岂有让宦官父亲担任的道理？ 
English: At first, the eunuch Meng Yao was favored by the general Sima Ying. Meng Yao wanted his father to serve as the eunuch county magistrate, and the left warden Shiluzhi and others did not dare to go against it. Only the right warden Ma Luyun insisted on disagreeing, saying: This county has always been served by people with the qualifications of the public magistrate, is there any reason to let the eunuch's father serve?

古文：玖深怨之。
现代文：孟玖深深地怨恨陆云。
English: Meng Yao deeply resented Lu Yun.

古文：玖弟超，领万人为小督，未战，纵兵大掠，陆机录其主者；超将铁骑百馀人直入机麾下，夺之，顾谓机曰： 貉奴，能作督不！ 
现代文：孟玖弟孟超，是率领万人的小督，还没有战斗，就纵兵抢掠。陆机将主犯拘捕，孟超带着全副武装的一百多骑兵冲到陆机的指挥将旗之下，夺走犯人，在马上回头对陆机说： 貉奴，会当都督吗？ 
English: Meng's younger brother, Meng Chao, was the little governor who led all the people. There was no battle yet, so they pillaged. The land plane arrested the main criminal. Meng Chao, with more than a hundred fully armed cavalrymen, rushed to the flag of the commander of the land plane, took away the prisoner, and immediately turned back to the land plane and said: Son of a bitch, will you be the governor?

古文：机司马吴郡孙拯劝机杀之，机不能用。
现代文：陆机的司马吴郡人孙拯劝说陆机把他杀掉，陆机没有采纳。
English: Sun Zheng, a resident of Wu County, who was the chief of the land machine, persuaded the land machine to kill him, but the land machine did not accept.

古文：超宣言于众曰： 陆机将反。 
现代文：孟超向大家宣告说： 陆机打算叛变。 
English: Meng Chao announced to everyone that: the land machine intends to mutiny.

古文：又还书与玖，言机持两端，故军不速决。
现代文：又给孟玖去信，说陆机怀有二心，所以军队不能快些取胜。
English: He also sent a letter to Meng Xuan, saying that the army could not win quickly because the army had two minds.

古文：及战，超不受机节度，轻兵独进，败没。
现代文：等到战斗开始，孟超不听陆机指挥调动，轻率地带兵孤军深入，以致全军覆没。
English: Waiting for the battle to begin, Meng Chao did not listen to the command of the land plane to mobilize, and rashly took the soldiers of the lone army deep, so that the whole army was destroyed.

古文：玖疑机杀之，谮之于颖曰： 机有二心于长沙。 
现代文：孟玖怀疑是陆机把孟超杀了，对司马颖进谗言说： 陆机怀有二心勾结长沙王。 
English: Meng Yao suspected that it was the land machine that killed Meng Chao, and said to Sima Yingjin: The land machine colluded with Changsha King.

古文：牵秀素诌事玖，将军王阐、郝昌、帐下督阳平公师籓皆玖所引用，相与共证之。
现代文：牵秀对孟玖一直阿谀谄媚，将军王阐、郝昌，帐下督阳平人公师藩等人又都是由孟玖引荐而得到任用的，这些人在一起共同证实孟玖的谗言。
English: Tsuchihide has always been flattering to Meng Hui, and the generals Wang Xuan, Qichang, and the subordinate governor Yang Pingren Gongshi Han and others were all appointed by Meng Hui's recommendation, and these people together confirmed Meng Hui's criticism.

古文：颖大怒，使秀将兵收机。
现代文：司马颖勃然大怒，派牵秀带兵拘捕陆机。
English: Sima Ying flew into a rage and sent soldiers to arrest the land plane.

古文：参军事王彰谏曰： 今日之举，强弱异势。庸人犹知必克，况机之明达乎！
现代文：参军事王彰劝谏说： 今天的举动，强弱力量对比悬殊，最平庸的人都知道谁一定能取胜。
English: Wang Zhangxuan, a member of the military, said: Today's move, the strong and weak forces are very different, and the most mediocre people know who can win.

古文：但机吴人，殿下用之太过，北土旧将皆疾之耳。 
现代文：何况陆机那样明白通达的人呢？只因陆机是吴地人，殿下对他过于重用，才引起北方地区的旧将对他的嫉妒怨恨罢了。 
English: What is more, what about a man who is as clear-sighted as Lu Jia? It is only because Lu Jia is from Wuxi, and His Royal Highness is too heavy-handed with him, that he has aroused the jealousy and resentment of the old guard in the northern region.

古文：颖不从。
现代文：司马颖没有接受。
English: Sima Ying did not accept.

古文：机闻秀至，释戎服，著白帢，与秀相见，为笺辞颖，既而叹曰： 华亭鹤唳，可复闻呼！ 
现代文：陆机听说牵秀来了，于是脱下军服，戴着低贱的便帽，与牵秀相见，又写信辞别司马颖，一会儿慨叹说： 故乡华亭的鹤声，还能再听到吗？ 
English: The land plane heard that Tsuchishoo was coming, so he took off his military uniform and wore a lowly cap to meet Tsuchishoo. He also wrote a letter to say goodbye to Sima Ying. For a moment, he sighed and said: Can I hear the cranes of my hometown Huating again?

古文：秀遂杀之。
现代文：牵秀随即将他杀了。
English: Tsuishu follows and kills him.

古文：颖又收机弟清河内史云、平东祭酒耽及孙拯，皆下狱。
现代文：司马颖又拘捕了陆机弟清河内史陆云、平东祭酒陆耽以及孙拯，都投入牢狱。
English: Sima Ying also arrested Lu Yun, the younger brother of Qing Hanoi History Lu Yun, Pingdong Festival wine Lu Tan and Sun Zheng, and they were all put in prison.

古文：记室江统、陈留蔡克、颍川枣嵩等上疏，以为： 陆机浅谋致败，杀之可也。
现代文：记室江统、陈留人蔡克、颍川人枣高等上奏章，认为： 陆机考虑不周而导致失败，处死是可以的。
English: Ji Muro Jiang Tong, Chen Liu Ren Cai Ke, Xichuan Ren Zao High School Senior Song Zhang, believed that: If the land plane is ill-considered and leads to failure, it is okay to execute.

古文：至于反逆，则众共知其不然。
现代文：至于说他反叛，则大家都知道这不是事实。
English: As for him rebelling, we all know that's not true.

古文：宜先检校机反状，若有征验，诛云等未晚也。 
现代文：应当首先检查审核陆机谋反的情况，如果能够证实，那么再杀陆云等人也不晚。 
English: It should first check and verify the situation of the rebel land machine, and if it can be confirmed, then it is not too late to kill Lu Yun and others.

古文：统等恳请不已，颖迟回者三日。
现代文：江统等人不断地恳切请求，司马颖拖延三天也不答复。
English: Jiang Tong and others continued to make earnest requests, but Sima Ying delayed for three days and did not reply.

古文：蔡克入，至颖前，叩头流血，曰： 云为孟玖所犯，远近莫不闻。今果见杀，窃为明公惜之！ 
现代文：蔡克进入王府，来到司马颖面前，叩头叩得流血，说： 陆云被孟玖怨恨，远近没有不知道的，现在如果陆云果然被杀，我为您惋惜！ 
English: Cai Ke entered the king's palace, came to Sima Ying in front of him, bowed his head to the point of bleeding, and said: Lu Yun was resented by Meng Yao, there was nothing he didn't know. Now, if Lu Yun was indeed killed, I feel sorry for you!

古文：僚属随克入者数十人，流涕固请，颖恻然，有宥云之色。
现代文：随蔡克进去的僚属有几十人，都流泪苦苦请求，司马颖听后也感到忧伤，面露宽宥原谅陆云的容色。
English: There were dozens of colleagues and relatives who went in with Cai Ke, and they all cried and begged. Sima Ying also felt sad after listening, and showed Lu Yun's face of forgiveness.

古文：孟玖扶颖入，催令杀云、耽，夷机三族。
现代文：孟玖扶着司马颖进屋，催促司马颖下令杀掉陆云、陆耽，夷灭陆机三族。
English: Meng Yao helped Sima Ying enter the house and urged Sima Ying to order the killing of Lu Yun, Lu Tan, and the extermination of the three families of Lu Ji.

古文：狱吏考掠孙拯数百，两踝骨见，终言机冤。吏知拯义烈，谓拯曰： 二陆之枉，谁不知之，君可不爱身乎！ 
现代文：狱吏拷打孙拯几百下，打得露出了踝骨，但孙拯始终说陆机冤枉，狱吏知道孙拯正义而刚烈，对孙拯说： 二陆的冤枉，谁不知道！您难道不珍惜自己的身体吗？ 
English: The prison guards tortured Sun Zheng several hundred times, beating him until his ankle bones were exposed, but Sun Zheng always said that the land machine had wronged him. The prison guards knew that Sun Zheng was righteous and strong, and said to Sun Zheng: The land has wronged you, who doesn't know that! Don't you value your own body?

古文：拯仰天叹曰： 陆君兄弟，世之奇士，吾蒙知爱，今既不能救其死，忍复从而诬之乎！ 
现代文：孙拯仰天长叹，说： 陆机兄弟，是天下不同寻常的人士，我承蒙他们的知遇和厚爱，现在既然不能把他从死亡中解救出来，怎么能忍心再诋毁他呢？ 
English: 

古文：玖等知拯不可屈，乃令狱吏诈为拯辞。
现代文：孟玖等人知道不能使孙拯屈服，就命令狱吏伪造孙拯的供词。
English: Knowing that they could not make Sun Zheng submit, Meng Wei and others ordered the prison officials to forge Sun Zheng's confession.

古文：颖既杀机，意常悔之，及见拯辞，大喜，谓玖等曰： 非卿之忠，不能穷此奸。 
现代文：司马颖杀了陆机后，心里常常感到后悔，等看见孙拯供词后，非常高兴，对孟玖等人说： 要不是你的忠诚，就不能够查清楚这反叛的情况。 
English: After Sima Ying killed the land plane, she often felt regret in her heart. After seeing Sun Zhe's confession, she was very happy and said to Meng Xuan and others: If it were not for your loyalty, we would not be able to find out the situation of this rebellion.

古文：遂夷拯三族。
现代文：于是夷灭孙拯三族。
English: Thus, the three clans of Sun Zheng were exterminated.

古文：拯门人费慈、宰意二人诣狱明拯冤，拯譬遣之曰： 吾义不负二陆，死自吾分；卿何为尔邪！ 
现代文：孙拯的学生费慈、宰意两个人到狱中申明孙拯冤枉，孙拯开导并让他们离开，说： 我从道义上不能辜负二陆，死是我现在所应该作的，你们为什么呢？ 
English: Two of Sun Zheng's students, Feizi and Zaiyi, went to the prison to affirm that Sun Zheng had wronged them, and Sun Zheng enlightened them and let them leave, saying: I can't fail the two countries morally, death is what I should do now, why don't you?

古文：曰： 君既不负二陆，仆又安可负君！ 
现代文：他们回答说： 您既然不辜负二陆，我等又怎么能辜负您呢？ 
English: They replied: Since you have lived up to the second land, how can we live up to you?

古文：固言拯冤，玖又杀之。
现代文：坚持说孙拯冤枉，孟玖又把他们杀了。
English: Insisting that Sun Zheng had wronged them, Meng Yao killed them again.

古文：太尉乂奉帝攻张方，方兵望见乘舆，皆退走，方遂大败，死才五千馀人。
现代文：太尉司马侍奉惠帝攻打张方，张方的兵远远地看到惠帝的御车，都败退而逃，张方于是惨败，死了五千多人。
English: Captain Sima, who served Hui Di, attacked Zhang Fang. Zhang Fang's soldiers saw Hui Di's carriage from a distance and fled in defeat. Zhang Fang suffered a crushing defeat, and more than 5,000 people died.

古文：方退屯十三里桥，众惧，欲夜遁，方曰： 胜负兵家之常，善用兵者能因败为成。今我更前作垒，出其不意，此奇策也。 
现代文：张方撤退到十三里桥驻扎，大家惶恐不安，想趁夜逃走，张方说： 胜负是兵家常事，善于用兵的人能够转败为胜，现在我反而再到前面修筑堡垒，出其不意，这是奇妙的计策。 
English: Zhang Fang retreated to the thirteen-mile bridge and stationed himself there. Everyone was panicked and anxious and wanted to take advantage of the night to escape. Zhang Fang said, "Winning and losing is a common thing for soldiers. Those who are good at using soldiers can turn defeat into victory. Now, instead, I will go to the front to build a fortress. This is a wonderful strategy.

古文：乃夜潜进，逼洛城七里，筑垒数重，外引廪谷以足军食。
现代文：于是趁夜色悄悄逼近距洛阳城七里处，修筑了几层堡垒，从外面运进仓库中的粮谷作为军粮。
English: Therefore, they took advantage of the night to quietly approach the place seven miles away from Luoyang City, built several layers of fortresses, and transported grain from outside into the warehouse as military grain.

古文：乂既战胜，以为方不足忧。
现代文：司马取胜后，认为张方不足以忧虑。
English: After Sima won, he thought that Zhang Fang was not worried enough.

古文：闻方垒成，十一月，引兵攻之，不利。
现代文：听说张方建成了堡垒，十一月，率领军队去进攻，一无所获。
English: Hearing that Zhang Fang had built a fortress, he led an army to attack in November, but nothing was gained.

古文：朝议以乂、颖兄弟，可辞说而释，乃使中书令王衍等往说颖，令与乂分陕而居，颖不从。
现代文：朝廷讨论认为司马、司马颖是兄弟，可以用言辞来排解这一纠纷，于是派中书令王衍等人到司马颖那里劝说，让司马颖与司马平分秋色、共同辅助皇室。司马颖不答应。
English: The imperial court discussed that Sima and Sima Ying were brothers and could use words to resolve this dispute, so they sent a letter to Wang Yan and others to persuade Sima Ying to let Sima Ying and Sima evenly divide the autumn color and jointly assist the royal family. Sima Ying did not agree.

古文：乂因致书于颖，为陈利害，欲与之和解，颖复书： 请斩皇甫商等首，则引兵还鄴。 
现代文：司马又给司马颖去信，为他陈说利害关系，想与司马颖和解。司马颖回信说： 请斩掉皇甫商等人的首级，那么我就率兵回归邺城。 
English: Sima also sent a letter to Sima Ying, explaining the stakes for him and wanting to reconcile with Sima Ying. Sima Ying wrote back: Please cut off the heads of the imperial merchants and others, then I will lead the troops back to Lucheng.

古文：乂不可。
现代文：司马不同意。
English: Sima disagreed.

古文：颖进兵逼京师，张方决千金堨，水碓皆涸。
现代文：司马颖率兵进逼京城，张方把千里水坝中的水放掉，舂米的水碓全部无水可用。
English: Sima Ying led the troops into the capital, Zhang Fang released the water in the thousand-mile dam, and all the water in the glutinous rice was no longer usable.

古文：乃发王公奴婢手舂给兵，一品已下不从征者，男子十三以上皆从役，又发奴助兵；公私穷踧，米石万钱。
现代文：朝廷于是征发王、公大臣的奴婢用手舂米来供给军粮。一品以下不去应征的官员，家中十三岁以上的男子全部服劳役，又征发奴隶帮助军队。公室私家都穷困窘迫，一石米价值万钱。
English: The imperial court then conscripted the slaves and maids of the king and ministers of state to provide military rations with hand-squeezed rice. Officials who did not go to conscription for less than one dish, all men over the age of thirteen in the family served as laborers, and slaves were conscripted to help the army. Both public and private households were impoverished, and one stone of rice was worth thousands of dollars.

古文：诏命所行，一城而已。
现代文：皇帝的诏书命令所能指挥的，仅仅是京都一城罢了。
English: Only one city, Kyoto, could be commanded by the Emperor's edict.

古文：骠骑主簿范阳祖逖言于乂曰： 刘沈忠义果毅，雍州兵力足制河间，宜启上为诏与沈，使发兵袭颙。
现代文：骠骑主簿范阳人祖逖，对司马说： 刘沈忠诚正义果断坚毅，雍州的兵力足以对付河间王司马，应当启奏皇上给刘沈下诏书，派他出兵袭击司马。
English: Fan Yang's ancestor Zhu Xi said to Sima: Liu Shen is loyal, righteous, resolute and strong. The military strength of Yongzhou is enough to deal with Sima, the king of Kawama. The emperor should issue an imperial edict to Liu Shen and send him to attack Sima.

古文：颙窘急，必召张方以自救，此良策也。 
现代文：司马一旦窘迫紧急，一定要召回张方去救援自己，这是很好的计策。 
English: Once Sima is in an emergency, he must recall Zhang Fang to rescue himself, which is a good strategy.

古文：乂从之。
现代文：司马采纳了。
English: Sima accepted.

古文：沈奉诏驰檄四境，诸郡多起兵应之。
现代文：刘沈接到诏书，用快马向辖境内各郡发布檄文，各郡大多起兵响应。
English: When Liu Shen received the imperial edict, he used a fast horse to issue an edict to the counties under his jurisdiction, and most of the counties responded by raising troops.

古文：沈合七郡之众凡万馀人，趣长安。
现代文：刘沈组织七郡一共一万多人，进发长安。
English: Liu Shen has organized a total of more than 10,000 people in seven counties to go to Chang'an.

古文：乂又使皇甫商间行，赍帝手诏，命游楷等罢兵，敕皇甫重进军讨颙。
现代文：皇甫商秘密走到新平，遇到他的堂外甥，堂外甥一直憎恶皇甫商，就向司马告发，司马逮捕了皇甫商，并把他杀了。
English: Wangfusho secretly went to Xinping and met his great-nephew Zhuang. The great-nephew had always hated Wangfusho, so he told Sima. Sima arrested Wangfusho and killed him.

古文：商间行至新平，遇其从甥，从甥素憎商，以告颙捕商，杀之。十二月，议郎周𤣱、前南平内史长沙王矩起兵江东以讨石冰，推前吴兴太守吴郡顾秘都督扬州九郡诸军事，传檄州郡，杀冰所署将吏。于是前侍御史贺循起兵于会稽，庐江内史广陵华谭及丹扬葛洪、甘卓皆起兵以应秘。
现代文：十二月，议郎周、前南平内史长沙人王矩，在江东起兵讨伐石冰，推举前吴兴太守吴郡人顾秘任都督扬州九郡诸军事，向各州郡传布檄文，杀掉石冰所署的部将官吏。于是前侍御史贺循在会稽起兵，庐江内史广陵人华谭和丹阳人葛洪、甘卓都起兵响应顾秘。周是周处的儿子。
English: In December, Zhou He and Wang Rui, a native of Changsha and a former member of the Nanping Inner History Commission, raised an army in the east of the Yangtze River to fight against Shi Bing. Former Wu Xing, the governor of Wu County, was elected to be the military governor of nine counties in Yangzhou. He spread the message to all the counties and killed the general officers of the Shi Bing Investigation Commission. As a result, He, a former attendant of Shi Bing, raised an army at the meeting. Hua Tan, a native of Guangling in the Inner History Commission, and Ge Hong and Gan Zhuo, natives of Danyang, raised an army in response to Gu Bing

古文：𤣱，处之子；御，邵之子；卓，宁之曾孙也。冰遣其将羌毒帅兵数万拒𤣱，𤣱击斩之。
现代文：贺循是贺的儿子。甘卓是甘宁的曾孙。石冰派部将羌毒，率领几万军队抵抗周，周猛攻并杀了羌毒。
English: He Xun was the son of He, and Gan Zhuo was the great-grandson of Gan Ning. Shi Bing led tens of thousands of troops to resist Zhou, and Zhou attacked and killed He Xun.

古文：冰自临淮退趋寿春。
现代文：石冰从临淮赶到寿春。
English: Shi Bing rushed from Linhuai to Shuchun.

古文：征东将军刘准闻冰至，惶惧不知所为。
现代文：征东将军刘准听说石冰到了，惶恐惧怕不知所措。
English: When Liu Jun, the general of the Eastern Expedition, heard that Shih Bing had arrived, he was overwhelmed with fear.

古文：广陵度支庐江陈敏统众在寿春，谓准曰： 此等本不乐远戍，逼迫成贼，乌合之众，其势易离，敏请督帅运兵为公破之。 
现代文：广陵度支庐江人陈敏在寿春统率了一些人马，对刘准说： 石冰这些人本来是因为不愿远离故土去当兵，受到逼迫才成为盗贼的，这种乌合之众，是很容易瓦解的，请让我督率运粮兵为您打败他们。 
English: Chen Min, a native of Guanglingdu, Shijiazhuang, who led some men and horses in Shouchun, said to Liu Jun: Shi Bing, these people originally became thieves because they did not want to be soldiers far away from their homeland and were persecuted. This kind of rabble is easy to disintegrate. Please let me supervise the grain transport soldiers and defeat them for you.

古文：准乃益敏兵，使击之。
现代文：刘准于是给陈敏增派军队，让陈敏攻击石冰。
English: Liu Jun then sent more troops to Chen Min to attack Shih Bing.

古文：闰月，李雄急攻罗尚。
现代文：闰月，李雄对罗尚发起猛攻。
English: In the intercalary month, Li Xiong launched a fierce attack on Roshan.

古文：尚军无食，留牙门张罗守城。夜，由牛鞞水东走，罗开门降。
现代文：罗尚的军队没有粮食，就留下牙门张罗守城，自己夜里从牛水向东逃跑，张罗打开城门投降。
English: Luo Shang's army had no food, so he left Fangmen Zhang Luo to guard the city. He himself fled eastwards from Cowshed at night, and Zhang Luo opened the city gate and surrendered.

古文：雄入成都，军士饥甚，乃帅众就谷于郪，掘野芋而食之。
现代文：李雄进入成都，军队兵士非常饥饿，就率部众到县寻求给养，挖掘野山芋当粮吃。
English: When Li Xiong entered Chengdu, the army soldiers were very hungry, so he led the troops to the county to seek supplies, digging wild yam to eat as grain.

古文：许雄坐讨贼不进，征即罪。
现代文：李雄被判定犯了讨伐盗贼时裹足不前的罪过，朝廷召他去接受判罚。
English: Li Xiong was found guilty of dragging his feet when fighting thieves, and the court summoned him to be sentenced.

古文：安北将军、都督幽州诸军事王濬，以天下方乱，欲结援夷狄，乃以一女妻鲜卑段务勿尘，一女妻素怒延，又表以辽西郡封务勿尘为辽西公。
现代文：安北将军、都督幽州诸军事王浚，因为天下将要发生变乱，打算结交攀援夷狄，就把一个女儿嫁给鲜卑人段务勿尘，一个女儿嫁给素怒延。又上奏表把辽西郡划给段务勿尘，并封为辽西公。
English: General An Bei, the military governor of Yuzhou, and the military Wang Jun, because the world is about to be in turmoil, intending to make friends and aid the Yidi, married one daughter to a low-ranking official and another daughter to a high-ranking official. In addition, Liaoxi County was assigned to the official and named Liaoxi County.

古文：濬，沈之子也。
现代文：王浚是王沈的儿子。
English: Wang Jun is the son of Wang Shen.

古文：毛诜之死也，李睿奔五苓夷帅于陵丞，于陵丞诣李毅为睿请命，毅许之。
现代文：毛诜死后，李睿投奔了五苓夷的统帅于陵丞，于陵丞到李毅那里替李睿说情请命，李毅同意了。
English: After Mao Qian's death, Li Rui defected to Yu Lingzheng, the commander of the Wufengyi. Yu Lingzheng went to Li Yi to plead for Li Rui's life, and Li Yi agreed.

古文：睿至，毅杀之。
现代文：李睿到后，李毅把他杀了。
English: After Li Rui arrived, Li Yi killed him.

古文：于陵丞怒，帅诸夷反攻毅。
现代文：于陵丞动怒，带领各夷人部落造反攻打李毅。
English: Yu Lingzheng became angry and led the various barbarian tribes to rebel and attack Li Yi.

古文：尚书令乐广女为成都王妃，或谮诸太尉乂；乂以问广，广神色不动，徐曰： 广岂以五男易一女哉！ 
现代文：尚书令乐广的女儿是成都王司马颖的王妃，有人把这事密报太尉司马。司马问乐广，乐广神色不动，慢条斯理地说： 乐广我难道用五个男子去换一个女儿吗？ 
English: Shang Shuling said that Le Guang's daughter was the princess of Chengdu Wang Sima Ying. Someone tipped off the captain Sima about this. Sima asked Le Guang, Le Guang did not move and said slowly and reasonably: Le Guang, should I use five men to replace one daughter?

古文：乂犹疑之。
现代文：司马对他仍然心存疑忌。
English: Sima still harbors suspicions about him.

古文：孝惠皇帝中之下永兴元年春，正月，丙午，乐广以忧卒。
现代文：永兴元年永兴元年春季，正月，丙午，乐广忧郁而死。
English: Yongxing in the first year of Yongxing in the spring of the first year of Yongxing, the first month, the third day of the month, Le Guang died of melancholy.

古文：长沙厉王乂屡与大将军颖战，破之，前后斩获六、七万人。
现代文：长沙厉王司马多次与大将军司马颖开战，打败司马颖，前后杀死或俘虏六七万人。
English: Changsha Li Wang Sima repeatedly went to war with General Sima Ying, defeated Sima Ying, and killed or captured sixty or seventy thousand people.

古文：而乂未尝亏奉上之礼；城中粮食日窘，而士卒无离心。
现代文：战事紧张而司马对侍奉皇上的礼节却从不曾耽搁减少。城中粮食日益困窘，但士卒们却没有背离的想法。
English: Although the war was tense, Sima's etiquette for serving the emperor never waned. Food supplies in the city became increasingly scarce, but the soldiers had no intention of deserting.

古文：张方以为洛阳未可克，欲还长安。
现代文：张方认为洛阳不能攻克，想返回长安。
English: Zhang Fang thought that Luoyang could not be conquered and wanted to return to Chang'an.

古文：而东海王越虑事不济，癸亥，潜与殿中诸将夜收乂送别省。
现代文：这时东海王司马越在朝中考虑事情不能成功，癸亥，暗地与殿中各位将领趁夜把司马拘捕送到另外的官署。
English: At this time, the king of the East Sea, Sima Yue, began to consider in the court that the matter could not succeed, and secretly with the generals in the palace, he took advantage of the night to arrest Sima Yue and sent him to another government office.

古文：甲子，越启帝，下诏免乂官，置金墉城。
现代文：甲子，司马越启奏惠帝，下诏书罢免司马的官职，把他关在金墉城。
English: At the same time, Sima Yue issued an edict dismissing Sima from his official post and imprisoning him in Jincheng.

古文：大赦，改元。
现代文：赦免罪犯，改年号为永安。
English: An amnesty will be implemented and the year will be changed.

古文：城既开，殿中将士见外兵不盛，悔之，更谋劫出乂以拒颖。
现代文：城门打开后，殿中的官兵看到城外的军队并不强，因而感到后悔，又谋划劫出司马来抗拒司马颖。
English: After the city gate was opened, the officers and soldiers in the palace saw that the army outside the city was not strong, so they felt regret and plotted to kidnap Sima to resist Sima Ying.

古文：越惧，欲杀乂以绝众心。
现代文：司马越惶惶不安，想杀掉司马使大家断绝这个想法。
English: Sima became more and more panicked and anxious. He wanted to kill Sima to make everyone abandon this idea.

古文：黄门侍郎潘滔曰： 不可，将自有静之者。 
现代文：黄门侍郎潘滔说： 不能这样，将自然有使大家静心的人。 
English: Huangmen waiter Pan Tao said, "It can't be like this. There will naturally be someone to meditate everyone."

古文：乃遣密告张方。
现代文：就派人秘密告诉张方。
English: He sent someone to tell Zhang Fang in secret.

古文：丙寅，方取乂于金墉城，至营，炙而杀之，方军士亦为之流涕。
现代文：丙寅，张方在金墉城带走司马，到军营后，把司马用火烧烤后杀了，连张方军中的兵士也为司马流泪。
English: He Yin, Zhang Fang took away Sima in Jinlu City, and after arriving at the military camp, he grilled Sima with fire and killed him. Even the soldiers in Zhang Fang's army shed tears for Sima.

古文：公卿皆诣鄴谢罪；大将军颖入京师，复还镇于鄴。
现代文：朝廷公卿大臣都到邺城向司马颖认错道歉。大将军司马颖进入京城，后又回到邺城镇守。
English: Court nobles and ministers all went to Handan to apologize to Sima Ying. General Sima Ying entered the capital, and then returned to Handan to defend the town.

古文：诏以颖为丞相，加东海王越守尚书令。
现代文：惠帝诏令任司马颖为丞相；给东海王司马越加尚书令职。
English: Emperor Hui decreed that Sima Ying be appointed as chancellor; and the East Sea King Sima Yue was given the post of secretary.

古文：颖遣奋武将军石超等帅兵五万屯十二城门，殿中宿所忌者，颖皆杀之；悉代去宿卫兵。
现代文：司马颖派奋武将军石超等人率军队五万人驻扎在洛阳的十二个城门，朝廷中有宿怨的官员，司马颖把他们全部杀了。
English: Sima Ying sent General Shi Chao and others to lead an army of fifty thousand stationed at the twelve gates of Luoyang. There were feuding officials in the imperial court, and Sima Ying killed them all.

古文：表卢志为中书监，留鄴，参署丞相府事。
现代文：皇宫禁卫军也全部用自己的军队代替。表奏卢志任中书监，留驻邺城，管理丞相府事务。
English: The palace guards were also entirely replaced by his own troops. Lu Zhi was appointed as the middle school librarian and stayed in Shicheng to manage the affairs of the prime minister's office.

古文：河间王颙顿军于郑，为东军声援，闻刘沈兵起，还镇渭城，遣督护虞遵夔逆战于好畦。
现代文：河间王司马在郑县停兵驻扎，作为东军的声援，听说刘沈的军队进攻，就回到渭城镇守，派督护虞夔在好县迎战刘沈。
English: Kawama Wang Sima halted and stationed his troops in Zheng County, as a show of solidarity with the Eastern Army. When he heard that Liu Shen's army was attacking, he returned to the defense of the town of Lu, and sent Guo Guo Yu to meet Liu Shen in Haoxian.

古文：夔兵败，颙惧，退入长安，急召张方。方掠洛中官私奴婢万馀人而西。军中乏食，杀人杂牛马肉食之。
现代文：虞夔的军队失败，司马恐惧不安，退入长安，急忙召张方回来，张方在洛阳抢掠了官府私家的奴婢一万多人匆忙西归，军中缺乏粮食，把人杀了混在牛马肉中吃。
English: Gu Yao's army failed, Sima was afraid and uneasy, retreated to Chang'an, and hastily summoned Zhang Fang to return. Zhang Fang robbed more than ten thousand slaves and maids of the government and private households in Luoyang and hastily returned to the west. The army was short of grain, and killed people and mixed them with beef and horse meat to eat.

古文：刘沈渡渭而军，与颙战，颙屡败。
现代文：刘沈渡过渭水驻军，与司马交战，司马连连失败。
English: Liu Shen passed through the garrison of Surabaya and fought with Sima. Sima repeatedly failed.

古文：沈使安定太守衙博、功曹皇甫澹以精甲五千袭长安，入其门，力战至颙帐下。
现代文：刘沈派安定太守衙博、功曹皇甫澹带五千精兵袭击长安，攻入长安城门，奋力战斗，直至司马的军帐前。
English: Liu Shen sent five thousand elite soldiers to attack Chang'an, breaking into the Chang'an city gate and fighting hard until they reached Sima's military camp.

古文：沈兵来迟，冯翊太守张辅见其无继，引兵横击之，杀博及澹，沈兵遂败，收馀卒而退。
现代文：刘沈自己带的兵来晚了，冯翊太守张辅发现衙博的兵后继无援，带兵对这支精兵拦腰截击，杀了衙博和皇甫澹，这支精兵也就失败了，收拢残余而退去。
English: Liu Shen's own soldiers arrived late, and Zhang Fu, the empress dowager of Fengbo, found that Zibo's soldiers had no successors. He led the soldiers to intercept the elite soldiers and killed Zibo and Wang Fuxi. The elite soldiers also failed, gathered the remnants and retreated.

古文：张方遣其将敦伟夜击之，沈军惊溃，沈与麾下南走，追获之。
现代文：张方派他的部将敦伟趁夜攻打刘沈，刘沈的军队惊慌而溃散，刘沈与部下向南逃跑，被敦伟的兵追上而抓获。
English: Zhang Fang sent his general Dun Wei to attack Liu Sheng at night. Liu Sheng's army panicked and scattered. Liu Shen and his men fled south. They were caught by Dun Wei's soldiers.

古文：沈谓颙曰： 知己之惠轻，君臣之义重，沈不可以违天子之诏，量强弱以苟全。
现代文：刘沈对司马说： 朋友知己之间的恩惠微小，君臣之间的恩义重大，我不能违反天子的诏令，衡量势力的强弱来苟全性命。
English: Liu Shen said to Sima: The favor between friends and confidants is small, and the gratitude between monarchs and ministers is great. I cannot violate the edict of the Son of Heaven and measure the strength of the forces to protect my life.

古文：投袂之日，期之必死，葅醢之戮，其甘如荠。 
现代文：我在挥袖行动的时候，就预料到性命一定保不住，因此剁成肉酱的酷刑，对我来说如同品尝荠菜一样甘甜。 
English: When I went into action, I expected that my life would not be spared, so the torture of being turned into meat sauce was as sweet to me as tasting a stew.

古文：颙怒，鞭之而后腰斩。
现代文：听后司马发怒，鞭笞刘沈后又将他腰斩。
English: After hearing this, Sima became angry and whipped Liu Shen before beheading him.

古文：新平太守江夏张光数为沈画计，颙执而诘之，光曰： 刘雍州不用鄙计，故令王得有今日！ 
现代文：新平太守江夏人张光多次为刘沈出谋划策，司马抓住他而诘问，张光说： 雍州太守刘沈没有采纳我的计策，所以使得大王您得以有今天！ 
English: Zhang Guang, the Xinping Empress Dowager of Jiangxia, repeatedly made plans for Liu Shen, Sima caught him and interrogated him, Zhang Guang said: Yangzhou Empress Dowager Liu Shen did not adopt my strategy, so the great king made you have today!

古文：颙壮之。引与欢宴，表为右卫司马。
现代文：司马认为他壮烈，带他一起参加盛宴，表奏他为右司马。
English: Sima thought he was magnificent and took him to the feast with him, portraying him as the right-hand man of Sima.

古文：罗尚逃至江阳，遣使表状，诏尚权统巴东、巴郡、涪陵以供军赋。
现代文：罗尚逃到江阳，派使者向朝廷奏报情况，朝廷诏令罗尚暂且统领巴东、巴郡、涪陵，来供应军事给养。
English: Luo Shang fled to Jiangyang and sent an envoy to report the situation to the imperial court. The imperial court ordered Luo Shang to temporarily take control of Badong, Ba County and Fuling to supply military supplies.

古文：尚遣别驾李兴诣镇南将军刘弘求粮，弘纲纪以运道阻远，且荆州自空乏，欲以零陵米五千斛与尚。
现代文：罗尚派遣别驾李兴向镇南将军刘弘求助粮食，刘弘的参佐考虑到运粮道路遥远，加之荆州本地也粮食紧张，就想从零陵拨出五千斛米给罗尚。
English: Luo Shang sent his second-in-command Li Xing to the Zhenan general Liu Hong to ask for grain. Liu Hong's counselor, considering the long distance of grain transportation and the shortage of grain in Jingzhou, wanted to allocate five thousand glutinous rice to Luo Shang.

古文：弘曰： 天下一家，彼此无异，吾今给之，则无西顾之忧矣。 
现代文：刘弘说： 天下是一家，互相不分彼此，我现在供给他，就没有照顾担心西边的忧虑了。 
English: Liu Hong said: The world is one family, no matter each other, I now provide for him, there is no need to worry about the worries of the West.

古文：遂以三万斛结之，尚赖以自存。
现代文：于是给罗尚三万斛米，罗尚靠这些米得以生存。
English: So he gave Roshan 30,000 baht of rice, and Roshan was able to survive on this rice.

古文：李兴愿留为弘参军，弘夺其手版而遣之。
现代文：李兴想留下来作刘弘的参军，刘弘将他来参见用的手版夺走而赶他回去。
English: Li Xing wanted to stay behind to join Liu Hong's army, but Liu Hong took away the handprint he had used to join the army and forced him to go back.

古文：又遣治中何松领兵屯巴东为尚后继。
现代文：刘弘还派治中何松带兵驻扎在巴东作为罗尚的后援。
English: Liu Hong also sent Zhizhong He Song with soldiers stationed in Badong as Luo Shang's backup.

古文：于时流民有荆州者十馀万户，羁旅贫乏，多为盗贼，弘大给其田及种粮，擢其贤才，随资叙用，流民遂安。
现代文：当时在荆州的流民有十多万户，寄居他乡十分贫困，大多成为盗贼，刘弘分给他们大批田地和种籽，提拔其中贤德的人才，按照资质任用，流民于是安定下来。
English: At that time, there were more than one hundred thousand households of exiles in Jingzhou. They were very poor, and most of them became thieves. Liu Hong gave them a large number of fields and seeds, promoted the talents among them, and appointed them according to their qualifications. The exiles then settled down.

古文：二月，乙酉，丞相颖表废皇后羊氏，幽于金墉城，废皇太子覃为清河王。
现代文：二月，乙酉，丞相司马颖表奏废黜皇后羊氏，幽禁在金墉城，废黜皇太子司马覃为清河王。
English: In February, in Acetylene, the prime minister, Sima Ying, played the role of dethroning the queen, Yang Shi, and was imprisoned in Jinyuan City, and dethroned the crown prince, Sima Yu, as the king of Qinghe.

古文：陈敏与石冰战数十合，冰众十倍于敏，敏击之，所向皆捷，遂与周𤣱合攻冰于建康。
现代文：陈敏与石冰交战几十次，石冰的人数是陈敏的十倍，但陈敏攻打石冰，每次都获得胜利，于是与周在建康联合进攻石冰。
English: Chen Min fought with Shih Bing dozens of times. The number of Shih Bing was ten times that of Chen Min. However, Chen Min attacked Shih Bing and won every time. Therefore, he and Zhou Zaijiankang jointly attacked Shih Bing.

古文：三月，冰北走，投封云，云司马张统斩冰及云以降，扬、徐二州平。
现代文：三月，石冰失败逃窜，投奔封云，封云的司马张统杀掉石冰和封云后投降，扬、徐二州于是平定。
English: In March, Shih Bing failed to escape and fled to Fengyun. Zhang Tong, the Sima of Fengyun, killed Shih Bing and Fengyun and then surrendered. Yang and Xu Erzhou were then pacified.

古文：周𤣱、贺循皆散众还家，不言功赏。
现代文：周、贺循都遣散部众回家，不提功劳封赏。
English: Zhou and He Xun both dismissed their subordinates and went home, without mentioning the award.

古文：朝廷以陈敏为广陵相。
现代文：朝廷让陈敏担任广陵相。
English: The imperial court appointed Chen Min as Guangling minister.

古文：河间王颙表请立丞相颖为太弟。
现代文：河间大司马表奏请朝廷立丞相司马颖为皇太弟。
English: Kawama Daishi Mahozo asked the Imperial Court to appoint Prime Minister Ma Ying as the younger brother of the Emperor.

古文：戊申，诏以颖为皇太弟，都督中外诸军事，丞相如故。
现代文：戊申，惠帝下诏立司马颖为皇太弟，兼任都督中外诸军事，并保留丞相职。
English: According to Wu Shen, Emperor Hui decreed that Sima Ying would be the crown prince's younger brother, and he also served as the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, and retained the post of chancellor.

古文：大赦。
现代文：宣布大赦。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：乘舆服御皆迁于鄴，制度一如魏武帝故事。
现代文：皇太弟的车马及服饰用品都迁到邺城，制度就像魏武帝曹操那时一样。
English: The imperial prince's chariots, horses and clothing supplies were all moved to Lucheng, and the system was the same as that of Emperor Cao Cao of Wei.

古文：以颙为大宰、大都督、雍州牧；前太傅刘实为太尉。实以老，固让不拜。
现代文：让司马担任太宰、大都督、雍州牧；前太傅刘担任太尉，刘声称年纪已老，坚决辞让不去就职。
English: Let Sima serve as Dazai, grand governor, and Yongzhou magistrate; former Taifu Liu served as lieutenant, Liu claimed that he was too old and resolutely refused to take office.

古文：太弟颖僭侈日甚，劈幸用事，大失众望。
现代文：皇太弟司马颖超越本分奢侈一天比一天严重，所宠幸溺爱的小人执掌权力，令大家十分失望。
English: The extravagance of Sima Ying, the younger brother of the crown prince, in overstepping his duty is becoming more and more serious day by day. The favored and coddled villain is holding power, making everyone very disappointed.

古文：司空东海王越，与右卫将军陈眕，及长沙王故将上官已等谋讨之。
现代文：司空东海王司马越与右卫将军陈以及长沙王司马过去的部将上官巳等谋划讨伐司马颖。
English: Sikyong Donghai Wang Sima Yue and Right Guard General Chen, as well as Changsha Wang Sima's former commander Shangguan Si, planned to attack Sima Ying.

古文：秋，七月，丙申朔，陈眕勒兵入云龙门，以诏召三公百僚及殿中，戒严讨颖，石超奔鄴。
现代文：秋季，七月，丙申朔，陈率兵攻入云龙门，用皇帝诏书召集三公及群臣与三部众将领，戒严征讨司马颖。石超奔向邺城。
English: In the autumn, in July, Zi Shenshuo and Chen led the troops to break into Yunlongmen, and used the emperor's edict to convene the three princes and ministers and three generals to impose martial law to fight Sima Ying. Shi Chao rushed to Lucheng.

古文：戊戌，大赦，复皇后羊氏及太子覃。
现代文：戊戌，宣布大赦，恢复皇后羊氏和皇太子司马覃的地位。
English: He declared an amnesty and restored the status of Empress Yang and Crown Prince Sima.

古文：己亥，越奉帝北征。以越为大都督。
现代文：己亥，司马越侍奉惠帝向北征伐，司马越担任大都督。
English: At the same time, Sima Yue served Emperor Hui in the Northern Expedition, and Sima Yue served as the Grand Governor.

古文：征前侍中嵇绍诣行在。
现代文：征调前侍中嵇绍到惠帝身边任职。
English: Prior to the transfer, the chamberlain, Jinshao, took up a position next to Hui Di.

古文：侍中秦准谓绍曰： 今往，安危难测，卿有佳马乎？ 绍正色曰： 臣子扈卫乘舆，死生以之，佳马何为！ 
现代文：侍中秦准对嵇绍说： 现在随行，安危难以预料，你有好马吗？ 嵇绍神色严肃地说： 臣子护卫皇帝御车，死与生都要忠于职守，要好马干什么？ 
English: Attendant Qin Jun said to Yan Shao: Now you are accompanying, it is difficult to predict the safety, do you have a good horse? Yan Shao looked serious and said: The vassal guards the emperor's carriage, death and life must be faithful to duty, what do you want a good horse for?

古文：越檄召四方兵，赴者云集，比至安阳，众十馀万，鄴中震恐。
现代文：司马越发布檄文召集各地军队，奉诏赶来的队伍云集，行军到安阳，人数有十多万，邺城震惊惶恐。
English: Sima Yue issued an imperial edict to call up troops from all over the country, and the troops that arrived after the edict gathered and marched to Anyang. There were more than one hundred thousand people, and Lucheng was shocked and frightened.

古文：颖会群僚问计，东安王繇曰： 天子亲征，宜释甲缟素出迎请罪。 
现代文：司马颖召集幕僚参佐的询问计策，东安王司马繇说： 天子亲自征伐，应当放下武器身穿白色衣服出去迎接，并向天子请罪。 
English: Sima Ying called together staff officers to inquire about the strategy, and Dongan Wang Sima Yu said: the Son of Heaven himself should go to the battlefield, he should put down his weapons and wear white clothes to go out to meet the Son of Heaven, and ask the Son of Heaven for forgiveness.

古文：颖不从，遣石超帅众五万拒战。
现代文：司马颖不同意，派石超率五万人抵御作战。
English: Sima Ying disagreed and sent more than 50,000 troops to resist the battle.

古文：折冲将军乔智明劝颖奉迎乘舆，颖怒曰： 卿名晓事，投身事孤；今主上为群小所逼，卿奈何欲使孤束手就刑邪！ 
现代文：折冲将军乔智明劝说司马颖尊奉迎接惠帝御驾，司马颖发怒说： 你空有知晓事理的名声，投身到我身边做事。现在皇上被小人们逼迫，你为什么想让我捆绑住自己的手脚去接受刑罚呢？ 
English: General Orichon Qiao Zhiming persuaded Sima Ying Rongfeng to meet Hui Di's carriage, Sima Ying angrily said: You have a reputation of knowing the truth, and devote yourself to working with me. Now that the emperor is being persecuted by the little people, why do you want me to bind my hands and feet to accept the punishment?

古文：陈眕二弟匡、规自鄴赴行在，云鄴中皆已离散，由是不甚设备。
现代文：陈的两个弟弟陈匡、陈规从邺城赶到惠帝身边，说邺城里已经分崩离析，因此大家都不怎么安排防备。
English: Chen's two younger brothers, Chen Kuang and Chen Gui, rushed to Hui Di's side from Lucheng, saying that Lucheng had fallen apart, so everyone was not very prepared.

古文：己未，石超军奄至，乘舆败绩于荡阴，帝伤颊，中三矢，百官侍御皆散。
现代文：己未，石超的军队忽然杀到，惠帝的兵马在荡阴失败，惠帝面颊负伤，中了三箭，百官和侍卫全部溃逃。
English: Before long, Shi Chao's army suddenly arrived, Hui Di's soldiers and horses failed in the shade, Hui Di's cheek was injured and he was hit by three arrows, and all the officials and guards fled.

古文：嵇绍朝服，下马登辇，以身卫帝，兵人引绍于辕中斫之。
现代文：嵇绍身穿上朝的礼服，下马登上御车，用身体护卫着惠帝，兵士把嵇绍拉到车辕上就砍。
English: Gong Shao put on the morning dress, dismounted and boarded the coach, escorting Hui Di with his body. The soldiers pulled Gong Shao onto the coach and cut him.

古文：帝曰： 忠臣也，勿杀！ 
现代文：惠帝说： 这是忠臣，不要杀！ 
English: Hui Di said: This is a loyal subject, don't kill him!

古文：对曰： 奉太弟令，惟不犯陛下一人耳！ 
现代文：兵士回答说： 奉皇太弟的命令，只是不侵犯陛下一人而已。 
English: The soldier replied, "I am following the order of the emperor's younger brother, but I will not violate your majesty alone.

古文：遂杀绍。血溅帝衣。
现代文：于是杀了嵇绍，鲜血溅到惠帝的衣服上。
English: So he killed Gong Shao, and the blood spattered onto Hui Di's clothes.

古文：帝堕于草中，亡六玺。
现代文：惠帝从车上掉到草丛中，丢失了六枚御玺。
English: Hui Di fell out of the car into the grass and lost six of her brooches.

古文：石超奉帝幸其营，帝馁甚，超进水，左右奉秋桃。
现代文：石超侍奉惠帝到自己兵营中，惠帝非常饥饿，石超送上水，左右随从奉上秋桃。
English: Shi Chao served Hui Di to his barracks. Hui Di was very hungry. Shi Chao gave him some water, and his attendants gave him some autumn peaches.

古文：颖遣卢志迎帝；庚申，入鄴。大赦，改元曰建武。
现代文：司马颖派卢志迎接惠帝。庚申，惠帝进入邺城，宣布大赦，改年号为建武。
English: Sima Ying sent Lu Zhi to meet Hui Di. According to Geng, Hui Di entered Lucheng, announced an amnesty, and changed the year name to Jianwu.

古文：左右欲浣帝衣。帝曰： 嵇侍中血，勿浣也！ 
现代文：随从想为惠帝洗衣服，惠帝说： 有侍中嵇绍的血，不要洗了！ 
English: When a follower wanted to wash clothes for Hui Di, Hui Di said, "The blood of the chambermaid Zou Shao is on the clothes, don't wash them!"

古文：陈眕、上官巳等奉太子覃守洛阳。
现代文：陈、上官巳等人侍奉太子司马覃留守洛阳。
English: Chen, Shangguan Mi and others stayed in Luoyang to serve Prince Sima Yao.

古文：司空越奔下邳，徐州都督东平王楙不纳，越径还东海。
现代文：司空司马越逃奔下邳，徐州都督东平王司马不接纳，司马越就直接回到东海。
English: Sima Yue, the governor of Xuzhou, refused to accept Dongping Wang Sima, and Sima Yue returned directly to the East Sea.

古文：太弟颖以越兄北弟宗室之望，下令招之，越不应命。
现代文：皇太弟司马颖因为司马越兄弟在宗室中享有声望，下令招他来，司马越没有接受命令应召。
English: Sima Ying, the younger brother of the crown prince, ordered Sima Yue to be summoned because the brothers enjoyed prestige in the imperial family. Sima Yue did not accept the order to be summoned.

古文：前奋威将军孙惠上书劝越邀结籓方，同奖王室。越以惠为记室参军，与参谋议。
现代文：前奋威将军孙惠给司马越去信劝说司马越团结藩王，共同辅助王室，司马越让孙惠担任记室参军，让他参与计策的谋划商讨。
English: Former Tengwei general Sun Hui sent a letter to Sima Yue to persuade Sima Yue to unite with the king of the domain and jointly assist the royal family. Sima Yue asked Sun Hui to serve as a secretary to join the army and let him participate in the planning and discussion of strategies.

古文：北军中候苟晞奔范阳王虓，虓承制以晞行兗州刺史。
现代文：北军中候苟投奔范阳王司马，司马按照朝廷旨意让苟担任兖州刺史。
English: In the Northern Army, Fanyang Wang Sima joined the Northern Army, and Sima, in accordance with the will of the imperial court, allowed Gou to serve as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：初，三王之起兵讨赵王伦也，王浚拥众挟两端，禁所部士民不得赴三王召募。
现代文：当初，三个亲王发兵讨伐赵王司马伦，王浚辖所部脚踩两只船，禁止所属的官员百姓去应三亲王的召募。
English: At first, the three princes sent troops to fight against Zhao Wang Simaren, and the Wang Dung jurisdiction department stepped on two boats, forbidding the officials and people belonging to it to respond to the recruitment of the three princes.

古文：太弟颖欲讨之而未能，濬心亦欲图颖。
现代文：皇太弟司马颖想去讨伐王浚而没有能成行，王浚内心也想搞掉司马颖。
English: Empress Dowager's younger brother Sima Ying wanted to fight Wang Jun but was unable to do so. Wang Jun also wanted to get rid of Sima Ying.

古文：颖以右司马和演为幽州刺史，密使杀浚。
现代文：司马颖让右司马和演任幽州刺史，派他秘密杀掉王浚。
English: Sima Ying let the right Sima and the actor Yuzhou stabbing history, and sent him to secretly kill Wang Jun.

古文：演与乌桓单于审登谋与浚游蓟城南清泉，因而图之。
现代文：和演与乌桓单于审登谋划，在与王浚一起到蓟城南部清泉游玩时，伺机杀他。
English: He and Wu Huan planned to kill Wang Jun while they were visiting a spring in the southern part of Lucheng.

古文：会天暴雨，兵器沾湿，不果而还。
现代文：那天赶上天降暴雨，兵器被雨水打湿，徒劳而返。
English: On that day, torrential rain fell in the sky, the weapons were wet with rainwater, and they returned in vain.

古文：审登以为浚得天助，乃以演谋告浚。
现代文：审登认为这是王浚得到上天佑助，就把和演的阴谋告诉了王浚。
English: The judge thought that this was because Wang Jun was blessed by God, and he told Wang Jun about He Yuan's plot.

古文：浚与审登密严兵，约并州刺史东赢公腾共围演，杀之，自领幽州营兵。
现代文：王浚与审登秘密训练军队，约并州刺史东嬴公司马腾一起围攻和演，把他杀掉了。王浚自己接管了幽州所辖的军队。
English: Wang Jun secretly trained the army with Xudeng, and made an agreement with Ma Teng, the governor of Shidong County, to besiege and exercise together, and killed him. Wang Jun himself took over the army under the jurisdiction of Yuzhou.

古文：腾，越之弟也。
现代文：司马腾是司马越的弟弟。
English: Sima Teng is Sima Yue's younger brother.

古文：太弟颖称诏征浚，浚与鲜卑段务勿尘、乌桓羯硃及东嬴公腾同起兵讨颖，颖遣北中郎将王斌及石超击之。
现代文：皇太弟假称诏令征召王浚，王浚与鲜卑人段务勿尘，乌桓人羯朱以及东嬴公司马腾共同起兵讨伐司马颖，司马颖派北中郎将王斌以及石超迎击他们。
English: If the crown prince ordered Wang Jun to be conscripted, Wang Jun and his subordinates should not hesitate to do so. Wuhuan's Yu Zhu and Donglu's Ma Teng jointly raised an army to fight against Sima Ying. Sima Ying sent North Middle Brother Wang Bin and Shi Chao to meet them.

古文：太弟颖怨东安王繇前议，八月，戊辰，收繇，杀之。
现代文：皇太弟司马颖对东安王司马繇前次让他向惠帝投降的议论十分怨恨。八月，戊辰，拘捕司马繇，把他杀了。
English: Empress Dowager's brother Sima Ying was very resentful of Dongan King Sima Yu's previous suggestion that he surrender to Emperor Hui. In August, Wu Chen arrested Sima Yu and killed him.

古文：初，繇兄琅邪恭王觐薨，子睿嗣。
现代文：当初，司民繇的哥哥琅邪恭王司马觐去世，儿子司马睿继承爵位。
English: At the beginning, Sima Yan, the elder brother of Sima Minjun, died, and his son Sima Rui inherited the title.

古文：睿沈敏有度量，为左将军，与东海参军王导善。
现代文：司马睿沉毅机敏而又胸怀宽光广，任左将军，与东海参军王导要好。
English: Sima Rui and Shen Yi are astute and broad-minded. He is a left-wing general, and is better than Wang Du, who joined the East China Sea army.

古文：导，敦之从父弟也；识量清远，以朝廷多故，每劝睿之国。
现代文：王导是王敦的叔伯弟弟，见识胸怀清明广远，因为朝廷变故较多，经常劝说司马睿返回封国。
English: Wang Du was the uncle and younger brother of Wang Dun. He saw that Wang Du's mind was clear and far-reaching, and because there were many changes in the imperial court, he often persuaded Sima Rui to return to the feudal state.

古文：及繇死，睿从帝在鄴，恐及祸，将逃归。
现代文：等到司马繇被杀，司马睿在邺城侍从惠帝，害怕遭到灾祸，打算逃回去。
English: After Sima Yao was killed, Sima Rui, who had been serving Emperor Hui in Lucheng, was afraid of disaster and planned to flee back home.

古文：颖先敕诸关津，无得出贵人；睿至河阳，为津吏所止。
现代文：司马颖事先命令各关卡渡口，不许放贵族出城。司马睿到河阳，被渡口的官吏拦住。
English: Sima Ying ordered in advance that the aristocrats should not be allowed to leave the city. Sima Rui went to Kheyang and was stopped by the officials at the ferry.

古文：从者宋兴自后来，以鞭拂睿而笑曰： 舍长，官禁贵人，汝亦被拘邪？ 
现代文：司马睿的随从宋典从后面赶来，用鞭子扫拂司马睿，笑着说： 舍长，朝廷禁止贵族出去，怎么你也被拘在这儿呀？ 
English: Sima Rui's follower Song Sheng came from behind, whipped Sima Rui with a whip, and said with a smile: Mayor, the court forbids nobles to go out, so why are you detained here?

古文：吏乃听过。
现代文：官吏就让他们过去了。
English: It was only then that the officials allowed the former emperor to pass.

古文：至洛阳，迎太妃夏侯氏俱归国。
现代文：到洛阳，接上太妃夏侯氏一起返回封国。
English: Arrived in Luoyang, and returned to the fief together with Tofei Xia Hou.

古文：丞相从事中郎王澄发孟玖奸利事，劝太弟颖诛之，颖从之。
现代文：丞相从事中郎王澄揭发孟玖用邪恶的手段谋取私利，劝说太弟司马颖把他杀掉，司马颖批准。
English: The chancellor engaged the middle brother Wang Cheng to expose Meng Yao's use of evil means to seek personal gain, persuaded the elder brother Sima Ying to kill him, and Sima Ying approved.

古文：上官巳在洛阳，残暴纵横。
现代文：上官巳在洛阳，残暴横行。
English: The superior officer was in Luoyang, and brutality was rampant.

古文：守河南尹周馥，浚之从父弟也，与司隶满奋等谋诛之。事泄，奋等死，馥走，得免。
现代文：任河南尹的周馥，是周浚的堂弟，与司隶满奋等人谋划杀掉上官巳，走露了风声，满奋等人被杀，周馥逃走，得以免死。
English: Zhou Qian, who held the title of Yin in Henan Province, was Zhou Jun's cousin. He and his subordinate Man Fen and others plotted to kill the high-ranking official. Word got out, Man Fen and others were killed, and Zhou Qian escaped and was able to avoid death.

古文：司空越之讨太弟颖也，太宰颙遣右将军、冯翊太守张方将兵二万救之，闻帝已入鄴，因命方镇洛阳。
现代文：司空司马越征讨皇太弟司马颖，太宰司马派右将军、冯翊太守张方率两万人的军队前去救援，听说惠帝已进入邺城，就命令张方去镇守洛阳。
English: Siku Sima Yue enlisted the help of the prince's younger brother, Sima Ying, and the grand vizier, Sima, sent the right-hand general, Feng Yu, and Zhang Fang, the grand tutor, to go to the rescue with an army of 20,000 men. When he heard that Hui Di had entered Luoyang, he ordered Zhang Fang to defend Luoyang.

古文：巳与别将苗愿拒之，大败而还。
现代文：上官巳与另一支军队的将军苗愿抗拒张方，惨败，回到城里。
English: Shangguan and another army's general Miao were willing to resist Zhang's side, failed miserably, and returned to the city.

古文：太子覃夜袭巳、愿，巳、愿出走；方入洛阳。
现代文：太子司马覃夜袭上官巳、苗愿，上官巳、苗愿出城逃走，张方进入洛阳。
English: Prince Sima Ye attacked Shangguan Si and Miao Wei at night, Shangguan Si and Miao Wei fled the city, and Zhang Fang entered Luoyang.

古文：覃于广阳门迎方而拜，方下车扶止之。复废覃及羊后。
现代文：司马覃在广阳门迎着张方叩拜，张方下车把他扶住不让他叩拜，再一次废黜了司马覃和羊皇后。
English: Sima Yi bowed to Zhang Fang at the Guangyang Gate. Zhang Fang got off the train and held him down to prevent him from bowing. Once again, Sima Yi and the Queen of Sheep were dethroned.

古文：初，太弟颖表匈奴左贤王刘渊为冠军将军，监五部军事，使将兵在鄴。
现代文：当初，皇太弟表奏匈奴左贤王刘渊任冠军将军，监理五部匈奴的军政事务，让他在邺城统领军队。
English: At the beginning, the emperor's younger brother appointed Liu Yuan, the Hun king Zuoxian, as the champion general to supervise the military and political affairs of the five Huns, and let him lead the army in Lucheng.

古文：渊子聪，骁勇绝人，博涉经史，善属文，弯弓三百斤；弱冠游京师，名士莫不与交。
现代文：刘渊的儿子刘聪，骁勇超人，博览经史典籍，善于写文章，能用三百斤张力的大弓，年轻时到京都游玩，京都名士没有不与他结交的。
English: Liu Yuan's son, Liu Cong, was a superhuman warrior, well-versed in classics, good at writing articles, able to use a large bow with a tension of three hundred pounds, and visited Kyoto when he was young. There was no famous person in Kyoto who did not befriend him.

古文：颖以聪为积弩将军。
现代文：司马颖让他任积弩将军。
English: Sima Ying appointed him as General Jiejun.

古文：渊从祖右贤王宣谓其族人曰： 自汉亡以来，我单于徒有虚号，无复尺土；自馀王侯，降同编户。
现代文：刘渊堂祖父右贤王刘宣对他的族人说： 自从汉朝灭亡以来，我们的单于都是徒有虚名，不再有一寸土地。其余的王侯，地位却降到百姓一样。
English: Liu Yuan-tang's grandfather, King Uxian Liu Xuan, said to his people: "Since the fall of the Han Dynasty, everything we have is a false name, and we no longer have an inch of land. The remaining princes have been reduced to the same status as the common people.

古文：今吾众虽衰，犹不减二万，奈何敛手受役，奄过百年！
现代文：现在我们大家虽然衰落，但也在两万人以上，怎么能伏首贴耳地充当役夫，这样匆匆地过了一百年！
English: Now, although we are all in decline, there are also more than twenty thousand of us. How can we act as servants with our heads down, in such a hurry to pass a hundred years!

古文：左贤王英武超世，天苟不欲兴匈奴，必不虚生此人也。
现代文：左贤王英俊威武超凡绝伦，上天如果不想使匈奴兴盛，也就一定不会白白生出这个人。
English: Zuo Xian Wang is a handsome, powerful and extraordinary martial artist. If Heaven does not want the Xiongnu to prosper, it will not give birth to this person in vain.

古文：今司马氏骨肉相残，四海鼎沸，复呼韩邪之业，此其时矣！ 
现代文：现在司马氏骨肉亲人互相残杀，四海动乱如同鼎中沸腾的开水，光复呼韩邪的事业，这正是时候！ 
English: Now Sima's flesh and blood relatives are killing each other, the turmoil in the four seas is like boiling water in a pot, and it is time to call back the evil cause of Han!

古文：乃相与谋，推渊为大单于，使其党呼延攸诣鄴告之。
现代文：于是互相谋划，推举刘渊为大单于，并派他的党羽呼延攸到邺城去告知他。
English: So they plotted with each other to nominate Liu Yuan as the Great Monk, and sent his followers to Huaneng to inform him.

古文：渊白颖，请归会葬，颖弗许。
现代文：刘渊告诉司马颖，请求回乡参与葬礼，司马颖不允许。
English: Liu Yuan told Sima Ying that Sima Ying was not allowed to return to her hometown to attend the funeral.

古文：渊令攸先归，告宣等使招集五部及杂胡，声言助颖，实欲叛之。
现代文：刘渊让呼延攸先回去，通知刘宣等人让他们召集五部匈奴以及各小民族，声称援助司马颖，实际打算背叛他。
English: Liu Yuan let Huyan You go back first and told Liu Xuan and others to let them gather five Xiongnu and various small ethnic groups, claiming to help Sima Ying and actually planning to betray him.

古文：及王浚、东嬴公腾起兵，渊说颖曰： 今二镇跋扈，众十馀万，恐非宿卫及近郡士众所能御也，请为殿下还说五部，以赴国难。 
现代文：等到王浚、东嬴公司马腾起兵，刘渊对司马颖说： 现在幽、并二州的镇将猖獗，率众十多万人，恐怕不是禁卫军和附近郡县的军队可能抵御的，我请求为殿下回去召集五部匈奴人马赴救国难。 
English: When Wang Jun and Donglu Company's Ma Teng raised an army, Liu Yuan said to Sima Ying: Now, the towns of the two states will be rampant, led by more than one hundred thousand people. I am afraid that it is not possible for the Imperial Guard and the troops of the nearby counties to resist. I request that you go back and gather five Huns to save the country.

古文：颖曰： 五部之众，果可发否？
现代文：司马颖说： 五部匈奴的人马，真能够发动吗？
English: Sima Ying said: Is it really possible to mobilize five Huns?

古文：就能发之，鲜卑、乌桓，未易当也。
现代文：即使能发动他们，鲜卑、乌桓，也不是轻易能阻挡的。
English: Even if they can be set in motion, it is not easy to stop them.

古文：吾欲奉乘舆还洛阳以避其锋，徐传檄天下，以逆顺制之，君意何如？ 
现代文：我想侍奉皇帝还归洛阳，避开他们的锋芒，再慢慢向天下发布檄文，用正义制服邪恶的道理说服他们。
English: I want to serve the emperor and return to Luoyang, avoid their sharpness, and then slowly issue an imperial edict to the world, and use justice to subdue evil to convince them.

古文：渊曰： 殿下武皇帝之子，有大勋于王室，威恩远著，四海之内，孰不愿为殿下尽死力者！
现代文：您认为怎么样？ 刘渊说： 殿下是武帝的儿子，又对王室建立了大功勋，威严恩德远近闻名，四海之内，有谁不愿意为殿下拼死尽力呢？
English: What do you think? Liu Yuan said: His highness is the son of Emperor Wu, and he has made great contributions to the royal family. His majesty and benevolence are known far and wide. Within the four seas, who would not be willing to die for his highness?

古文：何难发之！
现代文：有什么难以发动的！
English: What is difficult to start!

古文：王浚竖子，东嬴疏属，岂能与殿下争衡邪！
现代文：王浚是小人，东赢公是关系疏远的皇亲，怎能与殿下争比高低呢！
English: Wang Jun is a villain, Dong Ying Gong is an estranged imperial relative, how can he compete with His Royal Highness!

古文：殿下一发鄴宫，示弱于人，洛阳不可得而至；虽至洛阳，威权不复在殿下也。
现代文：殿下如果离开邺城宫殿，那就是向人示弱，洛阳也不能进去了，即使到了洛阳，殿下也不会再有威势权力了。
English: If His Royal Highness leaves the Pengcheng Palace, it will be a sign of weakness to others, and he will not be able to enter Luoyang. Even if he arrives in Luoyang, His Royal Highness will no longer have any power.

古文：愿殿下抚勉士众，靖以镇之，渊请为殿下以二部摧东嬴，三部枭王浚，二竖之首，可指日而悬也。 
现代文：希望殿下抚慰勉励部众，使他们安定镇静，我请求为殿下用两部匈奴摧毁东赢公，三部匈奴去杀王浚，高悬二个小人的头颅，指日可待。 
English: I hope that Your Royal Highness will soothe, encourage, and calm down the crowd. I request that Your Royal Highness use two Xiongnu to destroy Dongying, three Xiongnu to kill Wangjun, and hang the heads of two villains high. I can't wait.

古文：颖悦，拜渊为北单于、参丞相军事。
现代文：司马颖非常高兴，任命刘渊担任北单于、参丞相军事等职。
English: Sima Ying was very pleased and appointed Liu Yuan to the position of Bei Shan Yu, and to the post of Sanzhong Minister of Military Affairs.

古文：渊至左国城，刘宣等上大单于之号，二旬之间，有众五万，都于离石，以聪为鹿蠡王。
现代文：刘渊到左国城，刘宣等人给他封上大单于的称号，二十天之间，有了五万人，建都离石县，封刘聪为鹿蠡王。
English: Liu Yuan went to the city of Zuo Guo, and Liu Xuan and others gave him the title of the Great Monk. Within twenty days, there were fifty thousand people, the capital was built away from Shixian, and Liu Cong was crowned the King of Deers.

古文：遣左于陆王宏帅精骑五千，会颖将王粹拒东嬴公腾。
现代文：派左於陆王刘宏，带领五千精锐骑兵，会同司马颖的部将王粹阻击东嬴公司马腾。
English: He sent Liu Hong, the king of Lu, to the left, leading five thousand elite cavalry, together with Wang Zi, the commander of Sima Ying, to block the Dongguan company of Ma Teng.

古文：粹已为腾所败，宏无及而归。
现代文：王粹已被司马腾打败，刘宏无功而返。
English: Wang Zi has been defeated by Sima Teng, Liu Hong has returned without success.

古文：王浚、东嬴公腾合兵击王斌，大破之。
现代文：王浚、东嬴公司马腾联合军队去攻打王斌，把王斌打得惨败。
English: Wang Jun and Ma Teng of the Dongguan Company joined forces to attack Wang Bin, and Wang Bin was defeated.

古文：浚以主簿祁弘为前锋，败石超于平棘，乘胜进军。
现代文：王浚让主簿祁弘担任前锋，在平棘县打败石超，祁弘乘胜进军。
English: Wang Jun let the main book, Zou Hong, serve as the striker, defeat Shi Chao in Pingxian County, and Zou Hong marched into the victory.

古文：候骑至鄴，鄴中大震，百僚奔走，土卒分散。
现代文：侦察骑兵到了邺城，邺城城里非常震惊，文武百官四处奔逃，士卒离散。
English: The reconnaissance cavalry arrived in Lucheng. The city of Lucheng was very shocked. Hundreds of officers and men fled everywhere, and the soldiers dispersed.

古文：卢志劝颖奉帝还洛阳。
现代文：卢志规劝司马颖侍奉惠帝返回洛阳。
English: Lu Zhige advised Sima Ying to serve Hui Di and return to Luoyang.

古文：时甲士尚有万五千人，志夜部分，至晓将发，而程太妃恋鄴不欲去，颖狐疑未决。
现代文：当时还有一万五千武装士卒。卢志连夜部署分派，到早晨将要出发，但程太妃留恋邺城不愿离开，司马颖也犹豫不决。
English: At that time, there were still fifteen thousand armed soldiers. Lu Zhi deployed the detachment overnight and was about to leave in the morning, but Cheng Taifei was reluctant to leave Shicheng, and Sima Ying also hesitated.

古文：俄而众溃，颖遂将帐下数十骑与志奉帝御犊车南奔洛阳。
现代文：一会儿大家溃散，司马颖于是连忙带领军帐下的几十个骑兵与卢志侍奉着惠帝登上犊车，向南逃往洛阳。
English: After a while, everyone dispersed. Sima Ying then hurriedly led dozens of cavalry under the military account and Lu Zhi to serve Hui Di, boarded the carriage, and fled south to Luoyang.

古文：仓猝上下无赍，中黄门被囊中赍私钱三千，诏贷之，于道中买饭，夜则御中黄门布被，食以瓦盆。
现代文：仓猝得君臣上下都没有带钱，中黄门行李中藏着三千私人的钱，诏令借他的这些钱，在路上买饭，夜里惠帝就用中黄门的布被，吃饭时使用瓦盆。
English: The emperor and his ministers were in a hurry and did not bring any money with them. Zhonghuangmen had three thousand private money hidden in his luggage. The emperor ordered to borrow this money from him to buy food on the way. In the night, Hui Di used Zhonghuangmen's quilt and used a crock pot when eating.

古文：至温，将谒陵，帝丧履，纳从者之履，下拜流涕。
现代文：到达温县，将要拜谒祖宗陵墓，惠帝把鞋走丢子，就把侍从的鞋要来穿上，到陵墓前流着泪下拜。
English: When he arrived in Wen County, he wanted to pay homage to the mausoleum of Emperor Xizong. Hui Di took off his shoes and put on his servant's shoes. He went to the mausoleum with tears streaming down his face.

古文：及济河，张方自洛阳遣其子罴帅骑三千，以所乘车奉迎帝。
现代文：过黄河时，张方派他儿子张罴带领三千骑兵，用自己的车乘侍奉迎接惠帝。
English: When crossing the Yellow River, Zhang Fang sent his son Zhang Jun to lead three thousand cavalry and use his own car to take servants to meet Hui Di.

古文：至芒山下，方自帅万馀骑迎帝。
现代文：行到芒山下，张方自己率领一万多骑兵迎接惠帝。
English: Going to the foot of Mount Mang, Zhang Fang himself led more than ten thousand cavalry to greet Hui Di.

古文：方将拜谒，帝下车自止之。
现代文：张方将要叩拜谒见，惠帝下车止住了他。
English: Zhang Fang was about to prostrate himself, but Hui Di got out of the car and stopped him.

古文：帝还宫，奔散者稍还，百官粗备。
现代文：惠帝回到皇宫，四处奔散的官员有少数也回来，文武百官大致齐备。
English: Emperor Hui returned to the imperial palace, and a few officials who had been running around everywhere also returned. A hundred civil and military officials were roughly ready.

古文：辛巳，大赦。
现代文：辛巳，宣布大赦。
English: It's time for a general amnesty.

古文：王浚入鄴，士众暴掠，死者甚众。
现代文：王浚进入邺城，士卒们狂暴抢掠，邺城中死了很多人。
English: Wang Jun entered Lucheng, the soldiers looted wildly, and many people died in Lucheng.

古文：使乌桓羯硃追太弟颖，至朝歌，不及。
现代文：派乌桓人羯朱追击皇太弟司马颖，追至朝歌，没有追上。
English: He sent Wu Huan to pursue the imperial prince's younger brother Sima Ying, and chased him to the morning song, but did not catch up with him.

古文：浚还蓟，以鲜卑多掠人妇女，命： 有敢挟藏者斩！ 
现代文：王浚回到蓟城，因为鲜卑大多抢劫人家妇女，就下令： 胆敢有挟藏妇女的人，斩！ 
English: When Wang Jun returned to Lucheng, because most of the Xianbei robbed other people's women, he ordered: "If anyone dares to kidnap a woman, behead him!"

古文：于是沈于易水者八千人。
现代文：结果因此被沉入易水的妇女有八千人。
English: As a result, eight thousand women were submerged in fresh water.

古文：东嬴公腾乞师于拓跋猗㐌以击刘渊，猗㐌与弟猗卢合兵击渊于西河，破之，与腾盟于汾东而还。
现代文：东赢公向拓跋猗求兵攻打刘渊，拓跋猗与弟拓跋猗卢联合在西河进攻刘渊，把刘渊打败，与司马腾在汾东结盟后回师。
English: Dongying Gong appealed to Tuobao to attack Liu Yuan. Tuobao and his brother Tuobao Lu jointly attacked Liu Yuan in the West River, defeated Liu Yuan, and allied with Sima Teng in Shandong before returning to the division.

古文：刘渊闻太弟颖去鄴，叹曰： 不用吾言，逆自奔溃，真奴才也！
现代文：刘渊听说皇太弟司马颖离开邺城，感叹说： 不采纳我的话，反倒自行奔逃溃散，真是奴才！
English: When Liu Yuan heard that the Crown Prince's younger brother Sima Ying had left Handan, he lamented, "He didn't accept my words, but ran away on his own. What a lackey!

古文：然吾与之有言矣，不可以不救。 
现代文：但我与他有言在先，不能不救他。 
English: But I had a prior agreement with him that I had to save him.

古文：将发兵击鲜卑、乌桓，刘宣等谏曰： 晋人奴隶御我，今其骨肉相残，是天弃彼而使我复呼韩邪之业也。
现代文：打算发兵攻打鲜卑、乌桓，刘宣等人劝谏说： 晋朝人像奴隶一样使用我们，现在他们骨肉亲人之间互相残杀，是上天抛弃他们而让我们光复呼韩邪的事业。
English: Liu Xuan, who planned to send troops to attack Xianbei, Wuhuan, and Liu Xuan, and others tried to persuade him, saying, "The Jin dynasty used us like slaves, and now their relatives are killing each other. It is the cause of Heaven to abandon them and let us return to Han evil.

古文：鲜卑、乌桓，我之气类，可以为援，奈何击之！ 
现代文：鲜卑、乌桓，是我们的同类，可以作为后援，怎么能攻打他们呢？ 
English: Xianbei and Wuhuan are our own kind and can be used as backup. How can we attack them?

古文：渊曰： 善！
现代文：刘渊说： 好！
English: Liu Yuan said: Good!

古文：大丈夫当为汉高、魏武，呼韩邪何足效哉！ 
现代文：大丈夫应当作汉高祖、魏武帝，呼韩邪哪里值得效仿呢？ 
English: It's okay to be the founder of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Wu of the Wei Dynasty, but where is it worth emulating the evil of the Han Dynasty?

古文：宣等稽首曰： 非所及也！ 
现代文：刘宣等人叩头行礼说： 我们是想不到啊。 
English: Liu Xuan and others bowed their heads and said: We didn't expect this.

古文：荆州兵擒斩张昌，同党皆夷三族。
现代文：荆州的军队擒获并杀掉张昌，他的同党都被诛灭三族。
English: The army of Jingzhou captured and killed Zhang Chang, and his fellow party members were all exterminated.

古文：李雄以范长生有名德，为蜀人所重，欲迎以为君而臣之，长生不可。
现代文：李雄认为范长生有名气威德，被蜀地百姓所看重，想自己作为臣下迎奉他为国君，范长生不同意。
English: Li Xiong believed that Fan Changsheng was famous for his virtue, valued by the people of Shu, and wanted to serve him as a vassal. Fan Changsheng disagreed.

古文：诸将固请雄即尊位。
现代文：各位部将坚持请求李雄登上王位。
English: All ministries will insist on asking Li Xiong to ascend to the throne.

古文：冬，十月，雄即成都王位，大赦，改元曰建兴。
现代文：冬季，十月，李雄即位为成都王，宣布大赦，改年号为建兴。
English: In winter, October, Li Xiong was enthroned as the king of Chengdu, announced an amnesty, and changed the year name to Jianxing.

古文：除晋法，约法七章。
现代文：废除晋朝法律，自建法律七章。
English: The laws of the Jin Dynasty were abolished, and seven chapters of laws were established.

古文：以其叔父骧为太傅，兄始为太保，李离为太尉，李云为司徒，李璜为司空，李国为太宰，阎式为尚书令，杨褒为仆射。
现代文：让他叔叔李骧担任太傅，兄李始担任太保，李离任太尉，李云任司徒，李璜任司空，李国任太宰，阎式任尚书令，杨褒任仆射。
English: Let his uncle Li Qian serve as taifu, his brother Li Shi as taibo, Li Li as taifu, Li Yun as stu, Li Qian as sikong, Li Guo as dazai, Yan Shih as Shang Shuling, and Yang Bo as pushe.

古文：尊母罗氏为王太后，追尊父特为成都景王。
现代文：尊奉母亲罗氏为王太后，追尊父亲李特为成都景王。
English: He revered his mother, Luo Shi, as the empress dowager, and revered his father, Li Te, as the king of Chengdu.

古文：雄以李国、李离有智谋，凡事必咨而后行，然国、离事雄弥谨。
现代文：李雄因为李国、李离有智慧谋略，任何事情都必定找他们咨询后才行动，然而李国、李离也愈发谨慎。
English: Li Xiong, because Li Guo and Li Li have a wise strategy, must consult them before taking any action. However, Li Guo and Li Li are also increasingly cautious.

古文：刘渊迁都左国城，胡、晋归之者愈众。
现代文：刘渊将都城迁到左国城。胡人、晋朝人归附他的更加多了。
English: Liu Yuan moved the capital to Sakoku City, and more Hu people and Jin Dynasty people joined him.

古文：渊谓群臣曰： 昔汉有天下久长，恩结于民。
现代文：刘渊对臣下们说： 过去汉能长久地拥有天下，是因为用恩德维系百姓。
English: Liu Yuan said to his subordinates: In the past, Han was able to hold the world for a long time because it used Ende to maintain the people.

古文：吾，汉氏之甥，约为兄弟。兄亡弟绍，不亦可乎！ 
现代文：我作为汉朝刘氏的外甥，相约为兄弟，哥哥亡故而弟弟继承，不也可以吗？ 
English: As Mr. Liu's nephew in the Han Dynasty, I'm almost like a brother to him. My brother passed away and my younger brother succeeded him. Isn't that okay?

古文：乃建国号曰汉。
现代文：于是建立国号称汉。
English: As a result, the founding country became known as Han.

古文：刘宣等请上尊号，渊曰： 今四方未定，且可依高祖称汉王。 
现代文：刘宣等人请求给刘渊上一个尊号，刘渊说： 现在四方各地都没有平定，暂且按照汉高祖那样称汉王。 
English: Liu Xuan and others requested that Liu Yuan be given an honorific title. Liu Yuan said, "Nowadays, there is no peace in all four directions. For the time being, we will call him Han Wang, as was the case with Han Gao Zu.

古文：于是即汉王位，大赦，改元曰元熙。
现代文：于是登上汉王王位，宣布大赦，改年号为元熙。
English: As a result, he ascended the throne of the Han King, declared an amnesty, and changed his name to Yuan Xi.

古文：追尊安乐公禅为孝怀皇帝，作汉三祖、五宗神主而祭之。
现代文：追尊安乐公刘禅为孝怀皇帝，制作汉高祖、世祖，昭烈皇帝三祖和汉太宗、世宗、中宗、显宗、肃宗五宗的神主来祭祀他们。
English: Liu Zhen, the patron saint of Anle, is the emperor of filial piety, and the deities of the five sects of Han, Taizong, Shizong, Zhongzong, Xianzong and Sozong are made to worship them, including the ancestor of the Han Dynasty, the ancestor of the Qing Dynasty, the three ancestors of the Ming Dynasty and the ancestor of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：立其妻呼延氏为王后。
现代文：立他的妻子呼延氏为王后。
English: He made his wife, Lady Huyan, his queen.

古文：以右贤王宣为丞相，崔游为御史大夫，左于陆王宏为太尉，范隆为大鸿胪，硃纪为太常，上常崔懿之、后部人陈元达皆为黄门郎，族子曜为建武将军；游固辞不就。
现代文：让右贤王刘宣担任丞相，崔游任御史大夫，左於陆王刘宏担任太尉，范隆担任大鸿胪，朱纪任太常，上党人崔懿之、匈奴后部人陈元达都担任黄门郎，同族侄子刘曜担任建武将军。崔游坚决辞让不去就任。
English: Liu Xuan, the right-hand king, was made chancellor, Cui You, the left-hand king, Liu Hong, the first lieutenant, Fan Long, the great general, Zhu Ji, the first secretary, Cui Yanzhi, a member of the Shang Dynasty, and Chen Yuanda, a member of the Hunnic dynasty, were both made Huangmen Lang, and Liu You, a nephew of the same tribe, was made General Jianwu. Cui You resolutely refused to take the post.

古文：元达少有志操，渊尝招之，元达不答。及渊为汉王，或谓元达曰： 君其惧乎？ 
现代文：陈元达年轻时就有志气节操，刘渊曾经招用他，陈元达没有答复，等到刘渊成为汉王，有人对陈元达说： 您害怕吗？ 
English: When Chen Yuanda was young, he had the spirit of self-restraint. Liu Yuan once recruited him. Chen Yuanda did not reply. When Liu Yuan became the king of Han, someone said to Chen Yuanda: Are you afraid?

古文：元达笑曰： 吾知其人久矣，彼亦亮吾之心；但恐不过三、二日，驿书必至。 
现代文：陈元达笑着说： 我了解这个人已很久了，他也明白我的心思，只恐怕过不了三两天，驿站必定送信来了。 
English: Chen Yuanda said with a smile, "I have known this man for a long time, and he also understands my thoughts. However, I'm afraid it won't take more than three or two days, and the post office will definitely send it."

古文：其暮，渊果征元达。
现代文：到傍晚，刘渊果然征用陈元达。
English: By the evening, Liu Yuan had indeed requisitioned Chen Yuanda.

古文：元达事渊，屡进忠言，退而削草，虽子弟莫得知也。
现代文：陈元达为刘渊作事，多次进谏忠言，退朝后就删削奏稿，即使是家人、子弟也没有谁能够知道内容。
English: Chen Yuanda worked for Liu Yuan Rong, and he was a loyal adviser many times. After he retired from the imperial court, he deleted the transcript. Even his family and children could not know the content.

古文：曜生而眉白，目有赤光，幼聪慧，有胆量，早孤，养于渊。
现代文：刘曜长着白眉毛，眼睛中有赤光，年幼时很聪明，有胆量，很早就失去父母，被刘渊抚养。
English: Liu You, with long white eyebrows and red light in his eyes, was very smart and courageous when he was young. He lost his parents at an early age and was raised by Liu Yuan.

古文：及长，仪观魁伟，性拓落高亮，与众不群。好读书，善属文，铁厚一寸，射而洞之。
现代文：等长大后，仪表魁梧伟岸，性格磊落高尚，孤傲不与大家往来，喜爱读书，善于写文章，一寸厚的铁板，他能用箭射穿。
English: When he grows up, he will have a huge and magnificent appearance, a noble and noble character, he will not associate with everyone, he will like to read, he will be good at writing articles, and he will be able to pierce an inch-thick iron plate with an arrow.

古文：常自比乐毅及萧、曹，时人莫之许也；惟刘聪重之，曰： 永明，汉世祖、魏武之流，数公何足道哉！ 
现代文：常常把自己比作乐毅和萧何、曹参，当时的人没有赞许他的，只有刘聪看重他，说： 刘曜属于汉世祖、魏武帝一类，乐毅等人有什么可称道的！ 
English: He often compared himself to Le Yi and Xiao He and Cao San. People at that time did not approve of him, only Liu Cong valued him, saying: Liu You belongs to the Han Dynasty, Wei Emperor, and Le Yi and others have nothing to commend!

古文：帝既还洛阳，张方拥兵专制朝政，太弟颖不得复豫事。
现代文：惠帝回到洛阳后，张方倚仗着兵权而独揽控制朝政，皇太弟司马颖不再能参与政事。
English: After Hui Di returned to Luoyang, Zhang Fang relied on military power to take sole control of the imperial government, and the brother of the crown prince, Sima Ying, could no longer participate in politics.

古文：豫州都督范阳王虓、徐州都督东平王楙等上言： 颖弗克负荷，宜降封一邑，特全其命。
现代文：豫州都督范阳王司马、徐州都督东平王司马等人给惠帝上言： 司马颖不能担负重任，应当把封地降为一个城邑，特许保全他的性命。
English: The governor of Yuzhou, Fanyang Wang Sima, the governor of Xuzhou, Dongping Wang Sima and others appealed to Emperor Hui: Sima Ying could not bear heavy responsibilities, he should reduce his fief to a township and be allowed to preserve his life.

古文：太宰宜委以关右之任，自州郡以下，选举授任，一皆仰成；朝之大事，废兴损益，每辄畴咨。
现代文：应当交给太宰司马统领关右的职任，从州郡以下，选举人才授官任职，都让他去办理，朝廷的大事，废除兴办减损增益等事宜，都和他商量咨询。
English: It should be entrusted to the Dazaifu Sima as the leader of the right-hand side of the post, from the state and county level, the election of personnel to the post, let him handle, the important matters of the imperial court, the abolition of the establishment of loss and gain, and other matters, consult with him.

古文：张方为国效节，而不达变通，未即西还，宜遣还郡，所加方官，请悉如旧。
现代文：张方为国家报效气节，但不晓事理变通，没有及时回到西边，应当发遣他回到郡中，给张方的官职，请全部按照过去的任命。
English: Zhang Fang reported to serve the country, but he did not know the reason and did not return to the west in time. He should be sent back to the county, and Zhang Fang should be given an official post. Please follow all the past appointments.

古文：司徒戎、司空越，并忠国小心，宜干机事，委以朝政。
现代文：司徒王戎、司空司马越都忠于国家，小心谨慎，应当参与机要事务，把朝廷政事交给他们。
English: Wang Rong and Ma Yue, both loyal to the country and cautious, should be involved in important affairs, and the affairs of the imperial court should be entrusted to them.

古文：王浚有定社稷之勋，宜特崇重，遂抚幽朔，长为北籓。臣等竭力扞城，籓屏皇家，则陛下垂拱，四海自正矣。 
现代文：王浚有稳定社稷的功勋，应当特别加以恩崇重用，让他管理幽州、朔方地区，成为北方藩篱屏障的首领，我们尽心竭力捍卫都城，保护皇室，那么陛下就可以垂衣拱手、高枕无忧，四海自然匡正。 
English: Wang Jun has the merit of stabilizing society, and should be especially honored and used. Let him manage the Yuzhou and Shuofang regions and become the leader of the northern barrier. We will do our best to defend the capital and protect the royal family. Then His Majesty can hang his clothes, sleep well, and be naturally upright in all directions.

古文：张方在洛既久，兵士剽掠殆竭，众情喧喧，无复留意，议欲奉帝迁都长安；恐帝及公卿不从，欲须帝出而劫之。
现代文：张方在洛阳时间已长，洛阳城几乎被兵士剽窃抢掠一空，士兵们喧闹吵嚷，没有再留下来的心思，商议着想侍奉着惠帝把都城迁往长安，恐怕惠帝和公卿大臣不同意，想等待惠帝出行时将他劫持。
English: Zhang Fang had been in Luoyang for a long time. The city of Luoyang was almost completely pillaged and plundered by soldiers. The soldiers were noisy and noisy, and there was no thought left behind. They discussed whether they wanted to serve Emperor Hui and move the capital to Chang'an. I'm afraid that Emperor Hui and the Minister of Justice disagreed and wanted to wait for Emperor Hui to be kidnapped when he was traveling.

古文：乃请帝谒庙，帝不许。
现代文：就请惠帝去拜谒宗庙，惠帝不答应。
English: He asked Hui Di to go and pay homage at the Jinsong Temple, but Hui Di did not agree.

古文：十一月，乙未，方引兵入殿，以所乘车迎帝，帝驰避后园竹中。
现代文：十一月，乙未，张方带兵进入宫殿，用自己的车乘去接惠帝，惠帝连忙到后园竹林中躲避。
English: In November of the same year, Zhang Fang led soldiers into the palace and used his own car to pick up Hui Di. Hui Di hurriedly fled to the bamboo grove in the backyard.

古文：军人引帝出，逼使上车，帝垂泣从之。
现代文：兵士将惠帝带出，逼迫着让他上车，惠帝流着泪勉强答应了。
English: The soldiers took Hui Di out and forced him to get on the bus. With tears streaming down his face, Hui Di reluctantly agreed.

古文：方于马上稽首曰： 今寇贼纵横，宿卫单少，愿陛下幸臣垒，臣尽死力以备不虞。 
现代文：张方在马上行礼说： 现在强盗窃贼横行无忌，守护皇宫的禁卫势单力簿，希望陛下到我的营垒中去，我将拼死尽力来防备意外发生。 
English: Zhang Fang immediately saluted and said, "Nowadays, robbers and thieves are rampant, and the guarding of the imperial palace is a one-man show. I hope that Your Majesty will come to my camp, and I will do my best to prevent accidents.

古文：时群臣皆逃匿，唯中书监卢志侍侧，曰： 陛下今日之事，当一从右将军。 
现代文：当时大臣们都四处逃避躲藏，只有中书监卢志在惠帝身边侍奉，说： 陛下今天的事情，应该全听右将军张方安排。 
English: At that time, the ministers fled and hid everywhere. Only Lu Zhi, the Chinese librarian, served at Hui Di's side and said, "Your Majesty, you should listen to the arrangements of General Zhang Fang.

古文：帝遂幸方垒，令方具车载宫人、宝物。
现代文：惠帝于是来到张方营垒，并让张方准备车去装载宫女、宝物。
English: Hui Di then came to Zhang Fang's camp, and asked Zhang Fang to prepare a car to load the princess and treasures.

古文：军人因妻略后宫，分争府藏，割流苏、武帐为马帴，魏、晋以来蓄积，扫地无遗。
现代文：兵士们趁机到后宫抢劫污辱宫女，争夺瓜分宫中所藏的物品，割下丝织垂穗、皇宫兵器帷帐当作马鞍垫，宫中魏、晋以来蓄积的宝藏，一扫而空。
English: The soldiers took advantage of the opportunity to rob the harem, insult the princesses, compete for the items hidden in the palace, cut down the silk hanging ears, the palace weapon curtain as a saddle pad, and the treasures accumulated since the Wei and Jin dynasties in the palace were swept away.

古文：方将焚宗庙、宫室以绝人返顾之心，卢志曰： 昔董卓无道，焚烧洛阳，怨毒之声，百年犹存，何为袭之！ 
现代文：张方将要焚烧宗庙、宫室，想断绝人们回返的心思，卢志说： 董卓暴虐不讲道义，在洛阳放火，怨怒愤恨的声音，一百年后还能听得见，为什么要去学他呢？ 
English: Zhang Fang is going to burn down the ancestral temple and the imperial palace to stop people from returning. Lu Zhi said, "Dong Zhuo is a tyrant who doesn't preach morality. He set fire to Luoyang. The voices of anger and resentment can still be heard a hundred years later. Why learn from him?

古文：乃止。
现代文：张方这才罢手。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：帝停方垒三日，方拥帝及太弟颖、豫章王炽等趋长安，王戎出奔郏。
现代文：惠帝在张方营垒中停留了三天，张方带着惠帝和皇太弟司马颖、豫章王司马炽等向长安进发，王戎逃奔郏县。
English: Hui Di stayed in Zhang Fang's camp for three days. Zhang Fang took Hui Di and the imperial brothers Sima Ying and Yu Zhang Wang Sima Blaze to Chang'an, and Wang Rong fled to Lixian County.

古文：太宰颙帅官属步骑三万迎于霸上，颙前拜谒，帝下车止之。
现代文：太宰司马率领官员僚属和步兵、骑兵共三万人在霸上迎接，司马上前叩拜谒见，惠帝下车止住他。
English: Dazai Sima led a total of 30,000 officials and subordinates, as well as infantry and cavalry, to meet him at the summit. Sima bowed before him, and Hui Di got out of the car to stop him.

古文：帝入长安，以征西府为宫。唯尚书仆射荀籓、司隶刘暾、河南尹周馥等在洛阳为留台，承制行事，号东、西台。
现代文：惠帝进入长安，以司马的征西将军府作为皇宫，只有尚书仆射荀藩、司隶刘暾、河南尹周馥在洛阳留守朝廷台署，根据皇帝的旨意处理事务，与长安新建台署分别号称东台、西台。
English: When Emperor Hui entered Chang'an, he used Sima's General Headquarters of the Western Expedition as the imperial palace. Only Shang Shufu (尚書仆), Shao Han (射藩), Sifu (司隶), Liu Zang (劉) and Henan Yin Zhou (Henan 尹周) stayed in Luoyang to work at the Imperial Theater, handling affairs according to the emperor's will. The newly built theater in Chang'an was known as the East Theater and the West Theater.

古文：籓，勖之子也。
现代文：荀藩是荀勖的儿子。
English: Zou Han is the son of Zou.

古文：丙午，留台大赦，改元复为永安。
现代文：丙午，洛阳留守台署宣布大赦，把年号又重新改为永安。
English: On the 12th, Taiwan implemented an amnesty and resumed the Yongan Year.

古文：辛丑，复皇后羊氏。
现代文：辛丑恢复皇后羊氏的地位。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Yang clan restored the status of the empress.

古文：罗尚移屯巴郡，遣兵掠蜀中，获李骧妻昝氏及子寿。
现代文：罗尚迁移到巴郡驻扎，派兵抢掠蜀中，抓获李骧的妻子昝氏鹅儿子李寿。
English: Luo Shang moved to Ba County and stationed there. He sent troops to plunder Shuzhong and captured Li Shou, the son of Li Shao's wife and the son of Shao's goose.

古文：十二月，丁亥，诏太弟颖以成都王还第；更立豫章王炽为皇太弟。
现代文：十二月，丁亥，诏令皇太弟以成都王的身分返回府第，改立豫章王司马炽为皇太弟。
English: In December, Dinghai, the emperor ordered the crown prince to return to the capital as the king of Chengdu, and replaced Yuzhang Wang Simachao as the crown prince.

古文：帝兄弟二十五人，时存者惟颖、炽及吴王晏。
现代文：惠帝兄弟共二十五人，当时在世的只有司马颖、司马炽和吴王司马晏。
English: There were a total of twenty-five Hui Di brothers. At that time, only Sima Ying, Sima Cao and Wu Wang Sima Yao were still alive.

古文：晏材质庸下；炽冲素好学，故太宰颙立之。
现代文：司马晏才能平庸资质低下，司马炽自幼平和质朴好学，所以太宰司马拥立他。
English: Sima Yao's talent is mediocre and his qualifications are low. Sima Yao has been peaceful and simple and eager to learn since he was a child, so Dazai Sima supported him.

古文：诏以司空越为太傅，与颙夹辅帝室，王戎参录朝政。
现代文：诏令司空司马越任太傅，与司马共同辅佐皇室，王戎参与管理朝政。
English: The emperor ordered Sima Yue, the imperial secretary, to be appointed taifu, and he and Sima jointly assisted the imperial family, and Wang Rong participated in the management of the imperial government.

古文：又以光禄大夫王衍为尚书左仆射。
现代文：又让光禄大夫王衍任尚书左仆射。
English: He also appointed Guanglu doctor Wang Yan as Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：高密王略为镇南将军，领司隶校尉，权镇洛阳。
现代文：让高密王司马略任镇南将军，兼任司隶校尉，暂且镇守洛阳。
English: Let Gaomi Wang Sima Liao serve as the general of Zhenan, concurrently as the lieutenant of Sili, and temporarily guard Luoyang.

古文：东中郎将模为宁北将军，都督冀州诸军事，镇鄴。
现代文：东中郎将司马模担任宁北将军，都督冀州诸军事，镇守邺城。
English: Dong Zhong Lang appointed Sima Miao as the general of Ningbei, the military governor of Jizhou, and the town guard of Shicheng.

古文：百官各还本职。
现代文：让各部门大臣官员各自回到本来的职任上。
English: Let the ministerial officials of each department return to their original duties.

古文：令州郡蠲除苛政，爱民务本，清通之后，当还东京。
现代文：命令州、郡取消苛刻的政令，爱护人民，让他们从事本业，等到形势清平通畅后，就返回东京洛阳。
English: He ordered the prefectures and counties to cancel the harsh decrees, love the people, let them engage in their own business, and return to Tokyo Luoyang when the situation is clear and smooth.

古文：大赦，改元。
现代文：宣布大赦，改年号为永兴。
English: An amnesty will be implemented and the year will be changed.

古文：略、模，皆越之弟也。
现代文：司马略和司马模，都是司马越的弟弟。
English: Sima Liao and Sima Mo are the younger brothers of Sima Yue.

古文：王浚既去鄴，越使模镇之。
现代文：王浚离开邺城后，司马越派司马模在邺城镇守。
English: After Wang Jun left Handan City, Sima Yue sent Sima Miao to guard Handan Town.

古文：颙以四方乖离，祸难不已，故下此诏和解之，冀获少安。
现代文：司马因为各地抵触分袭，祸患灾难不断出现，所以下这个诏令使各地方和解，企望能够获得稍微安定的局面。
English: Because Sima was hit by conflicts in various regions, and disasters and calamities continued to occur, he issued this edict to reconcile the various regions, hoping to achieve a slightly stable situation.

古文：越辞太傅不受。
现代文：司马越推辞不接受太傅的职务。
English: Sima Yue refused to accept the post of grand steward.

古文：又诏以太宰颙都督中外诸军事。
现代文：又下诏让太宰司马任都督中外诸军事。
English: He also issued an edict to appoint Dazai Sima as the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces.

古文：张方为中领军、录尚书事，领京兆太守。
现代文：让张方担任中领军、录尚书事，兼任京兆太守。
English: Let Zhang Fang serve as the middle leader, record the records, and concurrently serve as the governor of Beijing.

古文：东嬴公腾遣将军聂玄击汉王渊，战于大陵，玄兵大败。
现代文：东嬴公司马腾派将军聂玄攻打汉王刘渊，在大陵县交战，聂玄的军队惨败。
English: The Dongguan Company's Ma Teng sent General Yu Xuan to attack the Han King Liu Yuan, and they fought in Daling County. Yu Xuan's army suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：渊遣刘曜寇太原，取泫氏、屯留、长子、中都。
现代文：刘渊派刘曜进犯太原，攻克泫氏、屯留、长子、中都等地。
English: Liu Yuan sent Liu You to invade Taiyuan, conquering the Min clan, Tinglu, the eldest son, Zhongdu and other places.

古文：又遣冠军将军乔晞寇西河，取介休。
现代文：又派冠军将军乔进犯西河，攻克介休。
English: He also sent the champion general Qiao to invade the West River and conquer Jiehu.

古文：介休令贾浑不降，晞杀之；将纳其妻宗氏，宗氏骂晞而哭，日晞又杀之。
现代文：介休县令贾浑不投降，乔就把他杀了，打算娶贾浑妻宗氏，宗氏痛哭怒骂乔，乔又把她杀了。
English: When Jia Hun, the governor of Jiehu County, refused to surrender, Qiao killed him. He planned to marry Jia Hun's wife, Zongji. Zongji scolded Qiao in tears, and Qiao killed her again.

古文：渊闻之，大怒曰： 使天道有知，乔晞望有种乎！ 
现代文：刘渊听说这事，非常生气，说： 假如上天知道了，乔还能希望有后代吗？ 
English: When Liu Yuan heard about this, he was very angry and said, "If God only knew, could Qiao still hope to have descendants?

古文：追还，降秩四等，收浑尸，葬之。
现代文：将乔追回，降了四级官秩，收敛贾浑的尸体安葬了。
English: He recovered Qiao, lowered the four-level official rank, and buried the body of the averted Jia Hun.

