古文：孟郊者，字东野，湖州武康人。
现代文：孟郊的字叫东野，湖州武康县人。
English: Mengjiao's character is called Higashino, a native of Huzhou's Bukang County.

古文：少隐嵩山，性介，少谐合。
现代文：年轻时隐居嵩山，生性孤僻，很少与人合得来。
English: When he was young, he lived in seclusion in Songshan. He was a loner by nature and rarely got along with others.

古文：愈一见为忘形交。
现代文：韩愈见到后就和他成了好朋友。
English: Han Yu became good friends with him after meeting him.

古文：年五十，得进士第，调溧阳尉。县有投金濑、平陵城，林薄蒙翳，下有积水。
现代文：孟郊五十岁时，考中了进士，任溧阳县尉，县里有投金濑、平陵城，草木丛生，下边有水潭。
English: When Meng Jiao was 50 years old, he passed the entrance examination and was appointed as the lieutenant of Fenyang County. There were gold mines and Pingling City in the county, with thick vegetation and a pool at the bottom.

古文：郊闲往坐水旁，裴回赋诗，而曹务多废。
现代文：孟郊有空就去坐在水潭边，徘徊做诗，公务多耽误了。
English: Meng Jiao went to sit on the edge of the pond when he had time, wandered around to write poetry, and delayed his official duties.

古文：令白府，以假尉代之，分其半奉。
现代文：县令报告了刺史，任命了一位代理县尉替代他，把他的俸禄分出了一半。
English: The county magistrate reported the incident, appointed an acting county lieutenant to replace him, and gave him half of his salary.

古文：郑余庆为东都留守，署水陆转运判官。
现代文：郑余庆任东都留守，任命他为水陆转运判官。
English: Zheng Yuqing appointed him as the judge of land and water transportation.

古文：余庆镇兴元，奏为参谋。
现代文：郑余庆镇守兴元，又任命他为参谋。
English: Zheng Yuqing appointed him as the commander of Xingyuan and appointed him as a staff officer.

古文：卒，年六十四。
现代文：后去世了。享年六十四岁。
English: He later died at the age of 64.

古文：张籍谥曰贞曜先生。
现代文：张籍给他立谥号叫 贞曜先生 。
English: Zhang Qi gave him a nickname called Mr. Zhengyo.

古文：郊为诗有理致，最为愈所称，然思苦奇涩。
现代文：孟郊写诗有内容和情趣，最受韩愈赏识，但诗句过于怪异和艰涩。
English: Meng Jiao's poetry has content and charm, which is most appreciated by Han Yu, but the verses are too strange and difficult.

古文：李观亦论其诗曰： 高处在古无上，平处下顾二谢 云。
现代文：李观也评论他的诗说： 其中好的古代无双，其中一般的也超过谢灵运和谢眺。 
English: Li Guan also commented on his poem, saying, "Among them, the good ancient ones are unparalleled, among them, the general ones are also superior to Xie Lingyun and Xie Zhou.

古文：张籍者，字文昌，和州乌江人。
现代文：张籍的字叫文昌，和州乌江县人。
English: Zhang's family name is Wenchang, and he is from Wuzhou, Wujiang County.

古文：第进士，为太常寺太祝。
现代文：他考中了进士，任太常寺太祝。
English: He passed the entrance examination and was appointed to the Daijo-ji Temple.

古文：久次，迁秘书郎。
现代文：任此职很长时间后，升任秘书郎。
English: After holding this post for a long time, he was promoted to secretary.

古文：愈荐为国子博士。
现代文：韩愈推荐他任国子博士。
English: Han Yu recommended him as Dr. Kuniko.

古文：历水部员外郎、主客郎中。
现代文：后历任水部员外郎、主客郎中。
English: Later, he served as the water department member's second son and the chief guest's younger brother.

古文：当时有名士皆与游，而愈贤重之。
现代文：那时有名的人都和他有交往，韩愈称赞推崇他。
English: At that time, famous people had dealings with him, and Han Yu praised and respected him.

古文：籍性狷直，尝责愈喜博褭及为驳杂之说，论议好胜人，其排释老不能著书若孟轲、扬雄以垂世者。
现代文：张籍生性偏激直率，曾经责备韩愈喜欢格五棋和研究各种学说，讨论喜欢压倒别人，驳斥佛教、道教不能像孟轲、扬雄那样著书传世。
English: Zhang Qisheng was a bit outspoken by nature. He once reproached Han Yu Rong for liking checkers and studying various theories. He liked to dominate others in discussions, and refuted that Buddhism and Taoism could not be passed down to the next generation by writing books like Meng Xuan and Yang Xiong.

古文：愈最后答书曰：吾子不以愈无似，意欲推之纳诸圣贤之域，拂其邪心，增其所未高。
现代文：韩愈最后写信回答说：你不认为我不好，心里想帮助我达到众圣人贤者的境界，纠正我的错误，增加我的价值。
English: Han Yu finally replied in a letter: "You don't think I'm bad. In your heart, you want to help me reach the realm of all the saints and sages, correct my mistakes, and increase my value.

古文：谓愈之质有可以至于道者，浚其源，道其所归，溉其根，将食其实。
现代文：说我的品质有能够发展到圣贤之道的基础，只要疏浚源头，引导流向，培育根本，就能有成果。
English: To say that my qualities have the foundation to be able to develop into the path of sages, as long as we dredge the source, guide the flow, and cultivate the foundation, we can achieve results.

古文：此盛德之所辞让，况于愈者哉？抑其中有宜复者，故不可遂已。
现代文：这是有很高德行的人都不敢承担的褒奖，更何况我呢？但这里面有应该答复的，所以不能不说。
English: It is a compliment that no man of high moral character would dare to accept, much less me, but it has something to answer for, so it must be said.

古文：昔者圣人之作《春秋》也，既深其文辞矣，然犹不敢公传道之，口授弟子，至于后世，其书出焉。
现代文：过去孔子写《春秋》，已写得很隐晦了，但还不敢公开传播，只是传授给学生，流传到后来，他的书才发表了。
English: In the past, Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn," which was already very obscure, but he did not dare to publicly disseminate it. He only taught it to students, and it was not until later that his book was published.

古文：其所以虑患之道，微也。
现代文：他防备祸患的考虑非常周全。
English: His precautions against calamity were very well thought out.

古文：今夫二氏之所宗而事之者，下及公卿辅相，吾岂敢昌言排之哉？
现代文：现佛、道二教的信奉者，有达官贵人，我怎敢公然驳斥它们呢？
English: The current followers of Buddhism and Taoism are high-ranking dignitaries. How dare I openly refute them?

古文：择其可语者诲之，犹时与吾悖，其声哓哓。若遂成其书，则见而怒之者必多矣，必且以我为狂为惑。
现代文：选择告诉其中谈得来的，他们还常和我争论，耳边一片反对声，如果写成了书，那么看到后对书感到愤怒的人必定更多，人们一定会认为我狂妄、糊涂。
English: They also often argue with me, and there is a voice of opposition in my ear. If it is written into a book, then there must be more people who are angry with the book after seeing it. People must think I am arrogant and confused.

古文：其身之不能恤，书于何有？
现代文：自己的名誉都无法保住，书有什么意义？
English: You can't even save your own reputation. What's the point of a book?

古文：夫子，圣人也，而曰： 自吾得子路，而恶声不入于耳。 
现代文：孔子是圣人，却说： 从我有了子路，耳边才听不到坏话了。 
English: Confucius was a sage, but he said, "Ever since I was born, I have never heard a bad word."

古文：其余辅而相者周天下，犹且绝粮于陈，畏于匡，毁于叔孙，奔走于齐、鲁、宋、卫之郊。
现代文：他的其他学生任官的到处都是，尚且在陈国断了粮，在匡地遇到危险，被叔孙诋毁，在齐、鲁、宋、卫之间跑来跑去。
English: Other students of his have been appointed as officials all over the world, yet they ran out of food in the State of Chen, encountered danger in the State of Kuang, were slandered by their uncles and grandsons, and ran back and forth between Qi, Lu, Song, and Wei.

古文：其道虽尊，其穷亦至矣。
现代文：他的学说虽然地位高，他不得志也到了极点。
English: Although his doctrine has a high status, he is also extremely frustrated.

古文：赖其徒相与守之，卒有立于天下。
现代文：幸亏他的学生们继承他的学说，终于成了负有盛名的学派。
English: Fortunately, his students inherited his teachings and eventually became a prestigious school.

古文：向使独言之而独书之，其存也可冀乎？
现代文：要是他只是自己说自己写书，能指望他的学说存在吗？
English: If he just says he writes books, can we expect his doctrine to exist?

古文：今夫二氏行乎中土也，盖六百年有余矣。
现代文：现在佛、道二教在华夏流行，已将近六百多年了。
English: Buddhism and Taoism have been popular in China for nearly 600 years.

古文：其植根固，其流波漫，非可以朝令而夕禁也。
现代文：它们根基牢固，影响很大，不可能早晨下令晚上就禁止。
English: They have a strong foundation and great influence, and it is impossible to issue an order in the morning and ban it in the evening.

古文：自文王没，武王、周公、成、康相与守之，礼乐皆在，及乎夫子未久也，自夫子而至乎孟子未久也，自孟子而至乎扬雄亦未久也。
现代文：从周文王去世后，周武王、周公旦、周成王、周康王继承他，礼、乐制度都存在，到孔子时间还不太长，从孔子到孟子时间也不太长，从孟子到扬雄时间也不太长。
English: After the death of King Zhou Wen, King Zhou Wu, King Zhou Gongdan, King Zhou Cheng and King Zhou Kang succeeded him. The ritual and music systems all existed. It wasn't too long before Confucius, it wasn't too long before Confucius and Mencius, and it wasn't too long before Mencius and Yang Xiong.

古文：然犹其勤若此，其困若此，而后能有所立，吾岂可易而为之哉？
现代文：尚且那样勤勉，那样艰难，然后才能成功，我怎能轻率地去做呢？
English: How could I do it so carelessly when I had to work so hard and struggle so hard to succeed?

古文：其为也易，则其传也不远，故余所以不敢也。
现代文：做事轻率，流传就不会长远，所以我不敢写书。
English: If you do things rashly, it won't last long, so I don't dare to write a book.

古文：然观古人，得其时，行其道，则无所为书。
现代文：我观察古代人，受到了重用，实施了自己的抱负，就不用写书。
English: I observed the ancients, was reused, carried out my own ambitions, and did not have to write a book.

古文：为书者，皆所为不行乎今，而行乎后世者也。
现代文：写书的，都是不受当时重用，而被后代采纳的人。
English: People who write books are not reused at the time, but are adopted by future generations.

古文：今吾之得吾志、失吾志未可知，则俟五十、六十为之，未失也。
现代文：现在我受重用不受重用还说不准，因此等到五十、六十岁写书，也来得及。
English: Now I can't say whether I'm overused or underused, so I can wait until I'm fifty or sixty to write a book.

古文：天不欲使兹人有知乎，则吾之命不可期；如使兹人有知乎，非我其谁哉！
现代文：上天如不想让人们有认识，那么我的寿命不能做指望；如想让人们有认识，不成全我成全谁呢？
English: If God does not want people to have knowledge, then my life expectancy cannot be counted on; if He wants people to have knowledge, if I do not fulfill, who will I fulfill?

古文：其行道，其为书，其化今，其传后，必有在矣。
现代文：推行学说，写成著作，改变风俗，传给后人，一定能够实现，你为什么竟然担心我做的事呢？
English: Why are you so worried about what I'm doing? I'm sure I can carry out the teachings, write books, change customs, and pass them on to future generations.

古文：前书谓吾与人论不能下气，若好胜者。
现代文：上封信说我和人讨论不能心平气和，像一心想争赢的人。
English: In my last letter, I said that I was not able to discuss things calmly with people, like a person who wants to win.

古文：虽诚有之，抑非好己胜也，好己之道胜也。
现代文：虽然确实是这样，但不是自己想赢，而是想自己的学说赢。
English: Although this is indeed the case, it is not that they want to win, but that they want their own doctrine to win.

古文：非好己之道胜也，己之道乃夫子、孟轲、扬雄之道。
现代文：也还不是想自己的学说赢，自己的学说是孔子、孟轲、扬雄的学说。
English: Nor is it about wanting one's own doctrine to win. One's own doctrine is the doctrine of Confucius, Mencius, and Yang Xiong.

古文：传者若不胜，则无所为道，吾岂敢避是名哉！
现代文：传播学说的人如辩不赢，对学说就没有贡献，我怎敢躲避这个罪名呢！
English: How dare I evade the accusation that if those who spread the doctrine do not win the debate, they have made no contribution to the doctrine!

古文：夫子之言曰： 吾与回言，终日不违。 
现代文：孔子说过 ：我和颜回谈话一整天，他都不反驳我像愚昧无知一样。 
English: Confucius said: I have been talking with Yan Hui for a whole day, and he does not refute me like ignorance.

古文：如愚则其与众人辩也有矣。
现代文：那么孔子和大家肯定有争辩。
English: Then Confucius and everyone must have an argument.

古文：驳杂之讥，前书尽之，吾子其复之。昔者夫子犹有所戏，《诗》不云乎： 善戏谑兮，不为虐兮。 
现代文：研究学说太杂的批评，上封信已详细答复了，请你再看一遍。过去孔子也有娱乐，《诗经》不也说： 善于开玩笑，是不过分的。 
English: In the past, Confucius also had amusements. The Book of Songs says, "It is not too much to be good at joking."

古文：《记》曰： 张而不弛，文武不为也。 
现代文：《礼记》说： 总是紧张不松弛，周文王、周武王也办不到。 
English: "Li Ji" said: Always tense and not relaxed, neither King Zhouwen nor King Zhouwu can do it.

古文：籍为诗，长于乐府，多警句。
现代文：对学说有什么妨害呢？你没有想过吗？张籍写诗，擅长乐府诗，写了很多名句。
English: What hinders the doctrine? Haven't you thought about it? Zhang Qi wrote poetry, excelled in the poetry of the Lefu, and wrote many famous sayings.

古文：仕终国子司业。
现代文：他最后官任国子司业。
English: His last post was that of Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：皇甫湜，字持正，睦州新安人。
现代文：皇甫湜的字叫持正，睦州新安县人。
English: The character of Wang Fuxi is called Mochizheng. He is from Xin'an County, Mutsu Province.

古文：擢进士第，为陆浑尉，仕至工部郎中，辨急使酒，数忤同省，求分司东都。
现代文：他考中了进士，先任陆浑县尉，后官当到工部郎中。他性情急躁借酒使性，几次触犯同事，于是请求分管东都的部门。
English: He passed the entrance examination, and was first appointed as a lieutenant of Lukhun County, and later as a junior official of the Ministry of Industry. He was quick-tempered and used alcohol to his advantage. He offended his colleagues several times, so he asked to be put in charge of the department in charge of the eastern capital.

古文：留守裴度辟为判官。
现代文：东都留守裴度任命他为判官。
English: He was appointed as a magistrate by Pei Du, who stayed in Dongdu.

古文：度脩福先寺，将立碑，求文于白居易。湜怒曰： 近舍湜而远取居易，请从此辞。 
现代文：裴度建福先寺，要立碑，请白居易撰文，皇甫湜发怒说 ：丢开近处的皇甫湜老远去找白居易，我请求从此告辞。 
English: When Pei Du built Fuxian Temple and wanted to erect a monument, he asked Bai Juyi to write an article. The Empress Dowager said angrily, "Leave the nearby Empress Dowager and go far away to find Bai Juyi. I ask you to leave now."

古文：度谢之。
现代文：裴度向他道了歉。
English: Baidu apologized to him.

古文：湜即请斗酒，饮酣，援笔立就。
现代文：皇甫湜就请求倒一斗酒，喝到兴头上，拿起笔立刻写好了。
English: The Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：度赠以车马缯彩甚厚，湜大怒曰： 自吾为《顾况集序》，未常许人。
现代文：裴度送给他车辆马匹绸缎等很重的礼物，皇甫湜却很生气地说 ：自从我写《顾况集序》后，没再答应给别人撰文。
English: Pei Du gave him heavy gifts such as vehicles, horses, silk and silk brocade, but the Empress Dowager said angrily: Since I wrote "Gu Jia Shu Xuan," I have not promised to write to others.

古文：今碑字三千，字三缣，何遇我薄邪？ 
现代文：现碑上有三千字，每个字只值三匹绢，怎么对我这样刻薄呢？ 
English: There are three thousand words on the monument, and each word is worth only three horseshoes. How can you be so mean to me?

古文：度笑曰： 不羁之才也。 
现代文：裴度笑着说 ：你是个不管常理的人才。 
English: Pei Du smiled and said, "You are a talent who doesn't care about common sense."

古文：从而酬之。
现代文：按他的要求酬劳了他。
English: They paid him what he asked for.

古文：湜尝为蜂螫指，购小儿敛蜂，捣取其液。
现代文：皇甫湜曾被蜂子螫了手指，就悬赏叫小孩抓蜂子，把蜂子捣烂成浆。
English: When Emperor Fuxi had his finger stung by a bee, he offered a reward to any child who could catch the bee and grind it into a paste.

古文：一日命其子录诗，一字误，诟跃呼杖，杖未至，啮其臂血流。
现代文：一天他叫儿子抄诗，抄错了一个字，他跳脚骂着叫拿棍子来，棍子没送来，他把儿子的手臂咬得流出血来了。
English: One day, he asked his son to copy a poem. He made a mistake in copying a word. He jumped to his feet, cursed and called for a stick. The stick did not come. He bit his son's arm until it bled.

古文：卢仝居东都，愈为河南令，爱其诗，厚礼之。
现代文：卢仝住在洛阳时，韩愈任河南县令，喜欢他的诗，用重礼待他。
English: When Lu Yao lived in Luoyang, Han Yu was the Henan County Governor. He liked Lu Yao's poetry and treated him with great courtesy.

古文：仝自号玉川子，尝为《月蚀诗》以讥切元和逆党，愈称其工。
现代文：卢仝自称玉川子，曾写了《月蚀诗》来讽刺元和年间的叛逆集团，韩愈称赞写得好。
English: Lu Wei, who calls himself Tamagawa Zi, once wrote "The Lunar Eclipse Poem" to satirize the rebel group during the Yuan and He years, which Han Yu praised as well written.

古文：时又有贾岛、刘乂，皆韩门弟子。
现代文：当时还有贾岛、刘义，都是韩愈的学生。
English: At that time, there were also Jia Dao and Liu Yi, both of whom were students of Han Yu.

古文：岛，字浪仙，范阳人。初为浮屠，名无本。
现代文：贾岛的字叫浪仙，范阳郡人，先当了和尚，法名叫无本。
English: The Chinese character for Jia Dao is "Long Xian" (浪仙), a native of Fanyang County who first became a monk. His Dharma name is Mubeng.

古文：来东都，时洛阳令禁僧午后不得出，岛为诗自伤。愈怜之，因教其为文，遂去浮屠，举进士。
现代文：后到了洛阳，当时洛阳县令下令僧人中午以后不能外出。贾岛写诗伤感，韩愈喜欢他，就教他写文章，他于是还了俗，去考进士。
English: Later, he went to Luoyang. At that time, the Luoyang County ordered that monks could not go out after noon. Jia Dao wrote sad poems. Han Yu liked him and taught him to write articles. He then returned to the secular world and took the entrance examination.

古文：当其苦吟，虽逢值公卿贵人，皆不之觉也。
现代文：他在苦苦吟诗的时候，即使碰到达官显贵，也不会察觉。
English: Even if he bumps into a dignitary while he is struggling to recite a poem, he won't notice.

古文：一日见京兆尹，跨驴不避，讠虖诘之，久乃得释。
现代文：有一天碰到了京兆尹，他骑着驴子也不回避，京兆尹把他喊去责问，很长时间才放了他。
English: One day, he met Jing Zhaoyun. He rode a donkey and did not shy away. Jing Zhaoyun called him to question him, and it took him a long time to let him go.

古文：累举，不中第。
现代文：多次参加科举考试，都没有考中。
English: He took the imperial examinations many times, but never passed the middle school entrance examination.

古文：文宗时，坐飞谤，贬长江主簿。
现代文：唐文宗时，他受流言诽谤，被贬任长江县主簿。
English: At the time of Tang Wenzong, he was slandered by rumors and demoted to the position of the chief accountant of Yangtze County.

古文：会昌初，以普州司仓参军迁司户，未受命卒，年六十五。
现代文：会昌初年，从普州司仓参军升任司户参军，没接到任命就去世了，享年六十五岁。
English: In the first year of Huichang, he was promoted from the Puzhou Custodian of the Army to the Custodian of the Army, but died without receiving the appointment, at the age of sixty-five.

古文：刘义者，亦一节士。
现代文：刘义也是一个有节操的士人。
English: Liu Yi is also a disciplined scholar.

古文：少放肆为侠行，因酒杀人亡命。
现代文：他年轻时放纵自己行侠义，酒后杀人逃亡。
English: When he was young, he indulged himself in chivalry, killing and fleeing after drinking.

古文：会赦，出，更折节读书，能为歌诗。
现代文：遇到赦免，他回来了，竟改变志向读起书来，并擅长写诗歌。
English: When he was pardoned, he came back, changed his mind, started reading books, and became good at writing poetry.

古文：然恃故时所负，不能俯仰贵人，常穿屐、破衣。
现代文：他倚仗过去的抱负，不肯屈事权贵，常常穿着木屐、破衣裳。
English: He relied on his past ambitions, refused to bow to the powerful, and often wore wooden shoes and ragged clothes.

古文：闻愈接天下士，步归之，作《冰柱》《雪车》二诗，出卢仝、孟郊右。
现代文：听说韩愈招纳国内的士人，他步行归附韩愈，写了《冰柱》、《雪车》两首诗，比卢仝、孟郊写得好。
English: He heard that Han Yu was recruiting domestic scholars. He joined Han Yu on foot and wrote two poems, "Ice Pillar" and "Snow Car," which were better than Lu Xun and Meng Jiao.

古文：樊宗师见，为独拜。
现代文：樊宗师见了他，单单给他行礼。
English: When Master Zou saw him, he simply bowed to him.

古文：能面道人短长，其服义则又弥缝若亲属然。
现代文：他能当面指出别人的优缺点，但对佩服的人又像亲戚一样掩饰过失。
English: He can point out the strengths and weaknesses of others in person, but he covers up the faults of those he admires like a relative.

古文：后以争语不能下宾客，因持愈金数斤去，曰： 此谀墓中人得耳，不若与刘君为寿。 
现代文：后来他因争论不肯谦让客人，就拿了韩愈的几斤金子走了，并说： 这是说死人好话得来的，不如给我做寿。 
English: Later, because of the argument, he refused to let the guests leave, so he took Han Yu's several kilos of gold and left, saying, "This is the result of saying good things about the dead, it's better to celebrate my birthday."

古文：愈不能止，归齐、鲁，不知所终。
现代文：韩愈拦不住他，他回到齐、鲁一带，不知到哪里去了。
English: Han Yu couldn't stop him. He went back to Qi and Lu and I don't know where he went.

古文：赞曰：唐兴，承五代剖分，王政不纲，文弊质穷，崿俚混并。
现代文：赞词：唐朝建立，上承南北朝的分裂，国家治理混乱，文风败坏不讲内容，淫邪和俚俗混杂。
English: Praise: the establishment of the Tang Dynasty, the split of the Southern and Northern Dynasties, the chaos of national governance, the corruption of the literary style, not to mention the content, the mixture of lewdness and vulgarity.

古文：天下已定，治荒剔蠹，讨究儒术，以兴典宪，薰■涵浸，殆百余年，其后文章稍稍可述。
现代文：全国平定后，革除弊病，倡导儒家学说，发扬先王之道，陶冶影响，近一百多年，此后文章才略有可观。
English: After the country was pacified, it took nearly a hundred years to eradicate the ills, advocate the Confucian doctrine, carry forward the way of the former king, and cultivate the influence. After that, the article was only slightly noticeable.

古文：至贞元、元和间，愈遂以《六经》之文为诸儒倡，障堤末流，反刓以朴，刬伪以真。
现代文：到贞元、元和年间，韩愈就用儒经的文章向学者宣扬，纠正颓靡文风，反对纤巧倡导质朴，反对做作倡导真实。
English: During the Zhengyuan, Yuan and He years, Han Yu used Confucian scriptures to preach to scholars, correcting the popular style, advocating simplicity against subtlety, and advocating truthfulness against artificiality.

古文：然愈之才，自视司马迁、扬雄，至班固以下不论也。
现代文：韩愈的文才，自认为和司马迁、扬雄一样，从班固以后他都看不上。
English: Han Yu's literary talent, he thinks, is the same as that of Sima Qian and Yang Xiong, and he can't look up to them after he left Banggu.

古文：当其所得，粹然一出于正，刊落陈言，横骛别驱，汪洋大肆，要之无牴牾圣人者。
现代文：他的长处是：文风纯正且都合乎正道，除尽陈旧的语句，自辟蹊径、淋漓尽致，总的说没有不合孔孟之道的。
English: His strengths are: the style of writing is pure and conforms to the right path, eliminating obsolete sentences, self-invented methods, and perfect writing. In general, there is nothing that does not conform to the way of Confucius and Mencius.

古文：其道盖自比孟轲，以荀况、扬雄为未淳，宁不信然？
现代文：他把自己的思想和孟轲相提并论，认为荀况、扬雄还不够淳正，难道不是这样吗？
English: He compared his own thoughts with Meng Xuan's, and thought that Meng Xuan and Yang Xiong were not honest enough. Isn't that so?

古文：至进谏陈谋，排难恤孤，矫拂媮末，皇皇于仁义，可谓笃道君子矣。
现代文：至于他劝君上、献计谋，论辩哀悼，都能纠正时弊，弘扬仁义之道，真可算得上是信守道义的正人君子了。
English: As far as he could persuade the emperor, devise strategies, debate and mourn, he could correct the ills of the times and promote the path of benevolence and righteousness. He can truly be regarded as an upright gentleman who adheres to morality.

古文：自晋汔隋，老佛显行，圣道不断如带。
现代文：从晋朝到隋朝，道教、佛教盛行，儒学形势危急。
English: From the Jin Dynasty to the Sui Dynasty, Taoism and Buddhism prevailed, and the situation of Confucianism was critical.

古文：诸儒倚天下正议，助为怪神。
现代文：众儒生将合于正道的议论认为是怪异，帮助宣扬邪说。
English: Confucianism students think it's weird to talk about things that are in line with the righteous path, and they help propagate the heresy.

古文：愈独喟然引圣，争四海之惑，虽蒙讪笑，合而复奋，始若未之信，卒大显于时。
现代文：韩愈独自感慨并援引圣人学说，与全国受迷惑的人争辩，虽然遭到嘲笑，跌倒了又爬起来，开始人们不相信他，最终在当代有了很大名气。
English: Han Yu felt alone and invoked the doctrine of sages to argue with the confused people of the whole country. Although he was ridiculed, he fell down and got up again, people began to disbelieve him, and eventually became very famous in modern times.

古文：昔孟轲拒杨、墨，去孔子才二百年。
现代文：过去孟轲抵制杨朱、墨翟的学说，距孔子才两百年。
English: In the past, Meng Xuan resisted the teachings of Yang Zhu and Mo Xuan, only two hundred years after Confucius.

古文：愈排二家，乃去千余岁，拨衰反正，功与齐而力倍之，所以过况、雄为不少矣。
现代文：韩愈反对道教、佛教，离孔子已一千多年了，他能振兴衰落趋势回归正道，功劳和孟轲一样而且费力加倍，他超过荀况、扬雄就很远了。
English: Han Yu opposed Taoism and Buddhism. He was more than a thousand years away from Confucius. He was able to revitalize the declining trend and return to the right path. He did the same work as Meng Xuan and worked twice as hard. He was far ahead of his time and far ahead of his time.

古文：自愈没，其言大行，学者仰之如泰山、北斗云。
现代文：人们认为自从韩愈死后，他的学说极为盛行，学者们对他像泰山、北斗星一样敬仰。
English: It is believed that since Han Yu's death, his theory has been extremely popular, and scholars admire him like Mount Tai and the Big Dipper.

