古文：源贺源贺，自署河西王秃发傉檀之子也。
现代文：源贺，是自封的河西王秃发亻辱檀之子。
English: Genga is the son of the self-proclaimed King of Hexi.

古文：傉檀为乞伏炽磐所灭，贺自乐都来奔。
现代文：秃发亻辱檀被乞伏炽磐灭亡之后，源贺从乐都前来投奔大魏。
English: After the demise of Bald-Faced Goat, who was killed by Beggar Blazing Rock, Genga came from Ledu to join the Wei Dynasty.

古文：贺伟容貌，善风仪。
现代文：源贺容貌魁伟，仪表堂堂。
English: Genga is a great-looking man with a dashing personality.

古文：世祖素闻其名，及见，器其机辩，赐爵西平侯，加龙骧将军。
现代文：世祖向来听说他的名声，及至见到他后，非常器重他的机灵巧辩，赐给他西平侯的爵位，加授龙骧将军。
English: The ancestor had always heard of his reputation, and when he saw him, he highly valued his cunning and skillful argument, and gave him the title of Xiping Marquis and the additional title of Longjing General.

古文：谓贺曰： 卿与朕源同，因事分姓，今可为源氏。 
现代文：世祖对源贺说： 你与我渊源相同，因为某种原因才分属别姓，你现在可以改姓源。 
English: The ancestor said to Yuan He, "You and I have the same origin. For some reason, we have different surnames. You can now change your surname to Yuan."

古文：从击叛胡白龙，又讨吐京胡，皆先登陷陈。进号平西将军。
现代文：源贺跟随世祖攻讨叛逆的胡人白龙，又征讨吐京胡，都是在前头冲锋陷阵，晋封为平西将军。
English: MINAMOTO no He followed his ancestor to attack and subdue the rebellious Hu people, the Bai Long, and also to recruit and subdue the Tu Jing Hu. He was at the forefront of the charge, and was promoted to the post of General of Pingxi.

古文：世祖征凉州，以贺为乡导。
现代文：世祖征讨凉州，以源贺为向导。
English: The ancestor's expedition to conquer Liangzhou, with Yuan He as the guide.

古文：诏问攻战之计。贺对曰： 姑臧城外有四部鲜卑，各为之援。
现代文：向他询问攻击作战的计谋，源贺答道： 姑臧城外有四部鲜卑，各自作为姑臧城的外援。
English: Asked him about the strategy of attacking and fighting, Yuan He replied: There are four subordinate units outside the city of Guzheng, each of which serves as a foreign aid to Guzheng.

古文：然皆是臣祖父旧民，臣愿军前宣国威信，示其福祸，必相率归降。
现代文：但他们都是我祖父属下的旧民，我愿意到军前向他们宣扬大魏国的威信，昭示他们祸福所在，他们必然会相率归降。
English: But they are all the old people who belonged to my grandfather. I am willing to go to the front of the army to preach to them the prestige of the Great Wei Kingdom, to show them where their blessings and misfortunes lie, and they will inevitably fall in line.

古文：外援既服，然后攻其孤城，拔之如反掌耳。 世祖曰： 善。 
现代文：外援已经降服，然后再攻打姑臧这座孤城，占领它真是易如反掌。 世祖说： 很好。 
English: The foreign forces had already surrendered, and then they attacked the isolated city of Guzheng, and it was so easy to occupy it.

古文：于是遣贺率精骑历诸部招慰，下三万馀落，获杂畜十馀万头。
现代文：于是派源贺率领精锐骑兵到各个部落进行招安抚慰，共招降三万余部，获得各种牲畜十余万头。
English: As a result, he sent Yuan He to lead the elite cavalry to various tribes to recruit and appease, recruiting more than 30,000 units in total, and obtaining more than 100,000 heads of various livestock.

古文：及围姑臧，由是无外虑，故得专力攻之。
现代文：到了围攻姑臧的时候，因此而不再担心有人声援，能够集中兵力攻打它。
English: When the time came to lay siege to Gudang, they no longer had to worry about support and were able to concentrate their forces to attack it.

古文：凉州平，迁征西将军，进号西平公。
现代文：平定凉州之后，源贺升任征西将军，爵位进封为西平公。
English: After the subjugation of Liangzhou, Genga was promoted to General of the Western Expedition and given the title of Lord of Xiping.

古文：又从征蠕蠕，击五城、吐京胡，讨盖吴诸贼，皆有功。
现代文：源贺又随从世祖征伐蠕蠕，攻击五城、吐京胡，讨伐盖吴诸贼，都建立了战功。
English: Following his ancestor, Genga also conquered and subdued the Cumans, attacked the Five Cities and the Tu Jinghu, and subdued the Wu bandits, all of which established his war exploits.

古文：拜散骑常侍。
现代文：源贺被授予散骑常侍之职。
English: He was a regular attendant of the imperial court.

古文：从驾临江，为前锋大将。
现代文：源贺随从皇帝前往长江，充任前锋大将。
English: Yuan He followed the emperor to the Yangtze River and served as the vanguard general.

古文：贺为人雄果，每遇强寇，辄自奋击。
现代文：源贺为人英勇果敢，每逢遇到强大的敌军，都自告奋勇主动出击。
English: Genga was a brave and courageous man. Whenever he encountered a powerful enemy army, he volunteered to take the initiative to attack.

古文：世祖戒之曰： 兵凶战危，不宜轻犯；卿可运筹处分，勿恃身力也。 
现代文：世祖劝诫他说： 敌军凶顽，战事危险，不宜轻举妄动，你应当精心运筹妥善处置，不要自恃身体强壮武艺高强。 
English: The patriarch admonished him: "The enemy army is fierce, the war is dangerous, and it is not appropriate to act rashly. You should carefully plan and properly dispose of it, and do not boast of your strong body and high martial arts.

古文：贺本名破羌，是役也，世祖曰； 人之立名，宜其得实，何可滥也？ 
现代文：源贺本来名叫破羌，经过这些战役，世祖说： 一个人取名字，应该使它符合实际，怎么能够随随便便呢。 
English: After these battles, the ancestor said, "If one takes a name, one should make it correspond to reality. How can one take it casually?"

古文：赐名贺焉。
现代文：就赐给他名为贺。
English: and gave him the name Horus.

古文：拜殿中尚书。
现代文：源贺又被授任为殿中尚书。
English: In addition, Genga was appointed to the post of chancellor of the palace.

古文：南安王余为宗爱所杀也，贺部勒禁兵，静遏外内，与南部尚书陆丽决议定策，翼戴高宗。
现代文：南安王拓跋余被宗爱杀死的时候，源贺统领宫中禁兵，稳固地把守宫禁内外，他同南部尚书陆丽商议决定对策，拥戴高宗为帝。
English: When King Tuoba of Nan'an was killed by Zong Ai, Geng He banned soldiers from the imperial palace and firmly guarded both inside and outside the palace. He discussed with Southern Shang Shulli to decide on a countermeasure and supported Gao Zong as emperor.

古文：令丽与刘尼驰诣苑中，奉迎高宗，贺守禁中为之内应。
现代文：让陆丽和刘尼骑马奔往皇苑中，去奉迎高宗，源贺领兵守卫在宫禁中作为他们的内应。
English: Let Lu Li and Liu Ni ride on horseback to the middle of the imperial garden to pay homage to Gaozong, and let Geng He lead the guards in the palace as their inner response.

古文：俄而丽抱高宗单骑而至，贺乃开门。
现代文：不久陆丽单骑抱着高宗来到，源贺就打开宫门。
English: Soon Lu Li came riding alone with Gao Zong in her arms, and Genga opened the palace gate.

古文：高宗即位，社稷大安，贺有力焉。
现代文：高宗即位，大魏社稷得以安定，源贺立下了汗马功劳。
English: Gao Zong ascended the throne, the Great Wei Dynasty was stabilized, and Geng He made great contributions.

古文：转征北将军，加给事中，以定策之勋，进爵西平王。
现代文：转授征北将军，加任给事中之职。凭着在关键之时决定对策的功勋，进封爵位为西平王。
English: He was transferred to the position of general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, and was appointed to the position of the person in charge of affairs. With the merit of deciding the countermeasures at the critical time, he was knighted as the King of Xiping.

古文：高宗即位，班赐百僚，谓贺曰： 朕大赍善人，卿其任意取之，勿谦退也。 
现代文：高宗即位之后，颁令赏赐文武百官，对源贺说： 朕要大大奖赏有功之臣，你需要什么可以任意选取，千万不要谦让。 
English: After Emperor Gao Zong ascended the throne, he issued an order to reward hundreds of civil and military officials, and said to Geng He: "I want to greatly reward meritorious vassals. You can choose whatever you need, and don't be modest.

古文：贺辞，固使取之，贺唯取戎马一匹而已。
现代文：源贺极力辞让，高宗坚决要他选取，源贺仅仅要了一匹军马而已。
English: Genga tried his best to give in, but Gaozong insisted that he choose. Genga only asked for a war horse.

古文：是时，断狱多滥，贺上书曰： 案律：谋反之家，其子孙虽养他族，追还就戮，所以绝罪人之类，彰大逆之辜；其为劫贼应诛者，兄弟子姪在大远，道隔关津，皆不坐。
现代文：当时，官吏断案多有量刑过度等不当之处，源贺为此向皇帝上书说： 法律规定：凡是阴谋反叛朝廷的人，他的子孙即使被别的宗族收养，也要追回来予以杀戮，这是为了根绝罪人的同类，昭示反叛者大逆不道的罪行；那些犯了抢劫偷盗之罪而应当诛杀的人，他的兄弟子侄在远方，道路有关隘渡口被阻隔，都不株连问罪。
English: At that time, there were many cases of excessive sentencing and other improprieties in the cases decided by officials. For this reason, Genga wrote to the emperor, "The law stipulates that anyone who plots to rebel against the imperial court, even if his descendants are adopted by other clans, must be traced back and killed. This is to eradicate the same kind of criminals and show the rebels the crime of high treason; those who have committed the crime of robbery and theft and should be killed, his brothers and nephews are far away, and the road is blocked by the relevant narrow ferry, are not even questioned.

古文：窃惟先朝制律之意，以不同谋，非绝类之罪，故特垂不死之诏。
现代文：我私下考虑先朝制定这种法律的用意，是因为他们不是同谋者，又不属于根绝同类之罪，所以特别定下不予处死的诏令。
English: It was thought by courtiers that the significance of enacting this law in the previous dynasty was to prevent complicity, and if the crime was not genocide, it was necessary to issue a special edict not to sit together.

古文：若年十三已下，家人首恶，计谋所不及，愚以为可原其命，没入县官。 
现代文：如果年龄在十三岁以下，他的家人犯罪是首恶者，其策划图谋都与他不相干，我以为可以免去他的死罪，没收到县衙充当苦役就行。 
English: If he is under the age of thirteen, and his family members are the worst offenders, and his plans and schemes have nothing to do with him, I thought I could exempt him from the death penalty, and he could do hard labor without receiving the county bail.

古文：高宗纳之。
现代文：高宗采纳了他的意见。
English: Gaozong accepted his opinion.

古文：出为征南将军、冀州刺史，改封陇西王。
现代文：源贺出任为征南将军、冀州刺史，改封为陇西王。
English: Genga was appointed as the general of the Southern Expedition and the governor of Jizhou Province, and his title was changed to the King of Shaanxi Province.

古文：贺上书曰： 臣闻：人之所宝，莫宝于生全；德之厚者，莫厚于宥死。
现代文：源贺向皇帝上书说： 微臣听说：人最宝贵的，莫过于保全自己的生命；恩德中最厚重的，莫过于宽宥他人的死罪。
English: Minamoto no He wrote to the emperor saying, "We, the ministers, have heard that the most precious of human rights is to preserve one's own life, and that the greatest act of kindness is to forgive the capital crimes of others.

古文：然犯死之罪，难以尽恕，权其轻重，有可矜恤。
现代文：然而犯了死罪的人，不能全部都予以宽恕，应当权衡其罪行的轻重，有的是可以怜惜的。
English: However, those who have committed capital crimes cannot all be pardoned. The severity of their crimes should be weighed, and some can be pitied.

古文：今劲寇游魂于北，狡贼负险于南，其在疆场，犹须防戍。
现代文：如今北边有强劲的敌寇经常骚扰，南边有狡诈的贼人负隅捣乱，那里的边疆战场，还须严加防备戍守。
English: Nowadays, there are strong enemy raiders in the north that often harass, and cunning thieves in the south that cause trouble. The frontier battlefields there still need to be strictly guarded.

古文：臣愚以为自非大逆、赤手杀人之罪，其坐赃及盗与过误之愆应入死者，皆可原命，谪守边境。
现代文：为臣愚见以为只要不是大逆谋反、蓄意杀人之罪，那些替盗贼窝赃和过失杀人应当处死的人，都可以保全他的性命，将其贬谪充军戍守边境。
English: The vassal foolishly thought that as long as it was not the crime of high treason, conspiracy and premeditated murder, those who should be put to death for theft, concealment and manslaughter could save his life and demean him as an army guarding the border.

古文：是则已断之体，更受全生之恩；徭役之家，渐蒙休息之惠。
现代文：这样做既符合断案的规矩，又使这些人受到保全性命的恩德；服徭役的人家，能够逐渐蒙受休养生息的好处。
English: Doing so not only conforms to the rules for deciding cases, but also enables these people to receive the benefit of preserving their lives; the families of those who serve as guards can gradually enjoy the benefits of rest and recuperation.

古文：刑措之化，庶几在兹。
现代文：刑罚举措所达到的感化教育，也许就在于此。
English: It is hoped that this will be the start of an improvement in penal measures.

古文：《虞书》曰 流宥五刑 ，此其义也。
现代文：《虞书》上说 用流放来赦免五刑 ，就是这个意思。
English: That's what it means when it says in the "Book of the State" that the Five Punishments can be pardoned by exile.

古文：臣受恩深重，无以仰答，将违阙庭，豫增系恋，敢上瞽言，唯加裁察！ 
现代文：微臣蒙受皇上的恩宠十分深重，无以报答，现在将要远别朝廷，未行之前更增添系恋之情，所以大胆地进上愚昧的意见，还望陛下明察裁断。 
English: Our vassal has received the grace of the emperor very deeply, and there is no way to repay it. Now he will be far away from the imperial court, and before he goes, he will be even more in love. Therefore, he boldly enters into foolish opinions, and hopes that His Majesty will judge clearly.

古文：高宗纳之。
现代文：高宗接受了他的建议。
English: Gaozong accepted his opinion.

古文：已后入死者，皆恕死徙边。
现代文：以后犯了死罪的人，都被免于处死而流放到边境。
English: Those who later committed capital crimes were exempted from execution and exiled to the border.

古文：久之，高宗谓群臣曰： 源贺劝朕宥诸死刑，徙弃北番诸戍，自尔至今，一岁所活殊为不少，生济之理既多，边戍之兵有益。
现代文：过了许久，高宗对群臣说道： 源贺劝朕宽宥各种死刑，将其贬徙充军到北边的各个戍所，从那时到现在，一年之中得以活命的人实在不少，这样既表明了救济民生的大理，又对充实边戍的兵力有好处。
English: After a long time had passed, Gaozong said to his courtiers: "Gen. He advised me to pardon all kinds of death sentences, and to deport them to various camps in the north. From then until now, there have been quite a few people who have been able to survive during the year. This not only shows the principle of relieving the people's livelihood, but is also good for enriching the troops of the frontier.

古文：卿等事朕，致何善意也？
现代文：你们侍奉朕，有什么好的意见吗？
English: You serve me, do you have any good suggestions?

古文：苟人人如贺，朕治天下复何忧哉！
现代文：假如人人都像源贺那样，朕治理天下又有什么忧虑呢！
English: If everyone were like Genga, how could we worry about ruling the world?

古文：顾忆诚言，利实广矣。 
现代文：回想他那一番忠诚的言辞，所得的益处实在是多啊。 
English: When you think back to his most loyal utterances, the benefits have been enormous.

古文：群臣咸曰： 非忠臣不能进此计，非圣明不能纳此言。 
现代文：朝中群臣都说道： 不是忠臣不能进献这样的计策，不是圣明的君主不会采纳这样的意见。 
English: The ministers all said, "No loyal minister would make such a suggestion, and no sage prince would accept such a suggestion."

古文：贺之临州，鞫狱以情，徭役简省。
现代文：源贺到了冀州以后，凭着情理来审讯囚犯，尽量减省百姓的徭役。
English: After Geng He arrived in Jizhou, he used reason to interrogate prisoners, and tried to reduce the number of common people in the camp.

古文：武邑郡奸人石华告沙门道可与贺谋反，有司有闻。
现代文：武邑郡有个奸邪之人石华，状告僧人道可与源贺图谋反叛朝廷，有司将此事上奏皇帝。
English: There was a traitor in Wuyi County, Shi Hua, who accused the monk, Duan Ke, of plotting with Yuan He to rebel against the imperial court. A magistrate reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：高宗谓群臣曰； 贺诚心事国，朕为卿等保之，无此明矣。 
现代文：高宗对群臣说： 源贺忠心耿耿为国效力，朕向你们替他担保，没有此事是非常明显的。 
English: Gao Zong said to the courtiers, "Gen He has been loyal to the country, and I will vouch for him to you. It is very obvious that this is not the case.

古文：乃精加讯检，华果引诬。
现代文：就令人细致地加以侦讯检查，石华果然犯了诬告之罪。
English: As a result, the court ordered a careful interrogation, and Shihua admitted that it was a false accusation.

古文：于是遣使者诏贺曰 卿以忠诚款至，著自先朝，以丹青之洁而受苍蝇之汙。
现代文：于是高宗派遣使者向源贺传达诏令说： 你以至忠至诚之心，称著于先朝，以丹青一样的光明磊落而蒙受苍蝇的玷污。
English: As a result, Emperor Gaozong sent an emissary to convey the imperial edict to Yuan He, saying: You are famous for your loyalty and sincerity in the previous dynasty, and you have been tarnished by flies with the same brilliance as Danqing.

古文：朕登时研检，已加极法，故遣宣意。
现代文：朕立即对此事加以检查验证，已将诬告之人处以极刑，所以派人前来宣示朕的旨意。
English: I immediately checked and verified this matter, and I have sentenced the person who falsely accused me to capital punishment, so I sent someone to come and declare my will.

古文：其善绥所莅，勿以嚣谤之言致损虑也。 
现代文：你应安心于所任的职位，不要因为诽谤之言而影响自己的事情。 
English: You should be comfortable in your position and not let slander affect your business.

古文：贺上书谢。书奏，高宗顾谓左右曰： 以贺之忠诚，尚致其诬，不若是者，可无慎乎！ 
现代文：源贺向高宗上书表示感谢，书信奏上皇帝，高宗对左右的大臣说： 就凭源贺这样忠诚的人，尚且招致他人诬陷，不如他的人，难道可以不谨慎从事吗？ 
English: Genge expressed his gratitude to Gao Zong in a letter. When the letter was delivered to the emperor, Gao Zong said to the ministers around him: Even though a loyal person like Genge has caused others to frame him, can a person who is not as good as him not be prudent?

古文：时考殿最，贺治为第一，赐衣马器物，班宣天下。
现代文：当时朝廷考核官员政绩的上下等次，源贺名列第一，皇帝赐给他衣马器物，在全国颁布宣扬他的事迹。
English: At that time, the imperial court evaluated the performance of officials in the lower and upper ranks, and Genga ranked first. The emperor gave him clothes and horse utensils, and promulgated his deeds throughout the country.

古文：贺上表请代，朝议以贺得民情，不许。
现代文：源贺向皇帝上表请求派人代替他的职务，朝廷议论由于源贺很得民心，不予准许。
English: Genga petitioned the emperor to send someone to take his place, but the court argued that since Genga was popular, it would not be allowed.

古文：在州七年，乃徵拜太尉。
现代文：源贺在冀州任职七年，被征召回朝任太尉。
English: Geng He served in Jizhou for seven years and was called back to the imperial court as a captain.

古文：蠕蠕寇边，贺从驾追讨，破之。
现代文：蠕蠕侵犯边境，源贺跟随皇帝进行征讨，把蠕蠕打败。
English: When the Cree invaded the border, Geng He followed the emperor to fight and defeat the Cree.

古文：显祖将传位于京兆王子推，时贺都督诸军屯漠南，乃驰传徵贺。
现代文：显祖打算把皇位传给京兆王子推，当时源贺正都督诸军屯驻在漠南，就派人驰往驻地召回源贺。
English: Emperor Xianzu planned to pass the imperial throne to Prince Jingzhao. At that time, Genge Zheng, the military governor of the capital, was stationed in the south of the country, and he sent someone to the garrison to recall Genge.

古文：贺既至，乃命公卿议之。
现代文：源贺到来之后，显祖就令朝中公卿议论传位之事。
English: After the arrival of Genga, Emperor Showa ordered the nobles in the court to discuss the succession.

古文：贺正色固执不可。
现代文：源贺表情严肃，坚持认为这样做不可。
English: Genga, with a serious expression, insisted that this was impossible.

古文：即诏贺持节奉皇帝玺绶以授高祖。
现代文：于是就诏令源贺持节把皇帝玺绶传授给了高祖。
English: Therefore, Emperor Gaozu was given the imperial scepter according to the Imperial edict of the Minamoto no Haji festival.

古文：是岁，河西敕勒叛，遣贺率众讨之，降二千馀落。倍道兼行，追贼党郁朱于等至枹罕，大破之，斩首五千馀级，虏男女万馀口、杂畜三万馀头。
现代文：这一年，河西敕勒人叛乱，朝廷派源贺率领部众前往征讨，降服部族二千余落，昼夜兼行，追击贼党郁朱于等人到达粃罕，大败敌军，斩首五千余级，虏获男女一万余人、各种牲畜三万余头。
English: In the same year, when the people of Mule in Hexi rebelled, the imperial court sent Yuan He to lead the troops to conquer and subjugate more than two thousand tribes, marching day and night, chasing the bandit Yu Zhuyu and others to arrive in Shuhan, defeating the enemy army, beheading more than five thousand people, capturing more than ten thousand men and women, and more than thirty thousand heads of various livestock.

古文：复追统万、高平、上邽三镇叛敕勒至于金城，斩首三千级。
现代文：接着又追击统万、高平、上圭阝反叛的敕勒人到达金城，斩首三千级。
English: Next, he pursued the rebellious Qile people of Tongman, Gaoping, and Shangguiyi to Jincheng, and beheaded 3,000 of them.

古文：贺依古今法及先儒耆旧之说，略采至要，为十二陈图以上之。
现代文：源贺依照古今兵法和古代儒者、年老旧友的言论，简略地采用最重要的内容，撰写了《十二阵图》，把它进献给皇帝。
English: According to the ancient and modern warfare and the ancient Confucianism, the old and old friends' remarks, the most important content was briefly adopted, and the "Twelve Arrays" was written by Geng He, and it was presented to the emperor.

古文：显祖览而嘉焉。
现代文：显祖读了之后十分称赞。
English: Hsien Tzu praised it highly after reading it.

古文：贺以年老辞位，诏不许。
现代文：源贺因年老而请求辞去官职，皇帝不准。
English: Due to his old age, Genko requested to resign from his official post, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：又诏都督三道诸军，屯于漠南。
现代文：皇帝又令他都督三道诸军，屯驻在大沙漠之南。
English: The emperor also made him the governor of three armies, stationed in the south of the great desert.

古文：是时，每岁秋冬，遣军三道并出，以备北寇，至春中乃班师。
现代文：那时，每年秋冬两季，朝廷都要派遣军队三路并出，以防备北边的敌寇，到第二年春季才班师回朝。
English: At that time, every autumn and winter, the imperial court had to send troops three ways simultaneously to guard against enemy raiders from the north, and the division would only return to the North in the spring of the following year.

古文：贺以劳役京都，又非御边长计，乃上言： 请募诸州镇有武健者三万人，复其徭赋，厚加赈恤，分为三部。
现代文：源贺认为这样做既加重了京都的劳役负担，又不是守御边地的长远之计，就向朝廷进言： 请求招募各州镇勇武健壮的人三万人，免去其徭役赋税，给予优厚的赈恤，把他们分为三部。
English: Genga believed that this increased the burden of labor in Kyoto and was not a long-term plan to protect the outlying areas, so he proposed to the imperial court: Request the recruitment of 30,000 brave and robust people from all prefectures and towns, exempt them from labor taxes, give them generous pensions, and divide them into three parts.

古文：二镇之间筑城，城置万人，给强弩十二床，武卫三百乘。
现代文：两个城镇之间建筑一座城，每城设置一万人，配备强弩十二床，武卫三百乘。
English: A city was built between the two towns, with ten thousand people in each city, equipped with twelve strong rafts and three hundred armed guards.

古文：弩一床，给牛六头。武卫一乘，给牛二头。
现代文：弩一床，配给牛六头，武卫一乘，配给牛二头。
English: Toad one bed, ration six head of cattle, Wu Wei one ride, ration two head of cattle.

古文：多造马枪及诸器械，使武略大将二人以镇抚之。
现代文：多多制造马枪和各种器械，派武略大将二人前去坐镇安抚。
English: Harnesses, weapons and other equipment were mass-produced, and each city was guarded by two generals skilled in martial arts.

古文：冬则讲武，春则种殖，并戍并耕，则兵未劳而有盈畜矣。
现代文：冬季讲习武艺，春季耕种养殖，一边戍守一边耕牧，那样就能做到兵士不过于辛劳而牲畜有盈余。
English: Martial arts training in the winter, spring farming and breeding, and farming and herding on the one hand, so that soldiers can do no more than hard work and livestock can have a surplus.

古文：又于白道南三处立仓，运近州镇租粟以充之，足食足兵，以备不虞，于宜为便。
现代文：又在白道南边建立三处仓库，把附近州镇的租粟运到那里以充实仓廪，有了足够的粮食和足够的兵员，就可用来防备意外之事，又合适又便当。
English: They also built three warehouses on the south side of Baidu Road, and transported the rent poppies from nearby Zhouzhen to fill the warehouses. With enough grain and enough soldiers, they could be used to prevent accidents. It was convenient and convenient.

古文：不可岁常举众，连动京师，令朝庭恆有北顾之虑也。 
现代文：不能每年都兴师动众，牵动京师，使朝廷长期有北顾之忧。 
English: It is not possible to arouse the public every year and attract the Beijing division, so that the imperial court has long-term worries about the north.

古文：事寝不报。
现代文：这件事被搁置起来没有结果。
English: The motion was put on hold with no response.

古文：又上书称病笃，乞骸骨，至于再三，乃许之。
现代文：源贺又向朝廷上书说自己病重，请求辞去官职，直至两次三次上书，皇帝才予准许。
English: Genga also wrote to the imperial court to say that he was seriously ill and asked to resign from his official post. The emperor did not grant permission until he had written twice or three times.

古文：朝有大议皆就询访，又给衣药珍羞。
现代文：朝中凡是有大事要商议都要征询他的意见，又赐给他衣服药物美味。
English: Whenever there were important matters to be discussed in the court, his opinion was sought, and he was given clothes, medicine, and delicacies.

古文：太和元年二月，疗疾于温汤，高祖、文明太后遣使者屡问消息，太医视疾。
现代文：太和元年二月，源贺在温泉疗治疾病，高祖、文明太后屡次派使者前去探问消息，派太医前去给他看病。
English: In February of the first year of the Taisho era, Genga was treated for an illness at a hot spring. Emperor Gaozu and Empress Dowager Bunmei repeatedly sent emissaries to inquire about the news and sent a doctor to see him.

古文：患笃，还京师。
现代文：源贺病危，回到了京师。
English: Genga fell seriously ill and returned to Kyoto.

古文：三年秋薨，年七十三。
现代文：留下遗嘱教训他的几个儿子说： 我不久前因为年老患病而辞去官职，上天慈爱降恩，爵位将传给你们。
English: He left a will to instruct his sons, saying: "I have recently resigned from my official position due to old age and illness. God willing, the title will be passed down to you."

古文：赠侍中、太尉、陇西王印绶，谥曰宣，赙杂彩五百匹，赐辒辌车及命服、温明秘器，陪葬于金陵。
现代文：你们都不要骄傲狂妄，不要荒疏怠慢，不要奢侈越轨，不要嫉妒他人；有疑难要多请教，言语要审慎，行为要恭谨，服饰要适度；要做到抑恶扬善，亲贤远佞；眼睛观察事物定要求其真实，两耳听话一定要求其正确；以忠诚勤勉去侍奉国君，以清廉俭朴来要求自己。
English: All of you should not be proud and arrogant, should not be careless and negligent, should not be extravagant and deviant, and should not be jealous of others; if you have any doubts, you should consult more, your words should be prudent, your behavior should be respectful, and your clothing should be appropriate; you should do your best to suppress evil and promote good, and you should be kind and far-sighted; observing things with your eyes should require them to be true, and listening with your ears should require them to be correct; serve the sovereign with loyalty and diligence, and demand yourself with cleanliness and frugality.

古文：长子延，性谨厚好学。初以功臣子拜侍御中散，赐爵武城子，西冶都将。
现代文：我死之后，殡葬时用普通的衣服和单薄的小棺木，就足以表明你们的一片孝心，殉葬用的葬器之类，一概不要使用。 太和三年秋天，源贺去世，终年七十三岁。
English: After my death, it is enough to show your filial piety to use ordinary clothes and a thin small coffin at the time of burial, and not to use any funerary utensils for funerals.In the autumn of the 3rd year of the Taiwa era, Genga passed away at the age of 73.

古文：卒，赠凉州刺史、广武侯，谥曰简。子鳞袭。
现代文：皇帝追授他为侍中、太尉，追赠陇西王的印绶，规定其谥号为宣，赐给办理丧事用的杂色丝绸五百匹，以及丧车、命服、各种殉葬的器物，陪葬先帝于金陵。
English: The emperor posthumously awarded him with the titles of chamberlain and captain, presented him with the seal of the King of Jinsi, stipulated that his posthumous name be Xuan, and gave him five hundred pieces of multi-colored silk to be used for funerals, as well as funeral cars, life jackets, and various funerary objects to accompany the former emperor in the Jinling.

古文：延弟思礼，后赐名怀，谦恭宽雅，有大度。
现代文：源延之弟源思礼，后赐名为怀，为人谦恭宽雅，有大度。
English: The younger brother of MINAMOTO no Nobunaga, MINAMOTO no Sirei, later given the name "Hai," was a humble, courteous, broad-minded, and generous person.

古文：高宗末，为侍御中散。
现代文：高宗在位末年，源怀任侍御中散。
English: In the last years of the reign of Emperor Gaozong, MINAMOTO no Kuniyasu resigned from the position of Grand Chamberlain.

古文：父贺辞老，诏怀受父爵，拜征南将军。
现代文：父亲源贺告老辞去官爵，皇帝令源怀承袭父亲的爵位，授任他为征南将军。
English: His father, Geng He Gui Lao, resigned his title of nobility, and the emperor ordered Geng Huai to inherit his father's title and appointed him as a general of the Southern Expedition.

古文：寻为持节、督诸军，屯于漠南。
现代文：不久任持节、督诸军，屯驻在大沙漠之南。
English: He was soon appointed as the military governor and stationed in the south of the great desert.

古文：还，除殿中尚书，出为长安镇将、雍州刺史。
现代文：源怀还朝，被授予殿中尚书之职，出任长安镇将、雍州刺史。
English: When Yuan Huai returned to the imperial court, he was awarded the post of court secretary, and served as the general of Chang'an Town and the chief historian of Yongzhou.

古文：清俭有惠政，善于抚恤，劫盗息止，流民皆相率来还。
现代文：源怀为官清廉而有好的政绩，善于抚恤百姓，所任之处盗贼止息，流民全都相继还家。
English: Yuanhuai was a clean official with good political achievements and was good at supporting the people. Wherever he was assigned, the thieves stopped and the displaced people all returned home one after another.

古文：岁馀，复拜殿中尚书，加侍中，参都曹事。
现代文：一年多以后，源怀再次被授任为殿中尚书，加授侍中，参与都曹事。
English: More than a year later, Yuan Huai was once again appointed to the post of palace secretary, and was also awarded the post of chamberlain, and participated in the affairs of the capital.

古文：又督诸军征蠕蠕，六道大将咸受节度。
现代文：源怀又督率诸军征讨蠕蠕，六路大将都受他的节制调度。
English: Yuan Huai also led the army to fight against Cormac, and the six generals were all subject to his restrained scheduling.

古文：迁尚书令，参议律令。
现代文：后迁任尚书令，参加议定朝廷法律命令。
English: Later, he was transferred to Shang Shuling and participated in the negotiation of the imperial court's legal orders.

古文：后例降为公。
现代文：后来按例降爵位为公。
English: Later, as usual, he was demoted to a knighthood.

古文：除司州刺史。
现代文：任司州刺史。
English: Appointed to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：从驾南征，加卫大将军，领中军事。
现代文：源怀跟从皇帝南征，加授为卫大将军，负责中军事务。
English: Yuan Huai followed the Emperor's Southern Expedition and was awarded the title of General of the Guards, responsible for the affairs of the Chinese army.

古文：以母忧去职，赐帛三百匹、谷千石。
现代文：源怀由于为母亲服丧而辞去官职。皇帝赐给他帛三百匹、谷一千石。
English: Genkai resigned from his official post due to mourning for his mother. The emperor gave him three hundred horses and a thousand koku.

古文：十九年，除征北大将军、夏州刺史，转都督雍岐东秦诸军事、征西大将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：太和十九年，源怀被授予征北大将军、夏州刺史之职，转任都督雍岐东秦三州诸军事、征西大将军、雍州刺史。
English: In the 19th year of the Taihe era, Yuan Huai was awarded the posts of General of the Expedition to the North and Historian of the Xia Prefecture, and was transferred to the post of the Governor of the Military Region of the Eastern Qin and Three Provinces of Yongqi, General of the Expedition to the West, and Historian of the Yongzhou Prefecture.

古文：景明二年，徵为尚书左仆射，加特进。
现代文：景明二年，源怀被召回朝任尚书左仆射，加赐为特进。
English: In the second year of the reign of King Jingming, Yuan Huai was recalled to the imperial court to serve as Shang Shuxi's second-in-command, and was also given a special promotion.

古文：时有诏，以奸吏犯罪，每多逃遁，因眚乃出，并皆释然。
现代文：当时皇帝有令，由于奸邪的官吏犯了罪以后，每每有许多人逃遁而未被追究，这些人有了过失就逃走，都感到怡然自得。
English: At that time, the emperor had decreed that because many treacherous officials had committed crimes, many people had fled without being prosecuted. These people fled when they were guilty, and they all felt happy.

古文：自今已后，犯罪不问轻重，而藏窜者悉远流。
现代文：从今以后，凡是犯罪的人不问其罪行轻重，只要是藏匿逃窜者全部流放到边远之地。
English: From now on, anyone who commits a crime, no matter how serious, will be banished to a remote place, as long as they are hiding fugitives.

古文：若永避不出，兄弟代徙。
现代文：如果长期躲避不出来，就让他的兄弟代替他远徙。
English: If he cannot escape for a long time, let his brother go in his place.

古文：怀乃奏曰： 谨按知制：逃吏不在赦限。
现代文：源怀于是向皇帝上表启奏说： 按照朝廷的条令制度：犯罪而逃跑的吏员不在赦免之列。
English: Yuan Huai then made a report to the emperor, saying: According to the imperial court's regulation system: officials who commit crimes and escape are not included in the pardon.

古文：窃惟圣朝之恩，事异前宥，诸流徙在路，尚蒙旋反，况有未发而仍遣边戍？
现代文：我私下考虑圣上的恩德，此事同先前宽宥的政策有所不同，过去许多被流放还在半路的人，尚且能获赦免而得以回还，何况有的人并未犯罪，还要把他们遣徙到边戍吗？
English: Privately, I'm thinking about the grace of God. This is different from the previous policy of forgiveness. In the past, many people who were exiled halfway could be pardoned and returned. Moreover, some people did not commit a crime. Should they be deported to the border?

古文：按守宰犯罪，逃走者众，禄润既优，尚有兹失，及蒙恩宥，卒然得还。
现代文：查地方官犯罪，逃走的人甚多，他们俸禄已经十分优厚，尚且还有这种过失，及至他们蒙受恩宥，忽然又得以返还。
English: When the magistrates were tried for their crimes, a large number of fugitives, who were already well paid, were found guilty of the same, and were pardoned and allowed to return.

古文：今独苦此等，恐非均一之法。
现代文：如今惟独苦了一般的吏员，恐怕不是平等之法。
English: It is not the law of equality, I'm afraid, that ordinary officials are now the only ones to suffer.

古文：如臣管执，谓宜免之。 
现代文：如果让我掌管此事，我以为应当宽免他们。 
English: If I were in charge of this, I think they should be pardoned.

古文：书奏，门下以成式既班，驳奏不许。
现代文：书表呈上以后，门下省认为现行条令已经颁布，就把他所奏之事驳回不予准许。
English: After the book was submitted, the subordinate province considered that the current regulation had already been promulgated, and rejected the matter he reported and did not grant permission.

古文：怀重奏曰： 臣以为法贵经通，治尚简要，刑宪之设，所以纲罗罪人。
现代文：源怀又重新上奏说： 臣以为朝廷法令贵在执行通畅，治政崇尚简明切要，设立刑罚之法，目的在于惩治犯罪之人。
English: Yuan Huai reported again, "My subordinates think that the imperial decrees should be implemented smoothly, that it is important to govern concisely, and that the purpose of establishing a criminal law is to punish criminals.

古文：苟理之所备，不在繁典；行之可通，岂容峻制？
现代文：假若符合道理，法令就不在乎是否繁多；执行法令可以通畅，岂能容允制度的严苛。
English: If it is reasonable, it does not matter whether there are many laws and regulations; the implementation of laws and regulations can be smooth, but the rigidity of the system cannot be tolerated.

古文：此乃古今之达政，救世之恆规。
现代文：这就是古今的达政，济世之常规。
English: This is the ancient and modern Dazheng, the rule of the world.

古文：伏寻条制，勋品已下，罪发逃亡，遇恩不宥，仍流妻子。
现代文：我考察现行的条例制度，被授予勋品以下的人，因犯罪被揭发而逃亡的，一律不予宽宥，还要流放他们的妻儿。
English: I examine the present system of regulations. Those who have been awarded less than decorations, and those who have fled because their crimes have been exposed, will not be pardoned, and their wives and children will be exiled.

古文：虽欲抑绝奸途，匪为通式。
现代文：这虽然是想要抑制和阻绝奸邪之路，但这不是通用的法式。
English: Although this is an attempt to curb and block the road of treachery, it is not a universal French style.

古文：谨按事条，侵官败法，专据流外，岂九品已上，人皆贞白也？
现代文：我又查寻条例规定，违犯职守的败坏法纪的，专门惩办九品官以下的人，难道九品以上的官员，人人都坚贞清白吗？
English: I also looked up the regulations stipulating that those who violate their duties and corrupt the law and discipline should be specially punished below the ninth grade. Are all officials above the ninth grade innocent?

古文：其诸州守宰，职任清流，至有贪浊，事发逃窜，而遇恩免罪。
现代文：各州郡的地方官，一般都清廉有威望，至于有贪婪污浊的人，因事实被揭发而逃窜，但遇到恩赦可以免罪。
English: Local officials in all states and counties are generally honest and honorable. As for those who are greedy and corrupt, they may flee when the facts are revealed, but they can be exonerated if they are pardoned.

古文：勋品已下，独乖斯例。
现代文：勋品以下的官员，独独与这种规定不一致。
English: Only officials below the level of decoration are not consistent with this provision.

古文：如此，则宽纵上流，法切下吏，育物有差，惠罚不等。
现代文：像这样做，就是宽待纵容九品以上的官员，而严责品位以外的吏员，使得对官吏的培育安抚有差别，恩惠与惩罚不均等。
English: To do so is to treat officials above the ninth grade with leniency and indulgence, while severely reprimanding officials outside the grade, making the cultivation and appeasement of officials different, and the favors and punishments unequal.

古文：又谋逆滔天，轻恩尚免；吏犯微罪，独不蒙赦，使大宥之经不通，开生之路致壅，进违古典，退乖今律？辄率愚见，以为宜停。 
现代文：又有图谋叛逆罪恶滔天的人，遇到恩宥尚且可以免罪，而吏员犯了轻微的罪过，独独不受到赦免，致使大赦之法不能通行，开生之路受到阻塞，上违古代典宪，下悖现时法律，依臣之愚见，认为应当停止。 
English: There are also people who plot treason and commit heinous crimes, who can be pardoned if they are pardoned, while officials commit minor crimes and are not pardoned, so that the law of amnesty cannot be passed, the road to enlightenment is blocked, it violates the ancient Constitution, violates the current law, and follows the stupidity of the minister, and believes that it should be stopped.

古文：书奏，世宗纳之。
现代文：书表奏上以后，世宗采纳了他的意见。
English: After the reading of the book, Sejong accepted his opinion.

古文：其年，除车骑大将军、凉州大中正。
现代文：这一年，源怀被任命为车骑大将军、凉州大中正。
English: In the same year, Geng Huai was appointed as the General of Chariot and Cavalry and the Vice-President of Liangzhou University.

古文：怀奏曰： 南贼游魂江扬，职为乱逆，肆厥淫昏，月滋日甚。
现代文：源怀向皇帝上书说： 南方贼寇游弋于长江、扬子江，经常挑起战乱，骄奢淫逸之风日益滋长。
English: Yuan Huai wrote a letter to the emperor saying: Southern thieves and robbers roam the Yangtze River and the Yangtze River, often provoking wars, and the trend of arrogance and debauchery is growing.

古文：贵臣重将，靡才孑遗，崇信奸回，昵比阉竖，内外离心，骨肉猜叛。
现代文：其贵臣重将，所剩无几，崇信奸佞之徒，亲昵阉宦之人，内外离心离德，骨肉猜忌叛逆。
English: There are only a few remaining of his dignitaries and generals, who revered traitors and those who befriended them, who were alienated from morality both inside and out, and who were suspicious of rebellion.

古文：萧宝融僭号于荆郢，其雍州刺史萧衍勒兵而东袭，上流之众已逼其郊。
现代文：萧宝融在荆郢僭位，其雍州刺史萧衍率军向东攻袭，上游的军队已逼近其京城郊野。
English: Xiao Baorong was in Jingyuan, and his Yongzhou subordinate Xiao Yan led the army to attack to the east. The upstream army had approached the outskirts of the capital.

古文：广陵、京口各持兵而怀两望，钟离、淮阴并鼎峙而观得失。
现代文：广陵、京口守将各自持兵而两边观望，钟离、淮阴一带相互鼎峙而静观得失。
English: The keepers of Guangling and Jingkou will hold their troops and watch from both sides, while the keepers of Zhongli and Huaiyin will stand opposite each other and watch the gains and losses.

古文：秣陵孤危，制不出门。
现代文：秣陵孤立危急，闭门不出。
English: Fuling is isolated and in a critical situation, and cannot be left behind closed doors.

古文：君子小人，并罗灾祸，延首北望，朝不及夕。
现代文：江南的君子小人，全都遭受灾祸，翘首北望，朝不保夕。
English: The gentleman villains in the south of the Yangtze River have all suffered calamities, looking to the north, insecure.

古文：斯实天启之期，吞并之会。
现代文：这实在是上天赐予的大好时机，实行吞并的难得机遇。
English: This is truly a heaven-sent opportunity, a rare chance to carry out annexation.

古文：乘厥萧墙之衅，藉其分崩之隙，东据历阳，兼指瓜步，缘江镇戍，达于荆郢。
现代文：我朝可以乘其萧墙之衅，借其分崩之机，发兵向东占据历阳，兼程指向瓜步，沿长江镇戍，直达于荆郢。
English: Our dynasty can take advantage of its provocation of the collapse of the wall, take advantage of the opportunity of its collapse, send troops to the east to occupy Liyang, and also point to Guapu, along the Yangtze River Zhenya, up to Jingyao.

古文：然后奋雷电之威，布山河之信，则江西之地，不刃自来，吴会之乡，指期可举。
现代文：然后振奋我军雷电之威，广布我朝山河之信，那么长江西面之地，不用兵就自会来降，吴会一带地方，指日可以占领。
English: Then, I will invigorate the thunder and lightning power of our army, and spread the message that I am the ruler of mountains and rivers. Then, the land to the west of the Yangtze River will come down without soldiers, and the areas around Wu will be occupied by the sun.

古文：昔士治有言，皓若暴死，更立贤主，文武之官，各得其任，则劲敌也。
现代文：昔日王士治曾经说过，孙皓倘若暴死，另外拥立贤主，其文武之官，各得其任，就会是我们的劲敌。
English: Long ago, Wang Shizhu once said that if Sun Yat-sen died violently and another wise leader was appointed, and his officials of literature and military affairs each had their own duties, they would be our fierce enemies.

古文：若萧衍克就，上下同心，非直后图之难，实亦扬境危逼。
现代文：如果萧衍举事成功，其上下同心一致，那么非但我朝今后图谋很难，而且会使我扬州境内受到危逼。
English: If Xiao Yan's petition is successful, and his superiors and subordinates are of the same mind, then it will be difficult for me to plot in the future, and I will be in danger in Yangzhou.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：寿春之去建鄴，七百而已，山川水陆，彼所谙利。
现代文：寿春距离建邺，只七百里地而已，那一带的山川水陆，萧衍都十分熟悉。
English: Shouchun is only seven hundred miles away from Jianye, and Xiao Yan is very familiar with the mountains, rivers and land in that area.

古文：脱江湘无波，君臣效职，藉水凭舟，倏忽而至，寿春容不自保，江南将若之何？
现代文：倘若江南没有风波，其君臣效力尽职，借水凭舟，转眼而至，寿春都不能自保，对江南又能怎样呢？
English: If there is no turmoil in the south of the Yangtze River, if its princes and ministers perform their duties effectively, borrow water by boat, and arrive in the blink of an eye, Shuchun cannot protect itself, what can it do to the south of the Yangtze River?

古文：今宝卷邑居有土崩之形，边城无继援之光，清荡江区，实在今日。
现代文：如今萧宝卷政权有土崩瓦解之势，其边城无援军救助，扫荡长江地区，的确就在今日。
English: Now Xiao Baotan's regime is on the verge of collapse, and its border cities are without reinforcements, sweeping the Yangtze River region, indeed, today.

古文：臣受恩既重，不敢不言。 
现代文：臣蒙受皇上深重的恩幸，以上想法不敢不照直陈述。 
English: The vassal was greatly blessed by the emperor, and he dared not not state the above thoughts.

古文：诏曰： 不君不臣，江南常弊，有粟不食，其在斯矣。
现代文：世宗下诏说： 不君不臣，是江南的常弊，有粟不食，那也就在于此。
English: Shizong said in his edict: "Not to be a ruler, not to be a subject, is a common evil in the south of the Yangtze River. If you have millet and don't eat it, it is because of this.

古文：上天将欲亡之，诸番又愿取之，人事天道，孰云匪会？
现代文：上天将要消亡它，诸臣又愿攻取它，人事天道都顺应，谁说不是大好时机？
English: Heaven is about to extinguish it, the ministers are willing to conquer it, and the people are obedient to the heavenly way. Who says it is not a great opportunity?

古文：但以养害，仁者不为。
现代文：而且养虎遗患，是仁者所不为。
English: Moreover, it is not for the benevolent to raise tigers.

古文：且十月五日，衍军已达大航，其大伤小亡之势，久应有决。
现代文：况且十月五日，萧衍军已从水路大举进攻，江南大伤小亡之势，久来应有所定。
English: Moreover, on October 5, Xiao Yan's army had launched a large-scale attack from the waterway, and the situation in the south of the Yangtze River should have been settled for a long time.

古文：假令天罚宝卷，衍兵获进，则衍之主佐，又是乱亡遣孽，皇灵其能久佑之乎？
现代文：假使上天惩罚萧宝卷，萧衍获胜，那么萧衍主佐江南，必然又是乱亡遗孽，皇灵怎能长久保他呢？
English: If heaven punishes Xiao Baowan and Xiao Yan wins, then Xiao Yan's master, Jiangnan, must be a ruinous relic. How can the emperor's spirit protect him for a long time?

古文：今之所矜者，正以南黔企德，边书继至，殄悴之氓，理须救接。
现代文：如今朕所倚仗的，正是由于南方百姓企望圣德，边地书信相继而至，对于痛苦劳悴的百姓，理应救助接济。
English: What I rely on now is that precisely because the people of the south aspire to sanctity, letters from the border regions have been arriving one after another. For the people who are suffering and laboring, they deserve help and assistance.

古文：若尔者，扬州兵力，配积不少，但可速遣任城，委以处分，别加慰勉，令妙尽边算也。 
现代文：如果像这样做，扬州的兵力，已经配积不少，只需速速派任城王元澄，委付他进行处置，另外加以慰勉，令其筹划边地战事的计策。 
English: If this is done, Yangzhou's military forces have already been allocated a lot, it is only necessary to quickly assign the city king, Yuancheng, to entrust him with the disposal, and to give him consolation, so that he can plan the strategy of the border war.

古文：以衍事克，遂停。
现代文：后来由于萧衍举事成功，就将此事停止下来。
English: Later, due to the success of Xiao Yan's petition, the matter was stopped.

古文：怀又表曰： 昔世祖升遐，南安在位，出拜东庙，为贼臣宗爱所弑。
现代文：源怀又上表说： 昔日世祖仙逝，南安王在位，出外祭拜东庙，被贼臣宗爱所弑。
English: Yuan Huai also wrote: Once upon a time, the ancestor immortal passed away, the king of Nan'an was on the throne, he went out to worship the East Temple, and was captured by the thief Zong Ai.

古文：时高宗避难，龙潜苑中，宗爱异图，神位未定。
现代文：当时高宗避难，潜藏在园苑之中，宗爱图谋不轨，皇位尚未确立。
English: At that time, Emperor Gaozong had taken refuge and was hiding in the gardens. Emperor Zong'ai was scheming, and the imperial throne had not yet been established.

古文：臣亡父先臣贺与长孙渴侯、陆丽等表迎高宗，纂微宝命。
现代文：臣之亡父先臣源贺与长孙渴侯、陆丽等人迎立高宗，继承皇位。
English: The vassal's deceased father, the senior vassal, MINAMOTO no He, and his eldest grandchildren, Saho and Lu Li, welcomed Emperor Gaozong to succeed to the throne.

古文：丽以扶负圣躬，亲所见识，蒙授抚军大将军、司徒公、平原王。
现代文：陆丽由于怀抱高宗入宫，为高宗所亲近和赏识，被封抚军大将军、司徒公、平原王。
English: Because Lu Li embraced Gaozong and entered the palace, she was close to and appreciated by Gaozong, and became the general of the fief army, the prince of Sidu, and the king of the plain.

古文：兴安二年，追论定策之勋，进先臣爵西平王。
现代文：兴安二年，朝廷追论定策之功，进封先父爵位为西平王。
English: In the 2nd year of the Heian period, the Imperial Court awarded the title of Xiping King to his father.

古文：皇兴季年，显祖将传大位于京兆王。
现代文：皇兴末年，显祖准备传皇位给京兆王。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Heungseong, Emperor Xianzu prepared to pass the imperial throne to King Gyeongjo.

古文：先臣时都督诸将，屯于武川，被徵诣京，特见顾问。
现代文：先父当时都督诸将，屯驻在武川，被征召到京师，特地向他征询意见。
English: At that time, my father was the governor of the capital, stationed in Bukawa, and was called to the capital to ask his advice.

古文：先臣固执不可，显祖久乃许之，遂命先臣持节授皇帝玺绶于高祖。
现代文：先父坚持认为不可，显祖许久才同意他的意见。就令先父持节将皇帝玺绶授予高祖。
English: His father insisted that this was not possible, and it took a long time for Emperor Xuanzong to agree with him. So he ordered his father to bestow the imperial scepter on Emperor Gaozong.

古文：至太和十六年，丽息叡状私书，称其亡父与先臣援立高宗，朝廷追录，封叡钜鹿郡开国公。
现代文：到了太和十六年，陆丽之子陆睿呈状于秘书省，说他的亡父与先父迎立高宗，朝廷追记其功，封陆睿为巨鹿郡开国公。
English: In the 16th year of the Taihe era, Lu Li's son, Lu Rui, submitted a letter to the Ministry of Secretaries, saying that his deceased father and his forefather had ushered in Gao Zong, and that the Imperial Court would record his achievements and seal Lu Rui as the founding father of Ju County.

古文：臣时丁艰草土，不容及例。
现代文：臣当时回乡为母亲守丧，未能依例受封。
English: At the time, the vassal was returning to his hometown to attend his mother's funeral and was unable to receive the title as usual.

古文：至二十年，除臣雍州刺史，临发奉辞，面奏先帝，申先臣旧勋。
现代文：到了太和二十年，授任臣为雍州刺史，在出发之时，面奏先帝，申述先父往日的功勋。
English: In the 20th year of the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, he was awarded the title of Yongzhou's minister of history, and at the time of departure, he met the former emperor and recounted his father's past exploits.

古文：时敕旨但赴所临，寻当别判。
现代文：当时皇帝命臣暂且赴任，不久当另有裁断。
English: At that time, the emperor's vassal was temporarily appointed to the post, but it was soon decided otherwise.

古文：至二十一年，车驾幸雍，臣复陈闻，时蒙敕旨，征还当授。
现代文：及至二十一年，高祖驾幸雍州，臣又向皇帝陈说，当时蒙圣上敕旨，说待将臣召回朝廷后定当封授。
English: In the twenty-first year, Gao Zu went to Yongzhou, and the vassal told the emperor Chen that he had received the imperial edict at that time, saying that after the vassal was recalled to the imperial court, he would be conferred the title.

古文：自宫车晏驾，遂尔不白。
现代文：自从高祖晏驾之后，就再未提及此事。
English: Since Gao Zu's visit, there has been no further mention of the matter.

古文：窃惟先臣远则援立高宗，宝历不附；近则陈力显祖，神器有归。
现代文：臣私下考虑先父在远曾迎立高宗，使大魏江山不坠；在近则效力于显祖，使社稷有归。
English: The vassal privately considered that his forefather in the distant past had ushered in Gaozong, so that the Great Wei Dynasty would not fall; in the near future, he would work for Xianzu, so that the community would return.

古文：如斯之勋，超世之事。
现代文：像这样的功勋，超出当世。
English: A feat like this is beyond the realms of possibility.

古文：丽以父功而获河山之赏。臣有家勋，不沾茅社之赐。
现代文：陆睿凭他父亲之功而获得河山之赏，臣有家勋，却未沾茅土之赐。
English: Lu Rui won the award of rivers and mountains thanks to the merits of his father. He had a distinguished family, but he did not receive the gift of thatch.

古文：得否相悬，请垂裁处。 
现代文：得失悬殊，请圣上予以裁断处理。 
English: There is a great disparity in gains and losses, and I would ask His Holiness to adjudicate on this.

古文：诏曰： 宿老元丕，云如所诉；访之史官，颇亦言此。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 朝廷老前辈元丕，所说的情况与你申述的一样，访之于史官，其言大体也是如此。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying, "Former imperial court member Yuan Shao, what you have said is the same as what you have said, and what the historian has said is generally the same.

古文：可依比授冯翊郡开国公，邑百户。 
现代文：可依例授爵为冯翊郡开国公，食邑九百户。 
English: He can be awarded a knighthood as the founding father of Fengye County, which has 900 households.

古文：又诏为使持节，加侍中、行台，巡行北边六镇、恆燕朔三州，赈给贫乏，兼采风俗，考论殿最，事之得失，皆先决后闻。
现代文：皇帝又令源怀任使持节，加授侍中、行台之职，巡行北部边境六镇、恒燕朔三州，赈济贫乏，兼采风俗，考论官员政绩名次，所有事情的得失，都由他先行决断然后上奏。
English: The emperor also appointed Yuan Huai as the envoy to hold the festival, awarded him the posts of attendant and escort, patrolled the northern border of six towns and three states of Hengyan, helped the poor, and collected customs, and examined the ranking of officials' political achievements. The gains and losses of all things were decided by him first and then played.

古文：自京师迁洛，边朔遥远，加连年旱俭，百姓困弊。
现代文：自从京都迁到洛阳，北方边地遥远，加之连年大旱，百姓贫困不堪。
English: Since Kyoto moved to Luoyang, the northern border is far away, coupled with years of drought, the people are poor.

古文：怀衔命巡抚，存恤有方，但宜运转，有无通济。
现代文：源怀奉命巡行安抚，赈济有方，及时转运，通济有无。
English: Yuan Huai was ordered to patrol and pacify, to give aid and assistance, to transfer goods in a timely manner, and to give aid and assistance.

古文：时后父于劲势倾朝野，劲兄于祚与怀宿昔通婚，时为沃野镇将，颇有受纳。
现代文：当时皇后的父亲于劲势倾朝野，于劲之兄于祚与源怀原先就有婚姻之亲，当时任沃野镇将，颇多受贿之事。
English: At that time, the empress's father, Yu Jinsheng, was in opposition to the imperial court, and Yu Jinsheng's brother, Yu Jun and Yuan Huai, were originally related by marriage. At that time, Yu Jinsheng was the mayor of Wuye Town, and he took a lot of bribes.

古文：怀将入镇，祚郊迎道左，怀不与语，即劾祚免官。
现代文：源怀将要巡行到他的镇所，于祚出城在道旁迎接，源怀根本不同他说话，即刻弹劾于祚并免去他的官职。
English: Yuan Huai is going to parade to his town, and meet him on the side of the road. Yuan Huai is fundamentally different from him, and will immediately impeach him and remove him from office.

古文：怀朔镇将元尼须与怀少旧，亦贪秽狼藉，置酒请怀，谓怀曰； 命之长短，由卿之口，岂可不相宽贷？ 
现代文：怀朔镇将元尼须是源怀年轻时的好友，也多有贪污受贿之事，他置酒宴请源怀，对源怀说： 我的生命是长是短，全在于你一句话，难道不能对我给以宽待吗？ 
English: The mayor of Waishuo Town, Yuan Nishi, must have been a close friend of Yuan Huai when he was young, and there were also many cases of corruption and bribery. He invited Yuan Huai to a banquet, and said to Yuan Hui: My life is long or short, it all depends on your word, can't you treat me with leniency?

古文：怀曰； 今日之集，乃是源怀与故人饮酒之坐，非鞫狱之所也。
现代文：源怀说道： 今天的聚会，乃是源怀与故友饮酒之处，而不是判断案情之所。
English: Yuan Huai said: Today's gathering is a place for Yuan Huai and his old friend to drink, not a place to judge the case.

古文：明日公庭，始为使人捡镇将罪状之处。 
现代文：明天到公庭之上，才是令人检举镇将罪状的地方。 
English: It is up to the public court tomorrow to bring charges against the town.

古文：尼须挥泪而已，无以对之。
现代文：元尼须无言以对，惟有流泪而已。
English: Yuan Nisu was speechless, and could only shed tears.

古文：怀既而表劾尼须。
现代文：源怀不久就上表弹劾元尼须。
English: Yuan Huai soon moved to impeach Yuan Nisu.

古文：其奉公不挠，皆此类也。
现代文：他奉公不屈，都皆如此类。
English: He's a hard worker, they're all like that.

古文：怀又表曰： 景明以来，北蕃连年灾旱，高原陆野，不任营殖，唯有水田，少可菑亩。
现代文：源怀又向世宗上表说： 自景明以来，北方边地连年遭受旱灾，高原陆地，不适于经营养殖，只有少量水田，尚可耕耘。
English: Yuanhuai also said to Shizong: Since the Ming Dynasty, the northern borderland has suffered from droughts year after year. The plateau land is not suitable for farming, and only a small number of paddy fields can be cultivated.

古文：然主将参僚，专擅腴美，瘠土荒畴给百姓，因此困弊，日月滋甚。
现代文：然而各镇主将和幕僚，擅自占有丰腴的田地，把贫瘠荒芜的土地给予百姓，百姓因此而困敝不堪，这种现象日益严重。
English: However, this phenomenon is becoming more and more serious as township commanders and staff members take possession of rich fields without authorization and give barren and desolate land to the people. As a result, the people are trapped.

古文：诸镇水田，请依地令分给细民，先贫后富。
现代文：特请求将各镇的水田，就地分给普通百姓，先贫后富进行分配。
English: He specifically requested that the rice fields of each town be distributed to ordinary people on the spot, with the poor first and the rich second.

古文：若分付不平，令一人怨讼者，镇将已下连署之官，各夺一时之禄，四人已上夺禄一周。
现代文：若因分配不公平，有一人怨愤而上诉者，镇将以下连署之官，每人扣去一季的俸禄，有四人以上上诉的各扣去俸禄一年。
English: If there is one person who complains and appeals due to unfair distribution, the town will deduct one quarter's salary from each of the following officers, and if there are four or more people who appeal, they will each deduct one year's salary.

古文：北镇边蕃，事异诸夏，往日置官，全不差别。
现代文：北方边镇，事情与内地不同，往日设置官职，完全没有差别。
English: In the town on the northern border, things are different from the mainland. In the past, there was no difference at all in the establishment of government posts.

古文：活野一镇，自将已下八百馀人，黎庶怨嗟，佥曰烦猥。
现代文：单就沃野一镇而言，从镇将以下达八百余人，黎民百姓怨声载道，都说官员繁冗。
English: As far as the town of Wouno is concerned, there are more than eight hundred people from the town. The people of Li are complaining loudly, saying that officials are cumbersome.

古文：边隅事鲜，实少畿服，请主帅吏佐五分减二。 
现代文：边地事情不多，确实少于京城地区，请求将各镇主帅的属员减去五分之二。 
English: There is not much going on in the outlying areas, certainly less than in the capital region, and we request that the number of subordinates of the head coach of each town be reduced by two-fifths.

古文：诏曰： 省表具恤民之怀，已敕有司一依所上，下为永淮。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 你的奏表具有抚恤百姓之心，已敕令有司全部依允所奏之事，下达施行作为永久的标准。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict saying, "Your report card has the heart of caring for the people. I have ordered all departments to comply with what you have reported, and issue and implement it as a permanent standard.

古文：如斯之比，不便于民，损化害政者，其备列以闻。 
现代文：像这类不能使百姓得益，有损教化伤害政事的现象，你可全部列举上报朝廷。 
English: You can enumerate and report to the imperial court all such phenomena that do not benefit the people and harm the political process.

古文：时细民为豪强陵压，积年枉滞，一朝见申者，日有百数。
现代文：当时百姓被豪强欺凌压制，多年来积累的冤情太多，一时间前来申诉的，一天就有上百人。
English: At that time, the people were bullied and suppressed by the powerful, and there were too many grievances accumulated over the years. There were hundreds of people a day who came to appeal at one time.

古文：所上事宜便于北边者，凡四十馀条，皆见嘉纳。
现代文：源怀对有利于北方边地的事，所收集上报朝廷的，共有四十余条，都被嘉奖和采纳。
English: In total, more than forty articles collected by Yuan Huai and reported to the imperial court on matters beneficial to the northern borderlands have been commended and adopted.

古文：正始元年九月，有告蠕蠕率十二万骑六道并进，欲直趋沃野、怀朔，南寇恆代。
现代文：正始元年九月，有边报说蠕蠕部将率十二万骑兵六路并进，想要直趋沃野、怀朔，南侵恒州、代州。
English: At the very beginning of September of the first year of the year, a foreign newspaper said that the Communist Party of China would lead 120,000 cavalry to march six ways at the same time, and wanted to go straight to fertile fields, Huai Shuo, and invade Hengzhou and Daizhou in the south.

古文：诏怀以本官，加使持节、侍中，出据北蕃，指授规略，随须徵发。诸所处分，皆以便宜从事。
现代文：世宗下诏命令源怀以本官加授使持节、侍中，出朝据守北部边地，指授方略，征发士卒，各种所应处置之事，都凭源怀随时应变、见机行事。
English: Emperor Shizong issued an edict ordering Yuan Huai to use his official position to confer envoys and retainers, attendants, go to the north to defend the northern border, assign strategies, solicit officers, and all kinds of things that should be dealt with, all of which depend on Yuan Hui to be flexible and act at the right time.

古文：又诏怀子直寝徽随怀北行。
现代文：又诏令源怀之子直寝源徽跟随源怀北行。
English: He also ordered the son of Yuan Huai to follow Yuan Hui to the north.

古文：诏赐马一匹、细铠一具、御槊一枚。
现代文：诏赐马一匹、细铠一具、御槊一枝。
English: The emperor gave a horse, a fine reed, and a reed.

古文：怀拜受讫，乃于其庭跨鞍执槊，跃马大呼，顾谓宾客曰； 气力虽衰，尚得如此。
现代文：源怀拜受完毕，就在他家的前庭跨鞍持槊，跃马大呼，环顾前来送行的宾客说道： 我气力虽已衰弱，还是能够像这样出征。
English: After receiving the worship, Yuan Huai rode across the front yard of his house, holding a saddle and riding a horse. Looking around at the guests who came to see him off, he said: Although my strength has weakened, I can still go to war like this.

古文：蠕蠕虽畏壮轻老，我亦未便可欺。
现代文：蠕蠕人畏壮轻老，我也未必就可以欺侮。
English: I may not be able to bully because I am too young and too strong.

古文：今奉庙胜之规，总骁捍之众，足以擒其酋帅，献俘阙下耳。 
现代文：今日承奉朝廷的作战方略，总领骁悍之众，足以生擒其部族主帅，献俘于朝廷宫阙之下。 
English: Today, he follows the imperial court's battle strategy, leading a fierce crowd, enough to kill his tribal leader and sacrifice prisoners under the imperial palace.

古文：时年六十一。
现代文：时年六十一岁。
English: Cai Jun was 61 years old at the time of his death.

古文：怀至云中，蠕蠕亡遁。
现代文：源怀一到云中，蠕蠕人闻风逃遁。
English: As soon as the source is in the clouds, people smell the wind and run away.

古文：怀旋至恆代，案视诸镇左右要害之地，可以筑城置戍之处，皆量其高下，揣其厚薄，及储粮积仗之宜，犬牙相救之势，凡表五十八条。
现代文：源怀随即到达恒、代二州，巡视各镇左右要害之地，确定可以筑城置戍之处。一处一地测量其戍城的高低，计算其城墙的厚薄，考察其储存粮草兵器的方便，犬牙交错相互救援的形势，一共表奏五十八条。
English: Yuan Hui immediately arrived in Hengduan and Erzhou, inspected the key areas around each town, and determined where the city could be built. One by one, he measured the height of the city, calculated the thickness of the city wall, examined the convenience of storing grain and grass weapons, and the situation of interlaced mutual rescue. A total of fifty-eight articles were presented.

古文：表曰： 蠕蠕不羁，自古而尔。
现代文：表章说： 蠕蠕人不受辖制，自古至今都如此。
English: The frontispiece says: "Humans are not subject to authority, and this has been the case since ancient times.

古文：游魂鸟集，水草为家，中国患者，皆斯类耳。
现代文：四处游牧如鸟集散，择水草之地为家，中国深以为患者，都是这类部族。
English: Nomadic herdsmen are scattered everywhere like birds, choosing the land of water and grass as their home. China deeply believes that patients are all such tribes.

古文：历代驱逐，莫之能制。
现代文：历代君王想要驱除它，都没有能够制服。
English: Successive monarchs have tried to drive it out, but have been unable to subdue it.

古文：虽北拓榆中，远临瀚海，而智臣勇将，力算俱竭。胡人颇遁，中国以疲。
现代文：虽然北边拓展到榆中，再远到达大沙漠，但历代智臣勇将，也都竭尽其力量和谋算，胡人虽屡次逃遁，中国却因此而疲惫不堪。
English: Although the north extends to the middle of the Yunnan Province and as far as the Great Desert, the wise and brave generals of all ages have also exhausted their strength and strategies. Although the Hu people have repeatedly fled, China has been exhausted.

古文：于时贤哲，思造化之至理，推生民之习业。
现代文：当时的先哲们，思考自然万物之至理，推广百姓所熟悉的生业。
English: The sages of that time thought about the ultimate truth of all things in nature and promoted the livelihoods familiar to the people.

古文：量夫中夏粒食邑居之民、蚕衣儒步之士，荒表茹毛饮血之类、鸟宿禽居之徒，亲校短长，因宜防制。
现代文：比较中原的粒食邑居之民、蚕衣儒步之士，与边远的茹毛饮血之类、鸟宿禽居之徒，亲自衡量其短长，因此制定适当的防备策略。
English: Comparing the grain-eating people of the Central Plains, the silkworm-coated people of the Confucianism, and the remote wool-drinking blood-sucking people, the bird-dwelling people of the bird-dwelling people, I personally measured their short and long, so I developed an appropriate prevention strategy.

古文：知城郭之固，暂劳永逸。
现代文：知道修筑坚固的城郭，可以一劳而永逸。
English: If you know how to build a strong castle, you can escape once and for all.

古文：自皇魏统极，都于平城，威震天下，德笼宇宙。
现代文：自从皇魏统一中国，建都于平城，威震天下，德冠宇宙。
English: Since the unification of China by Emperor Wei, the capital was built in Pingcheng, dominating the world and dominating the universe.

古文：今定鼎成周，去北遥远。
现代文：现在定都于洛阳，离北地遥远。
English: Now it is located in Luoyang, far away from the north.

古文：代表诸蕃北固，高车外叛，寻遭旱俭，戒马甲兵，十分阙八。
现代文：代州上表说北地边防巩固，高车族在外反叛，随即遭受旱灾，戎马甲兵，十分缺少八分。
English: Daizhou's gazette said that the northern border defense was consolidated, the Gaochu people rebelled outside, and then suffered from drought, and the armored soldiers were very short of eight points.

古文：去岁复镇阴山，庶事荡尽，遣尚书郎中韩贞、宋世量等检行要险，防遏形便。
现代文：臣去年再次镇守阴山，排除繁杂的事务，派尚书郎中韩贞、宋世量等考察各处险要，了解便于防守的地形。
English: Last year, the minister once again guarded the gloomy mountain, eliminated complicated affairs, and sent Shang Shuro, Zhong Han Zhen, Song Shiguo, etc. to investigate the dangers everywhere and understand the terrain that is easy to defend.

古文：谓淮旧镇东西相望，令形势相接，筑城置戍，分兵要害，劝农积粟，警急之日，随便翦讨。
现代文：以原有镇所东西相望为标准，使地势互相连接，于其中筑城置戍，分兵把守要害，平时劝农积粟，战时随时出兵征讨。
English: Taking the view of the east and west of the original town as the standard, the terrain was connected to each other, in which the city was built, the soldiers were divided to guard the key, the farmers were advised to accumulate millet in peacetime, and the soldiers were dispatched at any time during the war.

古文：如此则威形增广，兵势亦盛。
现代文：这样就做到了增广有利的地形，军队气势也更加强盛。
English: In this way, it was possible to expand the favorable terrain, and the army's momentum was also stronger.

古文：且北方沙漠，夏乏水草，时有小泉，不济大众。
现代文：而且北方沙漠之地，夏季缺乏水草，有时虽有少量泉水，也无济于大众。
English: Moreover, in the northern desert, there is a lack of aquatic plants in the summer, and although there is sometimes a small amount of spring water, it does not help the public.

古文：脱有非意，要待秋冬，因云而动。
现代文：倘若胡人有非分之意，也要等到秋冬之际，因气候有利才敢行动。
English: If the Hu people have ulterior motives, they will wait until the autumn and winter, when the weather is favorable, before they dare to act.

古文：若至冬日，冰沙凝厉，游骑之寇，终不敢攻城，亦不敢越城南出，如此北主无忧矣。 
现代文：如果到了冬天，到处冰沙凝冻，北边游骑之寇，终究不敢来攻城，也不敢越过戍城南下，这样一来北方就没有忧患了。 
English: If, in the winter, smoothies freeze everywhere, and robbers ride around the north, they will eventually not dare to attack the city, nor will they dare to go south across Lucheng. In this way, there will be no sorrow in the north.

古文：世宗从之。
现代文：世宗听从了他的建议。
English: Sejong accepted his opinion.

古文：今北镇诸戍东西九城是也。
现代文：现今北方边镇东西九座戍城就是那时构筑的。
English: It was at that time that the present-day nine walled cities on the eastern and western sides of the northern border town were built.

古文：迁骠骑大将军。
现代文：源怀迁任骠骑大将军。
English: Yuan Huaiqian was appointed as the general of the cavalry.

古文：时武兴氐王杨绍先叔集起反叛，诏怀使持节、侍中、都督平氐诸军事以讨之，须有兴废，任从权计。
现代文：当时武兴氐王杨绍先的叔父杨集起反叛朝廷，皇帝令源怀任使持节、侍中、都督平氐诸军事，率兵进行征讨，所有兴废之事，由他见机行事全权处理。
English: At that time, the uncle of the King of Wu Xing, Yang Shaoshan, Yang Ji, rebelled against the imperial court. The emperor ordered Yuan Huai to send envoys, attendants, and the governor of the capital, Pingyao, to the military, to lead the soldiers to carry out the investigation, and to deal with all the wasteful things at his own discretion.

古文：其邢峦、李焕并禀节度。
现代文：邢峦、李焕一同奉命受他节度。
English: Gong and Li Huan were both ordered to accept his edict.

古文：三年六月卒，年六十三。
现代文：正始三年六月，源怀去世，终年六十三岁。
English: At the beginning of the third year, in June, Genkai passed away at the age of 63.

古文：诏给东围秘器、朝服一具、衣一袭、钱二十万、布七百匹、蜡三百斤，赠司徒、冀州刺史。
现代文：世宗诏令赐给他东园制造的棺木、朝服一套、衣一件、钱二十万、布七百匹、蜡三百斤，追赠他为司徒、冀州刺史。
English: Emperor Zedong gave him a coffin made in the East Garden, a set of imperial robes, a piece of clothing, 200,000 yuan, 700 pieces of cloth, and 300 pounds of wax. He was posthumously awarded the titles of "Stu" and "Jizhou Shishi."

古文：兼吏部尚书卢昶奏： 太常寺议谥曰，怀体尚宽柔，器操平正，依谥法，柔直考终曰 靖 ，宜谥靖公。
现代文：兼吏部尚书卢昶上奏皇帝说： 太常寺给源怀议定谥号说，源怀一生崇尚宽柔，气质操守正直，依照定谥号之法，以宽柔正直而善终曰 靖 ，应定谥号为靖公。
English: The Emperor said, "The Taiji Temple gave the agreed-upon posthumous name to Yuan Huai, saying that Yuan Huai has been advocating gentleness and softness all his life, and his temperament is honest and upright. According to the law of the posthumous name, it is said that with gentleness, honesty and goodness, he will end up being Jing, and his posthumous name should be Jing Gong.

古文：司徒府议，怀作牧陕西，民馀惠化，入总端贰，朝列归仁，依谥法，布德执议曰 穆 ，宜谥穆公。
现代文：司徒府的议论则说，源怀在陕西任地方长官，使百姓得到恩惠教化，在朝廷任尚书令，百官称他有仁义，按照谥法规定，布德执义曰 穆 ，应当谥为穆公。
English: The argument of the Sifu said that Yuan Huai served as a local governor in Shaanxi, so that the people were favored and educated, and he served as an official in the imperial court. Hundreds of officials said that he had benevolence and righteousness. According to the provisions of the Law of the People's Republic of China, the virtue of benevolence is called "Mu" and should be regarded as "Mu Gong."

古文：二谥不同。 
现代文：两者所定的谥号不相同。 
English: The nicknames assigned to the two are different.

古文：诏曰： 府、寺所执，并不克允，爱民好与曰 惠 ，可谥惠公。 
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 司徒府和太常寺所持的意见，并不十分得当，爱民好施曰 惠 ，可以谥为惠公。 
English: The emperor issued an edict saying, "The opinions held by the Shuto-fu and the Taichō-ji Temple are not very proper. If you love the people and give alms, you can be regarded as a benefactor.

古文：及至白水，首摧阿非。随子雍至都，进爵浮阳伯，增封百户，为谏议大夫。假冠军将军、别将，随子雍北讨。
现代文：源怀性情宽容简约，不喜欢繁复琐碎，他经常对别人说： 作为一个朝廷命官，治理世务应当提纲举要，何必过于仔细呢。就好比做房子，只要外观高峻，梁柱平正，基墙牢固，风雨不入，就很好了。
English: He was tolerant of simplicity and disliked complexity and triviality. He often said to others, "As an official of the imperial court, the management of affairs should be outlined, so why be too careful? It's like building a house, as long as the exterior is high and steep, the beams and columns are straight, the foundation walls are solid, and it is impervious to wind and rain, it's fine."

古文：与葛荣战殁，时年二十四。
现代文：至于刀斧痕迹不平整，砍削不细密，这不是房屋的毛病。 
English: As for the uneven knife and axe marks, the chopping is not fine, this is not a problem with the house.

古文：赠持节、平北将军、凉州刺史，开国如故。
现代文：源怀生性不爱饮酒，但喜欢以酒待人，乐于结交朋友，擅长音律，虽然在白发之年，每逢安逸闲暇的时候，常常自己抚弄丝竹。
English: Yuan Huai Sheng did not like drinking, but he liked to treat people with wine, was happy to make friends, and was good at music, although in his grey-haired years, whenever he was at leisure, he often stroked silk bamboo.

古文：子孝孙，袭。
现代文：源怀共有七个儿子。
English: Genkai had seven sons in total.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。子雍弟子恭，字灵顺，聪惠好学。
现代文：源子雍之弟源子恭，字灵顺，聪慧好学。
English: The younger brother of Yuan Zi Yong, Yuan Zi Qiong, is well-spoken, intelligent and eager to learn.

古文：初辟司空参军事。
现代文：起初被征召为司空参军事。
English: At first, he was conscripted into the military as a flight attendant.

古文：司徒祭酒、尚书北主客郎中，摄南主客事。
现代文：后任司徒祭酒、尚书北主客郎中，代理南主客之事。
English: He later served as the priest's sacrificial wine, and acted as the agent of the Southern Host and the Northern Host.

古文：萧衍亡人许周自称为衍给事黄门侍郎，朝士翕然，咸共信待。
现代文：从萧衍那里逃亡而来的人许周，自称曾任萧衍的给事黄门侍郎，朝廷官员都亲近他，对他十分信任。
English: Xu Zhou, who fled from Xiao Yan, claimed to have been Xiao Yan's personal attendant at the Yellow Gate. Imperial officials were close to him and trusted him very much.

古文：子恭奏曰： 徐州表投化人许团并其弟周等，究其牒状，周列云已萧衍黄门侍郎。又称心存山水，不好荣宦，屡曾辞让，贻彼赫怒，遂被出为齐康郡。
现代文：源子恭上奏皇上说： 徐州刺史表奏前来归附的许团及其弟许周等人。探究其呈上的书状，许周说自己位列萧衍的黄门侍郎，又说自己一心寄情于山水，不爱官宦虚荣，曾经多次辞让官职，以致激起萧衍的愤怒，于是被贬谪为齐康郡守。
English: Minamoto no Tsukasa wrote to the emperor, saying: Xu Zhou and his brother Xu Zhou and others who came to Xuzhou to play the role of Xu Zhou and his brother Xu Zhou. Examining the letter he submitted, Xu Zhou said that he was ranked as Xiao Yan's Huangmen waiter, and said that he was devoted to the landscape, did not like the official's vanity, and had resigned his official position many times, which aroused Xiao Yan's anger, so he was demoted to the governor of Qikang County.

古文：因尔归国，愿毕志嵩岭。
现代文：因此前来归附我朝，希望能成全他隐居嵩岭之志。
English: So he came to join me, hoping to fulfill his dream of living in seclusion in Songling.

古文：比加采访，略无证明；寻其表状，又复莫落。
现代文：等到对他的事深加查访，连一点证据都找不到；考究他的表状，又毫无着落。
English: When his case was investigated in depth, not a single piece of evidence was found; when his appearance was scrutinized, nothing was found.

古文：案牒推理，实有所疑。
现代文：按照书状推理，确实多有可疑之处。
English: According to the written reasoning, there are indeed many suspicious things.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：昔夷齐独往，周王不屈其志；伯况辞禄，汉帝因成其美。
现代文：古代伯夷叔齐隐居首阳山，周王并不强迫其改变志向；伯况极力辞让禄位，汉帝就成全他的美德。
English: In ancient times, Uncle Qi lived in seclusion on Shouyang Mountain, and King Zhou did not force him to change his aspirations. However, when Bocong tried his best to give up his position, the Han emperor fulfilled his virtue.

古文：斯实古先哲王，必有不臣之人者也。
现代文：这说明即使是在圣王明君的古代，也必然有不愿为臣之人。
English: This shows that even in the ancient times of King Mingzhu, there must have been people who did not want to be subjects.

古文：萧衍虽复崎岖江左，窃号一隅，至于处物，未甚悖礼。
现代文：萧衍尽管盘踞江左，窃号称帝于一方，至于他待人处事，并不过于悖逆礼法。
English: Although Xiao Yan left the Lijiang River and stole the title of emperor, as far as his treatment of people is concerned, he is not too disobedient to etiquette.

古文：岂有士辞荣禄而苟不听之哉？
现代文：哪里会有士人辞让荣禄而不肯允许的道理呢？
English: Where can there be a reason for a scholar to give up his honor and refuse to allow it?

古文：推察情理，此则孟浪。
现代文：推察情理，这件事不可置信。
English: On the face of it, this is unbelievable.

古文：假萧衍昏狂，不存雅道，逼士出郡，未为死急，何宜轻去生养之土，长辞父母之邦乎？
现代文：即使萧衍昏庸狂妄，没有雅正之道，逼迫士人出为郡守，那也不属于丧命之急，为什么一定要轻易离开生养之土，长期辞别父母之邦呢？
English: Even if Xiao Yan is delusional and arrogant, and does not have the path of righteousness, forcing scholars to become county governors, it is not a matter of life and death. Why must he easily leave the land of his birth and upbringing, and say goodbye to the country of his parents for a long time?

古文：若言不好荣官，志愿嵩岭者，初届之日，即应杖策寻山，负帙沿水。而乃广寻知已，遍造执事。希荣之心已见，逃宦之志安在？
现代文：如果像他所说的不好荣官，志愿隐居嵩岭，那么在当初，他就应拄着拐杖寻访山岭，背着书卷沿水遨游，但他却到处寻求知己之人，四处编造曾担任官职，其希图荣禄之心已经显现，逃避官宦之志又在何处？
English: If, as he said, he was not a good honorable officer and voluntarily lived in seclusion in Songling, then at the beginning, he should have visited the mountains on crutches and traveled along the water with books on his back, but he was looking for his confidants everywhere, fabricating everywhere that he had held an official position, and his desire to be honored had already appeared, where is the desire to escape the official position?

古文：昔梁鸿去乡，终佣吴会；逄萌浮海，远客辽东。
现代文：昔日梁鸿离乡，始终在吴会一带为人佣作；逄萌渡海，一直客居于遥远的辽东。
English: In the past, Liang Hong left his hometown and always worked as a domestic helper in the area of the Wu Association; Zou Meng crossed the sea and has been living in the distant Liaodong Province.

古文：并全志养性，逍遥而已，考之事实，何其悬哉？
现代文：都是为了保全心志修养性情，逍遥自在而已，考察追究其事实，许周与他们何其悬殊？
English: All of them are for the purpose of preserving the mind and cultivating the disposition, just being carefree. Investigating and investigating their facts, what is the difference between Xu Zhou and them?

古文：又其履历清华，名位高达，计其家累，应在不轻。
现代文：又他曾任高官显职，名位崇高显达，计算其家业积累，应当在所不轻。
English: In addition, he was once a high-ranking official, with a lofty and illustrious position. The accumulation of his family business should not be taken lightly.

古文：今者归化，何其孤迥？
现代文：如今前来归化，又显得何等意高志远？
English: Now that you have come to naturalize, how ambitious are you?

古文：设使当时忽遽，不得携将，及其来后，家赀产业应见簿敛，尊卑口累亦当从法。
现代文：假设他当时由于匆促急迫，来不及携带，那么他到此地之后，家资产业应当见于登记的文簿，其家室尊卑长幼也该依法贬徙。
English: Assuming that he was in a hurry at the time and did not have time to carry it, then after he arrived here, the family assets should be found in the registration book, and his family members should also be deported according to law.

古文：而周兄弟怡然，尝无忧戚。
现代文：但许周兄弟却怡然自乐，不曾有过忧戚的迹象。
English: However, the Xu Zhou brothers were happily enjoying themselves and never showed any signs of sorrow.

古文：若无种族，理或可通，如有不坐，便应是衍故遣，非周投化。
现代文：如果他没有家室族人，道理上还说得通，如果有家室而不连坐获罪，就应是萧衍故意派遣来的，并非前来归附。
English: If he does not have a family member, it is reasonable to say that if he has a family member and is not convicted, it should be that Xiao Yan deliberately sent him, not that he came to join him.

古文：推究二三，真伪难辨，请下徐扬二州密访，必令获实，不盈数旬，玉石可睹。 
现代文：推究再三，真伪难辨，请求下令让徐扬二州秘密查访，一定要他们获取实证，不满数旬，玉石可见。 
English: After repeated investigation, the authenticity is difficult to distinguish, the request was ordered to let Xu Yang secretly visit the two states, they must obtain empirical evidence, dissatisfied with the number of years, the jade can be seen.

古文：于是诏推访，周果以罪归阙，假称职位，如子恭所疑。
现代文：于是皇帝诏令二州推究查访，许周果然是由于犯了罪而前来投奔，假称其曾任官职。正如源子恭所怀疑的那样。
English: So the emperor issued an imperial edict to investigate and visit the two states, and Xu Zhou indeed fled because he had committed a crime, pretending that he had held an official post, just as Geng Ziqiang suspected.

古文：河州羌却铁忽反，杀害长吏，诏子恭持节为行台，率诸将讨之。
现代文：河州羌人却铁葱反叛，杀害地方官吏，皇帝令源子恭持节为行台，率领诸将进行征讨。
English: However, the people of Hezhou rebelled and killed local officials. The emperor ordered Yuan Zi to hold the festival as a platform and led the generals to carry out the investigation.

古文：子恭严勒州郡及诸军，不得犯民一物，轻与贼战，然后示以威恩，两旬间悉皆降款。
现代文：源子恭严令州郡和各路军队，不得侵占百姓的一草一木，不得轻率地同敌军作战，然后对却铁葱的部队昭示朝廷威恩，两旬之间全部诚服归降。
English: Yuan Zi ordered the prefectural, county and provincial armies not to encroach on the people's land, not to fight with the enemy army rashly, and then to show their loyalty to the imperial court to the enemy's troops, and all sincere obedience and surrender between the two.

古文：朝廷嘉之。
现代文：朝廷嘉奖源子恭的功绩。
English: The Imperial Court rewarded him for this.

古文：正光元年，为行台左丞，巡行北边。
现代文：正光元年，源子恭任行台左丞，巡行北部边境。
English: In the first year of the Zhenguang era, Yuan Zi was appointed as the second-in-command to patrol the northern border.

古文：转为起部郎。
现代文：源子恭转任起部郎之职。
English: Minamoto no Tsukiyasu was transferred to the post of Kiburo.

古文：明堂、辟雍并未建就，子恭上书曰： 臣闻辟台望气，轨物之德既高；方堂布政，范世之道斯远。
现代文：当时明堂、辟雍都还没有建成，源子恭向肃宗上书说： 臣闻辟台望气占卜吉凶，规范事物的准则非常高超；明堂之中宣明政治教化，规范人世的道理非常深远。
English: At that time, Myeongdong and Pyeongyongdu were not yet built, and Gensokgyon wrote to Su Jong in a letter, saying, "The principle of regulating things is very excellent; the principle of regulating the world is very far-reaching; the principle of regulating the world is very profound."

古文：是以书契之重，理冠于造化；推尊之美，事绝于生民。
现代文：因此文字典籍的重要，道理超出天地万物；推举尊长的美好，政事超绝于百姓生民。
English: Therefore, the importance of dictionaries, the truth beyond the heavens and the earth; the beauty of the election of elders, politics beyond the people.

古文：至如郊天飨帝，盖以对越上灵；宗祀配天，是用酬膺下土。
现代文：至于郊外祭天飨帝，是以皇帝之德配称于上天；宗庙祭祖配天，是用来亲自酬谢下土。
English: As for the Suburban Festival of the Heavenly Emperor, it is the virtue of the emperor that is said to be worthy of heaven; the ancestral temple festival of the ancestral god is used to personally reward the soil.

古文：大孝莫之能加，严父以兹为大，乃皇王之休业，有国之盛典。
现代文：大孝至高无上，严父以此事为最大，这是帝王的美好事业，国家的盛大典礼。
English: Great filial piety is supreme, strict father is the greatest in this matter, this is the emperor's good cause, the country's grand ceremony.

古文：窃惟皇魏居震统极，总宙驭宇，革制土中，垂式无外。
现代文：我私下考虑皇魏君临天下，总驭宇宙，改革国家制度，垂范于广大地域。
English: Privately, I considered that Emperor Wei was the ruler of the world, the master of the universe, the reformer of the national system, and the model for the vast region.

古文：自北徂南，同卜维于洛食；定鼎迁民，均气侯于寒暑。
现代文：自北往南，共同选地建都于洛阳；定鼎迁民，协调气候于寒暑。
English: From the north to the south, they jointly chose a place to build the capital in Luoyang; Dingding moved the people, and coordinated the climate in cold and hot.

古文：高祖所以始基，世宗于是恢构。
现代文：高祖在此开创基业，世宗在此扩大建设。
English: Gaozu founded the foundation here, and Shizong expanded the construction here.

古文：按功成作乐，治定制礼，乃访遗文，修废典，建明堂，立学校，兴一代之茂矩，标千载之英规。
现代文：功业完成应制作音乐，政治安定应制定礼法，于是查寻古代的文献，修整荒废的典章，建明堂，立学校，兴立一代美好的规矩，标榜千载英明的法度。
English: Music should be made to complete the work, and etiquette should be established for political stability. Therefore, ancient documents should be searched for, obsolete ordinances should be rectified, Ming Hall should be built, schools should be established, a generation of beautiful rules should be established, and the wise laws of thousands of years should be advertised.

古文：永平之中，始创雉构，基趾草昧，迄无成功。
现代文：永平年间，开始修建，基址初创，迄今尚未完工。
English: During the Yongping era, construction began, the base site was a start-up, and it has not yet been completed.

古文：故尚书令、任城王臣澄按故司空臣冲所造明堂样，并连表诏答、两京模式，奏求营起。
现代文：已故尚书令、任城王元澄按照已故司空李冲所设计的明堂图样，连同表章诏书、两京模式，上奏皇帝请求营建。
English: The late Shang Shuling and Rencheng Wang Yuancheng built the Ming Hall according to the pattern designed by the late Siku Li Chong, together with the Imperial Rescript and the model of the two capitals, as requested by the emperor.

古文：缘期发旨，即加葺缮。
现代文：只待旨意下达，立即进行修建。
English: Just wait for the decree to be issued, and the construction will be carried out immediately.

古文：侍中、领军臣叉，物动作官，宜赞授令。
现代文：侍中、领军元叉总领匠作之官，宣明皇上诏令。
English: The Emperor's edict was read aloud by the officer of the Imperial Household Agency, the General of the Imperial Household Agency, the General of the Imperial Household Agency, the General of the Imperial Household Agency, the General of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：自兹厥后，方配兵人，或给一千，或与数百，时退节缩，曾无定淮，欲望速了，理在难克。
现代文：从此之后，才予以配给兵士，有时给一千人，有时给数百人，增减节缩，一直没有定准，要期望早日完工，道理上实难做到。
English: Since then, it has only been allocated to soldiers, sometimes to a thousand people, sometimes to hundreds of people. There has been no set standard for the increase, decrease, and contraction. It is difficult to expect it to be completed as soon as possible.

古文：若使专役此功，长得营造，委成责办，容有就期。
现代文：倘若派人专营此事，不断进行营造，责成其认真办理，或许能有成功之日。
English: If you send someone to specialize in this matter, continuously carry out construction, and instruct them to handle it seriously, you may be able to have a successful day.

古文：但所给之夫，本自寡少，诸处竞借，动即千计。
现代文：但所给的役夫，本来就很少，各处工程竞相借调，动辄以千人计。
English: However, the number of workers provided is very small, with thousands of people being seconded to projects across the country.

古文：虽有缮作之名，终无就功之实。
现代文：虽有修建营作之名，终无成就完工之实。
English: Despite the name of the construction project, there is no achievement of completion.

古文：爽垲荒茫，淹积年载，结架崇构，指就无兆。
现代文：明亮的屋宇被荒废，停滞多年，高峻的屋架刚搭起，成就之日尚无征兆。
English: Bright buildings have been abandoned and stagnant for many years, high-rise roofs have just been erected, and there is no sign of the day of achievement.

古文：仍令肄胄之礼，掩仰而不进；养老之仪，寂寥而不返。
现代文：仍旧使国子学生肆业之礼，掩仰而不进；对老年贤者敬以酒食之仪，寂寥而不返。
English: It is still the custom for the sons of the country to make the students do their homework, but they do not enter; they respect the old sages with the ceremony of eating and drinking, but they do not return.

古文：构厦止于尺土，为山顿于一匮，良可惜欤！
现代文：构厦废止于尺土，为山功亏于一匮，实在是可惜啊！
English: It is a pity that the construction of the building was cancelled due to the lack of soil, and the mountain was built due to a lack of water.

古文：愚谓召民经始，必有子来之歌；兴造勿亟，将致不日之美。
现代文：愚以为征召百姓经营，必有 庶民子来 之歌；兴造之事加紧，将致 不日成之 之美。
English: Foolishly, he thought that if he conscripted the people to run the business, there would surely be songs from the common people; if he intensified the construction work, it would result in a beauty that would not be achieved in a day.

古文：况本兵不多，兼之牵役，废此与彼，循环无极。
现代文：况且兵士本来不多，兼之被其他劳役牵制，废弃此处而给与他处，循环往来没有止境。
English: Moreover, there are not many soldiers originally, and they are also held back by other laborers, abandoning this place and giving it to others, and there is no end to the cycle.

古文：便是辍创礼之重，资不急之费，废经国之功，供寺馆之役，求之远图，不亦阙矣？
现代文：这就是所谓停止创造礼仪之重，而资助不急之费，废弃经国之功，而供给寺馆之役吧，要想求得长远之图，不也是一种过失吗？
English: This is the so-called stop creating the weight of etiquette, but funding is not urgent, abandoning the merits of the country, but providing the role of the temple, if you want to get a long-term plan, is not it also a mistake?

古文：今诸寺大作，稍以粗举，并可彻减，专事经综，严勒工匠，务令克成。
现代文：如今各地大建寺庙，粗略地举出一些，都可以撤除或减少，专门经营此事，严格勒令工匠，务使早日完成。
English: Nowadays, large-scale temples are being built all over the country, and some of them can be removed or reduced. This is a matter of special management, and craftsmen are strictly ordered to complete it as soon as possible.

古文：使祖宗有荐配之期，苍生睹礼乐之富。 
现代文：使得祖宗有祭祀配天之期，苍生能睹礼教音乐之富。 
English: This allowed the ancestors to have a period of offering sacrifices to the gods, and the living to witness the richness of ritual music.

古文：书奏，从之。
现代文：书表奏上朝廷，皇帝听从了他的意见。
English: reported to the Imperial Court, which agreed with his opinion.

古文：除冠军将军、中散大夫，又领治书侍御史。
现代文：朝廷授任源子恭为冠军将军、中散大夫，又兼治书侍御史。
English: The Imperial Court appointed MINAMOTO no Tsukiyasu as Champion General, Chusan no daibu, and concurrently as Shushimi no goshi.

古文：秦益氐反，诏子恭持节为都督、河间王琛军司以讨之。
现代文：秦、益二州的氐人反叛，皇帝令源子恭持节为都督，作为河间王元琛的军司率兵征讨氐人。
English: Qin and Yizhou revolted, and the emperor made Yuan Zi Gongzhi Jie the governor of the capital. As the military commander of King Yuan of Kawama, he led an army to fight against the Qin.

古文：事平，仍行南秦州事。
现代文：事平之后，源子恭仍代管南秦州政事。
English: After the matter was settled, Minamoto no Tsukiyasu remained in charge of Southern Qin politics.

古文：及六镇反，以子恭兼给事黄门郎，持节慰劳。
现代文：及至六镇反叛，朝廷以源子恭兼任给事黄门郎，持节前往慰劳讨敌的将士。
English: When the Six Towns rebelled, the imperial court gave Huangmenro the additional post of Minamoto no Tsukiyasu, a soldier who went to comfort the enemy.

古文：还，拜河内太守，加后将军，平绛蜀反。
现代文：不久回到京城，被任命为河内太守，加授后将军，率部平定绛蜀的叛军。
English: He soon returned to Beijing and was appointed the governor of Hanoi, promoted to the rank of general, and led the troops to subdue the rebels in Lushu.

古文：丹谷、清廉二路险涩不通，以子恭为当囗郡别将。
现代文：丹谷、清廉两处道路险阻不通，朝廷以源子恭为当郡别将。
English: Tanggu and Qinglian, two dangerous roads, were impassable, and the imperial court selected Yuan Ziqong as the county commander.

古文：俄而建兴蜀复反，相与连势，进子恭为持节、散骑常侍、假平北将军、征建兴都督，仍兼尚书行台，与正平都督长孙稚合势进讨，大破之。
现代文：不久建兴蜀又反叛，同绛蜀相互呼应，朝廷进授源子恭为持节、散骑常侍、假平北将军、征建兴都督，仍兼尚书行台，与正平都督长孙稚合兵进讨，大破敌军。
English: Not long after the construction of Xingshu, he rebelled again, echoing each other with the construction of Xinshu. The imperial court promoted Yuan Zikong to the position of holding festivals, riding horseback as a regular attendant, pretending to be the general of North Pyongan Province, recruiting and building the capital, but he was still a scholar and a scholar, and joined forces with the head of the capital of North Pyongan Province, Sun Chih, and defeated the enemy army.

古文：正平贼帅范明远与贼帅刘牙奴并面缚请降。
现代文：正平的贼帅范明远与贼帅刘牙奴都自缚请求投降。
English: The thief-commander Fan Mingyuan and the thief-commander Liu Gano, both of whom were on an equal footing, tied themselves together and asked for surrender.

古文：事平，除平南将军、豫州刺史，寻加散骑常侍、抚军将军。
现代文：事件平定之后，源子恭被授任为平南将军、豫州刺史，不久加授散骑常侍、抚国将军。
English: After the incident was settled, Geng Zi Gong was appointed as the general of Pingnan and the governor of Yuzhou, and was soon promoted to the general of the cavalry and the general of Fuzhou.

古文：武泰初，郢州刺史元愿达以城降萧衍，诏徵都督尉庆宾还京师，回众隶子恭以讨之。
现代文：武泰初年，郢州刺史元愿达以其州城投降萧衍，皇帝征召都督尉庆宾回到京师，将其部众隶属源子恭前往征讨。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wu of Tai, Shizhi Yuan of Bozhou capitulated to Xiao Yan, and the emperor summoned the governor, Lieutenant Qing Bin, to return to the capital, and sent his subordinates, including Yuan Zi Gong, to the capital.

古文：衍将夏侯夔率众数万来寇，远近不安。
现代文：萧衍部将夏侯夔率众数万前来侵犯，远近之地不得安宁。
English: Xiao Yanbu invaded Xia Houyi with tens of thousands of people, and there was no peace in the near and far.

古文：夔乘势分兵，遂逼新蔡，自攻毛城。
现代文：夏侯夔乘势分兵，进逼新蔡，自己领兵攻打毛城。
English: Xia Houyi took advantage of the situation to send troops to force Xin Cai, and led his own troops to attack Mao Cheng.

古文：子恭随方应援，贼并破走。
现代文：源子恭随机接应援助，两路敌军都溃败逃走。
English: Geng Zi Gong randomly accepted the aid, and both enemy forces were routed and fled.

古文：萧衍豫州刺史夏侯亶复遣四将，率众三万，入围南顿，北攻陈项。
现代文：萧衍的豫州刺史夏侯又派遣四员将领，率领部众三万人，前来围攻南顿，向北攻打陈项。
English: Xiao Yan's Yuzhou vassal Shi Xiao also sent four generals, leading 30,000 troops, to besiege Nantong and attack Chenxiang to the north.

古文：子恭遣军御之，贼复奔退。
现代文：源子恭派军抵抗，敌军再次奔逃退走。
English: Minamoto no Toshiyasu sent his army to resist, and the enemy army ran away again.

古文：加镇南将军，又兼尚书行台。
现代文：朝廷授任他为镇南将军，又兼任尚书行台。
English: The imperial court appointed him as Zhenan General, and he also served as Shang Shujangdai.

古文：子恭勒众渡淮，徙民于淮北，立郡县，置戍而还。
现代文：源子恭率领部众渡过淮河，把南岸百姓迁徙到淮河之北，建立郡县，设置戍所，然后回到朝廷。
English: Minamoto no Tsukiyasu led his troops across the Huai River, migrated the people on the south bank to the north of the Huai River, established counties, set up a post, and then returned to the imperial court.

古文：萧衍直阁将军、军主胡智达等八将，与其监军阎次洪入寇，屯于州城东北四十馀里。
现代文：萧衍的直将军、军主胡智达等八员将领，与其监军阎次洪入寇，屯军于州城东北四十余里的地方。
English: Eight generals, including Xiao Yan's General Zhi and commander Hu Zhida, along with their overseer Yan Zihong, invaded and garrisoned a place more than forty miles northeast of Suzhou.

古文：子恭击破之，斩智达，生擒次洪。
现代文：源子恭率军将其击败，斩了胡智达，生擒阎次洪。
English: Minamoto no Tsukiyasu led an army to defeat him, beheading Hu Zhida and beheading Yan Zhihong.

古文：元颢之入洛也，加子恭车骑将军，子恭不敢拒之，而频遣间使参庄帝动静。
现代文：元颢进入洛阳的时候，授任源子恭为车骑将军，源子恭不敢拒绝，但不断派遣密使了解庄帝的动静。
English: When Yuan Shao entered Luoyang, he appointed Yuan Zikong as the general of chariot and cavalry. Yuan Zikong did not dare to refuse, but constantly sent secret envoys to understand the movements of Zhuangdi.

古文：未几，颢败，车驾还洛，进征南将军、兼右仆射，假车骑将军，后加散骑常侍。
现代文：不久，元颢失败，皇帝回到洛阳，进升源子恭为征南将军、兼右仆射，假车骑将军，后加授散骑常侍。
English: Soon after, the Yuan Dynasty was defeated, and the emperor returned to Luoyang, and promoted Yuan Zi Gong to be the general of the Southern Expedition, and also the right-hand man, the general of the fake carriage ride, and later the attendant of the free ride.

古文：板桥蛮文石活、石忌粗受萧衍印节，扇诱党类，据险寇窃。
现代文：板桥的蛮人文石活、石忌粗接受了萧衍的印节，煽动诱惑党类，凭据险要之地前来侵犯劫掠。
English: The barbaric humanities of Banqiao, Shi Hui and Shi Boi crudely accepted Xiao Yan's seal, incited and tempted the party members, and came to invade and plunder the critical areas.

古文：子恭躬率将士，径袭其栅，数日之中，歼殪略尽。
现代文：源子恭亲自率领将士，径直袭击他们的山寨栅栏，几天之内，歼灭杀戮殆尽。
English: Geng Zi Gong personally led the soldiers to directly attack their cottage fence, and within a few days, the annihilation and killing were exhausted.

古文：诸蛮款服，咸求输税。
现代文：各地的蛮人降服，都来请求缴纳税粮。
English: Barbarians from all over the country have come to demand payment of tax grain.

古文：徵拜右光禄大夫、给事黄门侍郎，仍本将军。
现代文：朝廷将源子恭召回京师授任为右光禄大夫、给事黄门侍郎，仍为本将军。
English: The Imperial Court recalled MINAMOTO no Tsukiyasu back to Kyoto and appointed him as Uko no Roku no daibu (Master of the Right Division of Outer Palace Guards) and gave him the position of Kumano no Jiro (Master of the Right Division of Outer Palace Guards), but he remained as the main general.

古文：录其前后征讨功，封临颍县开国侯，食邑六百户，加散骑常寺，俄迁侍中。
现代文：朝廷记载他前后征讨的功勋，封赐他为临颍县开国侯，食邑六百户，加授散骑常侍。不久迁任侍中。
English: The imperial court recorded the merits of his campaigning, awarding him the title of the founding lord of Linyi County, 600 households in food villages, and the title of loose-riding equerry. He was soon transferred to the position of equerry.

古文：尔朱荣之死也，世隆、度律据断河桥，诏子恭为都督以讨之。出顿于大夏门北。
现代文：尔朱荣伏诛之后，尔朱世隆、尔朱度律占据并切断了河桥，庄帝令源子恭为都督率军征讨，出城屯军于大夏门北。
English: After Lzhu Rong's surrender, Lzhu Shilong and Lzhu Duru occupied and cut off the river bridge. Zhuang Emperor ordered Yuan Zikong to lead the army to fight for the governor and leave the city to the north of Daxiamen.

古文：寻而太府卿李苗夜烧河桥，世隆退走，仍以子恭兼尚书仆射，为大行台、大都督。
现代文：不久太府卿李苗趁夜晚火烧河桥，尔朱世隆退走，朝廷仍以源子恭兼任尚书仆射，为大行台、大都督。
English: Soon after, Li Miao, the prefectural governor, took advantage of the night to set fire to the river bridge, and Er Zhu Shilong retreated. The imperial court continued to use Yuan Ziqong as Shang Shufu Shao, as the grand governor and grand governor.

古文：寻迁卫将军、假车骑将军，率诸将于太行筑垒以防之。
现代文：不久迁任卫将军、假车骑将军，率领诸将在太行山构筑堡垒用以防御敌军。
English: He was soon transferred to be the general of the guards and the general of the cavalry, and he led the troops to build a fortress on Mount Taihang to defend against the enemy.

古文：既而尔朱兆率众南出，子恭所部都督史仵龙、羊文义开栅降兆。
现代文：没过多久，尔朱兆率领部众向南出击，源子恭所部都督史仵龙、羊文义打开栅门投降尔朱兆。
English: Not long after, Er Zhu Zhao led the troops to attack the south, and the governors of the Minamoto clan, Shi Shulong and Yang Wenyi, opened the gate and surrendered to Er Zhu Zhao.

古文：子恭退走，为兆所破。
现代文：源子恭引兵退走，被尔朱兆打败。
English: Yuan Zi respectfully led his soldiers to retreat and was defeated by Er Zhu Zhao.

古文：众既退散，兆因入洛。
现代文：众军退却四散，尔朱兆因此得以进入洛阳。
English: The troops retreated and dispersed, allowing Lzhu Zhao to enter Luoyang.

古文：子恭窜于缑氏，仍被执送，俄而见释。
现代文：源子恭逃到纟侯氏，还是被敌军捉住送到洛阳，不久以后又被释放。
English: Minamoto no Tsukune fled to the Minho clan, but was still captured by the enemy and sent to Luoyang, where he was released soon after.

古文：前废帝初，除骠骑将军、左光禄大夫，侍中如故。
现代文：前废帝初立，授任源子恭为骠骑将军、左光禄大夫，侍中之职仍旧。
English: At the time of the former emperor's enthronement, MINAMOTO no Tsukiyasu was appointed to the post of Shunkei no shogun (general of the imperial cavalry) and Sakoroku no daibu (chief of the Imperial Household Agency), but his position as an attendant remained unchanged.

古文：寻授散骑侍郎、都督三州诸军事、本将军、假车骑大将军、行台仆射、荆州刺史。
现代文：不久又授任他为散骑侍郎、都督三州诸军事、本将军、假车骑大将军、行台仆射、荆州刺史。
English: Soon, he was also appointed as a horseback riding attendant, the military governor of the three states, the general, the fake carriage riding general, the go-between, and the Jingzhou stabbing history.

古文：以与定策之勋，封临汝县开国子，食邑三百户。
现代文：由于他有参与拥立皇帝之勋，封爵为临汝县开国子，食邑三百户。
English: Due to his participation in the enthronement of the emperor's son, he was knighted as the founding father of Lin Ru County, with 300 households.

古文：时叛蛮雷乱清受萧衍衮州刺史章绶，入为寇掠，诸蛮从之，置立郡县。
现代文：当时反叛的蛮人雷乱清接受萧衍兖州刺史的印绶，前来侵犯抢掠，各地的蛮人跟随他反叛，自己设置郡县。
English: At that time, the rebel barbarian Lei Ranqing accepted the seal of Xiao Yan's state history and came to invade and plunder. The barbarians from all over the country followed him to rebel and set up their own counties.

古文：子恭讨平之。
现代文：源子恭率兵征讨将其平定。
English: MINAMOTO no Kuniyasu led a force of soldiers to quell the uprising.

古文：永熙中，入为吏部尚书，加骠骑大将军。
现代文：永熙年间，源子恭入朝任吏部尚书，加授骠骑大将军。
English: During the Yongxi era, MINAMOTO no Kuniyoshi entered the imperial court and was appointed to the position of Shoshu, an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and was also awarded the title of Shoki taisho (general of cavalry).

古文：以子恭前在豫州战功，追赏襄城县开国男，食邑二百户。
现代文：凭源子恭先前在豫州的战功，追加赏赐为襄城县开国男，食邑二百户。
English: On the basis of Yuan Zikong's previous war exploits in Yuzhou, an additional reward was given to him for being the founding father of Xiangcheng County, with 200 households receiving food.

古文：又论子恭馀效，封新城县开国子，食邑四百户。
现代文：又论源子恭其余功劳，封赐新城县开国子，食邑四百户。
English: He also talked about the other merits of Yuan Zi Gong, and awarded Xincheng County to open the country, with 400 households in food villages.

古文：子恭寻表请转授第五子文盛，许之。
现代文：源子恭随即上表请求把爵位转授给他的第五个儿子源文盛，皇帝准许其请求。
English: As a result, Minamoto no Miko requested that the title be transferred to his fifth son, Minamoto no Fumimori, and the emperor granted his request.

古文：天平初，除中书监。
现代文：天平初年，授源子恭为中书监。
English: In the first year of the Tenpyo era, Minamoto no Tsukiyasu was appointed as the school's librarian.

古文：三年，拜魏尹，又为齐献武王军司。
现代文：天平三年，授任他为魏尹，又任齐献武王军司。
English: In the third year of the balance of power, he was appointed as Wei Yin, and also as Qi Xianwu Wang Junshi.

古文：元象元年疑
现代文：元象元年，源子恭去世。
English: In the first year of Yuan Xiang, Yuan Zi Gong passed away.

古文：兴和二年，赠都督徐衮二州诸军事、骠骑大将军、尚书左仆射、司空公、衮州刺史，谥曰文献。
现代文：兴和二年，追赠源子恭为都督徐兖二州诸军事、骠骑大将军、尚书左仆射、司空公、兖州刺史，定谥号为文献。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, Yuan Zi Gong was posthumously awarded the titles of the military governor of Xuzhou, the general of the imperial cavalry, the left-handed archer of Shangshu, the airship captain of Xuzhou, and the historian of Xuzhou, and his posthumous title was literature.

