古文：召公奭与周同姓，姓姬氏。
现代文：召公奭和周王族同姓，姓姬。
English: Zhao Gongye and the Zhou royal family have the same surname, surnamed Ji.

古文：周武王之灭纣，封召公於北燕。
现代文：周武王灭掉商纣王以后，把召公封在北燕。
English: After King Zhou Wu eliminated the merchant king, he made the call public in Beiyan.

古文：其在成王时，召王为三公：自陕以西，召公主之；自陕以东，周公主之。
现代文：周成王在位的时候，召公位居三公：自陕地以西，由召公主管；自陕地以东，由周公主管。
English: When Zhou Cheng Wang was on the throne, Zhaogong ranked third: from the west of Shaanxi Province, Zhaogong was in charge; from the east of Shaanxi Province, Zhaogong was in charge.

古文：成王既幼，周公摄政，当国践祚，召公疑之，作君奭。
现代文：当时成王还年幼，周公代他主持朝政，执掌国家大权，俨然同天子一样。召公怀疑周公的作为，周公就写了《君奭》一文进行表白。
English: At that time, Cheng Wang was still young, and Zhou Gong presided over the imperial government on his behalf, holding the power of the state, just like the heavenly son. When Zhao Gong doubted Zhou Gong's actions, Zhou Gong wrote an article "Jun Xi" to confess.

古文：君奭不说周公。
现代文：召公仍然对周公很不满。
English: Zhao Gong is still very dissatisfied with Zhou Gong.

古文：周公乃称 汤时有伊尹，假于皇天；在太戊时，则有若伊陟、臣扈，假于上帝，巫咸治王家；在祖乙时，则有若巫贤；在武丁时，则有若甘般：率维兹有陈，保乂有殷 。
现代文：周公于是称扬殷商时的有关史实说： 商汤时有伊尹，功德感通了上天；太戊在位时，又有像伊陟、臣扈那样的人，功德感通了上天，并有巫咸治理朝政；在祖乙在位时期，就有像巫贤那样的人；在武丁时代，就有像甘般那样的人：这些大臣都有辅佐君王主持施政的功业，殷朝得到了治理和安定。 
English: Zhou Gong then praised the relevant historical facts of the Yin Dynasty: In the Shang Tang Dynasty, there was Yi Yin, whose merits were sent to heaven; in the reign of Ta Wu, there were people like Yijun and Zeng Yao, whose merits were sent to heaven, and there was Wuxian to govern the court; in the reign of Zu Yi, there were people like Wuxian; in the era of Wuding, there were people like Gan: these ministers had the merit of assisting the king to preside over the government, and the Yin Dynasty was governed and stabilized.

古文：於是召公乃说。
现代文：召公听了这番话，这才高兴起来。
English: When Zhao Gong heard this, he was delighted.

古文：召公之治西方，甚得兆民和。
现代文：召公治理西部一带，深得人民的爱戴。
English: He called for the public to govern the western region and was deeply loved by the people.

古文：召公巡行乡邑，有棠树，决狱政事其下，自侯伯至庶人各得其所，无失职者。
现代文：召公到乡村城镇去巡察，看到一棵棠梨树，他就在树下判断官司，处理政事。从侯爵、伯爵到平民都得到了适当的安置，没有失职的地方。
English: When a magistrate was summoned to inspect a rural town and saw a pear tree, he judged a lawsuit under the tree and dealt with political affairs. From marquesses and counts to commoners, they were all properly placed and there was no place for dereliction of duty.

古文：召公卒，而民人思召公之政，怀棠树不敢伐，哥咏之，作甘棠之诗。
现代文：召公去世后，民众思念他的政绩，怀念棠梨树下召公处理政事的时光，不舍得砍伐，并歌颂召公，作了名为《甘棠》的诗篇。
English: After the death of Zhaogong, the people thought about his political achievements, missed the time when Zhaogong dealt with political affairs under the Tang Pear Tree, were not willing to cut it down, and sang in praise of Zhaogong, and made a poem called "Sweet Pea."

古文：自召公已下九世至惠侯。
现代文：从召公以后，经过九代传到惠侯。
English: After being summoned to court, it was passed down through nine generations to Hui Hou.

古文：燕惠侯当周厉王奔彘、共和之时。
现代文：燕惠侯在位正值周厉王逃跑到彘，周定公和召穆公共同执政的时候。
English: Yan Hui Hou's reign coincided with the time when Zhou Li Wang fled to Shao, and Zhou Ding Gong and Zhao Mu Gong jointly ruled.

古文：惠侯卒，子厘侯立。
现代文：惠侯去世，他儿子釐侯即位。
English: Hui Hou died, and his son Zhou Hou ascended to the throne.

古文：是岁，周宣王初即位。
现代文：这一年，周宣王刚刚即位。
English: In that year, King Zhou Xuan had just ascended to the throne.

古文：厘侯二十一年，郑桓公初封于郑。
现代文：釐侯二十一年，郑桓公方始被封于郑。
English: In the twenty-first year of his reign, Zheng Huan Gongfang was first sealed in Zheng.

古文：三十六年，厘侯卒，子顷侯立。
现代文：三十六年，釐侯去世，他儿子顷侯即位。
English: Thirty-six years later, Gong Hou died, and his son He Hou ascended to the throne.

古文：顷侯二十年，周幽王淫乱，为犬戎所弑。
现代文：顷侯二十年，周幽王淫乱，被犬戎所杀。
English: After twenty years of marriage, Zhou Yu Wang committed adultery and was killed by a dog.

古文：秦始列为诸侯。
现代文：秦国这时开始被列为诸侯。
English: Qin began to be listed as a vassal.

古文：二十四年，顷侯卒，子哀侯立。
现代文：顷侯在位二十四年去世，他儿子哀侯即位。
English: He died after reigning for twenty-four years, and his son, Soma, ascended the throne.

古文：哀侯二年卒，子郑侯立。
现代文：哀侯在位两年去世，他儿子郑侯即位。
English: Lai Hou died two years into his reign, and his son Zheng Hou ascended to the throne.

古文：郑侯三十六年卒，子缪侯立。
现代文：郑侯在位三十六年去世，他儿子缪侯即位。
English: Zheng Hou died thirty-six years into his reign, and his son Miao Hou ascended the throne.

古文：缪侯七年，而鲁隐公元年也。
现代文：燕缪侯七年，正是鲁隐公元年。
English: The seventh year of Yan Mu's reign was the year of Luyin.

古文：十八年卒，子宣侯立。
现代文：燕缪侯在位十八年去世，他儿子宣侯即位。
English: Prince Yan Miao died in the eighteenth year of his reign, and his son was proclaimed prince and ascended to the throne.

古文：宣侯十三年卒，子桓侯立。
现代文：宣侯在位十三年去世，他儿子桓侯即位。
English: Nobukatsu died thirteen years into his reign, and his son Kanhō succeeded to the throne.

古文：桓侯七年卒，子庄公立。
现代文：桓侯在位七年去世，他儿子庄公即位。
English: Prince Kan died seven years into his reign, and his son Prince Zhuang ascended the throne.

古文：庄公十二年，齐桓公始霸。
现代文：庄公十二年，齐桓公开始称霸。
English: In the twelfth year of King Zhuang, King Qi Huan began to dominate.

古文：十六年，与宋、卫共伐周惠王，惠王出奔温，立惠王弟颓为周王。
现代文：十六年，燕国和宋国、卫国一起攻打周惠王，惠王逃奔到温地，三国拥立惠王的弟弟颓做周王。
English: Sixteen years later, Yan, Song, and Wei attacked Zhou Hui together. Hui fled to a warmer place, and the three countries supported Zhou's younger brother, Zou, as Zhou king.

古文：十七年，郑执燕仲父而内惠王于周。
现代文：十七年，郑国拘捕了燕仲父，并护送周惠王回周国。
English: In 17 years, Zheng Guo arrested Yan Zhongfu and escorted Zhou Hui Wang back to Zhou Guo.

古文：二十七年，山戎来侵我，齐桓公救燕，遂北伐山戎而还。
现代文：二十七年，山戎侵犯燕国，齐桓公去救援燕国，于是率兵北上讨伐山戎，然后回国。
English: In the 27th year, San Rong invaded Yan Province, Qi Huan Gong went to rescue Yan Province, so he led his soldiers to the north to fight against San Rong, and then returned to China.

古文：燕君送齐桓公出境，桓公因割燕所至地予燕，使燕共贡天子，如成周时职；使燕复修召公之法。
现代文：燕庄公欢送齐桓公出了国境，齐桓公就把燕庄公所到的地方割让给了燕国，让燕庄公和诸侯一道向周天子进贡，像周成王时的燕召公那样尽职；又让燕国重新修明燕召公时候实行的法度。
English: Yanzhuang Gong Huan sent Qi Huan Gong out of the border, Qi Huan Gong ceded the place where Yanzhuang Gong arrived to Yan Guo, let Yanzhuang Gong and the princes pay tribute to Zhou Tianzi, like Yan Zhao Gong at the time of King Zhoucheng; and let Yan Guo re-clarify the laws implemented at the time of Yan Zhao Gong.

古文：三十三年卒，子襄公立。
现代文：三十三年，庄公去世，他儿子襄公即位。
English: Thirty-three years later, Prince Zhuang died and his son Prince Xiang ascended the throne.

古文：襄公二十六年，晋文公为践土之会，称伯。
现代文：襄公二十六年，晋文公召集诸侯在践土会盟，在诸侯中称霸。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of Emperor Xiang, Emperor Wenzong of Jin convened the princes in the Earth-moving Association, and became dominant among the princes.

古文：三十一年，秦师败于殽。
现代文：三十一年，秦国军队在殽山被晋军打败。
English: In the 31st year, the Qin army was defeated by the Jin army in Lushan.

古文：三十七年，秦穆公卒。
现代文：三十七年，秦穆公去世。
English: In 1937, Qin Mu Gong passed away.

古文：四十年，襄公卒，桓公立。
现代文：四十年，燕襄公去世，桓公即位。
English: Forty years later, Prince Yan Xiang died and Prince Huan ascended the throne.

古文：桓公十六年卒，宣公立。
现代文：桓公在位十六年去世世，宣公即位。
English: In the sixteenth year of his reign, King Kan passed away and was succeeded by his son, King Seonjo.

古文：宣公十五年卒，昭公立。
现代文：宣公在位十五年去世，昭公即位。
English: In the fifteenth year of his reign, Shoko died, and Akihiko ascended the throne.

古文：昭公十三年卒，武公立。
现代文：昭公在位十三年去世，武公即位。
English: Prince Akihito died thirteen years into his reign, and Prince Takehito ascended the throne.

古文：是岁晋灭三郄大夫。
现代文：这一年，晋国诛灭了三郤大夫。
English: In the same year, the State of Jin killed three magistrates.

古文：武公十九年卒，文公立。
现代文：武公在位十九年去世，文公即位。
English: Emperor Wu died 19 years into his reign, and Emperor Wengu ascended the throne.

古文：文公六年卒，懿公立。
现代文：文公在位六年去世，懿公即位。
English: Wengong died six years into his reign, and Zengong ascended the throne.

古文：懿公元年，齐崔杼弑其君庄公。
现代文：懿公元年，齐国崔杼杀死了他的国君庄公。
English: In the 6th year of the Christian era, Cui Zhen of Qi killed his sovereign Zhuang Gong.

古文：四年卒，子惠公立。
现代文：懿公在位四年去世，他的儿子惠公即位。
English: Shihong died four years into his reign, and his son Huigong ascended the throne.

古文：惠公元年，齐高止来奔。
现代文：惠公元年，齐国的高止逃亡，前来投奔燕国。
English: In the year of Hui, Gaozhong of Qi fled and came to Yan.

古文：六年，惠公多宠姬，公欲去诸大夫而立宠姬宋，大夫共诛姬宋，惠公惧，奔齐。
现代文：六年，惠公有许多宠爱的的姬妾，他打算除掉各位大夫从而立一位叫宋的宠姬，大夫们一起诛杀了名叫宋的宠姬。惠公害怕了，逃奔到齐国。
English: In the sixth year, Prince Hui had many favorite concubines. He planned to get rid of the doctors and set up a favorite concubine named Song. The doctors together killed the favorite concubine named Song. Prince Hui was afraid and fled to Qi.

古文：四年，齐高偃如晋，请共伐燕，入其君。
现代文：他到齐国的第四年，齐国派高偃去到晋国，请求联合讨伐燕国，送燕惠公回国为君。
English: In the fourth year of his stay in Qi, the State of Qi sent Gao Yao to Jin to request a joint crusade against Yan and to send Yan Huigong back to the country.

古文：晋平公许，与齐伐燕，入惠公。
现代文：晋平公答应了，和齐国一起讨伐燕国，把燕惠公送回了燕国。
English: Jin Ping Gong agreed, and together with Qi Guo, they fought against Yan Guo and sent Yan Hui Gong back to Yan Guo.

古文：惠公至燕而死。
现代文：惠公刚到燕国就死去了。
English: Huigong died as soon as he arrived in Yan's country.

古文：燕立悼公。
现代文：燕国人拥立了悼公。
English: The people of Yan supported the mourning.

古文：悼公七年卒，共公立。
现代文：悼公在位七年去世，共公即位。
English: Eiko died seven years into his reign, and Goko ascended the throne.

古文：共公五年卒，平公立。
现代文：共公在位五年去世去世，平公即位。
English: He died five years into his reign and was succeeded by TAIRA no Kimi.

古文：晋公室卑，六卿始强大。
现代文：这时候晋国的君权衰弱了，范、中行、智、赵、韩、魏等六个家族的力量开始强大起来。
English: At this time, the royal power of Jin weakened, and the power of six families such as Fan, Zhongxing, Zhi, Zhao, Han and Wei began to grow stronger.

古文：平公十八年，吴王阖闾破楚入郢。
现代文：平公十八年，吴王阖闾攻破楚国，进入郢都。
English: In the 18th year of the Heian period, King Wu of Wu invaded the State of Chu and entered the capital of Chu.

古文：十七年卒，简公立。
现代文：平公在位十九年去世，简公即位。
English: Taira no kimi died 19 years into his reign, and Jane no kimi ascended the throne.

古文：简公十二年卒，献公立。
现代文：简公在位十二年去世，献公即位。
English: Jian Gong died in the twelfth year of his reign and was enthroned.

古文：晋赵鞅围范、中行于朝歌。
现代文：晋国赵鞅把范氏、中行氏围困在朝歌。
English: Zhao Wei of Jin besieged the Fan clan and the Zhongxing clan at Chaoga.

古文：献公十二年，齐田常弑其君简公。
现代文：献公十二年，齐国田常杀死了他的国君简公。
English: In the twelfth year of dedication, Qi Guotian often killed his sovereign Jian Gong.

古文：十四年，孔子卒。
现代文：十四年，献公去世，孝公即位。
English: In the fourteenth year of his reign, he died, and Takako ascended to the throne.

古文：二十八年，献公卒，孝公立。孝公十二年，韩、魏、赵灭智伯，分其地，三晋强。
现代文：孝公十二年，韩、魏、赵三家灭掉了智伯，瓜分了他的封地，这三家逐渐强大起来。
English: In the twelfth year of Xiaogong, Han, Wei, and Zhao wiped out Zhibo and divided his fiefs, and these three families gradually became powerful.

古文：十五年，孝公卒，成公立。
现代文：十五年，孝公去世，成公即位。
English: Fifteen years later, Prince Takahito died, and Prince Seiko ascended the throne.

古文：成公十六年卒，愍公立。
现代文：成公在位十六年去世，愍公即位。
English: Chenggong died in the sixteenth year of his reign, and Zenggong ascended the throne.

古文：愍公三十一年卒，厘公立。
现代文：愍公在位三十一年去世，厘公即位。
English: Shigong died in the 31st year of his reign, and Li Gong ascended the throne.

古文：是岁，三晋列为诸侯。
现代文：这一年，韩、赵、魏三国被列为诸侯。
English: In this year, Han, Zhao and Wei were listed as princes.

古文：厘公三十年，伐败齐于林营。厘公卒，桓公立。
现代文：厘公三十年，燕国在林营征伐并打败了齐国。厘公去世，桓公即位。
English: Thirty years after the death of Li Gong, Yan Guo conquered and defeated Qi Guo in Lin Ying. Li Gong died and Huan Guo ascended to the throne.

古文：桓公十一年卒，文公立。
现代文：桓公在位十一年去世，文公即位。
English: Prince Kan died eleven years into his reign, and Prince Wengu ascended the throne.

古文：是岁，秦献公卒。秦益强。
现代文：这一年，秦献公去世，秦国更加强大了。
English: In this year, Qin Xiangong passed away, and Qin State became even stronger.

古文：文公十九年，齐威王卒。
现代文：文公十九年，齐威王去世。
English: In the 19th year of King Wen, King Qi Wei passed away.

古文：二十八年，苏秦始来见，说文公。
现代文：二十八年，苏秦初次来燕国拜见文公，又说文公。
English: In the 28th year, Su Qin came to Yan Province for the first time to pay homage to Wen Gong, also known as Wen Gong.

古文：文公予车马金帛以至赵，赵肃侯用之。
现代文：文公赠给他车辆、马匹、黄金和绢帛，让他到赵国去，赵肃侯重用了他。
English: Wen Gong presented him with vehicles, horses, gold and money, and asked him to go to Zhao Province. Zhao Su Hou made good use of him.

古文：因约六国，为从长。
现代文：于是苏秦与六国实行合纵政策，他成为了纵长。
English: As a result, Su Qin and the Six Kingdoms implemented a longitudinal integration policy, and he became the longitudinal leader.

古文：秦惠王以其女为燕太子妇。
现代文：这时候，秦惠王把自己的女儿嫁给燕国太子做妻子。
English: Qin Hui Wang married his daughter to Prince Yan as his wife.

古文：二十九年，文公卒，太子立，是为易王。
现代文：二十九年，文公去世，太子即位，这就是易王。
English: In the 29th year, Wengong died, and the prince ascended to the throne. This was King Yi.

古文：易王初立，齐宣王因燕丧伐我，取十城；苏秦说齐，使复归燕十城。
现代文：易王刚刚即位，齐宣王就趁着给文公办丧事的机会攻打燕国，夺取了十座城池；苏秦到齐国游说，说服齐王把十座城池又归还了燕国。
English: As soon as Yi Wang ascended the throne, Qi Xuan Wang took the opportunity to attack Yan Province and captured ten cities; Su Qin went to Qi Province to lobby and persuaded Qi Wang to return the ten cities to Yan Province.

古文：十年，燕君为王。
现代文：十年，燕国国君才正式称王。
English: It took ten years for Yan Guo Guojun to be officially crowned king.

古文：苏秦与燕文公夫人私通，惧诛，乃说王使齐为反间，欲以乱齐。
现代文：苏秦和燕文公的夫人通奸，害怕被杀掉，于是就游说易王派他出使齐国去搞反间，借以扰乱齐国。
English: Su Qin and the wife of Yan Wengong committed adultery and was afraid of being killed, so he lobbied King Yi to send him to Qi to stir up trouble and disrupt Qi.

古文：易王立十二年卒，子燕哙立。
现代文：易王十二年去世，他儿子燕王哙即位。
English: Yi Wang died in the twelfth year, and his son Yan Wang Rong ascended the throne.

古文：燕哙既立，齐人杀苏秦。
现代文：燕王哙即位以后，齐国人杀掉了苏秦。
English: After the enthronement of Yan Wangtao, the people of Qi killed Su Qin.

古文：苏秦之在燕，与其相子之为婚，而苏代与子之交。
现代文：苏秦在燕国的时候，和国相子之结成了儿女亲家，苏秦的弟弟苏代也和子之交往密切。
English: When Su Qin was in Yan Province, he formed a family with his son-in-law. Su Qin's younger brother Su Dai also had a close relationship with his son.

古文：及苏秦死，而齐宣王复用苏代。
现代文：等到苏秦死后，齐宣王又任用了苏代。
English: After Su Qin's death, King Qi Xuan appointed Su as his successor.

古文：燕哙三年，与楚、三晋攻秦，不胜而还。
现代文：燕王哙三年，燕国联合楚国及韩、赵、魏三国去攻打秦国，没能取胜便回国了。
English: In the third year of the reign of King Yan, Yan's country, together with Chu, Han, Zhao, and Wei, went to attack Qin. When they failed to win, they returned home.

古文：子之相燕，贵重，主断。
现代文：当时子之做燕国的国相，位尊权重，主决国家大事。
English: At that time, the son was the minister of state of Yan, the position of dignity and weight, and the main decision-maker of national affairs.

古文：苏代为齐使于燕，燕王问曰： 齐王傒如？ 
现代文：苏代做为齐国的使臣出使到燕国，燕王问他说： 齐王这个人怎么样？ 
English: The Su Dynasty sent an envoy to Yan as an envoy of Qi. Yan Wang asked him: "What about this person, King Qi?

古文：对曰： 必不霸。 
现代文：苏代回答说： 肯定不能称霸。 
English: Sudai replied, "It is definitely impossible to dominate."

古文：燕王曰： 何也？ 
现代文：燕王问： 为什么呢？ 
English: Yan Wang asked: Why?

古文：对曰： 不信其臣。 
现代文：回答说： 不信任他的大臣。 
English: "A minister who doesn't trust him," he replied.

古文：苏代欲以激燕王以尊子之也。
现代文：苏代是想用这些话刺激燕王，使他尊重子之。
English: Su Dai wanted to use these words to stimulate Yan Wang and make him respect his son.

古文：于是燕王大信子之。
现代文：于是燕王十分信任子之。
English: As a result, Yan Wang trusted his son very much.

古文：子之因遗苏代百金，而听其所使。
现代文：子之因此赠给苏代一百镒黄金，任凭他使用。
English: As a result, his son gave Sudai a hundred pieces of gold, which he was allowed to use.

古文：鹿毛寿谓燕王： 不如以国让相子之。
现代文：鹿毛寿对燕王说： 您不如把国家让给国相子之。
English: Lu Mao Shou said to Yan Wang: You might as well give the country to your son-in-law.

古文：人之谓尧贤者，以其让天下于许由，许由不受，有让天下之名而实不失天下。
现代文：人们之所以称道尧为君贤圣，是因为他把天下让给了许由，许由没有接受，因此尧有了让天下的美名而实际上并没有失去天下。
English: The reason why people call Daodejing a great sage is because he gave the world to Xu Rong, but Xu Rong did not accept it. Therefore, Daodejing gained the reputation of giving the world, but did not actually lose the world.

古文：今王以国让于子之，子之必不敢受，是王与尧同行也。 
现代文：如果现在您把国家让给子之，子之一定不敢接受，这就表明您和尧有同样的高尚品德。 
English: If you now give the country to your son, your son will not dare to accept it, which shows that you and I have the same high moral character.

古文：燕王因属国于子之，子之大重。
现代文：燕王于是把国家托付给了子之，子之的地位就更其尊贵起来。
English: Yan Wang then entrusted the country to his son, and the son's status became even more prestigious.

古文：或曰： 禹荐益，已而以启人为吏。
现代文：有人对燕王说： 大禹举荐了伯益，却任用启的臣子当官吏。
English: Someone said to King Yan: Dayu recommended Bo Yi, but appointed Qi's vassal as an official.

古文：及老，而以启人为不足任乎天下，传之于益。
现代文：等到大禹年老时，又认为启不足以担当治理天下的重任，把君位传给了伯益。
English: When Dayu was old, he thought that Kai was not enough to take on the heavy responsibility of governing the world, and passed the throne to Bo Yi.

古文：已而启与交党攻益，夺之。
现代文：不久，启就和他的同党攻打伯益，夺走了君位。
English: Soon after, Kai and his fellow party members attacked Bo Yi and took away his throne.

古文：天下谓禹名传天下于益，已而实令启自取之。
现代文：天下人都说大禹名义上是把天下传给了伯益，而实际上接着又让启自己夺了回去。
English: People all over the world say that Dayu nominally handed over the world to Bo Yi, but in fact he let Qi take it back.

古文：今王言属国于子之，而吏无非太子人者，是名属子之而实太子用事也。 
现代文：现在大王说是把国家托付给了子之，但官吏却没有一个不是太子的臣子，这正是名义上把国家托付给子之，实际上还是由太子执政啊。 
English: Now the great king says that he has entrusted the country to his son, but there is not a single official who is not a vassal of the crown prince. This is precisely why the country has been entrusted to his son in name, but in reality it is the crown prince who governs.

古文：王因收印自三百石吏已上而效之子之。
现代文：燕王于是把俸禄三百石以上的官吏的印信收起来，交给了子之。
English: Yan Wang then put away the seal letters of officials with a salary of more than 300 koku and handed them over to his son.

古文：子之南面行王事，而哙老不听政，顾为臣，国事皆决于子之。
现代文：子之就面向南坐在君位上，行使国王的权力；燕王哙年老不再处理政务，反而成为了臣子，国家一切政务都由子之裁决。
English: The son sat on the throne facing south and exercised the power of the king; the old king Yan no longer dealt with government affairs, but became a vassal, and all government affairs of the country were decided by the son.

古文：三年，国大乱，百姓恫恐。
现代文：三年以后，燕国大乱，百官人人恐惧。
English: Three years later, there was a big riot in Yan's country, and all the officials were terrified.

古文：将军市被与太子平谋，将攻子之。
现代文：将军市被和太子平谋划，准备攻打子之。
English: The generals were plotting with the crown prince, preparing to attack him.

古文：诸将谓齐愍王曰： 因而赴之，破燕必矣。 
现代文：齐国众将对齐愍王说： 我们趁这个机会出兵奔赴燕国，一定能将燕国攻破。 
English: The people of Qi will say to King Qianlong: We will take advantage of this opportunity to send troops to rush to Yan, and we will surely be able to break through Yan.

古文：齐王因令人谓燕太子平曰： 寡人闻太子之义，将废私而立公，饬君臣之义，明父子之位。
现代文：齐王于是派人对燕太子平说： 我听说太子主持正义，将要废私立公，整顿君臣的伦理，明确父子的地位。
English: King Qi then sent a messenger to Prince Yan Ping to say: I have heard that the prince will preside over justice, abolish private and public, rectify the ethics of princes and ministers, and clarify the status of father and son.

古文：寡人之国小，不足以为先后。
现代文：我的国家很小，不足以跟随在您左右。
English: My country is too small to follow in your footsteps.

古文：虽然，则唯太子所以令之。 
现代文：即使这样，我们也愿意听从太子的差遣。 
English: Even so, we are willing to follow the prince's orders.

古文：太子因要党聚众。将军市被围公宫，攻子之，不克。
现代文：太子平于是邀集同党聚合徒众，将军市被包围了王宫，攻打子之，没有攻克。
English: Prince Ping then invited his fellow party members to gather the disciples, and the general city was surrounded by the royal palace, which was attacked but not conquered.

古文：将军市被及百姓反攻太子平，将军市被死，以徇。
现代文：将军市被和百官又反过来攻打太子平。结果将军市被战死，被陈尸示众。
English: Shogunichi was taken away by a hundred officials and in turn attacked Taishihei. As a result, Shogunichi was killed in battle and his corpse was displayed to the public.

古文：因构难数月，死者数万，众人恫恐，百姓离志。
现代文：这样，国内造成了几个月的祸乱。死去了好几万人，民众非常恐惧，百官离心离德。
English: As a result, the country was plunged into months of chaos. Tens of thousands of people died, the people were terrified, and hundreds of officials were forced to resign.

古文：孟轲谓齐王曰： 今伐燕，此文、武之时，不可失也。 
现代文：孟轲对齐王说： 现在去讨伐燕国，这正是周文王、武王伐纣那样的好时机，千万不可以错失啊。 
English: Meng Yao said to King Qi, "Now is the time to attack Yan's country. This is just as good a time as when King Zhou and King Wu attacked Yan's country. Don't miss it."

古文：王因令章子将五都之兵，以因北地之众以伐燕。
现代文：齐王于是命令章子率领五都的军队，并且偕同北方边境的士卒，一起讨伐燕国。
English: King Qi then ordered Zhang Zi to lead the armies of the five capitals, and together with the soldiers from the northern border, to fight against Yan.

古文：士卒不战，城门不闭，燕君哙死，齐大胜。
现代文：燕国的士兵不迎战，城门也不关闭，燕君哙死，齐军大胜。
English: The soldiers of Yan's country did not fight, and the city gates were not closed. Yan Jun died, and the Qi army won a great victory.

古文：燕子之亡二年，而燕人共立太子平，是为燕昭王。
现代文：燕子之死后第二年，燕国人共同拥立太子平，这就是燕昭王。
English: In the second year after the death of Yan Zi, Yan people jointly supported the establishment of Prince Ping, which is Yan Zhao Wang.

古文：燕昭王于破燕之后即位，卑身厚币以招贤者。
现代文：燕昭王是在燕国被攻破之后即位的，他以自身的谦恭和丰厚的礼物来招揽贤才。
English: Yan Zhao Wang came to the throne after Yan's country was defeated, and he used his humility and rich gifts to recruit talents.

古文：谓郭隗曰： 齐因孤之国乱而袭破燕，孤极知燕小力少，不足以报。
现代文：他对郭隗说： 齐国趁我们的国内混乱没有防备，攻破了燕国，我深知燕国国家小、力量弱，没有足够的能力报仇。
English: He said to Guo Wei: "Qi Guo took advantage of our domestic chaos and broke through Yan Guo. I am well aware that Yan Guo is a small and weak country, and does not have enough ability to take revenge.

古文：然诚得贤士以共国，以雪先王之耻，孤之愿也。
现代文：可是如果得到贤士一起来治理国家，雪洗先王的耻辱，这是我的愿望啊。
English: But if I can get the wise men together to govern the country and wash away the shame of the former king, this is my wish.

古文：先生视可者，得身事之。 
现代文：先生看到有这样合适的人才，我一定亲自侍奉他。 
English: Sir, seeing such a suitable talent, I will certainly serve him myself.

古文：郭隗曰： 王必欲致士，先从隗始。
现代文：郭隗说： 假若大王一定要招致贤士，那就先从我郭隗开始。
English: Guo Wei said: If the great king must invite sages, then start with me, Guo Wei.

古文：况贤于隗者，岂远千里哉！ 
现代文：至于那些比我更贤能的人，难道还会以千里为远而不来吗？ 
English: As for those who are wiser than me, would they travel thousands of miles and not come?

古文：于是昭王为隗改筑宫而师事之。
现代文：于是昭王给郭隗改建了华美的住宅，并像对待老师那样用最高层次的待士礼节服侍他。
English: As a result, King Zhao rebuilt a gorgeous house for Guo Jun, and served him with the highest level of courtesy as if he were a teacher.

古文：乐毅自魏往，邹衍自齐往，剧辛自赵往，士争趋燕。
现代文：这时乐毅从魏国到来，邹衍从齐国到来，剧辛从赵国到来，贤士们争着奔赴燕国。
English: At this time, Le Yi arrived from Wei, Yan Yan arrived from Qi, and Juxin arrived from Zhao, and the sages competed to go to Yan.

古文：燕王吊死问孤，与百姓同甘苦。
现代文：燕王吊祭死者，慰问孤儿，和臣下们同甘共苦。
English: Yan Wang hanged the dead, consoled the orphans, and shared the joys and sorrows with his subjects.

古文：二十八年，燕国殷富，士卒乐轶轻战，于是遂以乐毅为上将军，与秦、楚、三晋合谋以伐齐。
现代文：二十八年，燕国殷实富足了，士兵都乐于出击，不惧怕战事。燕王于是任命乐毅为上将军，和秦、楚以及赵、魏、韩等国共同谋划，发兵征讨齐国。
English: In the 28th year, Yan's country was rich and prosperous, and the soldiers were happy to attack and were not afraid of war. Yan Wang then appointed Le Yi as the general, and together with Qin, Chu, Zhao, Wei, Han and other countries, they planned and sent troops to recruit Qi.

古文：齐兵败，愍王出亡于外。
现代文：齐军战败，齐湣王逃到外地。
English: After the defeat of the Qi army, the king of Qi fled to another place.

古文：燕兵独追北，入至临淄，尽取齐宝，烧其宫室宗庙。
现代文：燕军单独追击败逃的齐军，攻入齐都临淄，夺取了齐国所有的宝物，焚烧了齐国的宗庙宫室。
English: Yan's army single-handedly chased and defeated the fleeing Qi army, entered the Qi capital of Linyi, seized all the treasures of Qi, and burned the imperial palace of Qi.

古文：齐城之不下者，独唯聊、莒、即墨，其余皆属燕，六岁。
现代文：齐国城池没有被攻下的，只有聊、莒和即墨三处，其余都隶属于燕国，达六年之久。
English: Qigong's citadel was not conquered, only Liaocheng, Zhouzhuang and Zhimo three places, the rest are subordinate to Yan, up to six years.

古文：昭王三十三年卒，子惠王立。
现代文：昭王在位三十三年去世，他的儿子惠王即位。
English: King Zhao died in the 33rd year of his reign, and his son King Hui ascended the throne.

古文：惠王为太子时，与乐毅有隙；及即位，疑毅，使骑劫代将。乐毅亡走赵。
现代文：惠王在做太子的时候，就和乐毅有嫌隙；等到即位以后，他不信任乐毅，让骑劫代替乐毅做将军。
English: When Hui Wang was crown prince, he had a grudge against Le Yi; after he ascended the throne, he did not trust Le Yi, and let the cavalry robber replace Le Yi as general.

古文：齐田单以即墨击败燕军，骑劫死，燕兵引归，齐悉复得其故城。
现代文：乐毅逃跑到赵国。齐国田单凭借即墨一城的兵力，打败了燕国军队，骑劫战死，燕军后退到本国，齐国又全部收复了其原有的城池。
English: Le Yi fled to Zhao. Tian Shan of Qi defeated Yan's army with the help of troops from Zhimo I City, and died in the battle. Yan's army retreated to their home country, and Qi regained all of its original cities.

古文：愍王死于莒，乃立其子为襄王。
现代文：齐愍王死在莒城，于是齐国人拥立他的儿子为襄王。
English: The King of Qi died in Lucheng, so the people of Qi supported his son as the King of Xiang.

古文：惠王七年卒。韩、魏、楚共伐燕。
现代文：惠王在位七年去世，韩、魏、楚三国联合攻打燕国。
English: Hui Wang died seven years into his reign, and the three countries of Han, Wei, and Chu jointly attacked Yan.

古文：燕武成王立。
现代文：燕武成王即位。
English: The enthronement of King Yan Wucheng.

古文：武成王七年，齐田单伐我，拔中阳。
现代文：武成王七年，齐国田单征伐燕国，攻占了中阳。
English: In the seventh year of King Wucheng, the Qin and Yan provinces were conquered separately, and Zhongyang was captured.

古文：十三年，秦败赵于长平四十余万。
现代文：十三年，秦国在长平打败了赵国四十多万军队。
English: In the thirteenth year, Qin State defeated more than four hundred thousand troops of Zhao State in Changping.

古文：十四年，武成王卒，子孝王立。
现代文：十四年，武成王去世，他儿子孝王即位。
English: In the 14th year, King Wu Cheng died, and his son King Xiao ascended to the throne.

古文：孝王元年，秦围邯郸者解去。
现代文：考王元年，秦国围围邯郸的军队解除包围，离开了赵国。
English: In the first year of King Kao's reign, the army of Qin that had been besieging Zhao lifted the siege and left Zhao.

古文：三年卒，子今王喜立。
现代文：孝王在位三年去世，他儿子燕王喜即位。
English: Prince Takahito died three years into his reign, and his son, Prince Yan, succeeded to the throne.

古文：今王喜四年，秦昭王卒。
现代文：燕王喜四年，秦昭王去世。
English: In the fourth year of Yan Wangxi, Qin Zhao Wang passed away.

古文：燕王命相栗腹约欢赵，以五百金为赵王酒。
现代文：燕王派国相栗腹和赵国订立友好盟约，送上五百镒黄金给赵王置酒祝寿。
English: King Yan sent his minister of state, Li Gang, to conclude a friendship treaty with Zhao Guo, and sent five hundred ounces of gold to Zhao Wangji to celebrate his birthday.

古文：还报燕王曰： 赵王壮者皆死长平，其孤未壮，可伐也。 
现代文：栗腹回国报告燕王说： 赵王国内年轻力壮的人都战死在长平了，他们的孩子还没有长大，我们可以趁机攻打赵国。 
English: After returning to China, Yan Wang said: The young and strong people in the Kingdom of Zhao have all died in the battle of Changping. Their children have not yet grown up. We can take advantage of this opportunity to attack Zhao.

古文：王召昌国君乐闲问之。
现代文：燕王叫来昌国君乐间询问这事情。
English: Yan Wang called Chang Guojunle to inquire about the matter.

古文：对曰： 赵四战之国，其民习兵，不可伐。 
现代文：乐间回答说： 赵国是个四面受敌、经常抗战的国家，他的百姓熟悉军事，不可以进攻。 
English: Le replied, "Zhao is a country that has suffered from enemies on all sides and has always resisted war. Its people are familiar with military affairs and cannot attack.

古文：王曰： 吾以五而伐一。 
现代文：燕王说： 我们是以五个人攻打他们一个人。 
English: Yan Wang said, "We attacked them one by one with five people.

古文：对曰： 不可。 
现代文：乐间仍然回答说： 不可以。 
English: Fan Ye replied, "It's not appropriate."

古文：燕王怒，群臣皆以为可。
现代文：燕王很生气，这时群臣都认为可以进攻。
English: Yan Wang was very angry. At this time, the courtiers all thought that they could attack.

古文：卒起二军，车二千乘，栗腹将而攻鄗，卿秦攻代。
现代文：燕国终于派出两路军队，兵车二千辆，栗腹率领一路攻打鄗，卿秦领兵攻打代地。
English: Yan finally sent out a two-way army, two thousand chariots, led by Chestnut-bellied to attack Yunnan, and led by Qin Qin to attack Quzhou.

古文：唯独大夫将渠谓燕王曰： 与人通关约交，以五百金饮人之王，使者报而反攻之，不祥，兵无成功。 
现代文：只有大夫将渠对燕王说： 和人家互通关卡，制订了盟约，拿出五百镒黄金给人家的君王祝酒，使者回来一报告就反过来进攻人家，这种做法是不吉利的，作战不会成功。 
English: Only the doctor-commander said to King Yan, "It is unlucky to pass through checkpoints with others, to make a covenant, to take out five hundred shekels of gold to give a toast to the king of one's home, and to attack others in turn as soon as the messenger returns with a report. This approach will not succeed in the war."

古文：燕王不听，自将偏军随之。
现代文：燕王听不进去，自己亲自率领侧翼部队随军出发。
English: Yan Wang did not listen, and personally led the flank troops to follow the army.

古文：将渠引燕王绶止之曰： 王必无自往，往无成功。 
现代文：将渠拉住燕王腰间系印的带子阻止他说： 大王一定不要亲自前去，去了是不会成功的！ 
English: He tugged at the seal band around the king's waist to stop him, saying, "The great king must not go in person, he will not succeed!"

古文：王蹴之以足。
现代文：燕王用脚把他踢开了。
English: Yan Wang kicked him away with his foot.

古文：将渠泣曰： 臣非以自为，为王也！ 
现代文：将渠哭着说： 臣下不是为了自己，为的是大王啊！ 
English: crying, said: My vassals are not fighting for themselves, but for the great king!

古文：燕军至宋子，赵使廉颇将，击破栗腹于鄗。
现代文：燕军到达宋子，赵国派廉颇率兵，在鄗打败了栗腹。
English: When Yan's army arrived in Songzi, Zhao sent Lianpo to lead the army and defeated Chulibang in Handan.

古文：乐乘破卿秦于代。乐闲奔赵。
现代文：乐乘也在代地打败了卿秦。乐间逃奔到赵国。
English: Le Rong also defeated Emperor Qin on his behalf. Le fled to Zhao.

古文：廉颇逐之五百余里，围其国。
现代文：廉颇追赶燕国，追出五百多里，包围了燕国的都城。
English: He chased Yan Guo for more than five hundred miles and encircled the capital city of Yan Guo.

古文：燕人请和，赵人不许，必令将渠处和。
现代文：燕国人请求议和，赵国人不答应，一定要让将渠出面主持议和。
English: The people of Yan requested to discuss peace, but the people of Zhao did not agree, so they had to ask the general to come forward to preside over the discussion.

古文：燕相将渠以处和。
现代文：燕国便任命将渠为国相，前去主持议和。
English: Yan Guo then appointed Zeng Qu as Minister of State to preside over the peace negotiations.

古文：赵听将渠，解燕围。
现代文：赵国听了将渠的请求，解除了对燕国的包围。
English: Zhao listened to the request of the general and lifted the siege on Yan.

古文：六年，秦灭东周，置三川郡。
现代文：燕王喜六年，秦国灭掉东周，设置了三川郡。
English: In the sixth year of King Yan's reign, Qin wiped out Eastern Zhou and set up Sanchuan County.

古文：七年，秦拔赵榆次三十七城，秦置大原郡。
现代文：七年，秦国攻占了赵国榆林等三十七城，设置了太原郡。
English: In the seventh year, Qin conquered thirty-seven cities such as Zhao Guobulin and established Taiyuan County.

古文：九年，秦王政初即位。
现代文：九年，秦王嬴政刚刚即位。
English: In the 9th year of the Qin Dynasty, King Yongzheng had just ascended to the throne.

古文：十年，赵使廉颇将攻繁阳，拔之。
现代文：十年，赵国派廉颇率兵攻打魏国的繁阳，占领了它。
English: In the tenth year, Zhao sent Liangpo and his soldiers to attack the prosperous sun of Wei and occupied it.

古文：赵孝成王卒，悼襄王立。
现代文：这时，赵孝成王去世，悼襄王即位。
English: At this time, King Zhao Xiaocheng died, and King Xiang came to the throne.

古文：使乐乘代廉颇，廉颇不听，攻乐乘，乐乘走，廉颇奔大梁。
现代文：悼襄王派乐乘接替廉颇统兵，廉颇不听命令，攻打乐乘，乐乘逃跑了，廉颇也逃奔到魏都大梁。
English: In mourning, King Xiang sent Le Rong to take over the command of the army from Liang Po, but Liang Po disobeyed the order and attacked Le Rong. Liang Po also fled to Dalian, the capital of Wei.

古文：十二年，赵使李牧攻燕，拔武遂、方城。
现代文：十二年，赵国派李牧进攻燕国，夺取了武遂和方城。
English: In the twelfth year, Zhao sent Li Mu to attack Yan and captured Wusui and Fangcheng.

古文：剧辛故居赵，与庞暖善，已而亡走燕。
现代文：剧辛从前住在赵国时，和庞煖很要好，后来逃跑到燕国。
English: In the past, when she lived in Zhao Province, she was very friendly with Pang Yong. Later, she ran away to Yan Province.

古文：燕见赵数困于秦，而廉颇去，令庞暖将也，欲因赵毙攻之。
现代文：燕王看到赵国屡次被秦兵围困，而且廉颇又离开了赵国，这时正让庞煖领兵作战，就想要趁赵国疲惫的机会去进攻它。
English: King Yan saw that Zhao was repeatedly besieged by Qin soldiers, and that Renpo had left Zhao. At that time, he was letting Pang Jun lead the troops into battle, so he wanted to take advantage of Zhao's exhaustion to attack it.

古文：问剧辛，辛曰： 庞暖易与耳。 
现代文：燕王这时询问剧辛，剧辛说： 庞煖很容易对付。 
English: At this time, the king of swallows inquired about the pangolin. The pangolin said, "The pangolin is easy to deal with.

古文：燕使剧辛将击赵，赵使庞暖击之，取燕军二万，杀剧辛。
现代文：燕王就派剧辛领兵攻打赵国，赵国派庞煖迎战，俘获了燕军两万人，杀掉了剧辛。
English: The king of Yan sent Yuxin to lead an army to attack Zhao, and Zhao sent Pangyao to fight, capturing 20,000 of Yan's army and killing Yuxin.

古文：秦拔魏二十城，置东郡。
现代文：这时秦国攻取了魏国的二十座城池，设置了东郡。
English: At this time, the State of Qin captured twenty castles of the State of Wei and set up Dong County.

古文：十九年，秦拔赵之邺九城。
现代文：十九年，秦国攻取了赵国的邺等九座城池。
English: In the 19th year of the Qin Dynasty, the state of Qin conquered nine cities and towns in Zhao, including Zou.

古文：赵悼襄王卒。
现代文：赵悼襄王去世。
English: Zhao mourns the death of Xiangwang.

古文：二十三年，太子丹质于秦，亡归燕。
现代文：二十三年，燕太子丹被送到秦国去做人质，这时逃回燕国。
English: In 233, Yan Taizi Dan was sent to Qin as a hostage, but he escaped back to Yan.

古文：二十五年，秦虏灭韩王安，置颍川郡。
现代文：二十五年，秦国俘虏了韩王安，灭掉了韩国，设置了颍川郡。
English: In 25 years, Qin captured Han Wangan, eliminated South Korea, and set up Suichuan County.

古文：二十七年，秦虏赵王迁，灭赵。
现代文：二十七年，秦国俘虏了赵王迁，灭掉了赵国。
English: In the 27th year, Qin captured Zhao Wangqian and destroyed Zhao.

古文：赵公子嘉自立为代王。
现代文：赵国公子嘉自立为代王。
English: Zhao Guozhijia established himself as acting king.

古文：燕见秦且灭六国，秦兵临易水，祸且至燕。
现代文：燕国君臣看到秦国即将灭掉六国，秦军已经到达易水，祸患将要降临燕国了。
English: Yan's princes and ministers saw that Qin was about to wipe out the Six Kingdoms. The Qin army had already reached Yishui. Disaster was about to befall Yan's country.

古文：太子丹阴养壮士二十人，使荆轲献督亢地图于秦，因袭刺秦王。
现代文：燕太子丹暗地里供养着二十名壮士，这时他派荆轲把督亢地图献给秦王，趁机刺杀秦王。
English: Yan Taizi Dan secretly supported twenty strong men. At this time, he sent Jing Yao to present the map of Duye to King Qin, taking the opportunity to assassinate King Qin.

古文：秦王觉，杀轲，使将军王翦击燕。
现代文：秦王发觉了，杀死了荆轲，派将军王翦攻打燕国。
English: King Qin found out, killed Jing Ye, and sent the general Wang Ye to attack Yan.

古文：二十九年，秦攻拔我蓟，燕王亡，徙居辽东，斩丹以献秦。
现代文：二十九年，秦军攻取了燕国都城蓟，燕王逃走了，后来迁居辽东，杀掉了太子丹，把他的首级献给了秦国。
English: In the 29th year, the Qin army captured the capital of Yan, Chengdu, and Yan Wang fled. Later, he moved to Liaodong, killed Prince Dan, and dedicated his head to Qin.

古文：三十年，秦灭魏。
现代文：三十年，秦国灭掉了魏国。
English: Thirty years ago, Qin State eliminated Wei State.

古文：三十三年，秦拔辽东，虏燕王喜，卒灭燕。
现代文：三十三年，秦军攻取了辽东，俘虏了燕王喜，终于灭掉了燕国。
English: In 333, the Qin army captured Liaodong, captured Yan Wangxi, and finally eliminated Yan's country.

古文：是岁，秦将王贲亦虏代王嘉。
现代文：这一年，秦将王贲也俘虏了代王嘉。
English: In the same year, the Qin general Wang Xi also captured the deputy Wang Jia.

古文：太史公曰：召公奭可谓仁矣！
现代文：太史公说：召公奭可以称得上有仁德的人了！
English: Taishigong said: Zhao Gongjun can be called a benevolent person!

古文：甘棠且思之，况其人乎？
现代文：那棵棠梨树，尚且被民众思念，更何况召公本人呢？
English: That tanggu pear tree, even though it is missed by the people, let alone the summoner himself?

古文：燕外迫蛮貉，内措齐、晋，崎岖强国之间，最为弱小，几灭者数矣。
现代文：燕国在外遭受蛮貉的逼迫，在内受到齐、晋的夹击，在强国之间艰难生存，势力最弱，有许多次几乎被灭掉。
English: Yan's country suffered brutal persecution abroad, and was attacked internally by Qi and Jin. It had a hard time surviving among the powerful countries. It had the weakest power and was almost wiped out many times.

古文：然社稷血食者八九百岁，于姬姓独后亡，岂非召公之烈邪！
现代文：然而国家延续了八、九百年之久，在姬姓诸侯中最后灭亡，这难道不是召公的功业吗？
English: However, the country lasted for eight or nine hundred years, and finally perished in the middle of the princes. Isn't this the work of summoning the public?

