古文：范承吉，字宠之。
现代文：范承吉，字宠之。
English: Fan Chengji, one of the most beloved characters in the series.

古文：好学问，属辽季盗贼起，虽避地未尝废书。
现代文：承吉喜好学问，在辽代末年的时候，即使盗贼蜂起，虽然在避难的地方也不曾放弃读书。
English: Chengji was fond of learning, and in the last years of the Liao Dynasty, even when the thieves revolted, he did not give up reading, even though he was in a place of refuge.

古文：天庆八年中进士丙科，授秘书省校书郎，至大定府金源令。
现代文：辽国天庆八年，承吉考中进士丙科，被授予秘书省校书郎的职务，官做到大定府金源令。
English: In the eighth year of Tianqing in Liaoning Province, Chengji passed the junior high school entrance examination and was awarded the post of secretary of the provincial school, and the official achieved the Dadingfu gold source order.

古文：归朝为御前承应文字。
现代文：归属金朝后，做了御前承应文字。
English: After it became part of the Kim dynasty, it was given the imperial seal of approval.

古文：天会初，迁殿中少监。
现代文：天会初年，迁任殿中少监。
English: In the first year of the Heavenly Society, he was transferred to the position of junior high school superintendent.

古文：四年，从攻太原，迁少府监。
现代文：四年，参加攻打太原，迁任少府监。
English: Four years later, he took part in the attack on Taiyuan and was transferred to the post of Junior Prefectural Inspector.

古文：五年，宗翰克宋，所得金珠承吉司其出入，无毫发欺，及还，犊车载书史而已，寻迁昭文馆直学士，知绛州。
现代文：五年，宗翰攻克宋国，所缴获的金银珠宝由承吉掌握出库入库，没有一丝一毫的作假欺骗行为，等到还朝的时候，只是用牛载宋国史书拉回而已。不久迁任昭文馆直学士，主持绛州的政事。
English: Five years later, when Zonghan conquered Song, the gold, silver, and jewels seized were taken out of storage and put into storage by Chengji. There was not the slightest act of forgery or deception. When the dynasty was still in power, they were just brought back with a copy of the history book of Song. He was soon transferred to the post of direct scholar of the Shouwen Museum and presided over the political affairs of Zhangzhou.

古文：先是，军兴，民有为将士所掠而逃归者，承吉使吏遍谕，俾其自实，凡数千人，具白元帅府，许自赎为良，或贫无赀者以公厨代输。
现代文：起初，兴兵打仗，百姓中有被将士抢掠去当兵却又逃跑归来的，承吉派官员四处通告，让他们自己据实汇报，大约有几千人，全部情况禀告元帅府，元帅府允许他们用钱物赎回自己仍当良民，对贫穷没有财物的，从公库中拿出代为垫付。
English: At first, the soldiers went to war, and some of the people were robbed by soldiers and went to be soldiers but ran away again. Chengyi sent officials to announce everywhere and let them report truthfully. There were about a few thousand people, and they reported the whole situation to the marshal's office. The marshal's office allowed them to redeem themselves with money. They were still good people, and they had no property for poverty. They took it out of the public treasury to advance payment.

古文：六年，改河东北路转运使。
现代文：六年，承吉改任河东北路转运使。
English: Six years later, Chengji was reappointed as the Northeast Railway Transfer Envoy.

古文：时承宋季之弊，民赋繁重失当，承吉乃为经画，立法简便，所入增十数万斛，官既足而民有余。
现代文：当时正是宋代末年，有许多社会弊端，百姓所负担的赋税过分繁重，范承吉于是就筹划治理税制，由于立法合理简便，所收入税金增加了十几万斛，官府收足了税而百姓还有富余。
English: At that time, it was the end of the Song Dynasty, there were many social ills, the tax burden on the people was too heavy, so Fan Chengji planned to manage the tax system. Because the legislation was reasonable and simple, the tax revenue increased by more than 100,000 baht, the government collected enough tax and the people still had surplus.

古文：历同知平阳尹、西京副留守，迁河东南路转运使，改同签燕京留守事、顺天军节度使，属地震坏民庐舍，有欲争先营葺者，工匠过取其直，承吉命官属董其役，先后以次，不间贫富，民赖以省费。
现代文：承吉历任知平阳尹、西京副留守，迁任河东南路转运使，改同签燕京留守事、顺天军节度使。因为发生地震，民房被毁坏，有的人想争先修缮，工匠过量地收取费用，承吉命令由官府统一管理这些工程，排好先后次序，不论贫富，百姓因此节省了修缮费。
English: Chengjie successively held the posts of Zhiping Yangyin and West Beijing deputy left-behind, and was transferred to the South Hedong Road transfer envoy, and changed to the same as the Yanjing left-behind and Shun Tianjun festival envoy. Because of the earthquake, the houses were destroyed, some people wanted to rush to repair, and the craftsmen charged excessive fees. Chengjie ordered the government to uniformly manage these projects and arrange the order of priority, regardless of rich and poor, so the people saved the repair costs.

古文：历镇西军节度使、行台礼部尚书、泰宁军节度使，复镇顺天。
现代文：承吉历任镇西军节度使、行台礼部尚书、泰宁军节度使，还镇守过顺天。
English: Chengji successively served as the festival envoy of the Western Military Command of the town, the ceremonial department of the parade, and the festival envoy of the Taining Military Command, and also guarded the town of Shuntian.

古文：岁大饥，盗贼掠人为食。诸县老弱入保郡城，不敢耕种，农事废，畎亩荒芜。
现代文：奚族的兵卒散居在境内，联系了几千人当强盗，承吉绳之以法严惩不贷，这些人因惧怕而不敢再侵扰百姓。
English: The soldiers of the Yi people were scattered in the territory, and they contacted several thousand people to act as robbers. Chengji was brought to justice and severely punished. These people were afraid to disturb the people again.

古文：敏行白州，借军士三十护县民出耕，多张旗帜为疑兵，敏行率军巡逻，日暮则阅民入城，由是盗不敢犯而耕稼滋殖。转高平令。县城圮坏久不修，大盗横恣，掠县镇不能御。敏行出己俸，率僚吏出钱顾役缮治，百姓欣然从之，凡用二千人，版筑遂完。乡村百姓入保，贼至不能犯。凡九迁，为河北东路转运使。致仕。卒。傅慎微，字几先。
现代文：贞元二年，承吉以光禄大夫的身份辞官，去世的时候六十六岁。傅慎微，字几先。
English: In the second year of the Zhengyuan era, Chengji was appointed to the post of Guanglu doctor. He was 66 years old at the time of his death.

古文：其先秦州沙溪人，后徙建昌。
现代文：他的祖先是秦州沙溪人，后来迁徙到建昌。
English: His ancestors were from Qinzhou Shaxi and later migrated to Jianchang.

古文：慎微迁居长安。
现代文：傅慎微移居长安。
English: Fu Shengwei moved to Chang'an.

古文：宋末登进士，累官河东路经制使。
现代文：宋朝末年，他中了进士，逐渐升任河东路经制使。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Jin Shi, and gradually rose to the position of the Hengtong Road Economic Envoy.

古文：宗翰已克汴京，使娄室定陕西，慎微率众迎战，兵败被获，送至元帅府。
现代文：宗翰攻下汴京后，派娄室平定陕西。傅慎微率领军众迎战，战败被俘，被送到元帅府。
English: After Zonghan captured Beijing, he sent his troops to subdue Shaanxi. Fu Shenwei led the army to fight, was defeated and captured, and was sent to the marshal's office.

古文：元帅宗翰爱其才学，弗杀，羁置归化州，希尹收置门下。
现代文：元帅宗翰喜爱他的才学，不杀他，把他押至归化州，由希尹接收安排到手下。
English: Marshal Zonghan liked his talent, did not kill him, sent him to the naturalization state, and arranged for Xi Yin to receive him as a subordinate.

古文：宗弼复取河南地，起为陕西经略使，寻权同州节度使事。
现代文：宗弼又攻取了河南土地，把傅慎微起用为陕西经略使，接着掌握同州节度使事之职。
English: Zonglu also conquered the land of Henan, and appointed Fu Shenwei as the special envoy to Shaanxi Province, and then took over the post of the special envoy to the festival in the same province.

古文：明年，陕西大旱，饥死者十七八，以慎微为京兆、鄜延、环庆三路经济使，许以便宜。
现代文：第二年，陕西发生了大旱灾，饿死的人有十分之七八，慎微被派作京兆、延、环庆三路经济使，并批准他可以灵活行事。
English: The following year, a severe drought occurred in Shaanxi, and seven out of ten people died of starvation. He was appointed as the economic envoy to Beijing, Yan'an, and Huanqing, and approved to act flexibly.

古文：慎微募民入粟，得二十余万石，立养济院饲饿者，全活甚众。
现代文：他向百姓征缴粮食，收得二十多万石，建立养济院给饥民发放粮食，救活了很多人。
English: He collected grain from the people, collected more than two hundred thousand stones, established a nursing home to distribute grain to the hungry, and saved many people.

古文：改同知京兆尹，权陕西诸路转运使。
现代文：傅慎微改任同知京兆尹，统辖陕西各路转运使。
English: Fu Shenwei was reassigned to the position of Tongzhi Jing Zhaoyun, in charge of all roads in Shaanxi.

古文：复修三白、龙首等渠以溉田，募民屯种，贷牛及种子以济之，民赖其利。
现代文：他重修三白、龙首等水渠来灌溉田地，招募百姓屯田耕种，把牛和粮种借贷给他们以帮助劳动，百姓从中得益甚多。
English: He rebuilt the Sanbai, Longshou and other canals to irrigate the fields, recruited people to farm the fields, and lent them cattle and grain to help them work. The people benefited a lot from this.

古文：转中京副留守，用廉，改忻州刺史，累迁太常卿，除定武军节度使，移静难军，忤用事者，苏保衡救之得免。
现代文：傅慎微又转任中京副留守，因为政清廉而改为忻州刺史，逐步升迁为太常卿，任定武军节度使，又转至静难军。他触犯了当权者，由于苏保衡相救才得以幸免。
English: Fu Shenwei was also transferred to the position of the vice-resident of Beijing, and because of his political integrity, he was changed to the governor of Zhangzhou, and gradually promoted to the Tai Changqing, appointed the military governor, and transferred to the Jingnan Army. He violated those in power, and was only spared because of Su Baoheng.

古文：大定初，复为太常卿，迁礼部尚书，与翰林侍讲学士徒单子温、翰林待制移剌熙载俱兼同修国史。
现代文：大定初年，傅慎微复职为太常卿，升任礼部尚书，和翰林侍讲学士徒单子温、翰林待制移剌熙载一起兼任同修国史之职。
English: In the first year of Dading, Fu Shenwei was reinstated as Tai Changqing, promoted to the Ministry of Rites and Decrees, and concurrently served as a student of national history together with Hanlin attendant lecturer and academician Wen Shan Zi and Hanlin attendant and scholar Ying Xi Zai.

古文：卒官，年七十六。
现代文：他死于任上，终年七十六岁。
English: He died in office, aged 76.

古文：慎微博学喜著书，尝奏《兴亡金镜录》一百卷。
现代文：傅慎微学识渊博，喜欢著书，他曾经进献《兴亡金镜录》一百卷。
English: Fu Shengwei is very knowledgeable and likes to write books. He once donated 100 volumes of "The Golden Mirror of Prosperity and Destruction."

古文：性纯质，笃古喜谈兵，时人以为迂阔云。
现代文：他性格纯然质朴，深熟古史，好谈论用兵之事，当时的人却认为他迂阔。
English: His character was pure and simple, he was well-versed in ancient history, and he liked to talk about the use of soldiers, but people at the time thought he was too broad-minded.

古文：刘焕，字德文，中山人。
现代文：刘焕，字德文，是中山人。
English: Liu Huan, written in German, is a native of Zhongshan.

古文：宋末起兵，城中久乏食，焕尚幼，煮糠核而食之，自饮其清者，以醲厚者供其母，乡里异之。
现代文：宋代末年战事纷起，城中缺粮很久了，刘焕年纪还小，煮米麦的糠屑充饥，自己喝其清汤，把稠的供他的母亲，乡亲们对此很是惊奇。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, war broke out, and there was a shortage of grain in the city for a long time. Liu Huan, who was still young, boiled rice and wheat bran to satisfy his hunger, drank his own clear soup, and gave the thick soup to his mother. The villagers were very surprised.

古文：稍长就学，天寒拥粪火读书不怠。
现代文：稍稍长大，刘焕开始学习，天气严寒拥在粪火边读书，从不知疲倦，更不懈怠。
English: Growing up a little, Liu Huan began to study. The weather was very cold and he was huddled around a dung fire to study. He never tired and never slacked off.

古文：登天德元年进士。调任丘尉。
现代文：天德元年，刘焕应考高中进士，调到任丘当县尉。
English: In the first year of the Tiande era, Liu Huan passed the high school entrance examination and was transferred to the post of county lieutenant.

古文：县令贪污，焕每规正之，秩满，令持杯酒谢曰： 尉廉慎，使我获考。 
现代文：该县县令贪污，刘焕经常规劝纠正他的错误。他的任期满了，县令端着一杯酒感谢他说： 县尉您廉政谨慎，让我受到启发而思考。 
English: The county magistrate of the county was corrupt, and Liu Huan often advised him to correct his mistakes. When his term of office was over, the county magistrate thanked him with a glass of wine, saying: "County lieutenant, your integrity and prudence have inspired me to think."

古文：调中都市令。
现代文：刘焕调任中都市令。
English: Liu Huan was transferred to the post of Zhongshan city magistrate.

古文：枢密使仆散忽土家有绦结工，牟利于市，不肯从市籍役，焕系之。
现代文：枢密使仆散忽土家雇有结绦的工匠，在市场上牟利，不肯服从市场规定注册交税，刘焕拘囚了工匠。
English: Liu Huan detained the craftsmen who had been hired by the Zhu family to make profits in the market and refused to comply with the market regulations to register and pay taxes.

古文：忽土召焕，焕不往，暴工罪而笞之。
现代文：忽土召见刘焕，刘焕不去，公布了工匠的罪名并且鞭打了他。
English: Suddenly, the soil summoned Liu Huan, Liu Huan did not go, announced the craftsman's crime and whipped him.

古文：焕初除市令，过谢乡人吏部侍郎石琚，琚不悦曰： 京师浩穰，不与外郡同，弃简就烦，吾所不晓也。 
现代文：刘焕当初任市令的时候，探望同乡吏部侍郎石琚，并通报自己治理市场的情况，石琚不高兴地说： 京师地广人多，与外郡不相同，你弃简就烦，这是我所不理解的。 
English: When Liu Huan was first appointed as the city's mayor, he visited his fellow townspeople, Rama Ishizaki, and informed him about the situation of market management. Ishizaki was displeased and said, "There are many people in Beijing, which is different from other counties. If you abandon simplicity, you will be bored. This is something I do not understand."

古文：至是，始重之。
现代文：到现在，他才看重刘焕和他的作为了。
English: Only now does he value Liu Huan and what he has done.

古文：以廉升京兆推官，再迁北京警巡使。
现代文：刘焕因为清廉升任京兆推官，又迁北京警巡使。
English: Liu Huan was promoted to Beijing magistrate and transferred to Beijing police inspector because of his incorruptibility.

古文：捕二恶少杖于庭中，戒之曰： 孝弟敬慎，则为君子。
现代文：刘焕曾经逮捕两个恶少在庭中用棍打惩罚，告诫他们说： 孝敬父亲，善待兄弟，礼貌待人，谨慎做事，才是君子。
English: Liu Huan once arrested two ruffians and punished them with a club in the courtroom, admonishing them: "Honor your father, be kind to your brothers, be polite to others, and be cautious in doing things. Only then will you be a gentleman."

古文：暴戾隐贼，则为小人。
现代文：狂暴凶恶，隐讳做贼，则是小人。
English: Violent and ferocious, a stealthy thief, is a villain.

古文：自今以往，毋狃于故习，国有明罚，吾不得私也。 
现代文：从今往后，不要对旧习惯习以为常，国家有明确的处罚条令，我不能够私下开脱你们。 
English: From now on, don't take old habits for granted. The state has a clear punishment policy, and I can't absolve you in private.

古文：自是，众皆畏惮，毋敢犯者。
现代文：从此，众人都敬畏回避，不敢犯法。
English: Since then, many people have been afraid of evasion and dare not break the law.

古文：召为监察御使，父老数百人或卧车下，或挽其靴镫，曰： 我欲复留使君期年，不可得也。 
现代文：皇帝召他任监察御史，当地父老乡亲几百人有的趴在车下，有的挽住他的靴镫，说： 我们想再挽留使君一年，看来是不能实现了。 
English: The emperor called him to serve as inspector of imperial history, and hundreds of local fathers and fellow countrymen, some lying under the car, some holding his shoelaces, said: We want to retain the envoy for another year, it seems impossible to achieve.

古文：以本官摄户部员外郎，代州钱监杂青铜铸钱，钱色恶，类铁钱。
现代文：刘焕以监察御史的身份兼辅助户部员外郎。代州钱监在铸钱时掺杂青铜，钱币成色恶劣，类似铁钱。
English: Liu Huan plays the role of the inspector of imperial history and the assistant member of the household department. The daishu money inspector adulterates bronze when minting money, and the coins have a bad color, similar to iron money.

古文：民间盗铸，抵罪者众，朝廷患之，下尚书省议。
现代文：民间偷偷仿造，许多人因此犯罪。朝廷对这件事很忧虑，向尚书省下达命令让讨论对策。
English: The Imperial Court was very worried about this and ordered the Ministry of Education to discuss countermeasures.

古文：焕奏曰： 钱宝纯用黄铜精治之，中濡以锡，若青铜可铸，历代无缘不用。
现代文：刘焕禀奏说 ：钱宝应当纯粹用黄铜精心制作，其中加进少量锡。如果青铜可以用来铸造钱币，历代没有理由不用。
English: Liu Huanqiao said: Money should be made of pure brass, with a small amount of tin added. If bronze can be used to mint coins, there is no reason not to use it.

古文：自代州取二分与四六分，青黄杂糅，务省铜而功易就。
现代文：自从代州按二分和四六分的比例，把青铜和黄铜杂糅铸制钱币，一定是节省铜而且容易造成。
English: Since Daizhou minted coins with a mixture of bronze and brass at a ratio of two and four sixths, it must save copper and be easy to make.

古文：由是，民间盗铸，陷罪者众，非朝廷意也。
现代文：由于这个原因，民间偷偷铸钱，犯罪的人很多，这并不是朝廷的本意。
English: For this reason, many people secretly minted money and committed crimes, which was not the intention of the imperial court.

古文：必欲为天下利，宜纯用黄铜，得数少而利远。
现代文：一定要为天下的利益考虑，应该规定铸钱纯用黄铜，这样虽然铸得的钱数少而利益长远。
English: Consideration must be given to the interests of the world. It should be stipulated that the minted money should be made of pure brass, so that although the number of minted money is small, the benefits are long-term.

古文：其新钱已流行者，宜验数输纳准换。 
现代文：那些掺杂青铜铸成的钱已经在市上流行的，应该验收数量收入库，准许拥有的人来兑换。 
English: Those doped bronze cast money has been popular in the market, should be the acceptance of the number of revenue base, allowed to own people to exchange.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：再迁管州刺史，耆老数百人疏其著迹十一事，诣节镇请留焕，曰： 刺史守职奉法，乞留之。 
现代文：刘焕再迁任管州刺史，德高望重的老学者几百人共同上疏他的十一件事迹，前往节镇请求留下刘焕继续任职，说 ：刘刺史忠于职守，奉公守法，乞请留下他。 
English: Liu Huan was re-appointed as the governor of Guanzhou Province, and hundreds of highly respected old scholars jointly removed his eleven deeds and went to the festival town to request Liu Huan to continue to serve, saying: Liu Huan is loyal to his duties and obeys the law, please keep him.

古文：以廉升郑州防御使，迁官一阶，转同知北京留守事。
现代文：刘焕因廉政升任郑州防御使，官升一级，转任同知北京留守事。
English: Liu Huan was promoted to the post of Zhengzhou defense envoy due to his clean politics. He was promoted to the first rank and transferred to Beijing to stay with a friend.

古文：世宗幸上京，所过州郡大发民夫治桥梁驰道，以希恩赏，焕所部惟平治端好而已。
现代文：世宗巡幸上京，所经过的州郡大力调动民夫整治桥梁马路，企望恩赏，刘焕领导他的部下只是治桥平路使它们处于良好状态而已。
English: When Shizong went to Beijing on his inspection tour, he vigorously mobilized the people of the states and counties he passed through to repair bridges and roads, hoping to be rewarded. Liu Huan led his subordinates to only repair bridges and roads and keep them in good condition.

古文：上嘉其意，迁辽东路转运使，卒。
现代文：皇上嘉奖他的诚意，令迁任辽东路转运使，在任上逝世。
English: The emperor commended his sincerity and transferred him to the post of Liaodong Road Transport Envoy, where he died.

