古文：乐广刘仁轨娄师德李勣李日知卢承庆裴冕郭子仪宋则
现代文：乐广刘仁轨娄师德李勣李日知卢承庆裴冕郭子仪宋则
English: Le Guang, Liu Ren, Lu Xun, De Li, Li Zhizhi, Lu Chengqing, Fei Guan, Guo Zi Yi, Song Ze

古文：乐广
现代文：乐广
English: Leguang District

古文：晋乐令广女适大将军成都王颖。
现代文：晋惠帝时，尚书令乐广的女儿嫁给成都王、大将军司马颖。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jinhui, the daughter of Shang Shuling and Le Guang married the king of Chengdu, General Sima Ying.

古文：王兄长沙王乂，执权于洛，遂构兵相图。
现代文：成都王的哥哥长沙王司马乂在朝廷很有权势，担心成都王危及他的地位，准备起兵攻打。
English: The brother of the king of Chengdu, Changsha King Sima Yu, was very powerful in the imperial court. He was worried that the king of Chengdu would endanger his position and was preparing to attack.

古文：长沙亲近小人，远外君子，凡在朝者，人怀危惧。乐令既处朝望，加有婚亲，小人谗于长沙。
现代文：所以就有人向长沙王进谗言，说他的坏话。这话传到乐广耳里，乐广神态自若，缓缓地说：我怎么可能帮成都王呢，我只有一个女儿在他那里，可是我在洛阳还有五个儿子啊。
English: Therefore, someone spoke ill of the King of Changsha and said bad things about him. These words reached the ears of Le Guang. Le Guang looked confident and said slowly: "How can I help the King of Chengdu, I only have one daughter with him, but I have five sons in Luoyang."

古文：尝问乐令，神色自若，徐答曰：广岂以五男易一女。由是释然，无复疑意。
现代文：我不能用五个儿子的性命做交易。长沙王听了，认为有理，不再怀疑他。
English: I can't bargain with the lives of my five sons. Changsha Wang listened to him, thought he was right, and no longer doubted him.

古文：刘仁轨
现代文：刘仁轨
English: Liu Ronglu

古文：唐刘仁轨为左仆射，戴至德为右仆射，皆多刘而鄙戴。
现代文：唐高宗时，刘仁轨做左仆射，戴至德做右仆射。大家都尊崇刘仁轨而鄙视戴至德。
English: During the reign of Emperor Tang Gao, Liu Renzhong served as his left-hand man and Dai Zhide as his right-hand man. Everyone respected Liu Renzhong and despised Dai Zhide.

古文：时有一老妇陈牒，至德方欲下笔，老妇顾左右曰：此刘仆射？戴仆射？
现代文：当时有一位老妇人呈递申述状，戴至德刚要下笔批示。老妇人向左右的人们问，这是刘仆射还是戴仆射？
English: At that time, there was an old woman who submitted a complaint form, and Dai Zhide was about to write an instruction. The old woman asked the people around, is this Liu Pudu shooting or Dai Pudu shooting?

古文：左右以戴仆射言。
现代文：属下告诉她这是戴仆射。
English: A subordinate told her it was a hoax.

古文：急就前曰。此是不解事仆射，却将牒来。至德笑，令授之。
现代文：戴至德一笑，让人把诉状还她。在职期间，戴至德没什么明显的业绩。
English: Dai Zhide smiled and let the complaint be returned to her. During her tenure, Dai Zhide had no obvious performance.

古文：戴仆射在职无异迹，当朝似不能言。
现代文：在皇帝和同僚面前，也不善于言词。他死后，唐高宗很痛惜。说：自从我失去戴至德，再也听不到意见了。
English: In front of the emperor and his colleagues, he was also not good at words. After his death, Tang Gaozong was very sorry. He said, "Since I lost Dai Zhi De, I can no longer hear opinions.

古文：及薨后，高宗叹曰：自吾丧至德，无所复闻，当其在时，事有不是者，未尝放我过，因出其前后所陈，章奏盈箧，阅而流涕，朝廷始追重之。
现代文：他在的时候，我有不对的地方，从不放过。高宗把戴至德陈事的奏章拿出来，竟有满满的一匣子。高宗一边看一边流着眼泪，大家才知道戴至德是这样一位值得尊重的人。
English: When he was there, I never let anything go that wasn't right. Gaozong took out the transcript of Dai Zhitong's records, and there was a box full of them. Gaozong shed tears as he looked at it, and everyone knew that Dai Zhitong was a man worthy of respect.

古文：娄师德
现代文：娄师德
English: Zou Shide

古文：纳言娄师德，郑州人，为兵部尚书，使并州，接境诸县令随之。
现代文：唐纳言娄师德，是郑州人。作兵部尚书时，巡视并州。入境后。
English: Tang Na, a native of Zhengzhou, toured the province when he was a military attaché. He returned after entering the country.

古文：日高至驿，恐人烦扰驿家，令就厅同食。
现代文：近处的县令们都来迎接并且随行。中午到了驿站，恐怕人多打扰，就让大家在一起吃饭。
English: The nearby prefectural governors all came to greet and accompany him. When he arrived at the station at noon, he was afraid that there would be too many people to disturb him, so he asked everyone to eat together.

古文：尚书饭白而细，诸人饭黑而粗。
现代文：他吃的是精细的白米饭，而别人吃的却是粗糙的黑米饭。
English: He eats fine white rice, while others eat coarse black rice.

古文：呼驿长责之曰：汝何为两种待客？
现代文：便把驿长叫来，责备说：你为什么用两种米来待客？
English: So he called the chief steward and scolded him, saying, "Why do you use two kinds of rice to serve your guests?

古文：驿将恐，对曰：邂逅浙米不得，死罪。
现代文：驿长很惶恐，说：一时搞不到细米，我该死。
English: Zhang Chang was very frightened and said, "I can't get thin rice at the moment, I'm doomed."

古文：尚书曰：卒客无卒主人，亦复何损。
现代文：娄师德说：这不好，客人不应分成等级。
English: Gong Shide said: This is not good, guests should not be divided into grades.

古文：遂换取粗饭食之。
现代文：便换了黑米饭和大家一起吃。
English: So I switched to black rice and ate it with everyone.

古文：检校营田，往梁州，先有乡人姓娄者为屯官，犯赃，都督许钦明欲决杀令众。
现代文：次后，到梁州去考查屯田。和他同乡同姓的一个人在那里作屯田官，犯了罪。都督许钦明准备杀他以儆效尤。
English: The next time, he went to Liangzhou to inspect the military cantonment. A person with the same surname as his fellow villager worked there as a military cantonment officer and committed a crime. The governor, Xu Qinming, planned to kill him to set an example.

古文：乡人谒尚书，欲救之。
现代文：那个人来见娄师德，请他说情。
English: The man came to see Gong Shide and asked him to intercede.

古文：尚书曰：犯国法，师德当家儿子。亦不能舍，何况渠。
现代文：娄师德说：犯了国法，就是我的亲儿子，也不能放过，何况你？
English: Gong Shide said, "If you break the law of the country, even if you are my own son, you can't be let off, let alone you."

古文：明日宴会，都督与尚书：犯国法俱坐。
现代文：第二天宴会上，许钦明对娄师德说：犯了国法都要受到惩处。
English: At the banquet the next day, Xu Qinming said to Gong Shide: Anyone who violates the law of the country will be punished.

古文：尚书曰：闻有一人犯国法，云是师德乡里，师德实不识，但与其父为小儿时共牧牛耳，都督莫以师德宽国家法。
现代文：娄师德说：我听说有一个人犯了国法，说是我的同乡，我其实根本不认识他。但是，我小时候同他父亲一起放过牛。请都督不要因为我而失法度。
English: Zou Shide said, "I heard that there was a man who violated the national law, saying that he was my fellow villager, but in fact I didn't know him at all. However, when I was a child, I used to herd cattle with his father. Please, governor, don't break the law because of me."

古文：都督遽令脱枷至。
现代文：许钦明立即让人给那个人去了刑具，带到大厅。
English: Xu Qinming immediately had someone give the man a torture device and take him to the hall.

古文：尚书切责之曰：汝辞父娘，求觅官职，不能谨洁，知复奈何。
现代文：娄师德严词训斥说：你辞别父母，来求官职。但是做了官，却不干净，你知道下场吗？
English: Gong Shi De sternly reprimanded: "You leave your parents and come to seek a government post. But when you become a government official, you are not clean. Do you know what will happen?

古文：将一碟堆饼与之曰：噇却，作个饱死鬼去！
现代文：拿了一盘饼给他，说吃去罢，作个饱鬼。许钦明于是开释了那个人。
English: He took a plate of bread to him and said that he should eat it and become a full ghost. Xu Qinming then released the man.

古文：都督从此舍之。后为纳言平章事。
现代文：娄师德后来升为纳言平章政事又一次巡察屯田。
English: Later, Zou Shide was promoted to Nagon Pingzhang, and he once again inspected the military camps.

古文：父检校屯田，行有日矣，谘执事早出，娄先足疾，待马未来，于光政门外横木上坐。
现代文：出行的日子已经定了，部下随行人员已先起程。娄师德脚有毛病，坐在光政门外的大木头上等马。
English: The day of the journey had already been set, and the members of his subordinates' entourage had set off first. Zou Shi De had a problem with his feet and was sitting on a large tree outside the Guangzheng Gate waiting for the horse.

古文：须臾，有一县令，不知其纳言也，因诉身名，遂与之并坐。
现代文：不一会儿，有一个县令不知道他是纳言，自我介绍后，跟娄师德并坐在大木头上。
English: Soon, there was a county magistrate who did not know that he was Nagan. After introducing himself, he sat on a large tree with Kaji.

古文：令有一丁，远觇之，走告曰：纳言也。
现代文：县令的手下人远远瞧见，赶忙走过来告诉县令，说：这是纳言。
English: The county magistrate's subordinates saw it from afar and hurried over to tell the county magistrate, saying: "This is a trick.

古文：令大惊，起曰：死罪。
现代文：县令大惊，赶忙站起来赔不是，并称：死罪。
English: The county magistrate was shocked, quickly stood up, apologized, and said: capital offense.

古文：纳言曰：人有不相识，法有何死罪。
现代文：娄师德说：你因为不认识我才和我平坐，法律上没有犯死罪这一条。
English: Gong Shide said: Because you don't know me, you are on an equal footing with me. Legally, you haven't committed a capital crime.

古文：令因诉云：有左嶷，以其年老眼暗奏解，某夜书表状亦得，眼实不暗。
现代文：县令说：有一个叫左嶷的人，以其年老眼神不好请求解职。其实这个人的辞职书就是晚上写的，眼睛并没大病。
English: The county magistrate said: There was a person named Zuo Zhuang, who asked to be dismissed because of his old eyesight. In fact, this person's resignation letter was written at night, and his eyes were not seriously ill.

古文：纳言曰：道是夜书表状，何故白日里不识宰相。
现代文：娄师德取笑他，说：可不是，那个人说他晚上眼神不好，你呢，大白天不认识宰相。
English: Gong Shide made fun of him and said, "No, that man said his eyesight was bad at night, but you don't know the prime minister during the day."

古文：令大惭曰：愿纳言莫说向宰相。纳言南无佛不说。
现代文：县令很惭愧，说：请纳言千万别给我宣传，你就是老佛爷了。
English: The county magistrate was very ashamed and said, "Please, Nagan, don't give me any publicity, you're an old man."

古文：公左右皆笑。
现代文：娄师德左右的部下们都笑了。
English: Gong Shide's subordinates on both sides laughed.

古文：使至灵州，果驿上食讫，索马，判官谘，意家浆水亦索不得，全不祇承。
现代文：到了灵州，在驿站吃完了饭，娄师德让人牵来马。他的判官说：你吃过了饭，我们连水也没喝上呢，根本没人答理。
English: When he arrived in Lingzhou, after finishing his meal at the station, Zou Shide had his horse brought to him. His judge said: "You've eaten your meal, we haven't even had a drink of water. No one has replied at all."

古文：纳言曰：师德已上马，与公料理。
现代文：娄师德说：我就不下马了，这件事我来处理。
English: Gong Shide said: I will not get off the horse, I will deal with this matter.

古文：往呼驿长责曰：判官与纳言何别？不与供给？
现代文：便叫来驿长批评说：判官同我有什么分别，你竟敢不供给？
English: He then called in the chief judge to criticize him, saying, "What is the difference between the judge and me? How dare you not provide?

古文：索杖来。
现代文：拿板子来。
English: Get the board.

古文：驿长惶怖拜伏。
现代文：吓得驿长连忙叩头。
English: Startled, the chief eunuch quickly bowed his head.

古文：纳言曰：我欲打汝一顿，大使打驿将，细碎事，徒涴却名声。若向你州县道，你即不存生命，且放却。
现代文：娄师德说：我要打你一顿，是一件小事，但丢了名声。如果我告诉你的上司，他们就会杀你，我暂且放过你吧。
English: Gong Shide said, "I'm going to beat you up. It's a small thing, but I've lost my reputation. If I tell your boss, they'll kill you. I'll let you go for now."

古文：驿将跪拜流汗，狼狈而走。
现代文：驿长叩头流汗，狼狈而去。
English: The eunuch bowed his head, sweating profusely, and left in dismay.

古文：娄目送之，谓判官曰：与公踬顿之矣。
现代文：娄师德望着他的背影，跟判官说，我替你出气了。
English: Zou Shide looked at his back and said to the judge, "I took out my anger for you."

古文：众皆怪叹。
现代文：大家都叹息。
English: Everyone sighs.

古文：其行事皆此类。
现代文：娄师德做事，大致如此。
English: That's pretty much how it works.

古文：浮休子曰：司马徽、刘宽，无以加也。
现代文：浮休子说，司马徽、刘宽也超不过他。
English: Ukiyuko said that Sima Hui and Liu Kuan are also superior to him.

古文：李昭德为内史，师德为纳言，相随入朝。
现代文：李昭德为内史，娄师德为纳言，相随入朝。
English: Li Zhaode was the Inner Historian, and Zou Shide was the Nagan, and they both entered the imperial court together.

古文：娄体肥行缓，李屡顾待，不即至。
现代文：娄师德肥胖，走得慢。李昭德好几次停下来等他，他还是赶不上。
English: Gong Shide is fat and walks slowly. Li Zhaode stops several times to wait for him, but he still can't catch up.

古文：乃发怒曰：可耐杀人田舍汉。
现代文：李昭德生气发怒，说：你这个只配种地的臭家伙。
English: Li Zhaode got angry and said, "You are a stinky fellow who is only good at farming.

古文：娄闻之，乃笑曰：师德不是田舍汉。更阿谁是？
现代文：娄师德听了也不发火，笑道：我可不就是个种过地的人吗，如果我不是种地的人，还有谁是呢？
English: Gong Shi De did not get angry when he heard this, he smiled and said, "Am I not just a person who has cultivated the land? If I am not a farmer, who else is?

古文：师德弟拜代州刺使，将行，谓之曰：吾以不才，位居宰相。
现代文：娄师德的弟弟被任命为代州刺史。临行，娄师德说：我的才能不算高，做到宰相。
English: Zou Shide's younger brother was appointed as Daizhou chief minister. When he was about to leave, Zou Shide said, "I'm not very talented, but I can be prime minister."

古文：汝今又得州牧，叨遽过分，人所嫉也，将何以全先人发肤？
现代文：现在你呢，又去做很高的地方官。有点过分了，人家会嫉妒我们，应该怎样才能保全性命呢？
English: Now you're going to be a high-ranking local official. It's a bit too much. People will be jealous of us. How can we save our lives?

古文：弟长跪曰：自今后，虽有人唾某面上，某亦不敢言，但拭之而已，以此自勉，庶不为兄忧。
现代文：他的弟弟跪下说：从今以后，即使有人把口水吐到我脸上，我也不敢还嘴，把口水擦去就是了。我以此来自勉，绝不让你不放心。
English: His younger brother knelt down and said, "From now on, even if someone spits saliva on my face, I won't dare to answer back, I'll just wipe the saliva away. I use this to motivate myself, and I won't let you worry."

古文：师德曰：此适为我忧也。
现代文：娄师德说：这恰恰是我最担心的。
English: Gong Shide said: This is exactly what I am most worried about.

古文：夫人唾汝者，发怒也。
现代文：唉，人家拿口水唾你，是人家对你发怒了。
English: Alas, they spit on you. They are angry with you.

古文：汝今拭之，是恶其唾。
现代文：如果你把口水擦了，说明你不满。
English: If you wipe the drool off, it means you're not happy.

古文：恶而拭，是逆人怒也。
现代文：不满而擦掉，使人家就更加发怒。
English: Dissatisfaction rubs off, making the person even angrier.

古文：唾不拭，将自干，何如？
现代文：应该是让唾沫不擦自干。怎么样？
English: It should be to let the spittle dry on its own. How about that?

古文：弟笑而受之。
现代文：他弟弟会心地笑了。
English: His brother smiled knowingly.

古文：武后年，竟保宠禄。
现代文：武则天当政时，娄师德也没有失去宠禄。
English: When Wu Zetian was in power, Zou Shide did not lose his favour.

古文：李勣
现代文：李勣
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：唐英公李勣为司空，知政事。
现代文：唐代太宗时，英国公李勣作司空，参与大政。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty, the English nobleman, Li Tong, became the secretary of the imperial court and took part in the government.

古文：有一番官者参选被放，来辞英公。
现代文：有一位少数民族官员被罢免了京官外放。他去辞别李勣。
English: One ethnic minority official was removed from his post and banished from Beijing. He went to bid farewell to Li Yao.

古文：公曰：明朝早，向朝堂见我来。
现代文：李勣说：明天早晨你到朝房来见我。
English: Li Yao said, "Tomorrow morning, you come to the morning room to see me."

古文：及期而至，郎中并在傍。
现代文：次日到了朝房，英公手下的人都在。
English: The next day, when I arrived at the Imperial Household Agency, all of Engong's subordinates were there.

古文：番官至辞，英公嚬眉谓之曰：汝长生不知事尚书侍郎，我老翁不识字，无可教汝，何由可得留，深负愧汝，努力好去。
现代文：那个少数民族官员来辞别。李勣皱着眉头说：你平素不知道好好侍候上司吗？我老汉不认字，没办法帮你留下来。很对不起你，多努力吧，好自为之。
English: The ethnic minority official came to say goodbye. Li Yan frowned and said: "Don't you usually know how to serve your boss well? My old man doesn't know how to read, so I can't help you stay. I'm very sorry for you, try harder, do it yourself."

古文：侍郎等慌惧，遽问其姓名，令南院看榜，须臾引入，注与吏部令史。
现代文：侍郎等听了害怕，马上问这个人叫什么名字，并领这个人到南院去看榜，很快又领回来，重新办理手续，让他到吏部去做令使。
English: Hearing this, the attendants were afraid, and immediately asked the man what his name was. They took him to the Southern Court to look at the list, and soon brought him back to go through the formalities again, so that he could go to the personnel department to become an envoy.

古文：英公时为宰相，有乡人尝过宅，为设食，客人裂却饼缘。
现代文：李勣做宰相时，有同乡人来串门，李勣留他吃饭。这个人把饼边扯掉，只吃中间。
English: When Li Lan was prime minister, a fellow villager came to visit, and Li Lan let him stay for dinner. The man tore off the edge of the cake and only ate the middle.

古文：英公曰：君大年少，此饼，犁地两遍熟，檕下种锄埘，收割打扬讫，碨罗作面，然后为饼。
现代文：李勣说：年轻人啊，这个饼要犁地两遍，下种莳弄，收割打场。用磨来磨，用罗来罗，然后面才能做成饼。
English: Li Yao said: "Young man, this cake needs to be baked twice, the second time it needs to be kneaded, the second time it needs to be kneaded, the third time it needs to be kneaded, the fourth time it needs to be kneaded, the fifth time it needs to be kneaded, the sixth time it needs to be kneaded.

古文：少年裂却缘，是何道？
现代文：年轻人把饼边扔了，是什么道理？
English: Why did the young man throw away the edge of the cake?

古文：此处犹可，若对至尊前，公做如此事，参差砍却你头。
现代文：在我这里还可以。如果在皇帝面前，要砍你的头哇。
English: It's okay with me. If you're in front of the emperor, he'll cut off your head.

古文：客大惭悚。
现代文：那个人很惭愧。
English: The man was ashamed.

古文：浮休子曰：宇文朝，华州剌史王罴，有客裂饼缘者，罴曰：此饼大用功力，然后入口。
现代文：浮休子说，宇文朝华州刺使王罴也遇到同样的事。王罴说，这张饼费了多大的力气才能吃到口里。
English: Ukiyuko said that the same thing happened to Wang Yao, the ambassador of the Uwen Dynasty in Huazhou. Wang Yao said that this cake took a lot of effort to get to his mouth.

古文：公裂之，只是未饥，且擎却。
现代文：你把饼边扯下来，是你不饿，你给我擎着。
English: If you pull off the edge of the cake, you're not hungry, you're starving.

古文：客愕然。
现代文：那个人吃惊。
English: The man was stunned.

古文：又台使致罴食饭，使人割瓜皮大厚，投地。
现代文：又一次，部下侍候王罴吃饭，那个人把很厚的瓜皮削掉，扔到地上。
English: Another time, when Wang Yao's subordinates were serving him dinner, the man peeled off the thick rind of a melon and threw it on the ground.

古文：罴就地拾起，以食之，使人极悚息。
现代文：王罴拾起来，说你给我吃了，那个人很慌恐。
English: Wang Yao picked it up and said, "You gave it to me," and the man panicked.

古文：今轻薄少年裂饼缘，割瓜侵瓤，以为达官儿郎，通人之所不为也。
现代文：如今一些没品行的年轻人丢饼边、切瓜皮很厚，装公子哥的样子，实在是普通本分人所不做的。
English: Nowadays, some immoral young people throw the edge of the cake, cut the thick skin of the melon, and pretend to be a gentleman, which is really not done by ordinary people.

古文：李日知
现代文：李日知
English: Li Rizhi

古文：唐刑部尚书李日知自为畿赤，不曾行杖罚，其事克济。及为刑部尚书，有令使受敕三日，忘不行者，尚书索杖剥衣，唤令使总集，欲决之。
现代文：唐代李日知做地方官时，由于治内年成不好，从不打人板子。做刑部尚书后，有一令使接受任务后竟然忘记，三天没有处理。李日知叫人拿来板子，剥了他的衣服。把所有的令使都喊来，准备打他板子。
English: When Li Rizhi was a local official in the Tang Dynasty, he never beat anyone with a board due to his poor performance during the reign. After he wrote a book for the criminal investigation department, he received an order that he forgot after accepting the task and did not deal with it for three days. Li Rizhi asked someone to bring a board and stripped his clothes. He called all the messengers and prepared to beat him with a board.

古文：责曰：我欲笞汝一顿，恐天下人称你云，撩得李日知嗔，吃李日知杖，你亦不是人，妻子亦不礼汝。
现代文：责备说：我本要打你一顿板子，又担心天下人说你这家伙真行，能把李日知惹火，连李日知都打你。人家就不拿你当人了，你老婆孩子也不尊重你了。
English: The reproach said: I was going to beat you to a pulp, and I was worried that the world would say that you, this guy, are really good and can make Li Rongzhi angry, and even Li Rongzhi will beat you. People will not take you for a human being, and your wife and children will not respect you.

古文：遂放之，自是令史无敢犯者。
现代文：就饶过他。此后，令史们没人敢马虎。
English: After that, no one dared to be careless.

古文：设有稽失，众共责之。
现代文：如果有谁出了过失，大家就共同批评他。
English: If someone makes a mistake, everyone criticizes him together.

古文：卢承庆
现代文：卢承庆
English: Lu Chengqing

古文：卢尚书承庆，总章初考内外官。
现代文：卢承庆做尚书，总管官吏的考评。
English: Lu Chengqing is the chief examiner and evaluator of officials.

古文：有一官督运，遭风失米。
现代文：有一位官员负责漕运，遇到大风，翻了船，损失了米。
English: There was an official in charge of rowing transport who encountered high winds, overturned the boat, and lost rice.

古文：卢考之曰：监运失粮，考中下。
现代文：卢承庆在评语上写：监运失粮，考中下。
English: Lu Chengqing wrote in the commentary: "Supervising transportation of lost grain, middle and lower exams."

古文：其人容止自若，无一言而退。
现代文：那个人神态自若，没话退下。
English: The man looked self-assured and didn't say a word.

古文：卢重其雅量，改注曰非力所及，考中中。
现代文：卢承庆认为这个人很有雅量，改评语为：非力所及，考中中。
English: Lu Chengqing thought that this person was very elegant, and changed the comment to: beyond his reach, in the middle of the exam.

古文：既无喜容，亦无愧词。
现代文：那个人既未表示高兴，也未表示惭愧。
English: The man expressed neither pleasure nor shame.

古文：又改曰：宠辱不惊，可中上。
现代文：卢承庆又改评语为：庞辱不惊，可以考中上。
English: Lu Chengqing also changed his comment to: It's no big deal, you can take the middle school entrance examination.

古文：裴冕
现代文：裴冕
English: Fei Guorong

古文：李齐物，天宝初为陕州刺史，开砥柱之险，石中铁犁铧有平陆字，因改河北县为平陆县。
现代文：唐天宝初年李齐物做陕州刺使，开山筑路、设置守备。乱石中发现铁铧子，上面铸有平陆两字，因此改陕州河北县为平陆县。
English: In the first year of Tang Tianbao, Li Qiming was sent to Shaanxi to build roads and set up defenses. An iron hammer was found in the rubble, with the words "平陆" cast on it, so Hebei County of Shaanxi was changed to Pinglu County.

古文：齐物性褊急，怒陕县尉裴冕于路，冠冕之士鄙之。
现代文：李齐物这人是个急性子，在大道上对陕县县尉裴冕发火，以至有身份的人都鄙视裴冕。
English: Li Qiming was a hothead. On the highway, he was angry with the Shaanxi County Lieutenant Fei Guan, and even people with status despised Fei Guan.

古文：后冕为宰相，除齐物太子宾客。
现代文：后来，裴冕做了宰相，任用李齐物为太子宾客。
English: Later, Fei Guan became the prime minister and appointed Li Qiming as the crown prince's guest.

古文：时人嘉冕不报私怨。
现代文：大家都称颂裴冕，说他心地公正，不报私怨。
English: Everyone praised Fei Guan, saying that he was fair-minded and did not report personal grudges.

古文：郭子仪
现代文：郭子仪
English: Guo Ziyi

古文：郭子仪为中书令，观容使鱼朝恩请游章敬寺，子仪许之。
现代文：郭子仪作中书令。观军容使鱼朝恩请他一起游章敬寺，郭子仪答应。
English: Guo Ziyi wrote the middle of the letter. Guo Junrong asked Yu Chaon to go to the temple with him, and Guo Ziyi agreed.

古文：丞相意其不相得，使吏讽，请君无往。
现代文：宰相考虑到郭子仪和鱼朝恩之间有矛盾，让部下劝告郭子仪，希望他不要去。
English: Taking into account that there was a contradiction between Guo Ziyi and Yu Chaon, the prime minister asked his subordinates to advise Guo Ziyi, hoping that he would not go.

古文：邠吏自中书驰告郭公，军容将不利於公，亦告诸将。
现代文：郭子仪的部属也跑到他那里去，说鱼朝恩将对你不利。并且把这话告诉了将领们，请他们劝阻。
English: Guo Ziyi's subordinates also ran to him, saying, "Fish favor will be against you," and they told this to the generals, asking them to dissuade him.

古文：须臾，朝恩使至，子仪将行，士衷甲请从者三百人。
现代文：不一会儿，鱼朝恩派人来请郭子仪。郭子仪刚要走，部下三百人全副武装要求同他一起去，以便保卫。
English: Soon after, Yu Chaon sent someone to invite Guo Ziyi. Just as Guo Ziyi was about to leave, three hundred of his subordinates, fully armed, demanded to go with him in order to protect him.

古文：子仪怒曰：我大臣也，彼非有密旨，安敢害我！
现代文：子仪生气地说：我是国家的大臣，他如果没有天子的密诏，怎么敢害我？
English: Ziyi said angrily, "I am the minister of the country. If he does not have the secret edict from the Son of Heaven, how dare he harm me?"

古文：若天子之命，尔曹胡为？
现代文：如果是天子的命令，你们更不能胡来。
English: If it's God's order, you can't fool around.

古文：独与童仆十数人赴之。
现代文：说完，只带十几个仆人走了。
English: After saying this, he left with only a dozen servants.

古文：朝恩候之，惊曰：何车骑之省也？
现代文：鱼朝恩正等待郭子仪，见他轻车简从，非常惊讶。
English: Yu Chaoyen was waiting for Guo Zi Rong, and was very surprised to see him driving a light car.

古文：子仪以所闻对。
现代文：说：你怎么带这么几个人？
English: He said, "How come you brought so many people with you?"

古文：且曰：恐劳恩虑耳。
现代文：郭子仪把他听到的流言告诉鱼朝恩。并说：我才不费心思去想那些无端的事。
English: Guo Ziyi told Yu Chaon about the rumors he had heard and said, "I don't even bother to think about those baseless things.

古文：朝恩抚胸捧手，呜咽挥涕曰：非公长者，得无疑乎？
现代文：鱼朝恩捶胸顿足，流涕呜咽，说：正因为你是一个长者，才这样相信我。
English: "It is because you are an elder that you believe in me in this way," he said, sobbing.

古文：子仪有功高不赏之懼，中贵人害其功，遂使盗于华州，掘公之先人坟墓。
现代文：郭子仪有很大的功劳，常常为这个担心。宦官中的当权人物嫉恨他的功劳，暗中差人到华州去挖了他的祖坟，盗了坟中的祭品。
English: Guo Ziyi had great merit and often worried about this. The eunuchs in power envied his merit and secretly sent someone to dig up his ancestral grave in Huazhou and steal the offerings in the grave.

古文：公裨将李怀光等怒，欲求物捕其赏。
现代文：郭子仪的部将李怀光等人非常气愤，准备搜查物证，按物抓人。
English: Guo Ziyi's subordinate Li Huaiguang and others were very angry and prepared to search for evidence and arrest people.

古文：及公入奏，对扬之曰，但号泣自罪。
现代文：郭子仪入朝，面对皇上，流泪长哭，自称有罪。
English: Guo Ziyi entered the imperial court, faced the emperor, shed tears and cried for a long time, claiming to be guilty.

古文：因奏曰：臣领师徒，出外征伐，动经岁年，害人之兄，杀人之父多矣。
现代文：向皇帝奏说：我指挥部队，外出征伐，动不动就成年地打仗。害了人家的兄长，杀了人家的父亲，这情况是很多的。
English: He reported to the emperor: "I command troops, go out to fight, and fight as an adult at every turn. I have harmed other people's brothers and killed other people's fathers. There are many such cases.

古文：其有节夫义士，刃臣于腹中者众。今构隳辱，宜当其辜。
现代文：他们的兄弟妻子想给我捅刀子的人也是很多的。今天我受到的污辱，正是由于他们的无辜。
English: There are also many whose brothers and wives want to stab me, and it is because of their innocence that I am being insulted today.

古文：但臣为国之心，虽死无悔。
现代文：但是，我为报效国家的热心，即使死了也是无悔。
English: However, I have no regrets about my zeal to serve my country, even if I die.

古文：由是中外翕然莫测。
现代文：由是，当时中外的人都猜不透郭子仪这个人。
English: Therefore, at that time, people at home and abroad could not guess the person of Guo Ziyi.

古文：公子弘广常于亲仁里大启其弟，里巷负贩之人，上至公子簪缨之士，出入不问。
现代文：他的儿子郭弘广在长安亲仁里启造府第，里巷中的小贩子、或者士人们，也受不干扰。
English: His son, Guo Hongguang, opened a post office in Chang'an's Xinren Village, and the hawkers, or scholars, in the streets and alleys were not disturbed.

古文：或云：王夫人赵氏爱女，方妆梳对镜，往往公麾下将吏出镇去，及郎吏，皆被召，令汲水持帨，视之不异仆隶。
现代文：有人说，郭子仪的夫人王氏和他的爱女，正在对镜梳头时，往往就有出镇的将领来辞行；有时，也有属员来请示。
English: Some people say that when Guo Ziyi's wife Wang and his beloved daughter are combing their hair in front of the mirror, there are often generals from the town to resign; sometimes, there are subordinates to ask for instructions.

古文：他曰，子弟焦列启陈，公三不应。
现代文：郭子仪不但不要她们回避，而且还要她们亲自给倒茶水或拿擦脸巾，视她们与普通人甚至仆人一样。
English: Guo Ziyi not only does not want them to avoid her, but also wants them to personally pour tea or wipe their face with a towel, treating them like ordinary people or even servants.

古文：于是继之以泣曰：大人功业已成，而不自崇重，以贵以贱，皆游卧内，某等以为虽伊霍不当如此也。
现代文：过后，他的孩子们给他提意见，郭子仪再三不作答。于是，他们流着泪，说：大人功业已经成就，即使自己不拿架子，也不能以贵为贱。不管是什么人连卧室都可以出入，这怎么行？我们想，即便是伊尹、霍光那样的人，也不会这样做。
English: Afterward, his children asked him for advice, and Guo Ziyi repeatedly did not answer. So, they shed tears and said: "Adult work has been accomplished, even if you do not take pride, you cannot be cheap. No matter who you are, you can even enter and leave the bedroom, how can this be done? We think that even people like Yi Yin and Huo Guang will not do this.

古文：公笑而谓曰：尔曹固非所料。
现代文：郭子仪笑着对他们说：你们都没想明白。
English: Guo Ziyi smiled and said to them, "You all don't want to understand.

古文：且吾官马粟者五百匹，官饩者一千人，进无所往，退无所据，向使崇垣扃户，不通内外，一怨将起，构以不臣，其有贪功害能徒，成就其事，则九族齑粉，噬脐莫追。
现代文：咱们家吃官粮的马就有五百匹、吃官饭的上千人。
English: In our family, there are five hundred horses that eat government grain, and more than a thousand people who eat government grain.

古文：今荡荡无间，四门洞开，虽谗毁是兴，无所加也，吾是以尔。
现代文：我们为的是这个啊。
English: That's what we're here for.

古文：诸子皆伏。
现代文：他的孩子们都表示钦服。
English: His children are full of admiration.

古文：永泰元年，仆固怀恩卒，诸蕃犯京畿，子仪统众御之。
现代文：唐代宗永泰元年，大将仆固怀恩病故。各异民族联合进犯京畿。郭子仪奉命抵御。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Zong Yongtai of the Tang Dynasty, the general's servant Gu Wai En died of illness. Various ethnic groups jointly attacked Gyeonggi. Guo Zi Yi was ordered to resist.

古文：至泾阳，而虏已合。
现代文：刚到泽阳，少数民族的部伍已经合军。
English: Just arrived in Zeyang, the ethnic minority troops have already joined the army.

古文：子仪率甲士二千出入。虏见而问曰：此何人也？
现代文：郭子仪只率了两千部众，少数民族的头领问：这个领兵人是谁？
English: Guo Ziyi only led two thousand people. The leaders of ethnic minorities asked: Who is this leader?

古文：报曰：郭令公。
现代文：部下说：他是郭令公。
English: His subordinates said, "He is Guo Lingguo."

古文：回纥曰：令公在乎？
现代文：回纥头领说：怎么郭令公还在？
English: The head of Hui Province said, "How is Guo Linggong still alive?"

古文：怀恩谓吾，天可汗已弃四海，令公殂谢，中国无主，故某来。
现代文：仆固怀恩告诉我，大唐皇帝死了，郭令公也死了，中国没有头脑了，所以我才来的。
English: My servant Gu Wai Yan told me that Emperor Datang was dead, Guo Linggong was dead, and China was brainless, so I came here.

古文：今令公在，天可汗在乎？
现代文：现在郭令公在，大唐皇帝在不在呢？
English: Now Guo Ling Gong is here, but Emperor Datang is not?

古文：子仪报曰：皇帝万寿无疆。
现代文：郭子仪差人告诉他，说皇帝身体康泰。
English: Guo Ziyi told the policeman that the emperor was in good health.

古文：回纥皆曰：怀恩欺我。
现代文：回纥头领说：我们叫仆固怀恩骗了。
English: Back to the Shantou leader, he said, "We tricked Min Gu Wai En."

古文：子仪使谕之。回纥曰：令公若在，安得见之？
现代文：郭子仪使人传话，回纥头领说：郭令公真在的话，我能见到他吗？
English: Guo Ziyi sent a message back to Shantou saying: "If Guo Ling Gongzhen is here, can I see him?"

古文：子仪出。诸将皆曰：戎狄不可信也，请无往。
现代文：郭子仪将要出见，将领们说，少数民族的人不可以相信，不要去。
English: Guo Ziyi is going to appear, and the generals say that people from ethnic minorities cannot be trusted and should not go.

古文：子仪曰：虏有数十倍之众，今力不敌，奈何？
现代文：郭子仪说：他们几十倍于我，真打起来，咱们的力量是不足的，怎么办？
English: Guo Ziyi said, "They are dozens of times more powerful than me. When a real fight breaks out, our strength is insufficient. What should we do?"

古文：但至诚感神，况虏乎？
现代文：至诚可以感动神仙，何况是少数民族呢？
English: Sincerity can move the gods, and what about ethnic minorities?

古文：诸将请选铁骑五百为从，子仪曰：此适足为害也。
现代文：将领们要选五百精锐的骑兵给他做护卫。郭子仪说，那足以倒找麻烦。
English: The generals wanted to choose five hundred elite cavalrymen to escort him. Guo Ziyi said that would be enough to cause trouble.

古文：及传呼曰：令公来！
现代文：令人传呼，告诉说郭令公来了。
English: People are calling out, telling them that Guo Lingong is coming.

古文：初疑。皆持兵注目以待之。
现代文：少数民族的头领们开始怀疑，严阵以待。
English: The leaders of the ethnic minorities began to have doubts and were on the alert.

古文：予仪乃数十骑徐出，免胄劳之曰：安乎？
现代文：郭子仪仅率几十骑人马出阵，摘下头盔来打招呼说：你们安好啊。
English: Guo Ziyi led only a few dozen riders out of the battle, took off his helmet to say hello and said: You are safe.

古文：久同忠义，何至于是。
现代文：很久以来你们同怀忠义，尊重朝廷，现在怎么做这样的事？
English: For a long time you have been loyal to each other and respectful of the imperial court. How can you do such a thing now?

古文：回纥皆舍兵降马曰：是吾父也。
现代文：回纥头领率先下马致敬，说：这是我们的父辈啊。
English: The leader of the Hui tribe dismounted first and saluted, saying, "These are our ancestors."

古文：子仪长六尺余，貌秀杰。
现代文：郭子仪身长六尺多、相貌堂堂。
English: Guo Ziyi is more than six feet tall and has an imposing appearance.

古文：于灵武加平章事，封汾阳王，加中书令。
现代文：唐肃宗在灵武封他为天下兵马副元帅，加平章政事，又封为汾阳王，又加中书令后来把他的像画在凌烟阁上。
English: In Lingwu, Tang Su Zong made him the vice-marshal of the world's soldiers and horses, added Ping Zhang to the government affairs, and made him the King of Shenyang, and added the Chinese calligraphy, and later painted his portrait on Lingyakou.

古文：图形凌烟阁，加号尚父，配飨代守庙庭。
现代文：德宗时又加号为尚父。逝世后，配享代宗庙庭，极为尊荣。
English: At the time of the Desong, he was also given the additional title of Shangfu. After his death, he was awarded the ancestral temple garden, which was extremely honorable.

古文：有子八人，壻七人，皆重官。
现代文：有八个儿子、七个女婿，都做到很大的官。
English: He has eight sons and seven sons-in-law, all of whom have achieved high office.

古文：子暖，尚升平公主。
现代文：他的儿子郭暖，娶代宗的女儿升平公主。
English: His son, Guo Nuan, married the Daizong's daughter, Princess Shengping.

古文：诸孙数十人。
现代文：有几十个孙子和孙女。
English: There are dozens of grandchildren and granddaughters.

古文：每诸生问安，颔之而已。
现代文：这些人给他问安或祝寿的时候，他仅点头而已。
English: When these people greeted him or wished him a happy birthday, he only nodded.

古文：事上诚尽，临下宽厚。
现代文：郭子仪忠心于国家，对皇帝和官职高于他的人，非常至诚。对待下级，又非常宽厚。
English: Guo Ziyi was loyal to the country, very sincere to the emperor and those who were higher than him. He treated his subordinates very generously.

古文：前后连罹幸臣程无振、鱼朝恩等，谮毁百端。
现代文：作战勇猛有智，每战必克。幸臣程元振、鱼朝恩多少次诋毁他。
English: He fought bravely, fiercely and wisely, and was always victorious in every battle. Fortunately, Cheng Yuan Zhen and Yu Chaon denigrated him many times.

古文：时方握强兵，或临戎敌，诏命征之，未尝以危亡回顾。
现代文：他带领重兵，或者正在作战，接到皇帝召见的命令，从不为担心自己的性命而顾盼。
English: He led a heavy army, or was fighting, received the emperor's summons, and never looked back for fear of his life.

古文：亦遇天幸，竟免患难。
现代文：也是老天有眼，他终于很平安。
English: Thank God, he is finally at peace.

古文：田承嗣方跋扈，狠傲无礼，子仪尝遣使至魏州，承嗣辄望拜，指其膝谓使者曰：此膝不屈于人若干岁矣，今为公拜。
现代文：田承嗣很跋扈，傲慢无礼。郭子仪的使者到他那里去，田承嗣去拜望，指着自己的膝盖说：我这腿很多年是不屈于人的，现在我只好为郭令公一屈了。
English: Tian Chengzhi was arrogant and rude. Guo Ziyi's envoy went to him. Tian Chengzhi went to pay his respects, pointing to his knee and saying: "For many years, my leg has not yielded to anyone. Now I have to bend down for Guo Lingguo."

古文：麾下老将若李怀光辈数十人，皆王侯重贵，子仪麾指进退如仆隶焉。
现代文：郭子仪部下的老将比如李怀光等，都是封王侯的，郭子仪指挥他们得心应手，他们对郭子仪，象奴仆对主人一样尊重。
English: The veterans under Guo Ziyi, such as Li Huai Guang, are all princes, Guo Ziyi commands them well, and they respect Guo Ziyi like slaves respect their master.

古文：始光弼齐名。虽威略不见，而宽厚得人过之。
现代文：当年，郭子仪同平定安史之乱的另一位重要将领李光弼齐名。虽然威武不如李光弼，但是在宽厚待人方面，是超过他的。
English: At that time, Guo Ziyi was on a par with Li Guangyao, another important general in the Anshi Rebellion. Although he was not as powerful as Li Guangyao, he was more generous in his treatment of people.

古文：岁入官俸二十四万，私利不预焉。
现代文：每年他家的俸银有二十四万两，其他的收入尚且不算。
English: His family's annual salary is 240,000 taels, not counting other income.

古文：其宅在亲仁里，居其地四分之一，通求巷，家人三千，相出入者，不知其居。
现代文：郭子仪的家住在长安的亲仁里，占整个亲仁里的四分之一。亲仁里是一个四通八达的巷子，郭子仪家仆人三千，从不生事。
English: Guo Ziyi's family lives in Zijin, Chang'an, which accounts for a quarter of the entire Zijin. Zijin is an alley that can be reached from all directions. Guo Ziyi's family has three thousand servants, and they never cause trouble.

古文：代宗不名，呼为大臣。
现代文：经过亲仁里的人，甚至分不出哪一家是郭子仪的府第。
English: After going through relatives and relatives, I can't even tell which family is Guo Ziyi's hometown.

古文：天下以其身存亡为安危者殆二十年。校中书令考二十四年。
现代文：唐代宗很恩宠他，从来不直呼郭子仪的名字，而称为大臣。二十余年，天下安危，靠他支撑。做中书令二十四年。
English: The Tang Dynasty Emperor favored him very much and never called Guo Ziyu by his first name, but called him minister. For more than twenty years, the world was safe and supported by him. Twenty-four years of making the edict.

古文：权倾天下而朝不忌，功盖一代而主不疑，侈穷人欲而君子不罪。
现代文：权倾天下而朝廷不忌；功盖一代而皇帝从不猜疑；过着奢侈的生活，没有人不满。
English: Power is spread all over the world, but the imperial court is not afraid; the emperor never doubts the achievements of a generation; he lives a luxurious life, and no one is dissatisfied with him.

古文：富贵寿考，繁衍安泰，终始人伦之盛无缺焉。
现代文：郭子仪一生富贵，子孙安康，于天伦之乐，没有缺憾。
English: Guo Ziyi has been wealthy all her life, her children and grandchildren are healthy, and she enjoys a happy family life. She has no regrets.

古文：卒年八十五。
现代文：去世的那年，八十五岁。
English: The year he died, he was eighty-five.

古文：宋则宋则家奴执弩弦断，误杀其子，则不之罪。
现代文：宋则宋则家奴执弩弦断，误杀其子，则不之罪。
English: If a slave of the Song family killed his son by mistake, he would not be guilty.

古文：出《独异志》
现代文：宋则
English: Song Ze

