古文：维三月，既生魄，文王令六州之侯，奉勤于商。
现代文：三月十五日，文王集合六州的诸侯要去服事商朝。
English: On March 15th, King Wen gathered the princes of the six states to go and serve the Shang Dynasty.

古文：商王用宗谗，震怒无疆，诸侯不娱，逆诸文王。
现代文：商纣王听信崇侯虎的谗言，愤怒不已。这就惹得诸侯不高兴，就归附于文王。
English: Shangguan Wang listened to the advice of Chong Houhu and was furious. This made the lords unhappy, so they attached themselves to King Wen.

古文：文王弗忍，乃作《程典》，以命三忠。
现代文：文王不忍背负商朝，就作《程典》，以之命令司徒、司马、司空三吏。
English: King Wen could not bear to carry the mercantile dynasty on his back, so he wrote the "Schedule" and ordered the three officials, Sito, Sima, and Siku.

古文：曰： 余体民，无小不敬，若毛在躬，拔之痛，无不省。
现代文：说道：
English: He said:

古文：政失患作，作而无备，死亡不诫，诫在往事，备必慎，备思地，思地慎制，思制慎人，思人慎德，德开，开乃无患。
现代文：帮助我体察民情，不要因为事小而不重视。
English: Help me to be sensitive to people's feelings. Don't take things lightly.

古文：慎德必躬恕，恕以明德，德当天而慎下。
现代文：如同毛发在身，拔它会痛，不得不仔细。
English: Like hair on the body, pulling it out is painful and must be done carefully.

古文：下为上贷，力竞以让，让德乃行。
现代文：上司无是非，下属就结党。消除争斗才会和顺。
English: The boss is all right, the subordinates will form a party. Eliminate the fight and there will be harmony.

古文：慎下必翼上，上中立而下比，争省，和而顺；携乃争，和乃比。比事无政，无政无选，无选民乃顽，顽乃害上。
现代文：闹矛盾就有争斗，一团和气就会结党。结党就无从治国，不治国就无从选拔贤才。无贤才，百姓就会凶顽，凶顽就会危害上司。
English: Where there is discord, there is strife; where there is harmony, there is faction; where there is faction, there is no governance; where there is no governance, there is no selection of talent; where there is no talent, the people will be vicious; where there is viciousness, the boss will be harmed.

古文：故选官以明训，顽民乃顺，慎守其教，小大有度，以备灾寇。
现代文：所以，选择官吏要他们晓明训教，顽民就会顺从。谨慎地遵从教化，使尊卑贵贱有度，以防备天灾外寇。
English: Therefore, the selection of officials requires them to know the teachings, and the people will obey. Carefully follow the teachings, and make the high and low dignified, in order to prevent natural disasters and foreign invaders.

古文：习其武诫，依其山川，通其舟车，利其守务。
现代文：协和他们的三族，稳定他们的四援，明确部伍的轮流候望，操练好他们的武备，保卫他们的山川，沟通他们的水陆交通，以便利于防务。
English: Harmonize their three ethnic groups, stabilize their four aids, clarify the rotation of ministries, train their armed forces well, protect their mountains and rivers, and communicate their land and water transportation to facilitate defense.

古文：士大夫不杂于工商，士之子不知义，不可以长幼。
现代文：士大夫不参与务工经商。商人资财不厚，工匠技艺不巧，农夫不尽力务农，便不能治理。
English: Merchants are not rich, craftsmen are not skilled, and farmers do not do their best in farming, so they cannot be governed.

古文：工不族居，不足以给官；族不乡别，不可以入惠。
现代文：士大夫之子不懂得义，就不能培养好下一代。工匠不集中居处，就不足以供给官府。族人不分属各乡，就不能使之和顺。
English: If the sons of scholars and magistrates do not understand righteousness, it is impossible to train the next generation well. If craftsmen do not live in concentrated areas, it is not enough to supply the government. If the ethnic people do not belong to each township, it is impossible to make it harmonious.

古文：为上不明，为下不顺无丑。
现代文：做上司的不明智，当下属的不会顺从，就不知耻丑，行为轻率，愚昧增多，十足无知。
English: A boss who is not wise, a subordinate who does not obey, is shameless, imprudent, foolish, and ignorant.

古文：轻其行，多其愚不知，慎地必为之图，以举其物，物其善恶。
现代文：慎重对待土地，就必须画成地图，标明它的物产。察看土地的好坏，量出它的高低。
English: If you treat land carefully, you must draw a map and mark its properties. Observe the quality of the land and measure its height.

古文：度其高下，利其陂沟，爱其农时，修其等列，务其土实。
现代文：利用好池塘水沟，珍惜那农事季节。制定土地的等次，致力于它的物产。
English: Make good use of the pond and ditch, cherish the agricultural season, determine the grade of the land, and devote ourselves to its production.

古文：差其施赋，设得其宜，宜协其务，务应其趣。
现代文：区别土地的租赋，多少要制定得当。租赋得当以合于农民的耕种，耕种得顺应他们的意愿。
English: Differentiation of land rent, how much should be properly formulated. The rent should be suitable for the farmers' cultivation, and the cultivation should conform to their wishes.

古文：慎用必爱，工攻其材，商通其财，百物鸟兽鱼鳖，无不顺时。
现代文：谨慎所用，一定要珍惜。工匠治理手中的材料，商人交易他们的货物，百物鸟兽鱼鳖无不顺时生长。
English: If used with caution, it must be treasured. Artisans manage the materials in their hands, merchants trade their goods, and all kinds of birds and beasts grow at the right time.

古文：生穑省用，不滥其度，津不行火，薮林不伐，牛羊不尽齿不屠。
现代文：生爱惜之心必节省财用，不会超过限度。草木滋生之时不放火，不砍伐正在生长的树木，牛羊还没长大就不宰杀。
English: If you live with a caring heart, you will save money and not exceed the limit. Do not set fire to plants when they are growing, do not cut down trees that are growing, and do not slaughter cows and sheep before they are grown.

古文：美不害用，用乃思慎，□备不敬，不意多□，用寡立亲，用胜怀远，远格而迩安。
现代文：土地尽其力就不求最美，美以不妨害使用为限度，使用权时就想到要谨慎。所有的准备都得认真，不要去想多多享用。财用少可安定亲人，财用多可召来远人。远人到来，近处人就会安宁。
English: The land does its best without seeking the most beautiful, beauty is limited to harmless use, and caution should be thought of when using the right. All preparations must be serious, do not think about enjoying more. Less money can stabilize relatives, and more money can bring people from far away. When people from far away arrive, people from nearby will be peaceful.

古文：于安思危，与始思终，于迩思备，于远思近，与老思和，不备无违，无违严戒。 
现代文：在安宁之时要想到危难，在开头之时要想到终了，在靠近身时要想到防备，在远方之时要想到近处，在年老之时要想到多动不止这些啊，不要违背，要严加戒备。
English: In times of peace, think of danger; in times of war, think of the end; in times of peace, think of defense; in times of war, think of defense; in times of peace, think of defense; in times of peace, think of defense; in times of war, think of defense; in times of peace, think of defense; in times of peace, think of defense; in times of peace, think of defense; in times of peace, think of defense; in times of peace, think of defense; in times of peace, think of defense; in times of peace, think of defense; in times of peace, think of defense; in times of peace, think of defense; in times of

