古文：风伯，雨师，星也。
现代文：风伯、雨师，都是星宿。
English: The wind god and the rain god are the stars.

古文：雨师者，毕星也。
现代文：风伯，是箕星，雨师，是毕星。
English: Fengbo, is the bright star, Yushi, is the bright star.

古文：郑玄谓：司中、司命，文星第四，第五星也。
现代文：郑玄说：司中、司命分别是文昌星宫中的第四、第五星。
English: Zheng Xuan said: Sizhong and Simei are respectively the fourth and fifth stars in the star palace of Wenchang.

古文：雨师：一曰屏翳，一曰号屏，一曰玄冥。
现代文：雨师又叫屏翳，又叫屏号，又叫玄冥。
English: Yueshi is also called Pingyao, Pingxiao, and Xuanmiao.

古文：蜀郡张宽，字叔文，汉武帝时为侍中。
现代文：蜀郡的张宽，字叔文，汉武帝的时候曾在皇宫里做侍中。
English: Shu County's Zhang Kuan, nicknamed Uncle Wen, once worked as a chamberlain in the imperial palace during the reign of Emperor Hanwu.

古文：从祀甘泉，至渭桥，有女子浴于渭水，乳长七尺。
现代文：他跟随汉武帝到甘泉宫祭祀，车队经过渭桥，看见有一个女子在渭水中洗澡，她的乳房有七尺长。
English: He followed Emperor Hanwu to the Ganquan Palace for a religious ceremony. As the motorcade passed the Fen Bridge, he saw a woman bathing in the Fen River. Her breasts were seven feet long.

古文：上怪其异，遣问之。女曰： 帝后第七车者知我。 
现代文：皇上感到很奇怪，就派人去问她，这位女子说： 皇上后面第七辆车中的人，知道我是从什么地方来的。 
English: The emperor felt very strange, so he sent someone to ask her. The woman said, "The people in the seventh carriage behind the emperor know where I came from.

古文：所来时，宽在第七车。对曰： 天星。主祭祀者，斋戒不洁，则女人见。 
现代文：当时张宽在第七辆车中，他回答说： 祭祀者是天星的话，他如果斋戒不洁净，就会出现女人。 
English: At that time, Zhang Guang was in the seventh chariot. He replied, "If the worshiper is a celestial star, if he fasts and is not clean, a woman will appear.

古文：文王以太公望为灌坛令，期年，风不鸣条。
现代文：周文王任命吕尚为主管在祭坛上酌酒灌地来降神的灌坛令。
English: Zhou Wen Wang appointed Jiang Ziga and Jiang Taigong as the order of pouring the altar. For a year, there was not even a wind to blow the branches loudly.

古文：文王梦一妇人，甚丽，当道而哭。
现代文：一念之间，风调雨顺，没有发生过一次使树枝发出声响的大风。周文王梦见一个妇女，长得很漂亮，挡住了他的去路在哭。
English: In a flash, the wind changed to rain, and there was not a single gale that made the branches make noise. Zhou Wenwang dreamed of a beautiful woman who blocked his path and was crying.

古文：问其故。曰： 吾泰山之女，嫁为东海妇，欲归，今为灌坛令当道有德，废我行；我行，必有大风疾雨，大风疾雨，是毁其德也。 
现代文：问她哭的原因，他说： 我是泰山神女，嫁给西海神做媳妇。我想回家，如今因为灌坛县令有德，被他挡住了道，使我不能成行。我一出行，必定会有狂风暴雨。有狂风暴雨，这是毁坏他的德行呀。 
English: Asked why she was crying, he said: "I am the goddess of Mount Taishan, married to the daughter-in-law of the god of the West Sea. I want to go home, but now, because the governor of Gannan County has virtue, he has blocked my path, so I can't go. When I travel, there will certainly be violent storms. There are violent storms, this is the virtue of destroying him.

古文：文王觉，召太公问之。
现代文：周文王醒来，召见吕尚询问这件事。
English: Zhou Wenwang woke up and summoned Lushang to inquire about the matter.

古文：是日果有疾雨暴风，从太公邑外而过。
现代文：那一天果然有暴风骤雨，但只从吕尚住的城外经过。
English: On that day, there was indeed a storm, but it only passed outside the city where Lü Shang lived.

古文：文王乃拜太公为大司马。
现代文：周文王于是就任命吕尚为大司马。
English: As a result, King Wen bowed to Jiang Taigong as the chief steed.

古文：胡母班，字季友，泰山人也。
现代文：胡母班，字季友，是泰山郡人。
English: Hu Muban, alias Ji You, is a native of Taishan County.

古文：曾至泰山之侧，忽于树间，逢一绛衣驺呼班云： 泰山府君召。 
现代文：有一次他走过泰山的旁边，忽然在树林里碰上一个身穿红衣的骑士，招呼胡母班说： 泰山府君召见你。 
English: Once, when he was walking past Mount Tai, he suddenly met a knight in a red robe in the woods. He called out to him and said, "Mister Mount Tai has summoned you."

古文：班惊楞，逡巡未答。复有一驺出，呼之。
现代文：胡母班感到很惊讶，正在犹豫不决还没回答的时候，又有一个红衣骑士出来，呼唤他。
English: Hu Muban was very surprised. While he was hesitating to answer, another knight in red came out and called him.

古文：遂随行数十步，驺请班暂瞑，少顷，便见宫室，威仪甚严。
现代文：于是胡母班就跟着他们走了几十步，骑士就请胡母班暂时闭上眼睛。不一会儿到了一个地方，睁眼一看，之间宫殿房屋，仪仗非常威严。
English: The knights then asked Hu's team to close their eyes for a moment. Soon they arrived at a place, and when they opened their eyes, they saw a palace and a house in the middle of a very dignified battle.

古文：班乃入阁拜谒，主为设食，语班曰： 欲见君，无他，欲附书与女婿耳。 班问： 女郎何在？ 
现代文：胡母班就进府拜见了泰山府君，泰山府君让人为他准备了酒食，对胡母班说： 我想见您，没有别的事情，只是想请您捎封信给我女婿罢了。 胡母班问： 您女儿在哪里？ 
English: Hu Muban went into the house to visit Taishan Fuchun. Taishan Fuchun had people prepare wine and food for him and said to Hu Muban: I want to see you, there is nothing else, I just want to ask you to write a letter to my son-in-law. Hu Muban asked: Where is your daughter?

古文：曰： 女为河伯妇。 
现代文：泰山府君说： 我女儿是河伯的妻子。 
English: Taishanfukun said: My daughter is Hebe's wife.

古文：班曰： 辄当奉书，不知缘何得达？ 
现代文：胡母班说： 当然该为你送信，不知怎样才能到达？ 
English: Hu Muban said: Of course I should send it for you, I don't know how to get there.

古文：答曰： 今适河中流，便扣舟呼青衣，当自有取书者。 
现代文：泰山府君回答说： 你乘船到黄河中流，就敲打着船呼唤 青衣 自会有人来取信。 
English: Taishanfukun replied, "If you take a boat to the middle of the Yellow River, you can knock on the boat and call for Qing Yi, and someone will come to pick up the letter."

古文：班乃辞出。昔驺复令闭目，有顷，忽如故道。
现代文：胡母班就告辞了出来，刚才那骑士又让他闭上眼睛，过了一会，他忽然又来到了原来的路上。
English: Just then, the knight asked him to close his eyes again. After a while, he suddenly returned to his original path.

古文：遂西行，如神言而呼青衣。
现代文：胡母班就向西去了，按照泰山府君所说的那样呼唤奴婢。
English: Hu Muban went to the west and called for slaves and maidservants as Taishan Fuchun had said.

古文：须臾，果有一女仆出，取书而没。
现代文：一会儿，果然有一个婢女出来，拿了信就又潜到水中去了。
English: After a while, one of the maids did indeed come out, take the letter and dive back into the water.

古文：少顷，复出。云： 河伯欲暂见君。 
现代文：过了一会儿，这婢女又冒出水面，说： 河伯想见您一下。 
English: After a while, the maid came up out of the water again and said, "Hebo wants to see you."

古文：婢亦请瞑目。
现代文：这婢女也请他闭上眼睛。
English: The maid also asked him to close his eyes.

古文：遂拜谒河伯。
现代文：不一会儿，胡母班便拜见了河伯。
English: In a short while, Hu's class paid their respects to Hebe.

古文：河伯乃大设酒食，词旨殷勤。
现代文：河伯则大摆酒宴，说话也十分热情。
English: Hebe, on the other hand, had a big drinking party and spoke very enthusiastically.

古文：临去，谓班曰： 感君远为致书，无物相奉。 
现代文：临走时，他对胡母班说： 感激您老远给我送来信，我也没有什么东西奉送给您。 
English: As he was about to leave, he said to Hu Muban: "I am grateful to you for sending me a letter from so far away. I have nothing to give you.

古文：于是命左右： 取吾青丝履来！ 
现代文：于是就命令身边的侍从： 把我的青丝鞋拿来。 
English: So he ordered the attendants around him: Bring me my blue silk shoes.

古文：以贻班。
现代文：于是就把这鞋子赠送给了胡母班。
English: So he gave the shoes to Hu Moban.

古文：班出，瞑然忽得还舟。
现代文：胡母班出来时，也闭上眼睛，忽然又回到了船上。
English: When Hu's mother class came out, she also closed her eyes and suddenly returned to the ship.

古文：遂于长安经年而还。
现代文：胡母班在长安过了一年就回家去了。
English: Hu's classmates went home after a year in Chang'an.

古文：至泰山侧，不敢潜过，遂扣树自称姓名，从长安还，欲启消息。
现代文：他走到泰山旁边，不敢偷偷地经过，就敲着树干，自报姓名： 我胡母班从长安回来，想报告一下消息。 
English: When he came to the side of Mount Tai, he did not dare to sneak past, so he knocked on the tree trunk and gave his name: My classmate Hu came back from Chang'an and wanted to report some news.

古文：须臾，昔驺出，引班如向法而进。
现代文：一会儿，从前的那骑士出来，带着胡母班按照过去的方法进了泰山。
English: After a while, the former knight came out and, with the goose squad, entered Mount Tai according to the old method.

古文：因致书焉。府君请曰： 当别。 
现代文：于是胡母班就向泰山府君报告了送信的经过。泰山府君请求说： 我会在其他方面再报答您。 
English: So Hu's mother class reported the sending process to Mr. Taishan. Mr. Taishan requested: I will repay you in other ways.

古文：再报班，语讫，如厕，忽见其父着械徒，作此辈数百人。
现代文：胡母班把要说的话说完，就去上厕所。忽然他看见父亲戴着镣铐在干活，一起干活的有几百个人。
English: After Hu's mother finished saying what she wanted to say, he went to the toilet. Suddenly, he saw his father wearing shackles at work, with hundreds of people working together.

古文：班进拜流涕问： 大人何因及此？ 
现代文：胡母班上前拜见父亲，流着泪问： 大人为什么落到这个地步？ 
English: Hu's mother went to the front of the class to see her father and asked through tears: "Why have adults fallen to this level?

古文：父云： 吾死不幸，见遣三年，今已二年矣。困苦不可处。
现代文：他父亲说： 我死了后很不幸，被惩罚三年，现在已经二年了，苦得不能再呆下去了。
English: His father said: "I am very unhappy after my death. I was punished for three years, and now it's been two years. I can't stay any longer.

古文：知汝今为明府所识，可为吾陈之。乞免此役。
现代文：知道您现在被府君所赏识，你可以给我向他诉说一下，求他免除这劳役，我只是想在家乡弄个土地神做做。 
English: Knowing that you are now appreciated by the governor, you can tell him to me and ask him to exempt this labor service. I just want to make a land god in my hometown.

古文：便欲得社公耳。 班乃依教，叩头陈乞。
现代文：胡母班就依照父亲教给他的话，向府君磕头求情。
English: In accordance with the words taught to him by his father, Hu Muban begged for mercy from the prefect.

古文：府君曰： 生死异路，不可相近，身无所惜。 
现代文：府君说： 活人和死人属于不同的世界，不可以互相接近。我倒不是不肯帮忙。 
English: Fuchun said, "The living and the dead belong to different worlds and should not be allowed to come close to each other. I am not unwilling to help.

古文：班苦请，方许之。
现代文：胡母班苦苦哀求，府君才答应了他的请求。
English: Hu Moban pleaded hard, and the prefect only agreed to his request.

古文：于是辞出，还家。
现代文：于是胡母班告辞出来，回家去了。
English: So Hu's classmates excused themselves and went home.

古文：岁余，儿子死亡略尽。
现代文：过了一年多，胡母班的儿子一个个都死了。
English: More than a year later, all of Hu's sons have died.

古文：班惶惧，复诣泰山，扣树求见。
现代文：胡母班惶恐不安，又来到泰山，敲树求见。
English: Panicked and uneasy, Hu Muban came to Mount Tai again, knocking on trees to ask for a meeting.

古文：昔驺遂迎之而见。
现代文：过去的骑士就迎接他去见府君。
English: The official who drove the horse and carriage that year greeted him as he entered the underworld and met the god.

古文：班乃自说： 昔辞旷拙，及还家，儿死亡至尽。今恐祸故未已，辄来启白，幸蒙哀救。 
现代文：胡母班就自己先说道： 我过去说话粗疏，等到我回家后，我的儿子都快死光了，现在恐怕祸事还没完，所以马上来禀告给您，希望得到您的怜悯和拯救。 
English: Hu's mother said to herself first: I used to be a rough talker, and when I got home, my son was almost dead, and now I'm afraid the disaster is not over, so I'll come to report to you right away, hoping to get your mercy and salvation.

古文：府君拊掌大笑曰： 昔语君：死生异路，不可相近故也。 
现代文：府君拍手大笑说： 这就是我过去对你所说的 活人和死人属于不同的世界，不可以互相接近 的缘故啊。 
English: Fuchun clapped his hands and laughed loudly, saying, "This is the reason why I told you in the past that the living and the dead belong to different worlds and should not come close to each other."

古文：即敕外召班父。须臾至，庭中问之： 昔求还里社，当为门户作福，而孙息死亡至尽，何也？ 
现代文：过了一会，胡父来到庭中，问他： 你当初要求回家乡做土地神，应当为自己家里添点福，却使孙子一个个都死尽了，是为了什么？ 
English: After a while, Hu's father came to the courtyard and asked him, "You originally asked to go back to your hometown to be the god of the land, and you should add some blessings to your home, but you caused all of your grandchildren to die. What was the reason for this?

古文：答云： 久别乡里，自忻得还，又遇酒食充足，实念诸孙，召之。 
现代文：胡母班的父亲回答说： 我离开家乡很久了，十分高兴能回家，加以酒食充足，实在想念孙儿们，所以就把他们都召到身边了。 
English: Hu Muban's father replied, "I have been away from home for a long time. I am very happy to be back home. I have plenty of food and drink. I really miss my grandchildren, so I have called them all to be with me."

古文：于是代之。
现代文：于是府君便撤换了胡母班的父亲。
English: As a result, the prefectural governor replaced the father of Homiban.

古文：父涕泣而出。
现代文：他父亲痛哭流涕地出去了。
English: His father stormed out in tears.

古文：班遂还。后有儿皆无恙。
现代文：胡母班就回家去了，这以后，他生下的孩子，都不再有什么意外。
English: Hu's mother class went home, and after that, the children he gave birth to no longer had any accidents.

古文：宋时弘农冯夷，华阴潼乡堤首人也。
现代文：宋朝时候，弘农郡的冯夷，是华阴县潼乡河堤边上的人。
English: During the Song Dynasty, Feng Yi of Hongnong County was a man on the edge of the river embankment in Huanxiang, Huayin County.

古文：以八月上庚日渡河，溺死。天帝署为河伯。
现代文：他在八月上旬的庚日横渡黄河时被淹死了，天帝安排他做了河伯。
English: He was drowned in early August when he was crossing the Yellow River on the 6th day of the 8th month. The Heavenly Emperor arranged for him to become a Hebei fisherman.

古文：又五行书曰： 河伯以庚辰日死，不可治船远行，溺没不返。 
现代文：另外，《五行书》也说： 河伯死在庚辰日。这一天不可以开船到远处去，如果去，就会沉没回不来。 
English: In addition, "The Book of Five Elements" also says: He Bo died on Geng Chen Day. On this day, it is not allowed to sail far away. If you do, you will sink and not be able to come back.

古文：吴余杭县南，有上湖，湖中央作塘。
现代文：吴郡余杭县南边有个上湖，这湖的中央筑有堤坝。
English: There is a lake in the south of Yuhang County, Wuxi County. There is a dam in the middle of the lake.

古文：有一人乘马看戏，将三四人，至岑村饮酒，小醉，暮还时，炎热，因下马，入水中枕石眠。
现代文：有一个人骑着马去看戏，带了三四个人到岑村喝酒，喝得稍微有点醉了，看到太阳西斜，他就同随从一起回家了。
English: There was a man who rode a horse to the theatre and took three or four people to the village of Handan to drink. He was a little drunk, and when he saw the sun was setting, he went home with his followers.

古文：马断走归，从人悉追马，至暮不返。
现代文：当时天气十分炎热，因而他就下了马跳到湖里，把头枕在石头上睡着了。
English: The horse broke the rope and ran back. The man's entire entourage went after the horse and did not return until dark.

古文：眠觉，日已向晡，不见人马。
现代文：哪知他的马却扯断了缰绳跑回家去了，随从们都去追马，到天黑也没回来。
English: However, his horse broke its bridle and ran home, and his attendants all ran after the horse and did not return until dark.

古文：见一妇来，年可十六七，云： 女郎再拜，日既向暮，此间大可畏，君作何计？ 
现代文：他一觉醒来，太阳已经下山，人跟马也不见了。这时候，只见一个女子走来，年纪大约有十六七岁，对他说： 小女子在此有礼了。天色已经不早，这里十分可怕，您打算怎么办？ 
English: When he awoke, the sun had gone down, and the people and horses were gone. Just then, he saw a woman, about sixteen or seventeen years old, come up to him and say: "Little girl, you're too polite here. It's getting late, it's very scary here. What are you going to do?"

古文：因问： 女郎何姓？
现代文：他就问： 姑娘您姓什么？
English: He asked: What is your name, young lady?

古文：那得忽相闻？ 
现代文：怎么会到这儿来呢？ 
English: Suddenly, there was a noise in the distance, and another boy came running in a new car.

古文：复有一少年，年十三四，甚了了，乘新车，车后二十人至，呼上车，云： 大人暂欲相见。 
现代文：这时又有一个少年，年纪在十三四岁，生得聪明伶俐，坐了一辆新车，车后跟着二十个人，到了跟前，招呼他上车，对他说： 我家大人想见您一下。 
English: At this time, there was another boy, aged thirteen or fourteen, born clever, sitting in a new car, followed by twenty people, who approached him, invited him to get on the car, and said to him: My family wants to see you.

古文：因回车而去。
现代文：这少年便掉转车头回去了。
English: He just got in the car and drove away.

古文：道中绎络，把火见城郭邑居。
现代文：只见路上火把接连不断，不一会儿便望见那城墙房屋。
English: I saw torches going up one after another on the road, and soon I could see the walled house.

古文：既入城，进厅事，上有信幡，题云： 河伯信。 
现代文：进了城，来到官府公堂上，只见有一面信旗，上面写着 河伯信 。
English: I entered the city and came to the public hall of the government office, only to see a letter banner with Hebe's letter written on it.

古文：俄见一人，年三十许，颜色如画，侍卫烦多，相对欣然，敕行酒，笑云： 仆有小女，颇聪明，欲以给君箕帚。 
现代文：一会儿又看见一个人，年纪在三十岁左右，面色就象图画上画的一样，待从很多。河伯对他的来临感到很高兴，就让侍从给他斟酒端肉，并对他说： 我有个女儿，很聪明，我想把她嫁给您。 
English: A moment later, he saw another man, about thirty years old, with a face like a cartoon, who had been there for a long time. Hebe was happy to see him, so he asked the waiter to pour him wine and meat, and said to him, "I have a daughter who is very smart, and I want to marry her to you."

古文：此人知神，不敢拒逆。
现代文：这个人知道河伯是神，所以不敢拒绝。
English: This man knew that Hebe was a god, so he dared not refuse.

古文：便敕：备办会就郎中婚。
现代文：河伯就命令部下去准备，让女儿与他结婚。
English: He Bo ordered the minister to go down and prepare for his daughter to marry him.

古文：承白：已办。遂以丝布单衣，及纱袷绢裙，纱衫裈履屐，皆精好。
现代文：承办的小吏汇报说已办妥，河伯就拿丝绸单衣以及纱夹衣、绸缎裙子、纱短衫裤、鞋子等给了他，这些东西都很精美。
English: The junior clerk who was in charge of the work reported that it had been completed, and Hebe gave him a silk singlet and a gauze jacket, a silk and satin skirt, gauze shorts, shoes, etc. These things were all exquisite.

古文：又给十小吏，青衣数十人。
现代文：又给了他十个小吏，几十个婢女。
English: He also sent ten servants and dozens of maids.

古文：妇年可十八九，姿容婉媚，便成。
现代文：那女子年龄大约在十八九岁，身材苗条，容貌妩媚。于是他们成了婚。
English: The girl was about eighteen or nineteen years old, slim and pretty, and they were married.

古文：三日，经大会客拜阁，四日，云： 礼既有限，发遣去。 
现代文：婚后三天，举行了盛大的宴会，宾客云集，女婿拜门。第四天，河伯说： 婚礼的举行是有期限的，已经成礼，就要回家了。 
English: Three days after the wedding, a grand banquet was held, guests gathered, and the son-in-law bowed at the door. On the fourth day, Hebe said, "There is a time limit for holding the wedding, the ceremony is over, and I'm going home."

古文：妇以金瓯麝香囊与婿别，涕泣而分。
现代文：这个人的妻子便拿了黄金酒器、麝香袋和丈夫告别，痛哭流涕地和他分手。
English: The man's wife took the golden goblet and the musk bag and bade farewell to her husband, weeping bitterly as she parted from him.

古文：又与钱十万，药方三卷，云： 可以施功布德。 
现代文：另外，还给了他十万钱、三卷药方，对他说： 这些东西可以用来为百姓做好事布施恩德。 
English: In addition, he also gave him 100,000 yuan and three volumes of prescriptions, telling him: "These things can be used to do good things for the people.

古文：复云： 十年当相迎。 
现代文：又说： 再过十年，你要来接我。 
English: Say you'll see me again in ten years.

古文：此人归家，遂不肯别婚，辞亲出家作道人。
现代文：这个人回家后，就不肯再与别人结婚了；他辞别了父母亲，出家做了道士。
English: After this man returned home, he refused to marry anyone else; he left his parents and became a Taoist monk.

古文：所得三卷方：一卷脉经，一卷汤方，一卷丸方。
现代文：他得到的三卷药方：一卷是《脉经》，一卷是《汤方》，一卷是《丸方》。
English: The three volumes of formulas he obtained include: one volume of pulse, one volume of soup formula, one volume of pill formula.

古文：周行救疗，皆致神验。
现代文：他四出奔走，救死扶伤，都有神奇的效验。
English: He travels around, saving lives and curing diseases, all with amazing efficiency.

古文：后母老，兄丧，因还婚宦。
现代文：后来他母亲年迈去世，哥哥也过世了，他就回到河伯那儿，和妻子团聚，并在河伯手下做了官。
English: Later, when his mother died of old age and his brother also passed away, he returned to Hebe, reunited with his wife, and became an official under Hebe.

古文：秦始皇三十六年，使者郑容从关东来，将入函关，西至华阴，望见素车白马，从华山上下。
现代文：秦始皇三十六年，使者郑容从关东过来，要进函谷关。他向西走到华阴县，远远望见白车白马从华山顶上下来。
English: In the 36th year of the reign of Qin Shi Huang, the envoy Zheng Rong came from Kanto to enter Hakodate. He went west to Huayin County, and saw the white horse coming down from the top of Huashan Mountain.

古文：疑其非人，道住止而待之。
现代文：他怀疑不是凡人，就在路上停住了，等着马车过来。
English: Suspecting that he was not an ordinary man, he stopped on the road and waited for the carriage to come.

古文：遂至，问郑容曰： 安之？ 答曰： 之咸阳。 
现代文：一会儿那车子就到了他眼前，里面的人问郑容道： 你到哪里去？ 郑容回答说： 到咸阳。 
English: After a while, the car arrived in front of his eyes, and the people inside asked Zheng Rong: Where are you going? Zheng Rong replied: To Xianyang.

古文：车上人曰： 吾华山使也。
现代文：车上的人说： 我是华山神的使者。
English: The person in the car said: I am the messenger of Huashan God.

古文：愿托一牍书，致镐池君所。
现代文：我想托你带一封信，送到镐池君那里。
English: I'd like you to take a letter and deliver it to Tsugaike-kun.

古文：子之咸阳，道过镐池，见一大梓，有文石，取款梓，当有应者。 
现代文：你到咸阳，将路过镐池，在镐池你会看见一棵大梓树，那树下有一块带有花纹的石头，你拿它敲梓树，就会有接应的人出来，你就把信交给他。 
English: If you go to Xianyang, you will pass by the Dianchi Lake. At the Dianchi Lake, you will see a big maple tree. Under the tree, there is a stone with a pattern. If you knock on the maple tree with it, someone will come out to receive the letter, and you will hand it to him.

古文：即以书与之。容如其言，以石款梓树，果有人来取书。
现代文：郑容按照他的话，用那石头敲那棵梓树，果然有人来拿信。
English: Zheng Rong, in accordance with his words, used the stone to knock down the tree, and someone came to take the letter.

古文：明年，祖龙死。
现代文：第二年，秦始皇便死了。
English: The following year, Qin Shi Huang died.

古文：张璞，字公直，不知何许人也。
现代文：张璞，字公直，不知道是什么地方的人。
English: Zhang Yao, whose name means "honest," doesn't know who he really is.

古文：为吴郡太守，征还，道由庐山，子女观于祠室，婢使指像人以戏曰： 以此配汝。 
现代文：他任吴郡太守的时候，被征召回朝，路上经过庐山。他的儿女游览祠堂，婢女指着那泥菩萨和他女儿开玩笑说： 把他许给你。 
English: When he was appointed as the governor of Wu County, he was called back to the morning, passing Lushan on the way. His children toured the ancestral hall, and the maid pointed at the mud bodhisattva and his daughter and joked: "Give him to you."

古文：其夜，璞妻梦庐君致聘曰： 鄙男不肖，感垂采择，用致微意。 
现代文：那天夜里，张璞的妻子梦见庐山神送上聘礼说： 我的儿子不成器，感谢您肯低就，选择了我儿子做女婿，我拿这些东西来表示我一点小小的心意。 
English: That night, Zhang Ye's wife dreamt that Lushan Shen gave her a betrothal gift, saying, "My son is not a vessel, thank you for being so kind as to choose my son to be your son-in-law. I use these things to show my little heart."

古文：妻觉怪之。
现代文：张璞的妻子醒来后，觉得很奇怪。
English: Zhang Yao's wife woke up feeling very strange.

古文：婢言其情。于是妻惧，催璞速发。
现代文：那婢女便说出了开玩笑的事情，于是妻子很害怕，催促张璞赶快出发。
English: When the maid told her the truth, she felt a little scared and urged her husband to leave immediately.

古文：中流，舟不为行。
现代文：谁知道船刚行到江心，却停住不动了。
English: Who knows if the boat has just reached the center of the river, but it has stopped moving.

古文：阖船震恐。乃皆投物于水，船犹不行。
现代文：全船的人都十分惊惧，就一起向江中扔东西，但是船还是不动。
English: Everyone on the boat was very frightened and started throwing things into the river, but the boat didn't move.

古文：或曰： 投女。 则船为进。
现代文：这时有人说： 把女孩扔到江中，船就能前进了。 
English: At this time, someone said: Throw the girl into the river, and the boat will be able to move forward.

古文：皆曰： 神意已可知也。
现代文：大家也都附和着说： 山神的用意已经可以明白了。
English: Everyone agreed, saying, "We can understand the mountain god's intention."

古文：以一女而灭一门，奈何？ 
现代文：因为舍不得一个女儿而使一家都遭殃，这怎么行呢？ 
English: How is it possible to make a whole family suffer because one daughter cannot be spared?

古文：璞曰： 吾不忍见之。 乃上飞庐，卧，使妻沈女于水。
现代文：张璞说： 我不忍心眼睁睁地看着女儿被扔进江中。 
English: Zhang Jun said: I can't bear to watch my daughter being thrown into the river.

古文：妻因以璞亡兄孤女代之。
现代文：于是他就登上船的顶楼去睡了，让妻子把女儿沉到江中去。
English: Reluctant to do so, his wife substituted the orphaned daughter left behind by Zhang Ye's dead brother.

古文：置席水中，女坐其上，船乃得去。
现代文：他的妻子使用张璞已故兄长的孤女代替了自己的女儿，把席子放在水面上，让女孩坐在上面，这样，船才开走了。
English: His wife used the orphaned daughter of Zhang Ye's late brother as a substitute for her own daughter, placing a mat on the water for the girl to sit on, and the boat sailed away.

古文：璞见女之在也，怒曰： 吾何面目于当世也。 
现代文：张璞下来看见自己的女儿还在船上，生气地说： 我还有什么面子活在世上！ 
English: Zhang Xuan came down and saw that his daughter was still on the boat. He angrily said, "I don't have the face to live in this world!

古文：乃复投己女。
现代文：就又把自己的女儿扔进水里。
English: After saying this, he also threw his daughter into the river.

古文：及得渡，遥见二女在下。
现代文：等他们渡到对岸的时候，远远望见两个女孩站在岸下。
English: When they reached the opposite shore, they could see two girls standing on the shore in the distance.

古文：有吏立于岸侧，曰： 吾庐君主簿也。
现代文：有个小吏站在岸边，对张璞说： 我是庐山神的主簿。
English: A minor official stood on the shore and said to Zhang Ye: "I am the master of the gods of Lushan.

古文：庐君谢君。知鬼神非匹。又敬君之义，故悉还二女。 
现代文：庐山神向您拜谢道歉，他知道鬼神不能和您女儿婚配，又钦佩您的道义，所以把两个女孩全部送回来了。 
English: The god of Lushan apologizes to you. He knows that ghosts and gods cannot marry your daughter, and he admires your morality, so he sent all two girls back.

古文：后问女。言： 但见好屋，吏卒，不觉在水中也。 
现代文：后来张璞问女儿，女儿说： 我当时只看见漂亮的房屋和官吏士兵，没感觉到自己是在水中。 
English: Later, Zhang Ye asked her daughter, and her daughter said: At that time, I only saw beautiful houses and officials and soldiers, and did not feel that I was in the water.

古文：建康小吏曹着，为庐山使所迎，配以女婉。
现代文：建康郡的小吏曹著，被庐山之神的使者接了去，庐山神把名叫婉的女儿嫁给了他。
English: Cao Cao, a minor official of Jiankang County, was picked up by the messenger of the god of Lushan. The god of Lushan married his daughter, whose name was Wan.

古文：着形意不安，屡屡求请退。
现代文：曹著老是心神不定，多次请求下山。
English: Cao was always in a fickle mood and repeatedly asked to go down the mountain.

古文：婉潜然垂涕，赋诗序别。幷赠织成裈衫。
现代文：婉儿泪流满面，做了一首诗和他告别，并把高级丝织品所做的裤子衣衫赠给了他。
English: With tears streaming down her face, Wan Er composed a poem to bid him farewell, and presented him with a pair of trousers and a shirt made of high-grade silk fabric.

古文：宫亭湖孤石庙，尝有估客下都，经其庙下，见二女子，云： 可为买两量丝履，自相厚报。 
现代文：宫亭湖畔有座孤石庙，曾经有一个贩运货物的商人到都城去，经过这庙下的时候，看见两位姑娘对他说： 希望您能给我们买两双丝鞋来，我们一定会重谢您。 
English: There is a lonely stone temple on the shore of the lake. Once upon a time, a merchant who trafficked goods went to the capital. When he passed under the temple, he saw two girls who said to him, "I hope you can buy us two pairs of silk shoes. We will be sure to thank you."

古文：估客至都，市好丝履，幷箱盛之，自市书刀，亦内箱中。
现代文：这商人到了都城，买好丝鞋，把它们合装在一只箱子里，他自己买了一把写字时用来削改竹简的书刀也放纳在箱子里。
English: The merchant went to the capital, bought a pair of silk shoes and put them in a box. He also bought a penknife, which he used to sharpen bamboo slips while writing, and put it in the box.

古文：既还，以箱及香置庙中而去，忘取书刀。
现代文：既已返回，他就把箱子和线香放在庙里走了，忘记了取出书刀。
English: After returning, he left the box and the incense in the temple and forgot to take out the knife.

古文：至河中流，忽有鲤鱼跳入船内，破鱼腹，得书刀焉。
现代文：他的船刚行到河中央，忽然有一条鲤鱼跳进船舱里。他把鱼肚子剖开，发现书刀就在里面。
English: His boat had just reached the middle of the river when an eel jumped into the cabin. He cut open the fish's stomach and found the knife inside.

古文：南州人有遣吏献犀簪于孙权者，舟过宫亭庙而乞灵焉。
现代文：南州有个人派小吏给孙权进献犀牛角制成的簪子，船经过彭泽湖边的宫亭庙，这小吏就到庙中乞求神灵保佑。
English: A person in Nanzhou sent a minor official to present rhinoceros horn braids to Sun Quan. The boat passed the palace temple on the edge of Pengze Lake, and the minor official went to the temple to pray for the blessing of the gods.

古文：神忽下教曰： 须汝犀簪。 
现代文：可那神灵忽然传话说： 我要你的犀牛角簪子。 
English: But the spirit suddenly sent a message: "I want your rhinoceros horns."

古文：吏惶遽不敢应。
现代文：这小吏惊恐万状，不敢答应。
English: The clerk was terrified and did not dare to agree.

古文：俄而犀簪已前列矣。神复下教曰： 俟汝至石头城，返汝簪。 
现代文：过了一会儿，他已经把犀牛角簪子放到神像的前面了，那神灵又传话说： 等你到了石头城，我把簪子还给你。 
English: After a while, he had placed the rhinoceros horn pliers in front of the statue of the god, and the god sent another message: When you get to Stone Town, I'll give you back the pliers.

古文：吏不得已，遂行，自分失簪，且得死罪。
现代文：这小吏也无可奈何，就怏怏不乐地走了。他自料丢了这簪子，将会被判处死刑。
English: The clerk went away in a sulk, knowing that if he had lost the mule, he would be sentenced to death.

古文：比达石头，忽有大鲤鱼，长三尺，跃入舟。
现代文：哪知等他的船到了石头城，忽然有一条大鲤鱼，长三尺，跳进船里。
English: However, when his boat arrived at Stone Town, suddenly a large catfish, three feet long, jumped into the boat.

古文：剖之，得簪。
现代文：他把鱼肚剖开，使得到了这簪子。
English: He cut open the fish's belly to get to the hook.

古文：郭璞过江，宣城太守殷佑，引为参军。
现代文：郭璞过了长江，宣城郡太守殷佑推荐他当了参军。
English: Guo Yao crossed the Yangtze River and was recommended to join the army by Yin You, the grand marshal of Xuancheng County.

古文：时有一物，大如水牛，灰色，卑脚，脚类象，胸前尾上皆白，大力而迟钝，来到城下，众咸怪焉。
现代文：当时有一个怪物，像水牛一样大，灰色，矮脚，脚与象差不多，胸口前面以及尾巴上面都是白颜色，力气很大，但行动迟钝，来到宣城郡城下。
English: At that time, a monster, as large as a buffalo, gray, short-legged, with feet similar to an elephant, white in front of the chest and above the tail, very strong, but sluggish, came to the town of Xuancheng County.

古文：佑使人伏而取之。
现代文：老百姓看见了这怪物都觉得很奇怪。
English: When the villagers saw the monster, they thought it was very strange.

古文：令璞作卦，遇遯之蛊，名曰 驴鼠。 
现代文：殷佑派人埋伏下来把它逮住了，让郭璞算卦，碰到的是 遁 卦与 蛊 卦，原来这怪物叫做 驴鼠 。
English: Yin You sent someone to ambush it and caught it. He asked Guo Yao to calculate the ratios, and what he found was a rat and a rat. Originally, this monster was called a donkey rat.

古文：卜适了，伏者以戟刺，深尺余。
现代文：卦刚算完，埋伏的人就用戟刺这怪物，刺进去有一尺多深。
English: As soon as Gua had finished his calculations, the ambushed man stabbed the monster with a spade, and the hole was more than a foot deep.

古文：郡纪纲上祠请杀之。
现代文：宣城郡的主簿到祠庙里去请求把它杀了。
English: The head librarian of Xuancheng County went to the ancestral temple to request that it be killed.

古文：巫云： 庙神不悦。
现代文：巫师说： 庙里的神灵对你们的做法很不高兴。
English: The sorcerer said, "The gods in the temple are not happy with what you are doing.

古文：此是郱亭驴山君使。至荆山，暂来过我，不须触之。 
现代文：这是宫亭湖畔庐山神的使者，它要到荆山去，暂时来拜访我一下。你们不必去碰它。 
English: This is the messenger of the god of Lushan on the shores of Lake Gongting. It wants to go to Mount Jing and visit me for a while. You don't have to touch it.

古文：遂去，不复见。
现代文：这怪物就走了，从此再也没有人看见过它。
English: The monster went away and was never seen again.

古文：庐陵欧明，从贾客，道经彭泽湖，每以舟中所有多少投湖中，云： 以为礼。 
现代文：庐陵郡的欧明，跟随贩运货物的商人路过彭泽猢，总是把船里的东西或多或少地丢一点到湖里，说： 把它作为我的礼物吧。 
English: Ao Ming from Fuling County, who was passing through Pengzeyao with a merchant who was transporting goods, would always throw a little of what was in the boat into the lake and say, "Take this as my gift."

古文：积数年后，复过，忽见湖中有大道，上多风尘，有数吏，乘车马来候明，云： 是青洪君使要。 
现代文：这样一直过了几年，后来他又经过彭泽湖，忽然看见湖中有一条大路，路上尘土很多。有几个小吏，乘着车、骑着马来迎接欧明，说是青洪君派他们来邀请他的。
English: This went on for several years, and then he passed through Pengze Lake and suddenly saw a large road in the lake, with a lot of dust on the road. Several minor officials, in cars and on horseback, came to meet Ou Ming, saying that Qing Hongjun had sent them to invite him.

古文：须臾，达见，有府舍，门下吏卒。明甚怖。
现代文：一会儿欧明便到了那里边，只看见有官府房屋，门口还有差役把持，欧明很害怕。
English: After a while, Ou Ming went there. He only saw the government building and the guards at the gate. Ou Ming was very scared.

古文：吏曰： 无可怖！
现代文：那小吏说： 没有什么可害怕的。
English: "There's nothing to be afraid of," the clerk said.

古文：青洪君感君前后有礼，故要君，必有重遗君者。
现代文：青洪君感激您前前后后赠送礼品，所以邀请您。
English: Qinghong is grateful for the gifts you have given him, so he has invited you.

古文：君勿取，独求 如愿 耳。 
现代文：他肯定有贵重的物品送给您，可您别拿，独独求个如愿就行了。 
English: He must have something valuable to give you, but don't take it, just ask for what you want.

古文：明既见青洪君，乃求 如愿。 
现代文：欧明见了青洪君，就向他要如愿。
English: When Ou Ming saw Qing Hongjun, he asked him to do as he wished.

古文：使逐明去。
现代文：青洪君就让如愿跟着欧明走了。
English: Qing Hongjun let Ou Ming go with him as he wished.

古文：如愿者，青洪君婢也。
现代文：如愿，是青洪君的婢女。
English: As she wished, she became Qing Hongjun's maid.

古文：明将归，所愿辄得，数年，大富。
现代文：欧明带着如愿回家，他的愿望总是能实现，几年下来，他就极其富裕了。
English: Ou Ming went home with his wishes fulfilled. His wishes were always fulfilled, and after a few years, he became extremely wealthy.

古文：益州之西，云南之东，有神祠，克山石为室，下有神，奉祠之，自称黄公。因言：此神，张良所受黄石公之灵也。清净不宰杀。
现代文：益州的西面，云南的东面，有一座神庙。在山崖上凿个洞作为供奉神灵的宝殿，宝殿下有个得道成仙的人敬奉祭祀庙中的神灵，他自称黄公，因而说这庙的神灵，是张良所就学过的黄石公的灵魂，喜欢清静素洁，不主张宰杀牲畜来祭他。
English: On the west side of Yizhou, on the east side of Yunnan, there is a temple. A hole is cut in the cliff to serve as a temple to worship the gods. Beneath the temple, there is a man who has attained immortality and worships the gods in the temple. He calls himself Huang Gong, and therefore says that the god of this temple is the soul of Huangshi Gong, which Zhang Liang studied. He likes tranquility and purity, and does not advocate the slaughter of livestock to sacrifice him.

古文：诸祈祷者，持一百钱，一双笔，一丸墨，置石室中，前请乞，先闻石室中有声，须臾，问： 来人何欲？ 
现代文：来祈祷的人们，只要拿一百张纸、两支笔、一块墨放在那石洞中，便可以走上前去乞求了。先可以听见石洞中发出声音，过了一会儿，里边就问来祈祷的人有什么要求。
English: People who come to pray just need to take a hundred pieces of paper, two pens and a piece of ink and place them in the cave, then they can go forward to pray. At first, a voice can be heard in the cave, and after a while, the people inside ask the people who come to pray what they want.

古文：既言，便具语吉凶，不见其形。
现代文：等祈祷的人说完，他就一一告诉其中的吉凶，但看不见他的形体。
English: After you have stated your request, that person will tell you the fortunes and misfortunes. However, you only hear the voice and do not see the form.

古文：至今如此。
现代文：这情况直到今天还是这样。
English: To this day, it's still like that.

古文：永嘉中，有神见兖州，自称樊道基。
现代文：永嘉年间，有个神仙出现在兖州，自称是樊道基。
English: During the Yongjia era, a god appeared in Zhangzhou, claiming to be Zhang Daoji.

古文：有妪，号成夫人。
现代文：有个妇女，号称成夫人。
English: There is a woman who calls herself Mrs. Cheng.

古文：夫人好音乐，能弹箜篌，闻人弦歌，辄便起舞。
现代文：成夫人喜欢音乐，会弹箜篌，她听见别人奏乐歌唱，马上就跳起舞来了。
English: Mrs. Cheng likes music and can play the gong. When she hears others playing music and singing, she immediately starts dancing.

古文：沛国戴文谋，隐居阳城山中，曾于客堂，食际，忽闻有神呼曰： 我天帝使者，欲下凭君，可乎？ 
现代文：沛国的戴文谋，隐居在阳城山中。有一次他在客厅吃饭的时候，忽然听见有个神仙对他说： 我是天帝的使者，想下凡来依靠您，可以吗？ 
English: Once, when he was having dinner in his living room, he suddenly heard a divine being say to him: "I am an emissary of the Heavenly Emperor, would you mind if I come and rely on you?"

古文：文闻甚惊。又曰： 君疑我也。 
现代文：戴文谋听了后十分吃惊，那神仙又说： 您怀疑我吗？ 
English: After listening to Dai Wenmou, he was very surprised. The fairy then said, "Do you doubt me?

古文：文乃跪曰： 居贫，恐不足降下耳。 
现代文：戴文谋便跪下来说： 我很穷，恐怕不值得您下凡依靠罢了。 
English: Dai Wenmou then knelt down and said: I am very poor, I am afraid I am not worthy of your trust.

古文：既而洒扫设位，朝夕进食，甚谨。
现代文：接着戴文谋就把家中打扫干净，设立了这神仙的牌位，天天进献食物，十分谨慎。
English: Next, Dai Wenmou cleaned up his home, set up this immortal card, and donated food every day, very carefully.

古文：后于室内窃言之。妇曰： 此恐是妖魅凭依耳。 文曰： 我亦疑之。 
现代文：后来他在房间里偷偷地把这件事告诉了妻子，他妻子说： 这恐怕是妖怪想依靠我们吧。 戴文谋说： 我也怀疑他。 
English: Later, he secretly told his wife about this in his room, and his wife said, "I'm afraid this is a monster who wants to rely on us." Dai Wenmou said, "I also doubt him."

古文：及祠飨之时，神乃言曰： 吾相从方欲相利，不意有疑心异议。 
现代文：等到他再进献祭品的时候，那神仙便对他说： 我跟随你，刚想帮你的忙，想不到你对我还有疑心，还说我的鬼话。 
English: When he came to the sacrificial offering, the genie said to him, "I have been following you. I just wanted to help you. I had no idea that you still had doubts about me and that you were still talking about me.

古文：文辞谢之际，忽堂上如数十人呼声，出视之，见一大鸟，五色，白鸠数十随之，东北入云而去，遂不见。
现代文：戴文谋正在向他道歉的时候，厅堂上忽然发出象几十个人在呼叫的声音。他出去一看，只见一只五色大鸟，有几十只白鸠跟随着它，飞进东北方的云中去了，从此就看不见什么了。
English: When Dai Wenmou was apologizing to him, the hall suddenly sounded like dozens of people were shouting. He went out to take a look, only to see a large five-colored bird, followed by dozens of egrets, flying into the northeastern clouds. From then on, he couldn't see anything.

古文：麋竺，字子仲，东海朐人也。
现代文：麋竺，字子仲，东海郡朐县人。
English: Zou, Zizhong, a native of Zou County, Donghai County.

古文：祖世货殖，家赀巨万。
现代文：他祖祖辈辈经商，家中有财产几万万。
English: His ancestors have been in business for generations, and his family has tens of thousands of dollars in assets.

古文：常从洛归，未至家数十里，见路次有一好新妇，从竺求寄载。
现代文：有一次他从洛阳回家，在离家还有几十里的地方，在路上碰到一个漂亮的新娘，向他请求搭车。
English: Once, when he was returning home from Luoyang, dozens of miles away from home, he met a beautiful bride on the road and asked him for a ride.

古文：当往烧东海麋竺家，感君见载，故以相语。 
现代文：麋竺让她上车后，走了大约二十多里，新娘向他告别，对麋竺说： 我是天使，要去烧掉东海郡麋竺的家。感激您让我搭了车，所以把这个消息告诉你。 
English: The bride said goodbye to the bridegroom and said, "I'm an angel and I'm going to burn down the house of the bridegroom in Donghai County. I'm grateful that you gave me a ride, so I'll tell you the news."

古文：竺因私请之。妇曰： 不可得不烧。
现代文：麋竺听了后就向她求情：那新娘说： 不烧是不可能的。
English: The bride said, "It is impossible not to burn."

古文：如此，君可快去。我当缓行，日中，必火发。 
现代文：这样吧，你可以赶快回去，我就慢慢地走来，但到中午一定要烧起来了。 
English: All right, you can hurry back, I'll walk slowly, but by noon I'll be burning up.

古文：竺乃急行归，达家，便移出财物。
现代文：麋竺就急忙赶回家，到家后，就搬出所有的财物。
English: He hurried home, and after arriving at home, he moved out all of his belongings.

古文：日中，而火大发。
现代文：到了中午，大火就熊熊地燃烧起来了。
English: By midday, the fire was raging.

古文：汉宣帝时，南阳阴子方者，性至孝。积恩，好施。喜祀灶。
现代文：汉宣帝的时候，南阳郡有个叫阴子方的人，本性极其孝顺，他积聚恩德，爱好施舍，喜欢祭灶。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Xuan, there was a man in Nanyang County named Yin Zi Fang, who was extremely filial by nature. He accumulated benevolence, loved charity, and liked the sacrificial stove.

古文：腊日，晨炊，而灶神形见。
现代文：腊日那天做早饭的时候，灶神现出了原形，阴子方虔诚地向灶神拜了两次。
English: On the day of Laxi, when making breakfast, the Kitchen God appeared in his original form. Yin Zi Fang piously bowed to the Kitchen God twice.

古文：子方再拜受庆，家有黄羊，因以祀之。
现代文：请求能受到灶神的福佑。他家里有条黄羊，就用它来祭灶。
English: His request was blessed by the god of the hearth. He had a yellow sheep at home and used it to light the hearth.

古文：自是已后，暴至巨富。田七百余顷，舆马仆隶，比于邦君。
现代文：打这以后，他一下子变成了大富翁，拥有耕田七百多顷，车马仆人，与国君一样多。
English: After this, he suddenly became a millionaire, owning more than seven hundred hectares of farmland and as many chariots and servants as the sovereign.

古文：子方尝言：我子孙必将强大，至识三世，而遂繁昌。
现代文：阴子方曾经说： 我的子孙一定会强大的。 到第三代阴识的时候，阴家就已繁荣了。
English: Yin Zi Fang once said: My descendants will certainly be powerful, and by the time of the third generation of Yin Zi, the Yin family will have prospered.

古文：家凡四侯，牧守数十。
现代文：家里共有四个人被封侯，做州郡一级的官有几十个。
English: A total of four people in the family were knighted, and there are dozens of officials at the state and county level.

古文：故后子孙尝以腊日祀灶，而荐黄羊焉。
现代文：所以后来他的子孙常常在腊日祭灶，井献上黄羊作祭品。
English: Therefore, his descendants often offered a yellow sheep as a sacrifice at the Lazhi sacrificial hearth and well.

古文：吴县张成，夜起，忽见一妇人立于宅南角，举手招成曰： 此是君家之蚕室。我即此地之神。
现代文：吴县的张成，有一天夜里起床，忽然看见一个女子站在他住宅的南边，挥着手招呼张成说： 这是你们家的养蚕房，我就是这里的神仙。
English: Zhang Cheng of Wuxian County woke up one night and suddenly saw a woman standing on the south side of his house, waving to Zhang Cheng and saying, "This is your silkworm house. I am the fairy godmother here."

古文：明年正月十五，宜作白粥，泛膏于上。 
现代文：明年正月十五，你应该煮一些白米粥，在这养蚕房上涂一层米膏。 
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the next year, you should cook some white rice porridge and apply a layer of rice cream on this silkworm house.

古文：以后年年大得蚕。
现代文：以后张成每年都在那里获得很多的蚕。
English: Since then, Zhangcheng has obtained a lot of silkworms there every year.

古文：今之作膏糜像此。
现代文：现在人们做糯米膏也象这样。
English: Now people make glutinous rice cream in the same way.

古文：豫章有戴氏女，久病不差，见一小石形像偶人，女谓曰： 尔有人形，岂神？
现代文：豫章郡有一个姓戴的女子，病了很久不痊愈。一次她看见一块小石头，形状象个木偶人。这女子就对它说： 你有人的形状，是否是神仙呢？
English: In Yuzhang County, there was a woman surnamed Dai, who had been ill for a long time and had not recovered. Once she saw a small stone, shaped like a puppet. The woman said to it: "You have the shape of a man, are you a fairy?"

古文：能差我宿疾者，吾将重汝。 
现代文：你如果能使我这老病痊愈，我一定会从重酬谢你的。 
English: If you can cure me of this old disease, I will surely thank you from the heavy reward.

古文：其夜，梦有人告之： 吾将佑汝。 
现代文：那天夜里，这女子梦见有人告诉她： 我将保佑你。 
English: That night, the woman had a dream in which someone told her: "I will protect you."

古文：自后疾渐差。
现代文：从此以后她的毛病就渐渐好了。
English: Since then, her condition has gradually improved.

古文：遂为立祠山下。戴氏为巫，故名戴侯祠。
现代文：于是她就在山下为这小石头建造了一座庙宇，这姓戴的女子做了里面的巫婆，所以这庙取名为戴侯祠。
English: So she built a temple for this small stone at the bottom of the mountain, and the woman surnamed Dai became the witch inside, so the temple was named Dai Hou Temple.

古文：汉阳羡长刘尝言： 我死当为神。 
现代文：汉朝阳羡县县令刘曾经说： 我死了会成仙。 
English: Liu, the prefectural governor of Enshi County in the Han Dynasty, once said: I will become immortal when I die.

古文：一夕，饮醉，无病而卒。
现代文：一天晚上他喝醉了，没生什么病就死了。
English: One night he got drunk and died without any illness.

古文：风雨，失其柩。
现代文：当时风雨大作，把他的棺材刮走了。
English: There was a storm at the time, which swept his coffin away.

古文：夜闻荆山有数千人噉声，乡民往视之，则棺已成冢。
现代文：那天夜里人们听见荆山上有几千个人的喊声，乡里的老百姓赶去一看，那棺材早就已经埋在坟墓中了。
English: That night, people heard the shouts of thousands of people on Mount Jing, and the villagers rushed to see that the coffin had already been buried in the grave.

古文：遂改为君山，因立祠祀之。
现代文：于是人们便将荆山改称为君山，同时建造了庙宇来祭他。
English: As a result, people changed the name of Jing Mountain to Junshan, and at the same time built a temple to worship him.

