古文：◎庄烈帝二
现代文：庄烈帝二
English: Zhuang Lie Diji

古文：十一年春正月丁丑，洪承畴败贼于梓潼，贼还走陕西。
现代文：崇祯十一年正月十三日，洪承畴在梓潼打败李自成，李自成回师陕西。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the 11th year of Chongzhen, Hong Chengzong defeated Li Zicheng in Zizhi, and Li Zicheng returned to Shaanxi.

古文：丁亥，裁南京冗官。
现代文：二十三日，裁减南京多余官员。
English: On the 23rd, the redundant officials in Nanjing were reduced.

古文：二月甲辰，改河南巡按御史张任学为总兵官。
现代文：二月十日，改河南巡按都御史张任学为总兵官。
English: On February 10, Zhang Renxue, the governor of Henan Province, was appointed as the chief military officer.

古文：三月戊寅，贺逢圣致仕。
现代文：三月十五日，贺逢圣辞官退职。
English: On March 15th, He Fengsheng retired.

古文：是月，李自成自洮州出番地，总兵官曹变蛟追破之，复入塞，走西和、礼县。
现代文：这月，李自成从洮州出番地，被总兵官曹变蛟追击失败，李自成再次入塞。率军到西和、礼县。
English: This month, Li Zicheng set out from Bozhou and was unsuccessfully pursued by the commander-in-chief Cao Zhenyao. Li Zicheng once again entered Tibet and led the army to Xihe and Lixian.

古文：夏四月辛丑，张献忠伪降于谷城，熊文灿受之。
现代文：四月八日，张献忠在谷城假装投降，熊文灿受降。
English: On April 8, Zhang Xianzhong pretended to surrender in Gucheng, and Xiong Wencang accepted the surrender.

古文：戊申，张至发致仕。
现代文：十五日，张至发辞官退职。
English: On the 15th, Zhang Zhihua retired from his post.

古文：己酉，荧惑逆行，谕廷臣修省。
现代文：十六日，火星逆向行驶，告诉廷臣修身反省。
English: On the 16th, the planet Mars was traveling in reverse, telling courtiers to practice self-criticism.

古文：五月癸亥朔，策试考选官于中左门。
现代文：五月初一日，在中左门策试考选官。
English: On the first day of May, there will be a tryout for an election official at the center-left gate.

古文：六月癸巳，安民厂灾，坏城垣，伤万余人。
现代文：六月二日，安民厂发生灾害，城垣被毁坏，万余人受伤。
English: On June 2, a disaster occurred at the Anmin Plant, the city wall was destroyed, and more than 10,000 people were injured.

古文：壬寅，孔贞运致仕。
现代文：十一日，孔贞运辞官退职。
English: On the 11th day, Kong Zhengyun resigned and retired.

古文：乙卯，兵部尚书杨嗣昌、户部尚书程国祥、礼部侍郎方逢年、工部侍郎蔡国用俱礼部尚书，大理少卿范复粹为礼部侍郎，并兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：二十四日，兵部尚书杨嗣昌、户部尚书程国祥、礼部侍郎方逢年、工部侍郎蔡国用均为礼部尚书，大理少卿范复粹为礼部侍郎，一同兼东阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On the 24th, Yang Shichang, the secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Cheng Guoxiang, the secretary of the Ministry of Household Affairs, Fang Fu Rong, the secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and Cai Guoyong, the secretary of the Ministry of Industry, were the secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and Fan Fuzi, the junior secretary of the Ministry of Science and Technology, was the secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and they were also Dongge University scholars, participating in important affairs.

古文：嗣昌仍掌兵部。
现代文：杨嗣昌仍然掌管兵部。
English: Yang Shichang is still in charge of the military.

古文：是月，两畿、山东、河南大旱蝗。
现代文：这月，两畿、山东、河南大旱，起蝗虫。
English: This month, the two Kis, Shandong and Henan provinces experienced a severe drought, and locusts emerged.

古文：秋七月乙丑，少詹事黄道周以论杨嗣昌夺情，谪按察司照磨。
现代文：七月四日，少詹事黄道周因谈论杨嗣昌父丧未辞官守孝一事，贬为按察司照磨。
English: On July 4th, Zhou Dao Zhou, a minor official, was demoted to inspector general because he talked about Yang Shichang's father's death without resigning his post.

古文：八月戊戌，以灾异屡见，斋居永寿宫，谕廷臣修省。
现代文：八月八日，因多次出现灾害和异常情况，居永寿宫行斋，告诉廷臣修身反省。
English: On August 8th, due to repeated disasters and abnormal conditions, he fasted at the Yongshu Palace and told courtiers to practice self-criticism.

古文：癸丑，傅冠致仕。
现代文：二十三日，傅冠辞官退职。
English: On the 23rd, Fu Guan resigned from his post.

古文：戊午，停刑。
现代文：二十八日，停止用刑。
English: On the 28th, the sentence was suspended.

古文：流贼罗汝才等自陕州犯襄阳。
现代文：罗汝才等从陕州侵犯襄阳。
English: Luo Rucai and others invaded Yangyang from Shaanxi.

古文：九月，陕西、山西旱饥。
现代文：九月，陕西、山西天旱饥荒。
English: In September, drought and famine struck Shaanxi and Shanxi.

古文：辛巳，大清兵入墙子岭，总督蓟辽兵部侍郎吴阿衡死之。
现代文：二十二日，大清兵进入墙子岭，总督蓟辽兵部侍郎吴阿衡战死。
English: On the 22nd, the soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty entered Wanziling, and Wu Aheng, the steward of the military department of Governor Zou Liao, died in the battle.

古文：癸未，京师戒严。
现代文：二十四日，京师戒严。
English: On the 24th, martial law was imposed in Beijing.

古文：冬十月癸巳，卢象升入援，召对于武英殿。
现代文：十月四日，卢象升入京救援，皇帝在武英殿召对他。
English: On October 4, Lu Xiangsheng went to Beijing for help. The emperor summoned him to the Wuying Palace.

古文：甲午，括马。
现代文：五日，招买马匹。
English: On the fifth day, horses were bought.

古文：卢象升、高起潜分督援军。
现代文：卢象升、高起潜分别领导援军。
English: Lu Xiangsheng and Gao Qichen led the reinforcements respectively.

古文：是月，洪承畴、曹变蛟大破贼于潼关南原，李自成以数骑遁。
现代文：这月，洪承畴、曹变蛟大败李自成于潼关南原，李自成只率骑兵数人逃走。
English: This month, Hong Chengzong and Cao Zhengyi defeated Li Zicheng in the Southern Plains of Shaoguan. Li Zicheng only led a few cavalrymen to escape.

古文：十一月戊辰，大清兵克高阳，致仕大学士孙承宗死之。
现代文：十一月十日，大清兵攻克高阳，退职大学士孙承宗战死。
English: On November 10, the soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty conquered Gaoyang. Sun Chengzong, a retired university professor, died in the battle.

古文：戊子，罢卢象升，戴罪立功。
现代文：三十日，罢免卢象升，准其带罪立功。
English: On the 30th, Lu Xiangsheng was dismissed and allowed to take the crime and make meritorious contributions.

古文：刘宇亮自请视师，许之。
现代文：刘宇亮自己请求视察军队，得到同意。
English: Liu Yuliang himself asked to inspect the troops and was granted permission.

古文：是月，罗汝才降。
现代文：这月，罗汝才投降。
English: This month, Luo Ru finally surrendered.

古文：十二月庚子，方逢年罢。
现代文：十二月十二日，方逢年停职。
English: On December 12, Fang Fengyan was suspended.

古文：卢象升兵败于巨鹿，死之。戊申，孙传庭为兵部侍郎督援军。征洪承畴入卫。
现代文：卢象升在巨鹿兵败而死。二十日，孙传庭为兵部侍郎监督援军，征调洪承畴入京守卫。
English: Lu Xiangsheng died in the defeat at the Battle of the Giant Deer. On the 20th, Sun Chuanting supervised the reinforcements as the attendant of the military department, and conscripted Hong Chengzho to enter Beijing as a guard.

古文：是年，土鲁番、琉球入贡。
现代文：当年，土鲁番、琉球入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Turuban and Ryukyu paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：十二年春正月己未朔，以时事多艰，却廷臣贺。
现代文：崇祯十二年正月一日，因时事艰难多难，拒绝朝臣庆贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 12th year of Chongzhen, due to the difficulties of current affairs, he refused to celebrate as a courtier.

古文：庚申，大清兵入济南，德王由枢被执，布政使张秉文等死之。
现代文：二日，大清兵进入济南，德王朱由枢被活捉，布政使张秉文等死。
English: On the second day, the Great Qing soldiers entered Jinan, the German king Zhu Yuzhu was captured alive, and the cloth political envoy Zhang Bingwen died.

古文：戊辰，刘宇亮、孙传庭会师十八万于晋州，不敢进。
现代文：十日，刘宇亮、孙传庭会师十八万人于晋州，但不敢前进。
English: On the 10th, Liu Yuliang and Sun Chuan held a meeting of 180,000 people in Jinzhou, but they did not dare to move forward.

古文：丁丑，改洪承畴总督蓟、辽，孙传庭总督保定、山东、河北。
现代文：十九日，改洪承畴镇守蓟、辽二州，孙传庭总督保定、山东、河北。
English: On the 19th, he changed Hongcheng Province to Zhenshuyi Province, Liaoning Province to Liaoning Province, and Sun Chuanting Province to Baoding Province, Shandong Province, and Hebei Province.

古文：二月乙未，刘宇亮罢。
现代文：二月七日，刘宇亮停职。
English: On February 7, Liu Yuliang was suspended.

古文：大清兵北归。
现代文：大清兵引兵北回。
English: The Great Qing soldiers led the troops back to the north.

古文：三月丙寅，出青山口。凡深入二千里，阅五月，下畿内、山东七十余城。
现代文：三月九日，出青山口，共深入内地二千里，经历五个月，攻下畿内、山东七十余城。
English: On March 9, they left Qingcheng Pass, traveled a total of 2,000 miles inland, and after five months, captured more than 70 cities in the Kinai region and Shandong.

古文：丙子，加上孝纯皇太后谥，诏天下。
现代文：十九日，加上孝纯皇太后谥号，诏告天下。
English: On the 19th, together with the posthumous name of Empress Dowager Xiaochun, the imperial edict was announced to the world.

古文：夏四月戊申，程国祥致仕。
现代文：四月二十一日，程国祥辞官退职。
English: On April 21, Cheng Guoxiang resigned from his post.

古文：是月，左良玉击降贼首李万庆。
现代文：这月，左良玉攻击降贼首领李万庆。
English: This month, Zuo Liangyu attacked Li Wanqing, the leader of the rebels.

古文：五月甲子，礼部侍郎姚明恭、张四知，兵部侍郎魏照乘，俱礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：五月八日，礼部侍郎姚明恭、张四知、兵部侍郎魏照乘均为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On May 8th, Yao Minggong, Zhang Shizhi, and Wei Zhaojun, the attendants of the Ceremonial Affairs Department, and the attendants of the Military Affairs Department, were all the senior scholars of the Ceremonial Affairs Department and the Dongge University, and participated in the important affairs.

古文：乙丑，张献忠叛于谷城，罗汝才等起应之，陷房县。
现代文：九日，张献忠在谷城起兵反明，罗汝才等相继起兵响应，一举攻克房县。
English: On the 9th, Zhang Xianzhong raised an army in Gucheng, and Luo Rucai and others responded by raising an army one after another, conquering Fang County in one fell swoop.

古文：乙亥，削孙传庭籍，寻逮下狱。
现代文：十九日，孙传庭革职，不久被逮捕入狱。
English: On the 19th, Sun Chuan resigned from the court and was soon arrested and jailed.

古文：六月，畿内、山东、河南、山西旱蝗。
现代文：六月，畿内、山东、河南、山西天旱，起蝗虫。
English: In June, the Kinai region, Shandong, Henan, and Shanxi were affected by drought, and locusts appeared.

古文：己酉，抽练各镇精兵，复加征练饷。
现代文：二十三日，抽调各镇精兵进行训练，又增加练兵粮饷。
English: On the 23rd, elite soldiers from each town were transferred for training, and the amount of food for training soldiers was increased.

古文：秋七月壬申，左良玉讨张献忠，败绩于罗猴山，总兵官罗岱被执死之。
现代文：七月十七日，左良玉征讨张献忠，在罗猴山失败，总兵官罗岱被活捉处死。
English: On July 17th, Zhang Xianzhong was defeated at Lomaishan, and the commander-in-chief Luo Gan was captured alive and executed.

古文：熊文灿削籍，寻逮下狱。
现代文：熊文灿被革职，不久逮捕下狱。
English: Xiong Wencang was dismissed from his post and soon arrested and sent to prison.

古文：八月癸巳，诏诛封疆失事巡抚都御史颜继祖，总兵官倪宠、祖宽，内臣邓希诏、孙茂霖等三十三人，俱弃市。
现代文：八月八日，下诏诛杀边境失事巡抚都御史颜继祖，总兵官倪宠、祖宽，内臣邓希诏、孙茂霖等三十三人，全部弃市示众。
English: On August 8th, thirty-three people, including the governor of the border crash, Miyoshi Yan, the general officer Ni Diao, Zu Kuan, the vassal Deng Xizhao, and Sun Maolin, all left the city to demonstrate.

古文：己亥，免唐县等四十州县去年田租之半。
现代文：十四日，减免唐县及其他四十州县去年田租的一半。
English: On the 14th, half of the last year's field rent in Tang County and other forty counties will be reduced and exempted.

古文：壬子，大学士杨嗣昌督师讨贼，总督以下并听节制。
现代文：二十七日，大学士杨嗣昌率军征讨贼军，总督以下全部听其节制。
English: On the 27th, Yang Shichang, a university scholar, led an army to fight against the bandits, and the governor and others all obeyed his restraint.

古文：冬十月甲申朔，杨嗣昌誓师襄阳。
现代文：十月初一日，杨嗣昌在襄阳誓师。
English: On the first day of October, Yang Shichang swore in Yangyang.

古文：甲午，左良玉为平贼将军。
现代文：十一日，左良玉为平贼将军。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Sadayotama was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：丙申，《钦定保民四事全书》成，颁布天下。
现代文：十三日，《钦定保民四事全书》修成，颁布于天下。
English: On the 13th, the "Fourth Book of the Protection of the People" was completed and promulgated to the world.

古文：十一月辛巳，祀天于南郊。
现代文：十一月二十八日，在京师南郊祭祀天。
English: On November 28th, in the southern suburb of Beijing, there was a religious service.

古文：十二月，罗汝才犯四川。
现代文：十二月，罗汝才侵犯四川。
English: In December, Luo Rucai invaded Sichuan.

古文：丙午，下兵部尚书傅宗龙于狱。
现代文：二十四日，下兵部尚书傅宗龙于狱。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Zonglong, the under-secretary of the military department, was released from prison.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。
现代文：当年，琉球入朝进贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：十三年春闰正月乙酉，振真定饥。
现代文：崇祯十三年闰正月三日，赈救真定饥荒。
English: On the third day of the leap month of the 13th year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the famine relief began.

古文：戊子，振京师饥民。
现代文：六日，赈救京师饥民。
English: On the 6th, he came to the rescue of the starving people in Beijing.

古文：癸卯，振山东饥。
现代文：二十一日，赈济山东饥荒。
English: On the 21st, famine broke out in Shandong Province.

古文：二月壬子朔，祀日于东郊。
现代文：二月初一日，在东郊祭日。
English: On the first day of February, at the Eastern Suburbs Festival.

古文：戊午，总督陕西三边侍郎郑崇俭大破张献忠于太平县之玛瑙山，献忠走归州。
现代文：七日，总督三边侍郎郑崇俭在太平县玛瑙山大败张献忠，张献忠败走归州。
English: On the seventh day, Zheng Chongjian, the governor's three-sided attendant, defeated Zhang Xianzhong in Manaoshan, Taiping County. Zhang Xianzhong was defeated and went back to the state.

古文：戊寅，以久旱求直言。
现代文：二十七日，因长时间干旱，征求直言。
English: On the 27th, due to a long period of drought, direct speech was solicited.

古文：三月甲申，祷雨。
现代文：三月三日，祈祷雨。
English: March 3, praying for rain.

古文：丙戌，大风霾，诏清刑狱。
现代文：五日，大风沙，下诏清理刑狱。
English: On the fifth day, a strong wind and sand swept through the prison.

古文：戊子，罢各镇内臣。
现代文：七日，罢免各镇内臣。
English: On the seventh day, all town councilors were dismissed.

古文：丙申，赐魏藻德等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十七日，赐魏藻德等进士及第、出身各有不同。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Wei, Mote, and other new recruits were given different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：戊戌，振畿内饥。
现代文：十九日，赈救畿内饥荒。
English: On the 19th, the relief of famine in the Kinai region began.

古文：丁未，免河北三府逋赋。
现代文：二十八日，减免河北三府欠交赋税。
English: On the 28th, the three prefectures of Hebei were exempted from tax arrears.

古文：夏四月戊午，逮江西巡抚佥都御史解学龙及所举黄道周。
现代文：四月七日，逮捕江西巡抚佥都御史解学龙及他推举的黄道周。
English: On April 7th, the governor of Jiangxi Province, Xingdu Guishi, arrested Xiaolong and his chosen zodiac week.

古文：己卯，吏部尚书谢升为礼部尚书，礼部侍郎陈演以原官并兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：二十八日，吏部尚书谢升为礼部尚书，礼部侍郎陈演以原官兼东阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On the 28th, Shangshu Xie of the Personnel Department was promoted to Shangshu of the Ceremonial Department, and Chen Yuan, the attendant of the Ceremonial Department, was appointed as a former official and a scholar of Dongge University to participate in important affairs.

古文：五月，罗汝才犯夔州，石砫女官秦良玉连战却之。
现代文：五月，罗汝才攻打夔州，石石主女土官秦良玉连续战退罗汝才。
English: In May, Luo Rucai attacked Zhangzhou, and Qin Liangyu, the chief land officer of Shishi, fought back against Luo Rucai.

古文：甲申，祀地于北郊。
现代文：四日，在北郊祭地。
English: On the 4th, in the northern suburb of Mt.

古文：庚戌，姚明恭致仕。
现代文：三十日，姚明恭辞官退职。
English: On the 30th, Yao Mingjun resigned and retired.

古文：六月辛亥朔，总兵官贺人龙等分道逐贼，败之，罗汝才走大宁。
现代文：六月初一日，总兵官贺人龙等分路追击罗汝才，罗汝才兵败，移师大宁。
English: On the first day of early June, the commander-in-chief, He Ronglong, and others pursued Luo Rucai on a separate route. Luo Rucai was defeated and transferred to the Daning division.

古文：庚午，蔡国用卒。
现代文：二十日，蔡国用死。
English: On the 20th, Cai Guoyong died.

古文：辛未，薛国观罢。
现代文：二十一日，薛国观停职。
English: On the 21st, Xue Guoguan was suspended from his post.

古文：秋七月庚辰朔，畿内捕蝗。
现代文：七月初一日，畿内捕捉蝗虫。
English: On the first day of July, locusts began to be caught in the Kinai region.

古文：己丑，发帑振被蝗州县。
现代文：十日，发放钱币赈救遭受蝗灾州县。
English: On the 10th, coins were distributed to help the locust-stricken prefectures.

古文：辛卯，左良玉及京营总兵官孙应元等大破罗汝才于兴山。
现代文：十二日，左良玉及京师营兵总兵官孙应元等在兴山大败罗汝才。
English: On the 12th, Zuo Liangyu and Sun Yingyuan, the commander of the battalion of the Beijing Division, defeated Luo Rucai in Xingshan Mountain.

古文：汝才走巫山，与张献忠合。
现代文：罗汝才败走巫山，与张献忠会合。
English: Luo Ru finally left Wushan and met with Zhang Xianzhong.

古文：八月甲戌，振江北饥。
现代文：八月二十五日，赈救江北饥荒。
English: On August 25th, the famine in the north of the Yangtze River was relieved.

古文：九月，陕西官军围李自成于巴西鱼腹山中，自成走免。
现代文：九月，陕西官军将李自成围困于巴西鱼腹山中，李自成因逃走幸免。
English: In September, the Shaanxi government army besieged Li Zicheng in Brazil's Fish Belly Mountain. Li Zicheng was spared because he escaped.

古文：癸巳，张献忠陷大昌，总兵官张令战死。
现代文：十五日，张献忠攻陷大昌，总兵官张令战死。
English: On the fifteenth day, Zhang Xianzhong invaded Dachang, and the commander-in-chief Zhang Rong died in the battle.

古文：十一月，杨嗣昌进军重庆。
现代文：不久又攻克剑州、绵州。十月六日，熊文灿被斩首示众。
English: He soon conquered Jianzhou and Mianzhou. On October 6, Xiong Wencang was beheaded in public.

古文：丁亥，祀天于南郊。
现代文：十一月，杨嗣昌进军重庆，十日，在南郊祭天。
English: In November, Yang Shichang marched into Chongqing. On the 10th, he held a festival in the southern suburbs.

古文：戊子，南京地震。
现代文：十一日，南京发生地震。
English: On the 11th, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing.

古文：十二月丁未朔，严军机抄传之禁。
现代文：十二月初一日，严格抄传军事机密禁令。
English: On the first day of December, the ban on strictly copying and transmitting military secrets was lifted.

古文：辛亥，张献忠陷泸州。
现代文：五日，张献忠攻陷泸州。
English: On the fifth day, Zhang Xianzhong led the attack on Zhangzhou.

古文：乙卯，逮薛国观。
现代文：九日，逮捕薛国观。
English: On the 9th, Xue Guokun was arrested.

古文：是月，李自成自湖广走河南，饥民附之，连陷宜阳、永宁，杀万安王采崿，陷偃师，势大炽。
现代文：这月，李自成从湖广到河南，饥饿农民争先恐后跟随李自成。连续攻陷宜阳、永宁，杀万安王采，攻陷偃师，声势大震。
English: This month, Li Zicheng went from Hukang to Henan, and hungry farmers scrambled to follow Li Zicheng. Yiyang and Yongning were successively attacked, Wan'an Wangcai was killed, and Shanshi was attacked, and the situation was dramatic.

古文：是年，两畿、山东、河南、山、陕旱蝗，人相食。
现代文：当年，两畿、山东、河南、山西、陕西天旱，蝗虫大起，人相残食。
English: In that year, there was a drought in the two Kis, Shandong, Henan, Shanxi and Shaanxi, locusts were rampant, and people were eating each other's leftovers.

古文：十四年春正月辛巳，祈谷于南郊。
现代文：崇祯十四年正月五日，在京师南郊祭谷。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 14th year of Chongzhen, in the southern suburb of Beijing Shizhu Festival Valley.

古文：己丑，总兵官猛如虎追张献忠及于开县之黄陵城，败绩，参将刘士杰等战死，贼遂东下。
现代文：十三日，总兵官猛如虎追击张献忠于开县黄陵城，官军溃败，参将刘士杰等战死，张献忠遂挥师东下。
English: On the 13th, the commander-in-chief fiercely pursued Zhang Xianzhong in Huangling City, Kai County. The government army was routed, and Liu Shijie and others were killed in the battle. Zhang Xianzhong then sent his division eastward.

古文：丙申，李自成陷河南，福王常洵遇害，前兵部尚书吕维祺等死之。
现代文：二十日，李自成攻下河南，福王朱常洵被杀，前兵部尚书吕维祺等死。
English: On the 20th, Li Zicheng conquered Henan, Fu Wang Zhu Changyao was killed, and former military commander Shangshu Lu Weiyao died.

古文：二月己酉，诏以时事多艰，灾异叠见，痛自刻责，停今岁行刑，诸犯俱减等论。
现代文：二月四日，下诏因时事艰难，灾害多次出现，悲痛得自己责罚自己。停止执行今年刑狱。所有罪犯全部减等定罪。
English: On February 4th, the following edict was issued: "Due to the difficult current situation, disasters have occurred many times, and the grief has caused self-punishment. The execution of this year's prison sentence will be suspended. All criminals will be convicted to a lesser degree."

古文：庚戌，张献忠陷襄阳，襄王翊铭、贵阳王常法并遇害，副使张克俭等死之。
现代文：五日，张献忠攻陷襄阳，襄王朱翊铭、贵阳王朱常法一同遇害，副使张克俭等战死。
English: On the fifth day, Zhang Xianzhong invaded Yangyang. Yangyang King Zhu Rongming and Guiyang King Zhu Changfa were killed together, and deputy envoy Zhang Kejian and others died in battle.

古文：戊午，李自成攻开封，周王恭枵、巡按御史高名衡拒却之。
现代文：十三日，李自成进攻开封，周王朱恭枵、巡抚御史高名衡抗拒迎战李自成，李自成退却。
English: On the 13th day, Li Zicheng attacked Kaifeng. Zhou Wang Zhu Jiong and the governor Gao Mingheng resisted Li Zicheng's attack, and Li Zicheng retreated.

古文：乙丑，张献忠陷光州。
现代文：二十日，张献忠攻陷光州。
English: On the 20th, Zhang Xianzhong invaded Gwangju.

古文：己巳，召阁臣、九卿、科道于乾清宫左室。命驸马都尉冉兴让等赍帑金振恤河南被难宗室。
现代文：二十四日，在乾清宫左室召见阁臣、九卿、科道。命驸马都尉冉兴让等赏赐钱币金银，赈救河南受难宗室。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, in the left room of the Qianqing Palace, he summoned the courtiers, nine nobles, and scholars. He ordered the horse captain Ran Xingzhan to reward the money, gold and silver to save the suffering family in Henan.

古文：三月丙子朔，杨嗣昌自四川还，至荆州卒。
现代文：三月初一日，杨嗣昌从四川回京，到荆州死去。
English: On the first day of March, Yang Shichang returned to Beijing from Sichuan and died in Jingzhou.

古文：乙酉，祷雨。
现代文：十日，祈祷下雨。
English: On the 10th, I prayed for rain.

古文：丙申，洪承畴会八镇兵于宁远。
现代文：二十一日，洪承畴会合八镇兵于宁远。
English: On the 21st, Hong Chengzheng gathered soldiers from eight towns in Ningyuan.

古文：丁酉，逮郑崇俭下狱，寻弃市。
现代文：二十二日，逮捕郑崇俭下狱，不久弃市。
English: On the 22nd, Zheng Chongjian was arrested, released from prison, and soon left the city.

古文：夏四月壬子，大清兵攻锦州，祖大寿拒守。
现代文：四月七日，大清兵攻锦州，祖大寿奋力拒守。
English: On April 7th, the soldiers of the Qing Dynasty attacked Jinzhou, and Zu Dazhou fought hard to hold out.

古文：己未，总督三边侍郎丁启睿为兵部尚书，督师讨贼。
现代文：十四日，总督三边侍郎丁启睿为兵部尚书，率军征讨贼军。
English: On the 14th, Ding Qirui, the governor's third-in-command, wrote a letter to the military department and led the army to fight against the bandits.

古文：五月庚辰，范复粹致仕。
现代文：五月六日，范复粹辞官退职。
English: On May 6, Fan Fuxi resigned from his post.

古文：释傅宗龙于狱，命为兵部侍郎，总督陕西三边军务，讨李自成。
现代文：从狱中释放傅宗龙，任命他为兵部侍郎，总督陕西三边军务，征讨李自成。
English: He released Fu Zonglong from prison, appointed him as the military commissary, the governor of the three-sided military affairs of Shaanxi, and recruited Li Jicheng.

古文：戊子，祀地于北郊。
现代文：十四日，在北郊祭地。
English: On the 14th, at the Hokkien Festival Grounds.

古文：六月，两畿、山东、河南、浙江、湖广旱蝗，山东寇起。
现代文：六月，两畿、山东、河南、浙江、湖广旱灾，起蝗虫，山东盗贼大起。
English: In June, droughts in the two provinces of Gyeonggi, Shandong, Henan, Zhejiang and Hunan, locusts, and bandits in Shandong.

古文：秋七月己卯，李自成攻邓州，杨文岳、总兵官虎大威击败之。
现代文：七月五日，李自成攻打邓州，杨文岳、总兵官虎大威打败李自成。
English: On July 5, Li Zicheng attacked Dengzhou, and Yang Wenyue and Commander-in-Chief Hu Dawei defeated Li Zicheng.

古文：壬寅，洪承畴援锦州，驻师松山。
现代文：二十八日，洪承畴增援锦州，驻军于松山。
English: On the 28th, Hong Chengzhuang reinforced Jinzhou and garrisoned troops in Matsuyama.

古文：是月，临清运河涸。
现代文：这月，临清运河干涸。
English: This month, the Linqing Canal dried up.

古文：京师大疫。
现代文：京师大发瘟疫。
English: A major epidemic broke out in Beijing.

古文：八月乙巳，援兵战于松山，阳和总兵官杨国柱败没。
现代文：八月二日，援兵与清军激战于松山，阳和总兵官杨国柱溃败战死。
English: On August 2nd, reinforcements and Qing troops fought a fierce battle in Matsuyama, and Yang He's general officer Yang Guozhu was defeated and killed.

古文：辛亥，赐薛国观死。
现代文：八日，赐薛国观死。
English: On the eighth day, Xue Guoquan passed away.

古文：辛酉，重建太学成，释奠于先师孔子。
现代文：十八日，重新建成太学，隆重祭奠先师孔子。
English: On the 18th, Taigaku was re-established, and a grand ceremony was held to pay tribute to the pioneer teacher, Confucius.

古文：甲子，总兵官吴三桂、王朴自松山遁，诸军夜溃。
现代文：二十一日，总兵官吴三桂、王朴从松山逃跑，其他军队在夜间全部溃败。
English: On the twenty-first day, the general officers Wu Sangui and Wang Pu fled from Matsuyama, and all the other troops were routed in the night.

古文：是月，左良玉大败张献忠于信阳。
现代文：这月，左良玉在信阳大败张献忠。
English: This month, Zuo Liangyu defeated Zhang Xianzhong in Shinyang.

古文：九月丁丑，傅宗龙帅师次新蔡，与总督保定侍郎杨文岳军会。
现代文：九月四日，傅宗龙率师住新蔡，与总督保定侍郎杨文岳会师。
English: On September 4th, Fu Zonglong led the teachers to live in Xin Cai, and met with Yang Wengyue, the governor Baoding's valet.

古文：己卯，遇贼，贺人龙师溃，宗龙被围，文岳走陈州。
现代文：六日，与贼军相遇，贺人龙全军溃败，傅宗龙被围困，文岳逃往陈州。
English: On the sixth day, he met with the bandits, He Renlong's entire army was defeated, Fu Zonglong was besieged, and Wen Yue fled to Chenzhou.

古文：甲申，周延儒、贺逢圣复入阁。
现代文：十一日，周延儒、贺逢圣再次入阁。
English: On the 11th, Zhou Yanru and He Fengsheng re-entered the cabinet.

古文：辛卯，封皇子慈炯为定王。
现代文：十八日，封皇子朱慈炯为定王。
English: On the 18th, the crown prince Zhu Cixuan was enthroned as the king.

古文：壬辰，傅宗龙溃围出，趋项城，被执死之。
现代文：十九日，傅宗龙突围而出，直奔项城，被活捉处死。
English: On the 19th, Fu Zonglong broke out of the encirclement and went straight to Xiangcheng. He was captured alive and executed.

古文：贼屠项城及商水、扶沟。
现代文：贼军屠戮项城及商水、扶沟。
English: The bandits massacred Xiangcheng, Shangshui and Fugu.

古文：戊戌，李自成、罗汝才陷叶县，守将刘国能死之。
现代文：二十五日，李自成、罗汝才攻陷叶县，守将刘国能战死。
English: On the 25th, Li Zicheng and Luo Rui invaded Ye County, and the guard Liu Guoneng died in the battle.

古文：是月，官军破张献忠于英山之望云寨。冬十月癸卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：这一月，官军在英山望云寨打败张献忠。十月初一日，有日食。
English: This month, the government army defeated Zhang Xianzhong in Yingshan Wangyunzhai. On the first day of October, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：十一月丙子，李自成陷南阳，唐王聿镆遇害，总兵官猛如虎等死之。
现代文：十一月四日，李自成攻陷南阳，唐王朱聿镆遇害，总兵官猛如虎等战死。
English: On November 4th, Li Zicheng invaded Nanyang, Tang King Zhu Xi was killed, and the commander-in-chief Wu Rugao and others died in battle.

古文：十二月，李自成连陷洧川、许州、长葛、鄢陵。
现代文：十二月，李自成连续攻陷洧川、许州、长葛、鄢陵。
English: In December, Li Zicheng successively invaded and occupied Luochuan, Huzhou, Changge and Fuling.

古文：甲子，戍解学龙、黄道周。
现代文：二十三日，解学龙戍边，黄道周戍边。
English: On the twenty-third day, the dragon fringe and the zodiac fringe were dismantled.

古文：李自成、罗汝才合攻开封，周王恭枵、巡抚都御史高名衡拒守。
现代文：李自成、罗汝才合力攻打开封，周王朱恭枵、巡抚都御史高名衡誓死拒守。
English: Li Zicheng and Luo Rucai jointly attacked and opened the seal, and Zhou Wang Zhu Gongyi and the governor of the capital, Gao Mingheng, refused to defend it.

古文：十五年春正月癸未，孙传庭为兵部侍郎，督京军救开封。
现代文：崇祯十五年正月十三日，孙传庭任兵部侍郎，统领京师军队救援开封。
English: On the 13th day of the 1st month of the 15th year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Sun Chuanting was appointed as the attendant of the military department and led the Beijing division army to rescue Kaifeng.

古文：乙酉，杨文岳援开封，贼解去，南陷西华。
现代文：十五日，杨文岳救援开封，李自成领兵南陷西华。
English: On the 15th, Yang Wengyue's rescue opened the seal, and Li Zicheng led the soldiers to the south of West China.

古文：戊子，免天下十二年以前逋赋。
现代文：十八日，减免天下崇祯十二年以前欠交赋税。
English: On the 18th, the tax arrears of 12 years ago were reduced and exempted.

古文：是月，山东贼陷张秋、东平，劫漕艘。
现代文：这月，山东贼军攻陷张秋、东平，抢劫漕运船只。
English: This month, the Shandong Kleptocratic Army captured Zhangqiu and Dongping, and robbed rowing boats.

古文：太监王裕民、刘元斌帅禁兵会兖东官军讨平之。
现代文：太监王裕民、刘元斌率兵会合兖东官军征讨平定。
English: The eunuchs Wang Yumin and Liu Yuanbin led the soldiers to gather and subjugate the eastern Shandong government army.

古文：二月戊申，振山东就抚乱民。
现代文：二月八日，赈救山东愿接受抚恤乱民。
English: On February 8th, Yizhe Shandong was willing to accept the pension of the rioters.

古文：癸丑，总督陕西都御史汪乔年次襄城，遇贼，贺人龙等奔入关，乔年被围。
现代文：十三日，总督陕西都御史汪乔年暂住襄城，途中遇贼军，贺人龙等逃奔入关，汪乔年被围困。
English: On the 13th day, the governor of Shaanxi, Wang Qianren, temporarily stayed in Xiangcheng. On the way, he encountered a bandit army, and He Renlong and others fled into the pass. Wang Qianren was besieged.

古文：丁巳，城陷，被执死之。
现代文：十七日，襄城沦陷，汪乔年被捉拿处死。
English: On the 17th, Xiangcheng fell, and Wang Qiao was captured and executed.

古文：戊午，大清兵克松山，洪承畴降，巡抚都御史丘民仰，总兵官曹变蛟、王廷臣，副总兵江翥、饶勋等死之。
现代文：十八日，大清兵攻克松山，洪承畴投降，巡抚都御史丘民仰，总兵官曹变蛟、王廷臣，副总兵江翥、饶勋等死于军火。
English: On the 18th, the soldiers of the Great Qing conquered Songshan, Hong Chengzhuang surrendered, the governor of the capital Shiqiu Minqian, the general officers Cao Zhengyi, Wang Tingchen, the deputy general officers Jiang Xi and Rao Xun, and others died in the war.

古文：是月，孙传庭总督三边军务。
现代文：这一月，由孙传庭总督三边军务。
English: This month, the trilateral military affairs will be led by Sun Chuanting, the Governor-General.

古文：三月，李自成陷陈州。
现代文：三月，李自成攻陷陈州。
English: In March, Li Zicheng invaded and occupied Chenzhou.

古文：丁丑，魏照乘致仕。
现代文：八日，魏照乘辞官退职。
English: On the 8th, Wei Zhaojing resigned from his post.

古文：己卯，祖大寿以锦州降于大清。
现代文：十日，祖大寿以锦州向大清兵投降。
English: On the 10th, Zu Dashou surrendered to the Qing soldiers in Jinzhou.

古文：辛卯，李自成陷睢州、太康、宁陵、考城。
现代文：二十二日，李自成攻陷睢州、太康、宁陵、考城。
English: On the 22nd, Li Zicheng captured Zhangzhou, Taikang, Ningling, and Kaocheng.

古文：壬辰，封皇子慈召为永王。
现代文：二十三日。封皇子朱慈火召为永王。
English: On the 23rd, Prince Zhu Ci was enthroned as the eternal king.

古文：丙申，李自成陷归德。
现代文：二十七日，李自成攻陷归德。
English: On the 27th, Li Zicheng returned to Germany.

古文：是春，江北贼陷含山、和州，南京戒严。
现代文：当年春天，江北贼军攻陷含山、和州，南京戒严。
English: In the spring of that year, the north river bandits invaded and occupied Hanzhong, Hezhou, and Nanjing was placed under martial law.

古文：夏四月癸亥，李自成复围开封。
现代文：四月二十四日，李自成又包围开封。
English: On April 24, Li Zicheng again besieged Kaifeng.

古文：乙丑，削谢升籍。
现代文：二十六日，谢升革职。
English: On the 26th, Xie Sheng resigned.

古文：五月己巳，孙传庭入关，诛贺人龙。
现代文：五月一日，孙传庭入关，诛杀贺人龙。
English: On May 1st, Sun Chuanting entered the customs and killed He Renlong.

古文：甲戌，张献忠陷庐州。
现代文：六日，张献忠攻陷庐州。
English: On the 6th, Zhang Xianzhong invaded and occupied Zhangzhou.

古文：丁亥，王朴弃市。
现代文：十九日，王朴弃市示众。
English: On the 19th, Wang Pak abandoned the city and demonstrated to the public.

古文：六月戊申，贺逢圣致仕。
现代文：六月十日，贺逢圣辞官退职。
English: On June 10, He Fengsheng retired from the post.

古文：癸丑，张四知致仕。
现代文：十五日，张四知辞官退职。
English: On the 15th, Zhang Sichi resigned from his post.

古文：甲寅，诏天下停刑三年。
现代文：十六日，下诏天下停止用刑三年。
English: On the 16th, the country issued a decree to suspend the use of the sentence for three years.

古文：己未，詹事蒋德璟、黄景昉，戎政侍郎吴甡，俱礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：二十一日，詹事蒋德瞡、黄景窻、戎政侍郎吴生生均为礼部尚书兼任东阁大学士，参与军国大事。
English: On the 21st day of the month, Jiang Deyao, Huang Jingyao, and Wu Shengsheng, the attendant of the military government, were all appointed to the Ministry of Ceremonies as well as the Dongge University, and participated in the military affairs.

古文：庚申，诏孙传庭出关。
现代文：二十二日，诏孙传庭出关。
English: On the 22nd, Sun Zhaozong left the court.

古文：兵部侍郎侯恂督左良玉军援开封。
现代文：兵部侍郎侯恂督领左良玉军队增援开封。
English: He was reinforced by the army of General Zara Ryotama, who was the commander of the military.

古文：壬戌，以会推阁臣下吏部尚书李日宣六人于狱，谪戍有差。
现代文：二十四日，因一起推举阁臣之事，下吏部尚书李日宣六人于狱，贬官戍边各有不同。
English: On the 24th, due to the matter of electing cabinet ministers at the same time, six members of the lower echelon, including Shangshu and Li Rixuan, were imprisoned.

古文：甲子，祀地于北郊。
现代文：二十六日，在京师北郊祭地。
English: On the 26th, at the festival site in the northern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：是月，筑坛亲祭死事文武大臣。
现代文：这月，筑祭坛亲自祭祀死去的文武大臣。
English: This month, he personally built an altar to worship the deceased Minister of Education.

古文：山西总兵官许定国援开封，溃于沁水，宁武兵溃于覃怀。
现代文：山西总兵官许定国增援开封，在沁水溃败，宁武兵在覃怀溃败。
English: The Shanxi general officer Xu Dingguo reinforced Kaifeng, defeated in Surabaya, and Ningwu soldiers were defeated in Zhuhai.

古文：秋七月己巳，左良玉、虎大威、杨德政、方国安四镇兵溃于朱仙镇。
现代文：七月一日，左良玉、虎大威、杨德政、方国安四镇兵在朱仙镇溃败。
English: On July 1, soldiers from four towns, including Zu Liangyu, Hu Dawei, Yang Dezheng and Fang Guoan, were defeated in Zhu Xian Town.

古文：八月庚戌，安庆兵变，杀都指挥徐良宪，官军讨定之。
现代文：八月十三日，安庆发生兵变，杀都指挥徐良宪，后来官军平定兵变。
English: On August 13, a mutiny occurred in Anqing, killing the commander of the capital, Xu Liangxian, and later the government army suppressed the mutiny.

古文：乙丑，释黄道周于戍所，复其官。
现代文：二十八日，黄道周从戍所释放出来，恢复其原来官职。
English: On the 28th, Zodiac Zhou was released from the detention center and resumed his former official position.

古文：丁卯，兵部尚书陈新甲下狱，寻弃市。
现代文：三十日，兵部尚书陈新甲下狱，不久弃市。
English: On the 30th, the military secretary Chen Xinjia was released from prison and soon left the city.

古文：九月壬午，贼决河灌开封。
现代文：九月十五日，李自成决黄河堤灌于开封城。
English: On September 15, Li Zicheng decided to dam the Yellow River in Kaifeng City.

古文：癸未，城圮，士民溺死者数十万人。
现代文：十六日，开封城垣倒塌，淹死城民数十万人。
English: On the 16th, the Kaifeng city wall collapsed, drowning hundreds of thousands of citizens.

古文：己丑，孙传庭帅师赴河南。
现代文：二十二日，孙传庭率军赶赴开封。
English: On the 22nd, Sun Chuanting and his army rushed to Kaifeng.

古文：辛卯，凤阳总兵官黄得功、刘良佐大败张献忠于潜山。
现代文：二十四日，凤阳总兵官黄得功、刘良佐在潜山大败张献忠。
English: On the 24th, the Fengyang general officer Huang Dergong and Liu Liangzu defeated Zhang Xianzhong in the Hidden Mountain.

古文：冬十月辛酉，孙传庭败绩于郏县，走入关。
现代文：十月二十四日，孙传庭在郏县被张献忠打败。孙传庭引兵入关。
English: On October 24th, Sun Chuanting was defeated by Zhang Xianzhong in Handan County. Sun Chuanting led his troops into the pass.

古文：十一月丁卯，援汴总兵官刘超据永城反。
现代文：十一月一日，援汴总兵官刘超占据永城谋反。
English: On November 1st, Liu Chao, the general officer in charge of relief and rescue, occupied Yongcheng and plotted a rebellion.

古文：庚午，发帑振开封被难宗室兵民。
现代文：四日，发放钱币赈济开封受灾宗室兵民。
English: On the 4th, coins were distributed to help the affected soldiers and civilians in Kaifeng.

古文：壬申，大清兵分道入塞，京师戒严。
现代文：六日，大清兵分路入塞，京师戒严。
English: On the 6th, the detachment of the Qing soldiers entered the fortress, and the capital was placed under martial law.

古文：命勋臣分守九门，太监王承恩督察城守。
现代文：命令勋臣分守九门，太监王承恩监督检查城防。
English: He ordered his courtiers to guard nine gates, and eunuch Wang Cheng'en to supervise and inspect the city's defenses.

古文：诏举堪督师大将者。
现代文：下诏推举能率军守京大将。
English: The following edict was issued to nominate the most capable general to be the military governor of Kyoto.

古文：戊寅，征诸镇入援。
现代文：十二日，征调各镇兵入京救援。
English: On the 12th, soldiers from various towns were called in to rescue the capital.

古文：庚辰，大清兵克蓟州。
现代文：十四日，大清兵攻克蓟州。
English: On the 14th, the soldiers of the Qing Dynasty conquered Zhangzhou.

古文：丁亥，蓟镇总督赵光抃提调援兵。
现代文：二十一日，蓟镇总督赵光提调援军。
English: On the 21st, the governor of Handan, Zhao Guangdi, sent reinforcements.

古文：戊子，张献忠陷无为。
现代文：二十二日，张献忠攻陷无为。
English: On the 22nd, Zhang Xianzhong's attack failed.

古文：己丑，辽东督师侍郎范志完入援。
现代文：二十三日，辽东督师侍郎范志完入京救援。
English: On the 23rd, Fan Zhi, the Liaodong governor's aide-de-camp, arrived in Beijing to help.

古文：闰月癸卯，下诏罪己，求直言。
现代文：闰十一月七日，下诏责备自己，征求直言。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, the next emperor rebuked himself and asked for a direct speech.

古文：壬寅，大清兵南下，畿南郡邑多不守。
现代文：十六日，大清兵南下，畿南郡邑大多没有守卫。
English: On the 16th, the soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty marched south, leaving most of the counties and towns in the south of China unguarded.

古文：丁巳，起废将。
现代文：二十一日，起用已废除将领。
English: On the 21st, the appointment of generals was abolished.

古文：是月，李自成陷汝宁，前总督侍郎杨文岳、佥事王世琮不屈死。
现代文：这月，李自成攻陷汝宁，前总督侍郎杨文岳、佥事王世琮宁死不屈英勇而死。
English: In this month, Li Zicheng invaded Yuning, and Yang Wengyue, the former governor's valet, and Wang Shixuan died heroically.

古文：十二月，大清兵趋曹、濮，山东州县相继下，鲁王以派自杀。
现代文：十二月，大清兵直捣曹、濮，相继攻下山东州县，鲁王朱以派自杀。
English: In December, the soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty directly attacked Cao Cao and Yao Cao, and successively conquered Shandong Prefecture. Lu Wang Zhu committed suicide.

古文：己巳，李自成陷襄阳，据之。
现代文：四日，李自成攻陷并占据襄阳。
English: On the fourth day, Li Zicheng invaded and occupied Yangyang.

古文：左良玉奔承天，寻走武昌。
现代文：左良玉逃奔承天，不久到武昌。
English: Zuo Liangyu fled to Chengdu and soon arrived in Wuchang.

古文：贼分兵下德安、彝陵、荆门，遂陷荆州。
现代文：李自成分兵前进，攻下德安、彝陵，相继攻克荆门、荆州。
English: Li advanced with his own troops, conquered De'an and Fuling, and successively conquered Jingmen and Jingzhou.

古文：癸巳，焚献陵。
现代文：二十八日，焚烧献陵。
English: On the 28th, the sacrificial mausoleum was burned.

古文：十六年春正月丁酉，李自成陷承天，巡抚都御史宋一鹤、留守沈寿崇等死之。
现代文：崇祯十六年正月二日，李自成攻陷承天，巡抚都御史宋一鹤、留守沈寿崇等死。
English: On the 2nd day of the 1st month of the 16th year of Chongzhen, Li Zicheng attacked and besieged Xingtian, the governor of the capital, Song Yikhe, and the left-behind Shen Shuzong died.

古文：庚申，张献忠陷蕲州。
现代文：二十五日，张献忠攻陷蕲州。
English: On the 25th, Zhang Xianzhong led an army to invade Zhangzhou.

古文：二月乙丑朔，日有食之。己巳，范志完、赵光抃会师于平原。
现代文：二月初一日，有日食。五日，范志完、赵光会师于平原。
English: On the first day of February, there was a solar eclipse. On the fifth day, Fan Zhihan and Zhao Guanghui were walking in the plain.

古文：三月庚子，李自成杀罗汝才，并其众。
现代文：三月十七日，李自成杀害罗汝才，合并其部众。
English: On March 17th, Li Zicheng killed Luo Rucai and merged his subordinates.

古文：壬寅，命大学士吴甡督师讨贼。
现代文：十九日，命令大学士吴生生率师征剿李自成。
English: On the 19th, he ordered Wu Shengsheng, a university scholar, to lead the division to recruit Li Zicheng.

古文：丁未，贼陷武冈，杀岷王企昪。
现代文：二十四日，李自成攻克武冈，杀岷王朱企。
English: On the 24th, Li Zicheng conquered Wu Gang and killed Zhu Qi.

古文：张献忠陷黄州。
现代文：张献忠攻陷黄州。
English: Zhang Xianzhong invaded Huangzhou.

古文：夏四月丁卯，周延儒自请督师，许之。
现代文：四月四日，周延儒自己请求率师出征，得到皇帝允许。
English: On April 4th, Zhou Yanru requested to lead his division into battle, and received permission from the emperor.

古文：辛卯，大清兵北归，战于螺山，总兵官张登科、和应荐败没，八镇兵皆溃。
现代文：二十八日，大清兵北回，与官军战于螺山，总兵官张登科、和应荐兵败，八镇兵全部溃败。
English: On the 28th, the Great Qing soldiers returned to the north and fought with the government army in Lushan. The general officer Zhang Dengke and the recommended soldiers were defeated, and all eight soldiers were defeated.

古文：是月，刘超平。
现代文：这年，刘超讲和。
English: That year, Liu Chao declared peace.

古文：五月癸巳朔，张献忠陷汉阳。
现代文：五月初一日，张献忠攻陷汉阳。
English: On the first day of May, Zhang Xianzhong invaded Hanyang.

古文：壬寅，周延儒还京师。
现代文：十日，周延儒回京师。
English: On the 10th, Zhou Yanru returned to Beijing.

古文：丙午，修撰魏藻德为少詹事兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：十四日，修撰魏藻德为少詹事兼东阁大学士，辅佐军国大事。
English: On the 14th, he was awarded the title of Shao Zhanji (少詹事) and Dongge University Scholar (東阁大学士), and assisted in military and national affairs.

古文：戊申，吴甡罢。
现代文：十六日，吴生生停职。
English: On the 16th, Wu Shengsheng was suspended.

古文：丁巳，周延儒罢。
现代文：二十五日，周延儒停职。
English: On the 25th, Zhou Yanru was suspended.

古文：壬戌，张献忠陷武昌，沈楚王华奎于江，在籍大学士贺逢圣等死之。
现代文：三十日，张献忠攻陷武昌，楚王朱华奎被沉于长江。在籍大学士贺逢圣等死。
English: On the 30th, Zhang Xianzhong invaded Wuchang, and the king of Chu, Zhu Huakui, was drowned in the Yangtze River. He Fengsheng, a university student, died.

古文：六月癸亥，诏免直省残破州县三饷及一切常赋二年。
现代文：六月一日，下诏减免直省残破州县三饷及一切常赋二年。
English: On June 1st, it was announced that the reduction and exemption of the direct province, the remaining provinces, the counties and the three counties and all the permanent grants would last for two years.

古文：己卯，逮范志完下狱。
现代文：十七日，逮捕范志完下狱。
English: On the 17th, Fan Zhi was arrested and released from prison.

古文：丙戌，雷震奉先殿兽吻，敕修省。
现代文：二十四日，雷电震坏奉天殿上兽吻，命令修身反省。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the thunder and lightning tremors were bad, and the celestial palace was kissed by the beast, and the order was given to improve oneself and reflect.

古文：秋七月丁酉，亲鞫范志完于中左门。乙卯，亲鞫前文选郎中吴昌时于中左门，征周延儒听勘。
现代文：七月六日，在中左门亲自审讯范志完。二十四日，亲自在中左门审讯前任文选侍郎吴昌时，允许周延儒旁听调查。
English: On July 6, he personally interrogated Fan Zhi at the center left gate. On the 24th, he personally interrogated Wu Chang, the former secretary of Wen Xuan, at the center left gate, and allowed Zhou Yanru to listen to the investigation.

古文：己未，戒廷臣私谒阁臣。
现代文：二十八日，禁止朝廷大臣私下谒见阁臣。
English: On the 28th, ministers of the Imperial Court were forbidden to meet with cabinet ministers in private.

古文：京师自二月至于是月大疫，诏释轻犯，发帑疗治，瘗五城暴骸。
现代文：京师从二月到本月发大瘟疫，下诏释放轻刑罪犯，发放钱币治疗疾病，掩埋五城外露尸骨。
English: From February to this month, Beijing issued decrees on the release of minor offenders, the distribution of coins to treat diseases, and the burial of exposed bones outside the five cities.

古文：八月壬戌朔，左良玉复武昌、汉阳。
现代文：八月初一日，左良玉收复武昌、汉阳。
English: On the first day of August, Zuo Liangyu regained Wuchang and Hanyang.

古文：丙寅，张献忠陷岳州。
现代文：五日，献忠攻陷岳州。
English: On the fifth day, the loyal troops captured Yuezhou.

古文：丙戌，陷长沙。
现代文：二十五日，攻陷长沙。
English: On the 25th, Changsha was captured.

古文：庚寅，陷衡州。
现代文：二十九日，攻陷衡州。
English: On the 29th, Hengzhou was captured.

古文：九月丙申，张献忠陷宝庆。
现代文：九月五日，张献忠攻陷宝庆。
English: On September 5, Zhang Xianzhong invaded Baoqing.

古文：己亥，黄景昉致仕。
现代文：八日，黄景窻辞官退职。
English: On the 8th, Huang Jingyao resigned and retired.

古文：辛丑，孙传庭复宝丰，进次郏县，李自成迎战，击败之。
现代文：十日，孙传庭收复宝丰，进住郏县，击败前来迎战的李自成。
English: On the 10th, Sun Chuanting recovered Baofeng, entered the county of Jixian, and defeated Li Zicheng, who came to meet the battle.

古文：庚戌，张献忠陷永州，巡按御史刘熙祚死之。
现代文：十九日，张献忠攻陷永州，巡按御史刘熙祚战死。
English: On the 19th, Zhang Xianzhong invaded Yongzhou, and the inspector Liu Xizhao was killed in the battle.

古文：辛亥，赐杨廷鉴等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：二十日，赐杨庭鉴等进士及第，出身各有不同。
English: On the 20th, Yang Tingjian and others were promoted to the first and second ranks, with different origins.

古文：壬子，孙传庭兵以乏食引退，贼追及之，还战大败，传庭以余众退保潼关。
现代文：二十一日，孙传庭因缺乏军粮引兵退去，李自成追击，大败孙传庭，孙传庭只好以残兵退守潼关。
English: On the twenty-first day, Sun Chun Ting withdrew his troops due to a lack of military supplies, and Li Zicheng pursued and defeated Sun Chun Ting. Sun Chun Ting had to retreat to Shaoguan with the remnants of his troops.

古文：是月，凤阳地屡震。
现代文：这月，凤阳多次发生地震。
English: This month, Fengyang has been hit by several earthquakes.

古文：冬十月辛酉朔，享太庙。
现代文：十月初一日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the first day of October, the rituals of Taimyo came to an end.

古文：丙寅，李自成陷潼关，督师尚书孙传庭死之。
现代文：六日，李自成攻克潼关，杀督师尚书孙传庭。
English: On the sixth day, Li Zicheng conquered Shaoguan and killed the inspector Shang Shusun.

古文：贼连陷华州、渭南、临潼。
现代文：李自成接连攻陷华州、渭南、临潼。
English: Li Zicheng successively invaded and occupied Huazhou, Hunan, and Linyi.

古文：命有司以赎鍰充饷。
现代文：命令官吏用赎罪换得的财物充当军饷。
English: He ordered the officials to use the property obtained in exchange for atonement as military pay.

古文：戊辰，李自成屠商州。
现代文：八日，李自成屠戮商州。
English: On the 8th, Li Zicheng slaughtered Shangzhou.

古文：庚午，张献忠陷常德。
现代文：十日，张献忠攻陷常德。
English: On the 10th, Zhang Xianzhong invaded Changde.

古文：壬申，李自成陷西安，秦王存枢降，巡抚都御史冯师孔、按察使黄絅等死之。
现代文：十二日，李自成攻克西安，秦王朱存枢投降，巡抚都御史冯师孔、按察使黄等被杀。
English: On the twelfth day, Li Zicheng attacked Xian, Qin King Zhu Cunxu surrendered, and the governor of the capital, Shi Feng Shikong, and the inspector Huang were killed.

古文：丁丑，张献忠陷吉安。
现代文：十七日，张献忠攻陷吉安。
English: On the 17th, Zhang Xianzhong led his troops to invade Ji'an.

古文：十一月甲午，李自成陷延安，寻屠凤翔。
现代文：十一月四日，李自成攻陷延安，继而迅速攻下凤翔。
English: On November 4, Li Zicheng captured Yan'an, and then quickly captured Fengxiang.

古文：壬寅，祀天于南郊。
现代文：十二日，在南郊祭天。
English: On the 12th, the Southern Suburbs Festival will be held.

古文：辛亥，吏部侍郎李建泰、副都御史方岳贡并兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：二十一日，吏部侍郎李建泰、副都御史方岳贡并兼东阁大学士，辅佐军国大事。
English: On the twenty-first day, Li Jiantai, the attendant of the cadre department, and Fang Yuegong, the vice-governor of the capital and a scholar of Dongge University, assisted in the military and national affairs.

古文：癸丑，范志完、赵光抃弃市，戍吴甡于金齿。
现代文：二十三日，范志完、赵光扌卞弃市。吴生生到金齿戍边。
English: On the 23rd, after Fan Zhi finished, Zhao Guangyu abandoned the city. Wu Sheng Sheng went to Jintai Lijiang.

古文：丁巳，李自成陷榆林，兵备副使都任、在籍总兵官尤世威等死之。
现代文：二十七日，李自成攻陷榆林，兵备副使都任、在职总兵官尤世威等被杀。
English: On the 27th, Li Zicheng invaded Yulin, and the Vice-Minister of Armaments and Military Supplies Du Du and the Chief Military Officer Yu Shih-wei were killed.

古文：宁夏、庆阳相继陷，韩王亶塉被执。
现代文：宁夏、庆阳相继被攻克，韩王朱被活捉。
English: Ningxia and Qingyang were conquered successively, and Han Wang Zhu was captured alive.

古文：十二月壬戌，张献忠陷建昌。
现代文：十二月二日，张献忠攻陷建昌。
English: On December 2, Zhang Xianzhong invaded Jianchang.

古文：乙丑，周延儒有罪赐死。
现代文：五日，周延儒犯罪被赐死。
English: On the fifth day, Zhou Yan, a Confucian criminal, was sentenced to death.

古文：丁卯，张献忠陷抚州。
现代文：七日，张献忠攻陷抚州。
English: On the seventh day, Zhang Xianzhong invaded Fuzhou.

古文：辛巳，贼渡河，陷平阳，山西州县相继溃降。
现代文：二十一日，李自成北渡黄河，攻陷平阳，山西州县相继兵败投降。
English: On the twenty-first day, Li Zicheng crossed the Yellow River to the north, captured Pingyang, and Shanxi Prefecture surrendered one after another.

古文：甲申，贼陷甘州，巡抚都御史林日瑞、总兵官马爌等死之。
现代文：二十四日，李自成攻克甘州，巡抚都御史林日瑞、总兵官马火广等被杀死。
English: On the 24th, Li Zicheng invaded Keganzhou, and the governor of the capital, Shilin Rizui, and the commander-in-chief, Ma Huaguang, were killed.

古文：丙戌，左良玉复长沙。
现代文：二十六日，左良玉收复长沙。
English: On the 26th, Zuo Liangyu recaptured Changsha.

古文：是年，暹罗，琉球、哈密入贡。
现代文：这年，暹罗、琉球、哈密入朝进贡。
English: That year, Siam, Ryukyu, and Hami paid tribute to the dynasty.

古文：十七年春正月庚寅朔，大风霾，凤阳地震。
现代文：崇祯十七年正月初一，大风沙，凤阳发生地震。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventeenth year of Chongzhen, an earthquake occurred in Fengyang.

古文：庚子，李建泰自请措饷治兵讨贼，许之。乙卯，幸正阳门楼，饯李建泰出师。
现代文：十一日，李建泰自己主动请求筹集军饷、治理军队征讨李自成，得到皇帝同意，二十六日，巡幸正阳门楼，为李建泰出师送行。
English: On the 11th day, Li Jiantai himself took the initiative to request the mobilization of military funds and the management of the army to solicit Li Zicheng, and obtained the consent of the emperor. On the 26th day, he toured the Zhengyang Gate Tower to see off Li Jiantai's departure.

古文：南京地震。
现代文：南京发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in Nanjing.

古文：丙辰，工部尚书范景文、礼部侍郎丘瑜并兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：二十七日，工部尚书范景文、礼部侍郎丘瑜同兼东阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On the 27th, Shangshu Fan Jingwen from the Engineering Department and Qiu Yu from the Ceremonial Department, who is also a scholar from Dongge University, participated in important affairs.

古文：是月，张献忠入四川。
现代文：本月，张献忠攻入四川。
English: This month, Zhang Xianzhong invaded Sichuan.

古文：二月辛酉，李自成陷汾州，别贼陷怀庆。
现代文：二月二日，李自成攻陷汾州，别部攻克怀庆。
English: On February 2nd, Li Zicheng attacked and conquered Zhangzhou, and the other side attacked and conquered Huaiqing.

古文：丙寅，陷太原，执晋王求桂，巡抚都御史蔡懋德等死之。
现代文：七日，攻陷太原，活捉晋王朱求桂，巡抚都御史蔡懋德等被杀。
English: On the seventh day, Taiyuan was captured, and the Jin king Zhu Cui Gui was captured alive, and the governor of the capital, Cai Bingde, was killed.

古文：壬申，下诏罪己。
现代文：十三日，下诏责罚自己。
English: On the 13th, he issued a decree to punish himself.

古文：癸酉，潞安陷。
现代文：十四日，潞安陷落。
English: On the 14th, Shao'an fell.

古文：乙亥，议京师城守。
现代文：十六日，讨论京师城防。
English: On the 16th, the defense of the capital was discussed.

古文：李自成攻代州，总兵官周遇吉力战，食尽，退守宁武关。
现代文：李自成进攻代州，总兵官周遇吉奋力相战，因缺乏粮食，被迫退守宁武关。
English: Li Zicheng attacked Daizhou, and the commander-in-chief Zhou Yujie fought hard, but was forced to retreat to Ningwuguan due to lack of food.

古文：丁丑，贼别将陷固关，犯畿南。
现代文：十八日，李自成部另外一大将攻陷固关，进攻畿南。
English: On the 18th, another major general from Li Zicheng's division invaded Gugang and attacked Gyeongnam.

古文：己卯，遣内臣高起潜、杜勋等十人监视诸边及近畿要害。
现代文：二十日，派内臣高起潜、杜勋等十人监视各边境及近畿各要害位置。
English: On the 20th, he sent ten people including Naisen, Takatsuki, and Du Xun to monitor the borders and key locations in the Kinki region.

古文：壬午，真定知府丘茂华杀总督侍郎徐标，檄所属降贼。
现代文：二十三日，真定知府丘茂华杀害总督侍郎徐标，向所属降兵传达檄文。
English: On the 23rd, Chu Maohua, the governor of Mading County, killed the governor's aide-de-camp, Xu Bei, and sent a message to his subordinate soldiers.

古文：甲申，贼至彰德，赵王常氵臾降。
现代文：二十五日，李自成兵临漳德，赵王朱常氵臾投降。
English: On the 25th, Li Zicheng and Zhao Wang surrendered.

古文：丁亥，诏天下勤王。
现代文：二十八日，下诏天下救援京师。
English: On the 28th, it was decreed that the whole world would come to the rescue of the capital.

古文：命廷臣上战守事宜。
现代文：命令文武百官上奏战守事宜。
English: He ordered hundreds of military and civilian officials to report on matters of defense.

古文：左都御史李邦华、右庶子李明睿请南迁及太子抚军江南，皆不许。
现代文：左都御史李邦华、右庶子李明睿请求南迁，让皇太子去江南抚慰军队，皇帝都不允许。
English: Li Banghua, the left imperial governor, and Li Mingrui, the right illegitimate son, requested to move south, so that the crown prince could go to the south of the Yangtze River to comfort the army. The emperor did not allow it.

古文：戊子，陈演致仕。
现代文：二十九日，陈演辞官退职。
English: On the 29th, Chen Ren resigned and retired.

古文：李自成陷宁武，周遇吉力战死之。
现代文：李自成攻陷宁武，周遇吉奋力战死。
English: Li Zicheng captured Ningwu, and Zhou Yujie died in battle.

古文：三月庚寅，贼至大同，总兵官姜瑰降贼，代王传齐遇害，巡抚都御史卫景瑗被执，自缢死。
现代文：三月二日，李自成兵至大同，总兵官姜瑰投降，代王朱传火齐遇害，巡抚都御史卫景瑗被活捉，自杀身亡。
English: On March 2, Li Zicheng led his soldiers to Datong, the commander-in-chief, Jiang Gui, surrendered, the deputy king, Zhu Chuanzhong, was killed, and the governor of the capital, Gu Shiwei Jingyao, was captured alive and committed suicide.

古文：辛卯，李建泰疏请南迁。
现代文：三日，李建泰上奏请求南迁。
English: On the third day, Li Jiantai made a request to move to the south.

古文：壬辰，召廷臣于平台，示建泰疏，曰： 国君死社稷，朕将焉往？ 
现代文：四日，在平台召见文武百官，把李建泰的奏书拿来给他们看，庄烈帝说： 一国之君应该为国而死，我是否打算前往？ 
English: On the fourth day, he summoned hundreds of civil and military officials to the platform and showed them Li Jiantai's report. Zhuang said: The prince of a country should die for the country. Do I plan to go?

古文：李邦华等复请太子抚军南京，不听。
现代文：李邦华再次请求让皇太子去江南抚慰南京军士，没得到允许。
English: Li Banghua once again requested that the crown prince go to the south of the Yangtze River to comfort the Nanjing sergeant, but was not allowed.

古文：蒋德璟致仕。
现代文：蒋德瞡辞官退职。
English: Jiang Deguan resigned and retired.

古文：癸巳，封总兵官吴三桂、左良玉、唐通、黄得功俱为伯。
现代文：五日，封总兵官吴三桂、左良玉、唐通、黄得功为伯。
English: On the 5th, General Wu Sangui, General Zuo Liangyu, General Tang Tong, and General Huang were awarded the Medal of Merit.

古文：甲午，征诸镇兵入援。
现代文：六日，征诏各镇兵入京救援。
English: On the 6th, soldiers from all the towns were called in to rescue the city.

古文：乙未，总兵官唐通入卫，命偕内臣杜之秩守居庸关。
现代文：七日，总兵官唐通入京守卫，命令他同内臣杜之秩据守居庸关。
English: On the seventh day, the commander-in-chief, Tang Tong, entered the capital as a guard and ordered him to accompany the vassal, Du Zhi, to guard Juyongguan.

古文：戊戌，太监王承恩提督城守。
现代文：十日，太监王承恩负责城守防备。
English: On the 10th, the eunuch Wang Cheng'en was put in charge of the city's defense.

古文：己亥，李自成至宣府，监视太监杜勋降，巡抚都御史朱之冯等死之。
现代文：十一日，李自成到宣府，负责监视宣府的太监杜勋投降，巡抚都御史朱之冯等被杀。
English: On the 11th day, Li Zicheng went to Xuanwu, the eunuch Du Xun, who was responsible for monitoring Xuanwu, surrendered, and the governor of the capital, Zhu Zhi Feng, was killed.

古文：癸卯，唐通、杜之秩降于自成，贼遂入关。
现代文：十五日，唐通、杜之秩向李自成投降，李自成于是便挥师进入居庸关。
English: On the 15th, Tang Tong and Du Zhichang surrendered to Li Zicheng, who then entered Juyongguan.

古文：甲辰，陷昌平。
现代文：十六日，攻陷昌平。
English: On the 16th, Changping fell.

古文：乙巳，贼犯京师，京营兵溃。
现代文：十七日，李自成开始攻打京师城，京师营兵全部溃败。
English: On the seventeenth day, Li Zicheng began to attack Beijing Division City, and all the battalions of Beijing Division were defeated.

古文：丙午，日晡，外城陷。
现代文：十八日傍晚，京师外城陷落。
English: On the evening of the 18th, the outer city of Beijing fell.

古文：是夕，皇后周氏崩。
现代文：当天夜里，周皇后死。
English: In the evening of the same day, Empress Zhou died.

古文：丁未，昧爽，内城陷。
现代文：十九日拂晓，内城陷落。
English: At dawn on the 19th, the inner city fell.

古文：帝崩于万岁山，王承恩从死。
现代文：庄烈帝吊死在万寿山，王承恩与其一同吊死。
English: Emperor Zhuang was hanged to death on Mount Wanzhou, and Wang Cheng'en was hanged along with him.

古文：御书衣襟曰： 朕凉德藐躬，上干天咎，然皆诸臣误朕。
现代文：死时衣襟里留有遗书，遗书写道 ：我因无德，干犯天怒，降下这场大灾，然而这都是各位大臣害了我。
English: At the time of his death, he left a suicide note tucked into his coat. The note read: "I have brought this catastrophe on myself through my lack of virtue and my violation of God's wrath. However, it is all the ministers who have harmed me."

古文：朕死无面目见祖宗，自去冠冕，以发覆面。
现代文：我死后无脸见祖宗，自己去掉冠帽，用头发盖住脸面。
English: When I died, I had no face to meet my ancestors, so I took off my crown cap and covered my face with my hair.

古文：任贼分裂，无伤百姓一人。 
现代文：现在任凭盗贼分裂，但不要伤害百姓一人。 
English: Now let the thieves split, but don't hurt a single citizen.

古文：自大学士范景文而下死者数十人。
现代文：从大学士范景文以下死去数十人。
English: Dozens of people died, from university graduate Fan Jingwen on down.

古文：丙辰，贼迁帝、后梓宫于昌平。昌平人启田贵妃墓以葬。
现代文：二十八日，贼军迁庄烈帝及皇后棺材于昌平，昌平人开启田贵妃墓安葬庄烈帝及皇后。
English: On the 28th, the invaders moved the coffins of Emperor Zhuang and Empress Dowager to Changping. Changping people opened the tomb of Princess Tian Guifei to bury Emperor Zhuang and Empress Dowager Dowager Dowager.

古文：明亡。
现代文：明朝到此灭亡。
English: The Ming dynasty came to an end here.

古文：是年夏四月，我大清兵破贼于山海关，五月，入京师，以帝体改葬，令臣民为服丧三日，谥曰庄烈愍皇帝，陵曰思陵。
现代文：当年四月，大清兵在山海关打败李自成。五月，清兵进入京师，用皇帝安葬礼节安葬庄烈帝，命令所属臣民穿丧服三天。谥号叫庄烈愍皇帝，陵墓叫思陵。
English: In April of that year, the Great Qing soldiers defeated Li Zicheng in Shanhaiguan. In May, the Qing soldiers entered the Beijing Division, buried Zhuang Li Rong with the Emperor An Funeral Festival, and ordered their subjects to wear mourning clothes for three days. The nickname is Zhuang Li Rong Emperor, and the mausoleum is called Siling.

古文：赞曰：帝承神、熹之后，慨然有为。
现代文：评论：庄烈帝继承神宗、熹宗之大业，慨然有为。
English: Comment: Emperor Zhuang Reticent inherits the great cause of Shenzong and Shizong, and he has done a great job.

古文：即位之初，沈机独断，刈除奸逆，天下想望治平。
现代文：即位之初，决策机智，铲除奸贼叛逆，天下向往太平。
English: At the beginning of the enthronement, the decision-making was witty, the traitors and rebels were eradicated, and the world yearned for peace.

古文：惜乎大势已倾，积习难挽。
现代文：可惜大势已去，败势难救。
English: Unfortunately, the general trend has gone, the defeat is irretrievable.

古文：在廷则门户纠纷。疆埸则将骄卒惰。
现代文：在朝廷则有门户纠纷，在边境则将士骄横懒惰。
English: At the imperial court, there were disputes over the portals, and at the border, there was arrogance and laziness.

古文：兵荒四告，流寇蔓延。
现代文：四处兵荒马乱，流寇大起。
English: Soldiers and horses ran amok everywhere, and banditry became rampant.

古文：遂至溃烂而莫可救，可谓不幸也已。
现代文：最后到了不可挽救的地步，真可谓不幸。
English: It's just unfortunate that it got to the point where it couldn't be saved.

古文：然在位十有七年，不迩声色，忧劝惕励，殚心治理。
现代文：然而，在位十七年，不沉溺于声色，忧勤惕励，竭力治理国家。
English: However, in the seventeenth year of his reign, he did not indulge in rhetoric, but worked hard and diligently, and tried his best to govern the country.

古文：临朝浩叹，慨然思得非常之材，而用匪其人，益以偾事。
现代文：临朝浩叹，慨然思非常之才，但因用非其人，政事每况愈下。
English: Lintao sighed and thought that he was very talented, but because he was not his own man, political affairs were getting worse and worse.

古文：乃复信任宦官，布列要地，举措失当，制置乖方。
现代文：于是又信任宦官，并将其分布安置于各要害位置，举措失当，致使朝廷制置脱离常轨。
English: As a result, he trusted eunuchs and placed their distribution in key positions, which was inappropriate and led to the establishment of the imperial court deviating from the normal course.

古文：祚讫运移，身罹祸变，岂非气数使然哉。
现代文：即使乞求时来运转，但还是身遭不幸，这难道不是天运使他这样么！
English: Even if begging works, but he still suffers misfortune, isn't it fate that made him like this!

古文：迨至大命有归，妖氛尽扫，而帝得加谥建陵，典礼优厚。
现代文：等到他命归黄泉，妖贼流寇被全部清除，庄烈帝因此才得加谥号建陵墓，且典礼比较优厚隆重。
English: By the time his life returned to the underworld, the demons, thieves, and robbers had all been eliminated, and it was only because of this that Emperor Zhuang had the mausoleum built, and the ceremony was relatively grand.

古文：是则圣朝盛德，度越千古，亦可以知帝之蒙难而不辱其身，为亡国之义烈矣。
现代文：此乃圣朝盛德远扬千古，也可因此知道庄烈帝虽遭受灾难而未被侮辱其身，真是亡国之义烈。
English: This is because the virtue of the Holy Dynasty has been passed down for thousands of years, and it can also be known that although Zhuangde suffered a disaster and was not insulted, he was truly a martyr of the ruined country.

