古文：萧辅沈李梁
现代文：萧铣是后梁宣帝的曾孙。
English: Xiao Wei was the great-grandson of Emperor Xuan of Later Liang.

古文：祖岩，开皇初叛隋降陈，陈亡，文帝诛之。
现代文：祖父萧岩，开皇初年叛隋降于陈朝，陈亡后被隋文帝诛杀。
English: Xiao Yan's grandfather rebelled against the Sui Dynasty and surrendered to the Chen Dynasty in the first year of the Emperor's reign. After Chen's death, he was killed by the Sui Emperor Wen.

古文：铣少贫，佣书，事母孝。
现代文：萧铣少时孤贫，卖书谋生，侍奉母亲很孝顺。
English: Xiao Yao was poor when she was young. She sold books to make a living and was very dutiful in serving her mother.

古文：炀帝以外戚擢为罗川令。
现代文：炀帝时因外戚之恩提拔为罗川县令。
English: Emperor Qian was promoted to be the governor of Luochuan County due to the kindness of his maternal relative.

古文：大业十三年，岳州校尉董景珍、雷世猛，旅帅郑文秀、许玄彻、万瓚、徐德基、郭华，沔人张绣等谋反隋，且推景珍为主，景珍曰： 吾素微，虽假名号，众不厌。
现代文：大业十三年，岳州校尉董景珍、雷世猛，旅帅郑文秀、许玄彻、万瓒、徐德基、郭华，沔州人张绣等共谋起兵反隋，众人欲推举景珍为首领，景珍说 ：我素来寒微，虽假借名号，也怕不能服众。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Taiei era, Yuezhou captain Dong Jingzhen, Lei Shimeng, brigadier Zheng Wenxiu, Xu Xuanqiu, Wan Xuan, Xu Deji, Guo Hua, Zhang Xiu from Zhangzhou and others conspired to raise an army against the Sui Dynasty. Everyone wanted to promote Jingzhen as the leader. Jingzhen said, "I have always been cold, although I borrowed the name, I am afraid I can't serve the public.

古文：罗川令，故梁裔也，宽仁大度，有武皇遗风。
现代文：罗川县令，是故梁后代，宽仁大度，有梁武帝遗风。
English: The governor of Luochuan County is a descendant of the late Liang, and is a magnanimous person, with the legacy of Emperor Liangwu.

古文：且吾闻帝王之兴，必有符命。
现代文：况且我听说帝王兴起，必有符命。
English: Besides, I've heard that the rise of an emperor is a sure sign of doom.

古文：隋冠带悉号 起梁 ，萧氏中兴象也。
现代文：隋朝冠带尽称 起梁 ，这是萧氏中兴的征兆。
English: The crown of the Sui Dynasty is said to be lifted, which is a sign of Xiao's rejuvenation.

古文：今推之，以应天顺人，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：现在推他为主，以应天顺人，不更好吗？ 
English: Isn't it better to promote him as the main figure now and let the weather be favorable?

古文：乃遣人告铣。
现代文：便派人告知萧铣。
English: They sent someone to tell Xiao Yao.

古文：铣即报景珍书曰： 我先君昔事隋，职贡无废，乃贪我土宇，灭我宗祊，我是以痛心疾首，恫心疾首，思刷厥耻。
现代文：萧铣随即回信对景珍说： 我先君侍奉隋朝，职贡毫无缺失，而隋人竟贪我土地，灭我宗社，我因此痛心疾首，想洗雪这个耻辱。
English: Xiao Wei immediately wrote back to Jing Zhen saying: My predecessor served the Sui Dynasty, and there was no shortage of tribute, but the Sui people actually coveted my land and destroyed my ancestral shrine. Therefore, I was heartbroken and wanted to wash away the shame.

古文：杰今天诱乃衷，公等降心，将大复梁绪，徼福于先帝，吾敢不纠厉士众以从公哉！ 
现代文：如今上天诱导各位，降心从事，将重续梁朝统治，以求福佑于先帝，我怎敢不纠集勉励士众以随公之后呢？ 
English: Now that Heaven has induced you all to devote yourselves to the task of renewing the reign of the Liang Dynasty in order to seek blessings from the former emperor, how dare I not gather and encourage you all to follow the emperor?

古文：即募兵数千，扬言迹盗，将以应景珍。
现代文：立即募兵数千，扬言讨伐贼寇，实则准备响应景珍起兵。
English: He immediately recruited thousands of soldiers and threatened to fight against illegal loggers, but in reality he was preparing to raise an army in response to Jing Zhen.

古文：会颍川贼沈柳生寇县，铣出战不利，谓其下曰： 岳阳豪杰将推我为主，今天下叛隋，吾能守节独完哉？
现代文：时逢颍川贼寇沈柳生进犯县境，萧铣出战不利，对其部下说： 岳阳豪杰打算推我为主，如今天下全都叛隋，我能独自守节以保全吗？
English: At the time of the invasion of the county border by the bandit Shen Liu Sheng, Xiao Yu was unfavorable to go to war, and said to his subordinates: Yueyang Hero intends to push me as the main, if today all the rebels of the Sui Dynasty, can I keep the festival alone to preserve it?

古文：且吾先人国于此，若徇其请复梁祚，因以半纸檄召群盗，谁敢不从？ 
现代文：况且我祖先建国于此，如从其请恢复梁朝，再以半纸檄文招降群盗，谁人敢不服从？ 
English: Moreover, my ancestors founded the country here. If I were to request the restoration of the Liang Dynasty from them, and then invite the bandits to surrender with a half-written document, who would dare to disobey?

古文：众悦。乃以十月称梁公，旗帜服色悉用其旧。
现代文：众人大喜，便在十月里自称梁公，旗帜服色全遵梁朝旧例。
English: Everyone was overjoyed, and in October he called himself Liang Gong, wearing the flag in full accordance with the old Liang dynasty.

古文：柳生以众归铣，用为车骑大将军。
现代文：柳生率众归附萧铣，用他为车骑大将军。
English: Yagyu led the crowd to attach Xiao Yao, using him as a chariot and cavalry general.

古文：不五日，远近争附，众数万，乃趋巴陵。
现代文：不满五天，远近争附，众达数万，便率众前往巴陵郡。
English: In less than five days, tens of thousands of people gathered from near and far, and he led them to Baling County.

古文：景珍遣徐德基、郭华率强姓百迎谒，而先见柳生。
现代文：景珍派遣徐德基、郭华率领瞗姓首领数百人前来迎接，而首先见到柳生。
English: Jing Zhen dispatched Xu Deji and Guo Hua to lead hundreds of leaders surnamed Yu to come to meet, and first saw Liu Sheng.

古文：柳生与其下谋曰： 梁公起，我最先附，勋第一。
现代文：柳生与其部下商议说： 梁公起兵，我最先归附，功勋居第一。
English: Discussing with his subordinates, Liu Sheng said, "When Liang Gong raised an army, I was the first to join, and I won the most merit.

古文：今岳阳兵众而位多，谁肯为我下？
现代文：如今岳州兵众而将多，谁肯位在我下？
English: Now that the number of soldiers in Yuezhou is increasing, who would be willing to serve under me?

古文：不如杀德基，质其人，独挟梁主以进，则吾谁先？ 
现代文：不如杀掉德基，扣押其人，独挟梁主进取州城，那么谁能位于我前呢？ 
English: It would be better to kill Deji, arrest his men, and take the state capital by force, then who would be ahead of me?

古文：因杀德基，诣中军白铣。
现代文：于是杀死德基，前往中军告知萧铣。
English: So he killed Deji and went to the Chinese army to inform Xiao Yao.

古文：铣惊曰： 今欲拨乱，遽自相屠，我不能为若主矣！ 
现代文：萧铣大惊道： 今欲拨乱反正，忽然自相屠杀，我不能当你们的君主了！ 
English: Xiao Yao was stunned: Now he wants to stir up trouble anyway, and suddenly massacre each other. I can't be your ruler!

古文：步出军门。
现代文：随即走出军门。
English: He then walked out of the gate.

古文：柳生惧，伏地请罪。
现代文：柳生害怕，伏地请罪。
English: Afraid, Yagyu pleaded guilty.

古文：铣责宥之，陈兵而进。
现代文：萧铣斥责后宽宥了他，陈兵进城。
English: Xiao Yu reprimanded and then forgave him, and Chen Bing marched into the city.

古文：景珍曰： 德其倡义竭诚，柳生擅杀之，不诛，无以为政。
现代文：景珍说： 德基倡义竭诚尽力，柳生擅自杀害，如不加诛，将无法治政。
English: Jing Zhen said: Deji advocated and made every effort, and Liu Sheng committed suicide. If he did not do so, he would not be able to govern.

古文：且凶贼与共处，必为乱。 
现代文：且与凶贼共处，久后必生祸患。 
English: And if you live with a thief, disaster is sure to follow.

古文：铣因斩柳生。
现代文：萧铣因此下令斩柳生。
English: Xiao Yao therefore ordered the execution of Liu Sheng.

古文：于是筑坛城南，柴上帝，自称梁王。
现代文：于是筑坛于城南，燔柴告祭上天，自称梁王。
English: As a result, he built a shrine in the south of the city, offered incense to the heavens, and called himself the King of Liang.

古文：有异鸟至，建元为凤鸣。
现代文：因有异鸟到来，于是建立纪元年号为凤鸣。
English: Due to the arrival of a strange bird, the first year of the era was established as Fengming.

古文：义宁二年，僭称皇帝，署百官，一用梁故事。
现代文：义宁二年，僭称皇帝，署置百官，全都依照梁代旧例。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Yining, the emperor was proclaimed and hundreds of officials were appointed, all in accordance with the old practice of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：追谥从父琮为孝靖帝，祖岩河间忠烈王，父璿文宪王。
现代文：追谥从父萧琮为孝靖帝，祖父萧岩为河间忠烈王，父亲萧璇为文宪王。
English: His father Xiao Yao was the Emperor Xiao Jing, his grandfather Xiao Yan was the King of the River People, and his father Xiao Yao was the King of the People's Republic of China.

古文：封景珍晋王，雷世猛秦王，郑文秀楚王，许玄彻燕王，万瓚鲁王，张绣齐王，杨道生宋王。
现代文：封景珍为晋王，雷世猛为秦王，郑文秀为楚王，许玄彻为燕王，万瓒为鲁王，张绣为齐王，杨道生为宋王。
English: Feng Jing Zhen was the King of Jin, Lei Shimeng was the King of Qin, Zheng Wenshu was the King of Chu, Xu Xuanqiu was the King of Yan, Wan Xuan was the King of Lu, Zhang Xiu was the King of Qi, and Yang Daosheng was the King of Song.

古文：隋将张镇州、王仁寿击铣，不能克，及隋亡，乃与宁长真等率岭南州县降于铣。
现代文：隋将张镇州、王仁寿进击萧铣，不能取胜。后得知隋亡，便与宁长真等人率领岭南州县归降于萧铣。
English: The Sui Dynasty sent Zhang Zhenzhou and Wang Renshou to attack Xiaoqi, but they could not win. Later, when they learned that the Sui Dynasty had died, they and Ning Changzhen and others led Lingnan County to fall to Xiaoqi.

古文：时林士弘据江南，铣遣将苏胡儿拔豫章，使杨道生取南郡，张绣略定岭表。
现代文：当时林士弘据有江南，萧铣派遣部将苏胡儿攻拔豫章郡，派杨道生夺取南郡，张绣略定岭表。
English: At that time, Lin Shihong controlled the southern part of the Yangtze River, and Xiao Qi dispatched Su Huer to attack Yuzhang County, Yang Daosheng to capture Nan County, and Zhang Xiu to capture Dingling County.

古文：西至三峡，南交趾，北距汉水，皆附属，胜兵四十万。
现代文：西至三峡，南到交趾，北距汉水，全都归属萧铣，兵力达到四十万。
English: From the West to the Three Gorges, from the South to the Jiaozuo, and from the North to the Han River, they all belonged to Xiao Qi, with a total of 400,000 soldiers.

古文：武德元年，徙都江陵，复园庙。
现代文：武德元年，迁都于江陵，修复先祖园庙。
English: In the first year of Wu De, the capital was moved to Gangneung, and the ancestral garden and temple were restored.

古文：引岑文本为中书侍郎，掌机密。
现代文：任命岑文本为中书侍郎，主掌机密事务。
English: He was appointed as the secretary of Chinese books, in charge of confidential affairs.

古文：遣道生攻峡州，刺史许绍击破之，士死过半。
现代文：派遣杨道生进攻峡州，被该州刺史许绍击败，战士死伤大半。
English: Yang Daosheng was dispatched to attack Xiaozhou and was defeated by Xu Shao, the governor of the province. Most of the soldiers were killed or injured.

古文：三年，高祖诏夔州总管赵郡王孝恭讨之，拔通、开二州，斩伪东平王阇提。
现代文：武德三年，高祖下诏夔州总管赵郡王孝恭征讨萧铣，攻拔通、开二州，斩其伪东平王提。
English: In the third year of Wu De, Gao Zu's subordinate, Zhao Gu Wang Xiaogong, the general manager of Zhaozhou, recruited Xiao Qi, attacked Tong, opened two states, and cut off his pseudo Dongping Wang Ti.

古文：诸将擅兵横恣，铣恐浸不制，乃阳议休兵营农，以黜其权。
现代文：当时诸将擅兵横暴，萧铣怕以后无法控制，便扬言休兵以便农耕，以罢免将帅兵权。
English: At that time, the generals were armed and violent, and Xiao Yu was afraid that he would not be able to control them in the future, so he threatened to call a truce in order to farm, in order to remove the commander-in-chief.

古文：大司马董景珍之弟为将军，怨之，谋作乱，事泄，被诛。
现代文：大司马董景珍之弟为将军，心怀不满，谋图作乱，因事泄被杀。
English: Chief Secretary Ma Dongjingzhen's younger brother, a general, harbored discontent, plotted to create turmoil, and was killed as a result.

古文：景珍方镇长沙，铣下书赦之，召还江陵。
现代文：景珍当时镇守长沙，萧铣下书赦免他，并将他招还江陵。
English: At that time, Jing Zhen was the town guard of Changsha. Xiao Yao wrote a letter to pardon him and recruited him back to Jiangling.

古文：景珍惧，遣使诣孝恭，举地降。
现代文：景珍害怕，派遣使者前往孝恭处，举地归降。
English: Jing Zhen was afraid, so he sent an envoy to Xiaogong's place, and Xiaogong surrendered.

古文：铣遣张绣攻景珍，景珍曰： 前年醢彭越，往年杀韩信，独不见乎！
现代文：萧铣派遣张绣进攻景珍，景珍说：  前年醢彭越，往年杀韩信 ，您没听说过吗？
English: Xiao Yao sent Zhang Xiu to attack Jing Zhen. Jing Zhen said, "Last year, you killed Peng Yue. In previous years, you killed Han Xin. Haven't you heard?

古文：奈何相攻？ 
现代文：何必互相攻讨？ 
English: Why attack each other?

古文：绣不答，围之。
现代文：张绣不回答，进兵围城。
English: Zhang Xiu did not answer, and the troops entered the besieged city.

古文：景珍溃而走，麾下杀之。
现代文：景珍溃围而走，被其部下杀害。
English: Jingzhen broke through the encirclement and was killed by his subordinates.

古文：铣进绣为尚书令。
现代文：萧铣提升张绣为尚书令。
English: Xiao Wei promoted Zhang Xiu to Shang Shuling.

古文：绣恃功，亦骄蹇，铣又诛之。
现代文：张绣居功自傲，萧铣又杀了他。
English: Zhang Shujiu was proud of his achievements, but Xiao Yu killed him again.

古文：铣性外宽内忌，疾胜己者，于是大臣旧将皆疑间，多叛去，铣不能禁，由此愈弱。
现代文：萧铣性情外表宽仁而内心疑忌，嫉妒胜己者，因此大臣旧将尽怀疑惧，往往叛离，萧铣不能禁制，所以日渐衰弱。
English: Xiao Yao's disposition is outwardly benevolent but inwardly suspicious, jealous of those who are better than him. As a result, ministers will always be suspicious and often defect. Xiao Yao cannot be restrained, so he is weakening day by day.

古文：四年，诏孝恭与李靖率巴蜀兵顺流下，庐江王瑗繇襄阳道，黔州刺史田世康出辰州道，会兵图铣。
现代文：武德四年，下诏李孝恭与李靖率领巴蜀兵顺流而下，庐江王李瑗由襄阳道，黔州刺史田世康出辰州道，合兵以图萧铣。
English: In the fourth year of Wude, Li Xiaogong and Li Jing led the Bashu soldiers down the river, the king of the Yangtze River, Li Qian, came from Xiangyang Road, the governor of Zhangzhou, Tian Shikang, came from Chenzhou Road, and the soldiers joined forces with Xiao Qian.

古文：伪将周法明以四州降，即诏为黄州总管，趋夏口道，攻安州，克之。
现代文：伪将周法明率四州归降，随即下诏法明任黄州总管，前赴夏口道，进攻安州，拿了下来。
English: The false general Zhou Farming led the four states to surrender, and then the next Zhao Farming was appointed the head of Huangzhou, went to Xiakou Road, attacked Anzhou, and took it down.

古文：伪将雷长颍以鲁山降。
现代文：伪将雷长颍以鲁山归降。
English: The false general Lei Changyu surrendered to Lu Shan.

古文：铣乃遣将文士弘拒孝恭，战清江口，孝恭大破之，获斗舰千艘，拔宜昌、当阳、枝江、松滋，伪江州将盖彦举以城降。
现代文：萧铣便派部将文士弘抵御孝恭，战于清江口，孝恭大破其众，缴获战舰千艘，攻拔宜昌、当阳、枝江、松滋等县，伪江州总管盖彦举城归降。
English: Xiao Yu then sent the general Wenshi Hong to defend against Xiaogong and fought at the mouth of the Qing River. Xiaogong defeated the others, captured a thousand warships, conquered Yichang, Dangyang, Yijiang, Songzhi and other counties, and the pseudo Jiangzhou general manager Gai Yan surrendered the city.

古文：孝恭、靖直逼其都。
现代文：李孝恭、李靖直逼其都。
English: Li Xiaogong and Li Jingzhi forced their way into the capital.

古文：初，铣放兵，止留宿卫数千人，及仓卒追集，江、岭回远，未及赴。
现代文：起初，萧铣放散兵卒，仅留宿卫战士数千人，等到仓促召集兵马时，江南、岭南，路途辽远，未及赴援。
English: At first, Xiao Yao released a few soldiers, leaving only a few thousand guardsmen, but when the soldiers and horses were hastily called up, they were too far away from the south of the Yangtze River and Lingnan to go to the rescue.

古文：孝恭布长围守之，数日，破其水城，取楼船数千。
现代文：孝恭布列长围以守。数日之后，攻破水城，缴获楼船数千艘。
English: A few days later, he broke through Shuicheng and captured thousands of ships.

古文：交州总管丘和、长史高士廉、司马杜之松诣靖降。
现代文：交州总管丘和、长史高士廉、司马杜之松前往李靖处归降。
English: The head of the Jiaozhou District, Qiu He, Changshi Gao Shilian, and Simadunimatsu went to Li Jing's office to surrender.

古文：铣度救不至，谓其下曰： 天不祚梁乎？
现代文：萧铣自料救兵不会前来，对其属下说： 上天不保佑梁朝啊！
English: Xiao Yao did not expect that the rescuers would come, and said to his subordinates: "God bless Liang Chao!

古文：待穷而下，必害百姓。
现代文：如待力尽而降，必害百姓遭殃。
English: If they give up in the face of overwhelming odds, the people will suffer.

古文：今城未拔，先出降，可免乱。
现代文：如今趁城未攻下，先行出降，可免乱兵祸害。
English: Now, they are taking advantage of the fact that the city has not yet been conquered to surrender first, so that they can avoid the scourge of chaotic soldiers.

古文：诸人何患无君？ 
现代文：各位何愁没有君主呢？ 
English: Why do you worry about not having a monarch?

古文：乃麾而令，守陴者皆恸。
现代文：便巡城下令，守城士卒全都痛哭。
English: He then ordered a patrol of the city, and all the defenders of the city burst into tears.

古文：以太牢告于庙，率官属缌衰布帻诣军门，谢曰： 当死者铣尔，百姓非罪也，请无杀掠！ 
现代文：萧铣用太牢告祭于太庙，率领官属身穿孝服前往军门，认罪说 ：应死者仅萧铣一人，百姓无罪，请不要杀掠他们！ 
English: Xiao Yao made a solemn announcement at the Great Temple. He led the officials in filial piety to the military gate and confessed: Xiao Yao was the only one who should have died, the people were not guilty, please do not kill and plunder them!

古文：孝恭受之，护送京师。
现代文：孝恭受降，护送至京师。
English: Takayasu accepted the surrender and was escorted to Kyoto.

古文：后数日，救兵至，且十余万。
现代文：过后几天，救兵赶到，众达十余万人。
English: A few days later, the rescuers arrived, numbering more than a hundred thousand.

古文：知铣降，乃送款。
现代文：知萧铣已降，便都归降朝廷。
English: Knowing that Xiao Yao had surrendered, they all surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：铣至，高祖让之，对曰： 隋失其鹿，英雄竞逐。铣无天命，故为陛下禽，犹田横南面，岂负汉哉？ 
现代文：萧铣送到京师。高祖斥责其罪，萧铣回答说： 隋失其鹿，英雄竞逐，萧铣无天命护佑，故被陛下擒获，正如田横南面称王，难道对不起汉朝吗？ 
English: Gao Zu rebuked him for his crime, and Xiao Yu replied, "The Sui Dynasty lost its deer, heroes compete, Xiao Yu had no heavenly destiny to protect him, so he was captured by His Majesty, just as Tian Yang Nanmen proclaimed himself king, aren't you sorry for the Han Dynasty?"

古文：帝怒其不屈，诏斩都市，年三十九。
现代文：高祖因其言不屈而大怒，下诏斩于都市，时年三十九岁。
English: Gao Zu was infuriated by his unyielding words, and he was thirty-nine years old when he was beheaded in the city.

古文：自僭国至灭凡五年。
现代文：自起兵僭国至灭亡历时五年。
English: It took five years from the beginning of the war to the end of the war.

古文：赞曰：铣，故梁子孙，起文吏，掩东南而有之，荆、楚好乱，气俗然也。
现代文：赞文说： 萧铣是故梁子孙，起家于文官，掩据东南，荆楚好乱，是风气习俗如此。
English: Zhanwen said: Xiao Wei is a descendant of the late Liang, he started his family as a civil servant, he was hiding in the southeast, Jingchu is chaotic, this is the custom.

古文：观铣武虽不足，文有余矣，大抵盗仁义，诡世乱俗者，圣人所必诛。
现代文：观萧铣武功虽不足称，文治却有余力，大凡盗窃仁义、诡世乱俗之人，为圣人之所必诛。
English: Although Xiao Yao's military exploits are not well-known, he has the ability to govern well. A great thief of benevolence and justice, a man of the world, is a must for a saint.

古文：若铣力困计殚，以好言自释于下，系虏在廷，抗辞不屈，伪辩易穷，卒以殊死，高祖圣矣哉！
现代文：如萧铣力困计穷，用温言好语向部下自我解释，俘获至朝廷时，又抗言不屈，诡辩易尽，结果身首分离而死，高祖是圣人啊！ 
English: For example, when Xiao Yan was captured and brought to the imperial court, he tried his best to explain himself to his subordinates with warm words and kind words. However, he was adamant in his resistance and could not be persuaded. As a result, his head was severed and he died. Gao Zu is a saint!

古文：辅公祏，齐州临济人。
现代文：李子通是沂州丞乡里县人。
English: Li Zittong is a resident of Luzhouzheng County.

古文：隋季与乡人杜伏威为盗，转掠淮南。
现代文：少时贫贱，靠渔猎为生。居其乡里时，见头发花白的老人提携重物，必定代为效劳，家有余财，则周济别人，但性喜报仇。
English: When he lived in his hometown, if he saw a gray-haired old man lugging heavy loads, he would do his duty. If the family had extra money, they would give it to others, but they liked to take revenge.

古文：伏威兵浸盛，自号总管，以公祏为长史。
现代文：隋朝大业末年，长白山贼寇左才相自称为博山公，子通依附他，凭其武力称雄其间。
English: In the last years of the Sui Dynasty, the bandit Zu Cai Xiang of Changbai Mountain called himself Boshan Gong, and his son Tong followed him, and became the most powerful among them by virtue of his force.

古文：贼李子通据江都，伏威使公祏以精卒数千度江击之。
现代文：乡人有陷入贼寇者，子通必定护理保全。那时，群盗凶暴残忍，惟子通仁爱，归附的人渐多，不到半年，有众万人。
English: At that time, the bandits were ferocious and cruel, but kind and benevolent, and more and more people joined them. Within half a year, there were tens of thousands of people.

古文：子通拒战，众十倍，锐甚。
现代文：才相畏忌他，子通便率众渡过淮河，与杜伏威合兵。
English: Only when they feared him did Zi Tong cross the Huai River and join forces with Du Fuwei.

古文：公祏选甲士千人，操长刀居前，别以千人随之，令曰： 却者斩！ 
现代文：后为隋将来整击败，奔往海陵，拥众数万人，自称为将军。大业十一年，僭号称楚王。
English: After being defeated by the Sui Dynasty, he rushed to Hailing, gathered tens of thousands of people, and called himself a general. In the eleventh year of the Great Leap Forward, his nickname was King Chu.

古文：公祏以众殿。俄而子通方阵而进，长刀千人皆决死斗，公祏纵左右翼搏之，子通大溃，降其众数千。
现代文：宇文化及杀害炀帝，任命右御卫将军陈眣为江都太守，不久陈眣归降，高祖授予其职为总管，仍守其郡。子通进攻陈眣，陈眣力尽，向沈法兴、杜伏威请求救兵。伏威亲自率兵屯驻清流，法兴派遣其子沈纶屯驻扬子，相去数十里。
English: After the death of Emperor Wu and the murder of Emperor Xuan, the right guard general Chen Xun was appointed as the governor of the Yangtze River. Chen Xun soon surrendered, and Gao Zu gave him the post of general manager, still guarding his county. Zi Tong attacked Chen Xun, Chen Xun tried his best, and asked Shen Fa Xing and Du Fuwei for rescue. Fu Wei personally led the troops stationed in Qingliu, and Fa Xing sent his son Shen Yutun to Yangtze, dozens of miles away.

古文：伏威既遣使归国，武德二年，诏授公祏淮南道行台尚书左仆射，封舒国公。
现代文：子通纳言毛文深建议招募吴人冒充法兴兵马夜袭伏威，两人便交恶结仇，都不敢先动。子通趁机尽力攻取江都，进据该城，陈眣逃跑。子通僭即皇帝位，国号称吴，建立纪元年号为明政。
English: Zitoong took advantage of the opportunity to make every effort to capture Jiangdu, entered the city, and Chen Yu fled. Zitoong Yu is the emperor, the country is called Wu, and the founding year is Ming.

古文：初，伏威与公祏少相爱，又兄事之，故军中呼辅伯，尊礼略等。
现代文：齐州贼寇乐伯通先为宇文化及防守丹阳，随即率众万余人归降，子通用为尚书左仆射。
English: Qizhou bandit Le Bo-tong first marched for Yu Culture and the defense of Danyang, and then led more than ten thousand people to surrender. His son was Shangshu Zuopu-sha.

古文：伏威稍忌之，乃署养子阚棱为左将军，王雄诞为右将军，推公祏为仆射，阴解其柄。
现代文：接着击败法兴兵马，夺取晋陵，命法兴所署置的府掾李百药为内史侍郎，主掌文书，尚书左丞殷芊为太常卿，主掌礼乐，由此江南士人多来归附。其后伏威命令辅公礻石攻拔丹阳，进屯于溧水，子通战败，粮草将尽，便放弃江都，退保京口，伏威尽得其江北之地。
English: He then defeated the Hoxing soldiers and horses, captured the Jin Mausoleum, and ordered Li Baiyao, the prefect of Fuxing, to be the attendant of the internal history and the chief clerk, Shangshu Zuojiao and Yin Qi to be the Tai Changqing and the chief clerk of the ceremonial music, from which many people from the south of the Yangtze River came to join. After that, Fu Wei ordered the assistant to the governor, Zou Shi, to attack Danyang and enter the camp in Surabaya. When Zi Tong was defeated and the grain and grass were exhausted, he gave up the capital of the Yangtze River and withdrew to

古文：公祏内怏怏不平，乃与故人左游仙伪学辟谷以自晦。
现代文：不久又东奔太湖，收集散亡兵士二万人，兵势又张，便袭击法兴于吴郡，攻破其城，进据余杭。东到会稽，南至五岭，西抵宣城，北达太湖，尽据其地。
English: Not long after, he went to Taihu Lake to collect 20,000 soldiers who had been scattered and died, and the number of soldiers increased. He attacked Faxing in Wuxian County, broke through its city, and advanced to Yuhang. He went to Huijin in the east, Wuling in the south, Xuancheng in the west, and Taihu Lake in the north, as far as possible.

古文：六年，伏威入朝，留公祏居守，复令雄诞握兵副之，阴诫曰： 吾至京不失职，无容公祏为变。 
现代文：武德四年，伏威派遣部将王雄诞讨伐子通。大战于苏州，子通战败，退守余杭，雄诞进围其城。
English: In the fourth year of Wude, the Fuwei dispatching department sent Wang Yuxi to fight against Zidong. In the great war in Suzhou, Zidong was defeated, retreated to Yuhang, and Yuxi entered its city.

古文：后左游仙说公祏反，会雄诞以疾卧家，公祏夺其兵，绐言伏威移书令举事。
现代文：其后左游仙说动公祏造反，恰逢雄诞因病在家休养，公祏趁机夺其兵权，谎称伏威来书下令起兵。
English: After that, Zuo Youxian said that he would instigate the rebellion of Gongzhu, which coincided with the time when Xuan Zi was at home recuperating from illness. Gongzhu took the opportunity to seize his military power, falsely claiming that Fu Wei had ordered the army to be raised.

古文：八月，遂僭位，国称宋，即陈故宫都之；杀王雄诞，署百官，以左游仙为兵部尚书、东南道大使、越州总管；增修器械，转廪食，遣将徐绍宗侵海州，陈正通寇寿阳。
现代文：八月，公祏僭即伪位，国号称宋，在陈朝故宫处建都；杀害王雄诞，署置百官，任命左游仙为兵部尚书、东南道大使、越州总管；增造器械，转运粮草，派遣部将徐绍宗进犯海州，陈正通入寇寿阳。
English: In August, the official name was changed to Song, and the capital was built at the site of the Chen Dynasty's Forbidden City; Wang Yongxing was killed, hundreds of officials were appointed, and Zuo Youxian was appointed as the military commander of Shangshu, the ambassador of Southeast Province, and the governor of Yuezhou; additional equipment was built, grain and grass were transported, and Xu Shaosong was sent to Haizhou by the dispatching department, and Chen Zhengtong went to Shouyang.

古文：诏越郡王孝恭趋九江，岭南大使李靖下宣城，怀州总管黄君汉出谯，齐州总管李世勣繇淮、泗讨之。
现代文：下诏赵郡王孝恭由九江东下，岭南大使李靖由宣城进兵，怀州总管黄君汉出兵谯县，齐州总管李世责力由淮、泗进讨。
English: Wang Xiaogong of Zhao County marched eastward from the Jiujiang River, Li Jing, the ambassador of Lingnan Province, marched into the army from Xuancheng, Huang Junhan, the governor of Huizhou Province, marched into the army from Handan County, and Li Shileili, the governor of Qi Province, marched into the discussion from Huai and Handan.

古文：孝恭取芜湖，下梁山三镇。
现代文：孝恭夺取芜湖，攻下梁山三镇。
English: Xiao Qiong captured Wuhu and three towns in Liangshan.

古文：河南安抚大使任瑰拔扬子城，降伪将龙龛，遂据扬州。
现代文：河南安抚大使任瑰攻拔扬子城，收降其将龙龛，进据扬州。
English: Ren Rui, Henan's ambassador of pacification, besieged Yangzi City, captured its commander Longyu, and advanced to Yangzhou.

古文：公祏复遣将冯惠亮、陈当世屯博望山，陈正通、徐绍宗屯青州山以拒战，孝恭率诸将破之，惠亮、正通走，李靖蹑追百余里，众悉溃，正通等以五百骑奔丹阳。
现代文：公祏又派遣部将冯惠亮、陈当世屯驻博望山，陈正通、徐绍宗屯驻青林山以抵御官军，孝恭率诸将将其击破，惠亮、正通逃走，李靖紧追百余里地，其众大败，正通等人仅率五百名骑兵奔往丹阳。
English: He also dispatched Feng Huiliang and Chen Dangshi to stay in Bohang Mountain, and Chen Zhengtong and Xu Shaozong to stay in Qinglin Mountain to resist the government army. Xiao Hong led the generals to defeat them. Huiliang and Zhengtong fled, and Li Jing chased them for more than a hundred miles. They were defeated, and Zhengtong and others rushed to Danyang with only five hundred cavalry.

古文：公祏惧，弃城奔左游仙于会稽，兵尚数万。夜至毘陵，能从者裁五百。
现代文：公祏害怕，弃城前往会稽投奔左游仙，夜里奔至毗陵，随从仅剩五百人。
English: Gwangsoo was afraid, so he left the city and went to visit Zuo Youxian. At night, he ran to Viling, with only five hundred followers remaining.

古文：伪将吴骚、孙安谋执之，公祏弃妻子斩关遁，与腹心士数十抵武康，野人执送丹阳，孝恭斩之，传首京师击李子通，始公祏佐伏威起据江东，距公祏死，凡十三年。
现代文：伪将吴骚、孙安商议擒捉他们，公祏抛弃妻子儿女斩关而逃，与心腹卫士数十人到达武康县，被当地居民抓获，送至丹阳，孝恭下令斩决，传首于京师。公祏从辅佐伏威起兵占据江东到灭亡，历时十三年。
English: The pseudo-commanders Wu Sau and Sun An discussed and captured them, Gong Li abandoned his wife and children and fled, arriving in Wukang County with dozens of his closest bodyguards. He was captured by local residents and sent to Danyang. Xiao Qiang ordered the execution and sent his head to the capital. It took Gong Li thirteen years to occupy Jiangdong from Fu Wei to his death.

