古文：孝闵帝孝闵皇帝讳觉，字陀罗尼，太祖第三子也。
现代文：孝闵皇帝名讳觉，字陁罗尼，是太祖的第三个儿子。
English: The third son of Emperor Taizu, known as Emperor Xiaojun and Emperor Shaku Jue, also known as Emperor Xiaolong and Emperor Xiaolong.

古文：母曰元皇后。
现代文：母亲是元皇后。
English: His mother was a former empress.

古文：大统八年，生于同州官舍。
现代文：西魏大统八年，生于同州官舍。
English: In the eighth year of the unification of the Western Wei Dynasty, he was born in a government official's residence in the same state.

古文：九岁，封略阳郡公。
现代文：九岁时，被封为略阳郡公。
English: At the age of nine, he was given the title of Liaoyang County Grand Duke.

古文：时有善相者史元华见帝，退谓所亲曰： 此公子有至贵之相，但恨其寿不足以称之耳。 魏恭帝三年三月，命为安定公世子。
现代文：当时有位善于看相的人史元华见到孝闵帝，回家后对自己的亲属说： 这个公子有极为尊贵的面相，但遣憾的是他的寿命不足以同他的面相相称。 魏恭帝三年三月，被任命为安定公的世子。
English: At that time, a person who was good at seeing faces, Shi Yuanhua, saw Emperor Xiaozhong and said to his relatives after returning home: This prince has an extremely noble face, but unfortunately his life expectancy is not enough to match his face.

古文：四月，拜大将军。
现代文：四月，拜为大将军。
English: In April, he was promoted to general.

古文：十月乙亥，太祖崩，丙子，嗣位太师、大冢宰。
现代文：十月乙亥曰，太祖去世，丙子日，孝闵帝继任太师、大冢宰。
English: In October, Emperor Yihai passed away, and on Cixi Day, Emperor Xiaozhun succeeded him as Grand Master and Grand Vizier.

古文：十二月丁亥，魏帝诏以岐阳之地封帝为周公。
现代文：十二月丁亥，西魏恭帝下诏将岐阳的地域封给孝闵帝并封他为周公。
English: In December of Dinghai, Emperor Gong of the Western Wei Dynasty issued an edict to give the region of Qiyang to Emperor Xiaohui and made him Zhou Gong.

古文：庚子，禅位于帝。
现代文：庚子曰，魏恭帝惮位于孝闵帝。
English: According to Geng Zi, Emperor Wei and Emperor Gong are at the top of the list.

古文：诏曰： 予闻皇天之命不于常，惟归于德。
现代文：魏恭帝下韶说： 我听说皇天之命不是固定的，衹是归于有德的人。
English: Emperor Wei Gong said, "I have heard that the Emperor's command is not fixed, and it is bestowed upon those who are virtuous.

古文：故尧授舜，舜授禹，时其宜也。
现代文：所以尧将帝位授与舜，舜将帝位授与禹，在当时是适宜的。
English: Therefore, it was appropriate at the time to bestow the imperial throne to, and to bestow the imperial throne to.

古文：天厌我魏邦，垂变以告，惟尔罔弗知。
现代文：上天厌弃我魏邦，降下灾异予以告示，这是你们都知道的。
English: You all know that Heaven abhors my Wei state and has sent down disasters and calamities to announce it.

古文：予虽不明，敢弗龚天命，格有德哉。
现代文：我虽然不明哲，但也不敢不恭敬天命，阻拒有德的人啊。
English: Although I'm not a philosopher, I don't dare to disrespect the Mandate of Heaven and oppose virtuous people.

古文：今踵唐虞旧典，禅位于周，庸布告遐迩焉。 使大宗伯赵贵持节奉册书曰： 咨尔周公，帝王之位弗有常，有德者受命，时乃天道。
现代文：现在我继承尧舜旧时的典制，禅位于周，布告于远近四方。 派大宗伯赵贵手持符节献上册书： 周公啊，帝王之位是没有固定的，有德的人接受天命，这是上天的法则。
English: Now I am inheriting the ancient ceremonial system. Zen is located in Zhou, and it is announced far and near in all four directions. I sent the great patriarch Zhao Gui to present the registered book with the symbols: Zhou, the throne of the emperor is not fixed, and virtuous people accept the destiny of heaven. This is the law of heaven.

古文：予式时庸，荒求于唐虞之彝踵。
现代文：我才德平庸，幼稚地求助于尧舜留下的旧制。
English: I am a mediocre talent, childishly resorting to the old system left by Mao Zedong.

古文：曰我魏德之终旧矣，我邦小大罔弗知，今其可久怫于天道而不归有德欤。
现代文：我们魏德已经穷尽了，这是我国君臣百姓都已知道的，现在还可以长久地违背天道而不把政权交给有德的人吗。
English: Our virtue has been exhausted, which is known to all the princes, ministers and people of our country. Can we now go against Heaven's will for a long time without handing over the power to a virtuous person?

古文：时用询谋。佥曰公昭考文公，格勋德于天地，丕济生民。
现代文：此时求谋于众人，都说你的父亲文公，穷究天地间的大德，广济生民。
English: At this time, he sought advice from many people, and they all said that your father, Wen Gong, was the best, the most virtuous man in the world, and the most generous to the people.

古文：洎公躬，又宣重光。
现代文：到了你这裹，又彰明辉光相承的累世的功德。
English: When it comes to you, it also highlights the merits of the past generations of brilliance.

古文：故玄象征见于上，讴讼奔走于下，天之历数，用实在焉。
现代文：所以天象显现在上天，妪歌颂扬的人奔走在地下，上天的历敷，确实感应在这裹。
English: Therefore, the celestial beings appear in the heaven, the people who praise the elegy run underground, and the history of the heaven is indeed felt here.

古文：予安敢弗若。
现代文：我怎敢不这样做。
English: How dare I not do it.

古文：是以钦祗圣典，逊位于公。
现代文：所以恭敬地举行圣典，逊位于公。
English: So hold the scriptures reverently, not publicly.

古文：公其享兹大命，保有万国，可不慎欤。 魏帝临朝，遣民部中大夫、济北公元迪致皇帝玺绂。
现代文：公将享此天命，拥有万国，能不谨慎吗。 西魏恭帝上朝，派民部中大夫、济北公元迪将皇帝玉玺和绶带献上。
English: Can we not be prudent when it comes to public officials enjoying this heavenly destiny and possessing all nations? When Emperor Gong of the Western Wei Dynasty ascended to the throne, he sent the middle doctor of the Ministry of People's Affairs, Ji Bei Di, to present the emperor's jade bracelet and sash to the emperor.

古文：固辞。公卿百辟劝进，太陈祥瑞，乃从之。
现代文：孝闵帝坚决推辞，公卿百官再三劝进，太史陈述祥瑞，这才接受。
English: Emperor Xiaozhun firmly rejected it, and hundreds of court nobles and officials repeatedly urged him to accept it, and Emperor Taishi declared Xiangrui to accept it.

古文：是日，魏帝逊于大司马府。
现代文：当日，魏帝在大司马府逊位。
English: On the same day, Emperor Wei abdicated in Dashima Prefecture.

古文：元年春正月辛丑，即天王位。
现代文：孝闵帝元年春季正月辛丑，宇文觉登上天王位。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of Emperor Xiaojun's reign, Uwen Jie ascended the throne.

古文：柴燎告天，朝百官于路门。
现代文：焚烧柴草祭告上天，在路门接受百官的朝拜。
English: The burning of firewood and grass festival was announced to the heavens, and received the worship of hundreds of officials at the road gate.

古文：追尊皇考文公为文王，皇妣为文后。
现代文：追尊父亲文公为文王，母亲为文后。
English: His father, Wenguang, was known as King Wengu, and his mother as Queen Wengu.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：封魏帝为宋公。
现代文：封魏恭帝为宋公。
English: Emperor Wei Gong was enthroned as Emperor Song.

古文：是日，槐里献赤雀四。
现代文：这天，槐里献上了四只朱雀。
English: On this day, there were four red starlings in the cocoon.

古文：百官奏议云： 帝王之兴，罔弗更正朔，明受之于天，革民视听也。
现代文：百官奏议说： 帝王兴起，没有不更改正朔的，表明受之于天，改变百姓的视听。
English: The centurion's report said: The rise of the emperor did not change the original, but showed that it was accepted by heaven and changed the people's audio-visual.

古文：逮于尼父，稽诸阴阳，云行夏之时，后王所不易。
现代文：到了孔子时，他考察阴阳变化，说正值实行夏历的时候，为后世君王所不改变。
English: When he came to Confucius, he examined the yin and yang changes and said that it was time to implement the summer calendar, which would not be changed by future kings.

古文：今魏历告终，周室受命，以木承水，实当行录，正用夏时，式遵圣道。
现代文：现在魏历宣告结束，周室接受天命，以木德继承水德，确实正应五行循环次序，正好使用夏朝历法，遵循圣人的法则。
English: Now that the end of the Wei calendar has been announced, Zhou Miao accepts the destiny of heaven, inherits the water virtue with the wood virtue, truly follows the order of the five elements cycle, just uses the summer calendar, and follows the rule of the sage.

古文：惟文王诞玄气之祥，有黑水之谶，服色宜乌。 制曰可。
现代文：衹是文王诞生时有玄气的祥瑞，有黑水的谶记，服装的颜色宜用黑色。 孝闵帝说可以。
English: When King Wen was born, he was a dark-skinned young man, with a memory of black water. The color of his clothing should be black. His father-in-law said yes.

古文：以大司徒、赵郡公李弼为太师，大宗伯、南阳公赵贵为太傅、大冢宰，大司马、河内公独孤信为太保、大宗伯，柱国、中山公护为大司马。
现代文：任命大司徒、赵郡公李弼为太师，大宗伯、南阳公趟贵为太傅、大冢宰，大司马、河内公独孤信为太保、大宗伯，柱国、中山公宇文护为大司马。
English: He appointed the Grand Steward and Zhao County official Li Qian as the Grand Master, the Grand Elder and Nanyang official Quan Gui as the Grand Master and the Grand Steward, the Grand Master Ma, Hanoi official Du Guoxin as the Grand Master, the Grand Elder and Zhu Guo and Zhongshan official Yu Wengu as the Grand Master.

古文：以大将军宁都公毓、高阳公达奚武、武阳公豆卢宁、小司寇阳平公李远、小司马博陵公贺兰祥、小宗伯魏安公尉迟迥等并柱国。
现代文：任命大将军宁都公室塞箍、产垦蚣达圣武、迭垦蚣亘卢空、小司寇阳平公奎达、小司马坛屋公贺兰祥、小宗伯趣圭公尉翅等人一同为柱国。
English: He appointed the generals Ningdu Gongshu Saigu, Zanggu Da Shengwu, Diyu Waku Rukong, Xiao Zi Kouyang Ping Gong Queda, Xiao Zi Ma Dan Ya Gong He Lanxiang, Xiao Zong Bo Qigui Gong Liang and others as pillar countries.

古文：壬寅，祠圆丘。
现代文：壬寅，在圆丘祭祀天神。
English: Minshinran, the deities worshipped at the round mound.

古文：诏曰： 予本自神农，其于二丘，宜作厥主。
现代文：孝闵帝下韶说： 我本源自神农氏，在圆坛和方坛二丘，都应设立控垦压的神主。
English: Emperor Xiaozhun said: I originally came from the Shennong clan, and in the round and square altars of the two hills, we should set up a god to control the pressure.

古文：始祖献侯，启土辽海，肇有国基，配南北郊。
现代文：始祖卢岖，在：童避开拓疆土，开始建立国家基业，配享南北郊祀。
English: The founder, Lugubo, began to establish a national foundation and share the north-south suburban worship in Tongyuan.

古文：文考德符五运，受天明命，祖于明堂，以配上帝，庙为太祖。 
现代文：先父文帝的品德符合五行的气运，接受上天的明命，祖祭于明堂，以配享上帝，庙号为太祖。 癸卯。
English: The moral character of his forefather, Emperor Wen, was in line with the five elements of luck, and he accepted the clear mandate of heaven, and the ancestor sacrifice was held in the Ming Hall to enjoy God, and the temple name was Taizu.

古文：癸卯，祠方丘。
现代文：在方丘祭祀地祇。
English: In Funaoka, there is a shrine dedicated to the deity.

古文：甲辰，祠太社。
现代文：甲辰，在太社祭祀。
English: At the time of the Jiaotong Emperor, there was a religious service at Taisha.

古文：初除市门税。
现代文：开始免除市门税。
English: Starting with the exemption of the city gate tax.

古文：乙巳，祠太庙。
现代文：乙巳日，在太庙祭祀。
English: On the Day of the Snake, a ritual is held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：丁未，会百官于干安殿，班赏各有差。
现代文：丁未，在干安殿会见百官，按不同的等级颁赏。
English: Ding Wei met with hundreds of officials at the Gan'an Hall and awarded prizes according to different levels.

古文：戊申，诏曰： 上天有命，革魏于周，致予一人，受兹大号。
现代文：戊申曰，孝闵帝下诏说： 上天有命，将魏更改为周，将政权交给寡人，使我接受这个大号。
English: Wushin said that Emperor Xiaojun issued an edict saying, "God willing, I will change Wei to Zhou and hand over the power to someone else, so that I can accept this title."

古文：予惟古先圣王，罔弗先于省视风俗，以求民瘼，然后克治。
现代文：我认为古代的圣王，没有不是先视察风俗，以探求百姓的疾苦，然后才完成大治的。
English: I think that the holy kings of ancient times did not first inspect the customs to explore the people's sufferings, and then complete the great cure.

古文：矧予眇眇，又当草昧，若弗尚于达四聪、明四目之训者，其有闻知哉。
现代文：况且我个人微小，又当初创，如果不崇尚广纳四方听闻的训诲，难道能知道民情吗。
English: Moreover, I am a small person and a beginner. If I do not uphold and accept the teachings heard by all quarters, can I really know the people's feelings?

古文：有司宜分命方别之使，所在巡抚。
现代文：有关部门应当分别任命不同的专使，在所辖区域巡抚。
English: The relevant departments shall separately appoint different special envoys to act as supervisors in the areas under their jurisdiction.

古文：五教何者不宣，时政有何不便；得无修身洁己，才堪佐世之人，而不为上所知；冤枉受罚，幽辱于下之徒，而不为上所理；孝义贞节，不为有司所申；鳏寡孤穷，不为有司所恤；暨黎庶衣食丰约，赋役繁省，灾厉所兴，水旱之处：并宜具闻。
现代文：五教有什么不能得到宣扬，时政有什么不便利；有没有修身洁己，才可佐世的人不为朝廷所了解；冤枉受罚，在下面幽禁受辱的人，不为朝廷所申理；孝义忠节的人，没有受有关部门的宣扬；鳏寡孤穷的人，没有得到有关部门的抚恤；以及百姓衣食是否丰富短缺，赋税徭役是否繁杂省简，病疫的发生，水灾旱灾在哪裹，都应当详细上报。
English: What can't be propagated by the Five Great Teachings, what is inconvenient about the current political situation; whether they have cultivated their bodies and cleansed themselves, only then can the people of the world not be understood by the imperial court; those who have been unjustly punished, and those who have been imprisoned and humiliated below, are not considered by the imperial court; those who have not been propagated by the relevant departments; those who are widowed and destitute, and those who have not received subsidies from the relevant departments; and whether the people's clothing and food are in short supply, whether the taxes and duties are complex and simple, the occurrence of diseases, and where the floods and droughts

古文：若有年八十已上，所在就加礼饩。 辛亥，祠南郊。
现代文：如果有年已八十以上的人，当地官吏就应加以礼遇和赠送食物。 辛亥日，在南郊祭祀。
English: If there are people over the age of eighty, local officials should treat them with courtesy and give them food.On the day of Xinhai, there will be a sacrifice in the southern suburbs.

古文：壬子，立王后元氏。
现代文：壬子日，立元氏为工后。
English: On the day of Imago, the Ritsumoto clan came to work.

古文：乙卯，诏曰： 惟天地草昧，建邦以宁。
现代文：乙卯日，孝闵帝下韶说： 天下混乱，应建立国家以使其安宁。
English: On the second day of the second month, Emperor Xiaojun said: The world is in chaos, and a country should be established to make it peaceful.

古文：今可大启诸国，为周藩屏。 于是封太师李弼为赵国公，太傅赵贵为楚国公，太保独孤信为卫国公，大司寇于谨为燕国公，大司空侯莫陈崇为梁国公，大司马、中山公护为晋国公，邑各万户。
现代文：现在可以大规模设立诸国，作为周的藩屏。 于是封太师李弼为赵国公，太傅趟贵为楚国公，太保独孤信为卫国公，大司寇于谨为燕国公，大司空侯莫陈崇为梁国公，大司马、中山公宇文护为晋国公，食邑各一万户。
English: Now, it is possible to set up various provinces on a large scale to serve as Zhou's han screens. As a result, Fong Taishi Li Qian became Zhao Guogong, Taifu Watikai became Chu Guogong, Taibao Duxunxin became Wei Guogong, Daishi Koko Yujian became Yan Guogong, Daishi Kuo Mo Chen Chong became Liang Guogong, Daishi Ma and Zhongshan Guogong Yu Wenguo became Jin Guogong, with 10,000 households in each county.

古文：辛酉，祠太庙。
现代文：辛酉曰，在太庙祭祀。
English: Xin Xin said that the ritual would be held in the Great Temple.

古文：癸亥，亲耕籍田。
现代文：癸亥曰，孝闵帝亲自耕种籍田。
English: On the 18th, the emperor himself went to work on his family farm.

古文：丙寅，于剑南陵井置陵州，武康郡置资州，遂宁郡置遂州。
现代文：丙寅曰，在剑南陵井设置陵州，在武康郡设置资州，在遂宁郡设置遂州。
English: Hsin Yin said that Lingzhou would be set up in Jiannan Lingjing, Zhizhou would be set up in Wukang County and Suizhou would be set up in Suining County.

古文：二月癸酉，朝日于东郊。
现代文：二月癸酉日，在长安束郊朝拜太阳。
English: On the third day of February, the sun was worshipped in the suburbs of Chang'an.

古文：乙亥，改封永昌郡公广为天水郡公。
现代文：乙亥曰，改封永昌郡公宇文广为天水郡公。
English: Yi Hai said that Yongchang County official U Wenguang was renamed Tianshui County official.

古文：戊寅，祠太社。
现代文：戊寅日，在太社祭祀。
English: On the day of Boshin, a ritual is held at Taisha Shrine.

古文：丁亥，楚国公赵贵谋反，伏诛。
现代文：丁亥日，楚国公赵贵谋反，被诛杀。
English: On the day of Dinghai, Zhao Guigui, the Duke of Chu, plotted a rebellion and was killed.

古文：诏曰：朕文考昔与群公洎列将众官，同心戮力，共治天下。
现代文：孝闵帝下诏说：朕的父亲文帝从前与群公及列将众官，同心合力，共同治理天下。
English: Emperor Xiaojun issued an edict saying, "My father, Emperor Wen, once worked with the princes and generals to jointly govern the world.

古文：自始及终，二十三载，迭相匡弼，上下无怨。
现代文：从头到尾。共计二十三年，相互扶持辅弼，上下没有怨心。
English: From the beginning to the end, a total of 23 years, mutual support and assistance, there is no resentment.

古文：是以群公等用升余于大位。
现代文：所以群公共同将我推上帝位。
English: That is why the princes jointly promoted me to the throne.

古文：朕虽不德，岂不识此。
现代文：我虽然没有才德，但岂能不知道这些。
English: I'm no genius, but how could I not know this?

古文：是以朕于群公，同姓者如弟兄，异姓者如甥舅。
现代文：所以朕与群公，同姓的犹如弟兄，异姓的好像甥舅。
English: Therefore, I and Qun Gong are like brothers with the same surname, and like nephews with different surnames.

古文：冀此一心，平定宇内，各令子孙，享祀百世。
现代文：希望大家齐心同德，平定海内，让各自的子孙，享祠百世。
English: I hope that everyone will work together to pacify the sea and let their children and grandchildren enjoy the ancestral shrine for a hundred generations.

古文：而朕不明，不能辑睦，致使楚公贵不悦于朕，与万俟几通、叱奴兴、王龙仁、长孙僧衍等阴相假署，图危社稷。
现代文：但朕不明哲，不能使大家和睦，致使楚国公赵贵对朕不满，与万俟几通、叱奴兴、王龙仁、长孙僧衍等人在暗中相互擅自设置官职，图谋危害社稷。
English: However, I was not wise and could not make everyone be at peace. As a result, the Duke of Chu, Zhao Gui, became dissatisfied with me, and together with Wan Xun Qitong, Yan Nuxing, Wang Longren, and his eldest grandson, Zeng Yan, they secretly set up government posts without authorization and plotted to harm the society.

古文：事不克行，为开府宇文盛等所告。
现代文：事情尚未实行，被开府宇文盛等告发。
English: The matter has not yet been implemented and was reported by the head of the prefectural government, Uwensho, and others.

古文：及其推究，咸伏厥辜。
现代文：等到推究审问后，都认罪伏诛。
English: After further investigation and interrogation, they all pleaded guilty and were arrested.

古文：兴言及此，心焉如痗。
现代文：我讲到这些，心中忧伤不已。
English: I say this with a heavy heart.

古文：但法者天下之法，朕既为天下守法，安敢以私情废之。
现代文：但法是天下的法，我既然为天下守法。怎敢因为私情而废置法律。
English: But the law is the law of the land, and since I abide by the law for the sake of the land, how dare I abrogate the law because of my personal feelings?

古文：书曰 善善及后世，恶恶止其身 ，其贵、通、兴、龙仁罪止一家，僧衍止一房，余皆不问。
现代文：《尚书》说 扬善施及后世，惩恶止于一身 ，赵贵、万俟几通、叱奴兴、王龙仁的罪止于一家，长孙僧衍的罪止于一室，其余的人都不追究。
English: "Shangshu" said that Yang Zhenzhi's benevolence extends to future generations, and the punishment of evil stops at one person, the crimes of Zhao Gui, Wan Xuan Qitong, Yan Nuxing, and Wang Longren stop at one family, and the crimes of the eldest grandson, Zang Yan, stop at one room, and the rest of the people are not investigated.

古文：惟尔文武，咸知时事。
现代文：希望你们文武官员，都知道此时的事。
English: I hope that all of you, military and civilian officials, are aware of the current situation.

古文：太保独孤信有罪免。
现代文：太保独孤信有罪被免除官职。
English: Taiho Dokushin was found guilty and removed from office.

古文：甲午，以大司空、梁国公侯莫陈崇为太保，大司马、晋国公护为大冢宰，柱国、博陵公贺兰祥为大司马，高阳公达奚武为大司寇，大将军、化政公宇文贵为柱国。
现代文：甲午曰，任命大司空、梁国公侯莫陈崇为太保，大司马、晋国公宇文护为大冢宰，柱国、博陵公贺兰祥为大司马，高阳公达奚武为大司寇，大将军、化政公字文贵为柱国。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the second month of the year, the grand secretary Ku and the prince of Liang Province, Mo Chen Chong, were appointed as Tai Bao, the grand secretary Ma and the prince of Jin Province, Yu Wengu, were appointed as the grand secretary, the pillar country and the prince of Boling Province, He Lanxiang, were appointed as the grand secretary Ma, the prince of Gaoyang Province, Da Da Da Wu, was appointed as the grand secretary, and the grand general and the prince of Huazheng Province, Wengu, were appointed as the pillar country.

古文：己亥，秦州、泾州各献木连理。
现代文：己亥日，秦州、泾州各自献上枝干连生的树。
English: On the day of the Chinese New Year, Qinzhou and Zhangzhou each presented a tree with unbroken branches.

古文：岁星守少微，经六十日。
现代文：岁星进入少微星天区，前后六十天。
English: The year star enters the minor planet region of the sky, lasting sixty days.

古文：三月庚子，会文武百官，班赐各有差。
现代文：三月庚于曰，孝闵帝会见文武百官，按不同等级予以颁布赏赐。
English: In March, Emperor Xiaojun met with hundreds of military and civilian officials and issued rewards according to different ranks.

古文：己酉，柱国、卫国公独孤信赐死。
现代文：己酉曰，柱国、卫国公独孤信被赐死。
English: Ji Xuan said that the pillar of the country and the defense of the country were given death.

古文：壬子，诏曰： 州去岁不登，厥民饥馑，朕用慜焉。
现代文：壬子日，孝闵帝下诏说： 淅州去年庄稼歉收，当地百姓饥馑，朕心中忧悯。
English: On the day of Jinsi, Emperor Xiaojun issued an edict saying: Last year's harvest in Zhangzhou was poor, and the local people were starving. My heart was filled with sorrow.

古文：其当州租输未毕者，悉宜免之。
现代文：本州没有缴纳完的租税，全部应当免除。
English: All unpaid taxes in the state should be waived.

古文：兼遣使巡检，有穷馁者，并加赈给。 癸亥，省六府士员，三分减一。
现代文：另派使者巡察检阅，有穷困饥饿的人，都加以救济。 癸亥日，各省六府官员，裁减三分之一。
English: In addition, envoys were sent to inspect and inspect, and those who were poor and hungry were given relief. On the day of the Chinese New Year, officials in six provinces were reduced by one third.

古文：夏四月己巳，以少师、平原公侯莫陈顺为柱国。
现代文：夏季四月己巳曰，任命少师、平原公侯莫陈顺为柱国。
English: In the summer of April, Mo Chen Shun, a young scholar and prince of the Plain, was appointed as a pillar state.

古文：壬申，诏死罪以下，各降一等。
现代文：壬申曰，孝闵帝下诏死罪以下的，各降罪一等。
English: According to Jinshin, Emperor Xiaojun decreed that all crimes less than the death penalty would be reduced to the first class.

古文：壬午，谒成陵。
现代文：壬午曰，晋谒成陵。
English: On the morning of the third day of the third lunar month, the tomb of Emperor Jincheng was completed.

古文：乙酉，还宫。
现代文：乙酉日，回宫。
English: He returned to the Imperial Palace on the day of the earthquake.

古文：丁亥，祠太庙。
现代文：丁亥曰，祭祀太庙。
English: Dinghai said, "It's time for the ritual at the Great Temple."

古文：五月癸卯，岁星犯太微上将，太白犯轩辕。
现代文：五月癸卯日，岁星侵犯太微上将，太白星侵犯轩辕星。
English: On the day of the May equinox, the year star encroached on the minor general, and the white star encroached on the bright star.

古文：己酉，槐里献白燕。
现代文：己酉曰，槐里晋献白燕。
English: It was said that Bai Li Jin would offer Bai Yan.

古文：帝欲观渔于昆明池，博士姜须谏，乃止。
现代文：孝闵帝准备到垦鼬观看捕鱼，博士差玺劝谏，这才作罢。
English: Emperor Xiaojun was preparing to come to Shandong to watch the fishing, but the doctor advised him not to do so.

古文：秋七月壬寅，帝听讼于右寝，多所哀宥。
现代文：秋季七月壬寅日，孝闵帝在右寝听理诉讼，许多当事人因孝闵帝的哀怜而受到宽赦。
English: In the autumn, on July's Ren Yin Day, Emperor Xiaojun slept on the right side of the bed to hear the reason for the lawsuit, and many of the parties were pardoned because of Emperor Xiaojun's pity.

古文：甲辰，月掩心后星。
现代文：甲辰曰，月亮遮掩住心宿的后星。
English: In the first hour of the month, the moon covers the rising and setting stars.

古文：辛亥，祠太庙。
现代文：辛亥日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the day of the Chinese New Year, a ritual is held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：荧惑犯东井北端第二星。
现代文：火星侵犯束井北端的第二星。
English: Mars encroaches on the second star at the northern end of the crescent.

古文：八月戊辰，祠太社。
现代文：八月戊辰日，祭祀太社。
English: In August, on the day of Pentecost, there is a ritual at Taisha.

古文：辛未，诏曰： 朕甫临大位，政教未孚，使我民农，多陷刑网。
现代文：辛末日，孝闵帝下诏说： 朕刚刚登临帝位，政治教化尚未能使人信服，致使我国百姓农夫，很多都遭受刑狱。
English: At the end of the Heian period, Emperor Xiaoyan issued an edict saying, "I have just ascended to the throne, and political indoctrination has not yet been able to convince people. As a result, many of our peasants and farmers have been imprisoned.

古文：今秋律已应，将行大戮，言念群生，责在于朕。
现代文：现在秋天已到，将要实行大戮，考虑到众生，责任在我身上。
English: Now that autumn has arrived and the massacre is about to be carried out, it is my responsibility to consider all living beings.

古文：宜从肆眚，与其更新。
现代文：应当宽赦有罪的人，让他们改过自新。
English: The guilty should be pardoned and rehabilitated.

古文：其犯者宜降从流，流以下各降一等。
现代文：犯有死罪的当降为流放，流放以下的各降罪一等。
English: Those who have committed capital crimes shall be sentenced to banishment, and the sentences below banishment shall be first-class.

古文：不在赦限者，不从此降。 甲午，诏曰： 帝王之治天下，罔弗博求众才，以乂厥民。
现代文：不在宽赦范围的，不按此例降罪。 甲午，下诏说： 帝王治理天下，没有不广泛搜求众才，以治理百姓的。
English: If it is not within the scope of the pardon, the crime will not be reduced according to this example. In the afternoon of the 1st, the following edict said: The emperor governs the world, and there is no one who does not extensively search for talents to govern the people.

古文：今二十四军宜举贤良堪治民者，军列九人。
现代文：现在二十四军都应当推举贤良可以治理百姓的人，每军推举九人。
English: Now the 24 armies should all nominate good men who can govern the people, with each army nominating nine men.

古文：被举之人，于后不称厥任者，所举官司，皆治其罪。 
现代文：被推举的人，以后不称职的，推举他的官吏，都予以治罪。 
English: If a person who has been promoted is later found to be incompetent, the officials who promoted him are to be punished.

古文：九月庚申，诏曰： 朕闻君临天下者，非由一人，时乃上下同心所致。
现代文：九月庚申曰，孝闵帝下韶说： 朕听说君临天下的人，并不是因为他一人，而是上下同心所致。
English: In September, Gao Shen said that Emperor Xiaojun said: I heard that the person who came to the world was not because of him alone, but was caused by the same heart.

古文：今文武之官及诸军人不沾爵封者，宜各授两大阶。 改太守为郡守。
现代文：现在文武官员及每个隶属军籍服兵役的人没有被授爵受封的，应各授两大阶。 改太守为郡守。
English: At present, civil and military officials and every person in the military who is subject to military service who has not been knighted should be awarded two major ranks.

古文：帝性刚果，见晋公护执政，深忌之。
现代文：孝闵帝性情刚毅果敢，见晋公宇文护把持朝政，非常忌恨。
English: Emperor Xiaohui had a strong and courageous character, and he hated to see Jin Gongwu Wenwu take control of the imperial government.

古文：司会李植、军司马孙恒以先朝佐命，入侍左右，亦疾护之专，乃与宫伯乙弗凤、贺拔提等潜谋，请帝诛护。
现代文：司会李植、军司马孙恒因在太祖时就辅佐朝政，所以入宫侍奉左右，也痛恨宇文护专权，就与宫伯乙弗凤、贺拔提等密谋，请求孝闵帝诛杀宇文护。
English: The secretary Li Zhi and the military secretary Ma Sun Heng, because they had assisted the imperial government when they were the great-grandfathers, so they served around the palace. They also hated the exclusive right of Uwenguo, so they conspired with the imperial princes Yifu Feng and He Batti to request the filial piety of the emperor to kill Uwenguo.

古文：帝然之。
现代文：孝闵帝认为很对。
English: The emperor agreed to Wang Hun's score.

古文：又引宫伯张光洛同谋。
现代文：李植等人又引进宫伯张光洛参与谋划。
English: Li Zhi and others also introduced the imperial prince Zhang Guangluo to participate in the planning.

古文：光洛密白护，护乃出植为梁州刺史，恒为潼州刺史。
现代文：张光洛将此事偷偷报告给宇文护，宇文护就外放李植为梁州刺史，孙恒为潼州刺史。
English: Zhang Guangluo secretly reported the matter to Yu Wenzhou, and Yu Wenzhou sent Li Zhi to Liangzhou and Sun Heng to Zhangzhou.

古文：凤等遂不自安，更奏帝，将召群公入，因此诛护。
现代文：乙弗凤等也不自安，再次上奏孝闵帝，准备召集各位王公入朝，趁此诛杀宇文护。
English: Yifu Feng and the others were not at ease, and once again appealed to Emperor Xiaowan, preparing to summon the princes to the imperial court, taking advantage of this opportunity to assassinate Uwen Rong.

古文：光洛又白之。
现代文：张光洛又报告给宇文护。
English: Zhang Guangluo also reported to Yu Wenzhou.

古文：时小司马尉迟纲总统宿卫兵，护乃召纲共谋废立。
现代文：当时小司马尉迟纲统领宿卫兵，宇文护就召尉迟纲共同商议废除孝闵帝拥立新帝。
English: At that time, Xiao Sima, Lieutenant Chi Gang, was in charge of leading the residential guards, and Uwen, Protector, summoned Lieutenant Chi Gang to jointly discuss the abolition of Emperor Xiaobai and the establishment of a new emperor.

古文：令纲入殿中，诈呼凤等论事。
现代文：派尉迟纲进入宫殿中，假传乙弗凤等人商讨国事。
English: He sent an envoy to enter the palace, falsely claiming that Yifu Feng and others were there to discuss state affairs.

古文：既至，以次执送护第，并诛之。
现代文：等他们来到后，依次逮捕押送到宇文护的宅第，一起杀掉。
English: After they arrived, they were arrested one by one and escorted to Umenosuke's house, where they were killed together.

古文：纲仍罢散禁兵，帝方悟，无左右，独在内殿，令宫人持兵自守。
现代文：尉迟纲就立即解散禁兵，孝闵帝这才醒悟，身边无一人，独自坐在内殿，命宫女宦官手持兵器自卫。
English: The emperor immediately dissolved the ban on soldiers, and it was only then that he realized that there was no one around him, he was sitting alone in the inner hall, and the eunuch of the imperial court was holding a weapon for self-defense.

古文：护又遣大司马贺兰祥逼帝逊位。
现代文：宇文护又派大司马贺兰祥逼迫孝闵帝退位。
English: Uwenguo also sent the Grand Master Ma Heranxiang to force Emperor Xiaojun to abdicate.

古文：遂幽于旧邸，月余日，以弒崩，时年十六。
现代文：于是将孝闵帝囚禁在略阳公旧宅，一个多月后，因被诛杀去世。当时十六岁。
English: As a result, Emperor Xiaozhun was imprisoned in the former residence of Emperor Liangyang, and died more than a month later after being beaten to death. He was sixteen years old at the time.

古文：植、恒等亦遇害。
现代文：李植、孙恒等也被杀害。
English: Li Zhi, Sun Heng and others were also killed.

古文：及武帝诛护后，乃诏曰： 慎始敬终，有国彝典；事亡如存，哲王通制。
现代文：周武帝诛杀宇文护后，就下诏说： 慎始敬终，国有常典。把过去的事情看作现在仍存在的一样，这是明哲的君王通行的法则。
English: After Emperor Zhou Wuzhong killed Umenguo, he issued the following edict: "Prudence begins with respect and ends with state-owned classics. Viewing the past as if it still exists is the rule of a wise ruler."

古文：义崇追远，礼贵尊亲。
现代文：义崇尚追效远古，礼以尊敬亲人为贵。
English: It is important to follow the example of the ancients and to respect one's relatives.

古文：故略阳公至德纯粹，天姿秀杰。
现代文：原略阳公高尚的道德纯美无瑕，天赋的品质俊秀超群。
English: Originally, the noble morality of Yang Gong was pure and flawless, and the quality of talent was outstanding.

古文：属魏祚告终，宝命将改，讴歌允集，历数攸归，上协苍灵之庆，下昭后祇之锡。
现代文：在魏王朝结束后，天命将要更换，颂扬之声齐集，天道归向略阳公，上应苍灵的庆赏，下显后土的恩赐。
English: After the end of the Wei Dynasty, the fate of heaven will be changed, the voices of praise will gather, the heavenly way will return to the Liao Yang Gong, the celebration of the heavenly spirit will be rewarded, and the gift of the back soil will be revealed.

古文：而祸生肘腋，衅起萧墙，白兽噬骖，苍鹰集殿，幽辱神器，弒酷乘舆，冤结生民，毒流宇县。
现代文：但灾祸产生于肘腋，争端兴起于萧墙，白兽吞噬骖腓，苍鹰聚集殿堂，幽禁羞辱君主，残酷弑杀帝王，冤仇系结于人民，毒害流布于天下。
English: But the calamity arose from the elbow, the dispute arose from the wall, the white beast devoured the cormorant, the eagle gathered the hall, imprisoned and humiliated the monarch, brutally killed the emperor, the grudge was tied to the people, and the poison spread all over the world.

古文：今河海澄清，氛沴消荡，追尊之礼，宜崇徽号。 遣太师、蜀国公于南郊上谥曰孝闵皇帝，陵曰静陵。
现代文：现在海内清平，灾气荡除，按追加尊号的礼法，应当为略阳公加上美好的谧号。 派太师、蜀国公显迟回在南郊为坚堕公追加谧号为孝闵皇帝，他的陵墓为趋堕。
English: Now that the sea is calm and calamities have been eliminated, according to the etiquette of adding honorific titles, it is necessary to add a beautiful nickname for Emperor Xiaoyang. Emperor Paidei and Emperor Shuguang later returned to the southern suburbs to add a nickname for Emperor Jianpang, and his mausoleum is the fallen.

古文：史臣曰：孝闵承既安之业，应乐推之运，柴天竺物，正位君临，迩无异言，远无异望。
现代文：史臣曰：孝闵帝继承已经安定的事业，适应被人拥戴的气运，烧柴祭天，登位君临天下，近无不同的言论，远无不同的意愿。
English: Shichen said: Emperor Xiaobai inherits a stable cause, adapts to the luck of the people, burns firewood and sacrifices to the heavens, and ascends to the throne. There is almost no different speech, and there is no different will.

古文：虽黄初代德，太始受终，不之尚也。
现代文：即使是曹丕替代漠德、晋武帝承受帝位，也没有超过这样。
English: Even if Cao Pi took the throne in place of Emperor Mudek and Emperor Jinwu, it was no more than that.

古文：然政由宁氏，主怀芒刺之疑；祭则寡人，臣无复子之请。
现代文：然而朝政把持在宁氏手中，主上有心怀芒刺的疑惧；祭祀则缺少相助之人，臣下没有还政的奏请。
English: However, the administration of the imperial court was in the hands of the Ning clan, and the lord was suspicious of anyone with a thorn in his heart; the sacrificial rites lacked anyone to help, and there was no petition from the vassals to return to the government.

古文：以之速祸，宜哉。
现代文：以此加速灾祸，也是必然的啊。
English: It is also inevitable that this will accelerate the disaster.

