古文：常衮，京兆人，天宝末，及进士第。
现代文：常衮是京兆府人，天宝末年，考中了进士。
English: Janghyeon is a native of Gyeongsangbuk-do, and in the last years of his life, he passed the entrance examination.

古文：性狷洁，不妄交游。
现代文：生性崇尚廉洁，不随便与人交往。
English: By nature, he advocates honesty and does not casually socialize with people.

古文：由太子正字，累为中书舍人。
现代文：从太子正字官，升至中书舍人。
English: From the prince orthographic officer, he rose to the Chinese scholar.

古文：文采赡蔚，长于应用，誉重一时。
现代文：文章严密华丽，擅长写诏令公文，在当时很有名望。
English: He was famous at the time for his meticulous and ornate articles, and he was good at writing official documents for imperial edicts.

古文：鱼朝恩赖宠，兼判国子监。
现代文：鱼朝恩仗着皇帝宠信，兼管国子监。
English: Yu Chaoyuan, by virtue of the emperor's favor, was also in charge of the State Children's Supervisor.

古文：衮奏： 成均之任，当用名儒，不宜以宦臣领职。 
现代文：常衮上奏说： 太学主持人，应任命有名的学者，不应由宦官主管。 
English: He said, "A famous scholar should be appointed as the president of the university, and a eunuch should not be in charge.

古文：始，回纥有战功者，得留京师，虏性易骄，后乃创邸第、佛祠，或伏甲其间，数出中渭桥，与军人格斗，夺含光门鱼契走城外。
现代文：当初，回纥助唐立有战功的人，可以留住京城，这些异族人生性骄横，后来他们建有府第、佛堂，有时在里面隐藏着军队。多次到中渭桥，和驻军争斗，把含光门的符信抢走跑到城外去。
English: At first, those who had distinguished themselves in the war to help Tang could retain the capital. These foreigners were arrogant by nature. Later, they built government offices and Buddhist temples, sometimes hiding troops inside. They repeatedly went to Zhongli Bridge, fought with the garrison, and took away the letters containing the light gate and ran outside the city.

古文：衮建言： 今西蕃盘桓境上，数入寇，若相连结，以乘无备，其变不细，请早图之。 
现代文：常衮上奏说 ：现吐蕃在边境游弋，多次入侵，如果和他们勾结起来，趁我们没防备时动手，那祸害就大了，应早点除掉他们。 
English: He said at the top of the speech, "Nowadays, the Tibetans are wandering around the border and have invaded many times. If we collude with them and attack when we are unprepared, the disaster will be great. We should get rid of them as soon as possible."

古文：又天子诞日，诸道争以侈丽奉献，不则为老子、浮屠解祷事。
现代文：皇帝过生日，各地争着献奢华的礼品，或者设道、佛教法事来消灾求福。
English: On the emperor's birthday, various regions compete to offer luxurious gifts, or set up Tao and Buddhist rituals to eliminate disasters and seek blessings.

古文：衮以为： 汉文帝还千里马不用，晋武帝焚雉头裘，宋高祖碎琥珀枕，是三主者，非有聪明大圣以致治安，谨身率下而已。
现代文：常衮认为 ：汉文帝不接受千里马，晋武帝烧毁了用野鸡头上的毛做成的皮衣，南朝宋高祖打碎了琥珀做的枕头，这三位君主，并不是有特别的圣明治好了国家，只是严格要求自己做臣下的榜样。
English: Chang Yu thought: Emperor Hanwen did not accept the horse of a thousand li, Emperor Jinwu burned the fur coat made of the hair on the head of a pheasant, and the Southern Dynasty Song Gao Zu broke the pillow made of amber. These three monarchs did not have a special Saint Meiji to improve the country, but only strictly required themselves to be an example for their subjects.

古文：今诸道馈献，皆淫侈不急，而节度使、刺史非能男耕而女织者，类出于民，是敛怨以媚上也，请皆还之。
现代文：现各地献上的东西，都是奢侈不急用的，节度使、刺史又并非自己生产，都是从老百姓那里来的，这是搜刮老百姓来向皇上讨好，请求全还给各地。
English: The things now offered by various regions are all extravagant and not urgently needed, and they are not produced by themselves. They all come from the common people. This is a way of robbing the common people in order to please the emperor, and requesting that they all be returned to various regions.

古文：今军旅未宁，王畿户口十不一在，而诸祠寺写经造像，焚币埋玉，所以赏赉若比丘、道士、巫祝之流，岁巨万计。
现代文：现战乱尚未平息，京城一带户数都不到以前的十分之一，但各寺庙却抄经文、造神像、烧礼物、埋璧玉，为此赏给僧人、道士、巫师等的钱财，每年极多。
English: The current war has not yet subsided, and the number of households in the capital area is less than one-tenth of what it used to be, but the temples have copied scriptures, made statues of gods, burned gifts, and buried precious stones, for which they reward monks, Taoists, wizards, etc. with a great deal of money every year.

古文：陛下若以易刍粟，减贫民之赋，天下之福岂有量哉！ 
现代文：皇上如用这钱来买粮草，以减轻贫穷老百姓的赋税，国家的福分就享用不尽了！ 
English: If the emperor used this money to buy grain and grass to reduce the taxes of poor people, the country's blessings would be inexhaustible!

古文：代宗嘉纳。
现代文：唐代宗称赞并采纳了他的话。
English: The Tang Dynasty Zong praised and adopted his words.

古文：迁礼部侍郎。
现代文：后升任礼部侍郎。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of Reibu Jiro.

古文：时宦者刘忠翼权震中外，泾原节度使马璘为帝宠任，有所干请，衮皆拒却。
现代文：当时宦官刘忠义权力大到使全国人害怕，泾原节度使马瞞也受皇帝宠信，求他行方便，他都拒绝了。
English: At that time, the eunuch Liu Zhongyi's power was so great that the whole country was afraid of him, and the eunuch Yuan Jiedu also made Ma Xie the emperor's favorite, and asked him to go conveniently, but he refused.

古文：元载死，拜门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事，弘文、崇文馆大学士，与杨绾同执政。
现代文：元载死后，他被任命为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事，又任弘文、崇文馆大学士，和杨绾一起掌权。
English: After the death of Yuan Zai, he was appointed as a subordinate attendant, a subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate.

古文：绾长厚通可，而衮苛细，以清俭自贤。
现代文：杨绾厚道通达；常衮则苛刻琐碎，以清廉节俭自负。
English: Yang Mi is generous and accomplished; Chang Mi is harsh and petty, boasting of being clean and frugal.

古文：帝内重绾而颛任之，礼遇信爱，衮弗及也，每所恨忌。
现代文：皇帝内心看重杨绾，故一心任用他，在礼节宠信上，常衮比不上，总是忌妒。
English: The emperor's heart valued Yang Xuan, so he appointed him wholeheartedly. In terms of etiquette, Yang Xuan was always jealous.

古文：会绾卒，衮始当国。
现代文：到杨绾去世了，常衮才开始当权。
English: It was not until the death of Yang Hui that Chang Hui came to power.

古文：先是，百官俸寡狭，议增给之。时韩滉使度支，与衮皆任情轻重。
现代文：此前，群臣俸禄少，经讨论予以增加，当时韩任度支职，和常衮都随私心处理。
English: Previously, the group of vassals had a small salary, which was increased after discussion. At that time, Han Rendu was in charge of the branch office, and Changyu dealt with it selfishly.

古文：滉恶国子司业张参，衮恶太子少詹事赵槊，皆少给之。
现代文：韩讨厌国子司业张参，常衮讨厌太子少詹事赵，就都少加俸禄。
English: Han disliked Zhang San, the secretary of state, and Chang Xi disliked Zhao Zhan, the crown prince, so they both received less salary.

古文：太子文学为洗马副，衮姻家任文学者，其给乃在洗马上。
现代文：太子文学是太子洗马的副手，常衮亲戚任太子文学职，俸禄比太子洗马还多。
English: The prince of literature is the deputy of the prince of horse-washing, and his relatives are often appointed to the prince of literature, and the salary is more than that of the prince of horse-washing.

古文：其骋私崇怨类此。
现代文：他的利己招怨都和这相似。
English: His self-serving grievances are similar.

古文：故事，日出内厨食赐宰相家，可十人具，衮奏罢之。
现代文：按旧规矩，每天送宫内厨房的饭菜给宰相家，每家可供十人吃，常衮上奏取消了。
English: According to the old rules, meals from the palace kitchen are sent to the prime minister's family every day, and each family can feed ten people.

古文：又将让堂封，它宰相不从，乃止。
现代文：他又想取消政事堂的公膳，其他的宰相不同意，才算了。
English: He also wanted to abolish public meals in the government building, but the other prime ministers did not agree, so that was that.

古文：政事堂北门，异时宰相过舍人院咨逮政事，至衮乃塞之，以示尊大。
现代文：政事堂北门是过去宰相到舍人院咨询政务用的，常衮堵住了这门，以表示地位尊贵。
English: The north gate of the Seiji-do Hall was used in the past by the prime minister to consult government affairs with the House of Councillors. Tsuneyoshi blocked this gate to show his high status.

古文：惩元载败，窒卖官之路，然一切以公议格之，非文词者皆摈不用，故世谓之 濌伯 ，以其濌々无贤不肖之辨云。
现代文：鉴于元载被治罪，他禁绝了受贿卖官的路，但所有官员都按规定任用，不是中科举的都不任用，所以当时人称他为 胡涂宰相 ，因为他胡里胡涂不分好歹。
English: In view of the fact that Yuan Zai was convicted, he forbade the way of accepting bribes and selling officials, but all officials were appointed according to regulations, and those who were not appointed were not appointed, so at that time people called him Hu Tui Prime Minister, because he did not distinguish between good and bad.

古文：衮为相，散官才朝议，而无封爵，郭子仪言于帝，遂加银青光禄大夫，封河内郡公。
现代文：常衮任宰相后，闲职只是朝议大夫，又没有爵位。郭子仪对皇帝说了，才升任银青光禄大夫，封爵河内郡公。
English: After the appointment of the Prime Minister, Guo Ziyi said to the emperor that he was promoted to the position of the doctor of the silver Qingguanglu and the knighted governor of Hanoi County.

古文：德宗即位，衮奏贬崔祐甫为河南少尹。
现代文：唐德宗登基后，常衮上奏贬崔甫任河南府少尹。
English: After Emperor Dezong of Tang Dynasty ascended to the throne, Choe Heung-soo demoted Choe Fu to the position of Henan prefectural Shao Yin.

古文：帝怒，使与祐甫换秩，再贬潮州刺史。
现代文：皇帝后来生气了，让他和崔甫交换官职，后又贬为潮州刺史。
English: The emperor later became angry and made him and Cui Fu exchange official positions, and then he was relegated to the position of Chaozhou goblin.

古文：建中初，杨炎辅政，起为福建观察使。
现代文：建中初年，杨炎当了宰相，起用他任福建观察使。
English: In the first year of the middle school, Yang Yan became the prime minister and appointed him as the Fujian Observer.

古文：始，闽人未知学，衮至，为设乡校，使作为文章，亲加讲导，与为客主钧礼，观游燕飨与焉，由是俗一变，岁贡士与内州等。
现代文：先前，福建人不知道学习，常衮去了，为他们设立学校，教他们写文章，亲自讲学指导，对他们行客人和主人平等的礼节，一起参加游览和祭神的仪式，从此风俗有了较大改变，每年经乡贡考试合格送京参加会试的人和内地各州相等。
English: Previously, people in Fujian did not know how to study and often went to the countryside to study, so we set up a school for them, taught them to write articles, personally lectured and guided them, treated them with the same etiquette as guests and hosts, and participated in tours and rituals together. Since then, the customs have changed a lot. The number of people who pass the township tax examination and go to Beijing to participate in the examination every year is equal to that of the mainland states.

古文：卒于官，年五十五，赠尚书左仆射。
现代文：他任此职时去世，享年五十五岁。赠官为尚书左仆射。
English: He died in office at the age of 55 and was succeeded by his right-hand man, Shang Shuzhu.

古文：其后闽人春秋配享衮于学官云。
现代文：据说后来福建人每年春秋两季把常衮的牌位放到官学接受祭祀。
English: It is said that the people of Fujian later placed the card rank of Changyu into the official school to receive sacrifices every spring and autumn.

