古文：甘脆肥脓，命曰腐肠之药；羹藜含糗，难语太牢之滋。御食曰珍馐，白米曰玉粒。
现代文：甘甜脆酥、浓醇肥美的食物，吃多了便是腐烂肠胃的毒药；对于终日以粗粮野菜充饥的人，很难向他们描述牛、羊、猪这些佳肴的滋味。皇帝吃的食物叫 珍馐 ，白米又称 玉粒 。
English: Sweet, crispy, rich and fatty food, eating too much is the poison of rotting intestines; for those who are hungry all day with coarse vegetables, it is difficult to describe to them the taste of cattle, sheep, pigs and other delicacies. The food eaten by the emperor is called precious rice, and white rice is also known as jade grain.

古文：好酒曰青州从事，次酒曰平原督邮。
现代文： 青州从事 是好酒的别名， 平原督邮 是劣酒的名称。
English: "Qingzhou engaged" is another name for good wine, and "Plain Post Office" is the name for bad wine.

古文：鲁酒茅柴，皆为薄酒；龙团雀舌，尽是香茗。
现代文： 鲁酒 、 茅柴 都是味道不醇厚的酒； 龙团 、 雀舌 都是上等的香茗。
English: Lu wine, Maochai are all mellow wines; Longtuan, Sparrow's Tongue are all first-class champagnes.

古文：待人礼衰，曰醴酒不设；款客甚薄，曰脱粟相留。
现代文：待客的礼仪渐衰微，称为 醴酒不设 。款待客人十分菲薄叫做 脱粟相留 。
English: The etiquette of waiting for guests is gradually fading, known as "no alcohol." Treating guests very thinly is called "staying away from poppies."

古文：竹叶青，状元红，俱为美酒；葡萄绿，珍珠红，悉是香醪。
现代文： 竹叶青  状元红 ，都是香甜的美酒； 葡萄绿  珍珠红 ，都是醇厚的香醪。
English: Bamboo leaf blue-like original red, are sweet wines; grape green, pearl red, are mellow champagne.

古文：五斗解酲，刘伶独溺于酒；两腋生风，卢仝偏嗜乎茶。茶曰酪奴，又曰瑞草；米曰白粲，又曰长腰。
现代文：喝五斗酒才能解酒瘾，刘伶极其爱酒；卢仝特别喜好喝茶，喝了七杯茶以后觉得两腋习习清风生。茶又名 酪奴 ，又称 瑞草 ；米也称为 白粲 ，又称 长腰 。
English: Drinking five buckets of wine can relieve alcohol addiction, Liu Wei is extremely fond of wine; Lu Wei is particularly fond of drinking tea, and after drinking seven cups of tea, he feels refreshed. Tea is also known as cheese, also known as sweet grass; rice is also known as chalk, also known as long waist.

古文：太羹玄酒，亦可荐馨；尘饭涂羹，焉能充饿。
现代文：即使用肉汁清水，也可以祭祀祖先；把灰尘泥土当作羹饭，怎能救人饥荒！
English: Even if you use gravy and clear water, you can also offer sacrifices to ancestors; if you use dust and dirt as soup, how can you save people from famine!

古文：酒系杜康所造，腐乃淮南所为。
现代文：酒是杜康首先制造的，豆腐则是淮南王刘安所发明。
English: Liquor was first made by Du Kang, and tofu was invented by Liu An, King of Huainan.

古文：僧谓鱼曰水梭花，僧谓鸡曰穿篱菜。
现代文：僧人把鱼叫做 水梭花 ，把鸡叫做 穿篱菜 。
English: The monks call the fish "water shuttle" and the chicken "through the hedge."

古文：临渊羡鱼，不如退而结网；扬汤止沸，不如去火抽薪。
现代文：站在水边想得到鱼，不如回家去结网；把锅里开着的水舀起来再倒回去，使它凉下来不沸腾，还不如抽掉锅底的柴火。
English: If you stand at the water's edge and want to catch fish, it is better to go home and cast a net; if you scoop up the water in the pot and then pour it back, so that it cools down and does not boil, it is better to remove the firewood from the bottom of the pot.

古文：羔酒自劳，田家之乐；含哺鼓腹，盛世之风。
现代文：吃了羊羔美酒，这是农家生活的欢乐。口里含着食物，肚子吃得饱饱的，这是形容太平盛世的状况。
English: Having eaten lamb and wine, this is the joy of farm life. Having food in the mouth and a full stomach, this is the description of a peaceful prosperous life.

古文：人贪食曰徒餔啜，食不敬曰嗟来食。
现代文：贪吃懒做的人，每天只知吃喝叫做徒啜；带有轻视性的施舍叫做嗟来食。
English: Those who are greedy and lazy only know how to eat and drink every day are called "suckers"; charity with a sense of contempt is called "suckers."

古文：多食不厌，谓之饕餮之徒；见食垂涎，谓有欲炙之色。
现代文：贪于饮食不知厌足，这是饕餮这一类的人；看见食物就垂涎三尺，这是一幅很想吃的样子。
English: People who are greedy for food and can't get enough of it are the type of people who are like centipedes; they salivate at the sight of food, and this is the look of someone who really wants to eat.

古文：未获同食，曰向隅；谢人赐食，曰饱德。
现代文：没有被邀请同食叫向隅，感谢主人殷勤款待赏赐食物叫做饱德。
English: If you are not invited to a meal, you should call out to the corner, thank the host for his hospitality and reward him with food, which is called sati.

古文：安步可以当车，晚食可以当肉。
现代文：平和安稳地走路当作坐车子一样舒服，肚子饿了以后吃什么都像吃肉。
English: Walking peacefully and steadily is as comfortable as riding in a car, and eating anything when you're hungry is like eating meat.

古文：饮食贫难曰半菽不饱，厚恩图报曰每饭不忘。
现代文：家境穷困时常吃不饱称为 半菽不饱 。受人厚恩常思报答称为 每饭不忘 。
English: A poor family is often not satisfied with what they eat, which is called "semi-starvation." A person who is favored by others often thinks about how to repay them, which is called "remembering every meal."

古文：谢扰人曰兵厨之扰，谦待薄曰草具之陈。
现代文：兵厨之扰是表示叨扰酒食的谢意；主人自谦待客菲薄叫做草具之陈。
English: To disturb the cook is to show one's gratitude for disturbing the food and drink; the host humbly waits for the guest.

古文：白饭青刍，待仆马之厚；炊金爨玉，谢款客之隆。
现代文： 白饭青刍 ，由此可知主人对仆人及马都很优厚； 炊金爨玉 ，是宾客感谢主人的隆重款待。
English: Shiroi Seigan, from which it can be seen that the master is very generous to his servants and horses; and rice cooked in gold and jade, are the guests thanking the master for his grand hospitality.

古文：家贫待客，但知抹月披风；冬月邀宾，乃曰敲冰煮茗。
现代文： 抹月批风 ，是文人表示家贫，没有东西可以招待客人的戏言； 敲冰煮茗 ，是冬天邀请客人的雅称。
English: "Wiping away the moon and blaming the wind" is a play on words used by literati to indicate that the family is poor and has nothing with which to invite guests; "knocking on the ice and boiling the lettuce" is a polite term for inviting guests in winter.

古文：君侧元臣，若作酒醴之麴蘖；朝中冢宰，若作和羹之盐梅。
现代文：君王身边的重臣，就像是酿酒时的酒曲一样重要；朝廷中的宰相，就像是调和五位羹汤时的盐和梅子一样不可或缺。
English: The chief minister around the monarch is as important as the sake melody when brewing wine; the prime minister in the court is as indispensable as the salt and plum when blending the five kinds of soup.

古文：宰肉甚均，陈平见重于父老；戛釜示尽，邱嫂心厌乎汉高。
现代文：陈平分肉十分公平，乡里父老都夸奖他；大嫂厌恶刘邦，在他来时故意敲锅子，表示羹已经吃完。
English: Chen Ping's division of the meat was very fair, and all the parents in the village praised him; his older sister-in-law detested Liu Bang, and when he came, she deliberately knocked on the pot to indicate that the soup was finished.

古文：毕卓为吏部而盗酒，逸兴太豪；越王爱士卒而投醪，战气百倍。
现代文：毕卓在吏部做官，夜里却到邻家偷酒喝，这种逸兴未免太过分；越王把酒倒在河水上游，让军士们都能喝到，军士们感激他的恩惠，因而勇气百倍。
English: Bi Zhuo worked as an official in the cadre department, but in the night he went to a neighbor's house to steal and drink wine. This extravagance was too much; Yue Wang poured the wine upstream of the river so that the sergeants could drink it. The sergeants were grateful for his favor, so they had a hundred times more courage.

古文：惩羹吹齑，谓人惩前警后；酒囊饭袋，谓人少学多餐。
现代文：惩羹吹齑是说因为喝热汤烫伤了，连吃冷菜，也不敢到口就吃，还要把它吹一吹，是惩前戒后，过分小心的意思。酒囊饭袋是形容人不学无术只会吃喝。
English: The punishing spoon blowing is to say that because the hot soup burns the spoon, even if you eat cold dishes, you dare not eat it to the mouth, and you have to blow it. It is the meaning of being too careful before and after the punishment. The wine bag lunch bag is to describe people who are not learned and have no skills, but only eat and drink.

古文：隐逸之士，漱石枕流；沉湎之夫，藉糟枕麴。
现代文：隐逸山林之士漱石枕流，是何等的清高；沉湎酒中的人，如同靠着酒糟，枕着酒曲，每天都活在醉梦中。
English: How clear and high is the pillow stream of Soseki, the hermit of the mountains and forests; people in heavy drinking, as if leaning on the dregs, with a pillow of wine songs, live in a drunken dream every day.

古文：昏庸桀纣，胡为酒池肉林；苦学仲淹，惟有断齑画粥。
现代文：昏庸无道的桀、纣，以酒为池，以肉为林；范仲淹刻苦求学，每天仅靠咸菜与白粥度日。
English: Dull and dull, with wine as a pool and meat as a forest; Fan Zhong studied hard and spent every day only on pickled vegetables and porridge.

