古文：高阳问力黑曰：天地已成，黔首乃生。
现代文：高阳问力黑说：天地已经形成，百姓也因此产生。
English: Gaoyang Qili Hei said: Heaven and earth have been formed, and the people have also come into being.

古文：莫循天德，谋相覆倾。
现代文：很多人都不遵循天道，而且阴谋相互颠覆，我对此十分忧虑，这怎么办呢？
English: I am very worried that many people are not following the heavenly way and are plotting to overthrow each other. What should I do?

古文：吾甚患之，为之若何？力黑对曰：勿忧勿患，天制固然。
现代文：力嘿回答说：不需忧虑，也不必担心，天道自有其本然的法则。
English: Lihai replied, "There is no need to worry, there is no need to worry, the heavenly way has its own inherent laws.

古文：天地已定，蚑蛲毕争。作争者凶，不争亦毋以成功。
现代文：天地的格局已定，连各色的动物都在纷纷争斗，妄肆争斗者有凶殃，然而一昧不争的也无成功可言。
English: The pattern of heaven and earth has been determined. Even animals of all colors are fighting one after another. Those who fight recklessly will meet with disaster. However, those who do not fight will not succeed.

古文：顺天者昌，逆天者亡。
现代文：自然社会的规律便是：顺随天道的就能兴昌，违逆天道的就会败亡。
English: Only those who obey the laws of nature can survive, and those who violate the laws of nature will inevitably perish.

古文：毋逆天道，则不失所守。
现代文：不违背天道，就不会失去自己所固有持守的东西。
English: If you don't go against the heavenly way, you won't lose what you inherently hold on to.

古文：天地已成，黔首乃生。
现代文：天地已经形成，人民随之产生。
English: Heaven and earth have been formed, and the people have come into being.

古文：胜生已定，敌者生争，不谌不定。
现代文：氏族部落已经形成，敌对的部落之间也就随之出现争斗，不予以伐正这种争端就不会平息。
English: Clans and tribes have been formed, and conflicts between rival tribes have ensued. These disputes will not subside unless they are resolved.

古文：凡谌之极，在刑与德。
现代文：而伐正的准则，便是刑罚和德赏并行。
English: The principle of rectification is that punishment and reward should go hand in hand.

古文：刑德皇皇，日月相望，以明其当。
现代文：刑罚与德赏昭著显明，兼行并举，配合恰当。
English: Punishments and moral rewards are conspicuous, concurrent, and appropriate.

古文：望失其当，环视其殃。
现代文：如果配合失当，上天会反过来降灾的。
English: If the cooperation is improper, God will in turn reduce the disaster.

古文：天德皇皇，非刑不行；缪缪天刑，非德必倾。
现代文：天德平正，但没有刑罚的配合是无法实行的；天刑威严，但没有德赏作依托也必然倾毁。
English: Heaven and morality are equal, but without the cooperation of punishment, they cannot be implemented; heaven and punishment are majestic, but without the reward of virtue as a support, they will inevitably be destroyed.

古文：刑德相养，逆顺若成。
现代文：刑罚与德赏相辅相成，逆与顺也便因此而定。
English: Punishments and moral rewards complement each other, and vice versa and proximate also depend on this.

古文：刑晦而德明，刑阴而德阳，刑微而德彰。
现代文：刑罚属阴的范畴，因此具有微晦的特质；德赏属阳的范畴，因此具有明彰的特质。
English: Punishment belongs to the yin category, so it has a subtle quality; virtue reward belongs to the yang category, so it has a bright quality.

古文：其明者以为法，而微道是行。
现代文：所以，秉执法度要彰明，施行道术要隐晦。
English: Therefore, the degree of adherence to law enforcement should be made clear, and the implementation of Taoism should be obscure.

古文：明明至微，时反以为几。天道环周，于人反为之客。
现代文：明了通晓德赏、刑罚的内涵以及二者之间的关系，就要抓住天道运行的规律来把握采取行动的契机。这样的话，人就能在天道运行当中反客为主。
English: Having understood the connotation of reward and punishment and the relationship between the two, it is necessary to grasp the laws of the operation of the heavenly way to grasp the opportunity to take action. In this case, people can be anti-customer-oriented in the operation of the heavenly way.

古文：争作得时，天地与之。争不衰，时静不静，国家不定。
现代文：如果一味地争竞，该静时不静，国家就无法安定治理。
English: If we only compete with each other, the country will not be able to be governed in a stable manner.

古文：可作不作，天稽环周，人反为之客。
现代文：相反的，该动时不动，那么在天道运行当中，人就会重新处于被动地位。
English: On the contrary, it is necessary to move and not move, then in the course of the heavenly path, people will be in a passive position again.

古文：静作得时，天地与之；静作失时，天地夺之。
现代文：因此说，动静合时，就会得到天地的佑助；而如果动静不合时宜，就会失去天地的佑助。
English: Therefore, it is said that when the movement is appropriate, it will receive the blessing of heaven and earth; and if the movement is not appropriate, it will lose the blessing of heaven and earth.

