古文：苏娥涪令妻诸葛元崇吕庆祖元徽李义琰岐州寺主馆陶主簿僧昙畅
现代文：苏娥涪令妻诸葛元崇吕庆祖元徽李义琰岐州寺主馆陶主簿僧昙畅
English: Su Ying, Su Ying's wife, Zhu Ge, Yuan Chong, Lu Qing, Zu Yuanhui, Li Yixing, Qizhou Temple's main hall, pottery master book, and monk Junchang

古文：午桥氏卢叔敏郑生
现代文：午桥氏卢叔敏郑生
English: Wu Qiao's Lu Shumin Zheng Sheng

古文：苏娥
现代文：苏娥
English: Su'e

古文：汉何敞为交趾刺史，行部苍梧郡高要县。
现代文：汉朝时何敞任交趾刺史。有一天到了苍梧郡高要县，晚上住在鹊奔亭。
English: During the Han Dynasty, he was an outspoken critic of the government. One day, he arrived in Gaoyao County, Cangwu County, and stayed in the evening at Gaobenting.

古文：暮宿鹊奔亭，夜犹未半，有一女从楼下出，自云： 妾姓苏名娥，字始珠，本广信县修里人。
现代文：还没有到半夜，见有一女子从楼下走出来，自己说： 我姓苏名娥，字始珠。原来是广信县修里人。
English: It was not yet midnight when I saw a woman come out from downstairs and say to herself: My surname is Su Nae, my first name is Shizuru. I am originally from Shuri in Guangxin County.

古文：早失父母，又无兄弟，夫亦久亡。
现代文：很早就失去了父母，又没有兄弟，丈夫也早死了。
English: She lost her parents at an early age, has no brothers, and her husband died long ago.

古文：有杂缯帛百二十疋，及婢一人，名致富，孤穷羸弱，不能自振，欲往傍县卖缯，就同县人王伯赁车牛一乘，直钱万二千，载妾并缯，令致富执辔。
现代文：家中有各种丝绸一百二十疋，以及奴婢一人，名叫致富。因我们孤苦穷困又很瘦弱，不能自己使生活振作起来，想要到临县去卖绸布，就向邻居王大伯租了一辆牛车，价值约一万二千钱。用车装着我和绸布，让致富赶着牛车。
English: There were one hundred and twenty silks of various kinds at home, as well as one slave, named Zhifu. Because we were lonely, poor and very thin, we could not cheer up our lives by ourselves. If we wanted to go to Lin County to sell silk cloth, we rented an ox cart from our neighbor, Uncle Wang, worth about twelve thousand yuan. The ox cart was used to carry me and the silk cloth, and let Zhifu drive the ox cart.

古文：以前年四月十日，到此亭外，于时已暮，行人既绝，不敢前行，因即留止。
现代文：在去年的四月十日，来到这座亭外，当时天色已晚，行人已经断绝，我们不敢前行，因此就停留在这里。
English: On April 10 last year, when we came to this pavilion, it was late in the day and there were no pedestrians. We didn't dare to go any further, so we stopped here.

古文：致富暴得腹痛，妾往亭长舍乞浆取火，亭长龚寿操刀持戟，来至车傍，问妾曰： 夫人从何所来？
现代文：致富突然肚子痛，我就去亭长家乞讨浆水和火，亭长龚寿听说后就拿着刀和戟，来到车旁，问我说： 夫人从什么地方来？
English: When I suddenly had a stomachache, I went to Ting Chang's house to beg for water and fire. After hearing about Ting Chang's death, I took a knife and sickle, came to the car and asked me: Where did my wife come from?

古文：车上何载？
现代文：车上装的什么？
English: What was in the car?

古文：丈夫安在？
现代文：你丈夫在哪里？
English: Where's your husband?

古文：何故独行？ 
现代文：为什么独自行走？ 
English: Why walk alone?

古文：妾应之曰： 何劳问之。 
现代文：我回答他说： 这些不必劳累你来过问了。 
English: I replied to him, "You don't have to go to all the trouble of asking.

古文：寿因捉臂欲汙妾。不从，寿即以刀刺胁，妾立死，又杀致富。
现代文：龚寿就趁机抓住我的手臂想要污辱我，我不顺从，他就用刀直刺我的肋下，我当时就死了，他又杀了致富，在这个楼下挖了个坑，把我和致富一块儿埋了。
English: Gong Shou took advantage of the opportunity to grab my arm to try to humiliate me. When I did not comply, he stabbed me directly under the ribs with a knife. I died at that time. He also killed Zhu Rong, dug a pit downstairs and buried me and Zhu Rong together.

古文：寿掘楼下，埋妾并婢，取财物去，杀牛烧车，杠及牛骨，投亭东空井中。
现代文：取走了财物，并杀了牛、烧了车，把牛骨杠着扔到了这个亭东面的空井里。
English: They took their belongings, killed the cow, burned the car, and threw the cow's bones into the empty well to the east of the pavilion.

古文：妾死痛酷，无所告诉，故来告于明使君。 
现代文：我死得好惨，无处投诉，所以才来告诉您。 
English: I died a horrible death and have no one to complain to, so I'm telling you.

古文：敞曰： 今欲发汝尸骸，以何为验？ 
现代文：何敞说： 现在要挖掘你的尸骸，凭什么作为验证呢？ 
English: He Zang said: Now we want to dig up your remains, on what basis as a verification?

古文：女子曰： 妾上下皆著白衣，青丝履，犹未朽也。 
现代文：女子说： 我全身穿的都是白色衣服，脚上是青丝鞋，还没有腐烂呢。 
English: The woman said, "I'm wearing white clothes all over my body, and I have blue silk shoes on my feet. They haven't rotted yet."

古文：掘之果然。
现代文：挖掘出来一看，果然象她说的那样。
English: When it was excavated, it turned out to be just as she said.

古文：敞乃遣吏捕寿，拷问具服，下广信县验问，与娥语同，收寿父母兄弟皆系狱。
现代文：何敞就派人去抓龚寿，拷问之后全部供认，又到广信县核对，同苏娥说的相同。又收监了龚寿的父母和兄弟等。
English: He promptly sent someone to arrest Gong Shou, tortured him until he confessed everything, and then sent him to Guangxin County for verification, which was the same as what Su E said. He also imprisoned Gong Shou's parents and brothers.

古文：敞表寿杀人，于常律不至族诛。但寿为恶，隐密经年，王法所不能得。
现代文：何敞说龚寿杀人，按一般刑律不至于诛连同族，但是龚寿作恶，隐瞒秘密有一年多了，王法所不能容。
English: According to the general criminal law, it is not enough for a murderer to be separated from his family, but if a murderer has been committing evil deeds and concealing secrets for more than a year, it cannot be tolerated by the Legal Affairs Bureau.

古文：鬼神自诉，千载无一，请皆斩之，以助阴诛，上报听之。
现代文：而鬼神自己出来控诉，这是千百年来没有的事，请求全部斩首，用来帮助阴间来杀他们，上报后同意何敞的处理意见。
English: But the ghosts and gods themselves came out to complain, which is something that has not happened for thousands of years. They requested that all beheadings be used to help the underworld to kill them. After the report was made, they agreed with Ho's handling opinion.

古文：涪令妻
现代文：涪令妻
English: The wife of a king

古文：汉王忳，字少琳，为郿县令。
现代文：汉朝人王忳，字少琳，作郿县县令。
English: The Han Dynasty people Wang Qian, also known as Shaolin, became the county magistrate of Qian County.

古文：之邰亭，亭素有鬼。
现代文：到邰亭，邰亭经常闹鬼，王忳就住在楼上。
English: When you get to Apgujeong, Apgujeong is often haunted, and Wang Yao lives upstairs.

古文：忳宿楼上，夜有女子，称欲诉冤，无衣自进。
现代文：到了夜间，有一个女子，自称要诉冤，没穿衣服就自己进来了。
English: During the night, a woman who said she wanted to file a complaint came in without any clothes on.

古文：忳以衣与之，进曰： 妾本涪令妻也，欲往官，过此亭宿。亭长杀妾大小十口，埋在楼下，取衣裳财物，亭长今为县门下游徼。 
现代文：王忳就拿衣服给她穿，她上前说： 我原本是涪县令的妻子，在随丈夫赴任途中，经过此亭，亭长带人杀了我家大小十口，掩埋在这座楼下，抢走了衣服和财物。亭长现在是你县的乡官掌巡察缉捕的 游徼  。
English: Wang Yao took clothes for her to wear, and she came forward and said, "I was originally the wife of the county magistrate of Handan County. On my way to work with my husband, I passed by this pavilion. The chief of the pavilion and his men killed ten members of my family, buried them under this staircase, and robbed them of their clothes and belongings. The chief of the pavilion is now a peregrine falcon that is being investigated and arrested by the township officials of your county.

古文：忳曰： 当为汝报之，无复妄杀良善也。 
现代文：王忳说： 我一定为你报仇，不能让他再杀好人啊。 
English: Wang Yao said, "I will definitely take revenge for you. I can't let him kill more good people."

古文：鬼投衣而去。
现代文：鬼放下衣服走了。
English: The ghost put down his clothes and walked away.

古文：忳且召游徼问，即服。收同时十余人，并杀之。
现代文：王忳立即召来游徼审问，他全部招供了，又抓了同时作案的十多人，一起杀了。
English: Wang Yao immediately summoned Youjun for interrogation. He confessed everything, and arrested more than ten people who committed the crime at the same time, and killed them together.

古文：掘取诸丧，归其家葬之，亭永清宁。
现代文：后来挖出被杀的人，送尸骨回家乡埋葬了，邰亭从此就清宁了。
English: Later, the person who was killed was dug up, and the bones were sent back to their hometown for burial. Since then, Suiting has been a peaceful place.

古文：诸葛元崇
现代文：诸葛元崇
English: Zhuge Yuan Chong

古文：瑯琊诸葛覆，宋永嘉年为九真太守，家累悉在扬都，唯将长子元崇赴职。
现代文：琅琊人诸葛覆，南朝宋文帝永嘉年间作九真太守。其家眷全留在扬都居住，只带着长子元崇去赴任。
English: Zhuge Zhou of the Han Dynasty became the 9th Empress Dowager during the reign of Emperor Yongjia of the Southern Song Dynasty. All of his family members stayed in Yangdu, except for his eldest son, Yuan Chong, who went to work.

古文：覆于郡病亡，元崇始年十九，送丧欲还。
现代文：诸葛覆于任内病故，元崇那年才十九岁，护送父亲灵柩回乡。
English: Zhuge Zhou died of illness while in office. Yuan Chong, who was only nineteen years old at the time, escorted his father's coffin back to his hometown.

古文：覆门生何法僧贪其资，与伴共推元崇堕水而死，因分其财。
现代文：诸葛覆的学生何法僧贪图诸葛家的财产，在送元崇回乡时与同谋把元崇推到水里淹死，瓜分掉诸葛元崇的钱财。
English: Zhuge Zhou's student, Ho Fa Monk, coveted the property of Zhuge Zhou's family. When he sent Yuan Chong back to his hometown, he and his accomplice pushed Yuan Chong into the water and drowned him, and divided up the money and property of Zhuge Zhou.

古文：元崇母陈氏梦元崇还，具叙父亡及身被杀委曲，尸骸流漂，怨酷无双。奉迷累载，一旦长辞，衔悲茹恨，如何可说。
现代文：元崇的母亲陈氏梦到元崇回来了。并叙述了父亲的死以及自己被害的全部经过，尸骸顺水漂流，怨恨无比，和母亲分别已经一年，现又被害死在外地，含悲饮恨，又向谁去述说呢。
English: Mr. Chen, the mother of Mr. Yuan Chong, dreamed that Mr. Yuan Chong had come back, and described the death of his father and the whole process of his own damage, the bodies drifted along the water, the resentment was incomparable, and his mother had been separated for a year, and now he was killed and died in a foreign country, with sorrow and hatred, and who would he tell?

古文：觑欷不能自胜，又云： 行速疲极，因卧窗下床上，以头枕窗，明日视儿眠处，足知非虚矣。 
现代文：长呼短叹不能自禁。又说，因走得匆忙急迫所以疲劳极了，就躺在窗下的床上，把头枕在窗台上。告诉母亲说： 您明天看一下我睡觉的地方，就知道我说的是事实。 
English: He couldn't help but sigh and groan. He also said that he was so tired because he was in such a hurry, so he lay down on the bed under the window and rested his head on the ledge. He told his mother, "You should take a look at where I sleep tomorrow and you'll see that I'm telling the truth."

古文：陈氏悲怛惊起，把火照儿眠处，沾湿犹如人形。于是举家号泣，便如发闻。
现代文：陈氏悲痛惊醒，点着火照着儿子睡过的地方，被水浸湿的地方好象人的形状，于是全家号哭，就象发丧一样。
English: Mr. Chen woke up in grief, lit a fire to illuminate the place where his son had slept, and the water-soaked place looked like a human shape, so the whole family cried, just like mourning.

古文：于时徐森之始除交州，徐道立为长史，道立即陈氏从姑儿也。具疏梦，托二徐验之。
现代文：当时徐森之刚刚任职交州，徐道立为长史，道立是陈氏表姐的儿子，就向他详细说了所做的梦，托付二徐察验此事。
English: At that time, Xu Senzhi had just taken office in Jiaozhou, and Xu Daoli, the son of Chen's cousin, told him in detail about the dream he had had, and entrusted Er Xu to investigate the matter.

古文：徐道立遇诸葛丧船，验其父子亡曰，悉如鬼语。
现代文：徐道立遇到了诸葛覆的丧船，对照其父子死亡的时间，与鬼说的完全相同。
English: Xu Daoli met Zhuge Zhou's funeral boat, and compared with the time of his father and son's death, it was exactly the same as the ghost said.

古文：乃收行凶二人，即皆款服，依法杀之，差人送丧还扬都。
现代文：就逮捕了行凶的两个人，二人都认了罪，依照法律把他们杀了。后又差人护送死了的诸葛覆的灵柩回扬都。
English: They arrested the two perpetrators, both of whom confessed to the crime, and killed them in accordance with the law. Later, they sent someone to escort the coffin of the dead Zhuge Hui back to Yangdu.

古文：吕庆祖
现代文：吕庆祖
English: Lyu Qingzu

古文：宋永康人吕庆祖，家甚殷富，常使一奴名教子守视墅舍。庆祖自往案行，忽为人所杀。
现代文：宋朝永康人吕庆祖，家产很富，平时派一名叫教子的奴仆看守家园，庆祖自顾办自己的事，有一天忽然被人杀害。
English: Lu Qingzu, a member of the Yongkang dynasty of the Song Dynasty, had a very rich family, and usually sent a servant called Guozi to guard his home. Qingzu took care of his own affairs, but one day he was suddenly killed.

古文：族弟无期，先贷举庆祖钱，咸谓为害。
现代文：同族中有个弟弟名叫无期，以前曾向庆祖借过钱。大家都说庆祖是被无期杀害的。
English: There was a younger brother in the same family named Mu Zhou, who had previously borrowed money from Qing Zu. Everyone said that Qing Zu was killed by Mu Zhou.

古文：无期便斋酒脯至柩所而祝曰： 君荼酷如此，乃谓是我，魂而有灵，使知其全。 
现代文：无期便拿着酒菜到庆祖的灵柩前祷告说： 你遭到这样惨死，都说是我干的，请你魂魄显灵，让别人知道谁是凶手。 
English: Unexpectedly, he took the wine and vegetables to Qingzu's coffin and prayed: "You suffered such a tragic death, everyone says I did it, please reveal your soul, let others know who the murderer is.

古文：既还，至三更，见庆祖来云： 近履行，见奴教子畦畴不理，许当痛治。奴遂以斧砍我背，将帽塞口，因得啮奴三指，悉皆破醉。
现代文：回来后，到了三更天，看见庆祖来说： 近日察看家园，见我的仆人教子不整理田舍，我就说要狠狠地惩罚他，他就用斧子砍我的后背，并用帽子堵我的嘴，我趁机咬住他的三个手指，都被我咬碎了。
English: After returning, on the third day, he saw Qing Zu and said, "Recently I inspected my home and saw that my servant godson was not tidying up the farmhouse. I said I would punish him severely. He cut my back with an axe and gagged my mouth with a hat. I took the opportunity to bite three of his fingers, and I bit them all to pieces.

古文：便取刀刺我颈，曳著后门。
现代文：他又拿刀刺我的脖颈，拉扯着到了后门。
English: He stabbed me again in the neck and dragged me to the back door.

古文：初见杀时，从行人亦在其中，而不同，执罪之失也。
现代文：当初我被杀时，其它仆人也有在场的，只是和他不一样，他是杀我的主犯。
English: When I was killed, other servants were also present, but unlike him, he was the main culprit.

古文：奴今欲叛，我已钉其头著壁。 
现代文：教子现在想要逃跑，我把他的头钉在墙上。 
English: My godson now wants to run away and I've nailed his head to the wall.

古文：言卒而遂灭。
现代文：说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：无期具以告其父母，潜视奴所住壁，果有一把发，以竹钉之。又看其指，并见伤破，录奴诘验，承伏。
现代文：无期把这件事全都告诉了庆祖的父母，他们暗中到教子的房里，看到墙上果有一把头发，是用竹签钉上的，又看教子的手指头，也真的受伤了。
English: They told all of this to Qingzu's parents in vain. They secretly went to their godson's room, saw a handful of hair on the wall, nailed with a bamboo stick, and looked at their godson's fingers. They were really hurt.

古文：又问汝既反逆，何以不叛，奴曰： 头如被击，欲逃不得，诸同见者事相符。即焚教子，并其二息。
现代文：抓住这个奴仆审问，他全部认罪了。又问他，你既然反叛了主人，为什么不逃走呢？教子说： 我的头好象被人拽住了似的，想要逃却逃不掉。 大家见人事相符，就杀了教子连同他的两个孩子。
English: They seized the slave and questioned him, and he confessed everything. They also asked him, "Since you have rebelled against your master, why didn't you run away?" His godson said, "My head seems to have been pulled by someone. I tried to escape, but I couldn't. When they saw that there was a match, they killed my godson and his two children."

古文：元徽
现代文：元徽
English: Original coat of arms

古文：后魏庄帝永安中，北海王颢入洛。庄帝北巡，城阳王徽舍宅为宣中寺，尔朱兆擒庄帝，徽投前洛阳令寇祖仁。
现代文：后魏庄帝永安年间，北海王元颢攻入洛阳，魏庄帝向北逃走，城阳王元徽献出自己的宅园作宣中寺，随着皇帝出逃。后来尔朱兆活捉了庄帝，元徽只好投奔前洛阳县令寇祖仁。
English: During the Yongan period after the Wei Zhuang Emperor, the North Sea King Yuan Shun invaded Luoyang, the Wei Zhuang Emperor fled to the north, and the Chengyang King Yuan Hui offered his home garden to build the Xuanzhong Temple, and fled with the emperor. Later, Zhu Zhao captured the Zhuang Emperor alive, and Yuan Hui had to go to the former Luoyang County Ling Ke Zu Ren.

古文：祖仁闻尔朱兆购徽，乃斩徽首送兆。
现代文：寇祖仁听说尔朱兆悬赏提拿元徽，就杀了元徽把首级送给尔朱兆。
English: When Kozu-Ren heard that Er Shuzhao was offering a reward to take the original emblem, he killed the original emblem and gave the head to Er Shuzhao.

古文：兆梦徽曰： 我有金二百斤，马一百匹，在祖仁家，卿可取之。 
现代文：尔朱兆梦到元徽说： 我有白银二百斤，一百匹马，现在寇祖仁家，你可以去取来。 
English: When Zhu Zhaomeng went to Yuanhui, he said, "I have two hundred catties of silver and a hundred horses, and now I am at Kozu-Ren's house. You can go and get them."

古文：兆于是悬祖仁首于高树，以大石坠其足，鞭棰之，问得金及马。
现代文：尔朱兆就把寇祖仁的头吊在大树上，用大石头坠着他的脚，用鞭子打他，问他白银和马都放在哪里了。
English: Le Zhu Zhao then hung Kozu Ren's head from a large tree, pelted his feet with large stones, beat him with a whip, and asked him where he had put the silver and horses.

古文：而祖仁死，时以为祸报。
现代文：就这样寇祖仁被活活打死，当时人们都认为这是作恶的报应。
English: In this way, Kozuken was beaten to death. At the time, people thought that this was retribution for doing evil.

古文：李义琰
现代文：李义琰
English: Lee Eui-yong

古文：唐陇西李义琰，贞观年中，为华州县尉。
现代文：唐朝陇西有个叫李义琰的人，在太宗贞观年间，任华州县尉。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Li Yixuan in the west of Shaanxi Province. During the reign of Taizong Zhenguo, he was a lieutenant of Huazhou County.

古文：此县忽失一人，莫知所在，其父兄疑一仇家所害，诣县陈情。
现代文：华州县忽然失掉一个人，没有人能知道他到那里去了。这家的父亲和兄长都怀疑是与他们家有仇的人家害的，就把情况向县衙报告了。
English: A man was suddenly lost in Huazhou County, and no one knew where he had gone. The father and elder brother of the family suspected that someone with a grudge against their family had caused the accident, and reported the situation to the county magistrate.

古文：义琰案之，不能得决，夜中执烛，委细穷问。
现代文：义琰接受了这个案子，但不能做出决断。夜间点上灯烛，细细的追问。
English: Yixuan accepted the case, but could not make a decision. At night, he lit a candle and asked detailed questions.

古文：至夜，义琰据案俛首，不觉死人即在，犹带被伤之状，云： 某乙打杀，置于某所井中，公可早验，不然，恐被移向他处，不可寻觅。 
现代文：到了深夜低头伏在桌子上，不知不觉看见死人来了，好象还带着被打伤的样子，那人说： 我是被某人打死的。又把我扔到一个井里，您应该早去验证，不这样的话，恐怕被移到别的地方，以后就不好找了。 
English: In the middle of the night, he lay with his head down on the table and unknowingly saw the dead man coming, as if he was still injured. The man said: "I was killed by someone. They threw me into a well. You should have checked it out earlier. Otherwise, I'm afraid I would have been moved to another place and it would have been difficult to find me later."

古文：义琰即亲往，果如所陈，而仇家始具款伏。
现代文：义琰听了他的话后立刻亲自前往巡视，真的象鬼在梦中所说的那样。这时，那个和死人有仇的人家才认罪伏法。
English: After listening to his words, Yixuan immediately went to the inspection in person, really like a ghost said in a dream. At this time, the person who had a grudge against the dead person confessed to the crime.

古文：当闻见者，莫不惊叹。
现代文：当时听到这件事的人没有一个不惊叹的。
English: No one who heard about it at the time could fail to be amazed.

古文：岐州寺主
现代文：岐州寺主
English: The head priest of a temple in Kishu

古文：唐贞观十三年，岐州城内有寺主，共都维那为隙，遂杀都维那，解为十二段，置于厕中。
现代文：唐朝贞观十三年，岐州城里有个寺主，同都维那不和，于是就杀了都维那，尸体肢解为十二块，扔到厕所里。
English: In the thirteenth year of Zhenguan of the Tang Dynasty, there was a temple master in the city of Qizhou who was at odds with Du Wei, so he killed Du Wei, dismembered the body into twelve pieces, and threw it into the toilet.

古文：寺僧不见都维那久，遂告别驾杨安共来验检，都无踪迹。
现代文：寺内的众僧很长时间没有看到都维那了。就告诉了其衙里的别驾杨安共来验查，但没有发现什么蛛丝马迹。
English: The monks in the temple hadn't seen Du Wei for a long time, so they told Yang Anqin, the head monk of the monastery, to come and check on him, but no clues were found.

古文：别驾欲出，诸僧送别驾，见寺主左臂上袈裟，忽有些鲜血。别驾勘问，云： 当杀之夜，不著袈裟，有其鲜血，是诸佛菩萨所为。 
现代文：杨安共要走，众僧都来送他，这时忽然发现寺主左臂的袈裟上，有些血迹，杨安共就追问他，寺主说： 都维那被杀那天晚上，我没有穿袈裟，有他的鲜血，恐怕是诸位神佛和菩萨显灵的结果。 
English: Yang Anqin wanted to leave, and all the monks came to see him off. At this time, they suddenly found some bloodstains on the yoke of the left arm of the temple's head priest. Yang Anqin questioned him. The temple's head priest said, "On the night of Du Wei's murder, I was not wearing a yoke. His blood is there. I'm afraid it's the result of the manifestation of the spirits of all the gods, buddhas and bodhisattvas."

古文：竟伏诛。
现代文：最后寺主伏法被杀了。
English: In the end, the head of the temple, Fubo, was killed.

古文：馆陶主簿
现代文：馆陶主簿
English: Museum Pottery Master Book

古文：唐冀州馆陶县主簿姓周，忘其名字。
现代文：唐朝冀州馆陶县的主簿姓周，忘记他叫什么名字了。
English: The main book of the Tang Dynasty Jizhou Pavilion Tao County is surnamed Zhou, but I have forgotten his name.

古文：显庆中，奉使于临渝关牙市。
现代文：高宗显庆年间，他奉命到临渝关牙市办事。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gao Zongxianqing, he was ordered to work in the city of Linyu.

古文：当去之时，佐使等二人从往，周将钱帛稍多，二人乃以土囊压而杀之。所有钱帛，咸盗将去，唯有随身衣服充敛。
现代文：当他去的时候，有两个助手跟从他去。周主簿带的钱财稍多些，两个人见钱生恶心，就用土袋子把主簿压死，所带的钱财全部被盗走，只剩下了随身穿的衣服而被埋葬。
English: When he left, he was followed by two assistants. Zhou's master ledger contained slightly more money and property. Two of them, disgusted by the amount of money, crushed the master's ledger to death with an earthen bag. All the money and property he had brought with him was stolen, and only the clothes he was wearing were left to be buried.

古文：至岁暮，妻梦，具说被杀之状，兼言所盗财物之处。
现代文：到了年底，主簿的妻子做了个梦，主簿向她说了被害的全部经过，又提到了被盗去的财物现在藏的地方。
English: At the end of the year, the wife of the accountant had a dream, and the accountant told her the whole story of the damage, and also mentioned where the stolen property was now hidden.

古文：妻乃依此诉官。
现代文：周的妻子凭这梦中的情景报告官府。
English: Zhou's wife used the dream to report to the government.

古文：官司案辨，具得实状，钱帛并获，二人皆坐处死。
现代文：官府立案分析审理，得到了全部实情，并起出了被盗去的钱财，那两个人都因犯法而被处死。
English: After the case was filed, analyzed and tried by the government, all the facts were obtained, and the stolen money was recovered, and the two people were executed for breaking the law.

古文：相州智力寺僧慧永云，尝亲见明庭观道士刘仁宽说之。
现代文：相州智力寺的和尚慧永说，他曾亲眼见到明庭观道士刘仁宽说这件事。
English: Huiyong, a monk of the Xiangzhou Intellectual Temple, said that he had personally seen Liu Renkang, a Ming Court Taoist, say this.

古文：僧昙畅
现代文：僧昙畅
English: Sanghyeonchang

古文：唐乾封年中，京西明寺僧昙畅，将一奴二骡向岐州棱法师处听讲。
现代文：唐高宗乾封年间，京城西明寺的和尚昙畅，带着一个仆人两匹骡子去岐州棱法师处听讲。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong of Tang, the monk Junchang of Ximing Temple in Beijing took a servant and two mules to listen to the teachings of the Qizhou Ren Master.

古文：道逢一人，著衲帽弊衣，掐数珠，自云贤者五戒，讲。
现代文：途中遇上个人，穿戴着破旧的衣帽，手中掐着念珠，自己说是贤德的人，叫五戒，晚上到马嵬店住宿。
English: On the way, I met a person, wearing a shabby cap and gown, with a rosary in his hand. He said that he was a virtuous person, called Wujie. In the evening, he stayed at a horse stables.

古文：夜至马嵬店宿，五戒礼佛诵经，半夜不歇，畅以为精进一练。
现代文：五戒拜佛念经至半夜不停。昙畅以为五戒精练到如此地步。
English: He recited the Five Precepts of Buddhism non-stop until midnight. He thought it was the best way to practice the Five Precepts.

古文：至四更，即共同发，去店十余里，忽袖中出两刃刀子，刺杀畅，其奴下马入草走，其五戒骑骡驱驮即去。
现代文：四更天，就一齐出发。离开旅店十多里，五戒忽然从袖子里拔出一把两刃刀刺杀昙畅，那奴仆跳下马钻进草地跑了。五戒骑着马驮着东西也立刻离开了。
English: Four days later, they set off together. More than ten miles away from the hotel, Wukai suddenly pulled out a double-edged knife from his sleeve to assassinate Hunchang. The servant jumped off his horse and ran into the grass. Wukai also rode away with something.

古文：主人未晓，梦畅告云： 昨夜五戒杀贫道。 
现代文：店主人还没有醒，梦见昙畅告诉说： 昨夜五戒杀我。 
English: The owner of the store had not yet woken up, and he dreamt that Yan Chang told him: "Last night, the Five Precepts killed me.

古文：须臾奴走到，告之如梦。
现代文：不一会，奴仆跑到，告诉店主，就象梦中的情形一样。
English: After a while, the servant ran and told the owner, just like in a dream.

古文：时同宿三卫子，披持弓箭，乘马趁四十余里，以弓箭拟之，即下骡乞死。
现代文：当时同时住宿的三卫子，带着弓箭，骑着马追赶了四十多里，用弓箭逼住他，五戒立刻下马乞求饶命。
English: At that time, the three guards who were staying at the same time, with bows and arrows, chased the horse for more than forty miles, forced him with bows and arrows, and immediately got off the horse and begged for his life.

古文：缚送县，决杀之。
现代文：就捆绑着送到县里杀了他。
English: They tied him up and took him to the county to kill him.

古文：午桥民
现代文：午桥民
English: Wu Qiao Min

古文：唐卫州司马杜某尝为洛阳尉，知捕寇。
现代文：唐朝卫州司马姓杜曾任洛阳县尉，主管捕捉盗贼。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Wei Zhou Sima surnamed Du once served as Luoyang County Lieutenant, in charge of catching thieves.

古文：时洛阳城南午桥，有人家失火，七人皆焚死。
现代文：当时洛阳城南的午桥，有一家失了火，这家的七口人都烧死了。
English: At that time, in the south of Luoyang city, there was a fire in a family, and all seven members of the family were burned to death.

古文：杜某坐厅事，忽有一人为门者所执，狼狈至前。
现代文：杜县卫正在办公，忽然看见有一个人被门卫抓住，样子非常狼狈来到面前。
English: Du County Guard is in the office, suddenly saw a person was caught by the doorman and came to the front looking very confused.

古文：问其故，门者曰： 此人适来，若大惊恐状，再驰入县门，复驰出，故执之。 
现代文：杜县尉问是什么缘故。门卫报告说： 这个人才来的时候，好象受很大的惊恐的样子，再次跑进县衙门，又很快地跑出去，所以我就把他捉住了。 
English: The gatekeeper reported: "When this man came, he seemed to be very frightened, ran into the county gate again, and quickly ran out, so I caught him.

古文：其人曰： 某即杀午桥人家之贼也，故来归命。
现代文：那个人说： 我就是杀午桥人家的坏人，所以来自首。 
English: The man said, "I am the bad guy who killed the Wuhou family, so I am turning myself in."

古文：尝为伴五人，同劫其家，得财物数百千，恐事泄，则杀其人，焚其室，如自焚死者，故得人不疑。
现代文：原来同伙的有五个人，一同抢劫了那家人家，抢得财物有几百千钱，恐怕事情被人发现，就杀了他们全家人，放火烧了房子，好象自己烧死的，好叫别人不生疑。
English: Originally, there were five accomplices who robbed the family's home together, robbing hundreds of thousands of dollars in property. Afraid that the matter would be discovered, they killed their entire family and set fire to the house, as if they had burned to death, so that others would not be suspicious.

古文：将财至城，舍于道德里，与其伴欲出外，辄坎轲不能去。今日出道德坊南行，忽见空中有火六七团，大者如瓠，小者如杯，遮其前，不得南出。因北走，有小火直入心中，爇其心腑，痛热发狂。因为诸火遮绕，驱之令入县门，及入则不见火，心中火亦尽。于是出门，火又尽在空中，遮不令出，自知不免，故备言之。
现代文：把钱财送到城内的道德里藏起来，和同伙想要逃到外地，但道路不平坷坷绊绊不能走，今天从道德里往南逃，忽然看见天上有六七团火，大的象葫芦，小的象酒杯，遮挡在他们前面，不能南逃，因此又往北跑，又有小火团直进入心中，烧到心腹，又痛又热发了狂，又因好些火团遮饶着他，驱赶着他让他进县衙门，等到进了县门就看不见火了，心中的火也没有了，于是又跑出衙门，那些火团又全在空中，遮拦着不让他跑出，他自知不能幸免，所以才全部招认供出了。
English: He hid the money and property in a chest in the city. He and his accomplices wanted to escape to the countryside, but the road was rough and bumpy and they couldn't make it. Today, he fled south from the chest. Suddenly, he saw six or seven balls of fire in the sky, large ones like gourds and small ones like wine glasses, blocking their way and preventing him from escaping south. So he ran north again. Small fireballs flew straight into his heart, burning it to the pit of his stomach, making him mad with pain and heat. Many fireballs covered him and drove him into the county gate. When he entered the county gate, he couldn't see

古文：由是命尽取其党及财物，于府杀之。
现代文：由此杜县尉命人全部抓获其同伙并缴获了全部财物，在县衙把他们杀了。
English: As a result, the commander of Du County ordered all of his accomplices to be captured, seized all of their property, and killed them at the county seat.

古文：卢叔敏
现代文：卢叔敏
English: Lu Shumin

古文：唐卢叔敏，居缑氏县，即故太傅文贞公崔祐甫之表侄。
现代文：唐朝的卢叔敏，住在缑氏县，就是已故的太傅文贞公崔祐甫的表侄。
English: Lu Shumin of the Tang Dynasty, who lived in Jinshi County, was the cousin of the late Taifu Wenzheng Cui Youfu.

古文：时祐甫初拜相，有书与卢生，令应明经举。
现代文：当时祐甫刚当上宰相，有信给卢生，让他进京考举人。
English: At that time, Yu Fu had just become the prime minister, and he had a letter to Lu Sheng, asking him to go to Beijing for the examination.

古文：生遂自缑氏赴京，行李贫困，有驴，两头叉袋，一奴才十余岁而已。
现代文：卢生就从缑氏县奔赴京城。他的行李很少，有一头驴，驮着两个布袋。有一个才十多岁的小书僮。
English: Lu Sheng rushed to Beijing from Jinshi County. He had very little luggage. He had a donkey, carrying two cloth bags, and a small bookshelf that was more than ten years old.

古文：初发县，有一紫衣人，擎小幞，与生同行，云： 送书状至城。 
现代文：刚从县城出发，有一个穿紫色衣服的人拿着个小包袱，与卢生同行。
English: Just after setting out from the county seat, there was a man in purple clothes carrying a small bag, walking with Lu Sheng.

古文：辞气甚谨。生以僮仆小，甚利其作侣，扶接鞍乘。
现代文：自己说是送状子进京城，言谈举目很谨慎，卢生因为奴仆太小，很愿意和他作伴，那人也帮卢生扶鞍解蹬，一路上帮了不少忙。
English: He said that he came to Beijing with a letter of invitation, and he was very cautious in his speech. Lu Sheng, because his servant was too small, was very willing to accompany him. The man also helped Lu Sheng to saddle and untie the horse, and helped a lot along the way.

古文：每到店，必分以茶酒，紫衣者亦甚知愧。
现代文：每次到了旅店，卢生一定要分些茶酒给他吃，那紫衣人也很领情。
English: Every time he arrived at the inn, Lu Sheng would make sure to give him some tea and wine to eat. The man in purple was very appreciative.

古文：至鄂岭，早发十余里，天才明，紫衣人与小奴驱驴在后。
现代文：到鄂岭，起早走出十多里，天才亮。紫衣和小童仆赶着驴在后面走。
English: To E-ling, get up early and walk more than ten miles, genius bright. Purple clothes and small children's servants drive the donkey behind.

古文：忽闻奴叫呼声，云： 被紫衣殴击。 
现代文：急然听到后面有呼叫声。小童说紫衣人打了他。
English: Suddenly he heard a shout from behind. The boy said that the man in purple had hit him.

古文：生曰： 奴有过但言，必为科决，何得便自打也。 
现代文：卢生说： 小奴有什么过错只管说，我一定要教训他，你何必随便亲自打他呢？ 
English: Lu Sheng said: What is the fault of the slave, just say, I must teach him a lesson, why do you need to hit him?

古文：言讫，已见紫衣人怀中抽刀，刺奴洞肠流血。
现代文：说完，只见紫衣人从怀里抽出刀，刺破了小童的肚子，肠子和血都流出来。
English: After saying this, the man in purple drew a knife from his arms and stabbed the child in the stomach, causing his intestines and blood to come out.

古文：生乃惊走，初尚乘驴，行数十步，见紫衣人趁在后，弃驴并靴，驰十数步，紫衣逐及，以刀刺倒，与奴同死于岭上。
现代文：卢生害怕逃跑，开始还骑着驴，跑了十多步，发现紫衣人在后面紧追，慌忙丢掉了驴和鞋，又跑了十多步，紫衣人追上来，用刀把他刺倒，和小童仆一块儿死在岭上。
English: Lu Sheng was afraid to run away. At first, he rode a donkey and ran more than ten steps. He found that the man in purple was chasing him. He hurriedly threw away his donkey and shoes and ran more than ten steps. The man in purple caught up with him, stabbed him with a knife, and died on the ridge together with the boy servant.

古文：时缑氏尉郑楚相，与生中外兄弟。
现代文：那时缑氏县的县尉郑楚相，和卢生是表兄弟。
English: At that time, Zheng Chuxiang, the county lieutenant of Jixi County, and Lu Sheng were cousins.

古文：晨起，于厅中忽困睡，梦生被发，血污面目，谓尉曰： 某已被贼杀矣。 
现代文：这天早晨起来，在厅堂中忽然困倦睡着了，梦到卢生披散着头发，满脸是血，对县尉说： 我已经被贼人杀了。 
English: This morning, I woke up and suddenly fell asleep in the hall, feeling drowsy. I dreamed that Lu Sheng, with his hair disheveled and his face covered in blood, said to the county lieutenant, "I have been killed by thieves."

古文：因问其由，曰： 某枉死，然此贼今捉未得。 
现代文：县尉因此询问详情。卢生说： 我死得太冤枉了，但是这个贼人现在还没有抓到。 
English: Lu Sheng said, "My death was too unjust, but this thief has not been caught yet."

古文：乃牵白牛一头来，跛左脚，曰： 兄但记此牛，明年八月一日平明，贼从河中府，与同党买牛来，于此过，入西郭门，最后驱此者即是。 
现代文：说着就牵了一头白牛，这牛跛着左腿。卢生说： 表兄要记住这条牛，明年八月一日天亮时，贼人要从河中府与他的同伙卖牛来，从这里经过，进西城门，最后面那个赶着这条牛的人就是杀我的人。 
English: Lu Sheng said, "Cousin, remember this cow. At dawn on the first day of August next year, the thief and his accomplices will come from Hechu Prefecture to sell the cow. They will pass through here and enter the West City Gate. The last person to drive this cow will be the one who kills me."

古文：郑君惊觉，遂言于同僚。至明日，府牒令捉贼，方知卢生已为贼所杀。
现代文：郑县尉惊醒，于是说给同僚们听，第二天，州府通牒下令捉拿贼人，才知道卢生真的被贼人杀害了。
English: Zheng County Lieutenant woke up and said to his colleagues, the next day, the state government issued an ultimatum to arrest the thief, only to know that Lu Sheng was really killed by the thief.

古文：于书帙中得崔相手札，河南尹捕捉甚急，都无踪迹。
现代文：在书袋里找到了崔宰相的一封信。河南府尹下令捕捉凶犯很急迫，但是一点踪影也没有。
English: A letter from Prime Minister Cui was found in the satchel. Yin of Henan ordered the arrest of the murderer as a matter of urgency, but there was no trace of him.

古文：至明年七月末，郑君与县宰计议，至其日五更，潜布弓矢手力于西郭门外，郑君领徒自往，伏于路侧。至日初出，果有人驱牛自西来者。
现代文：到了第二年七月末，郑县尉同县宰商量，直到快天亮，在西城城门外埋伏下弓箭手，郑县尉亲自领了些人，埋伏在路边，直到太阳刚刚出来，果然有一些从西边赶着牛来的人，后面有一条白牛跛着腿，走得慢，赶不上大队，有一个人赶着它。
English: At the end of July of the following year, the lieutenant of Zheng County consulted with the governor of the county, and waited until almost dawn to ambush the archers outside the gate of the West City. The lieutenant of Zheng County personally led some people to ambush the roadside until the sun just came out. Sure enough, there were some people from the west who were driving cows. Behind them was a white cow with its legs tied. It was walking slowly and could not catch up with the brigade. One person was driving it.

古文：及开之，知非也，唯得绢两疋耳。自此以来，常仿佛见此郎君在侧，如未露，尚欲归死，已就执，岂敢隐讳手！ 因具言其始末，与其徒皆死于市。
现代文：这头牛就是郑楚相在梦中牵着的那头，于是就抓获了那人，还有同伙的六七个人也全都抓到了，赶着跛牛的人，就是杀卢生的贼人。审问后他全部供认。又说： 这位先生对我有恩，但我把他口袋里的书，错误的认为是绸缎，于是劫杀了他，等我打开那些布袋，才知不是绸缎，只得到两匹绸布罢了。从那时起到现在，经常仿佛看见这个年轻人在我的身旁，这件事如果不泄露，我都要去死，现在已经被捉到了，还敢隐瞒吗？ 他就说出了事情的全部经过，最后和同伙的那些人一同死在刑场。
English: This cow was the one that Zheng Chuxiang was leading in his dream, so they caught the man, and all of his six or seven accomplices were also caught. The person who drove the yakitori was the thief who killed Lu Sheng. After the interrogation, he confessed everything. He also said: This gentleman was kind to me, but I mistakenly thought that the book in his pocket was silk, so I robbed him and killed him. When I opened those cloth bags, I found out that it was not silk, but only got two pieces of silk. From then until now, I often seem to see this young man next to me. If I did not reveal this, I would die

古文：郑生
现代文：郑生
English: Zheng Sheng

古文：唐荥阳郑生，善骑射，以勇悍趫捷闻，家于巩雒之郊。
现代文：唐朝荥阳人郑生，擅长骑马射箭，凭勇敢强悍矫健敏捷而闻名，家在洛阳郊区。
English: Zheng Sheng, a native of Luoyang in the Tang Dynasty, excelled at horseback archery and was known for his bravery, strength, agility. He lived on the outskirts of Luoyang.

古文：尝一日乘醉，手弓腰矢，驰捷马，独驱田野间，去其居且数十里。会天暮，大风雨，生庇于大木下。久之，得雨霁，已夕矣，迷失道，纵马行，见道旁有门宇，乃神庙也。
现代文：有一天乘着酒醉，手拿着弓，腰上挂着箭囊，骑一匹快马，独自在田野间奔驰，离他家约几十里了，天色已晚，又赶上大风雨，没办法，郑生就在大树下避雨，过了很长时间雨才停，但是天已黑了，迷失了道路，只好骑着马随意走。走不多远，忽然看见路旁有座门楼。走近才知是座神庙。
English: One day, drunk, with a bow in his hand and a quiver of arrows around his waist, he was riding a fast horse, galloping alone through the fields. He was about several dozen miles from his home. It was late in the day, and there was a big storm. There was no way out. Zheng Sheng took shelter under a big tree. It took a long time for the rain to stop, but it was already dark and the road was lost, so he had to ride the horse at will. He didn't go far before he suddenly saw a gatehouse on the side of the road. It was only when he got closer that he knew it was a temple.

古文：生以马系门外，将止屋中，忽栗然心动，即匿身东庑下，闻庙左空舍中窣窣然，生疑其鬼，因引弓震弦以伺之。俄见一丈夫，身长衣短，后卓衣负囊仗剑自空舍中出，既而倚剑扬言曰： 我盗也，尔岂非盗乎？ 
现代文：郑生把马拴在庙门外，刚进到屋里，忽然害怕心跳，立刻藏在东厢房下，听到庙左边的空屋子里有悉悉窣窣的声音，郑生心里怀疑是鬼，就拉起弓，搭上箭等待着，不一会看见一个男人，身体高大但衣服很短，身后背个包袱拿着剑从空屋子里出来，然后就提着剑大声说： 我是强盗，你难道也是强盗？ 
English: Zheng Sheng tied his horse outside the door of the temple. As soon as he entered the room, he was suddenly afraid of his heartbeat and immediately hid under the east wing. He heard a muffled sound in the empty room on the left side of the temple. Zheng Sheng suspected that it was a ghost in his heart, so he drew his bow and waited with his arrows. Soon he saw a man, tall but with short clothes, carrying a bag behind him and coming out of the empty room with a sword. Then he said loudly with his sword: I am a robber, are you also a robber?

古文：郑生曰： 吾家于巩雒之郊，向者独驱田间，适遇大风雨，迷而失道，故匿身于此。 
现代文：郑生说： 我家住在洛阳郊外，到这之前因独自骑马在田野里跑，正遇大风骤雨，又迷了路，所以才到这里藏身。 
English: Zheng Sheng said: My family lives on the outskirts of Luoyang. Before this, because I was riding alone in the fields, I was in a storm and lost my way, so I came here to hide.

古文：仗剑者曰： 子既不为盗，得无害我之心乎？
现代文：拿着剑的人说： 你既然不是强盗，难道没有伤害我的心吗？
English: The man with the sword said: Since you are not a robber, have you not wounded my heart?

古文：且我遁去，道必经东庑下，愿解弓弦以授我，使我得去，不然，且死于竖子矣。 
现代文：且放我逃走，一定要经过东屋廊下，希望你解下弓弦交给我，我才敢放心走。不这样，我就会死在你这小子手里。 
English: And if you let me escape, I must go through the east hallway. I hope you will loosen the bowstring and give it to me, so I can go with confidence. Otherwise, I will die in your little hands.

古文：先是生常别以一弦致袖中，既解弦，投于剑客前，密以袖中弦系弓上。
现代文：原来郑生经常另备一个弓弦在衣袖里，就解了弓弦，扔到剑客前面，偷偷地把另一个弓弦系到弓上。
English: Originally, Zheng Sheng often had another bow string in his sleeve, so he untied the bow string, threw it in front of the swordsman, and secretly tied another bow string to the bow.

古文：贼既得弦，遂至东庑下，将杀郑生以灭口。
现代文：贼人已经得到弓弦，就到了东屋下，要杀掉郑生灭口。
English: The thief had already obtained the bowstring, so he went to the east room to kill Zheng Sheng.

古文：急以矢系弦，贼遂去，因曰： 吾子果智者，某罪固当死矣。 
现代文：郑生急忙拉弓搭箭，贼人就逃跑了，并说： 你这小子果然聪明，我犯了罪本来该死啊！ 
English: Zheng Sheng quickly drew his bow and arrows, and the thief ran away, saying, "You really are a clever boy. I should have been put to death for committing a crime!"

古文：生曰： 我不为害，尔何为疑我？ 
现代文：郑生说： 我不害你，你为什么怀疑我？ 
English: Zheng Sheng said: I will not harm you, why do you doubt me?

古文：贼再拜谢。生即去西庑下以避贼。既去，生惧其率徒再来，于是登木自匿。
现代文：贼人多次拜谢，郑生就躲到西屋来躲避贼人，看见贼人跑了，他又害怕贼人率领同伙再回来，就上到高处藏起来。
English: The thief thanked him many times, and Zheng Sheng hid in the west room to avoid the thief. When he saw the thief running away, he was afraid that the thief would lead his accomplices back again, so he went up to a higher place to hide.

古文：久之，星月始明，忽见一妇人，貌甚冶，自空舍中出，泣于庭。问之，妇人曰： 妾家于村中，为盗见诱至此，且利妾衣装，遂杀妾空舍中，弃其尸而去，幸君子为雪其冤。 
现代文：过了很长时间，月亮出来了，忽然看见一个妇人，长得很漂亮，从空房子里出来，在院子里哭，郑生问她为什么哭，她说： 我家住在这个村子里，被强盗引到这里来，他贪图我的衣服好，就在空屋子里把我杀了，扔掉尸体跑了，今有幸遇到公子，希望你为我昭雪申冤。 
English: After a long time, the moon came out, and he suddenly saw a woman, who looked very beautiful, come out of the empty house and cry in the yard. Zheng Sheng asked her why she was crying. She said: My family lives in this village. I was brought here by a robber. He coveted my clothes. He killed me in the empty house, threw away the body and ran away. Now I am lucky to meet a boy. I hope you can avenge my death.

古文：又曰： 今夕当匿于田横墓，愿急逐之，无失。 
现代文：又说： 那贼人今天晚上应该藏在田横的坟墓里，希望你快点追他，不要失掉机会。 
English: He also said, "That thief is supposed to be hiding in the tomb of Tian Yang this evening. I hope you will hurry to chase him and not lose your chance."

古文：生诺之，妇人谢而去。
现代文：郑生答应了妇人拜谢后走了。
English: Zheng Sheng accepted the woman's apology and left.

古文：及晓，生视之，果见尸。
现代文：等到天亮，郑生查看，果然看见一具女尸。
English: At dawn, Zheng Sheng checked and saw a woman's corpse.

古文：即驰马至洛，具白于河南尹郑叔则。
现代文：郑生立即骑马到洛阳，把所遇到的情景向河南府尹报告了。
English: Zheng immediately rode to Luoyang and reported the situation to Yin of Henan Province.

古文：尹命吏捕之，果得贼于田横墓中。
现代文：府尹命令府吏去捕捉，果然在田横墓里抓到了贼人。
English: Fu Yin ordered the officials to catch the thief, and the thief was indeed caught in the Tianyang Tomb.

