古文：马融设绛帐，前授生徒，后列女乐；孔子居杏坛，贤人七十，弟子三千。
现代文：东汉的马融设帐授徒，前面教导弟子，后面却有女乐为伴；孔子在杏坛讲学，先后培养了三千多弟子，其中有名的就有七十二人。
English: The Eastern Han Dynasty's Ma Rong set up a guild to teach disciples, teaching disciples in front, but having female music as a companion behind; Confucius lectured at the almond altar, and successively trained more than three thousand disciples, among whom there were seventy-two famous ones.

古文：称教馆曰设帐，又曰振铎；谦教馆曰糊口，又曰舌耕。
现代文：形容别人设立教馆讲学叫做 设帐 ，又叫 振铎 ；谦称自己设立教馆讲学叫做 糊口 ，又叫 舌耕 。
English: Describing the establishment of a teaching center by others is called "setting accounts," also known as "shaking hands"; modestly saying that you have set up a teaching center is called "living," also known as "tongue cultivation."

古文：师曰西宾，师席曰函丈；学曰家塾，学俸曰束修。
现代文：家塾老师被称作 西宾 ，老师的座席被称作 函丈 ；在家里设学堂教学叫做 家塾 ，学生给老师的学费叫做 束脩 。
English: The homestay teacher is called Xibin, the teacher's seat is called Hanjo; homeschooling is called homestay, and the tuition fee paid by the student to the teacher is called Sokaku.

古文：桃李在公门，称人弟子之多；苜蓿长阑干，奉师饮食之薄。
现代文： 桃李在公门 ，是用来形容教的学生特别多； 苜蓿长阑干 ，是说老师待遇不好饮食差。
English: "Tao Li in the public gate" is used to describe a particularly large number of teaching students; "長干" means that teachers are treated badly and have a poor diet.

古文：冰生于水而寒于水，比学生过于先生；青出于蓝而胜于蓝，谓弟子优于师傅。
现代文： 冰生于水而寒于水 ，是用来形容学生比先生优秀； 青出于蓝而胜于蓝 ，是用来形容弟子强过师傅。
English: Ice is born in water and is cold in water, is used to describe a student who is better than his teacher; blue is born out of blue and is better than blue, is used to describe a disciple who is better than his teacher.

古文：未得及门，曰宫墙外望；称得秘授，曰衣钵真传。
现代文：还没有进入师门的叫做 宫墙外望 ；已经得到师父的秘密传授，叫做得到 衣钵真传 。
English: Those who have not yet entered the gate of the master are called "looking outside the palace wall"; those who have already obtained the secret teachings of the master are called "obtaining the true transmission of the mantle."

古文：人称杨震为关西夫子，世称贺循为当世儒宗。
现代文：杨震的学生有数千人之多，可以和孔子相媲美，人们称他是 关西夫子 ；贺循博览群籍，精通礼传，人们都称他是 当世儒宗 。
English: There are thousands of students of Yang Zhen, who can be compared to Confucius. People say that he is the son of Guan Xi, and He Xing is well-versed in Confucianism. People say that he is a contemporary Confucian.

古文：负笈千里，苏章从师之殷；立雪程门，游杨敬师之至。
现代文： 负笈千里 ，是形容苏章拜师求学的殷切， 立雪程门 ，是形容游酢和杨时对老师程颐的尊重。
English: "Negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative."

古文：弟子称师之善教，曰如坐春风之中；学业感师之造成，曰仰沾时雨之化。
现代文：学生称赞老师善于教导，就说像坐在感化万物的春风中一样；学业有成，感谢老师的教导，就说受到了符合时令的雨露的滋润和感化。
English: Students praised the teacher for being good at teaching, saying that it was like sitting in the spring breeze that influenced everything; academic success, thanks to the teacher's teaching, said to have been moisturized and influenced by the seasonal rain and dew.

