古文：吴人入楚，昭王出奔，济于成臼，见蓝尹亹载其孥。
现代文：吴国军队攻入楚国，楚昭王出逃，在成臼渡河，看见蓝尹亹用船载着妻子儿女。
English: The army of the State of Wu invaded the State of Chu, and the King of Chu Zhao fled. While crossing the river in Chengwus, he saw Lan Yinjun carrying his wife and children in a boat.

古文：王曰： 载予。 
现代文：昭王说： 载我过河。 
English: King Zhao said, "Take me across the river."

古文：对曰： 自先王莫坠其国，当君而亡之，君之过也。 
现代文：蓝尹亹回答说： 自先王以来没有一个失掉国家的，到了您在位而失国出逃，这是您的罪过。 
English: Lan Yunyun replied, "Since the previous king, no one has lost his country. When you came to the throne, you lost your country and fled. This is your fault."

古文：遂去王。
现代文：于是抛下昭王走了。
English: So he left Shouwang and went away.

古文：王归，又求见，王欲执之，子西曰： 请听其辞，夫其有故。 
现代文：昭王回国后，蓝尹亹又来求见，昭王想把他逮捕起来，子西说： 请听听他说些什么，他来总有缘故。 
English: After King Zhao returned to China, Lan Yunyang came to see him again. King Zhao wanted to arrest him. Zixi said, "Please listen to what he has to say. There is always a reason for him to come.

古文：王使谓之曰： 成臼之役，而弃不穀，今而敢来，何也？ 
现代文：昭王派人对他说： 在成臼战役时，你抛下我，现在你还敢来，是为什么？ 
English: King Zhao sent a man to him, saying, "You left me behind during the Battle of Chengmu, but now you dare to come. Why?

古文：对曰： 昔瓦唯长旧怨，以败于柏举，故君及此。
现代文：他回答说： 以前囊瓦只会助长过去的怨恨，以致在柏举被打败，所以您才落到了这种地步。
English: He replied: "In the past, you would only fuel the resentment of the past, so you were defeated in the battle, and that's why you ended up in this situation.

古文：今又效之，无乃不可乎？
现代文：如今您又仿效他，恐怕不行吧！
English: Now you are following his example, I'm afraid not!

古文：臣避于成臼，以儆君也，庶悛而更乎？
现代文：我在成臼避开您，是为了儆戒您，如此总该悔改了吧？
English: I'm avoiding you in order to warn you, so you should repent, right?

古文：今之敢见，观君之德也，曰：庶忆惧而鉴前恶乎？
现代文：现在我敢来求见，是为了观察您的德行，我说：总该回忆战败的可怕，把以前的过失作为借鉴了吧？
English: Now I dare to come to see you, in order to observe your virtue, I said: it is always necessary to recall the horror of defeat, to use previous mistakes as a reference, right?

古文：君若不鉴而长之，君实有国而不爱，臣何有于死，死在司败矣！
现代文：您如果不以此为鉴，反而发展它，您实在是有了国家而不爱它，我又何惜一死，就是死在司法官那儿罢了！
English: If you don't take this as a lesson and develop it instead, you really have a country and don't love it. If I had to die, I would die at the hands of the judiciary!

古文：惟君图之！ 
现代文：希望您考虑考虑！ 
English: I hope you will consider it!

古文：子西曰： 使复其位，以无忘前败。 
现代文：子西说： 让他官复原职，使我们不要忘记以前的失败。 
English: Zixi said: Let him be reinstated, so that we do not forget the previous failure.

古文：王乃见之。
现代文：昭王于是接见了他。
English: King Zhao then received him.

