古文：道浚既官锦衣，以忠臣子见重，屡加都指挥佥事，佥书卫所。
现代文：张道浚，张铨之子。铨死后，朝廷授道浚锦衣卫指挥佥事。因是忠臣之子，受到重视，加都指挥佥事，负责卫所。
English: Zhang Daojun, the son of Zhang Ye. After the death of Ye, the imperial court gave Daojun Jin the command of the Imperial Guard. Because he was the son of a loyal subject, he was valued, and he was in charge of the Imperial Guard.

古文：顾与阉党杨维垣等相善，而受王永光指，攻钱龙锡、成基命等，为公论所不予。
现代文：他与阉党杨维垣等人相好，受王永光的指使，攻击钱龙锡、成基命等人，故为公论所不容。
English: He was friendly with Yang Vigaki and others of the Kuomintang Party, and was ordered by Wang Yongguang to attack Qian Longxi, Cheng Ji Mu and others, so he was unacceptable to the public.

古文：寻以纳贿事败，戍雁门。
现代文：不久，因受贿而被贬戍雁门关。
English: Soon after, he was demoted from Ganmenguan for accepting bribes.

古文：流贼起，山西巡抚宋统殷檄道浚军前赞画。
现代文：农民大起义爆发，山西巡抚宋统殷令道浚参与军事策划。
English: The Great Peasants' Revolt broke out, and the Shanxi governor Song Tongyin ordered Daojun to participate in military planning.

古文：道浚家多壮丁，能御贼。
现代文：道浚家丁多，能抵抗义军。
English: There are a lot of dowsers who can resist the rebels.

古文：崇祯五年四月，贼犯沁水，宁武守备猛忠战死。
现代文：崇祯五年四月，农民起义军进攻沁水，宁武守备猛忠战死。
English: In April of the fifth year of Chongzhen, the peasant uprising army attacked Surabaya, and Ningwu's garrison, Bei Mengzhong, was killed in the battle.

古文：道浚遣游击张瓒驰援，贼乃退。
现代文：道浚派游击张瓒赶去援救，义军撤退。
English: The dredge sent the guerrilla Zhang Xuan to rescue, and the rebels retreated.

古文：八月，紫金樑、老回回、八金刚等以三万众围窦庄，谋执道浚以胁巡抚。
现代文：八月，义军紫金梁、老回回、八金刚等部，以三万大军围攻窦庄，计划生擒道浚以威胁巡抚，但多次进攻不利。
English: In August, the rebel forces of Zijinliang, Lao Hui Hui, Hakingang and other departments besieged Douzhuang with 30,000 troops. They planned to dredge the ditch to threaten the governor, but many attacks were unfavorable.

古文：道浚屡败贼，贼乃欲因道浚求抚。紫金樑请见，免胄前曰： 我王自用也，误从王佳胤至此。 
现代文：义军又打算通过道浚向朝廷请求招安。紫金梁求见道浚，声称他名叫王自用，是误随王佳胤至此。
English: The rebels also planned to appeal to the imperial court for peace through Dojun. Zijin Liang asked to see Dojun, claiming that his name was Wang Ziyi and that he had mistakenly followed Wang Jiayin.

古文：又一人跽致辞曰： 我宜川廪生韩廷宪，为佳胤所获，请誓死奉约束。 
现代文：同去的另一人也向道浚表白，他是宜川廪生韩廷宪，为佳胤所俘，今后愿誓死受道浚的管束。
English: Another person who went with him also confessed to Daojun that he was Han Tingxian, a son of Yichuan, who had been captured by Jiaying, and that in the future he would swear on his life to be controlled by Daojun.

古文：道浚劳遣之，而阴使使啗廷宪图贼。
现代文：道浚慰劳他们，叫他们回去，暗中使人去利诱韩廷宪为谋取义军的内应。
English: Dojun consoled them, told them to go back, and secretly sent people to entice Han Tingxian in order to gain the inner support of the rebels.

古文：贼至旧县，守约不动，廷宪日惎紫金樑就款，未决。
现代文：农民起义军至旧县，遵守与明朝官军所订的规约，按兵不动。廷宪每天催促紫金梁接受招安，紫金梁等还犹豫不决。
English: The Peasants' Revolt Army went to the old counties, abided by the regulations made with the government army of the Ming Dynasty, and did not move by soldiers. Ting Xian urged Zijin Liang to accept the recruitment every day, but Zijin Liang still hesitated.

古文：官军袭之，贼怒，尤廷宪，遂败约，南突济源，陷温阳。
现代文：官军发动进攻，义军大怒，责怪廷宪，毁约南攻济源，攻陷温阳。
English: The government army launched an attack, the rebel army was furious, blamed the Constitution, destroyed Yonan, attacked Jiyuan, and invaded Wenyang.

古文：九月，廷宪知紫金樑疑己，思杀之以归，约道浚伏兵沁河以待。
现代文：九月，廷宪知紫金梁已对他有怀疑，想杀他投降官军，约道浚在沁河伏兵接应。
English: In September, Ting Xianzhi suspected Zi Jinliang and wanted to kill him so that he would surrender to the government army. He arranged for Daojun to meet the ambush in the Fenhe River.

古文：窦庄东面河，道浚潜渡上流，绕贼后大噪，贼骇遁去。
现代文：道浚遣所部刘伟去。当晚，义军攻打生员盖汝璋庄院时，廷宪知道他投降官军的事败露，与刘伟逃跑了。
English: That night, when the rebel army attacked the villa of a villager named Ge Rong, Ting Xian knew that he had failed to surrender to the government army and fled with Liu Wei.

古文：未几，官军扼贼陵川，师溃，道浚据九仙台以免。
现代文：义军追到沁河边，遭到官军的伏击，滚山虎等六人战死。义军屯驻于沁河边，道浚从上游偷渡，绕义军后方，喊声大起，义军撤退。
English: The rebels chased the government troops to the Shaohe River, where they were ambushed by the government troops. Rolling Mountain Tiger and six others were killed in the battle. The rebels were stationed at the Shaohe River, and the dredges were smuggled from the upstream and circled around the rear of the rebels. They shouted loudly and the rebels retreated.

古文：十二月，廷宪知紫金樑、乱世王有隙，纵谍遣书间之。
现代文：不久，官军在陵川为义军大败，道浚逃到九仙台。十二月，韩廷宪探知紫金梁与乱世王不和，便进一步施离间计。
English: Soon after, the government army suffered a crushing defeat at the hands of the rebels in Lingchuan, and Dojun fled to Sendai. In December, when Han Tingxian discovered that Zijin Liang was not on good terms with the King of Chaos, he further plotted to drive a wedge between them.

古文：乱世王果疑，遣其弟混世王就道浚乞降。
现代文：乱世王果然中计，怀疑紫金梁，派其弟混世王向道浚求降。
English: The king of the turbulent times indeed had a plan. He suspected Zijin Liang and sent his younger brother, the king of the turbulent times, to appeal to Daojun for a reduction.

古文：时统殷以失贼罢，许鼎臣来代，主进讨。
现代文：这时，宋统殷因讨义军不利而被罢职，由许鼎臣接替山西巡抚，他主张进讨。
English: At this time, Song Tongyin was dismissed from his post for antagonizing the rebels, and Xu Dingchen took over as the Shanxi governor. He advocated further discussion.

古文：道浚权词难之曰： 斩紫金樑以来，乃得请。 
现代文：道浚有意为难混世王，要他先斩紫金梁再来归顺。
English: Dojun deliberately tried to confuse the world's king, asking him to first cut off the purple and gold beam and then submit.

古文：混世王怏怏去，贼众遂分部掠诸郡县。
现代文：混世王怏怏地回去了。义军分兵进攻山西各郡县。
English: The half-breed king hurriedly went back. Rebel detachments attacked every county in Shanxi.

古文：明年三月，官军蹑贼，自阳城而北。
现代文：崇祯六年三月，官军自阳城向北尾追义军。
English: In March of the sixth year of Chongzhen, the government army chased the rebel army from Yangcheng to North Tail.

古文：道浚设伏三缠凹，擒贼渠满天星等，巡抚鼎臣奏道浚功第一。
现代文：道浚设伏兵于三缠凹，俘获义军首领满天星等。巡抚许鼎臣奏报道浚一等功。
English: Dojun set an ambush in Sanliankou and captured the rebel leader Man Tianxing. The inspector Xu Dingcheng reported that Dojun won the first prize.

古文：都司徐国全闻之，亦自经公署。
现代文：八月，义军攻陷沁水，道浚率家兵三百人反击，义军退十五里，副使王肇生上报道浚功劳。
English: In August, the rebel army attacked and captured Surabaya, and Daojun led 300 soldiers to counterattack. The rebel army retreated fifteen miles, and deputy envoy Wang Zhaosheng reported on the dredging work.

古文：事闻，赠光禄卿，再赠大理卿，赐祭葬，谥忠愍，世荫锦衣百户。
现代文：道浚从前得罪了朝廷谏官，企图用军功来洗掉他身上的污点，而谏官仍弹劾他擅离军伍，冒领军功。
English: In the past, Daojun offended the eunuch of the imperial court and tried to use his military merit to wash away the stain on his body, but the eunuch still impeached him for leaving the army without permission and taking the military merit.

古文：国全赠恤如制。
现代文：巡按御史冯明弹劾他失守沁水城，无功可言。
English: His impeachment by the Inspector-General Feng Ming for losing control of Surabaya City was fruitless.

古文：高邦佐，字以道，襄陵人。
现代文：朝廷令他去戍守海宁卫。高邦佐，字以道，襄陵人。
English: The imperial court ordered him to go and guard Hainingwei. Gao Bangzuo, also known as Dao, was from Xiangling.

古文：万历二十三年进士。
现代文：万历二十三年进士，授寿光知县。
English: He entered the priesthood at the age of 23 and was given the posthumous name of Kochi.

古文：授寿光知县，教民垦荒，招集流亡三千家。
现代文：他在寿光教民垦荒，招集流亡百姓三千余家。
English: In Shouguang, he taught the people how to live in the wilderness, and gathered more than 3,000 families of exiled people.

古文：历户部主事、员外郎。
现代文：后历任户部主事、员外郎。
English: Later, he served as the head of the household department and a member of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：迁永平知府，浚泺河，筑长堤。裁抑税使高淮，不敢大横。
现代文：在任永平知府时，疏浚滦河，修筑长堤，裁制税使高淮，使他不敢肆意横行。
English: When he was Yongping prefect, he dredged the Wei River, built a long embankment, and cut taxes to make Gao Huai not dare to run amok.

古文：迁天津兵备副使，平巨盗董时耀。
现代文：后调任天津兵备副使，平息大盗董时耀。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Tianjin Deputy Military Preparedness Envoy to quell the bandit Dong Shiyao.

古文：转神木参政，屡破套寇沙计。
现代文：又转任神木参政，多次击破 套寇 沙计。
English: He was also transferred to the post of shinboku (divine tree) to participate in politics, and repeatedly defeated Setoko Shaku.

古文：以嫡母忧归，补蓟州道，坐调兵忤主者意，被劾归。
现代文：母亲去世，他归家服丧，孝期满，补任蓟州道参政，因在调兵中违背主帅意图，被罢官归家。
English: After his mother's death, he returned home to pay his respects. When his term of filial piety expired, he took up a new post as a politician in Luzhou Province. However, he was dismissed and returned home because he violated the coach's intention during the transfer of troops.

古文：熊廷弼、王化贞构隙，邦佐知辽事必败，累乞归。
现代文：天启元年，清军攻破辽阳，起任邦佐为参政，分守广宁。熊廷弼与王化贞不合，邦佐因而预料辽东用兵必败，多次请求准假归养八十老母。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, the Qing army broke through Liaoyang, and Bonzo was appointed to participate in politics and defend Guangning. Xiong Tingtao and Wang Huazhen did not get along, so Bonzo expected that the Liaodong soldiers would be defeated, and repeatedly requested permission to leave to take care of his eighty-year-old mother.

古文：方报允，而化贞弃广宁逃。
现代文：刚被批准，化贞弃广宁逃跑。
English: Having just been approved, Hua Zhen abandoned Guangning and ran away.

古文：众谓邦佐既请告，可入关。
现代文：守军将士看到邦佐又已请假，军无统帅，便打算撤回关内。
English: Seeing that Bonzo had taken another leave of absence and that the army had no commander, the soldiers of the defending army planned to withdraw to Kansai.

古文：邦佐叱曰： 吾一日未去，则一日封疆臣也，将安之！ 
现代文：邦佐厉声阻止： 我一日不走，便是一日封疆之臣，你们要向哪里走！ 
English: Bonzo stopped him with a sharp voice: If I don't go one day, I'll be a vassal of the fiefdom for one day. Where are you going?

古文：夜作书诀母，策骑趋右屯谒廷弼，言： 城中虽乱，敌尚未知。亟提兵入城，斩一二人，人心自定。
现代文：连夜写信给母亲，表示誓死保卫疆土。他赶到右屯去拜见熊廷弼，对他说： 广宁城中虽乱，好在敌人还不知道，应尽快提兵入城，斩一二逃跑者，人心自定。
English: He wrote to his mother overnight, vowing to defend the territory to the death. He rushed to Uditun to meet Xiong Tingyao and told him: Although the city of Guangning is in chaos, it is a good thing that the enemy does not know it yet. Troops should be brought into the city as soon as possible, and one or two escapees should be killed. The people should make up their own minds.

古文：公即不行，请授邦佐兵赴难。 
现代文：如果公不去，请给我邦佐一支人马去抵御清军。 
English: If the court does not go, please give me Bonzo a horse and man to resist the Qing army.

古文：廷弼不纳，偕化贞并走。
现代文：廷弼没有接受他的要求，而是同化贞一样离开防地。
English: Ting Yao did not accept his request, but left the defensive zone as if he was assimilating Zhen.

古文：邦佐仰天长叹，泣语从者曰： 经、抚俱逃，事去矣。
现代文：邦佐仰天长叹，对随行人员说： 经略、巡抚都走了，大势已去。
English: With a long sigh, Bonzo said to his entourage, "The manager and the governor have left, and the momentum has gone.

古文：松山吾守地，当死此。
现代文：松山是我的防守之地，与防地共存亡。
English: Matsuyama is my place of defense, and I coexist with the defense.

古文：汝归报太夫人。 
现代文：你回去禀告太夫人。 
English: You go back and tell your mother-in-law.

古文：帝赠献明、天球光禄少卿，泽光禄丞，俱荫一子。
现代文：解印自尽。仆人高永说： 主人死，怎能没有仆从。 也自尽了。朝廷赐祭葬，赠光禄卿，再赠太仆卿，谥忠节。
English: Gao Yong, a servant, said, "How can a master die without a servant?" He also committed suicide. The imperial court gave him a funeral and burial, presented him with the title of Guangluqing, and then presented him with the title of Taibuqing on the Day of Loyalty.

古文：元雅以大吏失城，赠恤不及。张春，字泰宇，同州人。
现代文：荫后代为锦衣卫百户，建祠宣武门外，与张铨、何廷魁一同祭祀。张春，字泰宇，同州人。
English: The descendants of Yin were the hundred households of Jin Yi Wei, and they built a small shrine outside the Xuanwu Gate, and worshipped together with Zhang Xuan and He Tingkui. Zhang Chun, also known as Tai Yu, was from the same county.

古文：万历二十八年举于乡。
现代文：万历二十八年乡试中举，曾任刑部主事。
English: In the 28th year of Wanli, he was appointed as the head of the criminal justice department.

古文：历刑部主事，励操行，善谈兵。
现代文：他很注意德行修养，善谈兵法。
English: He pays great attention to moral cultivation and is good at talking about military tactics.

古文：天启二年，辽东西尽失，廷议急边才，擢山东佥事，永平、燕建二路兵备道。
现代文：天启二年，辽东辽西尽为清军占领，朝廷急需守边将才，升张春为山东佥事，兼永平、燕建二路兵备道。
English: In the second year of the Apocalypse, Liaodong and Liaoxi were completely occupied by the Qing army, and the imperial court was in urgent need of border guards. Zhang Chun was promoted to Shandong Anji, and Yongping and Yan Jian were also prepared for the second road.

古文：时大军屯山海关，永平为孔道，士马络绎，关外难民云集。
现代文：这时大军屯驻山海关，永平为来往要道，兵马络绎不绝，关外难民也云集于此。
English: At this time, a large army was stationed at the Shanhaiguan Customs, and Yongping was an important route, with an endless stream of soldiers and horses. Refugees from outside the customs also gathered here.

古文：春运筹有方，事就理而民不病。
现代文：春运筹有方，事情办得合理，又不扰害百姓。
English: The Spring Festival Parade was well-planned, things were handled reasonably, and the people were not disturbed.

古文：累转副吏、参政，仍故官。
现代文：历任副使、参政，最后又回到原来官职。
English: Successive deputy envoys, participation in politics, and finally returning to the original post.

古文：七年，哈刺慎部长汪烧饼者，拥众窥桃林口，春督守将擒三人。
现代文：天启七年，哈剌慎部酋长汪烧饼，率兵窥探桃林口，春督率守将生擒三人。
English: In the seventh year of the apocalypse, the chief of the Harbin Shenbu, Wang, baked cakes, led soldiers to spy on the Taolin mouth, and the governor of the spring led the three guards.

古文：烧饼叩关愿受罚，春等责数之，誓不敢叛。
现代文：烧饼到关前道歉，愿受惩罚，还表示誓死不敢反叛朝廷。
English: He apologized for burning the cake in front of the gate and said he was willing to be punished. He also said that he would not dare to rebel against the imperial court.

古文：崇祯元年改关内道。
现代文：崇祯元年，改任关内道兵备。
English: In the first year of the Chongzhen era, he was reassigned to Guanai Military Region.

古文：兵部尚书王在晋惑浮言，劾春嗜杀，一日枭斩十二人。
现代文：兵部尚书王在晋听信流言，说春好杀人，一天斩首十二人。
English: The head of the military department, Shang Shu Wang, heard a rumor in Jin that the spring was good for killing, and beheaded twelve people in one day.

古文：春具揭辩，关内民亦为讼冤。
现代文：春上书申辩，关内百姓为他诉冤。
English: He submitted a written plea in the spring, and the people of Guanai sued him.

古文：在晋复劾其通奄克饷，遂削籍，下法司治。
现代文：在晋又弹劾他与太监有勾结，克扣军饷，将他革职，交司法衙门惩办。
English: In Jin, he was also impeached for colluding with eunuchs, embezzling military funds, dismissed from his post, and sent to the judicial gate for punishment.

古文：督师袁崇焕言春廉惠，不听。
现代文：督师袁崇焕认为张春廉洁，不同意惩办。
English: Supervisor Yuan Chonghuan believed that Zhang Chun was honest and did not agree with the punishment.

古文：御史李炳言： 春疾恶过甚，为人中伤。
现代文：御史李炳认为，春平时疾恶如仇，故为人所中伤。
English: Historian Li Wei believed that in springtime and in peacetime, illness and evil are like enemies, so people slander them.

古文：夫杀之滥否，一勘即明，乞免提问。 
现代文：是不是有滥杀行为，一调查便会明白，用不着提审。
English: If there is indiscriminate killing, an investigation will show that there is no need for an arraignment.

古文：不从。
现代文：皇帝不同意。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：明年，法司言春被劾无实，乃释之。
现代文：第二年司法衙门报告说，弹劾张春的罪状，均查无实据，于是将他释放。
English: The next year, the judicial gate reported that the charges of impeaching Zhang Chun were found to be unsubstantiated, so he was released.

古文：三年正月，永平失守，起春永平兵备参议。
现代文：崇祯三年正月，永平失守，起任春为永平兵备。
English: In the first month of the third year of Chongzhen, Yongping lost his defense, and Yongping became a soldier in the spring.

古文：春言： 永平统五县一州，今郡城及泺州、迁安并失，昌黎、乐亭、抚宁又关内道所辖。臣寄迹无所，当驻何城？
现代文：春奏称 ：永平统辖五县一州，今郡城及滦州、迁安都失守，昌黎、乐亭、抚宁又为关内道所管辖，臣没有立足之地，应当驻于何城？
English: Shunso said: Yongping oversees five counties and one prefecture, and now the county seat and Zhangzhou and Qian'an have all been lost, and Changli, Leting and Fusing are also under the jurisdiction of Guanai Province. The minister has no foothold, so where should he be stationed?

古文：臣以兵备名官，而实无一兵，操空拳入虎穴，安能济事。
现代文：臣有兵备之名，而实际上无一兵一卒，赤手空拳，深入虎穴，怎能有济于事。
English: A vassal has the reputation of being well-equipped with soldiers, but in reality there is not a single soldier. How can it be of any use to go into a tiger's den with empty hands?

古文：乞于赴援大将中，敕一人与臣同事，臣亦招旧日义勇率之自效。
现代文：求在赴援大将中，令一人与臣同事，臣招旧日义勇，率领他们为朝廷效力。
English: I ask that among the generals who go to the aid, one of them should be a colleague of a vassal, and that the vassal should recruit the former day's heroes and lead them to serve the imperial court.

古文：臣身已许此城，不敢少规避。
现代文：臣已决心与永平共存亡，不敢有丝毫回避。
English: The minister has decided to coexist with Yongping and dare not evade him in the slightest.

古文：但必求实济封疆，此臣区区之忠，所以报圣明而尽臣职也。 
现代文：但必须求得实际上于保卫边疆有利，这就是臣以拳拳忠心以报圣上，以尽臣职。 
English: However, it must be advantageous to the defense of the frontier. That is, the vassal must be loyal to the emperor and fulfill his duties.

古文：因言兵事不可预泄，乞赐陛见，面陈方略，帝许之。
现代文：还说兵机不可泄露，请准予朝见皇上，面陈战略。
English: He also said that the military plan must not be leaked, please allow the court to see the emperor, and face the strategy.

古文：既入对，帝数称善，进春参政。
现代文：皇帝准许，他当面向皇上陈述了自己的意见，皇帝认为很好，升他为参政。
English: With the emperor's permission, he presented his views to the emperor face-to-face. The emperor thought it was a good idea and promoted him to participate in politics.

古文：已而偕诸将收复永平诸城，论功加太仆少卿，仍涖兵备事，候巡抚缺推用。
现代文：随后，春同诸将收复了永平诸城，论功加太仆少卿，仍负责兵备事，候巡抚开缺时再补任。
English: Subsequently, the Chuntong generals recovered the cities of Yongping, adding the title of Taifu and Shaoqing, and were still responsible for the preparation of troops. They would fill in for the governor-in-waiting when he was absent.

古文：时乙榜起家者多授节钺，而春独需后命，以无援于朝也。永平当兵燹之余，闾阎困敝，春尽心抚恤，人益怀之。
现代文：这时，凡以科举考试中乙榜起家的人，多半授有官职，而唯独张春还要待命，是因为他在朝中无援，永平大战之后，百姓贫困，春尽心抚恤，所以人民更加怀念他。
English: At this time, most of the people who started their families with the second place in the imperial examinations were given official positions, but Zhang Chun was the only one who had to be on standby, because he had no support from the central government. After the Yongping War, the people were poor, and Chun did his best to support them, so the people missed him even more.

古文：四年八月，大清兵围大凌河新城，命春监总兵吴襄、宋伟军驰救。
现代文：崇祯四年八月，清兵围攻大凌河畔之新城，命春督率总兵吴襄、宋伟去援救。
English: In August of the fourth year of Chongzhen, the Qing soldiers besieged the new city on the banks of the Daling River, and the commander-in-chief Wu Xiang and Song Wei went to the rescue.

古文：九月二十四日渡小凌河。
现代文：九月二十四日渡过小凌河，经三日到达长山，距城十五里。
English: On September 24th, they crossed the Xiaoling River and after three days arrived in Changshan, fifteen miles from the city.

古文：越三日次长山，距城十五里，大清兵以二万骑来逆战。两军交锋，火器竞发，声震天地。
现代文：清军以二万骑兵来迎战。两军交锋，枪炮齐发，声震天地。
English: The Qing army came to meet the battle with twenty thousand cavalry. The two armies clashed, guns were fired in unison, and the sound shook the world.

古文：春营被冲，诸军遂败，襄先败，春复收溃众立营。
现代文：春营受到冲击，诸军皆败。春收集被击溃的军士再立营。
English: The spring camp was attacked, and all the troops were defeated. In the spring, the defeated soldiers were gathered together to re-establish the camp.

古文：时风起，黑云见，春命纵火，风顺，火甚炽，天忽雨反风，士卒焚死甚众。
现代文：忽然风起云涌，春命纵火，火势甚大。又突然大雨，风向逆转，明官军士卒被烧死很多。
English: Suddenly, a gust of wind came up, and the fire was ignited by spring, and the fire was very strong. Suddenly, it rained heavily, and the wind direction reversed, and many officers and men were burned to death.

古文：少顷雨霁，两军复鏖战，伟力不支亦走。
现代文：过了一会儿雨停，两军再战，宋伟不能支持，退走。
English: After a while, the rain stopped and the two armies fought again. Song Wei could not support them and retreated.

古文：春及参将张洪谟、杨华征，游击薛大湖等三十三人俱被执，部卒死者无算。
现代文：春及参将张洪谟、杨华征，游击恭大湖等三十三人被俘，部卒死者无数。
English: Thirty-three people were captured, including Chun and senior generals Zhang Hongmu and Yang Huazheng, as well as guerrilla fighter Gong Da Hu, and countless subordinates died.

古文：令薙发，不从。居右庙，服故衣冠，迄不失臣节而死。
现代文：他们见了清太宗皇太极，都行君臣跪拜礼，只有张春直立不跪，绝食三日。
English: When they saw the Emperor Taichi of the Qing Taizong, they all knelt down to worship. Only Zhang Chun stood upright and did not kneel down, and went on a three-day hunger strike.

古文：初，襄等败书闻，以春守志不屈，遥迁右副都御史，恤其家。春妻翟闻之，恸哭，六日不食，自缢死。
现代文：只是由于看守者恳切劝解，又为清太宗的诚意所感动，才食一餐。令他剃发，不肯，住在古庙内，穿着明朝衣冠，以表示他不失对朝廷的忠心，最后自杀而死。
English: It was only through the earnest persuasion of the guards, and moved by the sincerity of Emperor Taizong, that he was able to eat a meal. He was ordered to shave his hair, but he refused, and lived in an ancient temple, wearing a Ming Dynasty crown to show his loyalty to the imperial court. He eventually committed suicide and died.

古文：张秉文，字含之，桐城人。
现代文：张秉文，字含之，桐城人。
English: Zhang Bingwen, including the characters, is from Tongcheng.

古文：祖淳，官参政，事具《循吏传》。秉文举万历三十八年进士，历福建右参政，与平海寇李魁奇。
现代文：万历三十八年进士，曾任福建右参政，参与平息海寇李魁奇。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 38th year of Wanli, and once served as a right-wing politician in Fujian Province, participating in the pacification of the sea pirate Li Kuiqi.

古文：崇祯中，历广东按察使，右布政使，调山东为左。
现代文：崇祯年间，历任广东按察使、广东右布政使、山东左布政使。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, he was successively appointed as the Inspector-General of Guangdong Province, the Political Envoy to the Right Bank of Guangdong Province and the Political Envoy to the Left Bank of Shandong Province.

古文：十一年冬，大清兵自畿辅南下。本兵杨嗣昌檄山东巡抚颜继祖移师德州，于是济南空虚，止乡兵五百，莱州援兵七百，势弱不足守。
现代文：崇祯十一年冬，清兵自畿辅南下，杨嗣昌令山东巡抚颜继祖调防德州，于是济南空虚，只有乡兵五百人及莱州援兵七百人，势单力薄，不足以守城。
English: In the winter of the 11th year of Chongzhen, the Qing soldiers went south from Kijiyu, and Yang Shichang ordered Yan Jizu, the governor of Shandong Province, to transfer the defense of Dezhou. As a result, Jinan was empty, with only 500 local soldiers and 700 reinforcements from Laizhou, which was too weak to defend the city.

古文：巡按御史宋学朱方行部章丘，闻警驰还，与秉文及副使周之训、翁鸿业，参议邓谦，盐运使唐世熊等议守城，连章告急于朝。
现代文：巡按御史宋学朱正巡视章丘，闻清军至，忙回到省城济南，与秉文及副使周之训、翁鸿业、参议邓谦、盐运使唐世熊等商议守城，连续上书朝廷告急。
English: Zhu Zheng, the inspector of the Song Dynasty, inspected Zhangqiu, heard the arrival of the Qing army, and hurriedly returned to the provincial capital Jinan. He discussed the defense of the city with Bingwen, the deputy envoy Zhou Zhixun, Weng Hongye, the councillor Deng Qian, and the salt transport envoy Tang Shixiong, and continuously sent a letter to the imperial court.

古文：嗣昌无以应，督师中官高起潜拥重兵临清不救，大将祖宽、倪宠等亦观望。
现代文：杨嗣昌屯兵不动，督师宦官高起潜在临清拥有重兵，但不救援济南，大将祖宽、倪宠等也都一旁观望。
English: Yang Shichang did not move the garrison, the superintendent and eunuchs raised the potential Linqing to have heavy troops, but did not rescue Jinan, and the generals Zu Guang and Ni Zhaotong also watched from the sidelines.

古文：大清兵徇下州县十有六，遂临济南。秉文等分门死守，昼夜不解甲，援兵竟无至者。
现代文：清军攻下十六州县，兵临济南城下，秉文等分门死守，昼夜不解铠甲，而援兵始终未来。
English: The Qing army captured 16 prefectures and counties, the soldiers near Jinan City were in the lead, and Bingwen and other sub-gates were deadlocked. Day and night, they did not disengage their armor, and reinforcements were always coming.

古文：明年正月二日，城溃，秉文擐甲巷战，已被箭，力不能支，死之。
现代文：崇祯十二年正月二日，济南被清军攻陷，秉文率兵巷战，不幸中箭阵亡。其妻妾均投大明湖自尽。
English: On the 2nd day of the 1st month of the 12th year of Chongzhen, Jinan was invaded by the Qing army, and Bingwen led the soldiers to fight in the streets. Unfortunately, he was killed by an arrow. His wives and concubines all threw themselves into Daming Lake and committed suicide.

古文：烟举进士，历户部主事，解职归。及城失守，力抗，子凤苞以身翼之，皆被杀。
现代文：宋学朱、周之训、邓谦、唐世熊及济南知府苟好善、同知陈虞胤、通判熊烈献、历城知县韩承宣等人，皆殉国难，德王朱由枢被俘。
English: Song Xuechu, Zhou Zhixun, Deng Qian, Tang Shixiong, and Jinan Zhifu Gou Haoshan, Tongzhi Chen Yuyin, Tongzhan Xiong Rijian, Licheng Zhixian Han Chengxuan and others all died in the national tragedy, and De Wang Zhu Yuzhu was captured.

古文：妻赵触柱死。弘绪历车驾郎中，遇变死。
现代文：秉文赠太常寺卿，之训、谦赠光禄寺卿，承宣赠光禄寺少卿，为他们建祠祭祀。学朱死，但未见尸，翁鸿业及推官陆灿不知下落。
English: Bingwen gave gifts to the chief priest of Taiji Temple, Zhixun and Qian gave gifts to the chief priest of Guanglu Temple, and He Xuan gave gifts to the junior chief priest of Guanglu Temple, and built shrines and temples for them. Xu Zhu died, but his body was never found, and the whereabouts of Weng Hongye and his deputy, Lu Can, are unknown.

古文：邓藩锡，字晋伯，金坛人。
现代文：邓藩锡，字晋伯，金坛人。
English: Deng Hanzi, surnamed Jinbo, the man of the golden altar.

古文：崇祯七年进士。历南京兵部主事。
现代文：崇祯七年进士，曾任南京兵部主事，十五年，调任兖州知府。
English: In the seventh year of his enlistment, Chongzhen served as the head of the Nanjing Military Department, and in the fifteenth year, he was transferred to the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：夫城郭者，我之命也。财贿者，人之命也。我不能畀彼以命，而望彼畀我以命乎？
现代文：城郭是我们的生命，钱财是百姓的生命。如果我们不给他们生命，又怎能期望他们给我们生命？
English: The castle is our life, the money is the life of the people. If we do not give them life, how can we expect them to give us life?

古文：王诚散积储以鼓士气，城犹可存。不然，大事一去，悔无及矣。 
现代文：王真能以所积蓄的金钱粮食来激励士气，城就可保，不然大势一去，悔之不及了。 
English: If Wang Zhen can stimulate morale with the money and grain he has saved, the city can be secured. Otherwise, the momentum will be lost and it will be too late to regret.

古文：王不能从。
现代文：鲁王不听从他的意见。
English: Xiao Gang did not listen to his advice.

古文：藩锡与监军参议王维新，同知谭丝、曾文蔚，通判阎鼎，推官李昌期，滋阳知县郝芳声，副将丁文明，长史俞起蛟及里居给事中范淑泰等分门死守。
现代文：藩锡与监军参议王维新，同知谭丝、曾文蔚，通判阎鼎，推官李昌期，滋阳知县郝芳声，副将丁文明，长史俞起蛟及还乡闲住的给事中范淑泰等，分门死守。
English: Wang Weixin, the councillor of the Hanzi clan and the supervisor of the army, Tan Si, Zeng Wen Wei, the councillor of the same clan, Yan Ding, the councillor of the same clan, Li Chang Cai, the councillor of the same clan, Ziyang Zhixian Gong Fang Sheng, the vice-commander of the same clan, Ding Wenming, the vice-commander of the same clan, Chang Shi, Fan Shuyai, the councillor of the same clan and the councillor of the same clan who returned to their hometowns and lived idly, and so on, were

古文：至十二月八日，力不支，城破，维新犹力战，被二十一创乃死。
现代文：至十二月八日，城被攻破，维新力战，受伤二十一处阵亡。藩锡不降，被杀。
English: By December 8th, the city had been breached, and 21 soldiers were killed and wounded in the battle to restore order. Han Xi, who refused to surrender, was killed.

古文：事闻，赠维新光禄卿，藩锡太仆少卿，昌期佥事，余赠恤有差。
现代文：朝廷赠维新光禄卿，藩锡太仆少卿。
English: The imperial court gave him the title of Wei Xin Guanglu, and the title of Han Xitai Minion Shaoqing.

