古文：天地与其所产焉，物也。
现代文：世界及其所产生的一切现象，都是来源于物质。
English: The world and all the phenomena it produces are derived from matter.

古文：物以物其所物而不过焉，实也。
现代文：以概念来称谓事物而不超过事物的实际范围，只是概念的外延。
English: Using concepts to refer to things without going beyond the actual scope of things is just an extension of the concept.

古文：实以实其所实而不旷焉，位也。
现代文：以事物的本质属性来规定概念所表示的事物，使该事物充足具备而不欠缺其本质属性，这时概念的内涵。
English: The essential attribute of a thing is used to specify the thing represented by the concept, so that the thing sufficiently possesses and does not lack its essential attribute, which is the connotation of the concept.

古文：出其所位，非位，位其所位焉，正也。
现代文：概念的内涵不充足就是错误的概念；概念具备充足的内涵就是正确的概念。
English: A concept with insufficient connotation is a wrong concept; a concept with sufficient connotation is a correct concept.

古文：以其所正，正其所不正；以其所不正，疑其所正。
现代文：以正确的概念来校正不正确的概念，又以不正确的概念的失误之处，反过来探究正确的概念之所以正确的所在。
English: Correct the incorrect concept with the correct concept, and use the mistakes of the incorrect concept to, in turn, explore why the correct concept is correct.

古文：其正者，正其所实也；正其所实者，正其名也。
现代文：要使概念正确，就必须正确反映事物的本质；而要正确反映事物的本质，就必须依靠正确的概念。
English: In order for a concept to be correct, it must correctly reflect the essence of things; and in order to correctly reflect the essence of things, it must rely on a correct concept.

古文：其名正则唯乎其彼此焉。
现代文：正确的概念必须是彼或此的概念相应于彼或此的事物。
English: The correct concept must be that he or this concept corresponds to he or this thing.

古文：谓彼而彼不唯乎彼，则彼谓不行；谓此而此不唯乎此，则此谓不行。
现代文：以彼名称呼彼物而无彼物与之相应，则彼名不适用于彼物；以此名称呼此物而无此物以之相应，则此名不适用于此物。
English: If you call something by its name and there is no corresponding other thing, then its name does not apply to it; if you call this thing by this name and there is no corresponding other thing, then this name does not apply to it.

古文：其以当不当也。不当而当，乱也。
现代文：这是因为充当事物的概念不正确，以不正确的概念来称呼事物，会引起逻辑混乱。
English: This is because the concept of "object" is incorrect, and calling things by incorrect concepts will cause logical confusion.

古文：故彼彼当乎彼，则唯乎彼，其谓行彼；此此当乎此，则唯乎此，其谓行此。
现代文：所以，彼名称呼彼物并且符合于彼物，就是于彼物相应，则称为适用于彼物的概念；以此名称呼此物并且符合于此物，就是与此物相应，则称为适用于此物的概念。
English: Wherefore, he who calls another thing by that name, and it agrees with him, that is, corresponds to him, is called a concept applicable to that other thing; and he who calls this thing by that name, and it agrees with him, that is, corresponds to him, is called a concept applicable to that other thing.

古文：其以当而当也。以当而当，正也。
现代文：这时因为充当事物的概念符合于事物，以与事物相符合的概念来称呼事物，便称为正确的概念。
English: At this time, because the concept of the object corresponds to the thing, and the concept that corresponds to the thing is called the correct concept.

古文：故彼彼止于彼，此此止于此，可。
现代文：所以，以彼名称呼彼物并且仅当称呼彼物，以此名称呼此物并且仅当称呼此物，这时正确的，即遵守了同一律。
English: Therefore, to call by his name the other thing and only the other thing, to call this thing by this name and only to call this thing, then it is correct, that is, to comply with the same law.

古文：彼此而彼且此，此彼而此且彼，不可。
现代文：彼此不同的事物只能名称其彼此而不可称彼亦且是此；此彼不同的事物只能各称其此彼而不可称此亦即是彼，这时违反排中律的。
English: Things that are different from each other can only be called each other and cannot be called he and this; things that are different from each other can only be called he and this and cannot be called he and this, which is against the law of the excluded middle.

古文：夫名，实谓也。
现代文：概念是事物的称号。
English: A concept is a name for something.

古文：知此之非此也，知此之不在此也，则不谓也；知彼之非彼也，知彼之不在彼也，则不谓也。
现代文：知道此物而非此物，知道此物已经变化而不是此物了，就是不可以此名来称呼此物；知道彼物而非彼物，知道彼物已经变化而不是彼物了，就不可以彼名来称呼必物。
English: Knowing this thing and not this thing, knowing that this thing has changed and is not this thing, one cannot call this thing by this name; knowing the other thing and not the other thing, knowing that the other thing has changed and is not the other thing, one cannot call the necessary thing by its name.

古文：至矣哉，古之明王。
现代文：这就是要遵守不矛盾率。
English: This is to comply with the non-contradiction rate.

