古文：晋人杀厉公，边人以告，成公在朝。
现代文：晋国人杀了晋厉公，鲁国防守边境的官员把这个消息报告给朝廷，鲁成公正好在朝堂上。
English: The people of Jin killed Jin Liguo, the officials of the border defense of Lu reported this news to the imperial court, and Lu Cheng was justly praised in the imperial court.

古文：公曰： 臣杀其君，谁之过也？ 
现代文：成公听到后说： 臣子杀了他的国君，是谁的过错？ 
English: Upon hearing this, Cheng Gong said: If a vassal killed his sovereign, whose fault is it?

古文：大夫莫对，里革曰： 君之过也。
现代文：大夫们没有人回答。里革回答说： 这是国君的过错。
English: The doctors did not answer. Riga replied: "It is the fault of the sovereign."

古文：夫君人者，其威大矣。
现代文：统治民众的人，他的威严是极大的。
English: The man who governs the people, his majesty is great.

古文：失威而至于杀，其过多矣。
现代文：丧失威严以至于被杀，他的过错一定太多了。
English: It must have been too much for him to lose his dignity and be killed.

古文：且夫君也者，将牧民而正其邪者也，若君纵私回而弃民事，民旁有慝无由省之，益邪多矣。
现代文：而且做国君的，应该治理民众并纠正民众的邪恶。倘若国君放纵自己的私心邪念而放弃了治理民众的事情，民众中间发生的邪恶没有人去了解，就会使邪恶越来越多。
English: Moreover, as the sovereign, he should govern the people and correct the evil of the people. If the sovereign indulges his selfish evil thoughts and abandons the governance of the people, no one will understand the evil that occurs among the people, and it will cause more and more evil.

古文：若以邪临民，陷而不振，用善不肯专，则不能使，至于殄灭而莫之恤也，将安用之？
现代文：倘若用邪恶的办法治理民众，政事就会败坏而不能挽救。施行仁政又不肯专一到底，就不能支配民众。民众到了灭亡的地步也不去体恤，这样还要国君做什么？
English: If the people are governed by evil methods, the government will be corrupted and cannot be saved. If benevolent policies are implemented, but they are not willing to be single-minded to the end, they cannot control the people. The people will not be sympathetic to the point of destruction, so what should the sovereign do?

古文：桀奔南巢，纣踣于京，厉流于彘，幽灭于戏，皆是术也。
现代文：夏桀出逃到南巢，商纣王死在朝歌，周厉王被流放到彘地，周幽王在戏山身亡，都是由于过错太多失掉威严的缘故。
English: Xia Yao fled to the southern nest, Shangyu Wang died in the morning song, Zhou Li Wang was exiled to Shantian, and Zhou Yu Wang died in the play mountain, all due to too many mistakes and the loss of dignity.

古文：夫君也者，民之川泽也。
现代文：国君就好比养育民众的川泽。
English: The sovereign is like Kawazawa, who nurtures the people.

古文：行而从之，美恶皆君之由，民何能为焉。 
现代文：君行而民从，好坏都由国君决定，民众怎么能无故弑君呢？ 
English: The ruler acts and the people follow, the good and the bad are decided by the sovereign. How can the people follow the ruler without any reason?

