古文：起瘀逢阉茂，尽旃蒙大渊献，凡二年。
现代文：起，止，一共两年。
English: From start to finish, a total of two years.

古文：孝献皇帝丙兴平元年
现代文：汉献帝兴平元年
English: Han Xian Di in the first year of Xingping

古文：春，正月，辛酉，赦天下。
现代文：春季，正月，辛酉，大赦天下。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, and the Chinese New Year are all auspicious.

古文：甲子，帝加元服。
现代文：甲子，献帝举行加冠礼。
English: On the 16th, Diga was crowned.

古文：二月，戊寅，有司奏立长秋宫。
现代文：二月，戊寅，有关部门奏请献帝选立皇后。
English: In February, Wu Yin, the relevant departments appealed to Emperor Xian for the election of an empress.

古文：诏曰： 皇妣宅兆未卜，何忍言后宫之选乎！ 
现代文：献帝下诏说： 我母亲安葬的地方还未定，怎么忍心谈挑选后妃的事呢？ 
English: The imperial edict dedicated to the emperor said: My mother's burial place is still undecided, how can I bear to talk about the selection of the empress dowager?

古文：壬午，三公奏改葬皇妣王夫人，追上尊号曰灵怀皇后。
现代文：壬午，三公上奏，请将献帝的母亲王美人改葬到灵帝之陵，并追加尊号，称 灵怀皇后 。
English: In the morning of the 3rd day of the 3rd month of the 3rd year of the 3rd month of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year

古文：陶谦告急于田楷，楷与平原相刘备救之。
现代文：徐州牧陶谦向青州刺史田楷告急，田楷与平原国相刘备率兵去援救他。
English: Xuzhou's Mu Taoqian sent an urgent message to Tian Kai, the governor of Qingzhou. Tian Kai and the Minister of the Plain Liu Bei led soldiers to rescue him.

古文：备自有兵数千人，谦益以丹杨兵四千，备遂去楷归谦，谦表为豫州刺史，屯小沛。
现代文：刘备拥有自己的军队数千人，陶谦又增拨丹阳郡兵士四千名归他指挥，于是刘备就脱离田楷，投奔陶谦。陶谦上表推荐刘备担任豫州刺史，驻扎在小沛。
English: Liu Bei had thousands of soldiers of his own, and Tao Qian assigned an additional four thousand soldiers from Danyang County to his command, so Liu Bei left Tiankai and went to Tao Qian. Tao Qian recommended Liu Bei to serve as the governor of Yuzhou, stationed in Xiaopei.

古文：曹操军食亦尽，引兵还。
现代文：正好曹操军粮也已告尽，率军撤回兖州。
English: Just as Cao Cao's rations ran out, he led his army back to Zhangzhou.

古文：马腾私有求于李傕，不获而怒，欲举兵相攻；帝遣使者和解之，不从。
现代文：征西将军马腾为私事有求于李，因未得到满足而大怒，打算部署军队进攻李。献帝派遣使者进行调解，马腾不肯听从。
English: Marten, the general of the Western Conquest, asked Li for a private matter. He was very angry because he was not satisfied, and planned to deploy troops to attack Li. He offered to send an envoy to mediate, but Marten refused to listen.

古文：韩遂率众来和腾、傕，即而复与腾合。
现代文：韩遂率军从金城郡来调解马腾与李的纠纷，结果反而又与马腾联合。
English: Han Sui led an army from Jincheng County to mediate the dispute between Ma Teng and Li, but ended up uniting with Ma Teng.

古文：谏议大夫种邵、侍中马宇、左中郎将刘范谋使腾袭长安，己为内应，以诛傕等。
现代文：谏议大夫种邵、侍中马宇、左中郎将刘范策划让马腾进袭长安，自己做内应，以诛灭李等人。
English: Dr. Zeng Shao, Ma Yu, and Zuo Zhong Lang discussed Liu Fan's plan to let Ma Teng attack Chang'an, and did their own internal affairs to eliminate Li and others.

古文：壬申，腾、遂勒兵屯长平观。
现代文：壬申，马腾、韩遂率军进驻长平观。
English: Jinshin, Ma Teng and Han Sui led the army into Changping.

古文：邵等谋泄，出奔槐里。
现代文：种邵等人的计划泄露，他们便从长安出逃，跑到槐里。
English: When the plan of Zeng Shao and others was leaked, they fled from Chang'an and went to Tongli.

古文：傕使樊稠、郭汜及兄子利击之，腾、遂败走，还凉州。
现代文：李派樊稠、郭汜及自己的侄子李利发动进攻，马腾、韩遂兵败退回凉州。
English: Li sent Guozhuo, Guo Jun and his nephew Li Li to launch an attack, while Ma Teng and Han Sui retreated to Liangzhou in defeat.

古文：又攻槐里，邵等皆死。
现代文：樊稠等又进攻槐里，种邵等人全都被杀。
English: Zeng Congu and others attacked Baili again, and Zeng Shao and others were all killed.

古文：庚申，诏赦腾等。
现代文：庚申，下诏赦免马腾等人。
English: Goshun issued an edict to pardon Ma Teng and others.

古文：夏，四月，以腾为安狄将军，遂为安降将军。
现代文：夏季，四月，任命马腾为安狄将军，韩遂为安降将军。
English: In the summer, in April, he appointed Ma Teng as General Andy and Han Sui as General Anjun.

古文：曹操使司马荀彧、寿张令程昱守鄄城，复往攻陶谦，遂略地至琅邪、东海，所过残灭。
现代文：曹操委派司马荀、寿张县令程昱留守鄄城，自己再次前往徐州进攻陶谦，于是沿途攻掠，直到琅邪、东海，所过之处受到严重破坏。
English: Cao Cao appointed Sima Qian and Shou Zhang County commander Cheng Yao to stay in Handan, and he went to Xuzhou to attack Tao Qian again, so he attacked and plundered along the way, until the East Sea and the East Sea, and the places he passed were seriously damaged.

古文：还，击破刘备于郯东。
现代文：大军返回，又在郯县以东击败刘备的军队。
English: The large army returned and defeated Liu Bei's army east of Handan County.

古文：谦恐，欲走归丹杨。
现代文：陶谦震恐，打算逃回丹阳。
English: Tao Qian panicked and wanted to escape back to Danyang.

古文：会陈留太守张邈叛操迎吕布，操乃引军还。
现代文：正在这时，陈留太守张邈背叛曹操，迎接吕布入兖州，于是曹操撤军，回救兖州。
English: Just at this time, Chen Liu Taishou Zhang Ye betrayed Cao Cao and welcomed Lv Bu into Ganzhou, so Cao Cao withdrew his army and returned to rescue Ganzhou.

古文：初，张邈少时，好游侠，袁绍、曹操皆与之善。
现代文：起初，张邈年轻时，行侠仗义，袁绍、曹操都与他友善。
English: At first, when Zhang Ye was young, Yuan Shao and Cao Cao were friendly with him.

古文：及绍为盟主，有骄色，邈正议责绍；绍怒，使操杀之。
现代文：及至袁绍当上讨伐董卓联军的盟主，待人接物态度傲慢，张邈义正辞严地责备袁绍。袁绍恼羞成怒，让曹操去杀张邈。
English: When Yuan Shao became the leader to fight against the allied forces of Dong Zhuo, he was arrogant in his treatment of others, and Zhang Rongyi sternly rebuked Yuan Shao. Yuan Shao became angry and let Cao Cao kill Zhang Rong.

古文：操不听，曰： 孟卓，亲友也，是非当容之。
现代文：曹操不肯听从，说： 张邈是亲近的朋友，即使他有不对的地方，也该宽容。
English: Cao Cao refused to listen, saying: Zhang Ye is a close friend, even if he has something wrong, he should be tolerant.

古文：今天下未定，奈何自相危也！ 
现代文：如今天下尚未安定，怎么能自相残杀呢？ 
English: If the present situation is not stable, how can they kill each other?

古文：操之前攻陶谦，志在必死，敕家曰： 我若不还，往依孟卓。 
现代文：曹操第一次进攻陶谦时，决心战死，曾命令家中妻小说： 我如果不能生还，他们就去投靠张邈。 
English: When Cao Cao attacked Tao Qian for the first time, he was determined to die in battle. He ordered his family: "If I don't survive, they will go to Zhang Ye.

古文：后还见邈，垂泣相对。
现代文：后来曹操回来见到张邈，两人相对流下眼泪。
English: Later, Cao Cao came back to see Zhang Ye, and both of them shed tears.

古文：陈留高柔谓乡人曰： 曹操军虽据兗州，本有四方之图，未得安坐守也。
现代文：陈留人高柔对同乡人说： 曹操虽然目前占有兖州，但他本有兼并天下的图谋，不会安心坐守这块地盘。
English: Chen LiuRen GaoRu said to his countryman: Although Cao Cao currently occupies Zhangzhou, he originally had plans to annex the whole world, and will not sit and guard this site with peace of mind.

古文：而张府君恃陈留之资，将乘间为变，欲与诸君避之，何如？ 
现代文：而张邈倚仗陈留郡作资本，将会找机会另作打算。我想和你们一同避开争战，怎么样？ 
English: And Zhang Ye, relying on Chen Liu County as his capital, will look for opportunities to make other plans. I want to avoid war with you, how about it?

古文：众人皆以曹、张相亲，柔又年少，不然其言。
现代文：众人都认为曹操与张邈互相亲善，而高柔年纪又轻，不相信他的预言。
English: Everyone thought that Cao Cao and Zhang Ye were friendly with each other, but Gao Ju was young and did not believe his prediction.

古文：柔从兄幹自河北呼柔，柔举宗从之。
现代文：恰好高柔的堂兄高干从河北召唤高柔，高柔带着全族人前往河北依附高干。
English: It just so happened that Gao Rou's cousin Gao Gan summoned Gao Rou from Hebei, and Gao Rou took the whole family to Hebei to join Gao Gan.

古文：吕布之舍袁绍从张杨也，过邈，临别，把手共誓。
现代文：吕布离开袁绍去投奔张杨时，路过陈留郡，拜访张邈，临别时，一同握手盟誓。
English: When Lü Bu left Yuan Shao to join Zhang Yang, he passed through Chenliu County, visited Zhang Ye, and shook hands and swore together at the time of parting.

古文：绍闻之，大恨。
现代文：袁绍知道这一消息后，大为痛恨。
English: After hearing this, Yuan Shao felt very resentful.

古文：邈畏操终为绍杀己也，心不自安。
现代文：张邈担心曹操终究会为袁绍谋害自己，心中不能自安。
English: Zhang Ye was worried that Cao Cao would eventually kill himself for Yuan Shao, and could not calm down.

古文：前九江太守陈留边让尝讥议操，操闻而杀之，并其妻子。
现代文：前任九江太守、陈留人边让曾经讥讽过曹操，曹操知道后，将边让及其妻子儿女全部杀死。
English: The former governor of Jiujiang and retainer of Chen, Bianjan, had once mocked Cao Cao. Cao Cao knew this and killed Bianjan, his wife and children.

古文：让素有才名，由是兗州士大夫皆恐惧。
现代文：边让一向才华出众，声望很高，因此兖州地区的士大夫全都感到恐惧。
English: Bian Zhan has always been talented and has a high reputation, so all the scholars and doctors in Zhangzhou are afraid.

古文：陈宫性刚直壮烈，内亦自疑，乃与从事中郎许汜、王楷及邈弟超共谋叛操。
现代文：陈宫性情梗直刚烈，心里也疑虑不安，就与从事中郎许汜、王楷以及张邈的弟弟张超一起策划背叛曹操。
English: Chen Gong's temperament was straight and strong, and he was also doubtful and uneasy in his heart, so he plotted to betray Cao Cao together with the middlemen Xu Yao, Wang Kai and Zhang Yao's brother Zhang Chao.

古文：宫说邈曰： 今天下分崩，雄杰并起，君以千里之众，当四战之地，抚剑顾眄，亦足以为人豪，而反受制于人，不亦鄙乎！
现代文：陈宫对张邈进言： 如今天下分袭，豪杰纷纷崛起，您拥有广达千里的疆土民众，又处于四方必争的冲要之地，手抚佩剑，左右顾盼，也足以成为人中豪杰。却反而受制于人，不是太鄙陋了吗？
English: Chen Gong said to Zhang Ye: If today is the day of the next attack, heroes will rise one after another. You have a vast territory of thousands of miles of people, and you are in a crucial place that must be contested by all four sides. Caressing the sword with your hand and looking left and right is enough to become a hero among people. But on the contrary, you are subject to people. Isn't it too despicable?

古文：今州军东征，其处空虚，吕布壮士，善战无前，若权迎之，共牧兗州，观天下形势，俟时事之变，此亦纵横之一时也。 
现代文：如今曹操统率大军东征，州中空虚，吕布是个壮士，能征善战，无人可比，如果暂时迎接他来，共同主持兖州事务，观察天下的形势，等待时局变化，这也是您纵横捭阖的一个时机。 
English: Now Cao Cao is leading a large army to the east, the state is empty, and Lvbu is a strong man, able to fight a good war, no one can compare. If you temporarily welcome him, co-chair the affairs of Zhangzhou, observe the situation in the world, and wait for the situation to change, this is also an opportunity for you to travel.

古文：邈从之。
现代文：张邈听从了陈宫的意见。
English: Zhang Ye listened to Chen Gong's advice.

古文：时操使宫将兵留屯东郡，遂以其众潜迎布为兗州牧。
现代文：当时曹操派陈宫率兵留守东郡，于是陈宫就率军秘密迎接吕布来担任兖州牧。
English: At that time, Cao Cao sent Chen Gong and his army to stay in Dong County, so Chen Gong led his army to secretly welcome Lü Bu to serve as the herdsman of Zhangzhou.

古文：布至，邈乃使其党刘翊告荀彧曰： 吕将军业助曹使君击陶谦，宜亟供其军食。 
现代文：吕布到达后，张邈就派他的党羽刘翊告诉荀说： 吕将军来帮助曹刺史进攻陶谦，应该赶快供给他军粮。 
English: After Lv Bu arrived, Zhang Ye sent his henchman Liu Ye to tell Lv that: General Lv should help Cao Zhishi to attack Tao Qian and should quickly provide him with military rations.

古文：众疑惑，彧知邈为乱，即勒兵设备，急召东郡太守夏侯惇于濮阳；惇来，布遂据濮阳。
现代文：众人感到疑惑，荀知道张邈将要背叛，就立即部署军队进行防守，并急速征召在濮阳的东郡太守夏侯。夏侯前来救援，吕布便占据濮阳。
English: Everyone was puzzled. Knowing that Zhang Ye was about to defect, Zou immediately deployed troops to defend the city and quickly called in Xia Hou, the governor of Dong County in Shenyang. When Xia Hou came to the rescue, Lv Bu occupied Shenyang.

古文：时操悉军攻陶谦，留守兵少，而督将、大吏多与邈、宫通谋。
现代文：当时曹操把所有的军队都带去进攻陶谦，留守的兵很少，而且大部分将领和主要官吏都参与了张邈、陈宫的阴谋。
English: At that time, Cao Cao brought all the troops to attack Tao Qian. There were very few soldiers left behind, and most of the generals and major officials were involved in the conspiracy of Zhang Ye and Chen Gong.

古文：惇至，其夜，诛谋叛者数十人，众乃定。
现代文：夏侯赶到以后，当天夜里，就诛杀了几十个参与叛变阴谋的官员，情势才稳定下来。
English: After Xia Hou arrived, he killed dozens of officials involved in the mutiny plot in the night of the same day, and the situation stabilized.

古文：豫州剌史郭贡率众数万来至城下，或言与吕布同谋，众甚惧。
现代文：豫州刺史郭贡率领数万人的大军来到鄄城城下，有谣言说他与吕布合谋，城中众人十分恐惧。
English: Guogong, the governor of Yuzhou, led a large army of tens of thousands of people to the city of Lucheng. There were rumors that he had conspired with Lv Bu, and everyone in the city was very afraid.

古文：贡求见荀彧，彧将往，惇等曰： 君一州镇也，往必危，不可。 
现代文：郭贡要求会见荀。荀准备出城会面，夏侯等劝阻他说： 你是一州的主持人，出城必定有危险，不能去。 
English: Guo Gong asked to meet with Yao. Yao was preparing to leave the city to meet, Xia Hou and others dissuaded him saying: You are the host of a state, leaving the city must be dangerous, you can't go.

古文：彧曰： 贡与邈等，分非素结也，今来速，计必未定，及其未定说之，纵不为用，可使中立。
现代文：荀说： 郭贡与张邈等人并不是老交情，如今来得这样迅速，必是还未定好策略，趁他尚未定好策略时说服他，即便他不能帮助我们，也可使他保持中立。
English: Zou said: Guo Gong and Zhang Ye and others are not old friends, and now they come so quickly, they must have not yet decided on a strategy. Take advantage of him when he has not yet decided on a strategy to convince him that even if he cannot help us, he can keep him neutral.

古文：若先疑之，彼将怒而成计。 贡见彧无惧意，谓鄄城未易攻，遂引兵去。
现代文：如果先疑心他，将使他在一怒之下打定主意，投到敌人那边 郭贡看到荀并恐惧之心，认为鄄城不易攻破，于是率军离去。
English: If you doubt him first, he will make up his mind in a fit of anger and go over to the enemy side. Guogong saw the shackles and fear, and thought that it was not easy to break through the city, so he led the army to leave.

古文：是时，兗州郡县皆应布，唯鄄城、范、东阿不动。
现代文：当时，兖州属下的郡、县全都响应吕布，只有鄄城、范县、东阿县没有动摇。
English: At that time, counties and counties under Luzhou all responded to Lvbu, but only Lucheng, Fan County and Dong'a County did not waver.

古文：布军降者言： 陈宫欲自将兵取东阿，又使氾嶷取范。 
现代文：吕布军中归降的人说： 陈宫准备自己率军攻取东阿，又派汜嶷攻取范县。 
English: A returnee from the Lvbu army said: Chen Gong is preparing to lead his army to conquer Dong'a, and he has also sent troops to conquer Fan County.

古文：吏民皆恐。
现代文：官民全都感到恐慌。
English: Everyone panicked, both public and private.

古文：程昱本东阿人，彧谓昱曰： 今举州皆叛，唯有此三城，宫等以重兵临之，非有以深结其心，三城必动。
现代文：程昱本是东阿人，荀对他说： 如今全州都已背叛，只剩下了这三个城。陈宫等派大军攻城，如果我们不能紧密地团结民心，这三城必定会动摇。
English: Cheng Yu, who was originally from East Africa, said to him, "Nowadays, the whole province has been betrayed, and only these three cities remain. Chen Gong and others have sent a large army to attack the city. If we cannot closely unite the people's hearts, these three cities will surely be shaken."

古文：君，民之望也，宜往抚之。 
现代文：你在东阿人民中声望很高，应该前去进行安抚。 
English: You have a high reputation among the people of East Afghanistan, and you should go to pacify them.

古文：昱乃归过范，说其令靳允曰： 闻吕布执君母、弟、妻子，孝子诚不可为心。
现代文：于是，程昱离开鄄城返回东阿，在途中经过范县，劝说范县县令靳允道； 听说吕布已将您的母亲、弟弟和妻子儿女都抓了起来，孝子的心情自然十分沉重。
English: As a result, Cheng Yao left Shicheng to return to East Africa, passing through Fan County on the way and persuading Fan County to let him go. Hearing that Lü Bu had arrested your mother, brother, wife and children, the filial son's heart was naturally very heavy.

古文：今天下大乱，英雄并起，必有命世能息天下之乱者，此智者所宜详择也。
现代文：如今天下大乱，英雄纷纷崛起，其中必定会有一位主宰时代命运安定天下的人，这是智者应该对比仔细选择的。
English: If today there is great turmoil and heroes are rising one after another, there will surely be a person who dominates the era and stabilizes the world. This is what the wise should carefully choose.

古文：得主者昌，失主者亡。
现代文：跟对主人，才能兴旺；跟错主人，就会败亡。
English: Those who gain a sacred master will prosper, and those who lose their master will decline.

古文：陈宫叛迎吕布而百城皆应，似能有为；然以君观之，布何如人哉？
现代文：陈宫背叛曹操，迎接吕布，而诸城全都响应，似乎能有所作为。然而据您观察，吕布是个什么样的人？
English: Chen Gong betrayed Cao Cao and welcomed Lv Bu, and all the cities responded, it seems that they can make a difference. However, according to your observation, what kind of person is Lv Bu?

古文：夫布粗中少亲，刚而无礼，匹夫之雄耳。
现代文：吕布为人粗暴而很少与人亲近，又刚愎无礼，不过是个勇猛的匹夫而已。
English: Lvbu is a rough person and rarely gets close to people. He is also rude and unruly, but he is just a brave man.

古文：宫等以势假合，不能相君也；兵虽众，终必无成。
现代文：陈宫等人在目前形势下与他联合，只是互相利用，不会奉吕布为主，因此，他们虽然兵多，但终究不会成事。
English: Chen Gong and others have united with him under the current situation, but they only use each other, and will not give priority to Lü Bu. Therefore, although they have more soldiers, they will not succeed in the end.

古文：曹使君智略不世出，殆天所授。
现代文：曹操的智慧谋略盖世，简直是上天特别授予他的。
English: Cao Cao's wisdom and stratagem were bestowed upon him by heaven.

古文：君必固范，我守东阿，则田单之功可立也。
现代文：您一定要坚守范县，我来守住东阿，就可以立下田单恢复齐国那样的大功。
English: You must hold on to Fan County, and I will hold on to Dong'a, and then we can establish a merit like Tian Shan's recovery of lost land.

古文：孰与违忠从恶而母子俱亡乎？
现代文：这样，难道不比你违背忠义去跟随恶人，结果母子都被杀死要好吗？
English: Who would choose to be disloyal and side with the wicked, resulting in the death of both mother and child?

古文：唯君详虑之！ 
现代文：请您好好考虑！ 
English: Please think about it!

古文：允流涕曰： 不敢有贰心。 
现代文：靳允流着泪说： 我不敢有二心。 
English: With tears streaming down his face, Hao Yun said, "I dare not have two hearts.

古文：时泛嶷已在县，允乃见嶷，伏兵刺杀之，归，勒兵自守。
现代文：这时，汜嶷已率兵进入范县，靳允便出来会见汜嶷，用伏兵将汜嶷刺杀。回城后，部署军队坚守。
English: At this time, Yao had already led his soldiers into Fan County, and Yao Yun came out to meet Yao, and assassinated Yao with an ambush. After returning to the city, the deployed troops held firm.

古文：徐众评曰：允于曹公未成君臣；母至亲也，于义应去。
现代文：徐众评曰：靳允与曹操之间并没有确立君臣关系，而母亲是至亲，依照道义，靳允应该辞官去跟随母亲。
English: Xu Zhongyan said: There is no monarch-servant relationship established between Nie Yun and Cao Cao, and his mother is a close relative. According to morality, Nie Yun should resign to follow his mother.

古文：卫公子开方仕齐，积年不返，管仲以为不怀其亲，安能爱君！
现代文：春秋时期，卫国公子开方到齐国当官，多年没有返回家乡，官仲认为，不惦念自己父母的人，又怎么能爱君主！
English: During the Spring and Autumn Period, Prince Weiguo went to Qi Province to become an official, and did not return to his hometown for many years. The officials thought that people who did not miss their parents could not love the monarch!

古文：是以求忠臣必于孝子之门；允宜先救至亲。
现代文：所以，访求忠臣一定要到孝子之门。靳允应该首先去营救自己的至亲骨肉。
English: Therefore, to visit a loyal subject, you must go to the door of a filial son. You should first go to rescue your own flesh and blood.

古文：徐庶母为曹公所得，刘备遣庶归北，欲为天下者恕人子之情也；曹公亦宜遣允。
现代文：徐庶的母亲被曹操俘虏，刘备就送徐庶返回北方，以便营救他的母亲。想要掌握天下的人，应当体恤作儿子的孝顺之情。而曹操也应该让靳允离开。
English: Xu Shizhu's mother was captured by Cao Cao, so Liu Bei sent Xu Shizhu back to the north in order to rescue his mother. If you want to rule the world, you should be considerate of your son's filial piety. And Cao Cao should also let You Yun leave.

古文：昱又遣别骑绝仓亭津，陈宫至，不得渡。
现代文：程昱又派遣一支骑兵部队，截断黄河上的仓亭津渡口，陈宫率军到河边，无法渡河。
English: Cheng Yu also dispatched another detachment of soldiers to block the Kuratei ferry port. Chen Gong and his men arrived and were unable to cross the river.

古文：昱至东阿，东阿令颍川枣祗已率厉吏民拒城坚守，卒完三城以待操。
现代文：程昱来到东阿，东阿县令、颖川人枣祗已率领吏民在城墙上坚守。他们终于守住这三城等到曹操大军的归来。
English: When Cheng Yao arrived in Dong'a, the governor of Dong'a County, Zaozhuang Yao, a native of Yingchuan, led the officials and people to hold on to the city wall. They finally held on to these three cities until Cao Cao's army returned.

古文：操还，执昱手曰： 微子之力，吾无所归矣。 
现代文：曹操回来后，握着程昱的手说： 假若不是你尽力，我就无家可归了。 
English: After Cao Cao came back, he put his hands on Cheng Yao's hands and said, "If it weren't for your efforts, we wouldn't have a place to go!"

古文：表昱为东平相，屯范。
现代文：曹操上表推荐程昱为东平国相，驻在范县。
English: Cao Cao recommended Cheng Yao as Dongping Minister of State on the table, stationed in Fan County.

古文：吕布攻鄄城不能下，西屯濮阳。
现代文：吕布进攻鄄城，未能攻克，就向西移驻濮阳。
English: Lvbu attacked Shicheng, but failed to conquer it, so he moved west to Shiyang.

古文：曹操曰： 布一旦得一州，不能据东平，断亢父、泰山之道，乘险要我，而乃屯濮阳，吾知其无能为也。 
现代文：曹操说： 吕布一下子得到一州的地盘，却不能占据东平，切断亢父、泰山的要道，利用险要的地势来对抗我，反而回驻濮阳，我知道他没有多大作为。 
English: Cao Cao said, "Lyub got the territory of Yizhou all of a sudden, but he couldn't occupy Dongping, cut off the important routes of his father and Mount Taishan, and took advantage of the dangerous terrain to oppose me. Instead, he returned to Poyang. I know he didn't accomplish much.

古文：乃进攻之。
现代文：于是进攻吕布。
English: They then attacked Lübbe.

古文：五月，以扬武将军郭汜为后将军，安集将军樊稠为右将军，并开府如三公，合为六府，皆参选举。
现代文：五月，任命扬武将军郭汜为后将军，安集将军樊稠为右将军，都和三公一样开府，设置僚属。
English: In May, Yangwu's general Guo Jun was appointed as the rear general, and Anji's general Zeng Cong was appointed as the right general. Both of them, like the three princes, opened the capital and set up subordinates.

古文：李傕等各欲用其所举，若一违之，便忿愤喜怒。
现代文：加上先前已享受这种待遇的车骑将军李，与三公的府署合称为六府，都参预全国官员的推荐与选举。李等人都要任用自己所推荐的人选，要是一有违背，就大发脾气。
English: In addition to General Li, who had previously enjoyed such treatment, the General Office of the Three Municipalities, together with the General Office of the Three Municipalities, is called the Six Municipalities, and they all participate in the recommendation and election of prefectural officials. Li and others must appoint the candidates they recommend, and if there is any violation, they will lose their temper.

古文：主者患之，乃以次第用其所举。先从傕起，汜次之，稠次之，三公所举，终不见用。
现代文：有关机构无法应付，只好依照次序任用他们所推荐的人选，先从李推荐的开始，其次是郭汜，再次是樊稠，三公所推举的人才，根本没有被任用的机会。
English: The relevant agencies could not cope, so they had to appoint the candidates recommended by them in the following order, starting with Li's recommendation, followed by Guo Wei, and then Gong Cong. The talents recommended by the three public institutions had no opportunity to be appointed at all.

古文：河西四郡以去凉州治远，隔以河寇，上书求别置州。
现代文：河西的敦煌、酒泉、张掖、武威四郡，因为距离凉州官府所在地冀县太远，而且交通又被盗寇阻断，因此上书请求另外设置一州。
English: The four counties of Dunhuang, Jiuquan, Zhangye and Wuwei in the west of the river, because they are too far away from Jixian, the seat of the government of Liangzhou, and the traffic was blocked by thieves, so the petition requested the establishment of another state.

古文：六月，丙子，诏以陈留邯郸商为雍州剌史，典治之。
现代文：六月，丙子，下诏设置雍州，任命陈留人邯郸商为雍州刺史，治理河西四郡事务。
English: In June, Emperor Xizong decreed the establishment of Yongzhou, and appointed Chen Lujin, a merchant, as the governor of Yongzhou to administer the affairs of the four counties in Hexi.

古文：丁丑，京师地震；戊寅，又震。
现代文：丁丑，京师长安发生地震。戊寅，再次发生地震。
English: Dingwuxi, Beijing Division Chang'an Earthquake. Wuyin, another earthquake.

古文：乙酉晦，日有食之。
现代文：乙酉晦，出现日食。
English: Acetylene day, solar eclipse.

古文：秋，七月，壬子，太尉硃俊免。
现代文：秋季，七月，壬子，太尉朱俊被免职。
English: In the autumn, in July, Taifu Zhu Jun was dismissed from his post in Renzi.

古文：戊午，以太常杨彪为太尉，录尚书事。
现代文：戊午，任命太常杨彪为太尉，主持尚书事务。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, Yang Biao was appointed as the first lieutenant to preside over the affairs of Shangshu.

古文：甲子，以镇南将军杨定为安西将军，开府如三公。
现代文：甲子，任命镇南将军杨定为安西将军，允许他开府置僚属，待遇与三公相同。
English: Jiazi, appointed Zhenan General Yang as Anxi General, allowed him to set up a government and appoint subordinates, and the treatment was the same as that of the three princes.

古文：自四月不雨至于是月，谷一斛直钱五十万，长安中人相食。
现代文：从四月到七月，一直没有降雨，谷价一斛值五十万钱。因为饥荒，长安城中的百姓出现人吃人的现象。
English: From April to July, there was no rain, and the price of grain was half a million dollars a bushel. Because of the famine, people in Chang'an City started to eat each other.

古文：帝令侍御史侯汶出太仓米豆为贫人作糜，饿死者如故。
现代文：献帝命令侍御史侯汶取出太仓中储存的米、豆为贫民熬粥，进行施舍。
English: Emperor Xian ordered the attendant Shi Houwen to take out the rice and beans stored in the warehouse to make porridge for the poor and give alms.

古文：帝疑禀赋不实，取米豆各五升于御前作糜，得二盆。
现代文：可是饿死的人仍像过去一样多。献帝怀疑有人从中作弊，便命令用米、豆各五升，在自己面前熬粥，煮出两盆。
English: However, there are still as many people starving to death as in the past. Suspecting that someone was cheating, Emperor Xian ordered that five liters of rice and five liters of beans be used to boil porridge in front of him, and two pots were made.

古文：乃杖汶五十，于是悉得全济。
现代文：于是，责打侯汶五十棍。贫民才都得以保全性命。
English: As a result, Houwen was beaten with fifty sticks. Only then were the poor able to save their lives.

古文：八月，冯翊羌寇属县，郭汜、樊稠等率众破之。
现代文：八月，冯翊地区的羌族人进攻属下各县，郭汜、樊稠率军将其击败。
English: In August, the Yi people in the Fengye region attacked the subordinate counties, and Guo Gan and Zou Cong led the army to defeat them.

古文：吕布有别屯在濮阳西，曹操夜袭破之，未及还。
现代文：吕布有一支部队驻在濮阳以西，曹操乘夜袭击，将其击溃。
English: Lvbu had an army stationed west of Shenyang. Cao Cao attacked it at night and defeated it.

古文：会布至，身自搏战，自旦至日，数十合，相持甚急。
现代文：还未来得及撤回，正遇上吕布前来援救。吕布亲自冲锋陷阵，自清晨一直战到太阳偏西，交战数十回合，两军相持不下，十分危急。
English: Before he could withdraw, he was confronted by Lü Bu, who came to the rescue. Lü Bu personally charged into the battle and fought from the early morning until the west of the sun, engaging in dozens of rounds. The two armies could not stand each other, it was very critical.

古文：操募人陷陈，司马陈留典韦将应募者进当之，布弓弩乱发，矢至如雨。
现代文：曹操召募壮士去突击敌阵，司马、陈留人典韦率领那些应募壮士在阵前抵御吕布军队的进攻。吕布军中弓弩齐发，箭如雨下。
English: Cao Cao called for recruits to storm the enemy lines. Sima, Chen Liu Ren and Dian Wei led those recruits to resist the attack of the Lvbu army before the battle. In the Lvbu army, bows and arrows were fired in unison, and arrows rained down.

古文：韦不视，谓等人曰： 虏来十步，乃白之。 
现代文：典韦对敌人连看也不看，对那些壮士说： 敌人来到距我们十步的地方，再告诉我。 
English: Denwei did not even look at the enemy and said to the strong men, "If the enemy comes within ten paces of us, let me know."

古文：等人曰： 十步矣。 
现代文：壮士们说： 已经十步了。 
English: His subordinates said, "There are only ten steps left."

古文：又曰： 五步乃白。 
现代文：典韦又说： 相距五步时再告诉我。 
English: Deng Wei also said, "Let me know when you are five paces apart."

古文：等人惧，疾言： 虏至矣！ 
现代文：那些壮士们见敌人已到面前，大为惊惶，赶快喊： 敌人已经到了！ 
English: When the soldiers saw the enemy approaching, they panicked and shouted, "The enemy has arrived!"

古文：韦持戟大呼而起，所抵无不应手倒者，布众退。
现代文：典韦手执铁戟，大喊而起，冲入敌阵，对面的敌人无不应手而倒，吕布的军队后撤。
English: Dian Wei, holding a spade in his hand, stood up shouting and rushed into the enemy lines. The enemy on the opposite side all fell down, and Lvbu's army retreated.

古文：会日暮，操乃得引去。
现代文：这时天色已晚，曹操才得以率军退回自己的营寨。
English: By this time it was too late, and Cao Cao was able to lead his army back to his camp.

古文：拜韦都尉，令常将亲兵数百人，绕大帐左右。
现代文：回营后，曹操提升典韦为都尉，命他平日率领亲兵数百人，在自己的大帐左右负责警卫。
English: After returning to the camp, Cao Cao promoted Dian Wei to captain, and ordered him to lead hundreds of his own soldiers on weekdays, and be responsible for the guards around his own account.

古文：濮阳大姓田氏为反间，操得入城，烧其东门，示无反意。
现代文：濮阳县的大姓田氏为吕布实行反间计，假意作曹操的内应。曹操得以进入濮阳城后，纵火焚烧所经过的东门，表示自己不再退回。
English: The Tai clan, the largest family in Shenyang County, plotted against Lv Bu, pretending to be Cao Cao's inner circle. After Cao Cao was able to enter Shenyang City, he set fire to the East Gate, saying that he would not return.

古文：及战，军败，布骑得操而不识，问曰： 曹操何在？ 
现代文：及至与吕布交战，曹军大败，吕布部下的骑士捉到曹操而不认识，问道： 曹操在哪里？ 
English: Cao Cao's army was defeated in the battle with Lü Bu. Lü Bu's knights captured Cao Cao without recognizing him and asked, "Where is Cao Cao?"

古文：操曰： 乘黄马走者是也。 
现代文：曹操说： 骑黄马逃走的那人，就是曹操。 
English: Cao Cao said, "The man who fled on the yellow horse is Cao Cao."

古文：布骑乃释操而追黄马者。
现代文：吕布的骑士就放开曹操，而去追那骑黄马的人。
English: The knight of Lvbu let go of Cao Cao and chased the man on the yellow horse.

古文：操突火而出，至营，自力劳军，令军中促为攻具，进，复攻之，与布相守百馀日。
现代文：曹操从大火中突围而出，回到营中，亲自慰问军士，命令军中赶快制作攻城用的器械。随即进军，再次攻击濮阳。
English: Cao Cao broke out of the fire, returned to the camp, personally consoled the sergeants, and ordered the army to quickly make equipment for attacking the city. Then he marched in and attacked Shenyang again.

古文：蝗虫起，百姓大饿，布粮食亦尽，各引去。
现代文：他与吕布相持一百余天，发生蝗灾，百姓饥馑，吕布的存粮也已吃尽，两军各自撤退。
English: At this time, the locust plague broke out, the people were starving, and the grain in the Lvbu army was exhausted, so both sides withdrew their troops.

古文：九月，操还鄄城。
现代文：九月，曹操回到鄄城。
English: In September, Cao Cao returned to Handan.

古文：布到乘氏，为其县人李进所破，东屯山阳。
现代文：吕布率军到乘氏县，被乘氏县人李进击败，向东退到山阳。
English: Lvbu soldiers went to Jingshi County, where they were defeated by a local man, Li Jin, and retreated east to garrison Sanyang.

古文：冬，十月，操至东阿。
现代文：冬季，十月，曹操来到东阿县。
English: In winter, in October, Cao Cao came to Dong'a County.

古文：袁绍使人说操，欲使操遣家居鄴。
现代文：这时，袁绍派人劝说曹操，想让曹操把家眷送到邺城居住。
English: At this time, Yuan Shao sent someone to persuade Cao Cao to let Cao Cao send his family to live in Lucheng.

古文：操新失兗州，军食尽，将许之，程昱曰： 意者将军殆临事而惧，不然，何虑之不深也！
现代文：曹操新近失掉兖州，军中粮食也已吃尽，便准备接受袁绍的建议。程昱说： 大概将军怕是临事畏惧，不然，为什么考虑得这么不深！
English: Cao Cao had recently lost Zhangzhou, and the army had run out of food, so he was ready to accept Yuan Shao's suggestion. Cheng Yu said, "The general is probably afraid of the situation, otherwise, why did he not think about it deeply!

古文：夫袁绍有并天下之心，而智不能济也；将军自度能为之下乎？
现代文：袁绍有并吞天下的野心，但他的智谋却不足以实现他的野心。将军自己考虑一下，能做他的下属吗？
English: Yuan Shao had the ambition of annexing the whole world, but his wit was not enough to realize his ambition. The general himself should think about it, can he be his subordinate?

古文：将军以龙虎之威，可为之韩、彭邪？
现代文：将军以龙虎之威，可以当他的韩信、彭越吗？
English: Can the general with the might of dragons and tigers be his Han Xin and Peng Yue?

古文：今兗州虽残，尚有三城，能战之士，不下万人，以将军之神武，与文若、昱等收而用之，霸王之业可成也，愿将军更虑之！ 
现代文：如今兖州虽已残破，还有三城控制在您的手中，能战的兵士不下万人，凭将军的谋略与武功，再加上荀和我们这些人，齐心协力，是可以成就霸王之业的，愿将军重新考虑！ 
English: Today, although Zhangzhou has been destroyed, there are still three cities under your control. There are no less than ten thousand soldiers who can fight. With the general's strategy and military prowess, coupled with you and us, working together, it is possible to achieve the overlord's cause. May the general reconsider!

古文：操乃止。
现代文：曹操于是放弃了原来的打算。
English: Cao Cao finally gave up.

古文：十二月，司徒淳于嘉罢，以卫尉赵温为司徒，录尚书事。
现代文：十二月，司徒淳于嘉被免职，任命卫尉赵温为司徒，主持尚书事务。
English: In December, the tutor, Chun Yu Jia, was removed from his post, and the guard lieutenant, Zhao Wen, was appointed as the tutor to preside over the book-keeping affairs.

古文：马腾之攻李傕也，刘焉二子范、诞皆死。
现代文：马腾进攻李时，刘焉的两个儿子刘范、刘诞都被杀死。
English: When Ma Teng attacked Li, Liu Yan's two sons, Liu Fan and Liu Xie, were both killed.

古文：议郎河南庞羲，素与焉善，乃募将焉诸孙入蜀。
现代文：议郎、河南人庞羲，平时与刘焉友善，便派人带刘焉的孙子们入蜀。
English: Heirong, a Henan native, was usually friendly with Liu Yan, so he sent someone to bring Liu Yan's grandchildren to Shu.

古文：会天火烧城，焉徙治成都，疽发背而卒。
现代文：这时，原州府所在地绵竹城被雷击引起的大火烧毁，刘焉就把州府移到成都，因背生毒疮而去世。
English: At this time, Mianzhu City, the original seat of the prefectural government, was destroyed by a fire caused by a lightning strike. Liu Yan moved the prefectural government to Chengdu, where he died of a poisonous ulcer on his back.

古文：州大吏赵韪等贪焉子璋温仁，共上璋为益州刺史，诏拜颍川扈瑁为刺史。
现代文：州中主要官员赵韪等贪图刘焉的儿子刘璋性情温和，好施仁义，便一同上表请求朝廷委任刘璋为益州刺史。献帝下诏，任命颖川人扈瑁为益州刺史。
English: The main officials in the prefecture, including Zhao Jie and Liu Jie's son Liu Jie, who was eager to emulate Liu Jie's mild-mannered and benevolent character, jointly petitioned the imperial court to appoint Liu Jie as the prefect of Yizhou. The imperial edict was issued to appoint Yingchuan Ren Jie as the prefect of Yizhou.

古文：璋将沈弥、娄发、甘宁反，击璋，不胜，走入荆州；诏乃以璋为益州牧。
现代文：刘璋的部将沈弥、娄发、甘宁等人叛变，进攻刘璋，战败，逃入荆州。朝廷对益州事务鞭长莫及，只好下诏任命刘璋为益州刺史。
English: Liu Bei's subordinate generals, such as Shen Mi, Hefa, and Ganning, mutinied, attacked Liu Bei, were defeated, and fled to Jingzhou. The imperial court had no choice but to issue an edict appointing Liu Bei as the governor of Yizhou.

古文：璋以韪为征东中郎将，率众击刘表，屯朐䏰。
现代文：刘璋任命赵韪为征东中郎将，率军进攻刘表，驻守朐。
English: Liu Bei appointed Zhao Bei as the general of the Eastern Expeditionary Army, and led the army to attack Liu Biao and garrison it.

古文：徐州牧陶谦疾笃，谓别驾东海麋竺曰： 非刘备不能安此州也。 
现代文：徐州牧陶谦病势危重，他对别驾、东海人糜竺说： 除非刘备，不能保护本州的安全。 
English: Xuzhou Mu Taoqian is critically ill. He said to the other driver, Donghai Renju: Unless Liu Bei, can not protect the security of the state.

古文：谦卒，竺率州人迎备。
现代文：陶谦去世后，糜竺率领徐州官民迎接刘备。
English: After the death of Tao Qian, Zou led the Xuzhou officials and people to meet Liu Bei.

古文：备未敢当，曰： 袁公路近在寿春，君可以州与之。 
现代文：刘备不敢担当此任，说： 袁术近在寿春，你们可以把徐州交给他。 
English: Liu Bei did not dare to take on this task and said: Yuan Shuxu is close to Shouchun, you can give him Xuzhou.

古文：典农校尉下邳陈登曰： 公路骄豪，非治乱之主。
现代文：典农校尉、下邳人陈登说： 袁术骄奢横暴，不是能治理乱世的君主。
English: Chen Deng, a lieutenant of the Fennong School and a member of the lower echelon, said: Yuan Shou is arrogant and tyrannical, and is not a monarch who can govern the chaotic world.

古文：今欲为使君合步骑十万，上可以匡主济民，下可以割地守境；若使君不见听许，登亦未敢听使君也。 
现代文：如今，我们打算为您集结起十万步、骑大军，上可以辅佐君王，拯救百姓，下可以割据一方，保守疆土。如果您不答应我们的请求，我们也不敢听从您的建议。 
English: Now, we are going to gather for you an army of one hundred thousand foot soldiers and horsemen, who can help the king and save the people on the top, and keep the territory on the bottom. If you do not agree to our request, we will not dare to follow your suggestion.

古文：北海相孔融谓备曰： 袁公路岂忧国忘家者邪！
现代文：北海国相孔融说： 袁术岂是忧国忘家的人！
English: Kong Rong, the Vice Premier of the North Sea State, said: Yuan Shiu is a person who is worried about the country and has forgotten his home!

古文：冢中枯骨，何足介意！
现代文：不过是依仗祖上遗留下的威望，根本不足介意。
English: However, relying on the prestige left behind by our ancestors is not enough.

古文：今日之事，百姓与能。
现代文：今天的事情，是百姓选择贤能。
English: What is happening today is that the people are choosing virtue.

古文：天与不取，悔不可追。 
现代文：这种上天赐予的机会，如果拒绝，后悔就来不及了。 
English: This is a heaven-sent opportunity, and if you turn it down, it's too late to regret it.

古文：备遂领徐州。
现代文：于是刘备接受他们的请求，兼任徐州牧。
English: So Liu Bei accepted their request and concurrently served as the Xuzhou Patriarch.

古文：初，太傅马日磾与赵岐俱奉使至寿春，岐守志不桡，袁术惮之。
现代文：当初，太傅马日与赵岐一起奉朝廷使命来到寿春，赵岐严守气节，不肯迁就，袁术对他很敬畏。
English: At first, Ma Rong and Zhao Qi came to Shuchun together on a mission from the imperial court. Zhao Qi strictly observed the qi festival and refused to be moved, and Yuan Shou was very much in awe of him.

古文：日磾颇有求于术。术侵侮之，从日磾借节视之，因夺不还，条军中十馀人，使促辟之。
现代文：马日经常有求于袁术，袁术就折辱马日，向他借所持的代表皇帝权力的符节看，乘机夺走不还，又开列了军中十几个人的名单，要马日赶快征召任命。
English: Ma Rong often asked Yuan Shu for favors. Yuan Shu humiliated Ma Rong and took advantage of the opportunity to take away the power of the representative emperor from him. He also made a list of more than a dozen people in the army and asked Ma Rong to quickly conscript and appoint them.

古文：日磾从术求去，术留不遣，又欲逼为军师。
现代文：马日向袁术请求离去，袁术扣留不放，又要逼迫他担任军师。
English: Maji asked Yuan Shou to leave. Yuan Shou was detained and forced to serve as a military instructor.

古文：日磾病其失节，呕血而死。
现代文：马日悔恨自己失去献帝授予的符节，吐血而死。
English: Maji regretted that he had lost the rune given to him by the emperor, and vomited blood and died.

古文：初，孙坚娶钱唐吴氏，生四男策、权、翊、匡及一女。坚从军于外，留家寿春。
现代文：当初，孙坚娶钱唐人吴氏为妻子，生下四个儿子，即孙策、孙权、孙翊、孙匡，此外还有一个女儿，孙坚在外征战，把家眷留在寿春。
English: At first, Sun Jian married the Qiantang Wu clan and gave birth to four sons, namely Sun Ce, Sun Quan, Sun Yao, and Sun Kuang, in addition to a daughter. Sun Jian went to fight abroad, leaving his family behind in Shuchun.

古文：策年十馀岁，已交结知名。
现代文：孙策十余岁时，已开始结交当地知名之士。
English: When Sun Ce was more than ten years old, he had already begun to make friends with local celebrities.

古文：舒人周瑜与策同年，亦英达夙成。闻策声问，自舒来造焉，便推结分好，劝策徙居舒；策从之。
现代文：舒县人周瑜与孙策同岁，也英武豪迈，少年早成，听到孙策的名声，便从舒县前来拜访，两人一见如故，互相推心置腹。
English: Zhou Yu, a resident of Shuxian County, was the same age as Sun Ce. He was also a brave and courageous young man. When he heard of Sun Ce's fame, he came from Shuxian to pay a visit. The two immediately fell in love with each other.

古文：瑜乃推道南大宅与策，升堂拜母，有无通共。
现代文：周瑜劝孙策移居舒县，孙策同意，周瑜就把临近道路的一座大宅院让给孙策居住。周瑜还到内堂去拜见了孙策的母亲，两家互通有无。
English: Zhou Yu advised Sun Ce to move to Shu County. Sun Ce agreed, and Zhou Yu let Sun Ce live in a large mansion near the road. Zhou Yu also went to the inner hall to visit Sun Ce's mother. The two families have no communication.

古文：及坚死，策年十七，还葬曲阿；已乃渡江，居江都，结纳豪俊，有复仇之志。
现代文：孙坚死时，孙策十七岁，把父亲的棺木送回老家曲阿去安葬。安葬后，他渡过长江，住在江都，结交天下豪杰，立志为父亲报仇。
English: When Sun Jian died, Sun Ce was seventeen years old. He sent his father's coffin back to his hometown, Qu'ao, to be buried. After the funeral, he crossed the Yangtze River, lived in Jiangdu, made friends with world heroes, and determined to avenge his father.

古文：丹杨太守会稽周昕与袁术相恶，术上策舅吴景领丹杨太守，攻昕，夺其郡，以策从兄贲为丹杨都尉。
现代文：丹阳郡太守、会稽人周昕与袁术互相敌视，袁术上表推荐孙策的舅父吴景兼任丹阳郡太守，进攻周昕，夺下丹阳郡，将孙策的堂兄孙贲任命为丹阳都尉。
English: Zhou Qi, the governor of Danyang County and the auditor of the association, and Yuan Shou were hostile to each other. Yuan Shou recommended Sun Ce's uncle Wu Jing, who also served as the governor of Danyang County, to attack Zhou Qi, seize Danyang County, and appoint Sun Ce's cousin Sun Qi as the governor of Danyang.

古文：策以母弟托广陵张纮，径到寿春见袁术。涕泣言曰： 亡父昔从长沙入讨董卓，与明使君会于南阳，同盟结好，不幸遇难，勋业不终。
现代文：孙策把母亲和弟妹托付给广陵人张，自己直接到寿春去见袁术，流着泪对袁术说： 我已故的父亲当年从长沙出发讨伐董卓，与您在南阳相会，共结盟好。他不幸中途遇难，没能完成功业。
English: Sun Ce entrusted his mother and brothers and sisters to Zhang Guangling, and went directly to Shouchun to meet Yuan Shou. He said to Yuan Shou with tears: My late father set out from Changsha to fight against Dong Zhuo. He met you in Nanyang and formed an alliance. Unfortunately, he died in the middle of the journey and was unable to complete his career.

古文：策感惟先人旧恩，欲自凭结，愿明使君垂察其诚！ 
现代文：我感念您对我父亲的旧恩，愿继续为您效力，请您明察我的一征诚心！ 
English: I miss your old favor to my father and would like to continue to serve you. Please look into my sincerity!

古文：术甚奇之，然未肯还其父兵，谓策曰： 孤用贵舅为丹杨太守，贤从伯阳为都尉，彼精兵之地，可还依召募。 
现代文：袁术对孙策的谈吐举止，很感惊异，但不肯交还他父亲原来统率的队伍，对他说： 我已任用你舅父吴景为丹阳郡太守，你堂兄孙贲为都尉，丹阳郡是出精兵的地方，你可以回去依靠他们的力量召募兵马。 
English: Yuan Shu was very surprised by Sun Ce's talkative demeanor, but he refused to return his father's original leadership team, and said to him: I have appointed your uncle Wu Jing as the governor of Danyang County, and your cousin Sun Ye as the captain. Danyang County is a place of elite soldiers. You can go back and rely on their strength to recruit soldiers.

古文：策遂与汝南吕范及族人孙河迎其母诣曲阿，依舅氏。
现代文：孙策就与汝南人吕范、本族人孙河将母亲接到曲阿，依靠舅父吴景，乘机在当地募兵，得到数百人。
English: Sun Ce, together with Lü Fan from the south of the Yunnan Province and Sun He from his own ethnic group, sent his mother to Qu'ao and, relying on his uncle Wu Jing, took the opportunity to recruit soldiers in the local area, gaining hundreds of people.

古文：因缘召募，得数百人，而为泾县大帅祖郎所袭，几至危殆。
现代文：但他遭到泾县的土豪祖郎的袭击，几乎被杀。于是他再次去见袁术。
English: However, he was attacked and almost killed by the local strongman Zuro of Jixian County, so he went to see Yuan Shu again.

古文：于是复往见术。术以坚馀兵千馀人还策，表拜怀义校尉。
现代文：袁术把孙坚旧部千余人还给孙策，向朝廷上表推荐他担任怀义校尉。
English: Yuan Shu returned more than a thousand people from Sun Jian's old department to Sun Ce, and recommended him to the imperial court to serve as Captain Huaiyi.

古文：策骑士有罪，逃入术营，隐于内厩。策指使人就斩之，讫，诣术谢。
现代文：孙策部下的一名骑士犯罪后逃入袁术大营，隐藏在里面的马房中，孙策派人进去当场将骑士处斩，然后，他拜见袁术，表示谢罪。
English: After committing a crime, a knight of Sun Ce's subordinates escaped into Yuan Shuxu's camp and hid in the stable inside. Sun Ce sent someone to enter and execute the knight on the spot. Then, he visited Yuan Shuxu to express his gratitude.

古文：术曰： 兵人好叛，当共疾之，何为谢也！ 
现代文：袁术说： 有些士兵喜欢叛变，我与你一样痛恨这种行为，你为什么要谢罪！ 
English: Yuan Shu said: Some soldiers like to mutiny, I hate this kind of behavior as much as you do, why should you apologize!

古文：由是军中益畏惮之。
现代文：从此以后，袁术军中对孙策更加畏惧。
English: From then on, Sun Ce was even more feared by Yuan Shuxiong's army.

古文：术初许以策为九江太守，已而更用丹杨陈纪。
现代文：袁术最初应许孙策为九江郡太守，但此后却改用丹阳人陈纪。
English: Yuan Shuxu initially promised Sun Ce as the governor of Jiujiang County, but later changed it to Chen Ji from Danyang.

古文：后术欲攻徐州，从庐江太守陆康求米三万斛；康不与。
现代文：后来，袁术准备进攻徐州，要求庐江郡太守陆康提供三万斛米，陆康不给。
English: Later, Yuan Shou was preparing to attack Xuzhou, and he asked Lu Kang, the governor of Minjiang County, to provide him with thirty thousand mu of rice, but Lu Kang refused.

古文：术大怒，遣策攻康，谓曰： 前错用陈纪，每恨本意不遂。
现代文：袁术大怒，派孙策去进攻陆康，对孙策说： 以前我错用陈纪为九江太守，每以不合本意而感到遗憾。
English: Yuan Shuxu was furious and sent Sun Ce to attack Lu Kanglu. He said to Sun Ce, "In the past, I mistakenly used Chen Ji as the governor of Jiujiang. I regret that it was not my intention.

古文：今若得康，庐江真卿有也。 
现代文：这次你如果能战胜陆康，庐江郡就真的归你所有了。 
English: If you can defeat Lu Kang this time, Minjiang County will really be yours.

古文：策攻康，拔之，术复用其故吏刘勋为太守；策益失望。
现代文：孙策进攻陆康，攻下庐江郡府。但是袁术又任用自己的部下刘勋为庐江郡太守，孙策对他更加失望。
English: Sun Ce attacked Lu Kang and captured the county seat of Minjiang. However, Yuan Shu also appointed his subordinate Liu Xun as the governor of Minjiang. Sun Ce was even more disappointed with him.

古文：侍御史刘繇，岱之弟也，素有盛名，诏书用为扬州刺史。
现代文：侍御史刘繇是已故兖州刺史刘岱的弟弟，一向声望很高，朝廷下诏任命他为扬州刺史。
English: Liu Ye, the younger brother of the late Liu Ye, the governor of Zhangzhou, has always enjoyed a high reputation. He was appointed governor of Yangzhou by imperial edict.

古文：州旧治寿春，术已据之，繇欲南渡江，吴景、孙贲迎置曲阿。
现代文：扬州州府以前设在寿春，但这时已被袁术占据，刘繇想把州府设在长江以南，吴景、孙贲就迎接刘繇到曲阿。
English: The Yangzhou prefectural government was previously located in Shouchun, but this time it was occupied by Yuan Shucao. Liu Hui wanted to locate the prefectural government south of the Yangtze River, and Wu Jing and Sun Yat-sen welcomed Liu Hui to Qu'ao.

古文：及策攻庐江，繇闻之，以景、贲本术所置，惧为袁、孙所并，遂构嫌隙，迫逐景、贲。
现代文：及至孙策进攻庐江，刘繇听到消息后，认为吴景、孙贲本是袁术安置的人，害怕自己被袁术、孙策等所兼并，于是产生敌意，将吴景、孙贲等赶走。
English: As far as Sun Ce's attack on the Minjiang River, after hearing the news, Liu Bei thought that Wu Jing and Sun Ye were the ones who had been placed by Yuan Shu. He was afraid that he would be annexed by Yuan Shu and Sun Ce, so he became hostile and drove Wu Jing and Sun Ye away.

古文：景、贲退屯历阳。繇遣将樊能、于糜屯横江，张英屯当利口以拒之。
现代文：吴景、孙贲退守历阳，刘繇派部将樊能、于糜驻横江，张英驻当利口以防备他们。
English: Wu Jing and Sun Ye retreated to Liyang, Liu Ye's faction stationed Xun Neng and Yu Ye in Hengjiang, and Zhang Ying stationed in Dang Likou to guard against them.

古文：术乃自用故吏惠衢为扬州刺史，以景为督军中郎将，与贲共将兵击英等。
现代文：袁术知道后，就自己委派旧部下惠衢为扬州刺史，委任吴景为督军中郎将，与孙贲等率军一起进攻张英等。
English: After Yuan Shuxu learned of this, he appointed his former subordinate Hui Yao as Yangzhou chief historian, appointed Wu Jing as commander-in-chief, and attacked Zhang Ying with the army led by Sun Yao and others.

古文：孝献皇帝丙兴平二年春，正月，癸丑，赦天下。
现代文：兴平二年春季，正月，癸丑，大赦天下。曹操在定陶击败吕布。
English: In the spring of the second year of Xingping, in the first month of the year, Cao Cao defeated Lü Bu in Dingtao.

古文：曹操败吕布于定陶。诏即拜袁绍为右将军。
现代文：朝廷下诏派使者到邺城，就地任命袁绍为右将军。
English: The imperial court sent an envoy to Handan and appointed Yuan Shao as the right-hand general.

古文：董卓初死，三辅民尚数十万户，李傕等放兵劫略，加以饥馑，二年间，民相食略尽。
现代文：董卓刚死的时候，三辅地区的百姓还有数十万户。由于李等人纵兵抢掠，加上饥荒，百姓吃人肉充饥，两年之间，几乎死尽。
English: At the time of Dong Zhuo's death, there were still hundreds of thousands of households in the Sanfu area. Due to the looting and pillaging by Li and others, coupled with famine, the people ate human flesh to satisfy their hunger. Within two years, they almost died out.

古文：李傕、郭汜、樊稠各相与矜功争权，欲斗者数矣，贾诩每以大体责之，虽内不能善，外相含容。
现代文：李、郭汜、樊稠相互夸耀自己的功勋，争权夺利，有几次要冲突起来。贾诩每次都责备他们要以大局为重，因此，虽然他们内部不能友好相处，但表面还是团结一致。
English: Li, Guo Jun and Gong Chuxu boasted of their exploits to each other and competed for power and profit, leading to conflicts on several occasions. Jia Jun always scolded them to focus on the overall situation. Therefore, although they could not get along amicably internally, they were united on the surface.

古文：樊稠之击马腾、韩遂也，李利战不甚力，稠叱之曰： 人欲截汝父头，何敢如此！我不能斩卿邪！ 
现代文：樊稠进攻马腾、韩遂时，李的侄子李利作战不很出力，樊稠斥责他说： 人家要来砍你叔父的人头，你还胆敢如此松懈，难道我不能杀你吗！ 
English: When Gao Chou attacked Ma Teng and Han Sui, Li's nephew Li Li did not fight very hard. Gao Chou rebuked him, saying, "People are coming to chop off your uncle's head. You still dare to be so lax. Can't I kill you?"

古文：及腾、遂败走，稠追至陈仓，遂语稠曰： 本所争者非私怨，王家事耳。
现代文：马腾、韩遂败退时，樊稠军追到陈仓，韩遂对樊稠说： 本来咱们之间争的不是个人仇怨，而是国家大事。
English: When Ma Teng and Han Sui were defeated and retreated, Han Sui's army chased them to Chen Cang. Han Sui said to Han Sui: Originally, the dispute between us was not a personal grudge, but a national event.

古文：与足下州里人，欲相与善语而别。 
现代文：我与你都是同州人，临别前想再说几句知心话。 
English: You and I are both from the same state, and I would like to say a few words of wisdom before parting.

古文：乃俱却骑，前接马，交臂相加，共语良久而别。
现代文：于是各自命令军士后退，他们两个人骑马上前对话，相互握手致意，交谈很久才告别。
English: So they each ordered the sergeant to step back, and the two of them rode forward to talk, shook hands with each other, and talked for a long time before saying goodbye.

古文：军还，李利告傕： 韩、樊交马语，不知所道，意爱甚密。 
现代文：大军回到长安后，李利报告李说： 樊稠与韩遂两人马头相交地密谈，不知道谈话的内容，只看到你们很亲近。 
English: After the large army returned to Chang'an, Li Li reported to Li saying: Gong Chou and Han Sui had a close conversation. I don't know the content of the conversation, but I saw that you were very close.

古文：傕亦以稠勇而得众，忌之。
现代文：李也因为樊稠作战勇猛而得到部属拥戴，对他有猜忌之心。
English: Li was also admired by his subordinates for his bravery in battle, and they were suspicious of him.

古文：稠欲将兵东出关，从傕索益兵。
现代文：樊稠准备率军东出函谷关，向李要求增加军队。
English: Gao Zong prepared to lead the army east out of Hanzhongguan and asked Li to increase the number of troops.

古文：二月，傕请稠会议，便于坐杀稠。
现代文：二月，李请樊稠商议事情，就在会上杀死了樊稠。
English: In February, Li asked Gong Chouzhuo to discuss the matter, and killed Gong Chouzhuo at the meeting.

古文：由是诸将转相疑贰。
现代文：从此以后，将领们之间相互猜忌，不能团结一致。
English: Since then, the generals have been suspicious of each other and unable to unite.

古文：傕数设酒请郭汜，或留汜止宿。
现代文：李经常摆下酒宴款待郭汜，有时还留郭汜住宿在自己家中。
English: Li often entertained Guo Gan with wine banquets, and sometimes let Guo Gan stay at his home.

古文：汜妻恐汜爱傕婢妾，思有以间之。
现代文：郭汜的妻子恐怕郭汜会喜欢上李家的侍女，想用计阻止郭汜前往。
English: Guo Yao's wife is afraid that Guo Yao will fall in love with the Li family's maid, and wants to use trickery to prevent Guo Yao from going.

古文：会傕送馈，妻以豉为药，擿以示汜曰： 一栖不两雄，我固疑将军信李公也。 
现代文：正好李送来食物，郭汜妻把豆豉说成毒药，挑出来给郭汜看，说： 一群鸡中容不下两只公鸡，我实在不明白将军为什么这样信任李。 
English: Just as Li was delivering the food, Guo Yao's wife picked out the bean curd, calling it poison, and showed it to Guo Yao. She said, "There can't be two roosters in a flock of chickens. I really don't understand why the general trusts Li so much."

古文：他日，傕复请汜，饮大醉，汜疑其有毒，绞粪汁饮之。
现代文：另一天，李又宴请郭汜，郭汜饮酒过量而大醉。他疑心酒里有毒，就喝下粪汁来使自己呕吐。
English: On another day, Li invited Guo Yao to a banquet. Guo Yao drank too much and got very drunk. Suspecting that the wine was poisonous, he drank excrement juice to make himself vomit.

古文：于是各治兵相攻矣。
现代文：于是，他们各自部署队伍，相互攻击。
English: As a result, they each deployed teams to attack each other.

古文：帝使侍中、尚书和傕、汜，傕、汜不从。
现代文：献帝派侍中、尚书去调解李和郭汜的矛盾，但李、郭汜都不服从。
English: Emperor Xian sent an attendant, Shang Shu, to mediate the conflict between Li and Guo Gan, but neither Li nor Guo Gan obeyed.

古文：汜谋迎帝幸其营，夜有亡者。告傕。
现代文：郭汜阴谋劫持献帝到他的军营，夜里，有人逃到李营中，将部汜的计划告诉李。
English: Guo Gan plotted to kidnap Emperor Xian to his camp. At night, someone escaped to Li's camp and told Li about Guo Gan's plan.

古文：三月，丙寅，傕使兄子暹将数千兵围宫，以车三乘迎帝。
现代文：三月，丙寅，李派侄子李暹率领数千名兵士包围皇宫，用三辆车迎接献帝到自己营中。
English: In March, Hsin-yin and Li sent their nephew Li-siam to lead thousands of soldiers to encircle the imperial palace and use three cars to welcome the emperor to their camp.

古文：太尉杨彪曰： 自古帝王无在人家者，诸君举事，奈何如是！ 
现代文：太尉杨彪说： 自古以来，帝王从没有住在臣民家中的，你们做事，怎么能这样呢！ 
English: Captain Yang Biao said: Since ancient times, emperors have never lived in the homes of their subjects. How can you do things like this?

古文：暹曰： 将军计定矣。 
现代文：李暹说： 将军的计划已经定了。 
English: Li Siam said: The general's plan has been determined.

古文：于是君臣步从乘舆以出，兵即入殿中，掠宫人、御物。
现代文：于是，群臣徒步跟在献帝的车后出宫。军队立即就进入宫殿，抢掠宫女和御用器物。
English: As a result, the courtiers left the palace on foot following the car dedicated to the emperor. The army immediately entered the palace and looted the palace maids and royal utensils.

古文：帝至傕营，傕又徙御府金帛置其营，遂放火烧宫殿、官府、民居悉尽。
现代文：献帝到李营中后，李又将御府所收藏的金帛搬到自己营里，随即放火将宫殿、官府和百姓的房屋全部烧光。
English: After presenting the emperor to Li Yingzhong, Li also moved the gold ingots collected by the imperial government to his own camp, and then set fire to the palace, government offices and people's houses.

古文：帝复使公卿和傕、汜，汜留杨彪及司空张喜、尚书王隆、光禄勋刘渊、卫尉士孙瑞、太仆韩融、廷尉宣璠、大鸿胪荣郃、大司农硃俊、将作大匠梁邵、屯骑校尉姜宣等于其营为质。
现代文：献帝又派公卿调解李、郭汜的矛盾，郭汜就把太尉杨彪及司空张喜、尚书王隆、光禄勋刘渊、卫尉士孙瑞、太仆韩融、廷尉宣、大鸿胪荣、大司农朱俊、将作大匠梁邵、屯骑校尉姜宣等都扣留在营中，作为人质。
English: Emperor Xian also sent court nobles to mediate the conflict between Li and Guo Gan. Guo Gan then detained the following people as hostages in the camp: First Lieutenant Yang Biao, Second Officer Zhang Xi, Second Officer Wang Long, Grand Officer Liu Yuan, Guardsman Sun Rui, Footman Han Rong, First Officer Xuan, Grand Officer Xuan Rong, Second Officer Nong Zhu Jun, Master Craftsman Liang Shao, and Cavalry Captain Jiang Xuan.

古文：硃俊愤懑发病死。
现代文：朱俊十分气愤，发病而死。
English: Zhu Jun was so angry that he fell ill and died.

古文：夏，四月，甲子，立贵人琅邪伏氏为皇后；以后父侍中完为执金吾。
现代文：夏季，四月，甲子，献帝立贵人、琅邪人伏氏为皇后，任命皇后的父亲、侍中伏完为执金吾。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Go-Shirakawa installed the noble and wicked Fushi as empress, and appointed the queen's father, the chamberlain Fushikan, as the regent.

古文：郭汜飨公卿，议政李傕。
现代文：郭汜设宴款待被扣的朝廷大臣，商议进攻李。
English: Guo Gan held a banquet to entertain the detained minister of the imperial court and discussed attacking Li Shao.

古文：杨彪曰： 群臣共斗，一人劫天子，一人质公卿，可行乎！ 
现代文：太尉杨彪说： 你们这些臣属互相争斗，一个人劫持天子，一个人将公卿做人质，这怎么能行呢！ 
English: Captain Yang Biao said, "You vassals are fighting with each other. One of you is holding the Son of Heaven hostage, and one of you is holding a noble hostage. How can this be done?

古文：汜怒，欲手刃之。彪曰： 卿尚不奉国家，吾岂求生邪！ 
现代文：郭汜大怒，想要亲手用刀杀死杨彪，杨彪说： 你连皇上都不尊奉，我难道还会求生吗？ 
English: Guo Yao was furious and wanted to kill Yang Biao with a knife. Yang Biao said, "You don't even respect the emperor. Will I still survive?"

古文：中郎将杨密固谏，汜乃止。
现代文：中郎将杨密竭力劝阻，郭汜这才作罢。
English: Zhong Lang tried his best to dissuade Yang Mi, but Guo Gan refused.

古文：傕召羌、胡数千人，先以御物缯纟采与之，许以宫人、妇女，欲令攻郭汜。
现代文：李召集数千名羌人和胡人，先以御用物品和绸缎赏赐他们，许诺还将赏赐宫女和民间妇女，打算要他们进攻郭汜。
English: Li gathered thousands of Xiongnu and Hu people, and first rewarded them with royal goods and silk brocade, promising to also reward concubines and common women, intending to have them attack Guo Gan.

古文：汜阴与傕党中郎将张苞等谋攻傕。
现代文：郭汜则暗中与李的党羽中郎将张苞等勾结，策划进攻李。
English: Guo Gan secretly colluded with Li's faction leader Zhang Ye and others to plan the attack on Li.

古文：丙申，汜将兵夜攻傕门，矢及帝帘帷中，又贯傕左耳。
现代文：丙申，郭汜率军乘夜进攻李营门，飞箭射到献帝御帐的帷帘中，还贯穿了李的左耳。
English: Bishen, Guo Gan led the army to attack Li Yingmen at night, flying arrows shot into the curtain of the imperial tent, and also penetrated Li's left ear.

古文：苞等烧屋，火不然。
现代文：张苞等人在营内放火烧房，但火没有燃着。
English: Zhang Qian and others set fire to a room in the camp, but the fire did not ignite.

古文：杨奉于外拒汜，汜兵退，苞等因将所领兵归汜。
现代文：李部下杨奉在营外抵抗郭汜，郭汜军撤退，张苞于是率领部下投奔郭汜。
English: Li's subordinate Yang Bong resisted Guo Gan outside the camp, Guo Gan's army retreated, and Zhang Gan then led his subordinates into Guo Gan.

古文：是日，傕复移乘舆境北坞，使校尉监坞门，内外隔绝，侍臣皆有饥色。
现代文：这天，李又把献帝迁移到北坞，派校尉把守坞门，断绝内外交通，献帝左右的侍臣都面有饥色。
English: On this day, Li moved the emperor to the north dock, sent a lieutenant to guard the dock door, cut off internal and external traffic, and the courtiers around the emperor were hungry.

古文：帝求米五斗、牛骨五具以赐左右。
现代文：献帝派人向李要求供应五斗米，五具牛骨，以赐给左右。
English: Emperor Xian sent someone to Li to request the supply of five barrels of rice and five ox bones, which were given to both sides.

古文：傕曰： 朝晡上飰，何用米为？ 
现代文：李说： 早晚两次送饭，要米干什么用？ 
English: Li said, "I have my meals delivered twice a day, morning and evening. Why do I need rice?

古文：乃以臭牛骨与之。帝大怒，欲诘责之。
现代文：于是把已发臭的牛骨头送去，献帝大怒，想要责问李。
English: So he sent the stinking cow bones to the emperor, who was furious and wanted to question Li.

古文：侍中杨琦谏曰： 傕自知所犯悖逆，欲转车驾幸池阳黄白城，臣愿陛下忍之。 
现代文：侍中杨琦劝阻说： 李自己知道所犯下的是叛逆大罪，打算把陛下转移到池阳的黄白城，我愿陛下忍耐。 
English: The aide-de-camp Yang Jie dissuaded him, saying, "Li himself knows that what he has committed is a serious crime of treason, and he intends to transfer Your Majesty to Huangbai City in Chiyang. I wish Your Majesty patience."

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：献帝这才作罢。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：司徒赵温与傕书曰： 公前屠陷王城，杀戮大臣，今争睚眦之隙，以成千钧之雠。朝廷欲令和解，诏命不行，而复欲转乘舆于黄白城，此诚老夫所不解也。
现代文：司徒赵温写信给李说： 你先前攻陷京城，烧杀抢掠，杀害大臣，如今为了一些小小怨恨而铸成深仇，皇上想要让你们和解，但诏书无人遵奉，而你又打算把皇上转移到黄白城，这实在让我不解。
English: The tutor, Zhao Wen, wrote to Li, saying: You have previously attacked and captured the capital, burned, killed, robbed, and killed ministers, and now, for the sake of some small grudges, have forged a deep hatred. The emperor wants to reconcile you, but no one is obeying the edict, and you plan to transfer the emperor to the Yellow and White City. This really baffles me.

古文：于《易》，一为过，再为涉，三而弗改，灭其顶，凶。
现代文：根据《易经》，第一次为过分，第二次就陷入水中，第三次还不改，就将被淹没，大凶。
English: According to the "I Ching," the first time is excessive, the second time falls into the water, and the third time, if it is not changed, it will be submerged.

古文：不如早共和解。 
现代文：不如早些与郭汜和解。 
English: It would have been better to reconcile with Guo Gan earlier.

古文：傕大怒，欲杀温，其弟应谏之，数日乃止。
现代文：李大怒，想要杀死赵温，他弟弟李应劝阻，几天后，李才作罢。
English: Li flew into a rage and wanted to kill Zhao Wen. His brother Li Ying dissuaded him, and it was only after a few days that Li gave up.

古文：傕信巫觋厌胜之术，常以三牲祠董卓于省门外。
现代文：李相信男、女巫师解除灾祸的法术，经常在宫门外用猪、牛、羊三牲祭奠董卓。
English: Li believed in the magic of men and witches to solve the disaster, and often used pigs, cattle and sheep to worship Dong Zhuo outside the palace gate.

古文：每对帝或言 明陛下 ，或言 明帝 ，为帝说郭汜无状，帝亦随其意应答之。
现代文：李每次见到献帝，或者称献帝为 明陛下 ，或者称 明帝 ，向献帝述说郭汜的罪行，献帝也顺着李的意思应答。
English: Every time Li saw Xian Di, or called Xian Di as Ming Majesty, or called Ming Di, he told Xian Di about Guo Gan's crimes, and Xian Di also responded according to Li's intention.

古文：傕喜，自谓良得天子欢心也。
现代文：李大喜，自己以为已得到献帝的欢心。
English: Li Daxi thought he had won the emperor's favor.

古文：闰月，己卯，帝使竭者仆射皇甫郦和傕、汜。
现代文：闰五月，己卯，献帝派谒者仆射皇甫郦调解李、郭汜的争端。
English: In late May, Emperor Xian sent his emissary, Emperor Fu Rong, to mediate the dispute between Li and Guo.

古文：郦先诣汜，汜从命；又诣亻隺，傕不肯，曰： 郭多，盗马虏耳，何敢欲与吾等邪！
现代文：皇甫郦先去拜见郭汜，郭汜答应服从。皇甫郦又去拜见李，李不肯接受，说： 郭汜不过是个盗马贼罢了，怎么敢与我平起平坐，一定要杀死他！
English: The Empress Dowager first went to meet Guo Gan, and Guo Gan agreed to obey. The Empress Dowager also went to meet Li, but Li refused to accept, saying, "Guo Gan is nothing but a horse thief, how dare he stand on an equal footing with me, he must be killed!"

古文：必诛之！君观吾方略士众，足办郭多否邪？
现代文：您看我的谋略和队伍，是不是已经足够制服郭汜？
English: You see my strategy and team, is it enough to subdue Guo Yu?

古文：郭多又劫质公卿，所为如是，而君苟欲左右之邪？ 
现代文：郭汜又劫持大臣作为人质，行为如此恶劣，而您还要帮助他吗！ 
English: Guo Gan has taken another minister hostage, his behavior is so bad, and you still want to help him!

古文：郦曰： 近者董公之强，将军所知也；吕布受恩而反图之，斯须之间，身首异处，此有勇而无谋也。
现代文：皇甫郦说： 不久以前，董卓势力的强大，是将军所知道的。但吕布受他恩宠，却反过来杀害他，不过眨眼之间，董卓已经身首异处，这是因为董卓有勇而无谋。
English: Emperor Fuxi said, "Not long ago, the general knew that Dong Zhuo's power was great. However, Lü Bu was favored by him and killed him in return. However, in the blink of an eye, Dong Zhuo's head was already in a different place. This was because Dong Zhuo was brave but had no plan.

古文：今将军身为上将，荷国宠荣，汜质公卿而将军胁主，谁轻重乎！
现代文：如今，将军身为上将，受到朝廷荣宠，郭汜劫持大臣，而将军却劫持天子，这罪过是谁轻谁重？
English: Today, the general, as a general, is favored by the imperial court. Guo Zheng has kidnapped a minister, while the general has kidnapped the heavenly son. Who is more guilty?

古文：张济与汜有谋，杨奉，白波贼帅耳，犹知将军所为非是，将军虽宠之，犹不为用也。 
现代文：张济已与郭汜联合在一起，杨奉不过是个白波军的首领，还知道将军所作的事情不对，将军虽然宠信他，但恐怕他也不会听你支使。 
English: Zhang Ji has already united with Guo Gan. Yang Bong is just the leader of the Bai Bo army. He also knows that what the general has done is not right. Although the general trusts him, I am afraid that he will not listen to your envoy.

古文：傕呵之令出。
现代文：李大声呵斥，让皇甫郦出去。
English: Li shouted loudly and ordered the emperor to leave.

古文：郦出，诣省门，白 傕不肯奉诏，辞语不顺。 
现代文：皇甫郦离开李大营，到献帝住处汇报，说： 李不肯奉召，而且言辞不恭顺。 
English: Emperor Fuxi left Li Daying and reported to Emperor Xian's residence, saying: Li refused to be summoned, and his words were not respectful.

古文：帝恐傕闻之，亟令郦去。
现代文：献帝恐怕李听到，赶快命令皇甫郦离去。
English: When Li heard about the emperor's offering, he was afraid and quickly ordered the emperor to leave.

古文：傕遣虎贲王昌呼，欲杀之，昌知郦忠直，纵令去，还答傕，言 追之不及 。
现代文：李果然派虎贲武士王昌来叫皇甫郦，准备杀死他。王昌知道皇甫郦忠贞正直，就放他逃走，回去报告李说： 皇甫郦已逃走，追赶不上。 
English: Li did indeed send the tiger warrior Wang Chang to summon Wang Fuxiong and prepare to kill him. Wang Chang knew that Wang Fuxiong was loyal and honest, so he let him escape and returned to report to Li, saying: "Wang Fuxiong has already fled, I can't catch up with him."

古文：辛巳，以车骑将军李傕为大司马，在三公之右。
现代文：辛巳，任命车骑将军李为大司马，位在三公之上。
English: Soon after, he appointed General Li, the chariot and cavalry commander, as the grand steward, placing him above the three princes.

古文：吕布将薛兰、李封屯巨野，曹操攻之，布救兰等，不胜而走，操遂斩兰等。
现代文：吕布的部将薛兰、李封驻军巨野，曹操向他们发动进攻、吕布前来援救，被曹操击败，退走。于是曹操斩杀薛兰等人。
English: Cao Cao launched an attack on Lü Bu's subordinates Xue Lan and Li Feng, who were garrisoned in the Giant Field. Lü Bu came to their rescue, was defeated by Cao Cao, and retreated. Cao Cao then beheaded Xue Lan and the others.

古文：操军乘氏，以陶谦已死。欲遂取徐州，还乃定布。
现代文：曹操驻军乘氏，因徐州牧陶谦已死，便准备先夺取徐州，回来再攻打吕布。
English: Cao Cao's garrisoned troops, because Xuzhou Mu Tao Qian had died, prepared to seize Xuzhou first, and then return to attack Lvbu.

古文：荀彧曰： 昔高祖保关中，光武据河内，皆深根固本以制天下，进足以胜敌，退足以坚守，故虽有困败而终济大业。
现代文：荀说： 从前高祖守保关中，光武帝占据河内，都巩固基地以控制天下，进足以胜敌，退足以坚守，所以虽有困顿失利，但最终完成统一天下的大业。
English: Hao said: From the time of Gaozhu Guo Guan, Emperor Guangwu occupied Hanoi, consolidated the base to control the world, advanced enough to defeat the enemy, and retreated enough to hold on, so although there were difficulties and defeats, he finally completed the great cause of unification.

古文：将军本以兗州首事，平山东之难，百姓无不归心悦服。
现代文：将军本来从兖州起兵，平定山东之乱，百姓无不对您心悦诚服。
English: The general originally raised an army from Bozhou to quell the Shandong Rebellion, and the people wholeheartedly agree with you.

古文：且河、济，天下之要地也，今虽残坏，犹易以自保，是亦将军之关中、河内也，不可以不先定。
现代文：而且，兖州处于黄河与济水之间，是天下的冲要之地，如今虽已残破，但还易于自保，这正是将军的 关中 、 河内 ，不能不先把这个基地安定下来。
English: Moreover, Zhangzhou straddles the Yellow River and Jishui. Although the military stronghold is now ruined, it is still easy to protect itself with its own strength. This is your Guanzhong and Hanoi, which must first be pacified.

古文：今已破李封、薛兰，若分兵东击陈宫，宫必不敢西顾，以其间勒兵收熟麦，约食畜谷，一举而布可破也。
现代文：现在，已击破李封、薛兰，如果分兵向东进攻陈宫，他必然不敢再有西进的打算，我们便乘机收获已成熟的麦子，节约饭食，储备粮草，就可以一举击败吕布。
English: Now that Li Feng and Xue Lan have been defeated, if the detachment attacks Chen Gong to the east, he will certainly not dare to go west again. We will take the opportunity to harvest ripe wheat, save food, and reserve grain and grass. We can defeat Lv Bu in one fell swoop.

古文：破布，然后南结扬州，共讨袁术，以临淮、泗。
现代文：击败吕布后，再向南与扬州刺史刘繇结盟，共同讨伐袁术，控制淮水、泗水一带。
English: After defeating Lvbu, he went south to unite with Liu Bei in Yangzhou, joined forces to fight Yuan Shu, and expanded his power to Huai Shui and Surabaya.

古文：若舍布而东，多留兵则不足用，少留兵则民皆保城，不得樵采，布乘虚寇暴，民心益危，唯鄄城、范、卫可全，其馀非己之有，是无兗州也。
现代文：如果现在不管吕布，而去向东攻打徐州，多留兵则出征兵力不足，少留兵则只有让全体百姓守城，不要说收麦，连上山砍柴也不能进行。吕布乘虚进攻，民心就会更加动摇，只有鄄城、范县、濮阳可以保全，其余的城都会失去，那就等于您不再占有兖州了。
English: If you leave Lvbu now and attack Xuzhou to the east, if you keep more soldiers, you will not have enough conscription strength, and if you keep fewer soldiers, you will only have to let all the people defend the city. Not to mention the collection of wheat, you can't even go up the mountain to cut firewood. If Lvbu attacks at the wrong time, the people's hearts will be more shaken. Only Fucheng, Fan County and Fenyang can be preserved, and the rest of the city will be lost, which means that you will no longer occupy Fenyang.

古文：若徐州不定，将军当安所归乎！
现代文：如果出征不能平定徐州，将军将回到哪里去呢！
English: If the expedition fails to pacify Xuzhou, where will the general return to?

古文：且陶谦虽死，徐州未易亡也。
现代文：而且陶谦虽然已死，徐州并不容易灭亡。
English: Moreover, although Tao Qian is dead, Xuzhou is not easy to capture.

古文：彼惩往年之败，将惧而结亲，相为表里。
现代文：那里的人接受往年失败的教训，必然因畏惧而团结一致，内外呼应。
English: They will learn from the failures of previous years, will be closely linked by tools, and will take care of each other.

古文：今东方皆已收表，必坚壁清野以待将军，攻之不拔，略之无获，不出十日，则十万之众，未战而先自困耳。
现代文：如今东边徐州的麦子已经收割，他们必定坚壁清野，等待将军。既攻不下城，又抢掠不到物资，不出十天，十万大军还没有作战，已先自陷困境了。
English: Now that the wheat in eastern Xuzhou has been harvested, they must be waiting for the general. They can neither attack the city nor loot the materials. In less than ten days, the hundred thousand army has not yet fought, and has already fallen into a predicament.

古文：前讨徐州，威罚实行，其子弟念父兄之耻，必人自为守，无降心，就能破之，尚不可有也。
现代文：上次讨伐徐州，您曾实行威罚，徐州的子弟们想到父兄的仇恨，必然人人固守，不肯归降，即使您能攻破城池，仍不能使他们归顺。
English: The last time Xuzhou was conquered, the measures of governance by punishment were implemented. Xuzhou people, thinking of the shame of their father and brother being killed, will certainly spontaneously defend the city. There is no idea of surrender. Even if Xuzhou is conquered, it cannot be owned.

古文：夫事固有弃此取彼者，以大易小可也，以安易危可也，权一时之势，不患本之不固可也。
现代文：在考虑事情时，经常要有舍此取彼的选择，可以取大而舍小，可以求安全而舍危险，可以在不威胁根本稳固的前提下采取权宜之计。
English: In the world, there are always people who give up this to get that, as long as they exchange the big for the small, and the safe for the dangerous. It is also possible to weigh the current situation and not worry about the foundation not being solid.

古文：今三者莫利，惟将军熟虑之。 
现代文：现在东征徐州，并不符合以上三个取舍标准，请将军仔细斟酌。 
English: Now the eastward expedition to Xuzhou does not meet the above three criteria, please consider it carefully.

古文：操乃止。
现代文：曹操这才打消了东征的念头。
English: Cao Cao finally gave up.

古文：布复从东缗与陈宫将万馀人来战，操兵皆出收麦，在者不能千人，屯营不固。
现代文：吕布再次从东缗出发，与陈宫率领万余人来进攻曹操。曹操部下的士兵全都出去收割麦子，在营中的不到一千人，难以守住营寨。
English: Lv Bu once again set out from Dongtao, and together with Chen Gong, led more than ten thousand people to attack Cao Cao. All of Cao Cao's soldiers went out to harvest wheat. There were less than a thousand people in the camp, and it was difficult to hold the camp.

古文：屯西有大堤，其南树木幽深，操隐兵堤里，出半兵堤外。
现代文：在营寨西边有一条大堤，南边有一片茂密深广的树林。曹操把一半士兵埋伏在堤后，另一半士兵暴露在堤外布下阵势。
English: On the west side of the camp, there was a large dike, and on the south side, there was a thick, deep forest. Cao Cao placed half of the soldiers in ambush behind the dike, and the other half of the soldiers were exposed outside the dike to set up a position.

古文：布益进，乃令轻兵挑战，既合，伏兵乃悉乘堤，步骑并进，大破之，追至其营而还。
现代文：吕布的军队逼近时，曹操才命轻装部队挑战，等到两军厮杀在一起以后，伏兵才登上大堤杀出，步兵与骑兵一齐冲锋，大破吕布的军队，直追到吕布的营寨才返回。
English: When Lvbu's army was approaching, Cao Cao only ordered the light-armed troops to challenge. After the two armies fought together, the ambush soldiers boarded the embankment and drove out. The infantry and cavalry charged together, broke through Lvbu's army, and chased them straight to Lvbu's camp before returning.

古文：布夜走，操复攻拔定陶，分兵平诸县。
现代文：吕布当夜撤退。曹操又攻下定陶，分兵平定各县。
English: Lvbu retreated that night. Cao Cao also captured Dingtao, and his troops subdued all the counties.

古文：布东奔刘备，张邈从布，使其弟超将家属保雍兵。
现代文：吕布向东到徐州投奔刘备。张邈跟随吕布，让自己的弟弟张超带领家属退守雍丘。
English: Lv Bu went east to Xuzhou to join Liu Bei. Zhang Ye followed Lv Bu and let his brother Zhang Chao lead his family to retreat to Yongqiu.

古文：布初见备，甚尊敬之，谓备曰： 我与卿同边地人也！布见关东起兵，欲诛董卓。
现代文：吕布初见刘备时，十分尊敬，对刘备说： 我与你都是连疆出身的人，我见到函谷关以东诸州、郡起兵，目的是讨伐董卓。
English: When Lü Bu saw Liu Bei for the first time, he respected him very much and said to Liu Bei: I and you are both from Lianjiang. I saw the armies of the states and counties east of the Hanzhong Pass, with the aim of fighting against Dong Zhuo.

古文：布杀卓东出，关东诸将无安布者，皆欲杀布耳。 
现代文：但我杀死董卓后，来到关东，关东的诸将领没有一个接纳我，而都要杀死我！ 
English: But after I killed Dong Zhuo, I came to Kanto. None of the generals in Kanto accepted me, but they all wanted to kill me!

古文：请备于帐中，坐妇床上，令妇向拜，酌酒饮食，名备为弟。
现代文：吕布请刘备到自己帐中，坐在妻子的床上，让自己妻子向刘备行礼。又设酒宴款待刘备，称刘备为弟。
English: Lv Bu asked Liu Bei to come to his house, sit on his wife's bed, and let his wife bow to Liu Bei. He also held a wine banquet to entertain Liu Bei, calling Liu Bei his younger brother.

古文：备见布语言无常，外然之而内不悦。
现代文：刘备见吕布语无伦次，外表上与他应酬，内心里感到不快。
English: Liu Bei saw that Lü Bu's language was incoherent, and outwardly entertained him, but inwardly felt uncomfortable.

古文：李傕、郭汜相攻连月，死者以万数。
现代文：李傕、郭汜相互攻击，一连几个月，死者数以万计。
English: Li Gan and Guo Gan attacked each other for months on end, resulting in tens of thousands of deaths.

古文：六月，傕将杨奉谋杀傕，事泄，遂将兵叛傕，傕众稍衰。
现代文：六月，李部将杨奉打算谋杀李，计划泄露，便率领部下背叛李，李的势力逐渐衰落。
English: In June, Li's subordinate Yang Bong's plan to murder Li was leaked, and he led his subordinates to betray Li. Li's power gradually declined.

古文：庚午，镇东将军张济自陕至，欲和傕、汜，迁乘舆权幸弘农。
现代文：庚午，镇东将军张济从陕县来到长安，打算调解李与郭汜的争端，迎接献帝前往弘农。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Zhendong General Zhang Ji came to Chang'an from Shaanxi, intending to mediate the dispute between Li and Guo Gan, and welcome Emperor Xian to Hongnong.

古文：帝亦思旧京，遣使宣谕，十反，汜、傕许和，欲质其爱子。
现代文：献帝也思念旧京洛阳，便派遣使者到李、郭汜营中传达圣旨。使者反复十次，李与郭汜才答应讲和，打算互相交换爱子，作为人质。
English: Emperor Xian also missed the old Beijing and Luoyang, so he sent an envoy to Li and Guo Gan's camp to convey the holy will. The envoy repeated ten times, and only after that did Li and Guo Gan agree to make peace, intending to exchange their beloved son as a hostage.

古文：傕妻爱其男，和计未定，而羌、胡数来窥省门，曰： 天子在此中邪！
现代文：李的妻子疼爱儿子，所以和约没有谈成。而在这段时间，李部下的羌人与胡人不断地到献帝住地的大门窥探，说： 皇帝在这里面吗！
English: Li's wife loved her son dearly, so a peace treaty was not negotiated. Meanwhile, Li's subordinates, the Xiong people and the Hu people, kept spying on the gate of the emperor's residence, saying, "Is the emperor in here?"

古文：李将军许我宫人，今皆何在？ 
现代文：李答应赐给我们的宫女，如今都在什么地方？ 
English: Where are the maids of honour that Li promised to give us?

古文：帝患之，使侍中刘艾谓宣义将军贾诩曰： 卿前奉职公忠，故仍升荣宠；今羌、胡满路，宜思方略。 
现代文：献帝不安，派侍中刘艾对宣义将军贾诩说： 你以前对国家忠心耿耿，恪尽职守，因此得到提升，享受荣宠。如今羌人与胡人塞满道路，你应该筹划一个对策。 
English: Uneasy about offering the emperor, Liu Ai, the attendant sent, said to Jia Jun, the general of Xuan Yi: You used to be loyal to the country and fulfilled your duties, so you were promoted and enjoyed honor and favor. Now the Xiong people and the Hu people are clogging the roads, you should plan a countermeasure.

古文：诩乃召羌、胡大帅饮食之，许以封赏，羌、胡皆引去，傕由此单弱。
现代文：于是，贾诩大开酒宴，款待羌人和胡人的首领，许诺授予他们爵位和赏赐财物，这些羌人和胡人才全部离去，李从此势力单弱。
English: As a result, Jia Zhang held a grand wine banquet, entertained the leaders of the Xiong and Hu people, and promised to grant them peerages and reward them with wealth. These Xiong and Hu people all left, and Li's power was weak from then on.

古文：于是复有言和解之计者，傕乃从之，各以女为质。
现代文：于是又有人提出和解的建议时，李便同意与郭汜讲和，相互交换女儿作人质。
English: So when someone else proposed a reconciliation, Li agreed to make peace with Guo Jun and exchange their daughter as a hostage.

古文：秋，七月，甲子，车驾出宣平门，当渡桥，汜兵数百人遮桥曰： 此天子非也？ 车不得前。
现代文：秋季，七月，甲子，献帝乘车出宣平门，正要过护城河桥，郭汜部下数百名士兵在桥上拦住去路，问： 这是不是天子！ 
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Gaozong rode out of the Xuanping Gate, and just as he was about to cross the moat bridge, hundreds of soldiers under Guo Gan stopped him on the bridge and asked: "Is this the Son of Heaven?"

古文：傕兵数百人，皆持大戟在乘舆车前，兵欲交，侍中刘艾大呼曰： 是天子也！ 
现代文：献帝车驾无法前进。李部下数百名士兵，全都手执大戟守在车前，两军就要交手，侍中刘艾大声喊： 真的是天子！ 
English: The imperial car could not move forward. Hundreds of soldiers under Li's command, all holding hands, stood in front of the car. The two armies were about to fight. The attendant Liu Ai shouted out: "He really is the Son of Heaven!"

古文：使侍中杨琦高举车帷，帝曰： 诸君何敢迫近至尊邪？ 
现代文：让侍中杨琦把车帘高高掀起，献帝说： 你们怎敢这样迫近至尊！ 
English: Let the chambermaid Yang Mi lift the curtain high and say to the emperor: How dare you get so close to the Supreme!

古文：汜兵乃却。既渡桥，士众皆称万岁。
现代文：郭汜的兵才撤退，渡过桥后，官兵一起高呼： 万岁！ 
English: Guo Gan's soldiers retreated, and after crossing the bridge, the officers and soldiers shouted together: "Hooray!

古文：夜到霸陵，从者皆饥，张济赋给各有差。
现代文：晚上走霸陵，侍从官员与卫士都饥饿不堪，张济根据各人官职大小，分别给予饮食。
English: Walking around the tomb in the evening, the attendant officials and guards were starving. Zhang Jie gave meals to each person according to their official rank.

古文：傕出屯池阳。
现代文：李离开长安，驻军池阳。
English: Li left Chang'an and garrisoned in Chiyang.

古文：丙寅，以张济为票骑将军，开府如三公；郭汜为车骑将军，杨定为后将军，杨奉为兴义将军。皆封列侯。
现代文：丙寅，献帝任命张济为票骑将军，允许他开府置僚属，待遇与三公相同。任命郭汜为车骑将军，杨定为后将军，杨奉为兴义将军，都封为列侯。
English: He Yin, dedicated to the emperor, appointed Zhang Ji as the general of the cavalry, allowed him to set up a government and appoint subordinates, and the treatment was the same as that of the three princes. Guo Wei was appointed as the general of the cavalry, Yang was designated as the general of the rear, and Yang Feng was designated as the general of Xingyi, and they were all appointed as vassals.

古文：又以故牛辅部曲董承为安集将军。
现代文：又任命原为牛辅部曲的董承为安集将军。
English: He also appointed Dong Cheng, who was originally the leader of the Cattle Auxiliary, as the General of Anji.

古文：郭汜欲令车驾幸高陵，公卿及济以为宜幸弘农，大会议之，不决。
现代文：郭汜想让献帝前往高陵，公卿与张济都认为应该去弘农，召开大会进行商议，但决定不下。
English: Guo Gan wanted Emperor Xian to go to Gaoling, and the nobles and Zhang Jie both thought that they should go to Hongnong and hold a general assembly to discuss, but they could not make a decision.

古文：帝遣使谕汜曰： 弘农近郊庙，勿有疑也。 汜不从。
现代文：献帝派使者去告诉郭汜： 我只是因为弘农离祭祀天地之处和祖先宗庙较近，并无别的意思，将军不要猜疑！ 郭汜仍不服从。
English: Emperor's tribute sent an envoy to tell Guo Gan: I only did it because Hongnong is closer to the place of worshiping heaven and earth and the ancestral temple. I had no other intention. General, don't be suspicious! Guo Gan still disobeyed.

古文：帝遂终日不食。
现代文：于是献帝整天不肯进食。
English: As a result, Emperor Xian refused to eat all day.

古文：汜闻之曰： 可且幸近县。 
现代文：郭汜听到后说： 可以暂且先到附近的县城，再作商议。 
English: After hearing this, Guo Wei said, "We can temporarily go to the nearby county seat first, and then have a discussion."

古文：八月，甲辰，车驾幸新丰。
现代文：八月，甲辰，献帝到达新丰。
English: In August, Jiachen, the emperor's gift, arrived in Xinfeng.

古文：丙子，郭汜复谋胁帝还都郿，侍中种辑知之，密告杨定、董承、杨奉令会新丰。
现代文：丙子，郭汜又阴谋胁迫献帝西还，定都地。侍中种辑得到消息，秘密通知杨定、董承、杨奉，命令他们到新丰来会合。
English: Bong Zi, Guo Jie also conspired to coerce Xian Di to return to Xi'an, the capital city of Xi'an. When the attendant Zong Ji got the news, he secretly informed Yang Ding, Dong Cheng and Yang Bong and ordered them to come to Xinfeng for a meeting.

古文：郭汜自知谋泄，乃弃军入南山。
现代文：郭汜知道阴谋败露，于是抛弃他的军队，逃入终南山。
English: Guo Gan knew that the plot had failed, so he abandoned his army and fled to Nanshan.

古文：曹操围雍丘，张邈诣袁术求救，未至，为其下所杀。
现代文：曹操率军包围雍丘，张邈去见袁术请求救援，他还没有走到，就被自己部下杀死。
English: Cao Cao led the army to surround Yongqiu, Zhang Ye went to see Yuan Shu to ask for help, but before he could get there, he was killed by his own men.

古文：冬，十月，以曹操为兗州牧。
现代文：冬季，十月，任命曹操为兖州牧。
English: In the winter, in October, Cao Cao was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：戊戌，郭汜党夏育、高硕等谋胁乘舆西行。
现代文：戊戌，郭汜的党羽夏育、高硕等策划劫持献帝西行，先纵火扰乱人心。
English: The partisans Xia Yu, Gao Shuo and others of Guo Gan planned to kidnap Emperor Xian for a trip to the West, and first set fire to disturb people's hearts.

古文：侍中刘艾见火起不止，请帝出幸一营以避火。
现代文：侍中刘艾看到火起不息，就请献帝到其他军营中躲避火势。
English: When Liu Ai, an aide-de-camp, saw that the fire was still raging, he asked Emperor Xian to move to another military camp to escape the flames.

古文：杨定、董承将兵迎天子幸杨奉营，夏育等勒兵欲止乘舆，杨定、杨奉力战，破之，乃得出。
现代文：杨定、董承率军接献帝到杨奉营，夏育等出兵企图阻拦献帝，杨定、杨奉奋力作战，击败夏育等，献帝才得以逃出。
English: Yang Ding and Dong Chenggong led the army to escort Emperor Xian to the Yang Feng Camp. Xia Yu and other soldiers attempted to stop Emperor Xian. Yang Ding and Yang Feng fought hard and defeated Xia Yu and others, and Emperor Xian was able to escape.

古文：壬寅，行幸华阴。
现代文：壬寅，献帝抵达华阴。
English: Ren Yin, dedicated to the emperor, arrived in Huayin.

古文：宁辑将军段煨具服御及公卿已下资储，欲上幸其营。
现代文：宁辑将军段煨准备好献帝的衣服车马等御用物品和公卿及以下官员们所需要的物资器具，想要献帝进驻他的大营。
English: General Duan Qi of Ningji prepared the emperor's clothes, chariots, horses, and other royal items, as well as the supplies and equipment needed by the nobles and officials below, who wanted to present the emperor to his large camp.

古文：煨与杨定有隙，定党种辑、左灵言煨欲反，太尉杨彪、司徒赵温、侍中刘艾、尚书梁绍皆曰： 段煨不反，臣等敢以死保。 
现代文：段煨与杨定有仇，杨定的同党种辑、左灵声称段煨蓄意谋反。太尉杨彪、司徒赵温、侍中刘艾、尚书梁绍都说： 段煨不会谋反，我们愿以性命来作保证！ 
English: Duan Hui had a grudge against Yang Ding. Yang Ding's fellow Party members, Zhuo Luo and Zuo Ling, claimed that Duan Hui deliberately plotted a rebellion. First Lieutenant Yang Biao, Sifu Zhao Wen, Attendant Liu Ai, and Shang Shuliang Shao all said: Duan Hui will not plot a rebellion, we are willing to guarantee it with our lives!

古文：董承、杨定胁弘农督邮令言郭汜来在煨营，帝疑之，乃露次于道南。
现代文：董承、杨定威胁弘农郡督邮，让他向献帝报告说： 郭汜已来到段煨营中。 献帝惊疑不定，只好在路南露宿。
English: Dong Cheng and Yang Ding threatened the postmaster of Hongnong County and asked him to report to Emperor Xian that Guo Yao had arrived at the Duan Ye camp. Emperor Xian was taken by surprise and had no choice but to camp in the south of the road.

古文：丁未，杨奉、董承、杨定将攻煨，使种辑、左灵请帝为诏，帝曰： 煨罪未著，奉等攻之而欲令朕有诏耶？ 
现代文：丁未，杨奉、董承、杨定等人准备进攻段煨，派种辑、左灵来请求献帝下诏。献帝说： 段煨并没有谋反的迹象，杨奉等人去进攻他，还要命令朕下诏吗？ 
English: Ding Wei, Yang Bong, Dong Cheng, Yang Ding and others were preparing to attack Duan Xuan. They sent Sejia and Zuo Ling to request Emperor Xian to issue an edict. Emperor Xian said: Duan Xuan did not show any signs of plotting a rebellion. Yang Bong and others attacked him. Do you still want to order me to issue an edict?

古文：辑固请，至夜半，犹弗听。
现代文：种辑一再坚持，直到半夜，献帝仍然拒绝下诏。
English: He insisted again and again until midnight, but Emperor Xian still refused to issue the edict.

古文：奉等乃辄攻煨营，十馀日不下。
现代文：于是杨奉等就进攻段煨大营，一连十余天，未能攻下。
English: As a result, Yang Bong and others attacked the large camp of Duanqi for more than ten days in a row, but failed to capture it.

古文：煨供给御膳，禀赡百官，无有二意。
现代文：段煨供应献帝的御膳及百官的饮食，并没有二心。
English: There is no ambiguity in the fact that Duan Er supplies the imperial banquet and the diet of the hundred officials.

古文：诏使侍中、尚书告谕定等，令与煨和解，定等奉诏还营。
现代文：献帝下诏，派侍中、尚书等告诉杨定等，命令他们与段煨和解。杨定等奉诏回营。
English: He issued an imperial edict to dedicate the emperor, and sent a chamberlain, Shang Shu, and others to tell Yang Ding and others, ordering them to reconcile with Duan Xi. Yang Ding and others returned to the camp after receiving the imperial edict.

古文：李傕、郭汜悔令车驾东，闻定攻煨，相诏共救之，因欲劫帝而西。
现代文：李、郭汜后悔让献帝去弘农，听说杨定进攻段煨，就相互召响，共同率军援救，想乘机劫持献帝去西方。
English: Li and Guo Gan regretted letting Xian Di go to Hongnong. When they heard that Yang Ding was attacking Duan Gan, they called each other and jointly led the army to rescue him. They wanted to take the opportunity to kidnap Xian Di and go to the West.

古文：杨定闻傕、汜至，欲还蓝田，为汜所遮，单骑亡走荆州。
现代文：杨定听说李、郭汜前来，想退回蓝田，但被郭汜拦住，于是他自己单人匹马逃到荆州。
English: Yang Ding heard that Li and Guo Gan were coming and wanted to return to Lantian, but was stopped by Guo Gan, so he fled to Jingzhou alone.

古文：张济与杨奉、董承不相平，乃复与傕、汜合。
现代文：张济又与杨奉、董承发生冲突，于是再次跟李、郭汜联合。
English: Zhang Jie again clashed with Yang Bong and Dong Cheng, so he once again allied with Li and Guo Gan.

古文：十二月，帝幸弘农，张济、李傕、郭汜共追乘舆，大虞于弘农东涧，陈、奉军败，百官、士卒死者，不可胜数，弃御物、符策、典籍，略无所遗。
现代文：十二月，献帝抵达弘农。张济、李、郭汜一同追赶献帝，在弘农东涧展开大战，董承、杨奉的军队战败，被杀死的文武百官与兵士，不计其数。御用物品、符信典策、图书档案等，几乎全部散落。
English: In December, Emperor Xian arrived in Hongnong. Zhang Ji, Li, and Guo Gan together chased Emperor Xian and launched a great battle in Donglu, Hongnong. The army of Dongcheng and Yang Bong was defeated, and hundreds of civil and military officials and soldiers were killed. Almost all of the royal goods, letters and documents, books and archives, etc. were scattered.

古文：射声校尉沮俊被创坠马，傕谓左右曰： 尚可活否？ 
现代文：射声校尉沮俊受伤落马，李对左右说： 这人还能活吗？ 
English: Li said to his right and left, "Can this man still live?

古文：俊骂之曰： 汝等凶逆，逼劫天子，使公卿被害，宫人流离。
现代文：沮俊诟骂道： 你们这帮凶恶的逆贼，逼劫天子，使公卿被害，宫女流散。
English: Dejected Jun scolded, "You gang of vicious traitors, you have forced the abduction of the heavenly son, caused the death of the court noble, and dispersed the royal concubines.

古文：乱臣贼子，未有如此也！ 
现代文：乱臣贼子，还没有人像这样大逆不道！ 
English: Unruly vassal thief, no one has ever been so rebellious!

古文：傕乃杀之。
现代文：于是李将沮俊杀死。
English: So Li killed Dejun.

古文：壬申，帝露次曹阳。
现代文：壬申，献帝抵达曹阳，露宿在外。
English: Jinshin, dedicated to the emperor arrived in Caoyang, camped outside.

古文：承、奉乃谲傕等与连和，而密遣间使至河东，招故白波帅李乐、韩暹、胡才及南匈奴右贤王去卑，并率其众数千骑来，与承、奉共击傕等，大破之，斩首数千级。
现代文：董承、杨奉等假装与李等联合，而暗中派出使者到河东郡去招请原白波军的首领李乐、韩暹、胡才以及南匈奴右贤王去卑，全都各率部下数千骑兵前来，与董承、杨奉等合击李等。李等大败，被斩杀数千人。
English: Dongcheng, Yangfeng and others pretended to unite with Li and others, but secretly sent envoys to Hedong County to invite the leaders of the former White Wave Army, Li Le, Han Siem, Hu Cai and the South Hun King Uxian, all of whom led thousands of cavalrymen to come and fight with Dongcheng, Yangfeng and others against Li and others. Li and others were defeated and thousands of people were killed.

古文：于是董承等以新破傕等，可复东引。
现代文：于是董承等人认为李等刚刚被打败，可以继续东行。
English: As a result, Dong Cheng and others thought that Li and others had just been defeated and could continue eastward.

古文：庚申，车驾发东，董承、李乐卫乘舆，胡才、杨奉、韩暹、匈奴右贤王于后为拒。
现代文：庚申，献帝一行向东进发，董承、李乐保护车驾，胡才、杨奉、韩暹与匈奴右贤王去卑率军作为后卫。
English: Goshun and the emperor-offering party set off eastward, with Dongcheng and Li Le protecting the driver, and Hu Cai, Yang Bong, Han Siem, and Hunnu Righteous King Dangbei leading the army as guards.

古文：傕等复来战，奉等大败，死者甚于东涧。
现代文：李等又来进攻，杨奉等大败，死亡人数比在弘农东涧时还多。
English: Li Xie et al. came to attack again, Yang Bong et al. were defeated, and more people died than at the time of Sokcho.

古文：光禄勋邓渊、廷尉宣璠、少府田芬、大司农张义皆死。
现代文：光禄勋邓渊、廷尉宣、少府田芬、大司农张义全都被杀。
English: Deng Yuan, Grand Officer of the People's Liberation Army, Ting Yi Xuan, Shofu Tian Fen, and Grand Secretary of Peasants Zhang Yiquan were all killed.

古文：司徒赵温、太常王绛、卫尉周忠、司隶校尉管郃为傕所遮，欲杀之，贾诩曰： 此皆大臣，卿奈何害之！ 
现代文：司徒赵温、太常王绛、卫尉周忠、司隶校尉管被李俘虏，李要杀死他们，贾诩说： 这些人都是朝中大臣，你怎么能杀害他们！ 
English: Li had taken prisoner the tutor Zhao Wen, the imperial secretary Wang Qian, the guard lieutenant Zhou Zhong, and the captain of Sili. Li wanted to kill them. Jia Qian said, "These people are the ministers of the central government, how can you kill them!

古文：乃止。
现代文：李这才作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：李乐曰： 事急矣，陛下宜御马。 
现代文：李乐对献帝说： 形势十分危急，陛下应该上马。 
English: Li Le said to Xian Di: The situation is very critical, Your Majesty should get on the horse.

古文：上曰： 不可舍百官而去，此何境哉！ 
现代文：献帝说： 我不能丢下百官，自己逃命，他们有什么罪！ 
English: The emperor said, "I can't abandon hundreds of officials and run for my life. What are they guilty of?"

古文：兵相连缀四十里，方得至陕，乃结营自守。
现代文：军队断断续续地在道路上连接有四十里长，然后到达陕县，于是筑起营寨固守。
English: The army intermittently linked up on the forty-mile-long road before reaching Shaanxi, whereupon they set up a camp and held fast.

古文：时残破之馀，虎贲、羽林不满百人，傕、汜兵绕营叫呼，吏士失色，各有分散之意。
现代文：当时，在大败之后，护驾的虎贲、羽林武士不到一百人。李、郭汜的兵士绕着献帝的营寨大声呼喊，官兵们惊慌失色，都有分散逃跑的想法。
English: At that time, after the great defeat, there were less than a hundred Tiger Clan and Ulin Warriors to escort. Li and Guo Gan's soldiers shouted loudly around the camp dedicated to the emperor, and the officers and soldiers panicked and lost their color, and all had the idea of dispersing and fleeing.

古文：李乐惧，欲令车驾御船过砥柱，出孟津。
现代文：李乐感到恐惧，想让献帝乘船沿黄河而下，经过砥柱，从孟津上岸。
English: Li Le felt fear and wanted to let Xian Di take a boat down the Yellow River, pass through the pillar, and go ashore from Mengjin.

古文：杨彪以为河道险难，非万乘所宜乘；乃使李乐夜渡，潜具船，举火为应。
现代文：太尉杨彪认为黄河水路艰难，不宜于让天子冒这么大的危险。于是派李乐乘夜渡河，秘密准备船只，举火把作为信号。
English: Captain Yang Biao thought that the Yellow River was a difficult waterway, and it was not suitable for the emperor to take such a big risk. So he sent Li Le to cross the river at night, secretly prepare the boat, and hold a torch as a signal.

古文：上与公卿步出营，皇后兄伏德扶后，一手挟绢十匹。
现代文：献帝与公卿徒步走出营寨，伏皇后的哥哥伏德一手扶着伏皇后，一手挟着十匹绢。
English: Emperor Xian and the noblemen walked out of the camp on foot. The queen's brother, Fude, supported the queen with one hand and held ten donkeys in his other hand.

古文：董承使符节令孙徽从人间斫之，杀旁侍者，血溅后衣。
现代文：董承派符节令孙微用刀在人群中开道，杀死伏皇后身边的侍者，鲜血溅到伏皇后的衣服上。
English: On the day of Dongcheng's festival, Sun Weir cut a path through the crowd with a knife, killing a waiter who was with Empress Fu. The blood splattered onto the Empress Fu's clothes.

古文：河岸高十馀丈，不得下，乃以绢为辇，使人居前负帝，馀皆匍匐而下，或从上自投，冠帻皆坏。
现代文：黄河堤岸离水面有十余丈高，无法下去，就用绢结成坐椅，让人在前面背着献帝，其余的人都爬着下去，有的人从堤岸上自己跳下去，把官帽全都撤坏了。
English: The embankment of the Yellow River is more than ten feet high from the water surface, and it is impossible to go down, so they use rafts to make chairs, let people carry offerings to the emperor in front, and the rest of the people climb down. Some people jump down from the embankment themselves, removing all the official hats.

古文：既至河边，士卒争赴舟，董承、李乐以戈击之，手指于舟中可掬。
现代文：到达河边后，士卒争先恐后地跳上渡船，董承、李乐等用长戈阻拦，船中堆满了被砍落的手指，多得可以用手捧起来。
English: After reaching the river, the soldiers scrambled to jump on the ferry, and Dong Cheng, Li Le and others used a crossbow to stop them. The boat was full of severed fingers, so many that they could be picked up by hand.

古文：帝乃御船。同济者，皇后及杨彪以下才数十人，其宫女及吏民不得渡者，皆为兵所掠夺，衣服俱尽，发亦被截，冻死者不可胜计。
现代文：献帝这才上船，与他同时渡过河的，只有伏皇后以及杨彪以下数十人。宫女与跟随的官员、百姓未能渡河的，都遭到乱兵的掠夺，衣服全被脱光，连头发也被割掉，冻死的人不计其数。
English: Emperor Xian only got on the boat at this time, and only Empress Fu and dozens of people below Yang Biao crossed the river at the same time. The palace maids, officials and commoners who were unable to cross the river were all plundered by the soldiers, their clothes were completely stripped, even their hair was cut off, and countless people froze to death.

古文：卫尉士孙瑞为傕所杀。
现代文：卫尉士孙瑞被李杀死。
English: Guardsman Sun Rui was killed by Li Gang.

古文：傕见河北有火，遣骑候之，适见上渡河，呼曰： 汝等将天子去邪！ 
现代文：李看到黄河北岸有火光，就派骑兵侦察，正看见献帝在渡河，就大声喊： 你们把天子弄到哪里去？ 
English: When Li saw a fire on the north bank of the Yellow River, he sent his cavalry to investigate. Just as he saw Xian Di crossing the river, he shouted loudly: "Where are you taking Tianzi?

古文：董承惧射之，以被为幔。
现代文：董承害怕他们射箭，就把被子张开做帷幔进行掩护。
English: Dong Cheng was afraid of them shooting arrows, so he opened the quilt as a curtain to cover them.

古文：毁到大阳，幸李乐营。
现代文：到达大阳以后，进入李乐军营。
English: After arriving in Dayang, he entered the Li Le military camp.

古文：河内太守张杨使数千人负米来贡饷。
现代文：河内郡太守张杨派数千人背着米来进贡。
English: Zhang Yang, the governor of Hanoi County, sent thousands of people with rice on their backs to pay tribute.

古文：乙亥，帝御牛车，幸安邑，河东太守王邑奉献绵帛，悉赋公卿以下，封邑为列侯，拜胡才为征东将军，张杨为安国将军，皆假节开府。
现代文：乙亥，献帝乘坐牛车，抵达安邑。河东郡太守王邑奉献丝绵与绸缎，献帝全部赏赐给公卿及随行官员。献帝封王邑为列侯，任命胡才为征东将军、张杨为安国将军，都持符节，享有开府置僚属的权力。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, Emperor Taizong arrived in Anyi by ox-drawn carriage. Wangyi, the governor of Hedong County, offered silk and silk yarns, and all the gifts were given to the nobles and accompanying officials. Wangyi was made a vassal of the emperor, Hu Cai was appointed as the general of the expedition to the East, and Zhang Yang was appointed as the general of the expedition to the East. They all held the festival of the Chinese characters, and enjoyed the right to set up a government and appoint subordinates.

古文：其垒壁群帅竞求拜职，刻印不给，至乃以锥画之。
现代文：他们部下将领竞相向献帝乞请官职，因任命官员太多，来不及刻印，以至用铁锥来划。
English: Their subordinate generals competed with each other in begging Emperor Xian for official posts. Since there were too many officials to be appointed, it was too late to engrave them, so they were drawn with iron cones.

古文：乘舆居棘篱中，门户无关闭，天子与群臣会，兵士伏篱上观，互相镇压以为笑。
现代文：献帝住在以荆棘为篱的房中。门窗不能关闭，献帝与群臣们举行朝会时，兵士们就趴在篱笆上观望，相互拥挤取乐。
English: Emperor Xian lived in a house surrounded by a hedge of thorns. The doors and windows could not be closed. When Emperor Xian held a court meeting with his courtiers, the soldiers would lie on the fence and watch, jostling each other for fun.

古文：帝又遣太仆韩融至弘农与傕、汜等连和，傕乃放遣公卿百官，颇归所掠宫人及乘舆器服。
现代文：献帝又派太仆韩融到弘农，与李、郭汜等讲和，李这才放走被他浮虏的公卿百官，并归还了不少被掠去的宫女和御用物品。
English: Emperor Xian also sent his servant Han Rong to Hongnong to make peace with Li, Guo Gan and others. Only then did Li let go of the hundreds of nobles and officials he had captured, and returned many of the court ladies and royal goods that had been stolen.

古文：已而粮谷尽，宫人皆食菜果。
现代文：不久，粮食吃光，宫女们全都以野菜、野果充饥。
English: Before long, they ran out of food, and all the ladies of the court fed themselves with vegetables and wild fruits.

古文：乙卯，张杨自野王来朝，谋以乘舆还雒阳；诸将不听，杨复还野王。
现代文：乙卯，河内郡太守张杨从野王县来朝见献帝，计划护送献帝返回洛阳，但是护驾的将领们不同意，张杨就又回到野王。
English: Second, Zhang Yang, the governor of Hanoi County, came from Niuang County to see the emperor and planned to escort the emperor back to Luoyang, but the generals who escorted him did not agree, and Zhang Yang returned to Niuang.

古文：是时，长安城空四十馀日，强者四散，羸者相食，二三年间，关中无复人迹。
现代文：这时候，长安城中无人管理，达四十余天。身强力壮的都四散逃命，老幼病弱的只能自相残杀，靠吃人肉度日。两三年间，关中地区不再有人的踪迹。
English: At this time, there was no one in charge in Chang'an City for more than forty days. The able-bodied fled for their lives, and the old, the young, and the sick could only kill each other and survive by eating human flesh. For two or three years, there was no trace of anyone in the Guanzhong area.

古文：沮授说袁绍曰： 将军累叶台辅，世济忠义。
现代文：沮授向袁绍建议说： 将军的祖先，几代都是国家大臣，世传忠义。
English: The dejected professor suggested to Yuan Shao: The general's ancestors have been ministers of state for several generations, and they are known to be loyal.

古文：今朝廷播越，宗庙残毁，观诸州郡虽外托义兵，内实相图，未有忧存社稷恤民之意。
现代文：如今，天子流离失所，宗庙也残败毁坏。我看到各州、郡虽然表面上都声称是义兵，实际上互相图谋，并没有忧国忧民的想法。
English: Today, the Son of Heaven has been displaced, and the ancestral temple has also been damaged and destroyed. I see that each state and county, although ostensibly claiming to be a volunteer, actually conspire with each other, and do not have the idea of worrying about the country and the people.

古文：今州域粗定，兵强士附，西迎大驾，即宫鄴都，挟天子而令诸侯，畜士马以讨不庭，谁能御之！ 
现代文：如今，将军已基本平定冀州地区，兵强马壮，将士听命，如果您向西去迎接天子，迁都邺城，就可以挟天子而令诸侯，积蓄兵马，讨伐不服从朝廷的叛逆，天下有谁能与您对抗？ 
English: Today, the general has basically pacified the Jizhou region, the army is strong and the soldiers are obedient. If you go west to meet the Son of Heaven and move the capital, you can take the Son of Heaven and make princes, accumulate soldiers and horses, and fight against disobedience to the imperial court. Who in the world can fight against you?

古文：颍川郭图、淳于琼曰： 汉室陵迟，为日久矣，今欲兴之，不亦难乎！
现代文：颖川人郭图、淳于琼说： 汉朝王室的没落，为时已久，如今要使它复兴，不是太困难了吗！
English: Guo Tu and Chun Yu Qiong from Yingchuan said: The decline of the Han Dynasty royal family has been a long time coming, and now it is too difficult to revive it!

古文：且英雄并起，各据州郡，连徒聚众，动有万计，所谓秦失其鹿，先得者王。
现代文：而且英雄豪杰纷纷起兵，各据州、郡，部下人马动辄数以万计。这正是泰朝失其鹿，先得者为王的时机。
English: Moreover, the heroes arose at the same time, each occupying a prefecture or county, and united to gather thousands of followers, with tens of thousands of people at any time. This is just like the Qin Dynasty lost the imperial throne, and the person who got it first became the son of heaven.

古文：今迎天子自近，动辄表闻，从之则权轻，违之则拒命，非计之善者也。 
现代文：现在，要是把天子迎接到自己身边，一举一动都要上表奏请服从天子，则自己权力减轻；不服从，则要蒙受违抗圣旨的罪名。
English: Now, if one welcomes the Son of Heaven to one's side and obeys the Son of Heaven in every move, one's power will be lessened; if one does not obey, one will be accused of defying God's will.

古文：授曰： 今迎朝廷，于义为得，于时为宜，若不早定，必有先之者矣。 
现代文：这不是上策。 沮授说： 现在迎接天子，即符合君臣大义，又是最有利的时机，如果不能早日决定，必定会有人抢先下手。 
English: This is not the best strategy. Dejected teacher said: Now is the most favorable time to meet the Son of Heaven, that is, in line with the great justice of the monarchs and ministers. If you can't decide early, someone will definitely take the lead.

古文：绍不从。
现代文：袁绍没有采纳沮授的建议。
English: Yuan Shao did not accept his suggestion.

古文：初，丹杨硃治尝为孙坚校尉，见袁术政德不立，劝孙策归取江东。
现代文：当初，丹阳人朱治曾经在孙坚部下担任过校尉，他看到袁术为政混乱，对待下属刻薄，就劝孙策返回故乡，去占据江东。
English: At first, Zhu Zhi from Danyang had served as a lieutenant under Sun Jian. When he saw that Yuan Shou was in political chaos and treated his subordinates harshly, he advised Sun Ce to return to his hometown and occupy the east of the Yangtze River.

古文：时吴景攻樊能、张英等，岁馀不克，策说术曰： 家有旧恩在东，愿助舅讨横江。
现代文：当时孙策的舅父吴景攻打樊能、张英等人，一年多未能取胜。孙策便向袁术请求说： 我家在江东地区对人民有旧恩，我愿意帮助舅父去进攻横江。
English: At that time, Sun Ce's uncle, Wu Jing, had been unable to defeat Shun Neng, Zhang Ying and others for more than a year. Sun Ce pleaded with Yuan Shu, saying: My family has a long-standing favor for the people in the east of the Yangtze River, and I am willing to help my uncle attack the Yangtze River.

古文：横江拔，因投本土召募，可得三万兵，以佐明使君定天下。 
现代文：攻陷横江后，我便回到家乡去召募兵马，可以集结起三万兵众，用来辅佐将军平定天下。 
English: After the fall of Yokoe, I returned to my hometown to recruit soldiers and horses. I could gather up to thirty thousand soldiers to assist the general in pacifying the world.

古文：术知其恨，而以刘繇据曲阿，王朗在会稽，谓策未必能定，乃许之。
现代文：袁术知道孙策对自己心怀不满，但由于当时扬州刺史刘繇占据曲阿，会稽郡太守王朗守在本郡，他认为孙策不一定能将他们击败，于是同意了孙策的请求，上表推荐他为折冲校尉。
English: Yuan Shu knew that Sun Ce was dissatisfied with himself, but since the Yangzhou leader Liu Ye occupied Qu'a at that time, and the county governor Wang Lang Shou was in the county, he thought that Sun Ce would not necessarily be able to defeat them, so he agreed to Sun Ce's request and recommended him as a Fuchong lieutenant.

古文：表策为折冲校尉，将兵千馀人、骑数十匹。行收兵，比至历阳，众五六千。
现代文：孙策率领千余名步兵和数十名骑兵出发，一边走一边招兵，到达历阳的时候，已经增加到五六千人。
English: Sun Ce led more than a thousand infantrymen and dozens of cavalrymen to set out, recruiting soldiers as he went. By the time he reached Liyang, the number had increased to five or six thousand.

古文：时周瑜从父尚为丹杨太守，瑜将兵迎之，仍助以资粮。
现代文：这时，周瑜的伯父周尚为丹阳郡太守，周瑜率兵迎接孙策，并援助他军费和粮草。
English: At this time, Zhou Yu's uncle Zhou Shang was the governor of Danyang County. Zhou Yu led the troops to meet Sun Ce, and assisted him with military expenses and grain.

古文：策大喜，曰： 吾得卿，谐也！ 
现代文：孙策大喜，说： 我得到你的帮助，一定能成功！ 
English: Sun Ce was overjoyed and said, "With your help, I am sure to succeed!"

古文：进攻横江、当利，皆拔之，樊能、张英败走。
现代文：孙策进攻横江、当利，全都攻克，樊能、张英战败逃走。
English: Sun Ce attacked Hengjiang and Dangli, and conquered them all. Yan Neng and Zhang Ying were defeated and fled.

古文：策渡江转斗，所向皆破，莫敢当其锋者。百姓闻孙郎至，皆失魂魄。长吏委城郭，窜伏山草。
现代文：孙策渡江以后，辗转作战，战无不胜，没有人能抵挡住他的攻势，百姓听到孙策将要到达，全都失魂落魄；各地官员弃城出逃，躲到深山之中。
English: After Sun Tse crossed the river, he turned to battle and was invincible. No one could resist his offensive. When the people heard that Sun Tse was about to arrive, they all lost their souls. Officials from all over the country abandoned the city and fled, hiding in the mountains.

古文：及策至，军士奉令，不敢虏略，鸡犬菜茹，一无所犯，民乃大悦，竞以牛酒劳军。
现代文：及至孙策到来，军队奉有命令，不敢进行掳掠，民间的一只鸡、一条狗、一棵蔬菜，都不能触动。于是民心大为欢悦，争先用牛肉和美酒去慰劳孙策的军队。
English: When Sun Tse arrived, the army was ordered not to dare to carry out looting, and not to touch a chicken, a dog, or a vegetable. So the people were very happy and rushed to comfort Sun Tse's army with beef and wine.

古文：策为人，美姿颜，能笑语，性阔达听受，善于用人，是以士民见者莫不尽心，乐为致死。
现代文：孙策相貌英俊，言谈幽默，性格豁达，能接受别人的意见，善于使用人才。因此，无论士大夫还是一般百姓，凡是见过他的人，都为他尽心尽力，乐意为他效死。
English: Sun Ce is handsome, humorous, open-minded, receptive to the opinions of others, and good at using talent. Therefore, no matter whether he is a scholar or an ordinary person, everyone who has seen him has done their best for him and is willing to die for him.

古文：策攻刘繇牛渚营，尽得邸阁粮谷、战具。
现代文：孙策进攻刘繇设在牛渚的营地，获得了存在那里的全部粮草与武器。
English: Sun Ce attacked Liu Bei's camp at Niu Zangzi and obtained all the grain, grass and weapons that existed there.

古文：时彭城相薛礼、下邳相丹杨笮融依繇为盟主，礼据秣陵城，融屯县南，策皆击破之。
现代文：当时，彭城国相薛礼、下邳国相丹阳人笮融都拥戴刘繇为盟主，薛礼驻守秣陵城，笮融驻军秣陵县南，都被孙策击破。
English: At that time, Pengcheng's governor, Xue Li, and Danyang's governor, Yan Rong, both supported Liu Bei as their ally. Xue Li was stationed in Fuling City, and Yan Rong was stationed in the south of Fuling County. Both were defeated by Sun Ce.

古文：又破繇别将于梅陵，攻湖孰、江乘，皆下之，进击繇于曲阿。
现代文：孙策又攻破刘繇驻在梅陵的一支部队，转而进攻湖孰、江乘，全都攻克。于是到曲阿进击刘繇。
English: Sun Ce also defeated one of Liu Bei's troops stationed in Meiling, and then attacked Hubei and Jiangren, conquering them all. So he went to Qu'a to attack Liu Bei.

古文：繇同郡太史慈时自东莱来省繇，会策至，或劝繇可以慈为大将。繇曰： 我若用子义，许子将不当笑我邪！ 
现代文：刘繇的同郡人太史慈这时从东莱来看望刘繇，正赶上孙策进攻曲阿。有人劝刘繇可任用太史慈为大将，刘繇说： 我如果任用太史慈，许劭不会笑话我吗！ 
English: At that time, Liu Yao's compatriot, Taishi Ci, came from Donglai to visit Liu Yao, who was catching up with Sun Ce's offensive. Someone advised Liu Yao to appoint Taishi Ci as general, Liu Yao said: If I appoint Taishi Ci, won't Xu Yao laugh at me!

古文：但使慈侦视轻重。
现代文：他只派太史慈去侦察敌军动静。
English: He only sent Taishi Ci to reconnoiter Sun Ce's troop situation.

古文：时独与一骑卒遇策于神亭，策从骑十三，皆坚旧将辽西韩当、零陵黄盖辈也。
现代文：有一次，太史慈只带一个骑兵外出，在神亭与孙策突然相遇，当时跟随孙策的有十三名骑士，都是辽西人韩当、零陵人黄盖等当年追随孙坚的旧将。
English: Once, Taishi Ci went out with only one cavalryman and suddenly met Sun Ce in the shrine. At that time, there were thirteen knights following Sun Ce, all of whom were veterans who had followed Sun Jian that year, such as Han Tang from West Liaoning and Huang Gai from Luling.

古文：慈便前斗，正与策对，策刺慈马，而揽得慈项上手戟，慈亦得策兜鍪。
现代文：太史慈便向前出战，正与孙策相对，孙策一枪刺中太史慈的马，夺得太史慈脖子后面插的手戟，而太史慈也夺得孙策的头盔。
English: Taishi Ci then went forward to fight, facing Sun Ce. Sun Ce stabbed Taishi Ci's horse with a single shot, taking the handcuffs from the back of Taishi Ci's neck, while Taishi Ci also took Sun Ce's helmet.

古文：会两家兵骑并各来赴，于是解散。
现代文：正在此时，两家的骑兵各自同时赶来，于是双方散开。
English: Just at this time, the cavalry of the two sides arrived at the same time, so the two sides dispersed.

古文：繇与策战，兵败，走丹徒。
现代文：刘繇与孙策交战，兵败，逃往丹徒。
English: Liu Bei fought with Sun Ce, was defeated, and fled to Dantu.

古文：策入曲阿，劳赐将士，发恩布令，告谕诸县： 其刘繇、笮融等故乡部曲来降首者，一无所问；乐从军者，一身行，复除门户；不乐者不强。 
现代文：孙策进入曲阿，慰劳赏赐将士，发布宽大命令，通知各县： 凡是刘繇、笮融等人的乡亲故友和部下，前来自首归降的，一概不咎既往。愿意去当兵的，一家只出一人，免除全家的赋役负担；不愿再当兵的，也不勉强。 
English: Sun Ce entered Qu'ao, consoled and rewarded the soldiers, issued a lenient order, and informed the counties: All the hometown relatives, old friends and subordinates of Liu Xuan, Xun Rong and others, who were the first to surrender, will not be blamed for the past. If you are willing to go to the army, only one person from a family will be exempted from the burden of the whole family; if you do not want to be a soldier again, you will not be forced.

古文：旬日之间，四面云集，得见兵二万馀人，马千馀匹，威震江东。
现代文：不过十天，应募者从四面涌来，得到二万余名兵士，一千余匹战马。孙策的声威震动江东。
English: However, within ten days, applicants flooded in from all over, receiving more than twenty thousand soldiers and more than a thousand war horses. Sun Ce's prestige shook the East River.

古文：丙辰，袁术表策行殄寇将军。
现代文：丙辰，袁术上表推荐孙策代理殄寇将军。
English: Xing Chen and Yuan Shuxu recommended Sun Ce to be the acting general of the Kuomintang.

古文：策将吕范言于策曰： 今将军事业日大，士众日盛，而纲纪犹有不整者，范愿暂领都督，佐将军部分之。 
现代文：孙策的部将吕范对孙策说： 如今，将军事业日益兴盛，部下将士越来越多，但军中纪律还有不完备的地方，我愿意暂时担任都督，帮助将军进行治理。 
English: Lu Fan, Sun Tse's subordinate, said to Sun Tse: Nowadays, the general's military career is increasingly prosperous, and his subordinates are more and more soldiers. However, there are still imperfections in military discipline. I am willing to temporarily serve as the governor and help the general to govern.

古文：策曰： 子衡既士大夫，加手下已有大众，立功于外，岂宜复屈小职，知军中细事乎！ 
现代文：孙策说： 子衡你既然是士大夫，手下又统率重兵，在外立下军功，难道应再让你屈居这种小官职，管理军中的细小事情吗？ 
English: Sun Ce said: Zi Heng, since you are a senior officer, and your subordinates command heavy troops, and you have made military achievements in the outside world, should you be relegated to such a minor official position to manage the small things in the army?

古文：范曰： 不然。今舍本土而托将军者，非为妻子也，欲济世务也。
现代文：吕范说： 不然，我如今舍弃故乡来追随将军，不是为了妻子儿女，而是为了搞好世间的政务。
English: Lu Fan said, "Otherwise, I am now abandoning my hometown to follow the general, not for the sake of my wife and children, but in order to do well in the world's political affairs."

古文：譬犹同舟涉海，一事不牢，即俱受其败。
现代文：譬如共同乘一条船去飘洋过海，一件事不牢靠，就使大家全都受害。
English: For example, if we take a boat together to cross the ocean, if one thing is not reliable, we will all suffer.

古文：此亦范计，非但将军也。 策笑，无以答。
现代文：我这样作，也是为我自己打算，不仅是为将军。 孙策笑了笑，无法回答。
English: I planned to do this for myself, not just for the general.Sun Ce smiled, unable to answer.

古文：范出，便释傕，著袴褶，执鞭诣阁下启事，自称领都督，策乃授传，委以众事。
现代文：吕范出来后，就脱去单衣，换上便于骑马的军服，手执鞭子，到孙策办事的房前报告，自称兼任都督，于是孙策就授给他符传，委任所应主管的各项工作。
English: After Lv Fan came out, he took off his singlet, put on a military uniform that was easy to ride, held a whip in his hand, reported to Sun Ce's office, and claimed to be the governor of the capital. Sun Ce then awarded him the title of Fu Zhen and appointed him to be in charge of various tasks.

古文：由是军中肃睦，威禁大行。
现代文：自此之后，营中气氛严肃和睦，军纪严明，禁令得到彻底贯彻。
English: Since then, the atmosphere in the camp has been serious and harmonious, military discipline has been strict, and the ban has been thoroughly implemented.

古文：策以张纮为正议校尉，彭城张昭为长史，常令一人居守，一人从征讨，及广陵秦松、陈端等亦参与谋谟。
现代文：孙策委任张为正议校尉，彭城人张昭为长史，经常让他们一个人留守，一个人跟随自己出征。广陵人秦松、陈端等也参预决策。
English: Sun Ce appointed Zhang as the principal lieutenant, and Zhang Zhao from Pengcheng as the senior lieutenant. He often left them alone and sent one person to accompany him. Qin Song and Chen Du, both from Guangling, also participated in the decision-making.

古文：策待昭以师友之礼，文武之事，一以委昭。
现代文：孙策以老师和朋友的礼节对待张昭，行政与军务大事，全都委托他来处理。
English: Sun Ce treated Zhang Zhao with the etiquette of a teacher and friend, and entrusted him to handle all administrative and military affairs.

古文：昭每得北方士大夫书疏，专归美于昭，策闻之，欢笑曰： 昔管子相齐，一则仲父，二则仲父，而桓公为霸者宗。
现代文：张昭经常收到北方士大夫的书信，信中把江东地区的政绩都归功于张昭。孙策知道后，高兴地说： 从前管仲在齐国为相，把诸事都交给他作主，而齐桓公终于成为五霸之首。
English: Zhang Zhao often received letters from officials in the north, in which they attributed the political achievements in the east of the Yangtze River to Zhang Zhao. After learning this, Sun Ce was pleased to say: In the past, Guan Zhong was the ruler of Qi, and he was in charge of everything, but Qi Huan finally became the head of the Five Dynasties.

古文：今子布贤，我能用之，其功名独不在我乎！ 
现代文：如今，张昭为人贤明，我能任用他，他的功名难道不属于我吗！ 
English: Now that Zibuxian is able, I can reuse it. Isn't his fame all mine?

古文：袁术以从弟胤为丹杨太守。周尚、周瑜皆还寿春。
现代文：袁术委任堂弟袁胤为丹阳郡太守，周尚与周瑜都回到寿春。
English: Yuan Shou appointed his cousin Yuan Yin as the governor of Danyang County, and Zhou Shang and Zhou Yu both returned to Shuchun.

古文：刘繇自丹徒将奔会稽，许邵曰： 会稽富实，策之所贪，且穷在海隅，不可往也。
现代文：刘繇想从丹徒逃到会稽郡，许劭对他说： 会稽郡殷实富裕，正是孙策所贪图的，而且该郡又远在海边，你不能去那里。
English: Liu Yao wanted to escape from Dantu to Heji County, and Xu Yao said to him: Heji County is very rich, which is what Sun Ce coveted, and the county is far from the sea, so you can't go there.

古文：不如豫章，北达豫壤，西接荆州；若收合吏民，遣使贡献，与曹兗州相闻，虽有袁公路隔在其间，其人豺狼，不能久也。
现代文：还不如到豫章郡，那里北连豫州，西接荆州，如果能把官员与百姓安顿好，派使者到朝廷去进贡，与占据兖州的曹操取得联系，尽管现在袁术隔断了豫章与中原的联系，但像他这样豺狼之辈不会长久。
English: It would be better to go to Yuzhang County, which is connected to Yuzhang in the north and Jingzhou in the west. If the officials and the people can be settled well, they can send an envoy to the imperial court to pay tribute and get in touch with Cao Cao, who occupies Zhangzhou. Although Yuan Shou has now severed the connection between Yuzhang and the Central Plains, a wolf like him will not last long.

古文：足下受王命，孟德、景升必相救济。 
现代文：您是朝廷正式任命的刺史，曹操与刘表必定会予以援助。 
English: You are officially appointed by the imperial court, Cao Cao and Liu Biao will certainly provide assistance.

古文：繇从之。
现代文：刘繇听从了他的劝告。
English: Liu Ye heeded his advice.

古文：初，陶谦以笮融为下邳相，使督广陵、下邳、彭城粮运。
现代文：起初，徐州牧陶谦委任笮融为下邳国相，派他负责监督广陵、下邳、彭城的粮食运输。
English: At first, Xuzhou Mu Taoqian appointed Yu Rong as the minister of the State of Hebei, and sent him to be responsible for supervising the grain transportation of Guangling, Hebei and Pengcheng.

古文：融遂断三郡委输以自入，大起浮屠祠，课人读佛经，招致旁郡好佛者至五千馀户。
现代文：笮融就把这三个郡国应交的粮食都据为己有，大肆兴建佛教寺庙，命令百姓诵读佛经，又招引邻郡的佛教徒五千余户迁徒到下邳国来。
English: Xun Rong took possession of all the grain that should have been paid by the three counties, built Buddhist temples, ordered the people to recite Buddhist scriptures, and attracted more than 5,000 Buddhist families from neighboring counties to migrate to the country.

古文：每浴佛，辄多设饮食，布席于路，经数十里，费以巨亿计。
现代文：每逢释迦牟尼生日，举办 浴佛会 时，都在路边摆设宴席，连绵不断，长达数十里，耗费钱物数以亿计。
English: Every Shakyamuni's birthday, when the Buddhist bathing ceremony is held, banquets are set up on the roadside, continuously, for dozens of miles, costing hundreds of millions of money.

古文：及曹操击破陶谦，徐土不安，融乃将男女万口走广陵，广陵太守赵昱待以宾礼。
现代文：到曹操击败陶谦，徐州局势动荡时，笮融便率领男女信徒万余人退到广陵。广陵郡太守赵昱用宾客之礼接待笮融。
English: When Cao Cao defeated Tao Qian and the situation in Xuzhou was in turmoil, Yu Rong led more than 10,000 male and female believers to retreat to Guangling. Zhao Yu, the governor of Guangling County, received Yu Rong as a guest.

古文：先是彭城相薛礼为陶谦所逼，屯秣陵，融利广陵资货，遂乘酒酣杀昱，放兵大掠，因过江依礼，既而复杀之。
现代文：在这以前，彭城国相薛礼受到陶谦军队的逼迫，率领部下迁徒到秣陵。而笮融贪图广陵富庶，就在一次宴席上，乘酒酣之机杀死了赵昱，纵容部下大肆抢掠。又乘势渡过长江到秣陵去投靠薛礼。
English: Prior to this, Pengcheng's statesman Xue Li was persecuted by Tao Qian's army and led his subordinates to relocate to Fuling. However, Zhaoyun, who was greedy for wealth, killed Zhao Qian at a banquet and indulged his subordinates in plundering. He also took advantage of the situation to cross the Yangtze River to Fuling to rely on Xue Li.

古文：刘繇使豫章太守硃皓攻袁术所用太守诸葛玄，玄退保西城。
现代文：接着又杀死了薛礼。刘繇派豫章郡太守朱皓进攻袁术委任的豫章郡太守诸葛玄，诸葛玄退守西城。
English: Liu Bei sent Zhu Xi, the governor of Yuzhang County, to attack Zhu Gexuan, the governor of Yuzhang County appointed by Yuan Shou. Zhu Gexuan retreated to the west of the city.

古文：及繇溯江西上，驻于彭泽，使融助皓攻玄。
现代文：及至刘繇沿江西上，驻军彭泽，便派笮融去帮助朱皓进攻诸葛玄。
English: When Liu Bei advanced along the west bank of the Yangtze River and garrisoned troops in Pengze, he sent Gao Rong to help Zhu Xi attack Zhuge Xuan.

古文：许邵谓繇曰： 笮融出军，不顾名义者也。硃文明喜推诚以信人，宜使密防之。 
现代文：许劭对刘繇说： 笮融出动军队，不讲名节，不顾信义，朱皓喜欢以诚待人，要让朱皓严密提防笮融。 
English: Xu Yao said to Liu Yao: "Zhu Rong is mobilizing the army. He doesn't care about famous festivals and doesn't care about loyalty. Zhu Yao likes to treat people with sincerity. Zhu Yao should be on his guard against him."

古文：融到，果诈杀皓，代领郡事。
现代文：笮融到达后，果然用诡计杀死朱皓，接管了豫章郡事务。
English: After Xuan Rong arrived, he indeed killed Zhu Xi with a trick and took over the affairs of Yuzhang County.

古文：繇进讨融，融败走，入山，为民所杀。
现代文：刘繇进军讨伐笮融，笮融战败，逃入深山，为当地百姓杀死。
English: Liu Bei marched to fight against Yan Rong, defeated by Yan Rong, fled into the mountains, and killed for the local people.

古文：诏以前太傅掾华歆为豫章太守。
现代文：朝廷下诏，任命前太傅掾华歆为豫章郡太守。
English: The imperial court issued a decree, appointing the former Taifu, Yu Huaqi, as the governor of Yuzhang County.

古文：丹杨都尉硃治逐吴郡太守许贡而据其郡，贡南依山贼严白虎。
现代文：丹阳郡都尉朱治赶走吴郡太守许贡，占领吴郡。许贡南逃，投靠山贼首领严白虎。
English: Danyang County Captain Zhu Zhi drove away Wu County Governor Xu Gong and occupied Wu County. Xu Gong fled south and sided with the bandit leader Yan Baihu.

古文：张超在雍丘，曹操围之急，韩曰： 惟臧洪当来救吾。 
现代文：张超固守雍丘，曹操对他发动猛烈的围攻，张超说： 只有臧洪会来救我。 
English: Zhang Chao firmly defended Yongqiu, Cao Cao launched a fierce siege against him, Zhang Chao said: Only He Hong will come to save me.

古文：众曰： 袁、曹方睦，洪为袁所表用，必不败好以招祸。 
现代文：部下众人都说： 袁绍与曹操目前关系亲密，臧洪是袁绍推荐委任的官员，他必定不会破坏袁、曹的和睦而招惹大祸。 
English: All of his subordinates said: Yuan Shao and Cao Cao currently have a close relationship, and Yan Hong is an official recommended by Yuan Shao. He will certainly not disrupt the harmony between Yuan and Cao and cause a catastrophe.

古文：超曰： 子源天下义士，终不背本；但恐见制强力，不相及耳。 
现代文：张超说： 臧洪是天下知名的义士，最终不会背弃旧恩，只怕他被袁绍的强大力量控制，不能及时赶来。 
English: Zhang Chao said: Yan Hong is a world-renowned righteous man, and he will not betray the old grace in the end. He is afraid that he will be controlled by Yuan Shao's powerful forces and will not be able to arrive in time.

古文：洪时为东郡太守，徒跣号泣，从绍请兵，将赴其难，绍不与；请自率所领以行，亦不许。
现代文：臧洪当时担任东郡太守，他赤着双脚，大声痛哭着请求袁绍发兵，要去解救张超急难，袁绍不肯发兵。臧洪又请求自己率领东郡的人马去救摇，袁绍也不允许。
English: Yan Hong was the governor of Dong County at that time. He was barefoot, crying loudly and begging Yuan Shao to send troops to rescue Zhang Chao. Yuan Shao refused to send troops. Yan Hong also asked himself to lead the people of Dong County to rescue Zhang Chao. Yuan Shao did not allow it.

古文：雍丘遂溃，张超自杀，操夷其三族。
现代文：臧洪因此怨恨袁绍，与袁绍断绝一切关系。
English: Therefore, Yan Hong resented Yuan Shao and severed all relations with Yuan Shao.

古文：洪由是怨绍，绝不与通。
现代文：袁绍发兵包围东郡，攻打一年多，仍未攻克。
English: Because of this, Yan Hong harbored a grudge against Yuan Shao and cut off all contacts with him.

古文：绍兴兵围之，历年不下。
现代文：袁绍命令与臧洪同县的陈琳写信给臧洪，为他分析利害。
English: Yuan Shao sent troops to besiege him, but they did not achieve victory for several years.

古文：绍令洪邑人陈琳以书喻之，洪复书曰： 仆小人也，本乏志用；中因行役，蒙主人倾盖，恩深分厚，遂窃大州，宁乐今日自还接刃乎！
现代文：臧洪复信说： 我是一个渺小的人，本无大志。在仁途中，得到袁绍的赏识，受恩深厚，被委以重任，难道我愿意像今天这样干戈相向吗？
English: Zhai Hong replied, "I am a small person, with no great ambition. On the path of benevolence, I was appreciated by Yuan Shao, received deep grace, and was entrusted with important tasks. Am I willing to fight like this today?

古文：当受任之初，自谓究竟大事，共尊王室。
现代文：当初我受任之时，自以为能完成大事，共尊王室。
English: When I accepted the mission to preside over the alliance, I vowed to end the current turmoil in the world and honor the royal family.

古文：岂悟本州被侵，郡将遘厄，请师见拒，辞行被拘，使洪故君遂至沦灭，区区微节，无所获申，岂得复全交友之道，重亏忠孝之名乎！
现代文：谁知道当我的本州受到攻击。郡长官陷于危难之时，我请求发兵，却遭到拒绝；想单独出兵，又在辞行时被扣下，致使我的故主全家被害。我对故主的节义，无法表达，难道还能顾全你我的朋友交谊，再去损害忠孝的名声吗！
English: Who knows, when my home state was under attack, when the county sheriff was in danger, I asked to send troops, but was refused; I wanted to send troops alone, but was detained at the time of resignation, resulting in the death of my late master's entire family. I cannot express my gratitude to my late master, can I take care of your friendship with my friends, and then damage the reputation of loyalty and filial piety!

古文：斯所以忍悲挥戈，收泪告绝。
现代文：因此我强忍悲痛，挥戈而起，拭去眼泪，毅然决裂。
English: Therefore, I forcibly endured the grief, waved my arms, wiped away my tears, and resolutely broke up.

古文：行矣孔璋，足下徼利于境外，臧洪投命于君亲；吾子托身于盟主，臧洪策名于长安；子谓余身死而名灭，仆亦笑子生而无闻焉！ 
现代文：别了，老朋友！你在境外谋求利益，我则为君亲效命；你托身投靠盟主袁绍，我则为朝廷尽心。你认为我将身死名灭，我也笑你虽生而无闻。 
English: Farewell, old friend! You seek profits abroad, while I work for your own life; you rely on your ally, Yuan Shao, while I devote myself to the imperial court. You think I will die in vain, I also laugh at you, although you are born and unheard of.

古文：绍见洪书，知无降意，增兵急攻。
现代文：袁绍见到臧洪的回信，知他没有投降的意思，就增兵猛攻。
English: Yuan Shao received a reply from Yao Hong, and knowing that he would not surrender, he increased his forces and intensified the siege of the city.

古文：城中粮谷已尽，外无强救，洪自度必不免，呼将吏士民谓曰： 袁氏无道，所图不轨，且不救洪郡将，洪于大义，不得不死。
现代文：城中粮食已尽，外面没有强大的救兵，臧洪自知不能幸免，就把官员、将士和百姓召集来，告诉他们： 袁绍无道，又图谋不轨，而且不去援救我本郡的长官，我出于君臣大义，不能不死。
English: The food in the city had run out, and there were no powerful rescuers outside. Yan Hong knew that he could not be spared, so he gathered the officials, soldiers and people and told them: Yuan Shao had no way out, he was plotting, and he was not going to rescue the governor of his own county. Out of the great righteousness of a prince and a minister, I could not help but die.

古文：念诸君无事空与此祸，可先城未败，将妻子出。 
现代文：我想到你们与此并不相干，却凭空卷入这场大祸，可在城未破前，带领你们的妻儿去逃命。 
English: And I remembered that you had nothing to do with it, but that you had taken part in this great evil in vain, and that you had taken your wives and your children and fled for your lives before the city was taken.

古文：皆垂泣曰： 明府与袁氏本无怨隙，今为本朝郡将之故，自致残困；吏民何忍当舍明府去也！ 
现代文：众人都流着泪说： 您与袁绍本来没有仇怨，如今只是为了本朝的旧长官，而自己找来灾难。我们怎能忍心抛下您去逃生！ 
English: Everyone shed tears and said, "You and Yuan Shao originally had no grudge against each other, but now you have brought disaster upon yourselves just for the sake of the old prefect of this dynasty. How can we bear to leave you behind to escape?"

古文：初尚掘鼠煮筋角，后无可复食者。
现代文：开始，城中还能挖到老鼠，并煮食皮革制品，后来就再没有可吃的东西了。
English: At the beginning, the soldiers and civilians in the city were still digging up mice and digging up tree roots to satisfy their hunger. Later, there was nothing to eat.

古文：主簿启内厨米三升，请稍以为饘粥，洪叹曰： 何能独甘此邪！ 
现代文：主簿告诉臧洪，内厨房只剩三升米，请主允许做一点稠粥。臧洪说： 我怎么能单独下咽呢！ 
English: The chief clerk told Zhai Hong that there was only three liters of rice left in the kitchen, so please allow me to make some thick porridge. Zhai Hong said: How can I swallow it alone!

古文：使作薄糜，遍班士众，又杀其爱妾以食将士。
现代文：便命人熬成稀粥，让所有的士兵共享。臧洪又杀死自己的爱妾，给将士食用。
English: He then ordered someone to boil it into thin gruel for all the soldiers to share. Su Hong also killed his beloved concubine and gave it to the soldiers to eat.

古文：将士咸流涕，无能仰视者。
现代文：将士们都泪流满面，不能抬头仰视。
English: The generals were in tears and did not dare to look up.

古文：男女七八千人，相枕而死，莫有离叛者。
现代文：城中有男女七八千人因饥饿而死，尸体相互枕藉，重叠堆积，但没有人背叛臧洪。
English: In the city, seven or eight thousand men and women died of starvation, and the bodies were piled on top of each other, but no one betrayed Sui Hong.

古文：城陷，生执洪。
现代文：城陷后，臧洪被生擒。
English: They broke through the city and captured Sui Hong alive.

古文：绍大会诸将见洪，谓曰： 臧洪，何相负若此！
现代文：袁绍召集诸将，审问臧洪说： 臧洪，你为什么这样背叛我！
English: Yuan Shao gathered all the generals and interrogated Gong Hong, saying: Gong Hong, why did you betray me like this!

古文：今日服未？ 
现代文：今天服了没有？ 
English: Now are you convinced or not?

古文：洪据地瞋目曰： 诸袁事洪，四世五公，可谓受恩。
现代文：臧洪两手撑着，坐在地上，瞪起眼睛说道： 你们袁家侍奉汉朝，四代有五个人出任三公，可以说是受到皇室的深恩。
English: Yan Hong sat on the ground with his hands propped up and his eyes wide open. He said, "You Yuan family have served the Han Dynasty. Five people in four generations have served as Three Sovereigns. You can say that you have been deeply favored by the royal family.

古文：今王室衰弱，无扶翼之意，欲因际会，希冀非望，多杀忠良以立奸威。
现代文：如今皇室势力衰弱，却没有辅佐之意，反而想乘机图谋不轨，靠多杀忠良来树立自己的威望。
English: Now that the Liu royal family is in decline, you not only have the intention of assisting, but also take advantage of the turmoil in the world to create unreasonable thoughts, kill many loyal subjects, and establish your own arrogance in the future.

古文：洪亲见呼张陈留为兄，则洪府君亦宜为弟，同共戮力，为国除害，奈何拥众观人屠灭！
现代文：我亲眼见到你称张邈为兄，那么我的故主、张邈弟弟张超也就是你的弟弟，大家应该齐心协力，为国除害，怎么能按兵不动，眼看着他被人杀害！
English: I saw with my own eyes that you called Zhang Ye an elder brother. Then my late master, Zhang Ye's younger brother Zhang Chao, is also your younger brother. Everyone should work together to eliminate harm to the country. How can you stand by and watch him being killed!

古文：惜洪力劣，不能推刃为天下报仇，何谓服乎！ 
现代文：我自恨力量薄弱，不能挥刀为天下人报仇，谈什么服不服。 
English: Unfortunately, my strength is weak, and I cannot personally take a sword and kill you to avenge the world. How can I submit?

古文：绍本爱洪，意欲令屈服，原之；见洪辞切，知终不为己用，乃杀之。
现代文：袁绍本来很喜欢臧洪，想要使他屈服后，再加宽怒。见他言词激烈，知道决不会再为自己效力，就下令杀死臧洪。
English: Yuan Shao had always cherished Sui Hong, and only wanted him to submit, then he would be able to forgive him, but when he saw that Sui Hong's words were fierce and earnest, so much so that he would not use them for himself, he killed him.

古文：洪邑人陈容少亲慕洪，时在绍坐，起谓绍曰： 将军举大事，欲为天下除暴，而先诛忠义，岂合天意！
现代文：臧洪的同县人陈容自小亲近敬慕臧洪，这时正好在座，站起来对袁绍说： 将军身负大任，要为天下除害，却先诛杀忠义之人，怎么能上合天意！
English: Yan Hong's fellow county resident Chen Rong, who had been close to and admired Yan Hong since childhood, happened to be present at the time, stood up and said to Yuan Shao: The general has a great responsibility to eliminate harm for the world, but how can he meet the will of heaven if he kills the loyal person first!

古文：臧洪发举为郡将，奈何杀之！
现代文：臧洪起兵是为了他的故主，为什么要杀他！ 
English: Yan Hong raised an army for the county general, how to kill him!

古文：绍惭，使人牵出，谓曰： 汝非臧洪俦，空复尔为！ 
现代文：袁绍心中惭愧，派人把陈容拉出去，对他说： 你不是臧洪那样的人，再讲这些话有什么用！ 
English: Yuan Shao felt ashamed and sent someone to pull Chen Rong out and said to him, "You are not a person like Sui Hong, what is the use of saying these words again!

古文：容顾曰： 仁义岂有常，蹈之则君子，背之则小人。
现代文：陈容回过头来说： 仁义并没有一定形式，遵循仁义就是君子，背弃仁义就是小人。
English: Looking back, Chen Rong said: Righteousness does not have a certain form. To follow righteousness is to be a gentleman, and to abandon righteousness is to be a villain.

古文：今日宁与臧洪同日而死，不与将军同日而生也！ 
现代文：今天我宁愿与臧洪同日而死，不愿与将军同日生！ 
English: Today, I would rather die on the same day as Yan Hong than be born on the same day as the general!

古文：遂复见杀。
现代文：于是陈容也被杀死。
English: He was killed as a result.

古文：在坐无不叹息，窃相谓曰： 如何一日杀二烈士！ 
现代文：在座的人无不叹息，私下互相议论说： 怎么能在一天之中杀死两位烈士！ 
English: Everyone present sighed and said to each other privately: How can two martyrs be killed in one day!

古文：公孙瓚既杀刘虞，尽有幽州之地，志气益盛，恃其才力，不恤百姓，记过忘善，睚眦必报。
现代文：公孙瓒杀死刘虞后，占有全部幽州，更加趾高气扬，倚仗自己的才干和武力，不体恤百姓。只记住别人的过失，却不记得别人的好处，连瞪他一眼的小事，也必定要报复。
English: After Gongsun Yao killed Liu Yu, he took over all of Yuzhou and became even more arrogant. He relied on his own talent and strength and had no compassion for the people. He only remembered the faults of others, but did not remember the benefits of others. Even if he glanced at a trifle, he was bound to take revenge.

古文：衣冠善士，名在其右者，必以法害之；有材秀者，必抑困使在穷苦之地。
现代文：对士大夫名望在他之上的，一定假借法律来加以陷害；对有才能的人，一定要想法压抑，把对方置于穷因之地。
English: For a scholar-doctor whose reputation is higher than his, the law must be used to frame him; for a talented person, he must suppress his thoughts and put the other party in a desperate situation.

古文：或问其故，瓚曰： 衣冠皆自以职分当贵，不谢人惠。 
现代文：有人问公孙瓒这样作的原因，公孙瓒说： 士大夫们全都自认为他们应该富贵，给他们富贵，他们也不会感谢。 
English: When asked why he did this, Gongsun Rong said, "All the scholars and officials think they should be rich. If you give them wealth, they won't thank you.

古文：故所宠爱，类多商贩、庸儿，与为兄弟，或结婚姻；所在侵暴，百姓怨之。
现代文：所以公孙瓒所宠信的都是商贩一类的庸人，与这些人结为兄弟，或者互通婚姻。这些人到处侵扰欺人，百姓怨恨他们。
English: Therefore, Gongsun Yao's favorites were all philistines such as merchants, and he became brothers with these people, or intermarried with them. These people harassed and deceived people everywhere, and the people resented them.

古文：刘虞从事渔阳鲜于辅等，合率州兵欲共报仇，以燕国阎柔素有恩信，推为乌桓司马。
现代文：已故幽州牧刘虞的从事、渔阳人鲜于辅等人，集结率领州中的军队，要一同为刘虞报仇。燕国人阎柔因平素威信较高，被推举为乌桓司马。
English: The late Yuzhou herdsman Liu Yu was engaged in fishing, and the Yang people were fewer than the auxiliary people. They gathered and led the army in the leading state to take revenge for Liu Yu. Yan Rui, a native of Yan Guo, was elected as Wuhuan Sima because of his high prestige.

古文：柔招诱胡、汉数万人，与瓚所置渔阳太守邹丹战于潞北，斩丹等四千馀级。
现代文：阎柔召引胡人、汉人，有数万之多，与公孙瓒委任的渔阳郡太守邹丹在潞县以北大战，阎柔获胜，斩杀邹丹及其部下四千余人。
English: Yan Rong summoned Hu people and Han people, there were tens of thousands of them, and fought with the governor of Yuyang County, Shidan, who was appointed by Gongsun Rong, in the north of Shixian County. Yan Rong won and killed Shidan and more than four thousand of his subordinates.

古文：乌桓峭王亦率种人及鲜卑七千馀骑，随辅南迎虞子和与袁绍将麹义，合兵十万共攻瓚，破瓚于鲍丘，斩首二万馀级。
现代文：乌桓峭王也率领乌桓人及鲜卑人，共七千余骑兵，随鲜于辅南下迎接刘虞的儿子刘和，与袁绍部将义联合，共计十万兵马，进攻公孙瓒。在鲍丘打败公孙瓒，斩杀两万余人。
English: King Wu Huanqiao also led the Wu Huan people and the Xianbei people, a total of more than seven thousand cavalry, followed the Xian Yu Fu to the south to meet Liu Yu's son Liu He, and combined with Yuan Shao Bu to attack Gongsun Yao with a total of one hundred thousand soldiers and horses. In Baoqiu, he defeated Gongsun Yao and killed more than twenty thousand people.

古文：于是代郡、广阳、上谷、右北平各杀瓚所置长吏，复与鲜于辅、刘和兵合，瓚军屡败。
现代文：于是，代郡、广阳郡、上谷郡与右北平郡纷纷起兵，杀死公孙瓒所委任的官员，又与鲜于辅、刘和的队伍会师。
English: As a result, Dai County, Guangyang County, Shanggu County and Right Beiping County raised an army one after another, killed the officials appointed by Gongsun Yu, and joined forces with the teams of Sun Yu Fu and Liu He.

古文：先是有童谣曰： 燕南垂，赵北际，中央不合大如砺，唯有此中可避世。 
现代文：公孙瓒军队屡战屡败。在此之前，有童谣说： 燕国南疆，赵国北界，中央不合，大如砺石，只有此中，可以避世。 
English: Prior to this, there was a nursery rhyme that said: Yan Guo Nanjiang, Zhao Guo Bei Jie, the center is out of alignment, as big as flint, only in this way can you escape from the world.

古文：瓚自谓易地当之，遂徙镇易，为围堑十重，于堑里筑京，皆高五六丈，为楼其上；中堑为京，特高十丈，自居焉。
现代文：公孙瓒自认为童谣所说的地方是指易县，就把自己的大本营迁到那里，在周围挖掘了十道堑壕，在堑壕内修筑许多土丘，每座土丘都有五六丈高，在上面建起高楼。在中央有一个最高的土山，达到十丈，供公孙瓒自己居住。
English: Gongsun Yao thought that the place mentioned in the nursery rhyme was Yi County, so he moved his base camp there, dug ten trenches around it, and built many mounds in the trenches. Each mound was five or six meters high, and high-rises were built on top of them. In the center, there was a highest mound, reaching ten meters, for Gongsun Yao to live in.

古文：以铁为门，斥去左右，男人七岁以上不得入门，专与姬妾居。
现代文：以铁为门，左右侍卫全被隔在门外，七岁以上的男子不许入内，只与姬妾同住。
English: The door is made of iron, and the guards on the left and right are all separated outside the door. Men over the age of seven are not allowed to enter, and they can only live with their concubines.

古文：其文簿、书记皆汲而上之。
现代文：文书、报告等都用绳子吊上城。
English: Documents, reports, etc. are hung up on the city with a rope.

古文：令妇人习为大声，使闻数百步，以传宣教令。
现代文：他又命令妇女练习放大嗓门，使声音能传到数百步，以便向其他城楼传达命令。
English: He also ordered the women to practice amplifying their voices to hundreds of paces so they could relay orders to other towers.

古文：疏远宾客，无所亲信，谋臣猛将，稍稍乖散。
现代文：公孙瓒于是疏远宾客，没有亲信；部下的谋士与猛将逐渐离散。
English: As a result, Gongsun Yao alienated his guests and had no close friends; his subordinates, the strategists and the fierce generals, gradually dispersed.

古文：自此之后，希复攻战。
现代文：而且从此以后，公孙瓒也很少再出外作战。
English: Since then, it has rarely gone to war.

古文：或问其故，瓚曰： 我昔驱畔胡于塞表，扫黄巾于孟津，当此之时，谓天下指麾可定。
现代文：有人问起原因，公孙瓒说： 我从前在塞外驱逐胡人部落，在孟津扫荡黄巾叛军，那时，自认为可以凭借自己的能力，平定天下叛乱。
English: When asked about the reason, Gongsun Yao said: I used to expel the Hu tribe outside of Tibet and sweep the Yellow Turban rebels in Mengjin. At that time, I thought that I could use my ability to quell the rebellion around the world.

古文：至于今日，兵革方始，观此，非我所决，不如休兵力耕，以救凶年。
现代文：但到了今天，战乱才不过刚刚开始，看起来，大局并非能够由我决定。因此，不如让士兵们养精蓄锐，努力耕作，以渡过荒年。
English: But today, the war has only just begun, and it seems that the overall situation cannot be decided by me. Therefore, it is better to let the soldiers keep their energy and work hard to survive the lean years.

古文：兵法，百楼不攻。
现代文：兵法上讲：百楼不攻。
English: According to the laws of war, do not attack a place where there is a high watchtower.

古文：今吾诸营楼橹数十重，积谷三百万斛。食尽此谷，足以待天下之事矣。 
现代文：如今，我的军队分驻各楼，有深堑高楼数十重，存粮食三百万斛，吃尽这些粮食，足可以看到天下局势的变化了。 
English: Today, my army is stationed in various buildings, there are dozens of high-rise buildings with deep moats, and there are three million mu of grain stored. After eating all this grain, we can see the changes in the situation in the world.

古文：南单于于扶罗死，弟呼厨泉立，居于平阳。
现代文：南匈奴单于於扶罗去世，他弟弟呼厨泉继位，率部驻在平阳。
English: Nan Xun Nuan died in Guro, and was succeeded by his younger brother, Hukouquan, who was stationed in Pingyang.

