古文：曹操在兖州，引兵东击陶谦于徐，而陈宫潜迎吕布为兖牧，郡县皆叛，赖程昱、荀彧之力，全东阿、鄄、范三城以待操。
现代文：曹操率部在兖州驻扎的时候，曾经领兵往东到徐州攻打陶谦，可是陈宫暗地里迎来吕布作了兖州的地方长官，所统辖的郡县也都背叛了曹操，依靠程显、荀彧的力量，才保全了东阿、鄄城、范县三座县城等待曹操。
English: When Cao Cao and his troops were stationed in Bozhou, Cao Cao once led his troops eastward to Xuzhou to attack Tao Qian. However, Chen Gong secretly welcomed Lv Bu as the local governor of Bozhou. The counties under his jurisdiction also betrayed Cao Cao. It was only by relying on the strength of Cheng Xian and Yao that he was able to keep the three county towns of Dong'a, Bozhou and Fan County waiting for Cao Cao.

古文：操还，执昱手曰： 微子之力，吾无所归矣。 
现代文：曹操回来之后，双手捧定程昱的手，说： 要是没有您出力，找们就没有地方去了！ 
English: After Cao Cao came back, he put his hands on Cheng Yao's hands and said, "If it weren't for your efforts, we wouldn't have a place to go!"

古文：表为东平相。
现代文：上表推荐他为东平国之相。
English: The table above recommends him as the top official of Dongping Province.

古文：唐庄宗与梁人相持于河上，梁将王檀乘虚袭晋阳。
现代文：唐庄宗和梁朝军队在黄河边上互相争战，打得难分难解，梁朝大将王檀乘虚袭击晋阳。
English: Tang Zhuangzong and Liang's army fought each other on the edge of the Yellow River, and the battle was hard to separate. Liang's general Wang Dan attacked Jinyang.

古文：城中无备，几陷者数四，赖安金全帅子弟击却之于内，石君立引昭义兵破之于外，晋阳获全。
现代文：城中没有准备，有多次几乎失陷，全仗着安金全率领子弟们在城内击退敌兵、石君立率领昭义节度使派来的军队在城外击破敌人，晋阳城才得以保全。
English: There was no preparation in the city, and it almost fell several times. It was thanks to the efforts of An Jinquan and his sons to repel the enemy soldiers inside the city, and Shi Junli and his son Zhao Yi Jiedu to defeat the enemy outside the city, that the city of Jinyang was preserved.

古文：而庄宗以策非已出，金全等赏皆不行。
现代文：可是唐庄宗因为计策不是自己制订的，对安金全等人的奖赏都没有施行。
English: However, because Tang Zhuozong did not formulate the strategy himself, the reward was not implemented for Anjin Quan and others.

古文：操终有天下，庄宗虽能灭梁，旋踵残覆亡，考其行事，概可睹矣。
现代文：曹操终于统一了天下，庄宗尽管所能灭掉梁朝，可是转眼灭亡，考查他们平时的行为，就可大概看出端倪了。
English: Cao Cao finally unified the world. Although Zhuang Zong was able to destroy the Liang Dynasty, he died in the blink of an eye. By examining their usual behavior, we can get a general idea.

