古文：张说以大驾东巡，恐突厥乘间入寇，议加兵备边，召兵部郎中裴光庭谋之。
现代文：原文唐玄宗开元十三年，宰相张说考虑到天子大驾东去泰山封禅，恐怕突厥乘机侵犯边境，主张加派军队守备边境，他找来兵部郎中裴光庭一起商量这件事情。
English: In the thirteenth year of the reign of Emperor Tang Xuan Zong, Prime Minister Zhang said that considering the fact that Emperor Taizi had traveled east to Mount Tai for a retreat, he feared that the Turks would take advantage of the opportunity to violate the border and advocated sending more troops to guard the border. He called in the vice-minister of the military, Pei Guangting, to discuss the matter.

古文：光庭曰： 封禅，告成功也，今将升中于天而戎狄是惧，非所以昭盛德也。 
现代文：裴光庭说： 天子封禅，是向天下表明治国的成功。现在将要宣告成功的时候却害怕突厥的入侵，这就显示不出大唐的强盛和功德了。 
English: Pei Guangting said: The enthronement of the Son of Heaven is to show the world the success of governing the country. Now, when success is to be announced, they are afraid of the Turkish invasion, which does not show the strength and merits of the Great Tang Dynasty.

古文：说曰： 如之何？ 
现代文：张说问道： 那应该怎么办呢？ 
English: Zhang said, "Then what should we do?"

古文：光庭曰： 四夷之中，突厥为大。比屡求和亲，而朝廷羁縻未决许也。
现代文：裴光庭答道： 四方的夷国之中，突厥是个大国，他们屡次要求与朝廷和亲，可是朝廷一直犹豫不决没答应。
English: Pei Guangting replied, "Among the four barbarian countries, Turkey is a big country. They have repeatedly requested to make peace with the imperial court, but the imperial court has been hesitant to agree.

古文：今遣一使，征其大臣从封泰山，彼必欣然承命。
现代文：现在派遣一名使者，征求突厥国派一名大臣，随从天子封禅泰山，他们必定欣然从命。
English: Now send an envoy to solicit the Turkic countries to send a minister to follow the heavenly son, Fuzan Taishan, and they will surely gladly comply with the order.

古文：突厥来，则戎狄君长无不皆来，可以偃旗卧鼓，高枕有余矣。 
现代文：只要突厥来人，那么其他外族的君长就没有不来的了。这样，边境上可以偃旗息鼓，高枕无忧了！ 
English: As long as the Turks come, then other foreign monarchs will not fail to come. In this way, the border can be quiet, and there is no need to worry!

古文：说曰： 善！
现代文：张说道： 对！
English: Zhang said: That's right!

古文：吾所不及。 
现代文：你的见解是我所不及的。 
English: Your insight is second to none.

古文：即奏行之。
现代文：张说立即向天子奏明，按裴光庭的建议执行，派遣使者知会突厥。
English: Zhang said that he would immediately report to the heavenly son and, according to Pei Guangting's suggestion, send an envoy to learn about the Turks.

古文：遣使谕突厥，突厥乃遣大臣阿史德颉利发入贡，因扈从东巡。
现代文：突厥于是派遣大臣阿史德颉利发入朝进贡，接着随从天子去泰山封禅。
English: The Turks then sent their minister, Ashdod, to pay tribute to the dynasty, and then followed the emperor to Mount Taishan to meditate.

