古文：崔祐甫，字贻孙，太子宾客孝公沔之子也。
现代文：崔讳甫的字叫贻孙，是太子宾客、孝公崔沔的儿子。
English: Cui Zhanfu's character is called the grandson, the son of the prince's guest, the dutiful Cui Yao.

古文：世以礼法为闻家。
现代文：他家世代以守礼制有名。
English: His family has been famous for its etiquette for generations.

古文：第进士，调寿安尉。
现代文：他考中了进士，被封为寿安县县尉。
English: He passed the entrance examination and was awarded the title of Shouan County Lieutenant.

古文：安禄山陷洛阳，祐甫冒矢石入私庙，负木主以逃。
现代文：安禄山攻陷了洛阳，崔讳甫冒着危险到家祠里，把神主背着逃了出来。
English: Mount Anlu captured Luoyang, and Cui Shufu risked his life to go to his family's ancestral shrine and escape with the deity on his back.

古文：自起居舍人累迁中书舍人。
现代文：从起居舍人多次升官后任中书舍人。
English: After being promoted several times from the position of a housekeeper, he was appointed as a middle school teacher.

古文：性刚直，遇事不回。
现代文：他性格刚强梗直，遇事不肯回头。
English: He has a strong and upright personality, and is not willing to back down in the face of adversity.

古文：时侍郎阙，祐甫摄省事，数与宰相常衮争议不平。
现代文：当时中书侍郎空缺，崔讳甫代管中书省事务，多次和宰相常衮争议不妥协。
English: At that time, the position of the Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China was vacant, and Cui Yanfu was in charge of the affairs of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of the People's Republic of China.

古文：衮怒，使知吏部选，每拟官，衮辄驳异，祐甫不为下。
现代文：常衮发怒了，派他分管吏部选派官员，每次拟定选派官员，常衮就驳斥打回去，崔讳甫不肯低头。
English: Changyu got angry and sent him to be in charge of selecting officials for the cadre department. Each time he proposed to select officials, Changyu refuted and hit back, and Cui Shufu refused to bow down.

古文：会硃泚军中猫鼠同乳，表其瑞，诏示衮，衮率群臣贺，祐甫独曰： 可吊不可贺。 
现代文：遇到朱氵此军中发现有猫给小老鼠喂奶，上表称吉兆，有诏给常衮看，常衮率百官道贺。崔讳甫却说： 这事应警觉而不应祝贺。 
English: When he met Zhu Xi, he found that there was a cat feeding milk to a little mouse in the army. The table above said that it was a good omen. There was an edict for Chang Xi to see, and Chang Xi was congratulated by hundreds of officials. However, Cui Yanfu said: This matter should be alerted but not congratulated.

古文：诏使问状，对曰： 臣闻《礼》： 迎猫，为其食田鼠。 
现代文：送诏书的问他原因，他说： 我看到《礼记》上说： 迎猫神，因为猫能吃田鼠。 
English: When asked why he sent the edict, he said: "I read in the Book of Rites that it says: Welcome the cat god, because cats can eat voles.

古文：以其为人去害，虽细必录。
现代文：猫能为人除害，虽然小人们也认为可取。
English: A cat can do harm to a person, although small people also think it is desirable.

古文：今猫受畜于人，不能食鼠而反乳之，无乃失其性邪？
现代文：现猫被人喂养，不吃老鼠反而给它喂奶，难道不是丧失了它的本性吗？
English: Now that the cat is being fed by people, instead of eating mice, they give it milk. Hasn't it lost its nature?

古文：猫职不修，其应若曰法吏有不触邪，疆吏有不捍敌。
现代文：这预兆的应验好像是执法的官吏有不敢触犯邪恶的，边境将领有不敢抵御敌人的。
English: The fulfillment of this omen seems to be that some law enforcement officials do not dare to commit evil, and some border generals do not dare to resist the enemy.

古文：臣愚以为当命有司察贪吏，诫边候，勤徼巡，则猫能致功，鼠不为害。 
现代文：我认为应命令有关部门查找贪赃的官吏，督查边境的守卫，多多巡逻，那么猫就能效力，老鼠就不能为害了。 
English: I think that the relevant departments should be ordered to find corrupt officials, inspect border guards, and patrol more, so that cats can be effective and mice cannot be harmful.

古文：代宗异其言，衮益不喜。
现代文：唐代宗对他的话感到惊异，常衮更不高兴了。
English: Tang Daizong was surprised by his words, and Changyu was even more displeased.

古文：帝崩，衮与礼官议： 礼，为君斩衰三年。
现代文：皇帝去世了，常衮和管礼仪的官员商议说： 按礼制，应给国君服丧三年。
English: When the emperor died, Changyu and the officials in charge of etiquette discussed and said: According to the etiquette, the emperor should be mourned for three years.

古文：汉文帝权制三十六日。
现代文：汉文帝改为三十六天。
English: The reign of Emperor Hanwen was changed to 36 days.

古文：我太宗文皇帝崩，遗诏亦三十六日，群臣不忍，既葬而除，略尽四月。
现代文：我朝太宗皇帝去世，留下诏令也说只服丧三十六天，百官不忍心，下葬除服后，差不多服了四个月的丧。
English: When Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty died, he left behind an imperial edict saying that only 36 days of mourning should be observed. The officials couldn't bear it. After the funeral and removal of clothing, the mourning lasted for almost four months.

古文：高宗如汉故事。
现代文：高宗皇帝的丧期和汉代旧制一样。
English: The period of Emperor Gaozong's death is the same as that of the Han Dynasty.

古文：玄宗以来，始变天子丧为二十七日。
现代文：玄宗皇帝以后，才变皇帝丧期为二十七天。
English: It was only after Emperor Xuanzong that the period of mourning for emperors was changed to 27 days.

古文：乃者，遗诏虽曰 天下吏民，三日释服 ，群臣宜如皇帝服二十七日乃除。 
现代文：过去，皇帝留下的诏令虽说 全国吏和老百姓，三天除服 ，但百官应像皇帝那样服丧二十七天才除服。 
English: In the past, although the imperial edict left by the emperor said that the national officials and the common people should remove their uniforms in three days, the officials should wear mourning clothes like the emperor for 27 days before removing their uniforms.

古文：祐甫曰： 遗诏无臣、庶人之别，是皇帝宜二十七日，而群臣三日也。 
现代文：崔讳甫说 ：遗诏没有百官和老百姓的区分。这是说皇帝应服丧二十七天，但百官只三天。 
English: Cui Yanfu said, "There is no distinction between the officials and the common people in the edict. This means that the emperor should be in mourning for 27 days, but the officials only for three days."

古文：衮曰： 贺循称，吏者，官长所署，非公卿百官也。 
现代文：常衮说： 贺循说过，吏是百官的部属，不是指大臣百官。 
English: Changyu said: He Xunlu said that officials are subordinates of officials, not ministers.

古文：祐甫对： 《传曰》 委之三吏 ，乃三公也。
现代文：崔讳甫说： 《传》称 把这交给三位吏 ，吏指的是三公。
English: Cui Yanfu said: "Zhuang" said that this should be handed over to the three officials, and the officials referred to the three princes.

古文：史称循吏、良吏，岂胥吏欤？ 
现代文：史书称循吏、良吏，难道都是小官吏吗？ 
English: Is it true that the history books say that all officials are minor officials?

古文：衮曰： 礼非天降地出，人情而已。
现代文：常衮说 ：礼制并非天地生成，是人们感情的寄托。
English: Tsuneyoshi said, "The etiquette system is not created by heaven and earth, but is based on people's emotions.

古文：且公卿在臣膺受宠禄，今与黔首同，信宿而除，于公安乎？ 
现代文：公卿百官接受了皇帝的宠信和俸禄，现服丧却和老百姓一样，过了两夜就除掉丧服，良心上过意吗？ 
English: The court nobles and officials accepted the emperor's favor and salary, but they wore mourning clothes like the common people. After two nights, they removed the mourning clothes. Did they have a bad conscience?

古文：祐甫曰： 若遗诏何？
现代文：崔讳甫说 ：你怎么对待皇帝留下的诏令呢？
English: Cui Yanfu said: How do you treat the imperial edict left by the emperor?

古文：诏而可改，孰不可改？ 
现代文：诏令都可以改动，还有什么不能改动呢？ 
English: The edict can be changed, what else can't be changed?

古文：意象殊厉。
现代文：语气脸色都极严厉。
English: The tone of their countenances was very stern.

古文：衮方入临，遣从吏扶立殿墀上，祐甫指之谓众曰： 臣哭君前，有扶礼乎？ 
现代文：常衮刚才进殿哀悼时，派手下人扶着他站在殿上，崔讳甫指着他对百官说： 臣下在皇帝面前哀悼，有搀扶的礼节吗？ 
English: When Chang Juan had just entered the hall to mourn, he sent his subordinates to help him stand on the hall. Cui Shufu pointed to him and said to the hundred officials: "Your subjects are mourning in front of the emperor. Is there any etiquette for helping them?

古文：衮不胜怒，乃劾祐甫率情变礼，挠国典，请贬潮州刺史。
现代文：常衮怒不可遏，就弹劾崔讳甫随意改变礼制，妨碍国家礼仪，请求贬为潮州刺史。
English: He was so furious that he impeached Cui Shufu for arbitrarily changing the etiquette, obstructing the national etiquette, and requested to be relegated to the history of Chaozhou.

古文：德宗以为重，改河南少尹。
现代文：唐德宗认为处分重了，改为河南府少尹。
English: Tang Dezong thought that the punishment was too heavy, and changed it to Henan Prefecture Shao Yin.

古文：始肃宗时，天下务剧，宰相更直掌事，若休沐还第，非大诏命，不待遍晓，则听直者代署以闻。
现代文：从唐肃宗时开始，国家事务繁多，宰相轮流值班管事，如有休假回家，不是重要诏令，不需一一告知，就让值班的宰相代替签名报上。
English: From the time of Emperor Suzong of the Tang Dynasty, there were many state affairs, and the chancellors took turns on duty to manage them. If there was a vacation to go home, it was not an important edict, and it was not necessary to inform them one by one, and let the chancellor on duty replace the signature on the newspaper.

古文：是时郭子仪、硃泚俱以平章事当署敕尾，而不行宰相事。
现代文：当时郭子仪、朱氵此都任宰相应在诏令后签名，但他们并没有管理宰相事务。
English: At that time, Guo Ziyi and Zhu Rongguo were both appointed chancellors and signed their signatures after the edict, but they did not manage the affairs of the chancellors.

古文：帝新即位，衮如故事代署。
现代文：唐德宗刚登基，常衮按老办法代他们签了名。
English: Tang Dezong had just ascended to the throne, and Changyu signed their names on their behalf according to the old method.

古文：子仪、泚入，言祐甫不宜贬，帝曰： 卿向何所言？
现代文：郭子仪、朱氵此进京后，说崔讳甫不应贬官，皇帝说： 你们原来怎么说的？
English: After Guo Ziyi and Zhu Rong entered Beijing, they said that Cui Yanfu should not be demoted. The emperor said: What did you say?

古文：今云非邪？ 
现代文：现在又说不应该了吗？ 
English: Is it wrong to say that now?

古文：二人对初不知。
现代文：他们俩人说当初不知道。
English: Both of them said they didn't know at first.

古文：帝怒，以衮为罔上。
现代文：皇帝发怒了，认为常衮欺骗皇帝。
English: The emperor was furious, believing that Chang Juan had deceived the emperor.

古文：是日，群臣苴绖立月华门外，即两换职，以衮河南少尹，而拜祐甫门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：这天，百官穿着丧服站在月华门外，有诏命两人对调职务，任命常衮为河南府少尹，崔讳甫为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On this day, hundreds of officials wearing mourning clothes stood outside the Yuehua Gate. An imperial edict ordered the two men to switch their positions, appointing Chang Xi as the Henan Prefecture's Shao Yin, and Cui Yanfu as a subordinate attendant and a subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate.

古文：俄改中书侍郎。
现代文：不久改任中书侍郎。
English: He was soon reassigned to the post of chūshusaijiro.

古文：自至德、乾元以来，天下战讨，启丐填委，故官赏缪紊。
现代文：自从乾元、至德年以来，全国战乱，都请求使用空白委任状，所以官制奖赏混乱。
English: Since the Qianyuan and German years, the country has been at war, and blank letters of appointment have been requested, so the official reward system has been chaotic.

古文：永泰后，稍稍平定，而元载用事，非贿谢不与官，刬塞公路，纲纪大坏。
现代文：永泰年以后，略为安定了。但元载当权，不送贿赂就不封官，堵塞了正当升官的途径，法制大乱。
English: After the Yongtai era, the situation stabilized slightly. However, the Yuan Dynasty seized power, and officials could not be appointed without paying bribes, which blocked the path of legitimate promotion and caused great turmoil in the legal system.

古文：载诛，杨绾相，未几卒。
现代文：元载被杀死后，杨绾任宰相，不久就去世了。
English: After Yuan Zai was killed, Yang Jie was appointed prime minister and died soon after.

古文：衮当国，惩其敝，凡奏请一杜绝之，惟文辞入第乃得进，然无所甄异，贤愚同滞焉。
现代文：常衮当权，鉴于元载的弊政，凡是推荐全部不用，只有考中科举才能任官，但没有区别，贤才和愚人一样得不到推荐任用。
English: In view of the maladministration that has been going on for a long time, those in power do not need any recommendation at all. Only those who pass the junior high school entrance examination can be appointed, but there is no difference. Wise men and fools alike cannot be recommended for appointment.

古文：及祐甫，则荐举惟其人，不自疑畏，推至公以行，未逾年，除吏几八百员，莫不谐允。
现代文：到崔讳甫任宰相，推荐的只要是人才，就毫不犹豫畏惧，凭公心行事。不到一年，任命官员近八百人，其中没有不称职的。
English: When Cui Jianfu was appointed prime minister, he did not hesitate to recommend talents and acted with integrity. In less than a year, he appointed nearly 800 officials, none of whom were incompetent.

古文：帝尝谓曰： 人言卿拟官多亲旧，何邪？ 
现代文：皇帝曾对他说 ：人们说你任命官员多用亲戚熟人，为什么这样呢？ 
English: The emperor once said to him: People say that you appoint officials using relatives and acquaintances, why is that?

古文：对曰： 陛下令臣进拟庶官，夫进拟者必悉其才行，如不与闻知，何由得其实？ 
现代文：他回答说： 皇上命我推荐官员，推荐必定要熟悉他的才能和品行，如果不熟悉了解，怎么知道他的真实情况呢？ 
English: He replied: "By the Emperor's order, I recommend officials. The recommendation must be familiar with his talent and character. If you are not familiar with understanding, how can you know his true situation?

古文：帝以为然。
现代文：皇帝认为他说得对。
English: Emperor Wu believed Dongfang Shuo's explanation.

古文：神策军使王驾鹤者，典卫兵久，权震中外，帝将代之，惧其变，以问祐甫，祐甫曰： 是无足虑。 
现代文：神策军使王驾鹤，掌管禁军时间长了，权势使全国的人都害怕，皇帝想更换他，又怕他叛乱，就问崔讳甫办法，崔讳甫说 ：这不费事。 
English: The Emperor wanted to replace him and was afraid that he would rebel, so he asked Choe Son-bok what he should do. Choe Son-bok said, "It's not a big deal."

古文：即召驾鹤留语移时，而代者已入军中矣。
现代文：他立刻把王驾鹤召来谈了一个时辰的话，替代他的人就已到军中上任了。
English: He immediately summoned Wang Jiehe to talk for an hour, and the person who replaced him has already taken office in the army.

古文：淄青李正己畏帝威断，表献钱三十万缗，以观朝廷。帝意其诈，未能答。
现代文：淄青节度使李正己害怕皇帝的威严和果断，上奏献上三十万贯钱，来试探皇帝，皇帝估计他是假意，没办法答复他。
English: Li Zhengyi was afraid of the emperor's majesty and decisiveness, so he offered 300,000 yuan to test the emperor. The emperor thought he was a fake and could not answer him.

古文：祐甫曰： 正己诚诈，陛下不如因遣使劳其军，以所献就赐将士。
现代文：崔讳甫说 ：李正己确实是假意，皇上不如乘机派使者慰劳他的军队，将他说要献的钱赏给他的军队。
English: Cui Yanfu said: "Li Zheng is indeed a fake, the emperor should take the opportunity to send an envoy to comfort his army and reward the money he said he would donate to his army.

古文：若正己奉承诏书，是陛下恩洽士心；若不用，彼自敛怨，军且乱。
现代文：如果李正己按诏令办了，这就使皇上的恩德深入到兵将心里；如果他不照办，他将自招怨恨，军队就会反对他。
English: If Li Zheng did as ordered, it would bring the emperor's benevolence deep into the general's heart; if he did not do so, he would incur resentment, and the army would oppose him.

古文：又使诸籓不以朝廷为重贿。 
现代文：又能使各藩镇不认为朝廷看重钱财。 
English: In addition, it can make the provinces and towns not think that the imperial court values money.

古文：帝曰： 善。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：好。 
English: Mutei said, "That's well said."

古文：正己惭服。
现代文：李正己为此感到惭愧而且佩服。
English: Li Zheng himself felt ashamed and admired for this.

古文：时议者韪其谟谋，谓可复贞观、开元之治。
现代文：当时议论的人赞美他的谋略，认为可以恢复贞观、开元年的盛世。
English: At the time, commentators praised his strategy, believing that it could restore chastity and usher in the golden age of the first year.

古文：是岁被疾，诏肩舆至中书，卧而承旨，若还第，即遣使咨决。
现代文：这年他害病了，有诏让他乘轿子到中书省，躺着接受诏令，如果他回家去了，就派使者去请他谋划或决断。
English: This year he fell ill, and an edict was issued ordering him to travel by palanquin to Zhongshuo and lie down to receive the edict. If he went home, an envoy would be sent to ask him to plan or make a decision.

古文：薨，年六十，赠太傅，谥曰文贞。
现代文：他去世时，享年六十岁，赠官为太傅，赐谥号叫文贞。
English: When he died, at the age of sixty, he was given the title of Taifu and the posthumous name of Wenzhen.

古文：故事，门下侍郎未有赠三师者，帝以其有大臣节，特宠异之。
现代文：按惯例，门下侍郎没有赠官为三师的，皇帝因为他有重臣的节操，所以特别优宠他。
English: According to the usual practice, the Emperor favored the junior chamberlain, who did not have the rank of Third Division, because he had the discipline of a senior minister.

古文：硃泚乱，祐甫妻王陷贼中，泚尝与祐甫同列，遗以缯帛菽粟，受而缄鐍之，帝还京，具封以献，士君子益重其家法云。
现代文：据说朱氵此反叛时，崔讳甫的妻子王氏身在叛军控制区，朱氵此因曾和崔讳甫同事，就送给她绸缎和粮食，她收下后都封存起来。皇帝回到京城后，他都原封献上，当时的士人更推崇他的家教了。
English: It is said that when Zhu Xi rebelled, Wang Shizhen, the wife of Cui Yanfu, was in the rebel-controlled area. Because Zhu Xi had been a colleague of Cui Yanfu, he gave her silk and grain. After she received it, he sealed it. After the emperor returned to Beijing, he presented it in its original seal. At that time, the scholars respected his tutor even more.

古文：子植嗣。
现代文：他的侄儿崔植做了他的继承人。
English: His nephew Cui Zhi became his heir.

古文：植字公修，祐甫弟庐江令婴甫子也。
现代文：崔植的字叫公修，是崔祐甫弟弟庐江县县令崔婴甫的儿子。
English: The character of Cui Zhi is called Gong Xiu. He is the son of Cui Yufu, the brother of Cui Youfu, the county magistrate of Minjiang County.

古文：祐甫病，谓妻曰： 吾殁，当以庐江次子主吾祀。 
现代文：崔祐甫生病了，对他的妻子说： 我死后，要崔婴甫的二儿子做我的继承人。 
English: When Cui Youfu fell ill, he said to his wife, "When I die, I want Cui Youfu's two sons to be my heirs."

古文：及卒，护丧者以闻，帝恻然，召植，使即丧次终服。
现代文：他死后，办理丧礼的人报告了这事，皇帝很同情，把崔植召来，叫他作为继承人参加葬礼和服丧。
English: After his death, the person in charge of the funeral reported the matter, and the emperor was very sympathetic and called Cui Zhi to attend the funeral and mourning as an heir.

古文：补弘文生。
现代文：后增补他为弘文生。
English: Later, he was added as a student of Kobun.

古文：博通经史，于《易》尤邃。
现代文：他精通儒经和史书，对《周易》的研究尤其精深。
English: He is well versed in Confucianism and history books, and his research on "Zhou Yi" is particularly profound.

古文：与郑覃同时为补阙，皆贤宰相后，每朝廷有得失，两人者更疏论执，誉望蔚然。
现代文：他和郑覃同时任补阙官，都是名宰相的后代，每当朝廷措施有失误，他们两人就上奏指出，很有名声和威望。
English: Both he and Zheng He, who was also a supplementary eunuch, were descendants of the famous prime minister. Whenever there was a mistake in the imperial court's measures, they both pointed it out. They had a great reputation and prestige.

古文：元和中，为给事中。时皇甫镈判度支，建言减百官奉禀，植封还诏书。
现代文：元和年间，他担任给事中，当时皇甫镈任判度支职，建议削减群臣的俸禄，崔植不批准为此起草的诏书。
English: During the Yuan and Zhou dynasties, he was in charge of giving advice. At that time, the Emperor Fuxiong was in charge of judging and recommending the reduction of the salaries of the courtiers. Cui Zi did not approve the edict drafted for this purpose.

古文：镈又请天下所纳盐酒利增估者，以新准旧，一切追偿。
现代文：皇甫镈又请求要全国缴纳盐酒利润加价的，按新价算旧账，补交所有利润。
English: Emperor Fuxi also requested the whole country to pay the profit increase of salt wine, calculate the old account according to the new price, and pay all the profits.

古文：植奏言： 用兵久，百姓凋罄，往虽估逾其实，今不可复收。 
现代文：崔植上奏说： 打仗的时间长了，老百姓贫穷了，过去虽价格高于规定的，但现不能再收了。 
English: Cui Zhi Shangsoo said: The war has been going on for a long time, and the people are poor. Although the price was higher than the regulation in the past, it can no longer be collected.

古文：于是议者咸罪镈，镈惧而止。
现代文：当时议论的人都指责皇甫镈，皇甫镈害怕就取消了。
English: At that time, everyone who was talking about it blamed the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager.

古文：长庆初，拜中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：长庆年初期，他被任命为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: At the beginning of the year of the Long Qing Dynasty, he was appointed as the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and became a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：穆宗问： 贞观、开元中治道最盛，何致而然？ 
现代文：唐穆宗问道： 贞观、开元年间国家治理得最好，是因为什么？ 
English: Tang Muzong asked: During the Zhenguan and the beginning of the first year, the country was best governed, why?

古文：植曰： 太宗资上圣，兴民间，知百姓疾苦，故厉精思治，又以房玄龄、杜如晦、魏徵、王珪为之佐，君明臣忠，圣贤相维，治致升平，固其宜也。
现代文：崔植说： 太宗皇帝天生睿智，从地方上来，知道老百姓的困苦，所以全力治国；又有房玄龄、杜如晦、魏征、王王圭做他的辅佐，皇帝英明臣子忠诚，相辅相成，造就了盛世，当然是自然的。
English: Cui Zhi said: Emperor Taizong was born with natural wisdom. He came from the countryside and knew the hardships of the people, so he did his best to govern the country. He also had Fang Xuanling, Du Rugao, Wei Zheng, and Wang Wanggui as his assistants. The emperor was a wise and loyal minister, and they complemented each other, creating a prosperous world. Of course, it was natural.

古文：玄宗在天后时，身践忧患，既即位，得姚崇、宋璟，此二人蚤夜孜孜，纳君于道。
现代文：玄宗皇帝在武则天皇后时，亲身经历了忧患，登基后，得到了姚崇、宋瞡，这两人日夜操劳，使国君能按正道治国。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong was the empress of Emperor Wuzhe, he personally experienced the hardships. After he ascended the throne, he gained Yao Chong and Song Tao, both of whom worked day and night to enable the sovereign to rule the country in an upright manner.

古文：珪尝手写《尚书》《无逸》，为图以献，劝帝出入观省以自戒。
现代文：宋瞡曾亲手抄写了《尚书·无逸篇》，画成图画献上，劝皇帝出进看后反省告诫自己。
English: Song Tao once hand-copied "Shang Shu · Muxiyuan" and presented it as a picture to persuade the emperor to come and see it. After reflection, he admonished himself.

古文：其后朽暗，乃代以山水图，稍怠于勤，左右不复箴规，奸臣日用事，以至于败。
现代文：后来图画陈旧朽坏，就用山水画取代了它，皇帝就逐渐懈怠了，近臣不再劝谏，奸臣逐渐当了权，以致国家大乱。
English: Later, the picture became old and rotten, and landscape painting was used to replace it. The emperor gradually slacked off, his close vassals no longer advised him, and his treacherous vassals gradually took power, resulting in a national turmoil.

古文：昔德宗尝问先臣祐甫开元、天宝事，先臣具道治乱所以然，臣在童鹴，记其说。
现代文：过去德宗皇帝曾问我父亲崔甫开元、天宝年间的事，我父亲详细说了治理好坏的原因，我在童年时，就记下了他的话。
English: In the past, Emperor Dezong had asked my father about the events in the years of Cui Fu Kai Yuan and Tianbao. My father detailed the reasons for good or bad governance, and I wrote down his words when I was a child.

古文：今愿陛下以《无逸》为元龟，则天下幸甚。 
现代文：现希望皇上以《无逸篇》为指南，那么全国人民就很幸运了。 
English: Now, I hope that the emperor will take "Wu Yizhen" as a guide, then the people of the whole country will be very lucky.

古文：他日又问： 司马迁言汉文帝惜十家产而罢露台，身衣弋绨，履革舄，集上书囊为殿帷，信乎？
现代文：另一天皇帝又问道 ：司马迁说汉文帝爱惜十户人家的财产而不筑灵台，穿黑色粗丝的衣服，穿皮制的鞋，把装奏章的袋子积累起来做成宫殿的帷幕，是真的吗？
English: The next day, the emperor asked again: Is it true that Sima Qian said that Emperor Hanwen spared the property of ten families and did not build a funeral table, wore black thick silk clothes, wore leather shoes, and accumulated bags containing music chapters to make a palace curtain?

古文：何太俭邪？ 
现代文：怎么这么节俭呢？ 
English: How can you be so frugal?

古文：植曰： 良史非儿言。汉承秦侈纵之馀，海内凋窭，文帝从代来，知稼穑艰难，是以躬履俭约，为天下守财。
现代文：崔植说 ：有名的史家不会乱说，汉朝在秦朝奢侈荒淫之后，全国贫困，汉文帝从代地来，知道耕种的辛劳，因此自身节俭，为国家积累财富。
English: Cui Zhi said: A famous historian will not say without reason that the Han Dynasty, after the extravagance and debauchery of the Qin Dynasty, the whole country was impoverished. Emperor Hanwen came from the place, knew the hard work of farming, so he was frugal and accumulated wealth for the country.

古文：景帝遵而不改，故家给户足。
现代文：汉景帝遵从他没有改变，所以人民富足。
English: Emperor Han Jing obeyed him and did not change, so the people became rich.

古文：至武帝时，钱朽贯，谷红腐，乃能出师征伐，威动四方；然侈靡不节，末年户口减半，税及舟车，人不聊，乃下哀痛诏，封丞相为富人侯。
现代文：到了汉武帝时，仓库里的钱串都朽了、粮食都烂了，于是才能出兵征讨，威震四方；但汉武帝奢侈而不节制，后期人口减少了一半，连船和车都要收税，人民无法活下去，于是才颁布罪己诏，把丞相封为富民侯。
English: By the time of Emperor Hanwu, the money strings in the warehouse were rotten and the grain was rotten, so he was able to send troops to collect it, causing a shock in all directions; but Emperor Hanwu was extravagant and unrestrained, and later the population was reduced by half, and even ships and cars had to be taxed, so the people could not live, so he issued the Sin Ji Zhao and made the prime minister rich and populous.

古文：然则帝王不可以不示俭而天下足。 
现代文：因此帝王为国家富足不能不节俭。 
English: Therefore, the emperor must be frugal for the wealth of the country.

古文：帝曰： 卿言善，患行之为难耳！ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：您说得虽然对，但担心实行起来困难哪！ 
English: The emperor said, "Though you are right in what you say, I am afraid it will be difficult to put it into practice.

古文：时朝廷悉收河朔三镇，而刘总又以幽、蓟七州献诸朝，且惧部将构乱，乃先籍豪锐不检者送京师，而硃克融在籍中。
现代文：当时朝廷完全收复了河北三处藩镇的辖区，而且刘总又将幽、蓟等七州交还了朝廷，刘总担心部下将领叛乱，就先挑选其中强横有野心不守规矩的送到京城来，朱克融也在其中。
English: At that time, the imperial court had completely recovered the jurisdictional areas of the three towns in Hebei Province, and General Liu had also returned seven states, including You and Handan, to the imperial court. General Liu was worried about the rebellion of his subordinate generals, so he first selected those who were arrogant, ambitious and unruly and sent them to Beijing. Zhu Ke Rong was also among them.

古文：植与杜元颖不知兵，谓蕃镇且平，不复料天下安危事，而克融等羁旅塞踬，愿得官自效，日诉于前，皆抑不与。
现代文：崔植和杜元颖不懂军事，以为藩镇将要铲平了，不再考虑国家的安危，朱克融等人住在旅店里贫困了，希望封官效力，每天来中书省诉说，都没有任命他们。
English: Cui Zhi and Du Yuanying do not understand military affairs. They thought that the town would be razed to the ground and no longer considered the safety of the country. Zhu Ke Rong and others lived in poverty in a hotel and hoped to be effective in sealing officials. They came to Zhongshuo every day to tell that they had not appointed them.

古文：及遣张弘靖赴镇，纵克融等北还，不数月，克融乱，复失河朔矣。
现代文：到派张弘靖去任节度使时，又放朱克融等人北归。不到几个月，朱克融反叛，国家又丢失了河北。
English: When Zhang Hongjing was appointed as the festival envoy, Zhu Ke Rong and others were allowed to return to the north. Within a few months, Zhu Ke Rong rebelled, and the country lost Hebei again.

古文：天下尤之，植内惭。
现代文：全国人都责怪崔植等人，崔植内心也惭愧。
English: The whole nation blames Cui Zhi and others, and Cui Zhi is also ashamed.

古文：罢为刑部尚书，旋授岳鄂观察使。
现代文：后罢相任刑部尚书，随即被任命为岳鄂观察使。
English: After his dismissal, he was assigned to the Criminal Division of the Ministry of Justice, and was immediately appointed as the Yue-Hao Observation Envoy.

古文：未几，迁岭南节度使，还拜户部尚书。
现代文：不久，升任岭南节度使，后回京城任户部尚书。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the Lingnan Festival Envoy, and later he was appointed to the Household Department of the Imperial Household in Beijing.

古文：终华州刺史，赠尚书左仆射。
现代文：去世时任华州刺史，赠官为尚书左仆射。
English: At the time of his death, he was the governor of Huazhou, and the bestowed official was Shang Shuxi Zuoxi.

古文：倰，字德长，祐甫从子也。
现代文：崔統的字叫德长，是崔祐甫的侄儿。
English: Cui Tong's nickname is De Chang, and he is Cui Youfu's nephew.

古文：性介洁，矜己之清，视赃负者若雠。
现代文：生性耿直廉洁，以自己的廉洁自负，看到贪赃枉法的像见了仇人一样。
English: He is honest and incorruptible by nature, and is proud of his own honesty. When he sees corruption, it is like seeing an enemy.

古文：以苏州刺史奏课第一，迁湖南观察使。
现代文：任苏州刺史时在全国政绩最好，后升任湖南观察使。
English: He had the best political performance in the country when he was appointed as Suzhou's chief historian, and was later promoted to the post of Hunan observation envoy.

古文：湖南旧法，虽丰年，贸易不出境，邻部灾荒不恤也。
现代文：按湖南地区的旧规矩，即使丰年，粮食买卖也不出境，邻近地区受灾也不管。
English: According to the old rules of the Hunan region, even if it is a good year, grain trading does not go abroad, and the neighboring areas are not affected by the disaster.

古文：倰至，谓属吏曰： 此岂人情乎？
现代文：他去后，对下属官员说： 这合人情吗？
English: After he left, he said to subordinate officials: "Is this humane?

古文：无闭籴以重困民。 
现代文：不要阻碍粮食流通让人民买卖都困难。 
English: Don't obstruct grain circulation and make it difficult for people to buy and sell.

古文：削其禁，自是商贾流通，赀物益饶。
现代文：他于是废除这禁令，从此商人往来，人民更富裕了。
English: He then repealed the ban, and since then, merchants have come and gone, and the people have become more affluent.

古文：入为户部侍郎，判度支。
现代文：后入京任户部侍郎、判度支。
English: After that, he moved to Kyoto and was appointed as a household attendant and judge.

古文：时田弘正徙镇州，以魏兵二千行。
现代文：当时田弘正调到镇州任节度使，带领魏州两千兵上任。
English: At that time, Tian Hong was transferred to Zhenzhou to serve as the delegate of the festival, leading two thousand soldiers from Weizhou to take office.

古文：既至，留自卫，请度支给岁粮，穆宗下其议，倰固执不与，弘正不得已，遣魏卒。
现代文：到任后，把军队留下保卫自己，请求度支供应军饷，唐穆宗交臣下讨论这事，崔統坚持不发，田弘正没办法，把魏州兵打发回去了。
English: After taking office, he left the army behind to defend himself, requested financial support and the supply of military pay. Tang Mu Zong's courtiers discussed this matter. Cui Tong insisted on not sending the Wei soldiers, but Tian Hongzheng had no choice but to send the Wei soldiers back.

古文：俄而镇兵乱，弘正遇害，倰之为也。
现代文：不久镇州发生兵变，田弘正被杀害了，这是崔統造成的。
English: Soon after, there was a mutiny in Zhenzhou, and Tian Hongzheng was killed, which was caused by Cui Tonglu.

古文：时天子失德，倰党与盛，有司不敢名其罪。
现代文：当时皇帝不行仁政，崔統的同伙势力很大，有关部门不敢指出他的罪名。
English: At that time, the emperor did not practice benevolent politics, and Choi Tong's associates were very powerful. The relevant departments did not dare to point out his crimes.

古文：出为凤翔节度使。
现代文：后来他出京任凤翔节度使。
English: Later, he went to Beijing to serve as Fengxiang's envoy.

古文：逾年，徙河南尹。
现代文：过了一年，调任河南尹。
English: A year later, he was transferred to Henan Yin.

古文：以户部尚书致仕，卒，赠太子少保，谥曰肃。
现代文：在户部尚书任上辞官，后去世了，赠官为太子少保，赐谥号叫肃。
English: In the household department, Shang Shu resigned from the post, and later died. He was given the post of crown prince minor protector, and his posthumous name was Suen.

