古文：海内西南陬以北者。
现代文：内西经所记载的是西南角以北的地方。
English: What is recorded in the Inner West Canon is the area north of the southwest corner.

古文：贰负之臣曰危，危与贰负窫窳。
现代文：贰负有位臣子名叫危，危与贰负一起杀了窫窳。
English: He had a vassal named Ketsuro, and Ketsuro and Ketsuro killed Shiori together.

古文：帝乃梏之疏属之山，桎其右足，反缚两手与发，系之山上木。
现代文：天帝知道后，便把危拘禁在疏属山中，把他的右足戴上脚镣，把他的双手与头发反缚在一起，并捆到山上的一棵树上。
English: When the Heavenly Emperor found out, he imprisoned him in the mountains of Shu, put his right foot in shackles, tied his hands and hair together, and tied him to a tree on the mountain.

古文：在开题西北。
现代文：疏属山在开题国的西北。
English: Sosui Mountain is located in the northwest of the country.

古文：大泽方百里，群鸟所生及所解。
现代文：大泽方圆一百里，是各种禽鸟生卵孵化幼鸟和脱换羽毛的地方。
English: Osawa, a hundred-mile radius, is a place where all kinds of birds lay eggs, hatch young birds and shed their feathers.

古文：在雁门北。
现代文：它位于雁门山的北面。
English: It is located on the north side of Yanmen Mountain.

古文：雁门山，雁出其间。
现代文：雁门山，雁从它两座对峙的山中飞过。
English: Yanmen Mountain, geese fly over the two opposing mountains.

古文：在氐国西。高柳在代北。
现代文：它位于高柳山的北面。高柳山在代的北面。
English: It is located on the north side of Mount Gaoliu. Mount Gaoliu is located on the north side of Mt.

古文：后稷之葬，山水环之。
现代文：后稷所葬之地，四周山水环绕。
English: The place where Hou Yi was buried is surrounded by mountains and rivers.

古文：在氐国西。
现代文：它位于氐人国的西面。
English: It is located in the west of the country.

古文：流黄酆氏之国，中方三百里；有涂四方，中有山。
现代文：流黄酆氏国，疆域有方圆三百里。有道路通向四方，中间有一座大山。
English: There are roads leading to all four directions, with a large mountain in the middle.

古文：在后稷葬西。
现代文：它位于后稷所葬之地的西面。
English: It is located to the west of the place where Hou Yi was buried.

古文：流沙出钟山，西行又南行昆仑之虚，西南入海，黑水之山。
现代文：流沙的发源地在钟山，向西流动而再朝南流过昆仑山，继续往西南流入大海，直到黑水山。
English: The source of the quicksand is in Zhongshan. It flows westward and then southward through the Kunlun Mountains, continuing to flow southwest into the sea until the Black Water Mountain.

古文：东胡在大泽东。
现代文：东胡国在大泽的东面。
English: Donghu Province is to the east of Osawa.

古文：夷人在东胡东。
现代文：夷人国在东胡国的东面。
English: Iritsu Province is to the east of Donghu Province.

古文：貊国在汉水东北。
现代文：貊国在汉水的东北面。
English: Yunnan Province is in the northeast of the Han River.

古文：地近于燕，灭之。
现代文：它靠近燕国的边界，后来被燕国灭掉了。
English: It was close to the border of Yan country and was later wiped out by Yan country.

古文：孟鸟在貊国东北。
现代文：孟鸟在貊国的东北面。
English: Mengjiao is located in the northeast of Shandong Province.

古文：其鸟文赤、黄、青，东乡。
现代文：这种鸟的羽毛花纹有红、黄、青三种颜色，面朝东方而立。
English: The feather pattern of this bird has three colors, red, yellow and blue, and faces east.

古文：海内昆仑之虚，在西北，帝之下都。
现代文：海内的昆仑山，屹立在西北方，是天帝在下方的都城。
English: Kunlun Mountain in the inland, standing in the northwest, is the capital city of the Heavenly Emperor below.

古文：昆仑之虚，方圆八百里，高万仞。
现代文：昆仑山，方圆八百里，高一万仞。
English: Kunlun Mountain, eight hundred miles in circumference, ten thousand meters high.

古文：上有木禾，长五寻，大五围。
现代文：山顶有一棵像大树似的稻谷，高达五寻，粗细需五人合抱。
English: At the top of the mountain, there is a rice paddy that looks like a big tree. It is as high as five fathoms, and it takes five people to hold it.

古文：面有九井，以玉为槛。
现代文：昆仑山的每一面有九眼井，每眼井都有用玉石制成的围栏。
English: There are nine wells on each side of Kunlun Mountain, and each well has a fence made of jade.

古文：面有九门，门有开明兽守之，百神之所在。
现代文：昆仑山的每一面有九道门，而每道门都有称作开明的神兽守卫着，是众多天神聚集的地方。
English: There are nine gates on each side of Mount Kunlun, and each gate is guarded by a divine beast called the Enlightened One. It is a place where many heavenly deities gather.

古文：在八隅之岩，赤水之际，非仁羿莫能上冈之岩。
现代文：众多天神聚集的地方是在八方山岩之间，赤水的岸边，不是具有像夷羿那样本领的人就不能攀上那些山冈岩石。
English: The place where many heavenly deities gather is between the rocks of the Happo Mountains, on the shore of the Red Water. Those who do not have the ability to climb those mountains and cliffs cannot do so.

古文：赤水出东南隅，以行其东北。
现代文：赤水从昆仑山的东南角发源，然后流到昆仑山的东北方，又转向西南流而注到南海厌火国的东边。
English: The red water originates from the southeast corner of Mount Kunlun, then flows to the northeast of Mount Kunlun, and turns to the southwest flow and pours into the east of the South China Sea.

古文：河水出东北隅，以行其北，西南又入渤海，又出海外，即西而北，入禹所导积石山。
现代文：黄河水从昆仑山的东北角发源，然后向北而流，再折向西南流入渤海，又流出海外，就此向西而后往北流，一直流入大禹所疏导过的积石山。
English: The Yellow River water originates from the northeast corner of Mount Kunlun, then flows northward, then turns to the southwest and flows into the Bohai Sea, and then flows out of the country, and then flows westward and then northward, all the way into the Jishi Mountain, which was channeled by Dayu.

古文：洋水、黑水出西北隅，以东，东行，又东北，南入海，羽民南。
现代文：洋水和黑水发源于昆仑山的西北角，向东流，继而向东北流，再折向南流后入海，在羽民国的南边。
English: Yangshui and Heishui originate from the northwest corner of Kunlun Mountain, flow eastward, then northeastward, and then flow southward into the sea, in the south of the Republic of China.

古文：弱水、青水出西南隅，以东，又北，又西南，过毕方鸟东。
现代文：弱水、青水从昆仑山的西南角发源，向东流，又向北流，再折向西南，流过毕方鸟生活之地的东边。
English: Weak water and blue water originate from the southwest corner of Kunlun Mountain, flow eastward, then northward, and then turn to the southwest, flowing through the east of the land where Bifang birds live.

古文：昆仑南渊深三百仞。
现代文：昆仑山的南面有一个深达三百仞的渊潭。
English: In the south of Kunlun Mountain, there is a 300-meter-deep crocodile pool.

古文：开明兽身大类虎而九首，皆人面，东向立昆仑上。
现代文：开明兽的大小与虎相似，长着九个脑袋，每个脑袋上都长着人一样的面孔，朝东立在昆仑山顶。
English: The enlightened beast is similar in size to a tiger, has nine heads, each with a human-like face, and stands on the top of Mount Kunlun facing east.

古文：开明西有凤皇、鸾鸟，皆戴蛇践蛇，膺有赤蛇。
现代文：开明兽所在之地的西面有凤凰、鸾鸟栖息，它们的头上盘着蛇，脚下踩着蛇，胸前有赤蛇。
English: On the west side of the land where the enlightened beasts are located, there are phoenixes and ostriches roosting. They have snakes on their heads, snakes under their feet, and red snakes on their chests.

古文：开明北有视肉、珠树、文玉树、玗琪树、不死树。凤皇、鸾鸟皆戴瞂。又有离朱、木禾、柏树、甘水、圣木曼兑，一曰挺木牙交。
现代文：开明神兽所在之地的北面有视肉怪兽、珠树、文玉树、玕琪树、不死树，那里的凤皇、鸾鸟都戴着盾牌，还有三足乌、像树似的稻谷、柏树、甘水、圣木曼兑。另一种说法认为圣木曼兑叫做挺木牙交。
English: On the north side of the land where the enlightened gods and beasts are located, there are carnivorous monsters, pear trees, jade trees, acacia trees, and immortal trees, where the phoenix emperor and ostriches are wearing shields, as well as the three-legged owl, the tree-like rice, the cypress tree, the sweet water, and the sacred wooden mandala. Another theory is that the sacred wooden mandala is called the straight wooden tooth.

古文：开明东有巫彭、巫抵、巫阳、巫履、巫凡、巫相，夹窫窳之尸，皆操不死之药以距之。
现代文：开明神兽所在之地的东面有巫师神医巫彭、巫抵、巫阳、巫履、巫凡、巫相，他们围在窫窳的尸体周围，都手捧不死药来抵抗死气而要使他复活。
English: On the eastern side of the land where the enlightened gods and beasts are located, there are sorcerers and healers such as Wu Peng, Wu Rui, Wu Yang, Wu Lu, Wu Fan, and Wu Fang. They surround the corpse of the dragonfly, all holding the elixir of life to resist death and resurrect him.

古文：窫窳者，蛇身人面，贰负臣所杀也。
现代文：这位窫窳，是蛇的身子人的面孔，被贰负和他的臣子危合伙杀死的。
English: This dragonfly, the face of the snake-bodied man, was killed by the dragonfly and his vassal.

古文：服常树，其上有三头人，伺琅玕树。
现代文：有一种服常树，它上面有个长着三个脑袋的人，守候着附近的琅玕树。
English: There is a tree that has a man with three heads on it, watching over a nearby elm tree.

古文：开明南有树鸟，六首；蛟、蝮、蛇、蜼、豹、鸟秩树，于表池树木，诵鸟、鶽、视肉。
现代文：开明神兽所在之地的南面有种树鸟，长着六个脑袋；那里还有蛟龙、蝮蛇、长尾猿、豹子、鸟秩树，在水池四周环绕着树木而显得华美；那里还有诵鸟、鶽鸟、视肉怪兽。
English: In the south of the land where the enlightened divine beast is located, there is a kind of tree bird with six heads; there are also dragons, pythons, long-tailed apes, leopards, birds and trees, which are surrounded by trees around the pond and look gorgeous; there are also chanting birds, ostriches, and carnivorous monsters.

