古文：起屠维单阏正月，尽十月，不满一年。
现代文：起屠维单阏正月，尽十月，不满一年。
English: From the first month of Tu Wei to October, less than a year.

古文：高祖神尧大圣光孝皇帝上之下
现代文：高祖神尧大圣光孝皇帝上之下
English: Emperor Gaozhushin and Emperor Guangxiao

古文：武德二年己卯、公元六一九年春，正月，壬寅，王世充悉取隋朝显官、名士为太尉府官属，杜淹、戴胄皆预焉。
现代文：唐高祖武德二年春季，正月壬寅，王世充让所有隋朝的显要官吏、名士充当太尉府的官吏，杜淹、戴胄也都在其中。
English: In the spring of the second year of Tang Gao Zuwude, the first month of Ren Yin, Wang Shichong let all the prominent officials and celebrities of the Sui Dynasty serve as officials of the Tai Luefu, and Du Huang and Dai Yao were also among them.

古文：胄，安阳人也。
现代文：戴胄是安阳人。
English: Dai Wei is from Anyang.

古文：隋将军王隆帅屯卫将军张镇周、都水少监苏世长等以山南兵始至东都。
现代文：隋朝的将军王隆统率屯卫将军张镇周、都水少监苏世长等，率领山南军队刚刚到达东都。
English: Wang Longtong, the general of the Sui Dynasty, led by the general of the garrison Zhang Zhen Zhou, the junior superintendent of the capital water Su Shichang, and others, led the Shannan army just arrived in Dongdu.

古文：王世充专总朝政，事无大小，悉关太尉府；台省监署，莫不阒然。
现代文：王世充专揽朝政，事情无论大小，都要通过太尉府；隋的台、省、监、署各官府，都无事可做。
English: Wang Shichong specialized in handling the affairs of the imperial court. No matter how big or small the matter was, it had to go through the captain's office. In the Sui Dynasty, there was nothing to do in the offices of the emperor, provinces, supervisors, and agencies.

古文：世充立三牌于府门外，一求文学才识堪济时务者，一求武勇智略能摧锋陷敌者，一求身有冤滞拥抑不申者。
现代文：王世充在太尉府的门外树立三个牌子：一个牌子招求有文学才识、足能成就时务的人；一个牌子招求有武勇智略、能带头摧锋陷敌的人；一个牌子招求遭受到冤屈、郁郁不得申说的人。
English: Wang Shichong set up three signs outside the gate of the captain's residence: a sign inviting people with literary talent and sufficient ability to achieve current affairs; a sign inviting people with bravery and wisdom, who can take the lead in destroying the enemy; a sign inviting people who have suffered grievances and are too depressed to speak.

古文：于是上书陈事者日有数百，世充悉引见，躬自省览，殷勤慰谕，人人自喜，以为言听计从，然终无所施行。
现代文：于是，每天都有数百人上书陈事，王世充都招来接见，亲自阅文，殷勤慰问，人人自喜，以为王世充会言听计从，然而，最后王世充什么事也没有做。
English: As a result, every day there were hundreds of people submitting written complaints. Wang Shicheng would invite everyone to meet, personally read the documents, and solicit condolences. Everyone was pleased with themselves, thinking that Wang Shicheng would listen to them. However, in the end, Wang Shicheng did nothing.

古文：下至士卒厮养，世充皆以甘言悦之，而实无恩施。
现代文：甚至于到士兵仆役这层人，王世充都以好话来取悦他们，但实际上并没给他们什么恩惠。
English: Even for those who were soldiers or servants, Wang Shicheng gave them kind words to please them, but in reality, he did not give them any favors.

古文：隋马军总管独孤武都为世充所亲任，其从弟司隶大夫机与虞部郎杨恭慎、前勃海郡主簿孙师孝、步兵总管刘孝元、李俭、崔孝仁谋召唐兵，使孝仁说武都曰： 王公徒为儿女之态以悦下愚，而鄙隘贪忍，不顾亲旧，岂能成大业哉！
现代文：隋朝的马军总管独孤武都受王世充信任，独孤武都的唐弟司隶大夫独孤机与虞部郎杨恭慎、前勃海郡主簿孙师孝、步兵总管刘孝元、李俭、崔孝仁谋划招引唐兵前来，便让崔孝仁对独孤武都说： 王世充只是以儿女情长取悦下属，实际上卑鄙、狭隘，贪婪、残忍，不顾亲旧，怎么能成大业呢！
English: Wang Shichong trusted the commander-in-chief of the horse army of the Sui Dynasty, Wang Shichong. The commander-in-chief of the horse army of the Sui Dynasty, Wang Shichong, and the commander-in-chief of the horse army of the Tang Dynasty, Yang Jinshan, the former governor of Bo Hai County, Sun Shihong, the commander-in-chief of the infantry, Liu Xiaoyuan, Li Jian, and Cui Xiaojin planned to attract Tang soldiers, and then let Cui Xiaojin say to the commander-in-chief: Wang Shichong is just pleasing subordinates with his children and relatives. In fact, he

古文：图识之文，应归李氏，人皆知之。
现代文：按图谶之文所说，天下应归李氏，人人都知道。
English: Everyone knows that the world should belong to the Li family, according to the text on the map.

古文：唐起晋阳，奄有关内，兵不留行，英雄景附。
现代文：唐从晋阳举事，占据关内，军队未遇阻滞，英雄景仰攀附。
English: Tang started from Jinyang, occupied Guanzhong, the army was not blocked, and the heroes were admired and followed.

古文：且坦怀待物，举善责功，不念旧恶，据胜势以争天下，谁能敌之！
现代文：而且李氏待人处事襟怀坦荡，任用善人，勉励有功的人，不念旧恶，据有优胜之势来争夺天下，谁能与其相匹敌呢？
English: Moreover, Li's treatment of people is straightforward, appoints good people, encourages meritorious people, does not remember the old evil, and competes for the world according to the potential to win. Who can match it?

古文：吾属托身非所，坐待夷灭。
现代文：我们这些人托身于不该托身的地方，只能坐等被消灭。
English: Those of us who are hiding in places where we shouldn't be hiding can only wait to be eliminated.

古文：今任管公兵近在新安，又吾之故人也，若遣间使召之，使夜造城下，吾曹共为内应，开门纳之，事无不集矣。 
现代文：现在，任管公的军队近在新安，又是我们的旧交，假如能暗中派使者把他们招来，让他们夜里来到城下，我们共同作为内应，开门纳入，事情没有不成功的。 
English: Now, the army of Ren Guanzhong is close to Xin'an, and they are our old friends. If we can secretly send an envoy to invite them, and let them come to the city at night, we can work together as an internal response, open the door and integrate them, and things will not be unsuccessful.

古文：武都从之。
现代文：独孤武都听从了此计。
English: All but one soldier obeyed this order.

古文：事泄，世充皆杀之。
现代文：但事情泄露了，他们都被王世充杀死。
English: But the affair leaked out, and they were all killed by Wang Shichong.

古文：恭慎，达之子也。
现代文：杨恭慎是杨达的儿子。
English: Yang Kyung-shin is the son of Yang Da-ro.

古文：癸卯，命秦王世民出镇长春宫。
现代文：癸卯，唐高祖李渊命令秦王李世民出京镇守长春宫。
English: At the same time, Li Yuan, the ancestor of Tang Gao, ordered Li Shimin, the king of Qin, to leave Beijing to guard Changchun Palace.

古文：宇文化及攻魏州总管元宝藏，四旬不克。
现代文：宇文化及带兵攻打魏州总管元宝藏，经四十天攻打不下。
English: Yu Wenhua and his soldiers attacked the treasure of the General Manager of Weizhou Province. After forty days, they were unable to attack.

古文：魏征往说之，丁未，宝藏举州来降。
现代文：魏徵前去游说，丁未，元宝藏举州投降唐朝。
English: Wei Zheng went to lobby, Ding Wei, the former treasure of Juzhou surrendered to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：戊午，淮安王神通击宇文化及于魏县，化及不能抗，东走聊城。
现代文：戊午，淮安王李神通在魏县进攻宇文化及，宇文化及抵抗不住，向东逃往聊城。
English: At noon, Li Shentong, the king of Huai'an, attacked Yu Cultura in Wei County. Yu Cultura could not resist and fled eastward to Liaocheng.

古文：神通拔魏县，斩获二千余人，引兵追化及至聊城，围之。
现代文：李神通攻克魏县，杀死、俘虏两千多人，带兵追击宇文化及到聊城，并包围聊城。
English: Li Shentong invaded Kwei County, killed and captured more than two thousand people, led the troops to pursue U Culture and Liaocheng, and surrounded Liaocheng.

古文：甲子，以陈叔达为纳言。
现代文：甲子，唐高祖任命陈叔达为纳言。
English: Emperor Gaozu of Tang Dynasty appointed Chen Shuda as Nagan.

古文：丙寅，李密所置伊州刺史张善相来降。
现代文：丙寅，李密所任命的伊州刺史张善相前来降唐。
English: Cui Yin and Zhang Zensheng, the governor of Yizhou who was appointed by Li Mi, came to Tang.

古文：硃粲有众二十万，剽掠汉、淮之间，迁徙无常，攻破州县，食其积粟未尽，复他适，将去，悉焚其余资；又不务稼穑，民馁死者如积。
现代文：硃粲有二十万人，在汉水、淮河之间剽掠，迁徒没有规律，每攻破一个州县，还没有吃尽该州县积聚的粮食，就又转移，将离州县时，把州县其余的物资全部焚毁；又不注重农业，饿死的老百姓堆的像山那样高。
English: There are two hundred thousand of them, pillaging between the Han River and the Huai River. There is no regularity in their migration. Each time they invade a prefecture, they have not yet exhausted the grain accumulated in the prefecture, and they will move again. When they leave the prefecture, they will burn all the remaining materials in the prefecture. They do not pay attention to agriculture, and the piles of starving people are as high as mountains.

古文：粲无可复掠，军中乏食，乃教士卒烹妇人、婴儿噉之，曰： 肉之美者无过于人，但使他国有人，何忧于馁！ 
现代文：朱粲没有再可掠夺的了，军队中缺乏吃的，就教士兵烧煮妇女、小孩吃，说： 没有比人肉更好吃的了，只要其他的城镇里有人，何必为挨饿发愁呢！ 
English: Zhu Xi had nothing left to plunder. The army was short of food, so he taught the soldiers to cook the women and children and eat them, saying, "There is nothing more delicious than human flesh. As long as there are people in other towns, why worry about starving!"

古文：隋著作佐郎陆从典、通事舍人颜愍楚，谪官在南阳，粲初引为宾客，其后无食，阖家皆为所敢。
现代文：隋朝的著作佐郎陆从典，通事舍人颜愍楚，被贬官住在南阳。朱粲起初都请来作自己的宾客，以后朱粲缺乏吃的，二人全家都被朱粲吃掉。
English: The author of the Sui Dynasty, Saro Lu Congdian, was a man of few words, and lived in Nanyang. At first, Zhu Xi invited him to be his guest. Later, Zhu Xi was short of food, and his entire family was eaten by Zhu Xi.

古文：愍楚，之推之子也。
现代文：颜愍楚是颜之推的儿子。
English: Yan Xizhu is the son of Yan Zhutu.

古文：又税诸城堡细弱以供军食，诸城堡相帅叛之。
现代文：朱粲又征收各城堡的妇人小孩供给军队为军粮，各城堡相继背叛了他。
English: Zhu Xi also levied the women and children of each castle to supply the army with military food, and each castle betrayed him one after another.

古文：淮安土豪杨士林、田瓚起兵攻粲，诸州皆应之。
现代文：淮安当地的豪强杨士林、田瓒起兵攻打朱粲，各州县都响应。
English: The local strongmen Yang Shilin and Tian Qi in Huai'an raised an army to attack Zhu Qi, and all prefectures and counties responded.

古文：粲与战于淮源，大败，帅余众数千奔菊潭。
现代文：朱粲在淮源和他们交战，大败，率领数千名残兵逃奔菊潭。
English: Zhu Xi fought with them in Huaiyuan and suffered a crushing defeat. He led thousands of remaining soldiers to flee to Jutang.

古文：士林家世蛮酋，隋末，士林为鹰扬府校尉，杀郡官而据其郡。既逐硃粲，己巳，帅汉东四郡遣使诣信州总管庐江王瑗请降，诏以为显州道行台。士林以瓚为长史。
现代文：杨士林家族世代都是蛮族首领，隋末，杨士林当鹰扬府校尉，杀了郡里官员占据了郡县，赶跑朱粲以后，已巳，杨士林率领汉东四郡派遣使节到唐信州总管庐江王李瑗处请求投降，唐高祖下诏任命杨士林为显州道行台，杨士林又任命田瓒作长史。
English: Yang Shilin's family had been barbarian leaders for generations. At the end of the Sui Dynasty, Yang Shilin became the captain of Yingyang Prefecture, killed the county officials and occupied the county. After chasing away Zhu Xi, Yang Shilin led the four counties of the East Han Dynasty to send envoys to the general manager of Tang Xinshou, the king of the Minjiang River, Li Xi, to request his surrender. The Emperor Gaozhu of Tang appointed Yang Shilin as the governor of Hsien Province, and Yang Shilin also appointed Tian Qi as the long history.

古文：初，王世充既杀元、卢，虑人情未服，犹媚事皇泰主，礼甚谦敬。
现代文：当初，王世充杀掉元文都、卢楚之后，担心人情不服，还谄媚皇泰主，礼节相当谦敬。
English: At the beginning, after Wang Shichong killed Yuanwendu and Lu Chu, he was worried that he would not be accepted by the people, but he also flattered Emperor Taizong and was quite modest in his etiquette.

古文：又请为刘太后假子，尊号曰圣感皇太后。
现代文：又请求作刘太后的干儿子，尊称刘太后为圣感皇太后。
English: He also requested to be the legitimate son of the Empress Dowager Liu, and respectfully called the Empress Dowager Liu the Empress Dowager Sheng Kan.

古文：既而渐骄横，尝赐食于禁中，还家大吐，疑遇毒，自是不复朝谒。
现代文：以后，王世充便渐渐变得骄横了，有一次在宫中吃了赏赐的食物，回到家里大吐，他便怀疑食物被人下了毒，自那以后，王世充就不再上朝拜谒了。
English: After that, Wang Shicheng gradually became arrogant. Once, he ate the food given to him in the palace and vomited when he returned home. He suspected that the food had been poisoned. Since then, Wang Shicheng no longer went to pay homage.

古文：皇泰主知其终不为臣，而力不能制，唯取内库彩物大造幡花；又出诸服玩，令僧散施贫乏以求福。
现代文：皇泰主知道王世充最后不会甘当臣下，而自己又无力制服他，只能从宫内仓库中取来丝织品，做了许多幡花；又拿出各种衣服玩物，让僧人到处施舍给贫穷、缺少东西的人，以求福佑。
English: Emperor Taizong knew that Wang Shichong would not be a willing subject in the end, and he was powerless to subdue him. He could only take silk fabrics from the palace warehouse and made a lot of flags; he also took out various clothes and toys and asked the monks to give alms everywhere to the poor and those who lacked things, in order to seek blessings.

古文：世充使其党张绩、董浚守章善、显福二门，宫内杂物，毫厘不得出。
现代文：王世充让其党羽张绩、董浚守住章善、显福二门，宫内的杂物，毫厘不得拿出。
English: Wang Shichong let his party members Zhang Cui, Dong Junshu, Zhang Zhen, and Xian Fu two doors, and the debris in the palace must not be taken out.

古文：是月，世充使人献印及剑。
现代文：当月，王世充让人献给他印玺和宝剑。
English: That month, Wang Shichong had a seal and a sword presented to him.

古文：又言河水清，欲以耀众，为己符瑞云。
现代文：他又说黄河水清了，想以此向众人炫耀，为自己制造祥瑞。
English: He also said that the water of the Yellow River was clear, and he wanted to show it off to everyone and create good luck for himself.

古文：上遣金紫光禄大夫武功靳孝谟安集边郡，为梁师都所获。
现代文：唐高祖派金紫光禄大夫武功人靳孝谟带兵安定边郡，靳孝谟被梁师都俘获。
English: Tang Gao Zu sent Jin Zi Guanglu, a doctor of martial arts, and Gong Xiaomu, a military hero, to lead the troops to Dinganbian County. Gong Xiaomu was captured by Liang Shidu.

古文：孝谟骂之极口，师都杀之。
现代文：靳孝谟破口大骂梁师都，被梁师都杀掉。
English: Zou Xiaomu cursed Liang Shidu and was killed by Liang Shidu.

古文：二月，诏追赐爵武昌县公，谥曰忠。
现代文：二月，唐高祖下诏，追赐靳孝谟为武昌县公，谥号为 忠 。
English: In February, Emperor Gaozhu of Tang Dynasty issued an edict, posthumously awarding Gong Xiaomu the title of Wuchang County official, and his posthumous name was Zhong.

古文：初定租、庸、调法，每丁租二石，绢二匹，绵三两；自兹以外，不得横有调敛。
现代文：初步制定租、庸、调法，每个成年男子每年交租二石，绢二匹，绵三两；除此之外，不得横征暴敛。
English: The rent, average, and adjustment methods were initially formulated, and each adult man was required to pay two stone, two horses, and three yarns per year; in addition, he was not allowed to arbitrarily collect.

古文：丙戌，诏： 诸宗姓居官者在同列之上，未仕者免其徭役；每州置宗师一人以摄总，别为团伍。 
现代文：丙戌，高祖下诏： 皇室各同族中做官的，位在同品级官员之上，没有做官的，免除其徭役；每州设立一个宗师加以管理，另为编制。 
English: Emperor Gaozong issued the following edict: Among the members of the imperial family from all ethnic groups, those who have served as officials should be ranked higher than officials of the same grade, and those who have not served as officials should be exempted from the post of eunuch; each state should set up a grand master to manage, and another one should be established.

古文：张俟德至凉，李轨召其群臣廷议曰： 唐天子，吾之从兄，今已正位京邑。
现代文：张俟德到达凉州，李轨召集他的群臣在朝廷上议论说： 唐天子是我的堂兄，现在已在京邑做上皇帝。
English: When Zhang Rongde arrived in Liangzhou, Li Liao called together his ministers to argue in the court and said: Tang Tianzi is my cousin, now he has become the emperor in Beijing.

古文：一姓不可自争天下，吾欲去帝号，受其官爵，可乎？ 
现代文：一姓之人不应自相争夺天下，我想去掉帝号，接受唐朝的封爵，合适吗？ 
English: People with the same surname should not compete with each other for the world, I want to remove the imperial title and accept the Tang Dynasty's knighthood, is it appropriate?

古文：曹珍曰： 隋失其鹿，天下共逐之，称王称帝者，奚啻一人！
现代文：曹珍说： 隋朝失去天下，天下人共争君位，称王称帝的，岂只一人！
English: Cao Zhen said: The Sui Dynasty lost the whole country. People all over the world were competing for the throne. Was there only one person who called himself king and emperor?

古文：唐帝关中，凉帝河右，固不相妨。
现代文：唐朝在关中称帝，凉朝在河右称帝，本来不相妨碍。
English: The Tang Dynasty proclaimed the emperor in Guanzhong, and the Liang Dynasty proclaimed the emperor in Hezu, which did not interfere with each other.

古文：且已为天子，奈何复自贬黜！
现代文：况且您已经做了天子，何必又自己贬黜自己呢！
English: Besides, you have already become a son of heaven, why do you have to belittle yourself!

古文：必欲以小事大，请依萧察事魏故事。 
现代文：如果您想以小事大的话，就请依照过去梁朝萧服从魏朝的那种做法吧。 
English: If you want to make a big deal out of a small thing, please follow the practice of Liang Zhao Xiao obeying the Wei Dynasty in the past.

古文：轨从之。
现代文：李轨听从了曹珍的话。
English: Li Rail obeyed Cao Zhen's words.

古文：戊戌，轨遣其尚书左丞邓晓入见，奉书称 皇从弟大凉皇帝臣轨 而不受官爵。
现代文：戊戌，李轨派遣他的尚书左丞邓晓入京见唐朝皇帝，献书上自称 皇帝的堂弟、大凉国皇帝、臣下李轨 ，而不接受唐朝的官爵。
English: Wuzhen, Li Rail sent his Shangshu Zuorong Deng Xiao to Beijing to see the Tang Dynasty emperor, and Li Rail, who claimed to be the emperor's cousin, the Emperor of the Great Liang, and a vassal, did not accept the Tang Dynasty's official title.

古文：帝怒，拘晓不遣，始议兴师讨之。
现代文：高祖很生气，拘留了邓晓，不让他返回。同时开始议论兴师讨伐李轨之事。
English: Gaozu was very angry, detained Deng Xiao and did not allow him to return. At the same time, he began to discuss the matter of Xingshi's crusade against Li Gang.

古文：初，隋炀帝自征吐谷浑，吐谷浑可汗伏允以数千骑奔党项，炀帝立其质子顺为主，使统余众，不果入而还。
现代文：当初，隋炀帝亲自征讨吐谷浑，吐谷浑的可汗伏允带领几千骑兵逃到党项，隋炀帝扶立吐谷浑在隋作人质的伏允之子伏顺为吐谷浑君主，让伏顺统帅留下的部众，但伏顺没能回到吐谷浑便返回中原。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Sui personally recruited Tukuhun, and Tukuhun's khan Fuyun led several thousand cavalrymen to escape to the capital. Emperor Sui made Tukuhun's son Fushun, who had been a hostage in the Sui Dynasty, the monarch of Tukuhun, and allowed him to command the remaining troops. However, Fushun was unable to return to Tukuhun and returned to the Central Plains.

古文：会中国丧乱，伏允复还收其故地。
现代文：恰逢中国丧乱，伏允又返回吐谷浑收回原有的领地。
English: Coinciding with the turmoil in China, Fuyun returned to Tugu Hun to reclaim his original territory.

古文：上受禅，顺自江都还长安，上遣使与伏允连和，使击李轨，许以顺还之。
现代文：皇上即位时，伏顺从江都回到长安，高祖派使者与伏允联合，让伏允进攻李轨，许愿归还伏顺。
English: When the emperor ascended the throne, Fushun returned to Chang'an from Jiangdu. Gao Zu sent an envoy to unite with Fuyun, let Fuyun attack Li Rail, and promised to return Fushun.

古文：伏允喜，起兵击轨，数遣使入贡请顺，上遣之。
现代文：伏允很高兴，发兵进攻李轨，几次派遣使者给唐朝进贡，请求归还伏顺，皇上遣返伏顺回吐谷浑。
English: Fuxun was very happy, sent troops to attack Li Rail, and several times sent envoys to pay tribute to the Tang Dynasty, requesting the return of Fuxun, and the emperor repatriated Fuxun back to Tugu Hun.

古文：闰月，硃粲遣使请降，诏以粲为楚王，听自置官属，以便宜从事。
现代文：闰二月，朱粲派使者到唐朝请求投降，高祖下诏立朱粲为楚王，听凭朱粲自己设立官属，视方便办事。
English: In leap February, Zhu Di sent an envoy to the Tang Dynasty to request surrender. Gao Zu decreed that Zhu Di was the King of Chu, and allowed Zhu Di to set up his own subordinates and act as he saw fit.

古文：宇文化及以珍货诱海曲诸贼，贼帅王薄帅众从之，与共守聊城。
现代文：宇文化及用珍奇货物引诱海边的贼众，贼帅王薄率贼众服从宇文化及，与宇文化及一起守护聊城。
English: U Culture and lure the thieves on the seashore with rare goods. The Thief King leads the thieves to obey U Culture and guard Liaocheng together with U Culture and Liaocheng.

古文：窦建德谓其群下曰： 吾为隋民，隋为吾君；今宇文化及弑逆，乃吾仇也，吾不可以不讨！ 
现代文：窦建德对其群下说： 我是隋朝百姓，隋是我的君主；现在宇文化及叛逆杀了皇帝，就是我的仇人，我不能不讨伐！ 
English: Dou Jiande said to his group: I am the people of the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty is my monarch; now that the Yu Culture and Rebellion have killed the emperor, who is my enemy, I can't help but fight!

古文：乃引兵趣聊城。
现代文：于是带兵开赴聊城。
English: So he led his soldiers to Liaocheng.

古文：淮安王神通攻聊城，化及粮尽，请降，神通不许。
现代文：淮安王李神通攻打聊城，宇文化及没有了粮食，请求投降，李神通不准。
English: Huai'an King Lishentong attacked Liaocheng, Yu Culture and had no grain, asked for surrender, Lishentong was not allowed.

古文：安抚副使崔世幹劝神通许之，神通曰： 军士暴露日久，贼食尽计穷，克在旦暮，吾当攻取以示国威，且散其玉帛以劳战士；若受其降，将何以为军赏乎！ 
现代文：安抚副使崔世劝李神通准许宇文化及投降，李神通说： 军队、士卒风餐露宿这么长时间，敌人粮尽计穷，马上就能取胜，我要攻下聊城以宣扬国威，并且分了他的财宝慰劳将士，如果接受他投降，那么用什么来作赏赐军队的费用呢？ 
English: The pacifying vice-envoy Cui Shih advised Li Shentong to allow the Uygur culture and surrender. Li Shentong said: The army and soldiers have been camping for such a long time, and the enemy is so poor in food that they can win immediately. I want to capture Liaocheng to promote national dignity, and I have divided his treasure to comfort the soldiers. If I accept his surrender, what will I use to reward the army?

古文：世幹曰： 今建德方至，若化及未平，内外受敌，吾军必败。
现代文：崔世说： 现在窦建德就要抵达，如果还没有平定宇文化及，里外受敌，我军必然失败。
English: Cui Shih said, "Now that Dou Jiande is about to arrive, if we haven't pacified the Yu culture and haven't been attacked by enemies at home and abroad, our army will inevitably fail.

古文：夫不攻而下之，为功甚易，奈何贪其玉帛而不受乎！ 
现代文：不打就降服了敌人，作为功劳来得太容易了，怎么还能贪图他的财宝而不接受投降呢？ 
English: How can one covet his treasure and not accept his surrender?

古文：神通怒，囚世幹于军中。
现代文：李神通很生气，把崔世囚禁在军中。
English: Li Shentong was very angry and imprisoned Cui Shitong in the army.

古文：既而宇文士及自济北馈之，化及军稍振，遂复拒战。
现代文：不久，宇文士及从济北运粮接济宇文化及，宇文化及的兵力逐渐恢复，于是又重新抵抗。
English: Soon after, the Uwenshi and the troops of the Jiu Culture and the Jiu Culture gradually recovered from the grain transportation from the north of Jeju, so they resisted again.

古文：神通督兵攻之，贝州刺史赵君德攀堞先登，神通心害其功，收兵不战。君德大诟而下，遂不克。
现代文：李神通督率军队攻城，贝州刺史赵君德率先攀着城堞登上城墙，李神通心中嫉妒他的功劳，收兵不战，赵君德大骂下了城，于是未能攻克。
English: Li Shentong led the army to attack the city, and the besiegers Zhao Junde took the lead in climbing the battlements to climb the city wall. Li Shentong was jealous of his achievements, and did not want to fight. Zhao Junde cursed the city and failed to conquer it.

古文：建德军且至，神通引兵退。
现代文：窦建德的军队即将抵达，李神通于是带兵撤退。
English: Dou Jiande's army was about to arrive, so Li Shentong withdrew with his soldiers.

古文：建德与化及连战，大破之，化及复保聊城。
现代文：窦建德和宇文化及连续交锋，大败宇文化及，宇文化及重又保守聊城。
English: Dou Jiande and Yu culture and continuous confrontation, defeated Yu culture and, Yu culture and heavy and conservative Liaocheng.

古文：建德纵兵四面急攻，王薄开门纳之。
现代文：窦建德率兵从四面猛攻，王薄开城门迎入窦军。
English: Dou Jiande and his soldiers attacked fiercely from all directions, and Wang Bo opened the city gate to welcome Dou's army.

古文：建德入城，生擒化及，先谒隋萧皇后，语皆称臣，素服哭炀帝尽哀；收传国玺及卤簿仪仗，抚存隋之百官，然后执逆党宇文智及、杨士览、元武达、许弘仁、孟景，集隋官而斩之，枭首军门之外。
现代文：窦建德进城，活捉了宇文化及，先去拜谒了隋萧皇后，言语都自称臣下，身着白色服装哭隋炀帝以尽哀节；收拾隋传国玉玺及车驾仪仗，安抚隋朝的百官，然后，捉住派逆的同党宇文智及、杨士览、元武达、许弘仁、孟景，集合隋朝官员当面斩了这几个人，割下首级悬挂于军营门外。
English: Dou Jiande entered the city, captured U Culture and first went to pay homage to Empress Sui Xiao, all of whom claimed to be his vassals. Dressed in white clothing, he wept for Emperor Sui in full mourning. He collected the imperial regalia of the Sui Dynasty and the ceremonial chariots to pacify the hundreds of officials of the Sui Dynasty. Then, he captured the dissident party members U Wenzhi, Yang Shizhang, Yuan Wuda, Xu Hongren, and Meng Jing, and gathered the officials of the Sui Dynasty to behead these people in person, and hung the severed heads outside the gate of the military camp.

古文：以槛车载化及并二子承基、承趾至襄国，斩之。
现代文：用槛车载宇文化及和两个儿子宇文承基、宇文承趾到襄国，将他们斩首。
English: He took U Bunka and his two sons, Umen Seung-gi and Umen Seung-tae, to Xiangguo in a covered wagon and beheaded them.

古文：化及且死，更无馀言，但云： 不负夏王！ 
现代文：宇文化及临死，没有什么要说的，只说道： 不负复王！ 
English: When he was about to die, he had nothing to say, except, "I am worthy to be restored to the throne!"

古文：建德每战胜克城，所得资财，悉以分将士，身无所取。
现代文：窦建德每次打了胜仗、攻陷城池，得到的物资财产，全部用来分给将士，自己不留任何东西。
English: Every time Dou Jiande won a battle or captured a castle, all the materials and property he obtained were used to distribute to his soldiers, and he did not keep anything for himself.

古文：又不敢肉，常食蔬，茹粟饭；妻曹氏，不衣纨绮，所役婢妾，才十许人。
现代文：他又不吃肉，经常吃蔬菜，下粗米饭，妻子曹氏，不穿绫绢做的衣服，役使的奴婢侍妾，才十几个人。
English: He also does not eat meat, often eats vegetables, eats coarse rice, his wife, Ms. Cao, does not wear clothes made of silk, and there are only a dozen servants and concubines.

古文：及破化及，得隋宫人千数，即时散遣之。
现代文：待到打败宇文化及，获得一千多名隋朝宫女，当即遣散。
English: Wait until the defeat of Yu Culture and obtain more than a thousand Sui Dynasty palace maids, immediately dismissed.

古文：以隋黄门侍郎裴矩为左仆射，掌选事，兵部侍郎崔君肃为侍中，少府令何稠为工部尚书，右司郎中柳调为左丞，虞世南为黄门侍郎，欧阳询为太常卿。
现代文：窦建德任命隋朝的黄门侍郎裴矩为左仆射，掌管官吏的选拔，兵部侍郎崔君肃为侍中，少府令何稠为工部尚书，右司郎中柳调为左丞，虞世南为黄门侍郎，欧阳询为太常卿。
English: Dou Jiande appointed the Yellow Gate chamberlain of the Sui Dynasty, Pei Rong, as the left footman, in charge of the selection of officials, the War Department chamberlain, Cui Junsu, as the junior chamberlain, the minor prefect, He Cong, as the senior secretary of the Ministry of Industry, the right secretary, Zhong Liu, as the junior secretary of the left, Yu Shennan as the Yellow Gate chamberlain, and Ouyang Xun as the grand secretary.

古文：询，纥之子也。
现代文：欧阳询是欧阳纥的儿子。
English: Ouyang En is the son of Ouyang Yao.

古文：自馀随才授职，委以政事。
现代文：其余的隋朝官员也都量才授官，交给他们政事。
English: The remaining officials of the Sui Dynasty were also appointed according to their ability, and political affairs were handed over to them.

古文：其不愿留，欲诣关中及东都者，亦听之，仍给资粮，以兵援之出境。
现代文：对不愿留下的人，准备去关中或东都的，听任他们前往，并给予路费粮食，派兵保护他们出境。
English: For those who do not want to stay, who are ready to go to Guanzhong or Dongdu, let them go, and give them travel expenses and food, and send soldiers to protect them from leaving the country.

古文：隋骁果尚近万人，亦各纵遣，任其所之。
现代文：隋骁果还有近一万人，也分派遣返，听任他们选择去处。
English: There are nearly ten thousand people in Sui and Bingguo, and they are also dispatched to return, leaving them to choose where to go.

古文：又与王世充结好，遣使奉表于隋皇泰主，皇泰主封为夏王。
现代文：窦建德又与王世充联合交好，派遣使节进表于皇泰主，黄泰主封他为夏王。
English: Dou Jiande also made a joint friendship with Wang Shichong, dispatched envoys to the court of Emperor Taizong, and Huang Tai made him the king of summer.

古文：建德起于群盗，虽建国，未有文物法度，裴矩为之定朝仪，制律令，建德甚悦，每从之咨访典礼。
现代文：窦建德出身盗贼，虽然建国，但没有典章制度，裴矩为他制定朝仪，修订法律，窦建德非常高兴，经常向裴矩请教礼仪典章之事。
English: Dou Jiande was born a thief. Although the founding of the country, there was no formal system. Pei An formulated the morning ceremony and revised the law for him. Dou Jiande was very happy and often asked Pei An for advice on ceremonial and formalities.

古文：甲辰，上考第群臣，以李纲、孙伏伽为第一。因置酒高会，谓裴寂等曰： 隋氏以主骄臣谄亡天下，朕即位以来，每虚心求谏，然唯李纲差尽忠款，孙伏伽可谓诚直。馀人犹踵敝风，俯眉而已，岂朕所望哉！
现代文：甲辰，唐高祖考核群臣高下，李纲、孙伏伽为第一，于是设盛大宴会，对裴寂等人说： 隋朝因为君主骄奢，臣子谄媚，丢了天下，朕即位以来，经常虚心求谏，但是唯有李纲比较能竭尽忠诚，孙伏伽可以称的正直，其余的仍然沿袭隋朝恶劣的风气，只是俯首贴耳，这岂是朕所希望的！
English: Jia Chen, Tang Gao's ancestor, assessed the group of high-ranking officials, Li Gang and Sun Fu Jia as the first, so he set up a grand banquet and said to Pei Jia and others: The Sui Dynasty lost the world because of the monarch's arrogance and the flattery of the courtiers. Since I ascended the throne, I have often humbly begged for favors, but only Li Gang is more able to be loyal, and Sun Fu Jia can be said to be honest. The rest still follow the bad customs of the Sui Dynasty, but just bow their heads and stick their ears. Isn't this what I hope

古文：朕视卿如爱子，卿当视朕如慈父。有怀必尽，勿自隐也。 
现代文：朕视各位犹如爱子，各位应当将朕当作慈父，有什么看法一定要畅所欲言，不要埋在心里。 
English: I regard you all as my beloved children, and you should regard me as a loving father. Any opinions you may have must be freely expressed, and not buried in your hearts.

古文：因命舍君臣之敬，极欢而罢。
现代文：于是下令免去君臣之间的礼数，尽兴而罢。
English: So he ordered that the number of courtesies between princes and ministers be waived, and that they should enjoy themselves to the full.

古文：遣前御史大夫段确使于硃粲。
现代文：唐派遣前御史大夫段确出使朱粲之处。
English: The part where the Tang dispatched the former Imperial Historian is where Zhu Xi's envoy really comes into play.

古文：初，上为隋殿内少监，宇文士及为尚辇奉御，上与之善。
现代文：当初，唐高祖作隋殿内少监，宇文士当隋尚辇奉御，高祖与他很要好。
English: At the beginning, Tang Gao Zu served as a junior inspector in the Sui Dynasty, and Wu Wenshi served as Sui Shangyuan. Gao Zu was very friendly with him.

古文：士及从化及至黎阳，上手诏召之，士及潜遣家僮间道诣长安，又因使者献金环。
现代文：宇文士及随宇文化及到黎阳，高祖亲笔写诏书召宇文士及，宇文士及暗中派家僮从小路赴长安，又托使者献金环表示想回长安。
English: Gaozhu personally wrote an imperial edict to summon Uwenshi and Uwenshi secretly sent a messenger to Chang'an, and asked the messenger to donate a gold ring to express his wish to return to Chang'an.

古文：化及至魏县，兵势日蹙，士及劝之归唐，化及不从，内史令封德彝说士及于济北征督军粮以观其变。
现代文：宇文化及到魏县，兵力日益衰弱，宇文士及劝他归顺唐朝，宇文化及不听，内史令封德彝劝士及在济北征收督运军粮静观其变。
English: When U Bun Hwa arrived in Wei County, his army was getting weaker and weaker. U Bun Hwa tried to persuade him to submit to the Tang Dynasty, but U Bun Hwa did not listen. He was ordered by the emperor to pay tribute to the emperor and to collect grain for the military transportation in northern Jeju.

古文：化及称帝，立士及为蜀王。
现代文：宇文化及称帝，立士及为蜀王。
English: Universal culture and glorifying the emperor, establishing the emperor and being the king of Shu.

古文：化及死，士及与德彝自济北来降。
现代文：宇文化及死后，宇文化及和封德彝从济北前来降唐。
English: After U Bunka's death, U Bunka and Hefeng Dejun came down from Jibei to Tang.

古文：时士及妹为昭仪，由是授上仪同。
现代文：当时宇文士及的妹妹是后宫中的昭仪，因此授予士及上仪同之衔。
English: At that time, Uwenshi and his younger sister were Zhaoyi in the harem, so they were awarded the same title as Zhaoyi and Shangyi.

古文：上以封德彝隋室旧臣，而谄巧不忠，深诮责之，罢遣就舍。
现代文：高祖因为封德彝是隋朝旧臣，谄媚虚伪而不忠诚，狠狠地斥责了他一番，罢免了他的官职遣返回家。
English: Gao Zu severely reprimanded Feng Dejun, who was an old minister of the Sui Dynasty, for being charming, hypocritical and disloyal, and dismissed him from his post and sent him back home.

古文：德彝以秘策干上，上悦，寻拜内史舍人，俄迁待郎。
现代文：封德彝用秘策迎合皇上，谋求进身，高祖很高兴，马上拜封德彝为内史舍人，不久又升迁为侍郎一级官员。
English: Gao Zu was very pleased that Fong Deyu used his secret strategy to meet the emperor and seek advancement. He immediately made Fong Deyu a member of the privy council, and was soon promoted to the first-level official of the chamberlain.

古文：甲寅，隋夷陵郡丞安陆许绍帅黔安、武陵、澧阳等诸郡来降。
现代文：甲寅，隋朝夷陵郡丞安陆人许绍带领黔安、武陵、澧阳等郡官吏前来降唐。
English: Jia Yin, the Sui Dynasty Yiling County chief An Lu person Xu Shao led the county officials such as Yan'an, Wuling, and Fenyang to come to Tang.

古文：绍幼与帝同学；诏以绍为峡州刺史，赐爵安陆公。
现代文：许绍幼年与高祖在一起上学，高祖下诏任命许绍为峡州刺史，赐爵安陆公。
English: When he was a child, Xu Shao went to school with Gaozu. Gaozu issued an edict to appoint Xu Shao as the governor of Xiaozhou and give him the title of Duke of Anlu.

古文：丙辰，以徐世勣为黎州总管。
现代文：丙辰，唐高祖任命徐世为黎州总管。
English: Cixin, Tang Gaozu appointed Xu Shizhen as the general manager of Lizhou.

古文：丁巳，骠骑将军张孝珉以劲卒百人袭王世充汜水城，入其郛，沉米船百五十艘。
现代文：丁巳，唐骠骑将军张孝珉率领一百精壮士兵袭击王世充的汜水城，进入汜水外城，将一百五十艘运米船沉入水中。
English: At the same time, Zhang Xiaohui, the general of the Tang Dynasty cavalry Zhang Xiaohui, led a hundred strong soldiers to attack the Surabaya city of Wang Shichong, entered the outer city of Surabaya, and sank a hundred and fifty rice ships into the water.

古文：己未，世充寇穀州。世充以秦叔宝为龙骧大将军，程知节为将军，待之皆厚。
现代文：己未，王世充侵犯州，王世充任命秦叔宝为龙骧大将军，程知节为将军，待他们很好。
English: Before Wang Shicheng invaded the state, Wang Shicheng appointed Qin Shubao as the general of Longjing and Cheng Zhisai as the general, and treated them well.

古文：然二人疾世充多诈，知节谓叔宝曰： 王公器度浅狭而多妄语，好为咒誓，此乃老巫妪耳，岂拨乱之主乎！ 
现代文：但是二人憎恨王世充多诈，程知节对秦叔宝说： 王公才识风度浅薄狭隘，却爱乱说，喜欢赌咒发誓，这不过是老巫婆，哪里是拨乱反正的君主！ 
English: However, the two hated Wang Shicheng for being deceitful. Cheng Zhisai said to Qin Shubao: Wang Gongcai is shallow and narrow-minded, but he loves to talk about chaos and swear oaths. This is nothing but an old witch, where is the monarch who is stirring up chaos!

古文：世充与唐兵战于九曲，叔宝、知节皆将兵在陈，与其徒数十骑，西驰百许步，下马拜世充曰： 仆荷公殊礼，深思报效；公性猜忌，喜信谗言，非仆托身之所，今不能仰事，请从此辞。 
现代文：王世充在九曲与唐军交战，秦叔宝、程知节都带兵在阵上，和他们的几十名部下，骑着马向西跑了一百来步，然后下马向王世充行礼，说道： 我等身受您的特别优待，总想报恩效力，但您性情猜忌，爱信谗言，不是我等托身之处，如今不能再侍奉您，请求从此分别。 
English: Wang Shichong fought against the Tang army in Jiuqu. Qin Shubao and Cheng Zhijie both led soldiers in the battle, and with their dozens of subordinates, they rode a hundred paces to the west, then dismounted and bowed to Wang Shichong, saying: I am so privileged by your special treatment, I always want to repay your kindness, but your temperament is suspicious, love to believe and slander, it is not a place for me to hide, now I can no longer serve you, I request to be separated from now on.

古文：遂跃马来降，世充不敢逼。
现代文：于是跳上马前来降唐，王世充不敢追逼。
English: Therefore, Wang Shichong jumped on his horse and came to the Tang Dynasty. Wang Shichong did not dare to chase him.

古文：上使事秦王世民，世民素闻其名，厚礼之，以叔宝为马军总管，知节为左三统军。
现代文：高祖让他们侍奉秦王李世民，李世民早已听说他们的名声，十分尊重他们，任命秦叔宝为马军总管，程知节为左三统军。
English: Gao Zu let them serve Qin King Li Shimin. Li Shimin had already heard of their reputation and respected them very much. He appointed Qin Shubao as the commander-in-chief of the Horse Army, and Cheng Zhijie as the commander-in-chief of the Left Third United Army.

古文：时世充骁将又有骠骑武安李君羡、征南将军临邑田留安，亦恶世充之为人，帅众来降。
现代文：当时王世充的骁将还有骠骑武安人李君羡、征南将军临邑人田留安，也厌恶王世充的为人，带领部下前来投降。
English: At that time, Wang Shichong's commander-in-chief was also the commander-in-chief of the cavalry of the Wu'an people, Li Junen, and the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, Lin Yurong, Tian Liu'an. He also detested Wang Shichong as a person and led his subordinates to surrender.

古文：世民引君羡置左右，以留安为右四统军。
现代文：李世民将李君羡安置在身边，任命田留安为右四统军。
English: Li Shimin placed Li Junen at his side and appointed Tian Ruian as the leader of the Right Four United Army.

古文：王世充囚李育德之兄厚德于获嘉，厚德与其守将赵君颖逐殷州刺史段大师，以城来降。
现代文：王世充将李育德的兄长李厚德囚禁在获嘉县，李厚德与看守他的将领赵君颖赶走了殷州刺史段大师，以城池来降唐。
English: Wang Shichong imprisoned Li Yude's brother Li Houde in Hujia County. Li Houde and the general Zhao Junying, who was guarding him, drove away the master of Yinzhou, and used the city to bring down Tang.

古文：以厚德为殷州刺史。
现代文：唐任命李厚德为殷州刺史。
English: Tang appointed Li Houde as the chief historian of Yinzhou.

古文：窦建德陷邢州，执总管陈君宾。
现代文：窦建德攻陷了邢州，活捉了总管陈君宾。
English: Dou Jiande invaded Zhangzhou and captured the general manager Chen Junbin alive.

古文：上遣殿内监窦诞、右卫将军宇文歆助并州总管齐王元吉守晋阳。
现代文：唐高祖派遣殿内监窦诞、右卫将军宇文歆协助并州总管齐王李元吉镇守晋阳。
English: Emperor Gaozong of Tang dispatched the palace inspector Dou Sheng, the right guard general U Wenjun to assist, and the state general Qi Wang Li Yuanji to guard Jinyang.

古文：诞，抗之子也，尚帝女襄阳公主。
现代文：窦诞是窦抗的儿子，娶了高祖的女儿襄阳公主。
English: Dou Guo, the son of Dou Qi, married Gao Zu's daughter, Princess Xiangyang.

古文：元吉性骄侈，奴客婢妾数百人，好使之被甲，戏为攻战，前后死伤甚众，元吉亦尝被伤。
现代文：李元吉性情骄横，生活奢侈，有几百名奴婢侍妾，喜欢让他们穿上战袍，作打仗的游戏，前后死伤了很多人，李元吉也曾受伤。
English: Li Yuanji was arrogant and lived a luxurious life. He had hundreds of servants and concubines, and liked to dress them in battle robes and play war games. Many people were killed and injured, and Li Yuanji was also injured.

古文：其乳母陈善意苦谏，元吉醉，怒，命壮士殴杀之。
现代文：元吉的奶妈陈善意苦苦劝说，元吉喝醉，听到她的话很生气，命令力士打死了陈善意。
English: Yuanji's wet nurse, Chen Shanwei, tried hard to persuade him. Yuanji was drunk and was very angry when he heard her words. He ordered a wrestler to beat Chen Shanwei to death.

古文：性好田猎，载罔罟三十余车，尝言： 我宁三日不食，不能一日不猎。 
现代文：李元吉生性喜欢打猎，有三十车捕捉鸟兽鱼虾的网，曾经说： 我宁可三天不吃饭，也不能一天不打猎。 
English: Li Yuanjisheng likes to hunt. He has a net of thirty carts to catch birds, animals, fish and shrimps. He once said: I would rather not eat for three days than not hunt for one day.

古文：常与诞游猎，蹂践人禾稼。
现代文：常常和窦诞游猎，践踏百姓的庄稼。
English: He often went hunting with Dou Xing and trampled on people's crops.

古文：又纵左右夺民物，当衢射人，观其避箭。
现代文：他还放纵身边的人枪夺民物，在大街上射人，看人避箭的样子。
English: He also allowed people around him to take civilian property with guns, shoot people on the street, and watch people dodge arrows.

古文：夜，开府门，宣淫他室。
现代文：夜里打开王府大门，公然在别人家做出淫秽之事。
English: Open the gate of the royal palace at night, and openly do obscene things in other people's homes.

古文：百姓愤怨，歆屡谏不纳，乃表言其状。壬戌，元吉坐免官。
现代文：百姓十分愤恨，宇文歆屡次规劝元吉都不听，于是宇文歆上表报告了李元吉的情况。壬戌，李元吉获罪被免官。
English: The people were very angry, and Uwen Hui did not listen to the repeated exhortations of Yuanji, so Uwen Hui reported the situation of Li Yuanji on the table. After all, Li Yuanji was convicted and removed from office.

古文：癸亥，陟州刺史李育德攻下王世充河内堡聚三十一所。
现代文：癸亥，唐陟州刺史李育德攻下王世充在河内地区的三十一座堡垒村落。
English: At the beginning of the 19th century, Li Yude, a Tang dynasty general, conquered the 31 fortress villages of Wang Shichong in the Hanoi region.

古文：乙丑，世充遣其兄子君廓侵陟州，李育德击走之，斩首千余级。
现代文：乙丑，王世充派遣侄子王君廓侵犯陟州，李育德击退来敌，杀死一千多人。
English: Second Ugly, Wang Shichong sent his nephew Wang Junku to invade Zhangzhou, Li Yude repelled the enemy and killed more than a thousand people.

古文：李厚德归省亲疾，使李育德守获嘉，世充并兵攻之，丁卯，城陷，育德及弟三人皆战死。
现代文：李厚德回乡探望生病的父母，让李育德守卫获嘉，王世充合兵攻打获嘉，丁卯，获嘉陷落，李育德与三个弟弟全部阵亡。
English: Li Houde went back to his hometown to visit his sick parents, so that Li Yude's guards were awarded, Wang Shicheng's soldiers attacked and won, Dingwu and Jia fell, Li Yude and his three younger brothers all died in battle.

古文：己巳，李公逸以雍丘来降，拜杞州总管，以其族弟善行为杞州刺史。
现代文：己巳，李公逸以雍丘前来降唐，官拜杞州总管，任命他的同族弟弟李善行为杞州刺史。
English: At that time, Li Gongyi came from Yongqiu to the Tang Dynasty and became the governor of Bozhou. He appointed his brother Li Shan to be the governor of Bozhou.

古文：隋吏部侍郎杨恭仁，从宇文化及至河北；化及败，魏州总管元宝藏获之，己巳，送长安。
现代文：隋朝的吏部侍郎杨恭仁，跟随宇文化及来到河北；宇文化及失败，被唐魏州总管元宝藏俘获，已巳，将杨恭仁押送到长安。
English: Yang Guoren, an official of the Sui Dynasty, came to Hebei with Yu Wenhua; Yu Wenhua failed and was captured by the chief administrator of the Tang and Wei states, and Yang Guoren was sent to Chang'an.

古文：上与之有旧，拜黄门侍郎，寻以为凉州总管。
现代文：唐高祖和他是老相识，于是杨恭仁官拜黄门侍郎，随即又任命为凉州总管。
English: Tang Gaozu and he knew each other for a long time. Therefore, Yang Gongren was appointed as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain, and then he was appointed as the head of Liangzhou.

古文：恭仁素习边事，晓羌、胡情伪，民夷悦服，自葱岭已东，并入朝贡。
现代文：杨恭仁一向熟悉边境事务，了解羌、胡各族的虚实，凉州百姓与夷族对他都心悦诚服，葱岭以东地区的各国，都前来朝拜，献纳贡品。
English: Yang Guoren has always been familiar with border affairs and understands the truth and falsehood of the Yan and Hu ethnic groups. The people of Liangzhou and the barbarians are all pleased with him, and all countries in the eastern region of the Qilian Mountains have come to worship and pay tribute.

古文：突厥始毕可汗将其众渡河至夏州，梁师都发兵会之，以五百骑授刘武周，欲自句注入寇太原。会始毕卒，子什钵苾幼，未可立，立其弟俟利弗设为处罗可汗。
现代文：突厥始毕可汗带领手下人马渡过黄河到夏州，梁师都排出军队与突厥会合，把五百骑兵授予刘武周，准备从句注入侵太原，恰好始毕去世，始毕的儿子什钵年幼，不能立为可汗。突厥立始毕的弟弟俟利弗设为处罗可汗。
English: Turk Zhi Bi Khan led his men across the Yellow River to Cangzhou, and Liang's division all left the army to join the Turks. He gave five hundred cavalrymen to Liu Wu Zhou to prepare for the invasion of Taiyuan. It happened that Zhi Bi died, and Zhi Bi's son Shifu was too young to become khan. Turk Zhi Bi's younger brother Qili Fu was set up as Zhanluo khan.

古文：处罗以什钵苾为尼步设，使居东偏，直幽州之北。
现代文：处罗任命什钵为尼步设，把他安置在突厥的东部，正当幽州的北面。
English: Shi Luo appointed Shifang as his deputy and placed him in the eastern part of Turkey, just north of Yuzhou.

古文：先是，上遣右武候将军高静奉币使于始毕，至丰州，闻始毕卒，敕纳于所在之库。
现代文：这之前，唐高祖派遣右武候将军高静携带礼物出使突厥，走到丰州，听说始毕去世，朝廷下令将这些礼物交到当地的仓库。
English: Prior to this, Tang Gaozu sent General Gao Jing to carry gifts to the Turks and went to Fuzhou. When he died, the court ordered these gifts to be delivered to a local warehouse.

古文：突厥闻之，怒，欲入寇；丰州总管张长逊遣高静以币出塞为朝廷致赙，突厥乃还。
现代文：突厥闻讯，很气愤，打算入侵，丰州总管张长逊派高静带这些礼物出塞作为朝廷赠送给始毕丧事的用款，于是突厥回师。
English: Hearing the news, the Turks were very angry and planned to invade. The governor of Fuzhou, Zhang Changsun, sent Gao Jing out with these gifts as a gift from the imperial court to pay for the funeral, so the Turks returned.

古文：三月，庚午，梁师都寇灵州，长史杨则击走之。
现代文：三月庚午，梁师都侵犯灵州，被唐灵州长史杨则击退。
English: In the late afternoon of March, Liang Shidu invaded Lingzhou, but was repulsed by Tangling Governor Shi Yang.

古文：壬申，王世充寇穀州，刺史史万宝战不利。
现代文：壬申，王世充侵犯州，唐州刺史史万宝迎战失利。
English: Jinshin, Wang Shicheng invaded the state, and Tangzhou defeated Wanbao.

古文：庚辰，隋北海通守郑虔符、文登令方惠整及东海、齐郡、东平、任城、平陆、寿张、须昌贼帅王薄等并以其地来降。
现代文：庚辰，隋朝北海通守郑虔符、文登县令方惠整以及东海，齐郡，东平、任城、平陆、寿张、须昌叛乱首领王薄等人都以属地降唐。
English: Geng Chen, Zheng Qianfu, the commander-in-chief of the North Sea of the Sui Dynasty, Fang Huijin, the commander of Wenden County, and Wang Bo, the rebel leader of the East Sea, Qi County, Dongping, Rencheng, Pinglu, Shuzhang, and Suchang, all surrendered their territories to Tang.

古文：王世充之寇新安也。外示攻取，实召文武之附己者议受禅。
现代文：王世充侵犯新安，对外说是要攻取城池，实际召集文武官员中附合自己的人商议接受禅让帝位的事。
English: Wang Shichong invaded Xin'an, saying to the outside world that he was going to capture the city, but in fact he called together the civil and military officials who agreed with him to discuss the matter of accepting Zen's abdication.

古文：李世英深以为不可，曰： 四方所以奔驰归附东都者，以公能中兴隋室故也。今九州之地，未清其一，遽正位号，恐远人皆思叛去矣！ 
现代文：李世英坚持认为不可，他说： 四方八面的群雄之所以迅速归附东都，是认为您能够中兴隋朝的缘故，如今全国九州之地，平定的还不及其一就仓促称帝，恐怕与您不够亲近的人，都想叛离而去了！ 
English: Li Shiying insisted that it was impossible, he said: The reason why the heroes of the four directions and eight sides quickly attached Dongdu was that they thought that you could rejuvenate the Sui Dynasty. Nowadays, the land of Kyushu, which is not yet peaceful, hastily proclaimed the emperor. I am afraid that people who are not close enough to you want to defect and leave!

古文：世充曰： 公言是也！ 
现代文：王世充说： 你说的对！ 
English: Wang Shichong said: You are right!

古文：长史韦节、杨续等曰： 隋氏数穷，在理昭然。
现代文：长史韦节、杨续等说： 隋朝的气数已经完了，这道理很明白。
English: Chang Shihwei, Yang Cuiwei and others said: The Qi number of the Sui Dynasty has been completed, this reason is very clear.

古文：夫非常之事，固不可与常人议之。 
现代文：特殊情况，自然不可与常人商量。 
English: Special circumstances, of course, cannot be discussed with ordinary people.

古文：太史令乐德融曰： 昔岁长星出，乃除旧布新之征；今岁星在角、亢。亢，郑之分野。
现代文：太史令乐德融说： 往年长星出现，这是除旧布新的征兆，现今岁星在角宿、亢宿，亢宿是郑的分野。
English: Taishi Lingle De Rong said: In the past, the long stars appeared, which was a sign of the removal of the old cloth and the emergence of a new one. Now, the long stars are in the horns of the inn, the inn, and the inn is Zheng's field.

古文：若不亟顺天道，恐王气衰息。 
现代文：如果不马上顺应天道，恐怕王气就会衰落。 
English: If you don't follow the heavenly path right away, I'm afraid your royal power will wane.

古文：世充从之。
现代文：王世充听从了这些意见。
English: Wang Shichong listened to these opinions.

古文：外兵曹参军戴胄言于世充曰： 君臣犹父子也，休戚同之，明公莫若竭忠徇国，则家国俱安矣。 
现代文：外兵曹参军戴胄对王世充说： 君臣就像父子，休戚与共，明公您不如竭忠为国，则个人国家都会安定。 
English: Foreign soldier Cao Dai said to Wang Shichong: "Rulers and ministers are like father and son, they are in solidarity with each other. If you are loyal to the country, your country will be stable."

古文：世充诡辞称善而遣之，世充议受九锡，胄复固谏，世充怒，出为郑州长史，使与兄子行本镇虎牢。
现代文：王世充假意称他说得很好把他打发走了。王世充商议接受九锡，戴胄又尽力规谏，王世充很生气，把他贬出东都作郑州长史，让他和王世充的侄子王行本镇守虎牢。
English: Wang Shicheng pretended that he had spoken well and sent him away. Wang Shicheng negotiated to accept Jiuxi, and Dai Ying tried his best to discipline him. Wang Shicheng was very angry, and relegated him to Dongdu as the governor of Zhengzhou, and let him and Wang Shicheng's nephew Wang Xingbong guard the town.

古文：乃使段达等言于皇泰主，请加世充九锡。
现代文：王世充于是派段达等人对皇泰主说明，请求授予王世充九锡。
English: Wang Shichong then sent Danda and others to explain to Emperor Taizong and request that Wang Shichong be awarded nine pennies.

古文：皇泰主曰： 郑公近平李密，已拜太尉，自是以来，未有殊绩，俟天下稍平，议之未晚。 
现代文：皇泰主说： 郑公新近平定了李密，已经官拜太尉，从那以来，没有特别的功劳，待天下逐渐平定，再论此事也不晚。 
English: Emperor Taizong said: Zheng Gong Xinping had appointed Li Mi, and he had already been promoted to the rank of lieutenant. Since then, there has been no special achievement. The world will be gradually pacified, and it is not too late to discuss this matter.

古文：段达曰： 太尉欲之。 
现代文：段达说： 太尉想加九锡。 
English: Duan Da said, "The captain wants to earn more money."

古文：皇泰主熟视达曰： 任公！ 
现代文：皇泰主紧紧盯着段达，说： 随您便！ 
English: Emperor Taizong stared at Dangda and said, "As you wish!"

古文：辛巳，达等以皇泰主之诏，命世充为相国，假黄钺，总百揆，进爵郑王，加九锡，郑国置丞相以下官。
现代文：辛巳，段达等人以皇泰主的名义下诏命王世充为相国，让他持饰有黄金的斧头，让他总理百官政务，爵位晋封为郑王，加九锡，郑国可设置丞相以下官员。
English: Xin Si, Duan Da and others issued an edict in the name of Emperor Taizong, ordering Wang Shizhong to be the consort of the country, let him hold an axe decorated with gold, let him be the prime minister of the government affairs, be promoted to the title of King Zheng, add Jiu Xi, and Zheng Guo could set up officials below the prime minister.

古文：初，宇文化及以隋大理卿郑善果为民部尚书。从至聊城，为化及督战，中流矢。
现代文：当初，宇文化及任用隋大理卿郑善果作民部尚书，郑善果跟随宇文化及到聊城，为宇文化及督战，中了流箭。
English: At the beginning, U Culture and Zheng Zengguo, who had been appointed by the Sui Emperor as the Minister of People's Affairs, followed U Culture and Zheng Zengguo to Liaocheng to fight for U Culture and supervise the battle.

古文：窦建德克聊城，王琮获善果，责之曰： 公名臣之家，隋室大臣，奈何为弑君之贼效命，苦战伤痍至此乎！ 善果大惭，欲自杀，宋正本驰往救止之；建德复不为礼，乃奔相州，淮安王神通送之长安。
现代文：窦建德攻克聊城，王琮抓获了郑善果，斥责他说： 您是名臣之后，隋朝的大臣，怎么能为弑君的反贼效命，拼命作战受伤到这副样子； 郑善果羞愧万分，想自杀，宋正本跑去制止了他；窦建德又对他不尊重，于是郑善果逃往相州，淮安王李神通送他去长安。
English: When Dou Jiande conquered Liaocheng, Wang Yao captured Zheng Shan Guo and scolded him, saying, "After you were a famous minister, a minister of the Sui Dynasty, how could you serve as an anti-thief for Xing Jun, desperately fighting and being injured to this extent; Zheng Shan Guo was so ashamed that he wanted to commit suicide, Song Zhengben ran to stop him; Dou Jiande also did not respect him, so Zheng Shan Guo fled to Xiangzhou, and Huai'an Wang Lishentong sent him to Chang'an.

古文：庚午，善果至，上优礼之，拜左庶子、检校内史待郎。
现代文：庚午，郑善果到达长安，高祖对他很优厚，官拜左庶子、检校内史侍郎。
English: At noon, Zheng Shan Guo arrived in Chang'an. Gao Zu was very kind to him. He was the official's illegitimate son and the attendant of history in the inspection school.

古文：齐王元吉讽并州父老诣阙留己；甲申，复以元吉为并州总管。
现代文：齐王李元吉暗示并州的父老赴朝中要求挽留自己；甲申，重新任命李元吉为并州总管。
English: The king of Qi, Li Yuanji, hinted that the father of the unified state would go to the DPRK to ask for his retention; Jia Shen, reappointed Li Yuanji as the general manager of the unified state.

古文：戊子，淮南五州皆遣使来降。
现代文：戊子，淮南五洲均派遣使节前来降唐。
English: Wuzi, Huainan and Wuzhou all sent envoys to come to Tang.

古文：辛卯，刘武周寇并州。
现代文：辛卯刘武周侵犯并州。
English: Xinwu Liuwu invaded and annexed the prefecture.

古文：壬辰，营州总管邓暠击高开道，败之。
现代文：壬辰，唐营州总管邓进攻并打败了高开道。
English: In Imjin, Tangying State Governor Deng attacked and defeated Gao Kaido.

古文：甲午，王世充遣其将高毘寇义州。
现代文：甲午，王世充派遣他的将领高毗侵犯义州。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, Wang Shichong sent his general Gao Wei to invade Yizhou.

古文：东都道士桓法嗣献《孔子闭房记》于王世充，言 相国当代隋为天子 。
现代文：东都的道士桓法嗣将《孔子闭房记》一书献给王世充，称相国王世充应取代隋作天子。
English: The Taoist priest of Dongdu, Huan Fushi, dedicated the book "Confucius's Diary of a Closed Room" to Wang Shicheng, saying that King Shicheng should replace Sui as the Son of Heaven.

古文：世充大悦，以法嗣为谏议大夫。
现代文：王世充欣喜异常，任命桓法嗣为谏议大夫。
English: Wang Shisheng was overjoyed and appointed Kuan Fa He to be the chief doctor.

古文：世充又罗取杂鸟，书帛系颈，自言符命而纵之。
现代文：王世充又网住各种飞禽，将布帛写上字系在鸟颈上，自称受命于天而放掉。
English: Wang Shichong also netted various birds, tied a piece of cloth with writing on it around the bird's neck, and said that he had been ordered by heaven to let it go.

古文：有得鸟来献者，亦拜官爵。
现代文：有人得到这些鸟献上，也拜官封爵。
English: Some people have been presented with these birds and have been knighted.

古文：于是段达以皇泰主命，加世充殊礼。
现代文：于是段达以皇泰主的名义下令，给予王世充特殊的礼遇，王世充上表三次推让。
English: So Danda ordered in the name of Emperor Taizong to give Wang Shichong special treatment. Wang Shichong made concessions three times.

古文：世充奉表三让，百官劝进，设位于都常。
现代文：满朝文武百官劝他称帝，在都堂设座位。
English: A hundred officials of the Manchu court advised him to proclaim himself emperor and set up a seat in the capital hall.

古文：纳言苏威年老，不任朝谒，世充以威隋氏重臣，欲以眩耀士民，每劝进，必冠威名。
现代文：纳言苏威年老，上朝难以支撑，王世充因为苏威是隋朝的重臣，想利用他向大臣，百姓炫耀，每次百官劝进，必定以苏威为首。
English: Wang Shichong, because Su Wei was a senior vassal of the Sui Dynasty, wanted to use him to show off to the minister and the people. Every time he persuaded hundreds of officials to advance, he must be led by Su Wei.

古文：及受殊礼之日，扶威置百官之上，然后南面正坐受之。
现代文：待接受殊礼的日子，将苏威扶到百官之前，然后自己面向南坐定接受拜见。
English: On the day he was to receive the award, he carried Su Wei to the front of the hundreds of officials and then sat facing south to receive their greetings.

古文：夏，四月，刘武周引突厥之众，军于黄蛇岭，兵锋甚盛。
现代文：夏季四月，刘武周带领突厥人马，在黄蛇岭扎营，来势很猛，齐王李元吉让车骑将军张达用兵挑战。
English: In the summer of April, Liu Wuzhou led the Turkic people and horses to camp in the Yellow Snake Ridge. The situation was very fierce, and the king of Qi, Li Yuanji, challenged the chariot and cavalry general Zhang Da with soldiers.

古文：齐王元吉使车骑将军张达以步卒百人尝寇；达辞以兵少不可往，元吉强遣之，至则俱没。达忿恨，庚子，引武周袭榆次，陷之。
现代文：张达推辞说兵力太少不可前往，李元吉硬逼他出兵，士兵到敌营便全部阵亡。张达很忿怒，庚子，张达带领刘武周袭击并攻陷了榆次。
English: Zhang Da reasoned that the troops were too few to go, Li Yuanji forced him to send troops, and the soldiers were all killed when they reached the enemy camp. Zhang Da was very angry, Geng Zi, Zhang Da led Liu Wuzhou to attack and capture the city.

古文：散骑常侍段确，性嗜酒，奉诏慰劳硃粲于菊潭。
现代文：唐散骑常侍段确生性喜欢喝酒，奉诏到菊潭慰劳朱粲。
English: It is true that Tang's stragglers often liked to drink, and they were ordered to go to Jutang to comfort Zhu Yao.

古文：辛丑，乘醉侮粲曰： 闻卿好敢人，人作何味？ 
现代文：辛丑，段确趁酒醉侮慢朱粲说： 听说你爱吃人肉，人肉是什么滋味？ 
English: Sinister and ugly, Duan indeed took advantage of his drunkenness to insult Zhu Xi, saying: I heard that you like to eat human flesh, what is the taste of human flesh?

古文：粲曰： 敢醉人正如糟藏彘肉。 
现代文：朱粲回答： 吃醉鬼的肉就像吃酒糟猪肉。 
English: Zhu Xi replied: "Eating the flesh of a drunkard is like eating wine-stained pork.

古文：确怒，骂曰： 狂贼入朝，为一头奴耳，复得敢人乎！ 
现代文：段确生气，骂道： 狂贼入朝，不过是个奴仆头目罢了，还能吃人肉吗？ 
English: Duan Duan was really angry and scolded, "A mad thief entering the imperial court is nothing more than a slave leader. Can he still eat human flesh?

古文：粲于座收确及从者数十人，悉烹之，以敢左右。遂屠菊潭，奔王世充，世充以为龙骧大将军。
现代文：朱粲就在席间捉住段确和几十名随者，全部煮了，分给身边的人吃，随后朱粲屠杀了菊潭百姓，投奔王世充，王世充任命他为龙骧大将军。
English: Zhu Xi caught Duan Zhengyi and dozens of followers in the middle of the banquet, cooked them all, and distributed them to the people around him. Zhu Xi then slaughtered the people of Jutan and went to Wang Shichong. Wang Shichong appointed him as the general of Longyan.

古文：王世充令长史韦节、杨续等及太常博士衡水孔颖达，造禅代仪，遣段达、云定兴等十余人入奏皇泰主曰： 天命不常，郑王功德甚盛，愿陛下遵唐、虞之迹。 
现代文：王世充命令长史韦节、杨续等人及太常博士衡水人孔颖达制订禅代的礼仪，派段达、云定兴等十几个人进宫禀告皇泰主说： 上天的旨意不是永恒不变的，如今郑王功高德重，希望陛下遵从唐尧、虞舜的做法禅位。 
English: Wang Shichong ordered the chancellors Shi Wei Jie, Yang Cui, and others, as well as the imperial doctor Hengshui, Kong Yingda, to work out the etiquette of the Zen era. He sent more than a dozen people, including Duan Da and Yun Ding Xing, to the palace to inform the emperor that: God's will is not eternal and unchanging. Today, King Zheng is highly virtuous, and I hope that His Majesty will follow the practice of Tang Xi and Yu Xi to meditate.

古文：皇泰主敛膝据案，怒曰： 天下，高祖之天下，若隋祚未亡，此言不应辄发；必天命已改，何烦禅让！
现代文：原盘坐榻上德皇泰主不禁并拢双膝撑着矮桌气愤地说： 天下，是高祖的天下，如果隋运未亡，这种话就不应提起，如果上天的旨意已经改变，也用不着什么禅让！
English: The German Emperor, who was originally seated on the couch, could not help but put his knees together to prop up the low table and said angrily: The world is the world of the ancestors. If the Sui Dynasty is still alive, such words should not be mentioned. If the will of heaven has changed, there is no need to make concessions!

古文：公等或祖祢旧臣，或台鼎高位，既有斯言，朕复何望！ 
现代文：各位不是祖辈旧臣，就是身居三公高位，既然你们说出这种话，朕还能指望什么！ 
English: You are either ancestors or former ministers, or you are high-ranking officials of the Three Kingdoms. Since you say such things, what can I expect!

古文：颜色凛冽，在廷者皆流汗。
现代文：神色严峻，在朝的各位大臣都流下冷汗。
English: Their countenances were grim, and all the ministers in the morning were in a cold sweat.

古文：退朝，泣对太后。
现代文：皇泰主下朝后，对着太后流泪。
English: After Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, he shed tears for the empress dowager.

古文：世充更使人谓之曰： 今海内未宁，须立长君，俟四方安集，当复子明辟，必如前誓。 
现代文：王世充又派人对皇泰主说： 如今海内尚未安定，需要立年长一些的人作君主，待到天下安宁，一定公开恢复您的帝位，决不违背原先的誓言。 
English: Wang Shichong also sent a message to Emperor Taizong, saying, "Nowadays, the country is not yet stable. It is necessary to appoint an older person to be the monarch. Until the world is peaceful, you must openly restore your imperial throne and never violate the original oath."

古文：癸卯，世充称皇泰主命，禅位于郑。
现代文：癸卯，王世充声称皇泰主之命。
English: Suddenly, Wang Shichong claimed that it was the order of Emperor Taishu.

古文：遣其兄世恽幽皇泰主于含凉殿，虽有三表陈让及敕书敦劝，皇泰主皆不知也。
现代文：隋禅位于郑，派他的兄长王世恽将皇泰主软禁在含凉殿，虽然这以前有王世充三次上表辞让及皇泰主下敕书敦促劝进的事，实际皇泰主都不知道。
English: Sui Zen was located in Zheng and sent his elder brother Wang Shihong to place Emperor Taizong under house arrest in the Hall of Coolness. Although Emperor Taizong had previously been persuaded by Wang Shichong's three-time resignation and Emperor Taizong's letter, the actual Emperor Taizong did not know about it.

古文：遣诸将引兵入清宫城，又遣术人以桃汤苇火祓除禁省。
现代文：王世充派遣众将领带兵清理宫城，又派术士用桃汤、苇火在宫中举行除凶祈福的仪式。
English: Wang Shichong dispatched generals and soldiers to clean up the palace city, and sent magicians to use peach soup and bonfires to hold a ceremony to pray for good luck in the palace.

古文：隋将帅、郡县及贼帅前后继有降者，诏以王薄为齐州总管，伏德为济州总管，郑虔符为青州总管，綦公顺为淮州总管，王孝师为沧州总管。
现代文：隋朝的将帅、郡县以及各地起兵者前后相继来降唐的人、唐高祖下诏任命王薄为齐州总管，伏德为济州总管，郑虔符为青州总管，綦公顺为淮州总管，王孝师为沧州总管。
English: The generals of the Sui Dynasty, the commanders of counties and counties, and the soldiers from all over the country successively came to the Tang Dynasty, and the Emperor Gaozhu of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict to appoint Wang Bo as the general manager of Qi Province, Fude as the general manager of Jeju Province, Zheng Qianfu as the general manager of Qingdao Province, Zou Gongshun as the general manager of Huai Province, and Wang Xiaoshi as the general manager of Cangzhou Province.

古文：甲辰，遣大理卿新乐郎楚之安抚山东，秘书监夏侯端安抚淮左。
现代文：甲辰，唐派遣大理卿新乐人郎楚之安抚山东，秘书监夏侯端安抚淮左。
English: At the time of Jia Chen, the Tang Dynasty dispatched the new musician Lang Chu to pacify Shandong, and the secretary-supervisor Xia Houdan to pacify Huai Zu.

古文：乙巳，王世充备法驾入宫，即皇帝位。丙午，大赦，改元开明。
现代文：乙巳，王世充用全套皇帝车驾进入宫城，即皇帝位，丙午，大赦天下，改年号为开明。
English: At this time, Wang Shichong used the full set of the emperor's car to drive into Miyagi, that is, the emperor's throne, H afternoon, amnesty to the world, and the new year's name was enlightened.

古文：丁未，隋御卫将军陈稜以江都来降；以稜为扬州总管。
现代文：丁未，隋御卫将军陈棱以江都来降唐；唐任命陈棱为扬州总管。
English: Ding Wei, Chen Ren, the general of the Sui Dynasty, used the capital of the Yangtze River to bring down the Tang Dynasty; the Tang Dynasty appointed Chen Ren as the governor of Yangzhou.

古文：戊申，王世充立子玄应为太子，玄恕为汉王，余兄弟宗族十九人皆为王。
现代文：戊申，王世充立儿子王玄应为太子，王玄怨为汉王，其余兄弟、同族十九人都封为王。
English: According to Wushin, Wang Shizhuling's son Wang Xuan should be crown prince, Wang Xuanwu should be Han king, and the remaining 19 brothers and relatives should be crowned kings.

古文：奉皇泰主为潞国公。
现代文：奉皇泰主为潞国公。
English: To serve the Emperor Taishu is to serve the country.

古文：以苏威为太师，段达为司徒，云定兴为太尉，张仅为司空，杨续为纳言，韦节为内史，王隆为左仆射，韦霁为右仆射，齐王世恽为尚书令，杨汪为吏部尚书，杜淹为少吏部，郑颋为御史大夫。
现代文：任命苏威为太师，段达为司徒，云定兴为太尉，张仅为司空，杨续为纳言，韦节为内史令，王隆为左仆射，韦霁为右仆射，齐王王世恽为尚书令，杨汪为吏部尚书，杜淹为少吏部，郑为御史大夫。
English: He appointed Su Wei as the grand master, Duan Da as the tutor, Yun Dingxing as the second lieutenant, Zhang as the deputy commander, Yang Cui as the adviser, Wei Jie as the secretary of internal history, Wang Long as the left-hand servant, Wei Wei as the right-hand servant, Qi Wang Wang Shijun as the secretary of history, Yang Wang as the secretary of personnel department, Du Yun as the junior secretary of personnel department, and Zheng as the secretary of history.

古文：世恽，世充之兄也。
现代文：王世恽是王世充的兄长。
English: Wang Shizhen is the elder brother of Wang Shizhong.

古文：又以国子助都吴人陆德明为汉王师，令玄恕就其家行束脩礼。
现代文：又任命国子助教吴人陆德明为汉王的教师，命汉王王玄怨到他家中行拜师礼。
English: He also appointed Guo Zi's assistant teacher Wu Ren Lu Deming as Han Wang's teacher, and ordered Han Wang Wang Xuan to pay homage to his teacher at his home.

古文：德明耻之，故服巴豆散，卧称病，玄恕入跪床下，对之遗利，竟不与语。
现代文：陆德明觉得是耻辱，吃了泻药巴豆散，卧床说有病，王玄怨进屋跪在床前，陆德明当着王玄怨面泄痢，从始至终没有和他说一句话。
English: Lu Deming felt it was a disgrace. He took the laxative Bacosan and lay in bed saying he was ill. Wang Xuanwen went into the house and knelt in front of the bed. Lu Deming expressed his dysentery in front of Wang Xuanwen and did not say a word to him from beginning to end.

古文：德明名朗，以字行。
现代文：陆德明名朗，平素称字。
English: Lu De is well-known and famous.

古文：世充于阙下及玄武门等数处皆设榻，坐无常所，亲受章表。或轻骑游历衢市，亦不清道，民但避路而已。
现代文：王世充在宫门前的阙楼下及玄武门等几处都摆了榻，行坐没有固定场所，亲自接受奏章上表，有时轻骑简装经过闹市，也不用清道令百姓回避，老百姓只需让开道。
English: Wang Shichong placed his bed in several places, such as under the main hall in front of the palace gate and at the Genwu Gate. There was no fixed place to sit, and he personally received the music on the table. Sometimes he rode lightly in a simple outfit through the busy city. He did not have to clear the road for the people to avoid him, the people only had to give way.

古文：世充按辔徐行，语之曰： 昔时天子深居九重，在下事情无由闻彻。
现代文：王世充勒住马缰缓慢行走，对老百姓说： 过去的天子居住于重重宫殿之中，民情无法上达帝听。
English: Wang Shihong walked slowly, holding his horse by the bridle, and said to the common people: In the past, heavenly sons lived in palaces, and the people's feelings could not be heard by the emperor.

古文：今世充非贪天位，但欲救恤时危，正如一州刺史，亲览庶务，当与士庶共评朝政，尚恐门有禁限，今于门外设坐听朝，宜各尽情。 
现代文：如今世充不是贪图皇帝的宝座，只是想拯救现实的危难，就如一个州的长官刺史一样，亲自过问政务，并要与官员百姓共同评议朝政，还怕宫门有所限制，现在在宫门外设坐位听朝，各位都应当把了解的情况全部讲出来。 
English: Today, Shichong is not coveting the throne of the emperor, but just wants to save the real danger. Just like the governor of a state, he personally inspects the government affairs and has to discuss the government affairs with the officials and the people. He is also afraid of the restrictions of the palace gate. Now, a seat is set up outside the palace gate to listen to the government. You should all tell everyone what you know.

古文：又令西朝堂纳冤抑，东朝堂纳直谏。
现代文：又命令以西朝堂受理冤情，东朝堂接受直言极谏。
English: He also ordered the West Court to accept the grievances, and the East Court to accept the outspoken criticism.

古文：于是献策上书者日有数百，条疏既烦，省览难遍，数日后，不复更出。
现代文：于是每天有几百人献策上书，分类既很麻烦，也难以全部省阅，几天后，王世充就不再出宫。
English: As a result, several hundred people submitted suggestions every day, and it was both troublesome to classify them and difficult to read them all. A few days later, Wang Shichong no longer left the palace.

古文：窦建德闻王世充自立，乃绝之，始建天子旌旗，出警入跸，下书称诏，追谥隋炀帝为闵帝。
现代文：窦建德听说王世充自立为帝，于是与王世充断绝了关系，开始自己设立天子使用的旗帜，出入都像天子一样清道警戒。下达的文书称为诏，追谥隋炀帝为隋闵帝。
English: Dou Jiande heard that Wang Shicheng had declared himself emperor, so he broke off relations with Wang Shicheng and began to set up his own flag to be used by the emperor. The entrance and exit were guarded like that of the emperor. The document he issued was called the "Zhao," and the emperor he pursued was the emperor of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：齐王暕之死也，有遣腹子政道，建德立以为郧公，然犹依倚突厥，以壮其兵势。
现代文：隋齐王杨死的时候，有遗腹子名政道，窦建德立他为郧公，但是仍然依靠突厥以壮声势。
English: When King Yang of the Sui and Qi dynasties died, he left behind a son who became a great statesman. Dou Jiande made him the regent, but he still relied on the Turks to strengthen his reputation.

古文：隋义成公主遣使迎萧皇后及南阳公主，建德遣千馀骑送之，又传宇文化及首以献义成公主。
现代文：隋朝义成公主派人迎接隋萧皇后和南阳公主到突厥，窦建德派遣一千多骑兵护送，又将宇文化及的首级献给义成公主。
English: Princess Yicheng of the Sui Dynasty sent people to welcome Empress Sui Xiao and Princess Nanyang to Turkey. Dou Jiande dispatched more than a thousand cavalry to escort them, and also dedicated the U Culture and the headdress to Princess Yicheng.

古文：丙辰，刘武周围并州，齐王元吉拒却之。
现代文：丙辰，刘武周包围并州，齐王李元吉抵抗并击退来敌。
English: Hsin Chen and Liu Wuzhou encircled and annexed the state, and the king of Qi, Li Yuanji, resisted and repulsed the enemy.

古文：戊午，诏太常卿李仲文将兵救并州。
现代文：戊午，唐下诏命太常卿李仲文带兵救援并州。
English: At noon, the Tang Dynasty issued an imperial edict ordering the Tai Changqing, Li Zhongwen, to lead soldiers to rescue and annex the state.

古文：王世充将军丘怀义居门下内省。召越王君度、汉王玄恕、将军郭士衡杂妓妾饮博，侍御史张蕴古弹之。
现代文：王世充的将军丘怀义在门下内省，召集越王王君度、汉王王玄怨、将军郭士衡与女妓侍妾鬼混在一起饮酒赌博，侍御史张蕴古弹劾他们。
English: King Shichong's general, Qiu Huaiyi, did some introspection under his tutelage. He summoned the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the King of Kings, the

古文：世充大怒，令散手执君度、玄恕，批其耳数十；又命引入东上阁，仗之各数十。
现代文：王世充非常生气，命令散手仗卫士捉住王君度、王玄怨，打了他们几十个耳光，又下令带入东上阁，各打几十大板。
English: Wang Shichong was very angry. He ordered the guards to catch Wang Jindu and Wang Xuanyuan, and slapped them dozens of times. He also ordered that they be brought into the East Pavilion, and each of them was slapped with dozens of large boards.

古文：怀义、士衡不问。
现代文：丘怀义、郭士衡不问罪。
English: Qiu Huaiyi and Guo Shiheng will not be charged.

古文：赏蕴古帛百段，迁太子舍人。
现代文：赏给张蕴古一百段帛，迁官太子舍人。
English: Zhang Yungu was awarded one hundred dan and the title of crown prince.

古文：君度，世充之兄子也。
现代文：王君度是王世充兄长的儿子。
English: Wang Jindu is the son of Wang Shicheng's elder brother.

古文：世充每听朝，殷勤诲谕，言词重复，千端万绪，侍卫之人不胜倦弊，百司奏事，疲于听受。
现代文：王世充每次听朝，都殷勤训谕，言词重复，千头万绪，令侍卫疲倦不堪，各部门官吏上奏政事，也因长时间听受训示而疲惫。
English: Every time Wang Shichong listened to the emperor, he was diligently instructed, the words were repeated, and there were thousands of them, which made the guards tired. Officials from various departments reported on government affairs, and they were also tired from listening to instructions for a long time.

古文：御史大夫苏良谏曰： 陛下语太多而无领要，计云尔即可，何烦许辞也！ 
现代文：御史大夫苏良劝谏道： 陛下话太多，而不得要领，如此这般商议一下就可以了，何必费这么多口舌？ 
English: Chief Historian Su Liang advised him, "Your Majesty talks too much and doesn't have a point to make. It's enough to have a discussion like this. Why do you need to talk so much?"

古文：世充默然良久，亦不罪良，然性如是，终不能改也。
现代文：王世充沉默很长时间，也不怪罪苏良，但是他就是这种性情，最终也不能改。
English: Wang Shichong was silent for a long time, and did not blame Su Liang, but he was of this disposition, and ultimately could not be changed.

古文：王世充数攻伊州，总管张善相拒之；粮尽，援兵不至，癸亥，城陷，善相骂世充极口而死。
现代文：王世充几次攻打伊州，唐总管张善相拒敌，粮食吃光，还不见援军，癸亥，城池陷落，张善相尽力痛骂王世充一直到死。
English: Wang Shichong attacked Yizhou several times. The Tang general manager Zhang Shanshu resisted the enemy, ran out of grain, and did not see reinforcements. When the city fell, Zhang Shanshu did his best to curse Wang Shichong until his death.

古文：帝闻，叹曰： 吾负善相，善相不负吾也！ 
现代文：唐高祖听说后，感叹道： 我对不起善相，善相却没有辜负我！ 
English: After hearing this, Tang Gaozu lamented, "I'm sorry, Zenso, Zenso didn't live up to my expectations!

古文：赐其子爵襄城郡公。
现代文：赐给张善相的儿子襄城郡公爵位。
English: and bestowed the title of Duke of Xiangcheng County on Zhang Shanxiang's son, Wu.

古文：五月，王世充陷义州，复寇西济州。
现代文：五月，王世充攻陷义州之后，又侵犯西济州。
English: In May, after Wang Shichong invaded Yizhou, he also invaded Xizhou.

古文：遣右骁卫大将军刘弘基将兵救之。
现代文：唐派右骁卫大将军刘弘基带兵救援。
English: General Liu Hongji of the Tang faction's Right Division came to the rescue with his soldiers.

古文：李轨将安修仁兄兴贵，仕长安，表请说轨，谕以祸福。
现代文：李轨的将领安仁的兄长安兴贵，在长安作官，上表请求去说服李轨，对他讲明祸福。
English: Li Rail's general, Anren's elder brother, An Xinggui, who was an official in Chang'an, asked the table to persuade Li Rail and explain to him the misfortunes and blessings.

古文：上曰： 轨阻兵恃险，连结吐谷浑、突厥，吾兴兵击之，尚恐不克，岂口舌所能下乎！ 兴贵曰： 臣家在凉州，奕世豪望，为民夷所附；弟修仁为轨所信任，子弟在机近者以十数。臣往说之，轨听臣固善，若其不听，图之肘腋，易矣！ 
现代文：高祖说： 李轨依仗军队凭借险要，连结吐谷浑、突厥，我起兵攻打他，还怕不能取胜，哪里是一番口舌就可以拿下的？ ，安兴贵回答： 臣下的家在凉州，累世豪门望族，各族百姓多加依附，弟弟仁受李轨信任，有十几名子弟为李轨机密近要官员，臣前去说服李轨，李轨能听我的话固然好，如果不听，在他的身边解决他，也容易了！ 
English: Gao Zu said: Li Rail relies on the army by virtue of the danger, links Tujugun, Turk, I attack him, but I'm afraid I can't win, where is the best tongue to take it?, An Xinggui replied: His vassal's home is in Liangzhou, he has been a member of a prestigious family for many generations, people of all ethnic groups are more attached to him, his brother Ren is trusted by Li Rail, and there are more than a dozen children who are Li Rail's confidential close officials. The vassal went to persuade Li Rail, Li Rail can listen to my words is certainly good, if he doesn't listen

古文：上乃遣之。
现代文：于是高祖派他前往凉州。
English: So Gao Zu sent him to Liangzhou.

古文：兴贵至武威，轨以为左右卫大将军。
现代文：安兴贵到达武威，李轨任命他为左右卫大将军。
English: When An Xinggui arrived in Wuwei, Li Rail appointed him as the left and right guards general.

古文：兴贵乘间说轨曰： 凉地不过千里，土薄民贫。
现代文：安兴贵找机会劝李轨说： 凉的辖地不过千里，土地瘠薄百姓贫困。
English: An Xinggui took the opportunity to persuade Li Liao, saying: Liang's jurisdiction is only thousands of miles away, the land is thin and the people are poor.

古文：今唐起太原，取函秦，宰制中原。战必胜，攻必取，此殆天启，非人力也。
现代文：如今唐从太原兴起，夺取了函秦，统制中原，战必胜，攻必取，这大概是天意，不是人力能做到的。
English: Now that Tang has risen from Taiyuan, captured Hanzhong and Qin, and controls the Central Plains, the battle must be won, the attack must be taken. This is probably the will of heaven, not manpower.

古文：不若举河西归之，则窦融之功复见于今日矣！ 
现代文：您不如带整个河西归附唐，那么汉代窦融的功勋又可以在今天重现了！ 
English: You might as well take the whole of Hexi to the Tang Dynasty, then the merits of Dou Rong in the Han Dynasty can be reproduced today!

古文：轨曰： 吾据山河之固，彼虽强大，若我何？
现代文：李轨说： 我凭着山河的牢固，他们虽然强大，又能拿我怎么样？
English: Li Rail said: I rely on the solidity of the mountains and rivers. Although they are powerful, what can they do to me?

古文：汝自唐来，为唐游说耳。 
现代文：你从唐朝来，是为唐游说吧。 
English: If you come from Tang Dynasty, lobby for Tang Dynasty.

古文：兴贵谢曰： 臣闻富贵不归故乡，如衣绣夜行。臣阖门受陛下荣禄，安肯附唐！
现代文：安兴贵连忙谢罪道： 我听说富贵不回乡，就像穿着锦绣衣服在夜间行走不为人所知一样，臣下我全家受陛下的荣禄，怎么肯归附唐？
English: An Xinggui hurriedly said, "I heard that Fugui did not return to his hometown, just as it is not known for people to walk around at night wearing richly embroidered clothes. How can my whole family, as a vassal, accept the honor of Your Majesty and join the Tang Dynasty?"

古文：但欲效其愚虑，可否在陛下耳。 
现代文：只不过想呈上我的想法，行不行在陛下您了。 
English: I just want to present my ideas, but it's up to you, Your Majesty.

古文：于是退与修仁阴结诸胡起兵击轨，轨出战而败，婴城自守。
现代文：于是退下和安仁秘密联合各胡部起兵攻打李轨，李轨出战，打了败仗，于是环城自守。
English: So he retreated and secretly allied with Anren to raise an army to attack Li Rail. Li Rail went to war and was defeated, so Huancheng defended itself.

古文：兴贵徇曰： 大唐遣我来诛李轨，敢助之者夷三族！ 
现代文：安兴贵宣告： 大唐派我来诛灭李轨，有胆敢援助他的，诛杀三族。 
English: An Xinggui declared: Datang sent me to annihilate Li Luo. If you have the courage to help him, kill the three tribes.

古文：城中人争出就兴贵。
现代文：城中的人争相出城投奔安兴贵。
English: People in the city are rushing out of the city to join An Xinggui.

古文：轨计穷，与妻子登玉女台，置酒为别。
现代文：李轨无计可施，和妻儿登上玉女台，摆酒话别。
English: Li Rail had no choice, and he and his wife and children boarded the grandstand to drink and say goodbye.

古文：庚辰，兴贵执之以闻，河西悉平。
现代文：庚辰，安兴贵捉住李轨上报唐廷，河西全部平定。
English: Geng Chen and An Xinggui captured Li Rail and reported to Tang Ting, and all of Hexi was pacified.

古文：邓晓在长安，舞蹈称庆，上曰： 汝为人使臣，闻国亡，不戚而喜，以求媚于朕。不忠于李轨，肯为朕用乎！ 
现代文：李轨的使者邓晓在长安，行礼表示祝贺，高祖说： 你身为人家的使臣，得知国家灭亡，不悲戚反而欣喜。向朕献媚，你不能忠于李轨，能够为朕所用吗？ 
English: In Chang'an, Li Le's emissary, Deng Xiao, bowed to express his congratulations. Gao Zu said, "You are an emissary of your family. When you learned of the country's demise, you were not sad, but happy. You flatter me. Can't you be loyal to Li Le, can you be of use to me?

古文：遂废之终身。
现代文：于是废黜他终身不得任用。
English: As a result, he was deposed and banned from holding office for life.

古文：轨至长安，并其子弟皆伏诛。
现代文：李轨被押送到长安，与他的儿子兄弟等全部伏法。
English: Li Rail was escorted to Chang'an, and he and his son and brother were all arrested.

古文：以安兴贵为右武候大将军、上柱国、凉国公，赐帛万段，安修仁为左武候大将军、申国公。
现代文：唐任命安兴贵为右武候大将军、上柱国、凉国公，赐一万段帛，任命安仁为左武候大将军，申国公。
English: Tang appointed An Xinggui as the right military commander, Shangzhuo, and Liangguo, and gave him 10,000 pieces of silver, and appointed An Ren as the left military commander, Shenguo.

古文：隋末，离石胡刘龙儿拥兵数万，自号刘王，以其子季真为太子；虎贲郎将梁德击斩龙儿。
现代文：隋末，离石胡人刘龙儿拥有数万兵马，自己号称刘王，以儿子刘季真为太子，唐虎贲郎将梁德攻打并杀了刘龙儿。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, Liu Long Er, a man from Shihu, owned tens of thousands of soldiers and horses. He called himself Liu Wang, with his son Liu Jizhen as the prince. Tang Huzhong attacked Liang De and killed Liu Long Er.

古文：至是，季真与弟六儿复举兵为乱，引刘武周之众攻陷石州，杀刺史王俭。
现代文：到此时，刘季真与弟弟刘六儿又起兵叛乱，带领刘武周的军队攻陷石州，杀死唐石州刺史王俭。
English: At this time, Liu Jizhen and his brother Liu Liule rebelled again, leading Liu Wuzhou's army to invade Shizhou and kill the Tang Shizhou assassin Wang Jian.

古文：季真自称突利可汗，以六儿为拓定王。
现代文：刘季真自称突利可汗，以刘六儿为拓定王。
English: Liu Jizhen called himself Turi Khan, with Liu Liuer as the king of Tuoding.

古文：六儿隋使请降，诏以为岚州总管。
现代文：刘六儿派人向唐请降，唐下诏任命他为岚州总管。
English: Liu Luer sent someone to Tang to ask for his resignation, and Tang issued an edict appointing him as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：壬午，以秦王世民为左武候大将军、使持节、凉、甘等九州诸军事、凉州总管，其太尉、尚书令、雍州牧、陕东道行台并如故。
现代文：壬午，唐任命秦王李世民为左武候大将军、使持节、凉甘等九州诸军事、凉州总管，原太尉、尚书令、雍州牧、陕东道行台等官职仍旧。
English: At noon, Tang appointed Qin King Li Shimin as General Zuowu, and he continued to hold the military posts in Kyushu, such as Jingzhi Jie and Liangan, and the general manager of Liangzhou, as well as the official posts such as Yuan Taijun, Shang Shuling, Yongzhou Maki, and Shaanxi Dao Xingtai.

古文：遣黄门侍郎杨恭仁安抚河西。
现代文：又派遣黄门侍郎杨恭仁安抚河西。
English: He also dispatched the Yellow Gate attendant Yang Gongren to pacify Hexi.

古文：丙戌，刘武周陷平遥。
现代文：丙戌，刘武周攻陷平遥。
English: Liu Wuzhou captured Pingyao.

古文：癸巳，梁州总管、山东道安抚副使陈政为麾下所杀，携其首奔王世充。
现代文：癸巳，唐梁州总管、山东道安抚副使陈政被部下杀死，部下携带他的首级投奔了王世充。
English: Soon after, Chen Zheng, the chief administrator of Tang Liang Prefecture and the vice-envoy for the pacification of Shandong, was killed by his subordinates, who took his head to Wang Shichong.

古文：政，茂之子也。
现代文：陈政是陈茂的儿子。
English: Chen Zheng is the son of Chen Mao.

古文：王世充以礼部尚书裴仁基、左辅大将军裴行俨有威名，忌之。
现代文：王世充因为礼部尚书裴仁基、左辅大将军裴行俨很有威望，所以猜忌他们。
English: Wang Shichong was suspicious of Pei Renji, the ceremonial secretary, and Pei Xingyao, the left adjutant general, because they were very prestigious.

古文：仁基父子知之，亦不自安，乃与尚书左丞宇文儒童、儒童弟尚食直长温、散骑常侍崔德本谋杀世充及其党，复尊立皇泰主；事泄，皆夷三族。
现代文：裴仁基父子得知后，内心不安，于是与尚书左丞宇文儒童、宇文儒童之弟尚食直长宇文温、散骑常侍崔德本谋划杀死王世充及其党羽，重新尊奉皇泰主杨侗为君主，事情泄露，均遭诛灭三族。
English: After learning of this, Pei Renki and his son felt uneasy, so he plotted with Shang Shuzhong Uwen Rudeong, Uwen Rudeong's younger brother Shang Shujing Zhizhong Uwenwen, and Sanzhong's equerry Cui Deben to kill Wang Shichong and his followers, and re-honor Emperor Tai's master Yang Di as the monarch. The affair was leaked, and all three clans were annihilated.

古文：齐王世恽言于世充曰： 儒童等谋反，正为皇泰主尚在故也，不如早除之。 
现代文：齐王王世恽对王世充说： 儒童等人谋反，就是因为皇泰主还活着的缘故，不如早些除掉皇泰主。 
English: The king of Qi, Wang Shihong, said to Wang Shichong: "Ju Tong and others are plotting a rebellion, that is, because Emperor Taishu is still alive, it is better to get rid of Emperor Taishu earlier."

古文：世充从之，遣兄子唐王仁则及家奴梁百年鸩皇泰主。
现代文：王世充听从了他的计划，派兄长的儿子唐王王仁则及家中奴隶梁百年毒死皇泰主。
English: Wang Shichong obeyed his plan and sent his elder brother's son, Tang Wang Wang Ren, and the family slave, Liang Centenary, to poison and kill Emperor Taishu.

古文：皇泰主曰： 更为请太尉，以往者之言，未应至此。 
现代文：皇泰主杨侗说： 就麻烦你们请问太尉，按他以前所说的话，不应该这样对待我。 
English: Wang Tai's master, Yang Qi, said, "If you please, ask the captain. According to what he said before, you shouldn't treat me like this."

古文：百年欲为启陈，世恽不许；又请与皇太后辞决，亦不许。
现代文：梁百年想为皇泰主向王世充启奏，王世恽不准，皇泰主又请求与皇太后诀别，王世恽也不准。
English: Liang Centenary wanted to perform for Wang Shijun, but Wang Shijun did not allow it. Wang Shijun also asked Wang Shijun to bid farewell to the empress dowager. Wang Shijun also did not allow it.

古文：乃布度焚香礼佛： 愿自今已往，不复生帝王家！ 
现代文：于是皇泰主设席焚香拜佛祈祷道： 愿从今以后，不再生在帝王家！ 
English: As a result, the principal of the imperial palace set up a seat to burn incense and worship the Buddha, praying: "May no one be born in the imperial family from now on!"

古文：饮药，不能绝，以帛缢杀之。谥曰恭皇帝。
现代文：喝下毒药，没能气绝，于是又用帛勒死了皇泰主，定谥号为恭皇帝。
English: After drinking the poison, he could not get enough breath, so he strangled Emperor Taishen with a pestle. His posthumous name was Emperor Gong.

古文：世充以其兄楚王世伟为太保，齐王世恽为太傅，领尚书令。
现代文：王世充任命他的兄长楚王王世伟为太保，齐王王世恽为太傅，兼尚书令。
English: Wang Shichong appointed his elder brother, Chu Wang Wang Shihwei, as Taibo, and Qi Wang Wang Shijun as Taifu, as well as Shang Shuling.

古文：六月，庚子，窦建德陷沧州。
现代文：六月庚子，窦建德攻陷沧州。
English: In June, Geng Zi and Dou Jian De invaded Cangzhou.

古文：初，易州贼帅宋金刚，有众万余，与魏刀儿连结。
现代文：当初，易州盗贼首领宋金刚，有一万多人马，和魏刀儿相连结。
English: At the beginning, Song King Kong, the leader of the thieves in Yizhou, had more than ten thousand people connected to Wei Jiao Er.

古文：刀儿为窦建德所灭，金刚救之，战败，帅众四千西奔刘武周，武周闻其善用兵，得之，甚喜，号曰宋王，委以军事，中分家赀以遗之。
现代文：魏刀儿为窦建德消灭，宋金刚救援魏刀儿，战败，带领四千人马向西投奔了刘武周。刘武周听说宋金刚会用兵，得到他后，非常高兴，称他为宋王，将军事大权交给宋金刚，并将自己的财产分出一半送给宋金刚。
English: Wei Tou Er was eliminated by Dou Jiande, Song King Kong rescued Wei Tou Er, was defeated, and led four thousand horses to the west to join Liu Wuzhou. Liu Wuzhou heard that Song King Kong would use soldiers, and was very happy when he got him. He called him Song King, handed over military power to Song King Kong, and gave half of his property to Song King Kong.

古文：金刚亦深自结，出其故妻，纳武周之妹，因说武周图晋阳，南向争天下。
现代文：宋金刚也深加交结，休掉原来的妻子，娶了刘武周的妹妹。并趁机劝刘武周图谋晋阳，向南争夺天下。
English: Song King Kong also deepened the relationship, divorced his original wife, married Liu Wuzhou's sister, and took the opportunity to persuade Liu Wuzhou to seek Jinyang and compete for the world to the south.

古文：武周以金刚为西南道大行台，使将兵三万寇并州。
现代文：刘武周任命宋金刚为西南道大行台，让他带领三万兵马侵犯并州。
English: Liu Wuzhou appointed Song King Gang as the governor of Southwest Province, and let him lead 30,000 soldiers and horses to invade and annex the state.

古文：丁未，武周进逼介州，沙门道澄以佛幡缒之入城，遂陷介州；诏左武卫大将军姜宝谊、行军总管李仲文击之。
现代文：丁未，刘武周进逼介州。憎人道澄用佛幡把他拉入城中，于是刘武周攻陷了介州，唐命左武卫大将军姜宝谊、行军总管李仲文迎击刘武周。
English: Ding Wei, Liu Wuzhou entered and forced Jiezhou. The enemy dragged him into the city with a Buddha banner, so Liu Wuzhou captured Jiezhou. Tang ordered General Jiang Baoyi and General Manager of the Marching Corps Li Zhongwen to attack Liu Wuzhou.

古文：武周将黄子英往来雀鼠谷，数以轻兵挑战，兵才接，子英阳不胜而走，如是再三，宝宜、仲文悉众逐之，伏兵发，唐兵大败，宝谊、仲文皆为所虏。既而俱逃归，上复使二人将兵击武周。
现代文：刘武周的将领黄子英来往于雀鼠谷，几次用小部队挑战，两军才一接触，黄子英就假作失败逃走，几次三番这样，姜宝谊、李仲文便出动全部兵力追击，对方伏兵出击，唐军大败，姜宝谊、李仲文都被对方俘虏，不久均逃回，高祖重让二人带军攻打刘武周。
English: Huang Ziying, Liu Wuzhou's general, went back and forth to the Valley of Sparrows and Mice. He challenged the two armies with small forces several times. Only when the two armies came into contact did Huang Ziying pretend to be defeated and run away. This happened several times. Jiang Baoyi and Li Zhongwen then sent out all their forces to chase. The other side ambushed and attacked. The Tang army was defeated. Jiang Baoyi and Li Zhongwen were both captured by the other side and soon fled back. Gao Zu heavy let the two men attack Liu Wuzhou with the army.

古文：己酉，突厥遣使来告始毕可汗之丧，上举哀于长乐门，废朝三日，诏百官就馆吊其使者。
现代文：己酉，突厥使节前来通报始毕可汗讣闻，高祖在长乐门举行哀悼仪式，三天不上朝，命百官到使者住所吊唁。
English: When the Turkic envoys came to inform the emperor of the Khan's death, Gao Zu held a mourning ceremony at the Changle Gate, and did not go to the capital for three days. He ordered hundreds of officials to go to the envoy's residence to offer condolences.

古文：又遣内史舍人郑德挺吊处罗可汗，赙帛三万段。
现代文：又派内史舍人郑德挺去慰问处罗可汗，赠丧仪三万段。
English: He also sent Zheng De Ting, a historian, to the condolence office of Luo Kahn, and presented him with a 30,000-dan funeral gift.

古文：上以刘武周入寇为忧，右仆射裴寂请自行。
现代文：高祖因为刘武周的入侵而担心，右仆射裴寂请求派自己前去。
English: Gaozu was worried because of Liu Wuzhou's invasion, and his right-hand man, Sha Peizhang, asked Mao to send him there.

古文：癸亥，以寂为晋州道行军总管，讨武周，听以便宜从事。
现代文：癸亥，唐任命裴寂为晋州道行军总管，讨伐刘武周，听其相机行事。
English: In the Year of the Rooster, the Tang Dynasty appointed Pei Jia as the head of the Jinzhou Road Marching Corps. He fought against Liu Wuzhou and listened to his camera.

古文：秋，七月，初置十二军，分关内诸府以隶焉，皆取天星为名，以车骑府统之。
现代文：秋季七月，唐初次设置十二军，关内诸府分别隶属于十二军，均取天星的名称，由车骑府统领。
English: In the autumn of July, Tang set up the 12th army for the first time. The provinces in Guan separately belonged to the 12th army, all of which were named Tianxing, and were led by the cavalry province.

古文：每军将、副各一人，取威名素重者为之，督以耕战之务。
现代文：每军将军、副将各一人，选择素有威望者充任，督察农耕与战备。
English: One general and one vice-general from each army will choose a well-known and respected person to act as an inspector of farming and combat readiness.

古文：由是士马精强，所向无敌。
现代文：从此唐兵强马壮，军队所向无敌。
English: From then on, Tang soldiers were strong and invincible.

古文：海岱贼帅徐圆朗以数州之地请降，拜兗州总管，封鲁国公。
现代文：海岱盗贼首领徐圆郎带几州之地请求降唐，唐命他为兖州总管，封爵鲁国公。
English: Seagull thief leader Xu Yuan Lang took several states to request a reduction to Tang. Tang appointed him as the chief administrator of Zhangzhou and knighted him as the Duke of Lu.

古文：王世充遣其将罗士信寇穀州，士信帅其众千余人来降。
现代文：王世充派遣他的将领罗士信侵犯州，罗士信带领他的一千多人马前来降唐。
English: Wang Shichong sent his general Luo Shixin to invade the state, and Luo Shixin led more than a thousand of his men to come to Tang.

古文：先是，士信从李密击世充，兵败，为世充所得，世充厚礼之，与同寝食。
现代文：此前，罗士信跟随李密攻打王世充，作战失败，为王世充俘获，王世充对他很优厚，和他一同就寝进餐。
English: Previously, Luo Shixin followed Li Mi to attack Wang Shicheng, failed in the battle, and was captured by Wang Shicheng. Wang Shicheng was very kind to him and slept and dined with him.

古文：既而得邴元真等，待之如士信，士信耻之。
现代文：不久王世充又得到邴元真等人，像对罗士信一样对待他们，罗士信以此为耻。
English: Wang Shichong was soon joined by Xing Yuanzheng and others, who treated them as they had treated Luo Shixin. Luo Shixin was ashamed of this.

古文：士信有骏马，世充兄子赵王道询欲之，不与，世充夺之以赐道询；士信怒，故来降。
现代文：罗士信有骏马，王世充兄长的儿子赵王王道询想要，罗士信不给，王世充夺了罗士信的马赐给王道询；罗士信很气愤，因此来投降。
English: Luo Shixin had a fine horse. Zhao Wang Wang Daoyuan, the son of Wang Shicheng's elder brother, wanted it, but Luo Shixin would not give it to him. Wang Shicheng took away Luo Shixin's horse and gave it to Wang Daoyuan. Luo Shixin was very angry, so he surrendered.

古文：上闻其来，甚喜，遣使迎劳，赐帛五千段，禀食其所部，以士信为陕州道行军总管。
现代文：高祖听说罗士信投降，非常高兴，派人前去迎接慰问，供给他的人马军粮，任命罗士信为陕州道行军总管。
English: Gaozu was very happy to hear that Luo Shixin had surrendered. He sent people to greet him, provided him with food, and appointed Luo Shixin as the commander-in-chief of the march in Shaanxi Province.

古文：世充左龙骧将军临泾席辩与同列杨虔安、李君义皆帅所部来降。
现代文：王世充的左龙骧将军，临泾人席辩和同事杨虔安、李君义都率领自己的人马来降唐。
English: Wang Shichong's General Zuo Longquan, Linyi's Seifeng, and his colleagues Yang Qian'an and Li Junyi all led their own men to bring down the Tang Dynasty.

古文：丙子，王世充遣其将郭士衡寇穀州，刺史任瑰大破之，俘斩且尽。
现代文：丙子，王世充派遣他的将领郭士衡侵犯州，唐州刺史任大败郭士衡，郭士衡的部队被杀死、俘虏殆尽。
English: In response, Wang Shichong sent his general Guo Shiheng to invade the state, and the Tang state defeated Guo Shiheng. Guo Shiheng's troops were killed and prisoners were exhausted.

古文：甲申，行军总管刘弘基遣其将种如愿袭王世充河阳城，毁其河桥而还。
现代文：甲申，唐行军总管刘弘基派遣手下将领种如愿袭击王世充占据的河阳城，破坏了王世充所置黄河渡桥后回军。
English: At Jiaxing, Liu Hongji, the commander-in-chief of the Tang marching army, sent his generals to attack the city of Heyang occupied by Wang Shichong, destroying the bridge across the Yellow River built by Wang Shichong and then returning to the army.

古文：乙酉，西突厥统叶护可汗、高昌王麹伯雅各遣使入贡。
现代文：乙酉，西突厥统叶护可汗、高昌王伯雅分别派遣使节入朝纳贡于唐。
English: Emperor Yixuan, the Western Turkic ruler Yegu Khan, and the Gochang king Borya each sent envoys to the Tang Dynasty to pay tribute.

古文：初，西突厥曷娑那可汗入朝于隋，隋人留之，国人立其叔父，号射匮可汗。
现代文：当初，西突厥曷娑那可汗到隋朝见，隋朝留下了他，西突厥国人立曷娑那的叔父为可汗，称射匮可汗。
English: At first, West Turkistan's Jinnah Khan went to the Sui Dynasty to meet, but the Sui Dynasty left him behind. West Turkistan's people established Jinnah's uncle as the khan and called him Shaka Khan.

古文：射匮者，达头可汗之孙也，既立，拓地东至金山，西至海，遂与北突厥为敌，建庭于龟兹北三弥山。
现代文：射匮是达头可汗的孙子，即位后，开拓疆土东到金山，西到西海，于是与北突厥相对抗，在龟兹以北三弥山建立朝庭。
English: Shakya was the grandson of the great Khan. After he ascended to the throne, he explored the territory east to Jinshan and west to the West Sea, and then opposed the Northern Turks and established the imperial court in Sanmishan, north of Gezi.

古文：射匮卒，弟统叶护立。
现代文：射匮死后，他的儿子统叶护成为可汗。
English: After his death, his son Tongye Omo became khan.

古文：统叶护勇而有谋，北并铁勒，控弦数十万，据乌孙故地，又移庭于石国北千泉；西域诸国皆臣之，叶护各遣吐屯监之，督其征赋。
现代文：统叶护英勇而有谋略，北面吞并了铁勒，拥有几十万兵马，占据了乌孙原来的地域，又将朝廷迁到石国北面的千泉，西域各国都臣服于他，叶护分别派遣吐屯监理各国，督察他们交纳赋税。
English: Ye Guo, the ruler of the Western Regions, was brave and resourceful. To the north, he annexed Tiele, had hundreds of thousands of soldiers and horses, and occupied the original region of Wusun. He also moved the imperial court to Qianquan, to the north of Shikoku. All countries in the Western Regions were subject to him. Ye Guo separately dispatched Tutun to supervise all countries and inspect them to pay taxes.

古文：辛卯，宋金刚寇浩州，浃旬而退。
现代文：辛卯，宋金刚侵犯浩州，十天后退军。
English: Xinwu and Song Jinguang invaded Huzhou and withdrew ten days later.

古文：八月，丁酉，酅公薨，谥曰隋恭帝；无后，以族子行基嗣。
现代文：八月丁酉，公去世，谥为隋恭帝，恭帝没有后裔，以同族兄弟之子杨行恭为后嗣。
English: In August, Ding Yao, the emperor, died. He was the Emperor of Sui and Gong, and Emperor Gong had no descendants. He was succeeded by Yang Xingyao, the son of a brother of the same family.

古文：窦建德将兵十余万趣洺州，淮安王神通帅诸军退保相州。
现代文：窦建德带领十余万兵力奔赴州，淮安王李神通闻讯，率领各路兵马退守相州。
English: Dou Jiande led more than one hundred thousand troops to rush to the state, and Huai'an Wang Lishentong heard the news and led all the troops and horses to retreat to Xiangzhou.

古文：己亥，建德兵至洺州城下。
现代文：已亥，窦建德的军队到达州城下。
English: By now, Dou Jiande's army had reached the outskirts of the state capital.

古文：丙午，将军秦武通军至洛阳，败王世充将葛彦璋。
现代文：丙午，唐将军秦武通军队到洛阳，打败了王世充的将领葛彦璋。
English: In the afternoon of the 4th day of the 4th month, the Tang general Qin Wudong led the army to Luoyang and defeated the general of Wang Shichong, Ge Yanjun.

古文：丁未，窦建德陷洺州，总管袁子幹降之。
现代文：丁未，窦建德攻陷州，唐总管袁子投降了窦建德。
English: Ding Wei, Dou Jiande, and the Tang general Yuan Zi surrendered to Dou Jiande.

古文：乙卯，引兵趣相州，淮安王神通闻之。帅诸军就李世勣于黎阳。
现代文：乙卯，窦建德又领兵马开赴相州，淮安王李神通闻讯，率领各路兵马到黎阳投靠李世。
English: Second, Dou Jiande also led the soldiers and horses to go to Xiangzhou. Huai'an King Li Shengtong heard the news and led all the soldiers and horses to Liyang to support Li Shih.

古文：梁师都与突厥命数千骑寇延州，行军总管段德操兵少不敌，闭壁不战，伺师都稍怠，九月，丙寅，遣副总管梁礼将兵击之。
现代文：梁师都与突厥合兵以数千骑兵侵犯延州，唐行军总管段德操兵力少寡不敌众，关闭城门不出战，等梁师都逐渐松懈。九月丙寅，段德操派遣副总管梁礼带兵攻打梁师都。
English: Liang Shidu and the Turks invaded Yanzhou with thousands of cavalrymen. The Tang general administration sent Liang Li and his troops to attack Liang Shidu. Liang Shidu gradually slackened as the Tang general administration sent Liang Li and his troops to attack Liang Shidu.

古文：师都与礼战方酣，德操以轻骑多张旗帜，掩击其后，师都军溃；逐北二百余里，破其魏州，虏男女二千馀口。
现代文：正当梁师都与梁礼战斗激烈时，段德操用轻骑打起很多旗帜，从背后突然袭击梁师都，梁师都的军队溃败，唐军追逐逃敌走了二百里，攻克了梁师都的魏州，俘虏二千多名男女。
English: When the battle between Liang Shidu and Liang Lili was fierce, Duan Deyu used a light horse to raise many flags and suddenly attacked Liang Shidu from behind. Liang Shidu's army was defeated. The Tang army chased the fleeing enemy for two hundred miles and conquered Liang Shidu's Weizhou, capturing more than two thousand men and women.

古文：德操，孝先之子也。
现代文：段德操是段孝先的儿子。
English: Duan Deshu is the son of Duan Xiaosen.

古文：萧铣遣其将杨道生寇峡州，剌史许绍击破之。
现代文：萧铣派手下将领杨道生侵犯峡州，唐刺史许绍攻打并击败了杨道生。
English: Xiao Yao sent his general Yang Daosheng to invade Xiaozhou, Tang general Xu Shao attacked and defeated Yang Daosheng.

古文：铣又遣其将陈普环帅舟师上峡，规取巴、蜀。
现代文：萧铣又派部将陈普环率领水军溯江而上攻峡州，谋划取巴、蜀。
English: Xiao Wei also sent Chen Puhuan to lead the naval force up the Yangtze River to attack Xiaozhou, planning to capture Ba and Shu.

古文：绍遣其子智仁及录事参军李弘节等追至西陵，大破之，擒普环。
现代文：许绍派儿子许智仁及其录事参军李弘节等人追到西陵，大败萧铣的军队，活捉陈普环。
English: Xu Shao sent his son Xu Zhiren and Li Hongjie, who had joined the army, to chase them to Xiling, defeat Xiao Yao's army and capture Chen Puhuan alive.

古文：铣遣兵戍安蜀城及荆门城。
现代文：萧铣派兵守卫安蜀城和荆门城。
English: Xiao Wei sent soldiers to guard Anshu City and Jingmen City.

古文：先是，上遣开府李靖诣夔州经略萧铣。靖至峡州，阻铣兵，久不得进。
现代文：此前，唐高祖派遣开府李靖赴夔州筹划对付萧铣，李靖到峡州，受到萧铣军队的阻挡，迟迟不能前进。
English: Previously, Tang Gaozu had sent Li Jing from Kaifu to Ganzhou to plan against Xiao Yu. Li Jing went to Xiaozhou, but was blocked by Xiao Yu's army and was unable to advance.

古文：上怒其迟留，阴敕许绍斩之；绍惜其才，为之奏请，获免。
现代文：高祖恼怒他停滞不前，密令许绍斩杀李靖，许绍爱惜李靖的才能，替他上奏请罪，李靖才免于一死。
English: Gao Zu was angry that he was stagnating, and secretly ordered Xu Shao to kill Li Jing. Xu Shao cherished Li Jing's talent and pleaded guilty for him. Li Jing was spared from death.

古文：己巳，窦建德陷相州，杀刺史吕珉。
现代文：已巳，窦建德攻陷相州，杀死唐相州刺史吕珉。
English: At this time, Dou Jiande attacked and captured Sangzhou, and killed Tang Sangzhou's assassin, Lv Ying.

古文：民部尚书鲁公刘文静，自以才略功勋在裴寂之右，而位居其下，意甚不平。
现代文：唐民部尚书鲁公刘文静，自认为才智谋略与功勋比裴寂高而职位却比裴寂低，心中愤恨不平。
English: Liu Wenzhing, Shang Shulukong of the Tang Ministry of the People's Republic of China, thought that his talent, strategy and merits were higher than that of Pei Zhizhong, but his position was lower than that of Pei Zhizhong, and his heart was resentful.

古文：每廷议，寂有所是，文静必非之，数侵侮寂，由是有隙。
现代文：每当在朝堂议政，裴寂赞同的，刘文静必定反对，还经常欺凌羞辱裴寂，二人因此不和。
English: Whenever there was a political discussion in the imperial court and Pei Jia agreed with it, Liu Wenzhing would certainly oppose it. He also often bullied and humiliated Pei Jia, and the two did not get along.

古文：文静与弟通直散骑常侍文起饮，酒酣，怨望，拔刀击柱曰： 会当斩裴寂首！ 
现代文：刘文静与弟弟通直散骑常侍刘文起一起喝酒，喝酒多了不禁发怨气，拔刀砍柱子，说道： 应当砍了裴寂的脑袋！ 
English: Liu Wenzhing and her brother, Liu Wenzhong, a regular attendant of Tongzhi Sanzhong, drank together. When they drank too much, they couldn't help but feel resentful. They pulled out a knife and cut the pillar, saying: "You should have cut off Pei Shao's head!"

古文：家数有妖，文起召巫于星下被发衔刀为厌胜。
现代文：他家里多次出现怪异的现象，刘文起召来巫师在星光下披散着头发、口中衔着刀来避邪。
English: Strange phenomena repeatedly appeared in his home, and Liu Wenqi summoned a sorcerer to wear his hair loose under the starlight and hold a knife in his mouth to ward off evil.

古文：文静有妾无宠，使其兄上变告之。
现代文：刘文静有位侍妾不受宠，于是她让哥哥上告刘文静要谋反。
English: Liu Wenzhing had a concubine who was not favored, so she asked her brother to sue Liu Wenzhing to rebel.

古文：上以文静属吏，遣裴寂、萧瑀问状。文静曰： 建义之初，忝为司马，计与长史位望略同。
现代文：高祖因为刘文静是太原起兵时的属下，派裴寂、萧审查此事，刘文静说： 当初太原起兵时，我愧居司马，算起来与裴长史的职位声望大致相当。
English: Gaozu, because Liu Wenzhing was a subordinate of Taiyuan at the time of the military uprising, sent Pei Zh and Xiao to review the matter. Liu Wenzhing said: At the beginning of the military uprising in Taiyuan, I was ashamed to be a subordinate, which is roughly equivalent to the position reputation of Pei Changshi.

古文：今寂为仆射，据甲第；臣官赏不异众人，东西征讨，老母留京师，风雨无所庇，实有觖望之心，因醉怨言，不能自保。 
现代文：如今裴寂官居仆射，据有优于众人的府第，臣下我的官衔与所受赏赐却与众人没什么两样，东征西讨，老母留在京师，风风雨雨无所庇护，确实有些不满的情绪，因喝醉了酒口出怨言，不能保护自己。 
English: Nowadays, Peizhang officials live in the palace, they are said to be superior to everyone else, my subordinate's title and rewards are no different from everyone else's, the Eastern and Western expeditions are discussed, my mother remains in Beijing, there is no shelter from the wind and rain, there is indeed some dissatisfaction, because I am drunk and complain, I can not protect myself.

古文：上谓群臣曰： 观文静此言，反明白矣。 
现代文：高祖对群臣说， 听刘文静这番话，显然是要谋反。 
English: Gaozu said to his courtiers, "Listening to Liu Wenzhing's words, it is obvious that he is plotting a rebellion.

古文：李纲、萧瑀皆明其不反，秦王世民为之固请曰： 昔在晋阳，文静先定非常之策，始告寂知；及克京城，任遇悬隔，令文静觖望则有之，非敢谋反。 
现代文：李纲、萧都说明刘文静没有谋反，秦王李世民一再替他求情，说： 过去在晋阳，文静先定起兵大策，才告诉裴寂，而攻克京城后，任用待遇相差悬殊，令文静产生不满情绪是有的，并非胆敢谋反。 
English: Li Gang and Xiao both explained that Liu Wenzhing did not conspire to rebel, and Li Shimin, the king of Qin, repeatedly interceded for him, saying: In the past, in Jinyang, Wenzhing first decided on a grand strategy before telling Pei Zh, but after conquering the capital, the appointment and treatment were very different. Wenzhing was dissatisfied, but did not dare to conspire to rebel.

古文：裴寂言于上曰： 文静才略实冠时人，性复粗险，今天下未定，留之必贻后患。 
现代文：裴寂对高祖说： 文静的才智谋略在众人之上，加上性情粗疏险恶，如今天下未定，留着他必定是后患。 
English: Pei Zh said to Gao Zu, "Wen Jing's talent and wit are superior to everyone else's, and his temperament is coarse and sinister. If it's undecided today, keeping him will definitely be a hindrance.

古文：上素亲寂，低回久之，卒用寂言。
现代文：高祖一向与裴寂亲近，徘徊了很长时间之后，最终采纳了裴寂的意见。
English: Gaozu had always been close to Peizhang, and after lingering for a long time, he finally adopted Peizhang's opinion.

古文：辛未，文静及文起坐死，籍没其家。
现代文：辛未，刘文静与刘文起因罪被处死，家产全部没收入官。
English: Xin Wei, Liu Wenzhing and Liu Wenzhong were executed for their crimes, and all of their family property was confiscated.

古文：沈法兴既克毘陵，谓江、淮之南指捴可定，自称梁王，都毘陵，改元延康，置百官。
现代文：沈法兴攻克毗陵后，认为江、淮以南只须自己发令调遣即可平定，于是自称梁王，建都于毗陵，改年号为延康，设置百官。
English: After Shen Fa Xing conquered Kefiling, he thought that Jiang and Huai Nan only needed to issue their own orders to pacify, so he called himself Liang Wang, built the capital in Feiling, changed the year name to Yankang, and set up 100 officials.

古文：性残忍，专尚威刑，将士小有过，即斩之，由是其下离怨。
现代文：沈法兴性情残忍，崇尚严刑将士稍有过错，立即斩首，他的部下因此产生叛离怨恨之情。
English: Shen Faxing had a cruel disposition, advocating the severe punishment of soldiers who made a slight mistake, immediately beheading them. His subordinates thus felt a sense of betrayal and resentment.

古文：时杜伏威据历阳，陈稜据江都，李子通据海陵，俱有窥江表之心。
现代文：当时杜伏威占据历阳，陈棱占据江都，李子通占据海陵，均有窥伺江南的意图。
English: At that time, Du Fu Wei occupied Liyang, Chen Ren occupied Jiangdu, and Li Zi Tong occupied Hailing, all with the intention of spying on the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：法兴军数败；会子通围稜于江都，稜送质求救于法兴及伏威，法兴使其子纶将兵数万，与伏威共救之。伏威军清流，纶军扬子，相去数十里。
现代文：沈法兴的军队几次战败，时值李子通在江都包围陈棱，陈棱送人质于沈法兴和杜伏威以求援助。沈法兴让儿子沈纶带领几万军队与杜伏威一同救援陈棱，杜伏威驻扎在清流，沈纶驻扎在扬子，相隔数十里。
English: Shen Farxing's army was defeated several times. At that time, Li Zi Tong surrounded Chen Ren in Jiangdu. Chen Ren sent hostages to Shen Farxing and Du Fu Wei for help. Shen Farxing let his son Shen Yao lead tens of thousands of troops to rescue Chen Ren together with Du Fu Wei. Du Fu Wei was stationed in Qingliu, and Shen Yao was stationed in Yangzi, separated by dozens of miles.

古文：子通纳言毛文深献策，募江南人诈为纶兵，夜袭伏威营，伏威怒，复遣兵袭纶。
现代文：李子通的纳言毛文深献计，召募江南人伪装成沈纶的士兵，夜晚袭击杜伏威军营，杜伏威很气愤，也派兵袭击沈纶。
English: Li Zi Tong's flatterer Mao Wen was deeply involved in the scheme. He recruited soldiers from the south of the Yangtze River to disguise themselves as soldiers from Shen Yi and attack the Duvois military camp at night. Duvois was very angry and also sent soldiers to attack Shen Yi.

古文：由是二人相疑，莫敢先进。
现代文：二人因此相互猜疑，谁也不敢先进军。
English: As a result, the two men were suspicious of each other, and neither dared to join the army.

古文：子通得尽锐攻江都，克之，稜奔伏威。
现代文：李子通得以用全力攻打江都，攻克江都城，陈棱投奔了杜伏威。
English: Li Zi Tong was able to use all his strength to attack Jiangdu and conquer Jiangdu City. Chen Ren went to Du Fu Wei.

古文：子通入江都，因纵击纶，大破之，伏威亦引去。
现代文：李子通进出江都，乘势挥兵进攻沈纶，大败沈纶，杜伏威也带领军队撤走。
English: Li Zi Tong went in and out of Jiangdu, took advantage of the situation to attack Shen Yao, defeated Shen Yao, and Du Fuwei also led the army to withdraw.

古文：子通即皇帝位，国号吴，改元明政。
现代文：李子通即皇帝位，建立吴国，改年号为明政。
English: Li Zidong became emperor, established the State of Wu, and changed his name to Ming Zheng.

古文：丹杨贼帅乐伯通帅众万馀降之，子通以为左仆射。
现代文：丹阳盗贼首领乐伯通率领一万多人马投降了李子通，李子通任命他为左仆射。
English: Danyang thief leader LeBertong led more than ten thousand people to surrender to Li ZiTong, who appointed him as his second-in-command.

古文：杜伏威请降；丁丑，以伏威为淮南安抚大使、和州总管。
现代文：杜伏威请求投降；丁丑，唐任命杜伏威为淮南安抚大使、和州总管。
English: Duvoisier requested to surrender; Dingwu, Tang appointed Duvoisier as Huainan's pacification ambassador and provincial governor.

古文：裴寂至介休，宋金刚据城拒之。
现代文：裴寂到介休，宋金刚凭借城池抵抗。
English: Pei Jia to retire, Song King Kong with the city's resistance.

古文：寂军于度索原，营中饮涧水，金刚绝之，士卒渴乏。
现代文：裴寂在度索原扎营，军营中饮用山涧水，宋金刚切断了水源，唐军士兵又渴又乏。
English: Peizhang was encamped in Duxoyuan, drinking mountain spring water in the camp. Song Jinguang cut off the water source, and the Tang soldiers were thirsty and weary.

古文：寂欲移营就水，金刚纵兵击之，寂军遂溃，失亡略尽，寂一日一夜驰至晋州。
现代文：裴寂想迁移营地靠近水源，宋金刚趁机挥兵进攻，于是裴寂的军队溃败，几乎全军覆没；裴寂经一天一夜奔驰到晋州。
English: Peizhang wanted to move the camp closer to the water source, Song Jingang took the opportunity to attack, so Peizhang's army was defeated and almost completely destroyed; Peizhang galloped to Jinzhou overnight.

古文：先是，刘武周屡遣兵攻西河，浩州剌史刘赡拒之；李仲文引兵就之，与共守西河。
现代文：在此之前，刘武周屡次派兵攻打西河，唐浩州刺史刘赡抵御来敌，李仲文带兵赴浩州，与刘赡共同守卫西河。
English: Prior to this, Liu Wuzhou repeatedly sent troops to attack the West River, Tang Haozhou sent Liu Yan to resist the enemy, Li Zhongwen led troops to Haozhou, and Liu Yan jointly guarded the West River.

古文：及裴寂败，自晋州以北城镇俱没，唯西河独存。
现代文：等到裴寂失败，自晋州以北的城镇全部沦陷，唯独西河保存下来。
English: By the time of Peizhang's defeat, all the towns north of Jinzhou had fallen, with the exception of Xihe.

古文：姜宝谊复为金刚所虏，谋逃归，金刚杀之。
现代文：姜宝谊再次被宋金刚俘虏，他谋划逃回唐，被宋金刚杀死。
English: Jiang Baoyi was once again captured by Song Jingang. He planned to escape back to Tang and was killed by Song Jingang.

古文：裴寂上表谢罪，上慰谕之，复使镇抚河东。
现代文：裴寂上书谢罪，高祖安慰他，重新让他镇抚河东。
English: Pei Jia wrote a thank-you letter, Gao Zu consoled him and asked him to appease Hedong again.

古文：刘武周进逼并州，齐王元吉绐其司马刘德威曰： 卿以老弱守城，吾以强兵出战。 
现代文：刘武周进逼并州，齐王李元吉欺骗他的司马刘德威说： 你带老弱守成，我带强兵出战。 
English: Liu Wu Zhou advanced to force the annexation of the state, and the king of Qi, Li Yuanji, deceived his Sima, Liu Dewei, saying: You take the old and weak to defend, I take the strong soldiers to fight.

古文：辛巳，元吉夜出兵，携其妻妾弃州奔还长安。
现代文：辛巳，李元吉半夜出兵，携带妻妾放弃并州逃回长安。
English: Soon after, Li Yuanji sent troops in the middle of the night, abandoned his wife and concubine and fled back to Chang'an.

古文：元吉始去，武周兵已至城下，晋阳土豪薛深以城纳武周。
现代文：李元吉刚离开，刘武周的大军就抵达城下，晋阳当地豪强薛深献城池接纳了刘武周。
English: As soon as Li Yuanji left, Liu Wuzhou's army arrived at the foot of the city. Jinyang's local strongman Xue Shengjian accepted Liu Wuzhou.

古文：上闻之，大怒，谓礼部尚书李纲曰： 元吉幼弱，未习时事，故遣窦诞、宇文歆辅之。
现代文：高祖闻讯，极为震怒，对礼部尚书李纲说： 元吉年轻，不熟悉时事，所以才派窦诞、宇文歆辅佐他。
English: Hearing the news, Gao Zu was extremely furious and said to Li Gang, Shangshu of the Ceremonial Department: Yuanji is young and is not familiar with current affairs, so he sent Dou Xing and Yu Wenjun to assist him.

古文：晋阳强兵数万，食支十年，兴王之基，一旦弃之。
现代文：晋阳有几万强兵，足够吃十年的粮食，它是王业兴起的根基，却一下就放弃了。
English: Jinyang has tens of thousands of strong soldiers, enough to eat ten years of grain, which is the foundation of Wangye's rise, but it gave up all at once.

古文：闻宇文歆首画此策，我当斩之！ 
现代文：听说是宇文歆首先提出这主意，我一定要杀了他！ 
English: I heard that it was Yu Wenyi who first proposed this idea, I must kill him!

古文：纲曰： 王年少骄逸，窦诞曾无规谏，又掩覆之，使士民愤怨，今日之败，诞之罪也。
现代文：李纲说； 齐王年轻骄奢放纵，窦诞不曾有所规谏，反而为他掩饰，使百姓愤怒，今天的失败，是窦诞的罪过。
English: Li Gang said: King Qi was young, arrogant and indulgent. Dou Xizhe did not have any rules, but instead covered up for him, making the people angry. Today's failure is Dou Xizhe's fault.

古文：歆谏，王不悛，寻皆闻奏，乃忠臣也，岂可杀哉！ 
现代文：宇文歆劝谏，齐王不改，他将所有的情况上奏朝延，是忠臣，怎么能杀掉？ 
English: King Qi would not change, he would report everything to the emperor, he was a loyal subject, how could he be killed?

古文：明日，上召纲入，升御座曰： 我得公，遂无滥刑。
现代文：第二天，高祖召李纲入见，登上御座说道： 我有了你，才能够没有滥施刑罚。
English: The next day, Gao Zu called Li Gang into his presence and ascended the throne, saying: "Only when I have you can I not inflict punishment indiscriminately."

古文：元吉自为不善，非二人所能禁也。 
现代文：元吉自己不学好，不是窦诞、宇文歆两个人能禁止得了的。 
English: It is not Dou Xing and Uwen Yao who can ban the two people if Yuanji himself does not study well.

古文：并诞赦之。
现代文：于是连窦诞也一起赦免了罪过。
English: As a result, even Dou Zi also pardoned the crime.

古文：卫尉少卿刘政会在太原，为武周所虏，政会密遣人奉表论武周形势。
现代文：卫尉少卿刘政会在太原，被刘武周俘虏，政会秘密上表分析了刘武周的形势。
English: Liu Zhengkai, a guard lieutenant, was captured by Liu Wuzhou in Taiyuan. Zhengkai secretly analyzed Liu Wuzhou's situation on the table.

古文：武周据太原，遣宋金刚攻晋州，拔之，虏右骁卫大将军刘弘基，弘基逃归。
现代文：刘武周占据太原，派宋金刚进攻并攻克了晋州，俘虏了唐右骁卫大将军刘弘基，刘弘基逃回了唐。
English: Liu Wuzhou occupied Taiyuan, sent Song King Kong to attack and conquered Jinzhou, and captured Liu Hongji, Tang's right-armored general. Liu Hongji fled back to Tang.

古文：金刚进逼绛州，陷龙门。
现代文：宋金刚进逼绛州，攻陷了龙门。
English: Song Jinguang entered and besieged Bozhou and captured Longmen.

古文：西突厥曷娑那可汗与北突厥有怨；曷娑那在长安，北突厥遣使请杀之，上不许。
现代文：西突厥曷娑那可汗与北突厥有仇怨，曷娑那在长安，北突厥派使节到唐请求杀了曷娑那，高祖不答应。
English: The Western Turk Jinnah Khan had a grudge against the Northern Turk. Jinnah was in Chang'an. The Northern Turk envoys went to Tang and asked for Jinnah to be killed. Gaozu did not agree.

古文：群臣皆曰： 保一人而失一国，后必为患！ 
现代文：群臣都说： 保护了一个人却得罪一个国家，今后必然是祸患！ 
English: The courtiers all said: To have protected a man and offended a country is bound to be a disaster in the future!

古文：秦王世民曰： 人穷来归我，杀之不义。 
现代文：秦王李世民说： 别人无路可走前来投奔，我们杀了他是不义。 
English: Li Shimin, the king of Qin, said: "Other people have no way to come and flee, and it is unjust for us to kill him.

古文：上迟回久之，不得己，丙戌，引曷娑那于内殿宴饮，既而送中书省，纵北突厥使者使杀之。
现代文：高祖迟疑了很长时间，不得已，丙戌，带曷娑那在内殿设宴饮酒，然后把他送到中书省，听任北突厥的使者杀了曷娑那。
English: Gao Zu hesitated for a long time, and finally, he had to have a banquet and drink with Jina in the inner hall, and then sent him to the Central Library to let the North Turkic envoy kill Jina.

古文：礼部尚书李纲领太子詹事，太子建成始甚礼之。
现代文：礼部尚书李纲兼太子詹事，太子李建成一开始对他很尊重。
English: Li Gang, the head of the etiquette department, was also the prince's friend. At the beginning, the prince respected him very much.

古文：久之，太子渐昵近小人，疾秦王世民功高，颇相猜忌；纲屡谏不听，乃乞骸骨。
现代文：时间一长，太子渐逐亲近小人，嫉妒秦王李世民功劳大，颇猜忌李世民，李纲屡次规劝，李建成都不听，于是李纲请求告老退休。
English: As time passed, the prince gradually became close to the villain, jealous of the great achievements of Qin King Li Shimin, rather suspicious of Li Shimin, Li Gang repeatedly persuaded, Li Jiancheng did not listen, so Li Gang asked to retire.

古文：上骂之曰： 卿为何潘仁长史，乃耻为朕尚书邪！
现代文：高祖骂他道： 你当过何潘仁的长史，就耻于作朕的上书吗！
English: Gao Zu scolded him, "You have been a disciple of Panren for a long time, are you ashamed to write my letter?

古文：且方使卿辅导建成，而固求去，何也？ 
现代文：况且正要让你辅导建成，却坚持要离职，这是为什么？ 
English: Moreover, you are about to complete your tutoring, but you insist on leaving your job. Why is that?

古文：纲顿首曰： 潘仁，贼也，每欲妄杀人，臣谏之即止。为其长史，可以无愧。
现代文：李纲叩头谢罪道： 潘仁是个盗贼，每次想妄杀无辜，我规劝后他立刻就不杀了，作他的长史，我可以问心无愧。
English: Li Gang bowed his head and said, "Pan Ren is a thief. Every time he wanted to kill an innocent person, he would not kill immediately after I advised him. I can have a clear conscience because of his long history."

古文：陛下创业明主，臣不才，所言如水投石，言于太子亦然，臣何敢久污天台，辱东朝乎！ 
现代文：陛下是创业的圣明君主，我没有能力，说的话犹如用水浇石，虽然石头湿了可并不能渗透，对太子的规劝也是一样不起作用，我怎么敢长期使尚书省受玷污，而使东宫蒙受耻辱呢？ 
English: Your Majesty is the patron saint of entrepreneurs. I don't have the ability. My words are like pouring water on a stone. Although the stone is wet, it can't be penetrated. My exhortations to the prince are just as ineffective. How dare I tarnish Shang Shuxuan for a long time and bring shame to the Eastern Palace?

古文：上曰： 知公直士，勉留辅吾儿。 
现代文：高祖说， 朕知道您是位正直的人，请您勉为其难留下辅导我的儿子。 
English: Gaozu said, "I know you are an honest person, so please stay to tutor my son.

古文：戊子，以纲为太子少保，尚书、詹事如故。
现代文：戊子，任命李纲为太子少保，原礼部尚书、太子詹事的官职依旧保留。
English: At the same time, Li Gang was appointed as the Prince's Junior Bodyguard, and the former official positions of the Ministry of Ceremonies and the Prince's Office were still retained.

古文：纲复上书谏太子饮酒无节，及信谗慝，疏骨肉。太子不怿，而所为如故。纲郁郁不得志，是岁，固称老病辞职，诏解尚书，仍为少保。
现代文：李纲又上书规劝太子饮酒没有节制，以及信任邪恶之人，疏远骨肉兄弟，太子不高兴，所作所为依然如故，李纲郁郁不得志，当年，坚持说自己年老多病必须辞职，高祖下诏解除他的尚书职务，仍然让他担任少保。
English: Li Gang also wrote a letter to advise the prince to drink alcohol without restraint, as well as trust evil people, alienate flesh and blood brothers, the prince was not happy, his behavior was still the same, Li Gang was depressed, that year, he insisted that he was old and sick and had to resign, Gaozhu issued a decree to relieve him of his duties as a priest, and still let him serve as a minor.

古文：淮安王神通使慰抚使张道源镇赵州。
现代文：淮安王李神通命慰抚使张道源镇守赵州。
English: Huai'an King Li Shentong sent Zhang Daoyuan to guard Zhaozhou.

古文：庚寅，窦建德陷赵州，执总管张志昂及道源。
现代文：庚寅，窦建德攻陷赵州，捉住唐总管张志昂及张道源。
English: Geng Yin, Dou Jian De invaded Zhaozhou and captured the Tang general Zhang Zhiang and Zhang Dogen.

古文：建德以二人及邢州刺史陈君宾不早下，欲杀之。国子祭酒凌敬谏曰： 人臣各为其主用，彼坚守不下，乃忠臣也。
现代文：窦建德因为他们二人以及邢州刺史陈君宾没有尽早投降，打算杀了他们，窦建德的国子祭酒凌敬规谏道： 人臣各自为他们的主人效力，他们坚守城池不投降，是忠臣。
English: Dou Jiande planned to kill them because the two of them and Chen Junbin, the governor of Zhangzhou, did not surrender as soon as possible. Dou Jiande's son-in-law, Ling Jingbi, said: "Each of the officials worked for their masters. They held fast to the castle and did not surrender. They were loyal subjects."

古文：今大王杀之，何以励群下乎！ 
现代文：现在大王杀了他们，用什么来勉励部下呢？ 
English: Now that the great king has killed them, what will he use to encourage his men?

古文：建德怒曰： 吾至城下，彼犹不降，力屈就擒，何可舍也！ 
现代文：窦建德生气地说： 我到了城下，他们还不投降，力尽被擒，怎么能放过他们？ 
English: Dou Jiande said angrily, "When I got to the outskirts of the city, they still didn't surrender, and I was handcuffed with all my might. How could I let them go?

古文：敬曰： 今大王使大将高士兴拒罗艺于易水，艺才至，士兴即降，大王之意以为何如？ 
现代文：凌敬说道： 现在大王派大将高士兴在易水抵御罗艺，罗艺才到，高士兴就投降，大王认为怎么样？ 
English: Ling Jing said: Now the king has sent the general Gao Shixing to resist Luo Yi at Yishui. Luo Yi has just arrived, and Gao Shixing has surrendered. What does the king think?

古文：建德乃悟，即命释之。
现代文：于是窦建德才醒悟，立即下令释放了他们。
English: When Dou Jiande understood this, he ordered that they be released.

古文：乙未，梁师都复寇延州，段德操击破之，斩首二千馀级，师都以百馀骑遁去。
现代文：乙未，梁师都再次侵犯延州，段德操打败了他，并杀死二千多人，梁师都率一百多骑兵逃遁。
English: Two days later, Liang Shidu invaded Yanzhou again. Duan Dequan defeated him and killed more than two thousand people. Liang Shidu led more than one hundred cavalrymen to escape.

古文：德操以功拜柱国，赐爵平原郡公。
现代文：段德操因功官拜柱国，赐爵平原郡公。
English: Due to his meritorious service, Duan Dequan was awarded the title of Prince of Pingyuan County.

古文：鄜州刺史鄜城壮公梁礼战没。
现代文：州刺史城壮公梁礼阵亡。
English: Zhuanggong Liangli, the governor of Zhicheng, died in the battle.

古文：冬，十月，己亥，就加凉州总管杨恭仁纳言；赐幽州总管燕公罗艺姓李氏，封燕郡王。
现代文：冬季，十月已亥唐加凉州总管杨恭仁官为纳言；赐幽州总管燕公罗艺姓李，封燕郡王。
English: In the winter, in October, Yang Guoren, the general manager of Yanggang and Liangzhou, was awarded the title of Nagan; the general manager of Yuzhou, Yengong Luo Yi, surnamed Li, was awarded the title of King of Yengzhou.

古文：辛丑，李艺破窦建德于衡水。
现代文：辛丑，李艺在衡水打败窦建德。
English: Li Yi defeated Dou Jiande in Hengshui.

古文：癸卯，以左武候大将军庞玉为梁州总管。
现代文：癸卯，唐任命左武候大将军宠玉为梁州总管。
English: At the same time, Tang appointed General Zou Wu as the general manager of Liangzhou.

古文：时集州獠反，玉讨之，獠据险自守，军不得进，粮且尽。
现代文：当时集州獠民反叛，宠玉讨伐叛獠，獠民凭借险要固守，唐军队不能前进，而且军粮食尽。
English: At that time, the people of Jizhou rebelled against the Tang Dynasty, and the people of Jizhou had to fight against the rebels. The people of Jizhou had to defend themselves against the danger, the Tang army could not advance, and the army ran out of food.

古文：熟獠与反者皆邻里亲党，争言贼不可击，请玉还。
现代文：靠近边境的熟獠与反叛的獠民都是乡亲，争相进言说无法攻打叛獠，请求宠玉回军。
English: Close to the border, the familiar and the rebellious villagers are all fellow villagers, arguing that they cannot attack the traitors, and asking the favorite to return to the army.

古文：玉扬言： 秋谷将熟，百姓毋得收刈，一切供军，非平贼吾不返。 
现代文：宠玉故意宣扬说： 秋谷即将成熟，百姓不得收割，一切供给军需，不平叛贼我不撤军。 
English: Dotyama deliberately proclaimed: Akitani is about to ripen, the people are not allowed to harvest, everything must be supplied to the military, I will not withdraw the army because of the rebels.

古文：闻者大惧，曰： 大军不去，吾曹皆将馁死。 
现代文：听说此话的人大为惊恐，说： 大军不走，我们这些人都要被饿死。 
English: When they heard these things, they were exceedingly afraid, and said, "If this great multitude does not depart, we shall all die of hunger."

古文：其中壮士乃入贼营，与所亲潜谋，斩其渠帅而降，馀党皆散，玉追讨，悉平之。
现代文：其中的壮士便进入叛獠营地，和认识的叛獠暗中谋划，杀了叛獠头领投降唐军，余众全部溃散，宠玉追逐讨伐，全部平定了叛獠。
English: The bravest among them then entered the rebel camp, plotted secretly with the known rebels, killed the rebel leader and surrendered to the Tang army, and the rest of the crowd all dispersed, chasing the crusade, and all quelled the rebels.

古文：刘武周将宋金刚进攻浍州，陷之，军势甚锐。
现代文：刘武周的将领宋金刚进攻并攻克了浍州，军势很猛。
English: Liu Wuzhou's general Song Jingang attacked and conquered Zhangzhou, and the army was very strong.

古文：裴寂性怯，无将帅之略，唯发使骆驿，趣虞、泰二州收民入城堡，焚其积聚。
现代文：裴寂性格怯懦，没有将帅的才干，只是不断地派出使者，催促虞、泰二州的居民进入城堡，并焚毁了他们的积蓄。
English: Peizhao was a coward and had no skill as a general, but he constantly sent emissaries to urge the residents of Yu and Tai Erzhou to enter the castle and burned their savings.

古文：民惊扰悉怨，皆思为盗。夏县民吕崇茂聚众自称魏王，以应武周，寂讨之，为所败。
现代文：百姓惊恐不安忧愁抱怨，都想去当强盗，夏县居民吕崇茂聚众自称魏王，响应刘武周，裴寂去讨伐，被吕崇茂打败。
English: The people were alarmed, uneasy, sad and complaining, and all wanted to be robbers. The residents of Xia County, including Lv Chongmao, gathered together and called themselves Wei Wang. In response to Liu Wuzhou, Pei Zhia went to fight, and was defeated by Lv Chongmao.

古文：诏永安王孝基、工部尚书独孤怀恩、陕州总管于筠、内史侍郎唐俭等将兵讨之。
现代文：唐下诏命令永安王李孝基、独孤怀恩，陕州总管于筠、内史侍郎唐俭等人带兵讨伐吕崇茂。
English: The Tang Dynasty issued an edict ordering the Yongan King Li Xiaoji, Du Guowai En, the General Manager of Shaanxi Province Yu Yao, the Secretary of the Inner History Tang Jian and others to lead troops to fight against Lü Chongmao.

古文：时王行本犹据蒲坂，未下，亦与武周相应，关中震骇。上出手敕曰： 贼势如此，难与争锋，宜弃大河以东，谨守关西而已。 
现代文：当时王行本还占据着蒲反，没有被攻下，也与刘武周相互呼应，关中震惊，高祖下亲笔敕书道： 贼势到如此地步，很难与他们抗争，宜放弃黄河以东地区，谨守关西。 
English: At that time, Wang Xingbon was still occupying Putang and had not been captured. He and Liu Wuzhou also echoed each other. Guanzhong was shocked. Gao Zu personally wrote: The banditry has reached such a level that it is difficult to fight against them. It is advisable to give up the area east of the Yellow River and keep Kansai.

古文：秦王世民上表曰： 太原，王业所基，国之根本；河东殷实，京邑所资，若举而弃之，臣窃愤恨。
现代文：秦王李世民上表称： 太原是王业的基础，国家的根本；河东地区富饶，京城靠它供给，如果全部放弃，臣深感愤恨。
English: Li Shimin, the king of Qin, said on the table: Taiyuan is the foundation of the king's career and the foundation of the country; the eastern part of the river is rich and the capital city depends on it for supplies. If you give up everything, your subjects will be deeply resentful.

古文：愿假臣精兵三万，必冀平殄武周，克复汾、晋。 
现代文：希望给臣三万精兵，必定可望消灭刘武周，收复汾、晋。 
English: He hoped to give his vassal thirty thousand elite soldiers, and he certainly hoped to eliminate Liu Wu Zhou, and recover Jie and Jin.

古文：上于是悉发关中兵以益世民所统，使击武周，乙卯，幸华阴，至长春宫以送之。
现代文：于是高祖征发关中所有兵力扩充李世民的部队，让他攻打刘武周。乙卯，高祖驾临华阴，至长春宫为秦王送行。
English: Therefore, Gaozhu sent all the troops to expand Li Shimin's troops and let him attack Liu Wuzhou. Second, Gaozhu drove to Huayin to see off Qin Wang at the Changchun Palace.

古文：窦建德引兵趣卫州。
现代文：窦建德带兵赴卫州。
English: Dou Jiande led the troops to Weizhou.

古文：建德每行军，常为三道，辎重、细弱居中央，步骑夹左右，相去二里许。
现代文：窦建德每次行军，经常将部队分为三道，辎重、家眷居中央，步兵骑兵在两边，相隔三里左右。
English: Every time Dou Jiande marched, he often divided his troops into three lines, with the nobles and their families in the center, and the infantry and cavalry on both sides, about three miles apart.

古文：建德以千骑前行，过黎阳三十里，李世勣遣骑将丘孝刚将二百骑侦之。
现代文：窦建德带千名骑兵走在前面，过黎阳三十里，李世派骑兵将领丘孝刚率领三百骑兵侦察窦建德的军情。
English: Dou Jiande led a thousand cavalry in front, and thirty miles past Liyang, Li Shih sent cavalry general Qiu Xiaogang to lead three hundred cavalry to reconnoiter Dou Jiande's military situation.

古文：孝刚骁勇，善马槊，与建德遇，遂击之，建德败走；右方兵救之，击斩孝刚。
现代文：丘孝刚勇猛善战，善于骑马使长枪，和窦建德遭遇，便攻击窦建德，窦建德败退，右边骑兵救援，攻打丘孝刚并杀了他。
English: Qiu Xiaogang fought bravely and fiercely, and was good at riding a horse and using a long gun. When he encountered Dou Jiande, he attacked Dou Jiande, Dou Jiande retreated, and the cavalry on the right came to his rescue, attacked Qiu Xiaogang and killed him.

古文：建德怒，还攻黎阳，克之，虏淮安王神通、李世勣父盖、魏征及帝妹同安公主。
现代文：窦建德很气愤，回军攻打并攻陷了黎阳，俘虏了唐淮安王李神通、李世的父亲李盖、魏徵以及唐高祖的妹妹同安公主。
English: Dou Jiande was very angry. The Hui army attacked and conquered Liyang, and captured Li Shentong, the king of Tang and Huai'an, Li Gui, the father of Li Si, Wei Zheng, and Princess Tong'an, the sister of Tang Gaozu.

古文：唯李世勣以数百骑走渡河，数日，以其父故，还诣建德降。卫州闻黎阳陷，亦降。
现代文：唯有李世带几百骑兵逃过黄河，几天后，李世又因为父亲被俘的缘故，返回黎阳投降了窦建德，卫州得知黎阳陷落，也投降了窦建德。
English: Only Li Shih escaped across the Yellow River with a few hundred cavalrymen. A few days later, Li Shih returned to Liyang and surrendered to Dou Jiande because his father had been captured. When Weizhou learned of the fall of Liyang, it also surrendered to Dou Jiande.

古文：建德以李世勣为左骁卫将军，使守黎阳，常以其父盖自随为质。
现代文：窦建德任命李世为左骁卫将军，命他守卫黎阳，并把他的父亲李盖带在身边作为人质。
English: Dou Jiande appointed Li Shizhen as Zuo Jianwei general, ordered him to guard Liyang, and took his father Li Gai as a hostage.

古文：以魏征为起居舍人。
现代文：任命魏徵为起居舍人。
English: Wei Zheng was appointed as the chief resident.

古文：滑州刺史王轨奴杀轨，携其首诣建德降。
现代文：唐滑州刺史王轨的奴仆杀了王轨，携带王轨的首级到窦建德处投降。
English: The slave of Tanglizhou assassin Wang Liao killed Wang Liao and took Wang Liao's head to Dou Jiande's place to surrender.

古文：建德曰： 奴杀主大逆，吾何为受之！ 
现代文：窦建德说： 奴仆杀死主人是大逆不道，我怎被能接受他呢？ 
English: Dou Jiande said: "A slave killing his master is an act of rebellion. How can I accept him?

古文：立命斩奴，返其首于滑州。
现代文：立即下令斩了那位奴仆，将王轨的首级送回滑州。
English: He immediately gave the order to behead the servant and sent Wang Luo's head back to Lushan.

古文：吏民感悦，即日请降。
现代文：滑州百姓深受感动，当天就请求投降。
English: Deeply moved, the people of Nanzhou asked for surrender the same day.

古文：于是其旁州县及徐圆朗等皆望风归附。
现代文：于是附近的州县以及徐圆朗等人都望风归附。
English: As a result, the nearby prefectures and counties, as well as Xu Yuanlang and others, all hoped for the wind to come.

古文：己未，建德还洺州，筑万春宫，徙都之。置淮安王神通于下博，待以客礼。
现代文：已未，窦建德返回州，修建万春宫，将夏国都城迁到州，窦建德将唐淮安王李神通安置在下博，用宾客的礼节对待他。
English: Before long, Dou Jiande returned to Zhou, built the Wanchun Palace, and moved the summer capital city to Zhou. Dou Jiande placed Tang Huai'an King Li Shentong in Xiabo, and treated him with the etiquette of a guest.

古文：行军总管罗士信帅勇士夜入洛阳外郭，纵火焚清化里而还。
现代文：唐行军总管罗士信率领勇士夜晚进入洛阳外城，放火焚烧清化里后返回营地。
English: Luo Shixin, the general manager of the Tang march, led the warriors into the outer city of Luoyang at night, set fire to Qinghua Village and returned to the camp.

古文：壬戌，士信拔青城堡。
现代文：壬戌，罗士信攻破青城堡。
English: Ren Zheng and Luo Shixin stormed the Qing Castle.

古文：王世充自将兵徇地至滑台，临黎阳；尉氏城主时德睿、汴州刺史王要汉、亳州刺史丁叔则遣使降之。
现代文：王世充亲自带领兵马攻占土地到滑台，逼近黎阳；唐尉氏城主时德睿、汴州刺史王要汉、亳州刺史丁叔则派人投降了王世充。
English: Wang Shichong personally led the soldiers and horses to occupy the land to the slipway and approached Liyang; the Tang Lord's castle lord Shide Rui, Zhangzhou Zishi Wang Yaohan, and Zhangzhou Zishi Ding uncle sent people to surrender Wang Shichong.

古文：以德睿为尉州刺史。
现代文：王世充任命时德睿为尉州刺史。
English: Wang Shichong appointed Zhide Rui as the governor of Wuzhou.

古文：要汉，伯当之兄也。
现代文：王要汉是王伯当的兄长。
English: Wang Yaohan is the elder brother of Wang Bodang.

古文：夏侯端至黎阳，李世勣发兵送之，自澶渊济河，传檄州县，东至于海，南至于淮，二十馀州，皆遣使来降。
现代文：夏侯端到黎阳，李世派兵护送他，从澶渊渡过黄河，传递檄文到各州县，东至海，南到淮河，二十多个州县，均派使者前来降唐。
English: Xia Houdan went to Liyang, and Li Shih sent soldiers to escort him. He crossed the Yellow River from Putian and delivered the imperial edict to all prefectures and counties, east to the sea and south to the Huaihe River. More than 20 prefectures and counties sent emissaries to come to Tang.

古文：行至谯州，会汴、亳降于王世充，还路遂绝。
现代文：夏候端走到谯州，恰好汴、亳州投降了王世充，切断了他返回长安的道路。
English: Xia Xudong went to Zhangzhou, just as Zhang and Zhangzhou surrendered to Wang Shichong, cutting off his way back to Chang'an.

古文：端素得众心，所从二千人，虽粮尽不忍委去，端坐泽中，杀马以飨士，因歔欷谓曰： 卿等乡里皆已从贼，特以共事之情，未能见委。
现代文：夏候端历来得人心，随从人员两千名，虽然粮食吃光了，不忍心丢下他离去，夏侯端坐在沼泽中，杀掉马匹犒劳士兵们，他抽泣着说道： 你们的家乡都已投降了贼人，只是因为共事的情份，没有丢下我。
English: Xia Houfang has always been popular. He has a retinue of two thousand people. Although they have run out of food, they can't bear to leave him behind. Xia Houfang sat in the swamp, killed horses and overworked soldiers. He sobbed and said, "Your hometowns have all surrendered to the thieves. It's only because I worked with them that they didn't abandon me."

古文：我奉王命，不可从卿；卿有妻子，无宜效我。
现代文：我奉王命，不能随你们去，你们有妻儿，也不宜效仿我。
English: I have received a command from the king, and I cannot go with you. If you have wives and children, it is not right for you to follow me.

古文：可斩吾首归贼，必获富贵。 
现代文：可以砍下我的头归附贼人，一定能得到富贵。 
English: You can cut off my head and give it to a thief, and you will certainly become rich.

古文：众皆流涕曰： 公于唐室非有亲属，直以忠义，志不图存。
现代文：众人都流着泪说： 您和唐室没有什么亲属关系，只是为了忠义，立志牺牲。
English: Everyone shed tears and said, "You are not related to the Tang family, but you are willing to sacrifice for the sake of loyalty."

古文：某等虽贱，心亦人也，宁肯害公以求利乎！ 
现代文：我们虽然很卑贱，也有人心，难道能害了您去求得自己的利益吗？ 
English: Although we are very lowly, we also have human hearts, can we harm you to seek your own interests?

古文：端曰： 卿不忍见杀，吾当自刎。 
现代文：夏侯端说： 你们不忍心杀我，我就当自刎而死。 
English: Xia Houduan said, "If you don't have the heart to kill me, then I should kill myself."

古文：众抱持之，乃复同进，潜行五日，馁死及为贼所击奔溃相失者太半，唯馀五十三人同走，采豆生食之。
现代文：众人抱住他，于是又重新一起前进，偷偷地走了五天，二千人中饿死以及被王世充军队追击逃散失去了大半，只剩下五十二个人与他同行，采野豆生吃。
English: The crowd embraced him, and then marched forward together again, secretly walking for five days. Of the two thousand, most died of starvation and were chased and dispersed by Wang Shichong's army. Only fifty-two people remained with him, harvesting wild beans and eating them raw.

古文：端持节未尝离身，屡遣从者散，自求生，众又不可。
现代文：夏候端拿着使臣的信物节始终不离身，屡次让随从离去，自求生路，众人又不同意。
English: Xia Houduan held the ambassador's token and never left his body. He repeatedly let his entourage go and tried to survive on his own. However, everyone disagreed.

古文：时河南之地皆入世充，唯杞州刺史李公逸为唐坚守，遣兵迎端，馆给之。
现代文：当时河南都是王世充的势力范围，只有州刺史李公逸为唐坚守，李公逸派兵迎接夏候端，供给他食宿。
English: At that time, all of Henan was in Wang Shicheng's sphere of influence. Only the prefectural governor, Li Gongyi, held out for the Tang Dynasty. Li Gongyi sent soldiers to welcome Xia Hui Duan and provide him with food and lodging.

古文：世充遣使召端，解衣遗之，仍送除书，以端为淮南郡公、尚书少吏部。
现代文：王世充派人召夏候端，脱下衣服送给他，并送去委任状，任命夏候端为淮南郡公，尚书少吏部。
English: Wang Shichong sent someone to summon Xia Hui Duan, took off his clothes and gave them to him, and sent him a letter of appointment, appointing Xia Hui Duan as Huainan County official, Shangshu Junior Official Department.

古文：端对使者焚书毁衣，曰： 夏侯端天子大使，岂受王世充官乎！
现代文：夏侯端当着王世充使者的面烧了委任状，毁掉衣服，说道： 夏侯端是天子的大使，怎么能接受王世充的官职？
English: In front of Wang Shichong's envoy, Xia Houdan burned the letter of appointment, destroyed his clothes, and said: Xia Houdan is the ambassador of the Son of Heaven, how can he accept Wang Shichong's official post?

古文：汝欲吾往，唯可取吾首耳。 
现代文：你想让我去，除非取了我的脑袋！ 
English: You want me to go, unless you take my head!

古文：因解节旄怀之，置刃于竿，自山中西走，无复蹊径，冒践荆棘，昼夜兼行，得达宜阳，从者附崖溺水，为虎狼所食，又丧其半；其存者鬓发秃落，无复人状。
现代文：于是解下节上的旄放入怀中，将刀插在节竿上，从山中向西行，不在有道路，踏着荆棘，昼夜兼程，到达宜阳，随行的人坠崖溺水，为虎狼吃掉的，有丧失了一半，活下来的人都鬓发脱落，不象人样。
English: So he untied the knots on the knots and put them in his arms. He put the knife on the knots. He walked from the mountains to the west, where there was no road. He walked on the thorns, day and night, to reach Yiyang. The people who accompanied him fell off the cliff and drowned. Those who were eaten by the tigers and wolves lost half of them. Those who survived burst and fell off, not like humans.

古文：端诣阙见上，但谢无功，初不自言艰苦，上复以为秘书监。
现代文：夏候端上殿谒见皇上，只道歉说没有功劳，丝毫不提一路上的艰苦，高祖仍然任命他为秘书监。
English: In the summer, Gaozu was brought to the palace to meet the emperor, and he only apologized that he had no merit, without mentioning the hardships along the way. Gaozu still appointed him as secretary supervisor.

古文：郎楚之至山东，亦为窦建德所获，楚之不屈，竟得还。
现代文：郎楚之出使到山东，也被窦建德俘获，郎楚之不屈服，最终得以返回长安。
English: Lang Chu's envoy to Shandong was also captured by Dou Jiande. Lang Chu did not give in and was eventually able to return to Chang'an.

古文：王世充遣其从弟世辩以徐、亳之兵攻雍丘。李公逸遣使求救，上以隔贼境，不能救。
现代文：王世充派遣他的堂弟王世辩用徐、亳州的军队攻打雍丘，李公逸派人向唐求救，高祖因为雍丘与关中隔着敌人占领区，不能救援。
English: Wang Shichong sent his cousin Wang Shiyan to attack Yongqiu with troops from Xu and Ganzhou, Li Gongyi sent people to Tang for help, Gaozu could not rescue because Yongqiu was separated from Guanzhong by the enemy occupied area.

古文：公逸乃留其属李善行守雍丘，身帅轻骑入朝，至襄城，为世充伊州刺史张殷所获。世充谓曰： 卿越郑臣唐，其说安在？ 
现代文：李公逸于是留他的亲属李善行守卫雍丘，自己率领轻骑入朝，到襄城，被王世充的伊州刺史张殷抓获，王世充对他说： 你越过郑国向唐称臣，哪有这种道理？ 
English: Li Gongyi then left his relative Li Shan Xing to guard Yongqiu, and led his light cavalry into the court, to Xiangcheng, and was captured by Wang Shichong's Izhou assassin Zhang Yin. Wang Shichong said to him: You crossed Zheng Guo to Tang to claim to be a minister, what is the reason for this?

古文：公逸曰： 我于天下，唯知有唐，不知有郑。 
现代文：李公逸回答： 我对天下，只知道有唐，不知道有郑。 
English: Li Gongyi replied: To the world, I only know that there is Tang, but I don't know that there is Zheng.

古文：世充怒，斩之。
现代文：王世充很生气，杀了他。
English: Wang Shichong was very angry and killed him.

古文：善行亦没。
现代文：李善行也遇害。
English: Li Shanzhong was also killed.

古文：上以公逸子为襄邑公。
现代文：高祖封李公逸的儿子为襄邑公。
English: His great-great-great-grandfather, Li Gongyi's son, was Xiangyi Gong.

古文：甲子，上祠华山。
现代文：甲子，唐高祖祭华山。
English: Jiazi, Tang Gao Ancestor Festival Huashan.

