古文：万俟普，字普拨，太平人，其先匈奴之别种也。
现代文：万俟普，字普拨，太平人，其祖先为包盘的分支。
English: Wanyan Pu, Zhe Pu Zhe, Taiping people, whose ancestors are the branches of the Houdan.

古文：雄果有武力。
现代文：勇猛果敢有武力。
English: Bravery and courage have force.

古文：正光中，破六韩拔陵构逆，授普太尉。
现代文：正光年间，破六韩拔陵叛逆，任命万俟普为太尉。
English: During the reign of Zheng Guang, he broke through the rebellion of six Han Ba Ling and appointed Wan Xunpu as a lieutenant.

古文：率部下降魏，授后将军，第二领民酋长。
现代文：率部下投降魏，任命为后将军，第二领民酋长。
English: He led his subordinates to surrender to Wei and was appointed as the second general and the second territorial people's chief.

古文：高祖起义，普远通诚款，高祖甚嘉之。
现代文：高祖起义，万俟普从远方表达诚意，产祖非常赞赏他。
English: After Gao Zu's uprising, Wan Rongpu expressed his sincerity from afar, which was highly appreciated by Gao Zu.

古文：斛斯椿逼帝西出，授司空、秦州刺史，据覆靺城。
现代文：斛斯椿逼迫皇帝西出，任命为司空、秦州刺史，据守覆秣城。
English: Qin Shiqin forced the emperor to leave the west, and appointed him as the governor of the sky, the governor of the Qin State, and the governor of the city of Fuzhou.

古文：高祖平夏州，普乃率其部落来奔，高祖躬自迎接，授普河西公。
现代文：直担平定夏，亘俊萱乃率其部落来投奔，直担亲自迎接，拜授万俟普为河西公。
English: Directly in charge of suppressing Dingxia, Guo Junxuan led his tribe to rush to meet him, and personally greeted him, and made Wancheng Pu the prince of Hexi.

古文：累迁太尉、朔州刺史，卒。
现代文：多次升任为太尉、朔州刺史，去世。
English: He was promoted to the rank of captain several times, and died.

古文：子洛，字受洛干。
现代文：他的儿子万俟洛，字受洛干。
English: His son, Wan Jiao Luo, is also known as Luo Gan.

古文：豪壮有武艺，骑射过人，为乡闾所伏。
现代文：气势豪壮，有武艺，骑马射箭勇力遇人，为乡间所敬佩。
English: They are impressive, have martial arts, ride horses and shoot arrows with courage, and are admired by the countryside.

古文：拔陵反，随父归顺，除显武将军。
现代文：拔陵反叛，随父亲归顺，任显武将军。
English: He rebelled at Bailing, surrendered with his father, and was appointed as General Xianwu.

古文：随氽朱荣每有战功，累迁汾州刺史、骠骑将军。
现代文：跟随氽朱荣，常有战功，多次升任为汾州刺史、骠骑将军。
English: He followed Zhang Zhu Rong, often distinguished himself in battle, and was promoted several times to the post of Zhangzhou chief historian and general of cavalry.

古文：及起义信都，远送诚款，高祖嘉其父子俱至，甚优其礼。
现代文：到值都起义，从远方表达诚意，高祖赞赏他们父子一起前往，对他们礼遇非常优厚。
English: They all went to the uprising and expressed their sincerity from afar. Gaozu appreciated that their father and son went together and treated them very generously.

古文：除抚军，兼灵州刺史。
现代文：任抚军，兼任玺刺史。
English: He served as a military governor and also as a military historian.

古文：武帝入关，除左仆射。
现代文：亘堕入腿，任左仆射。
English: Wataru falls to his knees and lets the left-hander shoot.

古文：天平中，随父东归，封建昌郡公，再迁领军将军。
现代文：玉垩年间，随父束归，封建昌郡公，两次升任为领军将军。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yushan, he followed his father and became the feudal lord of Chang County, and was twice promoted to be the leading general.

古文：与诸将围独孤如愿于金墉，及河阴之战，并有功。
现代文：与众将包围独孤如愿在金扩，以及迥渣战役，均有战功。
English: In the Battle of Jinshan and the Battle of Dregs, he was able to encircle the enemy as he wished.

古文：高祖以其父普尊老，特崇礼之，尝亲扶上马。
现代文：直担因为其父亘蝗萱位尊年老，特别尊崇礼遇他，曾亲自扶他上马。
English: Because his father respected old age, Zhongsang treated him with special respect and courtesy, and once personally helped him onto a horse.

古文：洛免冠稽首曰： 愿出死力以报深恩。 
现代文：万俟洛免冠行稽首礼说： 愿奋死效力来报答大恩。 
English: "May you work hard to repay the great favor," he said as he bowed his head without a crown.

古文：及此役也，诸军北渡桥，洛以一军不动。
现代文：到这次战役，众军向北渡过桥梁，万俟洛率一支军队不动。
English: By the time of this battle, the troops had crossed the bridge to the north, and Wan Rongluo led an army and did not move.

古文：谓西人曰： 万俟受洛干在此，能来可来也！ 
现代文：对西人说： 万俟受洛干在这裹，能来的人就来吧! 
English: To the Westerners, he said: "If Lokan is here, let those who can come come!

古文：西人畏而去。
现代文：西人畏惧而离去。
English: The Westerners were afraid and left.

古文：高祖以雄壮，名其所营地为回洛城。
现代文：直担因其雄壮，命名他所在营地为旦困。
English: Due to his stature, he was nicknamed "Danzo" in his camp.

古文：洛慷慨有气节，勇锐冠时，当世推为名将。
现代文：亘丝盗慷慨有气节，勇锐盖世，当世推崇为名将。
English: Wanshi Guo was generous, brave, and respected as a great general in his day.

古文：兴和初卒。
现代文：兴和初年去世。
English: He passed away in the first year.

古文：可朱浑元，字道元。
现代文：可朱浑元，字道元。
English: It can be written in red ink, or in Chinese characters.

古文：自云辽东人。世为渠帅，魏时拥众内附，曾祖护野肱终于怀朔镇将，遂家焉。
现代文：自称辽束人，世代为部落首领，魏时带领兵众归附朝廷，曾祖护野肱死于怀朔镇将的职位上，于是在那裹安家。
English: He called himself a Liao Sok man. He was a tribal leader for generations. During the Wei Dynasty, he led the troops to join the imperial court. His great-grandfather, Guo Yucheng, died in the position of general of Waishuo Town, so he made his home there.

古文：元宽仁有武略，少与高祖相知。
现代文：可朱浑元宽厚仁义，有军事谋略，年轻时舆高祖互相了解，感情深厚。
English: However, Zhu Hunyuan was generous and benevolent, had military strategies, and when he was young, he and his ancestors understood each other and had deep feelings.

古文：北边扰乱，遂将家属赴定州，值鲜于修礼作乱，元拥众属焉。
现代文：北部边境骚扰，于是带领家属前往定州，逢鲜于修礼作乱，可朱浑元率众跟随他。
English: He was harassed at the northern border, so he led his family members to Dingzhou. When there was a disturbance at the ceremony, Zhu Hunyuan led the crowd to follow him.

古文：葛荣并修礼，复以元为梁王。
现代文：葛荣吞并了修礼，又以可朱浑元为梁王。
English: Ge Rong absorbed Shurei and made Zhu Hunyuan the king of Liang.

古文：遂奔尔朱荣，以为别将，隶天光征关中，以功为渭州刺史。
现代文：于是投奔叁塞荣，以他为别将，跟随天光征伐关中，因功任渭州刺史。
English: As a result, he rushed to Xie Sai Rong, and with him as his second-in-command, followed Tian Guang in the conquest of Guanzhong, and became a prominent figure in the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：侯莫陈悦之杀贺拔岳也，周文帝率岳所部还，共图悦。
现代文：侯莫陈悦杀贺拔岳的时候，周文帝率领贺拔昼所属部队回来共同图谋侯莫陈悦。
English: When Hou Mo Chen Yue killed He Bailu, Zhou Wendi led the troops belonging to He Bailu back to conspire with Hou Mo Chen Yue.

古文：元时助悦，悦走，元收其众，入据秦州，为周攻围，苦战，结盟而罢。
现代文：可朱浑元当时帮助侯莫陈悦，侯莫陈悦败走，可朱浑元收编了他的兵众，入城占据秦州，被周围攻，经过苦战，结盟而罢兵。
English: However, Zhu Hunyuan helped Hou Mo Chen Yue at that time, and Hou Mo Chen Yue was defeated and left. However, Zhu Hunyuan gathered his soldiers, entered the city to occupy Qinzhou, was attacked by the surroundings, and after a hard battle, allied with the enemy.

古文：元既早被高祖知遇，兼其母兄在东，尝有思归之志，恒遣表疏，与高祖阴相往来。
现代文：可朱浑元既然早被高祖赏识，再加上他的母亲、兄长在东方，曾有思归之志，常派人送表疏给高祖，私下相互往来。
English: But since Zhu Hunyuan had already been appreciated by Gao Zu, together with his mother and brother in the East, he had the desire to return, often sending people to send watches to Gao Zu, and privately communicating with each other.

古文：周文忌元智勇，知元怀贰，发兵攻之。
现代文：周文嫉妒可朱潭元智勇双全，知道可朱潭元怀有贰心，便发兵攻打他。
English: Zhou Wen was jealous of Zhu Tan Yuan's superior wisdom and courage. Knowing that Zhu Tan Yuan harbored evil intentions, he sent troops to attack him.

古文：元乃率所部发自渭州，西北渡乌兰津。
现代文：可朱浑元就率所属部队，从渭州出发，向西北渡岛兰津。
English: However, Zhu Hunyuan led his troops, starting from Zhangzhou and heading northwest to the island of Lanzhin.

古文：周文频遣兵邀之，元战必摧之。
现代文：周文多次派兵截击他，可朱浑元每次作战必定摧毁截击的军队。
English: Zhou Wen repeatedly sent troops to intercept him, but Zhu Hunyuan was sure to destroy the intercepting army in every battle.

古文：引军历河、源二州境，乃得东出。
现代文：率军经过河、源二州，才得以从柬杀出。
English: He led his army through He and Yuan two prefectures before he was able to leave Cambodia.

古文：灵州刺史曹女婿刘丰与元深相交结，元因说丰以高祖英武非常，克成大业，丰自此便有委质之心，遂资遣元。
现代文：灵州刺史曹垄的女婿刘丰舆巫苤运元相交很深。可塞运元于是用高祖英武非常，能成大业来说服刘丰，刘丰从此便有委身之心，就供给物资送走可朱浑元。
English: Liu Feng, the son-in-law of the Lingzhou assassin Cao Reng, had a deep relationship with Zhu Hun Yuan. However, Liu Feng used Gao Zu Yingwu to convince Liu Feng that he was very capable of becoming a great cause. Liu Feng was committed from then on, and sent supplies to Zhu Hun Yuan.

古文：元从灵州东北入云州。
现代文：可朱潭元从灵州东北进入云州。
English: But Zhu Tanyuan entered Yunnan from the northeast of Lingzhou.

古文：高祖闻其来也，遣平阳守高嵩持金环一枚以赐元，并运资粮，远遣候接。
现代文：高祖听说他来，派平匮守令高嵩持金环一枚赏赐可朱潭元，并且运送物资粮食，派人到远方迎候。
English: When Gao Zu heard that he was coming, he sent Gao Song holding a gold ring to reward Gao Song with a gold ring, and also transported supplies of grain and sent people to greet him from afar.

古文：元至晋阳，引见执手，赐帛千匹并奴婢田宅。
现代文：可朱浑元到晋阳。引见握手，赏赐千匹帛和奴婢田宅。
English: But Zhu Hun Yuan went to Jinyang. He shook hands with him and rewarded him with thousands of horses and slaves.

古文：兄弟四人先在并州者，进官爵。
现代文：兄弟四人中先在并州的人，晋升了官爵。
English: The first of the four brothers to join the state was promoted to a peerage.

古文：元所部督将，皆赏以爵邑。
现代文：可朱浑元部下的督将，皆赏给爵位和封邑。
English: However, the viceroys of Zhu Hun's former subordinates were all rewarded with peerages and fiefdoms.

古文：封元县公，除车骑大将军。
现代文：封可朱浑元为县公，任车骑大将军。
English: Zhu Hunyuan was given the title of county magistrate, and served as the general of cavalry.

古文：讨西魏仪同金祚、皇甫智达于东雍，擒之。
现代文：到束壅征讨西魏仪同金祚、皇甫智达，抓获了他们。
English: They went to Sokzheng to recruit Western Wei Yi, along with Jin Yong and Wang Fuzhida, and captured them.

古文：迁并州刺史。
现代文：升任并州刺史。
English: He was promoted to the post and made state history.

古文：又与诸将征伐，频有克捷降下。
现代文：又舆众将征伐，屡有战胜之功，多次使敌人降服归顺。
English: In addition, the general public will conquer, often have the merit of victory, and many times make the enemy surrender.

古文：天保初，封扶风王。
现代文：天保初年，封扶凰王。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, he was given the title of Fuhuo Wang.

古文：频从显祖讨山胡、茹茹，累有战功。
现代文：多次跟随题担征讨山超、蕴苞，屡有战功。
English: He has repeatedly followed the theme of "taking up the mountain and conquering the mountain" and has made great achievements in war.

古文：迁太师，薨。
现代文：升任太师，去世。
English: Promoted to Grand Master, passed away.

古文：赠假黄钺、太宰、录尚书。
现代文：追赠假黄钺、太宰、录尚书。
English: The fake Huang Qi, Dazai, and Luo Shangshu were given as gifts.

古文：元善于御众，行军用兵，务在持重，前后出征，未尝负败。
现代文：可朱浑元善于驾驭部属，行军用兵，务求谨慎，前后出征，未曾失败。
English: However, Zhu Hunyuan was good at controlling subordinates, marching soldiers, seeking prudence, traveling back and forth, and never failed.

古文：及卒，朝廷深悼之。
现代文：到去世，朝廷深深悼念他。
English: At the time of his death, he was deeply mourned by the Imperial Court.

古文：皇建初，配享世宗庙庭。
现代文：皇建初年，拊祀于世宗宗庙。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was enshrined in the Sejong Seomyo Temple.

古文：刘丰，字丰生，普乐人也。
现代文：刘丰，字丰生，普乐人。
English: Liu Feng, also known as Feng Sheng, is a happy-go-lucky person.

古文：有雄姿壮气，果毅绝人，有口辩，好说兵事。
现代文：有英姿豪气，果断刚毅过人，有口才，好谈论军事。
English: He is heroic, resolute, courageous, eloquent, and good at talking about the military.

古文：破六韩拔陵之乱，丰以守城之功，除普乐太守。
现代文：破六韩拔陵叛乱，刘丰困守城之功，任普乐太守。
English: After defeating the six-Korean tomb-sweeping rebellion, Liu Feng was appointed as the governor of Ple, for his hard work in defending the city.

古文：魏永安初，除灵州镇城大都督。
现代文：魏永安初年，任灵州镇城大都督。
English: In the first year of Wei Yongan, he was appointed as the governor of Lingshou Town.

古文：周文授以卫大将军，丰不受，乃遣攻围，不克。
现代文：周文任命他为卫大将军，刘丰不接受，就派人围攻，没有攻克。
English: Zhou Wen appointed him as the general of Wei, Liu Feng did not accept, he sent people to besiege, but did not conquer.

古文：丰远慕高祖威德，乃率户数万来奔。
现代文：刘丰远慕高祖的威德，就率领敷万户人前来投奔。
English: Liu Fengyuan admired Gao Zu's virtue and led tens of thousands of people to come and join him.

古文：高祖上丰为平西将军、南汾州刺史。
现代文：高祖让刘丰就职平西将军、南汾州刺史。
English: Gaozu appointed Liu Feng as the general of Pingxi and the governor of Nanluozhou.

古文：遂与诸将征讨，平定寇乱。
现代文：于是与众将征讨，平定外寇和内乱。
English: As a result, he went to war with the generals to quell foreign invaders and civil unrest.

古文：又从高祖破周文于河阴，丰功居多，高祖执手嗟赏。
现代文：又跟随高祖在河阴攻破周文，刘丰功劳最大，高祖拉着手赞叹。
English: He also followed Gao Zu to break Zhouwen in Heyin. Liu Feng made the greatest contribution, and Gao Zu started to admire.

古文：入为左卫将军，出除殷州。
现代文：入朝为左卫将军，又出任殷州。
English: He entered the imperial court as the General of the Left Division, and also served as the Governor of Yinzhou.

古文：王思政据长社，世宗命丰与清河王岳攻之。
现代文：王思政占据长社，世宗命令刘丰与清河王高岳攻打他。
English: Wang Sizheng occupied Chosha, and Shizong ordered Liu Feng and Qinghe Wang Gao Yue to attack him.

古文：丰建水攻之策，遂遏洧水以灌之，水长，鱼鳖皆游焉。
现代文：刘丰提出水攻的策略，就阻挡洧水来灌城，水上涨，鱼鳖都在水中游。
English: Liu Feng put forward the strategy of water attack, blocking the rushing water to fill the city, the water rises, and the fish gills are swimming in the water.

古文：九月至四月，城将陷。
现代文：从上年九月至下一年的四月，城将被攻破。
English: From September last year to April next year, the city will be breached.

古文：丰与行台慕容绍宗见北有白气同入船，忽有暴风从东北来，正昼昏暗，飞沙走砾，船缆忽绝，漂至城下。
现代文：刘丰与行台慕容绍宗见北方有白气，就一起进船。忽然有暴风从东北方刮来，大白天变得昏暗，飞沙走石，船的缆绳忽然断绝，漂?白到城下。
English: Liu Feng and the merchant Murong Shaosong saw white clouds in the north, so they boarded the ship together. Suddenly, a storm blew from the northeast, the daytime became dark, the sand drifted, the ship's cable suddenly broke, and the sky turned white under the city.

古文：丰游水向土山，为浪所激，不时至，西人钩之，并为敌人所害。
现代文：刘丰游水向土山，被浪冲激，不时而至，西方人用钩钩住了他。二人一起被敌人杀害。
English: Liu Feng swam in the water towards the muddy hill, was swept by the waves, and from time to time, a Westerner hooked him with a hook. Both of them were killed by the enemy.

古文：丰壮勇善战，为诸将所推。
现代文：刘丰刚勇，善于作战，为众将推崇。
English: Liu Fenggang is brave, good at fighting, and is respected by the public.

古文：死之日，朝野骇惋。
现代文：死的那天，朝廷内外惊骇惋惜。
English: On the day of his death, there was shock and regret both inside and outside the Imperial Court.

古文：赠大司马、司徒公、尚书令，谥曰忠。
现代文：追赠大司马、司徒公、尚书令，溢号为忠。
English: He was posthumously awarded the grand steed, the steward, and the imperial edict, and was known for his loyalty.

古文：子晔嗣。
现代文：儿子刘晔继承了他的爵位。
English: His son Liu Ye inherited his title.

古文：破六韩常，字保年，附化人，匈奴单于之裔也。
现代文：破六韩常，字保年，附化人，匈奴单于的后裔。
English: He is a descendant of Han Zang, Zi Bao Nian, Zi Hua Ren, and Xiong Niu Shan Yu.

古文：右谷蠡王潘六奚没于魏，其子孙以潘六奚为氏，后人讹误，以为破六韩。
现代文：右谷蠡王潘六奚死于魏，他的子孙用潘六奚为氏，后人讹误，成为破六韩。
English: Pan Liukong, the king of the Right Valley, died in the Wei Dynasty. His descendants used Pan Liukong as their clan name. Later generations mistook it for Han Han.

古文：世领部落，其父孔雀，世袭酋长。
现代文：世代率领部落，他的父亲孔雀，世袭酋长。
English: generation led the tribe, his father Peacock, hereditary chief.

古文：孔雀少骁勇。
现代文：孔雀年少骁勇。
English: Peacocks are young and vigorous.

古文：时宗人拔陵为乱，以孔雀为大都督、司徒、平南王。
现代文：当时同宗之人拔陵作乱，以孔雀为大都督、司徒、乎南王。
English: At that time, members of the same clan plundered the mausoleum and caused a disturbance, taking Peacock as the grand governor, Stowe, and King Hunan.

古文：孔雀率部下一万人降于尔朱荣，诏加平北将军、第一领民酋长，卒。
现代文：孑雀率领部下一万人投降了尔朱荣，奉诏加授平北将军、第一领民酋长，去世。
English: Hao Jiao led 10,000 people to surrender to Le Zhu Rong, and was posthumously awarded the title of General of Pingbei, the first leader of the people, and passed away.

古文：常沉敏有胆略，善骑射，累迁平西将军。
现代文：破六韩常沉稳机敏，有胆略，善于骑马射箭，多次升任为平西将军。
English: He was often calm and quick-witted, daring, good at riding and archery, and was promoted to the rank of General Pingxi several times.

古文：高祖起义，常为附化守，与万俟受洛干东归，高祖嘉之，上为抚军。
现代文：高祖起义，破六韩常为附化守令，与万俟受洛干束归，高祖嘉奖他，就职为抚军。
English: Gao Zu revolted, defeated six Han, often served as Fuke's subordinate, and returned to Wanju with Luo Gan. Gao Zu commended him and took office as the leader of the army.

古文：与诸将征讨，又从高祖攻击诸寇，累迁车骑大将军、开府，封平阳公，除洛州刺史。
现代文：舆众将征讨，又跟随高祖攻击众寇，多次升任为车骑大将军、开府，封平阳公。任洛州刺史。
English: The public will fight, and follow Gao Zu to attack the bandits. He has been promoted to General of Cavalry, Kaifu, and Pingyang several times. He is the history of Luozhou.

古文：常启世宗曰： 常自镇河阳以来，频出关口，太谷二道，北荆已北，洛州已南，所有要害，颇所知悉。
现代文：破六韩常启奏世宗说： 常自从镇守河阳以来，多次出关口、太谷二道，北荆以北，洛州以南，所有要害之地，都很熟悉。
English: He said: "Since I have been in charge of the town of Heyang, I have been familiar with the pass, the two valleys, the north of Beiting, the south of Luzhou, and all the important places.

古文：而太谷南口去荆路逾一百，经赤工坂，是贼往还东西大道，中间旷绝一百五十里，贼之粮饟，唯经此路。
现代文：而太谷南口距荆道路超过一百里，经过赤工坂，是贼人东西来往的大道，中间空缺一百五十里，贼人的粮饷，衹经过此路。
English: However, Taiyuan South Gate is more than a hundred miles away from Jing Road, and passes through Akagozaka. It is a highway for thieves to go back and forth between east and west, with a gap of one hundred and fifty miles in the middle. Thieves' grain and straw pass through this road.

古文：愚谓于彼选形胜之处，营筑城戍，安置士马，截其远还，自然不能更有行送。 
现代文：我认为在那襄选择险要之地，建造城堡，安置军队，阻止其从远方回来，自然不能再有粮饷运送。 
English: I think that if you choose a dangerous place, build a castle, place an army, and prevent it from returning from a distance, it is natural that there will be no more grain delivery.

古文：世宗纳其计，遣大司马斛律金等筑杨志、百家、呼延三镇。
现代文：世宗采纳了他的计策，派大司马斛律金等人建造杨志、百家、呼延三镇。
English: King Sejong adopted his strategy and sent Grand Master Ma Yeol Rukin and others to build the three towns of Yangzhi, Baekje and Huyan.

古文：常秩满，还晋阳，拜太保、沧州刺史，卒。
现代文：破六韩常任期满，回到晋阳，任太保、沧州刺史，去世。
English: At the end of his six-year term of office, he returned to Jinyang, and served as Taibo and Cangzhou chief historian. He passed away.

古文：赠尚书令、司徒公、太傅、第一领民酋长，假王，谥曰忠武。
现代文：追赠尚书令、司徒公、太傅、第一领民酋长，假王，谧号为忠武。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Shang Shuling, Stukong, Taifu, First Territorial People's Chief, False King, and his posthumous name was Zhongwu.

古文：金祚，字神敬，安定人也。
现代文：金祚，字神敬，安定人。
English: The golden egret, the god of the word, and the stable person.

古文：性骁雄，尚气任侠。
现代文：天性骁勇，重义气，能见义勇为。
English: They are courageous by nature, have a strong sense of righteousness, and are able to act in a righteous and courageous manner.

古文：魏正光中，陇右贼起，诏雍州刺史元猛讨之，召募狼家，以为军导，祚应选。
现代文：魏正光年间，陇右贼起，韶令雍州刺史元猛征讨，招募清白人家，作为军队的向导，金祚应召被选。
English: During the reign of Wei Zhengguang, he ordered the Yongzhou Jishi Yuan to raid and recruit the Qing white people. As a guide for the army, Jin Qi was selected.

古文：以军功累迁龙骧将军、灵州刺史。
现代文：因军功几次升任为龙骧将军、灵州刺史。
English: Due to his military achievements, he was promoted several times to the rank of Longjing General and Lingzhou Sashihong.

古文：高祖举义，尔朱天光率关右之众与仲远等北抗义师。
现代文：高祖起义，尔朱天光率领关右的民众与仲远等向北抵抗起义的军队。
English: Gaozu Uprising, Er Zhu Tianguang led the people on the right side of the pass and the army that resisted the uprising to the north.

古文：天光留祚东秦，总督三州，镇静二州。
现代文：天光留金祚在柬秦，总督三州，安定二州。
English: Tenkuang left gold ingots in Qin, the governor of three states, and stability in two states.

古文：天光败，归高祖，除车骑大将军。
现代文：天光失败，归附高祖，任车骑大将军。
English: Tianguang failed, it was attached to Gaozu, and he became the general of chariot and cavalry.

古文：邙山之战，以大都督从破西军。
现代文：邙山战役，以大都督的身份随军击破西军。
English: In the Battle of Lushan, he defeated the Western Army as the grand governor.

古文：祚除华州刺史，加开府仪同三司，别封临济县子，卒。
现代文：金祚任华州刺史，加授开府仪同三司，另封临济县子，去世。
English: Jin Rong served as the state historian of Huazhou, and was awarded the honorary title of "Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi," and was also awarded the title of "Linji County Son." He passed away.

古文：赠司空。
现代文：追赠司空。
English: The after-gift is Siku.

古文：韦子粲，字晖茂，京兆人。
现代文：韦子粲，字晖茂，京兆人。
English: Wei Zixuan, Zhaojun Mao, Jingzhao Ren.

古文：曾祖阆，魏咸阳守。
现代文：曾祖韦闯，任魏咸阳郡守。
English: Zeng Zu Wei Ran, served as Wei Xianyang County Governor.

古文：父隽，都水使者。
现代文：父亲韦隽，任都水使者。
English: His father, Wei Wei, was the water envoy to the capital.

古文：子粲仕郡功曹史，累迁为大行台郎中，从尔朱天光平关右。
现代文：子粲任郡功曹史，几次升任为大行台郎中，跟随尔朱天光平定关右。
English: Zixuan served as a county meritorious person, and was promoted several times to the middle of the Da Xing Tai Lang. He followed Er Zhu Tian Guang Ping Ding Guan.

古文：孝武入关，以为南汾州刺史。
现代文：孝武入关，任命他为南汾州刺史。
English: Xiaowu entered the customs and appointed him as the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：神武命将出讨，城陷，子弟俱破获，送晋阳，蒙放免。
现代文：神武命将领征讨，城陷，子弟全被俘获，送到晋阳，蒙赦免释放。
English: Shenwu ordered the generals to invade, the city fell, his sons and brothers were all captured, sent to Jinyang, pardoned and released.

古文：以粲为并州长史，累迁豫州刺史，卒。
现代文：让子粲任并州长史，多次升任为豫州刺史，去世。
English: Zhang Zixuan served as governor and historian, and was promoted to the post of historian of Yuzhou several times. He passed away.

古文：初，子粲兄弟十三人，子侄亲属，阖门百口悉在西魏。
现代文：当初子粲弟兄十三人，子侄亲属，全家百口全在西魏。
English: At the beginning, there were thirteen brothers and sisters, nephews and relatives, and the whole family was in the West Wei Dynasty.

古文：以子粲陷城不能死难，多致诛灭，归国获存，唯与弟道谐二人而已。
现代文：因子粲在城陷后不能为国难而死，多被杀戮，回国获得生存的，衹有他和弟弟：蔓赞二人罢了。
English: After the fall of the city, since Zixuan could not die for the national calamity, he was mostly killed. Only he and his brother, Manzan, survived to return to their homeland.

古文：谐与粲俱入国。
现代文：道趱与：球一起入国。
English: Daodejing entered the country together with:ball.

古文：粲富贵之后，遂特弃道谐，令其异居，所得廪禄，略不相及，其不顾恩义如此。
现代文：王鏊富贵之后，却抛弃了道赞，让他另住，所得俸禄，全不相与，其不讲恩义达到这个地步。
English: However, after Wang Yao became rich, he abandoned Daozan and let him live elsewhere. The salary he earned was completely different from that of the others, and his ingratitude reached such a level.

