古文：子路初见孔子，子曰： 汝何好乐？ 
现代文：子路初次拜见孔子，孔子说： 你有什么爱好？ 
English: Zi Lu met Confucius for the first time. Confucius said: What are your hobbies?

古文：对曰： 好长剑。 
现代文：子路回答说： 我喜欢长剑。 
English: Zilu replied, "I like long swords."

古文：孔子曰： 吾非此之问也，徒谓以子之所能，而加之以学问，岂可及乎。 
现代文：孔子说： 我不是问你这个。我是说以你的能力，再加上努力学习，谁能赶得上你呢！ 
English: Confucius said: I am not asking you this. I am saying that with your ability, plus hard work, who can catch up with you!

古文：子路曰： 学岂益哉也？ 
现代文：子路说： 学习真的有用吗？ 
English: Zilu said: Is learning really useful?

古文：孔子曰： 夫人君而无谏臣则失正，士而无教友则失听。
现代文：孔子说： 国君如果没有敢谏的臣子就会失去正道，读书人没有敢指正问题的朋友就听不到善意的批评。
English: Confucius said: "If a prince does not have courtiers who dare to criticize him, he will lose the right path. If a reader does not have friends who dare to point out problems, he will not hear good-natured criticism."

古文：御狂马不释策，御狂马者不得释棰策也操弓不反檠。
现代文：驾驭正在狂奔的马不能放下马鞭，已经拉开的弓不能用檠来匡正。
English: A whip cannot be put down to control a galloping horse, and a bow that has already been drawn cannot be straightened with a hoe.

古文：弓不反于檠然后可持也木受绳则直，人受谏则圣，受学重问，孰不顺哉。
现代文：木料用墨绳来矫正就能笔直，人接受劝谏就能成为圣人。接受知识，重视学问，谁能不顺利成功呢？
English: Wood can be straightened with an ink rope, and a person can become a saint by accepting advice. Accept knowledge and attach importance to learning, who can fail to succeed?

古文：毁仁恶仕，必近于刑。
现代文：诋毁仁义厌恶读书人，必定会触犯刑律。
English: Slandering benevolence and justice and abhorring readers will certainly violate the criminal law.

古文：谤毁仁者憎怒士人必主于刑也君子不可不学。 子路曰： 南山有竹，不柔自直，斩而用之，达于犀革。
现代文：所以君子不可不学习。 子路说： 南山有竹子，不矫正自然就是直的，砍下来用作箭杆，可以射穿犀牛皮。
English: Therefore, a gentleman must study. Zilu said: Nanshan has bamboo, which is naturally straight without correction. If it is cut down and used as an arrow, it can pierce the rhinoceros hide.

古文：以此言之，何学之有？ 
现代文：以此说来，哪用学习呢？ 
English: So what's the point of learning?

古文：孔子曰： 括而羽之，镞而砺之，其入之不亦深乎。 
现代文：孔子说： 做好箭栝还要装上羽毛，做好箭头还要打磨锋利，这样射出的箭不是射得更深吗？ 
English: Confucius said: If you make a good arrowhead, you must also install feathers, and if you make a good arrow, you must also polish it to make it sharp. Won't the arrow fired in this way be shot deeper?

古文：子路再拜曰： 敬而受教。 
现代文：子路再次拜谢说： 恭敬地接受您的教诲。 
English: Zilu thanked him again and said, "I respectfully accept your teachings."

古文：子路将行，辞于孔子。
现代文：子路将要出行，向孔子辞行。
English: Zi Lu is about to leave for the trip, bowing to Confucius.

古文：子曰： 赠汝以车乎？
现代文：孔子说： 我送给你车呢，还是送给你一些忠告呢？ 
English: Confucius said, "Should I give you a car, or give you some advice?"

古文：赠汝以言乎？ 
现代文：子路说： 请给我一些忠告吧。 
English: Zilu said, "Please give me some advice."

古文：子路曰： 请以言。 孔子曰： 不强不达，人不以强力则不能自达不劳无功，不忠无亲，不信无复，信近于义言可复也今而不信则无可复不恭失礼，慎此五者而矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 不持续努力就达不到目的，不劳动就没有收获，不忠诚就没有亲人，不讲信用别人就不再信任你，不恭敬就会失礼。谨慎地处理好这五个方面就好啦。 子路说： 您的话我会一直记在心里。
English: Confucius said, "If you do not persist in your efforts, you will not achieve your goal; if you do not work, there will be no harvest; if you are not loyal, there will be no relatives; if you do not trust others, they will no longer trust you; if you do not respect others, you will be disrespectful. It is best to handle these five aspects carefully." Zilu said, "I will always keep your words in mind."

古文：子路曰： 由请终身奉之。
现代文：请问取得新结交的人的信任应该怎么做？
English: What should you do to gain the trust of a new acquaintance?

古文：敢问亲交取亲若何？
现代文：说话少而事情又能行得通需要怎么做？
English: What do you need to do to talk less and get things done?

古文：言寡可行若何？长为善士而无犯若何？ 
现代文：一直都是善人而不受别人侵犯需要怎么做？ 
English: What do you need to do to be a good person all the time and not be violated by others?

古文：孔子曰： 汝所问苞在五者中矣。
现代文：孔子说： 你所问的问题都包括在我讲的五个方面了。
English: Confucius said, "The questions you have asked are all included in the five aspects I have mentioned.

古文：亲交取亲，其忠也；言寡可行，其信乎；长为善士，而无犯于礼也。 
现代文：要取得新结识的人的信任，那就是诚实；说话少事情又行得通，那就是讲信用；一向为善而不受别人侵犯，那就是遵行礼仪。 
English: To gain the confidence of a new acquaintance, that is honesty; to say little and do well, that is trustworthiness; to be always good and not to be offended by others, that is etiquette.

古文：孔子为鲁司寇，见季康子，康子不悦。
现代文：孔子在鲁国担任司寇时去拜见季康子，季康子很不高兴。
English: Confucius went to see Ji Kang Zi when he was a scout in Lu. Ji Kang Zi was very unhappy.

古文：当为桓子非康子也孔子又见之。
现代文：孔子又去拜见他。宰予劝孔子说： 从前我曾听老师讲过：王公贵族要是不以礼聘请我，我不会主动去找他们。
English: Confucius went to see him again. Zayo advised Confucius to say: I once heard a teacher say: If the princes and nobles do not hire me with courtesy, I will not take the initiative to find them.

古文：宰予进曰： 昔予也常闻诸夫子曰，王公不我聘则弗动，今夫子之于司寇也日少，谓在司寇官少日浅而屈节数矣，谓屈节数见于季孙不可以已乎？ 孔子曰： 然，鲁国以众相陵，以兵相暴之日久矣，而有司不治，则将乱也，其聘我者，孰大于是哉。 
现代文：现在您担任司寇的时间不长，但已屈节委屈自己多次了，不可以不去吗？ 
English: Now you have not been acting as a scoutmaster for long, but you have been wronged many times, can you not go?

古文：言聘我使在官其为治岂复可大于此者也鲁人闻之曰： 圣人将治，何不先自远刑罚，自此之后，国无争者。 
现代文：孔子说： 是这样的。鲁国国内以多欺少，用士兵来侵犯别人的时间已经很久了，而有关官员不管，那将会出大乱子。执政者如果任用我，让我来治理此事，有哪件事比这更大呢？ 鲁国人听到这些话，说： 圣人将要来治理鲁国，我们何不自己先远离刑罚。 自此以后，鲁国没有相互争斗的人。
English: Confucius said, "That's right. It's been a long time since the Lu nation has used soldiers to invade others, using more or less deception, and regardless of the relevant officials, there will be a big mess. If the ruler appoints me to manage this matter, what's bigger than this? Lu people heard these words and said, "A saint is going to manage Lu, why don't we stay away from punishment first." Since then, there have been no people fighting each other in Lu.

古文：违去也蟪蛄蛁蟟也蛁蟟之声去山十里犹在于耳以其鸣而不已言政事须慎听之然后行之者也
现代文：孔子对宰予说： 离山十里，蟪蛄的叫声仍然在耳。所以处理政事不如谨慎地听取意见，然后找相应的办法。 
English: Confucius said to Zayou: Ten miles away from the mountain, the cry of crickets is still in the ear. Therefore, it is better to listen carefully to opinions and then find corresponding measures to deal with political affairs.

古文：孔子兄子有孔篾者，与宓子贱偕仕。
现代文：孔子兄有子叫孔篾的人，他与宓子贱一起做官。
English: The elder brother of Confucius had a son named Confucius, who worked as an official together with Confucius's younger brother.

古文：孔子往過孔篾，而問之曰： 自汝之仕，何得何亡？ 
现代文：孔子外出路过孔篾那里，问孔篾： 自从出仕以来，有何得失？ 
English: On his way out, Confucius passed by Confucius and asked Confucius: What have you gained and lost since you entered the service?

古文：对曰： 未有所得，而所亡者三，王事若龙，龙宜为詟前后相因也学焉得习，言不得习学也是学不得明也；俸禄少饘粥，不及亲戚，是以骨肉益疏也；公事多急，不得吊死问疾，是朋友之道阙也。
现代文：孔篾回答： 没有所得，却有三个所失。政事一件接着一件，以前学到的知识，怎能得到实践呢？因此，所学知识无法理解明白；获得的俸禄太少，稀粥都不够父母兄弟适用，因此，骨肉之情日加疏远；公务繁多有紧迫，没有时间去吊唁死者、探望病者，因此，朋友之情愈加缺失。
English: Confucius replied, "There are no gains, but there are three losses. In politics, one thing after another, how can the knowledge previously learned be put into practice? Therefore, the knowledge learned cannot be understood clearly; the salary earned is too little, the gruel is not enough for parents and brothers to apply, therefore, the feelings of flesh and blood are increasingly alienated; there are many urgent official duties, there is no time to mourn the dead and visit the sick, therefore, the feelings of friends are increasingly lacking.

古文：其所亡者三，即谓此也。 
现代文：我所说的三个所失，指的就是这些。 
English: These are what I mean by the three losses.

古文：孔子不悦，往过子贱，问如孔篾。
现代文：孔子听了很不高兴。路过宓子贱那里，孔子问宓子贱如孔篾一样的问题。
English: Confucius was very unhappy to hear this. When he passed by, Confucius asked Shanzi Tian the same question.

古文：对曰： 自来仕者无所亡，其有所得者三，始诵之，今得而行之，是学益明也；俸禄所供，被及亲戚，是骨肉益亲也；虽有公事，而兼以吊死问疾，是朋友笃也。 
现代文：宓子贱回答道： 自从出仕以来，没有所失，却有三个所得。以前记诵学到的知识，现在有机会得以实践，因此，所学知识更加明白；把所得到的俸禄，分享给父母兄弟，因此，骨肉之情愈加亲密；即使公务再繁忙，也要兼顾到吊唁死者、探望病者，因此，朋友之情愈加深厚。 
English: Zou Zi Tian replied, "Since I entered the service, I have not lost anything, but I have gained three things. I have the opportunity to practice the knowledge I learned before, so the knowledge I learned is more clear; I share the salary I received with my parents and brothers, so the flesh-and-blood feelings are more intimate; even if I am busy with official duties, I must take into account the condolences of the dead and visit the sick, so the feelings of friends are more profound.

古文：孔子喟然，谓子贱曰： 君子哉若人。
现代文：孔子感慨地评价宓子贱说： 真人君子啊！
English: Confucius commented on Zou Zi Tian with emotion, saying: A true gentleman!

古文：若人犹言是人者也鲁无君子者，则子贱焉取此。 孔子侍坐于哀公，赐之桃与黍焉。哀公曰： 请食。 
现代文：如果鲁国没有君子，那么宓子贱又是从哪儿学到这些君子品质的呢？ 孔子陪哀公坐着，哀公赏赐他黍和桃。哀公说： 请吃吧。 
English: If there are no gentlemen in Lu, then where did Zou Zi Tian learn these gentlemanly qualities? Confucius sat with Aigong, and Aigong rewarded him with a gourd and a peach. Aigong said: Please eat.

古文：孔子先食黍而后食桃，左右皆掩口而笑。
现代文：孔子先吃黍，而后才吃桃，哀公身边的人都捂着嘴笑。
English: Confucius ate the gourd first, and then ate the peach. The people around him smiled and covered their mouths.

古文：公曰： 黍者所以雪雪拭桃，非为食之也。 
现代文：哀公说： 黍是用来擦拭桃的，不是吃的。 
English: Aiko said, "The pestle is used to wipe the peach, not to eat it.

古文：孔子对曰： 丘知之矣，然夫黍者，五谷之长，郊礼宗庙以为上盛，属有六而桃为下，祭祀不用，不登郊庙，丘闻之君子以贱雪贵，不闻以贵雪贱，今以五谷之长，雪？
现代文：孔子回答说： 我知道。但黍是五谷中最好的东西，在对天地、祖先的祭祀中作为上等供品，果品有六种，而桃子是最差的一种，祭祀不用，不能摆在郊庙的供桌上，我听说，君子用低贱的东西拭珍贵的东西，没听说过用珍贵的东西来擦拭低贱的东西。
English: Confucius replied, "I know, but the gourd is the best of the five grains. It is the best offering in the sacrifices to heaven, earth and ancestors. There are six kinds of fruits, but the peach is the worst. It is not used in sacrifices and cannot be placed on the offering table of a suburban temple. I heard that a gentleman wipes precious things with cheap things. I have never heard of using precious things to wipe cheap things.

古文：之下者，是从上雪下，臣以为妨于教，害于义，故不敢。 
现代文：现在要用五谷中最好的黍去擦拭果品中最下等的桃，是用上等的擦拭下等的。我认为这有害于教，又有害于义，所以不敢这样做。 
English: Now it is necessary to use the best part of the grain to wipe the peach, which is the lowest of the fruits, and to use the best part of the grain to wipe the peach, which is the lowest of the fruits. I do not dare to do this because I think it is harmful to the teaching and to righteousness.

古文：公曰： 善哉。 
现代文：哀公说： 说得好啊 
English: Aiko said, "That was well said."

古文：子贡曰： 陈灵公宣淫于朝，灵公与卿共淫夏姬泄治正谏而杀之，是与比干谏而死同，可谓仁乎？ 
现代文：子贡说： 陈灵公在朝中干淫乱的事，泄冶直言劝谏而遭到杀害，这和比干劝谏殷纣王而遭杀害是相同的，可以称为仁吗？ 
English: Zigong said, "Chen Linggong committed adultery in the middle of the court and was killed for speaking out. This is the same as the murder of King Bi Gan for speaking out. Can it be called benevolence?"

古文：子曰： 比干于纣，亲则诸父，官则少师，忠报之心在于宗庙而已，固必以死争之，冀身死之后，纣将悔寤其本志，情在于仁者也；泄治之于灵公，位在大夫，无骨肉之亲，怀宠不去，仕于乱朝，以区区之一身，欲正一国之淫昏，死而无益，可谓捐矣。
现代文：孔子说： 比干对于殷纣王，从亲戚关系上说是纣王的叔父，官位则是少师，报国的忠心，在于维护祖宗宗庙，必定会以死进谏，希望身死之后，纣王能够悔悟，他的各项情志都在仁上。泄冶对于陈灵公，官职是大夫，无骨肉之亲，受到宠爱而不愿离去，仍在乱朝做官，以他区区一身而想匡正一个国家淫乱的昏君，死了也对国家无益，可说是性情拘谨耿直。
English: Confucius said, "Compared to Yin Shao Wang, Bi Gan is the uncle of Yin Shao Wang in terms of kinship, but his official position is that of a minor teacher. His loyalty to the country lies in the protection of the ancestral temple, and he will certainly be punished by death. I hope that after his death, Yin Shao Wang will be able to repent, and his various aspirations are on the benevolence. For Chen Ling Gong, the official position is a doctor, a spineless relative, he is favored and does not want to leave, he is still working as an official in a chaotic dynasty, and he wants to rectify a country's lewd

古文：诗云： 民之多辟，无自立辟。
现代文：《诗经》说： 当今民间多邪辟，勿自立法以害己。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Nowadays, many people are evil, so don't harm yourself by making laws.

古文：僻邪辟 其泄治之谓乎。 
现代文：大概说的就是泄冶这样的事吧。 
English: I'm probably talking about things like smelting.

古文：孔子相鲁，齐人患其将霸，欲败其政，乃选好女子八十人，衣以文饰而舞容玑，容玑舞曲及文马四十驷，驷四马也以遗鲁君，陈女乐，列文马于鲁城南高门外，季桓子微服？
现代文：孔子在鲁国辅助国君时，齐国人担心鲁国会成为霸主，想要破坏鲁国的政治，于是选了八十名漂亮的女子，让她们穿上华丽的衣服，教她们跳舞，又选毛色有文采的马六十匹，准备送给鲁国国君。齐国人让这些女子在鲁国城外跳舞，又将那些有文采的马也排列在那里。
English: When Confucius was assisting the king of Lu, the people of Qi feared that Lu would become the overlord and wanted to destroy Lu's politics, so they selected eighty beautiful women, put them in gorgeous clothes, taught them to dance, and selected sixty horses with rich colors to give to the king of Lu. The people of Qi let these women dance outside the city of Lu, and also lined up those horses with rich colors.

古文：观之再三，将受焉，告鲁君为周道游观，观之终日，怠于政事。子路言于孔子曰： 夫子可以行矣。 
现代文：季桓子穿着老百姓的衣服偷偷地看了好几次，打算接受这些礼物。他报告了鲁国国君并带他到大道上去观看。这样整日观看，荒废了朝政。子路对孔子说： 您可以离开鲁国了。 
English: Ji Hanzi, dressed in the clothes of the common people, secretly looked at Lu several times, intending to accept these gifts. He reported Lu Guo Guo Jun and took him to the avenue to watch. Watching all day, the imperial government was wasted. Zi Lu said to Confucius: You can leave Lu Guo.

古文：孔子曰： 鲁今且郊，若致膰于大夫，膰祭肉也是则未废其常，吾犹可以止也。 
现代文：孔子说： 鲁国现在马上就要举行郊祭，如果国君还能馈送大夫祭祀用的肉，这样还不算失去礼，我还可以留在这儿。 
English: Confucius said, "The suburb festival of Lu is about to be held. If the sovereign can still provide meat for the doctor's sacrifice, this is not considered a loss of courtesy, and I can still stay here.

古文：桓子既受女乐，君臣淫荒，三日不听国政，郊又不致膰俎，孔子遂行。
现代文：后来季桓子换受了齐国赠送的舞女，君臣沉溺于声色之中，三天不理朝政，郊祭也不准备祭肉和礼器。
English: Later, Ji Hanzi received a dancing maiden presented by the State of Qi in exchange for a cow, and the monarchs and ministers indulged in the color of their voices, ignored the imperial government for three days, and did not prepare the sacrificial meat and ceremonial objects for the suburban festival.

古文：宿于郭，屯师以送曰： 夫子非罪也。 孔子曰： 吾歌可乎？
现代文：孔子于是离开了鲁国，在城外的村庄住宿。师以去送他，说： 您没有错。 孔子说： 我唱首歌可以吗？ 
English: Confucius then left Lu and stayed in a village outside the city. Shi Yiming went to see him off and said, "You did nothing wrong." Confucius said, "Can I sing a song?"

古文：澹台子羽有君子之容，而行不胜其貌，宰我有文雅之辞，而智不充其辩。
现代文：于是唱道： 这些妇人的口舌，可以让你出走。那些妇人的请求，可以让你失败死亡。我还是悠闲自得地生活，以此来安度岁月吧。 澹台子羽有君子那样的容貌，而他的品行却比不上他的容貌。宰我谈吐文雅，而他的智力却不如他的言辞。
English: So he sang: "These women's words can make you run away. Those women's pleas can make you fail and die. I'll live a leisurely life, so that I can spend my years in peace. Xing Tai Zi Yu has the appearance of a gentleman, but his character is not as good as his appearance. He speaks elegantly, but his intelligence is not as good as his words.

古文：孔子曰： 里语云： 相马以舆，相士以居，弗可废矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 俗话说： 看马的好坏要看它推车的情况，看人的高下要看他平时的表现。
English: Confucius said, "As the saying goes, the quality of a horse depends on how well it can pull a cart, and the quality of a person depends on how he behaves in everyday life.

古文：以容取人，则失之子羽；以辞取人，则失之宰予。 
现代文：这个道理不能丢弃啊。 以容貌来选择人才，在澹台子羽身上就会失误，以言辞来选择人才，在宰我身上就会出现错误。 
English: This principle should not be discarded. If you choose a talent based on his appearance, you will make a mistake with regard to the hairstyle; if you choose a talent based on his words, you will make a mistake with regard to his personality.

古文：孔子曰： 君子以其所不能畏人，小人以其所不能不信人。
现代文：孔子说： 君子因为他有的方面不如人而畏惧别人，小人因为他有的方面不如人而不相信别人。
English: Confucius said: A gentleman fears others because he is not as good as others in some aspects, and a villain does not trust others because he is not as good as others in some aspects.

古文：故君子长人之才，小人抑人而取胜焉。 
现代文：所以君子推崇别人的才干，小人则以压制别人的才干来取胜。 
English: Therefore, a gentleman praises the talent of others, while a villain suppresses the talent of others to win.

古文：孔篾问行己之道。
现代文：孔篾问孔子为人的方法。
English: How to ask Confucius if he is a man.

古文：子曰： 知而弗为，莫如勿知；亲而弗信，莫如勿亲。
现代文：孔子说： 知道了不去做，不如不知道；亲近他又不信任他，不如不亲近。
English: Confucius said: "It is better not to know than to know and not to do; it is better not to be close to him and not to trust him."

古文：乐之方至，乐而勿骄；患之将至，思而勿忧。 
现代文：快乐的事到来时，要乐而不骄；灾难将要到来时，要有所准备而不忧愁。 
English: When happy things come, be happy without being proud; when disasters are about to come, be prepared without being sad.

古文：孔篾曰： 行己乎？ 
现代文：孔篾说： 我该怎么做呢？ 
English: Kong Yu said: What should I do?

古文：子曰： 攻其所不能，补其所不备。
现代文：孔子说： 学习不会做的事情，弥补自己不具备的才能。
English: Confucius said: To learn what one cannot do is to make up for one's lack of talent.

古文：毋以其所不能疑人，毋以其所能骄人。
现代文：不要因为自己不能做就怀疑别人，不要因为有能干的事情就向别人炫耀。
English: Don't doubt others because you can't do it yourself, and don't show off to others because you can.

古文：终日言，无遗己之忧，终日行，不遗己患，唯智者有之。 
现代文：终日说话，不要留下忧虑；终日做事，不要给自己留下祸患。这点只有智者才能做到。 
English: Speak all day long, and leave no worries behind; work all day long, and leave no disasters for yourself. Only the wise can do this.

