古文：蠕蠕匈奴宇文莫槐徒何段就六眷高车
现代文：蠕蠕族，是东胡族的后代子孙，姓郁久闾氏。
English: The Cm Cm people are the descendants of the Eastern Hu people, and their surname is Yu Cu.

古文：蠕蠕，东胡之苗裔也，姓郁久闾氏。始神元之末，掠骑有得一奴，发始齐眉，忘本姓名，其主字之曰木骨闾。 木骨闾 者，首秃也。
现代文：传说在神元帝末年，有人在东胡抢劫马匹时抓到一个奴隶，头发只齐眉毛那么长，不知道自己的姓名，主人就给他取名叫木骨闾。 木骨闾 就是头秃的意思。
English: Legend has it that in the last years of Emperor Shenyuan, someone robbed a horse in Donghu and caught a slave whose hair was only as long as his eyebrows. He did not know his name, so his master gave him the name Mokotsu, which means bald.

古文：木骨闾与郁久闾声相近，故后子孙因以为氏。
现代文：木骨闾与郁久闾声音相近，所以他的子孙就以郁久闾作为姓氏。
English: Mokotsubo and Ikukyu sound similar, so his descendants took Ikukyu as their surname.

古文：木骨闾既壮，免奴为骑卒。
现代文：木骨闾成年后，被免去奴隶身份而充当骑卒。
English: The half-timbered yakitori has come of age, freed from the slavery of being a cavalryman.

古文：穆帝时，坐后期当斩，亡匿广漠溪谷间，收合逋逃得百余人，依纯突邻部。
现代文：穆帝时，他因为行军误期而犯了斩首之罪，就逃到沙漠上的奚谷谷之间藏匿起来，聚合逃亡者共一百余人，依附于纥突邻部。
English: At the time of Mu Di, he committed the crime of beheading because of the delay in marching, so he fled to the desert and hid between Shibuya Valley, gathering a total of more than one hundred fugitives and adhering to the neighboring part of Shibuya.

古文：木骨闾死，子车鹿会雄健，始有部众，自号柔然，而役属于国。
现代文：木骨闾死后，其子车鹿会十分雄伟强健，开始形成自己的部族，自号为柔然，而役属于中国。
English: After the death of the wood skeleton, its son, the roe deer, will be very majestic and strong, and begin to form their own tribe. They call themselves Zhuoran, and they belong to China.

古文：后世祖以其无知，状类于虫，故改其号为蠕蠕。
现代文：后来世祖因为这个部族愚昧无知，就像是虫子，所以把它的称号改为蠕蠕。
English: Later, the patriarch changed the tribe's name to Creep Creep because they were ignorant and stupid, just like worms.

古文：车鹿会既为部帅，岁贡马畜、貂豽皮，冬则徙度漠南，夏则还居漠北。
现代文：车鹿会当了部族首领之后，每年都向朝廷进贡马匹牲畜和貂豸内皮，他们冬天就迁徙到大沙漠以南，夏天又迁回大沙漠之北。
English: After the Chele deer association became the tribal leader, they paid tribute to the imperial court every year with horses, livestock and donkey inner skins. They migrated to the south of the Great Desert in winter and back to the north of the Great Desert in summer.

古文：车鹿会死，子吐奴傀立。
现代文：车鹿会死后，其子吐奴傀继位。
English: The car deer will die, and the son will become a toad.

古文：吐奴傀死，子跋提立，跋提死，子地粟袁立。
现代文：吐奴傀死后，其子跋提继位。跋提死后，其子地粟袁继位。
English: After the death of Tu Niu, his son Wati succeeded to the throne. After the death of Wati, his son Ji Mou Yuan succeeded to the throne.

古文：地粟袁死，其部分为二，地粟袁长子匹候跋继父居东边，次子缊纥提别居西边。
现代文：地粟袁死后，部族就一分为二，地粟袁的长子匹候跋继承父位居于东边，次子纥提另居西边。
English: After the death of Ji Mou Yuan, the tribe was divided into two, with Ji Mou Yuan's eldest son, Pi Houba, inheriting his father's position in the east, and his second son, Jie Ti, in the west.

古文：及昭成崩，缊纥提附卫辰而贰于我。
现代文：到昭成帝驾崩，纥提依附于卫辰而背叛我朝。
English: After the death of Emperor Zhaocheng, he betrayed the Ming Dynasty by clinging to Wei Chen.

古文：登国中讨之蠕蠕移部遁走，追之，及于大碛南床山下，大破之，虏其半部。
现代文：登国年间大魏出兵讨伐他，蠕蠕部族便迁移逃跑，将其追逐到大沙漠南床山下，把它打败，俘虏了其部族人的一半。
English: When the Great Wei sent troops to fight him in the year of his ascension to the throne, the Cree Cree tribe migrated and fled, chased him to the south of the Great Desert, defeated him, and captured half of his tribe.

古文：匹候跋及部帅屋击各收余落遁走，遣长孙嵩及长孙肥追之，渡碛。
现代文：匹候跋和部帅屋击各自收集其余部逃走，我朝派长孙嵩和长孙肥继续追击，穿过大沙漠。
English: I sent Chosun Song and Chosun Hui to continue the pursuit through the desert.

古文：嵩至平望川，大破屋击，禽之，斩以徇。
现代文：长孙嵩追到平望川，大破屋击，并将他擒获，斩首示众。
English: When the eldest grandson, Song, arrived at Pingwang River, he was defeated, captured, and beheaded in public.

古文：肥至涿邪山，及匹候跋，跋举落请降。
现代文：长孙肥追至诼邪山，逼近匹候跋，匹候跋所部全部投降。
English: The eldest grandson, Fei, chased them to Shanzhai Mountain, approaching the horse-drawn carriage. The horse-drawn carriage's entire party surrendered.

古文：获缊纥提子曷多汗及曷多汗兄诘归之、社仑、斛律等并宗党数百人，分配诸部。
现代文：又抓获纥提之子曷多汗和曷多汗之兄诘归之、社仑、斛律等人及其宗族党羽数百人，把他们分配到各部。
English: In addition, they also captured Guido Khan, the son of Guidi, and Guido Khan's elder brothers, Ruqizhi, Shulun and Balut, as well as hundreds of their family members and followers, and distributed them to various ministries.

古文：缊纥提西遁，将归卫辰，太祖追之，至跋那山，缊纥提复降，太祖抚慰如旧。
现代文：纥提向西而逃，企图回到卫辰那里去，太祖下令追击，到达跋那山，纥提也被迫投降，太祖对他像往日那样加以抚慰。
English: Shanti fled to the west in an attempt to return to Weichen. Taizu gave the order to pursue him, and when they reached Banya Mountain, Shanti was also forced to surrender. Taizu comforted him as he had done in the past.

古文：九年，曷多汗与社仑率部众弃其父西走，长孙肥轻骑追之，至上郡跋那山，斩曷多汗，尽殪其众。
现代文：登国九年，曷多汗与社仑率部众背弃其父纥提向西逃走，长孙肥率轻骑追赶，追至上郡跋那山，斩曷多汗，并将跟随他叛逃的人全都杀死。
English: In the ninth year of his ascension to the throne, Gundokhan and his followers abandoned his father, Gundotra, and fled westward. His eldest grandson, Hideharu, pursued them on horseback, and chased them as far as Bana Mountain in Shanggong County, where he killed Gundokhan and all those who had followed him to defect.

古文：社仑与数百人奔匹候跋，匹候跋处之南鄙，去其庭五百里，令其子四人监之。
现代文：社仑带领数百人逃奔匹候跋，匹候跋把他安置在南部边邑，离自己的王庭五百里，并令自己的四个儿子对他进行监视。
English: He led hundreds of his followers to flee and placed himself in a southern outpost, five hundred miles from his own court, with his four sons to keep an eye on him.

古文：既而社仑率其私属执匹候跋四子而叛，袭匹候跋。
现代文：不久，社仑率领他的亲随捉拿匹候跋的四个儿子而反叛，袭击匹候跋。
English: Soon after, the community led by his relatives rebelled against the four sons who had captured the horse-drawn wagons and attacked the horses.

古文：诸子收余众，亡依高车斛律部。
现代文：匹候跋的其他几个儿子收集余部，逃走依附于高车的斛律部族。
English: The rest of the sons gathered the rest of the people and fled with Gao Chejun's legal department.

古文：社仑凶狡有权变，月余，乃释匹候跋，归其诸子，欲聚而歼之。
现代文：社仑凶狠狡诈而有权变，过了一个多月，就释放了匹候跋，送还了他的几个儿子，企图将他们聚而歼之。
English: The social mountain is ferocious, cunning and has the power to change. In May, he released the pony, let him and his sons gather in one place, and wanted to gather them.

古文：密举兵袭匹候跋，杀匹候跋。
现代文：于是暗中发兵袭击匹候跋，将他杀死。
English: Secretly send troops to attack the horse-drawn carriage and kill the horse-drawn carriage.

古文：子启拔、吴颉等十五人归于太祖。
现代文：匹候跋之子启拔、吴颉等十五人归附于太祖。
English: Fifteen people, including the sons of Pi Xuchu, Qi Ba, and Wu Yao, were attached to the great ancestor.

古文：社仑既杀匹候跋，惧王师讨之，乃掠五原以西诸部，北度大漠。
现代文：社仑杀了匹候跋之后，害怕魏军前来征讨，就抢掠五原以西的各个部落，向北穿过大沙漠。
English: Sheshan Lunshan killed a horse-drawn carriage and was afraid of Wang Shih's crusade, so he plundered all parts west of the Five Plains and crossed the Great Wall to the north.

古文：太祖以拔、颉为安远将军、平侯。
现代文：太祖授予启拔、吴颉以安远将军、平棘侯之职。
English: The great-great-grandfather conferred the promotion of Wu Xi to the rank of General Anyuan and the post of the Prince of Pingxian.

古文：社仑与姚兴和亲。
现代文：社仑与后秦结和亲之约。
English: The Shire and the Later Qin Dynasty concluded a treaty of amity.

古文：太祖遣材官将军和突袭黜弗、素古延诸部，社仑遣骑救素古延，突逆击破之。
现代文：太祖派材官将军和突袭击黜弗、素古延各部族，社仑派骑兵援救素古延，和突回兵攻击，大败社仑。
English: Taizu sent officers and generals to raid the Shufu and Suguen tribes, and the Shulun sent cavalry to rescue Suguen, and attacked the raiders, and defeated the Shulun.

古文：社仑远遁漠北，侵高车，深入其地，遂并诸部，凶势益振。
现代文：社仑远逃到大沙漠以北，侵犯高车族，深入高车境内，于是兼并邻近的各个部族，其凶顽之势日益加剧。
English: Sheshan Lun fled as far as the north of the desert, invaded Gaochao, and penetrated deep into the hinterland, whereupon it annexed all the provinces, and became even more ferocious.

古文：北徙弱洛水，始立军法：千人为军，军置将一人，百人为幢，幢置帅一人；先登者赐以虏获，退懦者以石击首杀之，或临时捶挞。
现代文：社仑又迁移到北边的弱洛水，开始建立军法：一千人为军，每军设置一个将，一百人为幢，每幢设置一个帅；作战时抢在前面的人就赐给虏获的俘虏和财物，胆小退却的人就用石头击破脑袋而死，或者暂时用棍子、鞭子痛打。
English: The community also migrated to Weak Luoshui in the north and began to establish military law: a thousand people are an army, each army is set up with a general, a hundred people are a building, and each building is set up with a commander; when fighting, those who grab the front are given to the captured prisoners and property, and those who are afraid to retreat are killed by breaking their heads with stones, or temporarily beaten with sticks and whips.

古文：无文记，将帅以羊屎粗计兵数，后颇知刻木为记。
现代文：因其没有文字来记载，将帅就用羊屎来粗略地计算兵员数目，后来才稍为懂得用刻木的方法来记事。
English: Since there was no written record, the commander-in-chief used sheep dung to roughly calculate the number of soldiers, and later learned to use the method of carving wood to record things.

古文：其西北有匈奴余种，国尤富强，部帅曰拔也稽，举兵击社仑，社仑逆战于頞根河，大破之，后尽为社仑所并。
现代文：社仑部的西北边有匈奴余族，其部落非常富足强盛，部落头领名叫拔也稽，他发兵攻击社仑，社仑在安页根河迎战，大破拔也稽军，后来其部族全都被社仑所兼并。
English: There was a Hunnic remnant on the northwest side of the Shulun, whose tribe was very rich and powerful. The tribal leader's name was Ba Yaqi. He sent troops to attack the Shulun. The Shulun fought against the Shulun at the Anzhale River, and after a great battle, Ba Yaqi's troops were defeated. Later, his entire tribe was annexed by the Shulun.

古文：号为强盛。
现代文：于是其政权一时十分强盛。
English: As a result, his regime was very strong for a while.

古文：随水草畜牧，其西则焉耆之地，东则朝鲜之地，北则渡沙漠，穷瀚海，南则临大碛。
现代文：部族人随水草之地游牧，其西边是焉耆国的疆土，东边是朝鲜国的疆土，北边穿过大沙漠，直到沙漠尽头，南边则临大沙漠。
English: The tribesmen are nomadic with the land of water and grass. The west side is the territory of Yancheng, the east side is the territory of Korea, the north side crosses the Great Desert until the end of the desert, and the south side is adjacent to the Great Desert.

古文：其常所会庭则敦煌、张掖之北。
现代文：其经常聚会议事的中心在敦煌、张掖的北部。
English: The center of its regular meetings is in Dunhuang, north of Zhangye.

古文：小国皆苦其寇抄，羁縻附之，于是自号丘豆伐可汗。 丘豆伐 犹魏言驾驭开张也， 可汗 犹魏言皇帝也。
现代文：邻近的小国都深受其侵犯掳掠之害，只得同它联络关系而依附于它，于是社仑自号为丘豆伐可汗。 丘豆伐 相当于北魏人所说的 驾驭开张 的意思， 可汗 相当于北魏所说的皇帝。
English: The neighboring small countries were deeply affected by its invasion and plunder, but they had to establish contact with it and cling to it, so the community called itself Qiuzuwa Khan.Qiuzuwa is equivalent to the meaning of "driving the opening up" said by the Northern Wei people, and Khan is equivalent to the emperor said by the Northern Wei.

古文：蠕蠕之俗，君及大臣因其行能即为称号，若中国立谥，既死之后，不复追称。
现代文：蠕蠕国的风俗，国君和大臣凭他的行为能力给予称号，就像中国的为某人立谥号，人死之后，不再追加称号。
English: According to the custom of the country, the sovereign and the minister give the title according to his ability to act, just as China sets up a nickname for someone, and after the death of a person, there is no additional title.

古文：太祖谓尚书崔玄伯曰： 蠕蠕之人，昔来号为顽嚣，每来抄掠，驾牸牛奔遁，驱犍牛随之，牸牛伏不能前。
现代文：太祖对尚书崔玄伯说道： 蠕蠕族的人，历来号称凶顽愚蠢，每次外出抢掠，都要驾着母牛奔逃，驱赶着犍牛跟随着跑，母牛往往趴伏着不能往前跑。
English: The great-grandfather said to Shangshu Cui Xuanbo: People of the Cree Cree tribe have always been known as fierce and stupid. Every time they go out to loot, they have to drive the cow to run away, drive the snail to run with it, and the cow is often lying down and cannot run forward.

古文：异部人有教其以犍牛易之者，蠕蠕曰 其母尚不能行，而况其子 ，终于不易，遂为敌所虏。
现代文：别的部族的人教给他们用犍牛替换母牛，蠕蠕人说 它的母亲都不能走，何况它的儿子呢 ，终究不予以替换，于是只能被敌方俘虏。
English: The other tribes taught them to replace the cow with a snail, but the Cree said that its mother could not go, let alone its son, after all, it would not be replaced, so it could only be captured by the enemy.

古文：今社仑学中国，立法置战陈，卒成边害。
现代文：现在社仑学习中国，建立军法，设置作战的阵式，终于成为边地的祸害。
English: Now the Sharen learn from China, establish military law, and set up battle formations, and finally become the scourge of the outlying areas.

古文：道家言圣人生，大盗起，信矣。 
现代文：道家曾说圣人生，大盗起，确实说得不错啊。 
English: The Taoists once said that a saint's life begins with theft, and they were right.

古文：天兴五年，社仑闻太祖征姚兴，遂犯塞，入参合陂，南至豺山及善无北泽。
现代文：天兴五年，社仑听说太祖征讨姚兴，就来侵犯边塞，进入参合陂，南边到达豺山和善无北泽。
English: In the fifth year of Tianxing, when the community heard that the ancestor's conquest of Yao Xing was successful, they came to invade the border fortress, entered Shenghe Fen, and reached the southern side of Lushan and Zhenwu Beizhe.

古文：时遣常山王遵以万骑追之，不及。
现代文：当时太祖派常山王拓跋遵率一万骑兵追击，没有追上。
English: At that time, he sent Wang Zun of Changshan to lead thousands of horsemen to chase after them, but they did not catch up.

古文：天赐中，社仑从弟悦代、大那等谋杀社仑而立大那，发觉，大那等来奔。以大那为冠军将军、西平侯，悦代为越骑校尉、易阳子。
现代文：天赐年间，社仑的堂弟悦代、大那等人图谋杀死社仑而拥立大那，被社仑发觉，大那等人前来投奔，朝廷授予大那冠军将军、西平侯，悦代为越骑校尉、易阳子。
English: During the heaven-sent year, the cousin of the eunuch, Etsudai, Dana, and others tried to murder the eunuch and support the eunuch. When the eunuch was discovered by the eunuch, Dana and others came to flee, and the court awarded Dana to the champion general, Xiping Hou, and Etsudai to the cavalry captain, Yi Yangzi.

古文：三年夏，社仑寇边，永兴元年冬，又犯塞。
现代文：天赐三年夏，社仑侵犯边境，永兴元年冬，又来侵犯边塞。
English: By God's grace, in the summer of the third year, the enemy invaded the border, and in the winter of the first year of Yongxing, the enemy invaded the border fortress.

古文：二年，太宗讨之，社仑遁走，道死。
现代文：永兴二年，太宗发兵讨伐，社仑逃走，死于途中。
English: In the second year of Yongxing, Taizong sent an army to fight, and the community fled, dying on the way.

古文：其子度拔年少，未能御众，部落立社仑弟斛律，号蔼苦盖可汗，魏言姿质美好也。
现代文：社仑的儿子度拔年幼，不能控制其部众，部落就拥立社仑之弟斛律为首领，号为蔼苦盖可汗， 蔼苦盖 就是魏人所说 姿质美好 的意思。
English: His son, Du Bi, was too young to rule the people, and the younger brother of the founder of the tribe, Shan Lun, was named Bao Lu. He was nicknamed "Ai Kui Kahn" and his Chinese was "good."

古文：斛律北并贺术也骨国，东破譬历辰部落。
现代文：斛律于北边兼并了贺术也骨国，东边攻破譬历辰部落。
English: The Hailu absorbed the Hechu Yao Kingdom in the north and defeated the Li Lichen Tribe in the east.

古文：三年，斛律宗人悦侯咄触千等数百人来降。
现代文：永兴三年，斛律的同宗人悦侯咄角氐干等数百人前来投降。
English: In the third year of Yongxing, hundreds of people from the same clan as Li Li came to surrender.

古文：斛律畏威自守，不敢南侵，北边安静。
现代文：斛律惧怕朝廷威严而只顾防守，不敢南来侵犯，于是北部边境得以安宁。
English: The Pelican Law is afraid of the power and defends itself, not daring to invade the south. The northern border is peaceful.

古文：神瑞元年，与冯跋和亲，跋聘斛律女为妻，将为交婚。
现代文：神瑞元年，斛律与冯跋联姻和亲，冯跋娶斛律的女儿为妻，将要举行婚礼。
English: In the first year of Shen Rui's reign, Gong Lu and Feng Bao were united in marriage and affinity. Feng Bao married Gong Lu's daughter, and the wedding was about to take place.

古文：斛律长兄子步鹿真谓斛律曰： 女小远适，忧思生疾，可遣大臣树黎、勿地延等女为媵。 
现代文：斛律长兄之子步鹿真对斛律说： 你的女儿年尚幼小，远嫁到外地，恐怕会因想家而忧思得病，可以派大臣树黎、勿地延等的女儿作为陪嫁。 
English: Bu Lu Zhen, the son of Ba Lu's eldest brother, said to Ba Lu: "If your daughter marries young and far away, and is worried and sick, you can send the daughters of ministers such as Shu Li and Mody Yan to be your wives.

古文：斛律不许。
现代文：斛律不答应。
English: Singing is not permitted.

古文：步鹿真出，谓树黎等曰： 斛律欲令汝女为媵，远至他国。 
现代文：步鹿真出来后对树黎等人说： 斛律想要把你们的女儿作为陪嫁，远送到别的国家。 
English: Bu Degu really came out and said to Shuli and the others: "Gong Li wants your daughter to be a nanny, far away to another country.

古文：黎遂共结谋，令勇士夜就斛律穹庐，候伺其出执之，与女俱嫔于和龙。
现代文：于是树黎就与步鹿真共同策划，派一批勇士趁夜晚靠近斛律所住的毡帐，等到他出来时就把他扣押起来，并让他陪他的女儿嫁到和龙城。
English: So Shu Li plotted with Bu Lu Zhen to send a group of warriors to take advantage of the night close to the bedchamber where Bao Li lived, to detain him when he came out, and let him accompany his daughter to marry and Longcheng.

古文：乃立步鹿真。
现代文：于是就立步鹿真为首领。
English: And so Deerslayer was born.

古文：步鹿真立，委政树黎。
现代文：步鹿真即位后，把政事委付给了树黎。
English: Bu Lu Zhen Li entrusted the government affairs to Shuli.

古文：初，高车叱洛侯者叛其渠帅，导社仑破诸部落，社仑德之，以为大人。
现代文：当初，高车族的叱洛侯背叛他的首领，引导社仑攻破各个部落，社仑十分感激他，让他做了大人。
English: At first, the scold of the Gaochao people, Luo Hou, betrayed his leader and led the community to conquer various tribes. The community was very grateful to him and made him an adult.

古文：步鹿真与社仑子社拔共至叱洛侯家，淫其少妻。
现代文：有一次，步鹿真同社仑的儿子社拔一道到叱洛侯家中，与他年轻的妻子私通。
English: Bu Lu Zhen and Sheshan Lun's son, Shebat, went to Zhelokhou's home together and raped his young wife.

古文：妻告步鹿真，叱洛侯欲举大檀为主，遗大檀金马勒为信。
现代文：他的妻子告诉步鹿真说，叱洛侯想要推举大檀为首领，送给大檀一副黄金制的马勒作为信物。
English: His wife told Bu Lu Zhen that the prefect of Luo wanted to promote Datan as the leader, and gave Datan a pair of gold mallets as a token.

古文：步鹿真闻之，归发八千骑往围叱洛侯，叱洛侯焚其珍宝，自刎而死，步鹿真遂掩大檀，大檀发军执步鹿真及社拔，绞杀之，乃自立。
现代文：步鹿真听了后，回去派了八千名骑兵包围了叱洛侯，叱洛侯被迫烧毁了他的所有珍宝，自刎而死。于是步鹿真就乘其不备袭击大檀，大檀发兵捉拿了步鹿真和社拔，把他们绞死，就自己立为部族首领。
English: After listening to this, Bu Dezhen sent back eight thousand cavalrymen to surround Zheloh, who was forced to burn all his treasures and commit suicide. Therefore, Bu Dezhen took advantage of his unpreparedness to attack Datan. Datan's soldiers captured Bu Dezhen and Shebat, hanged them, and made himself the leader of the tribe.

古文：大檀者，社仑季父仆浑之子，先统别部，镇于西界，能得众心，国人推戴之，号牟汗纥升盖可汗，魏言制胜也。
现代文：大檀，是社仑的叔父仆浑之子，先前统率其他部落，镇守在西部边界，由于他很得人心，部族的人都推崇拥戴他，自号为牟汗纥升盖可汗，就是魏国人所说 制胜 的意思。
English: Datan was the son of Shulun's uncle, Hudhun, who had previously led other tribes and guarded the town on the western border. Because he was very popular, the people of the tribe respected and admired him. He called himself Mukhan, Shenggei Khan, which is what the Wei people called "winning."

古文：斛律父子既至龙，冯跋封为上谷侯。
现代文：斛律父子到了和龙城以后，冯跋封他为上谷侯。
English: After his father and son arrived in Hualong City, Feng Bawu made him the lord of Shanggu.

古文：大檀率众南徙犯塞，太宗亲讨之，大檀惧而遁走。
现代文：后来大檀率部向南迁移进犯边塞，太宗亲自带兵征讨，大檀畏惧逃跑。
English: Later, Datan and his followers migrated south to invade the border fortress, and Taizong personally led the army to recruit soldiers. Datan was afraid to run away.

古文：遣山阳侯奚斤等追之，遇寒雪，士众冻死堕指者十二三。
现代文：太宗派山阳侯奚斤等人领兵追击，碰上严寒大雪，战士们冻死的、冻掉手指的占十分之二三。
English: The Tai Sect sent Sanyang Hou Rongjin and others to lead the pursuit, and when they encountered severe cold and heavy snow, the soldiers froze to death, with frozen fingers accounting for two-thirds of ten.

古文：及太宗崩，世祖即位，大檀闻而大喜，始光元年秋，乃寇云中。
现代文：到太宗驾崩后，世祖即位，大檀听到这消息大喜，始光元年秋，就来侵犯云中郡。
English: After the death of Emperor Taizong, the ancestor ascended to the throne. When Datan heard this news, he was overjoyed. In the autumn of the first year of the 21st century, he invaded Yunnan County.

古文：世祖亲讨之，三日二夜至云中。
现代文：世祖带兵亲往讨伐，三天两夜赶赴云中。
English: The ancestor personally led the soldiers to the crusade, and rushed to Yunzhong in three days and two nights.

古文：大檀骑围世祖五十余重，骑逼马首，相次如堵焉。
现代文：大檀率领骑兵包围世祖，共围了五十层，后面的马头紧靠前面的马，一层接一层就像是土墙一样。
English: Datan led the cavalry to encircle Shizu, a total of fifty layers, behind the horse's head close to the front of the horse, one layer after another like a dirt wall.

古文：士卒大惧，世祖颜色自若，众情乃安。
现代文：魏军士卒十分恐慌，而世祖却神色自若，于是军情才得以安定。
English: The Wei sergeant-at-arms was very panicked, but the patriarch looked confident, so the military situation was stabilized.

古文：先是，大檀弟大那与社仑争国，败而来奔。
现代文：早先，大檀的弟弟大那与社仑争夺领导权，失败后投奔朝廷。
English: Previously, Datan's younger brother, Dana, had been competing for the country with Sheshan Lun, and defected when he failed.

古文：大檀以大那子于陟斤为部帅，军士射于陟斤杀之，大檀恐，乃还。
现代文：大檀以大那的儿子于陟斤为部帅，魏朝军士用乱箭将于陟斤射死，大檀恐惧，就退了回去。
English: Datan took the son of Datan, Yu Shujin, as his commander. The Wei Dynasty sergeant shot Shujin to death with a random arrow. Datan was afraid and retreated back.

古文：二年，世祖大举征之，东西五道并进：平阳王长孙翰等从黑漠，汝阴公长孙道生从白黑两漠间，车驾从中道，东平公娥清次西从栗园，宜城王奚斤、将军安原等西道从尔寒山。
现代文：始光二年，世祖发兵大举征伐，分兵从东西五路齐发并进：平阳王长孙翰等人从黑漠进发，汝阴公长孙道生从黑白两漠之间进军，世祖从中路前进，东平公娥清从偏西方向经栗园进军，宜城王奚斤、将军安原等从西路经尔寒山进军。
English: In the second year of Shiguang, the founder of the dynasty sent troops on a large-scale campaign, and the detachments marched simultaneously from the east and west along five routes: the king of Pingyang, Chosun Han, and others marched from the Black Desert, the prince of Ruyin, Chosun Daosheng, marched from between the Black and White deserts, the founder of the dynasty marched from the middle route, the king of Dongping, Gong'e Qing, marched from the west direction through the chestnut orchard, and the king of Yicheng, Shujin, and the general, An Yuan, marched from the west route through the cold

古文：诸军至漠南，舍辎重，轻骑赍十五日粮，绝漠讨之，大檀部落骇惊北走。
现代文：各部分头前进到达漠南，留下辎重，骑兵轻装只带十五天的干粮，横穿大沙漠合兵围剿，大檀部落惊恐惧怕，向北而逃。
English: Each side marched headlong into the desert south, leaving behind their heavy baggage. The light cavalry, carrying only fifteen days' worth of dry rations, marched across the great desert to join forces and encircle the enemy. Terrified and fearful, the Datan tribe fled north.

古文：神元年八月。大檀遣子将骑万余人入塞，杀掠边人而走。
现代文：神元年八月，大檀又派儿子率骑兵万余人侵入边塞，杀戮抢掠边地居民而逃。
English: In August of the first year of the Jin Dynasty, Datan sent his son and more than 10,000 cavalrymen to invade the border fortress, kill and plunder the residents of the border area and flee.

古文：附国高车追击破之。
现代文：魏朝附属国高车出兵追击，将他们打败。
English: The Wei Dynasty-affiliated National Highways dispatched troops to chase and defeat them.

古文：自广宁还，追之不及。
现代文：皇帝从广宁回朝，派兵追击却没有追到。
English: Wei Lord returned from Guangning and did not catch up.

古文：二年四月，世祖练兵于南郊，将袭大檀。
现代文：神二年四月，世祖在南郊操练兵马，准备攻击大檀。
English: In April of the second year of the Jin Dynasty, Shizu trained his soldiers and horses in the southern suburbs, preparing to attack Datan.

古文：公卿大臣皆不愿行，术土张渊、徐辩以天文说止世祖，世祖从崔浩计而行。
现代文：朝廷的公卿大臣们都不愿意出兵，术士张渊、徐辩用观察星象的结果去劝阻世祖，世祖却听从崔浩的建议决定进兵。
English: The court nobles and ministers of the imperial court were not willing to send troops. The sorcerers Zhang Yuan and Xu Yan used the results of observing the stars to dissuade the ancestor, but the ancestor listened to the advice of Cui Hao and decided to enter the army.

古文：会江南使还，称刘义隆欲犯河南，谓行人曰： 汝疾还告魏主，归我河南地，即当罢兵，不然尽我将士之力。 
现代文：刚好派往江南的使者回来，报告了刘义隆想要进犯黄河以南地区的情况，刘义隆对使者说： 你速速回去告知魏朝皇帝，归还我黄河以南地区，我就立即罢兵，不然的话，我就会下令将士全力进攻。 
English: An envoy sent to the south of the Yangtze River just happened to return and reported the situation of Liu Yilong's plan to invade the area south of the Yellow River. Liu Yilong said to the envoy: You should go back immediately to inform the Emperor of the Wei Dynasty to return the area south of the Yellow River to me, I will immediately disband, otherwise, I will order the soldiers to attack with all their might.

古文：世祖闻而大笑，告公卿曰： 龟鳖小竖，自救不暇，何能为也。
现代文：世祖听说后大笑，对朝廷公卿大臣说： 刘义隆不过是一个龟鳖小儿，连自救都顾不上，能有什么作为。
English: Upon hearing this, King Sejong laughed loudly and said to the Minister of the Imperial Court: "Liu Yilong is nothing but a child of a turtle, he can't even save himself, what can he do?

古文：就使能来，若不先灭蠕蠕，便更坐待寇至，腹背受敌，非上策也。
现代文：即使他敢于来犯，倘若不先灭除蠕蠕，就等于是坐等贼寇到来，使我们腹背受敌，这不是上策。
English: Even if he dares to attack us, if we don't eliminate him first, it's like waiting for the bandits to come and attack us from behind. That's not the best strategy.

古文：吾行决矣。 
现代文：我出兵征讨蠕蠕的主意已经定了。 
English: I am determined to strike at once.

古文：于是车驾出东道向黑山，平阳王长孙翰从西道向大娥山，同会贼庭。
现代文：于是，皇帝的车驾出东路向黑山进发，平阳王长孙翰率兵从西路向大娥山进发，两路合兵直逼蠕蠕的政权中心。
English: As a result, the emperor's car drove out of the east road to Montenegro, and the king of Pingyang, Sun Yat-sen, led the army from the west road to Mount Dae, and the two joined forces to directly approach the center of the regime.

古文：五月，次于沙漠南，舍辎重轻袭之，至栗水，大檀众西奔。
现代文：同年五月，军队驻扎在大沙漠之南，留下辎重轻装奔袭，兵到栗水，大檀所部闻风向西逃窜。
English: In May of the same year, the army was stationed in the south of the great desert, leaving behind a heavy load of light equipment to attack. The soldiers fled to Chestnut, and the wind blew westward.

古文：弟匹黎先典东落，将赴大檀，遇翰军，翰纵骑击之，杀其大人数百。
现代文：大檀的弟弟匹黎原先掌管东边部落，打算赶赴大檀所在之处，途中遭遇长孙翰的军队，长孙翰派骑兵进击，杀死其酋长数百人。
English: His younger brother Piri, who had previously been in charge of the tribe on the east, was about to go to Dattan, where he would meet the army of the eldest son, Han, who would attack on horseback, killing hundreds of them.

古文：大檀闻之震怖，将其族党，焚烧庐舍，绝迹西走，莫知所至。
现代文：大檀闻讯十分震惊恐惧，就率领他的部族，烧掉毡帐房舍，向西逃走，不留行迹，没有人知道他们逃到了哪里。
English: After hearing the news, Datan was shocked and horrified. He led his clan and township party to burn down their homestead and flee to the west, leaving no trace and not knowing where to go.

古文：于是国落四散，窜伏山谷，畜产布野，无人收视。
现代文：于是，蠕蠕国部落四处奔散，窜逃藏匿于山谷地区，弃下各种牲畜遍布四野，没有人看管照料。
English: As a result, the country was scattered, escaped baboons hid in the valley, livestock was all over the field, and there was no one to take care of them.

古文：世祖缘栗水西行，过汉将窦宪故垒。
现代文：世祖沿着栗水向西而行，路经汉代大将窦宪昔日的营垒。
English: The ancestor followed the chestnut water to the west, passing the former camp of the Han Dynasty general Dou Xian.

古文：六月，车驾次于免园水，去平城三千七百里。
现代文：六月，世祖的车驾驻扎在兔园水，这里离平城有三千七百里。
English: In June, Shizu's chauffeur was stationed in Usenyosui, which is 3,700 miles away from Pingcheng.

古文：分军搜讨，东至瀚海，西接张掖水，北渡燕然山，东西五千余里，南北三千里。
现代文：分兵搜索征讨，东边到达大沙漠，西边接近张掖水，北边越过燕然山，东西五千余里，南北三千里。
English: The division of troops to search and recruit reached the Great Desert in the east, approached Zhangye Water in the west, and crossed Yanran Mountain in the north, covering more than 5,000 miles from east to west and 3,000 miles from north to south.

古文：高车诸部杀大檀种类，前后归降三十余万，俘获首虏及戎马百余万匹。
现代文：高车各部族捕杀大檀属下的人，前后有三十余万人归降，俘获大小头领及胡马百余万匹。
English: The tribes of Gaochang hunted down and killed the people who belonged to Datan, and more than three hundred thousand people surrendered before and after, and more than one million big and small leaders and horses were captured.

古文：八月，世祖闻东部高车屯已尼陂，人畜甚众，去官军千余里。
现代文：这年八月，世祖听说东部的高车人屯扎在已尼陂，人口和牲畜非常多，离官军一千多里。
English: In August of that year, Shizu heard that the eastern Gaochu people were encamped in Yenyi, with a very large population and livestock, more than a thousand miles away from the official army.

古文：遂遣左仆射安原等往讨之。
现代文：于是派左仆射安原等人前往征伐。
English: As a result, he sent his left-hand man, Yasuhara Sakura, and others to go on a campaign.

古文：暨已尼陂，高车诸部望军降者数十万。
现代文：军队开到已尼陂，高车各部落纷纷向官军投降，共计数十万人。
English: When the army arrived, the tribes in Taka surrendered to the government army one after another, totaling hundreds of thousands of people.

古文：大檀部落衰弱，因发疾而死，子吴提立，号敕连可汗，魏言神圣也。
现代文：大檀的部落从此衰弱不堪，大檀也发病而死，其子吴提继位，号敕连可汗，是魏人所说 神圣 之意。
English: Datan's tribe became weak and feeble, and Datan also died of the disease. His son Wu Ti succeeded him, and his name was Qilian Khan, which the Wei people said meant "sacred."

古文：四年，遣使朝献。
现代文：神鹿加四年，吴提派使者向朝廷进贡。
English: Four years later, he sent an envoy to the Imperial Court to collect tribute.

古文：先是，北鄙候骑获吴提南偏逻者二十余人，世祖赐之衣服，遣归。
现代文：起先，北方边境魏军的哨骑抓获吴提派往南边巡逻的士卒二十余人，世祖赐给他们衣服，把他们遣送回去。
English: At first, the sentries of the Wei army on the northern border captured more than twenty soldiers sent by Wu Ti to patrol the south. The patriarch gave them clothes and sent them back.

古文：吴提上下感德，故朝贡焉。
现代文：吴提上下的人都感激朝廷恩德，所以就向朝廷纳贡。
English: Wu Tizhong is grateful and grateful, so the tribute is paid in the morning.

古文：世祖厚宾其使而遣之。
现代文：世祖将其使者当作贵宾给以厚待，并送他们回去。
English: The patriarch treated his emissaries as honored guests and sent them home.

古文：延和三年二月，以吴提尚西海公主，又遣使人纳吴提妹为夫人，又进为左昭仪。
现代文：延和三年二月，因吴提娶了西海公主为妻，世祖又派使者前往把吴提的妹妹纳为夫人，后又将她进升为左昭仪。
English: In February of the third year of Yanhe, because Wu Ti married the West Sea Princess as his wife, the ancestor sent an envoy to accept Wu Ti's sister as his wife, and then promoted her to Zuo Zhaoyi.

古文：吴提遣其兄秃鹿傀及左右数百人来朝，献马二千匹，世祖大悦，班赐甚厚。
现代文：吴提派其兄秃鹿傀和近侍数百人前来朝贡，献马二千匹，世祖大悦，对他们颁赐甚为丰厚。
English: Wu Ti sent his brother, Bald Deer Stooge, and hundreds of attendants to pay tribute, offering two thousand horses, which greatly pleased the ancestor. The gifts were very rich.

古文：至太延二年，乃绝和犯塞。
现代文：到了太延二年，吴提又断绝和睦关系进犯边塞。
English: In the second year of Taien, Wu Ti broke off the amicable relationship and invaded the border.

古文：四年，车驾幸五原，遂征之。
现代文：四年，世祖带兵到达五原，征伐吴提。
English: In the fourth year, Shizu arrived at Wuhuan with his soldiers and began the conquest of Wudi.

古文：乐平王丕、河东公贺多罗督十五将出东道，永昌王健、宜都王穆寿督十五将出西道，车驾出中道。
现代文：乐平王拓跋丕、河东公贺多罗督率十五员大将出兵东路，永昌王拓跋健、宜都王穆寿督率十五员大将从西路进军，世祖从中路进发。
English: Leping Wang Qian and Hedong Gong Hedoro will lead fifteen soldiers to the east road, Yongchang Wang Jian and Yidu King Mu Shou will lead fifteen soldiers to the west road, and Taiwu Emperor will lead soldiers to the middle road.

古文：至浚稽山，分中道复为二道，陈留王崇从大泽向涿邪山，车驾从浚稽北向天山。
现代文：到达浚稽山，又将中路军分成两路，陈留王拓跋崇由大泽向涿邪山前进，世祖则从浚稽往北向天山进军。
English: Arriving at Junchi Mountain, the middle path is divided into two paths, Chen Liu Wang Chong from Osawa to Shanzhai Mountain, and Taiwu Emperor from Junchi North to Tianshan.

古文：西登白阜，刻石记行，不见蠕蠕而还。
现代文：军队登上西边的白阜山，在石头上刻字记载其行踪，终因没有发现蠕蠕人的踪迹而回还。
English: The army climbed Mount Baifu in the west, inscribed their whereabouts on the stone, and eventually returned because they found no trace of the Creeper.

古文：时漠北大旱，无水草，军马多死。
现代文：当时漠北大旱，大沙漠中没有水草，军马死亡甚多。
English: At that time, there was a severe drought in the north of the country, there was no water and grass, and many horses died.

古文：五年，车驾西伐沮渠牧犍，宜都王穆寿辅景穆居守，长乐王嵇敬、建宁要王崇二万人镇漠南，以备蠕蠕。
现代文：太延五年，世祖向西讨伐沮渠牧犍，宜都王穆寿辅助景穆帝留守京师，长乐王嵇敬、建宁王拓跋崇率二万人镇守漠南，以防备蠕蠕来犯。
English: In the fifth year of the Taiyuan era, the founder of the dynasty went to the west to fight against the Qiuqiu herdsmen. King Mu Shou of Yidu assisted King Mudi to stay in Beijing, and Changle King Su Jing and Jianning King Tuoba Chong led 20,000 people to stay in the south of the desert to guard against the Qiuqiu invaders.

古文：吴提果犯塞寿素不设备，贼至七介山，京邑大骇，争奔中城。
现代文：吴提果然侵犯边塞，穆寿一向不加防备，致使敌军进至七介山，京城的人大为惊恐，争相奔往中城。
English: Wu Ti did indeed invade the border fortress, and Mu Shou was always unprepared, causing the enemy army to advance to Qixia Mountain. The people of Beijing were greatly alarmed and rushed to the middle of the city.

古文：司空长孙道生拒之于吐颓山。
现代文：司空长孙道生领兵迎敌于吐颓山。
English: Sun Daosheng, the chief of the Civil Aviation Bureau, resisted them in the Tubaoshan Mountains.

古文：吴提之寇也，留其兄乞列归与北镇诸军相守，敬、崇等破乞列归于阴山之北，获之。
现代文：吴提前来侵犯之时，留其兄乞列归与北边各镇的军队对峙，长乐王嵇敬、建宁王拓跋崇等人率兵大破乞列归于阴山北面，将他擒获。
English: When Wu invaded ahead of time, he left his brother's queue to confront the army of the towns in the north, and Changle Wang Shujing, Jianning Wang Tuobasong and others led the soldiers to break the queue to the north of Yinshan and captured him.

古文：乞列归叹曰： 沮渠陷我也。 
现代文：乞列归叹道： 这是沮渠牧犍陷我于死地啊。 
English: Keli lamented, "This is the reason why I have fallen to my death.

古文：获其伯父他吾无鹿胡及其将帅五百人，斩首万余级。
现代文：又抓获乞列归的伯父他吾无鹿胡及其将帅五百人，斩首万余级。
English: He captured his uncle, Tawamuzhuhu, and 500 of his generals, beheading more than 10,000 of them.

古文：吴提闻而遁走，道生追之，至于漠南而还。
现代文：吴提闻讯逃走，长孙道生随后追击，追到漠南而还。
English: When Wu Ti heard this, he ran away. Tao Sheng chased after him and arrived in the southern desert.

古文：真君四年，车驾幸漠南，分四道：乐安王范、建宁王崇各统十五将出东道，乐平王督十五将出西道，车驾出中道，中山王辰领十五将为中军后继。
现代文：真君四年，世祖驾幸漠南，分兵四路：乐安王拓跋范、建宁王拓跋崇各领十五员大将出东路，乐平王拓跋丕督率十五员大将出西路，世祖率军出中路，中山王拓跋辰统领十五员大将为中路军的后继。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of King Zhen, the ancestor led the army to the south of the happiness desert, and divided the army into four directions: the fifteen generals led by Le An Wang Tuo Ba Fan and Jian Ning Wang Tuo Ba Chong led the army to the east, the fifteen generals led by Le Ping Wang Tuo Ba Jun led the army to the west, the ancestor led the army to the middle, and the fifteen generals led by Zhongshan Wang Tuo Ba Chen led the army to the middle.

古文：车驾至鹿浑谷，与贼将遇，吴提遁走，追至頞根河，击破之。
现代文：世祖到达鹿浑谷，将要同敌军遭遇，吴提逃走，魏军追至安页根河，将吴提军击破。
English: When Shizu reached Luhun Valley, he was about to encounter the enemy army. Wu Ti fled, and the Wei army chased him to Anzhaligen River and defeated Wu Ti's army.

古文：车驾至石水而还。
现代文：世祖到达石水而还。
English: Emperor Taibu went to Shisui and came back.

古文：五年，复幸漠南，欲袭吴提，吴提远遁，乃还。 
现代文：真君五年，世祖又到漠南，想要攻击吴提，吴提逃到很远的地方，世祖才回朝。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of King Zhen, Shizhu went to the south of the desert to attack Wu Ti. Wu Ti fled to a faraway place, and Shizhu returned to the imperial court.

古文：吴提死，子吐贺真立，号处可汗，魏言唯也。
现代文：吴提死后，其子吐贺真继位，号处可汗，是魏人所说 答应 的意思。
English: Wu Ti is dead, his son is Toga Zhenli, his name is Duan Khan, and his Chinese name is Si Shen.

古文：十年正月，车驾北伐，高昌王那出东道，略阳王羯兒出西道，车驾与景穆自中道出涿邪山。
现代文：真君十年正月，世祖北伐，高凉王拓跋那出东路，略阳王拓跋羯儿出西路，世祖与景穆帝由中路出涿邪山。
English: In the first month of the 10th year of the reign of King Zhen, the founder of the Northern Expedition, Gao Liang Wang Tuoba took the east road, Liang Yang Wang Tuoba Er took the west road, and the founder and King Mu Di took the middle road out of the evil mountain.

古文：吐贺真别部帅尔绵他拔等率千余家来降。
现代文：吐贺真的部落首领尔绵他拔等人率一千多家前来投降。
English: More than a thousand families from the branch of the Toka Zhenbei faction have come to surrender.

古文：是时，军行数千里，吐贺真新立，恐惧远遁。
现代文：当时，魏军前行数千里，吐贺真由于刚刚即位，十分畏惧就远远地逃遁。
English: At this time, the army was thousands of miles away, and he felt fear and fled far away.

古文：九月，车贺北伐，高昌王那出东道，略阳王羯兒出中道，与诸军期会于地弗池。
现代文：这一年九月，世祖又一次北伐，高凉王拓跋那从东路进发，略阳王拓跋羯儿从中路出兵，与各路军约定时间在地弗池会师。
English: In September of the same year, Shizhu once again set out on the Northern Expedition. Gao Liang Wang Tuobana marched from the east, while Liangyang Wang Tuobaba sent troops from the middle, and agreed on a time to join the division in Di Fu Chi.

古文：吐贺真悉国精锐，军资甚盛，围那数十重，那掘长闱坚守，相持数日。
现代文：吐贺真集合全国的精锐兵力，军队物资非常充足，将高凉王拓跋那围困数十层，高凉王拓跋那挖掘长长的围子坚守，双方相持好几天。
English: He gathered the elite troops from all over the country, and the military supplies were very sufficient. He besieged Gao Liang Wang Tuobana for dozens of layers, and dug a long enclosure around Gao Liang Wang Tuobana. The two sides held each other for several days.

古文：吐贺真数挑战，辄不利，以那众少而固，疑大军将至，解围夜遁。
现代文：吐贺真多次向拓跋那挑战，都没有成功，因为高凉王拓跋那兵少而防守坚固，吐贺真怀疑魏军大部队很快就会到来，就解除包围连夜逃走。
English: He challenged Takubana many times, but without success. Since Takubana had few soldiers and was well defended, he suspected that a large force of Wei troops would soon arrive, so he broke the encirclement and fled overnight.

古文：那引军追之，九日九夜，吐贺真益惧，弃辎重，逾穹隆岭远遁。
现代文：高凉王拓跋那领军追击，一连追了九天九夜，吐贺真越发畏惧，就丢弃辎重，跨越穹隆岭逃之夭夭。
English: Tuoba led the army in pursuit. For nine days and nine nights, Tugazhen was even more afraid. He abandoned his baggage and fled across the ridge.

古文：那收其辎重，引军还，与车驾会于广泽。
现代文：高凉王拓跋那收集敌军的辎重，领军而还，与世祖会师于广泽。
English: Takubana collected the booty, led the army back, and met with Emperor Taivu in Guangze.

古文：略阳王羯兒尽收其人户畜产百余万。
现代文：略阳王拓跋羯儿收聚蠕蠕族的人口畜产达百余万。
English: King Tuoba of Liaoyang gathered more than one million people and livestock of the Demu-Hem people.

古文：自是吐贺真遂单弱，远窜，边疆息警矣。
现代文：从此以后，吐贺真力量日益薄弱，逃往远处，于是边疆的敌患得以停息。
English: From then on, as the power of the Toga clan became weaker and weaker, they fled far away, and the enemy's troubles on the frontier came to an end.

古文：太安四年，车驾北征，骑十万，车十五万两，旌旗千里，遂渡大漠。
现代文：太安四年，高宗北征，出动骑兵十万，战车十五万辆，旌旗相连长达千里，穿越大沙漠。
English: In the four years of Taian, the emperor conquered the north, riding a hundred thousand, driving a hundred and fifty thousand vehicles, flying a thousand flags, and then crossing the desert.

古文：吐贺真远遁，其莫弗乌朱驾颓率众数千落来降，乃刊石记功而还。
现代文：吐贺真逃往远地，其属下乌朱驾颓率数千部落前来投降，于是高宗令人在石头上刊刻记载北征之功，回到京城。
English: Tokachika fled to a distant land, and thousands of tribes came to surrender, led by his subordinate Ujukuni, so Gaozong ordered the Northern Expedition to be recorded on stone, and returned to the capital.

古文：世祖征伐之后，意存休息，蠕蠕亦怖威北窜，不敢复南。
现代文：高宗承世祖对蠕蠕进行征伐之后，有意要休养生息，蠕蠕族也畏惧朝廷威势而远窜北方，再也不敢南犯。
English: After Gao Zongcheng's ancestor carried out a campaign against the Cormorants, he intended to rest and recuperate. The Cormorants were also afraid of the imperial power and fled far to the north, never daring to go south again.

古文：和平五年，吐贺真死，子予成立，号受罗部真可汗，魏言惠也。
现代文：和平五年，吐贺真死，其子予成继位，号受罗部真可汗，这是魏人所说 恩惠 的意思。
English: In the fifth year of peace, Toga Zhen died, and his son was established. His name was Luo Bu Zhen Khan, and his Chinese name was "Gong Hui."

古文：自称永康元年，率部侵塞，北镇游军大破其众。
现代文：予成自定年号为永康元年，率领其部族又来侵犯边境，魏朝北方各镇流动出击的军队把他们打败。
English: In the first year of Yongkang, he led his tribe to invade the border again, and the army of the northern towns of the Wei Dynasty defeated them.

古文：皇兴四年，予成犯塞，车驾北讨。
现代文：皇兴四年，予成又来犯边，显祖带兵北伐。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xing, Youcheng came to the border again, and Xianzu led the soldiers to the Northern Expedition.

古文：京兆王子推、东阳公元丕督诸军出西道，任城王云等督军出东道，汝阴王赐、济南公罗乌拔督军为前锋，陇西王源贺督诸军为后继。
现代文：京兆王子推、东阳公元丕督率诸军出西路，任城王元云等督率军队出东路，汝阴王元赐、济南公罗乌拔督率军队为前锋，陇西王源贺督率诸军为后继。
English: Prince Jingzhao pushed the troops out of the west road with the Dongyang commander in charge, King Yuan of Ren led the troops out of the east road with the commander in charge, King Yuan of Ruyin led the troops out of the east road with the commander in charge, King Luo of Jinan led the troops out of the east road with the commander in charge, and King Yuan He of Shaanxi led the troops out of the east road with the commander in charge.

古文：诸将会车驾于女水之滨，显祖亲誓众，诏诸将曰： 用兵在奇不在众也，卿等为朕力战，方略已在朕心。 
现代文：各路将领与显祖在女水之滨会合，显祖亲临誓师，诏令诸将说： 打仗用兵不在于多而在于出奇制胜，你们要为朝廷奋力作战，作战方略朕已成竹在胸。 
English: The generals from all directions met with Emperor Xianzu on the banks of the Yeosu River. Emperor Xianzu swore the oath in person and ordered the generals to say: "In war, it is not the number of soldiers that matters, but the ability to achieve a surprise victory. You must fight hard for the imperial court. We already know how to fight.

古文：乃选精兵五千人挑战，多设奇兵以惑之。
现代文：于是就挑选精兵五千人向敌军挑战，布置许多奇兵来迷惑对方。
English: So he selected five thousand elite soldiers to challenge the enemy army, and arranged many strange soldiers to confuse the other side.

古文：虏众奔溃，逐北三十余里，斩首五万级，降者万余人，戎马器械不可称计。
现代文：蠕蠕军溃败逃窜，魏军向北追逐三十余里，斩首五万级，敌军投降的有万余人，缴获军马兵器不计其数。
English: The Crome army was routed and fled, the Wei army chased northward for more than 30 miles, beheaded 50,000 people, the enemy surrendered more than 10,000 people, and seized countless military and horse weapons.

古文：旬有九日，往返六千余里，改女水曰武川，遂作《北征颂》，刊石纪功。
现代文：十九天之内，往返行军六千余里，把女水改名为武川，并撰写《北征颂》，刊刻在大石上以记载战功。
English: Within nineteen days, he made a round-trip march of more than six thousand miles, changed the name of Yeosu to Bukawa, and wrote "Song of the Northern Expedition," which was engraved on a large stone to record his war exploits.

古文：延兴五年，予成求通婚娉，有司以予成数犯边塞，请绝其使，发兵讨之。
现代文：延兴五年，予成向朝廷请求通婚，朝中官吏认为予成屡次侵犯边塞，请求皇帝拒绝他派来的使者，发兵讨伐予成。
English: In the fifth year of Yanxing, Youcheng asked the imperial court for marriage. The officials of the DPRK and China believed that Youcheng repeatedly violated the border fortress, and asked the emperor to reject the envoy he sent and send troops to fight Youcheng.

古文：显祖曰： 蠕蠕譬若禽兽，贪而亡义，朕要当以信诚待物，不可抑绝也。
现代文：显祖说： 蠕蠕人好像禽兽，贪婪而不讲信义，朕应当以信用和诚恳对待他们，不能强行与之断绝。
English: Xianzu said: "Humans are like beasts, greedy and untrustworthy. We should treat them with trust and sincerity, and cannot forcefully break away from them.

古文：予成知悔前非，遣使请和，求结姻援，安可孤其款意？ 
现代文：予成既然懂得悔过，派使者前来请和，要求结姻攀附，怎么能辜负他的一片诚意？ 
English: How could he betray his sincerity when he had shown remorse, sent an envoy to ask for reconciliation, and requested the conclusion of a marriage contract?

古文：乃诏报曰： 所论婚事，今始一反，寻览事理，未允厥中。
现代文：于是下诏回复说： 所论通婚之事，说明你开始有所转变，但探究事情的道理，却不能允许你的请求。
English: Then the next emperor replied, "The matter of marriage, which we discussed, has only now come back to me once, to investigate the cause, and it is not appropriate.

古文：夫男而下女，爻象所明，初婚之吉，敦崇礼娉，君子所以重人伦之本。
现代文：男女婚嫁之事，爻象上说得十分明白，初次婚媾的喜事，应当崇尚厚重的礼聘，这是君子之所重视的人伦之本。
English: When it comes to marriage between a man and a woman, it is said very clearly that the joy of the first wedding should advocate a heavy gift, which is the book of human ethics that a gentleman values.

古文：不敬其初，令终难矣。 
现代文：如果开头就不严肃慎重地对待，此事终究难以长久。 
English: If you don't respect the beginning, it's hard to let him have the beginning and the end.

古文：予成每怀谲诈，终显祖世，更不求婚。
现代文：予成经常心怀诡谲奸诈，于显祖在位之时，不再向朝廷求婚。
English: Yucheng, who was always devious and treacherous, no longer proposed marriage to the imperial court when Emperor Xianzu was on the throne.

古文：太和元年四月，遣莫何去汾比拔等来献良马、貂裘，比拔等称伏承天朝珍宝华丽甚积，求一观之。
现代文：太和元年四月，予成派遣使者比拔等人前来向朝廷进献良马、貂裘，比拔等人说天朝拥有珍宝华丽之物非常之多，请求让他们观看一番。
English: In April of the first year of the Taiwa era, Yoshinari sent envoys such as Bibaru and others to come to the imperial court to offer good horses and horses. Bibaru and others said that the imperial court had a lot of precious and gorgeous things, and asked them to take a look.

古文：乃敕有司出御府珍玩金玉、文绣器物，御厩文马、奇禽、异兽，及人间所宜用者列之京肆，令其历观焉。
现代文：皇帝就令有关官员拿出宫中所藏的珍玩金玉、文绣器物，御厩里的宝马、奇禽、异兽，以及人间所用的贵重物品，都陈列在京城街市，让他们一一观赏。
English: The emperor ordered the relevant officials to take out the precious gold and jade and embroidered articles hidden in the palace, the BMWs, exotic birds and beasts in the imperial stables, as well as the valuables used by humans, all of which were displayed in the streets of the capital, allowing them to admire them one by one.

古文：比拔见之，自相谓曰： 大国富丽，一生所未见也。 
现代文：比拔看了以后，对同来的人说： 大国这等富贵华丽，我一生都不曾见到过。 
English: When he saw the comparison, he said to himself: Great country, rich and beautiful, never seen before in my life.

古文：二年二月，又遣比拔等朝贡，寻复请婚焉。
现代文：太和二年二月，予成又派比拔等人前来朝贡，不久又请求通婚。
English: In February of the second year, he sent Bibi Bao and others to pay tribute to the Imperial Court, and again sought to ask for a mixed marriage.

古文：高祖志存招纳，许之。
现代文：高祖有招纳蠕蠕之意，就准许了。
English: Gao Zu had the intention of recruiting him, so he gave his permission.

古文：予成虽岁贡不绝，而款约不著，婚事亦停。
现代文：予成虽然年年朝贡，却不曾明确地同朝廷订立款约，因此通婚之事也就停了下来。
English: Although the annual tribute continued, the sincerity of the invitation was not obvious, and the marriage was stopped.

古文：九年，予成死，子豆仑立，号伏古敦可汗，魏言恆也。
现代文：太和九年，予成死。其子豆仑继位，号伏古敦可汗，是魏人所说 永久 的意思。
English: Nine years ago, Youcheng died, and his son, Doushan Lunli, took the name of the ancient ruler, Tun Khan. The Chinese word for this is "eternity."

古文：自称太平元年。
现代文：自称太平元年。
English: He claimed to be born in the first year of the Taiping Dynasty.

古文：豆仑性残暴好杀，其臣侯医垔、石洛候数以忠言谏之，又劝与国通和，勿侵中国。
现代文：豆仑性情残暴，杀人成性，他的大臣侯医西山、石洛候屡次以忠言相谏劝，又劝他与魏和睦相交，不要侵犯中国。
English: Doulun was cruel and murderous, and his ministers Hou Yi Xishan and Shi Luo repeatedly advised him to be loyal to Wei and not to encroach on China.

古文：豆仑怒，诬石洛候谋反，杀之，夷其三族。
现代文：豆仑大怒，诬陷石洛候图谋反叛，把他杀掉，并夷灭其三族。
English: In a rage, Doushan Lun framed Shi Luo for plotting a rebellion, killed him, and exterminated his three clans.

古文：十六年八月，高祖遣阳平王颐、左射陆叡江为都督，领军斛律桓等十二将七万骑讨豆仑。
现代文：太和十六年八月，高祖派阳平王元颐、左仆射陆睿又同为都督，统领斛律桓等十二员大将率七万骑兵征讨豆仑。
English: In August of the 16th year of Tahe, Gao Zu sent Yangping Wang Yuanjun, his left-hand man Sha Lu Rui, who was also the governor of the capital, and twelve generals led by Yao Ruikuan and 70,000 cavalry to collect beans.

古文：部内高车阿伏至罗率众十余万落西走，自立为主。
现代文：蠕蠕部族内高车族人阿伏至罗率十余万人向西逃走，自立为主。
English: More than one hundred thousand people fled westward, mainly on their own, led by Awu Ziro, a member of the Gaochu tribe in the Dem Dem tribe.

古文：豆仑与叔父那盖为二道追之，豆仑出自浚稽山北而西，那盖出自金山。
现代文：豆仑与叔父那盖分两路追击，豆仑从浚稽山北面出发向西，那盖则从金山出发。
English: Doulun and his uncle Nagae split their pursuit into two routes, with Doulun heading west from the north side of Junchi Mountain, and Nagae heading from Jinshan Mountain.

古文：豆仑频为阿伏至罗所败，那盖累有胜捷。
现代文：豆仑多次被阿伏至罗打败，而那盖则接连打了胜仗。
English: Doushan Lun was repeatedly defeated by Avu Zhi Luo, and Nagae won several times.

古文：国人咸以那盖为天所助，欲推那盖为主。
现代文：于是国人都认为那盖有上天帮助，想要推举那盖为首领。
English: As a result, the people of the country thought that Nagai had divine help and wanted to elect Nagai as their leader.

古文：那盖不从，众强之，那盖曰： 我为臣不可，焉能为主！ 
现代文：那盖不从，众人强逼他，他就说： 我当臣子都不行，怎么能当国主？ 
English: But he would not: and when they urged him, he said, I am not able to be a minister: how can I be a prince?

古文：众乃杀豆仑母子，以尸示那盖，那盖乃袭位。
现代文：部众就杀了豆仑母子，把他们的尸首给那盖看，那盖这才即位。
English: The ministers then killed the mother and son and showed their bodies to Nagai, who then ascended to the throne.

古文：那盖号候其仗代库者可汗，魏言悦乐也。
现代文：那盖号为候其伏代库者可汗，在魏人语言中是 悦乐 的意思。
English: Nagaigo is the name of Khan, the founder of the Fudai school, and means "pleasantness" in the Wei language.

古文：算称太安元年。
现代文：自称年号为太安元年。
English: The self-proclaimed year is the first year of Taian.

古文：那盖死，子伏图立，号他汗可汗，魏言绪也。
现代文：那盖死，其子伏图继位，号他汗可汗，是魏人所说 开端 的意思。
English: Nagae is dead, his son Voturi is called Tarkhan Khan, and Chinese is a cause left behind by the predecessors.

古文：自称始平元年。
现代文：自称始平元年。
English: He claims to have been born in the first year of the Heian period.

古文：正始三年，仗图遣使纥奚勿六跋朝献，请求通和。
现代文：正始三年，伏图派使者纥奚勿六跋来朝廷进贡，请求通和。
English: At the beginning of the third year, the emperor sent an envoy to the imperial court to pay tribute and ask for peace.

古文：世宗不报其使，诏有司敕勿六跋曰： 蠕蠕远祖社仑是大魏叛臣，往者包容，暂时通使。
现代文：世宗不答复使者，让朝廷有关官员下诏书给勿六跋说： 蠕蠕的远祖社仑是大魏国的叛臣，我们对过去的事予以宽容，暂时与你通使往来。
English: Shizong did not reply to the envoy, and asked the relevant officials of the imperial court to issue an edict to Baerubai, saying: "Your distant ancestor Sharen was a traitor to the Great Wei State. We will be tolerant of the past and temporarily communicate with you.

古文：今蠕蠕衰微，有损畴日，大魏之德，方隆周汉，跨据中原，指清八表。
现代文：现在蠕蠕已经衰微，势力比往昔大为减弱，我大魏朝恩德广厚，兴隆如同周、汉，跨据中原之地，肃清八方之外。
English: Now that the Qing Dynasty has waned, its power is much weaker than in the past. Our Great Wei Dynasty is generous and prosperous, like the Zhou and Han dynasties, straddling the Central Plains and sweeping beyond the eight directions.

古文：正以江南未平，权宽北掠，通和之事，未容相许。
现代文：现因江南尚未平定，权且宽容北边的掳掠，双方通和之事，不容轻易应允。
English: Now, because the southern part of the Yangtze River has not yet been pacified, and the north side's abduction and plunder is allowed and tolerated, it is not easy for the two sides to reach a compromise.

古文：若修籓礼，款诚昭著者，当不孤尔也。 
现代文：如你们整治藩邦之礼，表现出明显的诚意，自当不会辜负尔之诚心。 
English: If you rectify the honor of the domain and state, and show obvious sincerity, you will not fail to live up to your sincerity.

古文：永平元年，伏图又遣勿六跋奉函书一封，并献貂裘，世宗不纳，依前喻遣。
现代文：永平元年，伏图又派勿六跋奉上函信一封，并献上貂裘，世宗不予接纳，按照前次晓喻的道理将使者遣还。
English: In the first year of the Yongping era, Futu sent another letter to the Six Immortals and presented them with a joke. The Sejong did not accept it, and sent the messenger back according to the principle of the previous story.

古文：伏图西征高车，为高车王弥俄突所杀，子丑奴立，号豆罗伏跋豆伐可汗，魏言彰制也。
现代文：伏图征伐西部的高车族，被高车王弥俄突所杀，其子丑奴继位，号豆罗伏跋豆伐可汗，是魏人所说 彰制 的意思。
English: Vutu conquered the Gaochao people in the west, was killed by Gaochao King Mioyu, and his son, Ugly Slave, succeeded to the throne. This is what the Wei people mean by "Chang System."

古文：自称建昌元年。
现代文：自称建昌元年。
English: He claimed to be from the first year of Jianchang.

古文：永平四年九月，丑奴遣沙门洪宣奉献珠像。
现代文：永平四年九月，丑奴派僧人洪宣向朝廷奉献珠宝佛像。
English: In September of the 4th year of Yongping, the villain sent Shamen Hongxuan to dedicate the pearl elephant.

古文：延昌三年冬，世宗遣骁骑将军马义舒使于丑奴，未发而崩，事遂停寝。
现代文：延昌三年冬，世宗派骁骑将军马义舒出使丑奴，使者还未出发而皇帝驾崩，此事便停止下来。
English: In the winter of the third year of Yanchang, the World Sect sent an envoy, the ugly slave, riding on the horse of General Ma Yishu. The envoy had not yet set off and the emperor had passed away, so the matter came to a halt.

古文：丑奴壮健，善用兵。
现代文：丑奴魁梧健壮，善于用兵。
English: Ugly and strong, he is good at using soldiers.

古文：四年，遣使俟斤尉比建朝贡。
现代文：延昌四年，派大臣尉比建前来朝贡。
English: In four years, he sent an envoy, Xing Jinyi, to pay tribute to the Emperor Bi Jian.

古文：熙平元年，西征高车大破之，禽其王弥俄突，杀之，尽并叛者，国遂强盛。
现代文：熙平元年，丑奴西征高车并大破高车军队，擒获高车王弥俄突，把他杀掉，吞并所有高车的人马，其国由此而又趋强盛。
English: In the first year of Heiping, the villain westwardly conquered Gaocheng and defeated Gaocheng's army. He captured Gaocheng's king, Miwotong, killed him, and absorbed all Gaocheng's people. As a result, his country became stronger.

古文：二年，又遣俟斤尉比建、纥奚勿六跋、巩顾礼等朝贡。
现代文：熙平二年，丑奴又派大臣尉比建、纥奚勿六跋、巩顾礼等前来朝贡。
English: In the second year of Heiping, the Ugly Slave also sent the minister-lieutenants Bi Jian, Zou Muxi, Gong Gu Li and others to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：神龟元年二月，肃宗临显阳殿，引顾礼等二十人于殿下，遣中书舍人徐纥宣诏，让以蠕蠕籓礼不备之意。
现代文：神龟元年二月，肃宗驾临显阳殿，把巩顾礼等二十人带到殿前，派中书舍人徐纥宣读诏书，表示对蠕蠕履行藩邦之礼不完备的谴责之意。
English: In February of the first year of Jinbei, Su Zong arrived at the Xianyang Palace, brought 20 people such as Gong Gu Li to the front of the palace, and sent the Chinese scholar Xu Wei to read out the imperial edict, expressing his condemnation of the incomplete performance of the state ceremony.

古文：初，豆仑之死也，那盖为主，伏图纳豆仑之妻候吕陵氏，生丑奴，阿那瑰等六人。
现代文：当初，豆仑被下属杀死，那盖继位为首领，伏图就占有豆仑之妻候吕陵氏，生下丑奴、阿那瑰等六人。
English: At first, Doulun was killed by his subordinates, Nagae succeeded as the leader, and Futu took Doulun's wife, Hou Luling, and gave birth to Ugly Slave, Anagui, and six others.

古文：丑奴立后，忽亡一子，字祖惠，求募不能得。
现代文：丑奴即位后，忽然丢失了名叫祖惠的儿子，四处寻找都不见。
English: After Ugly Slave was established, it suddenly lost one son, Zha Zu Hui, and was unable to find and solicit any more.

古文：有屋引副升牟妻是豆浑地万，年二十许，为医巫，假托神鬼，先常为丑奴所信，出入去来，乃言此兒今在天上，我能呼得。
现代文：有个叫屋引副升牟的人，他的妻子名叫是豆浑地万，年方二十，是一个巫医，常常假托神鬼附身，以前经常被丑奴所信任，在丑奴那里进进出出，她说这个小儿如今在天上，我能够呼叫到他。
English: There was a man called Shomu, the house leader's second-in-command. His wife was named Shuman, she was in her twenties, a witch doctor who often pretended to be possessed by a god. She had often been trusted by the Ugly Goat in the past, and had been in and out of the Ugly Goat. She said that this child was now in heaven, and I could call out to him.

古文：丑奴母子欣悦，后岁仲秋，在大泽中施帐屋，斋洁七日，祈请天上。
现代文：丑奴母子俩对此十分欣喜，第二年仲秋之际，在大泽中设置帐篷，斋戒洁身七天，祈请上天。
English: Ugly mother and son were very happy about this. On the occasion of the second year's Mid-Autumn Festival, they set up a tent in Osawa, fasted for seven days, and prayed to the heavens.

古文：经一宿，祖惠忽在帐中，自云恆在天上。
现代文：过了一夜，祖惠忽然来到帐篷里，自己说是长期以来住在天上。
English: After one night, Zu Hui suddenly appeared in the ledger, saying that he had been in heaven.

古文：丑奴母子抱之悲喜，大会国人，号地万为圣女，纳为可贺敦，授夫副升牟爵位，赐牛马羊三千头。
现代文：丑奴母子紧紧抱着他，悲喜交加，于是聚会全国的人，给是豆浑地万取号为圣女，把她接纳为可贺敦，授予她的丈夫屋引副升牟爵位，并赐给牛马羊三千头。
English: Ugly mother and son hugged him tightly, grief and joy mixed, so people from all over the country gathered to give her the title of saint, accept her as Koha Tun, award her husband the title of Duke of Yuhin, and give him three thousand heads of cattle, horses and sheep.

古文：地万既挟左道，亦有姿色，丑奴甚加重爱，信用其言，乱其国政。
现代文：是豆浑地万既怀有邪门左道，又颇有姿色，丑奴对她非常喜爱，对她言听计从，于是国政由此而日益昏乱。
English: The ugly slave was very fond of her and obeyed her every word. As a result, national politics became increasingly chaotic.

古文：如是积岁，祖惠年长，其母问之，神惠言： 我恆在地万家，不尝上天，上天者地万教也。 
现代文：像这样过了许多年，祖惠长大成人，他母亲问他早先的事，祖惠说道： 我长期住在是豆浑地万家里，根本不曾去到天上，上天的说法是地万教我的。 
English: After many years had passed like this, Zu Hui grew up to be an adult. His mother asked him about his earlier life. Zu Hui said: I have lived in the same family for a long time. I have never been to heaven at all. I learned about heaven from Du Man.

古文：其母具以状告丑奴，丑奴言： 地万悬鉴远事，不可不信，勿用谗言也。 
现代文：他母亲就把这些情况全都告诉丑奴，丑奴说： 地万能够看得见很遥远的事情，不能不相信她，你不要用谗言诽谤她。 
English: His mother told all this to the ugly one, and the ugly one said, "The earth is able to see things far away, you can't not believe her, don't slander her with slanderous words."

古文：既而地万恐惧，谮祖惠于丑奴，丑奴阴杀之。
现代文：后来地万对此感到非常恐惧，就在丑奴面前诬陷祖惠，丑奴就暗地里把祖惠杀了。
English: Before long, fear gripped everyone, the villain framed Zou Hui, and the villain secretly killed Zou Hui.

古文：正光初，丑奴母遣莫何去汾李具列等绞杀地万，丑奴怒，欲诛具列等。
现代文：正光初年，丑奴的母亲派大臣李具列等人将是豆浑地万绞死，丑奴大怒，要诛杀李具列等人。
English: In the first year of Zheng Guang, the ugly slave's mother sent the minister Li Guulei and others to be hanged, and the ugly slave was furious and wanted to kill Li Guulei and others.

古文：又阿至罗侵丑奴，丑奴击之，军败。
现代文：这时阿至罗部来侵犯丑奴，丑奴领兵回击，被打败。
English: At this time, Ah Zhi Robe came to encroach on the villain, the villain led the troops to fight back and was defeated.

古文：还，为母与其大臣所杀，立丑奴弟阿那瑰。
现代文：丑奴返回之后，他的母亲和大臣把他杀了，立丑奴的弟弟阿那瑰为主。
English: After the ugly slave returned, his mother and the minister killed him and put the ugly slave's brother, Anagui, in charge.

古文：立经十日，其族兄俟力发示发率众数万以伐阿那瑰，阿那瑰战败，将弟乙居伐轻骑南走归国。
现代文：即位仅有十天，阿那瑰的族兄大臣示发率数万之众攻打阿那瑰，阿那瑰战败，带领他的弟弟乙居伐轻骑往南投奔大魏。
English: After only ten days on the throne, tens of thousands of people attacked Anagui, and Anagui was defeated, leading his younger brother, Yi Ju, on horseback to Nantou and Wei.

古文：阿那瑰母候吕陵氏及其二弟寻为示发所杀，而阿那瑰未之知也。
现代文：阿那瑰之母候吕陵氏同他的二个弟弟不久就被示发杀死，但阿那瑰却不知道此事。
English: Anahit's mother, Hou Luling, and her younger brother were soon killed, but Anahit did not know why.

古文：九月，阿那瑰将至，肃宗遣兼侍中陆希道为使主，兼散骑常侍孟威为使副，迎劳近畿；使司空公、京兆王继至北中，侍中崔光、黄门郎元纂在近郊，并申宴劳，引至门阙下。
现代文：同年九月，阿那瑰将要到达京师，肃宗派兼侍中陆希道为主使，兼散骑常侍孟威为副使，到京城辖区的边地迎接慰劳；派司空公、京兆王元继到北中这个地方，侍中崔光、黄门郎元纂在离京城五十里处，设置酒宴以表示慰劳，一直把他接到朝廷门阙之下。
English: In September of the same year, Anagui was about to arrive in Beijing. He sent Su Sect faction and attendant Zhonglu Xi Dao as the main envoy, and also rode horseback with regular attendant Meng Wei as the deputy envoy, to the outskirts of the capital jurisdiction area to meet the consolation. He sent Sifu Kong and Jingzhao Wangyuan to the North Middle School, and the attendant Cui Guang and Huangmen Langyuan were 50 miles away from the capital. They set up a wine banquet to express consolation, and kept him under the imperial latch.

古文：十月，肃宗临显阳殿，引从五品以上清官、皇宗、籓国使客等列于殿庭，王公以下及阿那瑰等入，就庭中北面。
现代文：十月，肃宗来到显阳殿，指定从五品以上任职显要的官员、宗室贵族、各藩国的使者贵宾等，都排列坐于殿庭之上，王公以下的人和阿那瑰等人进来后，就在庭院中面北而坐。
English: In October, Su Zong came to the Hsien Yang Palace. Eminent officials, aristocrats, emissaries of the feudal states, and other dignitaries who had been appointed from the Fifth Rank and above were all lined up and seated on top of the palace courtyard. After the people below the prince and Anagu came in, they sat facing north in the courtyard.

古文：位定，谒者引王公以下升殿，阿那瑰位于籓王之下，又引将命之官阿那瑰弟并二叔位于群官之下。
现代文：座位定下来以后，接待宾客的近侍引导王公以下的官员上殿，阿那瑰位置列于藩王之下，又让将任命的官员和阿那瑰之弟与二叔位列于群官之下。
English: After the seats were set, the attendants who received the guests led the officials below the prince to the hall. Anagui's position was listed under the king of the domain, and the officials to be appointed and Anagui's brother and second uncle were listed under the group officials.

古文：遣中书舍人曹道宣诏劳问，阿那瑰启云： 陛下优隆，命臣弟叔等升殿预会，但臣有从兄，在北之日，官高于二叔，乞命升殿。 
现代文：皇帝派中书舍人曹道宣读诏令表示慰劳和问候，阿那瑰向皇帝启奏说： 陛下宽厚为怀，让我的弟弟与叔叔等人得以上殿参与盛会，但微臣还有一位堂兄，在我们部族里官职高于二叔，乞望陛下允许他上殿。 
English: The emperor sent Cao Dao, a scholar from the Middle Kingdom, to read out the imperial decree to express his condolences and greetings. Anagu said to the emperor, "Your majesty has been kind enough to allow my younger brother and uncle to attend the grand event at the Great Hall. However, there is another cousin of Weixin, who holds a higher official position than my second uncle in our tribe, and he is begging your majesty to allow him to attend the Great Hall.

古文：诏听之，乃位于阿那瑰弟之下，二叔之上。
现代文：皇帝下令准许他的请求，就把他的座位安排在阿那瑰弟弟之下，其二叔之上。
English: He obeyed the lower edict, and his position was just below Anaxun's younger brother and above his second uncle.

古文：宴将罢，阿那瑰执启立于座后，诏遣舍人常景问所欲言，阿那瑰求诣殿前，诏引之。
现代文：宴会将要结束时，阿那瑰手捧奏折站立在座席之后，肃宗派舍人常景前去问他有什么话想要说，阿那瑰请求走到殿前，皇帝令人引导他上前。
English: When the banquet was about to end, Anagi stood behind the seats, holding a recorder in his hand. Su Sect sent someone to go to Changjing to ask him what he wanted to say. Anagi asked to go to the front of the hall, and the emperor had him lead him forward.

古文：阿那瑰再拜跽曰： 臣先世源由，出于大魏。 
现代文：阿那瑰再次下拜，直身跪着说： 微臣祖先，原是出自大魏国。 
English: Anaxagoras kneeled again and said, "The origin of my ancestors is from the Great Wei Dynasty.

古文：诏曰： 朕已具之。 
现代文：皇帝说： 朕已经都知道了。 
English: The emperor said, "I already know everything.

古文：阿那瑰起而言曰： 臣之先，逐草放牧，遂居漠北。 
现代文：阿那瑰站起身来说道： 臣的祖先，随着水草之地放牧牲畜，后来定居在大沙漠之北。 
English: Anaxagoras stood up and said: My ancestors grazed with water plants, so they lived in the desert.

古文：诏曰： 卿言未尽，可具陈之。 
现代文：皇帝说： 你的话没有说完，可以详细陈述出来。 
English: The emperor said, "Sir, you have not finished your speech, you can make a more specific statement.

古文：阿那瑰又言曰： 臣先祖以来，世居北土，虽复隔越山津，而乃心慕化；未能时宣者，正以高车悖逆，臣国扰攘，不暇遣使以宣远诚。
现代文：阿那瑰又说： 微臣的先祖，世世代代居住在北方，虽然山隔水阻，但世代都倾心仰慕大魏的教化；之所以没有能够早日普及教化，都是因为高车族的悖逆所致，臣国长期受其骚扰，没有机会派遣使者前来向朝廷表达我们深远的诚心。
English: Anagui also said: The ancestors of the Weizhong subjects have lived in the north for generations. Although separated by mountains and rivers, the generations have all admired the Wei Dynasty's enlightenment. The reason why the enlightenment could not be spread as early as possible is due to the rebellion of the Gaochao people. The subject country has been harassed by them for a long time and has not had the opportunity to send an envoy to express our profound sincerity to the court.

古文：自顷年以前，渐定高车。
现代文：到几年之前，才逐渐平定高车。
English: It wasn't until a few years ago that high-speed trains were gradually phased out.

古文：及臣兄为主，故遣巩顾礼等使来大魏，实欲虔修籓礼，是以曹道芝北使之日，臣与主兄即遣大臣五人拜受诏命。
现代文：我的哥哥当了国主之后，曾经派遣巩顾礼等使者前来大魏，确实是想要诚心诚意地奉行藩国的礼仪，所以朝廷派曹道芝出使臣国之日，我与当国主的哥哥立即派五位大臣拜受皇帝的诏命。
English: After my brother became the ruler of the country, he sent envoys such as Gong Gu Li to the Great Wei Dynasty. Indeed, he wanted to sincerely follow the etiquette of the domain. Therefore, on the day that the court sent Cao Daozhi to be the envoy of the subject country, I and my brother, who was the ruler of the country, immediately sent five ministers to receive the emperor's edict.

古文：臣兄弟本心未及上彻。但高车从而侵暴，中有奸臣，因乱作逆，杀臣兄，立臣为主。
现代文：我兄弟二人臣奉朝廷的心愿没有能够向陛下表明，高车又前来侵犯，国内又有奸臣乘乱反叛，将微臣的哥哥丑奴杀死，拥立臣为国主。
English: My brother and two vassals, in accordance with the wishes of the imperial court, have not been able to show your majesty that Gaochao has once again come to invade, and that there are treacherous vassals in the country who have rebelled by taking advantage of the turmoil to kill the elder brother Ugly Slave of Wechat, and to make Wechat the ruler of the country.

古文：裁过旬日，臣以陛下恩慈如天，是故仓卒轻身投国，归命陛下。 
现代文：仅仅过了十多天，为臣因感到陛下恩慈如同天日，所以在仓卒之间只身前来投奔大魏，归附听命于陛下。 
English: Just ten days later, the minister, moved by His Majesty's graciousness, rushed to the country and returned to obey His Majesty's command.

古文：诏曰： 具卿所陈，理犹未尽，可更言之。 
现代文：皇帝说道： 听了你的陈说，觉得你还没有把事理说完，你可以继续往下说。 
English: The emperor said, "Your Excellency has made a specific statement, but you haven't finished your reason, you can say it again."

古文：阿那瑰再拜受诏，起而言曰： 臣以家难，轻来投阙，老母在彼，万里分张，本民臣民，皆已进散。
现代文：阿那瑰再次跪拜接受诏命，起身说道： 微臣因家国有难，只身来投奔朝廷，我的老母还留在那里，母子分离相距万里，本国的臣民都四处逃散。
English: Anagui again knelt down to accept the imperial command, and then stood up and said: My father-in-law was in trouble at home, so he came to the imperial court all by himself. My mother still stayed there. The mother and son were separated by thousands of miles, and the country's subjects fled in all directions.

古文：陛下隆恩。有过天地，求乞兵马，还向本国，诛翦叛逆，收集亡散。
现代文：陛下恩德深重，胜过天地，请求陛下派给兵马，帮助我回归本国，翦灭叛逆之徒，收集逃散的臣民。
English: I beg Your Majesty to send soldiers and horses to help me return to my country, to crush the traitors, and to gather the fleeing subjects.

古文：陛下慈念，赐借兵马。
现代文：望陛下以仁慈为怀，赐给微臣兵马。
English: I hope that His Majesty will be merciful and bestow Terracotta Warriors and Horses on Weixin.

古文：老母若在，得生相见，以申母子之恩；如其死也，即得报仇，以雪大耻。
现代文：我的老母倘若还在人世，能同我相见，就可继续母子间的恩爱；如果她已经亡故，我定要报这个仇，来洗雪我的奇耻大辱。
English: If my old mother were still alive and could meet me, she could continue the love between mother and son; if she had died, I would certainly avenge this, to wash away my great shame.

古文：臣当统临余人，奉事陛下，四时之贡，不敢阙绝。
现代文：微臣定当统领余部，侍奉陛下，对朝廷一年四时的贡纳，决不敢有所缺少。
English: The vassals lead the rest of the people, serve His Majesty, pay tribute to the four seasons, and do not dare to lack severance.

古文：陛下圣颜难睹，敢有披陈，但所欲言者口不能尽言，别有辞启，谨以仰呈，愿垂昭览。 
现代文：臣难以得见陛下圣颜，心里有许多话要向陛下倾吐，但想要说的意思不是几句话就能说完的，另外写有启奏的表章，现在恭敬地呈送陛下，希望陛下仔细阅览。 
English: It is difficult for a minister to see His Majesty's sacred face. There are many things in my heart that I want to say to His Majesty, but what I want to say cannot be said in just a few words. In addition, I have written the opening chapter and now respectfully present it to His Majesty, hoping that His Majesty will read it carefully.

古文：仍以启付舍人常景，具以奏闻。
现代文：于是把奏折交付舍人常景，把要说的事一一奏上皇帝。
English: He still entrusted the opening music to Shenren Changjing, and played it all for the emperor to know.

古文：寻封阿那瑰朔方郡公、蠕蠕王，赐以衣冕，加之轺盖，禄从、仪卫，同于戚籓。
现代文：不久，肃宗封阿那瑰为朔方郡公、蠕蠕王，并赐给他衣服冠冕，赠给他轻便马车上的车盖，以及朝臣的俸禄、仪仗与卫士，待遇与藩王相同。
English: Not long after, Su Zongfeng Anagui became the county magistrate of Shuofang County and the king of Wuming County, and gave him a clothing crown, gave him a car cover on a light carriage, as well as a courtier's salary, honor guard and guards, and the same treatment as the king of the domain.

古文：十二月，肃宗以阿那瑰国无定主，思还绥集，启请切至，诏议之。
现代文：同年十二月，因为阿那瑰考虑到国内没有法定的国主，想要回去加以安抚，屡次向朝廷上书请求，肃宗就诏令朝廷大臣商议此事。
English: In December of the same year, because Anagui considered that there was no legal sovereign in the country and wanted to go back to appease him, he repeatedly sent a letter to the Imperial Court to request, Su Zong ordered the Minister of the Imperial Court to discuss the matter.

古文：时朝臣意有同异，或言听还，或言不可。
现代文：当时朝臣中意见不统一，有的主张让他归还，有的则认为这样做不妥。
English: At that time, the opinions of courtiers were mixed, with some saying that the return should be obeyed, and others saying that it should not.

古文：领军元乂为宰相，阿那瑰私以金百斤货之，遂归北。
现代文：领军元叉时任宰相，阿那瑰私下用黄金一百斤贿赂他，终于获准回到北方。
English: The leader of the army, Yuan Zha, was the prime minister at the time. Anagui privately bribed him with a hundred kilos of gold and was finally allowed to return to the north.

古文：二年正月，阿那瑰等五十四人请辞，肃宗临西堂，引见阿那瑰及其伯叔兄弟五人，升阶赐坐，遣中书舍人穆弼宣劳。
现代文：正光二年正月，阿那瑰等五十四人向朝廷辞别，肃宗亲临西堂，接见阿那瑰及其伯叔兄弟五人，让他们上殿并赐坐，并派中书舍人穆弼对他们进行慰劳。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Zhengguang era, 54 people including Anagui bid farewell to the imperial court. Emperor Sui personally came to the West Hall to receive Anagui and his five uncles and brothers, let them go to the hall and give them seats, and sent the Chinese scholar Mu Xi to console them.

古文：阿那瑰等拜辞，诏赐阿那瑰细明光人马铠二具，铁人马铠六具；露丝银缠槊二张并白眊，赤漆槊十张并白眊，黑漆槊十张并幡；露丝弓二张并箭，朱漆柘弓六张并箭，黑漆弓十张并箭；黑漆盾六幡并刀；赤漆鼓角二十具；五色锦被二领，黄绸被褥三十具；私府绣袍一领并帽，内者绯纳袄一领；绯袍二十领并帽，内者杂人彩千段；绯纳小口袴褶一具，内中宛具；紫纳大口袴褶一具，岗中宛具；百子帐十八具，黄布幕六张；新乾饭一百石，麦麨八石，榛麨五石；铜乌錥四枚，柔铁乌錥二枚，各受二斛；黑漆竹榼四枚，各受二升；婢二口；父草马五百匹，驼百二十头，牸牛一百头，羊五千口：朱画盘器十合，粟二十万石。
现代文：阿那瑰等人向皇帝拜辞，皇帝下令赐给阿那瑰细明光人马铠二副，铁人马铠六副；露丝银缠槊二张并配有装饰的白羽毛，赤漆的槊十张也配有白羽毛，黑漆的槊十张并配有旗帜；露丝弓二张并配有箭，朱漆柘弓六张并配有箭，黑漆弓十张并配有箭；赤漆的盾牌六副并有刀，黑漆的盾牌六副并配刀；赤漆鼓角二十具；五色锦被二床，黄绸被褥三十套；诸侯贵戚穿的绣袍一件并带冠帽，诸侯夫人穿的红纳袄一件；红袍二十件并带冠帽，女子穿用的各色丝织物千匹；红色的小口骑服一套及饰物，紫色的大口骑服一套及饰物；百子帐十八具，黄布幕六张；新鲜干粮一百石，炒面粉八石，炒榛粉五石；铜制乌钅育四个，铁制乌钅育二个，容积为二斛；黑漆的竹木盍四个，容积为二升；婢女二人；父草马五百匹，骆驼一百二十头，母牛一百头，羊五千头；朱红色漆画的盘子十合；小米二十万石。
English: Anaju and others bowed to the emperor, and the emperor ordered that Anaju be given two pairs of light horse halters and six pairs of iron horse halters; two pairs of silver halters with decorated white feathers, ten red lacquer halters with white feathers, ten black lacquer halters with flags; two rosy bows with arrows, six vermilion lacquer halter bows with arrows, ten black lacquer bows with arrows; six red lacquer shields with swords, six black lacquer shields with swords; twenty red lacquer drum horns; two beds of five-colored brocade, thirty sets of yellow silk bedding;

古文：至镇给之。
现代文：全都运送到目的地交给阿那瑰。
English: All of them were transported to the destination and handed over to Anagui.

古文：诏侍中崔光、黄门元纂郭外劳遣。
现代文：又诏令侍中崔光、黄门元纂把他们送到京城之外。
English: He also ordered the chamberlains Choe Kwang and Wong Mun Won-soo to send them away from the capital.

古文：阿那瑰来奔之后，其从父兄俟力发婆罗门卒数万人入讨示发，破之。
现代文：阿那瑰前来投奔朝廷之后，他的堂兄大臣婆罗门率领数万人征讨示发，把他打败。
English: After Anagui came to the imperial court, his cousin and minister, Brahman, led tens of thousands of people in a demonstration and defeated him.

古文：示发走奔地豆于，为其所杀。
现代文：示发只得逃奔地豆于人，被地豆于人杀死。
English: Shi Fa had to run away and was killed by Duzuyu.

古文：推婆罗门为主，号弥偶可社句可汗，魏言安静也。
现代文：于是蠕蠕人推举婆罗门为国主，号为弥偶可社句可汗，是魏人所说 安静 的意思。
English: Therefore, the people of Wormwood elected Brahman as the ruler of the country, and called him Khan, which is what the Wei people meant by "quiet."

古文：时安北将军、怀朔镇将杨钧表： 传闻彼人已立主，是阿那瑰同堂兄弟。
现代文：当时，安北将军、怀朔镇将杨钧给朝廷上表说： 传说蠕蠕人已经另立国主，是阿那瑰的堂兄。
English: At that time, the general of Anbei, Wai Shuo Town, put Yang Xuan on the table: Legend has it that those people have set up leaders and are cousins of Anaxun.

古文：夷人兽心，已相君长，恐未肯以杀兄之人，郊迎其弟。
现代文：北夷人心似野兽，他既然已即国君之位，恐怕未必会以一个杀死兄弟的人的身份，出郊隆重地迎接其堂弟阿那瑰。
English: Since he has ascended to the throne of the country, I am afraid that he will not go out to welcome his cousin Anagui as a man who killed his brother.

古文：轻往虚反，徒损国威，自非广加兵众，无以送其入北。 
现代文：我朝轻率地送他前去，徒劳往返，将会徒然损害国威，除非是增派军队，否则就不可能把他送回北方。 
English: If I send him to the north carelessly, he will make a round trip in vain, the national prestige will be damaged in vain, and it will be impossible to send him back to the north unless it is to send more troops.

古文：二月，肃宗诏旧经蠕蠕使者牒云具仁，往喻婆罗门迎阿那瑰复籓之意。
现代文：同年二月，肃宗让昔日担任蠕蠕使者的牒云具仁，前往晓喻婆罗门劝其迎接阿那瑰以恢复其王位。
English: In February of the same year, Su Zong sent Cho Yun Ju Ren, who had previously served as an envoy, to Xiaoyu Brahman to persuade him to meet Anaga to restore his throne.

古文：婆罗门殊自骄慢，无逊避之心，责具仁礼敬，具仁执节不屈。
现代文：婆罗门特别骄横侮慢，毫无逊位回避之心，强迫牒云具仁对他以君臣之礼相见，具仁坚守节操不肯屈服。
English: The brahman himself is particularly arrogant and haughty, with an indomitable spirit of concession, demanding that the guren show respect by behaving in accordance with etiquette, and that the guren adhere to discipline and not give in.

古文：婆罗门遣大官莫何去汾、俟斤丘升头六人将兵二千随具仁迎阿那瑰。
现代文：婆罗门就派他手下的大官莫何去汾、丘升头等六人率兵二千人随具仁迎接阿那瑰。
English: Brahman then sent his great officer, Mokho, to meet Anakha, and six men, including the head of the hill, led two thousand soldiers to meet Anakha.

古文：五月，具仁还镇，论彼事势。
现代文：五月，牒云具仁回到阿那瑰所在的边镇，一同计议当时的事态形势。
English: In May, Gu Ren returned to the town guard to discuss the trend of events there.

古文：阿那瑰虑不敢入，表求还京。
现代文：阿那瑰顾虑重重不敢北进，就上表请求仍回到京都。
English: Anaximenes was afraid to enter, and sent a request to return to the capital.

古文：会婆罗门为高车所逐，率十部落诣凉州归降，于是蠕蠕数万相率迎阿那瑰。
现代文：适逢婆罗门被高车族追逐，被迫率领十个部落到凉州归降大魏，于是蠕蠕族数万臣民相率迎接阿那瑰。
English: At the right time, Brahman was chased by the Gaochao and was forced to lead ten tribes to Liangzhou to surrender to the Great Wei, so tens of thousands of subjects of the Cree Cree tribe lined up to welcome Anagui.

古文：七月，阿那瑰启云： 投化蠕蠕元退社、浑河旃等二人以今月二十六日到镇，云国土大乱，姓姓别住，迭相抄掠，当今北人鹄望待拯。
现代文：七月，阿那瑰上书启奏说： 归顺的蠕蠕人元退社、浑河旃等二人本月二十六日到达我的镇所，说蠕蠕国内大乱，各个姓氏另居别地，相互之间抄家抢掠，如今北方部族的人都引颈翘望，等待朝廷前来拯救。
English: In July, Anagui wrote in the opening of the book: "Two people, including the surrendered Cm Cm Ren Yuan and retired Cm Cm, and Hun Hoan, arrived at my town on the 26th of this month, saying that there was a great turmoil in Cm Cm, all surnames lived in different places, robbed each other's houses, and now the people of the northern tribes are waiting for the court to come and save them.

古文：今乞依前恩，赐给精兵一万，还令督率送臣碛北，抚定荒人，脱蒙所请，事必克济。 
现代文：现在我请求朝廷依照先前的恩德，赐给精兵一万。并令人督率送微臣前往漠北，抚慰安定百姓，倘蒙陛下应允我的请求，事情必定能够成功。 
English: Now I ask the Imperial Court, in accordance with the previous grace, to grant 10,000 to the elite soldiers, and to send the vassal to the north of the desert to comfort the stable people. If His Majesty agrees to my request, things will surely be successful.

古文：诏付尚书、门下博议。
现代文：肃宗诏令将此事交付尚书、门下省广为计议。
English: The imperial edict was issued to deliver the imperial edict, and it was widely discussed.

古文：八月，诏兼散骑常侍王尊业驰驿宣旨慰阿那瑰，并申赐赍。
现代文：八月，皇帝诏令兼散骑常侍王遵业驰往驿所宣旨慰问阿那瑰，并且再次对他进行赏赐。
English: In August, the emperor issued an imperial edict and sent his horseback-riding attendant, King Zunye, to the imperial palace to express his condolences to Anagu, and once again rewarded him.

古文：九月，蠕蠕后主俟匿伐来奔怀朔镇，阿那瑰兄也，列称规望乞军，并请阿那瑰。
现代文：同年九月，蠕蠕后主俟匿伐前来投奔怀朔镇，俟匿伐是阿那瑰的哥哥，他一再声称蠕蠕人希求朝廷派兵，并敦请阿那瑰归国。
English: In September, Cree Cree's eldest son, Anasazi's elder brother, Cree Cree's second-eldest son, Cree Cree's second-eldest son, Cree Cree's third-oldest son, Cree Cree's second-oldest son, Cree Cree's third-oldest son, Cree Cree's second-oldest son, Cree Cree's second-oldest son, Cree Cree's second-oldest son, Cree Cree's second-oldest son, Cree's second-oldest son, Cree's third-oldest son,

古文：十月，录尚书事高阳王雍、尚书令李崇、侍中侯刚、尚书左仆射元钦、侍中元乂、侍中安丰王延明、吏部尚书元修义、尚书李彦、给事黄门侍郎元纂、给事黄门侍郎张烈、给事黄门侍卢同等奏曰： 窃闻汉立南、北单于，晋有东、西之称，皆所以相维御难，为国籓篱。
现代文：十月，录尚书事高阳王元雍、尚书令李崇、侍中侯刚、尚书左仆射元钦、侍中元叉、侍中安丰王元延明、吏部尚书元义、尚书李彦、给事黄门侍郎元纂、给事黄门侍郎张烈、给事黄门侍郎卢同等人上书启奏说： 臣等私下听说汉朝在匈奴分立南、北单于，晋朝则有东、西单于之称，都是为了相互维系抵御外患，为国家建立屏障。
English: In October, the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the

古文：今臣等参议以为怀朔镇北土名无结山吐若奚泉，敦煌北西海郡即汉晋旧障，二处宽平，原野弥沃。
现代文：现在臣等参与议论，认为怀朔镇在北国名叫无结山吐若奚泉，敦煌北部的西海郡就是汉、晋两朝旧有的屏障，这两处地势宽阔平坦，原野广袤肥沃。
English: Now, ministers and others are participating in the discussion, believing that Wai Shuo Town in the north of the country is called Mujie Mountain Tujia Spring, and Sihai County in the north of Dunhuang is the old barrier between the Han and Jin dynasties. These two places are wide and flat, and the wilderness is vast and fertile.

古文：阿那瑰宜置西吐若奚泉，婆罗门宜置西海郡，各令总率部落，收离聚散。
现代文：最好是把阿那瑰安置于西吐若奚泉，把婆罗门安置在西海郡，命他们各自统辖所在的部落，收聚离散的百姓。
English: It would be best to place the Anangu in the West Tujiaquan, and the Brahmins in the West Hai County, and order the tribes under their respective jurisdiction to gather the scattered people.

古文：其爵号及资给所须，唯恩裁处。
现代文：他们的爵号和所需物资给养，可凭朝廷的恩德予以裁断处置。
English: Their titles and supplies are needed, and it is hoped that the royal decree will be dealt with.

古文：彼臣下之官，任其旧俗。
现代文：他们大臣以下各级官吏，还让其依照原有的习惯任命。
English: His subordinate officials were left to their old habits.

古文：阿那瑰所居，既是境外，宜少优遣，以示威刑。
现代文：阿那瑰所居之地，既然位于边境之外，应尽量少给优厚的遣送，以显示朝廷威严的治理。
English: Since Anakie's place of residence is outside the border, it is necessary to minimize the number of honorable deportations in order to show the dignified governance of the imperial court.

古文：请沃野、怀朔、武川镇各差二百人，令当镇军主监率，给其粮仗，送至前所，仍于彼为其造构，功就听还。
现代文：请诏令沃野、怀朔、武川三镇各派二百人，令各镇军队的主将监督率领，给他们配给粮草兵器，送阿那瑰到达西吐若奚泉，仍留在那里帮助他从事创建事宜，成功之后再让他们回来。
English: Please issue an order to dispatch 200 people from each of the three towns of Wo-no, Waisaku, and Bukawa, and order the commander of the army of each town to supervise and lead them, distribute grain and grass weapons to them, send Anagui to the West Tuyaku Spring, still stay there to help him with the creation matters, and let them come back after success.

古文：诸于北来，在婆罗门前投化者，令州镇上佐准程给粮，送诣怀朔阿那瑰，镇与使人量给食禀。
现代文：从北边前来归顺婆罗门的人，令各州镇官员依照规定供给口粮，把他们送到怀朔阿那瑰那里，由各镇和使者酌量给以粮食。
English: Those who came from the north to follow the brahman ordered the officials of the states and towns to provide them with food rations according to the regulations, and they were sent to Vaisravana, where they were given food by the towns and emissaries according to their discretion.

古文：在京馆者任其去留。
现代文：尚在京城的人则听任他们自己决定去留。
English: Those who are still in the capital are left to their own devices.

古文：阿那瑰草创，先无储积，请给朔州麻子乾饭二千斛，官驼运送。
现代文：阿那瑰还处于初创时期，原先没有储备积蓄，请给予朔州麻子干粮二千斛，由官家驼队运送前往。
English: At the time of the creation of the Anas grass, there were no reserves previously accumulated, and it was requested that two thousand catties of Shuozhou poppy seed dry grain be given and transported by camel.

古文：婆罗门居于西海，既是境内，资卫不得同之。
现代文：婆罗门居于西海郡，既然是地处边境之内，物资和军队的供给就不能与阿那瑰一样对待。
English: Since the Brahmins lived in the Western Sea District, which was within the border, the supply of goods and troops could not be treated in the same way as that of the Anakas.

古文：阿那瑰等新造籓屏，宜各遣使持节驰驿先诣慰喻，并委经略。 
现代文：阿那瑰等新建藩国，应当各派使者持节乘驿马迅速赶到那里予以慰问抚喻，并委付使者帮助他们筹划、治理。 
English: When a new domain was established, such as Anagui, envoys should be dispatched to the new domain to offer condolences and consolation, and to help plan and administer the new domain.

古文：肃宗从之。
现代文：肃宗准许了他们所奏之事。
English: Sozong allowed them to play.

古文：十二月，诏安西将军、廷尉元洪超兼尚书行台，诣敦煌安置婆罗门。
现代文：十二月，皇帝诏令安西将军、廷尉元洪超兼任尚书行台，到敦煌安置婆罗门。
English: In December, the emperor ordered General Anxi and the imperial lieutenant Yuan Hongchao to concurrently serve as Shang Shujangdai and relocate Brahman to Dunhuang.

古文：婆罗门寻与部众谋叛投嚈哒，嚈哒三妻，皆婆罗门姊妹也。
现代文：不久，婆罗门与他的部众图谋反叛投奔口厌哒国，口厌哒国君的三个妻子，都是婆罗门的姊妹。
English: Not long after, Brahman and his followers plotted a rebellion and fled to the kingdom of Kuching. The three wives of the king of Kuching were all sisters of Brahman.

古文：仍为州军所讨，禽之。
现代文：后来还是州军前去征讨，擒获婆罗门。
English: However, it was intercepted and captured by the state army.

古文：三年十二月，阿那瑰上表乞粟以为田种，诏给万石。
现代文：正光三年十二月，阿那瑰上表请求朝廷供给小米用来做种子，皇帝诏令供给万石。
English: In December of the third year of Zhengguang, Anagu requested the imperial court to supply millet to be used as seeds, and the emperor ordered the supply of stone.

古文：四年，阿那瑰众大饥，入塞寂抄，肃宗诏尚书左丞元孚兼行台尚书持节喻之。
现代文：四年，阿那瑰的部族遇到大饥荒，就进入边塞大肆抢掠，肃宗令尚书左丞元孚兼任行台尚书持节前往晓喻。
English: In the fourth year, when the tribe of Anagui encountered a great famine, they entered the frontier fortress and plundered extensively. Su Zong ordered Shangshu Zuo Jiao Yuan Fu, who also served as Gangtai Shangshu, to go to Xiaoyu for the festival.

古文：孚见阿那瑰，为其所执，以孚自随，驱掠良口二千，公私驿马牛羊数十万北遁，谢孚放还。
现代文：元孚见到阿那瑰，被他扣押，他把元孚当作人质带在身边，驱使部下抢掠良民二千人及公私驿马牛羊数十万向北逃遁，向元孚道歉之后把他放回。
English: Yuanfu saw Anagui and was detained by him. He took Yuanfu as a hostage and forced his subordinates to rob two thousand good people and hundreds of thousands of horses, cattle and sheep to flee to the north. After apologizing to Yuanfu, he was released.

古文：诏骠骑大将军、尚书令李崇等率骑十万讨之，出塞三千余里，至瀚海，不及而还。
现代文：肃宗诏令骠骑大将军、尚书令李崇等人率十万骑兵讨伐阿那瑰，出边塞三千余里，直到大沙漠，没有追到阿那瑰，只好撤回。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered his cavalry generals, Shang Shuling, Li Chong and others to lead the cavalry in a hundred thousand crusade, travel more than three thousand miles from the fortress, reach the open sea, and return without catching up.

古文：俟匿伐至洛阳，肃宗临西堂，引见之。
现代文：俟匿伐来到洛阳，肃宗驾临西堂，接见俟匿伐。
English: Su Yanfa came to Luoyang, Su Zong drove to the West Hall to meet with Su Yanfa.

古文：五年，婆罗门死于洛南之馆，诏赠使持节、镇西将军、秦州刺史、广牧公。
现代文：正光五年，婆罗门死于洛阳南边的客馆中，皇帝诏令追赠他为使持节、镇西将军、秦州刺史、广牧公。
English: In the fifth year, Brahman died in the mansion in Lonan, and the edict was given to the envoys, Zhenxi General, Qinzhou Jishi, and Guangmu Gong.

古文：是岁，沃野镇人破六韩拔陵反，诸镇相应。
现代文：这一年，沃野镇人破六韩拔陵反叛朝廷，各镇与他相呼应。
English: This year, the people of Wo-yeon Town broke the rebellion of the six Koreas to pull down the mausoleum, and all towns responded.

古文：孝昌元年春，阿那瑰率众讨之，诏遣牒云具仁赉杂物劳赐阿那瑰，阿那瑰拜受诏命，勒众十万，从武川镇西向沃野，频战克捷。
现代文：孝昌元年春，阿那瑰率兵征讨破六韩拔陵，肃宗诏令派牒云具仁送去各种杂物慰劳赏赐阿那瑰，阿那瑰拜受皇帝诏命，率领十万之众，从武川镇向西进军沃野，屡战告捷。
English: In the spring of the first year of the reign of Emperor Xiaochang, Anagui led an army to break through the six Korean tombs, and Su Zong issued a decree to send all kinds of miscellaneous goods to reward Anagui. Anagui was ordered by the emperor to lead a hundred thousand people to march westward from Wuchuan Town to fertile fields, and repeatedly won victories.

古文：四月，肃宗又遣兼通直散骑常侍、中书舍人冯俊使阿那瑰，宣劳班赐有差。
现代文：四月，肃宗又派兼通直散骑常侍、中书舍人冯俊出使阿那瑰，表示慰劳并按照次第等级给以赏赐。
English: In April, Su Zong also sent Feng Jun, who was also a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters, to Anagui to express his condolences and reward him according to his rank.

古文：阿那瑰部落既和，士马稍盛，乃号敕连头兵豆伐可汗，魏言把揽也。
现代文：阿那瑰的部落已经安定，兵马略为强盛，于是自号敕连头兵豆伐可汗，是魏人所说 把揽 的意思。
English: The tribe of Anagui was already stable, and the Terracotta Warriors and Horses were slightly more powerful. Therefore, he called himself the "Khan of the Bean-throwing Soldiers," which was what the Wei people meant by "seizing control."

古文：十月，阿那瑰复遣郁久闾弥娥等朝贡。
现代文：十月，阿那瑰又派郁久闾弥娥等人前来朝贡。
English: In February, Anahata sent Ikukyu Shinya and others to pay tribute to the Imperial Court.

古文：三年四月，阿那瑰遣使人巩凤景等朝贡，及还，肃宗诏之曰： 北镇群狄，为逆不息，蠕蠕主为国立忠，助加诛讨，言念诚心，无忘寝食。
现代文：孝昌三年四月，阿那瑰派使者巩凤景等前来朝贡，在他们临走时，肃宗下达诏书说： 北方各镇的夷狄，不停地背叛朝廷，蠕蠕国主为大魏国尽忠，帮助朝廷诛讨叛逆，表示侍奉朝廷的诚心，不忘寝食之恩。
English: In April of the third year of the reign of Xiaochang, Anaxi sent emissaries such as Gong Fengjing to pay tribute to the imperial court. When they were about to leave, Su Zong issued an edict saying: "The barbarians in the towns in the north have constantly betrayed the imperial court, and the lord of the country has been loyal to the Great Wei State, helping the imperial court to fight against rebellion, expressing the sincerity of serving the imperial court, and not forgetting the grace of sleeping and eating.

古文：今知停在朔垂，与尔朱荣邻接，其严勒部曲，勿相暴掠。
现代文：现知他停息在北方边陲，与朱荣相邻接，应严格管束部属，不要施暴掳掠。
English: It is now known that he stopped at the northern border, adjacent to Zhu Rong. He should strictly control his subordinates and not engage in violent abduction and plunder.

古文：又近得蠕蠕主启，更欲为国东讨。
现代文：再者，最近又得蠕蠕主的奏启，再次要为国东征。
English: Recently, he has been inspired by the leader of the Communist Party of China, and wants to go to the East for the sake of the country.

古文：但蠕蠕主世居北漠，不宜炎夏，今可且停，听待后敕。 
现代文：但考虑到蠕蠕主世代居住北漠，不适应夏季炎热，现在可暂且停止，等待以后的敕令。 
English: However, the main generation of worms live in the northern desert and are not adapted to the hot summer. Now they can temporarily stop and wait for the next life.

古文：盖朝廷虑其反复也。
现代文：这是朝廷考虑他反复无常的原因。
English: This was the reason why the court considered him to be capricious.

古文：此后频使朝贡。
现代文：此后，蠕蠕主频繁派遣使者前来朝贡。
English: After that, the envoy repeatedly paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：建义初，孝庄诏曰： 夫勋高者赏重，德厚者名隆，蠕蠕主阿那瑰镇卫北落，御侮朔表，遂使阴山息警，弱水无尘，刊迹狼山，铭功瀚海，至诚既笃，勋绪莫酬。
现代文：建义初年，孝庄帝下诏说： 功勋卓著的人应得重赏，德行厚重的人名声隆盛，蠕蠕主阿那瑰镇守防卫于北部边境，抵御敌侮于北方地域，终于使得阴山一带战乱停息，弱水一带没有战事，事迹刊刻在狼山，功名铭记于瀚海，至诚之心甚为深厚，功勋业绩未得酬报。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, Emperor Xiaozhuang issued an edict saying: People with outstanding merits should be rewarded, people with great virtues should have a great reputation, and Lord Anaguizhen guarded and defended the northern border and resisted the enemy's humiliation in the northern region. He finally brought the war in the gloomy mountain area to a halt, and there was no war in the weak water area. His deeds were engraved on the wolf mountain, and his achievements were remembered in the vast sea. His sincerity was very deep, and his meritorious performance was not rewarded.

古文：故宜标以殊礼，何容格以常式。
现代文：所以应当对他表示特殊的礼遇，怎能用普通的规格来对待他。
English: Therefore, special courtesy should be shown to him, how can he be treated with ordinary specifications.

古文：自今以后，赞拜不言名，上书不称臣。 
现代文：从今以后，他来朝廷赞拜可以不称道自己的姓名，给朝廷上书可以不称臣。 
English: From now on, there is no need to praise the name, and there is no need to praise the minister in the letter.

古文：太昌元年六月，阿那瑰遣乌句兰树什伐等朝贡，并为长子请尚公主。
现代文：太昌元年六月，阿那瑰派乌句兰树什伐等前来朝贡。并替自己的长子请求娶一位公主为妻。
English: In June of the first year of the Taichang Emperor, Anaxia sent the Ukulele Tree to pay tribute, and asked for a princess to marry his eldest son.

古文：永熙二年四月，出帝诏以范阳王诲之长女琅邪公主许之，未及婚，帝入关。
现代文：永熙二年四月，出帝下诏把范阳王元诲的长女琅笽公主许配给阿那瑰的长子，还没有举行婚礼，皇帝就被迫逃往关中。
English: In April of the second year of Yongxi, the emperor issued an imperial edict to give the eldest daughter of Fan Yang Wang Yuanyi, Princess Zou, to Anagu's eldest son. The wedding had not yet been held, and the emperor was forced to flee to Guanzhong.

古文：齐献武王遣使说之，阿那瑰遣使朝贡，求婚。
现代文：齐献武王派使者前往游说阿那瑰，阿那瑰就又派使者来朝贡，并再次求婚。
English: King Qi Xianwu sent an envoy to persuade Anagui, and Anagui sent another envoy to pay tribute and propose marriage again.

古文：献武王方招四远，以常山王妹乐安公主许之，改为兰陵公主。
现代文：献武王正要招抚四方边远之地，就把常山王之妹乐安公主许配给他，改称为兰陵公主。
English: When King Xianwu wanted to woo distant lands in the four directions, he betrothed Princess Le'an, the sister of King Jangsan, to him and renamed her Princess Lanling.

古文：郁兰死，子龛代之。及冉闵之乱，龛率众南移，遂据齐地。
现代文：阿那瑰送奉一千匹马作为聘礼，迎娶公主，皇帝令宗正元寿送公主前往北地。
English: Anagi sent a thousand horses as a betrothal gift to marry the princess, and the emperor sent Zong Zhengyuan to send the princess to the North.

古文：慕容俊使弟玄恭帅众伐龛于广固，执龛送之蓟，俊毒其目而杀之，坑其徒三千余人。高车，盖古赤狄之余种也，初号为狄历，北方以为敕勒，诸夏以为高车、丁零。
现代文：自此以后，蠕蠕向朝廷的朝贡就连续不断而来。阿那瑰因见齐献武王的威德日益隆盛，就请求把自己的爱女送给他，静帝诏令献武王接纳她。从此之后，北方边境地区就没有战乱骚扰的现象发生了。高车部，是古代赤狄族的余脉，最初叫做狄历，北方将它称之为敕勒，中原称之为高车、丁零。
English: From then on, the dynastic tribute to the imperial court came continuously. Anagui, seeing the increasing prosperity of Qi Xianwu, asked for his beloved daughter to be given to him, and Emperor Jing ordered Xianwu to accept her. Since then, there has been no war disturbance in the northern border area. Gao Chebu, a remnant of the ancient Chidi tribe, was originally called Dili, the north called it Mule, and the Central Plains called it Gao Che and Ding Zi.

古文：其语略与匈奴同而时有小异，或云其先匈奴之甥也。
现代文：这个部族的语言同匈奴大体相同但略有差异，有人说它的先祖是匈奴的外甥。
English: The language of this tribe is roughly the same as that of the Xiongnu, but slightly different. Some say that its ancestors were the nephews of the Xiongnu.

古文：其种有狄氏、表纥氏、斛律氏、解批氏、护骨氏、异奇斤氏。
现代文：高车族的分支有狄氏、袁纥氏、斛律氏、解批氏、护骨氏、异奇斤氏。
English: The branches of the Gaochao family include the Di clan, the Yuan Qi clan, the Bao Li clan, the Liang Bi clan, the Bao Guo clan, and the Yi Qijin clan.

古文：俗云匈奴单于生二女，姿容甚美，国人皆以为神。
现代文：民间传说匈奴单于生下两个女儿，姿态容貌非常美丽，国中之人都认为她们是神仙下凡。
English: According to folklore, the Xiongnu gave birth to two daughters, both of whom were very beautiful. The people of the country considered them to be divine beings.

古文：单于曰： 吾有此女，安可配人，将以与天。 
现代文：单于说： 我有这样两个美丽的女儿，怎么能把她们嫁给普通凡人，我打算把她们嫁到天上去。 
English: He only said, "I have two beautiful daughters. How can I marry them to ordinary mortals? I plan to marry them to heaven."

古文：乃于国北无人之地，筑高台，置二女其上，曰： 请天自迎之。 
现代文：单于就在匈奴国的北方无人居住的地方，建筑一座高台，把两个女儿安置在高台之上，对天祈请说： 恳请天神自己来把她们接去。 
English: Just build a high platform in the uninhabited northern part of the Hunnic country, place the two daughters on it, and pray to the heavens: "Please ask the gods themselves to come and take them away."

古文：经三年，其母欲迎之，单于曰： 不可，未彻之间耳。 
现代文：过了三年，两个女儿的母亲想要把她们接回去，单于阻止说： 不可以，还没有到撤回的时间。 
English: After three years, the mother of the two girls tried to take them back, only to be told: "No, it's not time to go back."

古文：复一年，乃有一老狼昼夜守台嗥呼，因穿台下为空穴，经时不去。
现代文：又过了一年，就有一只老狼日夜守候在高台旁边嗥叫呼号，并且就在高台下边打了一个洞穴，过了好长时间都不离去。
English: After another year, there was an old wolf who waited day and night next to the platform, howling and howling, and he dug a hole under the platform. After a long time, he would not leave.

古文：其小女曰： 吾父处我于此，欲以与天，而今狼来，或是神物，天使之然。 
现代文：单于的小女儿说道： 我们的父亲把我们安置在这座高台上，想把我们送给上天，如今那只老狼来到这里，也许它是个神物，是上天派它前来的。 
English: The youngest daughter said, "Our father put us on this high place to send us to heaven, and now the old wolf has come here. Perhaps he is a divine being, sent by heaven."

古文：将下就之。
现代文：于是她打算走到台下去靠近那只老狼。
English: I'm going to go down and get close to it.

古文：其姊大惊曰： 此是畜生，无乃辱父母也！ 
现代文：她的姐姐大惊失色，说道： 这是一头畜牲，你要是去跟了它，岂不是有辱于我们的生身父母！ 
English: Her sister was shocked and said, "This is an animal. If you go with it, you will be dishonoring our biological parents!"

古文：妹不从，下为狼妻而产子，后遂滋繁成国，故其人好引声长歌，又似狼嗥。
现代文：妹妹不听她的话，便走下高台做了老狼的妻子并且生下一个儿子，后来子孙逐渐滋生繁衍，终于成了一个国，就是由于这个缘故，那里的人都喜欢引颈大声歌唱，又非常像是狼在嚎叫。
English: Her sister did not listen to her, so she went down the hill to become the wife of the old wolf and gave birth to a son. Later, the descendants gradually multiplied and finally became a country. It is for this reason that the people there like to sing loudly, and very much like a wolf howling.

古文：无都统大帅，当种各有君长，为性粗猛，党类同心，至于寇难，翕然相依。
现代文：高车族没有统领全部族的首领，各个姓氏分支都有自己的君长，人们性情粗犷豪放，同族的人都非常齐心，共同对付外族的侵袭，大家聚合在一起相依为命。
English: The Gaochao people do not have a leader who rules over the entire tribe. Each branch of the family name has its own ruler. People's temperament is rough and bold. People of the same tribe are very united and work together to deal with the invasion of foreigners. Everyone is gathered together and depends on each other for survival.

古文：斗无行陈，头别冲突，乍出乍入，不能坚战。
现代文：战斗时不讲究军队的行列阵势，各自为战，左冲右突，忽出忽进，不能够持久作战。
English: When fighting, they do not pay attention to the ranks and positions of the army. They fight independently, rushing left and right, rushing in and out, and cannot fight for a long time.

古文：其俗蹲踞亵黩，无所忌避。
现代文：那里的人们习惯于蹲腿而坐，风俗轻慢而不庄重，无所顾忌和避讳。
English: The people there are accustomed to squatting and sitting, the customs are frivolous and undignified, without scruples and shunning.

古文：婚姻用牛马纳以为荣。
现代文：男女婚嫁都用牛马作为聘礼，并以所纳的牛马多为荣。
English: Both men and women use oxen and horses as wedding gifts, and are proud of the number of oxen and horses they have received.

古文：结言既定，男党营车阑马，令女党恣取，上马袒乘出阑，马主立于阑外，振手惊马，不坠者即取之，坠则更取，数满乃止。
现代文：人们首先商定一个婚嫁的时间，到时候男方建造车辆并将马匹拦起来，让女方任意挑选一匹马，不用马鞍骑上马走出圈马的围栏，马的主人则站在栏门之外，挥动双手来惊吓马匹，马惊而狂奔乱跳，如果骑在马上的人没有坠落下来，此马即被选中，若骑手落马，则换别的马匹，直到选满约定的数量为止。
English: People first agree on a wedding time, at which time the man builds a vehicle and stops the horses. Let the woman choose a horse at will, ride the horse without a saddle and walk out of the horse's enclosure. The horse's owner stands outside the gate, waving his hands to frighten the horse. The horse is startled and jumps wildly. If the person riding the horse does not fall down, the horse is selected. If the rider falls off, another horse is selected until the agreed number is selected.

古文：俗无谷，不作酒，迎妇之日，男女相将，持马酪熟肉节解，主人延宾亦无行位，穹庐前丛坐，饮宴终日，复留其宿。
现代文：那里的习俗不种稻谷，也不酿酒，迎娶新娘的时候，男男女女相携而来，拿着马酪和熟肉，拆去骨头来吃肉。主人延请宾客也不讲究座位次序，大家就在帐篷前相杂而坐，饮宴持续一整天，到晚上又留客人住宿。
English: The custom there is not to grow rice or make wine. When a bride is to be married, men and women come together, take the marmalade and cooked meat, and remove the bones to eat the meat. The host invites the guests and does not pay attention to the seating order. Everyone sits together in front of the tent. The banquet lasts all day, and in the evening guests are left to stay.

古文：明日，将妇归，既而将夫党还入其家马群，极取良马。
现代文：第二天，男子带着新娘回到娘家，接着又让婆家的人，在娘家的马群里挑选最好的马匹。
English: The next day, the man returned to his daughter's house with the bride, and then asked the mother-in-law's family to choose the best horses from the family's herd.

古文：父母兄弟虽惜，终无言者。
现代文：家中父母兄弟虽然感到非常可惜，但终究没有什么话可说。
English: Although it is a great pity for the parents and brothers in the family, there is nothing to say.

古文：颇讳取寡妇而优怜之。
现代文：人们较为忌讳娶寡妇为妻，但对待她们却非常优厚和同情。
English: It was more taboo to marry widows, but they were treated with great kindness and compassion.

古文：其畜产自记识，虽阑纵在野，终无妄取。
现代文：各家所牧养的牲畜都有各自的标记，虽然没有栏圈，放纵在野外，但始终没有人胡乱占有他人的牲畜。
English: The livestock herded by each family has its own mark, although there is no fence, indulge in the wild, but there is always no one who arbitrarily occupies other people's livestock.

古文：俗不清洁。
现代文：这里的习俗不爱清洁。
English: The custom here is not to be clean.

古文：喜致震霆，每震则叫呼射天而弃之移去。
现代文：人们喜欢碰到大雷霆，每遇霹雳大作就大声呼叫着向天空射箭，而且抛弃原来的牧地迁往别处。
English: People like to encounter thunderstorms, shout loudly to shoot arrows into the sky whenever there is a thunderstorm, and abandon their original pastures to move elsewhere.

古文：至来岁秋，马肥，复相率候于震所，埋羚羊，燃火，拔刀，女巫祝说，似如中国祓除，而群队驰马旋绕，百币乃止。
现代文：到了第二年的秋季，马匹喂得又肥又壮，便又相率守候在去年遇上霹雳的地方，埋下黑色的公羊，燃烧起篝火，拔出刀来，女巫念着祝祷的咒词，就像是中国除凶去秽的仪式，人们成群结队地骑着马环绕旋转，奔驰上百圈才停止。
English: In the autumn of the following year, the horses were fat and strong, and they waited in line for the place where they met last year. They buried black rams, lit bonfires, pulled out swords, and witches recited prayers and spells. It was like a ritual of exorcism in China. People rode horses in groups and spun around, and the gallop stopped after a hundred laps.

古文：人持一束柳桋，回竖之，以乳酪灌焉。
现代文：每个人手里拿着一束柳条和木夷枝，把它掉转来竖着，用乳酪浇灌。
English: Each held a bundle of wicker and twigs in their hands, twisting it around and standing it on end, and dousing it with cheese.

古文：妇人以皮裹羊骸，戴之首上，萦屈发鬓而缀之，有似轩冕。
现代文：妇人用牛羊皮裹着羊骨头，把它戴在头上，将头发卷曲盘缠起来，缀上这种装饰，就像是中国官员们戴的冠冕。
English: The woman wraps the lamb's skeleton in leather and puts it on her head, twisting it around her hair and tying it up like a high crown.

古文：其死亡葬送，掘地作坎，坐尸于中，张臂引弓，佩刀挟槊，无异于生，而露坎不掩。
现代文：人死之后的葬礼，都是在地上挖一个大坑，把尸体坐着放置在坑里，并让他伸展胳臂张弓引箭，身上佩着刀挟着槊，同他生前没有两样，而且让土坑暴露着而不掩埋。
English: The dead are buried, the ground is made into a pit, the body is placed in the pit, the arm is extended to guide the bow, the sword is carried, and the spear is carried, which is no different from the living, and the pit is exposed and not buried.

古文：时有震死及疫疠，则为之祈福。
现代文：有时有人被雷击死或得瘟疫而死，人们就替他祈祷祝福。
English: Sometimes someone is killed by lightning or dies of the plague, and people pray for him.

古文：若安全无佗，则为报赛。
现代文：如果属于正常的死亡，就为他举行祭祀。
English: If it is a normal death, a ritual is held for him.

古文：多杀杂畜，烧骨以燎，走马绕旋，多者数百币，男女无小大皆集会，平吉之人则歌舞作乐，死丧之家则悲吟哭泣。
现代文：在葬礼上，杀死许多杂畜，把骨头烧着用来祭奠，人们骑着马环绕旋转，多的达到数百圈，男女不分大小都来集会，平安吉祥的人就唱歌跳舞作乐，而死者的家属则悲痛地呻吟哭泣。
English: At funerals, many animals are killed and their bones are burned as offerings. People ride around on horses in hundreds of circles. Men and women, young and old, come together to sing, dance and make music, while the family members of the deceased moan and weep in grief.

古文：其迁徙随水草，衣皮食肉，牛羊畜产尽与蠕蠕同，唯车轮高大，辐数至多。
现代文：部落的人选择有水草的地方经常迁移，穿的是羊皮，吃的是牛羊肉，牛羊和各种畜产与蠕蠕族完全相同，只是他们的车轮子特别高大，车轮辐条数特别多。
English: Tribal people often migrate to areas with aquatic plants. They wear sheepskins and eat beef and mutton. Cattle and sheep and all kinds of livestock are exactly the same as the Cree Cree, but their wheels are particularly tall and have a particularly large number of spokes.

古文：后徙于鹿浑海西北百余里，部落强大，常与蠕蠕为敌，亦每侵盗于国家。
现代文：高车族后来迁徙到鹿浑海西北一百多里的地方，部落越来越强大，经常与蠕蠕族为敌，也常来大魏国侵犯抢掠。
English: The Gaochao people later migrated to a place more than a hundred miles northwest of the Lugu Sea. The tribe became more and more powerful, and often became enemies with the Cree Cree people. They also often came to the Great Wei State to invade and plunder.

古文：太祖亲袭之，大破其诸部。
现代文：太祖曾亲自统兵前往攻击它，将其各个部落打败。
English: The great-grandfather had personally led an army to attack it and defeated its various tribes.

古文：后太祖复度弱洛水，西行至鹿浑海，停驾简轻骑，西北行百余里，袭破之，虏获生口马牛羊二十余万。
现代文：后来，太祖领军再次渡过弱洛水，向西进军到达鹿浑海，军队停止前进，派骑兵轻装奔袭，向西北突进百余里，把高车部打败，虏获人口及马牛羊各种牲口二十余万。
English: Later, the leader of Taizu's army crossed the weak Luoshui again and marched westward to the Deer Mud Sea. The army stopped advancing, sent light cavalry to attack, rushed to the northwest for more than a hundred miles, defeated the high carriage, and captured more than 200,000 people and horses, cattle and sheep.

古文：复讨其余种于狼山，大破之。
现代文：接着又在狼山一带讨伐其余部，把它们打得大败。
English: He also fought the remnants of his race in the Wolf Mountain and defeated them.

古文：车驾巡幸，分命诸将为东西二道，太祖亲勒六军从中道，自驳髯水西北，徇略共部，诸军同时云合，破其杂种三十余落。
现代文：太祖巡视到了边地，令所部各将领分成东西两路，太祖亲自统率六军从中路进发，经驳髯水西北，进击其各部落，各路军队按时会合在一起，打败高车杂姓部落三十多个。
English: Taizu inspected the outlying areas and ordered the generals of the headquarters to divide into two directions, east and west. Taizu personally led the six armies to advance from the middle to the northwest of Surabaya, and attacked its tribes. The armies from all directions gathered together on time and defeated more than 30 tribes with different surnames.

古文：卫王仪别督将从西北绝漠千余里，复破其遗迸七部。
现代文：卫王拓跋仪另外督率军队从西北方向横穿大沙漠一千多里，又打败高车族剩下的七个部落。
English: In addition, Wei Wang Tuoba Yi led an army from the northwest across the great desert for more than a thousand miles, and defeated the remaining seven tribes of the Gaochao people.

古文：于是高车大惧，诸部震骇。
现代文：于是，高车人大为惊惧，各个部落都震骇不已。
English: As a result, there was great fear of high-speed trains, and all ministries were shocked and afraid.

古文：太祖自牛川南引，大校猎，以高车为围，骑徒遮列，周七百余里，聚杂兽于其中。
现代文：太祖从牛川向南退军，进行大规模的围猎，把高车族的活动范围当作狩猎的大围子，让所有的骑兵列队拦遮野兽，方圆七百余里，驱赶各种野兽聚集在包围圈里以供猎取。
English: Taizu withdrew his army from Ushikawa to the south, carried out a large-scale hunting, and regarded the range of activities of the Gaochu people as a large hunting enclosure, letting all the cavalry line up to block the beasts, covering more than seven hundred miles, driving all kinds of beasts to gather in the encirclement for hunting.

古文：因驱至平城，即以高车众起鹿苑，南因台阴，北距长城，东包白登，属之西山。
现代文：这样驱赶到了平城，就令高车族的人建造供王室狩猎的鹿苑，南边靠近台阴，北边到达长城，东边包括白登，西边连接西山。
English: After being driven to Pingcheng in this way, the Gaochu people were ordered to build a deer park for the royal family to hunt deer. The south side is close to Taiyin, the north side reaches the Great Wall, the east side includes Baiden, and the west side connects to the West Mountain.

古文：寻而高车侄利曷莫弗敕力犍率其九百余落内附，拜敕力犍为扬威将军，置司马、参军，赐谷二万斛。
现代文：不久，高车族侄利曷部的首领敕力犍带领他的九百多个部落归附朝廷，朝廷封敕力犍为扬威将军，让其设置司马、参军等官职，赐给他谷物二万斛。
English: Not long after, Gao Che's nephew Lijun Mofu Lijun, led by his more than nine hundred followers, annexed it, sealed Lijun Lijun as General Yang Wei, set up a Sima, joined the army, and gave the valley twenty thousand baht.

古文：后高车解批莫弗幡豆建复率其部三十余落内附，亦拜为威远将军，置司马、参军，赐衣服，岁给廪食。
现代文：后来高车族解批部首领幡豆建又率领其部三十余落归附朝廷，也被封为威远将军，设置司马、参军等职，赐给衣服，每年拨给一定数量的粮食。
English: Later, Gao Che was pardoned by Mofu Hata Dojian, and he led more than 30 of his subordinates to annexation. He was also named General Wiyuan, set up Sima, joined the army, gave clothes, and supplied grain every year.

古文：蠕蠕社仑破败之后，收拾部落，转徙广漠之北，侵入高车之地。
现代文：蠕蠕族的社仑被打败之后，收拾他残余的部落，辗转迁徙到大沙漠之北，侵入高车族的领地。
English: After the mountain defeat of the Creep Creep Society, the tribe was cleaned up, moved to the north of the vast desert, and invaded the territory of the high cart.

古文：斛律部部帅倍侯利患之，曰： 社仑新集，兵贫马少，易与耳。 
现代文：高车族斛律部的部帅倍侯利认为社仑是他的祸害，说： 社仑刚刚收集他的残部，兵力贫乏，马匹又少，很容易对付。 
English: The commander of the legal department of the Gaochao clan, Beholi, believed that the company was his scourge, saying: The company has just collected his remnants, the troops are poor, the horses are few, and it is easy to deal with.

古文：乃举众掩击，入其国落。
现代文：于是就乘其不备发兵攻击，进入到社仑所驻的部落。
English: As a result, all members of the club went on the offensive and entered their homeland.

古文：高车昧利，不顾后患，分其庐室，妻其妇女，安息寝卧不起。
现代文：高车人鲁莽好利，全不顾及后患，分占蠕蠕人的帐篷，强占蠕蠕族的妇女，自己则安安稳稳地休息，寝卧不起。
English: Gaochuan coveted profit, disregarded the consequences, separated their confinement rooms, treated women as wives, rested safely, and lay down.

古文：社仑登高望见，乃招集亡散得千人，晨掩杀之，走而脱者十二三。
现代文：社仑登上高处望见了这种情形，就召集逃散的部众共千余人，趁天将亮时偷袭进去大砍大杀，高车人逃脱出来的只有十分之二三。
English: Seeing the situation from a high vantage point, the group gathered more than a thousand members who had fled, and took advantage of the break of dawn to sneak in and slash and kill. Only two-thirds of the people in the coach managed to escape.

古文：倍侯利遂来奔，赐爵孟都公。
现代文：倍侯利只得前来投奔大魏，朝廷赐给他孟都公的爵位。
English: Beholi had no choice but to come and join the Great Wei Dynasty, and the imperial court gave him the title of Prince of Mengdu.

古文：倍侯利质直勇健过人，奋戈陷陈，有异于众。
现代文：倍侯利性格质朴直爽，勇健过人，打起仗来奋戈陷阵，不同于一般人。
English: Beholi's character is simple and straightforward, he is extremely brave, and he is different from ordinary people in that he fights and fights.

古文：北方之人畏婴兒啼者，语曰 倍侯利来 ，便止。
现代文：所以，当时北方的人每逢婴儿啼哭，就拿他来吓唬，说： 倍侯利来了！ 
English: Therefore, at that time, whenever a baby cried, the people in the north would frighten him, saying: Beholi is coming!

古文：处女歌谣云： 求良夫，当如倍侯。 
现代文：婴儿立即停止啼哭。北方的少女所唱的歌谣里说： 要想寻求好夫婿，应当如同倍侯利。 
English: The baby immediately stopped crying. In a song sung by a young girl in the north, it says: If you want to find a good husband, you should be like Behuli.

古文：其服众如此。
现代文：老百姓就是这样地敬畏倍侯利。
English: This is how the common people revere Beholi.

古文：善用五十蓍筮吉凶，每中，故得亲幸，赏赐丰厚，命其少子曷堂内侍。
现代文：倍侯利擅长用五十根蓍草进行卜筮来预测吉凶，每次占卜都非常灵验，所以很受皇帝的宠幸，皇帝给予他十分丰厚的赏赐，并让他的小儿子曷堂充当内侍。
English: Beholi was good at divination with fifty reeds of rushes to predict the fortunes. Each time the divination was very effective, so he was very favored by the emperor. The emperor gave him a very rich reward and let his youngest son, Xingtang, serve as a chamberlain.

古文：及倍侯利卒，太祖悼惜，葬以国礼，谥曰忠壮王。
现代文：倍侯利死后，太祖很悲伤惋惜，用国礼予以厚葬，加给他的谥号叫忠壮王。
English: After Beholi's death, the great-great-grandfather was very sad and regretful. He was given a lavish funeral with state rites, and he was given the nickname Zhongzhuang Wang.

古文：后诏将军伊谓帅二万骑北袭高车余种袁纥、乌频，破之。
现代文：后来，皇帝诏令将军伊谓率领二万骑兵到北地袭击高车族的分支袁纥、乌频等部，把它们打败。
English: Later, the emperor ordered General Itzetsu to lead 20,000 cavalry to the north to attack the branches of the Gaochao clan, such as Yuan Qi and Wuchang, and defeat them.

古文：太祖时，分散诸部，唯高车以类粗犷，不任使役，故得别为部落。
现代文：太祖在位时，把边地各个部族都加以分散，惟独高车族因为它粗犷猛悍，不愿任人驱使，因而得以另外成为一个部落。
English: When the great-grandfather was on the throne, he dispersed all the tribes of the borderlands, but the Gaochao tribe, because it was rough and fierce and did not want to be driven by anyone, was able to become a separate tribe.

古文：后世祖征蠕蠕，破之而还，至漠南，闻高车东部在已尼陂，人畜甚众，去官军千余里，将遣左仆射安原等讨之。
现代文：后来世祖征讨蠕蠕，把它打败之后回朝，行军到大漠之南，听说高车族东部在巳尼陂一带，人口牲畜都非常多，距离官军有一千多里，准备派左仆射安原等人前往征伐。
English: Later, Shizuo's ancestors went to conquer Crum Crum, and after defeating it, they returned to the North and marched to the south of the great desert. It was heard that the eastern part of the Gaochao tribe was in the area of Sinuiju, with a very large population and livestock, more than a thousand miles away from the government army. They were preparing to send their left-hand man, Sha Anyuan, and others to go to the conquest.

古文：司徒长孙翰、尚书令刘洁等谏，世祖不听，乃遣原等并发新附高车合万骑，至于已尼陂，高车诸部望军而降者数十万落，获马牛羊亦百余万，皆徙置漠南千里之地。
现代文：司徒长孙翰、尚书令刘洁等人出来谏劝，世祖不听，就派安原等人所部以及新近归附的高车人共一万骑兵，进军到巳尼陂，高车族各部望军而降的有数十万落，俘获的马牛羊也有百余万头，把他们全部迁移到大沙漠南边方圆千里之地。
English: When the patriarch did not listen, he sent ten thousand cavalrymen led by Anyuan and others, as well as the newly annexed Gaochu people, to march to Minyuan. Hundreds of thousands of Gaochu people from all parts of the country surrendered to the army, and more than one million horses, cattle and sheep were captured. All of them were relocated to the southern edge of the great desert, a thousand miles away.

古文：乘高车，逐水草，畜牧蕃息，数年之后，渐知粒食，岁致献贡，由是国家马及牛羊遂至于贱，氈皮委积。
现代文：高车族人乘坐高大的车辆，追寻水草之地游牧，各种牲畜不断繁殖增多，几年之后，部族的人逐渐懂得以谷物作为粮食，每年向朝廷进献贡物，从此以后大魏的马和牛羊的价值渐至于低廉，毛毡兽皮积聚非常多。
English: The Gaochu people rode tall vehicles to pursue nomadic life in the land of water and grass, and all kinds of livestock continued to multiply and increase. After a few years, the tribesmen gradually understood that grain could be used as food and made annual tribute to the imperial court. Since then, the value of horses, cattle and sheep in the Great Wei Dynasty has gradually become low, and there has been a large accumulation of fur skins.

古文：高宗时，五部高车合聚祭天，众至数万。
现代文：高宗在位时，高车族的五大分支聚合在一起祭天，参加的人达到好几万。
English: When Gaozong was on the throne, the five branches of the Gaozhe clan gathered together to celebrate the festival, with tens of thousands of people taking part.

古文：大会，走马杀牲，游绕歌吟忻忻，其俗称自前世以来无盛于此。
现代文：大会上，人们跑马、宰杀牲畜，环绕在一起载歌载舞，显得十分高兴得意，当地民间说他们部族有史以来都没有过如此盛大的聚会。
English: At the meeting, people ran horses, slaughtered livestock, sang and danced around each other, and appeared very happy and proud. Local people said that their tribe had never had such a grand gathering.

古文：会车驾临幸，莫不忻悦。
现代文：正好皇帝也亲自到了那里，部族的人没有不感到欣喜的。
English: Just as the emperor arrived there in person, the tribesmen couldn't help but feel happy.

古文：后高祖召高车之众随车驾南讨，高车不愿南行，遂推表纥树者为主，相率北叛，游践金陵，都督宇文福追讨，大败而还。
现代文：后来高祖召集高车族的部众跟随皇帝去南边征讨，高车人不愿往南边走，就推举袁纥树者为主帅，在北边聚合一起反叛朝廷，放肆地践踏大魏皇室的陵墓，都督宇文福领兵追讨，大败而还。
English: Later, Gao Zu called the Gaochu people to follow the emperor to the south to fight. The Gaochu people did not want to go to the south, so they chose Yuan Shuxu as the main commander. They gathered together in the north to rebel against the imperial court, brazenly trampled on the mausoleum of the Wei royal family, and the governor Uwenfu led the troops to fight, but was defeated.

古文：又诏平北将军、江阳王继为都督讨之，继先遣人慰劳树者。
现代文：皇帝又令平北将军、江阳王元继为都督率兵征讨，江阳王元继首先派人去慰劳袁纥树者。
English: The emperor also ordered Pingbei General and Jiangyang Wangyuan to lead the troops for the governor, and Jiangyang Wangyuan was the first to send someone to comfort Yuan Shuxu.

古文：树者入蠕蠕，寻悔，相率而降。
现代文：袁纥树者投入蠕蠕部，不久他表示悔改，率部向朝廷投降。
English: Yuan Shuxu was put in charge of the army, but soon he repented and surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：高车之族，又有十二姓：一曰泣伏利氏，二曰吐卢氏，三曰乙旃氏，四曰大连氏，五曰窟贺氏，六曰达薄干氏，七曰阿仑氏，八曰莫允氏，九曰俟分氏，十曰副伏罗氏，十一曰乞袁氏，十二曰右叔沛氏。
现代文：高车这个部族，又分为十二姓：一是泣伏利氏，二是吐卢氏，三是乙旃氏，四是大连氏，五是窟贺氏，六是达薄干氏，七是阿仑氏，八是莫允氏，九是俟分氏，十是副伏罗氏，十一是乞袁氏，十二是右叔沛氏。
English: The Gao Che tribe is also divided into twelve surnames: the first is the Weeping Fori clan, the second is the Tu Lu clan, the third is the Yixing clan, the fourth is the Dalian clan, the fifth is the Guge clan, the sixth is the Dabogang clan, the seventh is the Alun clan, the eighth is the Mo Yun clan, the ninth is the Shubun clan, the tenth is the Vice-Furo clan, the eleventh is the Qian Yuan clan, and the twelfth is the Right Uncle Pei clan.

古文：先是副伏罗部为蠕蠕所役属，豆仑之世，蠕蠕乱离，国部分散，副伏罗阿伏至罗与从弟穷奇俱统领高车之众十余万落。
现代文：先前，副伏罗部被蠕蠕所统属役使，在豆仑为首领的时候，蠕蠕内部动乱分裂，部落四处分散，副伏罗部的头领阿伏至罗与他的堂弟穷奇各自都统领高车族部众十多万。
English: Previously, the Deputy Furobe was subordinate to the Cormorant Cree. When Doulun was the leader, the Cormorant Cree was divided by internal turmoil, and the tribe was scattered everywhere. The head of the Deputy Furobe, Avu Ziro, and his cousin, Kinchi, each led more than 100,000 people of the Cormorant Cree.

古文：太和十一年，豆仑犯塞，阿伏至罗等固谏不从，怒，率所部之众西叛，至前部西北，自立为王，国人号之曰 侯娄匐勒 ，犹魏言大天子也。
现代文：太和十一年，豆仑侵犯大魏边境，阿伏至罗等人极力劝阻，豆仑不听，大怒，率领他的部众在西部叛乱，到前部西北，自立为王，其部族里的人号称他为 候娄匐勒 ，就像魏人所说的大天子的意思。
English: In the 11th year of the Taihe era, Doulun invaded the border of the Great Wei Dynasty, and Avu Zhi Luo and others tried their best to dissuade him. Doulun did not listen and became very angry. He led his followers to rebel in the west, to the northwest of the front, and established himself as king. The people in his tribe called him Hou Xule, as the Wei people said, meaning the great god.

古文：穷奇号 候倍 ，犹魏言储主也。
现代文：穷奇号称 候倍 ，就像魏人所说的储君的意思。
English: Qianqi is known as "xo dou," which means "custodian" as the Wei people say.

古文：二人和穆，分部而立，阿伏至罗居北，穷奇在南。
现代文：两人和睦相处，分部而立，阿伏至罗居于北部，穷奇则在南部。
English: The two get along well and are divided into two parts, with Avi living in the north, and Luo in the south.

古文：豆仑追讨之，频为阿伏至罗所败，乃引众东徙。
现代文：豆仑发兵追袭他们，屡次被阿伏至罗打败，于是就带领部众向东迁徙。
English: Doulun sent troops to pursue them and was repeatedly defeated by Avu Ziloh, so he led his followers to migrate to the east.

古文：十四年，阿伏至罗遣商胡越者至京师，以二箭奉贡，云： 蠕蠕为天子之贼，臣谏之不从，遂叛来至此而自竖立。
现代文：太和十四年，阿伏至罗派遣他部落中的官员越者来到京师，把两支箭作为贡物奉献给朝廷，并说道： 蠕蠕是大魏天子的叛贼，微臣对他规劝他不听，所以背叛他来到此地自立为主。
English: In the 14th year of the Taihe era, Avu Ziro sent an official from his tribe, the Yue, to Beijing to offer two arrows as a tribute to the imperial court, and said: "Wormworm is a traitor to the Great Wei Emperor. The Weixin advised him not to listen, so he betrayed him and came here to become independent.

古文：当为天子讨除蠕蠕。 
现代文：我定当为天子征讨除灭蠕蠕部。 
English: I've decided to enlist the help of God to destroy the Demolition Division.

古文：高祖未之信也，遣使者于提往观虚实。
现代文：高祖没有相信阿伏至罗的话，派使者于提前往观察其虚实。
English: Gaozu did not believe the words of Avushiro and sent an envoy to Yutian to observe the truth.

古文：阿伏至罗与穷奇遣使者薄颉随于提来朝，贡其方物。
现代文：阿伏至罗与穷奇派使者薄颉随于提前来朝贡，进献当地的土特产。
English: Abu Zillah and the envoy of the Qianqi faction, Bo Xun, followed in advance to pay tribute, presenting local local products.

古文：诏员外散骑侍郎可足浑长生夏与于提使高车，各赐绣袴褶一具，杂彩百匹。
现代文：高祖诏令员外散骑侍郎可足浑长生同于提再次出使高车，对阿伏至罗和穷奇各赐予刺绣的骑服一套，各色丝织品一百匹。
English: Gao Zu's edict to his attendants that they could ride the chariot for as long as they lived was to send another chariot, and to each of Avuzhiro and Qianqi he gave a set of embroidered riding clothes, and one hundred pieces of silk fabric of various colors.

古文：穷奇后为嚈哒所杀，虏其子弥俄突等，其众分散，或来奔附，或投蠕蠕。
现代文：穷奇后来被口厌哒国所杀，他的儿子弥俄突等人被掳，穷奇的部众四处逃散，有的前来归附朝廷，有的投奔蠕蠕。
English: Later, Qunqi was killed by a traitor, and his son, Miottu, and others were taken captive. Qunqi's followers fled in all directions. Some came to join the imperial court, while others fled to Cumhuriyet.

古文：诏遣宣威将军、羽林监孟威抚纳降人，置之高平镇。
现代文：皇帝诏令宣威将军、羽林监孟威前去安抚招纳来降的高车人，把他们安置在高平镇。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered General Xuan Wei and Ulin Inspector Meng Wei to pacify the recruited Gaocheng people and resettle them in Gaoping Town.

古文：阿伏至罗长子蒸阿伏至罗余妻，谋害阿伏至罗，阿伏至罗杀之。
现代文：阿伏至罗的长子与阿伏至罗其他的妻妾淫乱，图谋杀害阿伏至罗，阿伏至罗发觉后就把他杀了。
English: Avro's eldest son committed adultery with Avro's other wives and concubines in an attempt to murder Avro, and Avro killed him when he found out.

古文：阿伏至罗又残暴，大失众心，众共杀之，立其宗人跋利延为主。
现代文：阿伏至罗变得残酷暴戾，大大失去了人心，大家起来杀掉了他，拥立他同宗的人跋利延为主。
English: Avosiro became cruel and violent, and he lost a lot of people's hearts. Everyone rose up and killed him, and the people of his clan, the Tavoriyan, were made the lords.

古文：岁余，嚈哒伐高车，将纳弥俄突，国人杀跋利延，迎弥俄突而立之。
现代文：一年多以后，口厌哒国征伐高车部，准备送回弥俄突，于是高车人杀死跋利延，迎接弥俄突回来并把他立为君主。
English: After more than a year, the Guozhen Kingdom was fed up with the conquest of Gao Chebu and was preparing to send him back to Miottu. Therefore, Gao Che people killed Tavoriyan to welcome Miottu back and set him up as a monarch.

古文：弥俄突既立，复遣朝贡，又奉表献金方一、银方一、金杖二、马七匹、驼十头。
现代文：弥俄突即位之后，再次派遣使者前来朝贡，又奉上表章，敬献金锭一块、银锭一块、金杖二根、马七匹、骆驼十头。
English: After his sudden accession to the throne, he again sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor. He was also presented with the imperial insignia, and offered a gold ingot, a silver ingot, two gold staffs, seven horses, and ten camels.

古文：诏使者慕容坦赐弥俄突杂彩六十匹。
现代文：皇帝令使者慕容坦赐给弥俄突各色彩绢六十匹。
English: The emperor ordered the emissary Murong Tan to give 60 horses of each color to Miortu.

古文：世宗诏之曰： 卿远据沙外，频申诚款，览揖忠志，特所钦嘉。
现代文：世宗对他下达诏书说： 你远据大沙漠之外，多次向朝廷表达忠诚恳切之意，纵览你一贯的忠诚之志，朝廷应当予以特殊的嘉奖。
English: Sejong issued an imperial edict to him, saying, "You have traveled far from the great desert, and have repeatedly expressed your sincere loyalty to the imperial court. Considering your consistent loyalty, the imperial court should give you a special award.

古文：蠕蠕、嚈哒、吐谷浑所以交通者，皆路由高昌，掎角相接。
现代文：蠕蠕、口厌哒、吐谷浑之间的交结往来，都要路经高昌，形成犄角相靠相接之势。
English: The intersections and exchanges between the creeping worm, the mouth-sucking worm, and the spitting worm all pass through Gaochang, forming a situation where the horns are close to each other.

古文：今高昌内附，遣使迎引，蠕蠕往来路绝，奸势。
现代文：如今高昌已经归附朝廷，互相派遣使者往来迎送，而蠕蠕断绝了往来的道路，造成相互干扰阻隔的局势。
English: Now that Gaochang has been annexed by the imperial court, envoys have been sent to and from each other to meet and greet each other, but the two sides have cut off the roads, creating a situation of mutual interference and obstruction.

古文：不得妄令群小敢有陵犯，拥塞王人，罪在不赦。 
现代文：朝廷不能随便让一帮小人欺凌侵犯，阻塞朝廷的使者，其罪责实在不能赦免。 
English: The imperial court cannot allow a gang of villains to bully and encroach on and obstruct the imperial envoys. Their guilt cannot be pardoned.

古文：弥俄突寻与蠕蠕主伏图战于蒲类海北，为伏图所败，西走三百余里。
现代文：弥俄突不久就与蠕蠕国主伏图在蒲类海北面大战，被伏图打败，向西逃走三百多里。
English: Not long after, Miotsu went to war with Vutu, the ruler of the Cree nation, on the northern side of the Pudong Sea. He was defeated by Vutu and fled more than three hundred miles to the west.

古文：伏图次于伊吾北山。
现代文：伏图临时驻扎在伊吾山北。
English: Votu was temporarily stationed in the north of Igu Mountain.

古文：先是，高昌王曲嘉表求内徙，世宗遣孟威迎之，至伊吾，蠕蠕见威军，怖而遁走。
现代文：早先，高昌王嘉上表请求迁徙到内地，世宗派孟威前往迎接他，到了伊吾，蠕蠕部见到孟威的军队，十分畏惧而逃走。
English: Earlier, Gaochang Wang Jia made a request to migrate to the mainland, and the World Sect sent Meng Wei to meet him. When he arrived in Igu, the World Sect saw Meng Wei's army and fled in fear.

古文：弥俄突闻其离骇，追击大破之，杀伏图于蒲类海北，割其发，送于孟威。
现代文：弥俄突听说蠕蠕人惊骇逃跑，就率兵追击把他们打得大败，在蒲类海北面杀死了伏图，把他的头发割下来，送到孟威那里。
English: Hearing that the Cree were fleeing in terror, Miowu led his soldiers in pursuit and defeated them. He killed Votu on the north side of the Pudong Sea, cut off his hair, and sent it to Meng Wei.

古文：又遣使献龙马五匹、金银貂皮及诸方物，诏东城子于亮报之，赐乐器一部，乐工八十人，赤绸十匹，杂彩六十匹。
现代文：弥俄突又派使者进献龙马五匹、金银貂皮和各种土特产，皇帝诏令东城子于亮前往酬报弥俄突，赐给他一部乐器，乐工八十人，红绸十匹，各色丝织品六十匹。
English: Miottu also sent an envoy to present five dragons and horses, gold and silver mink skins and various local special products. The emperor ordered Dongcheng Zi Yu Liang to go to reward Miottu, giving him a musical instrument, eighty musicians, ten red silk, and sixty silk fabrics of all colors.

古文：弥俄突遣其莫何去汾屋引叱贺真贡其方物。
现代文：弥俄突派他的大臣屋引叱贺真前来贡献各种土特产。
English: Miotsu sent his cabinet secretary to persuade Hezhen to come and contribute various local products.

古文：肃宗初，弥俄突与蠕蠕主丑奴战败被擒，丑奴系其两脚于弩马之上，顿曳杀之，漆其头为饮器。
现代文：肃宗在位之初，弥俄突与蠕蠕主丑奴作战失败而被丑奴擒获，丑奴把他的两脚系在一匹劣马身上，顿时将他拖死，又把他的头颅割下来漆上油漆当作饮用的器皿。
English: At the beginning of Su Zong's reign, Miotsu fought unsuccessfully against the creep master Ugly Slave and was captured by Ugly Slave. Ugly Slave tied his feet to a bad horse, dragged him to death, and cut off his head and painted it as a drinking vessel.

古文：其部众悉入嚈哒。
现代文：弥俄突的部下全部逃往口厌哒国。
English: All of Miottsu's subordinates fled to Kuchigai Province.

古文：经数年，嚈哒听弥俄突弟伊匐还国。
现代文：过了几年，口厌哒让弥俄突的弟弟伊匐回国。
English: A few years later, it became too much for him to let his younger brother, Ilya, return to Russia.

古文：伊匐既复国，遣使奉表，于是诏遣使者谷楷等拜为镇西将军、西海郡开国公、高车王。
现代文：伊匐既然恢复了高车国，就派使者奉表告知朝廷，于是皇帝令使者谷楷等人到高车，封伊匐为镇西将军、西海郡开国公、高车王。
English: Since Yili had restored the State of Gaochao, he sent an envoy to inform the imperial court by letter, so the emperor ordered the envoy Gu Kai and others to Gaochao, and appointed Yili as the general of Zhenxi, the founding father of Xihai County, and the king of Gaochao.

古文：伊匐复大破蠕蠕，蠕蠕王婆罗门走投凉州。
现代文：伊匐又大破蠕蠕，蠕蠕主婆罗门逃走投奔凉州。
English: Yigong broke down again, and the main brahmin fled to Liangzhou.

古文：正光中，伊匐遣使朝贡，因乞朱画步挽一乘并幔褥，鞦必一副，伞扇各一枚，青曲盖五枚，赤漆扇五枚，鼓角十枚。
现代文：正光年间，伊匐派使者前来朝贡，向朝廷请求赐给有红色图案的人拉车一辆并带车幔坐褥，驾车用的皮革器具一副，遮阳挡雨用的伞盖和车扇各一把，青色弯曲的车盖五把，红色油漆的车扇五把，战鼓和号角十套。
English: During the Zhengguang era, Yili sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court, requesting the imperial court to give the people with red patterns a towing vehicle with a seat cushion, a pair of leather driving tools, an umbrella cover and a fan for sun and rain protection, five blue curved car covers, five red painted fans, and ten sets of war drums and horns.

古文：诏给之。
现代文：皇帝诏令如数赐给。
English: The Emperor's edict gave the exact number.

古文：伊匐后与蠕蠕战，败归，其弟越居杀伊匐自立。
现代文：伊匐后来与蠕蠕作战，战败而归，他的弟弟越居杀了伊匐自立为主。
English: Later, Yili fought against Cree Cree and was defeated. His younger brother Yue Ju killed Yili for being self-reliant.

古文：天平中，越居复为蠕蠕所破，伊匐子比适复杀越居而自立。
现代文：天平年间，越居又被蠕蠕打败，伊匐的儿子比适又杀死越居自立为王。
English: During the Tenpyo era, Yorii was again defeated by Cree Cree, and Iyo's son Bisu killed Yorii and became king.

古文：兴和中，比适又为蠕蠕所破。
现代文：兴和年间，比适又被蠕蠕打败。
English: During the Xinghe years, Bishi was again defeated by Creep.

古文：越居子去宾自蠕蠕来奔，齐献武王欲招纳远人，上言封去宾为高车王，拜安北将军、肆州刺史。
现代文：越居的儿子去宾从蠕蠕前来投奔朝廷，齐献武王想要招纳边远各族的人，向皇帝进言封去宾为高车王，授予他安北将军、肆州刺史之职。
English: Yue Ju's son, Dang Bin, came to the imperial court from Huludao to join the imperial court. King Wu, who wanted to recruit people from remote ethnic groups, proposed to the emperor to appoint Dang Bin as the king of Gaochao, and to grant him the position of Anbei General and Wuzhou Historian.

古文：既而病死。
现代文：不久去宾病死。
English: He died of illness not long after.

