古文：《曲礼》曰： 毋不敬，俨若思，安定辞。 
现代文：据《曲礼》记载：待人处事必须恭敬严谨，神态应当端庄肃重，好像在沉思似的，所说的话要合理。
English: According to the "Song of Songs," one must be respectful and rigorous in dealing with others, the demeanor should be dignified and solemn, as if in contemplation, and the words should be reasonable.

古文：安民哉！
现代文：这样才能让人民安定下来。
English: Only in this way can the people settle down.

古文：傲不可长，欲不可从，志不可满，乐不可极。
现代文：不能滋长傲慢之心，不能放纵自己的欲望，内心的意志不可自满，享乐不可无度。
English: You can't nurture arrogance, you can't indulge your desires, your inner will can't be complacent, and your enjoyment can't be boundless.

古文：贤者狎而敬之，畏而爱之。
现代文：对于道德、才能胜于己者，要亲近和尊敬他，畏服并爱戴他。
English: For those whose morals and talents are superior to his own, he should be close to and respect him, fear and love him.

古文：爱而知其恶，憎而知其善。积而能散，安安而能迁。
现代文：对于自己所喜爱的人，不可只知其优点，而不知其缺点；对于自己所憎恶的人，不可只知其缺点，而不知其优点。
English: For those whom you love, you should not only know their strengths, but also their weaknesses; for those whom you hate, you should not only know their weaknesses, but also their strengths.

古文：临财毋苟得，临难毋苟免。
现代文：自己有了积蓄，要分给贫穷的人。
English: If you have savings, give them to the poor.

古文：很毋求胜，分毋求多。
现代文：居安思危，能够及时改变处境。
English: If you live with peace of mind, you will be able to change the situation in time.

古文：疑事毋质，直而勿有。
现代文：面对财物，不能随意的占为己有；面对危急，不能随意地逃避。
English: In the face of property, one cannot arbitrarily take possession of it; in the face of a crisis, one cannot arbitrarily escape.

古文：若夫，坐如尸，立如斋。
现代文：与人发生争执，不能狠辣地求胜；分配财物，不能强求过多的部分。
English: If you have a dispute with someone, don't be too eager to win; if you are distributing property, don't ask for too much.

古文：礼从宜，使从俗。夫礼者所以定亲疏，决嫌疑，别同异，明是非也。
现代文：对于有疑问的事情，不能自以为是，有正确的答案的时候也不能太自我。
English: When in doubt, don't be presumptuous, and when you have the right answer, don't be too self-righteous.

古文：礼，不妄说人，不辞费。
现代文：坐着的时候，要像祭祀时的人那样庄重；站着的时候，要像斋戒时的人那般恭敬。
English: When sitting, be as dignified as one who is offering a sacrifice; when standing, be as reverent as one who is fasting.

古文：礼，不逾节，不侵侮，不好狎。
现代文：礼节要顺应事之所宜，出使他国要入乡随俗。
English: The etiquette should be in accordance with the needs of the situation. If you go to another country, you should follow the customs of your hometown.

古文：道德仁义，非礼不成，教训正俗，非礼不备。分争辨讼，非礼不决。君臣上下父子兄弟，非礼不定。宦学事师，非礼不亲。班朝治军，莅官行法，非礼威严不行。祷祠祭祀，供给鬼神，非礼不诚不庄。
现代文：道德仁义没有合乎礼的标准的行为就不可能得以成就；教育人民端正，没有礼就不可能完备；论辩争执没有礼的介入，就不可能解决；君臣、上下级、父子、兄弟之间的名分礼遇，没有礼便不能；外出游学拜师，没有礼便不会亲密融洽；排列朝廷上的等级和整治军队，官员到位执法，没有礼就不能树立威严；因事祭祀和日常例行的祭祀、供养神鬼、若没有礼的程式，就不能体现虔诚和庄重。
English: Morality, benevolence and righteousness cannot be achieved without behavior that meets the standards of propriety; educating the people properly cannot be completed without propriety; arguments and disputes cannot be resolved without the intervention of propriety; the treatment of dignitaries and subjects, superiors and subordinates, father and son, and brothers cannot be done without propriety; traveling abroad to study and worship cannot be intimate without propriety; arranging the ranks of the imperial court and rectifying the army, and officials in place to enforce the law cannot establish dignity without propriety; because of the ritual and daily routine of sacrifice, offering and feeding the gods and demons, if there is no propriety,

古文：是以君子恭敬撙节退让以明礼。
现代文：这样说来，君子总是以恭敬、克制和退让来阐释礼。
English: Thus, a gentleman always interprets the etiquette with respect, restraint and concession.

古文：鹦鹉能言，不离飞鸟；猩猩能言，不离禽兽。
现代文：鹦鹉能言，始终是飞鸟；猩猩会说话，也始终属于禽兽。
English: If a parrot can talk, it is still a bird; if an orangutan can talk, it is still an animal.

古文：今人而无礼，虽能言，不亦禽兽之心乎？
现代文：现在作为人而不受礼的规范，即使能说话，不也合了禽兽的心态么？
English: Now that it is the norm to be impolite as a human being, even if you can speak, doesn't that fit the mentality of a beast?

古文：夫唯禽兽无礼，故父子聚麀。
现代文：只是禽兽无礼，才会有父子共妻。
English: It is only when animals are impolite that a father and son have a common wife.

古文：是故圣人作，为礼以教人。使人以有礼，知自别于禽兽。
现代文：所以，圣人兴起时，才制定礼教化人们，使人们有礼，从而懂得把自己与禽兽区别开来。
English: Therefore, when the sages arose, they developed rituals to educate people and make them polite, so that they would know how to distinguish themselves from animals.

古文：太上贵德，其次务施报。
现代文：上古时期，人们崇尚 德 ，后来却讲求施报。
English: In ancient times, people advocated virtue, but later they talked about giving rewards.

古文：礼尚往来。
现代文：礼崇尚往来。
English: Reverence and admiration go hand in hand.

古文：往而不来，非礼也；来而不往，亦非礼也。
现代文：施人恩惠却收不到回报，是不合礼的；别人施恩惠于己，却没有报答，也不合礼。
English: It is not proper to do someone a favor and not get it back; it is not proper for someone to do you a favor and not get it back.

古文：人有礼则安，无礼则危。故曰：礼者不可不学也。
现代文：人们有了礼的规范，社会便得以安定，少了礼社会便会倾危，所以说： 礼，不能不学啊! 
English: Once people have the norms of etiquette, society will be stable. Without etiquette, society will be in danger, so they say: etiquette, you have to learn it!

古文：夫礼者，自卑而尊人。虽负贩者，必有尊也，而况富贵乎？
现代文：礼的实质在于对自己卑谦，对别人尊重，即使是挑着担子做买卖的小贩，也一定有令人尊敬的地方，更何况富贵的人呢？
English: The essence of etiquette is to be humble to oneself and to respect others. Even a hawker who carries a burden to do business must have a respectable place, let alone a wealthy person?

古文：富贵而知好礼，则不骄不淫；贫贱而知好礼，则志不慑。
现代文：身处富贵而懂得遵守礼仪，就不会骄奢淫逸，身处贫贱而懂得遵守礼仪，那么就会树立远大志向，内心也会变得无所畏惧。
English: If you are rich and know how to observe etiquette, you will not be arrogant and lascivious. If you are poor and know how to observe etiquette, then you will establish lofty aspirations and your heart will become fearless.

古文：人生十年曰幼，学。二十曰弱，冠。三十曰壮，有室。四十曰强，而仕。五十曰艾，服官政。六十曰耆，指使。七十曰老，而传。八十、九十曰耄，七年曰悼，悼与耄虽有罪，不加刑焉。
现代文：男子长到十岁叫做幼，这时候该出外上学了；二十岁叫做弱，这时候就该加冠了；三十岁叫做壮，这时候就该娶妻了；四十岁叫做强，这时候就该做官了；五十岁叫做艾，这时候就该参与国家政事了；六十岁叫做耆，这时候就该役使他人了；七十岁叫做老，这时候就该把家事交给儿孙掌管了；八九十岁的人叫做耄；七岁的孩子叫做悼。被称为耄与悼的老人和幼儿，即令有罪，也不对他们判刑。
English: When a man reaches the age of ten, he is called "young," at which time he should go out and go to school; at the age of twenty, he is called "weak," at which time he should be crowned; at the age of thirty, he is called "strong," at which time he should marry; at the age of forty, he is called "strong," at which time he should become an official; at the age of fifty, he is called "Ai," at which time he should participate in national politics; at the age of sixty, he is called "Yang," at which time he should serve others; at the age of seventy, he is called "old," at which

古文：百年曰期，颐。
现代文：百岁老人叫做期，儿孙要尽心加以供养。
English: A centenarian is called a period, and children and grandchildren should do their best to provide for them.

古文：大夫七十而致事。若不得谢，则必赐之几杖，行役以妇人。
现代文：大夫级别的官员，到了七十岁就可以把所掌管的事情交还君主而告老。如果告老未得允许，那么君主一定要赐给大夫几和杖，在本国因公外出，可以有妇人陪从。
English: At the age of seventy, an official with the rank of doctor can hand over the affairs he is in charge of to the monarch and retire. If retirement is not permitted, then the monarch must give the doctor a pair of scissors and a cane, and he may be accompanied by a woman when he is out of the country on official business.

古文：适四方，乘安车。
现代文：若出使异国，可以乘坐安车。
English: If you are dispatched to a foreign country, you can take a cheap train.

古文：自称曰老夫，于其国则称名；越国而问焉，必告之以其制。
现代文：在上述场合与人讲话，可以自称 老夫 ，但在朝廷上与自己的国君讲话则要自称己名。邻国来问，国君必问于老者以答之。
English: When talking to people on the above-mentioned occasions, you can call yourself an old man, but when talking to your own sovereign at court, you should call yourself by your own name. If a neighboring country comes to ask, the sovereign must ask the old man to answer it.

古文：谋于长者，必操几杖以从之。长者问，不辞让而对，非礼也。
现代文：和长辈商议事情，一定要随身带着几杖去。长辈有所问，如果不先谦让一番而回答，就不合乎礼的规定。
English: When discussing matters with elders, be sure to take a few canes with you. If an elder has a question and you don't humbly answer it first, it's not polite.

古文：凡为人子之礼：冬温而夏清，昏定而晨省，在丑夷不争。
现代文：凡是作子女的都应做到冬天让父母过得温暖，夏天让父母过得凉爽，晚上替他们铺床安枕，早晨向他们问候请安。与平辈相处，不和人争斗。
English: All children should keep their parents warm in winter and cool in summer, make their beds and pillows for them at night, and greet them in the morning. They should get along with their peers and not fight with others.

古文：夫为人子者，三赐不及车马。
现代文：凡是做儿女的，可以以父亲的名义将某些财物送人，把一般财物赠人，还可以商量，但绝对不能赠送车马。
English: All sons and daughters may, in the name of the father, give away certain property, and may give away general property. It may be discussed, but it is absolutely forbidden to give away chariots and horses.

古文：故州闾乡党称其孝也，兄弟亲戚称其慈也，僚友称其弟也，执友称其仁也，交游称其信也。
现代文：所以本乡本土都称赞他的孝顺，兄弟亲戚都赞扬他的仁爱，同僚们都称赞他的敬爱兄长，同志们都称赞他的对人厚道，和他有来往的人也都称赞他的诚实可靠。
English: Therefore, his hometown and the mainland all praised his filial piety, brothers and relatives all praised his benevolence, colleagues all praised his beloved brother, comrades all praised his kindness to others, and people who had dealings with him also praised his honesty and reliability.

古文：见父之执，不谓之进不敢进，不谓之退不敢退，不问不敢对。
现代文：前去拜访父亲的好友，人家不让进门就不敢自己做主进去；不让向后退就不敢自己做主向后退；人家没有提问，不敢随意开口说话。
English: When I went to visit my father's best friend, I didn't dare to enter the door without permission; I didn't dare to step back without permission; I didn't dare to open my mouth without asking questions.

古文：此孝子之行也。
现代文：就像对待父亲一般。这样做才算是孝子的行为。
English: It's just like treating your father. That's what a filial son would do.

古文：夫为人子者：出必告，反必面，所游必有常，所习必有业。
现代文：作儿女的，出行之前一定要当面禀告父母，回到家里也要亲自告知父母。出游必须有一定的去处。所学习的一定有具体的正当的内容。
English: If you are a child, you must inform your parents in person before traveling, and you must inform your parents in person when you return home. There must be a certain place to go on a trip. There must be specific and legitimate content to learn.

古文：恒言不称老。
现代文：平常讲话不可在自称中带有 老 字。
English: In ordinary speech, you can't use the old characters in your name.

古文：年长以倍则父事之，十年以长则兄事之，五年以长则肩随之。
现代文：对于年长自己一辈的人，应当待之如父；对于年长十岁的人，应当待之如兄；对于年长五岁的人，虽可以并肩而行，但仍须略微退后。
English: To those a generation older than oneself, one should be a father; to those ten years older, an older brother; to those five years older, one should walk abreast, but a little behind.

古文：群居五人，则长者必异席。
现代文：自己一辈的五人同居一处，应让年长者另坐一席。
English: If five people of the same generation live together, the older person should be allowed to sit in a different seat.

古文：为人子者，居不主奥，坐不中席，行不中道，立不中门。
现代文：作儿女的，家居不可占据室内的西南隅，不可坐在席的中间位置，不可走在路的中央，不可立在门的中央。
English: If you are a son or daughter, your home should not occupy the southwest corner of the room, you should not sit in the middle of the seat, you should not walk in the middle of the road, and you should not stand in the center of the door.

古文：食飨不为概，祭祀不为尸。听于无声，视于无形。
现代文：遇有宴请宾客的事，如何招待，自有家长裁决，不可自作主张；举行祭祀的时候，不可充当受祭之人。
English: If there is a matter of inviting guests to a banquet, how to invite them is up to the parents to decide, and they must not make their own suggestions; when holding a religious service, they must not act as the recipient of the sacrifice.

古文：不登高，不临深。
现代文：要时刻留心父母旨意，在父母还没做出动作前就知道父母的意思。
English: Always pay attention to what your parents want, and know what they mean before they make a move.

古文：不茍訾，不茍笑。
现代文：不要登高，不要临深。
English: Don't go high, don't go low.

古文：孝子不服暗，不登危，惧辱亲也。
现代文：不随便诋毁他人，不随便嬉笑。孝子不在冥暗之中做事，不行险以侥幸，怕给双亲带来不善教子的恶名。
English: Do not casually slander others, do not casually laugh. Filial sons do not do things in the dark, do not take chances with luck, for fear of bringing a bad name of a bad godson to their parents.

古文：父母存，不许友以死。不有私财。
现代文：双亲健在，不应承诺为朋友报仇、卖命，也不应有私财。
English: If your parents are still alive, you should not promise to take revenge for your friends, work for a living, or have private money.

古文：为人子者：父母存，冠衣不纯素。
现代文：做儿女的，如果父母还健在，戴的帽，穿的衣服上不可用白色镶边。
English: Sons and daughters, if their parents are still alive, should not wear hats or clothes with white trim.

古文：孤子当室，冠衣不纯采。
现代文：主持家事的孤子，戴的帽，穿的衣服，不能用彩色镶边。
English: The orphan who presides over the housework, the hat he wears, the clothes he wears, cannot be trimmed with color.

古文：幼子常视毋诳，童子不衣裘裳。
现代文：切记不可给儿童做出说谎话的榜样。儿童不宜穿皮衣和裙子。
English: Remember not to set an example of lying to children. Children should not wear fur coats and skirts.

古文：立必正方。不倾听。
现代文：儿童站立的时候必须保持端正的姿势，不得作出偏头听人讲话的样子。
English: When children are standing, they must maintain a proper posture and must not look like they are listening to someone speak.

古文：长者与之提携，则两手奉长者之手。
现代文：如果长辈要拉着儿童的手走路，儿童就应双手捧着长辈的手。
English: If an elder is to walk holding a child's hand, the child should hold the elder's hand with both hands.

古文：负剑辟咡诏之，则掩口而对。
现代文：长辈俯下身来在耳边说话，小儿也应该掩口回答。
English: Elders should lean down to speak in their ear, and children should also cover their mouths to answer.

古文：从于先生，不越路而与人言。
现代文：跟随先生走路，不要随便越过道路与别人说话。
English: Walk with your teacher and don't just cross the road to talk to people.

古文：遭先生于道，趋而进，正立拱手。
现代文：在路上碰见先生，要快步上前，正立拱手见礼。
English: If you meet a gentleman on the road, you should quickly step forward, stand up straight and bow.

古文：先生与之言则对；不与之言则趋而退。
现代文：先生和自己讲话，就配合着回答；先生不与自己讲话，就快步退下。
English: If the teacher is talking to himself, he answers in unison; if the teacher is not talking to himself, he quickly retreats.

古文：从长者而上丘陵，则必向长者所视。
现代文：跟随长者登上较高的山坡时，一定要朝着长者所看的方向看去。
English: When following an elder up a high hill, be sure to look in the direction the elder is looking.

古文：登城不指，城上不呼。
现代文：登上城墙，不要随意指示方向，不要大呼小叫，以免使大家迷惑或受到惊吓。
English: When climbing the wall, do not point in any direction, do not shout, so as not to confuse or frighten people.

古文：将适舍，求毋固。
现代文：将要到别人家去，凡事当求合理，不可失之粗野。
English: will have to go to someone else's house, everything should be reasonable, not to lose the rough.

古文：将上堂，声必扬。
现代文：将要进入人家的堂室，一定要发出较大的声响。
English: If you are going to enter someone's living room, make sure you make a lot of noise.

古文：户外有二屦，言闻则入，言不闻则不入。
现代文：看到门外放着两双鞋子，能听到室内人说话的声音，是可以进去的；倘若不能听到室内人说话的声音，就不要进去了。
English: If you see two pairs of shoes outside the door and can hear people talking inside, you can go in; if you can't hear people talking inside, don't go in.

古文：将入户，视必下。
现代文：即将进门的时候，目光一定要向下。
English: When you are about to enter the door, you must look down.

古文：入户奉扃，视瞻毋回；户开亦开，户阖亦阖；有后入者，阖而勿遂。
现代文：进门以后要神情肃敬，不要东张西望。如果门本来是开着的，就让它仍旧开着；如果门本来是关着的，仍然让它关着。
English: After entering the door, you should look solemn and not look around. If the door is originally open, let it still be open; if the door is originally closed, let it still be closed.

古文：毋践屦，毋踖席，抠衣趋隅。
现代文：将入席位，不要跨越坐席，应提起裙子的下摆走向席位下角。
English: Will enter the seat, do not cross the seat, should lift the hem of the skirt to the bottom corner of the seat.

古文：必慎唯诺。
现代文：坐定之后，要谨慎地应对。
English: After sitting down, you should respond cautiously.

古文：大夫士出入君门，由闑右，不践阈。
现代文：大夫、士进出国君的大门，应由门橛的右边走，也不得践踏门坎。
English: Doctors and clerks entering and leaving the gate of the Kokujin should walk on the right side of the lintel, and should not step on the kerb.

古文：凡与客入者，每门让于客。
现代文：凡和客人一道进门，每到一个门口主人都要让客人先进。
English: Whoever enters the door with the guest, the host must let the guest go first at every door.

古文：客至于寝门，则主人请入为席，然后出迎客。客固辞，主人肃客而入。
现代文：客人走到寝室门口，主人要请客人稍等，而自己先进去铺好席位，然后再出来迎接客人，主人请客先入，客人要推辞两次，主人这才引导客人入室。
English: The guest walks to the door of the bedroom, the host asks the guest to wait a moment, and he goes first to prepare the seat, and then comes out to greet the guest. The host asks the guest to enter first, the guest has to decline twice, and the host then guides the guest into the room.

古文：主人入门而右，客入门而左。
现代文：主人进门后向右走，客人入门后向左走，主人走向东阶，客人走向西阶。
English: The host walks to the right after entering the door, the guest walks to the left after entering the door, the host walks to the east step, and the guest walks to the west step.

古文：主人就东阶，客就西阶，客若降等，则就主人之阶。主人固辞，然后客复就西阶。
现代文：如果客人身份较主人卑下，就应随主人走向东阶，要等主人一再谦让，然后客人才又拐回西阶。
English: If the status of the guest is lower than that of the host, the guest should follow the host to the east step, and wait for the host to make repeated concessions before the guest returns to the west step.

古文：主人与客让登，主人先登，客从之，拾级聚足，连步以上。上于东阶则先右足，上于西阶则先左足。
现代文：到了阶前，主客又互相谦让谁先登阶。谦让的结果主人先登，客人跟着，主人登上一阶，客人跟着登上一阶，每阶都是先举一足，而后举另一足与前足并拢，如此这般地一步接着一步地上去。上东阶的主人应先举右足，上西阶的客人应先举左足。
English: When it comes to the steps, the host and the guest bow to each other to see who can climb the steps first. The result of bowing is that the host climbs first, the guest follows, the host climbs up one step, the guest follows the guest up one step, each step is to lift one foot first, and then lift the other foot to be close to the front foot, and so on. The host of the upper east step should lift the right foot first, and the guest of the upper west step should lift the left foot first.

古文：帷薄之外不趋，堂上不趋，执玉不趋。
现代文：在离帷帘遮挡较远的地方不要快步走，堂上不要快步走，手中拿着玉器时也不要快步走。
English: Do not walk briskly in places that are far away from the curtains, do not walk briskly in the hall, and do not walk briskly when holding the jade in your hands.

古文：堂上接武，堂下布武。室中不翔，并坐不横肱。
现代文：堂上走路要用小碎步，堂下走路可以用大步，室内走路不可张开两臂。和别人坐在一起不可横起胳膊。
English: Walk up the hall with small steps, walk down the hall with large steps, walk indoors with your arms outstretched. Do not sit with others with your arms outstretched.

古文：授立不跪，授坐不立。
现代文：把东西交给站着的人则自己不应跪，把东西交给坐着的人则自己不应立。
English: If you give something to someone who is standing, you should not kneel, and if you give something to someone who is sitting, you should not stand.

古文：凡为长者粪之礼，必加帚于箕上，以袂拘而退；其尘不及长者，以箕自乡而扱之。
现代文：凡是为长者扫除席前之礼，一定要用扫帚遮住畚箕。扫的时候要一手持帚扫地，一手举起衣袖遮住扫帚，边扫边退，这样就不会使灰尘飞扬，污及长者。撮垃圾时，要使畚箕朝向自己。
English: When sweeping, you should sweep the floor with a broom in one hand, cover the broom with your sleeve in the other hand, and step back while sweeping, so that the dust does not fly and contaminate the elderly. When picking up garbage, you should keep the broom facing you.

古文：奉席如桥衡，请席何乡，请衽何趾。
现代文：双手捧席要横着，像井上桔槔那样左端昂起右端低垂。为尊者铺设坐席，要问面向何方；为尊者铺设卧席，要问脚朝何方。
English: Holding the seat with both hands should be done horizontally, with the left end raised and the right end hanging low, like the Inoue mandarin orange. If you are laying a seat for His Holiness, you should ask which way it faces; if you are laying a couch for His Holiness, you should ask which way his feet face.

古文：席：南乡北乡，以西方为上；东乡西乡，以南方为上。
现代文：席是南北方向铺设的，以西方为尊位；东西方向铺设的，以南方为尊位。
English: The seat is laid in the north-south direction, with the west as the place of honor; laid in the east-west direction, with the south as the place of honor.

古文：若非饮食之客，则布席，席间函丈。
现代文：若不是请来吃饭的客人，席要散开些，一般说来，席与席之间要有一丈的距离。
English: If you are not inviting guests to dinner, the table should be spread out. Generally speaking, there should be a certain distance between the table and the table.

古文：主人跪正席，客跪抚席而辞。
现代文：当主人跪着为客人整理席位时，客人也要跪着并且按住席子说不敢当。
English: When the host kneels to arrange the seats for the guests, the guests should also kneel and hold down the seat.

古文：客彻重席，主人固辞。
现代文：客人提出要撤去重叠的席子时，主人要一再地表示辞让阻止。
English: When the guest proposes to remove the overlapping mats, the host should repeatedly express his refusal.

古文：客践席，乃坐。
现代文：客人就席之后，主人才能坐下。
English: After the guests are seated, the host can sit down.

古文：主人不问，客不先举。
现代文：主人如果不问话，客人不可率先说话。
English: If the host does not ask questions, the guest should not speak first.

古文：将即席，容毋怍。
现代文：将就席，要仪容庄重，不可有失常态。
English: Will be seated, to look solemn, must not have abnormalities.

古文：两手抠衣去齐尺。衣毋拨，足毋蹶。
现代文：两手提起衣裳的下缉，使下缉离地一尺左右，这样才不致于脚踩着衣裳。不要掀动上衣。
English: Lift the hem of the dress with both hands, so that the hem is about a foot off the ground, so that you do not step on the dress. Do not lift the blouse.

古文：先生书策琴瑟在前，坐而迁之，戒勿越。
现代文：迈步不要慌里慌张，以免脚下有失。如果在当行的路前放有先生的书册琴瑟，就要跪下来把它们移开，千万不可从上面跨越过去。
English: Don't panic when you walk, so that you don't lose your footing. If there is a teacher's book in front of the current path, you must kneel down and remove it, and you must not cross it from above.

古文：虚坐尽后，食坐尽前。
现代文：不是饮食之座，应尽量往后坐；饮食之座，则要尽量靠前。
English: If it is not a dining seat, you should sit as far back as possible; if it is a dining seat, you should sit as far forward as possible.

古文：坐必安，执尔颜。
现代文：坐要安稳，始终保持自然的神态。
English: Sit comfortably and maintain a natural posture at all times.

古文：长者不及，毋儳言。
现代文：长者没有提及的事，不要随便插嘴打断。
English: Don't interrupt what the elder is not saying.

古文：正尔容，听必恭。
现代文：要神情端庄，恭恭敬敬地听先生讲话。
English: You should look dignified and listen respectfully to your teacher's speech.

古文：毋剿说，毋雷同。
现代文：不可把别人的见解说成是自己的见解，不可没有主见，人云亦云。
English: Do not present the opinions of others as if they were your own, do not have your own opinions, and do not be swayed by others.

古文：必则古昔，称先王。
现代文：说话一定要以历史事实为根据，也可引述先王之言为根据。
English: The speech must be based on historical facts, and can also be based on the words of the former king.

古文：侍坐于先生：先生问焉，终则对。
现代文：在先生身边陪坐，先生问到自己，要等到他的问话终了再回答。
English: Sitting next to him, he asked himself if he should wait until his questions were over before answering.

古文：请业则起，请益则起。
现代文：向先生请教书本中的问题，要起立；请先生把不明白的地方再讲一遍，也要起立。
English: If you want to ask your teacher a question from the book, you should stand up; if you want your teacher to repeat something you don't understand, you should also stand up.

古文：父召无诺，先生召无诺，唯而起。
现代文：父亲召唤时，不可用 诺 来答应；先生召唤时，也不可用 诺 来答应；应该用 唯 来回答，同时起立。
English: When your father calls, you must not answer with a promise; when your teacher calls, you must not answer with a promise; you must answer with a vow and stand up at the same time.

古文：侍坐于所尊敬，毋余席。
现代文：在所尊敬的人身边陪坐，要尽量靠近，不要使自己的席端留有余地。
English: When you sit next to someone you respect, try to get as close as possible, and don't leave room at the end of your seat.

古文：见同等不起。
现代文：见到同辈的人来，可不起立。
English: When I see my peers coming, I can't stand up.

古文：烛至起，食至起，上客起。
现代文：见到执掌火炬的人来，要起立。
English: When you see the torchbearer coming, stand up.

古文：烛不见跋。
现代文：见到端饭的人来，要起立。
English: Stand up when you see the server coming.

古文：尊客之前不叱狗。
现代文：见到主人的贵客来，要起立。
English: When you see your host's guest coming, stand up.

古文：让食不唾。侍坐于君子，君子欠伸，撰杖屦，视日蚤莫，侍坐者请出矣。
现代文：晚上座谈，不可使客人发现有许多火炬柄，否则，客人将误会为主人不欲留客久坐。
English: In the evening discussion, do not let the guests find that there are many torch handles, otherwise, the guests will misunderstand that the host does not want to keep the guests sitting for a long time.

古文：侍坐于君子，君子问更端，则起而对。
现代文：在贵客面前不得大声喝斥狗。主人请客人进食时，客人不可吐口水。
English: Dogs must not be loudly scolded in front of guests. When the host invites guests to eat, guests must not spit.

古文：侍坐于君子，若有告者曰，愿有复也；则左右屏而待。
现代文：在君子身旁陪坐，如果看到君子打哈欠伸懒腰，或是准备拿起手杖和穿鞋，或是据太阳的位置看时间的早晚，陪坐者就该主动告退了。
English: If you sit next to a gentleman and see him yawning and stretching, or getting ready to pick up his cane and put on his shoes, or looking at the time according to the position of the sun, the sitter should take the initiative to leave.

古文：毋侧听，毋噭应，毋淫视，毋怠荒。
现代文：在君子身旁陪坐，君子如果问及另外的事，陪坐者要起立回答。
English: Sit next to a gentleman. If the gentleman asks about something else, the sitter should stand up and answer.

古文：游毋倨，立毋跛，坐毋箕，寝毋伏。
现代文：在君子身旁陪坐，如果有人进来说： 想借用片刻空闲，有话要讲。 
English: If you sit next to a gentleman and someone comes in and says, "I'd like to borrow a moment of your time, I have something to say.

古文：敛发毋髢，冠毋免，劳毋袒，暑毋褰裳。
现代文：这时候，陪坐者就应暂时避开，在不影响来人说话的地方等待。
English: At this time, the attendant should temporarily avoid the ring and wait in a place that does not affect the person coming to speak.

古文：侍坐于长者，屦不上于堂，解屦不敢当阶。
现代文：不要侧耳探听别人的说话，不要粗声大气地答应，不要转动眼珠斜看，不要做出无精打采的样子。
English: Don't listen to others, don't gruffly agree, don't roll your eyes, don't look listless.

古文：就屦，跪而举之，屏于侧。乡长者而屦；跪而迁屦，俯而纳屦。离坐离立，毋往参焉；离立者，不出中间。
现代文：男女不可同坐在一起，不可共用同一个衣架，不可共用同一面巾和梳子，不可亲手互相递交东西。小叔和嫂嫂不互相问候。
English: Men and women can't sit together, can't share the same clothes hanger, can't share the same face cloth and comb, can't hand things to each other. Uncles and sisters-in-law don't greet each other.

古文：男女不杂坐，不同椸枷，不同巾栉，不亲授。
现代文：不可让庶母洗自己的下身衣裳。男人谈的事情不得让女人知道并干预，女人谈论的事情也不可让男人知道并干预。
English: A stepmother should not be allowed to wash her own undergarments, a woman should not be allowed to know or interfere in what a man is talking about, and a man should not be allowed to know or interfere in what a woman is talking about.

古文：嫂叔不通问，诸母不漱裳。
现代文：街谈巷议不得带入闺房；妇女在闺房所讲的话也不得拿到外边宣扬。
English: Street gossip may not be brought into the boudoir; what women say in the boudoir may not be taken outside and publicized.

古文：外言不入于梱，内言不出于梱。女子许嫁，缨；非有大故，不入其门。
现代文：女子订婚之后，就要头上佩戴彩带，表示已经有主了。没有大事，不得进入其居室之门。
English: After a woman is engaged, she must wear a colored ribbon on her head, indicating that she is married. No big deal, not allowed to enter the door of her room.

古文：姑姊妹女子子，已嫁而反，兄弟弗与同席而坐，弗与同器而食。
现代文：姑母、姐妹、自己的女儿，出嫁以后回到娘家，兄弟不可与之同席而坐，不可与之共用同一器皿进食。
English: When an aunt, a sister, or one's own daughter returns to her mother's house after marriage, a brother may not sit at the same table with her, nor may he eat from the same dish with her.

古文：父子不同席。
现代文：父子不可同席而坐。
English: Father and son may not sit at the same table.

古文：男女非有行媒，不相知名；非受币，不交不亲。
现代文：男女之间，如果没有媒人往来提亲，就不知道对方的名字；如果女方还没有接受财礼，双方就不会有交往，更不会关系亲密。
English: Between a man and a woman, if there is no matchmaker, the name of the other party will not be known; if the woman has not accepted the financial gift, there will be no interaction between the two parties, let alone intimacy.

古文：故日月以告君，齐戒以告鬼神，为酒食以召乡党僚友，以厚其别也。
现代文：因此，结婚的年月日要向官方登记，还要斋戒禀告祖先，还要置办酒席邀请乡邻、同事、朋友，如此郑重其事，就是为了强调男女之别。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to officially register the date of the wedding, to fast and tell the ancestors, and to hold a banquet to invite neighbors, colleagues, and friends, so solemnly, in order to emphasize the difference between men and women.

古文：取妻不取同姓；故买妾不知其姓则卜之。
现代文：娶妻不得取同姓女子，所以买妾不知她的本姓，就得通过占卜决定可否。
English: A man is not allowed to marry a woman with the same surname, so if he wants to buy a concubine without knowing her real surname, he has to decide whether to do so through divination.

古文：寡妇之子，非有见焉，弗与为友。
现代文：寡妇的儿子，除非表现出具有卓异的才能，不得和他交朋友。
English: A widow's son, unless he shows great ability, is not to be befriended.

古文：贺取妻者，曰： 某子使某闻子有客，使某羞。 
现代文：祝贺娶妻者，如果祝贺者本人不在场，其所派使者应当这样说： 是某君派我来的，某君听说您要宴请宾客，特派我来进献一点酒食。 
English: When congratulating a man on his marriage, if the person congratulating him is not present, the messenger sent by him should say something like this: A certain gentleman sent me; a certain gentleman heard that you were going to hold a banquet, and sent me specially to bring some food and drink.

古文：贫者不以货财为礼，老者不以筋力为礼。
现代文：对于贫穷的人，就不必苛求他非要以货财为礼了；对于年老的人，就不必苛求他非要以体力为礼了。
English: For the poor, there is no need to urge him to take wealth as a gift; for the elderly, there is no need to urge him to take physical strength as a gift.

古文：名子者不以国，不以日月，不以隐疾，不以山川。
现代文：替小孩取名，不要用国名，也不要用日月之名，不要用身上暗疾之名，也不要用山川之名。
English: When naming a child, don't use the name of a country, don't use the name of the sun or moon, don't use the name of a hidden illness, and don't use the name of a mountain or river.

古文：男女异长。男子二十，冠而字。父前，子名；君前，臣名。
现代文：有长男有次男，有长女有次女，兄弟和姐妹的排行应予以分开，男子到了二十岁，举行过冠礼，就得敬重他的大名，不好随便叫唤，因此要另取个 字 。不过，在父母和国君面前，仍须称名。
English: If there is an eldest son, there is a second son, if there is an eldest daughter, there is a second daughter. The ranking of brothers and sisters should be separated. When a man reaches the age of twenty and has been crowned, he must respect his daimyo. It is not good to call him randomly, so he must choose another name. However, he must still be named in front of his parents and the sovereign.

古文：女子许嫁，笄而字。凡进食之礼，左殽右胾，食居人之左，羹居人之右。
现代文：女子到了可以订婚的时候，要用簪盘起头发，亦不宜随便唤名，得另取个 字 。
English: When it is time for a woman to be engaged, she should wear her hair up in a bun. It is also not appropriate to call her by any name. She should choose a different name.

古文：脍炙处外，醯酱处内，葱渫处末，酒浆处右。
现代文：如果还要摆设干肉，则弯曲的在左，挺直的在右。
English: If you also want to display dried meat, then the curved one is on the left, and the straight one is on the right.

古文：以脯脩置者，左朐右末。客若降等执食兴辞，主人兴辞于客，然后客坐。
现代文：如果客人的身份较主人卑下，就应端着饭碗起立，说自己不敢当此席位，这时主人就要起身劝说客人不要客气，然后客人才又落座。
English: If the status of the guest is lower than that of the host, he should stand up with the rice bowl and say that he does not dare to be this seat. At this time, the host should get up and persuade the guest to be polite, and then the guest should sit down again.

古文：主人延客祭：祭食，祭所先进。殽之序，遍祭之。
现代文：主人请客人和他一道祭食。祭饭食的方法是，主人先摆上哪一种就先祭哪一种。
English: The host invites the guests to join him in a sacrificial meal. The method of the sacrificial meal is that whichever dish the host puts on first is the first to be offered.

古文：三饭，主人延客食胾，然后辩殽。
现代文：祭肴馔的方法是逐一祭之，祭个遍。吃过三口饭后，主人要请客人吃切好的大块肉，然后请客人遍尝各种肴馔。
English: The method of offering dishes is to offer them one by one. After eating three mouthfuls of the meal, the host should invite the guests to eat large pieces of meat, and then invite the guests to taste all kinds of dishes.

古文：主人未辩，客不虚口。
现代文：如果主人尚未吃完，客人不可漱口表示已经吃饱。
English: If the host has not finished eating, the guest must not rinse his mouth to indicate that he is full.

古文：侍食于长者，主人亲馈，则拜而食；主人不亲馈，则不拜而食。
现代文：陪着长者吃饭，如果主人亲自布菜，要拜谢之后再吃；主人不亲自布菜，就不必拜谢，可以径自动手取食。
English: When dining with an elderly person, if the host prepares the food himself, he should thank the host before eating; if the host does not prepare the food himself, there is no need to thank the host, and the meal can be picked up by hand.

古文：共食不饱，共饭不泽手。
现代文：大伙儿共同吃饭，要注意谦让，不可自顾自己吃饱。大伙儿共同吃饭，要注意手的清洁。
English: When eating together, everyone should be courteous and not allow themselves to eat too much. When eating together, everyone should keep their hands clean.

古文：毋抟饭，毋放饭，毋流歠，毋咤食，毋啮骨，毋反鱼肉，毋投与狗骨。毋固获，毋扬饭。饭黍毋以箸。毋嚃羹，毋絮羹，毋刺齿，毋歠醢。客絮羹，主人辞不能亨。
现代文：不要把饭搓成团，不要把多取的饭再放回食器，不要大口喝，以免满口汁液外流，不要吃得啧啧作响，不要啃骨头，以免弄出声响，不要把咬过的鱼肉再放回食器，不要把骨头扔给狗，不要争抢着吃好吃的东西，不要为了贪快而扬去饭中的热气，吃黍米饭不要用筷子，羹汤中的菜要经过咀嚼，不可大口囫囵吞下，不要当着主人的面调和羹汤。不要当众剔牙，不要喝肉酱。客人如果调和羹汤，主人就要道歉，说不会烹饪。
English: Don't scoop the rice into a ball, don't put the extra rice back into the tableware, don't take a big gulp to avoid a mouthful of juice flowing out, don't eat loudly, don't gnaw the bones to avoid making a noise, don't put the bitten fish meat back into the tableware, don't throw the bones to the dog, don't scramble to eat delicious things, don't get the heat in the meal for greed, don't eat glutinous rice, don't use chopsticks, the vegetables in the soup should be chewed, not swallowed with a big mouth, don't mix

古文：客歠醢，主人辞以窭。濡肉齿决，干肉不齿决。
现代文：客人如果喝肉酱，主人就要道歉，说由于家贫以至于备办的食物不够吃。
English: If a guest drinks meat sauce, the host has to apologize, saying that because of the family's poverty, the prepared food is not enough to eat.

古文：毋嘬炙。卒食，客自前跪，彻饭齐以授相者，主人兴辞于客，然后客坐。
现代文：湿软的肉可以用齿咬断，干硬的肉不可以用齿咬断，就须用手擘而食之。吃烤肉不要一口吞下一大块。食毕，客人要从前面跪着收拾盛饭菜的食器并交给在旁服务的人，这时主人要连忙起身，说不敢劳动客人，然后客人再坐下。
English: Wet and soft meat can be chewed with the teeth, dry and hard meat cannot be chewed with the teeth, it must be eaten with the hands. When eating grilled meat, do not swallow a large piece. After eating, the guest should kneel in front of the table to collect the dishes and hand them to the person serving next to him. At this time, the host should quickly get up and say that he does not dare to work for the guest, and then the guest should sit down again.

古文：侍饮于长者，酒进则起，拜受于尊所。
现代文：陪伴长者饮酒，看见长者将给自己斟酒就要赶快起立，走到放酒樽的地方拜受。
English: If you are drinking alcohol with an elderly person and you see that the elderly person is about to pour himself a drink, you should get up quickly and go to the place where the wine barrels are kept.

古文：长者辞，少者反席而饮。
现代文：长者说不要如此客气，然后少者才回到自己的席位准备喝酒。
English: The older man said, "Don't be so polite," and the younger man went back to his seat to drink.

古文：长者举未釂，少者不敢饮。
现代文：长者尚未举杯饮尽，少者不敢饮。
English: The elderly have not yet raised a glass to drink, and the young dare not drink.

古文：长者赐，少者、贱者不敢辞。
现代文：长者有所赐，作晚辈的、作僮仆的不得辞让不受。
English: Elders have gifts, but those who are juniors and servants should not be refused.

古文：赐果于君前，其有核者怀其核。
现代文：国君当面赐食水果，有核的要把核藏在怀里，不可以吐在地上。
English: The sovereign should eat fruit in front of others, and those who have nukes should hide them in their arms and not spit them on the ground.

古文：御食于君，君赐余，器之溉者不写，其余皆写。
现代文：伺候国君吃饭，国君赐以剩余之食，这时就要看盛食之器是否可以洗涤。
English: When serving dinner to the sovereign, and the sovereign gives the remaining food, it is necessary to see if the food container can be washed.

古文：馂余不祭。父不祭子，夫不祭妻。
现代文：若是可以洗涤的食器，则就原器取食，不必倒入另外的器皿；若是不可以洗涤的食器，就要统统倒入另外的器皿取食。
English: If the dishes can be washed, then take the food with the original utensils and do not need to pour it into another utensil; if the dishes cannot be washed, then they must all be poured into another utensil to take the food.

古文：御同于长者，虽贰不辞，偶坐不辞。
现代文：这是害怕弄脏了国君的食器。吃剩余之食不须行祭食之礼。父亲吃儿子剩余之食，丈夫吃妻子剩余之食，也都不祭。
English: This is the fear of dirtying the tableware of the sovereign. There is no need to offer a sacrifice when eating leftover food. A father does not offer a sacrifice when he eats leftover food from his son, nor does a husband when he eats leftover food from his wife.

古文：羹之有菜者用梜，其无菜者不用梜。
现代文：陪同长者参加宴会，如果主人厚待少者如同长者一样，少者不用说客气话。
English: Accompany the elderly to the banquet. If the host treats the young as well as the elderly, the young do not have to be polite.

古文：为天子削瓜者副之，巾以絺。
现代文：作为宴席上的陪客，也不用说客气话。
English: As a guest at a banquet, you don't have to be polite.

古文：为国君者华之，巾以绤。
现代文：汤里如果有菜，就要用筷子来夹；如果没有，则不用筷子，只用汤匙。
English: If there is food in the soup, you need to use chopsticks to hold it; if not, you don't need chopsticks, just a spoon.

古文：为大夫累之，士疐之，庶人龁之。
现代文：为天子削瓜，先削去皮，再切成四瓣，拦腰横切一刀，然后用细葛布盖上。
English: Peel the melon and cut it into four pieces. Slice it crosswise with a knife, and then cover it with a fine-gauze cloth.

古文：父母有疾，冠者不栉，行不翔，言不惰，琴瑟不御，食肉不至变味，饮酒不至变貌，笑不至矧，怒不至詈。
现代文：为国君削瓜，先削去皮，再一分为二，也拦腰横切一刀，然后用粗葛布盖上。为大夫削瓜，只要削去皮即可，不盖任何东西。
English: To peel a melon for a king, first peel it, then cut it in half, also cut it in half crosswise with a knife, and then cover it with a thick cloth. To peel a melon for a doctor, just peel it, it doesn't cover anything.

古文：疾止复故。有忧者侧席而坐，有丧者专席而坐。
现代文：父母有病的人要独席而坐，父母去世不久的人只坐单层的席子。
English: People whose parents are ill should sit alone, and those whose parents have recently died should only sit on a single-tier seat.

古文：水潦降，不献鱼鳖，献鸟者拂其首，畜鸟者则勿拂也。
现代文：路上积水下降，不须以鱼鳖献人。凡献野鸟要扭转其首以防其啄人，献家禽则不须如此。
English: It is not necessary to sacrifice a person with a fish hook if the water level drops on the road. If you offer a wild bird, you should twist its head to prevent it from biting you, but this is not necessary for poultry.

古文：献车马者执策绥，献甲者执胄，献杖者执末。
现代文：献车马的人，只要呈上马鞭和登车索就可以了，献铠甲的人，只要呈上头盔就行了。献手杖者，要自己手执杖的末端。
English: For those who offer a chariot or horse, it is enough to present a whip and a rope. For those who offer armor, it is enough to present a helmet. For those who offer a cane, they should hold the end of the cane in their hands.

古文：献民虏者操右袂。
现代文：献俘虏的时候要抓紧他的右臂。
English: When offering a captive, grasp his right arm tightly.

古文：献粟者执右契，献米者操量鼓。
现代文：献粱、稻一类谷物者，只要呈上可以兑取的证券就行了。献米的人，可以呈上量米的容器。
English: For those who donate grain such as oats and rice, they only need to present a redeemable certificate. For those who donate rice, they can present a container for measuring rice.

古文：献孰食者操酱齐。
现代文：献熟食的人，要先送上酱类和切碎的腌菜。
English: Those who offer cooked food should first offer sauces and chopped leeks.

古文：献田宅者操书致。
现代文：献田地房产的人，只要呈上田契房契即可。
English: For those who donate farmland real estate, they only need to present their farmland deed.

古文：凡遗人弓者：张弓尚筋，弛弓尚角。右手执箫，左手承弣。
现代文：凡是送人弓的，如果弓弦己经张紧，就要弓弦向上，如果弓弦尚未张紧，就要弓背向上，同时右手拿着弓的一头，左手托着弓背的中部。
English: When giving a bow to someone, if the string of the bow has been tightened, the string of the bow should be up. If the string of the bow has not been tightened, the back of the bow should be up. At the same time, hold the end of the bow in your right hand and the middle of the back of the bow in your left hand.

古文：尊卑垂帨。
现代文：授受双方彼此鞠躬为礼。
English: Both parties bowed to each other.

古文：若主人拜，则客还辟，辟拜。
现代文：如果主人下拜，客人要退避，避开主人的拜，表示不敢当。
English: If the host bows, the guest should back away, avoid the host's bow, and show that he does not dare.

古文：主人自受，由客之左接下承弣；乡与客并，然后受。
现代文：如果是主人自己接受弓，就要从客人左手方接住弓背的中部，用右手接住弓的下头，与客人面朝同一方向并排而立，然后接过弓来。
English: If the host accepts the bow himself, he should take the middle of the back of the bow from the left hand of the guest, take the lower end of the bow with his right hand, stand side by side with the guest facing the same direction, and then take the bow.

古文：进剑者左首。
现代文：送别人剑，要剑柄向右。
English: When giving someone a sword, the hilt should be turned to the right.

古文：进戈者前其鐏，后其刃。
现代文：送别人戈，要以戈柄朝前，戈刃向后。
English: When giving someone a goad, the goad handle should be facing forward and the goad blade should be facing backwards.

古文：进矛戟者前其镦。
现代文：送别人矛或戟，也要以柄向前。
English: If you give a spear or javelin to someone, you should also move forward with the handle.

古文：进几杖者拂之。
现代文：送人几案和手杖，要擦拭干净。
English: Send people a few cases and a cane, to wipe clean.

古文：效马效羊者右牵之；效犬者左牵之。
现代文：献马献羊要用右手牵着。献犬则用左手牵着。
English: The offering horse and sheep should be led with the right hand. The offering dog should be led with the left hand.

古文：执禽者左首。
现代文：以鸟送人，要鸟头向左。
English: To send someone away with a bird, the bird's head should be turned to the left.

古文：饰羔雁者以缋。
现代文：以羊羔和雁送人，要在羊羔和雁身上蒙上彩色画布。
English: If you give someone a lamb and a goose, you should cover the lamb and the goose with a colorful canvas.

古文：受珠玉者以掬。
现代文：接受珠玉，要用双手捧着。
English: To receive a jewel, you should hold it with both hands.

古文：受弓剑者以袂。
现代文：接受弓剑，要用衣袖承接。
English: If you accept a bow and sword, you should accept it with your sleeve.

古文：饮玉爵者弗挥。
现代文：用玉杯饮酒，不要挥扬，以免失手打破。
English: When drinking from a jade cup, don't wave it around to avoid accidentally breaking it.

古文：凡以弓剑、苞苴、箪笥问人者，操以受命，如使之容。凡为君使者，已受命，君言不宿于家。
现代文：凡是被尊者派去赠送弓剑、苞苴、箪笥的人，在捧起这些礼物接受使命时，其仪态要像是臣受君命出聘他国那样。
English: Anyone who is sent by His Holiness to present a bow, sword, scepter, or halberd, when receiving the mission with these gifts in hand, should have the appearance of a vassal who has been ordered by the sovereign to go to another country.

古文：君言至，则主人出拜君言之辱；使者归，则必拜送于门外。
现代文：凡是被国君派作使臣的人，接到使命之后就不得在家逗留，要立刻出发。传达国君命令的使者来到，主人就要穿上朝服在门外拜迎使者，并说有劳尊驾。
English: Anyone who is sent by the sovereign as an envoy must not stay at home after receiving the mission, but must leave immediately. When the messenger who conveys the sovereign's order arrives, the master must put on the imperial robe and greet the messenger outside the door, and say that it is a great honor to work for him.

古文：若使人于君所，则必朝服而命之；使者反，则必下堂而受命。
现代文：使者回去时，还要到门外拜送。如果派人到国君那里去，就得像亲自朝见国君那样，先穿上朝服再派遣使者。使者从国君那里回来，一定要下堂迎接使者带来的君命。
English: When an envoy returns, he must be escorted outside the gate. If you send someone to the sovereign, you must first put on the imperial robe and then send the envoy, just as if you were meeting the sovereign in person. When the envoy returns from the sovereign, you must go down to the hall to receive the royal command brought by the envoy.

古文：博闻强识而让，敦善行而不怠，谓之君子。
现代文：博闻强记而能谦让，乐于作善事而不懈怠，这样的人就叫做君子。
English: A person who is well-informed, has a strong sense of humor, and is willing to do good deeds without slacking off is called a gentleman.

古文：君子不尽人之欢，不竭人之忠，以全交也。
现代文：君子不要求别人时时事事都说自己好，也不要求别人时时事事都要对得起自己，这样，交情才能始终保持。《礼经》上说： 君子抱孙不抱子。 
English: A gentleman does not require others to say that he is good at all times, nor does he require others to be worthy of him at all times, so that friendship can always be maintained. "Li Jing" said: A gentleman does not hold a grandchild.

古文：《礼》曰：此言孙可以为王父尸，子不可以为父尸。
现代文：这话的意思是，祭祖时，孙子可以充当代表祖父的尸，而儿子则不可。
English: This means that when the ancestor is sacrificed, the grandson can act as the representative of the grandfather's corpse, but the son cannot.

古文：为君尸者，大夫士见之，则下之。
现代文：充当代表已故国君之尸的人，大夫和士遇到他都要下车致敬。
English: When doctors and soldiers meet the person who represents the body of the deceased sovereign, they all get out of the car to pay their respects.

古文：君知所以为尸者，则自下之，尸必式。
现代文：如果国君知道某人是尸，也要下车致敬。而为尸者一定要凭轼答谢。
English: If the sovereign knows that someone is a corpse, he will also get out of the car to pay tribute. And the corpse must be thanked with a gong.

古文：乘必以几。
现代文：尸登车时，要用几来垫足。
English: When a corpse boards a train, how many feet should be used to prop it up?

古文：齐者不乐不吊。
现代文：斋戒的人，不可听音乐，也不可到别人家吊丧。
English: Those who are fasting should not listen to music or go to other people's homes to mourn.

古文：居丧之礼，毁瘠不形，视听不衰。升降不由阼阶，出入不当门隧。
现代文：居丧之礼：允许由于悲伤而消瘦，但不至于形销骨立，视力和听力不可衰退，上堂下堂不走家长常走的东阶，出入大门不走门外当门之中道。
English: Funeral etiquette: it is permissible to be thin due to grief, but not so thin as to be emaciated, eyesight and hearing must not decline, do not walk the east steps that parents often walk when going to and from the hall, do not walk outside the door when the door is in the middle of the door.

古文：居丧之礼，头有创则沐，身有疡则浴，有疾则饮酒食肉，疾止复初。
现代文：居丧之礼：头上生了疮，可以洗头；身上长了疮，可以洗澡。生了病，这是特殊情况，可以饮酒吃肉，但病愈之后就要照旧。
English: Funeral etiquette: if you have a sore on your head, you can wash your hair; if you have a sore on your body, you can take a bath. If you are sick, this is a special case, you can drink alcohol and eat meat, but after the illness is over, you must continue as before.

古文：不胜丧，乃比于不慈不孝。
现代文：如果悲伤过度坏了身体而不能承担丧事，那就等于不慈不孝。
English: If the grief has damaged the body too much to be able to bear the bereavement, then it is tantamount to being uncharitable.

古文：五十不致毁，六十不毁，七十唯衰麻在身，饮酒食肉，处于内。
现代文：五十岁的人，允许因悲伤而消瘦，但不可过分。六十岁的人，可以不因为悲伤而消瘦。七十岁的人，只须披麻带孝就行，可以饮酒吃肉，可以住在自己的居室内。
English: A fifty-year-old is allowed to lose weight due to sadness, but not excessively. A sixty-year-old can not lose weight due to sadness. A seventy-year-old only needs to wear a hemp belt, can drink alcohol and eat meat, and can live in his own room.

古文：生与来日，死与往日。知生者吊，知死者伤。
现代文：办丧事的规矩，凡是涉及生者的，如成服和持丧棒，应从死者死之次日开始计算；凡是涉及死者的，如殡敛和埋葬，应从死者死之当天开始计算。
English: The rules for conducting funerals, all of which involve the living, such as clothing and holding a funeral stick, should be calculated from the day after the death of the deceased; all of which involve the dead, such as funerals and burials, should be calculated from the day of the death of the deceased.

古文：知生而不知死，吊而不伤；知死而不知生，伤而不吊。
现代文：如果是与死者家属有交情的，应去慰问死者家属；如果是与死者本人有交情的，应去哀悼葬者。
English: If you have a friendship with the family of the deceased, you should go to console the family of the deceased; if you have a friendship with the deceased himself, you should go to mourn the mourners.

古文：吊丧弗能赙，不问其所费。问疾弗能遗，不问其所欲。见人弗能馆，不问其所舍。
现代文：只与死者家属有交情而与死者本人无交情，就只须慰问而不须哀悼；反过来，则只须哀悼而不须慰问。慰问丧家，如果不能提供财物上的帮助，就不要问办丧事的花费。探视病人，如果不能有什么馈赠，就不要问病人需要什么。见到行人，如果不能留宿，就不要问他住在什么地方。
English: If you only have friendship with the family members of the deceased, but no friendship with the deceased himself, you only need to offer condolences without mourning; on the other hand, you only need to mourn without condolences. If you offer condolences, if you can't provide financial help, don't ask about the cost of the funeral. If you visit the patient, if you can't give anything, don't ask what the patient needs. If you see a pedestrian, if you can't stay, don't ask him where he lives.

古文：赐人者不曰来取。与人者不问其所欲。
现代文：赠人物品，不要叫人来取，而要派人送去，给人东西，不要问人想要与否。
English: If you give someone something, don't ask them to come and get it, but send someone to pick it up. If you give someone something, don't ask if they want it or not.

古文：适墓不登垄，助葬必执绋。
现代文：到墓地去，不要上到坟头上。参加葬礼必须助挽柩车。
English: If you go to the cemetery, don't go to the head of the grave. If you attend a funeral, you must help to pull the hearse.

古文：临丧不笑。
现代文：参加追悼，不可嬉笑。
English: When attending a memorial, do not laugh.

古文：揖人必违其位。
现代文：与人作揖，必须离开原位。
English: If you fight with someone, you must leave the original position.

古文：望柩不歌。
现代文：望见运柩车，不可唱歌。
English: Singing is not allowed within sight of a wagon.

古文：入临不翔。
现代文：进入丧家，走路不要张开两臂。
English: When entering a funeral home, do not walk with your arms wide open.

古文：当食不叹。
现代文：吃饭时不可唉声叹气。
English: Do not sigh when eating.

古文：邻有丧，舂不相。
现代文：邻居有丧事，即使在舂米时也不可喊号子。
English: If a neighbor is in mourning, you should not shout out a call to prayer, even if you are eating rice.

古文：里有殡，不巷歌。
现代文：邻里有停殡待葬的，就不要在街巷中唱歌。
English: If there is a funeral in the neighborhood, don't sing in the streets.

古文：适墓不歌。
现代文：到墓地上，不要唱歌。
English: Go to the cemetery. Don't sing.

古文：哭日不歌。
现代文：吊丧之日，不要唱歌。
English: Don't sing on the day of mourning.

古文：送丧不由径，送葬不辟涂潦。
现代文：护送柩车，不要走小路。挽着柩车，不要只顾自己而避开路上的积水。
English: If you are escorting a tuk-tuk, do not walk on the side of the road. If you are leading a tuk-tuk, do not just take care of yourself and avoid the standing water on the road.

古文：临丧则必有哀色，执绋不笑，临乐不叹；介胄，则有不可犯之色。
现代文：参加追悼一定要有哀伤的表情。助挽柩车时不可嬉笑。听音乐时不可叹气。披上铠甲戴上头盔，就要表现出不可侵犯的神态。
English: To participate in the memorial, you must have a sad expression. You must not laugh when helping to steer the carriage. You must not sigh when listening to music. Put on armor and wear a helmet, you must show an inviolable attitude.

古文：故君子戒慎，不失色于人。
现代文：所以君子小心谨慎，在什么场合就要有什么场合的神态。
English: Therefore, a gentleman should be careful and cautious, and he should have the appropriate appearance for any occasion.

古文：国君抚式，大夫下之。
现代文：遇到国君凭轼行礼时，大夫就要下车示敬。
English: When encountering a sovereign who salutes with a bow, the doctor should get out of the car to show respect.

古文：大夫抚式，士下之。
现代文：遇到大夫凭轼行礼时，士就要下车示敬。
English: When encountering a doctor saluting with a bow, the scholar should get off the train to show respect.

古文：礼不下庶人，刑不上大夫。
现代文：礼制不下及于庶人，刑罚不上及于大夫。
English: The etiquette is not lower than that of commoners, and the punishment is not higher than that of doctors.

古文：刑人不在君侧。
现代文：受过刑罚的人，不宜让他在国君左右。
English: A man who has been punished should not be allowed to be around the sovereign.

古文：兵车不式。
现代文：乘兵车时不须凭轼行礼。
English: It is not necessary to bow when riding in a military vehicle.

古文：武车绥旌，德车结旌。史载笔，士载言。
现代文：天子所乘的武车，旌旗是招展着的，意在宣扬威猛；天子所乘的德车，旌旗是缠在旗竿上的，以示德美于内，不尚赫奕。
English: In the chariot of the son of heaven, the banner is unfurled to proclaim his might; in the chariot of virtue, the banner is wrapped around the flagpole to show that virtue is within, not outside.

古文：前有水，则载青旌。前有尘埃，则载鸣鸢。
现代文：如果国君去参加盟会，随行的史官要负责携带文具，司盟的士要负责准备好有关盟辞。
English: If the sovereign attends the alliance meeting, the accompanying historian should be responsible for carrying stationery, and the taxi driver of the alliance should be responsible for preparing the relevant alliance words.

古文：前有车骑，则载飞鸿。前有士师，则载虎皮。前有挚兽，则载貔貅。行：前朱鸟而后玄武，左青龙而右白虎。
现代文：中军则以北斗七星旗为令旗。
English: The Chinese army used the Big Dipper as its banner.

古文：招摇在上，急缮其怒。
现代文：所以士卒坚劲奋勇，如天帝之威怒。
English: Therefore, the soldiers worked hard and bravely, such as the majesty of the Emperor.

古文：进退有度，左右有局，各司其局。
现代文：前进后退，都有一定的法度。左右两翼，也各有主官负责。
English: There are certain rules for moving forward and backward. The left and right wings also have commanders in charge.

古文：父之雠，弗与共戴天。
现代文：对于杀父的仇人，作儿子的必须与他拚个死活，什么时候杀了他什么时候才算罢休。
English: For the enemy who kills his father, the son must live with him to the death. When to kill him is when to call it quits.

古文：兄弟之雠不反兵。
现代文：对于杀害兄弟的仇人，要随时携带武器，遇见就杀。
English: As for the enemy who kills a brother, you should always carry a weapon and kill him when you meet him.

古文：交游之雠不同国。
现代文：对于杀害朋友的仇人，如果他不逃到别国去，见即杀之。
English: If an enemy who has killed a friend does not flee to another country, he is to be killed on sight.

古文：四郊多垒，此卿大夫之辱也。
现代文：如果国都的四郊筑有许多防御工事，那是卿、大夫的耻辱。
English: If the four suburbs of the national capital have many fortifications, it is a disgrace to the lord and doctor.

古文：地广大，荒而不治，此亦士之辱也。
现代文：土地尽管广大，如果任其荒废而不加治理，也算是地方官长的耻辱。
English: Despite the vastness of the land, if it is allowed to go to waste without being managed, it is a disgrace for local officials.

古文：临祭不惰。
现代文：参加祭祀，不得怠惰。
English: One must not be lazy when participating in religious rites.

古文：祭服敝则焚之，祭器敝则埋之，龟策敝则埋之，牲死则埋之。
现代文：祭服破了要烧掉，祭器破了要埋掉，用于卜筮的龟策破了要埋掉，用于祭祀的牲口死了要埋掉。
English: If the sacrificial garment is torn, it should be burned, if the sacrificial vessel is torn, it should be buried, if the turtle used for divination is torn, it should be buried, and if the animal used for sacrifice is dead, it should be buried.

古文：凡祭于公者，必自彻其俎。
现代文：凡是在国君的庙里助祭的士，祭过神后，都要把应得的一份祭肉自己带回家中。
English: All priests who officiate at the emperor's temple must take home a portion of the sacrificial meat after they have offered it to the gods.

古文：卒哭乃讳。礼，不讳嫌名。
现代文：行过卒哭之祭，就要避免称呼死者之名。
English: If you have been to a memorial service, you should avoid saying the name of the deceased.

古文：二名不偏讳。逮事父母，则讳王父母；不逮事父母，则不讳王父母。
现代文：但据礼的规定，与死者之名读音相同的字可以不避，双字之名只要避其一字即可。如果赶上侍奉父母，就要避讳祖父之名；如果未赶上侍奉父母，则可不避讳祖父之名。
English: However, according to the rules of etiquette, it is not necessary to avoid the letter that has the same pronunciation as the name of the deceased, and the double-character name can be avoided as long as it is one word. If you catch up with the serving parents, you should avoid the name of the grandfather; if you do not catch up with the serving parents, you can not avoid the name of the grandfather.

古文：君所无私讳，大夫之所有公讳。
现代文：在国君面前不避家讳，在大夫面前则应避国君之讳。
English: In the presence of the sovereign, one should not avoid one's family, but in the presence of a doctor, one should avoid the sovereign.

古文：《诗》、《书》不讳，临文不讳。庙中不讳。
现代文：读《诗经》、《尚书》等经典，不须避讳；写文章，不须避讳；否则将辞不达意，闹出笑话。
English: When reading classics such as "Shijing" and "Shangshu," there is no need to avoid taboos; when writing articles, there is no need to avoid taboos; otherwise, the words will not reach the intention, and jokes will be made.

古文：夫人之讳，虽质君之前，臣不讳也；妇讳不出门。
现代文：庙中的祭文和祝辞，不须避讳。国君夫人的家讳，即令是在和国君对话，臣子也不须避讳。妇人之名讳，仅限于家门之内。
English: There is no need to shy away from the ritual texts and greetings in the temple. The wife of the sovereign does not need to shy away from her family, even if she is in a dialogue with the sovereign, and the vassal does not need to shy away. The name of the woman is limited to within the family.

古文：大功小功不讳。
现代文：对大功、小功的亲属，不须避讳。
English: There is no need to shun relatives who have made great or small contributions.

古文：入竟而问禁，入国而问俗，入门而问讳。
现代文：凡是到了一个新地方，要先打听当地的禁忌；进到城里边，要先打听城里的风俗。进到别人家，要先打听主人的家讳。
English: Whenever you arrive in a new place, you should first inquire about the local taboos; when you enter the city, you should first inquire about the city's customs; when you enter someone else's home, you should first inquire about the owner's home.

古文：外事以刚日，内事以柔日。
现代文：祭祀家外之神要用单数日，祭祀家内之神要用双数日。
English: It is necessary to use single days to worship the gods outside the home, and double days to worship the gods inside the home.

古文：凡卜筮日：旬之外曰远某日，旬之内曰近某日。
现代文：凡用卜筮的办法来择定吉日，本旬以外的日子称作 远某日 ，本旬之内的日子称作 近某日 。
English: When the auspicious day is chosen by divination, the day outside the main season is called the far certain day, and the day within the main season is called the near certain day.

古文：丧事先远日，吉事先近日。
现代文：丧葬等事，应先卜远日；祭享等事，应先卜近日。
English: Funerals and other events should be planned for the future; celebrations and other events should be planned for the near future.

古文：曰： 为日，假尔泰龟有常，假尔泰筮有常。 
现代文：卜时要说： 卜个吉日，借助泰筮判个吉凶，泰筮的灵验是一贯的。 
English: When you make a prediction, you should say: "If you make a prediction of a good day, you can use the Thai yakitori to judge a good or bad day. The Thai yakitori is always effective."

古文：卜筮不过三，卜筮不相袭。
现代文：筮时要说： 筮个吉日，借助泰筮判个吉凶，泰筮的灵验是一贯的。 
English: When casting lots, you should say: "On a lucky day, use the divining rod to judge good and bad luck. The divining rod is always effective."

古文：龟为卜，策为筮，卜筮者，先圣王之所以使民信时日、敬鬼神、畏法令也；所以使民决嫌疑、定犹与也。故曰： 疑而筮之，则弗非也；日而行事，则必践之。 
现代文：不管是用卜或用筮，都不能超过三次。
English: No more than three times, whether it is with a divination or with a trumpet.

古文：君车将驾，则仆执策立于马前。
现代文：国君的乘车将要套马时，仆人应手执马鞭立在马前。
English: When the sovereign's carriage is about to be hitched, the servant should stand in front of the horse, holding the whip in his hand.

古文：已驾，仆展軨、效驾，奋衣由右上取贰绥，跪乘，执策分辔，驱之五步而立。
现代文：马套好之后，仆人要检查车轮有无毛病并且试车。试车时，仆人要首先抖落衣服上的尘土，然后从右边拉着副绥上车，以跪姿乘坐，拿起马鞭，两手分握缰绳，驱车前行五步而止。
English: After the horse has been harnessed, the servant should check the wheels for defects and start the car. When testing the car, the servant should first shake off the dust on the clothes, then pull the second yoke from the right side, get on the car, kneel down, pick up the horse whip, hold the reins with both hands, and drive the car for five steps.

古文：君出就车，则仆并辔授绥。
现代文：国君出来登车时，仆人要一手把缰绳总握，用另一只手将正绥递给国君。
English: When the sovereign comes out to board the carriage, the servant should hold the reins firmly in one hand and hand the saddlecloth to the sovereign with the other hand.

古文：左右攘辟，车驱而驺。
现代文：国君登车之后，侍从们退向路的两边。
English: After the sovereign boarded the carriage, the attendants retreated to either side of the road.

古文：至于大门，君抚仆之手而顾，命车右就车；门闾沟渠，必步。
现代文：车子开动以后，负责警卫的车又急忙跟在车后。车子走到大门口，国君按住仆人的手，示意停车，并回过头来命令车右登车。车子经过城门、里门和沟渠时，车右必须下车步行。
English: After the car started, the car in charge of the guards hurriedly followed the car. When the car reached the gate, the sovereign held the servant's hand, signaled to stop, and turned around to order the car to board on the right. When the car passed the city gate, the inner gate and the ditch, the car on the right had to get off and walk.

古文：凡仆人之礼，必授人绥。
现代文：凡是驾车的仆人，按礼来说，一定要把登车绳递给乘车者。
English: Any driver's servant must, as a matter of etiquette, pass the boarding rope to the passengers.

古文：若仆者降等，则受；不然，则否。
现代文：如果驾车者的身份低于乘车者，乘车者就接受；不然的话，就不能接受。
English: If the status of the driver is lower than that of the passenger, the passenger accepts it; otherwise, it cannot be accepted.

古文：若仆者降等，则抚仆之手；不然，则自下拘之。客车不入大门。
现代文：更具体地说，如果驾车者的身份低于乘车者，乘车者在接受登车绳时，应先用手按住驾车者的手，示意不敢当，然后再接受；如果双方身份相等，就应当从驾车者的手的下方直接取绳。
English: More specifically, if the status of the driver is lower than that of the passenger, when the passenger accepts the boarding rope, he should first hold the driver's hand with his hand, and then accept it; if the status of both parties is equal, he should take the rope directly from the bottom of the driver's hand.

古文：妇人不立乘。
现代文：客人的马车不可驶入主人的大门，这是表示谦虚。
English: It is a mark of modesty that a guest's carriage may not drive into the host's gate.

古文：犬马不上于堂。
现代文：妇女乘车不可站着。犬马不可牵到堂上。
English: Women are not allowed to stand when riding in a car. Dogs and horses are not allowed to be brought into the hall.

古文：故君子式黄髪，下卿位，入国不驰，入里必式。
现代文：君子乘车时，遇到老年人要凭轼致敬，经过卿的朝位要下车示敬，进入城门不可驰骋，进入里门必须凭轼致敬。
English: When a gentleman rides a car, when he encounters an elderly person, he should salute with a gong, and when he passes the throne of a lord, he should get off the car to show respect. He should not gallop into the city gate, but must salute with a gong when entering the inner gate.

古文：君命召，虽贱人，大夫士必自御之。
现代文：国君命人召唤，即使来人的地位低贱，大夫、士也必须亲自出迎，以示尊重君命。
English: When the sovereign summons someone, even if the person comes from a lowly position, doctors and magistrates must greet them in person to show their respect for the sovereign.

古文：介者不拜，为其拜而蓌拜。
现代文：穿铠甲的人不拜，因为著甲而拜有损军容。
English: He who wears armor does not bow down, for he who bows down while wearing armor disgraces the army.

古文：祥车旷左，乘君之乘车不敢旷左；左必式。
现代文：祥车要空着左边的尊位。如果乘国君的从车，可千万不要空着左边的尊位，因为那样就意味着国君去世。
English: If you are riding in the carriage of the sovereign, you must not leave the seat of honor on the left empty, because that would mean the death of the sovereign.

古文：仆御、妇人则进左手，后右手；御国君，则进右手、后左手而俯。国君不乘奇车。
现代文：既然是御者立在左边的尊位，为表示自己的局促不安，所以御者始终作凭轼之姿。为妇人驾车，要伸出左手执辔，右手后缩，这是为了避免嫌疑。为国君驾车，则要伸出右手执辔，左手后缩，朝国君略微俯身，以示敬意。国君不可乘奇邪不正之车。
English: Since it is the driver who stands on the left of the throne, in order to express his cramped anxiety, the driver always makes a crouching posture. For women driving, it is necessary to extend the left hand to hold the handle, and the right hand to shrink back, this is to avoid suspicion. For the sovereign driving, it is necessary to extend the right hand to hold the handle, the left hand to shrink back, and the sovereign slightly bends over to show respect. The sovereign may not ride a strange car.

古文：车上不广欬，不妄指。
现代文：在车上不要大声咳嗽，不要随便指指点点。
English: Don't cough loudly in the car, and don't point.

古文：立视五巂，式视马尾，顾不过毂。
现代文：站着，视线达到车轮转动五周的距离；凭轼行礼时，视线只达到马尾；回头看时，视线不得超过车毂。
English: When standing, the line of sight reaches the distance of five turns of the wheel; when bowing, the line of sight only reaches the horse's tail; when looking back, the line of sight must not exceed the wheel.

古文：国中以策彗恤勿驱。尘不出轨。
现代文：进入国都就改用策彗轻轻搔摩驾车的马，降低车速，使尘土不至于飞扬到车辙之外。
English: When entering the national capital, they will switch to the strategy of gently rubbing the driving horse, reducing the speed, so that the dust will not fly out of the rut.

古文：国君下齐牛，式宗庙。
现代文：国君经过宗庙的门口要下车，遇见供祭祀用的牛要凭轼致敬。
English: When the sovereign passes through the entrance of the ancestral temple, he must get off the train, and when he meets a cow used for sacrifice, he must salute it with a yakitori.

古文：大夫士下公门，式路马。
现代文：大夫、士经过国君的门口要下车，遇见路马要凭轼致敬。
English: Doctors and magistrates passing through the gate of the sovereign should get off the bus, and passers-by should salute with a gong.

古文：乘路马，必朝服载鞭策，不敢授绥，左必式。
现代文：臣子驾驭路马，一定要穿上朝服，虽然带有马鞭，但备而不用，也不敢把登车的引绳递给别人；并且要站在车的左边，必须凭轼致敬。
English: For courtiers to drive a carriage, they must put on the imperial robes, and although they carry a horse whip, they do not use it, and they dare not hand over the rope to others; and they must stand on the left side of the carriage, and must salute with their beaks.

古文：步路马，必中道。
现代文：牵着路马步行，一定要走在道路正中。
English: When walking with a horse, always walk in the middle of the road.

古文：以足蹙路马刍，有诛。齿路马，有诛。
现代文：凡是践踏路马草料者，有罚；估量路马年龄者，有罚。
English: Whoever tramples on the straw of a pony shall be punished; whoever measures the age of a pony shall be punished.

