古文：东山之首，曰樕䘄之山，北临乾昧。
现代文：东方第一列山系之首座山，叫做樕䘄山，北面与乾昧山相邻。
English: The first mountain in the first row of mountains in the east is called Mount Lushan, which is adjacent to Mount Qianmai in the north.

古文：食水出焉，而东北流注于海。
现代文：食水从这座山发源，然后向东北流入大海。
English: Fresh water springs from the mountain and flows northeast into the sea.

古文：其中多鳙鳙之鱼，其状如犁牛，其音如彘鸣。
现代文：水中有很多鳙鳙鱼，形状像犁牛，发出的声音如同猪叫。
English: There are a lot of eels in the water, shaped like snails and making sounds like pigs.

古文：又南三百里，曰藟山，其上有玉，其下有金。
现代文：再往南三百里，有一座藟山，山上有玉，山下有金。
English: Three hundred miles further south, there is a mountain called Lushan, with jade on the top and gold at the bottom.

古文：湖水出焉，东流注于食水，其中多活师。
现代文：湖水从这座山发源，向东流入食水，水中有很多蝌蚪。
English: The water of the lake originates from this mountain and flows eastward into the fresh water. There are many worms in the water.

古文：又南三百里，曰栒状之山，其上多金玉，其下多青碧石。
现代文：再往南三百里，有一座栒状山，山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下有丰富的青石碧玉。
English: Three hundred miles further south, there is a beak-shaped mountain, rich in metal minerals and jade on the mountain, and rich bluestone and jasper under the mountain.

古文：有兽焉，其状如犬，六足，其名曰从从，其鸣自詨。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像一般的狗，却长着六只脚，名称是从从，它发出的叫声便是自身名称的读音。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary dog, but with six legs. It is called a yakitori, and the sound it makes is the pronunciation of its name.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如鸡而鼠毛，其名曰鼠，见则其邑大旱。
现代文：山中有一种禽鸟，形状像普通的鸡却长着老鼠一样的尾巴，名称是鼠，在哪个地方出现那里就会有大旱灾。
English: There is a kind of bird in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary chicken but with a tail like a mouse. Its name is mouse. Wherever it appears, there will be a big drought.

古文：水出焉。而北流注于湖水。
现代文：水从这座山发源，然后向北流入湖水。
English: Water rises from the mountain and then flows north into the lake.

古文：其中多箴鱼，其状如儵，其喙如箴，食之无疫疾。
现代文：水中有很多箴鱼，形状像儵鱼，嘴巴像长针，人吃了它的肉就不会染上瘟疫病。
English: In the water there are a lot of fish, shaped like eels, with a mouth like a long needle. If you eat its meat, you won't catch the plague.

古文：又南三百里，曰勃垒之山，无草木，无水。
现代文：再往南三百里，有一座勃亝山，没有花草树木，也没有水。
English: Three hundred miles further south, there is a Burgundy mountain, with no flowers, trees or water.

古文：又南三百里，曰番条之山，无草木，多沙。
现代文：再往南三百里，有一座番条山，没有花草树木，到处是沙子。
English: Three hundred miles further south, there is a mountain called Fanjiao Mountain. There are no plants or trees, and there is sand everywhere.

古文：减水出焉，北流注于海，其中多鳡鱼。
现代文：减水从这座山发源，向北流入大海，水中有很多鳡鱼。
English: Water flows from the source of this mountain and flows north into the sea. There are a lot of eels in the water.

古文：又南四百里，曰姑儿之山，其上多漆，其下多桑柘。
现代文：再往南四百里，是座姑儿山，山上有茂密的漆树，山下有茂密的桑树、柘树。
English: Four hundred miles further south, there is a mountain called Guer. On the mountain, there are lush sumac trees, and under the mountain, there are lush mulberry and eucalyptus trees.

古文：姑儿之水出焉，北流注于海，其中多鳡鱼。
现代文：姑儿水从这座山发源，向北流入大海，水中有很多鳡鱼。
English: The water from the source of the mountain flows north into the sea, and there are many eels in the water.

古文：又南四百里，曰高氏之山，其上多玉，其下多箴石。
现代文：再往南四百里，有一座高氏山，山上盛产玉石，山下盛产箴石。
English: Four hundred miles to the south, there is a Gao's Mountain. The mountain is rich in jade, and the mountain is rich in stone.

古文：诸绳之水出焉，东流注于泽，其中多金玉。
现代文：诸绳水从这座山发源，向东流入湖泽，水中有许多金属矿物和玉石。
English: From the source of the mountain, the water of the rope flows eastward into the lake, and there are many metal minerals and jade in the water.

古文：又南三百里，曰岳山，其上多桑，其下多樗。
现代文：再往南三百里，有一座岳山，山上有茂密的桑树，山下有茂密的臭椿树。
English: Three hundred miles further south, there is a mountain, with thick mulberry trees on the top and thick camellia trees at the bottom.

古文：泺水出焉，东流注于泽，其中多金玉。
现代文：泺水从这座山发源，向东流入湖泽，水中有许多金属矿物和玉石。
English: Surabaya water flows from the source of this mountain to the east into the lake, and there are many metal minerals and jade in the water.

古文：又南三百里，曰犲山，其上无草木，其下多水，其中多堪㐨之鱼。
现代文：再往南三百里，有一座犲山，山上不生长花草树木，山下到处流水，水中有很多堪鱼。
English: Three hundred miles further south, there is a barren mountain. Flowers and trees do not grow on the mountain, water flows everywhere under the mountain, and there are many fish in the water.

古文：有兽焉，其状如夸父而彘毛，其音如呼，见则天下大水。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像猿猴却长着一身猪毛，发出的声音如同人呼叫，一出现而天下就会发生水灾。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ape but covered in pig hair, which makes a sound like a human call. When it appears, floods will occur all over the world.

古文：又南三百里，曰独山，其上多金玉，其下多美石末涂之水出焉，而东流注于沔，其中多鯈䗤，其状如黄蛇，鱼翼，出入有光，见则其邑大旱。
现代文：再往南三百里，有一座独山，山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下多的是美观漂亮的石头。未涂水从这座山发源，然后向东南流入沔水，水中有很多，形状与黄蛇相似，长着鱼一样的鳍，出入水中时闪闪发光，在哪个地方出现那里就会有大旱灾。
English: Three hundred miles further south, there is a unique mountain. The mountain is rich in metallic minerals and jade, and the lower part of the mountain is mostly beautiful stone. Uncoated water originates from this mountain, and then flows southeast into the Surabaya. There are many in the water, similar in shape to the yellow snake, with gills like fish, shining when entering and exiting the water. Wherever it appears, there will be a major drought.

古文：又南三百里，曰泰山，其上多玉，其下多金。
现代文：再往南三百里，有一座泰山，山上盛产玉，山下盛产金。
English: Three hundred miles further south, there is a mountain called Mount Tai. The top of the mountain is rich in jade and the bottom of the mountain is rich in gold.

古文：有兽焉，其状如豚而有珠，名曰狪狪，其鸣自詨。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状与一般的猪相似而体内却有珠子，名称是狪狪，它发出的叫声便是自身名称的读音。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, the shape of which is similar to that of an ordinary pig, but it has beads in its body. Its name is the baboon, and the cry it emits is the pronunciation of its name.

古文：环水出焉，东流注于江，其中多水玉。
现代文：环水从这座山发源，向东流入汶水，水中有很多水晶石。
English: From the source of this mountain, the ring water flows eastward into the Wen Shui, and there are many crystal stones in the water.

古文：又南三百里，曰竹山，錞于江，无草木，多瑶碧。
现代文：再往南三百里，有一座竹山，座落于汶水边上，这座山没有花草树木，到处是瑶、碧一类的玉石。
English: Three hundred miles further south, there is a bamboo mountain, located on the edge of the Wenchuan River. This mountain has no flowers or trees, and is full of jade such as jade and jasper.

古文：激水出焉，而东流注于娶檀之水，其中多茈羸。
现代文：激水从竹山发源，然后向东南流入娶檀水，水中有很多紫色螺。
English: The rushing water originates from Zhushan, and then flows into the south-east to marry sandalwood. There are many purple snails in the water.

古文：凡东山经之首，自樕鼄之山以至于竹山，凡十二山，三千六百里。
现代文：总计东方第一列山系之首尾，自樕山起到竹山止，一共十二座山，途经三千六百里。
English: In total, there are twelve mountains at the end of the first line of mountains in the East, from Shaoshan to Zhushan, a total of 3,600 miles.

古文：其神状皆人身龙首。
现代文：诸山山神的形貌都是人的身子龙的头。
English: The shapes of all the mountain deities are the heads of human-shaped dragons.

古文：祠：毛用一犬祈，衈用鱼。
现代文：祭祀山神：在毛物中用一只狗作为祭品来祭祀，祷告时要用鱼。
English: Sacrifices to the mountain gods: A dog is sacrificed as an offering in wool, and fish is used in prayer.

古文：东次二经之首，曰空桑之山，北临食水，东望沮吴，南望沙陵，西望涮湣泽。
现代文：东方第二列山系之首座山，叫做空桑山，北面临近食水，在山上向东可以望见沮吴，向南可以望见沙陵，向西可以望见湣泽。
English: The first mountain of the second row of mountains in the east is called Ku Kuangshan, facing the north near the water table. On the mountain, De Wu can be seen to the east, Sha Ling can be seen to the south, and Heze can be seen to the west.

古文：有兽焉，其状如牛而虎文，其音如钦。其名曰軨軨，其鸣自詨，见则天下大水。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像普通的牛却有老虎一样的斑纹，发出的声音如同人在呻吟，名称是軨軨，它发出的叫声便是自身名称的读音，一出现而天下就会发生水灾。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary cow but with tiger-like stripes. The sound it makes is like a person moaning. Its name is a cricket. The cry it emits is the pronunciation of its own name. As soon as it appears, floods will occur all over the world.

古文：又南六百里，曰曹夕之山，其下多毂而无木，多鸟兽。
现代文：再往南六百里，有一座曹夕山，山下到处是构树，却没有水流，还有许多禽鸟野兽。
English: Six hundred miles further south, there is a Cao Xiu Mountain. Under the mountain, there are trees everywhere, but there is no water flow, and there are many birds and beasts.

古文：又西南四百里，曰峄皋之山，其上多金玉，其下多白垩。
现代文：再往西南四百里，有一座峄皋山，山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下有丰富的白垩土。
English: Four hundred miles further to the southwest, there is a mountain of molybdenum. The mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, and there is rich chalk soil under the mountain.

古文：峄皋之水出焉，东流注于激女之水，其中多蜃珧。
现代文：峄皋水从这座山发源，向东流入激女水，水中有很多大蛤和小蚌。
English: Surabaya water flows from the source of this mountain to the east into the water, and there are many large and small cormorants in the water.

古文：又南水行五百里，流沙三进里，至于葛山之尾，无草木，多砥砺。
现代文：再往南行五百里水路，经过三百里流沙，便到了葛山的尾端，这里没有花草树木，到处是粗细磨石。
English: Further south, a five-hundred-mile waterway, after three hundred miles of quicksand, came to the end of Ge Shan. There are no flowers and trees here, and there are coarse and fine grinding stones everywhere.

古文：又南三百八十里，曰葛山之首，无草木。
现代文：再往南三百八十里，就是葛山的首端，这里没有花草树木。
English: Three hundred and eighty miles further south is the tip of Mount Ge, where there are no plants or trees.

古文：澧水出焉，东流注于余泽，其中多珠鳖鱼，其状如肺而有目，六足有珠，其味酸甘，食之无疠。
现代文：澧水从此发源，向东流入余泽，水中有很多珠蟞鱼，形状像动物的一叶肺器官却有四只眼睛，还有六只脚而且能吐珠子，这种珠蟞鱼的肉味是酸中带甜，人吃了它的肉就不会染上瘟疫病。
English: The source of the stream flows eastward into Yuzawa. There are many pearl eels in the water. The lung organ, shaped like an animal, has four eyes, six feet and can spit beads. The flesh of this pearl eel is sweet and sour. People who eat its flesh will not catch the plague.

古文：又南三百八十里，曰余峨之山。其上多梓枬，其下多荆杞。
现代文：再往南三百八十里，有一座余峨山，山上有茂密的梓树和楠木树，山下有茂密的牡荆树和枸杞树。
English: Three hundred and eighty miles further south, there is a mountain called Yuaga. On the mountain, there are lush trees such as azaleas and camphor trees, and at the foot of the mountain, there are lush trees such as oaks and eucalyptus.

古文：杂余之水出焉，东流注于黄水。
现代文：杂余水从这座山发源，向东流入黄水。
English: The mountain is the source of the surplus water, which flows eastward into the Yellow River.

古文：有兽焉，其状如菟而鸟类喙，鸱目蛇尾，见人则眠，名犰狳，其鸣自詨，见则螽蝗为败。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像一般的兔子却是鸟的嘴，鹞鹰的眼睛和蛇的尾巴，一看见人就躺下装死，名称是犰狳，发出的叫声便是它自身名称的读音，一出现就会有螽斯蝗虫出现而为害庄稼。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary rabbit but with the mouth of a bird, the eyes of a vulture and the tail of a snake. When it sees a person, it lies down and pretends to be dead. Its name is a grasshopper, and the cry it emits is the pronunciation of its own name. As soon as it appears, a grasshopper locust will appear and harm crops.

古文：又南三百里，曰杜父之山，无草木，多水。
现代文：再往南三百里，有一座杜父山，不生长花草树木，到处流水。
English: Three hundred miles further south, there is a mountain called Du Fuzhi, where flowers and trees do not grow, and water flows everywhere.

古文：又南三百里，曰耿山，无草木，多水碧，多大蛇。
现代文：再往南三百里，有一座耿山，没有花草树木，到处是水晶石，还有很多大蛇。
English: Three hundred miles further south, there is a mountain called Geng, devoid of flowers and trees, full of crystal stones, and many large snakes.

古文：有兽焉，其状如狐而鱼翼，其名曰朱獳，其鸣自詨见则其国有恐。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像狐狸却长着鱼鳍，名称是朱獳，发出的叫声便是它自身名称的读音，在哪个国家出现而那个国家里就会有恐怖的事发生。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like a fox but with fins, its name is the crested ibis, the cry it emits is the pronunciation of its own name, in which country it appears and in that country terrible things will happen.

古文：又南三百里，曰卢其之山，无草木，多沙石，沙水出焉，南流注于涔水，其中多鹙鹕，其状如鸳鸯而人足，其鸣自詨，见则其国多土功。
现代文：再往南三百里，有一座卢其山，不生长花草树木，到处是沙子石头。沙水从这座山发源，向南流入涔水，水中有很多鹈鹕鸟，形状像一般的鸳鸯却长着人一样的脚，发出的叫声便是它自身名称的读音，在哪个国家出现那个国家里就会有水土工程的劳役。
English: Three hundred miles further south, there is a Luchi mountain, where flowers and trees do not grow, and sand and stones are everywhere. Sand and water originate from this mountain and flow southward into the Surabaya. There are many ostriches in the water. They are shaped like an ordinary dragonfly but have human-like feet. The cry they emit is the pronunciation of their own name. In any country, there will be laborers for water and soil projects.

古文：又南三百八十里，曰姑射之山，无草木，多水。
现代文：再往南三百八十里，有一座姑射山，没有花草树木，到处流水。
English: Three hundred and eighty miles further south, there is a Gushan Mountain, with no flowers or trees, and water flowing everywhere.

古文：又南水行三百里，流沙百里，曰北姑射之山，无草木，多石。
现代文：再往南行三百里水路，经过一百里流沙，是座北姑射山，没有花草树木，到处是石头。
English: Further south, there is a three-hundred-mile waterway, passing through a hundred miles of quicksand, there is a Beigu shooting mountain, there are no flowers and trees, and there is stone everywhere.

古文：又南水行三百里，曰南姑射之山，无草木，多水。
现代文：再往南三百里，有一座南姑射山，没有花草树木，到处流水。
English: Three hundred miles further south, there is a mountain called Nan Gu Sho. There are no flowers or trees, and water flows everywhere.

古文：又南三百里，曰碧山，无草木，多蛇，多碧、多玉。
现代文：再往南三百里，有一座碧山，没有花草树木，有许多大蛇。还盛产碧玉、水晶石。
English: Three hundred miles further south, there is a green mountain with no flowers, plants or trees, but many large snakes. It is also rich in jasper and crystal stones.

古文：又南五百里，曰缑氏之山，无草木，多金玉。
现代文：再往南五百里，有一座缑氏山，不生长花草树木，有丰富的金属矿物和玉石。
English: Five hundred miles further south, there is a mountain called Shouji Mountain, which does not grow flowers or trees, but is rich in metal minerals and jade.

古文：原水出焉，东流注于沙泽。
现代文：原水从这座山发源，向东流入沙泽。
English: Raw water flows from the source of this mountain to the east into Shazer.

古文：又南三百里，曰姑逢之山，无草木，多金玉。
现代文：再往南三百里，有一座姑逢山，没有花草树木，有丰富的金属矿物和玉石。
English: Three hundred miles further south, there is a Gufeng Mountain, without flowers and trees, but rich in metal minerals and jade.

古文：有兽焉，其状如狐而有翼，其音如鸿雁，其名曰獙々，见则天下大旱。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像一般的狐狸却有翅膀，发出的声音如同大雁鸣叫，名称是獙獙，一出现而天下就会发生大旱灾。
English: There is a beast in the mountains. It is shaped like an ordinary fox, but it has wings. It makes a sound like a wild goose, and its name is the quail. Whenever it appears, there is a great drought in the world.

古文：又南五百里，曰凫丽之山，其上多金玉，其下多箴石，有兽焉，其状如狐，而九尾、九首、虎爪，名曰蠪侄，其音如婴儿，是食人。
现代文：再往南五百里，有一座凫丽山，山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下盛产箴石。山中有一种野兽，形状像一般的狐狸，却有九条尾巴、九个脑袋、虎一样的爪子，名称是侄，发出的声音如同婴儿啼哭，是能吃人的。
English: Five hundred miles further south, there is a beautiful mountain. The mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, and the lower part of the mountain is rich in gemstones. There is a beast in the mountain, shaped like an ordinary fox, but with nine tails, nine heads, tiger-like claws, the name is nephew, and the sound it makes is like a baby crying. It can eat people.

古文：又南五百里，曰䃌山，南临䃌水，东望湖泽，有兽焉，其状如马，而羊目、四角、牛尾，其音如獆狗，其名曰峳峳。见则其国多狡客。
现代文：再往南五百里，有一座䃌山，南面临近水，从山上向东可以望见湖泽。山中有一种野兽，形状像普通的马，却长着羊一样的眼睛、四只角、牛一样的尾巴，发出的声音如同狗叫，名称是峳峳，在哪个国家出现那个国家里就会有很多奸猾的政客。
English: Five hundred miles further south, there is a rugged mountain, facing south near the water, from the mountain to the east you can see the lake. There is a beast in the mountain, shaped like an ordinary horse, but with sheep-like eyes, four horns, a cow-like tail, a sound like a dog barking, the name is crickets, in which country there will be many treacherous politicians in that country.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如凫而鼠尾，善登木，其名曰絜钩，见则其国多疫。
现代文：山中还有一种禽鸟，形状像野鸭子却长着老鼠一样的尾巴，擅长攀登树木，名称是絜钩，在哪个国家出现那个国家里就多次发生瘟疫病。
English: There is also a bird in the mountains, shaped like a wild duck but with a tail like a mouse, good at climbing trees, called the hook. Plague occurs many times in any country.

古文：凡东次二经之首，自空桑之山至于䃌山，凡十七山，六千六百四十里。
现代文：总计东方第二列山系之首尾，自空桑山起到山止，一共十七座山，途经六千六百四十里。
English: In total, there are seventeen mountains at the beginning and end of the second row of mountains in the east, from Kuangshan in the sky to the end of the mountain, a total of 6,640 miles.

古文：其神状皆兽身人面载觡。
现代文：诸山山神的形貌都是野兽的身子人的面孔而且头上戴着觡角。
English: The shapes of the gods of the mountains are the faces of beasts with human bodies, and they wear horns on their heads.

古文：其祠：毛用一鸡祈，婴用一壁瘗。
现代文：祭祀山神：在毛物中用一只鸡献祭，在祀神的玉器中用一块玉璧献祭后埋入地下。
English: Sacrifices to the mountain deities: a chicken is sacrificed in a piece of wool, and a piece of jade is used in a jade vessel to worship the deities and then buried in the ground.

古文：又东次三经之首，曰尸胡之山，北望𦍙山，其上多金玉，其下多棘。
现代文：东方第三列山系之首座山，叫做尸胡山，从山上向北可以望见山，山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下有茂密的酸枣树。
English: The first mountain of the third row of mountains in the east is called Zhohu Mountain. The mountain can be seen from the mountain to the north. The mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, and there are dense sour jujube trees under the mountain.

古文：有兽焉，其状如麋而鱼目，名曰妴胡，其鸣自詨。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像麋鹿却长着鱼一样的眼睛，名称是妴胡，它发出的叫声便是自身名称的读音。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like a moose but with fish-like eyes. Its name is Moustache, and the call it emits is the pronunciation of its name.

古文：又南水行八百里，曰岐山，其木多桃李，其兽多虎。
现代文：再往南行八百里水路，有一座岐山，山中的树木大多是桃树和李树，而野兽大多是老虎。
English: Further south along the 800-mile waterway, there is a mountain pass. The trees in the mountain are mostly peach and plum trees, and the beasts are mostly tigers.

古文：又南水行七百里，曰诸钩之山，无草木，多沙石。
现代文：再往南行五百里水路，有一座诸钩山，没有花草树木，到处是沙子石头。
English: Further south along the five-hundred-mile waterway, there is a mountain of hooks, no flowers or trees, and sand and stones everywhere.

古文：是山也，广员百里，多寐鱼。
现代文：这座山，方圆一百里，有很多寐鱼。
English: This mountain, a hundred miles in circumference, has a lot of fishes.

古文：又南水行七百里，曰中父之山，无草木，多沙。
现代文：再往南行七百里水路，是座中父山，没有花草树木，到处是沙子。
English: Further south along the seven-hundred-mile waterway, there is Mount Zhongfu, no flowers or trees, and sand everywhere.

古文：又东水行千里，曰胡射之山，无草木，多沙石。
现代文：再往东行一千里水路，有一座胡射山，没有花草树木，到处是沙子石头。
English: A thousand miles further east along the waterway, there is a Hu Ya Mountain, without flowers and trees, and full of sand and stones.

古文：又南水行七百里，曰孟子之山，其木多梓桐，多桃李，其草多菌浦，其兽多麋鹿。
现代文：再往南行七百里水路，有一座孟子山，山中的树木大多是梓树和桐树，还生长着茂密的桃树和李树，山中的草大多是菌蒲，山中的野兽大多是麋、鹿。
English: Further south along the seven-hundred-mile waterway, there is a Mencius Mountain. The trees in the mountain are mostly azusa and paulownia, and there are also lush peach and plum trees. The grass in the mountain is mostly mycelium, and the beasts in the mountain are mostly deer and deer.

古文：是山也，广员百里。
现代文：这座山，方圆一百里。
English: This Three Dangers Mountain has a radius of more than a hundred miles.

古文：其上有水出焉，名曰碧阳，其中多鳣鲔。
现代文：有条河水从山上流出，名称是碧阳，水中生长着很多鳣鱼和鲔鱼。
English: There is a river flowing out of the mountain, called Biyang, in which many carp and eels grow.

古文：又南水行五百里，曰流沙，行五百里，有山焉，曰跂踵之山，广员二百里，无草木，有大蛇，其上多玉。
现代文：再往南行五百里水路，经过流沙五百里，有一座山，叫做踵踵山，方圆二百里，没有花草树木，有大蛇，山上有丰富的玉石。
English: Further south, five hundred miles of waterway, five hundred miles of quicksand, there is a mountain called Heels Heels Mountain, two hundred miles in circumference, no flowers or trees, there are big snakes, and the mountain is rich in jade.

古文：有水焉，广员四十里皆涌，其名曰深泽，其中多大龟。
现代文：这里有一水潭，方圆四十里都在喷涌泉水，名称是深泽，水中有很多蠵龟。
English: There is a pool here, with spring water gushing for forty miles around. It is called Fukasawa, and there are many tortoises in the water.

古文：有鱼焉，其状如鲤。而六足鸟尾，名曰鮯鮯之鱼，其名自詨。
现代文：水中还生长着一种鱼，形状像一般的鲤鱼，却有六只脚和鸟一样的尾巴，名称是鮯鮯鱼，发出的叫声便是它自身名称的读音。
English: There was also a fish growing in the water, shaped like a common carp, but with six legs and a bird-like tail. It was called a carp, and the cry it emitted was the pronunciation of its own name.

古文：又南水行九百里，曰踇隅之山，其上多草木，多金玉，多赭。
现代文：再往南行九百里水路，有一座踇隅山，山上有茂密的花草树木，有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，还有许多赭石。
English: Further south along the nine-hundred-mile waterway, there is a steep mountain with lush flowers and trees, rich in metal minerals and jade, and many flints.

古文：有兽焉，其状如牛而马尾，名曰精精，其鸣自詨。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像一般的牛却长着马一样的尾巴，名称是精精，它发出的叫声便是自身名称的读音。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary cow but with a horse-like tail. Its name is the Essence, and the cry it emits is the pronunciation of its name.

古文：又南水行五百里，流沙三百里，至于无皋之山，南望幼海，东望榑木，无草木，多风。
现代文：再往南行五百里水路，经过三百里流沙，便到了无皋山，从山上向南可以望见幼海，向东可以望见榑木，这里不生长花草树木，到处刮大风。
English: Further south along the five-hundred-mile waterway, after three hundred miles of quicksand, they reached Muxian Mountain. From the mountain, you can see the young sea to the south and the eucalyptus trees to the east. Flowers and trees do not grow here, and strong winds blow everywhere.

古文：是山也，广员百里。
现代文：这座山，方圆一百里。
English: This Three Dangers Mountain has a radius of more than a hundred miles.

古文：凡东次三经之首，自尸胡之山至于无皋之山，凡九山，六千九百里。
现代文：总计东方第三列山系之首尾，自尸胡山起到无皋山止，一共九座山，途经六千九百里。
English: In total, there are nine mountains at the beginning and end of the third row of mountains in the east, from the corpse of Mount Hu to Mount Muxi, a total of 6,900 miles.

古文：其神状皆人身而羊角。
现代文：诸山山神的形貌都是人的身子却长着羊角。
English: The shapes of all the mountain gods are human bodies, but they have the horns of a goat.

古文：其祠：用一牡羊，米用黍。
现代文：祭祀山神：在毛物中用一只公羊作祭品，祀神的米用黄米。
English: Sacrifices to the mountain gods: a ram is used as a sacrifice in wool, and the rice used to worship the gods is yellow rice.

古文：是神也，见则风雨水为败。
现代文：这些山神，一出现就会起大风、下大雨、发大水而损坏庄稼。
English: As soon as these mountain gods appear, there will be high winds, heavy rain, and flooding, which will damage crops.

古文：又东次四经之首，曰北号之山，临于北海。
现代文：东方第四列山系之首座山，叫做北号山，屹立在北海边上。
English: The first mountain of the fourth row of mountains in the east, called the North Mountain, stands on the edge of the North Sea.

古文：有木焉，其状如杨，赤华，其实如枣而无核，其味酸甘，食之不疟。
现代文：山中有一种树木，形状像普通的杨树，开红色花朵，果实与枣子相似但没有核，味道是酸中带甜，吃了它就能使人不患上疟疾病。
English: There is a kind of tree in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary poplar tree, with red flowers. The fruit is similar to a jujube but without a core. The taste is sweet and sour. Eating it can prevent people from getting malaria.

古文：食水出焉，而东北流注于海。
现代文：食水从这座山发源，然后向东北流入大海。
English: Fresh water springs from the mountain and flows northeast into the sea.

古文：有兽焉，其状如狼，赤首鼠目，其音如豚，名曰猲狙，是食人。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像狼，长着红脑袋和老鼠一样的眼睛，发出的声音如同小猪叫，名称是獦狚，是能吃人的。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like a wolf, with a red head and mouse-like eyes, and it makes a sound like a piglet calling. It's called a baboon, and it can eat people.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如鸡而白首，鼠足而虎爪，其名曰鬿誉亦食人。
现代文：山中还有一种禽鸟，形状像普通的鸡却长着白脑袋，老鼠一样的脚足和老虎一样的爪子，名称是鬿雀，也是能吃人的。
English: There is another kind of bird in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary chicken but with a white head, mouse-like feet and tiger-like claws. It is called the sparrowhawk, and it can also eat people.

古文：又南三百里，曰旄山，无草木。
现代文：再往南三百里，有一座旄山，没有花草树木。
English: Three hundred miles further south, there is a barren mountain, devoid of plants and trees.

古文：苍体之水出焉，而西浪注于展水，其中多鱃鱼，其状如鲤而大首，食者不疣。
现代文：苍体水从这座山发源，然后向西流入展水，水中生长着很多鱃鱼，形状像鲤鱼而头长得很大，吃了它的肉就能使人皮肤上不生瘊子。
English: The celestial body of water originates from this mountain, and then flows westward into the spreading water. There are many eels growing in the water. They are shaped like eels and their heads grow very large. If you eat its meat, you will not get lice on your skin.

古文：又南三百二十里，曰东始之山，上多苍玉。
现代文：再往南三百二十里，有一座东始山，山上多出产苍玉。
English: Three hundred and twenty miles further south, there is a mountain called Dongshi Mountain, which produces more celadon.

古文：有木焉，其状如杨而赤理，其汁如血，不实，其名曰芑，可以服马，泚水出焉，而东北流注于海，其中多美贝，多茈鱼，其状如鲋，一首而十身，其臭如蘪芜食之不䊧。
现代文：山中有一种树木，形状像一般的杨树却有红色纹理，树干中的液汁与血相似，不结果实，名称是芑，把液汁涂在马身上就可使马驯服。泚水从这座山发源，然后向东北流入大海，水中有许多美丽的贝，还有很多茈鱼，形状像一般的鲫鱼，却长着一个脑袋而十个身子，它的气味与蘼芜草相似，人吃了它就不放屁。
English: There is a kind of tree in the mountain. It is shaped like an ordinary poplar tree, but has a red texture. The sap in the trunk is similar to blood, but does not produce fruit. Its name is eucalyptus. If you apply the sap to a horse, you can tame it. The eucalyptus water originates from this mountain, and then flows to the northeast into the sea. There are many beautiful shells in the water, and there are many eels. The shape is like an ordinary eucalyptus, but it has one head and ten bodies. Its smell is similar to eucalyptus, and people do not fart when they eat it.

古文：又东南三百里，曰女烝之山，其上无草木，石膏水出焉，而西流注于鬲水，其中多薄鱼，其状如鳣鱼而一目，其音如欧，见则天下大旱。
现代文：再往东南三百里，有一座女烝山，山上没有花草树木。石膏水从这座山发源，然后向西流入鬲水，水中有很多薄鱼，形状像一般的鳝鱼却长着一只眼睛，发出的声音如同人在呕吐，一出现而天下就会发生大旱灾。
English: Three hundred miles further south-east, there is a hill called Mei Lai Mountain. There are no plants or trees on the mountain. The gypsum water originates from this mountain and then flows west into the Surabaya River. There are many thin fish in the water. They are shaped like ordinary eels but have one eye and make a sound like a person vomiting. As soon as they appear, there will be a major drought in the world.

古文：又东南二百里，曰钦山。多金玉而无石。
现代文：再往东南二百里，有一座钦山，山中有丰富的金属矿物和玉石却没有石头。
English: Another two hundred miles to the southeast, there is a Qin Mountain. The mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, but there is no stone.

古文：师水出焉，而北流注于皋泽，其中多鱃鱼，多文贝。
现代文：师水从这座山发源，然后向北流入皋泽，水中有很多鱃鱼，还有很多色彩斑斓的贝。
English: The spring water originates from this mountain and then flows north into Heze. There are a lot of eels in the water, as well as a lot of colorful shells.

古文：有兽焉，其状如豚而有牙，其名当康，其鸣自叫，见则天下大穰。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像小猪却长着大獠牙，名称是当康，它发出的叫声就是自身名称的读音，一出现而天下就要大丰收。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like a piglet but with big fangs. Its name is Dang Kang. The cry it emits is the pronunciation of its name. As soon as it appears, the world will have a bumper harvest.

古文：又东南二百里，曰子桐之山。
现代文：再往东南二百里，有一座子桐山。
English: Two hundred miles further south-east, there is a village called Tongshan.

古文：子桐之水出焉，而西流注于余如之泽。
现代文：子桐水从这座山发源，然后向西流入余如泽。
English: The mountain is the source of the Zi Tong water, which then flows west into the Yu Ruzhe River.

古文：其中多䱻鱼，其状如鱼而鸟翼，出入有光。其音如鸳鸯，见则天下大旱。
现代文：水中生长着很多鱼，形状与一般的鱼相似却长着禽鸟翅膀，出入水中时闪闪发光，发出的声音如同鸳鸯鸣叫，一出现而天下就会发生大旱灾。
English: Many fish grow in the water. Their shape is similar to that of ordinary fish, but they have bird-like wings. They sparkle when they enter and leave the water, and the sound they make is like crickets chirping. As soon as they appear, there will be a great drought in the world.

古文：又东北二百里，曰剡山，多金玉。
现代文：再往东北二百里，有一座剡山，有丰富的金属矿物和玉石。
English: Two hundred miles further to the northeast, there is a Lushan Mountain, which is rich in metal minerals and jade.

古文：有兽焉，其状如彘而人面。黄身而赤尾，其名曰合窳，其音如婴儿，是兽也，食人，亦食虫蛇，见则天下大水。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像猪却是人的面孔，黄色的身子上长着红色尾巴，名称是合窳，发出的声音如同婴儿啼哭。这种合窳兽，是吃人的，也吃虫和蛇，一出现而天下就会发生水灾。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like a pig but with a human face, a yellow body with a red tail, its name is the grasshopper, and it makes a sound like a baby crying. This grasshopper is a man-eater, but also eats insects and snakes. As soon as it appears, floods will occur all over the world.

古文：又东北二百里，曰太山，上多金玉桢木。
现代文：再往东二百里，有一座太山，山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石、茂密的女桢树。
English: Two hundred miles further east, there is a mountain, which is rich in metal minerals and jade, and thick with camphor trees.

古文：有兽焉，其状如牜而白首，一目而蛇尾，其名曰蜚，行水则竭，行草则死，见则天下大疫，钩水出焉，而北流注于劳水，其中多鱃鱼。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像一般的牛却是白脑袋，长着一只眼睛和蛇一样的尾巴，名称是蜚，它行经有水的地方水就干涸，行经有草的地方草就枯死，一出现而天下就会发生大瘟疫。钩水从这座山发源，然后向北流入劳水，水中有很多鱃鱼。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary cow, but with a white head, one eye and a snake-like tail. Its name is the grasshopper. When it passes through water, the water dries up, and when it passes through grass, the grass dies. As soon as it appears, there will be a great plague in the world. Hook water originates from this mountain, and then flows north into the labored water. There are many eels in the water.

古文：凡东次四经之首，自北号之山至于太山，凡八山，一千七百二十里。
现代文：总计东方第四列山系之首尾，自北号山起到太山止，一共八座山，途经一千七百二十里。
English: In total, there are eight mountains at the beginning and end of the fourth row of mountains in the east, from Mount Beiguo to Mount Tai, a total of 1,720 miles.

