古文：沔水又东过堵阳县，堵水出自上粉县，北流注之。
现代文：又往东流过堵阳县，堵水发源于上粉县，北流注人。
English: It also flows eastward through Doyang County. The damming water originates from Shangfa County, and the northern stream is the source.

古文：堵水出建平郡界故亭谷，东历新城郡。
现代文：堵水发源于建平郡边界的故亭谷，往东流注新城郡。
English: The blockage of water originated in the old Pavilion Valley on the border of Jianping County and flowed eastward to Xincheng County.

古文：郡，故汉中之房陵县也。
现代文：新城郡是从前汉中的房陵县。
English: Xincheng County is the Fangling County in the former Han Dynasty.

古文：世祖建武元年，封邓晨为侯国。
现代文：世祖建武元年把这地方封给邓晨，立为侯国。
English: In the first year of Emperor Jianwu's reign, this place was given to Deng Chen as a fiefdom.

古文：汉末以为房陵郡。魏文帝合房陵、上庸、西城，立以为新城郡，以盂达为太守，治房陵故县。
现代文：汉朝末年立为房陵郡，魏文帝把房陵、上庸、西城合并起来，立为新城郡，派孟达去当太守，郡治设在房陵县旧城。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, it was established as Fangling County. Emperor Wei Wenzhong merged Fangling, Shangyong and Xicheng and established it as Xincheng County. He sent Mengda to be the governor, and the county government was located in the old city of Fangling County.

古文：有粉水，县居其上，故曰上粉县也。
现代文：有粉、水，县城就在它的上游，所以称为上粉县。
English: There is flour and water, and the county seat is just upstream of it, so it is called Shangfang County.

古文：堵水之旁有别溪，岸侧土色鲜黄，乃云可啖。
现代文：堵水旁边另有一条溪岸边的泥土颜色鲜黄，据说可以吃。
English: Next to the blocked water, there is another creek with bright yellow mud on the shore, which is said to be edible.

古文：有言饮此水者，令人无病而寿，岂有信乎？
现代文：有人说饮了这条溪里的水，能使人无病而且长寿，难道这是真的吗？
English: Is it true that drinking water from this stream can make a person free from disease and live a long life?

古文：又有白马山，山石似马，望之逼真。
现代文：附近又有白马山，山上有块岩石，形状像马，远远望去非常逼真。
English: Nearby is Mount Paima. There is a rock on the mountain, shaped like a horse, which looks very realistic from far away.

古文：侧水谓之白马塞。盂达为守，登之而叹曰：刘封、申耽据金城千里，而更失之乎！
现代文：水旁有个白马塞，孟达当太守时，曾登临塞上慨叹道：刘封、申耽据有坚城，地方千里，难道可以又丢失吗？
English: There is a white horse by the water. When Meng Da was the eunuch, he once climbed onto the horse and sighed: Liu Feng and Shen Tan have a stronghold, thousands of miles away, can they be lost again?

古文：晋太康五年，立以为县。
现代文：于是作《上堵吟》，音韵哀婉凄切，听了使人枪然。
English: As a result, he composed "Shang Douyin" (上堵吟), the melody of which is mournful and poignant, and makes people shocked when they hear it.

古文：汉水又东径琵琶谷口，梁、益二州，分境于此，故谓之琵琶界也。
现代文：现在水旁还有人歌唱。堵水又往东北流经上庸郡，这里是从前的庸国。《春秋》：文公十六年设立为县。汉水又往东流经琵琶谷口，梁州、益州在此分界，因而又称为琵琶界。
English: Now there are still people singing by the water. The blocked water flows to the northeast through Shangyong County, which used to be Yongguo. "Spring and Autumn": It was established as a county in the 16th year of Wengong. Han water also flows eastward through the mouth of the Biwa Valley, and Liangzhou and Yishu are demarcated here, so it is also called the Biwa region.

古文：又东北流，又屈东南，过武当县东北，县西北四十里，汉水中有洲，名沧浪洲。
现代文：又往东北流，又转向东南，流过武当县东北，武当县西北四十里，汉水中有一个沙洲，名叫沧浪洲。
English: It also flows to the northeast and turns to the southeast, flowing through the northeast of Wudang County and forty miles northwest of Wudang County. There is a sandbar in the Han River, called Canglang Island.

古文：庾仲雍《汉水记》谓之千龄洲，非也。是世俗语讹，音与字变矣。
现代文：庚仲雍《汉水记》称为千龄洲，是不对的；这是民间口头相传造成的语讹，音与字都改变了的结果。
English: It is not correct that Geng Zhongyong's "Hanshui Ji" is called Qianling Zhou; this is the result of the changes in pronunciation, sound and characters caused by folk oral tradition.

古文：《地说》曰：水出荆山，东南流，为沧浪之水，是近楚都。
现代文：《地说》说：水发源于荆山，往东南流，成为沧浪之水。
English: "Saying" said: The water originates from Mount Jing, flows southeast, and becomes the water of vicissitudes.

古文：故渔父歌曰：沧浪之水清兮，可以濯我缨；沧浪之水浊兮，可以濯我足。
现代文：这里临近楚国都城，因此《渔父歌》唱道：沧浪之水很澄清，可以洗我的帽缨；沧浪之水很浑浊，可以洗我的脚。
English: It is close to the capital city of Chu, so the "Fisherman's Song" sings: the water of the waves is very clear, you can wash my hat; the water of the waves is very muddy, you can wash my feet.

古文：余按《尚书。禹贡》言，导漾水东流为汉，又东为沧浪之水，不言过而言为者，明非他水决入也，盖汉沔水自下有沧浪通称耳。
现代文：按《尚书·禹贡》说：疏导漾水，往东流称为汉水，再往东流成为沧浪水。这里不说经过而说称为，说明不是其它水的注入，而是汉浦水从这里以下有沧浪水的通称。
English: According to "Shangshu Yugong," the dredging of the Bohai River, the eastward flow is called the Han River, and the eastward flow becomes the Canglang River. Here, it is called not by the way, indicating that it is not the injection of other water, but the common name of the Han-Pu River with the Canglang River from here.

古文：缠络鄢郢，地连纪鄀。咸楚都矣。
现代文：水流绕过郡、郑，两地与纪、都相连，都是楚国的都城。
English: The water flow bypasses Gu and Zheng, and the two places are connected with Ji and Du, both of which are the capital cities of Chu.

古文：渔父歌之，不违水地，考按经传，宜以《尚书》为正耳。
现代文：渔人唱的歌，与河流和地点都没有违背，查考经传，我认为应当以《尚书》为准。
English: The songs sung by the fishermen do not contradict the rivers and places. I think that the "Shang Shu" should be used as the standard.

古文：汉水又东为佷子潭，潭中有石碛洲，长六十丈，广十八丈，世亦以此洲为佷子葬父于斯，故潭得厥目焉，所未详也。
现代文：汉水又往东流，有恨子潭，潭里有石债洲，长六十丈，宽十八丈，世人都认为这是恨子葬父的地方。因此潭就得了恨子潭的名称，不知是否如此。
English: The Han River flows to the east, and there is Haizi Lake. In the lake, there is a stone debt island, which is 60 meters long and 18 meters wide. The world believes that this is the place where Haizi buried his father. Therefore, the lake got the name of Haizi Lake. I don't know if this is true.

古文：汉水又东南径武当县故城北，世祖封邓晨子棠为侯国。
现代文：汉水又往东南流经武当县老城北面，世祖把这里封给邓晨的儿子邓棠，立为侯国。
English: The Han River also flows southeast through the northern part of the old city of Wudang County. The founder of the dynasty assigned this area to Deng Chen's son, Deng Tang, and established it as a vassal state.

古文：内有一碑，文字磨灭，不可复识，俗相传言是《华君铭》，亦不详华君何代之士。
现代文：城内有一块石碑，文字已模糊不清，不能辨认了。民间相传是《华君铭》，却又不知华君是哪个朝代的人。
English: There is a stone monument in the city, the writing has been blurred and can no longer be recognized. Folk legend is "Hua Junming," but it is not known which dynasty Huajun was from.

古文：汉水又东，平阳川水注之。
现代文：汉水又向东流，平阳川水注入。
English: The Han River flows to the east, and the water of the Pingyang River is injected.

古文：水出县北伏亲山，南历平阳川，径平阳故城下，又南流注于沔。
现代文：川水发源于县北的伏亲山，向南流经平阳川，流过平阳老城下，再往南流注入河水。
English: The river water originates from Fuxian Mountain in the north of the county, flows southward through the Pingyang River, flows under the old city of Pingyang, and then flows southward into the river.

古文：沔水又东南径武当县故城东，又东，曾水注之。
现代文：沔水又向东南流、经过武当县老城东面，又往东流，曾水注入。
English: Surabaya's water flowed to the southeast, passing to the east of Wudang County's old city, and then to the east, where the water was injected.

古文：水导源县南武当山，一曰太和山，亦曰上山，山形特秀，又曰仙室。
现代文：曾水发源于县南的武当山，又名太和山，或叫修上山，山形秀美独特，又有仙室之称。
English: Zengshui originated from Wudang Mountain in the south of the county, also known as Taihe Mountain, or Shou Shangshan. Yamagata is beautiful and unique, and it is also known as a fairyland.

古文：《荆州图副记》曰：山形特秀，异于众岳，峰首状博山香炉，亭亭远出，药食延年者萃焉。
现代文：《荆州图副记》说：山形秀美独特，不同于群峰，峰顶的形状像博山香炉，亭亭独立，远出众山之上，那些希望服药以延年益寿的人，都聚集在山上。
English: "Jingzhou Map Supplement" said: Yamagata is beautiful and unique, different from the peaks. The peak is shaped like a pottery incense burner, and the pavilion is independent. It is far away from the mountains. Those who hope to take medicine to prolong their life are gathered on the mountain.

古文：晋咸和中，历阳谢允，舍罗邑宰，隐遁斯山，故亦曰谢罗山焉。
现代文：晋朝咸和年间一，历阳的谢允，辞去罗邑的官职，隐居此山，因此又称谢罗山。
English: In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, Xianhe, Liyang's Xie Yun resigned from the official post of Luoyang and lived in seclusion on this mountain. Therefore, it is also known as Xie Luo Mountain.

古文：曾水发源山麓，径越山阴，东北流注于沔，谓之曾口。
现代文：曾水发源于山麓，流过山北，往东北流，注入河水，汇流处称为曾口。
English: Zengshui originates from the foot of the mountain, flows through the north of the mountain, flows to the northeast, and injects river water. The confluence is called Zengkou.

古文：沔水又东径龙巢山下。山在沔水中，高十五丈，广员一里二百三十步，山形峻峭，其上秀林茂木，隆冬不凋。
现代文：沔水又往东流经龙巢山下，山在酒水之中，高十五丈，方圆一里二百三十步，山形峻峭，山上林木茂密青翠，即使到子严冬也不凋零。
English: The stream flows eastward through the Dragon's Nest and down the mountain. The mountain is covered in wine. It is 15 meters high and has a circumference of one mile and 230 paces. The shape of the mountain is steep, and the trees on the mountain are lush and green. They do not wither even in the dead of winter.

古文：又东南过涉都城东北，故乡名也。
现代文：又往东南流过涉都城东北，涉都城是从前的乡名。
English: It also flows south-east through the north-east of Wudu Town, the former name of the township.

古文：按《郡国志》，筑阳县有涉都乡者也。
现代文：据《郡国志》，筑阳县有个涉都乡。
English: According to the "County History," there is a township involving the capital in Chikuyo County.

古文：汉武帝元封元年，封南海守降侯子嘉为侯国。
现代文：汉武帝元封元年把这里封给南海守降侯的儿子嘉，立为侯国。
English: In the first year of Emperor Hanwu's reign in the Yuan Dynasty, he granted this territory to Jiah, the son of the Nankai governor who had been demoted from vassal to vassal, and it became a vassal state.

古文：均水于县人酒，谓之均口也。
现代文：均水在该县注入酒水，汇流处称为均口。
English: The average water is injected into the liquor in the county, and the confluence is called the average outlet.

古文：又东南过酇县之西南，县治故城南临沔水，谓之酇头。汉高帝五年，封萧何为侯国也。
现代文：又往东南流过酇县西南，旧县城南濒沔水，称为嘟头，汉高帝五年前，把这里封给萧何，立为侯国。
English: It also flows to the southeast through the southwest of Handan County, the old county south of the city on the edge of Handan Water, known as Shantou. Five years ago, Emperor Han Gao gave this place to Xiao He and established it as a principality.

古文：薛瓒曰：今南乡酇头是也。
现代文：薛攒说：就是今天南乡的嘟头。
English: Xue Nan said: "This is today's Nanxiang steamed buns."

古文：《茂陵书》曰在南阳，王莽更名南庚者也。
现代文：《茂陵书》说：郑县在南阳，王莽改名为南庚。
English: "Mourning Book" said: Zheng County is in Nanyang, Wang Mang changed his name to Nangong.

古文：又南过谷城东，又南过阴县之西，沔水东径谷城南，而不径其东矣。城在谷城山上，《春秋》谷伯绥之邑也。
现代文：又往南流过谷城东面，又往南流过阴县西面，酒水往东流经毁城南而不是流经东面，城筑在毁城山上，是《春秋》鼓伯绥的封邑。
English: It also flows southward to the east of Guicheng, and southward to the west of Yin County. The wine flows eastward through the south of Ruicheng instead of flowing to the east. The city is built on the mountain of Ruicheng. It is the fief of the Drummer of Spring and Autumn.

古文：墉闽颓毁，基堑亦存。
现代文：现在城墙城门都已倾倒塌毁，而墙基和护城河仍还存在。
English: Now the walls and gates have collapsed, but the foundations and moat remain.

古文：沔水又东南径阴县故城西，故下阴也。《春秋》昭公十九年，楚工尹赤迁阴于下阴是也。
现代文：沔水又往东南流经阴县旧城西面，这里是从前的下阴，《春秋》昭公十九年前，楚国的工尹赤把阴的戎人迁到下阴。
English: Surabaya also flows to the southeast through the west of the old city of Yin County. This is the former Xieyin. Nineteen years before the "Spring and Autumn" Zhaogong, the engineer Yin Chia of Chu moved the Ying soldiers to Xieyin.

古文：县东有冢。
现代文：该县东面有座坟墓。
English: There is a tomb to the east of the county.

古文：县令济南刘熹，字德怡。
现代文：县令刘熹，字德怡，济南人，魏时治理此县。
English: The county magistrate Liu Wei, surnamed Deyi, a native of Jinan, governed the county during the Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏时宰县，雅好博古，教学立碑，载生徒百有余人，不终业而天者，因葬其地，号曰生坟。
现代文：他极其爱好博通古事，亲自教授学生，立了一块石碑，碑上载着一百多个学生的名字，他们都是未完成学业而夭折的人，就安葬在这里，称为 生坟 。
English: He was extremely fond of ancient history, personally taught his students, and erected a stone monument bearing the names of more than a hundred students, all of whom died before completing their studies and were buried here, known as the grave.

古文：沔水又东南得洛溪口，水出县西北集池陂，东南流，径洛阳城，北枕洛溪，溪水东南注沔水也。
现代文：酒水又往东南流，有洛溪口。洛溪水发源于该县西北面的集池破，向东南流经洛阳城。洛阳城北面紧靠洛溪，溪水向东南流，注入沔水。
English: The wine also flows to the southeast, and there is the mouth of Luo Creek. The water of Luo Creek originates in the northwestern part of the county and flows to the southeast through Luoyang City. The northern part of Luoyang City is close to Luo Creek, and the water of the stream flows to the southeast, injecting brackish water.

古文：又南过筑阳县东，筑水出自房陵县，东过其县，南流注之。
现代文：又向南流过筑阳县东面，筑水发源于房陵县，往东流过县城，南流注人。
English: It also flows southward through the eastern part of Chikuyo County. Tsukimizu originates in Fangling County, flows eastward through the county seat, and flows southward.

古文：沔水又南，泛水注之。
现代文：沔水又向南流，沉水注入。
English: The rushing water flows south again, and the sinking water is injected.

古文：水出粱州阆阳县。
现代文：巩水发源于梁州间阳县。
English: Gongshui originated in Liangzhou Mianyang County.

古文：魏遣夏侯渊与张沔下巴西，进军宕渠。刘备军泛口，即是水所出也。
现代文：魏国派遣夏侯渊和张都南下巴西，进军宕渠，刘备的军队驻扎在巩口，就是这条水的出口。
English: Wei dispatched Xia Houyuan and Zhang Du south to Brazil and marched into the Taga Canal. Liu Bei's army was stationed in Gongkou, which is the outlet of this water.

古文：张飞自别道袭张于此水，败，弃马升山，走还汉中。
现代文：张飞走了另一条路，就在这条水上袭击张邻；张都战败，抛弃了战马，爬山逃回汉中。
English: Zhang Fei took a different route and attacked Zhang's neighbors on the water; Zhang Du was defeated, abandoned his war horse, and climbed the mountain to escape back to Hanzhong.

古文：泛水又东径巴西，历巴渠北新城、上庸，东径泛阳县故城南，晋分筑阳立。
现代文：巩水又向东流经巴西，经过巴渠北面的新城、上庸，又向东流经沉阳县老城南面。该县是晋朝时从筑阳分出来设立的。
English: Gongshui also flows eastward through Brazil, passing through Xincheng and Shangyong on the north side of Bachu, and flowing eastward through the south side of the old city of Shenyang County, which was separated from Chikuyang during the Jin Dynasty.

古文：自县以上，山深水急，在渚崩湍，水陆径绝。
现代文：从巩阳县起，沉水上游山深水急，水岸曲折，激流飞溅，水路陆路都断了。
English: Starting from Gongyang County, the upstream mountain deep-water rapids are submerged, the banks are tortuous, the torrents are splashing, and the waterways and land routes are broken.

古文：又东径学城南，梁州大路所由也。
现代文：又往东流经学城南，这是梁州水路所经之地。
English: It also flows eastward to the south of Gucheng, which is the place where the Liangzhou Waterway passes.

古文：旧说，昔者有人立学都于此，值世荒乱，生徒罔依，遂共立城以御难，故城得厥名矣。
现代文：旧时传说，从前有人在此设立学府，当时正遇上世道荒乱，学生无依无靠，就共同建立此城来防御盗寇，因此名为学城。
English: According to an old legend, a school was once established here. At that time, the world was in a state of chaos, and the students had no one to turn to. They worked together to build this city to defend against robbers, which is why it is called the school city.

古文：泛水又东流注于沔，谓之泛口也。
现代文：巩水又往东流注入酒水，汇流处称为巩口。
English: The gongshui then flows eastward to infuse the liquor, and the confluence is called the gongkou.

古文：沔水又南径阙林山东，本郡陆道之所由。
现代文：酒水又向南流经网林山东面，这里本来是郡中陆路所经过的地方；山的东面有两块石碑，其中一块就是记述厥林山的。
English: The wine also flowed southwards through the eastern side of the Netzlin Mountain, which was originally the place where the county road passed through; there are two stone tablets on the eastern side of the mountain, one of which is a record of the Juelin Mountain.

古文：山东有二碑，其一即记阙林山，文曰：君国者不跻高堙下，先时或断山冈，以通平道，民多病，守长冠军张仲瑜乃与邦人筑断故山道，作此铭。
现代文：碑文说：身负治国重任的君主，不登高，也不履深。从前，有人挖断山冈以通平路，当地很多百姓因此得病，地方长官冠军张仲瑜和当地人一起把山冈缺口重新填筑起来，堵断了旧山道，因而作此铭文。
English: The inscription says: "The monarch, who bears the important responsibility of governing the country, does not climb high, nor does he walk deep. In the past, someone dug up the mountain to pass the flat road, and many local people got sick. Zhang Zhongyu, the champion of local governors, together with local people, refilled the mountain gap and blocked the old mountain road, thus making this inscription.

古文：其一《郭先生碑》，先生名辅，字甫成，有孝友悦学之美，其女为立碑于此，无年号，皆不知何代人也。
现代文：另一块是郭先生碑。郭先生名辅，字甫成，有孝敬父母、友爱兄弟和喜好学习的美德，他女儿为他在此处立碑。这两块碑都没有年号，不知两人是哪个朝代人。
English: The other is a monument to Mr. Guo. Mr. Guo's name means "supplementary" and his character is "successful." He had the virtues of filial piety, respect for his parents, friendship with his brothers, and a penchant for learning. His daughter erected a monument to him here. Both of these monuments do not have a year, and it is not known which dynasty the two were from.

古文：沔水又南径筑阳县东，又南，筑水注之。
现代文：涌水又向南流经筑阳县东面，又往南流，筑水注入。
English: The gushing water flowed southward through the eastern part of Chikuyo County, and flowed southward again, injecting water into Chikuyo.

古文：杜预以为彭水也。
现代文：杜预以为这条水是彭水。
English: Du Yuanyuan thought that this water was Pengshui.

古文：水出梁州新城郡魏昌县界，县以黄初中分房陵立。
现代文：筑水发源于梁州新城郡魏昌县边界。该县是黄初年间从房陵划分出来而设立的。
English: Tsukusui originated from the border of Weichang County, Xincheng County, Liangzhou, which was divided from Fangling in the early years of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：筑水东南流径筑阳县，水中有孤石挺出，其下澄潭，时有见此石根，如竹根而黄色，见者多凶，相与号为承受石，所未详也。
现代文：筑水向东南流经筑阳县，水中有一块孤石拔起，下面是个清澈的水潭，有时会看见石根像黄色的竹根一样，看见的人大多会碰到灾祸，就都把它号为承受石，不知是否确实。
English: The Tsukuba River flows southeast through Tsukiyama County. In the water, a lone rock is uprooted. Below is a clear pool. Sometimes you can see the stone root like a yellow bamboo root. Most people who see it will encounter a disaster. They all call it a bearing rock. I don't know if it's true.

古文：筑水又东径筑阳县故城南，县故楚附庸也。秦平鄢郢，立以为县。王莽更名之曰宜禾也。
现代文：筑水又往东流经筑县旧城南面，这里原是从前楚国的附庸，秦国平定郡郧后，把这地方设立为县，王莽时改名为宜禾。
English: Tsukimizu also flows eastward through the southern part of the old city of Tsukigata, which was originally a vassal of the former Chu state. After the Qin state conquered the county, this place was established as a county, and Wang Mangshi changed its name to Yihe.

古文：建武二十八年，世祖封吴盱为侯国。
现代文：建武二十八年,世祖把这地方封给吴盯，立为侯国。
English: In the 28th year of the Jianwu era, the ancestor gave this place to Wu Zang and established it as a principality.

古文：筑水又东流注于沔，谓之筑口。
现代文：筑水又往东流注入酒水，汇流处称为筑口。
English: Tsukimizu then flows eastwards to inject the alcohol, and the confluence is called Tsukiguchi.

古文：沔水又南径高亭山东，山有灵焉，士民奉之，所请有验。
现代文：沔水又往南流经高亭山东面，此山有神灵，士大夫和庶民都敬奉它。
English: Surabaya also flows south through the eastern side of Mount Gaoting. This mountain has deities, and both scholars and ordinary people worship it.

古文：父临亡，意欲葬山上，恐儿不从，故倒言葬我著渚下石碛上。
现代文：向山神有所祈求都很灵验。涌水又东流，有漆滩，新野郡山都县和顺阳郡筑阳县，就以漆滩为分界。
English: It is very effective to pray to the mountain god for something. The gushing water flows to the east, and there is a lacquer beach. Nino County, Yamato County, and Shunyang County, Chikuyo County, are separated by a lacquer beach.

古文：佷子曰：我由来不奉教，今从语。
现代文：又往东流过山都县东北，河水南面有固城，城在酒水旁边，是新野郡山都县的治所。
English: It also flows eastward through the northeastern part of Shandu County. On the south side of the river, there is a fortified city. The city is next to the wine, and is the administrative center of Shandu County, Nino County.

古文：遂尽散家财，作石冢，积土绕之，成一洲，长数百步。元康中，始为水所坏，今石皆如半榻许，数百枚聚在水中。
现代文：这里从前是南阳的赤乡，秦朝时把它设立为县，汉高后四年才被水冲坏。现在还能看到数百块像半张床那么大的巨石，堆集在水中。
English: This used to be Nanyang's Red Township. It was established as a county during the Qin Dynasty, and was only destroyed by water four years after the Han Dynasty. Now you can still see hundreds of boulders the size of half a bed piled up in the water.

古文：佷子是前汉人。
现代文：恨子是前汉人。
English: Haizi is a former Han Chinese.

古文：襄阳太守胡烈有惠化，补塞堤决，民赖其利。景元四年九月，百姓刊石铭之，树碑于此。
现代文：襄阳太守胡烈以仁爱教化百姓，他堵塞了石堤的缺口，百姓都赖以受益，景元四年九月，百姓为纪念他，在此刻石立碑。
English: In September of the 4th year of the Jingyuan Dynasty, the people erected a stone monument in his memory.

古文：城东门外二百步刘表墓，太康中为人所发，见表夫妻，其尸严然，颜色不异，犹如平生。墓中香气远闻，三四里中，经月不歇。
现代文：酒水又往东流，水渐变浅，冬季这里可以涉水过河，称为交湖，作战时军队大多从这里过河。晋朝太康年间被盗掘，看到刘表夫妻俩的尸体完好无损，容颜肤色与生时无异墓中香气袭人，三四里外都能闻到，接连一整个月，还是余香不断。
English: The wine flowed to the east again, the water gradually became shallow, and in winter it was possible to wade across the river here, known as the cross-lake, and most of the troops crossed the river from here during the war. During the Jin Dynasty and the Taikang Dynasty, the bodies of Liu Biao and his wife were stolen and excavated, and the appearance and skin color were the same as when they were alive. The aroma in the tomb was striking, and could be smelled three or four miles away. For an entire month, the aftertaste continued.

古文：今坟冢及祠堂犹高显整顿。
现代文：今天坟墓祠堂还完好地高高耸立着。
English: Today, the tomb chapel still stands tall and intact.

古文：城北枕沔水，水中常苦蛟害。襄阳太守邓遐，负其气果，拔剑入水，蛟绕其足，遐挥剑斩蛟，流血丹水，自后患除，无复蛟难矣。
现代文：城北濒酒水，常苦于水中蛟龙为害襄阳太守邓遐自恃胆气和刚勇，拔剑跳入水中，蛟龙把他的脚紧紧缠住，邓遐挥剑斩蛟，流血染红了沔水，从此以后再也没有蛟龙为害了。
English: In the north of the city, near the river of wine, the Yangyang Daju, the Yangyang Daju, often suffered from the harm caused by the dragon in the water. Deng Yao plucked up his courage and bravery, drew his sword and jumped into the water. The dragon entangled his feet tightly. Deng Yao swung his sword and cut off the dragon's beak. The blood stained the water red. Since then, there has been no harm caused by the dragon.

古文：昔张公遇害，亦亡剑于是水。后雷氏为建安从事；径践濑溪，所留之剑，忽于其怀跃出落水，初犹是剑，后变为龙，做吴均《剑骑诗》云：剑是两蛟龙。
现代文：从前张华遇害，也是在这条水中失去宝剑的，后来雷氏当建安从事，涉水经过一片浅滩时飞所带的宝剑忽然从他怀里跳出，落入水中，刚掉到水里时还是剑，过了一会儿忽然变成龙。因此吴均的《剑骑诗》说：剑是两蛟龙。
English: Once upon a time, Zhang Hua was killed and lost his sword in this water. Later, when Lei was engaged in Jian'an, the sword he was carrying when wading through a shoal suddenly jumped out of his arms and fell into the water. When he just fell into the water, it was still a sword, and after a while it suddenly turned into a dragon. Therefore, Wu Jun's "Sword Ride Poem" says: The sword is a two-pronged dragon.

古文：张华之言，不孤为验矣。
现代文：张华的话应验不止一个证据了。
English: There is more than one proof that Zhang Hua's words have come true.

古文：沔水又径平鲁城南。城，鲁宗之所筑也，故城得厥名矣。
现代文：河水又流经平鲁城南，此城是鲁宗之修筑的，所以有此名。
English: The river also flows through the south of Pinglu City, which was built by Lu Zong, hence the name.

古文：东对樊城。樊，仲山甫所封也。
现代文：平鲁城东面与樊城相对，樊城是仲山甫的封邑。
English: The east side of Pinglu City is opposite to Fucheng. Fucheng is the fief of Zhongshan Fu.

古文：《汉晋春秋》称：桓帝幸樊城，百姓莫不观，有一老父，独耕不辍。
现代文：《汉晋春秋》说：桓帝临幸樊城，全城百姓没有不来观看的，只有一个老头子独自在耕田不歇。
English: "Han Jin Spring and Autumn" said: Emperor Huan had the good fortune to visit the city, and the whole city's people did not come to watch, but only one old man did not rest alone in the fields.

古文：议郎张温使问焉，父笑而不答，温因与之言，问其姓名，不告而去。
现代文：议郎张温派人问他，老头子笑而不答。张温因此与他攀谈，问他姓名，老头子不告诉他就走了。
English: Zhang Wen, the mediator, sent someone to ask him, but the old man laughed and did not answer. Zhang Wen therefore talked to him, asked his name, and the old man left without telling him.

古文：城周四里，南半沦水，建安中关羽围于禁于此城，会沔水泛溢三丈有余，城陷，禁降。庞德奋剑乘舟，投命于东冈。
现代文：此城周围四里，南面一半已沉入水中。建安年间，关羽把于禁围困在此城，当时正逢沔水泛滥外溢，水深三丈余，城被攻陷，于禁投降，庞德挥剑奋战，乘船至东冈不屈而死。
English: The city is surrounded by four miles, and half of the south side has sunk into the water. During the Jian'an period, Guan Yu trapped Guan Yu in the siege of the city. At that time, it was a time when the floodwaters overflowed and the water depth was more than three feet. The city was captured and surrendered to the siege. Pound fought hard with his sword and took a boat to Donggang and died.

古文：魏武曰：吾知于禁三十余载，至临危授命，更不如庞德矣。
现代文：魏武帝说：我认识于禁已三十多年，到了生死关头，却远不如庞德了。
English: Wei Wudi said: I have known Yu Gan for more than thirty years, but when it comes to life and death, he is far inferior to Pound.

古文：城西南有曹仁记水碑，杜元凯重刊其后，书伐吴之事也。
现代文：城西南面有曹仁《记水碑》，是杜元凯重刻的，里面记载了有关攻打吴国的事。
English: In the southwest of the city, there is Cao Ren's "Water Mark," engraved by Du Yuankai, which records the attack on Wu.

古文：又从县东屈西南，淯水从北来注之。
现代文：又从县东转向西南，清水从北方流来注人。
English: It also turned from the east of the county to the southwest, and the clear water flowed from the north to the people.

古文：襄阳城东有东白沙，白沙北有三洲，东北有宛口，即淯水所入也。
现代文：襄阳城东有东白沙，白沙北面有三洲，东北面有宛口，就是清水的入口处。
English: In the east of Yangyang City, there is Dongbaisha, in the north of Baisha, there are three continents, and in the northeast, there is an entrance, which is the entrance of clear water.

古文：沔水中有鱼梁洲，庞德公所居。
现代文：酒水中有鱼梁洲，是庞德公居住的地方。
English: Yu Liang Zhou in the liquor is the place where Lord Pound lived.

古文：士元居汉之阴，在南白沙，世故谓是地为白沙曲矣。
现代文：庞士元住在汉水的南面，在南白沙。所以世人称这地方为白沙曲，司马德操居住在洲的南面。
English: Pang Shiyuan lived in the south of Hanshui, in South Baisha. Therefore, the world called this place Baisha Qu, and Sima Deguo lived in the south of Zhou.

古文：司马德操宅洲之阳，望衡对宇，欢情自接，泛舟褰裳，率尔休畅，岂待还桂柁于千里，贡深心于永思哉。
现代文：屋宇隔水相望，自然常常欢聚，荡舟或涉水相访，无牵无挂地自得安闲之乐，哪里会想远道奔走于千里之外，弹精竭虑为君主尽忠效命呢！
English: Houses across from each other across the water, naturally often get together, go boating or wading to visit each other, carefree enjoyment of leisure, where would you want to go thousands of miles away, play hard for the monarch to serve loyally!

古文：水南有层台，号曰景升台，盖刘表治襄阳之所筑也。
现代文：南岸有层台，称作景升台，是刘表治理襄阳时修筑的。
English: There is a tiered platform on the south bank, known as Jing Sheng Platform, which was built when Liu Bei governed Xiangyang.

古文：言表盛游于此，常所止憩。
现代文：据说刘表很喜欢到这里游玩，常在这里逗留休息。刘表生性爱鹰，曾登上此台，高歌《野鹰来曲》。
English: It is said that Liu Biao likes to visit here very much and often stays here to rest. Liu Biao was born a sex eagle and once climbed onto this stage to sing "Wild Eagle Song."

古文：表性好鹰，尝登此台，歌《野鹰来曲》，其声韵似孟达《上堵吟》矣。
现代文：这首曲子声韵与孟达的《上堵吟》很相似。
English: The melody of this piece is very similar to the melody of Meng Da's "Jang Douyin."

古文：沔水又径桃林亭东，又径岘山东，山上有桓宣所筑城，孙坚死于此。
现代文：河水又流经桃林亭东面，又流经晚山东面，山上有一座桓宣修筑的城，孙坚就死在这里。
English: The river also flows to the east of the Taolin Pavilion and to the east of the Evening Mountain. On the mountain there is a city built by Huan Xuan, where Sun Jian died.

古文：又有《桓宣碑》。
现代文：又有一块桓宣碑，羊枯镇守襄阳的时候，曾与邹润甫登临山上。
English: There is also a Kanzen monument. When the town of Yokei was guarding Yangyang, it once climbed the mountain with Hunrunfu.

古文：羊祜之镇襄阳也，与邹润甫尝登之，及祜薨，后人立碑于故处，望者悲感，杜元凯谓之堕泪碑。
现代文：羊枯死后，后人在他旧游之处立了一块石碑，游人看到石碑，往往会感慨悲思，所以杜元凯称它为堕泪碑。
English: After the sheep died, the descendants erected a stone monument at the place where he used to travel. Tourists often feel sad when they see the stone monument, so Du Yuankai called it a tear-drop monument.

古文：山上又有《征南将军胡罴碑》，又有《征西将军周访碑》，山下水中，杜元凯沉碑处。
现代文：山上还有征南将军胡黑碑及征西将军周访碑。山下的水中，就是杜元凯沉碑处。
English: On the mountain, there is also a monument to Hu Hei, the general of the Southern Expedition, and a monument to Zhou Qi, the general of the Western Expedition. In the water below the mountain, there is a monument to Du Yuankai.

古文：沔水又东南径蔡洲，汉长水校尉蔡瑁居之，故名蔡洲。
现代文：河水又向东南流经蔡洲，汉时长水校尉蔡帽住在这里，所以取名蔡洲。
English: The river then flows south-east through Caizhou. Cai Hat, a Han-era Changshui lieutenant, lived here, hence the name Caizhou.

古文：洲东岸西有洄湖，停水数十亩，长数里，广减百步，水色常绿。
现代文：洲东岸西有个徊湖，积水面积数十亩，长数里，宽不到百步，水色常绿。
English: There is a lingering lake on the west coast of the east coast of the island. The accumulated water area is dozens of mu, several miles long, less than a hundred paces wide, and the water color is evergreen.

古文：杨仪居上洄，杨顒居下洄，与蔡洲相对，在岘山南广昌里。又与襄阳湖水合，水上承鸭湖，东南流径岘山西，又东南流注白马陂水。
现代文：杨仪住在上徊，杨颗住在下徊，与蔡洲相对七沔水在现山南的广昌里，又与襄阳湖水汇合，此水上流承接鸭湖，往东南流经观山西，又往东南流，注入白马破水。
English: Yang Yi lived in the upper reaches, Yang Dui lived in the lower reaches. As opposed to Cai Zhou, Qiqianshui was in Guangchangli in present-day southern Shanshan. It also merged with the waters of Xiangyang Lake. This upstream water flowed to connect with Duck Lake, flowed southeastward through the western part of Guanshan, and flowed southeastward again, injecting water into Baima Reservoir.

古文：又东入侍中襄阳侯习郁鱼池。
现代文：接着又往东派，注入侍中襄阳侯习郁的鱼池。
English: Next, he went to the Eastern faction, injecting the fish pond of the chamberlain, Xiangyang Hou Xiuyu.

古文：郁依范蠡养鱼法，作大陂，陂长六十步，广四十步，池中起钓台。
现代文：习郁根据范蠢的养鱼法，选了个大池塘，塘长六十步，宽四十步，池中筑了钓台。
English: Xi Yu chose a large pond according to Fan Yu's fish farming method. The pond was sixty paces long and forty paces wide, and a fishing platform was built in the pond.

古文：池北亭，郁墓所在也。
现代文：池北的亭子，就是习郁墓所在的地方。
English: The pavilion in the north of the pond is where Xi Yu's tomb is located.

古文：列植松篁于池侧，沔水上郁所居也。
现代文：甸也边的泻水岸边种了一片松林和竹林，这就是习郁的住处。
English: A pine forest and a bamboo forest have been planted on the shore of the lagoon on the other side of the delta. This is where Xi Yu lives.

古文：又作石洑逗，引大池水于宅北，作小鱼池，池长七十步，广二十步。西枕大道，东北二边，限以高堤，楸竹夹植，莲芡覆水，是游宴之名处也。
现代文：他用石块砌了一条弯曲的暗沟，把大池中的水引到住宅北面，造了个小鱼池。小鱼池长七十步，宽二十步，西边紧靠大路，东北两边筑了高堤，堤岸两边种遍揪树和翠竹，池中莲芡覆盖着水面，真是游乐宴饮的好去处。
English: He built a curved dark ditch with stones, and led the water from the large pond to the north of the house, creating a small fish pond. The small fish pond is seventy paces long and twenty paces wide, the west side is close to the highway, the northeast two sides have built a high embankment, eucalyptus trees and green bamboo are planted on both sides of the embankment, and lotus ferns cover the water in the pool. It is really a good place for entertainment and dining.

古文：山季伦之镇襄阳，每临此池，未尝不大醉而还，恒言此是我高阳池。
现代文：山季伦镇守襄阳的时候，每次来到这里游乐，没有不喝得大醉才回去的。并且还经常说：这是我的高阳池。
English: When Shan Jilun was in charge of Yangyang, every time he came here to play, he would not go back until he was very drunk. And he often said: This is my Gaoyang Pool.

古文：故时人为之歌曰：山公出何去，往至高阳池，日暮倒载归，酩酊无所知。
现代文：因此当时人作歌说：山公出门哪里去？去到高阳池。天晚倒载着回来，醉得什么也不知。
English: Therefore, at that time, people wrote a song saying: "Where does the mountain lord go? He goes to Goyangchi. He comes back late at night, drunk and doesn't know anything."

古文：其水下入沔。
现代文：水往下流，注入沔水。
English: The water flows downwards, injecting the brackish water.

古文：沔水西又有孝子墓。
现代文：沔水西岸，又有孝子墓。
English: On the west coast of Surabaya, there is also the grave of a filial son.

古文：河南秦氏，性至孝，事亲无倦，亲没之后，负土成坟，常泣血墓侧。
现代文：河南秦氏生性极为孝顺，侍奉双亲从不知厌倦。父母亡故后，亲自背土筑坟，经常在墓旁悲哭。
English: Henan Qin people are extremely filial by nature and never get tired of serving their parents. After the death of their parents, they personally dug the grave and often cried beside the grave.

古文：人有咏《蓼莪》，氏为泣涕，悲不自胜。
现代文：有人吟咏《寥获》，秦氏听了涕泪交流，悲伤不已。
English: Someone sang "Lack of Gain," and Mr. Qin listened with tears streaming down his face, overwhelmed with grief.

古文：于墓所得病，不能食，虎常乳之，百余日卒。
现代文：他在墓地得了病，吃不下东西，有一只老虎常用乳来喂他，一百多天后他就死了。
English: He fell ill in the cemetery and was unable to eat. A tiger used to feed him with milk. He died more than a hundred days later.

古文：今林木幽茂，号曰孝子墓也。
现代文：现在墓地林木幽深茂盛，人们称它为孝子墓。
English: Now the cemetery is a deep and lush forest, and people call it the tomb of filial piety.

古文：其南有蔡瑁冢，冢前刻石为大鹿，状甚大，头高九尺，制作甚工。
现代文：墓南有蔡唱墓，墓前有一头石刻巨鹿像，很大，头高九尺，制作极其精致。
English: To the south of the tomb is the tomb of Cai Xing, in front of which there is a huge stone statue of a deer, which is very large, nine feet high, and extremely delicately made.

古文：沔水又东南径邑城北，习郁襄阳侯之封邑也，故曰邑城矣。
现代文：沔水又往东南流经邑城北面，是习郁襄阳侯的封邑，因此称邑城，河水又往东流与洞口汇合。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the southeast through the north of the city, it is the fief of Xi Yu Xiangyang, so it is called the city, and the river water flows to the east to meet the cave.

古文：按《郡国志》，是南阳之属县也。
现代文：洞水发源于安昌县旧城东北的大父山，向西南流，称为白水。
English: The cave water originates from Dafu Mountain in the northeast of the old city of Anchang County and flows to the southwest, known as white water.

古文：浕水又西径蔡阳县故城东，西南流注于白水，又西径其城南。
现代文：又向南流经安昌旧城东面，拐弯向南流经县南，安昌县是从前蔡阳的白水乡，汉元帝以为长沙土地低洼潮湿，划分出白水、上唐两乡，设立了春陵县。
English: It also flows southward through the east of Anchang Old Town, and turns southward through the south of the county. Anchang County is the former Baishui Township of Caiyang. Emperor Han Yuan thought that the land of Changsha was low-lying and wet, and divided the two townships of Baishui and Shangtang, and established Chunling County.

古文：建武十三年，世祖封城阳王祉世子本为侯国。
现代文：光武帝即位后，改名为章陵县，在那里修筑了陵墓宗庙，魏黄初二年世祖把这里封给城阳王社的嫡长子本为侯国。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Guangwu, it was renamed Zhangling County, where a mausoleum and ancestral temple were built. In the first two years of the Wei and Huang dynasties, the patriarch gave this land to the eldest son of King Chengyang, who became the lord of the county.

古文：应劭曰：蔡水出蔡阳，东入淮。
现代文：应动说：蔡水发源于蔡阳，往东流注入淮水。
English: It should be said: Cai Shui originates from Caiyang and flows eastward into Huai Shui.

古文：今于此城南，更无别水，惟是水可以当之。
现代文：今天，在此城南没有其它的水，只有这条水可以对得上。
English: Today, there is no other water in the south of the city, only this water can meet.

古文：川流西注，苦其不东，且淮源阻碍，山河无相入之理，盖应氏之误耳。
现代文：川流只向西流，就是不向东流，况且淮水的源流受地形的阻碍，山脉和河流也没有互相穿透的道理，这是应氏弄错了。
English: The river only flows to the west, not to the east. Moreover, the source of the Huai River is hindered by the terrain, and the mountains and rivers do not penetrate each other. This is a mistake made by Mr. Ying.

古文：洞水又西南流注于沔水。
现代文：洞水又向西南流，注入酒水。
English: The cave water then flows to the southwest and is infused with alcohol.

古文：又东过中庐县东，维水自房陵县维山东流注之。
现代文：又往东流过中庐县东面，维水从房陵县的维山东流注人。
English: It also flows eastward through the eastern part of Zhonglu County, and Wei Shui flows from the eastern part of Wei Shan in Fangling County.

古文：县，即春秋庐戎之国也。
现代文：中庐县就是《春秋》的庐戎之国。
English: Zhonglu County is the country of "Spring and Autumn."

古文：县故城南，有水出西山。山有石穴出马，谓之马穴山。
现代文：该县旧城南有一条水，发源于西山，山里有个石洞曾跑出马来，你为马穴山。
English: In the southern part of the old city of the county, there is a stream that originates from the West Mountain. There is a rock cave in the mountain that was once used by horses. It is called Horse Cave Mountain.

古文：汉时，有数百匹马出其中，马形小，似巴滇马。
现代文：汉朝时洞里跑出数百匹马，这些马体型小，很像巴、滇的马。
English: During the Han Dynasty, hundreds of horses ran out of the cave. These horses were small in size, much like the horses of Ba and Yao.

古文：三国时，陆逊攻襄阳于此穴，又得马数十匹，送建业。
现代文：三国时，陆逊进攻襄阳，在这个石洞中又得了数十匹马送到建业。
English: During the Three Kingdoms period, Lu Xun attacked Yangyang, and obtained dozens of horses from this cave to send to Jianye.

古文：蜀使至，有家在滇池者，识其马毛色，云其父所乘，马对之流涕。
现代文：后来蜀使到了建业，其中有个家住滇池的人，认得他家那匹马的毛色，说这是他父亲所骑的马，因而对马落泪。
English: Later, the Shu envoys arrived in Jianye, and one of them, a man who lived in Longchu, recognized the hair color of his family's horse and said that it was the horse his father rode, so he shed tears for the horse.

古文：其水东流百四十里，径城南，名曰浴马港。言初得此马，洗之于此，因以名之。
现代文：这条水东流一百四十里经过城南，叫做浴马港，据说刚得到这些马时，在这里洗马，因此得名。
English: This water flows 140 li eastward through the south of the city and is called Yuma Port. It is said that when these horses were first obtained, they were washed here, hence the name.

古文：亦云乘出沔次浴之，又曰洗马厩。
现代文：也有说骑着这些马到河水岸边洗澡的，又名为洗马厩。
English: It is also said that they rode these horses to the riverbank to bathe, also known as washing stables.

古文：渡沔宿处，名之曰骑亭。
现代文：渡酒水时留宿之处名为骑亭。
English: The place to stay while drinking sake is called the Riding Pavilion.

古文：然候水诸蛮，北遏是水，南壅维川，以周田溉，下流入沔。
现代文：但当地蛮族在北面堵了这条水，在南面又截断维川，引水来灌溉田亩。下流注入河水。
English: However, the local barbarians blocked this water in the north and cut off the Wei River in the south, diverting water to irrigate the fields. The river water was injected downstream.

古文：沔水东南流，径犁丘故城西，其城下对缮州，秦丰居之，故更名秦洲。
现代文：河水往东南流经犁丘旧城西面，旧城下对缮洲，秦丰居住在这里，所以又改名为秦洲。
English: The river flows to the southeast through the west side of the old city of Mengqiu, the old city to Shuozhou, Qin Feng lives here, so it was renamed Qinzhou.

古文：王莽之败也，秦丰阻兵于犁丘。
现代文：王莽战败，秦丰拥兵于犁丘。
English: Wang Mang was defeated, and Qin Feng's army withdrew to Shaoqiu.

古文：犁丘城在观城西二里。
现代文：犁丘城在观城西二里。
English: Zouqiu City is located two miles west of Guancheng.

古文：建武三年，光武遣征南岑彭击丰，四年朱祐自观城擒丰子犁丘是也。沔水又南与疏水合，水出中庐县西南，东流至具北界，东入沔水，谓之疏口也。
现代文：建武三年，光武帝派遣征南将军岑彭攻打秦丰。四年朱佑从观城进兵，在犁丘擒获了秦丰沔水又向南流，与疏水汇合，疏水发源于中庐县西南，向东流到邓县北界，东流注入河水，汇流处称为疏口。
English: In the third year of the Jianwu era, Emperor Guangwu dispatched the Southern Expeditionary General Zi Peng to attack Qin Feng. In the fourth year, Zhu You marched in troops from Guancheng and captured Qin Feng at Zouqiu. The water flowed southward and merged with the ditch. The ditch originated in the southwest of Zhongye County and flowed eastward to the northern border of Deng County. The east stream injected water into the river, and the confluence was called the ditch.

古文：水中有物，如三四岁小儿，鳞甲如鲮鲤，射之不可入。七八月中好在碛上自曝，膝头似虎，掌爪常没水中，出膝头，小儿不知，欲取弄戏，便杀人。
现代文：水中有一种动物，像三四岁的小孩，身上有类似穿山甲的鳞，箭也射不进去，七八月间，喜欢在沙滩上晒太阳，膝头像虎，脚掌和爪子常没在水中，只露出膝头。小孩子不知道，想去拿来玩，它便会把人弄死。
English: There is an animal in the water, like a three- or four-year-old child, with scales similar to a pangolin, and arrows cannot be shot into it. In July and August, it likes to bask in the sun on the beach. Its knees are like a tiger's, and its paws and paws are often not in the water, only the knees are exposed. Little children do not know that if they want to play with it, it will kill them.

古文：或曰人有生得者，摘其皋厌可小小使，名为水虎者也。
现代文：有人说，如果能捉住一只活的，把它的鼻子割下，就可以驯服它。这种动物叫水虎。
English: Some people say that if you can catch a live crocodile and cut off its nose, you can tame it. This animal is called a water tiger.

古文：又南过县东北，沔水之左，有骑城，周回二里余，高一丈六尺，即骑亭也。县，故楚邑也。
现代文：又往南流过邓县东北，河水的左边有一座骑城，周围二里余，高一丈六尺，就是骑亭，邓县是从前楚国的城邑，秦时立为县。
English: It also flows south through the northeast of Deng County. On the left side of the river, there is a riding city, with a circumference of more than two miles and a height of one and a half feet, that is, a riding pavilion. Deng County was once a city in the former Chu Kingdom, and was established as a county in Qin Dynasty.

古文：秦以为县，汉高帝十一年，封黄极忠为侯国。县南有黄家墓，墓前有双石阙，雕制甚工，俗谓之黄公阙。
现代文：汉高帝十一年前，把这地方封给黄极忠，立为侯国，县南有黄家墓，墓前有一对石阀，雕刻极为精致，俗称黄公网。
English: Eleven years ago, Emperor Han Gao granted this place to Huang Jizhong and established it as a vassal state. There is a Huang family tomb in the south of the county. In front of the tomb there is a pair of stone valves with extremely delicate carvings, commonly known as Huang Gongwang.

古文：黄公名尚，为汉司徒。
现代文：黄公名尚，是汉朝的司徒。
English: Huang Gong's name was Shang, and he was a scholar of the Han Dynasty.

古文：沔水又东径猪兰桥。
现代文：河水又往东流经猪兰桥，原名木兰桥，桥的左右两边青篙芦荻很多。
English: The river then flows east through the Pig Lan Bridge, formerly known as the Magnolia Bridge. There are many reeds on both sides of the bridge.

古文：桥本名木兰桥，桥之左右，丰蒿荻，于桥东刘季和大养猪，襄阳大守曰：此中作猪屎臭，可易名猪兰桥。
现代文：刘季和在桥东养了很多猪。襄阳太守说：这里猪屎很臭，可改名为猪兰桥。于是百姓也就这么叫了。
English: Liu Jihe raised a lot of pigs on the east side of the bridge. The governor of Xiangyang said: "The pig manure here is very smelly, it can be renamed as the Pig Lan Bridge." So the people called it so.

古文：百姓遂以为名矣。桥北有习郁宅，宅侧有鱼池，池不假功，自然通洫，长六七十步，广十丈，常出名鱼。
现代文：桥北有习郁的住宅，屋旁有一个鱼池，这口池没有耗费人工，沟水自然流通。池长六七十步，宽十丈，常出产名鱼。
English: To the north of the bridge, there is the residence of Xi Yu. Next to the house, there is a fish pond. This pond does not require labor, and the water flows naturally. The pond is sixty or seventy paces long, wide and high, and often produces famous fish.

古文：沔水又南，得木里水会。楚时，于宜城东，穿渠上口，去城三里。
现代文：河水又往南流，与木里水汇合，楚时在宜城东开凿了一条水渠，水渠上口距离宜城三里。
English: The water of the river flowed south and merged with the water of the woodlands. Chu Shih drilled a canal in the east of Yicheng, and the upper mouth of the canal was three miles away from Yicheng.

古文：汉南郡太守王宠又凿之，引蛮水灌田，谓之木里沟，径宜城东而东北入于沔，谓之木里水口也。
现代文：汉朝南郡太守王宠又继续开凿，引过了蛮水来灌溉农田。这条水渠叫木里沟。沟水流经宜城东，而后往东北注入沔水，汇流处叫木里水口。
English: Wang Qiao, the governor of Nan County in the Han Dynasty, continued to excavate and diverted raw water to irrigate farmland. This canal is called the Muli Ditch. The ditch water flows through the east of Yicheng, and then to the northeast it is injected with brackish water, and the confluence is called the Muli Water Outlet.

古文：又南过宜城县东，夷水出自房陵，东流注之。
现代文：又往南流过宜城县东，夷水发源于房陵县，往东流注人。
English: It also flowed southward through the east of Yicheng County. The floodwater originated in Fangling County and flowed eastward.

古文：夷水，蛮水也。桓温父名夷，改曰蛮水。
现代文：夷水就是蛮水，桓温的父亲名夷，为避讳改名为蛮水。
English: Yishui means "wild water," and Kuanwen's father was named Yishui, but changed his name to "wild water" to avoid taboos.

古文：夷水导源中庐县界康狼山，山与荆山相邻。其水东南流，历宜城西山，谓之夷溪。又东南径罗卅城，故罗国也。
现代文：夷水发源于庐县边界的康狼山，山与荆山相邻，水往东南流，经过宜城西山，称为夷溪，又往东南流经罗川城，这里从前是罗国。
English: Yicheng Water originates from Kangwol Mountain on the border of Handan County. The mountain is adjacent to Jing Mountain, and the water flows southeast, passing through Yicheng Xishan, known as Yixi, and flowing southeast through Luochuan City, which used to be Luo Province.

古文：又谓之鄢水，《春秋》所谓楚人伐罗渡鄢者也。
现代文：夷溪也称为鄙水，《春秋》里所说的楚人伐罗，渡过郡水，就是这条水。
English: The Yixi River is also known as the shallow water. The Chu people's war cry in "Spring and Autumn," crossing the county water, is this water.

古文：夷水又东南流，与零水合，零水即沶水也。上通梁州没阳县之默城山，司马懿出沮之所由。
现代文：夷水又往东南流，与零水汇合，零水就是泳水，上源通梁州没阳县的默城山，司马彭出沮水就取道于此山。
English: Yiwu water also flows to the southeast, merging with zero water, zero water is swimming, Shangyuan through Liangzhou Moyang County's Mucheng Mountain, Sima Peng out of the water takes the road in this mountain.

古文：其水东径新城郡之沶乡县，县，分房陵立，谓之沶水。
现代文：泳水往东流经新城郡的标乡县，该县是从房陵县分出来而设立的，因而称此水为标水。
English: The swimming water flows eastward through Binxiang County of Xincheng County, which was established after it was separated from Fangling County. Therefore, this water is called "Binxiang Water."

古文：又东历軨乡，谓之軨水。
现代文：泳水又往东流经转乡，称为转水。
English: The swimmer then swims eastward through the diversion, known as the diversion.

古文：东流合于夷水，谓之沶口也。与夷水乱流东出，谓之淇水。
现代文：晋武帝平定吴国，把临沮的北乡、中卢的南乡分出来设立上黄县，县治在转乡。泳水又往东流经宜城西山，称为你溪；又东流与夷水汇合，汇流处称为标口。
English: Emperor Jinwu conquered the State of Wu and divided the Northern Township of Linyi and the Southern Township of Zhonglu to establish Shanghuang County. The county government is in the process of changing townships. The stream flows eastward through the West Mountain of Yicheng, and is called You Creek. The eastward stream also merges with the Yishui, and the confluence is called the mouth of the stream.

古文：径蛮城南，城在宜城南三十里，《春秋》莫敖自罗败退，及鄢，乱次以济淇水是也。
现代文：泳溪与夷水汇合后乱流东出，称为淇水，流经蜚城南，蛮城在宜城南面三十里。《春秋》莫敖在罗打了败仗，退到了郡，队伍混乱，渡过淇水。
English: After the confluence of Yingxi and Yishui, the turbulent flow eastward, known as Qi Shui, flows through the south of Lucheng, and the barbarian city is 30 miles south of Yicheng. In "Spring and Autumn," Mo Yan fought a losing battle in Luo and retreated to the county. The team was confused and passed through Qi Shui.

古文：夷水又东注于沔。
现代文：夷水又往东流，注入酒水。
English: The floodwaters then flowed eastward, filling the river with alcohol.

古文：昔白起攻楚，引西山长谷水，即是水也。
现代文：从前白起进攻楚国，引西山长谷水灌城，就是这条水。
English: It was this water that led to the attack on Chu Province and the flooding of the West Mountain and Hase Waterworks.

古文：旧堨去城百许里，水从城西，灌城东入，注为渊，今熨斗陂是也。
现代文：旧堰离城约百里，当时水从城西向东灌入城中，流注形成深潭，就是今天的熨斗破。
English: The old weir is about a hundred miles from the city. At that time, water poured into the city from the west to the east, forming a deep pool, which is today's Iron Pier.

古文：水溃城东北角，百姓随水流死于城东者，数十万，城东皆臭，因名其陂为臭池。
现代文：水冲毁了城的东北角，百姓随水漂流，淹死在城东的有数十万。城东一带臭气熏天，因此把这片破塘称为臭池。
English: The water washed away the northeast corner of the city, the people drifted with the water, and hundreds of thousands drowned in the east of the city. The east of the city is stinking, so this piece of broken pond is called a stinking pond.

古文：西北又为土门陂，从平路渠以北，木兰桥以南，西极土门山，东跨大道，水流周通。其水自新陂东入城。
现代文：后人就沿用这条渠道，筑成破塘，来浇灌城西的田亩。这个破塘称为新破，占地数十顷；西北又形成土门阪。从平路渠以北、木兰桥以南，西到土门山，东跨大路，水流四通八达，水从新破东流入城。
English: Later generations followed this channel and built a pond to irrigate the fields to the west of the city. This pond, known as the new pond, covers an area of dozens of hectares; the northwest also forms the Tsuchimen-zaka. From the north of the flat road canal, south of the Mulan Bridge, west to the Tsuchimen Mountain, east across the highway, the water flows in all directions, and the water flows into the city from the new east.

古文：城，故鄢郢之旧都，秦以为县，汉惠帝三年，改曰宜城。
现代文：此城是从前郡那的旧都，秦立为县。汉惠帝三年改名为宜城。
English: This city was the old capital of the former county of Qin. It was renamed Yicheng in the third year of Han Hui's reign.

古文：其水历大城中，径汉南阳太守秦颉墓北，墓前有二碑。
现代文：新破水从大城中流过，经汉朝南阳太守秦领墓北，墓前有两块石碑。
English: The newly-broken water flowed from the center of the great city, passing north of the tomb of the Han Dynasty Nanyang Taishu Qinlian, and there were two stone monuments in front of the tomb.

古文：颉，鄀人也，以江夏都尉出为南阳太守。径宜城中，见一家东向，颉住车视之，曰：此居处可作冢。
现代文：秦领是都人，从江夏都尉升任南阳太守，上任时经过宜城城内，看见一家朝东的房子，他停车观看，说：这个住人的地方可以筑墓。
English: The Qin leader was a native of the capital. He was promoted from the governor of Jiangxia to the governor of Nanyang. When he took office, he passed through the city of Yicheng. He saw a house facing east. He stopped to look at it and said, "This place where people live can be used to build tombs."

古文：后卒于南阳，丧还至昔住车处，车不肯进，故吏为市此宅，葬之，孤坟尚整。
现代文：后来他死于南阳，运送灵枢回乡，到了昔日停车处，车子不肯前进。他的属吏购买了那所住宅，把他安葬了，现在那座孤坟还很完整。
English: Later, when he died in Nanyang, the car carrying his ashes back to his hometown stopped at the old parking lot, and the car refused to move forward. His relatives bought the house and buried him, and now the lonely grave is still intact.

古文：城南有宋玉宅。
现代文：水南有宋玉的住宅。
English: Song Yu's residence is located in the southern part of the province.

古文：玉，邑人，隽才辩给，善属文而识音也。
现代文：宋玉是本城人，才智出众，能言善辩，擅长写作而又精通音乐。
English: Song Yu is a native of this city. He has outstanding talent, can speak well, is good at writing and is proficient in music.

古文：其水又径金城前，县南门有古碑，犹存。
现代文：这条水又流经金城前，县南门有一块古碑还在。
English: This water flows through Jincheng again, and there is still an ancient monument at the south gate of the county.

古文：其水又东出城，东注臭池。
现代文：水又往东流，出城后注入臭池。
English: The water flows east again, and after leaving the city, it flows into the stinking pond.

古文：臭池溉田，陂水散流，又人朱湖陂，朱湖陂亦下灌诸田，余水又下入木里沟。
现代文：臭池灌溉农田，破水散流，又注入朱湖破。朱湖破引水灌溉各处农田，多余的水又排入木里沟。
English: The stinking pond irrigates farmland, the water is broken and dispersed, and then injected into the Zhu Lake. The Zhu Lake is broken and the water is diverted to irrigate farmland everywhere, and the excess water is discharged into the wood gully.

古文：木里沟是汉南郡太守王宠所凿，故渠引鄢水也，灌田七百顷，白起渠溉三千顷，膏良肥美，更为沃壤也。
现代文：木里沟是汉朝南郡太守王宠开凿的旧渠道，引来郡水灌溉农田七百顷。白起渠灌溉三千顷，都是良田沃野，土壤更加肥美。
English: Muli ditch is an old channel excavated by the Han Dynasty's Southern County Governor Wang Diao, attracting county water to irrigate seven hundred hectares of farmland. Baiqi canal irrigates three thousand hectares, all of which are fertile fields, and the soil is more fertile.

古文：县有太山，山下有庙，汉末名士居其中，刺史二千石卿长数十人，朱轩华盖，同会于庙下。
现代文：该县有座太山，山下有庙。汉朝末年有很多士人，其中刺史、二千石卿长数十人，乘坐着豪华的车马，纷纷来庙下会聚。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, there were many nobles, including dozens of Shishi and 2,000-koku chieftains, who came to the temple in luxurious cars and horses.

古文：荆州刺史行部见之，雅叹其盛，号为冠盖里，而刻石铭之。
现代文：荆州刺史巡行时看到这种情景，对当时的盛况赞叹不已，就把这地方取名为冠盖里，而且刻石纪念。
English: When the Jingzhou Shishi parade saw this scene, they were full of admiration for the grandeur of the time, and named the place Guanqaili, and carved a stone memorial.

古文：此碑于永嘉中始为人所毁，其余文尚有可传者。
现代文：这块石碑到永嘉年间才被人毁坏，但留下的文章还有值得传诵的地方。
English: This stone tablet was not destroyed until the Yongjia era, but the articles left behind are still worth reciting.

古文：其辞曰：峨峨南岳，烈烈离明。
现代文：赞辞说：那巍峨的南山，在南天浮起巨影。
English: The eulogy said: "The towering Nanshan Mountain casts a huge shadow in the southern sky.

古文：实敷俊义，君子以生。
现代文：这里英才济济，人杰应运而生。
English: There is a wealth of talent here, and outstanding people have emerged in response to the times.

古文：惟此君子，作汉之英。
现代文：只有这些人杰呵，是大汉的精英！
English: Only these people are the best, the elite of the big men!

古文：德为龙光，声化鹤鸣。
现代文：德行受君王宠遇，声音化作九霄鹤鸣。
English: Virtue is favored by kings, and the sound is transformed into a crane's song.

古文：此山以建安三年崩，声闻五六十里，雉皆屋雊。
现代文：这座山于建安三年崩塌，轰鸣声传到五六十里以外，堆鸡都叫起来，当地百姓以为不吉而感到讨厌，就去询问侍中庞季。
English: The mountain collapsed three years ago in Jian'an. The roar of the crash was heard fifty or sixty miles away, and the chickens began to crow. The local people thought it was unlucky and found it unpleasant, so they went to inquire about the chamberlain, Pang Ji.

古文：县人恶之，以问侍中庞季，季云山崩川竭，国土将亡之占也。十三年，魏武平荆州，沔南雕散。
现代文：庞季说：山崩河干，这是国家将亡的征兆。十三年魏武帝平定了荆州，河南衰落下去，人民也逃散了。
English: Pang Ji said: "The landslide of mountains and rivers is a sign of the country's impending doom. In the 13th year of Wei, Emperor Wu leveled Jingzhou, Henan fell into decline, and the people fled.

古文：沔水又径鄀县故城南，古鄀子之国也。
现代文：酒水又流经都县旧城南面，这里是古时的部子国。
English: The liquor also flows through the southern part of the old city of Du County, which is the ancient land of Bu Zi.

古文：秦、楚之间，自商、密迁此，为楚附庸，楚灭之以为邑。
现代文：都子国在秦、楚之间，是从商、密迁到这里的，起初做楚的附庸，后来楚灭了它，成为楚邑。
English: Between the Qin and Chu dynasties, the Tuzi Kingdom migrated here from the Shang and Min dynasties. At first, it was a vassal of Chu, but later, it was destroyed by Chu and became Chuyi.

古文：县南临沔律，津南有石山，上有古烽火台。
现代文：部县南临两水，水南有一座石山，山上有古时的烽火台，县北有大城，楚昭王被楚所迫，从纪邹迁都到这里。
English: There are two rivers in the south of Bu County, and there is a stone mountain in the south of the river. There is an ancient campfire tower on the mountain, and there is a big city in the north of the county. King Chu Zhao was forced by Chu to move the capital from Jiwei to here.

古文：县北有大城，楚昭王为吴所迫，自纪郢徙都之，即所谓鄢、鄀、卢、罗之地也，秦以为县。
现代文：这就是所谓焉队部、庐、罗之地，秦朝时设立为县。
English: This is the so-called place of wanqib, shu and luo, which was set up as a county during the Qin Dynasty.

古文：沔水又东，敖水往之。
现代文：河水又东流，敖水注入。
English: The river also flows to the east, injecting brackish water.

古文：水出新市县东北，又西南径太阳山，西南流径新市县北，又西南而右合枝水，水出大洪山而西南流，径襄阳鄀县界西南，径狄城东南，左注敖水。
现代文：敖水发源于新市县东北，又往西南流经太阳山西面，向南流经新市县北面。又往西南流，在右面汇合了一条支流，这条支流发源于大洪山，往西南流经襄阳都县边界，往西南流经狄城东南，从左面注入敖水。
English: Surabaya water originates in the northeast of Xincheng County, flows southwest through the west of Sun Mountain, and flows south through the north of Xincheng County. It also flows southwest, merging with a tributary on the right. This tributary originates from Dahong Mountain, flows southwest through the border of Xiangyangdu County, and flows southwest through the southeast of Dicheng, injecting Surabaya water from the left.

古文：敖水又西南流注于沔，寔曰敖口。
现代文：敖水又往东西南流，注入两水，汇流处称为敖口。
English: Surabaya water also flows east-west and south, injecting two waters, and the confluence is called Surabaya mouth.

古文：沔水又南径石城西，城因山为固，晋太傅羊祜镇荆州立。
现代文：酒水又往南流经石城西面，石城依山而筑，非常坚固，是晋太傅羊枯镇守荆州时所筑。
English: The wine also flows southwards through the west side of Shicheng. Shicheng is built against the mountain and is very strong. It was built by Emperor Jintao when he was guarding Jingzhou.

古文：晋惠帝元康九年，分江夏西部，置竟陵郡。治此。
现代文：晋惠帝元康九年划分出江夏西部设置了竟陵郡，郡治就在此城。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Jingu, Emperor Yuan Kang divided the western part of Jiangxia and set up Jingtong County. The county seat is in this city.

古文：沔水又东南与臼水合，水出竟陵县东北聊屈山，一名卢屈山，西流注于沔。
现代文：河水又往东南流，与臼水汇合，臼水发源于竟陵县东北的聊屈山，又名卢屈山，向西流注于河水。
English: The river then flows to the southeast and merges with the Usui River. The Usui River originates from Mt. Lakuku, also known as Mt. Luku, in the northeast of Jingling County, and flows westward into the river.

古文：鲁定公四年，吴师入郢，昭王奔随，济于成臼。谓是水者也。
现代文：鲁定公四年前，吴国军队攻入邹都，楚昭玉逃奔到随，渡过成臼，就是指这条水。
English: Four years before King Luding, the army of the State of Wu invaded Shidu, and Chu Zhaoyu fled to Sui, passing through Chengwu, which refers to this water.

古文：又东过荆城东，沔水自荆城东南流，径当阳县之章山东。山上有故城，太尉陶侃伐杜曾所筑也。
现代文：又往东流过荆城东面，沔水从荆城向东南流，经过当阳县章山东面，山上有旧城，是太尉陶侃征伐杜曾时所筑。
English: It also flows eastward through the east side of Jingcheng, and the Xingshui flows from Jingcheng to the southeast, passing through the east side of Zhangshan in Dangyang County. There is an old city on the mountain, which was built by Taifeng Tao Kan during the conquest of Du Zeng.

古文：《禹贡》所谓内方至于大别者也。
现代文：《禹贡》所说的内方山，至大别山，这里的内方山就是章山。
English: Uchifangshan mentioned in "Yugong" extends to Dabie Mountain, where Uchifangshan is Zhangshan.

古文：既携带沔流，寔会《尚韦》之文矣。
现代文：两水既流经章山，那么与《尚书》的记载是相符的了。
English: Since the two streams flowed through Zhangshan, it is consistent with the records of "Shang Shu."

古文：沔水又东，右会权口。
现代文：浦水又东流，在右面与权口汇合。
English: Pushui also flows to the east, merging with Quankou on the right.

古文：水出章山，东南流径权城北，古之权国也。
现代文：权水发源于章山，往东南流经权城北面，这里是古时的权国。
English: The Quan Shui originates from Zhangshan and flows southeast through the north of Quancheng. This is the ancient Quan Guo.

古文：《春秋》鲁庄公十八年，楚武王克权，极叛，围而杀之、迁权于那处是也。
现代文：《春秋》：鲁庄公十八年前，楚武王攻克权国，权国反叛，武王包围了权国，杀了反叛者，并把权人迁到那处。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Lu Zhuanggu eighteen years ago, King Chu Wu conquered the sovereign state, the sovereign state rebelled, King Wu surrounded the sovereign state, killed the rebels, and moved the authorities there.

古文：东南有那口城。
现代文：东南有那口城。
English: To the southeast is Naguchi Castle.

古文：权水又东入于沔。
现代文：权水又往东流注入沔水，河水又往东南流，与扬口汇合。
English: The Qianshui also flows eastward to inject water into the Yanshui, and the river water flows southeastward to merge with the Yangkou.

古文：沔水又东南与扬口合，水上承江陵县赤湖。江陵西北有纪南城，楚文王自丹阳徙此，平王城之。
现代文：扬水上流承接江陵县赤湖，江陵县西北有纪南城，楚文王从丹阳迁到这里，平王修筑了这座城。
English: The upper reaches of the Yangshuo River inherited the Chako Lake in Gangneung County and the Yuji South City in the northwest of Gangneung County. King Chuwen moved here from Danyang, and King Ping built this city.

古文：班固言：楚之郢都也。
现代文：班固说，这是楚国的邹都。
English: "This is the capital of Chu," said Bangu.

古文：城西南有赤坂冈，冈下有渎水，东北流入城，名曰子胥渎，盖吴师入郢所开也，谓之西京湖。
现代文：城西南有赤板冈，冈下有一条水渠，往东北流入城内，名叫子肯读。是吴国军队入郑时开凿的，称为西京湖。
English: In the southwest of the city, there is a red plate hill. Under the hill, there is a water channel that flows into the city to the northeast, called Ziken. It was dug by the army of the State of Wu when they entered Zheng, and it is called the West Beijing Lake.

古文：又东北出城西南，注于龙陂，陂，古天井水也，广圆二百余步，在灵溪东，江堤内。水至渊深，有龙见于其中，故曰龙陂。
现代文：渠水又向东北流出城外，向西南注入龙破。龙坡是古时的天井水，周围二百余步，在灵溪东边的江堤内，水极深，有龙出现在破塘中，因此称为龙破。
English: The canal water flows out of the city to the northeast, and flows into Longba to the southwest. Longpo is an ancient ceiling water, with more than two hundred steps around it. In the river dike on the east side of Lingxi, the water is extremely deep, and dragons appear in the broken pond, so it is called Longba.

古文：陂北有楚庄王钓台，高三丈四尺，南北六丈，东西九丈。
现代文：破塘的北面有楚庄王的钓台，高三丈四尺，南北六丈，东西九丈。
English: On the north side of the broken pond, there is the fishing platform of Chu Zhuang Wang, which is 3 feet high, 4 feet long, 6 feet long from north to south, and 9 feet long from east to west.

古文：陂水又径郢城南，冻北流，谓之扬水。
现代文：破水又流经郑城南，向东北流，叫扬水。
English: The broken water flows through the south of Zhengcheng and flows to the northeast, called Yangshui.

古文：又东北，路白湖水注之。
现代文：又向东北流，路白湖水注入。
English: It also flows to the northeast, injecting water from the White Lake.

古文：湖在大港北，港南曰中湖，南堤下曰昏官湖，三湖合为一水，东通荒谷，荒谷东岸有冶父城，《春秋传》曰：莫敖缢于荒谷，群帅囚于冶父。谓此处也。
现代文：湖在大港北面，港南叫中湖，南堤一下叫昏官湖，三湖汇合成一条水，东面通荒谷。荒谷东岸有座冶父城，《春秋传》说：莫敖溢死于荒谷，诸将帅被囚禁在冶父，说的就是此处。
English: The lake is north of the Grand Harbour, south of the harbour is called the Middle Lake, south of the embankment is called the Dimguan Lake, the three lakes merge into one water, and the east side leads to the barren valley. On the east coast of the barren valley there is a city of Yechu, "Spring and Autumn Legend" said: "Meng Yiyi died in the barren valley, the generals were imprisoned in Yechu, it is here that it is said.

古文：春夏水盛，则南通大江，否则南迄江堤，北径方城西。
现代文：春夏水盛时，水就与南面的大江相通，否则，在南面水就到江堤为止，在北面则流经方城以西。
English: When the water level is high in spring and summer, the water is connected to the big river in the south. Otherwise, the water reaches the river bank in the south and flows west of Fangcheng in the north.

古文：方城即南蛮府也。
现代文：方城就是南蛮府。
English: Fangcheng is Nanban Prefecture.

古文：又北与三湖会，故盛弘之曰：南蛮府东有三湖，源同一水，盖徙治西府也。
现代文：又北流与三湖汇合，因此盛弘之说：南蛮府东有三湖，水源同属一条水，而方位不同，这是因为治所迁到西府的缘故。
English: Moreover, the northern stream converges with the three lakes, so Morihiro said: There are three lakes in the east of Nanban Prefecture. The water source belongs to the same water, but the orientation is different. This is because the treatment center moved to the west.

古文：宋元嘉中，通路白湖下注扬水，以广运漕。
现代文：宋元嘉年间一，开通了路白湖，湖水流注入扬水，扩大了运粮河道。
English: In the first year of Song Yuan Jia, the White Lake Road was opened, the lake water flow was injected into the headwaters, and the grain transportation channel was expanded.

古文：扬水又东历天井北，井在方城北里余，广圆二里，其深不测。井有潜室，见辄兵。
现代文：扬水又往东流经天井北面，井在方城北面一里余处，周围二里，深不可测，井水底下有房屋，出现时就有战祸。
English: The rising water also flows eastward through the north side of the ceiling. The well is more than one mile north of Fangcheng, and the surrounding area is two miles deep. There are houses under the well water, and when they appear, there is a war disaster.

古文：西岸有天井台，因基旧堤，临际水湄，游憩之佳处也。
现代文：西岸有天井台，以旧堤作台基筑成，台临水岸，是游乐休息的好地方。
English: There is a terrace on the west bank, built on the foundation of an old dike. It faces the waterfront and is a good place for recreation and rest.

古文：扬水又东北流，东得赤湖水口，湖周五十里，城下陂池，皆来会同。
现代文：扬水又往东北流，东面有赤湖水口，湖的周围五十里，城下的破池，都汇合到这里。
English: The swollen water flows to the northeast, and to the east there is the mouth of the Red Lake. Fifty miles around the lake, and the broken pool under the city, all converge here.

古文：湖东北有大暑台，高六丈余，纵广八尺，一名清暑台，秀宇层明，通望周博，游者登之，以畅远情。
现代文：湖东北有大暑台，高六丈余，长宽各八尺，又名清暑台，楼台秀丽明亮，视野开阔，遐远的情怀为之一畅。
English: In the northeast of the lake, there is a large hot spring platform, six meters high, eight meters long and wide, also known as a clear hot spring platform. The platform is beautiful and bright, with a wide view and a long-lasting feeling.

古文：扬水又东入华容县，有灵溪水，西通赤湖水口，已下多湖，周五十里，城下陂他，皆来会同。
现代文：扬水又往东流入华容县境，有一条灵溪水，西通赤湖水口，下流湖泊很多，周围五十里，城下的破池都汇合到这里。
English: The upstream water flows eastward into the Huarong County border. There is a Lingxi water, the west channel is the mouth of the Red Lake, and there are many downstream lakes. There are fifty miles around, and the broken ponds under the city all converge here.

古文：又有子胥渎，盖人郢所开也。
现代文：又有一条子青读，是伍子骨入邹时开凿的。
English: There is also a blue line, which was cut when the bone was put into the coffin.

古文：水东人离湖，湖在县东七十五里，《国语》所谓楚灵王阙为石郭陂，汉以象帝舜者也。
现代文：扬水东流注入离湖，湖在县东七十五里。《国语》说：楚灵王为自己凿石榔、堵汉水，使水绕墓地旋转，就像舜墓那样，指的就是此湖。
English: The lake is seventy-five miles east of the county. "National Language" said: King Chuling dug a stone dike for himself, blocked the Han water, and made the water rotate around the cemetery, just like the tomb of the dragonfly, referring to this lake.

古文：湖侧有章华台，台高十丈，基广十五丈。
现代文：离湖旁有章华台，台高十丈，台基宽十五丈。
English: Next to the lake, there is the Zhanghua Platform, which is 10 meters high and 15 meters wide.

古文：左丘明曰：楚筑台于章华之上。
现代文：左丘明说：楚国在章华上建筑了一座高台。
English: Zuo Quming said: Chu built a high platform on Zhanghua.

古文：韦昭以为，章华亦地名也。
现代文：韦昭认为章华也是地名。
English: Wei Zhao believes that Zhanghua is also a place name.

古文：王与伍举登之。举曰：台高不过望国之氛祥，大不过容宴之俎豆。
现代文：有一次，楚灵王与伍举一起登上章华台，伍举说：台高度不过可望国家的凶吉之气；大小不过可放宴会的杯盘。
English: On one occasion, King Chuling boarded the Zhanghua stage together with Wu Qiu. Wu Qiu said, "The height of the stage is just the auspiciousness of the country; the size is just the cup and saucer for the banquet."

古文：盖讥其奢而谏其失也。
现代文：他这样说，实际上是讥讽楚灵王的奢侈，规谏他的过失。
English: When he said this, he was actually mocking King Chuling's extravagance and chastising him for his mistakes.

古文：言此渎，灵王立台之曰漕运所由也。
现代文：据说这条渠道，在楚灵王造台时，是运粮所经的航道。
English: It is said that when King Chuling built the platform, this channel was the shipping route for grain.

古文：其水北流注于扬水，扬水又东北与柞溪水合，水出江陵县北，盖诸池散流、咸所会合，积以成川。
现代文：渠水北流，注入扬水。扬水又向东北流，与柞溪水汇合，柞溪水发源于江陵县北面，是由各坡塘散流出的水汇集而成为一条溪流的。
English: The canal water flows to the north and is injected into the Yangshui River. The Yangshui River flows to the northeast and merges with the Minxi River. The Minxi River originates in the north of Jiangling County, and the water flowing from the ponds is collected and becomes a stream.

古文：东流径启宗之垒南，当驿路，水上有大桥，隆安三年，桓玄袭殷仲堪于江陵，仲堪北奔，缢于此桥。
现代文：向东流经鲁宗之堡垒南面，这里正好是骚路所经，水上有大桥。隆安三年，桓玄在江陵袭击殷仲堪，殷仲堪向北逃奔，最后在这座桥上自统。
English: In the 3rd year of Longan, Huan Xuan attacked Yin Zhongkan in Gangneung, Yin Zhongkan fled to the north, and finally surrendered on this bridge.

古文：柞溪又东注船官湖，湖水又东北入女观湖，湖水又东入于扬水。
现代文：柞溪又往东流注入船官湖，湖水又往东北注入女观湖；湖水又往东注入扬水。
English: In addition, the eastward flow of Minxi River injected water into Funan Lake, and the water of the lake injected water into the northeast of Nian Guan Lake; the water of the lake injected water into the east.

古文：扬水又北径竟陵县西，又北纳巾、吐柘，柘水即下扬水也。
现代文：扬水又往北流经竟陵县西面，又往北流，汇入巾水，分出拓水―拓水就是下扬水。
English: The upstream water flows northward through the west side of Jingting County, and flows northward again, merging into the downstream water, separating the upstream water - the upstream water is the downstream water.

古文：巾水出县东百九十里，西径巾城。
现代文：巾水发源于竟陵县东面一百九十里，往西流经巾城，城下设置了巾水戍。
English: The Wan Shui originates one hundred and ninety miles east of Jingling County and flows westward through Wancheng. A Wan Shui Dam has been set up under the city.

古文：城下置巾水戍，晋元熙二年，竟陵郡巾水戍得铜钟七口，言之上府。
现代文：晋朝元熙二年,在竟陵郡的巾水戍得到七口铜钟，报告了朝廷的府库。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jin, seven bronze bells were found in Zhanshui County, Jingling County, and reported to the imperial treasury.

古文：巾水又西径竟陵县北，西注扬水，谓之巾口。
现代文：巾水又往西流经竟陵县北，向西注入扬水，汇流处称为巾口。
English: The draw-water also flows westward through the north of Jingling County, injecting uplifted water to the west. The confluence is called the draw-water outlet.

古文：水西有古竟陵大城，古郧国也。郧公辛所治，所谓郧乡矣。
现代文：扬水的西面有古时的竟陵大城，这是古代的郧国，是郧公辛所管辖的地方，就是所谓郧乡。
English: To the west of Yangshui, there is the ancient city of Jingsling, which is the ancient state of Yao, the place governed by Yao Gongxin, the so-called Yao Township.

古文：昔白起拔郢，东至竟陵，即此也。
现代文：从前白起攻克邹都，东面直打到竟陵，就是这里。
English: Once upon a time, the White Army attacked and conquered Shantou, and went as far east as the Mausoleum of Genghis Khan, which is here.

古文：秦以为县，王莽之寄平矣。
现代文：秦时立为县，王莽时名为守平。
English: In the Qin Dynasty, it was a county, and in the Wang Mang Dynasty, it was called Shouping.

古文：世祖建武十三年，更封刘隆为侯国。
现代文：世祖建武十三年，把这里改封给刘隆，立为侯国。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jianwu, the founder of Jianwu, he changed the name of this place to Liu Long and established it as a principality.

古文：城旁有甘鱼陂，《左传》昭公十三年，公子黑肱为令尹，次于鱼陂者也。
现代文：城旁有个甘鱼破。《左传》：昭公十三年前，公子黑肚当令尹，在鱼破留宿，就指此肚。
English: There is a sweetfish pond next to the castle. "Left biography": Akiko thirteen years ago, when his son Kurobelly ordered Yin, to stay in the fish pond, it refers to this pond.

古文：扬水又北注于沔，谓之扬口，中夏口也。
现代文：扬水又北流注入酒水，汇流处称为扬口，也就是中夏口。
English: The headwaters and the north stream inject the liquor, and the confluence is called the headwaters, that is, the middle summer headwaters.

古文：曹太祖之追刘备于当阳也，张飞按矛于长坂，备得与数骑斜趋汉津，遂济夏口是也。
现代文：曹太祖在当阳追刘备，张飞横矛立马于长坂坡，刘备才得以和几个随从骑马斜插到汉津，渡过了夏口。
English: Cao Taizu chased Liu Bei in Dangyang, Zhang Fei stood on a long slope with a crossbow, and Liu Bei was able to ride with several followers to Hanzin, passing through Xiakou.

古文：沔水又东得浐口，其水承大浐、马骨诸猢水，周三四百里，及其夏水来同，渺若沧海，洪潭巨浪，萦连江沔。
现代文：河水又往东流，有沪口，这条水承接大沪、马骨等湖水，周围三四百里，到了夏水汇流进来，就变得像大海似的一片汪洋，水深浪阔，与江、污萦回曲折地连在一起了。
English: The water of the river flows to the east, and there is the Hukou River. This water is connected to the waters of the Dahu, Ma Jian, and other lakes. It has a circumference of three or four hundred miles. When the summer water flows in, it becomes a vast ocean like the sea. The water is deep and wide, and it is connected to the river and the dirty canal.

古文：故郭景纯《江赋》云：其旁则有朱浐、丹漅是也。
现代文：所以郭景纯《江赋》说：旁近则有朱、沪、丹、漂诸水。
English: Therefore, Guo Jingshun said in "Jiang Fu": Nearby there are Zhu, Huh, Dan, and Buxu.

古文：又东南过江夏云杜县东，夏水从西来注之。
现代文：又往东南流过江夏郡云杜县东面，夏水从西方流来注入。
English: It also flows southeast through the eastern side of Yundu County, Jiangxia County, and the summer water flows in from the west.

古文：即堵口也，为中夏水。
现代文：夏水注入处就是堵口，这条水也叫中夏水。
English: The place where the summer water is injected is the plugging, and this water is also called the mid-summer water.

古文：县，故亭，《左传》若敖娶于是也。
现代文：云杜县就是过去的邓亭。《左传》说：若敖在邓娶妻。
English: Yundu County is the past Deng Ting. "Zo Zhuan" said: If you marry a wife in Deng.

古文：《禹贡》所谓云土梦作，故县取名焉。
现代文：《禹贡》说：云梦泽一带也都可耕种了。
English: "Yugong" said: Yunmengze area can also be cultivated.

古文：县有云梦城，城在东北。
现代文：所以取名为云杜县。该县东北有云梦城。
English: Therefore, it was named Yundu County. In the northeast of the county, there is Yundu Dream City.

古文：沔水又东径左桑，昔周昭王南征，船人胶舟以进之。昭王渡沔，中流而没，死于是水。
现代文：酒水又往东流经左桑，从前周昭王南征，船夫把用胶粘合起来的船进献给他，昭王乘船渡河水，船到中流就沉没了，于是死于水中。
English: The wine also flowed eastward through Zuo San. From the previous week, Zhou Zhaowang went to the south, and the boatman presented him with a boat glued together. Zhaowang took the boat to cross the river, and the boat sank in the middle of the stream, so he died in the water.

古文：齐、楚之会，齐侯曰：昭王南征而不复，寡人是问。
现代文：齐、楚会盟时，齐侯说：昭王南征却没有回来，我要追查这件事的。
English: When Qi and Chu were allied, Qi Hou said: Zhao Wang did not return from the Southern Expedition. I will investigate this matter.

古文：屈完曰：君其问诸水滨。
现代文：屈完说：你们还是去追查水滨吧！
English: Qu finally said, "You should still go after the waterfront."

古文：庾仲雍言：村老云：百姓佐昭王丧事于此，成礼而行，故曰佐丧。左桑，字失体耳。
现代文：庚仲雍说：村里的老人说，当地百姓在这里帮助料理昭王的丧事，丧礼完成后就启程，因此称为佐丧 左桑是把字写错的结果。
English: Geng Zhongyong said: The old man in the village said that the local people helped to prepare the funeral of Zhao Wang here, and left after the funeral was completed. Therefore, the name Zhao Zang was the result of a misspelling.

古文：沔水又东合巨亮水口。水北承巨亮湖，南达于沔。
现代文：河水又往东流，与巨亮水口汇合，这条水承接北面的巨亮湖，南流到河水。
English: The water of the river flows to the east and meets the mouth of the Jiu Liang Lake. This water is connected to the Jiu Liang Lake in the north and flows to the river in the south.

古文：沔水又东得合驿口，庾仲雍言：须导村耆旧云：朝廷驿使，合王丧于是，因以名焉。
现代文：沔水又往东流到合绎口。庚仲雍说：须导村的老人说，朝廷释使到这里会合，参加昭王的丧事，因此得了合绎的地名。
English: Gong Zhongyong said, "The old man of Sudao village said that the imperial envoys gathered here to attend the funeral of King Zhao, so the place name of Sudao was given.

古文：今须导村正有大敛口，言昭王于此殡敛矣。
现代文：今天须导村有大敛口，据说昭王就是在这里殡敛的。
English: Today, Sudo Village has a large mortuary, and it is said that King Akira was buried here.

古文：沔水又东，谓之横桑，言得昭王丧处也。
现代文：河水又往东流，有一处叫横桑，据说是找到昭王遗体的地方。
English: The river flows east again, and there is a place called Yokosang, which is said to be the place where the remains of King Zhao were found.

古文：沔水又东，谓之郑公潭，言郑武公与王同溺水于是。
现代文：河水又往东流到郑公潭，据说郑武公与昭王一同溺死在这里。
English: The river then flows east to Zheng Gongtan, where Zheng Wukong and Zhao Wang are said to have drowned.

古文：余谓世数既悬，为不近情矣。
现代文：我想武公与昭王时代相距很远，这说法太不近情理了。
English: I think that there is a great distance between the times of King Wu and King Zhao, and this statement is too far-fetched to be true.

古文：斯乃楚之郑乡，守邑大夫僭言公，故世以为郑公潭耳。
现代文：这里是楚的郑乡，守城大夫自封为公，所以民间把这地方称为郑公潭了。
English: This is the Zheng Township of Chu, and the town doctor has made himself public, so the people call this place Zheng Gongtan.

古文：沔水又东得死沔，言昭王济沔自是死，故有死沔之称，王尸岂逆流乎？
现代文：河水又往东流到死河，据说昭王渡河时在这里溺死，所以有死河的名称。难道昭王的尸体会逆流而上吗？
English: The river then flows east to the Dead River. It is said that King Zhao drowned here while crossing the river, hence the name Dead River. Could it be that King Zhao's body floated upstream?

古文：但千古芒昧，难以昭知，推其事类，似是而非矣，沔水又东与力口合，有溾水，出竟陵郡新阳县西南池河山，东流径新阳县南，县治云杜故城，分云杜立。
现代文：远古的事渺茫得很，也很难弄得清楚；如果根据事理来推断，就令人觉得似是而非了。河水又往东流，与力口汇合，有魄水发源于竟陵郡新阳县西南的池河山，往东流经新阳县南，县治在云杜旧城，是从云杜县分出来设置的。
English: The ancient matter is very vague, and it is difficult to figure out; if it is inferred from the facts, it is plausible. The river flows to the east and merges with the Liguo, and the water originates from the Chihe Mountain in the southwest of Xinyang County, Jingling County, and flows to the east through the south of Xinyang County. The county government is in Yundu Old Town, and it is set up separately from Yundu County.

古文：溾水又东南，流注宵城县南大湖，又南入于沔水，是曰力口。
现代文：魄水又往东南流，注入宵城县南面的大湖，又往南流注入河水，汇流处叫力口。
English: The rushing water flows to the southeast, and is injected into the large lake in the south of Yoicheng County, and the southward flow is injected into the river, and the confluence is called the mouth of the river.

古文：沔水又东南，溾水入焉。
现代文：酒水又往东南流，郧水注入。
English: The wine then flows to the southeast, where it is mixed with brackish water.

古文：沔水又东径沌水口，水南通县之太白湖，湖水东南通江，又谓之沌口。沔水又东径沌阳县北，处沌水之阳也。
现代文：沔水文往东流经沌水口，沌水南通县内的太白湖，湖水往东南注入江水，又称沌口，河水又往东流经沌阳县北面，沌阳县坐落在沌水的北面。
English: The Yangtze River flows eastward through Chaon Reservoir, Chaon Reservoir is Lake Tai Bai in Nantong County, the lake water flows southeast into the river water, also known as Chaon Reservoir, and the river water flows eastward through the north of Chaon Yang County, Chaon Yang County is located in the north of Chaon Water.

古文：沔水又东径临嶂故城北，晋建兴二年，太尉陶侃为荆州，镇此也。
现代文：河水又往东流经临嶂旧城北，晋朝建兴二年，太尉陶侃任荆州刺史，镇守在这里。
English: The river flowed eastward through the old city north of Linyi. In the second year of the construction of the Jin Dynasty, Lieutenant Tao Kan was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou, and the town guard was here.

古文：又南至江夏沙羡县北，南入于江。
现代文：又往南流到江夏郡沙羡县北面，南流注人江水。
English: It also flows southward to the north of Shasen County, Jiangxia County, and the south stream pours into the water of the Renren River.

古文：庾仲雍曰：夏口亦曰沔口矣。《尚书。禹贡》云：汉水南至大别入江。
现代文：庚仲雍说：夏口又名两口。《尚书·禹贡》说：汉水往南流到大别山注入江水。
English: Geng Zhongyong said: Xiakou is also known as two mouths. "Shangshu · Yugong" said: Han water flows south to Dabie Mountain to inject river water.

古文：《春秋左传》定公四年，吴师伐郢，楚子常济汉而陈，自小别至于大别。
现代文：《春秋左传》：定公四年前，吴国军队攻郧，楚子常渡过汉水布阵，从小别山到大别山。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn": Four years ago, when Ding Gong was attacked by the army of the State of Wu, Chu Zi often crossed the Han River and went from Xiaobie Mountain to Dabie Mountain.

古文：京相璠《春秋土地名》曰：大别，汉东山名也，在安丰县南。
现代文：京相播《春秋土地名》说：大别是汉水东面的山名，在安丰县南。
English: Beijing News anchor "Spring and Autumn Land Names" said: Dabie is the name of the mountain east of the Han River, in the south of Anfeng County.

古文：杜预《释地》曰：二别近汉之名，无缘乃在安丰也。
现代文：杜预《释地》说：大、小二别是由于靠近汉水而来的山名，不可能在安丰。
English: Du Yuan of "Interpretation" said: The difference between the big and small ones is due to the mountain name coming from near the Han River, and it is impossible to be in Anfeng.

古文：按《地说》言：汉水东行，触大别之阪。
现代文：按《地说》的说法，汉水东流触到大别山坡，南流与江水汇合。
English: According to the "saying," the east stream of the Han River touches the Dabie mountain slope, and the south stream merges with the river.

古文：南与江合，则与《尚书》、杜预相符，但今不知所在矣。
现代文：这和《尚书》、杜预的说法是相符的。但今天却不知道它在什么地方了。
English: This is consistent with the view of Du Yuehong in Shangshu, but today we don't know where it is.

