古文：吴猎，字德夫，潭州醴陵人。
现代文：吴猎，字德夫，潭州醴陵人。
English: Wu Huan, Zhi Defu, a resident of Fulin, Tanzhou.

古文：登进士第，初主浔州平南簿。
现代文：考中进士，最初任浔州平南县主簿。
English: Passed the junior high school entrance examination, and initially served as the chief bookkeeper of Bozhou Pingnan County.

古文：时张栻经略广西，檄摄静江府教授。
现代文：当时张木式为广西经略使，征召吴猎为静江府教授。
English: At that time, Zhang Muxi was the Guangxi Minister of Education, and Wu Han was recruited as a professor from Jingjiang Prefecture.

古文：刘焞代栻，栻以猎荐，辟本司准备差遣。
现代文：刘火享代替张木式职务后，张木式把吴猎推荐给他，他任命吴猎为经略司准备差遣。
English: After Liu Huo Jian replaced Zhang Muxi in his position, Zhang Muxi recommended Wu Han to him, and he appointed Wu Han as Secretary of the General Office of the Communist Party of China.

古文：盗李接起，陷容、雷、高、化、贵、郁林等州，猎请赏劳诛罪，焞于是录郁林功，诛南流县尉、郁林巡检，人人惊厉，争死斗，不逾时，盗悉就擒。
现代文：李接起义，攻陷了容、雷、高、化、贵、郁林等州，吴猎请求赏功诛罪，刘火享于是对郁林之战进行赏罚，杀死南流县尉、郁林巡检，人人受到很大震动，争相死战，不久，就平定了起义。
English: Li Jian led the uprising and conquered the provinces of Rong, Lei, Gao, Huan, Guizhou, and Yulin. Wu Han asked for rewards and punishments for his crimes. Liu Hu enjoyed the rewards and punishments for the battle of Yulin and killed the Nanliu County lieutenant and the Yulin patrol. Everyone was greatly shaken and fought to the death. Soon, the uprising was quelled.

古文：尉，宰相王淮甥也，猎坐降官。
现代文：南流县尉，是宰相王淮的外甥，吴猎因此被降官。
English: Nanliu County Lieutenant is the nephew of Prime Minister Wang Huai, and Wu Han was demoted as a result.

古文：久之，知常州无锡县。
现代文：过了一段时间，吴猎为常州无锡县知县。
English: After a period of time, Wu Han became the county magistrate of Wuxi County, Changzhou.

古文：用陈傅良荐，召试，守正字。
现代文：因陈傅良的举荐，被特旨召试，任秘书正字。
English: On the recommendation of Chen Fu Liang, he was specially summoned for an examination and appointed secretary of Zheng Zi.

古文：光宗以疾久不觐重华宫，猎上疏曰： 今慈福有八十之大母，重华有垂白之二亲，陛下宜于此时问安上寿，恪共子职。 辞甚切。
现代文：光宗因病很久不去重华宫拜见，吴猎上疏说： 现在慈福宫有八十岁的太后，重华宫有年迈的双亲，陛下应在此时问安上寿，恪守做儿子的职责。 言语十分恳切。
English: Guangzong did not visit Chonghua Palace for a long time due to illness, and Wu Huan Shangzhu said: Now Cifu Palace has an eighty-year-old empress dowager, and Chonghua Palace has elderly parents. His Majesty should ask for peace and longevity at this time, and abide by the duties of being a son. The words are very sincere.

古文：又白宰相留正，乞召朱熹、杨万里。
现代文：吴猎又对宰相留正说，请求召用朱熹、杨万里。
English: Wu Han also said to the Prime Minister Ruzheng, requesting the use of Zhu Xi and Yang Wanli.

古文：时陈傅良以言过宫事不行求去，猎责之曰： 今安危之机，判然可见，未闻有牵裾折槛之士。
现代文：此时陈傅良因上书议论过关于妇女职事的事没有施行而辞官，吴猎责备他说： 现在显然是国家的安危之机，没听说在此时有才的人对国事袖手旁观的。
English: At this time, Chen Fu Liang resigned from his post because he had written a letter discussing the issue of women's employment and it had not been implemented. Wu Han reproached him, saying, "Now is clearly a time of danger for the country. I have not heard of any talented people standing idly by at this time.

古文：公不于此时有所奋发，为士大夫倡，第洁身而去，于国奚益！ 傅良为改容谢之。
现代文：您不在此时有所作为，做士大夫的领袖，只想洁身而去，对国家有什么益处？ 陈傅良很感谢他。
English: If you do not make a difference at this time, if you are a leader who only wants to clean up and leave, what is the benefit to the country? Chen Fuliang is very grateful to him.

古文：宁宗即位，迁校书郎，除监察御史。
现代文：宁宗即位后，吴猎升为校书郎，担任监察御史。
English: After the enthronement of Ningzong, Wu Hunsheng became the school scribe and served as inspector of history.

古文：上趣修大内，将移御，猎言： 寿皇破汉、魏以来之薄俗，服高宗三年之丧，陛下万一轻去丧次，将无以慰在天之灵。 又言： 陛下即位，未见上皇，宜笃厉精诚，以俟上皇和豫而祗见焉。 会伪学禁兴，猎言： 陛下临御未数月，今日出一纸去宰相，明日出一纸去谏臣，昨又闻侍讲朱熹遽以御札畀祠，中外惶骇，谓事不出于中书，是谓乱政。 猎既驳史浩谥，又请以张浚配享阜陵曰： 艰难以来，首倡大义，不以成败利钝异其心，精忠茂烈，贯日月、动天地，未有过于张浚也。
现代文：宁宗催促修缮皇宫，要移到别处临御，吴猎说： 寿皇破除汉、魏以来的旧俗，服高宗三年丧，陛下万一轻易除去丧礼，将无以慰先皇的在天之灵。 又说 ：陛下即位，没见到太上皇，应该笃信精诚，等太上皇病愈后再去拜见他。 正赶上禁伪学，吴猎说： 陛下临朝不几个月，今天下一诏书罢去宰相，明天出一诏书免去谏臣，昨天又听说侍讲朱熹被下诏免职给以管宫观的闲职，朝内外惊骇，认为政事不出自中书，就是乱政。 吴猎驳议对史浩的赠谥，又请求让张浚在阜陵同受祭祀说： 国家艰难以来，首倡大义，不以成败、顺利和挫折改变自己的决心，精忠刚烈，可以贯日月、动天地，没有超过张浚的人。
English: Ning Zong urged that the imperial palace be repaired and moved to another place to be closer to the emperor, and Wu Han said, "Emperor Shou has abolished the old customs from the Han and Wei dynasties, and the three-year funeral of Emperor Gaozong will be held. If His Majesty were to easily remove the funeral rites, there would be no consolation for the spirit of the former emperor in heaven. He also said, "Your Majesty has ascended to the throne, and you have not seen the former emperor, you should be faithful and sincere, and wait until the former emperor has recovered from his illness before visiting him. You are just catching up with the prohibition of pseudoscience, Wu

古文：孝宗皇帝规恢之志，一饭不忘。
现代文：孝宗皇帝立志恢复失地，寝食不忘。
English: Emperor Xiaozong was determined to recover the lost territory and did not forget to eat and sleep.

古文：历考相臣，终始此念，足以上配孝宗在天之意，亦惟浚一人耳。 议皆不合。
现代文：考察当时的大臣，始终讲求恢复，足以上配孝宗在天之意，也只有张浚一人。 吴猎的建议都与宁宗不合。
English: When the ministers of the time were examined, they always insisted on restoration, and only Zhang Jun was willing to support Xiaozong. Wu Han's suggestions were not in line with Ningzong.

古文：出为江西转运判官，寻劾罢。
现代文：他被贬出朝为江西转运判官，不久被弹劾罢去。
English: He was denounced as the judge of Jiangxi transshipment in the DPRK, and was soon impeached and dismissed.

古文：久之，党禁驰，起为广西转运判官，除户部员外郎、总领湖广江西京西财赋。
现代文：过了一段时间，朝廷解除了党禁，吴猎被起用为广西转运判官，担任户部员外郎，总领湖、广、江西、京西财赋。
English: After a period of time, the imperial court lifted the party ban, and Wu Han was appointed as the judge of Guangxi transshipment, the head of the household department, and the general leader of Hubei, Guangxi, Jiangxi and West Beijing.

古文：韩侂胄议开边，猎贻书当路，请号召义士以保边场，刺子弟以补军实，增枣阳、信阳之戍以备冲突，分屯阳罗五关以扞武昌，杜越境诱窃以谨边隙，选试良家子以卫府库。
现代文：韩胄决定兴兵，吴猎写信给当权的人，请求号召义士保卫边疆，让自己的子弟当兵出征，增加枣阳、信阳的守备，分兵屯驻阳罗五关以保卫武昌，禁止越境引诱金地百姓和偷盗以防止发生边境冲突，选拔良家子弟保卫府库。
English: Han Xuan decided to raise an army, and Wu Han wrote to the people in power, requesting that they call up volunteers to defend the border, let their children go to war, increase the defense of Zaoyang and Xinyang, station troops at Yangluo Wuguan to defend Wuchang, prohibit crossing the border to lure people from Jindi and stealing to prevent border conflicts, and select good children to defend the government treasury.

古文：且谓： 金人惩绍兴末年之败，今其来必出荆、襄逾湖。 乃输湖南米于襄阳，凡五十万石；又以湖北漕司和籴米三十万石分输荆、郢、安、信四郡；蓄银帛百万计以备进讨；拔董逵、孟宗政、柴发等分列要郡，厥后皆为名将。
现代文：并说 ：金人鉴于绍兴末年的失败，今日出兵一定是绕过两湖攻打荆、襄。 于是就从湖南运五十万石米到襄阳；又把湖北漕司的和籴米三十万石分别运到荆、郢、安、信四郡；储备银帛百万计准备进兵；提拔董逵、孟宗政、柴发等分别守卫军事要地，后来他们都成为名将。
English: He also said: "In view of the failure of the last years of Shaoxing, the Jin people must have sent troops to attack Jing and Xiang by bypassing the two lakes today. Therefore, they transported 500,000 koku meters from Hunan to Xiangyang; transported 300,000 koku of Hubei Caozi and glutinous rice to four counties of Jing, Handan, An and Xin respectively; stockpiled millions of silver ingots to prepare for entering the army; promoted Dong Jun, Meng Zongzhen and Chai Fa to guard military important places respectively, and later they all became famous generals.

古文：召除秘书少监，首陈边事，乞增光、鄂、江、黄四郡戍。
现代文：吴猎被召用为秘书少监，他首先陈奏边事，请求增加光、鄂、江、黄四州守备。
English: Wu Han was appointed as the secretary of the junior superintendent. At first, he played up side issues and requested to increase the number of guards in the four provinces of Guangxi, Hunan, Jiangxi and Hunan.

古文：属江陵告饥，除秘阁修撰、主管荆湖北路安抚司公事、知江陵府。
现代文：时值江陵发生饥荒，吴猎被任命为秘阁修撰、主管荆湖北路安抚司公事、江陵知府。
English: At the time of the famine in Gangneung, Wu Han was appointed as secretary of the secret cabinet, director of the Jinghu North Road Pacification Division of the Ministry of Public Affairs, and governor of Gangneung.

古文：陛辞，请出大农十万缗以振饥者。
现代文：辞别皇上时，吴猎请求拿出大农十万缗钱来赈济饥民。
English: When bidding farewell to the emperor, Wu Han asked the farmer to take out 100,000 baht to feed the hungry.

古文：道武昌，遣人招商分籴；至郡，减价发粜，米价为平。
现代文：路过武昌时，派人招募商人分别买粮；到江陵后，把粮食低价卖出，米价持平。
English: When passing through Wuchang, he sent someone to recruit merchants to buy grain separately; after arriving in Gangneung, he sold the grain at a low price, and the rice price remained flat.

古文：猎计金攻襄阳，则荆为重镇，乃修成 高氏三海 ，筑金鸾、内湖、通济、保安四匮，达于上海而注之中海；拱辰、长林、药山、枣林四匮，达于下海；分高沙、东奖之流，由寸金堤外历南纪、楚望诸门，东汇沙市为南海。
现代文：吴猎估计金人将攻打襄阳，而荆州是重镇，于是修成 高氏三海 ，筑金鸾、内湖、通济、保安四个水池，通到上海而流入中海；拱辰、长林、药山、枣林四个水池，通到下海；分高沙、东奖的水流，由寸金堤外经南纪、楚望各门，在东面沙市相会合为南海。
English: Wu Han estimated that the Jin people would attack Xiangyang, while Jingzhou was an important town, so he built Gao's Three Seas, four pools of gold, inland lake, Tongji and Baoan, leading to Shanghai and flowing into the Mediterranean Sea; four pools of Gongchen, Changlin, Yushan and Zao Lin, leading to the lower sea; the water flow of Fengaosha and Dongpo, passing through the gates of Nanji and Chuwang from the outside of the Jin dike, and meeting the South Sea in the east of Shaxi.

古文：又于赤湖城西南遏走马湖、熨斗陂之水，西北置李公匮，水势四合，可限戎马。
现代文：又在赤湖城西南阻住走马湖、熨斗陂的水，在西北修李公柜，水势四面合围，可阻止金的骑兵。
English: In addition, in the southwest of the Red Lake City, the water of the walking horse lake and the iron dipper was stopped, and the Li public coffer was repaired in the northwest. The water potential was surrounded on all sides, which could stop the cavalry of gold.

古文：金人围襄阳、德安，游骑迫竟陵，朝廷命猎节制本路兵马。
现代文：金人包围襄阳、德安，金的游骑临近竟陵，朝廷命令吴猎节制本路兵马。
English: The Jin surrounded Xiangyang and De'an. Jin's cavalry was close to Qingling. The imperial court ordered Wu Xuan to restrain the soldiers and horses on this road.

古文：猎遣张荣将兵援竟陵，又招神马陂溃卒得万人，分援襄阳、德安。
现代文：吴猎派张荣率兵支援竟陵，又招来神马陂的一万名溃兵，分别支援襄阳、德安。
English: Wu Huan sent Zhang Rong and his soldiers to support Jingling, and also brought ten thousand routed soldiers from Shenma to support Xiangyang and De'an.

古文：加宝谟阁待制、京湖宣抚使。
现代文：吴猎被加官为宝谟阁待制、京湖宣抚使。
English: Wu Han was promoted to the position of Bommu Pavilion Attendant and the Beijing-Lake Xuanfu Envoy.

古文：时金人再犯竟陵，张荣死之，襄阳、德安俱急。
现代文：此时金人又攻竟陵，张荣战死，襄阳、德安都十分危急。
English: At this time, the Jin people attacked the Mausoleum, Zhang Rong died in battle, and Xiangyang and De'an were in great danger.

古文：吴曦俄反于蜀，警报至，猎请魏了翁摄参议官，访以西事，募死士入竟陵，命其将王宗廉死守，调大军及忠义、保捷分道夹击，金人遂去。
现代文：吴曦不久又在蜀反叛，警报传来，吴猎请求朝廷让魏了翁任参议官，访察西边的事，招募敢死队进入竟陵，命令他们的将官王宗廉要死守，调大军及忠义、保捷军分道夹击，金人才撤走。
English: Wu Xi soon rebelled again in Shu, and the alarm was raised. Wu Han requested the imperial court to appoint Wei Lioweng as a senator to investigate the situation in the west, recruit death squads to enter the tomb, order their general Wang Zonglian to defend it to the death, and dispatch a large army and the Zhongyi and Porsche armies to split up the attack, so that Jin talent could withdraw.

古文：又督董逵等援德安，董世雄、孟宗政等解襄阳之围。
现代文：又督促董逵等救援德安，董世雄、孟宗政等解襄阳之围。
English: He also urged Dong Xuan and others to rescue De'an, and Dong Shixiong, Meng Zongzheng and others to lift the siege of Xiangyang.

古文：西事方殷，猎为讨叛计，请于朝，以王大才、彭辂任西事，仍分兵抗均、房诸险，漕粟归、峡以待王师。
现代文：吴曦十分猖狂，吴猎为平叛，向朝廷请示，让王大才、彭辂负责西边的事，仍旧分兵抵御均、房各险要之地，把米漕运到归、峡等待宋军。
English: Wu Xi was very rampant, Wu Han was a counter-rebel, and he asked the imperial court for instructions to let Wang Dacai and Peng Yao be responsible for the west side. Still, the detachment of soldiers resisted all the dangerous places, and transported the rice paddles to the Hui Gorge to wait for the Song Army.

古文：及曦诛，除刑部侍郎，充四川宣谕使。
现代文：吴曦被杀后，吴猎被任命为刑部侍郎，担任四川宣谕使。
English: After Wu Xi was killed, Wu Han was appointed as the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department and served as the messenger of the Sichuan Proclamation.

古文：朝廷命旌别淑慝。
现代文：朝廷下令甄别善良和邪恶。
English: The court ordered the screening of good and evil.

古文：以敷文阁学士、四川安抚制置使兼知成都府。
现代文：吴猎以敷文阁学士、四川安抚制置使的身份兼任成都知府。
English: Wu Han concurrently held the post of Chengdu prefectural governor with the status of Shikibunkaku bachelor and Sichuan pacification envoy.

古文：嘉定六年召还，卒，家无余资。
现代文：嘉定六年吴猎被召回京，去世，家无余财。
English: In the sixth year of Jiading, Wu Han was recalled to Beijing and passed away. The family had no spare money.

古文：蜀人思其政，画像祠之。
现代文：蜀人思念他的政事，画像祭祀他。
English: The people of Shu miss his politics, and his image is worshipped.

古文：猎初从张栻学，乾道初，朱熹会栻于潭，猎又亲炙，湖湘之学一出于正，猎实表率之。
现代文：吴猎最初从学于张木式，乾道初年，朱熹和张木式在潭州相会，吴猎又亲承朱熹的教化，湖湘之学出于正统，实在是吴猎倡导的。
English: Wu Han initially learned from Zhang Mu style. In the first year of the dry way, Zhu Xi and Zhang Mu style met in Tanzhou. Wu Han also personally inherited Zhu Xi's enlightenment. The study of Hunan was orthodox, and it was really advocated by Wu Han.

古文：有《畏斋文集》、奏议六十卷。
现代文：吴猎有《畏斋文集》、奏议六十卷。
English: Wu Huan has "A Collection of Poems on the Fear of Lying" and 60 volumes of speeches.

古文：谥文定。
现代文：他被谥号 文定 。
English: He was nicknamed Wenjing.

古文：项安世，字平父，其先括苍人，后家江陵。
现代文：项安世，字平父，他的祖先是括苍人，后来家住江陵。
English: He was born in Ansei, and his father's family name was Ping. His ancestors were Kechang people, and later the family lived in Gangneung.

古文：淳熙二年进士，召试，除秘书正字。
现代文：淳熙二年考中进士，被特旨召试，任命为秘书正字。
English: In the second year of Aung Hee's junior high school entrance examination, he was called for a special examination and appointed as secretary Zheng Zi.

古文：光宗以疾不过重华宫，安世上书言： 陛下仁足以覆天下，而不能施爱于庭闱之间；量足以容群臣，而不能忍于父子之际。
现代文：光宗因病不去重华宫，项安世上书说 ：陛下的仁德足以覆盖天下，却没有施爱于父母；气量足以容纳群臣，却不能容忍父子间的事。
English: Guangzong did not go to Chonghua Palace due to illness, and Xiang An said in a letter to the world: His Majesty's benevolence is enough to cover the world, but he did not love his parents; his stamina is enough to accommodate his ministers, but he cannot tolerate father-son affairs.

古文：以一身寄于六军、万姓之上，有父子然后有君臣。
现代文：陛下身在六军、万姓之上，有父子然后有君臣。
English: His Majesty is above the six armies and all the families. There are fathers and sons, and then there are princes and ministers.

古文：愿陛下自入思虑，父子之情，终无可断之理；爱敬之念，必有油然之时。
现代文：希望陛下自己考虑，父子之情，始终没有可断绝的道理；对父母的爱，一定有油然而升的时候。
English: I hope that His Majesty will consider for himself that there is always no reason why the love between father and son can be severed; there must be a time when the love for parents rises.

古文：圣心一回，何用择日，早往则谓之省，暮往则谓之定。
现代文：陛下回心转意，何必选择日子，早晨去重华宫问候称 省 ，晚上去问安则叫 定 。
English: His Majesty had a change of heart, so why did he have to choose the day? In the morning, he would go to Chonghua Palace to greet the provincials, and in the evening, he would go to say hello to the regulars.

古文：即日就驾，旋乾转坤，在返掌间尔。 疏入不报。
现代文：今日就去，扭转乾坤，在翻掌之间。 奏疏没得到答复。
English: Go today, turn things around, in the palm of your hand.

古文：安世遗宰相留正书求去，寻迁校书郎。
现代文：项安世给宰相留正写信请求辞职，不久升为校书郎。
English: Koto Yasushi wrote a letter to Prime Minister Ruzheng to request his resignation, and was soon promoted to school scribe.

古文：宁宗即位，诏求言，安世应诏言：
现代文：宁宗即位后，下诏征求意见，项安世应诏上疏：
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Ningzong, the following edict was issued to solicit opinions, and the item "peace and stability" was added to the previous edict:

古文：管夷吾治齐，诸葛亮治蜀，立国之本，不过曰量地以制赋，量赋以制用而已。
现代文： 管夷吾治理齐国，诸葛亮治理蜀国，他们立国的根本，不过是根据土地来确定赋税，根据赋税来决定用度而已。
English: Guan Yiwu governed Qi Province, Zhuge Liang governed Shu Province, and the basis of their founding of the country was to determine the tax based on the land, and to determine the expenditure based on the tax.

古文：陛下试披舆地图，今郡县之数，比祖宗时孰为多少？
现代文：陛下看看舆地图，如今天下郡县的数量，跟祖宗时相比谁多谁少？
English: Your Majesty, take a look at the world map. If you look at the number of counties today, how many are there compared to the time of your ancestors?

古文：比秦、汉、隋、唐时孰为多少？
现代文：跟秦、汉、隋、唐时相比谁多谁少？
English: Compared with the Qin, Han, Sui and Tang dynasties, who is more and who is less?

古文：陛下必自知其狭且少矣。
现代文：陛下一定知道现在郡县小而且少。
English: Your Majesty must know that counties are now few and far between.

古文：试命版曹具一岁赋入之数，祖宗盛时，东南之赋入几何？
现代文：陛下可让户部列出一年的赋税收入，在祖宗盛世时，东南的赋税收入是多少？
English: Your Majesty may ask the Household Department to list a year's tax revenue. What was the tax revenue of the Southeast when your ancestors were in their prime?

古文：建炎、绍兴以来至乾道、淳熙，其所增取几何？
现代文：建炎、绍兴以来到乾道、淳熙时，赋税增加了多少？
English: How much has the tax increased since Jianyan and Shaoxing to Qiandao and Junxi?

古文：陛下试命内外群臣有司具一岁之用，人主供奉、好赐之费几何？
现代文：陛下可让内外群臣和各机构列出一年的费用，其中供奉陛下、赏赐的费用是多少？
English: Your Majesty may ask your ministers and agencies at home and abroad to list their expenses for the year. How much will it cost to serve and reward Your Majesty?

古文：御前工役、器械之费几何？
现代文：御前工役、器械的费用是多少？
English: What is the cost of labor and equipment?

古文：嫔嫱、宦寺廪给之费几何？
现代文：嫔嫱、宦官供给费用是多少？
English: How much does it cost to supply a eunuch?

古文：户部、四总领养兵之费几何？
现代文：户部、四总领养兵的费用是多少？
English: How much does it cost to adopt a soldier from the Household Division or the Fourth General Headquarters?

古文：州县公使、迎送、请给之费几何？
现代文：州县的公使、迎送、请给的费用是多少？
English: How much does it cost to send an envoy, welcome, or give a gift to a prefectural or county official?

古文：陛下必自知其为侈且滥矣！
现代文：陛下一定知道所用奢侈无度了！
English: Your Majesty must know the extravagance!

古文：用不量赋而至于侈且滥，内外上下之积不得而不空，天地山川之藏不得而不竭，非忍痛耐谤，一举而更张之，未知其所以终也。
现代文：国家用度不根据赋税收入情况来决定，以至于奢侈无度，那么内外上下的积蓄不能不空，天地山川的储藏不能不枯竭，陛下如果不听取意见，一举而改变这种情况，那就不知道将出现什么后果了。
English: If the national expenditure is not decided according to the tax revenue situation, so that it is extravagant, then the savings at home and abroad cannot but be empty, and the reserves of heaven and earth cannot but be exhausted. If Your Majesty does not listen to the opinions and change this situation at one stroke, then I do not know what consequences will occur.

古文：今天下之费最重而当省者，兵也。
现代文： 如今天下的费用最重而且应当节省的，就是军费。
English: For example, the biggest expense today, and the one that should be saved, is military spending.

古文：能用土兵则兵可省，能用屯田则兵可省。
现代文：能用土兵则军费可以节省，能用屯田制则军费可以节省。
English: If you can use soldiers, you can save on military expenses, and if you can use the military cantonment system, you can save on military expenses.

古文：其次莫如宫掖。
现代文：其次就是宫中的耗费。
English: The second is the cost of the palace.

古文：兵以待敌国，常畏而不敢省，故省兵难。
现代文：兵是用来对付敌国的，常怕敌国来犯而不敢省，所以省兵难。
English: Soldiers are used to deal with the enemy country, and they are often afraid of the enemy country to commit and dare not save, so it is difficult to save soldiers.

古文：宫掖以私一身，常爱而不忍省，故省宫掖难。
现代文：后宫是满足一个人的，常喜爱而不忍省，所以省后宫难。
English: The harem is to meet a person, often like and can not bear to save, so saving the harem is difficult.

古文：不敢省者，事在他人；不忍省者，在陛下。
现代文：不敢省兵，取决于他人；不忍省后宫，取决于陛下。
English: If you don't dare to save the troops, it's up to others; if you can't bear to save the harem, it's up to His Majesty.

古文：宫中之嫱嫔、宦寺，陛下事也，宫中之器械、工役，陛下事也，陛下肯省则省之。
现代文：宫中的嫔嫱、宦官，是侍奉陛下的，宫中的器械、工役，是满足陛下的，陛下肯省就能省。
English: The eunuchs and eunuchs in the palace are servants of His Majesty. The equipment and laborers in the palace are to satisfy His Majesty. If His Majesty wants to save money, he can save money.

古文：宫中既省，则外廷之官吏，四方之州县，从风而省，奔走不暇，简朴成风，民志坚定，民生日厚，虽有水旱虫蝗之灾，可活也；国力日壮，虽有夷狄盗贼之变，可为也。
现代文：宫中费用节省了，那么朝中官吏，各地州县，就会跟从这种节省风气，为节省而奔忙，形成简朴的风气，百姓意志坚定，民生日益富足，即使有水旱虫蝗的灾害，也能存活；国力日益壮大，即使发生夷狄盗贼的变乱，也可抵御。
English: If the expenses in the palace are saved, then the officials in the central government and the officials in the various prefectures and counties will follow this style of saving. They will work hard to save money and form a simple style. The people will be determined, the people's livelihood will become more and more abundant, and they will be able to survive even if there is a disaster of locusts; the national strength will become stronger and stronger, and they will be able to resist even if there is a disturbance of thieves.

古文：复祖宗之业，雪人神之愤，惟吾所为，无不可者。
现代文：恢复祖宗的大业，雪去人神的愤慨，只要陛下肯为，是一定能成功的。 
English: As long as His Majesty is willing to restore the great cause of his ancestors and remove the indignation of the gods and mortals, he is sure to succeed.

古文：时朱熹召至阙，未几予祠，安世率馆职上书留之，言： 御笔除熹宫祠，不经宰执，不由给舍，径使快行，直送熹家。
现代文：当时朱熹被召入朝中，不久又被罢为宫观之职，项安世率馆职上书请求留下朱熹，说： 陛下御笔贬朱熹去管祠观，不经过宰执、给舍，直接派快使把诏书送到朱熹家。
English: At that time, Zhu Xi was summoned to the center of the imperial court, and soon he was removed from the position of the palace observer. Xiang Anshi, who was in charge of the museum, sent a letter to request Zhu Xi to stay, saying, "Your majesty has written to dismiss Zhu Xi from the position of the temple observer, and sent a courier directly to Zhu Xi's house to deliver the imperial edict to him without going through the office of the emperor or the palace.

古文：窃揣圣意，必明知熹贤不当使去，宰相见之必执奏，给舍见之必缴驳，是以为此骇异变常之举也。
现代文：我们暗中推测陛下的意思，陛下一定是明知朱熹贤能不应让他离开，宰相看见诏书一定会上奏挽留，给舍看见诏书一定会封驳，所以才做出这种违背常规的举动。
English: We surmised His Majesty's intention. His Majesty must have known that Zhu Rongxian could not let him leave, that the prime minister would withhold the imperial edict when he saw it, and that he would reject it when he saw it, which is why he made this unconventional move.

古文：夫人主患不知贤尔，明知其贤而明去之，是示天下以不复用贤也。
现代文：人主的祸患是不知贤能的人，明知这人贤能却明确地罢去他，这是告诉天下不再用贤人了。
English: The scourge of the human master is the man who does not know what is wise and capable, knowing that this man is wise and capable but clearly dismissing him. This is telling the world to stop using wise men.

古文：人主患不闻公议尔，明知公议之不可而明犯之，是示天下以不复顾公议也。
现代文：人主的祸患是不听公议，明知公议不赞同却去明确违背它，这是向天下表示不再顾忌公议了。
English: The scourge of a human master is not to listen to public opinion, knowing that public opinion does not agree, but to clearly violate it. This is to say to the world that they no longer care about public opinion.

古文：且朱熹本一庶官，在二千里外，陛下即位未数日，即加号召，畀以从官，俾侍经幄，天下皆以为初政之美。
现代文：况且朱熹本是一个普通的官，在二千里之外，陛下即位不几天，就召他入朝，让他任从官，为陛下讲解经史，天下都认为这是陛下开始掌政的美好之处。
English: Moreover, Zhu Yibin was an ordinary official. Two thousand miles away, His Majesty ascended to the throne in just a few days, and summoned him to the imperial court. He appointed him as an official to explain the history of scripture to His Majesty. The whole world thought that this was a wonderful thing for His Majesty to begin his reign.

古文：供职甫四十日，即以内批逐之，举朝惊愕，不知所措。
现代文：朱熹任职才四十天，就被御旨逐走，整个朝廷都惊愕，不知所措。
English: Zhu Xi had only been in office for forty days when he was forced out by imperial order. The entire imperial court was stunned and at a loss.

古文：臣愿陛下谨守纪纲，毋忽公议，复留朱熹，使辅圣学，则人主无失，公议尚存。 不报。
现代文：臣希望陛下遵守纲纪，不要忽视公议，重新留下朱熹，来辅导圣上学习经史，这样人主就没有过失，公议仍然存在。 
English: The minister hoped that His Majesty would abide by the rules and regulations, not ignore the public discussion, and once again leave Zhu Xi to guide the saint to study the history of scripture. In this way, there would be no fault on the part of the master, and the public discussion would still exist.

古文：俄为言者劾去，通判重庆府，未拜，以伪党罢。
现代文：没有得到答复。不久他被言官弹劾罢职，为重庆府通判，他还没受命上任，就因伪党的罪名被罢去。
English: He did not receive a reply. Soon he was impeached and dismissed by the speaker, sentenced to the Chongqing prefectural court, and dismissed for the crime of pseudo-party before he was appointed to office.

古文：安世素善吴猎，二人坐学禁久废。
现代文：项安世一向和吴猎友好，二人因禁伪学被长期罢官。
English: Xiang An Shi has always been friendly with Wu Han, and the two have been dismissed for a long time because of the ban on forgery.

古文：开禧用兵，猎起帅荆渚，安世方丁内艰。
现代文：开禧时用兵，吴猎被起用统帅荆渚，项安世正遭母丧。
English: At the time of the jubilee, Wu Han was appointed commander-in-chief of Jingzhu, while Xiang Anshi was mourning the death of his mother.

古文：起复，知鄂州。
现代文：他守丧未满三年，被朝廷重新起用为鄂州知州。
English: Less than three years after his death, he was reinstated by the imperial court as Ezhou chizhou.

古文：俄淮、汉师溃，薛叔似以怯懦为侂胄所恶，安世因贻侂胄书，其末曰： 偶送客至江头，饮竹光酒，半醉，书不成字。 侂胄大喜曰： 项平父乃尔闲暇。 遂除户部员外郎、湖广总领。
现代文：不久，淮、汉军溃败，薛叔似因怯懦被韩胄所憎恶，项安世就给韩胄写信，信末说： 偶然送客人到江边，饮竹光酒，半醉，字写得不好。 韩胄很高兴地说 ：项平父竟然这么悠闲。 于是项安世被任命为户部员外郎、湖广总领。
English: Soon after, the Huai and Han armies were routed, and Uncle Xue seemed to be hated by Han Zheng for his cowardice. Xiang Anshi wrote to Han Zheng, saying at the end of the letter: I accidentally sent a guest to the river, drank bamboo light wine, was half drunk, and my handwriting was not good. Han Zheng was pleased to say: Xiang Ping's father was so leisurely. Therefore, Xiang Anshi was appointed as the head of the household department and the head of Hubei Province.

古文：会叔似罢，金围德安益急，诸将无所属。
现代文：恰好薛叔似被罢，金兵围攻德安更急，诸将失去统帅。
English: It just so happens that Uncle Xue seems to have been ousted, the siege of De'an by the Jin soldiers is more urgent, and they will lose their commander.

古文：安世不俟朝命，径遣兵解围。
现代文：项安世不等朝廷命令，就赶紧派兵去解围。
English: He did not wait for an order from the imperial court, but quickly sent troops to break the siege.

古文：高悦等与金人力战，马雄获万户，周胜获千户，安世第其功以闻。
现代文：高悦等同金人力战，马雄捕获金兵的万户，周胜捕获金兵的千户，项安世排列他们的功劳上奏给朝廷。
English: Gao Yue is equivalent to Jin Ren Ren, Ma Xiong captured 10,000 households of Jin Ren, Zhou Sheng captured 1,000 households of Jin Ren, and their achievements were reported to the imperial court.

古文：猎代叔似为宣抚使，寻以宣谕使入蜀。
现代文：吴猎代替薛叔似为宣抚使，不久又任宣谕使到蜀地。
English: Wu Han seems to have replaced Xue Shuxiu as the envoy, and soon he was sent to Shu.

古文：朝命安世权宣抚使，又升太府卿。
现代文：朝廷任命项安世为权宣抚使，又升他为太府卿。
English: The imperial court appointed Xiang Anshi as the envoy of the proclamation of power, and he was promoted to Dafuqing.

古文：有宣抚幕官王度者，吴猎客也。
现代文：宣抚司幕官王度，是吴猎的门客。
English: Wang Du, the procurator of the procuratorate, was Wu Han's protégé.

古文：猎与安世素相友，及安世招军，名项家军，多不逞，好虏掠，猎斩其为首者，安世憾之，至是斩度于大别寺。
现代文：吴猎与项安世一向友好，等到项安世招募军队，名叫项家军，军士多数不守纪律，好掳掠，吴猎斩了为首作恶的人，项安世忌恨吴猎，这时就在大别寺杀了王度。
English: Wu Han and Xiang Anshi had always been friendly. It was not until Xiang Anshi recruited an army, called the Xiang Family Army, that most of the officers and men did not follow discipline and were eager to plunder. Wu Han beheaded the first person to commit evil. Xiang Anshi hated Wu Han. At this time, he killed Wang Du in Dabie Temple.

古文：猎闻于朝，安世坐免。
现代文：吴猎把这事上奏朝廷，项安世获罪被免职。
English: Wu Han reported the matter to the imperial court, and Xiang Anshi was convicted and removed from office.

古文：后以直龙图阁为湖南转运判官，未上，用台章夺职而罢。
现代文：后来项安世以直龙图阁的身份为湖南转运判官，还没上任，就因台臣的奏章被夺职罢免。
English: Later, Xiang Anshi became the judge of Hunan transshipment in the capacity of Zhilong Tu Ge. Before he took office, he was removed from office because of the Taizhen's petition.

古文：嘉定元年，卒。
现代文：嘉定元年，项安世去世。
English: In the first year of Jiading, Xiang Anshi passed away.

古文：所著《易玩辞》、他书，多行于世。
现代文：他著有《易玩辞》、其他文书，多数在世间流行。
English: He is the author of "Easy to Play Words" and other instruments, most of which are popular in the world.

古文：卒于官，谥曰庄惠。刘光祖，字德修，简州阳安人。
现代文：刘光祖，字德修，简州阳安人。
English: Liu Guangzu, also known as De Xiu, was born in Yang'an, Jiangsu Province.

古文：幼出于外祖贾晖，后以晖遣泽补官。
现代文：小的时候就由外祖父贾晖抚养，后来他靠外祖父贾晖的恩荫补为官员。
English: When he was a child, he was raised by his maternal grandfather Jia Jia, and later he became an official thanks to his maternal grandfather Jia Jia.

古文：登进士第，廷对，言： 陛下睿察太精，宸断太严，求治太速，喜功太甚。 又言： 陛下躬擐甲胄，间驭球马，一旦有警，岂能亲董六师以督战乎？
现代文：刘光祖考中进士，在朝廷上奏对时，他说 ：陛下的访察太精密，决断太严厉，追求太平太急速，好大喜功太过分。 又说： 陛下亲自穿上铠甲，骑在马上玩击的游戏，一旦有警报，怎么能亲自统帅大军并督战呢？
English: Liu Guang, a junior high school student in the Ancestor Examination, said: "His Majesty's inspection is too precise, his decision is too severe, his pursuit of peace is too rapid, and his great achievement is too excessive" when he played a match at the Imperial Court. He also said: "His Majesty himself put on armor and rode on a horse to play the game of attack. Once there is an alarm, how can he personally command the army and supervise the battle?

古文：夫人主自将，危道也。
现代文：君主亲自统帅军队，是危险的。
English: It is dangerous for a monarch to personally command an army.

古文：臣恐球马之事，敌人闻之，适以贻笑，不足以示武。 除剑南东川节度推官，辟潼川提刑司检法。
现代文：我恐怕陛下骑马击的事，敌人听说后，会加以耻笑的，这不能显示武威。 刘光祖被任命为剑南东川节度推官，被征用为潼川提刑司检法。
English: I'm afraid that when the enemy hears about His Majesty's attack on horseback, they will scoff at it, which is not a display of military prowess. Liu Guangzu was appointed as the chief of the Jiannan Dongchuan Festival, and was requisitioned as the chief of the Jianchuan Criminal Investigation Division.

古文：淳熙五年，召对，论恢复事，请以太祖用人为法，且曰： 人臣献言，不可不察：其一，不量可否，劝陛下轻出骤进，则是即日误国；其一，不思振立，苟且偷安，则是久远误国。 除太学正。
现代文：淳熙五年，刘光祖被召回京城奏对，谈论恢复失地的事，他请皇上效法太祖的用人原则，并且说： 对大臣们说的话，不能不考察：一方面，不考虑自己的实力，劝陛下轻易出兵，快速进兵的，那么就会立即危害国家；一方面，不考虑振兴国家，苟且偷安，就是长期危害国家。 
English: In the fifth year of Chunxi, Liu Guangzu was called back to Beijing to mediate and talk about the restoration of the lost land. He asked the emperor to follow the employment principle of the great-grandfather, and said: The words said to the ministers must be examined: on the one hand, if you do not consider your own strength and advise your majesty to send troops easily and quickly, then you will immediately endanger the country; on the other hand, if you do not consider the revitalization of the country and steal security, you will endanger the country for a long time.

古文：召试，守正字，兼吴、益王府教授，迁校书郎，除右正言、知果州。
现代文：刘光祖被任命为太学正，他被召试，担任正字，兼任吴王、益王府教授。刘光祖升为校书郎，被任命为右正言、果州知州。
English: Liu Guangzu was appointed as Taishu Zheng, he was called to the examination, served as Zheng Zheng, and also served as a professor of Wu Wang and Yi Wangfu. Liu Guangzu was promoted to school scribe, and was appointed as Right Zheng Zheng and Guozhou Zhizhou.

古文：以赵汝愚荐，召入。
现代文：因为赵汝愚的推荐，刘光祖被召回朝中。
English: Because of Zhao Rugu's recommendation, Liu Guangzu was recalled to the imperial court.

古文：光宗即位，除军器少监兼权侍左郎官，又兼礼部。
现代文：光宗即位后，刘光祖被任命为军器少监兼权侍左郎官，又在礼部兼职。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Guangzong, Liu Guangzu was appointed as the Junior Inspector of Ordnance with the concurrent powers of an attendant and a secretary, and also worked part-time in the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：时殿中侍御史阙，上方严其选，谓宰相留正曰： 卿监、郎官中有其人。 正沈思久之，曰： 得非刘光祖乎？ 上曰： 是久在朕心矣。 
现代文：当时缺殿中侍御史，皇上正在严格挑选，对宰相留正说： 卿监、郎官中有这个人。 留正沉默一阵后，问： 难道是刘光祖吗？ 皇上说 ：他在我心中已经很久了。 
English: At that time, there was a shortage of palace attendants, and the emperor was making a strict selection. He said to the prime minister, Ruzheng, "There is this person among the court attendants and retainers." After a period of silence, Ruzheng asked, "Could it be Liu Guangzu?" The emperor said, "He has been in my heart for a long time."

古文：光祖入谢，因论：
现代文：刘光祖入朝拜谢，他趁机议论说：
English: Liu Guangzu entered the morning to offer thanks, he took the opportunity to say:

古文：近世是非不明，则邪正互攻；公论不立，则私情交起。
现代文： 近年以来是非不明，因此邪恶和正直互相攻击；公论不确立，因此私情相继出现。
English: In recent years, the rights and wrongs are not clear, so evil and honesty attack each other; public opinion is not established, so personal feelings appear one after another.

古文：此固道之消长，时之否泰，而实为国家之祸福，社稷之存亡，甚可畏也。
现代文：这虽是事理的消失或者存在，时运的好或者坏，实际是国家的祸或者福，社稷的存在与灭亡，太可怕了。
English: Although this is the reason for the disappearance or existence of things, the good or bad of the times, the fact is the misfortune or blessing of the country, the existence and demise of the society, it is too terrible.

古文：本朝士大夫学术议论，最为近古，初非有强国之术，而国势尊安，根本深厚。
现代文：本朝士大夫的学术和议论，最接近古人，开始时没有强国之术，但国势尊显平安，基础牢固。
English: The scholarship and discourse of this doctor-chancellor is the closest to that of the ancients. In the beginning, there was no great power, but the country's situation was peaceful and the foundation was solid.

古文：咸平、景德之间，道臻皇极，治保太和，至于庆历、嘉祐盛矣。
现代文：咸平、景德那个时候，治国的法规完善，国家太平祥和，到庆历、嘉那个时候，出现了盛世。
English: At the time of Xianping and Jingde, the laws and regulations for governing the country were perfect, and the country was peaceful and peaceful. At the time of Qingli and Jia, there was a prosperous era.

古文：不幸而坏于熙、丰之邪说，疏弃正士，招来小人，幸而元祐君子起而救之，末流大分，事故反覆。
现代文：不幸这种情况被熙宁、元丰时的邪说给破坏，正直的人被疏远和摒弃，奸邪的人被任用，幸而元时贤能的人被起用来挽救这种局面，但不良风气仍然存在，所以事情出现了反复。
English: Unfortunately, this situation was destroyed by the evil theories of Xi Ning and Yuan Feng, the honest people were alienated and abandoned, the traitors were appointed, and fortunately, the virtuous people of Yuan were appointed to save the situation, but the bad atmosphere still existed, so things happened repeatedly.

古文：绍圣、元符之际，群凶得志，绝灭纲常，其论既胜，其势既成，崇、观而下，尚复何言。
现代文：绍圣、元符之际，那些凶险的人如愿以偿，灭绝伦理纲常，他们的观点占上风，他们的势力已经形成，崇宁、大观以后，还有什么话可说。
English: At the time of Shaosheng and Yuanfu, those dangerous people got what they wished for, the extinction of ethical standards, their views prevailed, their forces have been formed, after Chongning and Daguan, what else can be said.

古文：臣始至时，闻有讥贬道学之说，而实未睹朋党之分。
现代文： 我刚到朝廷时，听到有讥讽和贬斥道学的，但确实没看见有朋党。
English: When I first arrived at the imperial court, I heard mockery and disparagement of Taoism, but I really did not see any comrades.

古文：中更外艰，去国六载，已忧两议之各甚，而恐一旦之交攻也。
现代文：这期间我为父亲守丧，离开朝廷六年，我已经担心两种观点差别太大，又害怕持两种观点的人互相攻击。
English: During this period, I was mourning my father and had been away from the imperial court for six years. I was already worried that the two views were too different, and I was afraid that people holding the two views would attack each other.

古文：逮臣复来，其事果见。
现代文：等我再回到朝廷时，果然看到了这种事。
English: When I returned to the Imperial Court, I did see such a thing.

古文：因恶道学，乃生朋党，因生朋党，乃罪忠谏。
现代文：因为恨道学，就出现了朋党，因为出现了朋党，就给忠心劝谏的人加上罪名。
English: Because of the hatred of Taoism, a crony party has emerged, and because of the emergence of a crony party, a crime has been added to the person who loyally persuades others.

古文：嗟乎，以忠谏为罪，其去绍圣几何！
现代文：唉，认为忠心劝谏有罪，这跟绍圣时差不多！
English: Alas, it is almost the same as the time when he was found guilty of loyally advising Mao Zedong!

古文：陛下履位之初，端拱而治，凡所进退，率用人言，初无好恶之私，岂以党偏为主。
现代文：陛下即位之初，敛手无为而治，凡是任用和斥退官员，都采用别人的意见，开始时没有喜欢和讨厌的私心，哪有靠朋党的偏庇来决定的。
English: At the beginning of His Majesty's accession to the throne, his hands were tied and he did nothing but govern. In appointing and dismissing officials, he used the opinions of others. At the beginning, there was no selfishness that he liked or disliked, which was decided by the favor of his friends and party.

古文：而一岁之内，逐者纷纷，中间好人固亦不少，反以人臣之私意，微累天日之清明。
现代文：然而一年之内，被贬逐的人很多，其中好人本来也不少，反而因为官僚的私心，稍微连累了陛下的清明。
English: However, within a year, many people were disparaged, many of whom were originally good people, but because of the selfishness of bureaucrats, it slightly affected His Majesty's clemency.

古文：往往推忠之言，谓为沽名之举；至于洁身以退，亦曰愤怼而然。
现代文：往往是忠直的话，被认为是在谋取好名声；不与奸邪的人同流合污，辞去官职的人，也被说成是怨恨朝廷。
English: Those who are often loyal and honest are considered to be seeking a good reputation; those who do not collude with traitors and resign from official positions are also said to be resentful of the imperial court.

古文：欲激怒于至尊，必加之以讦讪。
现代文：如果想激怒皇上一定要加上对某人的攻击和诽谤。
English: If you want to irritate the emperor, you must add an attack and slander against someone.

古文：事势至此，循默乃宜，循默成风，国家安赖？
现代文：在这种情况下，保持沉默才适合，沉默不言形成风气，国家依靠什么？
English: In such a situation, silence is appropriate. Silence creates a culture. What does the country rely on?

古文：臣欲熄将来之祸，故不惮反复以陈。
现代文： 我想平息将来的祸患，所以不怕触犯皇上，反复陈述。
English: I want to calm down the future disaster, so I am not afraid to offend the emperor and repeatedly state it.

古文：伏几圣心豁然，永为皇极之主，使是非由此而定，邪正由此而别，公论由此而明，私情由此而熄，道学之讥由此而消，朋党之迹由此而泯，和平之福由此而集，国家之事由此而理，则生灵之幸，社稷之福也。
现代文：希望陛下明白这些，永远做圣明的君主，使是与非从此确定下来，奸邪与忠直从此得到区别，公论从此明确，私情从此消除，对道学的讥讽从此消失，朋党从此灭绝，和平从此到来，国家的事情从此得以治理好，这才是老百姓的幸运，国家的福气。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will understand these things and will always be a saintly monarch, so that the rights and wrongs will be determined from now on, treachery and loyalty will be distinguished from now on, public opinion will be clear from now on, private feelings will be eliminated from now on, ridicule of ethics will disappear from now on, the party will be extinct from now on, peace will come from now on, and the affairs of the country will be well managed from now on. This is the luck of the people and the blessing of the country.

古文：不然，相激相胜，展转反复，为祸无穷，臣实未知税驾之所。
现代文：不这样的话，两种人互相排斥，循环反复，会造成没完没了的祸患，我实在不知道归宿在哪里。 
English: Otherwise, the two types of people will repel each other, and the cycle will repeat, causing endless disasters. I really don't know where to go.

古文：章既下，读之有流涕者。
现代文：刘光祖的奏章传下来后，读它使人流泪。
English: After Liu Guangzu's score was passed down, reading it brought people to tears.

古文：劾罢户部尚书叶翥、太府卿兼中书舍人沈揆结近习，图进用，言： 比年以来，士大夫不慕廉靖而慕奔竞，不尊名节而尊爵位，不乐公正而乐软美，不敬君子而敬庸人，既安习以成风，谓苟得为至计。
现代文：刘光祖弹劾罢去户部尚书叶翥、太府卿兼中书舍人沈揆交结被皇帝宠幸的人，谋求升官，他说： 近年以来，士大夫不羡慕廉洁和谦恭，而羡慕对名利的追求，不尊崇名誉与节操而尊崇爵位，不喜欢公正而喜欢趋炎附势，不敬佩君子而敬佩平庸的人，使无所作为形成风气，认为苟且求得，不应该得到的却得到了，是最好的谋略。
English: Liu Guangzu said: "In recent years, the scholar-officials do not envy the integrity and modesty, but envy the pursuit of fame and fortune, do not respect the honor and discipline, but respect the knighthood, do not like justice, but like the fire and power, do not admire the gentleman, but admire the mediocre, and create a culture of inaction. They think that it is the best strategy to ask for what you want, but get what you do not deserve.

古文：良由前辈老成，零落殆尽，后生晚进，议论无所据依，学术无所宗主，正论益衰，士风不竞。
现代文：因为前辈贤德的人，几乎都不在了，后辈任职晚，议论国事没有什么可依据的，学术不知以谁为宗主，正论更加衰微，士风不强。
English: Because the wise and virtuous predecessors are almost all gone, the younger generation is late in taking office, there is nothing to base the discussion of national affairs on, the academic does not know who is the master, the orthodoxy is more fading, and the scholarly style is not strong.

古文：幸诏大臣，妙求人物，必朝野所共属、贤愚所同敬者一二十人，参错立朝，国势自壮。
现代文：幸好皇上诏命大臣，搜求人才，必须是被朝廷和田野中的官僚与老百姓所瞩目、贤能的人和愚蠢的人所共同尊敬的一二十人，在朝廷担任各种官职，国家自然能强大。
English: Fortunately, the emperor's edict ordered the minister to search for talent. It was necessary to find ten or twenty people who would be noticed by the court and the bureaucrats in the fields as well as by the common people, and who would be respected by both the wise and the foolish. They would hold various official positions in the court, and the country would naturally be strong.

古文：臣虽终岁无所奏纠，固亦未至旷官。
现代文：我虽然一年没上奏纠劾什么，但也没有白拿国家的俸禄。
English: Although I did not file a complaint for a year, I did not take the state salary for nothing.

古文：今日之患，在于不封殖人才，台谏但有摧残，庙堂初无长养。
现代文：现在的祸患，在于不任用和培养人才，台谏只是弹劾官员，而国家没培养后备人才。
English: The current disaster lies in the failure to appoint and train talent. Taiwan is only impeaching officials, and the country has not trained reserve talent.

古文：臣处当言之地，岂以排击为能哉？ 徙太府少卿。
现代文：我身为言官，哪能以排挤和攻击人才为有能力呢？ 刘光祖转任太府少卿。
English: As a spokesman, how can I be capable of excluding and attacking talented people? Liu Guangzu was transferred to the position of Taifu Shaoqing.

古文：求去不已，除直秘阁、潼川运判。
现代文：他不停地辞官，被任命为直秘阁、潼川运判。
English: He kept resigning his posts and was appointed to the cabinet of direct reports and the Shukawa transport commission.

古文：改江西提刑，又改夔州。
现代文：改为江西提刑，又改到夔州任职。
English: He was transferred to Jiangxi Province, and then to Zhangzhou.

古文：时孝宗不豫，上久不过宫，光祖致书留正、赵汝愚曰： 宜与群贤并心一力，若上未过宫，宰执不可归安私第。
现代文：当时孝宗有病，光宗很长时间不去宫中探望，刘光祖给留正、赵汝愚写信说 ：应该与那些贤德的人同心协力，如果皇上不去探望孝宗，宰执不应该回到自己家中安歇。
English: At that time, Xiaozong was ill, and Guangzong did not visit the palace for a long time. Liu Guangzu wrote to Ruizheng and Zhao Rugu, saying, "We should work together with those virtuous people. If the emperor does not visit Xiaozong, the emperor should not return to his home to rest."

古文：林、陈二阉，自以获罪重华，日夜交谍其间。
现代文：林、陈二个宦官，自己认为得罪了孝宗，日夜在孝宗和光宗之间挑拨离间。
English: Lin and Chen, two eunuchs, thought they had offended Xiaozong, and day and night they sowed discord between Xiaozong and Guangzong.

古文：宜用韩魏公逐任守忠故事，以释两宫疑谤。
现代文：应该以韩魏公驱逐任守忠为榜样，逐走林、陈二个宦官，来解除孝宗与光宗之间的猜疑。
English: It is necessary to follow the example of Han Wei Gong's expulsion of Ren Shuzhong and expel Lin and Chen, two eunuchs, to remove the suspicion between Xiaozong and Guangzong.

古文：大臣亦当收兵柄，密布腹心，俾缓急有可仗者。 闻孝宗崩，又贻书汝愚，勉以安国家、定社稷之事。
现代文：也应该收回大臣兵权，秘密地安排心腹之人，使危急时有可以依靠的。 刘光祖听说孝宗去世后，又给赵汝愚写信，劝勉赵汝愚做那些能安定国家的事。
English: It is also necessary to take back the minister's military power and secretly arrange confidants so that there is someone to rely on in times of crisis.After Liu Guangzu heard about the death of Xiaozong, he also wrote to Zhao Rugu, urging Zhao Rugu to do those things that can stabilize the country.

古文：宁宗即位，除侍御史，改司农少卿。入对，献《谨始》五箴。
现代文：宁宗即位后，刘光祖被任命为侍御史，改为司农少卿，他入朝奏对，献上《谨始》五箴。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Ningzong, Liu Guangzu was appointed as an attendant to the Emperor, and changed his title to Sino-Minor General. He entered the imperial court and presented the Five Precepts of "The Beginning of Justice."

古文：又论： 人主有六易：天命易恃，天位易乐，无事易安，意欲易奢，政令易怠，岁时易玩。
现代文：他又议论： 君主有六易：易依靠天命，易喜欢帝位，易安于无事，易使欲望奢侈，易懈怠政令，易在一年四季游玩。
English: He also said: There are six characteristics of a monarch: easy to rely on fate, easy to like the throne, easy to rest in nothingness, easy to make desires extravagant, easy to slacken government decrees, and easy to travel all year round.

古文：又有六难：君子难进，小人难退，苦言难入，巧佞难远，是非难明，取舍难决。
现代文：又有六难：难进用君子，难斥退小人，难接受刺耳的话，难疏远乖巧佞幸的人，难辨明是非，难决定取舍。
English: There are also six difficulties: it is difficult to advance with a gentleman, it is difficult to repel a villain, it is difficult to accept harsh words, it is difficult to alienate a well-behaved and fortunate person, it is difficult to distinguish right from wrong, and it is difficult to decide what to do.

古文：暗主之所易，明主之所难；暗主之所难，明主之所易。 又言： 陛下以隆慈之命，践祚于素幄，盖有甚不得已者，宜躬自贬损，尽礼于上皇，使圣意欢然知释位之乐，然后足以昭陛下之大孝。 上悚然嘉纳。
现代文：昏庸的君主认为容易的，英明的君主认为难；昏庸的君主认为难的，英明的君主认为容易。 又说 ：陛下受太皇太后的诏命，登上皇位，这是不得已的事。应该自己谦恭一些，对太上皇要以礼相待，使太上皇知道退位的欢乐，之后足能显示陛下的大孝。 皇上很高兴地接受了。
English: The foolish monarch thought it was easy, the wise monarch thought it was difficult; the foolish monarch thought it was difficult, the wise monarch thought it was easy. He also said, "Your Majesty, it is a matter of necessity for you to ascend to the throne after receiving the Imperial edict from the Grand Empress Dowager. You should be humble, treat the Grand Empress Dowager with courtesy, let the Grand Empress Dowager know the joy of abdication, and then be able to show your great filial piety. The Emperor gladly accepted.

古文：进起居舍人。
现代文：刘光祖升为起居舍人。
English: Liu Guangzu was promoted to live-in caretaker.

古文：论： 政令当出中书，陛下审而行之，人主操柄，无要于此。 知阁门事韩侂胄浸擅威福，故首及之。
现代文：他论奏说： 政令应该由中书制定，陛下审察之后再执行，君主操纵权柄，没有比这更重要的。 知门事韩胄逐渐恃势弄权，所以刘光祖首先谈论这些。
English: There is nothing more important than the monarch's manipulation of power, he said, commenting on the following: government decrees should be formulated by the central government, and implemented after being reviewed by His Majesty; Han Xuan gradually lost power, so Liu Guangzu first talked about these.

古文：迁起居郎。
现代文：刘光祖升为起居郎。
English: Liu Guangzu was promoted to kijiro.

古文：集议卜孝宗山陵，与朱熹皆谓会稽山陵，土薄水浅，乞议改卜。
现代文：百官集中讨论占卜孝宗的山陵，刘光祖和朱熹都认为会稽山的陵地，土薄水浅，请求决定重新占卜。
English: A hundred officials concentrated on the discussion of divination of the mausoleum of Xiaozong. Liu Guangzu and Zhu Xi both believed that the mausoleum of the mountain would be inspected, the soil was thin and shallow, and they requested a decision to redo the divination.

古文：既而熹与祠，光祖言： 汉武帝之于汲黯，唐太宗之于魏征，仁宗之于唐介，皆暂怒旋悔。
现代文：不久，朱熹被贬，担任管宫观的闲职，刘光祖说 ：汉武帝对汲黯，唐太宗对魏征，仁宗对唐介，都是暂时发怒很快就后悔。
English: Not long after, Zhu Xi was demoted and took up the sinecure of being in charge of palace inspection. Liu Guangzu said: Emperor Hanwu was angry with Qiu Qiu, Emperor Taizong of Tang was angry with Wei Zheng, and Emperor Renzong was angry with Tang Jie, but they all got angry temporarily and regretted it soon.

古文：熹明先圣之道，为今宿儒，又非三臣比。
现代文：朱熹通晓古代圣贤的学说，是当今有学问的老儒者，又不是汲黯、魏征、唐介所能比的。
English: Zhu Xi is familiar with the teachings of the ancient sages, and is a learned old Confucian today, and is not comparable to Chu Qian, Wei Zheng, and Tang Jie.

古文：陛下初膺大宝，招徕耆儒，比初政之最善者。
现代文：陛下刚即位时，招揽老儒者，都是刚执政时最好的事。
English: When Your Majesty first came to the throne, recruiting old Confucians was the best thing to do when you first came to power.

古文：今一旦无故去之，可乎？ 且曰： 臣非助熹，助陛下者也。 再疏，不听。
现代文：现在一旦无缘无故地罢去朱熹，能行吗？ 并且说： 我不是帮助朱熹，我是在帮助陛下呀。 刘光祖又一次上疏，皇上没听。
English: Now, if you were to dismiss Zhu Xi for no reason, would that be okay? And say: I'm not helping Zhu Xi, I'm helping Your Majesty. Liu Guangzu once again went rogue, and the emperor didn't listen.

古文：刘德秀劾光祖，出为湖南运判，不就，主管玉局观。
现代文：刘德秀弹劾刘光祖，刘光祖出朝担任湖南运判，他没去就职，而为主管玉局观。
English: Liu Dexiu impeached Liu Guangzu. Liu Guangzu was appointed as the transportation judge of Hunan Province. He did not go to take office, but was the head of the Jade Bureau.

古文：赵汝愚既罢相，侂胄擅朝，遂目士大夫为伪学逆党，禁锢之。
现代文：赵汝愚被罢去宰相后，韩胄专权，就把士大夫看成伪学逆党，不准他们做官并且永不叙用。
English: After Zhao Ruwu was ousted as prime minister, Han Zheng took over the dictatorship and regarded the scholar-officials as pseudo-scholars and rebels. They were not allowed to work as officials and would never be promoted.

古文：光祖撰《涪州学记》，谓： 学之大者，明圣人之道以修其身，而世方以道为伪；小者治文章以达其志，而时方以文为病。
现代文：刘光祖撰写《涪州学记》，说 ：学问大的人，通晓圣人的学说并用这些学说来陶冶自己，而现在以道学为伪学；地位低的人写文章来表达自己的志向，而现在以写文章为害。
English: Liu Guangzu, who wrote "The History of Zhangzhou Scholarship," said: "People of great learning, who are familiar with the teachings of sages and use these teachings to cultivate themselves, now regard Taoism as pseudoscience; people of low status write articles to express their aspirations, but now they are harmed by writing articles.

古文：好恶出于一时，是非定于万世。 谏官张釜指为谤讪，比之杨惲，夺职，谪居房州。
现代文：好恶是暂时出现的，是非是由后世来判定的。 谏官张釜指责刘光祖是在诽谤，把他比作杨恽，刘光祖被罢官，贬到房州。
English: The likes and dislikes are temporary, and the rights and wrongs are determined by future generations. The eunuch Zhang Gama accused Liu Guangzu of slander and compared him to Yang Hui. Liu Guangzu was dismissed from his post and relegated to Fangzhou.

古文：久之，许自便。
现代文：过了一段时间，允许他随便搬迁。
English: After some time, he was allowed to move freely.

古文：起知眉州，复职，将漕利路，以不习边事辞。
现代文：刘光祖被起用为眉州知州，官复原职，将要负责利路的漕运，他以不熟习边防的事为理由推辞。
English: Liu Guangzu was appointed as Meizhou Zhizhou, the reinstatement of the post, and will be responsible for the paddling of the road. He declined on the grounds that he was not familiar with border defense.

古文：进直宝谟阁，主管冲佑观。
现代文：刘光祖升为直宝谟阁，主管冲佑观。
English: Liu Guangzu was promoted to Zhiobao Mougou, the head of Chongyou Guan.

古文：吴曦叛，光祖白郡守，焚其榜通衢，且驰告帅守、监司之所素知者，仗大义，连衡以抗贼。
现代文：吴曦反叛，刘光祖向郡守汇报，烧吴曦张贴在交通要道的告示，并且骑马去联络帅守、监司中那些一向与自己相知的人，希望大家仗大义，团结起来共同抗贼。
English: Wu Xi rebelled, Liu Guangzu reported to the county governor, burned the notice that Wu Xi posted on the main road, and rode to contact those who had always known him among the superintendents and supervisors, hoping that everyone would fight for justice and unite to fight against thieves.

古文：俄闻曦诛，则以书属宣抚使杨辅，讲行营田，前日利归吴氏者，悉收之公上，以省饷军费；奖名节、旌死事以激忠烈之心。
现代文：不久听说吴曦已经被杀，刘光祖就给宣抚使杨辅写信，讲应该推行营田，以前归吴氏所有的利益，都收回来归国家所有，以便节省军费；奖励名誉与节操、表彰为国而死的人以激励忠烈之心。
English: Soon after he heard that Wu Xi had been killed, Liu Guangzu wrote a letter to Yang Shuo, the imperial envoy, saying that all the benefits that had previously belonged to the Wu clan should be returned to the state in order to save military expenses; reward honor and discipline, and commend those who died for the country to encourage the loyal heart.

古文：除潼川路提刑、权知泸州。
现代文：刘光祖被任命为潼川路提刑、权知泸州。
English: Liu Guangzu was appointed as the head of the Xingchuan Road Criminal Court and the head of the Guanzhi County Criminal Court.

古文：侂胄诛，召除右文殿修撰、知襄阳府，进宝谟阁待制、知遂宁府，改京、湖制置使，以宝谟阁直学士知潼川府。
现代文：韩胄被杀后，刘光祖被召用为右文殿修撰、襄阳知府，他进升为宝谟阁待制、遂宁知府，改为京、湖制置使，以宝谟阁直学士的身份为潼川知府。
English: After Han Xuan was killed, Liu Guangzu was called to serve as Uwenden Shuxin and Xiangyang prefectural governor, he was promoted to Baomu Pavilion, Suining prefectural governor, changed to Beijing and Hubei prefectural governor, and served as Xichuan prefectural governor with the status of Baomu Pavilion direct bachelor.

古文：诏以闵雨求言，光祖奏： 女直乃吾不共戴天之仇，天亡此仇，送死于汴。
现代文：皇上因为担心雨水下诏书征求意见，刘光祖上奏： 女真是我们不共戴天的仇敌，上天要灭亡这个仇敌，让他们到汴京去送死。
English: Because the emperor was worried that the imperial rescript would be lost in the rain, Liu Guangzu recited: Women are truly our sworn enemies. Heaven wants to destroy this enemy and send them to Beijing to die.

古文：陛下为天之子，不知所以图之，天与不取，是谓弃天，未有弃天而天不我怒也。
现代文：陛下是上天的儿子，不知道去图取他们，上天送给的都不去取，这是背弃上天，没有背弃上天而上天不对我们发怒的。
English: Your majesty is the son of heaven. You don't know where to go to get them. You don't take what heaven gives you. This is turning your back on heaven. If you don't turn your back on heaven, heaven won't be angry with us.

古文：青、郓、蔺、会求通弗纳，陛下为中国衣冠之主，人归而我绝之，是谓弃人，未有弃人而人不我怨也。
现代文：青、郓、兰、会州请求归附，朝廷不接纳，陛下是中原老百姓的主人，人来归附但我们拒绝接受，这是丢弃人，没有丢弃人而人不怨我们的。
English: Qing, Yan, Lan, and Huizhou requested to be annexed, but the imperial court did not accept. Your majesty is the master of the people of the Central Plains. People came to be annexed, but we refused to accept. This is discarding people, not discarding people, and people do not complain about us.

古文：且金人舍其巢穴，污我汴京，尚可使吾使人拜之于祖宗昔日朝会之廷乎？ 
现代文：况且金人舍掉他们的家园，践踏我们的汴京，还能让我们派人在从前祖宗接见大臣、处理朝政的地方去拜见他们吗？ 
English: Moreover, the Kim people have abandoned their homeland and trampled on our Beijing. Can we still send people to visit them in the place where our ancestors received ministers and dealt with government affairs?

古文：又请改正宪圣慈烈皇后讳日。
现代文：刘光祖又请求改正宪圣慈烈皇后的忌日。
English: Liu Guangzu also requested that the Constitution be amended to change the date of the death of Empress Dowager Cixi.

古文：先是，后崩以庆元三年十一月二日，郊禋期迫，或谓侂胄曰： 上亲郊，不可不成礼。
现代文：原先，太后去世时是庆元三年十一月二日，这时祭天的时间迫近，有人对韩胄说： 皇上亲自去祭天，不能不符合礼仪。
English: Originally, when the empress dowager passed away, it was November 2nd, the 3rd year of the Qing Dynasty. At that time, the time of the festival was approaching. Someone said to Han Zheng, "The emperor cannot go to the festival in person, it would not be in accordance with the etiquette."

古文：且有司所费既夥，奈何已之？ 侂胄入其言，五日祀圜丘，六日始宣遗诰。
现代文：况且为这次祭祀已花费了许多，怎么能停止呢？ 韩胄对皇上讲了这个人说的话，朝廷就在五日祭祀太皇太后的园陵，六日才宣读她的遗诰。
English: Moreover, a lot of money has been spent on this ceremony, so how can it be stopped? Han Zheng told the emperor what this man had said, and on the fifth day, the court held a ceremony in the garden of the great empress dowager, and on the sixth day, her widow was read out.

古文：于是光祖言： 宪圣，陛下之曾祖母，克相高宗，再造大业。
现代文：于是刘光祖说： 宪圣，是陛下的曾祖母，她辅佐高宗，再次创造伟大的功业。
English: Then Liu Guangzu said, "Xian Sheng is your majesty's great-grandmother. She assisted Gao Zong and created great achievements again.

古文：侂胄敢视之如卑丧，迁就若此。
现代文：韩胄竟敢把她去世看成卑丧，如此将就。
English: Han Yan dared to see her death as a humiliation, and so it will be.

古文：贼臣就戮，盍告谢祖宗，改从本日？ 从之。
现代文：贼臣已经被杀，为什么不告诉祖宗，改回原来的日子呢？ 
English: The traitor has already been killed, why not tell the ancestors and go back to the old days?

古文：升显谟阁直学士、提举玉隆万寿宫。
现代文：皇上采纳了。刘光祖升为显谟阁直学士、提举玉隆万寿宫。
English: The emperor accepted it. Liu Guangzu was promoted to the direct bachelor of Xianmu Pavilion and promoted to the Gyulong Palace of Longevity.

古文：引年不许，提举西京嵩山崇福宫。
现代文：他因年龄大请求退休，皇上不许，让他提举西京嵩山崇福宫。
English: He asked to retire because of his age, but the emperor did not allow him to do so, and let him be elevated to the West Beijing Songshan Chongfu Palace.

古文：嘉定十五年卒，进华文阁学士，谥文节。
现代文：嘉定十五年刘光祖去世，他被进升为华文阁学士，谥号 文节 。
English: In the fifteenth year of Jiading, Liu Guangzu passed away. He was promoted to the rank of Huafeng Academy, and his posthumous name was Wenjie.

古文：赵汝愚称光祖论谏激烈似苏轼，恳恻似范祖禹，世以为名言。
现代文：赵汝愚称赞刘光祖劝谏时言辞激烈就像苏轼，恳切就像范祖禹，人们认为这是名言。
English: When Zhao Rugu praised Liu Guangzu's persuasion, his words were as fierce as Su Shi and as earnest as Fan Zuyu. People thought it was a famous saying.

古文：所著《后溪集》十卷。
现代文：刘光祖著有《后溪集》十卷。
English: Liu Guangzu is the author of the ten-volume "Houxi Collection."

古文：子：端之、靖之、翊之、竑之。
现代文：他的儿子是：刘端之、刘靖之、刘翊之、刘竑之。
English: His sons are: Liu Duanzhi, Liu Jingzhi, Liu Xizhi, Liu Xizhi.

