古文：孙处、蒯恩、刘钟、虞丘进孙处，字季高，会稽永兴人也。
现代文：孙处字季高，会稽永兴人，他的户籍上写的是季高，所以他的字反而通行社会上。
English: Sun Duan's family name is Ji Gao, and he is a member of the Yongxing Association of Auditors. His family name is Ji Gao, so his family name is common in society.

古文：籍注季高，故字行于世。少任气。高祖东征孙恩，季高义乐随。高祖平定京邑，以为振武将军，封新夷县五等侯。
现代文：孙处年轻时任情放纵，高祖东征孙恩，季高很乐意随从，高祖平定京城，用他当振武将军，封为新夷县五等侯。
English: When Sun Zu was young, he indulged in indulgence, Gao Zu led the eastward expedition of Sun En, Ji Gao was happy to follow, Gao Zu conquered the capital, used him as General Zhenwu, and was named the fifth prince of Xinyi County.

古文：广固之役，先登有功。
现代文：广固之战，孙处立了最先攻进城内的功劳。
English: In the Battle of Guanggu, Sun Shizhen was credited with being the first to enter the city.

古文：卢循之难，于石头捍栅，戍越城、查浦，破贼于新亭。
现代文：卢循进逼京城时，孙处在石头城设立栅栏，戍守越城、查浦，在新亭打败了卢军。
English: When Lu Xun advanced to the capital, Sun Zi set up a fence in the Stone City, defended Yuecheng and Chapu, and defeated the Lu army at Xinting.

古文：高祖谓季高曰： 此贼行破，应先倾其巢窟，令奔走之日，无所归投，非卿莫能济事。 
现代文：高祖对孙处说： 卢循要被彻底打败，应该首先捣毁他的巢穴，叫他奔逃的时候，无处安身，没有你便不能完成这个任务。 
English: Gao Zu said to Sun Zu, "In order to completely defeat Lu Xun, we should first destroy his lair, so that when he runs away, he will have nowhere to hide. Without you, we cannot complete this task."

古文：遣季高率众三千，泛海袭番禺。
现代文：于是派孙处率步兵三千，从海上经过，袭击番禺。
English: So he sent Sun Duan and three thousand foot soldiers across the sea to attack Panyu.

古文：初，贼不以海道为防，季高至东冲，去城十余里，城内犹未知。
现代文：先前，卢循不以海路为意，孙季高到东冲，离城十多里，城内的人还不知道。
English: Previously, Lu Xun did not intend to take the sea route, and Sun Jigao went to Dongchong, more than ten miles away from the city. People in the city still do not know.

古文：循守战士犹有数千人，城池甚固。
现代文：卢循的守兵还有几千人，城池很坚固。
English: There are still several thousand soldiers guarding Luzhu, and the castle is very strong.

古文：季高先焚舟舰，悉力登岸，会天大雾，四面陵城，即日克拔。
现代文：孙处首先焚烧船舰，全部登岸，恰遇此时大雾弥漫，孙处带兵从四面登城，当天便打下了广州城。
English: Sun first burned the ship, and they all went ashore. Just at that time, the fog was thick, and Sun led the soldiers to attack the city from all sides. On that day, they laid siege to Guangzhou City.

古文：循父嘏、长史孙建之、司马虞尪夫等，轻舟奔始兴。
现代文：卢循的父亲卢嘏、长史孙建之、司马虞夫等，坐小船逃到始兴。
English: Lu Xun's father Lu Yao, chief historian Sun Jianzhi, Sima Yufu and others fled to Shixing by boat.

古文：即分遣振武将军沈田子等讨平始兴、南康、临贺、始安岭表诸郡。
现代文：孙处便派振武将军沈田子等讨平始兴、南康、临贺、始安等岭南各郡。
English: Sun Zu then sent General Zhenwu Shen Tianzi and others to subdue Shixing, Nankang, Linhe, Shi'an and other counties in southern Lingnan.

古文：循于左里奔走，而众力犹盛，自岭道还袭广州。季高距战二十余日，循乃破走，所杀万余人。追奔至郁林，会病，不得穷讨，循遂得走向交州。
现代文：卢循从左里逃跑，但兵力还不少，从南岭回袭广州，孙处抵御二十多天，卢循才被打败逃走，杀死敌人一万多，一直追奔到郁林，恰遇病情暴发，不能穷追到底，卢循于是得以逃向交州。
English: Lu Xun fled from Zuoli, but there were still a lot of troops. From Nanling, he attacked Guangzhou, and Sun Quan resisted for more than twenty days. Lu Xun was defeated and fled, killing more than ten thousand enemies. He chased all the way to Yulin. When the disease broke out, he could not chase it to the end, so Lu Xun was able to escape to Jiaozhou.

古文：义熙七年四月，季高卒于晋康，时年五十三。
现代文：义熙七年四月。孙季高在晋康逝世，当年五十三岁。
English: In April of the seventh year of Yixi, Sun Jigao died in Jinkang at the age of fifty-three.

古文：追赠龙骧将军、南海太守，封侯官县侯，食邑千户。
现代文：死后被追赠为龙骧将军、南海太守，封爵为侯官县侯，食邑一千户。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Longjing General and Nankai Governor-General. He was also given the title of Marquis of Hokanshan County and the title of Hokenshu of a thousand households.

古文：九年，高祖念季高之功，乃表曰： 孙季高岭南之勋，已蒙褒赠。
现代文：九年高祖思念季高的功劳，于是上表说： 孙季高岭南的功劳，已蒙受赠封。
English: In the ninth year, Gaozu thought of Sun Ji Gao's merits, so the above table said: Sun Ji Gao Lingnan's merits have been awarded.

古文：臣更思惟卢循稔恶一纪，据有全域。若令根本未拔，投奔有所，招合余烬，犹能为虞；县师远讨，方勤庙算。
现代文：我再想卢循作恶十二年，据有岭南，如果他的根据地不被攻拔，有地方投身，必然招集残余，还能构成后患。
English: I then thought of Lu Xun's twelve years of evil, according to Lingnan, if his base is not attacked, if there is a place to devote himself to, he will inevitably recruit remnants, and can also constitute a hindrance.

古文：而季高泛海万里，投命洪流，波激电迈，指日遄至，遂奄定南海，覆其巢窟，使循进退靡依，轻舟远迸。
现代文：孙季高在海上行走万里，投身于洪波巨涛之上，风驰电掣，快速攻到，于是平定南海，捣毁敌人巢穴，使卢循进退无所，坐小船远逃。
English: Sun Jigao walked thousands of miles on the sea, threw himself on the huge waves of the Hongbo, rode the wind and lightning, and quickly attacked, so he pacified the South China Sea, destroyed the enemy's lair, made Lu Xun retreat to nowhere, and fled far away in a small boat.

古文：曾不旬月，妖凶歼殄。
现代文：不需一个月，妖邪叛贼便被消灭。
English: It took less than a month for the evil traitors to be eliminated.

古文：荡涤之功，实庸为大。往年所赠，犹为未优。愚谓宜更赠一州，即其本号，庶令忠勋不湮，劳臣增厉。 
现代文：平叛的功劳，确实非常地大，往年的赠给，还不算优等，我认为更应赠他一州刺史，加上他的本号，为的是让忠诚勤劳不被埋没，勤劳的功臣更加奋发有为。 
English: The merit of defeating the rebellion is indeed very great, and the gifts of previous years are not superior. I think it is more appropriate to give him a state record, plus his real name, in order to keep the loyalty and hard work from being buried, and to make the hard-working heroes more vigorous.

古文：重赠交州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：再赠给孙季高交州刺史，将军照旧。
English: He then presented Sun Ji Gao with a copy of the history of Jiaozhou, and the general continued as before.

古文：子宗世卒，子钦公嗣。
现代文：他的儿子孙宗世去世，孙子孙钦公继承。
English: His son Sun Zongshi died, and his grandson Sun Qin Gong succeeded him.

古文：钦公卒，子彦祖嗣。
现代文：孙钦公去世，他的儿子孙彦祖继承。
English: After the death of Sun Qin Gong, his son Sun Yanzu succeeded him.

古文：齐受禅，国除。
现代文：齐国建立，封爵被取消。
English: The State of Qi was established, and the title of nobility was abolished.

古文：蒯恩，字道恩，兰陵承人也。
现代文：蒯恩字道恩，兰陵承县人。
English: He is from Lanling, Chengxing County.

古文：高祖征孙恩，县差为征民，充乙士，使伐马刍。
现代文：刘裕征讨孙恩时，该县征蒯恩为民亻夫，作为乙等劳力使用，叫他运载马的粮草。
English: When Liu Yuzheng enlisted Sun En, the county enlisted him as a herdsman, used him as a second-class laborer, and asked him to carry grain and grass for horses.

古文：恩常负大束，兼倍余人，每舍刍于地，叹曰： 大丈夫弯弓三石，柰何充马士！ 
现代文：蒯恩常常背负一大捆，有一般人两个那么多，他每每丢下刍草，感叹道： 大丈夫应该开挽三石弓箭杀敌，怎么能仅当一个马兵呢？ 
English: Yan En often carried a large bundle on his back, which was as much as two ordinary people. Every time he dropped the rushes, he lamented, "It's all right for a man to use a three-stone bow and arrow to kill the enemy, but how can he be just a horse soldier?

古文：高祖闻之，即给器仗，恩大喜。自征妖贼，常为先登，多斩首级。
现代文：高祖听说蒯恩这些事，马上便给他武器铠甲，蒯恩高兴万分，从征讨孙恩起，常常率先攻击敌人，杀了很多敌人。
English: When Gaozu heard of these things, he immediately gave him weapons and armor, and Gaozu was overjoyed. From the time of Sun Yat-sen's conquest, Gaozu often took the lead in attacking the enemy and killed many enemies.

古文：既习战阵，胆力过人，诚心忠谨，未尝有过失，甚见爱信。于娄县战，箭中左目。
现代文：既熟悉了战阵，又胆量才能过人，忠诚恭谨，未曾有错误，很得高祖的喜欢，在娄县战斗中，他的左眼被箭射伤。
English: He was familiar with the battlefields and had the courage to surpass others. He was loyal and respectful, never made a mistake, and was very much liked by Gaozu. During the battle in Zhixian County, his left eye was injured by an arrow.

古文：从平京城，进定京邑，以宁远将军领幢。
现代文：蒯恩随同高祖平定京城，以宁远将军身份带一队人马。
English: Xiong En accompanied Gao Zu to pacify the capital, and took a team of men and horses as the general of Ningyuan.

古文：随振武将军道规西讨，虏桓仙客，克偃月叠，遂平江陵。
现代文：又随同振武将军刘道规西向讨伐。俘虏桓仙客，攻克偃月垒，于是打下江陵。
English: He also accompanied the Zhenwu general Liu Daogu to the westward crusade. He captured Huan Xianke, conquered the Yueyue bastion, and then laid siege to Jiangling.

古文：义熙二年，贼张坚据应城反，恩击破之，封都乡侯。
现代文：义熙二年，张坚占据应城造反，蒯恩击败张坚，蒯恩被封为都乡侯。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, Zhang Jian occupied Yingcheng and led a rebellion. Xiong defeated Zhang Jian, and Xiong was awarded the title of capital township.

古文：从伐广固，又有战功。
现代文：随同刘裕进攻广固，又有战功。
English: Accompanied Liu Yu in the attack of Guanggu, and made war achievements.

古文：卢循逼京邑，恩战于查浦，贼退走。
现代文：卢循进逼京城，蒯恩在查浦抵抗敌人，敌人退走。
English: Lu Xun marched into the capital, Zhen resisted the enemy in Chapu and the enemy retreated.

古文：与王仲德等追破循别将范崇民于南陵。
现代文：他又和王仲德等追击，击败卢循部将在南陵的范崇民。
English: He and Wang Zhongde also pursued and defeated Fan Chongmin, the general of Lu Xun's army, in Nanling.

古文：循既走还广州，恩又领千余人随刘籓追徐道覆于始兴，斩之。
现代文：卢循逃回广州，蒯恩又带一千人随同刘藩追击在始兴的徐道覆，并将他斩首。
English: Lu Xun fled back to Guangzhou, and Yan En took another thousand people with Liu Han to pursue Xu Daohui in Shixing, and beheaded him.

古文：迁龙骧将军、兰陵太守。
现代文：蒯恩迁任龙骧将军、兰陵太守。
English: He was transferred to be the general of Longjing and the governor of Lanling.

古文：高祖西征刘毅，恩与王镇恶轻军袭江陵，事在《镇恶传》。
现代文：高祖西征刘毅，蒯恩和王镇恶率领轻兵袭击江陵，此事可参见《王镇恶传》。
English: Gao Zu Xizheng, Liu Yi, Xiong En and Wang Zhenxiong led light soldiers to attack Jiangling, this matter can be found in "Wang Zhenxiong."

古文：以本官为太尉长兼行参军，领众二千，随益州刺史硃龄石伐蜀。
现代文：蒯恩在本官的基础上又兼任太尉长兼行参军，带兵二千，随同益州刺史朱龄石征讨蜀国。
English: On the basis of his official position, Yan En also concurrently served as a captain and joined the army, leading two thousand soldiers, along with Yizhou scribe Zhu Lingshi to conquer Shu.

古文：至彭模，恩所领居前，大战，自朝至日昃，勇气益奋，贼破走。
现代文：到彭模时，蒯恩所带的部队冲在前面，和敌人展开激烈的战斗，从早晨到傍晚，蒯恩更加勇猛。
English: When he arrived at Pengmo, the troops led by Xiong En rushed to the front and fought a fierce battle with the enemy. From morning to evening, Xiong En was even more courageous.

古文：进平成都，擢为行参军，改封北至县五等男。
现代文：敌人败逃，前进平定成都，他被选拔为行参军，改封北至县五等男。
English: The enemy was defeated and fled, advancing to pacify Chengdu. He was selected to join the army and was promoted to the 5th grade of the North Zhixian County.

古文：高祖伐司马休之及鲁宗之，恩与建威将军徐逵之前进。
现代文：高祖征讨司马休之和鲁宗之，蒯恩和建威将军徐逵之先行。
English: Gaozhu's conquest was preceded by that of Sima Xiu and Lu Zong, and that of Xiong En and Jian Wei's general Xu Xi.

古文：逵之败没，恩陈于堤下。宗之子轨乘胜击恩，矢下如雨，呼声震地，恩整厉将士，置阵坚严。
现代文：徐逵之败亡，蒯恩的部队在堤下布阵，鲁宗之的儿子鲁轨利用胜利形势进攻蒯恩，飞箭乱射，仿佛雨点一般，呼声震动天地。蒯恩勉励将士，战阵更加坚固。
English: After Xu Shizhi's defeat, Shenn's troops set up a line of battle under the embankment. Lu Zongzhi's son, Lu Lu, took advantage of the victorious situation to attack Shenn. He shot arrows indiscriminately, as if they were raindrops, and his shouts shook heaven and earth. Shenn encouraged his soldiers, and the battle line was more solid.

古文：轨屡冲之不动，知不可攻，乃退。
现代文：鲁轨多次冲击，蒯恩都巍然不动。鲁轨觉得攻不下于是退却了。
English: Lu Lu was hit many times, but he did not move. Lu Lu felt that he could not attack, so he retreated.

古文：高祖善其能将军持重。
现代文：高祖肯定他带兵稳重。
English: Gaozu affirmed that he led the troops in a steady manner.

古文：江陵平定，复追鲁轨于石城。
现代文：江陵平定后，蒯恩再追击鲁轨到石头城。
English: After Gangneung was pacified, Yan En again pursued Lu onto Stone Town.

古文：轨弃城走，恩追至襄阳，宗之奔羌，恩与诸将追讨至鲁阳关乃还。
现代文：鲁轨弃城而逃，蒯恩追到襄阳，鲁宗之逃奔后秦，蒯恩和将领们追到鲁阳关才回来。
English: Lu Cao abandoned the city and fled, chasing Xiong En to Xiangyang. After Lu Zong fled to Qin, Xiong En and the generals chased him to Luyang Pass before returning.

古文：恩自从征讨，每有危急，辄率先诸将，常陷坚破阵，不避艰惸。凡百余战，身被重创。
现代文：蒯恩自随从刘裕征战以来，每次有危急时，都首先冲击，常常攻陷敌阵，打败敌人，不避险阻，大小一百多次战斗，他身上也多次受重伤。
English: Since following Liu Yu into battle, whenever there was a crisis, Yan En was the first to strike, often capturing the enemy's position, defeating the enemy, not avoiding obstacles, fighting more than a hundred times, and he was also seriously injured many times.

古文：高祖录其前后功劳，封新宁县男，食邑五百户。
现代文：高祖记下他的前后功劳，封他为新宁县男，食邑五百户。
English: Gao Zu wrote down his merits before and after, and named him the man of Xinning County, with more than 500 households in the county.

古文：高祖世子为征虏将军，恩以大府佐领中兵参军，随府转中兵参军。
现代文：高祖的世子当征虏将军，蒯恩以大府将佐兼领世子的中兵参军。
English: Gaozu's heir became a conscript general, and he was given the honor of leading his son's middle-ranking soldiers to join the army.

古文：高祖北伐，留恩侍卫世子，命朝士与之交。
现代文：随同本府转任中兵参军，高祖北伐，留下蒯恩保护世子，叫朝臣和他结交。
English: Gao Zu went to the Northern Expedition with the soldiers transferred from this prefecture to join the army, leaving behind a legacy of protection for his son and calling on courtiers to make friends with him.

古文：恩益自谦损，与人语常呼官位，而自称为鄙人。
现代文：蒯恩更加谦虚，与人谈话时总是以官职称呼别人，而却自称鄙人。
English: Yan En is more modest. When talking to people, he always calls others by their official title, but calls himself a humble person.

古文：抚待士卒，甚有纪纲，众咸亲附之。
现代文：他对待士兵们，很有纪律，部下都亲近拥护他。
English: He treated his soldiers with great discipline, and his men were very close to him and supported him.

古文：迁咨议参军，转辅国将军、淮陵太守。
现代文：他迁任谘议参军，转任辅国将军、淮陵太守。
English: He was transferred to an advisory position to join the army, and later became the general of the auxiliary state and the governor of Huairing.

古文：世子开府，又为从事中郎，转司马，将军、太守如故。
现代文：世子建立军府，他又当从事中郎，再转司马，将军、太守照旧。
English: When his son established the military government, he had to serve as a middle-ranking official, and then he was promoted to shima, shogun, and daijo as before.

古文：入关迎桂阳公义真。
现代文：蒯恩到关中迎接桂阳公刘义真。
English: Yan En went to Guanzhong to meet Liu Yizhen, the Guiyang Prince.

古文：义真还至青泥，为佛佛虏所追，恩断后，力战连日。
现代文：刘义真回到青，被赫连氏追击，蒯恩在后护卫，连日激战。
English: Liu Yizhen returned to Qing, was chased by the Herian clan, with Yan En as his rear guard, and the battle raged for days.

古文：义真前军奔散，恩军人亦尽，为虏所执，死于虏中。
现代文：刘义真的前军逃散，蒯恩的部队也大部分牺牲，他本人被敌人俘虏，在夏国境内死去。
English: Liu Yizhen's former army fled and scattered, and most of Xiong's troops also died. He himself was captured by the enemy and died in Xia territory.

古文：子国才嗣。
现代文：他的儿子蒯国才继承他的爵位。
English: His son, Xing Guo, succeeded to his title.

古文：国才卒，子慧度嗣。
现代文：国才去世，儿子蒯慧度继承。
English: Kunzai died, and his son Zou Huidu succeeded him.

古文：慧度卒，无子，国除。
现代文：慧度去世，没有儿子，封爵被取消。
English: Wisdom died without a son, and his knighthood was revoked.

