古文：沈聿党国清太原小吏村人陈翁乐坤永清县庙崔泽韩愈李逢吉
现代文：沈聿党国清太原小吏村人陈翁乐坤永清县庙崔泽韩愈李逢吉
English: Chen Weng Le Kun, a villager from the village of Taiyuan who was a minor official in the State of the Qing Dynasty, went to the temple in Yongqing County. Cui Ze, Han Yu, Li Fengji

古文：樊宗训裴度张仲殷凌华
现代文：樊宗训裴度张仲殷凌华
English: Zou Zongxun Pei Du Zhang Zhong Yin Linghua

古文：沈聿
现代文：沈聿
English: Shen Zhen

古文：贞元中，庶子沈华致仕永崇里。其子聿尉三原。
现代文：贞元年间，沈华辞官归于永崇里，他儿子沈聿在三原当县尉。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan, Shen Hua's position was given to Yong Chongli, and his son, Shen Qi, became a county official in Mihara.

古文：素有别业，在邑之西，聿因官遂修葺焉。
现代文：城西有他家一个庄园，沈聿因为做了官。就把庄园整修一番。
English: His family had a manor in the west of the city, but because he was a government official, he had the manor renovated.

古文：于庄之北，平原十余里，垣古埏以建牛坊。
现代文：庄园的北面有十多里的平原，就用墙围起一片过去的坟地做了牛圈。
English: To the north of the manor there is a plain more than ten miles long, so they surrounded a former cemetery with a wall and made a cattle pen.

古文：秩满。因归农焉。
现代文：沈聿任期满了以后，就回到庄园务农了。
English: After his term of office expired, he returned to the manor to work as a farmer.

古文：一日，寝堂之东轩。忽惊寤，见二黄吏谓聿曰：府司召郎。
现代文：有一天，他在东屋窗下午睡，忽然惊醒，看见两个黄衣官员进屋来对他说，府司召见你。
English: One day, when he was sleeping in the afternoon in the window of the east wing, he suddenly woke up and saw two yellow-clad officials enter the house and say to him, "The prefect has summoned you."

古文：聿自谓官罢。无事诣府。拒之未行。
现代文：沈聿说自己已经不作官了，没有什么公事须去见府司，就拒绝不去。
English: Shen Yu said that he was no longer an official and had no official business to attend to, so he refused to go.

古文：二吏坚呼，聿不觉随出。
现代文：可是两个黄衣官员坚持叫他去，他也就不知不觉地跟着走了。
English: But two yellow-vested officers insisted that he go, and he followed unnoticed.

古文：经历亲爱洎家人，挥霍告语，曾无应者。
现代文：看见家里的亲人们，沈聿挥手告别，但家人没有任何反应。
English: Seeing his relatives at home, Shen Rong waved goodbye, but there was no reaction from his family.

古文：二吏呵驱甚迫，遂北行可二十里。
现代文：两个黄衣官员催促得很急，带着他向北走了二十多里，进了一个城里。
English: Two yellow-clad officials hurried him and took him more than 20 miles north to a city.

古文：至一城署，人民稀少，道路芜荟，正衙之东街，南北二巨门对启。吏导入北门，止聿屏外。入云，追沈聿到。
现代文：城中人很稀少，路上长满荒草。正衙在东街上，南北两扇大门对开着，官员领沈聿进了北面的衙门，让他在外面等着，进去报告说，沈聿已经捉到。
English: There were very few people in the city, and the roads were overgrown with weeds. The main gate was on the east street, and the north and south gates were open. The officials led Shen Yao into the north gate, and asked him to wait outside. He went in and reported that he had caught Shen Yao.

古文：良久，厅上读状，付司责问。
现代文：过了半天，听得里面大堂上有人念状子，还有审判官责问的声音。
English: Half a day later, I could hear someone in the lobby reading a petition, as well as the voice of the judge scolding.

古文：聿惶惧而逃，莫知所诣，遂突入南门。
现代文：沈聿吓坏了，掉头就跑，惊惶中不知该向那里去，就急忙逃进了南面的衙门。
English: Horrified, Shen Yao turned around and ran. In his panic, he didn't know where to go, so he hurriedly fled into the south gate of the castle.

古文：门内有厅，重施帘幙，聿危急，径入帘下。
现代文：见门内有个大厅，门上有很厚的门帘子挡着。
English: There is a hall inside the door, which is blocked by a thick curtain.

古文：则见紫衣贵人，寝书案后。
现代文：沈聿急忙躲进帘子后面，一看厅上有个穿紫衣的人在书桌后面睡着。
English: Shen Yao hurriedly hid behind the curtain. At first glance, there was a person in a purple robe asleep behind the desk in the hall.

古文：聿欣有所投，又惧二吏之至，因声气撼动，紫衣遂寤。熟视聿曰：子为何者？
现代文：沈聿虽然为找到躲藏的地方而高兴，但仍怕两个黄衣官追到这里，喘气很粗，惊醒了那个睡觉的紫衣人。紫衣人看了沈聿半天说，你是什么人？
English: Although Shen Rong was happy to have found a place to hide, he was still afraid that the two officers in yellow would chase him here, panting heavily, and wake up the sleeping man in purple. The man in purple looked at Shen Rong for a long time and said, "Who are you?"

古文：又曰：子非张氏之弥甥乎？
现代文：沈聿就报了姓名和官职。紫衣人说，我们是亲戚，你知道吗？
English: Shen Yao gave his name and position. The man in purple said, "We are relatives, do you know that?"

古文：吾而祖舅也。
现代文：沈聿感到惊讶，一时答不上来。
English: Shen Yao was surprised and couldn't answer for a moment.

古文：子在人间，亦知张谓侍郎乎？
现代文：紫衣人又说，你不是张某外甥的儿子吗，我是你的舅爷爷呀，你在人间难道不知道张谓张侍郎吗？
English: The man in purple also said, "Aren't you Zhang's nephew's son? I'm your great-uncle. Don't you know that in the human world, Zhang is called Zhang Jirong?"

古文：聿曰：幼稚时则闻之。
现代文：沈聿说，小时听说过您。
English: Shen Yao said that he had heard about you for an hour.

古文：家有文集，尚能记念。
现代文：我家有您的诗文集，我读过，还能记得一些。
English: My family has your poetry collection. I have read it and can still remember some of it.

古文：紫衣喜曰：试为我言。
现代文：紫衣人高兴的说，那你能不能给我背几首呢？
English: The man in purple said happily, "Could you recite a few pieces for me, then?"

古文：聿念樱桃解结垂檐子，杨柳能低入户枝。
现代文：沈聿就背了樱桃解结垂檐子，杨柳能低入户枝的诗句。
English: Shen Yao recited the verses of the untying of the cherry tree, the hanging of the pigtail, and the willow tree being able to enter the house.

古文：紫衣大悦。
现代文：紫衣人更高兴了。
English: The man in purple is even happier.

古文：二吏走至前庭曰：秋局召沈聿。因遥拜，呼紫衣曰生曹，礼谒甚恭。
现代文：这时那两个黄衣官突然进来了，但他们见了紫衣人很恭敬，称他生曹并跪下叩拜，然后说，秋局让我们带沈聿去过堂。
English: At this time, the two yellow-clothed officials suddenly came in, but they were very respectful when they saw the purple-clothed person, saying that he was a college student and kneeled down and bowed, and then said, let us take Shen Yao to the hall in the autumn.

古文：紫衣谓曰：沈聿吾之外孙也，尔可致吾意于秋局，希缓其期。
现代文：紫衣人说，沈聿是我的外孙，你们向秋局的主管转达我的意思，请他们对沈聿缓期执行。
English: The man in purple said, "Shen Yao is my grandchild. Please convey my intention to the head of the autumn bureau, and ask them to suspend the execution of Shen Yao."

古文：二吏承命而出。俄返曰：敬依教。紫衣曰：尔死矣，宜速归。
现代文：两个官员奉命走了，不一会儿就回来对紫衣人说，照您的意思办了。
English: The two officers were ordered to leave, but soon returned to tell the man in purple that they had done as he had asked.

古文：聿谢辞而出，吏伺聿于门，笑谓聿曰：生曹之德，其可忘哉。
现代文：紫衣人对沈聿说，这里是阴曹，你来这里就是死了，现在放了你，就快回家吧。沈聿赶快拜谢后退出来，见那两个官员等在门外，对沈聿笑着说，生曹的恩情你可不要忘了啊！
English: The man in purple said to Shen Yao, "It's a dirty place, you'll die if you come here. Now that you've been released, just go home." Shen Yao hurriedly bowed and retreated, saw the two officials waiting outside the door, and said to Shen Yao with a smile, "Don't forget the kindness of your father!"

古文：因引聿而南。
现代文：说完就领上他向南走。
English: And when he had thus spoken, he took him, and went in the direction of the south.

古文：聿大以酒食钱帛许之。
现代文：沈聿对两个官员说回头一定好好报答。
English: Shen Rong told the two officials that they must return the favor.

古文：忽若梦觉，日已夕矣。
现代文：这时沈聿就突然醒了过来，一看太阳已经落了。
English: At this time, Shen Yao suddenly woke up and saw that the sun had already set.

古文：亦不以告人，即令致奠二吏于野外。
现代文：这件事他谁也没告诉，立刻派人带着酒饭纸钱到野外祭奠那两个官员，就没再有什么事情。
English: He didn't tell anyone about this, and immediately sent someone out into the field with food, wine, paper and money to pay tribute to the two officials, and then nothing happened.

古文：聿亦无恙。又五日，聿晚于庄门复见二吏曰：冤诉不已，须得郎为证。
现代文：五天后的晚上，沈聿在庄园门外看见那两个官员又来了，对沈聿说，你案子中的原告不断喊冤，追得很紧，你得去对案作证。
English: Five days later, in the evening, outside the gate of the manor, Shen Yu saw the two officials coming again. They said to Shen Yu, "The plaintiff in your case is constantly crying out for justice, and you are being chased very closely. You have to go and testify to the case."

古文：聿即询其事犯，二吏曰：郎建牛坊，平夷十古塚，大被论理，候郎对辩。
现代文：沈聿就问自己倒底犯了什么案。两个官员说，你家盖牛圈，平了十个古墓，人家把你告下了，等你去对证。
English: The two officials said, "Your family built a cattle pen and levelled ten ancient tombs. You have been reported to the police, wait until you go to testify."

古文：聿谓曰：此主役之家人银钥擅意也。
现代文：沈聿说，平坟的事是我的管家擅自干的，他叫银钥。
English: Shen Yao said that the matter of the flat grave was done without authorization by my steward, his name was Silver Key.

古文：二吏相顾曰：置即召奴，或可矣。
现代文：两个官员至互相看了看说，那就把他留下，咱们去抓管家银钥，也许能行。
English: The two officials looked at each other and said, well, let him stay, let's go get the butler's keys, maybe we can.

古文：因忽不见。
现代文：说完忽然不见了。
English: After saying this, he suddenly disappeared.

古文：其夜，银钥气蹶而卒。
现代文：这天夜晚，管家突然气绝死去。
English: That night, the steward suddenly died of exhaustion.

古文：数日，忽复遇二吏，谓聿曰：银钥称郎指教，屈辞甚切，郎宜自往。
现代文：几天后，两个官员又来了，对沈聿说，银钥说平坟的事是你命令他干的，一个劲地叫屈，你还是去一趟吧。
English: A few days later, the two officials came again and said to Shen Rong, "Silver Key, you ordered him to level the grave. You should still go."

古文：聿又勤求，特希一为告于生曹，二吏许诺。
现代文：沈聿就一面请求，并希望他们把这情形告诉那们当生曹的舅爷爷，两个官员答应了。
English: Shen Rong made a request and hoped that they would tell their great-great-uncle about the situation, and the two officials agreed.

古文：及至，遇所友之僧出，因投其房。
现代文：过了一会就回来对沈聿说，你舅爷让你今晚赶快出去躲一躲，这话千万不可泄露，你躲出去三天就没事了。说完就不见了。
English: After a while, he came back and said to Shen Tao, "Your uncle told you to go out and hide tonight. You must not reveal this. If you go out and hide for three days, you will be fine." After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：当宿累日，惧贻严君之忧，则径归京，不敢以实启。
现代文：沈聿立刻偷偷骑上快马，乘天黑逃出去。他过去曾在同州的寺里读书，打算到那里去躲。到了寺，找到他交好的一位和尚，就住在他房里。
English: Shen Yao immediately secretly got on a fast horse and fled in the dark. He used to study in a temple in the same state and planned to hide there. When he got to the temple, he found a monk he was friends with and lived in his room.

古文：庄夫至云：前夜火发，北原之牛坊，已为煨烬矣。
现代文：几天后，怕自己的父亲挂念，就赶回京城，这些事都没敢实说。后来庄园的仆人来报告说前天晚上庄园突然失火，北原上的牛圈已化为灰烬了。
English: A few days later, fearing that his father would miss him, he rushed back to Kyoto, not daring to tell the truth about these things. Later, the servants of the manor came to report that the manor had suddenly caught fire the night before, and the cowshed on the north field had been reduced to ashes.

古文：聿终免焉。
现代文：沈聿终于逃出了这场劫数。
English: Shen Yao finally escaped the carnage.

古文：党国清
现代文：党国清
English: Dangguoqing

古文：晋阳东南二十里，有台骀庙，在汾水旁。
现代文：晋阳东南二十里有座台骀神庙，庙在汾河边上。
English: In the southeast of Jinyang, there are twenty Taoist temples. The temple is on the edge of the Tao River.

古文：元和中，王锷镇河东时，有里民党国清者，善建屋。
现代文：元和年间王锷镇守河东时，有一个叫党国清的老百姓，善于盖房子。
English: During the Yuan and He years, when Wangye Town guarded the east of the river, there was an ordinary citizen named Dangguoqing who was good at building houses.

古文：一夕，梦黑衣人至门，谓国清曰：台骀神召汝。
现代文：有天晚上，国清梦见一个黑衣人对他说，台骀要召见你。
English: One night, Guo Qing had a dream in which a man in black said to him, "The emperor wants to see you."

古文：随之而去。
现代文：他就跟着走。
English: Zhao Yu followed suit.

古文：出都门，行二十里，至台骀神庙。
现代文：出了城门二十多里，来到台骀神庙。
English: I walked more than 20 miles out of the city gate and came to the Taishan Temple.

古文：庙门外有吏卒数十，被甲执兵，罗列左右，国清恐悸不敢进。
现代文：只见庙外有几十个穿铠甲持刀枪的兵丁列在两旁，国清吓得不敢进去。
English: Seeing dozens of soldiers wearing armor and holding swords and guns lined up on both sides outside the temple, Guo Qing was too scared to enter.

古文：使者曰：子无惧。
现代文：黑衣人说别怕，带他进了庙拜见。
English: The man in black said, "Don't be afraid," and took him into the temple to meet him.

古文：已而入谒。见有兵士百余人，传导甚严，既再拜。
现代文：只见庙内也有一百多侍卫，警戒森严，一个传一个地呼喊着让他往前走。国清赶快又下拜。
English: There were also more than a hundred guards inside the temple, keeping a strict vigil, shouting for him to go forward one by one. Guo Qing quickly bowed down again.

古文：台骀神召国清升阶曰：吾庙宇隳漏，风日飘损，每天雨，即吾之衣裾几席沾湿。
现代文：台骀神召国清上殿，对他说，我的庙宇漏了，风吹日晒，一到雨天，我的衣服用具就被淋湿。
English: The god called Guo Qing to the hall and said to him, "My temple is leaking, the wind is blowing and the sun is shining, and when it rains, my clothes and utensils get wet.

古文：且尔为吾塞其罅隙，无使有风雨之苦。
现代文：请你把房上的漏处修补一下，使我免受风雨之苦。
English: Please fix the leak in my house and save me from the storm.

古文：国清曰：谨受命。
现代文：国清说，我一定照办。
English: Guo Qing said, I will certainly do so.

古文：于是搏涂登庙舍，尽补其漏。即毕，神召黑衣者。
现代文：于是就和好了泥，上房把漏的地方全都堵上了。
English: So the mud was smoothed out, and the upper room was plugged up where it leaked.

古文：送国清还。
现代文：干完以后，神就让那黑衣人送国清回家。
English: When he was finished, God told the man in black to take Guo Qing home.

古文：出庙门，西北而去，未行十里，忽闻传呼之声，使者与国清俱匿于道左。
现代文：出了庙门往西北走，没走十里地，忽然听见喝道声，黑衣人和国清一起藏在道旁。
English: After leaving the temple gate and walking northwest, he had not gone more than ten miles when he suddenly heard shouting. The man in black and Guo Qing hid together by the roadside.

古文：俄见百余骑，自北而南，执兵设辟者数十。有一人具冠冕，紫衣金佩，御白马，仪壮魁伟，殿后者最众。
现代文：不一会只见一百多人骑马由北向南来，其中有几十个拿着兵器侍卫的人，中间簇拥着一个头戴官帽身穿紫色官服佩带金饰的人，这人骑着白马，仪表堂堂，后面的卫队人数更多。
English: After a while, I saw more than a hundred people riding from north to south. Among them, there were dozens of guards with weapons. In the middle, there was a man wearing an officer's cap, a purple official uniform and gold ornaments. He was riding a white horse and was very handsome. There were more guards behind him.

古文：使者曰：磨笄山神也，以明日会食于李氏之门，今夕故先谒吾君于庙耳。
现代文：黑衣人告诉国清那就是磨笄山的山神，因为明天要去参加一位姓李的人家的宴会，今晚先来我们这里约请我们台骀神去。
English: The man in black told Guo Qing that it was the mountain god of the Mule Mountain, because tomorrow he was going to attend a banquet at the home of a man surnamed Li. Tonight, he came here first to invite us to go to the mountain god.

古文：国清与使者俱入城门，忽觉目皆微惨，以乎搔之，悸然而寤。
现代文：国清和黑衣人进了城门后，忽然觉得两眼有点痛，用手一揉，就醒过来了。
English: After Guo Qing and the man in black entered the city gate, he suddenly felt a little pain in his eyes. He rubbed his eyes with his hands and woke up.

古文：明日，往台骀庙中，见几上有屋坏泄雨之迹。视其屋，果有补葺之处。
现代文：第二天他来到台骀庙，看见案子上有屋坏漏雨的水渍，抬头看屋顶，果然有修补堵漏的痕迹。
English: The next day, he came to the Taichung Temple and saw that there were water stains on the roof due to leaking rain. Looking up at the roof, there were indeed traces of repairing and plugging leaks.

古文：及归，行未六七里，闻道西村堡中有箫鼓声，因往谒焉。
现代文：回来时，刚走了六七里地，听见路西村子里有鼓乐声，就跑去看。
English: When I came back, I had just walked six or seven miles when I heard the sound of drums and music in Lusi village, so I ran to see.

古文：见设筵，有巫者呼舞，乃醮神也。
现代文：原来是有一家人正在设了祭坛摆着酒宴祭神，还有跳大神的载歌载舞。一打听，原来这家人正是姓李。
English: It turned out that a family was setting up an altar with a wine banquet to worship the gods, as well as singing and dancing to the great gods. Upon inquiry, it turned out that this family was surnamed Li.

古文：国清讯之，曰：此李氏之居也。李存古尝为衙将，往年范司徒罪其慢法，以有军功，故宥其死，摈于雁门郡。
现代文：这家有个叫李存古的曾当过军官，因为目无法纪犯了死罪，上司范司经徒他曾有军功，免去李存古死罪，把他流放到偏远的雁门郡。
English: One of the family members, Li Cungu, had been an officer and had committed a capital crime because he was blind, but his superior, Fan Si Jingtu, who had military merit, exempted Li Cungu from the death penalty and exiled him to remote Yanmen County.

古文：雁门有磨笄山神，存古常祷其庙，愿得生还。
现代文：雁门有磨笄山神庙，李存古常常到庙里去上供祷告，祈求得够活着回到故乡。
English: There is a temple dedicated to the god of Mount Moriyama in Yanmen. Li Cungu often went to the temple to offer prayers and pray to be able to return to his hometown alive.

古文：近者以赦获归。
现代文：最近果然被赦免放回来了。
English: He was recently pardoned and released.

古文：存古谓磨笄山神所祐，于是醮之。
现代文：李存古说这是磨笄山神的保佑，所以才摆设祭坛谢神。
English: Li Cungu said that this was the blessing of the god of the grinding mountain, so he set up an altar to thank the god.

古文：果与国清梦同也。
现代文：国清一听，果然和自己做的梦完全符合。
English: Upon listening to Guo Qing, he was completely in line with his own dream.

古文：太原小吏
现代文：太原小吏
English: Taiyuan petty official

古文：既而伫立久之，若有所伺。小吏见之甚惧，白于衙将靳坦、张和。
现代文：元和年间王锷镇守太原。有一天中午，他手下一个小官看见一个神人，有一丈多高，穿着金甲执着宝剑，从衙门那边慢慢走来，然后站住，停了很长时间，好象在等什么人。
English: During the Yuan and Wu Dynasties, Wang Qizhen guarded Taiyuan. One day at noon, a petty officer under his command saw a tall god-man, wearing golden armor and holding a sword, slowly walking from the gate, and then stopped and paused for a long time, as if waiting for someone.

古文：偕视之，如小吏言。俄有暴风起，因忽不见。
现代文：小官十分害怕，跑去告诉衙将靳坦、张和，两个人一同来看，果然和小官说的一样。不一会突然狂风大作，那大神也消失了。
English: The minor official was very scared and ran to tell the chief priests, Shantan and Zhang He, to come and have a look. The two of them came to the same conclusion as the minor official. Not long after, there was a sudden storm and the great god disappeared.

古文：后月余而锷薨，时元和中也。
现代文：过了一个多月，王锷就去世了。这是元和年间的事。
English: After more than a month, Wang Yao passed away. This was during the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：村人陈翁
现代文：村人陈翁
English: Village resident Chen Weng

古文：云朔之间尝大旱，时暑亦甚，里人病热者以千数。
现代文：云朔一带曾经大旱，天气十分炎热。乡村里得了热病的人数以千计。
English: There was a drought in the area around Yunshuo, and the weather was very hot. Thousands of people in the countryside fell ill with fever.

古文：有甿陈翁者，因独行田间，忽逢一人，仪状其异，擐金甲，左右佩弧矢，执长剑，御良马，朱缨金佩，光采华焕，鞭马疾驰。
现代文：有位种地的老人姓陈，这天一个人在田里耕作。忽然遇见一个怪人，穿着金铠甲，盔上戴着红缨，衣上佩着金饰，腰里带着弓箭，手执长剑，骑着高头大马，十分雄伟。
English: An old farmer named Chen was ploughing a field alone one day when he suddenly met a strange man, dressed in golden armor, with a red scepter on his helmet, gold ornaments on his clothes, a bow and arrow at his waist, a long sword in his hand, and riding a tall horse. He was very majestic.

古文：神人曰：我天使，上帝以汝里中人俱病热，岂独骄阳之所为乎？
现代文：远人正骑马飞奔，看见陈翁就停了下来问道，你不是这个村的人吗？陈翁说，我是种田人，在这村已住多年了。
English: A man in the distance was galloping on a horse. When he saw Chen Weng, he stopped and asked, "Aren't you from this village?" Chen Weng said, "I am a farmer and have lived in this village for many years.

古文：且有厉鬼在君邑中。
现代文：神人说，我是上天派来的使者。
English: The god said, "I am a messenger sent from heaven.

古文：故邑人多病，上命我逐之。
现代文：天帝见你们村里人得了热病，并不是太阳太毒，而是你们村里有恶鬼作怪，所以命令我来撵鬼。
English: When the Heavenly Emperor saw that people in your village were suffering from fever, it wasn't that the sun was too toxic, but that there were evil spirits in your village, so he ordered me to exorcise them.

古文：已而不见。
现代文：说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：陈翁即以其事白于里人。
现代文：陈翁把这事告诉了村里人。
English: Chen Weng told the villagers about this.

古文：自是云朔之间，病热皆愈。
现代文：果然后来云朔一带得热病的人都好了。
English: As a result, people who came to Yunshuo and the surrounding areas with fever got better.

古文：乐坤
现代文：乐坤
English: 乐坤

古文：乐坤，旧名冲，累举不第。元和十二年，乃罢举东归，至华阴。
现代文：乐坤原名叫乐冲，赶考多次都没考中，元和十二年落第后，离京东去回乡。
English: Le Kun's original name was Le Chong, and he failed the middle school entrance examination many times. After failing in the first and twelfth years, he left Jingdong to return to his hometown.

古文：夜祷岳庙，以卜进退之计。
现代文：走到华阴县，夜里到华岳神庙去进香，并抽签算算自己今后该怎么办。
English: Walk to Huayin County, go to Huayue Temple at night for incense, and draw lots to figure out what to do in the future.

古文：中夜，忽梦一青绶人，检簿出来报云：来年有乐坤名已到，冥簿不见乐冲也。
现代文：半夜忽然梦见一个穿黑衣佩着印绶的人，手里拿着个本子对他说，明年，乐坤这个名的已到中举，本子上已有名字，但是阴司的簿子上没有乐冲的名字。
English: In the middle of the night, he suddenly dreamed of a man wearing black and wearing a seal, holding a book in his hand and saying to him, "Next year, the name Le Kun has been raised to the middle, there are names on the book, but there is no name of Le Chong on the book of the vagina."

古文：冲遂改为坤。
现代文：乐冲就改名叫乐坤。
English: Le Chong changed his name to Le Kun.

古文：来年如其说。
现代文：第二年，乐坤果然考中。
English: In the second year, Le Kun successfully passed the middle school entrance examination.

古文：春闱后，经岳祈谢，又祝官位所至。
现代文：春天的京试结束后，乐坤经过岳庙，又进去祷告，并向神求问今后官运如何。
English: After the spring exam in Beijing, Le Kun passed by the Yue Temple, went inside again to pray, and asked God what the future of the government would be like.

古文：梦中称官历四资，郡守而已，乃终于郢州。
现代文：夜里梦见神对他说能做四任官，最高能做到郡守。果然，乐坤最终做了郢州郡守。
English: At night, he dreamed that God told him that he could be a four-term official, and the best he could do was county governor. Sure enough, Le Kun eventually became the county governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：永清县庙
现代文：永清县庙
English: Yongqing County Temple

古文：房州永清县，去郡东百二十里，山邑残毁，城郭萧条。
现代文：永清县在房州郡以东一百二十多里，是个篇僻贫穷的小山城，城墙残破，城里很萧条。
English: Yongqing County, more than 120 miles east of Fangzhou County, is a remote and poor small mountain town. The city wall is broken, and the city is very depressed.

古文：穆宗时，有县令至任逾年，其弟宁省，乍睹见牢落，不胜其忧。
现代文：有个县令到永清县上任一年后，他的弟弟来看他。弟弟在城里转了转，看到一片破败景象，心里很不好受。
English: One year after a county magistrate took office in Yongqing County, his younger brother came to see him. The younger brother looked around the city and saw a dilapidated scene, feeling very uncomfortable.

古文：暇日，周览四隅，无非榛棘，见荒庙岿然，土偶罗列，无门榜牌记，莫知谁氏。
现代文：闲暇时到城边四方转了转，看见一个破庙，里面排列着些神像，但庙门上没有匾额标识，不知是个什么庙。
English: In my spare time, I wandered around the outskirts of the city and saw a ruined temple with statues of gods lined up inside, but there was no inscription on the temple door, so I didn't know what kind of temple it was.

古文：访之邑吏，但云永清大王而已。
现代文：向地方上的小吏打听，说是永清大王庙。
English: When I asked the local officials, they said that it was the Yongqing Great King Temple.

古文：令弟徙倚久之，昏然成寐，与神相接。
现代文：县令的弟弟倚在庙门上好久，竟昏昏睡去。
English: The younger brother of the county magistrate leaned on the temple gate for a long time and fell into a deep sleep.

古文：神曰：我名迹不显久矣。郁然欲自述其由，恐为妖怪。
现代文：在梦中，庙神来见他，说，我已经默默无闻很久了，很想倾诉一下我的处境，又怕人们把我当成妖怪。
English: In the dream, the temple god came to see him and said, "I've been unknown for a long time, and I'd like to talk about my situation, but I'm afraid people will think I'm a monster."

古文：今吾子致问，得伸积年之愤。
现代文：今天你来关心我，我就对你说说我多年的忧愤吧。
English: Today, if you care about me, I'll tell you about my years of sorrow and anger.

古文：我毗陵人也，大父子隐，吴书有传。
现代文：我原来是毗陵人，祖上子隐是名人，吴书上有他的传记。
English: I was originally from Viling, and my great-grandfather Zi Yan was a famous person. His biography is in the Book of Wu.

古文：诛南山之虎，斩长桥之蛟，与民除害，阴功昭著。
现代文：他曾杀过南山猛虎，斩过长桥的蛟龙，为民除害，阴功很昭著。
English: He once killed the Nanshan tiger, cut the dragon across the Long Bridge, and eliminated harm to the people, and his evil deeds are well known.

古文：余素有壮志，以功佐时。
现代文：我向来有大志，想立那济世的大业。
English: I have always had a great ambition to establish a great cause to help the world.

古文：余名廓，为上帝所命，于金商均房四郡之间，捕鸷兽。
现代文：我叫廓，受天帝的指派在金、商、房、均四州地面，捕杀恶禽猛兽。
English: My name is Kuka, and I have been assigned by the Heavenly Emperor to hunt and kill evil birds and beasts on the ground of the four prefectures of Jin, Shang, Fang, and Jun.

古文：余数年之内，剿戮猛虎，不可胜数，生聚顿安。
现代文：几年的时间，我杀掉的猛虎不计其数，人民才得安居乐业。
English: Over the course of several years, I killed countless tigers so that the people could live and work in peace.

古文：虎之首帅在西城郡，其形伟博，便捷异常，身如白锦，额有圆光如镜，害人最多，余亦诛之。
现代文：虎群的王在西城郡。虎王身上像白色锦缎，额头有像镜子般的圆光。虎王害人最多，我也把它杀掉了。
English: The king of the tiger group is in Xicheng County. The body of the tiger king looks like white brocade, and the forehead has a round light like a mirror. The tiger king causes the most harm to people, and I also killed it.

古文：居人怀恩，为余立庙。
现代文：当地百姓感我的恩，为我建了庙。
English: The local people felt my gratitude and built a temple for me.

古文：自襄汉之北，蓝关之南，凡三十余处，皆余憩息之所也。
现代文：从襄汉以北到蓝关以南，给我立了三十多个祠庙，年年供奉祭祀，我的香火连绵不断。
English: From the north of Xianghan to the south of Lankan, more than thirty ancestral temples have been built for me, offering sacrifices year after year, and my incense is continuous.

古文：岁祀绵远，俗传多误，以余为白虎神。
现代文：民间后来传说错了，误把我当做白虎神。
English: Later, folklore got it wrong, mistaking me for the White Tiger God.

古文：幸君子访问，愿为显示，以正其非。
现代文：今天幸亏你来关心我，那就求你给我庙门挂块匾，以纠正传说之误。
English: Today, thanks to your concern for me, please hang a plaque on the door of my temple to correct the error of the legend.

古文：他日，令弟言于襄阳从事，乃出版值于庙中。
现代文：后来，县令的弟弟告诉了襄阳从事，就写了块牌板放在庙里。
English: Later, the younger brother of the county magistrate told Xiangyang that he was engaged, so he wrote a plaque and placed it in the temple.

古文：尘侵雨渍，文字将灭，大中壬申岁，襄州观察判官王澄，刻石于庙。
现代文：后来天长日久雨打风吹，版上的文字快看不见了。大中壬申年间，襄州观察判官王澄才叫人在庙里放了块石刻的碑。
English: Later, after days and days of rain and wind, the words on the plate were almost invisible. During the Jinshin period of the junior high school, Wang Cheng, the observer and judge of Xiangzhou, ordered a stone monument to be placed in the temple.

古文：崔泽
现代文：崔泽
English: Cui Ze rises

古文：王锷镇太原，有清河崔泽者，长庆中刺坊州。
现代文：王锷在太原做镇守使。有个清河人崔泽，长庆年间在坊州当刺史。
English: Wang Qian was a town guard in Taiyuan. There was a Qinghe man, Cui Ze, who was a thorn in the side of Fangzhou during the Changqing period.

古文：常避暑于庭，时风月清朗。
现代文：有一次，崔泽在院里乘凉。
English: On one occasion, Cui Ze was taking a cold shower in the hospital.

古文：忽见一丈夫身甚长，峨冠广袖，自堂之前轩而降，立于阶所，厉声而呼，凡三呼而止。
现代文：这时月朗风清，忽然有一个人在屋子窗前从空而降。这人身材高大，戴着很高的帽子，衣袖十分宽大。
English: At this time, the moon was bright and the wind was light. Suddenly, a man descended from the sky in front of the window of the house. This man was tall, wore a tall hat, and his sleeves were very wide.

古文：崔氏一家皆见，泽惧而且恶，命家僮逼之，已亡见矣。
现代文：这人站在台阶上大叫了三声。崔泽全家都看见了。崔泽又怕又讨厌，让家里的仆人赶他走，仆人去赶，已经不见了。
English: The man stood on the steps and shouted three times. The whole family saw him. Terrified and disgusted, he asked the servants to drive him away. The servants did, and he was gone.

古文：是夕，泽被疾。
现代文：这天夜里，崔泽病了。
English: That night, Cui Ze fell ill.

古文：至明日，发使献书，愿解官归老，相府不许。
现代文：第二天，就派人给上司送报告，请求辞官还乡，相府没准。
English: The next day, he sent someone to report to his boss, requesting the official to return to his hometown, but the prime minister's office did not approve.

古文：后月余，卒于郡。
现代文：一个多月后，崔泽就死在郡里了。
English: More than a month later, Traize died in the county.

古文：韩愈
现代文：韩愈
English: Han Yu

古文：吏部侍郎韩愈，长庆四年夏，以疾不治务。至秋九月免，疾益甚。
现代文：长庆四年夏天，吏部侍郎韩愈由于患病不能处理公务，到秋天九月辞官，病更重了。
English: In the summer of the fourth year of the Long Qing Dynasty, Han Yu, the attendant of the cadre department, was unable to handle official duties due to illness, and resigned from the post in the autumn of September, becoming even more ill.

古文：冬十一月，于靖安里昼卧。见一神人。长丈余，被甲仗剑，佩弧矢，仪状甚峻，至寝室，立于榻前。久而谓愈曰：帝命与卿计事。
现代文：十一月的一天，他在靖安里的家中睡午觉，看见一个神人，个子有一丈多高，身穿盔甲手持宝剑，腰里带着弓箭，神态严峻地进入室内，站在床前很久，然后说，天帝要和你商量一件事。
English: One day in November, he was taking an afternoon nap at his home in Jing'anli when he saw a god-man, who was as tall as he was tall, wearing armor and holding a sword, with a bow and arrow at his waist. He entered the room with a grim expression, stood in front of the bed for a long time, and then said, "The Heavenly Emperor wants to discuss something with you."

古文：愈遽起，整冠而坐曰：臣不幸有疾，敢以踞见王。
现代文：韩愈赶快起来，整好衣冠坐着说，我病得站都站不起来，怎么敢坐着见大王呢？
English: Han Yu quickly got up, straightened his robe and sat down and said, I am too sick to stand up, how dare I sit down to see the great king?

古文：神人曰：威粹骨蕝国，世与韩氏为仇，今欲讨之而力不足。
现代文：神人说，有一个叫威粹骨蕝的国，世代和韩氏为敌，现在想讨伐，但力量不足，你看怎么办？
English: The man of God said, "There is a country called Wizir, which has been an enemy of Han for generations, and now it wants to fight, but it lacks strength. What do you think it should do?"

古文：卿以为何如？
现代文：韩愈说，我愿跟随大王去讨伐。
English: Han Yu said, I am willing to follow the great king to fight.

古文：对曰：臣愿从大王讨之。神人颔而去。于是书其词，置于座侧，数日不能解。至十二月而卒。
现代文：神人点点头而去。韩愈就把神人说的话写下来放在座位边，好几天也弄不懂是什么意思，到十二月，韩愈就死了。
English: The godman nodded and left. Han Yu wrote down what the godman said and put it next to his seat. For several days, he couldn't figure out what it meant. By December, Han Yu was dead.

古文：李逢吉
现代文：李逢吉
English: Li Fengji

古文：故相李逢吉，尝为司空范希朝从事于单于府。
现代文：已故的相国李逢吉，曾经在单于都护府范围朝的幕僚。
English: The late consort Li Fengji was once an aide-de-camp of the Northern Song Dynasty in the area of Dugongfu.

古文：时金城寺有老僧无为者，年七十余。
现代文：当时金城寺里有个叫无为的和尚，七十多岁了。
English: At that time, there was a 70-plus-year-old monk in Kinjo-ji Temple named Mugeno.

古文：尝一日独处禅斋，负壁而坐，瞬目数息。忽有一介甲持殳者，由寺而至。
现代文：有一天他一个人在禅房里靠着墙闭目打坐，忽然看见一个穿甲胃持长枪的人从庙里走来。
English: One day, he was sitting alone in the Zen room, leaning against the wall and closing his eyes to meditate, when he suddenly saw a man with an armored stomach and a long gun coming from the temple.

古文：食顷，闻报李从事来，自是逢吉将游金城寺。
现代文：过了一顿饭功夫，有人报告说，李逢吉李从事到！
English: After a hard day's work, someone reported that Li Fengjili had made it!

古文：无为辄见向者神人先至，率以为常。
现代文：从此以后，只要李逢吉到庙里来，无为和尚总是看见那个持长枪的神人先到，渐渐就习以为常了。
English: From then on, whenever Li Fengji came to the temple, the mute monk always saw the holy man with a long gun arrive first, and gradually became accustomed to it.

古文：衙将简郢，与无为弟子法真善，常为郢语之。
现代文：当时李逢吉衙里有个叫简郢的军官，和无为和尚的弟子法真是朋友，法真曾对简郢说了这件事。
English: At that time, there was an officer named Jian Chen in Li Fengji Temple, and a disciple of the worthless monk Fa Zhen was a friend. Fa Zhen had told this to Jian Chen.

古文：樊宗训
现代文：樊宗训
English: Zongxun

古文：硖石县西有圣女神祠，县令韦谋，与前县令樊宗训游焉。
现代文：硖石县城西有座圣女神祠。有一天县令韦谋与以前当过本县县令的樊宗训到圣女祠游玩。
English: There is a shrine of the Goddess of Mercy in the west of the city of Shishi County. One day, the county leader Wei Mu and the former county leader Zou Zongxun went to visit the shrine.

古文：宗训性疏复，不以神鬼为意，以鞭划其墙壁，抉剔其衣祛，言笑慢亵。
现代文：樊宗训为人很轻浮独特，不信鬼神。进圣女祠后，他用马鞭在庙墙上画着玩，还用鞭子挑神像的衣袖，开一些亵渎神灵的玩笑。
English: Gong Zongxun was a very unique and frivolous person, he did not believe in ghosts and gods. After he entered the Shrine of the Immaculate Conception, he used a horsewhip to draw pictures on the wall of the temple, he also used the whip to pick up the sleeves of the statues of gods and make some jokes about blaspheming the gods.

古文：归数日，邑中有狂僧，忽突入县门大呼曰：县令当持法，奈何放纵恶人，遣凌轹恣横？
现代文：他们回来几天后，有一个疯和尚闯进县衙大声叫道，县大老爷应该执法，为什么放纵坏人，让坏人这样横行不法？
English: A few days after their return, a mad monk broke into the county hall and shouted loudly, "The county grand master should enforce the law. Why do you indulge bad people and let them run amok like this?"

古文：谋遣人逐出，亦不察其意也。
现代文：韦谋让手下人把他赶了出去，并不明白他说的什么意思。
English: Wei Mu let his subordinates drive him out, and did not understand what he meant.

古文：旬余，谋小女病，召巫者视之曰：圣女传语长官，土地神灵，尽望长官庇护。岂有教人侵夺？
现代文：十多天后，韦谋的小女儿病了，就请巫师来看。巫师说，圣女神让给大人传话，说土地神灵应该受到地方官的保护，不然就会受到侵害。
English: More than ten days later, Wei Muo's little daughter fell ill and asked a sorcerer to come and see her. The sorcerer said that the holy goddess had sent a message to the adults, saying that the land deities should be protected by local officials, otherwise they would be infringed upon.

古文：前者遣阿师白于长官，又不见喻。
现代文：前些天圣女神曾派了师傅到县衙向你告状，你没有管。
English: A few days ago, the sacred goddess sent a master to the county magistrate to sue you, but you did nothing about it.

古文：韦君曰：恶人是谁？
现代文：韦谋说，坏人是谁呢？
English: Wei Mu said, who is the bad guy?

古文：即与捕捉。
现代文：我就去抓他。
English: I'll go get him.

古文：曰：前县令樊宗训，又已发，无可奈何。
现代文：巫师说，就是那个以前的县令樊宗训，已经卸任了，没法处理他。
English: The sorcerer said that it was the former county magistrate, Gong Zongxun, who had already stepped down, and that he could not be dealt with.

古文：以后幸长官留意，勿令如此。
现代文：希望您以后留意，不要再出这样的事，你的小女儿病就会好。
English: I hope you pay attention in the future and don't let something like this happen again, and your little daughter will get better.

古文：小娘子疾苦即应愈。
现代文：韦谋向圣女神赔了礼，命人到庙里请扫上供，让老百姓都要敬神。
English: Wei Mu bowed to the holy goddess and ordered people to go to the temple to offer sacrifices, so that the people would worship God.

古文：韦君谢之，令人焚香洒扫，邑中皆加敬畏，其女数日即愈。
现代文：过了几天，他女儿的病果然好了。
English: A few days later, his daughter's illness was cured.

古文：裴度
现代文：裴度
English: Pei Du

古文：裴度少时，有术士云：命属北斗廉贞星神，宜每存敬，祭以果酒。
现代文：裴度少年时曾经听一个算卦人说，自己属北斗廉贞星神，应该心存敬畏，还要常常备好祭品果酒供奉星神。
English: When Baidu was a boy, he once heard a fortune-teller say that he belonged to Beidou Lianzheng Star God, and that he should be in awe, and that he should always prepare a sacrifice of fruit wine to offer to Star God.

古文：度从之，奉事甚谨。
现代文：裴度很相信，就常常祭祀自己的星神。
English: Pei Du believed in it so much that he often worshipped his own star god.

古文：及为相，机务繁冗，乃致遗忘。
现代文：后来裴度拜了相，公务太繁忙，就渐渐忘了，觉得敬不敬设什么关系。
English: Later, when Pei Du worshiped the emperor and was too busy with his official duties, he gradually forgot and felt that there was no relationship between respect and disrespect.

古文：心恒不足，然未尝言之于人，诸子亦不知。
现代文：不过这想法他没跟人讲过，别人也不知道。
English: But he didn't tell anyone about this idea, and no one knew about it.

古文：京师有道者来谒，留之与语。
现代文：有一次京城有个道士拜见，裴度留他谈话。
English: Once, there was a Taoist monk in Beijing who wanted to see him, and Pei Du kept him talking.

古文：曰：公昔年尊奉神，何故中道而止？
现代文：道士说，您过去尊奉天神，为什么后来不敬奉了呢？
English: The moralist said, "You used to worship angels, why didn't you worship them later?"

古文：崇护不已，亦有感于相公。
现代文：是你的守护神感谢你的供奉，才保佑你到了今天。
English: It is your patron saint who thanks you for your offering and has blessed you to this day.

古文：度笑而已。
现代文：裴度笑而不答。
English: Pei Du laughed and did not answer.

古文：后为太原节度使，家人病，迎女巫视之。
现代文：后来裴度谢任太原节度使时，家里人生病，请来女巫跳神。
English: Later, when Pei Du Xie was sent to the Taiyuan Festival, his family members fell ill, so he invited a witch to dance for him.

古文：弹胡琴，颠倒良久，蹶然而起曰：请裴相公。廉贞将军遣传语 大无情，都不相知耶？ 
现代文：女巫弹着胡琴，颠三倒四昏昏沉沉了好半天，突然跳起来说，有请裴相公，廉贞将军传话说你太不讲情义，都把他忘了。
English: The witch played the huqin and was dizzy and drowsy for more than half a day. Suddenly, she jumped up and said, "I have a message for Pei Xianggong. General Lian Zhen said that you are too careless and have forgotten him."

古文：将军甚怒，相公何不谢之。
现代文：将军很生气。相公为什么不向廉贞将军请罪呢？
English: The general was very angry. Why didn't the consort plead guilty to General Ren Zhen?

古文：度甚惊。巫曰：当择良日洁斋，于净院焚香，具酒果，廉贞将军亦欲现形于相公。其日，度沐浴，具公服，立于阶下，东向奠酒再拜。见一人金甲持戈，长三丈余，北向而立。裴公汗洽，俯伏不敢动，少顷即不见。问左右，皆云无之。度尊奉不敢怠忽也。
现代文：从此后他就更加尊奉大神，再也不敢有丝毫怠慢。
English: From then on, he revered the Great God even more, and no longer dared to be negligent in the slightest.

古文：张仲殷
现代文：张仲殷
English: Zhang Zhongyin

古文：户部郎中张滂之子，曰仲殷，于南山内读书，遂结时流子弟三四人。
现代文：户部郎中张滂的儿子叫仲殷，在南山读书时，结交了几个同年的子弟。
English: When studying in Nanshan, Zhong Yin, the son of Zhang Ye, the head of the household, made friends with several children of the same age.

古文：仲殷性亦聪利，但不攻文学，好习弓马。时与同侣挟弹，游步林薮。
现代文：仲殷聪明机灵，但不爱读书喜欢骑马射箭，常常带着弓箭和同伴们到树林里去玩。
English: Zhong Yin is smart and clever, but he doesn't like to read. He likes to ride horses and shoot arrows. He often takes his bow and arrow and his companions to play in the woods.

古文：去所止数里，见一老人持弓，逐一鹿绕林，一矢中之，洞胸而倒。仲殷惊赏。
现代文：有一次他们走出去三四里地，在林子里遇见一个老人拿着弓箭正追赶一只鹿。老人只一箭就把鹿射中，箭穿鹿胸。仲殷十分赞赏。
English: Once they went out for three or four miles and met an old man in the forest who was chasing a deer with a bow and arrow. The old man hit the deer with just one arrow, and the arrow pierced the deer's chest. Zhong Yin was very appreciative.

古文：老人曰：君能此乎？
现代文：老人问，你能达到这个程度吗？
English: The old man asked, can you reach this level?

古文：仲殷曰：固所好也。
现代文：仲殷说，我倒是希望射得这么好。
English: I wish I could shoot so well, said Zhong Yin.

古文：老人曰：获此一鹿，吾无所用，奉赠君，以充一饭之费。
现代文：老人说，我得了这个鹿也没什么用，送给你们拿回去吃了吧。
English: The old man said, "It's no use for me to get this deer. I'll give it to you to take back and eat."

古文：仲殷等敬谢之。
现代文：仲殷和同伴们十分感谢。
English: Zhong Yin and his companions are very grateful.

古文：老人曰：明日能来看射否？
现代文：第二天来，又看老人在追一头鹿，又是一箭射中，射中后又把鹿送给了仲殷，第三天仍是这样。
English: The next day, he saw the old man chasing a deer, and again he shot it with an arrow. After he shot it, he gave the deer to Zhong Yin. It was still like this on the third day.

古文：明日至，亦见老人逐鹿。
现代文：仲殷非常惊异佩服，就拜求老人教给箭法。
English: Surprised and impressed, Zhong Yin asked the old man to teach him archery.

古文：复射之，与前无异，复又与仲殷。
现代文：老人说，我看你还可以传授，明天你再到这儿来，别告诉别人。
English: The old man said, I think you can still teach. If you come here again tomorrow, don't tell anyone.

古文：仲殷益异之。如是三度，仲殷乃拜乞射法。
现代文：第二天仲殷如约来到时，老人也来了，就领着仲殷往西走了四五里，走进一个山口，路渐渐低下去，好象走进一个洞里。
English: The next day, when Zhong Yin arrived as promised, the old man also came. He led Zhong Yin westward for four or five miles, into a mountain pass. The road gradually descended, as if they had entered a cave.

古文：老人曰：观子似可教也。
现代文：洞里的树木花草也和外面不一样，仲殷更加敬服老人。
English: The trees, flowers and plants in the cave are also different from those outside, and Zhongyin is more respectful of the elderly.

古文：约行三十余里，至一大庄，如卿相之别业焉。
现代文：大约走了三十里地，来到一个大庄园，看样子像王公大臣的别墅。
English: We walked about thirty miles and arrived at a large manor house, which looked like the villa of an imperial minister.

古文：止仲殷于中门外厅中，老人整服而入，有修谒之状。
现代文：老人让仲殷在中门外等着，自己整好衣冠走近去，好象要对谁行大礼参见。
English: The old man asked Zhong Yin to wait outside the middle gate. He straightened his robe and approached, as if he wanted to make a grand salute.

古文：出曰：姨知君来此，明日往相见。
现代文：不一会老人出来说，姨知道你来了，明天要你去见她。
English: After a while, the old man came out and said, "Auntie knows you're here and wants you to see her tomorrow."

古文：仲殷敬诺而宿于厅。
现代文：仲殷就住在前厅，等候接见。
English: Zhong Yin lived in the front hall, waiting to be received.

古文：至明日，敕奴仆与仲殷备汤沐，更易新衣。老人具馔于中堂，延仲殷入拜母。
现代文：第二天，老人让仆人准备了热水给仲殷洗浴，换上新衣，在大厅摆了酒席，请仲殷参拜老太太。
English: The next day, the old man asked the servant to prepare hot water for Zhong Yin to take a bath, put on new clothes, and set up a banquet in the hall to invite Zhong Yin to visit the old lady.

古文：仲殷拜堂下，母不为起，亦无辞让。
现代文：仲殷赶忙跪拜，老太太没起身，也没什么礼让的客气话。
English: Zhongyin hurried to kneel, but the old lady did not get up, nor did she offer any polite words of courtesy.

古文：老人又延升堂就坐，视其状貌，不多类人，或似过老变易，又如猿玃之状。
现代文：老人就请仲殷入席。仲殷看这位老太太不像人，也许是太老以后变了形，倒象个大猿猴。
English: The old man invited Zhong Yin to take a seat. Zhong Yin saw that the old lady did not look like a person, perhaps she had changed her shape after she was too old, but rather resembled a large ape.

古文：其所食品物甚多，仲饮食次，亦不见其母动匕箸，倏忽而毕。
现代文：桌上的酒菜十分丰盛，仲殷都吃完了，也不见老太太动筷子。但是转眼间，桌上的酒菜全都没有了。
English: The dishes and drinks on the table were very plentiful, Zhong Yin had finished eating, and the old lady did not move her chopsticks. However, in the blink of an eye, all the dishes and drinks on the table were gone.

古文：久视之，敛坐如故，既而食物皆尽。
现代文：仲殷仔细看老太太，见她还是一动不动地坐着。
English: When Zhong Yin took a closer look at the old lady, she was still sitting motionless.

古文：老人复引仲殷出，于厅前树下，施床而坐。
现代文：宴毕老人领仲殷到院里，在厅前的树下放了一张床坐下。
English: After the banquet, the old man led Zhong Yin to the courtyard and placed a bed under the tree in front of the hall.

古文：老人即命弓矢，仰首指一树枝曰：十箭取此一尺。
现代文：接着老人拿来弓箭，抬头指着一个树枝说，我发十箭射下一尺树枝来。
English: Then the old man took a bow and arrows, looked up and pointed to a branch and said, I shot ten arrows at a foot of branches.

古文：遂发矢十枝，射落碎枝十段，接成一尺，谓仲殷曰：此定如何？
现代文：说着就连发十箭，射下来十段树枝。仲殷把碎枝接起来一量。
English: Saying that, he even shot ten arrows and shot down ten branches. Zhong Yin joined the broken branches together.

古文：仲殷拜于床下曰：敬服。
现代文：正好一尺。老人问这个技术怎么样，仲殿跪拜在地，连说，佩服之极！
English: Exactly one foot. When the old man asked how the technique was, Nakadono bowed to the ground and said, "I'm so impressed!

古文：又命墙头上立十针焉，去三十步，举其第一也。
现代文：老人又让在墙头扎上十根针，在三十步外，从第一根起，挨着顺序根根全都射中。
English: The old man also had ten needles stuck into the wall, and thirty paces away, from the first needle, they all hit in sequence.

古文：乃按次射之，发无不中者也。遂教仲殷屈伸距跗之势。但约臂腕骨，臂腕骨相柱，而弓已满。故无强弱，皆不费力也。
现代文：老人接着教仲殷各种射箭的姿势和诀窍，指点仲殷臂在拉弓时要尽力向内弯，弯到碰到腕骨的程度也能把弓拉满，到了这个程度，那就不论拉强弓还是弱弓，都会毫不费力了。
English: The old man went on to teach Zhong Yin various archery postures and techniques, pointing out that Zhong Yin's arm should be bent inward as much as possible when pulling the bow, and the bow can also be pulled full when it is bent to the extent that it touches the wrist bone. At this level, it will be effortless to pull a strong bow or a weak bow.

古文：数日，仲殷已得其妙。
现代文：过不几天，仲殷就掌握了诀窍。
English: Within a few days, Zhong Yin had mastered the trick.

古文：老人抚之，谓仲殷曰：止于此矣。
现代文：老人高兴地说，就教这些就够你用了。
English: The old man said happily, "That's enough to teach you.

古文：勉驰此名，左右各教取五千人，以救乱世也。
现代文：以后你出了名，可以再教五六千个善射的人，就可以在国家有乱时平定乱世了。
English: After you become famous, you can teach another five or six thousand people who are good at shooting, and you can calm down the chaotic world when the country is in turmoil.

古文：遂却引归至故处。
现代文：然后老人就把仲殷领到来时的山口。
English: Then the old man led Zhong Yin to the mountain pass where they had arrived.

古文：而仲殷艺日新，果有善射之名。受其教者，虽童子妇人，即可与谈武矣。
现代文：仲殷的箭法越来越精，经他指点过的，那怕是妇女儿童，都精通武艺兵法。
English: Zhong Yin's archery is getting more and more refined. Even women and children who have been instructed by him are proficient in martial arts.

古文：后父卒除服，偶游于东平军，乃教得数千人而卒。
现代文：后来仲殷父亲死了，他料理完丧事，偶然到东平军中去，教了好几千将士学箭术才去世。
English: Later, when Zhong Yin's father died, he accidentally went to the Dongping Army after the funeral and taught several thousand soldiers to learn archery before he died.

古文：其老人盖山神也。
现代文：原来那位老人就是山神。
English: The old man turned out to be a mountain god.

古文：善射者必趫度通臂，故母类于猿焉。
现代文：善于射箭的人都必然双臂特别健壮，所以那个老太太就象猿猴了。
English: People who are good at archery must have very strong arms, so the old lady was like a monkey.

古文：凌华
现代文：凌华
English: Linghua

古文：杭州富阳狱吏曰凌华，骨状不凡。
现代文：杭州富阳有个名叫凌华的典狱官，骨相很不一般。
English: There is a warden named Ling Hua in Fuyang, Hangzhou. His bones are very unusual.

古文：常遇施翁相曰：能舍吏，当为上将军。
现代文：曾经有一个姓施的老者给他相面后说，如果你能不当这个小典狱官，以你的骨相看，将来能做大将军。
English: Once, an old man surnamed Shi gave him a face-to-face meeting and said, "If you can be a good little warden, judging by your bones, you can be a great general in the future."

古文：华为吏酷暴，每有缧絏者，必扼喉撞心，以取贿赂。
现代文：凌华管理监狱非常残暴。对待送来的犯人，常常插人喉咙撞人家心口，通犯人给他行贿。
English: The management of Linghua Prison was very cruel. They treated the prisoners they sent, often jamming their throats into people's hearts, and bribing them through the prisoners.

古文：元和初，病一夕而死。
现代文：元和初年，凌华病了一夜就死了。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Linghua fell ill and died overnight.

古文：将死，见黄衫吏赍诏而前，宣云：牒奉处分，以华昔日曾宰剧县，甚著能绩。后有缺行，败其成功。
现代文：刚要死时，看见一个穿黄衣的官员，带着公文来到床前宣读说，现在奉命对你进行处理。你过去曾在很困难的条件下办公事，有不少功劳。
English: When he was about to die, he saw an official in a yellow coat come to his bedside with a document and read out, "I am now ordered to deal with you. You have done a lot of work in the past under very difficult conditions.

古文：谪官圜扉，伺其修省。既迷所履，太乖乃心。
现代文：可是你后来有不少罪错，使你没能成大事。
English: But you made a lot of mistakes later on, which prevented you from achieving great things.

古文：玉枕嶷然，委于庸贱。
现代文：你现在被贬去官职，闭门思过，进行对自己罪过的反省。
English: You've been demoted, you've been behind closed doors, you've reflected on your sins.

古文：念兹贵骨，须有所归。今镇海军讨逆诸臣，合为上将。骨未圆实，难壮威棱。
现代文：既然你心存邪恶，走上犯罪的道路，就使你的很高骨的骨相与你卑劣的本身不相符合了。然而你高贵的骨头应该有所归属。现在镇海将军是平乱的有功之臣，马上要晋升为上将，然而他们的骨相不好，作为上将军很不威壮。
English: Since you have evil in your heart and have embarked on the path of crime, your high-boned bone does not match your despicable self. However, your noble bones should belong to something. Now, General Zhenhai is a meritorious vassal of peace and order, and is about to be promoted to general. However, their bone is not good, and they are not very dignified as a general.

古文：宜易之以得人，免块然而妄处。
现代文：所以应该把你高贵的骨头换给上将军，以免贵骨还附在你卑劣的肉体中。
English: Therefore, you should exchange your noble bones with the superior general, so that the noble bones will not be attached to your despicable body.

古文：付司追凌华，凿玉枕骨送上。
现代文：现在派人找到你，把你的玉枕骨凿下来上交。
English: Now send someone to find you, chisel off your jade occipital bone and hand it over.

古文：仍令所司，量事优恤。
现代文：并命令办这事的官员，对你给予适当的体恤照顾。
English: and ordered the officer in charge of the case to give you the appropriate compassionate care.

古文：于是黄衫人引入。
现代文：于是黄衣官员领凌华到了一个地方。
English: As a result, the yellow-clad official led Linghua to a place.

古文：有绿冠裳者隔帘语曰：今日之来，德之不修也。
现代文：只听得有个绿衣人隔着帘子说，你今天到这里来受处理，是因为你缺乏作官之德。
English: I only heard a man in green say through the curtain that you are here today to be dealt with because you lack the virtue of an official.

古文：见小吏而失禄，窃为吾子惜焉。
现代文：为了一个小官而失去上将军的前程，真为你有那样好的骨相而可惜啊！
English: To lose your future as a general for the sake of a petty officer, it's a shame you have such a good bone structure!

古文：命左右取钳槌。
现代文：然后叫左右快取来钳子铁锤。
English: Then he called for a pair of pliers and a hammer.

古文：俄顷，有缁衣豹袖执斤斧者三人。
现代文：不一会儿，有三个穿黑衣挽着豹皮袖子的人拿着刀斧进来。
English: A moment later, three men dressed in black with leopard-skin sleeves came in with knives and axes.

古文：绿裳赐华酒王盅，昏然而醉。
现代文：绿衣人给凌华五杯酒，凌华喝下去立刻就醉得不省人事，只听到有斧子在凿自己的脑袋。
English: The man in green gave Linghua five glasses of wine. Linghua drank it down and immediately became unconscious. All he could hear was an axe chopping at his head.

古文：唯闻琢其脑，声绝而华醉醒。复止华于西阶以听命。
现代文：凿声停后，凌华也就醒过来了，又让他站在台阶下听候吩咐。
English: After the chiseling stopped, Ling Hua also woke up and asked him to stand at the bottom of the steps and wait for orders.

古文：移时，有宣言曰：亡贵之人，理宜裨补。
现代文：立刻，又宣布说，凌华既然已失去了高贵的骨头，应该有所照顾补偿。
English: Immediately, he also announced that since Linghua had lost its noble bones, it should be compensated.

古文：量延半纪，仍赍十千。
现代文：再三斟酌，决定发给十千钱。
English: After much deliberation, it was decided to give him ten thousand dollars.

古文：宣讫，绿裳延华升阶语曰：吾汉朝隐屠钓之人也。
现代文：宣布完后，那绿衣人请凌华上台阶到大厅上来，对凌华说，我是汉朝一个为想做官而故意隐居在民间，以求有朝一日能被朝廷赏识的人。
English: After the announcement, the man in green invited Linghua to come up the stairs to the hall and said to Linghua, I am a Han Dynasty who deliberately secluded himself in the people in order to become an official, in order to one day be appreciated by the court.

古文：盖求全身，微规小利。既殁之后，责受此官。位卑职猥，殊不快志。足下莫叹失其贵骨，此事稍大，非独一人。
现代文：为了自身追求微薄的名利，我死后罚我当这个专管给人换骨头的官，官位卑小，干的公事也很卑劣，你别感叹你失去了贵人的骨相，这事虽然不小，但受这样处置的决不只你一个人啊。
English: For the sake of his own pursuit of meager fame and profit, after my death, he punished me to be the official in charge of changing people's bones. The official rank is lowly, and the official duties are also despicable. Don't lament that you have lost the bones of a noble person. Although this is not a small matter, you are by no means the only one to be treated this way.

古文：命酒与华对酌别。
现代文：说罢叫人拿酒来，与凌华对饮饯别。
English: Say goodbye to drinking with Ling Hua by asking someone to bring wine.

古文：饮数杯，冥然无所知。既醒，宛然在废床之上。
现代文：凌华喝了几杯，就昏沉沉不省人事，等醒来时，发现自己躺在一张破旧的床上。
English: After a few drinks, Linghua became drowsy and unconscious. When she woke up, she found herself lying on a worn-out bed.

古文：扪其脑而骨已亡，其侪流赙助，凡十千焉。
现代文：摸摸自己的脑袋倒还在，但脑袋里的骨头已能没有了。一打听，他那帮朋友们为给人办丧事送的钱，加在一起正好是十千。
English: He felt his head was still there, but the bones in his head were gone. Upon inquiry, the money his group of friends had sent to pay for the funeral came to exactly ten thousand.

古文：后十五年而卒。
现代文：凌华又活了十五年后才死。
English: Linghua lived for another fifteen years before dying.

