古文：十有六年春，王正月，葬晋悼公。
现代文：十六年春季，周历正月，安葬晋悼公。
English: In the spring of the 16th year, in the first month of the lunar calendar, the funeral of Jin Yigong began.

古文：三月，公会晋侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯、莒子、邾子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子于湨梁。
现代文：三月，襄公与晋侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯、莒子、邾子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子在湨梁会见。
English: In March, Prince Xiang met with Prince Jin, Prince Song, Prince Wei, Prince Zheng, Prince Cao, Prince Zizi, Prince Zizi, Prince Xue, Prince Zibo, and Prince Xiao Zizi in Qilian.

古文：戊寅，大夫盟。
现代文：戊寅日，各诸侯国大夫结盟。
English: On the day of Wu Yin, the governors of all provinces formed an alliance.

古文：晋人执莒子、邾子以归。
现代文：晋国人拘捕了莒子、邾子，将他们带回了国。
English: The people of Jin arrested Miao Zi and Miao Zi and brought them back to the country.

古文：齐侯伐我北鄙。
现代文：齐侯率领军队攻打我国北面边境。
English: Qi Hou led the army to attack the northern border of our country.

古文：夏，公至自会。
现代文：夏季，襄公从诸侯会面的地方回来。
English: In the summer, Prince Xiang returned from the place where the princes met.

古文：五月甲子，地震。
现代文：五月甲子日，发生地震。
English: On May 1st, an earthquake occurred.

古文：叔老会郑伯、晋荀偃、卫甯殖、宋人伐许。
现代文：鲁国大夫叔老会和郑伯、晋荀偃、卫甯殖、宋国人一起攻打许国。
English: Lu Guodong, Zheng Bo, Jin Zheng, Wei Zhengxuan, and Song Guo attacked Xu Province together.

古文：秋，齐侯伐我北鄙，围成。
现代文：秋季，齐侯率兵攻打我国北面边境，包围成地。
English: In autumn, Qi Hou led his troops to attack the northern border of our country and besieged Chengdu.

古文：大雩。
现代文：举行大规模的求雨祭祀。
English: The festival is held to pray for rain.

古文：冬，叔孙豹如晋。
现代文：冬季，鲁国大夫叔孙豹去到晋国。
English: In the winter, Uncle Sun Leopard, a doctor in Lu, went to Jin Province.

古文：十六年春，葬晋悼公。
现代文：十六年春季，安葬晋悼公。
English: In the spring of the 16th year, Jin's funeral was held.

古文：平公即位。羊舌肸为傅，张君臣为中军司马，祁奚、韩襄、栾盈、士鞅为公族大夫，虞丘书为乘马御。
现代文：晋平公即位，羊舌肸做太傅，张君臣做中军司马，祁奚、韩襄、栾盈、士鞅做公族大夫，虞丘书做乘马御。
English: Prince Jinping ascended to the throne, Yang Jiechi as Taifu, Zhang Junchen as Sima of the Chinese army, Zou, Han Xiang, Zou Ying, Shi Zou as Gongzongdafu, and Yu Qushu as Hengmao.

古文：改服修官，烝于曲沃。
现代文：改穿吉服，选贤任能，在曲沃举行烝祭。
English: They changed into auspicious clothing, elected wise men as needed, and held a wreath-laying ceremony in Quwo.

古文：警守而下，会于湨梁。
现代文：晋平公在国都布置守备以后就沿黄河而下，和鲁襄公、宋平公、卫献公、郑简公、曹成公、莒子、邾子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子在湨梁会见。
English: Prince Jinping went down the Yellow River after the national capital was put on alert, and met with Prince Lu Xiang, Prince Song Ping, Prince Wei Xian, Prince Zheng Jian, Prince Cao Cheng, Prince Zizi, Prince Zizi, Prince Xue Bo, Prince Zibo, and Prince Xiao Zizi in Lu Liang.

古文：命归侵田。
现代文：命令诸侯退回互相侵占的土田。
English: Ordered the lords to return to the mutually occupied fields.

古文：以我故，执邾宣公、莒犁比公，且曰： 通齐、楚之使。 
现代文：由于我国的缘故，拘捕了邾宣公、莒犁比公，而且说这两国 使者来往齐国、楚国之间 。
English: For the sake of our country, Gong Xuan Gong and Gong Bi Gong were arrested, and it was said that the envoys of these two countries traveled between Qi and Chu.

古文：晋侯与诸侯宴于温，使诸大夫舞，曰： 歌诗必类！ 
现代文：晋平公和诸侯在温地举行宴会，让大夫们舞蹈，说： 唱诗一定要和舞蹈相配合。 
English: Prince Jinping and the princes held a banquet in Warmi, and asked the doctors to dance, saying, "Singing must be combined with dancing."

古文：齐高厚之诗不类。
现代文：齐国高厚的诗与舞蹈配不好。
English: The poetry and dance of Qi Guo Gao-Chu are not well matched.

古文：荀偃怒，且曰： 诸侯有异志矣！ 
现代文：荀偃发怒，并且说： 诸侯有别的想法了。 
English: He flew into a rage and said: "The lords have other ideas."

古文：使诸大夫盟高厚，高厚逃归。
现代文：让大夫们和高厚结盟，高厚逃走回国。
English: Let the doctors make an alliance with Gao Hou, and Gao Hou will flee back to the country.

古文：于是，叔孙豹、晋荀偃、宋向戌、卫甯殖、郑公孙虿、小邾之大夫盟曰： 同讨不庭。 
现代文：当时叔孙豹、晋国荀偃、宋国向戌、卫国宁殖、郑国公孙虿、小邾国的大夫盟誓说： 共同讨伐不忠于盟主的人。 
English: At that time, the doctors of Uncle Sun Leopard, Jin Guoqi, Song Guoqi, Wei Guoqi, Zheng Guoqi, Sun Quan and Xiao Quan Guoqi vowed: jointly fight those who are not loyal to the leader.

古文：许男请迁于晋。
现代文：许灵公向晋国请求迁都。
English: Xu Linggong requested that the capital be moved to Jin Province.

古文：诸侯遂迁许，许大夫不可。晋人归诸侯。
现代文：诸侯就让许国迁移，许国的大夫不同意，晋国人让各国诸侯回国而单独出兵进攻许国。
English: The lords asked Xu Guo to relocate, but Xu Guo's doctors disagreed. The Jin people asked the lords to return to China, but sent troops to attack Xu Guo alone.

古文：郑子蟜闻将伐许，遂相郑伯以从诸侯之师。
现代文：郑国的子蟜听到将要进攻许国，就辅佐郑简公跟从诸侯的军队。
English: When Zheng Zikang heard that Xu Province was about to be attacked, he assisted Zheng Jian Gong and the armies of the princes.

古文：穆叔从公。
现代文：穆叔跟从鲁襄公回国。
English: Mu Xiang followed Lu Xiang back to China.

古文：齐子帅师会晋荀偃。
现代文：齐子率领军队会见晋国荀偃。
English: Qi Zi led the army to meet with the Emperor of Jin.

古文：书曰： 会郑伯。 为夷故也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 会郑伯 ，是为了把序列摆平。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that he will Zheng Bo, in order to smooth out the sequence.

古文：夏六月，次于棫林。
现代文：夏季，六月，军队驻扎在棫林。
English: In the summer, in June, the army was stationed in Yulin.

古文：庚寅，伐许，次于函氏。
现代文：初九日，攻进许国，驻扎在函氏。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, they invaded Xu Province and were stationed in Hanzhi.

古文：晋荀偃、栾黡帅师伐楚，以报宋扬梁之役。
现代文：晋国的荀偃、栾黡带兵进攻楚国，报复在宋国扬梁的那一次战役。
English: Jin's Zou and Zou led troops to attack Chu, taking revenge for the previous battle in Song's Yangliang.

古文：楚公子格帅师及晋师战于湛阪，楚师败绩。
现代文：楚国的公子格带兵，和晋军在湛坂作战。楚军大败。
English: The nobles of Chu led their soldiers into battle with the Jin army at Tanzaka. The Chu army was soundly defeated.

古文：晋师遂侵方城之外，复伐许而还。
现代文：晋军就侵袭方城山的外边，再次进攻许国然后回国。
English: The Jin army attacked the outskirts of Fangcheng Mountain, attacked Xu Province again and then returned home.

古文：秋，齐侯围成，孟孺子速徼之。
现代文：秋季，齐灵公包围成地，孟孺子速拦击齐军。
English: In autumn, Qilinggong besieged Chengdu, and Meng Jiazi quickly intercepted the Qi army.

古文：齐侯曰： 是好勇，去之以为之名。 
现代文：齐灵公说： 这个人喜欢勇敢，我们离开这里以使他成名。 
English: "This man likes to be brave, let's leave here to make him famous," Qilinggong said.

古文：速遂塞海陉而还。
现代文：孟孺子速就堵塞了海陉险道然后回去。
English: Meng Yanzi quickly blocked the Haiyan Highway and then went back.

古文：冬，穆叔如晋聘，且言齐故。
现代文：冬季，穆叔去到晋国聘问，同时说到齐国的事情。
English: In the winter, Uncle Mu went to Jin Province to ask questions, and at the same time, he talked about Qi Province.

古文：晋人曰： 以寡君之未禘祀，与民之未息。不然，不敢忘。 
现代文：晋国人说： 由于寡君还没有举行禘祭和百姓没有安息，所以不能救援，如果不是这样，那是不敢忘记的。 
English: The people of Jin said, "Since the widower has not yet held the burnt offering and the people have not rested, there can be no rescue. If this is not the case, then we dare not forget."

古文：穆叔曰： 以齐人之朝夕释憾于敝邑之地，是以大请！
现代文：穆叔说： 由于齐国人早晚都在敝邑的土地上发泄愤恨，因此才来郑重请求。
English: Mu Xiu said: Because the people of Qi have been venting their anger on the land of Zouyi sooner or later, they have come to make a solemn request.

古文：敝邑之急，朝不及夕，引领西望曰： 庶几乎！ 
现代文：敝邑的危急，早晨等不到晚上，伸长了脖子望着西边说： 也许可以来救援了吧！ 
English: In the critical situation of Handan, the morning can't wait for the evening. He craned his neck and looked to the west and said: Maybe we can come to the rescue!

古文：比执事之閒，恐无及也！ 
现代文：等到执事得空闲，恐怕来不及了。 
English: I'm afraid it's too late to wait until the deacon is free.

古文：见中行献子，赋《圻父》。
现代文：见了中行献子，赋了《圻父》这首诗。
English: When he saw Zhong Xing's offering, he wrote the poem "Father of the Dragonfly."

古文：献子曰： 偃知罪矣！敢不从执事以同恤社稷，而使鲁及此。 
现代文：献子说 偃知道罪过了，岂敢不跟从执事来一起为国家忧虑，而让鲁国到达这样的地步！ 
English: The officiant said, "If you know that you have sinned, how dare you not come with the deacon to worry about the country, and let the country reach such a point!"

古文：见范宣子，赋《鸿雁》之卒章。
现代文：见了范宣子，赋《鸿雁》这首诗的最后一章。
English: met Fan Xuan Zi and read the last chapter of the poem "The Wild Geese."

古文：宣子曰： 匄在此，敢使鲁无鸠乎？ 
现代文：范宣子说： 匄在这里，岂敢让鲁国不得安宁？ 
English: Fan Xuan Zi said, "If you stay here, how dare you make the country of Lu restless?

