古文：孝元皇帝，宣帝太子也。
现代文：汉元帝，是汉宣帝的太子。
English: Emperor Han Yuan, is the crown prince of Emperor Han Xuan.

古文：母曰共哀许皇后，宣帝微时生民间。
现代文：母亲是恭哀许皇后，宣帝微贱时生于民间。
English: His mother was the Empress Kyoei, and he was born to a commoner when Emperor Xuan was still a minor.

古文：年二岁，宣帝即位。
现代文：年二岁时，宣帝继承帝位。
English: At the age of two, Emperor Xuancheng succeeded to the throne.

古文：八岁，立为太子。
现代文：元帝年八岁时，被立为太子。
English: When Emperor Yuan was eight years old, he was made crown prince.

古文：壮大，柔仁好儒。
现代文：成年后，宽厚而尊重儒术。
English: When he became an adult, he was generous and respected Confucianism.

古文：见宣帝所用多文法吏，以刑名绳下，大臣杨恽、盖宽饶等坐刺讥辞语为罪而诛，尝侍燕从容言： 陛下持刑太深，宜用儒生。 
现代文：见宣帝所起用的多是法吏，他们以名责实，尊君卑臣以弹治天下，大臣杨恽、盖宽饶等都因犯讥刺君上之罪而被诛戮，常在平时侍奉时从容进言： 陛下持刑太深，应用儒生。 
English: Most of the officials employed by Emperor Xuanzong were legal officials. They ruled the country by name and truth, and ruled the country by flattery. The ministers Yang Xi and Gaikang Rao were all killed for the crime of ridiculing the emperor. When they were serving, they would often calmly say: "Your Majesty's punishment is too deep, use Confucianism."

古文：宣帝作色曰： 汉家自有制度，本以霸王道杂之，奈何纯任德教，用周政乎！
现代文：宣帝动怒说： 汉家自有制度，本以王霸二道交替使用，为何要专行仁政，效法周朝呢？
English: Emperor Xuan said angrily, "The Han Dynasty has its own system, using the two methods of Wangba alternately. Why should we exclusively practice benevolent government and follow the example of the Zhou Dynasty?

古文：且俗儒不达时宜，好是古非今，使人眩于名实，不知所守，何足委任？ 
现代文：况且一般儒生不能用所学结合实际，喜欢厚古薄今，使人惑乱于名实，不知所从，那怎么能委以重任！ 
English: Moreover, the average Confucian scholar cannot combine what he has learned with reality, likes to mix the past with the present, confuses people in name and reality, and does not know where to go, so how can he be entrusted with an important task!

古文：乃叹曰： 乱我家者，太子也！ 
现代文：于是叹道： 乱我刘家朝纲的，将是太子啊！ 
English: Then he sighed, "If I mess up the Liu family's morning routine, it will be the crown prince!"

古文：由是疏太子而爱淮阳王，曰： 淮阳王明察好法，宜为吾子。 
现代文：由是就疏太子而爱淮阳。宣帝说： 淮阳王明于察断而爱学法律，应继承我的事业。 
English: Emperor Xuan said: The Prince of Huaiyang, who is good at judging and loves to study law, should inherit my business.

古文：而王母张婕妤尤幸。
现代文：淮阳王的母亲张婕妤更得宠。
English: Huaiyang Wang's mother, Zhang Ye, was even more favored.

古文：上有意欲用淮阳王代太子，然以少依许氏，俱从微起，故终不背焉。
现代文：宣帝有意用淮阳王取代太子，但由于少年微贱时依靠许氏，夫妇义结糟糠，所以最终还是不肯背弃许皇后而另立太子。
English: Emperor Xuan intended to replace the crown prince with King Huaiyang, but because he had relied on the Hui clan when he was a young man, and the couple had a bad relationship, he eventually refused to abandon Queen Hui and set up another crown prince.

古文：黄龙元年十二月，宣帝崩。
现代文：黄龙元年十二月，宣帝驾崩。
English: In December of the first year of the Yellow Dragon, Emperor Xuan died.

古文：癸巳，太子即皇帝位，谒高庙。
现代文：二十六日，太子继皇帝位，到高庙祭祀。
English: On the 26th, the crown prince ascended to the throne and went to the high temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：尊皇太后曰太皇太后，皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：尊皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为皇太后。
English: The respected empress dowager is the great empress dowager, and the empress is the empress dowager.

古文：初元元年春正月辛丑，孝宣皇帝葬杜陵。
现代文：初元元年春正月初四日，葬汉宣帝于杜陵。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the first century, Emperor Han Xuan was buried in the Tu Ling.

古文：赐诸侯王、公主、列侯黄金，吏二千石以下钱、帛，各有差。
现代文：赏赐各侯王、公主、列侯以黄金，官吏二千石以下以钱帛，各有差别。
English: Each lord, princess, and vassal was rewarded with gold, while officials with less than two thousand koku were rewarded with money.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：三月，封皇太后兄侍中中郎将王舜为安平侯。
现代文：三月，封皇太后兄侍中中郎将王舜为安平侯。
English: In March, the brother of the crowned empress dowager, the middle son of a chamberlain, made Wang Xuan the Prince of Anping.

古文：丙午，立皇后王氏。
现代文：初十日，立皇后王氏。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the Empress Wang clan was established.

古文：以三辅、太常、郡国公田及苑可省者振业贫民，訾不满千钱者赋贷种、食。
现代文：以三辅、太常、郡国公田及皇家御苑可以借用的就借给贫民耕种，家产不满千钱的借给种子与粮食。
English: Those who could borrow land from Sanfu, Taichung, county-owned public lands and the Imperial Palace were lent to the poor for farming, and those whose family assets were less than 1,000 yuan were lent seeds and grain.

古文：封外祖父平恩戴侯同产弟子中常侍许嘉为平恩侯，奉戴侯后。
现代文：封外祖父平恩戴侯的同母弟之子中常侍许嘉之子为平恩侯，以作戴侯之后。
English: The son of the junior attendant Xu Jia, who was the son of the maternal half-brother of the grandfather Ping En Dai Hou, was named Ping En Hou, followed by Dai Hou.

古文：夏四月，诏曰： 朕承先帝之圣绪，获奉宗宙，战战兢兢。
现代文：夏四月，下诏说： 朕继承先帝的神圣事业，能奉宗庙，战战兢兢。
English: In the summer of April, he issued the following edict: I have inherited the sacred cause of the former emperor, and I am able to serve the ancestral temple with fear and trembling.

古文：间者地数动而未静，惧于天地之戒，不知所由。
现代文：近来数次发生地震，为上天示以警戒而惶恐，而又不知其原因。
English: Earthquakes have occurred several times recently, and we are alarmed by the warning from heaven, but we do not know the cause.

古文：方田作时，朕忧蒸庶之失业，临遣光禄大夫褒等十二人循行天下，存问耆老、鳏、寡、孤、独、困乏、失职之民，延登贤俊，招显侧陋，因览风俗之化。相、守二千石诚能正躬劳力，宣明教化，以亲万姓，则六合之内和亲，庶几虖无忧矣。
现代文：正当农时季节，朕担心黎民中有的无力耕种，及时派遣光禄大夫褒等十二人循行于天下，慰问耆老鳏寡孤独困乏而失其常业的百姓，延请贤俊，招询隐士，以观览风俗教化，郡守国相及二千石果能以身作则勤于政事，宣明朝廷教化，以使万姓相亲，这样就会使宇宙之内莫不和睦相亲，就基本上达到国泰民安了。
English: During the agricultural season, I was worried about the inability of some of the Li people to cultivate. I promptly sent twelve people such as Dr. Guanglu and Dr. Bo to travel around the world, to comfort the lonely and poor people who lost their regular jobs, to invite sages, to invite hermits, to observe and educate the customs, to be diligent in government affairs by example, and to educate the imperial court, so that all surnames would be similar. In this way, there would be no incompatibility in the universe, and the country and the people would basically be safe.

古文：《书》不云乎？ 股肱良哉，庶事康哉！ 
现代文：《尚书》不是说过吗？ 股肱之臣良善，众事就能安宁！ 
English: Didn't "Shang Shu" say it? If the vassal of a vassal is good, everything will be peaceful!

古文：布告天下，使明知朕意。 
现代文：特布告天下，使明知朕意。 
English: Announce it to the whole world, so that people will know my will.

古文：又曰： 关东今年谷不登，民多困乏。
现代文：诏书又说： 关东今年谷物歉收，百姓困乏。
English: The edict also said: "This year's grain harvest in Guandong Province is poor, and the people are in need.

古文：其令郡国被灾害甚者毋出租赋。
现代文：现令郡国受灾严重的免出租赋。
English: The county is now exempt from paying rent due to the severity of the disaster.

古文：江、海、陂、湖、园、池属少府者以假贫民，勿租赋。
现代文：江海陂湖园池属于少府的可以借给贫民谋生，不出租税。
English: Jianghai Lugu Lake Park Pool belongs to Shaofu, which can be lent to the poor to earn a living, and there is no rental tax.

古文：赐宗室有属籍者马一匹至二驷，三老、孝者帛五匹，弟者、力田三匹、鳏、寡、孤、独二匹，吏民五十户牛、酒。 
现代文：赏赐刘氏宗族名在谱籍的马一匹至八匹，三老、孝子赏帛五匹，悌者、力田的赏帛三匹，鳏寡孤独二匹，吏民每五十户赏牛酒若干。 
English: From one to eight horses bearing the Liu family name will be awarded, five horses will be awarded to the three elders and three sons, three horses will be awarded to the three ruffians and two horses will be awarded to the lonely widow, and a number of cattle and wine will be awarded to every fifty households.

古文：六月，以民疾疫，令大官损膳，减乐府员，省苑马，以振困乏。
现代文：六月，因民间瘟疫流行，下令宫廷节省膳食开支，裁减乐府人员，减少御苑马匹，以其财物赈济困乏地区。
English: In June, due to the outbreak of the plague, the court ordered the emperor to cut down on the cost of meals, reduce the number of staff in the palace, and reduce the number of horses in the imperial court, and use the money to help the poor areas.

古文：秋八月，上郡属国降胡万余人亡入匈奴。
现代文：秋八月，上郡属国降胡一万余人，逃亡进入匈奴地区。
English: In the autumn and August, more than ten thousand people from the Shang County vassal country surrendered to Hu and fled into the Xiongnu region.

古文：九月，关东郡国十一大水，饥，或人相食，转旁郡钱、谷以相救。
现代文：九月，关东郡国十一处大水，饥荒严重，有的地方人相食，调运附近的钱谷以救灾。
English: In September, eleven places in Kanto county were flooded, famine was severe, and in some places people were cannibalizing each other. The nearby Qian Valley was dispatched for disaster relief.

古文：诏曰： 间者，阴阳不调，黎民饥寒，无以保治，惟德浅薄，不足以充入旧贯之居。
现代文：下诏说： 前者阴阳不调，黎民饥寒，失去生活保障，只因朕的德行浅薄，不足以担任治理天下的重任而居停于先帝的宫室。
English: The next edict said: "The former does not adjust yin and yang, the people are hungry and cold, and they have lost their livelihood security. Only because my virtue is shallow, it is not enough to take on the important task of governing the world and stay in the imperial palace of the former emperor.

古文：其令诸宫、馆希御幸者勿缮治，太仆减谷食马，水衡省肉食兽。 
现代文：现令各官馆准备迎驾的处所不必修缮，太仆减少饲马的粮食，水衡减少饲养珍禽异兽的肉类。 
English: All government offices are now ordered to prepare for the arrival of the locomotive without repairing the premises, the servants reduce the grain for feeding horses, and the water balance reduces the meat for feeding rare birds and animals.

古文：二年春正月，行幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：二年春正月，驾临甘泉，郊祭泰畤。
English: In the first month of spring of the second year, arriving at Ganquan, the suburb festival was held.

古文：赐云阳民爵一级，女子百户牛、酒。
现代文：赏赐云阳臣民爵位一级，赏赐女子每百户牛酒若干。
English: Yunyang was awarded a first-class title of nobility, and women were awarded a certain amount of cattle wine per hundred households.

古文：立弟竟为清河王。
现代文：封弟刘竟为清河王。
English: His adopted brother Liu is actually the king of Qinghe.

古文：三月，立广陵厉王太子霸为王。
现代文：三月，封广陵厉王太子霸为王。
English: In March, Fuguangling Li Wang, the crown prince, became king.

古文：诏罢黄门乘舆狗马，水衡禁囿、宜春下苑、少府佽飞外池、严篽池田假与贫民。
现代文：下诏免去近署的车辆与狗马，水衡所禁止开采的园囿、宣春苑、少府的猎场水池、射苑中的池田，都借与贫民谋生。
English: The following edict exempted vehicles and dogs and horses in the vicinity of the station, as well as garden ploughs prohibited from mining by the water balance, Xuanchun Garden, the hunting pool in Shofu, and Ikeda in the shooting garden, all of which were used by the poor to earn a living.

古文：诏曰： 盖闻贤圣在位，阴阳和，风雨时，日月光，星辰静，黎庶康宁，考终厥命。
现代文：诏书说： 常闻圣帝贤王在位，阴阳协和，风调雨顺，日月光，星宿定位，百姓安宁，益寿延年。
English: The edict said: It is commonly known that the holy Emperor Xianwang is on the throne, the yin and yang are harmonious, the wind and rain are harmonious, the sun and moon are bright, the stars are aligned, the people are peaceful, and life is prolonged.

古文：今朕恭承天地，托于公侯之上，明不能烛，德不能绥，灾异并臻，连年不息。
现代文：今日朕恭承天地，位尊于公侯之上，明不能够烛照四海，德不足以安定兆民，灾异屡现，连年不息。
English: Today, I hold the heavens and the earth in reverence, and I am held in high esteem above the princes. Clearly, I am not able to light up the four seas with a candle. Virtue is not enough to stabilize the trillions of people. Disasters are recurring, year after year.

古文：乃二月戊午，地震于陇西郡，毁落太上皇庙殿壁木饰，坏败豲道县城郭官寺及民室屋，压杀人众。
现代文：在二月二十八日，陇西郡发生地震，毁落太上皇庙殿壁木饰，毁坏原道县城郭官寺及人民房屋，压死多人。
English: On February 28, an earthquake occurred in Shaanxi County, destroying the wooden decorations on the wall of the Great Emperor's temple, destroying the castle, official temples and people's houses in Yuandao County, and crushing many people.

古文：山崩地裂，水泉涌出。
现代文：山崩地裂，水泉涌出。
English: The landslide split the ground, and water springs gushed out.

古文：天惟降灾，震惊朕师。
现代文：上天降灾，多次警朕。
English: It was an act of God, and the police were called several times.

古文：治有大亏，咎至于斯。
现代文：治国有过，罪有应得。
English: The country has been misgoverned, and the guilt is deserved.

古文：夙夜兢兢，不通大变，深惟郁悼，未知其序。
现代文：日夜战战兢兢，不能理解发生灾变的原因，内心有说不出的痛苦，思绪紊乱。
English: Trembling day and night, unable to understand the cause of the disaster, there is unspeakable pain in my heart, and my thoughts are disordered.

古文：间者岁数不登，元元困乏，不胜饥寒，以陷刑辟，朕甚闵之。
现代文：近年经常歉收，百姓穷困，经受不住饥寒交迫，就铤而走险陷入囚狱，朕深为哀怜。
English: In recent years, the harvest has often been poor, the people are poor, they can't stand the cold and hunger, and they risk going to prison. I am deeply sorry.

古文：郡国被地动灾甚者，无出租赋。
现代文：郡国因地震灾害严重的免出租赋。
English: Due to the serious earthquake disaster, the county is exempt from rent.

古文：赦天下。有可蠲除、减省以便万姓者，条秦，毋有所讳。
现代文：赦天下，凡是可以蠲除减省以方便百姓的，可以逐条上奏，不必有所回避。
English: If there is anything that can be eliminated or reduced for the convenience of the people, it can be raised one by one, and there is no need to avoid it.

古文：丞相、御史、中二千石举茂材异等、直言极谏之士，朕将亲览焉。 
现代文：丞相、御史、中二千石都荐举才华出色的敢于直言极谏之士，朕将亲自阅览他们所提出的批评与建议。 
English: The Prime Minister, the Minister of History, and the 2,000-koku junior high school all recommended talented and outstanding people who dare to be outspoken. I will personally read the criticisms and suggestions they have made.

古文：夏四月丁巳，立皇太子。
现代文：夏四月二十八日，立皇太子。
English: On the 28th day of the 4th month of the summer, the crown prince was appointed.

古文：赐御史大夫爵关内侯，中二千石右庶长，天下当为父后者爵一级，列侯钱各二十万，五大夫十万。
现代文：赐御史大夫官爵为关内侯，中二千石官爵为左庶长，天下的为父亲继承人的赏爵一。列侯赏钱二十万，五大夫赏钱十万。
English: He bestowed a peerage on Mishi no daifu as Kwanai no marquis, a 2,000-koku peerage on Sasabe no choja, and a peerage on his father's heir. A peerage was awarded 200,000 yen, and a grand peerage was awarded 100,000 yen.

古文：六月，关东饥，齐地人相食。
现代文：六月，关东发生严重饥荒，齐地人相食。
English: In June, a severe famine occurred in Kanto, and people in Qi started to eat each other.

古文：秋七月，诏曰： 岁比灾害，民有菜色，惨怛于心。
现代文：秋季七月，下诏说： 连年灾害，民有菜色，朕深感惨痛。
English: In the autumn of July, the next emperor said: I am deeply saddened by the consecutive years of disasters, the people have no choice.

古文：已诏吏虚仓廪，开府库振救，赐寒者衣。
现代文：已命令有关官员虚仓廪、开府库以行赈饥者食、赐寒者衣。
English: Relevant officials have been ordered to open storehouses and warehouses to provide food for the hungry and clothing for the cold.

古文：今秋禾麦颇伤。
现代文：今秋禾麦也不同程度受灾。
English: This autumn, wheat and barley were also affected to varying degrees.

古文：一年中地再动。北海水溢，流杀人民。
现代文：一年中几次地震，北海涨潮，流杀人民。
English: Earthquakes several times a year, the North Sea rising tides, and the killing of people.

古文：阴阳不和，其咎安在？
现代文：阴阳不和，过失何在？
English: Yin and yang do not get along, what is the fault?

古文：公卿将何以忧之？
现代文：公卿认为应如何进行处置？
English: What does the Lord Advocate think should be done?

古文：其悉意陈朕过，靡有所讳。 
现代文：希望尽意批评朕的过失，不必有所隐讳。 
English: I hope you will criticize me for my mistakes without hiding anything.

古文：冬，诏曰： 国之将兴，尊师而重傅。
现代文：冬，下诏说： 国家将走向兴盛，就尊重师傅。
English: In the winter, the next edict said: If the country is to prosper, it must respect its masters.

古文：故前将军望之傅朕八年，道以经书，厥功茂焉。其赐爵关内侯，食邑八百户，朝朔、望。 
现代文：原前将军望之为朕师傅八年，教导经书，其功甚美，现赐爵为关内侯，食邑八百户，每月只在初一与十五入朝。 
English: The former general has been my teacher for eight years, teaching scripture, and his work is very beautiful. He is now a knight of Kwanai, serving eight hundred households, and only enters the imperial court on the first day of the first month and the fifteenth day of the first month.

古文：十二月，中书令弘恭、石显等谮望之，令自杀。
现代文：十二月，中书令弘恭、石显等人诬告望之，元帝令望之自杀。
English: In December, Zhongshu ordered Hongyong, Shi Xian and others to falsely accuse Wang Zhi, and Yuan Di ordered Wang Zhi to commit suicide.

古文：三年春，令诸侯相位在郡守下。
现代文：三年春，下令诸侯国相位在郡守之下。
English: In the spring of the third year, he ordered that the status of the vassal states be placed under the county governors.

古文：珠厓郡山南县反，博谋群臣。
现代文：珠崖郡山南县造反，广征群臣之谋。
English: The rebellion in Shannan County, Zhuyao County, and the enlistment of vassals were the result of a conspiracy.

古文：待诏贾捐之以为宜弃珠厓，救民饥馑。
现代文：待诏贾捐之认为可暂放弃珠崖造反事不管，应集中力量救灾。
English: However, Jia Tongzhi thought that it was possible to temporarily give up the rebellion and concentrate on disaster relief.

古文：乃罢珠厓。
现代文：于是未对珠崖采取行动。
English: As a result, no action was taken against Zhuyao.

古文：夏四月乙未晦，茂陵白鹤馆灾。 
现代文：夏四月三十日，茂陵白鹤馆火灾。
English: On the 30th day of the 4th month of the summer, a fire broke out in the White Crane Hall.

古文：诏曰： 乃者火灾降于孝武园馆，朕战栗恐惧。
现代文：下诏说： 前者火灾发生在武帝园陵馆中，朕战栗恐惧。
English: The next edict said: The former fire occurred in the Imperial Garden Mausoleum, I tremble with fear.

古文：不烛变异，咎在朕躬。
现代文：不了解变异的发生之因，过失在于朕躬。
English: The fault lies with us for not understanding the cause of the mutation.

古文：群司又未肯极言朕过，以至于斯，将何以寤焉！
现代文：群臣又未肯极力批评朕的错误，以至于此，朕怎能寝安于席啊！
English: The ministers did not want to criticize my mistake, so how could I sleep peacefully?

古文：百姓仍遭凶厄，无以相振，加以烦扰虖苛吏，拘牵乎微文，不得永终性命，朕甚闵焉。其赦天下。 
现代文：百姓累遭灾患，国家赈救不力，加之受苛吏的烦扰，受条文的拘牵，不得保其性命，朕甚为同情，现决定赦天下。 
English: I am very sympathetic to the people who suffered from the disaster and the country's inability to rescue them, as well as being disturbed by the harsh officials and detained by the regulations, and unable to save their lives. I have now decided to pardon the whole world.

古文：夏，旱。
现代文：夏，发生旱灾。
English: Summer, drought.

古文：立长沙炀王弟宗为王。封故海昏侯贺子代宗为侯。
现代文：立长沙炀王弟宗为王，封已故海昏侯贺之子代宗为侯。
English: He set up the king of Changsha, Wang Di Zong, as king, and appointed the son of the late Haizhong Hou He, Zong Daizong, as prince.

古文：六月，诏曰： 盖闻安民之道，本由阴阳。
现代文：六月，下诏说： 曾闻安民之道，在于协调阴阳。
English: In June, the next imperial edict said: The road to peace and security lies in the coordination of yin and yang.

古文：间者阴阳错谬，风雨不时。
现代文：近来阴差阳错，风雨不时。
English: Recently, there have been ups and downs, wind and rain from time to time.

古文：朕之不德，庶几群公有敢言朕之过者，今则不然。
现代文：朕德行有亏，总希望诸公卿中有能无所顾忌地指出朕的过失，实则不然。
English: I hope that some of the nobles will have the courage to point out my faults, but that is not the case.

古文：偷合苟从，未肯极言，朕甚闵焉。
现代文：唯唯诺诺，不肯极力进谏，朕深感不安。
English: I am deeply uneasy because I am a meek person and do not want to do my best to advance.

古文：惟烝庶之饥寒，远离父母、妻子，劳于非业之作，卫于不居之宫，恐非所以佐阴阳之道也。
现代文：经常怀念黎民的饥寒，他们有的远离父母妻子，从事官家所差役的不急之事，守卫那些并无人居住的宫殿，这恐怕不符合协理阴阳之道啊！
English: They often miss the cold and hunger of the Li people, some of whom are far away from their parents and wives, engaged in non-urgent tasks assigned by officials, and guarding palaces that are not inhabited. I'm afraid this is not in line with the principle of yin and yang!

古文：其罢甘泉、建章宫卫，令就农。
现代文：现决定罢免甘泉、建章宫的守卫，令卫卒就农。
English: It has now been decided to dismiss the guards of Ganquan and Jianzhang Palace, and order the guards to become farmers.

古文：百官各省费。条奏毋有所讳。
现代文：百官各省开支，呈奏不必有所顾忌。
English: There is no need to be concerned about the expenditure of hundreds of officials in each province.

古文：有司勉之，毋犯四时之禁。
现代文：有关官员要恪尽职守，不要贻误农时。
English: Relevant officials should fulfill their duties and not waste the time of farmers.

古文：丞相、御史举天下明阴阳灾异者各三人。 
现代文：丞相御史举荐天下明了阴阳灾异的各三人。 
English: The three men recommended by the Prime Minister of the Empire, who understood the yin and yang of the disaster.

古文：于是言事者众，或进擢召见，人人自以得上意。
现代文：从此提批评建议的人多起来了。有的被提拔召见，人人都自以为能深明天子之意。
English: Since then, the number of people offering criticism and suggestions has increased. Some have been promoted, and everyone thinks they can make a difference.

古文：四年春正月，行幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：四年春正月，驾临甘泉，郊祭泰畤。
English: In the first month of spring in the fourth year, arriving at Ganquan, the suburb festival was held.

古文：三月，行幸河东，祠后土。
现代文：三月驾临河东，祭祀后土。
English: In March, they came to the eastern part of the river to hold a memorial service.

古文：赦汾阴徒。赐民爵一级，女子百户牛、酒，鳏、寡、高年帛。
现代文：赦免汾阴犯人，赏赐臣民爵一级，女子每百户牛酒若干，鳏寡高年帛若干。
English: He pardoned the Jinyin prisoners and rewarded the subjects with a first-class peerage, the women with a certain amount of cattle wine per hundred households, and the widows and widowers with a certain amount of seniority.

古文：行所过无出租赋。
现代文：车驾所经之地免出今年租税。
English: The place you drive through is exempt from this year's tax.

古文：五年春正月，以周子南君为周承休侯，位次诸侯王。
现代文：五年春正月，以周子南君为周承休侯，位次于各侯王。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, Zhou Zi Nankun was appointed as Zhou Chengyu, second only to the princes.

古文：三月，行幸雍，祠五畤。
现代文：三月，驾临雍地，祭祀五畤。
English: In March, they arrived in the Yangtze River Delta and began to perform the Five Rites of Spring.

古文：元元失望，上感皇天，阴阳为变，咎流万民，朕甚惧之。
现代文：夏四月，彗星出现在参星区。下诏说： 朕从政不勤，任官无序而职责不明，机构不全而职事空废。
English: In the summer of April, the comet appeared in the constellation. The following edict said: I am not diligent in politics, my appointment is disorderly and my duties are unclear, the organization is incomplete and my duties are empty.

古文：乃者关东连遭灾害。饥寒疾疫，夭不终命。
现代文：使百姓失望。前些时关东连遭灾害，饥寒疾疫，引起非正常死亡。
English: Some time ago, the Kanto region was hit by a series of disasters, including famine, cold and epidemics, causing unnatural deaths.

古文：《诗》不云乎， 凡民有丧，匍匐救之。 
现代文：《诗》不是说过吗？ 凡是有人遇到丧祸之事，就应当尽力救助。 
English: Isn't it said in the poem that whenever someone is in distress, they should be helped as much as possible?

古文：其令太官毋日杀，所具各减半。
现代文：现令太官不要每日宰杀牲禽，御膳所供按食谱减一半。
English: The eunuch has now been ordered not to slaughter poultry every day, and to reduce the number of dishes served according to the recipe by half.

古文：乘舆秣马，无乏正事而已。
现代文：宫廷所备的车乘马匹，只供郊祀与艹鬼狩必需而已。
English: The carriage and horses provided by the court were only necessary for suburban worship and ghost hunting.

古文：罢角抵、上林宫、馆希御幸者、齐三服官、北假田官、盐铁官、常平仓。
现代文：罢免角抵之戏，遣返上林宫馆内的姬妾。罢免主管文绣衣服之官、盐铁官、常平仓。
English: He removed the official in charge of embroidering clothes, the salt and iron official, and Tsunehirakura.

古文：博士弟子毋置员，以广学者。
现代文：博士弟子不设专职，要广为培养社会上的学者。
English: There is no full-time position for doctoral disciples, and it is necessary to widely train scholars in society.

古文：赐宗室子有属籍者马一匹至二驷，三老、孝者帛，人五匹，弟者、力田三匹，鳏、寡、孤、独二匹，吏民五十户牛、酒。 
现代文：赐宗室男子谱上有名者马一匹至八匹，三老、孝者赏帛，每人五匹。悌者、力田每人赏帛三匹。鳏寡孤独每人二匹，吏民五十户赏牛酒若干。 
English: A famous person on the genealogy of the male line was given one to eight horses, three old people and filial piety were awarded five horses each, three horses each were awarded to those who were lazy and strong, two horses each were awarded to widows and widowers alone, and some cattle wine was awarded to fifty households.

古文：省刑罚七十余事。除光禄大夫以下至郎中保父母同产之令。
现代文：减轻刑罚七十余件，废除光禄大夫至郎中的父母兄弟，一人有过，都要连坐的法令。
English: More than seventy sentences were reduced, and the ordinance requiring the parents and siblings of Dr. Guanglu and his son-in-law to sit together if there was more than one was abolished.

古文：令从官给事宫司马中者，得为大父母、父母、兄弟通籍。
现代文：下令天子的日常侍从在宫廷外门任事的，应将祖父母及父母、兄弟的年龄、姓名、相貌特征填写清楚。
English: When ordering the son of heaven's daily attendants to work at the outer gate of the palace, they should clearly fill in the age, name, and facial features of the grandparents, parents, and brothers.

古文：冬十二月丁未，御史大夫贡禹卒。
现代文：冬十一月初九日，御史大夫贡禹去世。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month of winter, Dr. Gong Yu passed away.

古文：卫司马谷吉使匈奴，不还。
现代文：卫司马谷吉出使匈奴，失踪。
English: The Xiongnu sent an envoy, Weishi Magukichi, but he disappeared.

古文：永光元年春正月，行幸甘泉，效泰畤。赦云阳徒。
现代文：永光元年春正月，驾临甘泉，郊祭泰畤，赦免云阳犯人。
English: In the first month of spring of the first year of Yongguang, he came to Ganquan, held a suburb festival, and pardoned Yunyang prisoners.

古文：赐民爵一级，女子百户牛、酒，高年帛。
现代文：赏赐臣民爵一级，女子每百户牛酒若干。
English: Every 100 households will be rewarded with a first-class citizen title, and women will receive a certain amount of cattle wine.

古文：行所过毋出租赋。
现代文：高年赐帛，御驾所经过之处不出租税。
English: Senior citizens are exempt from the tax, and there is no tax on the places you drive through.

古文：二月，诏丞相、御史举质朴敦厚逊让有行者，光禄岁以此科第郎、从宫。
现代文：二月，诏令丞相、御史举荐质朴、敦厚、谦逊有高行的人，光禄每年按此内容考校郎、从官而定其等级。
English: In February, the emperor ordered the prime minister and the minister of history to recommend people who are simple, strong-willed, humble and have high morals, and the Guanglu will examine schoolboys and officials according to this content every year to determine their level.

古文：三月，诏曰： 五帝、三王任贤使能，以登至平，而今不治者，岂斯民异哉？
现代文：三月，下诏说： 五帝三王任贤使能，以登于天下至治，而今日国家混乱，难道是人民不同了吗？
English: In March, the next imperial edict said: "Five emperors and three kings were appointed by sages to rule the world, and today the country is in chaos. Is it the people who are different?

古文：咎在朕之不明，亡以知贤也。
现代文：问题就出在朕的不明，不能识别贤才。
English: The problem is that we don't know, we can't identify the talent.

古文：是故壬人在位，而吉士雍蔽。
现代文：是以佞人在位，贤人就受到堵塞与排挤。
English: If a lazy person is in charge, the wise person will be blocked and ousted.

古文：重以周、秦之弊，民渐薄俗，去礼义，触刑法，岂不哀哉！
现代文：特别是周秦以来的积弊，使社会风气日下，以致有的人抛弃礼义，触犯刑法，真是可悲啊！
English: In particular, the accumulated shortcomings since Zhou Qin have caused the social ethos to decline, so that some people abandon etiquette and violate the criminal law. It's really sad!

古文：由此观之，元元何辜？
现代文：由此看来，百姓何罪？
English: From this perspective, what are the people guilty of?

古文：其赦天下，令厉精自新，各务农亩。
现代文：现在赦天下，令犯罪者努力改过自新，各务农业生产。
English: Now the world has been pardoned, and the criminals have been made to work hard to rehabilitate themselves and do their best in agricultural production.

古文：无田者皆假之，贷种、食如贫民。
现代文：无田地的都借以公田，和一般贫民一样贷给种子与粮食。
English: Those who do not own land have to borrow public land, and are loaned seeds and grain like ordinary poor people.

古文：赐吏六百石以上爵五大夫，勤事吏二级，民一级，女子百户牛、酒，鳏、寡、孤、独、高年帛。 
现代文：赏赐吏六百石以上爵级为五大夫，勤于政事的官吏赐爵二级，继承父后的百姓赐爵一级。女子百户赐牛酒若干，鳏寡孤独及高年赐帛若干。 
English: The officials with more than six hundred koku were given five peerages, the officials who were diligent in government affairs were given two peerages, and the people who succeeded their fathers were given one peerage. A hundred households gave a number of cows and wine to women, and a number of widows and orphans and the elderly were given a number of gongs.

古文：是月雨雪，陨霜伤麦稼，秋罢。
现代文：本月雨雪交加，严霜伤冻麦稼，秋无所收。
English: This month, rain and snow have been added, severe frosts have damaged and frozen wheat crops, and nothing has been harvested in autumn.

古文：二年春二月，诏曰： 盖闻唐、虞象刑而民不犯，殷周法行而奸轨服。
现代文：二年春二月，下诏说： 曾闻唐虞象征性的施刑而民不犯法，商周法令推行而奸宄慑服。
English: In the spring and February of the second year, the next imperial edict said: It was once heard that Tang Yu imposed symbolic punishments and the people did not violate the law, and Shang Zhou's decrees were implemented and the traitors were deterred.

古文：今朕获承高祖之洪业，托位公侯之上，夙夜战栗，永惟百姓之急，未尝有忘焉。
现代文：今日朕能继承高祖的伟业，位尊于公卿之上，日夜战战兢兢，长期悬念百姓的疾苦，从未忘怀。
English: Today, I am able to carry on the great legacy of Gao Zu, and I am held in high esteem by the nobility. I tremble day and night, and have long pondered the sufferings of the common people, and have never forgotten them.

古文：然而阴阳未调，三光晻昧。元元大困，流散道路，盗贼并兴。
现代文：然而阴阳未调，日月黯淡，百姓困苦，流离失所，盗贼兴起。
English: However, the yin and yang have not been adjusted, the sun and moon are gloomy, the people are poor, displaced, and thieves are on the rise.

古文：有司又长残贼，失牧民之术。
现代文：主管机构又助长残贼，未采取治理百姓的有效措施。
English: In addition, the competent agencies encouraged the remnants of the bandits and failed to take effective measures to govern the people.

古文：是皆朕之不明，政有所亏。
现代文：这都是朕的不明，治国无方。
English: This is all unclear to me, and there is no way to govern the country.

古文：咎至于此，朕甚自耻。
现代文：过失就在于此，朕深感内疚。
English: This is where the fault lies, and I feel deeply guilty.

古文：为民父母，若是之薄，谓百姓何？
现代文：为百姓的父母，而如此薄德，这将何以抚临百姓！
English: As the people's parents, and such a thin morality, how will this affect the people!

古文：其大赦天下，赐民爵一级，女子百户牛、酒，鳏、寡、孤、独、高年、三老、孝弟、力田帛。 
现代文：应大赦天下，赏赐民爵一级，女子每百户牛酒若干，鳏寡孤独高年、三老、孝悌力田帛若干。 
English: There should be a general amnesty for the whole country, awarding a first-class title of people's peer, a certain amount of cattle and wine for women per hundred households, and a certain amount of rice for widows, lonely old people, the elderly, and filial piety.

古文：又赐诸侯王、公主、列侯黄金，中二千石以下至中都官长吏各有差，吏六百石以上爵五大夫，勤事吏各二级。
现代文：又赏赐各侯王、公主、列侯以黄金，中二千石以下至中都官长吏按差等进行赏赐。吏六百石以上赏以五大夫爵级，勤于政事的官吏各赏爵二级。
English: In addition, gold was awarded to all princes, princesses, and vassals, and officials from 2,000 koku and below to 600 koku and above were awarded the rank of five grand dukes, and officials who were diligent in political affairs were awarded the second grade of peerage.

古文：三月壬戌朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：三月初一日，出现日偏食。
English: On the first day of March, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：诏曰： 朕战战栗栗，夙夜思过失，不敢荒宁。
现代文：下诏说： 朕战战栗栗、昼夜反省过失，不敢废事而自宁。
English: The next edict said: "I tremble with fear, I reflect on my mistakes day and night, I dare not do anything foolish, and I calm down.

古文：惟阴阳不调，未烛其咎，娄敕公卿，日望有效。
现代文：对于阴阳不调，不知错误出在何处。屡次晓谕公卿，期望他们努力从政。
English: I don't know where the mistake came from regarding the imbalance of yin and yang. I have repeatedly told the nobles that I expect them to work hard at politics.

古文：至今有司执政，未得其中，施与禁切，未合民心，暴猛之俗弥长，和睦之道日衰，百姓愁苦，靡所错躬。
现代文：至今一些主持政务的人，未能抓住根本，施惠不足而禁令烦苛，不能得到民心。暴猛的风气日长，和睦的大道日衰，百姓愁苦，没办法生活下去。
English: So far, some people who preside over government affairs have failed to grasp the fundamentals, the benefits are insufficient and the prohibitions are cumbersome, and they cannot get the hearts of the people. The violent culture is growing day by day, the road of harmony is fading day by day, the people are sad, and they cannot live on.

古文：是以氛邪岁增，侵犯太阳，正气湛掩，日久夺光。
现代文：是以恶气弥漫，侵犯太阳，正气沉沦，日被夺光。
English: It is pervaded by evil, invades the sun, sinks the righteous, and is deprived of the sun.

古文：乃壬戌，日有蚀之，天见大异，以戒朕躬，朕甚悼焉。
现代文：三月初一，日偏食，天显异象，以警戒朕躬。朕深感悲哀。
English: On the first day of March, a partial solar eclipse, a celestial phenomenon, caught me off guard. I was deeply saddened.

古文：其令内郡国举茂材异等、贤良、直言之士各一人。 夏六月，诏曰： 间者连年不收，四方咸困。
现代文：现令中原郡国各举德才兼具的直言之士一人。 夏六月，下诏说： 近年来连年收成不好，四方皆困。
English: He is now one of the most outspoken and talented people in Nakahara County. In the summer of June, he said: In recent years, the harvest has been poor year after year, and everyone is in trouble.

古文：元元之民，劳于耕耘，又亡成功，困于饥馑，亡以相救。
现代文：各地百姓，辛勤耕作，劳动而无所收获，处于饥饿的困境，无法互相救助。
English: People all over the country, who have worked hard in agriculture, have nothing to show for their labors, are in the predicament of starvation, and are unable to help each other.

古文：朕为民父母，德不能覆，而有其刑，甚自伤焉。
现代文：朕为百姓父母，恩德不能普及，而仅以刑罚相加，内心深感伤悲。
English: I am the people's father and mother. Charity cannot be universal, but can only be achieved by adding punishments together. My heart is deeply saddened.

古文：其赦天下。 
现代文：现赦天下。 
English: Now he intends to grant amnesty to the whole world.

古文：秋七月，西羌反，遣右将军冯奉世击之。
现代文：秋七月，西羌反叛。派右将军冯奉世领兵平叛。
English: In autumn and July, Xidi rebelled and sent the right-wing general Feng Bongshi to lead the troops in the counter-rebellion.

古文：八月，以太常任千秋为奋威将军，别将五校并进。
现代文：八月，任太常任千秋为奋威将军，另领五校之兵与右将军并进。
English: In August, Ren Taizhong appointed Qianqiu as General Fenwei, and he also led the soldiers of the Five Schools to march alongside the Right General.

古文：三年春，西羌平，军罢。
现代文：三年春，西羌平定，收兵。
English: In the spring of the third year, Xidi was pacified and the troops were withdrawn.

古文：三月，立皇子康为济阳王。
现代文：三月，立皇子康为济阳王。
English: In March, Prince Kang was appointed King of Jiyang.

古文：夏四月癸未，大司马车骑将军接薨。
现代文：夏四月初九日，大司马车骑将军王接去世。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the summer, the great chariot driver Wang Jie passed away.

古文：冬十一月，诏曰： 乃者已丑地动，中冬雨水、大雾，盗贼并起。
现代文：冬十一月，下诏说： 前者十月八日地动，冬月降大雨、起大雾，盗贼四起。
English: In the winter of November, the following edict was issued: On the 8th day of October, the former moved, heavy rain and fog fell in the winter months, and thieves were everywhere.

古文：吏何不以时禁？
现代文：官吏为何不及时禁断？
English: Why didn't officials stop it in time?

古文：各悉意对。 
现代文：各应尽意提出对策。 
English: Each side should do its best to come up with countermeasures.

古文：冬，复盐铁官、博士弟子员。
现代文：冬，复设盐铁官、博士弟子员。
English: In winter, the Salt and Iron Officer and the Doctoral Disciple were reinstated.

古文：以用度不足，民多复除，无以给中外徭役。
现代文：鉴于百姓生活困苦，对赋税大多予以减免，且不必供给京都与外地的徭役。
English: In view of the hardships of the people's lives, most of the taxes are reduced and exempted, and there is no need to provide bailiffs in Kyoto and other places.

古文：四年春二月，诏曰： 朕承至尊之重，不能烛理百姓，娄遭凶咎。
现代文：四年春二月，下诏说： 朕继承至尊的重任，不能有效地治理百姓，使其屡遭灾祸。
English: In the spring and February of the fourth year, the following edict said: I have inherited the most important responsibility, but I am unable to effectively govern the people, and they have suffered repeated disasters.

古文：加以边境不安，师旅在外，赋敛、转输，元元骚动，穷困亡聊，犯法抵罪。
现代文：加以边境不安，大军在外，而征收赋税与支援前线，使百姓疲于奔命，穷困无聊，犯法触罪。
English: Adding border insecurity and a large army outside, while levying taxes and supporting the front line, makes the people tired of running for their lives, poor and bored, and breaking the law.

古文：夫上失其道而绳下以深刑，朕甚痛之。
现代文：对这种朝廷失治理之道而对百姓采用严刑峻法的举措，朕深感痛心。
English: I am deeply saddened by the fact that the imperial court has lost its way of governance and has resorted to harsh punishments against the people.

古文：其赦天下，所贷贫民勿收责。 
现代文：现赦免天下，原贷给贫民的粮钱免予偿还。 
English: The world is now pardoned, and the grain money originally loaned to the poor is exempt from repayment.

古文：夏六月甲戌，孝宣园东阙灾。
现代文：夏闰六月二十七日，宣帝园陵东关失火。
English: On the 27th day of the sixth lunar month, Dongguan, the imperial mausoleum in Xuan Di Park, caught fire.

古文：戊寅晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：三十日，出现日偏食。
English: On the 30th, a partial solar eclipse occurred.

古文：诏曰： 盖闻明王在上，忠贤布职，则群生和乐，方外蒙泽。
现代文：下诏说： 曾闻明王在上，忠贤各司其职，就能让百姓安居乐业，周边地区蒙受恩泽。
English: The next edict said: Once King Wenming ascended the throne, and the loyal and virtuous all performed their duties, it would be possible for the people to live and work in peace, and the surrounding areas would be blessed.

古文：今朕晻于王道，夙夜忧劳，不通其理，靡瞻不眩，靡听不惑，是以政令多还，民心未得，邪说空进，事亡成功。此天下所著闻也。
现代文：今日朕暗于王道，日夜忧虑，还不能求得治道的真谛。每看到一事就定不了标准，每听到一言就拿不定主张，是以政令不能贯彻始终，得不到臣民的真正拥戴，空谈阔论，未能办成几件实事，这是天下所共闻的。
English: Today, I am engrossed in the royal path, worrying day and night, unable to find the true meaning of the path. Every time I see something, I can't set a standard, and every time I hear a word, I can't take a firm stand. It is common knowledge around the world that I can't carry out my decrees consistently, that I can't gain the true support of my subjects, that I talk too much, and that I haven't been able to accomplish a few things.

古文：公卿大夫好恶不同，或缘奸作邪，侵削细民，元元安所归命哉！
现代文：公卿大夫的爱憎各异，有的缘奸作邪，贪赃枉法，百姓将去依靠谁啊！
English: Court nobles and doctors are loved and hated in different ways. Some are predestined to do evil, and some are greedy and corrupt. Who will the people rely on?

古文：乃六月晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：六月三十日，出现日食。
English: On June 30, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：《诗》不云乎？ 今此下民，亦孔之哀！ 
现代文：《诗》不是说过吗？ 今天的百姓饱受灾祸，处境是十分地可哀！ 
English: Isn't it said in the "Poem"? Today's people are plagued by disasters, and the situation is quite miserable!

古文：自今以来，公卿大夫其勉思天戒，慎身修永，以辅朕之不逮。
现代文：从今以后，公卿大夫应该严肃思考上天所示的警戒，慎于修身，明确施政的长远目标，以辅佐朕的不足之处。
English: From now on, the noble doctor should seriously think about the vigilance indicated by the heavens, be cautious in self-cultivation, clear the long-term goal of governance, and help our shortcomings.

古文：直言尽意，无有所讳。 
现代文：直言进谏，无所隐讳。 
English: He is outspoken and outspoken.

古文：九月戊子，罢卫思后园及戾园。
现代文：九月十三日，罢去卫思后园陵与戾太子园陵。
English: On September 13th, the gardens of Emperor Weishi and the gardens of Crown Prince Nintoku were demolished.

古文：冬十月乙丑，罢祖宗宙在郡国者。
现代文：冬十月二十日，罢去在郡国的祖宗祠庙。
English: In the winter, on October 20th, I went to the ancestral temple in the county.

古文：诸陵分属三辅。
现代文：各陵园分别划归三辅所辖。
English: All cemeteries are under the jurisdiction of the three auxiliary bureaus.

古文：以渭城寿陵亭部原上为初陵。
现代文：以渭城寿陵亭部原上为元帝初陵。
English: The original mausoleum of the Yuan Emperor is located on the grounds of the Pavilion of the Shouling Mausoleum.

古文：诏曰： 安土重迁，黎民之性；骨肉相附，人情所愿也。
现代文：下诏说： 安土重迁，是黎民的本性；骨肉相附，是人情的自然。
English: The next edict said: It is the nature of the Lebanese people to relocate to a safe place; it is the nature of human nature to be attached to each other.

古文：顷者有司缘臣子之义，奏徙郡国民以奉园陵，令百姓远弃先祖坟墓，破业失产，亲戚别离，人怀思慕之心，家有不安之意。
现代文：前不久，有关机构引用臣子之义，奏请迁徙郡国人民以奉园陵祭祀，使百姓远弃先祖坟墓，破产失业，亲戚别离，迁出的怀有思念亲人之心，在原籍的亲人又有不安之意。
English: Not long ago, the relevant agencies quoted the principle of vassalage and invited the people of the migrated counties to perform the memorial service, so that the people abandoned the graves of their ancestors, went bankrupt, lost their jobs, separated from their relatives, missed their relatives who had moved away, and felt uneasy about their relatives back home.

古文：是以东垂被虚耗之害，关中有无聊之民，非久长之策也。《诗》不云乎？ 民亦劳止，迄可小康，惠此中国，以绥四方。 
现代文：这样，关东就会因迁徙而虚耗费用，迁入关中的人又无业可从，这不是长久之计，《诗》不是说过吗？ 人民劳苦已久，至此可以小享安康。施恩泽于中原啊！进而安定四方。 
English: In this way, Guandong will waste expenses due to migration, and people who move into Guanzhong will have no job to go to. This is not a long-term solution. Isn't it what the poem said? The people have been working hard for a long time, and now they can enjoy a little well-being. Give grace to the Central Plains! and then stabilize the four directions.

古文：今所为初陵者，勿置县邑，使天下咸安土乐业，亡有动摇之心。
现代文：今所设置的初陵，不必移民设置县邑，让天下都能安土乐业，不必担心迁徙流动。
English: The initial mausoleum now set up does not require immigrants to set up counties and towns, so that the whole world can settle down and enjoy themselves, and there is no need to worry about the migration flow.

古文：布告天下，令明知之。 
现代文：特布告天下，使百姓明知。 
English: A special announcement was made to the world so that the people would know.

古文：又罢先后父母奉邑。
现代文：又罢去先后为其父母守冢奉祭祀的奉邑。
English: He also went to Bong-eup, where his parents had held a memorial service for him.

古文：五年春正月，行幸甘泉，效泰畤。
现代文：五年春正月，驾临甘泉，郊祭泰畤。
English: In the first month of spring in the fifth year, arriving at Ganquan, the suburb festival was held.

古文：三月，上幸河东，祠后土。
现代文：三月，又驾临河东，祭祀后土。
English: In March, they came to the eastern part of the river to hold a memorial service.

古文：秋，颍川水出，流杀人民。
现代文：秋，颍川大水决口，淹死人民。
English: In the autumn, the floodwaters of the Li River broke through, drowning people.

古文：吏、从官县被害者与告，士卒遣归。
现代文：吏和皇上从官属本县人有被水害的，都给假期探视，灾区的士卒复员回籍。
English: Officials and emperors from government-affiliated people in the county who were affected by the floods were given a holiday visit, and officers and men in the disaster area were demobilized and repatriated.

古文：冬，上幸长杨射熊馆，布车骑，大猎。
现代文：冬，元帝驾临长杨射熊馆，布列车骑，大猎。
English: In the winter, Emperor Yuan drove to the Linchang Yangshai Bear Museum, rode the cloth train, and went big game hunting.

古文：十二月乙酉，毁太上皇、孝惠皇帝寝庙园。
现代文：十二月十六日，太上皇、惠帝寝庙园发生火灾。
English: On December 16th, a fire broke out in the garden where the Emperor and Empress Hui slept.

古文：建昭元年春三月，上幸雍，祠五畤。
现代文：建昭元年春三月，元帝亲临雍地，祭祀五畤。
English: In the spring and March of the first year of Jian Zhao, the Yuan Emperor personally visited the Yangtze River to perform the Five Rites of Spring Festival.

古文：秋八月，有白蛾群飞蔽日，从东都门至枳道。
现代文：秋七月，有白蛾群飞蔽日，从东都门到枳道。
English: In autumn and July, swarms of white moths cover the sun from Dongdumen to Xiangdao.

古文：冬，河间王元有罪，废迁房陵。
现代文：冬，河间王元有罪，废为平民迁于房陵。
English: In the winter, Kawama Wangyuan was found guilty and moved to Fangling as a commoner.

古文：罢孝文太后、孝昭太后寝园。
现代文：罢去孝文太后、孝昭太后寝园。
English: Empress Dowager Xiaowen and Empress Dowager Xiaozhao went to bed.

古文：二年春正月，行幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：二年春正月，驾临甘泉，郊祭泰畤。
English: In the first month of spring of the second year, arriving at Ganquan, the suburb festival was held.

古文：三月，行幸河东，祠后土。
现代文：三月，又驾临河东，祭祀后土。
English: In March, they came to the eastern part of the river to hold a memorial service.

古文：益三河大郡太守秩。户十二万为大郡。
现代文：增加三河郡太守的俸禄，该郡是十二万户的大郡。
English: Increase the salary of the governor of Mikawa County, which is a large county with 120,000 households.

古文：夏四月，赦天下。
现代文：夏季四月，赦免天下。
English: In the summer, in April, there is a general amnesty.

古文：六月，立皇子舆为信都王，闰月丁酉，太皇太后上官氏崩。
现代文：六月，封皇子舆为信都王。闰八月八日，太皇太后上官氏去世。
English: In June, Fon no Miko became the king of Shintō. On the 8th day of the 8th month, the great empress Dowager Shangguan died.

古文：冬十一月，齐、楚地震，大雨雪，树折屋坏。
现代文：冬十一月，齐楚地震，大雪纷飞，树折屋坏。
English: In November of winter, there was an earthquake in Qi Chu, heavy snow fell, and the houses were destroyed by falling trees.

古文：淮阳王舅张博、魏君太守京房坐窥道诸侯王以邪意，漏泄省中语，博要斩，房弃市。
现代文：淮阳王舅张博、魏郡太守京房犯有阴导各侯王以邪逆之意，漏泄禁中机密，张博腰斩，京房处决。
English: Zhang Bo, the uncle of the king of Huaiyang, and Jing Fang, the governor of Wei County, were found guilty of leading the princes of various counties to leak forbidden secrets with evil intentions, Zhang Bo was beheaded, and Jing Fang was executed.

古文：三年夏，令三辅都尉、大郡都尉秩皆二千石。
现代文：三年夏，下令三辅都尉，大郡都尉爵级都为二千石。
English: In the summer of the third year, he ordered the three assistant captains, the county captain and the peerage to be two thousand koku.

古文：六月甲辰，丞相玄成薨。
现代文：六月十九日，丞相玄成去世。
English: On June 19th, the prime minister of the Joseon Dynasty, Hyun Song, passed away.

古文：秋，使护西域骑都尉甘延寿、副校尉陈汤挢发戊已校尉屯田吏、士及西域胡兵攻郅支单于。
现代文：秋，朝廷派驻护西域骑都尉甘延寿、副校尉陈汤，矫以朝廷之命调动戍己校尉、屯田将士及西域胡兵攻郅支单于。
English: In the autumn, the imperial court stationed the western region cavalry captain Gan Yan Shou and the vice-captain Chen Tang, and ordered the imperial court to mobilize the colonel Zou Ji, the soldiers of Tonden and the western region Hu soldiers to attack and support Shan Shan.

古文：冬，斩其首，传诣京师，县蛮夷邸门。
现代文：冬，斩其首级，传到京师，悬于鸿胪客馆外门以示众。
English: In winter, the decapitated head was brought to Beijing and hung on the outer gate of the Hongyi Hotel for public display.

古文：四年春正月，以诛郅支单于告祠郊庙。
现代文：四年春正月，因诛郅支单于事在祖庙进行告祖祭祀。
English: In the first month of spring in the fourth year, the ancestor-telling ceremony was held in the ancestral temple due to the incident of the support ticket.

古文：赦天下。
现代文：赦免天下。
English: Pardons all around.

古文：群臣上寿。置酒，以其图书示后宫贵人。
现代文：郡臣置酒相贺呼 万岁 ，元帝将征讨郅支的图书展示与后宫贵人观看。
English: Long live the county vassal's toast, the former emperor will solicit the book display and the harem nobles to watch.

古文：夏四月，诏曰： 朕承先帝之休烈，夙夜栗栗，惧不克任。
现代文：夏四月，下诏说： 朕继承先帝的丰功伟绩，日夜诚惶诚恐，深恐不能胜任。
English: In the summer of April, the next imperial edict said: I inherit the great achievements of the former emperor, and I am afraid day and night, and I am afraid that I am not competent.

古文：间者阴阳不调，五行失序，百姓饥馑。
现代文：前一段阳阴不调，五行失序。百姓饥馑。
English: In the previous paragraph, the yang and yin are out of kilter, the five elements are out of order, and the people are starving.

古文：惟烝庶之失业，临遣谏大夫博士赏等二十一人循行天下，存问耆老、鳏、寡、孤、独、乏困、失职之人，举茂材特立之士。
现代文：为了了解黎民的失其常业的情况，特派遣谏大夫博士赏等一十人循行天下，慰问耆老鳏寡孤独乏困失业的人，荐举茂材特立之士。
English: In order to understand the situation of Limin's loss of his normal work, Dr. Zou was specially dispatched to reward ten people who followed the world, to comfort the elderly, the lonely, the poor, and the unemployed, and to recommend the outstanding people of Moshu.

古文：相、将、九卿，其帅意毋怠，使朕获观教化之流焉。 
现代文：将相九卿，要努力贯彻朕的意图，使朕能了解政教与风化的运行情况。 
English: Master Sang Jiuqing, we must strive to carry out my intention, so that I can understand the operation of politics, religion and customs.

古文：六月甲申，中山王竟薨。
现代文：六月初五日，中山王刘靖去世。
English: On the 5th day of early June, Liu Jing, the King of Zhongshan, passed away.

古文：蓝田地沙石雍霸水，安陵岸崩雍泾水，水逆流。
现代文：蓝田地沙石堵塞灞水，安陵岸崩壅住泾水，水倒流。
English: The sandstone of Lantian blocked the floodwater, and the Anling Bank collapsed and blocked the floodwater, causing the water to flow backwards.

古文：五年春三月，诏曰： 盖闻明王之治国也，明好恶而定去就，崇敬让而民兴行，故法设而民不犯，令施而民从。
现代文：五年春三月，下诏说： 常闻明王治国，明确是非标准而供臣民遵循，提倡严谨谦虚并形成社会风气，所以法设而民不犯，令施而民乐从。
English: In the spring and March of the fifth year, the following edict said: It is common knowledge that a clear king rules the country, clarifies the standards for subjects to follow, advocates rigor and modesty, and forms a social ethos. Therefore, the law is set and the people do not commit crimes, so that the people are happy to obey.

古文：今朕获保宗庙，兢兢业业，匪敢解怠，德薄明晻，教化浅微。
现代文：今日朕继承宗庙，兢兢业业，不敢懈怠，而德薄目暗，教化浅微。
English: Today, I inherit the ancestral temple, diligently work, dare not slack off, and the moral is dim, and the enlightenment is shallow.

古文：传不云乎？ 百姓有过，在予一人。 
现代文：《论语》不是说过吗？ 百姓的过失，都应由君临天下的人负责。 
English: Didn't the Analects of Confucius say that all the faults of the people should be taken care of by those who reign over the world?

古文：其赦天下，赐民爵一级，女子百户牛、酒，三老、孝弟、力田帛。 
现代文：现赦免天下，赏赐民爵一级。女子每百户牛酒若干，三老、孝悌力田帛若干。 
English: The whole country is now pardoned and awarded the first class of people's peerage. For women, there is a certain amount of cattle and wine for every hundred households, and a certain amount of Sanro, filial piety and filial piety.

古文：又曰： 方春，农桑兴，百姓戮力自尽之时也，故是月劳农劝民，无使后时。
现代文：诏书又说： 正值春耕与蚕桑时期，是百姓全力以赴的时刻，所以在本月要慰勉农户，不违农时。
English: The edict also said: It is the time of spring ploughing and silkworming, and it is the time for the people to go all out. Therefore, we should comfort farmers this month and not go against the agricultural time.

古文：今不良之吏，覆案小罪，征召证案，兴不急之事，以妨百姓，使失一时之作，亡终岁之功，公卿其明察申敕之。 
现代文：现有不良之吏，为查证小罪，征召证人到署作证。兴生一些不急之事，以妨害百姓，使其贻误农时失去节令，而致秋后无所收获，对此，公卿要认真了解并三令五申，保证不妨害农事。 
English: The existing bad officials, in order to investigate minor crimes, will summon witnesses to the agency to testify. Some non-urgent matters will arise to interfere with the people, causing them to miss the agricultural season and lose the festival, resulting in no harvest after the autumn. For this, the noblemen should seriously understand and make three orders and five appeals to ensure that agricultural affairs are not harmed.

古文：夏六月庚申，复戾园。
现代文：夏六月十七日，恢复戾太子园陵。
English: On the 17th day of the 6th month of the summer, the garden mausoleum of the crown prince was restored.

古文：壬申晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：六月三十日，日偏食。
English: The 28th is the last day of the year, a solar eclipse.

古文：秋七月庚子，复太上皇寝庙园、原庙，昭灵后、武哀王、昭哀后、卫思后园。
现代文：秋七月二十八日，恢复太上皇寝庙园、高祖原庙、昭灵后、武哀王、昭哀后、卫思后园陵。
English: On the 28th day of the 7th month of autumn, the Emperor's mausoleum garden, the original temple of Emperor Gaozhu, the gardens of Empress Zhaoling, Empress Wu'er, Empress Zhaoling and Empress Wei were restored.

古文：竟宁元年春正月，匈奴乎韩邪单于来朝。
现代文：竟宁元年春正月，匈奴呼韩邪单于来朝。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of King Ning, the Xiongnu called Han Yidan to come to the North.

古文：诏曰： 匈奴郅支单于背叛礼义，既伏其辜，乎韩邪单于不忘恩德，乡慕礼义，复修朝贺之礼，愿保塞传之无穷，边垂长无兵革之事。
现代文：下诏说： 匈奴郅支单于背叛礼义，已经伏罪被诛，呼韩邪单于不忘恩德，仰慕大汉礼义，再次修朝贺之礼，愿意保持中原与塞外的长期和睦友好，使边陲长无兵革之祸，可改元为竟宁。
English: The next edict said: The Huns supported the single in the betrayal of propriety and justice, and have been ambushed and killed, called the Han evil single in not forgetting the benevolence, admired the Han propriety and justice, once again performed the morning greeting, and are willing to maintain the long-term harmony and friendship between the Central Plains and Serbia, so that there is no disaster of war, and can be changed to Chongning.

古文：皇太子冠。
现代文：赐单于以待诏掖庭王嫱为其后。 皇太子行冠礼。
English: After the imperial edict and the court edict, the crown prince performed the coronation.

古文：赐列侯嗣子爵五大夫，天下为父后者爵一级。
现代文：赐列侯嗣子之爵为五大夫。天下为父亲的继承人的爵一级。
English: He gave the title of Count to the heir to the throne as the fifth husband. The heir of the father is the first rank in the world.

古文：二月，御史大夫延寿卒。
现代文：二月御史大夫繁延寿去世。
English: In February, Dr. Mishi passed away.

古文：三月癸未，复孝惠皇帝寝庙园、教文太后、孝昭太后寝园。
现代文：三月十四日，恢复惠帝寝庙陵园、孝文太后、孝昭太后寝园。
English: On March 14, the cemetery of Hui Di's sleeping temple, and the sleeping gardens of Empress Dowager Xiaowen and Empress Dowager Xiaozhao were restored.

古文：夏，封骑都尉甘延寿为列侯。
现代文：夏，封骑都尉甘延寿为列侯。
English: In the summer, the feudal equestrian captain, Gan Yanshou, became a vassal lord.

古文：赐副校尉陈汤爵关内侯、黄金百斤。
现代文：赐副校尉陈汤爵关内侯，黄金百斤。
English: He gave Vice-Colonel Chen Tangzhu the title of Guan Nei Hou, and 100 catties of gold.

古文：五月壬辰，帝崩于未央宫。
现代文：五月二十五日，元帝驾崩于未央宫。
English: On May 25, the former emperor passed away at the Miyang Palace.

古文：毁太上皇、孝惠、孝景皇帝庙。
现代文：太上皇、惠帝、景帝庙发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out in the temple of Emperor Taejong, Emperor Hui and Emperor Jing.

古文：罢孝文、孝昭太后、昭灵后、武哀王、昭哀后寝园。
现代文：罢去文帝、昭太后、昭灵后、武哀王、昭哀后寝园。
English: Emperor Wen, Empress Dowager Zhao, Empress Dowager Zhao Ling, King Wu'er and Empress Dowager Zhao Er slept in the garden.

古文：秋七月丙戌，葬渭陵。
现代文：秋七月十九日，葬元帝于渭陵。
English: On the 19th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Emperor Yuan's funeral was held at Fuling.

古文：赞曰：臣外祖兄弟为元帝侍中，语臣曰：元帝多材艺，善史书。鼓琴瑟，吹洞箫，自度曲，被歌声，分节度，穷极幼眇。
现代文：班固评论：臣外祖兄弟曾为元帝侍中，告诉过臣说元帝兴趣广泛，精于书法，会弹琴、吹箫，能按曲谱，为配新词，节拍分明，穷极要妙。
English: Ban Gu's comment: A minister's maternal grandfather's brother was once an attendant of the former emperor. He told the minister that the former emperor had a wide range of interests, was good at calligraphy, could play the piano and the bagpipes, could follow a musical score, match new words, had a clear beat, and was extremely witty.

古文：少而好儒，及即位，征用儒生，委之以政，贡、薛、韦、匡迭为宰相。
现代文：少年即尊崇儒术，及继帝位，征用儒生，委以政事，贡禹、薛广德、韦贤、匡衡等儒生相继为宰相。
English: The boy revered Confucianism, and succeeded to the throne, requisitioned Confucian students, and appointed them to political affairs. Confucian students such as Gong Yu, Xue Guangde, Wei Xian, and Kuang Heng successively served as prime ministers.

古文：而上牵制文义，优游不断，孝宣之业衰焉。
现代文：而元帝为文义所牵制，优柔寡断，宣帝中兴之业遂衰。
English: However, Emperor Yuan was held back by Emperor Wenyi, who was indecisive, and Emperor Xuan's efforts to revive the economy failed.

古文：然宽弘尽下，出于恭俭，号令温雅，有古之风烈。
现代文：然而宽弘尽下，出于恭俭，号令温雅，有古代贤王之遗风。
English: However, out of respect and frugality, Hirohiro tried his best to be gentle, which is a legacy of the ancient wise kings.

