古文：季文子相宣、成，无衣帛之妾，无食粟之马。
现代文：季文子在鲁宣公和鲁成公时担任国相，他的妾不穿丝帛，马匹不喂精料。
English: Ji Wenzi served as minister of state during the reigns of King Lu Xuan and King Lu Chengguo. His concubine did not wear silk stockings, and he did not feed his horses with herbs.

古文：仲孙它谏曰： 子为鲁上卿，相二君矣，妾不衣帛，马不食粟，人其以子为爱，且不华国乎！ 
现代文：仲孙它劝他说： 您是鲁国的上卿，辅佐过两朝国君，妾不穿丝帛，马匹不喂精料，国人恐怕会以为您吝啬，而且国家不也有失体面吗？ 
English: Zhongsun advised him, "You are the high lord of the State of Lu. You have assisted the sovereigns of two dynasties. Your concubine does not wear silk, and you do not feed the horses with delicacies. I am afraid that the people of the State will think that you are stingy, and that the State has lost its dignity.

古文：文子曰： 吾亦愿之，然吾观国人，其父兄之食粗而衣恶者犹多矣，吾是以不敢。
现代文：季文子说： 我也愿意华贵一些啊。但是我看国人中，父兄吃粗粮，穿陋衣的还很多，所以我不敢。
English: "I'd like to be a bit more glamorous, but I see that many of my fellow countrymen and women still eat coarse grains and wear shabby clothes, so I don't dare," said Ji Wenzi.

古文：人之父兄食粗衣恶，而我美妾与马，无乃非相人者乎！
现代文：别人的父兄衣食不丰，而我却优待妾和马匹，这难道是辅佐国君的人该做的吗？
English: Other people's parents and brothers do not have enough food and clothing, but I prefer to treat concubines and horses. Is this what a person who assists the sovereign should do?

古文：且吾闻以德荣为国华，不闻以妾与马。 
现代文：况且我只听说高尚的德行可以为国增光，没有听说过以妾和马匹来夸耀的。 
English: Moreover, I have only heard of noble virtues that can bring glory to the country, and have not heard of anyone boasting of concubines and horses.

古文：文子以告孟献子，献子因之七日。
现代文：季文子把这件事告诉了仲孙它的父亲孟献子。孟献子为此把仲孙它关了七天。
English: Ji Wenzi told Meng Xianzi, the father of the second grandchild, about this. Meng Xianzi locked up the second grandchild for seven days.

古文：自是，子服之妾不过七升之布，马饩不过稂莠。
现代文：从这以后，仲孙它的妾穿的只是粗布，喂马的饲料也只是稗草。
English: From then on, Nakasun and his concubine wore only coarse cloth and fed their horses with nothing but rushes.

古文：文子闻之，曰： 过而能改者，民之上也。 
现代文：季文子知道后说： 有错误而能改正，是人中之俊杰啊。 
English: After knowing this, Ji Wenzi said, "If there is a mistake and you can correct it, you are one of the best people."

古文：使为上大夫。
现代文：于是推荐仲孙它担任上大夫。
English: So he recommended Nakasone to be the chief doctor.

