古文：蹇义，字宜之，巴人，初名瑢。
现代文：蹇义，字宜之，巴人，初名王容。
English: His first name is Wang Rong.

古文：洪武十八年进士。
现代文：洪武十八年中进士，被授予中书舍人。
English: Hongwu is an 18-year-old trainee.

古文：授中书舍人，奏事称旨。帝问： 汝蹇叔后乎？ 
现代文：他奏事很合皇上心意。皇上问道 ：你是蹇叔的后代吗？ 
English: His performance was very much to the Emperor's liking.The Emperor asked, "Are you a descendant of your uncle?"

古文：瑢顿首不敢对。
现代文：蹇王容叩头不敢回答。
English: Wang Rong did not dare to answer.

古文：帝嘉其诚笃，为更名义，手书赐之。
现代文：皇上很喜欢他的诚实，为他改名为义，并亲手写下蹇义之名赐给他。
English: The emperor liked his honesty so much that he changed his name to Yi Yi, and gave him the name Yi Yi in his own handwriting.

古文：满三载当迁，特命满九载，曰： 朕且用义。 
现代文：他任满三年应当升迁，皇上特命满九年后再升，说 ：朕将要用蹇义。 
English: After three years of his appointment, he should be promoted, and after nine years of the emperor's special appointment, he should be promoted again, saying: I am going to use a new meaning.

古文：由是朝夕侍左右，小心敬慎，未尝忤色。
现代文：因此他朝夕侍从皇上左右，小心敬慎，不曾触怒皇上。
English: Therefore, he served the emperor morning and evening, being careful not to offend the emperor.

古文：惠帝既即位，推太祖意，超擢吏部右侍郎。
现代文：惠帝即位后，推测太祖之意，超升蹇义为吏部右侍郎。
English: After Emperor Hui ascended to the throne, it is speculated that the meaning of the great ancestor was that Chao Shengxunyi became the right hand man of the cadre.

古文：是时齐泰、黄子澄当国，外兴大师，内改制度，义无所建明。
现代文：当时齐泰、黄子澄当国，外兴大师，内改制度，蹇义没有提出任何意见。
English: At that time, Qitai, Huang Zicheng as the head of the country, Gao Xingguo as the leader of the external reform, and Xiyi as the leader of the internal reform did not put forward any opinions.

古文：国子博士王绅遗书责之，义不能答。
现代文：国子博士王绅写信去责问他，蹇义无法回答。
English: Wang Sheng, the prince's doctor, wrote to rebuke him, but Zhai Yi was unable to reply.

古文：燕师入，迎附，迁左侍郎。
现代文：燕王的军队入京，蹇义前去归附，升为左侍郎。
English: Yan Wang's army entered Beijing, and Zou Yi went to join them, and was promoted to Zuo Jiro.

古文：数月，进尚书。
现代文：几个月之后，升为尚书。
English: A few months later, he was promoted to Shangshu.

古文：时方务反建文之政，所更易者悉罢之。
现代文：当时正致力于纠正建文时期的政治，凡那时所更改的都全部废除。
English: At that time, efforts were being made to rectify the politics of the Jianwen period, and all the changes made at that time were abolished.

古文：义从容言曰： 损益贵适时宜。
现代文：蹇义从容说道 ：增补贵在适合时宜。
English: Shinyi said calmly, "You can add more when it's appropriate."

古文：前改者固不当，今必欲尽复者，亦未悉当也。 
现代文：先前所改固然不适当，如今一定要全部改回，也未必全部合适。 
English: Of course, the previous changes were not appropriate, but now they must all be changed back, and they may not all be appropriate.

古文：因举数事陈说本末。
现代文：随即他举几件事为例加以说明。
English: He then gave a few examples to illustrate his point.

古文：帝称善，从其言。
现代文：皇上很赞同，听从了他的意见。
English: The Emperor was very much in agreement and heeded his advice.

古文：永乐二年兼太子詹事。
现代文：永乐二年蹇义兼任太子詹事。
English: In the second year of Yongle's reign, he was also appointed as Prince Zhanji.

古文：帝有所传谕太子，辄遣义，能委曲导意。
现代文：皇上有什么要传谕太子，总是派蹇义去，蹇义总能准确地传达皇上的意思。
English: If the emperor has something to tell the crown prince, he always sends Zou Yi. Zou Yi is always able to accurately convey the emperor's meaning.

古文：帝与太子俱爱重之。
现代文：皇上和太子都爱重他。
English: Both the Emperor and the Crown Prince hold him in high regard.

古文：七年，帝巡北京，命辅皇太子监国。
现代文：七年，皇上巡幸北京，命蹇义辅佐皇太子监国。
English: In the seventh year, the Emperor went on a tour of Beijing, assisted by the Crown Prince, the Supervisor of the State.

古文：义熟典故，达治体，军国事皆倚办。
现代文：蹇义熟悉典故，长于把握根本，军国大事都倚仗他办理。
English: Yan Yi is familiar with allusions, and is good at grasping the fundamentals. Military and national affairs all rely on him to handle.

古文：时旧臣见亲用者，户部尚书夏原吉与义齐名，中外称曰 蹇、夏 。
现代文：当时受到亲用的前朝旧臣中，户部尚书夏原吉和蹇义齐名，中外官民称他们为 蹇、夏 。
English: Among the former vassals of the former emperor who were personally used at that time, the head of the household, Shangshu Xia Yuanji, and Zhai Yi were equally famous. Chinese and foreign officials and people called them Zhai and Xia.

古文：满三考，帝亲宴二人便殿，褒扬甚至。
现代文：三年任满后，皇上亲自在便殿设宴招待他们，并高度赞扬了他们。
English: At the end of their three-year term of office, the Emperor himself held a banquet for them at the Temple of Convenience and praised them highly.

古文：数奉命兼理他部事，职务填委，处之裕如。
现代文：蹇义多次奉命兼管其他部的事务，职务纷集，但他处之裕如。
English: Xinyi was repeatedly ordered to take charge of the affairs of other departments, and the duties were piled up, but he had no shortage of opportunities.

古文：十七年以父丧归，帝及太子皆遣官赐祭。
现代文：十七年因父亲去世回家，皇上和太子都派官员赐祭。
English: Seventeen years after his father's death, when he returned home, the emperor and the crown prince both sent officials to offer sacrifices.

古文：诏起复。
现代文：诏令他出来供职。
English: The imperial edict was issued to start the double-time clock.

古文：十九年，三殿灾，敕廷臣二十六人巡行天下。
现代文：十九年，三殿失火，敕令二十六名廷臣巡行天下。
English: In 1919, the Third Palace caught fire, and the Emperor ordered twenty-six courtiers to parade around the country.

古文：义及给事中马俊分巡应天诸府，问军民疾苦，黜文武长吏扰民者数人，条兴革数十事奏行之。
现代文：蹇义和给事中马俊分巡应天等府，询问军民疾苦，废黜了几名骚扰百姓的文武长吏，还提出数十项应兴革的事情，上奏实行。
English: In order to solve the problems, Ma Jun made a tour to various prefectures including Yingtian, inquired about the hardships of the military and the people, deposed several civil and military officials who harassed the people, and also proposed dozens of things that should be carried out in response to the revolution.

古文：还治部事。
现代文：回来后他治理本部事务。
English: After returning, he managed the affairs of the headquarters.

古文：明年，帝北征还，以太子曲宥吕震婿主事张鹤朝参失仪，罪义不匡正，逮义系锦衣卫狱。
现代文：第二年，皇上北征回来，因为太子曲意宽宥吕震的女婿主事张鹤参见失仪之过，便怪罪蹇义不进行匡正，将他逮捕，关进锦衣卫监狱。
English: The following year, when the emperor returned from the Northern Expedition, he was arrested and imprisoned in Jin Rongwei Prison because the crown prince, Qu Rong, wanted to pardon Lv Zhen's son-in-law, Zhang He, who had presided over the misconduct, and blamed him for not carrying out rectification.

古文：又明年春得释。
现代文：到第二年的春天蹇义才获释。
English: He was not released until the spring of the following year.

古文：仁宗即位，义、原吉皆以元老为中外所信。
现代文：仁宗即位后，蹇义、夏原吉都因是元老而为中外所信赖。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Ninsong, Shunyi and Hahara Kichido were trusted by people at home and abroad because they were elders.

古文：帝又念义监国时旧劳，尤厚倚之。
现代文：皇上又念蹇义辅佐监国时的旧劳，对他尤为倚重。
English: The emperor also remembered the old labor of Yixing Yifu as the supervisor of the country, and he was particularly concerned about him.

古文：首进义少保，赐冠服、象笏、玉带，兼食二禄。
现代文：他首先进封蹇义为少保，赐给冠服、象笏、玉带，并享受二职俸禄。
English: He was the first to be awarded the title of "Junior Protector" and was given a crowned robe, an elephant skullcap, and a jade belt. He also enjoyed a second-class salary.

古文：历进少师，赐银章一，文曰 绳愆纠缪 。
现代文：蹇义又历升为少师，受银章一枚，上刻 绳愆纠缪 。
English: Xinyi was promoted to the rank of junior teacher, and received a silver medal with the inscription "绳 entwined."

古文：已，复赐玺书曰： 曩朕监国，卿以先朝旧臣，日侍左右。
现代文：其后，又赐给他玺书说： 先前朕监国时，卿以先朝旧臣，每天在左右侍候。
English: Later, he was also given a copy of the letter, which said: "When I was in charge of the country, every day I had to wait on my lord and former vassal.

古文：两京肇建，政务方殷，卿劳心焦思，不恤身家，二十余年，夷险一节。
现代文：两京刚建，政务正繁，卿劳心焦思，不顾身家，前后二十余年，多次挽救危难。
English: The two capitals had just been built, government affairs were in full swing, the emperor was working hard and anxious, regardless of his wealth, for more than 20 years, he repeatedly saved people from danger.

古文：朕承大统，赞襄治理，不懈益恭。
现代文：朕继承大统后，卿赞佐治理，毫不松懈，而且更加恭谨。
English: After I succeeded to the throne, Sir Zanzo governed the country with no let-up, and with even more respect.

古文：朕笃念不忘，兹以已意，创制 蹇忠贞印 赐卿。俾藏于家，传之后世，知朕君臣共济艰难，相与有成也。 
现代文：这些朕都深念不忘，兹以自己之意，创制 蹇忠贞印 一枚赐予爱卿，望卿藏于家中，传给后世，知道朕君臣共济艰难，共同做出了成就。 
English: I have never forgotten these things. Therefore, at my own request, I created the Seal of Loyalty and Chastity. It was given to Aikyo, while Bokyo hid it at home and passed it on to future generations. Knowing that we, the lords and the ministers, had to help each other in difficult times, we made achievements together.

古文：时惟杨士奇亦得赐 贞一 印及敕。
现代文：当时只有杨士奇也得赐给 贞一 印和敕书。
English: At that time, only Yang Shiqi also had to give Zhenyi a seal and an imperial edict.

古文：寻命与英国公辅及原吉同监修《太宗实录》。
现代文：不久命蹇义和英国公张辅以及夏原吉一同监修《太宗实录》。
English: Soon after his death, Shunyi supervised "Taizong Shitsuroku" together with the British official Zhang Fu and Xia Yuanji.

古文：义视原吉尤重厚，然过于周慎。
现代文：蹇义比夏原吉尤为忠厚，但过于周慎。
English: Shanyi is more loyal than Haruharu Kichiro, but he is too cautious.

古文：士奇尝于帝前谓义曰： 何过虑？ 
现代文：杨士奇曾在皇上面前对蹇义说 ：为什么过于忧虑？ 
English: Yang Shichi once said to Zhai Yi in front of the emperor: "Why worry too much?

古文：义曰： 恐卤莽为后忧耳。 
现代文：蹇义说 ：恐怕因为卤莽而留有后患而已。 
English: Zhai Yi said: I'm afraid it's just the aftermath of being reckless.

古文：帝两是之。
现代文：皇上对两人的意见都赞同。
English: The Emperor agreed with both of them.

古文：杨荣尝毁义。
现代文：杨荣曾诋毁蹇义。
English: Yang Rong once slandered Sun Yat-sen.

古文：帝不直荣。
现代文：皇上觉得杨荣不正直。
English: The emperor felt that Yang Rong was not honest.

古文：义顿首言： 荣无他。
现代文：蹇义叩头说道 ：杨荣没有别的意思。
English: "Yang Rong didn't mean anything else," said Zhai Yi's flunky.

古文：即左右有谗荣者，愿陛下慎察。 
现代文：如果左右有诬陷杨荣的人，愿陛下慎重考察。 
English: If there are people around who are framing Yang Rong, may His Majesty carefully investigate.

古文：帝笑曰： 吾固弗信也。 
现代文：皇上笑道 ：我本不信他的话。 
English: The Emperor laughed and said, "I didn't believe him."

古文：宣宗即位，委寄益重。
现代文：宣宗即位后，对蹇义的委寄更重。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xuan Zong, his devotion to Zeng Yi became even stronger.

古文：时方修献陵，帝欲遵遗诏从俭约，以问义、原吉。二人力赞曰： 圣见高远，出于至孝，万世之利也。 
现代文：当时正修建献陵，皇上想遵从遗诏要俭约，便问蹇义和夏原吉，两人极力赞扬说 ：圣见高远，又出于至孝，此万世之利也。 
English: At that time, the mausoleum was being built, and the emperor wanted to be frugal in accordance with his last will and testament, so he asked Shunyi and Natsuhara no Kichi. The two praised him, saying, "You have a lofty view of the sacred, and out of filial piety, this is also a benefit for all eternity."

古文：帝亲为规画，三月而陵成，宏丽不及长陵，其后诸帝因以为制。
现代文：皇上亲自规划，三个月后陵墓建成，它不如长陵那么宏丽，其后的各个皇帝都参照献陵的规制。
English: The emperor planned it himself, and the mausoleum was built three months later. It is not as magnificent as the Changling Mausoleum, and all subsequent emperors have referred to the regulations for the dedication of the mausoleum.

古文：迨世宗营永陵，始益崇侈云。
现代文：后来世宗营建永陵，才更加崇尚侈华。
English: Later, when Shizong built Yongling, he became even more adamant about luxury.

古文：帝征乐安，义、原吉及诸学士皆从，预军中机务，赐鞍马甲胄弓剑。
现代文：皇上征乐安时，蹇义、夏原吉以及各个学士都随从，参预军中机务，被赐给鞍马甲胄和弓剑。
English: During the Emperor's enlistment of Le'an, Shunyi, Xia Yuanji and all the scholars followed, participated in the preparatory army, and were given armor and swords.

古文：及还，赉予甚厚。
现代文：回来后，皇上赐予非常丰厚。
English: After his return, the emperor gave him a very generous pension.

古文：三年从巡边还。
现代文：三年蹇义随从皇上巡边回来。
English: Three years later, Shunyi returned from the emperor's inspection tour.

古文：帝以义、原吉、士奇、荣四人者皆已老，赐玺书曰： 卿等皆祖宗遗老，畀辅朕躬。
现代文：皇上因蹇义、夏原吉、杨士奇、杨荣四人都已老了，赐给他们玺书说： 卿等都是祖宗的遗老，辅佐朕躬。
English: The four emperors, Ying Zhaoyi, Xia Yuanji, Yang Shiqi, and Yang Ronglu, were all old, and he gave them an imperial edict saying, "You are all the elders of your ancestors, so assist me."

古文：今黄发危齿，不宜复典冗剧，伤朝廷优老待贤之礼。
现代文：现在已是黄发危齿，不宜再让你们处理冗繁的事务，从而有伤朝廷优老待贤之礼。
English: Now that your teeth are at risk of yellowing, it is no longer appropriate to let you deal with tedious matters, thereby injuring the courtesy of the Imperial Court.

古文：可辍所务，朝夕在朕左右讨论至理，共宁邦家。官禄悉如旧。 
现代文：你们可以放下所管的事务，朝夕在朕左右讨论至理，共同维持国家的安宁，官衔和俸禄都照旧。 
English: You can put aside the affairs you are in charge of, discuss the truth with me in the morning and evening, and jointly maintain the peace of the country. The official title and salary are still the same.

古文：明年，郭琎代为尚书。
现代文：第二年，郭代蹇义任为尚书。
English: In the following year, Guo Daibongyi was appointed as Shangshu.

古文：寻以胡濙言，命义等四人议天下官吏军民建言章奏。
现代文：不久因胡氵荧的建议，皇上命蹇义等四人讨论天下官吏和军民的章奏和建议。
English: Soon, at the suggestion of Hu Yufu, four people, including the emperor's emissary Zong Yi, discussed the situation and suggestions of the world's officials and military and civilians.

古文：复赐义银章，文曰 忠厚宽宏 。
现代文：赐给蹇义银章，上刻 忠厚宽宏 。
English: He was given a silver medal with the inscription "Loyal, Generous" on it.

古文：七年诏有司为义营新第于文明门内。
现代文：七年诏令有关部门在文明门内为蹇义修建新的宅第。
English: In 1997, the relevant departments were ordered to build a new residence for Shanyi inside the civilized gate.

古文：英宗即位，斋宿得疾。遣医往视，问所欲言。
现代文：英宗即位后，蹇义因斋戒得病，皇上派医生去探视，并问他有什么话要说。
English: After Emperor Yingzong ascended the throne, Zhai Yi fell ill due to fasting. The emperor sent a doctor to visit him and asked him if he had anything to say.

古文：对曰： 陛下初嗣大宝，望敬守祖宗成宪，始终不渝耳。 
现代文：蹇义说 ：陛下刚继承大位，惟望敬守祖宗成宪，始终不渝。 
English: Zou Yi said, "Your Majesty has just succeeded to the throne, and I hope that you will continue to respect your ancestors and the Constitution.

古文：遂卒，年七十三。
现代文：说完他便去世了，终年七十三岁。
English: With these words he died, aged seventy-three.

古文：赠太师，谥忠定。
现代文：赠太师，谥忠定。
English: He was given the title of Grand Master by Emperor Taizong.

古文：义为人质直孝友，善处僚友间，未尝一语伤物。
现代文：蹇义为人质朴正直，仁孝并忠于朋友，善于处理与同僚朋友的关系，不曾一语伤人。
English: Xing Yi is a simple and honest person. He is kind and filial and loyal to his friends. He is good at handling relationships with colleagues and friends. He has never said a word to hurt others.

古文：士奇常言： 张咏之不饰玩好，傅尧俞之遇人以诚，范景仁之不设城府，义兼有之。 
现代文：杨士奇曾说： 张咏的不近玩好，傅尧俞的待人以诚，范景仁的不设城府，蹇义兼而有之。 
English: Yang Shichi once said: Zhang Ye is not only good at playing, Fu Ye treats people with sincerity, Fan Jingren does not set up a city government, but also has a sense of justice.

古文：子英，有诗名，以荫为尚宝司丞，历官太常少卿。夏原吉，字维喆，其先德兴人。
现代文：夏原吉，字维喆，祖先是德兴人。
English: Natsuhara no Kichi, also known as Uiwaki, is a descendant of the Dexing people.

古文：父时敏，官湘阴教谕，遂家焉。
现代文：父亲夏时敏，任湘阴县教谕官，遂在那里成家定居。
English: His father, Xia Shimin, was an education official in Xiangyin County, and the family settled there.

古文：原吉早孤，力学养母。
现代文：原吉早年丧父，他致力于学问，以赡养母亲。
English: Harakichi lost his father at an early age, and he devoted himself to learning in order to support his mother.

古文：以乡荐入太学，选入禁中书制诰。
现代文：获乡荐进入太学，被选入宫中书写制诰。
English: He was recommended by his hometown to enter Taigaku and was elected to the palace as a scribe.

古文：诸生或喧笑，原吉危坐俨然。
现代文：有时太学生们大声喧笑，原吉却端坐不动。
English: Sometimes the students laugh too loudly, but Harukichi doesn't move.

古文：太祖诇而异之。
现代文：太祖看见后觉得他很不平凡。
English: My great-grandfather thought he was extraordinary when he saw him.

古文：擢户部主事。
现代文：升任户部主事。
English: Promoted to the head of the household department.

古文：曹务丛脞，处之悉有条理，尚书郁新甚重之。
现代文：原吉所在的部门事务繁琐，但他都处理得井井有条，尚书郁新很赏识他。
English: The affairs of the department where Harayoshi works are cumbersome, but he handles them all in an orderly manner. Ikuharu Shosho appreciates him very much.

古文：有刘郎中者，忌其能。
现代文：有个刘郎中，忌妒他的才能。
English: He had a younger brother, Liu Lang, who was jealous of his talent.

古文：会新劾诸司怠事者。
现代文：正好郁新弹劾各部门中办事懒惰的人。
English: It's time to impeach the slackers in every department.

古文：帝欲宥之，新持不可。
现代文：皇上想宽宥他们，郁新坚持说不行。
English: The emperor wanted to pardon them, but Ikushin insisted that he could not.

古文：帝怒，问： 谁教若？ 
现代文：皇上火了，问道： 这是谁教你的？ 
English: The emperor was enraged and asked: Who taught you this?

古文：新顿首曰： 堂后书算生。 
现代文：郁新叩头说 ：是堂后的书算生。 
English: Iku Shin kowtowed and said, "It's the math student from the back of the class."

古文：帝乃下书算生于狱。
现代文：皇上于是将书算生逮进监狱。
English: The emperor then arrested the student and put him in prison.

古文：刘郎中遂言： 教尚书者，原吉也。 
现代文：刘郎中便说 ：教尚书的是夏原吉。 
English: Liu Langzhong said, "It was Xia Yuanji who taught Shangshu."

古文：帝曰： 原吉能佐尚书理部事，汝欲陷之耶！ 
现代文：皇上说 ：原吉能够帮助尚书处理本部事务，你想陷害他吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "Haruyoshi can help Shangshu handle the affairs of the headquarters, do you want to frame him?"

古文：刘郎中与书算生皆弃市。
现代文：结果刘郎中和书算生都被处死，暴尸街头。
English: As a result, Liu Langzhong and Shusan Sheng were both put to death, leaving a trail of corpses in the streets.

古文：建文初，擢户部右侍郎。
现代文：建文初年，升任户部右侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Kenmon era, he was promoted to the position of the right hand man of the household.

古文：明年充采访使。
现代文：第二年充任采访使。
English: The following year, he was appointed as a press attaché.

古文：巡福建，所过郡邑，核吏治，咨民隐。
现代文：巡视福建时，所过郡县乡邑，都检查吏治好坏，询问百姓疾苦。
English: During the inspection tour of Fujian, all the counties, counties and townships visited were inspected for the quality of officials and inquired about the hardships of the people.

古文：人皆悦服。
现代文：人们都很高兴和敬佩。
English: People are happy and admiring.

古文：久之，移驻蕲州。
现代文：不久，移驻蕲州。
English: Soon, he moved to Zhangzhou.

古文：成祖即位，或执原吉以献。
现代文：成祖即位后，有人抓住原吉献给他。
English: After the enthronement of the founder, someone seized the original yakitori and offered it to him.

古文：帝释之，转左侍郎。
现代文：皇上将他释放，转任左侍郎。
English: The Emperor released him, and he was transferred to the position of Left Attendant.

古文：或言原吉建文时用事，不可信。
现代文：有人说原吉在建文帝时曾受重用，不可信任。
English: Some people say that Genji was heavily used during the reign of Emperor Jianwen and cannot be trusted.

古文：帝不听，与蹇义同进尚书。
现代文：皇上不听，将他和蹇义一起升为尚书。
English: The emperor didn't listen and promoted him to Shoshu along with Shunyi.

古文：偕义等详定赋役诸制。
现代文：原吉和蹇义等人详细制定了赋税徭役等制度。
English: Harakichi and Shinyi et al. worked out a detailed system of tax collection.

古文：建白三十余事，皆简便易遵守。
现代文：他提出三十多项建议，都简便而容易遵守。
English: He made more than thirty suggestions, all simple and easy to follow.

古文：曰： 行之而难继者，且重困民，吾不忍也。 
现代文：他说 ：政策颁行后如果难以继续下去，将会加重人民的困苦。这是我不愿意看到的。 
English: He said: "If it is difficult to continue the policy after it is implemented, it will increase the hardships of the people. This is something I do not want to see."

古文：浙西大水，有司治不效。
现代文：浙西发大水，有关官员治理得不得力。
English: Large-scale floods have occurred in western Zhejiang, and the relevant officials have been unable to control the situation.

古文：永乐元年，命原吉治之。寻命侍郎李文郁为之副，复使佥都御史俞士吉赍水利书赐之。
现代文：永乐元年命原吉前往治理，不久又命侍郎李文郁做他的副手，派佥都御史俞士吉带水利书籍赐给他。
English: In the first year of Yongle Emperor Yongle ordered Hara no Kichi to govern the province, and soon after, he ordered his attendant Li Wenyu to be his deputy, and sent Koto no Miishi Yoshitaka to give him books on water conservancy.

古文：原吉请循禹三江入海故迹，浚吴淞下流，上接太湖，而度地为闸，以时蓄泄。
现代文：原吉请沿着大禹所开的三江入海的故道，疏浚吴淞江下游，上接于太湖，然后，量地建闸，按季节不同开闭闸门。
English: Harakichi, please follow the ancient path of the Sanjiang River into the sea opened by Dayu, dredge the lower reaches of the Wuyi River, and connect it to the Taihu Lake, and then build the gate according to the quantity, and open and close the gate according to the season.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：役十余万人。原吉布衣徒步，日夜经画。
现代文：原吉动用十几万民工，他身穿布衣，徒步往返，日夜经划，盛夏也不张伞盖。
English: Harakichi mobilized more than a hundred thousand migrant workers. He wore cloth clothes, walked back and forth on foot, traveled day and night, and did not open an umbrella cover in midsummer.

古文：盛暑不张盖，曰： 民劳，吾何忍独适。 
现代文：他说 ：人民很劳苦，我怎忍独自贪图舒适？ 
English: He said: "The people are very hardworking, how can I bear to seek comfort on my own?

古文：事竣，还京师，言水虽由故道入海，而支流未尽疏泄，非经久计。
现代文：工程竣工后回京，他说水虽然已由故道入海，但支流还没有全部疏通，还不是长久之计。
English: After returning to Beijing after the completion of the project, he said that although the water has entered the sea from the old road, but the tributaries have not been completely dredged, it is not a long-term solution.

古文：明年正月，原吉复行，浚白茆塘、刘家河、大黄浦。
现代文：第二年正月，原吉再次前往浙西，疏浚了白茆塘、刘家河、大黄浦。
English: In the first month of the second year, Harakichi went to western Zhejiang again and dredged Baiyuntang, Liujiahe, and Dahuangpu.

古文：大理少卿袁复为之副。
现代文：大理寺少卿袁复做他的副手。
English: Yuan Fu, the Junior Secretary of Dali Temple, became his deputy.

古文：已，复命陕西参政宋性佐之。
现代文：不久，皇上又派陕西参政宋性辅助他。
English: Soon after, the emperor sent Song Zheng, a politician from Shaanxi Province, to assist him.

古文：九月工毕，水泄，苏、松农田大利。
现代文：九月工程完工，流水畅通，苏州、松江一带农田获得大利。
English: In September, the project was completed, the water flowed smoothly, and the farmland around Suzhou and Songjiang was improved.

古文：三年还。
现代文：三年回京。
English: He returned to Kyoto three years later.

古文：其夏，浙西大饥。命原吉率俞士吉、袁复及左通政赵居任往振，发粟三十万石，给牛种。
现代文：这年夏，浙西发生严重饥荒，皇上命原吉率领俞士吉、袁复和左通政赵居任前往赈济。他们发放三十万石粮食，并供给饥民耕牛和种子。
English: In the summer of that year, a severe famine occurred in western Zhejiang Province. By order of the emperor, Yuan Ji led Shiji, Yuan Fu, and Zuo Tong Zheng Zhao Ju Ren to Lijiang, where they distributed 300,000 koku of grain and provided starving people with cattle and seeds.

古文：有请召民佃水退淤田益赋者，原吉驰疏止之。
现代文：有人请招徕百姓佃耕大水退后的淤田，原吉急速传疏反对。
English: Some people asked the villagers to plough the silted fields after the flood waters receded, but Harakichi opposed the idea.

古文：姚广孝还自浙西，称原吉曰： 古之遗爱也。 
现代文：姚广孝从浙西回来，称赞原吉说： 他真有上古仁爱之心。 
English: Yao Guangxiao returned from West Zhejiang and praised Yuanji, saying: He really has the heart of benevolence.

古文：亡何，郁新卒，召还，理部事。
现代文：没多久，郁新去世，原吉被召回，代理部事。
English: Not long after, Ikuharu died, and Harakichi was recalled to the acting ministry.

古文：首请裁冗食，平赋役；严盐法、钱钞之禁；清仓场，广屯种，以给边苏民，且便商贾。
现代文：他首先请裁减过多的供给，减轻赋税徭役，严申食盐和钱钞方面的禁令，清理仓库货场，推广屯田种养，以供给边防，减轻人民负担，同时也方便商人。
English: First of all, he asked for the reduction of excessive supply, the reduction of tax collection, the strict enforcement of the ban on salt and banknotes, the clearing of warehouses, the promotion of farmland cultivation to supply border defense, and the reduction of the burden on the people, as well as the convenience of merchants.

古文：皆报可。
现代文：答复都说可行。
English: All replied in the affirmative.

古文：凡中外户口、府库、田赋赢缩之数，各以小简书置怀中，时检阅之。
现代文：凡各地的户口、府库、田税增减的数目，他都用小本子记好，带在身上，随时查阅。
English: He used a small notebook to keep track of all the increases and decreases in the number of hukou, prefectural treasury, and rice field tax in various regions. He carried it with him and checked it at any time.

古文：一日，帝问： 天下钱、谷几何？ 
现代文：一天，皇上问天下钱粮有多少，原吉回答得很详尽，为此他更受器重。
English: One day, the emperor asked how much money and grain there was in the world, and Harukichi gave a very detailed answer, which made him even more respected.

古文：对甚悉，以是益重之。当是时，兵革初定，论 靖难 功臣封赏，分封诸藩，增设武卫百司。
现代文：当时，战争刚刚结束，皇上给参加 靖难 的功臣封赏，分封藩王，增设武卫百司。
English: At that time, the war had just ended, and the emperor rewarded the meritorious vassals who had taken part in the Battle of Yasunan, divided the rewards among the lords of the domain, and added hundreds of military guards.

古文：已，又发卒八十万问罪安南、中官造巨舰通海外诸国、大起北都宫阙。
现代文：不久又发兵八十万向安南问罪，命宦官监造巨舰通使海外各国，在北京大造宫室。
English: Soon, he sent 800,000 soldiers to interrogate Annan, and ordered the eunuch to supervise the construction of a huge ship and send it to overseas countries to build a palace in Beijing.

古文：供亿转输以钜万万计，皆取给户曹。
现代文：这些事项，供应转输的财物都以数万万计，全由户部支出。
English: All of these items, as well as the supply and transfer of property, amount to tens of millions of dollars, all of which are spent by the Household Department.

古文：原吉悉心计应之，国用不绌。
现代文：原吉都尽心筹划，保证了国家各项开支。
English: Hara-Kichido made every effort to plan and ensure the state's various expenses.

古文：六年命督军民输材北都，诏以锦衣官校从，治怠事者。
现代文：六年，皇上命原吉监督军民将木材运往北京，又派锦衣卫官校随从，惩治怠工的人。
English: In the sixth year, the emperor ordered Harukichi to supervise the military and civilians to transport the wood to Beijing, and also sent an attendant from the Jin Yi Guards Officer School to punish the slackers.

古文：原吉虑犯者众，告戒而后行，人皆感悦。
现代文：原吉担心违犯的人太多，便事先告诫他们，然后再出发，人们都非常感激他。
English: Harakichi was worried that there would be too many violators, so he warned them in advance before setting off. People were very grateful to him.

古文：七年，帝北巡，命兼摄行在礼部、兵部、都察院事。
现代文：七年，皇上北巡，命原吉兼理行在所礼部、兵部和都察院事务。
English: In the seventh year, the emperor was on a tour of the north, and he ordered Yoshikane Hara to be in charge of the ceremonial department, the military department, and the imperial court.

古文：有二指挥冒月廪，帝欲斩之。
现代文：有两个指挥冒领月薪，皇上想处死他们。
English: The emperor wanted to execute two conductors who had dared to accept a monthly salary.

古文：原吉曰： 非律也，假实为盗，将何以加？ 
现代文：原吉说 ：这不合法，假如他们真的是盗贼，又将怎样处理他们呢？ 
English: Harakichi said, "This is illegal. If they really are thieves, how will they be dealt with?"

古文：乃止。
现代文：皇上这才罢了。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：八年，帝北征，辅太孙留守北京，总行在九卿事。
现代文：八年，皇上北征，原吉辅佐太孙留守北京，总管行在所九卿事务。
English: In the eighth year of the emperor's Northern Expedition, the former Kievo Sadaison stayed in Beijing, and was in charge of the affairs of nine emperors.

古文：时诸司草创，每旦，原吉入佐太孙参决庶务。
现代文：当时各部门刚刚创建，每天早上，原吉进去辅佐太孙处理各项事务。
English: At that time, the various departments had just been created, and every morning, Harakichi went in to assist Taison in dealing with various matters.

古文：朝退，诸曹郎御史环请事。
现代文：退朝后，各部的郎官和御史又围上来请示。
English: After the Emperor's abdication, retainers and officials from various ministries gathered again to ask for instructions.

古文：原吉口答手书，不动声色。
现代文：原吉一边回答一边手批，不动声色。
English: As he answers, Harakichi waves his hand dismissively.

古文：北达行在，南启监国，京师肃然。
现代文：北自行在所，南达京师，人们都对他肃然起敬。
English: North Korea is self-ruled, while South Korea is ruled by Beijing. People hold him in high esteem.

古文：帝还，赐钞币、鞍马、牢醴，慰劳有加。寻从还南京，命侍太孙周行乡落，观民间疾苦。
现代文：皇上回来后，赐给他钞币、鞍马、牛酒，厚加慰劳，不久随皇上回南京，受命侍从太孙周游乡里村落，考察民间疾苦。
English: After the emperor's return, he was given banknotes, a pommel horse, and cow's wine as a consolation. He soon returned to Nanjing with the emperor and was ordered to travel around the countryside and villages with the great-grandson to investigate the hardships of the people.

古文：原吉取齑黍以进，曰： 愿殿下食此，知民艰。 
现代文：原吉拿了一些粘黄米粉进呈给太孙，说： 请殿下将它吃了，以了解百姓生活的艰辛。 
English: Harakichi took some sticky yellow rice flour and presented it to his great-grandson, saying, "Please, Your Highness, eat it to understand the hardships of the people's lives."

古文：九载满，与蹇义皆宴便殿，帝指二人谓群臣曰： 高皇帝养贤以贻朕。
现代文：九年任满，皇上在便殿设宴，款待原吉和蹇义等人，皇上指着两人对群臣说： 高皇帝培养贤才留给我使用。
English: At the end of his nine-year tenure, the emperor held a banquet in the hall to entertain the likes of Harukichi and Shunyi. Pointing to the two men, the emperor said to his courtiers: Emperor Gao left the cultivation of talent to me.

古文：欲观古名臣，此其人矣。 
现代文：各位想看古代名臣，这两位便是。 
English: If you want to see ancient dignitaries, these two are it.

古文：自是屡侍太孙，往来两京，在道随事纳忠，多所裨益。
现代文：此后原吉多次侍从太孙，往来于南北两京，途中还随事献上忠言，使太孙获得很多助益。
English: After that, Harakichi served his great-grandson many times, traveling between the north and south of the two capitals. On the way, he also offered his advice, so that his great-grandson received a lot of help.

古文：十八年，北京宫室成，使原吉南召太子、太孙。
现代文：十八年，北京的宫室建成，皇上派原吉南下召太子和太孙北上。
English: In the 18th year, the imperial palace in Beijing was completed, and the emperor sent the former Jinan to summon the prince and the great-grandson to the north.

古文：既还，原吉言： 连岁营建，今告成。
现代文：回来后，原吉说： 经过多年营建，现在终于大功告成。
English: After returning, Harakichi said, "After years of construction, now the great work has finally been completed.

古文：宜抚流亡，蠲逋负以宽民力。 
现代文：应该安抚流亡在外的人，免除拖欠的各项征收，使人民得以休养生息。 
English: It is necessary to appease the exiles, exempt them from the collection of arrears, and enable the people to recuperate and live.

古文：明年，三殿灾，原吉复申前请，亟命所司行之。
现代文：第二年，三殿失火，原吉重申从前的请求。皇上马上命有关部门推行。
English: The following year, when the third hall of the Imperial Palace caught fire, Harukichi reiterated his previous request. The Emperor immediately ordered the relevant departments to carry it out.

古文：初以殿灾诏求直言，群臣多言都北京非便。
现代文：当初，皇上因三殿失火下诏求直言，群臣大都说迁都北京不便。
English: At first, the emperor asked for a direct answer under the imperial edict due to the fire in the third hall, and most of the courtiers said that it was inconvenient to move the capital to Beijing.

古文：帝怒，杀主事萧仪，曰： 方迁都时，与大臣密议，久而后定，非轻举也。 
现代文：皇上大怒，杀死主事萧仪，说道： 当初要迁都时，曾与大臣们秘密讨论过，很久才确定下来，并不是轻率决定的。 
English: The emperor flew into a rage, killed the person in charge, Xiao Yi, and said: At first, when the capital was to be moved, there were secret discussions with the ministers, and it took a long time to decide, and it was not a decision made lightly.

古文：言者因劾大臣。
现代文：言官借机弹劾大臣。
English: The government official took the opportunity to impeach the minister.

古文：帝命跪午门外质辨。
现代文：皇上命他们都跪在午门外辩论。
English: By the Emperor's command, they all knelt down and debated outside the gate.

古文：大臣争詈言者，原吉独奏曰： 彼应诏无罪。
现代文：大臣们都骂言官，原吉却唯独上奏说： 他们响应诏令而提出自己的意见，没有犯罪。
English: The ministers all scolded the speaker, but Harakichi was the only one to speak up and say: They did not commit a crime by responding to the edict and putting forward their own opinions.

古文：臣等备员大臣，不能协赞大计，罪在臣等。 
现代文：臣等一帮凑数的大臣，不能协同辅佐国家大事，应当有罪。 
English: If a group of ministers who have made up a number of ministers cannot work together to assist national affairs, they should be guilty.

古文：帝意解，两宥之。
现代文：皇上怒意消了，将双方都宽恕了。
English: The emperor lost his temper and forgave both sides.

古文：或尤原吉背初议。
现代文：有人指责原吉违背初衷。
English: Some people accused Harakichi of going against his original intention.

古文：曰： 吾辈历事久，言虽失，幸上怜之。
现代文：原吉说 ：我们这些人任职很久了，虽然言语有失，侥幸皇上能够原谅。
English: Harakichi said, "We have been in office for a long time, and although we have made mistakes in our speech, fortunately the Emperor can forgive us.

古文：若言官得罪，所损不细矣。 
现代文：如果言官得罪，那损失就不小了。 
English: If the spokesman offends, the loss is not small.

古文：众始叹服。
现代文：众人这才佩服。
English: This is what people admire.

古文：原吉虽居户部，国家大事辄令详议。
现代文：原吉虽然任户部尚书，国家大事总是被皇上召去详加议论。
English: Although Harakichi was in charge of household affairs, he was always summoned by the emperor to discuss important national events in detail.

古文：帝每御便殿阙门，召语移时，左右莫得闻。
现代文：皇上每次御临便殿门口，总是召原吉来谈话，常常忘了时间，左右的人都不得听闻。
English: Every time the emperor came to the door of the Imperial Palace, he always invited Harukichi to talk to him. He often forgot the time, and people around him were not allowed to listen.

古文：退则恂恂若无预者。
现代文：原吉退下后，总是恭恭敬敬的，就像什么都没有参预一样。
English: After Harakichi retreated, he was always respectful, as if nothing had happened.

古文：交阯平，帝问： 迁官与赏孰便？ 
现代文：讨平交趾后，皇上问升官与赏赐哪样便利。
English: After settling the dispute, the emperor asked what was the advantage of the promotion and the reward.

古文：对曰： 赏费于一时，有限；迁官为后日费，无穷也。 
现代文：原吉回答说 ：赏赐费用只是一次，是有限的；而升官后的费用，则是无限的。 
English: Harakichi replied, "The reward fee is a one-time fee, which is limited, but the fee after promotion is unlimited.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：西域法王来朝，帝欲郊劳，原吉不可。
现代文：有西域法王来朝见，皇上想到郊外去慰劳他，原吉说不行。
English: When the Western Regions Karmapa came to see the emperor, the emperor wanted to go to the suburbs to console him, but Harukichi said that was not possible.

古文：及法王入，原吉见，不拜。
现代文：到法王入宫后，原吉见而不拜。
English: After His Holiness entered the palace, Harakichi did not bow when he saw him.

古文：帝笑曰： 卿欲效韩愈耶？ 
现代文：皇上笑着说 ：爱卿想效法韩愈吗？ 
English: The emperor smiled and said, "Does Emperor Ai want to follow Han Yu's example?"

古文：山东唐赛儿反，事平，俘胁从者三千余人至。
现代文：山东唐赛儿造反，被平定以后，有三千多胁从者被俘来京。
English: After the rebellion of Tang Xie Er in Shandong Province was suppressed, more than three thousand of his followers were captured and brought to Beijing.

古文：原吉请于帝，悉原之。
现代文：原吉请求皇上，将他们全放了。
English: At the emperor's request, Harakichi released them all.

古文：谷王叛，帝疑长沙有通谋者。
现代文：谷王逪反叛，皇上怀疑长沙有人参与阴谋。
English: Gu Wangtao rebelled and the emperor suspected that someone in Changsha was involved in the conspiracy.

古文：原吉以百口保之，乃得寝。
现代文：原吉以全家一百条人命做担保，这事才得以平息。
English: It was only when Harakichi pledged the lives of 100 members of his family as collateral that the matter was settled.

古文：十九年冬，帝将大举征沙漠。命原吉与礼部尚书吕震、兵部尚书方宾、工部尚书吴中等议，皆言兵不当出。
现代文：十九年冬，皇上将要大举远征沙漠，命原吉与礼部尚书吕震、兵部尚书方宾、工部尚书吴中等人一起讨论，都说不宜出兵。
English: In the winter of the 19th year, the emperor was about to embark on a large-scale expedition to the desert. Mihara Yoshihito, together with people from the Ministry of Ceremonies, Shangshu Lucheng, the Ministry of Military Affairs, Shangshu Fangbin, and the Ministry of Industry, Shangshu Wu, all said that it was not appropriate to send troops.

古文：未奏，会帝召宾，宾力言军兴费乏，帝不怿。
现代文：他们还没有上奏，正好皇上召见方宾，方宾极力说兴兵的费用不足。
English: They had not yet begun to play, and it so happened that the emperor summoned Fang Bing, who insisted that the expenses for raising an army were insufficient.

古文：召原吉问边储多寡，对曰： 比年师出无功，军马储蓄十丧八九，灾眚迭作，内外俱疲。
现代文：皇上很不高兴，召原吉来问边防储备情况，原吉回答说： 连年出兵，都无功而返，军马储备已损失了十分之八九，加上灾荒不断发生，现在已经内外交困了。
English: The emperor was very displeased and summoned Harakichi to inquire about the state of the border defense reserves. Harakichi replied, "We have sent troops out year after year without any results. We have lost eighty-nine tenths of our horse reserves. In addition, natural disasters continue to occur. We are now in a difficult situation both domestically and internationally."

古文：况圣躬少安，尚须调护，乞遣将往征，勿劳车驾。 
现代文：况且您圣体欠安，还需要调养，就请遣将出征，不要劳动车驾了。 
English: Moreover, if your health is not good and you still need to be nursed back to health, please be sent to the front and do not drive a work vehicle.

古文：帝怒，立命原吉出理开平粮储。
现代文：皇上大怒，立即命令原吉出去治理开平的粮食储备。
English: The emperor was furious and immediately ordered Harukichi to go and manage Kaiping's grain reserves.

古文：而吴中入对如宾言，帝益怒。
现代文：而吴中进去所说的也和方宾一样。
English: But when Wu Zhong went in, he said the same thing as Fang Bin.

古文：召原吉系之内官监，并系大理丞邹师颜，以尝署户部也。
现代文：皇上更加愤怒，将原吉召回，关进内官监，并将大理寺丞邹师颜也关押起来，理由是他曾代理户部事。
English: The emperor was even more furious and recalled Harukichi to the court and put him under house arrest. He also imprisoned Dairi-ji Chojun Shiyan on the grounds that he had been in charge of the household affairs.

古文：宾惧自杀。
现代文：方宾惧而自杀。
English: Fang Bing was afraid and committed suicide.

古文：遂并籍原吉家，自赐钞外，惟布衣瓦器。
现代文：皇上于是抄原吉的家，除赐给的钞币外全部没收，只剩下布衣和坛坛罐罐。
English: The emperor then raided Harukichi's home, confiscating everything except the money he had given him, leaving only the cloth and the jars.

古文：明年北征，以粮尽引还。
现代文：第二年皇上北征，因粮尽而返。
English: In the second year, the emperor went on the Northern Expedition, but returned because of food shortages.

古文：已，复连岁出塞，皆不见敌。
现代文：其后，又连年出塞，但都不见敌人。
English: After that, they went out of the blockage for years, but did not see the enemy.

古文：还至榆木川，帝不豫，顾左右曰： 夏原吉爱我。 
现代文：在回到榆木川时，皇上病危，对左右的人说： 夏原吉爱护我。 
English: When he returned to Zhangmu River, the emperor was critically ill and said to the people around him, "Naharakichi, take care of me."

古文：崩闻至之三日，太子走系所，呼原吉，哭而告之。
现代文：皇上逝世的消息传到后三天，太子跑到关押原吉的地方，呼喊原吉，哭着告诉了他。
English: Three days after the news of the emperor's death, the prince ran to the place where Harukichi was being held, called out to Harukichi, and told him in tears.

古文：原吉伏地哭，不能起。
现代文：原吉哭倒在地，许久不能起来。
English: Harakichi fell to the ground crying and couldn't get up for a long time.

古文：太子令出狱，与议丧礼，复问赦诏所宜。
现代文：太子令他出狱，商议丧礼事宜，又问赦免诏书该写些什么。
English: The prince released him from prison, discussed the funeral arrangements, and asked what should be written in the pardon.

古文：对以振饥、省赋役、罢西洋取宝船及云南、交阯采办诸道金银课。
现代文：原吉回答说要赈济饥民，减省赋役，停罢下西洋的取宝船以及向云南、交趾地区各道采办金银。
English: Harakichi replied that he would feed the hungry, reduce the number of provincial officials, stop the treasure-hunting ships from the West, and purchase gold and silver from various provinces in Yunnan and Jiaozuo.

古文：悉从之。
现代文：太子全听从了。
English: All agreed to the reductions.

古文：仁宗即位，复其官。
现代文：仁宗即位后，恢复原吉的官衔。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, the official title of Genji was restored.

古文：方原吉在狱，有母丧，至是乞归终制。
现代文：当原吉还在狱中时，母亲去世了，这时他请求回家守孝。
English: When Harukichi's mother died while he was still in prison, he asked to return home to be a good son.

古文：帝曰： 卿老臣，当与朕共济艰难。
现代文：皇上说： 您是老臣，应当与我共济艰难。
English: The emperor said, "You are an old minister, you should help me in this difficult time."

古文：卿有丧，朕独无丧乎？ 
现代文：您有丧事，难道我就没有吗？ 
English: You've had a bereavement, haven't I?

古文：厚赐之，令家人护丧，驰传归葬，有司治丧事。
现代文：皇上给他优厚的赏赐，命他家人护丧，用驿车送回去下葬，又令有关官员治理丧事。
English: The emperor gave him a generous reward, ordered his family to take care of the funeral, sent him back in a carriage for burial, and ordered the relevant officials to manage the funeral.

古文：原吉不敢复言。
现代文：原吉不敢再说什么。
English: Harakichi didn't dare to say anything.

古文：寻加太子少傅。
现代文：不久加封为太子少傅。
English: He was soon given the title of Crown Prince Junior Master.

古文：吕震以太子少师班原吉上，帝命鸿胪引震列其下。
现代文：吕震是太子少师，朝拜班次在原吉之上，皇上命鸿胪寺将他列在原吉之下。
English: Lv Zhen is the prince's young teacher, and the pilgrimage schedule is above the original good luck, and the emperor ordered Hongyu Temple to list him below the original good luck.

古文：进少保，兼太子少傅、尚书如故，食三禄。
现代文：进封少保，仍兼太子少傅、尚书，享受三职俸禄。
English: When he was promoted to the rank of Shobo, he was still concurrently the prince's Shofu and Shoshu, and enjoyed the salary of the three positions.

古文：原吉固辞，乃听辞太子少傅禄。
现代文：原吉极力推辞，皇上允许他辞去太子少傅俸禄。
English: Harakichi tried his best to refuse, but the emperor allowed him to resign from the position of crown prince.

古文：赐 绳愆纠缪 银章，建第于两京。
现代文：赐给 绳愆纠缪 银章，并在南北两京建府第给他。
English: He bestowed the Silver Medal of the Order of the Silver Star on Zhou Enmu, and built prefectures for him in the two capitals of China.

古文：已而仁宗崩，太子至自南京。
现代文：不久仁宗逝世，太子从南京北上。
English: Soon after, Emperor Nanzong died, and the crown prince moved north from Nanjing.

古文：原吉奉遗诏迎于卢沟桥。
现代文：原吉奉遗诏到卢沟桥迎接。
English: In accordance with his last wishes, Harakichi went to Lugou Bridge to greet them.

古文：宣宗即位，以旧辅益亲重。
现代文：宣宗即位后，原吉作为先朝重臣更受敬重。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xuanzong, Harukichi became even more respected as a senior vassal of the previous emperor.

古文：明年，汉王高煦反，亦以 靖难 为辞，移檄罪状诸大臣，以原吉为首。
现代文：第二年，汉王高煦造反，也以 靖难 作为借口，檄文列举了各大臣的罪状，原吉排在第一个。
English: The following year, Emperor Gaozong of Han rebelled, also using Jingnan as an excuse. The imperial edict listed the crimes of each minister, and Harakichi was the first.

古文：帝夜召诸臣议。
现代文：皇上晚上召大臣们来商议。
English: In the evening, the emperor summoned his ministers to discuss the matter.

古文：杨荣首劝帝亲征。
现代文：杨荣首先劝皇上亲征。
English: First of all, Yang Rong advised the emperor to personally lead the expedition.

古文：帝难之。
现代文：皇上很为难。
English: The Emperor was in great perplexity.

古文：原吉曰： 独不见李景隆已事耶？
现代文：原吉说 ：您难道不知道李景隆的故事吗？
English: Harakichi said, "Don't you know the story of Li Jinglong?"

古文：臣昨见所遣将，命下即色变，临事可知矣。
现代文：臣昨天见到所派遣的将领，命令才下脸色就变了，临事就可想而知了。
English: When the minister saw the dispatched generals yesterday, his face changed as soon as the order was given. You can imagine what happened next.

古文：且兵贵神速，卷甲趋之，所谓先人有夺人之心也。荣策善。 
现代文：而且兵贵神速，卷起盔甲，快步前进，正可以先声夺人。杨荣的计策好。 
English: Moreover, Yang Rong's tactic of rolling up his armor and marching forward at a fast pace was a good one.

古文：帝意遂决。
现代文：皇上遂下了决心。
English: The emperor finally made up his mind.

古文：师还，赉予加等，赐阍者三人。
现代文：回师后，皇上加倍赏赐，赐给守门人三名。
English: After returning to his teacher, the emperor doubled the reward and gave it to three gatekeepers.

古文：原吉以无功辞。不听。
现代文：原吉以无功推辞，皇上不听。
English: The Emperor did not listen to Harakichi's futile excuses.

古文：三年，从北巡。
现代文：宣德三年，原吉随皇上北巡。
English: In the third year of Emperor Xuande's reign, Harukichi accompanied the emperor on a tour of the north.

古文：帝取原吉橐糗尝之，笑曰： 何恶也？ 
现代文：皇上拿过原吉袋里的干粮尝了尝，笑着说 ：怎么这么难吃？ 
English: The emperor took the dried grain in the original Yoshibukuro, tasted it, and said with a smile, "How come it tastes so bad?"

古文：对曰； 军中犹有馁者。 
现代文：原吉答道 ：军中还有挨饿的呢。 
English: Harakichi replied, "There are still people starving in the army."

古文：帝命赐以大官之馔，且犒将士。
现代文：皇上命赐给他大官吃的美食，并犒赏将士。
English: It was the emperor's will to give him the delicacies eaten by dignitaries, and to reward generals.

古文：从阅武兔儿山，帝怒诸将慢，褫其衣。
现代文：随从皇上在兔儿山阅兵，将领们动作太慢，皇上大怒，脱下他们的衣服。
English: Accompanying the emperor on a military parade in Tuxer Mountain, the generals were moving too slowly, and the emperor was furious and took off their clothes.

古文：原吉曰： 将帅，国爪牙，奈何冻而毙之？ 
现代文：原吉说： 将帅，是国家的栋梁，怎能将他们冻死？ 
English: Harakichi said: Generalissimo, is the backbone of the country, how can they freeze to death?

古文：反覆力谏。
现代文：他又反复极力谏阻。
English: He repeatedly and strenuously resisted.

古文：帝曰： 为卿释之。 
现代文：皇上说： 看在您的面上将他们放了。 
English: The emperor said: Let them go, for your sake.

古文：再与蹇义同赐银印，文曰： 含弘贞靖。 
现代文：原吉又与蹇义一起获赐银印，上面刻着 含弘贞靖 。
English: Harakichi was also given a silver seal together with Shinyi, which was engraved with "Han Hong Zhengying."

古文：帝雅善绘事，尝亲画《寿星图》以赐。
现代文：皇上雅善绘画，曾亲手画了一幅《寿星图》赐给原吉。
English: The Emperor Yasunaga, who was fond of painting, once hand-painted a "Lifespan Chart" to give to Harukichi.

古文：其他图画、服食、器用、银币、玩好之赐，无虚日。
现代文：皇上所赐的其他图画、衣物食品、器皿用具、银币和玩好之物，几乎每天都有。
English: Other pictures, clothes, food, utensils, silver coins and toys given by the emperor are available almost every day.

古文：五年正月，两朝实录成，复赐金币、鞍马。
现代文：五年正月，两朝《实录》修成，皇上又赐给金币、鞍马。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, the "True Record" of the two dynasties was completed, and the emperor also gave gold coins and a pommel horse.

古文：旦入谢，归而卒，年六十五。
现代文：天明入宫谢恩，回来后去世，终年六十五岁。
English: Shane entered the palace at dawn, and died after his return, aged sixty-five.

古文：赠太师，谥忠靖。
现代文：赠太师，谥忠靖。
English: He was given the title of Grand Master by Emperor Taizong.

古文：敕户部复其家，世世无所与。
现代文：敕令户部免除他家的赋税徭役，并且以后世代都不再征收。
English: He ordered the head of the household to exempt his family from paying taxes, and the taxes would not be levied on future generations.

古文：原吉有雅景，人莫能测其际。
现代文：原吉度量宽宏，人们都不能测其深浅。
English: Harakichi's measurement is broad, and people can't measure its depth.

古文：同列有善，即采纳之。或有小过，必为之掩覆。
现代文：同事有好的建议，他马上采纳；别人有小错，必定为之掩盖。
English: If a colleague has a good suggestion, he will adopt it immediately; if someone else has a small mistake, he will cover it up.

古文：吏污所服金织赐衣。原吉曰： 勿怖，污可浣也。 
现代文：有个小吏曾把皇上赐给他的金丝衣服弄脏了，原吉说： 不要害怕，脏了可以洗嘛。 
English: A minor official once soiled the gold-threaded clothes given to him by the emperor, and Harukichi said, "Don't be afraid, you can wash it if it's dirty."

古文：又有污精微文书者，吏叩头请死。
现代文：又有个小吏把一本精微文书弄污损了，小吏叩头请求将他处死。
English: There was also a minor official who defaced a delicate document, and the minor official kowtowed and asked to be put to death.

古文：原吉不问，自入朝引咎，帝命易之。
现代文：原吉却不向他问罪，自己去见皇上，承认过错，皇上命人给他换了一本。
English: However, Harakichi did not accuse him, but went to see the emperor himself and admitted his mistake. The emperor ordered someone to give him a new copy.

古文：吕震尝倾原吉。震为子乞官，原吉以震在 靖难 时有守城功，为之请。
现代文：吕震曾经排挤原吉，后来吕震为儿子求官，原吉因他在 靖难 时守城有功，便帮他请官。
English: Lv Zhen once ousted Geng Ji, and later Lv Zhen asked Geng Ji for a post for his son. Because Geng Ji had done a good job in defending the city during the Great Patriotic War, Lv Zhen helped him to get a post.

古文：平江伯陈瑄初亦恶原吉，原吉顾时时称瑄才。
现代文：平江伯陈蠧当初也不喜欢原吉，原吉却常常称赞他的才能。
English: At first, Pingjiang Mayor Chen Wei didn't like Harakichi either, but Harakichi often praised his talent.

古文：或问原吉： 量可学乎？ 
现代文：有人问原吉 ：人的度量可以学吗？ 
English: Someone asked Harakichi: Is it possible to learn how to measure people?

古文：曰： 吾幼时，有犯未尝不怒。
现代文：原吉说 ：我小的时候，别人冒犯我，我未尝没有发怒过。
English: Harakichi said, "When I was a child, if someone offended me, I never lost my temper.

古文：始忍于色，中忍于心，久则无可忍矣。 
现代文：后来先在外表上忍住不怒，再后来又在心里忍住，久而久之就没什么要忍的了。 
English: Later, I first held back my anger on the outside, and then held it back in my heart. After a while, there was nothing to hold back.

古文：尝夜阅爰书，抚案而叹，笔欲下辄止。
现代文：他曾在夜间批阅文书，抚案叹息，执笔难下。
English: He used to approve documents at night, fidgeting and sighing as he struggled to write.

古文：妻问之。曰： 此岁终大辟奏也。 
现代文：妻子问他，他说 ：这是年终大案的奏章。 
English: When his wife asked him about it, he said, "It's a year-end recital."

古文：与同列饮他所，夜归值雪，过禁门，有欲不下者，原吉曰： 君子不以冥冥堕行。 
现代文：与同事在外饮酒，晚上回来时正赶上下雪，经过禁门时，有的人不想下车。原吉说 ：君子不以在冥冥之中降低做人的准则。 
English: He and his colleagues were out drinking, and when he came back in the evening, it was snowing. When he passed the forbidden gate, some people didn't want to get off the bus. Harakichi said, "A gentleman doesn't lower his standards in the middle of things."

古文：其慎如此。
现代文：他就是这么谨慎。
English: That's how careful he is.

古文：原吉与义皆起家太祖时。
现代文：原吉和蹇义都是在太祖时起家。
English: Both Harakichi and Shinyi started their families at the time of the great-grandfather.

古文：义秉铨政，原吉筦度支，皆二十七年，名位先于三杨。
现代文：蹇义主持选官，原吉掌管财政，都长达二十七年之久，名位早于三杨。
English: Shanyi presided over the selection of officials, and Harakichi was in charge of finance, both of which lasted for 27 years, which was earlier than Sanyang.

古文：仁、宣之世，外兼台省，内参馆阁，与三杨同心辅政。
现代文：仁宗和宣宗时期，他外兼台省，内参馆阁，与三杨一起同心辅政。
English: During the period of Emperor Renzong and Emperor Xuanzong, he was concurrently the governor of Taiwan Province, and he was also a member of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of China. Together with Sanyang, he played a supporting role in politics.

古文：义善谋，荣善断，而原吉与士奇尤持大体，有古大臣风烈。
现代文：蹇义长于出谋划策，杨荣长于临事果断，而原吉与士奇尤长于顾全大局，具有古代大臣的作风和功绩。
English: Zhai Yi is good at making plans and suggestions, Yang Rong is good at making decisions, and Yuan Ji and Shiji are especially good at taking care of the overall situation, with the style and achievements of ancient ministers.

古文：子瑄，以荫为尚宝司丞。
现代文：儿子蠧，获父荫任为尚宝司丞。
English: His son, Hao, was appointed by his father to the post of Shang Bao Jie.

古文：喜谈兵。景泰时，数上章言兵事，有沮者，不获用。
现代文：他喜好谈兵，景泰时，曾多次上书论军事，因有人反对，没被采用。
English: He liked to talk about the military, and when he was in Jingtaishi, he repeatedly wrote about the military, but was not adopted due to objections.

古文：终南京太常少卿。
现代文：最后任至南京太常寺少卿。
English: He was finally appointed to the post of Shokei (Junior Secretary) of Nanjing Taizhoji Temple.

