古文：维王不豫，于五日召周公旦，曰： 呜呼，敬之哉！
现代文：武王生病，于初五日告诉周公旦说：啊呀，要重视它啊!
English: When King Wu fell ill, he told Zhou Gongdan on the fifth day of the first lunar month, saying, "Oh, you should pay attention to it!

古文：昔天初降命于周，维在文考，克致天之命。
现代文：从前上天开始降命给周，是在先父文王之时，文王能得到上天之命。
English: Heaven began to give orders to Zhou a long time ago. It was during the time of his father, King Wen, that King Wen was able to receive Heaven's orders.

古文：汝维敬哉！先后小子，勤在维政之失。
现代文：你要认真辅助太子诵，勤察为政的失误。
English: You should conscientiously assist the crown prince in reciting, and diligently observe the mistakes of the government.

古文：政有三机、五权，汝敬之哉。
现代文：为政有三机、五权，你要认真研究它啊。
English: For politics, there are three organs and five powers. You should seriously study it.

古文：克中无苗，以保小子于位。
现代文：要能持中不偏，无务细微末节，以确保太子在位。
English: It is necessary to be able to hold the middle and not be biased, and there is no need for fine details to ensure that the crown prince is in power.

古文： 三机：一疑家，二疑德，三质士。
现代文：三机是：一，与家族背离；二，不合道德；三，不学无术。
English: The three machines are: one, deviating from the family; two, unethical; three, uneducated.

古文：疑家无授众，疑德无举士，直士无远齐。
现代文：背离家族者不让他管理众人，违背道德者不举荐他任事，不学无术者不委以重任。唉，重视它啊!
English: Those who have deviated from the family will not let him manage the people, those who have violated morality will not recommend him to be in charge, and those who have not learned or practiced will not entrust him with important tasks. Alas, attach importance to it!

古文：吁，敬之哉！
现代文：天命没有定准，要认真审察三机。
English: There is no predestined destiny, so we must carefully examine the three machines.

古文：天命无常，敬在三机。五权：一曰地，地以权民；二曰物，物以权官；三曰鄙，鄙以权庶；四曰刑，刑以权常；五曰食，食以权爵。
现代文：五权：一是土地，土地用以调控人口；二是事务，事务用以调控官员；三是都邑，都邑用以调控城镇居民；四是刑法，刑法用以调控赏赐；五是俸禄，俸禄用以调控爵位。
English: Five powers: First, land, land is used to regulate population; second, affairs, affairs are used to regulate officials; third, capital cities, capital cities are used to regulate urban residents; fourth, criminal law, criminal law is used to regulate rewards; fifth, salary, salary is used to regulate peerage.

古文：不承括食不宣，不宣授臣。
现代文：不遵守法令，就不发俸禄。
English: If they do not comply with the law, they will not be paid.

古文：极赏则淈，淈得不食。
现代文：过度赏赐则财用屈竭；财用屈竭就不得食用。
English: Excessive reward is financial exhaustion; financial exhaustion is not edible.

古文：极刑则仇，仇至乃别，鄙庶则奴，奴乃不灭。
现代文：过度施刑就会结仇，结仇过深会反叛。都邑之外人作为奴婢，奴婢才不会灭绝。
English: Excessive punishment will lead to revenge, and excessive revenge will lead to rebellion. It is only when people from outside the capital are treated as slaves and maidservants that slaves and maidservants will not become extinct.

古文：国大则骄，骄乃不给，官庶则荷，荷至乃辛。
现代文：封国太多就会自满，自满就不会奉上。官多了就事物繁多，多得过分就烦碎了。
English: If there are too many fukoku, there will be complacency, and complacency will not be served. If there are too many officials, there will be too many things, and if there are too many things, there will be boredom.

古文：物庶则爵，乃不和。
现代文：事情多就杂乱，杂乱了就不和谐。
English: The more things there are, the more disorder there is, and the more disorder there is, the more disharmony there is.

古文：地庶则荒，荒则聂。
现代文：土地多就会荒芜，荒芜了就令人担心。
English: More land will become barren, and if it becomes barren, there is cause for concern.

古文：人庶则匮，匮乃匿。
现代文：人多了就会溃散，溃散就会逃亡。唉，重视它啊。
English: The more people there are, the more they scatter, and the more they scatter, the more they flee. Alas, pay attention to it.

古文：呜呼，敬之哉！汝慎和，称五权，维中是以，以长小子于位，实维永宁。 
现代文：你要认真协调衡量五权，用得适中，以抚养太子在位，实际上就有永久的安宁。 
English: You must carefully coordinate and measure the five powers, use them appropriately, and raise the prince on the throne, in fact, there will be permanent peace.

