古文：岛夷萧衍，字叔达，亦晋陵武进楚也。
现代文：岛夷萧衍，字叔达，也是晋陵武进的楚人。
English: Shimaishi Xiaoyan, also known as Shuda, was also a Chu man from Jinling Wujin.

古文：父顺之，萧赜光禄大夫。
现代文：萧衍的父亲萧顺之，是萧赜的光禄大夫。
English: Xiao Yan's father, Xiao Shunzhi, was Xiao Yao's doctor.

古文：衍少轻薄有口辩，历王俭卫军府户曹属，累迁为萧鸾黄门侍郎、太子中庶子。
现代文：萧衍年轻时为人轻薄而有口才，曾任王俭卫军府户曹属，后来接连升任萧鸾的黄门侍郎、太子中庶子。
English: When he was young, Xiao Yan was a light-hearted and eloquent person. He was once a member of the Cao family of Wang Jianwei's military headquarters, and later he was successively promoted to Xiao Yan's Huangmen waiter and the prince's middle child.

古文：太和二十二年，高祖南伐，诏诸军围襄阳，衍时率众来援，为武卫将军宇文福所破，单骑走免。
现代文：太和二十二年，高祖征讨南方，令诸军围攻襄阳，萧衍当时率领部众前来救援，被武卫将军宇文福打败，单骑逃走得以幸免。
English: In the 22nd year of the Taihe era, Gao Zu's expedition to the south led the armies to besiege Yangyang. At that time, Xiao Yan led the troops to come to the rescue. He was defeated by Wuwei General Yu Wenfu and escaped on horseback.

古文：萧鸾末，出为辅国将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：萧鸾在位的末年，萧衍被任命为辅国将军、雍州刺史。
English: In the last years of Xiao Yu's reign, Xiao Yan was appointed as the general of the auxiliary state and the crown prince of Yongzhou.

古文：鸾死，子宝卷立，杀衍兄懿，遣巴西、梓潼二郡太守刘山阳西上，声云之郡，实令袭衍。
现代文：萧鸾死后，他的儿子萧宝卷即位，他杀死了萧衍的哥哥萧懿，派巴西、梓潼二郡太守刘山阳率兵西上，名义上说是去到郡上任，实际是令他袭击萧衍。
English: After Xiao Yu's death, his son Xiao Baowan ascended to the throne. He killed Xiao Yu, Xiao Yan's elder brother, and sent Liu Shanyang, the governor of the Second County of Brazil and Zizhou, to the west, nominally to take office in the county, but actually to attack Xiao Yan.

古文：山阳至荆州，为萧颖胄所杀。
现代文：刘山阳到达荆州，被萧颖胄所杀。
English: Liu Shanyang arrived in Jingzhou and was killed by Xiao Yingyao.

古文：景明二年，衍乃与颖胄推宝卷弟荆州刺史宝融为主，号年中兴，举兵伐宝卷。
现代文：景明二年，萧衍就与萧颖胄共同推举萧宝卷的弟弟荆州刺史萧宝融为主，定年号为中兴，举兵讨伐萧宝卷。
English: In the second year of the Jingming Dynasty, Xiao Yan and Xiao Yingqi jointly nominated Xiao Baorong, the younger brother of Xiao Baorong, to be the chief of Jingzhou Jishi Xiao Baorong. The year of appointment was fixed as Zhongxing, and troops were raised to fight against Xiao Baorong.

古文：其年十二月，克建业，杀宝卷及其妻子。
现代文：这一年十二月，他们攻占了建业，杀死萧宝卷和他的妻子儿女。
English: In December of that year, they captured Jianye, killing Xiao Baotan and his wife and children.

古文：衍为大司马、录尚书事、扬州刺史，建安郡公，邑万户。
现代文：萧衍被授任为大司马、录尚书事、扬州刺史，封为建安郡公，食邑万户。
English: Xiao Yan was awarded the title of grand steward, recorder of records, and historian of Yangzhou, the title of Jian'an County official, and the title of food town of 10,000 households.

古文：三年，又自为相国、扬州牧，封十郡为梁王。
现代文：景明三年，萧衍又自任为相国、扬州牧，封邑十郡，号为梁王。
English: In the third year of the reign of King Jingming, Xiao Yan appointed himself as the Yangzhou Patriarch, the Yangzhou Patriarchate, and the ten counties of the fief. His name was Liang Wang.

古文：衍寻僭立，自称曰梁，号年天监。
现代文：萧衍不久就僭即皇帝之位，自称国号为梁，定年号为天监。
English: Xiao Yan soon ascended to the throne of the emperor, claiming the country name as Liang and the year name as Tianjing.

古文：五月，扬州小岘戍主党法宗袭衍大岘戍，破之，擒其龙骧将军邾菩萨送京师。
现代文：这一年五月，扬州小岘戍主党法宗带兵袭击萧衍的大岘戍，将其攻破，擒获他的龙骧将军邾菩萨，把他送至京师。
English: In May of the same year, Yangzhou Xiaojuan's main party leader, Fuzong, led an army to attack Xiao Yan's Dazhao, broke through it, captured his Longjing general, Zou Bodhisattva, and sent him to Beijing.

古文：衍又遣将张嚣寇扬州，州军击破之，斩二千余级。
现代文：萧衍又派他的部将张嚣侵犯扬州，扬州守军把他打败，斩首二千余级。
English: Xiao Yan also sent his general Zhang Rong to invade Yangzhou. Yangzhou's defenders defeated him and beheaded more than two thousand people.

古文：四年三月，扬州刺史、任城王澄遣长风戍主奇道显攻衍阴山戍，破之，斩其龙骧将军、都亭侯梅兴祖；仍攻白藁戍，又破之，斩其宁朔将军吴道爽等，获数千级。
现代文：景明四年三月，扬州刺史、任城王元澄派遣长风戍主奇道显攻打萧衍的阴山戍，把它攻占，斩了他的龙骧将军、都亭侯梅兴祖；接着又攻打白藁戍，又把它攻占，斩了他的宁朔将军吴道爽等人，斩首数千级。
English: In March of the 4th year of the Jingming Dynasty, the Yangzhou assassin, the king of the city, Yuancheng, dispatched the long-winded warlord, Qi Daoxian, to attack Xiao Yan's Yin Shan, capture it, and behead his dragon general, Du Ting Hou Meixing Zu; then attack the egret, capture it again, and behead his Ningshuo general, Wu Daoshuang, and others, beheading thousands of levels.

古文：衍又遣其徐州长史潘伯怜屯军淮陵，徐州刺史司马明素又据九山，澄遣军并击破之，斩伯怜，擒明素。
现代文：萧衍又派他的徐州长史潘伯怜屯军淮陵，徐州刺史司马明素又据守九山，任城王元澄派军队将他们一并击破，斩了潘伯怜，生擒司马明素。
English: Xiao Yan also sent his governor of Xuzhou, Spen Bo Rietun's army to Huairing, and the governor of Xuzhou, Sima Mingsu, also guarded Jiushan. The king of Rencheng, Yuancheng, sent his army to defeat them together, beheading Spen Bo Rietun and beheading Sima Mingsu.

古文：衍将吴子阳寇白沙，中山王英大破之，擒斩千数。
现代文：萧衍部将吴子阳侵犯白沙，中山王元英将其打败，俘虏、斩杀一千多人。
English: Xiao Yanbu invaded Baisha with Wu Ziyang, and Zhongshan Wang Yuanying defeated him, capturing and killing more than a thousand people.

古文：衍梁州刺史平阳县开国侯翟远、徐州刺史、永昌县开国侯陈虎牙来降。
现代文：萧衍的梁州刺史平阳县开国侯翟远、徐州刺史永昌县开国侯陈虎牙前来归降。
English: Xiao Yan's Liangzhou prince Pingyang County and Yongchang County prince Chen Huya came to surrender.

古文：正始元年正月，衍将赵祖悦屯据东关，江州刺史陈伯之击破之。
现代文：正始元年正月，萧衍部将赵祖悦屯据东关，江州刺史陈伯之领兵攻击将其打败。
English: At the beginning of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of

古文：二月，衍将姜庆真袭陷寿春外郭，州军击走之。
现代文：二月，萧衍部将姜庆真袭击寿春并攻陷外城，被州军攻击而败走。
English: In February, Xiao Yan attacked Jiang Qingzhen and captured the outer city of Shouchun, but was attacked by the state army and defeated.

古文：中山王英围衍钟离。
现代文：中山王元英围攻萧衍所属的钟离。
English: Zhongshan Wang Yuanying besieged Zhongli, which belonged to Xiao Yan.

古文：衍遣冠军张惠绍率众军送粮于钟离，任城王澄遣统军王足、刘思祖邀击于邵阳，大破之，生擒惠绍，并其骁骑将军祁县阳开国男赵景悦等十将，斩获数千级。
现代文：萧衍派冠军将军张惠绍率领众军往钟离运送粮草，任城王元澄派统军王足、刘思祖在邵阳进行阻击，大败敌军，生擒张惠绍，以及他的骁骑将军祁阳县开国男赵景悦等十员将领，斩首数千级。
English: Xiao Yan sent the champion general Zhang Huishao to lead the army to transport grain and grass to Zhongli. Rencheng Wang Yuancheng sent the unified army Wang Foot and Liu Sizu to block the enemy in Shaoyang, and defeated the enemy army. Zhang Huishao, and his cavalry general Zhao Jingyue, the founding father of Shenyang County, and other ten generals, beheaded thousands of people.

古文：惠绍，衍舅子也。
现代文：张惠绍，是萧衍舅舅的孩子。
English: Zhang Huishao is the child of Xiao Yan's uncle.

古文：衍乃移书求之，朝议欲示威怀，遂听惠绍等还。
现代文：萧衍就派人送来文书请求释放他，朝廷计议要显示大魏的声威与恩德，就放张惠绍等人回还。
English: Xiao Yan sent someone to send a letter to request his release, and the imperial court, intending to show the prestige and benevolence of the Great Wei Dynasty, released Zhang Huishao and others.

古文：三月，元英破衍将王僧炳于樊城。
现代文：三月，元英在樊城打败萧衍部将王僧炳。
English: In March, Yuan Ying defeated Xiao Yanbe's general Wang Sengyu in Handan.

古文：八月，英又攻衍义阳，克之，破衍将马仙琕，擒其冠军将军蔡灵恩等十余将。
现代文：八月，元英又出兵攻打萧衍的义阳并将其攻占，大败萧衍部将马仙鴘，擒获他的冠军将军蔡灵恩等十多个将领。
English: In August, Yuan Ying again sent troops to attack Xiao Yan's Yiyang and captured it. He defeated Xiao Yan's general Ma Xianqian and captured his champion general Cai Ling'en and more than ten other generals.

古文：九月，衍霍州刺史田道龙、义州刺史张宗之遣使内附。
现代文：九月，萧衍的霍州刺史田道龙、义州刺史张宗之派遣使者前来请求归附朝廷。
English: In September, emissaries sent by Xiao Yan's Huzhou vassal Tian Daolong and Yizhou vassal Zhang Zong came to request to be annexed to the imperial court.

古文：十二月，衍梁秦二州行事夏侯道迁据汉中内附，诏尚书邢峦率众赴之。
现代文：十二月，萧衍所属梁、秦二州行事夏侯道迁凭据汉中归附朝廷，皇帝令尚书邢峦率军前往汉中。
English: In December, Xia Hou, a member of the Liang and Qin dynasties, moved his capital to Hanzhong, which was annexed by the imperial court. The emperor ordered Shang Shuxuan to lead the army to Hanzhong.

古文：二年四月，峦频破衍军，遂入剑阁，执其辅国将军范始男送京师。
现代文：正始二年四月，邢峦频频击破萧衍的军队，于是进入剑阁，捉住他的辅国将军范始男把他押送到京师。
English: At the beginning of April of the second year, Gong frequently defeated Xiao Yan's army, so he entered Jiange, caught his auxiliary general Fan Shixiong and sent him to Beijing.

古文：峦又遣统军王足破衍诸将，斩其辅国将军冯文豪等。
现代文：邢峦又派统军王足打败萧衍的将领，斩了他的辅国将军冯文豪等人。
English: Yao also sent the unified army Wang Zu to defeat Xiao Yan's generals and beheaded his auxiliary general Feng Wenhao and others.

古文：六月，衍遣将王超宗寇边，扬州刺史薛真度大破之，俘斩三千级。
现代文：六月，萧衍派他的部将王超宗进犯边境，扬州刺史薛真度大破敌军，俘虏斩杀三千人。
English: In June, Xiao Yan sent his general Wang Chao Zong to attack the border. Yangzhou's general Xue Zhendu defeated the enemy army and killed 3,000 prisoners.

古文：七月，王足又大破衍众，斩其秦梁二州刺史鲁方达、王明达等三十余将，俘虏二千五百人。
现代文：七月，王足又大败萧衍部众，斩了他的秦、梁二州刺史鲁方达、王明达等三十多员将领，俘虏二千五百人。
English: In July, Wang Jie again defeated the Xiao Yan's army and killed more than 30 generals, including his Qin, Liang Erzhou, Zhishul, Fangda and Wang Mingda, and took 2,500 prisoners.

古文：九月，衍湘州刺史杨公则率众寇寿春，扬州刺史元嵩击破之，斩获数千级。
现代文：九月，萧衍的湘州刺史杨公则率军侵犯寿春，扬州刺史元嵩将其击破，斩杀、俘获数千人。
English: In September, Xiao Yan's Hunan vassal Yang Gongzhe led an army to invade Shouchun, Yangzhou vassal Yuan Song defeated it, killed and captured thousands of people.

古文：三年正月，衍徐州刺史昌义之寇梁城，江州刺史王茂先寇荆州，屯河南城。
现代文：正始三年正月，萧衍的徐州刺史昌义之入寇梁城，江州刺史王茂先入寇荆州，屯兵于河南城。
English: At the beginning of the first month of the third year, Xiao Yan's Xuzhou assassin, Chang Yizhi, entered Kouliang City, and Jiangzhou assassin, Wang Mao, first entered Koujing State, and stationed troops in Henan City.

古文：平南将军陈伯之击义之，平南将军杨大眼击茂先，并大破之，斩其辅国将军王花，俘斩二千，茂先逃溃，追奔至于汉水，拔其五城。
现代文：平南将军陈伯之率军迎击昌义之，平南将军杨大眼迎击王茂先，都大败敌军，斩了其辅国将军王花，俘虏、斩杀其部众二千余人，王茂先兵败溃逃，魏军追击到了汉水，接连攻占了五个城池。
English: The army led by Pingnan General Chen Bo attacked Chang Yizhi, and the one led by Pingnan General Yang Dajian attacked Wang Maoxian. Both of them defeated the enemy army, killed their auxiliary general Wang Hua, and captured and killed more than two thousand of his subordinates. Wang Maoxian's soldiers were defeated and fled. The Wei army chased them to Hanshui and captured five cities in succession.

古文：将军宇文福略衍司州，俘获千余口而还。
现代文：将军宇文福攻占萧衍的司州，俘获千余人而还。
English: General U Wenfu attacked Xiao Yan's Shizhou City, captured more than a thousand enemies and returned.

古文：五月，衍将萧昞寇淮阳，张惠绍寇宿豫，萧密寇梁城，韦叡寇合肥。
现代文：五月，萧衍部将萧日丙侵犯淮阳，张惠绍入侵宿豫，萧密入寇梁城，韦睿入寇合肥。
English: In May, Xiao Yan's division invaded Huaiyang with Xiao Rizhi, invaded Suyuan with Zhang Huishao, entered Qoliangcheng with Xiao Mi, and entered Hefei with Wei Rui.

古文：平南将军奚康生破惠绍，斩其徐州刺史宋黑。
现代文：平南将军奚康生击破张惠绍，斩了其徐州刺史宋黑。
English: Pingnan general Zou Kangsheng defeated Zhang Huishao and defeated his Xuzhou counterpart Song He.

古文：七月，衍徐州刺史王伯敖入寇阴陵，中山王英大破之，斩将二十五人，首虏五千。
现代文：七月，萧衍的徐州刺史王伯敖入寇阴陵，中山王元英将他打败，斩杀其将领二十五人，杀死、俘虏敌军五千。
English: In July, Xiao Yan's Xuzhou assassin, Wang Boqin, entered the Tomb of Gu Yin. Zhongshan's Wang Yuanying defeated him, beheaded 25 of his generals, and killed and captured 5,000 enemy troops.

古文：衍又遣将桓和屯孤山，冠军将军常方庆屯固城，龙骧将军矫道仪屯蒙山。
现代文：萧衍又派他的部将桓和屯兵于孤山，冠军将军桓方庆屯兵于固城，龙骧将军矫道仪屯兵于蒙山。
English: Xiao Yan also sent his subordinate general Huan He's garrison to Lone Mountain, champion general Huan Fang Qing's garrison to Gucheng, and Long Yu's general Jiao Daoyi's garrison to Mengshan.

古文：八月，安东将军邢峦击桓和，破之。
现代文：八月，安东将军邢峦攻击桓和，把他打败。
English: In August, General Anton  attacked Kanwa and defeated him.

古文：将军元常攻克固城，统军毕祖朽攻克蒙山，斩获及赴沂水死者四千有余。
现代文：将军元恒攻克固城，统军毕祖朽攻克蒙山，斩杀、俘获以及落入沂水淹死的敌军共四千有余。
English: General Yuan Heng attacked and conquered Gucheng City, and the united forces of Bi Zu Gui and Bi Zhu Gui attacked and conquered Meng Mountain. A total of more than four thousand enemy troops were killed, captured and drowned in the flood.

古文：衍又遣张惠绍屯宿豫，萧昞屯淮阳。
现代文：萧衍又派张惠绍屯兵宿豫，萧日丙屯兵淮阳。
English: Xiao Yan also sent Zhang Huishao's garrison to stay in Yu, and Xiao Ribi's garrison to stay in Huaiyang.

古文：九月，都督邢峦大破之，斩其大将蓝怀恭等三十余人，惠绍、萧昞并弃戍南去，追斩数万级。
现代文：九月，都督邢峦把他们打败，斩杀其大将蓝怀恭等三十余人，张惠绍、萧日丙都放弃他们的戍地往南逃走，邢峦率部追击，斩首数万级。
English: In September, Tudor Zhai defeated them and beheaded more than 30 people, including his general Lan Huaiqong. Zhang Huishao and Xiao Rihqin both abandoned their hideouts and fled south. Tudor Zhai's troops pursued them and beheaded tens of thousands.

古文：衍中军大将军、临川王萧密，右仆射柳惔，徐州刺史昌义之等屯据梁城，中山王英大破之，密等弃城氵公淮东走，追奔至于马头，衍冠军将军、马头戍主朱思远弃城走，擒衍将三十余人，斩获五万有余。
现代文：萧衍的中军大将军、临川王萧密，右仆射柳忄炎，徐州刺史昌义之等人屯据梁城，中山王元英率军大破梁城，萧密等人弃城沿淮水向东逃走，魏军追击到了马头，萧衍的冠军将军、马头戍主朱思远弃城逃走，擒获萧衍部将三十余人，斩杀俘虏敌军五万有余。
English: Xiao Yan's great general of the Chinese army, Linchuan King Xiao Mi, his right-hand man, Yan Yan Yan, and the Xuzhou assassin, Shi Changyi, and others occupied Liangcheng. Zhongshan King Yuan Ying led an army to destroy Liangcheng. Xiao Mi and others abandoned the city and fled east along Huai Shui. The Wei army chased them to Ma Tou. Xiao Yan's champion general, Ma Tou's assassin, Zhu Si, abandoned the city and fled far away. He captured more than thirty people from Xiao Yan's department and killed more than fifty thousand enemy prisoners.

古文：十月，衍征虏将军马仙琕率众三万寇义阳，郢州刺史娄悦以州军击走之。
现代文：十月，萧衍的征虏将军马仙鴘率兵三万人入寇义阳，郢州刺史娄悦率州军攻击，把他赶跑。
English: In October, Xiao Yan's conscript general Ma Xianqi led 30,000 soldiers to enter Kouyang, and Zhangzhou's army attacked and drove him away.

古文：永平元年十月，悬瓠城民白早生据州反叛，衍遣将齐苟仁等四将以助之。
现代文：永平元年十月，悬瓠城民白早生占据州城反叛，萧衍派遣齐苟仁等四员将领前往援助。
English: In October of the first year of the Yongping era, the citizens of Zhangye City rebelled and occupied the state capital at an early age. Xiao Yan sent four generals, including Qi Guoren, to help.

古文：诏尚书邢峦率骑讨之，峦攻克悬瓠，斩早生，擒苟仁，俘衍众三千余人。
现代文：皇帝令尚书邢峦率领骑兵进行讨伐，邢峦攻克悬瓠，斩了白早生，生擒齐苟仁，俘获萧衍部众三千余人。
English: The emperor ordered Shang Shuxuan to lead the cavalry in a crusade to conquer the Hanging Mountains, kill Bai Yousheng, capture Qi Guoren, and capture more than three thousand people from Xiao Yan.

古文：初，早生之反也，世宗遣主书董绍衔诏宣慰，绍为早生所执，送之于衍。
现代文：当初，白早生反叛的时候，世宗曾派主书董绍带着诏书前往宣谕抚慰，董绍被白早生扣押并送到萧衍那里。
English: At the beginning, when Bai Chaosheng rebelled, the world sect had sent the main writer, Dong Shao, with an edict to comfort him. Dong Shao was detained by Bai Chaosheng and sent to Xiao Yan.

古文：衍乃厚资遣绍，令奉书朝廷，请割宿豫内属，以求和好。
现代文：这时，萧衍就送给丰厚的礼物把董绍遣还，让他带上文书奉送朝廷，请求将宿豫割让给我朝，以求双方和好。
English: At this time, Xiao Yan sent a rich gift to Dong Shaowu to send him back, let him bring a document to be sent to the imperial court, requesting that he cede Suyuan to the imperial court, in order to seek reconciliation between the two sides.

古文：时朝议或有异同，世宗以衍辞虽款顺，而不称籓，诏有司不许。
现代文：当时朝中对此事的看法各有不同，世宗认为萧衍言辞虽然诚恳和顺，但就是不向朝廷称藩，诏令有司不予准许。
English: At that time, the opinions of the court and the central government on this matter were different. Shizong believed that although Xiao Yan's words were sincere and obedient, he did not declare the domain to the court, and the imperial edict did not allow him to have a division.

古文：十二月，衍宁朔将军张凝等率众寇楚城，中山王英破擒之。
现代文：十二月，萧衍的宁朔将军张凝等人率领部众侵犯楚城，中山王元英打败并擒获了张凝。
English: In December, Xiao Yan's Ningshuo general Zhang Geng and others led the troops to invade Chu City. Zhongshan Wang Yuanying defeated and captured Zhang Geng.

古文：衍将马仙琕据金山，郢州刺史娄悦击走之。
现代文：萧衍部将马仙鴘占据金山，郢州刺史娄悦把他赶跑了。
English: Xiao Yanbu took Ma Xianqi to Jinshan, and Zhangzhou Zishi Meiyue chased him away.

古文：二年正月，中山王英攻克衍长薄戍，杀伤数万；仍攻拨武阳关，擒衍云骑将军、松滋县开国侯马广，冠军将军、迁陵县开男子彭甕，骁骑将军、当阳县开国伯徐元秀等二十六将，俘获七千余人；又进攻黄岘西关，衍将军马仙琕弃西关，李元履弃黄岘遁走。
现代文：永平二年正月，中山王元英攻占萧衍的长薄戍，杀伤敌军数千；接着又攻占武阳关，生擒萧衍的云骑将军、松滋县开国侯马广，冠军将军、迁陵县开国子彭瓮，骁骑将军、当阳县开国伯徐元秀等二十六员将领，俘获敌军七千余人；又进攻黄岘西关，萧衍的将军马仙鴘放弃西关，李元履放弃黄岘逃走。
English: In the first month of the second year of Yongping, Wang Yuanying of Zhongshan captured the Changbai Pass of Xiao Yan, killing thousands of enemy troops; then he captured Wuyang Pass, and twenty-six generals including Yunjie General, the founder of Songzhi County, Ma Guang, the champion general, Peng Jie, the son of the founder of Qianling County, and Xu Yuanxiu, the founder of Dangyang County, captured more than 7,000 enemy troops; he also attacked the West Pass of Huangyan, and Xiao Yan's general Ma Xianqian abandoned West Pass, and Li Yuanlu abandoned Huangyan and fled.

古文：四年春三月，衍琅邪郡民王万寿等斩衍辅国将军、琅邪东莞二郡太守、带句山戍主刘晣并将士四十余人，以城内属。
现代文：永平四年春三月，萧衍所属琅笽郡平民王万寿等人斩了萧衍的辅国将军、琅笽东莞二郡太守、兼日句山戍主刘晰连同将士四十余人，以郡城归附于朝廷。
English: In the spring and March of the fourth year of Yongping, Wang Wanshou, a commoner from Min County who belonged to Xiao Yan, and others beheaded Xiao Yan's auxiliary general, the governor of the two counties of Dongguan, and Liu Qiao, the head of the Japanese mountain fortress, together with more than forty soldiers, and annexed the county seat to the imperial court.

古文：徐州刺史卢昶遣兼郯城戍副张天惠率众赴之，而衍郁洲已遣二军以拒天惠，天惠与万寿等内外齐击，俘斩数百。
现代文：徐州刺史卢昶派遣兼郯城戍副将张天惠率部前往琅笽郡，但萧衍的郁洲已派二支军队拦截张天惠，张天惠与王万寿等人内外进行夹击，俘虏、斩杀敌军数百。
English: Xuzhou sent Zhang Tianhui, vice-commander of the Xicheng Garrison, to Lushan County, but Yuzhou, the capital of Xiaoyan, sent two armies to intercept Zhang Tianhui. Zhang Tianhui and Wang Wanshou and others carried out a pincer attack inside and outside, capturing and killing hundreds of enemy troops.

古文：永仍遣琅邪戍主傅文骥入城据守，衍又遣将张稷、马仙琕等攻围文骥。
现代文：卢昶仍派琅笽戍主傅文骥入城据守，萧衍又遣其部将张稷、马仙鴘等围攻傅文骥。
English: Lu Wei still sent Fu Wenyi into the city to defend it, while Xiao Yan sent his subordinates Zhang Qi and Ma Xianqi to besiege Fu Wenyi.

古文：诏昶率众赴之，而文骥以粮尽降衍，昶遂失利而还。
现代文：世宗令卢昶率兵前去解围，但傅文骥由于城中粮尽而投降了萧衍，卢昶终于失利而还。
English: Shizong ordered Lu Wei to lead his troops to relieve the siege, but Fu Wenwei surrendered to Xiao Yan due to the shortage of food in the city, and Lu Wei finally lost and returned.

古文：延昌二年二月，郁洲徐玄明斩送衍镇北将军、青冀二州刺史张稷首，以州内附。
现代文：延昌二年二月，郁洲刺史徐玄明斩了萧衍的镇北将军、青冀二州刺史张稷，并送来他的首级，以其州归附朝廷。
English: In February of the second year of Yanchang, Xu Xuanming, the governor of Yuzhou, beheaded Xiao Yan's Zhenbei general, Zhang Ye, the governor of Qinghai and Hebei, and sent his head to the imperial court.

古文：三年六月，衍遣众寇九山，荆州刺史桓叔兴大破之，斩其虎旅将军蔡令孙、冠军将军席世兴、贞义将军蓝次孙。
现代文：三年六月，萧衍派兵侵犯九山，荆州刺史桓叔兴将其打败，杀了他的虎旅将军蔡令孙、冠军将军席世兴、贞义将军蓝次孙。
English: In June of the third year, Xiao Yan sent troops to invade Jiushan, and Jing Zhou stabbed Shi Huan Shuxing to defeat him and killed his tiger brigade general Cai Ling Sun, champion general Xi Shixing, and the second grandson of General Zhengyi Lan.

古文：四年二月，衍宁州刺史任太洪率众寇关城，益州长史成兴孙击破之。
现代文：四年二月，萧衍的宁州刺史任太洪率兵入寇关城，益州长史成兴孙将其打败。
English: In February of the fourth year, Xiao Yan's Ningzhou assassin Shi Ren Taihong led an army into the city of Guancheng, and Governor Shi Chengxing's son defeated him.

古文：熙平元年正月，衍遣其恆农太守王定世等寇边，都督元志破之，斩定世，悉俘其众。
现代文：熙平元年正月，萧衍派遣他的恒农太守王定世等侵犯边境，都督元志把他打败，斩了王定世，全部俘获他的部众。
English: In the first month of the first year of Heiping, Xiao Yan sent his Hengnong governor Wang Jingshe and others to invade the border. The governor Yuan Zhi defeated him, beheaded Wang Jingshe, and captured all his subordinates.

古文：衍豫州刺史赵祖悦率众数万，偷据硖石，诏镇南将军崔亮、镇军将军李平讨克之，斩祖悦，传首京师。
现代文：萧衍的豫州刺史赵祖悦率领数万人，偷袭并占据了硖石，皇帝令镇南将军崔亮、镇军将军李平前往征讨，攻克硖石，斩赵祖悦，把他的首级传送到京师。
English: Xiao Yan's Yuzhou assassin Zhao Zuyue led tens of thousands of people to raid and occupy Shanshi. The emperor ordered the Zhennan general Cui Liang and the Zhenjun general Li Ping to go and conquer Shanshi, behead Zhao Zuyue and send his head to Beijing.

古文：衍衡州刺史张齐寇益州，刺史传竖眼讨之，斩其将任太洪，齐遁走。
现代文：萧衍的衡州刺史张齐入寇益州，刺史傅竖眼前往征讨，斩其将任太洪，张齐逃走。
English: Xiao Yan's Hengzhou assassin Zhang Qi entered Kouyizhou, and the assassin Shi Fu went to recruit, killed his commander Ren Taihong, and Zhang Qi fled.

古文：初，衍每欲称兵境上，窥伺边隙，常为诸将摧破，虽怀进趣之计，而势力不从。
现代文：当初，萧衍每每想要兴兵侵犯边境，窥伺边防的漏洞，常常被诸将打败，他虽然心怀图谋我朝之计，但他的实力却总是不能如愿。
English: At the beginning, Xiao Yan always wanted to raise an army to invade the border and spy on the loopholes of the border defense, but he was often defeated by the generals. Although he was intent on plotting against me, his strength was always unable to fulfill his wish.

古文：遂于浮山堰淮，规为寿春之害。
现代文：于是他就在浮山修筑堤坝截断淮水，企图引水淹没寿春。
English: So he built a dam in Fushan to cut off the Huai River and tried to divert the water to flood Shuchun.

古文：肃宗诏征南萧宝夤率诸将讨之，大破衍众于淮北。
现代文：肃宗下令征南将军萧宝夤率领诸将前往征讨，在淮水之北大败萧衍部众。
English: Su Zong ordered the general of the Southern Expedition, Xiao Baojun, to lead the troops that would go to the conquest, and the general of the Southern Expedition was defeated in the north of Huai Shui.

古文：秋九月，堰自溃决，漂其缘淮城戍居民村落十余万口，流入于海。
现代文：这年秋天九月，水坝自行溃决，大水淹没他所辖沿淮城乡居民村落十余万人口，向东流入大海。
English: In September of that autumn, the dam broke on its own, and the floodwaters inundated more than one hundred thousand people living in villages along Huaicheng Township under his jurisdiction, and flowed eastward into the sea.

古文：正光元年，衍改称普通，至三年，其弟子西丰侯正德弃衍来奔，寻复亡归，衍初忿之，改其姓为背氏，既而复焉，封为临贺王。
现代文：正光元年，萧衍把年号改为普通，到正光三年，他弟弟的儿子西丰侯萧正德背弃萧衍前来投奔，不久又逃了回去，萧衍起初感到十分气忿，把他的姓改为背氏，不久又恢复他的萧姓，封他为临贺王。
English: In the first year of Zhengguang, Xiao Yan changed his name to an ordinary one. In the third year of Zhengguang, his brother's son, Xi Feng Hou Xiao Zhengde, abandoned Xiao Yan and ran away. He soon fled back. At first, Xiao Yan felt very angry and changed his surname to his family name. Soon, he restored his Xiao surname and named him Lin He Wang.

古文：五年九月，衍将裴邃、虞鸿袭据寿春外郭，刺史长孙稚击走之。
现代文：正光五年九月，萧衍部将裴邃、虞鸿袭击并占据了寿春外城，刺史长孙稚将他们打败。
English: In September of Zhengguang's fifth year, Xiao Yan attacked Pei Yao and Yu Hong and occupied Shouchun Outer City, and stabbed Sun Zhi to defeat them.

古文：孝昌元年正月，徐州刺史元法僧据城南叛，衍遣豫章王综镇彭城，综，萧宝卷之遗腹子也。
现代文：孝昌元年正月，徐州刺史元法僧占据州城南叛，萧衍派豫章王萧综镇守彭城，萧综，是萧宝卷的遗腹子。
English: In the first month of the first year of Xiaochang, Xu Zhi Yuan, a legal monk, occupied the southern part of the city and rebelled. Xiao Yan faction, Yu Zhang Wang, Xiao Zui, guarded Pengcheng. Xiao Zui was the posthumous son of Xiao Bao Quan.

古文：初，衍平建业，因纳其母吴氏，吴氏先有孕，后生综，衍谓为己子，甚宠爱之。
现代文：当初，萧衍平定建业时，就把他的母亲吴氏收纳为妾，吴氏先就有了身孕，后来生下萧综，萧衍以为是自己的亲生儿子，对他非常宠爱。
English: At the beginning, when Xiao Yan was building his career, he took his mother Wu Ran as his concubine. Wu Ran became pregnant first, and later gave birth to Xiao Sim. Xiao Yan thought he was his own son, and was very fond of him.

古文：综既长，母密告综，综遂潜图叛衍，既镇彭城，及大军往讨，综乃拔身来奔。
现代文：萧综长大之后，他母亲暗地里把真相告诉了他，萧综于是就秘密图谋反叛萧衍，这回既然被派镇守彭城，及至魏军前去征讨时，萧综就抽身来投奔魏军。
English: After Xiao Zomei grew up, his mother secretly told him the truth. Xiao Zomei then secretly plotted to rebel against Xiao Yan. This time, since he was sent to guard Pengcheng, and when the Wei army went to investigate, Xiao Zomei withdrew to join the Wei army.

古文：余将退走，国军追蹑，所获万计。
现代文：其余敌将只得退走，国军乘机追剿，擒获敌军数以万计。
English: The rest of the enemy had to retreat, and the Chinese army took the opportunity to pursue and capture tens of thousands of enemy troops.

古文：衍初闻之，恸哭气绝，甚为惭惋，犹云其子，言其病风所致，时人咸笑之。
现代文：萧衍得知此事，恸哭气绝，心里感到十分惭愧惋惜，对别人还说萧综是他的儿子，说他是因为得病发疯才有此举动，当时人们都感到非常可笑。
English: When Xiao Yan found out about this, he was in tears and felt very ashamed and regretful. He also told others that Xiao Zomei was his son, and that he did this because he was sick and crazy. At that time, people felt very ridiculous.

古文：三月，衍遣其北梁州长史锡休儒、司马鱼和、上庸太守姜平洛等入寇直城，梁州刺史傅竖眼遣息敬绍率众大败之，擒斩三千人，休儒等遁走。
现代文：这一年三月，萧衍派他的北梁州长史锡休儒、司马鱼和、上庸太守姜平洛等人入寇直城，梁州刺史傅竖眼派他的儿子傅敬绍率兵把他们打败，生俘和斩杀三千人，锡休儒等人逃走。
English: In March of that year, Xiao Yan sent his governor of Beiliang, Shi Xixiuru, Sima Yuhuan, and Shangyong governor Jiang Pingluo and others to invade the city. Liangzhou's governor, Fu Zhixian, sent his son, Fu Jingshao, and his soldiers to defeat them, capturing and slaughtering three thousand people alive. Xixiuru and others fled.

古文：四月，衍益州刺史萧润猷将焚文炽等率众围小剑戍，益州刺史邴虬遣子子达，行台魏子建遣别将淳于诞拒击之。
现代文：四月，萧衍的益州刺史萧渊猷派部将樊文炽等率兵围攻小剑戍，益州刺史邴虬派其子邴子达，行台魏子建派其别将淳于诞拦截攻击。
English: In April, Xiao Yan's faction of the Yizhou branch of the Xiao Yuan faction besieged Xiao Jianye with the soldiers led by Wen Hui, the Yizhou branch of the faction led by his son Zheng Zida, and the Xingtai branch of the faction led by Wei Zi Jian led by his son Jun Yu Xuan to intercept the attack.

古文：五月，诞等大破文炽，俘斩二万，擒其次将萧世隆等十二人，文炽走免。
现代文：五月，淳于诞等人大破樊文炽，俘虏斩杀敌军二万，擒获其次将萧世澄等十二人，樊文炽逃走得以幸免。
English: In May, Chun Yu Xing and others made a great effort to break Wen Blaze. The captives killed twenty thousand enemy soldiers, and twelve people, including General Xiao Shizhen, were captured. However, Wen Blaze was able to escape.

古文：是岁，衍又改年为大通。
现代文：这一年，萧衍又改年号为大通。
English: This year, Xiao Yan changed his name to Datong.

古文：二年七月，衍将元树、湛僧珍等寇寿春。
现代文：孝昌二年七月，萧衍部将元树、湛僧珍等侵犯寿春。
English: In July of the second year of Xiaochang, Xiao Yanbu invaded Shuchun with Yuan Shu, Zhan Sozhen and others.

古文：又攻逼新野，诏都督魏承祖讨破之。
现代文：又进攻逼近新野，肃宗诏令都督魏承祖前往征讨把他打败。
English: Another attack was approaching Niiro, and Emperor Suzong ordered the governor Wei Chengzu to go and fight and defeat him.

古文：三年二月，衍将成景俊寇彭城，行台崔孝芬率诸将击走之。
现代文：三年二月，萧衍部将成景俊入寇彭城，行台崔孝芬率领诸将进击将其赶走。
English: In February of the third year, Xiao Yan's division drove Cheng Jingjun into Copeng City, and Gangtai Cui Xiaofen led the troops to attack and drive him away.

古文：建义元年，衍遣其将曹义宗寇荆州，大都督费穆大破之，生擒义宗，槛送京师。
现代文：建义元年，萧衍派其部将曹义宗入寇荆州，大都督费穆大破敌军，生擒曹义宗，用囚车把他送往京师。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, Xiao Yan sent his troops to take Cao Yizong to Jingzhou, and the great governor Feimu defeated the enemy army, captured Cao Yizong alive, and sent him to Beijing in a prison wagon.

古文：初，尔朱荣入洛，北海王颢奔于衍，衍以颢为魏主，资颢士马，令其大将陈庆之部率送颢。
现代文：当初，朱荣进入洛阳，北海王元颢投奔萧衍，萧衍以元颢为魏主，送给元颢士卒和马匹，令他的大将陈庆之所部护送元颢。
English: At first, Zhu Rong entered Luoyang, and the North Sea king, Yuan Shao, went to fight against Xiao Yan. Xiao Yan, with Yuan Shao as his patron, gave Yuan Shao soldiers and horses, and ordered his general, Chen Qingzhi, to escort Yuan Shao.

古文：永安二年夏，遂入洛阳，车驾还讨，破走之，唯庆之一身走免，自余部众皆见俘执。
现代文：永安二年夏，元颢进入洛阳，敬宗回兵讨伐，将其打败，只陈庆之一人得以逃走，其余部众全都被俘获。
English: In the summer of the second year of Yong'an, Yuan Zang entered Luoyang, led a counterattack against the troops of Jingzong Hui, and defeated them. Only one person, Chen Qing, was able to escape, and the rest of the troops were all captured.

古文：闰月，巴州刺史严始欣据州入衍，衍遣将萧玩、张鸿等率众赴援，都督元景夏率益梁二州军讨之。
现代文：闰月，巴州刺史严始欣占据州郡投向萧衍，萧衍遣部将萧玩、张鸿等率兵赶去救援，都督元景夏率益梁二州的军队前往征讨。
English: In the intercalary month, the governor of Bazhou, Yan Shixin, occupied the county and threw it to Xiao Yan. Xiao Yan sent troops led by Xiao Gan and Zhang Hong to rescue the troops, and the governor of Bazhou, Yuan Jingxia, led the troops of Yiliang and the two counties to go to collect the troops.

古文：三年正月，斩始欣，衍众败走，又斩萧玩等首，俘获万余人。
现代文：三年正月，斩了严始欣，萧衍部众败走，又斩萧玩等人首级，俘获衍军万余人。
English: In the first month of the third year, Yan Shixin was beheaded, Xiao Yan's troops were defeated and fled, and Xiao Yan and others were beheaded, and more than 10,000 Yan soldiers were captured.

古文：普泰元年春，南青州刺史茹怀朗遣部将何宝率步骑三千击衍守将于琅邪，擒其云麾将军、徐兗二州刺史沈预，斩其宣猛将军、齐州刺史刘相如。
现代文：普泰元年春，南青州刺史茹怀朗派部将何宝率步骑兵三千在琅笽攻击萧衍的守将，擒获他的云麾将军、徐兖二州刺史沈预，斩其宣猛将军、齐州刺史刘相如。
English: In the spring of the first year of Putai, Ru Huilang, the governor of South Qingzhou, sent He Bao and 3,000 infantry and cavalry to attack Xiao Yan's guards in Zhouzhuang. He captured his general Yun Qi, the governor of Xuzhou, Shen Yu, and killed his fierce general, the governor of Qizhou, Liu Xiangru.

古文：永熙元年夏，衍遣其鄴王元树及谯州刺史朱文开入据谯城，东南道行台樊子鹄率诸军攻克之，擒元树、文开等送于京师。
现代文：永熙元年夏，萧衍派他的邺王元树和谯州刺史朱文开占据谯城，东南道行台樊子鹄率领诸军攻克谯城，生擒元树、朱文开等人送往京师。
English: In the summer of Yongxi in the first year of the Heian period, Xiao Yan sent his son Wang Yuanshu and his son Zhu Wenkai to occupy Lucheng. The southeastern province of Xingtai led the army to conquer Lucheng, and sent his son Wang Yuanshu, Zhu Wenkai and others to Beijing.

古文：天平元年十月，衍雄信将军纪耕率众入寇尃嵣，都督曹仲尼破走之，斩其军主沈达、闵庄等。
现代文：天平元年十月，萧衍的雄信将军纪耕率众入寇山甫寸蜲，都督曹仲尼将其打败，斩杀其军主沈达、闵庄等人。
English: In October of the first year of the Tenpyo era, Xiao Yan's trusted general, Ji Ko, led the crowd into the Qoshan Fuxing Fortress. The governor, Cao Zhongni, defeated him and killed his commander, Shen Da, and others.

古文：二年正月，衍将湛僧珍寇南兗州，州军击破之。
现代文：二年正月，萧衍部将湛僧珍入寇南兖州，州军将其击败。
English: In the first month of the second year, Xiao Yanbu sent Zhan Sengzhen to Konan, Luzhou, and the state army defeated him.

古文：行台元晏又破湛僧珍等于项城，虏其阙二字刺史杨票。
现代文：行台元晏又在项城打败湛僧珍等人，俘获其□□刺史杨日票。
English: In Xiangcheng, Gangtai Yuanjun defeated Zhan Zengzhen and others, and captured his most prized ticket.

古文：二月，衍司州刺史陈庆之、郢州刺史田朴特等寇边，豫州刺史尧雄击走之。
现代文：二月，萧衍的司州刺史陈庆之、郢州刺史田朴特等侵犯边境，豫州刺史尧雄将其击败。
English: In February, Xiao Yan's Shizhou vassal Chen Qingzhi and Zhangzhou vassal Tian Pote violated the border, and were defeated by the Yuzhou vassal Shixiong.

古文：五月，衍仁州刺史黄道始寇北济阴，徐州刺史任祥讨破之。
现代文：五月，萧衍的仁州刺史黄道始入寇北济阴，被徐州刺史任祥打败。
English: In May, Xiao Yan's Renzhou Zishi Zodiac began to enter Koubei Jiyin, and was defeated by Xuzhou Zishi Renxiang.

古文：十月，衍将梁秉俊寇单父，祥又大败之，俘斩万余人。
现代文：十月，萧衍部将梁秉俊入寇单父，任祥又把他打败，俘获斩杀万余人。
English: In October, Xiao Yan put Liang Bingjun into the single-parent robbery, Ren Xiang defeated him again, and captured and killed more than 10,000 people.

古文：十一月，衍雍州刺史萧恭遣将柳仲礼寇荆州，刺史王元轨破之于牛饮，斩其将张殖、王世兴。
现代文：十一月，萧衍的雍州刺史萧恭派部将柳仲礼入寇荆州，刺史王元轨在牛饮将其击败，斩其将张殖、王世兴。
English: In November, Xiao Yan's Yongzhou assassin Xiao Qiong sent a detachment to lure Liu Zhongli into Guo Jingzhou. The assassin Wang Yuanlu defeated him in Niu Dang and beheaded his generals Zhang Xuan and Wang Shixing.

古文：是年，衍又改号为中大通。
现代文：这一年，萧衍改年号为大同。
English: This year, Xiao Yan changed the year name to Datong.

古文：三年五月，豫州刺史尧雄攻衍白苟堆镇，克之，擒其北平太守苟元旷。
现代文：天平三年五月，豫州刺史尧雄攻打萧衍所属的白苟堆镇，占领了该镇，生擒其北平太守苟元旷。
English: In May of the third year of the Tenpyo era, the Yuzhou assassin Shih Xiong attacked the town of Baigoudui, which belonged to Xiao Yan, occupied the town, and captured the Beiping Taishou Gouyuan.

古文：十月，行台侯景攻陷衍楚城，获其楚州刺史桓和兄弟。
现代文：十月，行台侯景攻陷萧衍所属的楚城，擒获其楚州刺史桓和兄弟。
English: In October, Gaotai Houjing conquered Chu City, which belonged to Xiao Yan, and captured his brother, Chuzhou Jishi Huan.

古文：四年九月，衍青冀二州刺史除子彦寇圉城，南青州刺史陆景元击走之。
现代文：四年九月，萧衍的青冀二州刺史徐子彦入寇圉城，被南青州刺史陆景元打败溃逃。
English: In September of the fourth year, Xu Zihang, a member of Xiao Yan's Qinghai-Hebei two-state stabbing team, entered Kouyi City and was defeated and routed by Lu Jingyuan, a member of the South Qingzhou stabbing team.

古文：先是，益州刺史傅和以城降衍，衍资送和，令申意于齐献武王，求通交好，王志绥边远，乃请许之。
现代文：在此之前，益州刺史傅和以其城投降于萧衍，萧衍送给傅和许多财物，要他向齐献武王致意，请求交结和好，齐献武王志在安抚边远之地，就请皇帝准许了他的请求。
English: Prior to this, Yizhou assassinated Fu He and surrendered his city to Xiao Yan. Xiao Yan gave Fu He and a lot of wealth, asking him to pay homage to King Wu and ask for reconciliation. King Wu's ambition was to pacify remote areas, so he asked the emperor to grant his request.

古文：四年冬，衍遣其散骑常侍张皋、通直常侍刘孝仪、通直常侍崔晓朝贡。
现代文：天平四年冬，萧衍派他的散骑常侍张皋、通直常侍刘孝仪、通直常侍崔晓前来朝贡。
English: In the winter of the 4th year of the Tenpyo era, Xiao Yan sent his horseback riding attendants Zhang Xuan, Tsunzhi attendant Liu Xiaoyi, and Tsunzhi attendant Cui Xiao to pay tribute.

古文：二年夏，又遣散骑常侍沈山卿、通直常侍刘研朝贡。
现代文：元象二年夏，又派散骑常侍沈山卿、通直常侍刘研前来朝贡。
English: In the summer of Yuan Zhao's second year, he also dispatched the cavalry aides-de-camp, Shen Shanqing and Tongzhi aide-de-camp, Liu Ken, to pay tribute.

古文：兴和二年春，又遣散骑常侍柳豹、通直常侍刘景彦朝贡。
现代文：兴和二年春，又派散骑常侍柳豹、通直常侍刘景彦前来朝贡。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Heian period, they also sent the knights-errant Liu Leopard and the knight-errant Liu Jingyan to pay tribute.

古文：其年冬，又遣散骑常侍陆晏子、通直常侍沈景徽朝贡。
现代文：这一年冬，又遣散骑常侍陆晏子、通直常侍沈景徽前来朝贡。
English: In the winter of the same year, he also dispatched the equestrian constables, Lu Xunzi and Tong Zhi, and the equestrian constables, Shen Jinghui, to pay tribute.

古文：是年，衍改号大同。三年夏，又遣散骑常侍明少遐、通直郎谢藻朝贡。
现代文：三年夏，又派散骑常侍明少遐、通直郎谢藻朝贡。
English: In the summer of the third year, he also dispatched the horseback cavalry constables, Ming Shaoqi and Tong Naorong, to pay tribute to Emperor Xiemo.

古文：四年春，又遣散骑常侍袁狎、通直常侍贺文发朝贡。
现代文：四年春，又遣散骑常侍袁狎、通直常侍贺文发朝贡。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, the imperial equerry Yuan Qi and the imperial equerry Tong Zhi sent a congratulatory letter to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：其年冬，又遣散骑常侍刘孝胜、通直常侍谢景朝贡。
现代文：这一年冬，又遣散骑常侍刘孝胜、通直常侍谢景朝贡。
English: In the winter of the same year, the imperial equerry Liu Xiaosheng and the imperial equerry Xie Jing were also dismissed.

古文：武定元年夏，又遣散骑常侍沈众、通直常侍殷德卿朝贡。
现代文：武定元年夏，又遣散骑常侍沈众、通直常侍殷德卿朝贡。
English: In the summer of the first year of Wuding, he also dismissed the imperial equerry Shen Zhong and the imperial equerry Tong Zhiqing to pay tribute to Yin Deqing.

古文：其年冬，又遣散骑常侍萧确、通直常侍陆缅朝贡。
现代文：这一年冬，又派散骑常侍萧确、通直常侍陆缅朝贡。
English: In the winter of the same year, they also dispatched roving attendants Xiaojing and Tongzhizhong to pay tribute to the Burmese court.

古文：三年秋，又遣散骑常侍徐君房、通直常侍庾信朝贡。
现代文：三年秋，又遣散骑常侍徐君房、通直常侍庾信朝贡。
English: In the autumn of the third year, the imperial equerry Xu Junfang and the imperial equerry Tong Zhi Xin were also dismissed.

古文：四年夏，又遣散骑常侍萧瑳、通直常侍贺德易朝贡。
现代文：四年夏，又遣散骑常侍萧王差、通直常侍贺德蠩朝贡。
English: In the summer of the fourth year, the equestrian regular attendants Xiao Wangzha and Tsunzhi regular attendants He Dejun paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：五年春，又遣散骑常侍谢兰、通直常侍鲍至朝贡。
现代文：五年春，又遣散骑常侍谢蔺、通直常侍鲍至朝贡。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, the equestrian regular attendants Xie Jun and Tong Zhi regular attendant Bao were dismissed to pay tribute.

古文：朝廷亦遣使报之。
现代文：朝廷也派遣使者回访萧衍。
English: The imperial court also sent an envoy to pay a return visit to Xiao Yan.

古文：十余年间，南境宁息。
现代文：十多年间，南方境域战争停息，平静安宁。
English: For more than ten years, the war in the southern region has been suspended, and there is calm and tranquility.

古文：六年，衍又改号为中大同，其年又改为太清。
现代文：武定六年，萧衍又把年号改为中大同，次年又改为太清。
English: In the sixth year of Wu Ding, Xiao Yan changed the year name to Zhongda Tong, and the next year to Taiqing.

古文：是岁，司徒侯景反，遣使通衍，请其拯援。
现代文：这一年，司徒侯景反叛，派遣使者勾结萧衍，请求他派兵援助。
English: In the same year, Szeto Houjing rebelled and sent an envoy to collude with Xiao Yan, asking him to send troops to help.

古文：冬冰可折，时不再来，凡百君子，勉求多福。
现代文：萧衍被侯景的游说所蛊惑，就与魏断绝了贡使往来。萧衍之子萧纲和朝中大臣们一齐劝谏萧衍，认为这样做不妥，萧衍不听。
English: Persuaded by the lobbying of Houjing, Xiao Yan broke off the tribute envoy contacts with Wei. Xiao Yan's son, Xiao Gang, and the ministers of the Central Government jointly advised Yan Xiao Yan that this was not appropriate, but Xiao Yan did not listen.

古文：檄之所到，咸共申省，知我国行师之意。
现代文：于是派遣他哥哥的儿子豫州刺史、贞阳侯萧渊明，北兖州刺史胡贵孙等入寇逼进徐州，给侯景以声援，接着就筑坝拦截泗水，引水以灌彭城。
English: Therefore, he sent his brother's sons, such as Yu Zhou Shishi, Zhengyang Hou Xiao Yuanming, and Beilun Zhou Shishi Hu Guisun, to invade and force Xuzhou, to give solidarity to Hou Jing, and then built a dam to intercept the floodwater and divert the water to fill Pengcheng.

古文：冬十二月，绍宗、高岳等大破衍众寒山，擒渊明、贵孙等，俘斩五万，其冻溺烧之而死，不可胜数。
现代文：齐文襄王派行台慕容绍宗、仪同三司高岳、潘相乐等人率兵进行讨伐。这年冬十二月，慕容绍宗、高岳等在寒山大破萧衍部众，生擒萧渊明、胡贵孙等人，俘虏斩杀敌人五万，敌军冻死、溺死、烧死的人不可胜数。
English: In the winter of December of that year, Murong Shao Zong, Yi Tong Sanji Gao Yue, Pan Sang Le and others were sent by the King of Qi Wenxiang to lead the troops in the crusade. Murong Shao Zong, Yi Tong Sanji Gao Yue, Pan Sang Le and others broke the retreating troops on the Cold Mountain, and Xiao Yuanming, Hu Guisun and others were captured alive. The enemy killed 50,000 prisoners, and the number of enemy soldiers who froze to death, drowned or burned to death was incalculable.

古文：衍既惭悔，六年，复遣使羊珍孙款关乞和，并修吊书于齐文襄王。
现代文：萧衍感到惭愧悔恨，在武定六年，再次派遣使者羊珍孙前来叩关求和，并给齐文襄王写了一封请求信。
English: Xiao Yan felt ashamed and remorseful. In the sixth year of Wuding, he again sent an envoy, Yang Zhensun, to come to Baiguan to sue for peace, and wrote a letter of request to King Qibun Xiang.

古文：文襄王欲以威德怀之，许其通而不复其书。
现代文：文襄王想要以威德并重来安抚萧衍，准许与他通和而不给他复信。
English: King Wenxiang wanted to appease Xiao Yan with virtue and respect, allowing him to communicate with him without replying to him.

古文：衍于是遣其散骑常侍谢班、通直常侍徐陵诣阙朝贡。
现代文：萧衍于是派他的散骑常侍谢、通直常侍徐陵到朝廷朝贡。
English: Xiao Yan then sent his stragglers, Tsuneishi Xie and Tsuneishi Tsuneishi Xuling, to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：班等未及还而侯景举兵袭衍，密与衍弟子临贺王正德交通，许推为主。
现代文：谢等人还没有归还，侯景就兴兵袭击萧衍，秘密与萧衍弟弟之子临贺王萧正德勾结，答应推他为主。
English: Since Xie and others had not yet returned, Hou Jing ordered his soldiers to attack Xiao Yan. He secretly colluded with Xiao Yan's brother's son, Lin He Wang Xiao Zhengde, and promised to promote him as the leader.

古文：景至横江，衍令正德率军拒景，正德因而迎之。
现代文：侯景军至横江，萧衍令萧正德率军抗拒侯景，萧正德就借机前往迎接侯景。
English: When Hou Jing's army reached the Yangtze River, Xiao Yan ordered Xiao Zhengde to lead the army to resist Hou Jing. Xiao Zhengde took the opportunity to go to meet Hou Jing.

古文：景济江，立以为主，以趣建业。
现代文：侯景渡过长江，拥立萧正德为主，直趋建业。
English: Hou Jing crossed the Yangtze River, supported Xiao Zhengde as the main, and continued to build.

古文：衍好人佞己，末年尤甚，或有云国家强盛者，即便忿怒，有云朝廷衰弱者，因致喜悦。
现代文：萧衍喜欢别人逢迎谄媚自己，晚年尤其如此，如果有人说魏国强大，他立即表示愤怒，有人说魏廷衰弱，就因此而感到喜悦。
English: Xiao Yan liked others to flatter him, especially in his later years. If someone said that Wei was strong, he immediately expressed anger. If someone said that Wei Ting was weak, he was pleased.

古文：是以其朝臣左右皆承其风旨，莫敢正言。
现代文：所以他的朝臣左右都奉承他的旨意，没有人敢于正直陈言。
English: Therefore, his courtiers flatter his will, and no one dares to speak honestly.

古文：初景之将渡江也，衍沿道军戍，皆有启列，而中领军朱异恐忤衍意，且谓景不能渡，遂不为闻。
现代文：当初侯景准备渡江的时候，萧衍所属沿路的军队，都有所准备，但中领军朱异生怕违背了萧衍的旨意，却说侯景不能渡过长江，就不报告给萧衍。
English: At the beginning, when Hou Jing was preparing to cross the Yangtze River, all the armies along the road that belonged to Xiao Yan had made some preparations, but Zhu Yixing, the middle leader, was afraid of violating Xiao Yan's will, but said that if Hou Jing could not cross the Yangtze River, he would not report to Xiao Yan.

古文：景至嵫湖，方大惊骇，乃令其太子纲守中书省，军事悉以季之。
现代文：侯景到了嵫湖，萧衍才大为惊骇，就让他的太子萧纲掌管中书省，把军机要事全都委付给他。
English: When Hou Jing arrived at Wuhu, Xiao Yancai was greatly shocked, so he put his prince Xiao Gang in charge of the Central Book Department and entrusted all the important matters of the military aircraft to him.

古文：又逼居民入城，百姓因相剥掠，不可禁止。
现代文：又逼迫居民迁进城内，百姓因此而相互抢掠，无法禁止。
English: In addition, they forced the residents to move into the city, and the people robbed each other as a result, which cannot be prohibited.

古文：衍令直从临俞景茂赦二冶、尚方、钱署罪人及建康、廷尉诸囚，欲押令入城以充防捍。
现代文：萧衍令直从监俞景茂赦免在二治、尚方、钱署内服役的罪犯，以及建康、廷尉关押的囚犯，想要把他们押解到城内以充实防卫。
English: Xiao Yan ordered directly from the warden Jingmao to pardon the criminals who served in Erji, Shangfang and Qiantang, as well as the prisoners held by Jiankang and Tingfei, and wanted to escort them to the city to strengthen the defense.

古文：诸徒囚放火烧冶，一时散走。
现代文：众囚徒放火烧了冶炼铜铁的场所，一时间全都逃散。
English: The prisoners set fire to the place where copper and iron were smelted, and all of them fled at once.

古文：衍忧懑无计，唯令其王公已下分屯诸门；摄诸寺藏钱皆入聚德阳堂，以充军实。
现代文：萧衍忧愤不已无计可施，只好令其王公以下的人分别屯守各处城门，征收各个寺庙的钱财聚集在德阳堂，用来补充军队的费用。
English: Depressed and angry, Xiao Yan was at a loss for what to do. He had no choice but to order his subordinates to guard the gates of the city, collect money from the temples, and gather it in Deyang Hall to supplement the expenses of the army.

古文：景既至，便围其城，纵火烧爇，掘长围，筑土山以攻衍。
现代文：侯景的军队到达之后，就包围了建业城，四处纵火焚烧，挖掘长长的围子，构筑土山用来攻击萧衍。
English: After the arrival of Hou Jing's army, they surrounded Jianye City, set fire to it everywhere, excavated a long enclosure, and built a mound of earth to attack Xiao Yan.

古文：衍亦于城内起山以应之。
现代文：萧衍也在城内筑起土山来对付侯景。
English: Xiao Yan also built a mound of earth in the city to deal with Houjing.

古文：衍令文武运土，人责二十石，于是其王侯朝贵皆自负檐。
现代文：萧衍命令朝中文武搬运泥土，责令每人要运二十石，于是他的王侯权贵都不得不亲自挑担运土。
English: Xiao Yan ordered the Chinese soldiers to carry the soil and ordered each person to carry twenty stones, so his princes and dignitaries had to personally carry the soil.

古文：萧网亦欲自负，佥议以为太示迫屈，乃止。
现代文：萧纲也要亲自挑土，佥议认为这样做过于显示其窘迫和屈辱，于是就停止了。
English: Xiao Gang also wanted to dig up the soil himself, but was told that doing so would be too embarrassing and humiliating, so he stopped.

古文：衍每募人出战，素无号令，初或暂胜，后必奔背。
现代文：萧衍每每召募人丁出战，平素没有严明的号令，起初或许暂时能打胜仗，到后来必然就违令逃跑。
English: Whenever Xiao Yan called for recruits to fight, there was never a clear order. At first, he might be able to temporarily win the battle, but later he would inevitably violate the order and run away.

古文：景宣言曰： 城中非无菜，但无酱耳 ，以戏侮之。
现代文：侯景就到处宣扬说： 建业城里并非没有菜，只是没有酱罢了。 用这种话来戏虐侮辱萧衍。
English: Hou Jing spread the rumor everywhere, saying, "Jianye City is not devoid of food, but it is devoid of sauce," using such words to playfully insult Xiao Yan.

古文：衍太官及军人元柴，乃发取尚书省、武库、左右藏以充用。
现代文：萧衍朝中掌管百官膳食的太官和城中军队没有柴草做饭，就打开尚书省、兵器库和左右仓库，用木料来当柴烧。
English: In the reign of Emperor Xiao Yan, the eunuchs who were in charge of the meals of the officials and the troops in the city did not have firewood to cook, so they opened the Shangshu Province, the arsenal and the left and right warehouses, and used wood as firewood.

古文：衍州镇外援虽有至者，而景围栅深固，内外断色。
现代文：萧衍各州镇的军队虽有赶到城外来援救的，但侯景构建了很深的围子和坚固的栏栅，把城内城外两下隔绝。
English: Although the troops of Xiao Yan's various counties and towns rushed to the outside of the city for rescue, Hou Jing built a deep enclosure and a solid fence to isolate the city from the outside.

古文：衍数募人出战，常为景所执获。
现代文：萧衍多次征募人丁出战，常常被侯景的部众所擒获。
English: Xiao Yan repeatedly recruited men to fight, and they were often captured by Hou Jing's subordinates.

古文：有一小兒请以飞鵄传致消息，网乃作数千丈绳，缀纸鵄于绳端，缚书其背，又题鵄口： 若有得鵄送援军者赏银百两。 
现代文：有一个小孩请求用纸鸢向城外传送消息，萧纲就做了几千丈长的细绳，把纸鸢系在细绳的一头，把书信绑在纸鸢的背上，又在纸鸢的头部题字： 若有得到纸鸢而送给援军的人赏银一百两。 
English: When a child asked for a paper shovel to send messages outside the city, Xiao Gang made thousands of lengths of string, tied the paper shovel to one end of the string, tied the letter to the back of the paper shovel, and inscribed on the top of the paper shovel: If anyone gets a paper shovel and gives it to the reinforcements, he will be rewarded with one hundred taels of silver.

古文：纲出太极殿，因西北风而飏之，频放数鵄，景令走马射取之，竟不能达也。
现代文：萧纲走出太极殿，借着西北风把纸鸢放飞，接连放了几只，都被侯景叫人跑马把它射下来，终究不能把书信送到援军那里。
English: Xiao Gang walked out of the Taiji Hall, and by means of the northwest wind, he let fly the paper cormorant. He let fly several cormorants in succession, but all of them were shot down by Hou Jing's courier. After all, he could not send the letter to the reinforcements.

古文：衍城内大饥，人相食，米一斗八十万，皆以人肉杂牛马而卖之。
现代文：萧衍城内大闹饥荒，人与人相食，一斗米价值八十万钱，人们都把人肉杂在牛马肉里面拿去卖钱。
English: In the city of Xiao Yan, famine was rampant, people were cannibalizing each other, a barrel of rice was worth 800,000 yuan, and people were mixing human flesh with beef and horse meat to sell for money.

古文：军人共于德阳堂前立市，屠一牛得绢三千匹，卖一狗得钱二十万。
现代文：军人都把德阳堂前面当作街市，在这里宰一头牛可得绢三千匹，卖一条狗可得钱二十万。
English: The soldiers all use the front of Deyang Hall as a street market. Slaughtering a cow here can fetch 3,000 baht, and selling a dog can fetch 200,000 baht.

古文：皆熏鼠捕雀而食之，至是雀鼠皆尽，死者相枕。
现代文：大家都用烟熏捉老鼠，捕捉鸟雀来充饥，到这时雀鼠都被吃尽，城中死者相互枕藉。
English: Everyone was using the smoke to catch mice and birds to satisfy their hunger. By this time, the mice and birds had all been eaten, and the dead in the city were lying next to each other.

古文：初有盗取其池鱼者，衍犹大怒，敕付廷尉，既而宿昔都尽。
现代文：起初有人偷捕池里的鱼，萧衍还大发其怒，敕令交付廷尉处置，没过多久还是全都被捕捞干净。
English: At first, someone stole the fish in the pond, and Xiao Yan was furious. He ordered that the fish be handed over to the court lieutenant for disposal. It didn't take long before all the fish were fished out.

古文：其不识事宜如此。
现代文：他不识时务大多像这类情况。
English: He doesn't know what it's like in most of these situations.

古文：景久攻未拔，而衍外援虽多，各各乖张，无有总制，更相妒忌，不肯奋击。
现代文：侯景攻城很久都未能得手，但萧衍外边的援军虽然众多，却各自分离，没有人能够统领，加上相互之间存有猜忌，都不肯奋力出击。
English: Hou Jing's siege of the city was unsuccessful for a long time, but Xiao Yan's reinforcements from the outside, although numerous, were separated from each other, no one could command, and there was suspicion between each other, and they were unwilling to attack.

古文：唯衍子邵陵王纶再于钟山决战，战败而走。
现代文：只有萧衍的儿子邵陵王萧纶一再在钟山与侯景军决战，最后战败而走。
English: Only Xiao Yan's son, Shao Ling Wang Xiao Yao, repeatedly fought a decisive battle with Hou Jing's army in Zhongshan, and was finally defeated.

古文：景粮既少，遂谲衍求和。
现代文：侯景军中粮草已经很少，就诡称向萧衍求和。
English: There was already little grain and grass in the army of Hou Jing, so he asked Xiao Yan for a truce.

古文：衍信之，乃割江西四州授景，封为寿阳王，遣其朝贡。
现代文：萧衍相信了他的诡计，就把长江西边四个州割让给侯景，封他为寿阳王，让他遣使朝贡。
English: Xiao Yan believed his trick, so he ceded the four states on the west side of the Yangtze River to Hou Jing, named him King of Shouyang, and asked him to send tribute.

古文：与部下歃血盟讫，景诈引军还石头。
现代文：萧衍与侯景派来的人歃血盟誓完毕，侯景就假作引军退回石头城。
English: After Xiao Yan and the people sent by Hou Jing swore a blood oath, Hou Jing returned to Stone Town under the pretense of leading an army.

古文：衍乃敕授军令下，诸军初不受诏，后重敕乃从。
现代文：萧衍于是下令城外援军退走，诸军开始时不肯接受诏令，后来再次敕令才听从。
English: Xiao Yan then ordered the reinforcements from outside the city to retreat. At first, the troops refused to accept the imperial edict, but later they obeyed the imperial order.

古文：衍又令援军以船三百艘给景，景犹嫌其少，又敕付二百。
现代文：萧衍又命令援军把三百艘战船交给侯景，侯景还嫌太少，萧衍又令交付二百艘。
English: Xiao Yan also ordered the reinforcements to hand over three hundred warships to Hou Jing, which was still too little, and Xiao Yan ordered the delivery of another two hundred.

古文：衍永安侯萧确、直阖将军赵威方颇有勇略，为景所惮。
现代文：萧衍的永安侯萧确、直将军赵威方很有勇气和谋略，为侯景所畏惧。
English: Xiao Yan's Yong'an warlord Xiao Ji and general Zhao Weifang had great courage and strategy, and were feared by Hou Jing.

古文：景乃谓衍曰： 确与威方频隔岸见骂，云： 天子自与汝和，我终不置汝！ 
现代文：侯景就对萧衍说： 萧确与赵威方多次隔岸大骂，说： 天子自己与你媾和，我始终不会饶恕你！ 
English: Hou Jing said to Xiao Yan: Xiao Zhen and Zhao Weifang have repeatedly scolded each other across the river, saying: The Son of Heaven himself will make peace with you, I will never forgive you!

古文：我今便不敢去，若召此二人入城者，吾当解围。 
现代文：因此我现在就不敢离开，如果你召这两个人入城的话，我就立即解围。 
English: That's why I don't dare to leave now. If you call these two men into the city, I will immediately lift the siege.

古文：衍复遣使征确等，确等不从。
现代文：萧衍又派使者征召萧确等人，萧确等人不从。
English: Xiao Yan also sent an envoy to recruit Xiao Zhen and others, but Xiao Zhen and others did not follow.

古文：衍又为手书与诸军，云： 确若不入者，宜以军法送之。 
现代文：萧衍又亲手写下诏书给各军，说： 萧确等如果不肯入城，应当按军法把他们押送来。 
English: Xiao Yan also wrote an edict with his own hand to all the troops, saying: If Xiao Zhen and the others refuse to enter the city, they should be escorted in accordance with military law.

古文：确等不得已，乃赴衍。
现代文：萧确等不得已，才去到萧衍那里。
English: Xiao Zhen waited until he had no choice but to go to Xiao Yan.

古文：景夏谓衍曰： 始有西信至，北军已克寿春、钟离，我今便无委足处，求权借广陵、谯州，待征复两城，还以此州相归。 
现代文：侯景又对萧衍说： 适才有西边的消息来说，北军已经攻克寿春、钟离，我现在没有了立足之地，请求暂且把广陵、谯州借给我，待我前去征伐收复两座城之后，就把这个州归还给你。 
English: Hou Jing also said to Xiao Yan, "As far as the news from the west is concerned, the Northern Army has already conquered Shuchun and Zhongli, and I now have no foothold. I request that Guangling and Zhangzhou be lent to me for the time being. After I go forward to conquer and recover the two cities, I will return this province to you.

古文：衍又许之。
现代文：萧衍又答应了他。
English: Xiao Yan agreed to play for him again.

古文：景外云欲和，伺其懈怠，衍君臣上下信景欺诈，所有战具，悉皆收去。
现代文：侯景外表上说想要讲和，实际上是为了等待萧衍懈怠不备，萧衍君臣上下都听信了侯景的谎言，把所有的作战工具全都收去。
English: On the surface, Hou Jing said that he wanted to make peace, but in reality, he wanted to wait for Xiao Yan to slack off. Xiao Yan's lords and vassals all believed Hou Jing's lies and took away all the war tools.

古文：后知非实，更狼狈设备，有甚于初。
现代文：后来知道侯景言不副实，便重新仓促添置设备，其狼狈之状比当初更加严重。
English: Later, knowing that Hou Jingyan's words were not true, they hastily added equipment again, and their troubles were even more serious than at the beginning.

古文：城转危急，衍等计穷，乃复遣使诣景。
现代文：建业城又转而十分危急，萧衍等已无计可施，就再次派使者去见侯景。
English: Jianye City turned out to be very critical, and there was nothing Xiao Yan could do, so he sent an envoy to see Hou Jing again.

古文：景又诡云： 今时既热，便不能得去，正当乞留京师，为朝廷立效耳。 
现代文：侯景又诡称： 现在天气已经炎热，军队不能够离开，正应当请求留在京师，为朝廷立功报效。 
English: Hou Jing also said slyly: Now that the weather is hot, the army cannot leave, and it should be asked to stay in the Beijing Division to make contributions to the imperial court.

古文：而悉力大攻，七年三月遂拔之。
现代文：就竭尽全力大举攻城，武定七年三月终于攻陷了建业城。
English: He made every effort to attack the city in a big way, and finally conquered Jianye City in March of the seventh year of Wuding.

古文：景自至建业，纵军士前后虏掠，仓库所有皆扫地尽矣。
现代文：侯景自从进入建业，纵容军士到处大肆掳掠，城中仓库所有的财物都一扫而空。
English: Since entering the construction industry, Hou Jing has indulged the soldiers to plunder everywhere, and all the property in the warehouse in the city has been swept away.

古文：景乃从数百骑见衍，歔欷流涕，因请香火为作义兒，还以衍为主。
现代文：侯景带数百骑前去见萧衍，当面欷流涕，并摆下香火盟誓，甘愿作萧衍的义子，仍旧奉萧衍为君主。
English: Hou Jing rode with hundreds of horsemen to see Xiao Yan. In front of him, he sprinkled incense and swore that he was willing to be Xiao Yan's son-in-law, and still honored Xiao Yan as the monarch.

古文：令正德通启云： 前为景所擒，使摄四海，辞不获免，权总万机，今景既入辅，乞解僭滥，以王还邸。 
现代文：侯景又令萧正德呈上启奏说： 先前被侯景所擒，让我统摄四海，虽极力推辞而未能获免，只得暂时总领万机，现在侯景既然辅佐朝政，请求宽恕我僭位之过，让我仍旧以王的爵位回到我的府第。 
English: Hou Jing also ordered Xiao Zhengde to make an opening speech, saying: Previously, I was kidnapped by Hou Jing and asked to rule the four seas. Although I was not able to get rid of him, I had to temporarily lead the world. Now, since Hou Jing is an assistant to the government, I ask for forgiveness for my crime of taking the throne, and let me still return to my capital with the title of king.

古文：自景围建业，城中多有肿病，死者相继，无复板木，乃刳柱为棺。自云龙、神虎门外，横尸重沓，血汁漂流，无复行路。
现代文：从侯景围攻建业以来，城里的居民很多人患有肿病，一个接一个地死亡，到处找不到棺木，就把屋柱剖开做成棺材，自云龙门、神虎门以外，尸首横陈堆积，血水漂流，路上没有行人。
English: Since the siege of Houjing against Jianye, many of the city's residents have suffered from tumours and died one after another. They couldn't find coffins everywhere, so they cut open the pillars of houses to make coffins. Outside of Yunlongmen and Shenhumen, the corpses were piled up sideways, dripping with blood, and there were no pedestrians on the road.

古文：及景入城，悉聚尸焚之，烟气张天，臭闻数十里。
现代文：及至侯景入城，就把尸体全都集中起来焚烧，烟雾直冲云天，臭气传到数十里以外。
English: As soon as Houjing entered the city, they gathered all the bodies together and burned them. The smoke went straight up into the sky, and the stench spread to dozens of miles away.

古文：初，城中男女十余万人，及陷，存者才二三千人，又皆带疾病，盖天亡之也。
现代文：起初，城中男女有十多万人，到了城被攻陷的时候，生存下来的才只二三千人，而且都患有疾病，这大概是上天要让萧衍灭亡吧。
English: At first, there were more than a hundred thousand men and women in the city, but by the time the city was captured, only two or three thousand survived, and they all suffered from disease. This was probably God's will to let Xiao Yan perish.

古文：衍寻为景所饿杀。
现代文：萧衍不久就被侯景饿死。
English: Xiao Yan was soon starved to death by Hou Jing.

古文：自衍为景攻围历百余日，衍子荆州刺史、湘东王绎，益州刺史、武陵王纪各拥兵自守，坐看衍之悬危，竟不奔赴。
现代文：自从萧衍被侯景围困以来共历一百多天，萧衍的儿子荆州刺史、湘东王萧绎，益州刺史、武陵王萧纪各屯兵自守，坐看萧衍倒悬的危机，竟然不率兵奔往援助。
English: Since Xiao Yan had been besieged by Hou Jing for more than a hundred days, Xiao Yan's sons Jingzhou Zishi, Hunan Dong Wang Xiao Yuan, Yizhou Zishi, and Wuling Wang Xiao Ji each guarded their own garrisons, watching the crisis hanging over Xiao Yan, and did not lead soldiers to help.

古文：始景渡江至陷城之后，江南之民及衍王侯妃主、世胄子弟为景军人所掠，或自相卖鬻，漂流入国者盖以数十万口，加以饥馑死亡，所在涂地，江左遂为丘墟矣。
现代文：从侯景渡江到攻陷建业城之后，江南的民众和萧衍的王侯嫔妃公主、世胄子弟都被侯景的部下所掳掠，有的自相卖鬻，漂泊进入魏国的人大约有数十万之多，加上饥馑死亡无数，所在之处破败不堪，江东一带便成为丘墟。
English: From Hou Jing's crossing of the Yangtze River to the fall of Jianye City, the people south of the Yangtze River and Xiao Yan's princes, princesses, and sons were all captured and plundered by Hou Jing's subordinates. Some sold their estates to each other, and there were about hundreds of thousands of people who wandered into Wei. In addition, countless people died of starvation. The places where they were located were dilapidated, and the area east of the Yangtze River became ruins.

古文：初，衍崇信佛道，于建业起同泰寺，又于故宅立光宅寺，于钟山立大爱敬寺，兼营长千二寺，皆穷工极巧，殚竭财力，百姓苦之。
现代文：当初，萧衍崇信佛教，在建业城盖起一座同泰寺，又在他的旧宅建起一座光宅寺，在钟山建立一座大爱敬寺，又营建长干两座寺庙，都穷极其精工奇巧，耗去了巨大财力，百姓因此而困苦不堪。
English: At the beginning, Xiao Yan believed in Buddhism. He built a Tongtai Temple in Jianye City, a Guangzhai Temple in his old house, a Great Love Temple in Zhongshan, and two temples in Changgan. All of them were extremely elaborate and ingenious, consuming huge financial resources, and the people were in dire straits.

古文：曾设斋会，自以身施同泰寺为奴，其朝臣三表不许，于是内外百官共敛珍宝而赎之。
现代文：萧衍曾经设立斋会，自己则舍身于同泰寺做僧人，他的朝臣三次上表谏劝他都不答应，于是朝廷内外百官共同聚集珍宝把他赎出。
English: Xiao Yan had once set up a prayer meeting, but he gave up his life to become a monk at Dongtai Temple. His courtiers did not agree to persuade him three times, so hundreds of officials inside and outside the court gathered precious treasures to redeem him.

古文：衍每礼佛，舍其法服，著乾陀袈裟。
现代文：萧衍每逢拜佛，都要脱去礼法规定的皇帝服装，穿上乾陀袈裟。
English: Every time Xiao Yan worships Buddha, she has to take off the emperor's clothes prescribed by the etiquette and put on a dry robe.

古文：令其王侯子弟皆受佛诫，有事佛精苦者，辄加以菩萨之号。
现代文：他还叫他的王侯子弟都接受佛教的戒律，凡是有侍佛精诚勤苦的，就给他加上菩萨的称号。
English: He also told his princes and princes to accept the precepts of Buddhism, and anyone who served the Buddha sincerely and diligently was given the title of Bodhisattva.

古文：其臣下奏表上书亦称衍为皇帝菩萨。
现代文：他的臣下奏表上书也称萧衍为皇帝菩萨。
English: His vassals also called Xiao Yan the Emperor's Bodhisattva in their report.

古文：衍所部刺史郡守初至官者，皆责其上礼献物，多者便云称职，所贡微少，言为弱惰。
现代文：萧衍所属的刺史郡守初次被授任官职的人，都要责成他向朝廷送礼献物，奉献多的就说他称职，所贡财物略少，就说他在职能力弱而且不勤勉。
English: Xiao Yan's subordinate, the county magistrate of Zhishi County, who was first appointed to an official post, was required to send gifts and offerings to the imperial court. If he contributed more, he was said to be competent. If he contributed less, he was said to be incompetent and not diligent.

古文：故其牧守，在官皆竞事聚敛，劫剥细民，以自封殖，多妓妾、粱肉、金绮。
现代文：因此他的牧守，在官任上都竞相聚敛财物，剥削掠夺平民百姓，来增加自己的财富，一个个嫖妓养妾，食不厌精，衣饰华丽。
English: Therefore, his pastors, in their official positions, all competed to accumulate wealth, exploit and plunder the common people to increase their own wealth, one by one, they prostituted and raised concubines, they were not tired of eating fine food, and their clothing was gorgeous.

古文：百姓怨苦，咸不聊生。
现代文：百姓倍受其苦，都不能维持生计。
English: The people have suffered a lot and are unable to make a living.

古文：又发召兵士，皆须锁械，不尔便即逃散。
现代文：萧衍又在民间征集兵士，征来的人丁都须用锁链锁住，不这样就全都会立即逃散。
English: Xiao Yan also conscripted soldiers from the civilian population. The conscripts had to be chained up, otherwise they would all run away immediately.

古文：其王侯贵人，奢淫无度，弟兄子侄，侍妾或及千数，至乃回相赠遗。
现代文：他的王侯贵人，个个奢淫无度，弟兄子侄，身边的侍妾有的达到上千人，以至于把她们拿来互相赠送。
English: His princes and nobles were all extravagant, his brothers and nephews, and his attendants and concubines numbered in the thousands, so much so that they gave them to each other as gifts.

古文：其风俗颓丧，网维不举若此。
现代文：其风俗的颓丧，纲纪的废弛竟然到了如此的地步。
English: The demise of its customs and the decline of its discipline have reached such a level.

古文：衍自以持戒，乃至祭其祖祢，不设牢牲，时人皆窃云，虽僭司王者，然其宗庙实不血食矣。
现代文：萧衍因为自己严守佛教戒律，以至于在祭祀祖先时，不用牛羊猪等，当时人们私下里都说，他虽然僭立王者之位，但他的祖先宗庙也不能吃荤食了。
English: Because Xiao Yan strictly adhered to the Buddhist precepts, so much so that he did not use cattle, sheep, pigs, etc. when sacrificing his ancestors. At that time, people said in private that although he stood on the throne, his ancestral temple could not eat meat.

古文：衍未败前，宵其同泰寺，衍祖父墓前石麟一旦亡失，识者咸知其将灭也。
现代文：萧衍没有失败之前，他的同泰寺曾遭受火灾，他祖父墓前的石麟忽然不见了，有识之人都知道这是他即将覆灭的征兆。
English: Before Xiao Yan's defeat, his Tongtai Temple had suffered a fire, and the stone unicorn in front of his grandfather's tomb had suddenly disappeared. People with insight knew that this was a sign of his impending doom.

古文：景又立衍子纲，寻复杀之。
现代文：侯景又立萧衍之子萧纲为帝，不久又把他杀了。
English: Hou Jing also made Xiao Yan's son, Xiao Gang, emperor, and killed him soon after.

古文：衍之亲属并见屠害矣。
现代文：萧衍的亲属也都被杀害。
English: Xiao Yan's relatives were also killed.

