古文：四年春，王二月，夫人姜氏享齐侯于祝丘。
现代文：四年春季周历二月，桓公夫人姜氏在祝丘与齐侯见面。
English: In February of the fourth year of the spring calendar, Emperor Huan's wife Jiang met with Qi Hou in Zhuqiu.

古文：三月，纪伯姬卒。
现代文：三月，纪伯姬去世。
English: Ms. Kee died in March.

古文：夏，齐侯、陈侯、郑伯遇于垂。
现代文：夏季，齐侯、陈侯、郑伯在垂地见面。
English: In the summer, Qi Hou, Chen Hou, and Zheng Bo meet at the hanging ground.

古文：纪侯大去其国。
现代文：纪侯永远离开了他的国家。
English: Ji Hou left his country forever.

古文：六月，齐侯葬纪伯姬。
现代文：六月乙丑日，齐侯安葬纪伯姬。
English: On the 1st day of the 2nd lunar month of June, Qi Hou buried Ji Baiji peacefully.

古文：秋七月。
现代文：秋季七月，无事。
English: Autumn in July.

古文：冬，公及齐人狩于禚。
现代文：冬季，庄公国齐国人在禚地狩猎。
English: In winter, the people of Zhuang Duchy and Qi Province go hunting in the badlands.

古文：四年春，王三月，楚武王荆尸，授师孑焉以伐随。
现代文：四年春季，周王朝历法的三月，楚武王运用名叫荆尸的军阵，把戟颁发给士兵，要去攻打随国。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, in the third month of the Zhou Dynasty calendar, King Chuwu used the army formation called Jingzang to issue badges to soldiers to attack Sui.

古文：将齊，入告夫人邓曼曰： 余心荡。 
现代文：准备斋戒，进宫告诉夫人邓曼说： 我心神动荡不安。 
English: Preparing for the fast, I went to the palace to tell my wife. Dunman said, "My mind is restless.

古文：邓曼叹曰： 王禄尽矣。
现代文：邓曼叹气说： 君王的福禄尽了。
English: Dunman sighed and said: The king's fortune is exhausted.

古文：盈而荡，天之道也，先君其知之矣。故临武事，将发大命，而荡王心焉。
现代文：满了就会动荡，这是自然的道理。先君大概知道了，所以面临作战，将要发布征伐命令而使君王心跳。
English: When it is full, it will be turbulent, this is a natural reason. The previous ruler probably knew this, so when he was faced with a battle, he would issue a conquest order, which made the king's heart beat faster.

古文：若师徒无亏，王薨于行，国之福也。 
现代文：如果军队没有什么损失，而君王死在行军途中，这就是国家之福了。 
English: If the army has nothing to lose and the king dies on the march, it is a blessing for the country.

古文：王遂行，卒于木之下。
现代文：楚武王于是出征，死在樠树下面。
English: King Chuwu then went to war and died under a camphor tree.

古文：令尹鬥祁、莫敖屈重除道梁溠，营军临随。
现代文：令尹鬬祁、莫敖屈重秘不发丧，开通新路，并在溠水筑桥，在随国境外建筑营垒。
English: In order not to lose heart, he opened a new road, built a bridge in Surabaya, and built a camp outside the border.

古文：随人惧，行成。
现代文：随国人恐惧，向楚军求和。
English: Following the fear of the countrymen, they sued for peace from the Chu army.

古文：莫敖以王命入盟随侯，且请为会于汉汭而还。济汉而后发丧。
现代文：莫敖屈重以楚王的名义进入随国，和随侯结盟，而且邀请随侯在汉水转湾处会见，然后退兵。
English: In the name of King Chu, he entered Sui Province, allied with Sui Hou, and invited Sui Hou to meet him at the Hanshui Bay, and then withdrew.

古文：纪侯不能下齐，以与纪季。
现代文：渡过了汉水以后公布丧事。纪侯不能屈从齐国，把国家政权让给了纪季。
English: After passing through the Han River, the funeral was announced. Ji Hou could not succumb to Qi, and ceded state power to Ji Ji.

古文：夏，纪侯大去其国，违齐难也。
现代文：夏季，纪侯永远离开了他的国家，以避免齐国对他所加的祸害。
English: In the summer, Ji Hou left his country forever to avoid the scourge of Qi.

