古文：陶潜字渊明，或云字深明，名元亮。寻阳柴桑人，晋大司马侃之曾孙也。
现代文：陶潜字渊明，也有的说字深明，名元亮，寻阳柴桑人，是晋朝大司马陶侃的曾孙。
English: Tao Qian's character is profound, and some people say that his character is profound, his name is bright, and he is a Chai San who is looking for the sun. He is the great-grandson of Ma Tao Kan, the Grand Master of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：少有高趣，宅边有五柳树，故常着五柳先生传云：先生不知何许人，不详姓字。
现代文：年少时就有高雅的志趣，他房舍边有五棵柳树，于是就写了《五柳先生传》： 先生不知是何许人，不清楚他的姓名。
English: When he was young, he had a taste for elegance. There were five willow trees by his house, so he wrote "The Biography of Mr. Willow": I don't know who he is, I don't know his name.

古文：闲静少言，不慕荣利。
现代文：安闲恬静不爱说话，不羡慕名誉利禄。
English: Leisurely and quietly do not like to talk, do not envy the honor of Li Luo.

古文：好读书，不求甚解，每有会意，欣然忘食。
现代文：好读书，而不作过深研究，每当对书中意思有了自己的领会，便高兴得忘了吃饭。
English: I like to read, but I don't do in-depth research. Whenever I have my own understanding of the meaning of a book, I'm so happy that I forget to eat.

古文：性嗜酒，而家贫不能恒得。
现代文：生性爱饮酒，但家贫不能常有。
English: Sex and alcohol are natural, but family poverty is not common.

古文：亲旧知其如此，或置酒招之，造饮辄尽，期在必醉。
现代文：亲戚故友知道他的嗜好，有时就摆酒请他去，他一去就要把酒喝完，拿定主意一醉方休。
English: His relatives and old friends know about his hobby, and sometimes they invite him to go out for a drink. As soon as he goes out, he has to finish the drink, make up his mind, get drunk, and leave.

古文：既醉而退，曾不吝情去留。
现代文：喝醉了就走，一点儿也不留恋。
English: You get drunk and go, and you don't miss it at all.

古文：环堵萧然，不蔽风日，裋褐穿结，箪瓢屡空，晏如也。
现代文：家中四壁空空，房屋挡不住风吹日晒，粗毛短衣满是破洞和补丁，锅碗里经常空空荡荡，他却安然自得。
English: The four walls of his home are empty, the house cannot stop the wind from blowing and the sun from shining, his woolen shorts are full of holes and patches, the pots and pans are often empty, but he is at peace.

古文：常着文章自娱，颇示己志，忘怀得失，以此自终。
现代文：常写文章来自娱，并用来表示自己的志向，把得失全都忘记，就这样过一辈子。 
English: He often writes articles to amuse himself and to express his aspirations. He forgets all the gains and losses and lives his whole life like this.

古文：其自序如此。盖以自况，时人谓之实录。
现代文：如此叙说，是用来形容自己，当时的人们都说这是他的真实写照。
English: He used this description to describe himself, and people at the time said it was a true reflection of him.

古文：亲老家贫，起爲州祭酒，不堪吏职，少日自解而归。
现代文：父母年迈，家境贫寒，被任用为州祭酒，受不了官场那一套，不久便辞职回家。
English: His parents were old, his family was poor, he was appointed as the state sacrificial wine, he could not stand the officialdom, and soon resigned to go home.

古文：州召主簿，不就，躬耕自资，遂抱羸疾。
现代文：州里征召他去作主簿，他不去任职，自己种田养活自己，于是变得体弱多病。
English: The state conscripted him to be the chief accountant, but he did not go to work, he cultivated his own land to support himself, so he became weak and sickly.

古文：江州刺史檀道济往候之，偃卧瘠馁有日矣，道济谓曰： 夫贤者处世，天下无道则隐，有道则至。
现代文：江州刺史檀道济去看望他，他瘦弱不堪卧病在床已经多天了。道济对他说： 贤者处世，天下无道就隐居，有道就出来做事。
English: He had been bedridden for several days and was so weak that he could not bear to lie down. Doji said to him, "A wise man deals with the world. If there is no way, he will live in seclusion. If there is a way, he will go out to do things."

古文：今子生文明之世，奈何自苦如此。 
现代文：如今你生在文明昌盛之世，为何这样自讨苦吃呢？ 
English: Now that you are born in a civilized and prosperous world, why are you so hard on yourself?

古文：对曰： 潜也何敢望贤，志不及也。 
现代文：他回答说： 我怎敢自认是贤士，志趣也没有那么高啊。 
English: He replied: "How dare I think of myself as a sage, my aspirations are not that high.

古文：道济馈以粱肉，麾而去之。
现代文：道济送给他粮食和肉，陶潜挥手让他回去。
English: Doji gave him food and meat, and Tao Wubing waved him to go back.

古文：后爲镇军、建威参军，谓亲朋曰： 聊欲弦歌，以爲三径之资，可乎？ 
现代文：后来作镇军、建威参军。他对亲朋说： 我想暂且作几天官吏，挣几个归隐生活的费用，是否可以呢？ 
English: He said to his relatives and friends, "I want to temporarily work as a government official for a few days to earn some money for my retirement. Is it possible?"

古文：执事者闻之，以爲彭泽令。
现代文：上司听说了，就派他去作彭泽县令。
English: When his boss heard about it, he sent him to serve as the Penza county magistrate.

古文：不以家累自随，送一力给其子，书曰： 汝旦夕之费，自给爲难，今遣此力，助汝薪水之劳。此亦人子也，可善遇之。 
现代文：他不带家眷，送一个仆人给他的儿子，给儿子写信说： 你每天的生活费用，难以自给，现在派这人去，帮你劳动，他也是人家父母的孩子，你要好好对待他。 
English: He sent a servant to his son without his family. He wrote to his son, saying, "Your daily living expenses are difficult to provide for yourself. Now send this man to help you with your work. He is also the child of other parents. You must treat him well."

古文：公田悉令吏种秫稻，妻子固请种粳，乃使二顷五十亩种秫，五十亩种粳。
现代文：陶潜让把县里的公田全都种上酿酒用的秫稻，妻子一再请求种点吃饭的粳稻，他才让把二顷五十亩种秫稻，五十亩种粳稻。
English: Tao Qian let all the public land in the county be planted with barley rice for brewing wine. His wife repeatedly asked him to plant barley rice for meals. He only let him plant two hectares and fifty mu of barley rice and fifty mu of barley rice.

古文：郡遣督邮至县，吏白应束带见之。
现代文：郡中派督邮来县里检查，县吏禀告陶潜要穿戴整齐去见督邮。
English: The county sent a postal inspector to inspect the county, and the county official told Tao Qian to dress neatly to see the postal inspector.

古文：潜叹曰： 我不能爲五斗米折腰向乡里小人。 
现代文：陶潜感叹说： 我不能为五斗米的俸禄向乡里小人弯腰屈背。 
English: Tao Qian sighed and said, "I can't bend down and bend my back to the village villain for a salary of five doomi.

古文：即日解印绶去职，赋归去来以遂其志，曰：
现代文：当天就丢下官印辞去职务，并写下《归去来》以抒发他的心绪，辞中写道：
English: On the same day, he left his official seal and resigned from his post, and wrote "Returned" to express his feelings. In his speech, he wrote:

古文：归去来兮，田园将芜胡不归？
现代文： 归去来兮，田园将芜胡不归？
English: Returning home, will the countryside not return?

古文：既自以心爲形役兮，奚惆怅而独悲。
现代文：既自以心为形役，奚惆怅而独悲？
English: Already with the heart as a role model, and then with sadness?

古文：悟已往之不谏，知来者之可追。
现代文：悟已往之不谏，知来者之可追。
English: Satoru has already gone to the past, and those who know him can pursue him.

古文：实迷涂其未远，觉今是而昨非。
现代文：实迷途其未远，觉今是而昨非。
English: In fact, it is still a long way to go, but it feels like it is now and not yesterday.

古文：舟遥遥以轻扬，风飘飘而吹衣，问征夫以前路，恨晨光之熹微。
现代文：舟遥遥以轻，风飘飘而吹衣，问征夫以前路，恨晨光之熹微。
English: The boat is light far away, the wind is blowing and blowing clothes, ask your husband the way ahead, hate the morning light.

古文：乃瞻衡宇，载欣载奔，僮仆欢迎，弱子候门。
现代文：乃瞻衡宇，载欣载奔，僮仆欢迎，稚子候门。
English: Naozhong Hengyu, Zai Xin Zai Ben, Zou Min welcome, Wanzi waiting for the door.

古文：三径就荒，松菊犹存，携幼入室，有酒盈樽。
现代文：三径就荒，松菊犹存，携幼入室，有酒盈缶尊。
English: The three roads are deserted, the pine chrysanthemums are still there, children are brought into the room, and there is a can of wine.

古文：引壶觞而自酌，眄庭柯以怡顔，倚南窗而寄傲，审容膝之易安。
现代文：引壶繡以自酌，眄庭柯以怡颜，倚南窗以寄傲，审容膝之易安。
English: Pulling the jug with self-drinking, watching the court with a pleasant face, leaning on the south window with pride, and judging the ease of the knee.

古文：园日涉而成趣，门虽设而常关。
现代文：园日涉以成趣，门虽设而常关。
English: The day-to-day operation of the park is fun, and the gate is always closed even though it is open.

古文：策扶老以流憩，时矫首而遐观。
现代文：策扶老以流憩，时矫首而遐观。
English: Help the elderly to have a good rest, and look at them when they bow their heads.

古文：云无心以出岫，鸟倦飞而知还。
现代文：云无心以出岫，鸟倦飞而知还。
English: The cloud has no intention to fly out of the cocoon, the bird is tired of flying and knows how to fly back.

古文：景翳翳其将入，抚孤松而盘桓。
现代文：景翳翳以将入，抚孤松而盘桓。
English: With a wave of his hand, he stroked the lone pine tree.

古文：归去来兮，请息交以绝游，世与我而相遗，复驾言兮焉求。
现代文： 归去来兮，请息交以绝游，世与我而相违，复驾言兮焉求。
English: When you come back, please give me your last breath. The world is against me, and I can't say a word.

古文：悦亲戚之情话，乐琴书以消忧，农人告馀以春及，将有事于西畴。
现代文：悦亲戚之情话，乐琴书以消忧。农人告余以春及，将有事于西畴。
English: Pleasing relatives with words of love, playing the lute to dispel worries. When farmers say that spring has come, there will be trouble in the west.

古文：或命巾车，或棹扁舟，既窈窕以穷壑，亦崎岖而经丘。
现代文：或命巾车，或棹孤舟，既窈窕以寻壑，亦崎岖而经丘。
English: Or a life-jacket car, or a lonely boat, both in search of a raft, and rugged and over the hills.

古文：木欣欣以向荣，泉涓涓而始流，善万物之得时，感吾生之行休。
现代文：木欣欣以向荣，泉涓涓而始流，善万物之得时，感吾生之行休。
English: Muxinxin begins with Xiang Rong, the fountainhead, and flows. When good things come, I feel that my life has come to an end.

古文：已矣乎，寓形宇内复几时，曷不委心任去留，胡爲遑遑欲何之。
现代文： 已矣乎，寓形宇内复几时，曷不委心任去留，胡为遑遑欲何之。
English: It's already too late, when will the allegory of Unai come back, I don't have the heart to stay, I don't know what I want.

古文：富贵非吾愿，帝乡不可期。
现代文：富贵非吾愿，帝乡不可期。
English: If I don't want to be rich, I can't expect to be emperor.

古文：怀良辰以孤往，或植杖而芸耔。
现代文：怀良辰以孤往，或植仗而芸籽。
English: To cherish a good time is to yearn for solitude, or to sow seeds of war.

古文：登东臯以舒啸，临清流而赋诗，聊乘化以归尽，乐夫天命复奚疑。
现代文：登东皋以舒啸，临清流而赋诗。聊乘化以归尽，乐夫天命复奚疑。 
English: In the East, poems are composed with a soothing tone and a clear flow. Conversations are transformed into conclusions. Musicians doubt the fate of the world.

古文：义熙末，征爲着作佐郎，不就。
现代文：义熙末年，征召他为著作郎，他不去赴任。
English: In the last years of Yixi's life, he was conscripted to be a scribe, but he did not go to the post.

古文：江州刺史王弘欲识之，不能致也。
现代文：江州刺史王弘想结识他，未能找到机会。
English: Wang Hong, a painter from Jiangzhou, wanted to get to know him, but couldn't find the opportunity.

古文：潜尝往庐山，弘令潜故人庞通之齎酒具于半道栗里要之。
现代文：陶潜曾到庐山去，王弘让陶潜的旧友庞通之带着酒具在半道栗里等他。
English: Tao Qian once went to Lushan. Wang Hong asked Tao Qian's old friend Pang Tongzhi to wait for him in the chestnut grove along the way with the drinking utensils.

古文：潜有脚疾，使一门生二儿举篮轝。
现代文：陶潜脚有毛病，让一个弟子和两个儿子用一顶小轿抬着他。
English: Tao Qian had a problem with his foot, so he asked a disciple and his two sons to carry him in a sedan chair.

古文：及至，欣然便共饮酌，俄顷弘至，亦无忤也。
现代文：走到栗里，便欣然和庞通之一起饮酒，一会儿王弘来到，陶潜也没有表示不快。
English: When he got to Kuriri, he gladly drank alcohol with Pang Tong. Wang Hong came a moment later, and Tao Qian did not express any displeasure.

古文：先是，顔延之爲刘柳后军功曹，在寻阳与潜情款。
现代文：先前，颜延之为刘柳后军功曹，在寻阳和陶潜很有交情。
English: Previously, Yan Yan was a military hero of Liu Liuhou, and he was very friendly with Huan Yang and Tao Qian.

古文：后爲始安郡，经过潜，每往必酣饮致醉。
现代文：后来作始安郡太守，经常去看望陶潜，每次去两人都要痛痛快快喝醉为止。
English: Later, as the governor of Shi'an County, he often went to visit Tao Qian, and every time they went, they both got drunk.

古文：弘欲要延之一坐，弥日不得。
现代文：而刺史王弘想请延之来坐坐，竟一天也等不来。
English: But Wang Hong wanted to invite Yan to sit down, but he couldn't wait a day.

古文：延之临去，留二万钱与潜，潜悉送酒家稍就取酒。
现代文：延之临走，给陶潜留下二万钱，陶潜一下子全都存放到卖酒的那里，以便今后天天来打酒。
English: Before leaving, Yan Zhi left 20,000 yuan to Tao Qian. Tao Qian immediately deposited all of it at the liquor store, so that he could come every day to drink.

古文：尝九月九日无酒，出宅边菊丛中坐久之。
现代文：曾有一次九月九没酒喝，就跑出来在屋旁菊花丛中枯坐良久。
English: Once, on September 9th, he ran out of alcohol and sat for a long time in the chrysanthemum bushes next to the house.

古文：逢弘送酒至，即便就酌，醉而后归。
现代文：碰巧王弘送酒来，于是马上痛饮，直到喝醉才回去。
English: Wang Hong happened to bring wine, so he immediately drank heavily and did not go back until he was drunk.

古文：潜不解音声，而畜素琴一张。每有酒适，辄抚弄以寄其意。
现代文：陶潜不懂音乐，却拥有一张素琴，每当酒喝得痛快，就摆出来抚弄几下以抒发情怀。
English: Tao Qian doesn't understand music, but he owns a suqin. Every time he has a good drink, he will play it and caress it a few times to express his feelings.

古文：贵贱造之者，有酒辄设。
现代文：来访者无论贫富，只要有酒就拿出来一块儿喝。
English: Whether visitors are rich or poor, as long as there is wine, they will take it out and drink together.

古文：潜若先醉，便语客： 我醉欲眠卿可去。 
现代文：陶潜如果先醉了，就对客人说： 我醉了要睡觉，你先回去吧。 
English: If Tao Qian is drunk first, he will say to the guest: I am drunk and want to sleep, you can go back first.

古文：其真率如此。
现代文：就是这样天真直率。
English: It's just so innocent and direct.

古文：郡将候潜，逢其酒熟，取头上葛巾漉酒，毕，还复着之。
现代文：本郡的军官去探望陶潜，碰上他的酒刚酿好，见他从头上摘下葛巾来滤酒，滤完后，又戴在头上。
English: The county's officers went to visit Tao Xuan, met his wine just brewed, saw him remove the cloth from his head to filter the wine, and after filtering, put it on his head.

古文：潜弱年薄宦，不洁去就之迹。自以曾祖晋世宰辅，耻复屈身后代，自宋武帝王业渐隆，不复肯仕。
现代文：陶潜年轻时作小官，无论出仕还是退隐都不注意名声操守，自以为曾祖作晋朝的宰辅大臣，耻于屈身侍奉新朝，自宋武帝的江山日渐巩固，便不肯出去作官。
English: Tao Qian was a minor official when he was young, and he did not pay attention to reputation and ethics, whether he was serving or retiring. He thought that his great-grandfather was the Vice-Minister of the Jin Dynasty, and he was ashamed to serve the new dynasty. Since Emperor Songwu's country was becoming more and more consolidated, he refused to go out as an official.

古文：所着文章，皆题其年月。义熙以前，明书晋氏年号，自永初以来，唯云甲子而已。
现代文：所写的文章，都注明写作年月，自晋义熙以前，写明晋朝年号；自宋永初以后，只用甲子纪年。
English: All the articles are marked with the date of writing. Since before the reign of Jin Yixi, the year of the Ming and Jin Dynasties is written; since the beginning of the Song Dynasty, only the Jiazi era is used.

古文：与子书以言其志，并爲训戒曰：
现代文：他给儿子写信述说自己的心志，并作训戒说：
English: He wrote to his son, telling him of his intentions and admonishing him:

古文：吾年过五十，而穷苦荼毒。
现代文： 我已年过五十，而受穷苦熬煎。
English: I'm in my fifties and I'm struggling.

古文：性刚才拙，与物多忤。自量爲己，必贻俗患。
现代文：性格刚直而能力不济，与外界多不相合，一任自己的性情行事，必会招致世人的非议。
English: He has an upright personality, but his ability is not good. He is not compatible with the outside world, and if he acts according to his own disposition, he will certainly attract the criticism of the world.

古文：僶俛辞事，使汝幼而饥寒耳。
现代文：很快就要离开这个世界了，让你们从小就受饥寒。
English: Soon it will leave this world, leaving you hungry and cold from childhood.

古文：常感孺仲贤妻之言，败絮自拥，何惭儿子。
现代文：经常感慨孺仲贤妻的话，自己围着破棉絮，在儿子面前又有什么惭愧的。
English: He often regrets the words of his wife, and feels ashamed to be surrounded by broken cotton wool in front of his son.

古文：此既一事矣。
现代文：已经是这样过一辈子了。
English: It's been like this my whole life.

古文：但恨邻靡二仲，室无莱妇，抱兹苦心，良独罔罔。
现代文：只是遗憾邻里间没有第二个孺仲，家中没有老莱子那样的贤妻，怀着这种苦心，独自深为怅惘。
English: It's just a pity that there isn't a second Yanzhong in the neighborhood, and that there isn't a virtuous wife like Laozi in the family. With this kind of painstaking effort, I'm struggling alone.

古文：少来好书，偶爱闲靖，开卷有得，便欣然忘食。见树木交荫，时鸟变声，亦复欢尔有喜。
现代文：从小喜欢读书，又爱闲静，读书如有所得，便高兴得忘了吃饭；见到树木荫影交错，听见各个季节的鸟儿不同的鸣叫，心里就会感觉舒畅。
English: Since childhood, I like to read, and I like to be quiet. If I get something from reading, I will be so happy that I will forget to eat. Seeing the shadows of trees interlace, and hearing the different songs of birds in each season, I will feel comfortable in my heart.

古文：尝言五六月北窗下卧，遇凉风暂至，自谓是羲皇上人。
现代文：曾经说如果五六月间卧于北窗下，突然有一阵凉风吹拂，就自认为安闲自在如同上古先民。
English: He once said that if he was lying under a north-facing window in May or June and a cool breeze suddenly blew, he would consider himself to be as relaxed as the ancients.

古文：意浅识陋，日月遂往，疾患以来，渐就衰损。亲旧不遗，每有药石见救，自恐大分将有限也。
现代文：见识浅薄，岁月一天天过去。自从患病以来，身体逐渐衰弱，亲朋故旧都没有忘了我，常常送药为我救治，但自忖怕是寿限不长了。
English: Since my illness, my body has gradually weakened. My friends and relatives have not forgotten me. They often send me medicine to cure me, but I am afraid that my life expectancy is not long.

古文：汝辈幼小，家贫无役，柴水之劳，何时可免。
现代文：你们还都年幼，家里穷雇不起佣人，打柴挑水的日常劳动，什么时候能少得了呢。
English: You are still young, your family is poor and can't afford to hire a servant. When will you be able to do less of the daily work of chopping wood and carrying water?

古文：念之在心，若何可言。
现代文：心里总丢不下这些，但又能说什么呢。
English: I can't get it out of my mind, but what can I say?

古文：然虽不同生，当思四海皆兄弟之义。
现代文：虽然不能和你们再共同生活在人世，但是你们要常想想四海之内皆兄弟的道理。
English: Although we can no longer live together in this world, you should always remember that we are all brothers and sisters.

古文：鲍叔、敬仲，分财无猜，归生、伍举，班荆道旧，遂能以败爲成，因丧立功。
现代文：鲍叔、管仲，分钱财从不互相猜疑；归生、伍举，坐在荆条上共叙旧情，于是就能把坏事变好事，化不利为有利。
English: Baozhu and Guanzhong never suspect each other when they share money and property; when they are reborn or promoted, they can sit on the thistle and recite the old situation together, so they can turn bad things into good things and turn disadvantages into advantages.

古文：佗人尚尔，况共父之人哉。
现代文：和别人尚能如此，何况同一个父亲的兄弟之间呢。
English: It is possible to do this with other people, and even more so with brothers of the same father.

古文：潁川韩元长，汉末名士，身处卿佐，八十而终，兄弟同居，至于没齿。
现代文：颍川韩元长，是汉末名士，身居卿相，活到八十岁，兄弟在一起生活，直到老年。
English: Luchuan Han Yuan Chang was a famous man at the end of the Han Dynasty. He lived to be 80 years old, and the brothers lived together until old age.

古文：济北泛幼春，晋时操行人也。七世同财，家人无怨色。
现代文：济北汜稚春，是晋朝有操守的人，一连七代兄弟们不分家而共同拥有财产，家里人都没有怨言。
English: Jibei Xizhichun was the most virtuous man in the Jin Dynasty. Seven generations of brothers owned property together, regardless of their families, and no one in the family complained.

古文：诗云 高山景行 ，汝其慎哉。
现代文：《诗经》中说： 高山仰止，景行行止。 
English: In the "Book of Songs," it says, "Mountains stand still, scenery moves."

古文：又爲命子诗以贻之。
现代文：你们都要好自为之。 又写下《命子诗》送给儿子们。
English: You should all be good at what you do, and also write down the "Children's Poem" to give to your sons.

古文：元嘉四年，将复征命，会卒。
现代文：元嘉四年，朝廷又要征召他作官，正在这时他去世了。
English: In the fourth year of Yuan Jia, the imperial court wanted to recruit him as an official, at which time he passed away.

古文：世号靖节先生。
现代文：世人称他为靖节先生。
English: The world calls him Mr. Yasukuni.

古文：兄子景远有续之风。
现代文：他妻子翟氏，与他志趣相投，也能安贫乐道，和他前后相随耕耘田园。
English: His wife, Ms. Zou, who shares the same interests as him, is also able to live a life of peace and contentment, and follows him around to cultivate the countryside.

古文：戴顒字仲若，谯郡銍人也。
现代文：戴顒字仲若，谯郡铚县人。
English: He is a native of Yixian County, Shandong Province.

古文：父逵，兄勃，并隐遁有高名。
现代文：父亲戴逵，哥哥戴勃，都隐居而享有高名。
English: His father, Dai Ye, and his brother, Dai Bo, both lived in seclusion and enjoyed a high reputation.

古文：顒十六遭父忧，几于毁灭，因此长抱羸患。
现代文：戴顒十六岁时丧父，哀伤过度差点儿丢了命，因此便长期衰弱多病。
English: At the age of sixteen, Dai Yao lost his father. He was so grief-stricken that he almost lost his life. As a result, he was weak and sickly for a long time.

古文：以父不仕，复修其业。
现代文：因为父亲从不作官，于是他也走了隐居的道路。
English: Because his father was never an official, he also took the path of seclusion.

古文：父善琴书，顒并传之。凡诸音律，皆能挥手。
现代文：父亲善于弹琴书法，戴顒也都继承了父亲的专长，不管什么曲调，都能弹奏。
English: His father was good at playing the piano and calligraphy, and Dai Wu also inherited his father's expertise, no matter what tune, he can play.

古文：会稽剡县多名山，故世居剡下。
现代文：会稽剡县名山很多，所以他们祖祖辈辈都在剡县。
English: There are many famous mountains in Jixian County, so their ancestors have been in Jixian County for generations.

古文：顒及兄勃并受琴于父，父没，所传之声不忍复奏，各造新弄。勃制五部，顒制十五部，顒又制长弄一部，并传于世。
现代文：戴顒和哥哥戴勃都跟着父亲学琴，父亲去世后，所传授的曲子他们不忍再弹奏，就各人再创作新曲，戴勃创作了五部，戴顒创作了十五部，又创作长曲一部，一并流传于世。
English: Dai Yao and his brother Dai Bo both studied the piano with their father. After their father's death, they couldn't bear to play the pieces he had taught them, so they each created new pieces. Dai Bo created five pieces, Dai Yao created fifteen pieces, and they also created a long piece, which has been passed down to the world.

古文：中书令王绥尝携客造之，勃等方进豆粥，绥曰： 闻卿善琴，试欲一听。 
现代文：中书令王绥曾带着客人到他家去，戴勃等人正在喝豆粥，王绥说： 听说你们善于弹琴，我们想听一听。 
English: In the middle of the book, Wang Yao once took a guest to his house. Dave and others were drinking bean porridge. Wang Yao said: I heard that you are good at playing the piano, we want to listen.

古文：不答，绥恨而去。
现代文：他们不理睬，王绥含恨而去。
English: They ignored him, and Wang Yao left with hatred in his heart.

古文：桐庐县又多名山，兄弟复共游之，因留居止。
现代文：桐庐县也有很多名山，兄弟二人又一同去游赏。
English: Tonglu County also has many famous mountains, and the two brothers went hiking together.

古文：勃疾，患医药不给。
现代文：于是就住在那里。
English: So he went to live there.

古文：顒谓勃曰： 顒随兄得闲，非有心于语默，兄今疾笃，无可营疗，顒当干禄以自济耳。 
现代文：戴勃得了病，怕没钱买药吃，戴顒对戴勃说： 我跟随兄长悠闲度日，并非甘心于默默无闻，如今兄长病重，我应当出去干个一官半职以挣钱糊口治病。 
English: When Dave got sick and was afraid he wouldn't have enough money to buy medicine, Daisy said to Dave: I've been following my brother's leisurely life. I'm not content with obscurity. Now that my brother is seriously ill, I should go out and work part-time to earn money to treat my illness.

古文：乃求海虞令，事垂行而勃卒，乃止。
现代文：于是就去求取海虞县令的官职，事情快办成时戴勃病死，便又作罢。
English: So he went to apply for the post of Haiyu County magistrate. When the job was almost done, Dave died of illness, and he gave up.

古文：桐庐僻远，难以养疾，乃出居吴下。
现代文：桐庐地方偏僻荒远，难以养病，就从那里迁到吴郡。
English: Tonglu is a remote and desolate place, and it is difficult to recover from illness, so they moved from there to Wuxian.

古文：吴下土人共爲筑室，聚石引水，植林开涧，少时繁密，有若自然。
现代文：吴郡一些社会上层人士合伙给他盖了房子，并堆石山，引水溪，植树开涧，不久就茂密一片，好像自然山水。
English: Some upper-class people in Wuxi County jointly built a house for him, and piled up stone mountains, diverted streams, planted trees and cleared land, and soon it was a lush area, like a natural landscape.

古文：乃述庄周大旨，着逍遥论、注礼记中庸篇。
现代文：于是戴顒就在此处讲解庄子学说，著《逍遥论》，注《礼记·中庸》篇。
English: As a result, Dai Zheng explained Zhuangzi's theory here, in his "On Indulgence," annotated "Li Ji, Zhong Yong" edition.

古文：三吴将守及郡内衣冠，要其同游野泽，堪行便去，不爲矫介，衆论以此多之。
现代文：吴地的文武官员和郡内上层人物，邀请他一起游览山川，他能去就去，不摆架子，因此得舆论好评。
English: Wudi's civil and military officials and the county's upper-class people invited him to tour the mountains and rivers. He went wherever he could, without any pretensions, and was well received by the public.

古文：宋国初建、元嘉中征，并不就。
现代文：宋国初建时和元嘉年间都曾征召他作官，他都没有出任。
English: He was conscripted to serve as an official in the early Song Dynasty and the Yuan Dynasty, but he did not serve.

古文：衡阳王义季镇京口，长史张邵与顒姻通，迎来止黄鹄山，山北有竹林精舍，林涧甚美，顒憩于此涧。
现代文：衡阳王刘义季镇守京口，长史张邵和戴顒通婚姻，就把戴顒接到黄鹄山来住。山北有竹林和学舍，林木溪流景色优美，戴顒就在此间歇息。
English: Hengyang's King Liu Yiji of the town of Jingkou, Changshi Zhang Shao and Dai Yao married, and they sent Dai Yao to Huangpi Mountain to live. There are bamboo forests and schoolhouses in the north of the mountain, and the forest and streams have beautiful scenery. Dai Yao rested here.

古文：义季亟从之游，顒服其野服，不改常度。
现代文：义季屡次和他一起游玩，戴顒穿着乡下人的衣服，不改平时的气度。
English: Yoshisue has visited with him many times, wearing a yakitori, wearing the clothes of a villager, and maintaining his usual demeanor.

古文：爲义季鼓琴，并新声变曲；其三调游弦、广陵、止息之流，皆与世异。
现代文：他为义季奏琴，并奏新曲调，其中 游弦 、 广陵 、 止息 三首曲子，都和世间流传的不一样。
English: He played the harp for Yizi, and played new tunes, including the three tunes of Yuzhong, Guangling, and Zhixi, all of which were different from those popular in the world.

古文：文帝每欲见之，尝谓黄门侍郎张敷曰： 吾东巡之日，当宴戴公山下也。 
现代文：宋文帝几次想见他，曾对黄门侍郎张敷说： 我东巡的时候，要在山下宴请戴公。 
English: Emperor Songwen wanted to see him several times, and once said to the Yellow Gate chamberlain Zhang Shiki: "When I am on an eastern tour, I will invite Dai Gong to a banquet at the foot of the mountain."

古文：以其好音，长给正声伎一部。
现代文：因为戴顒爱好音乐，就赐给他一班音调纯正的歌伎。
English: Because Dai Shizuku loved music, he was given a class of pure tone Kabuki.

古文：顒合何尝、白鹄二声以爲一调，号爲清旷。
现代文：戴顒把 何尝 、 白鹄 两支曲子合成一支，有清新旷远之称。
English: Dai Xuan combines two pieces, He Xuan and Bai Xuan, into one, which is said to be fresh and far-reaching.

古文：自汉世始有佛像，形制未工，逵特善其事，顒亦参焉。
现代文：佛像从汉代开始才有，形态不够完善，戴逵善于塑像，戴顒也跟着干。
English: Buddha statues have been around since the Han Dynasty, but their form is not perfect enough. Dai Wei is good at sculpting statues, and Dai Wei also follows suit.

古文：宋世子铸丈六铜像于瓦官寺，既成，面恨瘦，工人不能改，乃迎顒看之。
现代文：宋太子在瓦官寺铸了一尊丈六铜像，铸成后，觉得脸太瘦，工匠们无法改正，就把戴顒找来察看。
English: Prince Song cast a six-feet-tall bronze statue in the Wakan Temple. After casting, he felt that the face was too thin, and the craftsmen could not correct it, so he looked for Dai Yao.

古文：顒曰： 非面瘦，乃臂胛肥耳。 
现代文：戴顒说： 不是脸瘦，是胳膊和肩胛太肥了。 
English: Dai Wei said, "It's not that my face is thin, it's that my arms and shoulders are too fat.

古文：及减臂胛，瘦患即除，无不叹服。
现代文：等把胳膊肩胛削减以后，脸瘦的毛病也就消除了，众人无不叹服。
English: After the arm and shoulder girdle were trimmed, the problem of a thin face was eliminated, and everyone was impressed.

古文：希林少守家业，徵召一无所就，卒。子蒙亦隐居不仕。
现代文：元嘉十八年去世，没有儿子。景阳山修成后，戴顒已经亡故。文帝叹息道： 可惜不能让戴顒去看看了。 
English: Yuan Jia died in 18 and had no son. After the construction of Jingyang Mountain, Dai Ye passed away. Emperor Wen sighed and said, "Unfortunately, I can't let Dai Ye go to see it."

古文：刘凝之字隐安，小名长生，南郡枝江人也。
现代文：刘凝之字隐安，小名长生，南郡枝江人。
English: Liu Xing's character is Ying'an, a minor chancellor, from Nan County, Shijiang.

古文：父期公，衡阳太守。
现代文：父亲刘期公，为衡阳太守。
English: His father, Liu Zhigong, was the crown prince of Hengyang.

古文：兄盛公，高尚不仕。
现代文：哥哥刘盛公，人品高尚不肯作官。
English: His elder brother, Liu Sheng, was a man of high moral character and did not want to be an official.

古文：凝之慕老莱、严子陵爲人，推家财与弟及兄子，立屋于野外，非其力不食。
现代文：凝之仰慕老莱子、严子陵的为人，把家产全都交给弟弟和哥哥的儿子，自己在野外建房舍，全凭自己劳动过日子。
English: A person who admires Laozi and Yan Ziling, he gave all the family property to his brother and his brother's son, built a house in the field, and lived entirely by his own labor.

古文：州里重其行，辟召一无所就。
现代文：州里看重他的品行，征召他作官，他一次也不去。
English: The state values his character and recruits him as an officer, but he never goes.

古文：妻梁州刺史郭铨女也，遣送丰丽，凝之悉散之属亲。
现代文：妻子是梁州刺史郭铨的女儿，陪送的嫁妆非常丰厚华美，凝之都分给了亲属们。
English: His wife was the daughter of Liangzhou's ruler, Guo Gan. The dowry she brought with her was very rich and sumptuous, and all of it was divided among her relatives.

古文：妻亦能不慕荣华，与凝之共居俭苦。
现代文：妻子也能够不慕荣华富贵，和凝之一块儿过勤俭清苦的日子。
English: A wife can also not yearn for prosperity and wealth, and live a hard-working and frugal life together.

古文：夫妻共乘蒲笨车，出市买易，周用之外，辄以施人。
现代文：夫妻俩一起乘坐隐士们乘坐的用蒲草裹轮的大车，到市场上买卖东西，自己够用之外，经常拿来送给别人。
English: Together, the husband and wife would take the big wheeled cart with a reed-wrapped wheel that was used by the hermits, and go to the market to buy and sell things. In addition to their own needs, they would often give them to others.

古文：爲村里所诬，一年三输公调，求辄与之。
现代文：他被村里人欺骗，一年里上交了三次公调，只要要他就给。
English: He was deceived by the villagers and handed over the money three times in one year. He will give it to them if they want it.

古文：又尝有人认其所着屐，笑曰： 仆着已败，令家中觅新者备君。 
现代文：又曾有人把他脚下穿的鞋认成了自己的，他笑着说： 我穿这双已经破了，叫家里找双新的给你。 
English: Another time, someone recognized the shoes he was wearing as his own. He smiled and said, "I'm wearing these broken shoes. I'll ask my family to find a new pair for you."

古文：此人后田中得所失屐，送还不肯复取。
现代文：这人后来在田里找到了自己丢的鞋，把鞋还给他，他却不肯再要。
English: The man later found his lost shoe in a field and returned it to him, but he refused to take it back.

古文：临川王义庆、衡阳王义季镇江陵，并遣使存问。
现代文：临川王刘义庆、衡阳王刘义季镇守江陵，都派人去问候他。
English: Liu Yiqing, the king of Linchuan, and Liu Yi Ji, the king of Hengyang, sent people to greet him.

古文：凝之答书顿首称仆，不爲百姓礼，人或讥焉。
现代文：凝之回信写顿首并自称仆，不行百姓对长官的礼节。
English: It is not proper for a commoner to write a stiff reply and call himself a servant.

古文：凝之曰： 昔老莱向楚王称仆，严陵亦抗礼光武，未闻巢、许称臣尧、舜。 
现代文：有人批评他，凝之回答说： 从前老莱子向楚王称仆，严子陵也不向汉光武帝行大礼，也没有听说巢父、许由向尧、舜称臣。 
English: Some people criticized him, but Genshi replied: Once upon a time, Lao Laizi called himself a servant to King Chu, Yan Ziling did not make a grand salute to Emperor Han Guangwu, and he did not hear that his foster father, Xu Yu, called himself a minister.

古文：时戴顒与衡阳王义季书亦称仆。
现代文：当时戴给衡阳王刘义季写信也自称仆。
English: At that time, Dai also wrote a letter to the king of Hengyang, Liu Yiji, and called himself a servant.

古文：荆州年饥，义季虑凝之馁毙，饷钱十万。
现代文：荆州那年闹饥荒，义季怕凝之饿死，赠送他十万钱。
English: There was a famine in Jingzhou that year, and Yizi was afraid of starving to death, so he gave him one hundred thousand yuan.

古文：凝之大喜，将钱至市门，观有饥色者悉分与之，俄顷立尽。
现代文：凝之大喜，拿着钱到市场大门外，看见面有饥色的人就分给他一些，一会钱就光了。
English: Delirious with joy, he took the money to the market gate, and when he saw a hungry-looking man, he gave him some, but soon ran out of money.

古文：性好山水，一旦携妻子泛江湖，隐居衡山之阳，登高岭，绝人迹，爲小屋居之。
现代文：凝之生性爱好山水，一天携妻带子遨游江湖，在衡山南麓隐居，登上高高的山岭，在人迹不到之处，搭起小屋住在那里。
English: He has a natural affinity for mountains and rivers. One day, he took his wife and children on a tour of the rivers and lakes. He lived in seclusion at the southern foot of Hengshan Mountain, climbed high mountains, and set up a hut to live there in a place where no one could find him.

古文：时或赋诗，而言不及世事。
现代文：采草药，服五石散，老婆孩子也都顺从他的意愿。
English: His wife and children also obey his wishes when it comes to picking herbs and taking five stone powder.

古文：卒年四十二。
现代文：终年五十九岁。
English: He was fifty-nine years old.

古文：朱百年，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：朱百年是会稽山阴人。
English: Zhu Centenary is a member of the Shan Yin Society.

古文：祖凯之，晋左卫将军。
现代文：祖父朱凯之，是晋朝的左卫将军。
English: His grandfather, Zhu Kizhi, was a general of the Left Division of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：父涛，扬州主簿。
现代文：父亲朱涛，作扬州主簿。
English: His father, Zhu Tao, was the chief accountant of Yangzhou.

古文：百年少有高情，亲亡服阕，携妻孔氏入会稽南山，伐樵采箬爲业，每以樵箬置道头，辄爲行人所取，明旦已复如此，人稍怪之，积久方知是朱隐士所卖，须者随其所堪多少，留钱取樵箬而去。
现代文：百年从小就有高尚的情操。父死丧服期满后，带妻子孔氏进会稽南山，以砍柴伐竹为业。常把柴草放在路口，总被行人拿走，第二天又有柴草放在那儿，人们渐渐感到奇怪，时间长了才知道是朱隐士放在那里卖的，需要多少拿多少，留下钱把柴草拿走就是了。
English: After his father's death and the expiration of the mourning period, Mr. Kong and his wife entered the Nanshan Association to cut firewood and bamboo. They often put firewood at the intersection, which was always taken away by pedestrians. The next day, firewood was put there again, and people gradually felt strange. It took a long time to know that it was Zhu Yinshi who put it there to sell, and how much they needed to take, leaving money to take away the firewood.

古文：或遇寒雪，樵箬不售，无以自资，辄自榜船送妻还孔氏，天晴迎之。有时出山阴爲妻买缯采五三尺，好饮酒，遇醉或失之。
现代文：有时遇上天寒下雪，柴草卖不出去，没有钱度日，就自己撑船把妻子送回娘家去，天晴再把她接回来；有时候到山阴县给妻子买几尺丝绸，好喝酒，碰上喝醉就弄丢了。
English: Sometimes, when the weather is cold and snowy, the firewood and grass cannot be sold, and there is no money to spend, he will paddle his own boat to send his wife back to his mother's house, and the weather will pick her up again; sometimes he will go to Shanyin County to buy a few feet of silk for his wife, so that he can drink, and if he gets drunk, he will lose it.

古文：颇言玄理，时爲诗咏，往往有高胜之言。
现代文：爱谈玄理，有时还赋诗，往往有高于常人的言论。
English: They love to talk about metaphysics, and sometimes write poetry, and often have higher-than-average speech.

古文：隐迹避人，唯与同县孔觊友善。
现代文：隐遁形迹，避免与人来往，只和同县孔觊友善。
English: He keeps a low profile, avoids contact with other people, and is only friendly with Kong Yao from the same county.

古文：觊亦嗜酒，相得辄酣对尽欢。
现代文：孔觊也好喝酒，在一起谈得投机了就相对喝个痛快。
English: Kong Hao is also a good drinker, and when they have a chance to talk together, they have a good time.

古文：百年室家素贫，母以冬月亡，衣并无絮，自此不衣绵帛。
现代文：百年家历来贫穷，母亲死在冬天，衣服里没一点儿棉絮，于是百年也就不穿棉衣。
English: My family has been poor for a hundred years. My mother died in the winter, and there wasn't a bit of lint in her clothes, so she didn't wear cotton clothes for a hundred years.

古文：尝寒时就觊宿，衣悉夹布，饮酒醉眠，觊以卧具覆之，百年不觉也。
现代文：曾在天冷时在孔觊家过夜，穿的都是夹衣，喝醉酒睡下，孔觊用被子给他盖上，百年没有察觉。
English: Once, when it was cold, he spent the night at Kong Yao's house, wearing only a jacket. When he fell asleep drunk, Kong Yao covered him with a quilt, and he did not notice it for a hundred years.

古文：既觉，引卧具去体，谓觊曰： 绵定奇温。 
现代文：醒了以后，把被子从身上掀下去，对孔觊说： 丝绵真是特别暖和。 
English: After she woke up, she took the quilt off her body and said to Kong Hao, "The silk is really warm."

古文：因流涕悲恸，觊亦爲之伤感。
现代文：于是悲痛下泪，孔觊也因此伤感。
English: As a result, she shed tears of grief, which also made Kong Lan sad.

古文：除太子舍人，不就。
现代文：朝廷征召他为太子舍人，不去赴任。
English: He was summoned by the imperial court to resign as crown prince and not to take up the post.

古文：顔竣爲东扬州，发教饷百年谷五百斛，不受。
现代文：颜竣作东扬州刺史，下指示发给百年粮食五百斛，百年不收。
English: Yan Shun made the history of East Yangzhou, the next instruction was to issue 500 baht of grain for 100 years, and not to collect it for 100 years.

古文：时山阴又有寒人姚吟亦有高趣，爲衣冠所重。
现代文：当时山阴还有一位贫寒人士姚吟也有高雅志趣，被上流社会看重。
English: At that time, there was also a poor person in Shanyin, Yao Ying, who also had a taste for elegance and was valued by high society.

古文：竣饷吟米二百斛，吟亦辞之。
现代文：颜竣送给姚吟米二百斛，姚吟也不要。
English: Yan Shun gave Yao Ying rice worth 200 baht, and Yao Ying didn't want it.

古文：百年卒山中。
现代文：百年死在山里。
English: A hundred years dead in the mountains.

古文：蔡兴宗爲会稽太守，饷百年妻米百斛。
现代文：蔡兴宗作会稽太守，救济百年妻子米一百斛。
English: Cai Xingzong became the auditor-general of the association, and his hundred-year-old wife received one hundred baht in relief.

古文：百年妻遣婢诣郡门奉辞固让，时人美之，以比梁鸿妻。
现代文：百年妻派婢女到郡衙门上言坚决不收，当时人们都称颂她，把她比作梁鸿的妻子。
English: The hundred-year-old wife sent her maidservant to the county magistrate's office to resolutely refuse to accept the proposal. At that time, people praised her and compared her to Liang Hong's wife.

