古文：韦滂柳氏王诉李哲卢瑗庐江民扬州塔高邮寺刘积中
现代文：韦滂柳氏王诉李哲卢瑗庐江民扬州塔高邮寺刘积中
English: Wang Weiyanliu v. Li Zherlu, Min Jiang, Yangzhou Pagoda, Gaoyou Temple, Liu Jizhong

古文：韦滂
现代文：韦滂
English: Wei Xuan

古文：唐大历中，士人韦滂，膂力过人，夜行一无所惧。
现代文：唐朝大历年间，有个叫韦滂的士人，膂力过人，夜间走路什么都不怕。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a scholar named Wei Xuan. He was a man of great strength and was not afraid of anything when walking at night.

古文：善骑射，每以弓矢随行。非止取鸟兽烹灸，至于蛇蝎、蚯蚓、蜣螂、蝼蛄之类，见之则食。
现代文：他善长骑马射猎，常常把弓箭带在身上走路，不仅猎取飞鸟走兽煮烤而食，就连蛇、蝎、蚯蚓、蜣螂、蝼蛄之类，见了就吃。
English: He was good at riding a horse and shooting, and often walked with a bow and arrow on his body. He not only hunted and cooked birds and animals, but also ate snakes, scorpions, centipedes, cockroaches, centipedes, and the like.

古文：尝于京师暮行，鼓声向绝，主人尚远，将求宿，不知何诣。忽见市中一衣冠家，移家出宅。子弟欲锁门。
现代文：曾经在京城里夜行，鼓声将绝，离主人家还很远，要找个地方住下，正不知到何处去，忽然望见市中有一个士大夫之家，搬出宅子，子弟正要锁门。
English: Once I was walking at night in the capital, the drums were beating, it was still far from my host's house, I needed to find a place to stay, and I didn't know where to go, when I suddenly saw a shidafu's house in the city, they were moving out of the house, and my son was about to lock the door.

古文：滂求寄宿，主人曰：此宅邻家有丧，俗云，妨杀入宅，当损人物。
现代文：韦滂上前去求宿。主人说：此宅邻居家有丧事。民间说，害人的杀气进宅子，会损害人和物品的。
English: Wei Wei went up to look for a place to stay. The owner said, "There is a funeral in the house of a neighbor. Folk say that if the murderous spirit of the murderer enters the house, it will harm people and goods.

古文：今将家口于侧近亲故家避之，明日即归。
现代文：现在我将家口在附近找地方避一避，明天就回来。
English: Now I'm going to find a place close to home to avoid, and I'll be back tomorrow.

古文：不可不以奉白也。
现代文：我不能不告诉你。
English: I can't not tell you.

古文：韦曰：但许寄宿，复何害也。
现代文：韦滂说：只要你让我在这宿一夜，又能有什么害呢？
English: Wei Wei said, "As long as you let me stay here for one night, what harm can it do?

古文：杀鬼吾自当之。
现代文：杀鬼我自己去干！
English: I'll kill him myself!

古文：主人遂引韦入宅，开堂厨，示以床榻，饮食皆备。
现代文：主人于是领韦滂进了宅子，打开堂屋和厨房，把床榻指给他看，吃的东西全都有。
English: The master then led Wei Wei into the house, opened the hall and the kitchen, showed him the bed, and there was everything to eat.

古文：滂令仆使歇马槽上，置烛灯于堂中，又使入厨具食。
现代文：韦谤让仆人把马拴到马槽上，在堂中点上灯，又让他到厨房做饭。
English: Wei Zhao asked the servant to tie the horse to the manger, light a lamp in the hall, and let him go to the kitchen to cook.

古文：食讫，令仆夫宿于别屋，滂列床于堂，开其双扉，息烛张弓，坐以伺之。
现代文：吃完饭，他让仆人睡在另外的屋里，自己把床摆在堂中，打开两扇门，息了灯，拉开弓，坐在那里等着。
English: When he had finished eating, he asked his servant to sleep in another room. He placed the bed in the middle of the hall, opened the two doors, extinguished the lamp, drew back the bow, and sat there waiting.

古文：至三更欲尽，忽见一光，如大盘，自空飞下厅北门扉下，照耀如火。
现代文：等到三更要尽的时候，忽然看到一个光亮，象大盘子，从空中飞下，来到厅北门扇之下，象火一样照耀着。
English: When he was about to finish, he suddenly saw a bright light, like a big dish, flying down from the sky, coming under the north door of the hall, shining like fire.

古文：滂见尤喜，于暗中，引满射之，一箭正中，爆然有声。
现代文：韦滂见了很高兴，在暗影中拉满了弓射过去。一箭正好射中，爆炸似的发出声来，火光一抽一抽地好象在动。
English: Wei Xuan was very happy to see him. In the shadows, a bow was drawn and shot past. An arrow just hit, making a sound like an explosion, and the fire seemed to be moving.

古文：火乃掣掣如动，连射三箭，光色渐微，已不能动。
现代文：他连射三箭，光亮渐渐减弱了，已经不能动了。
English: He shot three arrows in quick succession, the light gradually faded, and he could no longer move.

古文：携弓直往拔箭，光物堕地。
现代文：他拿看弓直接过去拔箭，发光的东西掉到地上。
English: He went straight to the bow to draw the arrow, and the glowing object fell to the ground.

古文：滂呼奴，取火照之，乃一团肉，四向有眼，眼数开动，即光。
现代文：韦滂喊奴仆拿火来一照，原来是一团肉。肉的四个方向有眼，眼几次开动，就有光。
English: Wei Yao called for his servants to light a fire. It turned out to be a lump of meat. The meat has eyes in four directions. If the eyes are moved a few times, there will be light.

古文：滂笑曰：杀鬼之言，果不虚也。
现代文：韦谤笑道：杀鬼的话，果然不是瞎说。
English: Wei Zhao said with a smile, "The words of killing ghosts are not nonsense.

古文：乃令奴烹之。
现代文：就让仆人把肉煮了。
English: and sent his servants to boil the meat.

古文：而肉味馨香极甚。
现代文：肉的味道极香。
English: The taste of the meat is delicious.

古文：煮令过熟，乃切割，为挚挚之，尤觉芳美。乃沾奴仆，留半呈主人。
现代文：煮得烂熟了，才切割，做成细末儿吃它，更觉得香美无比，就分一些给奴仆吃，留一半送给主人。
English: When it was cooked to perfection, he cut it into small pieces and ate it. He thought it was delicious, so he gave some of it to his servants and gave half of it to his master.

古文：至明，主人归，见韦生，喜其无恙。
现代文：到天明，主人回来，见到韦滂，为他的无恙感到高兴。
English: At dawn, the master came back, saw Wei Yao, and was happy to see him well.

古文：韦乃说得杀鬼，献所留之肉，主人惊叹而已。
现代文：韦滂就将杀鬼之事讲了，献上留给主人的肉，主人惊叹不已。
English: Wei Yao told the ghost-killing story and offered the meat to his master, who was astonished.

古文：柳氏
现代文：柳氏
English: Yanagi clan

古文：唐大历中，有士人，庄在渭南，遇疾卒于京。
现代文：唐朝大历年间，有一个士人，庄园在谓南赶上有病死在京城。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a scholar who died of illness in Beijing.

古文：妻柳氏，因庄居。有一子，年十一二。
现代文：他的妻子柳氏，继续在庄园里住，有一个儿子，十一二岁。
English: His wife, Liu, continues to live on the estate and has a son, aged 11 or 12.

古文：夏夜，其子忽恐悸不眠，三更后，见一老人，白衣，两牙出吻外。
现代文：一个夏天的夜晚，她的儿子忽然恐惧惊悸，不敢睡觉。三更之后，见到一位老人。老人穿白衣，两牙长出唇外。
English: One summer night, her son was suddenly terrified and did not dare to sleep. Three days later, he saw an old man. The old man was wearing a white robe, and his two teeth were protruding from his lips.

古文：熟视之，良久渐近前。
现代文：他仔细地看了好久，才渐渐走上前来。
English: He looked at it carefully for a long time, and then gradually came forward.

古文：有婢眠熟，因扼其喉，咬然有声，衣随手碎，攫食之。
现代文：有一位婢女睡得正香，于是他就扼住她的喉咙，发出咬东西一样的声音。她的衣服随着他的手碎了。他抓起来就吃。
English: One of the maids was sound asleep, so he grabbed her by the throat and made a choking sound. Her clothes fell apart in his hands. He grabbed her and ate her.

古文：须臾骨露，乃举起，饮其五藏。
现代文：不一会儿便露出了骨头。他就把她举起来，喝她的五脏。
English: Soon the bones were exposed, and he picked her up and drank her guts.

古文：见老人口大如箕，子方叫，一无所见。
现代文：见老人的口大如簸箕，儿子才大叫，什么也看不见了。
English: Seeing the old man's mouth as big as a beak, the son cried out, unable to see anything.

古文：婢已骨矣。
现代文：婢女已只剩下骨头了。
English: The maid was reduced to bones.

古文：数月后，亦无他，士人祥斋。
现代文：几个月之后，也没发生别的事情。士人使屋宇吉祥。
English: After a few months, nothing else happened. The scholar made the house auspicious.

古文：嚗然分为两扇，空中转轮，声如分蜂，忽合于柳氏首，柳氏碎首，齿著于树，其物飞去。
现代文：于是胡桃就长起来，一开始象拳，象碗那么大，惊看的时候，已经象盘子那么大了。一声响分成两扇，在空中转轮，声音象要分开的一窝蜂子。两扇忽然合到柳氏头上。柳氏的头就碎了。她的牙齿附到树上。那怪物便飞走了。
English: So the walnut grew. At first it was as big as a fist, as big as a bowl, but when I looked at it in amazement, it was as big as a plate. It split in two with a bang, spinning its wheels in the air, the sound like a hive of bees about to be separated. The two wings suddenly closed over Liu's head. Liu's head shattered. Her teeth clung to the tree. The monster flew away.

古文：竟不知何怪也。
现代文：到底不知道那是个什么怪物。
English: I really don't know what kind of monster it is.

古文：王诉
现代文：王诉
English: King v. South

古文：建中三年，前杨府功曹王诉，自冬调选，至四月，寂无音书。
现代文：唐朝建中三年，前杨府功曹王诉，从冬季调到京城选官，一直到来年四月也杳无音信。
English: In the third year of the Tang Dynasty, the former Yangfu Gong Cao Wang sued and was transferred from winter to Beijing to select officials, but there was no news until April of the following year.

古文：其妻扶风窦氏，忧甚。
现代文：他的妻子，扶风人窦氏，非常忧虑。
English: His wife, Dou, the windmaker, is worried.

古文：有二女，皆国色。
现代文：他有两个女儿，都是倾国的美色。
English: He has two daughters, both drop-dead gorgeous.

古文：忽闻门有卖卜女巫包九娘者，过其巷，人皆推占事中，遂召卜焉。
现代文：忽然听到门外有一个以占卜为生的女巫包九娘从这条巷子路过。人们都推举她占卜的事情很准。
English: All of a sudden, I heard that a witch named Bao Jiu Niang, who lived by divination, was passing through the alley. People said that her predictions were very accurate.

古文：九娘设香水讫，俄闻空间有一人下，九娘曰：三郎来，与夫人看功曾有何事？
现代文：于是就请她进来占卜。包九娘把香、水等准备完毕，顷刻间听到空中有一个人降下来。包九娘说：三郎来给夫人看看，王功曹到底有什么事？
English: So he invited her to come in for divination. When Bao Jiu's daughter had finished preparing the incense, water, etc., she suddenly heard a man descend from the sky. Bao Jiu's daughter said: "Saburo, come and show your wife what's going on with Wang Gong Cao."

古文：更无音书，早晚合归！
现代文：又没有音信，什么时候才能回来？
English: I haven't heard from you again. When will you be back?

古文：言讫而去。
现代文：包九娘说完，三郎就离去了。
English: After Bao Jiu's daughter finished speaking, Saburo left.

古文：经数刻，忽空中宛转而下，至九娘喉中曰：娘子酬答何物？
现代文：几刻之后，三郎又宛转地从空中降下来，到包九娘的喉咙中说：娘子用什么东西报答我？
English: A few moments later, Saburo descended from the sky in a different direction and said into Bao Jiu's throat, "What did you give me in return?"

古文：阿郎归甚平安。
现代文：你丈夫很平安地回来了。
English: Your husband is back safe and sound.

古文：今日在西市绢行举钱，共四人长行。
现代文：他现在在西市的绢行里作买卖赚钱，一共有四个人长期结伴而行。
English: He now earns money by doing business in Minhang, Xicheng, and the four of them have been traveling together for a long time.

古文：缘选场用策子，被人告，所以不得见官。
现代文：因为他在选场上考试的时候带进书策，被人告发，所以没有选上官。
English: Because he brought in the book policy during the examination on the election field, he was denounced, so he was not elected to the post.

古文：作行李次，密书之。
现代文：他的书策藏在行李中，上面有其私下所书文字。
English: His book proposal was hidden in his luggage, with his private handwriting on it.

古文：五月二十三日初明，诉奄至宅。
现代文：五月二十三日天刚亮，王诉忽然回到家中。
English: At first light on May 23rd, Wang Zheng suddenly returned home.

古文：窦氏甚喜。
现代文：窦氏非常高兴。
English: Dou is very happy.

古文：坐讫，便问：君何故用策子，令选事不成？
现代文：他坐定之后，妻子便问他为什么带进书策，使选官的事情没有办成。
English: After he had sat down, his wife asked him why he had brought in the book policy, so that the selection of officials was not done.

古文：又于某月日西市举钱，共四人长行。
现代文：又问他某月某日是不是在西市挣钱，是不是共有四个人长期结伴而行。
English: He also asked him whether he was earning money in Xicheng on a certain day of a certain month, and whether there were a total of four people traveling together for a long time.

古文：诉自以不附书，愕然惊异，妻遂话女巫之事。
现代文：王诉自然因为自己没给妻子写信，妻子却知道得如此详细而愕然惊异。妻于是说出了女巫占卜的事。
English: The king naturally complained that he had not written to his wife, but his wife was astonished that he knew so much, so she told him about the witch's prediction.

古文：即令召巫来，曰：忽忧，来年必得好官。
现代文：王诉立即让妻子把女巫找来。女巫说：不要愁，来年你一定能得一个好官职。
English: The king immediately sent his wife to fetch the witch, who said, "Don't worry, next year you will get a good position."

古文：今日西北上有人牵二水牛，患脚，可勿争价买取。旬月间，应得数倍利。
现代文：今天西北方向上有人牵着两条水牛来，有脚病，你可以不讲价把它买下来，十天半月就可以获取几倍的利。
English: Today, someone is coming from the northwest with two buffaloes. They have foot ailments. You can buy them without bargaining, and you can get several times the profit in ten and a half days.

古文：至时，果有人牵跛牛过，即以四千贯买。
现代文：到时候，果然有人牵着瘸牛路过。王诉就用四千钱买下了。
English: At that time, someone did indeed pass by with a yakitori in tow. Wang Su bought the yakitori for four thousand yuan.

古文：经六七日，甚肥壮，足亦无损。
现代文：经过六七天，牛变得非常肥壮，脚也不瘸了。
English: After six or seven days, the cow became very fat and her legs were no longer lame.

古文：同曲磨家，二牛暴死，卒不可市，遂以十五千求买。
现代文：同乡一户以推磨为业的人家，两头牛突然死了，一直没买到牛，于是就花十五千钱买王朔的两头牛。
English: A fellow villager, whose business was grinding, had two cows die suddenly and had not been able to buy any, so he spent fifteen thousand yuan to buy Wang Shuo's two cows.

古文：初诉宅在庆云寺西，巫忽曰：可速卖此宅。
现代文：当初王诉的宅第在庆云寺以西，女巫忽然对他说：你应该赶快把这所宅子卖了！
English: At the beginning, Wang Su's house was west of Qingyun Temple. The witch suddenly said to him, "You should sell this house quickly!"

古文：明年春，连帅陈少游，议筑广陵城，取诉旧居，给以半价。
现代文：王诉把宅子卖了十五万钱。女巫又让他在河东租赁了一处宅子。然后用积攒了一年的钱买竹子，编粗笼子。编的都是能装五六斗的笼子。编完就积攒起来，积了无数。
English: Wang Su sold the house for 150,000 yuan. The witch also let him lease a house in Hedong. Then he used the money he had saved for a year to buy bamboo and weave coarse cages. He made cages that could hold five or six buckets. After he finished weaving, he saved up and accumulated countless.

古文：又运土筑笼，每笼三十文，计资七八万，始于河东买宅。
现代文：第二年春，连帅陈少游，提议筑广陵城，占取了王诉的旧居，只给了半价。又编笼运土，每个笼三十文。王诉一共得钱七八万。这才在河东买宅第。
English: In the spring of the second year, the liaison officer Chen Shaoyou proposed to build Guangling City, occupied Wang Zhe's former residence, and only gave him half the price. He also made cages to transport soil, each cage costing 30 mon. Wang Zhe earned a total of 780,000 yuan. This is when he bought a house in Hedong.

古文：神巫不从包九娘而自至，曰：某姓孙，名思儿，寄住巴陵。欠包九娘钱，今已偿足。与之别归，故来辞耳。
现代文：一天，神巫没有跟包九娘一起而自己来了，说：我姓孙，名叫思儿，寄住在巴陵，欠包九娘的钱，现在已经还清，和她告别回去，所以来辞行。
English: One day, the sorceress did not travel with Bao Jiu Ni and came by herself, saying: My surname is Sun, my name is Si'er, I live in Baling, I owe Bao Jiu Ni money, which has now been paid off, and I am going back to say goodbye to her, so I am quitting my job.

古文：吁嗟久之，不见其形。
现代文：神巫叹息半天，却见不到他的身形。
English: The sorcerer sighed for a long time, but could not see his form.

古文：窦氏感其所谋，谓曰：汝何不且住，不然，吾养汝为儿，可乎？
现代文：窦氏对他多次出谋帮助很感激，对他说：你为什么不暂且住下？要不然，我把你当儿子养着，可以吗？
English: Mr. Dou was very grateful for his many times of help, and said to him: Why don't you stay for a while? Otherwise, can I raise you as my son?

古文：思儿曰：娘子既许，某更何愁？
现代文：思儿说：娘子既然答应了，我还有什么可愁的！
English: Sorrow said, "Since my daughter has consented, I have nothing to be sad about!

古文：可为作一小纸屋，安于堂檐。每食时，与少食，即足矣。
现代文：您可以为我做一个小纸屋，放在屋檐下，每当吃饭的时候，少给一点吃的就行了。
English: You can make me a little paper house, put it under the eaves, and every time you eat, just give me a little less food.

古文：窦氏依之。
现代文：窦氏照他的话做了。
English: Dou did as he was told.

古文：月余，遇秋风飘雨，中夜长叹，窦氏乃曰：今与汝为母子，何所中外？
现代文：一个多月之后，赶上秋风飘雨，思儿夜里长叹。窦氏就说：我和你是母子，为什么分里外！
English: More than a month later, catching up with the autumn wind and rain, thinking of her son and sighing in the night. Dou said: I and you are mother and son, why are we so different!

古文：不然，向吾床头柜上安居，可乎？
现代文：要不，你到我床头柜上来住，可以吗？
English: Or you can come and stay on my nightstand, okay?

古文：思儿又喜，是夕移入。
现代文：思儿又很高兴，当天晚上就搬进来住了。
English: Si'er was so happy that she moved in the same evening.

古文：便问拜两娣，不见形，但闻其言。
现代文：于是就拜问两位姊妹。见不到他的身形，只能听到他的声音。
English: So she asked the two sisters. She couldn't see him, only hear his voice.

古文：诉长女好戏，因谓曰：娣与尔索一新妇。
现代文：王诉的大女儿喜欢开玩笑，便对他说：我给你找一个新媳妇！
English: Wang Zhao's eldest daughter liked to joke and said to him, "I'll find you a new daughter-in-law!"

古文：于是纸画一女，布綵缋。
现代文：当时就用纸画了一位女子，以及布帛彩绸什么的。
English: At that time, I drew a woman with paper, as well as cloth and silk and so on.

古文：思儿曰：请如小娣装素。
现代文：思儿说：请按小姐的装束来画。
English: Si'er said, "Please draw according to the attire of the young lady."

古文：其女亦戏曰：依尔意。
现代文：女儿也玩笑道：就照你说的办。
English: My daughter also joked: just do as you say.

古文：其夜言笑，如有所对。
现代文：夜里便听到他与新妇说笑相对。
English: In the night, he was heard joking with the bride.

古文：即云：新妇参二姑姑。
现代文：画上女子立即就说：新媳妇参见二位小姑！
English: The woman on the painting immediately said: "New daughter-in-law, see two sisters-in-law!"

古文：诉堂妹事韩家，住南堰，新有分娩。
现代文：王诉的一位堂妹嫁给了姓韩的，住在南堰，最近生了孩子。
English: One of Wang's cousins married a man surnamed Han, who lives in Nanyan and recently gave birth to a child.

古文：二女作绣鞋，欲遗之。
现代文：两个女儿为孩子做了绣鞋，想要送去，就让婢女把鞋包起来。
English: The two daughters had made embroidered shoes for the child. If they wanted to send them, they asked the maid to wrap the shoes.

古文：方命青衣装，思儿笑，二女问笑何事，答曰：孙儿一足肿，难著绣鞋。
现代文：思儿就笑。两个女儿问他笑什么。思儿回答说：新生的孩子一只脚肿胀，很难穿绣鞋。
English: When his two daughters asked him what he was laughing about, he replied, "A newborn baby has a swollen foot, so it's hard to wear embroidered shoes."

古文：窦氏始恶之，思儿已知，更数日，乃告辞，云：且归巴陵，蒙二娣与娶新妇，便欲将去。望与令一船子，长二尺已来。
现代文：窦氏开始讨厌他了，他已经知道了。又过了几天，就告辞，说：我暂时回巴陵去。蒙二位姐姐给我娶了新媳妇，就想要把她一块带回去，希望能让人给我做一条小船，长二尺左右。
English: Dou began to hate him, he already knew. After a few more days, he left, saying: "I'm going back to Baling for the time being. My two sisters have married me a new daughter-in-law, and they want to take her back with them, hoping that someone will make me a small boat, about two feet long."

古文：令娣监将香火，送至扬子江，为幸足矣！
现代文：请让两位姐姐监督带着香火，把我送到扬子江。有这样的荣幸，我也就足了。
English: Please let my two elder sisters supervise me to carry incense and send me to the Yangtze River. With such an honor, I am satisfied.

古文：窦氏从其请。
现代文：窦氏答应了他的请求。
English: Mr Dou agreed to his request.

古文：二女又与一幅绢，画其夫妻相对。
现代文：两个女儿又给了他一幅绢，画上他们夫妻相对。
English: His two daughters also gave him a picture of them as husband and wife.

古文：思儿着绿秉板。具小船上拜别。
现代文：思儿穿着绿衣服，拿着板具，在小船上拜别。
English: Sear, dressed in green and holding a board, waves goodbye from a small boat.

古文：自其去也，二女皆若神不足者。
现代文：从他离去，两个女儿都像精神欠佳似的。
English: Since he left, both of his daughters seem to be in bad spirits.

古文：二年，长女嫁外兄，亲礼夜，卒于帐门。
现代文：二年后，大女儿嫁给表兄，成亲大礼的那天夜里，死在帐子门前。
English: Two years later, the eldest daughter married her cousin and died in front of the screen door on the night of the big wedding.

古文：以烛照之，其形若黄叶尔。
现代文：用烛一照，她的脸色就像黄叶一般。
English: If you shine a candle on her, her face looks like a yellow leaf.

古文：小女适张初，初嫁亦如其娣，诉终山阳郡司马。
现代文：小女儿嫁给张初。刚嫁过去，也像她的姐姐那样死掉了。王诉死在山阳郡司马的任期内。
English: The youngest daughter married Zhang Chou. She had just married and died like her sister. Wang Sui died during Sima's term of office in Shanyang County.

古文：李哲
现代文：李哲
English: Li Zhe

古文：唐贞元四年春，常州录事参军李哲家于丹阳县东郭。
现代文：唐朝贞元四年春，常州录事参军李哲家住在丹阳县东郭。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of the Zhengyuan era of the Tang Dynasty, the Li Zhe family, who participated in the military in Changzhou, lived in Dongguo, Danyang County.

古文：去五里有庄，多茅舍，昼日无何，有火自焚，救之而灭。
现代文：他的庄园离县城五里。庄园里多半是茅草屋，大白天无缘无故就有火自己烧起来。
English: His manor is five miles from the county seat. Most of the manors are thatched cottages, and fires start spontaneously in broad daylight for no reason.

古文：视地，麻屦迹广尺余，意为盗，索之无状。
现代文：人们把火扑灭，一看地上，有一尺多宽的麻鞋脚印，认为是盗贼干的。但是到处搜索也查不出线索。
English: People put out the fire, and when they looked on the ground, they saw footprints more than a foot wide, which they thought were made by thieves. However, they searched everywhere and could not find any clues.

古文：旬时屡灾而易扑，方悟其妖异。
现代文：十天之内，多次发生这样的事情，而且很容易扑灭，这才明白是妖异所为。
English: Within ten days, this kind of thing happened many times, and it was easy to extinguish, which made it clear that it was the work of a monster.

古文：后乃有投掷空间，家人怖悸。辄失衣物。
现代文：后来竟有把火投到空中去的时候，家人十分害怕，动不动就丢失衣物。
English: Later, when fire was actually thrown into the air, the family members were so scared that they lost their clothes at every turn.

古文：有乳母阿万者，性通鬼神，常见一丈夫，出入随之。
现代文：有一位叫阿万的乳母，有通鬼神的灵性。她常常看见一位男子，跟着她出出入入，有时是胡人的打扮，胡须很重，羊皮袄貂皮帽，间杂有红色紫色，倏地闪出来。
English: There was a nanny named Awan, who had the spirit of a medium. She often saw a man following her in and out, sometimes dressed as a bearded man, with a heavy beard and a sheepskin mink hat, mixed with red and purple, flashing brightly.

古文：或为胡形，须髯伟然，羔裘貂帽，间以朱紫，倏闪出来，哲晚习《春秋》于阁，阿万见胡人窃书一卷而去，驰报哲。哲阅书，欠一卷，方祝祈之，须臾，书复帙中，亦无损污。
现代文：李哲晚上在阁楼上读《春秋》。阿万看见胡人偷去一卷书，就跑去向李哲报告。李哲一看，书确实少了一卷。
English: Li Zhe was reading "Spring and Autumn" in the attic at night. When Awan saw Hu stealing a book, he ran to report to Li Zhe. Li Zhe saw that the book was indeed missing one volume.

古文：李氏患之，意其庭竹耸茂，鬼魅可栖，潜议伐去之，以植桃。
现代文：于是他就祭祝祷告。片刻之间，书又回到书箱里来，也没有破损弄脏。李哲害怕了，想到院子里的竹很高很茂盛，鬼怪可以在里边栖息，就暗中商议，要把竹林砍去，用来栽种桃树。
English: Li Zhe was scared, thinking that the bamboo in the courtyard was very tall and lush, and that the ghosts could live there, so he secretly discussed cutting down the bamboo grove and using it to plant a peach tree.

古文：忽于庭中得一书；闻君议伐竹种桃，尽为竹筹。
现代文：忽然在院子里拾到一封信，信上说：听说你商议砍竹种桃，把竹子都做成筹签。
English: Suddenly, I found a letter in the yard. The letter said, "I heard that you were discussing cutting bamboo to grow peaches, and making bamboo into a plan.

古文：州下粟方贱，一船竹可贸一船粟，幸速图之。
现代文：州下粮食正便宜，一船竹子可以换一船粮，希望赶快行动。
English: Grain is cheap in the state, and a boatload of bamboo can be exchanged for a boatload of grain. I hope to act quickly.

古文：其笔札不工，纸方数寸。
现代文：写信的字迹不工整，纸有几寸见方大小。
English: The handwriting on the letter is sloppy, and the paper is a few inches square.

古文：哲兄子士温、士儒，并刚勇。常骂之。辄失冠履。后稍祈之，而归所失。
现代文：李哲的侄子李士温、李士儒都很刚勇，常常骂这妖物，动不动就丢了帽子和鞋，后来也略微祷告一番，丢失的东西便又回来了。
English: Li Zhe's nephews, Li Shwen and Li Shru, were both very brave. They often scolded the monster, and lost their hats and shoes at every turn. Later, they also prayed a little, and the lost things came back.

古文：复投书曰：惟圣罔念作狂，唯狂克念作圣，君始骂我而见祈，今并还之。
现代文：妖物又投书来说：只有圣人没有自己的思想叫做狂；只有狂人战胜自己的思想叫做圣。你当初骂我，如今又祈祝我，现在把东西都还给你。
English: The monster threw the book again and said, "Only a saint without his own thoughts is called a madman; only a madman who overcomes his own thoughts is called a saint. At first you cursed me, but now you pray for me, and now you want everything back.

古文：书后言墨荻君状。
现代文：信后署名是墨荻君。
English: The letter is signed "墨 Jun."

古文：居旬，邻人盗哲犬，杀而食之。
现代文：过了十天，邻居偷去了李哲的狗杀着吃了。
English: Ten days later, a neighbour stole Li Zhe's dog, killed it and ate it.

古文：事发，又得一书曰：里仁为美，择不处仁，焉得智？
现代文：事发后，又得到一封书信，说：邻里以仁为美，不择仁人为邻，哪里能有明智可言！
English: After the incident, he received another letter, saying: "It is beautiful to have benevolent neighbors, but it is not wise to choose benevolent neighbors.

古文：数旬之后，其家失物至多，家人意其鬼为盗，又一书言：刘长卿诗曰： 直氏偷金枉，君谓我为盗。今既得盗，如之何？
现代文：几十天之后，他家的东西丢失了许多，家人以为是那个鬼物偷走了。那鬼物又送来一书信，说：刘长卿的诗说， 直氏偷金枉，君谓我为盗 ，如今既然知道谁是盗贼了，你能把盗贼怎么样呢？
English: After dozens of days, many of his family's belongings were lost, and the family thought that the ghost had stolen them. The ghost sent another letter, saying: Liu Changqing's poem said, Nao stole money in vain, you called me a thief, now that you know who the thief is, what can you do with the thief?

古文：士温、士儒竟扜御之。
现代文：李士温、李士儒居然开始提防起来。
English: Li Shwen and Li Shuru actually began to be on their guard.

古文：是夏夜，士温醉卧，背烛床头。见一丈夫，自门直入，不虞有人，因至烛前。
现代文：这是个夏天的夜晚，李士温背着灯光醉卧在床上，看见一位男子，从门外直接进来，不怕屋里有人，于是就来到灯下。
English: It was a summer night. Li Shwen was lying drunk on his bed with the light on his back. He saw a man come in directly from outside the door. He was not afraid of someone in the room, so he came to the light.

古文：士温忽跃身擒之，果获，烛亦灭。
现代文：李士温忽然跳起来捉他，果然捉到了。灯也灭了。
English: Li Shwen suddenly jumped up to catch him, and he did. The lights went out.

古文：于暗中扜御尽力，久之，喀喀有声，烛至坚渐。
现代文：黑暗里李士温尽力防着他。过了挺长一会儿，有一种喀喀的声音。
English: In the darkness, Li Shwen tried his best to fend him off. After a long while, there was a clicking sound.

古文：是一瓦，瓦背画作眉目，以纸为头巾，衣一小儿衣，又以妇人披帛，缠头数匝，方结之。
现代文：有人把灯送来，一看，那小子渐渐变成一块瓦，瓦的背面画有眉眼，用纸做的头巾，穿了一件小孩衣裳，又用妇人的披帛，把头缠了几圈，才打了个结。
English: Someone brought a lamp, and at a glance, the boy gradually turned into a piece of tile. The back of the tile was painted with eyebrows and eyes, a paper headscarf, a child's dress, and a woman's shawl. He wrapped his head several times before tying a knot.

古文：李氏遂钉于柱，碎之，数日外，有妇人丧服哭于圃，言杀我夫。
现代文：姓李的于是就把这块瓦钉到了柱子上，把它打碎了。几天之后，有一个妇人穿着丧服在园子里哭，说杀了她的丈夫。
English: Li then nailed the tile to a post and smashed it, and a few days later a woman in mourning clothes was crying in the garden, saying she had killed her husband.

古文：明日哭于庭，乃投书曰：谚所谓 一鸡死，一鸡鸣 。
现代文：第二天，又到院子里哭，还投书说：谚语说的 一鸡死、一鸡鸣 。
English: The next day, she went to the courtyard to cry again, and she also wrote a letter saying, "As the saying goes, one chicken dies, one chicken crows."

古文：吾属百户，当相报耳。
现代文：我属下百家应当报复就这样她象原来一样来往。
English: A hundred families under me should take revenge, so she can come and go as before.

古文：如是往来如初，尝取人衣著中庭树，扶疏莫知所由也，求而遂解之。
现代文：曾经把人的衣服拿去挂到院子里的树上，随风飘动，谁也不知从哪来的。
English: He once took a man's clothes and hung them on a tree in the yard, and they fluttered in the wind, and no one knew where they came from.

古文：又以大器物投小器物中，出入不碍。
现代文：有人来找，衣服就自己落下来。她又把大器物扔到小器物之中，出入竟然没有阻碍。
English: When someone came to look for her, her clothes fell off on their own. She also threw large objects into small objects, and there were no obstacles to getting in or out.

古文：旬时，士儒又张灯，见一妇人外来，戏烛下，复为士儒擒焉。
现代文：十天之后，李士儒又在张灯时分看见一位妇人从外面来，在灯下嬉戏，又被李士儒捉住了。
English: Ten days later, at the time of hanging the lantern, Li Shiru saw a woman coming from outside, playing under the lantern, and was caught by Li Shiru again.

古文：扜力良久，杀而硬，烛之，亦瓦而衣也，遂末之。
现代文：扭动撕扯了半天，用侧手一打，觉得挺硬。用灯一照，也是一块穿了衣服的瓦。于是把它摔成粉末。
English: After twisting and tearing for half a day, I did a dozen with my side hand and felt it was hard. When I shined a light, it was also a piece of clothed tile. So I broke it into powder.

古文：而明日复有其类哀哭。
现代文：第二天又有那样的哀哭。
English: The next day there was more of that wailing.

古文：常畏三侄。呼为二郎。
现代文：平常就怕两个侄子，呼他二人为二郎。
English: He is usually afraid of his two nephews and calls them his second cousins.

古文：二郎至。即不多来。
现代文：二郎到了，妖鬼就不敢多来。
English: When Jiro arrives, the ghosts don't dare to come any more.

古文：李氏潜欲徙其居。而得一书曰：闻君欲徙居，吾已先至其所矣。
现代文：李家暗中想要搬家到别处去，都得到一封书信说：听说你要搬家，我已经先搬到那个地方了。
English: When the Li family secretly wanted to move to another place, they all received a letter saying: I heard that you were going to move, so I moved to that place first.

古文：李氏有二老犬，一名韩儿，一名猛子，自有此妖，不复食，常摇尾戏于空暗处，遂毙之。
现代文：李家有两条老狗，一条叫韩儿，一条叫猛子。自从有了这妖怪，狗就不再吃食，常常摇着尾巴在空暗处嬉戏。
English: The Li family has two old dogs, one named Han Er and the other named Meng Zi. Since they got this monster, the dogs no longer eat and often play in the dark, wagging their tails.

古文：自后家有窃议事，魅莫能知之。
现代文：于是就把它们打死了。从此以后，家中有私下议论的事，鬼怪就不能知道了。
English: So he killed them, and from then on, no one in the family could talk about the ghosts in private.

古文：一书：自无韩大猛二，吾属无依。
现代文：鬼怪又投来一书说：自从没了韩大和猛二，我们没有依靠了。
English: The ghost wrote another letter, saying, "Since we lost Han University and Meng Er, we don't have anyone to rely on.

古文：又家人自郭返，至其里，见二丈夫于道侧，迎问家人曰：闻尔家有怪异，若之何？
现代文：另外，一位家人从城中回来，走到庄外，看见两位男子在道旁迎住家人问道：听说你们家闹鬼，怎么办了？
English: In addition, a family member came back from the city, walked outside the village, saw two men on the roadside, greeted the family and asked: I heard that your house is haunted, what should I do?

古文：遂以事答，及行，顾已不见。
现代文：家人就把事告诉了他们。等到走的时候，回头一看，二位男子不见了。
English: The family members told them what had happened, but when they left, they looked back and the two men were gone.

古文：李氏于润州迎山人韦士昌，士昌以符置诸瓦棂间，以压之。
现代文：李家到润州把隐士韦士昌请了来。韦士昌把符放到瓦棂间，用来镇压鬼魅。
English: The Li family invited the hermit Wei Shichang to Rongzhou. Wei Shichang placed the charm between the tiles to suppress ghosts.

古文：鬼书至曰：符至圣也，而置之屋上，不亦轻为。
现代文：鬼投书来说：符是最神圣的东西，而你把它放到屋顶上，不也太不尊重了吗？
English: According to the ghost writer, the amulet is the most sacred thing, and if you put it on the roof, isn't it too disrespectful?

古文：士昌无能为，乃去。
现代文：韦士昌无能为力，就离开了。
English: Unable to do anything, Wei Shichang left.

古文：闻淮楚有卫生者，久于咒术，乃邀之。
现代文：听说淮楚一带有一个姓卫的年轻人，对咒术研究了很久，就请他来。
English: Hearing that there was a young man surnamed Wei in the Huai Chu area who had studied magic for a long time, he was invited to come.

古文：卫生至，其鬼颇惮之，其来稍疏。
现代文：姓卫的到了之后，那鬼非常害怕，来的次数就少了。
English: After Wei arrived, the ghost was very scared and came less often.

古文：卫生乃设道场，以考召。
现代文：姓卫的就设道场，用来考察召引妖鬼。
English: Wei set up a dojo to investigate summoning ghosts.

古文：置箱于坛中，宿昔箱中得一状，状件所失物，云：若干物已货讫，得钱若干；买果子及梳子等食讫，其余若干，并送还。
现代文：他在坛中放了一只箱子，早晨在箱子里得到一张状纸，状上分列所丢失的东西，说：若干东西已经卖出去了，得了若干钱，买果子和梳子等，吃了用了。其余的若干东西全部奉还。
English: He put a box in the jar, and in the morning he got a piece of paper from the box, on which he listed the things he had lost, saying: "Some things have been sold, I got some money, I bought fruit and combs, etc., and I used it. The rest of the things have all been returned."

古文：验其物，悉在箱中。
现代文：查验那些东西，全都在箱子里。
English: Check those things, they're all in the box.

古文：又言：失铛子，其实不取，请问诸水滨。
现代文：状上还说家里讲丢了锅，我确实没拿，请到水边上去打听一下。
English: The letter also said that the family had lost a pan, but I did not take it. Please go to the water's edge to find out.

古文：状言孤腾腞等状，自此更不复来。异日，于河中果得铛子，乃验水滨之说也。
现代文：从此更不敢再来了。他日，在河里果然找到了以前丢失的锅，这就应验了到水边上去打听一下的话。
English: From then on, he didn't dare to come back. The other day, the otter found the lost pot in the river, which fulfilled his promise to go to the water's edge to inquire.

古文：卢瑗
现代文：卢瑗
English: Lu Wei

古文：贞元九年，前亳州刺史卢瑗家于东都康裕坊。
现代文：贞元九年，前亳州刺史卢瑗家住东都康裕坊。
English: In the ninth year of the Zhengyuan era, the former Zhangzhou Zhishuluo family lived in the Dongdu Kangyu Village.

古文：瑗父正病卒，后两日正昼，忽有大鸟色苍，飞于庭，巡翔空间。
现代文：卢瑗的父亲正病死，两天之后正是白天，忽然有一只苍色大鸟飞到院子里来，在院子上空来回飞翔。
English: Lu Yao's father was dying of illness. Two days later, in the middle of the day, a large pale bird suddenly flew into the yard and flew back and forth over the yard.

古文：度其影，可阔丈四五，家人咸见。
现代文：估计一下它的影子，有一丈四五尺宽。家人全都看见了。
English: Estimating its shadow, it was four or five feet wide. The whole family saw it.

古文：顷之，飞入西南隅井中，久而飞出。
现代文：过了一会儿，大鸟飞进西南角的一口井里，好长时间又飞出来。
English: After a while, the large bird flew into a well in the southwest corner of the village and flew out again for a long time.

古文：人往视之，其井水已竭，中获二卵，大如斗。
现代文：人们跑去一看，井中水已经枯竭。从井里拾到两只鸟蛋，斗那么大。
English: People ran to see that the water in the well had dried up. They picked up two bird eggs from the well, the size of a large bucket.

古文：将出破之，血流数斗。
现代文：把蛋弄出来打破，淌出来几斗血。
English: Get the egg out and break it, and a few buckets of blood will come out.

古文：至明，忽闻堂西奥，有一女人哭。
现代文：到了明天，忽然听到堂屋西边深处，有一位女人在哭。
English: The next day, I suddenly heard a woman crying in the depths to the west of the hall.

古文：往看，见一女子，年可十八九，乌巾帽首，哭转哀厉。
现代文：去一看，见有一位十八九岁，头戴乌巾小帽的女子。她哭得更加哀伤。
English: I went there and saw an 18- or 19-year-old woman wearing a black headscarf, and she was crying even more sadly.

古文：问其所从来，徐徐出就东间，乃言曰：吾诞子井中，何敢取杀？
现代文：问她从哪来，她慢慢地出来来到东屋，才说道：我在井里生了儿子，你们怎么敢弄出杀死他们呢？
English: I asked her where she came from, and she slowly came out to the annex before saying: I gave birth to my son in the well, how dare you try to kill them?

古文：言毕，却往西间，拽其尸，如糜散之，讫，奋臂而去，出门而灭。
现代文：说完，她退往西间，拽那尸体，象糜烂了一般把它散开。弄完之后，奋臂离去，出门就消失了。
English: Having said this, she retreated to the west, dragged the corpse, and scattered it as if it were rotten. After she had done this, she stormed away and disappeared from the house.

古文：其家大震惧，取所留卵，却送于野，使人驰问桑道茂。
现代文：卢家很震惊，把留下的那只蛋拿出来，送到野外，派人去问桑道茂，桑道茂让他们祭祀消灾。
English: The Lu family was shocked. They took out the egg that was left and sent it to the field. They sent someone to ask Sando Shigeru. Sando Shigeru asked them to make a sacrifice to eliminate the disaster.

古文：道茂令禳谢之，后亦无徵祥，而莫测其异也。庐江民
现代文：后来也没什么征兆，也没有测知那是什么妖异。庐江民
English: Later, there were no signs, and there was no way to know what kind of monster it was.

古文：贞元中，有庐江都民，因采樵至山。
现代文：唐朝贞元年间，有一个家住江都的百姓，因为打柴进到山里，赶上天色已晚，忽然看到一个胡人。
English: In the first year of the Zhengyuan period of the Tang Dynasty, there was a peasant whose family lived in the capital of Jiangsu Province. Because he had gone into the mountains to collect firewood, it was too late to catch the sunrise, and he suddenly saw a Hu person.

古文：会日暮，忽见一胡人，长丈余，自山崦中出，衣黑衣，执弓矢。
现代文：那胡人一丈多高，从日落的山中走出来，穿着黑色衣服，带着弓箭。
English: A tall man, he came out of the mountains at sunset, dressed in black and carrying a bow and arrow.

古文：民大恐，遽走匿古木中，窥之，胡人伫望良久，忽东向发一矢。
现代文：这个百姓很害怕，急忙跑到古树林中藏起来，偷偷地往外看。胡人伫望了好久，忽然向东射了一箭。
English: Terrified, the man ran to hide in the ancient forest and peeked out. The man stared for a long time, then suddenly shot an arrow to the east.

古文：民随望之，见百步外有一物，状类人，举体黄毛数寸，蒙乌巾而立。
现代文：百姓随着箭望去，望见百步之外有一个东西，样子象人，满身有几寸长的黄毛，蒙着乌巾站在那里。
English: The people followed the arrow and looked, and saw a hundred paces away something that looked like a man, covered with yellow hair a few inches long, and standing there with a black cloth over his face.

古文：矢中其腹，辄不动。
现代文：箭头射中了它的肚子，它动也不动。
English: The arrow hit him in the stomach and he didn't move.

古文：胡人笑曰：果非吾所及。
现代文：胡人笑道：果然不是我能办到的！
English: Hu Ren laughed, "It's not something I can do!

古文：遂去。
现代文：于是就离去了。
English: The Qi army then left.

古文：又一胡，亦长丈余，魁伟愈于前者。
现代文：又来一位胡人，也是一丈多高，比前边那个更魁伟，也拿着弓箭，也向东射了一箭。
English: There came another Hun, also a great deal taller than the one in front, also holding a bow and arrow, and he also shot an arrow to the east.

古文：亦执弧矢，东望而射，中其物之胸，亦不动。胡人又曰：非将军不可。
现代文：他射中了那东西的胸部，那东西也不动。胡人说：非将军亲自来不可！
English: He shot it in the chest and it didn't move. Hu said: "The general himself must come!"

古文：又去。
现代文：也离去。
English: They also left.

古文：俄有胡人数十，衣黑，臂弓腰矢，若前驱者。
现代文：不一会儿，有几十个胡人，穿黑衣，挽弓带箭，像是前导。
English: Soon, there were dozens of Hu people, dressed in black, with bows and arrows, like guides.

古文：又见一巨人，长数丈，被紫衣，状貌极异，缓步而来。
现代文：又见有一个巨人，高几丈，披紫衣，相貌与众极不相同，缓步走来。
English: And I saw a giant of great stature, clothed in purple, very different in appearance, coming slowly toward me.

古文：民见之，不觉懔然。
现代文：那百姓一看，不由得感到敬畏。
English: When the people saw him, they were awestruck.

古文：巨胡东望，谓其前驱者曰：射其喉。
现代文：巨人向东望了望，对那些前导的人说：射它的喉！
English: The giant looked eastward, and said to those who led the way, "Shoot him in the throat!"

古文：群胡欲争射之。巨胡诫曰：非雄舒莫可。
现代文：那些人争抢着要射，巨人警告说：非雄舒射它不可！
English: The men scrambled to shoot it, but the giant warned, "Don't shoot it!

古文：他胡皆退，有一胡前，引满一发，遂中其喉。
现代文：别的胡人都后退，有一个胡人上前，拉满弓一发，于是射中了那东西的喉。
English: The other hooded men retreated, and one of the hooded men stepped forward, drew a full bow, and shot the thing in the throat.

古文：其物亦不惧，徐以手拔去三矢，持一巨砾，西向而来，胡人皆有惧色。前白巨胡：事迫矣，不如降之。
现代文：那东西也不怕，慢慢用手拔掉了三支箭，拿着一个巨大的石砾，向西走来。胡人都有畏惧之色，上前报告给巨人：事情紧迫，不如投降算了！
English: The thing wasn't afraid either. It slowly unplugged three arrows with its hand and took a huge boulder and walked west. Goose people are afraid, and went forward to report to the giant: things are urgent, it's better to surrender!

古文：巨胡即命呼曰：将军愿降。
现代文：巨人就让大家喊：将军愿意投降！
English: The giant let everyone shout: The general is willing to surrender!

古文：其物乃投砾于地，自去其中，状如妇人，无发。
现代文：那东西就把巨砾扔到了地上，自己除去了头巾，样子像一个妇人，没有头发。
English: The thing threw the boulder to the ground and took off its hood, looking like a woman with no hair.

古文：至群胡前，尽收夺所执弓矢，皆折之。
现代文：它来到群胡人跟前，把他们拿的弓和箭全都收夺过去折断。
English: It came up to the Qunhu people and snatched all the bows and arrows they were holding and broke them.

古文：遂令巨胡跪于地，以手连掌其颊。
现代文：于是就让巨胡人跪在地上，用手连连打他的面颊。
English: So he made the bearded giant kneel on the ground and hit him repeatedly on the cheek with his hand.

古文：胡人哀祈，称死罪者数四，方释之。
现代文：胡人哀求，一个劲说自己犯了死罪。
English: Hu pleaded, insisting that he had committed a capital crime.

古文：诸胡高拱而立，不敢辄动。
现代文：才放了他。群胡站在那里，不敢乱动。
English: Only then did they let him go. Qunhu stood there, not daring to move.

古文：其物徐以巾蒙首，东望而去。
现代文：那东西慢慢用头巾蒙了头，向东走去。
English: The thing slowly covered its head with a hood and headed east.

古文：胡人相贺曰：赖今日甲子耳，不然，吾辈其死乎。
现代文：胡人相贺说：多亏今天是好日子，不然，我们不都得死吗？
English: "Thanks to you, today is a good day. Otherwise, don't we all have to die?

古文：既而俱拜于巨胡前，巨胡颔之。良久，遂导而入山崦。
现代文：然后，都跪拜在巨胡面前。巨胡点头，很久，于是就由人引导着走进日没的山中。
English: Then they all kneeled in front of the giant. The giant nodded, for a long time, and then they were led into the mountains at sunset.

古文：时欲昏黑，民雨汗而归，竟不知其何物也。
现代文：那时候天要昏黑了。那位江都百姓一身大汗地回到家中，到底不知那是什么东西。
English: At that time, it was getting dark. That Jiangdu citizen returned home in a sweat, not knowing what it was.

古文：扬州塔
现代文：扬州塔
English: Yangzhou Tower

古文：谘议朱景玄，见鲍容说，陈少游在扬州时，东市塔影忽倒。
现代文：谘议朱景玄。见了鲍容说：陈少游在扬州的时候，东市上的塔影忽然倒了。
English: When he saw Bao Rong, he said, "When Chen Shaoyou was in Yangzhou, the shadow of the tower on the east side of the city suddenly fell down.

古文：老人言，海影翻则如此。
现代文：老人说，海影翻转就如此。
English: The old man said, "That's how the sea shadow flips."

古文：高邮寺
现代文：高邮寺
English: Kōhō-ji Temple

古文：高邮县有一寺，不记名。
现代文：高邮县有一座寺院，不记它的名字。
English: There is a temple in Gaoyou County, but I don't remember its name.

古文：讲堂西壁枕道，每日晚，人马车轝影，悉透壁上。
现代文：寺院的讲堂西壁枕大道。每天晚上，人、马、车辆的影子全映进墙来。
English: Every evening, the shadows of people, horses and vehicles are fully reflected in the wall.

古文：衣红紫者，影中鲁莽可辨。
现代文：穿红戴紫的，在影子中显得鲁莽，都能辨别出来。
English: Those who wear red and purple, and appear reckless in the shadows, can be distinguished.

古文：壁厚数尺，难以理究。
现代文：墙厚几尺，很难弄清其中道理。
English: The wall is a few feet thick, so it's hard to see the point.

古文：辰午之时则无，相传如此。
现代文：辰午之时就没有了。相传是这样。
English: At the stroke of noon, it was gone. This is how the legend goes.

古文：二十余年，或一年半年不见。
现代文：二十多年，有时候是一年半年不出现这种情况。
English: This has not happened for more than 20 years, and sometimes for a year and a half.

古文：刘积中
现代文：刘积中
English: Liu Jizhong

古文：刘积中，常于西京近县庄居。
现代文：刘积中，平常在西京附近县的村庄里居住。
English: Liu Jizhong usually lives in a village in a county near Xijing.

古文：妻病亟，未眠，忽有妇人，白首，长才三尺，自灯影中出，谓刘曰：夫人病，唯我能理，何不祈我？
现代文：他的妻子病得很重。一天晚上，他还没睡，忽然有一个三尺来高的白头妇人从灯影中走出来，对刘积中说：夫人的病，只有我能治，为什么不求我？
English: His wife was very ill. One night, while he was still awake, a three-foot-tall white-haired woman suddenly stepped out from the shadows of the lamp and said to Liu Zhe: "I am the only one who can cure my wife's illness, why don't you ask me?"

古文：刘素刚，咄之。
现代文：刘积中一向刚直，呵叱她。
English: Liu Jizhong always stood up straight and scolded her.

古文：姥徐戟手曰：勿悔勿悔。
现代文：老妇人叉手说：你可别后悔！
English: The old woman waved her hand and said, "Don't be sorry!

古文：遂灭，妻因暴心痛，殆将卒，刘不得已，祝之。
现代文：于是就消失了。妻子于是突然心痛，几乎要死了。刘积中不得已，只好祭祝祷告。
English: Then he disappeared. His wife suffered a sudden heartache and almost died. Out of desperation, Liu had no choice but to pray.

古文：言已复出，刘揖之坐。
现代文：话刚说完，那妇人就又出来了。刘积中揖请她入了座。
English: As soon as she had finished speaking, the woman came out again. Liu Jizhong invited her to take a seat.

古文：乃索茶一瓯，向日如咒状，顾令灌夫人，茶才入口，痛愈。
现代文：老妇人就要来一盏茶，朝向太阳像念咒的样子，回头让人用茶灌夫人。茶才入口，病痛就没了。
English: The old woman is about to have a cup of tea, facing the sun as if chanting a mantra, and turning her back to let someone pour tea over her. The tea has just entered, and the pain is gone.

古文：后时时辄出，家人亦不之惧。
现代文：后来这妇人常常出现。家人也不怕她。
English: Later, the woman often appeared, and the family was not afraid of her.

古文：经年，复谓刘曰：我有女子及笄，烦主人求一佳婿。
现代文：一年以后，她又对刘积中说：我有个女儿成年了，烦您给找个好女婿。
English: A year later, she said to Liu Jiao: "I have a daughter who is an adult, and I would like you to find a good son-in-law for her."

古文：刘笑曰：人鬼路殊，难遂所托。
现代文：刘积中笑道：人和鬼道路不同，我很难遂你的心愿。
English: Liu Jizhong laughed, "People and ghosts have different paths. It's hard for me to fulfill your wish."

古文：姥曰：非求人也，但为刻桐木稍工者，可矣。
现代文：老妇人说：不是要找个人，你用桐木为她刻一个比较工细的就行了。
English: The old woman said, "It's not about finding someone, you just need to carve a more detailed carving for her out of paulownia wood."

古文：刘许诺，因为具之。
现代文：刘积中答应了，于是就为她准备了。
English: Liu Jizhong agreed, so he prepared for her.

古文：经宿，木人失矣。
现代文：经过一宿，木人丢失了。
English: After one night, the wooden man was lost.

古文：又谓刘曰：兼烦主人作铺公铺母，若可，某夕，我自具车舆奉迎。
现代文：妇人又对刘积中说：再麻烦您夫妇二人作铺公铺母。如果可以，那一天，我亲自准备车辆来迎接。
English: The woman also said to Liu Jia: "Again, please ask your husband and wife to set up a booth. If possible, that day, I will personally prepare a vehicle to meet you."

古文：刘心计无奈之何，亦许之。
现代文：刘积中心里觉得无可奈何，也答应了。
English: Liu Jizhong felt helpless and agreed.

古文：至一日，过酉。有仆马车乘至门，姥亦至曰：主人可往。
现代文：到了那一天，过了酉时，就有仆从车马来到门前，老妇人也到了。她说：二位可以走了。
English: And it came to pass the same day, about the eleventh hour, that the servants came to the door with their horses and chariots; and the old woman came also, and said unto them, Go.

古文：刘与妻各登其车马，天黑至一处，朱门崇墉，笼烛列迎，宾客供帐之盛，如王公家。
现代文：刘积中和妻子各自登上车马。天黑来到一处，朱红的大门，高高的院墙，挑着灯笼列队迎接。宾客之多，排场之大，犹如王公之家。
English: Liu Jizhong and his wife each boarded a horse and cart. When it got dark, Zhu Hong's gate and the high courtyard wall were lined up with lanterns to welcome the guests. There were so many guests and so much pomp, it was just like the prince's home.

古文：引刘至一厅，朱紫数十，有相识者，有已殁者，各相视无言。
现代文：妇人领刘积中来到一厅中，穿红戴紫的人有好几十，有相识的，也有已经死了的，各都相视而不说话。
English: The woman led Liu Jizhong to a hall, where there were dozens of people wearing red and purple, some acquaintances, some already dead, all looking at each other without speaking.

古文：妻至一堂，蜡炬如臂，锦翠争焕，亦有妇人数十，存殁相识各半，但相识而已。
现代文：妻子来到一个堂屋，蜡烛象胳膊那么粗，陈设金碧辉煌，也有几十位妇人，活着的死去的相识的各占一半。只相视而已。
English: The wife came to a hall, the candles as thick as arms, the furnishings resplendent, there were also dozens of women, living and dead acquaintances each accounted for half. They only looked at each other.

古文：及五更，刘与妻恍惚，却还至家。如醉醒，十不记其一二。
现代文：到了五更，刘积中和妻子恍恍惚惚地回到家中，就像醉了之后刚醒，十件事记不起一两件。
English: At five o'clock, Liu Jizhong and his wife returned home in a daze, as if they had just woken up after being drunk and could not remember one or two things.

古文：数日，姥复来拜谢曰：我小女成长，今复托主人。刘不耐，以枕抵之曰：老魅，敢如此扰之。
现代文：几天之后，那妇人又来拜谢，说：我的小女儿也长大了，今天又来求您刘积中不耐烦了，用枕头抵挡她说：老鬼，你敢如此打扰我！
English: A few days later, the woman came to thank me again, saying, "My little daughter has also grown up, and today she came to beg you again. Liu Qi was getting impatient, and he used a pillow to fend her off, saying, "Old ghost, how dare you disturb me like this!

古文：姥随枕而灭，妻随疾发。
现代文：老妇人随着挡过来的枕头消失了。妻子于是就犯病了。
English: The old woman disappeared with the pillow she was blocking, and the wife fell ill.

古文：刘与男女酹地祷之，不复出矣。
现代文：刘积中和儿女们一起跪在地上祷告，老妇人不再出来了。
English: Liu Jizhong and her children knelt on the ground to pray together. The old woman did not come out again.

古文：妻竟以心痛卒。
现代文：妻子终于因为心痛而死。
English: The wife finally died of a broken heart.

古文：刘妹复病心痛，刘欲徙居，一切物胶着其处，轻若履屐，亦不可举。
现代文：刘积中的妹妹又开始心痛。刘积中要搬家，一切物品都象被胶粘在那里，即便像鞋那样轻的也拿不起来。
English: Liu Jizhong's younger sister's heart began to ache again. Liu Jizhong had to move house, and all of her belongings were stuck there like glue. Even something as light as a shoe couldn't be picked up.

古文：迎道流上章，梵僧持咒，悉不禁。
现代文：请道士来作法，请和尚来念咒，都不能禁止。
English: Asking a Taoist priest to perform the exercises or a monk to chant the mantras cannot be prohibited.

古文：刘常暇日读药方，其婢小碧，自外来，垂手缓步，大言：刘四，颇忆平昔无。
现代文：刘积中闲暇时间读药方，他的婢女小碧从外边进来，垂着手，慢举步，大声说：刘四，你很想念以前的事情不？
English: Liu Jie was reading a prescription in his spare time. His maid Xiao Bi came in from outside. She hung her hands, walked slowly, and said loudly: "Liu Si, don't you miss the old days?

古文：既而嘶咽曰：省躬近从泰山回，路逢飞天野叉，携贤妹心肝，我已夺得。
现代文：然后又呜咽着说：省躬我最近从泰山回来，路上遇到飞天夜叉，他携带着你妹妹的心肝，我已经把它夺回来了！
English: Then he sobbed again and said, "Look, I have recently returned from Mount Tai. On the way, I met a flying nightingale. He was carrying your sister's heart. I have won it back!"

古文：因举袖，袖中蠕蠕有物。
现代文：于是她举了举袖子，袖子里有东西在蠕动。
English: So she lifted up her sleeve, and there was something wriggling in the sleeve.

古文：左顾似有所命，曰：可为安置。
现代文：刘积中往左一看，见小碧好像有什么使命，就说：我可以为你安排一下。
English: Liu Jizhong looked to his left and saw Xiao Bi, who seemed to be on a mission. He said, "I can arrange something for you."

古文：又觉袖中风生，冲帘幌。
现代文：又觉得袖子里生风，吹动了帘帷。
English: I also felt the wind in my sleeve, blowing the curtains.

古文：婢入堂中，乃对刘坐，问存殁，叙平生事。
现代文：婢女来到堂中，竟面对刘积中而坐，问谁死了谁活着，叙平生的往事。
English: When the maid came to the hall, she actually sat facing Liu Jizhong, asked who was dead and who was alive, and recounted the past of her life.

古文：刘与杜省躬同年及第，友善，其婢举止笑语，无不肖也。
现代文：刘积中和杜省躬同一年考中进士，二人是好朋友。他的婢女小碧此时的举止谈笑，没有不像杜省躬的地方。
English: Liu Jizhong and Du Shouwen passed the junior high school entrance examination in the same year, and the two are good friends. His maid Xiao Bi's demeanor and laughter at this time are nothing like Du Shouwen's.

古文：顷曰：我有事，不可久留。
现代文：过了一会儿，小碧说：我有事，不能久留。
English: After a while, Xiao Bi said: I have something to do, I can't stay for long.

古文：执刘手呜咽，刘亦悲不自胜。
现代文：握着刘积中的手哭泣。刘积中也不胜悲伤。
English: Holding Liu Jizhong's hand and crying. Liu Jizhong is also very sad.

古文：婢忽倒，及觉，一无所记，其妹亦自此无恙。
现代文：婢女忽然倒在地上。等她醒来，刚才的事，什么也不记得了。
English: The maid suddenly fell to the ground. When she woke up, she didn't remember anything about what had just happened.

