古文：麒麟幼而好学，美姿容，善骑射。
现代文：韩麒麟，昌黎棘城人，自称是汉朝大司马韩增的后代。他虽然年幼，却喜爱学习，仪表俊美，善于骑马射箭。
English: Han Qilin, a resident of Changli Spine City, claims to be a descendant of Han Zeng, the Grand Master of the Han Dynasty. Although he is young, he likes to study, has a handsome appearance, and is good at riding and archery.

古文：景穆监国，为东曹主书。
现代文：景穆监理朝政，任他为东曹主书。
English: Jing Mu was the supervisor of the imperial government, and he was appointed as the chief secretary of the Eastern Cao Dynasty.

古文：文成即位，赐爵渔阳男。
现代文：文成帝即位，赐给他渔阳男的爵号。
English: Emperor Wencheng ascended the throne and gave him the title of Yuyangan.

古文：父亡，在丧有礼。后参征南慕容白曜军事。进攻升城，师人多伤。
现代文：后来参加征南将军慕容白曜率领的征讨，攻打升城，军中有很多人受伤。
English: Later, he took part in the campaign led by the Southern Expeditionary General Murong Peiyou and attacked Shengcheng. Many people in the army were injured.

古文：及城溃，白曜将坑之。
现代文：等到攻破城池，慕容白曜准备把抓到的俘虏全部活埋。
English: When the castle was breached, Murong Baiyou prepared to bury all the captured prisoners alive.

古文：麒麟谏曰： 今方图进趣，宜示宽厚，勍敌在前，而便坑其众，恐三齐未易图也。 
现代文：韩麒麟劝告说 ：现在我们谋图向南进取，应显示宽厚仁爱。强敌在前，尚未打败，却坑杀许多人，恐怕南齐不容易图取呀。 
English: Han Qilin advised, "Now that we are planning to advance to the south, we should show leniency and benevolence. A strong enemy is in front, has not yet been defeated, but has killed many people. I am afraid it is not easy to capture Nanqi."

古文：白曜从之，皆令复业，齐人大悦。
现代文：白曜听从了他的劝告，下令将俘虏全部释放，让他们恢复本业。南齐人十分高兴。
English: Bai You listened to his advice and ordered that all the prisoners be released so that they could resume their work. The people of Nanqi were very happy.

古文：后白曜表麒麟与房法寿对为冀州刺史。
现代文：后来，慕容白曜上表请求朝廷任韩麒麟与房法寿任冀州刺史。
English: Later, Murong Baiyou petitioned the imperial court to appoint Han Qilin and Fang Fa Shou as the governor of Jizhou.

古文：白曜攻东阳，麒麟上义租六十万斛，并攻战器械，于是军须无乏。
现代文：慕容白曜进攻东阳，韩麒麟为他提供六十万斛军粮和各种攻战器械，使得军需用品毫不匮乏。
English: When Murong Paiyang attacked Dongyang, Han Qilin provided him with 600,000 baht of military rations and various offensive equipment, so that there was no shortage of military supplies.

古文：及白曜被诛，麒麟停滞多年。
现代文：白曜被朝廷诛杀，韩麒麟多年没有升迁。
English: Bai You was killed by the imperial court, and Han Qilin was not promoted for many years.

古文：孝文时，拜齐州刺史，假魏昌侯。
现代文：孝文帝时，他任齐州刺史，封为魏昌侯。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, he was appointed as the prefect of Qizhou and was given the title of Wei Changhou.

古文：在官寡于刑罚，从事刘普庆说麒麟曰： 明公仗节方夏，无所斩戮，何以示威？ 
现代文：做官时很少用刑罚。从事刘普庆劝他 ：您受朝廷之命治理中原时，没有杀戮什么人，凭什么树立威信？ 
English: When he was an official, he rarely used punishment. Liu Puqing advised him: When you were ordered by the imperial court to govern the Central Plains, you did not kill anyone. How can you establish your prestige?

古文：麒麟曰： 人不犯法，何所戮乎？
现代文：他回答说： 人们不触犯刑律，我为什么要杀戮？
English: He replied: People don't break the law, so why should I kill?

古文：若必须斩断以立威名，当以卿应之。 
现代文：如果必须靠杀人来树立威信，当用你来试试。 
English: If you have to kill to establish your authority, try using you.

古文：普庆惭惧而退。
现代文：刘普庆满面惭愧地退下。
English: Liu Puqing withdrew with a face full of shame.

古文：麒麟以亲附之人，未阶台官，士人沈抑，乃表请守宰有阙，宜推用豪望，增置吏员，广延贤哲，则华族蒙荣，良才获叙，怀德安土，庶或在兹。
现代文：韩麒麟因新归降的人没有能进身官府，读书人颇受压抑，便上表请求朝廷应该任用归附的豪门望族，增加官吏数额，广泛延纳贤士哲人。这样，使大族蒙受恩荣，人才获得进取的机会，人人怀念朝廷恩德，使地方安稳宁静，或许根本就在于此。
English: Han Qilin, because the newly surrendered people were not able to enter the government, and the readers were quite suppressed, asked the imperial court to appoint the attached high-ranking and prestigious families, increase the number of officials, and widely extend the number of sages and philosophers. In this way, the big family would receive the honor, the talent would get the opportunity to advance, everyone would miss the grace of the imperial court, and the place would be stable and tranquil. Perhaps this is what it is all about.

古文：朝议从之。
现代文：朝廷会议，同意了他的意见。
English: The court agreed with him.

古文：太和十一年，京都大饥，麒麟表陈时务曰：
现代文：太和十一年，京都一带发生大饥荒，韩麒麟上表陈述时务，说：
English: In the eleventh year of the Taiwa era, when a great famine occurred in the Kyoto area, Han Kirin made a statement on the current situation, saying:

古文：古先哲王，经国立政，积储九稔，谓之太平。
现代文： 古代圣哲的帝王治理国家，建立政权，积蓄九年的粮食，才称得上太平。
English: The emperors of the ancient sages governed the country, established political power, and accumulated grain for nine years before they could be called peaceful.

古文：故躬藉千亩，以率百姓。
现代文：所以亲自耕田千亩，给百姓做出表率。
English: Therefore, I personally cultivated a thousand mu of land to set an example for the people.

古文：用能衣食滋茂，礼教兴行。
现代文：这样才能使天下衣食丰足，礼仪盛行。
English: Only in this way can the world be well fed and clothed, and etiquette prevail.

古文：逮于中代，亦崇斯业，入粟者与斩敌同爵，力田者与孝悌均赏。
现代文：到了后来，帝王仍崇敬力田农业，缴纳粮食的人同在战场上杀敌的一样都可以得到朝廷赐给的爵位，种田的人同孝敬父母、和睦兄弟的人一起可以得到同样的奖赏。
English: Later, emperors still revered rice-field agriculture. Those who paid for grain could receive a title of nobility from the imperial court, just as if they had killed an enemy on the battlefield. Those who farmed could receive the same reward as those who respected their parents and brothers.

古文：实百王之常轨，为政之所先。
现代文：这实在是历代帝王一贯的做法，为政者所必须首先考虑的。
English: This is indeed the consistent practice of successive emperors, and must be the first consideration for politicians.

古文：今京师人庶，不田者多；游食之口，三分居二。
现代文：现在，京城的人不种田的居多，不劳而食的人口，三分之中有其二。
English: Now, the majority of people in Beijing do not farm, and two-thirds of the population live without working.

古文：盖一夫不耕，或受其饥，况于今者，动以万计？
现代文：一个人不种，就可能会挨饿，更何况像现在这样，不耕田者数以万计？
English: If a person does not sow, he may starve, let alone tens of thousands of people who do not farm, as is the case now?

古文：故顷年山东遭水，而人有馁终，今秋京都遇旱，谷价踊贵，实由农人不劝，素无储积故也。
现代文：所以，近年山东遭受水灾，而有很多人挨饿受冻；今年秋天京城发生旱灾，谷价飞涨，实在是因为农民不事农业，平常没有积蓄的缘故。
English: Therefore, in recent years, Shandong has suffered from floods, while many people are starving and freezing; this autumn, a drought occurred in Beijing, and grain prices soared, really because farmers do not care about agriculture and usually do not have savings.

古文：伏惟陛下天纵钦明，道高三五，上垂覆载之泽，下有冻馁之人，皆由有司不为其制，长吏不恤其本。
现代文： 陛下您天资聪明英纵，德望高于三王五霸。尽管上面有您覆天载地的恩泽，下面却仍有挨饿受冻的百姓，都是因为有关的部司不制定出奖励农耕的制度，官吏不体恤农民，不把农耕作为根本。
English: Your Majesty, you are gifted with wisdom and talent, and your moral authority is higher than that of the three kings and five emperors. Despite your benevolence that covers the heavens and the earth above, there are still people who are starving and freezing below, all because the relevant ministries and departments do not set up a system to reward farming, officials do not sympathize with farmers, and do not regard farming as fundamental.

古文：自承平日久，丰穰积年，竞相矜夸，浸成侈俗。
现代文：自从长久升平，多年丰收，官吏竞相浮夸，渐渐养成奢侈的风气。
English: Since the long-term rise, many years of bumper harvests, officials compete to be pompous, and gradually develop into a luxury culture.

古文：故令耕者日少，田者日荒。谷帛罄于府库，宝货盈于市里，衣食匮于室，丽服溢于路。饥寒之本，实在于斯。
现代文：由此使得种田的人越来越少，土地荒芜的越来越多；府库里的粮食布帛几乎用完，集市上的东西却很充盈；家里衣食匮乏，道路上行走的人却盛装艳服，忍饥受寒的根本原因，实在由此引起。
English: As a result, fewer and fewer people are cultivating the fields, and more and more land is becoming barren; the grain baskets in the government storehouses are almost exhausted, but the things in the market are very full; there is a shortage of food and clothing at home, but people walking on the road are dressed in bright clothes. The root cause of hunger and cold is really caused by this.

古文：愚谓凡珍玩之物，皆宜禁断。
现代文：我认为凡是珍奇玩好，都应该禁绝；婚丧嫁娶的礼仪，都应该制定一定的格式。
English: I think that anything that is fun and exciting should be banned; wedding etiquette should have a certain format.

古文：吉凶之礼，备为格式，令贵贱有别，人归朴素。
现代文：让富贵和贫贱的有所区别，人人归于朴素。
English: Let there be a distinction between the rich and the poor, and everyone will be reduced to simplicity.

古文：制天下男女，计口受田。宰司四时巡行，台使岁一案检，勤相劝课，严加赏罚。
现代文：根据天下男女数量，按人口多少分给田地，下级官吏四时到乡村巡行督促，上级官吏，一年检查一次，多劝农夫耕田，根据耕田情况，严加奖励和处罚。
English: According to the number of men and women in the world, according to the number of population, the fields will be allocated, the lower-level officials will go to the villages at 4 o'clock to inspect the villages, and the higher-level officials will inspect once a year to persuade farmers to cultivate more fields, and according to the cultivated fields, they will strictly reward and punish.

古文：数年之中，必有盈赡，虽遇凶灾，免于流亡矣。
现代文：数年之内，一定会有丰余，再遇到灾荒，可避免流离死亡。
English: Within a few years, there will certainly be a surplus, and if there is another disaster, displacement and death can be avoided.

古文：往年校比户贯，租赋轻少。
现代文： 过去审核农户交纳情况，发现田租赋税既轻且少。
English: In the past, the payment status of farmers was audited, and it was found that the field rent tax was light and small.

古文：臣所统齐州，租粟才可给俸，略无入仓。
现代文：我所管辖的齐州，百姓交纳的租粟只够官吏的俸禄，入仓的数量很少。
English: In Qizhou, which is under my jurisdiction, the rent paid by the people is only enough to pay the salaries of government officials, and the number of people entering the warehouses is very small.

古文：虽于人为利，而不可长久。
现代文：虽然对老百姓有好处，却不可以长久这样下去。
English: Although it is good for the people, it cannot go on like this for long.

古文：脱有戎役，或遭天灾，恐供给之方，无所取济。
现代文：假如遇到战争或天灾，恐怕救济的东西都无处获得。
English: If there is a war or a natural disaster, I'm afraid there will be nowhere to get relief.

古文：请减绢布，增益谷租，年丰多积，岁俭出振。
现代文：请求朝廷减少征收绢绸和布匹的数量，增加谷物的数额。丰收年景就多积存一些，遇到荒歉就拿出来赈济。
English: Request the imperial court to reduce the amount of silk and cloth collected and increase the amount of grain. Harvest years will accumulate more, and in the event of a famine, it will be taken out for relief.

古文：临终之日，唯有俸绢数十疋，其清贫如此。
现代文：这就是所说的把私人的粮食寄存在官仓，官仓有积蓄，则老百姓就不会再有灾荒年了。 
English: This is what is meant by putting private grain in the government warehouse. If the government warehouse has savings, the people will no longer have disasters and years of famine.

古文：赠散骑常侍、燕郡公，谥曰康。
现代文：韩麒麟性情恭敬谨慎，经常将国家的律令放在座位旁边。
English: Han is respectful and cautious, and often places the country's laws and regulations next to his seat.

古文：长子兴宗，字茂先。好学有文才，位秘书中散。
现代文：临去世的时候，家中惟有数十匹作为俸禄的丝绢。
English: At the time of his death, there were only a few dozen silkworms in the family as a source of income.

古文：卒，赠渔阳太守。子子熙，字元雍。
现代文：他的清贫就是这样。韩子熙，字元雍。
English: His poverty is just like this. Han Zixi, character Yuan Yong.

古文：少自修整，颇有学识，为清河王怿郎中令。
现代文：从小就能自我约束，颇有学问见识，任清河王元怿的郎中令。
English: He was self-disciplined from a young age, had a lot of knowledge and insight, and was the second-in-command to King Yuan of Qinghe.

古文：初，子熙父以爵让弟显宗，不受；子熙成父素怀，卒亦不袭。
现代文：最初，他的父亲韩兴宗把父亲韩麒麟的封爵让给弟弟韩显宗继承，显宗不接受，子熙仍然成全父亲的意愿，自己始终不继承。
English: At first, his father, Han Xingzong, let his brother, Han Xianzong, inherit his father's title of Han Qilin. Xianzong did not accept it, but Zixi still fulfilled his father's wishes and never inherited it.

古文：及显宗卒，子熙别蒙赐爵，乃以先爵让弟仲穆。
现代文：显宗去世，子熙蒙受朝廷别的封爵，又把封爵让给了兄弟韩仲穆。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong died, Zixi received a second knighthood from the imperial court, which he then passed on to his brother Han Zhongmu.

古文：兄弟友爱如此。
现代文：他同兄弟之间就是如此友爱亲密。
English: He and his brother were so close.

古文：母亡，居丧有礼。
现代文：他的母亲去世，守丧完全按照礼节。
English: When his mother died, the funeral was conducted with complete propriety.

古文：子熙为怿所眷遇，遂阙位，待其毕丧后，复引用。
现代文：他被清河王元怿所信任，为母亲守丧期间，元怿将他的职位空着也不找人代替。等到他守丧完毕，又重新任用。
English: He was trusted by the king of Qinghe, Yuan Shao. During the mourning period for his mother, Yuan Shao left his post vacant and did not look for someone to replace him. When his mourning was over, he was reappointed.

古文：及元叉害怿，久不得葬。
现代文：元叉害死了元怿，很久没有下葬。
English: Yuan Zhao was killed by Yuan Xuan and was not buried for a long time.

古文：子熙为之忧悴，屏居田野。
现代文：子熙十分忧虑憔悴，住在野外替元怿守灵。
English: Zixi was very worried and lived in the open to keep watch over the spirit.

古文：每言王若不得复封，以礼迁葬，誓以终身不仕。
现代文：声言如果元怿的王号不重新恢复，尸体不按朝廷大礼迁葬，自己终身不再做官。
English: He said that if the title of king of the Yuan Dynasty was not restored, and the body was not moved and buried according to the imperial etiquette, he would no longer be an official for life.

古文：后灵太后反政，以叉为尚书令，解其领军。
现代文：后来，灵太后又掌握朝政，任元叉为尚书令，解除了他领军的职务。
English: Later, the Empress Dowager Ling also took control of the imperial government, appointed Yuan Zha as Shang Shuling, and relieved him of his duties as the leader of the army.

古文：子熙与怿中大夫刘定兴、学官令傅灵、宾客张子慎伏阙上书，理怿之冤，极言元叉、刘腾诬誷。
现代文：子熙与元怿的中大夫刘定兴、学官令傅灵瞯、宾客张子慎向朝廷上书，申诉元怿的冤枉，斥责元叉、刘腾对元怿的诬蔑。
English: Zixi, together with Liu Dingxing, the middle-ranking doctor of the Yuan Dynasty, Fu Lingjun, the scholar-official, and Zhang Zishan, the guest, sent a letter to the imperial court, complaining of the injustice of the Yuan Dynasty, and rebuking the slander of the Yuan Dynasty by Yuan Zha and Liu Teng.

古文：书奏，灵太后义之，乃引子熙为中书舍人。
现代文：灵太后看到奏章进行廷议，又任子熙为中书舍人。
English: When the Empress Dowager Ling saw that Sozheng was conducting the court deliberation, she also appointed Zixi as the mediator.

古文：后遂剖腾棺，赐叉死。
现代文：后来，剖开刘腾的棺木，处死了元叉。
English: Later, he opened Liu Teng's coffin and executed Yuan Xuan.

古文：寻修国史。
现代文：不久，子熙奉命修撰国史。
English: Soon after, Zixi was ordered to compile a national history.

古文：建义初，兼黄门，寻为正。
现代文：建义初年，他兼职黄门，不久正式任黄门职务。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, he worked part-time at Huangmen, and soon he was officially appointed to the post of Huangmen.

古文：子熙清白自守，不交人事。
现代文：子熙清廉自守，不随便与人联络交结。
English: Zixi is honest and self-disciplined, and does not casually make contact with people.

古文：又少孤，为叔显宗所抚养。
现代文：他早年丧父，叔父韩显宗将他收养。
English: He lost his father at an early age and was adopted by his uncle, Han Xianzong.

古文：及显宗卒，显宗子伯华又幼，子熙爱友等于同生。
现代文：显宗去世，儿子伯华年幼，子熙对于这位从弟十分友爱，就像同父同母所生的一样。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong died, his son Bo Hua was still young. Zixi was very fond of this younger brother, just as if they had been born of the same father and mother.

古文：长犹共居，车马资财，随其费用，未尝见于言色。
现代文：经常住在一起，自己的车辆马匹钱财，任他享用，脸上从未表现出不愉快的表情。
English: They often live together, have their own cars, horses and money, let him enjoy them, and never show an unpleasant expression on their faces.

古文：又上书求析阶与伯华，于是除伯华东太原太守。
现代文：他又上书朝廷，请求赐给伯华官职，于是，伯华被任为东太原太守。
English: He also wrote to the imperial court, requesting that Bo Hua be given an official position. As a result, Bo Hua was appointed the governor of East Taiyuan.

古文：及伯华在郡，为刺史元弼所辱。子熙乃泣诉朝廷。明帝诏遣案检，弼遂大见诘让。
现代文：伯华在任上，被刺史元弼侮辱，子熙便哭着在朝廷上诉说这件事，明帝下诏调查，元弼受到了指责。
English: When Bo Hua was in office, he was insulted by the assassin, Zixi, who cried and appealed to the imperial court about the matter. The Ming emperor ordered an investigation, and the assassin was blamed.

古文：尔硃荣之禽葛荣，送至京师。
现代文：尔朱荣擒获葛荣后，将他送到京城。
English: After Zhu Rongji won Ge Rong, he sent him to Beijing.

古文：庄帝欲面数之，子熙以为荣既元凶，自知必死，恐或不逊，无宜见之。
现代文：庄帝想当面斥责葛荣。子熙认为葛荣既然是罪魁祸首，知道自己一定会被处死，恐怕很不顺从，不宜再去看他。
English: Zhuang Di wanted to reprimand Ge Rong face to face. Zixi thought that since Ge Rong was the main culprit and knew that he would definitely be executed, he would probably be very disobedient and it would not be appropriate to see him again.

古文：尔硃荣闻而大怒，请罪子熙。
现代文：尔朱荣听说后十分恼怒，请求加罪子熙。
English: After hearing this, Le Zhu Rong was very angry and asked for Zixi to be punished.

古文：庄帝恕而不责。
现代文：庄帝饶恕了他。
English: Emperor Zhuang forgave him.

古文：及邢杲起逆，诏子熙慰劳。杲诈降，子熙信之。
现代文：邢杲叛乱，朝廷命子熙去招抚，邢杲假称投降，子熙相信了他。
English: When there was a rebellion, the imperial court ordered Zixi Xi to appease it. When Zixi Xi pretended to surrender, Zixi Xi believed him.

古文：迁至乐陵，杲复反，子熙还。
现代文：回到乐陵，邢杲再次反叛。
English: Back in Leling, Zou rebelled again.

古文：坐付廷尉，论以大辟，恕死免官。
现代文：子熙回到京城，坐罪交付廷尉处理，判以大辟罪，朝廷饶他不死，免去了他的官职。
English: Zixi returned to Beijing, pleaded guilty and was handed over to a court lieutenant to be dealt with. He was sentenced to capital punishment. The court spared his life and removed him from his official post.

古文：孝武初，领著作，以奉册勋，封历城县子。
现代文：孝武初年，任著作郎，因奉命册封勋臣，被封为历城县子。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xiaowu, he was appointed to the post of scribe, and because he was ordered to write down the names of his honored vassals, he was named the son of Licheng County.

古文：天平初，为侍读，除国子祭酒。
现代文：天平初年，为侍读，任国子监祭酒。
English: In the first year of the Tenpyo era, he served as an attendant, and was appointed as the Kokushi supervisor of the sake festival.

古文：子熙俭素安贫，常好退静。
现代文：子熙生活俭朴，安贫乐贱，喜好清静闲散。
English: Zixi lives a simple and frugal life, is happy to be poor, and likes to be quiet and idle.

古文：迁鄴之始，百司并给兵力，时以祭酒闲务，止给二人。
现代文：京师刚迁到邺城，朝廷给各部司配有兵丁，以供驱使，当时人们都认为祭酒是一个闲散职务，只给了两个人。
English: The Beijing Division had just moved to Lucheng, and the imperial court had equipped the various departments with soldiers to drive them. At that time, people thought that the sacrificial wine was an idle post, and only two people were given it.

古文：或有令其陈请者，子熙曰： 朝廷自不与祭酒兵，何关韩子熙事。 
现代文：有人劝子熙奏请朝廷多给几个人，子熙说： 朝廷不愿意多给祭酒配备兵丁，关我韩子熙什么事？ 
English: Some people urged Zixiu to ask the imperial court to give more soldiers. Zixiu said, "The imperial court is not willing to give more soldiers for the sacrificial wine. What does this have to do with me, Han Zixiu?"

古文：论者高之。
现代文：议论的人都称赞他。
English: The talking heads were all praising him.

古文：元象中，加卫大将军。
现代文：元象年间，加封他为卫大将军。
English: During the Yuan Dynasty, he was given the title of General of the Guards.

古文：先是，子熙与弟娉王氏为妻，姑之女也，生二子。
现代文：原先子熙给他的兄弟娶王氏为妻，王氏是他姑母的女儿，生了两个孩子。
English: Originally, Zixi married Wang, his aunt's daughter, to his brother, and they had two children.

古文：子熙尚未婚，后遂与寡妪李氏奸合而生三子。
现代文：子熙还没有娶妻，后来与寡妇李氏苟合，生了三个孩子。
English: Zixi had not yet married, but later had sexual intercourse with the widow Li, and gave birth to three children.

古文：王、李不穆，迭相告言。子熙因此惭恨，遂以发疾。
现代文：王氏和李氏不和睦，经常互相争吵，子熙因此惭愧气愤，积郁成疾。
English: Wang and Li did not get along well and often quarreled with each other. As a result, Zixi was ashamed and angry, which accumulated into an illness.

古文：卒，遗戒不求赠谥，其子不能遵奉，遂至干谒。
现代文：死后，遗嘱后代不要向朝廷请求谥号。他的儿子没有遵行，便向朝臣请托求谥。
English: After his death, he instructed his descendants not to ask the Imperial Court for a posthumous name. When his son did not comply, he asked a courtier for a posthumous name.

古文：武定初，赠骠骑大将军、仪同三司、幽州刺史。
现代文：武定初年，朝廷赠封他为骠骑大将军、仪同三司、幽州刺史。
English: In the first year of Wuding, the imperial court granted him the titles of General of the Horse, Grand Marshal of the Three Departments, and Grand Historian of Yuzhou.

古文：兴宗弟显宗，字茂亲。
现代文：韩显宗，字茂亲。
English: Han Xianzong, also known as Shoucheng.

古文：刚直，能面折廷诤，亦有才学。
现代文：为人刚直，敢当面向皇帝直言谏诤。也十分有才学。
English: He was an upright man, daring to speak frankly to the emperor. He was also very talented.

古文：沙门法抚，三齐称其聪悟。
现代文：和尚法抚，在三齐一带被称为聪明过人，曾与显宗比试。
English: Monk Fuzhou, known as a brilliant man in the Sanqi area, once competed with Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：尝与显宗校试，抄百余人名，各读一遍，随即覆呼，法抚犹有一二舛谬，显宗了无误错。
现代文：抄了一百多个人的名字，每人各读一遍，随即背诵，法抚记错了一两个，显宗却没有一处错误。
English: He copied the names of more than a hundred people, read them one by one, and then recited them. He made one or two mistakes in memorizing the Fa, but there was not a single mistake in practicing the Dharma.

古文：法抚叹曰： 贫道生平以来，唯服郎耳。 
现代文：法抚叹服，说 ：贫僧有生以来，只佩服你这个年轻人啊！ 
English: Fa Fu sighed and said, "Since I was a poor monk, I have only admired you, this young man!

古文：太和初，举秀才，对策甲科，除著作佐郎。后兼中书侍郎。
现代文：太和初年，显宗被举荐为秀才，朝廷对策，取为甲等，任命为著作佐郎，后又兼任中书侍郎。
English: In the first year of the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, Emperor Xuanzong was recommended as a brilliant person, and the imperial court countermeasures were taken as the first grade, and he was appointed as the author's assistant, and later he also served as the secretary's assistant.

古文：既定迁都，显宗上书：
现代文：朝廷决定迁都洛阳，显宗给孝文帝上书说：
English: When the imperial court decided to move the capital to Luoyang, Emperor Xuanzong sent a letter to Emperor Xiaowen saying:

古文：一曰：窃闻舆驾今夏若不巡三齐，当幸中山。窃以为非计也。
现代文： 一、听说皇上今夏如不巡视三齐，也要出游中山，我认为不应该这样啊。
English: First, I heard that if the emperor does not inspect Sanchi this summer, he will also travel to Zhongshan. I don't think that's right.

古文：何者？当今徭役宜早息，洛京宜速成。
现代文：当今徭役应当早日停止，洛阳应早日建成。
English: Today's reclamation should be stopped as soon as possible, and Luoyang should be built as soon as possible.

古文：省费则徭役可简，并功则洛京易就。
现代文：节省费用开支，徭役就可以减少；将一些不必要的工程合并，洛阳就可以早日建成。
English: By saving costs and expenses, the maintenance work can be reduced; by combining some unnecessary projects, Luoyang can be built as early as possible.

古文：愿早还北京，以省诸州供帐之费，则南州免杂徭之烦，北都息分析之叹；洛京可以时就，迁者佥尔如归。
现代文：希望您的车驾及早回到京城，这样可以省去各州郡供应的费用，南部州县可以免除各项徭役的纷扰，北都可以停止骨肉分离的叹息。洛阳可以马上迁入，群臣百姓会高兴得像回到家里一样。
English: It is hoped that your car will return to Beijing as early as possible, which will save the cost of supplies from various states and counties, the southern states and counties can be exempted from the interference of various officials, and the north can stop the sigh of separation of flesh and blood. Luoyang can move in immediately, and the people will be as happy as if they were back home.

古文：二曰：自古圣帝必以俭约为美，乱主必以奢侈贻患。
现代文： 二、自古以来，圣哲开明的皇帝都把勤俭节约当成美德，昏庸淫乱的君主必会因奢侈腐化留下祸患。
English: Second, since ancient times, sages and enlightened emperors have regarded diligence, thrift and economy as virtues. Delusional and adulterous monarchs will certainly leave behind a disaster due to extravagant corruption.

古文：仰惟先朝，皆卑宫室而致力于经略，故能基宇开广，业祚隆泰。
现代文：我朝先代帝王都节减皇宫的开支而致力于经略国家大事，所以能够使基业开拓广大，国运兴隆平安。
English: The previous emperors of my dynasty all reduced the expenses of the imperial palace and devoted themselves to managing national affairs, so they were able to make the foundation expand widely and the national movement flourish and prosper.

古文：今洛阳基趾，魏明所营，取讥前代。
现代文：今天洛阳的城址，是魏明帝营造的，却被前代所讥讽。
English: The city site of Luoyang today was built by Wei Mingdi, but was ridiculed by the previous generation.

古文：伏惟陛下损之又损之。
现代文：望陛下对旧城城址尽力缩小。
English: His Majesty hopes to reduce the size of the old city site as much as possible.

古文：顷来北都富室，竞以第宅相尚，今因迁徙，宜申禁约，令贵贱有检，无得逾制。
现代文：过去北都的富豪人家，比着看谁的府宅豪华，现在借着迁都的机会，应该申明禁令，让穷人和富人的住宅都有一定标准，不能超过国家的规定。
English: In the past, the rich people in the northern capital compared the luxury of their mansions to see who was more luxurious. Now, taking the opportunity to move the capital, it is necessary to declare a ban, so that the homes of the poor and the rich have a certain standard and cannot exceed the state's regulations.

古文：端广衢路，通利沟洫，使寺署有别，士庶异居，永垂百世不刊之范。
现代文：街道要宽广笔直，沟渠要往来交通，寺庙和官衙要有区别，官民不要杂处，要永远成为百代不磨的典范。
English: The streets should be wide and straight, the ditches should have good traffic, there should be a difference between temples and government offices, government officials and the public should not have any clutter, and it should always be a model for hundreds of generations.

古文：三曰：窃闻舆驾还洛阳，轻将数千骑，臣甚为陛下不取也。
现代文： 三、听说您的车驾到洛阳，只带领着数千名骑兵，我认为您很不应该这样做啊。
English: Third, I heard that you drove to Luoyang with only a few thousand cavalry. I think you should not have done that.

古文：夫千金之子，犹坐不垂堂，况万乘之尊，富有四海乎。
现代文：富贵人家的孩子，还不坐在危险的房子下面，更何况您是拥有万乘大国、富有四海的帝王呢！
English: The child of a rich and noble family does not yet sit under a dangerous house, not to mention that you are an emperor with a great country, rich in the four seas!

古文：清道而行，尚恐衔橛之失，况履涉山河而不加三思哉。
现代文：扫清道路再行走，还恐怕会有车辆倾覆的闪失，更何况跋涉万水千山而不多加考虑呢。
English: After clearing the road and walking, there will probably be a flash of a vehicle overturning, not to mention trekking through thousands of mountains without much consideration.

古文：四曰：窃惟陛下耳听法音，目玩坟典，口对百辟，心虑万机，晷昃而食，夜分而寝。
现代文： 四、陛下您耳中经常听的是佛法的声音，眼中经常看到的是经典巨著，口中说的是国家的各种法律，心里考虑的是天下纷繁的事务，日过中午才吃上饭，夜半三更才能就寝。
English: Fourth, Your Majesty, what you often hear in your ears is the voice of Buddhism, what you often see in your eyes are classic works, what you say is the various laws of the country, and what you consider in your heart is the complicated affairs of the world. You only eat after noon and go to bed after midnight.

古文：加以孝思之至，与时而深；文章之业，日成篇卷。
现代文：再加上对双亲十分孝敬思念，随着年岁的增长，倾注的感情越来越多。又用力于文章大业，每日挥成数篇。
English: In addition, she is very filial to her parents, and as she grows older, she pours out more and more feelings. She also works hard at her writing career, churning out several articles every day.

古文：虽睿明所用，未足为烦，然非所以啬神养性，熙无疆之祚。
现代文：虽然您智力过人，不感到这些事情烦难，然而，不爱惜精神，存养性情，就不能有无疆的寿命。
English: Although you are of superior intelligence and do not find these things troublesome, however, if you do not cherish your spirit and preserve your disposition, you cannot have a limitless life.

古文：庄周有言： 形有待而智无涯，以有待之形，役无涯之智，殆矣。 
现代文：庄周说过 ：身体有限度，而智慧却无穷尽，用有限度的身体，去役使无穷无尽的智慧，体力会消耗完的。 
English: Zhuang Zhou said: The body has a limit, but wisdom is inexhaustible. If you use your limited body to serve your infinite wisdom, your physical strength will be exhausted.

古文：此愚臣所不安也。
现代文：这使愚臣我常常忧虑不安啊。 
English: This often makes me feel worried and uneasy.

古文：孝文颇纳之。
现代文：孝文帝对他的意见颇愿采纳。
English: Emperor Xiaowen readily accepted his opinion.

古文：显宗又上言：
现代文：韩显宗又上表说：
English: Han Xianzong went on to say:

古文：前代取士，必先正名，故有贤良方正之称。
现代文： 前代选拔人才，必先正定名分。所以，有贤良方正的说法。
English: The previous generation of talent selection must first set the name. Therefore, there is a saying of virtuous and upright.

古文：今州郡贡察，徒有秀、孝之名，而无秀、孝之实。
现代文：现在各州郡察举的人才，徒有才干优秀，孝敬父母的名声，而没有优秀和孝敬的事实。
English: At present, the talents surveyed by each state and county only have the reputation of being talented, excellent, and respectful of their parents, but do not have the fact of being excellent and respectful.

古文：而朝廷但检其门望，不复弹坐。
现代文：朝廷只看他们的出身姓氏，不再考虑其他条件。
English: The court only looked at their family name and did not consider any other conditions.

古文：如此则可令别贡门望以叙士人，何假冒秀、孝之名也？
现代文：如果这样，可令州郡另外察举出身望族的人作为做官的人才，何必让他们假冒优秀与孝敬的资格呢？
English: If this is the case, the prefectural government can make the prefectural government additionally survey people from prestigious families as officials. Why should they have to fake excellent and honorable qualifications?

古文：夫门望者，是其父祖之遗烈，亦何益于皇家。
现代文：所谓门阀望族，只是他们祖上的功绩，对朝廷有什么益处呢？
English: The so-called gatekeepers and aristocrats are only the merit of their ancestors, but of what benefit are they to the imperial court?

古文：益于时者，贤才而已。
现代文：对国家有用的，是贤良卓越的人才。
English: What is useful to the country is a virtuous and outstanding talent.

古文：苟有其才，虽屠钓奴虏之贱，圣皇不耻以为臣；苟非其才，虽三后之胤，自坠于皁隶矣。
现代文：假如他有才干，虽然出身像屠户、渔夫、奴仆、俘虏那样卑贱，圣上您也要不耻于以他们为臣；假如他没有才干，虽然是大禹、商汤、周文王的后代，也会自己沦为皂役奴仆啊。
English: If he has talent, although he was born as lowly as a butcher, fisherman, slave, and prisoner, Your Holiness should not be ashamed to make them your vassals; if he does not have talent, although he is a descendant of King Dayu, King Shangtang, and King Zhouwen, he will also be reduced to a servant of soap.

古文：议者或云：今世等无奇才，不若取士于门。
现代文：有些论者可能会说： 现在世上没有有才干的人，不如在望门大族选拔人才。 
English: Some commentators may say: There are no talented people in the world now, so it is better to select talent from the Wangmen community.

古文：此亦失矣。
现代文：这也是错误的。
English: This is also wrong.

古文：岂可以世无周、邵，便废宰相而不置哉。
现代文：怎么因为世上没有周公、邵虎，便撤掉宰相的职务而不再设置呢？
English: How is it that because there is no Zhou Gong or Shao Hu in the world, the post of prime minister was removed and no longer set up?

古文：但当校其有寸长铢重者，即先叙之，则贤才无遗矣。
现代文：只有通过考核，认为他有寸长铢重般的能力，就可先叙职任用，这样贤才就不会遗失。 
English: Only if he passes the assessment and is considered to have the ability of an inch long and heavy, can he be assigned to a post first, so that the talent will not be lost.

古文：又曰：夫帝皇所以居尊以御下者，威也；兆庶所以徙恶以从善者，法也。
现代文：又说 ：皇帝之所以能够高居尊位而驾驭天下，在于威望；百姓所以改恶向善，是受法律的约束。
English: He also said: The reason why the emperor can hold a high rank and control the world is due to prestige; the reason why the people change from evil to good is due to the law.

古文：是以有国有家，必以刑法为政，生人之命，于是而在。
现代文：所以建国立家，一定以刑法去治理。救活人的生命，靠的也是刑法。
English: Therefore, to establish a national home, it must be governed by criminal law. To save people's lives, it also depends on criminal law.

古文：有罪必罚，罚必当辜，则虽以捶挞薄刑，而人莫敢犯。
现代文：有了罪就应当受到惩罚；惩罚那些犯了罪的，虽然用的是木板和鞭子一类较轻的刑具，而人们也不敢再犯。
English: If there is a crime, it should be punished, and those who have committed crimes should be punished, even if they use lighter instruments such as wooden boards and whips, and people should not dare to commit crimes again.

古文：有制不行，人得侥幸，则虽参夷之诛，不足以肃。
现代文：有了法律制度而不执行，人们心存侥幸，那么，虽然用夷灭三族的重刑，也不能肃清犯罪行为。
English: With a legal system that does not enforce, people are lucky, then, although the use of heavy punishment to exterminate the three ethnic groups, it can not eliminate criminal behavior.

古文：自太和以来，未多坐盗弃市，而远近肃清。
现代文：自太和年以来，没有过多地对盗贼处以斩首弃市的重刑，而天下却太平无事。
English: Since Taichung, there have not been too many cases of thieves being sentenced to beheading and abandoning the city, but the world is peaceful.

古文：由此言之，止奸在于防检，不在严刑。
现代文：由此看来，止息犯罪在于严格执行法律，不在于加重刑罚。
English: From this perspective, the way to stop crime is to strictly enforce the law, not to increase punishments.

古文：今州郡牧守，邀当时之名，行一切之法；台阁百官，亦咸以深酷为无私，以仁恕为容盗。迭相敦厉，遂成风俗。
现代文：现在州郡的官员，只图博取一时的虚名，滥肆实行刑罚；朝廷的官员，也都认为严酷苛峻为执法无私，认为仁恕宽厚为放纵容忍罪犯，互相仿效督促，便成了风气。
English: At present, officials of prefectures and counties only seek to gain a temporary false reputation and impose punishments indiscriminately; officials of the imperial court also believe that strictness and harshness are law enforcement and selflessness, that benevolence and clemency are indulgence and tolerance of criminals, and imitate and urge each other, which has become a custom.

古文：陛下居九重之内，视人如赤子；百司分万务之要，遇下如仇雠。
现代文：陛下居于九重深宫之内，视百姓有如赤子；朝廷各个部担当处理各种事务的重任，对百姓却有如仇敌。
English: His Majesty lives in a nine-storied palace and treats the people like babies; the various departments of the Imperial Court are responsible for handling various affairs, but they are like enemies to the people.

古文：是则尧、舜止一人，而桀、纣以千百，和气不至，盖由于此。
现代文：所以尧和舜这样圣明的皇帝只有一个两个，而像夏桀、殷纣这样的暴君却数以千百。天地畅和之气不出现的原因，大概就在于此。
English: Therefore, there are only one or two holy emperors such as Yao and Shun, while there are thousands of tyrants such as Xia Yao and Yin Yao. This is probably the reason why the spirit of harmony between heaven and earth does not appear.

古文：宜敕示百官，以惠元元之命。
现代文：应该告诫百官群僚，要施恩惠于黎民百姓。 
English: Officials and colleagues should be admonished to do favors for the people of Lebanon.

古文：又曰：昔周王为犬戎所逐，东迁河洛，镐京犹称宗周，以存本也。
现代文：韩显宗又上奏章说 ：过去周平王因被犬戎族进攻，将都城向东迁至河洛一带，镐京仍然称宗周，是为了保存根本。
English: Han Xianzong also wrote: In the past, King Zhou Ping moved the capital city to the east to the area around Helo due to being attacked by the dogs of the Rong people. Shijing is still called Zong Zhou, in order to preserve the fundamentals.

古文：光武虽曰中兴，实自草创，西京尚置京尹，亦不废旧。
现代文：光武帝刘秀虽号称中兴，对洛阳实在是草草创建，西京仍设置京兆尹，也不废除旧时的建制。
English: Although Guangwu Emperor Liu Xiu is known as the founder of ZTE, Luoyang was actually created in a hasty manner, and West Beijing is still set up by Jing Zhaoyun, and the old system is not abolished.

古文：今陛下光隆先业，迁宅中土，稽古复礼，于斯为盛。
现代文：现在陛下您发扬光大祖先开创的基业，迁往中原，根据古制恢复汉族礼仪，这实在是盛大的举动。
English: Now, Your Majesty, you are carrying forward the legacy created by your illustrious ancestors, moving to the Central Plains, and restoring Han Chinese etiquette according to the ancient system. This is truly a grand act.

古文：按《春秋》之义，有宗庙谓之都，无谓之邑，此不刊之典也。
现代文：根据《春秋》一书的意思，有皇族宗庙的城市叫都，没有的称邑，这是不容改动的典章。
English: According to the meaning of the book "Spring and Autumn," cities with imperial ancestral temples are called capitals, and those without are called towns. This is an unchangeable rule.

古文：况北代，宗庙在焉，山陵托焉，王业所基，圣躬所载，其为神乡福地，实亦远矣。
现代文：况且在北部的代都，有皇族的宗庙和先王的坟墓，王业的基础，天子的依托，但如果说那里是神乡福地，也差得太远了。
English: Moreover, in the northern capital, there are the ancestral temples of the imperial family and the tombs of the former kings, the foundation of the king's career, and the support of the heavenly son, but if we say that there is a heavenly land, it is too far away.

古文：今便同之郡国，臣窃不安。
现代文：现在，代都只同于一般的州郡，我为此感到很不安。
English: I'm very uneasy about the fact that the capital is now just the same as an ordinary county.

古文：愚谓代京宜建畿置尹，一如故事。
现代文：我认为代京建立辅地，设置京兆尹一职，都应该和过去一样。
English: I think that the establishment of ancillary land on behalf of Beijing and the establishment of the post of Beijing Zhaoyun should be the same as in the past.

古文：崇本重旧，以光万叶。
现代文：尊崇根本，重视旧制，以光耀史册。 
English: Reverence the fundamentals, attach importance to the old system, and enter the history books with glory.

古文：又曰： 伏见洛京之制，居人以官位相从，不依族类。
现代文：他还说： 我见洛阳的规定，居住按照官位的高低划分，不按照姓氏宗族。
English: He also said: I see the regulations of Luoyang, the residence is divided according to the level of official rank, not according to the surname and clan.

古文：然官位非常，有朝荣而夕悴，则衣冠沦于厮竖之邑，臧获显于膏腴之里，物之颠倒，或至于斯。
现代文：然而，官位是不稳定的，有的早晨荣耀而晚上就已败落，那么，士大夫就会与庶民住在一处，偷盗的赃物就会在富饶之区查获，事情的颠倒，或许就像这样。
English: However, the official position is unstable, some mornings are glorious and the evening has fallen, then, the magistrate will live with the common people, the stolen goods will be seized in the rich area, the reversal of things, perhaps like this.

古文：古之圣王，必令四人异居者，欲其业定而志专。
现代文：古代圣贤的帝王，一定要让职业不同的人分居在不同的地方，是想让他们职业稳定，志向专一。
English: The emperors of the ancient sages must have people with different occupations live in different places, in order to make their occupations stable and their aspirations more single-minded.

古文：业定则不伪，志专则不淫，故耳目所习，不督而就；父兄之教，不肃而成。
现代文：职业稳定就不会三心二意，志向专一就不会任意胡来。所以，让他们耳濡目染，不用监督就能成功；父兄的教育，不用严厉施行，就能产生作用。
English: Professional stability will not be half-hearted, and single-mindedness will not be arbitrary. Therefore, let them be wet-eyed, they can succeed without supervision; the education of parents and brothers can have an effect without strict implementation.

古文：仰惟太祖道武皇帝，创基拨乱，日不暇给，然犹分别士庶，不令杂居，伎作屠沽，各有攸处。
现代文：太祖道武皇帝创立基业，拨乱反正，日不暇给，然而，还让官民分开居住，不使他们混杂在一起。
English: Emperor Daowu, the great-grandfather of the dynasty, established the Imperial Foundation and tried to restore order. However, he also allowed officials and commoners to live separately so that they would not be mixed together.

古文：但不设科禁，买卖任情，贩贵易贱，错居浑杂。
现代文：作坊、屠户、酒店都有固定的场所，各行各业的商人也都住在一起，不设立律令，可以自由买卖。
English: Workshops, butchers, and hotels all have fixed locations, and merchants from all walks of life live together. They do not have to set up any bylaws and can trade freely.

古文：假令一处弹筝吹笛，缓舞长歌；一处严师苦训，诵《诗》讲《礼》，宣令童龀，任意所从，其走赴舞堂者万数，往就学馆者无一。
现代文：居住不能混杂，假如在一处弹筝吹笙，轻歌曼舞，一处有严厉的教师在授课，背诵《诗经》，讲解《礼记》，让学童们自己选择，那么，到歌舞场上的会数以万计，而到学馆的却没有一人。
English: Residences cannot be mixed. If in one place there is kite-flying, light song and dance, and in another there is a strict teacher giving lessons, reciting the "Book of Songs," explaining the "Rituals," and letting the schoolchildren choose for themselves, then tens of thousands of people will go to the song and dance hall, but no one will go to the school.

古文：此则伎作不可杂居，士人不宜异处之明验也。
现代文：这就是手艺人不能杂居，读书人不应与从事其他职业的住在一起的最好证明。
English: This is the best proof that craftsmen should not live together, and readers should not live together with people engaged in other professions.

古文：故孔父云里仁之美，孟母弘三徙之训。贤圣明诲，若此之重。
现代文：所以，孔子说居必择仁，孟母利用三迁作为训诫，圣贤者明哲的教诲，如此重要。
English: That is why it is so important for Confucius to say that one must choose benevolence, for Mother Meng to use the three migrations as an admonition, and for sages to teach.

古文：今令伎作之家习士人风礼，则百年难成；令士人兒童效伎作容态，则一朝可得。
现代文：假如让工匠之家学习士大夫的风度礼仪，恐怕一百年也学不成；让士大夫家的孩子仿效匠人的音容仪态，一天就可以学会。
English: If a family of craftsmen were asked to learn the manners and etiquette of a scholar-doctor, they would probably not be able to do so for a hundred years; if the children of a scholar-doctor family were asked to imitate the tone and manner of a craftsman, they could learn it in a day.

古文：以士人同处，则礼教易兴；伎作杂居，则风俗难改。
现代文：让读书人在一起，那么，礼教就容易兴盛；与工匠们住在一起，风气习俗就难以改变。
English: Let the readers be together, then the etiquette is easy to flourish; live with the craftsmen, the customs are difficult to change.

古文：朝廷每选举人士，则校其一婚一官，以为升降，何其密也。
现代文：朝廷每次选拔门第高的人，则察看他的婚姻情况和祖上的官阶，据此作为升降官职的依据，考虑得是多么周密啊。
English: Every time the imperial court selected the person with the highest rank, they looked at his marital status and the official rank of his ancestors. According to this, as the basis for promotion and demotion, how carefully they considered.

古文：至于伎作官涂，得与膏梁华望接闬连甍，何其略也。
现代文：至于有技艺的人进入仕途，能够与富室贵族房宅相连，又多么简略啊。
English: As for skilled people entering the profession, being able to connect with the homes of wealthy aristocrats, how simple it is.

古文：孝文曾谓显宗及程灵虬曰： 著作之任，国书是司。
现代文：现在根据古制建立标准，划分好住宅的区域。凡是迁居的都是公家的土地，分别工匠和士大夫的住处，在于朝廷一句话，有什么可犹豫的，而影响了迁都这件盛大壮美的事情？ 
English: Now, according to the ancient system, the standard is established and the residential area is well divided. All the residences are public lands, and the residences of craftsmen and scholars are respectively. In the words of the imperial court, what is there to hesitate, and has affected the grand and magnificent event of the capital relocation?

古文：卿等之文，朕自委悉；中省之品，卿等所闻。
现代文：孝文帝认为这些意见很好。孝文帝曾经对韩显宗和程灵箈说： 著书立说的重任，由撰写国书的人担任。你们的才华，我很了解。中书省的情况，你们都听说了。
English: Emperor Xiaowen thought these opinions were very good. Emperor Xiaowen once said to Han Xianzong and Cheng Lingyao: "The important task of writing a book and establishing a theory is carried out by the person who writes the national book. I know your talent very well. You have all heard about the situation in the Chinese Book Ministry."

古文：若欲取况古人，班、马之徒，固自辽阔。
现代文：如果与古人相比较，像班固、司马迁那样的人才，自然很少。
English: If compared with the ancients, talent like Bangu and Sima Qian is naturally rare.

古文：若求之当世，文学之能，卿等应推崔孝伯。 
现代文：如果与当代的人相比较，你们应该首先推举崔光。 
English: If you compare with contemporary people, you should first nominate Cui Guang.

古文：又谓显宗曰： 校卿才能，可居中第。 
现代文：孝文帝又对显宗说 ：比较你的才能，可居于中等。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen also said to Emperor Xuanzong: "Compare your talent, you can live in the middle class."

古文：谓程灵虬曰： 卿与显宗，复有差降，可居下上。 
现代文：对程灵箈说： 你与显宗，也有差别，可居于下等中的上乘。 
English: To Cheng Lingyao, he said, "You and Xian Zong are also different, and you can live in the superior of the inferior.

古文：显宗曰： 臣才第短浅，比于崔光，实为隆渥。
现代文：显宗说： 我才识短浅，但与崔光相比，实在要强得多。
English: Hentong said: I'm not very bright, but compared to Cui Guang, I'm much stronger.

古文：然臣窃谓陛下贵古而贱今。
现代文：我认为陛下您过于尊崇过去而轻视现在。
English: I think, Your Majesty, that you have too much reverence for the past and too little for the present.

古文：昔扬雄著《太玄经》，当时不免覆甕之谭，二百年外，则越诸子。
现代文：过去扬雄撰写《太玄经》，当时还不免被人讥刺为只能作盖酱罐的毫无价值的废品。
English: In the past, when Yang Xiong wrote the "Tao Xuan Jing," he was ridiculed as a worthless waste product that could only be used to cover sauce cans.

古文：今臣所撰，虽未足光述帝载，然万祀之后，仰观祖宗巍巍之功，上睹陛下明明之德，亦何谢钦明于《唐典》，慎徽于《虞书》。 
现代文：二百年以后，其价值超过了所有人的著作。现在我所撰写的，虽然不足以光大帝王的事业，然而万代之后，却可以从中了解先帝们的辉煌业绩和陛下您昭彰后世的道德，这既不次于《唐典》，也不逊色于《虞书》。 
English: Two hundred years later, its value exceeds that of all other human writings. Although what I have written now is not enough to illuminate the great emperor's career, after thousands of generations, it can be used to understand the brilliant achievements of the emperors and the morals that Your Majesty has taught to future generations, which is neither inferior to the "Tang Dynasty" nor inferior to the "Book of the Goose."

古文：帝曰： 假使朕无愧于虞舜，卿复何如尧臣？ 
现代文：孝文帝说： 假如我无愧于虞舜，你同尧的臣相比，会如何呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said, "If I am worthy of the peerage, how would you compare me to your peers?"

古文：显宗曰： 陛下齐踪尧、舜，公卿宁非二八之俦。 
现代文：显宗说： 您可以和尧、舜相提并论，公卿大臣难道不都是高阳氏的八个杰出人才吗？ 
English: Said Emperor Xuanzong: "You can be compared to Zhai and Zhai. Aren't the ministers of the nobility all the eight outstanding talents of the Goyang clan?

古文：帝曰： 卿为著作，仅名奉职，未是良史也。 
现代文：孝文帝说 ：你的著作，仅仅是奉行职务，并不是优秀的史书啊。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said, "Your work is just a job, not an excellent history book."

古文：显宗曰： 臣仰遭明时，直笔无惧，又不受金，安眠美食，此优于迁、固也。 
现代文：显宗回答说 ：我生逢您所治理的开明盛世，直笔写来，毫不惧怕，又不接受别人的金钱，睡得安稳，吃得有味，这又比司马迁、班固优越呀。 
English: Emperor Xuanzong replied, "I was born in the enlightened and prosperous times that you ruled over. I can write with a straight face, have no fear, do not accept other people's money, sleep soundly, and eat deliciously. This is superior to Sima Qian and Banggu.

古文：帝哂之。
现代文：孝文帝听了很不以为然。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was not impressed.

古文：后与员外郎崔逸等参定朝仪。
现代文：显宗后来又与员外郎崔逸等人一起修订朝廷礼仪。
English: Later, Emperor Xuanzong revised the etiquette of the imperial court together with members such as the concubine Cui Yat.

古文：帝曾诏诸官曰： 近代已来，高卑出身，恆有常分。朕意所为可，复以为不可，宜校量之。 
现代文：孝文帝曾下诏对朝臣们说 ：近代以来，出身的高贵与卑贱，常有固定的划分，我认为这样既可以，又不可以，应该认真考虑。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen once issued an edict to his courtiers, saying: "Since modern times, there has often been a fixed division between the highborn and the lowborn. I think this is both possible and impossible, and should be seriously considered.

古文：李冲曰： 未审上古已来，置官列位，为欲为膏梁兒地，为欲益政赞时？ 
现代文：李冲说 ：不知道自古以来设置官位，是为了那些出身富贵的膏粱子弟安排个位置呢，还是为了参赞政治，有益于当时呢？ 
English: Li Chong said, "I don't know if the government posts have been set up since ancient times. Is it to arrange a position for those rich sons of bitches, or is it for councillor politics, and is it beneficial at the time?"

古文：帝曰： 俱欲为人。 
现代文：孝文帝回答说 ：都是为了百姓。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen replied, "It's all for the people."

古文：冲曰： 若欲为人，陛下今日何为专崇门品，不有拔才之诏？ 
现代文：李冲接着说； 如果是为了百姓，陛下您现在为什么专门看重门第的高低，而不下达选拔人才的诏书？ 
English: Li Chong went on to say: If it is for the people, Your Majesty, why do you now pay special attention to the level of disciples, but do not issue an edict to select talents?

古文：帝曰： 苟有殊人之技，不患不知。
现代文：孝文帝说 ：如果有异乎常人的才能，不怕别人不知道。
English: Emperor Xiaowen said, "If you have extraordinary talent, don't be afraid that others don't know about it."

古文：然君子之门，假使无当世之用者，要自德行纯笃，朕是以用之。 
现代文：然而，那些生于有身份的人家的子弟假如还没有被录用，只要道德清纯笃厚，我可以任用他。 
English: However, if the children of those who were born into a family with status have not yet been hired, I can appoint him as long as his morals are pure and strong.

古文：冲曰： 傅岩、吕望，岂可以门见举？ 
现代文：李冲问： 像傅岩、吕望这样的人才，难道可以用门第出身决定他能否被举荐？ 
English: Li Chong asked: Can talents like Fu Yan and Lü Wang use their family background to decide whether they can be recommended?

古文：帝曰： 如此济世者希，旷代有一两耳。 
现代文：孝文帝说 ：像这样济世治国的旷世奇才太少了，许多朝代才会有一两个。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said, "There are too few great sages to rule the country like this, many dynasties only have one or two."

古文：冲谓诸卿士曰： 适欲请救诸贤。 
现代文：李冲对诸位公卿大臣说 ：正想向各位求救。 
English: Li Chong said to the nobles and ministers, "I'm trying to ask you for help."

古文：秘书令李彪曰： 师旅寡少，未足为援，意有所怀，敢不尽言于圣日。
现代文：秘书令李彪说： 军队中人才少，不足以作为证明。如果我有什么想法，能不向圣上畅所欲言？
English: The secretary ordered Li Biao to say: There are few talents in the army, which is not enough proof. If I have any thoughts, can I speak freely to the saint?

古文：陛下若专以地望，不审鲁之三卿，孰若四科？ 
现代文：陛下如果仅仅以地域门望裁量人才，不了解鲁国的季孙、叔孙、孟孙虽任三卿，哪里赶得上孔子所要求的德行、言语、政事、文学四项人才的标准呢？ 
English: Your Majesty, if you only judge talent by regional standards, and do not understand that the third generation of the Qisun, the great-great-grandson, and the great-great-grandson of Meng Sun are the three nobles in Lu, how can you meet the standards of the four talents of virtue, speech, politics, and literature required by Confucius?

古文：帝曰： 犹如向解。 
现代文：孝文帝问： 这如何解释？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen asked: How can this be explained?

古文：显宗进曰： 陛下光宅洛邑，百礼惟新，国之兴否，指此一选。
现代文：显宗答道： 陛下迁都洛阳，各项礼仪制度都得到革新，国家能否兴旺，在此一举。
English: Emperor Xuanzong replied, "Your majesty has moved the capital to Luoyang, the various etiquette systems have been innovated, and whether the country can prosper depends on this.

古文：且以国事论之，不审中秘监、令之子，必为秘书郎，顷来为监、令者，子皆可为不？ 
现代文：从国事考虑，不要问他是否是中秘监、令的儿子，就一定任为秘书郎。历来任中秘监、令的，儿子们也一定能胜任吗？ 
English: From the perspective of national affairs, don't ask whether he is the son of the middle secretary or the commander, he must be appointed as the secretary. Have the sons of the middle secretary and the commander always been competent?

古文：帝曰： 卿何不论当世膏腴为监、令者？ 
现代文：孝文帝问 ：你为什么不主张让当世的权门贵族任监和令的职务呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen asked: Why don't you advocate that the current aristocrats of power be appointed to the positions of warden and magistrate?

古文：显宗曰： 陛下以物不可类，不应以贵承贵，以贱袭贱。 
现代文：显宗回答： 陛下认为物不可类聚，不应该老是让贵族的后代继承前代的职务，卑贱的就永远只能承袭卑贱的职务。 
English: Emperor Xuanzong replied, "Your Majesty thinks that there is no comparison. It is not right to always let the descendants of aristocrats inherit the positions of their predecessors. The lowly can only inherit the lowly positions.

古文：帝曰： 若有高明卓尔，才具俊出者，朕亦不拘此例。 
现代文：孝文帝说： 如果有远见卓识，才能杰出的，我也不拘泥于这个成例。 
English: Xiaowen Di said: If you have foresight and insight, you can be outstanding, I will not stick to this example.

古文：后为本州中正。
现代文：韩显宗后来任本州的中正官。
English: Han Xianzong later became the vice-governor of Honshu.

古文：二十一年，车驾南征，以显宗为右军府长史、统军。
现代文：太和二十一年，孝文帝亲自南征，任命显宗为右军府长史、统军。
English: In the twenty-first year of the Taihe era, Emperor Xiaowen personally led the Southern Expedition, and appointed Emperor Xianzong as the prefect of the right army and the leader of the unified army.

古文：次赭阳，齐戍主成公期遣其军主胡松、高法援等并引蛮贼，来击军营。显宗拒战，斩法援首。
现代文：军队到达赭阳，南齐守将成公期派他的部将胡松、高法援等率领齐军和蛮军进攻魏军大营，显宗率军迎战，将齐将高法援斩首。
English: When the army arrived in Fenyang, the governor of Southern Qi, Cheng Gong, sent his subordinates, Hu Song and Gao Fa Yuan, to lead the Qi army and barbarian army to attack the camp of the Wei army. Xian Zong led the army to fight, and he beheaded Gao Fa Yuan.

古文：显宗至新野，帝曰： 何不作露布也？ 
现代文：显宗率军到了新野，孝文帝问他： 为什么不张贴布告？ 
English: When Emperor Henzong led his army to Niiro, Emperor Xiaowen asked him, "Why didn't you post an announcement?

古文：显宗曰： 臣顷见镇南将军王肃获贼二三，驴马数匹，皆为露布。
现代文：显宗回答说： 我过去见镇南将军王肃俘获二三个贼兵，几匹驴马，就写露布表功。
English: Emperor Xuanzong replied, "When I saw that the Zhenan general Wang Su captured two or three bandits and several donkeys and horses, I wrote a poem to show my gratitude.

古文：臣在东观，私每哂之。
现代文：我在京城的东观，私下里常常嘲笑他。
English: When I was in Dongguan, Beijing, I often laughed at him in private.

古文：近虽仰凭威灵，得摧丑虏，兵寡力弱，禽斩不多。脱复高曳长缣，虚张功捷，尤而效之，其罪弥甚。
现代文：最近我仰伏您的神威，得以摧垮敌兵。由于兵少力单，擒斩敌兵的数量不多，如果因此甩动长长的衣袖舞之蹈之，张扬功劳，仿效王肃过去的做法，罪过更重。
English: Recently, I have been able to defeat the enemy soldiers by relying on your divine power. Since the number of soldiers is small, the number of enemy soldiers to be killed is not large. If, as a result, you shake the long sleeve dance, publicize the merits, and follow Wang Su's past practices, the crime is more serious.

古文：所以敛毫卷帛，解上而已。 
现代文：所以，我收起毛笔，卷起白绢，不发露布，只将战况呈报给您就行了。 
English: Therefore, I put away the brush, roll up the white satin, do not reveal the cloth, just report the situation to you.

古文：帝笑曰： 如卿此勋，诚合茅社，须赭阳平定，检审相酬。 
现代文：孝文帝说 ：像你建立的功勋，可以封为王侯。等到赭阳平定后，再一并封赏。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said, "A merit such as the one you have established can be rewarded with the title of prince. Wait until Shenyang is pacified, and then reward them together."

古文：新野平，以显宗为镇南广阳王嘉谘议参军。
现代文：新野平定，任显宗为镇南广阳王元嘉的咨议参军。
English: Hino was pacified, and Ren Xianzong joined the army at the suggestion of Wang Yuanjia of Zhenan and Guangyang.

古文：显宗上表，颇自矜伐，诉前征勋。
现代文：显宗在给孝文帝的奏章中，颇有矜持骄傲的口气，自己诉说过去的功劳。
English: In his musical composition for Emperor Xiaowen, Emperor Xuanzong has a rather reserved and proud tone, telling of his past achievements.

古文：诏曰： 显宗进退无检，亏我清风，付尚书推列以闻。 
现代文：孝文帝下诏说 ：显宗进退失度，行为不检，有损朝廷清纯的风气，交付尚书按律处分。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict saying, "Hsienzong has made mistakes in advancement and retreat, behaved in a disorderly manner, undermined the pure atmosphere of the imperial court, and handed over Shangshu to be punished according to the law."

古文：兼尚书张彝奏免显宗官。
现代文：兼任尚书职务的张彝奏报免除显宗的官职。
English: Zhang Ye, who also held the post of Shang Shu, reported that the official post of Xian Zong was exempted.

古文：诏以白衣守谘议，展其后效。
现代文：孝文帝下诏命他以布衣的身份任咨议，以观后效。
English: Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict ordering him to serve as a consultative councilor in the capacity of a clothed person, with the effect of a spectator.

古文：显宗既失意，遇信向洛，乃为五言诗赠御史中尉李彪，以申愤结。
现代文：显宗失意丧志，遇到往洛阳写信的机会，便写了五言诗赠给御史中尉李彪，以抒发郁结在胸中的愤懑。
English: Dejected and discouraged, Hsien Tsung took the opportunity to write a letter to Luoyang, and wrote a five-character poem as a gift to the imperial lieutenant Li Biao to express his deep-seated resentment.

古文：骏少孤贫，居丧以孝称。
现代文：太和二十三年去世。程骏，字駘驹。他从小失去父亲，家境贫穷，守丧时以孝著称。
English: He lost his father when he was a child, his family was poor, and he was known for his filial piety at funerals.

古文：师事刘延明，性机敏好学，昼夜无倦。
现代文：拜刘延明为老师，性格机敏，酷好学习，昼夜苦读，没有倦意。
English: Bai Liu Yanming is a teacher, quick-witted, great at learning, studying hard day and night, and never tired.

古文：延明谓门人曰： 举一隅而以三隅反者，此子亚之也。 
现代文：刘延明对学生说 ：告诉他事物的一个方向，就能推知其他三个方向，程骏仅次于这样啊。 
English: Liu Yanming said to the students: Tell him one direction of things, he will be able to deduce the other three directions, Cheng Yao is second only to this.

古文：骏白延明曰： 今名教之儒，咸谓老庄其言虚诞，不切实要，不可以经世。
现代文：程骏对刘延明说 ：现今提倡名教的读书人，都说老庄的话虚无怪诞，不切实际，不可以用来治理国家。
English: Cheng Yao said to Liu Yanming: Nowadays, the readers who advocate the famous religion all say that Lao Zhuang's words are nothingness, grotesque, impractical, and cannot be used to govern the country.

古文：骏为不然。
现代文：我认为不是这个样子。
English: I don't think so.

古文：夫老子著抱一之言，庄生申性本之旨，若斯者，可谓至顺矣。
现代文：老子著抱一的学说，庄生申述性本的宗旨。如果都能做到这样，世道可以说就十分顺达了。
English: Laozi adhered to the doctrine of embracing unity, and Zhuang Sheng adhered to the tenet of expressing the nature of nature. If we can all do this, the world can be said to be very smooth.

古文：人若乖一，则烦伪生；爽性，则冲真丧。 
现代文：人如果不专一守本，那么烦恼就会产生；过去任性自为，就会流于放荡丧失真性情。 
English: If people do not stick to their principles, then troubles will arise; if they are self-willed in the past, they will drift into debauchery and lose their true nature.

古文：延明曰： 卿年尚幼，言若老成，美哉。 
现代文：刘延明说： 你还年幼，说话就这样老成，真好啊！ 
English: Liu Yanming said, "You are still young, but you speak so maturely. How nice!

古文：由是声誉益播。
现代文：从此，他的声誉远播。
English: From then on his reputation spread far and wide.

古文：沮渠牧犍擢为东宫侍讲。
现代文：沮渠牧健拔擢他为东宫侍讲。
English: Despondently, Mu Jianba promoted him to the East Palace.

古文：太延五年，凉州平，迁于京师。为司徒崔浩所知。
现代文：太延五年，凉州平定，程骏迁往京城，被司徒崔浩赏识。
English: In the fifth year of the Taiyan era, when Liangzhou was pacified, Cheng Yao moved to Beijing and was appreciated by the scholar Cui Hao.

古文：文成践阼，为著作郎。
现代文：文成帝继位，任程骏为著作郎。
English: Emperor Wencheng succeeds to the throne, appointing Cheng Yao as his literary agent.

古文：皇兴中，除高密太守。
现代文：皇兴年间，任高密太守。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xing, Gaomi was appointed as the de facto ruler.

古文：尚书李敷奏骏实史才，方申直笔，请留之。
现代文：尚书李敷奏报程骏实在是一个史才，朝廷正准备修史，请求把他留下。
English: Shang Shuxu, Li Shikisong, Bao Chengyu is really a historical talent. The imperial court is preparing to revise history and ask him to stay.

古文：书奏，从之。
现代文：奏章报给献文帝，同意了李敷的意见。
English: reported to the Imperial Court, which agreed with his opinion.

古文：献文屡引骏与论《易》、《老》义，顾谓群臣曰： 朕与此人言，意甚开暢。 
现代文：献文帝屡次与程骏讨论《易经》、《道德经》的含义，对群臣们说： 我与程骏谈论，思想十分舒畅。 
English: Emperor Xianwen repeatedly discussed the meanings of the I Ching and the Tao Te Ching with Cheng Xi, and said to his courtiers: I talked with Cheng Xi, and my thoughts were very comfortable.

古文：问骏年，对曰： 六十一。 
现代文：献文帝问程骏的年龄，他回答说 ：六十一岁。 
English: When Emperor Qianwen asked Cheng Yao how old he was, he replied that he was sixty-one years old.

古文：帝曰： 昔太公老而遭文王，卿今遇朕，岂非早也。 
现代文：献文帝说 ：昔日姜太公年纪高迈而遇到周文王，你今日遇到我，难道不是太早了吗？ 
English: Emperor Xianwen said, "Once upon a time, Jiang Taigong met King Zhou Wen at an advanced age, but you met me today. Isn't it too early?"

古文：骏曰： 臣虽才谢吕望，陛下尊过西伯。
现代文：程骏答道： 我的才能虽然不如姜太公，陛下您的尊贵却超过周文王。
English: Cheng Yu replied: Although my talent is not as good as Jiang Taigong, Your Majesty, your dignity is better than King Zhou Wen.

古文：觊天假余年，竭《六韬》之效。 
现代文：如果上天再让我多活几年，我一定像吕望编写《六韬》那样竭尽全力为您效劳。 
English: If God lets me live a few more years, I will do my best to serve you, just as Lü Wang did when he compiled "The Six Degrees of Separation."

古文：延兴末，高丽王琏求纳女于掖庭，假骏散骑常侍，赐爵安丰男，持节如高丽迎女。
现代文：延兴末年，高丽王高琏请求将女儿送给献文帝做妃子。孝文帝任程骏为散骑常侍，赐给安丰男的爵位，持节到高丽国迎接高琏的女儿。
English: At the end of the year of Yanxing, King Gaozong of Goryeo requested that his daughter be given to Emperor Xianwen as his concubine. Emperor Xianwen appointed Chengyu as his equestrian attendant, bestowed a peerage on Anfeng's son, and went to Goryeo to welcome Gaozong's daughter.

古文：骏至平壤城。或劝琏曰： 魏昔与燕婚，既而伐之，由行人具其夷险故也。
现代文：程骏到了平壤城，有人劝高琏说： 北魏过去与燕国通婚，后来又进攻人家，是由于迎亲的使者看见那里山川险要的缘故。
English: When Cheng Yao arrived at Pyongyang City, someone advised Gao Yao to say: The Northern Wei Dynasty used to intermarry with Yan Guo in the past, and later attacked other people's homes, because the welcoming envoy saw the mountains and rivers there.

古文：今若送女，恐不异于冯氏。 
现代文：现在如果我们将女儿送去，恐怕后果和燕国没有什么不同。 
English: If we send our daughter now, I'm afraid the consequences will be no different from those in Yan's country.

古文：琏遂谬言女丧。
现代文：高琏便谎称女儿死去。
English: Ms. Gao then falsely claimed that her daughter had died.

古文：骏与琏往复经年，责琏以义方。琏不胜其忿，遂断骏从者酒食，欲逼辱之，惮而不敢害。
现代文：程骏与高琏反复交涉了一年，用大义批评高琏，高琏十分气忿，断绝了程骏一行人的酒饭，想逼迫和羞辱他们，但由于惧怕北魏而不敢加害他们。
English: Cheng Yao and Gao Yao repeatedly negotiated for a year, criticizing Gao Yao with great righteousness. Gao Yao was very angry and cut off the food and drink of Cheng Yao and his entourage. He wanted to persecute and humiliate them, but because of his fear of the Northern Wei Dynasty, he did not dare to harm them.

古文：会献文崩，乃还。拜秘书令。
现代文：恰巧献文帝驾崩，程骏才回来，被封为秘书令。
English: It so happened that Emperor Xianwen passed away, and it was only after his death that Cheng Yao returned and was appointed secretary.

古文：初，迁神主于太庙，有司奏：旧事，庙中执事官例皆赐爵，今宜依旧。
现代文：开初，朝廷将神主迁到太庙，有司奏称：按照旧例，庙中的执事官都应该赐给爵位，现在应依旧例。
English: At the beginning of the year, the imperial court moved the deity to the Great Temple, and some scholars said: According to the old example, the deacon in the temple should be given a peerage, and now it should still be the case.

古文：诏百寮评议，群臣咸以为宜依旧事。
现代文：朝廷下诏让朝臣们评议这件事，群臣都认为应该按照旧例。
English: The imperial court issued an edict to let the courtiers discuss the matter, and the courtiers all believed that the old practice should be followed.

古文：骏独以为不可，表曰： 臣闻名器为帝王所贵，山河为区夏之重，是以汉祖有约，非功不侯。
现代文：程骏却认为不可以，上表说： 我听说名器被帝王所宝贵，山河为国家所珍重，所以汉代的帝王作出规定，不建立大功，就不分土封侯。
English: Cheng Yao, however, thought it was unacceptable. The above table said: I heard that famous vessels were precious to the emperor, and mountains and rivers were treasured by the country. Therefore, the emperor of the Han Dynasty made a provision that if great merit was not established, there would be no distinction between princes and vassals.

古文：未见预事于宗庙，而获赏于疆土。
现代文：没有见过在宗庙料理事务，却能得到疆土的赏赐。
English: I've never seen anyone get the reward of territory in spite of the fact that he was in charge of the temple's finances.

古文：虽复帝王制作，弗相沿袭。然一时恩泽，岂足为长世之轨乎。 
现代文：虽然也曾有帝王这样作，暂时又被沿袭，然而怎么能将帝王们一时的恩泽当成万世不变的成规呢？ 
English: Although there were emperors who did this and were temporarily followed, how can the emperors' momentary grace be regarded as an eternal rule?

古文：书奏，从之。
现代文：奏报朝廷，同意了他的意见。
English: reported to the Imperial Court, which agreed with his opinion.

古文：文明太后谓群臣曰： 言事，固当正直而准古典；安可依附暂时旧事乎！ 
现代文：文明太后对群臣们说： 议论事情，应当正直而又遵循古代的典章制度，怎么可以依循暂时的旧例呢？ 
English: The Empress Dowager of Civilization said to her courtiers: When discussing matters, we should be honest and follow the ancient legal system. How can we follow the temporary old practice?

古文：赐骏衣一袭，帛二百匹。
现代文：赐给程骏衣服一套，帛二百匹。
English: He gave her a set of clothes and two hundred camels.

古文：又诏曰： 骏历官清慎，言事每惬。门无挟货之宾，室有怀道之士。
现代文：朝廷又下诏说： 程骏做官清廉谨慎，论事常合朝廷的意见，家里没占有什么财货，室中却有道德高尚的主人。
English: The imperial court also issued an edict saying, "Cheng Yao is a clean and prudent official, and his opinions are always in line with the opinions of the imperial court. There is no wealth or goods in his family, but there is a highly moral master in his room.

古文：可赐帛六百匹，旌其俭德。 
现代文：可赐给帛六百匹，以表彰他节俭清正的美德。 
English: In recognition of his frugal and upright virtues, he could be given six hundred horses.

古文：骏悉散之亲旧。
现代文：程骏得到这些东西，全部分给了亲朋旧友。
English: All of these things were given to relatives, friends and old friends.

古文：性介直，不竞时荣。
现代文：程骏性格正直，不与世争荣。
English: Cheng Yao is honest and does not compete with the world.

古文：太和九年正月病笃，遗命曰： 吾存尚俭薄，岂可没为奢厚哉。
现代文：太和九年正月病重，留下遗言说： 我崇尚节俭，怎么能死了之后厚葬呢？
English: My mother-in-law fell seriously ill in the first month of the ninth year, and left a last will and testament saying: I advocate frugality, so how can I have a grand funeral after I die?

古文：昔王孙裸葬，有感而然；士安籧篨，颇亦矫厉。
现代文：过去王孙实行裸葬，是对厚葬有所感慨才这样；士安用粗席子埋葬，显得过于矫情和严厉。
English: In the past, Wang Sun carried out a naked burial, and it was only because he felt sorry for the heavy burial; Shi An was buried with a thick mat, which appeared to be too pompous and severe.

古文：可敛以时服，明器从古。 
现代文：我死了，入殓时可以穿上平时的衣服，随葬的明器遵从古制。 
English: When I die, I can wear my usual clothes when I'm buried, and the grave goods will follow the old system.

古文：初骏病甚，孝文、文明太后遣使者更问其疾，敕侍御师徐謇诊视，赐以汤药。
现代文：程骏最初病危，孝文帝和文明太后派使者来问候他，命御医徐謇给他诊治，赐给他汤药。
English: At first, Cheng Yao was critically ill. Emperor Xiaowen and Empress Dowager Wenying sent an envoy to greet him, ordered the doctor Xu Yao to treat him, and gave him soup medicine.

古文：临终，诏以小子公称为中散，从子灵虬为著作佐郎。
现代文：临终时，朝廷下诏封他的儿子程公称为中散大夫，从子灵箈为著作佐郎。
English: At the time of his death, the imperial court decreed that his son, Cheng Gong, would be known as Dr. Zhongshan, and his son's posthumous name would be Sakuro.

古文：及卒，孝文、文明太后伤惜之。赐东园秘器、朝服一称、帛三百匹，赠兗州刺史、曲安侯，谥曰宪。
现代文：死后，孝文帝和文明太后十分伤感痛惜，赐给他棺木一口，朝服一套、帛三百匹，追赠为兖州刺史、曲安侯，谥号为宪。
English: After his death, Emperor Xiaowen and Empress Dowager Fuxing were very sad and regretful, and gave him a coffin, a set of imperial robes, and 300 horses. He was posthumously given the titles of Zhangzhou Sisi and Qu'an Hou, and his posthumous name was Xian.

古文：所作文章，自有集录。李彪，字道固，顿丘卫国人也，孝文赐名焉。
现代文：李彪，字道固，顿丘卫国人，这是孝文帝赐给的名字。家庭贫寒，从小失去父亲，饱受贫困折磨。
English: Li Biao, also known as Daogu or Dongqiu, is the name given to him by Emperor Xiaowen. His family was poor, he lost his father at a young age, and he suffered from poverty.

古文：家寒微，少孤贫，有大志，好学不倦。
现代文：然而却胸怀大志，好学不倦。
English: However, he is ambitious, eager to learn and tireless.

古文：初受业于长乐监伯阳，伯阳称美之。
现代文：最初，受学于长乐的监伯阳，伯阳十分称赞他。
English: At first, he was taught by Jang Le's supervisor Bo Yang, and Bo Yang praised him highly.

古文：晚与渔阳高悦、北平阳尼等将隐名山，不果而罢。
现代文：后来与渔阳的高悦、北平的阳尼等人想一起隐居名山，没有实行。
English: Later, Gao Yue of Yuyang and Yang Ni of Beiping wanted to live together in seclusion on the famous mountain, but this did not come to fruition.

古文：悦兄闾博学高才，家富典籍，彪遂于悦家手抄口诵，不暇寝食。
现代文：高悦的兄长高闾学问广博，才干突出，家里藏有很多图书典籍，李彪便到高悦家借阅，天天手抄口念，废寝忘餐。
English: Gao Yue's elder brother Gao Yao was well-educated and talented. The family had a lot of books and classics. Li Biao would go to Gao Yue's house to borrow books and read them by hand every day, losing sleep and forgetting to eat.

古文：既而还乡里。
现代文：不久回到家乡。
English: He soon returned to his hometown.

古文：平原王陆睿年将弱冠，雅有志业。
现代文：平原王陆睿年近二十岁，素怀大志。
English: Lu Rui, the king of the plain, is nearly twenty years old and has a great ambition.

古文：娶东徐州刺史博陵崔鉴女，路由冀、相，闻彪名而诣之。修师友之礼，称之州郡遂。
现代文：他娶东徐州刺史博陵人崔鉴的女儿为妻，迎亲路经冀州、相州，听到李彪的名字，专门去拜访他，两人举行了师友的礼节，为州郡的人们所称道。
English: He married the daughter of Cui Jian, a resident of Jishiboling in East Xuzhou, and welcomed relatives via Jizhou and Xiangzhou. When he heard Li Biao's name, he specially went to visit him. The two men held the etiquette of mentors and friends, which was praised by the people of Zhouzhou County.

古文：遂举孝廉，至京师，馆而受业焉。
现代文：李彪便被举荐为孝廉，到京城入学馆受业。
English: Li Biao was recommended as a filial son and went to study at the Beijing University of Education.

古文：高闾称之朝贵，李冲礼之其厚，彪深宗附之。
现代文：高闾称赞他不久即可贵显，李冲对他礼遇甚厚，李彪与他们关系十分密切。
English: Gao Yao praised him and said that he would soon be honored, Li Chong treated him with great courtesy, and Li Biao had a very close relationship with them.

古文：孝文初，为中书教学博士。
现代文：孝文帝即位之初，任他为中书教学博士。
English: At the beginning of Emperor Xiaowen's reign, he was appointed as a doctor of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：后假散骑常侍、卫国子，使于齐。
现代文：后来又封为散骑常侍、卫国子，出使南齐。
English: Later, he was appointed as a knight errant, a son of the Emperor, and sent to Nanzhi.

古文：迁秘书丞，参著作事。
现代文：又任秘书丞，参与著作等事。
English: He also worked as a secretary and participated in writing.

古文：自成帝已来，至于太和，崔浩、高允著述国书，编年序录为《春秋》体，遗落时事。
现代文：自从文成帝以来到孝文帝太和年间，崔浩、高允撰写国史，编年序录采用了《春秋》的体例，遗落了许多重大的时事。
English: From the time of Emperor Wencheng to the time of Emperor Xiaowen, Cui Hao and Gao Yun wrote the national history, and the chronicle used the style of "Spring and Autumn," leaving out many important current events.

古文：彪与秘书令高祐始奏从迁、固体，创为纪、传、表、志之目焉。
现代文：李彪与秘书令高上书，请求按司马迁、班固创立的史书体例，撰写分为纪、传、表、志等目。
English: Li Biao and his secretary ordered Gao to write a letter, requesting that the writing be divided into discipline, transmission, table, and ambition according to the historical book style created by Sima Qian and Banggu.

古文：彪又表上封事七条，曰：
现代文：李彪又写表陈述有关封赏的事情七条，其一说：
English: Li Biao also wrote a table to state seven things about the reward, one of which said:

古文：古先哲王之为制也，自天子以至公卿，下及抱关击柝，其宫室车服，各有差品。
现代文： 古代圣哲的先王创立的制度，从天子到公卿，往下再到看门的和打更的，他们住的房子，坐的车子，穿的衣服，都有等级差别。
English: The system created by the ancestors of the ancient sages, from the heavenly sons to the nobles, down to the janitors and porters, the houses they lived in, the cars they rode in, and the clothes they wore, all had class differences.

古文：小不得僭大，贱不得逾贵。
现代文：地位低的不得超过地位高的，卑贱的不得超过高贵的。
English: The low should not exceed the high, the base should not exceed the noble.

古文：夫然，故上下序而人志定。
现代文：这样，才上下有序，人心稳定。
English: Only in this way can the top and bottom be orderly and the people's hearts be stable.

古文：今时浮华相竞，情无常守；大为消功之物，巨制费力之事，岂不谬哉。
现代文：现在的风气，人们竞相浮华，情志变化无常，大肆兴办耗费财力人力的事情。
English: In today's culture, people compete to be flashy, emotions are fickle, and things that consume money and manpower are carried out.

古文：夫消功者，锦绣雕文是也；费力者，广宅高宇，壮制丽饰是也。其妨男业害女工者，可胜言哉！
现代文：耗费财力的，如制造大批的绫罗绸缎和珍奇玩好；耗费人力的，如建造宫殿庙宇，并大加粉饰。这些妨害男子耕作女子纺织的事情，真是不胜枚举啊！
English: Expensive, such as the manufacture of a large number of silk brocades and rare toys; labor-intensive, such as the construction of palaces and temples, and heavily whitewashed. These things that hinder men from cultivating women's textiles are too numerous to list!

古文：汉文时，贾谊上疏，云今之王政可为长太息者六，此即是其一也。
现代文：汉文帝时，贾谊上疏，说当时朝政可令人长久叹息的事情有六，这便是其中之一呀。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwen, Jia's friendships were sparse. He said that there were six things about the imperial government at that time that would make people sigh for a long time, and this was one of them.

古文：夫上之所好，下必从之。
现代文： 上边所喜好的，下边一定仿效。
English: What the upper side likes, the lower side must imitate.

古文：故越王好勇而士多轻死；楚王好瘠而国有饥人。
现代文：所以，越王好勇斗狠，而将士大多轻生敢死；楚王喜欢瘦子，而国内就有人挨饿减肥。
English: Therefore, Yue Wang likes to fight bravely and fiercely, while most generals are willing to die; Chu Wang likes thin people, while some people in China are starving to lose weight.

古文：今二圣躬行俭素，诏令殷勤，而百姓之奢犹未革者，岂楚、越之人易变如彼，大魏之士难化如此？
现代文：现在，太上皇和皇上带头节俭，并下诏命官民都要勤劳。但是，百姓的奢华之风仍未变革，难道是楚国和越国的人就那样容易改变，我们魏国的人民就这样难以变化？
English: Now, the Grand Empress Dowager and the Emperor are leading the way in frugality, and have issued an edict ordering both officials and commoners to work hard. However, the people's luxurious lifestyle has yet to change. Could it be that the people of Chu and Yue are so easy to change, while we, the people of Wei, are so difficult to change?

古文：此盖朝制不宣，人未见德使之然耳。
现代文：这是因为朝廷的制度没有宣传，人们没有被感化所造成的。
English: This was caused by the fact that the system of the imperial court was not publicized and people were not influenced.

古文：臣愚以为第宅车服，自百官以下至于庶人，宜为其等制。
现代文：我认为住宅、车辆、服装，自百官以下到普通百姓，应该规定出等级式样。
English: I think that housing, vehicles, clothing, from officials to ordinary people, should stipulate a hierarchical style.

古文：使贵不逼贱，卑不僭高，不可以称其侈意，用违经典。
现代文：使高贵的不至于使用卑贱者的，卑贱者不至于违制使用高贵的，人人都不能任意奢侈，有违典章制度。 
English: So that the noble would not use the lowly, the lowly would not use the noble in violation of the rules, everyone could not be extravagant, and there would be a violation of the code system.

古文：其二曰：《易》称： 主器者莫若长子。 
现代文：其二说 ：《易经》上称 ：掌管国家神器都不如天子的长子。 
English: The second said, "In the I Ching, it is said that the firstborn son of the son of heaven is not as good as the firstborn son of the son of the son of heaven.

古文：《传》曰： 太子奉冢嫡之粢盛。 
现代文：《左传》说 ：太子继承王位，庄稼就长得好。 
English: "Zo Zhuan" said: When the crown prince succeeds to the throne, the crops grow well.

古文：然则祭无主则宗庙无所飨，冢嫡废则神器无所传。
现代文：然而，无人祭祀则皇室宗庙就没有供品，太子被废除国家的神器就无人可传。
English: However, if there is no one to offer sacrifices, there will be no offerings to the imperial family's ancestral temple, and if the prince is abolished, there will be no one to pass on the national sacred artifact.

古文：圣贤知其如此，故垂诰以为长世之法。
现代文：圣贤们知道这个道理，所以立下诰书作为世代遵奉的法典。
English: The sages knew this, so they established the Book of the Law as a code for the generations to follow.

古文：昔姬王得斯道也，故恢崇儒术以训世嫡。世嫡于是乎习成懿德，用大协于黎蒸。是以世统黎元，载祀八百。
现代文：过去周代的天子懂得这个道理，所以，推崇儒术以教育太子，太子因此养成美德，施行政治对于黎民百姓大有好处，所以世代拥有天下，前后历经八百年。
English: In the past, the sons of heaven in the Zhou Dynasty understood this principle. Therefore, they promoted Confucianism to educate the princes, and the princes thus developed virtues. The implementation of politics is of great benefit to the people. Therefore, the generation owns the world, after eight hundred years.

古文：逮嬴氏之君于秦也，弗以义方教厥冢子，冢子于是习成凶德，肆虐以临黔首。
现代文：到了嬴政当了秦国的皇帝，不用做人的正道教育他的儿子，他的儿子于是养成凶恶的品质，对待百姓肆虐横行，因而国运短暂，立国只有两代便被灭掉。
English: When Hezheng became the emperor of Qin, he did not have to teach his son the right way to be a man. As a result, his son developed a vicious character and treated the people in a violent manner. As a result, the national movement was short-lived, and only two generations after the founding of the country were eliminated.

古文：是以飨年不永，二世而亡。
现代文：灭亡与兴盛，其原因在于前代对后代如何教育。
English: The reason for the demise and prosperity lies in how the previous generation educates the next generation.

古文：亡之与兴，道在于师傅。故《礼》云： 冢子生，因举以礼，使士负之，有司齐肃端冕，见于南郊。 
现代文：所以，《礼经》上说： 太子出生后，要举行大礼，让人抱着他，有司的官员严肃端庄，在南郊拜见。 
English: Therefore, the "Book of Etiquette" said: After the birth of the prince, a grand ceremony should be held, people should hold him, and dignified officials should visit him in the southern suburbs.

古文：明冢嫡之重，见乎天也。 过阙则下，过庙则趋， 明孝敬之道也。
现代文：表明太子身份的重要，要被上天知道。 经过宫阙就下车马步行，经过家庙就去叩拜 ，这是申明孝敬尊长的道理。
English: It is important to show the identity of the crown prince, to be known by the heavens. After passing through the palace, get off the car and walk on foot, and after passing through the family temple, go to worship, this is the principle of affirming filial piety.

古文：然古之太子，自为赤子而教固以行矣。
现代文：然而，古时候的太子，把自己看成是普通的子民百姓，所以，教育能稳固地在他身上施行。
English: However, the prince in ancient times regarded himself as an ordinary citizen, so education could be firmly carried out on him.

古文：此则远世之镜也。
现代文：这是古代给我们留下的一面镜子呀。
English: This is a mirror left to us by the ancients.

古文：高宗文成皇帝慨少时师不勤教，尝谓群臣曰： 朕始学之日，年尚幼冲，情未能专。
现代文：高宗文成皇帝，感叹幼年时老师对他不勤加教诲，曾对群臣们说： 我刚开始读书时，年纪很小，不能专心。
English: Emperor Gao Zongwencheng, lamenting that his teachers did not teach him diligently when he was young, once said to his courtiers: When I first started studying, I was very young and could not concentrate.

古文：既临万机，不遑温习。
现代文：到称帝后，每天面临着繁重的政务，又无暇温习。
English: After becoming empress, she was faced with heavy government work every day, and had no time to study.

古文：今而思之，岂非唯予之咎，抑亦师傅之不勤。 
现代文：现在想起来，如果不是我的过失，也是因为老师不勤勉教育。 
English: Now that I think about it, if it wasn't my fault, it was also due to the teacher's lack of diligence in education.

古文：尚书李免冠而谢。
现代文：尚书李讠斤赶快跪下来免冠谢罪。
English: Shangshu Li Yujin quickly knelt down and absolved himself of the crime.

古文：此则近日之可鉴也。
现代文：这是近代给我们提供的借鉴。
English: This is a reference provided to us by modern times.

古文：伏惟太皇太后翼赞高宗，训成显祖，使巍巍之功，邈乎前王。
现代文： 太皇太后帮助高宗文成皇帝料理朝政，又将显祖献文皇帝培育成材。丰功伟绩远远地超过前代帝王。
English: The empress dowager helped Emperor Gaozong Wencheng prepare the imperial cuisine, and nurtured Emperor Xianzu Xianwen as a talent. Her great achievements far exceeded those of previous emperors.

古文：陛下幼蒙鞠诲，圣敬日跻，及储宫诞育，复亲抚诰，日省月课，实劳神虑。
现代文：陛下您从小就蒙受她的教诲，您对她的尊敬也日益增加，到了太子出生后，您亲加抚育教导，日日检查，月月考课，实在劳心费神。
English: Your Majesty, you have been taught by her since you were a child, and your respect for her is also increasing day by day. After the birth of the prince, you have been personally nurturing and teaching, inspecting day by day, and taking examinations month by month. You have really worked hard.

古文：今诚宜准古立师傅，以诏导太子。
现代文：今天，应该按照古制聘请老师，用以教导太子。
English: Today, a teacher should be hired in accordance with the old system to teach the prince.

古文：诏导正则太子正，太子正则皇家庆，皇家庆则人事幸甚矣。
现代文：教导正确太子就行为端正，太子端正就是皇家的福分，皇家有福则天下万民就享受太平。 
English: If the teaching is correct, the prince will behave well. If the prince behaves well, the royal family will be blessed. If the royal family is blessed, the people of the world will enjoy peace.

古文：其三曰：《记》云：国无三年之储，谓国非其国。
现代文：其三说： 《礼记》上说：国家没有三年的储蓄，就不能叫做国家。
English: A third said: "The Book of Rites says that a country cannot be called a country without three years of savings.

古文：光武以一亩不实，罪及牧守。
现代文：光武帝刘秀因一亩地不实在，就加罪于地方长官。
English: Emperor Guangwu Liu Xiu increased the local governor's punishment because one mu of land was not real.

古文：圣人之忧世重谷，殷勤如彼；明君之恤人劝农，相切若此。
现代文：圣人忧虑世事重视粮谷，是那样殷勤，不舍昼夜；开明的君主体恤百姓的生活，劝农耕桑，是这样热切。
English: The sage, concerned about worldly affairs and valuing grain, is so diligent, not giving up day and night; the enlightened monarch, sympathetic to the life of the people, advises farmers to cultivate mulberry, is so eager.

古文：顷年山东饥，去岁京师俭，内外人庶，出入就丰。
现代文：近年山东饥馑，去年京城歉收，百姓们纷纷出走逃向丰收地区。
English: In recent years, Shandong has been suffering from famine. Last year, the harvest in Beijing was poor, and people fled in droves to areas with good harvests.

古文：既废营产，疲困乃加，又于国体，实有虚损。
现代文：他们既荒废了所经营的产业，遭受疲劳饥饿的折磨，又使国体遭到损伤。
English: They not only laid waste to the industries they ran, suffered from fatigue and hunger, but also damaged the national body.

古文：若先多积谷，安而给之，岂有驱督老弱，糊口千里之外。
现代文：如果先多积蓄些粮食，按人口发给他们，他们怎么会扶老携幼，流浪到千里之外逃荒要饭？
English: If we first save more grain and distribute it to them according to population, how will they help the elderly with their children, wandering thousands of miles away to escape the famine and beg for food?

古文：以今况古，诚可惧也。
现代文：拿今天的情况与古代相比，实在可怕呀。
English: It's terrible to compare today's situation with that of ancient times.

古文：臣以为宜析州郡常调九分之二，京都度支岁用之余，各立官司。
现代文： 我认为应从州郡常年的租赋收入中拿出九分之二，京城每年费用开支的剩余部分，各立专门机构管理。
English: I think that two-ninths of the annual rental income of the state and county should be taken out, and the remaining part of the annual expenses of the capital city should be managed by special institutions.

古文：年丰籴积于仓，时俭则加私之二，粜之于人。
现代文：丰年则鼓励百姓粜粮，积聚在官仓中；遇到荒年则加上二成利润，粜给百姓。
English: In good years, the people were encouraged to hoard grain and accumulate it in government warehouses; in bad years, a 20% profit was added and the grain was given to the people.

古文：如此，人必事田以买官绢，又务贮财以取官粟。
现代文：这样，人们一定专心务农耕田以购买官府的布绢，又注重积存财物以买取官仓的粮食。
English: In this way, people must concentrate on cultivating farmland to buy cloth from the government, and pay attention to accumulating wealth to buy grain from government warehouses.

古文：年登则常积，岁凶则直给。
现代文：丰年则积存，荒年则卖出。
English: In good years they are saved, in bad years they are sold.

古文：又别立农官，取州郡户十分之一以为屯人。
现代文：另外，设立管理农业的官员，从州郡人户中抽去十分之一作为屯户。
English: In addition, officials were set up to manage agriculture, and one-tenth of households in prefectures and counties were removed as residents.

古文：相水陆之宜，料顷亩之数，以赃赎杂物余财市牛科给，令其肆力。
现代文：根据水陆交通的便利情况，估计田亩的数量，把从犯人那里追赃，或出钱赎罪和其他收入中余剩的钱用来购买耕牛，租给屯户，令他们尽力耕种。
English: According to the convenience of land and water transportation, the number of mu of farmland will be estimated, and the remaining money from the pursuit of stolen goods from prisoners, or the payment of atonement and other income will be used to purchase farm cattle and rented to residents, so that they can cultivate as much as possible.

古文：一夫之田，岁责六十斛，甄其正课并征戍杂役。
现代文：一个农夫每年要求他交纳六十斛粮食，除了征收正课之外，再让他们服一定的杂役。
English: A farmer asked him to pay sixty baht of grain every year, and in addition to levying the regular fee, he also required them to perform certain miscellaneous services.

古文：行此二事，数年之中，则谷积而人足，虽灾不害。
现代文：做好这两件事，数年之内就会积存粮食，人民丰足，虽然遇到灾荒也不会受侵害。
English: If these two things are done well, grain will be accumulated within a few years, and the people will have plenty, and will not be harmed even if they encounter a disaster.

古文：臣又闻前代明王皆务怀远人，礼贤引滞。
现代文： 我又听说前代贤明的帝王都一定关怀远方的人才，礼贤下士，拔擢沉滞不起的英才。
English: I also heard that the wise emperors of the past must have cared about the talents from far away, the virtuous corporals, and promoted the stagnant talents.

古文：故汉高过赵，求乐毅之胄；晋武廓定，旌吴、蜀之彦。
现代文：所以，汉高祖经过旧时的赵国，访求乐毅的后代；晋武帝拥有天下，却表彰吴、蜀之地的俊才。
English: Therefore, the ancestors of Han Gao passed through the old Zhao Kingdom to visit the descendants of Le Yi; Emperor Jinwu owned the world, but commended the talents of the land of Wu and Shu.

古文：臣谓宜于河表七州人中，擢其门才，引令赴阙，依中州官比，随能序之。
现代文：我认为应在黄河以南七州中选拔人才，让他们到京城中，按照中原官吏的标准，根据能力加以任用。
English: I believe that talent should be selected from the seven prefectures south of the Yellow River, and they should be sent to Beijing to be appointed according to their ability in accordance with the standards of officials in Central Plains.

古文：一可以广圣朝均新旧之义，二可以怀江、汉归有道之情。
现代文：这样，一可以表明我朝对新旧占领区的人才一视同仁，二可以怀柔长江、汉水一带士民百姓归顺我朝的感情。 
English: In this way, on the one hand, it can be shown that the DPRK treats the talents of the new and old occupied areas equally, and on the other hand, it can cherish the feelings of the people in the Yangtze River and Hanshui area to submit to the DPRK.

古文：其四曰：汉制，旧断狱报重尽季冬，至孝章时改尽十月，以育三微。
现代文：其四说： 汉朝制度，过去断狱决囚在冬季，至孝章皇帝时改在十月，用以孕育在地下萌动的万物。
English: The fourth said: "Under the Han Dynasty system, prisoners used to be released in the winter, but in the reign of Emperor Xiaozhang, it was changed to October, which was used to nurture everything that sprouted underground.

古文：后岁旱，论者以不十月断狱，阴气微，阳气泄，以故致旱，事下公卿。
现代文：后来遇到旱灾，议论的人认为十月断狱，阴气微弱，阳气散泄，所以导致旱灾发生。
English: Later, when there was a drought, the commentators thought that the prison break in October was weak in yin and weak in yang, which led to the drought.

古文：尚书陈宠曰： 冬至阳气始萌，故十一月有射干芸荔之应，周以为春。
现代文：朝廷将此事交给公卿讨论定夺。尚书陈宠说 ：冬至时阴气才萌发，所以，十一月有射干、芸、荔等草木初动，周代以这一天为春天的到来。
English: The Imperial Court referred the matter to the court nobles for discussion and decision. Shangshu Chen Zhao said: The winter solstice is the time when the gloomy air begins to germinate. Therefore, in November, there is the initial movement of grasses and trees such as shoots, lilies, and lichens. Zhou Dynasty regarded this day as the arrival of spring.

古文：十二月阳气上通，雉雊鸡乳，殷以为春。
现代文：十二月阳气向上涌动，所以，山鸡鸣叫，家鸡抱雏，殷代认为是春天的开始。
English: In December, the yang qi surges upward, so the mountain chickens chirp and the chickens hold their chicks, which the Yin Dynasty considered to be the beginning of spring.

古文：十三月阳气已至，蛰虫皆震，夏以为春。
现代文：十三月阳气已经降临，蛰伏在地下的虫子都已苏醒，夏代当作春天的到来。
English: In March, the yang air has arrived, the insects that have been lying dormant underground have woken up, and the summer is regarded as the arrival of spring.

古文：三微成著，以通三统。
现代文：三个朝代把动植物的萌动现象，分别演化成人统、地统、天统三历。
English: The three dynasties evolved the budding phenomenon of animals and plants into the three calendars of the adult dynasty, the earth dynasty, and the heavenly dynasty.

古文：三统之月断狱流血，是不稽天意也。 
现代文：在三统一月处决囚犯，是不顺应天意的。 
English: Executing prisoners in the month of the trinity is not in accordance with God's will.

古文：章帝善其言，卒以十月断。
现代文：孝章帝同意他的意见，定在十月断狱。
English: Emperor Xiaozhang agreed with his opinion and decided to end his imprisonment in October.

古文：今京都及四方断狱报重，常竟季冬，不推三正以育三微。
现代文： 现在京城和各州郡断狱决囚，常常放在冬季，不根据《三统历》推算万物萌动发育的情况。
English: Nowadays, the capital city and all prefectures and counties often place the execution of prisoners in the winter, and do not calculate the germination and development of all things according to the "Three Calendars."

古文：宽宥之情，每过于昔，遵之典宪，犹或阙然。
现代文：对囚犯宽大赦免的情况，现在远超过了从前，按照典章法律的要求，则是很大的缺陷。
English: The situation of clemency for prisoners, now far more than before, is a great shortcoming in accordance with the requirements of the law.

古文：今岂所谓助阳发生，垂奉微之仁也？
现代文：今天这种做法，难道就是所谓的帮助阳气发生上升，对万物奉献一点仁爱之心吗？
English: Today's practice, is it the so-called helping yang qi to rise, and offering a bit of benevolence to all things?

古文：诚宜远稽周典，近采汉制，天下断狱起自初秋，尽于孟冬。
现代文：实在应该借鉴周代的典章，采纳汉代的规定，将全国断狱的时间定在初秋开始，初冬结束。
English: It is really necessary to learn from the Zhou Dynasty and adopt the Han Dynasty regulations, and set the time for the nationwide prison break to begin in early autumn and end in early winter.

古文：不于三统之春，行斩绞之刑。
现代文：不在《三统历》确定的春天施行斩首、绞死一类的刑罚。
English: Punishments such as beheading and hanging are not carried out in the spring, which is determined by the "Three Unification Calendars."

古文：如此则道协幽显，仁垂后昆矣。
现代文：这样，道德就会施及人世和阴间，仁爱能够流传于后代。 
English: In this way, morality will be applied to the world and the underworld, and benevolence can be passed on to future generations.

古文：其五曰：古者大臣有坐不廉而废者，不谓之不廉，乃曰簠簋不饰。
现代文：其五说 ：古代的大臣有因为不廉洁坐罪被处罚的，不说他不廉洁，而说他盛食物的罐子不注意装了别人家的东西。
English: The fifth said: In ancient times, a minister was punished for the crime of dishonesty, not because he was dishonest, but because he did not pay attention to the contents of other people's things in the jar of food.

古文：此君之所以礼贵臣，不明言其过也。
现代文：这是国君对显贵大臣礼貌，不直接说明他的罪过。
English: This is the courtesy of the sovereign to the distinguished minister, not directly explaining his sin.

古文：臣有大谴，则白冠氂缨盘水加剑，造室而请死，此臣之所以知罪而不敢逃刑也。
现代文：大臣犯了罪，则洗净官帽，帽缨上加剑，请求自杀，这表明大臣知道自己的罪过而不敢逃脱刑罚呀。
English: When a minister commits a crime, he washes his cap, adds a sword to the brim, and asks to commit suicide. This shows that the minister knows his guilt and does not dare to escape punishment.

古文：圣朝宾遇大臣，礼崇古典，自太和降，有负罪当陷大辟者，多得归第自尽。
现代文：我朝礼遇大臣，礼仪崇尚前代。自太和年以来，有犯罪当被砍头的，大多让他回家自尽。
English: My dynasty treated ministers with courtesy and revered the etiquette of the previous generation. Since the Meiji era, when a criminal was beheaded, most of the time he was allowed to go home and commit suicide.

古文：遣之日，深垂隐愍，言发凄泪，百官莫不见，四海莫不闻，诚足以感将死之心，慰戚属之情。
现代文：颁发命罪臣自裁的圣旨时，陛下您恻隐沉痛，言语悲切，热泪双垂，朝臣们有目共睹，天下士民有耳皆闻，实在能够感动将死者的心灵，慰勉罪臣亲友的感情。
English: When issuing the imperial edict of self-adjudication, Your Majesty, you are so sad, words are sad, tears are falling, courtiers have eyes to see, and the world's people have ears to hear, which can really touch the soul of the deceased and comfort the feelings of relatives and friends of the deceased.

古文：然恩发于衷，未著永制，此愚臣所以敢陈末见。
现代文：然而，只是恩泽发于您的内心，并没有成为永久的制度，所以我敢陈述自己的浅见。
English: However, just because the grace comes from your heart, it does not become a permanent system, so I dare to state my shallow view.

古文：昔汉文时，人有告丞相勃谋反者，逮系长安狱，顿辱之与皁隶同。
现代文： 汉文帝时，有人告发丞相周勃谋反，朝廷将他关押在长安监狱中，对他的拷打羞辱与仆役一样。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwen, someone accused the chancellor Zhou of plotting a rebellion, and the court imprisoned him in Chang'an Prison, where he was tortured and humiliated like a servant.

古文：贾谊乃上书，极陈君臣之义，不宜如是。
现代文：贾谊便上书，极力陈说君臣的大义，不应该这样对待周勃。
English: Jia Yi then wrote a letter, trying his best to demonstrate the great righteousness of the monarchs and ministers. Zhou Bo should not be treated like this.

古文：夫贵臣者，天子为其改容而体貌之，吏人为共俯伏而敬贵之。
现代文：对于朝廷重臣，天子应该为他改变自己一向严肃的表情，十分礼貌地接待他，下级官吏应该毕恭毕敬地敬重他。
English: For a high-ranking court official, the emperor should change his usual serious expression for him and receive him very politely, and lower-ranking officials should respectfully respect him.

古文：其有罪过，废之可也，赐之死可也；若束缚之，输之司寇，搒笞之，小吏詈骂之，殆非所以令众庶见也。
现代文：他有了罪过，可以免除官职，可以将他赐死，不应将他捆绑起来，送给司法部门鞭打他，让衙役辱骂他，更不应该让老百姓看到这种情形呀。
English: If he has committed a crime, he can be removed from office, he can be sentenced to death, he should not be tied up, sent to the judicial department to be whipped, let the guards abuse him, let alone let the people see this situation.

古文：及将刑也，臣则北面再拜，跪而自裁。
现代文：行刑时，犯罪的大臣跪向北面，朝着宫庭的方向再次叩拜，然后自裁。
English: During the execution, the minister of crime kneeled to the north, bowed again in the direction of the palace, and then self-condemned.

古文：天子曰： 子大夫自有过耳，吾遇子有礼矣。
现代文：天子则说： 你们犯了罪啊，我待你们够有礼节了。 
English: The Son of Heaven said, "You have committed a sin. I have treated you with enough courtesy.

古文：上不使人抑而刑之也。 
现代文：朝廷不用派人就将刑罚执行了。
English: The imperial court did not have to send anyone to carry out the punishment.

古文：孝文深纳其言。是后大臣有罪，皆自杀不受刑。
现代文：孝文帝完全接受了他的意见，以后大臣犯罪，都让他自杀而不再受刑。
English: Emperor Xiaowen fully accepted his opinion, and after the minister committed a crime, he let him commit suicide and no longer be punished.

古文：至孝武时，稍复下狱。
现代文：到了孝武帝时，又恢复了下狱的做法。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu came to power, the practice of sending people to prison was resumed.

古文：焉得行恩当时，不著长世之制乎。
现代文：这是由于孝文帝只在自己在位时这样执行。并没有作为制度确定下来的缘故。 
English: This is due to the fact that Emperor Xiaowen only implemented this when he was in power, and it was not established as a system.

古文：其六曰：《孝经》称父子之道天性，盖明一体而同气，可共而不右离者也。
现代文：其六说 ：《孝经》称遵循父子之道是人的天性，这表明父子同体同气，可以永聚而不可以分离。
English: The sixth said: "The Filial Piety Sutra" said that it is human nature to follow the path of the father and son, which shows that the father and son are one and the same, and can be forever together and cannot be separated.

古文：及其有罪不相及者，乃君上之厚恩也。
现代文：犯了罪而不株连，是帝王的仁恩厚德。
English: It is the benevolence and kindness of the emperor to commit a crime and not be punished.

古文：而无情之人，父兄系狱，子弟无惨惕之容；子弟即刑，父兄无愧恧之色。
现代文：而有些没有感情的人，父兄被关押在监狱，子弟们却没有痛苦悲伤的表情；子弟受刑罚，父兄没有惭愧的容色。
English: On the other hand, there are some people who have no emotion. When a father or brother is detained in prison, the children do not have the expression of pain and sorrow; when a child is punished, the father or brother does not have the look of shame.

古文：宴安荣位，游从自若，军马仍华，衣冠犹饰。
现代文：依然宴欢享乐，悠游自在。车马和过去一样豪华，衣冠和从前一样鲜艳。
English: They still enjoy parties and leisurely travel. The carriages and horses are as luxurious as in the past, and the clothes are as bright as before.

古文：宁是同体共气，分忧均戚之理也？
现代文：这难道是父子兄弟同体共气，安危与共，福祸同担的道理吗？
English: Is this the reason why father and son brothers share the same body and breath, share the same safety and danger, and share the same blessings and misfortunes?

古文：臣愚以为父兄有犯，宜令子弟素服肉袒，诣阙请罪；子弟有坐，宜令父兄露板引咎，乞解所司。
现代文：我认为如果父兄犯了罪，应该让子弟穿着素淡的衣服，袒露着脊背，到宫门请罪；子弟如果犯罪，应该让父兄引咎自责，乞请将自己解押到司法部门问罪。
English: I think that if a parent commits a crime, the child should be made to wear plain clothes and bare his back to the palace gate to plead guilty; if a child commits a crime, the parent should be made to blame himself and beg to be released to the judicial department to plead guilty.

古文：若职任必要，不宜许者，慰勉留之。
现代文：如果职务重要，不适宜允许他到有司接受处罚的，可宽慰勉励，将他挽留。
English: If the duties are important and it is not appropriate to allow him to go to a division to receive punishment, he may be relieved and encouraged and retained.

古文：如此，足以敦厉凡薄，使人知有所耻矣。
现代文：这样，足可以严厉地警醒浅薄的世风，使人们知道什么叫耻辱。 
English: In this way, the feet can sternly warn the shallow world style, so that people know what is shame.

古文：其七曰：《礼》云：臣有大丧，君三年不呼其门。
现代文：其七说： 《周礼》上说：臣子家遇到大的丧事，君主三年内不派人到他家里呼唤他做事。
English: The seventh said: "Zhou Li" said: When a courtier's family suffers a great tragedy, the monarch will not send anyone to his house to call him to work for three years.

古文：此圣人缘情制礼，以终孝子之情也。
现代文：这是圣人们根据人的感情制定的礼节，让孝子尽完自己对父母的哀悼之情。
English: This is the etiquette developed by the saints according to human feelings, allowing the filial son to complete his feelings of mourning for his parents.

古文：周季陵夷，丧礼稍亡，是以要纟至即戎，素冠作刺。
现代文：周代末年国家混乱，丧礼渐渐消亡，所以，只在腰里扎上丧带就算穿孝，戴上白帽子就算哀悼。
English: At the end of the Zhou Dynasty, the country was in chaos, and funerals were gradually dying out. Therefore, just tying a funeral sash around your waist was considered to be a sign of filial piety, and wearing a white hat was considered to be a sign of mourning.

古文：逮乎虐秦，殆皆泯矣。
现代文：到了暴虐的秦国，丧礼几乎全部泯灭了。
English: In the tyrannical state of Qin, funerals were almost completely extinguished.

古文：汉初，军旅屡兴，未能遵古。
现代文：汉代初年，屡次兴兵打仗，没有能够遵循古制。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, the Xing soldiers repeatedly fought and failed to follow the ancient system.

古文：至宣帝时，人当从军屯者，遭大父母、父母死，未满三月，皆弗徭役。
现代文：到宣帝时，人们如果是军屯户，遭到祖父祖母和父母的丧事，守孝不满三个月，都要服徭役。
English: At the time of Emperor Xuan's enthronement, if people lived in military cantonments, their grandparents and parents had passed away, and their filial piety was less than three months old, they all had to serve in the imperial guard.

古文：其朝臣丧制，未有定闻。
现代文：朝臣们的丧礼制度，没有具体规定。
English: There are no specific regulations for the funeral system for courtiers.

古文：至后汉元初中，大臣有重忧，始得去官终服。
现代文：到后汉元初年间，大臣遇到父母去世这类重大的丧事，才能够离开官职度完丧期。
English: In the early years of the Han and Yuan Dynasties, it was only when a minister suffered a major bereavement, such as the death of a parent, that he or she was able to leave the post and complete the bereavement period.

古文：暨魏武、孙、刘之世，日寻干戈，前世礼制，复废不行。
现代文：到三国魏武和孙、刘时，每天战争不断，前代的礼制，又废而不行。
English: By the time of the three kingdoms of Wei, Wu, Sun and Liu, the war continued every day, and the previous etiquette system was abolished.

古文：晋时鸿胪郑默丧亲，固请终服，武帝感其孝诚，遂著令以为常。
现代文：晋朝时，鸿胪寺官员郑默失去亲人，坚决请求离任服完丧事，晋武帝被他的孝诚感动，便下令作为定制。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jin, Zheng Mo, an official of Hongluo Temple, lost his relative and strongly requested that he leave his post after the funeral. Emperor Jin was moved by his filial piety and ordered it to be customized.

古文：圣魏之初，拨乱反正，未遑建终丧之制。
现代文： 我朝立国之初，拨乱反正，还没来得及建立守丧的制度。
English: At the beginning of the founding of our country, we had not yet established a mourning system.

古文：今四方无虞，百姓安逸，诚是孝慈道洽，礼教兴行之日也。
现代文：现在四方平静，百姓安居乐业，实在是孝慈之道被推广、礼教制度兴行的时候。
English: Now that the situation is calm in all directions and the people are living and working in peace, it is truly the time for the way of filial piety to be promoted and the system of etiquette to be introduced.

古文：然愚臣所怀，窃有未尽。
现代文：然而，我所思虑的还没有完。
English: However, I haven't finished thinking about it.

古文：伏见朝臣丁大忧者，假满赴职，衣锦乘轩，从效庙之祀；鸣玉垂緌，同节庆之宴。
现代文：朝臣们服完父母们的丧期，回朝任职，穿着华丽的衣服，坐着宽敞的车子，到郊庙祭祀；身上的玉器相撞，声音清脆；帽带飘逸，潇洒风流，就如同参加节日的庆典。
English: After serving the mourning period of their parents, the courtiers returned to the imperial court, dressed in gorgeous clothes, sitting in a spacious car, and went to the suburb temple to offer sacrifices; the jade on their bodies collided, the sound was crisp; the hatband was flowing and chic, just like participating in a festival celebration.

古文：伤人子之道，亏天地之经。
现代文：这样作实在伤害了为人子的道德，亏损了天地的根本。
English: Doing so has really hurt the morality of the Son of Man, and has lost the foundation of heaven and earth.

古文：愚谓如有遭父母丧者，皆得终服。
现代文：我认为大臣们如有遭遇父母丧事的，都要服满丧期。
English: I think that ministers who have suffered the death of a parent should serve the full period of mourning.

古文：若无其人有旷官者，则优旨慰喻，起令视事。
现代文：如果有空缺的官职却因为这个人去守孝，无人能替补，则可以用特殊的诏书对他慰勉，让他回来继续任职。
English: If there is a vacancy in an official position, but no one is able to fill it because the person is a filial son, then a special edict can be issued to console him and allow him to return to continue his duties.

古文：但综理所司，出纳敷奏而已，国之吉庆，一令无预。
现代文：但只能在自己的官衙内活动，和进行一般性的交往，国家的吉庆大典，一概不让他参预。
English: However, he can only carry out activities within his own government and carry out general contacts, and he is not allowed to participate in the national auspicious celebration.

古文：其军戎之警，墨缞从役，虽愆于礼，事所宜行也。
现代文：军事上出现紧急情况，穿着孝服从征，虽然与礼仪有碍，按道理应该这样啊！ 
English: In the event of a military emergency, dressing in filial piety and obedience to conscription, although it interferes with etiquette, should logically be like this!

古文：帝览而善之，寻皆施行。
现代文：孝文帝看了他的奏章连连赞许，不久都被施行。
English: Emperor Xiaowen read his work and praised it, and it was soon put into practice.

古文：彪稍见礼遇。诏曰： 彪虽宿非清第，代阙华资，然识性严聪，学博坟籍，刚辩之才，颇堪时用。
现代文：李彪渐被朝廷重视，孝文帝便下诏说 ：李彪虽然不是出身于有名望的门第，上代也没有人在朝廷中做显官名宦可成为他的资本。然而，他性情严谨聪明，学识广博，遍读古代典籍，有刚强舌辩之才，很能被朝廷任用。
English: Li Biao gradually came to be valued by the imperial court, and Emperor Xiaowen issued the following edict: Although Li Biao did not come from a famous family, and no one in the previous generation became a prominent official in the imperial court to become his capital. However, his temperament was rigorous and intelligent, his knowledge was extensive, he read ancient classics all over the place, and he had a strong ability to argue, so he was very capable of being appointed by the imperial court.

古文：兼优吏职，载宣朝美，若不赏庸叙绩，将何以劝奖勤能。
现代文：做官行为优良，受到朝野的赞美，如果不奖赏他的功绩，怎么能激励勤奋而又有才于的人？
English: If you do not reward his merits, how can you motivate a diligent and talented person?

古文：特迁秘书令。
现代文：特提升他为秘书令。 
English: He was promoted to the position of secretary.

古文：以参议律令之勤，赐帛五百匹，马一匹、牛二头。 
现代文：根据他参与制定律令的功劳，赐给帛五百匹、马一匹、牛两头。
English: According to the merit of his participation in the formulation of the ritsuryo, he was given five hundred yakitori, one horse, and two cows.

古文：其年，加员外散骑常侍，使于齐。
现代文：这一年，他被封为员外散骑常侍的职务，朝廷派他出使南齐。
English: That year, he was appointed to the position of non-commissioned officer, and the court sent him to Nanzhi.

古文：齐遣其主客郎刘绘接对，并设宴乐。
现代文：南齐派主客郎刘绘接待，并摆设酒宴，备有音乐。
English: Nanqi sent Liu Peng, the chief guest, to receive the guests, and set up a wine banquet with music.

古文：彪辞乐。
现代文：李彪辞去了音乐。
English: Li Biao resigned from music.

古文：及坐，彪曰： 向辞乐者，卿或未相体。
现代文：坐下后，李彪说： 刚才辞去音乐，请您体谅。
English: After sitting down, Li Biao said: "I have just resigned from music, please forgive me.

古文：我皇孝性自天，追慕罔极，故有今者丧除之议。
现代文：我国皇帝孝性来自上天所赐，追慕过去冯太后的恩泽，所以最近进行有关丧礼的讨论。
English: Our emperor's filial piety comes from heaven, and he admires the grace of the empress dowager Feng in the past, so recently there has been a discussion about the funeral.

古文：去三月晦，朝臣始除缞裳，犹以素服从事。
现代文：去年三月的最后一天，朝臣们才脱掉身上的孝服，但还都穿着素淡的衣服上朝。
English: On the last day of March last year, the courtiers only took off their filial piety, but they still wore plain clothes.

古文：裴、谢在北，固应具此。
现代文：裴、谢二人在魏，也应该这样。
English: If Bae and Xie are both in Wei, it should be the same.

古文：今辞乐，想卿无怪。 
现代文：现在辞去音乐，想您不会责怪。 
English: I think you can't blame me for quitting music now.

古文：绘答言： 请问魏朝丧礼竟何所依？ 
现代文：刘绘问 ：请问魏朝的丧礼究竟根据什么定的？ 
English: Liu Miao asked: What is the basis for the funeral of the Wei Dynasty?

古文：彪曰： 高宗三年，孝文逾月。
现代文：李彪答道 ：高宗文成帝去世时，孝文帝才出生一个月。
English: Li Biao replied: When Emperor Gao Zongwencheng died, Emperor Xiaowen was only one month old.

古文：今圣上追鞠育之深恩，感慈训之厚德，报于殷、汉之间，可谓得礼之变。 
现代文：现在，圣上追忆冯太后对他养育的深恩，感激她教育训诫的厚德，为了深深报答，可以说十分懂得礼仪的变化。 
English: Now, the saint recalls the deep gratitude of the empress dowager Feng to his upbringing, appreciates the virtue of her education and admonition, and in order to repay deeply, it can be said that he fully understands the changes in etiquette.

古文：绘复问： 若欲遵古，何不终三年？ 
现代文：刘绘又问： 如果想遵循古制，为什么不守完三年的孝期？ 
English: Liu Peng also asked: If you want to follow the ancient system, why not complete the three-year period of filial piety?

古文：彪曰： 万机不可久旷，故割至慕，俯从群议。
现代文：李彪回答说 ：朝廷大事不能长时间无人处理，所以割舍对太皇太后的深情，屈从于群臣的建议。
English: Li Biao replied, "Imperial affairs cannot be left unattended for a long time, so I have to give up my deep affection for the Grand Empress Dowager and yield to the advice of my ministers."

古文：服变不异三年，而限同一期，可谓失礼？ 
现代文：服丧的感情不异于三年，而不拘于时间的长短，难道算得上失礼？ 
English: Is it considered impolite to mourn for three years, regardless of the length of time?

古文：绘言： 汰哉叔氏，专以礼许人。 
现代文：刘绘说 ：在这个乱世规矩太多了吧，何必专拿礼节来应酬人！ 
English: Liu Peng said: There are too many rules in this chaotic world, so why bother with etiquette to greet people!

古文：彪曰： 圣朝自为旷代之制，何关许人。 
现代文：李彪说 ：圣明的国家自然要定立旷古未有的制度，怎么能说是应酬人？ 
English: Li Biao said: The sacred country naturally wants to establish a system that has not existed for a long time. How can it be said to be a greeter?

古文：绘言： 百官总己听于冢宰，万机何虑于旷？ 
现代文：刘绘说： 朝廷百官都听宰相的，朝廷大事交给宰相就行了，何必忧虑无人管理？ 
English: Liu Miao said: All the officials of the imperial court listen to the prime minister. It is enough to hand over the important matters of the imperial court to the prime minister. Why worry about being unmanaged?

古文：彪曰： 五帝之臣，臣不若君，故君亲揽其事。
现代文：李彪说： 五帝时臣子不如国君的能力强，所以国君亲自管理国家大事。
English: Li Biao said: When there were five emperors, the ability of the vassals was not as strong as that of the sovereign, so the sovereign personally managed national affairs.

古文：三王君臣智等，故共理机务。
现代文：三王时，君臣能力相等，所以共同管理国事。
English: When there were three kings, the ability of the monarch and the vassal was equal, so they jointly managed the affairs of state.

古文：主上亲揽，盖远轨轩、唐。 
现代文：我们圣上亲自管理国事，他的能力可与轩辕和唐尧相比。 
English: Our Holy Father personally manages the affairs of state, and his ability can be compared to that of Xuan Xuan and Tang Xuan.

古文：彪将还，齐主亲谓彪曰： 卿前使还日，赋阮诗云： 但愿长闲暇，后岁复来游。 
现代文：李彪即将回北魏，齐主亲自对他说： 你前次出使齐国，回去时写诗说 ：但愿能长久得到闲暇，明年再来南朝游览。 
English: When Li Biao was about to return to the Northern Wei Dynasty, the Lord of Qi personally said to him, "The last time you sent an envoy to Qi, when you returned, you wrote a poem saying, "I hope I can have a long time of leisure, and come back next year to visit the Southern Dynasty."

古文：果如今日。
现代文：果然这次你又来了。
English: So you're here again.

古文：卿此还也，复有来理否？ 
现代文：你这次回去，还会再来吗？ 
English: If you go back this time, will you come back again?

古文：彪答： 请重赋阮诗曰： 宴衍清都中，一去永矣哉。  
现代文：李彪答道： 请允许我重新赋诗 ：宴乐在这天宫般的都城，但此去就永远不能重来。  
English: Li Biao replied: Please allow me to re-enact the poem: The banquet is in this heavenly capital, but it can never be repeated.

古文：齐主惘然曰： 清都可尔，一去何事！
现代文：齐主听了颇觉茫然，问 ：说齐都如天宫一般可以，一去不再来是为了什么？
English: The lord of Qi listened with a sense of bewilderment and asked, "What is the reason for saying that Qi is like the Celestial Palace?

古文：观卿此言，似成长阔。
现代文：看你这句诗，好像要成永别。
English: Looking at this poem of yours, it seems to be a farewell forever.

古文：朕当以殊礼相送。 
现代文：这样，我应当用特殊的礼节为你送行。 
English: Thus, I should see you off with special courtesy.

古文：遂亲至琅邪城，登山临水，命群臣赋诗以送别。
现代文：齐主便亲自送他到琅笽城，登临山水，命群臣们写诗为他送别。
English: The lord of Qi personally sent him to Lucheng, climbed the mountains and rivers, and ordered the ministers to write poems to send him off.

古文：其见重如此。
现代文：南齐君臣对他如此看重。
English: That's how much he values Kouhiko-chō.

古文：彪前后六度衔命，南人奇其謇博。
现代文：李彪前后六次奉命出使南齐，南人都很佩服他的诚恳和渊博。
English: Li Biao was ordered to send envoys to Nanchi six times, and the people of Nanchi admired his sincerity and knowledge.

古文：后为御史中尉，领著作郎。
现代文：后来，他任御史中尉，兼著作郎。
English: Later, he served as a lieutenant of the Imperial Household Agency, and also as a writer.

古文：彪既为孝文所宠，性又刚直，遂多劾纠，远近畏之。豪右屏气。
现代文：李彪既然被孝文帝所信任，性格又刚直不阿，便对朝臣中违法行为多有弹劾，远远近近的臣僚都畏惧他，豪强们屏声敛气。
English: Since Li Biao was trusted by Emperor Xiaowen, and his character was upright, he often impeached illegal acts among courtiers. Far and near courtiers were afraid of him, and powerful people held their breath.

古文：帝常呼为李生，从容谓群臣曰： 吾之有李生，犹汉之有汲黯。 
现代文：孝文帝常亲昵地称他为 李生 ，曾高兴地对群臣们说： 我有李生，就像汉武帝有汲黯。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen often referred to him affectionately as Li Sheng, and once said to his courtiers with pleasure: "I have Li Sheng, just like Emperor Hanwu had Kuching."

古文：后除散骑常侍，领御史中尉，解著作事。
现代文：他又任散骑常侍，兼御史中尉，解除了著作郎的职务。
English: He was also appointed Sangi-no-Zenshi-no-Zenshi, also serving as Lieutenant of Imperial History, and was relieved of his duties as Shosho-ro.

古文：帝宴群臣于流化池，谓仆射李冲曰： 崔光之博，李彪之直，是我国得贤之基。 
现代文：孝文帝在流化池宴请群臣，对仆射李冲说： 崔光的渊博，李彪的正直，是我朝得到的两个贤才。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen invited his ministers to a banquet at the liquefaction pond and said to his servant Li Chong: Cui Guang's profoundness and Li Biao's honesty are the two talents I have gained.

古文：肆志傲然，愚聋视听。此而可忍，谁不可怀。臣今请以见事免彪所居职，付廷尉狱。 
现代文：孝文帝亲自率军南征，李彪兼任度支尚书，与仆射李冲、任城王元澄等留在京城，参与料理朝廷大事。李彪生性刚直豪爽，与李冲等人意见往往不同，便露于形色，没有一点屈从的想法。李冲收集李彪过去的罪过，便禁止他在尚书省出入，又上表请求孝文帝免去李彪的所有职务，交给有司处理。
English: Emperor Xiaowen personally led the Southern Expedition, and Li Biao concurrently served as the governor of Shangshu. He stayed in Beijing with his servants Li Chong and Rencheng Wang Yuancheng to participate in the cooking of imperial events. Li Biao was born with a straightforward and heroic nature. He often had different opinions from Li Chong and others, which showed in his appearance, and he had no thought of submission. Li Chong collected Li Biao's past sins and prohibited him from entering and leaving Shangshu Province. He also requested Emperor Xiaowen to remove Li Biao from all his posts and hand them over to the imperial secretary to deal with.

古文：冲又表曰：臣与彪相识以来，垂二十二载。
现代文：李冲又上表说： 我与李彪相识以来，已近二十年。
English: Li Chong also said on the table: It has been nearly twenty years since I met Li Biao.

古文：彪始南使之时，见其色厉辞辩，臣之愚识，谓是拔萃之一人。
现代文：李彪开始出使南齐时，我见他面色严肃，善于辞辩。我见识愚昧，认为他是出类拔萃的人才。
English: When Li Biao began to dispatch Nanzhi, I saw that he had a serious face and was good at arguing. I saw ignorance and thought that he was an outstanding talent.

古文：及彪官位升达，参与言宴，闻彪平章古今，商略人物。兴言于侍筵之次，启论于众英之中；赏忠识正，发言恳恻，惟直是语，辞无隐避。
现代文：等到他官位升迁，参与朝廷的重大活动，听说他评论今古，讨论人物，发言虽在群臣之后，但赞扬忠贞，崇尚正直，言辞恳切，出语坦诚，从不闪烁其辞。
English: When he was promoted to the highest rank and participated in the major activities of the imperial court, I heard him comment on the present and the past, discuss figures, and although he spoke after the ministers, he praised loyalty, advocated honesty, spoke earnestly, spoke frankly, and never flickered his words.

古文：臣虽下愚，辄亦钦其正直。
现代文：我虽然愚钝，也常常钦佩他的正直无私。
English: Dull as I am, I often admire his honesty and selflessness.

古文：及其始居司直，执志径行，其所弹劾，应弦而倒。
现代文：等到他任职言官，志向坚定，行为果断，被他弹劾的人都应声而倒。
English: By the time he assumed the post of speaker, his aspirations were firm, his actions decisive, and those who were impeached by him fell into line.

古文：赫赫之威，振于下国；肃肃之称，著自京师；天下改目，贪暴佥手。
现代文：赫赫雄威，震动四方；严肃刚直的称誉，传遍京城，天下人对他刮目相看，贪婪残暴都因此收敛。
English: He is very powerful and shakes all over; his reputation for being serious and upright has spread throughout the capital. People all over the world are impressed by him, and greed and cruelty are thus restrained.

古文：然时有私于臣云其威暴者，臣以直绳之官，人所忌疾，风谤之际，易生音谣，心不承信。
现代文：然而，也不断有人私下里对我说他过于威严暴烈，我认为忠贞耿直的言官，常为人忌恨；风行诽谤的时候，容易产生谣言。所以，对这些议论没有相信。
English: However, I was also constantly told in private that he was too domineering and violent, and I did not believe these rumours. I believe that a loyal and forthright speaker is often hated by people, and when slander is popular, it is easy to generate rumours.

古文：往年以河阳事，曾与彪在领军府共太尉、司空及领军诸卿等集阅廷尉所问囚徒。
现代文： 过去因为河阳发生的事件，曾经与李彪在领军府同太尉、司空以及领军等人一起翻阅廷尉所讯问的囚犯的口供，发现不断有人诉说冤枉。
English: In the past, because of the incident that occurred in Kheyang, he had reviewed the confessions of the prisoners interrogated by the courtier together with Li Biao, the captain, the second lieutenant and the leader of the army in the leader's office, and found that there were constantly people complaining of injustice.

古文：时有人诉枉者，二公及臣少欲听采。语理未尽，彪便振怒，东坐攘袂挥赫，口称贼奴，叱吒左右。高声大呼曰： 南台中取我木手去，搭奴肋折！ 
现代文：太尉、司空和我想少许探听一下，话还没说完，李彪便大发脾气，坐在东面挽起衣袖挥动胳臂，口里喊着贼奴，怒斥左右的人，高声大叫着说 ：去御史台取我的刑具来，打断你们这些囚犯的肋骨！ 
English: The captain, the deputy commander and I wanted to listen for a while, but before the speech was over, Li Biao lost his temper. He sat in the east, rolled up his sleeves, waved his arms, shouted "thief" with his mouth, scolded people on both sides, and shouted loudly: "Go to the History Channel to get my torture equipment and break the ribs of you prisoners!"

古文：虽有此言，终竟不取。
现代文：虽然口中说这些话，终究没有派人去取。
English: In spite of these words, no one was sent to retrieve it.

古文：即言： 南台所问，唯恐枉活，终无枉死。 
现代文：他随即又说： 御史台所审问的犯人，惟恐宽纵得活，始终没有冤枉死的。 
English: He immediately added: The prisoners who were interrogated by the History Channel never died unjustly, for fear that they would be allowed to live.

古文：时诸人以所枉至重，有首实者多，又心难彪，遂各默尔。
现代文：当时，大家认为被他所冤枉的情况太严重，有证据的很多，又想不要难为李彪，便都沉默不语。
English: At that time, everyone thought that the situation of being wronged by him was too serious, there was a lot of evidence, and they wanted not to be difficult for Li Biao, so they were silent.

古文：因缘此事，臣遂心疑有滥，知其威虐。犹谓益多损少，故不以申彻，实失为臣知无不闻之义。
现代文：根据这件事，我便怀疑他审问案犯有不实之处，知道他的威风过甚，还想着案子中正确的多，枉滥的少，所以没有向朝廷奏报，实在有失做臣的应该知无不言的大义。
English: Based on this incident, I suspected that there was something untrue about his interrogation case. I knew that his arrogance was excessive. I also thought that the case was more correct and less unjust, so I did not report it to the court. It was really a great injustice for a minister to know everything.

古文：及去年大驾南行以来，彪兼尚书，日夕共事，始乃知其言与行舛，是己非人，专恣无忌，尊身忽物。
现代文： 自从去年大驾南征以来，李彪兼任尚书，我与他朝夕共事，才知道他言行暴戾，自以为是，好责人非，独断专行，横行无忌，惟我独尊，轻视别人。
English: Since the Great Southern Expedition last year, Li Biao has also served as Shangshu, and I have worked with him morning and evening, only to know that he is violent in words and deeds, self-righteous, blaming others, arbitrary, rampant, but I am the only one who respects and despises others.

古文：臣与任城卑躬曲己，其所欲者无不屈从。
现代文：我与任城王在他面前委曲求全，他想办的事无不屈从。
English: The king of the city and I have bent over backwards to please him. Everything he has wanted to do, we have obeyed.

古文：依事求实，悉有成验。
现代文：根据事实推断，前面讲的都得到验证。
English: Based on the facts, all of the above has been verified.

古文：如臣列得实，宜亟投彪于有北，以除奸矫之乱政；如臣列无证，宜放臣于四裔，以息青蝇之白黑。
现代文：如果我所列举的得到证实，应该迅速将李彪送到北方严寒荒凉的地方去，以清除伪装的奸臣，防止他祸乱朝政；如果我列举的事情没有证据，可以把我流放在四周边境的任何一个地方，以止息像嗡嗡的青蝇那样的进馋小人颠倒黑白。 
English: If the things I have listed are confirmed, Li Biao should be quickly sent to a cold and desolate place in the north to remove the disguised traitor and prevent him from wreaking havoc on the government; if there is no evidence of the things I have listed, I can be exiled to any place along the border to stop the villain like a buzzing blue fly from reversing black and white.

古文：帝在悬瓠，览表叹愕曰： 何意留京如此也！ 
现代文：孝文帝在悬瓠，看完表章惊叹道： 没想到他留在京城就这样啊！ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen is hanging from a noose. After looking at the seal, he exclaims in amazement: I didn't expect him to stay in the capital like this!

古文：有司处彪大辟；帝恕之，除名而已。
现代文：有司判决李彪大辟罪，孝文帝饶恕了他，只是罢去了官职。
English: A judge found Li Biao guilty, but Emperor Xiaowen pardoned him and he only resigned from his post.

古文：彪寻归本乡。
现代文：李彪不久回到故乡。
English: Li Biao soon returned to his hometown.

古文：帝北幸鄴，彪野服称草茅臣，拜迎鄴南。
现代文：孝文帝北巡至邺地，李彪穿着村野农夫的衣服，自称是草茅一样的贱臣，到邺城南面跪迎。
English: Emperor Xiaowen went on a northern tour to Handan, and Li Biao, wearing the clothes of a Murano farmer and claiming to be a lowly vassal like Cao Mao, came to the south of Handan to kneel and greet him.

古文：帝曰： 朕以卿为已死。 
现代文：孝文帝说 ：我以为你已经死了。 
English: Xiaowen Di said: I thought you were dead.

古文：彪对曰： 子在，回何敢死。 
现代文：李彪对答说 ：孔子还活着，颜回怎敢死去？ 
English: Li Biao replied: Confucius is still alive, how dare Yan Hui die?

古文：帝悦，因谓曰： 朕期卿每以贞松为志，岁寒为心，卿应报国，尽心为用，近见弹文，殊乖所以。
现代文：孝文帝很高兴，因而对他说： 我期望你常以坚贞的青松激励自己的气节，在寒冷的冬天磨砺自己的意志，你应尽心尽力，报效国家。近日见到弹劾你的奏章，与我期望的相差甚远。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was very pleased and said to him, "I hope that you will always inspire your spirit with the stamina of a steadfast young pine and sharpen your will in the cold winter. You should do your best to serve the country. I recently saw your impeachment report, which is far from what I expected.

古文：卿罹此谴，为朕与卿？
现代文：你遭受这种处分，是因为我加予你的呢？
English: Are you suffering this punishment because of what I did to you?

古文：为宰事？
现代文：还是因为宰相加给你的呢？
English: Or is it because the Prime Minister gave it to you?

古文：为卿自取？ 
现代文：还是因为你罪由自取？ 
English: Or do you blame yourself?

古文：彪曰： 臣愆由己至，罪自身招，实非陛下横与臣罪，又非宰事无辜滥臣。
现代文：李彪回答道 ：我的罪过已经降临，完全是自己招致，实在不是陛下您加给我的罪名，也不是宰相无端给我捏造的罪状。
English: Li Biao replied: My sin has already come, it is entirely self-inflicted, it is really not the accusation that Your Majesty imposed on me, nor is it the accusation that the Prime Minister fabricated for me without reason.

古文：臣罪既如此，宜伏东皋之下，不应远点属车之清尘。
现代文：我既然犯下这些罪恶，应该俯伏在东方的沼泽边上苟且生活，了此一生，不应再来到您的车驾前面。
English: Since I have committed these crimes, I should live prostrate on the edge of the eastern swamp, and I should not come in front of your car again in this lifetime.

古文：但伏承圣躬不豫，臣肝胆涂地，是以敢至，非谢罪而来。 
现代文：但是，承您不嫌弃，我敢冒惨死的危险来拜见您，不是为了谢罪而来的。 
English: But, if you don't mind, I've come to see you at the risk of my life, not to apologize.

古文：帝曰： 朕欲用卿，忆李仆射不得。 
现代文：孝文帝说： 我想任用你，恐怕仆射李冲不同意。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said: I want to appoint you, but I'm afraid my servant Li Chong does not agree.

古文：帝寻纳宋弁之言，将复采用。
现代文：孝文帝不久采纳宋弁的建议，准备重新起用李彪。
English: Emperor Xiaowen soon accepted Song Ben's suggestion and prepared to reinstate Li Biao.

古文：会留台表至，言彪与御史贾尚往穷庶人恂事，理有诬抑，奏请收彪。
现代文：适逢京城留台的表章到来，说李彪与御史贾尚审问被废太子元恂一案，颇有诬枉，请求将他关进监牢。
English: At the time of the arrival of the seal of the Beijing Remainder, it was said that Li Biao and Goshi Jia Shang interrogated the case of the deposed prince Yuan Shao, which was quite wrongful, and requested that he be put in prison.

古文：彪自言事枉，帝明彪无此，遣左右慰勉之。听以牛车散载，送之洛阳。
现代文：李彪申辩自己冤枉，孝文帝也认为李彪没有这条罪状，派人去宽慰勉励他，并派牛车将他送到洛阳。
English: Li Biao pleaded that he had been wronged, and Emperor Xiaowen also thought that Li Biao did not have this crime, sent someone to comfort and encourage him, and sent an ox cart to take him to Luoyang.

古文：会赦得免。
现代文：遇到大赦，他得以免除刑罚。
English: He was able to escape punishment thanks to an amnesty.

古文：宣武践阼，彪自托于王肃，又与郭祚、崔光、刘芳、甄琛、邢峦等诗书往来，迭相称重。
现代文：宣武帝元恪称帝，李彪向王肃请托，又与朝臣郭祚、崔光、刘芳、甄琛、邢峦等书信往来，并写诗酬唱应和，互相推崇。
English: Emperor Xuanwu proclaimed himself emperor, and Li Biao asked Wang Su for help. He also exchanged letters with courtiers Guo Jun, Cui Guang, Liu Fang, Zhen Rong, Zou, and others, and wrote poems and songs, and they respected each other.

古文：因论求复旧职，修史官之事，肃等许为左右。
现代文：因而，李彪请求朝廷给他恢复旧职，参与修史，王肃等人答应替他呼吁。
English: Therefore, Li Biao asked the imperial court to restore his old position and participate in the revision of history. Wang Su and others agreed to appeal on his behalf.

古文：彪乃表曰：
现代文：李彪便上表说：
English: Li Biao then said at the table:

古文：惟我皇魏之奄有中华也，岁越百龄，年几十纪，史官叙录，未充其盛。
现代文： 我魏朝据有中华，已有一百多年，历经将近十位皇帝，史官们的叙写记录，没有表现出我朝的强盛。
English: Our Wei Dynasty has been ruling China for more than a hundred years. After nearly ten emperors, the written records of historians do not show the strength of our dynasty.

古文：加以东观中圮，册勋有阙，美随日落，善因月稀。
现代文：加上东观倾毁，册籍多有损失，前代的美德随着太阳一天天落下而消失，善政伴着月圆月缺渐渐淡薄。
English: In addition to the destruction of Dongguan, the books are mostly lost, the virtues of the previous generation are disappearing with the sun falling day by day, and good governance is fading away with the full moon.

古文：故谚曰： 一日不书，百事荒芜。 
现代文：所以，有谚语说：一天不记录，所有的事情都会荡然无存。
English: Therefore, there is a saying: "If you don't record one day, everything will be lost."

古文：至于太和之十一年，先帝，先后召名儒博达之士，以充麟阁之选。
现代文：至于太和十一年，先帝和先太后召请著名的学士和知识渊博、见识高远的人，以充作功臣庙麒麟阁的人选。
English: As for the eleventh year of the Taihe era, the former emperor and the former empress dowager called on famous scholars and knowledgeable and far-sighted people to serve as candidates for the meritorious temple of Kirin Pavilion.

古文：于时忘臣众短，采臣片志，令臣出纳，授臣丞职，猥属斯事，无所与让。
现代文：其时，忘去我的短处，利用我的一片心志，让我出入各功臣府第采访他们的言行，又授给我秘书丞的职务，我担任这个职务，也无所辞让。
English: At that time, forgetting my shortcomings and making use of a piece of my mind, I was allowed to enter and leave the residences of meritorious officials to interview their words and deeds, and I was given the position of secretary-general, and I held this position without any concessions.

古文：高祖时诏臣曰： 平尔雅志，正尔笔端，书而不法，后世何观。 
现代文：高祖皇帝下诏对我说：平和你高雅的志向，端正你手中的笔管，写史而没有章法，后代人怎么去读它？
English: Emperor Gaozhu said to me in his edict: "Be at peace with your noble aspirations, straighten out the pen in your hand, write history without rules and regulations, how will future generations read it?

古文：臣奉以周旋，不敢失坠。
现代文：我奉诏尽力而为，不敢忘掉高祖的教诲。
English: I did my best according to the edict and dared not forget Gaozu's teachings.

古文：伏惟孝文皇帝承天地之宝，崇祖宗之业，景功未就，奄焉崩殂，凡百黎萌，若无天地。
现代文： 孝文帝承受天地的重托，继承祖宗开创的基业，大功还未完全告成，就大驾崩殂。天下万民，有如失天坠地。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was entrusted by heaven and earth to inherit the foundation created by his forefathers. However, his great work was not fully accomplished, and he died a violent death. All the people in the world felt as if they had lost heaven and fallen to earth.

古文：赖遇陛下体明睿之真，应保合之量，恢大明以烛物，履静恭以和邦。
现代文：幸赖陛下您体察先帝圣明睿智的真心，继承他养育万民的胸怀，行为正大光明，可以普照万物；处事宁静平和，可以通好各邦。
English: Fortunately, Your Majesty, you have experienced the true heart of the former emperor, Shengming Rongzhi, and have inherited his heart of nurturing all the people. Your conduct is upright and bright, and can illuminate all things; your work is quiet and peaceful, and you can communicate well with all states.

古文：天清其气，地乐其静，可谓重明叠圣，元首康哉。
现代文：上天因而气清，大地赖以平静，真可谓圣明无比，是万民之首啊。
English: For this reason, the air in heaven is pure, and the earth is peaceful. This is truly a matchless holiness, and it is the head of all people.

古文：《记》曰： 善迹者欲人继其行，善歌者欲人继其声。 
现代文：《礼记》上说 ：善于行路的，想让别人跟着他走；会唱歌的，希望别人跟着他唱。 
English: "The Book of Etiquette" says: Those who are good at walking want others to walk with them; those who can sing want others to sing with them.

古文：先皇有大功二十，加以谦尊而光，为而弗有者，可谓四三皇而六五帝矣。诚宜功书于竹素，声播于金石。
现代文：所以《左传》说： 文王奠定了周朝基业，周公完成了建周的大业。 然而，孝文帝卓越的才能，伟大的功勋，陛下您美好的道德，圣明的智慧，与古代相比，毫不逊色啊！
English: Therefore, "Zo Zhuan" said: King Wen laid the foundation of the Zhou Dynasty, and Zhou Gong completed the great cause of building the Zhou Dynasty. However, Emperor Xiaowen's outstanding talent, great merits, your majesty, your beautiful morality, holy wisdom, compared with ancient times, are not inferior!

古文：臣窃谓史官之达者，大则与日月齐其明，小则与四时并其茂，故能声流无穷，义昭来裔。
现代文：时间却一年年过去，难道不应昭彰于世吗？ 我认为史官中杰出的人才，大的可与日月齐光，小的可与四时并茂，所以，他的声音能够流传无穷，他的思想能照耀后代。
English: But time passes year by year. Shouldn't we shine brightly in the world? I think that the outstanding talents among historians, the big ones can be as bright as the sun and the moon, and the small ones can be as bright as four o'clock. Therefore, his voice can spread to infinity, and his thoughts can shine on future generations.

古文：是以金石可灭，而风流不泯者，其唯载籍乎。
现代文：因而，金石有可能消失，而文章却不会泯灭的原因，就凭借书籍记载啊！
English: Therefore, the reason why the precious stones may disappear, but the articles will not be destroyed, is due to the books.

古文：谚曰： 相门有相，将门有将。 
现代文：谚语说 ：相门还会出相才，将门还会有将才。 
English: A proverb says: There will always be a matchmaker, and there will always be a matchmaker.

古文：今大魏之史，职则身贵，禄则亲荣，优哉游哉，式穀令尔休矣！
现代文：不是因为性情的遗传，而是行为习惯的影响。我认为负责天文、历史的官员，如有合适的人才，应该让他们世守其业。 我朝的史官，职位高贵，俸禄优厚，却成日优哉游哉，无所事事，是福禄使他们没有作为啊！
English: Not because of the inheritance of temperament, but the influence of behavioral habits. I think that the officials responsible for astronomy and history, if they have the right talents, should let them keep their careers. The historians of my dynasty, the position is noble, the salary is rich, but they are always idle, idle, idle, it is the blessing that makes them do nothing!

古文：而典谟弗恢者，其有以也。
现代文：历史之所以不能被弘扬，原因就在于此。
English: This is why history cannot be promoted.

古文：而故著作渔阳傅毗、北平阳尼、河间邢产、广平宋弁、昌黎韩显宗并以文才见举，注述是同，并登年不永，弗终茂绩。
现代文：已故的著作官员有渔阳的傅毗、北平的阳尼、河间的邢产、广平的宋弁、昌黎的韩显宗，都以才华优秀被举荐，在解释典章，记录事实上作出同等的贡献，因为任职时间不长，都没有做出杰出的成绩。
English: The late officials Fu Pi of Yuyang, Yang Ni of Peiping, Han Xian Zong of Changli, Song Ben of Guangping, and Han Xian Zong of Changli were all recommended for their outstanding talents. In fact, they made equal contributions to the interpretation of ordinances and records, because they did not serve for a long time and did not make outstanding achievements.

古文：前著作程灵虬同时应举，共掌此务，今徙他职，官非所司。
现代文：前著作郎程灵箈与他们同时被举荐，共同负责记史写史的任务，现在也调任别的职务，官职却不是他应该从事的。
English: The former author's son, Cheng Lingyao, was recommended at the same time as them, jointly responsible for the task of recording and writing history. Now he has also been transferred to other positions, but the official position is not what he should be engaged in.

古文：唯著作崔光一人，虽不移任，然侍官两兼，故载述致阙。
现代文：只剩下著作郎崔光一人，虽然没有调任，然身兼两职，所以没有著作。
English: There is only one person left, the author, Choe Kwang. Although he has not been transferred, he has two jobs, so there is no book.

古文：臣闻载籍之兴，由于大业；雅颂垂荐，起于德美。
现代文： 我听说史书的繁兴，是由于国家的昌盛；《雅》、《颂》诗歌的出现，是由于统治者道德的完美。
English: I have heard that the flourishing of history books is due to the prosperity of the country; the emergence of "Ya" and "Ode" poems is due to the moral perfection of the ruler.

古文：昔史谈诫其子迁曰： 当世有美而不书，汝之罪也。 
现代文：过去汉代的史官司马谈告诫他的儿子司马迁说 ：当世有美好的东西而不记载，是你做史官的过错呀。 
English: In the past, Sima Tong, a historian of the Han Dynasty, admonished his son Sima Qian, saying, "It is your fault as a historian if you do not record the good things in this world."

古文：是以久而见美。
现代文：所以，人们能长久地看到美好的东西。
English: Therefore, people can see beautiful things for a long time.

古文：孔明在蜀，不以史官留意，是以久而受讥。
现代文：孔明在蜀国，不重视史官的作用，所以长时间受到舆论的讥刺。
English: In the State of Shu, Confucius did not attach importance to the role of historian, so he was ridiculed by the public for a long time.

古文：《书》称 无旷庶官， 《诗》有 职思其忧 ，臣虽今非所司，然昔忝斯任，故不以草茅自疏，敢言及于此。
现代文：《书经》称 不要使史官空缺 ，《诗经》上说 担任史官一职要忧患国家和人民。 我现在虽然没有担任这个职务，然而，过去曾任过著作郎，所以，不因自己目前处境低贱而自卑，敢于讲出以上这些话。
English: "Shujing" says, "Do not leave the post of historian vacant," and "Shijing" says, "To hold the post of historian is to bring sorrow to the country and the people." Although I do not hold this post now, I used to be a writer in the past, so I dare to say the above words without feeling inferior because of my current lowly situation.

古文：语曰： 患为之者不必知，知之者不得为。 
现代文：人们常说： 最堪忧虑的是在其位的人却不知道干什么，能干的人又不在其位。 
English: People often say: The most worrying thing is that those who are in power do not know what to do, and those who are capable are not in power.

古文：臣诚不知，强欲为之耳。
现代文：我难道不了解这句话的含义，勉强非要再任史官的职务吗？
English: Do I not understand the meaning of this sentence, and do I have to reluctantly take up the post of historian?

古文：窃寻先朝赐臣名彪者，远则拟《汉史》之叔皮，近则准《晋史》之绍统，推名求义，欲罢不能。
现代文：我常常思念孝文帝给我赐名 彪 的原因，远的把我比作写《汉书》的班彪，近的比成修撰《晋史》的绍统，根据名字探求实义，真使我欲罢不能。
English: I often think about the reason why Emperor Xiaowen gave me the name Biao. From afar, I compare myself to Ban Biao, who wrote the "Chinese Classics," and more recently, to Shao Tong, who wrote the "History of Jin Dynasty." I really can't stop myself from searching for the truth based on my name.

古文：今求都下乞一静处，综理国籍，以终前志。
现代文：现在，我请求在京城中给我一处静谧的住所，整理国家的典籍，以实现我的宿愿。
English: Now, I ask you to give me a quiet place to live in the capital, to sort out the country's classics, and to fulfill my long-cherished wish.

古文：官给事力，以充所须。
现代文：政府给我一定的人力物力，以满足我写史的需要。
English: The government gives me a certain amount of manpower and material resources to meet my needs for writing history.

古文：虽不能光启大录，庶不为饱食终日耳。
现代文：我虽然不能光大史书的著述，也不至于饱食终日。
English: Although I can't write a big history book, I can't eat all day.

古文：近则期月可就，远则三年有成，正本蕴之麟阁，副贰藏之名山。
现代文：短则月内可以写就，长则三年就会有成效。史书的正本藏在麒麟阁，副本放在有名的藏书的地方。 
English: The original of the history book is kept in the Kirin Pavilion, and the copy is kept in the famous book collection.

古文：时司空北海王详、尚书令王肃许之。
现代文：当时，司空北海王元详、尚书令王肃同意了他的要求。
English: At that time, Wang Yuanzhao, Secretary of the North Sea Air Defense Command, and Wang Su, Secretary of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army, agreed to his request.

古文：肃以其无禄，颇相赈饷。遂在秘书省，同王隐故事，白衣修史。
现代文：王肃因为他没有俸禄，经常赈济他，把他安排在秘书省，依照王隐的旧例，以平民的身份参与修史。
English: Wang Su, because he did not have a salary, often gave him money, placed him in the Ministry of Secretaries, and in accordance with Wang Yin's old example, participated in the revision of history as a commoner.

古文：宣武亲政，崔光表曰： 臣昔为彪所致，与之同业积年，其志力贞强，考述无倦。
现代文：宣武帝亲自管理朝政，崔光上表说： 我过去被李彪举荐，与他共事多年。他的心志坚强，精力充沛，考证著述，不知疲倦。
English: Emperor Xuanwu personally managed the government of the dynasty, Cui Guang said on the table: I was recommended by Li Biao in the past and worked with him for many years. His spirit is strong, full of energy, research and writing, tireless.

古文：顷来契阔，多所废离，近蒙收起，还综厥事。
现代文：近来离开著述一事，多有荒废。最近又被起用，重新从事这一工作。
English: Recently, he has been away from his writing, mostly idle, and has recently been called back to resume this work.

古文：老而弥厉，史才日新。
现代文：他虽然年老，却更加奋发，写史的才识越来越新。
English: Although he is old, he is more energetic, and his ability to write history is getting newer and newer.

古文：若克复旧职，专功不殆，必能昭明《春秋》，阐成皇籍。
现代文：如果恢复他的旧职，专门治史，毫不懈怠，一定能发扬《春秋》的治史精神，写成我朝的历史。
English: If he were to resume his former position, specializing in history and not slacking off, he would certainly be able to carry forward the historical spirit of "Spring and Autumn" and write the history of my dynasty.

古文：既先帝厚委，宿历高班，纤负微愆，应从涤洗。
现代文：既然先帝将重任委托给他，他又历任很高的官位，犯了微小的过失，一定能洗心革面。
English: Since the former emperor entrusted him with important duties, he has held high official positions and made minor mistakes, he will surely be able to clean up his act.

古文：愚谓宜申以常伯，正绾著作。 
现代文：我认为应当任他为侍中，让他重新从事著述。 
English: I think he should be made a chamberlain and allowed to return to his writing.

古文：宣武不许。诏彪兼通直散骑常侍、行汾州事，非彪好也，固请不行。
现代文：宣武帝没有同意，下诏命李彪为通直散骑常侍，负责汾州的管理事务。这不是李彪的生平所好，所以，他坚决请求，没有到任。
English: Emperor Xuanwu did not agree, and issued an edict ordering Li Biao to be the first non-commissioned officer, responsible for the administration of Zhangzhou. This was not what Li Biao wanted in life, so he firmly requested that he did not take up the post.

古文：卒于洛阳。
现代文：后来，死在洛阳。
English: Later, he died in Luoyang.

古文：始彪为中尉，号为严酷。
现代文：起初，李彪任御史中尉，被称为严厉残酷。
English: At first, Li Biao served as a lieutenant in the imperial court and was known to be harsh and cruel.

古文：述《春秋三传》，合成十卷。其余著诗颂赋诔章表别有集。
现代文：他因为犯罪人的口供不好取得，就做了一种叫木手的刑具，击打犯人的肋部，因而，常常有许多人被打得多次昏死过去。
English: Because it was difficult to obtain confessions from criminals, he made a kind of torture device called a wooden hand and hit the ribs of the criminal. As a result, many people were often knocked unconscious several times.

古文：彪虽与宋弁结管、鲍交，弁为大中正，与孝文私议，犹以寒地处之，殊不欲微相优假。
现代文：朝廷曾派他去安抚汾州胡人的叛乱，抓住叛首后，他下令用鞭子抽他们的脸，以至活活打死。李彪有病，身上常常像长疮那样溃烂，疼痛异常。李彪虽然与宋弁结下管仲、鲍叔牙那样深厚的友谊，宋弁任大中正，曾与孝文帝私议，仍将李彪流放到北部寒冷的地方，以处治他，一点也不想照顾他。
English: The imperial court had sent him to pacify the Hu people's rebellion in Zhangzhou. After catching the rebels, he ordered them to be whipped in the face and beaten to death. Li Biao was ill, and his body often festered like a long sore, and the pain was abnormal. Although Li Biao had a deep friendship with Song Ben and Bao Shu Zha, Song Ben, who was a high school senior, had a private discussion with Emperor Xiaowen, he still exiled Li Biao to a cold place in the north to treat him, and did not want to take care of him at all.

古文：彪亦知之，不以为恨。
现代文：李彪也知道这件事，但并不恼恨他。
English: Li Biao also knew about this, but did not resent him.

古文：弁卒，彪痛之无已，为之哀诔，备尽辛酸。
现代文：宋弁去世，李彪悲痛难忍，给他写悼文，极尽辛酸。
English: When Song Ben died, Li Biao was so grief-stricken that he wrote a very bitter eulogy for him.

古文：郭祚为吏部，彪为子志求官，祚乃以旧第处之。
现代文：郭祚在吏部任职，李彪想为儿子李志请求官职，郭祚只按旧家大族出身的子弟对待。
English: Guo Gan worked in the personnel department. Li Biao wanted to request an official post for his son, Li Zhi. Guo Gan was only treated as a child from a member of the old family.

古文：彪以位经常伯，又兼尚书，谓祚应以贵游拔之，深用忿怨，形于言色。
现代文：李彪认为自己职位已至侍中，又兼任尚书，对郭祚说应该按无官职的王公贵族选拔李志，由于十分忿恨，所以怒形于色。
English: Li Biao thought that he had reached the position of a chamberlain, and also served as a courtier. He said to Guo Wei that Li Zhi should be selected according to the princes and nobles who had no official position. Because he was very angry, his anger was palpable.

古文：时论以此非祚。祚每曰： 尔与义和至友，岂能饶尔而怨我乎。 
现代文：人们都认为郭祚做的不对，郭祚常对别人说： 我与李彪是亲密的朋友，怎能不向着他，他又怎么能怨恨我呢？ 
English: People all thought that what Guo Gan did was wrong. Guo Gan often said to others, "I am a close friend of Li Biao. How can I not hate him? How can he hate me?"

古文：任城王澄与彪先亦不穆，及为雍州，彪诣澄，为志求其府寮。
现代文：任城王元澄原先与李彪关系不融洽。元澄到雍州任职，李彪找到他，请求让李志在他的王府中任幕僚。
English: Originally, the relationship between the king of the city, Yuancheng, and Li Biao was not harmonious. When Yuancheng went to serve in Yongzhou, Li Biao found him and asked Li Zhi to serve as a staff member in his royal palace.

古文：澄释然为启，得为列曹行参军，时称澄之美。
现代文：元澄很爽快地答应了，任李志为列曹，行参军的职务。当时，人们都称颂元澄。
English: At that time, people were praising Motosumi. He readily agreed and appointed Li Zhi as a recorder and went to join the army.

古文：父凝，州主簿。
现代文：甄琛，字思伯，中山毋极人。
English: Zhen Rong, Zi Bo, and Zhong Shan are extremely talented.

古文：琛少敏悟。闺门之内，兄弟戏狎，不以礼法自居。
现代文：他从小聪敏颖悟，在家里与兄弟们游戏取乐，常常忘掉礼法。
English: Ever since he was a child, he played games with his brothers at home and often forgot the etiquette.

古文：学览经史，称有刀笔。
现代文：博览经史子集，文章犀利，称为刀笔。
English: A subset of the comprehensive history, the article is sharp, known as a knife and a pen.

古文：而形貌短陋，鲜风仪。
现代文：长得短小丑陋，缺少风度。
English: He is short, ugly and lacks manners.

古文：举秀才，入都积岁，颇以奕棋弃日，至乃通夜不止。
现代文：被举荐为秀才，到京城一年多，天天因下棋荒废时日，以至通宵不眠。
English: He was recommended as a talented person, and he has been in Beijing for more than a year. He wastes time every day by playing chess, and even stays up all night.

古文：手下仓头，常令执烛，或时睡顿，大加其杖，如此非一。
现代文：常常令仆人掌灯为他照亮。仆人有时打瞌睡，他就大加鞭打，这种情况不是一次两次。
English: He often had his servants hold a lamp for him, and if the servant fell asleep, he would whip him severely, not just once, but twice.

古文：奴后不胜楚痛，乃曰： 郎君辞父母仕宦，若为读书执烛，不敢辞罪，乃以围棋，日夜不息，岂是向京之意？
现代文：仆人受不住这份痛苦，便说： 你辞别父母出来做官，如果是为了读书让我掌灯，我不敢推罪。因为下棋，日夜不停，难道是来京城的目的？
English: The servant could not bear the pain and said, "You have left your parents to become an official. If you asked me to hold the lamp for reading, I would not dare to blame you. Because you play chess day and night, is that the purpose of coming to the capital?

古文：而赐加杖罚，不亦非理！ 
现代文：对我处罪，不也是没有道理吗？ 
English: Isn't it unreasonable to punish me?

古文：琛怅然惭感。遂从许赤彪假书研习，闻见日优。
现代文：甄琛听后十分惭愧，便跟着许赤彪读书研讨学问，知识日渐增加。
English: After listening to Zhen Rong, he was very ashamed, so he read and studied with Xu Chia Biao, and his knowledge gradually increased.

古文：太和初，拜中书博士，迁谏议大夫，时有所陈，亦为孝文知赏。
现代文：太和初年，任中书博士，又升任谏议大夫。经常有所陈奏，都得到孝文帝的赏识。
English: In the first year of the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, he was appointed Doctor of Chinese Calligraphy, and then promoted to Doctor of Divination. He often had recitals, which were appreciated by Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：琛俛眉畏避，不能绳纠贵游，凡所劾者，率多下吏。
现代文：宣武帝即位，任甄琛为中散大夫，兼御史中尉。他低眉俯首，畏惧权贵，不敢纠劾王公贵族。所弹劾的，大多是下级官吏。
English: When Emperor Xuanwu ascended the throne, he appointed Zhen Qi as the doctor of Zhongshan and also the lieutenant of the imperial history. He bowed his head with a low brow, feared the powerful and did not dare to impeach the princes and nobles. Most of those impeached were lower-level officials.

古文：于时赵修宠贵，琛倾身事之。
现代文：当时，赵修正受朝廷重用，甄琛尽力奉迎。
English: At that time, Zhao Jian was reused by the imperial court, and Zhen Rong did his best to welcome him.

古文：琛父凝为中散大夫，弟僧林为本州别驾，皆托修申达。
现代文：甄琛的父亲甄凝任中散大夫，兄弟甄僧林任原籍所在州的别驾，都是请托赵修帮他向朝廷申请办理的。
English: Zhen Rong's father Zhen Rong, who was a doctor in Zhongshan, and his brother Zhen Ronglin, who was a monk in their home province, both asked Zhao Xiu to help them apply to the imperial court.

古文：至修奸诈事露，明当收考，今日乃举其罪。
现代文：赵修干的许多奸诈欺蒙的事情败露，明天就要收监问罪，今天，甄琛便揭发他的罪状。
English: Zhao Shugang's many treacherous and deceitful deeds have been exposed. He will be taken into custody for questioning tomorrow. Today, Zhenya will expose his crimes.

古文：及监决修鞭，犹相隐恻，然告人曰： 赵修小人，背如土牛，殊耐鞭杖。 
现代文：让他监视对赵修施行鞭打，他还有些同情之心，然而却对别人说： 赵修是个小人，脊背像牛一样结实，很能耐住鞭子。 
English: Let him supervise the whipping of Zhao Xiu. He still has some sympathy, but he said to others: Zhao Xiu is a villain, his back is as strong as a cow, and he can withstand the whip.

古文：有识以此非之。
现代文：有见识的人因此非议他。
English: That's why people with insight criticize him.

古文：修死之明日，琛与黄门郎李凭以朋党被召诣尚书。
现代文：赵修死的第二天，甄琛与黄门郎李凭因犯有朋党罪被叫到尚书处。
English: The day after Zhao Xiu's death, Zhen Rong and Huang Men Lang Li Biao were summoned to the official records office for committing the crime of being party cronies.

古文：兼尚书元英、邢峦穷其阿附之状。
现代文：兼任尚书职务的元英、邢峦追究他们攀附赵修的情况。
English: Yuan Ying, who also held the post of Shang Shu, and Zou investigated the circumstances of their clinging to Zhao Xiu.

古文：琛曾拜官，诸宾悉集，峦乃晚至。琛谓峦： 何处放蛆来，今晚始顾？ 
现代文：甄琛曾经宴请朝廷的官员，客人们都已到来，邢峦来得较晚，甄琛戏谑说 ：哪里放出一条蛆来，这么晚才来？ 
English: Zhengyi once held a banquet for officials of the imperial court. The guests had all arrived. Zhengyi came late. Zhengyi jokingly said: "Where can I get a table, I came so late?"

古文：虽以言戏，峦变色衔忿。
现代文：虽然是开玩笑的话，邢峦听了变了脸色，心里十分恼怒。
English: Although it was a joke, the baboon changed his face and was very angry.

古文：及此，大相推穷。
现代文：这时，便全力审问他。
English: At this time, they interrogated him with all their might.

古文：请免所居官以肃风轨。
现代文：司徒、录尚书事、北海王元详等奏请朝廷免掉甄琛与李凭的官职，以严肃风纪。
English: Szeto, Luo Shang Shujie, Beihai Wang Yuanxiao and others petitioned the imperial court to relieve Zhenyao and Li Biao of their official posts, with a serious demeanor.

古文：奏可。琛遂免归本郡。左右相连死黜者二十余人。
现代文：奏章被批准，甄琛被免去职务，回到原籍，一起被株连处死和免官的共二十多人。
English: The report was approved, Zhen Rong was relieved of his duties and returned to his hometown, together with a total of more than twenty people who were executed and dismissed by the company.

古文：母钜鹿曹氏，有孝性。夫氏去家，路逾百里，每得鱼肉菜果珍美口实者，必令僮仆走奉其母，乃后食焉。琛母服未阕，复丧父。
现代文：开始甄琛以父母亲年纪高迈为理由，请求解除职务，回去侍奉老人。所以，孝文帝任他为本州的长史。等到他显贵发达，不再请求归乡，这时才回到家里。供养父母多年，母亲先故去，丧期未完，又遇父丧。
English: On the grounds that his parents were too old, Zhen Qi began to request that he be relieved of his duties and go back to serve the elderly. Therefore, Emperor Xiaowen appointed him as the long history of the state. When he was dignified and developed and no longer requested to return home, he returned home. He supported his parents for many years, his mother died first, and before the mourning period was over, he lost his father.

古文：琛于茔兆内手种松柏，隆冬负掘水土。乡老哀之，咸助加力。
现代文：甄琛在父母的墓地亲手栽植松柏，隆冬季节还掘土浇水，乡亲们哀怜他，都过来帮忙。
English: Zhen Rong planted conifers in his parents' graveyard with his own hands. In the midwinter season, he also dug the soil and watered it. The villagers felt sorry for him and came to help.

古文：十余年中，坟成木茂。
现代文：十多年内，树木繁茂。
English: For more than a decade, it was heavily wooded.

古文：与弟僧林誓以同居没齿，专事产业，躬亲农圃，时以鹰犬驰逐自娱。
现代文：甄琛与弟弟僧林发誓终生同住，专事家产。他亲自耕田，不断放鹰犬奔驰追逐作为娱乐。
English: Zhen Rong and his brother Zang Lin vowed to live together for life, specializing in the family property. He personally cultivated the fields, and constantly released the eagle dog Benz to chase as entertainment.

古文：朝廷有大事，犹上表陈情。
现代文：朝廷中有大事，还上表陈述自己的意见。
English: When there is a big event in the imperial court, he also states his opinion on the table.

古文：久之，复除散骑常侍，领给事黄门侍郎、定州大中正，大见亲宠。委以门下庶事，出参尚书，入厕帷幄。
现代文：过了很久，又被授予散骑常侍，任给事黄门侍郎、定州大中正，很被朝廷信任，以门下庶事相委任，出则参与尚书的政事，入则与皇帝共商大计。
English: After a long time, he was again awarded the title of strolling equerry. He was appointed as Huangmen's equerry and Dingzhou Daizhongzheng's equerry. He was trusted by the imperial court, and was appointed as a subordinate of the general affairs minister. He participated in Shangshu's political affairs when he was out of the palace, and discussed grand plans with the emperor when he was in the palace.

古文：孝文时，琛兼主客郎，迎送齐使彭城刘缵。
现代文：孝文帝时，甄琛兼任主客郎，迎送南齐使臣刘纟赞。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, Zhen Rong also served as host and concubine, welcoming the envoy of the Southern Qi Dynasty, Liu Yuzan.

古文：琛钦其器貌，常叹咏之。
现代文：他很敬佩刘纟赞的气宇形貌，常常感叹而称赞他。
English: He admires Liu Yuzan's good looks and often praises him.

古文：缵子昕为朐山戍主。昕死，家属入洛。
现代文：刘纟赞的儿子刘晰为驻守朐山的主帅，刘晰去世，家属迁居洛阳。
English: Liu Qizan's son, Liu Qiao, was the head coach stationed in Shaoshan. Liu Qiao passed away, and his family moved to Luoyang.

古文：有女年未二十，琛乃纳昕女为妻。
现代文：刘晰有个女儿不到二十岁，甄琛便娶来做妻子。
English: Liu Qiao has a daughter who is less than twenty years old. Zhen Rong then married her.

古文：婚日，诏给厨费。
现代文：结婚那天，朝廷下诏赏给厨房的用费。
English: On the day of the wedding, the imperial court awarded the use of the kitchen to Mao.

古文：琛所好悦，宣武时调戏之。
现代文：甄琛十分喜欢这个女孩子，宣武帝也时常来调戏她。
English: Zhen Rong was very fond of this girl, and Emperor Xuanwu often came to tease her.

古文：迁河南尹，黄门、中正如故。
现代文：他迁任河南府尹，黄门和中正的职务仍然不变。
English: He was transferred to Yin, Huangmen and Zhongzheng in Henan Province, but his duties remain unchanged.

古文：琛表曰：
现代文：他上表说：
English: He went on to say:

古文：国家居代，患多盗窃。
现代文： 我国还在北部代地时，忧虑盗贼太多。
English: When our country was still in the north, there were too many worries about thieves.

古文：世祖太武皇帝亲自发愤，广置主司，里宰皆以下代令长及五等散男有经略者乃得为之。
现代文：世祖太武皇帝亲自过问，到处设置主司，里宰一职都以下级代替令长，以及让五等无职务的男爵中有谋略的人来担任。
English: Emperor Taimu, the founder of the dynasty, personally made inquiries and set up chief officers everywhere, replacing the commander-in-chief with a subordinate in the position of lizai, and letting the strategists among the fifth-class barons without positions to serve.

古文：又多置吏士，为其羽翼。
现代文：又设置许多官吏和士兵，帮助里宰治安。
English: In addition, many officials and soldiers were set up to help maintain public order.

古文：崇而重之，始得禁止。
现代文：由于对这件事情重视，所以盗贼得以制止。
English: Due to the seriousness of the matter, the thieves were stopped.

古文：今迁都已来，天下转广；四远赴会，事过代都。
现代文：现在，迁都洛阳以来，天下疆域广阔，四方边远之地都来首都朝会，事业之盛，远过代都。
English: Now, since the relocation of the capital to Luoyang, the country's territory is vast, and remote places in all directions have come to the capital of the dynasty, and the cause is flourishing, far beyond the capital.

古文：寇盗公行，劫害不绝。
现代文：然而，盗贼公行，抢劫案件接连不断。
English: However, thieves are on the prowl, and robberies continue to occur.

古文：此由诸坊混杂，厘比不精，主司闇弱，不堪检察故也。
现代文：社会混乱的原因是市内各坊住人混杂，管理不严，主司软弱失职，不严加检查的缘故。
English: The reason for the social chaos is that the residents of the city are mixed, the management is not strict, the director is weak and derelict, and the inspection is not strict.

古文：今择尹既非南金，里尉铅刀而割，欲望清肃都邑，不可得也。
现代文：现在选择令尹既不是南方优秀的人才，里尉像拿着铅刀割肉一样对待囚犯，想整顿好洛阳的秩序是不可能的。
English: Now, it is impossible to rectify the order in Luoyang if Ling Yin is not an outstanding talent in the south, and the lieutenant treats the prisoners as if he were cutting meat with a lead knife.

古文：里正乃流外四品，职轻任碎，多是下才。人怀苟且，不能督察，故使盗得容奸，百赋失理。
现代文：里正一职是流外四品，官职小而任务繁琐，充任者多是下等人才，人人心怀苟且，不能督察，所以使盗贼肆虐。各种赋税也缺乏管理。
English: Li Zheng's first post was that of the Four Princes in Exile. The post was small and the tasks were cumbersome. Most of the appointees were low-level talents. Everyone was scrupulous and could not be supervised, so the thieves were rampant. Various taxes also lacked management.

古文：边外小县，所领不过百户，而令长皆以将军居之。
现代文：偏远小县，管辖不过百来户居民，而令长都由将军担任。
English: It is a small and remote county, with no more than a hundred households under its jurisdiction, and the shogun is always a general.

古文：高者领六部尉，中者领经途尉，下者领里正。不尔，请少高里尉之品，选下品中应迁者，进而为之。
现代文：京城中的各坊，大的或者一千户、五百户，住在里面的都是王公大臣、权要们的亲戚。骄横奸猾的仆役，偷偷蓄养着盗贼恶棍，他们住在高门大院，一般官员很难过问。治安与边远小县相比，难易程度大不相同。请选取武官中八品将官以下精明强干的，以原来的职务兼任里尉，各自领取原来的俸禄。官阶高的任六部尉，中等的任径途尉，低的任里正。 
English: All the villages in the capital, whether large or one thousand or five hundred, are inhabited by the relatives of princes, ministers and dignitaries. Proud and treacherous servants secretly breed thieving villains. They live in high gate compounds. Ordinary officials are hard to get past. Compared with remote small counties, the degree of difficulty is very different. Please select a military officer who is smart and strong below the rank of general and concurrently serve as a lieutenant in the original position, each receiving the original salary. The highest rank is appointed as a sixth lieutenant, the medium rank is appointed as a path lieutenant, and the low rank is appointed as a lieutenant.

古文：则督责有所，辇毂可清。诏曰： 里正可进至勋品、经途从九品、六部尉正九品诸职中简取，何必须武人也。 
现代文：朝廷下诏说： 里正官阶可进至勋品，经途官阶为从九品，六部尉从正九品中选取，何必一定要行伍出身的人担任呢？ 
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict saying, "Lizheng officers can be promoted up to the rank of medal, while en route officers can be selected from the nine ranks, and six lieutenants can be selected from the nine ranks. Why do people from the military have to serve?

古文：琛又奏以羽林为游军，于诸坊巷司察盗贼。
现代文：甄琛又奏请让羽林军在京城巡查，缉拿盗贼。
English: Zhen Rong also requested that the Ulin Army patrol the capital and arrest the thieves.

古文：于是京邑清静，后皆踵焉。
现代文：于是京城秩序稳定，后来都沿袭这种做法。
English: As a result, order in the capital was stabilized, and this practice was later followed.

古文：转太子少保，黄门如故。
现代文：甄琛又转任太子少保，黄门一职照旧。
English: Zhen Rong was transferred to the position of the Prince's Junior Bodyguard, and Huang Men remained in the same position.

古文：及高肇死，琛以党不宜复参朝政，出为营州刺史，迁凉州刺史。
现代文：高肇被处死，甄琛因与他有朋党关系不宜再参与朝政，朝廷调他任营州刺史，后又任凉州刺史。
English: Gao Zhao was put to death. Zhen Rong was no longer allowed to participate in imperial politics due to his close party ties with Gao Zhao. The imperial court transferred him to be the governor of Yingzhou and later the governor of Liangzhou.

古文：犹以高氏之昵，不欲处之于内。
现代文：他也因为自己与高肇关系亲近，不愿意在朝廷内任职。
English: He also did not want to serve in the imperial court because of his close relationship with Gao Zhao.

古文：久之，为吏部尚书。
现代文：过了很久，又回朝廷任吏部尚书。
English: After a long time, he returned to the imperial court to serve as an official.

古文：未几，除定州刺史。
现代文：不久，又调他任定州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to be appointed as the governor of Dingzhou.

古文：固辞曰： 陛下在东宫，崔光为少傅，臣为少保，今光为车骑大将军、仪同三司、开国公。
现代文：他坚决推辞，说： 陛下您在东宫为太子时，崔光任少傅，我任少保。现在，崔光任车骑大将军、仪同三司、开国公。
English: He firmly declined, saying, "Your Majesty, when you were crown prince in the East Palace, Choe Kwang was appointed as Junior Master, and I was appointed as Junior Bodyguard. Now, Choe Kwang is appointed as General of Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Korean People's Army, Grand Marshal of the Korean People's Army, and Founding Father.

古文：故仆射游肇时为侍中，与臣官阶相似；肇在省为仆射，死赠车骑将军、仪同三司、冀州刺史。
现代文：已故的仆射游肇当时为侍中，与我的官阶相似，游肇在尚书省为仆射，死后追赠车骑将军、仪同三司、冀州刺史的官职。
English: At that time, the late Yu Zhaozhao was a chamberlain, similar to my official rank. Yu Zhaozhao was a chamberlain in Shangshu Province, and after his death, he was posthumously awarded the official positions of General of Cavalry and Cavalry, the Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the Historian of Jizhou.

古文：臣今适为征北将军、定州刺史。
现代文：我现在才为征北将军、定州刺史。
English: I am only now making history as the general who conquered the North, the history of Dingzhou.

古文：生师保不如死游肇。 
现代文：活着的我还不如死了的游肇。 
English: I'd rather be dead than alive, Yu Zhao.

古文：曾祖轨，随慕容德徙青州，因居北海之剧县。
现代文：朝廷下诏书慰勉他。甄琛到了定州，白天穿着华贵的衣服到处巡游，志得意满。
English: The imperial edict issued by the court consoled him. Zhenya arrived in Dingzhou, and during the day he paraded around in luxurious clothes, full of pride.

古文：父法昂，少随其车骑将军王玄谟征伐，以功至员外郎，早卒。
现代文：为政虽然严谨细密，却没有什么声誉。死后，朝廷赠给棺木，封为司徒公、尚书左仆射，给予后部鼓吹的待遇。高聪，字僧智，原本是渤海人。
English: Although his politics were rigorous and meticulous, he did not have much of a reputation. After his death, the imperial court presented him with a coffin, which was sealed with the names of Stukong and Shangshu Zuopu, and he was given the treatment of a propagandist. Gao Cong, also known as Sengzhi, was originally from Bohai.

古文：聪生而丧母，祖母王抚育之。
现代文：他的曾祖父高轨随慕容德迁至青州，因而在北海剧县定居。高聪生下来就失去了母亲，祖母王氏将他抚养。
English: His great-grandfather Gaozhu moved to Qingzhou with Murongde and settled in Beihai Opera County. When Gaozhu was born, he lost his mother and was raised by his grandmother Wang.

古文：大军攻克东阳，聪徙平城，与蒋少游为云中兵户，窘困无所不为。
现代文：魏军攻克东阳，高聪迁至平城，与蒋少游同为云中的兵户，因贫苦穷困，什么事情都干过。
English: The Wei army conquered Dongyang, Gao Cong moved to Pingcheng, and he and Jiang Shaoyou were soldiers in the clouds. Due to poverty and hardship, they did everything.

古文：族祖允视之若孙，大加赒给。
现代文：本族的祖父高允看待他像自己的亲孙子，不断给予接济。
English: The grandfather of this tribe, Gao Yun, regarded him as his own grandchild and kept giving him money.

古文：聪涉猎经史，颇有文才。
现代文：高聪涉猎经史，很有文才。
English: Gao Cong dabbled in history and was very talented in literature.

古文：允嘉之，数称其美，言之朝廷，由是与少游同拜中书博士。
现代文：高允十分喜欢他，多次称赞他，并举荐给朝廷，因此，他与蒋少游一同任中书博士。
English: Gao Yun liked him very much, praised him many times, and recommended him to the imperial court. Therefore, he and Jiang Shaoyou jointly held the title of Doctor of Chinese Calligraphy.

古文：转侍郎，为高阳王雍傅，稍为孝文知赏。
现代文：又升任为侍郎，为高阳王元雍的老师，渐渐被孝文帝所赏识。
English: He was also promoted to the position of chamberlain, and was the teacher of the Goyang King Yuan Yong. He was gradually appreciated by Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：太和十七年，兼员外散骑常侍，使于齐。
现代文：太和十七年，高聪兼任员外散骑常侍，出使南齐。
English: In the 17th year of the Taihe era, Gao Cong also served as a non-commissioned officer, and was sent to Nanqi.

古文：后兼太子左率。
现代文：后又兼任太子左率。
English: Later, he also served as the left-hand man of the crown prince.

古文：聪微习弓马，乃以将略自许。
现代文：他早年多少学过些弓法骑术，便以将才自许。
English: He had learned some archery and horsemanship in his early years, so he prided himself on being a general.

古文：孝文锐意南讨，专访王肃以军事。
现代文：孝文帝下决心南讨，专门向王肃询问军事方面的事情。
English: Emperor Xiaowen made up his mind to invade the south and specifically asked Wang Su about military matters.

古文：聪托肃，愿以偏裨自效。
现代文：高聪向王肃请托，愿意以偏将的身份为南征效劳。
English: Gao Cong asked Wang Su for a favor and was willing to serve the Southern Expedition as a partial general.

古文：肃言于帝，故假聪辅国将军，受肃节度，同援涡阳。
现代文：王肃报告给了孝文帝，所以孝文帝便任命他为辅国将军，受王肃的节制，一同援救涡阳。
English: Wang Su reported to Emperor Xiaowen, so Emperor Xiaowen appointed him as an auxiliary general. He was restrained by Wang Su and helped rescue Yu Yuyang.

古文：聪躁怯少威重，及与贼交，望风退败。
现代文：高聪性情浮躁胆怯，缺少勇猛和威严，与敌兵交战，便望风败退。
English: Gao Cong was impetuous and timid, lacking courage and dignity. When he fought with the enemy soldiers, he expected to be defeated.

古文：孝文恕死，徙平州。
现代文：孝文帝饶恕了他的死罪，将他流放到平州。
English: Emperor Xiaowen pardoned his capital crime and exiled him to Pingzhou.

古文：行届瀛州，刺史王质获白兔，将献，托聪为表。
现代文：路经瀛州，刺史王质捕获一只白兔，准备献给朝廷，托高聪替他写一份奏表。
English: Passing through Bozhou, the crown prince captured a white rabbit and prepared to present it to the imperial court. He asked Gao Cong to write a report for him.

古文：帝见表，顾王肃曰： 在下那得有此才，令朕不知。 
现代文：孝文帝看到奏表，问王肃： 王质那里怎有这种人才？我却不知道。 
English: When Emperor Xiaowen saw the report, he asked Wang Su: "How could such a talent exist in the royal family? I don't know."

古文：肃曰： 比高聪北徙，或其所制。 
现代文：王肃答道 ：高聪流放到北边，大概是他写的。 
English: Wang Su replied: Gao Cong was exiled to the north, he probably wrote it.

古文：帝悟曰： 必应然也。 
现代文：孝文帝忽然明白，说： 一定是他。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen suddenly understood and said, "It must be him."

古文：宣武初，聪复窃还京师，说高肇废六辅。
现代文：宣武帝初年，高聪偷偷回到京城，劝说高肇废去京城附近的六个郡。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xuanwu, Gao Cong secretly returned to Beijing and persuaded Gao Zhao to go to six counties near Beijing.

古文：宣武亲政，除给事黄门侍郎，后加散骑常侍。
现代文：宣武帝亲自管理朝政，任他为给事黄门侍郎，后又加封为散骑常侍。
English: Emperor Xuanwu personally managed the affairs of the court, appointing him as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and later as the attendant of horseback riding.

古文：及幸鄴还，于河内怀界，帝射矢一里五十余步。
现代文：宣武帝巡游邺地归来，在河内的怀地，用箭射了一里零五十步。
English: Emperor Xuanwu, returning from a military parade, shot an arrow at one kilometer and fifty paces in Hanoi's Hoa Thi district.

古文：侍中高显等奏，盛事奇迹必宜表述，请勒铭射宫，永彰圣艺。
现代文：侍中高显等人奏称这是件盛事奇迹，应该大加表彰，请立石刻铭，存于射宫，以永远光大陛下高超的射术。
English: Attendant Gao Xian and others said that this was a great event and a miracle, and should be highly commended. Please set up a stone inscription and keep it in the shooting palace to forever glorify His Majesty's superb shooting skills.

古文：遂刊铭射所，聪为之词。
现代文：便在射箭的地方立石，高聪写下碑文。
English: So he set up a stone in the place where he used to shoot arrows, and Gao Cong wrote an inscription.

古文：赵修嬖境，聪深朋附。
现代文：赵修受到宣武帝的宠幸，高聪与他深相依附，并结成朋党。
English: Zhao Xiu was favored by Emperor Xuanwu, Gao Cong was deeply attached to him, and they became friends.

古文：及诏追赠修父，聪为碑文，出入同载，观视碑石。
现代文：朝廷下诏追赠赵修的父亲，高聪为赵修的父亲起草碑文，和赵修一同坐车出去，寻找立碑的石头。
English: The imperial court issued a posthumous award to Zhao Xiu's father, Gao Cong drafted an inscription for Zhao Xiu's father, and went out with Zhao Xiu in a car to find the stone to erect the monument.

古文：聪每见修，迎送尽礼。
现代文：高聪每见到赵修，又迎又送，极尽礼节。
English: Every time Gao Cong sees Zhao Xiu, he greets him and sends him off with the utmost courtesy.

古文：聪又为修作表，陈当时便宜，教其自安之术，由是迭相亲狎。
现代文：高聪又代替赵修起草奏章，陈述当时对他有利的事情，还教给他自保的方法。
English: Gao Cong also drafted a report on behalf of Zhao Xiu, stating the things that were beneficial to him at that time, and also taught him the method of self-protection.

古文：修死，甄琛、李凭皆被黜落，聪深用危虑，而先以疏宗之情，曲事高肇，竟获自免，肇之力也。修之任势，聪倾身事之；及死，言必毁恶。
现代文：因此，两个人的关系更加密切。赵修被处死，甄琛、李凭都被罢黜，高聪深感危急。他先用同姓疏房远族的感情，曲意侍奉高肇，竟然安然无事，完全依靠高肇的保护。赵修得势时，高聪倾身奉迎；他被处死后，高聪言必诽谤他。
English: As a result, the relationship between the two men became even closer. Zhao Xiu was executed, Zhen Rong and Li Biao were both ousted, and Gao Cong was deeply in danger. He first served Gao Zhao with the same surname, alienating the feelings of distant people, and relying entirely on Gao Zhao's protection. When Zhao Xiu gained power, Gao Cong bowed down to him; after he was executed, Gao Cong would slander him.

古文：茹皓之宠，聪又媚附，每相招命，称皓才识非修之俦。
现代文：茹皓获宠，高聪又献媚依附，每次见茹皓，都称赞他的才识远非赵修能比得上的。
English: Zhu Xi was favored, Gao Cong was flattered and attached. Every time he saw Zhu Xi, he praised his talent, which was far beyond Zhao Xiu's ability to match.

古文：乃因皓启请田宅，皆被遂许。
现代文：凭借着茹皓的地位请求朝廷给他田宅，都被批准。
English: By virtue of the status of Zhu Xi, he asked the court to give him a farmhouse, which was approved.

古文：及皓见罪戮，聪以为死之晚也。
现代文：茹皓犯罪被杀，他又说茹皓死得太晚了。
English: Zhu Xi was killed for committing a crime. He also said that Zhu Xi died too late.

古文：其薄于情义皆如此。
现代文：他的薄于情义都像这样。
English: His insincerity is like this.

古文：侍中高显为护军，聪代兼其任。
现代文：侍中高显任护军，高聪代替他兼任原来的职务。
English: Gao Hsien, a chamberlain, served as a guard, and Gao Cong took his place in his original position.

古文：显与兄肇疑聪间构而求之。
现代文：高显与兄长高肇怀疑高聪从中间做手脚，想谋取这个位置。
English: Gao Xian and his elder brother Gao Zhao suspected that Gao Cong was trying to get this position by maneuvering from the middle.

古文：聪居兼十余旬，出入机要，言即真，无远虑，藉贵因权，耽于声色，贿纳之音，闻于遐迩。
现代文：高聪兼任高显原来的侍中职务，出入于国家机要重地，说话直白，缺乏远虑，攀附权贵，沉缅于声色之中。收受贿赂的舆论，远近皆知。
English: Gao Cong concurrently held Gao Xian's original position as an aide-de-camp. He entered and left places of national importance, spoke bluntly, lacked foresight, clung to power, and indulged in gossip. The public opinion of accepting bribes is known far and wide.

古文：中尉崔亮知肇微恨，遂面陈聪罪，出为并州刺史。
现代文：中尉崔亮知道高肇怨恨高聪，当面陈说高聪的罪状。高聪被调出朝廷，任并州刺史。
English: Lieutenant Cui Liang knew that Gao Zhao held a grudge against Gao Cong, and confronted him with Gao Cong's crimes. Gao Cong was transferred out of the imperial court and assigned to the state court.

古文：聪善于去就，知肇嫌之，侧身承奉，肇遂待之如旧。
现代文：高聪善于趋炎附势，知道高肇嫌弃自己，仍委身巴结奉承，高肇对他又如当初。
English: Gao Cong is good at playing with fire, knowing that Gao Zhao dislikes abandoning himself, he still commits himself to flattery, and Gao Zhao treats him as he did at the beginning.

古文：聪在并州数岁，多不率法，又与太原太守王椿有隙，再为大使御史举奏。
现代文：高聪在并州几年，行事多不遵守法律典章，他与太原太守王椿有矛盾，再次被御史奏报。
English: Gao Cong lived in the annexed prefecture for several years, and his actions mostly did not comply with laws and ordinances. He had conflicts with the Taiyuan governor Wang Tsubaki, and was once again reported to the imperial court.

古文：肇每以宗私相援，事得寝缓。
现代文：高肇常因宗亲的缘故私下里帮助他，事情才被压了下来没有爆发。
English: Gao Zhao often helped him in private for the sake of his relative, but the matter was suppressed and did not break out.

古文：宣武末，拜散骑常侍、平北将军。
现代文：宣武帝末年，封他为散骑常侍、平北将军。
English: At the end of Emperor Xuanwu's life, he was appointed as a knight errant, a general of the North.

古文：明帝践阼，以其素附高肇，出为幽州刺史。
现代文：孝明帝继立，因为高聪过去依附高肇，让他出任幽州刺史。
English: Emperor Xiaoming succeeded him, and because Gao Cong had been attached to Gao Zhao in the past, he was appointed as the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：寻以高肇之党，与王世义、高绰、李宪、崔楷、兰氛之为中尉元匡所弹，灵太后并特原之。聪遂废于家，断绝人事，唯修营园果，世称高聪梨，以为珍异。
现代文：不久，又因为是高肇的党羽，被中尉元匡弹劾。高聪被罢官，闲居在家，断绝一切人事往来，专心管理自家的果园，种的梨被人们称为高聪梨，成为珍品。
English: Soon after, he was impeached by Lieutenant Yuan Kuang because he was a member of Gao Zhao's party. Gao Cong was dismissed from his post, idled at home, cut off all personnel contacts, and concentrated on managing his own orchard. The pears he grew were called Gao Cong pears and became a rare treasure.

古文：又唯以声色自娱。
现代文：他仍以声色自娱。
English: He still amuses himself with his voice.

古文：聪有妓十余人，有子无子皆注籍为妾，以悦其情。
现代文：高聪蓄养妓女十多人，不管生没有生孩子，都被纳为妾，以愉悦自己的感情。
English: Gao Cong kept more than ten prostitutes, and whether they had children or not, they were all taken as concubines to please his feelings.

古文：及病，欲不适他人，并令烧指吞炭，出家为尼。
现代文：他病后，不想让这些小妾在他死后再嫁给别人，让她们自烧手指，忏罪献身，吞炭尽忠，出家为尼。
English: After his illness, he didn't want these concubines to remarry after his death. He wanted them to burn their fingers, confess their sins, devote themselves, be loyal, and become nuns.

