古文：孔纬，字化文，鲁曲阜人，宣尼之裔。
现代文：孔纬字化文，山东曲阜人，是孔子的后代。
English: Confucius' descendant, Shandong Qufu people, are the descendants of Confucius.

古文：曾祖岑父，位终秘书省著作佐郎，谏议大夫巢父兄也。
现代文：他的曾祖孔岑父，最后官位为秘书省著作佐郎，是谏议大夫孔巢父的哥哥。
English: His great-grandfather, Confucius's father, whose last official position was secretary of the provincial government, was the elder brother of Confucius's father.

古文：祖戣，位终礼部尚书，自有传。
现代文：祖父孔癸戈，最高官位是礼部尚书。
English: Grandfather Kong Rongge, the highest official rank is the Ministry of etiquette.

古文：父遵孺，终华阴县丞。
现代文：父亲孔遵孺，最终官职为华阴县丞。
English: His father, Kong Zunyi, eventually rose to the position of Huayin County magistrate.

古文：纬少孤，依诸父温裕、温业，皆居方镇，与名公交，故纬声籍早达。
现代文：孔纬少年时已成孤儿，依靠同宗族的叔伯孔温裕、孔温业；他们都官居方镇，与有名望的人士交往，因而孔纬的名声身世早已显扬。
English: Orphaned as a boy, Kong Wai relied on his uncles of the same clan, Kong Wen Yu and Kong Wen Ye, both of whom lived in Fangzhen and socialized with famous people. As a result, Kong Wai's fame was already well known in his lifetime.

古文：大中十三年，进士擢第，释褐秘书省校书郎。
现代文：宣宗大中十三年，中进士，初入仕途任秘书省校书郎。
English: In the 13th year of the middle school of Xuan Zong University, he was promoted to junior high school, and was appointed secretary of the provincial school for the first time.

古文：崔慎由镇梓州，辟为从事。
现代文：崔慎由镇守梓州时，征召他为从事官。
English: When Cui Shen was transferred from the town guard of Zizhou, he was recruited as an officer.

古文：又从崔铉为扬州支使，得协律郎。
现代文：又随从崔铉任扬州支使，得到协律郎的职务。
English: He was also appointed Yangzhou envoy by Choe Heon, and received the post of assistant magistrate.

古文：崔慎由镇华州、河中，纬皆从之，历观察判官。
现代文：崔慎由镇守华州、河中，孔纬都随从他，历任观察判官。
English: Cui Shanyu was the town guard of Huazhou and Hezhong, and Kong Wei followed him, and successively served as an observer and judge.

古文：宰相杨收奏授长安尉，直弘文馆。
现代文：宰相杨收奏请朝廷授予他长安尉官职，代理弘文馆职务。
English: In his acceptance speech, Prime Minister Yang Jiechi asked the Imperial Court to grant him the official position of Chang'an lieutenant and the position of acting Hongwen Museum.

古文：御史中丞王铎奏为监察御史，转礼部员外郎。
现代文：御史中丞王铎奏请委任他为监察御史，后转任礼部员外郎。
English: He was appointed as the inspector of Imperial History by the Imperial Historian, Chujo Wang, and later became a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：宰相徐商奏兼集贤直学士，改考功员外郎。
现代文：宰相徐商奏请孔纬兼任集贤院直学士，改任考功员外郎。
English: Prime Minister Xu Shangso asked Kong Wei to concurrently serve as a direct bachelor of Jixian Academy, and was reappointed as an examiner Wairo.

古文：丁内忧免。
现代文：因母亲去世守丧，免去官职。
English: Due to the death of his mother, he attended the funeral and was relieved of his official duties.

古文：服阕，以右司员外郎入朝。
现代文：守丧期满，入朝任右司员外郎。
English: At the end of his mourning period, he entered the imperial court as the right-hand steward, Wairo.

古文：宰臣赵隐嘉其能文，荐为翰林学士，转考功郎中、知制诰，赐绯。
现代文：宰辅大臣赵隐赞赏他善于写文章，举荐他为翰林学士，后转任考功郎中、知制诰，被赐予标示五品以上官阶的绯色官服。
English: Vice-Minister Zhao Yin appreciated his ability to write articles and recommended him as a scholar of Hanlin, after which he was transferred to the post of meritorious scholar and intellectual, and was given a navy-colored official uniform with five or more ranks.

古文：正拜中书舍人，累迁户部侍郎。
现代文：被授予正职中书舍人，晋升官职至户部侍郎。
English: He was awarded the official position of junior high school librarian and promoted to the official position of household attendant.

古文：谢日，面赐金紫之服。
现代文：孔纬进宫谢授官之恩时，皇帝当面赐给他标示三品以上官阶的金鱼袋、紫色官服。
English: When he entered the palace to express his gratitude, Emperor Xuanzong personally gave him a goldfish bag and a purple official uniform, each of which was marked with three or more official ranks.

古文：乾符中，罢学士，出为御史中丞。
现代文：僖宗乾符年间，孔纬被免去学士职位，调出宫廷任御史中丞。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong of the Qianfu Dynasty, Kong Wei was removed from his position as an academician and transferred out of the court to serve as the Vice-President of History.

古文：纬器志方雅，嫉恶如仇。
现代文：孔纬为人正直，嫉恶如仇。
English: Kong Wei is an honest person. Jealousy is his worst enemy.

古文：既总宪纲，中外不绳而自肃。
现代文：由他掌握法纪后，朝廷内外不施加刑罚而纲纪整肃。
English: After he mastered the legal discipline, the discipline was rectified without imposing penalties inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：历户部、兵部、吏部三侍郎。
现代文：此后历任户部、兵部、吏部三部侍郎。
English: After that, he successively served as a chamberlain in the Household Department, the Military Department, and the Administrative Department.

古文：居选曹，动循格令。
现代文：他主管诠选官吏事务，一举一动都严守法令。
English: He is in charge of the selection of officials, and his every move is strictly in accordance with the law.

古文：权要有所托，私书盈几，不之省。
现代文：权臣势要向他托情，私下给他的书信堆满案几，他从不去看。
English: Powerful courtiers are bound to ask him for favors, and the letters he receives in private are so full of cases that he never reads them.

古文：执政怒之，改太常卿。
现代文：执政大臣感到恼怒，将他改任为太常卿。
English: Exasperated, the minister-in-charge changed his title to First Secretary of State.

古文：黄巢之乱，从僖宗幸蜀，改刑部尚书，判户部事。
现代文：黄巢造反，孔纬随僖宗去到蜀州，改任刑部尚书，兼管户部事务。
English: When Huang Chao rebelled, Kong Wei followed Shanzong to Shuzhou, and was appointed to the Department of Criminal Law, and also took charge of the Department of Household Affairs.

古文：宰臣萧遘在翰林时，与纬情旨不协。
现代文：宰辅大臣萧遘在翰林院时，与孔纬感情意见不融洽。
English: When the Vice-Minister Xiao Wei was in the Hanlin Academy, his feelings and opinions were not compatible with those of Kong Wei.

古文：至是，因户部取给不充，移之散秩，改太子少保。
现代文：到这时，借户部征收财物供给需用不足，萧遘将孔纬改任为闲散官员，担任太子少保。
English: At this time, the Department of Borrowing Households was insufficient in the collection of wealth and the supply of necessities, and Xiao Yao changed Kong Wei to an idle official and served as the prince's junior bodyguard.

古文：光启元年，从驾还京。
现代文：光启元年，孔纬随僖宗返回京都。
English: In the first year of the Kōki era, Kong Shih returned to Kyoto with Shinsō.

古文：是时，田令孜军败，沙陁逼京师，帝移幸凤翔，邠帅硃玫引兵来迎驾。
现代文：这时，田令孜率领的军队作战失败，沙陀军逼近京都长安，僖宗迁移到凤翔，州主帅朱玫领兵前来迎接僖宗。
English: At this time, the army led by Tian Lingze failed in the battle, the Shatian army approached Kyoto Chang'an, and Shizong moved to Fengxiang. The state commander Zhu Mei led the troops to meet Shizong.

古文：令孜挟帝幸山南。
现代文：田令孜挟制僖宗到山南道。
English: Tianling, Zizhang, Shanzong to Shannan Province.

古文：时中夜出幸，百官不及扈从，而随驾者黄门卫士数百人而已。
现代文：时值半夜出行，百官来不及随从，因而随从僖宗的门下省卫士仅数百人而已。
English: It was time to travel in the middle of the night, and hundreds of officials were too late to accompany him, so only a few hundred provincial guards under the tutelage of Emperor Taizong accompanied him.

古文：帝驻宝鸡，侯百官，诏授纬御史大夫，遣中使传诏，令纬率百僚赴行在。
现代文：僖宗停驻在宝鸡，等候赶来随从的百官，下诏委任孔纬为御史大夫，派宦官传达诏令，让孔纬率领百官赶赴皇帝出行的所在地。
English: Emperor Taizong stopped at Baoji to wait for the arrival of the hundred officials who accompanied him. He issued an imperial edict appointing Kong Yat-sen as the imperial historian, sent eunuchs to convey the imperial edict, and asked Kong Yat-sen to lead the hundred officials to the place where the emperor was traveling.

古文：时京师急变，从驾官属至盩厔，并为乱兵所剽，资装殆尽。
现代文：这时京都已发生重大紧急变化，随从护驾的官吏到周至时，全部遭到乱兵的抢劫，财物服装丢失殆尽。
English: At this time, Kyoto had undergone major emergency changes. When the officials accompanying the escort arrived, they were all robbed by the rioters, and all their belongings and clothing were lost.

古文：纬承命见宰相论事，萧遘、裴澈以田令孜在帝左右，意不欲行，辞疾不见纬。
现代文：孔纬奉命去见宰相议事，萧遘、裴澈因为田令孜在皇帝身边，不想随行，推辞有病不见孔纬。
English: Kong Wei was ordered to meet with the prime minister to discuss the matter. Xiao Wei and Pei Che did not want to accompany the emperor because Tian Ling Ze was at his side, so they declined, saying they were ill and could not see Kong Wei.

古文：纬遣台吏促百官上路，皆以袍笏不具为词。
现代文：孔纬差遣御史台吏员催促百官上路，群臣都以没有了朝服笏板为借口拒绝。
English: Kong Wei sent an official from the Imperial Historian's Office to urge the hundred officials to go on the road, but the ministers all refused on the pretext that they did not have the imperial robes.

古文：纬无如之何，乃召三院御史谓之曰： 吾辈世荷国恩，身居宪秩。
现代文：孔纬把他们无可奈何，于是召集侍御史、殿中侍御史和监察御史对他们说： 我们身受国恩，担任法纪官职。
English: Kong Wei could not help them, so he called together the attendants, the palace attendants, and the supervisors and said to them, "We are favored by the country and hold the position of law enforcement officers.

古文：虽六飞奔迫而咫尺天颜，累诏追征，皆无承禀，非臣子之义也。
现代文：虽然皇上的车驾行走急迫，但皇帝现已近在咫尺，屡次下诏催召前往，大家都不接受命令，这不是做臣子的应有行为。
English: Although the emperor's carriage drive was urgent, the emperor was now close at hand. He repeatedly issued an edict urging everyone to go, but no one accepted the order. This was not the proper behavior of a courtier.

古文：凡布衣交旧，缓急犹相救恤，况在君亲？
现代文：所有平民中的故交，遇到危急的事尚且相互救助，更何况是对待君主？
English: Of all the commoners, how many are old friends and help each other in times of need, let alone treat the sovereign?

古文：策名委质，安可背也！ 
现代文：出仕为官就该以死报效君王，怎么可以违背君主呢？ 
English: If you serve as a government official, you should serve the king with death. How can you go against the monarch?

古文：言竟泣下。
现代文：说得声泪俱下。
English: He was in tears as he spoke.

古文：三院曰： 夫岂不怀，但盩厔剽剥之余，乞食不给。
现代文：三院的御史们说： 我等哪里是不留恋皇上呢？只是在周至遭到抢劫后，所剩下的东西，吃都不足。
English: Historians of the Third Court said, "How could I not feel nostalgia for the emperor? However, after Zhou Zi was robbed, there was not enough food left to eat.

古文：今若首途，聊营一日之费，俟信宿纪行可也。 
现代文：现在怎样出发上路？姑且容我们谋得一天的费用，等过两天就启程。 
English: How are we to set out now? Let us get a day's pay and leave in two days.

古文：纬拂衣起曰： 吾妻危疾，旦不保夕，丈夫岂以妻子之故，怠君父之急乎？
现代文：孔纬激动地说： 我的妻子身患重病，性命朝不保夕，大丈夫难道因为妻子生病的缘故，而怠慢君主的急务吗？
English: Kong Wei said excitedly: My wife is seriously ill and her life is precarious. Is it okay to neglect the urgent duties of the monarch because of his wife's illness?

古文：公辈善自为谋，吾行决矣。 
现代文：诸位明公好好想想，我奉旨前往已经定了。 
English: Ladies and gentlemen, think about it, I have already decided to go.

古文：即日见李昌符告曰： 主上再有诏命，令促百僚前进。
现代文：当天孔纬就去见李昌符，求告说： 皇上一再下诏，让我催促百官进发。
English: On the same day, Kong Wei went to see Li Changfu and appealed: "The emperor has repeatedly issued an edict, let me urge the hundred officials to set out.

古文：观群公立意，未有发期。
现代文：可是看他们诸位的心意，还没有上路的准期。
English: However, judging by the intentions of all of you, they are not yet ready for the road.

古文：仆忝宪闱，不宜居后。
现代文：我愧列御史、诠选官位，不应行动在后。
English: I'm ashamed to be a member of the imperial history and an elected official, and I shouldn't be a follower.

古文：道途多梗，明公幸假五十骑，送至陈仓。 
现代文：一路上多有梗阻，恳望明公借给我五十名骑士，将我送到陈仓。 
English: There were many obstacles along the way. I begged Ming Gong to lend me fifty knights and send me to Chen Cang.

古文：昌符嘉之，谓纬曰： 路无顿递，裹粮办耶？ 
现代文：李昌符很赞赏他，对孔纬说： 沿途没有设置专供军用的饮食馆所和驿站，你长途远行的粮食备办了吗？ 
English: Li Changfu appreciated him very much and said to Kong Wei: There are no catering facilities and stations set up along the way specifically for military use. Have you prepared food for long-distance travel?

古文：乃送钱五十缗，令骑士援纬达散关。
现代文：于是送给他钱五十缗，派骑士护送孔纬到达大散关。
English: So he gave him 50 mon, and sent a knight to escort Kong Wei to the Great Hall of the People.

古文：纬知硃玫必蓄异志，奏曰： 关城小邑，不足以驻六师，请速幸梁州。 
现代文：孔纬料定朱玫必定心怀不轨之志，向僖宗进言说： 大散关是个小城，不适宜驻扎皇帝军队，请皇上立即去梁州。 
English: Kong Yueh determined that Zhu Mei must have evil intentions, and suggested to Emperor Xizong: Dasankuan is a small city, it is not suitable to station the emperor's army, please the emperor immediately go to Liangzhou.

古文：翌日，车驾离陈仓，才入关而邠、岐之兵围宝鸡，攻散关。
现代文：次日，僖宗离开陈仓，刚刚进入梁州城关，朱玫率领的州、岐州军队就包围了宝鸡，攻打大散关。
English: The next day, when Emperor Taizong left Chencang and just entered the Liangzhou city gate, the state and Qizhou armies led by Zhu Mei surrounded Baoji and attacked the big gate.

古文：微纬之言几危矣！
现代文：不是孔纬进言就危险了。
English: It is not the width of the orifice that is dangerous.

古文：至褒中，改兵部侍郎、同中书门下平章事，寻改中书侍郎、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：抵达褒中，孔纬改任兵部侍郎、同中书门下平章事，不久又改任中书侍郎、集贤殿大学士。
English: Arriving at Baozhong Middle School, Kong Wei was reappointed as the attendant of the military department, the subordinate of the middle school, and soon he was reappointed as the attendant of the middle school and the scholar of Jixian Palace.

古文：王行瑜斩硃玫，平定京城，迁门下侍郎、监修国史。
现代文：王行瑜斩杀朱玫，平定京都后，孔纬迁任门下侍郎、监修国史。
English: After Wang Xingyu killed Zhu Mei and subdued Kyoto, Kong Yuqian was appointed as a servant and supervisor of national history.

古文：从驾还京，驻跸岐阳，进阶特进，兼吏部尚书，领诸道盐铁转运使。
现代文：他随僖宗返回京都，停驻在岐阳时，孔纬晋级为特进，兼吏部尚书，并兼任诸道盐铁转运使。
English: He returned to Kyoto with Shoson, and while stationed in Qiyang, Kong Yat-sen was promoted to the rank of special envoy, concurrently holding the post of secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and concurrently serving as the envoy for the transfer of salt and iron from various provinces.

古文：车驾还宫，进位左仆射，赐 持危启运保乂功臣 ，食邑四千户，食实封二百户，赐铁券，恕十死罪，赐天兴县庄、善和里宅各一区，兼领京畿营田使。
现代文：僖宗回到宫中，孔纬官职晋升为左仆射，被赐予 持危启运保功臣 荣衔，封给他食邑四千户，实征赋税的食邑二百户，并被赐给享有特权的铁券，免除对他施行十项死罪法令的惩处；还赏给他天兴县的庄园和都城善和里的府宅各一处，兼任京畿营田使。
English: When Emperor Taizong returned to the palace, Kong Yat-sen's official position was promoted to that of a left-hand man, and he was given the title of a meritorious subject who survived the perilous journey to the capital. He was granted 4,000 households of food villages, and 200 households of tax-collecting food villages. He was also given privileged iron coupons, exempting him from the punishment of enforcing ten death penalty decrees. He was also given a manor in Tianxing County and a mansion in the capital city of Shanhe, and concurrently served as the Gyeonggi envoy.

古文：僖宗晏驾，充山陵使。
现代文：僖宗逝世，孔纬任山陵使。
English: After the death of Emperor Taizong, Kong Yu served as the envoy to the tomb.

古文：僖宗祔庙，纬准故事，不入朝。
现代文：按照惯例，在僖宗附随祖庙祭祀期间，孔纬作为山陵使不入朝参谒新君。
English: According to the usual practice, during the worship of the ancestral temple of the Jurchen Sect, Kong Wei, as a mountain mausoleum, did not allow the new prince to enter the Asanshan.

古文：昭宗遣中使召赴延英，令纬依旧视事，进加司空。
现代文：昭宗特派宫中使臣召回孔纬赴延英殿君臣见面，让他仍然处理政事，进加司空职衔。
English: Zhaozong sent a special envoy to the palace to recall Kong Wei to meet with the princes and ministers at Yan Ying Palace, let him still deal with political affairs, and promoted him to the vacant post of secretary.

古文：以国学盗火所焚，令纬完葺，仍兼领国子祭酒。
现代文：由于国学府失火被焚毁，昭宗让孔纬将其修缮复原，并兼国子祭酒。
English: As the Kokugakufu was burnt down in a fire, Akimune asked Kongyo to repair and restore it, and it was also used as the national son's sacrificial wine.

古文：蔡贼秦宗权伏诛，进阶开府仪同三司，进位司徒，封鲁国公。
现代文：蔡州逆贼秦宗权伏法处死后，孔纬晋升官阶为开府仪同三司，晋升官位为司徒，受封为鲁国公。
English: After the death of the traitor Qin Zongquan in Caizhou, Kong Wei was promoted to the official rank of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, promoted to the official rank of Sittu, and was awarded the title of Lu Guogu.

古文：十一月，昭宗谒郊庙，两中尉、内枢密请朝服。
现代文：十一月，昭宗祭天祭祖时，宦官担任的南、北禁军护军中尉及枢密使也请求穿官服随同助祭。
English: In November, when Zhaozong held the Heavenly Ancestor Festival, the eunuchs who served as the lieutenant of the South and North Forbidden Army and the confidential envoy also requested to wear official uniforms to accompany the assistant priest.

古文：所司申前例，中贵人无朝服助祭之礼，少府监亦无素制冠服。
现代文：主管部门申说以往惯例：宦官没有穿官服助祭这样的礼仪，少府监内也没有白衣面料制作的衣帽服饰。
English: The competent department said that in the past practice: eunuchs did not wear official attire to assist the ritual, and there was no clothing and hat made of white fabric in the juvenile detention center.

古文：中尉怒，立令制造，下太常礼院。
现代文：护军中尉发怒，当即命令制造。命令下达给太常礼院。
English: The lieutenant of the escort was angry and immediately ordered to make it. The order was given to the Taijō Rite School.

古文：礼官举故事，亦称无中尉朝服助祭之文，谏官亦论之。
现代文：执掌礼仪的官员列举旧日的典章制度，也说没有宦官穿着官服辅助祭祀的礼仪规定，谏官也同样这样奏论。
English: The official in charge of the etiquette enumerated the old ceremonial system, and also said that there was no eunuch wearing an official uniform to assist the ritual. The eunuch also responded in the same way.

古文：纬奏曰： 中贵不衣朝服助祭，国典也。
现代文：孔纬进言说： 宦官不穿官服助祭，是国家的典章制度。
English: Kong Yu Jinyan said: It is a national award system that eunuchs do not wear official uniforms to assist the priest.

古文：陛下欲以权道宠内臣，则请依所兼之官而为之服。 
现代文：陛下想借变通的办法尊宠宫廷官员，就请依照所兼任的官职穿著官服。 
English: If Your Majesty would like to honor the court officials in a flexible way, please wear the official uniform according to the official position you hold.

古文：天子召谏官谓之曰： 大礼日近，无宜立异，为朕容之。 
现代文：昭宗召见谏官，对他们说： 祭祀大典时间迫近，不宜再提别的意见，替朕宽容一下。 
English: Zhaozong summoned the eunuchs and said to them: The time of the great ritual is approaching, it is not appropriate to mention any other opinions, please be tolerant for me.

古文：于是内官以朝服助祭。
现代文：于是宦官穿著官服助祭。
English: So the eunuch dressed in his official robes and became a deacon.

古文：郊礼毕，进位兼太保。
现代文：祭天大礼举行完毕，孔纬晋升官位兼太保。
English: After the grand ceremony of the festival, Kong Yat-sen was promoted to the official rank of Grand Steward.

古文：大顺元年夏，幽州、汴州请讨太原。宰臣张浚请自率禁军为招讨。
现代文：大顺元年夏，幽州、汴州的藩镇奏请讨伐太原逆臣，宰相张浚奏请自率禁军任招讨使。
English: In the summer of the first year of the Dashun era, the towns of Yuzhou and Zhangzhou requested to fight against Taiyuan's rebellious vassals, and the Prime Minister Zhang Junsu requested to lead the forbidden army as a recruiting envoy.

古文：上持疑未决，问计于纬。
现代文：昭宗犹疑不决，向孔纬询问计策。
English: Akimune hesitated and asked Kong Yat-sen for advice.

古文：纬以讨之为便，语在《浚传》。其年秋，浚军为太原所击，大败而还。
现代文：孔纬认为讨伐有利。同年秋，张浚的军队遭太原叛军攻打，大败而回。
English: In the autumn of the same year, Zhang Jun's army was attacked by the Taiyuan rebels and returned home in utter defeat.

古文：浚罢相贬官，纬坐附浚，以检校太保、江陵尹、荆南节度观察等使，未离阙下，再贬均州刺史。
现代文：张浚被罢相贬官，孔纬因附议张浚，以检校太保职位调离朝廷任江陵尹、荆南节度、观察等使；还未离开京城，又被贬为均州刺史。
English: Zhang Jun was dismissed and demoted, and Kong Wei was transferred from the imperial court to the positions of Jiangling Yin, Jingnan Jiedu, observation and other envoys with the position of school inspector due to Zhang Jun's additional proposal; he had not yet left Beijing when he was demoted to the position of Junzhou Jiedu.

古文：纬、浚密遣人求援于汴州，硃全忠上章论救。
现代文：孔纬、张浚秘密派人到汴州求援，朱全忠上奏援救。
English: Kong Wei and Zhang Jun secretly sent people to Bozhou to ask for help, and Zhu Quanzhong came to the rescue.

古文：纬至商州，有诏俾令就便，遂寓居华州。
现代文：孔纬走到商州，有诏令让他就地停留，于是他寓居华州。
English: When Kong Wei went to Shangzhou, he was ordered to stay there, so he lived in Huazhou.

古文：乾守二年五月，三镇入京师，杀宰相韦昭度、李谿。
现代文：乾宁二年五月，靖难军节度使王行瑜、镇国军节度使韩建及凤翔、陇右节度使李茂贞进入京都，杀了宰相韦昭度、李奚谷。
English: In May of the second year of Qianning, Wang Xingyu, Han Jian and Feng Xiang, and Li Maozhen entered Kyoto on the occasion of the Jingnan Army Festival, and killed the prime ministers Wei Zhaodu and Li Shugu.

古文：帝以大臣朋党，外交方镇，思用骨鲠正人，遣中使趋华州召纬入朝，以疾未任上路。
现代文：昭宗由于朝廷大臣在内结成宗派，在外勾结方镇，想任用鲠直正派人士，派遣宫廷使臣赶到华州召孔纬入朝，孔纬因病没接受委任上路赴京。
English: Due to the fact that the imperial court ministers formed a sect within and colluded with Fangzhen outside, Zhaozong wanted to appoint people who were upright and honest, and sent court envoys to rush to Huazhou to summon Kong Wei to the imperial court. Due to illness, Kong Wei did not accept the appointment and went to Beijing.

古文：六月，授太子宾客。
现代文：六月，委任他为太子宾客。
English: In June, he was appointed as a guest of the Crown Prince.

古文：其日之夕，改吏部尚书。
现代文：这天夜晚，改任他为吏部尚书。
English: On this night, he was reassigned to be the secretary of the personnel department.

古文：翌日，拜司空，兼门下侍郎、同平章事、太清宫使，修奉太庙、弘文馆大学士、延资库使。
现代文：次日，任命他为司空，兼任门下侍郎、同平章事、太清宫使、修奉太庙、弘文馆大学士、延资库使。
English: The next day, he was appointed as the Secretary of the Empress Dowager Cixi, and concurrently served as the Footman of the Empress Dowager Cixi, Tongping Clerk of the Empress Dowager Cixi's Household, Clerk of the Empress Dowager Cixi's Household, Clerk of the Empress Dowager Cixi's Household, Clerk of the Empress Dowager Cixi's Household, Clerk of the Empress Dowager Cixi's Household, Clerk of the Empress Dowager Cixi's Household, Clerk of the Empress Dowager Cixi

古文：阶爵、功臣名、食邑并如故。
现代文：官阶爵位、功臣名称以及食邑一概照旧。
English: Official ranks and titles, names of meritorious vassals, and food villages are all the same.

古文：旬日之内，驿骑敦促，相望于路，扶疾至京师。
现代文：十天时间里，传递文书的使臣前去督促启程，一路相继而来，孔纬抱病去到京都。
English: Over the course of ten days, the envoy who delivered the document went to urge him to leave, and one after another, Kong Wei became ill and went to Kyoto.

古文：延英中谢，奏曰： 臣前时待罪宰相，智术短浅，有负弼谐。
现代文：孔纬到延英殿向皇帝叩谢信用之恩时，启奏说： 臣前段时间不称职地担任宰相，智谋策略眼光短浅，有负辅佐谐和之职。
English: When Kong Wei arrived at Yan Ying's palace to thank the emperor for his trust, the opening speech said: The minister was incompetent to serve as prime minister some time ago, his wisdom and strategy were short-sighted, and he had the duty of supporting and harmonizing.

古文：陛下特贷刑书，曲全腰领。
现代文：陛下破格免施刑法，使我得以保全性命。
English: Your Excellency has granted me amnesty and allowed me to save my life.

古文：臣期于死报泉壤，不望生叩玉阶。
现代文：微臣仅只期待死后九泉之下报恩，毫不指望有生之年叩首金殿。
English: We courtiers only expect to be rewarded after death, and have no hope of bowing to the emperor during their lifetime.

古文：复拜龙颜，实臣荣幸。
现代文：得以再次叩拜皇上，实在是臣下的荣幸。
English: It is truly an honor for the subjects to be able to bow to the emperor once again.

古文：然臣比婴衰疾，伏枕累年，形骸虽存，生意都尽。
现代文：但是微臣近来患病体衰，卧病在床多年，躯体虽然尚存，生机全都耗尽。
English: However, Weizong recently fell ill and was bedridden for many years. Although his body still existed, his vitality was all exhausted.

古文：平居勉强，御事犹疏。
现代文：平日勉强行动，办事仍然疏略。
English: On weekdays, we barely move, and things are still sloppy.

古文：况比尪羸，宁胜重委？
现代文：况且近来虚弱，哪能胜任要职？
English: Besides, he's been so weak lately, how can he take on important positions?

古文：国祚方泰，英彦盈庭，岂以朽腐之人，再尘机务！
现代文：国运正当康泰，英才贤士满庭，哪能以衰朽之人，久居于机务要职。
English: The national movement is just and prosperous, and the court is full of talented sages. How can a decadent person stay in an important position for a long time?

古文：臣力疾一拜殿庭，乞陛下许臣自便。 
现代文：臣下勉力支撑病体专一前来宫廷拜谢，敬求陛下准许微臣能按自己意愿行动。 
English: The vassal tried his best to support the sick body and came to the palace to offer his thanks and respectfully ask His Majesty to allow the vassal to act according to his own wishes.

古文：因鸣咽流涕。
现代文：说罢悲泣落泪。
English: Saying this, she broke down in tears.

古文：纬久疾，拜蹈艰难，上令中使止之，改容轸念。
现代文：孔纬长期生病，叩拜蹈舞艰难，昭宗让宦官上前劝止，仪容顿改深切感念。
English: Kong Wei had been ill for a long time, it was difficult to perform the kowtow dance, and Akimune asked the eunuch to come forward to dissuade him. He was deeply moved by the sudden change of appearance.

古文：令阁门使送纬中书视事。
现代文：于是叫腁门使扶送孔纬到中书省处理政事。
English: Therefore, he asked the gatekeeper to send Confucius to the Ministry of Literature to deal with political affairs.

古文：不旬日，沙陁次河中，同州王行约入京师谋乱，天子出幸石门。
现代文：不到十天，沙陀军进驻河中府，同州节度使王行约进入京城图谋作乱，昭宗出走至石门。
English: Less than ten days later, Shado's army was stationed in Hechu Prefecture, and the festival in the same province caused Wang Xingyo to enter the capital city in an attempt to create a disturbance, and Shozong fled to Shimen.

古文：纬从驾至莎城，疾渐危笃，先还京城。
现代文：孔纬随从皇帝行至莎城，疾病渐渐危重，先行返回京城。
English: Kong Wei accompanied the emperor to Shajing, but his illness gradually worsened and he returned to Beijing first.

古文：九月，卒于光德里第，赠太尉。
现代文：九月，孔纬在光德里的府宅去世，被追赠为太尉。
English: In September, Kong Wei passed away at his residence in Guangdeli and was posthumously promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：纬家尚节义，挺然不屈。
现代文：孔纬家风崇尚节操义行，为人刚直不屈。
English: Kong Wei's family style advocated the practice of righteousness, and he was an unyielding person.

古文：虽权势燻灼，未尝假以恩礼。
现代文：即使权豪势要威焰迫人，他也从不给以特殊礼遇。
English: He never gave special treatment, even when the powerful were trying to bully others.

古文：大顺初，天武都头李顺节恃恩颇横，不期年领浙西节度使，俄加平章事。
现代文：大顺初年，天武都头李顺节倚仗皇帝恩宠颇为强横，不到一年就被授职浙西节度使，不久又加官为平章事。
English: In the first year of Dashun, Li Shun, the head of the Tianwu Capital, relied on the emperor's grace and was quite domineering. Less than a year later, he was awarded the post of Zhejiang West Festival Envoy, and soon he was promoted to the post of Pingzhang.

古文：谢日，台吏申中书，称天武相公衙谢，准例班见百僚。
现代文：入朝谢恩时，御史台的官吏到中书省，说天武相公来官署致谢，按规矩应依官位次序会见百官。
English: When entering the imperial thanks, the officials of the Imperial History Station went to the Ministry of Chinese Literature and Literature, saying that the Tianwuxianggong Office had come to thank them, and according to the rules, they should meet with 100 officials according to the official rank order.

古文：纬判曰： 不用立班。 
现代文：孔纬决定说： 不用列班相见。 
English: Kong Yat-sen decided to say, "You don't have to wait in line.

古文：顺节粗暴小人，不闲朝法，盛饰趋中书，既见无班，心甚怏怏。
现代文：李顺节是个粗暴小人，不熟悉朝廷礼法，华服盛装快步来到中书省，见到没有列班相迎的队伍，心里很不满意。
English: Li Shunjie is a coarse villain, not familiar with the etiquette of the imperial court. Dressed in fine clothes, he hurried to the Central Literature Department. When he saw that there was no procession to meet him, he was very dissatisfied.

古文：他日因会，顺节微言之。纬曰： 必知公慊也。
现代文：后来有一天与孔纬相遇，李顺节隐约提到这件事，孔纬说： 我知道您心里肯定不痛快。
English: Later, one day, he met with Kong Wei. Li Shunjie vaguely mentioned the incident. Kong Wei said: I know that you are not happy.

古文：夫百辟卿士，天子庭臣也，比来班见宰相，以辅臣居班列之首，奉长之义也。
现代文：公卿大夫，是天子的朝廷大臣，近来只列班会见宰相，因为辅佐大臣居官位之首，是尊奉长官的意思。
English: Kugyo-dokufu, a minister of the Imperial Court, is the son of heaven. Recently, he has only met with the prime minister in a row, because the assistant minister is at the top of the official rank, which means honoring the superior officer.

古文：公握天武健兒，而于政事受百僚班见，意自安乎？
现代文：您掌握天武的士卒，却在政事厅接受百官按官位次序列队的相见，您心中能自安吗？
English: You have mastered the martial arts, but in the government affairs office, you have to meet hundreds of officials according to their ranks. Can you be at peace in your heart?

古文：必若须此仪，俟去 都头 二字可也。 
现代文：如果一定要举行百官列班会见您的礼仪，等到您去掉 都头 二字就可以了。 
English: If you must have the etiquette of a hundred officials lined up to meet you, wait until you remove the first two words.

古文：顺节不敢复言。
现代文：李顺节不敢再提此事。
English: Li Shunjie did not dare to mention the matter again.

古文：其秉礼不回，多此类也。
现代文：他坚持礼法而不屈从的事，大多与上述一事相类似。
English: Much of his insistence on propriety, rather than submission, is similar to the above.

