古文：宋子贞，字周臣，潞州长子人也。性敏悟好学，工词赋。弱冠，领荐书试礼部，与族兄知柔同补太学生，俱有名于时，人以大小宋称之。
现代文：宋子贞，字周臣，潞州长子人，聪明好学，二十岁就参加礼部会试，与族兄宋知柔同补为太学生，当时俱有名，人称 大小宋 。
English: Song Zizhen, also known as Zhou Zhen, was the eldest child of Emperor Zhou. She was bright and eager to learn. At the age of twenty, she took part in the ceremonial club exam. She was the same age as her elder brother Song Zhirong, and they were both students at the same time. They were both famous at the time, and were known as Big Song and Little Song.

古文：金末，潞州乱，子贞走赵、魏间。
现代文：金末，潞州战乱，子贞避乱于赵魏之间。
English: At the end of the Jin Dynasty, there was a war in Zhangzhou, and Zizhen took refuge in Zhao Wei.

古文：宋将彭义斌守大名，辟为安抚司计议官。
现代文：宋将彭义斌守大名，委任子贞为安抚司计议官。
English: Song put Peng Yibin in charge of the daimyo, and appointed Zizhen as the pacifier.

古文：义斌殁，子贞率众归东平行台严实。
现代文：义斌死后，子贞率众归附于东平行台严实。
English: After the death of Yibin, Zizhen led the masses to adhere to the East Parallel Table Yan solid.

古文：实素闻其名，招置幕府，用为详议官，兼提举学校。
现代文：严实素闻子贞之名，任用他为幕府详议官，兼提举学校。
English: In the name of Yan Shizhi Su Wen Zizhen, he was appointed as a detailed discussion officer of the bakufu, and also promoted the school.

古文：先是，实每令人请事于朝，托近侍奏决，不经中书，因与丞相耶律楚材有违言。子贞至，劝实致礼丞相，通殷勤，凡奏请，必先咨禀。
现代文：以前，严实每派人向朝廷请示，都是托皇帝近侍之臣奏请皇帝，不经过中书，因与丞相耶律楚材有些不和，子贞来后，劝严实先致礼于丞相，凡有奏请，必先禀告丞相。
English: In the past, every time Yan Si sent someone to petition the imperial court, he asked the emperor's close attendants to petition the emperor. Because there was some discord between Yan Si and the prime minister, Zizhen, Yan Si was advised to bow to the prime minister first, and if there was a petition, he must first inform the prime minister.

古文：丞相喜，自是交欢无间，实因此益委信子贞。
现代文：耶律楚材甚喜，从此与严实友好无间，严实因此更加信任子贞。
English: Yerut Chozai was overjoyed. From then on, he became very friendly with Yan Shih, and Yan Shih therefore trusted Zizhen even more.

古文：太宗四年，实戍黄陵，金人悉力来攻。
现代文：太宗四年，严实戍守黄陵，金军全力来攻。
English: In the fourth year of Taizong's reign, Huangling was firmly defended, and the Jin army attacked with all its might.

古文：与战不利，敌势颇张，曹、濮以南皆震。
现代文：蒙古军应战失利，金军势气大张，曹、濮以南都为之震惊。
English: The Mongolian army was defeated in the battle, the Chinese army was in full swing, and Cao and Xuan Nan were shocked.

古文：子贞多方赈救，全活者万余人。
现代文：有自敌逃归的人说，金兵大军将至，人心恐惧。
English: Some people who fled from the enemy said that the gold army was approaching, and people were afraid.

古文：金士之流寓者，悉引见周给，且荐用之。
现代文：子贞得到严实的允许，将宣扬金军的人斩首，境内才安定下来。汴梁攻下后，河南饥民北迁，沿路都是饿死的人，子贞多方赈救，活者万余人。
English: Zizhen received strict permission to behead those who propagated the Golden Army, and only then did the territory settle down. After the fall of Qiliang, the starving people of Henan migrated north. Along the road were people who were starving to death. Zizhen made many efforts to rescue them, and there were more than ten thousand survivors.

古文：拔名儒张特立、刘肃、李昶辈于羁旅，与之同列。四方之士闻风而至，故东平一时人材多于他镇。
现代文：金之儒生流亡者，都加以收养任用，如荐举名儒张特立、刘肃、李昶等。四方之士都投奔而来，故东平一时人才多于其他地方。
English: The Confucian exiles of Jin were all adopted and appointed, such as the recommended names of Confucius, Zhang, Teli, Liu, Su, Li, etc. People from all over the country came to the capital, so Dongping had more talent than other places at one time.

古文：七年，太宗命子贞为行台右司郎中。
现代文：七年，太宗命子贞为行台右司郎中。
English: In the seventh year, Taizong no Mikoto no Sadamori became a junior vassal of Gyotai no Utsushiro.

古文：中原略定，事多草创，行台所统五十余城，州县之官或擢自将校，或起由民伍，率昧于从政。
现代文：中原初定，什么事都还是开始，行台所统辖的五十余城，州县之官不是从将校中选拔，就是来自民间，都不知如何办理政事。
English: According to Zhongyuan's preliminary decision, everything will still start from scratch. The officials of the more than 50 cities, counties and prefectures under the jurisdiction of Xingtai are either selected from the officers or from the people, and they do not know how to handle political affairs.

古文：甚者专以掊克聚敛为能，官吏相与为贪私以病民。
现代文：甚至有的专以压榨搜括民财为能，官吏贪图私利，坑害人民。
English: There are even some officials who are exclusively capable of squeezing and collecting people's money. These officials are greedy for personal gain and harm the people.

古文：子贞仿前代观察采访之制，命官分三道纠察官吏，立为程式，与为期会，黜贪，奖廉勤，官府始有纪纲，民得苏息。
现代文：子贞仿前代观察采访之制，派专员分三道纠察官吏，立为规章，罢黜那些贪赃懒惰者，奖励廉洁勤恳的官员，于是官府始有纪纲，人民得以休养生息。
English: Zizhen imitated the previous generation's observation and interview system, sent commissioners to picket officials in three ways, established regulations, dismissed those who were greedy and lazy, and rewarded officials who were honest and diligent. As a result, the government office began to have a disciplinary system, and the people were able to rest and recuperate.

古文：东平将校，占民为部曲户，谓之脚寨，擅其赋役，几四百所。
现代文：东平将校占民为自己私兵，称之为 脚寨 ，任意向百姓征收赋税，遣派劳役。
English: The Dongping officers occupied the people as their own private soldiers, calling them "foot camps," arbitrarily collecting taxes from the people and sending them to forced labor.

古文：子贞请罢归州县。
现代文：像这样的有四百处。子贞请求将将校所占民户归属于州县。
English: There are 400 places like this. Zizhen requests that all the private households occupied by the military school be assigned to prefectures and counties.

古文：实初难之，子贞力言乃听，人以为便。
现代文：严实开始还有些为难，经子贞极力说服才同意照办，人民都认为很好。
English: Yan solidly began to have some difficulties, and only after strong persuasion did Jing Zizhen agree to comply, and the people all thought it was good.

古文：实卒，子忠济袭爵，尤敬子贞。
现代文：严实卒，其子忠济承袭爵位，尤敬重子贞。
English: He was a strict disciplinarian, and his son, Tadatsugu, inherited the title, and was especially revered by his elder son, Tadamasa.

古文：请于朝，授参议东平路事，兼提举太常礼乐。
现代文：奏请朝廷授子贞参议东平路事，兼提举太常礼乐。
English: He petitioned the imperial court to confer the title of Zizhen on the Dongping Road, and also proposed the Taizhong Rite.

古文：子贞作新庙学，延前进士康晔、王磐为教官，招致生徒几百人，出粟赡之，俾习经艺。
现代文：子贞建立新学庙，聘请以前的进士康晔、王磐为教官，招收学生几百人，由官府出粟来赡养他们，使他们学习经艺。
English: Zizhen established a new temple of learning, hired the former scholars Kang Jun and Wang Pan as instructors, enrolled hundreds of students, and the government paid to support them so that they could study the classics.

古文：每季程试，必亲临之。
现代文：每季课程考试，他都必亲临试场。
English: He has to appear in person at the test site for the quarterly course examinations.

古文：齐鲁儒风，为之一变。
现代文：齐鲁一带学风为之一变。
English: The learning style in the Qilu area has changed completely.

古文：岁己未，世祖南伐，召子贞至濮，问以方略。
现代文：宪宗九年，世祖南伐，召子贞至濮州询问进军方略。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the founder of the Southern Expedition, summoned Zizhen to Bozhou to inquire about the military strategy.

古文：对曰： 本朝威武有余，仁德未洽。
现代文：子贞说 ：本朝威武有余，仁德未能广泛施与。
English: Zizhen said, "This dynasty has more than enough military might, but it has not been able to widely practice benevolence.

古文：所以拒命者，特畏死尔，若投降者不杀，胁从者勿治，则宋之郡邑，可传檄而定也。 
现代文：百姓之所以抵抗，是因为怕死。若对投降者不杀，胁从者不问罪，宋之郡邑一纸檄文就可平定。 
English: The reason why the people resist is because they are afraid of death. If those who surrender are not killed and those who intimidate others are not held accountable, Song County could be pacified with a piece of paper.

古文：世祖善其言。
现代文：世祖认为这话很对。
English: The patriarch thought this was very true.

古文：中统元年，授益都路宣抚使。
现代文：中统元年，授子贞益都路宣抚使。
English: In the first year of the unification of China, Zhengyi Zhengyi was awarded the title of Xuanfu envoy.

古文：未几，入觐，拜右三部尚书。
现代文：不久，入朝拜为右三部尚书。
English: Soon after, the right three parts of the Shoshu were used for entering the Imperial Court.

古文：时新立省部，典章制度，多子贞裁定。
现代文：当时，中书省及各部是新建，其典章制度多由子贞裁定。
English: At that time, the Chinese Book Ministry and its various departments were newly established, and the award system was mostly decided by Zizhen.

古文：李璮叛，据济南，诏子贞参议军前行中书省事。
现代文：李王反叛，占据济南，朝廷诏子贞参议军前行中书省事。
English: King Li rebelled, occupied Jinan, and the imperial court's Prince Zizhen went to the front to advise the army.

古文：子贞单骑至济南，观璮形势，因说丞相史天泽曰： 璮拥众东来，坐守孤城，宜增筑外城，防其奔突，彼粮尽援绝，不攻自破矣。 
现代文：子贞单骑到济南考察李王的形势，对丞相史天泽说： 王拥兵从益都而来，坐守济南孤城。宜增筑外城，防他突围。彼粮尽援绝，不攻自破。 
English: Zizhen rode alone to Jinan to investigate the situation of King Li, and said to the prime minister Shi Tianze: The king has soldiers coming from Yidu to guard the isolated city of Jinan. It is advisable to build more outposts to prevent him from breaking out. He has all the support he needs and will not attack himself.

古文：议与天泽合，遂擒璮。
现代文：这一议论与天泽不谋而合。
English: This argument coincides with that of Tenzawa.

古文：子贞还，上书陈便宜十事，大略谓： 官爵人主之柄，选法宜尽归吏部。
现代文：其后李王果然被擒。子贞回到朝廷，上书可行者十事，大意是 任官爵是皇上之权，而考察与选拔官员的办法应由吏部进行。
English: After that, King Li was indeed executed. Zizhen returned to the imperial court and sent a letter to the emperor, listing ten possible things, to the effect that it was the emperor's prerogative to appoint officials and nobility, while the investigation and selection of officials should be carried out by the cadre department.

古文：律令国之纪纲，宜早刊定。
现代文：律令是国之纪纲，宜早规定。
English: The ritsuryo code is the country's code of conduct, and it is advisable to stipulate it early.

古文：监司总统一路，用非其材，不厌人望，乞选公廉有才德者为之。
现代文：监司统管一路，若用非其才则不孚众望，请选公正廉洁有才德的人任职。
English: Supervisors are in charge all the way, if they do not use their talents, they will not be able to meet the expectations of the public. Please elect a fair, honest and talented person to serve.

古文：今州县官相传以世，非法赋敛，民穷无告，宜迁转以革其弊。 
现代文：今州县官世代相传，非法征敛，民穷苦无处申诉，应把这些州县官调开，革除弊政 等等。
English: The present prefectural and county officials have been handed down from generation to generation. They illegally collect taxes, and the poor people have nowhere to appeal. These prefectural and county officials should be removed, and the bad government should be eliminated.

古文：又请建国学教胄子，敕州郡提学课试诸生，三年一贡举。
现代文：又请建立国学以教育贵族子弟，令州郡提学考试诸生，三年一贡举。
English: He also requested the establishment of a national school to educate the children of aristocrats, and to make the county raise the school examination for all students, with a three-year tribute.

古文：有旨命中书次第施行之。
现代文：这些建议朝廷命中书省一一施行。
English: The Imperial Court ordered the Ministry of Education to implement these recommendations one by one.

古文：至元二年，始罢州县官世袭。遣子贞与左丞相耶律铸行山东，迁调所部官。
现代文：至元二年，始废除县官世袭制，遣子贞与左丞相耶律铸行巡山东，调派所属州县官吏。
English: In the 2nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, the hereditary system of county officials was abolished, and Zizhen and the Minister of the Left, Yerut, were sent to patrol Shandong, and the officials of the state and county were transferred.

古文：还，授翰林学士，参议中书省事。
现代文：回朝授翰林学士，参议中书省事。
English: He was awarded the Hanlin Baccalaureate upon his return to the imperial court.

古文：奏请班俸禄，定职田，从之。
现代文：子贞奏请颁布官员俸禄，规定职田，均被采纳。
English: Zozenso's request to promulgate an official salary and stipulate job fields were both adopted.

古文：俄拜中书平章政事。
现代文：不久拜中书平章政事。
English: Bai Zhongshu and Pingzhang soon took over the government.

古文：复陈时务之切要者十二策。
现代文：又陈奏当务之急者十二策。
English: He also enunciated the 12 urgent measures.

古文：帝颇悔用子贞晚。
现代文：世祖颇悔用子贞晚了。
English: The founder regretted that he was too late to use his son Zhen.

古文：未几，以年老求退，帝曰： 卿气力未衰，勉为朕留，措置大事，俟百司差有条理，听卿自便。 
现代文：不久，子贞年老请求退休。世祖挽留 ：卿气力未衰，勉强为朕留任措置大事，等各衙门公务有了条理，听卿自便。 
English: Soon after, Zizheng asked to retire because of his old age. The ancestor begged him to stay: "Sir, your strength has not waned, you reluctantly agreed to stay on for me to deal with important matters. Once the official business of each court has been organized, you can do as you please."

古文：三年十一月，恳辞，乃得请。
现代文：至元三年十一月，再次恳切辞职，才被批准。
English: It was not until November of the third year of the Yuan Dynasty that his resignation was approved.

古文：特敕中书，凡有大事，即其家访问。
现代文：世祖特令中书省，凡有大事，到子贞家中询问。
English: The founder specifically ordered the Ministry of Education to inquire at Zizhen's home in the event of any major events.

古文：子渤，字齐彦，有才名，官至集贤学士。
现代文：而子贞虽居家中，每闻朝廷事办得不好，必上书陈述他的意见，其爱君忧国之心，不因退休而改变。
English: However, although Zizhen lives at home, whenever he hears that the affairs of the imperial court are not well managed, he must submit a letter to state his opinion, and his love for the emperor and concern for the country will not change due to retirement.

古文：商挺
现代文：享年八十一岁卒。
English: He died at the age of 81.

古文：商挺，字孟卿，曹州济阴人。
现代文：商挺，字孟卿，曹州济阴人。
English: Shang Ting, surnamed Meng Ching, from Caozhou, Jilin Province.

古文：其先本姓殷氏，避宋讳改焉。
现代文：其先家本姓殷，因避讳宋皇帝之名而改姓商。
English: His family's original surname was Yin, but he changed his surname to Shang to avoid the name of the Song Emperor.

古文：父衡，佥陕西行省员外郎，以战死。挺年二十四，汴京破，北走，依冠氏赵天锡，与元好问、杨奂游。
现代文：挺二十四岁时，汴京被蒙古军队攻破，因此到北方去依靠冠氏县赵天锡，在此与元好问、杨奂等交游。
English: At the age of just twenty-four, Heping was invaded by the Mongolian army, so he went to the north to rely on Zhao Tianxi of Guanxi County, where he met with Yuan Haowen and Yang Xuan.

古文：东平严实聘为诸子师。
现代文：东平严实聘请他为诸子的老师。
English: Tohei Yansei hired him as his son's teacher.

古文：实卒，子忠济嗣，辟挺为经历，出为曹州判官。未几，复为经历，赞忠济兴学养士。
现代文：严实死后，其子严忠济委任商挺为经历，出任曹州判官，不久又任经历，赞助忠济兴办学校培养人才。
English: After Yan Shih's death, his son Yan Zhongji appointed Shang Ting as judge of Caozhou, and soon after, sponsored Zhongji to establish a school to train talents.

古文：癸丑，世祖在潜邸，受京兆分地，闻挺名，遣使征至盐州。入对称旨，字而不名。
现代文：宪宗三年，世祖在王府接受京兆分地，闻挺之名，遣使把他从盐州请来，他对世祖的询问都做了满意的回答，世祖亲切地称他的字而不呼其名。
English: In the third year of the reign of King Gensong, King Sejo received a parcel of land in the capital of Gyeongsangbuk-do, and heard the name of Ting, and sent an envoy to invite him from Yanshou. He answered all of King Sejo's questions satisfactorily. King Sejo affectionately called him by his first name, but did not call him by his surname.

古文：间陪宴语，因曰： 挺来时，李璮城朐山，东平当馈米万石。
现代文：有次在陪宴时，商挺对世祖说： 挺来时，李王建朐山城，东平当输送米万石。
English: Once at a banquet, the merchant Ting said to the ancestor: When Ting came, Li Wang built Lushan City, and Dongping was transporting rice.

古文：东平至朐山，率十石致一石，且车淖于雨，必后期，后期罪死。
现代文：东平至朐山，运一石米要花十石的运费，而且雨后车辆往往陷于泥淖中，不能按期送到，过期判处死刑。
English: From Dongping to Lushan, it costs ten stone to transport one stone of rice, and the vehicle is often stuck in mud after rain, so it cannot be delivered on time, and it is sentenced to death if it is overdue.

古文：请输沂州，使璮军取食，便。 
现代文：请改运至沂州，令李王到沂州去取，这样方便。 
English: Please change the transportation to Ganzhou, and let Li Wang go to Ganzhou to pick it up. This is convenient.

古文：世祖曰： 爱民如此，忍不卿从。 
现代文：世祖说： 卿如此之爱民，不忍不依从。 
English: The patriarch said, "Since you love the people so much, you can't help but obey.

古文：杨惟中宣抚关中，挺为郎中。
现代文：杨惟中为关中宣抚使，挺为郎中。
English: Yang Weizhong was Guanzhong's envoy, and he was quite a henchman.

古文：兵火之余，八州十二县，户不满万，皆惊忧无聊。
现代文：战乱之后，关中八州十二县户不满万，皆惊惶不安，无所依托。
English: After the war, there were less than 10,000 households in twelve counties in eight prefectures in Guanzhong. Everyone was panicked and anxious, with nowhere to turn.

古文：挺佐惟中，进贤良，黜贪暴，明尊卑，出淹滞，定规程，主簿责，印楮币，颁俸禄，务农薄税，通其有无。期月，民乃安。
现代文：商挺辅助杨维中，任用贤良，罢黜贪官，使有才能德行的人受到重用和提拔，制定各项章程，印发纸币，颁布俸禄，重农业，薄赋税，通有无，等等，一月之内，人民安居乐业。
English: Merchants supported Yang Weizhong, appointed virtuous people, ousted corrupt officials, made talented and virtuous people be reused and promoted, formulated various regulations, issued banknotes, promulgated salaries, emphasized agriculture, reduced taxes, and so on. Within one month, the people lived and worked in peace.

古文：诛一大猾，群吏咸惧。
现代文：诛杀了一个最奸猾的官吏，其余都畏服。
English: He killed one of the most treacherous officials, and the rest were awestruck.

古文：丁巳，宪宗命阿蓝答儿会计河南、陕右。戊午，罢宣抚司，挺还东平。
现代文：还请求朝廷将关中每年的赋税减征一半。第二年，杨惟中罢职，由廉希宪代替，升挺为宣抚副使。宪宗九年，废除宣抚司，商挺回到东平。
English: He also requested the imperial court to reduce the annual tax levied on Guanzhong by half. The following year, Yang Weizhong resigned from his post and was replaced by Lian Xixian, who was promoted to vice-minister of propaganda. In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the propaganda department was abolished, and Shang Ting returned to Dongping.

古文：宪宗亲征蜀，世祖将趋鄂、汉，军于小濮，召问军事。
现代文：宪宗亲自征蜀。世祖将领兵出鄂、汉，驻军于小濮，召商挺询问军事形势。
English: The founder of the dynasty led troops out of E and Han, stationed troops in Xiaotang, and summoned merchants to inquire about the military situation.

古文：挺对曰： 蜀道险远，万乘岂宜轻动。 
现代文：挺说： 蜀道既远又险，皇上不宜轻动。 
English: Ting said: Shu Road is both far and dangerous, the emperor should not move lightly.

古文：世祖默然久之，曰： 卿言正契吾心。 
现代文：世祖沉吟了许久说 ：卿言正符合我的想法。 
English: The ancestor pondered for a long time and said, "Your words are in line with my thoughts."

古文：宪宗崩，世祖北还，道遣张文谦与挺计事。
现代文：宪宗崩，世祖北回京都，途中遣张文谦去与商挺议论如何应付时局变化的对策。
English: After the death of Emperor Xianzong, Emperor Xizong returned north to Kyoto. On the way, he sent Zhang Wenqian to discuss with Shangdian how to cope with the changing situation.

古文：挺曰： 军中当严符信，以防奸诈。 
现代文：挺说： 军中当严格管理符印，谨防奸诈。 
English: Ting said: the army should strictly manage the seal, beware of treachery.

古文：文谦急追及言之。
现代文：文谦急忙赶上世祖转告商挺的话。
English: Wen Qian hurried to catch up with the ancestor to convey the words of Shang Ting.

古文：世祖大悟，骂曰： 无一人为我言此，非商孟卿几败大计！ 
现代文：世祖猛然醒悟，骂道： 过去无一人同我这样说过，若非商孟卿，几乎要坏大事。 
English: The patriarch suddenly woke up and scolded, "No one has ever said this to me in the past. If it wasn't for the merchant Meng Qing, it would almost be a bad thing."

古文：速遣使至军立约。
现代文：速遣使至军中立定规约。
English: Quickly dispatched to the army to establish the statute.

古文：未几，阿里不哥之使至军中，执而斩之。
现代文：不久，阿里不哥之使来到军中，被逮捕斩首。
English: Soon after, Ali's envoy came to the army and was arrested and beheaded.

古文：召挺北上至开平，挺与廉希宪密赞大计。
现代文：召挺北上至开平，与廉希宪共同辅助世祖制定立国大计。
English: He was summoned to go north to Kaiping, and together with Ren Xixian, assisted the founder in formulating the grand plan for the founding of the country.

古文：世祖既即位，挺奏曰： 南师宜还扈乘舆，西师宜军便地。 
现代文：世祖即位后，商挺建议： 南伐之师应撤回，西蜀之师应择地屯驻。 
English: After the Emperor ascended to the throne, Shang Ting suggested that the Southern Expedition should withdraw, and the Western Expedition should choose a place to stay.

古文：从之。
现代文：世祖同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：以廉希宪及挺宣抚陕、蜀。
现代文：朝廷任廉希宪及商挺为陕、蜀两地宣抚使。
English: The imperial court appointed Lian Xixian and Shang Ting as the envoys of the two provinces of Shaanxi and Shu.

古文：中统元年夏五月，至京兆。
现代文：中统元年五月，挺至京兆。
English: In May of the first year of the unified China, it was moved to Beijing.

古文：哈剌不花者，征蜀时名将也，浑都海尝为之副，时驻六盘山，以兵应阿里不哥。
现代文：哈剌不花为征蜀名将，浑都海曾任他为副将，屯驻于六盘山，起兵响应阿里不哥反抗朝廷。
English: Huan Duhai was the vice-commander and stationed in Liupanshan. He raised an army in response to Ali Bengo's rebellion against the imperial court.

古文：挺谓希宪曰： 为六盘，有三策。悉锐而东，直捣京兆，上策也；聚兵六盘，观衅而动，中策也；重装北归，以应和林，下策也。 
现代文：挺对希宪说 ：估计六盘山哈剌不花有三种策略：全力向东，直取京兆，此为上策；聚兵于六盘山，伺机而动，这是中策；整装北归，策应和林阿里不哥，此为下策。 
English: Ting said to Xie Xian: It is estimated that there are three strategies for the defense of Liupanshan Mountain: the best strategy is to go all out to the east and directly attack Beijing and Shandong; the middle strategy is to gather troops in Liupanshan and wait for the opportunity to move; the next strategy is to return to the north in full gear and deal with Lin Alizhe.

古文：希宪曰： 彼将何从？ 挺曰： 必出下策。 
现代文：希宪问： 他们会采哪种策略？ 挺曰： 必取下策。 
English: Hixian asked: What kind of strategy will they adopt? Ting said: They must take the next step.

古文：已而果然。
现代文：不久，哈剌不花果然向和林而去。
English: Afterward, it really was like that.

古文：于是与希宪定议，令八春、汪良臣发兵御之，事具《希宪传》。
现代文：于是挺与希宪商定，令八春、汪良臣发兵抵御。其事见《廉希宪传》。
English: As a result, Ting agreed with He Xian and ordered Hachun and Wang Liangchen to send troops to resist. See "Lian He Xian's Biography."

古文：六盘之兵既北，而阿蓝答儿自和林引兵南来，与哈剌不花、浑都海遇于甘州。
现代文：六盘山之兵北上。阿蓝答儿自和林引兵南下，与哈剌不花、浑都海相遇于甘州。
English: The soldiers of Liupanshan went north. Alangdara led the soldiers from He Lin to the south, and met with Harbin, Hunduhai in Ganzhou.

古文：哈剌不花以语不合，引其兵北去，阿蓝答儿遂与浑都海合军而南。
现代文：哈剌不花与阿蓝答儿等不合，领兵继续北上，阿蓝答儿与浑都海合军南下。
English: Harun didn't spend much time with Alangdara, and they didn't get along. The leader continued to go north, while Alangdara went south with the Hundu army.

古文：时诸王合丹率骑兵与八春、汪良臣兵合，乃分为三道以拒之。
现代文：诸王合丹率骑兵与八春、汪良臣兵会合。商挺与他们议定，分三路抵抗南下军队。
English: Zhuwang Hadan led the cavalry to meet with Hachun and Wang Liang's soldiers. The merchants agreed with them to resist the southbound army in three ways.

古文：既阵，大风吹沙，良臣令军士下马，以短兵突其左，绕出阵后，溃其右而出，八春直捣其前，合丹勒精骑邀其归路，大战于甘州东，杀阿蓝答儿、浑都海。
现代文：南北两军交战，风沙大起，良臣令军士下马步战，以短兵冲击北军左翼，绕到后方，然后从右翼杀出；八春从正面进攻；合丹则以精兵截断北军的归路。双方大战于甘州之东，杀阿蓝答儿及浑都海。
English: The two armies of the north and the south engaged in battle, and the sandstorm arose. The good minister ordered the sergeant to dismount and fight on foot. He attacked the left wing of the Northern Army with short soldiers, went around to the rear, and then fought out from the right wing; Hachun attacked from the front; Hodan cut off the return route of the Northern Army with elite soldiers. The two sides fought in the east of Gansu, killing Alantair and Hundu Hai.

古文：事闻，帝大悦，曰： 商孟卿，古之良将也。 
现代文：世祖闻捷大喜，赞叹说： 商孟卿真古之良将也。 
English: The patriarch was overjoyed to hear of the victory and said with admiration: Shang Mengqing is truly a great general.

古文：改宣抚司为行中书省，进希宪为右丞，挺为佥行省事。
现代文：改宣抚司为行中书省，晋升希宪为行中书省右丞，挺为佥行省事。
English: The Department of Propaganda and Guidance was changed to the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy, and He Xian was promoted to the right-hand man of the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy. He was very active in the affairs of the Ministry.

古文：二年，进参知政事。
现代文：中统二年，挺晋升参知政事。
English: In the second year of unification, Tange was promoted to the post of councillor.

古文：宋将刘整以沪州降，系前降宋者数百人来归，军吏请诛以戒，挺尽奏而释之。
现代文：宋将刘整在泸州投降，并将以前降于宋的数人逮捕送来，蒙古军官要求杀掉这些人以儆戒其他，挺竭力奏请释放了这些人。
English: Song ordered Liu Zhengyi to surrender in Zhangzhou, and sent several people who had previously surrendered to Song to be arrested. The Mongolian officers demanded that these people be killed and others be reprimanded, but they did their best to please release these people.

古文：兴元判官费寅有罪惧诛，以借兵完城事讼挺与希宪于朝。帝召挺便殿，问曰： 卿在关中、怀孟，两著治效，而毁言日至，岂同寅有沮卿者耶？抑位高而志怠耶？
现代文：兴元判官费寅有罪，恐判死刑，借故向朝廷控告商挺与廉希宪，世祖召挺于便殿向道 ：卿在关中，怀孟两地治绩卓著，但攻击你的言论也有，难道说是同僚中有人要败坏你的名声，还是你地位高了而懒于政事？
English: Judge Fei Yin of Xingyuan was guilty and feared to be sentenced to death, so he used a pretext to complain to the imperial court against Shang Ting and Lian Xixian, and Shizhu Zhao Ting rather than Ben Dian Xingdao: Your Excellency is in the middle of the road, and you have made outstanding achievements in the two provinces of Huai and Meng, but there are also remarks attacking you. Is it possible that some of your colleagues want to tarnish your reputation, or are you too high-ranking and too lazy to do politics?

古文：比年论王文统者甚众，卿独无一言。 
现代文：近年来，谈论王文统的人不少，为何卿独无一言？ 
English: In recent years, quite a few people have been talking about Wang Wenzhong. Why is there not a single word about him?

古文：挺对曰： 臣素知文统之为人，尝与赵璧论之，想陛下犹能记也。
现代文：挺对曰： 臣素知文统之为人，曾与赵璧议论过，想陛下还能记得。
English: It is quite true to say: As a human being, Minister Su Zhiming once had a discussion with Zhao Bi, and I think His Majesty still remembers it.

古文：臣在秦三年，多过，其或从权以应变者有之。若功成以归己，事败分咎于人，臣必不敢，请就戮。 
现代文：臣在秦三年，过错很多，对有些事临时为适应情况在做法上有些改变也是有的，但说以功成归于自己，事败归罪于别人，臣则不敢，若有这样的事，请杀我的头。 
English: During my three years in Qin, I made a lot of mistakes, and there were some changes in my approach to some things temporarily to adapt to the situation. However, I did not dare to attribute my success to myself and my failure to others. If there is such a thing, please kill my head.

古文：挺既出，帝顾驸马忽剌出、枢副合答等，数挺前后大计，凡十有七，因叹曰： 挺有功如是，犹自言有罪，若此，谁复为朕戮力耶！
现代文：挺出朝后，世祖与驸马忽剌出、枢副合答等统计挺提出的大政方针先后有十七项，因而赞叹说： 挺有这样大的功，还说自己有罪，若真办他的罪，谁还肯为朕尽力！
English: According to statistics, there are seventeen major political policies successively proposed by Ting Ting, such as the founding father's sudden appearance with his horse, and the meeting of the two heads of state and government. Therefore, he said with admiration: Ting Ting has made such a great contribution, and he said that he is guilty. If he really did his crime, who would be willing to do his best for me!

古文：卿等识之。 
现代文：你们要记住这点。 
English: You have to remember that.

古文：四年，赐金符，行四川行枢密院事。
现代文：中统四年，赐商挺金符，命行四川行枢密院事。
English: In the fourth year of the Chinese Unification, merchants were given gold badges for their support, and they were ordered to carry out the duties of the Privy Council in Sichuan.

古文：至元元年，入拜参知政事。
现代文：至元元年，挺入朝拜参知政事。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he entered the court of the emperor to participate in political affairs.

古文：建议史事，附修辽、金二史，宜令王鹗、李治、徐世隆、高鸣、胡祗遹、周砥等为之，甚合帝意。二年，分省河东，俄召还。
现代文：建议令王鹗、李冶、徐世隆、高鸣、胡祗、周砥等人修纂辽、金二史，甚合皇帝的想法。二年，巡察河东，很快又召还京师。
English: He suggested that Wang Qian, Li Ye, Xu Shilong, Gao Ming, Hu Yao, Zhou Tuo and others be ordered to compile the histories of Liao and Jin, which was very much in line with the emperor's thoughts.

古文：三年，帝留意经学，挺与姚枢、窦默、王鹗、杨果纂《五经要语》凡二十八类以进。
现代文：三年，世祖注意于经学，挺与姚枢、窦默、王鹗、杨果等编纂《五经要语》共二十八类进呈。
English: In the third year, the founder paid attention to the study of the classics, and worked with Yao Zu, Dou Mo, Wang Xi, Yang Guo and others to compile the "Five Essentials of the Classics" with a total of 28 categories.

古文：六年，同佥枢密院事。
现代文：六年，任同佥枢密院事。
English: Six years later, he was appointed a peer of the Privy Council.

古文：七年，迁佥书。
现代文：七年，调为佥书。
English: Seven years later, it was transferred to the Nanshu.

古文：八年，升副使。
现代文：八年，升副使。
English: Eight years later, he was promoted to vice-envoy.

古文：数军食，定军官品级，给军吏俸。使四千人屯田，开恳三万亩，收其获以饷亲军。
现代文：在任枢密副使时，清点军队实有人数，确定军官品级和俸禄，令四千人屯田，垦田三万亩，其收获供亲军军饷。
English: When he was a Privy Vice-Minister, he counted the actual number of soldiers in the army, determined the rank and salary of officers, and ordered 4,000 people to set up military camps and 30,000 mu of farmland, the harvest of which would be used to pay salaries to the pro-army soldiers.

古文：汰不胜军者户三万户，一丁者亦汰去；丁多业寡，业多丁寡，财力相资，合出一军。
现代文：淘汰不能为军户者三万户，虽一丁一户者亦淘汰；丁多家产少、家产多而丁少者，各以其财或力合出一军。
English: Thirty thousand households that cannot be military households will be eliminated, although one household per household will also be eliminated; those with more than one income and less than one income, those with more than one household income and less than one income, each with their own wealth or strength, will form an army.

古文：九年，封皇子忙阿剌为安西王，立王相府，以挺为王相。
现代文：九年，封皇子忙阿剌为安西王，并为王建立相府，以商挺为王之相。
English: In the 9th year, Emperor Gaozong made Busa the king of Anxi, and established a palace for the king, with Shang Ting as the king's consort.

古文：十四年，诏王北征，王命挺曰： 关中事有不便者，可悉更张之。 
现代文：十四年，诏令安西王北征。王命挺曰 ：关中事有不适宜的，可完全改变。 
English: In the 14th year, Anxi Wang Beizheng issued an imperial edict. Wang Mingtang said: "If there is anything inappropriate in the situation, it can be completely changed."

古文：挺曰： 延安民兵数千，宜使李忽兰吉练习之，以备不虞。 
现代文：挺曰： 延安民兵共数千，应令李忽兰吉训练，以防意外。 
English: Ting said: There are thousands of Yan'an militiamen. Li Hulanji should be ordered to train them to prevent accidents.

古文：未几，秃鲁叛，以延安兵应敌，果获其力。
现代文：不久，秃鲁反叛，以延安之兵去对付，果有成效。
English: Soon after, Baloo rebelled, and Yan'an soldiers were sent to deal with them, with some success.

古文：挺进十策于王，曰：睦亲邻，安人心，敬民时，备不虞，厚民生，一事权，清心源，谨自治，固本根，察下情。
现代文：挺向安西王提出十项政策：和睦亲邻，安定人心，不耽误农时，防范意外，轻徭薄赋，统一权力，端正思想，谨慎治理辖区，巩固根本，体察民情。
English: Ting proposed ten policies to King Anxi: harmony with relatives and neighbors, stability of the people's hearts, not delaying the agricultural time, preventing accidents, frivolous and weak endowments, unification of power, correct thinking, prudent governance of the jurisdiction, consolidating the fundamentals, and considering the people's conditions.

古文：王为置酒嘉纳。
现代文：安西王均采纳。
English: All of them were adopted by the Anxi King.

古文：王薨，王妃使挺请命于朝，以子阿难答嗣。帝曰： 年少，祖宗之训未习，卿姑行王相府事。 
现代文：安西王去世，王妃令挺去朝廷奏请王子阿难答嗣位，世祖认为王子年少不懂事，命商挺姑行王相府事。
English: After the death of King Anxi, the Empress Dowager went to the Imperial Court to ask Prince Ananda to succeed to the throne. The ancestor thought that the prince was too young and did not know how to do things, so he asked his aunt to act as the king's consort.

古文：初，运使郭琮、郎中郭叔云与王相赵炳构隙。
现代文：原先，运使郭琮、郎中郭叔云与安西王丞相赵炳不和。
English: Originally, Guo Shuyun, the envoy of Guo Xi, and Guo Shuyun, his son-in-law, were at odds with Zhao Xi, the minister of Anxi Wangzheng.

古文：或告炳不法，妃命囚之六盘狱以死。
现代文：有人告发赵炳有违法事。王妃命把炳囚禁于六盘山狱中，病死。
English: Someone accused Zhao Yao of breaking the law. Wangfei ordered him to be imprisoned in the Liupanshan Prison, where he died of illness.

古文：二十一年，赵氏子复讼父冤，挺又被系，百余日乃释。
现代文：朝廷怀疑是王妃擅自杀害的，捕郭琮、郭叔云审问。二人伏罪，其事详见《赵炳传》。
English: The imperial court suspected that Wangfei had killed herself without permission, arrested Guo Yao and Guo Shuyun and interrogated them. The two men were found guilty, details of which can be found in "The Biography of Zhao Yao."

古文：二十五年，帝问中丞董文用曰： 商孟卿今年几何？ 对曰： 八十。 
现代文：这事与商挺本无丝毫关系，但王府女奴彻彻曾与二郭商定，在临刑时含糊其辞地株连商挺及其子商王献。帝怒，将挺父子下狱，经吏部尚书青阳梦炎及符宝郎董文忠的解救，于十六年冬释放。二十年，又任枢密副使，不久因病免职。
English: This matter had nothing to do with Shang Ting himself, but the servant girl of the royal court, Chercher, had agreed with the Second Guo that at the time of the execution, Lian Shang Ting and his son, Shang Wang Xian, would be vaguely imprisoned. The emperor was angry, and the father and son were released from prison in the winter of 16 after being rescued by Shang Shuxu Qingyang Mengyan and Dong Wenzhong, a treasure hunter. For twenty years, he also served as a vice-minister of the privy council, and was soon dismissed due to illness.

古文：帝甚惜其老，而叹其康强。
现代文：二十五年，世祖问中丞董文用： 商孟卿今年多大年纪？ 文用说 ：八十。 
English: In the 25th year, the ancestor asked the junior high school student Dong Wenyo: How old is Shang Mengqing this year? Wenyo said: 80.

古文：是岁冬十有二月卒。
现代文：帝甚惜他已年老。是年十二月卒。
English: The emperor was very sorry to see him grow old. He passed away in December.

古文：有诗千余篇，尤善隶书。
现代文：其遗著有诗千余篇，尤善于隶书。
English: His posthumous works include more than a thousand poems, and he was particularly good at calligraphy.

古文：琦善画山水。尝使蜀，持平守法，秋毫无私。赵良弼赵良弼，字辅之，女直人也。本姓术要甲，音讹为赵家，因以赵为氏。
现代文：延初，赠推诚协谋佐运功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国、鲁国公，谥 文定 。赵良弼，字辅之，女真人，本姓术要甲，音讹为赵家，故以赵为姓。
English: At the beginning of the Yan dynasty, Zhao Wending was awarded the honorary titles of "Sashun meritorious fellow," "Grand Master," "Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi," "Shangzhu Guo" and "Lu Guo Guo Guo." Zhao Liangqi, also known as Zhao Liang, was a female real person. His surname was Zhaojia, and his family name was Zhao. Therefore, his surname was Zhao.

古文：良弼明敏，多智略，初举进士，教授赵州。
现代文：其父名悫，曾为金朝之威胜军节度使，去世后，谥 忠闵 。良弼禀性聪明，足智多谋，科举中进士，为赵州教授。
English: His father's name was Yao, and he was an envoy to the festival of the victorious army of the Kim dynasty. After his death, he was known as Yao Zhongyao. He was good-natured, clever, resourceful, and a member of the Science Education Committee. He was a professor in Zhaozhou.

古文：世祖在潜藩，召见，占对称旨，会立邢州安抚司，擢良弼为幕长。
现代文：世祖即位前就召见过他。正值设立邢州安抚司，于是升良弼为幕长。
English: He was summoned before the enthronement of the founder of the dynasty. It was the time of the establishment of the Bozhou Pacification Division, so Liangyao was promoted to the chief of the shogunate.

古文：邢久不得善吏，且当要冲，使者旁午，民多逃去。
现代文：邢州很久就没有贤能的官吏，而地当要冲，来往使臣很多，民多逃亡。
English: For a long time, there were no competent officials in Zhangzhou, but there were many emissaries coming and going, and many people fled.

古文：良弼区画有方，事或掣制，则请诸藩邸，再阅岁，凡六往返，所请无不从。
现代文：良弼在邢州规划有方，有些事迅速做出决断，有的则请示于王府，一年之内去王府往返六次，所请示者无不听从。
English: In Bozhou, Liang Jie planned well. Some matters were decided quickly, while others were requested from the royal palace. Within a year, Liang Jie made six round trips to the royal palace. All of the requested people obeyed.

古文：脱兀脱以断事官镇邢，其属要结罪废者，交构嫌隙，动相沮挠。世祖时征云南，良弼驰驿白其事，遂黜脱兀脱，罢其属，邢大治，户口增倍。
现代文：脱兀脱为邢州断事官，其下属官吏相互猜疑，彼此阻挠，良弼在世祖征云南时将邢州情形报告给世祖，世祖罢脱兀脱的官，解散其部属，邢州因而大治，户口增加一倍。
English: De Guete was the adjudicator of Zhangzhou, and his subordinate officials were suspicious of each other and obstructed each other. Liang Zheng reported the situation of Zhangzhou to the ancestor when the ancestor conquered Yunnan. The ancestor dismissed the officials of De Guete and disbanded his subordinates. Zhangzhou was thus in a state of turmoil, and the household registration doubled.

古文：世祖在潜藩时，分地在关陕，奏以廉希宪、商挺宣抚陕西，以良弼参议司事。
现代文：世祖即位前，其封地在关陕，他奏请朝廷任命廉希宪、商挺为陕西宣抚使，赵良弼为参议司事。
English: Before the Emperor ascended to the throne, his fief was in Guanshan. He petitioned the imperial court to appoint Lian Xixian, Shang Ting as the Shaanxi envoy, and Zhao Liangyao as the councillor.

古文：阿蓝答儿当国，惮世祖英武，谗于宪宗。
现代文：阿蓝答儿执政，他慑服于世祖的英武，向宪宗进谗言。
English: When Alangdara was in power, he obeyed his ancestor, Yingwu, and spoke harshly to Kenzong.

古文：遂以阿蓝答儿为陕西省左丞相，刘太平参知政事，钩校京兆钱谷，煅炼群狱，死者二十余人，众皆股栗。
现代文：于是以阿蓝答儿为陕西省左丞相，刘太平为参知政事，他们搜刮京兆的钱谷，把许多人逮捕下狱，害死二十余人，大家都感到恐惧。
English: As a result, Alangdare was appointed as the Minister of the Left for Shaanxi Province, and Liu Taiping as the Councillor for Political Affairs. They ransacked the money valleys of Beijing and Zhao, arrested and imprisoned many people, and killed more than 20 people. Everyone was terrified.

古文：良弼力陈大义，词气恳款，二人卒不能诬，故宣抚司一无所坐。
现代文：良弼却敢于仗义执言，使廉希宪和商挺二人未遭诬陷，宣抚司无一被判有罪。
English: However, Liang Kun dared to speak out for justice, so that two people, Lian Xixian and Shang Ting, were not framed, and none of the procurators were found guilty.

古文：己未七月，世祖南征，召参议元帅事，兼江淮安抚使。
现代文：宪宗九年七月，世祖南征，召赵良弼参议元帅府事，兼江淮安抚使。
English: In July of the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the founder of the Southern Expedition summoned Zhao Liangyao to be the marshal of the prefectural affairs and conciliator of Jianghuai.

古文：亲执桴鼓，率先士卒，五战皆捷。禁焚庐舍、杀降民，所至宣布恩德，民皆按堵。
现代文：他指挥战斗，五战五捷；禁止士卒焚百姓房屋、杀害降民，凡到一处便宣布朝廷恩德，人民安居无事。
English: He commanded the battle, five wars and five victories; forbade the soldiers to burn people's houses and kill the people who had surrendered. Whenever he came to a place, he announced that the imperial court was in favor, and the people lived in peace.

古文：既渡江，攻鄂州，闻宪宗崩，世祖北还，良弼陈时务十二事，言皆有征。
现代文：渡江攻鄂州，闻宪宗崩，世祖北还京师，良弼陈奏当前应办政务十二事，都被采纳实施。
English: The crossing of the Yangtze River and the attack on Huzhou, the overthrow of Emperor Wenzong, the return of the Northern Yuan Dynasty to Beijing, and the enactment of the 12 tasks currently facing the government were all adopted and implemented.

古文：至卫，遣如京兆察访秦、蜀人情事宜，不逾月，具得实还报，曰： 宗王穆哥无他心，宜以西南六盘悉委属之。
现代文：至卫地，被派遣前往京兆访察秦、蜀风土人情，不过一月，了解详细情况，报告说 ：宗王穆哥无他心，宜以西南六盘一带地方委他管辖。
English: He was dispatched to Jingzhao to visit Qin and Shu customs and customs, but in January, to understand the details, he reported: Zongwang Mugo has no other intention, it is appropriate to take the southwest Liupan area under the jurisdiction of the local committee.

古文：浑都海屯军六盘，士马精强，咸思北归，恐事有不意。
现代文：浑都海屯军于六盘，兵强马壮，都想北归，恐发生意外。
English: Hundu Hai Tun Army in Liupan, soldiers strong, all want to return to the north, afraid of accidents.

古文：纽璘总秦、川蒙古诸军，多得秦、蜀民心，年少鸷勇，轻去就，当宠以重职，疾解其兵柄。
现代文：纽邻总领秦、川蒙古各军，深得秦、蜀民心，年少勇猛，当赋予他以重职，但应速解其兵权。
English: As the commander-in-chief of the Qin and Sichuan-Mongolian armies, he has won the hearts of the Qin and Shu people. He is young and brave. He should be given an important post, but he should be relieved of his military powers immediately.

古文：刘太平、霍鲁怀，今行尚书省事，声言办集粮饷，阴有据秦、蜀志。
现代文：刘太平、霍鲁怀今行尚书省事，办集粮饷，有占据秦、蜀的野心。
English: Liu Taiping and Horu Huai are now traveling to study and save money, organize grain collection, and have the ambition to occupy Qin and Shu.

古文：既即位，立陕西四川宣抚司，复以廉希宪、商挺为使、副，良弼为参议。
现代文：世祖即位后，设立陕西四川宣抚司，又以廉希宪、商挺为正副宣抚使，赵良弼为参议。
English: After the Emperor ascended to the throne, the Shaanxi and Sichuan Procuratorate was established, with Lian Xixian and Shang Ting as procurators and vice-procurators, and Zhao Liangyao as councillor.

古文：良弼先行，谋诸断事官八春曰： 今浑都海日夜思北归，纽璘迁延不即行，当先遣使奉上旨促纽璘入朝，刘太平速还京兆。 
现代文：良弼先去赴任，与断事官八春商议，提出 ：今浑都海日夜意图北归，纽邻拖延不立即起程，当先遣使奉朝廷圣旨敦促纽邻入朝，令刘太平速还京兆。 
English: Liang Zheng went to the post first, discussed with the adjudicator Hachun, and proposed: Now Hunduhai intends to return to the north day and night, New Neighbors do not delay the immediate departure, when the advance envoy urged New Neighbors to enter the imperial court in accordance with the holy will of the imperial court, and ordered Liu Taiping to return to Beijing Zhao quickly.

古文：八春从其议。
现代文：八春均表同意。
English: The Hachun Equilibrium Table agrees.

古文：至则纽璘果移营将入泾，刘太平将趋六盘，闻命乃止。
现代文：纽邻果然要率军入泾阳，刘太平准备开往六盘，朝廷使臣来宣布圣旨后才停止行动。
English: New Neighbors really wanted to lead the army into Fenyang, Liu Taiping was ready to go to Liupan, and the action stopped only after the imperial envoys came to announce the sacred will.

古文：后浑都海果叛北归，良弼与汪惟正、刘黑马二宣抚决议，执浑都海之党元帅乞台不花、迷立火者诛之。
现代文：后来浑都海果然反叛朝廷，引军北归。良弼与汪惟正、刘黑马二宣抚使决议，逮捕浑都海的党羽元帅乞台不花、迷立火者，立即处死。
English: Later, Gunduhai rebelled against the imperial court and led the army back to the north. Liang Zheng, Wang Weizheng and Liu Heima II issued a resolution to arrest Gunduhai's party marshal, Kaidai Nianhua, and those who set fire to the palace were immediately put to death.

古文：希宪及挺虑有擅杀名，遣使入奏待罪。
现代文：希宪与挺顾虑有 擅杀 的罪名，遣使入朝请罪。
English: He Xian and Jie Jie were sent to the court to plead guilty to the charge of "attempted murder."

古文：良弼具密状授使者，言： 始遣捕二帅时，止令囚以俟报，臣窃以为张惶不便，宜急诛之，擅杀在臣，实不在宣抚司，若上怒希宪等，愿使者即出此奏。 
现代文：使者临行时良弼将一份密奏交给他，并叮嘱道： 开始逮捕二帅，只是要把他俩囚禁起来，听候朝廷处置。臣认为，把事情张扬出去多有不便，宜尽快处决为好。擅杀之罪在我而不在宣抚司。若皇上责怪希宪等，望使者把这份密奏呈上。 
English: When the envoy was about to leave, Liang Yao gave him a secret report and instructed him: Start arresting the two generals, but only to imprison them both and await the court's disposition. The minister thought that it would be inconvenient to publicize the matter, and it would be better to execute them as soon as possible. The crime of unauthorized killing is mine, not the propaganda department. If the emperor blames He Xian and so on, ask the envoy to present this secret report.

古文：帝竟不问，使者以奏白政府，咸以良弼为长者。升参议陕西省事。
现代文：但世祖并未追问此事。升良弼参议陕西省事。
English: However, the ancestor did not pursue the matter. Shang Liangyao was a member of the Shaanxi Provincial People's Congress.

古文：蜀人费寅以私憾诬廉希宪、商挺在京兆有异志者九事，以良弼为征。
现代文：蜀人费寅，因私人恩怨而告廉希宪、商挺在京兆有图谋不轨的九条罪状，并说赵良弼可以作证。
English: Shu people Fei Yin, because of a personal grudge, accused Lian Xixian and Shang Ting of nine counts of scheming in Beijing, and said that Zhao Liangyao could testify.

古文：帝召良弼诘问，良弼泣曰： 二臣忠良，保无是心，愿剖臣心以明之。 
现代文：世祖召问良弼，良弼含泪回答说 ：二臣忠良，保证他们无异心，臣愿把心挖出来证明。 
English: The ancestor summoned Liang Zhe for questioning, and Liang Zhe replied with tears: "The two retainers are loyal and good, I guarantee that they have no other intentions, and the retainers are willing to dig out their hearts to prove it."

古文：帝意不释。
现代文：世祖的怀疑并未因此消除。
English: This did not dispel the suspicions of the patriarch.

古文：会平李璮，得王文统交通书，益有疑二臣意，切责良弼，无所不至，至欲断其舌。
现代文：这时正是刚平定李王之乱以后，获王文统与李王暗中勾结的书信，更加怀疑廉、商二臣有二心，谴责良弼，甚至要割他的舌头。
English: It was at this time, just after the suppression of King Li's Rebellion, that he received a letter from Wang Wentong, who was secretly colluding with King Li. He was even more suspicious of the double-mindedness of Liang and Shang and the two ministers, and condemned Liang Yao, and even wanted to cut out his tongue.

古文：良弼誓死不少变，帝意乃解，费寅卒以反诛。
现代文：良弼誓死也不乱说，世祖的疑心才消除，费寅终因谋反而被诛。
English: Liang Yao swore not to say anything, and it was only then that Shizuo's suspicions were dispelled. Fei Yin was eventually arrested for plotting a rebellion.

古文：至元七年，以良弼为经略使，领高丽屯田。
现代文：至元七年，任良弼为经略使，管理高丽屯田。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, Ren Liangyao was appointed as the Minister of Economic Affairs, managing the Goryeo Tunden.

古文：良弼言屯田不便，固辞，遂以良弼奉使日本。
现代文：良弼认为在高丽屯田不便，坚持辞任，于是命他出使日本。
English: Yoshitaka thought it was inconvenient to live in a Korean garrison and insisted on resigning, so he was ordered to go to Japan.

古文：给兵三千以从，良弼辞，独与书状官二十四人俱。
现代文：早在至元初多次遣使至日本，均无所得。良弼请求使日，世祖念他年老，不准，良弼再三请求，才授与他秘书监官职使日，并带随从兵三千人。
English: As early as the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty, he sent envoys to Japan several times, but nothing came of them. When Ryosuke asked for an envoy, the patriarch, thinking him old, did not allow it. It was only after repeated requests that Ryosuke was granted an envoy with his secretary, supervisor, and 3,000 soldiers.

古文：舟至金津岛，其国人望见使舟，欲举刃来攻，良弼舍舟登岸喻旨。
现代文：良弼不肯带军队去，只点名二十四位官员随行。元朝使船行至金津岛，日本人看见中国使船，欲来攻击。良弼舍舟登岸向他们讲明来意。
English: The Yuan dynasty sent a ship to the island of Jintsu, but the Japanese saw that China was sending a ship and wanted to attack. Liang Jun disembarked from the ship and explained his intentions to them.

古文：金津守延入板屋，以兵环之，灭烛大噪，良弼凝然自若。
现代文：金津守臣把良弼请进一间木板房，四面用兵围困，熄灯后喊声大作，而良弼镇定自若。
English: The governor of Kanazu invited Yoshitaka into a wood-paneled room. He was surrounded by soldiers on all sides. After the lights went out, there was a lot of shouting, but Yoshitaka remained calm.

古文：天明，其国太宰府官陈兵四山，问使者来状。
现代文：第二天，日本太宰府官列兵于四山之上，问中国使来意。
English: The next day, the Japanese Dazaifu officials and soldiers marched on the four mountains and asked the Chinese envoy to come.

古文：良弼数其不恭罪，仍喻以礼意。
现代文：良弼列举他们不恭敬之罪，但仍待之以礼。
English: Liang Yao enumerated their crimes of disrespect, but they were still treated with courtesy.

古文：太宰官愧服，求国书。
现代文：太宰官内心惭愧，要求国书。
English: Deeply ashamed, the Dazaikan asked for the imperial edict.

古文：良弼曰： 必见汝国王，始授之。 
现代文：良弼说 ：必须见到国王才给国书。 
English: Liang Yao said, "I have to see the king before I give him the imperial edict."

古文：越数日，复来求书，且曰： 我国自太宰府以东，上古使臣，未有至者，今大朝遣使至此，而不以国书见授，何以示信！ 
现代文：过了几天，太宰官又来要国书，并且说 ：我国自太宰府以东，上国使臣没有到过，今大朝派使臣来，若不见国书，何以相信？ 
English: A few days later, the Dazaikan came again to ask for the imperial edict, and said, "Since our country is east of Dazaifu, no envoys from Shangguo have arrived. Now the Great Court has sent an envoy. If you don't see the imperial edict, how can you believe it?"

古文：良弼曰： 隋文帝遣裴清来，王郊迎成礼，唐太宗、高宗时，遣使皆得见王，王何独不见大朝使臣乎？ 
现代文：良弼道 ：隋文帝遣裴清来，你们国王出城迎接；唐太宗、高宗遣使来，都见到你们国王，你们国王难道不见我大朝使臣吗？ 
English: Liang Zheng said: Sui Emperor sent Pei Qing to meet you, and your king went out of the city to meet him; Emperor Taizong of Tang and Emperor Gaozong sent envoys to meet your king, but didn't your king meet my imperial envoy?

古文：后又声言，大将军以兵十万来求书。
现代文：日本太宰官再回要求国书，甚至以兵威胁。良弼始终不给，只给副本。太宰官仍威胁说 ：大将军将会带十万大军来要国书。 
English: The Japanese Dazai-kan asked for the document again, even threatening to send soldiers. Yoshitaka still refused to give it, only a copy. The Dazai-kan still threatened: "The great general will bring a hundred thousand soldiers to demand the document."

古文：良弼曰： 不见汝国王，宁持我首去，书不可得也。 
现代文：良弼说： 不见你们国王，就是把我头割去，还是得不到国书。 
English: Liang Yao said, "If I don't meet your king, even if I cut off my head, I still won't get the imperial edict."

古文：日本知不可屈，遣使介十二人入觐，仍遣人送良弼至对马岛。
现代文：日本知不能使良弼屈服，派使引十二人去见日本国王，而将良弼送至对马岛。
English: Knowing that Japan could not make Ryoma submit, they sent an envoy to bring twelve people to see the Japanese king, and sent Ryoma to Tsushima.

古文：十年五月，良弼至自日本，入见，帝询知其故，曰： 卿可谓不辱君命矣。 
现代文：至元十年五月，良弼从日本回朝，拜见世祖。帝询问了他出使日本的情形，称赞他 不辱君命 。
English: In May of the 10th year of the first century, Yoshitaka returned to the Imperial Court from Japan to pay homage to his ancestor. The Emperor asked him about the circumstances of his mission to Japan and praised him for not dishonoring the Emperor's life.

古文：后帝将讨日本，三问，良弼言： 臣居日本岁余，睹其民俗，狠勇嗜杀，不知有父子之亲、上下之礼。
现代文：后来世祖准备征讨日本，三次征询良弼的意见。良弼说： 臣居日本一年多，见其民俗勇猛好杀，不知有父子之亲、上下之礼。
English: Later, the patriarch was preparing to conquer Japan, and three times he sought the opinion of Yoshitaka. Yoshitaka said, "I have been a vassal in Japan for more than a year, and I have seen that the people there are brave and eager to kill. I don't know if there is a father-son relationship, or if there is a higher or lower rank.

古文：其地多山水，无耕桑之利，得其人不可役，得其地不加富。
现代文：其地多山水，但无五谷桑麻之利，得其人不能役使，得其地也无利可获。
English: Its land is full of mountains and rivers, but there is no grain or mulberry profit. Those who get it cannot use it, and those who get it have no profit to gain.

古文：况舟师渡海，海风无期，祸害莫测。
现代文：何况水军渡海，海风无定期，祸害不可测，若征讨，是以有用之民力填无穷之大洞。
English: Moreover, the navy crosses the sea, the sea breeze is irregular, the scourge is immeasurable, and if it is requisitioned, it is an infinite hole filled with useful people.

古文：是谓以有用之民力，填无穷之巨壑也，臣谓勿击便。 帝从之。
现代文：臣以为不征讨的好。 
English: The vassal thought it would be better not to collect.

古文：十一年十二月，以良弼同佥书枢密院事。
现代文：世祖同意。十一年十二月，任良弼同佥书枢密院事。
English: The patriarch agreed. In December of the eleventh year, he was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：丞相伯颜伐宋，良弼言： 宋重兵在扬州，宜以大军先捣钱唐。 
现代文：丞相伯颜伐宋，良弼建议： 宋重兵在扬州，最好以大军先捣钱塘。 
English: The prime minister, Boyan, wanted to attack Song, and Liang Qi suggested: Song's heavy army is in Yangzhou, it is best to attack Qiantang with a large army first.

古文：后讫如其计。
现代文：后来就是按良弼的进军方略灭宋的。
English: Later, the Song Dynasty was overthrown by the military at the instigation of the emperor.

古文：又言： 宋亡，江南士人多废学，宜设经史科，以育人材，定律令，以戢奸吏。 
现代文：良弼又建议 ：宋亡，江南士人多废止了学业，宜设经史科以培育人材，制定律令，使奸吏们有所收敛。 
English: Liang Qi also suggested that since the Song Dynasty had passed away and many scholars in the south of the Yangtze River had abandoned their studies, it was appropriate to set up a history department to cultivate human resources, and to formulate laws and regulations to restrain the corrupt officials.

古文：卒皆用其议。
现代文：这些意见都被采用。
English: These comments have been taken on board.

古文：帝尝从容问曰： 高丽，小国也，匠工弈技，皆胜汉人，至于儒人，皆通经书，学孔、孟。
现代文：世祖曾问良弼： 高丽是个小国，而工匠技艺都胜过汉人。其儒人皆通经书，学孔孟之书。
English: The founder of the world once asked Liang Qi: Goryeo is a small country, but its craftsmen are more skilled than the Chinese. Its Confucians are all versed in the scriptures and study the writings of Confucius and Mencius.

古文：汉人惟务课赋吟诗，将何用焉！ 
现代文：而汉人只知吟诗做赋，将有何用？ 
English: But what use will it be if the Chinese only know how to chant poems?

古文：良弼对曰： 此非学者之病，在国家所尚何如耳。
现代文：良弼回答说： 这不是学者的弊端，在于国家提倡什么。
English: Liang Juan replied: This is not the fault of scholars, it is what the state advocates.

古文：尚诗赋，则人必从之，尚经学，则人亦从之。
现代文：如提倡诗赋，则人必吟诗做赋；如提倡经学，则人必学习经史。 
English: If you advocate poetry, then you must chant poetry; if you advocate scripture study, then you must study scripture history.

古文：良弼屡以疾辞，十九年，得旨居怀孟。
现代文：良弼多次称病辞职，至元十九年，得到批准，居于怀孟。
English: Liang Zhen repeatedly claimed to be ill and resigned. In 19th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was approved to live in Huai Meng.

古文：良弼别业在温县，故有地三千亩，乃析为二，六与怀州，四与孟州，皆永隶庙学，以赡生徒，自以出身儒素，示不忘本也。
现代文：良弼在温县别有产业，原有地三千亩，分为二份，其六份给怀州，四份给孟州，永远属于庙学，用以赡养庙学生徒，表示自己出身于儒学，不忘其本。
English: Liang Wei has another property in Wen County, the original land of three thousand mu, divided into two parts, six parts to Huai Zhou, four parts to Meng Zhou, always belongs to temple studies, used to support temple students, said that he was born in Confucianism, do not forget its original.

古文：或问为治，良弼曰： 必有忍，其乃有济。
现代文：有人问他如何治理政事，良弼回答说 ：必有能容忍的度量，事情才办得好。
English: When someone asked him how to manage political affairs, Liang Zhen replied: "There must be a tolerable measure before things can be done well."

古文：人性易发而难制者，惟怒为甚。
现代文：因为人性易暴发而难控制，特别是发怒。
English: Because human nature is explosive and difficult to control, especially anger.

古文：必克己，然后可以制怒；必顺理，然后可以忘怒。
现代文：必须先克己然后可以遏制怒气，必须顺理然后可以忘怒。
English: You must first restrain yourself and then you can control your anger, you must be reasonable and then you can forget your anger.

古文：能忍所难忍，容所难容，事斯济矣。 
现代文：要能忍所难忍，能容所难容，这样事情才办得好。 
English: We must be able to tolerate the intolerable, and tolerate the intolerable, so that things can be done well.

古文：二十三年，卒，年七十。
现代文：至元二十三年卒，享年七十岁。
English: He died at the age of 70, 23 years old.

古文：赠推忠翊运功臣、太保、仪同三司，追封韩国公，谥文正。
现代文：赠推忠翊运功臣、太保、仪同三司，追封韩国公，谥 文正 。
English: The three departments of the Ministry of the People's Liberation Army, the General Office of the People's Liberation Army, and the General Office of the People's Liberation Army were presented.

古文：子训，陕西平章政事。
现代文：赵璧，字宝臣，云中怀仁人。
English: Zhao Bi, the so-called "treasured minister," is a benevolent person in the clouds.

古文：赵璧赵璧，字宝臣，云中怀仁人。世祖为亲王，闻其名，召见，呼秀才而不名，赐三僮，给薪水，命后亲制衣赐之，视其试服不称，辄为损益，宠遇无与为比。命驰驿四方，聘名士王鹗等。
现代文：世祖为亲王时，闻其名而召见他，呼他秀才而不叫名字，赐他三个僮仆，给他薪水，命王后亲制衣赐他，若不合身，立即修整，其受恩宠无人可比。命他到各地去访聘名士王鹗等人。
English: When the ancestor of the world was a prince, he was called to see him when he heard his name, called him a brilliant man without naming him, gave him three servants, gave him a salary, and gave him the clothes made by the queen. If it did not fit, he would immediately fix it. His grace was incomparable. He was ordered to visit various places to hire celebrities such as Wang Yao.

古文：又令蒙古生十人从璧受儒书。
现代文：又令蒙古学生十人从璧学习儒学。
English: He also made ten Mongolian students learn Confucianism from scratch.

古文：敕璧习国语，译《大学衍义》，时从马上听璧陈说，辞旨明贯，世祖嘉之。
现代文：令璧学习蒙古语言以译《大学衍义》。世祖常在马上听赵璧讲解《大学衍义》，辞意明畅，甚受夸奖。
English: Ling Bi studied the Mongolian language to translate "University Derivation." Shizu often listened to Zhao Bi's explanation of "University Derivation" right away. The meaning of the words was clear, which was highly praised.

古文：宪宗即位，召璧问曰： 天下何如而治？ 
现代文：宪宗即位，召璧问道： 天下如何能治？ 
English: When Kenzong ascended the throne, Zhao Bi asked: How can the world be governed?

古文：对曰： 请先诛近侍之尤不善者。 
现代文：璧说 ：请先杀在陛下身边的那些最不好的人。 
English: Bi said, "Please kill the worst people around Your Majesty first."

古文：宪宗不悦。
现代文：宪宗听了不高兴。
English: Kenzong was not happy to hear this.

古文：璧退，世祖曰： 秀才，汝浑身是胆耶！
现代文：璧退朝后世祖对他说： 秀才，你浑身都是胆！
English: After the emperor's abdication, the ancestor said to him, "Clever man, you are full of gall!

古文：吾亦为汝握两手汗也。 
现代文：我也为你捏了一把冷汗。 
English: I broke out in a cold sweat for you, too.

古文：一日，断事官牙老瓦赤持其印，请于帝曰： 此先朝赐臣印也，今陛下登极，将仍用此旧印，抑易以新者耶？ 
现代文：有天，断事官牙老瓦赤持其印向宪宗请示 ：这是前朝皇帝赐臣的印，今陛下登极，是用此旧印，还是换新印？ 
English: One day, the official adjudicator, Lao Hua Chia, holding his seal, asked the Emperor: This is the seal that the former emperor gave to his subjects. Now that His Majesty has ascended to the throne, should this old seal be used, or should a new seal be used?

古文：时璧侍旁，质之曰： 用汝与否，取自圣裁，汝乃敢以印为请耶！ 
现代文：当时赵璧在帝身边，质问他 ：用不用你，还要由皇上决定，你敢来看问皇上是用什么印！ 
English: At that time, Zhao Bi was at the emperor's side and questioned him: "It is up to the emperor to decide whether to use you or not. Do you dare to come and ask the emperor what seal to use!"

古文：夺其印，置帝前。帝为默然久之，既而曰： 朕亦不能为此也。 
现代文：夺其印放在宪宗面前，宪宗沉默了很久，自此以后，不再任用牙老瓦赤。
English: The seal was placed in front of Kenzong. Kenzong was silent for a long time. Since then, he no longer appoints the old man.

古文：自是牙老瓦赤不复用。壬子，为河南经略使。
现代文：宪宗二年，任赵璧为河南经略使。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Zhao Bi was appointed as the Henan Jinglian envoy.

古文：河南刘万户贪淫暴戾，郡中婚嫁，必先赂之，得所请而后行，咸呼之为翁。
现代文：河南刘万户贪淫横暴，郡中婚嫁都要先贿赂他，得到他的允许后才行，人们都叫他 翁 。
English: Liu Wanzhu of Henan Province is a violent and lecherous man. People in the county have to bribe him before they get married, and only do so after getting his permission. People call him "Weng."

古文：其党董主簿，尤恃势为虐，强取民女有色者三十余人。
现代文：其党徒董主簿更是仗势为非作歹，强取民间美女三十余人。
English: The leader's book of party members and directors is even more violent, forcibly taking more than thirty folk beauties.

古文：璧至，按其罪，立斩之，尽还民女。
现代文：赵璧到任后，审查其罪行，立即处斩，归还所占民女，刘万户大惊。
English: After Zhao Bi took office, his crimes were reviewed, he was immediately executed, and the occupied women were returned. Liu Wanyu was shocked.

古文：刘大惊，时天大雪，因诣璧相劳苦，且酌酒贺曰： 经略下车，诛锄强猾，故雪为瑞应。 
现代文：此时，天降大雪，刘万户去慰劳璧之劳苦，酌酒祝贺道 ：经略一到就诛锄强暴，今日之雪实为瑞兆。 
English: At this time, the sky fell heavy snow, Liu Wanyu went to comfort the toil of the laborers, drinking wine and congratulating: As soon as it arrived, it was violent, today's snow is really auspicious.

古文：璧曰： 如董主簿比者，尚有其人，俟尽诛之，瑞应将大至矣。 
现代文：璧曰： 像董主簿这样的人还有，如杀尽了，祥瑞之兆就会大至。 
English: Bi said: There are still people like Dong Muzhuo, if they are killed, the auspicious sign will be great.

古文：刘屏气不复敢出语，归卧病而卒，时人以为惧死。
现代文：刘再不敢做声，回去病死。当时人认为是为赵璧的正气吓死的。
English: Liu Zai did not dare to make a sound and went back to die of illness. At that time, it was believed that he was scared to death because of Zhao Bi's righteous spirit.

古文：己未，伐宋，为江淮荆湖经略使。
现代文：宪宗九年，蒙古大军伐宋，任赵璧为江淮荆湖经略使。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, when the Mongolian army was fighting the Song Dynasty, Zhao Bi was appointed as the deputy envoy of the Jianghuai Jinghu.

古文：兵围鄂州，宋贾似道遣使来，愿请行人以和，璧请行。
现代文：蒙古军围鄂州，宋制置使贾似道遣使求和，赵璧请求去宋方谈判。
English: The Mongolian army encircled Ezhou, the Song Dynasty sent an envoy to Jiaxing to sue for peace, and Zhao Bi requested to go to the Song Dynasty to negotiate.

古文：世祖曰： 汝登城，必谨视吾旗，旗动，速归可也。 
现代文：世祖嘱咐道： 你登城，必看我旗号，若旗挥动，你就速归。 
English: The patriarch instructed, "If you go to the city, you must see my banner. If the banner waves, you must return immediately."

古文：璧登城，宋将宋京曰： 北兵若旋师，愿割江为界，且岁奉银、绢匹两各二十万。 
现代文：璧至鄂州城里，宋将宋京提出： 北兵若班师，我宋朝愿划江为界，每年奉献银二十万两，绢二十万匹。 
English: As far as the city of Ezhou, Song put forward Songjing as follows: If the Northern soldiers are good soldiers, I, the Song Dynasty, would like to row the river as a boundary, and donate 200,000 taels of silver and 200,000 horses every year.

古文：璧曰： 大军至濮州时，诚有是请，犹或见从，今已渡江，是言何益！
现代文：璧曰： 大军至濮州时，你提出这样要求，或可能依从，如今已渡江，说这样的话何益！
English: Bi said: When the great army arrived in Zhangzhou, you made such a request, or possibly complied, now you have crossed the river, what good is it to say such a thing!

古文：贾制置今焉在耶？ 
现代文：贾制置今在这里吗？ 
English: Is Jia Xiechi here now?

古文：璧适见世祖旗动，乃曰： 俟他日复议之。 
现代文：这时，看见世祖在挥动旗，便对宋京说 ：改日再议。 
English: At this time, when he saw the patriarch waving the flag, he said to Song Jing, "Let's discuss it another day."

古文：遂还。
现代文：立即回营。
English: I just came back.

古文：宪宗崩，世祖即位。
现代文：宪宗崩，世祖即位。
English: Kenzo passed away and Shiso ascended to the throne.

古文：中统元年，拜燕京宣慰使。
现代文：中统元年，拜赵璧为燕京宣慰使。
English: In the first year of China's unification, Bai Zhao Bi was sent to Yanjing as a propaganda envoy.

古文：时供给蜀军，府库已竭，及用兵北边，璧经画馈运，相继不绝。
现代文：当时，为供给蒙古入蜀军队粮饷，府库已空，到北边用兵时，赵璧能筹划供应军饷相继不绝。
English: At that time, in order to supply grain to the Mongolian army entering Shu, the prefectural treasury was empty. When he went to the north to use soldiers, Zhao Bi was able to plan the supply of military supplies one after another.

古文：璧曰： 太庙雅乐，大飨用之，圣上所以昭孝报本也，岂可系及无辜，而废雅乐之成哉！ 
现代文：中书省设立后，授璧平章政事，议加 答剌罕 的称号，璧坚决不肯接受。二年，本已随驾北征，又奉命还至燕京，以平章政事兼任大都督，总领各军。
English: After the establishment of the People's Republic of China, Bi was awarded the title of Pingzhang Zhengji (平章政事,议加 答罕) which Bi resolutely refused to accept. Two years later, he was ordered to return to Yanjing, with the title of Pingzhang Zhengji (平章政事) concurrently serving as the grand governor and commander-in-chief of the armies.

古文：奏请原之。三年，李璮反益都，从亲王合必赤讨之。
现代文：三年，李王在益都起兵反叛，赵璧随同亲王合必赤征讨。
English: Three years later, King Li rebelled in Yidu, and Zhao Bi accompanied Prince He Bing in the Red Expedition.

古文：璮已据济南，诸军乏食，璧从济河得粟及羊豕以馈军，军复大振。
现代文：王已占据济南，朝廷各军缺食，璧从济河得粟及羊、猪等以供军饷，军威大振。
English: The king had already occupied Jinan, and the troops of the imperial court were short of food. They obtained millet, sheep, and pigs from the Jihe River to feed the troops, and their military power was greatly enhanced.

古文：至元元年，官制行，加荣禄大夫。
现代文：至元元年，任制行官，加荣禄大夫。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed as an official, and became a doctor of Garonglu.

古文：帝欲作文檄宋，执笔者数人，不称旨，乃召璧为之。
现代文：世祖要人写伐宋檄文，数人草拟者，都不满意，召璧来写。
English: The founder of the world wanted someone to write the Song Dynasty, and several people who drafted it were not satisfied, and summoned Bi to write it.

古文：文成，帝大喜曰： 惟秀才曲尽我意。 
现代文：写完后世祖看了大喜，称赞说： 只有秀才完全表达出我的意思。 
English: After he finished writing, he looked at Daxi and praised it, saying, "Only a genius can fully express what I mean."

古文：改枢密副使。
现代文：改任璧为枢密副使。
English: Bi was reappointed as Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：六年，宋守臣有遣间使约降者，帝命璧诣鹿门山都元帅阿术营密议。命璧同行汉军都元帅府事。
现代文：六年，宋守臣有遣使来约降的，世祖命璧去鹿门山同都元帅密议，并命他同行汉军都元帅府事。
English: In the sixth year, Song Shoucheng sent an envoy to negotiate the surrender, and Shizu ordered Bi to go to Lu Men Mountain to discuss the matter with the capital marshal, and ordered him to accompany the Chinese army to the capital marshal's office.

古文：宋将夏贵，率兵五万，馈粮三千艘，自武昌溯流，入援襄阳。
现代文：宋将夏贵率兵五万、军粮三千船，自武昌逆流而上，增援襄阳。
English: Song dispatched Xia Gui with 50,000 soldiers and 3,000 ships of military supplies from Wuchang upstream to reinforce Xiangyang.

古文：时汉水暴涨，璧据险设伏待之。
现代文：当时汉水猛涨，璧占据险要之地，设伏兵等待。
English: At that time, Han Shui soared, Bi occupied a critical place, and set up an ambush to wait.

古文：贵果中夜潜上，璧策马出鹿门，行二十余里，发伏兵，夺其五舟，大呼曰： 南船已败，我水军宜速进。 
现代文：夏贵半夜潜行而上，璧出鹿门行二十余里，指挥伏兵发起进攻，夺敌船五艘，令军士大呼： 南船已败，我水军应速进。 
English: Xia Gui sneaked up in the middle of the night, traveled more than 20 miles from Lumen, commanded the ambush to launch an attack, captured five enemy ships, and made the sergeant shout: The south ship has been defeated, our navy should advance quickly.

古文：贵慑不敢动。
现代文：夏贵被慑服而不敢动。
English: Xia Gui was deterred by the clothes and did not dare to move.

古文：明旦，阿术至，领诸将渡江西追贵骑兵，璧率水军万户解汝楫等追贵舟师。遂合战于虎尾洲，贵大败走，士卒溺死甚众，夺战舰五十，擒将士三百余人。
现代文：第二天清晨，阿术领诸军到达，渡江西追夏贵骑兵。赵璧率水军万户解汝楫等追击夏贵水军，会战于虎尾洲，贵大败而走，宋军士卒溺死甚众，璧军夺战舰五十艘，擒敌将士三百余人。
English: In the early morning of the next day, Ah Xiu led the army to arrive and crossed the west of the Jiangsu Province to pursue Xia Gui's cavalry. Zhao Bi led the naval forces to pursue Xia Gui's naval forces, and they fought in Huwei Zhou. Gui was defeated and fled. A large number of Song's officers and men drowned. Bi's army captured fifty warships and killed more than three hundred enemy soldiers.

古文：高丽王禃为其臣林衍所逐，帝召璧还，改中书左丞，同国王头辇哥行东京等路中书省事，聚兵平壤。
现代文：高丽王礻直，为其臣林衍赶走。世祖召璧回朝，改任中书左丞，同国王头辇哥共管东京等路中书省事，聚兵于平壤。
English: Goryeo's King Goguryeo drove away his vassal Lin Yan. The ancestor summoned Bi to return to the dynasty, and he was appointed as the second-in-command of the Middle Shogunate, and he and the king's eldest brother jointly managed the affairs of the Middle Shogunate, such as Tokyo, and gathered troops in Pyongyang.

古文：时衍已死，璧与王议曰： 高丽迁居江华岛有年矣，外虽卑辞臣贡，内恃其险，故使权臣无所畏忌，擅逐其主。
现代文：这时，林衍已死，璧与国王头辇哥商议： 高丽王迁居江华岛已多年，外表虽称臣纳贡，言辞谦卑，而内心阴险，故权臣敢于驱逐他。
English: At this time, Lin Yan had already died, and Bi had a discussion with the king's eldest brother: King Goryeo had moved to Ganghwa Island for many years, and although outwardly he claimed to be a vassal, his words were humble, but his heart was insidious, so the powerful vassal dared to expel him.

古文：冬，祀太庙，有司失黄幔，索得于神庖灶下，已甚污弊。帝闻，大怒曰： 大不敬，当斩！ 
现代文：今衍虽死，而其王是无罪的，若朝廷遣兵护送他回京城复国，可以息兵安民，此为上策。 
English: Although Imaan is dead, his king is not guilty. If the imperial court sends soldiers to escort him back to the capital to restore the country, the soldiers can be pacified and the people can be safe. This is the best strategy.

古文：璧曰： 法止杖断流远。 
现代文：遣使将此策略奏报朝廷，为世祖采纳。
English: The envoy reported this strategy to the imperial court, which adopted it.

古文：其人得不死。
现代文：从高丽撤兵回来后，调璧为中书右丞。
English: After returning from the withdrawal of troops from Korea, he changed his name to Zhongshu Rongzheng.

古文：十年，复拜平章政事。
现代文：十年，又拜为平章政事。
English: Ten years later, he was appointed to the government again.

古文：十三年，卒，年五十七。
现代文：至元十三年卒，享年五十七岁。
English: He was fifty-seven years old when he died.

古文：大德三年，赠大司徒，谥忠亮。
现代文：大德三年，赠大司徒，谥 忠亮 。
English: Dade for three years, presented with the title of Grand Scholar, and awarded the title of Zou Zhongliang.

