古文：显宗孝明皇帝讳庄，光武第四子也。
现代文：显宗孝明皇帝名庄，光武帝第四子。
English: The fourth son of Emperor Guangwu and a famous villager of Emperor Xianzong Xiaoming.

古文：母阴皇后。帝生而丰下，十岁能通《春秋》，光武奇之。
现代文：母为阴皇后，明帝生而面方，十岁能通晓《春秋》，光武对他的才能很是惊奇。
English: His mother was the Queen of Yin, and he was born with the face of a bright emperor. At the age of ten, he was able to understand "Spring and Autumn." Guangwu was very surprised by his talent.

古文：建武十五年封东海公，十七年进爵为王，十九年立为皇太子。
现代文：建武十五年封东海公，十七年晋爵为王，十九年立为皇太子。
English: In the 15th year of Jianwu's reign, he was given the title of Donghaigong, in the 17th year he was promoted to the peerage, and in the 19th year he became crown prince.

古文：师事博士桓荣，学通《尚书》。
现代文：拜博士桓荣为师，学通《尚书》。
English: Dr. Bai Huan Rong was his teacher, and he learned through "Shang Shu."

古文：中元二年二月戊戌，即皇帝位，年三十。
现代文：中元二年二月初五，登皇帝位，年三十。
English: On the 5th day of the 2nd month of the 2nd year of the 2nd century, he was enthroned as emperor at the age of 30.

古文：尊皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：尊崇皇后为皇太后。
English: The revered empress is the empress dowager.

古文：三月丁卯，葬光武皇帝于原陵。有司奏上尊庙曰世祖。
现代文：三月初五，葬光武皇帝于原陵，有司奏上庙号尊为世祖。
English: On the fifth day of March, Emperor Guangwu was buried in the original mausoleum, and Emperor Xuanzong was honored as the founding father.

古文：夏四月丙辰，诏曰： 予未小子，奉承圣业，夙夜震畏，不敢荒宁。
现代文：夏四月二十四日，明帝下诏说： 我本小子，继承祖宗大业，日夜惶恐，不敢有半点随便。
English: On the 24th day of the 4th month of the summer, Emperor Ming issued an edict saying, "I am a young man, inheriting the great cause of my ancestors, and I am afraid day and night, and dare not do anything carelessly.

古文：先帝受命中兴，德侔帝王，协和万邦，假于上下，怀柔百神，惠于鳏、寡。
现代文：先帝秉承天命中兴汉室，品德同于帝王，与万国融洽，上下通达和睦。祭祀山川，百神和安，恩惠施及于鳏寡。
English: The previous emperor adhered to the heavenly mandate to establish the Han dynasty, and his moral character was the same as that of the emperor, and he was in harmony with all nations, and he was able to achieve harmony from top to bottom. He worshipped the mountains and rivers, the hundred deities, and peace, and granted favors to widows.

古文：朕承大运，继体守文，不知稼穑之艰难，惧有废失。
现代文：我承受国家大运。继承政体，谨守文德，不知稼穑的艰苦，只怕有荒废失误。
English: I am the bearer of the great national destiny. I will inherit the political system, adhere to morality, do not know the hardships of making money, and am only afraid of waste and mistakes.

古文：圣恩遗戒，顾重天下，以元元为首。
现代文：祖宗的遗嘱告诫，顾惜尊重天下，要以老百姓为首要。
English: The last will and testament of our ancestors warned us to respect the world, and to put the people first.

古文：公卿百僚，将何以辅朕不逮？
现代文：公卿百官，将怎样来辅助我的不足呢？
English: How will you, lords and gentlemen, supply my deficiency?

古文：其赐天下男子爵，人二级；三老、孝悌、力田人三级；爵过公乘，得移与子若同产、同产子；及流人无名数欲自占者人一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、笃癃粟，人十斛。
现代文：今赐天下男子爵位，每人两级；三老、孝悌、力田每人三级，爵过八级，可以移授予子或同母兄弟、同母兄弟的儿子；以及无户口的流浪人想自归首的，每人一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、患绝症的，每人发粟十斛。
English: Now, the world bestows peerages on men, two levels for each; three levels for each of the three elders, filial piety, and virtue, and after eight levels of peerage, they can be transferred to sons or brothers of the same mother, and sons of brothers of the same mother; and for homeless people who want to surrender, one level for each person; and for widows, widowers, orphans, and the terminally ill, ten millets for each person.

古文：其施刑及郡国徒，在中元元年四月己卯赦前所犯而后捕系者，悉免其刑。
现代文：解除了枷锁的囚徒及郡国苦役，在中元元年四月十一日，大赦前犯罪而后来捕系的，一律免刑。
English: The prisoners who had been released from the shackles and county-level forced labor were released on April 11, the first day of the year, and those who had committed crimes before the amnesty and were later arrested were all exempted from punishment.

古文：又边人遭乱为内郡人妻，在己卯赦前，一切遣还边，恣其所乐。
现代文：在四月十一日大赦前，边境平民遭乱成为内郡人妻子的，一律遣回边境，完全听她们自己的意愿。
English: Prior to the April 11 amnesty, all border civilians who became the wives of people from Inner County after the riots were sent back to the border, entirely according to their own wishes.

古文：中二千石下至黄绶，贬秩赎论者，悉皆复秩还赎。
现代文：中二千石下至二百石，降级和出钱赎罪的，都恢复官位品级发还赎钱。
English: In the middle two thousand koku down to two hundred koku, those who were downgraded and paid money to atone for their sins were restored to their official rank and grade and paid back the ransom money.

古文：方今上无天子，下无方伯，若涉渊水而无舟楫。
现代文：现在上无天子，下无地方长官，就像要渡过深渊而没有舟楫一样。
English: Now there is no heavenly son above, and no local governors below. It's like trying to cross the abyss without a boat.

古文：夫万乘至重而壮者虑轻，实赖有德左右小子。
现代文：皇位至关重要，而我年岁尚轻，思虑浮浅，实靠有德才的人指点帮助我。
English: The throne is very important, and I am still young, my thoughts are shallow, and I really rely on people of virtue to guide and help me.

古文：高密侯禹，元功之首；东平王苍，宽博有谋；并可以受六尺之托，临大节而不挠。其以禹为太傅，苍为骠骑将军。
现代文：高密侯邓禹大功居首，东平王刘苍大度而见识渊博有谋，临大节而不会屈挠，都可以受托辅助幼主治理天下。今任邓禹为太傅，刘苍为骠骑将军。
English: Gaomi marquis Deng Yu's great achievement ranks first, Dongping king Liu Cang is magnanimous, knowledgeable, and resourceful, and will not give in on the eve of the grand festival, and can be entrusted to assist the young master in governing the world. The current Deng Yu is the Taifu, and Liu Cang is the cavalry general.

古文：大尉憙告谥南郊，司徒奉安梓宫，司空鲂将校复土。
现代文：太尉赵喜心告谥南郊，司徒李讠斤奉安先帝梓宫，司空冯鲂将校覆土。
English: Second Lieutenant Zhao Xixin reported to the southern suburb of Handan, Sutor Li Yujin served Emperor An Zi Gong, and Officer Sikuo Feng Yao covered the soil.

古文：其封憙为节乡侯，为安乡侯，鲂为杨邑侯。
现代文：今封赵熹为节乡侯，李讠斤为安乡侯，冯鲂为杨邑侯。 
English: This time, Zhao Jian is the village head of Jie, Li Jianjin is the village head of An, and Feng Jian is the village head of Yang.

古文：秋九月，烧当羌寇陇西，败郡兵于允街。
现代文：秋九月，烧当羌入寇陇西，在允街打败陇西郡兵。
English: In the autumn and September, the Burntong army entered the west of Kou and defeated the soldiers of Shaanxi county in Yunjie.

古文：赦陇西囚徒，减罪一等，勿收今年租调。
现代文：赦免陇西囚徒，减罪一等，不收今年租调。
English: The prisoners in Shaanxi Province were pardoned, their crimes were reduced to the first class, and they did not have to pay rent this year.

古文：又所发天水三千人，亦复是岁更赋。遣谒者张鸿讨叛羌于允吾，鸿军大败，战殁。
现代文：又，所征发天水三千人，也免除这一年的更赋，派谒者张鸿在允吾讨伐叛羌，张鸿军大败，张鸿阵亡。
English: In addition, the three thousand people who were conscripted and sent to Tianshui were also exempted from this year's increase. Zhang Hong, who sent the troops, promised to fight against the rebels. Zhang Hong's army was defeated and Zhang Hong was killed.

古文：冬十一月，遣中郎将窦固监捕虏将军马武等二将军讨烧当羌。
现代文：冬十一月，派中郎将窦固监督捕虏将军马武等二将军讨伐烧当羌。
English: In the winter of November, he sent Zhongro to supervise Dou Gu and the captive general Ma Wu and other two generals to fight the felling and burning.

古文：十二月甲寅，诏曰： 方春戒节，人以耕桑。
现代文：十二月二十六日，明帝诏令说： 现在正是春天，人们都忙于耕田养蚕。
English: On December 26th, Emperor Ming decreed: "It is spring now, and people are busy cultivating fields and raising silkworms.

古文：其敕有司务顺时气，使无烦扰。
现代文：令所有官员务必顺应节气，不要妨碍干扰农事。
English: All officials must comply with the solar terms and not interfere with agricultural affairs.

古文：天下亡命殊死以下，听得赎论：死罪人缣二十匹，右趾至髡钳城旦舂十匹，完城旦舂至司寇作三匹。
现代文：天下亡命之徒判处斩首以下的，让他们赎罪：死罪入缣二十匹，刖右脚直至髡钳城旦、舂入缣十匹，完城旦、舂直至司寇作入缣三匹。
English: The world's outlaws sentenced to beheading or less, let them atone for their sins: the death penalty into the yoke of twenty horses, the right foot into the yoke of ten horses, the yoke into the yoke of ten horses, the end of the yoke into the yoke of three horses.

古文：其未发觉，诏书到先自告者，半入赎。
现代文：没有发觉，诏书到以前自首的，赎物减半。
English: If the ransom is not found, the ransom will be halved.

古文：今选举不实，邪佞未去，权门请托，残吏放手，百姓愁怨，情无告诉。有司明奏罪名，并正举者。
现代文：现在选举不真实，邪佞之人没有去掉，权贵受贿酷吏贪求，为所欲为，百姓愁苦埋怨，实情无从上告，有关官府，应明白上奏罪名，荐举不当者，治荐举人的罪。
English: Now the election is not true, the corrupt people have not been eliminated, the powerful and noble have been bribed, the cruel officials are greedy and do whatever they want, the people are sad and complain, the truth can not be appealed, the relevant government offices should clearly report the crime, recommend the wrong person, and recommend the crime of the person.

古文：又郡县每因征发，轻为奸利，诡责羸弱，先急下贫。
现代文：郡县每次征发劳役，轻易地作奸牟利，诡诈地呵责恫吓贫弱平民，使其心急如焚。
English: Every time a county or prefecture levies labor service, it is easy to commit fraud for profit, and cunningly scold and intimidate the poor and weak civilians, making them anxious.

古文：其务在均平，无令枉刻。 
现代文：现在务必要使劳役均平，不要枉屈刻薄。 
English: Now, it is imperative to make the labor service more even and not to be mean.

古文：永平元年春正月，帝率公卿已下朝于原陵，如元会仪。
现代文：永平元年春正月，明帝率领公卿以下官员朝拜原陵，如元会仪。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of Yongping, the Ming Emperor led officials below the nobility to worship the original mausoleum, such as the Yuan ceremony.

古文：夏五月，太傅邓禹薨。
现代文：夏五月，太傅邓禹去世。
English: In the summer of May, Grand Master Deng Yu passed away.

古文：戊寅，东海王彊薨，遣司空冯鲂持节视丧事，赐升龙旄头、銮辂，龙旂。
现代文：二十二日，东海王刘强去世，派司空冯鲂持符节视导丧事，赏赐升龙旄头、銮辂、龙旗。
English: On the 22nd, the king of the East Sea, Liu Qiang, passed away, and he sent the commander of the Eastern Sea Fleet, Feng Xuan, to lead the funeral ceremony, and awarded the dragon heads, beaks, and dragon flags.

古文：六月乙卯，葬东海恭王。
现代文：六月二十四日，葬东海恭王。
English: On June 24th, the funeral of King Donghaegong took place.

古文：秋七月，捕虏将军马武等与烧当羌战，大破之。
现代文：秋七月，捕虏将军马武等与烧当羌战斗，羌大败。
English: In the autumn and July, the captive general Ma Wu and others fought with the Burnt Donkey, and the Donkey suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：募士卒戍陇右，赐钱人三万。
现代文：募集士卒守卫陇右，每人赏赐钱三万。
English: Recruit officers to guard the right side of the gate, and reward each person with money of thirty thousand.

古文：八月戊子，徙山阳王荆为广陵王，遣就国。
现代文：八月初四，调山阳王刘荆为广陵王，令进入封地。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month, Liu Jing, the king of Shanyang, was transferred to Guangling and ordered to enter the fief.

古文：是岁，辽东太守祭肜使鲜卑击赤山乌桓，大破之，斩其渠帅。
现代文：这年，辽东太守祭肜使鲜卑攻击赤山乌桓，大败乌桓，斩其渠帅。
English: In this year, Liaodong Taishou Festival, Xianbei attacked Akayama Ukan, defeated Ukan, and beheaded him.

古文：越巂姑复夷叛，州郡讨平之。
现代文：越姑复夷反叛，州郡部队讨伐平定了叛乱。
English: Yue Gu rebelled against Fu Yi, and the state and county troops crushed the rebellion.

古文：二年春正月辛未，宗祀光武皇帝于明堂，帝及公卿列侯始服冠冕、衣裳、玉佩、絇屦以行事。
现代文：二年春正月十九日，在明堂祭祀光武皇帝。明帝及公卿列侯始服冠冕、衣裳、玉佩、绚屦举行仪式。
English: On the 19th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of Spring, Emperor Guangwu was worshiped in the Ming Hall. The Ming Emperor and the noble princes began to wear crowns, clothes, jade and ornaments. A ceremony was held.

古文：礼毕，登灵台。
现代文：行礼完毕，登灵台。
English: After the salute, it's off to the platform.

古文：使尚书令持节诏骠骑将军、三公曰： 今令月吉日，宗祀光武皇帝于明堂，以配五帝。
现代文：派尚书令持符节诏令骠骑将军、三公说： 当此吉日良辰，在明堂祭祀光武皇帝，以配享五帝。
English: He sent Shang Shuling to hold the festival, issued the edict to ride the general and the three kings, and said: On this auspicious day, we will sacrifice Emperor Guangwu in the Ming Hall to enjoy the five emperors.

古文：礼备法物，乐和八音，咏祉福，舞功德，班时令，敕群后。
现代文：礼备法物，乐和八音，歌咏福祉，舞蹈明功，布告时令，劝勉群后。
English: Preparation of ceremonial objects, music and eight tones, singing for welfare, dance for merit, announcement of the season, exhortation to the group.

古文：事毕，升灵台，望元气，吹时律，观物变。
现代文：行礼完毕，登灵台，望云气，吹管乐，观察事物变化。
English: After the procession, they ascended the platform, gazed at the clouds, played wind instruments, and observed the changes in things.

古文：群僚藩辅，宗室子孙，众郡奉计，百蛮贡职，乌桓、濊貊咸来助祭，单于侍子、骨都侯亦皆陪位。
现代文：百官藩辅，宗室子孙，郡县群吏众蛮首领乌桓氵岁貊，都来助祭，匈奴单于侍奉汉宫之子，骨都侯也都来参加典礼。
English: Hundreds of officials and assistants of the domain, descendants of the family, county officials and leaders of the barbarians all came to assist the priest, the sons of the Huns who served the Han Palace, and the bone princes also came to participate in the ceremony.

古文：斯固圣祖功德之所致也。
现代文：这都是圣祖功德感召的力量，使他们聚集到一起的。
English: It was the power of the Holy Father's call that brought them together.

古文：朕以暗陋，奉承大业，亲执珪璧，恭祀天地。
现代文：我昏黯鄙陋，集成大业，亲执王圭璧，恭祀天地。
English: I am dim and despicable, integrated great cause, pro-Wang Gui Bi, and worship heaven and earth.

古文：仰惟先帝受命中兴，拨乱反正，以宁天下，封泰山，建明堂，立辟雍，起灵台，恢弘大道，被之八极；而胤子无成、康之质，群臣无吕、旦之谋，盥洗进爵，踧惟惭。
现代文：缅怀先帝受命中兴，拨乱反正，使天下安乐，封禅泰山，修建明堂，立辟雍，起灵台，将立国爱民的事业，发扬光大。
English: Commemorating the memory of the former emperor, he was ordered to revitalize, rectify the chaos, make the world a better place, seal Mount Tai, build the Ming Hall, establish the Yong, raise the memorial table, establish the country and love the people, and carry forward the cause.

古文：素性顽鄙，临事益惧，故 君子坦荡荡，小人长戚戚 。其令天下自殊死已下，谋反大逆，皆赦除之。
现代文：恩泽遍布大地。而我没有周代成王、康王般的天质，群臣也没有吕尚、姬旦一样的谋略，盥洗进爵，恭恭敬敬也感到不安。素性鄙陋，每临大事就更加恐惧。所以说： 雍容大度的君子总是从容舒坦，而装不下事的小人就经常忧心忡忡啊。 今命令全国，从判处斩首罪的以下，到阴谋反叛大逆不道的人，都免罪不究。
English: But I don't have the natural qualities of Zhou Dynasty's Cheng Wang and Kang Wang, nor do my ministers have the same strategies as Lushan and Hetan, and I'm also uneasy about being ennobled and respected. I have a lowly nature, and I'm more afraid of every big event. Therefore, I said, "Elegant and dignified gentlemen are always at ease, while small people who can't pretend to do something are often worried." Now I order the whole country, from those who have been sentenced to beheading, to those who have conspired to rebel and commit high treason, to be exonerated.

古文：百僚师尹，其勉修厥职，顺行时令，敬若昊天，以绥兆人。 
现代文：所有一切官员，都要勤勉谨慎对待自己的职事，顺应时节，敬顺苍天，使亿万人民都过安乐的生活。 
English: All officials should be diligent and prudent in handling their duties, conform to the times, and respect the heavens, so that hundreds of millions of people can live a happy life.

古文：三月，临辟雍，初行大射礼。
现代文：三月，明帝临辟雍，第一次举行大射之礼。
English: In March, Emperor Ming of the Ming Dynasty arrived in Yongbyon and held the grand firing ceremony for the first time.

古文：秋九月，沛王辅、楚王英、济南王康、淮阳王延、东海王政来朝。
现代文：秋九月，沛王刘辅、楚王刘英、济南王刘康、淮阳王刘延、东海王刘政来朝拜。
English: In autumn and September, the Pei King Liu Fu, the Chu King Liu Ying, the Jinan King Liu Kang, the Huaiyang King Liu Yan, and the East Sea King Liu Zheng came to pay homage.

古文：冬十月壬子，幸辟雍，初行养老礼。
现代文：冬十月初五，明帝到辟雍，第一次举行养老礼。
English: On the fifth day of the tenth month of winter, Emperor Ming came to Biyong and held the first pension ceremony.

古文：诏曰： 光武皇帝建三朝之礼，而未及临飨。
现代文：下诏说： 光武皇帝建明堂、辟雍、灵台三朝之礼，而没有来得及赏赐宴请长老耆宿。
English: The next edict said: Emperor Guangwu had built the Ming Hall, the Yong Palace, and the Great Hall of Three Dynasties, but he did not have time to reward the elders with a banquet.

古文：眇眇小子，属当圣业。
现代文：渺小的我，继承王位。
English: Little old me, heir to the throne.

古文：间暮春吉辰，初行大射；令月元日，复践辟雍。
现代文：趁暮春三月良辰，初行大射之礼，美好的十月元日，再到辟雍。
English: Take advantage of the late spring in March, the first big shooting ceremony, the beautiful October New Year's Day, and then to Bailong.

古文：尊事三老，兄事五更，安车软轮，供绥执授。
现代文：尊事三老，兄事五更，安车软轮，亲执绥绶。
English: Respectful three elders, brotherly five more, secure the car soft wheel, personally hold the plow.

古文：侯王设酱，公卿馔珍，朕亲袒割，执爵而颤。
现代文：侯王设醢浆，公卿设馔珍，我亲自袒袖割俎，拿着酒杯，给老者漱口。
English: The lord of the manor set the gong pulp, the courtier set the gong zhen, I personally cut the gong, took the wine glass, and rinsed the old man's mouth.

古文：祝哽在前，祝噎在后。升歌《鹿鸣》，下管《新宫》，八佾具修，万舞于庭。
现代文：怕老人哽噎，前后捶背。升歌《鹿鸣》，下管《新宫》，八佾具列，万舞于庭。
English: Afraid of the old man's yakitori, he shuffles back and forth. The ascending song is "Deer Song," the descending song is "New Palace," the eight bowls are lined up, and everyone dances in the garden.

古文：朕固薄德，何以克当？
现代文：我深知自己德薄，怎么敢当？
English: I am well aware of my lack of virtue, how dare I?

古文：《易》陈负乘，《诗》刺彼己，永念惭疚，无忘厥心。
现代文：《易》说小人而服君子之器则致盗，《诗》也讽刺那非法制用器服的人，永远感到惭疚，内心牢牢记住。
English: "Yi" says that the villain steals the gentleman's tools, and "Poem" also satirizes the person who illegally makes tools and clothes. Always feel guilty and keep it firmly in mind.

古文：三老李躬，年耆学明。
现代文：三老李躬，年高学明。
English: The three old men, Li Mu, are old and learned.

古文：五更桓荣，授朕《尚书》。
现代文：五更桓荣，为我讲授《尚书》。
English: Wugang Kan Rong lectured me on "Shang Shu."

古文：《诗》曰： 无德不报，无言不酬。
现代文：《诗经》上说：无德不报，无言不酬。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says, "No virtue goes unreported, no word goes unrewarded."

古文：其赐荣爵关内侯，食邑五千户。
现代文：今赐桓荣关内侯爵位，食邑五千户。
English: Kan Rong is now given the title of Marquis of Kansai, with 5,000 households in the food village.

古文：三老、五更皆以二千石禄养终厥身。
现代文：三老、五更都以二千石俸禄养老终身。
English: The Three Elders and the Five Elders all receive a lifetime pension of 2,000 koku.

古文：其赐天下三老酒人一石，肉四十斤。有司其存耆耋，恤幼孤，惠鳏寡，称朕意焉。 
现代文：今赐天下三老，每人酒一石，肉四十斤，官员们要问候抚慰耆耋老人，怜恤幼小的孤儿，加惠于鳏寡，这样才符合我的心意。 
English: Now, there are three old people in the world, each with one stone of wine and forty pounds of meat. Officials should greet and comfort the old people, show mercy to the young orphans, and benefit the widows and widowers. This is in line with my heart.

古文：中山王焉始就国。
现代文：中山王刘焉开始到自己的封地。
English: Liu Yan, the king of Zhongshan, began to move to his own fief.

古文：甲子，西巡狩，幸长安，祠高庙，遂有事于十一陵。
现代文：十七日，明帝西巡视察，到长安，祭祀高帝庙及十一陵。
English: On the 17th, he inspected the western part of Mindi and went to Chang'an to offer sacrifices at the Emperor Gao Temple and the Eleven Tombs.

古文：历览馆邑，会郡县吏，劳赐作乐。
现代文：遍览客舍，召集郡县官员，慰劳犒赏作乐。
English: They toured guest houses, summoned county officials, and enjoyed themselves.

古文：十一月甲申，遣使者以中牢祠萧何、霍光。
现代文：十一月初七，派使者以猪羊二牲祭祀萧何、霍光。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, an envoy was sent to sacrifice two animals, a pig and a sheep, in honor of Xiao He and Huo Guang.

古文：帝谒陵园，过式其墓。
现代文：明帝参谒陵园，对墓致敬。
English: Ming Emperor's Jinshan Mausoleum, paying homage to the tomb.

古文：进幸河东，所过赐二千石、令长已下至于掾史，各有差。
现代文：行进到河东，对所经过地方二千石县令、县长以下至于掾史分别赏赐。
English: After marching to Hedong, the 2,000-koku county magistrate, the county governor and below, as well as the county magistrate, were awarded separately.

古文：癸卯，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十六日，明帝回到洛阳。
English: On the 25th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：十二月，护羌校尉窦林下狱死。
现代文：十二月，护羌校尉窦林下狱死。
English: In December, Guard Lieutenant Dou Lin died in prison.

古文：是岁，始迎气于五郊。
现代文：这年，首次迎气于五郊之兆。
English: This year, for the first time, the wind picked up in the five suburbs.

古文：少府阴就子丰杀其妻郦邑公主，就坐自杀。
现代文：少府阴就的儿子阴丰杀其妻郦邑公主，阴就因此自杀。
English: Young Fu Yin's son, Yin Feng, killed his wife, Princess Zouyi. As a result, Yin committed suicide.

古文：三年春正月癸巳，诏曰： 朕奉郊祀，登灵台，见史官，正仪度。
现代文：三年春正月十七日，明帝诏令说 ：我奉行郊祀，登灵台，召见掌天文的太史，放正天文仪器。
English: On the 17th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the Spring, the Ming Emperor issued a decree: "I will carry out suburban worship, ascend to the spiritual platform, summon the great historian who is familiar with astronomy, and set up astronomical instruments."

古文：夫春者，岁之始也。始得其正，则三时有成。
现代文：春天，是一年的开始，起头得其正，春、夏、秋三时就有收成。
English: Spring is the beginning of the year, the beginning is right, spring, summer, autumn harvest will be at 3 o'clock.

古文：比者水旱不节，边人食寡，政失于上，人受其咎，有司其勉顺时气，劝督农桑，去其螟蜮，以及蝥贼；详刑慎罚，明察单辞，夙夜匪懈，以称朕意。 
现代文：近来，大水天旱不时发生，边境民众少食，上面的政事不当，老百姓就遭殃，一切官员应勤勉顺应时节，劝导督促农桑，消灭虫害；判刑处罚，要仔细谨慎，不要偏听偏信，白天黑夜一点不要怠惰，以称我心愿。 
English: Recently, floods, droughts and droughts have occurred from time to time, the people along the border have little food, and the political affairs at the top have been improper, so the common people have suffered. All officials should be diligent in accordance with the season, advise and supervise farmers, and eliminate insect pests; when sentencing and punishing, they should be careful and prudent, do not listen to prejudice, and do not be lazy at all during the day and night, which is my heart's desire.

古文：二月甲寅，太尉赵憙、司徒李免。
现代文：二月初九，太尉赵熹、司徒李讠斤免职。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month of the year, First Lieutenant Zhao Jun and Second Lieutenant Li Yujin were relieved of their duties.

古文：丙辰，左冯翊郭丹为司徒。
现代文：十一日，任左冯翊郭丹为司徒。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Feng Yu Guodan was appointed as an apprentice.

古文：己未，南阳太守虞延为太尉。
现代文：十四日，南阳太守虞延为太尉。
English: On the 14th, Yu Yan, the Nanyang governor, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：甲子，立贵人马氏为皇后，皇子炟为皇太子。
现代文：十九日，立贵人马氏为皇后，皇子刘火旦为皇太子。
English: On the 19th, the noble Ma clan was appointed as the empress, and the prince Liu Huotan as the crown prince.

古文：赐天下男子爵，人二级；三老、孝悌、力田人三级；流人无名数欲占者人一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、笃、癃、贫不能自存者粟，人五斛。
现代文：赏赐天下男子爵位，每人二级；三老、孝悌、力田每人三级；无户口的流浪人想自归首的，每人一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、患绝症，穷得无法生存的，每人发粟五斛。
English: Reward the world's men with a knighthood, second level per person; the three elders, filial piety, and virtue, third level per person; the homeless without a hukou who want to return to their families, first level per person; the widows, widowers, orphans, and the terminally ill who are too poor to survive, five millet corns per person.

古文：夏四月辛酉，封皇子建为千乘王，羡为广平王。
现代文：夏四月十七日，封皇子刘建为千乘王，刘羡为广平王。
English: On the 17th day of the 4th month of the summer, the crown prince Liu Jian became the king of Qianren, and Liu En became the king of Guangping.

古文：六月丁卯，有星孛于天船北。
现代文：六月二十四日，有彗星出现于天船星北。
English: On June 24th, a comet appeared in the northern sky.

古文：秋八月戊辰，改大乐为大予乐。
现代文：秋八月二十五日，改大乐为大予乐。
English: On the 25th day of the 8th month of autumn, the Dairaku was changed to the Daiyo.

古文：壬申晦，日有蚀之。诏曰： 朕奉承祖业，无有善政。
现代文：二十九日，日蚀。明帝下诏说： 我继承祖业没有善政。
English: On the 29th, the day of the solar eclipse, Emperor Ming issued an edict saying, "I have inherited the legacy of my ancestors without good governance."

古文：日月薄蚀，彗孛见天，水旱不节，稼穑不成，人无宿储，下生愁垫。
现代文：日月迫近相食，彗星见天，水旱不时发生，粮食歉收，人民没有隔夜的余粮，下面忧愁聚积。
English: The sun and moon are about to eclipse each other, a comet will appear in the sky, floods and droughts will occur from time to time, the grain harvest will fail, the people will not have any leftover grain overnight, and sorrow will accumulate below.

古文：虽夙夜勤思，而智能不逮。
现代文：我虽日夜勤思，但智能不够。
English: Although I think day and night, I am not smart enough.

古文：昔楚庄无灾，以致戒惧；鲁哀祸大，天不降谴。
现代文：以前楚庄王时天地无灾，戒慎恐惧，求过于天。鲁哀公祸大，天不降谴。
English: In the past, when Chu Zhuang was king, heaven and earth were free from calamity, but caution, fear, and supplication were too much for heaven.

古文：今之动变，傥尚可救。
现代文：现在的异动怪变，还望可以挽救。
English: It is hoped that the current changes can be salvaged.

古文：有司勉思厥职，以匡无德。古者卿士献诗，百工箴谏。
现代文：全体官员努力搞好本职工作，匡救我的无德，古代公卿士庶献诗讽喻，师出箴言百士劝谏。
English: All officials worked hard to do a good job of their duties, save my lack of virtue, ancient noblemen and noblewomen presented poems and metaphors, and taught proverbs to persuade hundreds of people.

古文：其言事者，靡有所讳。 
现代文：群臣有议论批评的事情要说，不要忌讳。 
English: If you have something critical to say, don't hold back.

古文：冬十月，蒸祭光武庙，初奏《文始》、《五行》、《武德》之舞。
现代文：冬十月，冬祭光武庙，开始献《文始》、《五行》、《武德》之舞。
English: In the winter of October, the winter festival of Guangwu Temple began to present the dances of "Wen Zhi," "Wu Xing" and "Wu De."

古文：甲子，车驾从皇太后幸章陵，观旧庐。
现代文：二十二日，明帝从皇太后到章陵，察看旧日的住宅。
English: On the 22nd, Emperor Ming went to Zhangling from the Empress Dowager to inspect the old residence.

古文：十二月戊辰，至自章陵。
现代文：十二月二十七日，从章陵回洛阳。
English: On December 27th, he returned to Luoyang from Zhangling.

古文：是岁，起北宫及诸官府。
现代文：这年，修建北宫及各官府。
English: In this year, the Northern Palace and the government offices were built.

古文：京师及郡国七大水。
现代文：京师及郡国发了七次大水。
English: The city of Beijing and the county have issued seven major floods.

古文：四年春二月辛亥，诏曰： 朕亲耕藉田，以祈农事。
现代文：四年春二月十一日，明帝诏令说 ：我亲耕藉田中，告祀先农，希望农事丰收。
English: On February 11th, the 4th year of the Spring, Emperor Ming decreed, "I will personally cultivate the rice fields, pray for the farmers, and hope for a good harvest."

古文：京师冬无宿雪，春不燠沐，烦劳群司，积精祷求。
现代文：京师冬天没有大雪，春天不暖和滋，烦劳各部门官员，积储祷告。
English: Beijing does not have heavy snow in winter, spring is not warm, officials in various departments are tired and pray for accumulation.

古文：而比再得时雨，宿麦润泽。其赐公卿半奏。
现代文：幸而近来又得及时雨，麦田润泽，现赏赐公卿半俸。
English: Fortunately, it has recently rained in time, and the wheat fields are moist. Now, the noblemen are rewarded with half salary.

古文：有司勉遵时政，务平刑罚。 
现代文：所有官员勉力搞好时政，务必刑罚公。 
English: All officials should do their best to improve the current political situation, and punishments must be public.

古文：秋九月戊寅，千乘王建薨。
现代文：秋九月十二日，千乘王刘建去世。
English: On the 12th day of the 9th month of autumn, Liu Jian, the King of the Thousand Buddhas, passed away.

古文：冬十月乙卯，司徒郭丹、司空冯鲂免。
现代文：冬十月十九日，司徒郭丹、司空冯鲂被免职。
English: In the winter of October 19th, Sutor Guodan and Sikuo Fengyao were dismissed.

古文：丙辰，河南尹范迁为司徒，太仆伏恭为司空。
现代文：二十日，任河南尹范迁为司徒，太仆伏恭为空。
English: On the 20th, Yin Fanqian of Henan Province was appointed as the leading disciple, and Fuxiong, the second-in-command, was dismissed.

古文：十二月，陵乡侯梁松下狱死。
现代文：十二月，陵乡侯梁松下狱死。
English: In December, Lingxiang county magistrate Liang Song died in prison.

古文：五年春二月庚戌，骠骑将军东平王苍罢归藩；琅邪王京就国。
现代文：五年春二月十六日，骠骑将军东平王刘苍罢免归藩；琅笽王刘京进入封地。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, on February 16th, Dongping King Liu Cang, the general of the cavalry, was dismissed and returned to the domain; Liu Jing, the king of the cavalry, entered the fief.

古文：冬十月，行幸邺。与赵王栩会邺。
现代文：冬十月，明帝到邺县，与赵王刘栩在邺县会见。
English: In the winter of October, Emperor Ming went to Jixian and met with Zhao Wang Liu Tuo in Jixian.

古文：常山三老言于帝曰： 上生于元氏，愿蒙优复。 诏曰： 丰、沛、济阳，受命所由，加恩报德，适其宜也。
现代文：常山三老对明帝说 ：帝在元氏诞生，请求对这里有所优待，减免赋税。 明帝下诏说： 丰、沛、济阳，是祖先命创立帝业的地方，加恩报德，是很合适的。
English: The three elders of Changshan said to Emperor Ming: The emperor was born in the Yuan Dynasty, and he asked for preferential treatment and tax relief here. Emperor Ming issued a decree saying: Feng, Pei and Jiyang are the places where the ancestors created the empire, and it is very appropriate to reward and reward.

古文：今永平之政，百姓怨结，而吏人求复，令人愧笑。
现代文：现在永平的政事，百姓不满，官员要求免赋，令人愧笑。
English: Now Yongping's political affairs, the people are dissatisfied, and officials are demanding to be exempted from taxation, which is a shameful joke.

古文：重逆此县之拳拳，其复元氏县田租更赋六岁，劳赐县掾史，及门阑走卒。 至自邺。
现代文：难违此县三老的殷勤诚意，现免除元氏县田租更赋六年，分别赏赐县掾史及门阑走卒。 明帝自邺还洛阳。
English: It is hard to go against the diligent sincerity of the three elders of this county, and now they have waived the land rent of Yuan County for another six years, and awarded the county's history and history respectively.

古文：十一月，北匈奴寇五原；十二月；寇云中，南单于击却之。
现代文：十一月，北匈奴入寇五原，十二月入寇云中，南单于把他们打退。
English: In November, the Northern Xiongnu invaded the Five Plains, and in December they invaded the Central Plains, but the Southern Xiongnu drove them back.

古文：是岁，发遣边人在内郡者，赐装钱人二万。
现代文：这年，边境民众在内地郡县的都遣散回去，赏赐治装费每人二万。
English: This year, people at the border were sent back to their hometowns and counties in the interior, and were rewarded with 20,000 yuan each in administrative fees.

古文：六年春正月，沛王辅、楚王英、东平王苍、淮阳王延、琅邪王京、东海王政、赵王盱、北海王兴、齐王石来朝。
现代文：六年春正月，沛王刘辅、楚王刘英、东平王刘苍、淮阳王刘延、琅笽王刘京、东海王刘政、赵王刘盱、北海王刘兴、齐王刘石进京朝拜。
English: In the first month of the spring of the sixth year, King Liu of Pei, King Liu of Chu, King Liu of Dongping, King Liu of Huaiyang, King Liu of Qin, King Liu of Jing, King Liu of Donghai, King Liu of Zhao, King Liu of Beihai, King Liu of Xing, and King Liu of Qi went to Beijing to pay homage.

古文：二月，王雒山出宝鼎，庐江太守献之。
现代文：二月，王雒山出宝鼎，庐江太守献上。
English: In February, Wang Lushan produced Baoding, and presented it to the governor of the Li River.

古文：夏四月甲子，诏曰： 昔禹收九牧之金，铸鼎以象物，使人知神奸，不逢恶气。
现代文：夏四月，明帝诏令说： 从前夏禹收集九州牧守的金属，铸鼎塑造成鬼神百物之形状，让人们知道神灵鬼怪，走入山林川泽不碰上鬼怪。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Ming issued the following edict: From ancient times, Xia Yu collected metal from the shepherds of Kyushu and molded it into the shape of hundreds of ghosts and gods, so that people would know the gods and ghosts, and would not encounter ghosts when walking in the mountains and forests.

古文：遭德则兴，迁于商、周；周德既衰，鼎乃沦亡。
现代文：鼎逢有德之君便出现，所以传之商、周；周德衰亡，鼎也沉没入泗水。
English: Ding Feng, the prince of virtue, appeared, so the legendary merchant, Zhou; Zhou De decline, Ding also sank into the turbid waters.

古文：祥瑞之降，以应有德。
现代文：吉祥事物的出现，是应验有德的。
English: The appearance of auspicious things is a virtuous result.

古文：方今政化多僻，何以致兹？
现代文：现在政事教化不昌明，何以出现宝鼎呢？
English: Now that political education is not flourishing, why did Baoding appear?

古文：《易》曰鼎象三公，岂公卿奉职得其理邪？
现代文：《易经》上说鼎是三公的象征，大概是公卿奉行职事很得体吧？
English: "I Ching" says that the ring is a symbol of the Three Princes, so it must be very appropriate for a nobleman to perform his duties, right?

古文：太常其以礿祭之日，陈鼎于庙，以备器用。
现代文：太常在夏祭这天，把鼎陈放到宗庙，以备器用。
English: On the day of the summer festival, it is very common to place the Ding Chen in the ancestral temple to prepare it for use.

古文：赐三公帛五十匹，九卿、二千石半之。
现代文：赏赐三公帛五十匹，九卿二千石二十五匹。
English: He rewarded the three princes with fifty horses and the nine nobles with twenty-five horses worth two thousand koku.

古文：先帝诏书，禁人上事言圣，而间者章奏颇多浮词，自今若有过称虚誉，尚书皆宜抑而不省，示不为谄子蚩也。 
现代文：先帝的诏书，禁止人上书言事称圣，而近来有些章奏，颇多浮夸虚词，自今以后如再有过头的称谓和溢美之词，尚书都应抑压而不加省览。表示不为谄媚的人所讥笑。 
English: The previous emperor's edict forbade people to call books and things sacred, but recently there have been some chapters, quite a lot of pompous and false words. From now on, if there are any excessive titles and praise words, Shangshu should be suppressed without review. It means not to be ridiculed by flatterers.

古文：冬十月，行幸鲁，祠东海恭王陵；会沛王辅、楚王英、济南王康、东平王苍、淮阳王延、琅邪王京、东海王政。
现代文：冬十月，明帝到鲁，祭祀东海恭王陵；会见沛王刘辅、楚王刘英、洛南王刘康、东平王刘苍、淮阳王刘延、琅笽王刘京、东海王刘政。
English: In the winter of October, Emperor Ming went to Lu to offer sacrifices at the tomb of King Gong of the East Sea; he met with King Liu Fu of Pei, King Liu Ying of Chu, King Liu Kang of Luonan, King Liu Cang of Dongping, King Liu Yan of Huaiyang, King Liu Jing of Qin, and King Liu Zheng of the East Sea.

古文：十二月，还，幸阳城，遣使者祠中岳。
现代文：十二月，明帝返回，到阳城，派使者祭祀中岳嵩山。
English: In December, Emperor Ming returned to Yangcheng and sent an envoy to worship Zhongyue Songshan.

古文：壬午，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十四日，回到洛阳。
English: On the 24th, he returned to Luoyang.

古文：东平王苍、琅邪王京从驾来朝皇太后。
现代文：东平王刘苍、琅笽王刘京随帝进宫朝拜皇太后。
English: Dongping King Liu Cang and Shun King Liu Jing followed the emperor into the palace to pay homage to the empress dowager.

古文：七年春正月癸卯，皇太后阴氏崩。
现代文：七年春正月二十日，皇太后阴氏去世。
English: On the 20th day of the first month of the seventh year of the Spring, Empress Dowager Houyin passed away.

古文：二月庚申，葬光烈皇后。
现代文：二月初八，葬光烈皇后。
English: On the eighth day of the second month, the funeral of Empress Guanglie began.

古文：秋八月戊辰，北海王兴薨。
现代文：秋八月十八日，北海王刘兴去世。
English: On August 18th, Liu Xing, the king of the North Sea, passed away.

古文：是岁，北匈奴遣使乞和亲。
现代文：这年，北匈奴派使者来求和亲。
English: That year, the Northern Xiongnu sent an envoy to Trong to sue for peace.

古文：八年春正月己卯，司徒范迁薨。
现代文：八年春正月初二，司徒范迁逝世。
English: On the second day of the first month of the eighth year of spring, Sito Fanqian passed away.

古文：三月辛卯，太尉虞延为司徒，卫尉赵憙行太尉事。
现代文：三月辛卯，任太尉虞延为司徒。卫尉赵熹代行太尉职务。
English: In March of Xinwu, the captain Yu Yan was appointed as the steward. The guard lieutenant Zhao Jun performed the duties of captain on his behalf.

古文：遣越骑司马郑众报使北匈奴。
现代文：派越骑司马郑众回访北匈奴。
English: He sent Zheng Zong, a Vietnamese cavalry officer, to pay a return visit to the North Huns.

古文：初置度辽将军，屯五原曼柏。
现代文：开始设置度辽将军，屯驻五原曼柏。
English: General Du Liao was appointed and stationed in Wuhan.

古文：秋，郡国十四雨水。
现代文：秋，郡国十四雨水。
English: In autumn, the county has 14 rainy days.

古文：冬十月，北宫成。
现代文：冬十月，北宫落成。
English: In the winter of October, the North Palace was completed.

古文：丙子，临辟雍，养三老、五更。
现代文：初四，明帝临辟雍，享三老、五更酒食。
English: On the fourth day of the first lunar month, Emperor Ming pardoned Yong, and they enjoyed wine and food for three days and five days.

古文：礼毕，诏三公募郡国中都官死罪系囚，减罪一等，勿笞，诣度辽将军营，屯朔方、五原之边县；妻子自随，便占著边县；父母同产欲相代者，恣听之。
现代文：礼毕，诏令三公募郡国中都官宣布凡死刑在押囚犯，减罪一等，不要笞打，送到度辽将军兵营，屯垦朔方、五原的边县，妻子自愿相随，便算边县户籍，父母同胞兄弟想换替的，一律照准。
English: At the end of the ceremony, the county vice-governor announced that all the prisoners sentenced to death in custody would have their crimes reduced to the first degree, and would not be beaten. They would be sent to the General Du Liao's military camp, and to the border counties of Shuofang and Wuhuan. If their wives volunteered to accompany them, they would be registered as residents of the border counties. If their parents or brothers and sisters wanted to change their names, they would be allowed to do so.

古文：其大逆无道殊死者，一切募下蚕室。
现代文：其中大逆不道非斩首不可的，一律下蚕室实施腐刑。
English: Among them, those who commit high treason are to be beheaded, and all of them are to be subjected to corrosive punishment in the silkworm room.

古文：亡命者令赎罪各有差。凡徙者，赐弓弩衣粮。
现代文：逃跑了的罪犯，分别赎罪。凡是迁移的，赏赐弓弩衣服口粮。
English: The criminals who have fled, expiate separately. Those who have migrated, reward with bow and arrows, clothing and food rations.

古文：壬寅晦，日有食之，既。
现代文：三十日，日全蚀。
English: A total solar eclipse will occur on the 30th.

古文：诏曰： 朕以无德，奉承大业，而下贻人怨，上动三光。
现代文：明帝下诏说： 我因为薄德，继承大业，下给人民怨尤，上更震动日月星辰。
English: Emperor Ming issued an edict saying, "Because of my poor virtue, I have inherited a great cause, and I have caused the people to feel bitter, and I have shaken the sun, moon, and stars.

古文：日食之变，其灾尤大，《春秋》图谶所为至谴。
现代文：日蚀的变故，灾害最大，所以《春秋》图谶认为是极大的谴责。
English: The solar eclipse is the greatest disaster, so the "Spring and Autumn" cartoon is considered to be a great condemnation.

古文：永思厥咎，在予一人。
现代文：我久久地反省过咎，完全在我一人身上。
English: I've been reflecting on my mistakes for a long time, and it's all on me.

古文：群司勉修职事，极言无讳。 于是在位者皆上封事，各言得失。
现代文：所有官员勉力做好工作，尽量批评政事，不要忌讳。 于是在职官员，纷纷上奏封书，畅言政治得失。
English: All officials try their best to do a good job, criticize political affairs as much as possible, and don't be shy about it. Therefore, incumbent officials have submitted sealed letters one after another, and openly talked about political gains and losses.

古文：帝览章，深自引咎，乃以所上班示百官。
现代文：明帝看了这些奏章，深自引咎。便将上书所提意见，颁告百官。
English: Emperor Ming read these records and deeply reproached himself. He then issued the opinions proposed in the letter to all the officials.

古文：诏曰： 群僚所言，皆朕之过。人冤不能理，吏黠不能禁；而轻用人力，缮修宫宇，出入无节，喜怒过差。
现代文：诏令说： 各位官员所讲的，都是我的过错，人们有冤屈得不到昭雪平反；官吏阴险刻薄得不到禁止；而轻易劳民伤财，缮修宫宇，出入没有节制，喜怒不能适中。
English: The edict said: What the officials have said is all my fault. People have grievances that cannot be clarified and redressed; officials cannot be prohibited from being insidious and mean; and it is easy to hurt people's wealth, repair palaces, enter and leave without restraint, and cannot be moderate in joy and anger.

古文：昔应门失守，《关睢》刺世；飞蓬随风，微子所叹。
现代文：以前人主荒政，贤人歌《关雎》讽刺；心神不定像飞蓬，微子感叹。
English: In the past, the people were the masters of despotism, and the wise man's song "Guanzhang" was satirical; the mind and spirit were like a flying canopy, and the microbe sighed.

古文：永览前戒，竦然兢惧。
现代文：朗读这些告戒，不禁毛骨竦然，战战栗栗。
English: As I read these admonitions aloud, I could not help but shudder and tremble.

古文：徒恐薄德，久而致怠耳。 
现代文：惟恐薄德，久而怠惰呢！ 
English: But beware of being weak-minded and lazy for too long!

古文：北匈奴寇西河诸郡。
现代文：北匈奴入寇西河诸郡。
English: The Northern Huns entered the counties along the Kosi River.

古文：九年春三月辛丑，诏郡国死罪囚减罪，与妻子诣五原、朔方占著，所在死者皆赐妻父若男同产一人复终身；其妻无父兄独有母者，赐其母钱六万，又复其口算。
现代文：九年春三月初一，诏令郡国死罪囚犯减罪，与妻子儿女到五原、朔方落户，在那里死了的都赏赐妻父或同胞兄弟一人免赋终身；其妻没有父兄只有母亲的，赏赐母亲六万钱，还免去其人口税。
English: On the first day of March in the spring of the ninth year, the imperial edict ordered the county and state death penalty prisoners to commute their crimes, and to settle down with their wives and children in Wuhuan and Shuofang. Those who died there were awarded one wife, father or brother free of charge for life; if his wife had no father or brother but only a mother, his mother was awarded 60,000 yuan and his population tax was also exempted.

古文：夏四月甲辰，诏郡国以公田赐贫人各有差。
现代文：夏四月甲辰，诏令郡国拿公田分别赏赐贫民。
English: At the first hour of the fourth month of the summer, the county government issued a decree to reward the poor with public land separately.

古文：令司隶校尉、部刺史岁上墨绶长吏视事三岁已上理状尤异者各一人，与计偕上。
现代文：令司隶校尉、部刺史每年上报墨绶长吏视事三年以上，以及理状特别突出的各一人，与计吏同上。
English: The records of the superintendent, the lieutenant, and the secretary shall be reported annually to the chief inspector for more than three years, as well as one person with a particularly outstanding record, the same as that of the inspector.

古文：及尤不政理者，亦以闻。
现代文：很不会理政者，也上报。
English: Those who are not very good at governing are also reported.

古文：是岁，大有年。为四姓小侯开立学校，置《五经》师。
现代文：这年，大丰收，为外戚樊、郭、阴、马四姓子弟开立学校，设置《五经》师。
English: This year, with a bumper harvest, a school was opened for the four children of his maternal relatives, Gong, Guo, Yin and Ma, and a "Five Classics" division was set up.

古文：十年春二月，广陵王荆有罪，自杀，国除。
现代文：十年春二月，广陵王刘荆有罪，自杀，封国撤除。
English: In the spring and February of the 10th year, Guangling Wang Liu Jing was found guilty, committed suicide, and the state seal was removed.

古文：夏四月戊子，诏曰： 昔岁五谷登衍，今兹蚕麦善收，其大赦天下。
现代文：夏四月二十四日，明帝诏令说： 去年五谷丰登，今年蚕麦又好，大赦天下。
English: On the 24th day of the 4th month of summer, Emperor Ming decreed: Last year's grain was plentiful, this year's silkworm and barley are good, and the world will be amnestied.

古文：方盛夏长养之时，荡涤宿恶，以报农功。
现代文：现在正是盛夏万物生长的好时光，应当排除一切不利因素，以利农功。
English: Now is a good time for the growth of all things in midsummer, and all unfavorable factors should be eliminated to benefit agricultural work.

古文：百姓勉务桑稼，以备灾害。
现代文：老百姓要努力桑麻稼穑，防备水旱虫灾。
English: Ordinary people should work hard to grow mulberry and prevent floods, droughts and insect infestations.

古文：吏敬厥职，无令愆堕。
现代文：官员要搞好本职工作，不要犯罪堕落。 
English: Officials should do a good job in their duties and not commit crimes.

古文：闰月甲午，南巡狩，幸南阳，祠章陵。
现代文：闰十月初三，明帝南巡视察。到南阳，祭祀章陵。
English: On the third day of the tenth lunar month, the Ming Emperor inspected the south. He went to Nanyang and made a religious offering at the tomb.

古文：日北至，又祠旧宅。
现代文：夏至日，祭祀旧居。
English: On the summer solstice, a ritual is held at the former residence.

古文：礼毕，召校官弟子作雅乐，奏《鹿鸣》，帝自御埙篪和之，以娱嘉宾。
现代文：礼毕，召集学校主管及弟子演奏雅乐，歌唱《鹿鸣》的诗篇，明帝亲自吹着埙篪相和，与大家同乐。
English: After the ceremony, the school leaders and disciples were called together to play classical music and sing the poem "Deer Calls." Emperor Ming himself played the gongs and harmonies and enjoyed the music with everyone.

古文：还，幸南顿，劳飨三老、官属。
现代文：返转时到南顿，以酒食慰劳三老、官属。
English: When returning to Nantong, he consoled the three elders and officials with wine and food.

古文：冬十一月，征淮阳王延会平舆，征沛王辅会睢阳。
现代文：冬十一月，征召淮阳王刘延到平舆相会，征召沛王刘辅到睢阳相会。
English: In the winter of November, Huaiyang Wang Liu Yan was summoned to the Pingyang Inter-Ministerial Meeting, and Pei Wang Liu Yu was summoned to the Shenyang Inter-Ministerial Meeting.

古文：十二月甲午，车驾还宫。
现代文：十二月初四，明帝回到洛阳。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, Emperor Ming returned to Luoyang.

古文：十一年春正月，沛王辅、楚王英、济南王康、东平王苍、淮阳王延、中山王焉、琅邪王京、东海王政来朝。
现代文：十一年春正月，沛王刘辅、楚王刘英、济南王刘康、东平王刘苍、淮阳王刘延、中山王刘焉、琅笽王刘京、东海王刘政入京朝拜。
English: In the first month of the spring of the eleventh year, King Liu of Pei, King Liu of Chu, King Liu Kang of Jinan, King Liu Cang of Dongping, King Liu Yan of Huaiyang, King Liu Yan of Zhongshan, King Liu Jing of Qin, and King Liu Zheng of Donghai entered Beijing to pay homage.

古文：秋七月，司隶校尉郭霸下狱死。
现代文：秋七月，司隶校尉郭霸下狱死。
English: In the autumn of July, Sili Lieutenant Guo Ba died in prison.

古文：是岁，漅湖出黄金，庐江太守以献。
现代文：这年，巢湖出现黄金，庐江太守献黄金。
English: This year, gold appeared in Chaohu Lake, and the Lijiang River Taishou donated gold.

古文：时，麒麟、白雉、醴泉、嘉禾所在出焉。
现代文：当时麒麟、白雉、醴泉、嘉禾，随地都有出现。
English: At that time, unicorns, egrets, geese, and geese appeared everywhere.

古文：十二年春正月，益州徼外夷哀牢王相率内属，于是置永昌郡，罢益州西部都尉。
现代文：十二年春正月，益州界外夷哀牢王率领全部族归附内地，于是设置永昌郡，免去益州西部都尉。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 12th year, the king of Yizhou led all the tribes to return to the mainland, so he set up Yongchang County and removed the western captain of Yizhou.

古文：夏四月，遣将作谒者王吴修汴渠，自荥阳至于千乘海口。
现代文：夏四月，派将作谒者王吴修理汴渠，从荥阳到达千乘海口。
English: In the summer of April, Wang Wu, the author of the poem, was sent to repair the poem canal, and the poem reached Qianren Haikou from Fenyang.

古文：五月丙辰，赐天下男子爵，人二级，三老、孝悌、力田人三级，流民无名数欲占者人一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、笃癃、贫无家属不能自存者粟，人三斛。
现代文：五月初四，赏赐天下男子爵位，每人二级，三老、孝悌、力田每人三级；流民无户归首的每人一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、患绝症、穷而无家不能活下去的每人发粟三斛。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month of the lunar calendar, every man in the world was awarded a knighthood of the second level, and every elder, filial son and son-in-law was awarded the third level; every displaced person without a family was awarded the first level; and every widower, widow, orphan, widow, terminally ill, poor and homeless person who could not live without a home was awarded the third grade of poppy.

古文：诏曰： 昔曾、闵奉亲，竭欢致养；仲尼葬子，有棺无椁。
现代文：诏令说： 从前曾子、闵子侍奉父母，都竭尽全力孝养；孔子葬子，有棺无椁。
English: The edict said, "In the past, great-grandsons and great-nephews served their parents and did their best to raise them with filial piety. Confucius buried his son in a coffin without a coffin.

古文：丧贵致哀，礼存宁俭。
现代文：办丧事贵在表达哀思，礼仪表现在入土为安和俭朴上。
English: Funerals are about expressing grief, and etiquette is now about being down to earth and frugal.

古文：今百姓送终之制，竞为奢靡。
现代文：目前百姓送终的做法，都比阔气讲排场。
English: At present, the practice of sending people to the end of their lives is more ostentatious than lavish.

古文：生者无担石之储，而财力尽于坟土。
现代文：结果生者无一石米之储存，所有的财力都用在丧葬上。
English: As a result, the living do not have a single kilo of rice to store, and all financial resources are spent on funerals.

古文：伏腊无糟糠，而牲牢兼于一奠。
现代文：伏日、腊日无糟糠之食，而把猪羊用于一奠之丧祭。
English: On the other hand, pigs and sheep are used as a funeral offering.

古文：糜破积世之业，以供终朝之费，子孙饥寒，绝命于此，岂祖考之意哉！
现代文：历代的积蓄，一个早晨浪费掉，子孙饥寒，命运就这样断送，这难道是祖先的心愿吗？
English: Is it the wish of our forefathers that the savings of all generations should be squandered in a single morning, that our children and grandchildren should go hungry and cold, and that our fate should be sealed in this way?

古文：又车服制度，恣极耳目。
现代文：还有车马服饰，尽情讲究奢华。
English: There are also chariot and horse costumes, which are as luxurious as possible.

古文：田荒不耕，游食者众。
现代文：田地荒芜，游手好闲的人成堆。
English: The fields are deserted and hordes of idle people roam about.

古文：有司其申明科禁，宜于今者，宣下郡国。 
现代文：各级政府官员应申明各种法规禁令，适用于今天的，向郡国宣布执行。 
English: Government officials at all levels should affirm the various regulations and prohibitions that apply today, and announce them to the county for implementation.

古文：秋七月乙亥，司空伏恭罢。
现代文：秋七月二十四日，司空伏恭免职。
English: On the 24th day of the 7th month of autumn, Sikuku Fuki was relieved of his duties.

古文：乙未，大司农牟融为司空。
现代文：乙未，任大司农牟融为司空。
English: B Wei, the director of the Department of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, became the secretary of the Air Force.

古文：冬十月，司隶校尉王康下狱死。
现代文：冬十月，司隶校尉王康下狱死。
English: In the winter of October, Wang Kang, a sergeant major, went to prison and died.

古文：是岁，天下安平，人无徭役，岁比登稔，百姓殷富，粟斛三十，牛羊被野。
现代文：这年，天下安定，人无徭役，收成很好，百姓富足，粟米每斛仅三十钱，牛羊遍野。
English: This year, the world was stable, there was no famine, the harvest was good, the people were rich, the corn was only thirty cents per bushel, and the cattle and sheep were everywhere.

古文：十三年春二月，帝耕于藉田。
现代文：十三年春二月，明帝耕于藉田。
English: In the spring and February of the thirteenth year, Emperor Ming began to cultivate the rented fields.

古文：礼毕，赐观者食。
现代文：礼毕，赐观者酒食。
English: After the ceremony, the audience is given food and drink.

古文：三月，河南尹薛昭下狱死。
现代文：三月，河南尹薛昭下狱死。
English: In March, Henan Yin Xue Zhao died in prison.

古文：夏四月，汴渠成。
现代文：夏四月，汴渠修理完毕。
English: In the summer of April, the repair of the canal was completed.

古文：辛巳，行幸荥阳，巡行河渠。
现代文：初四，明帝到荥阳，巡视河渠。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Emperor Ming went to Fenyang to inspect the canals.

古文：乙酉，诏曰： 自汴渠决败，六十余岁，加顷年以来，雨水不时，汴流东侵，日月益甚，水门故处，皆在河中，漭瀁广溢，莫测圻岸，荡荡极望，不知纲纪。
现代文：初八，诏令说 ：自汴渠决坏，六十余年，加以近年以来，雨水不时，汴水东流侵蚀，一天天严重，原来的水门，都处在河中，渺茫横溢，望不到边际，极目滔滔不知怎样治理。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, the edict said: "Since the flood channel has been deteriorating for more than 60 years, and since recent years, rainwater from time to time, the east current of the floodwater has been eroding, and it is serious day by day. The original sluice gate is in the river, it is vague and overflowing, there is no edge to look at, and I do not know how to control it.

古文：今兖、豫之人，多被水患，乃云县官不先人急，好兴它役。
现代文：现兖、豫居民，多遭水患，都说县官不预先急居民之急，只令百姓服其他劳役。
English: Now, the residents of Handan and Henan, who are often affected by floods, say that the county officials do not anticipate the urgent needs of the residents, but only force the people to perform other labor services.

古文：又或以为河流入汴，幽、冀蒙利，故曰左堤强则右堤伤，左右俱强则下方伤，宜任水势所之，使人随高而处，公家息壅塞之费，百姓无陷溺之患。
现代文：又有的以为黄河流入汴水，幽州、冀州得利，所以说左堤强则右堤伤，左右都强则下方伤，应当随水势所流，使居民住于高地，公家可以节省拦截堵塞水流的费用，老百姓也没有陷溺的忧患。
English: Some people also think that the Yellow River flows into the Bohai River, and Yuzhou and Jizhou benefit the most, so they say that if the left bank is strong, the right bank will be damaged, and if both sides are strong, the lower side will be damaged. It should flow with the water potential, so that the residents can live in the highlands, the public can save the cost of intercepting and blocking the water flow, and the people do not have the sorrow of drowning.

古文：议者不同，南北异论，朕不知所从，久而不决。
现代文：议论不同，南北矛盾，我拿不定主意，久而未决。
English: The arguments are different, the North-South contradiction, I am undecided, and I have not decided for a long time.

古文：今既筑堤理渠，绝水立门，河、汴分流，复其旧迹，陶丘之北，渐就壤坟，故荐嘉玉絜牲，以礼河神。
现代文：现已筑堤理渠，断水立门，黄河汴水分流，恢复旧道，陶丘以北，平壤土阜，慢慢形成，因而备荐嘉玉洁牲，礼祀黄河神祗。
English: At present, dikes and canals have been built, water gates have been built, the Yellow River has been diverted, and the old road has been restored. North of Taoqiu, the soil of Pyongyang has been slowly formed. Therefore, Jiayu Jiezhu is recommended, and the Yellow River deity is worshipped.

古文：东过洛汭，叹禹之绩。
现代文：东过洛水入黄河之处，赞叹禹帝的功绩。
English: East of Luoshui into the Yellow River, he praised the exploits of Emperor Yu.

古文：今五土之宜，反其正色，滨渠下田，赋与贫人，无令豪右得固其利，庶继世宗《瓠子》之作。 因遂度河。
现代文：现在山林、川泽、丘陵、坟衍，原隰五土各得其宜，恢复了土性。接近水渠的下田，交给贫民，不要让强豪独霸其利，希望能继承世宗的遗风，媲美塞瓠子决河的伟业。 
English: Now, the mountains, the rivers, the hills, the burial grounds, and the five original lands have been restored to their natural state. The lower fields near the water channels should be given to the poor, and the powerful should not be allowed to dominate. It is hoped that they will inherit the legacy of the Sejong, comparable to the great cause of the Sejong River.

古文：登太行，进幸上党。
现代文：于是就渡过黄河，登太行山，行进到上党。
English: So they crossed the Yellow River, climbed Mount Taihang and marched to Shangdang.

古文：壬寅，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十五日，明帝回到洛阳。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Guangwu returned to Luoyang.

古文：冬十月壬辰晦，日有食之。三公免冠自劾。
现代文：冬十月壬辰日，日蚀。三公免冠自我检讨错误。
English: Winter, October, Imjin day, solar eclipse. The Three Noble Truths are exempt from self-examination errors.

古文：制曰： 冠履勿劾。
现代文：明帝命令说 ：你们官员不要自己弹劾自己。
English: Emperor Ming ordered, "You officials, do not impeach yourselves.

古文：灾异屡见，咎在朕躬，忧惧遑遑，未知其方。
现代文：灾异屡见，过咎在我，我忧恐不安，不知怎么办才好。
English: Disasters are common, I am to blame, I am worried and anxious, I don't know what to do.

古文：将有司陈事，多所隐讳，使君上壅蔽，下有不畅乎？
现代文：难道是官员们反映情况，多所忌讳隐瞒，使我耳目闭塞，使得下面的事情不能畅达吗？
English: Could it be that officials are reflecting the situation, concealing many taboos, blocking my ears and eyes, making the following things impossible to reach?

古文：昔卫有忠臣，灵公得守其位。今何以和穆阴阳，消伏灾谴？
现代文：从前卫灵公无道，幸有忠臣匡辅才得以守住他的尊位，现在怎么样才能和穆阴阳，消去灾祸呢？
English: In the past, there was no way out for Wei Ling Gong. Fortunately, there was a loyal subject, Kuanshu, who was able to maintain his dignity. Now, how can we eliminate the disaster with Mu Yin Yang?

古文：刺史、太守详刑理冤，存恤鳏孤，勉思职焉。
现代文：刺史、太守要详察刑案，理清冤案，慰问抚恤鳏、寡、孤、独者，勉力做好本职工作啊。 
English: Historians and governors-general should investigate criminal cases in detail, sort out unjust cases, offer condolences to the bereaved, widows, orphans and the lonely, and do their best to do their job.

古文：十一月，楚王英谋反，废，国除，迁于泾县，所连及死徙者数千人。
现代文：十一月，楚王刘英谋反，废去王位，撤销封国，迁移到泾县，株连而死以及被流放的有数千人。
English: In November, King Liu Ying of Chu plotted a rebellion, abdicated the throne, revoked the state seal, moved to Jixian County, and thousands of people died and were exiled.

古文：是岁，齐王石薨。
现代文：这年，齐王刘石去世。
English: This year, the king of Qi, Liu Shi, passed away.

古文：十四年春三月甲戌，司徒虞延免，自杀。
现代文：十四年春三月初三，司徒虞延免职，自杀。
English: On the third day of the third month of March in the spring of the 14th year of the Heian period, Shigetoyo was relieved of his duties and committed suicide.

古文：夏四月丁巳，巨鹿太守南阳邢穆为司徒。
现代文：夏四月十六日，任巨鹿太守南阳人邢穆为司徒。
English: On the 16th day of the 4th month of the summer, the person who was appointed as Koga Taishu Nanyang, Zou Mu, became a disciple.

古文：前楚王英自杀。
现代文：前楚王刘英自杀。
English: Former King of Chu Liu Ying commits suicide.

古文：夏五月，封故广陵王荆子元寿为广陵侯。
现代文：夏五月，封故广陵王刘荆子刘元寿为广陵侯。
English: In the summer of May, the late Guangling King Liu Jing's son Liu Yuan Shou was enthroned as Guangling Prince.

古文：初作寿陵。
现代文：开始建寿陵。
English: Construction of the mausoleum began.

古文：十五年春二月庚子，东巡狩。
现代文：十五年春二月初四，明帝东巡视察。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the fifteenth year of spring, the East Ming Dynasty inspection tour began.

古文：辛丑，幸偃师，诏亡命自殊死以下赎：死罪缣四十匹，右趾至髡钳城旦舂十匹，完城旦至司寇五匹；犯罪未发觉，诏书到日自告者，半入赎。
现代文：初五，到偃师。诏令亡命之徒从斩刑以下可以赎罪：死罪缣四十匹，刖脚至髡钳城旦舂十匹，完城旦至司寇五匹；犯罪未发觉，诏书到日自首的半入赎。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the emperor issued an edict that condemned criminals could atone for their crimes from beheading onward: forty horses for capital crimes, ten horses for lameness up to and including castration, and five horses for theft up to and including imprisonment; if the crime was not discovered, the emperor issued an edict that half of those who turned themselves in on that day would be redeemed.

古文：征沛王辅会睢阳。
现代文：征召沛王刘辅在睢阳相会。
English: The conscription of Pei Wang Liu Fu was held in Shenyang.

古文：进幸彭城。
现代文：行进到彭城。
English: March to Pengcheng.

古文：癸亥，帝耕于下邳。
现代文：二十七日，明帝耕于下邳。
English: On the 27th, the Ming emperor ploughed the lower plough.

古文：三月，征琅邪王京会良成，征东平王苍会阳都，又征广陵侯及其三弟会鲁。
现代文：三月，征召琅笽王刘京在良成相会，征召东平王刘苍在阳都相会，又征召广陵侯及其三弟在鲁相会。
English: In March, Liu Jing, the king of Qi, was summoned to a meeting in Liangcheng, Liu Cang, the king of Dongping, was summoned to a meeting in Yangdu, and Guangling Hou and his three brothers were summoned to a meeting in Luzhou.

古文：祠东海恭王陵。
现代文：祭祀东海恭王陵。
English: A ritual is held at the tomb of King Tokaikyo.

古文：还，幸孔子宅，祠仲尼及七十二弟子。
现代文：还京时，到孔子宅，祭祀孔子及七十二弟子。
English: When he returned to Beijing, he went to Confucius' house to worship Confucius and his seventy-two disciples.

古文：亲御讲堂，命皇太子、诸王说经。
现代文：亲到讲堂，叫皇太子、诸王述说经义。
English: He personally went to the lecture hall and asked the crown prince and the kings to recite the sutras.

古文：又幸东平。
现代文：又到东平。
English: I went to Dongping again.

古文：辛卯，进幸大梁，至定陶，祠定陶恭王陵。
现代文：辛卯，行进到大梁，至定陶，祭祀定陶恭王陵。
English: Xinwu, marching to Daliang, to Dingtao, to offer sacrifices to Dingtao Gong Wang Mausoleum.

古文：夏四月庚子，车驾还宫。
现代文：夏四月庚子，明帝回到洛阳。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Ming returned to Luoyang.

古文：改信都为乐成国，临淮为下邳国。
现代文：改信都为乐成国，临淮为下邳国。
English: All of the altered letters are from Lecheng, and Linhuai is from Jiaozuo.

古文：封皇子恭为巨鹿王、党为乐成王、衍为下邳王、畅为汝南王、昞为常山王、长为济阴王。
现代文：封皇子刘恭为巨鹿王，刘党为乐成王，刘衍为下邳王，刘畅为汝南王，刘日丙为常山王，刘长为济阴王。
English: Liu Gong, the son of Emperor Feng, was the King of the Giant Deer, Liu Dang was the King of Le Cheng, Liu Yan was the King of the Lower Yunnan, Liu Chang was the King of the Southern Ruins, Liu Nichi was the King of Mount Chang, and Liu Chang was the King of Jiyin.

古文：赐天下男子爵，人三级；郎、从官视事二十岁已上帛百匹，十岁已上二十匹，十岁已下十匹，官府吏五匹，书佐、小史三匹。
现代文：赏赐天下男子爵位，每人三级；郎、从官视事二十岁以上帛百匹，十岁以上二十匹，十岁以下十匹，官府吏五匹，书佐、小史三匹。
English: Awarded the world's male peerage, three levels per person; son-in-law, twenty years of age or older, twenty years of age or older, twenty years of age or older, ten years of age or younger, five government officials, three clerks and clerks.

古文：令天下大酺五日。
现代文：命令天下可以聚会畅饮五日。
English: The world was ordered to gather and drink freely for five days.

古文：乙巳，大赦天下，其谋反大逆及诸不应宥者，皆赦除之。
现代文：乙巳日，大赦天下，谋反大逆及其他不应宽宥的，一律赦免。
English: On the 21st day of the month, there will be a general amnesty, and those who conspire to commit high treason and others who should not be pardoned will all be pardoned.

古文：冬，车骑校猎上林苑。
现代文：冬，车骑校猎上林苑。
English: In winter, the cycling school hunts in the forest.

古文：十二月，遣奉车都尉窦固、驸马都尉耿秉屯凉州。
现代文：十二月，派奉车都尉窦固、驸马都尉耿秉屯兵凉州。
English: In December, he sent Lieutenant Dou Gu and Lieutenant Geng Bing to Liangzhou.

古文：十六年春二月，遣太仆祭肜出高阙，奉车都尉窦固出酒泉，驸马都尉耿秉出居延，骑都尉来苗出平城，伐北匈奴。窦固破呼衍王于天山，留兵屯伊吾庐城。
现代文：十六年春二月，派太仆祭肜出高阙、奉车都尉窦固出酒泉、驸马都尉耿秉出居延、骑都尉来苗出平城，讨伐北匈奴、窦固在天山打败呼衍王，留兵驻防伊吾卢城。
English: In the spring and February of the 16th year of the Heian period, he sent the eunuch Saisai to fight the Northern Xiongnu, the chariot commander Dou Gu to fight the Jiuquan, the horse commander Genbing to fight the Juyan, and the cavalry commander Lai Miao to fight the Pingcheng, and Dou Gu to fight the Huyan Wang in the Tianshan, and the soldiers were stationed in the Iguru city.

古文：耿秉、来苗、祭肜并无功而还。
现代文：耿秉、来苗、祭肜都没有战功而返。
English: Geng Bing, Lai Miao, and Saige did not return from the war.

古文：夏五月，淮阳王延谋反，发觉。
现代文：夏五月，淮阳王刘延谋反，被发觉。
English: In the summer of May, Liu Yan, the king of Huaiyang, plotted a rebellion and was discovered.

古文：癸丑，司徒邢穆、驸马都尉韩光坐事下狱死，所连及诛死者甚众。
现代文：二十五日，司徒邢穆、驸马都尉韩光因事下狱而死，株连被杀的很多。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Szu Yeon-moo and Yeonma lieutenant Han Kwang died in prison as a result of the incident, and many of the companies were killed.

古文：戊午晦，日有食之。
现代文：三十日，有日食发生。
English: On the 30th, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：六月丙寅，大司农西河王敏为司徒。
现代文：六月初八。大司农西河王刘敏任为司徒。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, Liu Min, the head of the West River King farmers, was appointed as a disciple.

古文：秋七月，淮阳王延徙封阜陵王。
现代文：秋七月，淮阳王刘延徙封为阜陵王。
English: In autumn and July, Liu Yan, the king of Huaiyang, was enthroned as the king of Fulin.

古文：九月丁卯，诏令郡国中都官死罪系囚减死罪一等，勿笞，诣军营，屯朔方、敦煌；妻子自随，父母同产欲求从者，恣听之；女子嫁为人妻，勿与俱。谋反大逆无道不用此书。
现代文：九月丁卯日，诏令郡国中都官死罪系囚减死罪一等，不要笞打，送到军营，屯垦朔方、敦煌；妻子儿女一道跟随，同胞兄弟想一同去的，随他们的意愿；女子已嫁人为妻，不要同往，谋反大逆无道，不适用这道诏令。
English: On September 9th, the imperial edict ordered the county-level capital punishment system prisoners to reduce the death penalty to the first degree, not to beat, to send to the military camp, to settle in Shuofang and Dunhuang; wives and children to follow together, compatriots and brothers want to go together, according to their wishes; women have been married, do not go together, there is no way to conspire to rebel, and this imperial edict does not apply.

古文：是岁，北匈奴寇云中，云中太守廉范击破之。
现代文：这年，北匈奴入寇云中，云中太守廉范将他打败。
English: In that year, the Northern Xiongnu invaded Yunnan, and Yunnan's grand marshal Lian Fan defeated him.

古文：十七年春正月，甘露降于甘陵。
现代文：十七年春正月，甘陵下降及时雨。
English: In the first month of the seventeenth year of the Spring, it rained for the first time in Ganling.

古文：北海王睦薨。
现代文：北海王刘睦去世。
English: The king of the North Sea, Liu Mucong, has died.

古文：二月乙巳，司徒王敏薨。
现代文：二月乙巳日，司徒王敏去世。
English: On the 21st day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：三月癸丑，汝南太守鲍昱为司徒。
现代文：三月二十九日，任汝南太守鲍昱为司徒。
English: On the 29th of March, Bao Tong, the first governor of the Southern Yunnan Province, was appointed as a disciple.

古文：是岁，甘露仍降，树枝内附，芝草生殿前，神雀五色翔集京师。
现代文：这年，连连下降及时雨，树长连理枝，芝草生殿前，五色神雀翔集京师。
English: In this year, the rain fell in succession, the tree grew in succession, the grass sprouted in front of the hall, and the five-colored birds gathered in front of the hall.

古文：西南夷哀牢、儋耳、僬侥、槃木、白狼、动黏诸种，前后慕义贡献；西域诸国遣子入侍。
现代文：西南夷哀牢、澹耳、僬侥、木、白、动黏诸种族，前后慕义进贡；西域诸国派儿子入朝侍奉。
English: In the south-west, the Yi, Ya, Fu, Mu, Bai, and Miao ethnic groups paid tribute to the emperor; the countries in the western region sent their sons to serve the emperor.

古文：夏五月戊子，公卿百官以帝威德怀远，祥物显应，乃并集朝堂，奉觞上寿。
现代文：夏五月初五，公卿百官以帝威德怀远，祥物显应，于是齐集朝堂，捧着酒杯祝寿。
English: On the 5th day of the 5th month of summer, hundreds of court nobles and officials gathered in the morning hall to celebrate their birthdays with a glass of wine.

古文：制曰： 天生神物，以应王者；远人慕化，实由有德。
现代文：明帝命令说： 天生神物，以应王者；远人爱慕教化，实在是由于朝廷有德。
English: Emperor Ming decreed: Those who are born as gods should answer to the king; those who are born as gods should answer to the king; those who are born as gods should answer to the king; those who are born as gods should answer to the king.

古文：朕以虚薄，何以享斯？
现代文：我空虚薄德，怎能享受这种美誉？
English: How can I, who am empty and devoid of virtue, enjoy such a reputation?

古文：唯高祖、光武圣德所被，不敢有辞。
现代文：只有高祖、光武德高望重，光照四海，没有话说。
English: Only Gaozu and Guangwu are held in high esteem, shining light on the four seas, and there are no words.

古文：其敬举觞，太常择吉日策告宗庙。
现代文：我们虔城地举起酒杯，太常择吉日策告宗庙。
English: We raised our glasses reverently, too often choosing a lucky day to go to the ancestral temple.

古文：其赐天下男子爵，人二级，三老、孝悌、力田人三级，流人无名数欲占者人一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、笃癃、贫不能自存者粟，人三斛；郎、从官视事十岁以上者，帛十匹。
现代文：赏赐天下男子爵位，每人二级，三老、孝悌、力田每人三级，流人无户籍想归首的每人一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、患绝症、穷得不能活下去的，每人发斛三粟；郎、从官视事十年以上的，帛十匹。
English: The peerage of the world is awarded to men, each with the second level, the three elders, filial piety, and virtue, each with the third level; the exiles without household registration who want to return to the head, each with the first level; the widows, widowers, orphans, and the terminally ill, who are too poor to live, each with the third level; the brothers and sisters who have been in the government for more than ten years, each with the tenth level.

古文：中二千石、二千石下至黄绶，贬秩奉赎，在去年以来皆还赎。 
现代文：中二千石、二千石至黄绶，贬职出钱赎罪的，从去年以来一律退还所有赎金。 
English: From 2,000 koku to 10,000 koku, and from 2,000 koku to 10,000 koku, those who were demoted and paid money to atone for their sins have been refunding all ransom money since last year.

古文：秋八月丙寅，令武威、张掖、酒泉、敦煌及张掖属国，系囚右趾已下任兵者，皆一切勿治其罪，诣军营。
现代文：秋八月十五日，命令武威、张掖、酒泉、敦煌及张掖属国，在押囚犯刖右脚以下还可以当兵的，一律不治他们的罪，送入军营。
English: On the 15th day of the 8th month of autumn, Wuwei, Zhang Ye, Jiuquan, Dunhuang and Zhang Ye were ordered to be taken to their respective countries. If the prisoners could still serve as soldiers, they were to be executed and sent to a military camp.

古文：冬十一月，遣奉车都尉窦固、驸马都尉耿秉、骑都尉刘张出敦煌昆仑塞，击破白山虏于蒲类海上，遂人车师。
现代文：冬十一月，派奉车都尉窦固、驸马都尉耿秉、骑都尉刘张出敦煌昆仑塞，在蒲类海上击败白山胡虏，进入车师。
English: In the winter of November, he sent Feng Chariot Captain Dou Gu, Horse Chariot Captain Geng Bing, and Cavalry Captain Liu Zhang out of Dunhuang Kunlun Sea to defeat Baishan Hurui in the Pudong Sea and enter the chariot division.

古文：初置西域都护、戊己校尉。
现代文：始设西域都护、戊己校尉。
English: He was assigned to protect the western area of the capital, and became a lieutenant.

古文：是岁，改天水为汉阳郡。
现代文：这年，改天水为汉阳郡。
English: This year, Tianshui was changed to Hanyang County.

古文：十八年春三月丁亥，诏曰： 其令天下亡命，自殊死已下赎：死罪缣三十匹，右趾至髡钳城旦舂十匹，完城旦至司寇五匹；吏人犯罪未发觉，诏书到自告者，半入赎。 
现代文：十八年春三月丁亥，诏令说： 令天下亡命之徒，自斩首以下赎罪：死罪缣三十匹，刖右脚至髡钳城旦舂十匹，完城旦至司寇五匹；吏人犯罪未发觉，诏书下达自首的，半入赎。 
English: In the spring of 18 and in March of Dinghai, the imperial edict said: Let the world's desperate criminals behead themselves to atone for the following sins: the death penalty is thirty horses, the right foot is ten horses, and the end of the city is five horses; the official's crime is undetected, and if the imperial edict is issued and he surrenders, half will be redeemed.

古文：夏四月己未，诏曰： 自春已来，时雨不降，宿麦伤旱，秋种未下，政失厥中，忧惧而已。
现代文：夏四月十一日，诏令说： 自入春以来，时雨不降，去年种的麦子干坏了，秋收的作物下不了种，政事有偏差，我只有忧愁恐惧。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of summer, the imperial edict said: Since the beginning of spring, the rain does not fall, the wheat planted last year has dried up, the autumn harvest crops cannot be planted, the government affairs are deviated, I have only sorrow and fear.

古文：其赐天下男子爵，人二级，及流民无名数欲占者人一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、笃癃、贫不能自存者粟，人三斛。
现代文：赏赐天下男子爵位，每人二级，以及流民无户籍想归首的每人一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、患绝症、穷得不能活下去的，每人发粟三斛。
English: Awarded the world men's peerage, second-class per person, and displaced persons without household registration who want to return to the first-class per person; widows, widowers, orphans, the terminally ill, and those who are too poor to live, each person will receive three millet corns.

古文：理冤狱，录轻系。
现代文：平反冤错假案，放轻罪系囚。
English: wrongful conviction cases will be rectified and misdemeanor prisoners will be released.

古文：二千石分祷五岳四渎。
现代文：二千石分别祷告五岳四渎。
English: Two thousand stones separately pray for five mountains and four faults.

古文：郡界有名山大川能兴云致雨者，长吏各洁斋祷请，冀蒙嘉澍。
现代文：郡界有名山大川能兴云致雨的，长吏各自洁器斋戒，祈祷，希望蒙降及时雨，滋生万物。 
English: There are famous mountains and rivers in the county that can cause clouds and rain. The leaders should clean their utensils, fast, pray, and hope for timely rain to breed all things.

古文：六月己未，有星孛于太微。
现代文：六月十二日，彗星出现于太微星宫。
English: On June 12th, the comet appeared in the Taimiao Star Palace.

古文：焉耆、龟兹攻西域都护陈睦，悉没其众。
现代文：焉耆、龟兹攻西域都护陈睦，陈睦全军覆灭。
English: Yan Xuan and Guizi attacked the western region to protect Chen Mutu, and Chen Mutu's entire army was destroyed.

古文：北匈奴及车师后王围戊己校尉耿恭。
现代文：北匈奴及车师后王围戊己校尉耿恭。
English: Northern Xiongnu and driver Queen Wang Wai Wu himself, Lieutenant Geng Gong.

古文：秋八月壬子，帝崩于东宫前殿。年四十八。
现代文：秋八月初六，帝于东宫前殿逝世，年四十八。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month of the autumn, the emperor died in the hall in front of the East Palace, at the age of 48.

古文：遗诏无起寝庙，藏主于光烈皇后更衣别室。
现代文：遗诏令不起寝庙，藏神主牌位于光烈皇后更衣别室。
English: According to the imperial edict, there was to be no sleeping temple, and the main tablet of the god of Tibet was to be found in the changing room of Empress Guangli.

古文：帝初作寿陵，制令流水而已，石椁广一丈二尺，长二丈五尺，无得起坟。
现代文：明帝初作寿陵时，曾命令只要能散水就行了，石椁宽一丈二尺，长二丈五尺，不要起坟。
English: When Emperor Ming first built the mausoleum, he ordered that as long as water could be sprinkled, it was fine. The stone coffin was one and two feet wide and two and five feet long. Do not dig up the grave.

古文：万年之后，扫地而祭，杅水脯糒而已。
现代文：万年之后，扫地而祭，禛水脯郷就行了。
English: After ten thousand years, it is enough to sweep the ground and make a sacrifice.

古文：过百日，唯四时设奠，置吏卒数人供给洒扫，勿开修道。
现代文：过百日，只要四时祭奠，设吏卒数人供给洒扫，勿开修道。
English: After a hundred days, as long as there is a four-hour memorial service, there should be a few officials to provide sprinkling and sweeping, and do not open the monastery.

古文：敢有所兴作者，以擅议宗庙法从事。
现代文：敢有所兴作的，以擅议宗庙法论罪。
English: If anyone dares to do so, he will be charged with illegally discussing the law on ancestral temples.

古文：帝遵奉建武制度，无敢违者。
现代文：帝遵行建武年代的制度，没有敢违抗的。
English: The emperor followed the system of the Jianwu era, and no one dared to defy him.

古文：后宫之家，不得封侯与政。
现代文：外戚之家，不得封侯参政。
English: The house of a maternal relative may not be given to a lord to participate in politics.

古文：馆陶公主为子求郎，不许，而赐钱千万。
现代文：武女馆陶公主，为儿子求郎的官位，明帝没有答应，却赐钱千万。
English: Princess Tao of Wuyuan, begged for an official position for her son. Emperor Ming did not agree, but gave her tens of millions of money.

古文：谓群臣曰： 郎官上应列宿，出宰百里，苟非其人，则民受其殃，是以难之。 故吏称其官，民安其业，远近肃服，户口滋殖焉。
现代文：对群臣说： 郎官上应天上星宿，宰辖百里，如果人选不当，老百姓就要遭殃，因此不能准许。 所以明帝时期官员称职，民安其业，远近心悦诚服，户籍人口增加很多。
English: He said to the group of courtiers: The officials should be chosen according to the stars in the sky, and they should have jurisdiction over a hundred miles. If the people are not chosen properly, the people will suffer. Therefore, it cannot be allowed. Therefore, during the Ming Dynasty, the officials were competent, the people were safe in their work, the far and near were pleased, and the registered population increased a lot.

古文：论曰：明帝善刑理，法令分明。日晏坐朝，幽枉必达。
现代文：史家评论说：明帝善于刑事诉讼，法令分明，日晏坐朝，枉屈不明的问题都能得到处理。
English: Historians commented: Emperor Ming was good at criminal proceedings, the laws and regulations were clear, the Japanese government was in power, and issues that were unclear could be dealt with.

古文：内外无倖曲之私，在上无矜大之色。
现代文：内外没有侥幸徇私的心情，在上也没有骄矜炫耀的神气。
English: There is no selfishness at home or abroad, and there is no arrogance and ostentation.

古文：断狱得情，号居前代十二。
现代文：断案合情合理，案件据称仅及前代十分之二。
English: The dismissal of the case is reasonable, and the case is said to be only two-tenths of the previous generation.

古文：故后之言事者，莫不先建武、永平之政。
现代文：所以后来称颂事情办得好的，没有不推崇建武永平之政的。
English: Therefore, later on, there was no one who praised how well things were run and did not advocate the policy of Jianwu Yongping.

古文：而钟离意、宋均之徒，常以察慧为言，夫岂弘人之度未优乎？
现代文：而钟离意、宋均一伙人，常常因明帝褊察明慧而不满，这难道是弘人之度不曾宽容吗？
English: On the other hand, Zhong Liangyi, Song Jun and the others were often dissatisfied with Emperor Ming's observation and wisdom. Was it because Emperor Hongzong was not tolerant?

