古文：黄帝问曰：愿闻九针之解，虚实之道。
现代文：黄帝问道：希望听你讲讲对九针的解释，以及虚实补泻的道理。
English: Huang Di asked: I hope to listen to your explanation of the nine stitches, as well as the principle of making up for laxity.

古文：岐伯对曰：刺虚则实之者，针下热也，气实乃热也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：针刺治疗虚证要用补法，针下应有热感，因为正气充实了，针下才会发热。
English: Qibo replied, "The acupuncture for the treatment of false symptoms should use the method of supplementation. There should be a feeling of heat under the needle, because when the righteous qi is full, it will heat up under the needle.

古文：满而泄之者，针下寒也，气虚乃寒也。
现代文：针刺治疗邪气盛满的实证要用泻法，针下应有凉感，因为邪气衰退了，针下才会发凉。
English: The empirical evidence for acupuncture treatment of full of evil qi is to use the laxative method. There should be a cool feeling under the needle, because the evil qi has faded, the needle will only get cold.

古文：菀陈则除之者，出恶血也。
现代文：血液郁积日久，要用放出恶血的方法来消除。
English: Blood has been accumulating for a long time, and it is necessary to use the method of releasing bad blood to eliminate.

古文：邪盛则虚之者，出针勿按。
现代文：邪盛用泻法治疗，就是出针后不要按闭针孔。
English: Yaxeng is treated by laxative, that is, do not close the needle hole after injection.

古文：徐而疾则实者，徐出针而疾按之。疾而徐则虚者，疾出针而徐按之。言实与虚者，寒温气多少也。
现代文：为使正气实应缓慢进针、迅速出针，并在出针时迅速按闭针孔；为使邪气泻应迅速进针、缓慢出针，并在出针后不要立即按闭针孔，实与虚的根据，是指气至之时针下凉感与热感的多少。
English: In order to make the positive qi flow, the needle should be slowly inserted and quickly withdrawn, and the needle hole should be quickly closed when the needle is withdrawn; in order to make the evil qi flow, the needle should be quickly inserted and slowly withdrawn, and the needle hole should not be closed immediately after the needle is withdrawn. The basis of the true and false is the degree of coolness and heat under the needle when the qi arrives.

古文：若无若有者，疾不可知也。
现代文：若有若无，是说下针后经气到来迅速而不易察觉。
English: If there is any, it means that the flow of qi after the needle comes quickly and is not easy to detect.

古文：察后与先者，知病先后也。
现代文：审察疾病的先后，是指辨别疾病的演变进程和预后。
English: Examining the sequence of the disease means distinguishing the evolution process and prognosis of the disease.

古文：为虚与实者，工勿失其法。
现代文：辨别疾病的虚与实，这是医生治病不可离开这个原则。
English: It is a principle that doctors should not depart from in their treatment of diseases, in order to distinguish between the false and the true.

古文：若得若失者，离其法也。
现代文：若医生不能准确地把握，那么就会背离正确的治疗法则。
English: If the doctor cannot accurately grasp it, then he will deviate from the correct treatment principle.

古文：虚实之要，九针最妙者，为其各有所宜也。
现代文：虚实补泻的关键，在于巧妙地运用九针，因为九针各有不同的特点，适宜于不同的病证。
English: The key to correcting laxity lies in the skillful use of nine needles, because each of the nine needles has different characteristics and is suitable for different pathologies.

古文：补泻之时者，与气开阖相合也。
现代文：针刺补泻的时间，应该与气的来去开阖相配合。
English: The time of acupuncture to make up for diarrhea should be coordinated with the coming and going of qi.

古文：九针之名各不同形者，针穷其所当补泻也。
现代文：九针的名称不同，形状也各有所异，根据治疗需要，充分发挥各自的补泻作用。
English: The names of the nine needles are different, and their shapes are also different. According to the needs of treatment, they can give full play to their respective role in alleviating diarrhea.

古文：刺实须其虚者，留针，阴气隆至，乃去针也。刺虚须其实者，阳气隆至，针下热乃去针也。
现代文：针刺实证须用泻法，下针后应留针，待针下出现明显的寒凉之感时，即可出针；针刺虚证须用补法，待针下出现明显的温热之感时，即可出针。
English: For positive acupuncture, the laxative method should be used, the needle should be left after the needle is lowered, and when there is a clear feeling of coldness under the needle, the needle can be released; for false acupuncture, the complementary method should be used, and when there is a clear feeling of warmth under the needle, the needle can be released.

古文：经气已至，慎守勿失者，勿变更也。
现代文：经气已经到来，应谨慎守候不要失去，不要变更手法。
English: The qi has already arrived, we should be careful not to lose it and not to change the method.

古文：深浅在志者，知病之内外也。
现代文：决定针刺的深浅，就要先察明疾病部位的在内在外。
English: To determine the depth of acupuncture, it is necessary to first detect the disease site inside and out.

古文：近远如一者，浅深其候等也。
现代文：针刺虽有深浅之分，但侯气之法都是相同的。
English: Although acupuncture has its own pros and cons, the methods are all the same.

古文：如临深渊者，不敢堕也。
现代文：行针时，应似面临深渊、谨防跌落那样小心翼翼。
English: When making the needle, you should be as careful as if you were facing the abyss and beware of falling.

古文：手如握虎者，欲其壮也。
现代文：持针时，手应像握着虎符那样坚定有力。
English: When holding the needle, the hand should be as firm and strong as holding the tiger sign.

古文：神无营于众物者，静志观病人，无左右视也。
现代文：思想不要分散于其他事情，应该专心致志观察病人，不可左顾右盼。
English: Don't let your thoughts be distracted by other things. You should concentrate on observing the patient. Don't look around.

古文：义无邪下者，欲端以正也。
现代文：针刺时要凝神聚气，手法要正确。
English: Needling should be done with concentration and the correct technique.

古文：必正其神者，欲瞻病人目，制其神，令气易行也。
现代文：下针后，务必注视病人的双目来控制其精神活动，使经气运行通畅。
English: After the injection, it is important to keep an eye on the patient's eyes to control his mental activity and keep the flow of qi smooth.

古文：所谓三里者，下膝三寸也。
现代文：所说的足三里穴，在膝下外侧三寸之处。
English: The so-called soles of the feet are three inches below the knee.

古文：所谓跗上者，举膝分易见也。
现代文：所说的跗上穴，在足背上，举膝易见之处。
English: The so-called supraorbital hole is on the instep, easily visible with the knee raised.

古文：巨虚者，蹻足胻独陷者。
现代文：巨虚穴，在跷足时小腿外侧肌肉凹陷之处。
English: Gigantic fossa, where the lateral calf muscles are sunken when the foot is lame.

古文：下廉者，陷下者也。
现代文：下廉穴，在小腿外侧肌肉凹陷处的下方。
English: Mandibular fossa, below the lateral calf muscle depression.

古文：帝曰：余闻九针,上应天地四时阴阳，愿闻其方，令可传于后世,以为常也。
现代文：黄帝说：我听说九针与天地四时阴阳相应合，请你讲讲其中的道理，以使其能流传于后世，作为治病的常法。
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "I have heard that the nine needles correspond to the four o'clock yin and yang of heaven and earth. Please tell me the reason for this, so that it can be passed down to future generations as a common method of curing diseases."

古文：岐伯曰：夫一天、二地、三人、四时、五音、六律、七星、八风、九野，身形亦应之，针各有所宜，故曰九针。
现代文：岐伯说：一天、二地、三人、四时、五音、六律、七星、八风、九野，人的形体也与自然界相应，针的式样也是根据其所适应的不同病症制成的，所以有九针之名。
English: Qibo said: one day, two places, three people, four hours, five tones, six laws, seven stars, eight winds, nine fields. The human body also corresponds to the natural world. The shape of the needle is also made according to the different diseases it adapts to, so there is a name of nine needles.

古文：人皮应天，人肉应地，人脉应人，人筋应时，人声应音，人阴阳合气应律，人齿面目应星，人出入气应风，人九窍三百六十五络应野。
现代文：人的皮肤在外，庇护全身，与天相应；肌肉柔软安静，如土地厚载万物一样；脉与人身体相应；筋约束周身；人的声音与五音相应；人的脏腑阴阳之气配合犹如六律高低有节；人的牙齿和面目的排列犹如星辰一样；人的呼吸之气犹如自然界的风一样；人的九窍三百六十五络分布全身，犹如地上的百川万水，纵横灌注于九野一样。
English: The human skin is outside, sheltering the whole body, corresponding to the sky; the muscles are soft and quiet, like the land is thick with all things; the veins correspond to the human body; the sinews constrain the whole body; the human voice corresponds to the five tones; the human viscera, yin and yang, match the qi as if there were six laws of high and low; the arrangement of the human teeth and face is like the stars; the human breath is like the wind of nature; the human nine points and 365 networks are distributed throughout the body, just like the rivers of water on the earth, pouring into the nine fields.

古文：故一针皮，二针肉，三针脉，四针筋，五针骨，六针调阴阳，七针益精，八针除风，九针通九窍，除三百六十五节气，此之谓各有所主也。
现代文：所以，九种针法之中，第一是针刺皮肤，第二是针刺肉，第三是针刺经脉，第四是针刺筋膜，第五是针刺骨，第六是针刺调和阴阳，第七是针刺补益精气，第八是针刺驱除风邪，第九是针刺通利九窍，以祛除周身三百六十五节间的邪气。
English: Therefore, among the nine methods of acupuncture, the first is to acupuncture the skin, the second is to acupuncture the flesh, the third is to acupuncture the meridians, the fourth is to acupuncture the fascia, the fifth is to acupuncture the bones, the sixth is to acupuncture the harmony of yin and yang, the seventh is to acupuncture the beneficial essence, the eighth is to acupuncture the expulsion of colds, and the ninth is to acupuncture the nine acupoints to expel the evil between the three hundred and sixty-five nodes around the body.

古文：人心意应八风，人气应天，人发齿耳目五声应五音六律，人阴阳脉血气应地，人肝目应之九。
现代文：这就叫做用不同的针刺手法有不同的功用和适应证。人的心愿意向与八风相应，人体之气运行与天气运行相应，人的发齿耳目五声与五音六律相应，人体阴阳经脉运行气血与大地江河百川相应，肝脏精气通于两目，目又属于九窍，所以肝目与九数相应。
English: This is called using different acupuncture methods to have different functions and indications. The human heart is willing to move in the direction corresponding to the eight winds, the human body's qi movement corresponds to the weather movement, the human's teeth, ears, eyes, five voices correspond to the five tones and six laws, the human body's yin and yang meridians run qi and blood corresponding to the earth, rivers and streams, the liver's qi passes through the two eyes, and the eyes belong to the nine acupoints, so the liver corresponds to the number nine.

