古文：赵文若孔恪霍有邻皇甫恂裴龄六合县丞薛涛赵裴邓成张瑶
现代文：赵文若孔恪霍有邻皇甫恂裴龄六合县丞薛涛赵裴邓成张瑶
English: Zhao Wenrao, Kong Guohao have neighbors, Emperor Fu, Pei Ling, Liuhe County Warlord, Xue Tao, Zhao Pei, Deng Cheng, Zhang Xuan

古文：赵文若
现代文：赵文若
English: Zhao Wenruo

古文：隋大业中，雍州长安县人赵文若，死经七日，家人大殓，将欲入棺，乃缩一脚。
现代文：隋朝大业年间，雍州长安县人赵文若，死了七天，家人把他入殓，将要放在棺材里时，竟然有一只脚缩回来。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, Zhao Wenro, a native of An County, Yongzheng Province, died for seven days. When his family placed him in the coffin, one of his feet retreated.

古文：家人惧怕，不敢入棺，文若得活。
现代文：家里人都很害怕，不敢把他放入棺中。文若则活过来了。
English: The whole family was very scared and did not dare to put him in the coffin. However, he came back to life.

古文：眷属喜问所由，文若云，初有人引至王所，王问： 汝生存之时，作何福业？ 
现代文：家里人和亲属们惊喜地问他怎么回事。文若说：开始时，有人领着他到阎王住的地方。阎王问他：你在活着的时候，做过什么好事？ 
English: His family and relatives were surprised and asked him what had happened. Wen Ruo said, "In the beginning, someone led him to the place where the King of Hell lived. The King of Hell asked him, "What good things did you do while you were alive?"

古文：文若答王： 受持《金刚般若经》。
现代文：文若回答阎王说常念《金刚般若经》。
English: Wen Ruo replied to Yan Wang that he often recited the Diamond Prajna Sutra.

古文：王叹云： 善哉！
现代文：王感叹地说： 好哇，这是头等的好事。
English: Wang exclaimed: Wow, this is a first-class good deed.

古文：此福第一。汝虽福善，且将示汝其受罪之处。 
现代文：你虽然做了好事，且让你看看他们受罪的地方。 
English: Even if you have done something good, show them where they have sinned.

古文：令人一引文若北行十步，至一墙孔，令文若入。
现代文：叫一个人领文若向北走十步，来到一个墙洞，叫文若进去。
English: If you ask a person to take ten steps to the north and come to a hole in the wall, ask him to go in.

古文：隔壁有人引手，从孔中捉文若头引出，极大辛苦，得度墙外。
现代文：隔壁有人伸过手来，从墙洞中捉住文若的头拉他出去。极大痛苦，才过了墙外。
English: Someone next door reached over, grabbed Moonrake's head from a hole in the wall and pulled him out. It was with great pain that he finally made it over the wall.

古文：见大地狱，镬汤苦具，罪人受苦，不可具述。
现代文：看见一个很大的地狱，油锅开水等各种残酷的刑具，罪人受苦，不可一一述说。
English: To see a great inferno, boiling pots of boiling water and other cruel instruments of torture, and sinners suffering, cannot be described in detail.

古文：乃有众多猪羊鸡鸭之属，竟来从文若债命。
现代文：并且有很多的猪、羊、鸡、鸭等，争先恐后向文若讨命。
English: And there are a lot of pigs, sheep, chickens, ducks, etc. scrambling for their lives.

古文：文若云： 吾不食汝身，何故见逼？ 
现代文：文若说： 我没有吃你们，为什么相逼？ 
English: Wenruo said, "I didn't eat you, why did you force me?"

古文：诸畜生云： 汝往时某处食我，头脚四肢，节节分张，人各饮啖。
现代文：所有的畜生都说： 你以前在某个地方吃过我们，头脚四肢，处处分解，各个连吃带喝。
English: All the animals said: You have eaten us somewhere before, our heads, feet and limbs, decomposed everywhere, we ate and drank together.

古文：何讳之？ 
现代文：为什么不敢承认？ 
English: Why not admit it?

古文：文若一心念佛，深悔诸罪，不出余言，求为修福报谢。
现代文：文若一心念佛，深深地悔恨各种罪恶，不多说一句话。请求修行福份，回报恩德。
English: If you recite the Buddha's name with one heart, deeply regret all kinds of sins, and don't say more than one sentence, ask for the blessings of practice, and return kindness.

古文：诸畜各散，使人将文若却至王所。
现代文：所有的畜生各自散去。让人带文若退回到阎王的住处。
English: Let all the animals scatter. Let them go back to the abode of the king of hell.

古文：王付一碗钉，令文若食之，并用五钉钉文若头顶及手足。然后放回。
现代文：阎王给他一碗钉，叫文若吃了它，并用五颗钉子钉文若的头和手脚，然后放他回去。
English: The king of hell gave him a bowl of nails, told him to eat it, and nailed his head, hands and feet with five nails, and then let him go.

古文：文若得苏。
现代文：文若得以苏醒。
English: Wen Ruo was able to wake up.

古文：其说此事，然患头痛及手足。
现代文：他说起这件事，然而却患了头痛和手脚痛的病。
English: He talks about it, yet he suffers from headaches and aching hands and feet.

古文：久后修福，痛渐得差。
现代文：从这以后便做起好事，痛的程度逐渐差了。
English: Since then, I've been doing good things, and the pain level has gradually decreased.

古文：后尔已来，精勤诵持《金刚般若经》，不敢遗漏寸阴。
现代文：从此以后，精勤诵持《金钢般若经》，不敢浪费一寸光阴。
English: Since then, he has diligently recited the "Golden Steel Prayer Book" and does not dare to waste an inch of time.

古文：但见道俗亲疏，并劝受持。
现代文：看见的人不论道俗亲疏，都劝他们念经。
English: Those who have seen it, regardless of whether they are familiar with the customs, are advised to recite the sutra.

古文：后因使，至一驿厅上，暂时偃息。
现代文：后来因为公差，到了一个驿站上，暂时仰卧休息。
English: Later, because of a business trip, he arrived at a train station and temporarily lay on his back to rest.

古文：於时梦见一青衣妇女，急来乞命。
现代文：这时梦见一个青衣女子。急忙前来讨命。
English: At this time, I dreamed of a woman in a blue dress. I hurried to her to plead for her life.

古文：文若惊寤，即唤驿长问曰： 汝为吾欲杀生不？ 
现代文：文若惊醒，立即招呼驿站的长官问道： 你为我想杀生吗？ 
English: When he woke up, he immediately called the stationmaster and asked: "Do you want to kill for me?

古文：驿长答云： 实为公欲杀一小羊。 
现代文：驿长回答说： 确实想为你杀一头小羊。 
English: The chief replied, "I really want to kill a lamb for you.

古文：文若问云： 其羊做何色？ 
现代文：文若问： 这个羊是什么颜色的？ 
English: Wen Ruo asked, "What color is this sheep?"

古文：答云： 是青牸羊。 
现代文：回答说： 是青色的雌羊。 
English: And he said, A female goat, bright blue.

古文：文若报云： 汝急放却，吾与价直。 
现代文：文若告诉他说： 你赶快把羊放了，我给你钱。 
English: And Manoah said unto him, Make haste, and let down thy sheep: and I will give thee money.

古文：赎取放之，良由般若威力，冥资感应也。
现代文：把羊赎回放了，这都是由于《般若经》的威力。冥冥之中都能感应到。
English: This is all due to the power of the Prajnaparamita Sutra, which can be sensed everywhere.

古文：孔恪
现代文：孔恪
English: Kong Ke up

古文：唐武德中，遂州总管府记室参军孔恪，暴病死，一日而苏。
现代文：唐朝武德年间，遂州总管府记室参军孔恪，患暴病而死。一天后苏醒过来。
English: During the Wude period of the Tang Dynasty, Suizhou General Administration Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office

古文：自说，被收至官所，问何故杀牛两头。恪云，不杀。
现代文：自己说：被收审来到一官府的地方。问他为什么杀两头牛？恪说： 没杀。 
English: He said to himself: I have been summoned to appear before a government office. I asked him why he killed two cows. He said: I didn't kill them.

古文：官曰： 汝弟证汝杀，何故不承？ 
现代文：官说： 你弟弟证明你杀了。为什么不承认。 
English: The official said: Your brother proved that you killed him. Why didn't you admit it?

古文：因呼恪弟，死已数年矣。
现代文：因此，招呼孔恪的弟弟，已经死了多年了。
English: As a result, Kong Ke's younger brother has been dead for many years.

古文：既至，枷械甚严。
现代文：来到后。看到带着枷锁刑具十分严酷。
English: After I arrived, I saw that the shackles and instruments of torture were very harsh.

古文：官问： 汝所言兄杀牛虚实，弟曰： 兄前奉使招慰獠贼，使某杀牛会之，实奉兄命，非自杀也。 
现代文：官问： 你所说的兄杀牛一事是真是假？ 弟说： 兄以前奉命招安慰问那些贼寇，指使我杀牛宴请他们，确实是奉兄的命令，不是我自愿杀的。 
English: The official asked, "Is what you said about your brother killing a cow true or false?" The younger brother said, "My brother was ordered to comfort those bandits before, and he told me to kill a cow and invite them to a banquet. It was indeed on my brother's orders, and I did not kill it voluntarily."

古文：恪曰： 使弟杀牛会是实，然国事也，恪有何罪？ 
现代文：恪说： 指使弟弟杀牛会请是事实，然而那是为了国家大事，我孔恪有什么罪过？ 
English: "It's true that I ordered my brother to kill the bull, but it was for a national event. What is my sin?

古文：官曰： 汝杀牛，会獠，以招慰为功，用求官赏，以为己利，何为国事也？ 
现代文：官说： 你杀牛会请贼寇，以招安有功。可以得到官府的奖尝。这是为自己的利益。为什么是为了国家的事呢？
English: The official said, "If you kill a cow, you will invite thieves and robbers, and you will be credited with bringing peace. You can get a reward from the government. This is for your own benefit. Why is it for the sake of the country?

古文：因谓恪弟曰： 汝以证兄故久留，汝兄既遣杀，汝便无罪，放任受生。 
现代文：因此对恪弟说： 你为证实你兄，所以久留在这里。既然是你兄派你杀牛，你便无罪。故你随便去托生吧。 
English: Therefore, he said to his younger brother, "You have stayed here for a long time in order to prove your brother. Since it was your brother who sent you to kill the cow, you are not guilty. Therefore, feel free to go and give birth."

古文：言讫，弟忽不见，亦竟不得言叙。
现代文：说完，弟忽然不见了，也竟然来不及再说什么。
English: After that, my brother suddenly disappeared, and I didn't even have time to say anything.

古文：官又问恪： 因何复杀两鸭？ 
现代文：官又问恪： 为什么又杀两只鸭子？ 
English: The officer then asked: Why did you kill two more ducks?

古文：恪曰： 前任县令，杀鸭供客，岂恪罪也？ 
现代文：恪说： 前任县令，杀鸭请客，难道是我的罪过吗？ 
English: Kako said, "Is it my fault that the former county magistrate killed a duck to invite guests?

古文：官曰： 客自有料，杀鸭供之，将求美誉，非罪而何？ 
现代文：官说： 客人自己有吃的东西，杀鸭子请他们，想得到他的赞誉，不是罪过是什么？ 
English: The official said, "If a guest has something to eat, but invites them to kill a duck, and they want to get his praise, isn't that a sin?

古文：又问： 何故杀鸡卵六枚？ 
现代文：又问： 为什么杀鸡蛋六枚？ 
English: He also asked: Why kill six eggs?

古文：曰： 平生不食鸡卵。
现代文：说： 我平生不吃鸡蛋。
English: He said: "I've never eaten eggs.

古文：唯忆九岁时寒食日，母与六枚，因煮食之。 
现代文：唯有回忆九岁的时候寒食节那天，母亲给我六个鸡蛋。因此煮着吃了。 
English: The only thing I can recall is that when I was nine years old, on the day of the Cold Food Festival, my mother gave me six eggs, so I boiled them and ate them.

古文：官曰： 然欲推罪母也。 
现代文：官说： 难道你想把罪过推给母亲吗？ 
English: The magistrate said: Do you want to blame your mother?

古文：恪曰： 不敢，但说其因耳。 
现代文：恪说： 不敢，只是证明其中的原因。 
English: Kako said: I don't dare, I just want to prove why.

古文：官曰： 汝杀他命，当自受之。 
现代文：官说： 你杀死他们的性命，自己应该受到惩罚。
English: The official said: You killed their lives, you should be punished.

古文：言讫，忽有数十人来执恪，将出去。
现代文：说完，忽然有数十人来拉孔恪，让他出去。
English: After he finished speaking, dozens of people suddenly came to pull him out.

古文：恪曰： 生来有罪皆不遗，生来修福，皆不见记者，岂非滥耶？ 
现代文：恪大声说： 官府也随意冤枉好人。 恪说： 生来所有罪过都不遗漏，生来做好事修福的，都不见有记载，这岂不是过分吗？ 
English: He said loudly, "The government also arbitrarily wrongs good people." He said, "All sins are not omitted at birth, and those who are born to do good deeds and attain blessings are not recorded. Isn't this too much?

古文：官问主司，恪有何福，何为不录？
现代文：官问主司， 恪有什么好事。为什么不给记录？ 
English: The official asked the boss, what good things did you do? Why didn't you record it?

古文：主司对曰： 福亦皆录，量罪多少。
现代文：主司回答说： 好事都记录了，根据数量的多少。
English: The manager replied, "The good things are all recorded, according to their number.

古文：若福多罪少，先令受福。罪多福少，先令受罪。
现代文：如果好事多罪过少，就先让他享受福份；罪过多好事少，就先让他受罪。
English: If the good deed is too much and the sin is too little, let him enjoy the blessing first; if the sin is too much and the good deed is too little, let him suffer the sin first.

古文：然恪福少罪多，故未论其福。 
现代文：然而孔恪好事少罪过多，所以没有考虑他的好处。 
English: However, Kong Ke did not consider his advantage, as he was guilty of doing too much with too little.

古文：官怒曰： 虽先受罪，何不唱福示之？ 
现代文：官大怒说： 虽然先受罪，但为什么不把好处告诉人家？ 
English: The official said angrily, "Although you suffered the crime first, why didn't you tell others about the benefits?

古文：命鞭主司一百，倏忽鞭讫，血流溅地。
现代文：叫人鞭打主司一百下。很快地鞭打完，血流满地。
English: And the captain of the guard was beaten with a hundred stripes; and immediately the stripes were taken off, and there was blood on the ground.

古文：既而唱恪生来所修之福，亦无遗者。官谓恪曰： 汝应先受罪，我更令汝归七日，可勤追福。 因遣人送出，遂苏。恪大集僧尼，行道忏悔，精勤苦行，自说其事。
现代文：进行忏悔。精心勤奋的做好事。
English: To do penance. To do good works diligently.

古文：至七日，家人辞诀，俄而命终也。
现代文：自己说了这些事。到了第七天，家人与他诀别，一会生命结束。
English: On the seventh day, his family said goodbye to him and his life came to an end.

古文：霍有邻
现代文：霍有邻
English: Where there is a neighbour

古文：开元末，霍有邻为汲县尉，在州直刺吏。
现代文：唐玄宗开元末年，霍有邻是汲县县尉，去州拜见刺史。
English: At the end of the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, Huo Yuxiang, a county official of Jixian County, went to the county to visit Sashi.

古文：刺史段崇简严酷。
现代文：刺史段崇简凶狠残酷。
English: In the stabbing story, Chong Jian is ferocious and cruel.

古文：会察长之日，中后索羊肾。有邻催促，屠者遑遽，未及杀羊，破肋取肾。
现代文：在会见各位官员的那天，有太监中后索要羊肾，有邻急忙催促，杀羊的人惊慌害怕，没待把羊杀死，就剥开肋骨取出羊肾。
English: On the day of the meeting with the officials, there was a eunuch who asked for a sheep's kidney, a neighbor hurriedly urged, and a sheep killer panicked and was afraid. Before killing the sheep, he peeled off the ribs and took out the sheep's kidney.

古文：其夕，有邻见吏曰： 王追。
现代文：当天晚上，霍有邻就看见一个差役说： 阎王追扑你。 
English: That evening, Huo's neighbor saw a policeman and said, "The king of hell is chasing you."

古文：有邻随吏见王，王云： 有诉君云，不待杀了，生取其肾。
现代文：有邻跟随差役去见阎王说： 有人告你的状说，不待杀死，就活生生的取出它的肾。
English: A neighbor followed the police to see the king of hell and said, "Someone told you that if you don't kill it, you can take out its kidney while it's still alive."

古文：何至如是耶？ 
现代文：为什么到了如此的程度？ 
English: Why has it come to this?

古文：有邻对曰： 此是段使君杀羊，初不由己。 
现代文：有邻回答说： 这是段使君杀的羊，我本来不愿意。 
English: One neighbour replied: "It's a sacrificial lamb, I didn't want to do it.

古文：王令取崇简食料，为阅毕。谓羊曰： 汝实合供段使君食，何得妄诉霍少府。 
现代文：王叫拿来段崇简吃的东西，看完后，对羊说： 你确实应该供给段使君吃。为什么妄告霍少府。 
English: The king asked him to bring some of the food that Duan Chongjian had eaten. After reading it, he said to the sheep: "You really should have provided some food for Duan Chongjian. Why did you falsely accuse Huo Shaofu?"

古文：驱之使出，令本追吏送归。
现代文：驱赶出去 叫原来追扑的差役送有邻回去。
English: To drive out; to make the police officer who was chasing you send your neighbor back.

古文：有邻还，经一院，云，御史大夫院。
现代文：有邻回去时，经过个院落，叫御使大夫院。
English: When a neighbor returned, he went through a courtyard and called the Imperial Envoy Doctor's House.

古文：有邻问吏，此是何官乎？ 
现代文：有邻问差役这里住的什么官？
English: A neighbour asked the policeman, "What kind of official lives here?"

古文：吏云： 百司并是，何但於此。 
现代文：差役说： 这里的官府都是这样，并不是只这一处。 
English: The official said: This is the case in all government offices here, not just this one.

古文：复问大夫为谁，曰： 秋仁杰也。 
现代文：又问，大夫是谁？说： 狄仁杰。 
English: He also asked, "Who is the doctor?" and said, "Di Renjie."

古文：有邻云，狄公是亡舅，欲得一见。
现代文：有邻说： 狄公是我已故的舅舅，想见上一面。 
English: One neighbour said: "Digong is my late uncle and I want to see him.

古文：吏令门者为通，须臾召入。
现代文：差役叫守门的人通报，一会儿召他进入。
English: The policeman called the gatekeeper to report, and then called him in.

古文：仁杰起立，见有邻，悲哭毕。
现代文：仁杰起立看见有邻放声大哭。
English: Standing up, Renjie saw a neighbor burst into tears.

古文：问汝得放还耶。
现代文：哭罢问，你被放还了吗？
English: For crying out loud, have you been released?

古文：呼令上坐，有佐史过案。仁杰问是何案。
现代文：招呼他到上边坐。有佐史拿过案卷，仁杰问是什么人的案卷？
English: He was invited to sit on the upper side. Sashi had taken a case file, and Renjie asked whose case file it was.

古文：云，李适之得宰相。
现代文：说，李适之要做宰相。
English: Li Shizhong wants to be prime minister, he said.

古文：又问天曹判未，对曰。
现代文：又问，天曹批了没有？
English: He also asked if it had been approved by God.

古文：诸司并了，已给五年。
现代文：回答说： 所有官员都通过了，已给五年期限。
English: He replied: All the officials have been approved, and they have been given a five-year deadline.

古文：仁杰判纸余。
现代文：仁杰在纸上批了。
English: Renjie approved it on paper.

古文：方毕，回谓有邻，汝来多时，屋室已坏。
现代文：才算完毕。回头对有邻说： 你来了已经好长时间，形体已经损坏。
English: He turned back to his neighbor and said, "You've been here for a long time, and your body is damaged.

古文：令左右取两丸药与之， 持归，可研成粉，随坏摩之。 有邻拜辞讫，出门十余里，至一大坑，为吏推落，遂活。
现代文：到了一个大坑。
English: We came to a big pit.

古文：时炎暑有邻死经七日方活。
现代文：被差役推下去，便活了。当时正是炎热的夏季，有邻死后经过七天才活过来。
English: He was pushed down by the police and survived. It was a hot summer day, and it took him seven days to come back to life after his neighbor died.

古文：心虽微暖，而形体多坏。
现代文：心虽然微微有点暖气，然而形体多处损坏。
English: Although the heart is slightly warmed, the body is damaged in many places.

古文：以手中药作粉，摩所坏处，随药便愈，数日能起。
现代文：把手中的药制成粉末。擦在损坏的地方，药到之处便好了，数日就能起来。
English: Take the medicine in your hand and make it into powder. Rub it on the damaged area, and the medicine will be good everywhere, and you can get up in a few days.

古文：崇简占见，问其事，嗟叹久之。
现代文：崇简从占卜中得知，问起这件事，感叹良久。
English: Chong Jane learned from divination, asked about this matter, and lamented for a long time.

古文：后月余，李适之果拜相。
现代文：一月以后，李适之果然当了宰相。
English: After January, Li Shizhi became the prime minister.

古文：皇甫恂
现代文：皇甫恂
English: Emperor Fu Xi

古文：安定皇甫恂，以开元中，初为相州参军，有疾暴卒，数食顷而苏。
现代文：安定皇甫恂，在开元年间，初任相州参军，得暴病而死。过了好几顿饭的功夫，一下子苏醒过来。
English: In the early years of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year

古文：刺史独孤思庄，好名士也。
现代文：刺史独狐思庄，是个喜欢名士的人。
English: He is a fan of celebrities.

古文：闻其重生，亲至恂所，问其冥中所见。
现代文：听皇甫恂死而复生，就亲自到皇甫恂的住处，问他在阴间所见到的一切。
English: Hearing that the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：云，甚了了，但苦力微，稍待徐说之。
现代文：说，特别多，但我苦于没有力气，稍等一下慢慢说给你听。
English: "It's a lot, but I don't have the energy," he said. "Wait a minute and I'll tell it to you slowly."

古文：顷者，恂初至官，尝摄司功。
现代文：过了一会，恂说：我刚到官，曾经佐理司功。
English: After a while, Zou said: "I have just arrived at the office, I used to be a secretary.

古文：有开元寺主僧，送牛肉二十斤，初亦不了其故，但受而食之。
现代文：有开元寺的一个主僧，送给我二十斤牛肉。开始也不知道其中的缘故，只是接受而且吃了它。
English: One of the chief priests of Kaiyuan Temple gave me twenty pounds of beef. At first, I didn't know why, but I just accepted it and ate it.

古文：适而被追，乃是为僧所引。
现代文：刚才被追扑，就是被僧供出的。
English: If you were chased just now, it was because you were offered up by a monk.

古文：既见判官，判官问何故杀牛。
现代文：立即去见判官。判官问为什么杀牛？
English: Immediately go to the judge. The judge asks why kill the cow?

古文：恂云： 生来蔬食，不曾犯此。 
现代文：恂说生来就吃蔬菜。不曾犯杀牛之罪。
English: Gong said that he was born to eat vegetables. He has never committed the crime of killing a cow.

古文：判官令呼僧，俄而僧负枷至，谓恂曰： 已杀与君，君实不知，所以相引，欲求为追福耳。 
现代文：判官叫招呼僧人过来，不一会僧带着枷锁来到，对皇甫恂说： 我杀牛给了你肉，你确实不知道。把你供出来，想求你帮我去办件好事。 
English: The judge called for the monks to come over, and soon a monk arrived with shackles and said to the emperor: "I killed a cow and gave you meat, you really don't know. I want to offer you up and ask you to help me do a good deed."

古文：因白判官： 杀牛己自当之，但欲与参军有言。 判官曰： 唯。 
现代文：于是对判官说： 杀牛的罪过由我自己承担，但是我想和参军说几句话。判官说： 行。 。
English: So I said to the judge: "The crime of killing a cow is my own responsibility, but I would like to say a few words about joining the army." The judge said: "Go ahead."

古文：僧乃至恂所，谓恂曰： 君后至同州判司，为我造陁罗尼幢。 
现代文：和尚就到了皇甫恂的住处，对恂说： 你以后到同州任司官。为我制作一个陁罗尼幢。 
English: The monk then went to the residence of the Empress Dowager, and said to the Empress Dowager, "You will later serve as a magistrate in the same prefecture. Make a throne for me."

古文：恂问，相州参军何由得同州掾官？
现代文：恂问： 相州的参军有什么理由能够得到同州的官禄呢？
English: Q: What is the reason for the military enlistment of Xiangzhou to be able to get the official salary of Xiangzhou?

古文：且余甚贫，幢不易造，如何？ 
现代文：而且我又十分贫寒，幢是不容易制作的，那该怎么办呢？ 
English: And I'm very poor, it's not easy to build a house, so what should I do?

古文：僧云： 若不至同州则已，必得之，幸不忘所托。
现代文：僧说： 如果不到同州也就罢了。一定能到的话，希望不要忘记我所委托的事。
English: The monk said, "If I don't get to Tongzhou, that's fine. If I do get there, I hope you won't forget what I've entrusted to you."

古文：然我辩伏，今便受罪。
现代文：当然我就没什么可说的甘愿伏罪，现在便可以受罪。
English: Of course, I don't have anything to say. I was willing to take the blame, and now I can take the blame.

古文：及君得同州，我罪亦毕，当托生为猪。
现代文：等到你得到同州官职后，我的罪也就结束了。该托生为猪。
English: Wait until you get the governorship, then my crime will be over. I should have been born a pig.

古文：君造幢之后，必应设斋庆度。其时会有所睹。 
现代文：你造幢之后，必定应设立祭坛进行斋戒以超度亡灵，到时会有所见。
English: After you have built the building, you should certainly set up an altar for fasting to overcome the dead, and then you will see something.

古文：恂乃许之，寻见牛头人以股叉叉其颈去。
现代文：恂于是答应了。随即看见长着牛头的人用带股的钢叉叉他的脖子。
English: He agreed, and then saw a man with a bull's head prick his neck with a spiked steel fork.

古文：恂得放还。
现代文：恂得到放还。
English: The cormorant was released.

古文：思庄素与僧善，召而谓之，僧甚悲惧，因敬其私财为功德。后五日，患头痛，寻生三痈，如叉之状。数日死。
现代文：思庄平素与僧人要好，招呼他并对他说这件事。和尚特别悲痛害怕。因而散发他的私有财产作功德，五天后，患头痛，随即生三个痈。象叉的形状，数天后死了。
English: Shizhuang, who was friendly with the monk, called him and told him about the incident. The monk was very sad and scared. So he distributed his private property to make merit. Five days later, he had a headache, and then he had three boils. They were shaped like forks. He died a few days later.

古文：恂自相州参军迁左武卫兵曹参军，数载，选受同州司士。
现代文：恂从相州参军升迁到左武卫兵曹参军。数年后被提拔为同州司士。
English: He was promoted from Sangju to Zuowu Guard Cao. A few years later, he was promoted to Sangju Sergeant.

古文：既至，举官钱百千，建幢设斋。
现代文：立即上任。把官钱十万全部用来建幢设斋。
English: He took office immediately. He used the entire 100,000 yuan of government money to build a building and set up a restaurant.

古文：有小猪来师前跪伏，斋毕，绕幢行道数百转，乃死。
现代文：有一头小猪前来跪伏。斋毕，围绕幢走了数百圈，于是死了。
English: A little pig came and knelt down, ate, walked around the block a few hundred times, and died.

古文：裴龄
现代文：裴龄
English: Pei Ling

古文：开元中，长安县尉裴龄，常暴疾数日。
现代文：唐玄宗开元间，长安县尉裴龄。曾突然患病已经好多天了。
English: During the reign of Emperor Tang Xuanzong, Pei Ling, a lieutenant of Chang'an County, suddenly fell ill for several days.

古文：至正月十五日夜，二更后，堂前忽见二黄衫吏持牒，云，王追。
现代文：到了正月十五日，夜晚二更以后，忽然看见堂屋前有两个穿黄色衣衫的差役手里拿着公文说： 阎王抓你。 
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month, after two more hours of night, he suddenly saw two officers wearing yellow shirts in front of the house, holding a document in their hands and saying: "Hell will catch you."

古文：龄辞已疾病，呼家人取马，久之不得，乃随吏去。
现代文：裴龄推辞自己有病。呼唤家人把马牵来，过了很久，也不见来。于是就随差役去了。
English: Pei Ling denied that he was ill. He called his family to bring the horse, but after a long time, they did not come. So he went with the messenger.

古文：见街中灯火甚盛，吏出门行十余里，烟火乃绝，唯一径在衰草中。
现代文：看见街上的灯火辉煌。差役出门走了十多里，灯火就没有了，只在枯草中间有一条唯一的小路。
English: I saw the brilliant lights on the street. The policeman went out and walked more than ten miles, the lights were gone, and there was only a single path in the middle of the dead grass.

古文：可行五十里，至一城，墙壁尽黑，无诸树木。
现代文：约走了五十里，到了一座城，墙壁全是黑色的，周围没有多少树木。
English: After about fifty miles, we arrived at a town with black walls and few trees.

古文：忽逢白衣居士，状貌瑰伟，谓二吏曰： 此人无罪，何故追来？ 
现代文：忽然又遇到一位白衣居士，身材魁伟，相貌堂堂，对二个差役说： 这个人没有罪，为什么把他抓来？ 
English: Suddenly, I met another villager in white, tall and handsome, who said to the two policemen: This man is not guilty, why did you arrest him?

古文：顾视龄曰： 君知死未？ 
现代文：回过头来看看裴龄说： 你知道死了没有？ 
English: Pei Ling looked back and said, "Do you know if he is dead?"

古文：龄因流涕，合掌白居士： 生不曾作罪业，至此，今为之奈何？ 
现代文：裴龄因此痛哭流涕，合掌作揖告诉白衣居士： 生来不曾做过有罪的事情，到现在，我也不知道今天的事究竟为什么？
English: As a result, Pei Ling wept bitterly and told the white-robed householder with her hands clasped together: I was born without having done anything sinful, and to this day, I still don't know why today's event happened.

古文：求见料理。 
现代文：请求帮助料理。 
English: Ask for help cooking.

古文：居士谓吏曰： 此人衣冠，且又无过，不宜去其巾带。 
现代文：居士对差役说： 这个人外表庄重，而且又没有罪过，不应该拿去他的头巾衣带。 
English: The householder said to the policeman: This man looks dignified and has committed no crime. You should not take away his turban and sash.

古文：吏乃还之，因复入城。
现代文：差役于是还给了他。于是又进了城。
English: The guard gave it back to him, and he went back into the city.

古文：数里之间，见朱门爽丽，奇树郁茂。
现代文：在几里地之间，看见朱门华丽，奇树繁茂。
English: In the space of a few miles, I saw the gorgeous vermilion gate and the luxuriant strange trees.

古文：前谓一官云是主簿，主簿遣领付典，勘其罪福。
现代文：前面一个官人，说是主簿。主簿派遣付典，检查他的罪福。
English: A previous official said that it was the family register. The family register sent a supplement to check his sins and blessings.

古文：典云： 君无大罪，理未合来。 
现代文：典说： 你没有大的罪过，按理不应该来。 
English: The scribe said, "You have not committed a great sin, so you should not have come."

古文：龄便苦请救助。
现代文：裴龄便苦苦请求他帮助和解救。
English: Pei Ling then pleaded with him for help and rescue.

古文：检案云： 杀一驴，所以追耳 然其驴执是市吏杀，君第不承，事当必释。 
现代文：检查案卷的人说： 杀了一头驴，所以抓你。  然而这头驴却是市吏所杀。你如果不承认。事情一定能解决。 
English: The person who checked the case file said: "You were arrested for killing a donkey. However, the donkey was killed by a city official. If you don't admit it, things will surely be resolved."

古文：须臾，王坐，主簿引龄入。
现代文：不一会。
English: Not for a while.

古文：王问何故追此人，主簿云： 市吏便引，适以诘问。 
现代文：阎王就坐。主簿领着裴龄进来。王问： 为什么抓这个人？ 主簿说把市吏也领来，正好一块盘问。
English: The king asked, "Why did you arrest this man?" The chief clerk said, "Bring the city clerk, too, so that we can interrogate him together."

古文：云： 实求肠，不遣杀驴。 
现代文：说： 其实是要肠子，不让杀驴。 
English: He said, "Actually, we want the intestines so that we don't have to kill the donkey."

古文：言讫，见市吏枷项在前，有驴羊鸡豕数十辈。随其后。
现代文：说完，看见市吏脖子上带着枷锁在前面走，有驴、羊、鸡、猪数十只跟在他的后边。
English: Having said that, I saw the city official walking in front with a yoke around his neck, followed by dozens of donkeys, sheep, chickens and pigs.

古文：王问市吏，何引此人。
现代文：王问市吏，为什么攀扯这个人。
English: Wang asked the city official why he was picking on this man.

古文：驴便前云： 实为市吏所杀，将肉卖与行人，不关裴少府事。 
现代文：驴便走上前去说： 我们这些实在是被市吏所杀，他把肉卖给了过路的人。这件事与裴少府没有关系。 
English: The donkey stepped forward and said, "We were really killed by the city official, who sold the meat to passers-by. This matter has nothing to do with Pei Shaofu."

古文：市吏欲言其他羊豕等，各如所执。
现代文：市吏刚想说话，其他羊猪等各各坚持前边说的话。
English: The city official just wanted to speak, but the other sheep, pigs, etc. all insisted on what they had said earlier.

古文：王言，此人尚有数政官禄，不可久留，宜速放去。
现代文：王说： 这个人还享有数年的国家官禄，不可在这久留，应该赶快把他放回去。
English: The king said, "This man still enjoys several years of state salary. He can't stay here for long. He should be sent back immediately."

古文：若更迟延，恐形骸隳坏。
现代文：如果再迟延下去，恐怕他的形骇会腐烂变坏。 
English: If we delay any longer, I'm afraid his appearance will rot and deteriorate.

古文：因谓龄曰： 令放君回，当万计修福。 龄再拜出，王复令呼。
现代文：因此对裴龄说： 叫人放你回去，应该千方百计修善造福，裴龄再次拜谢出去。
English: Therefore, he said to Pei Ling: If you want people to let you go back, you should try your best to do good and benefit others. Pei Ling said thanks again and went out.

古文：谓主簿，可领此人观诸地狱。
现代文：王又招呼主簿对他说可以领着这个人去看所有的地狱。
English: The king also called for the accountant and told him that he could take the man to see all of hell.

古文：主簿令引龄前行，入小孔中。见牛头卒以叉刺人，随业受罪。
现代文：主簿叫人领着裴龄在前面走进一个小洞中，看见长着牛头的小卒，用叉子刺人，按照所犯的罪受到不同的惩罚。
English: The master led Pei Ling into a small hole in front of him. He saw a young man with a bull's head stabbing someone with a fork. He was punished differently according to the crime he had committed.

古文：龄不肯观出小孔，辞主簿毕，复往别吏。
现代文：裴龄不肯看，走出小洞。告别了主簿以后，又到其他差役那里。
English: Pei Ling didn't want to look, and walked out of the small hole. After saying goodbye to the master book, she went to the other officers.

古文：吏云： 我本户部令史。 
现代文：差役说： 我原来是户部令史。 
English: The police officer said: I used to be the head of the household.

古文：一人曰： 我本京兆府史，久在地府，求生人间不得。
现代文：另一个说： 我原来是京兆府史，长期生活在地府里，请求到人间，得不到允许。
English: Another said: I used to be a prefectural governor of Jingzhao, and I lived in the prefectural capital for a long time. When I asked to go to the human world, I was not allowed.

古文：君可为写《金光明经》、法华、维摩、涅痏等经，兼为设斋度，我即得生人间。 
现代文：你可为我们写金光明经、法华、维摩、涅巉等经，同时再为我设斋超度，我们就能到人间生活。 
English: You can write the Golden Light Sutra, Lotus Sutra, Vimalakirti, Nirvana and other sutras for us, and at the same time set a fast for me, and we will be able to live on earth.

古文：龄悉许之。吏复求金银钱各三千贯。
现代文：裴龄全部答应了，差役又请求给他们金银钱各三千贯。
English: Pei Ling agreed to everything, and the policeman also asked for three thousand yuan each in gold and silver.

古文：龄云，京官贫穷、实不能办。
现代文：裴龄说：京官贫穷，实在没有办法。 
English: Pei Ling said: Beijing officials are poor, there is really no way.

古文：吏云： 金钱耳，是世间黄纸钱。
现代文：差役说： 金钱就是人间的黄纸，银钱是白纸。
English: The policeman said, "Money is the yellow paper of the world, and silver is the white paper.

古文：银钱者。白纸钱耳。 龄曰： 若求纸钱，当亦可办，不知何所送之。 
现代文：裴龄说：如果请求纸钱，那当然可以办到，不知道什么办法送给你们？
English: Pei Ling said, "If you ask for paper money, of course it can be done. I don't know how to give it to you."

古文：吏云： 世作钱於都市，其钱多为地府所收。
现代文：差役说，人世间在都市里制作钱，这些钱大多数被地府收去了。
English: The policeman said that people in the world make money in the city, and most of this money is collected by the government.

古文：君可呼凿钱人，於家中密室作之。毕，可以袋盛。
现代文：你可以叫制钱的人到家中密室里做完以后，用袋子装好，要在水边烧了它。
English: You can ask the money-maker to do it in a secret room at home, then pack it in a bag and burn it by the water's edge.

古文：当於水际焚之，我必得也。受钱之时，若横风动灰，即是我得。
现代文：我们一定能够收到。给钱的时候如果看见风吹灰动，那就是我们收到了。
English: We are sure to receive it. If you see the wind blowing when you give money, that means we have received it.

古文：若有风飏灰，即为地府及地鬼神所受。
现代文：如果有大风把灰吹扬，那就是被地府及地鬼神所接受。
English: If there is a strong wind blowing the ashes, it is accepted by the government and the gods.

古文：此亦宜为常占。
现代文：这样的事情常常去做。
English: This sort of thing happens all the time.

古文：然鬼神常苦饥，烧钱之时，可兼设少佳酒饭，以两束草立席上，我得映草而坐，亦得食也。 
现代文：当然鬼神也就常常挨饿，烧钱的时候还可以同时备办少量的好酒饭，把两束草立在席子上，我们在草影的地方坐着，这样才能得到食物。
English: Of course, ghosts and gods also often go hungry. When burning money, you can also prepare a small amount of good wine and rice at the same time, put two bunches of grass on the mat, and we sit in the shade of the grass, so that we can get food.

古文：辞讫，行数里，至舍。
现代文：辞别后，走了数里回到家。
English: After saying goodbye, he walked several miles back home.

古文：见家人哭泣，因尔觉痛。
现代文：看见家里都在哭泣，因而感觉到全身很痛，神情恍惚。
English: When I saw that everyone in my family was crying, I felt pain all over my body and was in a daze.

古文：遍身恍惚，迷闷久之，开视遂活。
现代文：迷蒙良久，才睁开了眼睛，于是活了，造经像烧完纸后。
English: I was lost for a long time before I opened my eyes, and then I came to life, like after burning paper.

古文：造经像及烧钱毕，十数日平复如常。六合县丞六合县丞者，开元中暴卒，数日即苏。
现代文：十几天就恢复到和平常一样。六合县丞六合县的县丞在唐玄宗开元年间得暴病死亡，几天后又苏醒了。
English: Within a dozen days, it was back to business as usual.Rokugo County Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile Juvenile

古文：云初死，被拘见判官，云是六合刘明府，相见悲喜。
现代文：说：刚死的时候，被拘捕去见判官，说是六合县刘明府。见面后悲喜交加。
English: He said: When he had just died, he was arrested and taken to see the judge. He said it was Liu Mingfu, Liuhe County. After the meeting, there was a mixture of sadness and joy.

古文：问家安否，丞云： 家中去此甚迩，不曾还耶？ 
现代文：问家中是否平安，县丞说： 家离这特别近，不曾回去吗？ 
English: When asked whether it was safe at home, the county magistrate said, "My home is very close to here, haven't you ever gone back?

古文：令云： 冥阳道殊，何由得往？ 
现代文：令说： 阴间和阳间的路不同，怎么能回去呢？ 
English: Ling said, "The path between the underworld and the sun is different. How can I go back?"

古文：丞云： 郎君早擢第，家甚无横。
现代文：县丞说： 您儿子早已及第，家里也没有不顺心的事。
English: The county magistrate said: Your son has already reached the first grade, and there is nothing unsatisfactory in the family.

古文：但夫人年老。微有风疾耳。 
现代文：只是夫人已年高，稍微患有风湿症。 
English: It's just that my wife is elderly and suffers from a bit of rheumatism.

古文：令云： 君算未尽，为数羊相讼，所以被追。
现代文：令说： 算计起来你阳寿未尽，只因为几只羊告你，所以被追捕。
English: The order said, "It is calculated that you have not yet reached the end of your life, and you are being pursued only because a few sheep are accusing you.

古文：宜自剖析，当为速返。 
现代文：自己去分辨。让你尽快回去。 
English: Figure it out for yourself. Get yourself back as soon as possible.

古文：须臾，有黑云从东来，云中有大船，轰然坠地，见羊头四枚。
现代文：不一会，有黑云从东边来，云中有大船，轰隆一声，落在地上。
English: And, behold, there came a black cloud out of the east, and a great ship; and there was a voice out of the cloud, and it fell upon the earth.

古文：判官云： 何以枉杀此辈？ 
现代文：看见有四颗羊头。判官说： 为什么无故杀死这此羊呢？ 
English: When the judge saw the four heads, he asked, "Why did you kill these sheep for no reason?"

古文：答云： 刺史正料，非某之罪。 
现代文：回答说： 刺吏正需要这东西，不是我的罪过。 
English: And he answered, It is not mine iniquity, but the publicans that have need of these things.

古文：二头寂然。
现代文：二颗羊头沉默无言可对。
English: The two mutton heads were speechless.

古文：判官骂云： 汝自负刺史命，何得更讼县丞？ 
现代文：判官大骂说： 你们本来就欠刺使的命，为什么告县丞呢？
English: The judge scolded: "You already owe the thug your life, so why sue the county magistrate?

古文：船遂飞去。
现代文：于是，船就飞去了。
English: As a result, the boat took off.

古文：羊大言云： 判官有情，会当见帝论之。 
现代文：羊大声说： 判官有私情，我们要面见天帝评论这件事。 
English: The sheep said in a loud voice: The judge has personal feelings, we want to meet the heavenly emperor to comment on this matter.

古文：判官谓丞曰： 帝是天帝也，此辈何由得见？
现代文：判官对县丞说： 帝是指天上的帝王，这些无名之辈怎么能见得着呢！
English: The judge said to the county magistrate: Emperor refers to the emperor of heaven, how can these nobodies see it!

古文：如地上天子，百姓求见，不亦难乎？
现代文：就象地上的天子。百姓要是求见，不也是极难吗？
English: Just like the Son of God on earth. If the people ask to see him, won't it be extremely difficult?

古文：然终须为作功德尔。 
现代文：然而，最终还是应做善事造福积德。 
English: However, at the end of the day, one should do good deeds to benefit oneself and accumulate virtue.

古文：言毕，放丞还 既出，见一女子，状貌端丽，来前再拜。
现代文：说完，放县丞回去。刚出去，看见一女子，身材相貌都很端庄秀丽，上前拜见。
English: Having said that, go back to the county magistrate. I just went out and saw a woman, her figure was very dignified and beautiful, so I went to see her.

古文：问其故，曰： 身是扬州谭家女，顷被召至，以无罪蒙放回。
现代文：问她什么原因，说： 我是扬州谭家的女子，刚才被召到这里来，因我没有罪幸蒙放回。
English: Asking her why, she said, "I am a woman from the Tan family in Yangzhou. I was called here just now, and I was fortunate enough to be released because I was not guilty.

古文：门吏以色美，曲相留连。
现代文：守门的差吏看我长的美貌，找各种籍口留我。
English: The gatekeepers saw my long, beautiful face and found all kinds of reasons to keep me.

古文：离家已久，恐舍宅颓坏，今君得还，幸见料理。
现代文：我离开家里已经很久，恐怕尸体腐烂。现在你能够回去，希望有幸得到你的帮助。
English: I've been away from home for a long time, I'm afraid the body is rotting. Now you can go back, I hope to be lucky enough to get your help.

古文：我家素富，若得随行，当奉千贯，兼永为姬妾，无所吝也。以此求哀。 
现代文：我家素来富有，如果能跟你一起走，一定奉送千贯钱，并永做你的姬妾，没有什么舍不得的东西，用这些求得你的同情。 
English: My family has always been rich. If I can walk with you, I will surely give you thousands of money and always be your concubine. There is nothing I can't bear. I will use these things to gain your sympathy.

古文：丞入白判官，判官谓丞曰： 千贯我得二百，我子得二百，余六百属君。 
现代文：丞进去对判官说这事，判官说： 千贯钱得给我二百，给我儿二百，余下六百归你。 
English: He went in and told the judge about it, and the judge said, "You must give me two hundred thousand, give my son two hundred thousand, and the remaining six hundred will be yours."

古文：因为书示之。判官云： 我二百可为功德。 
现代文：因此写在纸上让他看，判官说： 我的二百钱可用来作功德。 
English: So he wrote on a piece of paper for him to see, and the judge said, "My two hundred dollars can be used for merit."

古文：便呼吏问： 何得勾留谭家女子？ 
现代文：就传呼门吏问： 为什么勾引强留谭家女子？ 
English: The doorkeepers then asked: Why did you seduce a woman from the Tan family?

古文：决吏二十，遣女子随丞还。
现代文：打门吏二十杖。让女子随县丞回去。
English: The doorkeepers get twenty canes. Let the women go back with the county magistrate.

古文：行十余里，分路各活。
现代文：行了十余里，分路各回各的家，活了。
English: After traveling more than ten miles, we split up and went back to our respective homes.

古文：丞既痊平，便至谭家访女。
现代文：县丞很快痊愈后，就到谭家拜访女子。
English: After the county magistrate recovered quickly, he went to Tan's home to visit the woman.

古文：至门，女闻语声，遽出再拜。辞曰： 尝许为妾身不由己，父母遣适他人。今将二百千赎身，余一千贯如前契。 
现代文：到了门口，女子听到说话声，就出来拜见，推辞说：曾经许与你为妾，但身不由己，父母已许与他人，今将二百千赎身，一千贯按以前的约定。
English: When she arrived at the door, the woman heard the voice and came out to meet him. She said, "I once promised to be your concubine, but I couldn't help myself. My parents had already promised it to someone else. Now I will give you two hundred thousand rupees, one thousand rupees according to the previous agreement."

古文：丞得钱，与刘明府子，兼为设斋功德等。
现代文：丞得到钱，给刘明府的儿子，又为他设斋积功德等。
English: He got the money, gave it to Liu Mingfu's son, and set up a merit-making ceremony for him.

古文：天宝末，其人尚在焉。
现代文：天宝末年，这个人还在世。
English: At the end of the Tenpo era, this person is still alive.

古文：薛涛
现代文：薛涛
English: Xue Tao

古文：江陵尉薛涛，以乾元中，死三日活。
现代文：江陵尉薛涛，在唐肃宗乾元年间，死后三天复活。
English: Jiangling lieutenant Xue Tao was resurrected three days after his death in the Qianyuan period of the Sui Dynasty of Tang Dynasty.

古文：自言初逢一吏，持帖云，王使追。
现代文：自己说：当时遇见一个差役，拿着帖子说：王让拘扑你。
English: I said to myself: At that time, I met a policeman who held up a post and said, "I'll have you arrested."

古文：押帖作 祜 字。涛未审是何王，鞴马便去。
现代文：帖子上签了一个 祜 字，薛涛不清楚是哪个王，就备马跟随而去。
English: The post was signed with a swastika. Xue Tao did not know which king it was, so he prepared his horse to follow.

古文：行可十余里，至一城，其吏排闼，便入厅中。
现代文：走了大约十几里，到了一座城。这个差役推开门，便进入大厅，一个穿戴象大王的人。
English: After walking about a dozen miles, he arrived at a city. The policeman opened the door and entered the hall, a man wearing an elephant headdress.

古文：一人羽卫如王者，涛入再拜。王问： 君是荆州吏耶。 涛曰是。
现代文：薛涛再次下拜，王问： 你是荆州的官吏吗？ 涛说： 是 。
English: Xue Tao bowed again. Wang asked, "Are you an official from Jingzhou?" Tao said, "Yes."

古文：王曰： 罪何多也？
现代文：王说： 你的罪过为什么那么多？ 
English: And the king said, Why are your sins so many?

古文：今诉君者，不可胜数。 
现代文：现在告你的状的都数不过来。 
English: I can't count the number of people suing you right now.

古文：对曰： 往任成固县尉，成固主进鹰鹞，涛典其事，不得不杀，杀多诚有之。 
现代文：涛回答说： 前任成固县尉，成固县主管进贡鹰鹞。涛是主管这件事的人，不得不杀生，确实杀的比较多。 
English: Tao replied: The former Chenggu County Lieutenant, Chenggu County Supervisor Jin Gong Ying Qi. Tao is the person in charge of this matter, had to kill, indeed killed more.

古文：王曰： 杀有私乎？ 
现代文：王说： 有为私人杀的吗？
English: And the king said, Is there any cause whereon a man may kill a man?

古文：曰： 亦有之！ 
现代文：说，也有。
English: Yes, there is.

古文：公私孰多？ 
现代文：公和私哪个多？
English: Which is more important, the public or me?

古文：曰： 私少于公。 
现代文：说： 私少于公。 
English: He said: "I am less than a public servant.

古文：王曰： 诚之然。
现代文：王说： 你还很诚实。
English: The king said, "You are still very honest."

古文：君禄福有厚，寿命未已。彼亦无如君何，不得不追对耳。 
现代文：你的福禄还很长。寿命没完，他们不能怎么样你，不得不拘扑你来对证。 
English: Your fortune is still long. Life is not over, they can't do anything to you, they have to catch you to prove it.

古文：令涛出门，遍谢诸命。
现代文：叫涛出门。普遍地谢过被杀的生命。
English: He called Tao out of the house and thanked him profusely for his life.

古文：涛至，见雉兔等遍满数顷，皆飞走逼涛。
现代文：涛来到外面，看见鸡、兔等遍地都是，飞腾奔走，威逼薛涛。
English: When Tao came outside, he saw chickens, rabbits, etc. everywhere, flying around and threatening Xue Tao.

古文：涛云： 天子按鹰鹞，非我所为。观君辈意旨，尽欲杀我，其何故也？
现代文：涛说： 按天子的需要饲养鹰鹞，不是我要做的，看你们的意思，完全想杀死我，这是为什么？
English: Tao said, "Raising eagle owls according to the needs of the heavenly son is not what I want to do. Look at you, you totally want to kill me. Why is that?

古文：适奉命为君写经像，使皆讬生。何必众人杀一命也？ 
现代文：刚才奉命为你们画经像，使你们都能托生，何必大家一齐杀一人呢？ 
English: I have just been ordered to draw a picture for you, so that you can all survive, why do you all have to kill one person?

古文：王又令人传语。
现代文：王又叫人传下话去。
English: Then the king commanded the message to be delivered.

古文：久之，稍稍引去。
现代文：过了好长时间，悄悄领着离开。
English: After a long time, quietly led away.

古文：涛入，王谓之曰： 君算未尽。
现代文：涛进来，王对他说： 算来你的阳寿未尽。
English: When Tao came in, the king said to him, "You still have a long life ahead of you.

古文：故特为君计，还宜作功德，以自赎耳。 
现代文：所以特地为你考虑，回去之后应该作功德。用自己的行动去赎罪。 
English: Therefore, I specifically considered for you that you should make merit after returning. Use your own actions to atone for your sins.

古文：涛再拜数四，王问： 君读书否？ 
现代文：涛又四次拜谢。王问： 你读书吗？ 
English: Tao bowed four times again. Wang asked: Do you study?

古文：曰： 颇常读之。 
现代文：说： 我经常读很多书。
English: He said: I often read a lot of books.

古文：又问： 知晋朝有羊祜否？ 
现代文：又问，知道晋朝有个叫羊祜的人吗？
English: He also asked, "Do you know that in the Jin Dynasty, there was a man named Yang Jiao?

古文：曰： 知之！ 
现代文：涛说： 知道。 
English: Tao said: I know.

古文：王曰： 即我是也。
现代文：王说： 那就是我呀。
English: The king said, "That's me."

古文：我昔在荆州，曾为刺史，卒官舍，故见君江陵之吏，增依依耳。 
现代文：我以前在荆州曾经当过刺史，死在官府里。所以看见你这个江陵的小官，增添了相互的感情。 
English: I used to be a magistrate in Jingzhou and died in the government office, so seeing you, a minor official in Jiangling, added to our mutual feelings.

古文：言讫辞出，命所追之吏送之归舍，遂活。
现代文：说完告辞出去，叫拘捕他的差役送他回家，于是活了。
English: After saying good-bye, he went out and told the officers who had arrested him to take him home, and he lived.

古文：赵裴
现代文：赵裴
English: Zhao Pei

古文：明经赵裴，贞元中，选授巴州清化县。
现代文：唐德宗贞元年间，以明经中举的赵裴被派到巴州清化县。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of the Tang Dynasty, Zhao Pei, mentioned in the Ming Dynasty, was sent to Chinghua County, Bazhou.

古文：失志成疾，恶明，不饮食四十余日。
现代文：不得志酿成疾病。他怕见光亮，四十多天不吃东西。
English: He was afraid to see the light and did not eat for more than forty days.

古文：忽觉室中雷鸣，顷有赤气如鼓，轮转至床，腾空上，当心而住。
现代文：忽然听见屋中象雷鸣一样声音，片刻又有红色的气团象鼓一样，旋转到床前。腾空而上，到中间又停住。
English: Suddenly I heard a sound like thunder in the room, and for a moment there was a rumble of red air, like a drum, which swirled around to the bed. It rose into the air and stopped in the middle.

古文：初觉精神游散，奄如梦中。
现代文：起初觉得精神恍惚飘飘然，气息屏抑象在梦中。
English: At first, I felt like I was in a trance, like I was in a dream.

古文：有朱衣平帻者，引之东行。
现代文：有个穿红衣服戴平顶帽子的人，领他往东走，走到山崖处。
English: A man in red clothes and a flat cap led him east, to a cliff.

古文：出山断处，有水东西流。
现代文：有水自东向西流。
English: Water flows from east to west.

古文：久立视之，又东行。
现代文：站在这里观看好久，又往东走。
English: Stand here and watch for a long time, then walk east.

古文：一桥饰以金碧。
现代文：有一座桥装饰得金碧辉煌。
English: There is a bridge decked out in gold.

古文：过北，入一城，至曹司中，人吏甚众。
现代文：走过去再朝北，进了一城。到了官地府里，人特别多。
English: I walked further north and entered a city. When I got to the local government office, there were a lot of people.

古文：见妹婿贾奕，与己争杀牛事。
现代文：看见妹婿贾奕正与自己争论杀牛的事。
English: He saw his younger brother-in-law, Jia Yi, arguing with himself about killing a cow.

古文：疑是冥司，遽逃避至一壁间。
现代文：怀疑是阴间，害怕逃避到一间屋子里。
English: Suspicion is hell, fear escapes into a room.

古文：墙如石，黑，高数丈。
现代文：墙象石头的，很黑，高数丈。
English: The walls were stone-like, very dark, and several stories high.

古文：厅有呵喝声，朱衣者遂领入大院。
现代文：厅里边有吆喝的声音。穿红衣服的人于是领进一个大院。
English: There was shouting from inside the hall, and the man in red was led into a large courtyard.

古文：吏通曰： 司命过人。 
现代文：差役通报说，官叫人过去。
English: The officer called for someone to come over, the dispatcher reported.

古文：复见贾奕，因与辨对。
现代文：再次看见贾奕，因而与贾奕当面辨解。
English: He saw Jia Yi again, so he had a face-to-face discussion with Jia Yi.

古文：奕固执之，无以自明。
现代文：贾奕很固执，没法说明白。
English: Jia Yi is very stubborn and can't make it clear.

古文：忽有巨镜径丈，虚悬空中，仰视之，宛见贾奕鼓刀。业负明。
现代文：忽然有一面直径一丈的巨大镜子，悬挂在空中，抬头看，好像看见贾奕舞弄刀子，这已经很明白了。
English: Suddenly there was a huge mirror with a diameter of one meter, hanging in the air, looking up, as if seeing Jia Yi dancing with a knife, which was already very clear.

古文：有不忍之色，奕始伏罪。
现代文：脸上露出不忍心的表情。贾奕当时认罪。
English: An expression of impatience showed on his face. Jia Yi pleaded guilty at that time.

古文：朱衣人又引至司，入院，一人褐帔紫霞冠，状如尊像。
现代文：红衣人又领他到官府那里进院，一个人披褐色帔，戴紫霞冠。面貌威严。象尊佛像。
English: The man in red also led him to the government office where he was hospitalized. He was dressed in a brown robe and a purple crown. His face was majestic. Like a Buddha statue.

古文：责曰： 何故，窃他袱头二事。
现代文：指责说： 为什么偷别人的头巾二个？
English: The accusation said: Why steal two headscarves from others?

古文：在滑州市，隐橡子三升。 
现代文：在滑州市隐藏橡子三升。 
English: Three liters of hidden acorns in the city of Slush.

古文：因拜之无数。
现代文：于是无数次下拜。
English: As a result, they bowed down countless times.

古文：朱衣复引出，谓曰： 能游上清乎？ 
现代文：红衣人再次领他出去。对他说： 能游上清吗？ 
English: The man in red led him out again and said to him, "Can you swim upstream?"

古文：乃共登一山，下临流水，其水悬注腾沫，人随流而入者千万，不觉身亦随流。
现代文：于是一同登上一座山，从高处向下看，流水飞瀑悬注腾沫。顺流而下的人千千万万，不知不觉也在其中了。
English: So they climbed a mountain together and looked down from a high place. Flowing water and waterfalls were pouring foam. There were thousands of people going down the river, and they were unknowingly among them.

古文：良久，住大石上，有青白晕道。
现代文：过了很长时间，停在一块石头上，上边有青白痕迹。
English: After a long time, it came to rest on a rock with bluish-white marks on it.

古文：朱衣者变成两人，一导之，一促之。
现代文：这时红衣人变成了两个人。一人在前领路，一人在后督促。
English: At this time, the man in red became two people. One led the way in front, one urged behind.

古文：乃升石崖上立，坦然无尘。
现代文：于是又登上石崖。站在这里，平坦没有尘土。
English: So I climbed up the cliff again and stood there, flat and dust-free.

古文：行数里，旁有草如红兰，茎叶密，无刺，其花拂拂然，飞散空中。
现代文：往前走数里，路旁有草，像红色的蓝，茎叶茂密，无刺，花随风飘动，飞散在空中。
English: A few miles ahead, there is grass beside the road, like red and blue, the stems and leaves are dense, without thorns, the flowers flutter with the wind and fly in the air.

古文：又有草如苣，附地，亦飞花，初出如马勃，破，大如叠，赤黄色。
现代文：又有草象莴苣，附在地上，也有花在飞散。这种花刚开的时候象马勃，等到完全开放，很大赤黄色。
English: There were also grasses like thistles, clinging to the ground, and there were flowers flying about. When these flowers first opened, they looked like puffballs, but when they were fully open, they were very red and yellow.

古文：过此，见火如山，横亘天。
现代文：一队队的美女天仙，姿容绝伦，盖世无双。
English: A team of beautiful women, all of whom are heavenly beings, with stunning looks that are second to none.

古文：候焰绝乃前。
现代文：鼓乐之声此起彼伏。
English: The sound of drumming echoes in the background.

古文：至大城，城上重谯，街列果树，仙子为伍，迭谣鼓乐，仙姿绝世。
现代文：一派仙境。
English: A kind of fairyland.

古文：凡历三重门，舟艨交焕。
现代文：凡是经过这里的都得过三重门。舟船交错，互相辉映。
English: Everyone who passes through here has to go through the triple gate. Boats and ships are interlaced, reflecting each other.

古文：其地及壁，澄光可鉴，上不见天，若有绛晕都复之。
现代文：船底和船壁光华照人。向上看不见天，好象有紫红色的光晕覆盖着。
English: The bottom of the ship and the walls of the ship shone brightly. The sky could not be seen above, as if it were covered with a violet-red halo.

古文：正殿三重，悉列尊像。
现代文：三重正殿，全都排列着尊像。
English: The three main halls are all lined with statues.

古文：见道士一人，如旧相识。
现代文：看见一个道士，好象以前的相识。
English: Seeing a Taoist priest is like meeting an old friend.

古文：赵求为弟子，不许。
现代文：赵裴相求做他的弟子，没答应。
English: Zhao Pei Xiang asked to be his disciple, but he did not agree.

古文：诸乐中有如琴者，长四尺，九弦，近头尺余方广，中有两道横，以变声。
现代文：在许多乐器中有一个象琴的东西，长四尺，九根弦，靠近头的地方，有一尺多宽的方形，中有两道横梁。用来改变声音。
English: Among the many musical instruments, there is something like a lyre, four feet long, with nine strings, and near the head, there is a square more than a foot wide, with two beams. It is used to change the sound.

古文：又一如酒榼，三弦，长三尺，腹面上广下狭，背丰隆项。
现代文：又有一个象酒具，三根弦，长三尺。腹部上宽下窄，背面丰满脖子突出。
English: There is another one like a wine set, three strings, three feet long. The abdomen is narrow at the top and wide at the bottom, the back is plump and the neck protrudes.

古文：有过录，乃引出。
现代文：叫他与二个穿红衣服的人坐在大厅里候事。
English: He was told to sit in the hall with two men in red and wait.

古文：阙南一院，中有绛冠紫帔，命与二朱衣人坐厅事。
现代文：于是叫人拿来戊申的记录。记录就象人间的供词一样。
English: So they called for Boshin's records, which read like a confession.

古文：乃命先过戊申录，录如人间辞状，首冠人生辰，次言姓名年纪，下注生月日，别行横布六旬甲子。所有功德，日下具之。
现代文：首先是人的生辰，其次是姓名，年龄，下面注明出生年，月，日，横行列六十年甲子，所有功过都在日期下记载下来。
English: First of all, the person's birthday, followed by name, age, and then the year, month, and day of birth are indicated below. All achievements are recorded under the date.

古文：如无，即无字。
现代文：如果没有功过，就没有字。
English: If there is no merit, there will be no words.

古文：赵自视其录，姓名生辰日月，一无差也。
现代文：赵裴亲自看他的记录。姓名生辰日月，一点不差。
English: Zhao Pei personally looked at his record. The name of his birth date is the same.

古文：过录者，数盈亿兆。
现代文：记录的人超了亿兆。
English: The number of people recorded exceeded 100 million.

古文：朱衣人言，每六十年，天下人一过录，以考校善恶增算也。
现代文：红衣人说： 每六十年，天下所有的人都记录一次，用来考察核对善恶，计算增减寿限。 
English: The man in red said: Every sixty years, all the people in the world are recorded once, which is used to check the good and evil, and calculate the increase and decrease of life expectancy.

古文：朱衣者引出北门，至向路，执手别曰： 游此是子之魂，可寻此行，勿反顾，当达家矣。 
现代文：红衣人领出此门，到了回家方向的路上，拉着手告别说： 在这里游荡的是你的灵魂，可立即沿着这条路走，不要回头，一定能到家。 
English: The man in red led the way out of the door, and when they were on their way home, he took them by the hand and bade them farewell, saying, "It is your soul that is wandering here, you can go along this road immediately, don't look back, you will definitely get home."

古文：依其言，行稍急，蹶倒，如梦觉，死已七日矣。
现代文：按着他的话，走的稍急一点，突然摔倒。如梦方醒。这时死了已经七天了。
English: According to his words, he walked a little faster and suddenly fell down. He woke up as if in a dream. By this time, he had been dead for seven days.

古文：赵著《魂游上清记》，叙事甚该悉。
现代文：赵裴开始著书《魂游上清记》，叙事特别详尽。
English: Zhao Pei began to write the book "The Soul's Journey to the Pure Land," the narrative of which is particularly detailed.

古文：邓成
现代文：邓成
English: Deng Cheng

古文：邓成者，豫章人也，年二十余。曾暴死。
现代文：邓成是豫州人，当年二十多岁，曾经患暴病死亡。
English: Deng Cheng is a native of Yuzhou. He was in his twenties at the time and died of a violent illness.

古文：所由领至地狱，先过判官。
现代文：差役领到地狱。先见过判官。
English: The officers led him to hell. I saw the judge first.

古文：判官是刺史黄麟，麟即成之表丈也。
现代文：判官是刺史黄麟，麟就是邓成的表丈。
English: The adjudicator is Huang Lin, and Lin is Deng Cheng's journeyman.

古文：见成悲喜，具问家事，成语之，悉皆无恙。
现代文：看见邓成又悲又喜，讯问家中所有的事情。邓成对他说： 一切都很好。 
English: Seeing Deng Cheng both sad and happy, he inquired about everything at home. Deng Cheng told him: Everything is fine.

古文：成因求哀。
现代文：邓成因此请求他可怜。
English: Deng Cheng therefore asked for his mercy.

古文：麟云： 我亦欲得汝归，传语于我诸弟。 
现代文：麟说： 我也想让你回去，传话给我所有的兄弟。 
English: Rin said, "I also want you to go back and send a message to all my brothers."

古文：遂入白王。既出曰： 已论放汝讫。 
现代文：于是进去向王说明，一会出来说： 已经议论过了放你回去。 
English: Then he went in and told the king, and after a little while he came out and said, "It has been decided; you may go."

古文：久之，王召成问云： 汝在生作何罪业，至有尔许冤对头。
现代文：过了很长时间。王召见邓成问道： 你在一生中做了什么有罪的事，以至有那么多的冤家对头。
English: After a long time, Wang summoned Deng Chengguo and asked, "What did you do in your life that made you have so many enemies?"

古文：然算犹未尽，当得复还。无宜更作地狱冤也。 
现代文：然而算起来，你的寿命还没有完了，应该得以复还，不应该改作地狱的冤鬼。 
English: However, your lifespan is not over yet. You should be able to get your life back, and you should not be turned into an evil spirit from hell.

古文：寻有畜生数十头来噬成。
现代文：立即有畜生数十头前来咬邓成。
English: Immediately, dozens of animals came to bite Deng Cheng.

古文：王谓曰： 邓成已杀尔辈，复杀邓成，无益之事。
现代文：王对他们说： 邓成已经杀了你们，反过来再杀邓成，这样对谁都没有好处。
English: The king said to them, "Dengcheng has already killed you, so killing Dengcheng in turn will not benefit anyone.

古文：我今放成却回，令为汝作功德，皆使汝托生人间，不亦善哉！ 
现代文：我现在放邓成回去，让他为你们作功德，都使你们托生人间。不也是好事吗？ 
English: I will now let Deng Cheng go back, and let him do merits for you, so that you can be reborn on earth. Isn't that a good thing?

古文：悉云： 不要功德，但欲杀邓成耳。 
现代文：畜生都说： 不要功德，就是想杀了邓成。 
English: All the animals said, "No merit, just want to kill Deng Cheng."

古文：王言： 如此於汝何益。
现代文：王说： 这样做对你们有什么好处？
English: And the king said, What advantage is it to you to do so?

古文：杀邓成，汝亦不离畜生之身。
现代文：杀了邓成你们也脱离不了畜生的身子。
English: If you kill Deng Cheng, you can't get rid of the beast's body.

古文：曷若受功德，即改为人身也。 
现代文：你们倒不如接受功德，立即可以改变人身。 
English: You might as well accept the merits, you can change your body immediately.

古文：诸辈多有去者，唯一驴频来蹋成，一狗啮其衣不肯去。
现代文：这些畜生多数走开了，唯有一头驴屡次来踢邓成，一只狗咬住他的衣服不肯放开。
English: Most of the animals walked away, except for a donkey that repeatedly kicked Deng Cheng, and a dog that bit his clothes and would not let go.

古文：王苦救卫，然后得免。
现代文：王苦苦求救并加以保卫，才得到幸免。
English: The king had to plead for help and defend himself before he was spared.

古文：遂遣所追成吏送之。
现代文：于是派拘捕邓成的的差役送他回去，出去见过黄麟。
English: So they sent Deng Cheng's arresting officer to take him back, and he went out to meet Huang Lin.

古文：出过麟，麟谓成曰： 至喜莫过重生，汝今得还，深足忻庆。
现代文：麟对成说： 再大的喜事也没有超过重生的。你今天能够回去。要好好地庆贺一番。
English: Lin said to Cheng: "There is no greater joy than being reborn. You can go back today. Celebrate properly."

古文：吾虽为判官，然日日恒受罪。
现代文：我虽然作为判官，然而天天在受罪。
English: Even though I am the judge, I suffer every day.

古文：汝且住此，少当见之。 
现代文：你暂时待在这里，一会就能看个明白。 
English: If you stay here for a while, you'll understand.

古文：俄有一牛头卒，持火来从麟顶上然至足，麟成灰，遂灭，寻而复生。
现代文：很快有一个牛头小卒，拿着火，从黄麟头顶上烧到脚，麟变成了灰，接着火灭了，立即又得以复生。
English: Soon there was a young man with a bull's head, holding a fire, which burned from the top of the yellow unicorn's head to its feet. The unicorn turned to ashes, then the fire was extinguished, and it was immediately revived.

古文：悲涕良久，谓成曰： 吾之受罪如是，其可忍也！ 
现代文：悲伤哭泣很长时间。对邓成说： 吾经常受这样的罪，怎么可以忍受！
English: She cried in sorrow for a long time. She said to Deng Chengwu, "I often suffer from such a sin, how can I bear it!

古文：汝归，可传语弟，努力为造功德。令我得离此苦，然非我本物。
现代文：你回去，可传话给我弟弟，努力为我造功德，让我能够脱离这个苦地方。
English: When you go back, you can send a message to my brother and try to create merit for me, so that I can get out of this difficult place.

古文：虽为功德，终不得之。
现代文：然而不是我自己的东西。虽然作了功德，但终究得不到解脱。
English: However, it is not my own. Although I have made merit, I still cannot be liberated.

古文：吾先将官料置得一庄子，今将此造经佛，即当得之。
现代文：我以前用作官得到的薪俸购了一个庄园，现在用它来造经佛就可以得到解脱。
English: I used to buy a manor house with my salary as a government official, but now I can use it to make a sutra and be liberated.

古文：或恐诸弟为恍惚，不信汝言，持吾玉簪还，以示之。 
现代文：恐怕那些兄弟怀疑，不相信你的话，你拿着我的玉簪回去，给他们看。 
English: I'm afraid those brothers will be suspicious and not believe your words. Go back with my jade bracelet and show it to them.

古文：因拢头上簪与成。
现代文：因而拔了头上的簪子给邓成。
English: So he pulled out the braid on his head and gave it to Deng Cheng.

古文：麟前有一大水坑，令成合眼，推入坑中遂活。
现代文：黄麟前面有一个大水坑，叫邓成闭上眼睛，把他推进坑里。于是活了。
English: There was a big puddle in front of Huang Lin. He told Deng Cheng to close his eyes and pushed him into the puddle. He survived.

古文：其父母富於财，怜其子重生，数日之内造诸功德。
现代文：他的父母很有钱，可怜自己的儿子能够重生，数日之内就造了许多功德。
English: His parents are very rich, pity their son can be reborn, within a few days to create a lot of merit.

古文：成既愈，遂往黄氏，为说麟所托，以玉簪还之。
现代文：邓成就全好了，于是到黄家去向他们说黄麟委托的事情，把玉簪还给他们。
English: Deng Chengcheng was completely recovered, so he went to Huang Jia to tell them about the matter entrusted by Huang Lin and returned the jade bowl to them.

古文：黄氏识簪，举家悲泣，数日乃卖庄造经也。
现代文：黄家认识簪子，全家悲痛哭泣，数日就卖掉了庄园制造佛经。
English: The Huang family knew Zizi, the whole family cried with grief, and sold the manor to make Buddhist scriptures in a few days.

古文：张瑶
现代文：张瑶
English: Zhang Ye

古文：东阳张瑶病死，数日方活。
现代文：东阳张瑶，病死，数日后才活。
English: Dongyang Zhang Qi, died of illness, only to be revived a few days later.

古文：云，被所由领过一府舍，中有贵人傧从如王者。
现代文：他说： 被差役领着经过一个府舍，里边有一个身份高贵的人，从穿戴一看象个大王。
English: He said: "I was being led by police officers past a mansion. Inside was a man of high status, who looked like a great king from the way he was dressed.

古文：瑶至庭内，见其所杀众生尽来对。
现代文：瑶来到院子当中看见他所杀的众多生灵都来和他对质。
English: He came to the middle of the courtyard and saw that many of the creatures he had killed had come to confront him.

古文：瑶曾杀一牛，以布两端，与之追福。
现代文：瑶曾经杀过一头牛，用布两匹为它乞福。
English: A baboon once killed a cow and used two pieces of cloth to pray for its well-being.

古文：其牛亦在中庭，角戴两布。
现代文：这头牛也在院子中，角上挂着两块布。
English: The cow is also in the yard, with two pieces of cloth hanging from its horns.

古文：又曾供养病僧，其僧亦来，谓所司曰： 张瑶持《金刚经》，满三千遍，功德已入骨；又写《法华经》一部，福多罪少，故未合死。 
现代文：又曾供养过有病的僧人，这个僧人也来了。对所司曰： 张瑶念诵《金刚经》已满三千遍，功德很深，已入骨中。又写《法华经》一部，福多罪少，所以不应该死。 
English: This monk, who had once provided for a sick monk, also came. He said to the chief abbot: Zhang Ye has recited the Diamond Sutra three thousand times, and his merits are very deep and have been ingrained in his bones. He also wrote a part of the Lotus Sutra, and his merits are less than his sins, so he should not die.

古文：所司命秤之，畜生尽起，而瑶犹在地上。
现代文：所司叫人公平处理这件事。畜生都起来，而瑶还在地上。
English: The steward told the man to handle the matter fairly. The animals all got up, but the donkey was still on the ground.

古文：所司取司命簿勘之，一紫衣引黄衫吏抱黄簿至，云： 张瑶名已掩了，合死。 
现代文：所司叫拿来司命簿检查。一个穿紫色衣服的人领着穿黄衫的差役抱着黄色的册子到。说： 张瑶的名字已被盖上了，该死。 
English: A person in purple clothes led a policeman in a yellow shirt, holding a yellow booklet, and said, "Zhang Yao's name has been sealed, damn it."

古文：视簿，有纸帖掩其名。
现代文：再看司命簿，有纸帖盖上了他的名字。
English: Look again at the death register. There is a piece of paper with his name on it.

古文：又命取太山簿，顷之，亦紫衣吏人引黄衫吏持簿至。
现代文：又叫拿太山簿。很快，也是紫衣人领着黄衫差役拿簿子来到。
English: He was also told to take the Tai Shan book. Soon, the man in purple led the yellow-shirted policeman to take the book.

古文：云： 张瑶掩了，合死。 
现代文：说： 张瑶盖了，该死。 
English: He said, "The curtain is up, damn it.

古文：又命取阁内簿检，使者云： 名始掩半，未合死。 
现代文：又叫拿阁内簿检查。使者说： 字前头盖上一半，不该死。 
English: And he said, Take the book of the testimony, and read it: and he said, It is not lawful for a man to put a mark upon his forehead, or in his forehead.

古文：王问瑶： 汝名两处全掩，一处掩半，六分之内，五分合死，故不合复生。
现代文：王问瑶： 你的名字两处全盖上了，一处盖上一半。六分之中，五分该死。所以不应该再生。
English: Wang Qianqian: Your name is completely covered in two places, and half-covered in one place. Of the six points, five points are worthless. Therefore, you should not be reborn.

古文：以功德故，放汝归阎浮地，勿复杀生。 
现代文：因为你有功德的缘故，所以放你回到人间世界，不要再杀生灵。 
English: For the sake of your merits, let you return to the human world, and do not kill any more sentient beings.

古文：命瑶入地狱，遍见受罪，火坑镬汤，无不见有。
现代文：叫张瑶进地狱，普遍看见那些受罪的人，火烧、坑埋、锅煎、汤煮等各种酷刑无一不有。
English: Zhang Ye was told to go to hell, and he generally saw those who suffered from sin, burning, burying in pits, frying in pots, boiling in soup, and other forms of torture.

古文：僧曰： 汝勿复为罪。 
现代文：僧说： 你不需要再受这样的罪。 
English: The monk said, "You don't need to suffer like this anymore.

古文：遂即以印印其股，曰： 将此为信。 
现代文：于是就用印印在他的大腿上，说： 用这个做为记号。 
English: And they made him a mark on his thigh, saying, This shall be a sign to you.

古文：既活，印甚分明，至今未灭。
现代文：活了以后，印的地方很清楚。至今未灭。
English: After living, the place of the mark is very clear. It has not yet disappeared.

