古文：薛安都，河东汾阴人也。世为强族，同姓有三千家。父广，为宗豪，高祖定关、河，以为上党太守。
现代文：薛安都，河东汾阴人，世世代代是当地豪门大族，同姓的人有三千家，他父亲薛广是薛氏的首领，高祖刘裕平定关中河南，用薛广当上党太守。
English: Xue Andu, a native of Shiyin in eastern Henan Province, has been a member of the local elite for generations. There are 3,000 families with the same surname. His father, Xue Guang, was the head of the Xue clan, and his great-grandfather, Liu Yuping, ruled central Henan Province. He used Xue Guang as the party's grand marshal.

古文：安都少以勇闻，身长七尺八寸，便弓马。索虏使助秦州刺史北贺汨击反胡白龙子，灭之。由是为伪雍、秦二州都统，州各有刺史，都统总其事。
现代文：薛安都少年时便因勇敢著名，身长七尺八寸，熟习射箭和骑马，魏人叫安都帮助秦州刺史北贺汨攻叛乱胡人白龙子，消灭了敌人，因此安都当上了魏人雍州秦州二州都统，每州都有刺史，都统总管各州大事。
English: When Xue Andu was a boy, he was famous for his bravery. He was seven feet and eight inches tall, and was familiar with archery and horse riding. The Wei people called Andu to help Qin State stab Shi Bei He Zheng to attack the rebellious Hu people Bai Longzi and eliminate the enemy. Therefore, Andu became the Wei people of Yongzhou, Qin State, and the two states of Du Tong. Each state has a stabbing history, and Du Tong is in charge of the affairs of each state.

古文：元嘉二十一年，索虏主拓跋焘击芮芮大败，安都与宗人薛永宗起义，永宗营汾曲，安都袭得弘农。
现代文：元嘉二十一年，魏国国王拓跋焘讨伐柔然大败。薛安都和本家薛永宗起义造反，永宗屯兵汾曲，安都袭占弘农郡城。
English: In the twenty-first year of Yuan Jia, the Wei King Tuobao's crusade was soundly defeated. Xue Andu and his family Xue Yongzong revolted, Yongzong sent troops to quell the rebellion, and Andu occupied Hongnong County.

古文：会北地人盖吴起兵，遂连衡相应。
现代文：恰遇北地人盖吴起义，于是他们相互联络。
English: They came into contact with each other when they happened to come across the uprising of the Hokkien people in Gaiwu.

古文：焘自率众击永宗，灭其族，进击盖吴。安都料众寡不敌，率壮士辛灵度等，弃弘农归国。
现代文：拓跋焘亲自率兵攻击薛永宗，消灭了他一家族，又进击盖吴，薛安都估计众寡悬殊，率壮士辛灵度等人，丢下弘农郡投奔宋朝。
English: Tuobao personally led an army to attack Xue Yongzong and wiped out his entire family. He also attacked Gaiwu, and Xue An estimated that he was outnumbered. He led the strong man Xin Lingdu and others to leave Hongnong County and go to the Song Dynasty.

古文：太祖延见之，求北还构扇河、陕，招聚义众。
现代文：文帝亲自召见他，安都请求回到北方煽动关陕一带百姓，招集义兵。
English: Emperor Wen personally summoned him, and An Du asked him to return to the north to incite the people in the Guanxi area and recruit volunteers.

古文：上许之，给锦百匹，杂缯三百匹。
现代文：文帝同意了，给他锦缎一百匹，杂丝三百匹，再袭击弘农郡。
English: Emperor Wen agreed and gave him 100 brocade horses and 300 yarn horses to attack Hongnong County.

古文：复袭弘农，虏已增戍，城不可克，盖吴又死，乃退还上洛。
现代文：敌人已增加了防卫，弘农城攻不下来，盖吴又死了，安都只好退回上洛。
English: The enemy had increased its defenses, Hongnongcheng could not be taken, Gai Wu died again, and Andu had to return to Shangluo.

古文：世祖镇襄阳，板为扬武将军、北弘农太守。
现代文：世祖刘骏镇守襄阳，签署他当扬武将军、北弘农太守。
English: The ancestor Liu Xizhen guarded Xiangyang, and signed his name as Yangwu General and Beihong Nongdaimou.

古文：虏渐强盛，安都乃归襄阳。从叔沈亦同归国，官至绥远将军、新野太守。
现代文：魏人逐渐强盛，安都于是回到襄阳，堂叔薛沈也同时回到宋国，官到绥远将军，新野太守。
English: The Wei people gradually prospered, and An Du returned to Xiangyang. At the same time, Uncle Xue Shen also returned to the Song Dynasty, and was promoted to the position of general of Xinyuan and the governor of Niino.

古文：二十七年，随王诞版安都为建武将军，随柳元景向关、陕，率步骑居前，所向克捷，事在元景传。
现代文：文帝二十七年，随王刘诞任命安都当建武将军，随同柳元景向潼关陕县一带进发，率领步骑兵上路，所向披靡。这事见《柳元景传》。
English: In the 27th year of Emperor Wen, with the appointment of King Liu Xizhao to Andu as General Jianwu, he set out with Liu Yuanjing to Shaoguan County and led the infantry cavalry on the road, which was overwhelming. See "Liu Yuanjing Biography."

古文：军还，诞版为后军行参军。二十九年，除始兴王浚征北行参军，加建武将军。鲁爽向虎牢，安都复随元景北出，即据关城，期俱济河取蒲坂。会爽退，安都复率所领随元景引还。仍伐西阳五水蛮。
现代文：大军凯旋，刘诞任安都当后军行参军，二十九年，安都被调到始兴王刘浚征北行参军，加号建武将军，鲁爽向虎牢关进攻，薛安都再随同柳元景北伐，便占有关城，和柳元景约期都渡河攻下蒲坂，恰遇鲁爽退兵，安都再次率领部队随同柳元景退回，接着讨伐西阳五水蛮。
English: The great army made a triumphant return, and Liu Xizhen and An Du both joined the army after the military march. In 29th year, An Du was transferred to Shixing Wang Liu Jun to join the army in the north, plus General Jianwu, Lu Shuang attacked the tiger's stronghold, Xue An Du again accompanied Liu Yuanjing to the north, then occupied the relevant city, and Liu Yuanjing agreed to cross the river and capture Puzhan. When Lu Shuang retreated, An Du once again led the troops to return with Liu Yuanjing, and then fought against Xiyang Wushui.

古文：世祖伐逆，转参军事，加宁朔将军，领马军，与柳元景俱发。
现代文：世祖讨伐逆贼刘邵，安都转官参军事、加号宁朔将军，率领骑兵和柳元景同时出发。
English: Liu Shao, the founder of the crusade against the traitor Liu Shao, and An Du, who was transferred to join the military, plus Ning Shuo, the general, led the cavalry and Liu Yuanjing to set off at the same time.

古文：四月十四日，至硃雀航，横矛瞋目，叱贼将皇甫安民等曰： 贼弑君父，何心事之！ 
现代文：四月十四日，到朱雀航，安都横握长矛，虎目大睁，骂敌将皇甫安民等人说： 逆贼刘邵杀君杀父，你们还有什么心事侍候他？ 
English: On April 14th, on the way to Suzakehang, Andu held a spear sideways, his eyes were wide open, and he scolded the enemy general Huangfu Anmin and others, saying: The traitor Liu Shao killed his father, what else do you have in mind to serve him?

古文：世祖践阼，除右军将军。
现代文：世祖继位，安都被任命为右军将军。
English: When the founder succeeded to the throne, An was appointed as the general of the right army.

古文：五月四日，率所领骑为前锋，直入殿庭。贼尚有数百人，一时奔散。以功封南乡县男，食邑五百户。
现代文：五月四日，安都率他领导的骑军为先锋，直接向宫殿进攻，叛党还有几百人，一时之间迅速逃窜，因建功劳封南乡县男，享受五百户租税的待遇。
English: On May 4th, Ando led his cavalry as the vanguard, directly attacking the palace. The rebels, along with several hundred others, quickly fled. He was awarded the title of Nanxiang County Man for his contribution to the construction of the palace, and enjoyed the tax treatment of 500 households.

古文：安都从征关、陕，至臼口，梦仰头视天，正见天门开，谓左右曰： 汝见天门开不？ 
现代文：当初安都随从征伐关陕时，到臼口，做梦见到自己仰头看天，正看见天门大开，对身边的人说： 你们看见天门开了没有？ 
English: At the beginning, when An Du was following the conquest of Guan Shan, he went to Usukou and dreamed that he looked up at the sky and saw the gate of heaven wide open. He said to the people around him: Did you see the gate of heaven open?

古文：至是叹曰： 梦天开，乃中兴之象邪！ 
现代文：到这时便感叹说： 梦见天门大开，难道是中兴的征兆吗？ 
English: At this time, he sighed and said: Dreaming that the gates of heaven are wide open, is it a sign of ZTE?

古文：从弟道生，亦以军功为大司马参军。犯罪，为秣陵令庾淑之所鞭。
现代文：安都堂弟薛道生，也因为军功当大司马参军，犯了罪，被秣陵令庾淑之鞭打。
English: Ando's cousin, Xue Daosheng, also committed a crime because of his military service when he joined the army, and was whipped by Gongling's order.

古文：安都大怒，乃乘马从数十人，令左右执槊，欲往杀淑之。行至硃雀航，逢柳元景。
现代文：安都听了非常愤怒。于是，骑马带了几十人，叫左右的人手持长矛，想前去杀庾淑之，走到朱雀航时，恰逢柳元景。
English: Andu was very angry when he heard this. Therefore, he rode with dozens of people and ordered the people on his right and left, holding spears, to go ahead and kill Gongsukzhi. When he reached Zhucahang, he happened to meet Liu Yuanjing.

古文：元景遥问： 薛公何处去？ 
现代文：柳元景问他： 薛先生去哪里？ 
English: Liu Yuanjing asked him: Where is Mr. Xue going?

古文：安都跃马至车后曰： 小子庾淑之鞭我从弟，今诣往刺杀之。 
现代文：薛安都跃马到后车回答到： 狗崽子庾淑之鞭打我的堂弟。这便打算去杀掉他。 
English: Xue Andu leapt onto the back of the car and replied: "Dog-beater Gong Shuxi whipped my cousin. He then planned to kill him."

古文：元景虑其不可驻，乃绐之曰： 小子无宜适，卿往与手，甚快。 
现代文：柳元景担心他劝不住。于是骗安都道： 庾淑之这个小人不懂事。你去杀了他，很好。 
English: Liu Yuanqing was worried that he would not be able to persuade her. Therefore, Liang Andu said, "This little person, Min Sukzhi, does not know what to do. If you go and kill him, that's fine.

古文：安都既回马，复追呼之： 别宜与卿有所论。 
现代文：安都回马过来。柳元景又追上去叫他： 另外有话跟你说。 
English: Ando came back on his horse. Liu Yuanqing chased after him and called out, "I have something else to tell you."

古文：令下马入车。
现代文：叫他下马到车中来。
English: Tell him to get off the horse and get in the cart.

古文：既入车，因责让之曰： 卿从弟服章言论，与寒细不异，虽复人士，庾淑之亦何由得知？
现代文：待薛安都到车中，便批评他道： 你的堂弟衣着言论，和寒族小民没有差别。即使是其他的人，庾淑之之流的人怎么能知道这事？
English: While waiting for Xue An to get into the car, they criticized him, saying, "Your cousin's clothing and speech are no different from those of the cold people. Even if it were someone else, how could someone from the Meishu family know about it?

古文：且人身犯罪，理应加罚，卿为朝廷勋臣，宜崇奉法宪，云何放恣，辄欲于都邑杀人？
现代文：况且亲身犯法，于理应被惩罚。你是朝廷功臣，应该遵崇法律。为什么要放肆无忌，便想在京城杀人。
English: Besides, if you personally break the law, you deserve to be punished. You are a hero of the imperial court, you should respect the law. Why do you want to kill people in the capital?

古文：非唯科律所不容，主上亦无辞以相宥。 
现代文：这不仅是法律不允许的，皇上也无法原谅。 
English: This is not only prohibited by law, but also cannot be forgiven by the Emperor.

古文：因载之俱归，安都乃止。
现代文：于是，载着他一同回去，安都才罢休。
English: As a result, carrying him back with him, An Du finally gave up.

古文：其年，以惮直免官。
现代文：当年，因为严厉正直而被免官。
English: That year, he was dismissed from his post for his strict honesty.

古文：孝建元年，复除左军将军。
现代文：孝建元年，再当左军将军。
English: In the first year of the Xiao Jian era, he became the general of the Left Army again.

古文：二月，鲁爽反叛，遣安都及冗从仆射胡子反、龙骧将军宗越率步骑据历阳。
现代文：二月，鲁爽反叛，朝廷派安都和冗从仆射胡子反、龙骧将军宗越率领骑步兵进占历阳。
English: In February, Lu Shuang rebelled, and the imperial court sent Andu and Zhou's subordinate Shuaiwuzi to rebel, and Longjing General Zong Yue led the cavalry and infantry to occupy Liyang.

古文：爽遣将郑德玄戍大岘，德玄使前锋杨胡与轻兵向历阳。
现代文：鲁爽派将军郑德玄戍守大岘。郑德玄叫先锋杨胡与率轻兵向历阳进击。
English: Lu Shuang sent General Zheng Dexuan to defend Dajian. Zheng Dexuan ordered the vanguard Yang Hu and his light troops to attack Liyang.

古文：安都遣宗越及历阳太守程天祚逆击破之，斩胡与及其军副。
现代文：安都派宗越和历阳太守程天祚迎击，打败了杨胡与，杀了杨胡与和他的副将。
English: Amdo sent Zong Yue and Liyang's grand marshal Cheng Tianyao to meet the attack, defeated Yang Hui and killed Yang Hui and his vice-general.

古文：德玄复使其司马梁严屯岘东，安都幢主周文恭晨往侦候，因而袭之，悉禽；贼未敢进。
现代文：郑德玄再派他的司马梁严驻守大岘的东边。安都的幢主周文恭凌晨侦察，乘便袭击，全部活捉梁严等。
English: Zheng Dexuan then sent his Sima Liang Yan to guard the east side of Dafu. The builder of Ando, Zhou Wengong, scouted in the early morning, attacked by bus, and captured Liang Yan alive.

古文：世祖诏安都留三百人守历阳，渡还采石，迁辅国将军、竟陵内史。
现代文：叛军不敢前进。世祖命令安都留三百人守历阳，渡回采石矶。迁官辅国将军、竟陵内史。
English: The rebel army did not dare to advance. The ancestor ordered three hundred people to stay in Andu to guard Liyang and go back to the quarry. The transfer of officials to the general of the country, but the history of the tomb.

古文：四月，鲁爽使弟瑜率三千人出小岘，爽寻以大众阻大岘。
现代文：四月，鲁爽叫他的弟弟鲁瑜率三千人从小岘出发。鲁爽不久带大众驻扎大岘防守。
English: In April, Lu Shuang ordered his younger brother Lu Yu to lead 3,000 men from Xiaohui. Soon after, Lu Shuang and his people were stationed in Daxu to defend the city.

古文：又遣安都步骑八千度江，与历阳太守张幼绪等讨爽。
现代文：朝廷又派安都带骑兵八千渡过长江和历阳太守张幼绪等人讨伐鲁爽。
English: The imperial court also sent Andu with eight thousand cavalry to cross the Yangtze River and Liyang's governor Zhang Yuxu and others to fight Lu Shuang.

古文：安都军副建武将军谭金率数十骑挑战，斩其偏帅。
现代文：薛安都的副将建武将军谭金率几十个骑兵挑战，杀了鲁瑜的偏将军。
English: Xue Andu's vice-commander, General Tan Jin, led dozens of cavalry to challenge and kill Lu Yu's partial general.

古文：幼绪恇怯，辄引军退还，安都复还历阳。
现代文：张幼绪非常胆小，便率军退回，薛安都再回到历阳。
English: Zhang Youxu was very timid, so he led the army back, and Xue Andu returned to Liyang.

古文：臧质久不至，世祖复遣沈庆之济江督统诸军。
现代文：臧质好久不到，世祖再派沈庆之渡江统率三军。
English: After a long absence, the founder sent Shen Qingzhi to lead the three armies to unify the three provinces.

古文：爽军食少，引退，庆之使安都率轻骑追之；四月丙戌，及爽于小岘，爽自与腹心壮骑继后。
现代文：鲁爽的部队粮食不多，也退回去了。沈庆之派安都率领轻骑兵追击，四月丙戌，在小岘赶上鲁爽，鲁爽和他的心腹骑兵壮士断后。
English: Lu Shuang's troops didn't have much food, so they retreated. Shen Qing sent An Du to lead the light cavalry in pursuit. In April, after the light cavalry caught up with Lu Shuang, Lu Shuang and his trusted cavalrymen broke off.

古文：谭金先薄之，不能入，安都望见爽，便跃马大呼，直往刺之，应手而倒，左右范双斩爽首。
现代文：谭金首先进攻，不能攻入敌阵，安都望见鲁爽，便跃马大呼，直接上前刺向他，应手而倒，谭金身边的范双将鲁爽斩首。
English: Tan Jin attacked first, but was unable to break into the enemy lines. An Du saw Lu Shuang, so he leapt onto his horse and charged directly at him. He fell to the ground, and Fan Shuang, who was with Tan Jin, beheaded Lu Shuang.

古文：爽累世枭猛，生习战陈，咸云万人敌。
现代文：鲁爽世世代代骁勇非凡，一向习惯于阵式战斗，都说他是 万人敌 ，而薛安都单马而进，将他斩首而归。
English: For generations, Lu Shuang was extremely brave. He had always been accustomed to battle formations. Everyone said that he was a mortal enemy, while Xue An marched in single-handedly, beheaded him and returned.

古文：安都单骑直入，斩之而反，时人皆云关羽之斩颜良，不是过也。进爵为侯，增邑五百户，并前千户。
现代文：当时人都说关羽杀颜良，也不过如此。安都因此升进爵号为侯。增加五百户租税，和以前共一千户。
English: At that time, people said that Guan Yu killed Yan Liang, and it was no more than that. Therefore, An Du was promoted to the peerage as marquis. The tax of 500 households was increased, and there were a total of 1,000 households before.

古文：时王玄谟距南郡王义宣、臧质于梁山，安都复领骑为支军。
现代文：当时王玄谟正在梁山抗拒南郡王刘义宣、臧质。薛安都再次率领骑兵作为王玄谟的支队。
English: At that time, Wang Xuanmu was in Liangshan resisting Liu Yixuan, the king of Nan County, and Xue Andu, who again led the cavalry as Wang Xuanmu's detachment.

古文：贼有水步营在芜湖，安都遣将吕兴寿率数十骑袭之，贼众惊乱，斩首及赴水死者甚众。
现代文：叛军有水步兵军营在芜湖，安都派将领吕兴寿率领几十骑兵袭击敌人，敌人震惊而混乱，被杀头和跳水死的人很多。
English: The rebels had a water infantry battalion in Wuhu, and sent the general Lv Xing Shou from Andu to attack the enemy with dozens of cavalry. The enemy was shocked and confused, and many people were killed and drowned.

古文：义宣遣将刘湛之及质攻玄谟，玄谟命众军击之，使安都引骑出贼阵右。
现代文：刘义宣派将军刘湛之和臧质攻打王玄谟。王玄谟叫各部队奋击，叫薛安都率骑兵从敌军右阵突入。
English: Liu Yixuan sent General Liu Zhanqi to attack Wang Xuanmu. Wang Xuanmu ordered all the troops to fight hard, and ordered Xue Andu to lead the cavalry into the enemy's right front.

古文：谭金三历贼陈，乘其隙纵骑突之，诸将系进。
现代文：安都副将建武将军谭金三次冲入敌人战阵，乘空隙放开骑兵突击，各将领跟着踏进。
English: General Tan Jin, vice-commander of Andu, rushed into the enemy's battle line three times, taking advantage of the gap to let the cavalry attack, and the generals followed.

古文：是朝，贼马军发芜湖，欲来会战，望安都骑甚盛，隐山不敢出。
现代文：这天早晨，叛军骑兵从芜湖出发，想来会战，望见薛安都的骑兵气势庞大，隐藏在山后不敢过来。
English: That morning, the rebel cavalrymen set out from Wuhu, wanting to fight. They saw that Xue Andu's cavalrymen were huge, hiding behind the mountains and dared not come over.

古文：贼阵东南犹坚，安都横击陷之，贼遂大溃。
现代文：叛军东南战阵仍很坚固。薛安都从侧面攻破他们。于是敌人大败。
English: The south-eastern front of the rebels was still strong. Xue Andu broke through them from the side, and the enemy suffered a great defeat.

古文：安都队主刘元儒于舰中斩湛之首。
现代文：安都的队长刘元儒在舰上砍掉了刘湛之的脑袋。
English: The captain of the Andu, Liu Yuanru, cut off Liu Zhanzhi's head on the ship.

古文：转太子左卫率。
现代文：安都因此转官太子左卫帅。
English: He was also transferred to the position of the Crown Prince Left Guard.

古文：大明元年，虏向无盐，东平太守刘胡出战失利。
现代文：大明元年，魏人进攻无盐，东平太守刘胡出战不利。
English: In the first year of the Great Ming Dynasty, the Wei people attacked without salt, and the Dongping Emperor Liu Hu was unfavorable.

古文：二月，遣安都领马军北讨，东阳太守沈法系水军向彭城，并受徐州刺史申坦节度。
现代文：二月，朝廷派安都率领骑兵北伐，东阳太守沈法系率水军进向彭城，同时受徐州刺史申坦的节度。
English: In February, the imperial court sent Andu to lead the cavalry in the Northern Expedition, and the Dongyang Daju Shen Fa led the navy to march to Pengcheng, at the same time by the order of Xuzhou Jishi Shentan.

古文：上戒之曰： 贼若可及，便尽力殄之。
现代文：孝武帝告诫薛安都说： 敌人如果可以赶上，便可尽力消灭他们。
English: Emperor Xiaowu warned Xue Andu: If the enemy can catch up, you can try your best to eliminate them.

古文：若度已回，可过河耀威而反。 
现代文：如果敌人逃走，可以渡过黄河耀武扬威而回。 
English: If the enemy escapes, you can cross the Yellow River and return with a flourish.

古文：时虏已去，坦求回军讨任榛，见许。
现代文：当时魏人已走，申垣请求回师讨伐任榛，被同意了。
English: At that time, the Wei people had already left, and Shengaki requested the return of the division to fight against Ren Zhao, which was agreed.

古文：安都当向左城，左城去滑台二百余里，安都以去虏镇近，军少不宜分行。
现代文：薛安都应向左城，左城离滑台二百多里。安都因为觉得离敌人重镇很近，而自己部队太少，不应该分开行动。
English: Xue Andu should move to Zuocheng, Zuocheng is more than two hundred miles away from the slide. Because Andu felt that he was very close to the enemy's stronghold, and his own troops were too few, he should not act separately.

古文：至东坊城，遇任榛三骑，讨擒其一，余两骑得走。
现代文：到东坊城，遇到任榛三个骑兵，捉了一个，其余两个逃走。
English: When he arrived at Dongfangcheng, he encountered three cavalrymen, captured one, and the other two fled.

古文：任榛闻知，皆得逃散。
现代文：任榛等听到这消息，都得以逃散。
English: Upon hearing the news, Ren Yao and the others were able to escape.

古文：时天旱，水泉多竭，人马疲困，不能远追。
现代文：当时，正处于干旱时节，水源小泉都枯竭了，兵马都很疲劳，不能追击逃跑敌人。
English: At that time, it was the dry season, the water sources had all dried up, and the soldiers and horses were too tired to pursue the fleeing enemy.

古文：安都、法系并白衣领职，坦系尚方。
现代文：安都、沈法系都因此以士兵身份兼领原先职务，申坦被关在尚方监。
English: As a result, both An Du and Shen Fa took on their former positions as soldiers, and Shentan was imprisoned in Shangfang Prison.

古文：任榛大抵在任城界，积世逋叛所聚，所在皆棘榛深密，难为用师，故能久自保藏，屡为民患。
现代文：任榛的人马大概在任城境内，那里几十年一直是叛逃分子集中的地方，那一带都是荆棘满地，又深又高又密，难以用兵讨伐，以至叛逃者一直能得以保存，多次成为百姓的祸患。
English: Rencheng's men and horses are probably in the territory of Rencheng, where defectors have been concentrated for decades. The area is full of thorns, deep, high and dense, and it is difficult to fight with soldiers, so that defectors have been preserved and have repeatedly become a scourge to the people.

古文：安都明年复职，改封武昌县侯，加散骑常侍。
现代文：薛安都明年恢复官职。被改封为武昌县侯，加官散骑常侍。
English: Xue Andu will resume his official position next year. He was changed to the marquess of Wuchang County, and was promoted to the position of the riding attendant.

古文：七年，又加征虏将军，为太子左卫率十年，终世祖世不转。
现代文：七年加号征虏将军，当太子左卫帅十年，在世祖时代一直没有转换官职。
English: He was a conscript general for seven years and a prince of the Left Division for ten years, and he never changed his official position during the time of the founder of the dynasty.

古文：前废帝即位，迁右卫将军，加给事中。
现代文：前废帝即位，安都迁官右卫将军，加官给事中。
English: The former deposed emperor ascended to the throne, and Andu was transferred to the position of General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards. He is currently in the process of being promoted.

古文：永光元年，出为使持节、督兗州诸军事、前将军、兗州刺史。
现代文：永光元年，出外为使持节，督兖州诸军事，前将军，兖州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Yongguang era, he went abroad for the Envoys' Day, commanded the military in Zhangzhou, was a former general, and wrote a history of Zhangzhou.

古文：景和元年，代义阳王昶督徐州豫州之梁郡诸军事、平北将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：景和元年，代替义阳王刘昶督徐州豫州的梁郡诸军事、平北将军、徐州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Jinghe era, the Liang County Military, the Pingbei General, and the Xuzhou Sashih replaced the Yiyang King Liu Xuan, the governor of Xuzhou and Yuzhou.

古文：太宗即位，进号安北将军，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：明帝即位，进号安北将军，赏赐鼓吹一部。
English: Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, and was given the title of General Anbei.

古文：安都不受命，举兵同晋安王子勋。
现代文：薛安都不接受命令，起兵拥护晋安王刘子勋。
English: Xue'an did not accept the order and raised an army to support Liu Zixun, the King of Jin'an.

古文：初，安都从子索兒，前废帝景和中，为前军将军，直阁，从诛诸公，封武安县男，食邑三百户。
现代文：当初，安都堂侄薛索儿，在前废帝景和年中，当前军将军，在宫殿当警卫。跟从前废帝杀各个大臣，被封为武安县男，享受三百户租税待遇。
English: At first, An Du Tang's nephew Xue Sol, who was a general in the army during the reign of the former emperor Jing He, worked as a guard in the palace. He followed the former emperor to kill various ministers and was named the man of Wu'an County, enjoying the tax treatment of 300 households.

古文：太宗即位，以为左将军，直阁如故。
现代文：明帝即位，被用为左将军，仍旧当警卫将军。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he was used as a left general and still served as a guard general.

古文：安都将为逆，遣密信报之，又遣数百人至瓜步迎接。
现代文：薛安都将造反，派秘密使者报信给他，又派几百人到瓜步迎接他。
English: Xue An will rebel, send a secret messenger to report to him, and send hundreds of people to meet him in Guapu.

古文：时右卫将军柳光世亦与安都通谋。
现代文：当时右卫将军柳光世也和安都沟通。
English: At that time, the right guard general, Liu Guangshi, also communicated with Andu.

古文：泰始二年正月，索兒、光世并在省，安都信催令速去，二人俱自省逃出，携安都诸子及家累，席卷北奔。
现代文：泰始二年正月，薛索儿、柳光世也都在宫廷中，安都的使者叫薛索儿等快快离开，他二人都从宫禁中逃出，带着薛安都的儿子和家中大小一齐逃回北方。
English: In the first month of the second year of Taizhi, Xue Sol and Liu Guangxing were also in the court. Xue Sol, the emissary of Andu, quickly left. Both of them escaped from the palace, taking Xue Andu's son and the whole family back to the north.

古文：青州刺史沈文秀、冀州刺史崔道固并皆同反。
现代文：青州刺史沈文秀、冀州刺史崔道固都同时反叛。
English: Shen Wenshu of Qingzhou and Cui Daogu of Jizhou rebelled at the same time.

古文：文秀遣刘弥之、张灵庆、崔僧三军，道固遣子景征、傅灵越领众，并应安都。
现代文：沈文秀派刘弥之，张灵庆，崔僧三支部队，崔道固派儿子崔景征、傅灵越率领人马，都响应薛安都。
English: Shen Wenxiu sent Liu Yizhi, Zhang Lingqing, Cui Zeng and three troops, Cui Daogu sent his son Cui Jingsheng, Fu Lingyue led the troops, and all responded to Xue Andu.

古文：弥之等南出下邳，灵越自泰山道向彭城。
现代文：刘弥之等人向南进攻下邳，傅灵越从泰山方向进攻彭城。
English: Liu Yizhi and others attacked Zhangye from the south, while Fu Ling Yue attacked Pengcheng from the direction of Mount Tai.

古文：时济阴太守申阐据睢陵城起义，索兒率灵越等攻之。
现代文：当时济阴太守申阐占领睢陵城起义响应朝廷，薛索儿率傅灵越等进攻申阐。
English: At that time, the governor of Jilin Province, Shen Yao, occupied Fuling City in response to the uprising of the imperial court, and Xue Sol led Fu Ling Yue and other offensive Shen Yao.

古文：安都使同党裴祖隆守下邳城，弥之等至下邳，改计归顺，因进军攻祖隆，僧不同，率所领归安都。
现代文：安都派同党裴祖隆防守下邳城。刘弥之等人到下邳，突然改变计策归顺朝廷，乘便进攻在下邳的裴祖隆。崔僧不同意，率领其部下投奔薛安都。
English: Andu sent his party member Peizulong to defend the city of Jiaozuo. Liu Yizhi and others who went to Jiaozuo suddenly changed their strategy to submit to the imperial court and attack Peizulong in Jiaozuo. Cui Zang did not agree and led his subordinates to Xueandu.

古文：索兒闻弥之有异志，舍睢陵驰赴下邳，弥之等未战溃散，并为索兒所执，见杀。
现代文：薛索儿听说刘弥之有二心，丢下睢陵城迅速赶到下邳。刘弥之等不战而逃，都被薛索儿抓住杀了。
English: Xue Sol heard that Liu Ya was of two minds and left Fuling City and quickly rushed to Xiamen. Liu Ya and the others fled without a fight and were all caught and killed by Xue Sol.

古文：时太宗以申令孙为徐州，代安都。
现代文：当时太宗用申令孙当徐州刺史，代替薛安都。
English: At that time, Emperor Taizong ordered Sun Dang to make history in Xuzhou, replacing Xue Andu.

古文：令孙进据淮阳，密有反志，遣人告索兒曰： 欲相从顺，而百口在都。
现代文：申令孙前进占据淮阳，暗中准备响应叛军，派人告诉薛索儿说： 我想跟你们采取共同行动，但是一百多个家人在京城。
English: He ordered Sun to advance and occupy Huaiyang, secretly prepared to respond to the rebels, and sent someone to tell Xue Sol that: I want to take joint action with you, but more than a hundred family members are in Beijing.

古文：可进军见攻，若战败被执，家人可得免祸。 
现代文：你们可以进军攻打我，如果打败被你们抓住，我的家人能免除灾难。 
English: You can march against me, and if defeated and captured by you, my family will be spared disaster.

古文：索兒乃遣灵越向淮阳，令孙出城，为相距之形，既而奔散，北投索兒。
现代文：薛索儿于是派傅灵越向淮阳进军，申令孙出城，假装抵御敌人，不久奔跑而散，向北投向薛索儿。
English: Xue Sol then sent Fu Ling Yue to march to Huaiyang, ordered Sun to leave the city, pretended to resist the enemy, and soon ran away, heading north to Xue Sol.

古文：索兒使令孙说阐令降，阐既降，索兒执阐及令孙，并杀之。
现代文：薛索儿叫申令孙劝说申阐投降。申阐投降之后，薛索儿抓住申令孙和申阐，将他们都杀了。
English: Xue Sol called Shen Ling Sun to persuade Shen Ying to surrender. After Shen Ying surrendered, Xue Sol grabbed Shen Ling Sun and Shen Ying and killed them both.

古文：索兒因引军渡淮，军粮不给，掠奔百姓谷食。
现代文：薛索儿于是率领军队渡过淮河，军中粮食不足，便掠夺老百姓的谷子麦子补充。
English: Xue Sol then led the army across the Huai River. The army was short of grain, so they plundered the people's grain and wheat to supplement it.

古文：太宗遣齐王率前将军张永、宁朔将军垣山宝、王宽、员外散骑侍郎张寘震、萧顺之、龙骧将军张季和、黄文玉等诸军北讨。
现代文：太宗派齐王萧道成率领前将军张永、宁朔将军垣山宝、王宽、员外散骑侍郎张蜫震、萧顺之、龙骧将军张季和、黄文玉等众军北伐。
English: Taizong faction Qi Wang Xiao Daocheng led the former general Zhang Yong, Ningshuo general Guizan Bao, Wang Guang, non-commissioned cavalrymen Zhang Yucheng, Xiao Shunzhi, Longjing general Zhang Jihe, Huang Wenyu and other troops to the Northern Expedition.

古文：其年五月，军次平原，索兒等率马步五千，列陈距战，击大破之。
现代文：当年五月，萧道成等人驻扎平原。薛索儿等带领骑兵五千布阵抵抗。萧道成等奋击，大败薛索儿。
English: In May of that year, Xiao Daocheng and others were stationed on the plain. Xue Sol and others led five thousand cavalry to resist. Xiao Daocheng and others fought hard and defeated Xue Sol.

古文：索兒又虏掠民谷，固守石梁，齐王又率镇北参军赵昙之、吕湛之击之。
现代文：薛索儿又侵掠百姓谷粮，在石梁固守。萧道成又率镇北参军赵昙之、吕湛之进攻。
English: Xue Sol also invaded and plundered the people's grain, and held fast at Shiliang. Xiao Daocheng also led Zhenbei's army Zhao Xizhi and Lü Zhan to attack.

古文：索兒军无资实，所资野掠，既见攻逼，无以自守，于是奔散；又追破之于葛家白鹄。
现代文：薛索儿看军中无衣无粮，依靠的只是那些人野外掠夺的东西。既然被攻击，无法防守城池，于是薛军溃败，萧道成又在葛家白鹄击败敌人。
English: Xue Sol saw that there was no clothing or food in the army, relying only on what those people plundered in the field. Since they were attacked, they could not defend the city, so Xue's army was defeated, and Xiao Daocheng defeated the enemy in Geji Bailu.

古文：索兒走向乐平县界，为申令孙子孝叔所斩。
现代文：薛索儿逃向乐平县境内，被申令孙的儿子申孝叔斩首。
English: Xue Sol fled to the territory of Leping County and was beheaded by Shen Lingsun's son, Shen Xiao Jie.

古文：安都子道智、大将范双走向合肥，诣南汝阴太守裴季降。
现代文：薛安都的儿子薛道智、大将范双逃向合肥，到南汝阴太守裴季那里请降。
English: Xue Daozhi, the son of Xue Andu, and General Fan Shuang fled to Hefei, and asked to surrender to Pei Ji, the governor of Southern Ruyin.

古文：时武卫将军王广之领军隶刘勔，攻殷琰于寿阳。傅灵越奔逃，为广之军人所生禽，厉声曰： 我傅灵越也。
现代文：当时武卫将军王广之率军属于刘面力，正在寿阳攻打殷琰，傅灵越逃跑，被王广之的士兵活捉，傅灵越道： 我是傅灵越。
English: At that time, the army led by Wuwei General Wang Guangzhi belonged to Liu Menli, and was attacking Yin Qi in Shouyang. Fu Lingyue fled and was captured alive by Wang Guangzhi's soldiers. Fu Lingyue said: I am Fu Lingyue.

古文：汝得贼何不即杀。 
现代文：你们得到叛军怎么不马上杀掉？ 
English: Why didn't you kill the rebels as soon as you got them?

古文：生送诣勔，勔躬自慰劳，诘其叛逆。
现代文：傅被送到刘面力那里。刘面力亲自慰劳他，问他为什么反叛。
English: Fu was sent to Liu Mianli, who personally consoled him and asked him why he had rebelled.

古文：对曰： 九州唱义，岂独在我。 
现代文：傅答道： 四海起义，难道只是我一个人吗？ 
English: Fu replied, "The Four Seas Uprising, is it just me?

古文：勔又问： 四方阻逆，无战不禽，主上皆加以旷荡，即其才用。
现代文：刘面力又问他： 四方反叛人马，每战都被抓住。皇上都加宽容，就他的才能而选用。
English: Liu Mianli asked him again: "He was a four-sided rebel and was caught in every battle. The emperor was tolerant and chose him for his talent.

古文：卿何不早归天阙，乃逃命草间乎？ 
现代文：你为什么不马上归顺朝廷，而在原野上逃命呢？ 傅灵越答道： 薛先生在淮北起义，威震天下。
English: Why didn't you immediately surrender to the imperial court and run for your life in the field? Fu Lingyue replied: Mr. Xue was in the uprising in Huaibei, and he shook the world.

古文：灵越答曰： 薛公举兵淮北，威震天下，不能专任智勇，委付子侄，致败之由，实在于此。
现代文：只因不能信用智慧勇敢的英雄，而把重任委托给儿子侄子们。
English: Only because he could not trust the wise and brave hero, he entrusted the important task to his sons and nephews.

古文：然事之始末，备皆参豫，人生归于一死，实无面求活。 
现代文：这就是失败的原因。然而他的大事的前后，我都参与了。人生终归要死。确实没有脸面请求活下去。 
English: This is the reason for the failure. However, I have participated in his great events before and after. Life is doomed to die. I really do not have the face to ask to live.

古文：勔壮其意，送还京师。
现代文：刘面力很敬佩他的勇气，送他到京城，太宗想原谅他。
English: Liu Mianli admired his courage and sent him to the capital. Taizong wanted to forgive him.

古文：太宗欲加原宥，灵越辞对如一，终不回改，乃杀之。
现代文：傅灵越还是过去那样说，终究不悔改。于是杀了他。
English: Fu Lingyue still said what he had said in the past, and did not repent after all. So he killed him.

古文：灵越，清河人也。时辅国将军、山阳内史程天祚据郡同安都，攻围弥时，然后归顺。
现代文：傅灵越是清河人，当时辅国将军，山阴内史程天祚占据本郡响应薛安都，朝廷围攻很长时间，然后才投降。
English: Fu Lingyue was a native of Qinghe. At that time, he was a general of the Auxiliary State. According to the history of Shanyin, Tianyao occupied this county in response to Xue Andu. The imperial court besieged for a long time before surrendering.

古文：子勋平定，安都遣别驾从事史毕众爱、下邳太守王焕等奉启书诣太宗归款，曰： 臣庸隶荒萌，偷生上国，过蒙世祖孝武皇帝过常之恩，犬马有心，实感恩遇。
现代文：刘子勋平定后，安都派别驾从事史毕众爱、下邳太守王焕等人带书信给明帝投诚，说： 我是奴才野民，在贵国苟且偷生。承蒙世祖孝武皇帝非常的厚恩。
English: After Liu Zixun was subdued, An Du dispatched other officials such as Shi Bi Zonglu, and Wang Huan, the governor of the Lower Yangtze, to deliver a letter to Emperor Mingzong, saying: "I am a slave of the wild people, and I was born in your country. I am grateful for the great kindness of Emperor Xiaowu, my ancestor.

古文：是以晋安始唱，投诚孤往，不期生荣，实存死报。
现代文：觉得自己应该像狗马那样报答主人，深深感谢孝武帝的恩泽。所以晋安王刘子勋倡议起事，便转向前往投诚，不指望光荣活着，只打算以死报恩。
English: He felt that he should repay his master like a dog and horse, and was deeply grateful for the favor of Emperor Xiaowu. Therefore, Liu Zixun, the King of Jin'an, took the initiative to rise up, and turned to go to Tucheng. He did not expect to live gloriously, but only intended to repay the favor with his death.

古文：今天命大归，群迷改属，辄率领所部，束骸待诛，违拒之罪，伏听汤镬。 
现代文：今日天命归心皇上，小人悔改前非。我这里便率领部队，绑缚自己，等待皇上的惩罚。
English: Today, the fate of the heavens has come to the emperor's heart, and the villain has repented of his past misdeeds. I will lead the troops here, bind myself, and wait for the emperor's punishment.

古文：索兒之死也，安都使柳光世守下邳，至是亦率所领归降。
现代文：我以前抗拒的罪行，完全由皇上任意处理。 薛索儿死的时候，安都叫柳光世守卫下邳，到这时也率领部下投降，太宗因为四方平定，想在淮北摆摆威风。
English: When Xue Sol died, An Du asked Liu Guang Shih to guard the mandarin, and at this time he also led his subordinates to surrender, because Taizong wanted to show off his power in Huaibei due to the pacification of the four directions.

古文：太宗以四方已平，欲示威于淮外，遣张永、沈攸之以重军迎之。安都谓既已归顺，不应遣重兵，惧不免罪，乃遣信要引索虏。
现代文：于是派张永、沈攸之用重兵迎接安都。安都认为既然归顺朝廷，不应该派重兵迎接，害怕免除不了罪行，便派使者联系魏人。
English: As a result, Zhang Yong and Shen You were sent to meet Andu with heavy troops. Andu believed that since he had surrendered to the imperial court, he should not send heavy troops to meet him. Fearing that he would not be absolved of his crimes, he sent an envoy to contact Wei.

古文：三年正月，索虏遣博陵公尉迟苟人、城阳公孔伯恭二万骑救之。
现代文：三年正月，魏人派博陵公尉迟苟人、城阳公孔伯恭率二万骑兵救援他。
English: In the first month of the third year, the Wei people sent Boling's lieutenant Chi Guoren and Chengyang's Kong Boqiong with 20,000 cavalry to rescue him.

古文：永等引退，安都开门纳虏，虏即授安都徐州刺史、河东公。
现代文：张永等人只好退兵。安都开门接受魏兵，魏人马上授予薛安都徐州刺史、河东公。
English: Zhang Yong and others had no choice but to withdraw. Andu opened the door to accept the Wei soldiers, and the Wei people immediately awarded Xue Andu the title of Xuzhou Sashishi and the title of Hedong Gong.

古文：四年三月，召还桑乾。
现代文：四年三月，召回到桑乾宫。
English: In March of the same year, he was called back to Sangyan Palace.

古文：五年，死于虏中，时年六十。
现代文：五年在魏国去世，当年六十岁。
English: He died five years later in Wei at the age of sixty.

古文：初，安都起兵，长史兰陵俨密欲图之，见杀。
现代文：当初薛安都起兵时，他的长史兰陵俨暗中想杀安都，被安都杀了。
English: At the beginning, when Xue Andu raised an army, his long-term subordinate Lan Ling secretly wanted to kill Andu, and was killed by Andu.

古文：安都未向桑乾，前军将军裴祖隆谋杀苟人，举彭城归顺，事泄，见诛。
现代文：安都未到桑乾宫时，前军将军裴祖隆图谋杀掉尉迟苟人，让彭城归顺朝廷，计划泄露，被杀。
English: When Emperor Andu did not arrive at the Sangqian Palace, the former army general Pei Zulongtu murdered his subordinates and ordered Pengcheng to surrender to the imperial court. The plan was leaked and he was killed.

古文：员外散骑侍郎孙耿之击索兒战死，及刘弥之、张灵庆皆战败见杀，并为太宗所哀，追赠俨光禄勋，祖隆宁朔将军、兗州刺史，耿之羽林监，弥之辅国将军、青州刺史，灵庆宁朔将军、冀州刺史。
现代文：员外散骑侍郎孙耿之攻击薛索儿，和刘弥之、张灵庆都战败被杀，这些人都被太宗所哀悼，便追赠兰陵俨光禄勋，祖隆宁朔将军，兖州刺史，孙耿之羽林监，刘弥之辅国将军，青州刺史，灵庆宁朔将军，冀州刺史。
English: Sun Geng attacked Xue Sol, and Liu Yanzhong and Zhang Lingqing were defeated and killed. These people were mourned by Emperor Taizong, and they were posthumously awarded the Lanling Jiguanglu Honor, the Zulong Ningshuo General, the Zhangzhou Shishi, the Sun Geng Feather Forest Supervisor, the Liu Yanzhong General, the Qingzhou Shishi, the Lingqing Ningshuo General, and the Jizhou Shishi.

古文：安都子伯令、环龙，亡命梁、雍二州之间。
现代文：薛安都的儿子伯令、环龙，逃命在梁郡、雍郡二州之间。
English: Xue Andu's sons, Bo Ling and Huan Long, fled for their lives between Liang County and Yong County.

古文：三年，率亡命数千人袭广平，执太守刘冥虬，攻顺阳，克之，略有义成、扶风，置立守宰。
现代文：三年，率领亡命之徒几千人袭击广平，抓住了太守刘冥虬，攻顺阳，打下了。另外占有义城、扶风，设置太守县令。
English: In three years, he led several thousand of his outlaws to attack Guangping, captured the governor Liu Jiuyong, attacked Shunyang, and defeated it. In addition, he occupied Yicheng and Fufeng, and set up the governor of the county.

古文：文秀在桑乾凡十九年，齐之永明四年，病死，时年六十一。崔道固，清河人也。世祖世，以干用见知，历太子屯骑校尉，左军将军。
现代文：开始时响应安都，后来也投降朝廷，太宗用他当东徐州刺史，再被魏人所攻拔。崔道固，清河人，世祖时代，以能干被赏识，当太子屯骑校尉，左军将军。
English: At the beginning, he responded to Andu, and later also surrendered to the imperial court. Emperor Taizong used him as the East Xuzhou stabbing history, and then was attacked by the Wei people. Cui Daogu, Qinghe people, in the ancestral era, was appreciated for his ability, when he was the prince, the cavalry captain, and the general of the left army.

古文：大明三年，出为齐、北海二郡太守。
现代文：大明三年，出外当齐、北海二郡太守。
English: In the 3rd year of Daming, he went abroad as a peer, and became the governor of two counties in the North Sea.

古文：民焦恭破古冢，得玉铠，道固检得，献之，执系恭。
现代文：百姓焦恭挖开古墓，搞到一套玉铠。崔道固搜索到手，献给朝廷，并把焦恭捉起来关住。
English: The commoner Jiao Qiong dug up an ancient tomb and obtained a set of jade urns. Cui Daogu searched and obtained them, presented them to the imperial court, and arrested Jiao Qiong.

古文：入为新安王子鸾北中郎谘议参军，永嘉王子仁左军司马。
现代文：便到内地当新安王刘子鸾北中郎谘议参军、永嘉王刘子仁左军司马。
English: He then went to the mainland to consult Liu Zixuan, the King of Xin'an, about joining the army, while Liu Ziren, the King of Yongjia, became the left wing's second in command.

古文：景和元年，出为宁朔将军、冀州刺史，镇历城。
现代文：景和元年，道固出外当宁朔将军、冀州刺史，镇守历城。
English: In the first year of the Jinghe era, Daogu went abroad to serve as the general of Ningshuo, the historian of Jizhou, and the town guard of Licheng.

古文：泰始二年，进号辅国将军，又进号征虏将军。
现代文：泰始二年，增进位号辅国将军，又进号征虏将军。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, he was promoted to the rank of General of the Auxiliary Provinces and promoted to the rank of General of the Conscript Army.

古文：时徐州刺史薛安都同逆，上即还道固本号为徐州代之。
现代文：当时徐州刺史薛安都反叛朝廷，明帝便马上让道固以本号回到徐州当刺史代替薛安都。
English: At that time, Xuzhou's Xue Andu rebelled against the imperial court, and the Ming emperor immediately asked Daogu to return to Xuzhou with this number to replace Xue Andu.

古文：道固不受命，遣子景微、军主傅灵越率众赴安都。
现代文：道固没有从命，而派儿子崔景微、军主傅灵越率兵赶援薛安都。
English: Daogu did not obey the order, but sent his son Cui Jingwei and the commander Fu Lingyue to rush to the aid of Xue Andu.

古文：既而为土人起义所攻，屡战失利，闭门自守。
现代文：不久遭土人赵义部队进攻，几次战斗都失利，于是闭门自守。
English: It was soon attacked by the native Zhao Yi's troops and lost several battles, so it closed its doors to defend itself.

古文：会四方平定，上遣使宣慰，道固奉诏归顺。
现代文：恰遇四方平定，皇上派人前来安慰，崔道固奉诏归顺朝廷。
English: When the four sides were pacified, the emperor sent someone to comfort them, and Cui Daogu obeyed the imperial edict and surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：先是与沈文秀共引虏，虏既至，固守距之，因被围逼。虏每进，辄为道固所摧。
现代文：之前他和沈文秀共同勾引魏人，魏军到了以后，又固守抵挡魏军，于是被围困，敌人每次进攻，总是被崔道固打败。
English: Before, he and Shen Wenshu jointly seduced the Wei people. After the arrival of the Wei army, he also firmly resisted the Wei army, so he was besieged. Every time the enemy attacked, he was always defeated by Cui Daogu.

古文：三年，以为都督冀青兗幽并五州诸军事、前将军、冀州刺史，加节，又进号平北将军。
现代文：三年，朝廷用他当都督冀青兖幽并五州诸军事、前将军、冀州刺史，加上节杖，又进号平北将军。
English: In the third year, the imperial court used him as the governor of Jizhou to merge the five states of military, former generals, Jizhou engraved history, plus the staff, and entered the name of Pingbei General.

古文：其年，为虏所陷，被送桑乾，死于虏中。
现代文：当年，历城被魏人攻陷，崔道固被送到桑乾官，在魏国去世。
English: In that year, Licheng was conquered by the Wei people, and Cui Daogu was sent to Sangqian and died in Wei.

