古文：二十有二年春，公伐邾，取须句。
现代文：二十二年春季，鲁国攻打邾国，占领须句。
English: In the spring of 1922, Lu attacked and occupied Shu.

古文：夏，宋公、卫侯、许男、滕子伐郑。
现代文：夏季，宋公、卫侯、许男、滕子攻打邾国。
English: In the summer, Song Gong, Wei Hou, Xu Man, and Teng Zi attacked Shandong.

古文：秋八月丁未，及邾人战于升陉。
现代文：秋季八月丁未日，与邾国在升陉交战。
English: In the autumn, on the third day of August, war broke out with Min in Seongnam.

古文：冬十有一月己巳朔，宋公及楚人战于泓，宋师败绩。
现代文：冬季十一月初一，宋襄公与楚国人在泓水边上作战，宋国被打败。
English: On the first day of November in winter, Song Xianggong and the people of Chu fought on the edge of Surabaya, and Song was defeated.

古文：二十二年春，伐邾，取须句，反其君焉，礼也。
现代文：二十二年春季，鲁国讨伐邾国，占领须句，护送须句的国君回国，这是符合礼的。
English: In the spring of the 22nd year of the Lu dynasty, the state of Lu invaded the state of Shou, occupied Shou, and escorted the sovereign of Shou back to the country. This was in line with etiquette.

古文：三月、郑伯如楚。
现代文：三月，郑文公到楚国去。
English: In March, Zheng Wengong went to Chu.

古文：夏，宋公伐郑。
现代文：夏季，宋襄公进攻郑国。
English: In the summer, Song Xiangong attacked Zheng.

古文：子鱼曰： 所谓祸在此矣。 
现代文：子鱼说： 所说的祸乱就在这里了。 
English: The little fish said, "That's where the evil comes from."

古文：初，平王之东迁也，辛有適伊川，见被发而祭于野者，曰： 不及百年，此其戎乎！
现代文：当初，周平王向东迁都洛阳的时候，辛有到了伊川，见到披着头发在野外祭祀的人，说： 不到一百年，这里就要变成戎人居住的地方了！
English: At first, when King Zhou Ping moved the capital Luoyang to the east, Xin came to Icheon, saw the people wearing their hair in the open air, and said: "In less than a hundred years, this will become a place where eunuchs live!"

古文：其礼先亡矣。 
现代文：它的礼仪先就消失了。 
English: Its etiquette disappeared first.

古文：秋，秦、晋迁陆浑之戎于伊川。
现代文：秋季，秦国和晋国把陆浑之戎迁到伊川。
English: In the autumn, Qin and Jin moved the capital of Lu Hun to Icheon.

古文：晋大子圉为质于秦，将逃归，谓嬴氏曰： 与子归乎？ 
现代文：晋国的太子圉在秦国作人质，准备逃回晋国，对嬴氏说： 跟你一起回去么？ 
English: The prince of Jin, Yao, was a hostage in Qin and was preparing to escape back to Jin. He said to Mr. Yao, "Do you want to go back with me?"

古文：对曰： 子，晋大子，而辱于秦，子之欲归，不亦宜乎？
现代文：嬴氏说： 你是晋国的太子而屈居在秦国。你想回去，不也很应该吗？
English: Mr. Zou said, "You are the prince of Jin and live in Qin. If you want to go back, shouldn't you?

古文：寡君之使婢子侍执巾栉，以固子也。从子而归，弃君命也。
现代文：我国君主让婢子侍候你，为你捧着手巾梳子，是为了使你安心，跟你回去，就丢弃了国君的命令。
English: The sovereign of our country had a servant wait on you, held out a handkerchief and a comb for you, in order to reassure you, and when he returned with you, he discarded the sovereign's order.

古文：不敢从，亦不敢言。 
现代文：我不敢跟从，也不敢泄露。 
English: I didn't dare to follow or reveal it.

古文：遂逃归。
现代文：太子圉就逃回晋国。
English: Prince Oe fled back to Jin.

古文：富辰言于王曰： 请召大叔。
现代文：富辰对周襄王说： 请您把太叔召回来。
English: Fuchen said to Zhou Xiangwang, "Please call your great-uncle back."

古文：《诗》曰： 协比其邻，昏姻孔云。 
现代文：《诗》说： 和他的邻居融洽，姻亲才能友好。 
English: "Poetry" says: "It is necessary to be on good terms with one's neighbors in order to be friendly with one's in-laws."

古文：吾兄弟之不协，焉能怨诸侯之不睦？ 
现代文：我国兄弟都不融洽，哪里能埋怨诸侯的不顺服？ 
English: Our brothers are not harmonious, where can we complain about the disobedience of the lords?

古文：王说。
现代文：周襄王听了很高兴。
English: Zhou Xiangwang was very happy to hear this.

古文：王子带自齐夏归于京师，王召之也。
现代文：王子带从齐国回到京师，这是周襄王把他召回来的。
English: The prince and his retinue returned to Beijing from the state of Qi. It was King Zhou Xiang who called him back.

古文：邾人以须句故出师。
现代文：邾人由于鲁国帮助须句的缘故出兵攻打鲁国。
English: As a result of Shukun's help from Lu, Hayato sent troops to attack Lu.

古文：公卑邾，不设备而御之。
现代文：僖公轻视邾国，不作准备便去抵御。
English: Ying Gong despised Ying Guo and went to resist without any preparation.

古文：臧文仲曰： 国无小，不可易也。
现代文：臧文仲说： 国家无所谓弱小，不能轻视。
English: Yu Wenzhong said, "Countries are no matter how small or weak, and they should not be despised.

古文：无备，虽众不可恃也。
现代文：没有准备，人虽然众多，还是不足依靠的。
English: There was no preparation, and although there were many people, there was not enough to rely on.

古文：《诗》曰： 战战兢兢，如临深渊，如履薄冰。 
现代文：《诗》说： 战战兢兢，如同面向深渊，如同踩着薄冰。 
English: "Trembling, trembling, as if facing the abyss, as if treading on thin ice," the poem says.

古文：又曰： 敬之敬之，天惟显思，命不易哉！ 
现代文：又说： 谨慎又谨慎，上天光明普照，得到上天保佑不容易啊！ 
English: He also said, "Be cautious and prudent. Heaven's light shines everywhere. It's not easy to obtain Heaven's blessing!"

古文：先王之明德，犹无不难也，无不惧也，况我小国乎！
现代文：以先王的美德，还没有不困难、没有不戒惧的，何况我们小国呢？
English: The virtue of the former king, who was not without difficulties and fears, has not yet been achieved, let alone our small country?

古文：君其无谓邾小。蠭虿有毒，而况国乎？ 
现代文：君王不要认为邾国弱小，黄蜂、蝎子都有毒，何况一个国家呢？ 
English: Monarchs should not think that their country is weak. Wasps and scorpions are poisonous. How much more a country?

古文：弗听。
现代文：僖公不听。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：八月丁未，公及邾师战于升陉，我师败绩。
现代文：八月初八日，僖公率军与邾军在升陉作战，我军大败。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month of the first month of the year, Gong Gong led his army to fight against Gong's army in Shengkun, and our army was defeated.

古文：邾人获公胄，县诸鱼门。
现代文：邾军获得僖公的头盔，挂在鱼门上。
English: The Xing army obtained the helmet of Xing Gong and hung it on the fish gate.

古文：楚人伐宋以救郑。
现代文：楚人进攻宋国以救援郑国。
English: The Chu attacked Song to rescue Zheng.

古文：宋公将战，大司马固谏曰： 天之弃商久矣，君将兴之，弗可赦也已。 
现代文：宋襄公准备应战，大司马固劝阻说： 上天丢弃我们商朝后代已经很久了，您想复兴它，这是违背上天而不能被赦免的。 
English: Song Xianggong prepared to fight back, but was dissuaded by the Grand Master Ma Gu, who said: Heaven has abandoned our descendants of the Shang Dynasty for a long time. You want to revive it, which is against Heaven and cannot be pardoned.

古文：弗听。
现代文：宋襄公不听。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：冬十一月己巳朔，宋公及楚人战于泓。
现代文：冬季，十一月初一日，宋襄公与楚国人在泓水边上作战。
English: In the winter, on the first day of November, Song Xianggong and the people of Chu fought on the edge of Surabaya.

古文：宋人既成列，楚人未既济。
现代文：宋军已经排成队列，楚军还没有全部渡过河。
English: The Song army has already formed a queue, the Chu army has not yet crossed the river.

古文：司马曰： 彼众我寡，及其未既济也，请击之。 公曰： 不可。 
现代文：司马说： 他们兵多，我们兵少，趁他们没有全部渡过河的时候，请君王下令攻击他们。 宋襄公说： 不行。 
English: Sima said, "They have more soldiers than we do, so when they haven't all crossed the river, ask the king to order an attack on them." Song Xianggong said, "No."

古文：既济而未成列，又以告。公曰： 未可。 
现代文：楚军渡过河以后还没有排开阵势，司马又把刚才的情况报告宋襄公。宋襄公说： 还不行。 
English: After the Chu army crossed the river, they still hadn't lined up their positions. Sima reported the situation to Song Xianggong. Song Xianggong said, "Not yet."

古文：既陈而后击之，宋师败绩。公伤股，门官歼焉。
现代文：等楚军摆开阵势然后才攻击他们，宋军被打得大败，宋襄公大腿后受箭伤，跟随宋襄公的卿大夫子弟任护卫的被歼灭。
English: After waiting for the Chu army to set up a position and then attack them, the Song army was defeated, Song Xianggong was wounded by arrows in the back of his thigh, and the guards who followed Song Xianggong were annihilated.

古文：国人皆咎公。
现代文：都城里的人都责怪宋襄公。
English: People in the capital all blame Song Xiang.

古文：公曰： 君子不重伤，不禽二毛。
现代文：宋襄公说： 君子不两次伤害敌人，不擒捉头发花白的敌人。
English: Song Xiangong said: A gentleman does not hurt the enemy twice, nor does he try to catch the gray-haired enemy.

古文：古之为军也，不以阻隘也。
现代文：古代的作战，不靠关塞险阻取胜。
English: In ancient warfare, victory does not depend on blocking and blocking.

古文：寡人虽亡国之馀，不鼓不成列。 
现代文：寡人虽然是殷商亡国的后裔，不攻击没有摆开阵势的敌人。 
English: Although some people are the descendants of Yin merchants who died, they do not attack the enemy who has not set up a position.

古文：子鱼曰： 君未知战。
现代文：子鱼说： 国君不懂战争。
English: The little fish said, "The emperor doesn't understand war."

古文：勍敌之人隘而不列，天赞我也。阻而鼓之，不亦可乎？
现代文：强大的敌人，由于地形狭隘而没有摆开阵势，这是上天在帮助我，把他们拦截而攻击，不也是可以的吗？
English: The powerful enemy, because of the narrow terrain, did not set up a position. This is Heaven helping me. Isn't it okay to intercept and attack them?

古文：犹有惧焉。
现代文：可是还害怕不能取胜。
English: But there is also the fear of not being able to win.

古文：且今之勍者，皆吾敌也，虽及胡耇，获则取之，何有于二毛？
现代文：现在强大的国家，都是我们的敌人，虽然是老头子，捉了也不能放，管什么头发花白不花白。
English: Nowadays, all powerful countries are our enemies. Even if they are old men, we can't let them go, no matter how white their hair.

古文：明耻教战，求杀敌也，伤未及死，如何勿重？
现代文：说明国家耻辱是什么，以此教导士兵作战，目的就是为了多杀敌人。敌人受伤而没有死，为什么不可以再次打击他一次？
English: The purpose of teaching soldiers to fight is to kill more of the enemy. If the enemy is wounded but not killed, why can't he be hit again?

古文：若爱重伤，则如勿伤；爱其二毛，则如服焉。
现代文：如果爱惜敌人伤员而不再打击，就应该一开始就不伤害他；爱惜那些头发花白的人，就不如向他们投降。
English: If you would spare the enemy's wounded and not strike him, you should not strike him in the first place; if you would spare the gray hairs, you might as well surrender to them.

古文：三军以利用也，金鼓以声气也，利而用之，阻隘可也，声盛致志，鼓儳可也。 
现代文：军队，由于有利才加以使用；战鼓雷鸣，是用声音来激励士气。有利而使用，在狭路攻击是可以的；鼓声大作鼓舞了士气，攻击没有摆开阵势的敌人也是可以的。 
English: The army is used because it is advantageous; the thunder of the war drum is used as a sound to stimulate morale; it is used advantageously, and it is possible to attack in a narrow path; the drumbeat is a morale booster, and it is possible to attack the enemy who has not set up a position.

古文：丙子晨，郑文夫人芈氏、姜氏劳楚子于柯泽。
现代文：十一月初八日早晨，郑文公夫人芈氏、姜氏在柯泽慰劳楚成王。
English: On the morning of the 8th day of the 11th month, Zheng Wengong's wife, Ms. Zou and Mr. Jiang were in Keze to console King Chu Cheng.

古文：楚子使师缙示之俘馘。君子曰： 非礼也。
现代文：楚成王派师缙把俘虏和被杀死的敌人的左耳给他们看。君子说： 这是不合于礼的。
English: Chu Cheng Wang sent his master to show them the left ear of the captive and the killed enemy. The gentleman said: This is not proper.

古文：妇人送迎不出门，见兄弟不踰阈，戎事不迩女器。 
现代文：女人送迎不出房门，和兄弟相见不出门槛，打仗时不接近女人的用具。 
English: A woman cannot open the door to welcome a man, meet a brother without crossing the threshold, or approach a woman's equipment during a battle.

古文：丁丑，楚子入享于郑，九献，庭实旅百，加笾豆六品。
现代文：初九日，楚成王进入郑国接受享礼，主人敬酒九次，庭院里陈列的礼品有一百件，另外再加笾豆礼品六件。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, King Chu Cheng entered Zheng Guo to receive gifts. The host toasted nine times. There were one hundred gifts on display in the courtyard, plus six pea gifts.

古文：享华，夜出文芈送于军，取郑二姬以归。
现代文：宴请完毕，夜里出来，文芈送他到军营里。楚成王带了郑国的两个侍妾回去。
English: After the banquet was over, he came out at night, and Wen Xuan escorted him to the military camp. King Chu Cheng took Zheng's two concubines back with him.

古文：叔詹曰： 楚王其不没乎！
现代文：叔詹说： 楚成王恐怕不得寿终正寝吧！
English: Uncle Zhan said: I'm afraid that King Chu Chengwu will not live to see the day.

古文：为礼卒于无别，无别不可谓礼，将何以没？ 
现代文：执行礼节而最后至于男女混杂。男女混杂不能认为合于礼，他将怎么能得到好死？ 
English: As for mixing the sexes, mixing the sexes cannot be considered proper, how will he die a good death?

古文：诸侯是以知其不遂霸也。
现代文：所以诸侯知道楚成王不能完成霸业。
English: Therefore, the princes knew that King Chu Cheng could not complete the hegemony.

