古文：侯道华宜君王老陈师陈金
现代文：侯道华宜君王老陈师陈金
English: Hou Daohua Yi Wang Lao Chen Shi Chen Jin

古文：侯道华
现代文：侯道华
English: Hou Daohua

古文：河中永乐县道净院，居蒲中之胜境，道士寓居，有以十数。
现代文：河中永乐县道净院，地处蒲中的胜境，有几十个道士寓居那里。
English: Yongle County Taoist Pure Land Temple in the middle of the river is located in the scenic spot of Puzhong. Dozens of Taoist monks live there.

古文：唐文宗时，道士邓太玄炼丹于药院中。
现代文：唐文宗时，道士邓太玄在药院中炼丹。
English: At the time of Tang Wenzong, the Taoist priest Deng Taixuan worked in a pharmacy.

古文：药成，疑功未究，留贮院内，人共掌之。
现代文：丹药炼成，疑心功力不知究竟如何，就把它留在院内贮存起来，由道人共同掌管它。
English: Once the herbal medicine has been refined, if the practitioner is not sure about its efficacy, he or she should leave it in the hospital for storage, and the Taoists should jointly manage it.

古文：太玄死，门徒周悟仙主院事。
现代文：邓太玄死后，他的门徒周悟仙主持院中事务。
English: After Deng Taixuan's death, his disciple Zhou Wuxian presided over the affairs of the academy.

古文：时有蒲人侯道华，事悟仙以供给使。
现代文：这时有蒲人侯道华侍奉周悟仙而供差使。
English: At this time, there was a pupil named Hou Daohua who served Zhou Wuxian as an errand boy.

古文：诸道士皆奴畜之，洒扫隶役，无所不为，而道华愈欣然。
现代文：众道士都像役使奴仆似的役使他，洒水扫地奴隶般地役使，没有什么活不让他干，而侯道华更加高兴。
English: All the Taoists made him work like a slave, sweeping the floor like a slave, there was nothing he couldn't do, and Hou Daohua was even happier.

古文：又常好子史，手不释卷，一览必诵之于口。
现代文：侯道华平常又喜好子、史诸书，手不释卷，看过一遍一定诵之于口。
English: Hou Daohua is usually fond of children's and history books. He never lets go of a book. Once he has read it, he must recite it aloud.

古文：众或问之，要此何为，答曰： 天上无愚懵仙人。 
现代文：众道士有时问他看这些书干什么，他回答说： 天上没有愚昧糊涂的仙人。 
English: The Taoists sometimes asked him what he was doing reading these books, and he replied: "There are no foolish immortals in heaven.

古文：咸大笑之。
现代文：众人都嘲笑他。
English: Everyone laughed at him.

古文：蒲中多大枣，天下人传，岁中不过一二无核者，道华比三年辄得啖之。
现代文：蒲中大枣多，天下人传说，每年当中不过有一两颗无核的，侯道华三年中回回吃到。
English: There are many jujube trees in the middle of the forest, and people around the world have a legend that only one or two seedless jujube trees are eaten every year, and Hou Daohua can eat them every three years.

古文：一旦，道华执斧，科古松枝垂且尽，如削，院中人无喻其意。
现代文：一天早晨，道华拿着斧子，把古松树枝砍劈将尽，如刀削，院中人不明白他的意图。
English: One morning, Daohua took an axe and chopped the branches of an ancient pine tree, like sharpening a knife. The people in the hospital did not understand his intention.

古文：明日昧爽，众晨起，道华房中亡所见。
现代文：第二天天还没亮，众道士凌晨起来，道华房中没有见到人。
English: The next day, before dawn, all the Taoists got up in the early morning, and there was no one to be seen in the Taoist hall.

古文：古松下施案，致一杯水，仍脱双履案前，道华衣挂松上。
现代文：发现古松树下放着一张桌子，还有一杯水，一双鞋仍放在桌子前面，道华的衣服挂在松树上。
English: They found a table under the old pine tree, a glass of water, a pair of shoes still in front of the table, and Daohua's clothes hanging on the pine tree.

古文：院中视之，中留一首诗云： 帖里大还丹，多年色不移。
现代文：院中人一看，当中还留有一首诗： 帖里大还丹，多年色不移。
English: When the people in the hospital took a look, there was still a poem among them: 帖里大还丹,多年色不移.

古文：前宵盗吃却，今日碧空飞。
现代文：前宵盗吃却，今日碧空飞。
English: I stole food the night before, but today I'm flying high.

古文：惭愧深珍重，珍重邓天师。
现代文：惭愧深珍重，珍重邓天师。
English: I am deeply ashamed and cherish Deng Tianshi.

古文：他年炼得药，留着与内芝。
现代文：他年炼得药，留着与内芝。
English: He was able to refine the medicine in his early years, and kept it together with the nectar.

古文：吾师知此术，速炼莫为迟。
现代文：吾师知此术，速炼莫为迟。
English: My teacher knows this art, and it's never too late to learn it.

古文：三清专相待，大罗的有期。 
现代文：三清专相待，大罗的有期。 
English: Sanqing special treatment for each other, a period of time.

古文：下列细字，称去年七月一日，蒙韩君赐姓李名内芝，配住上清善进院，以次十数言。
现代文：下面还写着小字，称去年七月一日，蒙韩君给他赐姓李起名叫内芝，配住上清善进院，以下十几句话。
English: There is also a small word written below, saying that on July 1 last year, Meng Hanjun gave him the surname Liqi and the name Neizhi, and that he was worthy to live with Shang Qingzen and enter the hospital. The following are more than a dozen words.

古文：时唐大中五年五月二十一日，院中人方验道华窃太玄药仙去，因相率白节度使尚书郑公光，按视踪迹不诬，即以其事闻奏。
现代文：当时是唐朝大中五年五月二十一日，院中人方检验出侯道华偷吃了邓太玄的丹药而仙去，于是一起向节度使尚书郑公光禀报，按临现场视案踪迹不假，就把这件事奏报皇帝。
English: At that time, it was the 21st day of May in the fifth year of the Tang Dynasty, and the people in the hospital found out that Hou Daohua had stolen Deng Taixuan's herbal medicine and went to the fairy godmother. So, together, they reported to the festival that Shangshu Zheng Gongguang had stolen the medicine. According to the on-site inspection, the trace of the case was not false, and they reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：诏赍绢五百匹，并赐御衣，修饰廊殿，赐名升仙院。
现代文：皇帝下诏赏绢五百匹，并赐为御衣，修饰道院的廊殿，赐名的升仙院。
English: The emperor decreed that 500 yakitori be awarded and given as imperial robes to decorate the hallway of the Taoist Temple, which was named Shosen-in.

古文：宜君王老王老，坊州宜君县人也。
现代文：宜君王老王老，坊州宜君县人也。
English: Yijun Wang Laowanglao, Fangzhou Yijun County is also famous.

古文：居于村墅，颇好道爱客，务行阴德为意，其妻亦同心不倦。
现代文：居于村墅，颇好道爱客，务行阴德为意，其妻亦同心不倦。
English: He lives in a village villa, loves his guests, and strives to live a virtuous life. His wife is also a tireless worker.

古文：一旦有蓝缕道士造其门，王老与其妻俱延礼之。
现代文：一旦有蓝缕道士造其门，王老与其妻俱延礼之。
English: As soon as a blue-veined Taoist builds a gate, Wang Lao and his wife come to pay homage.

古文：居月余，间日与王老言谈杯酌，甚相欢狎。
现代文：居月余，间日与王老言谈杯酌，甚相欢狎。
English: Over the past few months, Wang Laojin and I have talked and had a drink every day, and we are very happy.

古文：俄患遍身恶疮，王老乃求医药看疗，益切勤切，而疮日甚。
现代文：俄患遍身恶疮，王老乃求医药看疗，益切勤切，而疮日甚。
English: The Russian suffered from sores all over his body. Wang Lao did not seek medicine to see a doctor, but became more and more diligent, and the sores became worse and worse.

古文：逮将逾年，道士谓王老曰： 此疮不烦以凡药相疗，但得数斛酒浸之，自愈。 
现代文：逮将逾年，道士谓王老曰： 此疮不烦以凡药相疗，但得数斛酒浸之，自愈。 
English: More than a year after the arrest, the Taoist priest Wang Lao said: "This sore does not bother to be treated with any medicine, but it can be cured with a few drops of wine.

古文：于是王老为之精洁酿酒，及熟，道士言以大瓮盛酒， 吾自加药浸之。 
现代文：于是王老为之精洁酿酒，及熟，道士言以大瓮盛酒， 吾自加药浸之。 
English: As a result, Wang Lao brewed a fine wine for him, and it was so good that the Taoist said to make a large bowl of wine, and I added medicine to soak it.

古文：遂入瓮，三日方出，须发俱黑，面颜复少年，肌若凝脂。
现代文：遂入瓮，三日方出，须发俱黑，面颜复少年，肌若凝脂。
English: So he entered the cocoon, and on the third day he came out, his hair was black, his face was like a boy's, and his skin was like gelatin.

古文：王老阖家视之惊异。
现代文：王老阖家视之惊异。
English: Wang Laojun's family was surprised.

古文：道士谓王老曰： 此酒可饮，能令人飞上天。 
现代文：道士谓王老曰： 此酒可饮，能令人飞上天。 
English: The moralist Wang Lao said: This wine can be drunk, it can make people fly up to the sky.

古文：王老信之。
现代文：王老信之。
English: Wang Laoxin said.

古文：初，瓮酒五斛余。
现代文：初，瓮酒五斛余。
English: At the beginning, there were more than five bottles of wine.

古文：及·３·太平广记窥，二三斗存耳，清冷香美异常。
现代文：及·３·太平广记窥，二三斗存耳，清冷香美异常。
English: And · 3 · Taiping Guang Ji Pei, two or three dowels are stored in the ear, and the coldness and fragrance are abnormal.

古文：时方打麦，王老与妻子并打麦人共饮，皆大醉。
现代文：时方打麦，王老与妻子并打麦人共饮，皆大醉。
English: Shifang played barley, Wang Lao and his wife also played barley and drank together. They were all very drunk.

古文：道士亦饮，云： 可上天去否？ 
现代文：道士亦饮，云： 可上天去否？ 
English: Taoists also drink, cloud: Can you go to heaven?

古文：王老愿随师所适。
现代文：王老愿随师所适。
English: Wang Lao is willing to do whatever his teacher wants.

古文：于是祥风忽起，彩云如蒸，屋舍草树，全家人物鸡犬，一时飞去。
现代文：于是祥风忽起，彩云如蒸，屋舍草树，全家人物鸡犬，一时飞去。
English: As a result, the wind suddenly picked up, the clouds were steaming, the houses, grass and trees, and the whole family, including the chickens and dogs, flew away in an instant.

古文：空中犹闻打麦声，数村人共观望惊叹。
现代文：空中犹闻打麦声，数村人共观望惊叹。
English: The sound of popping popcorn could be heard in the air, and several villagers watched in amazement.

古文：唯猫弃而不去。
现代文：唯猫弃而不去。
English: Only the cat abandons and does not go.

古文：风定，其佣打麦二人，乃遗在别村树下，后亦不食，皆得长年。
现代文：风定，其佣打麦二人，乃遗在别村树下，后亦不食，皆得长年。
English: According to Feng Ding, two of his maidservants left wheat under a tree in another village and did not eat it afterwards. They both lived for a long time.

古文：宜君县西三十里。
现代文：宜君县西三十里。
English: 30 miles west of Yijun County.

古文：有升仙村存焉。
现代文：有升仙村存焉。
English: The village of Shosen still exists.

古文：王老，是坊州宜君县人。
现代文：宜君王老王老，是坊州宜君县人。
English: Yijun Wang Lao Wang Lao is a native of Yijun County, Fangzhou.

古文：住在农村田野的草房里，很慕道好客，把致力于行阴德作为宗旨，他的妻子也与他心意相同坚持不懈。
现代文：住在农村田野的草房里，很慕道好客，把致力于行阴德作为宗旨，他的妻子也与他心意相同坚持不懈。
English: Living in a grass hut in a rural field, he is very hospitable and devotes himself to the practice of yin and yang as a principle. His wife is just as persistent as he is.

古文：一天，有个穿着破烂衣衫的道士登门拜坊，王老和他的妻子都很礼貌地招待这个道士。
现代文：一天，有个穿着破烂衣衫的道士登门拜坊，王老和他的妻子都很礼貌地招待这个道士。
English: One day, a Taoist wearing a tattered shirt came to the door to pay homage. Wang Lao and his wife were very polite to invite this Taoist.

古文：住了一个多月，闲暇的日子就和王老谈天饮酒，互相都很欢喜亲近。
现代文：住了一个多月，闲暇的日子就和王老谈天饮酒，互相都很欢喜亲近。
English: They stayed for more than a month, and in their free time, they talked and drank with Wang Lao, and they were very happy and close to each other.

古文：不久，道士遍体患了恶疮。
现代文：不久，道士遍体患了恶疮。
English: Soon, the Taoist suffered from sores all over his body.

古文：王老就求医买药给他治疗，更加殷勤关切，然而道士的恶疮却一天比一天严重。
现代文：王老就求医买药给他治疗，更加殷勤关切，然而道士的恶疮却一天比一天严重。
English: Wang Lao asked the doctor to buy medicine to treat him, and he was more concerned. However, the Taoist's malignancy was getting worse day by day.

古文：等到将要过年，道士对王老说： 这种疮不能用普通的药治疗，只要弄到几斛酒浸泡它，自然会好。 
现代文：等到将要过年，道士对王老说： 这种疮不能用普通的药治疗，只要弄到几斛酒浸泡它，自然会好。 
English: When it was time for the Chinese New Year, the Taoist priest said to Wang Lao: This kind of sore cannot be treated with ordinary medicine. As long as you can get a few jars of wine to soak it in, it will naturally get better.

古文：于是王老为他酿造精洁的酒，到酒熟时，道士说用大瓮盛酒， 我自己加药浸疮。 
现代文：于是王老为他酿造精洁的酒，到酒熟时，道士说用大瓮盛酒， 我自己加药浸疮。 
English: So Wang Lao brewed fine wine for him, and when the wine was ready, the Taoist said to use a large ladle to pour the wine, and I added medicine to soak the sores myself.

古文：道士就进了大瓮，三天才出来，胡子、头发全都变黑，容颜又变为少年，肌肤像凝固的油脂一般细嫩。
现代文：道士就进了大瓮，三天才出来，胡子、头发全都变黑，容颜又变为少年，肌肤像凝固的油脂一般细嫩。
English: The Taoist went into the big cocoon and only came out three days later. His beard and hair had all turned black, his face had turned into that of a boy, and his skin was as thin and tender as solidified grease.

古文：王老全家看到道士变得如此感到惊异。
现代文：王老全家看到道士变得如此感到惊异。
English: Wang Lao's whole family was surprised to see the Taoist become so unwell.

古文：道士对王老说： 这酒可以喝，能让人飞上天。 
现代文：道士对王老说： 这酒可以喝，能让人飞上天。 
English: The moralist said to Wang Lao, "This wine can be drunk and can make people fly into the sky."

古文：王老相信他的话。
现代文：王老相信他的话。
English: Wang Lao believed his words.

古文：当初，瓮中酒有五斛多，等到探视，只剩二三斗了，酒味香美清冷异常。
现代文：当初，瓮中酒有五斛多，等到探视，只剩二三斗了，酒味香美清冷异常。
English: At first, there were more than five barrels of wine in the urn, but by the time of the visit, there were only two or three barrels left, and the wine was unusually fragrant and cold.

古文：当时正打麦子，王老与妻子连同打麦子的人一起喝，都喝得大醉。
现代文：当时正打麦子，王老与妻子连同打麦子的人一起喝，都喝得大醉。
English: At that time, they were threshing wheat. Wang Lao and his wife were drinking together with the men who were threshing wheat. They were all very drunk.

古文：道士也喝，又问： 愿意上天去吗？ 
现代文：道士也喝，又问： 愿意上天去吗？ 
English: The Taoist also drank and asked, "Are you willing to go to heaven?"

古文：王老愿意随法师去。
现代文：王老愿意随法师去。
English: Wang Lao is willing to go with the sorcerer.

古文：于是忽起祥风，彩云如热气上升，屋舍草树，全家人、物、鸡、犬，同时飞去。
现代文：于是忽起祥风，彩云如热气上升，屋舍草树，全家人、物、鸡、犬，同时飞去。
English: As a result, a favorable wind suddenly arose, the clouds rose like hot air, the houses, grasses and trees, the whole family, things, chickens and dogs, flew away at the same time.

古文：还能听到空中打麦声，几个村人看到感到惊叹。
现代文：还能听到空中打麦声，几个村人看到感到惊叹。
English: The sound of wheat being threshed in the air could also be heard, and several villagers were amazed to see it.

古文：只有猫被弃而没飞去。
现代文：只有猫被弃而没飞去。
English: Only the cat was left behind and did not fly away.

古文：风定了，那雇来打麦子的两个人，被遗留在别的村子的树下。
现代文：风定了，那雇来打麦子的两个人，被遗留在别的村子的树下。
English: The two men who had been hired to harvest the wheat were left under a tree in another village when the wind died down.

古文：这两人后来也不食人间烟火，都得到长生。
现代文：这两人后来也不食人间烟火，都得到长生。
English: Both of them did not eat human firecrackers later, and both of them were granted eternal life.

古文：宜君县西三十里，还有升仙村留存在那里。
现代文：宜君县西三十里，还有升仙村留存在那里。
English: Thirty miles west of Yijun County, there is still the village of Shengxian remaining there.

古文：陈师
现代文：陈师
English: Chen Shi

古文：豫章逆旅梅氏，颇济惠行旅。
现代文：豫章旅馆有个姓梅的，特别周济照顾旅客。
English: The Yuzhang Hotel has a maiden name of Mei, who takes special care of guests.

古文：僧道投止，皆不求直。恒有一道士，衣服蓝缕，来止其家，梅厚待之。
现代文：和尚道士投宿，都不要钱，经常有一个道士，穿着破旧衣服，来他家投宿，梅老板厚待他。
English: Both monks and Taoists do not need money for lodging. There is often a Taoist, wearing worn-out clothes, who comes to stay at his house. Boss Mei treats him well.

古文：一日谓梅曰： 吾明日当设斋，从君求新瓷碗二十事，及七箸，君亦宜来会，可于天宝洞前访陈师也。 
现代文：有一天这个道士对梅老板说： 我明天当设斋饭，向您借二十只瓷碗和七双筷子。您也应当来聚会，可在天宝洞前打听陈师。 
English: One day, this Taoist priest said to Master Mei, "Tomorrow, I will hold a meal and borrow twenty porcelain bowls and seven pairs of chopsticks from you. You should also come to the gathering, and you can ask Master Chen in front of Tianbao Cave."

古文：梅许之，道士持碗渡江而去。
现代文：梅老板答应了，道士拿着碗渡江而去。
English: Boss Mei agreed, and Taoist took the bowl and went across the river.

古文：梅翌日诣洞前，问其村人。莫知其处。
现代文：梅老板第二天到了洞前，问那里的村人，没有人知道那个地方。
English: Boss Mei went to the cave the next day and asked the villagers there. No one knew about the place.

古文：久之将回，偶得一小迳，甚明净。
现代文：很久没找到，打算回去，偶然找到一条小路，很亮堂洁净。
English: I hadn't found it for a long time, I was planning to go back, and by chance I found a path. It was very bright and clean.

古文：试寻之，果见一院。
现代文：试着寻访陈师，果然见到一座院落。
English: Try to visit Chen Shi, and you will see a courtyard.

古文：有青童应门，问之，乃陈之居也。
现代文：有个青衣童子应门，问他，原来这就是陈师的居所。
English: A boy in a blue coat answered the door and asked him if this was Master Chen's residence.

古文：入见道士，衣冠华楚，延与之坐。
现代文：进去见道士，道士衣帽华贵整洁，请梅老板进来让他坐。
English: Go in to see the Taoist priest. The Taoist priest's robe and hat are gorgeous and neat. Ask Boss Mei to come in and let him sit down.

古文：命具食，顷之食至，乃熟蒸一婴儿，梅惧不食。
现代文：道士命人准备吃的，一会儿，吃的东西拿来了，原来是蒸熟了的一个婴儿，梅老板恐惧不吃。
English: The Taoist ordered the man to prepare something to eat. After a while, he brought something to eat. It turned out to be a steamed baby. Boss Mei was too scared to eat it.

古文：良久又进食，乃蒸一犬子，梅亦不食。
现代文：过了很久，又端进食物，乃是蒸熟的一个狗崽子，梅老板也不吃。
English: After a long time, the food was served again. It was a steamed dog's penis, which Boss Mei refused to eat.

古文：道士叹息，命取昨所得碗赠客。
现代文：道士叹息，命人拿来昨天所得的碗赠给客人。
English: The Taoist priest sighed and ordered someone to bring the bowl from yesterday to give to the guests.

古文：视之，乃金碗也。
现代文：一看，原来是金碗。
English: At a glance, it turned out to be a golden bowl.

古文：谓梅曰： 子善人也，然不得仙。
现代文：道士对梅老板说： 您是善人哪，然而不能成仙。
English: The moralist said to Boss Mei, "You are a good person, but you cannot become immortal.

古文：千岁人参枸杞，皆不肯食，乃分也。 
现代文：千年的人参枸杞都不肯吃，乃是缘分啊。 
English: People have refused to eat ginseng for thousands of years. It's fate.

古文：谢而遣之。
现代文：道士又向梅老板致谢而打发他走了。
English: The moralist thanked Boss Mei again and let him go.

古文：比不复见矣。
现代文：从此，再没有再见面。
English: We never saw each other again.

古文：陈金
现代文：陈金
English: Chen Jin

古文：陈金者，少为军士，隶江西节度使刘信。
现代文：陈金年轻时当过军士，隶属于江西节度使刘信。
English: When Chen Jin was young, he was a sergeant and was subordinate to Liu Xin, the chief of the Jiangxi Provincial Party Committee.

古文：围虔州，金私与其徒五人，发一大冢，开棺，见一白髯老人。
现代文：围困虔州时，陈金暗中与五个同伙掘开一座大坟，打开棺材，看见一个白胡子老头。
English: During the siege of Kianzhou, Chen Jinlu secretly dug a large grave with five accomplices, opened the coffin, and saw an old man with a white beard.

古文：面如生，通身白罗衣，衣皆如新。
现代文：这老头面色如生，全身穿着白色丝绸衣服，衣服都像新的似的。
English: The old man was fresh-faced, dressed all in white silk, his clothes looking as good as new.

古文：开棺即有白气冲天，墓中有非常香气。
现代文：他们打开棺材时就有白气冲天，墓中有不同寻常的香气。
English: When they opened the coffin, white gas shot into the air, and there was an unusual aroma in the grave.

古文：金独视棺盖上有物如粉，微作硫黄气。
现代文：陈金一个人看见棺材盖上有粉状物，微微发出硫黄的气味。
English: Chen Jin alone saw a powdery substance on the lid of the coffin, emitting a faint smell of sulfur.

古文：金素闻棺中硫黄为药，即以衣襟掬取怀归。
现代文：陈金过去就听说硫黄是药，就捧着把它放在衣襟中揣回来。
English: Chen Jin had heard that sulfur was a medicine in the past, so he took it and put it in his lap and brought it back.

古文：墓中无他珍宝，即共掩塞之而出。
现代文：墓中没有别的珍宝，他们就把棺材盖上一起出去，又把掘开之处堵塞好。
English: There were no other treasures in the grave, so they put the coffin lid back on and went out together to plug up the hole.

古文：既至营中，营中人皆惊云： 今日那得有香气？ 
现代文：回到军营以后，营中的人都惊讶地说： 今天哪里来的香气？ 
English: After returning to the camp, the people in the camp were surprised and said: Where did the aroma come from today?

古文：金知硫黄之异，旦辄汲水服之，至尽。
现代文：陈金知道硫黄奇异，天亮时就打水把硫黄粉喝了，到喝尽为止。
English: Chen Jin knew that sulfur was strange. At dawn, he took water and drank the sulfur powder until he had drunk it all.

古文：城平，入舍僧寺，偶与寺僧言之，僧曰： 此城中富人之远祖也，子孙相传，其祖好道，有异人教饵硫黄。
现代文：虔州城攻下后，陈金入城住在僧寺，偶然与寺僧说起这件事，和尚说： 这个墓中老人是城中富人的前代祖先，子孙相传他们的祖先好道，有异人传授他吃硫黄。
English: After the capture of Qizhou City, Chen Jin entered the city to live in a monk's temple. He happened to talk to a monk about this matter, and the monk said: This old man in the tomb is the ancestor of the rich people in the city. Their descendants have passed down the good way of their ancestors. A stranger taught him to eat sulfur.

古文：云数尽当死，死后三百年，墓当开，即解化之期也，今正三百年矣。 
现代文：他说寿数已尽该当死了，死后三百年，墓该当打开，那时就是他肉体凡胎化解之时。现在正好三百年了。 
English: He said that he had reached the age when he should have died, three hundred years after his death, when his grave should have been opened, when his mortal body should have dissolved. Now it is exactly three hundred years.

古文：即相与复视之，棺中空，唯衣尚存，如蝉蜕之状。
现代文：他们就一起去再看那座坟，发现棺中已空，只有衣服还在，好像蝉脱皮的样子。
English: They went to look at the grave again and found that the coffin was empty, only the clothes were still there, like a cicada shedding its skin.

古文：金自是无病，今为清海军小将，年七十余矣，形体枯瘦，轻健如故。
现代文：陈金从此无病，现在当清海军小将，七十多岁了，虽形体枯瘦，但轻捷健朗如故。
English: Chen Jin has been disease-free ever since, and now he is a Qing navy boy, more than seventy years old. Although his body is thin, he is still light and strong.

