古文：叛臣上仆固怀恩，铁勒部人。
现代文：仆固怀恩，是铁勒部人。
English: Minion Gu Wai Yan is a member of the Tiler Club.

古文：贞观二十年，铁勒九姓大首领率众降，分置瀚海、燕然、金微、幽陵等九都督府，别为蕃州，以仆骨歌滥拔延为右武卫大将军、金微都督，讹为仆固氏。
现代文：贞观二十年，铁勒九姓大首领率众投降，分别安置在翰海、燕然、金微、幽陵等九都督府，别为蕃州，任仆骨歌滥拔延为右武卫大将军、金微都督，音讹成为仆固氏。
English: In the 20th year of Zhenguan, nine great chieftains led by Tie Le surrendered and were placed in nine governorates including Hanhai, Yanran, Jinwei, and Yuling, respectively. They were assigned to Bozhou, and their subordinates were promoted to General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards and Governor of Jinwei, while their subordinates became the servants of the Gu clan.

古文：生乙李啜；乙李啜生怀恩，世袭都督。
现代文：歌滥拔延生乙李啜，乙李啜生怀恩，世袭都督。
English: Singing and chanting and chanting and chanting and chanting and chanting and chanting and chanting

古文：怀恩善战斗，晓识戎情，部分谨严。
现代文：仆固怀恩擅长战斗，了解戎情，管理部下谨严。
English: Minion Gu Wai Yan is good at fighting, understands the military situation, and manages his subordinates strictly.

古文：安禄山反，从朔方节度使郭子仪讨贼云中，破之；败薛忠义于背度山，杀七千骑，禽忠义子，下马邑。
现代文：安禄山叛乱，仆固怀恩跟随朔方节度使郭子仪到云中讨伐贼人，打破贼军；在背度山又打败薛忠义，杀七千骑兵，俘获薛忠义的儿子，攻克马邑。
English: During the Anlu Mountain Rebellion, Gu Wai's servant Gu Wai followed Shuo Fang's edict to send Guo Ziyi to the clouds to fight the bandits and break the bandit army. On the back of the mountain, Gu Wai defeated Xue Zhongyi, killed seven thousand cavalrymen, captured Xue Zhongyi's son, and conquered Ma'yun.

古文：进会李光弼，战常山、赵郡、沙河、嘉山，走史思明。
现代文：进军与李光弼会合，在常山、赵郡、沙河、嘉山一带战斗，赶走史思明。
English: He marched to meet with Li Guangyao and fought in the areas of Changshan, Zhao County, Shahe and Jiashan to drive out Shi Siming.

古文：肃宗即位，与子仪赴灵武。
现代文：肃宗即位时，与郭子仪同赴灵武。
English: When Su Zong ascended the throne, he went to Lingwu with Guo Zi Yi.

古文：时同罗部落叛，禄山北掠朔方，子仪率怀恩迎击。怀恩子玢战败降虏，已而自拔归，怀恩怒，叱斩之。
现代文：那时，同罗部落叛变，安禄山北上侵犯朔方，郭子仪率仆固怀恩迎击，怀恩的儿子仆固玢战败时投降了虏人，后来自拔归来，仆固怀恩怒他曾降敌，叱而斩杀了他。
English: At that time, Tonglu tribe rebelled, Anlu Mountain moved north to encroach on the Shuo side, Guo Ziyi led his servant Gu Wai En to counterattack, Wai En's son Gu Gu Yao surrendered to the Kruts when he was defeated, and later returned from exile. Gu Wai En's servant Gu Wai En was angry that he had surrendered to the enemy, scolded and killed him.

古文：将士股栗，皆殊死战，遂破其众，收马、橐它、器械甚众。
现代文：将士们都受惊，以后都勇猛死战，击破贼兵，缴获马、骆驼、器械甚多。
English: The soldiers were all frightened and fought bravely to the death, defeating the bandits and capturing many horses, camels and equipment.

古文：帝又诏与敦煌王承寀使回纥请师，回纥听命。
现代文：皇帝又诏令怀恩与敦煌王承宀采出使回纥去请援兵，回纥听命。
English: The emperor also ordered Wai Yan and Dunhuang Wang Chengyi to send reinforcements to Huizhou, and Huizhou obeyed.

古文：至德二载，从子仪下冯翊、河东，走贼将崔乾祐，袭潼关，破之。
现代文：至德二年，跟随郭子仪攻克河东、冯翊，赶跑贼将崔乾佑，进而攻破潼关。
English: In the second year of Zhi De, he followed Guo Ziyi to conquer Hedong and Fengyao, and chased away the thief Cui Qianyou, and then broke through the pass.

古文：贼将安守忠、李归仁苦战二日，王师败绩。
现代文：贼将安守忠、李归仁苦战两天，王师败。
English: Thieves An Shou Zhong and Li Guiren fought hard for two days, and Wang Shulong was defeated.

古文：怀恩至渭水，无舟，抱马鬣以逸，收散卒还河东。
现代文：仆固怀恩到了渭水，没有渡船，就抱着马鬣过河。收集打散了的兵众再回河东。
English: When Gu Wai'en's servant arrived in Surabaya, there was no ferry, so he crossed the river with his horse and donkey. He gathered the scattered soldiers and headed back to the east of the river.

古文：子仪赴凤翔，归仁以劲兵邀战三原，子仪使怀恩与王升、陈回光、浑释之、李国贞五将军伏白渠下，贼至遇伏，败而走。
现代文：郭子仪去凤翔，李归仁率劲军在三原迎战，郭子仪派仆固怀恩与王升、陈回光、浑释之、李国贞五员大将带兵埋伏在白渠下，贼兵来遇上伏军，大败而走。
English: Guo Ziyi went to Fengxiang, Li Guiren led a strong army to fight in Mihara, Guo Ziyi sent his servant Gu Wai En and five generals Wang Sheng, Chen Huiguang, Hun Shizhi and Li Guozhen to ambush the soldiers under the White Canal. The thief soldiers came across the ambush and were defeated.

古文：又战清渠，不利，引还。
现代文：他们又去清渠战斗，不能取胜，引兵回来。
English: They went to fight again, couldn't win, and brought the troops back.

古文：时回纥使叶护、帝得以四千骑济师，南蛮、大食等兵亦踵至。
现代文：那时，回纥派叶护、帝得带四千骑兵助战，南蛮、大食的人马也接踵而至。
English: At that time, the Uighurs sent Ye Gu, the Emperor brought four thousand cavalry to help in the battle, and the Southern Barbarians and the gluttonous people also came one after another.

古文：帝乃诏广平王为元帅，使怀恩统回纥兵，从王战香积寺北。
现代文：皇帝诏令广平王为元帅，让仆固怀恩统率回纥兵，跟随广平王战于香积寺北。
English: Emperor Zhao made Guangping Wang a marshal, and ordered his servant Gu Huai'en to lead the Hui soldiers and follow Guangping Wang to fight in the north of Xiangji Temple.

古文：贼以一军伏营左，怀恩驰掩之，馘斩无遗者，贼气沮。
现代文：贼人以一军伏于营左，仆固怀恩纵马掩杀过去，斩杀得一个也不剩，贼人气焰沮丧。
English: The bandits lay down on the left side of the camp with an army, and their servant Gu Wai En covered them up with his horse. There was no one left to be killed, and the bandits were furious and frustrated.

古文：既合战，以回纥夹攻贼，战酣，脱甲援矛直捣阵，杀十余人，众惊靡，亦会李嗣业鏖斗尤力，贼大崩败。
现代文：合兵以后，用回纥兵夹攻贼人，战到紧张时，仆固怀恩脱掉盔甲拿起矛直捣敌阵，一口气杀了十几个人，众人惊而败退，此时李嗣业也勇猛鏖战，贼人大溃败。
English: After joining forces, he attacked the bandits with a pickaxe, and when the battle became tense, his servant Gu Wai En took off his armor and picked up a spear to smash the enemy line. He killed more than a dozen people in one breath, and everyone was shocked and retreated. At this time, Li Shiye also fought bravely, and the bandits were defeated.

古文：会日暮，怀恩见王曰： 贼必弃城走，愿假壮骑二百，缚安守忠、李归仁等致麾下。 
现代文：太阳落山了，仆固怀恩去见广平王，说 ：贼人一定会弃城逃走，希望能借给我精壮骑兵两百人，我一定将安守忠、李归仁捆来送给麾下。 
English: When the sun set, Gu Wai'en's servant went to see King Guangping and said, "The thieves will surely abandon the city and flee. I hope you will lend me two hundred strong horsemen. I will surely bring the bundles of An Shou Zhong and Li Guiren to you."

古文：王曰： 将军战疲，且休矣；迨明，与将军图之。 
现代文：广平王说 ：将军已经很疲劳了，现在去休息，等到明天，再和将军商议。 
English: Guangping Wang said: The general is already very tired, now go to rest, wait until tomorrow, and then discuss with the general.

古文：对曰： 守忠等皆天下骁贼，骤胜而败，此天与我也，奈何纵之？
现代文：怀恩说 ：安守忠等人是天下骁勇之贼，在他们得胜后溃败，这是天助我，为什么要放过他们？
English: Wine said: An Shou Zhong and others are the bravest thieves in the world. After their victory, they were defeated. This is God's help to me. Why should I let them go?

古文：使复得众，必为我患，虽悔无逮。 
现代文：如果让他们又招集了人马，定会成为我们的祸患，那时候，后悔也来不及了。 
English: If they are allowed to call up more men and horses, it will surely become our misfortune. At that time, it will be too late to regret.

古文：王不从，固请，通夕四五反。
现代文：广平王不答应，仆固怀恩再三要求，一晚上谈了四五次。
English: Guangping Wang did not agree, and the servant Gu Huaiwen repeatedly demanded, and they talked four or five times in one night.

古文：迟明，谍者至，守忠等果遁去。
现代文：待到天明，侦察来报，安守忠等人果然逃走了。
English: After waiting until dawn, the reconnaissance reported that An Shou Zhong and the others had indeed escaped.

古文：又从王破贼于新店。
现代文：后来，仆固怀恩又跟随广平王在新店打败贼人。
English: Later, the servant Gu Wai En followed Guangping Wang to defeat the thief in the new store.

古文：以复两京有殊功，诏加开府仪同三司、鸿胪卿，封丰国公，赐封二百户。
现代文：因为怀恩在收复两京上有大功，诏加官为开府仪同三司、鸿胪卿，封爵丰国公，赐实封二百户。
English: Because of Wynn's great achievement in recovering the two capitals, he was awarded the title of Kaifu Yi, the title of Sanji, the title of Hongyi, the title of Fengguo, and the title of 200 households.

古文：从郭子仪破安太清，下怀、卫二州，攻相州，战愁思冈，常为先锋，勇冠军中。
现代文：仆固怀恩随从郭子仪击败安太清，攻克怀、卫二州，又攻打相州，战于愁思冈，常常当先锋，勇冠全军。
English: Gu Wai'en, Guo Ziyi's follower, defeated An Taiqing, conquered Huai, Wei and Erzhou, and attacked Xiangzhou, fought in Shuxi Hill, and was often the vanguard, winning the whole army.

古文：乾元二年，拜朔方行营节度使，进封大宁郡王。
现代文：乾元二年，被任为朔方行营节度使，进封为大宁郡王。
English: In the second year of Qianyuan, he was appointed as the envoy of the Suo camp, and was crowned as the king of Danying County.

古文：怀恩为人雄重寡言，应对舒缓，然刚决犯上，始居偏裨，意有不合，虽主将必折诟。
现代文：仆固怀恩为人勇毅不多说话，应对舒缓不敏捷，但耿直固执，敢于犯上。开始位居副将如果有不同看法，即使是对主将，也一定力争，甚至诟骂。
English: Minion Gu Wai En is a man of courage, he doesn't talk much, he is not quick to respond, but he is stubborn and dares to commit crimes. If you have a different opinion, even for the captain, you must strive and even abuse.

古文：其麾下皆蕃、汉劲卒，恃功多不法。子仪政宽，能优容之。
现代文：他的麾下都是蕃、汉中的强兵，自恃有功，多有不法的行为，郭子仪治军宽缓，能够宽容他们。
English: His subordinates were all powerful soldiers in the Han Dynasty, boasting of their achievements, and many of them committed illegal acts. Guo Ziyi ruled the army leniently and was able to tolerate them.

古文：及李光弼代子仪，怀恩仍为副。
现代文：后来李光弼代替郭子仪，仆固怀恩仍任副将。
English: Later, Li Guangyao replaced Guo Ziyi, and Gu Wai'en still served as vice-general.

古文：光弼守河阳，攻怀州，降安太清。
现代文：李光弼守河阳、攻怀州，降服安太清。
English: Li Guangxu held Kheyang and attacked Huai Prefecture, and surrendered to An Taiqing.

古文：又子瑒，亦善斗，以仪同三司将兵，每深入多杀，贼惮其勇，号猛将。
现代文：仆固怀恩的儿子仆固，也善战，以仪同三司的身份带兵，常常能深入敌阵多杀敌人，贼人都怕他的骁劲，称他为猛将。
English: Dugu Wain's son, Dugu, was also good at fighting. He led the troops as the third-in-command and was often able to penetrate deep into the enemy's lines and kill more enemies. The thieves were afraid of his tenacity and called him a fierce general.

古文：太清妻有色，瑒劫致于幕，光弼命归之，不听，以卒环守。
现代文：安太清的妻子很美，仆固把她抢来放在帐幕里，李光弼命令他送回去，仆固不听，还派兵守在四周。
English: An Tae Ching's wife was very beautiful. His manservant snatched her and put her in a tent. Li Guangyao ordered him to send her back. The manservant did not listen and sent soldiers to stand guard all around.

古文：复驰骑趋之，射杀七人，夺妻还太清。
现代文：李光弼骑马飞驰而来射杀七个人，把那女子夺过来还给安太清。
English: Li Guangyao galloped in on horseback and shot seven people, taking the woman and returning her to Antaiqing.

古文：怀恩怒曰： 公乃为贼杀官卒邪？ 
现代文：仆固怀恩很生气，说 ：公竟然为贼人而杀死官兵呀！ 
English: The servant Gu Wai Yan was very angry and said, "How dare the lord kill officers and soldiers for a thief!"

古文：光弼持法严，少假贷。
现代文：李光弼执法极严，从不宽贷。
English: Lee Kuan Yew enforced the law very strictly and never relaxed lending.

古文：初，会军汜水，朔方将张用济后至，斩纛下。怀恩心惮光弼，自用济诛，常邑邑不乐。
现代文：当初，约定在汜水会师，朔方的将领张用济到晚了，就将他在大旗下斩首，仆固怀恩心里害怕李光弼，自从张用济被杀，常常郁郁不乐。
English: At first, it was agreed at the Surabaya meeting that when Zhang Yizi, the general of the Shuo side, was late, he would behead him with a big flag. The servant Gu Wai En was afraid of Li Guangyao in his heart. Since Zhang Yizi was killed, he was often depressed.

古文：及光弼与史思明战邙山，不用令，以覆王师。
现代文：及至李光弼与史思明在邙山交战，居然不听命令，希望李光弼失败。
English: When Li Guangyao and Shi Siming fought in Shaoshan, he actually disobeyed orders and hoped that Li Guangyao would fail.

古文：帝思其功，召入为工部尚书，宠以殊礼。
现代文：皇帝念他有功，召他入朝任工部尚书，待以殊礼以示宠信。
English: The emperor thought he was meritorious and called him to the imperial court to serve as an official of the Ministry of Works. He received a special gift as a token of his favor.

古文：代宗立，拜陇右节度使，未行，改朔方行营节度，以副子仪。
现代文：代宗立，任仆固怀恩为陇右节度使，未到任，改任朔方行营节度，还为郭子仪的副手。
English: On behalf of Zongli, he appointed his servant Gu Wai En as his right-hand man, but before he took office, he was appointed as the right-hand man of Shuo Fangxing, and he was also the deputy of Guo Ziyi.

古文：初，肃宗以宁国公主下嫁毘伽阙可汗，又为少子请婚，故以怀恩女妻之。
现代文：当初，肃宗将宁国公主下嫁毗伽阙可汗，可汗又来为小儿子求婚，就将怀恩的女儿下嫁。
English: At first, Su Zong married off Princess Ningguo to Vijayan Khan, who in turn proposed marriage to his youngest son, and then married off Wine's daughter.

古文：少子立，号登里可汗，而怀恩女为可敦。
现代文：毗伽阙可汗的小儿子立，称为登里可汗，怀恩的女儿就成了可敦。
English: The youngest son of Vijayan Khan became known as Denri Khan, and the daughter of Wain became Kedun.

古文：宝应元年，帝召兵于回纥，而登里可汗已为史朝义所诱，引众十万盗塞，关中大震。
现代文：宝应元年，皇帝向回纥召兵，其时登里可汗已被史朝义诱骗，领了十万人马偷袭边塞，关中大为震惊。
English: In the first year of Baoying, the emperor summoned soldiers to Hulun. At that time, Dengli Khan, who had been deceived by Shichongyi, led a hundred thousand horses to raid the border fortress. Guanzhong was greatly shocked.

古文：帝遣殿中监药子昂劳之，可汗因请见怀恩及其母，有诏报可。
现代文：皇帝派殿中监药子昂去晓谕慰劳，可汗要求见仆固怀恩及其母亲，皇帝允许。
English: The emperor sent the palace middle warden, Yakushi Ang, to offer words of consolation. The khan asked to see the servant, Gu Wai Yan, and his mother. The emperor gave his permission.

古文：怀恩避嫌不往，帝赐铁券，手诏固遣，乃行。
现代文：但怀恩为避嫌不肯去，皇帝赐给铁券，还亲自写诏书坚持要他去，这才启程。
English: However, to avoid displeasure, Wain refused to go. The emperor gave him an iron voucher and personally wrote an edict insisting that he go, and then he set off.

古文：与可汗会太原，可汗大悦，遂请和，助讨朝义，即引兵屯陕州，待师期。
现代文：怀恩与登里可汗在太原相会，可汗非常高兴，于是请求和好，答应出兵帮助讨伐史朝义，即刻发兵屯驻陕州，等待出战的命令。
English: Wynn met with Dengli Khan in Taiyuan. Khan was very happy, so he asked for reconciliation, promised to send troops to help fight against Shichongyi, and immediately sent troops to be stationed in Shaanxi, waiting for the order to go to war.

古文：于是雍王以元帅为中军，拜怀恩同中书门下平章事为之副，乃与左杀为先锋。
现代文：那时，雍王以元帅身份任中军，委任仆固怀恩为同中书门下平章事而为雍王之副，与左杀同为先锋。
English: At that time, Yong Wang was appointed as the commander of the Chinese army as a marshal, and appointed his servant Gu Wai'en as the deputy of Yong Wang, and the vanguard together with Zuoshui.

古文：时诸节度皆以兵会，次黄水，贼坚壁自固。
现代文：当时各节度都派兵来会合，驻兵横水，贼人坚壁固守。
English: At that time, each sect sent soldiers to the meeting, stationed soldiers across the water, and the thieves held fast to the wall.

古文：怀恩阵西原，多张旗■，使突骑与回纥稍南出缭贼左，举旗为应，破贼壁，死者数万。
现代文：仆固怀恩列阵西原，大张旗鼓，派突击骑兵与回纥兵从南边出绕到贼营左边，举旗为号，猛击贼营，攻破贼人工事，杀死好几万人。
English: Zhuge Guai En arrayed the Western Plains, and with great fanfare, sent the assault cavalry and the Hui soldiers from the south to go around to the left of the bandit camp, raising the flag as a signal, slamming the bandit camp, breaking the bandit labor, and killing tens of thousands of people.

古文：朝义拥精骑十万来援，埋根决战，短兵接，杀获相当。
现代文：史朝义带领十万精锐骑兵来救，决心死战，两军短兵相接，各有死伤。
English: Shi Chao Yi led 100,000 elite cavalrymen to come to the rescue, determined to fight to the death. The two armies were close to each other, each with casualties.

古文：鱼朝恩令射生五百攒矢注射，贼多死，而阵坚不可犯。
现代文：鱼朝恩令弓箭手五百人集中发射，杀死贼人很多，但其阵营不动摇。
English: Yu Chaoyuan ordered 500 archers to fire in a concentrated manner, killing many thieves, but their camp did not waver.

古文：马璘怒，单骑援旗直进，夺两盾，贼辟易，大军乘以入，众嚣不止，朝义败。斩首万六千级，禽四千余人，降者三万。
现代文：马瞞气得单人匹马举着旗直冲过去，顺手夺过两面盾，贼人出其不意，败退，大军乘势而进，呐喊不止，史朝义军败，斩杀一万六千人，俘获四千多，投降的有三万。
English: The horse was so angry that it charged forward single-handedly holding a flag, and easily captured two shields. The thieves were taken by surprise and retreated. The large army marched forward taking advantage of the situation and shouted incessantly. The historical and modern rebel army was defeated, 16,000 people were killed, more than 4,000 were captured, and 30,000 surrendered.

古文：转战石榴园、老子祠，贼再败，自相奔蹂死，填尚书谷几满，朝义轻骑走。
现代文：接着转战石榴园、老子祠，贼两处均败，兵乱奔，自相践踏而死的人几乎要填满尚书谷，史朝义轻骑逃走。
English: Next, the battle turned to the Pomegranate Garden and the Lao Zi Ancestral Hall. The thieves were defeated in both places, the soldiers ran wildly, and the people who trampled each other to death almost filled the Shangshu Valley. Shi Chaoyi rode away lightly.

古文：怀恩进收东都、河阳，封府库，无所私。
现代文：仆固怀恩进而收复东都、河阳，封存府库，没私取一点东西。
English: Minion Gu Wai En then recovered Dongdu and Heyang, sealed the government treasury, and did not take a single thing for himself.

古文：释贼所署许叔冀、王伷等，众皆按堵。
现代文：按制度释放了史朝义所委任的中书令许叔冀、王亻由等人，其他人等均原位不动。
English: According to the system, Xu Shuji and Wang Xiyu, who were appointed by Shi Chaoyi, were released, and the others did not move.

古文：留回纥屯河阳，使瑒及北庭兵马将高辅成以万骑逐北，怀恩常压贼而次。
现代文：怀恩留回纥兵屯守河阳，让仆固及北庭兵马将高辅成率一万骑兵追赶史朝义。仆固怀恩常常是逼近敌军而扎营。
English: Wynn kept his troops back in Hechang and let his servant Gu and Heiting's soldiers and horses chase Shichongyi with 10,000 cavalrymen. Wynn's servant Gu often encamped close to the enemy.

古文：至郑州，再战再捷，贼帅张献诚以汴州降，下滑州。
现代文：到郑州，两战两胜，贼帅张献诚以汴州来降，又攻下滑州。
English: In Zhengzhou, after two battles and two victories, Zhang Xiancheng, the thief-commander-in-chief, came down from Zhangzhou and attacked Shizhou.

古文：朝义至卫州，与其党田承嗣、李进超、李达庐合，有众四万，据河以战。瑒济师登岸薄之，贼党奔溃。进次昌乐，朝义逸，伪帅达庐降，薛高、李宝臣举相、卫、深、定等九州献款。
现代文：史朝义到卫州，与其党羽田承嗣、李进超、李达卢等人会合，共有四万人马，据河而战，仆固率师渡河登岸逼近贼人，贼党溃散，仆固再进扎昌乐，史朝义逃走，伪帅李达卢投降，薛嵩、李宝臣率相、卫、深、定等九州来降。
English: Shi Chao Yi went to Weizhou and met with his party Haneda Heirzhi, Li Jinchao, Li Dalu and others, a total of forty thousand horses, fought along the river, Min Gu led the division to cross the river and approached the thieves, the thieves broke up, Min Gu re-entered Zachangle, Shi Chao Yi fled, pseudo-soldier Li Dalu surrendered, Xue Song and Li Baochen led the ministers, Wei, Sheng, Ding and other Kyushu to descend.

古文：朝义至贝州，得其党薛忠义，引众三万拒瑒于临清。
现代文：史朝义逃到贝州，会合其党羽薛忠义率领三万人马在临清与仆固交战。
English: Shi Chaoyi fled to Bechu, and his followers, led by Xue Zhongyi, gathered 30,000 men to fight against Zhuge in Linqing.

古文：贼气盛，瑒勒兵挫其锋，令高彦崇、浑日进、李光逸设三伏以待，贼半度，伏发，击之，朝义走。
现代文：贼人气势汹汹，仆固带兵挫折其锐气，令高彦崇、浑日进、李光逸设三道伏兵，史朝义率兵渡衡水，才渡一半，伏兵突出攻击，史朝义逃走。
English: The bandits were in a fierce mood, and the lackeys with soldiers frustrated their spirit. Gao Yan Chong, Hun Nijin, and Li Guangyi set up three ambushes. Shi Chaoyi led the soldiers to Hengshui, and only half of them crossed the river. The ambushes attacked prominently, and Shi Chaoyi fled.

古文：会回纥以轻骑至，瑒卷甲驰之，大战下博，贼背水阵，师奔击，贼大崩，积尸蔽流而下。
现代文：正好回纥轻骑兵也赶到了，仆固卸甲追赶，在下博大战，贼人背水列阵，仆固迅猛奔击，贼人崩溃，积尸满河。
English: Just as the light cavalry arrived in Huizhou, the minions unloaded their armor and chased after them. In the battle of Zibo, the thieves lined up with their backs to the water. The minions rushed to attack, the thieves collapsed, and the river was full of corpses.

古文：朝义退守莫州。
现代文：史朝义退守莫州。
English: Shi Chao Yi retreated to Mozhou.

古文：于是都知兵马使薛兼训、郝廷玉、兗郓节度使辛云京会师城下，朝义与田承嗣数挑战，不胜，临阵斩伪党敬荣。
现代文：那时，都知兵马使薛兼训、郝廷玉、兖郓节度使辛云京会师莫州城下，史朝义与田承嗣多次出来挑战，无一胜仗，临阵斩杀伪党敬荣。
English: At that time, Xue Jianxun, Yu Tingyu, and Zang Jiedu, all of whom were sent to the capital by the soldiers and horses of the Central Military Commission of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, repeatedly challenged Shichao Yi and Tian Chengxi, and there was no victory in the battle, and the pseudo-party was honorably killed in the front line.

古文：朝义惧，率残众奔幽州。
现代文：史朝义窘急，率残众奔往幽州。
English: In an urgent situation, Shi Chaoyi led the remnants to rush to Yuzhou.

古文：王追蹑，朝义走平州，自经死，河北平。
现代文：王师接踵而追，史朝义逃至平川，自缢而死，河北战乱平。
English: Wang Shi chased after him one after another, Shi Chao Yi fled to Pingchuan, hanged himself and died, and the war in Hebei ended in a stalemate.

古文：怀恩与诸将皆罢兵，以功迁尚书左仆射兼中书令、河北副元帅、朔方节度使，加封户四百。
现代文：仆固怀恩与各将都收兵回都，因战功升仆固怀恩为尚书左仆射兼中书令、河北副元帅、朔方节度使，加实封四百户。
English: The servant Gu Wai Yan and the generals all withdrew their troops back to the capital. Due to his war service, the servant Gu Wai Yan was promoted to Shang Shuxi Zuo Shuxi and Zhong Shuling, Deputy Marshal of Hebei Province, and Shuo Fang Jiedu Envoy, and his fief was increased by 400 households.

古文：初，帝有诏但取朝义，其它一切赦之。
现代文：起先，皇帝曾有诏令，只打击史朝义，其他的人都赦免不问。
English: At first, the emperor had issued a decree, only attacking Shi Chongyi, and pardoning everyone else.

古文：故薛嵩、张忠志、李怀仙、田承嗣见怀恩皆叩头，愿效力行伍。
现代文：所以薛嵩、张忠志、李怀仙、田承嗣投诚见仆固怀恩后，都叩头谢罪，愿效力行伍。
English: Therefore, Xue Song, Zhang Zhongzhi, Li Huaixian and Tian Chengzhi all bowed their heads in thanks and were willing to serve in the army.

古文：怀恩自见功高，且贼平则势轻，不能固宠，乃悉请裂河北分大镇以授之，潜结其心以为助，嵩等卒据以为患云。
现代文：仆固怀恩眼见自己功劳虽高，但贼乱平后威势也就轻了，不能巩固宠信，于是奏请将河北分为几个大镇，还让薛嵩等人镇守。想以此来暗中结其心，以后能有助于自己。不过，薛嵩等人终究以这些地方为据点，成为朝廷之患，这是后话。
English: The servant Gu Hui'en saw that although his merit was high, his prestige was also light after the chaos of the thieves, and he could not consolidate the favor, so he requested that Hebei be divided into several large towns, and also let Xue Song and others guard the town. If he wanted to secretly win his heart in this way, he could help himself in the future. However, Xue Song and others eventually used these places as a stronghold and became a problem for the imperial court. This is the afterword.

古文：未几，加太子少师，增户五百，第一区，与一子五品官。
现代文：不久，加官怀恩太子少师，增加实封五百户，住宅一区，再给一个儿子五品官。
English: Soon after, he increased the number of officials to Prince Wynn the Younger, increased the number of households to 500, and the residential area to one, and then gave one son the title of fifth grade official.

古文：诏护回纥归国，道太原，辛云京内忌怀恩，又以其与回纥亲，疑可汗见袭，闭关不敢犒军。
现代文：诏令护送回纥归国。道经太原，辛云京心中忌恨怀恩，又因他与回纥亲近，怀疑回纥可汗会袭击他们，因而闭关不敢出来犒军。
English: After passing through Taiyuan, Xin Yunjing hated Wai Yan in his heart, and because he was close to Wai Yan, he suspected that Wai Han would attack them, so he did not dare to go out to fight the army.

古文：怀恩既父子新立功，举河朔若拾遗，名出诸将远甚，而为云京所拒，大怒，表上其状。顿军汾州，使裨将李光逸以兵守祁，李怀光据晋州，张如岳据沁州，高晖等十余人自从。会监军骆奉先自云京所归，云京已厚结其欢，因言怀恩与可汗约反状明白。
现代文：仆固怀恩父子才新立功，攻取河朔就像拾起掉在地上的东西那样轻易，其名声高出各将领甚多，而竟然遭到辛云京的拒绝，大怒，上表诉说辛云京的情况，屯军汾州，派裨将李光逸带兵守祁州，李怀光守晋州，张如岳守沁州，高晖等十多人跟随自己，当时监军骆奉先从辛云京处回来，辛云京已经和他结欢，于是对他说仆固怀恩与回纥可汗相约欲反的情况已很明显。
English: Minion Gu Huai's father and son were the first to make new achievements. Conquering Hexao was as easy as picking up something that had fallen on the ground. Their reputation was higher than many generals. But they were rejected by Xin Yunjing. He was furious. He told the situation of Xin Yunjing on the table. He sent Li Guangyi with troops to defend Hexao, Li Huai Guang to defend Jinzhou, Zhang Ruyue to defend Hexao, Gao Wei and more than ten others to follow him. At that time, the supervisor Luo Feng returned from Xin Yunjing. Xin Yunjing had already made friends with him, so it was obvious to him that Minion

古文：奉先过怀恩，升堂拜母，母让曰： 若与我儿约兄弟，今何自亲云京？
现代文：骆奉先到怀恩处来，先升堂拜谒怀恩的母亲，怀恩母责备奉先说 ：你和我儿子曾约为兄弟，现在为什么去和辛云京亲近？
English: Luo Bong came to Huai's place first, and bowed to Huai's mother. Huai's mother scolded Bong and said, "You and my son used to be brothers. Why are you getting close to Xin Yunjing now?"

古文：然前事勿论，自今宜如初。 
现代文：以前的事不要再说了，从现在起你和我儿还应该和从前一样。 
English: Don't talk about what happened before. From now on, you and I should be the same.

古文：酒酣，怀恩舞，奉先厚纳以币。
现代文：酒宴中兴起，怀恩起而舞蹈，奉先送上一笔厚礼。
English: During the wine banquet, a dance broke out, and a generous gift was presented.

古文：怀恩未及酬，奉先亟辞去，怀恩即遣左右匿其马。奉先疑图己，乘夜遁归。怀恩惊，追与其马。
现代文：怀恩还没来得及道谢答礼，奉先就急急忙忙地要辞别，怀恩不让他走，叫左右把奉先的马藏起来，奉先以为怀恩要杀他，半夜里偷偷逃走，怀恩惊悟，追去还他马。
English: Before Wynn could thank him, Bongchon hurried to say goodbye. Wynn wouldn't let him go, and told both sides to hide Bongchon's horse. Bongchon thought Wynn was going to kill him, and sneaked away in the middle of the night. Wynn was startled and chased after his horse.

古文：奉先还，具奏怀恩反状，怀恩亦请诛云京、奉先，诏两解之。
现代文：奉先回朝，就上奏说仆固怀恩要谋反的种种迹象，此时怀恩也有表来请求诛杀辛云京和骆奉先。皇帝下诏令和解。
English: When Bongxian returned to the imperial court, he reported to the emperor that there were various signs that his servant Gu Huai'en was planning to rebel. At this time, Huai'en also had a petition to kill Xin Yunjing and Luo Bongxian. The emperor issued a decree of reconciliation.

古文：怀恩之过潞，李抱玉赠以币马，怀恩答之。
现代文：仆固怀恩经过潞州，李抱玉赠送钱币和马，怀恩酬谢。
English: Minion Gu Wai En passed through Zhangzhou, Li Baoyu presented coins and horses, and Wai En reciprocated.

古文：俄抱玉表怀恩私有所结。
现代文：不久，李抱玉上表说仆固怀恩私下有所勾结。
English: Soon after, Li Baoyu took to the airwaves to accuse Min Gu Wai Yan of colluding with him.

古文：广德初，进拜太保，与一子三品、一子四品官，增封户五百。
现代文：广德初年，进授为太保，给其一子三品官，一子四品官，加实封五百户。
English: In the first year of Guangde, he was promoted to Taibo, and his one son was given the third grade official, and his one son was given the fourth grade official, adding 500 households.

古文：瑒与一子五品官，封户百。
现代文：仆固与一子五品官，实封一百户。
English: The servant Gu and his son, the fifth-ranked official, were the head of a hundred households.

古文：仍赐铁券，以名藏太庙，画象凌烟阁。
现代文：仍赠铁券，名字藏于太庙，画像陈列凌烟阁。
English: They are still given iron coupons, their names are kept in the Great Temple, and their pictures are displayed in the Lingyan Pavilion.

古文：又以瑒检校兵部尚书、朔方行营节度使。
现代文：又任仆固为检校兵部尚书、朔方行营节度使。
English: He also served as a servant of Gu for the inspection of the school's military department, Shang Shu, and Shuo Fang for the camp.

古文：然怀恩怏怏，又性强固，不肯为谗毁屈，无以自解，乃上书陈情曰： 臣世本夷人，少蒙上皇驱策。
现代文：但仆固怀恩怏怏不乐，个性又固执刚强，不肯因谗言诬毁而违心，无法自我解脱，于是上书陈述： 臣世代本是夷人，年轻时恩蒙上皇驱策。
English: However, the vassal Guo Huai was not happy with the favor, his personality was stubborn and strong, he refused to violate his heart by slandering and destroying, and he could not free himself, so he submitted a written statement: The vassal generation was originally a barbarian, and when he was young, he was favored by the emperor.

古文：禄山之乱，臣以偏裨决死静难，杖天威神，克灭强胡。
现代文：安禄山之乱，臣以偏将身份决死平乱靖难，倚仗天威神灵，消灭了强胡。
English: In the Anlu Mountain War, the vassal used his position as commander-in-chief to crush the rebellion and pacify the difficulties, relied on the gods of heaven and earth, and eliminated Qiang Hu.

古文：思明继逆，先帝委臣以兵，誓雪国雠，攻城野战，身先士卒，兄弟死于阵，子姓没于军，九族之内，十不一在，而存者创痍满身。
现代文：史思明继起作乱，先帝信任，交兵给我，臣发誓洗雪国仇，凡攻城野战，均身先士卒，臣之兄弟战死阵上，臣之子侄牺牲军中，以致九族之内存留不到十分之一，且即使活着的，也创伤累累。
English: Shishiming started the turmoil, the former emperor trusted and sent soldiers to me, the vassals swore to avenge the country, and in every siege and field battle, they were the first soldiers, the vassal's brothers were killed in battle, and the vassal's sons and nephews were sacrificed in the army, so that less than one-tenth of the nine tribes remained, and even if they were alive, they were traumatized.

古文：陛下龙潜时，亲总师旅，臣事麾下，悉臣之愚。
现代文：陛下即位以前，亲自指挥师旅。臣侍奉麾下，竭尽全力。
English: Prior to His Majesty's accession to the throne, he personally led the division of the army, and his vassals served him to the best of their ability.

古文：是时数以微功，已为李辅国谗间，几至毁家。
现代文：那时多次立微功，后来遭到李辅国的谗言诋毁，几乎毁家。
English: At that time, he made minor contributions many times, but was later slandered by Li Yuxuo and almost ruined his family.

古文：陛下即位，知臣负谤，遂开独见之明，杜众多之口，拔臣于汧、陇，任臣以朔方，游魂反干，朽骨再肉。
现代文：陛下即位，知臣被冤，以独特之识见堵塞众人之口，将臣从、陇提拔出来，任臣以朔方节度，使臣游离之魂魄归入躯体，使臣枯槁之骨再生肌肉。
English: When His Majesty ascended the throne, he knew that his vassals had been wronged, and he used his unique insight to plug everyone's mouths. He promoted his vassals from the ranks of the lower ranks to the ranks of the upper ranks, and appointed his vassals to the ranks of the higher ranks. He brought the departed souls of his vassals into his body, and regenerated the bones and muscles of his withered vassals.

古文：前日回纥入塞，士人未晓，京辅震惊，陛下诏臣至太原劳问，许臣一切处置，因得与可汗计议，分道用兵，收复东都，扫荡燕、蓟。
现代文：前日回纥入塞，士人不知原因，京辅震惊，陛下诏令臣到太原犒劳慰问，允许臣相机处置，因而能与可汗商议，分道用兵，收复东都，荡涤燕、蓟之贼。
English: On the previous day, the two armies clashed, the magistrates did not know the reason, and the imperial aides were shocked. His majesty ordered his vassal to go to Taiyuan to offer condolences, and allowed the vassal to dispose of the camera. Thus, he was able to discuss with the khan, to divide the army, to recover the eastern capital, and to get rid of the petty thieves.

古文：时可汗在洛，为鱼朝恩猜阻，已失欢心。及臣护送回纥，云京闭城不出，潜使攘窃，蕃夷怨怒，弥缝百端，乃得返国。
现代文：那时可汗在洛阳，遭鱼朝恩的猜忌，已失欢心，及至臣护送回纥，辛云京闭城不出，暗中派人偷袭，以致蕃夷怨怒，臣多方解释补缝，才使回纥返国。
English: At that time, the khan was in Luoyang, was suspected by the fish Chao En, had lost favor, and was escorted back to Yunnan by his vassals. Xin Yunjing did not close the city, secretly sent people to sneak attack, resulting in the anger of the barbarians. The vassals explained and patched the seams in many ways, only to make Yunnan return to the country.

古文：臣还汾州，休息士马云京亦不使一介相闻，畏臣劾奏，故构为飞谤，以起异端。
现代文：臣回到汾州，休整人马，辛云京连一个人也不派来联系，怕臣上表揭发，因而制造谣言，欲引起事端。
English: When the minister returned to Zhangzhou to rest and recuperate, Xin Yunjing did not send a single person to make contact, fearing that the minister would expose the matter, thus creating rumors and wanting to cause trouble.

古文：陛下不垂明察，欲使忠直之臣，陷谗邪之党，臣所为拊心泣血者也。
现代文：陛下不加明察，欲听任忠直之臣陷入谗邪之党，此臣为之痛心泣血之事。
English: Your Majesty, without noticing, wanted to allow a loyal and upright vassal to fall into the clutches of an evil party, for which the vassal would weep bitterly.

古文：然臣之罪有六，无所逃死：往者同罗背逆，以骚河曲，兵连不解，臣不顾老母，从先帝于行在，募兵讨贼，同罗奔殄，是臣不忠于国，罪一也；斩子玢以令士众，舍天性之爱，是臣不忠于国，罪二也；二女远嫁，为国和亲，合从殄灭，是臣不忠于国，罪三也；又与子瑒躬履行阵，志宁邦家，是臣不忠于国，罪四也；河北新附，诸镇皆握强兵，臣之抚绥，反侧时定，是臣不忠于国，罪五也；协和回纥，戡定中原，二陵复土，使陛下勤孝两全，是臣不忠于国，罪六也。 
现代文：自我检查，臣之罪有六，不得免死：过去同罗背叛，骚扰河曲，兵患不解，臣不顾母亲年老，毅然跟从先帝到达行宫，募兵讨贼，剿灭同罗，是臣不忠于国之罪一；臣之子玢被同罗虏去，寻机会逃跑归来，臣将他斩杀以号令众士，舍弃了天性之爱，这是臣不忠于国之罪二；臣的两个女儿远嫁外夷，为国和亲，荡平敌寇，这是臣不忠于国之罪三；臣与子亲赴军旅，立志要使邦国安宁，拼死为国效命，这是臣不忠于国之罪四；河北新近归附的诸镇，均拥有强兵，臣前去抚绥以安定反侧，弭祸于未萌，这是臣不忠于国之罪五；臣说服回纥，使赴急难，戡定中原，二先帝之陵得以覆土，使陛下能勤孝两全，这是臣不忠于国之罪六。 
English: Self-examination, there are six sins of the vassal, which cannot be exempted from death: in the past, the vassal betrayed Tongluo, harassed Hequ, and did not understand the suffering of the soldiers; the vassal, regardless of his mother's old age, resolutely followed the former emperor to the imperial palace, recruited soldiers and destroyed Tongluo, which is the sin of the vassal's disloyalty to the country 1; the son of the vassal was abducted by Tongluo, looking for an opportunity to escape and return, the vassal killed him to command all the soldiers, abandoning the natural love, which is the

古文：又言： 来瑱之诛，不暴其罪，天下为疑。
现代文：又说： 来調受诛，朝廷不公开其罪行，天下为之疑惧。
English: He also said: The imperial court did not disclose his crimes when he was transferred to the imperial court, and the whole world was suspicious of him.

古文：四方奏请，陛下皆云与骠骑议之，可否不出宰相。 
现代文：四方有所奏请，陛下均说要与骠骑商议，可行或不可行均不出于宰相。 
English: The four parties have made requests, and His Majesty has said that he wants to discuss with the rider. Whether it is feasible or not is not up to the Prime Minister.

古文：词言慢很，帝一不为慊，且欲其悔过，故推心待之。诏宰相裴遵庆临谕诏旨，因察其去就。
现代文：书中言词颇有不敬之处，皇帝全然不生气，而且希望怀恩能悔过，所以与他推心置腹，诏令宰相裴遵庆前去宣谕诏旨，并观察他的行动。
English: The words in the book are quite disrespectful, the emperor is not angry at all, and hopes that Wine can repent, so he put his heart and soul with him, and ordered Prime Minister Pei Zunqing to go to proclaim the edict and observe his actions.

古文：遵庆至，怀恩抱其足，泣且诉。
现代文：裴遵庆到怀恩处，怀恩抱着他的脚，边哭边诉。
English: Pei Zunqing went to Wynn's place, Wynn hugged his feet, crying and complaining.

古文：遵庆道帝所以不疑，即劝入朝，怀恩许诺。
现代文：裴遵庆告诉他皇帝对他没有怀疑，圣眷正隆，劝他入朝，怀恩同意。
English: Pei Zunqing told him that the emperor had no doubts about him, and Zhenglong, who was a close relative of the emperor, advised him to enter the imperial court. Wine agreed.

古文：副将范志诚谏，以为 嫌隙成矣，奈何入不测之朝，独不见来瑱、李光弼乎？
现代文：副将范志诚劝谏道 ：猜忌和隔阂早就形成了，现在为什么要去那不可测之地，你难道不看见来調和李光弼吗？
English: Vice Admiral Fan Zhicheng advised him: Suspicions and estrangement have long been formed, why go to that unfathomable place now, don't you see to reconcile Li Guangyao?

古文：二臣功高不赏，瑱已及诛。 
现代文：这两人功高而不得赏，且来調已被诛杀了。 
English: These two men were not awarded for their great achievements, and have since been killed.

古文：怀恩乃止。欲使一子入宿卫，志诚固止。
现代文：怀恩入朝事作罢，准备派一个儿子入朝宿卫，范志诚再三劝阻。
English: Wynn entered the imperial court and prepared to send one of his sons to the imperial palace, but Fan Zhicheng repeatedly dissuaded him.

古文：御史大夫王翊使回纥还，怀恩虑泄其交通状，因留不遣。即使瑒攻云京，云京败，进攻榆次。
现代文：御史大夫王翊出使回纥回朝，怀恩怕他会泄露自己与回纥联系的事，于是将他留下，不让回京，又派仆固去攻辛云京，云京败，进而攻榆次。
English: Wang Xuan, the chief historian, sent Hui Xuan back to the imperial court. Wai En was afraid that he would reveal his connection with Hui Xuan, so he left him behind and did not allow him to return to Beijing. He also sent his servant Gu to attack Xin Yunjing, which was defeated, and then attacked Guanzi.

古文：初，帝幸陕，颜真卿请奉诏召怀恩。
现代文：以前，皇帝到陕州时，颜真卿请求由他奉诏召仆固怀恩。
English: In the past, when the emperor went to Shaanxi, Yan Zhenqing asked him to summon his servant Gu Wai.

古文：至是，帝使往，辞曰： 臣往请行，时也，今无及矣！ 
现代文：这时，皇帝派颜真卿去召怀恩，颜真卿不肯去，辞谢说 ：臣过去请求去召他，是个好时机，现在已经太晚了。 
English: At this time, the emperor sent Yan Zhenqing to summon Wynn. Yan Zhenqing refused to go, saying: "The minister asked me to summon him, it was a good time, now it's too late."

古文：帝问故，对曰： 顷陛下避狄于陕，臣见怀恩，责以《春秋》义，不奔问官守，故怀恩来朝，以助讨贼，则其辞顺。
现代文：皇帝问其中缘故，颜真卿说： 那时陛下在陕州避难，臣去见怀恩，责以《春秋》大义，他或为邀功，可能来朝助讨逆贼。
English: When the emperor asked the reason for this, Yan Zhenqing said: At that time, His Majesty took refuge in Shaanxi Province, and the minister went to see Wynn and praised him for the "Spring and Autumn" Great Righteousness. He may have come to the DPRK to help fight the traitors.

古文：今陛下即宫京邑，怀恩进不勤王，退不释众，其辞曲，必不来矣！ 
现代文：现在陛下返回京都，怀恩来京进不能勤王，退不能向众人解释，他理不正、气不壮，一定不会来。 
English: Now that His Majesty has returned to Kyoto, he cannot be loyal to the Emperor when he comes to Kyoto, and he cannot explain to everyone when he leaves. He is not honest and strong-willed, so he will definitely not come.

古文： 然则奈何？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：那该怎么办？ 
English: The emperor said, "Then what should we do?"

古文：曰： 今言怀恩反者，独辛云京、李抱玉、骆奉先、鱼朝恩四人耳，自馀盛言其枉。
现代文：颜真卿说 ：现在说怀恩将要反叛的只有辛云京、李抱玉、骆奉先、鱼朝恩四个人，别人都说他们的话是冤枉的。
English: Yan Zhenqing said: Now only four people, Xin Yunjing, Li Baoyu, Luo Bongxian and Yu Chaon, say that Wine will rebel. Others say that their words are unjustified.

古文：然怀恩将士，皆郭子仪旧部曲，陛下若以子仪代之，喻以逆顺，必相率而归。 
现代文：而且怀恩手下的将士，都是郭子仪的旧部，陛下若让郭子仪去，喻以逆顺祸福，一定会一同来归的。 
English: Moreover, the soldiers under Wynn's command are all from Guo Ziyi's old unit. If His Majesty allows Guo Ziyi to go, he will surely return together.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意这样办。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：子仪至河中，瑒攻榆次，未拔，追兵于祁，责其缓，鞭之，众怒。
现代文：郭子仪到了河中，仆固正攻榆次，未能取胜。仆固派裨将焦晖、白玉二人去调发祁县的兵。
English: When Guo Ziyi reached the middle of the river, Mugu was in the process of attacking Shiji, but failed to win. Mugu sent two men, Jiaojun and Baiyu, to dispatch the soldiers from Shixian.

古文：怀恩闻，以告母。母曰： 我戒汝勿反，国家酬汝不浅，今众变，祸且及我，奈何？ 怀恩再拜出，母提刀逐之曰： 吾为国杀此贼，取其心以谢军中。 
现代文：二人调兵来，仆固责备他们行动迟缓，鞭打了他们，激怒了众人。这天晚上，焦晖、白玉等人杀了仆固，将其首级传送阙下，怀恩听说后，将事情告诉母亲。母亲说： 我曾警戒你不要反叛。国家待你不薄。如今众人哗变，我也难免遭祸，怎么办？ 怀恩无言可答，再拜而出，母亲提刀赶出来说： 我为国家杀了此贼，取贼心以向三军道歉。 
English: That night, Jiaozhou, Baiyu, and others killed the servants and sent their heads to him. After hearing this, Wai Yan told his mother what had happened. His mother said, "I warned you not to rebel. The state does not treat you badly. Now the people have mutinied, and I cannot avoid disaster. What should I do?" Wai Yan was speechless, bowed again, and his mother rushed out with a sword and said, "I killed this thief for the state, taking the heart of a thief to apologize to the three armies."

古文：怀恩走，乃与部曲三百北度河，走灵武，稍稍引亡命，军复振。
现代文：仆固怀恩逃走始得免死，乃与部下三百人北渡黄河，去灵武，慢慢地召集亡命散众，军威复振。
English: The servant Gu Huai'en initially escaped death, but he and three hundred of his subordinates crossed the Yellow River to Lingwu, slowly gathered the scattered exiles, and regained military power.

古文：帝念旧勋，不加罪，诏辇其母归京师，厚恤之，以寿终。
现代文：皇帝念他往日的功劳，不加罪，诏令用车护送其母亲到京都，抚恤优厚，享天年而终。
English: The emperor, remembering his past services, did not add to his punishment, and ordered that his mother be escorted by car to Kyoto, where she would receive a generous pension and live out the rest of her days.

古文：又下诏拜怀恩太保兼中书令、大宁郡王，罢馀官。
现代文：又下诏任仆固怀恩为太保兼中书令、爵大宁郡王，其他官职则取消。
English: He also decreed the appointment of his servant Gu Wai Yan as Taibo and Chushirei, as well as Jie Da Ning Gu Wang, while other official positions were abolished.

古文：怀恩固恶不能改，遂诱吐蕃十万入塞，丰州守将战死。
现代文：仆固怀恩坚持错误不肯改正，诱骗吐蕃十万人入塞，丰州守将战死。
English: Minion Gu Wai En insisted on the error and refused to correct it. He tricked 100,000 people into entering the city, and the Toyosu commander was killed in the battle.

古文：进掠泾、邠，祭来瑱墓。
现代文：进而侵略泾州、州，祭奠来調墓。
English: Then they invaded Bozhou, Zhou, and held a memorial service to inspect the tombs.

古文：度泾水，邠宁节度使白孝德御之，覆其阵，怀恩泣曰： 曩皆为我子，反为人致死于我。 
现代文：渡过泾水，宁节度使白孝德迎战，将其军打得大败，仆固怀恩涕泣说： 以前都是我的儿，为我杀敌，今反被人要致我于死地。 
English: After crossing the Surabaya River, Ning Jietu sent Bai Xiaodong to fight, and his army was defeated. The servant Gu Gu wept bitterly and said, "In the past, they were all my sons, and they killed the enemy for me, but now they want to kill me."

古文：入侵奉天，子仪拒退之。
现代文：入侵奉天，郭子仪将他打退。
English: Feng Tian invaded, and Guo Ziyi drove him back.

古文：永泰元年，帝集天下兵防秋。怀恩诱合诸蕃号二十万入寇，吐蕃自北道逼醴泉，摇奉天；任敷、郑廷、郝德自东道寇奉先，以窥同州；羌、浑、奴剌自西道略盩厔，趣凤翔。
现代文：永泰元年，皇帝召集天下之兵以防狄，仆固怀恩诱合诸蕃号称二十万人入侵，吐蕃从北道逼攻醴泉，震动奉天；任敷、郑廷、郝德从东道入侵奉先，同时窥视同州；羌、浑、奴剌从西道侵略銩稨，再趋凤翔。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, the emperor summoned soldiers from all over the world to prevent Di, and his servant Gu Wai'en lured Zhu Xi to invade, claiming that 200,000 people would invade. Tubo attacked Luquan from the north, shaking Feng Tian; Ren Zhi, Zheng Ting, and Xing De invaded Feng Xian from the east, while peering into Tongzhou; Zhou, Hun, and Nong Zhou invaded Zhou from the west, and then Feng Xiang.

古文：京师震骇。
现代文：京师大受震惊。
English: Beijing Normal University was shocked.

古文：诏子仪屯泾阳，浑日进、白元光屯奉天，李光进屯云阳，马璘、郝廷玉屯便桥，董秦屯东渭桥，骆奉先、李日越屯盩厔，李抱玉屯凤翔，周智光屯同州，杜冕屯坊州，帝御六军屯苑中，下诏亲征。
现代文：诏令郭子仪屯兵泾阳，浑日进、白元光屯兵奉天，李光进屯兵云阳，马瞞、郝廷玉屯兵便桥，董秦屯兵东渭桥，骆奉先、李日越屯兵銩稨，李抱玉屯兵凤翔，周智光屯兵同州，杜冕屯兵坊州，皇帝亲御六军屯守苑中，下诏亲征。
English: The edict ordered Guo Ziyi to garrison Benyang, Hun Rai to enter, Bai Yuanguang to garrison Feng Tian, Li Guang to garrison Yunyang, Ma Xie to garrison Benyang, Yu Ting to garrison Benyangqiao, Dong Qin to garrison Dong Benyangqiao, Luo Bongxian to garrison Benyangqiao, Li Rai Yue to garrison Benyangqiao, Li Bao Yu to garrison Feng Xiang, Zhou Zhiguang to garrison Tongzhou, Du Rong to garrison Fangzhou, and Emperor Qin to garrison the six armies in

古文：怀恩至鸣沙，病甚，还死灵武，部曲焚其尸以葬。
现代文：仆固怀恩到达呜沙，病得很重，回到灵武，死。其部下将其尸焚烧后埋葬。
English: The servant, Gu Wai Yan, arrived in Wusha, fell seriously ill, returned to Lingwu and died. His men cremated his body and buried it.

古文：部将张韶、徐璜玉不能定其军，皆前死。
现代文：其部将张韶、徐璜玉统帅不了其军队，均被杀。
English: His subordinate generals Zhang Ye and Xu Bingyu were unable to command their armies and were both killed.

古文：范志诚统众寇泾阳。
现代文：范志诚率领众兵士入寇泾阳。
English: Fan Zhicheng led the soldiers to invade Fenyang.

古文：时诸屯坚壁，大雨，溪垘流溃，贼不得进。
现代文：那时诸屯都筑了工事坚守。天大雨，溪流暴涨，贼兵不能进。
English: At that time, all the towns built fortifications and held firm. It rained heavily, the stream rose sharply, and the bandits could not enter.

古文：吐蕃既持久，又与回纥争长，更相疑，莫适先进，因焚庐舍，驱男女数万去。
现代文：吐蕃出战已久，与回纥争为长，互相猜疑，均不肯先进军，乃在当地烧房屋、抢财物，驱赶男女几万人而回。
English: It had been a long time since the war broke out between the Tuvaluans and the Uyghurs, and they had been at odds with each other for a long time. They were suspicious of each other, and both sides refused to lead the army. Instead, they burned houses, looted property, and drove tens of thousands of men and women back.

古文：周智光邀战澄城，破之，收马牛军资万计。
现代文：周智光在澄城拦击，胜，缴获马牛及军资以万计。
English: Zhou Zhiguang intercepted and defeated in Chengcheng, and seized tens of thousands of horses and cattle and military funds.

古文：回纥乃诣子仪降，请击吐蕃自效。
现代文：回纥兵则到郭子仪处投降，愿意攻打吐蕃以效忠。
English: The Uighur soldiers surrendered at Guo Ziyi's place and were willing to fight the Tibetans in order to be loyal.

古文：子仪分兵随之，破其众于泾州。
现代文：郭子仪分兵随后，在泾州大战得胜。
English: Guo Ziyi's detachment subsequently won a victory in the Battle of Zhangzhou.

古文：任敷走，羌、浑诣李抱玉降。
现代文：任敷逃走，羌、浑则到李抱玉处投降。
English: Renjiki ran away, while Hao and Hun went to Li Baoyu's place to surrender.

古文：始，怀恩立功，门内死王事者四十六人。
现代文：当初，仆固怀恩立功，一家人中为国而死的有四十六人。
English: At the beginning, the servant Gu Wai Yan was the most meritorious. Forty-six members of his family died for the country.

古文：及拒命，士不弛甲凡三年。帝隐忍，数下诏，未尝声其反。
现代文：及至不听王命，转战三年，皇帝一直容忍，多次下诏，未曾说他谋反。
English: Even when he disobeyed the king's order and went to war three years later, the emperor tolerated him and repeatedly issued edicts, but never said that he was plotting a rebellion.

古文：高骈，字千里，南平郡王崇文孙也。
现代文：及死，还为他感伤，说 ：怀恩不会背叛，是被左右所误的啊！ 
English: And when he died, she still felt sad for him, saying: "Wynn wouldn't betray, he was led astray!"

古文：家世禁卫，幼颇修饬，折节为文学，与诸儒交，硁硁谭治道，两军中人更称誉之。
现代文：不久，其侄子仆固名臣带一千骑兵来降。大历四年，册封仆固怀恩的小女儿为崇徽公主，下嫁回纥。高骈，字千里，是南平郡王高崇文的孙子。家庭世代为禁卫，年少时为人严谨，研习兵书，又喜好文学，常与读书人交往，谈论治道之理。两军中的人交相称赞。
English: Not long after, his nephew, the servant Gu Mying, came down with a thousand cavalrymen. In the fourth year of the Tai Lian, the youngest daughter of the servant Gu Huain, who had been awarded the title, was the princess of Chonghui and married back to Gao Yu. Gao Yu, with thousands of words, was the grandson of the king of Nanping County, Gao Chongwen. His family had been guards for generations. When he was young, he was strict, studied military books, and liked literature. He often interacted with readers and talked about the principles of governance. People in the two armies praised each other.

古文：事硃叔明为司马。
现代文：曾在朱叔明手下任司马。
English: He once served as Sima under Zhu Shuming.

古文：有二雕并飞，骈曰： 我且贵，当中之。 
现代文：一天，见有两只雕在天上并飞，高骈说： 我如能发迹，就能射中。 
English: One day, Gao Yao saw two eagles flying in the sky. Gao Yao said, "If I can make a mark, I can hit it."

古文：一发贯二雕焉，众大惊，号 落雕侍御 。
现代文：一箭射去，贯穿两雕，众人大惊，称他为 落雕侍御 。
English: He shot an arrow, which went through the two statues. Everyone was shocked and called him the "lost statue attendant."

古文：后历右神策军都虞候。
现代文：后升任右神策军都虞候。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of Ushinsaku-gun.

古文：党项叛，率禁兵万人戍长武。
现代文：党项叛乱，他率领一万禁军戍守长武。
English: He led ten thousand forbidden soldiers to defend Changwu during the rebellion.

古文：是时诸将无功，唯骈数用奇，杀获甚多。
现代文：那时，各将领均未有功，惟独高骈多次瞅准时机出奇兵，杀获甚多。
English: At that time, none of the generals had any achievements, but Gao Yao was the only one who repeatedly seized the opportunity to make a surprise attack and killed a lot of soldiers.

古文：懿宗嘉之，徙屯秦州，即拜刺史兼防御使。
现代文：懿宗十分赞赏他。后来吐蕃犯边，就让他去镇守秦州，即委任他为秦州刺史兼防御使。
English: Emperor Taizong appreciated him very much. Later, when he was on the verge of committing a crime, he let him go to the town guard of Qinzhou, that is, he appointed him as Qinzhou stabbing history and defense envoy.

古文：取河、渭二州，略定凤林关，降虏万余人。
现代文：他攻克了河州、渭州，平定了凤林关，降服吐蕃一万多人。
English: He conquered Heshou and Ganzhou, leveled Fenglin Pass, and subdued more than ten thousand people in Tubo.

古文：咸通中，帝将复安南，拜骈为都护，召还京师，见灵台殿。
现代文：咸通年间，皇帝想收复安南，委任高骈为安南都护，召他回京师，在灵台殿召见他。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiantong, the emperor wanted to recover Annan, so he appointed Gao Qi as the guardian of Annan, called him back to Beijing, and summoned him to the Lingtai Hall.

古文：于是容管经略使张茵不讨贼，更以茵兵授骈。
现代文：那时，容管经略使张茵不讨贼，就把张茵的兵交给高骈。
English: At that time, Ying Guan Jing slightly prevented Zhang Yin from soliciting thieves, and handed Zhang Yin's soldiers over to Gao Gan.

古文：骈过江，约监军李维周继进。
现代文：高骈过江后，与监军李维周约定，让维周的兵为后援。
English: After Gao Gan crossed the river, he agreed with Li Weizhou, the supervisor of the army, to let Weizhou's soldiers act as backup.

古文：维周拥众壁海门，骈次峰州，大破南诏蛮，收所获赡军。
现代文：但维周按兵坚守海门不动。高骈到达峰州，大破南诏蛮兵，将所获的粮食充作军饷。
English: However, Wei Zhou and his soldiers held fast to the sea gate. Gao Gan reached Fengzhou, defeated the barbarian soldiers of Nanzhao, and used the obtained grain as war booty.

古文：维周忌之，匿捷书不奏。
现代文：李维周忌妒他，将他的捷报隐匿不报。
English: Li Wei Zhou envied him and hid his success from him.

古文：朝廷不知骈问百馀日，诏问状。
现代文：朝廷中一百多天不知高骈的消息，传诏问情况，李维周却诬告高骈故意玩敌而不进军。
English: For more than a hundred days, the imperial court did not know the news of Gao Qi. Li Wei Zhou falsely accused Gao Qi of deliberately playing the enemy and not marching into the army.

古文：维周劾骈玩敌不进，更命右武卫将军王晏权往代骈。
现代文：皇帝就改命右武卫将军王晏权去换下高骈。
English: The emperor changed his name to Wang Shiguang, the general of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, to replace Gao Yao.

古文：俄而骈拔安南，斩蛮帅段酋迁，降附诸洞二万计。晏权方挟维周发海门，檄骈北归。
现代文：不久，高骈攻克了安南，斩杀蛮帅段酋迁，降伏南蛮各洞两万多人，此时，王晏权正和李维周从海门出发，来勒令高骈北归。
English: Not long after, Gao Jian conquered Annan, killed the barbarian commander Duan Huijian, and surrendered more than 20,000 people in each of the southern barbarian dungeons. At this time, Wang Shiguang and Li Weizhou set out from Haimen to order Gao Jian to return to the north.

古文：而骈遣王惠赞传酋迁首京师，见艟舻甚盛，乃晏权等，惠赞惧夺其书，匿岛中，间关至京师。
现代文：与此同时，高骈派遣王惠赞将段酋迁的头送往京师。王惠赞在海上见前面大船好几艘，悬着旌旗，鼓棹而来。船上正是王晏权等人。王惠赞怕他们夺去高骈的报捷奏书，就藏身岛中。待大船过去，就兼程驰赴京师。
English: At the same time, Gaocheng sent Wang Huizan to send the head of the Duan chiefs to Beijing Division. Wang Huizan saw several large ships in front of him at sea, flying flags and drums. On board were Wang Shiguang and others. Wang Huizan was afraid that they would take away Gaocheng's report and report. He hid in the island. When the big ship passed, he also went to Beijing Division.

古文：天子览书，御宣政殿，群臣皆贺，大赦天下。
现代文：天子看了奏书，上宣政殿晓谕众臣，群臣皆庆贺，于是大赦天下。
English: Tianzi read the report, and went to the Xuanzheng Palace to tell all the courtiers. The courtiers all congratulated him, and he was pardoned.

古文：进骈检校刑部尚书，仍镇安南，以都护府为静海军，授骈节度，兼诸道行营招讨使。
现代文：升高骈为检校刑部尚书，依然镇守安南，以都护府为静海军，任高骈为节度使，兼诸道行营招讨使。
English: Gao Gao was appointed as the inspector of the school, Shang Shu was appointed as the inspector of the penal department, Zhengu Annan was still appointed as the town guard, Duofu was appointed as the quiet navy, Ren Gao Wei was appointed as the festival envoy, and Zhuodu Xingyuan was appointed as the recruiting envoy.

古文：始筑安南城。
现代文：这时才开始修建安南城。
English: At this time, the construction of Annan City began.

古文：由安南至广州，江漕梗险，多巨石，骈募工毚刂治，由是舟济安行，储饷毕给。
现代文：由安南到广州，航道中有许多大石头阻滞运输。高骈招募能工巧匠凿掉大石、疏浚河道，从此舟行畅通，储饷不缺。
English: From Annan to Guangzhou, there are many large stones blocking transportation in the waterway. Gaochun recruits skilled craftsmen to chisel away large stones and dredge the river, from which the boat traffic is smooth and there is no shortage of storage rafts.

古文：又使者岁至，乃凿道五所，置兵护送。
现代文：又因每年有使者来，于是开凿驰道，修建驿站五所，设兵护送使者。
English: Also, because envoys came every year, the road was chiseled, five stations were built, and soldiers were assigned to escort the envoys.

古文：其径青石者，或传马援所不能治。
现代文：道中有青石，据说当年马援都拿它没办法。
English: There is a bluestone on the road, and it is said that Ma Yuan couldn't do anything with it.

古文：既攻之，有震碎其石，乃得通，因名道曰 天威 云。
现代文：高骈来凿石，突发地震，将青石震碎，道路得通，于是命名此道为 天威 。
English: Gao Gan came to hew stone, a sudden earthquake occurred, the bluestone was shattered, and the road became passable, so the road was named Tianwei Road.

古文：加检校尚书右仆射。
现代文：加高骈官检校尚书右仆射。
English: Heighten the eunuch inspection school, Shangshu right-hand shot.

古文：骈之战，其从孙浔常先锋冒矢石以劝士。
现代文：高骈作战，其侄孙高浔常常身先士卒甘冒矢石。
English: Gao Yao fought, and his grandnephew Gao Yao was often at the forefront.

古文：骈徙节天平，荐浔自代，诏拜交州节度使。
现代文：高骈调任天平军节度观察使，就推荐高浔代理，皇帝乃任高浔为交州节度使。
English: Gao Wei was appointed as the observation envoy of the Tianping Army Festival, and Gao Wei's deputy was recommended. The emperor appointed Gao Wei as the envoy of the Jiaozhou Festival.

古文：僖宗立，即其军加同中书门下平章事。
现代文：僖宗立，即在高骈天平军上加任同中书门下平章事。
English: Zongli Zongli, that is, Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli Zongli

古文：南诏寇巂州，掠成都，徙骈剑南西川节度，乘传诣军。
现代文：南诏入侵州，掠夺成都，皇帝调高骈任剑南西川节度观察使。
English: Nanzhao invaded the state, plundered Chengdu, and the emperor appointed Gao Jun as the observation envoy of the Jiannan Xichuan Festival.

古文：及剑门，下令开城，纵民出入。
现代文：高骈乘驿车到军。到了剑门，下令开城，听凭民众自由出入。
English: Gao Gan took a carriage to the army. When he arrived at Jianmen, he ordered to open the city and let the people go in and out freely.

古文：左右谏： 寇在近，脱大掠，不可悔。 
现代文：左右劝谏说： 贼寇就在附近，万一乘机来抢掠，后悔也来不及了。 
English: He said: Thieves and robbers are nearby. If they take the opportunity to loot, they will not have time to regret it.

古文：骈曰： 属吾在安南破贼三十万，骠信闻我至，尚敢邪！ 
现代文：高骈说 ：我在安南击破贼寇三十万，骠信听说我来了，他还敢来吗？ 
English: Gao Yao said: I defeated 300,000 thieves and robbers in Annan, and Xin Xin heard that I was coming, would he dare to come?

古文：当是时，蛮攻雅州，壁庐山，闻骈至，亟解去。
现代文：那时，南蛮兵进攻雅州，驻守在卢山，听说高骈来了，急忙就退走了。
English: At that time, the Southern Barbarians attacked Yazhou and were stationed in Lushan. When they heard that Gao Gan was coming, they hurriedly retreated.

古文：骈即移檄骠信，勒兵从之。
现代文：高骈即送檄书给骠信，并领兵随其后。
English: Gao Yao sent the letter to Zou Xin, and led the soldiers to follow.

古文：骠信大惧，送质子入朝，约不敢寇。
现代文：骠信大恐，赶紧送质子入朝，相约再不敢犯边。
English: Yixin was terrified. He hurried to send the proton to the North, but dared not cross the border.

古文：蜀有突将，分左右二厢，厢有虞候，诘火督盗贼，有兵马虞候，主调发。骈罢其一，各置一虞候。
现代文：蜀地有突将，分左右两厢，厢设有虞候，掌管巡查火烛及盗贼，又有兵马虞候，主管调发，高骈撤消一个，各置一个虞候。
English: In Shu, there is a sudden general, divided into two compartments on the left and right, the compartment is equipped with a magistrate, in charge of patrolling candles and thieves, and there is also a soldier and horse magistrate, in charge of dispatching, one high roller is withdrawn, and one magistrate is placed in each compartment.

古文：又以蜀兵孱，诏蛮新定，人未安业，罢突将月禀并餐钱，约曰： 府库完，当如旧。 
现代文：他又因蜀兵孱弱，诏蛮新定，人尚未安业，又取消突将的月俸及餐钱，并与之约 府库充盈后，再依旧例发放 。
English: He also cancelled the monthly salary and meal allowance of the sudden generals due to the weakness of the Shu army, the situation was quite new, and the person was not yet secure, and after filling the prefectural treasury with it, it was still issued as usual.

古文：又团练兵战者，厚其衣禀；不团练者，但掌文书、仓库，衣禀减焉。
现代文：又团练兵中要出战的，其衣食俸禄均增加，不团练而只掌管文书、仓库的，其衣食俸禄则减少。
English: In addition, the clothing and food allowance of the soldiers who wanted to fight in the regimental drill was increased, while the clothing and food allowance of the soldiers who did not participate in the regimental drill and were only in charge of paperwork and warehouses was reduced.

古文：骈曰： 皆王卒，命均之。 
现代文：高骈说： 都是天子的兵，苦乐应均等。 
English: Gao Yao said: They are all soldiers of the Son of Heaven, and the bitterness and joy should be equal.

古文：战士大望。
现代文：战士们十分怨恨。
English: The soldiers were very angry.

古文：于时天平、昭义、义成戍军合蜀兵凡六万。
现代文：当时天平、昭义、义成的戍军合同蜀兵有六万人。
English: At that time, Tianping, Zhao Yi, and Yicheng had a total of 60,000 contract Shu soldiers.

古文：骈之自将出屯也，突将乱，乘门以入，骈匿于圊，求不得。
现代文：高骈自己带兵出屯时，突将作乱，破门而入，高骈藏在厕所里，乱军们找他不到。
English: When Gao Jue himself led his soldiers out of the camp, the rebels made a riot, broke down the door, and Gao Jue hid in the toilet. The rebels couldn't find him.

古文：天平军闻变，其校张桀以士五百格战，不胜。
现代文：天平军听说发生变故，其校将张桀带五百兵士迎战，不胜。
English: The Tianping Army heard that there had been a change of fortune, and its schoolmaster Zhang Xuan led five hundred soldiers into battle, but was unable to win.

古文：监军慰抚之，皆曰： 州虽更蛮乱，户口尚完，府库方实，公削军禀以自养，不堪其虐，故乱。 
现代文：监军出来慰抚，乱军们说： 我们州虽经南蛮之乱，但户口未动，府库也充实，而高公削减军俸而自肥，我们不堪虐待才作乱的。 
English: The supervisors of the army came out to comfort, the rebels said: Although our state has been through the Nanban Rebellion, the household registration has not been moved, the government treasury is also full, and Gao Gong has cut military salaries and enriched himself. We can only make trouble if we are mistreated.

古文：监军惧，讲解之。取役夫数百，名叛卒，藉斩其首，乃定。
现代文：监军怕事态扩大，好言劝慰，平息了事变，于是抓了几百名民工，说是叛兵，杀了他们，形势才定。
English: Fearing that the situation would escalate, the supervising troops calmed the situation with kind words and consolation. They then arrested several hundred migrant workers, claiming that they were rebels, and killed them. The situation was then stabilized.

古文：骈徐出，以金帛厚赏士，开府库悉还其衣禀。然密籍所给姓名，夜遣牙将击杀之，夷其族，虽孕者不贳，投尸于江。
现代文：高骈从藏身处出来，用财物厚赏那些士兵，并开府库将扣减的衣服薪俸全部发还，但又秘密记下他们的姓名，夜里派牙将去杀了他们全家，即使孕妇也不宽贷，尸体均投入江内。
English: Gao Yao came out from his hiding place, rewarded those soldiers with wealth and goods, and opened the government treasury to return all the deducted clothes and salaries, but he secretly recorded their names. In the night, he sent his soldiers to kill their whole family, even pregnant women were not forgiven, and the bodies were all thrown into the river.

古文：有一妇方踞而乳子，将就刑，媪伤之，疑其畏死，谓曰： 以子丐我，一诣曹司也。 
现代文：有一个妇女正喂孩子吃奶，即将受戮。一个老太婆很同情她，以为她怕死，就对她说： 把孩子给我，我们一同到阴曹去。 
English: There was a woman who was about to be slaughtered while she was suckling her child, and an old woman took pity on her, thinking she was afraid of death, and said to her, "Give me the child, and let us go to the underworld together."

古文：妇蹶起曰： 我知之，且饱吾子，不可使以饥就戮也。 
现代文：那妇人跳起身说： 我知道，先让我儿子吃饱了，不能让他饿着肚子被杀。 
English: The woman jumped up and said, "I know, let my son have enough to eat first, I can't let him starve to death."

古文：见刑者拜曰： 渠有节度使夺战士食，一日忿怒，淫刑以逞，国家法令何有也？
现代文：又对着行刑者下拜说 ：哪有节度使掠夺战士的口粮，一旦生气就滥用刑法以逞性，国家法令还有什么用？
English: He also bowed down to the executioner and said, "There is no moderation in robbing soldiers of their rations, and once you get angry, you abuse the criminal law to be brave. What is the use of national laws?"

古文：我死当诉于天，使此贼阖门如今日冤也！ 
现代文：我死了要上天去告状，让这个贼官的全家就像我们今天一样！ 
English: When I die, I want to go to heaven to sue, so that the whole family of this thieving official will be like we are today!

古文：逮死，神色晏然。
现代文：至死，她神色安然。
English: To her dying day, she seemed at peace.

古文：蜀人闻者为垂泣。
现代文：蜀人听说此事都为之哀伤。
English: The people of Shu were saddened to hear about this.

古文：骈复录突将戍还者，丸名贮器中，意不怿，则探之，或十或五，授将李敬全斩决。
现代文：高骈又将突将中戍守回来的人的名字封在腊丸里放进一个罐子。心里不快活时，就去罐子里，摸出十个或五个，把这些名字交给李敬全去处决。
English: Gao Yao also sealed the names of those who came back from the surprise attack and put them in a jar. When he was unhappy, he would go to the jar, find ten or five names, and give these names to Li Jingquan to execute.

古文：亲吏王殷说骈曰： 突将在行者，初不知谋，公当赦之。 
现代文：他的亲信王殷劝他 ：突将中在外执行任务的人，当初并不知道作乱的阴谋，你应该宽恕他们。 
English: His close confidant, Wang Yin, advised him, "Those who carried out tasks in the middle of the turmoil did not know about the conspiracy to create turmoil at the beginning, and you should forgive them.

古文：骈悦，投丸池中，人乃安。
现代文：高骈高兴了，将剩下的腊丸倒入池中，人们的心才安。
English: Gao Yao was happy and poured the rest of the wax into the pool, which made everyone feel at ease.

古文：蜀之土恶，成都城岁坏，骈易以砖甓，陴堞完新，负城丘陵悉垦平之，以便农桑。讫功，筮之得《大畜》。骈曰： 畜者，养也。
现代文：蜀地的土质不好，成都城每年都坏。高骈烧土为砖以代土，城堞才完好如新。城后的丘陵全挖平了，以便农桑。工程完毕后，卜筮得《大畜》卦。高骈说： 所谓 畜 ，就是养。
English: The soil quality of Shu is not good, and Chengdu city is bad every year. The burnt soil of sorghum is used as bricks to replace the soil, and the city walls are as good as new. The hills behind the city have been completely excavated to make way for agricultural mulberry trees. After the project was completed, Bu Wei received the "Big Cattle" gua. Gao Wei said: The so-called cattle is raised.

古文：济以刚健笃实，辉光日新，吉孰大焉！
现代文：再加上 刚建笃实 的光辉宣耀，象征其德自新，没有比这再吉利的了。
English: Coupled with the shining glory of the newly built solid, symbolizing its moral renewal, there is nothing more auspicious.

古文：文宜去下存上。 
现代文：其文字该去下存上。 
English: Its text should be preserved.

古文：因名大玄城。
现代文：于是将城命名为大玄城。
English: As a result, the castle was named the Great Hidden City.

古文：进检校司徒，封燕国公，徙荆南节度。
现代文：诏升高骈为检校司徒，封爵燕国公，调任荆南节度使。
English: He was promoted to the post of school inspector, given the title of Duke of Yan Province, and transferred to the post of Jingnan Festival envoy.

古文：梁缵者，本以昭义兵西戍，骈表隶麾下。
现代文：梁缵，本是带昭义兵西戍的人，高骈上表将他隶属自己麾下。
English: Liang Yao was originally the one who brought Zhao Yibing to Xicheng, and Gao Yao subordinated him to himself.

古文：王仙芝之败，残党过江，帝以骈治郓威化大行，且仙芝党皆郓人，故授骈镇海节度使。
现代文：王仙芝事败之后，其残党过江。皇帝因高骈治郓城时文武并用，卓有成效，而且王仙芝的党人都是郓州人，所以委任高骈为镇海节度使。
English: After the defeat of Wang Xianzhi, the remnants of his party crossed the river. The emperor appointed Gao Xianzhi as the Zhenhai Festival envoy because Gao Xianzhi's combination of literature and martial arts was very effective when he governed Zhangcheng. Moreover, all of Wang Xianzhi's party members were from Zhangzhou.

古文：骈遣将张潾与缵分兵穷讨，降其骁帅毕师鐸数十人，贼走岭表。
现代文：高骈派大将张贎与梁缵分兵穷追，迫使其骁帅毕师铎几十人投降，余贼逃至岭表。
English: Gao Jun sent his general Zhang Jun and Liang Jun's detachment in hot pursuit, forcing dozens of his soldiers to surrender. The rest of the bandits fled to Ling table.

古文：帝美其功，加诸道行营都统、盐铁转运等使。
现代文：皇帝嘉奖其功绩，加官诸道行营都统、盐铁转运使等职。
English: The emperor commended his achievements, and he was promoted to the posts of the general of the army, the general of salt and iron transportation.

古文：又诏骈料官军义营乡团，归其老弱伤夷，裁制军食；刺史以下小罪辄罚，大罪以闻。
现代文：又诏命高骈整顿官军义营乡团，让老弱伤残者回家，裁制军用；刺史以下犯小罪则处罚，犯大罪者则上报朝廷。
English: He also ordered Gao Qi to rectify the official army's volunteer village groups, let the old, weak and disabled go home, and cut down the military; those who committed minor crimes were punished, and those who committed major crimes were reported to the imperial court.

古文：贼更推黄巢南陷广州，骈建遣潾以兵五千屯郴扼贼西路，留后王重任以兵八千并海进援循、潮，自将万人繇大庾击贼广州，且请起荆南王鐸兵三万壁桂、永，以邕管兵五千壁端州，则贼无遗类。
现代文：贼人推举黄巢为头，南陷广州。高骈建议派张贎带兵五千屯守郴州扼住贼人西路，留后王重任带兵八千从海道进援循州、潮州，高骈自己率万人由大庾出兵去广州击贼；还请求调荆南的王铎兵三万坚守桂州、永州，派邕管五千坚守端州。能如此，则贼人无所逃遁。
English: The bandits chose Huang Chao as their leader, and Guangzhou fell to the south. Gao Gan suggested that Zhang Ye should send 5,000 troops to defend Bozhou and hold the west road of the bandits, leaving Wang Chong Ren to lead 8,000 troops from the sea to support Bozhou and Chaozhou. Gao Gan himself led 10,000 men from Dahu to Guangzhou to fight the bandits. He also requested that 30,000 soldiers of Wang Ye, who had been transferred to the south of Jing, should defend Guizhou and Yongzhou, and that 5,000 troops should be sent to defend Danzhou. If this could be done, the bandits would have nowhere to escape.

古文：帝纳其策，而骈卒不行。
现代文：皇帝接纳他的建议，然而高骈却终究未出兵。
English: The emperor accepted his suggestion, but Gao Pi did not send troops after all.

古文：俄徙淮南节度副大使。
现代文：不久，调任淮南节度副大使。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the post of Deputy Ambassador of Huainan Province.

古文：骈缮完城垒，募军及土客，得锐士七万，乃传檄召天下兵共讨贼，威震一时，天子倚以为重。
现代文：高骈修缮城堡、建筑工事，召募军人及土客兵，得精兵七万。于是到各处传递檄文，号召天下共同讨贼，威震一时，天子十分倚重他。
English: Gao Jun repaired the castle, carried out construction work, recruited soldiers and Turk soldiers, and gained 70,000 elite soldiers. So he went everywhere to pass on the imperial edict, calling on the whole world to jointly hunt down the thieves. At the time of the earthquake, the heavenly son was very concerned about him.

古文：广明初，潾破贼大云仓，诈降巢。
现代文：广明初年，张氵在大云仓大破贼军，欲使黄巢投降。
English: In the first year of Guangming, Zhang Ye broke up the bandit army in Dayuncang and tried to force Huang Chao to surrender.

古文：巢不意其袭，遂大奔，引残党壁上饶，然众亡几。会疫疠起，人死亡，潾进击之，巢大惧，以金啖潾，腾书于骈，丐归命。
现代文：黄巢没有料到张氵的袭击，于是逃跑，带领残余部队到上饶固守，但人不多，又遇上传染病流行，不少人病死，张氵趁势进击，黄巢非常害怕，用钱贿赂张氵，又送信给高骈，请求准许归顺。
English: Huang Chao did not expect Zhang Ye's attack, so he ran away and led the remaining troops to Shangrao to defend, but there were not many people, and there was an epidemic of infectious diseases, many people died. Zhang Ye took advantage of the situation to attack. Huang Chao was very afraid. He bribed Zhang Ye with money and sent it to Gao Ye to request permission to surrender.

古文：骈信之，许为求节度。
现代文：高骈相信了，同意代他请求任节度使。
English: Gao Yao believed him, and agreed to request the appointment of a delegate on his behalf.

古文：当此时，昭义、武宁、义武兵数万赴淮南，骈欲专己功，即奏贼已破，不须大兵。
现代文：就在那时，昭义、武宁、义武等地兵几万人正赶赴淮南，高骈想独占功劳，就上奏贼人已破，不须别地的大军。
English: At that time, tens of thousands of local soldiers including Zhao Yi, Wu Ning, and Yi Wu were rushing to Huainan. Gao Gan wanted to monopolize the credit, so he announced that the bandits had been defeated and there was no need for a large army elsewhere.

古文：有诏班师。
现代文：皇帝乃诏令班师。
English: The emperor is the master of the imperial edict.

古文：巢知兵罢，即绝骈请战，击杀潾，乘胜度江攻天长。
现代文：黄巢得知大军已回，就翻脸回绝高骈而请战，击杀了张氵，乘胜渡江攻打天长。
English: When Huang Chao learned that the large army had returned, he turned his back on Gao Yao and asked for a fight, killed Zhang Yao, and took advantage of the victory to cross the river to attack Tianlang.

古文：始，巢在广州，求天平节度，宰相庐携善骈，以有讨贼功，不肯赦巢，与郑畋争于朝，故巢怨不得节度。
现代文：当初，黄巢在广州时，要求当天平军节度使，宰相卢携与高骈要好，因高骈有讨贼功劳，所以不肯赦黄巢。曾与宰相郑畋在朝廷上争论过，所以黄巢对不能任节度使有怨气。
English: At first, when Huang Chao was in Guangzhou, he demanded that Prime Minister Lu Jie and Gao Qi, the commander-in-chief of the Pingjun Army, should be appointed as the commander-in-chief of the festival on that day. Because Gao Qi had the merit of catching thieves, he refused to pardon Huang Chao. He had argued with Prime Minister Zheng Qi in the imperial court, so Huang Chao had a grudge against not being able to make the festival.

古文：而骈闻议不一，亦不平，至是欲纵贼以耸朝廷，然后立功。
现代文：高骈听说朝中议论不一，心有不平，所以想放掉黄巢以震动朝廷，然后再来灭贼立功。
English: Gao Yao heard that there was discord between the two sides and felt uneasy, so he wanted to shake up the imperial court by getting rid of the Yellow Nest, and then do his best to eliminate the thieves.

古文：毕师鐸谏曰： 朝廷所恃，谁易于公？
现代文：毕师铎劝谏： 朝廷所倚仗的，谁比得上您。
English: Bi Shizhen advised: Who is better than you for the imperial court to rely on?

古文：制贼要害，莫先淮南。
现代文：要钳制贼人的要害，莫过于卡住淮南。
English: There is no better way to stop the thieves than to seize Huainan.

古文：今不据要津以灭贼，使得北度，必乱中原。 
现代文：现在不控制要津而灭贼，若让他们得机会北上，定会祸害中原。 
English: If we don't control the hot spots and exterminate the thieves now, if we give them the opportunity to go north, they will surely wreak havoc on the Central Plains.

古文：骈矍然，下令将出师。
现代文：高骈听后悚然，准备下令出师。
English: Gao Yao was horrified after hearing this, and prepared to order him to become a teacher.

古文：嬖将吕用之畏师鐸有功，谏曰： 公勋业极矣，贼未殄，朝廷且有口语。
现代文：其宠将吕用之担心毕师铎会有功，就劝谏： 公的功勋已到极顶了，贼人未灭，朝廷中尚且有人冷言冷语。
English: His favorite general, Lü Yingzhi, was worried that Bi Shizhen would succeed, so he advised Bi Shizhen: Public merit has reached its peak, thieves have not died out, and there are still people in the imperial court who speak coldly.

古文：况贼平，挟震主之威，安所税驾？
现代文：如果歼灭了贼人，公将有震主之威，还到何处止泊呢？
English: If the thieves are annihilated, the public will have the authority of the shaker, and where will they stay?

古文：不如观衅求福，为不朽资也。 
现代文：不如观贼乱以求福，这才是不朽之功。 
English: It's not as good as watching thieves scatter in search of good fortune. That's what makes it immortal.

古文：骈入其计，托疾未可以出屯，严兵保境。
现代文：高骈中了他的圈套，推说身体有病不能出屯，而严做战备保境。
English: Gao Yao fell into his trap, insinuating that he was too ill to leave the camp, but was preparing to fight to save the country.

古文：巢据滁、和，去广陵才数百里，乃求援陈许。
现代文：黄巢于是抢占了滁州、和州，离广陵仅几百里，乃向陈许求援。
English: Huang Chao then seized Zhangzhou and Hezhou, only a few hundred miles from Guangling, and appealed to Chen Xu for help.

古文：巢逼扬州，众十五万。
现代文：黄巢进逼扬州，有兵马十五万。
English: Huang Chao marched into Yangzhou with 150,000 soldiers and horses.

古文：骈将曹全晸以兵五千战不利，壁泗州以待援，骈兵终不出。
现代文：高骈的将领曹全日政率五千人马与之战，不胜，坚守泗州等待援兵。高骈的兵始终不出。
English: Cao Quanzhong's general Cao Quanzhong led five thousand soldiers to fight against them and was defeated. He held fast to Zhangzhou and waited for reinforcements. Gao Quanzhong's soldiers never came.

古文：贼北趋河洛，天子遣使者促骈讨贼，冠盖相望也。
现代文：黄巢北上往河洛而去，天子派使者催促高骈出兵讨贼，使者接连不断地来，但高骈仍不动。
English: Huang Chao went north to Helo, and the Son of Heaven sent an envoy to urge Gao Gan to send troops to hunt down the thieves. The envoys came one after another, but Gao Gan still did not move.

古文：俄而两京陷，天子犹冀骈立功，眷寄未衰，诏刺史若诸将有功，自监察御史至常侍，许墨制除授。
现代文：不久，两京陷落，天子还寄希望于高骈立功，信任不减。诏令其属内刺史及诸将若有功，允许墨制授官自监察御史直至常侍，授后再报。
English: Soon after the fall of the two capitals, Emperor Taishi still pinned his hopes on Takahata's achievements, and his trust in him did not diminish. Emperor Taishi ordered that Takahata be made a member of the Privy Council, and that if he and the other generals were found to be meritorious, they would be allowed to be appointed to positions ranging from inspector of the Imperial Household to regular attendant of the Emperor, and that this would be announced after the appointment was made.

古文：寻进检校太尉，东面都统，京西、京北神策军诸道兵马等使。
现代文：不久，进高骈官为检校太尉，东面都统，京西、京北神策军诸道兵马使等职。
English: Soon, the eunuchs who entered high schools were promoted to the rank of lieutenant inspectors, and the East was unified, and the West Beijing and North Beijing Shinsaka troops were promoted to the rank of military attachés.

古文：会二雉雊署寝，占者曰： 军府将空。 
现代文：恰遇两只雉鸡在府舍筑窝，占卜者说： 这主军府将空。 
English: A fortuneteller happened to meet two pheasants building a nest in the palace, and said, "This palace will soon be empty."

古文：骈恶之，悉兵出营东塘，舟二千艘，戈铠完锐，日讨金鼓，以侈士志。
现代文：高骈心中厌弃，于是带全部兵众到东塘扎营，战船两千艘，装备齐全，每日鸣金鼓以鼓士气。
English: Disgusted in his heart, Gao Yao took all the soldiers to camp in Dongtang. There were two thousand warships, fully equipped, and the golden drums were sounded daily to drum up morale.

古文：与浙西节度使周宝檄，欲连和而西，宝大喜。
现代文：并发檄书给浙西节度使周宝，约与他联和西进，周宝大喜。
English: At the same time, Zhou Bao was sent a letter of invitation to the Western Zhejiang Festival to make Zhou Bao, about to join him and go west, Zhou Bao was overjoyed.

古文：有谓宝： 彼欲并江东为孙策三分计。 
现代文：有人对周宝说： 他是想合并江东，玩孙策三分天下的把戏。 
English: Someone said to Zhou Bao: He wants to merge Jiangdong and play Sun Ce's trick of dividing the world into three parts.

古文：宝未之信。
现代文：周宝不很相信。
English: Zhou Bao doesn't quite believe it.

古文：俄而骈请宝至军议事，宝怒，辞疾不出，衅隙遂构。
现代文：不久，高骈请周宝到自己军中议事，周宝生气了，托辞有病不去。两人间遂有了隔阂。
English: Not long after, Gao Yao invited Zhou Bao to his army for a discussion. Zhou Bao became angry and used the excuse that he was ill. The two eventually fell out.

古文：骈屯东塘百日，托以宝及浙东刘汉宏将为不利，乃还，以应其变。
现代文：高骈屯守东塘一百天，以周宝及浙东刘汉宏将有不利之事为理由回广陵，准备应变。
English: Gao Gan stayed in Dongtang for a hundred days, and returned to Guangling on the grounds that Zhou Bao and East Zhejiang Liu Hanhong would have unfavorable things, and prepared for contingencies.

古文：帝知骈无出兵意，天下益殆。乃以王鐸代为都统，以崔安潜副之。
现代文：皇帝知道了高骈没有出兵的打算，天下越发危急，于是派王铎代为都统，崔安潜做副都统。
English: The emperor knew that Gao Pi had no intention of sending troops, and the world was getting more and more dangerous, so he sent Wang Qi to be the deputy of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, and Cui Anqian to be the deputy of the Central Committee.

古文：诏韦昭度领诸道盐铁转运使，加骈侍中，增实户一百，封渤海郡王。
现代文：诏令韦昭度任诸道盐铁转运使，而加高骈官职侍中，增加实封户一百，封爵渤海郡王。
English: The edict ordered Wei Zhaodu to be appointed as the salt and iron transportation envoy of all provinces, and to increase the number of high-ranking eunuchs and attendants, increase the number of real-estate households by one hundred, and knight the king of Bohai County.

古文：骈失兵柄利权，攘袂大诟，即上书谩言不恭，诋鐸乃败军将，而安潜狼贪，有如桡败，诒千古之悔。
现代文：高骈这一来既失了兵权，又丢了利权，就破口大骂，上书时也用词不恭，诋毁王铎是败军之将，又指责崔安潜是贪心小人，有如烂木头，用他们将遗千古之悔。
English: Gao Gan, having lost both military power and profit-making power this time, lashed out and cursed. He also used disrespectful words when writing the letter, slandering Wang Qi as the general of the defeated army, and accusing Cui Anqian of being a greedy villain, like rotten wood, using them will leave a thousand years of regret.

古文：又引更始刮席、子婴轵道事以激帝。
现代文：又引用汉淮阳王刘玄更始年降赤眉之事，秦子婴轵道降汉的事来刺激皇帝。
English: He also cited the events of Emperor Liu Xuan of the Han and Huaiyang Dynasties' abdication in the first year of the Heian period and the abdication of Emperor Qin Zibing of the Han Dynasty to stimulate the emperor.

古文：帝怒，下诏切责。
现代文：皇帝怒，下诏严厉斥责。
English: The emperor was furious and issued a stern reprimand.

古文：骈都统三年，无尺寸功，幸国颠沛，大料兵，阴图割据，一旦失势，威望顿尽，故肆为丑悖，胁邀天子，冀复故权。
现代文：其时王室微弱，号令之威力亦小。
English: At that time, the royal family was weak, and the power of the imperial edict was small.

古文：而吴人顾云以文辞缘泽其奸，偃然无所忌畏。
现代文：高骈都统三年，无尺寸之功，趁国家多难大整军，阴谋割据。如今一旦失势，威望顿消，所以肆意放纵，胁迫天子，希望能恢复权势。
English: During the three years of Goguryeo's capital unification, without any great achievements, it took advantage of the country's difficulties to reorganize the army and divide it into plots. Nowadays, once power is lost, prestige disappears, so they wantonly indulge and coerce the emperor, hoping to restore their power.

古文：又请帝南幸江淮。
现代文：又请皇帝南下江淮。
English: He also invited the emperor to go south to the Yangtze River.

古文：会平贼，骈闻，缩气怅恨，部下多叛去，郁郁无聊，乃笃意求神仙，以军事属用之。
现代文：正好黄巢之乱平，高骈听说后，骄气顿减，心中怅恨，部下很多都叛去，以致郁郁无聊，于是专心求仙寻道，全部军事都交给吕用之。
English: After hearing about the turmoil in the Yellow Nest, Gao Yao suddenly lost his pride and felt hatred in his heart. Many of his subordinates had defected, leading to depression and boredom. Therefore, he concentrated on seeking immortality, and all military affairs were handed over to Lü Ying.

古文：用之者，鄱阳人，世为商侩，往来广陵，得诸贾之驩。
现代文：吕用之，鄱阳人，世代均为商侩，往来广陵，很得诸商人的欢心。
English: Lyu Yizhi, a native of Fenyang, had been a merchant for generations and had been to Guangling many times. He was very popular with merchants.

古文：既孤，依舅家，盗私其室，亡命九华山，事方士牛弘徽，得役鬼术，卖药广陵市。
现代文：不幸父母早亡，寄居在舅家。后来偷了舅舅的钱财，逃到九华山，投奔了方士牛弘征，学得了驱鬼术，到广陵市来卖药。
English: Unfortunately, his parents died at an early age and he lived with his uncle. Later, he stole his uncle's money and property, fled to Mount Jiuhua, ran to the fortune-teller Niu Hongzhe, learned how to drive away ghosts, and came to Guangling City to sell medicine.

古文：始诣骈亲将俞公楚，验其术，因得见骈，署幕府，稍补右职。
现代文：最初到高骈的亲将俞公楚处，他的法术灵验了，因而见到高骈，成为他的幕僚，后来渐渐升迁以至高官。
English: At first, he went to Gao Yao's relative, Gao Gongchu, and his spell was effective. As a result, he met Gao Yao and became his staff member. Later, he was gradually promoted to a high-ranking official.

古文：用之既少贱，具知闾里利病、吏得失，颇班班言政事，以将左道，骈愈器之。
现代文：吕用之少年时地位低贱因此对闾里中的情况得失、官吏的好坏都了然于心，以此基础来议政事往往准确，成为他有道术的佐证。因而高骈越发器重他。
English: When he was a boy, Lyu Yingzhi's status was low, so he was well aware of the ups and downs of the situation in Yili and the quality of officials. On this basis, he was often accurate in discussing political affairs, which was proof of his virtue. As a result, Gao Yao became more and more attached to him.

古文：乃广树朋党，刺知骈动息，持金帛还结左右，日为诞妄以动骈。又荐狂人诸葛殷、张守一为长年方，并署牙将。
现代文：于是用之广树党羽，探听高骈的动静。又用钱物结交高骈的左右，每天都搞些荒诞之事来诱惑高骈，又推荐狂人诸葛殷、张守一为长年方，还设置牙将。
English: Therefore, he used his vast number of party members to listen to Gao Yao's movements. He also used money and goods to make friends with Gao Yao's right and left, and did some absurd things every day to tempt Gao Yao. He also recommended the madmen Zhuge Yin and Zhang Shou I as long-term guardians, and also set up a dentist.

古文：初，殷将见，用之绐曰： 上帝以公为人臣，虑机事薙废，使神人来备羽翼，且当以职縻之。 
现代文：当初，诸葛殷将来，吕用之骗高骈说： 上天因为您身为人臣，考虑事情有时不周到细密，所以派一个神人来做您的羽翼。您可以给他一个职位以留住他。 
English: At first, Zhuge Yin said to Lu Yingzhi, who was trying to trick Gao Yao: "God, because you are a vassal, sometimes you don't consider things carefully, so send a godman to be your wingman. You can give him a position to keep him.

古文：明日，殷以褐衣见，辩诈无穷，骈大惊，号 葛将军 。
现代文：第二天，诸葛殷穿着粗布衣来见，口若悬河，高骈大惊，称之为 葛将军 。
English: The next day, Zhugeyin came to see him wearing a coarse cloth, his mouth was agape, Gao Yan was shocked, and called him General Ge.

古文：其阴狡过用之远甚。
现代文：诸葛殷的阴险狡诈甚于用之多多。
English: Zhuge Yin's insidious cunning is far more effective than many tricks.

古文：有大贾居第华壮，殷求之不得，谓骈曰： 城中且有妖，当筑坛禳却之。 
现代文：有个大商人的房宅十分宽大华丽，诸葛殷想要，未能弄到手，就对高骈说： 城中有妖，让我筑坛祈祷驱妖。 
English: There was a large merchant's house that was very spacious and gorgeous. Zhuge Yin wanted to buy it, but when he couldn't get it, he said to Gao Gan, "There are demons in the city. Let me build an altar to pray and drive away the demons."

古文：因指贾居。
现代文：后来即指妖在那房宅中。
English: Later it was said that a demon was in the house.

古文：骈敕吏即日驱徙，殷入居之。
现代文：高骈派人当日就把那商人赶走，诸葛殷住了进去。
English: On the same day, Gao Gan sent someone to drive the merchant away, and Zhuge Yan moved in.

古文：骈造迎仙等楼，皆广高八十尺，饰以金珠璖玉，侍女衣羽衣，新声度曲，以拟钧天，薰斋其上，祈与仙接。
现代文：高骈建造迎仙楼等房屋，都高八十尺，用金银珠宝装饰，侍女都穿羽毛衣。编制新曲，均模仿中央，在楼上焚香祈祷，希望能与仙人相会。
English: Gao Yao built Ying Xian Lou and other buildings, all eighty feet high, decorated with gold and silver jewelry, and the maids all wore feather coats. He composed new songs, all of which imitated the central one, and burned incense and prayed upstairs, hoping to meet the immortals.

古文：用之自谓与仙真通，对骈叱咤风雨，或望空顾揖再拜，语言俚近，左右或窃议，辄杀之，后无敢出口者。
现代文：用之自称能与仙人相通，对高骈呼来喝去，有时对着空中又是作揖又是叩头，说些不三不四的话。左右人中有私下议论的，就杀死，以后就没有人敢说什么了。
English: They use it to claim to be able to communicate with the immortals, to chant to the high-pitched call, and sometimes to the air to make a coo and kowtow, to say something. If there is a private discussion between the left and right, they will kill it, and no one will dare to say anything in the future.

古文：萧胜纳贿用之，求盐城监，骈不肯。用之曰： 仙人言盐城有宝剑，须真人取之，唯胜可往。 
现代文：萧胜贿赂吕用之，想当盐城监，高骈不同意，用之说： 仙人说盐城有宝剑，须有真人才能取得，只有萧胜可以去。 
English: Xiao Sheng bribed Lu with it and wanted to be the overseer of Yancheng. Gao Yao disagreed and used it to say: Immortals say that Yancheng has a sword, which can only be obtained by a real person. Only Xia Sheng can go there.

古文：骈许诺。数月，胜献铜匕首，用之曰： 此北帝所佩也，得之者兵不敢犯。 
现代文：高骈同意了，过了几个月，萧胜献上铜匕首一把。用之说： 这剑是北帝佩带的，得了这把剑的人，兵不敢侵犯他。 
English: Gao Yao agreed, and a few months later, Xiao Sheng presented a bronze dagger to the emperor, saying, "This sword was worn by the Northern Emperor, and soldiers would not dare to attack anyone who had this sword."

古文：骈宝秘之，常持以坐起。
现代文：高骈把它当宝贝看待，常常把它带在身边。
English: Takahata regards it as a treasure and often carries it around with him.

古文：用之惮其术穷且见诘，乃刻青石手板为龙蛇隐起，文曰： 帝赐骈。 使人潜植机上，骈得之大喜。
现代文：用之害怕自己技穷，又怕别人询问，于是暗中在青石手板上刻上龙蛇隐约腾起的图样，还有 帝赐骈 等字，让人偷偷地竖在树上，高骈得到了十分高兴。
English: Using it, he was afraid of his own poor skills and others' inquiries, so he secretly engraved the looming dragon and snake on the blue stone tablet, as well as the words "帝赐," which let people secretly stand on the tree. Gao Yao was very happy.

古文：为寓鹄廷中，设机关，触人则飞动，骈衣羽服，乘之作仙去状。
现代文：用之还在廷中设木鹄，下设机关，人一触动就飞起来，高骈穿着羽毛衣服坐在木鹄上就像要飞上天似的。
English: It was also used to set up rafts in the court, with organs underneath. When touched, it would fly. A stilt dressed in feathers would sit on the raft as if it were about to fly into the sky.

古文：用之惧有擿其奸者，乃曰： 仙人当下，但患学者真气亏沮耳。 
现代文：用之怕有人戳穿他的奸计，就说： 仙人将下，就怕学道的人真气亏损。 
English: With the fear that someone will expose his treachery, he said: "When the Immortal is about to fall, those who learn the Tao are afraid of losing their sincerity."

古文：骈始弃人间事，绝妾媵，虽将吏不得见。
现代文：高骈于是放弃人间之事，不再与妻妾交欢，即使是将吏也见不着他。
English: Gao Yao then gave up human affairs and no longer had sex with his wife and concubine. Even the guards could not see him.

古文：客至，先遣薰濯，诣方士祓除，谓之解秽，少选即引去。
现代文：若有客人来访，一定要客人先沐浴薰香，到方士那里祭拜除妖气，称之为 解秽 ，只一会儿，就叫人领客人走。
English: If there is a guest visiting, the guest must first bathe in incense, go to the priests to worship and remove the evil spirits, call it decontamination, and after a while, ask the person to take the guest away.

古文：自是内外无敢言者，惟梁缵屡为骈言，骈不听。
现代文：从此不论内外，没一个人敢说什么的，只有梁缵多次劝导高骈，但他不听。
English: From then on, both inside and outside, no one dared to say anything. Only Liang Jun repeatedly tried to persuade Gao Jun, but he would not listen.

古文：缵惧，解所领兵，骈还其军于昭义，缵不复事矣。
现代文：梁缵担心再呆下去没有好结果，于是交还他所统率的军队，高骈将他原带的昭义兵仍归还昭义军。梁缵不再为高骈效力了。
English: Fearing that there would be no good results if he stayed any longer, Liang Hui handed back the troops he had commanded. Gao Hui still returned the loyalist soldiers he had brought with him to the loyalist army. Liang Hui no longer served Gao Hui.

古文：用之既自任，淫刑重赋，人人思乱。
现代文：吕用之既一手揽权，就滥刑重赋，以致人人不安，反心渐生，用之就提拔过去罢免的官吏一百多人。
English: After grabbing power with one hand, Lv used it to re-impose excessive punishments, which made everyone uneasy and resentful, and used it to promote more than a hundred officials who had been dismissed in the past.

古文：乃擢废吏百馀，号 察子 ，厚禀食，令居衢哄间，凡民私阋隐语莫不知，道路箝口。
现代文：称之为 察子 ，给以高薪，要他们住在街巷居民群中，所有民间的私事暗语全都汇报上去，以致任何人都不说什么。
English: They're called inspectors, they're well-paid, they're made to live in the middle of the street, and all the private conversations of the people are reported, so that no one says anything.

古文：诛所恶者数百族。
现代文：又诛杀看不顺眼的人几百家。
English: They also raided hundreds of homes of people they considered undesirable.

古文：又募卒二万，为左、右 镆邪军 ，与守一分总，置官属如骈府。
现代文：招募士兵两万人，编为左、右 镆邪军 ，与张守一分别统领，设置属吏与高骈府一样。
English: He recruited 20,000 soldiers and organized them into the Left and Right Evil Armies, with Zhang Shouyi as the commander, and set up subordinate officials in the same way as Gaolu Prefecture.

古文：用之每出入，驺御至千人；建大第，军胥营署皆备。
现代文：吕用之每次出入，侍御随从多达千人，又为自己建大宅第，宅中还备有军胥营署。
English: Every time Lü used to go out and come in, he was accompanied by as many as a thousand attendants. He also built a large house for himself, and there was also a military camp in the house.

古文：建百尺楼，托云占星，实窥伺城中之有变者。左右姬侍百馀，皆娟秀光丽，善歌舞，巾鹥束带以侍。
现代文：还建百尺高楼，说是用来观测星象，实则用来俯视全城，窥察监视市民，左右的姬侍多达一百多人，都是极娟秀光丽、擅长歌舞的女子，盛服而侍。
English: A hundred-foot high building was also built, said to be used for observing the stars, but in fact it was used to look down on the whole city, to spy on and monitor the citizens. There were as many as a hundred attendants on her right and left, all of whom were extremely beautiful and good at singing and dancing. They were dressed in grand attire.

古文：月二十宴，其费仰于民，不足，至苛留度支运物。诱人上变，则许入赀产赎罪。
现代文：每月设宴二十次，费用全由百姓负担，他还嫌不足，甚至扣留财政费用及往来运输，引诱人秘密向上检举揭发，同时允许人用钱财赎罪。
English: He held banquets twenty times a month, with all expenses borne by the common people. He did not want to be insufficient, and even withheld financial expenses and transportation, luring people to secretly report and expose, while allowing people to use money and wealth to atone for their sins.

古文：俞公楚数规戒其失，不听。
现代文：俞公楚多次规劝警戒其失措，不听。
English: Zou Gongchu repeatedly exhorted the police to be on their guard, but they did not listen.

古文：姚归礼谋杀之，弗克。
现代文：姚归礼打算杀了他，也没成功。
English: Yao Guili tried to kill him, but failed.

古文：用之因谮二人于骈，使以骁雄兵三千督盗于外，密使兵袭之，举师歼焉。
现代文：用之就在高骈面前说俞、姚两人的不是，就派他们带雄兵三千去外地督盗，又秘密派兵袭击他们，将他们全师歼灭。
English: He used it to say in front of Gao Gan that Zhai and Yao were wrong, and sent them with three thousand soldiers to supervise the thieves, and secretly sent soldiers to attack them and annihilate their entire division.

古文：骈从子澞密疏用之罪，谏骈曰： 不除之，高氏且无种。 
现代文：高骈的侄子高氵虞秘密报告吕用之的罪恶，劝谏高骈： 不除掉这人，高氏将会绝种的。 
English: Gao Yao's nephew Gao Yao secretly reported Lu Yingzhi's crime and advised Gao Yao: "If you don't get rid of this man, the Gao clan will become extinct."

古文：骈怒，命左右扶出，以状授用之。
现代文：高骈怒，命左右将高氵虞拉出，把他的话全告诉吕用之。
English: Gao Yao was so angry that he had to pull Gao Yao out of the room and tell his words to Lü Ying.

古文：用之诬澞貣贳不能满，故妄言。
现代文：用之诬蔑高氵虞是借贷不能满足，所以胡言乱语。
English: The false accusation of high credit risk is that borrowing and lending cannot be satisfied, so it is nonsense.

古文：因出澞笔验之，骈敕吏禁澞出入。
现代文：又拿出高氵虞的笔迹来验证，高骈下令衙史禁止高氵虞出入。
English: He also took out Gao Bingyu's handwriting to verify it. Gao Bingyu ordered that Gao Bingyu be banned from entering and leaving the country.

古文：俄署舒州刺史，未几为下所逐，用之构之也。
现代文：不久，将他派为舒州刺史，后来被手下人赶走，那是吕用之捣的鬼。
English: Soon, he was sent to Shuzhou to make history. Later, he was chased away by his subordinates. That was the ghost of Lyu Yingzhi.

古文：骈使人杀澞。
现代文：高骈派人杀了高氵虞。
English: Gao Gan sent someone to kill Gao Gan Yu.

古文：嗣襄王煴之乱，骈上书劝进，伪假骈中书令、诸道兵马都统、江淮盐铁转运使，以用之为岭南节度使。
现代文：嗣襄王誰叛乱，高骈上书劝誰称帝，誰乃授高骈为中书令、诸道兵马都统、江淮盐铁转运使，任吕用之为岭南节度使。
English: Heir to King Xiang who rebelled, Gao Yu wrote a letter to advise who should be called emperor, and who should be awarded Gao Yu as the envoy of the Chinese imperial edict, the unification of the armies and horses of all provinces, and the transfer of salt and iron from the Huai River to the Yangtze River, and appointed Lyu Yu as the envoy of the Lingnan Festival.

古文：骈久觖望，至是大喜，贡赋不绝。
现代文：高骈早就对朝廷不满而怨，这时大喜，对誰贡献不绝。
English: Gao Yao had long been dissatisfied with the imperial court, but at this time he was overjoyed and made endless contributions to everyone.

古文：用之始开府置官属，礼与骈均矣。
现代文：吕用之就设衙门、置官属，其礼与高骈等级了。
English: Lv Yizhi set up a gate of honor and appointed officials, and his courtesy was higher than that of high-ranking officials.

古文：以郑杞、董仅、吴迈为腹心，骈之亲信皆偪使附己，政事未尝关决骈。
现代文：又将郑杞、董仅、吴迈收为心腹之人，高骈的亲信都迫使依附自己。所有政事也都不再要高骈过问决断。
English: He also recruited Zheng Qi, Dong Bao, and Wu Mai as his confidants, forcing Gao Qi's close associates to rely on him. Gao Qi no longer had to make decisions on all political affairs.

古文：骈内悔，欲收其权，不能也。
现代文：高骈内心懊悔，想收回其权，但已不能了。
English: Gao Yao felt remorse in his heart and wanted to take back his rights, but he couldn't.

古文：用之问计于杞、仅，谋请骈斋于其第，密缢之，绐为升天，事不克。
现代文：吕用之向郑杞、董仅讨教对付高骈的办法，打算请高骈在他家里斋祭，秘密将他勒死，对人们则说他升天了。事未成。
English: Lv only asked Zheng and Dong for advice on how to deal with Gao Yao. He planned to invite Gao Yao to a religious festival at his home, strangle him in secret, and tell people that he had ascended to heaven. Nothing happened.

古文：光启三年，蔡贼孙儒兵略定远，声言涉淮。寿州刺史张翱奔告骈，命毕师鐸率骑三百戍高邮。
现代文：光启三年，蔡孙儒兵侵略定远，扬言将下淮南，寿州刺史张翱急奔告知高骈，高骈派毕师铎率骑兵三百人戍守高邮。
English: In the third year of Guangqi, Cai Sun's Confucian soldiers invaded Dingyuan, threatening to invade Huainan and Shuzhou. Zhang Xuan hurried to tell Gao Xuan that Gao Xuan sent Bi Division and 300 cavalrymen to defend Gaoyou.

古文：师鐸者，故仙芝党，以善骑射称。
现代文：毕师铎，以前是王仙芝的党羽，以善骑射闻名。
English: Bi Shijuan, formerly a member of Wang Xianzhi's faction, was known for his good horsemanship.

古文：骈败巢于浙西，用其力，故宠待绝等。
现代文：高骈前在浙西打败黄巢，都是用毕师铎的力量，所以对他十分宠信厚待。
English: Before Gao Gan defeated Huang Chao in West Zhejiang, he used the power of Bi Shisheng, so he was very favored and treated well.

古文：用之厚啖以利，欲其谐附，然不肯情。
现代文：吕用之用重金贿赂师铎，希望师铎能到自己的属下，但师铎不为所动，师铎有一个美妾，用之要求与之相见，师铎不同意。
English: Lü Yizhi bribed Shifu with a large sum of money, hoping that Shifu would come to his subordinates, but Shifu was not impressed. Shifu had a beautiful concubine, and Shifu did not agree to Shifu's request to meet her.

古文：师鐸有妾美，用之请见，不可，狙其出，观焉，怒而弃之；内忿惧，为子结婚于高邮将张神剑，阴倚为援。
现代文：用之候师铎不在家时，偷偷去看了。
English: She sneaked off to see it when her tutor was not at home.

古文：硃全忠方攻秦宗权，骈虑其奔突，使师鐸率兵逾都梁山，不见贼还。
现代文：师铎很生气，休了那个妾。师铎心里又恨又急，替儿子求婚，与高邮将领张神剑结为亲家，暗中倚仗为援。那时，朱全忠正攻打秦宗权，高骈担心贼人逃逸，派毕师铎率兵翻越都梁山，未见贼回。
English: Shifu was very angry and divorced the concubine. Shifu was both hateful and anxious in his heart. He proposed marriage for his son and married Zhang Shenjian, a high-ranking postmaster general, and secretly relied on him for support. At that time, Zhu Quanzhong was attacking the Qin Dynasty. Gao Wei was worried that the thief would escape and sent Bi Shifu and his soldiers to cross the Du Liang Mountain. The thief did not return.

古文：师鐸见骈府宿将多以谗死，忧甚。
现代文：毕师铎见高骈府中宿将很多都遭谗而冤死，心中甚为忧虑。
English: When Bi Shisheng saw that many of the middle-class residents of Gaoyuan were kidnapped and died unjustly, he was very worried.

古文：用之益加礼，师鐸愈恐，谋于神剑。神剑不然其言，而猜嫌日结。
现代文：吕用之对他则愈加多礼，师铎则愈加疑惧，就与张神剑商议，神剑不同意他的话，这就结下了猜疑。
English: Lv Yizhi became more and more polite to him, and Shifu became more and more suspicious, so he discussed with Zhang Shenjian. Shenjian did not agree with his words, which ended the suspicion.

古文：用之亦虑其变，内欲除之，亟请罢屯。
现代文：吕用之也害怕师铎会有变故，心中想除掉他，于是极力劝说高骈撤消师铎的屯兵。
English: Lv Yizhi was also afraid that there would be a change of fortune in Shifang, and he wanted to get rid of him in his heart, so he tried his best to persuade Gao Gan to withdraw Shifang's garrison.

古文：其母密擿师鐸使去，曰： 毋顾家室。 
现代文：师铎之母遣人秘密嘱师铎离去，说： 不要顾虑家室。 
English: Shi Yan's mother secretly sent someone to tell Shi Yan to leave, saying, "Don't worry about your family.

古文：师鐸忧，未知所出。
现代文：师铎内心如焚，不知怎么办。
English: Shisheng's heart was on fire and he didn't know what to do.

古文：而骈子怒用之专恣，觊师鐸与诸将发其奸，遣使谓师鐸曰： 用之欲因此行图君，既授书神剑矣，君其备之！ 
现代文：而高骈的儿子恨吕用之的专恣，极盼师铎与诸将能揭发吕用之的罪恶，派人对师铎说： 吕用之准备利用你撤屯之行杀害您，他已经写信给张神剑了，你要当心。 
English: However, Gao Yao's son hated Lv Ying's arbitrariness and desperately hoped that Shifu and the generals would be able to expose Lv Ying's crimes. He sent someone to say to Shifu: Lv Ying is preparing to use your evacuation to kill you. He has already written to Zhang Shenjian. You should be careful.

古文：师鐸惊，军中稍稍传言。
现代文：师铎大吃一惊，军中也渐渐有些传言。
English: Shisheng was taken aback, and rumours began to circulate in the army.

古文：诸将介而见，请杀神剑，并其军，驱市人以济乱。
现代文：诸将披挂来见师铎，要求杀死神剑，合并其军队，驱赶市民造成混乱。
English: The generals came to see Shizuka with their cloaks on, demanding to kill Shinsen, to merge their armies, and to drive out the citizens, causing chaos.

古文：师鐸曰： 不可，我若重扰百姓，复一用之也。
现代文：师铎说 ：不可以这样。我假如骚扰了百姓，就变成又一个吕用之了。
English: Shizuka said, "This is unacceptable. If I harass the people, I will become just another Lyu Yingzhe."

古文：郑汉璋素与我善，兵精士强，以用之用事，常不平。
现代文：郑汉璋一向与我友善，兵精士强，对于吕用之的擅权，常有不平。
English: Zheng Hanzhong has always been friendly with me, and he is a strong soldier. He often complains about Lü Yingzhi's arrogance.

古文：今若告之谋，彼必喜，则事济矣。 
现代文：假如告诉他而与他商议，他一定高兴，事情就定能成功。 
English: If you tell him and consult with him, he will be happy and things will work out.

古文：众然之。
现代文：众人都觉得对。
English: Everyone thinks it's right.

古文：神剑未知，方椎牛酾酒，且将犒师。
现代文：张神剑毫不知就里，正杀牛备酒，准备犒劳屯戍归来的士兵。
English: Zhang Shenjian didn't know anything about it. He was slaughtering cattle to prepare wine, and preparing to reward the returning soldiers for their hard work.

古文：师鐸潜师夜出，士皆绛缯抹首，且行且掠。
现代文：师铎悄悄地率师夜间出发，士兵都用绛缯包头，边行边抢。
English: The divisional commander quietly led the division to set out at night, and the soldiers wrapped their heads in cocoons and robbed as they went.

古文：汉璋闻，以麾下出迎，师鐸谂以计，大喜。
现代文：郑汉璋听说师铎来，派部下出迎。
English: When Zheng Hanzhong heard that his master was coming, he sent his subordinates to welcome him.

古文：留其妻守淮口，帅兵及亡命数千至高邮，见神剑，诘其变，神剑辞不知。
现代文：师铎告诉他自己的计划，汉璋大喜，将妻子留下守淮口，自己则率兵及敢死队几千人到高邮，去见张神剑，责问他为何变节。神剑说自己不知道。
English: Shizhao told him of his plan, Han Zheng was overjoyed and left his wife to guard Huaikou, while he led thousands of soldiers and death squads to Gaoyou to meet Zhang Shenjian and ask him why he had defected. Shenjian said that he did not know.

古文：师鐸语稍侵，神剑瞋目曰： 大夫何晚计！
现代文：师铎出语不逊，神剑怒目而视，说 ：大夫为什么这么晚才想到此事？
English: Shi Hao spoke harshly, and Shen Jian glared angrily and said, "Doctor, why did you think of this so late?

古文：彼一妖人，前假岭南节，不肯行，志图淮海，令君既夺魄，彼一日得志，吾能握刀头北面事之邪！
现代文：吕用之不过一个妖人。前些时已将岭南节度使的位置弄到手，又不赴任，其心思在于淮海，他一旦得志，我辈能握刀头向他低头听命吗？
English: Lv is nothing more than a sorcerer. Some time ago, he got the position of Lingnan Festival Grand Marshal, but he did not take up the post. His heart lies in Huaihai. Once he is successful, can we bow down to him and obey his orders?

古文：吾前未量君意，故不出口，尚何疑？ 
现代文：我以前未能得知你的心思，所以未说出口，难道对我还有怀疑吗？ 
English: Do you have any suspicions about me because I have not been able to know your thoughts before, so I have not spoken out?

古文：汉璋喜，取酒割臂血而盟，推师鐸为大丞相，作誓告神，乃移檄州县，以诛吕用之、张守一、诸葛殷为名。
现代文：汉璋很高兴，取酒让大家割臂滴血盟誓，共推毕师铎为大丞相，宣誓告神，于是传檄书到各州县，以诛杀吕用之、张守一、诸葛殷为名。
English: Han Zheng was very happy. After drinking, he made everyone swear an oath by cutting their arms and dripping blood, and jointly promoted Bi Shizhen as the grand chancellor, swearing an oath to God. The oath was then passed on to every prefecture and county, in the name of Xing Zhi Lv Ying Zhi, Zhang Shou Yi, and Zhuge Yin.

古文：神剑以高邮兵诸校倪详、褾并以天长子弟会，唐宏为先锋，骆玄真主骑，赵简主徒，王朗为殿，得胜兵三千。
现代文：张神剑派高邮兵的校将倪祥、逯并用天长子弟的名义合兵，唐宏为先锋，骆玄真指挥骑兵，赵简指挥步兵，王朗殿后，集中了精兵三千。
English: Zhang Shenjian sent Ni Xiang, the commander of the high-ranking postal soldiers, to lead the troops and use the name of the eldest son of heaven to join the troops. Tang Hong was the vanguard, Luo Xuanzhen commanded the cavalry, Zhao Jian commanded the infantry, and Wang Lang was the queen. Three thousand elite soldiers were concentrated.

古文：将发，神剑中悔，缪曰： 公兵虽精，然城坚，旬日不下则粮乏，众心摇矣。
现代文：行将出发，神剑心中后悔，编话说： 您的兵虽然精良，但是城池坚固。如果十天之内攻不下来，粮食就成问题了。
English: As they were about to set out, Shen Jian regretted in his heart and said to the editor: Although your soldiers are good, your castle is strong. If you can't capture it within ten days, there will be a problem with food.

古文：神剑请按军高邮，为公声援而督粮道。 
现代文：请让我驻军高邮，为您声援督办粮运。 
English: Please let me station troops in Gaoyou to support you in supervising grain transportation.

古文：师鐸曰： 民禀尚多，何患资储？
现代文：师铎说 ：民间储备尚多，怎会缺粮？
English: Shizhao said: There are still a lot of private reserves, how can there be a shortage of grain?

古文：城中携离无斗志，何事声援？
现代文：城中颇有离心，缺乏斗志，何需声援。
English: There's a lot of disengagement in the city, a lack of fighting spirit, and no need for solidarity.

古文：君意不行，孰敢违？ 
现代文：您不打算出兵，谁敢违命？ 
English: You are not planning to send troops. Who would dare to disobey your orders?

古文：汉璋内忌神剑，恐不为己下，劝许其计，约城破玉帛子女共之。
现代文：郑汉璋对张神剑颇疑忌，担心不是自己的下手，于是劝师铎同意他的计划，相约城破以后玉帛子女大家均分。
English: Zheng Hanzhong was rather suspicious of Zhang Shenjian, fearing that it was not his own hand, so he persuaded his teacher to agree to his plan, and after the city was broken, all the children of the Jade Emperor were equally divided.

古文：其四月，兵傅城，营其下。
现代文：这年四月，兵临城下，就在城边扎营。
English: In April of that year, the soldiers marched to the outskirts of the city and set up camp.

古文：城中骇乱，用之分兵守，且自督战。
现代文：城中惊惶不安。吕用之分兵把守，自己上阵督战。
English: The city was in a state of panic. Lü Ying's detachment guarded the city, while he went to the front to supervise the battle.

古文：令曰： 斩一级，赏金一饼。 
现代文：下令说： 杀死一个人，赏金一饼。 
English: The order said: "Kill one man, get one loaf of bread as a reward."

古文：士多山东人，坚悍颇用命。
现代文：士兵中很多山东人，勇猛强悍十分卖命。
English: Many of the soldiers were from Shandong Province. They were brave and strong and worked very hard.

古文：师鐸惧，退舍自固。
现代文：师铎害怕，退兵自守。
English: Shisheng was afraid and withdrew to protect himself.

古文：用之稍堙塞诸门。
现代文：用之趁空堵塞了各门。
English: They used it to take advantage of the empty space and block the doors.

古文：骈登延和阁，闻嚣甚，左右告之故，大惊，召用之问状，徐曰： 师鐸众思归，为门卫所轧，随已处置，不尔，烦玄女一符耳！ 
现代文：高骈登延和阁，听见喧闹声，左右告诉他出了什么事，大吃一惊，将用之召来问情况。用之慢吞吞地说 ：师铎的人马想回家，遭到门卫的阻挠，已经随宜处置了，即使仍不安，只要烦玄女赐一符就行了。 
English: Gao Yao went to Yan Yan's house, heard the noise, told him what had happened, was taken aback, and called him to ask him about the situation. He said slowly: Shi Yao's men wanted to go home, but were blocked by the doorman, and they have been dealt with as appropriate. Even if they are still uneasy, all they need to do is to get a letter from Yu Xuan's daughter.

古文：骈曰： 吾觉尔之诞多矣，善自为之，勿使吾为周宝也！ 
现代文：高骈说 ：我觉得你许多事都是虚妄荒诞的，你要好自为之，不要让我做周宝第二。 
English: Gao Yao said: I think many of your things are false and absurd. You should do your own thing and not let me be second to Zhou Bao.

古文：时宝已为下所逐出奔云。
现代文：那时，周宝已被手下赶走，逃亡在外。
English: At that time, Zhou Bao had already been driven away by his men and had fled.

古文：用之惭，不复有言。
现代文：吕用之有愧色，不再说话。
English: Lv Yizhi felt ashamed and stopped talking.

古文：师鐸见城未下，颇惧，求救于宣州秦彦，约事平迎以代骈。
现代文：师铎见城不能攻下，有些担心，向宣州秦彦求救，约定事平之后让秦彦代高骈之职。
English: Seeing that the city could not be captured, Shishun, somewhat worried, asked Qin Yan of Xuanzhou for help, and agreed to let Qin Yan succeed Gao Yu after the matter was settled.

古文：骈数责用之曰： 始吾以心腹任君，君御下无方，卒误我。
现代文：高骈多次责备吕用之： 当初，我把你当心腹看待，而你治理无方，终于害了我。
English: Gao Qi repeatedly reproached Lu Yingzhi: At first, I regarded you with my heart and soul, but you had no way to govern, and finally harmed me.

古文：今百姓饥馑，不可虐用，当遣大将赍吾书谕之，使罢兵。 
现代文：如今百姓挨饿，不可虐用，应该派大将带我的信过去，请他们停战罢兵。 
English: Now that the people are starving, they should not be abused. A general should be sent to them with my letter, asking them to stop the war and call off the troops.

古文：用之疑诸将不为用，以其党许戡奉书往。
现代文：吕用之认为各将均不可信用，于是派其党羽许戡去送信。
English: Lyu Enzhi thought that all generals were untrustworthy, so he sent his party member Xu Jun to deliver the letter.

古文：始师鐸意骈令宿将劳军，因得口陈用之罪。及戡至，大怒曰： 梁缵、韩问安在？
现代文：开始师铎以为高骈命宿将来慰劳，可以陈述吕用之的罪行，及至见是许戡来，大怒说： 梁缵、韩问都到哪里去了？
English: At first, the master thought that Gao Yao's fate would be a consolation, and that he could report the crimes committed by Lu Yingzhi. However, when he saw Xu Yao coming, he said angrily, "Where are Liang Yao and Han Yan?"

古文：若何庸来！ 
现代文：为什么要你来？ 
English: Why do you want to come?

古文：即斩之。乃系书射城内，用之不发，即火之。
现代文：当即斩杀，另写信系在箭上射入城内，用之得到，当即烧掉。
English: Immediately beheaded, another letter attached to an arrow shot into the city, used to get, immediately burned.

古文：它日以甲士百人入谒，骈惊匿内寝，少选乃出，叱曰： 得非反邪？ 
现代文：第二天带了全副武装的士兵一百人入见高骈。高骈吓得躲在寝室里，过了些时才出来，喝叱道： 你们莫非要造反吗？ 
English: The next day, a hundred fully armed soldiers came to see Gao Yao. Gao Yao was so scared that he hid in his bedroom. After a while, he came out and scolded: "Don't you want to rebel?

古文：命左右驱出。
现代文：命左右将他们赶出去。
English: Drive them out alive or dead.

古文：用之至南门，举策曰： 吾不复入是矣！ 
现代文：吕用之到了南门，举着马鞭说： 我再也不入这门了。 
English: Lv used it to get to the south gate, raised the horse whip and said, "I will never enter this gate again."

古文：始与骈贰。
现代文：于是与高骈离心。
English: It was then centrifuged with sorghum.

古文：师鐸壁扬子，发民庐舍治攻具。
现代文：师铎驻守扬子，拆民房制造攻城之具。
English: The division was stationed in Yangtze, tearing down houses to make tools for attacking the city.

古文：用之大索居人马及丁壮，骁将以长刀拥胁乘城，昼夜不得息。
现代文：吕用之则大肆搜索城中人马丁壮，派骁将用长刀胁迫这些人登城，昼夜不得休息。
English: Lv Yizhi then searched the city for Martin Zhuang, who was in the city. He would use a long knife to force these people to go to the city, day and night without rest.

古文：又疑为间，数易区处，家有馌饷，皆相失，至饥死者相枕藉。
现代文：又怀疑他们与城外通，多次将他们调换地方，家里送饭来都找不到地方，以致饿死的人越来越多。
English: They also suspected that they were in contact with people outside the city, and repeatedly moved them to different places. They couldn't find a place to bring food from home, so more and more people starved to death.

古文：骈召大将古锷赍师鐸母书及其子出谕，师鐸遣子还曰： 不敢负恩，朝斩凶人，夕还屯，愿以妻子为质。 
现代文：高骈召大将古锷带了师铎母亲写的信及师铎的儿子来到师铎处。师铎派儿子回来说 ：我不敢忘恩，你早上杀了吕用之等三人，我晚上就回高邮，我愿用妻儿为人质。 
English: Gao Yu summoned General Gu Yu to bring a letter written by Shi Yu's mother and Shi Yu's son to Shi Yu's place. Shi Yu sent his son back to say: I dare not be ungrateful. You killed three people including Lyu Yingzhi in the morning. I will return to Gaoyou in the evening. I am willing to use my wife and son as hostages.

古文：骈恐用之屠其家，乃收置署中。
现代文：高骈怕吕用之杀害师铎一家，乃将师铎之家人藏在官署中。
English: Gao Gan was afraid that Lv Ying would kill Shifeng's family, so he hid Shifeng's family in the government office.

古文：会秦彦遣秦稠率兵与师鐸合，攻益急，守陴者夜焚南栅以应于外，师鐸入，守将张全乃战死，用之距三桥，杀伤相当。
现代文：其时，秦彦派秦稠率兵与师铎会合，攻城更急，守城的人夜里焚烧南栅为外面做内应，师铎入城，守将张全乃战死，吕用之在三桥抗拒，杀伤相当。
English: At that time, Qin Yan sent Qin Chong and his soldiers to meet with Shiguang, and the siege of the city was more urgent. The defenders of the city burned the south gate at night to respond to the outside world. Shiguang entered the city. The guard Zhang Quan was killed in battle, and Lü Ying resisted at the three bridges, with a similar loss of life.

古文：骈从子杰率牙兵将执用之以畀师鐸，左镆邪兵复断其后，用之惧，乃出奔。
现代文：高骈的侄子高杰率衙兵准备抓住吕用之送给师铎，左镆邪兵再断其后卫。用之害怕了，出城逃走。
English: Gao Jie, Gao Yao's nephew, and his soldiers prepared to seize the horse that Lyu Yingzhi had given to Shi Yao, but the left-handed evil soldiers then cut off his guard. Being afraid of Yingzhi, they fled out of the city.

古文：骈召梁缵谢曰： 初不用子计以及此，庸何追？ 
现代文：高骈召梁缵来，向他道歉说： 当初不听你的话以致有今天。 
English: Gao Zheng called Liang Zhen and apologized to him, saying, "I didn't listen to you at first, and now this has happened.

古文：授以兵，使保子城。
现代文：交兵给他，让他保守子城。
English: Surrender to him and let him protect the city.

古文：迟明师鐸纵火大掠，骈乃命彻备，改服须其入。
现代文：天亮后师铎纵火，且纵兵大掠。
English: After dawn, the division set fire to the camp, and the soldiers carried out a large-scale raid.

古文：师鐸见延和阁，骈待之如宾，即署师鐸节度副使，汉璋、神剑以次授署，秦稠封府库以待，师鐸去丞相号。
现代文：高骈只得下令撤去兵备，改换服装等待师铎，两人在延和阁见面，高骈以宾客之礼相待，当即委任师铎为节度副使，汉璋、神剑也都依次授官，秦稠封府库以待，师铎撤消其丞相称号。
English: Gao Jian had to order the withdrawal of troops, change clothes and wait for Shi Jian. The two met at Yanhe Pavilion. Gao Jian treated Shi Jian with the courtesy of a guest, immediately appointed Shi Jian as the deputy envoy of the festival, Han Jian and Shen Jian were also appointed in turn, Qin Qian sealed the government treasury and waited, and Shi Jian revoked his title of prime minister.

古文：于时何卫未谨，骈爱将申及说骈曰： 逆人兵少弛，愿奉公夜出，发诸镇兵，还刷大耻，贼不足平也。
现代文：当时各处守卫尚不严密，高骈的爱将申及劝高骈 ：逆党兵不多，防守尚松，我愿保护您乘夜出城，去调发各镇兵，回来洗刷耻辱。
English: At that time, the guards were not yet tight everywhere, Gao Gan's love will appeal to and advise Gao Gan: There are not many soldiers of the opposite party, the defense is still loose, I am willing to protect you to go out of the city at night, to dispatch soldiers from all towns, and to return to wash off the shame.

古文：若不决，则及将不得侍公。 
现代文：这些人尚不堪一击，若迟延不决，那我恐怕也不能再侍候左右了。 
English: These people are still vulnerable, and if they delay making a decision, I'm afraid I won't be able to serve them any longer.

古文：因泣下。骈恇怯不能用其策，及乃匿去。
现代文：说完泪下，高骈胆怯犹豫，不能用申及之计，申及即逃匿而去。
English: After tears, Gao Yao hesitated timidly. He couldn't use the tactic of appealing, so he ran away.

古文：师鐸诛用之支党数十，使孙约迎秦彦。
现代文：师铎诛杀吕用之的党羽几十人，派孙约去迎接秦彦。
English: Shi Yan killed dozens of Lv Ying's followers and sent Sun Yotong to meet Qin Yan.

古文：彦者，徐州人，本名立，隶伍籍。
现代文：秦彦，是徐州人，本名立，行伍出身。
English: Qin Yan is a native of Xuzhou. His real name is Yu Li, and he was born in Xingwu.

古文：乾符中，以盗系狱且死，梦讠虖曰： 秦彦，而从我去！ 
现代文：乾符年间，因偷盗囚在监狱，将被处死，一日梦中听见有人呼唤： 秦彦，你跟我走。 
English: One day, in a dream, he heard someone call out, "Qin Yan, come with me."

古文：寤而视械破，因得亡命，即名彦。
现代文：醒来见桎梏破了，因而得越狱逃跑，就此改名为彦。
English: When he woke up, his eyelid was broken, so he had to escape from prison and changed his name to Hiko.

古文：聚徒百人，杀下邳令，取其赀，入黄巢党中。
现代文：出狱后集聚了上百人，杀了下邳县令，有了钱财，加入黄巢一党。
English: After he was released from prison, he gathered hundreds of people, killed the county magistrate, and with money and resources, he joined the Yellow Nest Party.

古文：既败，与许勍降骈，累表和州刺史。
现代文：黄巢败，秦彦与许京力降了高骈，高骈上表推荐，当了和州刺史。
English: Huang Chao was defeated, Qin Yan and Xu Jingli reduced Gao Zheng, Gao Zheng was recommended by the table, and became the history of Hezhou.

古文：中和初，宣歙观察使窦潏病，彦袭而代之。
现代文：中和初年，宣歙观察使窦聖病了，秦彦趁机袭击，取其位而代之。
English: In the first year of the Middle Ages, Xuanzang's observation caused Dou Sheng to fall ill, and Qin Yan seized the opportunity to attack and take his place.

古文：师鐸之召彦也，或计曰： 足下向诛妖人，故下乐从。
现代文：师铎此时召秦彦，有人替他考虑： 阁下前时是诛杀妖人，所以下面乐于跟从。
English: At this time, Shi Yan called Qin Yan, and someone considered for him: Your excellency used to fight and kill monsters, so I'm happy to follow you.

古文：今军府已安，宜还政高公，足下身典兵，权在掌握，四邻闻之，不失大义，诸将未敢谋也。
现代文：如今军府已安，应该仍还政于高公，您自任副佐典兵，军权在握。四邻听说后，您不失大义美名，诸将谁敢不服。
English: Now that the military government has been stabilized, it should still be ruled by Gao Gong. You have appointed yourself as the deputy military governor, and the military power is in your hands. After hearing from the four neighbors, you have not lost your great reputation, and who would dare to disagree with you?

古文：若令彦为帅，兵非足下有也。
现代文：倘若让秦彦为帅，那军队就非足下所有了。
English: If Qin Yan is allowed to be the best, then the army will not be able to do anything.

古文：且秦稠封府库，势已相疑。
现代文：何况秦稠封闭府库，其相疑之势已显。
English: What's more, Qin Zong closed the prefectural library, and the potential for suspicion has become apparent.

古文：足下如厚德彦，宜以金玉子女报之，勿听度江。
现代文：足下如果感秦彦之恩德，可以用金玉子女作为报酬，千万别让他过江来。
English: If you feel the benevolence of Qin Yan under your feet, you can use the golden children as a reward, don't let him cross the river.

古文：假足下能下彦，杨行密夕闻而朝必至。 
现代文：即使足下能安居秦彦之下，杨行密晚上知道情况后，早上就定会带兵来了。 
English: Even if the foot can live safely under Qin Yan, Yang Xingmi will definitely bring soldiers in the morning after knowing the situation in the evening.

古文：师鐸不决，以告汉璋。
现代文：师铎不能决断，就把这话告诉汉璋。
English: Shi Yan couldn't decide, so he told this to Han Yu.

古文：汉璋曰： 善。 
现代文：汉璋说 ：对呀！ 
English: Han Zheng said: That's right!

古文：师鐸出骈，囚南第。
现代文：师铎逼高骈出府，囚于南宅。
English: Shi Yan forced Gao Wei to leave the capital, and he was imprisoned in the Southern Mansion.

古文：稠麾下求无厌，烧贡奉楼数十楹，取珍宝。
现代文：秦稠的下属贪求无厌，烧了贡奉楼几十间，掠取珍宝。
English: Qin Zong's subordinates were insatiable, burning dozens of tribute buildings and plundering treasures.

古文：始骈自乾符以来，贡献不入天子，赀货山积，私置郊祀、元会供帐什器，殚极功巧，至是为乱兵所剽略尽。
现代文：高骈自乾符年以来，所得贡献均不交天子，故而财货堆积如山。他又私置郊祀，元会的供帐器皿，均极精巧。此时被乱兵全部抢光。
English: Since the year of the Chinese zodiac, the contribution of income was not paid to the heavenly son, so the wealth piled up like a mountain. He also privately set up a suburban shrine, and the accounting utensils of the original association were extremely exquisite. At this time, they were all robbed by the soldiers.

古文：师鐸徙骈东第。禽诸葛殷，腰下得金数斤，百姓交唾，拔须发无遗，再缢乃绝，仇家迍其目云，市人投瓦砾击尸，俄而成冢。
现代文：师铎将高骈迁到东宅，后来捕获诸葛殷，搜出好几斤金子，百姓见他，恨得唾他的脸，拔他的胡须头发，直至拔光，绞缢两次才毙命，怨家将他的眼睛也剜了去，百姓们用瓦砾掷他，顷刻堆积成丘。
English: Shi Yan moved Gao Yao to the East House. Later, he captured Zhuge Yin and found several pounds of gold. When the people saw him, they hated him so much that they spit on his face, plucked out his beard hair until it was bare, and strangled him twice before he died. His enemies also gouged out his eyes. The people pelted him with rubble and heaped it into mounds in an instant.

古文：骈出金遗守者，师鐸知之，加兵苛督，复入囚署中，子弟十余人同幽之。
现代文：高骈用钱贿看守他的人，师铎知道后，加兵严加看管，将他囚在官署中，其子弟十多人，同被幽禁。
English: Gao Yao bribed his guards with money. After Shi Yao found out, more soldiers were sent to keep a close watch on him, and he was imprisoned in a government office. More than ten of his children were also imprisoned.

古文：顾云入见，骈犹自若曰： 吾复居此，天时人事必有在。 
现代文：顾云去见他，高骈还若无其事地说： 我又到这里来了，定是又得天时人事了。 
English: When Gu Yun went to see him, Gao Yao said matter-of-factly, "I've come here again, I must have been fired again."

古文：意师鐸复推立之。
现代文：他还以为师铎会再推戴他。
English: He also thought that his master would promote him again.

古文：用之既出，以兵攻淮口未下，郑汉璋击之，遂奔天长。
现代文：吕用之逃跑后，率兵攻淮口，未能攻下，郑汉璋引兵来援，用之乃逃奔天长。
English: After Lyu Yingzhi's escape, he led his troops to attack Huaikou, but failed to capture it. Zheng Hanju brought in reinforcements, and used them to flee to Tianlang.

古文：初，用之诈为骈书，召兵于庐、寿，城陷，而杨行密兵万人次天长，用之自归。
现代文：当初用之曾伪造高骈的信，到卢州、寿州召兵。广陵城陷落，杨行密的兵上万人驻守在天长，用之这次即投奔杨行密。
English: At first, it was used to forge Gao Yao's letter and summon soldiers to Luzhou and Shoushou. When Guangling City fell, Yang Xingmi's army of more than ten thousand soldiers was stationed in Tianchang. This time, it was used to rush to Yang Xingmi.

古文：张神剑求赂于师鐸，辞以彦未至。
现代文：张神剑向师铎要财物，师铎推辞说秦彦还未到，待他到了再分。
English: Zhang Shenjian asked Shifu for his belongings, but Shifu said that Qin Yan had not arrived yet, and that they would be divided when he arrived.

古文：神剑怒，与别将高霸将攻师鐸。
现代文：神剑怒，与别将高霸准备攻击师铎。
English: Enraged by the divine sword, Gaoba prepares to attack his master.

古文：彦之来，召池州刺史赵锽守宣，自将入扬州，称节度使，以师鐸为行军司马，居用之第，不得在牙中。师鐸怏怏失志。
现代文：秦彦来时，召池州刺史赵守宣歙，自己带兵入扬州，自任节度使，任师铎为行军司马，居于吕用之的宅第而不得在衙中，师铎怏怏不得志。
English: When Qin Yan arrived, he summoned Zhao Shou Xuan, the statesman of Chizhou, and marched into Yangzhou with his own troops. He appointed himself as the commander of the troops, and Shifu as the commander of the marching troops. He lived in Lv Ying's house, but he was not allowed to stay in Shifu, and Shifu was not allowed to visit him.

古文：行密与神剑等连和，自江北至槐家桥，栅垒相联。
现代文：此时杨行密已与神剑等人联和，自长江北至槐家桥，栅垒相连。
English: At this time, Yang Xingmi had already made peace with Shen Jian and others, and the fences were connected from the north of the Yangtze River to the Jiajia Bridge.

古文：彦登城望之，色沮，乃授郑汉璋、唐宏等兵屯门，樵苏道绝，食且乏。
现代文：秦彦登城而望，见其势甚为沮丧，于是要郑汉璋、唐宏等人的兵守门，城内外交通断绝，粮食眼见困难。
English: Qin Yan went to the city and saw the situation was very depressing, so he asked Zheng Hanzhong, Tang Hong and other soldiers to guard the gate. Traffic in and out of the city was cut off, and it was difficult to find food.

古文：稠及师鐸以劲卒八千出战，大败，稠死之，士奔溺死者十八。
现代文：秦稠及师铎带领精锐八千人出战，不料大败，秦稠战死，士兵逃跑及淹死的约有十分之八。
English: Qin Zhou and his disciples led an elite force of eight thousand men into battle, but were soundly defeated. Qin Zhou died in battle, and about eight out of ten soldiers fled or drowned.

古文：彦大出金求救于张雄，雄引兵至东塘，得金，不战去。
现代文：秦彦出重金向张雄求救，张雄带兵到东塘，得了钱却不战而去。
English: Qin Yan paid a large sum of money to Zhang Xiong to ask for help. Zhang Xiong led an army to Dongtang, but after receiving the money, he left without a fight.

古文：彦使师鐸率兵二万阵城下，汉璋为前锋，宏次之，骆玄真、樊约又次之，师鐸、王朗以骑为左右翼。
现代文：秦彦派师铎率兵两万列阵城下，汉璋为前锋，唐宏次之，骆玄真、樊约又次之，师铎、王朗带骑兵为左右翼。
English: Qin Yan sent his division and 20,000 soldiers under the city, with Han Zheng as the vanguard, Tang Hong as the second, Luo Xuanzheng and Zhao Yu as the third, and Shi Zheng and Wang Lang with cavalry as the left and right wings.

古文：既成列，久之，行密乃出，委辎重于壁，以赢兵守之，伏精卒数千其旁。
现代文：阵势已成，已久，杨行密才出，将金帛粮米集中在一寨，派老弱兵守护，另以精兵几千埋伏在周围。
English: The formation had been in place for a long time before Yang Xingmi came out. He concentrated the Jinyu grain and rice in one village and sent old and weak soldiers to guard it, while several thousand elite soldiers lay in ambush around it.

古文：行密先犯玄真，短兵接，伪北，师鐸诸军奔其壁，争取金玉赀粮。伏噪而出，行密引轻兵蹑其尾，俘杀旁午，横尸十里。
现代文：行密先去攻骆玄真，短兵相接，假装打败，师铎各军奔往那储辎重的战寨，大家争抢金玉财物，伏兵鼓噪而出，行密又率轻兵尾随其后，被杀之兵横尸十里。
English: The conspiracy went first to attack Luo Xuan Zhen, the short soldiers met, pretended to defeat, the division and the army rushed to the heavily fortified camp, everyone competed for gold and property, the ambush soldiers came out, the conspiracy and the light soldiers followed, and the killed soldiers lay dead for ten miles.

古文：师鐸等奔还，玄真战死。
现代文：师铎等人逃回，玄真战死。
English: Shi Yao and the others fled back, and Xuanzhen died in the battle.

古文：师鐸雅倚玄真骁敢能拒敌，既失之，惋沮弥日，不复议出战矣。
现代文：师铎平日十分推崇玄真骁勇善战，如今战死，既惋惜又沮丧，不再谈出战之事。
English: Shi Yan, who had always highly respected Xuanzhen for his bravery and skill in battle, was both saddened and depressed by his death, and no longer talked about the war.

古文：骈久囚拘，供亿窘狭，群奴彻延和阁阑楯为薪，煮革带以食。
现代文：高骈被拘囚很久了，供应越来越少，奴仆们拆延和阁的槛栏做柴，煮皮带以充饥。
English: Gao Yao had been in custody for a long time, and supplies were dwindling. Servants were tearing down the thresholds of the huts to make firewood, and boiling the belts to satisfy their hunger.

古文：骈召幕府卢涚曰： 予粗立功，比求清净，非与此世争利害，今而及此，神道何望邪？ 
现代文：高骈召幕僚卢氵兑说： 我粗立功，既而求清净，无意与世人争利害，如今到这地步，神道还可企望吗？ 
English: Gao Yao summoned his aide-de-camp, Lu Xunwei, and said, "I have made a crude effort, and even though I seek purity, I have no intention of competing with the interests of the world. Now that I have reached this stage, can Shintoism still be aspired to?

古文：涕下不能已。
现代文：惨然泪下不止。
English: I burst into tears.

古文：师鐸既败，虑骈内应。
现代文：师铎战败，担心高骈会做内应。
English: Shisheng was defeated and worried that Gao Rong would retaliate.

古文：有女巫王奉仙谓师鐸曰： 扬州灾，有大人死，可以厌。 
现代文：这时有女巫王奉仙对师铎说 ：扬州将有灾祸，一定得死一个大人，才能除灾。 
English: At this time, a witch, Wang Fengxian, said to Shizhao: Yangzhou will have a disaster, an adult must die in order to eliminate the disaster.

古文：彦曰： 非高公邪？ 
现代文：秦彦说 ：岂不是应在高公身上吗？ 
English: Qin Yan said, "Shouldn't it be Gao Gong?"

古文：命左右陈赏等往杀之。
现代文：就命左右陈赏等去杀高骈。
English: Chen Bao waited for his turn to kill the stilt.

古文：侍者白有贼，骈曰： 此必秦彦来。 
现代文：高骈的侍者见人入，告诉高骈有贼，高骈说： 一定是秦彦来了。 
English: When Gao Yao's waiter saw people entering, he told Gao Yao that there was a thief. Gao Yao said, "It must be Qin Yan coming."

古文：正色须之。
现代文：正襟危坐而待。
English: I'm just sitting tight and waiting.

古文：众入，骈骂曰： 军事有监军及诸将在，何遽尔？ 
现代文：众人入，高骈骂道： 军事上有监军及诸将在，要你等来干什么？ 
English: When everyone entered, Gao Yao scolded, "There are military supervisors and generals, what do you want to wait for?

古文：众辟易，有奋而击骈者，曳廷下数之曰： 公负天子恩，陷人涂炭，罪多矣，尚何云？ 
现代文：众人震慑后退，有人奋勇上前将高骈拖到廷上指斥说： 你辜负天子的恩宠，陷人民于水深火热之中，罪恶数不胜数，还有什么话可说？ 
English: Everyone recoiled in shock, and someone bravely stepped forward and dragged Gao Yao to the court and rebuked him, saying: You have betrayed the grace of the Son of Heaven, you have plunged the people into the depths of hell, your sins are countless, what more can I say?

古文：骈未暇答，仰首如有所伺，即斩之。
现代文：高骈不做回答，仰头似有所待，当即斩首。
English: Gao Yao did not answer, but raised his head as if waiting for something, and immediately beheaded him.

古文：左右奴客遁归行密，行密举军缟素，大临而祭，独用之缞服哭三日。
现代文：其左右奴仆等人偷逃至杨行密处，行密全军都穿白孝衣，隆重祭奠，吕用之披麻戴孝哀哭三天。
English: His left and right slaves and others secretly fled to Yang Xingmi's place. The entire army of Xingmi wore white filial piety clothes and made a grand tribute. Lyu used it to wear mourning pajamas for three days.

古文：彦屡败，军气摧丧，与师鐸抱膝相视无它略，更问奉仙，赏罚轻重皆自出。
现代文：秦彦多次战败，士气低落，与师铎抱膝对视，想不出良策。又去向王奉仙请教，赏罚轻重都听她决断。
English: Qin Yan had been defeated many times, his morale was low, and he couldn't think of a good way to deal with his mentor. He went to Wang Fengxian for advice, and listened to her decision on rewards and punishments.

古文：彦遣汉璋击神剑，破之。神剑奔高邮，汉璋欲穷追，会大雨还。
现代文：秦彦派郑汉璋去攻张神剑，神剑败，逃奔高邮，汉璋欲穷追，遇天大雨而回。
English: Qin Yan sent Zheng Hanzhong to attack Zhang Shenjian. Zhang Shenjian was defeated and fled to Gaoyou. Hanzhong wanted to chase after Zhang Shenjian, but returned when it rained heavily.

古文：行密以城尚坚，师且老，议解去。
现代文：杨行密认为城池颇坚而军队即将疲惫，提出解围而去。
English: Yang Xingmi thought that the castle was quite strong and the army was about to be exhausted, and proposed to lift the siege and leave.

古文：用之裨将晨伏兵四壕，伺守者休代，引而登，杀数十人于门，以招外兵。
现代文：吕用之的副将早晨在西壕埋下伏兵，待守城换班时突然率兵登城，在城门杀死几十人，开门让外面兵入城。
English: In the morning, Lyu Yingzhi's vice-commander planted an ambush in the west ditch. While waiting for the guard shift to change, he suddenly led his soldiers to the city, killed dozens of people at the city gate, and opened the door to let the outside soldiers enter the city.

古文：守军亦厌苦，皆委兵溃。
现代文：守军早就厌战了，此刻都弃甲不战而自溃。
English: The defenders had long since grown weary of the war, and at this moment they abandoned their armor and broke away without a fight.

古文：师鐸与其家及彦奔东塘，人争出，相腾藉死，壕堑几满，王朗踣而殒。
现代文：师铎一家及秦彦逃奔东塘。城中人争先恐后逃出，挤踩而死者几乎填满城堑。王朗亦跌倒而死。
English: Shi Yao's family and Qin Yan fled Dongtang. People in the city scrambled to escape, and the dead almost filled the city walls. Wang Lang also fell to his death.

古文：行密既入，杀梁缵于牙门，以不死高氏难。
现代文：杨行密入城，在衙门将梁缵杀死，理由是他是高骈的人却不为高氏死难。
English: Yang Xing sneaked into the city and killed Liang Yao at the city gate, on the grounds that he was Gao Yao's man but would not die for Gao.

古文：韩问闻之，赴井死。居人癯忄叕奄奄，兵不忍加暴，反斥馀粮救之。
现代文：韩问听说此事，自己投井死，百姓们都已经瘦得皮包骨，气息奄奄，兵不忍心施暴，反将余粮赈济他们。
English: When Han Qian heard about this, he threw himself into a well and died. The people were already so thin that their breath stank. The soldiers did not have the heart to use violence, but gave them the leftover grain.

古文：彦、师鐸与唐宏、倪详焚白砂，将度江，会秦宗权使孙儒引兵三万袭扬州，次天长，彦等与之合，还攻行密，取行密辎重牛羊数千计。
现代文：秦彦、毕师铎与唐宏、倪祥焚毁白砂，准备渡江。其时秦宗权派孙儒领兵三万袭击扬州，驻扎在天长。秦彦等人与之会合，回来攻打杨行密，夺取行密的辎重及牛羊好几千。
English: Qin Yan, Bi Shijuan, Tang Hong and Ni Xiang burned the white sand and prepared to cross the river. At that time, Qin Zongquan sent Sun Ru to lead 30,000 soldiers to attack Yangzhou and stationed in Tianchang. Qin Yan and others met with him and returned to attack Yang Xingmi, seizing Xingmi's baggage and thousands of cattle and sheep.

古文：儒以食乏，乃屠高邮，据之。
现代文：孙儒说是缺乏粮草，屠掠高邮且据为己有。
English: Sun Ru said that it was the lack of grain and grass, the slaughter of high-ranking officials and the possession.

古文：张神剑奔还，行密授之馆，而高邮戍兵七百溃而来，行密责有谋，悉击杀之，因杀神剑。
现代文：张神剑逃回广陵，杨行密让他宿在馆中，接着高邮戍兵七百人溃退而来，行密怀疑他们将会叛变，将七百人全部击杀，就此也杀了神剑。
English: Zhang Shenjian fled back to Guangling, Yang Xingmi let him stay in the pavilion, and then 700 Gaoyou soldiers retreated. Xingjian suspected that they would mutiny and killed all 700 of them, thus also killing Shenjian.

古文：用之始诈行密曰： 庑下有瘗金五千斤，事平愿备一日乏。 
现代文：吕用之当初到天长曾骗行密说 ：我家庑廊下埋有黄金五千斤，事平之后愿供麾下解一日之乏。 
English: At the beginning of his visit to Tencho, Lyu Yanzhi lied and said, "There are five thousand catties of gold buried under the hallway of my house. After the matter is settled, I would like to offer my services to solve the shortage for one day."

古文：行密掘地无埋金，但得铜人三尺，身桎梏，钉刺其口，刻骈名于背，盖用蛊厌骈也。
现代文：至此，行密掘地找不到金子，只找得一个三尺高的铜人，手足均加桎梏，用钉刺铜人之口，背上刻着高骈的名字，这是用来诅咒加害高骈的。
English: At this point, the secret excavation could not find any gold. All they found was a three-foot-tall bronze man with webbed hands and feet. The bronze man's mouth was pierced with a nail, and his back was engraved with the name of sorghum, which was used to curse and harm sorghum.

古文：行密责其罪，并张守一斩于三桥，妻子皆死，著其罪于路。
现代文：行密指责用之的罪恶，与张守一一起在三桥斩首，其妻儿也被处死，还将其罪状公之于大路上。
English: He and Zhang Shouyi were beheaded at Sanqiao for the crime of spying, and their wives and children were also executed. Their crimes were also made public on the highway.

古文：儒攻城未得志，虑彦、师鐸有异谋，稍并其兵。
现代文：孙儒攻城未下，担心秦彦、毕师铎会有异心，渐渐收并其兵。
English: Before the siege of the city, Sun Ju, fearing that Qin Yan and Bi Shisheng would have other intentions, gradually gathered and merged his soldiers.

古文：唐宏度不免，即告儒曰： 师鐸密遣人至汴。 
现代文：唐宏估计秦彦等必将毁于孙儒，于是对孙儒说： 毕师铎秘密派人到汴州去了。 
English: Tang Hong estimated that Qin Yan and others would certainly be destroyed by Sun Ru, so he said to Sun Ru: Bi Shizhen secretly sent someone to Quzhou.

古文：儒大恐。
现代文：孙儒大惧。
English: Sun Ju was greatly afraid.

古文：明日，召彦、师鐸、汉璋会军中，彦、师鐸先至，壮士捽之至儒所，儒质彦反骈罪，斩之。
现代文：第二天，召秦彦、毕师铎、郑汉璋在军中相会。秦彦、毕师铎先到，卫士将他们反缚到孙儒处，孙儒责问秦彦反叛高骈之罪，将他斩首。
English: The next day, Qin Yan, Bi Shijuan, and Zheng Han Rong were summoned to meet in the army. Qin Yan and Bi Shijuan arrived first, and the guards tied them to Sun Ju. Sun Ju accused Qin Yan of rebelling against Gao Rong and beheaded him.

古文：至师鐸，呼曰： 丈夫成则王，败则虏，君何多责为？
现代文：到要问师铎时，师铎大喊： 大丈夫成则为王，败则为俘虏，你何必多问。
English: When it came time to ask questions of Shifu, Shifu shouted, "If you do well, you will be king, if you fail, you will be a prisoner. Why do you need to ask so many questions?"

古文：吾尝将数万兵，不死常人手，得公之剑，瞑目矣！ 
现代文：我曾率兵几万，不死在普通人手上而死在你的剑下，我死也瞑目了。 
English: I once led tens of thousands of soldiers. I did not want to die at the hands of ordinary people, but under your sword. I can't wait to die.

古文：儒骂曰： 庸贼欲污我手邪！ 
现代文：孙儒骂道 ：贱贼你想弄脏我的手吗？ 
English: Sun Ru scolded, "Thief, do you want to dirty my hands?

古文：趣斩之。
现代文：催手下将他推出斩首。
English: urging his men to push him out and behead him.

古文：汉璋至，奋臂击杀数人，乃死，身首糜散。
现代文：郑汉璋来了，奋起反抗，击杀了好几个人才死，将汉璋剁为肉酱。
English: Zheng Hanzhong came, rebelled, killed several people before he died, and turned Hanzhong into meat sauce.

古文：儒使宏主骑兵，厚赐之。
现代文：孙儒任唐宏主持骑兵，给予厚赏。
English: Sun Ju appointed Tang Hong to preside over the cavalry and gave him a large reward.

古文：文德元年，儒谍知行密粮乏，自高邮袭之。
现代文：文德元年，孙儒打听到杨行密缺粮，从高邮去袭击。
English: In the first year of the Wende era, Sun Ru heard that Yang Xingmi was short of grain and attacked from Gaoyou.

古文：行密拔其众还庐州，儒遂据扬州。
现代文：杨行密带领他的人马回到庐州，孙儒于是据有扬州。
English: Yang Xingmi led his men back to Zhangzhou, and Sun Ru thus gained control of Yangzhou.

古文：骈之死，裹以故氈，与子弟七人一坎而瘗。
现代文：高骈刚被害时，只用破毯子包裹，与子弟七人埋在一个坑里。
English: When Gao Yao was first killed, he was only wrapped in a torn blanket and buried in a pit with his seven children.

古文：行密擢骈孙愈为副使，令主丧事，未克葬，愈暴死，至是故吏邝师虔收葬之。
现代文：杨行密提拔高骈的孙子高愈为副使，要他主持丧事，还未落葬，高愈暴死。直到此时，其旧吏邝师虔将他收葬。
English: Yang Xingmi promoted Gao Yu's grandson Gao Yu to vice-envoy and asked him to preside over the funeral. Gao Yu died violently before he was buried. Until this time, his former official Yu Shigian buried him.

古文：扬州雄富冠天下，自师鐸、行密、儒迭攻迭守，焚市落，剽民人，兵饥相仍，其地遂空。
现代文：扬州的富庶为天下第一，自从毕师铎、杨行密、孙儒迭番攻守，烧毁街市，剽掠人民，兵灾天灾相继而来，其地竟成空墟。
English: Yangzhou is the richest place in the world. Since Bi Shizhen, Yang Xingmi, and Sun Ru attacked and defended the city, burned the streets, plundered the people, and suffered military and natural disasters one after another, the city has become an empty ruin.

