古文：贞观四年，李靖击突厥颉利，败之，其部落多来归降者。
现代文：贞观四年，李靖打败突厥颉利可汗，颉利统属的部落很多都归顺了大唐，于是，唐太宗下诏讨论安定边境的政策。
English: In the four years of Zhenguan, Li Jing defeated the Turk Qili Khan, and many tribes under Qili submitted to the Great Tang. Therefore, Emperor Taizong issued an edict to discuss the policy of stabilizing the border.

古文：诏议安边之策，中书令温彦博议： 请于河南处之。准汉建武时，置降匈奴于五原塞下，全其部落，得为捍蔽，又不离其土俗，因而抚之，一则实空虚之地，二则示无猜之心，是含育之道也。 
现代文：中书令温彦博建议说： 请陛下仿照东汉建武年间把降服的匈奴安置在五原郡边塞附近的办法，把突厥人安置在黄河以南地区，这样做，既可以保留原有的部落编制，作为中原的屏障，同时又不让他们远离本土、不改变他们的习俗，以便实行抚慰政策。如此，一来可充实空虚的边塞，二来可体现朝廷对他们没有猜疑之心。我认为，这才是包容养育他们的正当办法。 
English: The Chinese envoy, Wen Yanbo, suggested: "I would like to ask Your Majesty to place the Turks in the area south of the Yellow River, following the example of placing the surrendered Huns near the border fortress of Wuhuan County during the Jianwu period of the Eastern Han Dynasty. By doing so, it is possible to retain the original tribal structure as a barrier to the Central Plains, while at the same time not allowing them to move away from the mainland and not changing their customs, in order to implement the policy of appeasement. In this way, the empty border fortress can be filled, and the court can show that it has no suspicion of them. I believe that this is the right

古文：太宗从之。
现代文：太宗对温彦博的建议很是赞同。
English: Emperor Taizong followed his advice.

古文：秘书监魏征曰： 匈奴自古至今，未有如斯之破败，此是上天剿绝，宗庙神武。
现代文：秘书监魏徵却坚决反对说： 匈奴自古以来从未这样惨败过，这是上天要诛杀他们，也是陛下神武的表现。
English: But the secretary, Guan Weizheng, was adamantly opposed, saying, "The Huns have never suffered such a disastrous defeat since ancient times. This is God's will to fight and kill them, and it is also a manifestation of His Majesty's divine power."

古文：且其世寇中国，万姓冤仇，陛下以其为降，不能诛灭，即宜遣发河北，居其旧土。
现代文：他们世代与中原为敌，与老百姓结下了数不清的仇怨，陛下鉴于他们乃主动受降，因此没有将他们处死。依臣之见，应当把他们发配到黄河以北地区，让他们居住在自己的土地上。
English: For generations, they had been enemies of the Central Plains and had forged countless grudges with the common people. His Majesty did not execute them because they voluntarily surrendered. In his opinion, they should be sent to the area north of the Yellow River and let them live in their own land.

古文：匈奴人面兽心，非我族类，强必寇盗，弱则卑伏，不顾恩义，其天性也。秦、汉患之者若是，故时发猛将以击之，收其河南以为郡县。
现代文：秦汉时，他们是中原政府的祸患，所以当时朝廷常常派猛将去攻打他们，收归他们在黄河以南的土地，在那里设置郡县加强管理。
English: During the Qin and Han dynasties, they were the scourge of the Central Plains government, so at that time the imperial court often sent fierce generals to attack them, reclaim their land south of the Yellow River, and set up counties there to strengthen management.

古文：陛下以内地居之，且今降者几至十万，数年之后，滋息过倍，居我肘腋，甫迩王畿，心腹之疾，将为后患，尤不可处以河南也。 
现代文：陛下如今让他们在中原内地居住，并且降兵达几万，乃至十万之众，几年以后，他们的人数还会成倍增长，让他们生活在我们身边，离京城如此之近，将来可能会成为心腹之患，所以千万不可把他们安置在黄河以南。 
English: His Majesty now lets them live in the Central Plains, and the number of demobilized soldiers has reached tens of thousands, even hundreds of thousands. In a few years, their number will double. Let them live around us, so close to the capital. In the future, they may become a problem for his confidants, so they must not be placed south of the Yellow River.

古文：温彦博曰： 天子之于万物也，天覆地载，有归我者则必养之。
现代文：温彦博反驳说： 天子对于万事万物，不管天上飞的，还是地上长的，只要归顺，都应该收养。
English: Wen Yanbo retorted: The Son of Heaven should adopt all things, no matter whether they fly in the sky or grow on the ground, as long as they submit.

古文：今突厥破除，余落归附，陛下不加怜愍，弃而不纳，非天地之道，阻四夷之意，臣愚甚谓不可，宜处之河南。
现代文：如今突厥兵败，余部前来归降，如果陛下对他们不加以怜悯，反而弃他们于不顾，这不是天子的胸襟。我虽愚钝，但却认为陛下不应采取抑制少数民族的政策，而应把他们安置在黄河以南地区。
English: Now that the Turks have been defeated and the remnants have come to surrender, if Your Majesty does not have mercy on them, but abandons them, this is not the heart of a son of heaven. Although I am stupid, I believe that Your Majesty should not adopt a policy of suppressing ethnic minorities, but should resettle them in the area south of the Yellow River.

古文：所谓死而生之，亡而存之，怀我厚恩，终无叛逆。 
现代文：常言道：让濒临死亡的人活下去，要常怀仁爱之心，那么终将不会有叛乱发生。 
English: As the saying goes: let those who are dying live, and always be kind, then there will be no rebellion.

古文：魏征曰： 晋代有魏时，胡部落分居近郡，江统劝逐出塞外，武帝不用其言，数年之后，遂倾瀍、洛。前代覆车，殷鉴不远。
现代文：魏徵据理力争地说： 晋朝取代魏国的时候，胡部落常常在周边地区活动，江统劝说晋武帝把他们逐出塞外，晋武帝不听，几年之后，胡部落势力大增，将很多地方据为己有，前车之鉴不远。
English: Wei Zheng said rationally: When the Jin Dynasty replaced the Wei Dynasty, the Hu tribe often operated in the surrounding areas. Jiangtong persuaded Emperor Jinwu to expel them from Tibet. Emperor Jinwu did not listen. A few years later, the Hu tribe greatly increased its power and seized many places as its own. The precedent is not far away.

古文：陛下必用彦博言，遣居河南，所谓养兽自遗患也。 
现代文：陛下如果采纳温彦博的意见，让他们居住在黄河以南地区，将养虎为患，贻害无穷啊。 
English: If His Majesty adopts the opinion of Wen Yanbo and allows them to live in the area south of the Yellow River, they will raise tigers and cause endless harm.

古文：彦博又曰： 臣闻圣人之道，无所不通。
现代文：温彦博又说： 我听说，圣人之道无不通达。
English: Wen Yanbo also said: I have heard that the path of a sage is all-pervasive.

古文：突厥余魂，以命归我，收居内地，教以礼法，选其酋首，遣居宿卫，畏威怀德，何患之有？
现代文：突厥的残余部落，前来投奔我们，以保全性命。把他们安置在中原内地，传授给他们礼教法令，选拔他们的首领，派卫兵驻守那里，让他们畏惧大唐的威严，感激大唐的恩德，这有什么可担忧的呢？
English: The remnants of the Turkic tribes came to us to save their lives. We settled them in the Central Plains, taught them the rules of etiquette, selected their leaders, and stationed guards there, so that they would fear the majesty of the Great Tang Dynasty and be grateful for the grace of the Great Tang Dynasty. What is there to worry about?

古文：且光武居河南单于于内郡，以为汉藩翰，终于一代，不有叛逆。 
现代文：汉代光武帝在位时，让突厥的单于定居内地，成为汉朝的一位藩王，历经整个汉朝时期，突厥都不曾叛乱。 
English: When Emperor Guangwu of the Han Dynasty was on the throne, he allowed the Turks to settle in the inland and become a Han Dynasty king. Throughout the entire Han Dynasty period, the Turks never rebelled.

古文：又曰： 隋文帝劳兵马，费仓库，树立可汗，令复其国，后孤恩失信，围炀帝于雁门。
现代文：稍停片刻，他继续说道： 隋文帝兴师动众，耗尽了国库，扶持突厥可汗，让他回到旧地，后来可汗背信弃义，把隋炀帝围困在雁门，企图谋反。
English: After pausing for a moment, he continued: Sui Emperor Wenxing rallied the masses, drained the treasury, supported the Turkic khan and let him return to the old land. Later, the khan treacherously besieged the Sui and Qin Emperors at the Wild Goose Gate and attempted to rebel.

古文：今陛下仁厚，从其所欲，河南、河北，任情居住，各有酋长，不相统属，力散势分，安能为害？ 
现代文：现在，陛下仁慈宽厚，听凭他们的意愿，无论是河南、河北，任由他们选择居住的地方。另外，突厥部落众多，每个部落都有自己的酋长，他们内部不统一，力量分散，怎么会对中原政府造成危害呢？ 
English: Now, His Majesty is kind and generous, and he listens to their wishes, whether it is Henan or Hebei, and allows them to choose where to live. In addition, there are many Turkic tribes, each tribe has its own chief, they are not unified internally, and their power is dispersed. How can they cause harm to the Central Plains government?

古文：给事中杜楚客进曰： 北狄人面兽心，难以德怀，易以威服。
现代文：给事中杜楚客与温彦博同一阵线，说： 北方异族人面兽心，难以感化，用武力容易使他们臣服。
English: In this matter, Du Chuk and Wen Yanbo are on the same side, saying: The northern alien people are animal-like, difficult to influence, and it is easy to subjugate them by force.

古文：今令其部落散处河南，逼近中华，久必为患。
现代文：现在让他们的部落散居在黄河南，靠近中原政府，长此以往，必有祸患。
English: Now let their tribe live in the south of the Yellow River, close to the Central Plains government. In the long run, there will be a disaster.

古文：至如雁门之役，虽是突厥背恩，自由隋主无道。
现代文：至于隋炀帝在雁门关被困一事，虽是因为突厥背信弃义所致，隋炀帝昏庸无道也是重要的原因。
English: As for the fact that the Sui and Qian Dynasties were trapped in the Yanmen Pass, although it was caused by the treachery of the Turks, it was also an important reason why the Sui and Qian Dynasties were helpless.

古文：中国以之丧乱，岂得云兴复亡国以致此祸？
现代文：中原的衰败灭亡，怎能归咎于中原政府对少数民族的扶持政策？
English: How can the Central Plains government's policy of supporting ethnic minorities be blamed for the decline and fall of the region?

古文：夷不乱华，前哲明训，存亡继绝，列圣通规。
现代文：认为让他们复兴而种下祸根是没有道理的。少数民族不会扰乱华夏民族，这是先哲们总结的经验。
English: It is unreasonable to believe that reviving them will sow the seeds of disaster. Ethnic minorities will not disrupt the Chinese nation, this is the experience summed up by the sages.

古文：臣恐事不师古，难以长久。 
现代文：让快要死亡的人活下去，让行将灭绝的东西延续下去，这是古代圣贤通行的原则。
English: Let those who are about to die continue to live, and let those who are about to be extinct continue to exist. This is the principle of the ancient sages.

古文：太宗嘉其言，方务怀柔，未之从也。
现代文：臣恐怕如果不遵照古训，大唐将难以长久啊。 
English: I'm afraid that if you don't follow the ancient teachings, Datang will not last long.

古文：卒用彦博策，自幽州至灵州，置顺、祐、化、长四州都督府以处之，其人居长安者近且万家。
现代文：唐太宗听后，对他的意见非常赞许，于是对异族采取怀柔政策，这在历史上是从来没有过的。后来唐太宗采纳温彦博的策略，从幽州至灵州，设置了顺、佑、化、长四州安置归顺的突厥部落，从这以后，到长安定居的突厥人达万家之多。
English: Later, Emperor Taizong of Tang adopted Wen Yanbo's strategy, and from Yuzhou to Lingzhou, he set up Shun, Yu, Hu, and Chang four states to resettle the surrendered Turkic tribes. Since then, there have been as many as ten thousand Turks living in Changping.

古文：自突厥颉利破后，诸部落首领来降者，皆拜将军中郎将，布列朝廷，五品以上百余人，殆与朝士相半。
现代文：自从突厥颉利兵败后，凡有突厥部落的首领前来归降，大唐政府都把他们封为将军中郎将，在朝堂上，突厥五品以上的官员就有一百多人，与大唐自己的官员几乎各占一半。
English: Since the defeat of the Turkic Kheli army, whenever the leaders of the Turkic tribes came to surrender, the Datang government appointed them as generals and vice-generals. In the imperial court, there are more than a hundred Turkic officials with five or more titles, with Datang's own officials accounting for almost half.

古文：惟拓拔不至，又遣招慰之，使者相望于道。
现代文：突厥各族中，只有拓跋氏没有归顺，唐太宗派人前去招安，使者来来往往，不绝于道。
English: Of all the Turkic tribes, only the Tuoba clan did not submit. The Tang Taizong sect sent people to seek peace, and emissaries came and went, never ceasing to preach.

古文：凉州都督李大亮以为于事无益，徒费中国，上疏曰： 臣闻欲绥远者必先安近。
现代文：凉州都督李大亮认为这样做徒劳无益，只会白白地消耗财物，于是上疏说： 我认为，要安抚边远地区的人，首先应当使内陆的人安定。
English: Li Da-liang, the governor of Liangzhou, thought that doing so was futile and useless, and would only consume wealth in vain, so Shang Su said: I think that in order to appease the people in remote areas, we should first stabilize the people inland.

古文：中国百姓，天下根本，四夷之人，犹于枝叶，扰其根本以厚枝叶，而求久安，未之有也。
现代文：中原的百姓，是天下的根本，四方边境的少数民族，犹如树上的枝叶，如果用破坏树根的办法来使枝繁叶茂，那么，要想树木长期存活下去，恐怕是不可能的。
English: The people of the Central Plains are the foundation of the world, and the ethnic minorities on the borders of the four directions are like the branches and leaves on a tree. If you use the method of destroying the roots of the tree to make the branches and leaves flourish, then it is probably impossible for the trees to survive for a long time.

古文：自古明王，化中国以信，驭夷狄以权。
现代文：自古以来，贤明的君主以教化中原为根本方针，以驾驭夷、狄等少数民族为权宜之策。
English: Since ancient times, wise monarchs have taken the fundamental policy of enlightening the Central Plains, and the expedient policy of controlling ethnic minorities such as Yi and Di.

古文：故《春秋》云： 戎狄豺狼，不可厌也；诸夏亲昵，不可弃也。 
现代文：所以《春秋》说： 戎、狄这些少数民族犹如豺狼虎豹，不可让他们满足；华夏民族是近亲，不可将他们遗弃。 
English: Therefore, "Spring and Autumn" said: Rong and Di, these ethnic minorities, are like wolves, tigers and leopards, and they must not be satisfied; the Chinese nation is a close relative, and they must not be abandoned.

古文：自陛下君临区宇，深根固本，人逸兵强，九州殷富，四夷自服。
现代文：自从陛下君临天下以来，国泰民安，老百姓生活安乐，兵力得到了加强，四方少数民族俯首称臣。
English: Since His Majesty the King came to the world, the country and the people have enjoyed peace and security, the people's lives have been comfortable, the military strength has been strengthened, and the ethnic minorities in the four directions have bowed their heads and praised him.

古文：今者招致突厥，虽入提封，臣愚稍觉劳费，未悟其有益也。
现代文：如今朝廷招安突厥，对他们加官封爵，我认为这样做太浪费国家的财资，而没有什么实际的好处。
English: Today, the imperial court is recruiting Turks and giving them official titles and knighthoods. I believe that this is a waste of national resources and has no practical benefit.

古文：然河西民庶，镇御藩夷，州县萧条，户口鲜少，加因隋乱，减耗尤多，突厥未平之前，尚不安业，匈奴微弱以来，始就农亩，若即劳役，恐致防损，以臣愚惑，请停招慰。
现代文：黄河以西的百姓，是抵御强悍少数民族的前哨。那里人烟稀少，凋敝萧条，加之隋末的战火，老百姓遭受的损失尤其严重，在平定突厥之前，他们根本无法安居乐业，匈奴被削弱之后，才开始进行农业生产，如果现在就役使他们，恐怕会使他们元气大伤。臣固然愚钝，但还是请求陛下停止安抚劝降。
English: The people west of the Yellow River are the outposts of resistance against the powerful ethnic minorities. The people there are sparsely populated, withered and depressed, coupled with the war at the end of the Sui Dynasty. The losses suffered by the people are particularly serious. Before the Turks were pacified, they could not live and work in peace at all. After the Huns were weakened, they began to engage in agricultural production. If they were to serve them now, I am afraid that their vitality would be seriously injured. Although the minister was stupid, he still asked His Majesty to stop appeasing and persuading.

古文：且谓之荒服者，故臣而不纳。
现代文：并且，古人说，对于落荒而逃的人，即使前来称臣也不要接纳。
English: Moreover, the ancients said that for those who fled from the devastation, even if they came to praise, they should not be accepted.

古文：是以周室爱民攘狄，竟延八百之龄；秦王轻战事胡，故四十载而绝灭。汉文养兵静守，天下安丰；孝武扬威远略，海内虚耗，虽悔轮台，追已不及。
现代文：在周朝，王室爱抚百姓，但同时也抵御少数民族，所以延续了八百年的帝业；秦朝对抗击胡人不以为然，所以四十年就短命了；汉文帝畜养兵士以待变故，所以天下安宁富庶；汉武帝神武鹰扬，对少数民族连年征伐，致使劳民伤财，国内空虚。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, the royal family caressed the people, but at the same time resisted the ethnic minorities, so the imperial career lasted for eight hundred years; the Qin Dynasty did not agree to fight the Hu people, so the forty years were short-lived; the Han Emperor bred soldiers to wait for a change, so the world was peaceful and prosperous; the Han Emperor Shenwu hawked, and the ethnic minorities were conquered year after year, resulting in the loss of labor and wealth, and the emptiness of the country.

古文：至于隋室，早得伊吾，兼统鄯善，且既得之后，劳费日甚，虚内致外，竟损无益。
现代文：后来虽然有轮台之悔，但已追悔莫及了；隋代，在得到西域的伊吾、鄯善之地后，国库也几乎消耗殆尽，于国于民都没有丝毫益处。
English: Later, although there was regret for the wheel, it was too late to repent; in the Sui Dynasty, after obtaining the western regions of Igu and Shanshan, the national treasury was almost exhausted, and there was no benefit to the country and the people.

古文：远寻秦、汉，近观隋室，动静安危，昭然备矣。
现代文：如今，远有秦、汉的教训，近有隋代的前鉴，异族的动静变化，可谓清晰可见。
English: Today, the lessons of the Qin and Han dynasties are far away, the forerunner of the Sui dynasty is near, and the changes in the movement and movement of foreign ethnic groups can be clearly seen.

古文：伊吾虽已臣附，远在藩碛，民非夏人，地多沙卤。
现代文：伊吾虽已是大唐的附属地，但它远在边关荒漠之地，那里的人非华夏之族，土地也多荒漠沙丘。
English: Although Igu is already a tributary of the Great Tang Dynasty, it is far away on the edge of the desert, where the people are not Chinese, and the land is mostly desert sand dunes.

古文：近日突厥倾国入朝，既不能俘之江淮，以变其俗，乃置于内地，去京不远，虽则宽仁之义，亦非久安之计也。每见一人初降，赐物五匹，袍一领，酋长悉授大官，禄厚位尊，理多糜费。
现代文：对于主动称臣的，请陛下对他们严加约束，让他们居住在塞外，这样他们必定对大唐心怀畏惧又感恩戴德，永远做大唐的藩臣。所以对他们实施恩惠是虚，让老百姓享受太平是实。近来一有突厥人归降，朝廷就赏赐给他们布五匹，袍子一件，酋长归降，还要加官晋爵，享受极高的俸禄，这样做太浪费了。
English: As for those who take the initiative to claim to be vassals, please, Your Majesty, impose strict restrictions on them and let them live outside of Tibet. In this way, they will certainly fear and be grateful to the Great Tang Dynasty, and will always be the vassals of the Great Tang Dynasty. Therefore, it is false to grant them favors, and it is true to let the common people enjoy peace. Recently, as soon as a Turk surrendered, the court rewarded them with five pieces of cloth, one robe, the surrender of the chieftain, and they were also promoted to higher ranks and enjoyed a very high salary. This was too wasteful.

古文：以中国之租赋，供积恶之凶虏，其众益多，非中国之利也。 
现代文：把中原百姓上缴的租税，供养这些凶恶顽固的俘虏，让他们源源不断地进入中原，这对中原是非常不利的。 
English: It is very unfavorable to the Central Plains to take the taxes paid by the people of the Central Plains and feed these vicious and stubborn captives, allowing them to continuously enter the Central Plains.

古文：太宗不纳。
现代文：唐太宗没有接受他的意见。
English: Emperor Taizong did not accept his opinion.

古文：十三年，太宗幸九成宫。突利可汗弟中郎将阿史那结社率阴结所部，并拥突利子贺罗鹘夜犯御营，事败，皆捕斩之。
现代文：贞观十三年，太宗亲临九成宫，突利可汗的弟弟中郎将阿史那结社率暗地里纠结部众，并支持突利可汗的儿子贺罗鹘乘夜偷攻太宗的御营。事情败露后，他们都被捕获并斩首。
English: In the 13th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong personally visited the Jiu Chenggong Palace. The younger brother of the Turi Khan, Zhong Lang, led the Ashina Association to secretly entangle his followers, and supported the son of the Turi Khan, Horosuke, to sneak into Emperor Taizong's camp at night. After the affair was exposed, they were all captured and beheaded.

古文：太宗自是不直突厥，悔处其部众于中国，还其旧部于河北，建牙于故定襄城，立李思摩为乙弥泥熟俟利苾可汗以主之。
现代文：太宗从此不再信任突厥，并后悔把他们的部众安置在内地。于是将他们遣送回黄河以北地区，让他们在原来的定襄城建立官署，立李思摩为乙弥泥熟俟利苾可汗，以此来统率他们。
English: Emperor Taizong no longer trusted the Turks and regretted placing their followers in the inland, so he sent them back to the area north of the Yellow River, let them establish an office in the original Dingxiang City, and set up Li Sima as a khan to lead them.

古文：因谓侍臣曰 中国百姓，实天下之根本，四夷之人，乃同枝叶，扰其根本以厚枝叶，而求久安，未之有也。
现代文：事后，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 中原的百姓，实在是天下的根，周边的少数民族，就如同枝叶一样，损伤了根本，却想枝繁叶茂，国家长治久安，是绝不可能的。
English: Afterwards, Emperor Taizong said to his attendant ministers: The people of the Central Plains are truly the roots of the world, and the surrounding ethnic minorities, just like the branches and leaves, have damaged the foundation, but it is absolutely impossible for the branches to flourish and the country to enjoy long-term stability.

古文：初不纳魏征言，遂觉劳费日甚，几失久安之道。 
现代文：当初，我不接受魏徵的建议，因而感到劳费一天比一天严重。我考虑不周，差点失去了长治久安的好方法。 
English: At first, I did not accept Wei Zheng's suggestion, so I felt that the labor cost was getting more and more serious day by day. I was not thoughtful, and I almost lost a good way to maintain long-term stability.

古文：贞观十四年，侯君集平高昌之后，太宗欲以其地为州县。
现代文：贞观十四年，侯君集平定高昌之后，唐太宗想在高昌设立州县。
English: In the 14th year of Zhenguan, after Hou Junji conquered Gaochang, Tang Taizong wanted to set up prefectures in Gaochang.

古文：魏征曰： 陛下初临天下，高昌王先来朝谒，自后数有商胡称其遏绝贡献，加之不礼大国诏使，遂使王诛载加。
现代文：魏徵反对说道： 陛下当初刚登上皇位的时候，高昌王最先来朝谒，后来经商的胡人多次告发高昌王不向朝廷进献贡奉，加上他们对大国的使者不以礼相待，终于获得罪名。
English: Wei Zheng objected, saying: When His Majesty ascended the throne, King Gaochang was the first to come to the imperial court. Later, Hu people in business repeatedly reported that King Gaochang did not pay tribute to the imperial court, and they did not treat the envoys of the great powers with courtesy. Finally, they were convicted.

古文：若罪止文泰，斯亦可矣。
现代文：如果朝廷只对高昌王麹文泰一人定罪，也还合情合理。
English: If the imperial court convicted only one person, Gaochang Wang Qian Wentai, it would still be reasonable.

古文：未若因抚其民而立其子，所谓伐罪吊民，威德被于遐外，为国之善者也。
现代文：依臣之言，不如安抚他的臣民，拥立他的儿子。常言道：处罚有罪之君，安抚他的百姓，让威名和仁德播散到遥远的边关。
English: According to the words of a courtier, it is better to appease his subjects and support his son. As the saying goes: Punish the guilty prince, appease his people, and let the prestige and benevolence spread to distant borders.

古文：今若利其土壤以为州县，常须千余人镇守，数年一易。
现代文：这是最好的治国安边之策。现在如果在高昌王的土地上设立州县，必须经常有成百上千的人在那里守卫，并且几年要更换一次人马。
English: This is the best way to keep the country safe. Nowadays, if a prefecture is established on the land of King Gaochang, there must always be hundreds of people guarding it, and the personnel must be changed once every few years.

古文：每来往交替，死者十有三四，遣办衣资，离别亲戚。
现代文：每次换防，士兵们都往来奔波，死于劳顿的不计其数。士兵们还要添置衣物，离别亲人，饱受背井离乡之苦。
English: Every time there is a change of guard, soldiers rush back and forth, and countless soldiers die of exhaustion. Soldiers also have to buy more clothes, leave their relatives, and suffer from the hardships of leaving their hometowns.

古文：十年之后，陇右空虚，陛下终不得高昌撮谷尺布以助于中国。
现代文：十年过后，甘肃以西的地区肯定会人财空虚，而陛下始终得不到高昌一把谷子，甚至一尺帛布的援助。
English: Ten years later, the area west of Gansu will certainly be empty of people and money, and His Majesty will never receive a handful of grain or even a foot of cloth from Gaochang.

古文：所谓散有用而事无用，臣未见其可。 
现代文：这其实是拆散有用的东西，去侍奉无用的东西。我看不出有什么益处。 
English: It's really taking apart something that's useful and serving something that's not. I don't see the benefit.

古文：太宗不从，竟以其地置西州，仍以西州为安西都护府，每岁调发千余人防遏其地。
现代文：唐太宗不听他的意见，仍在高昌王的土地上设置西州属地，定西州为安西都护府，每年调派一千多人马驻守该地。
English: Tang Taizong did not listen to his opinion, and still set up the Xizhou territory on the land of Gaochang Wang. Dingxi Province was the Anxi Capital Protectorate, and more than a thousand horses were stationed there every year.

古文：黄门侍郎褚遂良亦以为不可，上疏曰： 臣闻古者哲后临朝，明王创业，必先华夏而后夷狄，广诸德化，不事遐荒。
现代文：黄门侍郎褚遂良也认为这样做不好，于是上疏说： 我听说，古代圣哲贤明的君王处理国政，都先使华夏诸族安定了，然后才平定少数民族，他们广泛散布仁德和教化，不干预边远悍荒之地的事务。
English: Huangmen's chamberlain, Zou Suiliang, also thought that this was not a good thing to do, so Shang Zuo said: I heard that the wise and sagacious kings of ancient times, when handling state affairs, first stabilized the various ethnic groups in China, and only then subdued the ethnic minorities. They widely spread benevolence and enlightenment, and did not interfere in the affairs of remote and desolate places.

古文：是以周宣薄伐，至境而反；始皇远塞，中国分离。
现代文：所以，周宣王征伐猃狁，将他们逐出边境就撤军了；而秦始皇频频出征边塞，修筑了万里长城，西起临洮，东到辽东，以抵御异族，但最后还是使国家分崩离析了。
English: Therefore, Zhou Xuan Wang led a military expedition against the barbarians, drove them out of the border and withdrew his army; while Qin Shihuang frequently went out to conquer border fortresses and built the Great Wall, stretching from Linyi in the west to Liaodong in the east, in order to resist the foreigners, but in the end the country fell apart.

古文：陛下诛灭高昌，威加西域，收其鲸鲵，以为州县。
现代文：陛下灭掉了高昌国，使西域异族臣服于大唐的威仪，如今还要据守他们的土地，设立州县。
English: His Majesty wiped out the State of Gaochang and made the foreign ethnic groups in the Western Regions submit to the majesty of the Great Tang Dynasty. Today, he still needs to defend their land and establish prefectures.

古文：然则王师初发之岁，河西供役之年，飞刍挽粟，十室九空，数郡萧然，五年不复。
现代文：然而，朝廷发兵的时候，黄河以西遇到荒年，田地野草蔓延，几年颗粒未收，十户人家有九户贫困，周边各郡县也都很萧条，五年过去了，还是没有改变。
English: However, when the imperial court sent troops, the west of the Yellow River encountered a bad year, the fields were overgrown with weeds, the granules were not collected for several years, nine out of ten households were poor, and the surrounding counties were also very depressed. Five years have passed, but nothing has changed.

古文：陛下每岁遣千余人而远事屯戍，终年离别，万里思归。
现代文：现在，陛下每年要派上千人前去戊守，他们背井离乡，饱尝思乡之苦。
English: Now, His Majesty sends thousands of people to Wuzhou every year. They leave their hometowns and suffer from homesickness.

古文：去者资装，自须营办，既卖菽粟，倾其机杼。经途死亡，复在言外。
现代文：离家的兵士还要自己操办行装，他们不得不卖掉粮食，拿走家中纺织的所有布匹，对他们的家庭来说，这无异于雪上加霜，而且有的人在路途中就命归黄泉了。
English: The soldiers had to sell their grain and take away all the cloth they had woven at home, which meant even more hardship for their families, and some died on the way.

古文：兼遣罪人，增其防遏，所遣之内，复有逃亡，官司捕捉，为国生事。
现代文：此外，兵士当中有的人还犯有官司，他们在征戍期间借机逃亡，官府还要捉拿查办，这为国家带来了多少事端啊！
English: In addition, some of the soldiers have also committed a lawsuit. They took the opportunity to flee during the recruitment period, and the government has yet to arrest and investigate. How many accidents has this brought to the country!

古文：高昌途路，沙碛千里，冬风冰冽，夏风如焚，行人遇之多死。
现代文：到高昌的旅途，千里沙丘，冬天寒风凛冽，夏天烈日炎炎，不少人在途中就染病死去了。
English: The journey to Gaochang, thousands of miles of sand dunes, the cold wind in winter, the hot sun in summer, many people got sick and died on the way.

古文：《易》云 安不忘危，治不忘乱。 
现代文：《周易》说： 处于安乐之中不要忘记危险，国富民安的时候不要忽略了动乱的产生。 
English: "Zhou Yi" said: Don't forget the danger when you are at ease, and don't ignore the emergence of turmoil when the country is rich and the people are safe.

古文：设令张掖尘飞，酒泉烽举，陛下岂能得高昌一人菽粟而及事乎？
现代文：假设张掖郡战火飞扬，酒泉郡烽烟四起，陛下能指望高昌供给一个人的粮米来增援吗？
English: Assuming that Zhangye County is in flames and Jiuquan County is in smoke, can Your Majesty expect Gaochang to provide one person with grain and rice to reinforce?

古文：终须发陇右诸州，星驰电击。
现代文：必须调发陇右各州军队，攻击敌人。
English: Troops from every state must be sent to attack the enemy.

古文：由斯而言，此河西者方于心腹，彼高昌者他人手足，岂得糜费中华，以事无用？
现代文：就此而言，黄河以西的百姓才是朝廷的心腹，高昌人终究是异族，怎么能浪费中原的财物，去供养毫无益处的人呢？
English: In this respect, the people west of the Yellow River were the imperial court's closest confidants. The people of Gaochang were, after all, an alien race. How could they squander the wealth of the Central Plains to feed people who were of no use to them?

古文：陛下平颉利于沙塞，灭吐浑于西海，突厥余落，为立可汗，叶浑遗萌，更树君长，复立高昌，非无前例，此所谓有罪而诛之，既服而存之。
现代文：陛下在沙塞平定颉利，在西海吞并吐浑。可这些地方依然不安宁，残余的突厥部落要拥立自己的可汗，吐谷浑也暗中推举自己的首领。如今，陛下应该让高昌人自己拥立首领。这样做，并非史无前例，古人说，有罪的人就诛杀他，臣服的人就使他存活。
English: Your Majesty has pacified Goli in Shasai, and has swallowed up Tukhun in the West Sea. But these places are still restless. The remaining Turkic tribes want to set up their own khan, and Tukhun has secretly elected its own leader. Now, Your Majesty should let the Gochang people themselves set up a leader. This is not unprecedented. The ancients said that the guilty would kill him, and the submissive would keep him alive.

古文：宜择高昌可立者，征给首领，遣还本国，负戴洪恩，长为藩翰。
现代文：陛下应当在高昌人中选择可以拥立的人，封他为首领，送他回故国，让他感激大唐的恩德，永远做中原政府的一名藩王。
English: His Majesty should choose someone from among the people of Gaochang whom he can support, make him the leader, send him back to his home country, make him grateful for the generosity of Datang, and forever be a king of the Central Plains government.

古文：中国不扰，既富且宁，传之子孙，以贻后代。 
现代文：这样，中原就不会受到干扰，老百姓就可安享富庶和安宁，如果这个安边政策一代代传下去，将会造福子孙后代。 
English: In this way, the Central Plains will not be disturbed, and the people can enjoy prosperity and peace. If this amicable policy is passed down from generation to generation, it will benefit future generations.

古文：疏奏，不纳。
现代文：但唐太宗没有接纳他的进谏。
English: However, Emperor Taizong did not accept his accession to the throne.

古文：至十六年，西突厥遣兵寇西州，太宗谓侍臣曰： 朕闻西州有警急，虽不足为害，然岂能无忧乎？
现代文：贞观十六年，西突厥派兵进犯西州地区，唐太宗对侍臣说： 我听说西州有军情，虽然还不足以构成危害，但怎能高枕无忧呢？
English: In the 16th year of Zhenguan, when the Western Turks sent troops to invade the Xizhou region, Tang Taizong said to his vassal: I have heard that Xizhou has a military situation, although it is not enough to cause harm, but how can you sleep well?

古文：往者初平高昌，魏征、褚遂良劝朕立麴文泰子弟，依旧为国，朕竟不用其计，今日方自悔责。
现代文：过去我刚刚平定高昌的时候，魏徵、褚遂良劝我立麹文泰的后代为王，归还他的国土，可是，我竟然没有采纳他们的意见，现在后悔晚矣。
English: In the past, when I had just pacified Gaochang, Wei Zheng and Zou Suiliang advised me to make the descendants of Zou Wentai king and return his land. However, I did not take their advice, and now it is too late to regret it.

古文：昔汉高祖遭平城之围而赏娄敬，袁绍败于官渡而诛田丰，朕恒以此二事为诫，宁得忘所言者乎！ 
现代文：过去汉高祖不听娄敬不出兵匈奴的劝告，结果遭到平城之围，事后汉高主大大犒赏了娄敬。袁绍不听田丰的建议，与曹操大战于官渡，结果大败而逃，事后却听信谗言，将田丰杀死。我常常以这两件事为诫，怎能忘记这些劝谏过我的人呢？ 
English: In the past, Emperor Gaozong of the Han Dynasty did not listen to the advice of the Xiongnu not to send soldiers to Pingcheng. As a result, he was besieged by Pingcheng. Afterwards, Emperor Gaozong greatly rewarded the advice of the Xiongnu. Yuan Shao did not listen to the advice of Tian Feng and fought Cao Cao at Guandu. As a result, he was defeated and fled. Afterwards, he listened to the advice and killed Tian Feng. I often take these two things as a warning. How can I forget these people who advised me?

