古文：雷公请问：气之多少，何者为逆，何者为从。
现代文：雷公请问道：气的盛衰，哪一种是逆？哪一种是顺？
English: Lei Gong, please ask: the rise and fall of qi, which one is the opposite? Which one is smooth?

古文：黄帝答曰：阳从左，阴从右，老从上，少从下。
现代文：黄帝回答道：阳气主升，其气从左而右；阴气主降，其气从右而左老年之气先衰于下；少年之气先盛于下，其气从下而上。
English: The Yellow Emperor replied: Yang qi is ascending, and its qi is ascending from left to right; yin qi is descending, and its qi is descending from right to left; old qi is first to decline; young qi is first to flourish below, and its qi is first to rise from below.

古文：是以春夏归阳为生，归秋冬为死，反之则归秋冬为生，是以气多少，逆皆为厥。
现代文：因此春夏之病见阳证阳脉，一阳归阳，则为顺为生，若见阴证阴脉，如秋冬之令，则为逆为死。反过来说，秋冬之病见阴证阳脉，以阴归阴，则为顺为生。所以不论气盛或气衰，逆则都成为厥。
English: Therefore, the disease of spring and summer is to see the yang to the yang, and the yang to the yang is to live in accordance with the yang, and the disease of autumn and winter is to see the yin to the yang, and the yin to the yang is to live in accordance with the yang. Therefore, regardless of qi or qi, the opposite is to become qi.

古文：气上不下，头痛巅疾，求阳不得，求阴不审，五部隔无徵，若居旷野，若伏空室，绵绵乎属不满日。
现代文：雷公又问：气有余也能成为厥吗？黄帝答道：阳气一上而不下，阴阳两气不相顺接，则足部厥冷至膝，少年在秋冬见病则死，而老年在秋冬见病却可生。
English: Lei Gong also asked, "Can you become a jue if you have enough qi?" Huang Di replied, "If the yang qi is up but not down, and the yin and yang qi are not congruent, then the foot will be cold to the knee. If a young man gets sick in autumn and winter, he will die, but if an old man gets sick in autumn and winter, he can still live."

古文：是以少气之厥，令人妄梦，其极至迷。三阳绝，三阴微，是为少气。是以肺气虚，则使人梦见白物，见人斩血藉藉，得其时，则梦见兵战。肾气虚，则使人梦见舟舩溺人，得其时，则梦伏水中，若有畏恐。
现代文：阳气上而不下，则上实下虚，为头痛癫顶疾患，这种厥病，谓其属阳，本非阳盛，谓其属阴，则又非阴盛，五脏之气隔绝，没有显著征象可，好象置身于旷野，负居于空窒，无所见闻，而病势绵绵一息，视其生命，一不满一天了。所以，气虚的厥，使人梦多荒诞；厥逆盛极，则梦多离奇迷乱。
English: If the yang qi rises and does not fall, then the yang qi is real and the yang qi is unreal. For headache and epilepsy, this disease is said to be yang, but not yang. If it is yin, then it is not yin. The qi of the five internal organs is isolated, and there are no significant signs, but it is as if they are in the wilderness, living in the air, seeing and hearing nothing, and the disease condition is short-lived, considering their life to be less than a day. Therefore, if the qi is weak, people's dreams are more absurd; if the qi is extremely high, the dreams are more bizarre and

古文：肝气虚，则梦见菌香生草，得其时，则梦伏树下不敢起。心气虚，则梦救火阳物，得其时，则梦燔灼。
现代文：三阳之脉悬绝，三阴之脉细微，就是所谓少气之侯。肺气虚则梦见悲惨的事物，或梦见人被杀流血，尸体狼籍，当金旺之时，则梦见战争。肾气虚则梦见舟船淹死人，当水旺之时，则梦见大火燔灼。
English: The veins of the three yang elements are weak, and the veins of the three yin elements are weak, which is the so-called period of weak qi. People with weak lung qi dream of tragic things, or dream of people being killed and bled, and corpses being dismembered. When there is a gold rush, they dream of war. People with weak kidney qi dream of boats drowning people, and when there is a flood, they dream of fires.

古文：脾气虚，则梦饮食不足，得其时，则梦筑垣盖屋。
现代文：脾气虚则梦饮食不足，得其土旺之时，则梦见作恒盖屋。
English: If one's temper is bad, one will dream of not having enough food. If one's soil is rich, one will dream of being a henge-roofed house.

古文：此皆五藏气虚，阳气有余，阴气不足。
现代文：这些都是五脏气虚，阳气有余，阴气不足所致。
English: These are all caused by the deficiency of qi in the five internal organs, too much yang and not enough yin.

古文：合之五诊，调之阴阳，以在经脉。
现代文：当参合五脏见证，调其阴阳，其内容已在《经脉》篇中论述过了。
English: When the five viscera witness each other, their yin and yang are adjusted, the content of which has already been discussed in the "Meridian" article.

古文：诊有十度度人：脉度，藏度，肉度，筋度，俞度。阴阳气尽，人病自具。
现代文：诊法有十度，就是衡量人的脉度、脏度、肉度、筋度、俞度、揆度它的阴阳虚实，对病情就可以得到全面了解。
English: The diagnosis method has ten degrees, that is, to measure the pulse, dirt, flesh, sinew, radiance, radiance of a person, its yin and yang, and its truth and falsity, so that a comprehensive understanding of the disease can be obtained.

古文：脉动无常，散阴颇阳，脉脱不具，诊无常行，诊必上下，度民君卿。
现代文：脉息之动本无常体，或则出现阴阳散乱而有偏颇，或则脉象搏动不明显，所以诊察时也就没有固定的常规。诊病时必须知道病人身份上下，是平民还是君卿。
English: The movement of the pulse is unstable, or the yin and yang are scattered and biased, or the pulse is not obvious, so there is no fixed routine at the time of diagnosis. At the time of diagnosis, it is necessary to know the status of the patient, whether it is a commoner or a prince.

古文：受师不卒，使术不明，不察逆从，是为妄行，持雌失雄，弃阴附阳，不知并合，诊故不明，传之后世，反论自章。
现代文：如果对老师的传授不能全部接受，医术不高明，不仅不能辨别逆从，而且会使诊治带有盲目性和片面性，看到了一面，看不到另一面，抓住了一点，放弃了另一点，不知道结合全面情况，加以综合分析，所以诊断就不能明确，如以这种诊断方法授给后人的话，在实际工作中自会明显地暴露出它的错误。
English: If the teacher's teaching cannot be fully accepted, the medical skill is not good, not only can not distinguish the contrary, but also will make the diagnosis and treatment with blindness and one-sidedness, see one side, can not see the other side, grasp one point, give up another point, do not know how to combine the overall situation and make a comprehensive analysis, so the diagnosis can not be clear. If this diagnostic method is given to future generations, it will obviously expose its error in actual work.

古文：至阴虚，天气绝；至阳盛，地气不足。
现代文：至阴虚，则天之阳气离绝；至阳盛，则地之阴气不足。
English: When the sun is at its zenith, the earth's yin and yang are insufficient.

古文：阴阳并交，至人之所行。
现代文：能使阴阳互济交通，这是有修养的医生的能事。
English: To be able to make yin and yang communicate with each other is the ability of a cultivated doctor.

古文：阴阳交并者，阳气先至，阴气后至。
现代文：阴阳之气互济交通，是阳气先至，阴气后至。
English: The qi of yin and yang reciprocate each other's traffic. The yang qi comes first and the yin qi comes later.

古文：是以圣人持诊之道，先后阴阳而持之，《奇恒之势》乃六十首，诊合微之事，追阴阳之变，章五中之情，其中之论，取虚实之要，定五度之事，知此乃足以诊。
现代文：所以，高明的医生诊病，是掌握阴阳先后的规律，根据奇恒之势六十首辩明正常和异常，把各种诊察所得的点滴细微的临床资料综合起来，追寻阴阳的变化了，了解五脏的病情，作出中肯的结论，并根据虚实纲要及十度来加以判断，知道了这些，方可以诊病。
English: Therefore, a skilled doctor diagnoses a disease by grasping the law of yin and yang, and according to the power of 60 odd constants to identify normal and abnormal, integrating the subtle clinical data obtained from various examinations, tracking the changes of yin and yang, understanding the condition of the internal organs, making pertinent conclusions, and judging according to the outline of truth and falsehood and ten degrees. If you know these, you can diagnose the disease.

古文：是以切阴不得阳，诊消亡，得阳不得阴，守学不湛，知左不知右，知右不知左，知上不知下，知先不知后，故治不久。
现代文：所以切其阴而不能了解其阳，这种诊法是不能行于世上的；切其阳而不能了解其阴，其所学的技术也是不高明的。知左而不知其右，知右而不知其左，知上而不知其下，知先而不知其后，他的医道就不会长久。
English: Therefore, he who diagnoses the yin without understanding the yang cannot be of any use to the world; he who diagnoses the yang without understanding the yin cannot be of any use to the world, and the techniques he has learned are not good. If he knows the left but not the right, the right but not the left, the above but not the below, and the before but not the after, his medical path will not last long.

古文：知醜知善，知病知不病，知高知下，知坐知起，知行知止，用之有纪，诊道乃具，万世不殆。
现代文：要知道不好的，也要知道好的；要知道有病的，也要知道无病的；既知道高，亦知道下，既知道坐，也要知道起；既知道行，也要知道止。能做到这样有条不紊，反复推求，诊断的步骤，才算全备，也才能永远不出差错。
English: If you want to know what is bad, you must also know what is good; if you want to know what is diseased, you must also know what is disease-free; if you want to know what is high, you must also know what is low; if you want to know how to sit, you must also know how to get up; if you want to know how to walk, you must also know how to stop. If you can achieve such a methodical, repeated reasoning, diagnostic step, it will be considered complete, and you will never make a mistake.

古文：起所有余，知所不足。度事上下，脉事因格。
现代文：疾病的初期，见到邪气有余，就应考虑其正气不足，因虚而受邪；检查病者的上下各部，脉证参合，以穷究其病理。
English: In the early stage of the disease, if you see that the evil spirit is abundant, you should consider its lack of righteousness, and suffer evil because of falsity; check the patient's upper and lower parts, pulse and symptoms, and thoroughly investigate its pathology.

古文：是以形弱气虚，死；形气有余，脉气不足，死。脉气有余，形气不足，生。
现代文：例如形弱气虚的；主死；形气有余的，脉气不足的，亦死；脉气有余，形气不足的，主生。
English: For example, if the form is weak and deficient in qi, the master dies; if the form has too much qi, and the pulse lacks qi, the master also dies; if the pulse has too much qi, and the form lacks qi, the master dies.

古文：是以诊有大方，坐起有常，出入有行，以转神明，必清必净，上观下观，司八正邪，别五中部，按脉动静，循尺滑濇，寒温之意，视其大小，合之病能，逆从以得，复知病名，诊可十全，不失人情。
现代文：所以，诊病有一定的大法，医生应该注意起坐有常，一举一动，保持很好的品德；思维敏捷，头脑清静，上下观察，分别四时八节之邪，辨别邪气中于五脏的何部；触按其脉息的动静，探切尺部皮肤滑涩寒温的概况；视其大小便的变化，与病状相参合，从而知道是逆是顺，同时也知道了病名，这样诊察疾病，可以十不失一，也不会违背人情。
English: Therefore, there is a certain great method for diagnosing diseases. The doctor should pay attention to the patient's sitting posture, every move, and maintain a good moral character; quick thinking, clear mind, up and down observation, separate the evil of the four o'clock and eight o'clock, and distinguish which part of the evil spirit is in the five internal organs; touch the movement of its pulse, and probe the general situation of the smooth and cold temperature of the skin in the ruler; according to the change of its feces and urine, and the disease condition, so as to know whether it is upside down or down, and also know the name of the disease. In this way, the disease can be diagnosed

古文：故诊之，或视息视意，故不失条理，道甚明察，故能长久。不知此道，失经绝理，亡言妄期，此谓失道。
现代文：所以诊病之时，或视其呼吸，或看其神情，都能不失于条理，技术高明，能保持永久不出差错；假如不知道这些，违反了原则真理，乱谈病情，妄下结论，这是不符合治病救人的医道的。
English: Therefore, when diagnosing a patient, you can either look at his or her breathing or look at his or her facial expression without losing your sense of order, and you can be highly skilled and never make a mistake. If you don't know these things, you will violate the principle of truth, talk about the condition randomly, and jump to conclusions. This is not in line with the medical way of treating diseases and saving people.

