古文：治生裴明礼何明远罗会窦乂
现代文：治生裴明礼何明远罗会窦乂
English: Vice-governor Baimingli He Mingyuan Luo Hui Douyi

古文：贪滕蒋二王窦知范夏侯彪之王志愔段崇简崔玄信严升期张昌仪李邕
现代文：贪滕蒋二王窦知范夏侯彪之王志愔段崇简崔玄信严升期张昌仪李邕
English: Zhengteng Jiang Er Wang Dou Zhi Fan Xia Hou Biao's Wang Zhi Duan Chong Jian Cui Xuan Xin Yan Sheng Zhang Chang Yi Li Yu

古文：裴佶元载张延赏卢昂崔咸崔远江淮贾人龙昌裔安重霸张虔剑
现代文：裴佶元载张延赏卢昂崔咸崔远江淮贾人龙昌裔安重霸张虔剑
English: Zhang Yanjian awarded Luangcui, Xiancui, Yuanjiang, Huaijia, Longchang, Anzhuo, Zhang Qianjian

古文：治生
现代文：治生
English: 治生

古文：裴明礼
现代文：裴明礼
English: Pei Mingli

古文：唐裴明礼，河东人。
现代文：唐朝人裴明礼，是河东人。
English: Pei Mingli, a Tang Dynasty person, was from the eastern part of the river.

古文：善于理生，收人间所弃物，积而鬻之，以此家产巨万。
现代文：裴明礼非常会料理生活，操持家业。他收购世间遗弃的物品，积攒到一定数量后再卖出去。
English: Pei Mingli is very good at cooking and managing the family business. He buys abandoned items from the world, accumulates a certain amount and then sells them.

古文：又于金光门外，市不毛地。
现代文：就这样，他积攒了万贯家财。同时，裴明礼又在金光门外，买下一块荒芜的不长庄稼、蔬菜的土地。
English: In this way, he amassed a fortune. At the same time, Pei Mingli also bought a barren piece of land with short crops and vegetables outside the Golden Gate.

古文：多瓦砾，非善价者。
现代文：这块土地全是瓦砾。因此没有人购买，卖不上好的价钱。
English: The land is all rubble, so no one is buying it and it cannot be sold for a good price.

古文：乃于地际竖標，悬以筐，中者辄酬以钱，十百仅一二中。
现代文：裴明礼想了个办法，在这块地里竖立一根木杆，上面悬挂一个筐，让人拣地里的石头瓦砾往筐里投掷，投中的人奖励他钱，吸引了许多人来投掷。上千个投掷的人，仅有一二个人投中。
English: Pei Mingli thought of a way to erect a wooden pole in this piece of land, with a basket hanging above it. People were asked to pick up stones and rubble from the ground and throw them into the basket. Those who hit the basket were rewarded with money, which attracted many people to throw. Of the thousands of people who threw, only one or two hit the basket.

古文：未洽浃，地中瓦砾尽矣。
现代文：还没等这些人投掷熟练，地里的瓦砾就已经被捡干净了。
English: The rubble in the field has already been picked up before these people have even had a chance to throw it skillfully.

古文：乃舍诸牧羊者，粪即积。
现代文：于是，裴明礼又将这块土地让人放羊。这样，地里又积满了粪便。
English: As a result, Pei Mingli gave the land over to be used for sheep grazing, and the land was again filled with excrement.

古文：预聚杂果核，具黎牛以耕之。
现代文：裴明礼，一车接一车地载到集市上去卖，又赚了许多钱。
English: Pei Mingli drove car after car to the bazaar to sell them, and made a lot of money.

古文：岁余滋茂，连车而鬻，所收复致巨万。乃缮甲第，周院置蜂房，以营蜜。
现代文：于是，裴明礼又在这块土地上建造房屋，在院子的周围安置蜂箱养蜂贮蜜。
English: As a result, Pei Mingli built a house on this land and placed beehives around the yard to keep bees and store honey.

古文：广栽蜀葵杂花果，蜂采花逸而蜜丰矣。
现代文：地里全栽上蜀葵，蜜蜂采花酿蜜又传授花粉。蜀葵与蜂蜜都获得丰收。
English: All the fields are planted with hollyhocks, and the bees collect the flowers, make honey and pass on pollen. Both the hollyhocks and the honey get a bumper harvest.

古文：营生之妙，触类多奇，不可胜数。
现代文：裴明礼善于经营管理，像这样的事例有很多啊！都是新奇的事，数不胜数。
English: Pei Mingli is good at business management, there are many examples like this! They are all novel things, countless.

古文：贞观中，自古台主簿，拜殿中侍御史，转兵吏员外中书舍人。累迁太常卿。
现代文：唐太宗贞观年间，裴明礼自古台主簿升任殿中御史，又转任兵部员外中书舍人，最后升任太常卿。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty, Pei Mingli was promoted from the head of the Imperial Household Agency to the Vice-President of the Imperial Household Agency, and then to the Vice-President of the Imperial Household Agency, and finally to the Vice-President of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：何明远
现代文：何明远
English: He Mingyuan

古文：罗会长安富民罗会以剔粪自业，里中谓之鸡肆，言若归之积粪而有所得也。
现代文：长安有个富翁叫罗会，以清除粪便为职业。街坊邻里都称他为除粪夫，是说他因为清除积攒粪便而发家致富的。
English: In Chang'an, there is a rich man named Luo Hui, whose occupation is to remove excrement. Neighbors call him the man who removes excrement, saying that he made his fortune by removing accumulated excrement.

古文：会世副其业，家财巨万。
现代文：罗会家世代都以清除积攒粪便为副业，家中有财产许多万。
English: For generations, members of the Luo Family Association have been engaged in removing accumulated excrement as a sideline, and the family has many thousands of yuan in assets.

古文：尝有士人陆景阳，会邀过所止。
现代文：一次，有个叫陆景阳的知识人，罗会邀请他在他家住宿。
English: On one occasion, Lu Jingyang, an intellectual, invited him to stay at his home.

古文：馆舍甚丽。入内梳洗，衫衣极鲜。
现代文：陆景阳看到罗会家的房屋建造装修得特别豪华富丽。他的妻了也梳洗打扮，穿着的衣服极其艳丽。
English: Lu Jingyang saw that the Luo family's house was built and decorated in a particularly luxurious way. His wife was also groomed and dressed, wearing extremely colorful clothes.

古文：屏风氈褥烹宰，无所不有。
现代文：屏风、毡褥等一应陈设，应有尽有。
English: Screens, urns, etc. should be set up and everything should be in place.

古文：非情愿也，分合如此。
现代文：而且自己家宰杀、烹煮牲畜。陆景阳问罗会：罗先生日子过得这样富裕安乐，为什么还继续从事清除粪便的肮脏污秽的工作？罗会说：我中间曾停工不干了有一二年。怎奈一不干清除粪便这行当，家中奴婢仆夫死去，牛马逃散丢失，眼瞅着家业就要败落。后来，恢复这一行当后，家道才逐渐恢复过来。不是我情愿干这除粪的行当啊！分析起来，罗会命中注定他就该干除粪的工作。
English: Lu Jingyang asked Luo Hui: Mr. Luo lives such a rich and happy life, why does he continue to engage in the dirty and filthy work of removing excrement? Luo Hui would say: I have been out of work for one or two years. How can I not do the business of removing excrement, the slaves and servants in the family have died, the cattle and horses have been lost, and the family business is about to fall. Later, after the resumption of this business, the family way has gradually recovered. It is not I who would like to do this business of removing excrement! Analyzed, Luo Hui's fate has destined him to do

古文：窦乂
现代文：窦乂
English: Dou Xuan

古文：扶风窦乂年十三，诸姑累朝国戚。
现代文：扶风有个叫窦乂的小男孩，才十三岁。他的诸位姑姑，都是历朝的国戚。
English: In Fufeng, there is a little boy named Dou Yao, only thirteen years old. All of his aunts are relatives of the dynasties.

古文：其伯检校工部尚书交，闲厩使宫苑使。
现代文：他的伯父任检校工部尚书，卸职后，转任闲厩使、官苑使，在嘉会坊有官祭的宗祠。
English: His uncle was Shang Shu of the school inspection department, and after leaving the post, he was transferred to the idle stable envoy and the official garden envoy. There is an ancestral shrine of the official festival in Jia Hui Fang.

古文：于嘉会坊有庙院，乂亲识张敬立任安州长史，得替归城。安州土出丝履，敬立赍十数辆，散甥侄。
现代文：窦乂的亲戚张敬立任安长史，在被接替返回京城的时候，带回来十几车安州的特产丝鞋，分送给外甥、侄儿们。
English: Dou Wei's relative, Zhang Jingli Ren An Changshi, when he was succeeded and returned to Beijing, brought back more than a dozen cars of Anzhou special silk shoes and distributed them to his nephews and nieces.

古文：竞取之，唯乂独不取。
现代文：都争抢着去拿，唯独窦乂不去抢拿。
English: They all scrambled to get it, except Dou Xuan, who did not try to grab it.

古文：俄而所余之一辆，又稍大，诸甥侄之剩者，乂再拜而受之。
现代文：过了一会儿，还剩下一车丝鞋，都是大号的，诸位外甥、侄儿们挑剩下的。窦乂再次拜谢收下了这一车鞋。
English: After a while, there was one pair of silk slippers left, all of them large-sized, and the nephews and nieces picked the rest. Dou Ye once again accepted this pair of slippers with thanks.

古文：敬立问其故，乂不对。
现代文：张敬立问他为什么要人家挑拣剩下的？窦乂不语。
English: Zhang Jingli asked him why people should pick the rest? Dou Yu was speechless.

古文：殊不知殖货有端木之远志。
现代文：其实是他竟不知道窦乂在经商方面有春秋时期子贡的远大目光。
English: In fact, he did not even know that Dou Wei had the far-sightedness of Zigong during the Spring and Autumn Period in business.

古文：遂于市鬻之，得钱半千，密贮之。
现代文：窦乂将这一车丝鞋拉到集市上去卖，换回了五百钱，偷偷贮藏起来。
English: Dou Yao took this pair of silk shoes to the bazaar to sell them, got back five hundred yuan, and secretly stored them.

古文：潜于锻炉作二枝小钎，利其刃。
现代文：暗中去铁匠辅打制了二把小铲，将铲刃磨得很锋利。
English: He secretly went to a blacksmith to make two small shovels and sharpened the blades.

古文：五月初，长安盛飞榆荚，乂帚聚得斛余。
现代文：五月初，正是京城长安榆树钱黄熟的季节，满城飞落着。
English: At the beginning of May, it is the season when the Beijing Chang'an eucalyptus trees are ripe, and the city is full of cranes.

古文：遂往诣伯所，借庙院习业，伯父从之。
现代文：窦乂扫聚到榆钱十余斗，然后到伯父家说：想借住在嘉会坊的宗祠内学习功课。伯父答应了他。
English: Dou Xuan swept more than ten bucks to Xuanqian, and then went to his uncle's house and said, "I want to live in the ancestral hall of Jia Hui Fang to study my lessons." His uncle agreed.

古文：乂夜则潜寄褒义寺法安上人院止，昼则往庙中。以二钎开隙地，广五寸，深五寸，密布四千余条，皆长二十余步。
现代文：窦乂每天晚上都偷偷寄宿在附近的褒义寺法安上人院中，白天则回到宗祠来，用二把小铲开垦院里的空地，挖成宽五寸、深五寸的浅沟共有四千多条，每条长二十多步。
English: Every night, Dou Ye secretly stayed at the nearby Fahuan Shonin-in of Boyi-ji Temple. During the day, he returned to the ancestral shrine and used two small shovels to open up the open space in Fuwa-in, digging a total of more than four thousand shallow trenches five inches wide and five inches deep, each more than twenty paces long.

古文：汲水渍之，布榆荚于其中。
现代文：打水浇灌，将榆钱播种在沟内。
English: Watering, watering, sowing the seeds in the ditch.

古文：寻遇夏雨，习皆滋长。
现代文：过了几天，下了一场透雨，每条沟里都长出了榆树苗。
English: A few days later, there was a downpour of rain, and eucalyptus seedlings sprouted in every ditch.

古文：比及秋，森然已及尺余，千万余株矣。
现代文：等到秋天，小树苗已长到一尺多高，很是茁壮，大约共有榆树苗数千株啊！
English: By autumn, the small saplings have grown to more than a foot high and are very vigorous. There are approximately thousands of eucalyptus seedlings!

古文：及明年，榆栽已长三尺余。
现代文：到了第二年，榆树苗已长到三尺多高。
English: By the second year, the eucalyptus seedlings had grown to more than three feet tall.

古文：乂遂持斧伐其并者，相去各三寸。
现代文：窦乂手持利斧间伐树苗，株距三寸，挑选枝条茁壮直挺的留下来。
English: Dou Xuan, holding a sharp axe, cut the tree seedlings, plant three inches away, and select the branches to stay strong and straight.

古文：又选其条枝稠直者悉留之，所间下者，二尺作围束之，得百余束。
现代文：间伐下来的小榆树，窦乂将它们捆成二尺粗的柴捆，共有一百多捆。
English: The small eucalyptus trees that were cut down were bundled into two-foot-thick bundles of firewood, totaling more than a hundred bundles.

古文：遇秋阴霖，每束鬻值十余钱。
现代文：这年秋天天气阴冷，连降大雨。
English: This autumn, the weather was overcast and cold, with continuous heavy rain.

古文：又明年，汲水于旧榆沟中。
现代文：窦乂将这一百多捆榆柴运到集上去卖。
English: Dou Jun transported the more than one hundred bundles of firewood to the market to sell it.

古文：至秋，榆已有大者如鸡卵。
现代文：每捆卖钱十多文。第三年，窦乂依旧为榆苗提水浇灌。到秋后，榆树苗有的已长成鸡蛋那么粗啦。
English: Each bundle sells for more than 10 yuan. In the third year, Dou Ying still watered the seedlings. By the autumn, some of the eucalyptus seedlings had grown into eggs so coarse.

古文：更选其稠直者，以斧去之，又得二百余束。
现代文：窦乂又挑选枝干茂盛的留下来，用斧砍间伐，又得榆柴二百多捆。
English: Dou Yao also chose to keep the branches that were luxuriant, cut them with an axe, and obtained more than two hundred bundles of firewood.

古文：此时鬻利数倍矣。
现代文：这时卖了后，已获利好几倍啦。
English: After selling at this time, I have already made several times the profit.

古文：其端大之材，在庙院者，不啻千余，皆堪作车乘之用。
现代文：又过了五年，当年植种的小榆树苗已经长大成材。窦乂挑选粗大的，伐下来制成盖房屋用的椽材一千多根，卖得三四万钱。又挑选出枝杆大的制成打造车乘的木料，有一千多根。
English: After another five years, the small eucalyptus seedlings planted that year have grown into saplings. Dou Wei selected more than a thousand coarse eucalyptus seedlings, which were cut down and used to build houses, and sold for 340,000 yuan. He also selected more than a thousand large branches and poles to make wood for cars.

古文：此时生涯已有百余。自此币帛布裘百结，日歉食而已。
现代文：到这时，窦乂的生活用度已经富足有余了，钱帛、布匹、裘皮衣服，什么都有，只是每天食用的食物需要现买。
English: By this time, Dou Xuan's living expenses were more than enough. He had money, cloth, furs and clothes, everything, but he needed to buy the food he ate every day.

古文：遂买蜀青麻布，百钱个疋，四尺而裁之，顾人作小袋子。
现代文：窦乂购买蜀郡产的青麻布。一百钱买一匹，裁成四尺宽，雇人缝成小布袋。
English: Dou Qian buys green linen from Shu County. For 100 yuan, he buys a horse, cuts it into four feet wide, and hires someone to sew it into a small cloth bag.

古文：又买内乡新麻鞋数百两。
现代文：又购买内乡产的新麻鞋几百双。
English: In addition, several hundred pairs of new hemp shoes produced in inland areas were purchased.

古文：不离庙中，长安诸坊小儿及金吾家小儿等，日给饼三枚，钱十五交，付与袋子一口。
现代文：窦乂每天都不离开宗祠，召来长安各条街坊里巷市民家的小孩，有些朝廷金吾卫士家的孩子也来到这里。每天发给这些小孩三张饼，十五文钱。再发给他们每人一只小布袋。
English: Dou Qian did not leave the ancestral shrine every day. He summoned children from citizens' homes in all the streets and alleys of Chang'an, and some children from the families of imperial guards also came here. He gave these children three pieces of cake and 15 yuan coins every day. He also gave each of them a small cloth bag.

古文：至冬，拾槐子实其内，纳焉。
现代文：到了冬天，让他们拣拾槐树籽，收上来。
English: In winter, they are asked to collect the eucalyptus seeds and store them.

古文：月余，槐子已积两车矣。
现代文：一个月多一点的时间，就收集槐树籽两车。
English: In a little over a month's time, two truckloads of eucalyptus seeds were collected.

古文：又命小儿拾破麻鞋，每三两，以新麻鞋一两换之。
现代文：又让小孩们拣拾破旧的麻鞋。三双破旧的麻鞋换一双新的麻鞋。
English: The children were also asked to pick up worn-out linen shoes. Three pairs of worn-out linen shoes were exchanged for a new pair of linen shoes.

古文：远近知之，送破麻鞋者云集。
现代文：远近居民都知道这件事，来用旧麻鞋换取新麻鞋的人不计其数。
English: Residents near and far know about this, and there are countless people who have come to exchange old hemp shoes for new hemp shoes.

古文：数日，获千余量。
现代文：几天后，就收换得旧麻鞋一千多双。
English: A few days later, more than a thousand pairs of old linen shoes were exchanged.

古文：然后鬻榆材中车轮者，此时又得百余千。
现代文：然后，又卖作车轮的榆材，得钱十多万。
English: Then he sold it to be used for wheels, and made more than a hundred thousand dollars.

古文：雇日佣人，于宗贤西门水涧，从水洗其破麻鞋。曝干，贮庙院中。
现代文：按天雇用仆役，在宗贤两门的溪涧中，用水洗涤破麻鞋，晒干，贮存在宗祠院中。
English: According to the day, servants were hired to wash the broken shoes with water in the creeks at the two gates of Zongxian, dry them, and store them in the ancestral shrine.

古文：又坊门外买诸堆弃碎瓦子，令功人于流水涧洗其泥滓，车载积于庙中。
现代文：又在坊门外买下几堆遗弃的碎瓦片，让工人在流水涧将泥滓洗去，用车运到宗祠院内。
English: He also bought a few piles of abandoned broken tiles outside the gate of the temple, and had the workers wash the mud away with a sluice and transport them by car to the ancestral shrine.

古文：然后置石嘴碓五具，锉碓三具。
现代文：然后置买了石嘴碓五具，锉碓三具。
English: He then bought five stone beakers and three cymbals.

古文：西市买油靛数石，雇庖人执爨。
现代文：西市买油脚几石，雇用厨役煮熬。
English: West City buys a few stone of oil and hires a cook to boil it.

古文：广召日佣人，令剉其破麻鞋，粉其碎瓦，以疏布筛之，合槐子油靛。
现代文：再多召按日计酬的仆役，让他们用锉碓锄切破麻鞋，用石嘴碓捣碎瓦片。再用疏布筛子筛过，和上槐子、油脚，让仆役们日夜不停地捣烂。
English: Call more servants who are paid by the day, let them use picks to cut the hemp shoes, use stone picks to smash the tiles, and then use a sponge sieve to sift, and the upper tweezers, grease feet, let the servants keep smashing day and night.

古文：令役人日夜加工烂擣，候相乳尺，悉看堪为挺，人臼中熟出。
现代文：待到捣成乳状，细看可以作成棍棒时，将它们从臼中趁热取出来，让工人们双手用力转握。
English: When they have been pounded until they are milky and can be made into sticks, they are taken out of the mortar while it is still hot and the workers have to grasp them with both hands.

古文：命工人并手团握，例长三尺已下，圆径三寸。垛之得万余条，号为法烛。
现代文：做成长三尺以下，圆径三寸的长棒，一共有一万多条，堆放在一起，称为法烛。
English: There are more than ten thousand long sticks with a growth of less than three feet and a diameter of three inches, which are stacked together and are called Dharma candles.

古文：建中初，六月。京城大雨，尺烬重桂，巷无车轮。
现代文：唐德宗建中初年，盛夏的六月，京城长安连降大雨，一尺长的一根柴薪价格同平常同样大小的桂木一样。就这样，满街巷没有一车柴薪。
English: In the first year of Tang Dezong Jian Middle School, in the middle of summer in June, there was a heavy rain in Chang'an, Beijing, and the price of a one-foot-long stick of firewood was the same as that of the usual size of Gui wood. As a result, there was not a single truck of firewood in the streets.

古文：乂取此法烛鬻之，每条百文。
现代文：窦乂于是将贮存的法烛拿出来卖，每条卖钱百文。
English: Dou Wei then took out the stored candlesticks and sold them, selling each one for one hundred mon.

古文：将燃炊爨，与薪功倍，又获无穷之利。
现代文：买的人拿回家去用它烧饭，火力是一般柴薪的一倍。窦乂卖掉全部法烛，又获利无其数。
English: Those who bought it took it home to cook with it, and the firepower was twice that of ordinary firewood. Dou Wei sold all the Dharma candles and made countless profits.

古文：先是西市秤行之南，有十余亩坳下潜污之地，目曰小海池。为旗亭之内，众秽所聚。
现代文：初时，长安西市秤行的南边有一处水洼，人们管它叫小海地，约有十多亩大小，成为了市楼以内，倒放垃圾的地方。
English: At the beginning, there was a puddle on the south side of the scale line in West Chang'an City. People called it Little Haiti, about more than ten mu in size, and it became a place for dumping garbage inside the city building.

古文：又遂求买之，其主不测，乂酬钱三万。
现代文：窦乂又将这块地方买下来。这块地皮的主人也不测量一下有多少亩，只收取了窦乂三万文钱。
English: Dou Ye also bought this piece of land. The owner of this piece of land did not even measure how many mu it was, and only charged Dou Ye 30,000 yuan.

古文：既获之，于其中立标，悬幡子。
现代文：买下这个小海池后，窦乂在它的中间立一木杆，杆顶悬挂一面小旗。
English: After buying this small sea pool, Dou Yu erected a wooden pole in the middle of it with a small flag hanging from the top of the pole.

古文：绕池设六七铺，制造煎饼乃糰子，召小儿掷瓦砾，击其幡标，中者以煎饼米团子啗。
现代文：再围绕着地沿塔起六七座临时小房，雇人制作煎饼、团子等食品。召呼小孩投掷石块、瓦片击木杆上面的小旗。击中的，奖给煎饼或团子吃。
English: Then, six or seven temporary small houses were built around the ground and along the tower, and people were hired to make pancakes, balls and other food. Children were called to throw stones and tiles to hit the small flag on the wooden pole. If they hit it, the prize was pancakes or balls.

古文：不逾月，两街小儿竞往，计万万，所掷瓦已满池矣。
现代文：两街的小孩争相前来投掷小旗。不到一个月，大概来投掷石头、瓦块就有上亿人次。所掷的石头、瓦块已将池子填满了。
English: Children from both sides of the street rushed to throw small flags. In less than a month, there were probably hundreds of millions of people who came to throw stones and bricks. The stones and bricks thrown have filled the pool.

古文：遂经度，造店二十间。
现代文：经过测量，在填平的这块地皮上建造了门市房二十间。
English: After measurements, 20 market stalls were built on the filled-in site.

古文：当其要害，日收利数千，甚获其要。
现代文：正是繁华市区，租出去，每天单房租就可以收取几千钱，获利甚多。
English: It is precisely the bustling urban areas that can be rented out, and thousands of money can be collected per day for a single room rent, making a lot of profit.

古文：店今存焉，号为窦家店。
现代文：这些店房今天还存在呢，叫窦家店。
English: These stores still exist today and are called Doujia stores.

古文：又尝有胡人米亮因饥寒，乂见，辄与钱帛。
现代文：曾经有个叫米亮的胡人，流落在街头。窦义每次看见，都给他一些钱。
English: Once upon a time, there was a Hu man named Meiliang who lived on the streets. Dou Yi gave him some money every time he saw him.

古文：凡七年，不之问。
现代文：整整有七年，都是这样。
English: This went on for seven years.

古文：异日，又见亮，哀其饥寒，又与钱五千文。
现代文：从来也不问米亮为什么落到这样地步。一次，在街市上窦乂又遇见了米亮。米亮向他述说饥寒之苦，窦乂又给了他五千文钱。
English: He never asked Meiliang why he ended up like this. Once, Dou Ying met Meiliang again at the market. Meiliang told him about the hardships of hunger and cold, and Dou Ying gave him another five thousand coins.

古文：亮因感激而谓人曰：亮终有所报大郎。
现代文：米亮特别感激，对人说：我米亮一定会报答窦乂的大恩大德的啊！
English: Miliang was especially grateful, telling people: I, Miliang, will surely repay Dou Ye's great kindness!

古文：乂方闲居，无何，亮且至。
现代文：窦乂刚刚闲下来，暂时没有什么事情可做，米亮就来见他。
English: Dou Yao has just been idle and has nothing to do for the time being, so Meiliang comes to see him.

古文：谓乂曰：崇贤里有小宅出卖，直二百千文，大郎速买之。
现代文：说：崇贤里有一套小宅院要出卖，要价二十万钱，你赶紧将它买下来。
English: He said, "There is a small house in Chongxian to be sold, the asking price is 200,000 yuan, you should hurry to buy it."

古文：又西布柜坊，巢钱盈余，即依直出钱市之。
现代文：还有西市一家代人保管舍银财物的柜坊，很赚钱，你也可以按价出钱将它买下来。
English: There is also a safe deposit box in Xicheng that stores silver and valuables on behalf of the owner. It is very profitable, and you can also buy it at cost.

古文：书契曰：亮语乂曰：亮攻于览玉，尝见宅内有异石，人罕知之。
现代文：写房契这天，米亮又对窦乂悄悄说：我擅长鉴别玉石。我曾看见这家屋内有一块特殊的石头，很少有人留意它，是一块捣衣石。
English: On the day of writing the house deed, Meiliang quietly said to Dou Yinghong: I am good at identifying jade. I once saw a special stone in this house, few people pay attention to it, it is a dress stone.

古文：是捣衣砧，真于阗玉，大郎且立致富矣。
现代文：这块岛衣石，是一块真的于阗玉啊！你窦乂会立即富起来的啊！
English: This piece of rock is a real gem! You'll be rich in no time!

古文：乂未之信。
现代文：窦乂没有相信米亮的话。
English: Dou Yao did not believe what Meiliang said.

古文：亮曰：延寿坊召玉工观之。
现代文：米亮说：你若是不相信，呆会儿到延庆坊召来一位玉工，让他给鉴定一下。
English: Meiliang said, "If you don't believe me, go to Yanqingfang and call a jade craftsman and ask him to identify it."

古文：玉工大惊曰：此奇货也，攻之当得腰带夸二十副。
现代文：玉工来后看到这块捣衣石，大为惊讶地说：这是一块奇异的宝玉啊！经过加工，可以雕琢出腰带扣板二十副。
English: When the jade craftsman came, he was very surprised to see this stone and said, "This is a rare gem! After processing, it is possible to carve out twenty pairs of belt buckles."

古文：每副百钱，三千贯文。
现代文：每副卖白文钱，还能卖三千贯文钱呢！
English: For every pair of white money sold, they can still sell three thousand crowns of money!

古文：遂令琢之，果得数百千价。又得合子执带头尾诸色杂类，鬻之，又计获钱数十万贯。
现代文：于是，窦乂雇来玉工将这块捣衣玉石加工成腰带扣板，卖了几百贯，又加工成盒子，执带头尾等各种东西，卖得钱几十万贯。
English: As a result, Dou Yu hired a jade craftsman to process this piece of pounded clothing jade into a belt buckle plate, sold several hundred yuan, and processed into boxes, straps, and other things, selling hundreds of thousands of yuan.

古文：其宅并元契，乂遂与米亮，使居之以酬焉。
现代文：之后，窦乂将这座买下的宅院，连同房契一块儿赠送给米亮，让他有个居住的地方，算做对米亮的酬谢。
English: After that, Dou Jun gifted the house he bought, together with the lease, to Miliang, so that he would have a place to live, as a reward for Miliang.

古文：又李晟大尉宅前，有一小宅。相传凶甚，直二百十千，又买之。
现代文：还有一件事，太尉李晟住宅边有一座小宅，传说是凶宅里面经常闹鬼，要价二十万钱，窦乂将它买了下来。
English: There was one more thing. There was a small house next to the residence of Lieutenant Li Qian, which was said to be haunted by ghosts. Dou Qian bought it for 200,000 yuan.

古文：筑园打墙，拆其瓦木，各垛一处，就耕之术。
现代文：四周筑上围墙，拆去房屋，将拆下来的木料、房瓦，各垛一处，准备辟成耕地。
English: A perimeter wall was built around the area, the houses were demolished, and the timber and roof tiles that were removed were piled up in one place each, ready to be turned into farmland.

古文：太尉宅中傍其地有小楼，常不噉焉，晟欲并之为击球之所。
现代文：太尉李晟家宅，有一座小楼挨着窦乂买下的这块地，经常无人照看。
English: There is a small building next to the land bought by Dou Yu, which is often left unattended.

古文：他日乃使人向乂，欲买之，乂确然不纳。
现代文：李晟想将窦乂买下的这块地，跟小楼所占的地方合并到一块儿，建造一座击球场。
English: Li Jun wanted to combine the land bought by Dou Jun with the land occupied by Xiaolou to build a batting stadium.

古文：云：某自有所要。候晟沐浴日遂具宅契书，请见晟。
现代文：一天，太慰李晟请人代他向窦乂提出买地的事，窦乂明确回答说不卖这块地，说：我留下这块地方也有用处的。待到李晟又承受新的皇恩时，窦乂带着房契去见太尉李晟。
English: One day, Emperor Taizong asked someone to propose the purchase of land to Emperor Douyin on his behalf. Emperor Douyin clearly replied that he would not sell the land, saying, "It is also useful for me to keep this place." When Emperor Li Rong received a new imperial favor, Emperor Douyin went to see Emperor Taifeng Li Rong with the house deed.

古文：语晟曰：某本置此宅，欲与亲戚居之。
现代文：说：我买下这座宅院原打算借给一位亲属居住。
English: He said: 'I bought the house with the intention of letting it to a relative.

古文：恐俯逼太尉甲第，贫贱之人，固难安矣。
现代文：但是，恐怕离太尉府第太近，可以俯瞰到您府上的一切。都是贫贱没什么修养的人，很难安分守己。
English: However, I'm afraid it's too close to the captain's residence, so you can overlook everything in your house. They are all poor and uneducated people, and it's hard to keep your distance.

古文：某所见此地宽闲，其中可以为戏马。
现代文：因此，我没有借给这家亲属住。我看到这块地方很宽阔、闲静，可以修建个跑马场。
English: That's why I didn't let it to this relative, I saw it as a wide, quiet area where I could build a racetrack.

古文：今献元契，伏惟府赐照纳。
现代文：今天，我特意来府上向太尉进献房契，只希望大人您能收下我的这份心意。
English: Today, I specially came to the house to present the house deed to the captain. I only hope that you can accept my heart.

古文：晟大悦。
现代文：太尉李晟非常高兴。
English: Captain Li Yao was very happy.

古文：私谓乂不要某微力乎，乂曰：无敢望，犹恐后有缓急，再来投告令公。
现代文：私下对窦乂说：不需要我帮你办点什么事情吗？窦乂说：我没敢有这个奢望。但是日后有什么急着要办的事情，我再来找太尉您。
English: Do you need me to help you with something? Dou Yu said, "I don't dare to have such an extravagant hope. However, if there is something urgent that needs to be done in the future, I will come to see you again."

古文：晟益知重。
现代文：太慰李晟更加看重窦乂了。
English: It is too comforting for Li Qiye to attach more importance to Dou Qiye.

古文：乂遂搬移瓦木平治其地如砥，献晟为戏马。
现代文：于是，窦乂搬走堆放的木料、房瓦，雇工将这块空地平整成象磨刀石一样平坦坚实后，送给太尉李晟为跑马场，使得太尉承受了他的好处。
English: As a result, Dou Yu removed the stacked wood and roof tiles, and after the hired workers had made this empty space as flat and solid as a grindstone, he gave it to Lieutenant Li Yu as a racecourse, so that the lieutenant received his benefits.

古文：荷乂之所惠。乂乃于两市。选大商产巨万者，得五六人。遂问之：君岂不有子弟婴诸道及在京职事否。
现代文：之后，窦乂在京城长安的东西两个集市上，挑选家财万贯的大商人五六个，问他们：你们没有孩子及亲属的子弟在京中和外面各道中干事的吗？
English: After that, Dou Yu selected five or six wealthy merchants at two fairs in the eastern and western parts of Chang'an, Beijing, and asked them: Do you have no children or relatives who are officials in Beijing and other provinces?

古文：贾客大喜，语乂曰：大郎忽与某等，致得子弟庇身之地，某等共率草粟之直二万贯文。
现代文：这些富商们听了后非常高兴，说：窦乂没有忘了我们啊！待到您为我们的孩子办得有人照看的好差使，我们一定送您二万贯表示酬谢。
English: These rich merchants were very happy to hear this and said: Dou Ye has not forgotten us! As long as you can do a good job of looking after our children, we will definitely give you twenty thousand yuan as a reward.

古文：乂因怀诸贾客子弟名谒晟，皆认为亲故。
现代文：于是，窦乂带着这些富商们的孩子的名氏简历去拜见太尉李晟，都说是自己亲朋好友的孩子。
English: As a result, Dou Wei took the name resumes of the children of these rich businessmen to visit Lieutenant Li Wei, who said they were the children of his relatives and friends.

古文：晟忻然览之，各置诸道膏腴之地重职，乂又获钱数万。
现代文：太尉李晟高兴地答应下来，都给安排在各道裕的州郡担任重要的职务。于是，窦乂从这些富商们那儿获钱几万。
English: Captain Li Wei happily agreed, and they were all assigned to important positions in various provinces and counties. As a result, Dou Wei received tens of thousands of yuan from these rich businessmen.

古文：崇贤里有中郎将曹遂兴当夜生一大树，遂兴每患其经年枝叶有碍庭宇，伐之又恐损堂室。
现代文：崇贤里内中郎将曹遂兴在庭院中离窗户很近的地方长着一株大树。曹遂兴即怕这株大树的枝叶遮挡住房的光线，又怕砍伐它弄不好砸坏了堂屋。
English: In the courtyard of Cao Suixing, there was a big tree growing very close to the window. Cao Suixing was afraid that the branches and leaves of this big tree would block the light of the house, and he was afraid that cutting it would damage the house.

古文：乂因访遂兴，指其树曰：中郎何不去之。
现代文：窦乂知道这件事后，来到曹家，指着这株大树对曹遂兴说：中郎怎么不将它砍伐了呢？
English: After Dou Qian knew about this, he came to Cao's house, pointed to this big tree and said to Cao Suixing: Why didn't Zhong Lang cut it down?

古文：遂兴答曰：诚有碍耳，因虑根深本固，恐损所居室宇。
现代文：曹遂兴回答说：是有些碍事。但是考虑到它根深本固，弄不好伐倒后砸坏堂屋。
English: Cao Suixing replied, "It is a bit of a hindrance. However, considering that it has deep roots, it is difficult to cut it down and destroy the house.

古文：乂遂请买之，仍与中郎除之。不令有损，当令树自失，中郎大喜。
现代文：窦乂于是要求将这株大树买下来，仍旧将它伐倒，却保证一点也不损坏他家的堂屋，而是让树自己去掉。曹遂兴听后非常高兴，答应将树卖给窦乂，只收五千文钱。
English: Dou Xuan then asked to buy the tree and still cut it down, but he promised not to damage his family's hall at all, but to let the tree remove itself. Cao Suixing was very happy to hear this and agreed to sell the tree to Dou Xuan for only five thousand yuan.

古文：乃出钱五千文，以纳中郎。与斧銆匠人议伐其树，自梢及根，令各长二尺余，断之，厚与其直。
现代文：窦乂买下这株大树后，跟伐树的匠人商议采取从稍到根砍伐的方法，将它伐成每段二尺多长的若干木段，工钱从优。
English: After Dou Jun bought the tree, he discussed with the woodcutter to take the method of cutting from the tip to the root, and cut it into several pieces of more than two feet long each, and the labor cost was better.

古文：因选就众材，及陆博局数百，鬻于本行。
现代文：结果，既避免了砸坏堂屋，又从中挑选出好材雇匠人制成赌博用具。在自己的商行中出卖，获利一百多倍。
English: As a result, not only did they avoid destroying the house, but they also selected good craftsmen to make gambling equipment. They sold it in their own business and made more than a hundred times the profit.

古文：乂计利百余倍，其精干率是类也。
现代文：窦乂的善于经商，精于盘算，都像这件事啊！
English: Dou Xuan is good at business, good at calculating, all like this thing!

古文：后乂年老无子，分其见在财等与诸熟识亲友。
现代文：窦乂老年时没有子嗣，将他一生积攒的钱财分别赠送给了他的亲朋好友。
English: In his old age, Dou Ye did not have any children, so he gave away the money he had saved throughout his life to his relatives and friends.

古文：至其余千产业，街西诸大市各千余贯，与常住法安上人经营。不拣日时供拟，其钱亦不计利。
现代文：至于其它的产业，街面各大商店，每个店都价值一千多贯，委托给他少年时曾经借宿过的法安上人家经营，不必挑选时日，随时供给他生活用度，所有的钱都不收取利息。
English: As for other industries, the major stores on the street, each store is worth more than a thousand yuan, entrusted to him when he was a teenager, he once stayed at the Fa'an Shanghe family business, do not have to choose the time, at any time to provide him with living expenses, all the money does not charge interest.

古文：乂卒时年八旬余，京城和会里有邸。
现代文：窦乂活到八十多岁才去世。死后，在京城长安和会里留下一座宅院，送给了他弟弟的儿子居住。
English: Dou Xuan lived to be more than 80 years old before he died. After his death, he left a house to his brother's son to live in at the Beijing Chang'an Peace Society.

古文：弟侄宗亲居焉，诸孙尚在。
现代文：这一族人，直到现在还在那里。
English: These people are still there to this day.

古文：贪滕蒋二王
现代文：段崇简
English: Duan Chongjian

古文：唐滕王婴、蒋王恽，皆不能廉慎。
现代文：唐朝时，深州刺史段崇简为人贪婪残暴成性。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Chong Chien was a greedy and cruel man.

古文：大帝赐诸王名五王，不及二王。
现代文：段崇简上任后，立即追逼乡的里正，命令里正让各户征召佃户。说：不得说没有佃户。上等户，每家召取两人。
English: After Duan Chongjian took office, he immediately pursued and forced the village chief of the township, ordering the chief to let each household recruit tenants. He said: "It is impossible to say that there are no tenants. For higher-class households, two people are recruited per household."

古文：敕曰：腾叔蒋兄，自解经纪，不劳赐物。
现代文：下等户，每家召取一人。不来的，可动用刑罚。
English: For the lower-class households, one person will be called from each household. If they do not come, they may be punished.

古文：与之，以为钱贯，二王大惭。
现代文：乡人们都惧怕，都说召取了。
English: The villagers are afraid and say they have been summoned.

古文：朝官莫不自励，皆以取受为脏污。
现代文：之后，段崇简发布命令说：不用招唤佃户来，但必须见到佃户的主人。
English: After that, Duan Chongjian issued an order saying: You don't have to invite the tenant to come, but you must see the owner of the tenant.

古文：有终身为累，莫敢犯者。
现代文：佃主来到后，段崇简处罚每个佃户白绢一疋，规定在一个月内上交。
English: After the thief came, Duan Chongjian punished each thief with one white feather, stipulating that it be handed over within one month.

古文：窦知范
现代文：共收得白绢三十车。
English: A total of 30 cars of white ploughs were collected.

古文：唐瀛州饶阳县令窦知范贪。
现代文：于是段崇简辞官返京。途经鹿县时，有一车没有装满白娟，还需要六百疋白绢，才能装满这辆车。
English: As a result, Duan Chongjian returned to Beijing. When passing through Lu County, one car was not filled with egrets, and six hundred egrets were needed to fill the car.

古文：有一里正死，范令门内一人，为里正造像，各出钱一贯，范自纳之。
现代文：里正们一时无法可想，于是到县令、县丞县尉家筹取。筹到一千二百疋白绢，呈交段崇简，比他要的六百疋还多筹了一倍。
English: Unable to think straight for a moment, they went to the homes of the county magistrate and the county magistrate to collect the money. They collected twelve hundred baht, which was twice as much as the six hundred baht he wanted.

古文：谓曰：里正有罪过，先须急救。
现代文：就是这样一位贪婪无比的官，回到京城长安后，又被授予分州刺史。
English: It was just such a greedy official who, after returning to the capital Chang'an, was awarded the title of "branch governor."

古文：范先造得一像，且以与之。
现代文：崔玄信唐朝时，安南都护崔玄信任命自己的姑爷裴惟岳代理受州刺史。
English: When Cui Xuanxin was in the Tang Dynasty, Annan trusted his uncle Pei Weiyue to be the guardian of Cui Xuan.

古文：结钱二百千，平像五寸半。
现代文：裴惟岳贪婪残暴，非法收取金银等财物价值万贯。一次，有位土著头人要娶媳妇。
English: Pei Weiyue was greedy and cruel. He illegally collected gold, silver and other valuable property. Once, an aboriginal chief wanted to marry his daughter-in-law.

古文：其贪皆类此。
现代文：裴惟岳向这位头人索要做车幔帐用的绫子一千疋。
English: Pei Weiyue asked the headman for a thousand baht for a pair of pliers to use for the bill.

古文：范惟有一男，放鹰马惊，桑枝打伤头破。百姓快之，皆曰：千金之子。
现代文：头人给他八百疋。
English: The headman gave him 800 baht.

古文：易一兔之命
现代文：还是不肯放过人家。
English: Still won't let people go.

古文：夏侯彪之
现代文：将头人的新娘抢回府衙，戏弄了三天，才放新娘回去。
English: He snatched the headman's bride back to Fuzhou and teased her for three days before letting her go.

古文：唐益州新昌县令夏侯彪之初下车，问里正曰：鸡卵一钱几颗。
现代文：这位头人还是不肯交纳余下的那二百疋绫子。于是裴惟岳亲自将这些绫子运到扬州。安南方面及时派人追到扬州，逮捕了裴惟岳。他运到扬州的一切财物也收为官有。
English: The headman still refused to pay the remaining two hundred mule loads. Therefore, Pei Weiyue personally transported these mule loads to Yangzhou. Annan promptly sent someone to chase him to Yangzhou and arrested Pei Weiyue. All the property he transported to Yangzhou was also confiscated.

古文：曰：三颗。彪之乃遣取十千钱，令买三万颗。
现代文：裴惟岳被戴上枷锁押送回安南，准备让他向安南的百姓们谢罪。走到海口，上面送来敕令敕他无罪。
English: Pei Weiyue was shackled and escorted back to Annan, where he was made to apologize to the people of Annan. When he got to Haikou, he received a letter from above, absolving him of his guilt.

古文：谓里正曰：未便要，且寄鸡母抱之，遂成三万头鸡，经数月长成，令县吏与我卖。
现代文：严升期
English: Strict promotion period

古文：一鸡三十钱，半年之间成三十万。
现代文：唐朝时，洛州司仓严升期兼侍御史，在江南巡察。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Luo Zhou's secretary, Cang Yan Sheng, who also served as imperial historian, inspected the southern part of the Yangtze River.

古文：又问：竹笋一钱几茎。
现代文：严升期非常喜爱吃牛肉，他巡察所到的州县，宰杀了许多牛做成菜肴给他吃。
English: Yan Sheng liked to eat beef very much. He inspected the states and counties he visited and slaughtered many cows to make dishes for him to eat.

古文：曰：五茎。又取十千钱付之，买得五万茎。
现代文：事情无论大小，只要送上金银等物就全都没有问题了。
English: No matter how big or small the matter is, as long as gold, silver, etc. are sent, there is no problem at all.

古文：谓里正曰：吾未须笋，且林中养之。
现代文：凡是严升期巡察到的地方，金银的价格猛然上涨。
English: Wherever strict price increases were observed, the prices of gold and silver soared.

古文：至秋竹成，一茎十钱，积成五十万。
现代文：因此，江南人称严升期为金牛御史。
English: Therefore, people in the south of the Yangtze River called the Yan Sheng period as the golden cow imperial history.

古文：其贪鄙不道，皆此类。
现代文：张昌仪唐朝时，张昌仪任洛阳县令。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Changyi was the governor of Luoyang County.

古文：王志愔唐汴州刺史王志愔饮食精细，对宾下脱粟饭。
现代文：仗恃张易之的权势，手下的僚属们没有不顺从他的。一次，惊堂鼓响。
English: Under Zhang Yi's influence, his subordinates did not disobey him. On one occasion, the hall was filled with thunderous applause.

古文：商客有一骡，日行三百里，曾三十千不卖。
现代文：有一个姓薛的人带着五十两黄金进入公堂，用衣袖遮挡着将黄金偷偷送给了张倡仪。
English: A man surnamed Xue entered the public hall with fifty-two pieces of gold and secretly gave the gold to Zhang Zhengyi, covering it with his sleeve.

古文：市人报价云十四千，愔曰：四千金少，更增一千。
现代文：张昌仪得到黄金后，接受了姓薛的状纸，回到京城将状纸交付天官侍郎张锡。
English: After Zhang Changyi got the gold, she accepted the paper with the surname Xue, and returned to Beijing to deliver the paper to the official's servant, Zhang Xi.

古文：又令买单丝罗，匹至三千。
现代文：几天后要审理案子，张锡问张昌仪：你上次交给我的是什么人的状纸？
English: A few days later, when the case was to be tried, Zhang Xi asked Zhang Changyi: What kind of paper did you give me last time?

古文：愔问用几两丝。
现代文：张昌仪回答说：我也不记得了。
English: Zhang Changyi replied, "I don't remember either."

古文：对曰：五两。
现代文：只要见到姓薛的就送上去。
English: Anyone with the surname Xue will be sent there.

古文：愔令竖子取五两丝来，每两别与十钱手功之直。
现代文：张锡回到官衙中查检，见桌案内放有六十多个姓薛的人的状纸。
English: Zhang Xi returned to the official residence to check. There were more than sixty pieces of paper with the surname Xue on the table guide.

古文：段崇简
现代文：将这些伏纸一并都送了上去。
English: I sent them all up together.

古文：唐深州刺史段崇简性贪暴。
现代文：唐朝武则天执政期间，政治腐败到这种地步了啊！
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu Zetian of the Tang Dynasty, political corruption reached such a level!

古文：到任追里正，令括客。
现代文：李邕唐朝时，江夏人李邕在海州为官。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Li Xi, a native of Jiangxia, was a high-ranking official in Haizhou.

古文：云：不得称无。上户每家取两人，下户取一人，以刑胁之。
现代文：一次，日本国派遣唐使来到海州，一共五百人，带着国书，乘十只船。
English: Once, Japan sent a Tang envoy to Haeju, a total of five hundred people, with a national document, on ten ships.

古文：人惧，皆妄通。
现代文：船上载满了珍宝，价值几百万钱。
English: The ship was loaded with treasure worth millions of dollars.

古文：通讫，简云：不用唤客来，但须见主人。
现代文：李邕见到这些珍宝后，将五百名遣唐使安排在驿馆住下，一切生活用品都给以优待，但是禁止随便出入。
English: After seeing these treasures, Li Yu arranged for five hundred envoys to the Tang Dynasty to live in the Shuguang Pavilion. All daily necessities were given preferential treatment, but it was forbidden to enter and leave at will.

古文：主人到，处分每客索绢一疋。
现代文：当天夜里，李邕派人将日本遣唐使船上的珍宝尽数取走，将船沉入海中。
English: In the evening of the same day, Li Yu sent people to take away as many treasures as possible from the Japanese envoy to Tang and sank the ship into the sea.

古文：约一月之内，得绢三十车。
现代文：天亮后，对所有驿馆的人谎称：昨夜海潮特别凶猛，日本国使臣的船全都漂失得不知去向。
English: After daybreak, he lied to all the people in the pavilion: Last night, the tides were particularly fierce, and all the ships of the Japanese envoys were lost.

古文：罢任发，至鹿城县。
现代文：于是，李邕将这件事上报给朝廷。
English: As a result, Li Yao reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：有一车装绢未满载，欠六百疋。
现代文：皇上发下来文书，命令李邕造十艘船，派遣船工五百人，送日本使臣回本国。
English: The emperor sent down a document, ordering Li Xi to build ten ships, dispatch five hundred shipwrights, and send Japanese envoys back to their home country.

古文：即唤里正，令满之。
现代文：李邕接到文书后，准备了船与水手。
English: After receiving the document, Li Xuan prepared the ship and sailors.

古文：里正计无所出，遂于县令丞尉家，一倍举送。
现代文：临出发前，水手们向李邕辞行时，李邕暗示水手们说：日本国离这非常遥远，海中风浪又大，怎么能够返回来呢？
English: Before the departure, when the sailors resigned to Li Yao, Li Yao hinted to the sailors saying: Japan is very far away from here, the sea is stormy and big, how can I return?

古文：至都，拜邠州刺史。
现代文：此去任凭你们自己见机行事了。
English: You are left to your own devices.

古文：崔玄信
现代文：水手们听了这话不由得大喜。
English: The sailors were overjoyed to hear this.

古文：唐安南部护崔玄信命女婿裴惟岳摄受州刺史。
现代文：起程在海上行了几天，趁日本国使臣没有准备，在一天夜里将他们全部杀死，驾着空船回到海州。
English: After a few days at sea, they took advantage of the unprepared Japanese envoys, killed them all in one night, and drove the empty ship back to Haeju.

古文：贪暴，取金银财物向万贯。
现代文：李邕喜欢收养门客，共收养了亡命徒几百人，用这些人从事抢劫的活动，事情败露就杀掉。
English: Li Yao liked to adopt clients. In total, he adopted hundreds of fugitives. He used these people to engage in robberies, and killed them if things were revealed.

古文：有首领取妇，裴即要障车绫。
现代文：李邕后来没有得到善终，而是因为他的残酷无度被反坐，处以殛刑。
English: Li Yao did not have a good death later, but because of his cruelty, he was sentenced to be beaten.

古文：索一千疋，得八百疋，仍不肯放。
现代文：裴佶唐朝人裴佶，曾经讲过这样一件事：裴佶小时候，他姑夫在朝中为官，关声很好，被认为是清官。
English: Pei Xuan, a Tang Dynasty Pei Xuan, once said something like this: When Pei Xuan was a child, his uncle was an official in the imperial court. He had a good reputation and was considered to be a high-ranking official.

古文：捉新妇归，戏之三日，乃放还。
现代文：一次，裴佶到姑夫家，正赶上姑夫退朝回来，深深叹口气，自言自语地说：崔昭何许人也，众口一致说他好。
English: Once, when Pei Yao arrived at his uncle's house, just in time for his uncle to return from the retreat, he sighed deeply and said to himself, "Cui Zhao is a great man. Everyone agrees that he is good."

古文：首领更不复纳，裴即领物至扬州。安南及问至，擒之。
现代文：一定是行贿了。这样下去，国家怎么呢个不混乱呢。
English: It must have been a bribe. If this continues, the country will be in chaos.

古文：物并纳官。裴亦鏁项至安南，以谢百姓。
现代文：裴佶的姑夫话还未说完，守门人进来通报说说：寿州崔刺史请求拜见老爷。
English: Before Pei Yao's uncle had finished speaking, the gatekeeper came in to announce that: Shoushu Cui Zhishi requested to see the master.

古文：及海口，会赦免。严升期
现代文：裴佶的姑夫听了后很是生气，呵斥门人一顿，让门人用鞭子将崔刺史赶出府门。
English: After listening to this, Pei Yao's uncle was very angry. He yelled at the doorman and asked the doorman to use a whip to drive Cui Zhishi out of the gate.

古文：唐洛州司仓严升期摄侍御史，于江南巡察。
现代文：过了很长工夫，这位崔刺史整束衣带强行拜见裴佶的姑夫。
English: After a long time, this Cui Zhishi with a full set of clothes and a belt forcibly went to see Pei Yao's uncle.

古文：性嗜牛肉，所至州县，烹宰极多。事无大小，入金则弭。
现代文：又过了一会儿，裴佶的姑夫急着命家人给崔刺史上茶。
English: After a while, Pei Yao's uncle hurriedly ordered his family to give Cui Zhisheng tea.

古文：凡到处，金银为之涌贵。
现代文：一会儿，又命准备酒宴。
English: A moment later, he was again ordered to prepare a banquet.

古文：故江南人呼为金牛御史。
现代文：一会儿，又命令做食饭。
English: A moment later, he ordered the food to be prepared.

古文：张昌仪唐张昌仪为洛阳令，恃易之权势，属官无不允者。
现代文：送走崔刺史后，裴佶的姑姑问他姑夫：你为什么前边那么踞骄而后又那么谦恭？
English: After seeing off Cui Zhishi, Pei Yao's aunt asked his uncle: Why are you so arrogant in front and so humble behind?

古文：鼓声动，有一人姓薛赍金五十两，遮而奉之。
现代文：裴佶的姑夫面带有恩于人的神色走进屋门，挥手让裴佶离开这里，说：去，到学堂休息去。
English: Pei Yao's uncle walked into the door with a benevolent look on his face and waved for Pei Yao to leave, saying, "Go, go to school and rest."

古文：仪领金，受其状。至朝堂，付天官侍郎张锡。
现代文：裴佶出屋还没走下门前的台阶，回头一看，见他姑夫从怀中掏出一张纸，上面写着：赠送粗官绸一千疋。
English: Before Pei Xuan Deya walked down the steps in front of the door, he looked back and saw his uncle pull out a piece of paper from his arms, on which was written: "A gift of 1,000 coarse gauze."

古文：数日失状，以问仪。
现代文：元载唐朝时，宰相元载获罪被抄家时，在他家抄出胡椒九百石。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, when Prime Minister Yuan Zhao was arrested and his house was searched, 900 kilos of pepper was found in his house.

古文：仪曰：我亦不记得，但姓薛者即与。
现代文：张延赏唐朝时，张延赏即将担任度支使。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Yanbo was about to serve as the imperial envoy.

古文：锡检案内姓薛姓者六十余人，并令与官，其蠹政也若此。
现代文：他知道有一宗大案子是冤案。每每提起这宗大案都扼腕叹息。待到张延赏担任度支使后，召见掌管讼案、刑狱的官吏严加训戒，并且责令他们说：这宗案子拖得太久了，你们必须在十天之内将它审理完。
English: He knew that there was a big case that was unjust. Every time he brought up this big case, he sighed. After Zhang Yanbo was appointed as the provincial party secretary, he summoned the officials in charge of the lawsuit and the prison and severely disciplined them and ordered them: "This case is too long, you must complete it within ten days."

古文：李邕唐江夏季邕之为海州也。
现代文：第二天来到府衙办公，见桌案上放着一张便笺上写：出钱三万贯，请你不要过问这宗案子。
English: The next day, when I came to the prefectural government office, there was a note on the desk saying, "I paid 30,000 yuan, please don't ask about this case."

古文：日本国使至海州，凡五百人，载国信。
现代文：张延赏看后大怒，更加督促这宗案子。
English: Zhang Yanbo was furious after seeing this, and pressed the case even harder.

古文：有十船，珍货数百万。
现代文：第三天，又在书案上看见一张便笺，上写：出钱五万贯。
English: On the third day, I saw another slip of paper on the bookcase, which read: "Pay fifty thousand yuan."

古文：邕见之，舍于馆。厚给所须，禁其出入。
现代文：张延赏看后更加气愤，责令两日内必须审理完毕，结案。
English: Zhang Yanbo became even angrier after watching, and ordered that the trial must be completed within two days and the case closed.

古文：夜中，尽取所载而沉其船。
现代文：第四天，书案上依然放着一张便笺，上面写着：钱十万贯。
English: On the fourth day, there was still a note on the bookcase, which read: "One hundred thousand yuan."

古文：既明，讽所馆人白云：昨夜海潮大至，日本国船尽漂失，不知所在。
现代文：张延赏看后再也不过问这件案子了。孩子们得知这件事情后，找机会问张延赏为什么不继续过问这宗案子啦？张延赏回答说：钱出到十万贯，能通神啊！
English: After Zhang Yanbo read it, he never asked about the case again. After the children learned about the matter, they took the opportunity to ask Zhang Yanbo why he did not continue to ask about the case? Zhang Yanbo replied: The money is up to one hundred thousand yuan, it can communicate with the gods!

古文：于是以其事奏之。
现代文：没有不可转回的事情。我害怕遭受祸患，不得不接受了啊！
English: There is no such thing as irreversible. I'm afraid of suffering misfortune, I have to accept it!

古文：敕下邕，令造船十艘，善水者五百人，送日本使至其国。
现代文：卢昂
English: Rouen

古文：邕既具舟具及水工。
现代文：唐朝时，卢昂主管福建盐铁。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Luang was in charge of the Fujian Salt and Iron Company.

古文：使者未发，水工辞邕。邕曰：日本路遥，海中风浪，安能却返？
现代文：他贪脏的罪行被举发后，在抄没家产中，抄出一只碧宝石的枕头，有半斗那么大，置放在黄金制作的床上。
English: After his dastardly crime was exposed, among the confiscated property was a half-moon-sized pillow made of lapis lazuli and placed on a bed made of gold.

古文：前路任汝便宜从事。送人喜。
现代文：在处理卢昂贪脏的案子时，御史中丞孟简审讯、查办了整整一个月，才有突破性的进展。
English: When dealing with the case of corruption in Luang Prabang, Meng Jian, the chief historian, investigated and investigated for a whole month before making a breakthrough.

古文：行数日，知其无备，夜尽杀之，遂归。
现代文：召见珠宝商人来评估这只碧宝石枕，有的珠宝商人说这只碧宝石枕是无价之宝；有人说是美石，不是真的碧宝石。
English: Jewellery dealers were called in to assess the stone, with some saying it was priceless and others saying it was a "beauty stone" rather than a gemstone.

古文：邕又好客，养亡命数百人，所在攻劫，事露则杀之。
现代文：崔咸唐朝时，中书舍人崔咸曾经受过一位高官的赏识。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Cui Xian, a scholar of Chinese calligraphy, was once praised by a high-ranking official.

古文：后竟不得死，且坐其酷滥也。
现代文：崔咸在七十二岁的时候，为这位高官写了一个表章上报朝廷请求表彰这位高官。
English: At the age of seventy-two, Cui Xian wrote a seal for the high-ranking official and submitted it to the imperial court to request that the high-ranking official be commended.

古文：裴佶唐裴佶常话，少时姑夫为朝官，有雅望。
现代文：这时，崔咸任司封郎中，从感恩的角度，在表章中极力赞美这位大僚。
English: At this time, from the perspective of gratitude, Cui Xian, who was the second-in-command, praised this great colleague in his epitaph.

古文：佶至宅，会其退朝。深叹曰：崔照何人，众口称美，必行贿也。
现代文：皇上下来命令，让议论一下并且让崔咸为这位大僚写表彰的文章。其实，这位大僚并没有什么美善的德行值得赞美的，写一章就可以了。
English: The emperor ordered that the matter be discussed and that Cui Xianlu write a commendation article for his colleague. In fact, the colleague did not have any virtuous deeds worthy of praise, so he could just write a chapter.

古文：如此安得不乱？
现代文：三五个月后，崔咸还在门馆中写这篇文章。谁也不到门馆去。
English: Three to five months later, Cui Xian is still writing this article in the gate hall. No one goes to the gate hall.

古文：言未讫，门者报曰：寿州崔使君候谒。
现代文：家里的晚辈人都在私下骂崔咸老了老了还拍马庇。
English: The younger generation of the family all privately scolded Cui Xian for being too old and for still photographing Ma Pei.

古文：姑夫怒，呵门者，将鞭之。
现代文：崔咸非常后悔，对家中子弟们说：有重要的事，一定不要跟你们年轻人说啊！
English: Cui Xian was very regretful and said to the children at home, "There are important things, you must not tell your young people!"

古文：良久，束带强见。
现代文：崔远唐朝时，宰相崔远将退职回家。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Prime Minister Cui Yuan would retire and return home.

古文：须臾，命茶甚急。
现代文：亲朋中关系密切的人，都鼓励他不要退下来。
English: Close friends and relatives are encouraging him not to back down.

古文：又命酒馔，又命术为饭。
现代文：只有他的大女儿知书达理，劝他退职。
English: Only his eldest daughter had the wisdom to advise him to resign.

古文：佶姑曰：前何踞而后恭。
现代文：于是崔远听从大女儿的话，决定退职回家。
English: So Cui Yuan listened to her eldest daughter and decided to retire and return home.

古文：及入门，有德色。
现代文：崔远退职在家赋闲了一二年，呆得心情郁闷烦躁。
English: Cui Yuan retired at home and was idle for a year or two, feeling depressed and irritable.

古文：揖佶曰：憩学中。佶未下阶，出怀中一纸，乃赠官絁千匹。
现代文：对儿子、侄子们说：自从退职回家后，再也没有得到各道属员们送的金的、铜的茶笼子。
English: He said to his sons and nephews, "Since I retired and returned home, I haven't received any more gold or copper tea cages sent by members of various sects.

古文：元载唐元载破家，藉财物，得胡椒九百石。
现代文：近些日子，总共才有四个人来跟我玩猜枚的游戏啊！于是，崔远又重新出山作官。
English: Recently, a total of only four people came to play a guessing game with me! So, Cui Yuan re-emerged as an official.

古文：张延赏
现代文：江淮贾人
English: Jianghuai Jia Ren

古文：唐张延赏将判度支，知一大狱颇有冤屈，每甚扼腕。
现代文：江淮有一位商人，积存许多米不卖等米价上涨。这位米商，让人画一个人，手中端着一斗，旁边写上：每斗米价一千文钱。
English: In Jianghuai, there is a merchant who hoards a lot of rice and doesn't sell it until the price of rice rises. This rice merchant asked people to draw a person holding a bucket in his hand, and wrote on the side: "The price of rice per bucket is one thousand yuan."

古文：及判使。
现代文：之后，将这幅宣传画悬贴在米市上。
English: The poster was then put up in the rice market.

古文：召狱吏，严诫之，且曰：此狱已久，旬日须了。
现代文：扬子留守余粲知道这件事情后，将这位米商逮捕到官衙中，活活将他施用杖刑打死。
English: After Yangzi knew about this, he arrested the American businessman and beat him to death with a cane.

古文：明旦视事，案上有一小帖子曰：钱三万贯，乞不问此狱。
现代文：龙昌裔戊子这年大旱，赤地千里。庐陵人龙昌裔囤米几千斛，趁机高价出卖。稍后，米价跌下来一些，龙昌裔于是写祷文，祈求上天再有一个月不下雨，之后亲自到神冈庙去祷告。
English: This year, there was a severe drought, and there were thousands of miles of red earth. Longchang people in Fuling sold thousands of stalks of glutinous rice at a high price. Later, the price of rice fell a little, so Longchang people wrote a prayer, asking God for another month without rain, and then went to the Jinguang Temple to pray in person.

古文：公大怒，更促之。明日，复见一帖子来曰：钱五万贯。
现代文：龙昌裔祷告完毕后，在回家的路上坐在一座亭子里稍休息一会儿。
English: After the prayer, the Longchang people sat in a pavilion to rest for a while on their way home.

古文：公益怒，令两日须毕。
现代文：忽然有一片黑云自神冈庙后涌过来。少顷，雷雨大作，龙昌裔被震死在亭子外面。
English: Suddenly, a dark cloud came from behind the Jinguang Temple. Suddenly, there was a thunderstorm, and Longchang was killed outside the pavilion.

古文：明旦，案上复见帖子曰：钱十万贯。
现代文：官司检视龙昌裔的尸体，解去他的头巾，在发髻中查到一张写着字的纸，就是他写的那篇祷文。
English: The prosecution examined the body of Longchang, removed his headscarf and found a piece of paper with writing in his hair, which was the prayer he had written.

古文：公遂止不问。
现代文：龙昌裔有个孙子，将去参加童子举试。
English: Longchang has a grandson who is going to take part in the boy's entrance examination.

古文：子弟承间侦之，公曰：钱至十万贯，通神矣，无不可回之事。
现代文：乡邻们将他的这件事告诉了举试官。于是他的孙子没有被获准举选。
English: Neighbours told the returning officer about him and his grandson was not allowed to stand.

古文：吾恐及祸，不得不受也。
现代文：安重霸前蜀王朝时，简州刺史安重霸贪得无厌。
English: When An Chongba ruled the former Shu Dynasty, he was insatiably greedy.

古文：卢昂
现代文：州中百姓中，有一位姓邓的油商，能弈棋，家中也比较富裕。
English: Among the people in the state, there is an oil trader surnamed Deng, who can play chess, and his family is relatively wealthy.

古文：唐卢昂主福建盐铁，赃罪大发，有瑟瑟枕大如半斗，以金床乘之。
现代文：安重霸将他找来对弈，只让他站着弈棋，不许坐下。邓油商每布下一子后，安重霸立即让他退到西北窗下站在那里，待自己盘算好棋路，才布子。
English: An Chongba found him to play the game, but only let him stand and play the game, not allowed to sit down. After the oil trader Deng played a piece of cloth, An Chongba immediately let him withdraw to the northwest window and stand there, and wait for him to calculate the chess way, and then play the cloth.

古文：御史中丞孟简按鞠累月，乃得以进。
现代文：下了一天不过只布下十几个子罢了。邓油商又累又饿，几乎到了体力支持不住的程度。
English: After one day, only a dozen or so chicks hatched. Deng Oilman was tired and hungry, almost to the point of being physically unable to support himself.

古文：召市人估之，或云宝无价。
现代文：第二天，安重霸又派人召见邓油商继续弈棋。
English: The next day, An Chongba also sent someone to summon Deng Yushang to continue the game.

古文：或云美石，非真瑟瑟地。
现代文：有人告诉邓油商说：这个刺史喜爱受贿，他找你的本意不是为了弈棋啊！
English: Someone told Mr. Deng, the oil trader, "This thug likes to take bribes. He didn't come looking for you to play chess!"

古文：崔咸
现代文：听的人，都讥笑他。
English: And all who heard him were mocking him.

