古文：○度宗度宗端文明武景孝皇帝，讳禥，太祖十一世孙。
现代文：度宗端文明武景孝皇帝，名甚，太祖十一世孙。
English: Emperor Wujing Xiao, the 11th generation descendant of Emperor Taizu.

古文：父嗣荣王与芮，理宗母弟也。
现代文：父亲是荣王赵与丙，是理宗的同母弟弟。
English: His father was Rongwang Zhao and C, the younger half-brother of Rizong.

古文：嘉熙四年四月九日生于绍兴府荣邸。
现代文：嘉熙四年四月九日，生于绍兴府荣邸。
English: He was born on April 9 of the 4th year of the Jia Hei Dynasty in the Rong Residence of Shaoxing Prefecture.

古文：初，荣文恭王夫人全氏梦神言： 帝命汝孙，然非汝家所有。 
现代文：起初，荣文恭王夫人全氏梦到神说： 帝命汝孙，然非汝家所有。 
English: At first, Mrs. Rongwen Gongwang Quanzhi dreamed of God saying, "The imperial command to your grandchildren does not belong to your family.

古文：嗣荣王夫人钱氏梦日光照东室，是夕，齐国夫人黄氏亦梦神人采衣拥一龙纳怀中，已而有娠。
现代文：嗣荣王夫人钱氏梦到日光照耀东边房间，这天晚上，齐国夫人黄氏也梦到穿彩衣的神人拥抱一条龙纳到怀中，不久怀孕。
English: Tsurong Wang's wife Qian Shi dreamed that the sun was shining in the eastern room. That night, Qigong's wife Huang Shi also dreamed that a god-man in a colorful robe hugged a dragon to his bosom, and soon became pregnant.

古文：及生，室有赤光。
现代文：等到出生那天，房间里有赤光。
English: On the day of the birth, there was a red light in the room.

古文：资识内慧，七岁始言，言必合度，理宗奇之。
现代文：度宗资性聪明，七岁才开始说话，出言必定合乎法度典常，理宗对他的表现非常惊奇。
English: Du Zong Zi is very intelligent. He only started to speak at the age of seven. His utterances must be in accordance with the law. Li Zong was very surprised by his performance.

古文：及在位岁久，无子，乃属意托神器焉。
现代文：等到理宗在位时间一长，没有儿子，于是有意把国家统治大权交付给度宗。
English: When the reign of Emperor Dezong became too long and he had no son, he intentionally gave the power to rule the country to Emperor Duzong.

古文：淳祐六年十月己丑，赐名孟启，以皇侄授贵州刺史，入内小学。
现代文：淳六年十月初四，赐名孟启，以皇侄身份授为贵州刺史。在皇宫小学就读。
English: On the fourth day of the tenth month of the sixth year of King Jun, he was given the name Meng Qi, and he was awarded the title of Guizhou historian as a royal nephew. He studied at the Imperial Palace Primary School.

古文：七年正月乙卯，授宜州观察使，就王邸训习。
现代文：淳七年正月初一，授为宜州观察使，在王邸接受教育。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of King Jun, he was awarded the title of Yizhou Observer and received education at the royal residence.

古文：九年正月乙巳，授庆远军节度使，封益国公。
现代文：淳九年正月初二，授为庆远军节度使，封为益国公。
English: On the second day of the first month of the ninth year of the June, he was awarded the Qingyuan Army Festival Envoy, and was given the title of Yikokukong.

古文：十一年正月壬戌，改赐名孜，进封建安郡王。
现代文：淳十一年正月初一，改赐名孜，进封建安郡王。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 11th month of the 1st year of the 11th month of the 11th year of the 11th month of the 12th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11

古文：宝祐元年正月庚辰，诏立为皇子，改赐今名。
现代文：宝元年正月初一，下诏立为皇子，改赐今名。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the Hōgen era, he was enthroned as the prince and given his current name.

古文：癸未，授崇庆军节度使、开府仪同三司，进封永嘉郡王。
现代文：初四，授崇庆军节度使、开府仪同三司，进封永嘉郡王。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, he was awarded the title of the Qingjun Festival Delegate, the title of Kaifu Ceremonial, and the title of Yongjia County King.

古文：二年七月，以宗正少卿蔡抗兼翊善。
现代文：宝二年七月，以宗正少卿蔡抗兼诩善。
English: In July of the 2nd year of the Heian period, Tsai Antoku, the younger brother of Emperor Zongzheng, ascended to the throne.

古文：时资善堂初建，理宗制《堂记》，书以赐王。
现代文：当时资政堂刚刚建立，理宗撰制堂主己，书写赐给他。
English: At that time, Shiseido had just been established, and the founder of the Risso sect was the head of the temple, and the writing was given to him.

古文：十月癸酉，进封忠王。
现代文：十月初四，进封忠王。
English: On the fourth day of the tenth month of the lunar calendar, King Zhongwang of Jinbo was crowned.

古文：十一月壬寅，加元服，赐字邦寿。
现代文：十一月初三，加冠行成人礼，赐字邦寿。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the coming-of-age ceremony will be held, and the word "Bongshou" will be given.

古文：五年十月庚子，授镇南、遂安军节度使。
现代文：宝五年十月十九日，授镇南、遂安军节度使。
English: On October 19th of the 5th year of Bao, Zhenan and Su'an were awarded the title of military envoys.

古文：景定元年六月壬寅，立为皇太子，赐字长源，命杨栋、叶梦鼎为太子詹事。
现代文：景定元年六月初六，立为皇太子，赐字长源，命杨栋、叶梦鼎为太子詹事。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 1st year of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th year of the 9th month of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 16

古文：七月丁卯，太子入东宫。
现代文：七月初一，太子人居东宫。
English: On the first day of July, the East Palace of the Prince's Residence was completed.

古文：癸未，行册礼。
现代文：十七日，举行册封礼。
English: On the 17th, the canonization ceremony was held.

古文：时理宗家教甚严，鸡初鸣问安，再鸣回宫，三鸣往会议所参决庶事。
现代文：当时理宗家教甚严，鸡初鸣问安，再鸣回宫，三鸣前往会议所参加处理国家政事。
English: At that time, Li Zong's family discipline was very strict. The rooster first crowed to ask for good luck, then crowed to return to the palace, and then crowed three times to go to the conference hall to participate in dealing with national politics.

古文：退入讲堂，讲官讲经，次讲史，终日手不释卷。
现代文：然后退回讲堂，讲官讲经，其次讲史，终日手不释卷。
English: Then they returned to the lecture hall, where the lecturer lectured on the Bible, followed by history, and remained with the scroll all day.

古文：将晡，复至榻前起居，率为常。
现代文：天将晚时，又到榻前起居，习以为常。
English: When it's getting late in the day, I get up before I go to bed, I'm used to it.

古文：理宗问今日讲何经，答之是，则赐坐赐茶；否，则为之反覆剖析；又不通，则继以怒，明日须更覆讲。
现代文：理宗问他今日讲的是何经，答对了，则赐座赐茶；否则，为之反复讲解分析；仍不明白的话，理宗会随之发怒，要求明天必须再予以讲解。
English: Rinzong asked him what sutra he was talking about today, and if he answered correctly, he would be given a seat and tea; otherwise, he would repeatedly explain and analyze it; if he still did not understand, Rinzong would get angry and demand that he must explain it again tomorrow.

古文：二年正月丁丑，谒孔子于太学，请以张栻、吕祖谦列从祀。
现代文：景定二年正月十五日，到太庙朝拜孔子，请以张试、吕祖谦列为从祀。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the second year of King Ding's reign, go to the Imperial Temple to worship Confucius. Please make Zhang Qian and Lü Zuqian your followers.

古文：十二月癸卯，册永嘉郡夫人全氏为皇太子妃。
现代文：十二月十五日，册立永嘉郡夫人全氏为皇太子妃。
English: On December 15, Lady Zeng of Yongjia County was registered as the Crown Princess.

古文：五年十月丁卯，理宗崩。受遗诏，太子即皇帝位。
现代文：景定五年十月二十六日，理宗去世，度宗接受遗诏，即皇帝位。
English: On the 26th day of October in the 5th year of Jingding, Rizong passed away, and Duzong accepted his last will and testament, that is, the emperor's throne.

古文：戊辰，尊皇后谢氏曰皇太后，生日为寿崇节。
现代文：二十七日，尊皇后谢氏为皇太后，生日为寿崇节。
English: On the 27th, the revered Empress Xie became the empress dowager, and her birthday was celebrated as Zhouzong Festival.

古文：庚午，宰执、文武百官诣祥曦殿表请听政，不允。
现代文：二十九日，宰执、文武百官到样曦殿上表请求听政，没有允准。
English: On the 29th, the leader and hundreds of civil and military officials went to the upper table of the Soxi Palace to ask to listen to the government, but they were not allowed.

古文：辛未，大赦。
现代文：三十日，大赦。
English: Xinwei, the implementation of the amnesty.

古文：十一月壬申，宰执以下日表请视朝，不允。
现代文：十一月初一，宰执以下连日以来不断上表请求上殿处理政事，度宗没允准。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the chief abbot and his subordinates had been requesting to go to the palace to deal with political affairs for several days. However, Emperor Wuzong did not grant their request.

古文：丁丑，凡七表，始从。
现代文：初六，共七次上表才允准臣僚的请求。
English: In the first six years of the year, a total of seven times the request of the ministers was granted.

古文：丙戌，帝初听政，御后殿，命马廷鸾、留梦炎兼侍读，李伯玉、陈宗礼、范东叟兼侍讲，何基、徐几兼崇政殿说书。
现代文：十五日，度宗初次听政，到后殿，命令马廷莺、留梦炎兼侍读，李伯玉、陈宗礼、范东雯兼侍读，何基、徐几兼崇政殿说书。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Du Zong listened to the politics for the first time. He went to the back hall and ordered Ma Tingtao and Lu Mengyan to serve as readers, Li Bo-yu, Chen Zongli and Fan Dongwen to serve as readers, and He Ji and Xu Jian to read the books in the back hall.

古文：诏求直言。
现代文：诏求直言。
English: Direct speech is required.

古文：又诏先朝旧臣赵葵、谢方叔、程元凤、马光祖、李曾伯各上言以匡不逮。
现代文：又下诏先朝旧臣赵葵、谢方叔、程元凤、马光祖、李曾伯分别上书陈述做得不够的事情。
English: He also ordered the former vassals Zhao Kwai, Uncle Xie Fang, Cheng Yuanfeng, Ma Guangzu and Li Zengbo to separately submit a letter to state the things that have not been done enough.

古文：召江万里、王龠、洪天锡、汤汉等赴阙。
现代文：召江万里、王抓、洪天锡、汤汉等前往朝廷。
English: Zhao Jiang Wanli, Wang Ci, Hong Tianxi, Tang Han and others went to the imperial court.

古文：诏躬行三年丧。
现代文：下诏亲自服丧三年。
English: It's been three years since I attended the funeral in person.

古文：复济王竑元赠少师、节度使，追封镇王，谥昭肃，有司讨论坟制增修之。
现代文：恢复济王赵原赠少师、节度使，追封镇王，溢号昭肃，有关部门讨论坟制，予以增修。
English: The king of Ji Province, Zhao Yuan, was restored as a minor teacher and festival envoy, the king of the town was chased, and the name of the town was abolished. The relevant departments discussed the cemetery system and made additional repairs.

古文：加封嗣荣王与芮武康、宁江军节度使，依前太师、判宗正事。
现代文：加封嗣荣王赵与丙为武康、宁江军节度使，依前为太师、判宗正事。
English: Zhao and Cui, the heirs of King Rong, were appointed as the envoys of Wu Kang and the Ningjiang Army, respectively, and Yixian was appointed as the Grand Master and the judge of the main affairs of the dynasty.

古文：诏抚劳边防将士。
现代文：下诏安抚慰劳边防将士。
English: The following edict was issued to appease and comfort the toiling border guards.

古文：监察御史劾宦官李忠辅、何舜卿等赃罪，并窜远方。
现代文：监察御史弹勃宦官李忠辅、何舜卿等犯贪赃罪，都流窜远方。
English: The supervising magistrate Li Zhongyu and the magistrate He Yuxing, who committed the crime of embezzlement, both went into exile.

古文：戊戌，诏儒臣日侍经筵，辅臣观讲。
现代文：二十七日，下诏儒臣日侍经筵，辅臣观讲。
English: On the twenty-seventh day, the next day, Confucius attended the sermon, and the assistant minister watched the sermon.

古文：乙未，命洪天锡以侍御史兼侍读。
现代文：乙未日，命令洪天锡以侍御史身份兼侍读。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month, Hong Tianxi was ordered to serve as an aide-de-camp to the emperor.

古文：十二月辛丑，诏改明年为咸淳元年，行铜钱关子，率贯以七百七十文足。
现代文：十二月初一，下诏改明年为咸淳元年，推行铜钱关子，以一贯当七百七十文用。
English: On the first day of December, the lower edict changed the next year to the first year of Xianjun, and promoted the introduction of copper coins, with a consistent maximum of seven hundred and seventy coins.

古文：壬寅，戒赃吏绝贡羡余。
现代文：初二，告诫赃吏不得进贡多收取的钱物。
English: On the second day of the first month, the officials were warned that they should not take away the money and goods collected in excess of the tribute.

古文：甲辰，诏以生日为乾会节。
现代文：初四，下诏以生日为乾会节。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the lunar calendar, it was announced that the birthday would be celebrated as a dry festival.

古文：初开经筵，讲殿以熙明为名。
现代文：初开经筵，讲殿以熙明为名。
English: At the beginning of the sermon, the lecture hall was named after Ximing.

古文：礼部尚书马廷鸾进读《大学衍义序》，陈心法之要。
现代文：礼部尚书马廷莺进读大学衍义序，陈述心法的要领。
English: In the etiquette department, Martin Tingyu read the university's preamble and expounded on the essentials of the mind.

古文：是岁，两浙、江东西、湖南北、广东西、福建、成都、京西、潼川、夔、利路户五百六十九万六千九百八十九，口一千三百二万六千五百三十二。
现代文：这一年，两浙、江东西、湖南北、广东西、福建、成都、京西、撞川、夔、利路户数为五百六十九万六千九百八十九，口数为一千三百零二万六千五百三十二。
English: In the same year, the number of households in Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Hunan, Guangxi, Fujian, Chengdu, West Beijing, Qianchuan, Handan and Lilu was 5,696,989, and the number of mouths was 1,302,565,332.

古文：大理寺奏大辟三十三人。
现代文：大理寺奏报处死囚犯三十三人。
English: Thirty-three prisoners were put to death, according to the Dali Temple report.

古文：咸淳元年春正月辛未朔，日有食之。
现代文：咸淳元年春正月初一，日食。
English: The solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of spring in the first year of Xianjun.

古文：丞相贾似道请为总护山陵使，不允，寻下诏奖谕。
现代文：承相贾似道请求为总护山陵使，没有允准，不久下诏奖谕。
English: Jia Li Dao requested to be the chief guardian of the mausoleum, but was not allowed, and was soon awarded the prize.

古文：癸酉，直学士院留梦炎疏留似道。
现代文：初三，直学士院留梦炎上疏请留用贾似道。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Jia Lian Dao was asked to stay at the Jia Lian Academy.

古文：甲戌，谏议大夫朱貔孙等亦请改命，不报。
现代文：初四，谏议大夫朱貌孙等也请改命，没有得到回答。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the new year, Zhu Maonsun, the doctor of consultation, and others also asked to change their lives, but they did not get an answer.

古文：诏临安免征商三月。
现代文：下诏临安免除三个月的商税征收。
English: Lin'an was exempted from commercial tax for three months.

古文：丙子，京湖制置使吕文德辞免，不允。
现代文：初六，京湖制置使吕文德辞免，没有允准。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the construction of Beijing Lake made Lu Wende resign and was not approved.

古文：二月庚申，置籍中书，记谏官、御史言事，岁终以考成绩。
现代文：二月二十日，在中书省设置簿籍，记载谏官、御史所言事情，岁终据此考核他们的成绩。
English: On February 20th, a book of records was set up in the Chinese Book Ministry to record the things said by eunuchs and imperial historians, and their achievements were assessed according to this at the end of the year.

古文：三月癸酉，似道乞解机政，不允。
现代文：三月初四，贾似道请求解除要职，没有允准。
English: On the 4th of March, Jia Li Dao requested to be relieved of his important position, but was not allowed.

古文：壬午，京湖制司创招镇边军。
现代文：十三日，京湖制司创招镇边军。
English: On the 13th, the Jinghu System Division created the town's border troops.

古文：甲申，葬理宗于永穆陵。
现代文：十五日，葬理宗于永穆陵。
English: On the 15th, Li Zong was buried in Yongmuling.

古文：夏四月壬寅，赏四川都统昝万寿云顶山、金堂峡之功，及其将士。
现代文：夏四月初三，奖赏四川都统咎万寿云顶山和金堂峡之功，并奖赏其余将士。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, Sichuan Province will reward the merits of Wan Shou Yun Ding Mountain and Jintang Gorge, and reward the remaining soldiers.

古文：丁未，寿崇节，免征临安官私房僦地钱。
现代文：初八，寿崇节，免征临安府官私房舍租地钱。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, the Shousong Festival, the money for renting land for government officials and private houses in Lin'an will be exempted.

古文：戊申，乾会节，如上免征，再免在京征商三月。
现代文：初九，乾会节，依前免征租地钱，别外免临安征商三个月。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the Qianhui Festival, according to the previous exemption of land rent money, do not be exempted from the collection of merchants for three months.

古文：自是祥庆、灾异、寒暑皆免。
现代文：从此样庆、灾异、寒暑都援此例免征。
English: From now on, celebrations, natural disasters, and cold and hot weather are all exempt from this tax.

古文：戊午，贾似道特授太师。
现代文：十九日，贾似道特授太师。
English: On the 19th, Jia Xi Dao was awarded the title of Grand Master.

古文：己未，幸景灵宫，发米八万石赡京城民。
现代文：二十日，到景灵宫，发米八万石贩济京城百姓。
English: On the 20th, 80,000 stonecutters came to Jingling Palace to distribute rice to the people of Beijing.

古文：夔路都统王胜以李市、沙平之战获功，转官两资，将士效力者，上其名推赏。
现代文：夔路都统王胜，因李市、沙平之战获战功，转官两资；效力用命的将士，上报姓名给予奖赏。
English: Wang Sheng, the governor of Kushiro, was awarded for his war service in the battles of Li and Shaping. He was promoted to the rank of vice-premier. The soldiers who worked hard and risked their lives were rewarded for reporting their names.

古文：五月己巳，追命史弥远为公忠翊运定策元勋。
现代文：五月初一，追命史弥远为公忠诩运定策元勋。
English: On the first day of May, he was appointed as the founding member of the Public Loyalty Campaign.

古文：闰月乙巳，久雨，京城减直粜米三万石。
现代文：闰五月初八，长期降雨，京城减价桌米三万石。
English: On the 8th day of the 5th month of the leap year, with long-term rainfall, the price reduction table for rice in Beijing reached 30,000 koku.

古文：自是米价高即发廪平粜，以为常。
现代文：从此米价昂贵就发仓米平桌，作为常制。
English: Since then, the price of rice has been expensive, and the flat table of rice in the warehouse has been used as a regular system.

古文：丁未，发钱二十万赡在京小民，钱二十万赐殿、步、马司军人，钱二万三千赐宿卫。
现代文：初十，发钱三十万络贩赡在京小民，出钱二十万赐给殿、步、马司军士兵，出钱二万三千络赐给宿卫士兵。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, 300,000 rupees were given to the peddlers to support the commoners in Beijing, 200,000 rupees were given to the soldiers of the Imperial Palace, the Imperial Guards, and the Horse Guards, and 23,000 rupees were given to the soldiers of the Home Guard.

古文：自是行庆、恤灾，或遇霪雨雪寒，咸赐如上数。
现代文：从此行庆、恤灾，或者遇到霍雨雪寒，都按此例赏赐。
English: From now on, if you go to a celebration, pay tribute to a disaster, or encounter rain, snow or cold, you will be rewarded according to this example.

古文：以江万里参知政事，王龠同知枢密院事、权参知政事，马廷鸾端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
现代文：以江万里为参知政事，王抓为同知枢密院事、代理参知政事，马廷莺为端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
English: With Jiang Wanli as the co-chancellor, Wang Ci as the co-secretary of the Privy Council and acting co-chancellor, and Ma Tingtao as the scholar of the Duanming Palace and the co-signatory of the Privy Council.

古文：丁巳，以钱三十万命临安府通变平物贾。
现代文：二十日，拨钱三十万络命令临安府采取变通办法平抑物价。
English: On the 20th, Lin'an prefecture was ordered to allocate 300,000 yuan to take alternative measures to stabilize prices.

古文：丁卯，故成都马步军总管张顺殁于王事，诏特赠官五转，其子与八官恩泽。
现代文：三十日，已故成都马步军总管张顺为国战死，下诏特赠转五官，其子给与八官待遇。
English: On the 30th, the late Zhang Shun, the general manager of the Chengdu Horse Brigade, died in battle for the country, and the next edict gave him five officials, and his son gave him eight officials.

古文：六月乙酉，名理宗御制之阁曰显文，置学士、直学士、待制、直阁等官。
现代文：六月十八日，理宗御制之阁称为显文，设置学士、直学士、待制、直阁等官。
English: On June 18th, the cabinet of the imperial system of the Rissong Dynasty was called the Xianwen Cabinet, and officials such as the bachelor, the direct bachelor, the waiting cabinet, and the direct cabinet were established.

古文：戊子，沿海制置使叶梦鼎三辞免，不允。
现代文：二十一日，沿海制置使叶梦鼎三次辞免，没有允准。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the coastal system made Ye Mengding resign three times without permission.

古文：己丑，名理宗原庙殿曰章熙。
现代文：二十二日，称理宗原庙殿为章熙。
English: On the 22nd, the original temple hall of Li Zong was named Zhang Xi.

古文：秋七月丁酉，太白昼见。
现代文：秋七月初一，太白星白天显现。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, the Taibai Star appears in the daytime.

古文：初命迪功郎邓道为韶州相江书院山长，主祀先儒周惇颐。
现代文：初命迪功郎邓道为韶州相江书院山长，主祀先儒周敦颐。
English: Deng Dao, the first named Di Gong Lang, was the president of Zhangzhou Aijiang Academy, and the main worshiper was the former Confucius Zhou Dun Yao.

古文：壬寅，参知政事江万里乞归田里，不允。
现代文：初六，参知政事江万里请求解职归田，没有允准。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Jiang Wanli, a member of the governor's council of state, requested to be relieved of his duties and returned to the field, but this was not granted.

古文：戊申，夔路安抚徐宗武城开、达石城，乞推恩，从之。
现代文：十二日，夔路安抚使徐宗武在开州、达州筑石城，请求给予恩赏，被批准。
English: On the 12th, Kushiro pacification envoy Xu Zongwu made a request for a reward in the cities of Kaizhou and Dazhou, which was approved.

古文：壬戌，督州县严钱法，禁民间用牌帖。
现代文：二十六日，督促州县严格执行钱法，禁止民间用牌帖。
English: On the 26th, he urged prefectures and counties to strictly enforce the money law and prohibit the use of cards by the general public.

古文：癸亥，以谅阴，命宰执类试，阮登炳以下，依廷试例出身。
现代文：二十七日，因居丧，命令宰执类试，阮登炳以下，依廷试例出身。
English: On the 27th, due to the death of a resident, it was ordered to preside over the class examination. Nguyn Đnh Thiệu and his subordinates were born in Yingting.

古文：禁在京置窠栅、私系囚。
现代文：禁止在京城设置案栅，私自关押囚犯。
English: It is prohibited to set up a case gate in the capital and detain prisoners without permission.

古文：八月庚辰，命陈奕沿江按阅军防，赐钱二十万给用。
现代文：八月十五日，命令陈奕沿江检阅军防，赐钱二十万供其用度。
English: On August 15, he ordered Chen Yi to go along the river to inspect the military defences and gave him 200,000 yuan for his use.

古文：丁亥，诏有司收民田租，或掊克无艺，监司其严禁戢，违者有刑。
现代文：二十二日，下诏： 有关部门收取百姓田租，或者拮克无度，监司要严加禁止，违者处以刑罚。 
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued: The relevant departments should strictly prohibit the collection of farm rents from the people, or the use of excessive fees, and the supervisors should impose a penalty on violators.

古文：甲午，大元元帅阿术帅大军至庐州及安庆，诸路统制范胜、统领张林、正将高兴、副将孟兴逆战，没于阵。诏胜等各官其一子进勇副尉。
现代文：二十九日，元军元帅阿术率大军到庐州和安庆，各路统制范胜、统领张林、正将高兴、副将孟兴阻击抵抗，死于战阵，下诏分别任命他们的一个儿子为进勇副尉。
English: On the 29th, the former army marshal Ah Ju led a large army to Zhangzhou and Anqing. The commander Fan Sheng, the commander Zhang Lin, the general Zheng He, and the vice-commander Meng Xing blocked the resistance and died in the battle. The next edict separately appointed one of their sons as the vice-lieutenant Jinyong.

古文：九月己酉，以洪天锡为工部侍郎兼侍读。
现代文：九月十四日，以洪天锡为工部侍郎兼侍读。
English: On September 14th, Hong Tianxi was promoted to the post of the workshop's waiter and attendant.

古文：壬子，命宰执访司马光、苏轼、朱熹后人，贤者能者，各上其名录用。
现代文：十七日，命令宰执寻访司马光、苏轼、朱熹等人的后代，贤者能者，各上报姓名录用。
English: On the 17th, he ordered the director to search for the descendants of Sima Guang, Su Xi, Zhu Xi and other people, and the wise and capable ones to report their names for recruitment.

古文：癸丑，吕文德言京湖制、帅、策应三司官属，乞推恩。诏各进一秩。
现代文：十八日，吕文德言京湖制、帅、策应三司官属，请求给予恩赏，下诏各进一秩。
English: On the 18th, Lü Wende said that the three subordinate officials of the Beijing Lake System, Shuai, and Ze should be promoted, and asked for a reward, and each of them was promoted to the next rank.

古文：庚申，吏部侍郎李常上七事，曰崇廉耻、严乡举、择守令、黜贪污、谳疑狱、任儒师、修役法。
现代文：二十五日，吏部侍郎李常上奏七件事，这就是崇廉耻、严乡举、择守令、默贪污、核疑狱、任儒师、修役法。
English: On the 25th, Li Chang, the secretary of the cadre department, listed seven things, namely, the promotion of honesty and integrity, the strict promotion of the countryside, the selection of the guard order, the silent corruption, the nuclear suspicion prison, the appointment of Confucius, and the training method.

古文：冬十月壬申，减四川州县盐酒课，始自景定四年正月一日，再免征三年。
现代文：冬十月初七，减少四川州县盐酒课，自景定四年正月一日起，再免征三年。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of winter, Sichuan Prefecture's salt liquor class will be reduced, and from the first day of the first month of the 4th year of Jingding, it will be exempted for another three years.

古文：乙亥，减田契税钱什四。
现代文：初十，减免田契税钱的十分之四。
English: On the tenth day of the month, four-tenths of the land deed tax is exempted.

古文：庚辰，江安州、潼川安抚司以攻怀、简小富砦战图来上，诏优答以赏。
现代文：十五日，江安州、撞川安抚司以攻怀、简小富寨战图上报，下诏从优奖赏。
English: On the 15th, the Jiang'an and Qianchuan Pacification Departments reported the battle map of Huai, Jian, Xiao and Fuzhai, and issued the award for excellence.

古文：十一月乙未，兄少保、保宁军节度使致仕乃裕薨，赠少傅，追封临川郡王。
现代文：十一月初一，兄少保、保宁军节度使退休赵乃裕去世，赠少傅，追封为临川郡王。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, Zhao Naiyu, who had retired from the Shao Bao and Boryeong Army, was given the posthumous title of King of Linchuan County.

古文：二年春正月癸丑，江万里四请归田、乞祠禄，不允，以为湖南安抚使兼知潭州。
现代文：咸淳二年春正月十九日，江万里四次请求解职归田、给予祠禄，没有允准，任命他为湖南安抚使兼潭州知州。
English: On the 19th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Spring of Hamchun, Jiang Wanli made four requests to be relieved of his duties and sent back to the fields, and to be given a stipend. However, he was not allowed to do so, and he was appointed as the pacifying envoy to Hunan as well as to Tanzhou and Zhizhou.

古文：二月乙巳，侍讲范东叟奏正心之要有三：曰进德，曰立政，曰事天。
现代文：二月乙巳日，侍讲范东雯上奏正心之要有三：一是进德，二是立政，三是事天。
English: On February 21st, there were three things that needed to be done for the attendant speaker Fan Dongwen to be sincere: one was to promote virtue, the second was to establish politics, and the third was to solve problems.

古文：上嘉纳焉。
现代文：度宗称赞并采纳了这个意见。
English: At that time, it was widely believed that Shi Hao was a recommended candidate.

古文：戊寅，诏免湖南漕司积年运上峡米耗折逋直。
现代文：十四日，下诏免除湖南槽司积年运上峡米的耗折拖欠钱物。
English: On the 14th, the following edict exempted the Hunan Trough Division from the arduous arrears of money and goods in the annual transportation of rice up the gorge.

古文：辛卯，诏左、右史循旧制立侍御坐前。
现代文：二十七日，下诏左、右史按照原来的制度立侍皇上宝座前。
English: On the 27th, according to the original system, the left and right histories were set up in front of the imperial throne.

古文：三月庚子，赏夔路总管张喜等防护开、达军功，将士进官有差。
现代文：三月初七，赏夔路总管张喜等防护开州、达州军功，将士进官不等。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month of the year, Zhang Xi, the general manager of Baotou Road, and other military heroes of the defense of Kaizhou and Dazhou were promoted to various positions.

古文：乙巳，诏郡守两年为任，方别授官。
现代文：十二日，下诏郡守两年为一个任期，期满方可另外授官。
English: On the 12th, it was announced that county governors would serve a two-year term, after which they could be promoted to other posts.

古文：戊申，赐敕书奖谕吕文德。
现代文：十五日，赐救书奖谕吕文德。
English: On the 15th, Lu Wende was awarded the Book of Salvation Award.

古文：夏四月乙丑，洪天锡三请祠，不允，以显文阁待制知潭州兼湖南安抚使。
现代文：夏四月初二，洪天锡三次请求祠禄官，没有允准，任命为显文阁待制、潭州知州兼湖南安抚使。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, Hong Tianxi requested the ancestral hall official for the third time, but was not allowed, and was appointed as the Hsienwen Pavilion standby, the Tanzhou Zhizhou and the Hunan Pacifying Envoy.

古文：甲申，侍御史程元岳上言： 帝王致寿之道在修德，后世怵邪说以求之，往辙可鉴。
现代文：二十一日，侍御史程元岳上书说： 帝王达到高寿的秘诀在于修养道德，后世人唯恐被邪说诱惑而追求道德的修养，用以往的经验作为借鉴。
English: On the twenty-first day, the attendant of history Cheng Yuan Yue said in a letter: The secret of the emperor's longevity lies in the cultivation of morality. In the future, the world will pursue the cultivation of morality in order to avoid being tempted by heresies, and use past experience as a reference.

古文：修德之目有三，曰清心，曰寡欲，曰崇俭，皆致寿之原。 
现代文：修养道德的名目有三：一是清心，二是寡欲，三是崇俭。这些都是达到高寿的根源。 
English: There are three aspects to cultivating morality: one is to have a pure heart, the second is to have few desires, and the third is to be frugal. These are the root causes of achieving a long life.

古文：上嘉纳之。
现代文：皇上称赞并采纳了这个意见。
English: The Emperor approved and adopted his opinion.

古文：丁亥，授信州布衣徐直方史馆编校。
现代文：二十四日，授信州布衣徐直方为史馆编校。
English: On the 24th, Xu Naofang from Zhushin County, Buyei Province, became the editor of the history museum.

古文：五月癸丑，诏诸节制将帅讨军实，节浮费，毋占役兵士，致妨训练。
现代文：五月二十一日，下诏各节制将帅讨军实，节浮费，不得占用和役使士兵，导致妨碍训练。
English: On May 21st, the following edict was issued to restrict the number of soldiers, reduce floating expenses, and prohibit the occupation and use of soldiers, which hindered training.

古文：六月丁丑，给罗鬼国化州印。
现代文：六月十六日，给罗鬼国化州印。
English: On June 16th, the state seal of nationalization was given to Luo Ji.

古文：壬午，以衢州饥，命守、令劝分诸藩邸发廪助之。
现代文：二十一日，因瞥州饥荒，命令守臣、县令劝分各藩邸发仓米接助饥民。
English: On the 21st, due to the famine in Gansu Province, he ordered his vassals and county magistrates to allocate storehouses of rice to each residence to help the starving people.

古文：秋七月壬辰，祈雨，诏以来年正月一日郊。
现代文：秋七月初一，祈祷降雨。下诏明年正月初一举行郊祀之礼。
English: On the first day of autumn and the first day of July, pray for rain.

古文：壬寅，礼部侍郎李伯玉言： 人材贵乎善养，不贵速成，请罢童子科，息奔竞，以保幼稚良心。 
现代文：十一日，礼部侍郎李伯玉说： 人才主要在于善于培养，不在于期望迅速成才，请求罢除童子科，不再注重追求名利，从而保养幼稚善良之心。 
English: On the 11th day of the month, Li Bo-yu, the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, said: Talent mainly lies in being good at training, not in expecting to quickly become talented, requesting the removal of the children's department, no longer focusing on the pursuit of fame and fortune, and thus maintaining a childish and kind heart.

古文：诏自咸淳三年为始罢之。
现代文：下诏从咸淳三年起开始废罢。
English: The following edict shall be abolished starting from the third year of Xianjun.

古文：八月甲申，安南国遣使贺登位，献方物。
现代文：八月二十四日，安南国派遣使臣祝贺度宗即皇帝位，进献土特产。
English: On August 24th, Annan sent an envoy to congratulate Duzong, the emperor, and presented local specialties.

古文：九月丙辰，浙西安抚使李芾以台臣黄万石等言，削两秩免。
现代文：九月二十七日，浙西安抚使李莆因台臣黄万石等人议论，削夺二秩免职。
English: On September 27th, the Zhejiang and Xian appeasement envoy Li Wei was removed from his post and stripped of his second rank because of the discussion with the Taiwanese minister Huang Wanshi and others.

古文：冬十一月辛丑，两淮制置使李庭芝立城，屯驻武锐一军，以工役费用及图来上。
现代文：冬十一月十三日，两淮制置使李庭芝立城，屯驻武锐一军，上报工役费用和城图。
English: On the 13th day of November in winter, the two Huai made Li Tingzhi establish the city, stationed a Wu Rui army, and reported the labor costs and the city map.

古文：诏奖劳之。
现代文：下诏奖赏慰问他。
English: The following edict rewarded and consoled him.

古文：乙卯，少师致仕赵葵薨，赠太傅，赐谥忠靖。
现代文：二十七日，少师致仕赵葵去世，赠太傅，赐溢号忠靖。
English: On the 27th, Zhao Kwai, a junior master, passed away. He was presented with the title of Grand Master and given the title of Zhongjing.

古文：丁巳，利东安抚使、知合州张珏调统制史炤、监军王世昌等复广安大梁城，诏推爵赏有差。
现代文：二十九日，利东安抚使、合州知州张环调遣统制史招、监军王世昌等收复广安大梁城，下诏给予爵位和恩赏不等。
English: On the 29th, Li Dongping and Hezhou Chizhou Zhang Huan dispatched Wang Shichang, who was in charge of collecting historical records and supervising the army, to recapture Guang'an Dalian City, and gave him a knighthood and rewards.

古文：十二月丁丑，申严戢贪之令。
现代文：十二月十九日，申严禁敢贪赃之令。
English: On December 19th, he issued an order strictly prohibiting corruption.

古文：甲申，以请先帝谥祭告天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：二十六日，以请先帝溢号祭告天地、宗庙、社翟。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the heavens and earth, the ancestral temple, and the shrine were announced with the exclamation of the former emperor.

古文：丙戌，奉册宝请于南郊，上谥曰建道备德大功复兴烈文仁武圣明安孝皇帝，庙号理宗。
现代文：二十八日，奉册、宝请于南郊，上溢号为建道备德大功复兴烈文仁武圣明安孝皇帝，庙号理宗。
English: On the 28th, Bongchon and Baojie were held in the southern suburb, with the overflowing sign for the establishment of the road, preparation of virtue, great contribution to the revival of the martyrs, literati and warriors, Emperor Ming and Emperor An, and the temple name Rizong.

古文：大理寺奏岁终大辟古十五人。
现代文：大理寺奏报本年处死囚犯三十五人。
English: Dali Temple reported that 35 prisoners were executed this year.

古文：三年春正月己丑朔，郊，大赦。
现代文：咸淳三年春正月初一，举行郊祀，大赦。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Ham Jun, a suburb worship was held, and an amnesty was held.

古文：丁酉，奉皇太后宝，上尊号曰寿和。
现代文：初九，奉上皇太后宝，上尊号为寿和。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, it was presented to the Empress Dowager Hou Bao, and was given the honorific title of Shouwa.

古文：辛丑，寿和太后册、宝礼成，谢堂等二十七人各进一秩，高平郡夫人谢氏等二十二人各进封、特封有差。
现代文：十三日，寿和太后册、宝礼成，谢堂等二十七人各进一秩，高平郡夫人谢氏等二十二人各进封特封不等。
English: On the 13th, 27 people, including the Dowager Dowager Shuhe, Bao Licheng, and Xie Tong, were each promoted to the first rank, and 22 people, including the wife of Gaoping County, Xie Shi, were each promoted to the special grade.

古文：癸卯，册命妃全氏为皇后。戊申，帝诣太学谒孔子，行舍菜礼，以颜渊、曾参、孔伋、孟轲配享，颛孙师升十哲，邵雍、司马光升列从祀，雍封新安伯。
现代文：十五日，册命妃子全氏为皇后，二十日，度宗到太学朝拜孔子，行舍菜礼，以颜渊、曾参、孔吸、孟柯配享，撷孙师升为十哲，邵雍、司马光升列从祀，邵雍封为新安伯。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the record ordered the concubine Quan to be the empress. On the twentieth day, Du Zong went to Taishu to worship Confucius and perform the funeral rites. Yan Yuan, Zeng Zang, Kong Su and Meng Ke were awarded to her. Her grandson Shi was promoted to the rank of ten sages, Shao Yong and Simagang were promoted to the rank of subordinates, and Shao Yongfeng was appointed as the new ambo.

古文：礼部尚书陈宗礼、国子祭酒陈宜中进读《中庸》。
现代文：礼部尚书陈宗礼、国子祭酒陈宜中进读《中庸。
English: Chen Zongli, a member of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and Chen Yi, a student of the National Children's Festival, read "Zhongyong."

古文：己酉，执经官宗礼、讲经官宜中各进一秩，宜中赐紫章服。
现代文：二十一日，执经官陈宗礼、陈宜中各进官品一级，赐陈宜中紫章服。
English: On the twenty-first day, Chen Zongli and Chen Yizhong, the executors of the sutras, were each promoted to the first level of official ranks, and Chen Yizhong was given a purple cap.

古文：太学、武学、宗学、国子学、宗正寺官若医官、监书库、门、庖等，各进一秩，诸斋长谕及起居学生推恩有差。
现代文：太学、武学、宗学、国子学、宗正寺官若医官、监书库、门、厄等，各进一级，各斋长谕、起居学生，给予恩惠不等。
English: For the students of Taigaku, Wushu, So-gaku, Kokushi-gaku, officials of Sojo-ji Temple and doctors, librarians, monks and nuns, and so on, each of them was promoted to the first grade, and each of them was assigned to the post of chief priest, and each of them was assigned to the post of living student, and the favors given to them varied.

古文：乙卯，寿和太后亲属谢奕修、郭自中、黄兴在等二十八人各升补一秩。
现代文：二十七日，寿和太后亲属谢奕修、郭自中、黄兴在等二十八人各升补官品一级。
English: On the 27th, 28 relatives of the Dowager Empress Suwa, including Xie Yixiu, Guo Zizhong and Huang Xing, were promoted to the first level of official products.

古文：二月己未，克复广安军，诏改为宁西军。
现代文：二月初一，攻取广安军，下诏改为宁西军。
English: On the first day of February, the Guang'an Army was captured, and the next edict changed it to the Ningxi Army.

古文：庚申，马光祖再乞致仕，不允。
现代文：初二，马光祖再请求退休，没有允准。
English: On the second day of junior high school, Ma Guangzu again asked to retire, but was not allowed.

古文：乙丑，诏贾似道太师、平章军国重事，一月三赴经筵，三日一朝，治事都堂。
现代文：初七，下诏贾似道为太师、平章军国重事，一月去经筵三次，三日朝见皇上一次，到都堂处理政事。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Emperor Jiaxing decreed that Jiaxing Dao be promoted to the rank of Grand Master and Pingzhang in charge of important military and state affairs. He went to Jing'an three times in January, and met the emperor for the last time on the morning of the third day. He went to the Capital Hall to deal with political affairs.

古文：丙子，枢密院言：知夔州、夔路安抚徐宗武创立卧龙山堡囿。诏宗武带行遥郡团练使，以旌其劳。
现代文：十八日，枢密院说： 夔州知州、夔路安抚使徐宗武创立卧龙山堡囿，下诏徐宗武带行遥郡团练使，表彰他的功绩。 
English: On the 18th, the Privy Council said: "The pacification of Zhangzhou, Chizhou, and Kushiro led Xu Zongwu to found the Wolongshan Fort, and ordered Xu Zongwu to take the group training envoy to Yao County to commend his achievements."

古文：三月癸卯，知房州李鉴及将校杜汝隆、夏喜以战龙光砦有功，优与旌赏。
现代文：三月十六日，知房州李鉴和将校杜汝隆、夏喜因在龙光寨作战有功，从优奖赏。
English: On March 16th, Zhifangzhou Li Jian and officers Du Rulong and Xia Xi were awarded for distinguished service in the battle of Longguangzhai.

古文：夏四月庚申，寿和太后两次册、宝，族兄弟谢奕实等十五人、族侄谢在达等四十七人、族侄孙谢镛等十四人各锡银十两、帛十匹。
现代文：夏四月初三，寿和太后两次册、宝，族兄弟谢奕实等十五人、族侄谢在达等四十七人、族侄孙谢墉等十四人，各赐银十两、帛十匹。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, the Dowager Empress Dowager Shuhe's 2nd and 2nd anniversaries, treasure, 15 ethnic brothers such as Xie Yishi, 47 ethnic nephews such as Xie Zaida, and 14 ethnic nephews such as Xie Yao, were each given 10 silver and 10 horses.

古文：诏：太中大夫全清夫儒科发身，恳陈换班，靖退可尚，特授清远军承宣使、提举佑神观，仍奉朝请。
现代文：下诏：太中大夫全清夫儒科出身，恳切要求换班，这种自然隐退的精神值得称赞，特授为清远军承宣使、提举佑神观，并且逢一日、五日朝见皇上。
English: The following edict was issued: The imperial doctor, Quan Qingfu, was from the Confucian school and earnestly requested a change of shift. This spirit of natural seclusion is commendable. He was specially awarded the title of Qingyuan military envoy, promoted to the position of Shengu, and met with the emperor every morning.

古文：乙酉，张珏护合州春耕，战款龙溪，以状言功，诏趣上立功将士姓名。
现代文：二十八日，张环保护守卫合州地区的春耕生产，在款龙溪作战，以具体实绩计功，下诏尽快报上立功将士姓名。
English: On the 28th, Zhang Huan protected and guarded the spring ploughing production in Hezhou region, and fought in Longxi. He was commended for his specific achievements, and the names of the meritorious soldiers were announced as soon as possible.

古文：五月丁亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月初一，日食。
English: First of May, solar eclipse.

古文：戊申，诏曰： 比常命有司按月给百官奉，惟官愈卑，去民愈亲，仍闻过期弗予，是吏奉吾命不虔也，诸路监司其严纠劾。 
现代文：二十二日，下诏说： 近来曾命令有关部门按月供给百官棒禄，我认为官越低，离民越亲，但是听说还有过期不给的现象，这是官吏奉行我的命令不虔诚的表现，各路监司要严格纠察弹勃。 
English: On the 22nd, he issued the following edict: Recently, I ordered the relevant departments to provide 100 official stipends on a monthly basis. I believe that the lower the official, the closer he is to the people. However, I heard that there is still a phenomenon of not paying after the expiration of the period. This is a manifestation of the impiety of officials in following my orders. All road supervisors should strictly picket.

古文：六月壬戌，加授吕文德少傅，马光祖参知政事，李庭芝兵部尚书，并职任仍旧。
现代文：六月初六，加授吕文德为少傅，马光祖为参知政事，李庭芝为兵部尚书，职任均不变。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：皇后受册推恩，弟全清夫以下十五人官一转，全必以下十七人补承信郎。
现代文：皇后受册给予恩赏，弟全清夫以下十五人转一官，全必肤以下十七人补承信郎。
English: The empress was given a reward for being registered, fifteen people from his younger brother, Quan Qingfu, were promoted to the same position, and seventeen people from Quan Bijiao were promoted to fill the position of Noburo.

古文：癸酉，美人杨氏进封淑妃。
现代文：十七日，美人杨氏进封淑妃。
English: On the 17th, the beautiful Ms. Yang entered the palace.

古文：戊寅，诏荣王族姻与莱等三十四人各转官有差。
现代文：二十二日，下诏荣王姻族与莱等三十四人各转官不等。
English: On the 22nd, 34 people, including Rong Wang's in-laws and Lai, were transferred to different posts.

古文：秋七月丁亥，张珏授正任团练使、带行左领军卫大将军，赐金带。
现代文：秋七月初二，张环授正任团练使、带行左领军卫大将军，赐给金带。
English: On the second day of the second month of the autumn, Zhang Huan awarded the gold belt to General Wei Da, who was in charge of the regimental drill and led the left wing.

古文：壬辰，枢密院言： 右武大夫、权鄂州都统汪政鄂城战御，又焚光化城外积聚，及攻真阳城，皆有功，该转十二官。 
现代文：初七，枢密院说： 右武大夫暂代鄂州都统汪政在鄂城战斗抵抗，又焚烧了光化城外元军积储的粮草，以及进攻真阳城，都有战功，应该转十二官。 
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the Privy Council said, "Uwudong, the doctor of the Right Division of Wu Dynasty, temporarily acting as the leader of the Ezhou Capital, Wang Zheng, fought and resisted in the city of E, burned the grain and grass stored by the Yuan forces outside the city of Guanghua, and attacked the city of Zhenyang, all of which are war exploits, and should be transferred to twelve officials."

古文：诏转横行遥郡。
现代文：下诏转横行遥郡。
English: The next stage of the journey will take you through Haruka-gun.

古文：甲午，四川都统昝万寿调统制赵宝、杨立等率舟师护粮达渠城，以功推赏。
现代文：初九，四川都统咎万寿调遣统制赵宝、杨立等率水军护送粮食到渠城，因功给予奖赏。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the Sichuan Provincial Government dispatched Zhao Bao and Yang Li to escort grain to Quicheng, and rewarded them for their service.

古文：己酉，权黎州张午招谕大青羌主归义，乞用两林西蕃瑜林例，赐予加优，从之。
现代文：二十四日，暂代黎州知州张午招谕大青羌主归顺朝廷，请用两林西蕃瑜林成例，从优赐赏，度宗批准了这个请求。
English: On the 24th day of the month, Zhang Bao, who was temporarily in charge of Lishu and Zhizhou, sent an invitation to the Daqing Emperor to surrender to the Shun court. He requested that the emperor use the example of the two forests of Xizhu and Yulin to reward the superior. Emperor Du approved this request.

古文：八月辛酉，遣步帅陈奕率马军舟师巡逻江防。
现代文：八月初六，派遣步帅陈奕率马军水军巡逻长江防务。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, Chen Yi, the infantry commander, was dispatched to patrol the defense of the Yangtze River with the horse army and navy.

古文：壬戌，边报警急，诏谕吕文德等申严防遏。
现代文：初七，边报警急，下诏告诉吕文德等人重申严密防守。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, while calling the police urgently, he told Lü Wende and others to reiterate their strict defense.

古文：乙丑，太师、武康、宁江军节度使、判大宗正事嗣荣王与芮进封福王，主荣王祀事。
现代文：初五，太师、武康军宁江军节度使、判大宗正事嗣荣王赵与丙进封福王，主荣王祭祀事务。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the grandmaster and the military commander of the Ningjiang Army of the Wu-Kang Army issued a verdict that the matters of the Heir Rongwang Zhao and the Heir Jinfeng Fuwang and the sacrificial affairs of the Lord Rongwang should be carried out.

古文：壬申，久雨，命在京三狱、赤县、直司、签厅择官审决狱讼毋滞。
现代文：十七日，久雨不晴，命令在京三狱、赤县、直司、签厅选择官吏审查处理狱讼，不得拖延。
English: On the seventeenth day, after a long rain, an order was issued to select officials to review and handle the prison lawsuit in the three prisons in Beijing, Aka County, Zhouzhi, and the Signing Office, without delay.

古文：九月乙未，诏郡县折收民田租，毋厚直取赢，违者论罪。
现代文：九月十一日，下诏郡县折收民田租税，不得多取赢余，违者以罪论处。
English: On September 11th, it was announced that counties and counties would collect people's land tax, and they were not allowed to take more than the surplus, and violators would be punished with a crime.

古文：癸卯，知邕州总统谭渊、李旺、周胜等繇特磨行大理界，率兵攻建水州，禽其知州阿孱以下三百余人，获马二百余，焚谷米、器甲、庐舍。
现代文：十九日，琶州知州总统谭渊、李旺、周胜等由特磨行进到大理境，率兵进攻建水州，擒获知州阿屏以下三百余人，俘获马匹二百多，焚烧谷米、器甲、庐舍。
English: On the 19th, Tan Yuan, Li Wang, Zhou Sheng, the president of Pazhou Chizhou, marched from Tema to Dali, led the troops to attack Jianshuizhou, captured more than three hundred people from Chizhou Aping, captured more than two hundred horses, and burned grain, jars, and stables.

古文：师还论功，各转官三资，军校补转有差。
现代文：师回论功行赏，各转三官资格，军校补转官职不等。
English: The award for meritorious service, the qualification for each of the three positions, the military school supplement and the transfer of official positions vary.

古文：冬十月庚申，复开州，赐四川策应司钱百万劳军。
现代文：冬十月初七，收复开州，赐给四川策应司钱一百万慰劳军队。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of winter, he recovered Kaizhou and gave Sichuan Province a million-strong consolation army.

古文：甲戌，大雷电。
现代文：二十一日，大雷闪电。
English: On the 21st, thunder and lightning occurred.

古文：十一月丙申，故左丞相吴潜追复光禄大夫。
现代文：十一月十三日，已故左承相吴潜追复光禄大夫。
English: On November 13th, the late Zuo Chengxiang Wu Qian pursued Dr. Fu Guanglu.

古文：壬寅，赏知房州李鉴调遣路将夏喜、统领冯兴等均州武阳坝战功。
现代文：十九日，知房州李鉴调遣路将夏喜、统领冯兴等在均州武阳坝作战，赏其战功。
English: On the 19th, Zhifangzhou Li Jian dispatched commander Xia Xi and commander Feng Xing to fight in Wuyangba, Junzhou, and awarded them for their war service.

古文：十二月丙辰，吕文焕依旧带行御器械，改知襄阳府兼京西安抚副使，丁卯，台臣言叙复元官观文殿学士、提举洞霄宫皮龙荣贪私倾险，尝朋附丁大全，乞寝新命。
现代文：十二月初四，吕文焕依旧带行御器械，改知襄阳府兼京西安抚副使。十五日，台臣说恢复原官的观文殿学士、提举洞霄宫皮龙荣贪私倾险，曾经朋附丁大全，请停发布新职的命令。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, Lu Wenhuan, still wearing his imperial regalia, was informed that he was no longer the vice-envoy to Yangyang Prefecture and the pacification of Beijing and Xi'an. On the fifteenth day, the Tai retainer said that the reinstatement of the original officer, Guanwen Dian Baccalaureate, and the promotion of Dongxiao Gong Pi Long Rong, who was greedy and risk-taking, and had once been a disciple of Ding Daquan, please stop issuing new orders.

古文：诏予祠禄。
现代文：下诏给予祠禄。
English: He issued the following edict to grant the shrine a stipend.

古文：四年春正月癸未，赐吕师夔紫章服、金带。
现代文：咸淳四年春正月初一，赐吕师夔紫章服、金带。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of Xian Jun, he gave Lv Shizhen the purple uniform and gold belt.

古文：己丑，吕文德言知襄阳府兼京西安抚副使吕文焕、荆鄂都统制唐永坚蜡书报白河口、万山、鹿门山北帅兴筑城堡，檄知郢州翟贵、两淮都统张世杰申严备御。
现代文：初七，吕文德说襄阳知府兼京西安抚副使吕文焕、荆鄂都统制唐永坚用蜡书报告说白河口、万山、鹿门山一带，有元军兴筑城堡，发布文书给即州知州翟贵、两淮都统张世杰，命令他们严密防御。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Lu Wende said that Tang Yongjian, the governor of Xiangyang Prefecture and the vice-envoy of Beijing and Xi'an for pacification, Lu Wenhuan and Jing Odu, reported in a wax book that there were Yuan forces building castles in the Baihekou, Wanshan and Lumen Mountains, and issued a document to Zhang Shijie, the governor of Zhizhou Province and Zhang Shijie, the governor of Zhizhou Province and Zhang Shijie, the governor of Zhuhai Province, ordering them to strictly defend.

古文：癸巳，故守合州王坚赐庙额曰 报忠 。
现代文：十一日，赐给已故合州守将王坚庙匾额为报忠庙。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the late Governor of Hezhou Province, Wang Jian, was given a temple plaque as a tribute to the loyalty of the temple.

古文：癸卯，沔州驻扎、潼川安抚副使昝万寿特升右武大夫、带行左骁卫大将军，赐金带。
现代文：二十一日，洒州驻扎撞川安抚副使咎万寿，特升右武大夫、带行左晓卫大将军，赐给金带。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the deputy envoy of the Kuchuan pacification stationed in Surabaya, Gui Wan Shou, was specially promoted to the doctor of the Right Division and accompanied by General Zuo Xiao Wei, and was given a gold belt.

古文：己酉，印应雷改知庆元府兼沿海制置使。
现代文：二十七日，印应雷改知庆元府兼沿海制置使。
English: On the 27th, the Qingyuan prefecture and the coastal system envoy were appointed by the Indian government.

古文：庚戌，诏曰： 迩年近臣无谓引去以为高，勉留再三，弗近益远，往往相尚，不知其非义也。
现代文：二十八日，下诏说： 近年来近臣往往以没有意义的引退为高尚，虽然朝廷一再挽留，但不见效果，往往相互攀比，实不知这样做是没有意义的。
English: On the 28th, the next imperial edict said: In recent years, courtiers have often regarded meaningless retirement as noble. Although the imperial court has repeatedly retained them, it has no effect, and they often compare themselves with each other. They really do not know that doing so is meaningless.

古文：亦由一二大臣尝勇去以为众望，相踵至今。
现代文：这种风气也是由一两个大臣曾经勇敢离去得到众人的欢迎造成的，一直沿袭至今。
English: This culture was also caused by one or two ministers who bravely left and were welcomed by everyone, and it has continued to this day.

古文：孟子于齐王不遇，故去，是未尝有君臣之情也，然犹三宿出昼，庶几改之。
现代文：孟子在齐王那儿得不到任用，所以离去，他们之间不曾有君臣的感情，然犹三宿出昼，庶几改之。
English: Mencius couldn't get an appointment with King Qi, so he left. There was never the feeling of a prince and a minister between them. However, after lunch, they changed their plans.

古文：儒者家法，无亦取此乎。
现代文：儒者家法，也不取法于此。
English: Confucian family law does not derive from this.

古文：朕于诸贤，允谓无负，其弗高尚，使人疑于负朕。 
现代文：肤对诸贤大臣，可以说是没有什么对不起的地方，希望不要互相竞比高尚，让人们怀疑有对不住诸位的地方。 
English: I can say that I have nothing to apologize for to the wise ministers. I hope that we will not compete with each other in being noble, and make people suspect that there is something that you cannot tolerate.

古文：闰月庚午，赐夏贵金带。
现代文：闰正月十八日，赐给夏贵金带。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of the leap year, Xia Gui was given a gold belt.

古文：夏四月壬午，汤汉三辞免刑部侍郎、福建安抚使。
现代文：夏四月初一，汤汉三次辞免刑部侍郎、福建安抚使。
English: On the first day of April in the summer, Tang Han resigned three times as a waiver of the criminal department and Fujian pacification envoy.

古文：庚寅，乾会节，帝御紫宸殿，群臣称贺。
现代文：初九，乾会节，度宗到紫哀殿，大臣称庆祝贺。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, on the day of the Chinese New Year, the minister called for congratulations.

古文：上曰： 谢方叔托名进香，擅进金器诸物，且以先帝手泽，每系之跋，率多包藏，至以先帝行事为己功，殊失大臣体，宜镌一秩。 
现代文：度宗说： 谢方叔托名进香，擅自进献金器物品，而且以先帝理宗的手泽，每系之跋，率多包藏，以至于以先帝理宗实行的政事作为自己的功劳，完全失去了作为大臣应该有的礼节，应该削夺一级。 
English: Duzong said: Xie Fangshu insinuated incense on the pretext of his name, and donated gold objects without authorization. Moreover, he took advantage of the former Emperor Li Zong's influence, so that he took the political affairs carried out by the former Emperor Li Zong as his own merit. He completely lost the etiquette he should have as a minister, and should be cut down to the first level.

古文：于是卢钺等相继论列方叔昨蜀、广败事，误国殄民，今又违制擅进，削一秩罚轻。
现代文：于是卢钱等人相继陈述谢方叔先前在蜀、广的坏事，误国害民，今又违制擅进，削夺一级官职属于轻罚。
English: As a result, Lu Qian and others successively stated that Uncle Xie Fang had previously done bad things in Shu and Guangxi, misled the country and harmed the people, and now violated the system of unauthorized entry, and stealing a first-class official post was a light punishment.

古文：诏削四秩，夺观文殿大学士、惠国公，罢宰臣恩数，仍追《宝奎录》并系跋真本来上。
现代文：下诏削夺官品四级，夺观文殿学士、惠国公，取消宰执待遇，并且追夺宝奎录和系跋真本缴纳给朝廷。
English: The following edict reduced the official grade to the fourth level, removed the title of "Academician of the Academy of Fine Arts" and "Honorary Citizen of the State," abolished the treatment of the emperor and empress, and pursued the seizure of the "Bao Kui Lu" and the "True Copy of the Great Treasures" to be paid to the imperial court.

古文：丙申，右正言黄镛言： 今守边急务，非兵农合一不可。
现代文：十五日，右正言黄墉说： 现在驻守边防最急切的事情，不实行兵农合一就没有出路。
English: On the 15th, Huang Qi, the Right Upright Upright, said: It is now the most urgent matter to garrison the border defense, and there is no way out without the unification of soldiers and peasants.

古文：一曰屯田，二曰民兵。
现代文：一是屯田，二是民兵。
English: First, the Tonden, and second, the Tsuma militia.

古文：川蜀屯田为先，民兵次之，淮、襄民兵为先，屯田次之，此足食足兵良策也。 
现代文：川蜀地区以屯田为主，民兵次之，淮、襄地区则以民兵为先，屯田次之，这是粮食富裕兵源充足的好政策。 
English: In the Sichuan-Shushu region, it is mainly the military cantonment, followed by the militia, while in the Huai and Xiang regions, it is the militia first, followed by the military cantonment. This is a good policy to have a sufficient supply of grain-rich soldiers.

古文：不报。
现代文：皇上没有表态回答。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：丁酉，诏故修武郎姚济死节，立庙，赐额曰 忠壮 。
现代文：十六日，下诏已故修武郎姚济为国壮烈战死，立庙，赐名额为忠壮。
English: On the 16th, it was announced that the late Emperor Xiuwu's brother Yao Ji had died in battle for the country, and that a temple would be built to honor his memory.

古文：五月辛酉，枢密都承旨高达再辞侍卫都虞候，乞归田里，命孙虎臣代之。
现代文：五月十一日，枢密都承旨高达再辞侍卫都虞候，请求回到家乡，命令孙虎臣代替他。
English: On May 11th, the Privy Council ordered Gao Gao to resign from his post as the guardian of the capital, and asked him to return to his hometown, ordering Sun Huchen to replace him.

古文：壬申，赐陈文龙以下六百六十四人进士及第、出身。
现代文：二十二日，赐陈文龙以下六百六十四人进士及第、出身。
English: On the 22nd, 664 people from Chen Wenlong onward were conferred the title and rank.

古文：丙子，贾似道乞骸骨，不允。
现代文：二十六日，贾似道请求辞官，没有允准。
English: On the 26th, Jia Li Dao requested to resign from his post, but this was not granted.

古文：六月辛巳，叶梦鼎再乞归田里，不允。
现代文：六月初一，叶梦鼎再次请求辞官，没有允准。
English: On the first day of June, Ye Mengding once again requested to resign, but was not allowed to do so.

古文：诏罢浙西诸州公田庄官，募民自耕输租，租减什三，毋私相易田，违制以盗卖官田论。
现代文：下诏废罢浙西各州公田庄官，招募百姓耕种输纳租税，租税减轻十分之三，不得私下互相换田，违制以盗卖官田论处。
English: The following edict abolished the public land stewardship in western and eastern Zhejiang provinces, recruited peasants to cultivate and pay taxes, and reduced taxes by three-tenths. They were not allowed to privately exchange land with each other, and were punished for violating the system by stealing and selling government land.

古文：秋七月戊午，有星出氐宿，西北急流入骑官星没。
现代文：秋七月初九，有星出现在氏宿，沿西北方向急速流人骑官星消失。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the autumn, a star appeared in Uji-juku, and it quickly disappeared along the northwest direction.

古文：己未，淑妃杨氏亲属杨幼节以下百三十四人推恩进秩。
现代文：初十，淑妃杨氏亲属杨幼节以下一百三十四人得到恩赏和进升官品。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, 134 people under Yang Yu Jie, a relative of the Yang clan, received rewards and promotions.

古文：八月壬寅，奉安《宁宗实录》、《理宗实录》、《御集》、《日历》、《会要》、《玉牒》、《经武要略》、《咸淳日历》、《玉牒》，贾似道、叶梦鼎、马廷鸾各补转两官，诸局官若吏推恩有差。
现代文：八月二十三日，恭敬陈列泞宗实录、理宗实录、理宗御臭、理宗日厉、理宗会要、理宗玉牌、经武要略、减淳日历、咸淳玉碟，贾似道、叶梦鼎、马廷莺各转两官，各局官和吏给予恩赏不等。
English: On August 23rd, the official records of the Jiu Zong Sect, the official records of the Jiu Zong Sect, the official records of the Jiu Zong Sect, the official records of the Jiu Zong Sect, the official records of the Jiu Zong Sect, the official records of the Jiu Zong Sect, the official records of the Jiu Zong Sect, the official records of the Jiu Zong Sect, the official records of the Jiu Zong Sect, the official records of the Jiu Zong Sect, the official records of the Jiu Zong Sect, the official records of the Jiu Zong Sect

古文：九月癸未，太白昼见。
现代文：九月癸未，太白星白天显现。
English: At the end of September, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：大元兵筑白河城，始围襄、樊。
现代文：元兵筑白河城，开始包围襄阳、樊城。
English: Yuan soldiers built Baihe City and began to encircle Xiangyang and Lucheng.

古文：冬十月戊寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬十月初一，日食。子赵宪出生。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：子宪生。参知政事常挺六乞归田里，诏予郡。
现代文：参知政事常挺六次请求辞官，下诏任地方官。
English: Six requests for resignation were received from Sangichi Seiji Jotani, who was subsequently appointed as a local official.

古文：己亥，已减四川州县盐酒课，诏自咸淳四年始，再免征三年。
现代文：二十二日，已经减免四川州路盐酒税额，下诏从咸淳四年起，再免征三年。
English: On the 22nd, the amount of tax on Sichuan road salt wine has been reduced and exempted, and the next decree will be exempted for another three years from the fourth year of Xianjun.

古文：十一月癸丑，枢密院言： 南平、绍庆六郡镇抚使韩宣城渝、嘉、开、达、常、武诸州有劳，繇峡州至江陵水陆措置，尽瘁以死，宜视没于王事加恩。 
现代文：十一月初六，枢密院说： 南平、绍庆六郡镇抚使韩宣筑城渝州、嘉州、开州、达州、常州、武州有功劳，由峡州至江陵措置水陆事务，尽瘁而死，应该看作是为国战死沙场，并按此给予恩赏。 
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month, the Privy Council said: Nanping and Shaoxing, the six county townships of Han Xuan, contributed to the construction of Yuzhou, Jiazhou, Kaizhou, Dazhou, Changzhou and Wuzhou, and dealt with land and water affairs from Xiaozhou to Gangneung, and died with all their strength. It should be regarded as a battlefield for the country, and rewards should be given accordingly.

古文：诏宣守本官致仕，任一子承节郎，仍赠正任承宣使。
现代文：下诏韩宣守本官退休，任其一子为承节郎，并且赠正任承宣使。
English: Han Xuan Shou retired from his post, appointed his son as Jeng Jielang, and gave him the post of Jeng Xuan Envoy.

古文：丁巳，诏知江陵府陈奕，裨将周全、王德等战西山、南谷口、田家山有功，各以等第推赏。
现代文：初十，下诏：江陵知府陈奕，副将周全、王德等在西山、南谷口、田家山作战有功劳，各以等第给予赏赐。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the following edict was issued: Chen Yi, governor of Gangneung Prefecture, vice-commanders Zhou Quan and Wang De, who had distinguished themselves in the battles of Xishan, Nantangou and Tianjiashan, were each given a reward.

古文：戊午，子锽生。
现代文：十一日，子赵出生。
English: On the 11th, Zhao Zong was born.

古文：丙寅，福建安抚使汤汉再辞免，乞祠禄，诏别授职。
现代文：十九日，福建安抚使汤汉又一次辞官，请求祠禄，下诏另外授职。
English: On the 19th, Tang Han, the pacifier of Fujian Province, once again resigned from his post, requested a stipend, and issued a decree to give him another post.

古文：辛未，以文武官在选，困于部吏，隆寒旅琐可闵。诏吏部长贰、郎官日趣铨注，小有未备，特与放行，违者有刑。
现代文：二十四日，因文武官正在选注差遣，困于部吏，隆冬时节，族居困顿，值得同情，下诏吏部正副长官、郎官每天督促锉注，如果手续只有无关紧要的问题，特与放行，违者加以处罚。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, because the military attaché was in the process of selecting and dispatching, and the officials were in trouble, the midwinter period, the family was in trouble, and it was worthy of sympathy. The chief and deputy chiefs of the Ministry of Civil Affairs and the vassals urged the officials every day to supervise and dispatch, and if the procedures only had insignificant problems, they would be released, and violators would be punished.

古文：自是隆寒盛暑，申严诫饬。
现代文：从此隆冬盛暑，都重申这一命令，告诫官吏。
English: Since then, in the middle of winter and in the heat of the day, they have reiterated this order and admonished officials.

古文：常挺卒，赠少保。
现代文：常挺去世，赠少保。
English: Tsunetada died and was given the title of Junior Public Security Officer.

古文：壬申，行义役法。
现代文：二十五日，推行义役法。
English: On the 25th, the implementation of the volunteer law began.

古文：十二月辛卯，以夏贵为沿江制置副使兼知黄州。
现代文：十二月十五日，以夏贵为沿江制置副使兼黄州知州。
English: On December 15th, Xia Gui was appointed as the deputy envoy along the Yangtze River and Huangzhou Zhizhou.

古文：癸巳，史馆状《理宗实录》接续起修。
现代文：十七日，史馆上状说理宗实录接续修撰。
English: On the 17th, the History Museum announced that the text of the True Record of the Risshu Sect would be compiled successively.

古文：张九成、孙象先力学饬行，不坠家声，其免一解示表厉。
现代文：张九成孙张象先力学伤行，不坠家声，特免一解，予以表彰。
English: Zhang Jiucheng's grandson Zhang Xiang suffered from a mechanical accident, but he did not lose his family reputation. He was granted a special exemption and was commended.

古文：命建康府建南轩书院，祠先儒张栻，戊戌，汪立信知潭州兼湖南安抚使，职任依旧。
现代文：命建康府建立南轩书院，祠先儒张斌。二十二日，汪立信知潭州兼湖南按抚制置大使，职任不变。
English: On the 22nd, Wang Lixin was appointed as the Ambassador of Hunan Province and the Ambassador of Hunan Province, and his position remained unchanged.

古文：乙巳，诏赏京湖总管张喜、赵万等石门坂堰战功。
现代文：二十九日，下诏赏京湖总管张喜、赵万等石门坂堰战功。
English: On the 29th, the general manager of Beijing Lake, Zhang Xi, Zhao Wan and others were awarded for their war service at Shimenzaka Dam.

古文：五年春正月丁未，以李庭芝为两淮安抚制置大使兼知扬州。
现代文：咸淳五年春正月初一，以李庭芝为两淮安抚制置大使兼扬州知州。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the fifth year of Xianjun, Li Tingzhi was appointed as the ambassador and Yangzhou chizhou of the two Huai appeasement system.

古文：壬子，京湖策应司参谋呼延德领诸将张喜等遇北兵，战于蛮河。
现代文：初六，京湖策应司参谋呼延德领诸将张喜等，在蛮河遇到元兵，与之作战。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the staff officer of the Beijing Lake Policy Division, Huyan De, led the generals Zhang Xi and others, encountered the Yuan soldiers in the barbarian river and fought with them.

古文：癸亥，叶梦鼎累章请老，留之，固辞，依前少保、判福州、福建安抚使，封信国公。
现代文：十七日，叶梦鼎多次上书请求辞官，留任他，依前为少保、判福州、福建安抚使，封为信国公。
English: On the 17th, Ye Mengding repeatedly petitioned for his resignation, but he remained in his post. He was previously appointed as a minor peacekeeper, appointed as a Fuzhou and Fujian pacification envoy, and appointed as a provincial governor.

古文：以马廷鸾参知政事兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：以马廷莺为参知政事兼同知枢密院事。
English: With Ma Tingtao as a member of the Council of State and a member of the Privy Council.

古文：甲戌，以江万里参知政事。
现代文：二十八日，以江万里为参知政事。
English: On the 28th, Jiang Wanli was appointed as the party secretary.

古文：二月戊子，江万里辞免参知政事，不允。
现代文：二月十二日，江万里辞免参知政事，没有允准。
English: On February 12th, Jiang Wanli resigned from the post of governor without permission.

古文：三月丙午，北帅阿术自白河以兵围樊城。
现代文：三月初一，元军统帅阿术从白河率军围攻樊城。
English: On the first day of March, the commander of the former army, Ah Xiu, led the army from Baihe to besiege Lucheng.

古文：甲寅，叶梦鼎辞免判福州、福建安抚使，诏不允。
现代文：初九，叶梦鼎辞免判福州、福建安抚使，下诏不允。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Ye Mengding resigned from the post of Fuzhou and Fujian Pacifying Envoy.

古文：乙卯，皇后归宁，族姻推恩，保信军节度使全清夫以下五十六人各进一秩，咸安郡夫人全氏以下三十二人各特封有差。
现代文：初十，皇后回家探亲，族党姻亲都得到恩赏，保信军节度使全清夫以下五十六人各进官品一级，咸安郡夫人全氏以下三十二人各特封不等。
English: On the 10th day of the first lunar month, the empress went home to visit relatives, and the relatives of the clan party in-laws all received rewards. The confidence-building army festival made 56 people below Quan Qingfu each promoted to the first grade, and 32 people below Xian'an County Mrs. Quan Shi each received special titles.

古文：大元兵城鹿门。
现代文：元军驻屯鹿门。
English: Former military stationed in Lumen.

古文：己未，诏浙西六郡公田设官督租有差。
现代文：十四日，下诏浙西六郡公田设官督租不等。
English: On the 14th, officials were appointed to supervise the rent of public land in six counties in western Zhejiang Province.

古文：辛酉，京湖都统张世杰率马步舟师援襄、樊，战于赤滩圃。
现代文：十六日，京湖都统张杰率马军、步军、水军救援襄樊，战于赤滩圃。
English: On the 16th, Zhang Jie led the cavalry, infantry, and navy to rescue Xiang Ye, and fought in the Red Beach.

古文：戊辰，以江万里为左丞相，马廷鸾为右丞相兼枢密使。
现代文：二十三日，以江万里为左承相，马廷莺为右承相兼枢密使。
English: On the 23rd, Jiang Wanli was appointed as the Left Vice-Premier, and Ma Tingtao as the Right Vice-Premier and Privy Envoy.

古文：己巳，以马光祖知枢密院事兼参知政事，吴革沿江制置使。
现代文：二十四日，以马光祖为知枢密院事兼参知政事，吴革为沿江制置使。
English: On the 24th, Ma Guangzu was appointed as the member of the Privy Council and the member of the Council of State, and Wu Ge was appointed as the envoy along the river.

古文：夏四月丙子，赏张世杰战功。
现代文：夏四月初一，赏张世杰战功。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of summer, Zhang Shijie was awarded for his war service.

古文：辛巳，江万里、马廷鸾辞免，诏不允。
现代文：初六，江万里、马廷莺辞免官职，下诏不允。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Jiang Wanli and Ma Tingya resigned and were dismissed from their posts.

古文：壬午，知渠州张资上蓬州界白土、神山、蒲渡等处今年春战功。
现代文：初七，知渠州张资上报蓬州白土、神山、蒲渡等处今年春天的战功。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Zhang Zi of Zhiquozhou reported the war exploits of Pengzhou Baidu, Kamiyama, Pudong and other places this spring.

古文：丙戌，以安西都统张朝宝、利东路安抚张珏领兵护钱粟饷宁西军，还至水硙头，战有功，诏推赏。
现代文：十一日，因安西都统张朝宝、利东路安抚使张环领兵防护钱粟到宁西军，回至水头，与元军作战，有战功，下诏给予奖赏。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhang Chaobao and Li Donglu appeased Zhang Huanzhong by unifying Anxi, and sent Zhang Huan to lead soldiers to protect Qian Mao to the Ningxi Army, and returned to Shuitou to fight against the Yuan Army. He was awarded a prize for his war service.

古文：己丑，刘雄飞依旧枢密都承旨、知沅州兼常德、澧、辰、沅、靖五郡镇抚使。
现代文：十四日，刘雄飞依旧为枢密都承旨、知沉州兼常德、遭、辰、沉、靖五郡镇抚使。
English: On the 14th, Liu Xiongfei was still appointed as the commander of the five counties of Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen and Zhen.

古文：癸巳，李庭芝特进一秩。
现代文：十八日，李庭芝特进官品一级。
English: On the 18th, Li Tingzhi was specially promoted to the first grade of official products.

古文：高邮县夏世贤七世义居，诏署其门。
现代文：高邮县夏世贤七世义居，下诏表彰。
English: Gaoyou County, Xia Shixian, the seventh generation of Yijie, received the award.

古文：五月己酉，马光祖依旧观文殿学士、提举洞霄宫。
现代文：五月初四，马光祖依旧为观文殿学士、提举洞霄宫。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, Ma Guangzu still became a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism and was promoted to the Dongxiao Palace.

古文：乙卯，程元凤薨，赠少师。
现代文：初十，程元凤去世，赠少师。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Cheng Yuanfeng passed away and was given the title of junior teacher.

古文：庚申，有星自斗宿距星东北急流向牛宿，至浊没。
现代文：十五日，有星从斗宿距星沿东北方向急速进人向牛宿，至浊宿消失。
English: On the fifteenth day, a star moved rapidly from Doushukaku along the northeastern direction to Niu-shukaku, and then disappeared from Haku-shukaku.

古文：壬戌，诏：信阳诸将娄安邦、朱兴战千石畈，吕文焕、呼延德战福山，杨青、李忠战石湫，俱有劳效，推赏有差。
现代文：十七日，下诏：信阳诸将娄安邦、朱兴在千石贩与元军作战，吕文焕、呼延德在福山与元军作战，杨清、李忠在石揪与元军作战，都有战功，给予恩赏不等。
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued: Xinyang generals Pu Anbang and Zhu Xing fought against the Yuan army in Qianshi Vendor, Lu Wenhuan and Huyan De fought against the Yuan army in Fukuyama, and Yang Qing and Li Zhong fought against the Yuan army in Shijiazhuang. All of them had distinguished war service, and their rewards varied.

古文：壬申，京湖制司言：故夔路安抚徐宗武没于王事，乞优加赠恤。
现代文：二十七日，京湖制司说：已故夔路安抚使徐宗武为国战死，请求从优给予赠恤。
English: On the 27th, the Beijing Lake System Division said: The late Kushiro pacified and made Xu Zongwu die for the country, and requested Zongyou to give him a bonus.

古文：诏致仕恩外，特官其一子承节郎。
现代文：下诏除退休待遇外，特任其一子为承节郎。
English: The following edict, in addition to retirement benefits, specially appointed one of his sons to be the successor.

古文：六月庚辰，以吕文福为复州团练使、知濠州兼淮西安抚副使。
现代文：六月初六，以吕文德为复州团练使、壕州知州兼淮西安抚副使。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the

古文：甲申，皇子昰生。
现代文：初十，皇子赵是出生。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Prince Zhao was born.

古文：辛卯，家铉翁辞免新命，诏别授职。庚子，李庭芝辞免兼淮东提举，不允。
现代文：十七日，家铰翁辞免新职，下诏另授他职，二十六日，李庭芝辞免兼淮东提举，没有批淮。
English: On the 17th, Jiaying Weng resigned and was relieved of his new post, and another post was awarded to him. On the 26th, Li Tingzhi resigned and was promoted to Huadong without approval.

古文：秋七月己酉，观文殿学士马光祖乞守本官致仕，诏允所请。
现代文：秋七月初五，观文殿学士马光祖请求守本官退休，下诏批准他的请求。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Ma Guangzu, a scholar of the Confucian Academy, asked the governor to retire, and the imperial edict approved his request.

古文：庚申，祈雨。
现代文：十六日，祈祷降雨。
English: On the 16th, I prayed for rain.

古文：壬戌，东南有星自河鼓距星西北急流，至浊没。
现代文：十八日，东南方向有星从河鼓距星沿西北方向急速流过，至浊宿消失。
English: On the 18th, a star in the southeast direction rapidly flowed from the river drum to the star along the northwest direction, and disappeared to the Pengshu.

古文：八月戊寅，诏郡县收民田租，毋巧计取赢，毋厚直折纳，转运司申严按劾。
现代文：八月初五，下诏郡县收取民田租税，不得巧计取赢，不得厚直折纳，转运司要严格检察和弹勃不法官吏。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, the counties and counties shall collect the people's land tax, and they shall not use trickery to win, and they shall not be paid directly, and the transportation department shall strictly inspect and punish the officials.

古文：诏襄、樊将士战御宣力，以钱二百万犒师，趣上其立功姓名补转官资。
现代文：下诏襄、樊将士尽力抵抗元军，调出二百万络钱用来搞赏军队，督促上报立功姓名，补转官资。
English: The following generals, Zhao Xiang and Zou, tried their best to resist the Yuan army, transferred two million rupees to reward the army, urged the soldiers to report their names for meritorious service, and supplemented the transfer of government funds.

古文：九月丙午，祈晴。
现代文：九月初三，祈祷天晴。
English: On the third day of the ninth month, pray for a fine day.

古文：辛酉，祀明堂，大赦。
现代文：十八日，祭祀明堂，大赦。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, a memorial service was held at Myodo, and a general amnesty was declared.

古文：丙寅，明堂礼成，加上寿和圣福皇太后尊号册、宝，太师、判大宗正事、福王、荣王祀事与芮加食邑一千户。
现代文：二十三日，明堂祭祀成，加上寿和圣福皇太后尊号册、宝，太师、判大宗正事、福王、主荣王祀事赵与丙加食邑一千户。
English: On the 23rd, the Myeongdong ritual was completed, and a thousand households in Zhao and Gyeongga shokup were added to the Shuwa and Holy Blessing of the Empress Dowager's honor roll, treasure, grandmaster, grand marshal, King of Good Fortune, and King of Glory.

古文：冬十月甲申，子宪授检校太尉、武安军节度使，封益国公。
现代文：冬十月十二日，子赵宪授为检校太尉、武安军节度使，封为益国公。
English: On October 12th, his son, Zhao Xianzhu, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant of the inspection of the school and the festival envoy of the Wu'an Army, and was named the prince of Yikang.

古文：己丑，吕文德进封崇国公，加食邑七百户。
现代文：十七日，吕文德进封崇国公，加食邑七百户。
English: On the seventeenth day, Lü Wende entered the territory of Chongguo, and added seven hundred households in Shuxi.

古文：以汤汉为显文阁直学士、提举玉隆万寿宫兼象山书院山长。
现代文：以汤汉为显文阁直学士、提举玉隆万寿宫兼象山书院山长。
English: With Tang Han as the direct bachelor of Xianwen Pavilion, he was promoted to the head of the Yulong Wanzhou Palace and the head of the Xiangshan Academy.

古文：十一月戊辰，少傅文德乞致仕，诏特授少师，进封卫国公，依所请致仕。
现代文：十一月二十七日，少傅文德请退休，下诏特授少师，进封卫国公，依所请退休。
English: On November 27th, Shao Fu Wende retired, and the following edict was issued: Shao Fu Wende retired, Shao Fu Wende retired, and Shao Fu Wende retired.

古文：十二月癸酉，文德卒，赠太傅，赐谥武忠。
现代文：十二月初二，文德去世，赠太傅，赐给溢号武忠。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, Wen De passed away, and was presented with the title of Taifu, which was given to Wu Zhong.

古文：己卯，以范文虎为殿前副都指挥使。
现代文：初八，以范文虎为殿前副都指挥使。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he appointed Fan Wenhu as the former vice-commander of the capital.

古文：寿和圣福皇太后尊号册宝礼成，侄谢堂、侄孙光孙等二十八人各转一官，余姻推恩有差。
现代文：寿和圣福皇太后尊号册、宝礼成，侄谢堂、侄孙谢光等二十八人各转一官，其余姻党给予恩赏不等。
English: Twenty-eight people, including the empress dowager Zhou He Shengfu, her son, Bao Licheng, nephew, Xie Tang, and grandnephew, Xie Guang, were each promoted to a higher position, and the rest of the marriage parties gave different rewards.

古文：甲申，以钱二百万命京湖帅臣给犒襄、郢等处水陆戍士。
现代文：十三日，以钱二百万络命令京湖帅臣搞赏襄、呈阵等处水陆戍兵。
English: On the 13th, he ordered the Beijing and Hubei grand marshals to reward the soldiers with 2 million rupees and to form a line of land and sea soldiers.

古文：戊子，诏安南国王父陈日煚、国王陈威晃并加食邑一千户。
现代文：十七日，下诏安南国王父陈日、国王陈威晃各加食邑一千户。
English: On the 17th, King Annan's father, King Trn Thiệu, and King Trn Vĩnh Quang each gave food to 1,000 households.

古文：大元兵筑南新城。
现代文：大元军队进筑南新城。
English: The Taiyuan army entered Nanxincheng, Chikuku.

古文：六年春正月壬寅，以李庭芝为京湖安抚制置使兼夔路策应使，印应雷两淮安抚制置使。
现代文：咸淳六年春正月初二，以李庭芝为京湖安抚制置使兼夔路策应使，印应雷为两淮安抚制置使。
English: On the second day of the first month of the spring of the sixth year of Xianjun, Li Tingzhi was appointed as the first envoy of the Beijing-Hubei pacification system and the deputy envoy, and Yingyinglei was appointed as the second envoy of the Huaihai pacification system.

古文：己酉，以钱二百万赐夔路策应司备御赏给。
现代文：初九，赐给夔路策应司二百万络钱备作抗元将士立功的奖赏。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Kushiro was given 2 million rupees as a reward for his contribution to the anti-Japanese war.

古文：庚戌，以高达为湖北安抚使、知鄂州，孙虎臣起复淮东安抚副使、知淮安州。
现代文：初十，以高达为湖北安抚使、鄂州知少，孙虎臣被起用为淮东安抚副使、淮安知州。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Gao was appointed as the Hubei Pacifying Envoy and Ezhou Zhishang, and Sun Huchen was appointed as the Huaidong Pacifying Deputy Envoy and Huai'an Zhizhou.

古文：辛酉，行《成天历》，丁卯，上制《字民》、《牧民》二训，以戒百官。
现代文：二十一日，施行成天历。二十七日，度宗撰制序昆、散昆二训，用以告诫百官。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Wuzong compiled the Preface to the Kun, and the Two Sanzhun of the Kun, to admonish the officials.

古文：戊辰，以江万里为福建安抚使。
现代文：二十八日，任命江万里为福建安抚使。
English: On the 28th, Jiang Wanli was appointed as the Fujian Pacifying Envoy.

古文：二月辛未，检校少保、安德军节度使与莱加食邑五百户。
现代文：二月初一，检校少保、安德军节度使赵与莱加食邑五百户。
English: On the first day of February, the inspection of the school's junior guards and the military festival brought 500 households to Zhao and Lijia food villages.

古文：丁亥，陈宜中经筵进讲《春秋》终篇，赐象简、金御仙花带、鞍马。
现代文：十八日，陈宜中在经筵进讲春和完毕，赐给象简、金御仙花带、鞍马。
English: On the 18th, after Chen Yizhong had finished the Spring Festival sermon at Jing'an, he gave Zhao Jian, the Golden Fairy Belt, and the Pommel Horse.

古文：丁酉，以吕文福为淮西安抚副使兼知庐州。
现代文：二十八日，以吕文德为淮西安抚副使兼庐州知州。
English: On the 28th, Lu Wende was appointed as the vice-envoy of Huaixi pacification and the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：己亥，朱禩孙权兵部尚书，仍四川安抚制置、总领夔路转运、知重庆府。
现代文：三十日，朱祀孙代理兵部尚书，仍为四川安抚制置使、总领夔路转运使、重庆知府。
English: On the 30th, Zhu Shishun's deputy of the military department, Shang Shu, was still appointed as the Sichuan pacification envoy, the general leader of the Kushiro transit envoy, and the Chongqing prefect.

古文：三月庚子朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of March, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：癸丑，诏曰： 吏以廉称，自古有之，今绝不闻，岂不自章显而壅于上闻欤？
现代文：十四日，下诏说： 以廉洁为世称道的官吏，自古以来就有，今天好像断绝没听说过有这样的官吏，难道不是自己不好夸耀显示自己而朝廷又没法知道造成的吗？
English: On the 14th, the next imperial edict said: Since ancient times, there have been officials who have been praised by the world for their integrity, but today it seems that no one has ever heard of such officials. Wasn't this caused by the fact that they didn't want to show themselves off and the imperial court couldn't find out about it?

古文：其令侍从、卿监、郎官，各举廉吏，将显擢焉。 
现代文：鉴于此，命令侍从、卿监、郎官分别举荐廉吏，将予以提升任用。 
English: In view of this, it was ordered that the attendant, the court inspector, and the steward should separately recommend the corrupt officials, and they would be promoted.

古文：癸亥，诏： 赣、吉、南安境数被寇，虽有砦卒，寇出没无时，莫能相救。
现代文：二十四日，下诏： 赣、吉、南安境内多次遭寇盗劫掠，虽然有寨兵，但寇贼出没无常，没有办法救民。
English: On the 24th, the following edict was issued: The territory of Handan, Ji and Nan'an was repeatedly robbed and plundered by bandits. Although there were soldiers, the bandits came and went, and there was no way to save the people.

古文：宜即要冲立四砦，砦屯兵百，使地势联络，御寇为便。从三郡择将官领之。 
现代文：应在要冲之地设立四寨，每寨屯兵一百人，使地势联络成一片，方便抵抗打击寇贼，从三郡选择将官主管。 
English: Four villages should be set up in the place to be stormed, with a hundred soldiers per village, so that the terrain is connected into one, it is convenient to resist and fight against the bandits, and the commander-in-chief is selected from the three counties.

古文：夏四月戊寅，以文天祥兼崇政殿说书。
现代文：夏四月初九，以文天样兼崇政殿说书。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the summer, I wrote a story about heaven and earth.

古文：五月辛丑，以吴革为沿江制置宣抚使。
现代文：五月初二，以吴革为沿江制置宣抚使。
English: On the second day of the fifth month, Wu Ge was appointed as the envoy along the river.

古文：六月庚午，诏《太极图说》、《西铭》、《易传序》、《春秋传序》，天下士子宜肄其文。戊寅，贾似道托疾退辞，疏十数上，上留益坚，礼异之，曰师相而不名。
现代文：六月初二，下诏全国士子应该学习汰极图泌、洒锻、渴传序、春秋传序。初十，贾似道借病辞退，上疏十多次，度宗留用更坚决，以特殊的礼节相待，称他为师相而不称呼姓名。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, it was decreed that the scholars of the whole country should learn the secretion of the ultimate, sprinkling forging, thirst transmission, spring and autumn transmission. In the tenth month of the year, Jia Xi Dao used illness to decline, more than ten times to go upstream, and more resolutely to stay with Du Zong, treat each other with special etiquette, and call him a teacher without giving his name.

古文：马廷鸾洎省、部、台谏、学馆、诸司，连章请留似道。
现代文：马廷莺和省、部、台谏、学、馆、各司，连续交相上书请留贾似道。
English: Ma Tingtao and the provinces, ministries, Taiwan provinces, universities, museums, and departments, please keep in touch with each other.

古文：庚辰，子宪薨。
现代文：十二日，子赵宪去世。
English: On the 12th, Zhao Xian passed away.

古文：庚寅，诏以襄、郢水陆屯戍将士隆暑露处，出钱二百万，命京湖制司给赐。
现代文：二十二日，因襄、呈阵水陆屯戍将士盛暑在外作战，下诏出钱二百万络，命令京湖制置司赐给将士。
English: On the 22nd, due to the fact that the soldiers were away fighting in the heat of the day, he issued an edict to pay 2 million rupees and ordered that the soldiers be given the post of the governor of Beijing Lake.

古文：秋七月，复开州。己亥，更铸印给之。
现代文：秋七月，收复开州，初一，改铸印给开州。
English: In autumn and July, Keshu was recovered, and on the first day of the new year, the seal was changed to Keshu.

古文：八月甲申，瑞安府乐清县嘉禾生，诏荐士增四名。
现代文：八月十七日，瑞安府东清县嘉禾生出，下诏荐士增加四名。
English: On August 17th, Jiahua, Dongqing County, Ruian Prefecture, was born, and the number of recommenders was increased by four.

古文：壬辰，诏：郡县行推排法，虚加寡弱户田租，害民为甚。其令各路监司询访，亟除其弊。
现代文：二十五日，下诏：郡县实行推排法，没有根据地增加寡弱户田租，严重地损害了百姓利益，命令各路监司寻访，尽快罢除其弊。
English: On the 25th day of the month, the following edict was issued: counties and counties should implement the push-pull method, increase the land rent of weak and weak households without any basis, seriously damage the interests of the people, and order the supervisors of various roads to visit and remove their drawbacks as soon as possible.

古文：诏精择监司、守令，监司察郡守，郡守察县令，置籍考核，岁终第其治状来上。
现代文：下诏精心选择监司、守臣，监司考察郡守，郡守考察县令，置籍考核，年终排列治绩好坏高下上报朝廷。
English: Under the imperial edict, supervisors and subordinates were carefully selected, supervisors inspected county governors, county governors inspected county magistrates, and citizens were registered. At the end of the year, their performance was ranked and reported to the imperial court.

古文：癸巳，以夏贵能举职事，进一秩。
现代文：二十六日，因夏贵出色地完成了职责范围内的事情，进升官品一级。
English: On the 26th, because Xia Gui excellently completed the tasks within the scope of his duties, he was promoted to the first level of official products.

古文：诏似道十日一朝。
现代文：下诏贾似道十日一朝。
English: The following is the morning of the tenth day of Jia Li Dao.

古文：九月庚戌，以黄万石为沿海制置使。
现代文：九月十三日，任命黄万石为沿海制置使。
English: On September 13th, Huang Wanshi was appointed as the Minister of Coastal Affairs.

古文：壬子，台州大水。
现代文：十五日，台州发生大水。
English: On the 15th, a big flood occurred in Taizhou.

古文：冬十月丁丑，遣范文虎总统殿司、两淮诸军，往襄、樊会合备御，赐钱百五十万犒师。
现代文：冬十月初十，派遣范文虎总统殿司、两淮诸军，前往襄樊联合其他宋军防御元军，赐钱一百五十万络搞赏军队。
English: On the 10th day of the 10th month of the 10th month of the 10th year of the 10th month of the 10th year of the 10th month of the 10th year of the 10th month of the 10th year of the 10th month of the 10th year of the 10th month of the 10th year of the 10th month of the 10th year of the 10th month of the 10th year of the 10th month of the 10th year of the 10th month of the 10th year of the 10th month of the 10th year of the 10th month of the 10th year of the 10th month of the 10th year of the 10th month of the 10

古文：己卯，诏台州发义仓米四千石并发丰储仓米三万石，振遭水家。
现代文：十二日，下诏台州发义仓米四千石，发丰储仓米三万石，贩济遭水灾的家庭。
English: On the 12th, Taizhou issued a 4,000-koku rice grant and a 30,000-koku rice grant to families affected by the floods.

古文：甲申，以陈宗礼、赵顺孙兼权参知政事，依旧同提举编修敕令、《经武要略》。
现代文：十七日，以陈宗礼、赵师孙兼代理参知政事，依旧同提举编修救令、经武要略。
English: On the 17th, with Chen Zongli and Zhao Shisun acting as co-chairs of government affairs, they still proposed the compilation and revision of the rescue order and the outline of the military strategy.

古文：闰十月己酉，安吉州水，免公田租四万四千八十石。
现代文：闰十月十三日，安吉州水灾，免除公田租税四万四千零八十石。
English: On October 13th, due to the floods in Anji, 44,080 koku of rice was exempted from public land tax.

古文：戊午，诏殿、步、马诸军贫乏阵没孤遗者多，方此隆寒，其赐钱二十万、米万石振之。
现代文：二十二日，下诏：殿、步、马各军贫乏阵亡孤遗者很多，值此寒冷之际，赐钱二十万络、米一万石贩济他们。
English: On the 22nd, he issued the following edict: On this cold occasion, he gave 200,000 rupees in money and 10,000 rupees in rice to the poor soldiers of the Imperial, Samoan, and Mongolian armies, many of whom had died in battle.

古文：十一月丁丑，嘉兴、华亭两县水，免公田租五万一千石，民田租四千八百一十石。
现代文：十一月十二日，嘉兴、华亭两县发生水灾，免除公田租税五万一千石，民田租税四千八百一十石。
English: On November 12, floods occurred in Jiaxing and Huating counties, exempting 51,000 koku of public land tax and 4,810 koku of private land tax.

古文：庚辰，诏襄、郢屯戍将士隆寒可闵，其赐钱二百万犒师。
现代文：十五日，下诏：襄、即屯戍将士寒冷可怜，赐钱二百万搞赏军队。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the following edict was issued: Xiang, that is, the soldiers of Tuen Mun were cold and pitiful, and they were given two million yuan to reward the army.

古文：己丑，都统张世杰领兵江防。
现代文：二十四日，都统张世杰领兵江防。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Zhang Shijie led the troops to defend the river.

古文：乙未，诏陈宗礼进一秩，为资政殿学士，依所请守兼参知政事致仕。
现代文：三十日，下诏陈宗礼进升一级，为资政殿学士，依所请守兼参知政事退休。
English: On the 30th, the next day, Chen Zongli was promoted to the first level, and became a scholar of the Palace of Government, and retired from politics in accordance with the request.

古文：十二月戊戌，陈宗礼卒，赠七秩。
现代文：十二月初三，陈宗礼去世，赠官品七级。
English: On the third day of December, Chen Zongli passed away and was awarded the seventh grade of the official award.

古文：己亥，诏唐全、张兴祖等赍蜡书入襄阳，往复甚艰，各补转三官，赐钱二千缗。
现代文：初四，下诏：唐全、张兴祖等带着蜡书进人襄阳，往还非常艰难，各补转三官，赐钱二千络。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the following edict was issued: Tang Quan, Zhang Xingzu, etc. entered Xiangyang with wax books. It was still very difficult to go there. They were each promoted to three positions and given 2,000 roubles in money.

古文：大元兵筑万山城。
现代文：元军进筑万山城。
English: The Yuan army advanced to build Wanshan City.

古文：三月戊寅，发屯田租谷十万石，振和州、无为、镇巢、安庆诸州饥。
现代文：咸淳七年春正月初一，子赵是授左卫上将军，进封建国公。下诏汤汉、洪天锡到朝廷。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of the spring of Ham Jun, his son Zhao was awarded the title of General of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards and became the founding prince of the state. Tang Han and Hong Tianxi went to the imperial court.

古文：辛巳，日晕，赤黄周匝。乙酉，平江府饥，发官仓米六万石。吉州饥，发和籴米十万石，皆减直振粜。
现代文：下诏告诫贪吏。初七，绍兴府诸暨县湖田水灾，免租二千八百多石。三月十五日，发屯田租谷十万石，吉州饥荒，发和来米十万石，都减价贩桌。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the floods in the lakes in Zhuji County, Shaoxing Prefecture, exempted more than 2,800 koku from rent. On March 15, the price of renting 100,000 koku from Tonden, 100,000 koku from Jizhou Famine, and 100,000 koku from Zhuji to Meizhou were all reduced.

古文：丙戌，诏减内外百司吏额。
现代文：二十三日，下诏裁减内外百司吏额。
English: On the 23rd, the next edict reduced the number of officials in the internal and external departments by 100.

古文：戊子，发米一万石，往建德府济粜。
现代文：二十五日，发米一万石，前往建德府济桌。
English: On the 25th, he sent 10,000 koku of rice to Jiandefu to feed the table.

古文：诏临江军宣圣四十七代孙延之子孙，与放国子监试。
现代文：下诏临江军宣圣四十七代孙孔延之子孙，与放国子监试。
English: The following is the proclamation of the proclamation of the forty-seventh generation of Sun Kong Yan's son Sun, and the supervision and examination of the son of Huo Guo.

古文：夏四月辛亥，免广东提举司盐箩银三万两。
现代文：夏四月十八日，免除广东提举司盐箩银三万两。
English: In the summer of April 18th, Guangdong was exempted from raising 30,000 taels of salt and 30,000 taels of silver.

古文：甲寅，礼部侍郎陈宜中再乞补外，以显文阁待制出知福州兼福建路安抚使。
现代文：二十一日，礼部侍郎陈宜中再次请求补任地方官，以显文阁待制出知福州兼福建路安抚使。
English: On the twenty-first day, Chen Yizhong, the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, once again requested to be reappointed as a local official, and to be appointed as the governor of Fuzhou and the pacifying envoy of Fujian Road.

古文：五月乙酉，赐礼部进士张镇孙以下五百二人及第、出身。
现代文：五月二十三日，赐礼部进士张镇孙以下五百零二人及第、出身。
English: On May 23rd, five hundred and two people, including Zhang Zhensun, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, were awarded.

古文：壬辰，发米二万石，诣衢州振粜。
现代文：三十日，发米二万石，发到瞥州贩桌。
English: On the 30th, 20,000 koku of rice was sent to the trading table in Gyeongju.

古文：六月癸巳，以钱百万、银五千两命知嘉定府昝万寿修城浚壕，缮甲兵，备御遏。
现代文：六月初一，给钱一百万络，银五千两，命令嘉定知府咎万寿修城浚壕，修缮兵甲，防御敌军。
English: On the first day of June, he gave a million rupees and 5,000 taels of silver to the governor of Jiading and ordered him to build a ditch for the city of Manshou, repair the armor, and defend the enemy.

古文：以韩震带行御器械、知江安州兼潼川东路安抚副使，马堃带行御器械、知咸淳府、节制涪、万州。
现代文：任命韩震带行御器械、江安知州兼撞川东路安抚副使，马带行御器械、咸淳知府，节制涪州、万州。
English: He appointed Han Zhen with the Instrument of Government, Jiang An with the Instrument of Government, Chizhou with the Instrument of Government, Binchuan East Road with the Instrument of Government, Ma with the Instrument of Government, Ham Chun with the Instrument of Government, Bozhou with the Instrument of Government, and Wanzhou with the Instrument of Government.

古文：台臣劾朱善孙督纲运受赃四万五千，诏特贷死，配三千里，禁锢不赦。
现代文：台臣弹勃朱善孙督管纲运接受赃款四万五千络，下诏特免死，流放三千里，禁锢不予赦免。
English: Zhu Shansun, the governor of Taizhou Province, received 45,000 rupees in bribe money, was exempted from death, exiled 3,000 miles, and his imprisonment was not pardoned.

古文：乙未，诏以蜀阃调度浩繁，赐钱二百万给用。
现代文：初三，下诏因蜀地调度浩繁，赐钱二百万络供其使用。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, because of the large number of dispatches from Shu, the lower court granted 2 million rupees for its use.

古文：丙申，诸暨县大雨、暴风、雷电，发米振遭水家。
现代文：初四，诸暨县大雨、暴风、雷电，发米贩济遭水灾民户。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the year, heavy rains, storms, and lightning in Zhuji County, rice traders and flood-affected households.

古文：瑞州民及流徙者饥，乏食，发义仓米一万八千石，减直振粜。
现代文：瑞州百姓和流徙者饥谨乏食，发义仓米一万八千石，减价贩桌。
English: The people of Ruizhou and the migrants are hungry and short of food, with 18,000 kilos of rice stored in charity warehouses and reduced-price vendor tables.

古文：己亥，诏以陆九渊孙溥补上州文学。
现代文：初七，下诏以陆九渊孙陆溥补上州文学官。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the following edict was issued to make Lu Jiuyuan's grandson, Lu Yao, a Shangzhou literary official.

古文：己酉，镇江府转输米十万石于五河新城积贮。
现代文：十七日，镇江府转输米十万石到五河新城贮积。
English: On the 17th, Zhenjiang transferred 100,000 kilos of rice to Wuhe New Town for storage.

古文：癸丑，以隆暑，给钱二百万赐襄、郢屯戍将士。
现代文：二十一日，因盛暑给钱二百万赐给襄、呈阵地区屯戍将士。
English: On the 21st, due to the hot weather, 2 million yuan was given to soldiers stationed in Xiangyang and other areas.

古文：丙辰，抚州黄震言： 本州振荒劝分，前谷城县尉饶立积米二百万，靳不发廪，虽尝监贷，宜正遏籴之罪。 
现代文：二十四日，抚州黄震说： 本州贩荒劝分，前谷城县尉饶立积米二百万石，吝惜不发仓米，虽曾监贷，也应按遏来之罪论处。 
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Fuzhou Huang Zhen said: The state's sale of barren land is persuasive, and the commander of Maetancheng County has set aside two million kilos of rice, and is reluctant to issue warehouse rice. Although he was a loan officer, he should also be punished according to the crime of deterrence.

古文：诏饶立削两秩、武冈军居住。
现代文：下诏饶立削夺两秩，武冈军居住。
English: In the following edict, Rao and Li were stripped of their two ranks, and the Wu-Gang army took up residence.

古文：洪天锡三辞召命，诏守臣勉谕赴阙。
现代文：洪天锡三辞召命，下诏守臣劝其前往朝廷。
English: Hong Tianxi was summoned three times, and Shoucheng advised him to go to the imperial court.

古文：戊午，绍兴府饥，振粮万石。
现代文：二十六日，绍兴府饥荒，贩济粮米一万石。
English: On the 26th, the famine in Shaoxing was over, and rice was sold for 10,000 koku.

古文：己未，两淮五河筑城具完，赐名安淮军。
现代文：二十七日，两淮五河筑城完成，赐名安淮军。
English: On the 27th, the construction of the two Huai and five rivers was completed, and the name Anhuai Army was given.

古文：大元会兵围襄阳。
现代文：元军集中兵力围攻襄阳。
English: The Yuan army concentrated its forces to besiege Xiangyang.

古文：秋七月辛未，枢密院言吴信、周旺赍蜡书入襄城，往复效劳，诏各补官三转。
现代文：秋七月初十，枢密院说吴信、周旺带着蜡书进人襄城，往还艰难，下诏各补转三官。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the Privy Council said that Wu Xin and Zhou Wang had entered Xiangcheng with wax books, and it was still difficult to go back and forth, and each of them was replaced by three officials.

古文：丁丑，湖南转运司访求先儒张栻后人义伦以闻，诏补将仕郎。
现代文：十六日，湖南转运司访求先儒张斌后人张义伦上报朝廷，下诏补为将仕郎。
English: On the 16th, the Hunan Transportation Department requested that Zhang Yilun, a descendant of the first Confucian Zhang Bin, visit the imperial court, and the imperial edict was issued.

古文：壬午，四川制置使朱禩孙言： 夏五以来，江水凡三泛溢，自嘉而渝，漂荡城壁，楼橹圮坏。又嘉定地震者再，被灾害为甚，乞赐黜罢，上答天谴。 
现代文：二十一日，四川制置使朱祀孙说： 人夏以来，江水共三次泛滥，自嘉州到渝州，荡涤城壁，楼憎损坏；又嘉定两次发生地震，造成的灾害十分严重，请求罢职，报答上天的惩罚。 
English: On the 21st, Zhu Shisun, the governor of Sichuan Province, said: Since the beginning of summer, the river has flooded a total of three times. From Jiazhou to Yuzhou, the city walls have been washed away and the buildings have been damaged. In addition, two earthquakes have occurred in Jiading, causing very serious disasters. I request to resign and repay the punishment of heaven.

古文：诏不允。
现代文：下诏不允。
English: The following edict is not acceptable.

古文：癸未，诏：城五河，淮东制置印应雷具有劳绩，进一秩，宣劳官属将士皆推恩。
现代文：二十二日，下诏：五河筑城，淮东制置使印应雷都有功劳，进官品一级，命令官属将士都给予恩赏。
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued: the Wuhe construction of the city and the establishment of the Huaidong system have all contributed to the invention of the thunderbolt, and have been promoted to the first level of official products, and ordered the officials and soldiers to give rewards.

古文：八月壬辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of August, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：甲午，以钱三百万，遣京湖制置李庭芝诣郢州调遣犒师。
现代文：初三，给钱三百万络，派遣京湖制置使李庭芝到即州调遣搞师。
English: On the third day of junior high school, he paid three million rupees and sent Li Tingzhi to Zhouzhou to recruit teachers.

古文：丁未，命沿江制置副使夏贵会合策应，以钱二百万随军给用。
现代文：十六日，命令沿江制置副使夏贵会合策应，给钱二百万络随军给用。
English: On the 16th, Xia Gui, the deputy envoy along the Yangtze River, was ordered to set up a meeting to respond to the plan and pay two million rupees to the army.

古文：九月乙亥，显文阁直学士汤汉、显文阁直学士洪天锡各五辞召命，诏并升华文阁学士，仍予祠禄。
现代文：九月十四日，显文阁直学士汤汉、洪天锡都五次辞免召命，下诏都升华文阁学士，仍给予祠禄。
English: On September 14th, Tang Han and Hong Tianxi, the direct bachelors of Xianwen Pavilion, resigned five times and were exempted from the call to duty, and were promoted to the bachelors of Huayuan Pavilion. They were still given the ancestral stipend.

古文：己丑，子生。
现代文：二十八日，子赵显出生。
English: On the 28th, his son Zhao Xian was born.

古文：冬十月丙申，少傅、嗣秀王与泽薨，诏赠少师，追封临海郡王。
现代文：冬十月初六，少傅、嗣秀王赵与泽去世，诏令赠少师，追封为临海郡王。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of winter, Zhao Youze, Shao Fu and the heir of King Xiu, passed away. He was posthumously awarded the title of King of Linhai County.

古文：癸丑，从政郎朱鉴孙进《群经要略》。
现代文：二十三日，从政郎朱鉴孙进呈群经要略。
English: On the 23rd, Zhu Jiansun, the political leader, presented a summary of the group scriptures.

古文：己未，诏殿、步、马诸军贫乏阵没孤遗者，方此隆寒，其赐钱二十万、米万石振之。
现代文：二十九日，诏令殿、步、马各军贫乏阵亡孤遗者，值此寒冷之际，赐给钱二十万络、米一万石贩济他们。
English: On the 29th, on this cold day, the Emperor gave 200,000 rupees in money and 10,000 koku of rice to the poor and destitute soldiers of the Imperial Army.

古文：十一月癸亥，诏民有以孝弟闻于乡者，守、令其具名上闻，将旌异劳赐焉。
现代文：十一月初三，下诏百姓有以孝佛闻名于乡者，令地方官开列姓名上报，将给予表彰赏赐。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, local officials were ordered to list the names of the people who were famous for their filial piety in the village, and they will be given awards.

古文：己已。诏汤汉官一转，端明殿学士，依所请致仕。
现代文：初九，下诏汤汉转一官，为端明殿学士，依所请退休。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, Tang Han was promoted to an official and became a scholar of the Duanming Palace. He retired as requested.

古文：十二月甲午，诏诸路监司循按刑狱，傔从扰民，御史台申严觉察。
现代文：十二月初四，下诏：各路监司视察刑狱案件，随从官吏骚扰百姓，御史台要申严觉察。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, the following edict was issued: the supervisors of each road should inspect the prison cases, and the officials should follow the officials to harass the people.

古文：丙午，以钱三十万命四川制司下渠、洋、开州、宁西镇抚使张朝宝创司犒师。
现代文：十六日，给钱三十万络命令四川制置司下发给渠、洋、开州和宁西镇抚使张朝宝创司搞军。
English: On the 16th, an order of 300,000 rupees was issued to the Sichuan Provincial Government to send troops to Qu, Yang, Kaizhou, and Ningxi Townships, with Zhang Chaobao as the commander of the troops.

古文：己亥，淮东统领兼知镇江府赵溍乞祠禄，不允。
现代文：己亥日，淮东统领兼镇江知府赵浩请求祠禄，没有允准。
English: On the day of Ji Hai, Zhao Hao, the general leader of Huai Dong and Zhenjiang prefecture, asked for a stipend, but it was not granted.

古文：谢方叔特叙复元官职、惠国公致仕。
现代文：谢方叔特恢复原官职，惠国公退休。
English: Xie Fangshute resumed his former official position, and Hui Guogong retired.

古文：辛亥，初置士籍。
现代文：二十一日，初置士籍。
English: On the 21st, he was registered as a citizen for the first time.

古文：戊午，诏举廉能材堪县令者，侍从、台谏、给舍各举十人，卿监、郎官各举五人，制帅、监司各举六人，知州、军、监各举二人。
现代文：二十八日，下诏举荐廉洁奉公、有才能可以担任县令者，侍从、台谏、给舍各举荐十人，卿监、郎官各举荐五人，制帅、监司各举荐六人，知州、知军、知监各举二人。
English: On the 28th, the next edict recommended those who are honest and serve the public and have the ability to serve as county magistrates, and recommended ten attendants, eunuchs, and courtiers, and recommended five superintendents and stewards, and recommended six marshals and superintendents, and recommended two chizhou, two chihun, and two superintendents.

古文：八年春正月庚申，诏： 朕惟崇俭必自宫禁始，自今宫禁敢以珠翠销金为首饰服用，必罚无贷。
现代文：咸淳八年春正月初一，皇上下诏说： 我认为崇尚节俭必须从宫廷内部做起，从今以后宫廷里有人胆敢用珠宝翠玉金银制品作为头发和衣服的装饰品，必定处罚决不宽恕。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighth year of the Spring of Emperor Xianjun, the emperor issued an imperial edict: I think that advocating frugality must start from within the court. From now on, if anyone in the court dares to use jade jewelry, gold and silver products as decorations for hair and clothes, the punishment will never be forgiven.

古文：臣庶之家，咸宜体悉。
现代文：无论是臣僚之家还是老百姓家庭。
English: Whether it is the home of a minister or a commoner's family.

古文：工匠犯者，亦如景祐制，必从重典。 
现代文：都应该明白这个道理。工匠违反者，也要按照仁宗景年间的规定，一定要依据严厉的法制予以处置。 
English: Everyone should understand this principle. Craftsmen who violate the rules must be dealt with in accordance with the strict legal system in accordance with the regulations of the Jinzongjing era.

古文：又诏： 有虞之世，三载考绩，三考黜陟幽明。
现代文：又下诏说： 有虞氏时代，三年考查一次官吏的政绩，经过三次考查，根据官员的昏暗或英明来决定升降。
English: The next edict said: In the era of the Yu clan, the political achievements of officials were examined once every three years. After three examinations, promotion and demotion were decided according to the dimness or wisdom of the officials.

古文：汉之为吏者长子孙，则其遗意也。
现代文：汉朝要求做官的做子孙的师长，就是那个时代遗留下来的意向。
English: The Han Dynasty's requirement that officials should be their children's teachers is a legacy of that era.

古文：比年吏习偷薄，人怀一切，计日待迁，事未克究，又望而之他。
现代文：近年来官吏习惯于苟且敷衍，人们心里所想的，是计算着等待提升进职的时间，事情还没有做出成绩来，又企望着别的职位。
English: In recent years, government officials have been accustomed to being meticulous and perfunctory. People's minds are calculating the time to wait for promotion, things have not been done, and they are looking forward to other positions.

古文：吏胥狎玩，窃弄官政，吾民奚赖焉？
现代文：各级官员互相亲近而不严肃，私下里玩忽职守，这样老百姓还依靠谁呢？
English: Officials at all levels are close to each other but not serious, and neglect their duties in private. So who do the people still rely on?

古文：继自今内之郎曹，外之牧守以上，更不数易，其有治状昭著，自宜奖异。 
现代文：从现在起宫内的侍从大臣，在外牧守以上官吏，调动不能太频繁，他们当中治绩显著者，自然应该特别奖励提拔。 
English: From now on, the attendants of ministers in the palace, and officials above the level of shepherds in the outside world, should not be transferred too frequently. Those who have outstanding performance among them should naturally be specially rewarded and promoted.

古文：辛未，子昺生。
现代文：十二日，子赵簌出生。
English: On the 12th, his son Zhao Yao was born.

古文：己丑，汤汉卒，赐谥文清。
现代文：三十日，汤汉去世，赐给溢号文清。
English: On the 30th, Tang Han passed away, and was given the posthumous name of Wenqing.

古文：二月癸巳，谢方叔卒，赠少师。
现代文：二月初四，谢方叔去世，赠少师。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, Uncle Xie Fang passed away.

古文：前知台州赵子寅殁，无所归，特赠直秘阁，给没官宅一区、田三百亩，养其孤遗，以旌廉吏。
现代文：前知台州赵子寅去世，无所归葬，特赠直秘阁，给没官宅一幢、田三百亩，养其遗孤，用来表彰廉吏。
English: The former governor of Taizhou, Zhao Ziying, died without a place to be buried. He was given a special gift of a secret cabinet, a government house and 300 mu of farmland, and his orphans were raised to commend corrupt officials.

古文：丙午，以钱二百万给犒襄、郢水陆战戍将士。
现代文：十七日，以钱二百万络用来搞赏襄、呈阵地区水陆战守将士。
English: On the 17th, two million rupees in money were used to reward soldiers and sailors who fought in the battlefield.

古文：三月丙子，同知枢密院事兼权参知政事赵顺孙授中大夫。
现代文：三月十八日，同知枢密院事兼代理参知政事赵顺孙授为中大夫。
English: On March 18th, Zhao Shunsun, Tongzhi Privy Councillor and Acting Councillor Zhao Shunsun, was awarded the title of Middle Doctor.

古文：夏四月戊子，知合州、利路安抚张珏创筑宜胜山城。
现代文：夏四月初一，知合州、利州路安抚使张环创筑宜胜山城。
English: On the first day of April in summer, Zhang Huan, the pacifier of Zhihezhou and Lizhou Roads, started to build Yisheng Mountain City.

古文：五月己巳，王龠除观文殿学士、提举万寿观兼侍读。
现代文：五月十二日，王抓授为观文殿学士，提举万寿观兼侍读。
English: On May 12th, Wang Shizhu became a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and was awarded the title of Banshu Guan and attendant.

古文：大元兵久围襄、樊，援兵厄关险，不克进。诏荆、襄将帅移驻新郢，遣部辖张顺、张贵将死士三千人自上流夜半轻舟转战。
现代文：元军久围襄、樊，援军扼于关险，不能前进，诏令荆、襄将帅移驻新即，派遣所部张顺、张贵率领敢死将士三千人从上游在半夜里乘轻舟转战。
English: The Yuan army had been besieging Xiang and Shao for a long time, and the reinforcements were in danger of being trapped and unable to advance. The emperor ordered the generals of Jing and Xiang to move to Xinxiao, and dispatched the headquarters of Zhang Shun and Zhang Gui, led by three thousand death-defying soldiers, from the upper reaches in the middle of the night by light boat.

古文：比明达襄城，收军阅视，失张顺。
现代文：黎明时分，抵达襄城，收军时清点人数，张顺战死。
English: At dawn, after arriving at Xiangcheng and counting the number of soldiers during the withdrawal, Zhang Shun died in battle.

古文：六月丙申，皮龙荣徙衡州。
现代文：六月初十，皮龙荣迁徙到衡州。
English: At the beginning of June 10th, Piron Rong migrated to Hengzhou.

古文：丁酉，以章鉴为端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事、同提举《经武要略》。
现代文：十一日，任命章鉴为端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事、同提举经武要略。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhang Jian was appointed as the academician of Duanming Palace, the same letter was signed by the Privy Councillor, and the same nomination was made by the military leader.

古文：以钱千万命京湖制司籴米百万石，转输襄阳府积贮。
现代文：出钱一千万络命令京湖制置司来米一百万石，转输到襄阳府积贮。
English: He ordered the Beijing Lake District to pay 10 million yuan to set up a rice mill to produce 1 million koku of rice, which would then be transported to Yangyang Prefecture for storage.

古文：乙巳，以家铉翁兼权知绍兴府、浙东安抚、提举司事，以唐震为浙西提点刑狱。
现代文：十九日，任命家铰翁兼代理绍兴知府、浙东安抚提举司事，任命唐震为浙西提点刑狱。
English: On the 19th, he appointed Jiayuan Weng as the deputy governor of Shaoxing Prefecture and the deputy governor of East Zhejiang Province, and appointed Tang Zhen as the deputy governor of West Zhejiang Province.

古文：王龠乞寝新命，不允，勉谕赴阙。
现代文：王抓请求罢除新职任命，没有允准，要求他前往朝廷。
English: Wang Zhi requested that his appointment to the new post be revoked, but this was not granted, and he was asked to go to the imperial court.

古文：辛亥，台臣言江西推排田结局已久，旧设都官、团长等虚名尚在，占吝常役，为害无穷，又言广东运司银场病民。
现代文：二十五日，台臣说江西推排土地事情早已完结，原来设置都官、团长等虚名仍然存在，占吝常役，为害无穷；又说广东转运司银场为害百姓。
English: On the 25th, the Taiwanese minister said that the land resettlement in Jiangxi had been completed long ago, and that the false names such as the original setting of the capital official and the head of the delegation still existed, and that the officials were miserly and did great harm; he also said that the Guangdong Transportation Department and the silver field harmed the people.

古文：诏俱罢之。
现代文：下诏罢除。
English: He was dismissed with the following edict.

古文：癸丑，以钱五百万命四川制司诣湖北籴运上峡入夔米五十万石。
现代文：二十七日，给钱五百万络命令四川制置司到湖北来运粮食五十万石经过峡州运到夔州。
English: On the 27th, the Sichuan Provincial Construction Division was ordered to pay 5 million RMB to Hubei Province to transport 500,000 kilos of grain to Ganzhou via Xiaozhou.

古文：秋七月辛未，知静江府、广西经略安抚使兼计度转运使胡颖乞祠禄，诏勋一转，依所乞宫观。
现代文：秋七月十五日，静江知府、广西经略安抚使兼计度转运使胡颖请求祠禄，下诏转升一级，依所请求给予宫观官。
English: On the 15th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Hu Ying, the conciliator of Jingjiang Prefecture and Guangxi Province, and also the envoy of measurement and transportation, requested a shrine stipend, and was promoted to the next level, and was given a palace observation officer according to the request.

古文：八月丙戌朔，日有食之。辛丑，诏家铉翁赴阙。
现代文：八月初一，日食。十六日，诏令家铰翁前往朝廷。
English: On the first day of August, there was a solar eclipse. On the 16th, Emperor Taizong ordered Jiayuan to go to the imperial court.

古文：丁未，绍兴府六邑水，发米振遭水家。
现代文：二十二日，绍兴府六县发生水灾，发米贩济遭受水灾民户。
English: On the 22nd, floods occurred in six counties of Shaoxing Prefecture, and the rice traders suffered from the floods.

古文：壬子，王龠辞免明堂大礼陪祠。
现代文：二十七日，王抓辞免明堂大礼陪祠。
English: On the 27th, Wang Jizhi was excused from the Ming Hall Grand Ceremony.

古文：乙卯，诏福建安抚陈宜中克举厥职，升宝谟阁待制。
现代文：三十日，下诏：福建安抚使陈宜中忠于职守，升为宝章阁待制。
English: On the 30th, the following edict was issued: Chen Yizhong, the pacifier of Fujian Province, had been loyal to his duties and was promoted to the rank of treasure.

古文：九月丁卯，诏洪天锡转端明殿学士，允所请致仕，辛未，明堂礼成，祀景灵宫。还遇大雨，改乘逍遥辇入和宁门，肆赦。
现代文：九月十二日，下诏洪天锡转端明殿学士，允许依所请退休。十六日，明堂礼完成，祭祀景灵宫，回来时遇上大雨，改乘逍遥举进人和宁门，实行赦免。
English: On the 16th, after the completion of the Ming Hall ceremony, he made a sacrifice to the Jingling Palace, and when he came back, it was raining heavily. Instead, he took the opportunity to go to Ningmen and Ningmen, and he was pardoned.

古文：庚辰，诏以朱禩孙兼四川屯田使。
现代文：二十五日，下诏任命朱祀孙兼四川屯田使。
English: On the 25th, the next imperial edict appointed Zhu Rishisun and the Sichuan Military Attaché.

古文：乙酉，洪天锡卒，赠五官，谥文毅。
现代文：三十日，洪天锡去世，赠五官，溢号文毅。
English: On the 30th, Hong Tianxi passed away. He was given the title of "five officials" and the posthumous name of "Wen Yi."

古文：冬十月己亥，绍兴府言八月一日，会稽、余姚、上虞、诸暨、萧山五县大水，诏减田租有差。
现代文：冬十月十四日，绍兴府说八月一日会稽、余姚、上虞、诸暨、萧山五县发生大水，下诏减免田租不等。
English: On October 14th, winter, Shaoxing Prefecture said that on August 1st, there was heavy water in five counties of Huiqi, Yuyao, Shangyu, Zhuji and Xiaoshan, and issued a decree to reduce and exempt farm rents.

古文：丁未，以章鉴兼权参知政事。
现代文：二十二日，任命章鉴兼代理参知政事。
English: On the 22nd, Zhang Jian was appointed Acting Councillor of State Affairs.

古文：右丞相马廷鸾十疏乞骸骨，诏不允。
现代文：右承相马廷莺十次上疏请求辞官，下诏不允。
English: The Right Heir to the throne, Ma Tingtao, requested to resign from his post ten times, but was not allowed to do so.

古文：庚戌，以秋雨水溢，诏减钱塘、仁和两县民田租什二，会稽湖田租什三，诸暨湖田租尽除之。
现代文：二十五日，因秋雨积水，会稽湖田租十分之三，诸暨湖田租全部免除。二十六日，陈宜中兼任给事中。
English: On the 25th, due to the autumn rain, three-tenths of the lake rent was deducted, and all the lake rents were exempted. On the 26th, Chen Yizhong also served as the secretary.

古文：辛亥，陈宜中兼给事中。十一月乙卯，右丞相马廷鸾累疏乞骸骨，授观文殿学士、知饶州。诏以隆寒，殿、步、马司诸军贫窭并阵没孤遗者，振以钱粟。
现代文：十一月初一，右承相马廷莺多次上疏请求辞官，授为观文殿学士、饶州知州。下诏寒冬季节，殿、步、马司各军贫乏和阵亡者的遗孤，给钱粟予以贩济。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the Right Heir of the Imperial Family, Ma Tingtao, repeatedly petitioned Shang Shou to grant him the title of Dictator, and he was awarded the title of Guanwen Dian Baccalaureate and the title of Raozhou Zhizhou. In the cold winter season, the poor soldiers and the orphans of the dead soldiers of the Imperial Army, the Shou, and the Ma Army were given money to sell poppies.

古文：丙辰，陈奕以殿前都指挥使摄侍卫步军司、马军司。
现代文：初二，陈奕以殿前都指挥使摄侍卫步军司、马军司。
English: On the second day of the junior high school, Chen Yiyi led the camera crew in front of the hall, followed by the guards and horse guards.

古文：己未，马廷鸾辞免知饶州，乞祠禄。诏以所请，以观文殿大学士、鄱阳郡公提举洞霄宫。
现代文：初五，马廷莺辞免饶州知州，请求祠禄，下诏批准他的请求，以观文殿大学士、番阵阳郡公提举洞霄宫。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Ma Tingyu resigned from Raozhou Zhizhou, requested the ancestral hall, and approved his request by the next imperial edict, and raised the Dongxiao Palace with the help of Guanwenden University and Fanjianyang County.

古文：壬戌，命阮思聪赴枢密院廪议。
现代文：初八，命令阮思聪到枢密院汇报工作。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he ordered Nguyen Sicong to report to the Privy Council.

古文：己巳，诏明堂礼成，安南国王陈日煚、陈威晃各加食邑一千户，赐鞭、鞍、马等物。
现代文：十五日，下诏明堂礼完成，安南国王陈日、陈威晃各加食邑一千户，赐给鞭、鞍、马等物。
English: On the fifteenth day, after the completion of the Lower Zhao Ming Hall ceremony, King Annan, Chen Rong and Chen Wei Xuan each gave 1,000 households a meal, and gave them whips, saddles, horses and other items.

古文：十二月甲寅，以叶梦鼎为少傅、右丞相兼枢密使。
现代文：十二月三十日，以叶梦鼎为少傅、右承相兼枢密使。
English: On December 30th, Ye Mengding was promoted to the position of Junior Minister, Minister of the Right and Privy Councilor.

古文：九年春正月乙丑，樊城破，范天顺、牛富死之。
现代文：咸淳九年春正月十一日，樊城被攻破，范天顺、牛富战死。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the spring of the ninth year of Xianjun, Lucheng was breached, and Fan Tianshun and Niu Fu died in the battle.

古文：癸未，诏定安丰统制金文彪、朱文广、王文显、盛全氵戎河、古河、泉河、珉河等处战功行赏。
现代文：二十九日，下诏确定安丰统制金文彪、朱文广、王文显、盛全戎河、古河、泉河、氓河等处战功，便于论功行赏。
English: On the 29th, the following edict was issued to determine the merits of Anfeng's commanders Kim Wenbiao, Zhu Wenguang, Wang Wenxian, Sheng Quan, Euncheon, Guhe, Quanhe, Gangue and other places, so as to facilitate the discussion and reward of merits.

古文：二月甲申，诏鄂州左水军统制张顺没身战阵，赠宁远军承宣使，官其二子承信郎，立庙京湖，赐额曰忠显。
现代文：二月初一，下诏：鄂州左水军统制张顺，战死沙场，赠宁远军承宣使，任命其二个儿子为承信郎，在京湖立庙，赐额忠显。
English: On the first day of February, the following edict was issued: Zhang Shun, the commander of the Ezhou Left Water Army, died in battle, presented the Ningyuan Army to Chengxuan Envoy, appointed his two sons as Chengxin Lang, and built a temple in Beijing Lake, and gave the award to Zhongxian.

古文：甲午，朱禩孙抚绥备御，义不辞难，敕书奖谕。
现代文：十一日，朱祀孙抚绥备御，义不辞难，救书奖谕。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhu Xi and Sun Fuzhen prepared for the award ceremony.

古文：丁未，以夏贵检校少保。
现代文：二十四日，任命夏贵为检校少保。
English: On the 24th, Xia Gui was appointed as the school inspector.

古文：庚戌，吕文焕以襄阳府归大元。
现代文：二十七日，吕文焕以襄阳府投降元朝。
English: On the 27th, Lü Wenhuan surrendered Xiangyang Prefecture to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：癸丑，以朱涧寺战功，推赏来归人马宣、沿江都统王喜等将士千五百七十余人。
现代文：三十日，因朱涧寺战功，给予来归顺朝廷的马宣、沿江都统王喜等将士一千五百七十多人恩赏。
English: On the 30th, rewards were given to more than 1,570 soldiers, including Ma Xuan and Wang Xi, who had surrendered to the imperial court for their service in the Battle of Zhulun Temple.

古文：三月庚申，贾似道言边遽日闻，请督师以励将帅。
现代文：三月初七，贾似道说边防警报一日紧似一日，请求亲自督战以激励将帅。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month of the year, Jia Liangdao said that the border defense alert was the same every day, and asked to personally supervise the battle to encourage the general.

古文：诏不允。
现代文：下诏不允。
English: The following edict is not acceptable.

古文：四川制司言： 近出师成都，刘整故吏罗鉴自北复还，上整书稿一帙，有取江南二策：其一曰先取全蜀，蜀平，江南可定；其二曰清口、桃源，河、淮要冲，宜先城其地，屯山东军以图进取。 
现代文：四川制司说： 近来出兵成都，刘整的旧吏罗鉴从元军回来，呈上刘整书稿一册，其中有夺取江南二策：其一说，先取四川全境，四川平定，江南才可以平定；其二说，清口、桃源、河、淮要冲，应先在其地进筑城池，屯军山东，以图进取。 
English: The Sichuan governor said: Recently, Luo Jian, the former official of Liu Zhengyi, who was sent to Chengdu, returned from the Yuan army and presented a copy of Liu Zhengyi's book, which included two strategies for seizing the southern part of the Yangtze River. The first said that the entire territory of Sichuan should be taken first, Sichuan should be pacified, and the southern part of the Yangtze River should be pacified. The second said that if Qingkou, Taoyuan, He and Huai wanted to rush, they should first build a city in their land, and the Shandong troops should advance to the east.

古文：帝览奏，亟诏淮东制司往清口，择利城筑以备之。
现代文：度宗阅看奏疏后，急忙诏令淮东制置司前往清口，选择有利地形筑城防备元军的进攻。
English: After Du Zong read and watched the report, he hastily issued an edict ordering the Huaidong Construction Division to go to Qingkou, choose a favorable terrain to build a city and prepare for the attack of the Yuan army.

古文：叶梦鼎辞免右丞相，诏不允。
现代文：叶梦鼎辞免右承相，下诏不允。
English: Ye Mengding resigns and is pardoned by Yu Chengxiang. The following edict is not allowed.

古文：庚午，遣金吾卫上将军阮思聪由平江、镇江及黄州行视城池，凡合缮修增易者亟条奏。
现代文：十七日，派遣金吾卫上将军阮思聪由平江、镇江到黄州，视察沿途城池情况，凡是需要修缮增易者急速奏报到朝廷。
English: On the 17th, Kim Woo Wee sent General Nguyen Sicong from Pingjiang and Zhenjiang to Hwangju to inspect the situation of the cities and towns along the way, and report to the imperial court quickly if there was any need for repair and improvement.

古文：丙子，来归人方德秀补成忠郎，栗勇、杨林、胡巨川补保义郎，刘全补承信郎。
现代文：二十三日，来归顺朝廷人方德秀补为成忠郎，栗勇、杨林、胡巨川补为保义郎，刘全补为承信郎。
English: On the 23rd, Fang De Xiuzhi, a returnee to the Shun court, became Cheng Zhongro, Kuriyu, Yang Lin, and Hu Juchuan became Hoyiro, and Liu Zhenzhi became Cheng Xinro.

古文：戊寅，贾似道始奏李庭芝表言襄帅吕文焕以城降大元。
现代文：二十五日，贾似道首次上奏说到李庭芝在奏表中谈到襄樊统帅吕文焕以城投降元朝的情况。
English: On the 25th, Jia Xi Dao reported for the first time that Li Tingzhi talked about the situation of the surrender of Xiangfan commander Lvwen Huan to the Yuan Dynasty in the report.

古文：己卯，加昝万寿宁远军承宣使、职任仍旧。
现代文：二十六日，加咎万寿为宁远军承宣使，职任不变。
English: On the 26th, Gao Wanshou was appointed as the ambassador of the Ningyuan Army, and his position remained unchanged.

古文：庚辰，夏贵辞免检校少保，不允。
现代文：二十七日，夏贵辞免检校少保，没有批准。
English: On the 27th, Xia Gui's resignation was not approved.

古文：壬午，诏建机速房，以革枢密院漏泄兵事、稽违边报之弊。
现代文：二十九日，下诏建立机速房，从而革除枢密院泄漏军事机密、拖延不发边防警报的弊端。
English: On the 29th, it was decided to establish a speed control room, thereby eliminating the drawbacks of the Privy Council leaking military secrets and delaying the issuance of border alarms.

古文：贾似道累疏请身督师，诏勉留。
现代文：贾似道多次上疏请求亲自督军作战，度宗诏令留在朝廷。
English: Jia Lian Dao repeatedly requested Shang Shu to personally supervise the army in battle, and the Emperor's edict remained in the imperial court.

古文：夏四月，诏褒襄城死节，右领卫将军范天顺赠静江军承宣使，右武大夫、马司统制牛富赠金州观察使，各官其二子承信郎，赐土田、金币恤其家。
现代文：夏四月，下诏褒奖襄城为国战死者，右领卫将军范天顺赠静江军承宣使，右武大夫、马军司统制牛富赠金州观察使，各自有两个儿子为承信郎，赐给土地、金币抚恤家属。
English: In the summer of April, the imperial edict was issued to commend the war dead of Xiangcheng for the country. General Fan Tianshun, the right-hand guard, presented the Jingjiang Army's successor envoy, Dr. Yu Wu, the secretary of the Ma Army, presented the Jinzhou observation envoy, and each had two sons as successor, and gave land and gold coins to the family members.

古文：甲申，汪立信权兵部尚书、京湖安抚制置使、知江陵府、夔路策应使、湖广总领，不许辞免。以钱二百万给立信开阃犒师。
现代文：初二，汪立信代理兵部尚书、京湖安抚制置使、江陵知府、夔路策应使、湖广总领，不许辞免，给钱二百万络，让汪立信开间搞军调用。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, Wang Lixin, the acting commander of the military department of Shangshu, the Beijing-Hukou pacification system, the Jiangling prefecture, the Kushiro road policy, and the general commander of Hukang, was not allowed to resign and was paid two million rupees, and Wang Lixin was allowed to call up troops at any time.

古文：叶梦鼎乞致仕，遣官勉谕赴都堂治事。
现代文：叶梦鼎请求退休，派遣官员劝谕他前往都堂处理政事。
English: Ye Mengding asked to retire, and officials were dispatched to advise him to go to the capital to deal with political affairs.

古文：辛卯，以赵溍为淮西总领兼沿江制置、建康留守。
现代文：初九，任命赵浩为淮西总领兼沿江制置使、建康留守。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Zhao Hao was appointed as the general leader of Huaxi and the envoy along the river, and Jiankang stayed behind.

古文：诏黄万石赴阙。
现代文：下诏黄万石前往朝廷。
English: Huang Wanshi went to the imperial court.

古文：壬辰，诏： 襄阳六年之守，一旦而失，军民离散，痛切朕心。
现代文：初十，下诏： 襄阳守了六年，终于失去，军民离散，肤深感痛心。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the following edict was issued: After six years of defending Yangyang, it was finally lost, and the soldiers and civilians were separated. I was deeply pained.

古文：今年乾会节，其免集英殿宴，以钱六十万给沿江制置赵溍江防捍御。 
现代文：今年乾会节，罢免集英殿宴会，给沿江制置使直赵借六十万络捍卫长江防线调用。 
English: On this year's Qianhui Festival, the banquet of the Jieying Hall was cancelled, and the Yangtze River Defense Line was set up to protect the Yangtze River.

古文：癸巳，知招信军陈岩乞祠禄。
现代文：十一日，招信知军陈岩请求祠禄。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Chen Yan, a member of the Zhaoxin Zhigong Army, asked for a stipend.

古文：诏曰： 乃者边吏弗戒，致有襄难，将士频岁暴露，边民荡析离居，伤朕心。
现代文：下诏说： 近年来边吏没有加以整治，结果导致襄阳失守。将士连年在外作战，边民离家出走他乡，肤心里十分悲伤。
English: The next edict said: In recent years, the border officials have not been rectified, resulting in the loss of Xiangyang. The soldiers have been fighting abroad for years, and the border residents have left home and gone to other villages, feeling very sad.

古文：尔阃臣专征方面，宜身率诸将，宣扬国威，以赏戮用命不用命。
现代文：你们这些统兵将帅主管一个地区的军事防务，应该为将领树立榜样，宣扬国威，用命者赏，不用命者杀。
English: You generals, who are in charge of the military defense of a region, should set an example for generals, promote national dignity, reward those who use their lives, and kill those who do not.

古文：尔守臣有土有民，宜申儆国人，保固封守。
现代文：你们这些守臣有土有民，应警告国人，严密防守疆土。
English: You, the guardians, have your own countrymen and your own people. You should warn your compatriots to closely defend their territory.

古文：尔诸将尚迪果毅，一乃心力，各以其兵，敌王所忾。
现代文：你们这些将领要坚决勇敢，同心同德，各率其兵，同仇敌汽，打击敌军的嚣张气焰。
English: You, generals, should be resolute and brave, work together with one heart and one mind, each leading his own troops, and fight together with the enemy against the enemy's arrogance.

古文：今朕多诰，尔其悉听明训，毋懈毋忄耎，习于故常，功多有厚赏，尔不克用劝，罚固不得私也。
现代文：今天肤告诫你等，应该完全听从朝廷的命令，不得懈怠，不要怯懦，因循守旧，功劳多给予厚赏，你们如果不克尽职守，那么惩罚是不可避免的。
English: Today, I warn you that you should fully obey the orders of the imperial court, not slack off, not be cowardly, follow the old rules, and be rewarded generously. If you do not perform your duties, then punishment is inevitable.

古文：又如中外小大臣僚，有材识超卓、明控御之宜、怀攻守之略者，密具以闻，一如端拱二年制书，朕当虚心以听。 
现代文：又如中外大小臣僚，有才识卓越，知道战守战略策略的，秘密开列姓名上报朝廷，一如端拱二年制书，肤到时应当虚心听取、采纳照办。 
English: For example, Chinese and foreign ministers of all ranks, regardless of rank, who have outstanding talents and know the strategy and tactics of the war, should secretly list their names and report to the imperial court. Just like the two-year-old book, when the time comes, they should listen with an open mind, accept and do as they are told.

古文：李庭芝乞解罢，诏赴阙。
现代文：李庭芝请求解除官职，下诏前往朝廷。
English: Li Tingzhi requested to be relieved of his official duties and went to the imperial court.

古文：壬寅，诏复置枢密院都统制、副都统制各一员。
现代文：二十日，下诏重新设置枢密院都统制、副都统制各一员。
English: On the 20th, the imperial edict was issued to re-establish one member of the Privy Council to be in charge of the capital city and one member to be in charge of the vice-capital city.

古文：丁未，以高达为宁江军节度使、湖北安抚使、知峡州。
现代文：二十五日，任命高达为宁江军节度使、湖北安抚使、峡州知州。
English: On the 25th, Gao Gao was appointed as the Ningjiang military envoy, Hubei pacification envoy, and Xiaozhou Chizhou envoy.

古文：诏忠州潜已升咸淳府，刺史王达改授高州刺史。
现代文：下诏忠州藩邸已升为咸淳府，刺史王达改授为高州刺史。
English: According to the following edict, the residence of the Chungju clan has been upgraded to Hamchungfu, and Wangda, the sashimi chef, has been upgraded to Gaozhou sashimi chef.

古文：李庭芝辞召赴阙，诏与祠。
现代文：李庭芝没有接受前往朝廷的命令，下诏给予祠禄。
English: Li Tingzhi did not accept the order to go to the imperial court, and the imperial edict was issued to give him a stipend.

古文：巳酉，诏： 南归人复有战功者予优赏，杨春、薛聚成、陈君谟、周海、周兴各补成忠郎，萧成、侯喜、丁甫、刘铸、郑归各补承信郎。 
现代文：二十七日，下诏： 南归人重新有战功者从优赏赐，杨春、薛聚成、陈君漠、周海、周兴各补成忠郎，萧成、侯喜、丁甫、刘铸、郑归各补承信郎。 
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued: The south returnees who had war meritorious service were again awarded from superior rewards, Yang Chun, Xue Jucheng, Chen Junmo, Zhou Hai, Zhou Xing were each awarded the title of Taorong, and Xiao Cheng, Hou Xi, Ding Fu, Liu Ji, and Zheng Gui were each awarded the title of Taorong.

古文：以夏贵兼侍卫马军都指挥使。
现代文：任命夏贵兼侍卫马军都指挥使。
English: Xia Gui, who was also the bodyguard of Ma Jun, was appointed to command the envoy.

古文：庚戌，诏汪立信赏罚调用悉听便宜行事。
现代文：二十八日，下诏汪立信赏罚调用全部自行处理决定，不必上奏。
English: On the 28th, Wang Lixin made the decision to call for reward and punishment all by himself, and there was no need to report it.

古文：辛亥，吕师夔言： 比贾似道得李庭芝书，报臣叔父文焕以襄城降，臣闻之陨越无地，不能顷刻自安。
现代文：二十九日，吕师夔说： 近来贾似道得到李庭芝的上书，说臣叔父吕文焕以襄城投降元朝，我听说后无地自容，不能顷刻自安。
English: On the 29th, Lu Shijuan said: Recently, Jia Xiangdao received a letter from Li Tingzhi, saying that his uncle Lu Wenhuan had surrendered to the Yuan Dynasty in Xiangcheng. After hearing this, I couldn't calm down.

古文：请以经略安抚、转运、静江府印委次官护之，席藁俟命，容臣归省偏亲，誓当趋事赴功，毁家纾难，以赎门户之愆，以报君父之造。 
现代文：请以经略安抚、转运、静江府印委任我来守护，席稿待命，容臣回家探亲，誓当趋事赴功，毁家纤难，以赎家门之罪过，以报君父之宽容。 
English: Please appoint me to be a guardian by means of appeasement, transfer, and Shingjiang prefectural seal, with a copy on standby, Yong minister to go home to visit relatives, pledge to work hard, destroy the family, redeem the family's sins, and repay the father's tolerance.

古文：诏不允。
现代文：下诏不允准。
English: The following edict is not acceptable.

古文：五月乙卯，以黄万石权户部尚书兼知临安府、浙西安抚使。
现代文：五月初四，任命黄万石代理户部尚书兼临安知府、浙西安抚使。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, Huang Wanshi was appointed as the acting Hubei Shangshu and Lin'an Zhifu, Zhejiang and West China pacification envoy.

古文：四川制司朱禩孙言： 所部诸县除正辟文臣外，诸郡属邑，许令本司不拘外县一体选辟文臣，以幸蜀之士民。 
现代文：四川制置司朱祀孙说： 所部各县除正式任命的文臣外，各郡属邑，允许本司不拘外县，一样可以选任为文臣，让四川士民觉得前途充满希望。 
English: Zhu Shisun, Sichuan's Secretary for the Establishment of the Civil Service, said: In addition to the officially appointed civil servants, each county belongs to the township. This department is allowed to be appointed as a civil servant regardless of the county, so that Sichuan citizens feel that the future is full of hope.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏可。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：丙辰，知庐州吕文福言： 从兄文焕以襄阳降，为其玷辱，何颜以任边寄，乞放罢归田里。 
现代文：初五，庐州知州吕文福说： 从兄吕文焕以襄阳降元，被其站污，有什么脸面担任边防守将，请求辞官。 
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Luzhou Zhizhou Lu Wenfu said: I was demoted from my brother Lu Wenhuan to Xiangyang, and I was tarnished by his station. I have no face to serve as a border guard, and I request to resign.

古文：诏不允。
现代文：下诏不允。
English: The following edict is not acceptable.

古文：吕师夔五疏乞罢任，诏赴阙。
现代文：吕师夔五次上疏请求辞职，下诏前往朝廷。
English: Lv Shisheng went to the imperial court five times to ask for resignation.

古文：丁卯，申禁奸民妄立经会，私创庵舍，以避征徭，保伍容芘不觉察坐之。
现代文：十六日，申命禁止奸民妄立经会，私创庵舍，以避征摇，保伍容纳包庇不检举处以连坐之罪。
English: On the 16th, he issued an order to prohibit the traitors from setting up a study group, creating a hermitage to evade the requisition, and protecting the troops to accommodate, cover up and not report the crime of sitting together.

古文：辛未，刘雄飞乞致仕。
现代文：二十日，刘雄飞请求退休。
English: On the 20th, Liu Xiongfei requested to retire.

古文：戊寅，孝感县丞关应庚上书言边防二十事，诏授武当军节度推官兼司法，京湖制司量材任使。
现代文：二十七日，孝感县承关应庚上书言边防二十事，下诏授为武当军节度推官兼司法参军，京湖制置司量才使用。
English: On the 27th, Xiaogan County's Chengguan was awarded the title of "Border Defense 20th," and the next edict was that he would be the military commander of the Wudang Army and join the army as a judicial officer. However, it was not until he was assigned to the Beijing Lake that he was put to use.

古文：庚辰，马军司统制王仙昔在襄、樊缘战陷阵，今复来归，特与官五转，充殿前司正额统制，赐钱一万。
现代文：二十九日，马军司统制王仙从前在襄、樊因战火陷阵，今天又来归顺，特给转五官，担任殿前司正额统制，赐钱一万络。
English: On the 29th, Wang Xian, the director of the Horse Troops, who had previously been in Xiang and Shao and was caught in the war, surrendered again today. He specially transferred five officials to serve as the official director of the front office of the palace, and gave 10,000 rupees in money.

古文：布衣林椿年等上书言边防十数事，诏诸人上书凡言请以丞相似道督视者不允，余付机速房。
现代文：布衣林椿年等上书言边防十余件事，下诏人们上书凡是请以承相贾似道督军者都不允准，其余的上书交付机速房。
English: There are more than ten matters concerning the border defense in the petition, such as the case of Bu Yilin and Tsubaki Nian. The next decree is that people are not allowed to petition anyone who is similar to the military governor, and the remaining petitions will be handed over to the speed room.

古文：六月，刑部尚书兼给事中陈宜中言，樊城之溃，牛富死节尤著，以职卑，赠恤下范天顺一阶，未惬舆情。
现代文：六月，刑部尚书兼给事中陈宜中说，樊城之溃败，牛富死节尤其显著，因职位低下赠恤低范天顺一级，不能使人满意。
English: In June, the Criminal Investigation Department's Shangshu and Chen Yi said in the report that the defeat of Lucheng and the death of Niu Fu were particularly significant, and that the award of the award was one level lower than that of Fan Tianshun due to the lower position, which was not satisfactory.

古文：诏加赠富宁远军承宣使，仍赐土田、金币恤其家。
现代文：下诏加赠牛富为宁远军承宣使，并且，赐给土地、金币抚恤其家。
English: The following edict added the gift of cattle and wealth for the Ningyuan army to receive the envoys, and gave land, gold coins and pensions to their families.

古文：前四川宣抚司参议官张梦发诣贾似道，上书陈危急三策，曰镇汉江口岸，曰城荆门军当阳界之玉泉山，曰峡州宜都而下联置堡砦，以保聚流民，且守且耕，并图上城筑形势。
现代文：前四川宣抚司参议官张梦发上书贾似道陈述解除危急形势的三条对策：一是镇汉江口岸，二是筑城于荆门军当阳的玉泉山，三是峡州宜都以下联置堡寨，保聚流民，且守且耕，并呈上筑城形势图。
English: Zhang Meng, the former senator of the Sichuan Propaganda and Guidance Department, sent a letter to Jia Li Dao stating three countermeasures to relieve the critical situation: one is to build the Han River port, the second is to build the city in the Jade Spring Mountain of the Jingmen Army, and the third is to build a fortification below the Yidu Gorge to keep the displaced people together, and to keep and cultivate, and to present the city building situation map.

古文：贾似道不以上闻，下京湖制司审度可否，事竟不行。
现代文：贾似道不让皇上知道，下发给京湖制置司审查可行与否，这件事情最终没有能够实行。
English: Jia Liangdao did not let the emperor know that the matter of sending it down to the Beijing Lake Establishment Division to examine whether it was feasible or not could not be implemented in the end.

古文：成都安抚使昝万寿去冬调将士攻毁成都大城，今春战碉门，五月遣统制杨国宝领兵至雅州，统领赵忠领兵至眉州，两路捍御有劳，诏具将士宣力等第、姓名以闻。
现代文：成都安抚使咎万寿去年冬天调将士攻毁成都大城，今年春天在碉门作战，五月派遣统制杨国宝率兵到雅州，统领赵忠率兵至眉州，两路抵御有功劳，下诏开列将士努力作战者等第、姓名上报朝廷。
English: Last winter, the Chengdu pacification envoy Wan Shou transferred the soldiers to attack and destroy the Chengdu metropolis. This spring, he fought in Shimen. In May, he sent the commanding officer Yang Guobao to Yazhou and the commanding officer Zhao Zhong to Meizhou. There are merits in the two-way resistance. The following edict lists the names of the soldiers who fought hard and reports their names to the imperial court.

古文：吕文福言文焕为人扶拥，以襄阳降非由己心。
现代文：吕文福说吕文焕被人挟持，以襄阳投降元朝不是他的本意。
English: Lu Wenfu said that Lu Wenhuan was held hostage, and it was not his intention to surrender Xiangyang to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：诏与李庭芝元陈异同，其审核以闻。
现代文：下诏说这与李庭芝原来陈述的情况不同，要加以调查核实，然后上报朝廷。
English: The next edict said that this was different from Li Tingzhi's original statement and should be investigated and verified, and then reported to the imperial court.

古文：庭芝表： 向在京湖，来归人吴旺等备言文焕父子降状，先纳莞钥，旋献襄城，且陈策攻郢州，请自为先锋。言人人同，制司案辞可征，非敢加诬人罪。 
现代文：李庭芝上表说： 从前在京湖，来归人吴旺等人详细陈述了吕文焕父子投降元朝的情状，先纳管钥，不久献纳襄城，而且陈述进攻即州的策略，请求亲自担任先锋，各人所言相同，制置司案辞可以为证，不敢加诬人罪。 
English: Li Tingzhi said on the table: Once upon a time in Jinghu, the returnees Wu Wang and others gave a detailed account of the situation of Lu Wenhuan's father and son's surrender to the Yuan Dynasty, the key was given to the father, and the key was given to Xiangcheng soon after, and the strategy of attacking the state was stated, and the request was to personally serve as the vanguard. Everyone said the same thing, and the wording of the case could be used as evidence, and they did not dare to add false charges.

古文：诏文福勉力捍御，毋坠家声。
现代文：下诏吕文福尽最大努力抵抗元军，不要损害家庭名声。
English: The following edict ordered Lü Wenfu to do his best to resist the Yuan army and not to damage the family's reputation.

古文：京湖制司言： 去年冬间，探司总管刘仪、盛聪，总制赵铎，领精锐至均州文龙崖立砦。
现代文：京湖制置司说： 去年冬天，探司总管刘仪、盛聪，总制赵铎，率领精锐部队到均州文龙崖建立堡寨。
English: The Beijing Lake Construction Division said: Last winter, Liu Yi and Sheng Cong, the chief inspectors, and Zhao Wei, the chief engineer, led the elite troops to Wenlong Cliff in Junzhou to build a fortress.

古文：吕文焕既降，均城受敌，知郡刘懋偕刘仪等扞御宣劳。 
现代文：吕文焕投降后，均州城受到元军的威逼，知郡刘愈会合刘仪等抵抗元军有功劳。 
English: After the surrender of Lü Wenhuan, the city of Junzhou was threatened by the Yuan Army. Liu Yi of the Zhigong County Liu Yu Association and others did a great deal to resist the Yuan Army.

古文：诏懋升右武大夫、带行左卫大将军，仍旧职，仪添差荆湖北路兵马钤辖，聪添差鄂州兵马钤辖，各官三转，将士官两转。
现代文：下诏刘愈升右武大夫、带行左卫大将军，职任不变，刘仪添差荆湖北路兵马铃辖，盛聪添差鄂州兵马铃辖，各转三官，将士转两官。
English: In the following edict, Liu Yuxing was promoted to the post of the doctor of the Right Division of the PLA Army, and Guo Xing was promoted to the post of the general of the Left Division of the Chinese People's Liberation Army. Their posts remained unchanged. Liu Yi was promoted to the post of the Jinghu North Road Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and Sheng Cong was promoted to the post of the Ezhou Terracotta Warriors and Horses. They were each promoted to three posts, and the soldiers were promoted to two posts.

古文：左藏东库蹇材望上书言边事大可忧者七，急当为者五。
现代文：左藏东库赛材望上书说边防有七件事值得特别忧虑，其中有五件事为紧急事务。
English: Zuo Zangdong Kusaizai looked at the letter and said that there were seven matters of special concern in the border defense, five of which were urgent matters.

古文：不报。
现代文：没有得到回答。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：丙戌，刘雄飞卒，特赠一官。
现代文：初五，刘雄飞去世，特赠一官。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Liu Xiongfei passed away.

古文：戊子，京湖制司请给器械，诏内军器库选犀利者赐之，仍赠钱百万备修缮。
现代文：初七，京湖制司请求供给器械，下诏内军器库选择锋利者赐给他们，并且赐给一百万络钱备作修缮费用。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Beijing Lake System Division requested the supply of equipment, and the next day, the National Armory selected the sharp ones to give them, and gave them one million yuan to prepare for repair costs.

古文：四川制置朱禩孙言月奉银计万两，愿以犒师，向后月免请。
现代文：四川制置司朱祀孙说月棒银共计万两，愿用来搞军，以后每月不支付。
English: Zhu Shisun, Sichuan's Minister of Construction, said that the total monthly amount of money was 10,000 yuan, and he was willing to use it to engage in the military, and would not pay monthly thereafter.

古文：诏常禄勿辞。
现代文：下诏正常应得的棒禄不要辞免。
English: Don't give up the bonus you normally deserve.

古文：己丑，给事中陈宜中言，乞正范文虎不力援襄之罚，诏文虎降一官、依旧知安庆府。
现代文：初八，给事中陈宜中说，请示治范文虎援襄不力之罪，诏令范文虎降一官，依旧知安庆府。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Chen Yi said in the matter, please punish Fan Wenhu for the crime of not being able to help Xiang Xiang, and ordered Fan Wenhu to be demoted one rank, still knowing Anqing Prefecture.

古文：安南国进方物，特赐金五百两、帛百匹。
现代文：安南国进贡土特产，特赐给金五百两、帛一百匹。
English: Annan pays tribute to local special products, and is specially given five hundred taels of gold and one hundred horses.

古文：癸卯，汪立信言： 臣奉命分阃，延见吏民，皆痛哭流涕而言襄、樊之祸，皆由范文虎及俞兴父子。文虎以三衙长闻难怯战，仅从薄罚，犹子天顺守节不屈，犹或可以少赎其愆。
现代文：二十二日，汪立信说： 臣奉命在外统兵，召见吏民，他们都痛哭流涕，说襄阳之祸，都是由于范文虎和俞兴父子造成的，范文虎作为三衙长帅遇难怯战，仅从轻处罚，他的儿子范天顺守节不屈，这好像或许可以稍稍赎减其罪。
English: On the 22nd, Wang Lixin said: "I was ordered to summon the officers and men of the foreign troops and they all cried bitterly, saying that the calamity of Xiangyang was caused by Fan Wenhu and Xing Xing, father and son. Fan Wenhu, as the commander of the Third Division, died in a difficult battle and was only lightly punished. His son Fan Tianshun kept the festival unyielding, which seems to be able to atone for his sin a little.

古文：兴奴仆庸材，器量褊浅，务复私仇，激成刘整之祸，流毒至今。其子大忠挟多资为父行贿，且自希荣进，今虽寸斩，未足以快天下之忿，乞置重典，则人心兴起，事功可图。 
现代文：俞兴是一介奴仆庸才，器量偏狭浅薄，一心想报私仇，激成刘整之祸，流毒至今，其子俞大忠挟持多资为父亲行贿，而且他自己希图进升，今虽寸斩，也不足以使全国愤怒之心感到痛快，请求从重处罚，那么人心可以因此团聚，精神振奋，抗元复疆的事业可以完成。 
English: Hao Xing is a servant and mediocrity, narrow-minded and shallow-minded, bent on revenge, provoked the calamity of Liu Zhei, and has been poisoned to this day. His son, Hao Datong, held back a lot of money to bribe his father, and he himself wanted to advance. Although it is a small cut, it is not enough to make the angry heart of the whole country feel happy. He asked for a heavier punishment. Then the hearts of the people can be reunited, the spirit can be invigorated, and the cause of resisting Yuan and restoring Xinjiang can be completed.

古文：诏俞大忠追毁出身文字，除名、循州拘管。
现代文：下诏俞大忠追毁出身文字，除名，循州拘管。
English: Under the following edict, Dazhong Dazhong was persecuted for destroying his birth certificate, expelled from the party, and put under state detention.

古文：又言守阙进义副尉童明，襄阳破，拔身来归，且尝立功开州，乞补转四官。
现代文：又说守网进义副尉童明，襄阳攻破，他拔身来归顺，而且曾经在开州战斗中立功，请求补转四官。
English: It was also said that Shouwang Jinyi's lieutenant Tongming was defeated by Xiangyang, and he was forced to surrender, and that he had served in the battle of Kaizhou and requested the transfer of four officers.

古文：诏特与官两转。
现代文：下诏特转两官。
English: I hereby order the transfer of the two posts.

古文：闰月辛亥，命殿前指挥使陈奕总统舟师备鄂州、黄州江防。
现代文：闰六月初一，命令殿前指挥使陈奕总统水军在鄂州、黄州一带备战江防。
English: On the first day of the leap month of June, the commander in front of the palace ordered President Chen Yi's navy to prepare for river defense in the areas of Ezhou and Huangzhou.

古文：癸丑，来归人郭珍补成忠郎，张进、张春、张德林、向德成、王全、娄德、王兴各补承信郎。
现代文：初三，来归人郭珍补为成忠郎，张进、张春、张德林、向德成、王全、娄德、王兴各补承信郎。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Guo Zhenzhi, a returnee, became Cheng Zhongro, and Zhang Jin, Zhang Chun, Zhang Delin, Xiang De Cheng, Wang Quan, Xing De, and Wang Xing each became Zhi Cheng Xinro.

古文：丙辰，朝散郎师显行进《注皇朝文鉴》。
现代文：初六，朝散郎师显行进呈注皇朝文鉴。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Asanro Shigen marched in to present the imperial anthology.

古文：前临安府司法梁炎午陈攻守之要五事，不报。
现代文：前临安府司法参军梁炎午陈述五件攻守之要事，没有得到回答。
English: In the afternoon of the previous day, Liang Yanwu, a member of the Lin'an Judicial Party and the People's Liberation Army, made a statement on five important issues of attack and defense, but did not receive an answer.

古文：命大理寺丞钟蜚英点视沿江堡隘兵船，戊辰，知叙州郭汉杰言，马湖蛮王汝作、鹿巫蛮王沐丘，帅蛮兵五百余助官军民义阻险马湖，捍御有功。诏赏汝作、沐丘金帛及其部兵有差。叙州总管曹顺一军，凡在战阵者，趣具立功等第来上。
现代文：命令大理寺钟蜚英视察沿江堡隘兵船。十八日，叙州知州郭汉杰说，马湖蛮王汝作、鹿巫蛮王沐丘，率蛮兵五百多人帮助官军义军阻险马湖，捍卫有功，下诏奖赏汝作、沐丘金帛及其部兵不等，叙州总管曹顺一军，凡在战场者，尽快开列立功等第上报。
English: On the 18th, Guo Hanjie of Chizhou, Suzhou, said that the barbarian king Ma Hu and the barbarian king Shugu, Mu Qiu, led more than 500 barbarians to help the government army block the danger of Ma Hu and defend the meritorious, and the award will be awarded to You Qiu, Mu Qiu Jin and his soldiers. The general manager of Suzhou, Cao Shun, said that all those who are in the battlefield should report their merits as soon as possible.

古文：秋七月丁亥，权绍兴府节制紫城军义文荣鼎及将校赵居敬、丁福、孟青、蒲祥、白贵、史用、罗宜、王繁等九人，成都之役没于兵，各追赠官秩，仍官其子。
现代文：秋七月初八，代理绍兴府节制紫城军义文荣鼎及其将校赵居敬、丁福、孟青、蒲样、白贵、史用、罗宜、王繁等九人，成都之役战死，各追赠官品，并且任其子为官。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Yiwen Rongding, the deputy commander of the Zicheng Army of Shaoxing Prefecture, and his officers Zhao Juqing, Ding Fu, Meng Qing, Pudong, Bai Gui, Shi Ying, Luo Yi, Wang Xiang, and nine others died in the Battle of Chengdu, each of them presented official gifts, and their sons were appointed as officials.

古文：癸巳，知达州赵章、知开州鲜汝忠、知渠州张资等复洋州。
现代文：十四日，达州知州赵章、开州知州鲜汝忠、渠州知州张资等收复洋州。
English: On the 14th, Dazhou, Chizhou, Zhao Zhang, Kaizhou, Chizhou, Xian Ruzhong, Quzhou, Chizhou, Zhang Zi and others recovered Yangzhou.

古文：戊戌，张珏等复马山。
现代文：十九日，张环等人收复马鬃山。
English: On the 19th, Zhang Huan and others recovered Mount Malang.

古文：八月癸丑，权知均州徐鼎、总管盛聪战房州胡师峪、板仓。
现代文：八月初四，代理均州知州徐鼎、总管盛聪，在房州胡师峪、板仓与元军作战。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month, Xu Ding, the agent of Junzhou and Zhizhou, and Sheng Cong, the general manager, fought against the Yuan army in Hu Shijian and Bancang of Fangzhou.

古文：乙卯，知房州李鉴调权竹山县王国材、统制熊权、总辖马宗明，战落马坪、白羊山，诏有司各以劳效论赏。
现代文：初六，房州知州李鉴调权竹山县王国材、统制熊权、总辖马宗明，在落马坪、白羊山作战，下诏有关部门分别论功行赏。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Fangzhou Zhizhou Li Jian transferred the power to Zhushan County Kingdom Material, the control of Xiongquan, the general jurisdiction of Ma Zongming, and fought in Lok Ma Ping and Baiyang Mountain, and the relevant departments separately discussed and rewarded the merits.

古文：九月辛巳，以章鉴签书枢密院事兼参知政事，陈宜中同签书枢密院事。
现代文：九月初二，任命章鉴签书枢密院事兼参知政事，陈宜中为同签书枢密院事。
English: On September 2, Zhang Jian was appointed Privy Councillor and Councillor of State, and Chen Yizhong was appointed Privy Councillor and Councillor of State.

古文：成都安抚使昝万寿城嘉定乌尤山。
现代文：成都安抚使咎万寿筑城嘉定乌尤山。
English: Chengdu's pacifying mission to build the city of Jiading, Wuyushan.

古文：乙未，以洪焘为浙东安抚使。
现代文：十六日，任命洪煮为浙东安抚使。
English: On the 16th, Hong Gui was appointed as the East Zhejiang Pacifying Envoy.

古文：丙申，以黄万石为湖南安抚使。
现代文：十七日，任命黄万石为湖南安抚使。
English: On the 17th, Huang Wanshi was appointed as the pacification envoy of Hunan.

古文：冬十月己酉，来归人汪福、许文政各官五转。
现代文：冬十月初一，来归人汪福、许文政各转五官。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Wang Fu and Xu Wensheng, who had returned to China, were promoted to the five positions.

古文：癸丑，镇巢军、和州、太平州诸将查文、李文用、孟浩等十一人，以射湖冈、万岁岭、后港及焦湖北岸战功，咸赐爵赏。
现代文：初五，镇巢军、和州、太平州诸将查文、李文用、孟浩等十一人，因射湖冈、万岁岭、后港和焦湖北岸战功，都得到爵位赏赐。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, eleven generals from the Zhenxu Army, Hezhou and Taiping Provinces, including Chawen, Li Wenyi and Meng Hao, were awarded knighthoods for their distinguished service in the battles of Jiuhuang, Wanzhiling, Hougang and the northern shore of Jiaohu.

古文：癸亥，雷。
现代文：十五日，打雷。
English: On the fifteenth day, there was thunder.

古文：四川制司言何炎向失洋州，调知达州赵章等率诸部军义复之；七月又复洋州、吴胜堡两城，权檄统辖谢益知洋州，总制赵桂楫知巴州，俾任责吴胜堡战守之事。
现代文：四川制置司说何炎原来丢失洋州，调遣达州知州赵章等率领各部士兵收复；七月又收复洋州、吴胜堡两城，权檄统辖谢益知洋少，总制赵桂揖知巴州，让其担任吴胜堡战守重任。
English: The Sichuan Construction Division said that He Yan had originally lost Yangzhou, and dispatched Dazhou, Chizhou, Zhao Zhang and other soldiers from various departments to recover it. In July, the two cities of Yangzhou and Wushengbao were recovered. The authority was under the jurisdiction of Xie Yixi, and the general system was under the jurisdiction of Zhao Gui and Zhao Baizhou, and he was given the important task of defending Wushengbao.

古文：至是以功来上，且以二州摄事守臣请命于朝，诏与正授。
现代文：这时报上战功，而且以二州摄事守臣请求朝廷正式任命，下诏给予正授。
English: At this time, he was awarded for his war service, and he requested the imperial court to officially appoint him as the regent of the two states, and the imperial edict was issued to give him the title of senior lecturer.

古文：丁丑，两淮制置使印应雷告老，进二秩致仕。
现代文：二十九日，两淮制置使印应雷辞官，进二级退休。
English: On the 29th day of the month, the two high-ranking officials were promoted to the second level and retired.

古文：李庭芝两淮安抚制置使，赐钱二百万激犒备御。
现代文：李庭芝为两淮安抚制置使，赐钱二百万用来赏赐备战守御有功之人。
English: Li Tingzhi appointed envoys for the two Huai appeasement systems and gave two million yuan to reward those who had distinguished themselves in preparing for and defending the war.

古文：十一月壬午，子授左卫上将军，封嘉国公。
现代文：十一月初四，子赵枉授为左卫上将军，封为嘉国公。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month, his son Zhao Yuanzhong was promoted to the rank of General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards and given the title of Prince of Jiaguo.

古文：戊子，知泰州龚准遣其将王大显等捍御水砦有功，又获俘民以还，诏水步两军将校凡用命者赏激有差。
现代文：初十，知泰州龚谁派遣其将王大显等守卫水寨有功，又夺回被俘百姓，下诏凡是用命的水陆两军将校奖赏不等。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Taizhou, who sent his commander Wang Daxian and others to guard the water castle and recapture the captured people, issued a decree to reward the officers of the two armies with different rewards.

古文：甲午，以夏贵为淮西制置使兼知庐州，陈奕沿江制置使兼知黄州，吕文福知阁门事。
现代文：十六日，任命夏贵为淮西制置使兼庐州知州，陈奕为沿江制置使兼黄州知州，吕文福知间门事。
English: On the 16th, Xia Gui was appointed as the Huaixi Designated Envoy and Zhangzhou Chizhou, Chen Yi was appointed as the Riverside Designated Envoy and Huangzhou Chizhou, and Lu Wenfu was appointed as the Intermediate Envoy.

古文：诏从李庭芝请分淮东、西制置为两司，就命庭芝交割淮东，仍兼淮西策应使。
现代文：下诏采纳李庭芝的请求，分淮东、西制置司为两司，命令李庭芝交割淮东，仍兼淮西策应使。
English: The following edict accepted Li Tingzhi's request and divided Huaidong and Xi'an into two departments, ordering Li Tingzhi to hand over Huaidong and still serve as the West Huai policy.

古文：乙未，以夏贵为淮西安抚制置使，赐钱百万激犒备御。
现代文：十七日，任命夏贵为淮西安抚制置使，赐钱一百万络用来赏赐备战守卫有功之人。
English: On the 17th, Xia Gui was appointed as the Huaixi pacification envoy, and was given one million rupees to reward those who had distinguished themselves in preparing for the war.

古文：李庭芝辞免淮西策应使，不允。
现代文：李庭芝辞免淮西策应使，没有允准。
English: Li Tingzhi's resignation was not approved.

古文：知安丰军陈万以舟师自城西大涧口抵正阳城，遇北兵力战，诏旌其劳。
现代文：安丰知军陈万率水师自城西大涧口抵正阳城，遇元军力战，下诏表彰他的功劳。
English: An Fengchi's army Chen Wan and his sailors arrived in Zhengyang City from the west gate of the city, and when they encountered Yuan's military force, he was awarded for his service.

古文：十二月甲子，以马廷鸾为浙东安抚使、知绍兴府。
现代文：十二月十六日，任命马廷莺为浙东安抚使、绍兴知府。
English: On December 16, he appointed Ma Tingtao as the East Zhejiang Pacification Envoy and the governor of Shaoxing.

古文：丙寅，权参知政事章鉴再乞解机政，不允。
现代文：十八日，代理参知政事章鉴再次请求解除职务，没有允准。
English: On the 18th, the acting co-governor, Zeng Jizhang Jian, once again requested to be relieved of his duties, but this was not granted.

古文：丁丑，沿江制置使所辖四郡夏秋旱涝，免屯田租二十五万石。
现代文：二十九日，沿江制置使所辖四郡夏秋发生早涝灾害，免除屯田租税二十五万石。
English: On the 29th, the four counties under its jurisdiction were exempted from 250,000 koku of farmland tax due to the fact that they were located along the river.

古文：十年春正月壬午，城鄂州汉口堡。
现代文：咸淳十年春正月初四，在鄂州汉口堡筑城。
English: On the fourth day of the first month in the spring of the tenth year of Xianjun, a city was built in Hamburg, Ezhou.

古文：权总制施忠、部将熊伯明、知泰州龚准以天长县东横山、秦潼湖、青蒲口等处战功推赏。
现代文：暂代总制施忠、部将熊伯明、泰州知州龚谁因天长县东横山、秦撞湖、青蒲口等处战功给予奖赏。
English: Shizhong, the temporary commander-in-chief, Xiong Boming, the captain of the division, and Taizhou Chizhou Zou were awarded for their war service in Dongyangshan, Qinchuan Lake, Qingpukou and other places in Tianchang County.

古文：戊子，江万里以疾辞职任，诏依旧观文殿大学士、提举洞霄宫。
现代文：初十，江万里因病辞免职任，下诏依旧为观文殿大学士、提举洞霄宫。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Jiang Wanli resigned from his post due to illness, and the next edict was still that he would become a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism and be promoted to Dongxiao Palace.

古文：乙丑，以留梦炎知潭州兼湖南安抚使。
现代文：乙丑日，任命留梦炎为潭州知州兼湖南安抚使。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd lunar month, he appointed Liu Mengyan as the Tanzhou-Chizhou and Hunan pacification envoy.

古文：庚寅，城鄂州沌口西岸堡。
现代文：十二日，在鄂州沌口西岸堡筑城。
English: On the 12th, a fort was built on the west coast of Chaoskou, Ezhou.

古文：京湖制司言襄阳勇信中军钤辖吴信随吕文焕北往，今并妻子冒险来归。
现代文：京湖制置司说襄阳勇信中军铃辖吴信随从吕文焕前往元军，今与妻子一起冒险来归朝廷。
English: According to the director of the Beijing Lake System, Yangyang Yongxin, Wu Xin followed Li Wenhuan to the Yuan army, and now he and his wife have ventured to return to the imperial court.

古文：诏吴信赴阙，制司仍存恤其家。
现代文：下诏吴信前往朝廷，制置司仍旧慰问抚恤其家。
English: After Wu Xin went to the imperial court, the construction department still sent condolences and pensions to his family.

古文：丙申，江东沙圩租米，以咸淳九年水灾，诏减什四。
现代文：十八日，江东沙田好田租米，因咸淳九年发生水灾，下诏减去十分之四。
English: On the 18th, due to the floods that occurred in the ninth year of Xianjun, four tenths were deducted from the next imperial edict.

古文：乙巳，雨土。
现代文：二十七日，降土。
English: On the 27th, the earth came down.

古文：二月己酉，以赵顺孙为福建安抚使。
现代文：二月初二，以赵顺孙为福建安抚使。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, Zhao Shunsun was appointed as the Fujian Peace Envoy.

古文：辛酉，诏诸制阃就任升除恩数，其告命、衣带、鞍马，阁门勿差人给赐，往要厚赂，以失优宠制臣之意，违者有刑。
现代文：十四日，下诏各统兵将领就任得到赏赐待遇，所括告命、衣带、鞍马，阎门不要派人给赐，从中索要贿赂，从而失去优宠制臣之意，违者处以刑罚。
English: On the 14th, it was decreed that all generals-in-chief would receive rewards and treatment after taking office. They were required to give up their lives, belts and saddled horses. They were not allowed to send anyone to give them, and they were not allowed to ask for bribes from them, thus losing the intention of being a favored vassal. Violators would be punished.

古文：三月己卯，免郡县侵负义仓米七十四万八千余石。
现代文：三月初二，免除郡县侵盗拖欠义仓米七十四万八千多石。
English: On the second day of March, more than 748,000 koku of rice in warehouses in counties and counties were exempted from theft and arrears.

古文：夏四月乙卯，子昺授左卫上将军，进封永国公。
现代文：夏四月初九，子赵簌授为左卫上将军，进封永国公。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the summer, his son, Zhao Bingzhu, was appointed as the General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards, and was enthroned as the Prince of Yongguo.

古文：诏赏沿江都统王达、黄俣战黄连寺之功。
现代文：下诏奖赏沿江都统王达、黄误战黄边寺之功。
English: The following edict rewards the merits of Wangda, the capital along the Yangtze River, and Huangbian Temple in the battle of Huangmei.

古文：戊午，以吕文福为常德、辰、沅、澧、靖五郡镇抚使、知沅州。
现代文：十二日，任命吕文福为常德、辰、沉、遭、靖五郡镇抚使，知沉州。
English: On the 12th, he appointed Lü Wenfu as the town officials of the five counties of Changde, Chen, Sheng, Xuan and Jing, known as Shenzhou.

古文：辛酉，诏赏光州守陈岩、路分李全、许彦德、总管何成、路钤仰子虎等牛市畈、丁家庄战功。
现代文：十五日，下诏奖赏光州守臣陈岩、路分都监李全和许彦德、总管何成、路铃辖仰子虎等牛市贩、丁家庄战功。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the imperial edict was issued to reward the cattle market vendors and Ding Jiazhuang, such as Chen Yan, the Gwangju governor, Li Quan and Xu Yande, the inspectors of the provincial capital, He Cheng, the general manager, and Yang Zihu, the superintendent of the road bell, for their war service.

古文：乌苏蛮王诣云南军前纳款大元。
现代文：乌苏蛮王到云南军前向元朝纳款归顺。
English: King Usu the Barbarian surrendered to the Yuan Dynasty before the Yunnan Army.

古文：五月丁亥，以高世杰为湖北安抚副使兼知岳州，总统出戍军马。
现代文：五月十二日，任命高世杰为湖北安抚副使兼岳州知州，总统出戍军马。
English: On May 12th, Gao Shijie was appointed as Hubei's Vice-Minister of Pacification and Yuezhou's Chizhou, and the president came out as a military horse.

古文：辛丑，马廷鸾辞免观文殿大学士、知绍兴府、浙东安抚使，诏不允。
现代文：二十六日，马廷莺辞免观文殿大学士、绍兴知府、浙东安抚使，下诏不允。
English: On the 26th, Ma Tingtao resigned from his positions as a scholar of Guanwendeng University, the governor of Shaoxing Prefecture, and the East Zhejiang Pacifying Envoy, and his resignation was not accepted.

古文：壬寅，张珏表请城马、虎头两山，或先筑其一，以据险要。
现代文：二十七日，张环上表请求在马鬃山、虎头山筑城，或者先筑其一，从而占据险要。
English: On the 27th, Zhang Huanzhong made a request to build a city on Mt. Mawei and Mt. Houtou, or to build one first, thus occupying the crucial point.

古文：六月戊午，以银二万两命寿春府措置边防。
现代文：六月十三日，给银二万两命令寿春府措置边防。
English: On June 13th, Shuchun Prefecture was ordered to pay 20,000 taels of silver for border defense measures.

古文：秋七月壬午，汪立信乞致仕，不允。
现代文：秋七月初八，汪立信请求退休，没有允准。
English: On the eighth day of the seventh month of autumn, Wang Lixin requested to retire, but was not allowed.

古文：癸未，帝崩于福宁殿，遗诏太子即皇帝位。
现代文：初九，度宗在福宁殿去世，留下遗诏太子赵硅即皇帝位。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Emperor Wuzong passed away at the Funing Palace, leaving behind a testament that Prince Zhao Si would become emperor.

古文：甲申，台臣劾内医蔡幼习，诏夺五秩，送五百里州军居住，二子并罢阁门职。
现代文：初十，台臣弹勃内医蔡幼习，下诏削夺官品五级，送到五百里外州军居住，两个儿子并罢间门职。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Cai Yuxi, a doctor of internal medicine, was promoted to the fifth grade, and he was sent to live 500 miles away from the provincial army. His two sons were also promoted.

古文：八月己酉，上大行皇帝谥曰端文明武景孝皇帝，庙号度宗。
现代文：八月初六，上大行皇帝度宗溢号为端文明武景孝皇帝，庙号度宗。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, Emperor Wudang of Shangdazhong and Emperor Wujing of the Tang Dynasty were given the posthumous name of Wudong.

古文：德祐元年正月壬午，葬于永绍陵。
现代文：德元年正月初十，葬于永绍陵。
English: He was buried in Yongshao Mausoleum on the tenth day of the first month of the first month of the first year of the first century.

古文：赞曰：宋至理宗，疆宇日蹙，贾似道执国命。
现代文：评论说：宋朝到理宗统治时，国土一天一天地宿小，贾似道操纵着国家大权。
English: The commentary said: When the Song Dynasty came under the rule of Rizong, the country became smaller and smaller day by day, and Jia Xiangdao manipulated the power of the state.

古文：度宗继统，虽无大失德，而拱手权奸，衰敝寝甚。
现代文：度宗即皇位，虽然在大的方面没有丧失德操，但把大权拱手交给奸臣，国家的衰败一天比一天严重。
English: Although he did not lose his virtue in major aspects, he handed over power to his treacherous vassals, and the country's decline became more serious day by day.

古文：考其当时事势，非有雄才睿略之主，岂能振起其坠绪哉！
现代文：考虑到当时的政治形势，没有一个雄才大略、深谋远虑的君主，怎么能够重新振兴已经日趋败落的事业呢？
English: Given the political situation at the time, how could any monarch, without great skill or foresight, have reinvigorated an increasingly ailing enterprise?

古文：历数有归，宋祚寻讫，亡国不于其身，幸矣。
现代文：皇位相传的次第循环是上天决定的，宋朝的统治不久就终结了，国家没有亡在他的身上，真是侥幸啊！
English: The gradual cycle of succession to the throne is determined by heaven. The reign of the Song Dynasty soon came to an end, and the country did not die in his body. What a fluke!

