古文：孟子见梁惠王，王曰： 叟！不远千里而来，将何以利吾国乎？ 
现代文：孟子会见梁惠王，梁惠王说： 老头，你不远千里而来，要拿什么使我的国家得利呢？ 
English: Mencius met with Liang Hui Wang. Liang Hui Wang said, "Old man, you have come thousands of miles. What do you want to use to benefit my country?

古文：孟子曰： 仁义而已，何必曰利。 
现代文：孟子说： 讲仁义就行了，为什么要说利呢？ 
English: Mencius said: It is enough to talk about benevolence and righteousness, why talk about profit?

古文：夫利有二：有货财之利，有安吉之利。
现代文：利有二种：有货物钱财的利，有平安吉祥的利。
English: There are two kinds of interests: the interests of goods and money, and the interests of peace and auspiciousness.

古文：惠王曰 何以利吾国 ？何以知不欲安吉之利，而孟於径难以货财之利也？
现代文：梁惠王说 拿什么使我的国家得利 ，怎么知道他不是想得到平安吉祥的利，而孟子却轻率地以货物钱财的利去责难他呢？
English: Liang Hui Wang said, "What can I use to benefit my country?" How do we know that he did not want to gain the benefit of peace and good fortune, while Mencius rashly accused him of profiting from goods and money?

古文：《易》曰： 利见大人 ， 利涉大川 ， 《乾》，元享利贞 。
现代文：《周易》上说： 得此卦见 大人 吉利 ， 得此卦过大河吉利 ， 得乾卦，大吉大利。 
English: "Zhou Yi" said: It is good luck to get this gaga, it is good luck to get this gaga, it is good luck to get this gaga, it is good luck to get this gaga.

古文：《尚书》曰： 黎民亦尚有利哉？ 皆安吉之利也。
现代文：《尚书·秦誓》上说： 老百姓也很看重利啊。 
English: "Shangshu · Qin Zhe" said: The common people also attach great importance to profit.

古文：行仁义，得安吉之利。
现代文：全是平安吉祥的利。实行仁义就会得到平安吉祥的利。
English: All are beneficial for peace and good luck. If you practice benevolence and righteousness, you will receive beneficial for peace and good luck.

古文：孟子必且语问惠王： 何谓 利吾国  ，惠王言货财之利，乃可答若设。
现代文：孟子一定要姑且先问一问惠王： 你说的使我的国家得利是什么意思？ 要是梁惠王说是货物钱财的利，才能够以 仁义而已，何必曰利 来回答。
English: Mencius must first of all ask King Hui: What do you mean by making my country prosperous? If King Liang Hui said that it was the prosperity of goods and money, he could only answer with "benevolence and righteousness," so why say "prosperity."

古文：令惠王之问未知何趣，孟子径答以货财之利。
现代文：如今还不知道惠王问的是什么意思，孟子就轻率地以货物钱财的利来对答。
English: Not yet knowing what Hui Wang meant by his question, Mencius rashly replied with the benefit of goods and money.

古文：如惠王实问货财，孟子无以验效也；如问安吉之利，而孟子答以货财之利，失对上之指，违道理之实也。
现代文：如果梁惠王确实是问货财的利，孟子也无法用什么来证明；如果是问平安吉祥的利，而孟子以货物钱财的利来对答，那就不符合君主的意图，也违背了起码的常识。
English: If Liang Hui Wang really asked about the benefit of goods and money, Mencius could not use anything to prove it; if he asked about the benefit of peace and good luck, and Mencius answered with the benefit of goods and money, it would not be in line with the monarch's intention, and it would also violate the minimum common sense.

古文：齐王问时子： 我欲中国而授孟子室，养弟子以万钟，使诸大夫、国人皆有所矜式。
现代文：齐宣王问时子： 我想在都城里给孟子一所房子，拿万钟俸禄供养他的弟子，让大夫和百姓们都有敬重效法的榜样。
English: Qi Xuan Wang asked Shi Zi: I want to give Mencius a house in the capital city, provide his disciples with ten thousand salaries, and let the doctors and the people have an example to follow.

古文：子盍为我言之？ 
现代文：你为什么不替我跟他说说呢？ 
English: Why don't you talk to Mencius for me?

古文：时子因陈子而以告孟子。
现代文：时子通过陈子把这事告诉了孟子。
English: Tokiko told Menko about this through Chen Zihao.

古文：孟子曰： 夫时子恶知其不可也？
现代文：孟子说： 时子哪里知道这样做不行呢？
English: Mencius said, "How did Tokiko know that it was not possible to do so?

古文：如使予欲富，辞十万而受万，是为欲富乎？ 
现代文：假使我想富贵，就不会拒绝做齐卿的十万钟俸禄来接受这一万钟俸禄，我这样做是为了贪图富贵吗？ 
English: If I am a greedy person, and I resign from a position with a salary of one hundred thousand baht, but accept a reward of ten thousand baht, is this a desire to get rich?

古文：夫孟子辞十万，失谦让之理也。夫富贵者，人之所欲也，不以其道得之，不居也。
现代文：孟子拒绝做齐卿的十万钟俸禄，不符合谦让的道理。 富贵，是人人想得到的，不从正当途径得到它，就不该享受。 
English: Mencius's refusal to accept Lord Qi's salary of 100,000 yuan did not conform to the principle of modesty. Everyone wants to be rich, and one should not enjoy it without obtaining it through legitimate means.

古文：故君子之於爵禄也，有所辞，有所不辞。
现代文：所以君子对于爵位和俸禄，有的推辞，有的不推辞。
English: That is why some gentlemen decline titles and salaries, while others do not.

古文：岂以己不贪富贵之故，而以距逆宜当受之赐乎？
现代文：难道因为自己不贪图富贵的缘故，就以此来拒绝应当接受的赏赐吗？
English: Is it because they are not greedy for wealth that they refuse the reward they should receive?

古文：陈臻问曰： 於齐，王馈兼金一百镒而不受；於宋，归七十镒而受；於薛，归五十镒而受取。
现代文：陈臻问孟子： 在齐国，齐王送你好金一百镒，不肯接受；在宋国，送你七十镒，却接受了；在薛国，送你五十镒，也接受了。
English: Chen Zhen asked Mencius: In the State of Qi, the King of Qi sent you one hundred mu of gold, but you refused to accept it; in the State of Song, he sent you seventy mu, but you accepted it; in the State of Xue, he sent you fifty mu, but you also accepted it.

古文：前日之不受是，则今受之非也。今日之受是，则前日之不受非也。
现代文：如果你认为以前不接受礼物是对的，那么今天接受礼物就错了；要是今天接受礼物是对的，那么以前不接受礼物就错了。
English: If you think it was right not to accept a gift before, then it is wrong to accept a gift today; if it is right to accept a gift today, then it was wrong not to accept a gift before.

古文：夫子必居一於此矣。 
现代文：老师你在这二者中必居其一。 孟子说： 我都是对的。
English: Teacher, you must be one of the two.Mencius said, "I am right in both cases."

古文：孟子曰： 皆是也。当在宋也，予将有远行，行者必以赆，辞曰归赆，予何为不受？
现代文：当时在宋国，我将要远行，给远行的人一定要送路费，辞行者说： 送盘费。 我哪能不接受呢？
English: At that time in the Song Dynasty, I was going to travel far away, and I had to send travel expenses to those who traveled far away. The traveler said, "Send plate fee. How can I not accept it?

古文：当在薛也，予有戒心，辞曰 闻戒，故为兵戒归之备乎！ 
现代文：当时在薛国，我害怕出危险有戒心，辞行的人说： 听说你有戒心，所以为便于有武器进行戒备，送点钱给你做准备吧！ 
English: At that time in Xueguo, I was afraid of danger and cautious, and the person who resigned said: I heard that you are cautious, so in order to facilitate the preparation of weapons, send you some money to prepare!

古文：予何为不受？
现代文：我哪能不接受呢？
English: So Song Jun said, "Send me some coils. Why don't I accept it?"

古文：若於齐，则未有处也，无处而归之，是货之也，焉有君子而可以货取乎？ 
现代文：像在齐国，我就没有收受礼物的理由。没有收受礼物的理由而送礼物给我，这是用财物收买我，难道有君子可以用财物收买的吗？ 
English: As in Qi, I have no reason to accept gifts. If you give me a gift without a reason to accept it, you are bribing me with wealth. Can any gentleman be bribed with wealth?

古文：夫金归或受或不受，皆有故。非受之时已贪，当不受之时己不贪也。
现代文：金子送来了，或者接受或者不接受，都是有缘故的，并不是接受的时候就表示自己贪财，当不接受的时候就表示自己不贪财。
English: When gold is sent, or when it is accepted, or when it is not accepted, it is all for a reason. It is not that when you accept, you are greedy for money, and when you do not accept, you are not greedy for money.

古文：金有受不受之义，而室亦宜有受不受之理。
现代文：金子有接受与不接受的道理，而房子也该有接受与不接受的道理。
English: Gold has the principle of acceptance and non-acceptance, and a house should also have the principle of acceptance and non-acceptance.

古文：今不曰 己无功 ，若 己致仕，受室非理， 而曰 己不贪富 ，引前辞十万以况後万。
现代文：如今孟子不说 自己没有功绩 ，或者 自己已辞官了，再接受房子就不合理 ，而是说 自己不贪图富贵 ，并用以前拒绝做卿的十万钟俸禄来比后来这次一万钟俸禄该拒绝的理由。
English: Now Mencius did not say that he had no merits, or that he had resigned from his post and it was unreasonable to accept the house again, but that he was not greedy for wealth, and used the 100,000-won salary that he had previously refused to be a lord to compare the reason for this 10,000-won salary.

古文：前当受十万之多，安得辞之？
现代文：其实以前该享受十万钟那么多的俸禄，这次又怎么能拒绝呢？
English: As a matter of fact, he should have enjoyed as much salary as 100,000 bells before, so how could he refuse this time?

古文：彭更问曰： 後车数十乘，从者数百人，以传食於诸侯，不亦泰乎？ 
现代文：彭更问孟子： 跟随你的车几十辆，跟随的人几百个，轮流由诸侯供养，不也太过分了吗？ 
English: Peng Geng asked Mencius: Isn't it too much to have dozens of cars and hundreds of people following you, supported by the princes in turn?

古文：孟子曰： 非其道，则一箪食而不可受於人；如其道，则舜受尧之天下，不以为泰。 
现代文：孟子说： 如果不符合礼义，连一篮子干粮也不能接受人家的；如果符合礼义，就是舜接受尧的天下，也不能算是过分。 
English: Mencius said: If it is not in accordance with propriety, it is not too much to accept even a basket of dried grain; if it is in accordance with propriety, it is not too much to accept the whole world.

古文：受尧天下，孰与十万？
现代文：接受尧的天下，跟接受十万钟俸禄相比，哪个多呢？
English: Which is greater, to receive ten thousand talents, or to receive an hundred thousand talents?

古文：舜不辞天下者，是其道也。
现代文：舜不拒绝接受天下，是符合礼义的。
English: It is proper etiquette not to refuse to accept the world.

古文：今不曰受十万非其道，而曰己不贪富贵，失谦让也。安可以为戒乎？
现代文：如今孟子不说 接受十万钟俸禄不符合礼义 ，而说 自己不贪图富贵 ，这不符合谦让，怎么能用来作为鉴戒呢？
English: Nowadays, Mencius does not say that it is not polite to accept a hundred thousand yuan salary, but that he does not covet wealth, which is not in line with modesty, how can it be used as a warning?

古文：沈同以其私问曰： 燕可伐与？ 
现代文：沈司以他的私交问孟子： 燕国可以讨伐吗？ 
English: Shen Tong asked Mencius in his personal capacity: Can we attack Yan Province?

古文：孟子曰： 可。
现代文：孟子说： 可以。
English: Mencius said: Yes!

古文：子哙不得与人燕，子之不得受燕於子哙。
现代文：子哙不该把燕国让给人，子之也不该从子哙手中接受燕国。
English: Zixuan should not give away Yan's country to anyone, and Zizhi should not accept Yan's country from Zixuan.

古文：有士於此，而子悦之，不告於王，而私与之子之爵禄。夫士也，亦无王命而私受之，於子，则可乎？
现代文：要是有这样的人，你喜欢他，不告诉国君，而私自把自己的爵位和俸禄给了他，而这人，也没有君王的命令就私自从你手中接受了爵位和俸禄，这样可以吗？
English: If there were such a man, and you liked him, and did not inform the sovereign, and I myself gave him my title and salary, and this man, without the order of the sovereign, I have since received the title and salary from your hands, is this right?

古文：何以异於是。 
现代文：现在子哙把王位让给子之跟这有什么差别呢？ 
English: What is the difference between this and the fact that Zixuan is now handing over the throne to his son?

古文：齐人伐燕，或问曰： 劝齐伐燕，有诸？ 
现代文：齐国讨伐燕国，有人问孟子： 听说你曾鼓动齐国讨伐燕国，有这事吗？ 
English: Mencius was asked, "I have heard that you once incited Qi to invade Yan, is this true?"

古文：曰： 未也。
现代文：孟子说： 没有。
English: The old man said, "That's not enough!

古文：沈同曰： 燕可伐与？ 
现代文：是沈同问： 燕国可以讨伐吗？ 
English: It was Shen Tong who asked: Can Yan Guo be defeated?

古文：吾应之曰： 可。 
现代文：我回答说： 可以。 
English: And I said, "Yes."

古文：彼然而伐之。
现代文：他认同就去讨伐了燕国。
English: He agreed and went to fight against Yan.

古文：如曰： 孰可以伐之？ 
现代文：他如果再问： 谁可以去讨伐它？ 
English: If he asks again: Who can fight it?

古文：则应之曰： 为天吏则可以伐之。 
现代文：我就会回答说： 只有奉行天命的周天子才能讨伐它。 
English: I would reply: Only Zhou Tianzi, who is carrying out the Mandate of Heaven, can fight it.

古文：今有杀人者，或问之曰： 人可杀与？ 
现代文：就像现在有个杀人犯，有人问他： 犯人可以杀吗？ 
English: It's like a murderer being asked, "Is it permissible for a criminal to kill?"

古文：则将应之曰： 可。 
现代文：那他将会回答说： 可以。 
English: Then he will answer: Yes.

古文：彼如曰： 孰可以杀之？ 
现代文：他如果再问： 谁可以去杀他呢？ 
English: If he asks again: Who can kill him?

古文：则应之曰： 为士师则可以杀之。 
现代文：那就应该回答说： 只有法官才可以杀他。 
English: Then you should answer: Only a judge can kill him.

古文：今以燕伐燕，何为劝之也？ 
现代文：如今作为像燕一样无道的齐国要去讨伐燕国，我为什么要去鼓动它呢？ 
English: Now, as Qi, who is as ruthless as Yan, is going to attack Yan, why should I encourage it?

古文：夫或问孟子劝王伐燕，不诚是乎？
现代文：有人问孟子鼓动齐王讨伐燕国的事情，不确实是这样吗？
English: Some people have asked about Mencius encouraging King Qi to invade Yan's territory. Is this really true?

古文：沈同问 燕可伐与 ，此挟私意欲自伐之也。
现代文：沈同问 燕国可以讨伐吗 ，这是挟带私心想使自己的国家去讨伐燕国。
English: Shen Tong asked whether Yan Guo could be defeated. This was a selfish attempt to get his own country to defeat Yan Guo.

古文：知其意慊於是，宜曰： 燕虽可伐，须为天吏，乃可以伐之。 
现代文：既然知道他的意图在讨伐燕国为满足，就应该说： 燕国即使可以讨伐，也必须是奉天命的周天子才能够去讨伐它。 
English: Since we know that his intention is to fight Yan Guo to his satisfaction, we should say: Even if Yan Guo can be fought, it must be commanded by Zhou Tianzi to fight it.

古文：沈同意绝，则无伐燕之计矣。
现代文：这样沈同的意图就会断绝，那么也就没有讨伐燕国的计划了。
English: In this way, Shen Tong's intention will be cut off, and then there will be no plan to attack Yan Guo.

古文：不知有此私意而径应之，不省其语，是不知言也。
现代文：如果不晓得他有这种私心而随便回答他，是没有省悟他话中的含意，这是不善于分析、判断言辞。
English: If you do not know that he has such selfishness and answer him casually, you have not reflected on the meaning of his words, which is not good at analyzing and judging words.

古文：公孙丑问曰： 敢问夫子恶乎长？ 
现代文：公孙丑问孟子： 请问老师擅长什么？ 
English: The ugly grandson asked Mencius: What is the teacher good at?

古文：孟子曰： 我知言。 
现代文：孟子说： 我善于分析、判断言辞。 
English: Mencius said: I am good at analyzing and judging words.

古文：又问： 何谓知言？ 
现代文：公孙丑又问： 什么叫善于分析、判断言辞呢？ 
English: Gongsun Ug also asked: What does it mean to be good at analyzing and judging words?

古文：曰： 诐辞知其所蔽，淫辞知其所陷，邪辞知其所离，遁辞知其所穷。
现代文：孟子说： 听到不公正的话，知道他要压制谁；蛊惑人心的话，知道他要陷害谁；邪僻的话，知道他要离间谁；吞吞吐吐的话，知道他要为难谁。
English: Mencius said, "If you listen to biased and improper speech, you will know that it is hidden; if you listen to exaggerated speech, you will know that it is indulgent; if you listen to evil speech, you will know that it is deviant; if you listen to evasive speech, you will know that it is impoverished.

古文：生於其心，害於其政，发於其政；害於其事。
现代文：这些话从他们心里产生，会危害他们的政治；用来处理他们的政务，就会危害他们的事业。
English: If these words come from their hearts, they will harm their politics; if they are used to deal with their politics, they will harm their cause.

古文：虽圣人复起，必从吾言矣。 
现代文：即使圣人重新出现，也一定会听从我的这番话。 
English: Even if the sage reappears, he will certainly listen to my words.

古文：孟子知言者也，又知言之所起之祸，其极所致之，见彼之问，则知其措辞所欲之矣。知其所之，则知其极所当害矣。
现代文：孟子是善于分析、判断言辞的，并知道言辞可能产生的灾祸，以及它最终会导致的危害。听见沈同的问话，就该知道他说话想表达的东西，知道他要表达东西，那就该知道它最终面临的危害。
English: Mencius was good at analyzing and judging words, and knew the calamity that could be caused by words and the harm that it would eventually lead to. Hearing Shen Tong's question, you should know what he wanted to express, know what he wanted to express, then you should know the harm that it would eventually face.

古文：孟子有云： 民举安，王庶几改诸！
现代文：孟子又说： 齐王如果任用我，那岂只是齐国的百姓得到太平，连天下的老百姓也都会得到太平，齐宣王也许可能改变态度吧！
English: Mencius also said, "If King Qi were to appoint me, it would not only bring peace to the people of Qi, it would also bring peace to the people of the world. Perhaps King Qi Xuan could change his attitude!"

古文：予日望之。 
现代文：我天天都在盼望着。 
English: I look forward to it every day.

古文：孟子所去之王，岂前所不朝之王哉？
现代文：孟子离开的这个齐王，难道不是以前不肯去朝见的齐王吗？
English: Isn't this King Qi, whom Mencius left, the same King Qi who refused to go to the court before?

古文：而是，何其前轻之疾而後重之甚也？
现代文：如果是这样，为什么以前极端轻视他，而后来又非常重视他呢？
English: If so, why did they hold him in such low esteem and then hold him in such high regard?

古文：如非是前王，则不去，而於後去之，是後王不肖甚於前；而去三日宿，於前不甚，不朝而宿於景丑氏。
现代文：如果不是这样，那就是不肯离开前一个齐王，而离开了后一个齐王，这说明后一个齐王比前一个齐王更不贤明，然而在离开后一个齐王的时候，却舍不得走，在昼住了三天，而对前一个不很贤明的齐王，不肯去朝见却躲在景丑氏家里。
English: If this is not the case, it means that he did not want to leave the previous king of Qi, but left the next king of Qi, which indicates that the latter king of Qi is less wise than the previous king of Qi. However, when the latter king of Qi left, he was reluctant to leave and stayed for three days at noon, while for the previous king of Qi, who was not very wise, he did not want to go to the court, but hid in the house of Jingwuxi.

古文：何孟子之操，前後不同？所以为王，终始不一也？
现代文：为什么孟子的操行前后不一样，对待齐王的态度，先后也这样不一致呢？
English: Why was Mencius's conduct different before and after, and his attitude towards King Qi so inconsistent?

古文：且孟子在鲁，鲁平公欲见之。
现代文：再说，孟子在鲁国的时侯，鲁平公想见他。
English: Moreover, when Mencius was in Lu, King Ruping wanted to see him.

古文：嬖人臧仓毁孟子，止平公。
现代文：宠臣臧仓毁谤孟子，劝阻了鲁平公。
English: His favorite vassal, Kamakura, slandered Mencius and dissuaded Lu Pingzang.

古文：乐正子以告。
现代文：乐正子把这事告诉了孟子。
English: Le Masako told Menko about this.

古文：曰： 行，或使之；止，或尼之。行止非人所能也。
现代文：孟子说： 干事，是有力量暗中支配他；不干，也是有力量暗中阻止他。
English: Mencius said: An officer has the power to secretly control him; if he does not do it, he also has the power to secretly stop him.

古文：予之不遇鲁侯，天也！ 
现代文：干与不干不是人能决定的。我得不到鲁侯的任用，是天意。 
English: To do or not to do is not for man to decide. It is God's will that I do not get the appointment of Lu Hou.

古文：前不遇於鲁，後不遇於齐，无以异也。前归之天，今则归之於王。孟子论称竟何定哉？
现代文：孟子以前在鲁国得不到任用，后来在齐国得不到任用，没有什么两样，把以前得不到任用归咎于天，把如今得不到任用就归咎于王，孟子的论述究竟以什么为标准呢？
English: There is no difference between Mencius not being appointed in the state of Lu before and not being appointed in the state of Qi later. He blamed the fact that he was not appointed in the past on the heavens and the fact that he is not appointed now on the king. What is the standard of Mencius's discussion?

古文：夫不行於齐，王不用，则若臧仓之徒毁谗之也。
现代文：孟子的主张在齐国得不到实行，齐王不任用他，就像在鲁国有臧仓一类人毁谤他一样，这也是 不干，有力量在暗中阻止他 。
English: Mencius's ideas could not be put into practice in the State of Qi, and the King of Qi did not appoint him, just as people like Kamakura slandered him in the State of Lu. This was also an act of disobedience, and they had the power to secretly stop him.

古文：此亦止或尼之也，皆天命不遇，非人所能也。
现代文：这都是由天命决定得不到任用，并非是由人能决定的。
English: It's all a matter of fate that you don't get the job, it's not something that people can decide.

古文：去，何以不径行而留三宿乎？
现代文：既然这样，离开齐国，为什么不直截了当走掉，而要在昼留宿三天呢？
English: Since this is the case, why not just leave Qi Province and stay for three days in the afternoon?

古文：天命不当遇於齐，王不用其言，天岂为三日之间易命使之遇乎？
现代文：天命不该在齐国被任用，齐王不采纳他的主张，天难道会在三天的时间里改变意志使他被任用吗？
English: The Mandate of Heaven should not have been appointed to the highest post in Qi. If the King of Qi did not accept his proposal, would Heaven change its will in three days to have him appointed?

古文：在鲁则归之於天，绝意无冀；在齐则归之於王，庶几有望。
现代文：在鲁国则归咎于天，断绝了念头不存在任何希望；在齐国则归咎于王，就感到也许会有希望。
English: In the kingdom of Lu, it was blamed on the sky, and there was no hope after the thought was cut off; in the kingdom of Qi, it was blamed on the king, and it was felt that there might be hope.

古文：夫如是，不遇之议一在人也。
现代文：照这样说，有关不被任用的解释，完全在于人怎么说了。
English: Thus, the explanation for not being appointed depends entirely on what the person said.

古文：或曰：初去，未可以定天命也。
现代文：有人说： 刚离开时，还不可能确定天命。
English: Some people say: When you first leave, it is impossible to determine your destiny.

古文：冀三日之间，王复追之，天命或时在三日之间故可也。
现代文：希望在三天之内，齐王又把他追回去，天命或许在三天之内才能做出决定，所以这样做是可以的。 
English: It is hoped that within three days, the king of Qi will chase him back, and the fate of heaven may be able to make a decision within three days, so it is possible to do so.

古文：夫言如是，齐王初使之去者，非天命乎？
现代文：那么照这样说，齐王最初让他离开，就不是天命了？
English: So, according to this, it is not fate that King Qi initially let him leave?

古文：如使天命在三日之间，鲁平公比三日亦时弃臧仓之议，更用乐正子之言，往见孟子，孟子归之於天，何其早乎？
现代文：如果天命在三天之内才能确定，鲁平公等了三天，也许抛弃了臧仓的意见，改用乐正子的建议去见孟子。孟子归咎于天，岂不太早了吗？
English: If the Mandate of Heaven can only be ascertained within three days, then Lord Luping waited for three days, perhaps abandoned the opinion of Kamakura, and instead went to see Mencius at the suggestion of Le Zhengzi. Mencius blamed Heaven, isn't it too early?

古文：如三日之间，公见孟子，孟子奈前言何乎？
现代文：如果三天之内鲁平公去见了孟子，孟子对前面说过的话又怎么解释呢？
English: If Luping went to see Mencius within three days, how would Mencius explain what he had said before?

古文：孟子去齐，充虞涂问曰： 夫子若不豫色然。
现代文：孟子离开齐国，充虞在路上问他： 看来老师好像有些不高兴的样子。
English: After Mencius left Qi Province, Geng Yu asked him on the way: It seems that the teacher is somewhat unhappy.

古文：前日，虞闻诸夫子曰： 君子不怨天，不尤人。 
现代文：从前，我听老师说过： 君子不抱怨天，不责怪人。  
English: Once upon a time, I heard a teacher say: A gentleman never complains about the weather or blames others.

古文：曰： 彼一时也，此一时也。
现代文：孟子说： 那时是那时，现在是现在。
English: Mencius said: Then was then, now is now.

古文：五百年必有王者兴，其间必有名世者矣。
现代文：历史上每过五百年一定有圣王出现，这期间肯定不会有著名于世的人物。
English: In history, every five hundred years there must be a holy king, and during this period there will certainly not be a famous person in the world.

古文：由周以来，七百有余岁矣，以其数则过矣，以其时考之，则可矣。
现代文：从周初以来，已有七百多年了。按年数，已经超过了；照时势来考察，是该出现圣王和 名世者 的时候了。
English: Since the beginning of Zhou, it has been more than seven hundred years. According to the number of years, it has been exceeded; according to the trend of the times, it is time for the holy king and the famous person to appear.

古文：夫天未欲平治天下乎？
现代文：难道上天不想使天下治理好吗？
English: Doesn't God want the whole world to be governed well?

古文：如欲平治天下，当今之世，舍我而谁也？吾何为不豫哉？ 
现代文：如果想使天下治理好，在当今这个时代，除了我还有谁呢，我为什么不高兴呢！ 
English: If you want the world to be governed well, in this day and age, who else is there but me? Why am I not happy?

古文：夫孟子言五百年有王者兴，何以见乎？
现代文：孟子说 每过五百年一定有圣王出现 ，何以见得呢？
English: Mencius said that a holy king must appear every five hundred years. How can this be?

古文：帝喾王者，而尧又王天下；尧传於舜，舜又王天下；舜传於禹，禹又王天下。
现代文：帝喾是圣王，而尧又做了天下的圣王；尧把王位传给舜，舜又做了天下的圣王；舜把王位传给禹，禹又做了天下的圣王。
English: The emperor is the holy king, and the emperor has become the holy king of the world; the emperor passed the throne to the emperor, and the emperor became the holy king of the world; the emperor passed the throne to Yu, and Yu became the holy king of the world.

古文：四圣之王天下也，断踵而兴。
现代文：这四位圣王统一天下，是连接出现的。
English: The unification of these four holy kings came about through a connection.

古文：禹至汤且千岁，汤至周亦然，始於文王，而卒传於武王。
现代文：从夏禹到商汤将近一千年，商汤到周代也大致是这样。从周文王开始，后来传给周武王。
English: From Xia Yu to Shang Tang is nearly a thousand years, and Shang Tang to the Zhou Dynasty is roughly the same. It began with King Zhou Wen and was later passed down to King Zhou Wu.

古文：武王崩，成王、周公共治天下。
现代文：周武王死了，周成王和周公旦共同治理天下。
English: Zhou Wu Wang died, Zhou Cheng Wang and Zhou Gongdan jointly governed the world.

古文：由周至孟子之时，又七百岁而无王者。五百岁必有王者之验，在何世乎？
现代文：从周初到孟子的时候，又经过了七百年而没有圣王出现。 每过五百年一定有圣王出现 的证据，在哪个朝代有过呢？
English: From the beginning of Zhou to the time of Mencius, another seven hundred years passed without the appearance of a holy king. Every five hundred years there must be evidence of the appearance of a holy king. In which dynasty was there one?

古文：云 五百岁必有王者 ，谁所言乎？
现代文：说 每过五百年一定有圣王出现 的话，又是谁说的呢？
English: Who said that every five hundred years there must be a holy king?

古文：论不实事考验，信浮淫之语；不遇去齐，有不豫之色；非孟子之贤效与俗儒无殊之验也？
现代文：发表议论不用事实考查验证，而轻信没有根据，过分夸大的话，自己不被任用离开齐国，却有不高兴的神色，这不是孟子贤明的表现，而是跟庸俗儒生没有区别的证明。
English: It is not a manifestation of Mencius's wisdom, but a proof that there is no difference between him and the vulgar Confucian.

古文： 五百年 者，以为天出圣期也，又言以 天未欲平治天下也 ，其意以为天欲平治天下，当以五百年之间生圣王也。
现代文：孟子说 五百年 作为天生圣王的期限。又说 天不想使天下治理好 ，他的意思认为天真想使天下治理好，就应该在五百年之内降生圣王。
English: Mencius said that five hundred years was the time limit for the birth of a saintly king. He also said that heaven does not want to make the world well governed. He meant to say that if one sincerely wanted to make the world well governed, a saintly king should be born within five hundred years.

古文：如孟子之言，是谓天故生圣人也。
现代文：按孟子的说法，是说天有意识地降生圣人的。
English: According to Mencius, it means that heaven consciously gave birth to a saint.

古文：然则五百岁者，天生圣人之期乎？
现代文：那么五百年，是天降生圣人的期限吗？
English: So, is five hundred years the time limit for a saint to be born?

古文：如是其期，天何不生圣？
现代文：如果是期限，天为什么不降生圣王呢？
English: If it is a time limit, why hasn't a holy king been born?

古文：圣王非其期故不生。孟子犹信之，孟子不知天也。
现代文：可见五百年不是圣王降生的期限，所以他不降生，然而孟子还是相信这个说法，这说明孟子不懂得天。
English: It can be seen that five hundred years is not the time limit for the birth of a holy king, so he was not born. However, Mencius still believed in this saying, which shows that Mencius did not understand heaven.

古文： 自周已来，七百余岁矣，以其数则过矣；以其时考之，则可矣。 
现代文： 从周初以来，已经七百多年了。按年数，已经超过了；照时势来考察，是该出现圣王和 名世者 ，的时候了。 
English: Since the beginning of Zhou, it has been more than seven hundred years. According to the number of years, it has been exceeded; according to the trend of the times, it is time for the holy king and the famous person to appear.

古文：何谓数过？
现代文：什么叫超过了年数？
English: What do you call exceeding the number of years?

古文：何谓 时可 乎？
现代文：什么叫照时势考察该出现圣王和 名世者 的时候？
English: What do you call the examination of the current situation to see when a holy king and a great man should appear?

古文：数则时，时则数矣。 数过 ，过五百年也。
现代文：年数就是时势，时势就是年数。超过年数，指已经超过了五百年。
English: The number of years is the current situation, and the current situation is the number of years. If it exceeds the number of years, it means that it has exceeded five hundred years.

古文：从周到今七百余岁，逾二百岁矣。
现代文：从周初到今天七百多年，已经超过了二百年。
English: From the beginning of the Zhou Dynasty to today, there have been more than 700 years, and it has been more than 200 years.

古文：设或王者，生失时矣，又言 时可 ，何谓也？
现代文：假设有圣王降生，已经错过了时间，又说 该是出现圣王和 名世者 的时候 ，这话怎么说呢？
English: Suppose a saintly king were to be born, and time had already been lost, and it was said that it was time for a saintly king and a great man to appear, how would this be said?

古文：云 五百年必有王者兴 ，又言 其间必有名世 ，与王者同乎？
现代文：说 过五百年一定有圣王出现 ，又说 这期间一定有著名于世的人物出现 ，这里说的著名于世的人物跟圣王是同一回事呢？
English: Saying that there must have been a holy king in the past five hundred years, and also saying that there must have been famous people in the world during this period, is the famous person in the world mentioned here the same thing as the holy king?

古文：异也？
现代文：还是两回事呢？
English: Or are they two different things?

古文：如同，为再言之？
现代文：如果是同一回事，为什么要重说一遍呢？
English: If it's the same thing, why repeat it?

古文：如异， 名世 者，谓何等也？
现代文：如果是两回事， 著名于世的人物 指的是什么人呢？
English: If they are two different things, who is the famous person in the world?

古文：谓孔子之徒、孟子之辈，教授後生，觉悟顽愚乎？
现代文：是说孔子、孟子之类人，教诲青年，使愚笨的人觉悟吗？
English: Are people like Confucius and Mencius supposed to teach the young and enlighten the stupid?

古文：已有孔子，己又以生矣。
现代文：那么已经有了孔子，而你自己却又出生了。
English: Then you already have Confucius, and you yourself have been born again.

古文：如谓圣臣乎？
现代文：如果说的是辅佐圣王的圣臣吗？
English: If we are talking about the saintly vassals of the holy king?

古文：当与圣同时。
现代文：就该与圣王同时出现。
English: It should appear at the same time as the holy king.

古文：圣王出，圣臣见矣。
现代文：圣王出现，圣臣就该出现。
English: When a saintly king appears, a saintly minister should appear.

古文：言五百年而已，何为言其间？
现代文：这样，说 五百年 就行了，为什么要说 在这期间 呢？
English: Thus, it is enough to say five hundred years, why say "during this period"?

古文：如不谓五百年时，谓其中间乎？
现代文：如果不是说五百年时间，是说五百年的中间吗？
English: If we are not talking about five hundred years, are we talking about the middle of five hundred years?

古文：是谓二三百年之时也。不与五百年时圣王相得。
现代文：这是说二三百年时间，那么圣臣就不会跟每五百年时间出现的圣王相遇了。
English: That is to say, two or three hundred years, then the sage would not have met the sage king who appears every five hundred years.

古文：夫如是，孟子言其间必有名世者，竟谓谁也？ 夫天未欲平治天下也。
现代文：象这样，孟子说 这期间一定有著名于世的人物 ，究竟指的是谁呢？ 天不想使天下治理好。
English: In this way, Mencius said that there must have been famous people in the world during this period, who is he referring to? Heaven does not want to make the world well-governed.

古文：如欲治天下，舍予而谁也？ 
现代文：要是想治好天下，除了我还有谁呢？ 
English: If you want to heal the world, who else is there but me?

古文：言若此者，不自谓当为王者，有王者，若为王臣矣。
现代文：孟子说这样的话，不是自认为应该做圣王，而是认为有圣王出现，则该做圣王的臣子。
English: When Mencius said this, it was not that he thought he should be a holy king, but that if a holy king appeared, he should be a vassal of the holy king.

古文：为王者臣，皆天也。
现代文：孟子认为做圣王、做王臣，都是天命决定。
English: Mencius believed that to be a saintly king or a king's vassal was determined by fate.

古文：己命不当平治天下，不浩然安之於齐，怀恨有不豫之色，失之矣。
现代文：既然自己命定不该把天下治理好，又不肯心地坦然地住在齐国，却怀恨在心，脸上露出不高兴的样子，这就不符合天命了。
English: Since he has determined that he should not govern the world well, and since he is unwilling to live peacefully in Qi Province, but holds grudges in his heart and shows an unhappy look on his face, this is not in line with the Mandate of Heaven.

古文：彭更问曰： 士无事而食，可乎？ 
现代文：彭更问孟子： 读书人不干事白吃饭，可以吗？ 
English: Peng Geng asked Mencius: Is it okay for a reader not to eat for free?

古文：孟子曰： 不通功易事，以羡补不足，则农有余粟，女有余布。
现代文：孟子说： 如果人们不交流成果互换产品，用多余补充不足，那么农民就会有余粮，妇女就会有余布。
English: Mencius said, "If people do not exchange the fruits and exchange the products, and use the surplus to supplement the shortage, then farmers will have surplus grain, and women will have surplus cloth.

古文：子如通之，则梓匠轮舆，皆得食於子。
现代文：你如果能使它们沟通，那么木工、造车工都能从你那儿找到饭吃。
English: If you can get them to communicate, then carpenters and wheelwrights will be able to find work from you.

古文：於此有人焉，入则孝，出则悌，守先王之道，以待後世之学者，而不得食於子。
现代文：如果这儿有个人，在家孝敬父母，出门尊敬兄长，坚守古代圣王的道义，以此教育后代的学者，却不能从你那儿找到饭吃。
English: If there is a person here who honors his parents at home, respects his brothers and sisters when he goes out, adheres to the morality of the ancient holy kings, and educates future generations of scholars in this way, but cannot find food from you.

古文：子何尊梓匠轮舆，而轻为仁义者哉？ 
现代文：那你为什么只看重木工、造车工而轻视遵循仁义的人呢？
English: So why do you only value carpenters and wheelwrights and look down on people who follow righteousness?

古文：曰： 梓匠轮舆，其志将以求食也。
现代文：彭更说： 木工、造车工，他们的目的是要以此谋生。
English: Peng said: "They are carpenters and car builders, and their goal is to make a living.

古文：君子之为道也，其志亦将以求食与？ 
现代文：君子遵循道义，他们的目的也是要以此谋生吗？ 
English: Gentlemen follow morality. Is it their goal to earn a living by doing so?

古文：孟子曰： 子何以其志为哉？
现代文：孟子说： 你为什么要考虑他们的目的呢？
English: Mencius said, "Why should you consider their purpose?

古文：其有功於子，可食而食之矣。
现代文：他们对你有用处，可以管饭就给他们饭吃。
English: They are useful to you. You can give them food and let them eat.

古文：且子食志乎？食功乎？ 
现代文：再说，你是按人的目的给饭吃呢，还是按对你有用给饭吃？ 彭更说： 按目的给饭吃。 
English: Furthermore, do you give food according to man's purpose, or do you give food according to what is useful to you?

古文：曰： 食志。 曰： 有人於此，毁瓦画墁，其志将以求食也，则子食之乎？ 
现代文：孟子说： 如果有人在这里，毁坏屋瓦割开车盖，他的目的是以此谋生，那你给他饭吃吗？ 彭更说： 不给。 
English: Mencius said, "If there is someone here who destroys roof tiles, cuts and covers cars, and his purpose is to make a living from this, will you give him food to eat?" Peng Jian said, "No."

古文：曰： 否。 曰： 然则子非食志，食功也。 
现代文：孟子说： 那么你并不是按人的目的给饭吃，而是按对你有用给饭吃的。 
English: Mencius said, "Then you do not give food according to the purpose of man, but according to what is useful to you.

古文：夫孟子引毁瓦画墁者，欲以诘彭更之言也。
现代文：孟子举出毁坏屋瓦，割开车盖的人，想用它来反驳彭更的话。
English: Mencius tried to refute Peng Qian's words by holding up a man who had destroyed roof tiles and slashed car covers.

古文：知毁瓦画墁无功而有志，彭更必不食也。
现代文：因为他知道毁坏屋瓦、割开车盖这种没有用处而想找饭吃的人，彭更一定不会给他饭吃。
English: Because he knows that people who destroy roof tiles and cut car covers are useless and want to find food, Peng will definitely not give him food.

古文：虽然，引毁瓦画墁，非所以诘彭更也。
现代文：即使这样，孟子举毁坏屋瓦、割开车盖的例子，也是不能驳倒彭更的。
English: Even so, Mencius' examples of destroying roof tiles and cutting car covers cannot refute Peng Geng.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：诸志欲求食者，毁瓦画墁者不在其中。
现代文：因为凡是目的在于想谋生的人中，毁坏屋瓦、割开车盖的人并不包括在内。
English: For among those whose aim is to earn a living, those who destroy roof tiles and cut car covers are not included.

古文：不在其中，则难以诘人矣。
现代文：既然不包括在内，就难于用它来反驳别人了。
English: Since it is not included, it is difficult to use it to refute others.

古文：夫人无故毁瓦画墁，此不痴狂则遨戏也。
现代文：一个人无缘无故地毁坏屋瓦、割开车盖，这人不是傻子、疯子，就是闹着玩的。
English: A person who destroys roof tiles and slashes car roofs for no reason is either a fool or a madman, or he is just having fun.

古文：痴狂人之，志不求食，遨戏之人，亦不求食。
现代文：傻子和疯子没有谋生的目的，闹着玩的人也没有谋生的目的。
English: Fools and madmen have nothing to live for, and jesters have nothing to live for.

古文：求食者，皆多人所得利之事，以作此鬻卖於市，得贾以归，乃得食焉。
现代文：想谋生的人，所做的大都是对人们共同有益的事情，他们把做的东西拿到市场上去卖，得钱回来，才能有饭吃。
English: People who want to earn a living mostly do things that are beneficial to people. They take what they make to the market to sell it and get money back in order to eat.

古文：今毁瓦画墁，无利於人，何志之有？
现代文：孟子现在说的毁坏屋瓦、割开车盖，对人没有好处，还谈得上有什么谋生的目的呢？
English: The destruction of roof tiles and the cutting of car covers, which Mencius is now talking about, are of no benefit to people. What is the purpose of earning a living?

古文：有知之人，知其无利，固不为也；无知之人，与痴狂比，固无其志。
现代文：有头脑的人，知道它对人没有益处，一定不会去做；没有头脑的人，跟傻子、疯子差不多，也就肯定没有谋生的目的。
English: A person with a brain, knowing that it is not beneficial to people, will certainly not do it; a person without a brain, similar to a fool or a madman, will certainly not have the purpose of earning a living.

古文：夫毁瓦画墁，犹比童子击壤於涂，何以异哉？
现代文：其实，毁坏屋瓦，割开车盖，跟小孩在路上玩击壤游戏有什么不同呢？
English: In fact, what is the difference between destroying roof tiles, cutting car covers, and children playing a game of hitting the ground on the road?

古文：击壤於涂者，其志亦欲求食乎？
现代文：在路上玩击壤游戏的小孩，他们的目的也是想谋生吗？
English: Are the children who are playing the game on the road also trying to earn a living?

古文：此尚童子，未有志也。
现代文：他们还是小孩，没有什么目的可言。
English: They're kids, they don't have a purpose.

古文：巨人博戏，亦画墁之类也。
现代文：大人玩博戏，也属割开车盖之类行为。
English: Adults playing games, also belongs to the cutting of car covers and similar acts.

古文：博戏之人，其志复求食乎？
现代文：玩博戏的人，他们的目的也是为了谋生吗？
English: Are those who play games also trying to make a living?

古文：博戏者尚有相夺钱财，钱财众多，己亦得食，或时有志。
现代文：玩博戏的还有人用来相互赢取钱财，赢的钱财多了，自己也就有了饭吃，这或许是有目的的。
English: Gambling is also used by people to win money from each other. The more money they win, the more they can eat. This may have a purpose.

古文：夫投石超距，亦画墁之类也。
现代文：那么，扔石头和跳远的人，也属于割开车盖之类行为。
English: Well, throwing stones and jumping over people also fall into the category of slashing car bonnets.

古文：投石超距之人，其志有求食者乎？
现代文：扔石头和跳远的人，他们的目的是要谋生吗？
English: Are the stone-throwers and long-jumpers trying to make a living?

古文：然则孟子之诘彭更也，未为尽之也。
现代文：那么孟子反驳彭更的话，不能认为完全合理。
English: So Mencius's rebuttal of Peng Qian's words cannot be considered completely reasonable.

古文：如彭更以孟子之言，可谓御人以口给矣。
现代文：如果彭更听信了孟子的话，那么孟子可能被称作是 专门靠巧言诡辩来对付人 的了。
English: If Peng listened more to Mencius, then Mencius may be said to have dealt with people exclusively by means of clever words and sophistry.

古文：匡章子曰： 陈仲子岂不诚廉士乎？
现代文：匡章说： 陈仲子难道不真是个廉洁的人吗？
English: Kuanzhang said, "Isn't Chen Zhongzi really a clean person?

古文：居於於陵，三日不食，耳无闻、目无见也。
现代文：他住在於陵，三天没有吃东西，耳朵听不见，眼睛看不见。
English: He lived in the mausoleum and did not eat for three days. His ears could not hear and his eyes could not see.

古文：井上有李，螬食实者过半，扶服往，将食之。
现代文：井上有个李子，被金龟子的幼虫吃去大半，他爬过去，拿来吃了。
English: There was a plum in the well, and the caterpillars of the cockchafer had eaten most of it. He climbed over and ate it.

古文：三咽，然後耳有闻，目有见也。 
现代文：咬了三口，然后耳朵才听得见，眼睛才看得见。 
English: He took three bites, and then his ears could hear and his eyes could see.

古文：孟子曰： 於齐国之士，吾必以仲子为巨擘焉！
现代文：孟子说： 在齐国的人士中，我就认为陈仲子是首屈一指的！
English: Mencius said, "Among the people of Qi, I consider Chen Zhongzi to be second to none!

古文：虽然，仲子恶能廉？
现代文：即使这样，陈仲子怎么能算廉洁呢？
English: However, how can Nakako be called incorruptible?

古文：充仲子之操，则蚓而後可者也。
现代文：要推广陈仲子的操行，那只有使人成为蚯蚓然后才能办到。
English: If Chen Zhongzi's practice is to be popularized, it can only be done by turning people into baboons.

古文：夫蚓，上食槁壤，下饮黄泉。
现代文：因为蚯蚓在地上吃干土，在地下饮泉水。
English: earthworms, which eat the dry soil on the ground and drink the underground spring water.

古文：仲子之所居室，伯夷之所筑与？抑亦盗跖之所筑与？
现代文：而陈仲子住的房子，是伯夷建造的，还是盗跖建造的呢？
English: And the house where Chen Zhongzi lived, was it built by a peasant or a thief?

古文：所食之粟，伯夷之所树与，抑亦盗跖之所树与？是未可知也。 
现代文：吃的粮食，是伯夷种的，还是盗跖种的呢？这是不可能知道的。 
English: It is impossible to know whether the grain we eat was grown by peasants or robbers.

古文：曰： 是何伤哉？
现代文：匡章说： 这有什么关系呢！
English: Kuanzhang said, "What does it matter?

古文：彼身织屦，妻辟纑，以易之也。 
现代文：他亲手编草鞋，妻子搓麻练麻，用这些来换房子和粮食。 
English: He himself knitted straw sandals, his wife opened up the business of weaving hemp thread, and took these to exchange.

古文：曰： 仲子，齐之世家，兄戴，盖禄万锺。
现代文：孟子说： 陈仲子，是齐国的贵族世家，他的哥哥陈戴，在盖地的俸禄有万钟。
English: Mencius said, "Chen Zhongzi belongs to a noble family in Qi, and his brother Chen Dai has a salary of ten thousand bells.

古文：以兄之禄为不义之禄，而不食也。以兄之室为不义之室，而弗居也。
现代文：他认为哥哥的俸禄是不义的俸禄，就不肯吃；认为哥哥的房子是不义的房子，就不肯住。
English: He thought that his brother's salary was an unjust salary and refused to eat; he thought that his brother's house was an unjust house and refused to live in it.

古文：辟兄离母，处於於陵。
现代文：回避哥哥，离开母亲，住在於陵。
English: He shunned his brother, left his mother, and lived in a mausoleum.

古文：他日归，则有馈其兄生鹅者也，己频蹙曰：恶用是鶂鶂者为哉？
现代文：有一天他回家，碰上有人送他哥哥一只活着的鹅，他皱着眉说： 怎么要这叫的东西干什么？ 
English: One day he came home to find someone had given his brother a live goose. He frowned and said: "What do you want with something called that?

古文：他日，其母杀是鹅也，与之食之。
现代文：后来有一天，他母亲杀了这只鹅，拿来给他吃。
English: Then one day his mother killed the goose and brought it to him to eat.

古文：其兄自外至，曰：是鶂鶂之肉也。
现代文：他哥哥正好从外边来到家，说： 这是叫的肉。 
English: His brother just came home from outside and said: "This is yakitori meat.

古文：出而吐之。
现代文：他于是出去吐掉了。
English: He then went outside and threw up.

古文：以母则不食，以妻则食之；以兄之室则不居，以於陵则居之。
现代文：因为是母亲的东西不吃，由于是妻子的东西就吃；因为是哥哥的房子不住，由于是於陵地方的房子就住。
English: For he will not eat of his mother's meat, because she was his wife; and his brother's house will not stand, because it is in the country of the Chaldeans.

古文：是尚能为充其类也乎？
现代文：这还能算是把自己的操行推广到所有的同类事物中去吗？
English: Is it even possible to generalize one's own practice to all similar things?

古文：若仲子者，蚓而後充其操者也。 
现代文：像陈仲子这样的人，只有变成了蚯蚓，然后才能成为推广他的操行到各个方面去的人啊。 
English: A person like Chen Zhongzi can only become a dragonfly before he can become a person who can promote his practice in all aspects.

古文：夫孟子之非仲子也，不得仲子之短矣。
现代文：孟子指责陈仲子，没有讲到他的短处。
English: Mencius criticized Chen Zhongzi without mentioning his shortcomings.

古文：仲子之怪鹅如吐之者，岂为在母不食乎？
现代文：陈仲子厌恶鹅肉而吐掉它，难道是因为母亲做的就不吃 吗？
English: Chen Zhongzi dislikes goose meat and vomits it up. Is it because he won't eat his mother's cooking?

古文：乃先谴鹅曰： 恶用鶂鶂者为哉？ 
现代文：而是因为才刚刚谴责鹅说： 怎么要这叫的东西干什么？ 
English: But because it has just condemned the goose, saying: How can this so-called thing do anything?

古文：他日，其母杀以食之，其兄曰： 是鶂鶂之肉。 
现代文：后来有一天他母亲杀了鹅给他吃，他的哥哥说： 这是叫的肉。 
English: Then one day his mother killed a goose and gave it to him to eat, and his brother said, "This is game meat."

古文：仲子耻负前言，即吐而出之。
现代文：陈仲子耻于违背了前面说过的话，立即把它吐了出来。
English: Chen Zhongzi, ashamed of having violated what he had said earlier, immediately spat it out.

古文：而兄不告，则不吐；不吐，则是食於母也。
现代文：要是哥哥不告诉他，他就不会吐；不吐出来，就是吃了母亲做的东西。
English: If his brother didn't tell him, he wouldn't throw up; if he didn't throw up, he had eaten something his mother had made.

古文：谓之 在母则不食 ，失其意矣。
现代文：孟子说他 母亲做的东西就不吃 ，这不符合陈仲子的意思。
English: Mencius said that he would not eat anything made by his mother, which was not what Chen Zhongzi meant.

古文：使仲子执不食於母，鹅膳至，不当食也。
现代文：假使陈仲子执意不吃母亲做的东西，那么鹅肉端上来，他就不该吃。
English: If Chen Zhongzi is determined not to eat what his mother made, then he shouldn't eat the goose meat that was served.

古文：今既食之，知其为鹅，怪而吐之。故仲子之吐鹅也，耻食不合己志之物也，非负亲亲之恩，而欲勿母食也。
现代文：现在既然吃了，就知道他是因为那只鹅，厌恶它而吐掉的，所以陈仲子吐掉鹅肉，是耻于吃了不符合自己志向的东西，而不是违背母子的恩情，想不吃母亲做的东西。
English: Now that he has eaten it, he knows that he vomited it up because of the goose, because he loathed it. Therefore, Chen Zhongzi vomited up the goose meat because he was ashamed of eating something that did not meet his own aspirations, and not because he wanted to go against the grace of his mother and son and not eat something made by his mother.

古文：又 仲子恶能廉？
现代文：孟子又说： 陈仲子怎么能算廉洁呢？
English: Mencius also said: How can Chen Zhongzi be regarded as incorruptible?

古文：充仲子之性，则蚓而後可者也。
现代文：要把他的操行推广到各方面，那只有人变成蚯蚓之后才能办到。蚯蚓在地上吃干土，在地下饮泉水 。
English: If his practice is to be extended in all directions, it can only be done after man has become a grasshopper. Grasshoppers eat dry soil on the ground and drink spring water underground.

古文：夫蚓，上食槁壤，下饮黄泉 ，是谓蚓为至廉也。
现代文：这是认为蚯蚓是最廉洁的，陈仲子要像蚯蚓一样，才算是廉洁的。
English: This is to say that Zhai is the most incorruptible, and Chen Zhongzi must be like Zhai before he can be considered incorruptible.

古文：仲子居而食之，於廉洁可也。
现代文：他现在住的房子，要是伯夷盖的，吃的粮食，要是伯夷种的，这样他去住、去吃，才能够称得上廉洁。
English: If the house he lives in now is built by peasants, if the grain he eats is produced by peasants, and if the seeds he plants are grown by peasants, only then can he live and eat in a way that can be called clean.

古文：或时食盗跖之所树粟，居盗跖之所筑室，污廉洁之行矣。
现代文：或许当时吃的是盗跖种的粮食，住的是盗跖盖的房子，那就玷污了廉洁的操行。
English: Perhaps at that time they ate food grown by thieves and lived in houses built by thieves, which tarnished their integrity.

古文：用此非仲子，亦复失之。
现代文：孟子用这种观点来指责陈仲子，也还是不正确的。
English: It is also incorrect for Mencius to use this view to criticize Chen Zhongzi.

古文：室因人故，粟以屦纑易之，正使盗之所树筑，己不闻知。
现代文：房子是承袭人家旧有的，粮食是用麻鞋麻线换来的，即使房子是强盗盖的，粮食是强盗种的，自己并没有听说过这些情况。
English: The house was inherited from an old family, and the grain was bartered for with hemp shoelaces and twine. Even though the house was built by robbers and the grain was grown by robbers, they had never heard of these things.

古文：今兄之不义，有其操矣。
现代文：如今哥哥的不义，有他自己的操行为证。
English: Now his brother's iniquity is evidenced by his own conduct.

古文：操见於众，昭晰议论，故避於陵，不处其宅，织屦辟纑，不食其禄也。
现代文：操行表现在众人面前，大家看得清清楚楚，议论纷纷，所以陈仲子才避居於陵，不住他的房子，编麻鞋搓麻线为生，不吃他的俸禄。
English: Chen Zhongzi lived in seclusion in the mausoleum. He did not live in his house, he made nettle shoelaces for a living, and he did not eat his salary.

古文：而欲使仲子处於陵之地，避若兄之宅，吐若兄之禄，耳闻目见，昭晰不疑，仲子不处不食，明矣。
现代文：如果陈仲子住在於陵的时候，避居像他哥哥那种人的房子，吃像他哥哥那种人的俸禄，只要他耳闻目睹，清楚无疑，那么陈仲子不住不吃，是肯定的。
English: If Chen Zhongzi, when he lived in Yu Ling, avoided living in the house of a person like his brother, and ate the salary of a person like his brother, as long as he heard and witnessed, it is clear and certain that Chen Zhongzi would not eat.

古文：今於陵之宅，不见筑者为谁，粟，不知树者为谁，何得成室而居之？得成粟而食之？
现代文：现在於陵的房子没有看见盖的人是谁，粮食也不晓得种的人是谁，哪能有现成的房子住，哪能有现成的粮食吃呢？
English: Who is the man who does not see the house being built in the mausoleum, and who does not know how to grow grain? Where can one find a ready-made house to live in, and where can one find ready-made grain to eat?

古文：孟子非之，是为太备矣。
现代文：孟子指责他，这就太求全责备了。
English: Mencius accused him, which was too much to ask for a full rebuke.

古文：仲子所居，或时盗之所筑，仲子不知而居之，谓之不充其操，唯蚓然後可者也。
现代文：陈仲子住的房子，或许是强盗盖的，他不知道而住了，就说他没有把自己的操行推广到各方面，只有 把自己变成蚯蚓然后才能办到 。
English: The house where Chen Zhongzi lived may have been built by a robber. He lived there without knowing it, so he said that he did not extend his practice to all aspects. He could only do it by turning himself into a skeleton.

古文：夫盗室之地中，亦有蚓焉，食盗宅中之槁壤，饮盗宅中之黄泉，蚓恶能为可乎？
现代文：其实，强盗住房的地下也有蚯蚓，它吃强盗房中的干土，饮强盗房子地下的泉水，那么蚯蚓又怎么能算是做到了廉洁呢？
English: In fact, there is also a centipede in the basement of the robber's house. It eats the dry soil in the robber's house and drinks the spring water under the robber's house. So how can the centipede be considered clean?

古文：在仲子之操，满孟子之议，鱼然後乃可。
现代文：要把陈仲子的操行推广到各方面，满足孟子议论的要求，只有把人变成鱼然后才能办到。
English: In order to expand Chen Zhongzi's practice to all aspects and meet the requirements of Mencius' discussion, it is only possible to turn people into fish.

古文：夫鱼处江海之中，食江海之士，海非盗所凿，士非盗所聚也。
现代文：因为鱼生活在江河海洋之中，吃的是江河海洋的泥土，而海洋不是强盗开凿的，泥土也不是强盗堆积的。
English: Because fish live in rivers and oceans, they eat the mud of rivers and oceans, and the ocean is not dug by robbers, nor is the mud piled up by robbers.

古文：然则仲子有大非，孟子非之，不能得也。
现代文：但是陈仲子有个大错误，孟子指责他时没有能抓住。
English: But Chen Zhongzi made a big mistake, which Mencius failed to catch when he accused him.

古文：夫仲子之去母辟兄，与妻独处於陵，以兄之宅为不义之宅，以兄之禄为不义之禄，故不处不食，廉洁之至也，然则其徒于陵归候母也，宜自赍食而行。
现代文：陈仲子离开母亲，避开哥哥，跟妻子单独住在於陵，是认为哥哥的房子是不义的房子，认为哥哥的俸禄是不义的俸禄，所以才不住不吃，真是廉洁到极点。那么他迁居於陵要回去看望母亲，就该自己带着粮食走。
English: Chen Zhongzi left his mother, avoided his brother, and lived alone with his wife in the mausoleum. He considered his brother's house to be an unjust house, and his brother's salary to be an unjust salary, so he didn't eat. It was the height of chastity. If he wanted to move to the mausoleum to visit his mother, he should have brought his own food.

古文：鹅膳之进也，必与饭俱。
现代文：鹅肉端上来，一定跟饭一起。
English: Serve the goose meat, and make sure it goes with the rice.

古文：母之所为饭者，兄之禄也。母不自有私粟。以食仲子，明矣。
现代文：母亲做的饭，是用他哥哥的禄米，母亲不会自己有粮食给陈仲子吃，这是明摆着的。
English: His mother cooked with his brother's rice, and it was clear that she would not be able to feed Chen Zhongzi herself.

古文：仲子食兄禄也。
现代文：看来，陈仲子还是吃了他哥哥的禄米。
English: It seems that Chen Zhongzi still ate his brother's loamy rice.

古文：伯夷不食周粟。饿死於首阳之下，岂一食周粟而以污其洁行哉？
现代文：伯夷不吃周朝的粮食，饿死在首阳山下，难道一吃周朝的粮食就会玷污他廉洁的操行吗？
English: Bo Yi did not eat the grain of Zhou Dynasty and died of starvation at the foot of Shouyang Mountain. Would eating the grain of Zhou Dynasty tarnish his integrity?

古文：仲子之操，近不若伯夷，而孟子谓之若蚓乃可，失仲子之操所当比矣。
现代文：陈仲子的操行，似乎不如伯夷，但孟子却说他要变得像蚯蚓才行，这就弄错了陈仲子的操行该拿什么来跟他相比。
English: Chen Zhongzi's conduct seems to be inferior to that of Bo Yi, but Mencius said that he only wanted to become like Bo, which confused what Chen Zhongzi's conduct should be compared to.

古文：孟子曰： 莫非天命也，顺受其正。
现代文：孟子说： 吉凶祸福没有一样不是命运，要顺应承受它的正命。
English: Mencius said: There is no good, evil, calamity, or fortune that is not fate, and we should accept our fate.

古文：是故知命者，不立乎岩墙之下。 
现代文：所以懂得天命的人，不站在要倒塌的高墙下以免死于非命。
English: Therefore, people who know the fate of heaven do not stand under the high wall that is about to collapse, so as not to die a violent death.

古文：尽其道而死者，为正命也；桎梏而死者，非天命也。
现代文：尽力行天道而死的人，是正命；戴脚镣手铐而死的人，不是正命。 
English: Those who die while trying their best to follow the heavenly path have a good life; those who die while wearing shackles and fetters do not.

古文：夫孟子之言，是谓人无触值之命也。
现代文：孟子的话是认为人没有 触值之命 。
English: Mencius's words mean that people do not have a "mandate of value."

古文：顺操行者得正命，妄行苟为得非正，是天命於操行也。
现代文：遵循操行的人可得正命，胡作非为的就要得非正命，这是说天命会随操行的好坏而变化。
English: Those who follow the conduct can get the right fate, and those who do wrong will get the wrong fate. This means that the fate of heaven will change with the good or bad conduct.

古文：夫子不王，颜渊早夭，子夏失明，伯牛为疠。四者行不顺与？
现代文：照这样说，孔子没有当帝王，颜渊早死，子夏哭瞎了眼，伯牛得麻疯病，都是四人的操行不好吗？
English: According to this, Confucius did not become an emperor, Yan Yuan died early, Zixia cried and went blind, and Uncle Niu contracted leprosy. Are all four of them behaving badly?

古文：何以不受正命？
现代文：为什么都得不到正命呢？
English: Why don't they all get a happy ending?

古文：比干剖，子胥烹，子路菹，天下极戮，非徒桎梏也。
现代文：比干被挖心，伍子胥被煮死，子路被剁成肉酱，这都是天下最残酷的刑罚，而不仅仅只是戴脚镣手铐了。
English: Digging out the heart of a gannet, boiling a woodpecker to death, and pounding a roe deer into meat sauce are all the most cruel punishments in the world, and not just wearing leg irons and handcuffs.

古文：必以桎梏效非正命，则比干、子胥行不顺也。
现代文：如果一定要用受刑而死来证明得到的不是正命，那么比干、伍子胥的操行都不好了。
English: If it is necessary to die as a punishment to prove that what one has received is not a righteous life, then the behavior of Bi Gan and Wu Zi Yao is not good.

古文：人禀性命，或当压溺兵烧，虽或慎操修行，其何益哉？
现代文：人从天禀受了性命，有的该被压死，有的该被淹死，有的该被杀死、有的该被烧死，即使这些人中有人谨慎地修养操行，那有什么用处呢！
English: People have received their lives from the heavens, some should be crushed to death, some should be drowned, some should be killed, some should be burned to death, even if some of these people carefully cultivate their behavior, what is the use!

古文：窦广国与百人俱卧积炭之下，炭崩，百人皆死，广国独济，命当封侯也。
现代文：窦广国跟一百人一起躺在炭堆下，炭堆倒塌，其他一百人都死了，只有窦广国一人得救，这是他命中注定该被封侯。
English: Dou Guangguo was lying under a pile of coal with a hundred people. The pile of coal collapsed, the other hundred people died, and only Dou Guangguo was saved. It was his fate to be imprisoned.

古文：积炭与岩墙何以异？
现代文：炭堆与高墙有什么两样？
English: What's the difference between a pile of coal and a high wall?

古文：命不压，虽岩崩，有广国之命者，犹将脱免。行，或使之；止，或尼之。
现代文：命不该被压死，即使高墙倒塌，只要有窦广国的命就会逃脱。 一个人干事，像有股力量在促使他；不干，也像有股力量在阻止他。 
English: Life should not be crushed to death, even if the high wall collapses, as long as there is Dou Guangguo's life, it will escape. If a person acts, it is as if a force is pushing him; if he does not act, it is as if a force is stopping him.

古文：命当压，犹或使之立於墙下。
现代文：命该被压死，就像有股力量促使他站在高墙下去被压死。
English: He deserved to be crushed to death, just as there was a force that made him stand on the high wall and be crushed to death.

古文：孔甲所入主人子，天命当贱，虽载入宫，犹为守者。
现代文：夏王孔甲所进的那户人家的孩子，天命该卑贱，即使他被带进宫中，还是做了守门的人。
English: The child of the family that Xia Wang Kong Jia entered was destined to be lowly, and even if he was brought into the palace, he still became the gatekeeper.

古文：不立岩墙之下，与孔甲载子入宫，同一实也。
现代文：不站在高墙的下面，跟夏王孔甲带那孩子进宫，其实都是同一个道理。
English: Not standing under the high wall, and bringing the child into the palace with Xia Wang Kongjia, are actually the same reason.

