古文：辛术，字怀哲，少明敏，有识度。解褐司空冑曹参军，与仆射高隆之共典营构邺都宫室，术有思理，百工克济。再迁尚书右丞。
现代文：辛术，字怀哲，少年聪明，有见识和器度最初任司空胄曹参军，与仆射高隆之共同主管营建邺都宫室，辛术有构思，百工之事都能成功，两次升任为尚书右丞。
English: Xin Shuxu, the word Huai Zhe, the boy is clever, has insight and dexterity. He was initially appointed as the Secretary of the Air Force, and joined the army. He was the co-supervisor of the construction of the imperial palace room with Gao Long, and Xin Shuxu had the idea. He could succeed in hundreds of things. He was promoted to Shang Shujie twice.

古文：出为清河太守，政有能名。
现代文：出任清河太守，治政以才能出名。
English: He was appointed governor of Qinghe and became famous for his ability to govern.

古文：追授□州长史，遭父忧去职。
现代文：又授并州长史，因父亲去世守丧而离任。
English: He was also awarded the governor's history, and left office due to his father's death.

古文：清河父老数百人诣阙请立碑颂德。文襄嗣事，与尚书左丞宋游道、中书侍郎李绘等并追诣晋阳，俱为上客。
现代文：清河父老几百人到京城请求立碑歌颂功德文襄继承时，辛术与尚书左丞宋游道、中书侍郎李绘等人追到晋阳，一并成为座上客。
English: When several hundred people of the Qing Dynasty came to Beijing to request the erection of a monument to praise the merits of de Wenxiang's succession, Xin Xiu, Song Youdao, the left-hand man of Shangshu, Li Wei, the waiter of Zhongshu, and others followed them to Jinyang and became guests on the stage together.

古文：累迁散骑常侍。
现代文：屡次升仟至散骑常侍。
English: He was promoted several times, and rose to the rank of straggler.

古文：武定八年，侯景叛，除东南道行台尚书，封江夏县男，与高岳等破侯景，擒萧明。迁东徐州刺史，为淮南经略使。
现代文：武定八年，侯景叛乱，任东南道行台尚书，封为江夏县男，同高岳等打败侯景，捕获萧明升任东徐州刺史，为淮南经略使。
English: In the eighth year of Wuding, Hou Jing rebelled. He was appointed as the Southeast Dao Gangdai Shangshu, and was appointed as the man of Jiangxia County. He defeated Hou Jing with Gao Yue and others, captured Xiao Ming, and was promoted to the East Xuzhou Shishi, and was appointed as the Huainan Jingli Envoy.

古文：齐天保元年，侯景征江西租税，术率诸军渡淮断之，烧其稻数百万石。
现代文：齐天保元年，娄量征收辽西的租税，圭街率领众军渡过进回拦截他们，烧毁他们征收的稻谷敷百万石。
English: In the first year of Qitianbo, a large amount of tax was collected from the west of Liao, and Gui Jie led the army to cross the river to intercept them and burn the rice paddies they had collected.

古文：还镇下邳，人随术北渡淮者三千余家。
现代文：返回后镇守下邳，百姓跟随辛术北渡淮河的人有三千余家。
English: After returning to the town, there were more than three thousand families of people who followed Xinzhu to the Huaihe River.

古文：东徐州刺史郭志杀郡守。
现代文：塞涂州刺史郭志杀郡守。
English: Saituzhou stabbed Guo Zhi, the county governor, to death.

古文：文宣闻之，□术自今所统十余州地诸有犯法者，刺史先启听报，以下先断后表闻。
现代文：文宣听说这件事，命令辛术从今以后所统率的十余州众人有犯法的，如果是刺史，先启奏朝廷，刺史以下的，先处理再上奏。
English: When Wen Xuan heard about this, he ordered that from now on, all people in the more than ten states ruled by Xin Zhi should violate the law. If it is a stabbing history, the court should be played first. If it is less than a stabbing history, it should be dealt with first and then played.

古文：齐代行台兼总人事，自术始也。
现代文：齐代行台兼管民事，是从辛术开始的。
English: Northern Qi's stationmaster, who is also in charge of one side of the personnel, starts from Xinzhu here.

古文：安州刺史、临清太守、盱眙蕲城二镇将犯法，术皆案奏杀之。
现代文：室州刺史、临清太守、盱眙蕲城二缜将领犯法，辛术都审理上奏杀了他们。
English: The towns of Anzhou Zishi, Linqing Dazhong, Handan and Handan will violate the law, and Xinzhu will report the case to the court and put them to death.

古文：睢州刺史及所部郡守俱犯大辟，朝廷以其奴婢百口及资财尽赐术，三辞不见许，术乃送诣所司，不复以闻。
现代文：睢州刺史及所属的郡守都犯了死罪，朝廷把他们的奴婢百及资财全部赐予了辛术，辛术再三辞让没有允许，辛街就送给主管部门，不再过问。
English: Zhangzhou Zhishi and the county magistrate who belonged to it all committed capital crimes. The imperial court gave all of their slaves and wealth to Xinzhu. Xinzhu repeatedly refused to concede, and without permission, Xinjie was sent to the competent department, and would no longer be questioned.

古文：邢卲闻之，遗术书曰： 昔钟离意云，便以珠玑委地，足下今能如此，可谓异代一时。 及王僧辩破侯景，术招携安抚，城镇相继款附，前后二十余州。
现代文：邢邵听说此事，给辛街写信说： 过去钟离意说 孑子在盗泉忍受干渴，便把珠玉扔到地上，你现在能够如此，可以说是不同时代的同一行为。 王僧辩打败侯景，辛术招引安抚，城镇相继归附，前后二十余州。
English: Zou Shao heard about this and wrote a letter to Xin Jie, saying: In the past, Zhong Liang said that Zou Zi endured thirst in the stolen spring and threw the jewel to the ground, now you can do so, it can be said to be the same act in different eras. Wang Sangyan defeated Hou Jing, Xin Jie attracted and pacified, towns were annexed one after another, and more than twenty states were annexed.

古文：于是移镇广陵。
现代文：于是移军镇于广陵。
English: As a result, the troops were moved to Guangling.

古文：获传国玺送邺，文宣以玺告于太庙。
现代文：获得传国玉玺送到邺，文宣拿着玉玺告于太庙。
English: After receiving the Imperial Regalia, Wen Xuan took the Imperial Regalia to the Grand Temple.

古文：此玺即秦所制，方四寸，上纽交盘龙，其文曰： 受命于天，既寿永昌。 二汉相传，又传魏、晋。
现代文：此玺是秦所制，四寸见方，上纽盘龙交错，其文字是： 受命于天，既寿永昌。 两漠相传，又传至魏、晋。
English: This gong was made by Qin, four centimeters square, with a dragon interlaced at the top of the gong, and its words are: "Commanded by heaven, both life and death are eternal." The two mists have been passed down to Wei and Jin.

古文：怀帝败，没于刘聪。
现代文：怀帝失败，沦于刘聪。
English: Emperor Huai failed and fell to Liu Cong.

古文：聪败，没于石氏。
现代文：刘聪败，沦于石氏。
English: Liu Cong was defeated and fell to the Shi clan.

古文：石氏败，晋穆帝永和中，濮阳太守戴僧施得之，遣督护何融送于建邺。
现代文：石氏败，晋穆帝永和年间，濮阳太守戴僧施得到，派督护何融送到建邺。
English: After the defeat of the Shi clan, during the reign of Emperor Jinmu Yonghe, the governor of Shenyang, Dai Seng Shi, sent the governor and protector He Rong to Jianye.

古文：历宋、齐、梁，梁败，侯景得之。
现代文：历经宋、齐、梁，梁败，侯景得到。
English: After Song, Qi, Liang, Liang defeated, Houjing obtained.

古文：景败，侍中赵思贤以玺投景南兖州刺史郭元建，送于术，故术以进焉。
现代文：侯景失败，侍中趟思贤拿着玉玺投奔侯景的部下南兖州刺史郭元建，郭元建送给辛术，所以辛术用以进献。
English: After Houjing's failure, the middle-ranking attendant, Watan Shixian, rushed to Houjing's subordinate, Guo Yuanjian, in southern Luzhou, holding the jade scepter. Guo Yuanjian gave it to Xinjie, so Xinjie used it to make a donation.

古文：寻征为殿中尚书，领太常卿，仍与朝贤议定律令。
现代文：不久召为殿中尚书，兼太常卿，于是与朝廷贤士议定律令。
English: Soon after, he was called to the position of court scribe in the palace, as well as the position of grand secretary, so he agreed on a code of conduct with the court sages.

古文：迁吏部尚书，食南兖州梁郡干。
现代文：升任吏部尚书，享受南兖州梁郡的干禄。
English: He was promoted to the post of cadre and enjoyed the highest salary in Liang County, South Luzhou.

古文：迁邺以后，大选之职，知名者数四，互有得失，未能尽美。
现代文：迁到邺以后，负责吏部铨选的官员，知名的有四个人，各有得失，未能尽善尽美。
English: After moving to Handan, there are four well-known officials responsible for the selection of cadres, each with their own advantages and disadvantages, and they are not perfect.

古文：文襄帝少年高朗，所弊者疏；袁叔德沉密谨厚，所伤者细；杨愔风流辨给，取士失于浮华。
现代文：文襄帝年轻豁达开朗，缺点在于粗疏；袁叔德谨慎忠厚。缺点在于过细；杨情风流敏捷，取人失于浮华。
English: Emperor Wenxiang is young, open-minded and cheerful, but his shortcoming is that he is rough; Yuan Shude is cautious and loyal, but his shortcoming is that he is too delicate; Yang Jie is amiable and agile, but he is not flashy.

古文：唯术性尚贞明，取士以才器，循名责实，新旧参举，管库必擢，门阀不遗。
现代文：惟有辛术崇尚坚贞清白，以才能取士，力求名符其实，新老人员都加以举荐，管库的有才能一定提拔，门第高低贵贱都不遣漏。
English: Only those who are diligent in practicing the art, upholding the principles of honesty and integrity, and using their talents to gain promotion are recommended by both new and old employees. Those who have talent in the management of the library will be promoted, and both high-ranking and low-ranking employees will be promoted.

古文：考之前后铨衡，在术最为折衷，甚为当时所称举。
现代文：考察他们前后品业衡量，在辛术那裹最为公允适中，很为当时称赞推崇。
English: As long as the minor officials in charge of the warehouse have the ability, they will certainly be promoted; people with big surnames from the local ruling families will not be left out. Examining the situation of selecting talents in this period, Xinxu was the most fair and was highly praised at the time.

古文：天保末，文宣尝令术选百员官，参选者二三千人，术题目士子，人无谤讟，其所旌擢，后亦皆致通显。
现代文：天保末年，文宣曾令辛术选拔百名官员，参选的二三千人，辛术品评士子，人们没有怨恨毁谤，他所提拔的人，后来也都显贵。
English: At the end of the Tenpo era, Emperor Wenxuan ordered him to select one hundred officials, and as many as two or three thousand people participated in the election. The list of scholars he listed was not unsatisfactory; those he selected later held prominent positions.

古文：术清俭，寡嗜欲。
现代文：辛术品德清廉，少奢欲。
English: Sincerity, morality, integrity, less extravagance.

古文：勤于所职，未尝暂懈。
现代文：勤于所任职务，未曾有一点懈怠。
English: He was diligent in his duties and never slacked off.

古文：临军以威严，牧人有惠政。
现代文：指挥军队有威严，管理百姓施行仁政。
English: He commands the army with dignity, manages the people and carries out benevolent policies.

古文：少爱文史，晚更修学，虽在戎旅，手不释卷。
现代文：年轻时喜爱文史，晚年更加勤于学习。即使在行军途中，也手不释卷。
English: When he was young, he loved literature and history, and in his later years he was more diligent in his studies. Even when he was on the march, he couldn't put the book down.

古文：及定淮南，凡诸资物一毫无犯，唯大收典籍，多是宋、齐、梁时佳本，鸠集万余卷，□顾、陆之徒名画，二王已下法书数亦不少，俱不上王府，唯入私门。
现代文：平定淮南，所有的物资秋毫无犯，惟有大收典籍，多是宋、齐、梁时的嘉本，搜集万余卷，还有顾、陆等人名画，二王以下的法书也为数不少，全都不上交王府，收入自己的家。
English: When Huainan was pacified, there was nothing wrong with all the materials. However, there was a large collection of classic books, mostly from the Song, Qi, and Liang dynasties. More than 10,000 volumes were collected, as well as famous paintings by Gu, Lu, and others. There were also quite a few law books below the two kings. All of them were not submitted to the royal palace, but were collected by their own families.

古文：及还朝，颇以馈遗权要，物议以此少之。
现代文：还朝后，多用以馈赠权贵，人们的议论因此鄙视他。
English: Later, he was often used to give gifts to the powerful, and people despised him because of this.

古文：十年卒，年六十。
现代文：天保十年去世。享年六十岁。
English: Tenpo passed away at the age of 60.

古文：皇建二年，赠开府仪同三司、中书监、青州刺史。
现代文：皇建二年，追赠开府仪同三司、中书监、青蛆刺史。
English: In the second year of the Emperor's reign, he posthumously presented Kaifu Yi with the three departments, the Central Library Supervisor, and the history of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：子阁卿，尚书郎。
现代文：儿子盐型，任尚书郎。
English: His son, Shiogata, became Ren Sho Shuro.

古文：阁卿弟衡卿，有识学，开府参军事。
现代文：旦困弟蛮型，有学识，任开府参军事。
English: Dan, the poor brother, was rude and learned, and was allowed to join the military.

古文：隋大业初，卒于太常丞。
现代文：隋大业初年，在太常丞官位匕去世。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, he died in the official position of Tai Changzheng.

古文：元文遥，字德远，河南洛阳人，魏昭成皇帝六世孙也。
现代文：元文遥，字德远，河南洛阳人，魏昭成皇帝第六世孙。
English: Yuan Wenyao, surnamed Deyuan, a native of Luoyang, Henan Province, was the sixth-generation grandson of Emperor Wei Zhaocheng.

古文：五世祖常山王遵。
现代文：五世祖是常山王元遵。
English: The fifth-generation ancestor was King Tuoba of Changshan.

古文：父晞，有孝行，父卒，庐于墓侧而终。
现代文：父亲元晞，有孝敬父母的德行，父亲去世后，在墓侧结庐守丧而死。
English: His father, Geng Yao, had the virtue of filial piety towards his parents. After his father's death, he died in the side of the grave, holding a funeral.

古文：文遥贵，赠特进、开府仪同三司、中书监，谥曰孝。
现代文：文遥显贵后，追赠元晞特进、开府仪同三司、中书监，谧号孝。
English: After Wenyao became a high-ranking official, the imperial court posthumously awarded Yuan the title of Tejin, Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji, and Zhongshujuan, and his posthumous name was Xiao.

古文：文遥敏慧夙成，济阴王晖业每云： 此子王佐才也。 晖业尝大会宾客，有人将何逊集初入洛，诸贤皆赞赏之。
现代文：文遥聪明成熟早，济阴王晖业常说： 这个孩子有辅助君王的才能。 晖业曾大会宾客，有人带《何逊集》初到洛，众人都加以赞赏。
English: Wenyao was clever and matured early, and the king of Jilin, Zouye, often said: This child has the ability to assist the king. Zouye was once a great guest, someone brought "What a collection" to Luo for the first time, and everyone appreciated it.

古文：河间邢卲试命文遥，诵之几遍可得？文遥一览便诵，时年十余岁。
现代文：河间邢邵测试文遥，读几遍可以背诵，文遥看一遍便背诵，当时年仅十余岁。
English: When he was just over ten years old, he took a quiz to see if he could recite a sentence after reading it several times.

古文：济阴王曰： 我家千里驹，今定如何？ 邢云： 此殆古来未有。 
现代文：济阴王说： 我家的千里驹，现在到底怎么样? 邢邵说： 这恐怕自古没有。 
English: Zhi Yin Wang said: My family has traveled thousands of miles, how is it now? Zou Shao said: I'm afraid it hasn't been like this since ancient times.

古文：起家员外散骑常侍。
现代文：从家中被征召任员外散骑常侍。
English: They were called up from their homes as non-commissioned officers and rode as regular attendants.

古文：遭父丧，服阕，除太尉东合祭酒。
现代文：父亲去世，服丧完毕，任太尉束合祭酒。
English: After the death of his father and the completion of the funeral, he was appointed as the captain of the Sokai ritual wine.

古文：以天下方乱，遂解官侍养，隐于林虑山。
现代文：因天下正乱，就辞官侍养母亲，隐居在林虑山。
English: Due to the turmoil in the world, he resigned from his official position, went home to support his mother, and lived in seclusion in Linxi Mountain.

古文：武定中，文襄征为大将军府功曹。
现代文：武定年间，文襄召为大将军府功曹。
English: When Emperor Wu of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaozhing, was in residence, Emperor Gaozhen of the Eastern Song Dynasty conscripted him to serve as a major general.

古文：齐受禅，于登坛所受中书舍人，宣传文武号令。
现代文：齐接受挥让，在登坛时受中书舍人，宣布传达文武号令。
English: They all accepted the concession, and when they ascended the altar, they accepted the Chinese calligraphy, and announced that they would convey the command of literature and martial arts.

古文：杨遵彦每云： 堪解穰侯印者，必在斯人。 后忽被中旨幽执，竟不知所由。
现代文：杨遵彦常说： 能够解穣侯印的，一定是此人。 后来忽然被秘密逮捕幽禁，竟然不知是何缘由。
English: Yang Zunyan often said: "He must be the one who can solve the problem of the imperial seal." Later, he was suddenly secretly arrested and confined, and he did not even know the reason.

古文：如此积年。
现代文：如此多年。
English: So many years.

古文：文宣后自幸禁狱，执手愧谢，亲解所著金带及御服赐之，即日起为尚书祠部郎中。
现代文：文宣后来亲自到监狱，握其手道歉，亲自解下所佩金带和御服赐予他，即日起用为尚书祠部郎中。
English: Later, Wen Xuan went to the prison in person, shook his hand in apology, personally removed the gold belt and robe he was wearing, and gave it to him. From that day on, he was used as a junior priest of the Shoshu Shrine.

古文：孝昭摄政，除大丞相府功曹参军，典机密。
现代文：孝昭摄政，任大丞相府功曹参军，掌管机密。
English: Xiao Zhao became regent, and Gong Cao, who was appointed grand chancellor, joined the army and was in charge of secrets.

古文：及践祚，除中书侍郎，封永乐县伯，参军国大事。
现代文：孝昭即位，任中书侍郎，封为永乐县伯，参预军国大事。
English: When Takaaki ascended to the throne, he was appointed to the post of chushijiro (chamberlain), given the title of Yongle County magistrate, and participated in the pre-military national events.

古文：及帝大渐，与平秦王归彦、赵郡王叡等同受顾托，迎立武成。
现代文：皇上病危，舆垩台王垦童、赵郡王产壑等共同接受顾命嘱托，迎立武成。
English: The emperor was critically ill, and Wang Xiantong of Mianzhongtai and Wang Zhizhong of Zhao County jointly accepted the commission to attend to the emperor's will and welcome Wu Cheng.

古文：即位，任遇转隆，历给事黄门侍郎、散骑常侍、侍中、中书监。
现代文：武成即位之后，地位待遇更高，历任给事黄门侍郎、散骑常侍、侍中、中书监。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Wucheng, the status treatment was higher, and the successors were given the posts of Huangmen waiter, straggler, chamberlain, and middle school librarian.

古文：天统二年，诏特赐姓高氏，籍属宗正，子弟依例岁时入朝。
现代文：天统二年，诏令特别赐予高姓，户籍属于掌管王室亲族的官吏，子弟照例每年一定时间入朝。
English: In the second year of Emperor Tenjo's reign, the Imperial Rescript issued a special decree to bestow high family names, and the family register belonged to the officials in charge of the royal family. As usual, the children entered the imperial court at a certain time each year.

古文：再迁尚书左仆射，进封宁都郡公，侍中。
现代文：再次升任尚书左仆射，进封宁都郡公，侍中。
English: He was once again promoted to the position of Shoshu Zuoying, and became the lord of Ningdu County and a chamberlain.

古文：文遥历事三主，明达世务，每临轩，多命宣□，号令文武，声韵高朗，发吐无滞。
现代文：文遥前后事奉三位君主，通达世务，皇上每到前殿，多命他宣布命令，号令文武百官，声韵高亢清朗，发音流畅。
English: Wen Yao served three monarchs before and after, and was well-versed in worldly affairs. Whenever the emperor came to the front hall, he announced the order, the order of Wenwu hundred officials, the rhyme was high and clear, and the pronunciation was smooth.

古文：然探测上旨，时有委巷之言，故不为知音所重。
现代文：然而探测主上旨意，时常被民间议论，所以不被了解的人所敬重。
English: However, the expression of the will of the Son of God often comes from folk slang, so it is not valued by those who know him.

古文：齐因魏朝，宰县多用□滥，至于士流耻居百里。
现代文：齐因袭魏朝，县宰多用出身低下的人，致使士人耻于作县令。
English: Due to the Wei Dynasty, county governors mostly used people of low birth, causing officials to be ashamed of making county orders.

古文：文遥以县令为字人之切，遂请革选。
现代文：塞遥认为县令是抚治百姓的关键，就请求淘汰选拔。
English: Sayaka believed that the county ordinance was the key to governing the people, and requested elimination and selection.

古文：于是密令搜扬贵游子弟，发□用之。
现代文：于是秘密命令访求举拔无官的贵族子弟，诏令任用他们。
English: Therefore, he secretly ordered that the sons of nobles who did not have official positions should be promoted, and issued a decree to appoint them.

古文：然性和厚，与物无竞，故时论不在彦深之下。
现代文：还恐怕他们陈诉，把他们召集到神武门，让趟郡王高散宣布主上旨意，大声地念他们的姓名，深加抚慰晓谕。士人作县令，从此开始。
English: However, because his personality is mild and thick, and he is not competitive with others, he is not considered to be inferior to Zhao Yanshen.

古文：初文遥自洛迁邺，惟有地十顷，家贫，所资衣食而已。
现代文：舆趟彦深、和士开一起被信任重用，虽然不如彦深清贞守道，又不像士开贪淫乱政，处在季、孟之间。但他性情宽厚，与人无洛到邺，仅有土地十顷，家境贫穷，仅够供穿衣吃饭而已。
English: Together with Hikobayashi and Shikai, he was trusted and reused, although he was not as pure and virtuous as Hikobayashi, and unlike Shikai, he was corrupt and chaotic, and was between Ji and Meng. However, he had a generous disposition, and was kind to everyone. He only had ten hectares of land, and his family was poor, only enough to provide clothing and food.

古文：魏之将季，宗姓被侮，有人冒相侵夺，文遥即以与之。
现代文：魏将到末世，宗族被侮辱，有人冒然侵夺，文遥就把土地给了他。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty was in decline, and the imperial family was despised. When someone competed with him for land, he gave it to this family.

古文：及贵，此人尚在，乃将家逃窜。
现代文：显贵后，这个人还在，就带领全家人逃跑。
English: The man who usurped his land was still there when he rose to high office, and he fled in terror with his whole family.

古文：文遥大惊，追加慰抚，还以与之，彼人愧而不受，彼此俱让，遂为闲田。
现代文：文遥大惊，追赶上加以抚慰，还把土地给他，那人惭愧而不接受，彼此相让，于是成为闲田。
English: Wen Yao was shocked. He chased and comforted him, and gave him the land. The man was ashamed and did not accept it. They gave in to each other, and it became idle land.

古文：至后主嗣位，赵郡王叡、娄定远等谋出和士开，文遥亦参其议。
现代文：后主继位，赵郡王高叙、娄定远等谋划将和开赶出朝廷，文遥也参加了他们的商议。
English: After the emperor's succession, Zhao County's Wang Gaoshu and Lu Dingyuan plotted to drive He Kai out of the imperial court, and Wenyao also took part in their deliberations.

古文：叡见杀，文遥由是出为西兖州刺史。
现代文：高教被杀，文遥由此出京任西兖州刺史。
English: Gao Jiao was killed, and as a result, Wen Yao went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Xishuanzhou.

古文：诣士开别，士开曰： 处得言地，使元家儿作令仆，深愧朝廷。 既言而悔，乃执手慰勉之。
现代文：到和士开那裹告别，士开说： 处在言官的职位，让元家小儿作令仆，深愧朝廷。 说完之后便后悔，就握着手安慰他。
English: On bidding farewell to Shikai, Shikai said, "Being in the post of spokesman, I am deeply ashamed of the imperial court for letting the younger son of the Yuan family serve as a servant. After saying this, I regretted it and held his hand to comfort him.

古文：犹虑文遥自疑，用其子行恭为尚书郎，以慰其心。
现代文：还顾虑文遥有疑心，任用他的儿子壬达为尚书郎，以宽其心。
English: He was also concerned that Wen Yao was suspicious, so he appointed his son, Rinda, as Shang Shuro, to ease his mind.

古文：士开死，自东徐州刺史征入朝，竟不用，卒。
现代文：题死，从塞鱼出刺史召入朝，最终没有任用，去世。
English: Titled dead, summoned to the imperial court from Saeki out of Sashimi, ultimately not appointed, died.

古文：行恭美姿貌，有父风，兼俊才，位中书舍人，待诏文林馆。
现代文：元行恭姿容英俊，有父辈的家风，并有卓越的才能，任中书舍人，在文林馆待诏。
English: Yuan Xing is handsome, has the family style of his fathers, and has outstanding talent. He is a middle-aged scholar, waiting for the imperial edict at the Wenlin Pavilion.

古文：齐亡，阳休之等十八人同入关，稍迁司勋下大夫。
现代文：齐灭亡，阳休之等十八人一起入腿，升任司勋下大夫。
English: After the death of Qi, Yang Xiu and other eighteen people entered the leg together, and were promoted to the position of junior doctor.

古文：隋开皇中，位尚书郎，坐事徙瓜州而卒。
现代文：隋闻皇年间，任尚书郎，因事连坐流放瓜州而去世。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty, Ren Shang Shuro died as a result of being exiled to Guazhou.

古文：行恭少颇骄恣，文遥令与范阳卢思道交游。
现代文：述年少而骄横放纵，塞遥让他与莲厘卢思道交往。
English: Said to be young and arrogant and indulgent, Sayaka allowed him to socialize with Lian Lilu.

古文：文遥尝谓思道云： 小儿比日微有所知，是大弟之力，然白掷剧饮，甚得师风。 思道答云： 郎辞情俊迈，自是克荷堂构，而白掷剧饮，亦天性所得。 行恭弟行如，亦聪慧早成，武平末，任著作佐郎。
现代文：文遥曾经对思道说： 小儿近略有学问，这是大弟的功劳，然而白天赌博，过量饮酒，也是从老师学的。 思道回答说： 令郎言辞优异，自然能够继承先祖的遭业，而白天赌博，遇量饮酒，也是天性所成。 行恭弟行如，也聪明早成，武平末年，任著作佐郎。
English: Wenyao once said to Shidao: Children nearly have a little knowledge, which is the merit of the elder brother, but gambling during the day, excessive drinking, is also learned from the teacher. Shidao replied: My son's speech is excellent, and he can naturally inherit the business of his ancestors, and gambling during the day, and drinking during the day, is also made by nature.

古文：赵彦深，自云南阳宛人，汉太傅□之后。
现代文：趟彦深，自称是直荡壅题人，濩太傅鱼遣的后代。
English: Wabi Hikoshin, who claims to be a direct descendant of the founder of the Tai Fu fishery.

古文：高祖父难，为清河太守，有惠政，遂家焉，清河后改为平原，故为平原人也。
现代文：高祖父赵凿，为!翅太守，有好的政绩，于是家居此地，渣回后改为里愿，所以为垩愿人。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Zhao Jizhi, was the Winged Emperor and had a good political record, so he chose to live here. After returning home, he changed his surname to Liyang, so he is a Liyang person.

古文：本名隐，避齐庙讳，改以字行。
现代文：本名碴，因避齐的庙讳，改为字称。
English: His real name,, was changed to a nickname to avoid the stigma of the temple.

古文：父奉伯，仕魏位中书舍人、行洛阳令。
现代文：父亲奉伯，在魏任中书舍人，兼代洛阳令。
English: His father, Fong Bo, was a scholar in the Wei Dynasty and also the ruler of Luoyang.

古文：彦深贵，赠司空。
现代文：彦深显贵后，追蹭为司空。
English: After Hikobayashi's rise to prominence, the Imperial Court bestowed the title of Siku on him.

古文：彦深幼孤贫，事母甚孝。
现代文：彦深年幼丧父，家中贫困，侍奉母亲非常孝顺。
English: Hikobuka lost his father at a young age, and his family was poor.

古文：年十岁，曾候司徒崔光。
现代文：十岁时，曾拜访司徒崔光。
English: He served his mother very dutifully.

古文：光谓宾客曰： 古人观眸子以知人，此人当必远至。 性聪敏，善书计，安闲乐道，不杂交游，为雅论所归服。
现代文：崔光对宾客说： 古人看眸子可以了解人，这个人必定前程远大。 天性聪明，擅长文字和筹算，安闲乐道，不随便与人交往，为雅士推崇信服。
English: Cui Guang said to the guests: The ancients could understand people by looking at their eyes, and this person must have a great future. He is naturally intelligent, good at writing and calculating, easy-going, does not casually interact with people, and is respected and trusted by aristocrats.

古文：昧爽，□自扫门外，不使人见，率以为常。
现代文：黎明就自扫门外，不让人看到，习以为常。
English: At dawn, they sweep themselves out of the door, not letting anyone see them, as is customary.

古文：初为尚书令司马子如贱客，供写书。
现代文：起初是尚书令司马子如地位低下的门客。负责书写。
English: At first, he was the lowest-ranking guest of Shang Shuling Sima Zi Rong, specializing in copying documents.

古文：子如善其无误，欲将入观省舍。
现代文：子如喜欢他无错，想要推举他入观省舍。
English: Sima Ziru really appreciated that he copied everything without any mistakes and wanted to take him to visit Shangshu.

古文：隐靴无□，衣帽穿弊，子如给之。
现代文：赵隐靴中无毡，衣帽破旧，子如供给他。
English: Zhao Yin's shoes were worn out, his clothes and hat were worn out, and his children were like props to him.

古文：用为书令史，月余，补正令史。
现代文：用他作书令史，月余，补为正令史。
English: After more than a month, his son appointed him as a book historian, and he was also appointed as an official historian.

古文：神武在晋阳，索二史，子如举彦深。
现代文：神武在晋阳，要找两个史官，子如举荐彦深。
English: Shenwu Emperor Gao Huan in Jinyang, to select and send two historical talents, Sima Ziru recommended Zhao Yanshen.

古文：后拜子如开府参军，超拜水部郎。
现代文：后来授子如开府参军，越级授水部郎。
English: Later, Gao Huan appointed his son Ru to join the army in Kaifu, and his son Ru made an unprecedented appointment to the post of Minister of Water Resources.

古文：及文襄为尚书令摄选，沙汰诸曹郎，隐以地寒被出为沧州别驾，辞不行。
现代文：到文襄为尚书令兼任吏部尚书，拣选诸曹郎官，赵隐因地位低贱被外任沧州别驾，辞绝没有到任。
English: When he arrived in Wenxiang, he was appointed as the secretary and also served as the secretary of the personnel department, and selected all the officials. Zhao Yin was appointed as the governor of Cangzhou due to his lowly status, and his resignation never arrived.

古文：子如言于神武，征补大丞相功曹参军，专掌机密，文翰多出其手，称为敏给。
现代文：子如把逭报告神武，征补为大丞相功曹参军，专门负责机密，公文信札由他起草书写，十分得体敏捷。
English: If his son reports to him, he will be promoted to major general and minister of war, he will be responsible for secrets, and he will draft and write official letters, which is very dignified and agile.

古文：神武曾与对坐，遣造军令，以手扪其额曰： 若天假卿年，必大有所至。 每谓司徒孙腾曰； 彦深小心恭慎，旷古绝伦。 
现代文：神武曾与他相对而坐，让他拟定军令，用手摸着他的额头说： 如果上天让你长寿，必定大有前途。 常对司徒孙腾说： 彦深小心恭慎，自古没有。 
English: Shenwu once sat opposite him, asked him to draw up military orders, and touched his forehead with his hand and said: "If the heavens let you live long, you will surely have a great future.

古文：及神武崩，秘丧事，文襄虑河南有变，仍自巡抚，乃委彦深后事，转大行台都官郎中。
现代文：文宣逝世，对丧事保密，文襄帝担心南有变故，就亲自巡视安抚，把后事委托彦深，改任大行台都官郎中。
English: Gao Huan passed away, and his funeral was kept secret for the time being. Emperor Gaocheng of the Manchurian Empire was worried that there would be turmoil south of the Yellow River, so he personally went to inspect and pacify, and then entrusted the matters in the rear to Hikobuka, appointing him as a subordinate of the governor of Dangdai.

古文：临发，握手泣曰： 以母弟相托，幸得此心。 既而内外宁静，彦深之力。
现代文：文襄临行，握着他的手流泪说： 把母亲弟弟托付给你，有幸得到你的诚心。 不久内外安宁，是凭藉彦深之力。
English: When Wen Xiang was about to leave, she held his hand and shed tears, saying, "I entrusted my mother's younger brother to you, and I was fortunate to receive your sincerity.

古文：及还发丧，深加褒美，乃披郡县簿为选封安国县伯。
现代文：回来发丧，对彦遝大加赞扬，打开郡县簿为他选封安国县伯。
English: When he came back from the funeral, he praised Hikone greatly and opened the county book to make him the first to be awarded the title of Ankoku County magistrate.

古文：从征颍川，时引水灌城，城雉将没，西魏将王思政犹欲死战。
现代文：跟随文襄帝出征颉川，当时引水灌城，城雉就要淹没，酉魏将领王墨苏还想死战。
English: He followed Emperor Wenxiang on his expedition to the Li River. At that time, the water was diverted to flood the city, and the city gates were about to be flooded. The Wei general Wang Muxu still wanted to fight to the death.

古文：文襄令彦深单身入城告喻，即日降之，便手牵思政出城。
现代文：文襄帝令彦锂只身入城晓谕敌军，当日投降，便手拉着思政出城。
English: Emperor Wenxiang ordered Yan Lili to enter the city alone to tell the enemy army to surrender on the same day, and he left the city with Sisi in hand.

古文：先是，文襄谓彦深曰： 吾昨夜梦猎，遇一□豕，吾射尽获之，独一大豕不可得。
现代文：在此之前，文襄对彦深说： 我昨夜梦到打猎，遇到一群猪，我全都射获，仅有一只大猪没有得到。
English: Prior to this, Wen Xiang said to Hikohisa: I dreamed of hunting last night. I encountered a group of pigs. I shot all of them, but only one big pig did not get shot.

古文：卿言当为吾取，须臾获豕而进。 至是，文襄笑曰： 梦验矣。 即解思政佩刀与彦深曰： 使卿常获此利。 
现代文：你说当为我获取，一会儿抓到大猪进献。 至此，文襄笑着说： 梦应验了。 就解下思政的佩刀给彦深说： 使你常猎得此类大猪。 
English: You said you should get it for me, and soon I caught a big pig for a gift. At this point, Wen Xiang smiled and said, "The dream has come true." He unsheathed his political saber and said to Hikobayashi, "So that you can often hunt such a big pig."

古文：文宣嗣位，仍典机密，进爵为侯。
现代文：塞宣继位，仍让彦蓝掌管机密，进升为侯爵。
English: Emperor Gaoyang of Emperor Wenxuan, still involved in military secrets, was promoted to the peerage as a marquis.

古文：天保初，累迁秘书监，以为忠谨，每郊庙，必令兼太仆卿，执御陪乘。
现代文：丢堡初年，多次升迁任秘书监，因为他忠诚谨慎，每次祭祀天地、先祖，一定让他兼太仆卿，驾车陪乘。
English: In the first year of losing the castle, he was promoted several times to the post of secretary-supervisor, because he was loyal and prudent. Every time he sacrificed heaven and earth and ancestors, he was always accompanied by his servant and chauffeur.

古文：转大司农。
现代文：改任大司农。
English: He was also transferred to the post of Chief Farmer.

古文：帝或巡幸，即辅赞太子，知后事。
现代文：皇上有时巡游，就辅助太子，掌管后方之事。
English: When the Emperor is on a tour, he assists the Crown Prince and takes charge of matters behind the scenes.

古文：出为东南道行台尚书、徐州刺史，为政尚恩信，为吏人所怀，多所降下。
现代文：出京任东南道行台尚书、徐州刺史，治理崇尚施恩德守信用，为官吏百姓所怀念，归顺的人很多。
English: He went to Beijing to serve as the governor of the southeastern provinces of Xingtai and Xuzhou, advocating benevolence and keeping trust. He is fondly remembered by officials and the people, and there are many people who have surrendered.

古文：所营军处，士庶追思，号赵行台顿。
现代文：所驻军的地方，士人百姓思念，称为赵行台顿。
English: The place where the troops were stationed, which the people miss, is called Zhao Xingdaidong.

古文：文宣玺书劳勉，征为侍中，仍掌机密。
现代文：文宣用加玺印的书信勉励慰劳，召为侍中，仍然掌管机密。
English: Emperor Wenxuan personally wrote an imperial edict to comfort and encourage him, and invited him to Beijing to serve as an attendant, still in charge of the imperial secrets.

古文：河清元年，进爵安乐公，累迁尚书左仆射、齐州大中正、监国史，迁尚书令，为特进，封宜阳王。
现代文：河清元年，进升安乐公的爵位，几次升任为尚书左仆射、齐州大中正、监国史，改任尚书令，为特进，封宜阳王。
English: In the first year of Heqing, he was promoted to the peerage of Anle Gong, and was promoted several times to Shangshu Zuopuzha, Chizhou University Vice President, Supervisor of National History, and was reappointed to Shangshu Ling, as a special promotion, and was given the title of Yiyang Wang.

古文：武平二年拜司空，为祖珽所间，出为西兖州刺史。
现代文：武平二年授司空，被祖埏所离间，出京任西兖州刺史。
English: In the second year of Wuping, he was awarded the title of Sikyong, but was ousted by Zhu Xi, and went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Xishuanzhou.

古文：四年，征为司空，转司徒。
现代文：武平四年，召为司空，又改任司徒。
English: In the fourth year of Wu Ping, he was once again conscripted into the imperial court to serve as a steward, and then transferred to a steward.

古文：丁母忧，寻起为本官。
现代文：母亲去世，离官守孝，不久又起任原来的官职。
English: After his mother's death, he resigned from his post due to his grief, and was soon appointed to his former post by the imperial court.

古文：七年六月暴疾薨，时年七十。
现代文：武平七年六月突然生病去世，享年七十岁。
English: In June of the seventh year of Wu Ping's reign, he suddenly fell ill and died at the age of 70.

古文：彦深历事累朝，常参机近，温柔谨慎，喜怒不形于色。
现代文：彦深前后事奉几个朝代，时常参与皇帝身边的机要之事，性情温柔谨慎，喜怒不形于色。
English: He has lived through several dynasties, several emperors, and has often participated in the secret grand politics of the imperial court. He is gentle and cautious, and his emotions are always the same.

古文：自皇建以还，礼遇稍重，每有引见，或升御榻，常呼官号而不名也。
现代文：从皇建以来，礼遇逐渐加重，每有召见，或入宫进见，经常呼他官号而不叫姓名。
English: Since the founding of Emperor Xiaozhao, the court's courtesy to him has increased. Whenever the emperor summoned him, he sometimes let him sit on his throne, and often called him by his official title instead of his name.

古文：凡诸选举，先令铨定，提□人物，皆行业为先，轻薄之徒，弗之齿也。
现代文：凡是各项选拔举荐，先让他审定，提拔奖励，都以德行功业放在首位，轻薄之徒，不屑一顾。
English: In all the selection and recommendation, he should be approved first, and the promotion and reward should be put on the first place with virtue and hard work. He is a frivolous person and should be disregarded.

古文：孝昭既执朝权，□臣密多劝进，彦深独不致言。
现代文：孝昭掌握朝廷大权，群臣大多秘密劝他当皇帝，彦深却不劝进。
English: Xiao Zhao controlled the power of the imperial court. Most of the courtiers secretly advised him to become emperor, but Hikobayashi did not follow their advice.

古文：孝昭尝谓王晞云： 若言□心皆谓天下有归，何不见彦深有语。 晞以告，彦深不获已，陈请，其为时重如此。
现代文：孝昭曾经对王晞说： 如果说众人之心都认为天下有所归附，为什么不见彦深说话。 王晞将这件事告诉彦深，彦深不得已，去劝陈，他在当时地位重要到如此地步。
English: Xiao Zhao once said to Wang Yao: If everyone's heart thinks that the world owes something to you, why don't you go and talk to Hikobayashi? Wang Yao told this to Hikobayashi, and Hikobayashi had no choice but to persuade Chen, his position was so important at that time.

古文：常逊言恭己，未尝以骄矜待物，所以或出或处，去而复还。
现代文：平时言语谦虚行为恭顺，不曾骄傲待人，所以有时显达有时隐退，离官后还能复职。
English: He spoke humbly and did not treat others with arrogance, so he could either leave or get along with everyone for a long time.

古文：母傅氏，雅有操识。
现代文：母亲傅氏，素有节操见识。
English: His mother, Ms. Fu, was very disciplined and insightful.

古文：彦深三岁，傅便孀居，家人欲以改适，自誓以死。
现代文：彦深三岁，傅氏便守寡，家人想要她改嫁，以死发誓不从。
English: When Hikoshin was three years old, Fu lost her husband and became a widow. Her family wanted her to remarry, but she swore on her life that she would not do so.

古文：彦深五岁，傅谓之曰： 家贫儿小，何以能济？ 彦深泣而言曰： 若天哀矜，儿大当仰报。 傅感其意，对之流涕。
现代文：彦深五岁，傅氏对他说： 家境贫困，孩儿年幼，靠什么生活? 彦深流着泪说： 如果上天哀怜，孩儿长大成人当报答抚养之恩。 傅氏很感动，相对哭泣。
English: When Hikohisa was five years old, Mr. Fu said to him, "My family is poor, my children are young, what can I live on?" With tears streaming down his face, Mr. Hikohisa said, "If it is God's will, my children should grow up to be adults in return for the grace of being raised by me." Mr. Fu was very moved and began to cry.

古文：及彦深拜太常卿，还，不脱朝服，先入见母，跪陈幼小孤露，蒙训得至于此。
现代文：彦深授太常卿后，回家，不脱朝服，先进去拜见母亲，跪在地上陈说幼小孤单，承蒙母训得以至此。
English: When he returned home after being appointed as the Grand Duke, he did not take off his imperial robes. First, he bowed to his mother and son, knelt down and stated that he lost his father when he was very young, and was only brought up by his mother.

古文：母子相泣久之，然后改服。
现代文：母子相对而泣许久，然后换服。
English: Mother and son cried for a long time before changing into civilian clothes.

古文：后为宜阳国太妃。
现代文：傅氏后来成为宜阳国太妃。
English: Fu later became the crown princess of Yiyang.

古文：彦深有七子，仲将知名。
现代文：彦深有七个儿子，仲将知名。
English: Hikobuka had seven sons, all of whom became famous generals.

古文：仲将，沉敏有父风。
现代文：仲将，沉静聪明有父亲的遣风。
English: Lieutenant general, quiet and clever, with his father's charisma.

古文：温良恭俭，虽对妻子，亦未尝怠慢，终日俨然。
现代文：温良恭俭，即使对于妻子儿女也未曾怠慢，整日庄重严肃。
English: Gentle, respectful and frugal, he never neglected his wife and children, and was solemn and serious all day long.

古文：学涉□书，善草隶。
现代文：博览群书，擅长草书隶书。
English: He reads a wide range of books and is good at cursive handwriting.

古文：虽与弟书，书字楷正，云草不可不解，若施之于人，即似相轻易，若与当家中卑幼，又恐其疑所在宜尔，是以必须隶笔。
现代文：即使给弟弟写信，写字也是端正工整，说草书不能不懂，若写给别人，就好像轻慢对方，如果写给本家中卑幼之人，又恐怕他们怀疑所应当作的事情，因此必须用隶书。
English: Even if you write a letter to your brother, the writing is correct and neat. It is said that cursive cannot be misunderstood. If you write to others, it is as if you despise the other person. If you write to the lowly in your family, I am afraid that they will doubt what should be done, so you must use cursive.

古文：彦深乞转以万年县子授之。
现代文：彦深请求改授他万年县子的爵位。
English: Hikobuka requested that he be given the title of Count for life.

古文：位给事黄门侍郎、散骑常侍。
现代文：任给事黄门侍郎、散骑常侍。
English: He was appointed to the posts of Huangmen waiter and horseback riding attendant.

古文：隋开皇中，位吏部郎，终于安州刺史
现代文：隋开皇年间，任吏部郎，在安州刺史的官职上去世。
English: During the reign of the Sui Dynasty, he was appointed as a bureaucrat and died in the official position of Anzhou chief historian.

古文：齐朝宰相，善始令终唯彦深一人。
现代文：齐朝的宰相，善始善终的仅有彦深一个人。
English: The prime minister of the Qi Dynasty, the only one who had a good beginning and a good end was Hikoshin.

古文：然讽朝廷以子叔坚为中书侍郎，颇招物议。
现代文：然而用委婉的语言暗示朝廷让他的儿子叔坚任中书侍郎，颇招致人们的议论。
English: However, he used euphemistic language to imply that the imperial court had appointed his son, Shu Jian, as the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, which caused a lot of discussion.

古文：时冯子琮子慈明、祖珽子君信并相继居中书，故时语云： 冯、祖及赵，秽我凤池。 然叔坚身材最劣。
现代文：当时冯子琮的儿子慈明、祖埏的儿子君信相继在中书省做官，所以当时有这样的话： 冯、祖和赵，脏了我的凤池。 以叔坚才能最差。
English: At that time, Feng Zixuan's son Ciming and Zu Xi's son Junxin successively served as officials in the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, so there was such a saying at that time: Feng, Zu and Zhao, dirty my phoenix pond.

