古文：◎舆服二
现代文：舆服二
English: Public dress two

古文：○皇帝冕服后妃冠服皇太子亲王以下冠服
现代文：皇帝冕服后妃冠服皇太子亲王以下冠服
English: Emperors wear crowns, queens wear crowns, crown princes wear crowns and so on.

古文：皇帝冕服：洪武元年，学士陶安请制五冕。
现代文：皇帝的冕服：洪武元年，学士陶安请求制定五种冕服。
English: The emperor's coronation robes: In the first year of Hongwu, the scholar Tao An requested the formulation of five kinds of coronation robes.

古文：太祖曰： 此礼太繁。
现代文：太祖说： 这种礼太繁琐。
English: The great-grandfather said, "This kind of ceremony is too complicated.

古文：祭天地、宗庙，服衮冕。
现代文：祭祀天地、宗庙，穿戴衮冕服。
English: They offer sacrifices to heaven, earth, and the ancestral temple, and wear ceremonial robes.

古文：社稷等祀，服通天冠，绛纱袍。
现代文：社稷等祭祀，戴通天帽，绛色的纱袍。
English: social rites and other rituals, wearing a top hat and a scarlet robe.

古文：馀不用。 
现代文：其余的不用。 
English: The rest is useless.

古文：三年，更定正旦、冬至、圣节并服衮冕，祭社稷、先农、册拜，亦如之。
现代文：三年，改变制定正旦、冬至、皇帝生日，都穿衮冕服祭祀社稷神、先农、册封拜授，也如同这样。
English: Three years later, the regulations were changed so that on the Mid-Autumn Festival, the Winter Solstice, and the emperor's birthday, people would all wear crowned robes to worship the gods, ancestors, and emperors, and so on.

古文：十六年，定衮冕之制。
现代文：十六年，制定衮冕服的仪制。
English: Sixteen years later, the ceremonial system of coronation robes was established.

古文：冕，前圆后方，玄表纁里。
现代文：冕，前面圆形后面方形，表面玄色里面浅绛色。
English: Corona, front round, back square, black on the outside, light brown on the inside.

古文：前后各十二旒，旒五采，玉十二，珠五，采缫十有二就，就相去一寸。
现代文：前后各悬十二条玉串，每条玉串有五彩珠玉十二颗，五彩丝绳十二匝，每匝间相离一寸。
English: Twelve strings of beads hang before and behind, each string has twelve multicolored beads and twelve strings of multicolored silk, with a distance of one inch between each string.

古文：红丝组为缨，黈纩充耳，玉簪导。
现代文：红丝组带作为系冠的带子，黄绵小球挂在冠两旁，下垂至耳，玉簪作导。
English: A band of red silk is used as a band to fasten the crown, yellow cotton balls hang on both sides of the crown, hanging down to the ears, and a jade bracelet acts as a guide.

古文：衮，玄衣黄裳，十二章，日、月、星辰、山、龙、华虫六章织于衣，宗彝、藻、火、粉米、黼、黻六章绣于裳。
现代文：衮，是玄上衣黄下裳，十二图纹，日、月、星辰、山、龙、雉六种织在衣上，绣虎或雌及、藻、火、粉米、黼、黻六种图纹绣在下裳。
English: The embroidery on the dress is the same as the embroidery on the dress of the bride, the dress of the bride, the dress of the bride, the dress of the bride, the dress of the bride and the dress of the bride.

古文：白罗大带，红里。
现代文：白色绫罗大带，红色的裹子。
English: A large band of white dill, a red wrapper.

古文：蔽膝随裳色，绣龙、火、山文。
现代文：蔽膝随同下裳的颜色，锈有龙、火、山的图纹。
English: The knee-length dress follows the color of the lower garment, with patterns of dragons, fire, and mountains.

古文：玉革带，玉佩。
现代文：嵌玉制革带，玉佩。
English: Inlaid jade leather belt, jade brooch.

古文：大绶六采，赤、黄、黑、白、缥、绿，小绶三，色同大绶。
现代文：大，的丝带有六种颜色，赤、黄、黑、白、青白、绿，小丝带三条，颜色如同大的丝带。
English: A large ribbon with six colors, red, yellow, black, white, blue-white, and green, and three small ribbons with the same colors as the large ribbon.

古文：间施三玉环。
现代文：间杂安放三个玉环。
English: Three jade rings are interspersed.

古文：白罗中单，黻领，青缘襈。
现代文：白色的绫罗裹衣，黑色与青色相问的衣领，青色的边缘饰。
English: White embroidered wrap, black and blue interlaced collar, blue edging.

古文：黄袜黄舄，金饰。
现代文：黄袜、黄鞋，用金装饰。
English: Yellow socks, yellow shoes, decorated with gold.

古文：二十六年，更定衮冕十二章。
现代文：二十六年，更改制定，衮冕十二种图纹。
English: In twenty-six years, the changes were made, and twelve patterns were crowned.

古文：冕版广一尺二寸，长二尺四寸。
现代文：冕帽版宽一尺二寸，长二尺四寸。
English: The crown plate is 1 foot 2 inches wide and 2 feet 4 inches long.

古文：冠上有覆，玄表朱里，馀如旧制。
现代文：冠帽上有覆盖物，玄色表面红色裹层，其余的如同旧有制度。
English: There is a covering on the crown cap, the black surface is covered with a red layer, and the rest is the same as the old system.

古文：圭长一尺二寸。
现代文：圭玉长一尺二寸。
English: Gui Yuping is 1 foot 2 inches tall.

古文：衮，玄衣纁裳，十二章如旧制。
现代文：衮衣，是玄色上衣浅绛色下裳，十二种图纹如同旧时的制度。
English: The dress code is a black top and light blue bottoms, with 12 patterns, the same as the old system.

古文：中单以素纱为之。
现代文：里衣用素纱制作。
English: The lining is made of plain yarn.

古文：红罗蔽膝，上广一尺，下广二尺，长三尺，织火、龙、山三章。
现代文：红色绫罗作蔽膝，上面宽一尺，下面宽二尺，长三尺，织上火、龙、山三种图纹。
English: A red brocade is made to cover the knees, the top is one foot wide, the bottom is two feet wide, and the length is three feet. Three patterns of fire, dragon, and mountain are woven.

古文：革带佩玉，长三尺三寸。
现代文：皮制束衣带佩玉，长三尺三寸。
English: A leather tunic with a beaded belt, three feet three inches long.

古文：大带素表朱里，两边用缘，上以朱锦，下以绿锦。
现代文：大带白色表面红色里层，两边用绿饰，上面用红色锦，下面用绿色锦。
English: Large white surface with red inner layer, green decoration on both sides, red brocade on top, green brocade on the bottom.

古文：大绶，六采织成，纯玄质五百首。
现代文：大的绶带，六种色彩黄、白、赤、玄、缧、绿编织而成，纯黑质地五百首。
English: A large ribbon, woven in six colors (yellow, white, red, black, navy and green), with 500 pieces of pure black fabric.

古文：小绶三，色同大绶。
现代文：小绶带三条，颜色如同大绶带。
English: Three small umbilical cords, the same color as the umbilical cord.

古文：间织三玉环。
现代文：间隔织上三玉环。
English: Interspersed with the weaving of the three jade rings.

古文：朱袜，赤舄。
现代文：红色袜，赤色鞋。
English: Red socks, red shoes.

古文：永乐三年定，冕冠以皂纱为之，上覆曰綖，桐板为质，衣之以绮，玄表朱里，前圆后方。
现代文：永乐三年制定，冕冠用皂纱制做，上面覆盖的叫艇，桐木板为底子，用彩色丝织品包裹，玄色表面红色里层，前面圆后面方。
English: Yongle formulated three years ago, the crown is made of soap yarn, the top is covered with yakitori, the base is a paulownia board, wrapped in colored silk fabric, the black surface has a red inner layer, and the front is behind the circle.

古文：以玉衡维冠，玉簪贯纽，纽与冠武并系缨处，皆饰以金。
现代文：用玉衡维系冠，玉簪贯穿冠纽，纽与冠武足的前体下面叫武，绳茁冠帽下也叫武。
English: The crown is held in place with a yamahira, and the yamahira runs through the crown nozzle. The lower part of the precursor of the nozzle and the crown nozzle is called the wu, and the lower part of the rope nozzle is also called the wu.

古文：綖以左右垂黈纩充耳，系以玄紞，承以白玉瑱朱纮。
现代文：并系上冠带处，都用金装饰。艇用左右垂挂黄色小绵球装饰耳旁，用黄玉制作。用系塞耳玉的丝带系着，用白玉填朱红色礼帽带承接。
English: The crown and sash are both decorated with gold. The boat is decorated with small yellow cotton balls hanging from the left and right of the boat, made of topaz. It is tied with a silk ribbon containing ear beads, and the red and scarlet hat band is filled with white beads.

古文：馀如旧制。
现代文：余下的如同旧有形制。
English: The rest is like the old physical system.

古文：玉圭长一尺二寸，剡其上，刻山四，以象四镇之山，盖周镇圭之制，异于大圭不瑑者也。
现代文：玉圭长一尺二寸，上面削去，刻山四座，来象征四镇的山，大概是周代镇圭的仪制，不同于不雕叙的大圭。
English: It is one foot and two inches long, with the top shaved off, and four mountains carved to symbolize the mountains of the four towns. It is probably the ceremonial system of Zhou Dynasty Zhengui, which is different from the non-carved Daguai.

古文：以黄绮约其下，别以囊韬之，金龙文。
现代文：用黄色丝织品缚住它的下面，另外用袋装盛它，金龙纹饰。
English: Tie its underside with yellow silk fabric, and put it in a bag, decorated with a golden dragon.

古文：衮服十有二章。
现代文：衮服十二种图纹。
English: There are twelve patterns in this dress.

古文：玄衣八章，日、月、龙在肩，星辰、山在背，火、华虫、宗彝在袖，皆织成本色领褾襈裾。纁裳四章，织藻、粉米、黼、黻各二，前三幅，后四幅，前后不相属，共腰，有辟积，本色綼裼。裳侧有纯谓之綼，裳下有纯谓之裼，纯者缘也。中单以素纱为之。
现代文：下裳侧边有镶边称作纬，下裳下边有镶边称作裼，纯即是镶边。里衣用素纱做成。
English: The side of the petticoat with a border is called the weft, and the side of the petticoat with a border is called the yoke. Pure is the border. The lining is made of suede.

古文：青领褾襈裾，领织黻文十三。
现代文：青色领子袖端绿饰前后襟，衣领织有黑白斧形花纹十三种。
English: The blue collar, sleeve ends and front and back collars are decorated with green, and the collar is woven with thirteen kinds of black and white axe-shaped patterns.

古文：蔽膝随裳色，四章，织藻、粉米、黼黻各二。
现代文：蔽膝随同下裳颜色，四种图纹，织以藻、粉米、黼、黻各两个图案。
English: The knee-length dress is the same color as the lower dress, with four patterns, woven with two patterns each of algae, powdered rice, cocoon and cocoon.

古文：本色缘，有紃，施于缝中。
现代文：本色边缘，有丝线编织成的图形细带，放置在衣缝中。
English: Genuine green trim, with round trim, placed in the seams.

古文：玉钩二。
现代文：玉钩二块。
English: Two pieces of jade hook.

古文：玉佩二，各用玉珩一、瑀一、琚二、冲牙一、璜二；瑀下垂玉花一、玉滴二；瑑饰云龙文描金。
现代文：玉佩二块、各自用玉珩一块、璃一块、琚二块、冲牙一块、璜二块；璃下垂挂玉花一朵、玉滴二个；球上装饰云龙图纹嵌上金线。
English: Two pieces of jade, each with a piece of jade, one piece of glaze, two pieces of enamel, one punch, two pieces of enamel; one jade flower and two jade drops hanging under the glaze; the ball is decorated with a cloud dragon pattern embedded with gold thread.

古文：自珩而下系组五，贯以玉珠。
现代文：从珩以下系组带五条，用玉珠贯穿。
English: From the middle to the bottom, there are five bands, which are pierced with jade beads.

古文：行则冲牙、二滴与璜相触有声。
现代文：行走时就冲牙、二玉滴与璜相碰触发出声音。
English: When walking, the impact of the punch, the two-ball drop and the beak triggers a sound.

古文：金钩二。
现代文：金钩两个。
English: Two gold hooks.

古文：有二小绶，六采纁质。大绶，六采纁质，三小绶，色同大绶。
现代文：有两条小绶带，六种色彩黄、白、赤、玄、缥、绿浅绛色质地，大的绶带六种色彩黄、白、赤、玄、缥、绿浅绛色质地，三条小绶带颜色如同大绶带。
English: There are two small umbilical cords, six colors yellow, white, red, black, dark blue, green light brown texture, large umbilical cords six colors yellow, white, red, dark blue, dark blue, green light brown texture, three small umbilical cords color like large umbilical cords.

古文：间施三玉环，龙文，皆织成。
现代文：问杂安放三个玉环，龙形图纹，都编织而成。
English: There are three jade rings, dragon-shaped patterns, all woven from yarn.

古文：袜舄皆赤色，舄用黑絇纯，以黄饰舄首。
现代文：袜鞋都是赤色，鞋采用黑绚镶边，用黄色修饰鞋的前部。
English: The socks are red, the shoes are edged in black, and the front of the shoes is decorated with yellow.

古文：嘉靖八年，谕阁臣张璁： 衮冕有革带，今何不用？ 
现代文：嘉靖八年，训谕阁臣张璁： 衮冕服有革制带，如今为何不用？ 
English: In the eighth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, he instructed the cabinet minister Zhang Jun: The coronation robe has a leather strap, why not use it now?

古文：璁对曰： 按陈祥道《礼书》，古革带、大带，皆谓之鞶。
现代文：张璁回答说： 按照陈祥道的《礼书》，古代的革带、大带，都称为击。
English: Zhang Rong replied: According to Chen Xiangdao's "Book of Etiquette," the ancient leather belt and large belt are both called "shooting."

古文：革带以纛佩韨，然后加以大带，而笏搢于二带之间。
现代文：革带用以系佩玉和祓，然后加上大带，而朝板插在两带之间。
English: Leather straps are used to tie the peyote and harae, and then add a large belt, while the morning board is inserted between the two belts.

古文：夫革带前系韨，后系绶，左右系佩，自古冕弁恒用之。
现代文：革带前边系上祓，后边系上绶带，左右系上玉佩，自古以来冕弁常用它。
English: The front edge of the leather strap is attached to the upper scabbard, the back edge is attached to the upper scabbard, and the left and right sides are attached to the upper scabbard. It has been commonly used for crown valves since ancient times.

古文：今惟不用革带，以至前后佩服皆无所系，遂附属裳要之间，失古制矣。 
现代文：如今惟有不使用革带，以至于前后玉佩服饰都没有拴系的地方，于是附属于裳腰之间，失去古时礼制了。 
English: Nowadays, however, leather straps are not used, so much so that there is no place for the corset on the front and back of the dress, so it is attached between the waist of the dress, losing the ancient etiquette.

古文：帝曰： 冕服祀天地，享祖宗，若阙革带，非齐明盛服之意。
现代文：皇帝说： 冕服祭祀天地，供奉祖宗，如果缺少革带，便不符合粢盛洁净，服饰整齐的意图。
English: The emperor said, "Crowned robes are worn to offer sacrifices to heaven and earth, and to venerate ancestors. If they lack leather straps, they do not meet the intention of keeping the robes clean and neat.

古文：及观《会典》载蔽膝用罗，上织火、山、龙三章，并大带缘用锦，皆与今所服不合。
现代文：至阅览《会典》记载衣前蔽膝采用绫罗，上面编织火、山、龙三种图饰，并且大带用锦绿边饰，都与今天所穿的不相合。
English: According to the reading of the "Code of the Association," the front knee cover is made of satin, the top is woven with fire, mountain and dragon three kinds of picture decorations, and the large band is decorated with green brocade, all of which are not compatible with today's wear.

古文：卿可并革带系蔽膝、佩、绶之式，详考绘图以进。 
现代文：您可以合并革带系以蔽膝、玉佩、绶带的样式，详细考察绘图进呈。 
English: You can combine the leather belt system with the style of knee, jade, and ribbon, and examine the drawing in detail.

古文：又云： 衣裳分上下服，而今衣恒掩裳。
现代文：又说： 衣裳分上下服饰，而如今上衣常常掩住下裳。
English: He also said: "Clothes are divided into upper and lower garments, and nowadays the upper garment often conceals the lower garment.

古文：裳制如帷，而今两幅。
现代文：下裳制作如同帷幕，而如今是两幅。
English: The next costume was made like a curtain, and now there are two.

古文：朕意衣但当与裳要下齐，而露裳之六章，何如？ 
现代文：朕的意思是上衣只应与下裳腰下端对齐，而露出下裳的六种图纹，怎么样？ 
English: What I mean is that the blouse should only be aligned with the lower end of the waist of the lower dress, and the six patterns of the lower dress should be exposed. How about that?

古文：已，又谕璁以变更祖制为疑。璁对曰： 臣考礼制，衣不掩裳，与圣意允合。
现代文：随后又训谕张璁因改变祖宗之制表示怀疑张璁回答说： 臣考查礼制，上衣不遮掩下裳，与圣上意图相符合。
English: Subsequently, he ordered Zhang Ye to express his doubts about changing the ancestral system, to which Zhang Ye replied: "Minister, examine the ceremonial system. The upper garment does not cover the lower garment, which is in line with the holy intention.

古文：夫衣六章，裳六章，义各有取，衣自不容掩裳。
现代文：上衣六种图饰，下裳六种图饰，意义各有所取，上衣自应不容许盖住下裳。
English: There are six designs for the upper garment and six designs for the lower garment, each with its own meaning. The upper garment should not be allowed to cover the lower garment.

古文：《大明集礼》及《会典》与古制不异。
现代文：《大明集礼》以及《会典》与古代的制度没有不同。
English: "Daming Collection" and "Canon" are no different from the ancient system.

古文：今衣八章，裳四章，故衣常掩裳，然于典籍无所准。
现代文：如今上衣八种图纹，下裳四种图纹，因而上衣常常掩盖下裳，可是对于典籍没有依据的标准。
English: Nowadays, there are eight patterns for jackets and four patterns for petticoats, so jackets often cover petticoats, but there is no basis for the standard in the classics.

古文：内阁所藏图注，盖因官司织造，循习讹谬。
现代文：内阁所收藏的图注，大致都由主管官吏编织制造，沿袭谬误。
English: The drawings and notes in the Cabinet Office's collection are generally made by the officials in charge, perpetuating the fallacy.

古文：今订正之，乃复祖制，非有变更。 
现代文：现在订正它，纔是恢复祖宗制度，并不是有什么变更。 
English: To revise it now is to restore the ancestral system, not to change anything.

古文：帝意乃决。
现代文：皇帝的主意于是定下来。
English: The emperor decided to come down.

古文：因复谕璁曰： 衣有六章，古以绘，今当以织。
现代文：因而又训谕张璁说： 上衣有六种图纹，古代绘制而成，如今应当编织。
English: Therefore, the precept of Zhang Xuan said: The coat has six patterns, which were drawn in ancient times and should be woven now.

古文：朕命织染局考国初冕服，日月各径五寸，当从之。
现代文：朕命令织染局查考开国初期的礼冠服饰，日、月图纹各直径五寸，应当依从。
English: I order the Weaving and Dyeing Bureau to investigate the ceremonial crown costumes in the early days of the founding of the People's Republic of China. The sun and moon patterns are five inches in diameter each, and should be followed.

古文：裳六章，古用绣，亦当从之。
现代文：下裳六种图纹，古代使用绣，也应当依从。
English: There are six patterns for undergarments, and embroidery was used in ancient times, which should also be followed.

古文：古色用玄黄，取象天地。
现代文：古代颜色用玄黄，取象于天地。
English: The ancient color is yellow, taken from heaven and earth.

古文：今裳用纁，于义无取，当从古。
现代文：如今下裳用浅绛色，于意义没有可取之处，应当依从古制。
English: Nowadays, the lower part of the dress is light blue, which has no merit in terms of meaning, and should follow the old system.

古文：革带即束带，后当用玉，以佩绶系之于下。
现代文：革带就是束带，后应当使用玉，把佩绶系在下面。
English: The leather strap is the cuff, after which you should use a bead and tie the webbing underneath.

古文：蔽膝随裳色，其绣上龙下火，可不用山。
现代文：蔽膝随同下裳的颜色，它的绣图上面是龙下面是火，可以不采用山。
English: The knee-length skirt follows the color of the petticoat, and its embroidery above is a dragon and below is fire. The mountain can be omitted.

古文：卿与内阁诸臣同考之。 
现代文：你与内阁各大臣一同考察。 
English: You've been looking at it with cabinet ministers.

古文：于是杨一清等详议： 衮冕之服，自黄、虞以来，玄衣黄裳，为十二章。
现代文：于是杨一清等详细讨论： 衮衣礼冠等服饰，自从黄帝、虞帝以来，玄色上衣黄色下裳，制作十二种图纹。
English: So Yang Yixing and others discussed in detail: Since the Yellow Emperor and Yu Emperor, twelve patterns have been made for costumes such as embroidered clothes and ceremonial crowns, and the black upper garment and the yellow lower garment.

古文：日、月、星辰、山、龙、华虫，其序自上而下，为衣之六章；宗彝、藻、火、粉米、黼、黻，其序自下而上，为裳之六章。
现代文：日、月、星辰、山、龙、雉，它们的顺序从上而下，作为上衣的六种图纹；虎或雌、藻、火、粉米、黼、黻，它们的顺序从下而上，作为下裳的六种图纹。
English: The sun, the moon, the stars, the mountains, the dragon and the dragonfly, their order from top to bottom, are the six patterns of the upper garment; the tiger or the female, the algae, the fire, the glutinous rice, the dragonfly and the dragonfly, their order from bottom to top, are the six patterns of the lower garment.

古文：自周以后浸，变其制，或八章，或九章，已戾于古矣。
现代文：从周以后渐渐改变它的形制，有的八种图纹，有的九种图纹，已经违背了古制。
English: After Zhou, it gradually changed its shape, and some eight patterns, some nine patterns, have violated the ancient system.

古文：我太祖皇帝复定为十二章之制，司造之官仍习舛讹，非制作之初意。
现代文：我太祖皇帝又定成十二种图纹的体制，负责制造的官员仍然沿袭错乱做法，并非规定制度的最初意图。
English: My great-grandfather, the emperor, also set up a system of twelve patterns, and the officials responsible for making them still follow the disordered practice, which is not the original intention of the system.

古文：伏乞圣断不疑。 
现代文：恳求圣上明断不要怀疑。 
English: beseech the saint not to doubt.

古文：帝乃令择吉更正其制。
现代文：皇帝于是下令选择吉日更正服饰的体制。
English: The emperor then ordered the system of selecting auspicious days to correct clothing.

古文：冠以圆匡乌纱冒之，旒缀七采玉珠十二，青纩充耳，缀玉珠二，馀如旧制。
现代文：礼冠用圆匡乌纱覆盖，前后悬挂七彩玉珠十二串，青色绵球挂在两旁，下垂至耳，下缀玉珠两颗，其余的如同以前样式。
English: The ceremonial crown is covered with round cinnamon, with twelve strings of seven-colored jade beads hanging in front and behind, blue cotton balls hanging on both sides, hanging down to the ear, two jade beads below, and the rest are the same as before.

古文：玄衣黄裳，衣裳各六章。
现代文：玄色上衣黄色下裳，上衣下裳各六种图纹。
English: Black upper garment, yellow lower garment, six patterns for each of the upper garment and the lower garment.

古文：洪武间旧制，日月径五寸，裳前后连属如帷，六章用绣。
现代文：洪武年问旧样式，日、月图案直径五寸，下裳前后连缀如同帷幕，六种图纹用刺绣。
English: Hongwu asked for the old style, the sun and moon patterns are five inches in diameter, the front and back of the petticoat are connected like a curtain, and six patterns are used for embroidery.

古文：蔽膝随裳色，罗为之，上绣龙一，下绣火三，系于革带，大带素表朱里，上缘以朱，下以绿。
现代文：蔽膝随同下裳颜色，用绫罗制作，上面绣一条龙，下面锈三团火，系于革带。大带白色表面红色襄层，上面绿边用红色，下面绿边用绿色。
English: Knee-length skirt in the same color as the lower dress, made of satin, embroidered with a dragon on the top, rusted with three fires on the bottom, tied to a leather belt. Large white surface with red lining, red on the upper green edge, green on the lower green edge.

古文：革带前用玉，其后无玉，以佩绶系而掩之。
现代文：革带前边用玉，后面无玉，用佩印丝巾拴系而遮住。
English: The front of the leather strap is beaded, the back is beadless, covered with a printed silk scarf.

古文：中单及圭，俱如永乐间制。
现代文：裹衣连同圭玉，都如同永乐年问形制。
English: The swaddling clothes, together with the beads, are like a perpetual calendar.

古文：朱袜，赤舄，黄条缘玄缨结。
现代文：朱色袜，赤红鞋，黄丝带绿饰玄色缨结。
English: Vermilion socks, crimson shoes, yellow ribbon with green trim and black knot.

古文：皇帝通天冠服：洪武元年定，郊庙、省牲，皇太子诸王冠婚、醮戒，则服通天冠、绛纱袍。
现代文：皇帝的通天冠服。洪武元年制定，天子祭祀天地与祖先，审察祭祀用的牲畜，皇太子各王冠礼婚礼、醮祭斋戒就戴通天冠、穿绛色纱袍。
English: It was established in the first year of Hongwu. The emperor would offer sacrifices to heaven, earth, and ancestors, and inspect the livestock used for the sacrifices. The crown prince would wear a crown and a gauze-colored robe for each coronation, wedding, and feast.

古文：冠加金博山，附蝉十二，首施珠翠，黑介帻，组缨，玉簪导。
现代文：礼冠加上金博山形，附金蝉十二个于冠前，头上施加珠翠，黑色裹发巾，编织的缨带，用玉簪作导。
English: The ceremonial crown is topped with the Jinbo Yamagata, with twelve golden cicadas in front of the crown, with pearls on the head, a black hair wrap, a braided ribbon, and a jade bracelet as a guide.

古文：绛纱袍，深衣制。
现代文：绛色纱袍，上衣下裳相连的衣服。
English: A navy gauze robe, with a matching dress underneath.

古文：白纱内单，皂领褾襈裾。
现代文：白纱内衣，皂色领口袖端衣边缘饰。
English: White gauze undergarment, soap-colored neckline, cuffs, hem.

古文：绛纱蔽膝，白假带，方心曲领。
现代文：绛纱蔽膝，白色大带，方心曲领。
English: Satin knee-length dress, large white belt, square neckline.

古文：白袜，赤舄。
现代文：白色袜，赤色鞋。
English: White socks, red shoes.

古文：其革带、佩绶，与衮服同。
现代文：它的革带、佩物绶带，与衮服相同。
English: Its leather straps and garter belts are the same as those of formal wear.

古文：皇帝皮弁服：朔望视朝、降诏、降香、进表、四夷朝贡、外官朝觐、策士传胪皆服之。
现代文：皇帝皮弁服。朔日、望日临朝听政、下发诏命、入庙焚香、进献章表、四方蛮夷入朝进贡、地方官员朝拜皇帝、策封士子殿试揭晓唱名，都穿戴皮弁服。
English: Emperor's leather trousers. The New Year's Day, the day of the Emperor's coronation, the day of listening to the government, the issuance of the imperial edict, the entry into the temple to burn incense, the entry into the medal table, the four sides of the barbarian invasion of the tribute, the local officials to worship the emperor, the sealing of the palace to try to reveal and sing the name, all wear leather trousers.

古文：嘉靖以后，祭太岁山川诸神亦服之。
现代文：嘉靖以后，祭祀太岁山川众神，也都穿戴皮弁服。
English: After the Jiajing, the gods of the mountains and rivers, who were worshipped, also wore furs.

古文：其制自洪武二十六年定。
现代文：这种形制从洪武二十六年制定。
English: This system has been in place since the 26th year of Hongwu.

古文：皮弁用乌纱冒之，前后各十二缝，每缝缀五采玉十二以为饰，玉簪导，红组缨。
现代文：皮弁用乌纱覆盖，前后各十二缝，每缝连缀五彩玉十二片作为装饰，玉簪引导，红色的编丝缨带。
English: The flap is covered with black gauze, with twelve seams on the front and back, and each seam is decorated with twelve pieces of multicolored jade, a jade guide, and a red silk ribbon.

古文：其服绛纱衣，蔽膝随衣色。
现代文：衣服为绛纱衣，蔽膝随同衣服的颜色。
English: The dress is a satin gauze dress, and the knees are covered with the same color as the dress.

古文：白玉佩革带。
现代文：白玉佩革带。
English: Shiratama wearing a leather belt.

古文：玉钩苾，绯白大带。
现代文：玉钩叉角矧乒白大带。
English: A jade hook, a forked horn, a table and a white ribbon.

古文：白袜，黑舄。
现代文：白色袜，黑色鞋。
English: White socks, black shoes.

古文：永乐三年定，皮弁如旧制，惟缝及冠武并贯簪系缨处，皆饰以金玉。
现代文：永乐三年规定，皮弁如同旧时样式，只有缝以及冠上结带和穿簪系冠缨的地方，都用金玉装饰。
English: According to the three-year regulations of Yongle, the flap is the same as the old-fashioned style, only the seams and the places where the crown is knotted and the braided crown are decorated with gold beads.

古文：圭长如冕服之圭，有脊，并双植文。
现代文：玉圭长如同礼冠服饰的圭玉，有脊背和双雕刻的花纹。
English: The crown jewels are long, like the crown jewels of ceremonial dress, and have a ridged back and double-carved patterns.

古文：绛纱袍，本色领褾襈裾。
现代文：绛色纱袍，本色衣领袖端衣边缘饰。
English: Navy gauze robe, authentic leader's dress with ruffled edges.

古文：红裳，但不织章数。
现代文：红色下裳，但不编织图纹。
English: Red petticoats, but no braid.

古文：中单，红领褾襈裾。
现代文：服饰裹衣，红衣领袖端绿饰衣襟。
English: The leader, dressed in red, wears a green collar.

古文：馀俱如冕服内制。
现代文：其余的都如冕服制度。
English: The rest is like the coronation system.

古文：皇帝武弁服：明初亲征遣将服之。
现代文：皇帝武弁服。明代初年，皇帝亲自征讨派遣将领时穿。
English: Emperor Wu Benfu. In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the emperor personally solicited the dispatch of generals to wear it.

古文：嘉靖八年谕阁臣张璁云： 《会典》纪亲征、类祃之祭，皆具武弁服。
现代文：嘉靖八年，告谕阁臣张璁说： 《会典》记载皇帝亲自征伐、类祭与褐祭，都穿戴武弁服。
English: In the eighth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, he told the cabinet minister Zhang Jun that: "The Code" recorded that the emperor himself wore a military uniform for the conquest, the class festival and the brown festival.

古文：不可不备。 
现代文：不能不准备。 
English: You have to be prepared.

古文：璁对：《周礼》有韦弁，谓以韎韦为弁，又以为衣裳。
现代文：张璁回答说： 《周礼》有韦弁，认为用赤黄色熟皮制成皮弁，又用它做成衣裳。
English: Zhang Ye replied: "Zhou Li" has a Wei valve, and it is believed that the valve is made of red and yellow mature leather, and it is also used to make clothes.

古文：国朝视古损益，有皮弁之制。
现代文：本朝比照古代形制减损增加，有皮弁的礼制。
English: Compared with the ancient form system, the present system has an increase in derogation, and the courtesy system with a leather flap has increased.

古文：今武弁当如皮弁，但皮弁以黑纱冒之，武弁当以绛纱冒之。 
现代文：如今武弁服应当如同皮弁服，可是皮弁用黑纱覆盖，武弁服应当用绛色纱覆盖。 
English: Today, the military uniform should be the same as the leather uniform, but the leather uniform should be covered with black yarn, and the military uniform should be covered with navy yarn.

古文：随具图以进。
现代文：随同准备好图形进呈。
English: The graphics are ready to be presented.

古文：帝报曰： 览图有韠形，但无系处。
现代文：皇帝批覆说： 看图有皮制蔽膝的图形，但役有拴系之处。
English: The emperor reprimanded and said, "Looking at the picture, there is a figure made of leather that covers the knees, but there is a place where there is a skull and crossbones.

古文：冠制古象上尖，今皮弁则圆。
现代文：冠的样式古代图像上面尖，现今皮弁则是圆的。
English: The style of the crown is pointed on the ancient image, but now the skin valve is round.

古文：朕惟上锐取其轻利，当如古制。
现代文：朕想上面尖锐取它的轻捷便利，应当如同古时样式。
English: I want it to be sharp, light and convenient, just like the old-fashioned style.

古文：又衣裳韠舄皆赤色，何谓？
现代文：又衣裳衣前皮蔽腺、鞋都是赤色，是什么意思呢？
English: What does it mean that the clothes, the foreskin, and the shoes are all red?

古文：且佩绶俱无，于祭用之，可乎？ 
现代文：况且佩饰和绶带都没有，在祭祀时穿它，可以吗？ 
English: Moreover, there is no adornment or ribbon. Is it okay to wear it during the ritual?

古文：璁对： 自古服冕弁俱用革带，以前系韨，后系绶。
现代文：张璁回答说： 从古服冕弁都使用革带，在前面系上蔽膝的带子，后面系上绶带。
English: Zhang Rong replied, "From ancient times, leather belts have been used for crowns, with a knee-length strap at the front and an umbilical cord at the back.

古文：韦弁之韠，正系于革带耳。
现代文：韦弁的皮制蔽膝，正系在革带上。
English: A knee-length leather loincloth with crotch flaps is attached to a leather strap.

古文：武事尚威烈，故色纯用赤。 
现代文：战争之事崇尚威武，因此颜色纯粹使用赤红。 
English: War is a martial art, so the color red is used.

古文：帝复报璁： 冠服、衣裳、韠舄俱如古制，增革带、佩绶及圭。 
现代文：皇帝又回复张璁： 礼冠服饰、衣裳、蔽膝、木底鞋都如同古代样式，增加革带，佩带绶带以及圭玉。 
English: The emperor also replied to Zhang Ye: The ceremonial crowns, robes, knee breeches, and wooden shoes are all the same as the ancient style, with the addition of leather belts, wearing ribbons, and gems.

古文：乃定制，弁上锐，色用赤，上十二缝，中缀五采玉，落落如星状。
现代文：于是定下制度，皮弁上面尖，颜色用赤红，上面十二缝，中间连缀五彩玉，落落如同星辰形状。
English: As a result, a system was established: the top of the flap is pointed, the color is red-red, the top has twelve seams, the middle is decorated with multicolored beads, and the drop is like a star shape.

古文：韎衣、韎裳、韎韐，俱赤色。
现代文：熟皮上衣、熟皮下裳、熟皮蔽膝，都是赤红色。
English: Mature leather jacket, mature leather petticoat, mature leather knee cover, are all red-red.

古文：佩、绶、革带，如常制。
现代文：佩带、绶带、革带，如同往常样式。
English: Worn with belt, sash, leather belt, as usual style.

古文：佩绶及韎韐，俱上系于革带。
现代文：佩带绶带以及熟皮蔽膝，都在上面拴系在革带上。
English: The cummerbund and the knee-length leather skirt are both attached to the leather belt at the top.

古文：舄如裳色。
现代文：木底鞋如同下裳颜色。
English: The wooden-soled shoes are the same colour as her underwear.

古文：玉圭视镇圭差小，剡上方下，有篆文曰 讨罪安民 。
现代文：玉圭比镇圭稍小，上部削尖下方，刻有篆文是 讨伐罪孽安定庶民 。
English: It is slightly smaller than Zhengui, and the upper part is sharpened and the lower part is engraved with the inscription, "Combat evil and stabilize the common people."

古文：皇帝常服：洪武三年定，乌纱折角向上巾，盘领窄袖袍，束带间用金、琥珀、透犀。
现代文：皇帝平常的服饰。洪武三年制定，乌纱折角向上巾，圆盘形衣领，窄袖袍，束带闲杂用金、琥珀、透犀。
English: The emperor's usual attire, designed by Hongwu in the third year of his reign, consisted of a shawl made of black yarn with folded corners, a disc-shaped collar, a narrow-sleeved robe, and a sash with gold, amber, and rhinestones.

古文：永乐三年更定，冠以乌纱冒之，折角向上，其后名翼善冠。
现代文：永乐三年重新制定，冠用乌纱覆盖，折角向上，此后名叫翼善冠。
English: Yongle re-enacted it three years later. The crown was covered with black gauze, with the corners turned upwards. It was thereafter called the Ying Zhen Crown.

古文：袍黄，盘领，窄袖，前后及两肩各织金盘龙一。
现代文：黄袍，圆盘形衣领，窄小衣袖，前后以及两肩各织上金色盘龙一条。
English: A yellow robe, a disc-shaped collar, narrow little sleeves, and a golden dragon woven on the front, back, and both shoulders.

古文：带用玉，靴以皮为之。
现代文：衣带用玉，靴用皮做成。
English: The belt is made of jade and the shoes are made of leather.

古文：先是，洪武二十四年，帝微行至神乐观，见有结网巾者。
现代文：在此以前，洪武二十四年，皇帝微服巡行到神乐观，看见有结织网巾的人。
English: Before that, in the twenty-fourth year of Hongwu, the emperor's parade was so optimistic that he saw a man knitting a net.

古文：翼日，命取网巾，颁示十三布政使司，人无贵贱，皆裹网巾，于是天子亦常服网巾。
现代文：第二天，命令取来纲巾，颁布告示十三布政使司，人人不分贵贱，都裹上网巾，于是天子也常常裹上网巾。
English: The next day, the order was issued to take the napkin, and the notice of the 13th cloth envoy was issued. Everyone, no matter how high or low, was wrapped in a napkin, so the emperor often wrapped a napkin.

古文：又《会典》载皇太孙冠礼有云： 掌冠跪加网巾 ，而皇帝、皇太子冠服，俱阙而不载。
现代文：又因《会典》记载皇太孙冠礼上说， 掌冠跪加网巾 ，而皇帝、皇太子礼冠服饰，都阙失不记载。
English: Also, because the "Canon" records the crown prince's crown ceremony, saying that the crown prince kneels and kneels with a net, but the emperor and crown prince's crown dress are not recorded.

古文：嘉靖七年，更定燕弁服。
现代文：嘉靖七年改定平常居处穿的燕弁服。
English: In the seventh year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the Yanfen clothing worn in the usual residence was revised.

古文：初，帝以燕居冠服，尚沿习俗，谕张璁考古帝王燕居法服之制。
现代文：当初，皇帝因为闲居礼冠服饰，仍然沿用习俗，便训谕张璁考查古代帝王退朝闲居法定服饰的样式。
English: At first, the emperor ordered Zhang Ye to examine the styles of the ancient emperors' idle formal wear because the idle ceremonial crown dress still followed the custom.

古文：璁乃采《礼书》 玄端深衣 之文，图注以进。
现代文：张璁于是采用《礼书》 玄端深衣 的记载，绘图注释进呈。
English: Zhang Ye then used the records of "The Book of Etiquette" by Xuan Duan and Shen Yi, and provided a drawing commentary.

古文：帝为参定其制，谕璁详议。
现代文：皇帝为此参考制定它的样式，训谕张璁详细讨论。
English: For this purpose, the emperor made reference to its style, and the edict was discussed in detail by Zhang Ye.

古文：璁言： 古者冕服之外，玄端深衣，其用最广。
现代文：张璁说： 古代冕服以外，玄色礼服上衣下裳相连之衣，它的用途最广。
English: Zhang Jun said: Apart from the ancient coronation robe, the most widely used robe is the dark-colored ceremonial robe with the upper and lower robes connected.

古文：玄端自天子达于士，国家之命服也。深衣自天子达于庶人，圣贤之法服也。
现代文：玄色礼服从天子到士人，是国家按等级所制定的服饰，上衣下裳相连缀的深衣从天子到百姓，是圣明贤德之人的法定服饰。
English: The dark-colored ceremonial dress obeys the Son of Heaven to the scholar, and is the dress established by the state according to the level. The dark-colored dress with the upper and lower garments connected from the Son of Heaven to the common people is the legal dress of the saint, sage and virtuous person.

古文：今以玄端加文饰，不易旧制，深衣易黄色，不离中衣，诚得帝王损益时中之道。 
现代文：现在用玄色礼服加以图纹修饰。不改变旧时样式，上农下裳连缀的深衣改成黄色，不抛弃内衣，实在深得帝王增加减损合时的道理。 
English: Now, the dark-colored gowns are decorated with patterns. Without changing the old style, the dark clothes of the upper and lower peasant costumes are changed to yellow, and the underwear is not abandoned. The reason why the emperor increased the deduction of the closing time is really profound.

古文：帝因谕礼部曰： 古玄端上下通用，今非古人比，虽燕居，宜辨等威。 
现代文：皇帝于是训谕礼部说： 古代玄色礼服上下通用，现在不能与古人相比，即使平常闲居，也应分辨等级威严。 
English: The emperor then issued an edict to the Ministry of Ceremonies, saying, "The ancient dark-colored ceremonial dress, which was used for both men and women, cannot be compared to that of the ancients. Even if you are usually idle, you should distinguish the level of dignity.

古文：因酌古制，更名曰 燕弁 ，寓深宫独处、以燕安为戒之意。
现代文：于是斟酌古代样式，改名为 燕弁 ，寄寓深宫独处的深意，用安宁太平警戒之意。
English: Therefore, taking into consideration the ancient style, the name was changed to Yan Ben, meaning to live alone in the deep palace, with the meaning of peace and vigilance.

古文：其制，冠匡如皮弁之制，冒以乌纱，分十有二瓣，各以金线压之，前饰五采玉云各一，后列四山，朱条为组缨，双玉簪。
现代文：那时的形制，冠帽框式如皮弁的仪制，用乌纱覆盖，分为十二瓣，各自用金线压住，前面装饰五彩玉云各一朵，后边排列四座山的图形，红色丝带作为系冠的丝带，双玉簪。
English: The shape at that time, the crown cap frame like a leather valve, covered with black yarn, divided into twelve petals, each held down with gold thread, decorated with one multicolored jade cloud on the front, four mountains on the back, red ribbon as the ribbon of the crown, double jade bracelet.

古文：服如古玄端之制，色玄，边缘以青，两肩绣日月，前盘圆龙一，后盘方龙二，边加龙文八十一，领与两祛共龙文五九。
现代文：服饰如同古代玄色礼服的样式，颜色玄色，边缘用青色，两肩锈上日月，前面盘圆龙一条，后面盘方龙两条，边上加上龙形图纹八十一处，衣领与两个袖口共有龙形图纹五十九处。
English: The dress resembled the style of an ancient black dress, the collar was black, the edges were blue, the shoulders were rusted, there was a round dragon on the front, two square dragons on the back, 81 dragon patterns were added to the edges, and the collar and two cuffs had a total of 59 dragon patterns.

古文：衽同前后齐，共龙文四九。
现代文：衣襟同前后相齐，共有龙形图纹四十九处。
English: There are 49 dragon-shaped patterns on the front and back of the dress.

古文：衬用深衣之制，色黄。
现代文：衬里用上衣下裳连缀的样式，颜色是黄色。
English: The lining is in the form of an interlocking pattern with the top and bottom of the dress, the color is yellow.

古文：袂圆祛方，下齐负绳及踝十二幅。
现代文：衣袖圆袖口方形，下衣底边背缝上下相当直到脚踝十二幅。
English: The sleeves are round with a square cuff, and the back seam of the bottom edge of the underwear is up and down until the ankles are twelve wide.

古文：素带，朱里青表，绿缘边，腰围饰以玉龙九。
现代文：白色带，红色衬里青色表层，绿色绿边，腰部饰以九条玉龙。
English: White band, red lining, blue outer layer, green edging, waist adorned with nine jade dragons.

古文：玄履，朱缘红缨黄结。
现代文：玄鞋，红边缘红丝带黄结。
English: Black shoes, red edge, red ribbon, yellow knot.

古文：白袜。
现代文：白色袜。
English: White socks.

古文：皇后冠服：洪武三年定，受册、谒庙、朝会，服礼服。
现代文：皇后的礼冠服饰。洪武三年制定，接受册封、拜谒祖庙、朝见天子，穿戴礼服。
English: The queen's ceremonial crown dress. Hongwu three years to formulate, accept the title, pay homage to the ancestral temple, see the emperor in the morning, wear a dress.

古文：其冠圆匡，冒以翡翠，上饰九龙四凤，大花十二树，小花数如之。
现代文：皇后的礼冠，圆框用翡翠覆盖，上面装饰九龙四凤，十二株大花，小花数目相同。
English: The queen's ceremonial crown, the round frame covered with jade, decorated with the four phoenixes of the nine dragons, twelve large flowers, and the same number of small flowers.

古文：两博鬓十二钿。
现代文：两鬓宽大，十二金钿。
English: A pair of wide hoops, twelve gold hoops.

古文：祎衣，深青绘翟，赤质，五色十二等。
现代文：绘有野鹦图纹的皇后祭服称裨衣，深青色绘有野鸡图纹装饰，红色质地，五色十二等。
English: The queen's ceremonial robe with wild parrot pattern is called a yakitori, dark blue with pheasant pattern decoration, red texture, five colors twelve, etc.

古文：素纱中单，黻领，朱罗縠逯襈裾。
现代文：白纱里衣，青黑相间的衣领，朱红色绫罗绉纹纱衣领袖端衣边缘饰。
English: White gauze lining, blue and black collar, vermilion satin satin gauze leader edge trim.

古文：蔽膝随衣色，以緅为领缘，用翟为章三等。
现代文：蔽膝随同上衣的颜色，用青赤色作为领口的绿饰，用野鸡图纹装饰作为图纹三等。
English: The knee-length skirt follows the color of the blouse, the blue-red color is used as a green trim for the neckline, and the pheasant pattern is used as the third pattern.

古文：大带随衣色，朱里纰其外，上以朱锦，下以绿锦，纽约用青组。
现代文：大带随同上衣颜色，朱红里镶饰缘边，上面用朱红锦缎，下面用绿色锦，纽结用青丝带。
English: The large belt follows the color of the blouse, the vermilion inlay border, the top with vermilion brocade, the bottom with green brocade, the knot with blue ribbon.

古文：玉革带。
现代文：玉制革带。
English: The leather strap is made of jade.

古文：青袜、青舄，以金饰。
现代文：青色袜子、青色的木底鞋，用金修饰。
English: Blue socks, blue wooden shoes, decorated with gold.

古文：永乐三年定制，其冠饰翠龙九，金凤四，中一龙衔大珠一，上有翠盖，下垂珠结，馀皆口衔珠滴，珠翠云四十片，大珠花、小珠花数如旧。
现代文：永乐三年规定制度，礼冠用九条翠龙，四只金凤装饰，中间一龙衔着一颗大珠，上面有翠盖，下边垂挂珠饰的组结，余下的都口中衔着珠滴，珍珠翡翠云彩四十片。大珠花、小珠花数目如同以前。
English: Yongle three-year regulation system, the ceremonial crown is decorated with nine green dragons and four gold phoenixes. In the middle, a dragon is holding a large bead, with a green cover on top, and a bead-decorated assemblage hanging from the bottom. The remaining part of the crown is holding beads, and there are forty pearl jade clouds. The number of large and small bead flowers is the same as before.

古文：三博鬓，饰以金龙、翠云，皆垂珠滴。
现代文：三个博鬓，用金龙、翠云装饰，都垂挂着珠滴。
English: Three Boao, decorated with golden dragons and green clouds, are hung with beads.

古文：翠口圈一副，上饰珠宝钿花十二，翠钿如其数。
现代文：翠口圈一副，上面装饰着珠宝、钿花十二朵，翠钿与此数相同。
English: A pair of chrysanthemum rings, decorated with jewels and twelve chrysanthemum flowers, and the same number of chrysanthemums.

古文：托里金口圈一副。
现代文：冠衬里金口圈一副。
English: A pair of lined gold mouth rings.

古文：珠翠面花五事。
现代文：珍珠翡翠面花五样。
English: Five kinds of pearl jade flowers.

古文：珠排环一对。
现代文：珍珠环一对。
English: A pair of pearl rings.

古文：皂罗额子一，描金龙文，用珠二十一。
现代文：黑色丝织无顶头巾一张，嵌有金线的龙纹，使用二十一颗珍珠。
English: A black silk headscarf, embroidered with gold thread and twenty pearls.

古文：翟衣，深青，织翟文十有二等，间以小轮花。
现代文：野鸡图纹装饰的翟衣，深青色，织上野鸡图纹十二等，间杂周小轮花。
English: Pheasant-patterned satin dress, dark blue, with 12 pheasant-patterns, interspersed with periwinkles.

古文：红领褾襈裾，织金云龙文。
现代文：红色衣领袖端衣边缘饰，织上金色云龙纹理。
English: The leader's red robe is trimmed at the hem with gold embroidered dragon motifs.

古文：中单，玉色纱为之，红领褾襈裾，织黻文十三。
现代文：里衣，用玉色纱做成，红色衣领袖端衣边缘饰，织上青黑相间的图纹十三样。
English: The bodice is made of jade-colored yarn, the leader of the red dress is decorated with the edge of the bodice, and thirteen patterns of blue and black are woven.

古文：蔽膝随衣色，织翟为章三等，间以小轮花四，以緅为领缘，织金云龙文。
现代文：蔽膝随同衣服的颜色，编织野鸡作为图纹三等，问杂用四朵小轮花，用青赤色作为衣领缘边，织上金色云龙纹理。
English: The knee-length skirt follows the color of the clothes, weaving pheasant as the third-class pattern, using four rhododendrons, using blue-red as the collar edge, and weaving a golden cloud dragon texture.

古文：玉谷圭，长七寸，剡其上，瑑谷文，黄绮约其下，韬以黄囊，金龙文。
现代文：玉谷圭，长七寸，下面大上面小，雕琢谷的图纹，黄色丝织物束在它的下面，收敛在黄色袋囊裹，金龙纹理。
English: Tamagokwe, seven inches long, large on the bottom, small on the top, carved valley pattern, yellow silk fabric bundled under it, convergence in a yellow bag, golden dragon texture.

古文：玉革带，青绮鞓，描金云龙文，玉事件十，金事件四。
现代文：玉制革带，青绮腰带，嵌上金线云龙图纹，玉器十件，金器四件。
English: A jade leather belt, a green satin belt, embedded with gold lines and dragon patterns, ten pieces of jade and four pieces of gold.

古文：大带，表里俱青红相半，末纯红，下垂织金云龙文，上朱缘，下绿缘，青绮副带一。
现代文：大的束带，表面里面都是青色红色各半，尾端纯红色。下面悬垂织金云龙图纹，上边是红色绿边，下边是绿色绿边，青色丝织辅助的束带一条。
English: A large bunch of ribbon, the inside of the surface is all blue-red in each half, the tail end is pure red. Below is a dangling woven gold cloud dragon pattern, the top is a red green border, the bottom is a green green border, and a bunch of ribbon assisted by blue silk.

古文：绶五采，黄、赤、白、缥、绿，纁质，间施二玉环，皆织成。
现代文：绶带为五彩色，黄、赤、白、缥、绿，浅绛质地，间杂施设二玉环，都编织而成。
English: The ribbon is five-coloured, yellow, red, white, crimson and green, with a light crimson texture, interspersed with two jade rings, all woven.

古文：小绶三，色同大绶。
现代文：小绶带三条，色彩如同大绶带。
English: Three small umbilical cords, the same color as the umbilical cord.

古文：玉佩二，各用玉珩一、瑀一、琚二、冲牙一、璜二，瑀下垂玉花一、玉滴二；瑑饰云龙文描金；自珩而下，系组五，贯以玉珠，行则冲牙二滴与二璜相触有声；上有金钩，有小绶五采以副之，纁质，织成。
现代文：玉佩二块，各自使用玉珩一块、踽一块、琚二块、冲牙一块、玉璜二块，璃下垂玉花一块、滴玉二块；雕饰云龙纹理嵌上金线，从珩以下，系上丝带五条，用珠玉贯穿，行走时冲牙二滴玉与二璜相碰撞发出声音；上面有金钩，有小绶带五彩来作陪衬，浅绛色质地，编织而成。
English: Two pieces of jade, each using one piece of jade dowel, one piece of dowel, two pieces of dowel, one piece of punch, two pieces of jade dowel, one piece of glazed hanging jade flower, two pieces of dripping jade; engraved cloud dragon texture embedded with gold thread, from the bottom of the beak, tied with five ribbons, pierced with beads, when walking, the punch of two drops of jade and the two beaks collide to make a sound; above there are gold hooks, there are small ribbons of five colors to serve as a foil, light ochre texture, woven.

古文：青袜舄，饰以描金云龙，皂纯，每舄首加珠五颗。
现代文：青色鞋袜，用嵌金线的云龙修饰，黑边，每只木底鞋首端加珍珠五颗。
English: Blue shoes and socks, decorated with a cloud dragon inlaid with gold thread, black edges, five pearls added to the front of each wooden shoe.

古文：皇后常服：洪武三年定，双凤翊龙冠，首饰、钏镯用金玉、珠宝、翡翠。
现代文：皇后的平常服饰。洪武三年制定，双凤翊龙冠，首饰、金钏手镯用金玉、珠宝、翡翠制成。
English: The ordinary dress of the empress. Hongwu three years to formulate, double phoenix and dragon crown, jewelry, gold bracelet made of gold, jewelry and jade.

古文：诸色团衫，金绣龙凤文，带用金玉。
现代文：各色团衫，用金绣上龙凤图纹，束带用金玉。
English: T-shirts in various colors, embroidered with gold with dragon and phoenix patterns, and tied with gold beads.

古文：四年更定，龙凤珠翠冠，真红大袖衣霞帔，红罗长裙，红褙子。
现代文：四年重新制定，龙凤珍珠翡翠冠，真红大袖衣霞帔，红色绫罗长裙，红色褙子。
English: Re-enacted four years later, the dragon, phoenix, pearl and jade crown, crimson long-sleeved dress, crimson long skirt, crimson braid.

古文：冠制如特髻，上加龙凤饰，衣用织金龙凤文，加绣饰。
现代文：冠的样式如高耸的发髻，上面加上龙凤装饰，衣服用织金的龙凤图纹，加刺绣装饰。
English: The style of the crown is like a towering bun, with dragon and phoenix decorations on top, and the clothes are decorated with embroidered dragon and phoenix patterns made of woven gold.

古文：永乐三年更定，冠用皂縠，附以翠博山，上饰金龙一，翊以珠。
现代文：永乐三年重新制定，冠用黑色绉纱，附上博山形翡翠装饰，上面用一条金龙图纹装饰，辅以珍珠。
English: Yongle three years of re-enactment, crown with black satin, attached to the mountain-shaped jade decoration, decorated with a golden dragon pattern, supplemented by pearls.

古文：翠凤二，皆口衔珠滴。
现代文：两只翠凤图纹，都口衔滴珠。
English: Two cedar phoenix patterns, both with mouth-shaped beads.

古文：前后珠牡丹二，花八蕊，翠叶三十六。
现代文：前后两枝珠玉牡丹，八蕊花，三十六片翠叶。
English: There are two kinds of pearl peonies in front and behind, eight flower patterns, and thirty-six green leaves.

古文：珠翠穰花鬓二，珠翠云二十一，翠口圈一。金宝钿花九，饰以珠。
现代文：珍珠翡翠穰花鬓二个，珍珠翡翠云二十一片，翡翠口圈一个，金色实钿花九朵，用珍珠装饰。
English: Two pearl and jade enamel wreaths, twenty pearl and jade clouds, one jade collar, nine solid gold enamel wreaths, decorated with pearls.

古文：金凤二，口衔珠结。
现代文：二只佥凤，口衔珍珠束结。
English: Two crested phoenixes, their beaks tied with a string of pearls.

古文：三博鬓，饰以鸾凤。
现代文：三处博山形鬓发，用鸾凤修饰。
English: Three Bozhans erupted, decorated with dragonflies and phoenixes.

古文：金宝钿二十四，边垂珠滴。金簪二。
现代文：金色实钿二十四枝，两边垂挂滴珠，金簪二枝。
English: Twenty-four branches of solid gold braid, hanging beads on both sides, two branches of gold braid.

古文：珊瑚凤冠觜一副。
现代文：珊瑚凤冠嘴一副。
English: A pair of coral crown-of-thorns starfish.

古文：大衫霞帔，衫黄，霞帔深青，织金云霞龙文，或绣或铺翠圈金，饰以珠玉坠子，瑑龙文。
现代文：大衫霞帔服饰，衫为黄色，披饰深青色，编织成金色云龙纹理，有的刺绣有的铺成翠圈金，用珠玉坠子装饰，雕刻上龙的图纹。
English: The large shirt is yellow, the drape is dark blue, woven into a golden cloud dragon texture, some embroidered, some paved with cedar circle gold, decorated with a beaded pendant, and engraved with a dragon pattern.

古文：四衤癸袄子，深青，金绣团龙文。
现代文：四衣衩袄子，就是上褙衣。深青色，用金线锈成团龙的图纹。
English: Four-layered satin, that is, the upper satin. Deep blue, rusted with gold thread into the pattern of a dragon.

古文：鞠衣红色，前后织金云龙文，或绣或铺翠圈金，饰以珠。
现代文：鞠衣是红色，前后编织金色云龙图纹，有的刺绣有的铺成翠圈金，用珍珠装饰。
English: The jersey is red, with a golden dragon pattern woven around the front and back, some embroidered, some paved with gold, and decorated with pearls.

古文：大带红线罗为之，有缘，馀或青或绿，各随鞠衣色。
现代文：大带用红线绫罗做成，有绿边，余下的有青色有绿色，各自随同鞠衣的颜色。
English: The large band is made of red thread embroidery, with a green edge, the rest are blue and green, each with the color of the jersey.

古文：缘襈袄子，黄色，红领褾襈裾，皆织金采色云龙文。
现代文：绿饰的夹袄，黄色，红色衣领袖端衣边缘饰，都织上金线的彩色云龙图纹。
English: The green-decorated clasps, the yellow and red-decorated leader's cuffs, and the edge decoration of the dress are all woven with gold-colored cloud dragon patterns.

古文：缘襈裙，红色，绿缘襈，织金采色云龙文。
现代文：绿边修饰裙，红色，绿色绿饰，织上金线的彩色云龙图纹。
English: Green trim skirt, red, green green trim, woven with gold colored dragon pattern.

古文：玉带，如翟衣内制，第减金事件一。
现代文：玉带，如同野鹦羽纹装饰的襄衣的样式，只是各减去金器一件。
English: The jade belt, like the style of a jacket decorated with wild parrot feathers, is only one piece each minus the gold.

古文：玉花采结绶，以红绿线罗为结，玉绶花一，瑑云龙文。绶带玉坠珠六，金垂头花瓣四，小金叶六。
现代文：玉花彩带结成绶带，用红绿线绫罗为带结，寅玉绶花一个，雕饰云龙图纹，绶带玉坠宝珠六个，金垂头花瓣四个，小金叶六片。
English: The band of jade flowers is knotted into a ribbon, with red and green lines twisted into a knot, a tiger jade thistle flower, a carved cloud dragon pattern, six jade pendant beads, four petals of the golden drooping head, and six small gold leaves.

古文：红线罗系带一。
现代文：红线绫罗系带一条。
English: There is a red line running through it.

古文：白玉云样玎榼二，如佩制，有金钩，金如意云盖一，下悬红组五贯，金方心云板一，俱鈒云龙文，衬以红绮，下垂金长头花四，中小金钟一，末缀白玉云朵五。
现代文：白玉云样的玎璀首饰两样，如同玉佩的形制，有金钩，金如意云盖一个，下面悬挂红丝带五贯，金方心云板一块，都嵌饰云龙图纹，用红色有纹彩的丝织物作衬，下面垂挂金长头花四个，中间有小金钟一个，末端连缀白玉云朵五片。
English: Two pieces of white jade cloud-like brooch jewelry, like the shape of a jade pendant, have a gold hook, a gold ruffled cloud cover, five red ribbons hanging below, and a gold square heart cloud plate. They are all inlaid with cloud dragon patterns, with red patterned silk fabric as a background. Four gold anemones hang below, with a small gold bell in the middle, and five white jade clouds at the end.

古文：青袜舄，与翟衣内制同。
现代文：青色袜和木底鞋，与野鸡羽纹装饰的裹衣样式相同。
English: Blue socks and clogs, the same style as the pheasant-feathered wrap.

古文：皇妃、皇嫔及内命妇冠服：洪武三年定，皇妃受册、助祭、朝会礼服。
现代文：皇帝妃子、皇帝女嫔以及朝内受封号妇人的礼冠服饰。洪武三年制定，皇帝妃子接受册封、辅助祭祀、朝见皇帝的礼服。
English: The ceremonial crown dress of the emperor's wife, the emperor's concubine, the emperor's concubine, and the woman who received the imperial title in the imperial court. Established in the third year of Hongwu, the emperor's wife received the imperial title, auxiliary sacrifices, and the imperial court dress.

古文：冠饰九翚、四凤花钗九树，小花数如之。
现代文：礼冠上装饰九枝山雉羽毛、四凤花钗九株，小花的数目相同。
English: The ceremonial crown is decorated with nine feathered hawthorn branches and nine four-phoenix flower stalks, with the same number of small flowers.

古文：两博鬓九钿。
现代文：两博鬓九钿。
English: Two Bo and nine Zhou.

古文：翟衣，青质绣翟，编次于衣及裳，重为九等。
现代文：野鹦装饰的衣服，青色质地矮上野鸡图纹，编织在上衣及下裳上，重新马九等。
English: The clothes decorated with wild parrots, with a blue texture and a pheasant pattern, are woven on the upper and lower garments, and are newly embroidered.

古文：青纱中单，黻领，朱縠逯襈裾。
现代文：青纱内衣，青黑相间的衣领，红绉纹袖端衣边缘饰。
English: Blue yarn undergarments, blue and black collar, red satin sleeves and edges.

古文：蔽膝随裳色，加文绣重雉，为章二等，以緅为领缘。
现代文：蔽膝与下裳的颜色相同，加上纹绣重叠野雉的图纹，为图纹两等，用青赤色帛绿衣领边。
English: The knee-length skirt is the same color as the petticoat, with embroidered overlapping patterns of wild thistles. The pattern is two-tiered, with blue-red embroidery on the green collar.

古文：大带随衣色。
现代文：大带与衣裳颜色相同。
English: The large band is the same colour as the dress.

古文：玉革带。
现代文：玉制革带。
English: The leather strap is made of jade.

古文：青袜舄、佩绶。
现代文：青色袜木制底鞋，青色佩绶带。
English: Blue socks with wooden soles, blue ribbon.

古文：常服：鸾凤冠，首饰、钏镯用金玉、珠宝、翠。
现代文：平时的服饰，鸾凤冠，首饰、臂钏手镯采用金玉、珠宝、翡翠。
English: Ordinary clothing, wreaths, crowns, jewelry, bracelets and bracelets are made of gold, jewels and jade.

古文：诸色团衫，金绣鸾凤，不用黄。
现代文：各色的团衫，用金线绣鸾鸟凤凰，不用黄色。
English: Team shirts of all colors, with gold embroidered ostrich phoenix, without yellow.

古文：带用金、玉、犀。
现代文：衣带用金、玉、犀牛角。
English: The strap is made of gold, jade and rhinoceros horn.

古文：又定山松特髻，假鬓花钿，或花钗凤冠。
现代文：又制定，山松高耸的髻，假黉花嵌金首饰，或者花样头钗凤凰冠。
English: It also stipulates that the mountain pine towering beak, fake beak flower inlaid gold jewelry, or flower pattern head beak phoenix crown.

古文：真红大袖衣，霞帔，红罗裙，褙子，衣用织金及绣凤文。
现代文：真红大袖衣，霞帔，红色的罗裙，半臂上衣，衣服用金线编织以及绣上的凤形图纹。
English: Crimson great-sleeved gown, halo, red petticoat, half-sleeved blouse, dress woven with gold thread and embroidered with a phoenix pattern.

古文：永乐三年更定，礼服：九翟冠二，以皂縠为之，附以翠博山，饰大珠翟二，小珠翟三，翠翟四，皆口衔珠滴。
现代文：永乐三年改定，礼服，九翟冠两顶，用黑色绉纱制作，附上博山形翡翠，用大珠雉羽二样装饰，小珠雉羽三样，翡翠雉羽四样，都口衔着珠滴。
English: Yongle three-year revision, dress, nine crowns two, made with black crepe, attached to the mountain-shaped jade, decorated with two large bead feathers, three small bead feathers, four jade feathers, all with bead drops.

古文：冠中宝珠一座，翠顶云一座，其珠牡丹、翠穰花鬓之属，俱如双凤翊龙冠制，第减翠云十。
现代文：冠中一座实珠，一座翡翠顶云，它的珠玉牡丹、翡翠穰花鬓之类，都如同双凤翊龙冠的形制，依次减翡翠云十片。
English: In the crown, there is a real bead, an emerald top cloud, its pearl peony, emerald thistle and so on, all of which are like the shape of the double phoenix dragon crown, and ten emerald clouds are sequentially reduced.

古文：又翠牡丹花、穰花各二，面花四，梅花环四，珠环各二。
现代文：又翡翠牡丹花、穰花各两样，面花四样，梅花环四样，珍珠玉环各两样。
English: There are also two each of jade peony flowers and thistle flowers, four each of face flowers, four each of plum blossom wreaths, and two each of pearl and jade rings.

古文：其大衫、霞帔、燕居佩服之饰，俱同中宫，第织金绣瑑，俱云霞凤文，不用云龙文。
现代文：其大衫、霞帔、闲居的佩饰服饰，都如同中宫皇后，依次用金织编雕饰，都是云霞凤凰图纹，不用云龙图纹。
English: His overcoat, cloak, and idle adornment are all like the empress of the Middle Palace, successively decorated with gold weaving, all with clouds and phoenix patterns, not with clouds and dragon patterns.

古文：九嫔冠服：嘉靖十年始定，冠用九翟，次皇妃之凤。
现代文：宫中女官九嫔的礼冠服饰。嘉靖十年纔制定，冠用九雉羽装饰，次于皇帝妃子的凤冠。
English: The ceremonial crown attire of court ladies with nine feathers. It was established by Emperor Jiajing in the 10th year of his reign. The crown is decorated with nine feathers, second only to the emperor's wife's phoenix crown.

古文：大衫、鞠衣，如皇妃制。圭用次玉谷文。
现代文：大衫、鞠衣，如同皇妃样式，圭用稍次的玉壳图纹。
English: An overcoat and a kimono, like the style of the empress, with a slightly different pattern of a jade shell.

古文：内命妇冠服，洪武五年定，三品以上花钗、翟衣，四品、五品山松特髻，大衫为礼服。
现代文：宫内受封命妇的礼冠服饰。洪武五年制定，三品官以上花纹头钗、雉羽装饰衣服，四品、五品山松高耸的发髻，大衫作为礼服。
English: The ceremonial crown dress of the women who were appointed to the imperial court. Hongwu five years to formulate, three official or higher flower pattern headdress, feathered ornamental clothes, four, five mountain pine towering hairpin, shirt as a dress.

古文：贵人视三品，以皇妃燕居冠及大衫、霞帔为礼服，以珠翠庆云冠，鞠衣、褙子、缘襈袄裙为常服。
现代文：贵人比照三品官，用皇妃闲居冠服以及大衫、霞帔作为礼服，用珍珠翡翠庆云冠，鞠衣、褙子、绿边袖端袄子衣裙作为平常服饰。
English: According to the three grade officials, the dignitaries used the empress idle crown dress and the blouse and the chrysanthemum as the dress, and the pearl jade celebration crown, the jersey, the satin, and the green-edged sleeve end satin dress as the ordinary clothing.

古文：宫人冠服，制与宋同。
现代文：宫女的礼冠服饰，形制与宋代相同。
English: The ceremonial crowns worn by court ladies have the same shape as those worn in the Song Dynasty.

古文：紫色，团领，窄袖，遍刺折枝小葵花，以金圈之，珠络缝金带红裙。
现代文：紫色，圆形衣领，窄袖，全部刺绣折枝的小葵花，用金线环绕，缀珍珠或网络缝织金带红裙。
English: Purple, round collar, narrow sleeves, all embroidered with sprigs of small sunflowers, surrounded by gold thread, decorated with pearls or net sewn gold band red skirt.

古文：弓样鞋，上刺小金花。
现代文：像弓形的鞋，上面刺绣小金花。
English: Bow-shaped shoes with small gold flowers embroidered on them.

古文：乌纱帽，饰以花，帽额缀团珠。
现代文：乌纱帽，用花装饰，帽前额点缀圆珠。
English: Black gauze hat, decorated with flowers, the front of the hat is embellished with beads.

古文：结珠鬓梳。
现代文：结有珠玉的鬓梳。
English: A beaded satin comb.

古文：垂珠耳饰。
现代文：垂挂珍珠的耳上装饰。
English: Dangling pearls adorn the ears.

古文：皇太子冠服：陪祀天地、社稷、宗庙及大朝会、受册、纳妃则服衮冕。
现代文：皇太子冠服。陪同祭祀天地、社稷、祖宗之庙以及大型朝会、接受册封、娶妃子就穿衮冕服。
English: The crown prince's ceremonial robe. Wearing the crown prince's robe when attending religious services, social gatherings, ancestral temples, large imperial court gatherings, receiving a title of nobility, and marrying a concubine.

古文：洪武二十六年定，衮冕九章，冕九旒，旒九玉，金簪导，红组缨，两玉瑱。
现代文：洪武二十六年规定，衮服礼冠九种图纹，礼冠前后悬垂玉串九串，金簪作导，红色丝织缨带，两块悬坠两侧垂于耳旁的玉。
English: In the 26th year of Hongwu, there were nine patterns for the ceremonial crown, nine strings of beads hanging from the front and back of the ceremonial crown, a gold bracelet as a guide, a red silk ribbon, and two beads hanging from both sides of the pendant.

古文：圭长九寸五分。
现代文：圭玉长九寸五分。
English: Gui Yuping is 9'5" tall.

古文：玄衣纁裳，衣五章，织山、龙、华虫、宗彝、火；裳四章，织藻、粉米、黼、黻。
现代文：黑色上衣绛色下裳，上衣五种图纹，编织山、龙、雉、宗彝、火；下裳四种图纹，编织藻、粉米、黼、黻。
English: Black upper garment and navy lower garment, upper garment with five patterns, woven mountain, dragon, dragonfly, dragonfly, fire; lower garment with four patterns, woven algae, powdered rice, dragonfly, dragonfly.

古文：白纱中单，黻领。
现代文：白色纱制里衣，黑青相问的衣领。
English: White gauze bodice, black and blue interlaced collar.

古文：蔽膝随裳色，织火、山二章。
现代文：衣前大巾与下裳的颜色相同，编织火、山两种图纹。
English: The tunic is the same colour as the petticoat, and is knitted in two patterns, fire and mountain.

古文：革带，金钩苾，玉佩。
现代文：革带，金钩钗，玉佩。
English: Leather belt, gold hooked brooch, jade pendant.

古文：绶五采织成，纯赤质，三百三十首。
现代文：绶带由五种色彩红、白、罴、浅青、绿织成，纯红质地，乏百三十首。
English: The ribbon is woven from five colors, red, white, indigo, light blue, and green, with a pure red texture. There are one hundred and thirty pieces.

古文：小绶三，色同。
现代文：小绶带三条，色彩相同。
English: Three small umbilical cords of the same colour.

古文：间织三玉环。
现代文：间杂编织三玉环。
English: Interspersed with the weaving of the three jade rings.

古文：大带，白表朱里，上缘以红，下缘以绿。
现代文：大带，白色表面红色里层，上面用红色绿边，下面用绿色绿边。
English: Large band, white on the outside, red on the inside, red and green on the top, green and green on the bottom.

古文：白袜，赤舄。
现代文：白色袜，红色鞋。
English: White socks, red shoes.

古文：永乐三年定，冕冠，玄表朱里，前圆后方，前后各九旒。
现代文：永乐三年规定，冕冠，玄色表面红色裹层，前面圆形后面方形，前后各自九条玉串。
English: Yongle three-year regulations, crown crown, black surface red wrapping layer, front round back square, front and back each with nine strings.

古文：每旒五采缫九就，贯五采玉九，赤、白、青、黄、黑相次。
现代文：每绦玉串五彩藻九匝，贯穿五彩玉九块，红、白、青、黄、黑依次排列。
English: Each jade string of five-colored algae has nine strings, running through nine pieces of five-colored jade, and red, white, blue, yellow and black are arranged in turn.

古文：玉衡金簪，玄紞垂青纩充耳，承以白玉瑱，朱纮缨。
现代文：玉衡金簪，系塞耳玉的丝带垂挂青色绵球悬在两旁下垂到耳，用青玉。用白玉充耳饰相承，红色冠缨带。
English: Jade weighted gold hoop, silk ribbon with ear-stuffed jade, hanging blue cotton ball hanging on both sides, hanging down to the ear, with blue jade. With white jade ear-filling decoration, red crown ribbon.

古文：玉圭长九寸五分，以锦约其下，并韬。
现代文：玉圭长九寸五分，用锦缎束住它的下面，连同弓袋。
English: Gyokkei is nine inches and five minutes long, and its underside is bound with brocade, together with the bow bag.

古文：衮服九章，玄衣五章，龙在肩，山在背，火、华虫、宗彝在袖，皆织成。
现代文：衮服九种图纹，黑衣五种图纹，龙形图纹在肩，山形图纹在背，火、雉、宗彝图纹在袖，每袖各三图。
English: There are nine patterns on the yakitori, five patterns on the yakitori, a dragon pattern on the shoulder, a mountain pattern on the back, and fire, dragonfly, and dragonfly patterns on the sleeves, with three patterns on each sleeve.

古文：本色领褾襈裾。
现代文：都编织而成。本色衣领袖端衣边缘饰。
English: They are all knitted. The leader of the original color clothing has a ruffled edge.

古文：纁裳四章，织藻、粉米、黼、黻各二，前三幅，后四幅，不相属，共腰，有襞积，本色綼裼。
现代文：浅绛下裳四种图纹，编织藻、粉米、黼、黻各二种图纹，前面三幅，后面四幅，不相连属，同腰，有褶榈，本色幅被绿饰。
English: There are four patterns on the lower part of the skirt, two patterns each on the knitting algae, glutinous rice, cocoon and cocoon, three on the front and four on the back, they are not connected, they are at the same waist, there are enamel, and the natural color range is decorated with green.

古文：中单以素纱为之，青领褾襈裾，领织黻文十一。
现代文：里衣用素纱做成，青色衣领袖口衣边缘饰，衣领上编织青黑相问的图纹十一种。
English: The inner garment is made of plain yarn, the leader of the blue garment is trimmed at the edge, and eleven patterns of blue and black are woven on the collar.

古文：蔽膝随裳色，四章，织藻、粉米、黼、黻。
现代文：衣前大巾与下裳的颜色相同，四种图饰，织上藻、粉米、黼、黻。
English: The tunic is the same color as the petticoat, with four designs, woven with algae, powdered rice, cocoons, and reeds.

古文：本色缘，有紃，施于缝中。
现代文：本色绿饰，有圆形饰带，安放在衣缝中。
English: Genuine green trim, with round trim, placed in the seams.

古文：上玉钩二。
现代文：上面有二块玉钩。
English: There are two ball hooks on it.

古文：玉佩二，各用玉珩一、瑀一、琚一、冲牙一、璜二；瑀下垂玉花一、玉滴二。
现代文：二块玉佩，各自用一块玉珩、一块璃、一块琚、一块冲牙、二块璜，踽下面垂挂玉花一件，玉滴二件。
English: Two pieces of jade, each with a piece of jade, a piece of glass, a piece of enamel, a piece of punch, two pieces of enamel, a jade flower hanging below the enamel, two pieces of jade.

古文：瑑云龙文，描金。
现代文：雕刻云龙图纹，镶嵌金线。
English: Carved cloud dragon pattern, inlaid with gold thread.

古文：自珩而下，系组五，贯以玉珠。
现代文：从珩而下，系上编织的丝带五条，用玉珠贯穿。
English: From the crotch down, five braided ribbons are tied, with jade beads running through.

古文：上有金钩。
现代文：上面有金钩。
English: It has gold hooks on it.

古文：小绶四采以副之，纁质。
现代文：小绶带四种色彩红、白、浅青、绿作为陪衬，浅绛色质地。
English: Small ribbon four colors red, white, light blue, green as a foil, light blue texture.

古文：大带，素表朱里，在腰及垂，皆有綼，上綼以朱，下綼以绿。
现代文：大带，白表面红里层，在腰部到衣垂，都有幅饰，上幅绿饰用朱红，下幅用绿色。
English: Large belt, white surface, red lining, at the waist to the hems, all have width decoration, the upper width green decoration with vermilion, the lower width with green.

古文：纽约用青组。
现代文：系结用青的丝带。
English: It is tied with a blue ribbon.

古文：大绶四采，纁质。
现代文：大绶带四种色彩，赤、白、浅青、绿。浅绛质地。
English: Large satin ribbon in four colors, red, white, light blue, green. Light satin texture.

古文：小绶三采。间施二玉环，龙文，皆织成。
现代文：小绶三种色彩，间杂安放两个玉环，龙形圆纹，都编织而成。
English: Three colors of small hoops, interspersed with two jade rings, dragon-shaped circles, are all woven.

古文：袜舄皆赤色，舄用黑絇纯，黑饰舄首。
现代文：袜鞋都是红色，木底鞋头用黑色饰物绿边，用黑色装饰鞋头。
English: The socks are red, the wooden soles are trimmed with black ornaments with green edges, and the soles are decorated with black.

古文：朔望朝、降诏、降香、进表、外国朝贡、朝觐，则服皮弁。
现代文：朔日、望日朝拜、下发诏书、焚香叩拜、进献奏表、外国朝贺上贡、朝见皇帝，便穿皮弁服。
English: On the New Year's Day, the Emperor's New Year's Day, the Emperor's New Year's Day, the Emperor's New Year's Day, the Emperor's New Year's Day, the Emperor's New Year's Day, the Emperor's New Year's Day, the Emperor's New Year's Day, the Emperor's New Year's Day, the Emperor's New Year's Day, the Emperor's New Year's Day, the Emperor's New Year's Day, the Emperor's New Year's Day, the Emperor's New Year's Day, the Emperor's New Year's Day,

古文：永乐三年定，皮弁，冒以乌纱，前后各九缝，每缝缀五采玉九，缝及冠武并贯簪系缨处，皆饰以金。
现代文：永乐三年规定，皮弁，用乌纱覆盖，前后各有九缝，每缝装饰五彩玉九片，缝及冠卷和贯替子系结缨带之处，都用金修饰。
English: According to the Yongle three-year regulations, the leather valve, covered with black yarn, has nine seams at the front and back, each seam is decorated with nine pieces of multicolored jade, and the seams and crown roll and the place where the crotch of the crotch is made are decorated with gold.

古文：金簪朱缨。
现代文：金簪红丝带。
English: A gold and red ribbon.

古文：玉圭，如冕服内制。
现代文：玉圭，如同礼冠服饰内制。
English: Tamagui, like ceremonial crowns, are made in-house.

古文：绛纱袍，本色领褾襈裾。
现代文：绛色纱袍，本色衣领袖端衣边缘饰。
English: Navy gauze robe, authentic leader's dress with ruffled edges.

古文：红裳，如冕服内裳制，但不织章数。
现代文：红色下裳，如同礼冠服饰内裳制，只是不编织细小的图纹。
English: The red petticoat, like the petticoat system in ceremonial dress, does not weave fine patterns.

古文：中单以素纱为之，如深衣制。
现代文：里衣用素纱制成，如同上衣下裳相连样式。
English: The inner garment is made of plain yarn, similar to the style in which the outer garment is connected to the inner garment.

古文：红领褾襈裾，领织黻文十一。
现代文：红色衣领袖口衣边缘饰，领口织上黑青相间的图纹十一种。
English: The leader of the red team has the edges of his shirt trimmed, and on his collar there are eleven patterns of intertwined black and blue.

古文：蔽膝随裳色，本色缘，有紃，施于缝中；其上玉钩二，玉佩如冕服内制，但无云龙文；有小绶四采以副之。
现代文：蔽膝与下裳颜色相同，本色绿饰，有丝织圆形细带，安放在缝中；上面两玉钩，玉佩如同礼冠服饰内制，只是没有云龙图纹；有小绶带四种色彩陪衬它。
English: The knee-length dress is the same color as the lower dress. It is decorated with green lace. There is a circular silk ribbon, which is placed in the seam. The upper dress has two jade hooks, and the jade lace is made in-house like a ceremonial dress, but without a dragon pattern. It is accompanied by a small ribbon in four colors.

古文：大带、大绶、袜舄赤色，皆如冕服内制。
现代文：大带、大绶、袜鞋都是赤色，都如同礼冠服饰内制。
English: The belt, cape, and socks are all red, all made in-house like ceremonial clothing.

古文：其常服，洪武元年定，乌纱折上巾。
现代文：皇太子平常服饰，洪武元年制定，乌纱折上头巾。
English: The crown prince's usual attire, established in the first year of Hongwu, is a headscarf made of black yarn.

古文：永乐三年定，冠乌纱折角向上巾，袍赤，盘领窄袖，前后及两肩各金织盘龙一。
现代文：永乐三年制定，戴乌纱折角向上头巾，也叫翼善冠，亲王、郡王及世子都相同。赤色袍，盘曲衣领窄袖，前后以及两肩各自用金线织成盘龙一条。
English: Enacted in the third year of Yongle, it is a red robe with a curved collar and narrow sleeves. The front and back as well as both shoulders are woven with gold thread into a single piece.

古文：玉带、靴，以皮为之。
现代文：玉带、靴，用皮做成。
English: Jade belts, shoes, made of leather.

古文：皇太子妃冠服：洪武三年定，礼服与皇妃同。
现代文：皇太子妃礼冠服饰。洪武三年制定，礼服与皇帝妃子相同。
English: Crown Princess ceremonial crown dress. It was established by Hongwu three years ago, and the dress is the same as the emperor's concubine.

古文：永乐三年更定，九翚四凤冠，漆竹丝为匡，冒以翡翠，上饰翠翚九、金凤四，皆口衔珠滴。
现代文：永乐三年更改制定，九翠四凤冠，漆涂竹丝作为框，用翡翠披覆，上面装饰翡翠九只山雉，四只金凤，都口衔珠滴。
English: Yongle's three-year revision stipulates, nine green four phoenix crown, lacquered bamboo wire as a frame, covered with emerald, decorated with emerald nine hawthorn, four gold phoenix, all mouth-shaped beads.

古文：珠翠云四十片，大珠花九树，小珠花数如之。
现代文：珍珠翡翠云四十片，大珠花九株，小珠花数目相同。
English: Forty pieces of pearl jade clouds, nine large beaded flowers, and the same number of small beaded flowers.

古文：双博鬓，饰以鸾凤，皆垂珠滴。
现代文：双博鬓，用鸾凤装饰，都垂挂珠滴。
English: A pair of boas, decorated with dragonflies and phoenixes, are hung with beads.

古文：翠口圈一副，上饰珠宝钿花九，翠钿如其数。
现代文：翡翠口圈一副，上面装饰珠宝花色嵌金饰物九件，翡翠嵌金饰物数目相同。
English: A pair of emerald mouth rings, decorated with nine pieces of gold-inlaid jewelry, and the same number of emerald-inlaid gold ornaments.

古文：托里金口圈一副。
现代文：衬里金口圈一副。
English: A pair of lined gold mouth rings.

古文：珠翠面花五事。珠排环一对。
现代文：珍珠翡翠面花五件，珍珠成排玉环一对。
English: There are five pieces of pearl jade face flowers, and a pair of rows of pearl jade rings.

古文：珠皂罗额子一，描金凤文，用珠二十一。
现代文：珍珠装饰的黑绫、罗额子一件，嵌有金线的凤凰图纹，用珍珠二十一颗。
English: A black beak decorated with pearls, a lobed forehead, a phoenix pattern inlaid with gold thread, and twenty-one pearls.

古文：翟衣，青质，织翟文九等，间以小轮花。
现代文：野鸡圆纹装饰的衣服，青色质地，织上野鹦图纹九等，间杂以小轮花。
English: Clothes decorated with pheasant stripes, blue texture, woven with nine wild parrot patterns, interspersed with ruffles.

古文：红领褾襈裾，织金云龙文。
现代文：红色衣领袖端衣边缘饰，织上金残的云龙图纹。
English: The leader's red robe is trimmed at the hem with gold embroidered dragon motifs.

古文：中单玉色纱为之。
现代文：礼服里衣，用玉色纱制成。
English: Dress liner, made of jade-colored yarn.

古文：红领褾襈裾，领织黻文十一。
现代文：红色衣领袖端衣边缘饰，领上编织黑青相问的图纹十一种。
English: The leader of the red team has the edges of his shirt trimmed, and on his collar there are eleven patterns of intertwined black and blue.

古文：蔽膝随衣色，织翟为章二等，间以小轮花三，以緅为领缘，织金云凤文。
现代文：衣服前的大巾与下裳颜色相同，织上野鸡图纹两等，问杂用三朵小轮花，用青赤色作为衣领缘饰，织上金线的云凤图纹。
English: The scarf in front of the dress is the same color as the lower dress, woven with a pheasant pattern of two grades, mixed with three rhododendrons, with blue and red as a collar trim, woven with a gold line cloud and phoenix pattern.

古文：其玉圭、带绶、玉佩、袜舄之制，俱同皇妃。
现代文：它的玉圭、绶带、玉佩、袜鞋的形制，都如同皇妃。
English: The shape of its bracelet, sash, jade bracelet, and socks are all similar to that of the empress.

古文：洪武三年又定常服。
现代文：洪武三年又规定平常的服饰。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, the usual dress code was established.

古文：犀冠，刻以花凤。
现代文：犀角装饰的冠帽，刻上花凤。
English: Crown cap decorated with rhinoceros horns and engraved with a flower phoenix.

古文：首饰、钏镯、衫带俱同皇妃。
现代文：首饰、金钏手镯、衣衫绶带都如同皇妃。
English: Jewellery, gold bracelets, and ribbons are all the same as the empress.

古文：四年定，冠亦与皇妃同。
现代文：四年规定，帽冠也与皇妃相同。
English: According to the four-year rule, the crown of the hat is also the same as that of the empress.

古文：永乐三年定燕居冠，以皂縠为之，附以翠博山，上饰宝珠一座，翊以二珠翠凤，皆口衔珠滴。
现代文：永乐三年规定闲居帽冠，用黑色绉纹纱做成，附上博山形翡翠。上面装饰宝珠一座，辅以雨样珠翠凤，都口街珠滴。
English: Yongle three-year regulation idle cap crown, made of black satin yarn, attached with Bozhan-shaped jade. The top is decorated with a precious pearl, supplemented by rain-like pearls and phoenixes, and the streets of the capital are dripping with pearls.

古文：前后珠牡丹二，花八蕊，翠叶三十六。
现代文：前后珍珠牡丹二样，花纹图案八朵，翠叶三十六片。
English: There are two kinds of pearl peonies in front and behind, eight flower patterns, and thirty-six green leaves.

古文：珠翠穰花鬓二。
现代文：珍珠翡翠穰花鬓二样。
English: There are two kinds of pearl and jade embroidered flowers.

古文：珠翠云十六片。
现代文：珍珠翡翠云片十六片。
English: Sixteen pieces of pearl jade cloud.

古文：翠口圈一副。
现代文：翡翠口圈一副。
English: A pair of emerald mouth rings.

古文：金宝钿花九，上饰珠九。
现代文：金宝嵌金花饰九样，上面装饰九粒珍珠。
English: There are nine pieces of gold inlaid ornaments and nine pearls on the top.

古文：金凤一对，口衔珠结。
现代文：金凤一对，口中衔着珠玉盘结。
English: A pair of gold phoenixes, with a bead encrusted in their mouths.

古文：双博鬓，饰以鸾凤。
现代文：双博鬓，用鸾鸟装饰。
English: Double boa constrictor, decorated with starlings.

古文：金宝钿十八，边垂珠滴。
现代文：金宝嵌金花饰十八件，旁边垂挂珠滴。
English: There are eighteen pieces of gold-inlaid gold flower ornaments, with beads hanging next to them.

古文：金簪一对。
现代文：金簪一对。
English: A pair of golden egrets.

古文：珊瑚凤冠觜一副。
现代文：珊瑚凤冠嘴一副。
English: A pair of coral crown-of-thorns starfish.

古文：其大衫、霞帔、燕居佩服之饰，俱同皇妃。
现代文：大衫、霞帔、闲居穿戴的服饰，都如同皇妃。
English: The blouse, the chiffon, the idle dress, are all like the empress.

古文：亲王冠服：助祭、谒庙、朝贺、受册、纳妃服衮冕，朔望朝、降诏、降香、进表、四夷朝贡、朝觐服皮弁。
现代文：亲王礼冠服饰。协助祭祀、拜谒祖庙、上朝庆贺、接受册封、娶妃穿衮冕服。朔日、望日朝拜、下发诏书、入庙焚香叩拜、进献奏表、四方蛮夷上朝进贡、朝拜君主穿皮弁服。
English: Crown prince ceremonial crown clothing. Assist in sacrificial rites, pay homage to the ancestral temple, celebrate the previous morning, accept the investiture, wear the crown dress when marrying a princess. New Year's Day, look forward to the day, issue an imperial edict, enter the temple, burn incense and worship, present a report card, pay tribute to the barbarians in all directions, and worship the monarch wearing a leather bento.

古文：洪武二十六年定，冕服俱如东宫，第冕旒用五采，玉圭长九寸二分五厘，青衣纁裳。
现代文：洪武二十六年规定，冕服都如同太子，只是冠冕的前玉串用五彩色，玉圭长九寸二分五厘，青色上衣浅绛色下裳。
English: In the 26th year of Hongwu's reign, it was decreed that the crown prince's robe would be the same as that of the crown prince, except that the crown would have five-colored beads on the front, the crown would be nine inches and two-and-a-half centimeters long, and the robe would be light blue on the top and light brown on the bottom.

古文：永乐三年又定冕服、皮弁制，俱与东宫同，其常服亦与东宫同。
现代文：永乐三年，又制定礼冠服饰、皮弁形制，都与太子相同。他们的平常服饰也与太子相同。
English: In the third year of Yongle, the ceremonial crown costume and the leather-valve-shaped system were also established, both of which are the same as the prince. Their ordinary clothing is also the same as the prince.

古文：嘉靖七年，谕礼部： 朕仿古玄端，自为燕弁冠服，更制忠静冠服，锡于有位，而宗室诸王制犹未备。
现代文：嘉靖七年，告谕礼部： 朕仿效古代玄端礼服，自己制闲居所穿的弁冠服饰，另外制定忠静冠帽服饰，赏赐给有官位的人，可是皇室各王的形制仍没具备。
English: In the seventh year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the Ministry of Ceremonies announced: "I will follow the example of the ancient Xuan Duan ceremonial dress and make my own costume of the crown worn in idleness. In addition, I will make a costume of the loyal crown and hat, which will be awarded to people with official positions. However, the form system of the kings of the royal family is still not available.

古文：今酌燕弁及忠静冠之制，复为式具图，命曰保和冠服。
现代文：如今斟酌闲居弁服以及忠静冠的样式，又为式样昼出图形，命名叫保和冠服。
English: Nowadays, the styles of leisurely-dwelling benfuku and loyal and quiet crowns are considered, and they are also the shapes of the patterns, and the names are called Bao and Guanfuku.

古文：自郡王长子以上，其式已明。
现代文：从郡王长子以上，他们的样式已经明晰。
English: From the eldest son of the county king onwards, their style has been clear.

古文：镇国将军以下至奉国中尉及长史、审理、纪善、教授、伴读，俱用忠静冠服，依其品服之。
现代文：镇国将军以下，到奉国中尉以及长史、审理、纪善、教授、伴读等官，都用忠静冠服饰，按照他们的官品穿戴。
English: From the Zhenguo general down to the Fengguo lieutenant, as well as the long history, trial, discipline, teaching, accompanying reading and other officials, all use the Zhongjing crown costume and wear it according to their official style.

古文：仪宾及馀官不许概服。
现代文：仪宾以及其余官员不允许一律穿戴。
English: The guests of honour and other officials are not allowed to wear the uniform.

古文：夫忠静冠服之异式，尊贤之等也。
现代文：忠静冠帽服饰的不同样式，是推尊贤良的等级。
English: The different styles of Zhongjing crown and cap costumes are the levels of promoting the virtuous.

古文：保和冠服之异式，亲亲之杀也。等杀既明，庶几乎礼之所保，保斯和，和斯安，此锡名之义也。
现代文：保和冠服饰的不同样式，是亲近亲属的等差，等差已明，礼差不多得以保持，礼保即和貭，和顺即安宁，这是赏赐名号的道理。
English: The different styles of ceremonial crown attire are the equivalent of close relatives. The equivalent is clear, and the etiquette is almost maintained. Ceremonial protection means harmony, and harmony means peace. This is the reason for awarding the name.

古文：其以图说颁示诸王府，如敕遵行。 
现代文：一定用图形和解说文字颁布宣示各王府，按照敕命遵照执行。 
English: The royal residences must issue proclamations with graphics and explanatory texts, and carry them out in accordance with their instructions.

古文：保和冠制，以燕弁为准，用九衤取，去簪与五玉，后山一扇，分画为四。
现代文：保和冠的样式，以闲居所戴的弁作为标准，用九条衣游缝，去掉簪子与五玉，后山一扇，分划为四份。
English: The style of the Hōwa crown is based on the standard of the cape worn by idlers. It is sewn with nine strips of cloth, the braid and five jewels are removed, and the back mountain is divided into four parts.

古文：服，青质青缘，前后方龙补，身用素地，边用云。
现代文：衣服，青质地青绿饰，前后方龙补饰，衣身用白质地，边饰用云形图纹。
English: Clothes, blue texture with green and blue decoration, front and back with dragon decoration, body with white texture, edge decoration with cloud pattern.

古文：衬用深衣，玉色。
现代文：衬衣采用上衣、下裳相连的衣服，玉的颜色。
English: The shirt is made of a blouse and a dress that are connected at the bottom, and is the color of jade.

古文：带青表绿里绿缘。
现代文：衣带是青色表面绿色襄层绿色绿饰。
English: The waistband is blue with a green outer layer and green trim.

古文：履用皂绿结，白袜。
现代文：鞋用黑绿盘结，白袜。
English: Shoes with black and green laces, white socks.

古文：亲王妃冠服：受册、助祭、朝会服礼服。
现代文：亲王妃的礼冠服饰。接受册封、陪位祭祀、朝会穿礼服。
English: The ceremonial crown attire of princesses. They wear ceremonial dresses to receive investitures, to attend enthronement ceremonies, and to attend court.

古文：洪武三年定九翚四凤冠。
现代文：洪武三年，制定九巩四凤冠。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, nine gongs and four phoenix crowns were formulated.

古文：永乐三年又定九翟冠，制同皇妃。
现代文：永乐三年，又制定九翟冠，样式与皇妃相同。
English: In the third year of Yongle, the nine-branched crown was established, with the same style as the imperial crown.

古文：其大衫、霞帔、燕居佩服之饰，同东宫妃，第金事件减一，玉绶花，瑑宝相花文。
现代文：她们的大衫、霞帔、闲居穿戴的服饰，与柬宫妃相同，祇是金器减步一件；玉绶花纹，雕宝相花凸纹。
English: Their blouses, gowns, and leisure wear are the same as those worn by the Cambodian princesses, except that the goldware is a step down; the jade brocade pattern, the carved treasure and the flower are convex.

古文：公主冠服，与亲王妃同，惟不用圭。
现代文：公主礼冠服饰，与亲王妃相同，只是不用玉圭。
English: Princess ceremonial crown dress, the same as the prince and princess, but without the topknot.

古文：亲王世子冠服：圣节、千秋节并正旦、冬至、进贺表笺及父王生日诸节庆贺，皆服衮冕。
现代文：亲王世子的礼冠服饰。皇帝生日、皇后、贵妃或太子生日连同正旦日、冬至日、进贺表笺以及父王生日等节日庆贺，都穿衮冕服。
English: Emperor's birthday, the birthday of empress, empress dowager or crown prince, together with the celebration of festivals such as the Mid-Autumn Festival, Winter Solstice Day, New Year's Eve, and the birthday of the father king, all wear coronation robes.

古文：洪武二十六年定，衮冕七章，冕三采玉珠，七旒。
现代文：洪武二十六年规定，衮冕服七种图饰，冕三色玉珠，前后悬挂玉串七串。
English: In the 26th year of Hongwu's reign, there were seven kinds of pictorial decorations on the coronation robe, a crown with three-colored beads, and seven strings of beads hanging in front and behind.

古文：圭长九寸。
现代文：圭玉长九寸。
English: The kei-tama is nine inches long.

古文：青衣三章，织华虫、火、宗彝。
现代文：青色衣三种花纹，编织雉、火、宗彝图纹。
English: The blue dress has three patterns, woven satin, fire and Zong embroidery.

古文：纁裳四章，织藻、粉米、黼、黻。
现代文：浅绛色下裳四种图纹，编织水藻、粉米、黼、黻。
English: There are four patterns under the light indigo color, weaving algae, powdered rice, cocoon and cocoon.

古文：素纱中单，青领襈，赤韨。
现代文：素纱制成里衣。青色衣领绿饰，赤色衣前服饰。
English: Veil made of linen. Blue collar with green trim, red vestments.

古文：革带，佩白玉，玄组绶。
现代文：革带，佩戴白玉，玄色丝绶带。
English: Leather belt, wearing white beads, black silk ribbon.

古文：绶紫质，用三采织成，间织三白玉环。
现代文：紫底色绶带，用三样色彩紫、黄、赤编织而成，间杂编织三样白玉环。
English: Purple base ribbon, woven with three colors purple, yellow and red, interwoven with three white jade rings.

古文：白袜，赤舄。
现代文：白袜、赤色鞋。
English: White socks, red shoes.

古文：永乐三年更定，冕冠前后各八旒，每旒五采缫八就，贯三采玉珠八，赤、白、青色相次。
现代文：永乐三年重新规定，冕冠前后悬挂玉串八串，每串五彩丝绳八匝，穿上三彩色玉珠八颗，赤、白、青色彩依次排列。
English: According to the new regulations of Yongle for three years, there are eight strings of jade beads hanging before and after the crown. Each string of multicolored silk ropes has eight hoops, and eight three-colored jade beads are put on. Red, white and blue colors are arranged in sequence.

古文：玉圭长九寸。
现代文：玉圭长九寸。
English: Tamagui is nine inches long.

古文：青衣三章，火在肩，华虫、宗彝在两袖，皆织成。
现代文：青色衣三种图饰，火在肩上，雉、宗彝在两袖，都编织而成。
English: The three patterns of the blue dress, the fire on the shoulder, and the skull and crossbones on the sleeves, are all woven.

古文：本色领褾袜裾。
现代文：本色衣领袖端衣边缘饰。
English: The leader of the true-colour clothing, the edges of the clothing are decorated.

古文：其纁裳、玉佩、带、绶之制，俱与亲王同，第领织黻文减二。
现代文：它的浅绛色下裳、玉佩、丝带、绶带的样式，都与亲王相同，祇是衣领上编织的黑青相间的纹饰减少两个。
English: Its light blue petticoat, jade lace, ribbon, and ribbon are all the same as the prince's, except that the black and blue embroidery on the collar has been reduced by two.

古文：皮弁用乌纱冒之，前后各八缝，每缝缀三采玉八，馀制如亲王。
现代文：白鹿皮帽用乌纱覆盖，前后各八条缝，每缝缀三色彩玉八颗，其余样式如同亲王。
English: The white deerskin cap is covered with black gauze, with eight seams on the front and back. Each seam is decorated with eight three-colored jewels, and the rest of the style is like a prince.

古文：其圭佩、带绶、袜舄如冕服内制。
现代文：它的圭玉佩饰、绶带、袜鞋如同冕服服饰内样式。
English: Its cape, sash, shoes and socks are made in-house, just like the crown and the dress.

古文：常服亦与亲王同。
现代文：平常服饰也与亲王相同。
English: The usual attire is also the same as the prince.

古文：嘉靖七年定保和冠服，以燕弁为准，用八衤取，去簪玉，后山以一扇分画为四，服与亲王同。
现代文：嘉靖七年制定保和冠服饰，以闲居所穿弁服为准，用八条衣游缝，去掉簪玉，后山用一扇分划为四，服饰与亲王相同。
English: In the seventh year of the Jiajing Emperor, the clothing for the Peace Preservation Crown was established. It was based on the clothes worn in the leisure residence, with eight clothes and eight seams, removing the enamel, and the back mountain was divided into four with one fan. The clothing was the same as that of the prince.

古文：世子妃冠服：永乐三年定，与亲王妃同，惟冠用七翟。
现代文：世子妃的礼冠服饰。永乐三年制定，与亲王妃相同，只是冠用七枝雉羽装饰。
English: The crown attire of the crown princess. Enacted in the third year of Yongle, it is the same as that of the crown princess, but the crown is decorated with seven cormorant feathers.

古文：郡王冠服：永乐三年定，冕冠前后各七旒，每旒五采缫七就，贯三采玉珠七。
现代文：郡王的礼冠服饰。永乐三年制定，礼冠前后各悬挂玉串七串，每串五种色彩的丝绳七匝，穿缀三种色彩的玉珠七颗。
English: The county king's ceremonial crown attire. Enacted by Yongle for three years, the ceremonial crown has seven strings of jade hanging before and behind it, each string of five colors of silk cord, and seven jade beads of three colors.

古文：圭长九寸。
现代文：圭玉长九寸。
English: The kei-tama is nine inches long.

古文：青衣三章，粉米在肩，藻、宗彝在两袖，皆织成。
现代文：青色衣三种图纹，粉米图纹在肩上，藻、宗彝图纹在两袖，都是编织而成。
English: The three patterns of the blue dress, the pattern of the powdered rice on the shoulder, and the patterns of the algae and the dragonfly on the two sleeves, are all woven.

古文：纁裳二章，织黼、黻各二。
现代文：浅绛色下裳二种图纹，编织黼、黻图纹二种。
English: There are two kinds of patterns for light-colored petticoats, and two kinds of patterns for woven coats and coats.

古文：中单，领织黻文七，馀与亲王世子同。
现代文：礼服的里衣，衣领饰青黑相问的图纹七样。其余与亲王世子服饰相同。
English: The lining of the dress and the collar are decorated with seven patterns of alternating blue and black. The rest are the same as the prince's heir.

古文：皮弁，前后各七缝，每缝缀三采玉七，馀与亲王世子同。
现代文：皮弁，前后各七条缝，每条缝连缀三种色彩的玉七片，其余与亲王世子相同。
English: The leather flap has seven seams on the front and back, each seam is decorated with seven pieces of three-coloured jade, the rest are the same as the heir to the throne.

古文：其圭佩、带绶、袜舄如冕服内制。
现代文：它的圭佩、绶带、鞋袜如同礼冠与服饰内制。
English: Its cape, sash, shoes and socks are made in-house, just like the crown and the dress.

古文：常服亦与亲王世子同。
现代文：平常服饰也与亲王世子的相同。
English: The usual attire is also the same as that of the heir to the throne.

古文：嘉靖七年定保和冠服，冠用七衤取，服与亲王世子同。
现代文：熹靖七年制定保和冠服，冠用七条衣游缝，服饰与亲王世子相同。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, the Guohe Guanfu was established. The Guohe Guanfu was sewn with seven pieces of clothing, and the clothing was the same as that of the prince's descendants.

古文：郡王妃冠服：永乐三年定，冠用七翟，与亲王世子妃同。
现代文：郡王妃的礼冠服饰。永乐三年规定，冠用七枝雉羽装饰，与亲王世子妃相同。
English: The county princess's ceremonial crown. According to the Yongle three-year rule, the crown is decorated with seven feathers, the same as the prince's daughter-in-law.

古文：其大衫、霞帔、燕居佩服之饰，俱同亲王妃，第绣云霞翟文，不用盘凤文。
现代文：它的大衫、霞帔、闲居佩服的装饰，都如同亲王妃，只是刺绣云霞野鸡图纹，不用盘凤图纹。
English: Its overcoat, the gazebo, the decoration of idle admiration, are all like the prince and princess, but embroidered with clouds and pheasants, without the phoenix pattern.

古文：郡王长子朝服：七梁冠，大红素罗衣，白素纱中单，大红素罗裳及蔽膝，大红素罗白素纱二色大带，玉朝带，丹矾红花锦，锦鸡绶，玉佩，象笏，白绢袜，皂皮云头履鞋。
现代文：郡王长子的朝服。七梁礼冠，大红白色绫罗衣，白色素纱里衣，大红素色绫罗下裳以及蔽膝，大红素色绫罗白色素纱两色大带，玉制朝带，丹红色山矾花红花锦缎，锦鸡绶带，玉佩，象牙手板，白色绢袜，黑皮云头鞋。
English: The county prince's eldest son's morning dress. Seven-beam crown, large red and white embroidered dress, white suede inner dress, large red and white embroidered petticoat and knee cover, large red and white embroidered and white suede two-color large belt, jade morning belt, tan red hawthorn red flower brocade, brocade chicken ribbon, jade lapel, ivory hand plate, white socks, black leather cloud shoes.

古文：公服：皂绉纱幞头，大红素纻丝衣，玉革带。
现代文：作公事的服饰，黑色绉纱幞头，大红素色贮丝衣，玉制革带。
English: Business attire, black satin bonnets, a large red silk storage coat, and a jade leather belt.

古文：常服：乌纱帽，大红纻丝织金狮子开衤癸，圆领，玉束带，皂皮铜线靴。
现代文：平常服饰，乌纱帽，大红纡丝编织金色狮子开钗，圆形衣领，玉制束带，黑色皮铜线靴。
English: Ordinary clothes, black hat, big red satin braid, gold lion's mane, round collar, jade cords, black leather and copper shoes.

古文：其保和冠，如忠静之制，用五衤取；服与郡王同，补子用织金方龙。
现代文：它的保和冠，如同忠静冠的样式采用五条衣游缝，衣服与郡王相同，徽饰用编织金线的方龙。
English: Its crown of peace, like the crown of chastity, is made of five loops of cloth. The cloth is the same as that of the county king, and the crest is a square dragon woven with gold thread.

古文：郡主冠服：永乐三年定，与郡王妃同。
现代文：郡主礼冠服饰。永乐三年制定，与郡王妃相同。
English: Guanzhong ceremonial crown costume. It has been formulated for three years, and it is the same as the Guanzhong crown.

古文：惟不用圭，减四珠环一对。
现代文：只是不用圭，减少四珠玉环一对。
English: It's just that you don't have to reduce the number of beads by one.

古文：郡王长子夫人冠服：珠翠五翟冠，大红纻丝大衫，深青纻丝金绣翟褙子，青罗金绣翟霞帔，金坠头。
现代文：郡王长子夫人礼冠服饰，珍珠翡翠五翟冠，大红贮丝大衫，深青色贮丝用金线绣成野鸡图纹的半臂上衣，青色绫罗用金线绣成野鸡图纹霞帔礼服，金坠头。
English: The county king's eldest son's wife's ceremonial crown costume, pearl emerald five-crowned crown, big red silk blouse, deep blue silk blouse embroidered with gold thread into a pheasant pattern half-arm blouse, blue satin dress embroidered with gold thread into a pheasant pattern, gold pendant head.

古文：镇国将军冠服，与郡王长子同。
现代文：镇国将军礼冠服饰，与郡王长子相同。
English: He wears the same ceremonial crown as the county king's eldest son.

古文：镇国将军夫人冠服，与郡王长子夫人同。
现代文：镇国将军夫人礼冠服饰，与郡王长子夫人相同。
English: The ceremonial crown dress of the wife of the general of the township is the same as that of the wife of the eldest son of the county king.

古文：辅国将军冠服，与镇国将军同，惟冠六梁，带用犀。
现代文：辅国将军礼冠服饰，与镇国将军相同；祇是礼冠用六梁，佩带用犀角。
English: The ceremonial crown of the general of the auxiliary state is the same as that of the general of the garrison state; only the ceremonial crown uses six beams, and the rhinoceros horn is used to wear the rim.

古文：辅国将军夫人冠服，与镇国将军夫人同，惟冠用四翟，抹金银坠头。
现代文：辅国将军夫人礼冠服饰，与镇国将军夫人相同；只是礼冠用四枝雉羽装饰，用金银粉涂抹坠头。
English: The ceremonial crown of the wife of the general of the auxiliary province is the same as that of the wife of the general of the township; however, the ceremonial crown is decorated with four feathers and the head of the pendant is smeared with gold and silver powder.

古文：奉国将军冠服，与辅国将军同，惟冠五梁，带用金鈒花，常服大红织金虎豹。
现代文：奉国将军礼冠服饰，与辅国将军相同；只是礼冠用五梁，佩带用金属镶嵌花纹，平常服饰用大红色上织金线的虎豹图纹。
English: The ceremonial crown of the General of the Bongguo Kingdom is the same as that of the General of the Auxiliary Kingdom; however, the ceremonial crown uses five beams, wears a metal inlaid pattern, and the ordinary costume uses a tiger and leopard pattern with a large red woven gold thread.

古文：奉国将军淑人冠服，与辅国将军夫人同，惟褙子、霞帔，金绣孔雀文。
现代文：奉国将军淑人的礼冠服饰，与辅国将军夫人相同；只是半背上衣、霞帔，用金线刺绣孔雀图纹。
English: The ceremonial crown attire of the lady of the general of Fengguo Province is the same as that of the wife of the general of Fu Guo Province; only the half-back blouse, the chiffon, and the peacock pattern embroidered with gold thread.

古文：镇国中尉冠服，与奉国将军同，惟冠四梁，带用素金，佩用药玉。
现代文：镇国中尉礼冠服饰，与奉国将军相同；祇是礼冠用四梁。衣带用素色织金，佩饰用药玉。
English: Lieutenant Zhen Guo's ceremonial crown costume is the same as that of General Feng Guo; only the ceremonial crown uses four beams. The belt uses plain-colored woven gold, and the decoration uses medicinal beads.

古文：镇国中尉恭人冠服，与奉国将军淑人同。
现代文：镇国中尉恭人礼冠服饰，与奉国将军淑人相同。
English: Zhenguo Lieutenant Gongren wears the same ceremonial crown as Gongguo General Gongren.

古文：辅国中尉冠服，与镇国中尉同，惟冠三梁，带用银鈒花，绶用盘雕，公服用深青素罗，常服红织金熊罴。
现代文：辅国中尉礼冠服饰，与镇国中尉相同；只是礼冠用三梁，衣带用银镶嵌的花纹，绶带使用盘雕，办公事的服饰用深青素色绫罗，平常服饰为红色上织金线成熊熙图纹。
English: The lieutenant of the auxiliary province wears the same ceremonial crown as the lieutenant of the township province; however, the ceremonial crown uses three beams, the sash uses a silver-inlaid pattern, the ribbon uses a plate engraving, the office attire uses a dark blue-green satin, and the ordinary attire is a red woven gold thread patterned with a bear.

古文：辅国中尉宜人冠服，与镇国中尉恭人同，惟冠用三翟，褙子、霞帔，金绣鸳鸯文，银坠头。
现代文：辅国中尉宜人的礼冠服饰，与镇国中尉恭人相同；祇是礼冠用三枝雉羽、半臂上衣、霞帔，用金线刺绣鸳鸯图纹，银坠头。
English: The pleasant ceremonial crown attire of Lieutenant Fu Guo is the same as that of Lieutenant Jing Guo; only the ceremonial crown uses three feathers, a half-arm tunic, a halo, embroidered with gold thread, and a silver pendant.

古文：奉国中尉冠服，与辅国中尉同，惟冠二梁，带用素银，绶用练鹊，幞头黑漆，常服红织金彪。
现代文：奉国中尉礼冠服饰，与辅国中尉相同；只是礼冠用二梁，衣带用素银，绶带用练鹊，幞头黑漆，平常服饰为红色上织金线成虎斑图纹。
English: Lieutenant Feng Guo's ceremonial crown costume is the same as that of the auxiliary lieutenant; however, the ceremonial crown uses two beams, the sash uses plain silver, the ribbon uses embroidered satin, the skull is black lacquer, and the usual costume is red woven gold thread with a tiger-spotted pattern.

古文：奉国中尉安人冠服，与辅国中尉宜人同，惟大衫用丹矾红，褙子、霞帔金绣练鹊文。
现代文：奉国中尉安人礼冠服饰，与辅国中尉宜人相同；只是大衫用丹红色山矾花图纹，半臂上衣、霞帔用金线锈成练鹊图纹。
English: The attire of Lieutenant Feng Guo Anren ceremonial crown is the same as that of Lieutenant Fu Guo Yi Ren; however, the overcoat is patterned with crimson hawthorn flowers, while the half-sleeved shirt and the apron are rusted with gold thread into a pattern of hoop earrings.

古文：县主冠服：珠翠五翟冠，大红纻丝大衫，深青纻丝金绣孔雀褙子，青罗金绣孔雀霞帔，抹金银坠头。
现代文：县主礼冠服饰。珍珠翡翠五枝雉羽帽装饰的礼冠，大红纡丝大衫，深青色贮丝金线绣成孔雀图纹的半臂上衣，青色绫罗用金线刺锈成孔雀图纹的霞帔，涂抹金银粉的坠头。
English: A ceremonial crown decorated with a pearl jade five-branched skullcap, a large red silk blouse, a dark blue half-sleeve blouse embroidered with gold thread into a peacock pattern, a blue halo embroidered with gold thread into a peacock pattern, and a gold-and-silver powdered headpiece.

古文：郡君冠服，与县主同，惟冠用四翟，褙子、霞帔金绣鸳鸯文。
现代文：郡君礼冠服饰，与县主相同；只是礼冠用四枝雉羽装饰，半臂上衣、霞帔用金线刺绣鸳鸯图纹。
English: The county official's ceremonial crown costume is the same as that of the head of the county; however, the ceremonial crown is decorated with four feathered plumes, and the half-arm tunic and cape are embroidered with gold thread.

古文：县君冠服，与郡君同，惟冠用三翟。
现代文：县君礼冠服饰与郡君相同；祇是礼冠用三枝雉羽装饰。
English: The ceremonial crown of the county magistrate has the same costume as that of the county magistrate, except that the crown is decorated with three feathered plumes.

古文：乡君冠服，与县君同，惟大衫用丹矾红，褙子、霞帔金绣练鹊文。
现代文：乡君礼冠服饰与县君相同；只是大衫用丹红山响花图纹，半臂上衣、霞帔用金线刺绣练鹊图纹。
English: The townspeople's ceremonial crown dress is the same as that of the county officials; however, the shirt is embroidered with the Dan Hongshan ringing flower pattern, the half-arm shirt, and the honeysuckle is embroidered with gold thread.

