古文：卢景裕赵文若赵文昌新繁县书生蒯武安睦彦通杜之亮慕容文策柳俭萧瑀赵文信刘弼袁志通韦克勤沈嘉会陆怀素
现代文：卢景裕赵文若赵文昌新繁县书生蒯武安睦彦通杜之亮慕容文策柳俭萧瑀赵文信刘弼袁志通韦克勤沈嘉会陆怀素
English: Lu Jingyu, Zhao Wenwu, Zhao Wenchang, Xinxiang County students, Wu An, Mutuhiko, Du Ziliang, Murong, Wen Zhe, Liu Jian, Xiao Zhao, Zhao Wenshin, Liu Yao, Yuan Zhitong, Wei Ke, Qin Shen Jia Hui, Lu Huai Su

古文：卢景裕
现代文：卢景裕
English: Lu Jingyu

古文：后魏卢景裕字仲儒，节闵初，为国子博士，信释氏，注《周易》、《论语》。
现代文：后魏卢景裕字仲儒，节闵帝初年，做国子博士，信奉佛教，解释周易、论语。
English: After Wei, Lu Jingyu was known as Zhong Ru, and in the first year of Emperor Xuanzong, he became a doctor of the country, believed in Buddhism, and explained Zhou Yi and the Analects.

古文：从兄神礼，据乡人反叛，逼其同力以应西魏，系晋阳狱。
现代文：跟着他的兄长拜神。因为乡人反叛，逼迫他一起去对付西魏，后被捕押在晋阳监狱。
English: Because the villagers rebelled, he was forced to go with them to fight against the Western Wei Dynasty, and was later arrested and held in Jinyang Prison.

古文：至心念金刚经，枷锁自脱。
现代文：他诚心念金刚经。结果枷锁自己脱落。
English: He sincerely recited the Diamond Sutra. As a result, his shackles fell off.

古文：齐神武作相，特见原宥。
现代文：齐神武作宰相，特意地宽恕了他。
English: Qi Shenwu, as prime minister, specifically pardoned him.

古文：赵文若
现代文：赵文若
English: Zhao Wenruo

古文：隋赵文若，开皇初病亡。
现代文：隋朝的赵文若，在文帝开皇初年病亡。
English: Zhao Wenruo of the Sui Dynasty died of illness in the first year of Emperor Wen's reign.

古文：经七日，家人初欲敛，忽缩一脚，遂停。
现代文：停了七天，家人才欲入殓。忽然文若腿收缩了一下，就停了下来。
English: It took seven days before the family members wanted to have sex. Suddenly, Wen Ruo's legs contracted, and he stopped.

古文：既苏云：被一人来追，即随行，入一宫城。
现代文：苏醒之后说：他被一个人追捕，就跟着他走，进入一座宫城。
English: After waking up, he said: He was chased by a man, so he followed him and entered a palace.

古文：见王曰： 卿在生有何功德？ 
现代文：看见一个君王问他： 你在人间有什么功德？ 
English: Seeing a king, he asked him, "What is your merit on earth?"

古文：答云： 唯持金刚经。 
现代文：答道： 就是念金刚经。 
English: Answer: It is reciting the Diamond Sutra.

古文：王曰： 此最第一。卿算虽尽，以持经之故，更为申延。 
现代文：君王说： 这是最主要的，你的寿命虽然已尽了，因为你念金刚经的缘故，我再为你延长寿命。 
English: The king said, "This is the most important thing. Although your life span is over, because of your recitation of the Diamond Sutra, I will extend your life span."

古文：又曰： 诸罪中，杀生甚重。
现代文：又说： 许多罪中，数杀生为最严重。
English: He also said: "Among many crimes, homicide is the most serious.

古文：卿以猪羊充饱，如何？ 
现代文：你用猪羊来填饱肚子，难道不是大罪吗？ 
English: Is it not a great sin for you to fill your stomach with pigs and sheep?

古文：即遣使领文若至受苦之处。
现代文：于是就派使者领文若到受苦的地方。
English: So he sent messengers to bring John to the place where they were being tormented.

古文：北行可三二里，至高墙下，有穴，才容身。从此穴出，登一高阜，四望遥阔，见一城极高峻，烟火接天，黑气溢地。
现代文：向北走了三二里路，到了高墙的下面，有一个洞穴，仅容纳一人，跟着从这个洞出去，又登上一个高坡，四下远望，看见一座极高峻的城，那里烟火连天。黑气布满地面。
English: I walked north for three or two miles, reached the bottom of a high wall, and there was a cave that could only hold one person. I followed him out of the cave, climbed another high slope, looked down and saw a very high city, where fireworks lit up the sky. Black air covered the ground.

古文：又闻楚痛哀叫之声不忍听，乃掩蔽耳目，叩头求出。
现代文：又听到凄楚痛苦的哀叫声，不忍再听。于是就捂着眼睛，堵着耳朵。叩头而请求出去。
English: Again he heard the most agonizing cries and could not bear to listen any longer. So he closed his eyes and plugged his ears. He bowed his head and begged to be let out.

古文：仍觉心破，口中出血，使者引回见王曰： 卿既啖肉，不可空回。 
现代文：他仍感到心痛，口中吐出鲜血。使者领着他回去见君王，王说： 你既然杀生吃肉，不可以不受惩罚就回去。 
English: He still felt pain in his heart and vomited blood from his mouth. The messenger led him back to the king, who said, "Since you kill and eat meat, you cannot go back unpunished."

古文：即索长钉五枚，钉头及手足疼楚。
现代文：于是就拿出五枚长钉，钉在头、手和脚上，痛疼难忍。
English: So he took out five long nails and nailed them to his head, hands and feet. The pain was unbearable.

古文：从此专持经，更不食肉。
现代文：文若复活后从此专心念经，更不吃肉。
English: After his resurrection, he devoted himself to chanting sutras and stopped eating meat.

古文：后因公事至驿，忽梦一青衣女子求哀。
现代文：后因公事到驿站，忽然梦见一青衣女子向他哀求。
English: After arriving at the station on business, he suddenly dreamed of a young woman in a blue dress pleading with him.

古文：试问驿吏曰： 有何物食。 
现代文：他问驿吏道： 你们给我准备了什么吃的？ 
English: He asked the eunuchs, "What food have you prepared for me?"

古文：报云： 见备一羊，甚肥嫩。 
现代文：回答说： 准备了一只羊，很肥嫩。 
English: And he said, I have prepared one ewe lamb, very tender.

古文：诘之，云： 青牸也。 文若曰： 我不吃肉。 
现代文：文若追问，驿吏说： 是一只青色的母羊。 文若说： 我不吃肉。 
English: When questioned, officials said the animal was a blue-coloured ewe, while Wen said: "I don't eat meat."

古文：遂赎放之。
现代文：于是赎回了羊放了它。
English: So he ransomed the sheep and set it free.

古文：赵文昌
现代文：赵文昌
English: Zhao Wenchang

古文：隋开皇十一年，大府寺丞赵文昌忽暴卒，唯心上微暖，家人不敢敛。
现代文：隋朝开皇十一年，大府寺丞赵文昌忽然暴死，唯独心上稍微温暖。家人不敢入殓，之后又活了。
English: In the eleventh year after the Sui Dynasty was founded, Zhao Wenchang, the abbot of Dafu Temple, suddenly died violently, but his heart was slightly warm. His family members did not dare to enter the tomb, but later they lived again.

古文：后复活，说云：吾初死，有人引至阎罗王所，王问曰： 汝一生已来，作何福业？ 
现代文：说： 我当初死时，有人领我到了阎罗王的住处。阎王问我： 你一生来，作了什么福事？ 
English: He said, "When I first died, someone led me to the abode of the king of hell. The king of hell asked me, 'What good things have you done in your life?'

古文：昌答云： 家贫，无力可营功德，唯专心持诵金刚般若经。 
现代文：答道： 家里贫穷，无有能力可以建立功德。只是专心致志地念金刚般若经。 
English: Answer: The family was poor and had no ability to build up merit. They just devoted themselves to reciting the Diamond Sutra.

古文：王闻语，合掌低首，赞言： 善哉！
现代文：阎王听了这些话，合掌低头，赞扬说： 很好。
English: After listening to these words, Yan Wang bowed his head with his palms together and praised, "Very good.

古文：汝既持般若，功德甚大。 
现代文：你已念般若经，功德很大。 
English: You have recited the Prajnaparamita Sutra, and your merit is great.

古文：王即使人引文昌，向经藏内取金刚般若经。
现代文：阎王就派人领文昌，向经藏内取出金刚般若经。
English: The king of hell then sent someone to take Wenchang and take out the Diamond Prajna Sutra from the library.

古文：文昌向西行五六里，见数十间屋，甚华丽，其中经典遍满，金轴宝帙，庄饰精好。
现代文：文昌向西走了五六里，看见几十间房子，非常华丽。房子里经典很多，金轴宝套，装饰非常好。
English: Wenchang walked five or six miles to the west and saw dozens of houses, very gorgeous. There are a lot of classics in the house, a gold axis treasure set, and the decoration is very good.

古文：文昌合掌闭目，信手抽取一卷开看，乃是金刚般若。
现代文：文昌合掌闭眼，随手抽出一卷打开看，乃是金刚般若经。
English: Wenchang clenched his hands, closed his eyes, and pulled out a scroll to open. It was the Diamond Sutra.

古文：文昌捧至王所，令一人执卷在西，文昌东立，面经读诵，一字不遗。
现代文：文昌捧到阎王的住处，让一个人拿卷在西面，文昌站在东面，面向经书诵读，一字不漏。
English: Wenchang took it to the abode of the king of hell, and asked a person to hold the scroll on the west side. Wenchang stood on the east side, facing the scriptures and read every word.

古文：王大欢喜，即放昌还家。
现代文：阎王非常高兴，就放文昌回家。
English: Yan Wang was very happy and let Wen Chang go home.

古文：令引文昌从南门出，至门首，见周武帝在门侧房内，著三重钳锁，唤昌云： 汝是我本国人，暂来至此，要与汝语。 
现代文：令让文昌从南门出去。到了门口，看见周武帝在门侧的房内。被锁着三重钳锁，叫文昌说： 你是我本国的人，暂时来到这里，我要和你说话。 
English: He ordered Wenchang to go out from the south gate. When he arrived at the gate, he saw Zhou Wudi in the room next to the gate. He was locked with a triple lock. He told Wenchang to say, "You are a person from my country, you have come here temporarily, I want to talk to you."

古文：文昌即拜之，帝曰： 汝识我否？ 
现代文：文昌立即拜见。武帝说： 你认识我吗？ 
English: Wenchang immediately went to see him. Emperor Wu said: Do you know me?

古文：文昌答云： 臣昔宿卫陛下。 
现代文：文昌答道： 我过去当过陛下的侍卫。 
English: Wenchang replied, "I used to be your Majesty's bodyguard.

古文：武帝云： 卿既是我旧臣，今还家，为吾向隋皇帝说。吾诸罪并欲辩了，唯灭佛法罪重，未可得免。
现代文：武帝说： 你既是我过去的臣子，现在回家，替我向隋皇帝说明，我许多罪过都能辩解明白，唯独消灭佛法的罪重，不能够赦免，望隋帝给我建立小小的功德。
English: Emperor Wu said: You are my former vassal, now go home and explain to Emperor Sui on my behalf that many of my sins can be justified and understood, but the sin of destroying Buddhism cannot be pardoned. I hope Emperor Sui will establish a small merit for me.

古文：望与吾营少功德，冀兹福祐，得离地狱。 
现代文：希望通过这些善事保祐，使我能够离开地狱。 
English: I hope that through these acts of kindness, I will be able to escape from hell.

古文：昌受辞而行。
现代文：文昌接受嘱托而走。
English: Wenchang accepted the commission and left.

古文：及出南门，见一大粪坑中，有人头发上出。昌问之，引人答云： 此是秦将白起，寄禁于此，罪尤未了。 
现代文：等到走出南门，看见一个大粪坑中，有一个人的头发浮在上面，文昌问引路的人，答道：这是秦国大将白起，被囚禁在这里，罪恶未了。
English: When he walked out of the south gate and saw a man's hair floating on top of a large cesspool, Wenchang asked the person leading the way and replied: This is the general Qin Guoqi, imprisoned here, his crime is over.

古文：昌至家得活，遂以其事上奏。
现代文：文昌到家后才复活。就把这些事奏于皇上，皇帝命令天下的人按人丁出钱为周武帝转金刚般若经。
English: Wenchang only came back to life when he got home. He reported these events to the emperor, and the emperor ordered everyone in the world to pay a certain amount of money to recite the Diamond Sutra for Emperor Zhou.

古文：帝令天下出口钱为周武帝转金刚般若经，设大供三日，仍录事状，入于隋史。新繁县书生益州新繁县西四十里王李村，隋时有书生，姓苟氏，善王书而不显迹，人莫能知之。尝于村东空中四面书金刚般若经，数日便了，云： 此经拟诸天读诵。 
现代文：几天就写完了。
English: I finished it in a few days.

古文：人初不之觉也。
现代文：他说，这是写给天上的神仙来念的。当初人都不知道这件事。
English: He said that it was written for the heavenly spirits to read. At first, no one knew about it.

古文：后值雷雨，牧牛小儿于书经处立，而不沾湿，其地干燥，可有丈余，及暗，村人怪之。
现代文：后来正赶上雷雨天，放牛的小孩在写着经书的地方站着，却不沾湿衣服，脚下也是干爽的，可能有一丈方圆。等到黑天，村人感到奇怪。
English: Later, just in time for a thunderstorm, a child herding cattle stood in the place where the scripture was written, but his clothes did not get wet. His feet were also dry, and they might have been a meter square. When the day turned dark, the villagers felt strange.

古文：尔后每雨，小儿常集其中，衣服不湿。
现代文：之后每当下雨，小孩常常聚集在那里，衣服不湿。
English: After that, whenever it rained, the children would often gather there to keep their clothes from getting wet.

古文：唐武德中，有异僧语村人曰： 此地空中有金刚般若经，诸天于上设宝盖覆之，不可轻犯。 
现代文：唐高祖武德年间，有一个外地来的和尚告诉村里人说： 这个地方空中有金刚般若经，诸天神在上面设宝盖覆盖着它。不可以轻易冒犯。 
English: During the reign of Emperor Wudi of the Tang Dynasty, a monk from out of town told the villagers: "In this place, there is a Vajra Mantra in the sky, and the gods have placed a cover over it. You must not offend easily."

古文：自尔于四周设栏楯，以阻人畜履践。每至斋日，村人四远就设佛供。常闻天乐，声震寥泬，繁会盈耳。
现代文：来阻止人畜的践踏。每当到了斋戒日，村人从四面八方赶来设供祭佛，能常常听到天空中有音乐声。声音震动苍天，响而震耳。
English: Whenever it is a fasting day, villagers come from far and wide to make offerings to the Buddha. You can often hear the sound of music in the sky. The sound shakes the sky and is loud and deafening.

古文：蒯武安
现代文：蒯武安
English: Zouwu'an

古文：隋蒯武安，蔡州人，有巨力，善弓矢，常射大虫。
现代文：隋朝蒯武安，是蔡州人。他臂力过人，擅长射箭，常常射老虎。
English: Wu'an, a member of the Sui Dynasty, was from Caizhou. He was very strong, good at archery, and often shot tigers.

古文：会嵩山南为暴甚，往射之。
现代文：正赶上老虎在嵩山以南行凶，前去射虎。
English: He was just catching up with a tiger that was on the rampage south of Songshan. He went to shoot the tiger.

古文：渐至深山，忽有异物如野人，手开大虫皮，冐武安身上，因推落涧下。
现代文：快到深山时，忽然有一个怪物象野人一样。用手撕开老虎的皮，罩在武安的身上，又把他推下深涧。
English: As he neared the mountains, a wild-man-like monster suddenly appeared. It tore the tiger's skin with its hands, wrapped it around Wu'an's body, and pushed him down into the depths.

古文：及起，已为大虫矣。
现代文：等到他起来，已经变成老虎了。
English: When he woke up, he had turned into a tiger.

古文：惶怖震骇，莫知所为，忽闻钟声，知是僧居，往求救。
现代文：他非常惊慌害怕，不知道怎么办。忽然听到钟声，知道是和尚住的地方，就去求救。
English: He was very panicked and scared and didn't know what to do. Suddenly, he heard a bell and knew it was where the monk lived, so he went to ask for help.

古文：果见一僧念金刚经，即闭目俯伏。
现代文：果真看见一和尚在念金刚经，他就闭着眼睛趴在那里。
English: If he really saw a monk reciting the Diamond Sutra, he would lie there with his eyes closed.

古文：其僧以手摩头，忽爆作巨声，头已破矣，武安乃从中出，即具述前事。
现代文：那个和尚用手摸他的头，忽听一响巨响，头已破了，武安才从中露出，就把前面的事全告诉和尚。
English: The monk touched his head with his hand. Suddenly, he heard a loud noise. The monk's head was broken, and only then did Wu'an emerge from it. He told the monk everything that had happened.

古文：又抚其背，随手而开，既出，全身衣服尽在，有少大虫毛，盖先灸疮之所粘也。
现代文：和尚又抚摸他的脊背，便随手而开，武安才完全露出来了，全身的衣服都在，只是有些老虎的毛，大概是先前长疮的地方粘的毛。
English: The monk stroked his back again, then he let go of his hand, and only then did Wu'an fully emerge, with all of his clothes on, except for some tiger hair, probably hair that had stuck to the place where the sores had previously grown.

古文：从此遂出家，专持金刚经。
现代文：从这以后他便出家，专心念金刚经。
English: From then on, he became a monk and devoted himself to reciting the Diamond Sutra.

古文：睦彦通
现代文：睦彦通
English: Mutsuhiko-dori Street

古文：睦彦通隋人，精持金刚经，日课十遍。
现代文：睦彦通是隋朝人，虔诚地念诵金刚经，每天学习十遍之多。
English: Mutsuhikontsu, a native of the Sui Dynasty, recited the Diamond Sutra religiously, studying it as many as ten times a day.

古文：李密盗起，彦通宰武牢，邑人欲杀之，以应义旗。
现代文：彦通事先知道了这件事。
English: Hikotori knew about it in advance.

古文：彦通先知之，遂投城下，贼拔刀以逐之。前至深涧，迫急跃入，如有人接右臂，置磐石上，都无伤处。
现代文：急忙出城。贼众拔刀来追赶他。到了深涧前，被迫急忙跳入涧中，他感到好象有人拉住他的右臂，把他放在磐石上。他一点也没有受伤。
English: He hurried out of the city. Thieves drew their swords to chase him. When he reached the edge of the moat and was forced to jump into the urn, he felt as if someone had grabbed his right arm and placed him on a rock. He was not injured at all.

古文：空中有言曰： 汝为念经所致，因得还家。 
现代文：天空上有人说： 你因为念经才能得救，得以回家去。 
English: Someone in the sky said, "You can only be saved and go home by reciting the sutras."

古文：所接之臂，有奇香之气，累日不灭。
现代文：他被拉住的那个右臂，有奇异的香气，多日不消散。
English: His right arm, where he was held down, had a strange smell that lingered for days.

古文：后位至方伯，九十余终。
现代文：以后爵位到方伯，九十多岁才死。
English: He was later raised to the peerage of Fangbo, and died in his nineties.

古文：杜之亮
现代文：杜之亮
English: Du Zhi Liang

古文：隋杜之亮，仁寿中为汉王谅府参军。
现代文：隋朝杜之亮，文帝仁寿年间做了汉王谅的参军。
English: Du Zhi Liang of the Sui Dynasty and Emperor Wen of the Han Dynasty joined the army.

古文：后谅于并州举兵反，败，亮与僚属皆系狱。亮惶惧，日夜涕泣。
现代文：后来谅举兵在并州谋反，失败。亮和他的同僚等都被抓进监狱里，亮惶慌害怕，整天的哭泣流泪。
English: Later, he raised an army to rebel in Bianzhou and failed. Liang and his colleagues were all taken to prison. Liang was panicked and scared, crying and weeping all day.

古文：忽夜梦一僧曰： 汝但念诵金刚经，即此厄可度。 
现代文：忽然夜里梦见一个和尚说： 你只要念诵金刚经，就可免除这种厄运。 
English: Suddenly, in the night, I had a dream of a monk saying, "If you just recite the Diamond Sutra, you can avoid this bad luck."

古文：至晓，即取经，专诚习念。
现代文：到了天亮，亮就拿来经书，专心致志诵读学习。
English: At dawn, they would take the scriptures and concentrate on chanting and studying.

古文：及主者并引就戮，亮身在其中，唱者皆死，唯无亮姓名。
现代文：等到和首犯准备受刑时，亮也在当中。点到名的都处死，唯独没有念到亮的姓名免去了一死。
English: When he and the first criminal were preparing to be sentenced, Ryo was also in the middle. All the names that were called out were executed, except for the one whose name was not called out, who was spared death.

古文：主典之者皆坐罚，俄而会赦得免。
现代文：主持典刑的人都被罚，后来赶上大赦又把杜之亮放了出来。
English: Those who presided over the final punishment were all punished, and later, in time for the amnesty, Du Zhi Liang was released.

古文：显庆中，卒于黄州刺史。
现代文：到了唐高宗显庆年间，在黄州刺史的任上才死去。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty, he died in the post of Huangzhou chief historian.

古文：慕容文策
现代文：慕容文策
English: Murong Wenshu

古文：慕容文策隋人，常持金刚经，不吃酒肉。
现代文：慕容文策是隋朝人，常常念金刚经，不吃酒肉，隋炀帝大业七年突然死去了。
English: Murong Wencai was from the Sui Dynasty. He often recited the Diamond Sutra and did not eat meat or wine. In the seventh year of the Sui Dynasty, Emperor Daye died suddenly.

古文：大业七年暴卒，三日复活，云： 初见二鬼，把文牒，追至一城门，顾极严峻。入行四五里，见有宫殿羽卫，王当殿坐，僧道四夷，不可胜数。
现代文：三天后又活了过来。说： 当初看见两个鬼，手拿文书，捉他到一城门，看管他们都非常严厉，入城走了四五里路，看见有一座宫殿有兵把守着，阎王正坐在大殿当中。
English: Three days later, he came back to life. He said: At first, I saw two ghosts, holding a document in their hands. I caught him at a city gate. The guards were very strict. I walked four or five miles into the city and saw a palace guarded by soldiers. The king of hell was sitting in the middle of the great hall.

古文：使者入见，文策最在后，一一问在生作善作恶，东西令立。
现代文：和尚、道人等众人物很多，数也数不过来。使者进入拜见，文策跟在最后。阎王一个一个问拘来的人生前作的善恶等事，然后叫他们站在东西两边。
English: Monks, Taoists, and many other figures are too numerous to count. The messenger enters to pay his respects, followed at the end by Wen Zha. The king of hell asks them one by one about the good and evil things they have done in their lives, and then asks them to stand on the east and west sides.

古文：乃唱策名，问曰： 作何善？ 
现代文：这时才喊到文策的名字，问他说： 你做了哪些好事？ 
English: It was only then that Wen Zhe's name was called out and he was asked: What good things have you done?

古文：对曰： 小来持金刚经。 
现代文：文策回答说： 我从小就念金刚经。 
English: Wenze replied, "I have been reciting the Diamond Sutra since I was a child.

古文：王闻，合掌叹曰： 功德甚大，且放还。 
现代文：阎王听后，拍手称赞说： 功德很大，暂且放你回去。 
English: After listening, Yan Wang clapped his hands in praise and said, "Your merits are great. I'll let you go back for the time being."

古文：忽见二僧，执火引策。
现代文：忽然看见两个和尚，举着火把领着文策。
English: Suddenly, I saw two monks holding torches and leading Wen Zhe.

古文：即捉袈裟角问之，僧云： 缘公持经，故来相卫，可随烛行。 
现代文：文策就抓住和尚衣角问他。和尚说： 因你念经，因此来护卫你。可随着火把走。 
English: Wensaku grabbed the monk by the scruff of the neck and asked him. The monk said, "I came to protect you because you are reciting sutras. You can go with the torches."

古文：遂出城门，僧曰： 汝知地狱处否？ 
现代文：就出了城门。和尚说： 你知道地狱在哪里吗？ 
English: The monk said, "Do you know where hell is?"

古文：指一大城门曰： 此是也。 
现代文：然后指着一个大城门说： 这就是。 
English: Then he pointed to a large gate and said, "This is it."

古文：策不忍看，求速去。
现代文：文策不忍看，请求快离开。
English: Wen Xue couldn't bear to look at it, so he asked her to leave.

古文：二僧即领至道，有一横垣塞路，僧以锡扣之，即开，云： 可从此去。 
现代文：两个和尚就领他到了路上，有一堵墙堵住了去路。和尚就用锡杖敲打墙，墙就打开了。和尚说： 可以从这里出去。 
English: Two monks led him to the road, but there was a wall blocking the way. The monk struck the wall with a tin cane, and the wall opened. The monk said, "You can go out from here."

古文：遂活。
现代文：于是文策又复活了。
English: As a result, the literary policy was revived.

古文：柳俭
现代文：柳俭
English: Liu Jian

古文：唐邢州司马柳俭，隋大业十年任岐州岐阳宫监。
现代文：唐代邢州司马柳俭，隋炀帝大业十年时曾任岐州岐阳宫监。
English: Sima Liuqian of Bozhou in the Tang Dynasty. He served as the palace inspector of Qizhou and Qiyang during the reign of Emperor Sui for ten years.

古文：义宁元年，坐诬枉系大理寺。
现代文：隋恭帝义宁元年，冤枉他犯了诬告罪而被押在大理寺。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Sui of Yining, he was falsely accused and detained in Dali Temple.

古文：俭至心诵金刚般若经，有两纸未通，不觉眠睡。
现代文：柳俭虔心诵读金刚般若经，有两页没有读完，不知不觉睡着了。
English: Liu Qian devoutly recited the Diamond Prayer Book. He did not finish reading two pages and unconsciously fell asleep.

古文：梦一婆罗门僧报云： 檀越宜诵经令遍，即应得出。 
现代文：梦见一个印度和尚告诉他说： 施主诵读经书应当从头到尾读完，就能够得到释放。 
English: He dreamt of an Indian monk who told him: "When the giver reads the scripture, he should read it from the beginning to the end, and then he can be released."

古文：俭忽寤，勤诵不懈经二日，忽有敕唤，就朝堂放免。
现代文：柳俭醒来，勤奋不懈地诵经。又过了两天，忽然又有令下，就在朝堂上放了他。
English: Liu Jian woke up and diligently and tirelessly chanted the sutras. Another two days passed, and suddenly he received another order, and he was released in the morning hall.

古文：又俭别时，夜诵经至三更，忽闻有异香，散漫满宅，至晓不绝，盖感应所致也。
现代文：柳俭在离别时，当夜诵读经书到三更时分。忽然闻到有奇异的香味，充满牢房，一直到早晨也不断，大概是感动上天所造成的。
English: At the time of parting, Liu Jian was reciting scriptures until 3 a.m. That night, he suddenly smelled a strange fragrance that filled the cell and lasted until morning. It was probably caused by the heavens.

古文：俭至终，计诵经得五千余遍。
现代文：柳俭一直到死，共诵读经书五千多遍。
English: Liu Jian recited the scripture more than five thousand times until his death.

古文：萧瑀
现代文：萧瑀
English: Xiao Yao

古文：萧瑀，梁武帝玄孙，梁王岿之子。
现代文：萧瑀，是梁武帝的重孙子，梁王岿的儿子。
English: Xiao Yao was the great-grandson of Emperor Liangwu and the son of Liang Wangyao.

古文：梁灭入隋，仕至中书令，封宋国公。
现代文：梁灭亡后归顺隋朝，官到中书令，封为宋国公。
English: After Liang's death, he submitted to the Sui Dynasty, and was appointed to the position of Zhongshirong, and was given the title of Song Guogong.

古文：女炀帝皇后，笃信佛法，常持金刚经。
现代文：他的女儿是隋炀帝的皇后，他诚笃信奉佛法，常常念诵金刚经。
English: His daughter was the empress of the Sui and Qian Dynasties. He sincerely believed in Buddhism and often recited the Diamond Sutra.

古文：议伐高丽，不合旨，上大怒。与贺若弼、高颍同禁，欲置于法。
现代文：因商议讨伐高丽，不附合皇帝的旨意，皇上大怒，和贺若弼、高颍一起被囚禁，想要置之于法。
English: The emperor was furious because he did not agree with the emperor's decision to attack Goryeo. He was imprisoned together with Horajoko and Takahata, and wanted to bring them to justice.

古文：瑀就其所，八日念金刚经七百遍，明日，桎梏忽自脱。守者失色，复为著。至殿前，独宥瑀，二人即重罚。
现代文：萧瑀在监牢中。八天念金刚经七百遍。第二天，枷锁忽然自己脱落，看守的人大惊失色，又给他带上，等到了金殿上，唯独宽恕了萧瑀，那两个人就受了重罚。
English: Xiao Yao was in prison. For eight days, he recited the Diamond Sutra seven hundred times. The next day, the shackles suddenly fell off on their own. The guards were shocked and disgraced. They put them on him again and waited for him in the Golden Hall. Only Xiao Yao was forgiven, while the other two were severely punished.

古文：因著《般若经灵验一十八条》，乃造宝塔贮经，檀香为之，高三尺。
现代文：于是萧瑀写了《般若经灵验一十八条》，还建宝塔贮藏经书。塔用檀香木造成，高三尺。
English: As a result, Xiao Yu wrote "The Eighteenth Article of the Prajna Sutra" and also built a pagoda to store scriptures. The tower is made of sandalwood and is three feet high.

古文：感一鍮石像，忽在庭中，奉安塔中，获舍利百粒。
现代文：感召来一黄铜佛像，落在院子里，把这佛像也安放在塔中，获得佛骨一百粒。
English: Inspired by a brass Buddha statue that fell in the courtyard, he placed this Buddha statue in the pagoda and obtained a hundred Buddha bones.

古文：贞观十一年，见普贤菩萨，冉冉向西而去。
现代文：唐太宗贞观十一年，看见了普贤菩萨，从塔中出来慢慢地向西而去。
English: In the eleventh year of Tang Taizong Zhenguan, he saw Pu Xian Bodhisattva, came out of the tower and slowly walked to the west.

古文：赵文信
现代文：赵文信
English: Zhao Wensin

古文：唐遂州人赵文信，贞观元年暴死，三日后还苏。
现代文：唐朝遂州人赵文信。贞观元年忽然暴死，三天后复苏。
English: Zhao Wenshin, a native of Suizhou in the Tang Dynasty, died suddenly in the first year of Zhenguan and was revived three days later.

古文：自说云：初死时，被人遮拥驱逐，同伴十人，相随至阎罗王所。
现代文：自己说： 当初死的时候，被人簇拥着驱赶着，与同伴十人，相随来到了阎罗王的地府。
English: He said to himself, "When I first died, I was surrounded and chased by people. Together with ten companions, I came to the realm of King Yama.

古文：其中有一僧，王先问云： 师在世修何功德？ 
现代文：其中有一个和尚，阎王先问道： 师傅在世修行什么功德？ 
English: One of them was a monk. Yan Wang first asked: What merits does the master practice while he is alive?

古文：师答云： 道徒自生以来，唯诵金刚般若经。 
现代文：和尚答道： 贫僧出生以来，专一诵读金刚般若经。 
English: The monk replied, "Ever since I was born, I have devoted myself to reciting the Diamond Sutra.

古文：王闻此语，忽即惊起，合掌赞言： 善哉善哉！
现代文：阎王听到这些话，忽然惊起。拍手赞道： 太好了，太好了！
English: Hearing these words, the king of hell was suddenly startled. He clapped his hands and said, "That's great, that's great!"

古文：师审诵般若，当得升天，何因错来至此？ 
现代文：师傅认真诵读般若经，应当升天，为什么错走到这里来？ 
English: Master, if you read the Prajnaparamita Sutra carefully, you should ascend to heaven. Why did you come here by mistake?

古文：言未讫，忽有天衣来下，引师上天去。
现代文：话没说完，忽然有天衣使者下来，接引和尚上天去了。
English: Before he had finished speaking, suddenly a heavenly messenger came down and took the monk up to heaven.

古文：王复唤遂州人前曰： 汝在生有何功德？ 
现代文：阎王又叫遂州人上前说： 你在人世有什么功德？ 
English: The king of hell also called Suizhou people to come forward and said: What are your merits in the world?

古文：其人报言： 臣一生以来，不读佛经，唯好庾信文章集。 
现代文：赵文信答道： 我一生不读佛经，只喜好庾信文章集。 
English: Zhao Wenshin replied: I have never read Buddhist scriptures in my life. I only like the collection of articles by Xuan Xin.

古文：王即令引出庾信，乃见是龟身，王又令引去，少时复作人来，语云： 我为生时好作文章，妄引佛经，杂揉俗书，又诽谤佛法，谓言不及孔老之教，今受罪报龟身，苦也。 
现代文：阎王又叫领回去。不一会又变作人来，说道： 我是活着的时候喜好作文章。乱引佛经，杂揉世俗的书，又诽谤佛法。说佛教赶不上儒教和道教，现在受罪报为龟身，很苦。 
English: The king of hell called for him to be taken back. Soon he turned into a human again and said, "When I was alive, I liked to write articles. I misquoted Buddhist scriptures, mixed up secular books, and slandered Buddhism. I said that Buddhism could not keep up with Confucianism and Taoism. Now I am being punished for being a turtle. It is very hard.

古文：此人活已，具述其事，遂州人多好捕猎，及闻所说，共相鉴戒，永断杀业，各发诚心，受持般若，迄今不绝。
现代文：文信复活之后，把所遭遇的全部讲述出来。遂州人很喜欢打猎，等到听说之后，互相为鉴，永远断绝杀生的事。各发诚心，信佛诵读般若经，到现在也不停止。
English: After the letter was resurrected, they recounted everything that had happened to them. Suizhou people are very fond of hunting, and when they heard about it, they learned from each other and forever cut off the killing of life. Each of them sincerely believed in Buddhism and recited the Prajna Sutra, and they have not stopped until now.

古文：刘弼
现代文：刘弼
English: Liu Xuan

古文：唐刘弼，贞观元年任江南县尉。
现代文：唐代刘弼，贞观元年任江南县尉。
English: Liu Ye in the Tang Dynasty, Zhenguan in the first year of Jiangnan County Lieutenant.

古文：忽一日，有乌于房前树上鸣。
现代文：忽然有一天，有只乌鸦在房前的树上鸣叫。
English: Suddenly one day, there was a crow crowing in the tree in front of the house.

古文：土人云： 是乌所止为不祥。 
现代文：当地人说： 这乌鸦停落的地方是不吉祥的。 
English: Locals said: 'The place where the crow landed is not auspicious.

古文：弼闻之恐惧，思欲修崇功德，不知何者为胜。
现代文：刘弼听说恐惧害怕，想要建立功德，不知道做什么最好。
English: Liu Wei heard that fear is afraid, wants to build merit, and does not know what to do best.

古文：夜梦一僧，偏赞金刚般若经，令诵百遍。
现代文：一夜梦见一个和尚，只是赞颂金刚般若经。让他诵读一百遍。
English: One night, I dreamt of a monk who was just praising the Diamond Sutra. I asked him to recite it a hundred times.

古文：及寤，依命即诵至百遍。
现代文：等到刘弼醒来，按照和尚的话就诵读到一百遍。
English: When Liu Ye woke up, he recited the monk's words one hundred times.

古文：忽有大风，从东北来，拔此树，隔舍遥掷巷外，其拔处土坎，纵广一丈五尺。
现代文：忽然刮起大风，从东北来。拔掉了这棵树，隔着房舍远远扔到村外。那个拔掉树的地方的土坎，长宽一丈五尺。
English: Suddenly, a strong wind came from the northeast, uprooted the tree and threw it far outside the village, across from the houses. The mound where the tree was uprooted was five feet long and wide.

古文：察暴风来处，小枝纤叶，并随风回靡，风止还起如故。乃知经力不可思议。
现代文：看那风暴来的地方，小枝细叶，一起随着风飘舞，风停止之后复原象当初那样，才知道经书的力量是不可思议的。
English: Look at the place where the storm came from, the twigs and leaves, together with the wind, the wind stops and the restoration is as it was at the beginning, only to know that the power of scripture is incredible.

古文：袁志通
现代文：袁志通
English: Yuan Zhitong

古文：唐袁志通，天水人，常持金刚经。
现代文：唐朝袁志通，是天水人，常常念金刚经，年龄二十岁。
English: Yuan Zhitong of the Tang Dynasty was from Tianshui and often recited the Diamond Sutra. He was 20 years old.

古文：年二十，被驱为军士，败走岩崄，经日不得食。
现代文：被抓去做了军士，失败逃跑到山岩险峻处，整天没有吃东西。
English: He was arrested and made a sergeant, but he failed to escape and fled to a rocky precipice. He didn't eat anything all day.

古文：而觉二童子，持满盂饭来与之。志通拜，忽然不见，既食讫，累日不饥。
现代文：却看见了二位童子，拿着满满的一碗饭来给他，志通拜谢，忽然间二童子不见了，就吃了饭，结果几天也不饿。
English: But when he saw two boys with a full bowl of rice, he wanted to thank them. Suddenly, the two boys disappeared. He ate the rice and was not hungry for a few days.

古文：后得还乡，贞观八年病死，两日即苏，曰： 被人领见王，王问在生善业，答云： 常持金刚经。 
现代文：以后回到家乡。贞观八年病死，两天后就复苏说： 被人领着拜见阎王，阎王问在人世做的好事，我答道： 常念金刚经 。
English: Afterward, he returned to his hometown. Zhenguan died after eight years of illness and was resuscitated two days later, saying, "I was led by someone to pay homage to the king of hell. When the king of hell asked me about the good things I had done in my life, I answered, "I often recite the Diamond Sutra."

古文：王甚喜曰： 且令送出。 遂活。 
现代文：阎王很高兴地称许我，并且下令送回去，于是我就活了。 
English: The king of hell was pleased to praise me and ordered me to be sent back, so I lived.

古文：韦克勤
现代文：韦克勤
English: Wake up

古文：唐韦克勤少持金刚经，为中郎将，从军伐辽，没高丽。
现代文：唐韦克勤从少年开始念金刚经，长大后做了中郎将，从军攻打辽国，失散在高丽。
English: Tang Wei Keqin diligently began to recite the Diamond Sutra as a boy, grew up to be a middle-ranking general, attacked Liao Province from the army, and was dispersed in Goryeo.

古文：贞观中，太宗征辽，克勤少持金刚经，望见官军，乃夜出投之。
现代文：贞观年间，太宗征辽，克勤看见了官军，就连夜出城投奔汉军。
English: During the Zhenguan era, Emperor Taizong conquered Liao, and when Keqin saw the government army, he left the city at night to join the Han army.

古文：暗不知路，乃至心念经，俄见炬火前导，克勤随火而去，遂达汉军。
现代文：天黑看不见去路，于是诚心念经，不一会看见火炬在前引导，克勤便跟着火炬而走，终于到达汉军。
English: It was dark and he couldn't see the way, so he sincerely recited the sutra. As soon as he saw the torch leading the way, Kechin followed the torch and finally reached the Chinese army.

古文：沈嘉会
现代文：沈嘉会
English: Shen Jia Hui

古文：唐沈嘉会，贞观中任校书郎，以事配兰州。
现代文：唐朝沈嘉会，贞观年间任校书郎。因犯罪发配兰州。
English: He was a member of the Shenjia Society in the Tang Dynasty and a school scribe during the Zhenguan era. He was sent to Lanzhou for a crime.

古文：思归甚切，每旦夕，常东向拜太山，愿得生还，积二百余日。
现代文：思归的心切。每天的早晚，常常向东拜泰山，愿能活着回去，一直过了二百多天。
English: The yearning to return. Every morning and evening, I often worship Mount Tai to the east, wishing I could go back alive. It has been more than two hundred days.

古文：永徽六年十月三日夜，见二童子，仪服甚秀，云是太山府君之子，府君愧公朝夕拜礼，故遣奉迎。
现代文：永徽六年十月三日夜，梦见二个童子，仪表服饰很美，说是泰山府君的儿子。说： 府君感谢你早晚礼拜，所以派遣我们来迎接你。 
English: On the evening of October 3rd, the sixth year of Yonghui, I dreamed of two boys with beautiful dress, saying that they were the sons of Taishan Fuchun. I said, "Fuchun thanks you for praying in the morning and evening, so he sent us to meet you."

古文：嘉会云： 太山三千余里，何能可去？ 
现代文：嘉会说： 泰山三千多里，怎么能去呢？ 
English: Jia would say: Mount Tai is more than three thousand miles away, how can I go there?

古文：童子曰： 先生闭目，勿忧道远。 
现代文：二童子说： 先生闭上眼睛，不要担心路远。 
English: The second boy said: Teacher, close your eyes, don't worry about the distance.

古文：即依其言，瞬息之间便到，宫殿宏丽，童子引入谒拜。
现代文：嘉会就按他俩说的那样，一会的功夫就到了。宫殿宏伟华丽，童子领他进入拜见府君，府君就延请他进入密室，对面坐着谈笑，府君学识渊博没有不知道的事。
English: The palace was magnificent and gorgeous. The boy led him into the palace to meet the prefect. The prefect then invited him into a secret room, where they sat across from each other and talked and laughed. The prefect was very knowledgeable and knew everything.

古文：府君即延入曲室，对坐谈笑，无所不知，谓嘉会曰： 人之为恶，若不为人诛，死后必为鬼得而治，无有徼幸而免者也。若日持金刚经一遍，即万罪皆灭，鬼官不能拘矣。 
现代文：对嘉会说： 人做恶，如果不被人杀，死后也一定会得到鬼的惩治，没有能侥幸而赦免的。如果每天能念金刚经一遍，所有的罪过就都没有了，鬼就不能拘捕你了。 
English: To Jia Jia, he would say: People do evil, and if they are not killed, they will certainly be punished by ghosts after death. No one can be pardoned by chance. If you can recite the Diamond Sutra once a day, all your sins will be gone, and the ghosts will not be able to arrest you.

古文：又云： 前府君有过，天曹黜之。
现代文：又说： 先前的府君有罪，天曹把他罢免了。
English: He also said: The previous governor was guilty, and Tenso removed him.

古文：某姓刘。 
现代文：我本人姓刘。 
English: My surname is Liu.

古文：嘉会亦不敢问其他也。
现代文：嘉会也不敢再问其他的事。
English: Jia Hui didn't dare to ask about anything else.

古文：尝与嘉会双陆，兼设酒肴。
现代文：曾和嘉会打双陆，并且摆设酒宴。
English: He once played doubles with the Jia Hui and held a wine banquet.

古文：嘉会起，于小厅东见姑臧令慕容仁轨执笏端坐，云： 府君帖追到此，已六十日，未蒙处分。 
现代文：嘉会站起来，在小厅的东面看见姑臧县令慕容仁轨捧着笏板端坐在那里，说： 府君用帖子拘拿我到这里，已经六十天了，还未处理。 
English: Jia Hui stood up, and on the east side of the small hall, he saw the governor of Guqin County, Murong Renlu, sitting there holding a cutting board. He said, "The governor has detained me here with a post, and it has been sixty days, and it has not been dealt with yet.

古文：嘉会坐启府君，便令召仁轨入，谓曰： 公县下有妇人阿赵，被县尉无状拷杀，阿赵来诉，遂误追公。 
现代文：嘉会回来坐下后禀告府君。府君就叫仁轨进来，对他说： 你的县里有个女人叫阿赵，被县尉毫无理由地拷打致死，阿赵到阴司告状，就错把你拘来了。 
English: After Jia Hui returned and sat down, he reported to the prefectural governor. The prefectural governor then called Ren Rail to come in and said to him: There is a woman in your county named A Zhao, who was tortured to death by the county lieutenant without any reason. When A Zhao went to the police station to file a complaint, they detained you by mistake.

古文：庭前有盆水，府君令洗面，仍遣一小儿送归。
现代文：院子里有一盆水，府君让仁轨洗了脸，叫一个童子送仁轨回去。
English: There was a basin of water in the yard. The prefect asked Renlu to wash his face and called a boy to take him back.

古文：嘉会亦辞。复令二男送。
现代文：嘉会也就告辞，又令二个童子送他。
English: Jia Hui also said goodbye and sent two boys to see him off.

古文：凡在太山二十八日，家人但觉其精神昏昧，既还如旧。
现代文：一共在泰山二十八天。同伴们只觉得他的精神恍惚。苏醒之后和先前一样。
English: A total of twenty-eight days in Mount Tai. His companions only felt that he was in a trance. After waking up, he was the same as before.

古文：嘉会话仁轨于众，长史赵持满令人验之，无不同。
现代文：嘉会把仁轨的事告诉大家，长史赵持满让人验证，果然是这样。
English: Jia Hui told everyone about the benevolence track, and Changshi Zhao was full of people to verify, which is indeed the case.

古文：自此常持金刚经，遇赦得归。
现代文：从此嘉会每天念金刚经，后来遇赦回乡。
English: From then on, Jia Hui would recite the Diamond Sutra every day. Later, he was pardoned and returned to his hometown.

古文：陆怀素
现代文：陆怀素
English: Lu Huai Su

古文：唐吴郡陆怀素，贞观二十年失火，屋宇焚烧，并从烟灭，惟金刚般若波罗密经独存。
现代文：唐朝吴郡的陆怀素，他家在贞观二十年失火。房屋被烧毁，一齐化为灰烬。只有金刚般若波罗密经没有被烧掉。
English: Lu Huai Su of Wu County in the Tang Dynasty lost his home of twenty years in Zhenguan to a fire. The house was burnt to ashes. Only the Prajnaparamita Paramita was not burnt.

古文：函及标轴亦尽，惟经字竟如故。
现代文：装经的匣子和装经的轴也都烧完了。唯独经字却象先前一样。
English: Both the box and the scroll were burned, but the words were just as they had been.

古文：闻者莫不惊叹。
现代文：听到的人没有不惊讶叹服的。
English: No one who heard it was not surprised and impressed.

古文：怀素即高阳许仁则妻之兄也，仁则当时目睹，常与人言之。
现代文：怀素就是高阳县许仁则的妻子的哥哥，许仁则当时亲眼看见，常常说给别人听。
English: Huai Su is the brother of the wife of Xu Renzhe of Goyang County. Xu Renzhe saw it with his own eyes at the time and often told others about it.

