古文：周霄问曰： 古之君子仕乎？ 
现代文：周霄问孟子： 古时候的君子做官吗？ 
English: Zhou Xiao asked Mencius: Did the gentlemen of ancient times become officials?

古文：孟子曰： 仕。
现代文：孟子说： 做官。
English: Mencius said: Be a government official.

古文：传曰： 孔子三月无君，则皇皇如也，出疆必载质。 
现代文：《传》上说： 孔子如果三个月没有君主任用他，就会徘徊迟疑，如果要离开此地，一定要携带与别国君主初次见面的礼物。 
English: "Legend" said: "If Confucius has not been used by the monarch for three months, he will linger and hesitate. If you want to leave this place, be sure to bring a gift for the first meeting with the monarch of another country."

古文：公明仪曰： 古之人三月无君则吊。  
现代文：所以古时候的人三个月没有君主任用，就会有人去慰问。 
English: That's why people in ancient times didn't need a head of state for three months, someone would go to offer condolences.

古文： 三月无君则吊，不以急乎？ 
现代文：周霄说： 三个月没有君主任用，就会有人去慰问，是不是太着急了？ 
English: Zhou Xiao said: If you don't have a director for three months, someone will go to offer condolences. Aren't you in a hurry?

古文：曰： 士之失位也，犹诸侯之失国家也。
现代文：孟子说： 读书人如果失去了位置，犹如诸侯失去国家。
English: Mencius said, "If a scholar loses his position, it is as if a prince loses his country."

古文：礼曰： 诸侯耕助，以供粢盛；夫人蚕缫，以为衣服。
现代文：《礼》书上说： 诸侯耕种藉田以供给祭祀用品，他们的夫人养蚕缫丝以制作祭祀用衣服。
English: The "Rite" book said: The lords cultivated and rented fields to supply sacrificial supplies, and their wives raised silkworms to make sacrificial clothes.

古文：牺牲不成，粢盛不洁，衣服不备，不敢以祭。
现代文：祭祀用的牲畜不肥壮，祭祀用的谷物不洁净，衣服不完备，就不敢用来祭祀。
English: If the sacrificial animals are not fat and strong, if the sacrificial grain is not clean, and if the clothing is not complete, they will not dare to be used for sacrifice.

古文：惟士无田，则亦不祭。 
现代文：惟有读书人没有田土，则可以不祭祀。 
English: However, if the reader does not have land, he or she may not offer the sacrifice.

古文：牲杀器皿衣服不备，不敢以祭，则不敢以宴，亦不足吊乎？ 
现代文：牲畜、器皿、衣服不完备，不敢用来祭祀，也就不能举行宴会，这难道还不该去安慰吗？ 
English: If the livestock, utensils, and clothes are not complete and dare not be used for sacrifice, then the banquet cannot be held. Shouldn't this be a consolation?

古文： 出疆必载质，何也？ 
现代文：周霄又问： 离开国境一定要携带与别国君主初次见面的礼物，又是什么道理呢？ 
English: Zhou Xiao also asked: What is the reason for leaving the border to bring a gift for the first meeting with the monarch of another country?

古文：曰： 士之仕也，犹农夫之耕也，农夫岂为出疆舍其耒耜哉？ 
现代文：孟子说： 读书人出来做官，就像农夫种地；农夫会因为离开此地就抛下自己的农具吗？ 
English: Mencius said, "A scholar who becomes a government official is like a farmer who cultivates the land; will the farmer abandon his tools because he leaves the land?

古文：曰： 晋国亦仕国也，未尝闻仕如此其急。
现代文：周霄说： 晋国也是一个读书人可以做官的国家，但没有听说想做官想得如此急迫的。
English: Zhou Xiao said: Jin is also a country where readers can become officials, but I have not heard of anyone who wants to become an official so urgently.

古文：仕如此其急也，君子之难仕，何也？ 
现代文：出来做官如此急迫，君子却怕求官，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Why is it that it is so urgent to become an official, but gentlemen are afraid to run for office?

古文：曰： 丈夫生而愿为之有室，女子生而愿为之有家。父母之心，人皆有之。
现代文：孟子说： 男孩生下来就希望为他找到妻室，女孩生下来就希望为她找到夫家，父母的这种心情，人人都有。
English: Mencius said, "When a boy is born, he hopes to find a wife for him. When a girl is born, she hopes to find a husband for her. Everyone has this feeling of parents.

古文：不待父母之命、媒妁之言，钻穴隙相窥，逾墙相从，则父母国人皆贱之。
现代文：但是不经过父母允许，没有媒人的介绍，就钻洞偷看，爬墙偷偷幽会，那么父母、社会上的人都会看不起他们。
English: However, without the permission of their parents, without the introduction of a matchmaker, they drill holes to peep, climb walls to sneak a tryst, then their parents and people in society will look down on them.

古文：古之人未尝不欲仕也，又恶不由其道。
现代文：古时候的人不是不想出来做官，但又讨厌不通过正道。
English: In ancient times, people didn't want to become officials, but they hated not following the right path.

古文：不由其道而往者，与钻穴隙之类也。 
现代文：不通过正道而做官的，就跟男女钻洞爬墙相类似。 
English: To become an official without going through the right channels is similar to a man and a woman climbing over a wall.

