古文：吴馔御厨五侯鲭刘孝仪鮔议鮔表热洛河
现代文：吴馔御厨五侯鲭刘孝仪鮔议鮔表热洛河
English: Wu Gan's Five Cuisines, Liu Xiaoyi's Discussions, Zhelohe's Table

古文：名食败障泥尚食令大饼
现代文：名食败障泥尚食令大饼
English: Famous food loser mud still eating large cake

古文：能食范汪宋明帝苻坚三将
现代文：能食范汪宋明帝苻坚三将
English: Can eat Fan Wang Song Ming Emperor Gong Jian three generals

古文：菲食茅容陆机羊曼
现代文：菲食茅容陆机羊曼
English: Philippine food Mao Rong land machine sheep man

古文：吴馔
现代文：吴馔
English: Wu Gan

古文：吴郡献海鮸乾鲙四瓶，瓶容一斗。
现代文：隋炀帝大业年间，吴郡向朝廷进献来海鮸鱼干鲙四瓶，瓶的容量为一斗。
English: During the reign of the Sui Dynasty, Wu County presented four jars of dried sea bream to the imperial court. The capacity of the jars was one bucket of cucumbers.

古文：浸一斗，可得径尺数盘。
现代文：浸泡一斗鮸鱼干鲙，可得一尺长的鮸鱼丝几盘。
English: If you soak a bucket of dried eel, you can get several trays of one-foot-long eel silk.

古文：并状奏作乾鲙法。
现代文：同时，吴郡的使臣还带来了烹饪这种鮸鱼鲙的方法。
English: At the same time, the envoys from Wuxian County also brought the method of cooking this sturgeon stew.

古文：帝示群臣云：昔术人介象于殿庭钓得海鱼，此幻化耳。亦何足为异？
现代文：隋炀帝告诉群臣说：从前仙人介象在宫殿庭院内的池水中钓上来海鱼，那是幻化出来的，没有什么奇异的。
English: The Emperor of the Sui Dynasty told his courtiers: Once upon a time, the hermit cormorant caught sea fish in the pool water in the palace courtyard. It was a hallucination, and there was nothing strange about it.

古文：今日之鲙，乃是真海鱼所作，来自数千里，亦是一时奇味。
现代文：现在，吴郡进献的鮸鱼鲙，才是真海鱼制作的。它来自几千里以外的吴郡，才是一时稀有的珍奇美味呀。
English: Now, the eel stew donated by Wuxi County is made from real sea fish. It comes from Wuxi County, thousands of miles away, and is a rare and delicious delicacy.

古文：虞世基对曰：术人之鱼既幻，其鲙固亦不真。
现代文：虞世基跟皇帝说：从前术士钓上来的海鱼既然是虚幻的，那么，用他钓上来的海鱼作成的鲙也不是真的。
English: Yu Shiji said to the emperor: Since the sea fish caught by the former sorcerer is illusory, then the cocoon made from the sea fish he caught is not real.

古文：出数盘以赐达官。
现代文：请皇上将吴郡进献的鮸鱼干鲙拿出几盘来赏赐给我们尝尝可以吗？
English: Could you please give us a few plates of the dried cod offered by the Emperor of Wu County to taste?

古文：作乾鲙之法：当五六月盛热之日，于海取得鮸鱼。大者长四五尺，鳞细而紫色，无细骨不腥者。捕得之，即于海船之上作鲙。
现代文：制作干鲙的方法：在五六月盛暑的时候，从海中捕获的鮸鱼中，挑选个头长大的，每条约四五斤重，细鳞而紫色，没有细骨不腥的，当即在海船上，将它们制做成鲙。
English: How to make dried eels: In the heat of May and June, from the eels caught in the sea, select the grown ones, each weighing about four or five pounds, fine-scaled and purple, without fine bones, and immediately make them into eels on a sea boat.

古文：去其皮骨，取其精肉缕切。
现代文：制作时，先去掉鮸鱼的皮骨，割取它身上的精肉切成条状。
English: To make it, first remove the skin and bones from the eel, then cut off the flesh and slice it into strips.

古文：随成随晒，三四日，须极干，以新白瓷瓶，未经水者盛之。
现代文：随切随晒，晒三四天，晒到特别干的程度，将它盛入没盛过水的新白瓷瓶中，用泥密封好，不能透风。
English: Bake it for three or four days, until it is very dry. Pour it into a new white porcelain jar that has not been filled with water, seal it with mud, and do not allow it to air out.

古文：密封泥，勿令风入，经五六十日，不异新者。
现代文：这样制做的鮸鱼干鲙，放个五六十天，吃时跟新鲜的鮸鱼一点不差味儿。
English: The dried eel prepared in this way is kept for 50 to 60 days, and tastes just like fresh eel.

古文：取啖之时，并出乾鲙，以布裹，大瓮盛水渍之，三刻久出，带布沥却水，则皦然。
现代文：吃的时候，将干鲙取出来后，用布裹上，放在盛水的大瓮里浸泡，约三刻工夫，带着布沥去水，打开一看，精白光亮啊。
English: When eating, take the dried gourd out, wrap it in a cloth, soak it in a large bowl of water, soak it for about three minutes, remove the water with a cloth, open it and look at it, it's white and bright.

古文：散置盘上，如新鲙无别。
现代文：散放在盘子上面，象新出网的海鮸没有什么两样。
English: Scattered over the plate, like newly-caught seagulls, they are no different.

古文：细切香柔叶铺上，筋拨令调匀进之。
现代文：再将切细的香柔叶放在上面，用筷子将它们调拌均匀，就可以进食了。
English: Then place the finely chopped cumin leaves on top, mix them evenly with chopsticks, and you are ready to eat.

古文：海鱼体性不腥，然鱕鮸鱼肉软而白色，经干又和以青叶，皙然极可噉。
现代文：海鱼体性不腥，特别是鱕鮸鱼，肉细软而色白，弄干后再配上青菜叶，白、绿分明，极好吃！
English: The body of the sea fish is not oily, especially the cod, the flesh is soft and white, after drying it is served with green leaves, white and green distinct, delicious!

古文：又献海虾子三十梴。
现代文：吴郡还进献海虾籽三十梃。
English: Wu County also donated 30 bunches of shrimp seeds.

古文：梴长一尺，阔一寸，厚一寸许，甚精美。
现代文：每梃长一尺，宽、厚各约一寸，非常精美。
English: Each  is a foot long, with a width and thickness of about one inch each, very exquisite.

古文：作之法：取海白虾有子者，每三五斗置密竹篮中，于大盆内以水淋洗。虾子在虾腹下，赤如覆盆子，则随水从篮目中下。
现代文：制作虾籽梃的方法是：挑取海白虾有籽的，每选出三五斗就将它们盛入一只密封的竹篮中，再将竹篮放在一只大盆内用水淋洗，虾籽长在虾腹下面，是红色的，象覆盆子。随着淋下的水，从竹篮的缝隙中流入大盆中。
English: The method of making shrimp seed cake is as follows: pick out the sea white shrimp with seeds, and put them into a sealed bamboo basket every three to five buckets, and then put the bamboo basket in a large basin and rinse it with water. The shrimp seeds grow under the shrimp belly and are red, like raspberries. With the dripping water, they flow into the large basin from the gap in the bamboo basket.

古文：通计虾一石，可得子五升，从盆内漉出。
现代文：大约一石白虾，可得五升虾籽。之后，再从大盆中将虾籽捞出来。
English: Approximately one stone of white shrimp yields five litres of shrimp seeds, which are then fished out of a large basin.

古文：缝布作小袋子，如径寸半竹大，长二尺。
现代文：用布缝成小袋，象直经一寸半的竹子那样宽大，长二尺。
English: Sewn with cloth into a small bag, as wide as a bamboo straight through an inch and a half, two feet long.

古文：以虾子满之，急击头，随袋多少，以末盐封之，周厚数寸。
现代文：将捞出来的虾籽盛入布袋，盛满为止，赶快用绳扎住袋口。不管一次有多少袋，都用盐末封上，周围封的盐末约几寸厚。
English: Put the fished out shrimp seeds into a cloth bag, fill it until it is full, quickly tie a rope to the mouth of the bag. No matter how many bags there are at a time, they are sealed with salt. The surrounding seal is about a few inches thick.

古文：经一日夜出晒，夜则平板压之，明日又出晒。
现代文：封上一昼夜后，将布袋取出来放在外面晒。晚上则取下来放在木板下面压，第二天再晒。
English: After sealing for a day and a night, the cloth bag is taken out and placed outside to dry. In the evening, it is taken off and placed under the wooden board to be pressed, and then re-dried the next day.

古文：夜以前压十日干，则拆破袋，出虾子梴。
现代文：这样晒压十天，看它完全干透后，拆开布袋，便得到虾籽梃了。
English: In this way, after ten days of sun and pressure, when it is completely dry, the cloth bag is opened and the shrimp seeds are obtained.

古文：色如赤琉璃，光彻而肥美，盐于鲻鱼数倍。
现代文：颜色象红琉璃，色泽光艳而质地肥美，比鲻鱼咸好几倍。
English: The color is like red glaze, the color is bright and the texture is fat. It is several times saltier than eel.

古文：又献鮸鱼含肚千头，极精好。
现代文：吴郡又进献鮸鱼含肚一千条，极其精好。
English: Wu County also presented 1,000 carp with bellies, which is extremely fine.

古文：作之法：当六月七月盛热之时，取鮸鱼长二尺许，去鳞净洗。停二日，待鱼腹胀起，方从口抽出肠，去腮留目。满腹内纳盐竟，即以末盐封周遍，厚数寸。经宿，乃以水净洗。
现代文：制作鮸鱼含肚的方法是：在六七月盛暑的时候，挑选二尺长左右的鮸鱼，刮去鱼鳞，用水洗净，放在一边放二天，待鱼腹胀起，方从鱼嘴抽出肠子，去掉鱼腮，留着鱼眼睛，将鱼腹内塞满盐，再用盐末将它的周身全封上，厚几寸，过了一宿，再用水洗净，放在太阳底下曝晒。
English: The method of making eel belly is: in June and July, when the heat is on, select a two-foot-long eel, scrape off the scales, wash it with water, put it aside for two days, wait for the fish to swell, remove the intestines from the fish mouth, remove the gills, keep the fish eyes, fill the fish belly with salt, and then use the salt to completely seal it, a few inches thick, after one night, wash it with water, and put it under the sun.

古文：日则曝，夜则收还。安平板上，又以板置石压之。
现代文：到晚上取下来，放在两板之间，上面压上石头，第二天再曝晒。
English: Take it off at night, put it between two boards, press a stone on it, and expose it again the next day.

古文：明日又晒，夜还压。如此五六日乾，即纳乾瓷瓮，封口。
现代文：这样晒压五六天，直到真的干透了，就将它们盛入干瓷瓮中，封上口，过了二十天再取出来。
English: They are left to dry for five or six days until they are really dry, then they are placed in a dry porcelain urn, the mouth is sealed, and they are taken out again after twenty days.

古文：经二十日出之，其皮色光彻，有如黄油，肉乾则如糗。
现代文：鮸鱼的皮色光亮透明，象黄油，鱼肉则象干粮，就象沙棋酥一样啊！
English: The skin color of the eel is bright and transparent, like butter, and the fish meat is like dry food, just like crispy sea bream!

古文：又如沙棋之苏者，微醎而有味，味美于石首含肚。
现代文：微咸而有味，比石首含肚还味美好吃。石首含肚也是每年时常进献来。
English: Slightly salty and tasty, it tastes even better than the stone-roasted pork belly. The stone-roasted pork belly is also often presented every year.

古文：然石首含肚亦年常入献，而肉强不及。
现代文：但是，它的肉发僵，不及鮸鱼含肚好吃。
English: However, its meat is tough and not as tasty as cod.

古文：此法出自随口味使大都督杜济，济会稽人，能别味，善于盐梅。
现代文：这种制作鮸鱼含肚的方法，出自于隋朝的口味使大都督杜济。杜济是会稽人，善于辨别各种味道，还擅长制做盐梅。
English: This method of making eel with a belly comes from the taste of the Sui Dynasty, which made the great governor Duji. Duji is a connoisseur, good at distinguishing various tastes, and also good at making salted plums.

古文：亦古之符郎，今之谢讽也。
现代文：他乃是古时候的符郎，当今的谢讽啊！
English: He is an old-time furrier, today's chivalry!

古文：又吴郡献松江鲈鱼乾鲙六瓶，瓶容一斗。
现代文：又：吴郡进献松花鲈鱼干鲙六瓶，瓶的容积为一斗。
English: Also: Wuxi County donated six bottles of pine-blossom eel jerky, each bottle with a volume of one bucket of cucumber.

古文：作鲙法，一同鮸。
现代文：将鲈鱼制作成干鲙的方法，跟鲙鱼一样。
English: The method of making eel into dried eel is the same as eel.

古文：然作鲈鱼鲙，须八九月霜下之时。
现代文：然而，制作鲈鱼干鲙时，须等到八九月下霜之后。
English: However, it is necessary to wait until after the frost in August and September to make dried eel.

古文：收鲈鱼三尺以下者作乾鲙，浸渍讫，布裹沥水令尽，散置盘内。取香柔花叶，相间细切，和鲙拨令调匀。
现代文：挑选三尺以下的鲈鱼作成干鲙，浸泡之后，用布裹好沥净水，散放在盘中，再将切细的香柔花叶放上，和鲙一起抖匀，就可以食用了。
English: Select carp under three feet in length to make dried bonito. After soaking, use a cloth to wrap it in soapy water, spread it on a plate, then put the finely chopped fragrant and tender leaves on it, shake it well with the bonito, and it's ready to eat.

古文：霜后鲈鱼，肉白如雪，不腥。
现代文：下霜后的鲈鱼，肉白如雪，一点也不腥。
English: The trout after the frost, the flesh is white as snow, not at all fishy.

古文：所谓金玉鲙，东南之佳味也。
现代文：就是人们常说的金脐玉鲙，是东南沿海一带极美的佳肴啊！
English: It's what people often call "golden eel and jade eel," and it's an extremely beautiful delicacy along the southeastern coast!

古文：紫花碧叶，间以素鲙，亦鲜洁可观。
现代文：你看紫花碧叶，还有白莹如雪的鲈鲙丝，也是鲜丽皎洁得让人喜欢。
English: Look at the purple flowers and green leaves, as well as the snow-white cocoon silk, which is also so fresh and beautiful that people like it.

古文：吴郡又献蜜蟹三千头，作如糖蟹法。
现代文：吴郡又进献蜜蟹三千只，象糖蟹那样作法。
English: Wu County also donated 3,000 honey crabs, just like sugar crabs.

古文：蜜拥剑四瓮。
现代文：蜜渍拥剑，共四瓮。
English: Honey stain holding a sword, a total of four strokes.

古文：拥剑似蟹而小，二螯偏大。
现代文：拥剑象蟹而比蟹小，二螯偏大。
English: It is smaller than a crab, but has a large beak.

古文：《吴郡赋》所谓乌贼拥剑是也。
现代文：就是《吴郡赋》中所说的乌贼拥剑！御厨
English: It is the "squid holding a sword" mentioned in "Wu County Fu"!

古文：御厨御厨进馔，凡器用有少府监进者。
现代文：宫廷里的厨房，向皇帝奉上食物菜肴时，一切器皿用具都由少府监供给。
English: In the court kitchen, when food and dishes were served to the emperor, all the utensils and utensils were supplied by the young superintendent.

古文：用九饤食，以牙盘九枚，装食味于其间。置上前，亦谓之看食。
现代文：先上九样陈设的食品，用象牙盘九只，将要上的食物菜肴放在上面，送到皇帝面前，也叫做看食。
English: First, nine kinds of food were set up, and nine dishes were made of ivory plates, and the food dishes to be served were placed on them and sent to the emperor, also known as watching food.

古文：见京都人说，两军每行从进食，及其宴设，多食鸡鹅之类。
现代文：听京城里的人说，两军的侍从每次进食或设筵席，多数时候都吃鸡鹅一类的菜肴。
English: According to people in the capital, the attendants of the two armies eat dishes such as chicken and goose most of the time every time they eat or set up a banquet.

古文：就中爱食子鹅，鹅每只价值二三千。
现代文：其中最爱吃的是童子鹅。童子鹅每只价值二三千钱。
English: One of the most popular dishes is the gander goose. Each gander goose is worth 23,000 yuan.

古文：每有设，据人数取鹅。燖去毛，及去五脏，酿以肉及糯米饭，五味调和。
现代文：每次设宴，都按人数去拿鹅，燖去毛，取出五脏，往里面填上肉和糯米饭，再用各种佐料调好。
English: At every banquet, according to the number of people, they take the goose, pluck off the feathers, take out the viscera, fill it with meat and glutinous rice, and then adjust it with various seasonings.

古文：先取羊一口，亦燖剥，去肠胃。置鹅于羊中，缝合炙之。
现代文：之后，弄来一羊，也将它剥皮去毛，取出脏腑，将上面做好的童子鹅放入羊腹中，缝合好在地火上烤。
English: After that, a sheep is brought in, it is also skinned and de-haired, the entrails are taken out, and the gosling made on top is put into the sheep's belly, sewn up and roasted on an open fire.

古文：羊肉若熟，便堪去却羊。
现代文：待到羊肉烤得象熟了的时候，便将羊剥去不要，取出羊腹中的童子鹅，就那么捧在手中吃。
English: When the lamb is roasted until it is as if it is ripe, do not peel the sheep, take out the gosling in the sheep's belly and eat it in your hands.

古文：取鹅浑食之，谓之浑羊殁忽。
现代文：称这种吃法为浑羊殁忽。
English: This way of eating is called "Hun Yang Jiu Wu."

古文：翰林学士每遇赐食，有物若毕罗，形粗大，滋味香美，呼为诸王修事。
现代文：翰林院的学士们，每逢皇上赏赐给他们菜肴饭食时，其中都有一种象毕罗一样的食品，形状粗大，滋味香美，叫作诸王修事。
English: The scholars of Hanlin Academy, whenever the emperor gave them dishes and meals, there was a kind of food like biro, with a large shape and delicious taste, called the king's meal.

古文：五侯鲭
现代文：五侯鲭
English: Wuhou County

古文：娄护字君卿，历游五侯之门。
现代文：类护，字君卿，遍访五位侯爷的家。
English: The tutelary deity, known as the King of Kings, visited the homes of five lords.

古文：每旦，五侯家各遗饷之。
现代文：每天，五位侯爷都各自派人送来饭食菜肴给他吃。
English: Every day, each of the five lords sent someone to bring him food to eat.

古文：君卿口厌滋味，乃试合五侯所饷之鲭而食，甚美。
现代文：类护吃得有些腻烦了，于是试着将五位侯爷家送来的鲭鱼折放在一起再烩了吃，味道特别好。
English: Class protection eat a little bored, so try to fold the carp sent by the five housewives together and then eat it, the taste is particularly good.

古文：世所谓五侯鲭，君卿所致。
现代文：从此，多了一种佳肴，就是世人所说的五侯鲭！这道菜是娄护创造出来的。
English: Since then, there has been one more delicacy, which is what the world calls Wuhou! This dish was created by Gongyou.

古文：或云，护兼善五侯，不偏食。故合而为之鲭也。
现代文：又有人说：娄护跟五位侯爷的关系都很好，不偏爱某一位侯爷送来的菜肴，因此将他们送来的鲭鱼放在一块儿吃。
English: Another person said: Xun You had a good relationship with the five masters. She didn't like the dishes sent by one of the masters, so she ate the eel they sent together.

古文：又五侯不相能，宾客不得往来。娄护丰辞，传会五侯间。
现代文：又有人说：五位侯爷之间关系不和，宾客不能上这位侯爷家又上那位侯爷家。
English: Another said: "The relationship between the five masters is not harmonious, guests cannot go to this master's house and that master's house."

古文：各得其心，竞致奇膳。
现代文：但是娄护非常善于说话，来往于五位侯爷之间，都博得到他们的欢心。
English: However, Yan Guo was very good at speaking. He went back and forth between the five masters and won their favor.

古文：护乃合以为鲭，世称五侯鲭，以为奇味焉。
现代文：因此，竞赛着给类护送美食佳肴。娄护将他们送来的用五种方法烧制的鲭鱼，合到一块儿吃，世上人称为五侯鲭。因为它味道奇特！
English: Therefore, they compete to send delicious food to the class. The escort eats the squid they sent, which is cooked in five ways, together. People in the world call it five-course meal. Because it tastes strange!

古文：刘孝仪
现代文：刘孝仪
English: Liu Xiaoyi

古文：梁刘孝仪食鲭鲊曰：五侯九伯，今尽征之。
现代文：南北朝时期，梁朝中丞刘孝仪吃了腌的鲭鱼后说：吴郡进献的腌鲭鱼真好吃，看来五侯九伯都应征伐夺取过来。
English: During the period of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, Liu Xiaoyi, the Vice-President of the Liang Dynasty, said after eating the eel eel: The eel eel presented by Wuxi County is really delicious. It seems that the five counties and nine counties should be conquered.

古文：魏使崔劼、李骞在坐。
现代文：当时，魏国的使臣崔劼、李骞也在坐。
English: At that time, Wei envoys Cui Wei and Li Wei were also sitting in the circle.

古文：劼曰：中丞之任，未应已得分陕。
现代文：崔劼说：中丞这样的官员，不应当早就到下边任一方的要员了。
English: Cui Wei said: officials such as Zhong Rong should not have become important members of either side so early.

古文：骞曰：若然，中丞四履，当至穆陆陵。
现代文：李骞说：如果这样，刘中丞的四只脚应当踏上穆陆陵的大地上啦！
English: Li Wei said: If so, Liu Zhongzheng's four feet should step on the ground of Mu Lu Ling!

古文：孝仪曰：邺中鹿尾，乃酒肴之最。
现代文：刘孝仪说：邺中的鹿尾，可是最好的下酒菜哟！
English: Liu Xiaoyi said: "Deer tails in the bowl, but the best wine dishes are yakitori!

古文：劼曰：生鱼熊掌，孟子所称。鸡跖猩唇，吕氏所问。
现代文：崔劼说：生鱼熊掌是孟子最称道的佳肴，鸡爪猩唇是吕不韦最后要的名菜。
English: Cui Wei said: raw fish bear's paw is the most commendable delicacy of Mencius, chicken claw orang lip is the last famous dish of Lü Bu Wei.

古文：鹿尾乃有奇味，竟不载书籍，每用为恨。
现代文：鹿尾这么有奇味，竟然书籍上没有记载。
English: Deer tails are so strange that there is no record of them in books.

古文：孝仪曰：实自如此，或古今好尚不同。
现代文：每次吃它的时候都感到非常遗憾。刘孝仪说：确实是如此。这大概是古人和今人喜好的不一样吧。
English: Every time I eat it, I feel very sorry. Liu Xiaoyi said: "It's really true. This is probably because the preferences of the ancients and modern people are different."

古文：梁贺季曰： 青州蟹黄。乃为郑氏所记。
现代文：梁贺季说过： 青州的蟹黄，是郑氏将它记载在书中的。
English: Liang Heji said: Crab yellow in Qingzhou was recorded in the book by Zheng.

古文：此物不书，未解所以。
现代文：鹿尾没有记在里面，不知道为什么？
English: I don't know why deer tails aren't included.

古文：骞曰：郑亦称益州鹿錗，但未是尾耳。
现代文：李骞说：郑氏也称赞过益州的鹿錗是美味。但不是鹿尾。
English: Li Yao said: Zheng also praised the deer stew in Yizhou as delicious, but not the deer tail.

古文：鮔议
现代文：鮔议
English: The motion passed.

古文：何胤侈于味，食必方丈。
现代文：何胤在饮食上非常奢侈，每次吃饭都必须摆上极为丰盛的菜肴。
English: He Yin is very extravagant in his diet, and every meal must be served with extremely rich dishes.

古文：后稍欲去其甚者，犹食白鱼鮔腊糖蟹，使门人议之。
现代文：后来，稍稍节俭一点，还是经常吃白鱼鮔腊糖蟹，致使属僚们都议论他。
English: Later, being a bit more frugal, he still often ate whitefish stew and sugar crabs, causing his colleagues to gossip about him.

古文：学士钟岍议曰：鮔之就腊，骤于屈申；蟹之将糖，躁扰弥甚。
现代文：学士钟鮔品评说：将鮔鱼制成肉干，它一定是拼命的屈伸挣扎过；将螃蟹浸渍上糖，它一定是在里面左突右撞，不堪忍受。
English: The bachelor Zhong Xuan commented on the product: "If the carp is made into jerky, it must have struggled desperately to bend and stretch; if the crab is impregnated with sugar, it must be jammed inside, unbearable.

古文：仁人用意，深怀恻怛。
现代文：品德高尚的人，应该在内心深处多怀恻隐，而富有同情心的。
English: A person of high moral character should, deep down, be more reserved and compassionate.

古文：至于车螯蚶蛎，眉目内缺，惭浑沦之奇。唇吻外缄，非金人之慎。
现代文：至于车螯蚶蛎，它们原本就没有眉毛眼睛，对外面的浑浊世界羞于见到；它们的唇吻是自己从外面封闭上的，不是象铜铸的人那样永不开口。
English: As for the chariots, they originally had no eyebrows or eyes, and were ashamed to be seen by the outside world; their lips and kisses were self-enclosed from the outside, and they never opened their mouths, unlike the bronze people.

古文：不荣不悴，曾草木之不若；无馨无臭，与瓦砾而何异。
现代文：它们不知道荣华也不懂得忧伤，竟连草木都不如；它们没有芳香也没有臭味，与瓦砾没有什么不同。
English: They know neither glory nor sorrow, being inferior even to plants; they have neither fragrance nor smell, and are no different from rubble.

古文：故宜长充庖厨，永为口实。
现代文：因此，适宜长期充当厨房里的材料，永远是人口中的食物。
English: Therefore, it is suitable for long-term use as a material in the kitchen and will always be food in the population.

古文：鮔表
现代文：鮔表
English: Table

古文：后梁韦林，京兆人。
现代文：后梁时的韦林，京都地区人。
English: Houliang's Weilin, a native of the Kyoto area.

古文：南迁于襄阳，天保中为舍人。
现代文：南迁到襄阳后，在梁明帝天保年间，韦林任中书舍人。
English: After moving south to Xiangyang, during the reign of Emperor Liangming, Weilin served as a scholar.

古文：涉猎有才藻，善剧谈。
现代文：韦林读书面广，有才华文彩，喜爱畅谈。
English: Weilin reads widely, has a talent for literature, and likes to talk freely.

古文：尝为鮔表以讥刺时人。
现代文：他曾假托鮔鱼的名义撰写过一篇《鮔表》，用来讥讽当时崇尚美味佳肴的达官贵人。
English: He once wrote an "Eel Table" under the name of a fake eel, which was used to ridicule dignitaries who advocated delicious delicacies at that time.

古文：其词曰：臣鮔言： 伏见除书，以臣为糁敖将军，油蒸校尉，膗州刺史。
现代文：《鮔表》的大意如下：鮔鱼说：我刚刚接到陛下签发的任命，授予我为米羹将军、油蒸校尉，肉羹刺史。
English: The gist of "Cormorant Watch" is as follows: "Cormorant said: I have just received an appointment issued by His Majesty, awarding me as a rice jelly general, oil steaming lieutenant, meat jelly stabbing history.

古文：脯腊如故。
现代文：与从前一样，将我制成干肉。
English: As before, I was made into dried meat.

古文：肃承将命，含灰屏息，凭笼临鼎，载战载兢。
现代文：我恭敬地接受陛下的任命，忍含着沮丧，屏息住呼吸，任凭你们将我放在笼屉上蒸，或者放进鼎镬里煮，每时每刻都战战惊惊啊！
English: I respectfully accept Your Majesty's appointment, endure the frustration, hold my breath, let you put me in a cage to steam, or put it in a pot to boil, and be surprised every moment!

古文：臣美愧夏鳣，味惭冬鲤。
现代文：比肥美，我愧对夏天里的鲟鱼；论味鲜，我羞见冬日里的鲤鱼。
English: Compared with the fat and beautiful, I am ashamed of the carp in the summer; on the delicious, I am ashamed of the carp in the winter.

古文：常恐鲐腹之讥，惧贻鳖岩之诮。
现代文：我常常恐慌鲐腹的讽刺，时时畏惧鳖岩的讥诮。
English: I have often dreaded the sarcasm of the scoffers, always dreaded the mockery of the scoffers.

古文：是以嗽流湖底，枕石泥中。
现代文：因此，我吮吸潮底的流沙为食，枕着石泥睡觉。
English: So I suck on quicksand at the bottom of the tide for food and sleep with a pillow of mud.

古文：不意高赏殊临。
现代文：不料，崇高的奖赏还是降临到我的头上。
English: Unexpectedly, the noble reward still came to my head.

古文：曲蒙钧拨，遂得超升绮席，忝预玉盘，远厕玳筵。
现代文：承蒙提拔，于是高升到丰盛的华宴上，列到玉盘中，远远地置放在豪华、珍贵的筵席旁边。
English: After being promoted, he was elevated to a sumptuous banquet, listed in the jade plate, and placed far away next to the luxurious and precious banquet.

古文：猥颁象箸，泽覃紫腴，恩加黄腹。
现代文：有劳象牙筷子大人，将我亲昵地夹起来，送入一张张肥大的嘴里，进入一个个长满黄油的肚子中。
English: The adults, with their laborious ivory chopsticks, clamped me up affectionately and sent me into my fat mouth, into a belly full of butter.

古文：方当鸣姜动桂，纡苏佩檔。
现代文：刚刚放上姜沫桂皮，再置入紫苏茱萸。
English: Just put the ginger foam cinnamon rind, and then put in the purple jujube.

古文：轻瓢才动，则枢盘如烟。
现代文：轻便的葫瓢刚刚勺动，精美的山榆木盘就象烟一样地聚来。
English: The light crucible is just stirred, and the exquisite hawthorn wood pan gathers like smoke.

古文：浓汁暂停，则兰肴成列。
现代文：浓浓的汤汁才停止沸腾，一排排的兰膏油灯就点燃了。
English: The thick soup only stopped boiling when the rows of lanterns were lit.

古文：宛转绿脐之中，逍遥朱唇之内。
现代文：周旋在绿色的腌菜中间，逍遥于红色的口唇之内。
English: Swirling in the green stew, floating in the red lips.

古文：衔恩噬泽，九殒弗辞。
现代文：含着你们的恩德，吃着你们的泽惠，虽然九死而不辞。
English: Carrying your bounty, eating your bounty, even if they die, they will not give up.

古文：无任屏营之诚，谨诣铜铛门，奉表致谢以闻。
现代文：没有任何惶恐可以诚告，只是谨慎地走进铜釜之门，奉上此表表示谢意。
English: Without any fear to tell the truth, I just cautiously walked into the door of the copper kettle and presented this watch to express my gratitude.

古文：诏答曰：省表具悉。
现代文：圣上颁下诏书回答说：奏上的表章全读过了。
English: The emperor replied, "I have read the entire imperial edict.

古文：卿池沼缙绅，陂渠俊乂。
现代文：爱卿乃是池沼中的晋绅，岸渠里的俊杰。
English: Aicheng is the gentleman in the pond and the young man in the canal.

古文：穿蒲入荇，肥滑有闻。
现代文：穿行于菖蒲、荇菜之间，以肥嫩滑腻而闻名于人世。
English: It is famous for its fat, tender and smooth texture.

古文：允堪兹选，无劳致谢。
现代文：正应当接受挑选，不用致谢。
English: You should be singled out, not thanked.

古文：热洛河
现代文：热洛河
English: The Jello River

古文：玄宗命射生官射鲜鹿，取血煎鹿肠。食之，谓之热洛河，赐安禄山及哥舒翰。
现代文：他还能作冷胡突。
English: He can also be a cold-hearted jerk.

古文：名食今衣冠家名食，有：萧家馄饨，漉去，其汤不肥，可以瀹茗；庾家粽子，白莹如玉；韩约能作樱桃饆饠，其色不变；又能造冷胡突，鲙鳢鱼臆，连蒸獐獐皮索饼。
现代文：还有鲙鲙鱼胸骨，连蒸獐獐皮面条。
English: There are also cod breast bones, even steamed cod skin noodles.

古文：将军曲良翰能为驴鬃驼峰炙。
现代文：将军曲良翰能将驴鬃驼峰炙烤着吃。
English: General Qu Lianghan can eat roasted donkey's colostrum.

古文：败障泥
现代文：败障泥
English: mudslide

古文：贞元中，有一将军家出饭食。
现代文：唐德宗贞元年间，有一位将军，他家什么东西都能作着吃。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of Tang, there was a general whose family could cook and eat anything.

古文：每说：无物不堪吃，唯在火候，善均五味。
现代文：这位将军说：天下没有不能吃的东西，诀窍在于火候掌握的怎么样，善不善于调味。
English: The general said: "There is nothing in the world that cannot be eaten. The trick is how to master the heat, and whether you are good at seasoning.

古文：尝取败障泥胡盝，修理食之，其味佳。
现代文：这位将军曾经将败障泥拿回家中，用盛箭矢的胡盝修理后吃，说味道特别好。
English: The general used to take the damaged mud home and eat it after repairing it with arrowheads, saying that the taste was particularly good.

古文：尚食令
现代文：尚食令
English: Order of the Rising Sun

古文：冯给事入中书祗候宰相，见一老官人衣绯，在中书门立，候通报。
现代文：冯给事到中书省去恭候宰相接见，见到一位着红衣的老官人站在中书省门前等候通报。
English: Feng gave the matter to the Ministry of Education and Culture to wait for the prime minister to meet, and saw an old official in red standing in front of the Ministry of Education and Culture waiting for notification.

古文：时夏谯公为相，留坐论事多时。
现代文：当时是夏谯任宰相，留下冯给事谈论公务，谈了很长时间。
English: At that time, Xia Yao was the prime minister, leaving Feng to talk about official business. They talked for a long time.

古文：及出，日势已晚，其官人犹尚在。
现代文：等到冯给事从中书省出来，天已经不早了，那位老官人还在门前等着通报呢。
English: By the time Feng had sorted things out, it was already late in the day, and the old official was still waiting in front of the door to be notified.

古文：乃遣人问是何官。
现代文：于是，冯给事让人上前询问他是干什么的？
English: As a result, Feng had someone come forward to ask him what he was doing.

古文：官人近前相见曰：某新除尚食局令，有事相见相公。
现代文：老官人走到冯给事身前，说：我刚刚被任命为尚食局令，有事情想见宰相。
English: The old official walked up to Feng and said, "I have just been appointed as the director of the Shang Food Bureau. I have something to see the prime minister about.

古文：因令省官通之。
现代文：冯给事乃让中书省的官员给通报一下。
English: Feng gave the matter to the officials of the Chinese Book Ministry to inform them.

古文：官人入，给事偶未去。
现代文：老官人进到中书省里。
English: Old officials enter the Ministry of Chinese Literature.

古文：官人见宰相了，出谢云：若非给事恩遇，某无因得见相公。
现代文：冯给事偶然耽搁一下，待老官人出来时还没有离去。老官人上前致谢说：若不是给事帮通报，我就没有机会见到宰相啦。
English: By chance, Feng was delayed and had not yet left when the elder statesman came out. The elder statesman came forward to express his thanks and said, "If it wasn't for you informing me, I wouldn't have had the chance to see the prime minister."

古文：某是尚食局造包子手，不知给事宅在何处？
现代文：我是尚食局做蒸饼的，不知道给事府第在那条街？
English: I make steamed buns at the Shang Food Restaurant. I don't know what the hell happened in that street.

古文：曰：在亲仁坊。
现代文：冯给事回答说：在亲仁坊。
English: Feng replied matter-of-factly, "It's in Chien-Ren Square."

古文：曰：欲说薄艺，但不知给事何日在宅？
现代文：老官人说：我想向你显示一下我的这点手艺，不知给事什么时候在府上？
English: The old man said, "I want to show you a little bit of my craft. I don't know when I'll be in the house.

古文：曰：来日当奉候。
现代文：冯给事说：明天我在家等你。
English: Feng said, "I'll be waiting for you at home tomorrow."

古文：然欲相访，要何物。
现代文：但你到我家献艺，不知道需要为你准备哪些用品？
English: But you come to my house to perform and you don't know what supplies you need?

古文：曰：要大台盘一只，木楔子三五十枚，及油铛灰火，好麻油一二斗，南枣烂面少许。
现代文：老官人说：需要准备大台盘一只，木契三五十枚。还有油釜、炭火、上好的麻油一二斗，南枣、普通面粉少许，就可以了。
English: The old official said, "We need to prepare one large tray and thirty-five wooden tokens. There is also an oil kettle, charcoal, one or two buckets of good hemp oil, southern dates, and a little bit of plain flour. That will be fine."

古文：给事素精于饮馔，归宅便令排比。
现代文：冯给事平素对饮食馔肴也很通晓，回到家里后，便让家人按老官人说的安排准备。
English: Feng Jizhe is usually very knowledgeable about food and dishes. After returning home, he asked his family to prepare according to the arrangements made by the old officials.

古文：乃垂帘，家口同观之。至日初出，果秉简而入。
现代文：并且事先安排好，在厨房外面挂上一幅帘子，他和家人在帘子里观看老官人如何献艺。第二天早晨，太阳刚出来，老官人果然手持宫中的简牍来了。
English: And he had arranged in advance to hang a curtain outside the kitchen, where he and his family would watch the old official perform. The next morning, the sun had just come up, and the old official did indeed come, holding the imperial scepter.

古文：坐饮茶一瓯，便起出厅。
现代文：稍坐，喝了一杯茶，便起身走出客厅到厨房里去。
English: After sitting for a while and drinking a cup of tea, he got up and walked out of the living room to the kitchen.

古文：脱衫靴带，小帽子，青半肩，三幅袴，花襜袜肚，锦臂沟。
现代文：只见他脱去外面的长衫、脚下的靴子，戴上一顶小帽，穿上青色半袖衫，三幅裤，系上花围裙袜兜，套上皮套袖。
English: I only saw him take off his outer long shirt, the boots under his feet, put on a small cap, put on a blue short-sleeved shirt, three pairs of pants, tie a flower apron sock, and put on leather sleeves.

古文：遂四面看台盘，有不平处，以一楔填之，后其平正。
现代文：之后，围着事先备好的平台盘仔细看看，见有不平的地方就用木契填上，将它整平。
English: After that, look carefully around the platform plate prepared in advance, and if you see any uneven areas, fill it with wood chips and level it.

古文：然后取油铛烂面等调停。袜肚中取出银盒一枚，银篦子银笊篱各一。
现代文：然后，拿过来油釜，将面粉等放在里面和好后，从袜兜中取出银盒一只，银篦子银笊篱各一只。
English: Then, take the oil kettle, put the flour and so on in it, and after it is well mixed, take out a silver box from the sock pocket, and a silver braid and a silver hedge.

古文：候油煎熟，于盒中取包子豏。以手于烂面中团之，五指间各有面透出。以篦子刮郤，便置包子于铛中。
现代文：等油煎热后，从银盒中取出做蒸饼用的豆馅儿，将面团在手里，从手指缝中挤出来，用银篦子刮下去，放在釜中热油里煎。
English: When the oil is hot, take the bean paste from the silver box, squeeze out the dough with your fingers, scrape it with a silver spatula, and fry it in the hot oil in the kettle.

古文：候熟，以笊篱漉出。
现代文：煎好后用银笊篱捞出来，放在新打来的水中。
English: After frying, it is fished out with silver bait and placed in fresh water.

古文：以新汲水中良久，郤投油铛中，三五沸取出。抛台盘上，旋转不定，以太圆故也。
现代文：过了好一会儿，将它们捞出来再放入釜中热油里炸三五个开后，捞出，抛放在台盘上，转个不停，因为包子太圆的缘故。
English: After a while, fish them out and then put them in a kettle of hot oil and fry for three to five minutes, then fish them out, throw them on a tray, and keep turning them, because the buns are too round.

古文：其味脆美，不可名状。
现代文：这种包子，口感酥脆，味道鲜美，你都说不出来它有多么好吃。
English: This kind of bun has a crispy texture and delicious taste. You can't even tell how delicious it is.

古文：大饼
现代文：大饼
English: Large cake from

古文：王蜀时，有赵雄武者，众号赵大饼。
现代文：五代前蜀王氏王朝时期，蜀中有个叫赵雄武的人，大家都称他为赵大饼。
English: Five generations ago, during the reign of the Shu Wang Dynasty, there was a man in Shu named Zhao Xiongwu. Everyone called him Zhao Dacai.

古文：累典名郡，为一时之富豪。
现代文：他的名字多次载入地方史志中，是当时蜀中的一位大富翁。
English: His name has been recorded many times in local histories, and he was a very wealthy man in Shuzhong at that time.

古文：严洁奉身，精于饮馔。居常不使膳夫，六局之中，中有二婢执役，常厨者十五余辈，皆着窄袖鲜洁衣装。
现代文：赵雄武从来都穿戴整齐洁净才下厨房，他精通饮食菜肴，平常家中不使用厨师，都是他亲自下厨。他家里后勤这一摊各有二个婢女掌管。到他这辈儿，他家有十五辈人从事厨师工作，都是穿窄袖干净整洁的服装下厨。
English: Zhao Xiongwu has always dressed neatly and cleanly before going to the kitchen. He is proficient in food and dishes. He usually does not use a chef at home, he cooks by himself. His family's logistics are each managed by two maids. In his generation, there have been 15 generations of his family working as chefs, and they all wear narrow sleeves and clean clothes when cooking.

古文：事一餐，邀一客，必水陆俱备。虽王侯之家，不得相倣焉。
现代文：而且，每餐饭只邀请一位客人，山珍海味都有，虽然是王侯之家也不能比。
English: Moreover, only one guest is invited to each meal, and they all have mountain and sea delicacies, although it cannot be compared to the princely family.

古文：有能造大饼，每三斗面擀一枚，大于数间屋。
现代文：赵雄武还会作大饼，擀一张大饼需用三斗面，饼有几间屋子那么大。
English: Zhao Xiongwu also makes large cakes. It takes three buckets of noodles to make one large cake. The cake is as big as several rooms.

古文：或大内宴聚，或豪家有广筵，多于众宾内献一枚。
现代文：或是宫廷里举行宴会，或是豪门贵族人家广筵宾朋，常常请他给擀作一张大饼，用刀割着吃。
English: Whether it was a banquet held at the court, or a large number of guests of the rich aristocrats, he was often asked to make a big cake for the dragonfly and cut it with a knife.

古文：裁剖用之，皆有余矣。
现代文：不论你来了多少宾客，也富富有余。
English: No matter how many guests you have, you will always have more than enough.

古文：虽亲密懿分，莫知擀造之法，以此得大饼之号。
现代文：就是再亲密的朋友，他也不告诉你擀做这种大饼的方法。因此，赵雄武得了个赵大饼的雅号。
English: No matter how close a friend he is, he will not tell you how to make this cake. Therefore, Zhao Xiongwu got the nickname of Zhao Big Cake.

古文：能食
现代文：能食
English: Able to eat

古文：范汪
现代文：范汪
English: Fan Wang

古文：晋范汪能噉生梅。
现代文：晋朝人范汪能吃生梅。
English: Fan Wang, who lived during the Jin Dynasty, could eat raw plum.

古文：有人致一斛，汪食之，须臾而尽。宋明帝
现代文：有人给他送来十斗生梅，他不一会儿就都吃没了。宋明帝
English: Someone brought him ten buckets of raw plums, but he ate them all in no time.

古文：宋明帝韦彧，能食蜜渍鱁鮧，一食数升。
现代文：南北朝时期，宋明帝韦彧非常能吃用蜂蜜腌渍的鱁鮧，一次可以吃几升。
English: During the period of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, Emperor Wei of the Song and Ming Dynasties was very good at eating beetroot marinated in honey, and could eat several liters at a time.

古文：噉猪肉炙，常至二百块。
现代文：这位皇帝吃烤猪肉，一次能吃二百块。
English: This emperor eats roast pork and can eat 200 pieces of wax at a time.

古文：苻坚三将
现代文：苻坚三将
English: The three generals of Sui Jian

古文：苻坚以乞活夏默为左镇郎，胡人护磨那为右镇郎，奄人申香为拂盖郎。
现代文：南北朝时期前秦的君主苻坚任乞活夏默为左镇郎，胡人护磨那为右镇郎，阉人申香为拂盖郎。
English: During the period of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, the former Qin Dynasty's ruler, Qian Jian, appointed the beggar Shamer to be the left zhenro, the goatherd Zhou to be the right zhenro, and the eunuch Shen Xiang to be the whisker.

古文：并身长一丈三尺，多力善射。
现代文：这三位武将都身高一丈三尺，力大无穷，而且擅长骑马射箭。
English: These three warriors are all three feet tall, powerful, and good at riding and archery.

古文：三人每食，饭一石，肉三十斤。
现代文：他们一顿饭要吃一石米，三十斤肉。
English: They have to eat one kilo of rice and 30 kilos of meat for one meal.

古文：菲食
现代文：菲食
English: Filipino food

古文：茅容
现代文：茅容
English: Mao Rong

古文：后汉茅容字季伟，郭林宗曾寓宿焉。
现代文：后汉人茅容，字季伟，郭林宗曾经在他家里住过一宿。
English: Later, the Han people Mao Rong, Ji Wei, and Guo Lin Zong once lived in his house for a night.

古文：及明旦，容杀鸡为馔，林宗初以为己设。
现代文：第二天早晨，茅容杀一只鸡做菜。起初，郭林宗以为是为了招待他这位客人的呢。
English: The next morning, Mao Rong killed a chicken to cook. At first, Guo Lin Zong thought it was to invite his guest.

古文：既而容独以供母，自以草蔬与客同饭。
现代文：等鸡做好了后，茅容单独将鸡给母亲吃。他自己和郭林宗一起儿只吃一般的蔬菜下饭。
English: After the chicken was ready, Mao Rong gave the chicken to his mother to eat alone. He and Guo Lin Zong only ate ordinary vegetables with their meals.

古文：林宗因起拜之曰：卿贤乎哉。
现代文：郭林宗起身参拜茅容，说：你很高尚啊！
English: Guo Linzong stood up and paid homage to Mao Rong, saying: You are very noble!

古文：劝之就学，竟以成德。
现代文：并劝他拜个老师很好地学习，后来竟然有所成就。
English: And he advised him to ask a teacher to study well, and later he actually achieved something.

古文：陆机
现代文：陆机
English: Land plane

古文：陆机诣王武子，有数斛羊酪。指示陆曰：卿江东无敌此。
现代文：陆机到王武子那去，带去几斛羊奶酪，问王武子：你们江东没有比羊奶酪还好的食品了吧。
English: The land plane went to Wang Wu Zi, brought a few scoops of goat cheese, and asked Wang Wu Zi: "Don't you have better food than goat cheese in the east of the Yangtze River?"

古文：曰：有千里莼羹，但未下盐豉耳。
现代文：王武子回答说：有啊。千里那地方用莼菜做的羹汤，还有未下那地方的盐豆豉，都很好吃啊！
English: Wang Wu Zi replied, "Yes. The soup soup made with amaranth in the place thousands of miles away, and the salted bean stew in the place thousands of miles away, are all delicious!

古文：羊曼
现代文：羊曼
English: Sheepman

古文：晋羊曼为丹阳尹。
现代文：晋朝人羊曼任丹阳郡尹。
English: Yin of Danyang County was appointed as Yangman of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：时朝士过江，初拜官，必饰供馔。
现代文：晋朝的首都南迁建邺后，朝廷的文武百官也随着过江。当时，凡是刚上任的官员都要设宴请客的。
English: After the capital of the Jin Dynasty was moved south and the Great Wall was built, hundreds of civil and military officials of the imperial court also crossed the river. At that time, all officials who had just taken office had to host a banquet.

古文：曼拜丹阳尹，客来早者得佳设，日晏即渐罄，不复精珍。
现代文：羊曼刚任丹阳郡尹时，也设宴请客。来得早的客人占据好位置。宴席吃的差不多了，就不再上什么好菜了。
English: When Yangman was newly appointed as Yin of Danyang County, he also held a banquet to invite guests. The guests who came early occupied a good position. The banquet was almost eaten, and no good dishes were served.

古文：随客早晚，不问贵贱。
现代文：羊曼设宴请客，不论你的身份高低，来早的就坐好位置，来晚的你就将就着坐。
English: Goatman set up a banquet to invite guests, regardless of your status, if you come early, you will sit in a good position, and if you come late, you will sit.

古文：有羊固者拜临海太守。备馔，竟日皆精，虽晚至者，犹有盛馔。
现代文：有个叫羊固的人被授任临海太守，也设宴请客，一整天都是佳肴美食，就是晚到的人，也能吃到丰盛的菜肴。
English: A man named Yang Gu was appointed as the governor of Linhai Province. He also held a banquet to invite guests. The whole day was a feast of delicious food. Even those who arrived late could eat hearty dishes.

古文：论者以固之丰腆，不如曼之真率也。
现代文：人们议论说：羊固的宴席虽然特别丰盛，却没有羊曼真诚啊！
English: People argue: although the banquet at the sheepfold is particularly sumptuous, it lacks sincerity!

