古文：桓公问管子曰： 请问乘马。 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 请问，经济的筹算计划。 
English: Kan Gong asked Guanzhong and said, "Excuse me, what is the economic calculation plan?"

古文：管子对曰： 国无储在令。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 国家没有财物积蓄，原因出在政令上。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "The reason why the country has no savings is due to the government decree.

古文：桓公曰： 何谓国无储在令？ 
现代文：桓公说： 为什么说国无积蓄的原因在于政令呢？ 
English: Huan Gong said: Why is it said that the reason why the country has no savings is due to the government decree?

古文：管子对曰： 一农之量壤百亩也，春事二十五日之内。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 一个农民只能种百亩土地，而春耕春种只能在二十五天内完成。 
English: Guanzhong replied: A farmer can only cultivate 100 mu of land, and spring cultivation can only be completed within 25 days.

古文：桓公曰： 何谓春事二十五日之内？ 
现代文：桓公说： 为什么说春耕春种只能在二十五天以内呢？ 
English: Kanko said, "Why is it said that spring cultivation and spring planting can only start within twenty-five days?

古文：管子对曰： 日至六十日而阳冻释，七十日而阴冻释。
现代文：管仲回答说： 冬至后六十天地面解冻，到七十五天地下解冻。
English: Guanzhong replied: The ground thaws sixty days after the winter solstice, and the underground thaws seventy-five days.

古文：阴冻释而秇稷，百日不秇稷，故春事二十五日之内耳也。
现代文：地下解冻才可以种谷，过冬至一百天就不能再种，所以春耕春种必须在二十五天内完成。
English: Grain can only be planted when the ground thaws, and it cannot be planted again until a hundred days after the winter solstice, so spring farming and spring planting must be completed within twenty-five days.

古文：今君立扶台、五衢之众皆作。
现代文：现在君上修建扶台，国内五方的民众都来服役。
English: Now the emperor is building a platform, and people from all five corners of the country are coming to serve.

古文：君过春而不止，民失其二十五日，则五衢之内阻弃之地也。
现代文：一直过了春天您还不下令停止，百姓就失去了春耕二十五天的时机，全国五方之地就成为废弃之地了。
English: If you do not order a halt until after the spring, the people will lose the opportunity to do spring farming for 25 days, and the land in all five directions will become abandoned land.

古文：起一人之繇，百亩不举；起十人之繇，千亩不举；起百人之繇，万亩不举；起千人之繇，十万亩不举。
现代文：征发一人的谣役，百亩地不得耕种；征发十人，千亩不得耕种；征发百人，万亩不得耕种；征发干人，十万亩不得耕种。
English: If one person is requisitioned and sent to the Gulag, one hundred mu of land may not be cultivated; if ten people are requisitioned and sent to the Gulag, one thousand mu may not be cultivated; if one hundred people are requisitioned and sent to the Gulag, one million mu may not be cultivated; if one person is requisitioned and sent to the Gulag, one hundred thousand mu may not be cultivated.

古文：春已失二十五日，而尚有起夏作，是春失其地，夏失其苗，秋起繇而无止，此之谓谷地数亡。
现代文：春季已失去了那个 二十五天 ，夏天又再来征发徭役，这就是春天误了种地，夏天误了耘苗，秋天再无休止地征发，这就叫做粮食、土地不断地丧失。
English: Spring has lost that twenty-five days, summer comes again to requisition the ploughing, which means that spring misses the planting ground, summer misses the seedlings, and autumn is again endlessly requisitioned. This is called the continuous loss of grain and land.

古文：谷失于时，君之衡藉而无止，民食什伍之谷，则君已籍九矣，有衡求币焉，此盗暴之所以起，刑罚之所以众也。随之以暴，谓之内战。 桓公曰： 善哉！ 
现代文：种谷既已延误了农时，君上的官吏又在不停地征税，农民吃用粮食通常只是收成的一半，现今则被君主拿去了九成。此外，官吏收税还要求交纳现钱。这些便是暴乱之所由起和刑罪增加的原因。如随之以暴力镇压，就要发生所谓 内战 了。 桓公说： 讲得好啊！ 
English: Since the planting of grain delayed the time of the peasants, the officials of the sovereign were constantly levying taxes. The peasants usually ate and used only half of the grain harvest, but now the monarch took away ninety percent. In addition, the officials collecting taxes also demanded the payment of cash. These were the reasons for the riots and the increase in criminal offenses. If they were violently suppressed, there would be a so-called civil war. Huan Gong said: Well said!

古文：管子曰： 策乘马之数求尽也，彼王者不夺民时，故五谷兴丰。
现代文：管仲接着说： 这就是因为没有充分利用计算筹划的理财方法。那些成王业的君主，从不侵夺百姓的农时，所以能五谷丰收。
English: Guanzhong went on to say: This is because the financial management method of calculation and planning is not fully utilized. Those monarchs who become kings never encroach on the people's agricultural time, so they can harvest a good harvest.

古文：五谷兴丰，则士轻禄，民简赏。
现代文：但是五谷丰收后，战士就往往轻视爵禄，百姓也难免轻视国家奖赏。
English: However, after a good harvest, soldiers tend to despise peerage, and the people inevitably despise state rewards.

古文：彼善为国者，使农夫寒耕暑耘，力归于上，女勤于纤微而织归于府者，非怨民心伤民意，高下之策，不得不然之理也。 
现代文：那种善于治理国家的人，就能使农民努力耕作而成果归于君上，妇女勤于纺织而成果归于官府。这并不是想要伤害民心民意，而是实行了利用物价高低的理财政策，就不能不是这样的结果。 
English: The kind of person who is good at governing the country will be able to make farmers work hard to cultivate and the results will be attributed to you, and women work hard to weave and the results will be attributed to the government. This is not to hurt the people's hearts and minds, but to implement a financial management policy that takes advantage of high and low prices. This cannot be the result.

古文：桓公曰： 为之奈何？ 
现代文：桓公说： 具体做法如何？ 
English: Kanko said, "What's the procedure?"

古文：管子曰： 虞国得策乘马之数矣。 
现代文：管仲说： 古代虞国是真正懂得运用计算筹划的理财方法的。 
English: Guanzhong said, "Ancient Yugo Kingdoms really knew how to apply the method of financial management based on calculation and planning.

古文：桓公曰： 何谓策乘马之数？ 
现代文：桓公说： 到底什么是运用计算筹划的理财方法？ 
English: Kanko said: What exactly is a financial management method that uses calculation and planning?

古文：管子曰： 百亩之夫，予之策： 率二十七日为子之春事，资子之币。 
现代文：管仲说： 对于种百亩田的农民们，下达一个通令说： 这个大约二十五天的时间，归你们自己进行春耕，国家并发给你们贷款。 
English: Guanzhong said: For the farmers who plant 100 mu of fields, a circular was issued saying: This time of about 25 days is for you to carry out spring plowing, and the state will give you a loan.

古文：春秋，子谷大登，国谷之重去分。
现代文：到了大秋，五谷大熟，国内粮价下降了一半。
English: By late autumn, the grain was so ripe that domestic grain prices had fallen by half.

古文：谓农夫曰： 币之在子者以为谷而廪之州里。 
现代文：这时又通告农民们说： 你们的贷款，都要折成粮食偿还，而且要送交州、里的官府收藏。 
English: At this time, they also announced to the farmers that: Your loans must be converted into grain repayment, and must be sent to the state and local government offices for collection.

古文：国谷之分在上，国谷之重再十倍。
现代文：等到国内市场的粮食有一半控制在国家手里时，就可使粮价提高二十倍。
English: When half of the grain in the domestic market is controlled by the state, grain prices could increase twentyfold.

古文：谓远近之县，里、邑百官，皆当奉器械备，曰： 国无币，以谷准币。 
现代文：于是又通告远近各县、各里、各邑的官吏们，要求他们都必须交纳兵器和各种用具备用。同时通告说： 国家没有现钱，用粮食折成现钱购买。 
English: Therefore, officials in counties, villages and towns far and near were also notified, and they were required to pay for weapons and all kinds of supplies. At the same time, it was announced that: The country has no cash, and purchases are made with grain converted into cash.

古文：国谷之櫎，一切什九。
现代文：这便在国内粮食价格上，一律取得十分之九的大利。
English: As a result, the domestic grain prices have gained nine-tenths of a percent.

古文：还谷而应谷，国器皆资，无籍于民。
现代文：经过偿还粮食来支付器械的贷款，国家的器物都得到供应，而用不着向百姓直接征收。
English: Through the repayment of grain to pay for the loan of equipment, the state's goods are supplied, and there is no need to collect directly from the people.

古文：此有虞之策乘马也。 
现代文：这就是虞国运用计算筹划的做法。 
English: This is the practice of using calculation and planning by the state.

