古文：卫青，字明德，松江华亭人。
现代文：卫青，字明德，松江华亭人。
English: Wei Qing, Zhi Ming De, Songjiang Huating.

古文：以蓟州百户降成祖，积功至都指挥佥事，莅中都留守司事，改山东备倭。
现代文：以蓟州百户的身份投降成祖，积功升至都指挥佥事，前往中都任留守司事。后改往山东防楼。
English: He surrendered to Cheng Zu as one of the hundred households of Bozhou, and was promoted to the commander of the capital Anji, and went to the capital to serve as a secretary. Later, he moved to the Shandong Defense Building.

古文：永乐十八年二月，浦台妖妇林三妻唐赛儿作乱。
现代文：永乐十八年二月，蒲台人林三之妻唐赛儿起义。
English: In February of the 18th year of Yongle, Tang Xie Er, the wife of Lin San, a resident of Putai, revolted.

古文：自言得石函中宝书神剑，役鬼神，剪纸作人马相战斗。
现代文：她自言在石匣中获得宝书神剑，能役使鬼神，并剪纸做成人马，让他们互相斗杀。
English: She told herself that in the stone box she had won the treasure of the book and the sword, and could serve the ghosts and gods, and cut paper to make adult horses, and let them fight and kill each other.

古文：徒众数千，据益都卸石栅寨。
现代文：她拥有数千徒众，占据益都卸石栅寨。
English: She has thousands of followers and occupies a stone-paved courtyard.

古文：指挥高凤败殁，势遂炽。
现代文：指挥高凤败死之后，其气势由此旺盛起来。
English: After the death of the commander Gao Feng, the momentum of the movement became more vigorous.

古文：其党董彦昇等攻下莒、即墨，围安丘。
现代文：其党羽董彦升等攻下营、即墨，包围安丘。
English: His followers, including Dong Yan Sheng, stormed the camp and immediately surrounded Anqiu.

古文：总兵官安远侯柳升帅都指挥刘忠围赛儿寨。
现代文：总兵官安远侯柳升率都指挥刘忠围攻唐赛儿的营寨。
English: The commander-in-chief Anyuan Hou and Liu Sheng both commanded Liu Zhong to besiege Tang Xiel's camp.

古文：赛儿夜劫官军。
现代文：唐赛儿夜劫官军。
English: Tang Xie'er robs government troops at night.

古文：军乱，忠战死，赛儿遁去。
现代文：官军乱成一团，刘忠战死，唐赛儿退去。
English: Liu Zhong was killed, and Tang Xie Er retreated.

古文：比明，升始觉，追不及，获贼党刘俊等及男女百余人。
现代文：天明之后，柳升才发觉，追赶不及，只俘获义军刘俊等及男女百余人。
English: It was only after daybreak that Liu Sheng realized that he was too late to catch up, and only captured rebel Liu Jun and more than a hundred men and women.

古文：而贼攻安丘益急，知县张旟、丞马捴死战，贼不能下，合莒、即墨众万余人以攻。
现代文：而义军更加猛攻安丘，知县张旋、县丞马擅拼死而战，义军未能攻下，便会合营、即墨万余义军来攻。
English: However, the rebels attacked Anqiu even more fiercely. Zhixian Zhang Xuan and Xian Rongma fought to the death, but the rebels were unable to capture it, so they gathered a battalion, i.e. more than 10,000 rebels, to attack.

古文：青方屯海上，闻之，帅千骑昼夜驰至城下。
现代文：卫青正屯兵海上，获悉此情后，率领一千名骑兵昼夜兼程到达城下。
English: Wei Qingzheng garrisoned troops at sea, and after learning of this situation, he led a thousand cavalrymen to reach the city by day and night.

古文：再战，大败之，城中亦鼓噪出，杀贼二千，生擒四千余，悉斩之。
现代文：再战，大败对方，城中守军也大喊而出，杀死义军二千人，生擒千余人，将他们全部斩首。
English: A second battle, a crushing defeat of the other side, the defenders in the city also shouted out, killing two thousand rebels, more than a thousand survivors, and beheading them all.

古文：时城中旦夕不能支，青救稍迟，城必陷。
现代文：当时城中已力不能支，危在旦夕，卫青救援稍迟一刻，城必被攻陷。
English: At that time, the city was already overstretched and in danger, Wei Qing's rescue was a moment late, and the city would be captured.

古文：比贼败，升始至，青迎谒。
现代文：义军被击败后，柳升才赶到，卫青前去迎见。
English: After the rebels were defeated, Liu Sheng arrived, and Wei Qing went to meet him.

古文：升怒其不待己，捽之出。
现代文：柳升十分气愤他不等自己，将他揪了出去。
English: Liu Sheng was so angry that he didn't wait for himself and kicked him out.

古文：是日，鳌山卫指挥王真亦以兵百五十人歼贼诸城，贼遂平。
现代文：这天，鳌山卫指挥王真也率领一百五十人在诸城歼灭义军，义军遂被平定。
English: On this day, Lushanwei commander Wang Zhen also led one hundred and fifty people to annihilate the rebels in the cities, and the rebels were finally subdued.

古文：而赛儿卒不获。
现代文：而唐赛儿始终未被抓获。
English: But Tangsail has never been caught.

古文：帝赐书劳青，切责升。
现代文：皇上赐书慰劳卫青，切责柳升。
English: The emperor sent a letter of consolation to Lao Weiqing, and strongly reprimanded Liu Sheng.

古文：尚书吴中等劾升，且言升媢青功。
现代文：尚书吴中等弹劾柳升，并说嫉妒卫青的功劳。
English: Shang Shu Wu Zhong impeached Liu Sheng and said that he was jealous of Wei Qing's achievements.

古文：于是下升狱，而擢青山东都指挥使，真都指挥同知，旟、捴左右参议，赏赉有差。
现代文：于是皇上将柳升下狱，而提拔卫青为山东都指挥使，王真为都指挥同知，张旋、马擅为左右参议，对他们分别给予赏赐。
English: As a result, the imperial general Liu Sheng was released from prison, and Wei Qing was promoted to Shandong capital command envoy, Wang Zhen was promoted to capital command confidant, Zhang Xuan and Ma Gang were promoted to left and right counsel, and they were rewarded separately.

古文：青还备倭海上。
现代文：卫青仍返回海上，防备倭寇。
English: Wei Qing still returned to the sea to guard against Japanese pirates.

古文：寻坐事系狱。
现代文：随即因事获罪被下狱。
English: He was immediately convicted and released from prison.

古文：宣德元年，帝念其功，释之，俾复职。
现代文：宣德元年，皇上念他有功，释放了他，让他恢复原职。
English: In the first year of Xuande, the emperor considered him to be meritorious, released him, and allowed him to resume his original post.

古文：时京师营缮役繁，调及防海士卒。
现代文：当时京军营造劳役繁多，朝廷要征调防海士卒。
English: At that time, there were many laborers in the construction of the Beijing army, and the imperial court had to recruit and transfer naval cadets.

古文：京师陷，怀铁券，阖门十七人皆赴井死。
现代文：卫青提出异议，才得以让番军代替。英宗即位后，卫青进升为都督佥事，随后便去世了。
English: After Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, Wei Qing was promoted to the position of the provincial governor and later died.

古文：董兴，长垣人。初为燕山右卫指挥使，累迁署都指挥同知。
现代文：卫青十分孝顺，善于安抚士卒，防守海上十余年，海滨百姓思念他，而向朝廷请求，立祠祭祠。董兴，长垣人。开始为燕山右卫指挥使，后累升至代理都指挥同知。
English: Wei Qing was very filial, good at appeasing soldiers, defended the sea for more than ten years, the coastal people missed him, and asked the court to establish an ancestral shrine. Dong Xing, a native of Nagagaki. He began as the commander of the Yanshan Right Guard, and later rose to the deputy commander.

古文：正统中，新建伯李玉等举兴将才，进署都指挥使，京营管操。
现代文：正统年间，新建伯李玉等认为董兴是将才而举荐他，董兴因此进升为代理都指挥使，在京营主管操练。
English: During the orthodox years, the newly-established Bo Liyu and others thought that Dong Xing was a great talent and recommended him. As a result, Dong Xing was promoted to acting commander and was in charge of training in the Beijing camp.

古文：复用荐，擢署都督佥事，充右参将，从宁阳侯陈懋讨邓茂七，破余党于建宁，进都督同知。
现代文：又因人荐举，被提升为代理都督佥事，充任右参将，跟随宁阳侯陈愈征讨邓茂七，在建宁击败他的余党，董兴进升为都督同知。
English: He was also promoted to acting governor of Anji due to the recommendation of others, and served as the right-hand general. He followed Ningyang marquis Chen Yu to fight against Deng Shaoqi, and defeated his remaining party in Jianning. Dong Xingjin was promoted to governor of Anji.

古文：南海贼黄萧养围广州，安乡伯张安、都指挥王清战死，贼众攻城益急。
现代文：南海贼寇黄萧养围攻广州，安乡伯张安、都指挥王清战死，贼众更加猛攻广州。
English: The South Sea bandit Huang Shao Yao besieged Guangzhou, and the Anxiang bandit Zhang An, both commanded by Wang Qing, died in battle. The bandits attacked Guangzhou even more fiercely.

古文：诏拜兴左副总兵，调江西、两广军往讨，而以侍郎孟鉴赞理军务。
现代文：皇上下诏授董兴为左副总兵，调江西、两广军队前往征讨，而命侍郎孟鉴赞理军务。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict to make Dong Xing the left deputy commander-in-chief, and ordered the troops of Jiangxi and Guangxi to go to the front to fight, while Meng Jian, the attendant of the imperial edict, was put in charge of military affairs.

古文：兴用天文生马轼自随。
现代文：董兴让精通天文的马轼跟随自己。
English: Dong Xing let Ma Yao, who is good at astronomy, follow him.

古文：兴果锐，不能戢下，轼戒之。
现代文：董兴十分果敢，却不能收敛部下，马轼为此劝诫他。
English: Dong Xing is very bold, but he can't control his subordinates. Ma Jun admonishes him for this.

古文：景泰元年二月，师至广州。贼舟千余艘，势甚炽，而征兵未至，诸将请济师。
现代文：景泰元年二月，董兴军到达广州，贼寇拥有船只千余艘，势头极盛，而朝廷征调的军队还未到，诸将请求停止前进。
English: In February of the year 1200, Dong Xing's army arrived in Guangzhou. The bandits had more than a thousand ships and were gaining momentum. However, the army sent by the imperial court had not yet arrived, and the generals requested that the advance be halted.

古文：轼曰： 广民延颈久矣，即以狼兵往击，犹拉朽耳。 
现代文：马轼说道： 广州百姓翘首以盼已经很久了，可是如果以乱兵进击，失败就会如同摧枯拉朽一般。 
English: Ma Wei said: The people of Guangzhou have been looking forward to it for a long time, but if they attack with chaotic soldiers, the failure will be like withering.

古文：兴从之。
现代文：董兴听从了他。
English: Dong Xing obeyed him.

古文：既而兵大集，进至大洲击贼，杀溺死者万余人，余多就抚。
现代文：不久，大军齐集，进至大洲袭击贼寇，被杀死、溺死的贼寇达一万余人，其余的大多就抚。
English: Soon, a large army gathered and went to the continent to attack the bandits. More than 10,000 bandits were killed and drowned, and most of the rest were left behind.

古文：萧养中流矢死，函首以献，俘其父及子等，余党皆伏诛。
现代文：黄萧养被飞箭射死，董兴将其首级献上，并俘获其父及子等人，余党全部伏诛。
English: Huang Xiaoyang was killed by flying arrows, Dong Xing presented his head, and his father and son were captured, and the rest of the party were all killed.

古文：论功，进右都督，留镇广东。
现代文：论功时，董兴进升为右都督，留下镇守广东。
English: On the basis of merit, Dong Xingjin was promoted to the right-hand governor, leaving the town guard of Guangdong.

古文：给事中黄士俊劾兴宽纵，降其官。明年复职。
现代文：给事中黄士俊弹劾董兴宽纵部下，董兴被降职。
English: In the affair, Huang Shijun impeached Dong Xingkang and his subordinates, and Dong Xing was demoted.

古文：久之，召还，分督京营。
现代文：第二年又恢复原职。久之，董兴应召回京，分督京营。
English: The next year, he resumed his original position. After a long time, Dong Xing was called back to Beijing and became the sub-governor of Beijing Camp.

古文：与曹吉祥结姻，冒 夺门 功，封海宁伯。
现代文：他与曹吉祥结成姻亲，冒 夺门 之功，被封为海宁伯。
English: He and Cao Jixiang became in-laws, and he was awarded the title of Haining Bo.

古文：未几，充总兵官，镇辽东，予世券。
现代文：不久，他充任总兵官，镇守辽东，并被授予世袭浩券。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the chief military officer, the town guard of Liaodong, and was awarded the hereditary ticket.

古文：议革 夺门 者爵，兴以守边得免。
现代文：朝廷商议要革除 夺门 者的爵位，董兴因防守边睡而得以幸免。
English: The imperial court deliberated to remove the knighthood of the wrestler, but Dong Xing was spared because he was sleeping on the defensive.

古文：吉祥诛，乃夺兴爵，仍右都督，发广西立功。
现代文：曹吉祥被诛后，朝廷才剥夺董兴的爵，仍任右都督，发配广西立功。
English: After Cao Jixiang was taken into custody, the imperial court stripped Dong Xing of his title, but he still served as the right-hand governor and was awarded the Guangxi meritorious service award.

古文：以锦衣李贵荐，复爵，总兵宣府，再予世券。
现代文：由于锦衣卫官员李贵的推荐，董兴恢复爵位，统领宣府军队，并再次被授予世袭浩券。
English: As a result of the recommendation of the brocade official Li Gui, Dong Xing restored his knighthood, commanded the Xuanwu army, and was once again awarded the hereditary high ticket.

古文：宪宗嗣位，罢还。
现代文：宪宗继位后，董兴被免职返京。
English: After the succession of Emperor Gensong, Dong Xing was dismissed and returned to Beijing.

古文：已，停世袭。
现代文：不久，又被取消世袭资格。
English: Soon after, he was stripped of his hereditary title.

古文：家居十余年卒。
现代文：居家十余年后去世。
English: He died after more than ten years of living at home.

古文：何洪，全椒人。
现代文：何洪，全椒人。
English: He Hong, the whole pepper people.

古文：嗣世职，为成都前卫指挥使。
现代文：他继承世袭职位，为成都前卫指挥使。
English: He inherited the hereditary position and became the vanguard conductor of Chengdu.

古文：正统中，从征麓川。景泰末，从征天柱、铜鼓。皆有功。
现代文：正统年间，他随军征讨麓川，景泰末年，他又随军征讨天柱、铜鼓，都有功劳。
English: During the years of orthodoxy, he followed the army to conquer the Luchuan River, and in the last years of King Taejo, he followed the army to conquer the Temple of Heaven and the Bronze Drum.

古文：屡迁都指挥使，掌四川都司事，与平东苗。
现代文：屡升至都指挥使，掌管四川都司事务，参加平定东苗。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to commander of the capital, in charge of the affairs of the Sichuan capital, and participated in the pacification of Dongmiao.

古文：宪宗即位，论功，擢都督佥事。
现代文：宪宗即位后，论功，何洪被提升为都督佥事。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Gensong, He Hong was promoted to the post of governor-general.

古文：巡抚汪浩乞留洪四川，许之。
现代文：巡抚汪浩请求将何洪留在四川，朝廷同意了他的请求。
English: Governor Wang Hao requested that He Hong remain in Sichuan, and the imperial court agreed to his request.

古文：德阳人赵铎反，自称赵王，汉州诸贼皆归之。
现代文：德阳人赵铎谋反，自称赵王，汉州诸贼都投靠了他。
English: The Deyang man Zhao Yao plotted a rebellion, calling himself Zhao Wang, and all the thieves in Hanzhou sided with him.

古文：连番众，数陷城，杀将吏。
现代文：他们联合番族，多次攻陷城市，杀害将吏。
English: They united with the tribunes, repeatedly captured cities, and killed generals.

古文：遣其党何文让及僧悟升掠安岳诸县。
现代文：赵铎派遣其党羽何文让及僧人悟升劫掠安岳诸县。
English: Zhao Yu sent his followers He Wenzhang and the monk Wosheng to loot and plunder counties in the Andes.

古文：洪斩悟升，生擒文让。
现代文：何洪斩杀了悟升，生擒何文让。
English: He Hong killed Gosen, and He Wenzhang is still alive.

古文：铎将逼成都，官军分三路讨。
现代文：赵铎即将进逼成都，官军兵分三路征讨。
English: Zhao Wei is about to force his way into Chengdu, and the officers and soldiers are divided into three groups.

古文：洪偕都指挥宁用趋彰明，贼引去。
现代文：何洪偕同都指挥宁用直趋彰明，贼寇退去。
English: He Hongyu and the commander of the capital Ning used the straight line to make it clear that the bandits had retreated.

古文：追至梓潼朱家河，力战，贼少却。
现代文：官军追至梓潼朱家河，拼力而战，贼寇往后退却。
English: The government army chased them as far as Zizhi Zhujiahe, fought tooth and nail, and the bandits retreated.

古文：洪乘胜陷阵，后军不继，为贼所围，左右跳荡，杀贼甚众，力竭而死。
现代文：何洪乘胜冲锋陷阵，可因后军不继，而被贼寇所围，他左右突阵，杀贼甚多，力竭而死。
English: He Hong took advantage of the victory to charge into the battle, but he was surrounded by thieves and robbers because the rearguard did not follow. He broke into the battle left and right, killed many thieves, and died from exhaustion.

古文：洪勇敢，善抚士，号令严，蜀将无及之者。
现代文：何洪勇敢善战，善于安抚士卒，号令严明，蜀将无人能与他相比。
English: He Hong is brave and good at fighting, good at pacifying his subordinates, and his orders are strict. No one can compare with him.

古文：既死，官军夺气。
现代文：何洪一死，官军为此丧气。
English: As soon as He Hong died, the government army lost heart.

古文：而四川都指挥佥事临淮刘雄亦战死。
现代文：而四川都指挥佥事临淮刘雄也已战死。
English: And the commander of Sichuan, Lin Huai Liu Xiong, also died in the battle.

古文：雄刚劲，遇敌辄前，尝捕贼汉州，生擒七十余人。
现代文：刘雄刚劲有力，临敌时总是冲锋在前，他曾在汉州追捕贼寇，生擒七十余人。
English: Liu Xionggang is strong and powerful. When facing the enemy, he always charges forward. He once chased a bandit in Hanzhou, capturing more than 70 people.

古文：及铎乱，追之罗江大水河，手馘数人，贼连败。
现代文：赵铎叛乱后，刘雄追击至罗江大水河，亲手杀贼数人，接连击败贼寇。
English: After Zhao Wei's rebellion, Liu Xiong chased the bandits to Dashui River of Luo River, killed several bandits with his own hands, and defeated the bandits one after another.

古文：千户周鼎伤，雄前救之，径奔贼阵，丛刺死。
现代文：千户周鼎受伤，刘雄上前相救，径自奔向贼阵，被乱军刺死。
English: Chihou Zhou Ding was injured, Liu Xiong came forward to help, ran to the bandits, and was stabbed to death by the rebels.

古文：诏赠洪都督同知，予祭葬，子节袭都指挥佥事。
现代文：皇上下诏追赠何洪为都督同知，赐予祭葬，命其子何节承袭都指挥佥事之职。
English: The imperial edict posthumously presented He Hong as the same as the governor, granted him a ceremonial funeral, and ordered his son He Jie to inherit the post of commander.

古文：雄赠都指挥同知，赐祭，命子袭职，超二官。
现代文：追赠刘雄为都指挥同知，并赐祭他，命其子承袭父职，还官升二级。
English: He presented Liu Xiong as a gift to his friend, the commander of the capital, and gave him a sacrifice, ordered his son to inherit his father's post, and promoted him to the second level.

古文：洪虽死，绵竹典史萧让帅乡兵击铎，破之。
现代文：何洪虽死，绵竹曲史萧让率领乡兵打击赵铎，击败之。
English: Although He Hong was dead, Mianzhu Qu Shi Xiao Zhang led the local soldiers to attack Zhao Yu and defeat him.

古文：官兵频进击，其党稍散去。
现代文：官兵也频繁进击，贼党逐渐散去。
English: Officers and soldiers also frequently attacked, and the bandits gradually dispersed.

古文：铎势孤，帅余贼趋彰明。
现代文：赵铎势孤力单，率领余贼奔往彰明。
English: Zhao Yuxian was all alone, leading the rest of the thieves to run to Zhangming.

古文：千户田仪等设伏梓潼，而参将周贵直捣其巢。
现代文：千户田仪等在梓潼设下埋伏，而参将周贵则直捣其巢穴。
English: Chido Tani and others lay in ambush under the aegis of Azusa, while the general Zhou Gui went straight for their lairs.

古文：贼大败，夜奔石子岭。
现代文：贼寇大败，连夜逃奔石子岭。
English: The bandits were soundly defeated and fled to Shiziling overnight.

古文：仪亟进，斩铎，贼尽平。
现代文：田仪迅速前进，斩杀赵铎，贼寇全被平定。
English: Tian Yi quickly advanced and killed Zhao Yao, and the bandits were all subdued.

古文：成化元年五月也。
现代文：当时是成化元年五月。
English: At that time, it was May of the first year of Chenghua.

古文：刘玉，字仲玺，磁州人。
现代文：刘玉，字仲玺，磁州人。
English: Liu Yu, alias Zhong Qi, from the magnetic state.

古文：生有膂力，给侍曹吉祥家。
现代文：他天生体力过人，在曹吉祥家当仆人。
English: He was born with superior physical strength and worked as a servant in Cao Jixiang's household.

古文：从征麓川，授副千户，积功至都指挥佥事，天顺元年以 夺门 功进都督佥事，寻充右参将，守备浔州。
现代文：他随军征讨麓川，被授为副千户，积功升至都指挥佥事。天顺元年，刘玉以 夺门 功进升为都督佥事，随即充任右参将，守备浔州。
English: He went with the army to conquer the Luchuan River and was awarded the title of vice-commander of a thousand households, and was promoted to commander of the capital city. In the first year of Tianshun, Liu Yu was promoted to governor of the capital city with the title of "capturing the gate" and was immediately appointed to the post of right adjutant general to defend Zhangzhou.

古文：庆远蛮剽博白及广东之宁川，玉偕左参将范信邀击，败之。
现代文：庆远蛮劫掠博白及广东之宁川，刘玉偕同左参将范信进行拦击，击败之。
English: Qingyuan brutally plundered Bo Bai and Ningchuan in Guangdong, and Liu Yuxuan and Zuo Sheng intercepted Fan Xin and defeated him.

古文：俄命分守贵州。
现代文：随即奉命分守贵州。
English: He was then ordered to take charge of Guizhou.

古文：从方瑛讨东苗，歼干把猪。
现代文：刘玉随方瑛征讨东苗，歼灭了干把猪。
English: Liu Yu, accompanied by Fang Ying, attacked Dongmiao and annihilated the pigs.

古文：讨西堡苗，絷其魁楚得。
现代文：又征讨西堡苗，捕获其首领楚得。
English: They also raided Xibao Miao and captured its leader, Chu De.

古文：先后斩首千级，毁其巢而还。
现代文：先后斩杀一千人，捣毁其巢穴而返。
English: He killed a thousand people one after another, destroyed their nests and then returned.

古文：旋改右副总兵，镇守贵州。
现代文：刘玉旋即改任右副总兵，镇守贵州。
English: Liu Yuxuan was immediately appointed to the post of the right deputy commander-in-chief and the town guard of Guizhou.

古文：吉祥诛，玉下吏当斩。
现代文：曹吉祥被诛，刘玉作为他的下属而应当斩首。
English: Cao Jixiang was executed, and Liu Yu, as his subordinate, should be beheaded.

古文：以道远不与谋，免死，谪海南副千户。
现代文：因为相隔遥远，刘玉没有参与其图谋，被免除死罪，贬为海南副千户。
English: Because of the distance, Liu Yu did not participate in his plot, was exempted from the death penalty, and was relegated to Hainan Vice-Chenghu.

古文：六年，帝将以谷登为甘肃副总兵。
现代文：六年，皇上将要任命谷登为甘肃副总兵。
English: In six years, the emperor was going to appoint Gu Deng as the deputy commander-in-chief of Gansu.

古文：李贤言登不任，玉老成。
现代文：李贤说谷登不能胜任，刘玉则老成持重。
English: Li Xian said that Gu Deng was not competent, while Liu Yu was a veteran.

古文：乃复以为都督佥事、右副总兵，镇守凉州。
现代文：于是皇上重又任命刘玉为都督佥事、右副总兵，镇守凉州。
English: As a result, the emperor appointed Liu Yu as the governor of Anji, the right deputy commander, and the town guard of Liangzhou.

古文：咎咂族叛，会兵平之，进都督同知。
现代文：咎砸族发动叛乱，刘玉聚集军队讨平之，因此进升为都督同知。
English: Liu Yu gathered an army to quell the rebellion launched by the Guanzhong people. As a result, he was promoted to the post of governor.

古文：成化四年，满俊乱固原，白圭举玉为总兵官，统左右参将夏正、刘清讨之，兵分为七。
现代文：成化四年，满俊扰乱固原，白圭举荐刘玉为总兵官，统领左右参将夏正、刘清前往征讨，兵分七路。
English: In the fourth year of Chenghua, Manjun disturbed Guyuan, Bai Gui recommended Liu Yu as the chief military officer, and the leaders of the left and right commanders, Xia Zheng and Liu Qing, went to recruit. There were seven divisions of soldiers.

古文：玉与总督项忠抵石城，贼已数败。
现代文：刘玉与总督项忠抵达石城时，乱贼已屡败官军。
English: When Liu Yu and Governor Xiang Zhong arrived in Shicheng, the bandits had repeatedly defeated the government army.

古文：会毛忠死，玉亦被围，中流矢，力战得出。
现代文：又逢毛忠战死，刘玉也被包围，被飞箭射中，拼力作战才得以冲出重围。
English: In addition, Mao Zhong was killed in battle, Liu Yu was also surrounded and shot by flying arrows. Only by fighting hard could he break out of the encirclement.

古文：相持两月，大小百十战，竟平之。
现代文：与乱贼相持两月，经过大小数十上百战，终于平息了叛乱。
English: They held out against the bandits for two months, and after dozens of battles, large and small, they finally quelled the rebellion.

古文：进左都督，掌右府事。
现代文：刘玉进升为左都督，掌管右府事务。
English: Liu Yuxin was promoted to the left governor, in charge of the affairs of the right government.

古文：自醖前西堡功，命增俸百石，掌耀武营。
现代文：他又自陈以往西堡之功，而被增加俸禄百石，并掌管耀武营。
English: He was also given a hundred-koku bonus for his past services to Xibao, and was put in charge of Yaowu Camp.

古文：六年充左副总兵，从朱永出延绥。
现代文：六年，刘玉充任左副总兵，随朱永出延绥。
English: In six years, Liu Yuchong served as the left deputy commander-in-chief, following Zhu Yongzhu.

古文：五月，河套部入犯，玉帅众御却之。
现代文：五月，河套部队人侵，刘玉率众将其击退。
English: In May, the Hetao troops invaded, and Liu Yu led the crowd to repel them.

古文：逾年卒。
现代文：一年之后，刘玉去世。
English: A year later, Ying Xuan passed away.

古文：赠固原伯，谥毅敏。
现代文：被赠为固原伯，谥号毅敏。
English: He was given the posthumous name "Guhara Bo" and the nickname "Yi Min."

古文：玉虽起仆隶，勇决过人，善抚士，所至未尝衄。
现代文：刘玉虽出身奴仆，但勇决过人，善于安抚士卒，所至之处从未失败过。
English: Although Liu Yu was born as a slave, he was more courageous than others and good at appeasing his subordinates. He never failed wherever he went.

古文：满俊之叛，据石城险，屡败官军，玉战最力。
现代文：满俊叛贼，凭借石城之险，屡败官军，刘玉战得最猛。
English: Manjun the traitor, by virtue of the danger of Shicheng, repeatedly defeated the government army, Liu Yu fought the fiercest.

古文：及论功，只赐秩一级，时惜其薄。
现代文：等到论功时，他却只官升一级，当时人们都觉得朝廷赏赐太薄。
English: However, when it came to the merit evaluation, he was only promoted to the next level. At that time, people felt that the reward from the imperial court was too meager.

古文：子文，袭指挥使。
现代文：其子刘文，承袭指挥使之职。
English: His son, Liu Wen, succeeded him as commander.

古文：仇钺，字廷威，镇原人。
现代文：仇钺，字廷威，镇原人。
English: Xenophobia, the character Ting Wei, and the town's original inhabitants.

古文：初以佣卒给事宁夏总兵府，大见信爱。
现代文：他开始是宁夏总兵府的雇佣兵，大受信任和偏爱。
English: He started out as a mercenary for the Ningxia General Garrison, and was well trusted and well liked.

古文：会都指挥佥事仇理卒，无嗣，遂令钺袭其世职，为宁夏前卫指挥同知。
现代文：恰逢都指挥佥事仇理去世，他没有后代，于是便命仇钺继承其世袭职位，为宁夏前卫指挥同知。
English: Coincidentally, Du Du's commander, An Ji Qiu Li, passed away. He had no descendants, so he ordered Qiu Ji to inherit his hereditary position. He was a friend of the Ningxia avant-garde commander.

古文：理，江都人，故钺自称江都仇氏。
现代文：仇理，江都人，所以仇钱自称江都仇氏。
English: Qiu Li is from Jiangdu, so Qiu Qian calls himself a member of the Jiangdu Qiu clan.

古文：再以破贼功，进都指挥佥事。
现代文：仇钱又以破贼之功，进升为都指挥佥事。
English: Qian Qian was promoted to the position of the commander of the capital with the achievement of defeating the bandits.

古文：正德二年用总制杨一清荐，擢宁夏游击将军。
现代文：正德二年，由于总制杨一清的推荐，仇钺被提升为宁夏游击将军。
English: In the second year of Zhengde, due to the recommendation of the general Yang Yiching, Qiu Jun was promoted to the Ningxia guerrilla general.

古文：五年，安化王寘鐇及都指挥何锦、周昂，指挥丁广反。
现代文：五年，安化王蜫鐇及都指挥何锦、周昂、指挥丁辉谋反。
English: In the fifth year of Anhua's reign, Wang Qian and the two commanders He Jin and Zhou Ang, as well as the commander Ding Hui, plotted a rebellion.

古文：钺时驻城外玉泉营，闻变欲遁去。
现代文：仇钺当时驻守在城外的玉泉营，获悉此事后想逃离。
English: At the time, he was stationed at the Yuquan Camp outside the city. After learning of the incident, he wanted to escape.

古文：顾念妻子在城中，恐为所屠灭，遂引兵入城。
现代文：可顾念自己的妻儿还在城中，担心被叛贼屠杀，于是引兵入城。
English: But considering that his wife and children were still in the city, and fearing that they would be massacred by the traitors, he brought troops into the city.

古文：解甲觐寘鐇，归卧家称病，以所将兵分隶贼营。
现代文：他脱下战袍，前去拜见蜫鐇，然后回到家中，卧床称病，将所部军队分属贼营。
English: He took off his battle robe, went to pay his respects to Yao, and then returned home, lying in bed, saying he was ill, and divided his army into battalions of thieves.

古文：锦等信之，时时就问计。
现代文：何锦等相信了他，时常去向他询问计策。
English: He Jin and others believed him and often went to him to ask for advice.

古文：钺亦谬输心腹。
现代文：仇钺也假装与他们倾心而谈。
English: Enemies also pretend to be in love with them.

古文：而阴结壮士，遣人潜出城，令还报官军旦夕至。
现代文：暗中却结交壮士，派人哨哨出城，然后再回来报告说官军马上就会赶到。
English: However, he secretly made friends with a strong man, sent a sentry out of the city, and then returned to report that the official army would arrive soon.

古文：钺因绐锦、广，宜急出兵守渡口，遏东岸兵，勿使渡河。锦、广果倾营出，而昂独守城。
现代文：仇钱趁机哄骗何锦、丁广，使其不能渡河。何锦、丁广果然倾巢而出，而让周昂独自留下守城。
English: Taking advantage of the opportunity, Qiancheng deceived He Jin and Ding Guang so that they could not cross the river. He Jin and Ding Guang finally fled the nest, leaving Zhou Ang to defend the city alone.

古文：寘鐇以祃牙召钺，钺称病亟。
现代文：蜫鐇因行祭旗礼去召仇钺，仇钺却声称自己病得厉害。
English: He went to summon his enemy for a flag-raising ceremony, but the enemy claimed to be seriously ill.

古文：昂来视，钺方坚卧呻吟。
现代文：周昂前来看他时，仇钺正躺在床上呻吟不止。
English: When Zhou Ang came to see him, his enemy was lying on the bed moaning.

古文：伏卒猝起，捶杀昂。
现代文：伏兵突起，乱棍将周昂打死。
English: An ambush sprang up, and Zhou Ang was beaten to death with a club.

古文：钺乃被甲横刀，提其首，跃马大呼，壮士皆集，径驰诣寘鐇第，缚之。
现代文：仇钺于是披甲横刀，提着周昂的脑袋，跃马大呼，壮士顿时齐集，径直奔向蜫鐇的府邸，将他捆绑起来。
English: Therefore, the enemies of Zhou Enlai put on armor and swords, carried Zhou Enlai's head, jumped on horses and shouted loudly. When they were strong enough, they ran straight to Zhou Enlai's mansion and tied him up.

古文：传寘鐇令，召锦等还，而密谕其部曲以擒寘鐇状。众遂大溃。
现代文：然后传达蜫鐇之命，召何锦等返回，而暗中却告诉其部曲蜫鐇被擒的情况，于是其部曲纷纷溃逃。
English: Then, he conveyed the order of Xing, called He Jin and others to return, but secretly told his subordinates the situation of Xing being captured, so his subordinates fled in droves.

古文：锦、广单骑走贺兰山，为逻卒所获，举事凡十八日而败。
现代文：何锦、丁广独自骑马逃往贺兰关，为巡逻士兵所俘，他们举兵谋反共十八日便失败了。
English: He Jin and Ding Guang fled alone on horseback to Horan Pass and were captured by patrolling soldiers. Their anti-communist campaign failed on the 18th.

古文：先是，中朝闻变，议以神英为总兵官，而命钺为副。
现代文：在此之前，朝廷获悉谋反一事，决定命神英为总兵官，而命仇钱为其助手。
English: Prior to this, the Imperial Court learned of the rebellion and decided to appoint Shen Ying as the commander-in-chief, while appointing Qian Qian as his assistant.

古文：俄传钺降贼，欲追敕还。
现代文：随即传来仇钱投降叛贼的消息，于是打算下诏将他追回。
English: Then came the news of Qian Qian's surrender to the traitor, so he planned to issue an edict to bring him back.

古文：大学士杨廷和曰： 钺必不从贼，令知朝廷擢用，志当益坚。
现代文：大学士杨廷和却说： 仇钺一定不会跟随叛贼，如果让他知道朝廷要提拔重用他，其意志会更加坚定的。
English: But Yang Tinghe, a university scholar, said: "Xiu Xuanru will definitely not follow the traitor. If he knows that the imperial court wants to promote and re-employ him, his will will be firmer."

古文：不然，弃良将资敌人耳。 
现代文：不然的话，只会把良将抛给敌人而已。 
English: Otherwise, it will only throw a good general to the enemy.

古文：乃不追。
现代文：朝廷这才没有下诏追究。
English: This is why the Imperial Court did not issue an edict to investigate.

古文：事果定。
现代文：事情果然被平息。
English: The situation was defused.

古文：而刘瑾暱陕西总兵官曹雄，尽以钺功归之，钺竟无殊擢。
现代文：而刘瑾与陕西总兵官曹雄关系亲密，而将仇钱的功劳全部归于曹雄，仇钱竟没能被特别提升。
English: However, Liu Wei had a close relationship with Cao Xiong, the military commander of Shaanxi, and attributed all the merits of the revenge money to Cao Xiong, but the revenge money was not specially promoted.

古文：巡按御史阎睿讼其功，诏夺俸三月。
现代文：巡按御史阎睿为仇钺颂功，却被剥夺三个月的俸禄。
English: The inspecting magistrate, Yan Rui, was deprived of his salary for three months for praising the enemy.

古文：瑾诛，始进署都督佥事，充宁夏总兵官。
现代文：刘瑾被诛后，仇钺才进升为代理都督佥事，充任宁夏总兵官。
English: It was only after Liu Bei was executed that Qiu Bei was promoted to acting governor of Anji and appointed as the commander-in-chief of Ningxia.

古文：寻论功，封咸宁伯，岁禄千石，予世券。
现代文：随后论功时，他被封为咸宁伯，年禄一千石，并被授予世袭浩券。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of Xian Ningbo, a year's salary of one thousand koku, and was awarded a hereditary high ticket.

古文：明年冬，召掌三千营。
现代文：第二年冬，仇钱应诏掌管三千营。
English: In the winter of the second year, Qian Qian was put in charge of the three thousand battalion.

古文：七年二月拜平贼将军，偕都御史彭泽讨河南盗刘惠、赵鐩，以中官陆訚监其军。
现代文：七年二月，仇钱被授为平贼将军，偕同都御史彭泽征讨何南盗贼刘惠、赵鐩。宦官陆监督其军。
English: In February of the seventh year, Qian Qian was awarded the title of General of the Anti-Thieves, and he and the governor of the capital, Peng Ze, went to fight against the southern thieves Liu Hui and Zhao Jun. The eunuch Lu supervised his army.

古文：未至，而参将冯祯战死洛南，贼势益炽。
现代文：还未赶到，而参将冯祯已在洛南战死，贼势更盛。
English: They had not yet arrived, but General Feng Yu had already died in battle in the south of China, and the banditry was on the rise.

古文：已，闻官军将至，遂奔汝州。
现代文：不久，盗贼听说官军将至，于是逃往汝州。
English: Soon after, the thieves heard that the government troops were coming, so they fled to Ruzhou.

古文：又闻官军扼要害，乃走宝丰，复由舞阳、遂平转掠汝州东南，败奔固始，抵颍州，屯朱皋镇。
现代文：又听说官军扼住了要害，才逃往宝丰，又由舞阳、遂平转而劫掠汝州东南，败逃至固始，抵达颖州，驻扎朱皋镇。
English: They also heard that the government army had pinched the key, and then fled to Baofeng. They also turned from Muyang and Suiping to plunder the southeast of Ruzhou, and fled to Gushi in defeat. They arrived in Yingzhou and stationed in Zhuye Town.

古文：永顺宣慰彭明辅等击之，贼仓猝渡河，溺死者二千人。
现代文：永顺宣慰彭明辅等率军攻击，盗贼仓促渡河，溺死者达二千人。
English: Yongshun Xuancheng, Peng Mingfu and other soldiers attacked, thieves hastily crossed the river, and up to two thousand people drowned.

古文：余众走光山，钺追及之。
现代文：余贼逃往光山，仇钺率军追上他们。
English: The rest of the thieves fled to Guangshan, and the enemy's army caught up with them.

古文：命诸将神周、姚信、时源、金辅左右夹击，贼大败，斩首千四百有奇。
现代文：命神周、姚信、时源、金辅等将领左右夹击，贼军大败，被斩杀一千四百余人。
English: Zhou, Yao Xin, Shi Yuan, Jin Fu and other generals clamped down left and right, the bandits were defeated, and more than 1,400 people were killed.

古文：湖广军亦破其别部贾勉儿于罗田。
现代文：湖广军队也在罗田击破贾勉儿所率领的另外一部分贼军。
English: The Hukang army also defeated another part of the thief army led by Jia Deming in Luotian.

古文：贼沿途溃散。
现代文：盗贼沿途溃散。
English: The thieves scattered along the road.

古文：自六安陷舒城，复还光山，至商城。
现代文：自六安攻陷舒城，又返回光山，到达商城。
English: From Lu'an, they captured Shucheng, and then returned to Guangshan, arriving at Shangcheng.

古文：官军追之急，贼复南攻六安。
现代文：官军急追，贼军又南攻六安。
English: The government army was in hot pursuit, and the rebel army attacked Lu'an from the south.

古文：将陷，时源等涉河进，败之七里冈。
现代文：即将攻陷时，时源等涉河而进，在七里冈击败之。
English: When it was about to fall, Jiyuan and others waded into the river and defeated it at Shiliang.

古文：贼趋庐州，至定远西又败。
现代文：贼军直趋庐州，到定远之西时又战败。
English: The invaders headed straight for Bozhou, but were defeated when they got as far west as Dingyuan.

古文：还至六安，分其众为二。
现代文：回到六安，贼众一分为二。
English: Back in Lu'an, the bandits split into two groups.

古文：刘惠与赵鐩二弟鐇、镐帅万余人，北走商城。
现代文：刘惠与赵拯的二个弟弟赵番赵镐率领一万余人，向北逃往商城。
English: Liu Hui and Zhao Zheng's two younger brothers, Zhao Fan and Zhao Yao, led more than 10,000 people to flee north to the mall.

古文：而鐩道遇其徒张通及杨虎遗党数千人，势复振，掠凤阳，陷泗、宿、睢宁、定远。
现代文：而赵述在途中遇上其徒弟张通及杨虎遗党数千人，贼势复振，劫掠凤阳，攻陷泅、宿、雅宁、定远。
English: On the way, Zhao Shuxu met his apprentice Zhang Tong and thousands of Yang Hu's surviving party members, revived the bandits' power, plundered Fengyang, and attacked Shao, Shuku, Yaning, and Dingyuan.

古文：于是泽与钺计，使神周追鐩，时源、金辅追惠，姚信追勉儿。
现代文：于是，彭泽与仇钱商量之后，命神周追击赵拯，时源、金辅追击刘惠，姚信追击贾勉儿。
English: As a result, after discussion between Peng Ze and Qian Qian, Zhou, the god of life, chased Zhao Zheng, Jiyuan and Jin Fu chased Liu Hui, and Yao Xin chased Jia Nian'er.

古文：勉儿、鐩复合，周信连败之宿州，追奔至应山，其众略尽。
现代文：贾勉儿、赵鐩重又会合，神周、姚信在宿州接连击败之，追奔至应山，贼众几乎全被消灭。
English: Jia Ying'er and Zhao Yingzhong met again. Shen Zhou and Yao Xin defeated them one after another in Suzhou and chased them to Yingshan. The thieves were almost completely wiped out.

古文：鐩薙发怀度牒，潜至江夏。饭村店，军士赵成执送京师，伏诛。
现代文：赵拯剃去头发，揣着度碟，偷偷逃至江夏，在村店吃饭时，军士赵成将其捉拿并押送京城，处以死刑。
English: Zhao Zheng shaved off his hair, carried a compass, and secretly fled to Jiangxia. While eating at a village store, Sergeant Zhao Cheng caught him and sent him to Beijing, where he was sentenced to death.

古文：源、辅追刘惠，连战皆捷。
现代文：时源、金辅追击刘惠，连战皆捷。
English: Jigen and Jinfu chased Liu Hui, and they were victorious in the battle.

古文：惠窘走南召，指挥王谨追及于土地岭，射中惠左目，自缢死。
现代文：刘惠被迫逃往南召，指挥王谨在土地岭追上了他，射中刘惠的左眼，刘惠便自编而死。
English: Liu Hui was forced to flee to Nanzhao. The conductor Wang Ji caught up with him at the Land Ridge, shot Liu Hui in the left eye, and Liu Hui died of his own accord.

古文：勉儿数为都指挥朱忠、夏广所败，获之项城丁村。
现代文：贾勉儿多次被都指挥朱忠、夏广所败，在项城丁村被俘。
English: Jia Deming was repeatedly defeated by Zhu Zhong and Xia Guang, both commanders, and was captured in the village of Xiangcheng Ding.

古文：余党邢本道、刘资及杨寡妇等先后皆被擒。
现代文：其余贼党邢本道、刘资及杨寡妇等都先后被擒。
English: The rest of the thieving Party members, such as Yan Hongdao, Liu Zi and Yang Wujie, were all arrested successively.

古文：凡出师四月，而河南贼悉平。
现代文：官军出兵共四个月，河南盗贼全被平定。
English: The official army dispatched troops for a total of four months, and all the thieves in Henan Province were subdued.

古文：赵鐩，一名风子，文安诸生也。
现代文：赵鐩，一名赵风子，文安的儒生。
English: Zhao Yao, a Zhao Fengzi, a Confucian scholar from Wen'an.

古文：刘七等乱起，鐩挈家匿渚中，贼驱之登陆，将污其妻女。
现代文：刘七等发动叛乱后，赵鐩带着家人躲往小洲中，乱贼将他们赶上陆地，要奸污其妻女。
English: After Liu Qi and others launched a rebellion, Zhao Qi took his family to hide in a small island, and the bandits drove them onto land to rape his wife and daughter.

古文：鐩素骁健，有膂力，手格杀二贼。贼聚执之，遂入其党为之魁。
现代文：赵鐩素来晓勇强健，很有臂力，亲手格杀二名乱贼，乱贼聚集起来将他捉住，赵鐩于是加人贼党而居为贼首。
English: Zhao Hui had always been brave and strong, with great arm strength. He killed two bandits with his own hands. The bandits gathered to capture him, and Zhao Hui then joined the bandit party and became the leader of the bandits.

古文：贼专事淫掠，鐩稍有智计，定为部伍，劝其党无妄杀。
现代文：贼党只知奸淫抢掠，赵拯稍有智谋，他将贼党编成部队，劝他们不要妄杀。
English: Kleptocrats only know how to rape, pillage and plunder. Zhao Zheng had a bit of wit. He organized the Kleptocrats into troops and advised them not to kill.

古文：移檄府县，约官吏师儒毋走避，迎者安堵。
现代文：他还致信府县，让官吏、军队、儒者不要逃避，留下的人都安然无恙。
English: He also sent a message to Shifu County, asking officials, the military, and Confucians not to flee. Those who stayed behind are safe and sound.

古文：由是横行中原，势出刘六等上。
现代文：因此，赵隧得以横行中原，其势力在刘六等之上。
English: As a result, Zhao Tun was able to run rampant in the Central Plains, and his power was greater than that of Liu Liu.

古文：尝攻钧州五日，以马文升方家居，舍之去。
现代文：他曾进攻钧州五日之久，因马文升正住在家中，便舍之而去。
English: He had attacked Zhangzhou for five days, but because Ma Wensheng was living at home, he gave up and left.

古文：有司遣人赍招抚榜至，鐩具疏附奏言： 今群奸在朝，舞弄神器，浊乱海内，诛戮谏臣，屏弃元老，举动若此，未有不亡国者。
现代文：官府派人携带招抚榜文而至，赵鐩上疏奏道： 现在群奸在朝，舞弄神器，扰乱海内，诛杀谏臣，屏弃元老，举措如此，没有不亡国的。
English: The government sent someone to bring a letter of encouragement, and Zhao Yao sang: Now the gangsters are in the North, playing with sacred objects, disturbing the sea, killing the vassals, and abandoning the elders. With such measures, there is no way to save the country.

古文：乞陛下睿谋独断，枭群奸之首以谢天下，即枭臣之首以谢群奸。 
现代文：请求陛下能英明决断，将群奸的脑袋砍下示众以谢天下，然后可马上砍下臣的脑袋示众以谢群奸。 
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty to make a wise decision and cut off the traitor's head to show his gratitude to the world, and then immediately cut off the minister's head to show his gratitude to the traitor.

古文：其桀黠如此。
现代文：赵鐩就是如此凶悍而狡猾。
English: Zhao Wei is so fierce and cunning.

古文：钺既平河南贼，移师会陆完，共灭刘七等于江北。
现代文：仇钺平定河南盗贼后，调军与陆完会合，一起在江北消灭了刘七等贼。
English: After quelling the thieves in Henan Province, he transferred troops to join forces with Lu Gan and together they eliminated Liu Qi and other thieves in the north of the Yangtze River.

古文：论功，进世侯，增禄百石，仍督三千营。
现代文：论功时，仇钱被封为世袭侯爵，增加俸禄一百石，仍然督率三千营。
English: In recognition of his services, Qiu Qian was made a hereditary marquis, his salary was increased by 100 kilos, and he still commanded 3,000 battalions.

古文：八年，大同有警，命充总兵官，统京军御之。
现代文：八年，大同告警，仇钺充任总兵官，统领京军前去御敌。
English: Eight years later, Datong raised the alarm, and Qu Rong was appointed commander-in-chief, leading the Beijing army to go against the enemy.

古文：钺上五事，中请遣还京操边军，停京军出征，以省公私之扰，尤切时弊。时不能用。
现代文：仇钺上奏五件事，其中请求让在京城操练的边军返回边疆，停止京军出征，从而减少公私之扰，尤其切中时弊，当时没有被采纳。
English: There were five matters on the agenda, among which the request to let the frontier troops that were training in Beijing return to the frontier and to stop the Beijing troops from going to war, thereby reducing public and private disturbance, was not adopted at that time.

古文：钺既至，值寇犯万全沙河。
现代文：仇钱到后，贼寇正在侵犯万全沙河。
English: After the arrival of the revenge money, the bandits are invading the Wanquan Sand River.

古文：击之，斩首三级，而军士亡者二十余人，寇亦引去。
现代文：他率军进击，斩首三人，而所部军士死亡二十余人，贼寇也退去。
English: He led the army to attack, beheading three people, while the staff sergeant killed more than twenty people, and the bandits also retreated.

古文：奏捷蒙赉，朝论耻之。
现代文：仇钺奏上捷报，并蒙受赏赐，朝臣们为此都耻笑他。
English: Enemies were rewarded for their success, and courtiers ridiculed him for it.

古文：帝诏诸边将入侍豹房。
现代文：皇上诏令边将人豹房侍奉。
English: The Emperor's edict ordered that he should be served by a person from the Leopard Room.

古文：钺尝一入，后辄力辞。
现代文：仇钺曾去过一次后来却总是极力推辞。
English: He had been there once before, but he always tried his best to refuse.

古文：世宗时，怙宠通边，磔死，爵除。
现代文：十年冬，他因病解除营务。皇上下诏供给他三十名士兵作为家仆。世宗即位后，仇钺又被起用督率三千营，掌管前府事务。
English: In the winter of the tenth year, he was relieved of his duties due to illness. The emperor issued an imperial edict to provide him with thirty soldiers as household servants. After the enthronement of King Sejong, Qu Yuan was appointed to supervise three thousand battalions and take charge of the affairs of the former capital.

古文：神英，字景贤，寿州人。
现代文：还未上任便去世了，终年五十七岁。谥号武襄。神英，字景贤，寿州人。
English: He died before taking office, at the age of fifty-seven. Nicknamed Wu Xiang. Shen Ying, nicknamed Jing Xian, a native of Shoushou.

古文：天顺初，袭父职，为延安卫指挥使，守备宁塞营，屡将骑兵，从都督张钦等征讨有功。
现代文：天顺初年，他承袭父职，为延安卫指挥使，守备宁塞军营，多次率领骑兵，跟随都督张钦等征讨有功。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, he inherited his father's post, and was the commander of Yan'an Defense Command, guarded the Ningxia Military Camp, led the cavalry many times, and followed the governor Zhang Qin to solicit meritorious service.

古文：成化元年，尚书王复行边，荐英有谋勇，进都指挥佥事。
现代文：成化元年，尚书王复到边疆巡察，推荐说神英有勇有谋，神英因此进升为都指挥佥事。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, Shang Shu Wang returned to the frontier to inspect, recommending that Shen Ying was brave and resourceful. As a result, Shen Ying was promoted to the commander of the capital.

古文：以从征满四功，迁都指挥使，充延绥右参将。
现代文：他因随军征讨满四有功，升为都指挥使，充任延绥右参将。
English: He was promoted to Commander-in-Chief of the Capital and appointed to the post of Yeonpyeong Right-Handed General after completing four meritorious service in the army.

古文：屡败癿加思兰兵，进署都督佥事。
现代文：又屡败加思兰兵，进升为代理都督佥事。
English: He also repeatedly defeated the garrison soldiers and was promoted to acting governor.

古文：巡抚余子俊筑边墙，命英董役，工成受赉。
现代文：巡抚余子俊筑造边墙，命神英监督管理此役，完工之后，他受到赏赐。
English: The governor, Yuzihun, built the boundary wall and ordered Shinyong to supervise and manage the work. After completion, he was rewarded.

古文：久之，充总兵官，镇守宁夏，移延绥，复移宣府。
现代文：此后，神英充任总兵官，镇守宁夏，调驻延绥，后又调往宣府。
English: After that, Shen Ying was appointed as the chief military officer, the town guard of Ningxia, stationed in Yancheng, and later transferred to Xuanfu.

古文：弘治改元，移大同。
现代文：弘治改元后，他又被调往大同。
English: After the change of era, he was transferred to Datong again.

古文：十一年，马市开，英违禁贸易，寇掠蔚州又不救，言官连劾，召还闲住。
现代文：十一年，马市开张，神英进行违禁贸易，贼寇抢掠蔚州时又不去援救，言官接连弹劾，他因此被召回京城闲住。
English: In the eleventh year, Ma City was opened, Shen Ying engaged in prohibited trade, thieves and robbers did not come to the rescue when they plundered Ulshu, and the speaker was impeached one after another, so he was recalled to Beijing to stay idle.

古文：寻起督果勇营。
现代文：随即被起用督率果勇营。
English: He was immediately assigned to supervise the Guoyong Battalion.

古文：尝充右参将，从朱晖御寇延绥。
现代文：神英曾充任右参将，跟随朱晖在延绥抵御贼寇。
English: Shen Ying once served as a right-hand general and followed Zhu Xi to resist the bandits in Yancheng.

古文：武宗立，寇犯宣府，与李俊并充左参将，帅京军以援。
现代文：武宗即位后，贼寇进犯宣府，神英与李俊一起充任左参将，率领京军前去救援。
English: After Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, bandits invaded Xuanwu. Shen Ying, together with Li Jun, assumed the position of General of the Left Division and led the Beijing army to the rescue.

古文：寻以都督同知佥事左府，剿近畿剧贼，进右都督。
现代文：神英随即以都督同知的身份任左军都督府金书，围剿近畿猛贼，进升为右都督。
English: Shinying immediately assumed the position of the left-wing military governor of the Kinki region, and was promoted to the right-wing governor of the Kinki region.

古文：正德五年，给事中段豸劾英老，命致仕。
现代文：正德五年，给事中段豸弹劾神英已年老，皇上便命他退休。
English: In the fifth year of Zhengde's reign, the emperor ordered him to retire because he was too old to be impeached.

古文：当是时，刘瑾窃政。
现代文：那个时候，刘瑾窃据政权。
English: At that time, Liu Piao was at the top of the regime.

古文：总兵官曹雄等以附瑾得重权。
现代文：总兵官曹雄等因依附刘瑾而大权在握。
English: Cao Xiong, the commander-in-chief of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, and others held great power due to their dependence on Liu Bei.

古文：英素习瑾，厚贿之。
现代文：神英向来熟悉刘瑾，便重贿他。
English: Shenying had always been familiar with Liu Yao, so he bribed him again.

古文：因自陈边功，乞叙录，特诏予伯爵。
现代文：并趁机自陈边防之功，请求奖励、记功，皇上于是特别下诏封神英为伯爵。
English: Taking advantage of the opportunity to ask for rewards and recognition for his border defense work, the emperor then issued a special decree to make Shenying an earl.

古文：吏、兵二部持之，下廷议。
现代文：吏、兵二部表示反对，因而被下到廷臣商议。
English: Two departments of officials and soldiers objected, so he was sent down to consult with courtiers.

古文：而廷臣希谨指，无不言当封者，遂封泾阳伯，禄八百石。
现代文：而廷臣们顺着刘瑾的意思，没有人不说应当封爵，于是神英被封为泾阳伯，年禄八百石。
English: The courtiers, however, followed Liu Bei's wishes, and no one failed to say that he should be given a knighthood. As a result, Shinying was given the title of Jinyangbo, with an annual salary of 800 koku.

古文：未几，寘鐇反，命充总兵官讨之。
现代文：不久，蜫鐇谋反，神英奉命充任总兵官前去征讨。
English: Soon after, Shen Ying was ordered to serve as the chief military officer to go and fight against the rebels.

古文：遂与彬相倚为声势，纳贿不赀。
现代文：他还未到，叛贼已被消灭。这年秋天，刘瑾被诛，神英也被言官弹劾。
English: Before he arrived, the traitors had been eliminated. In the autumn of that year, Liu Ye was arrested, and Shen Ying was also impeached by the speaker.

古文：彬败，周亦下狱，伏诛。曹雄，西安左卫人。
现代文：皇上下诏剥夺其爵位，命他以右都督的身份退休。两年过后，神英去世。曹雄，西安左卫人。
English: The imperial edict deprived him of his title and ordered him to retire as the right-hand governor. Two years later, Shenying died. Cao Xiong, Xi'an left guard.

古文：弘治末，历官都指挥佥事，为延绥副总兵。
现代文：弘治末年，历任都指挥佥事，为延绥副总兵。
English: In the last years of the Hongzhi era, all of his successors were in charge of anecdotes, and he was the deputy commander-in-chief of Yancheng.

古文：武宗即位，用总督杨一清荐，擢署都督佥事，充总兵官，镇固原。
现代文：武宗即位后，由于总督杨一清的举荐，曹雄被提升为代理都督佥事，充任总兵官，镇守固原。
English: After Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, due to the recommendation of Governor Yang Iqing, Cao Xiong was promoted to acting governor of Anji, and served as chief military officer and town guard of Gubuan.

古文：以瑾同乡，自附于瑾。
现代文：他因为与刘瑾是同乡，便依附于刘瑾。
English: Because he was a fellow villager with Liu Ye, he clung to Liu Ye.

古文：瑾欲广树党，日相亲重。
现代文：刘瑾想广树党羽，日益亲近看重曹雄。
English: Liu Ye wants to build a broad-based party, and he values Cao Xiong more and more.

古文：正德四年，雄上言： 故事，布、按二司及兵备道臣文移达总兵官者，率由都司转达。
现代文：正德四年，曹雄上奏道： 依照旧例，布政使司、按察使司及兵备道臣要移达总兵官的公文，一般都是由都司转达。
English: In the fourth year of Zhengde, Cao Xiong made a report: According to the old practice, the official documents of the chief military officer should be conveyed to the chief political envoy, the chief inspection envoy and the chief military envoy. Generally, they are conveyed by the general secretary.

古文：今边务亟，征调不时，都司远在会城，往返千里，恐误军机。
现代文：而今边务紧急，随时需要征调，而都司却远在省城，往返千里，恐误军机。
English: But now the border affairs are urgent, requiring conscription and transfer at any time, while the capital is far away in the provincial capital, thousands of miles round trip, and military aircraft may be mistaken.

古文：乞如巡抚大同例，径呈总兵官便。 
现代文：请按巡抚大同之例，公文直接呈送总兵官。 
English: Please follow the example of the patrol officer Datong and submit the official document directly to the chief military officer.

古文：兵部尚书曹元希瑾意，覆如其言。
现代文：兵部尚书曹元按刘瑾之意，同意了他的请求。
English: Cao Yuan, the secretary of the military department, agreed to Liu Yao's request.

古文：既复受瑾属，奏雄镇守未佩印，宜如各边例，特赐印以重其权。
现代文：不久又受刘瑾之托，上奏说曹雄出外镇守没有佩印，应当按照其他边将旧例，特赐其印以加重他的权力。
English: Soon after, he was entrusted by Liu Bei to report that Cao Xiong did not have the seal of the town guard when he went abroad, and that the seal should be specially granted to him in accordance with the old practice of other governors to strengthen his power.

古文：乃进雄署都督同知，以延绥总兵官吴江所佩征西将军印佩之，而别铸靖虏将军印予江。
现代文：朝廷于是进升曹雄为代理都督同知，让他佩带延绥总兵官吴江所佩的征西将军之印，而另外铸成靖虏将军印交给吴江。
English: The imperial court then promoted Cao Xiong to acting governor and made him wear the seal of the General of the Western Conquest worn by Yancheng's general officer Wu Jiang, and in addition, the seal of the General of the Western Conquest was cast and given to Wu Jiang.

古文：及总督才宽御寇沙窝为所杀，雄拥兵不救。佯引罪，乞解兵柄，令子谧赍奏诣京师。
现代文：当总督才宽在沙窝抵御贼寇而被杀时，曹雄却拥兵不救，他假装认罪，请救解除兵权，命其子曹谧携带奏书上京城。
English: When the governor, Cai Guang, was killed in the sand dungeon for resisting the bandits, Cao Xiong supported the soldiers instead of saving him. He pretended to plead guilty, asked to be relieved of his military powers, and ordered his son, Cao Yu, to carry the report to the capital.

古文：瑾异谧貌，妻以从女，而优诏褒雄，令居职如故，纠者反被责。
现代文：刘瑾觉得曹谧相貌不凡，便将侄女许配给他，而特别下诏褒奖曹雄，命他仍居原职，检举他的人反而受到指责。
English: Liu Yao thought Cao Yao's appearance was extraordinary, so he married his niece to him, and issued a special decree to praise Cao Xiong, ordering him to remain in his original position, but the person who reported him was criticized.

古文：寘鐇反宁夏，雄闻变，即统兵压境上。
现代文：蜫鐇在宁夏谋反，曹雄获悉此事，马上领兵直压境上。
English: Zhai plotted a rebellion in Ningxia. Cao Xiong learned of this and immediately led his troops to crush the rebellion.

古文：令都指挥黄正以兵三千入灵州，固士卒心，约邻境刻期讨。
现代文：并命都指挥黄正率领三千士兵进入灵州，稳定士兵之心，又与邻地相约限期征讨。
English: He also ordered the capital's commander, Huang Zheng, to lead three thousand soldiers into Lingzhou, stabilize the soldiers' hearts, and set a deadline for conscription with neighboring areas.

古文：密焚大、小二坝积草，与守备史镛等夺河西船，尽泊东岸。
现代文：曹雄暗中派人焚烧大、小二坝的积草，与守备史镛等夺取黄河西岸的船只，全部停泊于东岸。
English: Cao Xiong secretly sent people to burn the sediment of the large and small dams, and the ships that captured the west coast of the Yellow River, such as the garrisoned Shijiazhuang, were all moored on the east coast.

古文：贼党何锦惧，急帅兵出守大坝，以防决河。
现代文：贼党何锦心中畏惧，急忙率兵出守大坝，以防黄河决口。
English: He Jin, who was afraid in his heart, hurriedly led his soldiers to guard the dam to prevent the Yellow River from breaking.

古文：雄乃令镛潜通书仇钺，俾从中举事，贼遂成擒。
现代文：曹雄于是命史镛暗中写信给仇钺，让他从中率兵举事，贼寇于是被擒。
English: Cao Xiong then ordered Shi Yan to secretly write a letter to Qiu Yan, asking him to lead the soldiers to do something, and the thief was arrested.

古文：是役也，功虽成于钺，而居外布置，贼不内顾，雄有劳焉。
现代文：这一战役，功虽成于仇钺，但在外布置，使贼寇不能内顾，曹雄立有功劳。
English: Although this battle was won by the enemy, it was arranged outside, so that the thieves and robbers could not look inwards, and Cao Xiongli had merit.

古文：捷闻，瑾以平贼功归之，进左都督。谧亦官千户。
现代文：捷报上奏后，刘瑾将平贼之功归于曹雄，他因而被进升为左都督，曹谧也升为千户。
English: After the announcement of the victory, Liu Wei attributed the achievement of leveling the thieves to Cao Xiong, and he was promoted to the left governor, and Cao Wei was also promoted to the thousand households.

古文：雄不安，引咎自劾，推功诸将，降旨慰劳。
现代文：曹雄心中不安，引咎弹劾自己，将功劳推给诸将，而被降旨慰劳。
English: Cao Xiong was uneasy in his heart, blamed and impeached himself, pushed the credit to the generals, and was reduced to a consolation prize.

古文：时陕人率附瑾以进，故谦云然。雄下狱，谦亦被系，为怨家箠死。
现代文：不久，刘瑾被诛，言官纷纷弹劾曹雄，他因而被降为指挥佥事，随后被下狱，以党逆之罪被判死刑，并抄没其家。
English: Soon after, Liu Wei was arrested, and the government officials impeached Cao Xiong one after another. As a result, he was demoted to the rank of commander, then he was sent to prison, sentenced to death for the crime of party treason, and his home was confiscated.

古文：冯祯、绥德卫人。
现代文：皇上下诏赦免了曹雄，命他与家属永守海南，永不赦还。
English: The imperial edict pardoned Cao Xiong and ordered him and his family to stay in Hainan and never return.

古文：起家卒伍，累功为本卫指挥佥事。
现代文：冯祯，绥德卫人。他出身行伍，累功升至本卫指挥佥事。
English: Feng Yu, a member of the Shunde Garrison. He was born in the military and rose to the rank of commander of the Main Garrison.

古文：弘治末，擢署都指挥佥事，守备偏头关。
现代文：弘治末年，冯祯被提升为代理都指挥佥事，守备偏头关。
English: At the end of the Hongzhi era, Feng Jun was promoted to acting commander of the capital, guarding the turning point.

古文：寻充参将，分守宁夏西路，以勇敢闻。
现代文：随即充任参将，分守宁夏西路，以勇敢闻名。
English: He was then appointed as a general to guard the west road of Ningxia, and was known for his bravery.

古文：寘鐇反，驰奏告变。
现代文：蜫鐇谋反后，冯祯迅速上奏报告朝廷。
English: After plotting a rebellion, Feng Xuan quickly reported to the imperial court.

古文：事平，进署都指挥同知。
现代文：事情平息后，他进升为代理都指挥同知。
English: After things calmed down, he was promoted to acting director by a mutual friend.

古文：已，擢副总兵，协守延绥。
现代文：不久，又被提升为副总兵，协守延绥。
English: Not long after, he was promoted to vice-commander-in-chief, and became the deputy commander of Yancheng.

古文：正德六年七月，盗起中原。诏以所部千五百人入讨。
现代文：正德六年七月，盗贼骚扰中原，皇上下诏命冯祯率所部一千五百人前去征讨。
English: In July of the sixth year of Zhengde, thieves harassed Zhongyuan, and the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Feng Xuan to lead 1,500 people from the headquarters to go and investigate.

古文：至阜城，遇贼。
现代文：到达阜城时，遭遇盗贼。
English: When he arrived in Fucheng, he was confronted by thieves.

古文：祯令军中毋顾首级、贪虏获，遂大败贼。
现代文：冯祯命军中士兵不要顾念首级、贪图俘获，于是大败贼军。
English: Feng Xuan ordered the soldiers in the army not to worry about their heads and be greedy for capture, and the rebel army was defeated.

古文：逐北数十里，俘斩八百六十有奇。
现代文：追击数十里俘斩八百六十余人。
English: More than 860 people were captured and killed in the dozens of miles of pursuit.

古文：进解曹州围，执其魁朱谅。
现代文：然后进兵解除曹州之围，俘获贼首朱谅。
English: Then, the marching troops lifted the siege of Caozhou and captured the thief Zhu Rong.

古文：录功，进都督佥事。
现代文：冯祯被记功，进升为都督佥事。
English: Record achievements, and be promoted to the post of governor.

古文：明年春，刘惠、赵鐩乱河南，连陷鹿邑、上蔡、西平、遂平、舞阳、叶，纵掠南顿、新蔡、商水、襄城，复还，驻西平。
现代文：第二年春，刘惠、赵鐩扰乱河南，连陷鹿邑、上蔡、西平、遂平、舞阳、叶，纵掠南顿、新蔡、商水、襄城，又回驻西平。
English: In the spring of the second year, Liu Hui and Zhao Wei disturbed Henan, and were trapped in Ruyi, Shangcai, Xiping, Suiping, Muyang, Ye, and swept through Nantong, Xincai, Shangshui, Xiangcheng, and returned to Xiping.

古文：祯偕副总兵时源，参将神周、金辅击败之。
现代文：冯祯偕同副总兵时源，参将神周、金辅击败之。
English: Feng Xuan, together with the deputy commander-in-chief, Shi Yuan, defeated the joint commanders, Shen Zhou and Jin Fu.

古文：贼奔入城，官军塞其门。
现代文：贼寇逃奔入城，官军堵塞城门。
English: Thieves and robbers fled into the city, and the government army blocked the city gate.

古文：乘夜焚死千余人，斩首称是，余贼溃而西。
现代文：乘夜里烧死一千余人，斩首也一样多，余贼往西溃逃。
English: During the night, more than a thousand people were burned to death and just as many were beheaded. The remaining thieves fled west.

古文：巡抚邓璋等朝崇王于汝宁，宴饮连日。
现代文：巡抚邓璋等在汝宁朝见崇王，连日设宴饮酒。
English: The procurator, Deng Qi, and others met with King Chong in the Runnin Dynasty, and they feasted and drank for days on end.

古文：贼招散亡，势复振，陷鄢陵、荥阳、汜水、巩。
现代文：贼寇招集散兵，势头复振，攻陷鄢陵、荥阳、汜水、巩。
English: Thieves and bandits called up scattered soldiers, revived the momentum, and invaded Fuling, Fenyang, Surabaya, and Gong.

古文：围河南府三日，诸军始集。
现代文：河南府被围三日之后，诸军才开始聚集。
English: Three days after Henan was besieged, the armies began to gather.

古文：贼屯洛南，觇官军饥疲，迎战。
现代文：贼寇驻扎在洛南，探知官军又饿又累，便出来迎战。
English: Thieves and robbers were stationed in Lonan, and when they detected that the government army was hungry and tired, they came out to fight.

古文：右哨金辅不敢渡洛，祯及源、周方阵，而后哨参将姚信所部京军先驰，失利，遽遁。
现代文：右哨金辅不敢渡过洛河，冯祯及时源、神周正在布阵，而后哨参将姚信所部京军已经先行，失利而逃。
English: The right sentry, Jin Fu, did not dare to cross the Luo River. Feng Xuan, Jingyuan, and Shen Zhou were setting up their positions, while the rear sentry, General Yao Xinsheng of the Beijing Army, had already taken the lead and fled in defeat.

古文：阵乱，贼乘之。
现代文：战阵已乱，贼寇乘机进攻。
English: The battlefield is in disarray, and the bandits take the opportunity to attack.

古文：祯下马殊死斗，援绝死焉。
现代文：冯祯下马殊死作战，援绝而死。
English: The horse under the command of Feng Yu fought to the death, and died without assistance.

古文：赠洛南伯，赐祭葬，授其子大金都督佥事。
现代文：皇上追赠他为洛南伯，赐予祭葬，并授其子冯大金为都督佥事。
English: The emperor posthumously bestowed him with the title of Lonanbo, granted him a ceremonial funeral, and bestowed upon his son, Feng Daqin, the title of governor-general.

古文：后贼平，论功，复荫一子世百户。
现代文：后来贼寇被平定，论功时，皇上又授其一子为世袭百户。
English: Later, when the bandits were subdued, the emperor awarded one of his sons a hereditary hundred households.

古文：明年是日，祯死所风霾大作，又明年，亦如之。
现代文：第二年的这一天，冯祯死的地方风霾大作，又过一年，也是如此。
English: On this day of the second year, the place where Feng Xuan died was a haze, and it was the same a year later.

古文：伊王奏闻，敕有司建祠，岁以死日致祭。
现代文：伊王将此事上奏，皇上诏令官府为冯祯建祠，每年在他死的那天祭祀。
English: King Yi reported the matter to the emperor, and the emperor ordered the government to build a shrine for Feng Xuan, to be dedicated every year on the day of his death.

古文：寻用给事中李铎言，岁给米二石，帛二疋，赡其家。
现代文：随即又采纳给事中李铎的建议，每年以二石米、二匹帛，供给其家。
English: He also immediately adopted the suggestion of Li Jiao, who was in the middle of the matter, to provide his family with two kilos of rice and two horses every year.

古文：张俊，宣府前卫人。
现代文：张俊，宣府前卫人。
English: Zhang Jun, former guard of Xuanwu.

古文：嗣世职，为本卫指挥使。
现代文：他继承世袭职位，为本卫指挥使。
English: He succeeded to the hereditary post and became the commander of the Imperial Guards.

古文：累擢大同游击将军。
现代文：累升至大同游击将军。
English: He rose to the rank of Datong guerrilla general.

古文：弘治十二年以功进都指挥同知。
现代文：弘治十二年，又因功进升为都指挥同知。
English: In the twelfth year of the Hongzhi era, he was promoted to the position of metropolitan conductor due to his merits.

古文：火筛入大同左卫，大掠八日。
现代文：火筛侵入大同左卫，大肆抢掠八日之久。
English: The fire brigade invaded Datong Zuwei and plundered it for eight days.

古文：俊遣兵三百邀其前，复分兵三百为策应，而亲御之荆东庄。
现代文：张俊派兵三百在前拦截，又分兵三百作为策应，自己则亲自率军在荆东庄抵御。
English: Zhang Jun sent three hundred soldiers in front to intercept, another three hundred soldiers as a response, and he personally led the army to resist in Jingdongzhuang.

古文：依河结营，击却三万余骑。
现代文：傍河扎营，击退三万余敌寇骑兵。
English: They camped by the river and repelled more than thirty thousand enemy cavalry.

古文：帝大喜，立擢都督佥事。
现代文：皇上大喜，马上提拔他为都督佥事。
English: The emperor was overjoyed and immediately promoted him to the post of governor.

古文：未几，总兵官王玺失事被征，即命俊代之。
现代文：不久，总兵官王玺因事被追究，皇上立即命张俊代替王玺。
English: Soon after, the commander-in-chief of the military, Wang Qian, was investigated for the incident, and the emperor immediately ordered Zhang Jun to replace Wang Qian.

古文：其冬，以寇入戴罪，寻移镇宣府。
现代文：这年冬天，张俊因贼寇人侵而戴罪在身，随即被调去镇守宣府。
English: In the winter of that year, Zhang Jun was punished for the invasion of thieves and robbers, and was immediately transferred to the town of Xuanfu.

古文：中官苗逵督师延绥，檄大同、宣府卒为探骑。
现代文：宦官苗连在延绥督师，命大同、宣府士兵作为侦察骑兵。
English: The eunuch Miao Lian was in Yancheng inspector division, with the same mission and soldiers from Xuanfu as reconnaissance cavalry.

古文：俊持不遣，逵遂劾俊。
现代文：张俊坚决不派，苗连于是弹劾张俊。
English: Zhang Jun resolutely refused, and Miao Lian then impeached Zhang Jun.

古文：帝宥俊，而命发卒如逵言。
现代文：皇上宽恕了张俊，却命他按苗连所言派出士兵。
English: The emperor forgave Zhang Jun, but ordered him to send soldiers as Miao Lian said.

古文：武宗初立，寇乘丧大入，连营二十余里。
现代文：武宗刚刚即位，敌寇乘着朝廷大丧而大肆人侵，扎营二十余里。
English: Emperor Wuzong had just ascended to the throne, and the enemy bandits took advantage of the great loss of the imperial court to invade and encamp more than 20 miles away.

古文：俊遣诸将李稽、白玉、张雄、王镇、穆荣各帅三千人，分扼要害。
现代文：张俊派遣李稽、白玉、张雄、王镇、穆荣等将领各率三千人，分扼要害之地。
English: Zhang Jun dispatched Li Qini, Bai Yu, Zhang Xiong, Wang Zhen, Mu Rong and other generals, each with a force of three thousand, to divide up the critical areas.

古文：俄，寇由新开口毁垣入，稽遽前迎敌；玉、雄、镇、荣各帅所部拒于虞台岭。
现代文：不久，敌寇由新开口毁墙而人，李稽上前迎敌，白玉、张雄、王镇、穆荣各率所部在虞台岭抵御。
English: Soon, the enemy raiders broke through the newly opened wall, and Li Qi advanced to meet the enemy, while Bai Yu, Zhang Xiong, Wang Zhen, and Mu Rong led the headquarters to resist in Yutailing.

古文：俊急帅三千人赴援，道伤足，以兵属都指挥曹泰。
现代文：张俊急率三千人赴援，中途伤了脚，便将军队交给都指挥曹泰。
English: Zhang Jun rushed three thousand people to help, and when he hurt his foot halfway, he handed the army over to the commander of the capital, Cao Tai.

古文：泰至鹿角山，被围。
现代文：曹泰到达鹿角山时，被敌寇包围。
English: When Cao Tai arrived at Lugu Mountain, he was surrounded by enemy raiders.

古文：俊力疾，益调兵五千人，持三日粮，驰解泰围，复援出镇。
现代文：张俊极力忍住疼痛，加调军队五千人，携带三日军粮，迅速解除曹泰之围，再援救出王真。
English: Zhang Jun tried his best to bear the pain, increased the number of troops by five thousand, carried three days of rations, quickly lifted the siege of Cao Tai, and then rescued Wang Zhen.

古文：又分兵救稽、玉，稽、玉亦溃围出。
现代文：又分兵救援李稽、白玉，李稽、白玉也突围而出。
English: Another detachment of soldiers came to the rescue of Li Qi and Bai Yu. Li Qi and Bai Yu also broke out.

古文：独雄、荣阻山涧，援绝死。
现代文：唯独张雄、穆荣被阻在山涧之中，援绝而死。
English: However, Zhang Xiong and Mu Rong were blocked in the mountains and died.

古文：诸军已大困，收兵还。
现代文：诸军已十分困乏，于是收兵而返。
English: The troops were so exhausted that they withdrew.

古文：寇追之，行且战，仅得入万全右卫城，士马死亡无算。
现代文：敌寇追击，诸军且行且战，只得以进入万全右卫城，兵马死亡无数。
English: Pursued by the enemy corsairs, the troops fought and fought, only to be able to enter the Wanzheng right guard city, and countless soldiers and horses died.

古文：俊及中官刘清、巡抚李进皆征还。
现代文：张俊及宦官刘清、巡抚李进都被调回京城。
English: Zhang Jun, the eunuch Liu Qing, and the inspector Li Jin were all transferred back to Beijing.

古文：御史郭东山言，俊扶病驰援，劝惩不宜偏废，乃许赎罪。
现代文：御史郭东山建议说，张俊带病救援，奖惩不应当偏废，于是他才被允许赎罪。
English: Guo Dongshan, the superintendent of police, suggested that Zhang Jun should be allowed to atone for his crime, saying that Zhang Jun brought disease relief and that rewards and punishments should not be biased.

古文：正德五年，起署都督同知，典神威营操练。
现代文：正德五年，张俊被起用为代理都督同知，主管神威营操练。
English: In the fifth year of Zhengde, Zhang Jun was appointed as the acting governor of Tongzhu, in charge of the Shenwei camp drill.

古文：明年六月，贼杨虎等自山西十八盘还，破武安，掠威、曲周、武城、清河、故城、景州，转入文安，与刘六等合。
现代文：第二年六月，杨虎等贼寇自山西十八盘返回，攻破武安，劫掠威、曲周、武城、清河、故城、景州，转人文安，与刘六等会合。
English: In June of the following year, Yang Hu and other bandits returned from Shanxi in the 18th century, defeated Wu'an, plundered Wei, Quzhou, Wucheng, Qinghe, the Old City, and Jingzhou, and then moved on to Wenjin'an, where they met with Liu Li and others.

古文：都指挥桑玉屡败，佥事许承芳请济师。
现代文：都指挥桑玉多次失败，佥事许承芳请求增兵。
English: The commander of the capital, Sangyul, failed many times, and the anecdote of Xu Chengfang's request for additional troops is a good example.

古文：乃命俊充副总兵，与参将王琮统京军千人讨之。
现代文：朝廷于是命令张俊充任副总兵，与参将王琼统领京军一千人前去征讨。
English: The imperial court then ordered Zhang Juncheng to serve as deputy commander-in-chief, and he and the general Wang Qiong led the Beijing army of a thousand men to go and fight.

古文：往来近畿数月，不能创贼。
现代文：往来近畿数月之久，未能重创贼寇。
English: They have been traveling to and from Kinki for several months, but have not been able to seriously harm the bandits.

古文：已，朝议调边军协守，贼遂连败。
现代文：不久，朝廷决定调来边军协守，贼寇于是连连失败。
English: Soon after, the imperial court decided to bring in the border troops to help defend the city, and the bandits suffered a string of defeats.

古文：明年三月，刘六、刘七、齐彦名、庞文宣等败奔登、莱海套。
现代文：第二年三月，刘六、刘七、齐彦名、庞文宣等败逃登州、莱州海套。
English: In March of the following year, Liu VI, Liu VII, Qi Yanmei, Pang Wenzhen and others fled to Dengzhou and Laizhou.

古文：陆完檄俊军莱州，合诸将李鋐等邀之。
现代文：陆完命张俊驻守莱州，会合李错等将领拦击贼寇。
English: After the death of Lu, Zhang Jun was stationed in Laizhou, and met with Li Zhe and other generals to intercept the bandits.

古文：贼遂北走，转掠宝坻、香河、玉田，俊急偕许泰、郤永遏之。
现代文：贼寇于是北逃，转掠宝低、香河、玉田，张俊迅速偕同许泰、却永阻拦之。
English: The bandit then fled north, and went on to plunder Baoliao, Xianghe, and Tamada. Zhang Jun quickly went with Xu Tai, but was never able to stop him.

古文：帝喜，劳以白金。
现代文：皇上十分高兴，赐白金慰劳。
English: The emperor was very pleased and gave him platinum as a consolation prize.

古文：贼由武清西去。
现代文：贼寇由武清西逃。
English: The bandits fled from Wuqing to the west.

古文：未几，得疾召还。
现代文：不久，张俊因病应诏回京。
English: Soon after, Zhang Jun returned to Beijing due to illness.

古文：后贼平，实授都督同知。
现代文：贼寇平定后，张俊被实授为都督同知，直到张俊去世。
English: After the defeat of the bandits, Zhang Jun was awarded the title of "Todoku Tongzhu" until his death.

古文：久之，卒。俊为边将，持廉，有谋勇。其殁也，家无赢资。
现代文：张俊作为边将，持重廉洁，有勇有谋，他去世时，家里竟无余钱。
English: As a border guard, Zhang Jun was honest, courageous and resourceful. When he died, the family had no spare money.

古文：李鋐，大同右卫人。
现代文：李鋐，大同右卫人。
English: Li Xi, the Datong right guard.

古文：世指挥同知，累功进都指挥佥事，充参将，协守大同。
现代文：他承袭指挥同知之职，累功升至都指挥佥事，充任参将，协守大同。
English: He inherited the post of commander Tongzhi, and rose to the post of commander of the capital Anji, served as a general, and assisted in the defense of Datong.

古文：山东盗起，诏改游击将军，寻充副总兵，与俊等邀贼，复与刘晖部将傅铠、张椿等数立功。
现代文：山东盗贼猖獗，李鋐奉诏改任游击将军，随即充任副总兵，与张俊等拦击贼寇，又与刘晖的部将傅恺、张椿等多次立功。
English: The bandits in Shandong were rampant. Li Qiye was appointed as a guerrilla general after the edict was issued, and then he served as the deputy commander-in-chief. Together with Zhang Jun and others, he stopped the bandits, and together with Liu Qiye's subordinates Fu Qiye and Zhang Cun, he made many meritorious deeds.

古文：贼平，进都指挥同知，充总兵官，镇凤阳诸府。
现代文：贼寇平定后，李错进升为都指挥同知，充任总兵官，镇守凤阳诸府。
English: After the defeat of the bandits, Li Zhejin was promoted to the same rank as the commander of the capital, appointed as the chief military officer, and became the town guard of Fengyang.

古文：寻以江西盗猖獗，擢署都督佥事，与都御史俞谏同提督军务。
现代文：随即又因江西盗贼猖獗，而被提升为代理都督佥事，与都御史俞谏共同提督军务。
English: Then, because of the rampant theft in Jiangxi, he was promoted to the acting governor of Anji, and became the admiral of military affairs together with the governor of Shiqi.

古文：贼王浩八据裴源山，凭高发矢石，官军几不支。
现代文：贼寇王浩八占据裴源山，凭高发射箭石，官军几乎力不能支。
English: Thief and robber Wang Hao occupied Peiyuan Mountain, and the government army could barely hold out due to the high launch of arrow stones.

古文：鋐下马持刀，督将士殊死斗，贼乃走。
现代文：李错下马持刀，督率将士殊死而战，贼寇这才逃走。
English: Lee mistakenly dismounted and held a knife, the commander-in-chief led the soldiers to fight to the death, and the bandits fled.

古文：追数十里，擒之。
现代文：官军追击数十里，擒获了王浩八。
English: The government army chased them for dozens of miles and captured Wang Hao.

古文：复以次讨平刘昌三、胡浩三等。
现代文：李按又依次讨平了刘昌三、胡浩三等贼寇。
English: Li Yan in turn defeated Liu Chang San, Hu Hao San and other bandits.

古文：移驻余干，将击遗贼之未下者，疽发背，卒于军。
现代文：然后移驻余干，将要攻打那些还未攻下的余贼时，李鋐因背部毒疮发作，死于军中。
English: Then he moved to Yugang, and when he was about to attack the remaining bandits who had not yet been captured, Li Xuan died in the army due to an attack of poisonous sores on his back.

古文：诏赠右都督，荫子都指挥佥事。
现代文：皇上下诏追赠他为右都督，并授其子为都指挥佥事。
English: The Emperor posthumously bestowed him with the title of Right Governor and gave his son the title of Commander-in-Chief.

古文：杨锐，字进之，萧县人。
现代文：杨锐，字进之，萧县人。
English: Yang Rui, also known as Jin Zhi, was from Xiao County.

古文：嗣世职，为南京羽林前卫指挥使。
现代文：他继承世袭职位，为南京羽林前卫指挥使。
English: He inherited the hereditary position and was the vanguard commander of Nanjing Ulin.

古文：正德初，以才擢掌龙江右卫事，督造漕舟于淮安。
现代文：正德初年，杨锐因其有才而被提升掌管龙江右卫事务，在淮安督造漕船。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, Yang Rui was promoted to be in charge of Longjiang Uwei affairs because of his talent, and built rowing boats in Huai'an.

古文：宁王宸濠有异谋，王琼以安庆居要害，宜置戍，乃进锐署都指挥佥事，守备其地。
现代文：宁王朱宸濠企图谋反，王琼认为安庆地处要害，应当设军防卫，于是朝廷进升杨锐为代理都指挥佥事，守备其地。
English: King Zhu Xi of Ning attempted to rebel, and Wang Qiong believed that Anqing was in a critical situation and that an army should be set up to defend it, so Yang Rui, who was promoted to the imperial court as an agent, commanded affairs and guarded his land.

古文：锐与知府张文锦治战舰，日督士肄水战。
现代文：杨锐与知府张文锦修造战船，每日监督士兵操练水战。
English: Yang Rui and the prefectural governor Zhang Wenjin repaired and built warships, and supervised the soldiers to practice water battles every day.

古文：十四年六月丙子，宸濠反。
现代文：十四年六月十四日，朱宸濠发动叛乱。
English: On June 14, 1914, Zhu Xi launched a rebellion.

古文：东下，焚彭泽、湖口、望江。
现代文：率军东下，焚烧彭泽、湖口、望江。
English: He led his army eastward, burning Penza, Hukou, and Bojiang.

古文：己丑，奄至安庆城下，舟五十余艘。
现代文：二十七日，突然到达安庆城下，船只有五十余艘。
English: On the 27th, they suddenly arrived at the foot of Anqing Castle. There were only more than 50 boats.

古文：锐、文锦与指挥崔文、同知林有禄、通判何景昜、怀宁知县王诰等御之江浒。
现代文：杨锐、张文锦与指挥崔文、同知林有禄、通判何景怀宁知县王浩等在江边抵御。
English: Yang Rui, Zhang Wenjin and conductor Cui Wen, Tongzhi Lin Yulu, Tongzhan He Jinghuai, Ningzhi County Wang Hao and others resisted on the riverbank.

古文：已，收兵入城，被围。
现代文：不久，收兵入城，被叛军包围。
English: Soon, the army entered the city and was surrounded by rebels.

古文：锐、文军城西，文锦、有禄军城北，景抃、诰军东南。
现代文：杨锐、崔文驻军城西，张文锦、林有禄驻军城北，何景、王浩驻军城东南。
English: Yang Rui and Cui Wen were stationed in the west of the city, Zhang Wenjin and Lin Yilu were stationed in the north of the city, and He Jing and Wang Hao were stationed in the southeast of the city.

古文：城西尤要冲，锐昼夜拒战，杀伤贼二百余，斩其间谍，乃稍却。
现代文：城西尤属要冲。杨锐昼夜抗击，杀死叛贼二百余人，斩其间谍，叛军才稍往后退。
English: Yang Rui resisted day and night, killed more than 200 traitors and cut off their spies, before the rebels retreated a little.

古文：七月丁酉，贼悉兵至，号十万，舳舻相衔六十余里。
现代文：七月六日，叛贼全军赶到，号称十万，船舰相接六十余里。
English: On the 6th of July, the entire rebel army arrived, claiming to be 100,000 strong, with ships more than 60 miles apart.

古文：宸濠乘黄舰，泊黄石矶，身自督战。
现代文：宸濠所乘的黄色舰，停泊于黄石矶，他亲自督战。
English: The yellow ship he was on was anchored in Yellowstone, and he personally supervised the battle.

古文：江西佥事潘鹏在贼军，安庆人也，宸濠令谕降。
现代文：贼军中的江西佥事潘鹏是安庆人，宸濠命他前去谕降。
English: The story of Jiangxi in the army of thieves Pan Peng was from Anqing. He risked his life to go and surrender.

古文：呼锐及文锦语，众心颇摇。
现代文：潘鹏叫来杨锐及张文锦，与他们谈话，众心颇为动摇。
English: Pan Peng called Yang Rui and Zhang Wenjin to have a talk with them, and everyone was quite shaken.

古文：吏黄洲者，以大义责数之，鹏惭而退。
现代文：有一名在黄洲为官的人，以大义指责他，潘鹏惭愧而退。
English: There was a person who was an official in Huangzhou who accused him with great righteousness. Pan Peng was ashamed and retreated.

古文：既复持伪檄至，其家僮见，遥呼之，锐腰斩以徇。
现代文：不久潘鹏又持伪檄而至，家僮看到后，很远就叫他，杨锐将家僮拦腰斩断示众。
English: Soon after, Pan Peng arrived with a fake sword. When Jia Yao saw him, he called him from far away. Yang Rui cut off Jia Yao's waist to show the public.

古文：将射鹏，鹏遁去，众心乃定。
现代文：将要射击潘鹏时，潘鹏已逃走了，众心这才安定下来。
English: When they were about to shoot Pan Peng, Pan Peng had already fled, and only then did everyone's minds settle down.

古文：贼怒，围城数周，攻益急。锐等殊死战。
现代文：叛贼大怒，围城数周，攻势更猛，杨锐等殊死而战。
English: The traitors were furious, besieged the city for several weeks, the offensive was even more fierce, and Yang Rui and others fought to the death.

古文：贼云楼数十瞰城中，城中亦造飞楼射贼，夜缒人焚贼楼。
现代文：叛贼架起数十座云楼俯视城中，城中守军也造起飞楼射击贼军，并趁夜派人继城而出焚烧贼楼。
English: The rebels erected dozens of skyscrapers overlooking the city, and the city's defenders also built a take-off tower to shoot the thieves, and took advantage of the night to send people out of the city to burn the thieves' tower.

古文：贼置天梯，广二丈，高于城，版蔽之，前后有门，伏兵其中，轮转以薄城。
现代文：贼军又添置天梯，宽二丈，高于城，用木板掩盖起来，前后有门，伏兵其中，运来进逼城中。
English: The robber army also added a ladder, two feet wide and higher than the city, covered with wooden planks, with doors in front and behind, and ambushed soldiers were transported into the city.

古文：城上束苇沃膏，燃其端，梯稍近即投之，须臾尽焚，贼多死。
现代文：城上守军捆上芦苇沽上肥油，将其一端点着，当云梯稍一靠近便投下，顷刻之间全被烧尽，叛贼死了许多。
English: The defenders of the city tied bundles of fat oil on reeds and lit one end of it. When the ladder came a little closer, they threw it down, and it was all burned up in an instant, and many of the rebels died.

古文：时军卫卒不满百，乘城皆民兵。
现代文：当时军卫士兵不足百人，在城上的都是民兵。
English: At that time, there were less than a hundred guardsmen, and all the people in the city were militia.

古文：老弱妇女馈饷，人运石一二，数日积如山。
现代文：老弱妇女则送来饭菜。每人背运一、二块石头，数日之后便堆积如山。
English: Elderly women brought food, each carrying one or two stones on their backs, which piled up after a few days.

古文：贼攻城，城上或投石，或沸汤沃之，贼辄伤。
现代文：叛贼攻城，城上守兵或者投下石头，或者以沸汤浇下，叛贼总是受伤。
English: When the rebels attacked the city, the guards either threw stones or poured boiling water on them, and the rebels were always injured.

古文：锐等射书贼营，谕令解散，有亡去者。
现代文：杨锐等将信射到贼营，命其解散，有的叛贼便逃走了。
English: Yang Rui and others sent a letter to the bandit camp, ordering it to disband, and some of the traitors fled.

古文：乃募死士夜劫贼营，贼大惊扰，比晓稍定。
现代文：于是，杨锐招募敢死队夜劫贼营。叛贼大受惊扰，到天明才稍微安定下来。
English: As a result, Yang Rui recruited a death squad for the night robbery camp. The traitors were greatly alarmed, and only settled down a little by dawn.

古文：宸濠惭愤，谓其下曰： 安庆且不克，安望南都。 
现代文：宸濠羞愤交加，对其部下说道： 安庆都攻不下来，怎么能指望南都呢？ 
English: Shameful and angry, he said to his subordinates: Anqing can not be attacked, how can we expect Nandu?

古文：会闻伍文定等破南昌，遂解围去。
现代文：正又获悉伍文定等攻破南昌，于是便解围离去。
English: He had just learned that Wu Wenzing and others had defeated Nanchang, so he broke the siege and left.

古文：文出城袭击，又破之，旬有八日而围解。
现代文：崔文出城袭击，又击败之，十八日后城围解除。
English: Cui Wen attacked from the city, defeated it again, and the siege was lifted after 18 days.

古文：事闻，武宗大喜，擢锐参将，分守安徽池、太、宁国及九江、铙、黄。
现代文：捷报上奏，武宗大喜，提拔杨锐为参将，命其分守安徽池州、太州、宁国及九江、饶州、黄州。
English: After the victory was announced, Wu Zong was overjoyed and promoted Yang Rui to the rank of general and ordered him to take charge of Anhui Chizhou, Taizhou, Ningguo, Jiujiang, Raozhou and Huangzhou.

古文：锐荐郑岳、胡世宁，帝即召用。
现代文：杨锐举荐郑岳、胡世宁，皇上马上召用他俩。
English: Yang Rui recommended Zheng Yue and Hu Shining, and the emperor immediately summoned them.

古文：世宗立，论功，擢都督佥事，荫子世千户。
现代文：世宗即位后，论功时，杨锐被提升为都督佥事，庇荫其子为世袭千户。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, Yang Rui was promoted to the post of governor-general, and his son became the hereditary head of a thousand households.

古文：再迁佥书左府，改南京右府。
现代文：杨锐又升为左军都督府金书，改调南京右军都督府。
English: Yang Rui was also promoted to the left-wing military governor's gold medal and transferred to the right-wing military governor's office in Nanjing.

古文：充总兵官，镇辽东。
现代文：他充任总兵官，镇守辽东。
English: He served as commander-in-chief and town guard of Liaodong.

古文：改督漕运，镇淮安。
现代文：后又改督漕运，镇守淮安。
English: Later, he became the governor of Cao Yun and the town guard of Huai'an.

古文：嘉靖十年为巡按御史李循义劾罢，逾年卒。
现代文：嘉靖十年，杨锐被巡按御史李循义弹劾免职，一年后去世。
English: In the tenth year of Jiajing, Yang Rui was impeached and removed from office by the inspector-general of history Li Xunyi, and died a year later.

古文：崔文，世为安庆卫指挥使，守城劳亚于锐。
现代文：崔文，世袭焉安庆卫指挥使，守城的功劳次于杨锐。
English: Cui Wen, hereditary commander of Yan'an and Qingwei, was second only to Yang Rui in his contribution to the defense of the city.

古文：世宗录其功，超三阶为都指挥使，荫子世百户。
现代文：世宗审查他的功绩，提升三级任都指挥使，荫袭儿子世袭百户。
English: The Sejong examined his achievements, promoted him to the third-level commander, and overshadowed his son to inherit hundreds of households.

古文：江、淮多盗，廷议设总兵官，督上下江防，擢文都督佥事任之。
现代文：江、淮多盗贼，朝廷商议设立总兵官，管理上江、下江的防务，提升崔文为都督愈事担任。
English: The imperial court deliberated on the establishment of a general officer to manage the defense of the upper and lower rivers, and promoted Cui Wen to the post of governor.

古文：改莅南京前府，专督操江、久之，卒。
现代文：改任到南京前府，专门管理长江防务。
English: He was reassigned to the former prefecture of Nanjing to specifically manage the defense of the Yangtze River.

古文：赞曰：卫青等当承平时，不逞窃发，列城扰攘，赖其戡定。
现代文：很久以后，去世。赞曰：卫青等人处于太平时期，叛乱暗中暴发，各城受到侵扰，都依赖他们而平定。
English: A long time later, he passed away. Zang said: Wei Qing and others were in a period of peace, the rebellion broke out secretly, all cities were harassed, and they all depended on them to be pacified.

古文：虽所敌非坚，然勇敢力战，功多可纪。
现代文：虽然所面对的敌人并不强大，但是勇敢奋战，功劳大多可以记入史册。
English: Although the enemy they faced was not strong, they fought bravely, and most of their achievements can be recorded in history.

古文：或遂身膏原野，若何洪、刘雄、冯祯辈，壮节有足惜者。
现代文：有的还葬身原野，像何洪、刘雄、冯祯这些人，豪壮的气节足以让人感到惋惜。
English: Some of them were buried in the wilderness, such as He Hong, Liu Xiong, and Feng Qi. Their heroic spirit is enough to make people feel sorry.

古文：钺以心计定乱，锐以城守摧逆，干城之寄，克称庙谟。
现代文：仇铁以心计平定叛乱，杨锐以守城摧毁叛贼，是捍卫国家的依靠，可以称为庙堂的神算。
English: Qian Tie's strategy to quell the rebellion and Yang Rui's strategy to defend the city and destroy the traitors are the reliance of defending the country, which can be called the divine calculation of the temple.

古文：神英、曹雄亦有劳绩，而以附阉损名，且获罪。为将者其以跅弛为戒哉。
现代文：神英、曹雄也右功劳和业绩，但因依附宦官损坏名声，而且获罪，作将领的人应该以不遵守规矩为戒啊。
English: Shenying and Cao Xiong have also made great contributions and achievements, but because of their dependence on eunuchs, their reputations have been damaged and they have been found guilty. Those who are generals should be warned not to follow the rules.

