古文：耶律曷鲁，字控温，一字洪隐，迭剌部人。
现代文：耶律曷鲁，字控温，又字洪隐，迭剌部人。
English: Yeludonglu, the character of temperature control, also the character of Hongyin, a member of the second division.

古文：祖匣马葛，简宪皇帝兄。
现代文：祖父匣马葛，简宪皇帝之兄。
English: His grandfather was Magat, the brother of Emperor Jianxian.

古文：父偶思，遥辇时为本部夷离堇，曷鲁其长子也。
现代文：父偶思，在遥辇时任本部夷离堇，曷鲁乃是他的长子。
English: His father, Yuxi, was the head of the Headquarters for the Expulsion of Foreigners in Yalong Bay at the time, and Yalong Bay was his eldest son.

古文：性质厚。
现代文：曷鲁生性朴实厚道。
English: Jie Lu was born with a simple and kind nature.

古文：在髫鬌，与太祖游，从父释鲁奇之曰： 兴我家者，必二儿也。 
现代文：幼年时，与太祖交游，伯父释鲁觉得他们奇异不凡，说： 光大我们家族的，必定是这两个孩子。 
English: When he was a child, he traveled with his great-grandfather. Uncle Shilu thought they were extraordinary and said, "These two children must be the brightest in our family."

古文：太祖既长，相与易裘马为好，然曷鲁事太祖弥谨。
现代文：太祖成年之后，二人互换裘服、马匹结为好友，然而曷鲁事奉太祖更为小心了。
English: After the great-grandfather came of age, the two exchanged clothes and horses and became friends. However, Jilu was more careful in serving the great-grandfather.

古文：会滑哥弑其父释鲁，太祖顾曷鲁曰： 滑哥弑父，料我必不能容，将反噬我。
现代文：适逢滑哥杀害其父释鲁，太祖对曷鲁说： 滑哥杀父，猜度我一定不会相容，将会反过来害我。
English: On the occasion of the killing of his father, Shilu, by his brother, the great-grandfather said to his brother: "Since Shilu killed his father, I am sure that I am not compatible with him, and he will in turn harm me."

古文：今彼归罪台哂为解，我姑与之。
现代文：现在他归罪于台哂自行解脱，我姑且跟他交往。
English: Now he blames Taiwan for his self-liberation. I'll let him get on with it.

古文：是贼吾不忘也！ 
现代文：这个贼子我是不会忘了他的！ 
English: I won't forget this thief!

古文：自是曷鲁常佩刀从太祖，以备不虞。
现代文：从这以后，曷鲁总是佩着刀跟随太祖，以备不测。
English: From then on, Jiro always carried a sword with him when he went to visit his grandfather, just in case.

古文：居久之，曷鲁父偶思病，召曷鲁曰： 阿保机神略天授，汝率诸弟赤心事之。 
现代文：相处很久以后，曷鲁之父偶思病了，召见曷鲁说 ：阿保机天授神机，神妙莫测，你要带领各位兄弟忠心事奉他。 
English: After they had been together for a long time, Jairus' father fell ill and summoned Jairus, saying: O mighty one, full of wisdom and power, you must lead all the brothers to serve him faithfully.

古文：已而太祖来问疾，偶思执其手曰： 尔命世奇才。
现代文：不久太祖前来探病，偶思握着他的手说： 你乃是绝世之奇才。
English: Not long after, the great-grandfather came to visit the sick man. I happened to shake his hand and said, "You are an extraordinary genius."

古文：吾儿曷鲁者，他日可委以事，吾已谕之矣。 
现代文：我儿子曷鲁，将来可委以重任，我已跟他明白说知了。 
English: I have made it clear to my son, Jairo, that he can be entrusted with important responsibilities in the future.

古文：既而以诸子属之。
现代文：接着又将几个儿子都托付给他。
English: He then entrusted several of his sons to him.

古文：太祖为挞马狘沙里，参预部族事，曷鲁领数骑召小黄室韦来附。
现代文：太祖任挞马笰沙里，参预部族事务，曷鲁领数骑招徕小黄室韦归附。
English: The great-great-grandfather was a member of the pre-tribal affairs committee of the pre-tribal affairs committee of the pre-tribal affairs committee of the pre-tribal affairs committee of the pre-tribal affairs committee of the pre-tribal affairs committee.

古文：太祖素有大志，而知曷鲁贤，军国事非曷鲁议不行。
现代文：太祖向来有大志，而心知曷鲁之贤能，军国大事非要曷鲁发议论不行。
English: The great-grandfather always had a great ambition, and he knew the wisdom and ability of Jilu, and it was not possible to discuss military affairs without Jilu.

古文：会讨越兀与乌古部，曷鲁为前锋，战有功。
现代文：适逢讨伐越兀与乌古部，曷鲁为前锋，立了战功。
English: At the time of the crusade between Yue Qi and Ugube, Jilu was the forward and made a great contribution to the war.

古文：及太祖为迭剌部夷离堇，讨奚部，其长术里偪险而垒，攻莫能下，命曷鲁持一笴往谕之。
现代文：待到太祖为迭剌部夷离堇，讨伐奚部，其首领术里凭借险阻修筑工事，攻之而不能下，命曷鲁拿着一根箭杆前往晓谕。
English: Waiting for the great ancestor to expel  from  for the sake of, and to fight against, its leaders relied on dangerous obstacles to build construction in the operation, but could not attack it, and M Lu went to the oracle with an arrow.

古文：既入，为所执。
现代文：进去之后，被对方拘执。
English: After entering, he was detained by the other party.

古文：乃说奚曰： 契丹与奚言语相通，实一国也。
现代文：于是劝奚人说： 契丹与奚言语相通，实际上是一国。
English: So he persuaded the people to say, "The Khitan and the Yao have a common language, in fact, they are one country."

古文：我夷离堇于奚岂有輘轹之心哉？
现代文：我们夷离堇对于奚人怎么会有侵犯凌辱之心呢？
English: How can we have a heart of violation and humiliation for those who are separated from their families?

古文：汉人杀我祖奚首，夷离堇怨次骨，日夜思报汉人。
现代文：汉人杀我们祖先奚首，夷离堇恨之入骨，日夜思量要报汉人之仇。
English: The Han Chinese killed our ancestors with daggers, and their hatred is ingrained in their bones. They think about taking revenge on the Han Chinese day and night.

古文：顾力单弱，使我求援于奚，传矢以示信耳。
现代文：只是势力单弱，派我来向奚国求援，送箭来以表明信用罢了。
English: It's just that I've been sent here by a weak power to ask for help and send arrows to show my trust.

古文：夷离堇受命于天，抚下以德，故能有此众也。
现代文：夷离堇受命于天，以仁德安抚属下，所以能有这么多兵力。
English: He was ordered by heaven to pacify his subordinates with benevolence, which is why he was able to have so many troops.

古文：今奚杀我，违天背德，不祥莫大焉。
现代文：今日奚国杀我，违天理背大德，没有比这更不好的选择了。
English: If the country kills me today, it will be against nature and against morality. There is no worse choice than this.

古文：且兵连祸结，当自此始，岂尔国之利乎！ 
现代文：况且兵连祸结，将从此开始，这又难道是国家之福吗？ 
English: What's more, it will be the beginning of a chain reaction of misfortune. Is this a blessing for the country?

古文：术里感其言，乃降。
现代文：术里为他的话所感动，便降顺了。
English: The sorcerer was moved by his words and yielded.

古文：太祖为于越，秉国政，欲命曷鲁为迭剌部夷离堇。
现代文：太祖为于越，秉持国政，想任命曷鲁为迭剌部夷离堇。
English: The great-great-grandfather was in favor of Vietnam, upholding national politics, and wanted to appoint Jang Lu as the second-in-command.

古文：辞曰： 贼在君侧，未敢远去。 
现代文：曷鲁推辞说： 贼人就在你身边，我不能远离。 
English: "The thief is right next to you, I can't get away from him," he said.

古文：太祖讨黑车子室韦，幽州刘仁恭遣养子赵霸率众来救。
现代文：太祖讨伐黑车子室韦，幽州刺史刘仁恭派养子赵霸率兵往救。
English: The great-great-grandfather fought against the black chariot son Shumwei, and the Yuzhou ruler Liu Rengong sent his adopted son Zhao Ba to lead the soldiers to rescue him.

古文：曷鲁伏兵桃山，俟霸众过半而要之；与太祖合击，斩获甚众，遂降室韦。
现代文：曷鲁伏兵于桃山，等赵霸的人马半入伏圈时邀击之，与太祖合兵攻击，斩首俘虏者甚众，于是降服了室韦。
English: Zhao Lu set an ambush in Taoshan. When Zhao Ba's men were halfway into the ambush circle, he invited Zhao Lu to attack him. Zhao Lu attacked together with Taizu, beheading a large number of captives. As a result, Zhao Ba surrendered to Shuwa.

古文：太祖会李克用于云州，时曷鲁侍，克用顾而壮之曰： 伟男子为谁？ 
现代文：太祖在云州与李克用相会，当时曷鲁侍立于旁，李克用看了看，赞许地问： 这高大男子是谁？ 
English: The great-grandfather met Li Kegui in Yunnan. At that time, Zhao Lu was standing next to him. Li Kegui looked at him and asked approvingly: Who is this tall man?

古文：太祖曰： 吾族曷鲁也。 
现代文：太祖说 ：我们家曷鲁。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "Our family comes from Lu."

古文：会遥辇痕德堇可汗殁，群臣奉遗命请立太祖。
现代文：适逢遥辇痕德堇可汗逝世，群臣奉遗诏请立太祖。
English: At the time of the death of Dehaene Khan, a group of courtiers issued a posthumous edict requesting the establishment of a grand patriarch.

古文：太祖辞曰： 昔吾祖夷离堇雅里尝以不当立而辞，今若等复为是言，何欤？ 
现代文：太祖推辞说 ：当年我们祖先夷离堇雅里曾经以不该立而加以推辞，现在你们又这样说，是何道理？ 
English: The great-grandfather excused himself saying, "Back then, when our ancestors were exiled from Hunyar, they excused themselves by saying that they should not have stood up. Now you are saying the same thing. What is the reason for this?"

古文：曷鲁进曰： 曩吾祖之辞，遗命弗及，符瑞未见，第为国人所推戴耳。
现代文：曷鲁进言说 ：从前我们祖先的推辞，是因为遗旨没有提到，符瑞没有出现，只是为国人所拥戴罢了。
English: Zhao Lu Jinyan said: In the past, the rejection of our ancestors was because the will was not mentioned, and Fu Rui did not appear, but was only embraced by the people of the country.

古文：今先君言犹在耳，天人所与，若合符契。
现代文：现在先君言犹在耳，天赐神瑞，人心所向，天与人如出一辙。
English: Now, the words of the late emperor are still ringing in our ears. Heaven bestows divine grace, and the hearts of people are inclined in the same direction.

古文：天不可逆，人不可拂，而君命不可违也。 
现代文：天命不可违背，人心不可拂逆，而君命也不得违抗。 
English: The Mandate of Heaven cannot be violated, the human heart cannot be turned against, and the King's command cannot be defied.

古文：太祖曰： 遗命固然，汝焉知天道？ 
现代文：太祖说： 遗旨是有，你又怎么知道天命？ 
English: The great-grandfather said, "There is a testament, so how do you know the fate of heaven?

古文：曷鲁曰： 闻于越之生也，神光属天，异香盈幄，梦受神诲，龙锡金佩。
现代文：曷鲁说 ：听说于越您出生之时，神光照天，奇香布满帷帐，梦中受到神人教诲，皇上钦赐金佩。
English: He said, "I heard that when you were born in Yue, divine light shone in the sky, strange incense filled the curtains, you were taught by a god in a dream, and the emperor gave you gold.

古文：天道无私，必应有德。
现代文：上天向来不会私恩于人，必应于有德之人。
English: Heaven will never be ungrateful to man, but it will be to a man of virtue.

古文：我国削弱，齮龁于邻部日久，以故生圣人以兴起之。
现代文：我国衰弱，长期受邻近部落欺侮伤害，因此天生圣人来兴隆之。
English: Our country is weak and has long suffered from the bullying of neighboring tribes, so saints are born to prosper.

古文：可汗知天意，故有是命。
现代文：可汗知道天意，所以有此遗命。
English: The khan knew the will of heaven, so he had this last wish.

古文：且遥辇九营棋布，非无可立者；小大臣民属心于越，天也。
现代文：况且遥辇九营，繁密如棋，并非没有可立之人；臣民们一同倾心于于越您，此乃天意。
English: Moreover, there are nine encampments far away, and they are as numerous as chess pieces, so it is not as if there are no people who can stand up; it is the will of heaven that the subjects should all be devoted to you.

古文：昔者于越伯父释鲁尝曰： 吾犹蛇，儿犹龙也。 
现代文：当年于越的伯父释鲁曾经说： 我好比是蛇，侄儿好比是龙。 
English: Back then, Yu's uncle Shilu once said: "I am like a snake, and my nephew is like a dragon."

古文：天时人事，几不可失。 
现代文：顺天时成人事，机不可失。 
English: Things will happen in good time, so don't miss the opportunity.

古文：太祖犹未许。
现代文：太祖仍不肯答应。
English: The great-grandfather still refused to agree.

古文：是夜，独召曷鲁责曰： 众以遗命迫我。汝不明吾心，而亦俯随耶？ 
现代文：当天夜里，特地召见曷鲁，责备说： 众人借遗命逼迫我，你难道不了解我的心，也随大流吗？ 
English: That same night, he summoned Jairus specifically to rebuke him, saying: "Men persecute me at their own instigation. Do you not know my heart, and are you not following the crowd?

古文：曷鲁曰： 在昔夷离堇雅里虽推戴者众，辞之而立阻午为可汗。
现代文：曷鲁说： 从前夷离堇雅里尽管推戴之人多，还是加以推辞，而立阻午为可汗。
English: Jilu said: In the past, although there were many people who supported the expulsion of Xinyari, they still rejected it and stood up as khans.

古文：相传十余世，君臣之分乱，纪纲之统隳。
现代文：十几代相传下来，君与臣的名分已乱，法纪之准则也被破坏。
English: Down through more than a dozen generations, the titles of prince and vassal have been in disarray, and the principles of law and discipline have been destroyed.

古文：委质他国，若缀斿然。
现代文：委身投靠别国，好比垂饰物之依附于大旗。
English: Allegiance to a foreign country is like the attachment of an ornament to a flag.

古文：羽檄蜂午，民疲奔命。
现代文：战事纷纷扰扰，百姓疲于奔命。
English: The people were exhausted from running for their lives.

古文：兴王之运，实在今日。
现代文：兴王之大运，就在今日。
English: The great fortune of King Heung-Won starts today.

古文：应天顺人，以答顾命，不可失也。 
现代文：应天命顺人心，以报答先君之遗命，实在是机不可失。 
English: In accordance with the will of heaven, it is indeed an opportunity not to be missed to repay your predecessor's legacy.

古文：太祖乃许。
现代文：太祖便答应了。
English: The great-grandfather agreed.

古文：明日，即皇帝位，命曷鲁总军国事。
现代文：次日，即皇帝位，命曷鲁总揽军国事务。
English: The next day, when he became emperor, he ordered his general to take charge of the country's military affairs.

古文：时制度未讲，国用未充，扈从未备，而诸弟剌葛等往往觊非望。
现代文：当时法令礼俗还未走上正轨，国家用度不够充足，随从人员还不齐备；而诸弟剌葛等人总是心存非分之妄想。
English: At that time, the laws and customs were not yet on the right track, the state expenditure was not sufficient, and the entourage was not complete; and the brothers such as Zangge always had illusions.

古文：太祖宫行营始置腹心部，选诸部豪健二千余充之，以曷鲁及萧敌鲁总焉。
现代文：太祖在宫中和行营开始设置腹心部，选择各部强壮健儿二千余人充任，由曷鲁及萧敌鲁总管其事。
English: The great-great-grandfather began to set up an aide-de-camp in the palace and the camp, and selected more than 2,000 strong and able-bodied people from each department to serve as aide-de-camp, with Jialu and Xiao Jialu in charge.

古文：已而诸弟之乱作，太祖命曷鲁总领军事，讨平之，以功为迭剌部夷离堇。
现代文：不久诸弟之乱发生，太祖命曷鲁总领军事，讨平乱事，因功任为迭剌部夷离堇。
English: Soon after, the brothers' rebellion broke out, and the great-grandfather ordered the commander of the military to quell the turmoil, and because of his service, he was forced to leave the capital.

古文：时民更兵焚剽，日以抏敝，曷鲁抚辑有方，畜牧益滋，民用富庶。乃讨乌古部，破之。
现代文：当时百姓经历战争之苦，焚掠之余，日益凋敝，曷鲁安抚、协调有方，牲畜一天天变多，百姓日用变得富饶起来，于是讨伐乌古部，破之。
English: At that time, the common people were suffering from the war. After being burned and plundered, they were becoming more and more destitute. Lu was able to pacify and coordinate them. The number of livestock was increasing day by day, and the daily use of the common people was becoming more and more abundant. Therefore, they fought against Ugube and defeated it.

古文：自是震慑，不敢复叛。
现代文：乌古部从此震恐，再也不敢反叛。
English: Ugube was terrified and never dared to rebel again.

古文：乃请制朝仪、建元，率百官上尊号。
现代文：于是请求制定朝仪，建元，率百官奉上尊号。
English: Therefore, he requested the establishment of the imperial regalia, the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, and the conferment of the title of nobility on hundreds of officials.

古文：太祖既备礼受册，拜曷鲁为阿鲁敦于越。 阿鲁敦 者，辽言盛名也。
现代文：太祖在举行各种大礼接受上天册命之后，拜曷鲁为阿鲁敦于越。阿鲁敦，辽语盛名之意。
English: After the great-grandfather held various grand ceremonies to accept the heavenly mandate, he was named Arutun in Viet Nam. Arutun, in the Liao language, means great fame.

古文：后太祖伐西南诸夷，数为前锋。
现代文：后来太祖讨伐西南诸夷，曷鲁多次担当前锋。
English: Later, his great-grandfather subdued the southwestern Zhuyi, and Jilu was the forward for many times.

古文：神册二年，从逼幽州，与唐节度使周德威拒战可汗州西，败其军，遂围幽州，未下。
现代文：神册二年，随驾进逼幽州，在可汗州西拒战唐节度使周德威，败其军，于是包围了幽州，未能攻下。
English: In the second year of the Divine Book, he drove into Yuzhou, and in the west of Khan Prefecture, he refused to fight the Tang Dynasty and defeated Zhou Dewei and his army, so he surrounded Yuzhou and failed to capture it.

古文：太祖以时暑班师，留曷鲁与卢国用守之。
现代文：太祖因时当酷暑班师，留下曷鲁与卢国用守围。
English: Due to the hot weather, Taizu was in charge of the division, leaving Jilu and Lu to defend the country.

古文：后太祖二十一功臣，各有所拟，以曷鲁为心云。
现代文：不久敌救兵接连而至，曷鲁等因兵少无援，撤围。
English: Soon, enemy rescuers arrived one after another, and Jilu and others withdrew from the siege due to the lack of soldiers.

古文：子惕剌、撒剌，俱不仕。
现代文：三年七月，皇都建立之后，大宴群臣行落成之礼。
English: In July of the third year, after the imperial capital was built, a grand banquet was held for the completion of the ceremony.

古文：论曰：曷鲁以肺腑之亲，任帷幄之寄，言如蓍龟，谋成战胜，可谓算无遗策矣。
现代文：曷鲁在这一天得病逝世，年四十七岁。当初，曷鲁病重，太祖前往探视，问他要说什么。曷鲁说： 陛下您圣明贤德，宽厚仁慈，天下归心，帝业兴隆。
English: On this day, Jiro fell ill and died at the age of forty-seven. At the beginning, Jiro was seriously ill, and his great-grandfather went to visit and asked him what to say. Jiro said: Your Majesty, you are holy and wise, generous and merciful, the world is united, and the empire is flourishing.

古文：其君臣相得之诚，庶吴汉之于光武欤？
现代文：臣既已受您的宠爱恩遇，就是死了也已无憾。
English: Once a vassal has been favored by you, there is no regret even if he dies.

古文：夫信其所可信，智也，太祖有焉。
现代文：只有分散迭剌部的议案尚未决断，希望您赶紧实行。 
English: Only the motion to disperse the two departments has not yet been decided, and I hope you will implement it as soon as possible.

古文：故曰：惟圣知圣，惟贤知贤，斯近之矣。
现代文：及至逝世，太祖流着泪说： 他要是再活三五年，我的谋划就可以全部实现了！ 
English: At the end of his life, the great-grandfather shed tears and said, "If only he had lived another three or five years, all my plans could have been realized!"

古文：萧敌鲁，字敌辇，其母为德祖女弟，而淳钦皇后又其女兄也。
现代文：后来太祖的二十一功臣，各有所比附之名，以曷鲁为心。萧敌鲁，字敌辇，其母为德祖之妹，而淳钦皇后乃是其姊姊。
English: Later, each of the twenty-one meritorious vassals of the great-grandfather had a corresponding name, with Jilu as the heart. Xiao Jilu, the word Jilu, whose mother was the sister of the great-grandfather, and the Queen Junqin was her sister.

古文：五世祖曰胡母里，遥辇氏时尝使唐，唐留之幽州。
现代文：五世祖叫胡母里，在遥辇氏时曾经出使唐，唐留之于幽州。
English: The fifth-generation ancestor was named Hu Muli. When he was a member of the Yaojun clan, he once sent an envoy to Tang, but Tang remained in Yuzhou.

古文：一夕，折关遁归国，由是世为决狱官。
现代文：一天晚上，破关逃回国中，从此世代为决狱官。
English: One night, he broke out of prison and escaped back to China. From then on, he became a prison guard.

古文：敌鲁性宽厚，膂力绝人，习军旅事。
现代文：敌鲁性情宽仁厚道，力大过人，熟悉军事。
English: The enemy Lu has a generous and benevolent disposition, superior strength, and is familiar with military affairs.

古文：太祖潜藩，日侍左右，凡征讨必与行阵。
现代文：太祖在藩国未显时，每天伏侍左右，每逢征讨必定参与指挥布阵。
English: When the great-grandfather did not appear in the domain, he was around every day, and every time he was summoned, he would certainly participate in the command of the formation.

古文：既即位，敌鲁与弟阿古只、耶律释鲁、耶律曷鲁偕总宿卫。
现代文：即位之后，敌鲁与弟阿古只、耶律释鲁、耶律曷鲁一同主管宿卫。
English: After the enthronement, Chilu was in charge of the palace guards together with his brothers, Agudaku, Yerutoshiru, and Yerutoshiru.

古文：拜敌鲁北府宰相，世其官。
现代文：拜敌鲁为北府宰相，世代沿袭其官。
English: Baichulu was the prime minister of the northern prefecture, and his position was passed down from generation to generation.

古文：太祖征奚及讨刘守光，敌鲁略地海滨，杀获甚众。
现代文：太祖征讨奚人及讨伐刘守光，敌鲁在海滨攻城略地，斩首俘获甚众。
English: Emperor Taizu subdued the Xiongnu and Liu Shouguang, and the enemy Lu attacked the city on the seashore, beheading and capturing many people.

古文：顷之，剌葛等作乱，溃而北走。
现代文：不久，剌葛等作乱，溃败后北逃。
English: Soon after, Zou Ge and others started a riot and fled north after their defeat.

古文：敌鲁率轻骑追之，兼昼夜行。
现代文：萧敌鲁率轻骑追赶，昼夜兼程。
English: Xiao Qilu rode lightly to catch up, riding day and night.

古文：至榆河，败其党，获剌葛以献。
现代文：到榆河，击败剌葛党人，生俘剌葛献上。
English: He went to the Lugu River, defeated the Lugu Party members, and presented the captured Lugu fish to them.

古文：太祖嘉之，锡赉甚渥。
现代文：太祖大为嘉赏，赏赐十分优厚。
English: The great-grandfather was highly commended, and the reward was very generous.

古文：后讨西南夷，功居诸将先。
现代文：后来征讨西南夷，功劳居于诸将之首。
English: Later, the southwestern barbarians were subjugated, and it was the generals who received the credit for this.

古文：神册三年十二月卒。
现代文：神册三年十二月去世。
English: He passed away in December of that year.

古文：敌鲁有胆略，闻敌所在即驰赴，亲冒矢石，前后战未尝少恤，必胜乃止。以故在太祖功臣列，喻以手云。
现代文：敌鲁富有胆识和谋略，得悉敌人所在便即赶往，亲身冒着枪林弹雨，前后作战从不曾有些许畏惧退缩，一定要获胜才罢休，所以在太祖功臣之列中，被比拟为手。
English: He was full of daring and strategy. When he learned where the enemy was, he rushed there. He braved the hail of bullets himself. He was never afraid to fight back and forth. He would not stop until he won. Therefore, he was compared to a hand in the line of great ancestors.

古文：弟阿古只。
现代文：弟阿古只。
English: My brother, Ago, is the only one.

古文：阿古只，字撒本。
现代文：阿古只，字撒本。
English: Agudaku only, the words are scattered.

古文：少卓越自放不羁。
现代文：少时才能高超出众，自我放纵，不拘礼法。
English: Only when you're young can you rise above the crowd, be self-indulgent, and disregard etiquette.

古文：长骁勇善射，临敌敢前。
现代文：成年后，勇武骁强，擅长射箭，临阵一往无前。
English: After he became an adult, he was brave and stubborn, excelled at archery, and never looked back.

古文：每射甲楯辄洞贯。
现代文：每当射击甲盾时便能应弦洞穿。
English: It can pierce the chord hole whenever the shield is shot.

古文：太祖为于越时，以材勇充任使。
现代文：太祖为于越时，因为有材力且勇武，担任差事。
English: The great-grandfather was in charge of errands for the Viets, because he was resourceful and brave.

古文：既即位，与敌鲁总腹心部。
现代文：即位之后，阿古只跟萧敌鲁一道总揽腹心部。
English: After the enthronement, Ago only worked with Xiao Qilu to win the hearts of the people.

古文：剌葛之乱也，淳钦皇后军黑山，阻险自固。
现代文：剌葛之乱时，淳钦皇后驻军于黑山，依险自守。
English: At the time of the Hangeul Rebellion, Empress Junqin stationed troops in Montenegro, relying on danger to defend herself.

古文：太祖方经略奚地，命阿古只统百骑往卫之。
现代文：太祖正经营治理奚地，命令阿古只统领一百骑前往保卫。
English: The great-great-grandfather was in charge of the administration of the ploughed land, and ordered Ago to lead a hundred horsemen to defend it.

古文：逆党迭里特、耶律滑哥素惮其勇略，相戒曰： 是不可犯也！ 
现代文：逆党迭里特、耶律滑哥一向畏惧他勇武有谋略，互相告诫说 ：此人惹不起！ 
English: The rebels, Tsereteli and Yeruttyak, were always afraid of his bravery and cunning, and warned each other: "This man cannot be provoked!"

古文：剌葛既北走，与敌鲁追擒于榆河。
现代文：剌葛北逃之后，阿古只与敌鲁追赶并在榆河擒获了他。
English: After Gongge fled to the north, Agu only chased him with the enemy and caught him in the Minhe River.

古文：神册初元，讨西南夷有功；徇山西诸郡县，又下之，败周德威军。
现代文：神册元年，征讨西南夷，立有战功；在山西诸郡县攻城略地，又一一攻下，击败周德威军。
English: In the first year of the Book of God, the conquest of the Southwestern Yi was a great success; in Shanxi counties and counties, the city was besieged and attacked one by one, defeating the Zhou Dewei army.

古文：三年，以功拜北府宰相，世其职。
现代文：三年，因功拜为北府宰相，子孙世袭其职。
English: Three years later, he became the prime minister of Hokufu due to his merits, and his descendants inherited his position.

古文：天赞初，与王郁略地燕、赵，破磁窑镇。
现代文：天赞初年，与王郁掠地于燕、赵一带，攻破磁窑镇。
English: In the first year of Tianzan, he and Wang Yu raided the area around Yan and Zhao, and broke through the magnetic kiln town.

古文：太祖西征，悉诿以南面边事。
现代文：太祖西征，将南面边事全部托付给他。
English: The great-grandfather, Xi Zheng, entrusted all the southern border affairs to him.

古文：攻渤海，破扶余城，独将骑兵五百，败老相军三万。
现代文：攻渤海，破扶余城，独自率骑兵五百，击败老相军队三万。
English: He attacked the Bohai Sea, broke through and supported Yu City, led five hundred cavalry alone, and defeated the old army of thirty thousand.

古文：渤海既平，改东丹国。
现代文：渤海平定后，改为东丹国。
English: After the Bohai Sea was pacified, it was renamed Dongdan Province.

古文：顷之，已降郡县复叛，盗贼蜂起。
现代文：不久，已降附的郡县又反叛，盗贼纷起。
English: Soon, the counties and counties that had been annexed rebelled again, and thieves arose.

古文：阿古只与康默记讨之，所向披靡。
现代文：阿古只与康默记讨伐之，所向披靡。
English: Ago only fought with Kang Mei Ji, and was always victorious.

古文：会贼游骑七千自鸭渌府来援，势张甚。
现代文：适逢贼人游骑七千从鸭渌府前来增援，兵势十分嚣张。
English: At the right time, the bandits rode seven thousand reinforcements from Yaxuan Prefecture, and the troops were very arrogant.

古文：阿古只帅麾下精锐，直犯其锋，一战克之，斩馘三千余，遂进军破回跋城。
现代文：阿古只率部下精兵，径直击挫其兵锋，一战而胜，斩首俘虏三千余人，于是进军破回跋城。
English: Ago only led his elite soldiers, directly defeated his army, won the battle, beheaded more than three thousand captives, and then marched back to the city.

古文：以病卒。
现代文：因病去世。
English: He died of illness.

古文：功臣中喻阿古只为耳云。
现代文：功臣中将阿古只比拟为耳朵。
English: The meritorious Vice Admiral Ago is only likened to an ear.

古文：子安团，官至右皮室详稳。
现代文：子安团，官至右皮室详稳。
English: Zi'an group, officials to the right skin room, detailed and stable.

古文：耶律斜涅赤，字撒剌，六院部舍利褭古直之族。
现代文：耶律斜涅赤，字撒剌，六院部舍利袅古直之族人。
English: A member of the Gunao clan of the 6th Ward of the Sherrizan Convent.

古文：始字铎碗，早隶太祖幕下，尝有疾，赐樽酒饮而愈，辽言酒樽曰 撒剌 ，故诏易字焉。
现代文：初时字铎碗，先隶于太祖幕下，曾经生了病，太祖赐予他一樽酒，喝下便痊愈了，辽语酒樽称 撒剌 ，所以下诏让他改字撒剌。
English: At the beginning, the character 碗, first under the curtain of the great-grandfather, once fell ill, the great-grandfather gave him a barrel of wine, drank it and was cured, the Liao language called the wine barrel 撒, so the next edict let him change the word撒.

古文：太祖即位，掌腹心部。
现代文：太祖即位，掌管腹心部。
English: The great-grandfather ascended the throne and took charge of the inner circle.

古文：天赞初，分迭剌部为北、南院，斜涅赤为北院夷离堇。
现代文：天赞初年，分迭剌部为北、南院，斜涅赤为北院夷离堇。
English: In the first year of Tenzan, the North and South Divisions were divided into North and South Divisions, and the North Division was divided into North and South Divisions.

古文：帝西征至流沙，威声大振，诸夷溃散，乃命斜涅赤抚集之。
现代文：皇上西征到达流沙，声威大振，诸夷溃败逃散，于是命令斜涅赤招抚聚合之。
English: When the Emperor's Western Expedition arrived at the Quicksand, his prestige soared, and the barbarians were routed and dispersed. Therefore, he ordered Shani-Neha to bring them together.

古文：及讨渤海，破扶余城，斜涅赤从太子大元帅率众夜围忽汗城，大諲歙降。
现代文：待到讨伐渤海，攻破扶余城，斜涅赤跟随太子及大元帅率兵在夜里包围了忽汗城，大投降。
English: Waiting until the Battle of the Bohai Sea, defeating Buyeo City, Xian Rong accompanied the prince and the grand marshal and led the troops to surround the city of Hukang in the night, and surrendered.

古文：已而复叛，命诸将分地攻之。
现代文：不久又反叛，下令诸将分路攻打。
English: He soon rebelled again and ordered his generals to attack separately.

古文：诘旦，斜涅赤感励士伍，鼓噪登陴，敌震慑，莫敢御，遂破之。
现代文：次日，斜涅赤感奋激励士卒，大事鼓噪，一举登城，敌人震惊慑服，无人敢于抵抗，于是攻破了城池。
English: The next day, with a strong sense of inspiration and motivation, and with great fanfare, they entered the city in one fell swoop. The enemy was shocked and intimidated, and no one dared to resist, so they broke through the city.

古文：天显中卒，年七十，居佐命功臣之一。
现代文：天显年间去世，年七十岁，为佐命功臣之一。
English: He died at the age of seventy, during the Tengen era, and was one of the meritorious vassals of Satsumei.

古文：侄老古、颇德。
现代文：侄儿老古、颇德。
English: Nephew Lao Gu, Po De.

古文：老古，字撒懒，其母淳钦皇后姊也。
现代文：老古，字撒懒，其母亲为淳钦皇后的姐姐。
English: His mother was the elder sister of Queen Junqin.

古文：老古幼养宫掖，既长，沉毅有勇略，隶太祖帐下。
现代文：老古幼年时被养在宫廷之中，年长之后，沉着果断，富于勇武和谋略，隶属于太祖帐下。
English: When he was a child, Lao Gu was raised in the court. When he was older, he was calm and decisive, full of bravery and strategy, and was subordinate to his great-grandfather.

古文：既即位，屡有战功。
现代文：太祖即位之后，老古多次立有战功。
English: After the great-grandfather ascended the throne, Laogu repeatedly distinguished himself in battle.

古文：剌葛之乱也，欲乘我不备为掩袭计，绐降。
现代文：剌葛造乱，想要乘我方不备采用突袭之计，假意投降。
English: He tried to take advantage of our unpreparedness by making a surprise attack, pretending to surrender.

古文：太祖将纳之，命老古、耶律欲稳严号令，勒士卒，控辔以防其变。逆党知有备，惧而遁。
现代文：太祖准备纳降，命令老古、耶律欲稳严明号令，部勒士卒，加强防御以防止敌人又生变乱，逆党发现我方有备，害怕起来，便逃跑了。
English: The great-grandfather prepared to accept the surrender and ordered Lao Gu and Yerut to issue a strict order to strengthen the defense to prevent the enemy from creating chaos again. When the enemy found out that we were prepared, they got scared and fled.

古文：以功授右皮室详稳，典宿卫。
现代文：因功授为右皮室详稳，掌管宿卫。
English: Due to his merits, he was awarded the title of the right ward, in charge of the guards.

古文：太祖侵燕、赵，遇唐兵云碧店，老古恃勇轻敌，直犯其锋。
现代文：太祖进攻燕、赵，与唐军在云碧店遭遇，老古自恃勇武轻敌，径直干犯敌人兵锋。
English: The great-grandfather attacked Yan and Zhao, and encountered the Tang army at Yunbei. In ancient times, he prided himself on being brave and light against the enemy, and directly attacked the enemy soldiers.

古文：战久之，被数创，归营而卒。
现代文：久战不下，身受多处创伤，回到营里便去世了。
English: He fought for a long time, suffered multiple injuries, returned to the camp and died.

古文：太祖深悼惜之，佐命功臣其一也。
现代文：太祖十分痛悼怜惜，佐命功臣，老古位居其一。
English: The great-great-grandfather was greatly mourned and pitied, and his life as a meritorious vassal ranked first in ancient times.

古文：颇德，字兀古邻。
现代文：颇德，字兀古邻。
English: "Puo De" and "Zi Xuan" are old neighbors.

古文：弱冠事太祖。
现代文：未成年时事奉太祖。
English: Minors can serve their grandfathers.

古文：天显初，为左皮室详稳，典宿卫，迁南院夷离堇，治有声。
现代文：天显初年，任左皮室详稳，掌管宿卫，迁任南院夷离堇，治事颇有声誉。
English: In the first year of Tian Xian, he was appointed to the left leather room, in charge of the guards, and transferred to the Southern Court, where he had a good reputation.

古文：石敬瑭破张敬达军于太原北，时颇德勒兵为援，敬达遁。
现代文：石敬瑭击败张敬达军于太原北，当时颇德整兵加以增援，敬达逃走。
English: Shi Jingyao defeated Zhang Jingda's army in the north of Taiyuan. At that time, he was reinforced by the German army, and Jingda fled.

古文：敬瑭追至晋安寨围之，颇德领轻骑袭潞州，塞其饷道。
现代文：敬瑭追至晋安寨包围之，颇德率领轻骑兵袭击潞州，堵塞其粮饷道路。
English: After chasing Jing Yi to Jin Anzhai and encircling it, Pao De led the light cavalry to attack Zhangzhou and block its grain and grain roads.

古文：唐诸将惧，杀敬达以降。
现代文：唐诸将恐惧，杀张敬达出降。
English: Tang will be afraid, kill Zhang Jingda and surrender.

古文：会同初，改迭剌部夷离堇为大王，即拜颇德，既而加采访使。
现代文：会同初年，改迭剌部夷离堇名为大王，当下拜颇德为大王，后来又加采访使。
English: In the first year of the association, he changed his name from 部夷离 to 大王. At that time, he was called拜颇德, and later he was given the title of interview envoy.

古文：旧制，肃祖以下宗室称院，德祖宗室号三父房，称横帐，百官子弟及籍没人称著帐。
现代文：按旧制，肃祖以下宗室称院，德祖宗室号为三父房，称横帐，百官子弟及籍没之人称为著帐。
English: According to the old system, the ancestral house below Su Zu was called In, the ancestral house of De Zu below Su Zu was called San Chifu, and was called Heng Jie. The children of centurions and those who did not belong to any family were called Zhu Jie.

古文：耶律斜的言，横帐班列，不可与北、南院并。
现代文：耶律斜的说，横帐之官阶、品级，不能与北、南院相同。
English: According to the law, the official rank and grade of the accountant cannot be the same as that of the Northern and Southern Courts.

古文：太宗诏在廷议，皆曰然，乃诏横帐班列居上。
现代文：太宗诏令在朝廷上集议，都说是这样，于是下诏横帐品级位于北南院之上。
English: The Emperor Taizong's imperial edict was discussed in the imperial court, and it was all said to be so, so the next imperial edict was placed above the Northern and Southern Courts.

古文：颇德奏曰： 臣伏见官制，北、南院大王品在惕隐上。
现代文：颇德上奏说 ：臣伏见官制，北、南院大王品级在惕隐之上。
English: Pohodetsu Joso said, "Minister Fushimi is in charge of the government system, and the North and South Retired Emperors rank higher than the Emperor."

古文：今横帐始图爵位之高，愿与北、南院参任；兹又耻与同列。
现代文：横帐开始设置时贪图爵位之高，愿意与北、南院参合任用；现在又耻于与之同列。
English: At the beginning of the establishment, he coveted a high peerage and was willing to be appointed jointly with the Northern and Southern Courts; now he is ashamed to be ranked with them.

古文：夫横帐与诸族皆臣也，班列奚以异？ 
现代文：说起来横帐与诸族都是臣子，班次品级为什么要不同？ 
English: To put it bluntly, the yakuza and all ethnic groups are vassals, so why should class rank be any different?

古文：帝乃谕百官曰： 朕所不知，卿等不宜面从。 
现代文：皇上这才晓谕百官说： 朕不了解这些，你们不该当面附从。 
English: It was only then that the emperor told the officials: "I don't understand this, and you shouldn't follow me to my face.

古文：诏仍旧制。
现代文：诏令恢复旧制。
English: The imperial edict restored the old system.

古文：其强直不挠如此。
现代文：他就是这样刚强正直，不屈不挠。
English: That's how tough, honest and relentless he is.

古文：颇德状貌秀伟，初，太祖见之曰： 是子风骨异常儿，必为国器。 
现代文：颇德形貌俊秀魁伟，当初太祖见到他时说 ：此子风骨不同寻常，一定会成为治国之才。 
English: He was handsome, handsome, handsome. When the great-grandfather first saw him, he said, "This child has an unusual temperament and will surely become a talent for governing the country."

古文：后果然。
现代文：后来果真如此。
English: This later proved to be the case.

古文：卒年四十九。
现代文：终年四十九岁。
English: He was forty-nine years old.

古文：耶律欲稳，字辖剌干，突吕不部人。
现代文：耶律欲稳，字辖剌干，突吕不部人。
English: If you want to be stable, you have to be disciplined. If you want to be ruthless, you have to be ruthless.

古文：祖台押，遥辇时为北边拽剌。
现代文：祖父台押，在遥辇时任北边拽剌。
English: His grandfather, Tai Oshi, was in charge of pulling the rafts on the north side of the lake.

古文：简献皇后与诸子之罹难也，尝倚之以免。
现代文：简献皇后与诸子遭遇危难时，曾经靠他得以免祸。
English: When the Empress Jianqian and her sons were in danger, he was able to save them from disaster.

古文：太祖思其功不忘，又多欲稳严重有济世志，乃命典司近部，以遏诸族窥觊之想。
现代文：太祖追思其功劳不忘，又赞赏欲稳严肃稳重，有济世之志向，于是命他典司近部，以遏止诸族窥伺神器之念头。
English: The great-grandfather did not forget to think about his merits, but also appreciated the desire to be stable, serious and stable, and the aspiration to benefit the world, so he ordered his canonist to be nearby to stop the idea of all ethnic groups spying on the artifact.

古文：欲稳既见器重，益感奋思报。
现代文：欲稳受器重之后，更加感激奋发，想要报效皇恩。
English: After stabilizing the weight of the instrument, he was even more grateful and eager to repay the royal favor.

古文：太祖始置宫分以自卫，欲稳率门客首附宫籍。
现代文：太祖开始设置宫分以自卫，欲稳带领门客率先附于宫籍。
English: The great-grandfather began to set up a palace division for self-defense, and wanted to steadily lead the guests to attach themselves to the palace.

古文：帝益嘉其忠，诏以台押配享庙廷。
现代文：皇上更加嘉赏其忠心，诏令以台押配享朝廷。
English: The emperor appreciated his loyalty even more, and issued a decree that Taiwan should be allocated to the imperial court.

古文：及平剌葛等乱，以功迁奚迭剌部夷离堇。从征渤海有功。天显初卒。
现代文：待到平定剌葛等人的叛乱，因功迁任奚迭剌部夷离堇，随同出征渤海立有战功，天显初年去世。
English: He waited until the rebellion of Xing Ge and others was put down, and because of his meritorious service, he was transferred to the Second Division of the Second Division of the Second Division of the Second Division of the Second Division of the Second Division of the First Division of the Second Division of the Second Division of the Second Division of the Second Division of the First Division of the Second Division of the Second Division of the First Division of the Second Division of the Second Division of the First Division of the Second Division of the Second Division of the Second Division of the First Division of the Second Division of the Second Division of the Second Division of the Second Division of the Second Division of the Second Division of the Second Division of the Second Division of

古文：后诸帝以太祖之与欲稳也为故，往往取其子孙为友。宫分中称 八房 ，皆其后也。
现代文：后世诸帝因太祖与欲稳也为故人，往往选择跟他的子孙交友，宫分中有称 八房 者，都是其后代。
English: Later generations of emperors, because their great-grandfathers were also deceased, often chose to make friends with his children and grandchildren. Among the princes of the Imperial Court, those known as the Eight Families were all his descendants.

