古文：晋文王功德盛大，坐席严敬，拟于王者。
现代文：晋文王司马昭功勋卓著，恩德深厚，座上客人在他面前都很严肃庄重，把他比拟为王。
English: Sima Zhao, the king of the Jin Dynasty, was a man of outstanding achievements and deep benevolence. The guests at the table were very serious and solemn in front of him, likening him to a king.

古文：唯阮籍在坐，箕踞啸歌，酣放自若。
现代文：只有阮籍伸开两腿坐着，吹哨唱歌，痛饮放纵，不改常态。
English: Only Nguyn Quc sat with his legs stretched out, whistling and singing, indulging in hard drinking and not changing his normal state.

古文：王戎弱冠诣阮籍，时刘公荣在坐。阮谓王曰： 偶有二斗美酒，当与君共饮。彼公荣者，无预焉。 
现代文：王戎青年时代去拜访阮籍，这时刘公荣也在座，阮籍对王戎说： 碰巧有两斗好酒，该和您一起喝，那个公荣不要参加进来。 
English: When Wang Rong was young, he went to visit Nguyn Quc. At that time, Liu Gong Rong was also present. Nguyn Quc said to Wang Rong: It happens that there are two barrels of good wine. You should drink it with him. That Nguyn Quc should not come in.

古文：二人交觞酬酢，公荣遂不得一杯。而言语谈戏，三人无异。
现代文：两人频频举杯，互相敬酒，刘公荣始终得不到一杯；可是三个人言谈耍笑，和平常一样。
English: The two of them frequently raised their glasses and toasted each other, but Liu Gong Rong never got a glass; however, the three of them chatted and laughed, as usual.

古文：或有问之者，阮答曰： 胜公荣者，不得不与饮酒；不如公荣者，不可不与饮酒；唯公荣，可不与饮酒。 
现代文：有人问阮籍为什么这样做，阮籍回答说： 胜过公荣的人，我不能不和他一起喝酒；比不上公荣的人，又不可不和他一起喝酒；只有公荣这个人，可以不和他一起喝酒。 
English: When asked why he did this, Nguyn Quc replied, "I can't refuse to drink with anyone who is better than Qung Rng; I can't refuse to drink with anyone who is less than Qung Rng; and I can't refuse to drink with anyone who is Qung Rng."

古文：钟士季精有才理，先不识嵇康。钟要于时贤俊之士，俱往寻康。
现代文：钟士季精明且才思敏捷，先前不认识嵇康；他邀请当时一些才德出众人士一起去寻访嵇康。
English: Zhong Shiji, a shrewd and quick-witted man, had not previously known Jikang; he invited some outstanding talents at that time to go and search for Jikang.

古文：康方大树下锻，向子期为佐鼓排。
现代文：碰上嵇康正在大树下打铁，向子期正在打下手帮他拉风箱。
English: When we met, Yan Kang was working under a big tree, and Xiang Zi was helping him to pull the bellows.

古文：康扬槌不辍，傍若无人，移时不交一言。
现代文：嵇康继续挥动铁槌，旁若无人一直没有停下，过了好久也不和钟士季说一句话。
English: Yan Kang continued to wave the hammer, and if no one stopped by, he did not say a word to Zhong Shiji for a long time.

古文：钟起去，康曰： 何所闻而来？
现代文：钟士季起身要走，嵇康才问他： 听到了什么才来的？
English: When Zhong Shiji got up to leave, Yan Kang asked him: What did you just hear?

古文：何所见而去？ 
现代文：看到了什么才走的？ 
English: What did you see before you left?

古文：钟曰： 闻所闻而来，见所见而去。 
现代文：钟士季说： 听到了所听到的才来，看到了所看到的才走。 
English: Zhong Shijie said: I only come when I hear what I hear, and only leave when I see what I see.

古文：嵇康与吕安善，每一相思，千里命驾。
现代文：嵇康和吕安关系很好，每当想念对方的时候，即使相隔千里，也会立刻动身去见对方。
English: Yan Kang and Lu An have a good relationship. Whenever they miss each other, even if they are thousands of miles apart, they will immediately set off to see each other.

古文：安后来，值康不在，喜出户延之，不入。题门上作 凤 字而去。
现代文：后来有一次，吕安来看嵇康，正碰上嵇康不在家，嵇喜出门来邀请他进去，吕安不肯，只在门上题了个 凤 字就走了。
English: Later, on one occasion, Lu An came to see Gong Kang. He happened to come across Gong Kang who was not at home. Gong Xi went out to invite him in. Lu An refused and only wrote "feng" on the door before leaving.

古文：喜不觉，犹以为欣，故作。 凤 字，凡鸟也。
现代文：嵇喜没有醒悟过来，还因此感到高兴。所以写个凤字，是因为它分开来就成了凡鸟。
English: He didn't come to his senses, and he was happy about it. So he wrote a phoenix, because it became an ordinary bird when it was separated.

古文：陆士衡初入洛，咨张公所宜诣；刘道真是其一。
现代文：陆士衡初到京都洛阳，向张华询问应该去拜访哪些人，张华提出刘宝是其中一位。
English: When Lu Shiheng first arrived in Kyoto Luoyang, he asked Zhang Hua which people he should visit. Zhang Hua said that Liu Bao was one of them.

古文：陆既往，刘尚在哀制中。性嗜酒，礼毕，初无他言，唯问： 东吴有长柄壶卢，卿得种来不？ 
现代文：陆机前去拜访时，刘道真还在守孝，他生性喜欢喝酒；行过见面礼，并没有谈别的话，只是问： 东吴有一种长柄葫芦，你带来种子没有？ 
English: When the land plane went to visit, Liu Daozhen was still in filial piety, he likes to drink by nature; after the meeting ceremony, he did not talk about anything else, but asked: Dongwu has a long-stemmed gourd, did you bring seeds?

古文：陆兄弟殊失望，乃悔往。
现代文：陆家兄弟俩特别失望，后悔不该去这一趟。
English: The Lu brothers were particularly disappointed, regretting that they should not have made the trip.

古文：王平子出为荆州，王太尉及时贤送者倾路。
现代文：王平子要外调任荆州刺史，太尉王衍和当代名流全都来送行。
English: Wang Pingzi is to be transferred to Jingzhou, and Wang Yan and contemporary celebrities are all coming to see him off.

古文：时庭中有大树，上有鹊巢。
现代文：当时院子里有棵大树，树上有个喜鹊窝。
English: At the time, there was a large tree in the yard with a magpie nest in it.

古文：平子脱衣巾，径上树取鹊子。凉衣拘阂树枝，便复脱去。
现代文：王平子脱去上衣和头巾，干脆爬上树去掏小喜鹊，汗衫挂住树枝，就再脱掉。
English: Wang Pingzi takes off his jacket and headscarf, climbs up the tree to pick up a small magpie, hangs his shirt on a branch, and then takes it off again.

古文：得鹊子还，下弄，神色自若，傍若无人。
现代文：掏到了小鹊，又下树来继续玩弄，神态自若，旁若无人。
English: He pulled out a small beak and came down from the tree to continue playing with it, looking like he was enjoying himself, as if no one was around.

古文：高坐道人于丞相坐，恒偃卧其侧。
现代文：高坐和尚在丞相王导家做客，常常是仰卧在王导身旁。
English: The high-seated monk was a guest at the home of the chancellor, Wang Du, and often lay on his back next to Wang Du.

古文：见卞令，肃然改容云： 彼是礼法人。 
现代文：见到尚书令卞壸，就马上神态恭敬端庄，说道： 他是讲究礼法的人。 
English: When he saw Shang Shuling, he immediately assumed a respectful and dignified demeanor and said: He is a person who pays attention to etiquette.

古文：桓宣武作徐州，时谢奕为晋陵。先粗经虚怀，而乃无异常。
现代文：桓温任徐州刺史，这时谢奕任扬州晋陵郡太守，起初两人在交往中略为留意谦虚退让，而没有不同寻常的交情。
English: When Huan Wen was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou and Xie Yi was appointed as the governor of Jinling County in Yangzhou, the two initially showed some attention to modesty and concession in their dealings, but there was no unusual friendship.

古文：及桓还荆州，将西之间，意气甚笃，奕弗之疑。
现代文：到桓温调任荆州刺史，将要西去赴任之际，桓温对谢奕的情意就特别深厚了，谢奕对此也没有什么猜测。
English: When Kuan Wen was transferred to Jingzhou and was about to leave for the west, his feelings for Xie Yi were particularly deep. Xie Yi had no idea about this.

古文：唯谢虎子妇王悟其旨。每曰： 桓荆州用意殊异，必与晋陵俱西矣！ 
现代文：只有谢虎子的妻子王氏领会了桓温的意图，常常说： 桓荆州用意很特别，一定要和晋陵一起西行了。 
English: Only Xie Huo Zi's wife Wang Shizhu understood the intention of Huan Wen, and often said: Huan Jingzhou is very special, and must go west with Jinling.

古文：俄而引奕为司马。
现代文：不久就任用谢奕做司马。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to be the Sima with Xie Yi.

古文：奕既上，犹推布衣交。在温坐，岸帻啸咏，无异常日。宣武每曰： 我方外司马。 
现代文：谢奕到荆州以后，还很看重和桓温的老交情，到桓温那里作客，头巾戴得很随便，长啸吟唱，和往常没有什么不同。桓温常说： 是我的世外司马。 
English: After Xie Yi arrived in Jingzhou, he still valued his old friendship with Huan Wen. When he was a guest of Huan Wen, he wore his turban very casually and sang loudly, which was no different from usual. Huan Wen often said, "He is my world-famous Sima."

古文：遂因酒，转无朝夕礼。
现代文：谢奕终于因为好喝酒，越发违反晋见上级的礼节。
English: Finally, because Xie Yi liked to drink, he increasingly violated the etiquette of his superiors.

古文：桓舍入内，奕辄复随去。
现代文：桓温如果丢下他走进内室，谢奕总是又跟进去。
English: If Kuan Wen left him and went into the inner room, Xie Yi would always follow him in.

古文：后至奕醉，温往主许避之。
现代文：后来一到谢奕喝醉时，桓温就到公主那里去躲开他。
English: Later, as soon as Xie Yi got drunk, Kuan Wen went to the princess to avoid him.

古文：主曰： 君无狂司马，我何由得相见？ 
现代文：公主说： 您如果没有一个放荡的司马，我怎么能见到您呢！ 
English: The princess said, "How can I see you if you don't have a wild horse?"

古文：谢万在兄前，欲起索便器。
现代文：谢万在兄长面前，想起身找便壶。
English: In front of his brother, Xie Wan remembered to find a potty.

古文：于时阮思旷在坐曰： 新出门户，笃而无礼。 
现代文：当时阮思旷在座，说： 新兴的门第，真是粗率无礼。 
English: Nguyn Sn Quang, who was present at the time, said: "The emerging market is really rude.

古文：谢中郎是王蓝田女婿，尝箸白纶巾，肩舆径至扬州听事见王，直言曰： 人言君侯痴，君侯信自痴。 蓝田曰： 非无此论，但晚令耳。 王子猷作桓车骑骑兵参军，桓问曰： 卿何署？ 
现代文：王述说道： 并非没有这种说法，不过后来我就变得聪明了。 王徽之任车骑将军桓冲的骑兵参军。
English: Wang Shu said: "It is not without this kind of saying, but later I became wise. Wang Hui's cavalry, which was assigned to drive and ride the general, joined the army.

古文：答曰： 不知何署，时见牵马来，似是马曹。 
现代文：一次桓冲问他： 你在哪个官署办公？ 他回答说： 不知是什么官署，只是常常看见有人牵马进来，好像是马曹吧。 
English: He answered, "I don't know what government office it is, but I often see someone coming in with a horse, I think it's Marco."

古文：桓又问： 官有几马？ 
现代文：桓冲又问： 那你知道官府里有多少马吗？ 
English: Kanshu also asked: Do you know how many horses there are in the government?

古文：答曰： 不问马，何由知其数？ 又问： 马比死多少？ 
现代文：他回答说： 我不过问马，怎么知道马的数引 桓冲又问： 那近来马死了多少？ 
English: He replied, "I just ask the horse, how do I know the horse's number?" Han Chong asked again, "How many horses have died recently?"

古文：答曰： 未知生，焉知死？ 
现代文：他回答说： 活着的还不知道，哪能知道死的！ 
English: He answered, "The living don't know, and the dead don't know.

古文：谢公尝与谢万共出西，过吴郡。阿万欲相与共萃王恬许，太傅云： 恐伊不必酬汝，意不足尔！ 
现代文：谢安曾经和谢万一起坐船到京都去，过吴郡时，谢万想和谢安一起到王恬那里，太傅谢安说： 恐怕他不一定理睬你，我看不值得去拜访他。 
English: Xie An once took a boat to Kyoto with Xie Wan. When they passed through Wu County, Xie Wan wanted to go to Wang Yao with Xie An. Taifu Xie An said, "I'm afraid he won't necessarily pay attention to you. I don't think it's worth visiting him."

古文：万犹苦要，太傅坚不回，万乃独往。
现代文：谢万还是极力邀哥哥一起去，谢安坚决不改变主意，谢万只好一个人去。
English: Xie Wan still strongly invited his brother to go with him. Xie An resolutely did not change his mind, and Xie Wan had to go alone.

古文：坐少时，王便入门内，谢殊有欣色，以为厚待已。
现代文：到王恬家坐了一会儿，王恬就进里面去了，谢万显得非常高兴，以为会优礼相待。
English: After sitting for a while at Wang Yao's house, Wang Yao went inside. Xie Wan appeared very happy, thinking that he would be treated with courtesy.

古文：良久，乃沐头散发而出，亦不坐，仍据胡床，在中庭晒头，神气傲迈，了无相酬对意。
现代文：过了很久，王恬竟洗完头披着头发出来，也不陪客人坐，就坐在马扎儿上，在院子里晒头发，神情傲慢而放纵，一点也没有应酬客人的意思。
English: After a long time, Wang Yao actually washed his head and came out with his hair covered. Instead of sitting with the guests, he sat on a cushion and shaved his hair in the courtyard. He was arrogant and indulgent, and had no intention of entertaining the guests.

古文：谢于是乃还。未至船，逆呼太傅。
现代文：谢万于是只好回去，还没有回到船上，先就大声喊他哥哥。
English: So Xie Van had to go back. Before he got back on the boat, he shouted for his brother.

古文：安曰： 阿螭不作尔！ 
现代文：谢安说： 阿螭不会做作啊。 
English: Xie'an said, "Ama can't fake it."

古文：王子猷作桓车骑参军。
现代文：王徽之任车骑将军桓冲的参军。
English: Wang Hui's appointment as chariot and cavalry general Kanchong's joining the army.

古文：桓谓王曰： 卿在府久，比当相料理。 
现代文：桓冲对他说： 你到府中已经很久了，近日内应该处理政务了。 
English: Kancho said to him, "You have been in the prefectural government for a long time, and you should be handling government affairs within the next few days.

古文：初不答，直高视，以手版拄颊云： 西山朝来，致有爽气。 
现代文：王徽之并没有回答，只是看着远处，用手板支着腮帮子说： 西山早晨很有一股清爽的空气呀。 
English: Wang Huizhi didn't answer, he just looked into the distance, propped up his shovel with a hand board and said, "There's a lot of fresh air in the morning in Xishan."

古文：谢万北征，常以啸咏自高，未尝抚慰众士。
现代文：谢万北伐的时候，常常以长啸歌咏来表示自己清正严明，从来不去安抚和慰问手下的将士。
English: When Xie Wan was on the Northern Expedition, he often sang long and loud songs to show that he was upright and strict, and never tried to appease and comfort his soldiers.

古文：谢公甚器爱万，而审其必败，乃俱行。
现代文：谢安非常喜欢和欣赏谢万，却料定他一定会失败，就和他一同出征。
English: Xie An liked and admired Xie Wan very much, but he was sure that he would fail, so he went out with him.

古文：从容谓万曰： 汝为元帅，宜数唤诸将宴会，以说众心。 
现代文：谢安从容不迫地对谢万说： 你身为主帅，应该常常请将领们来宴饮、聚会，以此来笼络大家的心。 
English: Xie An calmly said to Xie Wan: As the head coach, you should often invite generals to banquets and gatherings to win everyone's hearts.

古文：万从之。因召集诸将，都无所说，直以如意指四坐云： 诸君皆是劲卒。 
现代文：谢万答应了，就召集众将领来，可是并没有多说什么，只是拿如意指着满座的人说： 你们都是很精壮的士兵。 
English: Xie Wan agreed and called for the generals to come, but he did not say much, just pointed to the full house and said: You are all very strong soldiers.

古文：谢公欲深箸恩信，自队主将帅以下，无不身造，厚相逊谢。
现代文：所有的将领听了更加怨恨他了。谢安对众将领多施恩惠以笼络人心，不管是多大的将领，他都亲自登门拜访，非常真诚地表示歉意。
English: All the generals became even more resentful of him. Xie An did a lot of favors to the generals to win their hearts. No matter how big the generals were, he personally visited them and sincerely apologized.

古文：及万事败，军中因欲除之。复云： 当为隐士。 
现代文：到谢万北伐失败后，军队内部将士们想要找机会杀掉谢万，后来又说： 应该为隐士谢安考虑一下。 
English: After the failure of Xie Wan's northern expedition, the soldiers in the army wanted to find an opportunity to kill Xie Wan, and later said: We should think about the hermit Xie An.

古文：故幸而得免。
现代文：所以谢万能侥幸地免掉一死。
English: As a result, Xie Wannen narrowly escaped death.

古文：王子敬兄弟见郗公，蹑履问讯，甚修外生礼。
现代文：王子敬兄弟去见郗愔，都要穿好鞋子去问候，很遵守外甥的礼节。
English: The prince respected his brother's etiquette when they went to meet the emperor, and they both had to wear good shoes to greet him.

古文：及嘉宾死，皆箸高屐，仪容轻慢。
现代文：到郗嘉宾死后，去见郗愔时都穿着高底木板鞋，态度轻慢。
English: After the death of Zou Jiabin, when he went to see Zou, he wore high-soled wooden shoes and had a light-hearted attitude.

古文：命坐，皆云 有事，不暇坐。 
现代文：郗惜叫他们坐，都说： 有事，没时间坐。 
English: Unfortunately, when I asked them to sit down, they all said, "We have things to do, we don't have time to sit down."

古文：既去，郗公慨然曰： 使嘉宾不死，鼠辈敢尔！ 
现代文：他们走后，都情感慨地说： 如果嘉宾不死，鼠辈敢这样！ 
English: After they left, they all said with emotion: If the guest does not die, the mice dare not do so!

古文：王子猷尝行过吴中，见一士大夫家，极有好竹。
现代文：王徽之到外地去，途中经过吴中，他知道附近的一个士大夫家有个很好的竹园。
English: When Wang Huizhi went abroad, he passed Wu Middle School on the way. He knew that a nearby scholar's family had a very good bamboo garden.

古文：主已知子猷当往，乃洒埽施设，在听事坐相待。
现代文：竹园主人也已经知道王徽之会来，就命人好好地洒扫园子，并准备设宴款待，在正厅里坐着等他。
English: The owner of the bamboo garden already knew that Wang Hui's party was coming, so he ordered someone to sweep the garden well, and prepared to set up a banquet and wait for him in the main hall.

古文：王肩舆径造竹下，讽啸良久。主已失望，犹冀还当通，遂直欲出门。
现代文：王徽之却坐着轿子直接来到竹园里，讽诵长啸了很久，主人已经很失望了，还希望他会来和自己打个招呼，可是他竟然直接出门就走。
English: Wang Huizhi, however, came directly to the bamboo garden in a palanquin and chanted for a long time. The owner was very disappointed and hoped that he would come to say hello to him, but he actually went straight out the door.

古文：主人大不堪，便令左右闭门不听出。
现代文：主人实在忍受不了，就叫手下的人去关了大门，不让他出去。
English: The owner couldn't stand it any longer, so he had his men close the gate and wouldn't let him out.

古文：王更以此赏主人，乃留坐，尽欢而去。
现代文：王徽之因此赏识主人，就留步坐下，尽情欢乐了一番才走。
English: Wang Huizhi appreciated his host for this, and sat down to enjoy himself before leaving.

古文：王子敬自会稽经吴，闻顾辟疆有名园。先不识主人，径往其家，值顾方集宾友酣燕。
现代文：王献之从会稽郡经过吴郡，听说顾辟疆有个名园，原先并不认识这个名园的主人，但还是径直到人家府上去。
English: Wang Xianzhi was passing through Wu County on his way from Hefei County. He heard that there was a famous garden in Gu Beijiang. He did not know the owner of this famous garden, but he still went all the way to the person's house.

古文：而王游历既毕，指麾好恶，傍若无人。
现代文：碰上顾辟疆正和宾客朋友设宴畅饮，王献之观赏完整个花园后，只在那里指点评论优劣，旁若无人。
English: When I met Gu Bijian and his guests and friends, they were having a banquet and enjoying a drink. After Wang Xizhi had finished viewing the entire garden, he only pointed out and commented on the merits and demerits, and no one else was around.

古文：顾勃然不堪曰： 傲主人，非礼也；以贵骄人，非道也。
现代文：顾辟疆脸色大变，非常生气，忍受不住说道： 对主人傲慢，这是失礼；靠地位高贵来做视别人，这是无理。
English: Gu Bijian's face changed dramatically, he was very angry, and he could not bear to say: It is rude to be arrogant to the host; it is unreasonable to rely on the noble status to treat others.

古文：失此二者，不足齿人，伧耳！ 
现代文：失去了这两方面，这种人是不值得一提的伧父罢了！ 
English: Deprived of these two aspects, such a person is nothing more than an abusive father, not worth mentioning!

古文：便驱其左右出门。
现代文：就把他的随从赶出门去。
English: And he drove his servants out of the house.

古文：王独在舆上回转，顾望左右移时不至，然后令送箸门外，怡然不屑。
现代文：王献之独自坐在轿子里，左顾右盼，随从很久也不来。然后顾辟疆叫人把他送到门外，对他但然自若，置之不理。
English: Wang Xianzhi sat alone in the palanquin, looking from side to side, and his attendants did not come for a long time. Then, he asked Gu Beijiang to send someone to take him outside the gate, but they ignored him.

