古文：李项生王义方何让之沈东美杨伯成叶法善刘甲李参军
现代文：李项生王义方何让之沈东美杨伯成叶法善刘甲李参军
English: Li Xiangsheng, Wang Yifang, Shen Dongmei, Yang Bo, Chengye, Fa Shan, Liu Jia and Li join the army

古文：李项生
现代文：李项生
English: Li Xiangsheng

古文：唐垂拱初，谯国公李崇义男项生染病。其妻及女于侧侍疾。
现代文：唐朝垂拱年初，谯国公李崇义的儿子李项生生病，他的妻子和女儿在身边侍候。
English: At the beginning of the year of the Tang Dynasty, Li Xiangsheng, the son of Li Chongyi, the Duke of Xing, fell ill. His wife and daughter were waiting for him.

古文：忽有一狐，从项生被中走出。
现代文：忽然有一只狐狸从李项生的被窝里钻出来，顷刻间就不见了。
English: Suddenly, a fox emerged from Li Xiangsheng's bed and disappeared in an instant.

古文：出《五行记》
现代文：几天之后，李项生死了。
English: A few days later, Li Xiang was born and died.

古文：王义方
现代文：王义方
English: Wang Yifang

古文：唐前御史王义方黜莱州司户参军，去官归魏州，以讲授为业。
现代文：唐朝前御史王义方被罢黜了莱州司户参军，离开官位回到魏州，以讲授学业为职业。
English: Wang Yifang, the pre-eminent historian of the Tang Dynasty, was deposed from his post as governor of Laizhou and joined the army. He left his post and returned to Wei Province to teach school as his profession.

古文：时乡人郭无为颇有术，教义方使野狐。
现代文：当时乡里有个叫郭无为的人很有道术，他教王义方使用狐狸。
English: At that time, there was a man in the village named Guo Muei, who was very good at martial arts. He taught Wang Yifang how to use a fox.

古文：义方虽能呼得之，不伏使，却被群狐竞来恼。每掷瓦甓以击义方。
现代文：王义方虽然能把狐狸呼唤出来，但是狐狸不听使唤，还遭到群狐的强烈反抗，常常扔瓦片袭击他。
English: Although Wang Yifang was able to call the fox out, the fox did not listen to the call, and was also strongly resisted by the foxes, often throwing tiles at him.

古文：或正诵读，即袭碎其书。闻空中有声云： 有何神术，而欲使我乎？ 
现代文：有时候他正在诵读，就扯裂他的书，听到空中有声音说： 你有什么神术，就想要使唤我呢？ 
English: Sometimes, when he was reading, he would tear open his book and hear a voice in the air saying: "What magic do you have that you want to use on me?"

古文：义方竟不能禁止。
现代文：王义方到底不能禁止它们。
English: Wang Yifang can't ban them after all.

古文：无何而卒。何让之
现代文：不久他就死了。何让之
English: He died soon after.

古文：唐神龙中，庐江何让之赴洛。遇上巳日，将陟老君庙，瞰洛中游春冠盖。
现代文：唐朝神龙年间，庐江的何让之到洛阳去，赶上一个三月三，就去登老君庙，俯视洛阳城中人们游春衣帽纷呈车盖连连的景象。
English: During the reign of Emperor Shenlong of the Tang Dynasty, He Zhenzhi of the Li River went to Luoyang. On March 3, he went to the Laojun Temple and looked down on the scene of people in Luoyang wearing spring jackets and hats.

古文：庙之东北二百余步，有大丘三四，时亦号后汉诸陵。
现代文：庙的东北二百多步的地方，有三四个大坟丘，当时叫做后汉诸陵。
English: More than two hundred paces northeast of the temple, there are three or four large burial mounds, which at that time were called the Hun tombs.

古文：故张孟阳七哀诗云： 恭文遥相望，原陵郁膴膴。 
现代文：所以张孟阳《七哀》诗说： 恭文遥相望，原陵郁膴膴。 
English: Therefore, Zhang Mengyang's "Seven Lamentations" poem said: "Compliments are far away from each other, and the original mausoleum is beautiful."

古文：原陵即光武陵。
现代文：原陵就是光武陵。
English: The original mausoleum is the Guangwu Mausoleum.

古文：一陵上独有枯柏三四枝，其下盘石，可容数十人坐。
现代文：有一座陵墓上独特地长着几棵枯柏，那下边是盘石，可容下几十人坐在那里。
English: There is a mausoleum with a few unique dead cypress trees on top, and a slab of stone below, which can accommodate dozens of people sitting there.

古文：见一翁，姿貌有异常辈。
现代文：那里现在坐着一位老头。
English: An old man is sitting there now.

古文：眉鬓皓然，著賨幪巾襦裤，帻乌纱，抱膝南望，吟曰： 野田荆棘春，闺阁绮罗新。
现代文：这老头的神态相貌与一般老头不大一样。他的眉毛、鬓发都白了，穿的是当时最时髦的布料做成的衣裤，头顶乌纱，抱着膝向南瞭望。他吟诵道： 野田荆棘春，闺阁绮罗新。
English: The appearance of this old man is not the same as that of an ordinary old man. His eyebrows and hair are white, he is wearing trousers made of the most fashionable fabric at the time, his head is covered with black tulle, and he is looking south while holding his knees. He chants: "Noda is full of thorns, the boudoir is full of new things."

古文：出没头上日，生死眼前人。
现代文：出没头上日，生死眼前人。
English: Appear on the first day, life and death before our eyes.

古文：欲知我家在何处，北邙松柏正为邻。 
现代文：欲知我家在何处，北邙松柏正为邻。 
English: If you want to know where my home is, the Beilun pines and cypresses are right next door.

古文：俄有一贵戚，金翠车舆。
现代文：何让之又望见一位贵戚。
English: It's great to see a precious relative again.

古文：如花之婢数十，连袂笑乐而出徽安门，抵榆林店。
现代文：这位贵戚的车子金翠辉映，前后有几十个如花似玉的婢女，她们衣袖相连地说笑着从徽安门里走出来。贵戚来到榆林店。
English: The chariot of this noble relative, Jin Cuihuiying, was preceded and followed by dozens of flower-like maidservants, who walked out of the Hui'an Gate with their sleeves linked, talking and laughing. The noble relative came to the Yulin store.

古文：又睇中桥之南北，垂杨拂于天津，繁花明于上苑。紫禁绮陌，轧乱香尘。
现代文：又望视中桥南北。垂杨在高空飘拂，繁花在上苑开放，紫禁宫中绮丽的小路上，车子轧乱了香尘。
English: He also looked north and south of the Middle Bridge. Hanging poplars fluttered in the sky, flowers bloomed in the Upper Garden, and the car rolled on the beautiful path in the Forbidden Palace, stirring up the incense dust.

古文：让之方叹栖迟，独行踽踽，已讶前吟翁非人，翁忽又吟曰： 洛阳女儿多，无奈孤翁老去何？ 
现代文：何让之正在感叹歇息，踽踽独行，已经惊讶前面吟诗的老头不是非常人。老头忽然又吟道： 洛阳女儿多，无奈狐翁老去何。 
English: What made him sighing for a rest, walking alone, already surprised that the old man chanting in front of him was not very human. The old man suddenly chanted again: Luoyang has many daughters, but what will the fox do?

古文：让之遽欲前执，翁倏然跃于丘中，让之从焉。
现代文：何让之急忙上前想要捉住他。只见他倏地就跳进坟丘里了。何让之也跟了进去。
English: He hurried forward to catch him, but when he saw him, he jumped into the mound. He followed him in.

古文：初入丘，曛黑不辨，其逐翁已复本形矢。
现代文：坟丘里很昏暗，看不清东西。何让之追赶的那个老头已经恢复了原形。
English: It's very dark in the mound, and I can't see anything clearly. The old man I was chasing has regained his original form.

古文：遂见一狐跳出，尾有火焰如流星。
现代文：于是就有一只狐狸跳出来。狐狸的尾巴上有流星一样的火花。
English: Then a fox jumped out, with meteor-like sparks on its tail.

古文：让之却出玄堂之外。
现代文：何让之也退到玄堂外边来。
English: He retreated to the outside of the hall.

古文：门东有一筵已空。
现代文：门东有筵席，已经空了。
English: There was a table to the east of the door, but it was empty.

古文：让之见一几案，上有朱盏笔砚之类，有一帖文书，纸尽惨灰色，文字则不可晓解。
现代文：何让之看到席上有一张几案，几案上有红色小杯、笔墨之类的东西，还有一帖文书。文书的纸全都是惨灰色的，上边的文字已经不能辨认。
English: On the table, there was a pile of cases, some of which had small red cups, pen and ink and the like, as well as a pile of paperwork. The paper of the paperwork was all a gloomy grey, and the writing on the top was unrecognisable.

古文：略记可辨者。
现代文：现将略微可辨的记在下面。
English: A slightly different account is given below.

古文：其一云： 正色鸿焘，神思化代。
现代文：其一是： 正色鸿焘，神思化代。
English: On the one hand, it is: the positive color is bright, and the spirit is transmuted.

古文：穹施后承，光负玄设。
现代文：穹施后承，光负玄设。
English: The dome is the result, the light is the result.

古文：呕沦吐萠，垠倪散截。
现代文：呕沦吐萠，垠倪散截。
English: Vomit, vomit, vomit, vomit.

古文：迷肠郗曲，霨零霾曀。
现代文：迷肠郗曲，霨零霾曀。
English: There is no mist, there is no fog.

古文：雀燬龟冰，健驰御屈。
现代文：雀燬龟冰，健驰御屈。
English: The sparrow flies, the turtle freezes, the horse gallops and the horse bends.

古文：拿尾研动，袾袾晰晰。
现代文：拿尾研动，袾袾晰晰。
English: Take the tail and study it, and you will see clearly.

古文：□用秘功，以岭以穴。
现代文：□用秘功，以岭以穴。
English: □ Use secret techniques and go from strength to strength.

古文：柂薪伐药，莽榤万茁。
现代文：柂薪伐药，莽榤万茁。
English: Lumbering medicine, reckless all the way.

古文：呕律则祥，佛伦惟萨。
现代文：呕律则祥，佛伦惟萨。
English: The rule of law is good, but the rule of law is bad.

古文：牡虚无有，颐咽蕊屑。
现代文：牡虚无有，颐咽蕊屑。
English: It's nothing, it's pharyngeal detritus.

古文：肇素未来，晦明兴灭。 
现代文：肇素未来，晦明兴灭。 
English: Caused by the future, the rise and fall of the past.

古文：其二辞曰： 五行七曜，成此闰余。
现代文：其二是： 五行七曜，成此闰余。
English: The second is: Five lines, seven days, make this a leap year.

古文：上帝降灵，岁旦涒徐。
现代文：上帝降灵，岁旦涒徐。
English: God willing, the years will pass slowly.

古文：蛇蜕其皮，吾亦神摅。
现代文：蛇蜕其皮，吾亦神摅。
English: A snake sheds its skin, and so does a god.

古文：九九六六，束身天除。
现代文：九九六六，束身天除。
English: In 1996, he was excommunicated.

古文：何以充喉，吐纳太虚。
现代文：何以充喉，吐纳太虚。
English: Don't choke, it's too weak.

古文：何以蔽踝？霞袂云袽。
现代文：何以蔽踝，霞袂云袽。
English: Why cover your ankles?

古文：哀尔浮生，栉比荒墟。
现代文：哀尔浮生，栉比荒墟。
English: Woe to those who live in luxury, and woe to those who live in desolation.

古文：吾复丽气，还形之初。
现代文：吾复丽气，还形之初。
English: I'm a recovering beauty, just getting back into shape.

古文：在帝左右，道济忽诸。 
现代文：在帝左右，道济忽诸。 
English: On the side of the emperor, Taoism and Confucianism are intertwined.

古文：题云：应天狐超异科策八道。
现代文：题目是： 应天狐超异科策八道 。
English: The topic is: The Eight Ways of the Heavenly Fox.

古文：后文甚繁，难以详载。
现代文：后边的文字特别繁杂，难以详细记载。
English: The text on the back is particularly complex and difficult to record in detail.

古文：让之获此书帖，喜而怀之，遂跃出丘穴。
现代文：何让之得了这一书帖，很高兴地把它揣起来。
English: What a treat to get this post, so glad I picked it up.

古文：后数日，水北同德寺僧志静来访让之。
现代文：于是他就跳出墓穴。几天之后，河北岸同德寺的和尚志静来拜访何让之。
English: So he jumped out of the grave. A few days later, the monk Zhizhing from Tongde Temple in Hebei Province came to visit He Zhan.

古文：说云： 前者所获丘中文书，非郎君所用，留之不祥。
现代文：志静说： 前两天你得到的坟丘里的文书，不是你能用的，留下是不祥的。
English: Zhizhing said, "The documents you got from the tumulus two days ago are not for you to use. It is ominous to leave them behind."

古文：其人近捷上界之科，可以祸福中国。
现代文：那个人与天界来往密切，可以左右中国的祸福。
English: That person is in close contact with the heavenly world and can influence China's misfortune and fortune.

古文：郎君必能却归此，他亦酬谢不薄。
现代文：你要是一定能把文书退还给他，他给你的酬谢也不会少的。
English: If you can return the document to him, he will reward you.

古文：其人谓志静曰： 吾已备三百缣，欲赎购此书。
现代文：那个人对我说， 我已经准备了三百匹绢，想要赎回这帖书。 
English: The man said to me, I have prepared three hundred donkeys to redeem this letter.

古文：如何？ 
现代文：怎么样？ 
English: What do you think should be done?

古文：让之许诺。
现代文：何让之同意了。
English: He readily agreed.

古文：志静明日，挈三百缣送让之。
现代文：第二天，志静拿来三百匹绢送给何让之。
English: The next day, Zhizhing brought three hundred yakitori to give to He Janzhi.

古文：让之领讫，遂话志静，言其书以为往还所借，更一两日当征之，便可归本。
现代文：何让之收下之后，就欺骗志静，说那文书已被别人借去了，得过几天把它要回来就可以归还本人。
English: After he received it, he lied to Zhizhing, saying that the document had been borrowed by someone else and that he had to return it in a few days so that it could be returned to him.

古文：让之复为朋友所说，云： 此僧亦是妖魅，奈何欲还之？
现代文：何让之又把这事对朋友讲了。朋友说： 这个志静和尚也是妖物，为什么要还给他？
English: The friend said, "This Zhizhong monk is also a monster, why give him back?"

古文：所纳绢，但讳之可也。 
现代文：收他的那些绢，只要不承认就行。 
English: Take those shackles off him, just don't admit it.

古文：后志静来，让之悉讳，云： 殊无此事，兼不曾有此文书。 
现代文：后来志静来取文书，何让之全不承认，既不承认志静送来过绢，也不承认自己有什么文书。
English: Later, when Zhizhing came to pick up the documents, he did not acknowledge them at all, neither did he acknowledge that Zhizhing had sent the money, nor did he acknowledge that he had any documents.

古文：志静无言以退。
现代文：志静也没说什么便走了。
English: Shizuka left without saying anything.

古文：经月余，让之先有弟在东吴，别已逾年。
现代文：一个多月以后，有一天，何让之的弟弟来了。他这个弟弟在东吴，兄弟分别已经一年多了。
English: More than a month later, one day, He Janzhi's younger brother came. This younger brother of his was in Dongwu, and the brothers had been separated for more than a year.

古文：一旦，其弟至焉。与让之话家私中外，甚有道。
现代文：弟弟和他说家事的里里外外，说得很有道理。
English: My brother and I talk about the ins and outs of household chores, and it makes a lot of sense.

古文：长夜则兄弟联床。
现代文：夜间，兄弟俩床挨床睡在一起。
English: At night, the two brothers sleep side by side.

古文：经五六日，忽问让之： 某闻此地多狐作怪，诚有之乎？ 
现代文：过了五六天，弟弟忽然问何让之： 我听说这地方有很多狐狸作怪的事，真有这样的事吗？ 
English: After five or six days, his younger brother suddenly asked him: "I've heard that there are a lot of foxes in this area, is that true?"

古文：让之遂话其事。而夸云： 吾一月前，曾获野狐之书文一帖，今见存焉。 
现代文：何让之就讲了那件事，自夸地说： 我在一个月前，曾经得到野狐狸的一帖文书，现在就在我这儿。 
English: He told the story and boasted, "A month ago, I received a letter from a wild fox, and now it's here.

古文：其弟固不信，宁有是事？
现代文：他弟弟根本不信，说： 难道有这样的事？ 
English: His younger brother didn't believe it at all and said, "Is there really such a thing?"

古文：让之至迟旦，揭箧，取此文书帖示弟。
现代文：何让之等到天要亮的时候，打开箱子，把文书拿出来给弟弟看。
English: Why not wait until dawn to open the box and show the document to his brother.

古文：弟捧而惊叹。
现代文：弟弟捧着文书惊叹。
English: His younger brother, clutching a document, was stunned.

古文：即掷于让之前，化为一狐矣。
现代文：立即就扔到何让之面前，变成一只狐狸了。
English: He was immediately thrown in front of He Zhen and turned into a fox.

古文：俄见一美少年，若新官之状，跨白马，南驰疾去。
现代文：不一会儿有一位俊美的年轻人，象个新官的样子，骑着一匹马向南飞快地奔去。
English: Soon a handsome young man, resembling a new official, was galloping south on a horse.

古文：适有西域胡僧贺云： 善哉，常在天帝左右矣！ 
现代文：恰好有一个西域的胡人和尚祝贺说： 好啊，常在天帝左右啦！ 
English: There just happened to be a Wu person from the western region who congratulated him and said, "Good, you're always around the Heavenly Emperor!"

古文：少年叹让之相绐，让之嗟异。
现代文：那年轻人慨叹何让之欺骗他。何让之觉得奇怪。
English: The young man lamented how he had been deceived, how he had been made to feel strange.

古文：未几，遂有敕捕，内库被人盗贡绢三百匹，寻踪及此。
现代文：不久，就有朝廷的捕快来到。内库里被人偷走三百匹绢，捕快们是寻踪追到此地的。
English: Soon, the courtiers arrived. Three hundred mules had been stolen from the inner courtyard, and the couriers had come in pursuit.

古文：俄有吏掩至，直挈让之囊检焉。
现代文：顷刻就有官吏突然闯进来，直接拿何让之的口袋来检查，果然查到了那些绢。
English: In an instant, the official suddenly burst in and directly took He Zhan's pocket to check, and found those shackles.

古文：果获其缣，已费数十匹。执让之赴法。
现代文：绢已经用去几十匹。捕快们捉拿何让之赴法。
English: Dozens of cormorants have already been used. The trappers catch the cormorants and let them go to France.

古文：让之不能雪，卒毙枯木。
现代文：何让之说不明白，终于死如枯草朽木。
English: I don't know what to say, I finally died like a dead tree.

古文：沈东美
现代文：沈东美
English: Shen Dongmei

古文：唐沈东美为员外郎。家有青衣，死且数岁。忽还家曰： 吾死为神，今忆主母，故来相见。
现代文：唐朝，沈东美是员外郎，他家里有一个婢女，死了已经几年了，忽然有一天回到家里来说： 我死了之后变成神，现在想念主母，所以就回来看她。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Shen Dongmei was a foreign minister. He had a maid in his family who had been dead for several years. One day, he suddenly returned home and said, "After I died, I became a god. I miss my mistress now, so I came back to see her."

古文：但吾饿，请一餐可乎？ 
现代文：但是我很饿，给点东西吃可以吗？ 
English: But I'm hungry. Can you give me something to eat?

古文：因命之坐，仍为具食。
现代文：于是就让她坐下，还给她准备了饭。
English: So he sat her down and prepared a meal for her.

古文：青衣醉饱而去。
现代文：婢女吃饱喝足就走了。
English: When the maidservant had eaten and drunk, she left.

古文：及暮，僮发草积下，得一狐大醉。
现代文：到了傍晚，家僮从一个草堆下面，捉到一条喝得烂醉的狐狸。
English: In the late afternoon, Iecheng caught a drunken fox from under a pile of grass.

古文：须臾，狐乃吐其食，尽婢之食也，乃杀之。
现代文：不一会儿那狐狸吐了，吐出的食物全是那婢女吃过的食物。于是就把狐狸杀了。
English: In a little while the fox vomited up all the food that the maidservant had eaten, and she killed the fox.

古文：杨伯成
现代文：杨伯成
English: Yang Bocheng

古文：杨伯成，唐开元初，为京兆少尹。
现代文：杨伯成在唐朝开元年初的时候，是京兆少尹。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Yang Bocheng was Jingzhao Shaoyun.

古文：一日有人诣门，通云吴南鹤。
现代文：一天，有一个人来到门前，通报说叫吴南鹤。
English: One day, a man came to the door and announced that his name was Wu Nanhe.

古文：伯成见，年三十余，身长七尺，容貌甚盛。
现代文：杨伯成接见了他。这个人三十多岁，身高七尺，容貌挺象样。
English: Yang Bocheng received him. This man is in his thirties, seven feet tall, and looks quite presentable.

古文：引之升座，南鹤文辨无双，伯成接对不暇。
现代文：入座之后，吴南鹤的文辞巧辨能力天下无双，杨伯成接对不及。
English: After taking his seat, Wu Nanhe's ability to decipher words is second to none in the world, while Yang Bocheng's is second to none.

古文：久之，请屏左右，欲有密语。
现代文：过了一会儿，吴南鹤请屏退左右，要秘密说什么。
English: After a while, Wu Nanhe asked the screen to move back and forth to say something secretly.

古文：乃云： 闻君小娘子令淑，愿事门下。 伯成甚愕，谓南鹤曰： 女因媒而嫁。且邂逅相识，君何得便尔？ 
现代文：屏退左右之后，他就说： 听说你女儿美貌贤惠，特来求婚 杨伯成十分惊愕，对吴南鹤说： 女孩子靠媒人传媒才能出嫁，况且我们是偶然相识，你怎么就能这样呢？ 
English: After the screen fades in and out, he said: I heard that your daughter is beautiful and virtuous, so I came to ask for her hand in marriage. Yang Bocheng was very surprised and said to Wu Nankhe: A girl can only get married through a matchmaker and the media. Besides, we met by chance, how could you do such a thing?

古文：南鹤大怒，呼伯成为老奴： 我索汝女，何敢有逆。 
现代文：吴南鹤大怒，叫杨伯成是 老奴 ，说： 我要你女儿，你还敢不顺从？ 
English: Wu Nanhe flew into a rage, calling Yang Bocheng an old slave, saying: I want your daughter, do you still dare to disobey?

古文：慢辞甚众，伯成不知所以。
现代文：他说了不少傲慢的话。杨伯成不知道为什么这样。
English: He said a lot of arrogant things. Yang Bocheng doesn't know why.

古文：南鹤迳脱衣入内，直至女所，坐纸隔子中。
现代文：吴南鹤直接脱去衣服，走进里边去，来到女儿的住处，坐入纸隔子中。
English: Wu Nanhe took off his clothes directly, went inside, came to his daughter's residence, and sat down in the paper partition.

古文：久之，与女两随而出。
现代文：过了些时候，他和女儿一块走出来。
English: Moments later, he emerged with his daughter.

古文：女言今嫁吴家，何因嗔责。
现代文：女儿说： 现在我已经嫁给吴家了。为什么要生气责怪呢？ 
English: My daughter said: Now that I have married into the Wu family, why should I be angry and blame them?

古文：伯成知是狐魅，令家人十余辈击之，反被料理，多遇泥涂两耳者。
现代文：杨伯成知道是狐狸精作祟，就让十几个家人一齐去打吴南鹤。没想到反被人家收拾了。多次被对手在两耳上涂泥。
English: Yang Bocheng knew that the fox was the culprit, so he let more than a dozen family members go to fight Wu Nanhe. Unexpectedly, he was picked up by someone else. He was repeatedly smeared with mud on both ears by his opponent.

古文：伯成以此请假二十余日。
现代文：杨伯成因此请假二十多天。
English: As a result, Yang Bocheng took more than 20 days off.

古文：敕问何以不见杨伯成？皆言其家为狐恼。
现代文：皇上问为什么没见到杨伯成，大伙都说他家正为狐狸烦恼。
English: When the emperor asked why he hadn't seen Yang Bocheng, everyone said that his family was worried about the fox.

古文：诏令学叶道士术者十余辈至其家，悉被泥耳及缚，无能屈伏。
现代文：皇上诏令学习道术的道士、术师十几个去到杨伯成家，全被两耳涂泥并上了绑。无奈只好屈服。
English: The emperor gave the order for more than a dozen Taoists and magicians who were studying Taoism to go to Yang Bocheng's house, where they were all covered with mud and tied up. They had no choice but to give in.

古文：伯成以为愧耻。及赐告，举家还庄。
现代文：杨伯成感到羞愧、感到耻辱，于是他又向皇上请了假，全家回到家乡的田庄去，在庄上。
English: Yang Bocheng felt ashamed and humiliated, so he asked the emperor for a leave of absence, and the whole family returned to the farm in his hometown.

古文：于庄上立吴郎院，家人窃骂，皆为料理。
现代文：家人偷偷地骂吴南鹤，都被收拾了。因此没有敢再说的。
English: Family members secretly scolded Wu Nanhe, and they were all taken away. Therefore, they did not dare to say it again.

古文：以此无敢言者。伯成暇日无事，自于田中，看人刈麦，休息于树下。
现代文：杨伯成困暇之余没事做，就亲自来到田间，看人家割麦子，正在树下休息，忽然来了一位道士。
English: Yang Bocheng had nothing to do in his spare time, so he personally went to the fields to watch people cutting wheat. While he was resting under a tree, a Taoist monk suddenly came.

古文：忽有道士，形甚瘦悴，来伯成所求浆水。
现代文：这道士身形挺瘦削，是来向杨伯成要水喝的。
English: The Taoist monk, who is rather thin, came to ask Yang Bocheng for water.

古文：伯成因尔设食。
现代文：杨伯成于是就给他准备了一顿饭。
English: Yang Bocheng then prepared a meal for him.

古文：食毕，道士问： 君何故忧愁？ 
现代文：吃完饭，道士问： 你因为什么发愁？ 
English: After the meal, the Taoist asked, "What are you worried about?

古文：伯成惧南鹤，附耳说其事。
现代文：杨伯成怕吴南鹤听见，趴在道士耳边小声说了这件事。
English: Yang Bocheng was afraid that Wu Nanhe would hear, so he whispered the matter in the Taoist's ear.

古文：道士笑曰： 身是天仙，正奉帝命，追捉此等四五辈。 
现代文：道士笑着说： 我是天上的神仙，正奉上帝的命令，追捕四五个这样的妖孽。 
English: The moralist smiled and said, "I am a heavenly immortal, and I am following God's order to hunt down four or five of these witches.

古文：因求纸笔。
现代文：于是就让找纸笔。
English: So let's find a pen and paper.

古文：杨伯成使小奴取之。
现代文：杨伯成让小奴去取。
English: Yang Bocheng let the little bastard take it.

古文：然犹惧其知觉，戒令无喧。
现代文：但是还怕吴南鹤知道，警告他不要大声说出去。
English: But he was afraid that Wu Nanhe would find out, and warned him not to speak out loud.

古文：纸笔至，道士书作三字，状如古篆。
现代文：小奴把纸笔拿来，道士写了三个字，样子象古篆。
English: The little slave brought the paper and pen, and the Taoist wrote three words, looking like an old man.

古文：令小奴持至南鹤所放前云： 尊师唤汝。 
现代文：道士让小奴拿着这三个字到吴南鹤面前，说 尊师叫你！ 。
English: The moralist told the young man to take these three words to Wu Nanhe and say, "Your teacher is calling you!"

古文：奴持书入房，见南鹤方与家婢相谑。
现代文：小奴拿着三个字进屋，见吴南鹤正与婢女玩笑。
English: The little slave entered the house holding the three characters and saw Wu Nanhe joking with the maid.

古文：奴以书授之。
现代文：小奴把三个字交给他。
English: The little slave handed him the three words.

古文：南鹤见书，匍匐而行，至树下。道士呵曰： 老野狐敢作人形！ 
现代文：吴南鹤见了这三个字，趴在地上往前走。来到树下，道士呵斥道： 老野狐敢变成人样？ 
English: When Wu Nanhe saw these three words, he prostrated himself on the ground and walked forward. When he came under the tree, the Taoist rebuked him: "How dare the old wild fox turn into a human being?

古文：遂变为狐，异常病疥。
现代文：吴南鹤于是就变成狐狸，非常难看。
English: Wu Nanhe then turned into a fox, very ugly.

古文：道士云： 天曹驱使此辈，不可杀之。
现代文：道士说： 天府驱使这些东西，不能杀它们。
English: The Taoist said: Heaven drives these things, it cannot kill them.

古文：然以君故，不可徒尔。 
现代文：但是由于你的原因，不能白白作罢，可用小木棍打它一百下。 
English: But because of you, I can't give it up for nothing. I can hit it a hundred times with a small wooden stick.

古文：以小杖决之一百，流血被地。
现代文：打完之后，流血满地。
English: After the beating, there was blood all over the floor.

古文：伯成以珍宝赠馈，道士不受。
现代文：杨伯成把珍宝送给道士，道士不收。
English: Yang Bocheng gave the treasure to the Taoist, but the Taoist did not accept it.

古文：驱狐前行，自后随之。
现代文：道士赶着狐狸在前边走，自己跟在后边。
English: The Taoist monk chased the fox and walked in front, while he followed behind.

古文：行百余步，至柳林边，冉冉升天，久之遂灭。
现代文：走了一百多步，来到柳林边上，就慢慢地升上天去，过了一会儿就不见了。
English: After walking more than a hundred paces, it came to the edge of the willow forest and slowly rose into the sky, disappearing after a while.

古文：伯成喜甚，至于举家称庆。
现代文：杨伯成非常高兴。甚至于全家庆贺。
English: Yang Bocheng was very happy. He even congratulated the whole family.

古文：其女睡食顷方起。惊云： 本在城中隔子里，何得至此？ 
现代文：他的女儿睡了一顿饭的时间才醒来，吃惊地说： 我本来在城里的隔子里，怎么能到这来？ 
English: His daughter slept through a meal before she woke up and said in surprise: "I was in a compartment in the city, how did I get here?

古文：众人方知为狐所魅，精神如睡中。
现代文：众人这才知道，被狐狸迷了，精神就象在沉睡之中。
English: It was only then that everyone knew that being carried away by a fox was like being in a deep sleep.

古文：叶法善
现代文：叶法善
English: by Ye Fa-zen

古文：道士叶法善，括苍人。
现代文：道士叶法善，是括苍人。
English: The Taoist priest, Ye Fa-zen, is a great man.

古文：有道术，能符禁鬼神。唐中宗甚重之。
现代文：他有道术，能用符咒禁止鬼神，唐中宗特别器重他。
English: He had Taoism skills and could use spells to ban ghosts and gods. Tang Zhongzong held him in high esteem.

古文：开元初，供奉在内，位至金紫光禄大夫鸿胪卿。
现代文：开元年初，他在宫中任职，官位到金紫光禄大夫鸿胪卿。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the year, he held a post in the palace, and his official rank rose to Jin Ziguanglu Doctor Hongyuqing.

古文：时有名族得江外一宰，将乘舟赴任。
现代文：当时有一个出身名族的人被授予江南某地的邑宰，将要坐着船去赴任。
English: At that time, a person from a famous family was awarded the post of governor of a certain place in the south of the Yangtze River, and he was going to go to the post by boat.

古文：于东门外，亲朋盛筵以待之。
现代文：他的亲戚朋友们在东门外设宴为他送行。
English: His relatives and friends held a banquet outside the east gate to see him off.

古文：宰令妻子与亲故车，先往胥溪水滨。
现代文：他让妻子儿女及亲故的车子先到胥溪岸边等他。
English: He let his wife, children and the family car wait for him on the bank of the Li River.

古文：日暮，宰至舟旁，馔已陈设，而妻子不至。
现代文：傍晚，他来到船边一看，饭食已经摆好，而妻子还没到。
English: In the evening, he came to the edge of the boat and saw that the meal was ready, but his wife had not yet arrived.

古文：宰复至宅寻之，云去矣。
现代文：他又回到住宅去寻找。有人告诉他，妻子等人已经走了。
English: He went back to the house to investigate and was told that his wife and others had left.

古文：宰惊，不知所以。
现代文：他大吃一惊，不知怎么回事。
English: He was taken aback and didn't know what to make of it.

古文：复出城问行人。
现代文：他又出门问路上的行人。
English: He went out again to ask passers-by on the road.

古文：人曰： 适食时，见一婆罗门僧执幡花前导，有数乘车随之。
现代文：行人说： 刚才一顿饭的时间之前，看见一个婆罗门僧人拿着旗幡和花在前边引导，有几辆车跟着，接连走出城门。
English: A passer-by said: "Just before meal time, I saw a Brahmin monk with a banner and flowers leading the way, followed by several cars, out of the city gate one after the other.

古文：比出城门，车内妇人皆下从婆罗门，齐声称佛，因而北去矣。 
现代文：车里的妇人，都下来跟着僧人步行，齐声念佛，一直向北去了。 
English: The women in the car all got out and followed the monk on foot, chanting Buddha's name in unison, all the way to the north.

古文：宰遂寻车迹，至北邙虚墓门。
现代文：邑宰寻着车子的踪迹，来到北邙虚墓门。
English: Pursuing the car's trail, Oaza arrived at the gate of the North Xiaokou Tomb.

古文：有大冢，见其车马皆憩其旁。
现代文：这地方有一个大坟堆。他见到他的车马都停在坟堆旁边。
English: There was a big graveyard in the area, and he saw that his car and horse were parked next to it.

古文：其妻与亲表妇二十余人，皆从一僧，合掌绕冢，口称佛名。
现代文：他妻子和其他二十几个亲表妇人，都跟着一个僧人，合掌围绕着坟堆，口里念着佛。
English: His wife and two dozen other female cousins, all following a monk, clasped their hands around the grave mound and chanted the Buddha's name.

古文：宰呼之，皆有怒色。
现代文：邑宰喊她们。她们都有怒色。
English: The town shouts at them. They get angry.

古文：宰前擒之，妇人遂骂曰： 吾正逐圣者，今在天堂。
现代文：邑宰上去捉住妻子。妻子就骂： 我正追赶圣人，现在在天堂。
English: The eunuch went to catch his wife, but she scolded him, "I was chasing the saint, and now I am in heaven."

古文：汝何小人，敢此抑遏？ 
现代文：你是什么小人，敢这样阻拦？ 
English: What sort of a villain are you, daring to stand in the way like that?

古文：至于奴仆，与言皆不应，亦相与绕冢而行。
现代文：至于那些奴仆，也都一样，和他们说话他们不答应，也一块绕着坟堆而行。
English: And likewise the servants also, when he spake unto them, they received him not: and they also walked over the sepulchre.

古文：宰因执胡僧，遂失。
现代文：邑宰于是就去捉那僧人。
English: Therefore, the mayor went to catch the monk.

古文：于是缚其妻及诸妇人，皆喧叫。
现代文：僧人就忽然不见了。于是邑宰把妻子和各位妇人绑了回来。
English: The monk suddenly disappeared, so the village headman tied up his wife and the women and brought them back.

古文：至第，竟夕号呼，不可与言。
现代文：她们都大吼大叫。回到家里，她们整整哭叫了一夜。不能和她们讲话。
English: They were all screaming. They came home and they cried all night. I couldn't talk to them.

古文：宰迟明问于叶师。
现代文：天将亮的时候，邑宰去问叶法善。
English: When the sky is about to light up, go to the village and ask Ye Fa-zen.

古文：师曰： 此天狐也。能与天通，斥之则已，杀之不可。
现代文：叶法善说： 这是一只天狐，它能通天，斥责它就行了，杀它是不行的。
English: Ye Fa-zen said, "This is a heavenly fox. It can penetrate the heavens. It is enough to rebuke it, but it is not enough to kill it.

古文：然此狐斋时必至，请与俱来。
现代文：但是这狐狸吃饭的时候一定来，你可以和它一块到我这来一下。 
English: But this fox will certainly come to dinner, and you can come to me with him.

古文：宰曰： 诺。 
现代文：邑宰说好。
English: The mayor said yes.

古文：叶师仍与之符，令置所居门。
现代文：叶法善还给邑宰写了符，让他把符贴到他家的门上。
English: Ye Fa-zen also wrote a sign for the mayor and asked him to put it on the door of his house.

古文：既置符，妻及诸人皆寤。
现代文：把符贴上之后，妻子和各位妇人都醒了。
English: After the sign was put up, my wife and all the women woke up.

古文：谓宰曰： 吾昨见佛来，领诸圣众，将我等至天堂。其中乐不可言。
现代文：妻子对邑宰说： 我昨天看见佛来，领着许多圣人，把我们领到天堂，那里的乐趣简直没法说。
English: His wife said to the mayor, "Yesterday I saw the Buddha come and lead many saints, and he led us to heaven, where the joy is indescribable.

古文：佛执花前后，吾等方随后作法事，忽见汝至，吾故骂，不知乃是魅惑也。 
现代文：佛拿着花走在前前后后，我们正跟在他后面作法事，忽然看见你来了，我因此就骂你，竟不知那是被妖魅魔住了。 
English: The Buddha was walking back and forth with the flowers, and we were following him to perform the ritual. Suddenly, I saw you coming, so I scolded you. I didn't know it was a demon.

古文：斋时，婆罗门果至，叩门乞食。
现代文：吃饭的时候，那僧人果然来了，敲门要饭吃。
English: When it was time to eat, the monk did indeed come, knocking on the door to ask for food.

古文：妻及诸妇人闻僧声，争走出门，喧言佛又来矣。
现代文：妻子和各位妇人听到僧人的声音，争抢着跑出门去，大声叫道： 佛又来了！ 
English: On hearing the monk's voice, his wife and the other women rushed out of the door, shouting, "Here comes the Buddha again!"

古文：宰禁之不可。
现代文：邑宰阻拦也拦不住。
English: Even the mayor can't stop it.

古文：乃执胡僧，鞭之见血，面缚，舁之往叶师所。
现代文：于是他就把胡僧捉起来，用鞭子把胡僧打得见了血。当面把僧人绑起来，抬着往叶法善的住处来。
English: So he caught the monk, beat him with a whip until blood could be seen, tied the monk up in front of him, and carried him to Ye Fa Shan's residence.

古文：道遇洛阳令。
现代文：道上遇到了洛阳令。
English: On the way, he met Luo Yangling.

古文：僧大叫称冤。
现代文：胡僧大声喊冤。
English: The goth monk shouted out his grievances.

古文：洛阳令反咎宰。
现代文：洛阳令反说邑宰无法无天。
English: Luoyang officials countered that the mayor was lawless.

古文：宰具言其故，仍请与俱见叶师。
现代文：邑宰详细陈述事情的前因后果，还请洛阳令一块去见叶法善。
English: The mayor of the town detailed the cause and effect of the incident, and also asked Luo Yangling to go to see Ye Faxian.

古文：洛阳令不信宰言，强与之去。
现代文：洛阳令不相信邑宰的话，勉强跟他去了。
English: Luo Yangling did not believe the words of the mayor and reluctantly went with him.

古文：渐至圣真观，僧神色惨沮不言。
现代文：渐渐走近圣真观，胡僧的神色悲惨沮丧，不说话。
English: As he gradually approached Shen Zhen Guan, the male monk looked miserable and depressed, and did not speak.

古文：及门，即请命。
现代文：到了门前，胡僧就请求保全自己的性命。
English: When he arrived in front of the door, the monk begged for his life.

古文：及入院，叶师命解其缚，犹胡僧也。
现代文：等到进了院子，叶法善让解去胡僧身上的绳子，还是胡僧的样子。
English: When he got into the courtyard, Ye Fa-zen let the rope on the monk's body be untied, and he still looked like a monk.

古文：师曰： 速复汝形！ 
现代文：叶法善说： 赶快恢复你的原形！ 
English: Ye Fazen said: Quickly restore your original form!

古文：魅即哀请。师曰： 不可。 
现代文：胡僧就哀求饶他。叶法善说： 不行！ 
English: The monk begged to be spared. Ye Fa-zen said, "No!

古文：魅乃弃袈裟于地，即老狐也。
现代文：这时候胡僧便把袈裟扔到地上，变成了一只老狐狸。
English: At this time, the monk threw the cocoon to the ground and turned into an old fox.

古文：师命鞭之百。还其袈裟，复为婆罗门。
现代文：叶法善让打了狐狸一百鞭子，又把袈裟还给狐狸，狐狸便又化作胡僧。
English: Ye Fa-shan gave the fox a hundred lashes and gave him back his beak, and the fox turned into a monk again.

古文：约令去千里之外。
现代文：叶法善和胡僧约好，让他到千里之外的地方去。
English: Ye Fa-zen made an appointment with the monk and asked him to go to a place thousands of miles away.

古文：胡僧顶礼而去，出门遂亡。
现代文：胡僧千恩万谢地行大礼而去，出门就不见了。
English: The monk bowed his head in gratitude and left, disappearing from the house.

古文：刘甲
现代文：刘甲
English: Liu Jia

古文：唐开元中，彭城刘甲者为河北一县。将之官。
现代文：唐朝开元年间，彭城人刘甲被授为河北一个县的县令，将要去上任。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Liu Jia, a native of Pengcheng, was awarded the post of county magistrate of a county in Hebei Province, and he will take up the post soon.

古文：途经山店，夜宿。
现代文：路上经过一个山区小店，就在那里住宿。
English: On the way, we passed a small shop in the mountains, where we stayed.

古文：人见甲妇美，白云： 此有灵祇，好偷美妇。前后至者，多为所取。
现代文：有一个人见刘甲的妻子很美，就对刘甲说： 这里有一种鬼神，喜欢偷漂亮女人，先后来过的，大多都被偷去了。
English: One person saw that Liu Jia's wife was very beautiful, and said to Liu Jia, "There is a kind of ghost here that likes to steal beautiful women. Most of the women who have come before have been stolen."

古文：宜慎防之。 
现代文：你应该严加提防。 
English: You should be on your guard.

古文：甲与家人相励不寐，围绕其妇。
现代文：刘甲和家人们互相勉励，都不睡觉，围绕在妻子的前前后后。
English: Liu Jia and his family encourage each other, do not sleep, and surround his wife.

古文：仍以面粉涂妇身首。
现代文：还用白面把妻子的头和身上涂抹了一遍。
English: He also smeared his wife's head and body with white paint.

古文：至五更后，甲喜曰： 鬼神所为，在夜中耳。今天将曙，其如我何？ 
现代文：到了五更之后，刘甲高兴地说： 鬼神干什么都是在夜间进行，现在天要亮了，它能把我怎么样呢？ 
English: After arriving at the five dungeons, Liu Jia said happily: Ghosts and gods do everything at night. Now it's getting light, what can it do to me?

古文：因乃假寐。
现代文：于是他就眯了一小觉。
English: Then he fell asleep for a while.

古文：顷之间，失妇所在。
现代文：顷刻之间，他的妻子就不知哪去了。
English: In an instant, his wife was gone.

古文：甲以资帛顾村人，悉持棒，寻面而行。
现代文：刘甲用资帛财物雇村里人，让他们全都拿着大棒，寻着白面的踪迹往前走。
English: Liu Jia hired the villagers with money and property, and let them all go forward with big sticks, looking for traces of the white side.

古文：因发掘之。丈余，遇大树坎如连屋，有老狐，坐据玉案，前两行有美女十余辈，持声乐。皆前后所偷人家女子也。
现代文：一开始是从窗子出来的，渐渐过了东墙，那里有一个古坟，坟上有一棵大桑树，树下有一个小孔，白面就进到这个小孔里。于是就挖掘。挖到一丈多深，遇到一个大树洞，象挺大的一间屋子，里边有一只老狐狸据案而坐，前边有十几个美女站作两行。这些女人有的唱歌有的奏乐，都是先后偷来的女子。
English: At first he came out of the window, and gradually passed the east wall, where there was an ancient grave. On the grave there was a large mulberry tree, and under the tree there was a small hole, and the white man went into this small hole. So he dug. He dug down to a depth of several feet, and came across a large tree hole, like a very large room. Inside, there was an old fox sitting according to the plan, and in front of him there were a dozen beautiful women standing in two lines. Some of these women were singing, and some were playing music. They were all women who had stolen successively.

古文：旁有小狐数百头，悉杀之。
现代文：旁边还有几百只小狐狸。刘甲把它们全杀了。
English: There were also hundreds of small foxes nearby. Liu Jia killed them all.

古文：李参军
现代文：李参军
English: Lee Joins the Army

古文：唐兖州李参军拜职赴任，途次新郑逆旅。遇老人读汉书。
现代文：唐朝兖州李参军授职以后赶去上任，路上住在新郑的一家客栈里，遇上一位老人正在读《汉书》，他就和老人交谈起来。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, after Li Shanzhou was appointed to the military, he rushed to take office. On the way, he stayed at an inn in Xinzheng. When he met an old man who was reading "Hanshu," he started a conversation with the old man.

古文：李因与交言，便及姻事。
现代文：于是就说到了婚姻方面的事。
English: That's when the subject of marriage came up.

古文：老人问先婚何家？
现代文：老人问他娶谁家的女儿为妻。
English: The old man asked him whose daughter he was going to marry.

古文：李辞未婚。
现代文：他说他还没有结婚。
English: He says he's not married.

古文：老人曰： 君名家子，当选婚好。
现代文：老人说： 你是名家子弟。应该选好这门亲事。
English: The old man said, "You are the son of a famous family. You should choose this relationship well.

古文：今闻陶贞益为彼州都督，若逼以女妻君，君何以辞之？
现代文：听说陶贞益是那个州的都督，如果他硬要把女儿嫁给你，你怎么呢？
English: I heard that Tao Zhengyi is the governor of that state. If he forces his daughter to marry you, what will you do?

古文：陶李为婚，深骇物听。
现代文：姓陶的和姓李的成婚，多么骇人听闻！
English: The marriage of a man surnamed Tao and a woman surnamed Li, how appalling!

古文：仆虽庸劣，窃为足下差之。
现代文：我虽然平庸无能，也为你感到羞耻！
English: Although I am mediocre and incompetent, I am also ashamed of you!

古文：今去此数里，有萧公是吏部璇之族，门地亦高。见有数女，容色殊丽。 
现代文：现在离这几里的地方，有个萧公是吏部萧璿的本家，门第也很高，现有几个女儿，都长得天仙一般美丽。 
English: Now, a few miles away from here, there is a Xiao Gong, the original family of the cadre Xiao Yao, whose family is also very high, and who has several daughters, all of whom are as beautiful as celestial nymphs.

古文：李闻而悦之，因求老人绍介于萧氏。
现代文：李参军听了很高兴，就求老人给介绍一下萧氏。
English: Li Shanjun was very happy to hear this and asked the old man to introduce him to Mr. Xiao.

古文：其人便许之。
现代文：老人答应了。
English: The old man agreed.

古文：去久之方还。
现代文：老人去了许久才返回来。
English: The old man went away for a long time before he came back.

古文：言萧公甚欢，敬以待客。
现代文：说萧公很喜欢，对客人很尊敬。
English: He said that he likes Xiao Gong very much and respects his guests very much.

古文：李与仆御偕行。
现代文：李参军便和仆从们一起跟着老人来到萧氏门前。
English: Li Shanjun and his servants followed the old man to the front of Xiao's gate.

古文：既至萧氏，门馆清肃，甲第显焕。高槐修竹，蔓延连亘，绝世之胜境。
现代文：门庭馆舍清新肃然，甲第宽敞显赫，高高的槐，长长的竹，连绵蔓延，世上少有的胜地。
English: The gate courtyard pavilion is fresh and dignified, the courtyard is spacious and prominent, the high gate, the long bamboo, the continuous spread, the world's rare resort.

古文：初，二黄门持金倚床延坐。
现代文：一开始，两个宦者拿着金礼器靠在床边欢迎他入座。
English: At the start, two crippled men holding golden utensils leaned over the edge of the bed to welcome him to his seat.

古文：少时，萧出，著紫蜀衫，策鸠杖，两袍袴扶侧，雪髯神鉴，举动可观。
现代文：一会儿，萧公出来了。他穿的是紫蜀衫，拄着鸠形拐杖，两只袍袖和两条裤腿扶在身侧，胡须象雪一样白，眼神象镜子一样明亮，举止可观。
English: After a while, Xiao Gong came out. He was wearing a purple shirt, carrying a cane-shaped crutch, two robe sleeves and two trouser legs propped up at his side, his beard was as white as snow, his eyes were as bright as a mirror, and his demeanor was impressive.

古文：李望敬之，再三陈谢。
现代文：李参军一看便生敬意，再三地陈述谢忱。
English: At the first sight of Li joining the army, he felt respect and repeatedly expressed his gratitude.

古文：萧云： 老叟悬车之所，久绝人事。何期君子，迂道见过。 
现代文：萧公说： 老叟年过七十辞官之后住在这个地方，很久没人来了，哪里想到君子绕道而来！ 
English: Xiao Gong said, "I have lived in this place for seventy years after becoming a magistrate. No one has come here for a long time. No one would expect a gentleman to take a detour!"

古文：延李入厅。
现代文：萧公把李参军迎进客厅。
English: Xiao Gong welcomed Li Shanjun into the living room.

古文：服玩隐映，当世罕遇。
现代文：厅里各种服用和玩赏的物品互相隐映，都是些当今世上难遇的宝物。
English: All kinds of objects used and enjoyed in the hall are reflected in each other. They are all treasures that are hard to find in today's world.

古文：寻荐珍膳，海陆交错，多有未名之物。
现代文：不长时间便摆好宴席，山珍海味都有，大多是些叫不出名来的东西。
English: It didn't take long to set up the banquet, with mountain delicacies and seafood, most of which were not famous.

古文：食毕觞宴。老人乃云： 李参军向欲论亲，已蒙许诺。 
现代文：吃完饭开始喝酒的时候，老人才说： 李参军刚才要求亲，已得到许诺。 
English: When he finished eating and began to drink, the old man said, "Li Shanjun just asked for a relative, and he has already received a promise.

古文：萧便叙数十句语，深有士风。
现代文：萧公便接着说了几十句话，很有大人风度。
English: Xiao Gong then said dozens of words, very adult demeanor.

古文：作书与县官，请卜人克日。
现代文：他写信给县官，请卜人来给选个好日子。
English: He wrote to the county magistrate, asking for someone to come and choose a good day.

古文：须臾卜人至，云： 卜吉，正在此宵。 
现代文：卜人一会儿就来到，说，好日子就在今晚。
English: The fortuneteller came in a moment and said, "The good day is tonight."

古文：萧又作书与县官，借头花钗绢兼手力等，寻而皆至。
现代文：萧公又写信给县官，借头花、钗绢和杂役人手什么的。
English: Xiao Gong also wrote a letter to the county official, borrowing flowers, broomsticks and miscellaneous officials.

古文：其夕，亦有县官来作傧相。
现代文：不多时什么都齐了。那天晚上，也有县官来作帮助迎送客人。
English: It's not often that everything is ready. That evening, a prefectural official came to help welcome the guests.

古文：欢乐之事，与世不殊。
现代文：欢乐的事情，和当世没什么两样。
English: Pleasant things, and the present world is no different.

古文：至入青庐，妇人又姝美。李生愈悦。
现代文：进入拜堂的青庐之后，见新娘子特别漂亮，李参军更加高兴。
English: After entering the youth hostel of the worship hall, seeing the bride was particularly beautiful, Li Jianjun was even happier.

古文：暨明，萧公乃言： 李郎赴上有期，不可久住。 
现代文：到了天明，萧公就说： 李郎上任有一定的期限，不能久住。 
English: At dawn, Xiao Gong said, "Li Lang has a certain term of office, he cannot stay for a long time.

古文：便遣女子随去。
现代文：便打发女儿和李参军一起走。
English: So he sent his daughter to join the army with Li.

古文：宝钮犊车五乘，奴婢人马三十疋。其他服玩，不可胜数。见者谓是王妃公主之流，莫不健羡。
现代文：五辆用珠宝装饰的牛车，奴婢人马三十多号，其它眼用和赏玩的物品不可胜数，见到的人都以为小夫妻是王妃公主一类人物，没有不艳羡的。
English: Five ox-drawn carts decorated with jewels, more than thirty slaves and maidservants, and countless other eye-pleasing and playful objects, everyone who saw them thought that the young couple were princesses, and there was nothing not to envy.

古文：李至任，积二年，奉使入洛，留妇在舍。
现代文：李参军到任，过了二年，奉使进入洛阳，将妻子留在京里。
English: Li joined the army and took office. Two years later, he was sent to Luoyang, leaving his wife behind in Beijing.

古文：婢等并妖媚盅冶，眩惑丈夫。往来者多经过焉。
现代文：婢女们个个都妩媚妖冶，迷惑成年男子，来往的成年男子大多都遇到过她们的挑逗。
English: All of the maidservants are charming and bewitching adult men, and most of the adult men who come and go have encountered their teasing.

古文：异日，参军王颙曳狗将猎。李氏群婢见狗甚骇，多骋而入门。
现代文：有一天，参军王颙牵着狗要出去打猎路过这里，李参军的这群婢女们见了狗非常害怕，大多都跑回家里去。
English: One day, Wang Yao, a member of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, was passing by with his dog to go hunting. The group of maidservants of Li, a member of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, were very scared when they saw the dog, and most of them ran home.

古文：颙素疑其妖媚，尔日心动，径牵狗入其宅。
现代文：王颙素来怀疑她们的妖媚，今天心里一动，径直牵着狗闯到李家宅院里去。
English: Wang Yuxuan had always suspected their bewitching. Today, he had a sudden impulse and led the dog straight to the Li family's courtyard.

古文：合家拒堂门，不敢喘息，狗亦掣挛号吠。
现代文：李家全家拒守堂门，气儿都不敢喘。狗往前挣着狂叫。
English: The whole Li family refused to open the gate, not daring to breathe. The dog yelped frantically.

古文：李氏妇门中大诟曰： 婢等顷为犬咋，今尚遑惧。王颙何事牵犬入人家？
现代文：李参军的妻子在门里大骂道： 婢女们不久前被狗咬了，到现在还害怕，王颙有什么事牵着狗进人家？
English: Li Shanjun's wife scolded loudly at the door: "The maids were bitten by a dog not long ago, and they are still afraid. What business does Wang Yao have leading a dog into someone's home?

古文：同官为僚，独不为李参军之地乎？ 
现代文：你和李参军是同僚，难道这不是李参军的地方吗？ 
English: You and Lee Joined the Army as Colleagues, Isn't This Where Lee Joined the Army?

古文：颙意是狐，乃决意排窗放犬，咋杀群狐。
现代文：王颙心里判定她是狐狸，就下决心推开窗子把狗放进去。
English: Wang Yao decided in his heart that she was a fox, so he decided to open the window and let the dog in.

古文：唯妻死，身是人，而其尾不变。
现代文：狗把群狐全咬死了，只有李参军的妻子死了之后还是人身子，但是尾巴没变。
English: The dogs had killed all the foxes. Only Li Shanjun's wife was still human after she died, but her tail had not changed.

古文：颙往白贞益，贞益往取验覆。见诸死狐，嗟叹久之。
现代文：王颙去告诉了陶贞益。陶贞益去验尸，看到了那些死狐，嗟叹了好长时间。
English: Wang Yao went to tell Tao Zhengyi. Tao Zhengyi went to the autopsy, saw those dead foxes, and sighed for a long time.

古文：时天寒，乃埋一处。
现代文：当时天很冷，就把它们埋在一处。
English: It was very cold at the time, so they were buried in one place.

古文：经十余日，萧使君遂至。入门号哭，莫不惊骇。
现代文：过了十几天，李参军的老丈人萧公来了，进门就哭，没有不惊骇的。
English: After a dozen days, Li Sangjun's father-in-law, Xiao Gong, came, crying when he entered the door, which was shocking.

古文：数日，来诣陶闻诉。言词确实，容服高贵，陶甚敬待。
现代文：几天后，他去拜见陶贞益，提出了控诉，他的言词准确真实，仪容服饰高贵，陶贞益很敬重地接待他。
English: A few days later, he went to see Tao Zhengyi and lodged a complaint. His words were accurate and true, his appearance and clothing were noble, and Tao Zhengyi received him with great respect.

古文：因收王颙下狱。
现代文：于是就把王颙捉起来下了大狱。
English: So they caught Wang Yao and put him in a big prison.

古文：土固执是狐，取前犬令咋萧。
现代文：王颙坚决认为她们是狐狸。让人把那条狗弄来咬姓萧的。
English: Wang Yao firmly believes that they are foxes. Let people get the dog to bite Xiao Ru.

古文：时萧陶对食，犬至，萧引犬头膝上，以手抚之，然后与食，犬无搏噬之意。
现代文：当时姓萧的正在和陶贞益面对面吃饭。狗来了之后，姓萧的把狗头拉到自己的膝盖上，用手抚摩它，然后给它东西吃。狗没有咬他的意思。
English: At that time, surnamed Xiao was eating face to face with Tao Zhengyi. After the dog came, surnamed Xiao pulled the dog's head onto his lap, stroked it with his hand, and then gave it something to eat. The dog did not intend to bite him.

古文：后数日，李生亦还。号哭累日，剡然发狂，啮王通身尽肿。
现代文：后来几天之后，李参军也回来了，一天天地号哭，状似发狂，把王颙的全身都咬肿了。
English: A few days later, Li Sanjun also came back, crying all day and night, as if he had gone mad, and his whole body was swollen with bites.

古文：萧谓李曰： 奴辈皆言死者悉是野狐，何其苦痛！
现代文：萧公对李参军说： 奴才们都说死的全是野狐狸，多么令人痛苦。
English: Xiao Gong said to Li Shanjun, "The servants all said that the dead were all wild foxes. How distressing.

古文：当日即欲开瘗，恐李郎被眩惑，不见信。
现代文：当天就想要把她们挖出来，怕你被迷惑，不相信。
English: I wanted to dig them up the same day, for fear that you would be confused and not believe me.

古文：今宜开视，以明奸妄也。 
现代文：现在打开看，来证明奴才们的奸诈和荒谬。 
English: Now open your eyes to the treachery and absurdity of the minions.

古文：命开视，悉是人形。
现代文：于是让人挖开看。全是人的身形。
English: So they had someone dig it up and look at it. It was all human.

古文：李愈悲泣。
现代文：李参军更加悲痛。
English: Li's joining the army was even more heartbreaking.

古文：贞益以颙罪重，锢身推勘。
现代文：陶贞益因为王颙罪重，把他禁锢起来审查。
English: Tao Zhengyi arrested Wang Qi for his serious crime and put him under investigation.

古文：颙私白云： 已令持十万，于东都取咋狐犬，往来可十余日。
现代文：王颙偷偷告诉陶贞益说，已经派人拿着十万钱到东都去取一条专咬狐狸的狗去了，往来十几天就行。
English: Wang Yao secretly told Tao Zhengyi that he had sent someone with 100,000 yuan to Dongdu to get a dog that only bites foxes, and that it would only take ten days.

古文：贞益又以公钱百千益之。
现代文：陶贞益又从公家的钱中拨出一百千增加到这件事里来。
English: Tao Zhenyi also allocated one hundred thousand yuan from the public money to increase this matter.

古文：其犬既至，所由谒萧对事。
现代文：那条狗取来之后，陶贞益就请萧公来大堂问话。
English: After retrieving the dog, Tao Zhenyi invited Xiao Gong to come to the lobby for questioning.

古文：陶于正厅立待。
现代文：陶贞益站在正厅等着。
English: Tao Zhengyi stood in the main hall and waited.

古文：萧入府，颜色沮丧，举动惶扰，有异于常。
现代文：姓萧的走进府来，颜色沮丧，举动慌张，和平常大不一样。
English: Xiao, surnamed Xiao, came into the house, looking depressed and acting panicked, which was very different from his usual behavior.

古文：俄犬自外入，萧作老狐，下阶走数步，为犬咋死。
现代文：不大一会儿狗从外边进来，姓萧的就变成一只老狐狸，跳下阶去只跑了几步，就被狗咬死了。
English: Not long after, a dog came in from outside, and Xiao became an old fox. He jumped down the steps, ran a few steps, and was bitten to death by the dog.

古文：贞益使验死者，悉是野狐。
现代文：陶贞益让人查验原先那些死者，全都是狐狸。
English: Tao Zhengyi had the dead foxes examined. They were all foxes.

古文：颙遂见免此难。
现代文：王颙便免除了这场大难。
English: Wang Yao was then spared the ordeal.

