古文：帝曰： 来，禹！
现代文：舜帝说： 来吧，禹！
English: Then he turned back to Yu and said, "Come on, Yu!

古文：汝亦昌言。 禹拜曰： 都！
现代文：你也发表你的意见吧。 禹拜谢说： 啊！
English: You should also express your opinion.Yubai Xie said: Ah!

古文：帝，予何言？
现代文：君王，我该说什么呢？
English: Monarch, what shall I say?

古文：予思日孜孜。 皋陶曰： 吁！
现代文：我只想每天认真的做事。 皋陶说： 啊！
English: I just want to do something serious every day. Shintao said: Ah!

古文：如何？ 
现代文：究竟怎么样呢？ 
English: What do you think should be done?

古文：禹曰： 洪水滔天，浩浩怀山襄陵，下民昏垫。
现代文：禹说： 大水弥漫接天，浩浩荡荡地包围了山顶，漫没了丘陵，老百姓沉没陷落在洪水里。
English: Yu said: "Large amounts of water engulfed the sky, surrounded the mountain tops in a huge swirl, engulfed the hills, and the people sank and were trapped in the flood.

古文：予乘四载，随山刊木，暨益奏庶鲜食。
现代文：我乘坐四种运载工具，沿着山路砍削树木作为路标，同伯益一起把新杀的鸟兽肉送给百姓们。
English: I took four types of vehicles, cutting trees along the mountain road as signposts, and together with Bo Yi, I sent the newly killed bird and animal meat to the people.

古文：予决九川，距四海，浚畎浍距川；暨稷播，奏庶艰食鲜食。
现代文：我疏通了九州的河流，使它们流到四海，挖深疏通了田间的大水沟，使它们流进大河。
English: I dredged the rivers of Kyushu so that they flowed to the four seas, dug deep and dredged the large ditches in the fields so that they flowed into the big rivers.

古文：懋迁有无，化居。烝民乃粒，万邦作乂。 
现代文：同后稷一起播种粮食，把百谷、鸟兽肉送给老百姓，让他们互通有无，调剂馀缺。于是，百姓们就安定下来了，各个诸侯国开始得到了治理。 
English: They sowed grain together with the Houyi, and sent grain and meat to the common people, so that they could exchange what they had and what they did not have. As a result, the people settled down, and the various vassal states began to be governed.

古文：皋陶曰： 俞！
现代文：皋陶说： 好啊！
English: Xing Tao said: Good!

古文：师汝昌言。 禹曰： 都！
现代文：你的这番话真好啊。 禹说： 啊！
English: What a nice thing to say. Yu said: Ah!

古文：帝，慎乃在位。 帝曰： 俞！
现代文：舜帝。你要诚实地对待你的在位的大臣。 舜帝说： 是啊！ 
English: Emperor Xuan. You must be honest with your reigning minister. Emperor Xuan said: Yes!

古文：禹曰： 安汝止，惟几惟康。
现代文：禹说： 要安静你的心意，考虑天下的安危。
English: Yu said: Keep your mind calm and think about the safety of the world.

古文：其弼直，惟动丕应徯志，以昭受上帝，天其申命用休。 帝曰： 吁！
现代文：用正直的人做辅佐，只要你行动，天下就会大力响应。依靠有德的人指导接受上天的命令，上天就会再三用休美赐予你。 舜帝说： 唉！
English: With honest people as assistants, as long as you act, the world will respond vigorously. Relying on the guidance of virtuous people to accept God's orders, God will repeatedly use Huimei to give you. Emperor Qian said: Alas!

古文：臣哉邻哉！
现代文：靠大臣啊四邻啊！
English: By the minister, by the four neighbors!

古文：邻哉臣哉！ 
现代文：靠四邻啊大臣啊！ 
English: Rely on your neighbors, minister!

古文：禹曰： 俞！ 
现代文：禹说： 对呀！ 
English: Yu said: Of course!

古文：帝曰： 臣作朕股肱耳目。
现代文：舜帝说： 大臣作我的股肱耳目。
English: The emperor said, "The minister is my best friend.

古文：予欲左右有民，汝翼。
现代文：我想帮助百姓，你辅佐我。
English: I want to help the people, you help me.

古文：予欲宣力四方，汝为。
现代文：我想用力治理好四方，你帮助我。
English: I want to do my best to govern the Quartet, you help me.

古文：予欲观古人之象，日、月、星辰、山、龙、华虫？作会；宗彝、藻、火、粉米、黼、黻，絺绣，以五采彰施于五色，作服，汝明。
现代文：我想显示古人衣服上的图象，用日、月、星辰、山、龙、雉六种田形绘在上衣上；用虎、水草、火、白米、黑白相间的斧形花纹、黑青相间的 己 字花纹绣在下裳上。
English: I want to show the images on the clothes of the ancients, with the sun, the moon, the stars, the mountains, the dragon and the dragonfly painted on the upper garment; with the tiger, the water plant, the fire, the white rice, the black-and-white axe pattern, and the black-and-blue "self" word pattern embroidered on the lower garment.

古文：予欲闻六律五声八音，在治忽，以出纳五言，汝听。
现代文：用五种颜料明显地做成五种色彩不同的衣服，你要做好。我要听六种乐律、五种声音、八类乐器的演奏，从声音的哀乐考察治乱，取舍各方的意见，你要听清，我有过失，你就辅助我。
English: I want to listen to six kinds of music, five kinds of sounds, and eight kinds of musical instruments. I want to investigate and control the chaos from the sadness and music of the sound, and accept the opinions of all parties. You must listen clearly. If I am at fault, you will assist me.

古文：予违，汝弼，汝无面从，退有后言。
现代文：你不要当面顺从，背后又去议论。要敬重左右辅弼的近臣！
English: You should not obey in front of others, but talk behind their backs. You should respect your right and left subordinates!

古文：钦四邻！庶顽谗说，若不在时，侯以明之，挞以记之，书用识哉，欲并生哉！
现代文：至于一些愚蠢而又喜欢谗毁、谄媚的人，如果不能明察做臣的道理，要用射侯之礼明确地教训他们，用鞭打警戒他们，用刑书记录他们的罪过，要让他们共同上进！
English: As for some foolish people who are fond of maligning and flattering others, if they cannot clearly see the truth of being a minister, they should be clearly taught with the eulogy, they should be warned with a whipping, and their sins should be recorded with a punishment book, and they should be promoted together!

古文：工以纳言，时而颺之，格则承之庸之，否则威之。 禹曰： 俞哉！
现代文：任用官吏要根据他所进纳的言论，好的就称颂宣扬，正确的就进献上去以便采用，否则就要惩罚他们。 禹说： 好啊！
English: The appointment of officials should be based on the speech he has received, the good should be praised and promoted, the correct should be presented for adoption, otherwise they should be punished.Yu said: Good!

古文：帝光天之下，至于海隅苍生，万邦黎献，共惟帝臣，惟帝时举。
现代文：舜帝，普天之下，至于海内的众民，各国的众贤，都是您的臣子，您要善于举用他们。
English: Emperor Xuan, under the whole world, as for all the people in the sea, the sages of all countries, are your courtiers, you should be good at using them.

古文：敷纳以言，明庶以功，车服以庸。
现代文：依据言论广泛地接纳他们，依据工作明确地考察他们，用车马衣服酬劳他们。
English: Accept them widely on the basis of their speech, examine them clearly on the basis of their work, and reward them with cars, horses, and clothes.

古文：谁敢不让，敢不敬应？
现代文：这样，谁敢不让贤，谁敢不恭敬地接受您的命令？
English: In this way, who dares not to be virtuous, who dares not to respectfully accept your order?

古文：帝不时敷，同，日奏，罔功。无若丹朱傲，惟慢游是好，傲虐是作。
现代文：帝不善加分别，好的坏的混同不分，虽然天天进用人，也会劳而无功。 没有象丹朱那样傲慢的，只喜欢懒惰逸乐，只作戏谑，不论白天晚上都不停止。
English: Emperors are not good at distinguishing between good and bad, and they do not distinguish between good and bad, and although they employ people every day, they will also work in vain. There is no arrogant person like Dan Zhu, who only likes lazy pleasure, only makes jokes, and does not stop at any time of the day or night.

古文：罔昼夜頟頟，罔水行舟。朋淫于家，用殄厥世。
现代文：洪水已经退了，他还要乘船游玩，又成群地在家里淫乱，因此不能继承尧的帝位。
English: The flood has receded, he still has to travel by boat and fornicate in groups at home, so he can't inherit the throne.

古文：予创若时，娶于涂山，辛壬癸甲。
现代文：我为他的这些行为感到悲伤。我娶了涂山氏的女儿，结婚四天就治水去了。
English: I am saddened by his actions. I married Mr. Tu's daughter, and four days after we were married, I went to fetch water.

古文：启呱呱而泣，予弗子，惟荒度土功。
现代文：后来，启生下来呱呱地啼哭，我顾不上慈爱他，只忙于考虑治理水土的事。
English: Later, after Kaifeng was born, he cried bitterly. I couldn't be bothered to love him. I was too busy thinking about how to manage the land and water.

古文：弼成五服，至于五千。
现代文：我重新划定了五种服役地带，一直到五千里远的地方。
English: I've redrawn five service areas, up to five thousand miles away.

古文：州十有二师，外薄四海，咸建五长，各迪有功，苗顽弗即工，帝其念哉！ 
现代文：每一个州征集三万人，从九州到四海边境，每五个诸侯国设立一个长，各诸侯长领导治水工作。只有三苗顽抗，不肯接受工作任务，舜帝您要为这事忧虑啊！ 
English: Each prefecture will recruit 30,000 people, and from Kyushu to the borders of the four seas, each of the five provinces will set up a governor, and each governor will lead the water control work. Only Sanmiao stubbornly refuses to accept the work task. Emperor Zou, you should be worried about this!

古文：帝曰： 迪朕德，时乃功，惟叙。 
现代文：舜帝说： 宣扬我们的德教，依时布置工役，三苗应该会顺从。 
English: Emperor Xuan said, "If you preach our moral teachings and arrange the labor service according to the time, the three seedlings should be obedient."

古文：皋陶方祗厥叙，方施象刑，惟明。
现代文：皋陶正敬重那些顺从的，对违抗的，正示以刑杀的图象警戒他们，三苗的事应当会办好。
English: Zhaotao respected those who obeyed, and warned those who disobeyed with the image of torture and killing. The three seedlings should do well.

古文：夔曰： 戛击鸣球、搏拊、琴、瑟、以咏。 
现代文：夔说： 敲起玉磬，打起搏拊，弹起琴瑟，唱起歌来吧。 
English: Zou said, "Strike up the tambourine, play the cymbals, play the harpsichord, and sing songs."

古文：祖考来格，虞宾在位，群后德让。
现代文：先祖、先父的灵魂降临了，我们舜帝的宾客就位了，各个诸侯国君登上了庙堂互相揖让。
English: The spirits of our ancestors and forefathers have descended, our imperial guests have taken their seats, and the various princes and sovereigns have ascended to the temple to make concessions to one another.

古文：下管鼗鼓，合止柷敔，笙镛以间。鸟兽跄跄；箫韶九成，凤皇来仪。夔曰： 于！
现代文：庙堂下吹起管乐，打着小鼓，合乐敲着柷，止乐敲着敔，笙和大钟交替演奏，扮演飞禽走兽的舞队踏着节奏跳舞，韶乐演奏了九次以后，扮演凤凰的舞队出来表演了。夔说： 唉！
English: Under the temple hall, pipe music was played, small drums were played, chime music was played, gong music was played, gong music was played, gong and big clock were played alternately, and the dance team that played the birds and beasts danced to the rhythm. After the gong music was played nine times, the dance team that played the phoenix came out to perform. Gong said: Alas!

古文：予击石拊石，百兽率舞。 
现代文：我轻敲重击着石磬，扮演百兽的舞队都跳起舞来，各位官长也合着乐曲一同跳起来吧！ 
English: Let's strike the flint and make music, and make those ignorant beasts and birds jump! The Dragon Emperor said, "Dragon!"

古文：庶尹允谐，帝庸作歌。
现代文：帝因此作歌。说： 勤劳天命，这样子就差不多了。 
English: For this reason, the emperor composed a song, saying: "Diligent destiny, it's almost like this."

古文：曰： 敕天之命，惟时惟几。 
现代文：于是唱道： 大臣欢悦啊，君王奋发啊，百事发达啊！ 
English: So he sang: "O minister of joy, O king of strength, O developed Pepsi!

古文：乃歌曰： 股肱喜哉！
现代文：皋陶跪拜叩头继续说： 要念念不忘啊！
English: Gong Tao continued to kneel and kowtow, saying, "You must never forget!"

古文：元首起哉！百工熙哉！ 
现代文：统率起兴办的事业，慎守你的法度，要认真啊！
English: Take the initiative to start a business, be careful to abide by your laws, and be serious!

古文：皋陶拜手稽首颺言曰： 念哉！
现代文：经常考察你的成就，要认真啊！ 
English: Regularly review your achievements. Take it seriously!

古文：率作兴事，慎乃宪，钦哉！
现代文：于是继续作歌说： 君王英明啊！
English: So he went on with his song and said, "How wise the king is!

古文：屡省乃成，钦哉！ 
现代文：大臣贤良啊！诸事安康啊！ 
English: Good minister! All is well!

古文：乃赓载歌曰： 元首明哉，股肱良哉，庶事康哉！ 又歌曰： 元首丛脞哉，股肱惰哉，万事堕哉！ 帝拜曰： 俞，往钦哉！ 
现代文：又继续作歌说： 君王琐碎啊！
English: He went on to sing: "The king is trivial!

