古文：孔子曰： 导之以政，齐之以刑，民免而无耻；导之以德，齐之以礼，有耻且格。 
现代文：孔子说： 用政令来诱导他们，用刑罚来整顿他们，人民衹是暂时地免于罪过，却没有廉耻之心；如果用道德来诱导他们，用礼教来整顿他们，人民不但有廉耻之心，而且人心归服。 
English: Confucius said: If they are guided by government decrees and disciplined by punishments, the people will be temporarily free from sin, but they will not have a sense of shame. If they are guided by morality and disciplined by etiquette, the people will not only have a sense of shame, but will also be submissive.

古文：老氏称： 上德不德，是以有德；下德不失德，是以无德。
现代文：老子说： 上德合乎自然，是真正有德；下德主观营造，其实是无德。
English: If morality is used to guide the people, and etiquette is used to restrain the people, then the people will have a sense of shame and reform themselves.

古文：法令滋章，盗贼多有。 
现代文：法令繁多则巧诈滋生，所以盗贼曰渐增多。 
English: Numerous laws and regulations breed clever fraud, so thieves are said to be on the rise.

古文：信哉是言也！
现代文：这真是至理明言啊！
English: This really is a statement of the obvious!

古文：法令者，治之具，而非制治清浊之原也。
现代文：法令这东西，是统治的工具，而并不是统治好坏的根源。
English: The law is an instrument of government, not the cause of good or bad government.

古文：昔天下之罔尝密矣，然奸轨愈起，其极也，上下相遁，至于不振。
现代文：从前天下法网严密的时候，盗贼却越来越多，发展到极点，造成了君臣人民之间都互相躲避，以致天下丧败，不可振救。
English: From the time when the law was strictly enforced in the world the day before yesterday, the number of thieves has increased and developed to the extreme, causing the rulers, subjects and people to avoid each other, so that the world was defeated and could not be revived.

古文：当是之时，吏治若救火扬沸，非武健严酷，恶能胜其任而愉快乎？
现代文：当此之时，地方的统治纷纷告急，若不使用强硬严酷的办法，又能以什么方法维护统治呢？
English: At this time, local governments are in a hurry. If they do not use tough and harsh methods, how can they maintain their rule?

古文：言道德者，溺于职矣。
现代文：主张道德的人，则采取宽松的方法。
English: Moralists take a more relaxed approach.

古文：故曰： 听讼吾犹人也，必也使无讼乎！ 
现代文：所以孔子说： 审理诉讼，我同别人差不多，一定要使诉讼的事件完全消灭才好！ 
English: Therefore, Confucius said, "I am no better than anyone else in handling lawsuits. I must completely eliminate the incidents of lawsuits!"

古文： 下士闻道大笑之。 
现代文：老子也说： 庸人不明大道，才枉加耻笑。 
English: Lao Tzu also said: It is only when a mediocre person walks down an unknown avenue that he becomes a laughing stock.

古文：非虚言也。
现代文：这都不是虚言。
English: These are not idle words.

古文：汉兴，破觚而为圜，斫雕而为朴，号为罔漏吞舟之鱼。而吏治蒸蒸，不至于奸，黎民艾安。
现代文：汉兴起，破方成圆，返朴归真，法纲极为宽疏。而吏治情况蒸蒸曰上，盗乱不兴，百姓安居乐业。
English: With the rise of the Han Dynasty, breaking the square into a circle, returning to simplicity and returning to truth, the legal framework is extremely sparse. Meanwhile, the situation of officials' governance is booming, theft and disorder are not popular, and the people live and work in peace.

古文：由是观之，在彼不在此。
现代文：由此看来，吏治的关键并不在法律的严酷。
English: Thus, the beauty of national politics lies in the magnanimity of the monarch, not in the severity of the law.

古文：高后时，酷吏独有侯封，刻轹宗室，侵辱功臣。
现代文：高后时，酷吏衹有侯封，践踏宗室，侵辱功臣。
English: In the post-high school era, the only cruel officials were the feudal lords, who harshly bullied the imperial family and insulted meritorious vassals.

古文：吕氏已败，遂夷侯封之家。
现代文：吕氏败落后，于是铲除了侯封的家族。
English: After the complete defeat of Zhu Lü, the imperial court killed the entire family of Houfeng.

古文：孝景时，晁错以刻深颇用术辅其资，而七国之乱发怒于错，错卒被戮。
现代文：景帝时，晁错以尖刻的权术辅助自己的才能，而七国之乱也由晁错而生，最后晁错被杀身亡。
English: During the reign of King Gyeonggi, Gyeongbokgung aided his talent with sharp-edged power techniques, and the Seven Kingdoms War also arose from Gyeongbokgung. In the end, Gyeongbokgung was killed.

古文：其后有郅都、甯成之伦。
现代文：而到后来，便又有郅都、宁成之流出现。
English: Later on, however, there was another group, the Ningcheng cormorants.

古文：郅都，河东大阳人也。
现代文：郅都，河东郡大阳县人。
English: A native of Dayang County, Hedong County.

古文：以郎事文帝。
现代文：以郎官的身份侍奉文帝。
English: He served Emperor Wen as a retainer.

古文：景帝时为中郎将，敢直谏，面折大臣于朝。
现代文：景帝时任中郎将，敢于向皇上直言进谏，在朝廷上当面斥责大臣的过失。
English: Emperor Jing, who was then the second-in-command, dared to speak directly to the emperor and rebuked the minister's fault in front of the court.

古文：尝从入上林，贾姬在厕，野彘入厕。上目都，都不行。
现代文：郅都曾随侍皇上去上林苑，贾姬在厕所，野猪也进入厕所，皇上目示郅都，郅都毫无所动。
English: The empress dowager went to Shanglinyuan with the emperor, Jackie was in the toilet, the wild boar also entered the toilet, the emperor showed the empress dowager, and the empress dowager was unmoved.

古文：上欲自持兵救贾姬，都伏上前曰： 亡一姬复一姬进，天下所少宁姬等邪？
现代文：皇上想亲自拿兵刃去救护买姬，郅都跪伏在皇上面前说： 失去了一个贾姬，又有一个新的买姬进来，天下缺少的难道是买姬这样的人吗？
English: The emperor wanted to personally take a sword to rescue Meiji, and they all knelt down in front of the emperor and said, "We have lost a consort, and a new consort has come in. Is it a person like Meiji that the world is lacking?

古文：陛下纵自轻，奈宗庙太后何？ 
现代文：陛下纵然不以自己为念，又怎能对得起国家和太后？ 
English: Even if His Majesty does not think of himself, how can he be worthy of the country and the empress dowager?

古文：上还，彘亦不伤贾姬。
现代文：皇上听了郅都的话，便退了回来，野猪也没有伤害买姬。
English: After listening to the emperor's words, he retreated back, and the wild boar did not hurt Maehime.

古文：太后闻之，赐都金百斤，上亦赐金百斤，由此重都。
现代文：太后听说了这件事，赏赐给郅都黄金一百斤，皇上也赏赐给郅都黄金一百斤，从此器重郅都。
English: When the empress dowager heard about this, she rewarded Shudu with one hundred catties of gold, and the emperor also rewarded Shudu with one hundred catties of gold. From then on, Shudu was given a heavy burden.

古文：济南瞷氏宗人三百余家，豪猾，二千石莫能制，于是景帝拜都为济南守。
现代文：济南困氏宗族三百多户，势力强大，无恶不作，郡太守不能制服他们，于是景帝任命郅都为济南太守。
English: There are more than three hundred clans of Jinan Sui clan. They are powerful and do no evil. The county governor cannot subdue them. Therefore, Emperor Jing appointed Xindu as the governor of Jinan.

古文：至则诛瞷氏首恶，余皆股栗。
现代文：郅都到任后，立即杀掉了唰氏元凶魁首，其他宗族余党都吓得大腿发抖。
English: After Yu Du took office, he immediately killed the leader of the Yu clan, and the rest of the clan trembled with fear.

古文：居岁余，郡中不拾遗，旁十余郡守畏都如大府。
现代文：郅都任太守一年多，济南郡路不拾遣，附近十多个郡的太守畏惧郅都，就像畏惧上级宫府一样。
English: He has been the governor of Xindu for more than a year. The roads of Jinan County are unpaved. The governors of more than ten counties in the vicinity are afraid of Xindu, just like they are afraid of the superior palace.

古文：都为人，勇有气，公廉，不发私书，问遗无所受，请寄无所听。
现代文：郅都为人勇敢而有气力，公正廉洁，不拆私人信件，不接受亲友的馈赠和私相嘱托。
English: They are all brave and powerful, fair and honest, do not open personal letters, do not accept gifts from relatives and friends, and do not ask for personal favors.

古文：常称曰： 已背亲而出身，固当奉职死节官下，终不顾妻子矣。 
现代文：经常宣称： 我丢下亲人，离乡背井外出为官，固然应当忠于职守，尽忠死节，妻子儿女最终是顾不得了。 
English: He often declared: I left my relatives behind, left my hometown and went abroad to become an official. Of course, I should be loyal to my duties, and I should be loyal to the day of my death. In the end, I couldn't care less about my wife and children.

古文：都迁为中尉，丞相条侯至贵居也，而都揖丞相。
现代文：郅都调中尉，丞相条侯极其尊贵傲慢，但郅都却对他揖而不拜。
English: He was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, and he was extremely noble and arrogant, but they did not bow down to him.

古文：是时，民朴，畏罪自重，而都独先严酷，致行法不避贵戚，列侯宗室见都侧目而视，号曰 苍鹰 。
现代文：这时候民风质朴，吏民们害怕触犯达官贵人而明哲保身，惟独郅都敢于率先极端严酷地执行法令，不避皇亲国戚，列侯宗室见到郅都都不敢正视，把他称作 苍鹰 。
English: At this time, the people's style was simple. The officials and commoners were afraid of offending the dignitaries and nobles, but they wisely protected themselves. However, the eunuchs dared to take the lead in implementing the decrees in an extremely harsh manner. They did not avoid the emperor's relatives and relatives. When the vassals saw the eunuch, they did not dare to face him, and called him a "goshawk."

古文：临江王征诣中尉府对簿，临江王欲得刀笔为书谢上，而都禁吏弗与。
现代文：临江王被召到中尉府对案，想得到刀具笔墨，写封信向皇上谢罪，但郅都禁止狱吏给他。
English: Linjiang Wang was summoned to the lieutenant's office to answer the case. He wanted to get a knife, pen and ink and write a letter to the emperor to thank him for his crime, but the warden forbade him.

古文：魏其侯使人间予临江王。
现代文：魏其侯派人暗地裹送给临江王刀笔。
English: Wei Qihou sent someone to secretly wrap the sword and pen to Linjiang Wang.

古文：临江王既得，为书谢上，因自杀。
现代文：临江王得到后，写信向皇上谢罪，进而自杀。
English: After Linjiang Wang received it, he wrote a letter to the emperor to apologize, and then committed suicide.

古文：窦太后闻之，怒，以危法中都，都免归家。
现代文：窦太后听到这件事，大怒，以重法中伤郅都，郅都被免除官职，回到家中。
English: Upon hearing this news, Empress Dowager Dou became enraged and used harsh punishments to slander both of them. Both of them were dismissed from their posts and returned home.

古文：景帝乃使使即拜都为雁门太守，便道之官，得以便宜从事。
现代文：景帝却派人到郅都家裹任命他为雁门太守，不用到朝廷辞谢，取近路直赴任所，并可以因利乘势，全权处理政务。
English: However, Emperor Jing sent someone to Shidu's house to appoint him as the governor of the Wild Goose Gate. He did not have to go to the court to express his gratitude, but took a shortcut to the office, and could take advantage of the situation and deal with government affairs with full power.

古文：匈奴素闻郅都节，举边为引兵去，竟都死不近雁门。
现代文：匈奴人素闻郅都气节，全部撤离边境部队，终郅都之死，不敢近雁门一步。
English: The Xiongnu people have always heard that the capital city will be destroyed, all the border troops will be evacuated, and eventually the capital city will be destroyed, and they dare not go near the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：匈奴至为偶人象都，令骑驰射，莫能中，其见惮如此。
现代文：匈奴人刻了个木偶人，酷似郅都，令骑兵奔驰射杀，没有能够射中的，他们被郅都震慑到如此地步。
English: The Huns carved a puppet man, exactly resembling the city of Khotan, and ordered the cavalry to shoot at it. When they couldn't hit it, they were so shocked by the city of Khotan.

古文：匈奴患之。乃中都以汉法。景帝曰： 都忠臣。 
现代文：匈奴人担忧这种情形，便用汉朝的法令陷害郅都。景帝说： 郅都是忠臣。 
English: The Xiongnu people were worried about this situation, so they used the Han Dynasty's decrees to frame the Xiongdu. Emperor Jing said: "All Xiongdu are loyal subjects."

古文：欲释之。
现代文：想释放他。
English: They want to release him.

古文：窦太后曰： 临江王独非忠臣乎？ 
现代文：窦太后说： 临江王难道就不是忠臣了吗？ 
English: Empress Dowager Dou said, "Isn't King Linjiang a loyal subject?"

古文：于是斩都也。
现代文：于是斩了郅都。
English: So he cut off the capital.

古文：甯成，南阳穰人也。
现代文：甯成，南阳郡穣县人。
English: Yu Cheng, a native of Yu County, Nanyang County.

古文：以郎谒者事景帝。
现代文：以郎官和谒者的身份侍奉景帝。
English: He served Emperor Jing as a retainer and eunuch.

古文：好气，为小吏，必陵其长吏；为人上，操下急如束湿。
现代文：他为人好逞强，做下级小吏，一定要凌驾于上级长吏之上；做别人的上司，役使下属就像捆缚湿柴一样严厉急切。
English: He is a strong-willed person. As a lower-level minor official, he must be above the higher-level officials; as someone else's boss, he is eager to make subordinates as strict as tying wet firewood.

古文：猾贼任威。
现代文：狡诈残忍，作威作福。
English: Cunning and cruel, pretentious and self-serving.

古文：稍迁至济南都尉，而郅都为守。
现代文：逐渐升官至济南都尉，正碰上郅都任济南太守。
English: He was gradually promoted to lieutenant of Jinan and was appointed governor of Jinan.

古文：始前数都尉步入府，因吏谒守如县令，其畏都如此。
现代文：先前几任都尉都步行进入郡府，通过小吏通禀传呼拜谒太守，像县令拜太守一样，他们惧怕郅都到了如此程度。
English: Several previous captains have entered the county seat on foot, and have called for the county magistrate through minor officials. Like the county magistrate, they are afraid of the county magistrate to such an extent.

古文：及成往，直凌都出其上。
现代文：等到宁成前往郡府，直接闯进去，凌侮郅都，气焰比郅都还高。
English: Wait until Ningcheng to go to the county seat, directly break into it, insult the capital, and the pride is higher than that of the capital.

古文：都素闻其声，善遇，与结欢。
现代文：郅都素间宁成声名，善待他，与他结成好友。
English: She treated him kindly and became good friends with him.

古文：久之，都死，后长安左右宗室多犯法，上召成为中尉。
现代文：过了很久，郅都死了。这以后长安及其周围的宗室贵族多有触犯法令的，皇上召调宁成担任中尉职务。
English: After a long time had passed, they all died. After this, most of the aristocrats of the family in and around Chang'an violated the law, and the emperor summoned Ningcheng to serve as a lieutenant.

古文：其治效郅都，其廉弗如，然宗室豪杰人皆惴恐。
现代文：宁成管治地方效法郅都，廉洁却不如他，然而宗室贵族及豪强大家都人人惊恐，战栗不安。
English: Ning Chenggong governed the local government according to the example of the capital, but he was not as clean as him. However, the aristocrats and the powerful were all frightened and trembling.

古文：武帝即位，徙为内史。
现代文：武帝即位，调宁成为内史。
English: Emperor Hanwu ascended to the throne, and Ning Cheng was appointed to the post of Inner Historian.

古文：外戚多毁成之短，抵罪髡钳。
现代文：外戚大都向武帝诋毁宁成的短处，宁成被判刑髡钳，剃去头发，脖颈套上铁圈。
English: Most of his relatives denigrated Ningcheng's shortcomings to Emperor Wu, and Ningcheng was sentenced to beheading, having his hair shaved off, and having an iron collar put around his neck.

古文：是时，九卿死即死，少被刑，而成刑极，自以为不复收，及解脱，诈刻传出关归家。
现代文：当时九卿中犯罪的该处死就处死，没有受其他刑罚的，而宁成被处以重刑，白以为不会再被起用，便自行脱去脖子上的铁圈，伪刻证件混出函谷关，逃到家中。
English: At that time, among the nine nobles, those who committed a crime should be sentenced to death, and those who did not receive other punishments, but Ningcheng was sentenced to a heavy sentence. He thought that he would not be used again, so he took off the iron ring around his neck by himself, mixed up the forged documents, and fled to his home.

古文：称曰： 仕不至二千石，贾不至千万，安可比人乎！ 
现代文：他扬言道： 做官到不了二千石，经商到不了千万，有何面目立足人间！ 
English: He Yangyan said; officials can't be a high-ranking official of 2,000 koku level, business can't earn 10 million yuan, how can they compare with others?

古文：乃贳貣陂田千余顷，假贫民，役使数千家。
现代文：于是贷款买了一千多顷水田，再租借给贫民，奴役百姓几千家。
English: As a result, the loan bought more than a thousand hectares of paddy fields, which were then leased to the poor, enslaving thousands of people.

古文：数年，会赦，致产数千万，为任侠，持吏长短，出从数十骑。
现代文：过了几年，遇到大赦，宁成已积累家产达数千万，成了打抱不平、负气仗义的侠士，手裹握着官吏们的短处阴私，随时要挟；出出进进有几十名骑士护卫跟随。
English: A few years later, when faced with an amnesty, Ning Cheng had accumulated tens of millions in household wealth, and became a knight who embraced injustice and fought evil with good will. He wrapped his hands around the shortcomings and selfishness of officials, and threatened them at any time. He was accompanied by dozens of knight guards when he went in and out.

古文：其使民，威重于郡守。
现代文：他役使百姓，威风比郡守还大。
English: He serves the people and has more prestige than the county governor.

古文：周阳由，其父赵兼以淮南王舅侯周阳，故因氏焉。
现代文：周阳由，其父亲趟兼以淮南王舅父的身份被封为周阳侯，由此便改姓周阳。
English: Zhou Yangyu, whose father was also known as the uncle of King Huainan, was given the title of Zhou Yang Hou, and thus changed his surname to Zhou Yang.

古文：由以宗家任为郎，事文帝。
现代文：周阳由因家庭的缘故而任郎官，服事文帝。
English: For family reasons, Zhou Yangyu was appointed as a vassal to serve Emperor Wen.

古文：景帝时，由为郡守。
现代文：景帝时，周阳由任郡守。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jing, Zhou Yang Rong became his vassal.

古文：武帝即位，吏治尚修谨，然由居二千石中最为暴酷骄恣。
现代文：武帝即位，吏治崇尚严谨，而周阳由在所有郡守中却最为严酷高傲。
English: Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, the government officials were strict, but Zhou Yangyu was the most severe and arrogant of all the county governors.

古文：所爱者，挠法活之；所憎者，曲法灭之。
现代文：他对自己亲善的人，即使罪该处死也要曲解法律而放其生路；而对自己憎恶的人，即使没犯死罪也要曲解法律而将其处死。
English: Those who are close to him, even if the crime is punishable by death, he will pervert the law and let them live; and those who hate him, even if they have not committed a capital crime, will pervert the law and put them to death.

古文：所居郡，必夷其豪。
现代文：他所居官的郡，总要将那裹的豪强铲除干净。
English: Whichever county he is in charge of, he must wipe out that county's powerful families.

古文：为守，视都尉如令；为都尉，陵太守，夺之治。
现代文：他任太守时，把都尉看作县令；一旦做了都尉，又凌驾于太守之上，剥夺其正当的权力。
English: When he was appointed as the daisho, he regarded the captain as the county magistrate; once he became the captain, he overrode the daisho and deprived it of its legitimate power.

古文：汲黯为忮，司马安之文恶，俱在二千石列，同车未尝敢均茵冯。
现代文：汲黯好刚愎白用，司马安则用文章伤害人，他们也都在郡守一级的官吏之列，但他们与周阳由同车时，也都自动避让，躲到一边去坐。
English: They are also among the officials at the level of county governors, but when they are in the same car with Zhou Yang, they also automatically give way and hide to the side to sit.

古文：后由为河东都尉，与其守胜屠公争权，相告言，胜屠公当抵罪，义不受刑，自杀，而由弃市。
现代文：后来周阳由任河东都尉，与该郡太守胜屠公争权，互相上告，胜屠公被判有罪，他不受严刑，就自杀了，而周阳由则被处死后弃市。
English: Later, Zhou Yangyu, who was a captain of Hedong, and the county's grand marshal, Cang Shengtu, fought for power and appealed against each other. Cang Shengtu was found guilty, but he was not severely punished and committed suicide, while Zhou Yangyu was executed and abandoned the city.

古文：自甯成、周阳由之后，事益多，民巧法，大抵吏治类多成、由等矣。
现代文：自从甯成、周阳由之后，天下越发的不平静，百姓以巧抗法，吏治也大都类似宁成和周阳由那样。
English: Since Rui Cheng and Zhou Yangyu, the world has become more and more restless, the people have skillfully resisted the law, and the officials are mostly similar to Ning Cheng and Zhou Yangyu.

古文：赵禹，斄人也。
现代文：赵禹，牦县人。
English: Zhao Yu, from Jixian County.

古文：以佐史补中都官，用廉为令史，事太尉周亚夫。
现代文：以佐史身份补为中都官，又因廉洁任令中，服事太尉周亚夫。
English: Zhou Yafu was appointed as the vice-governor of the capital with the status of assistant governor, and was promoted to the position of vice-governor due to his integrity.

古文：亚夫为丞相，禹为丞相史，府中皆称其廉平。
现代文：周亚夫做了丞相，趟禹便任丞相史，府中人都称赞他清廉公正。
English: Zhou Yafu as prime minister, Zhao Yu as prime minister of history, and people in the prime minister's office all praised him for his honesty and fairness.

古文：然亚夫弗任，曰： 极知禹无害，然文深，不可以居大府。 
现代文：但是周亚夫却没有重用他，并说： 我深知趟禹的品行才能不一般，但是他持法过于尖刻，不可以委以重任。 
English: But Zhou Yafu did not make much use of him, saying: I know very well that Zhao Yu has outstanding and incomparable talent, but he is very strict in enforcing the law and cannot be an official in a high-level government office.

古文：武帝时，禹以刀笔吏积劳，迁为御史。
现代文：武帝时，趟禹以刀笔吏身份积有劳绩，调任御史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu, Watan-yu was appointed to the position of imperial historian after he had accumulated a lot of achievements as a sword scribe.

古文：上以为能，至中大夫。
现代文：皇上认为他有才能，又升他做了中大夫。
English: The emperor thought he had talent, and promoted him to junior doctor.

古文：与张汤论定律令，作见知，吏传相监司以法，尽自此始。
现代文：他与张汤一起议定法律条令，其所作之法被认知，官吏相及监司传授法律，都是从此而开始。
English: Together with Zhang Tong, he agreed on the legal regulations, the law he made was recognized, and the officials and supervisors taught the law. It all started from here.

古文：禹为人廉裾，为吏以来，舍无食客。
现代文：赵禹为人廉洁清高，进入官场以来，家中没有一个食客。
English: Zhao Yu is a clean and honest person. Since he entered the government, there has not been a single diner in his home.

古文：公卿相造请，禹终不行报谢，务在绝知友宾客之请，孤立行一意而已。
现代文：公卿们请他去作客，趟禹始终加以谢绝，并自称要断绝一切友人宾客的邀请，衹想孤立独行而已。
English: The nobles invited him to be their guest, but he always declined, saying that he wanted to cut off all invitations from friends and guests, and that he just wanted to be left alone.

古文：见法辄取，亦不复案求官属阴罪。
现代文：他总是以法为准，也不翻案或是疏通官署私瞒罪行。
English: He always abides by the law, and does not overturn cases or try to cover up crimes through the authorities.

古文：尝中废，已为廷尉。
现代文：其间他曾被免官，事后被任命为廷尉。
English: In the meantime, he had been dismissed from his post and was subsequently appointed a court lieutenant.

古文：始条侯以禹贼深，及禹为少府九卿，酷急。
现代文：当初条侯周亚夫曾认为趟禹残忍尖刻，待他做了少府九卿，其严酷暴烈的本性更加显露。
English: At first, the feudal lord Zhou Yafu thought that Watan Yu was cruel and harsh, and treated him as a minor prefect and nine nobles, revealing his harsh and violent nature even more.

古文：至晚节，事益多。吏务为严峻，而禹治加缓，名为平。
现代文：而到了晚年，天下乱事越来越多，官吏们治民都务求严峻，赵禹此时却有所平和，名声也有所好转。
English: However, in his later years, there were more and more chaotic events in the world, and officials tried to be strict in governing the people. However, Zhao Yu was somewhat peaceful at this time, and his reputation also improved.

古文：王温舒等后起，治峻禹。
现代文：王温舒等人是后起酷吏，治民比趟禹还耍严峻。
English: Wang Wenshu and others were later-rising hard-liners, and their treatment of the people was even harsher than Yu's.

古文：禹以老，徙为燕相，数岁，悖乱有罪，免归。
现代文：赵禹因为年老，调为燕国相。几年后，因居官昏惑有罪，免官回乡。
English: Because of his old age, Zhao Yu was transferred to Yan Guoxiang. A few years later, he was removed from his post and returned to his hometown after being found guilty of bewilderment while in office.

古文：后十余年，以寿卒于家。义纵，河东人也。
现代文：又过了十多年，他于家乡寿终。义纵，河东人。
English: After more than ten years, he passed away in his hometown. Yizhong, a native of East Hadong.

古文：少年时尝与张次公俱攻剽，为群盗。
现代文：他年轻时曾与张次公都干过劫盗，加入遇贼党。
English: When he was young, he and Zhang Zikong both committed robbery and joined the Thieves' Party.

古文：纵有姊，以医幸王太后。
现代文：义纵有一个姐姐，因通医术得到王太后欣赏。
English: Yicheng had an older sister who was admired by the empress dowager for her skill in medicine.

古文：太后问： 有子、兄弟为官者乎？ 
现代文：王太后问她： 你有兄弟可以做官吗？ 
English: The Queen Mother asked her: Do you have a brother who can be an official?

古文：姊曰： 有弟无行，不可。 
现代文：义纵姐姐答道： 有一个弟弟不学好，当不了官。 
English: Yoshitsune's sister said, "I have a younger brother who has a bad character and cannot be an official.

古文：太后乃告上，上拜义姁弟纵为中郎，补上党郡中令。
现代文：王太后就把此事告诉了皇上，皇上就任命义峋的弟弟义纵做了中郎，后又补任上党郡中令。
English: The empress dowager told the matter to the emperor, and the emperor appointed Yoshitaka's younger brother, Yoshitsune, as chugo (middle-ranking official), who was later promoted to jodan-gun chujo (middle-ranking official).

古文：治敢往，少温籍，县无逋事，举第一。
现代文：义纵居官敢作敢为，少有温情含蓄，县中平安无事，被推举为天下第一。
English: Yigongju officials dare to be daring, have little warmth and reserve, are safe in the county, and have been elected as the first in the world.

古文：迁为长陵及长安令，直法行治，不避贵戚。
现代文：后来他被调任长陵及长安县令，能依法治理，不害怕和回避显赫的外戚。
English: Later, he was appointed as the county magistrate of Changling and Chang'an. He handled political affairs according to the law, and did not avoid aristocrats and imperial relatives.

古文：以捕按太后外孙脩成子中，上以为能，迁为河内都尉。
现代文：因为逮捕审问太后外孙脩成的儿子脩中，皇上认为他有能力，调任他为河内都尉。
English: Because of the arrest and interrogation of the son of the grandchild of the Empress Dowager, the Emperor thought that he was capable and transferred him to be the captain of Hanoi.

古文：至则族灭其豪穰氏之属，河内道不拾遗。
现代文：他一到任，就铲除消灭了当地的豪强穣氏一伙，河内一带顿时变得路不拾遣，清平安宁。
English: After taking office, he annihilated the local powerful Min clan, creating a chaotic situation in Hanoi.

古文：而张次公亦为郎，以勇悍从军，敢深入，有功，封为岸头侯。
现代文：而张次公也当了郎官，因勇敢精悍而从军，他敢于深入作战，立了战功，被赐予爵号岸头侯。
English: And Zhang Zikong also became a vassal, because he was brave and brave and joined the army, he dared to fight in-depth, made war achievements, and was given the title of Kishi Touhou.

古文：甯成家居，上欲以为郡守，御史大夫弘曰： 臣居山东为小吏时，甯成为济南都尉，其治如狼牧羊，成不可令治民。 
现代文：甯成在家闲居，皇上想让他出任郡守，御史大夫公孙弘说： 臣下我在山东做小吏时，宁成已是济南都尉，他的治理方法严厉得就像以狼牧羊一样。所以宁成不可派去治民。 
English: Rongcheng idled at home, the emperor wanted him to serve as county governor, and the chief historian Gongsun Hong said: When I was a minor official in Shandong, Ningcheng was already a lieutenant of Jinan, and his governance method was as strict as shepherding sheep with a wolf. Therefore, Ningcheng could not be sent to govern the people.

古文：上乃拜成为关都尉。
现代文：皇上于是就任命宁成为关都尉。
English: The emperor then appointed Ning Cheng as the captain of Guan.

古文：岁余，关吏税肄郡国出入关者，号曰： 宁见乳虎，无直甯成之怒。 
现代文：一年多后，守关的官吏和各郡国出关入关的人，都叫道： 宁愿看乳虎发火，不愿见宁成发怒。 
English: More than a year later, the officials guarding the customs and the people entering and leaving the customs in various counties and countries all exclaimed: I would rather see the milk tiger get angry than see Ningcheng get angry.

古文：其暴如此。
现代文：可见他的暴烈已经达到如此程度。
English: You can see how violent he has become.

古文：义纵自河内迁为南阳太守，闻甯成家居南阳，及至关，甯成侧行送迎，然纵气盛，弗为礼。
现代文：义纵从河内调任南阳太守，听说宁成家在南阳，待他行至关前时，宁成已来路边送迎，然而义纵气盛，不与宁成行礼。
English: Yigong was transferred from Hanoi to be the governor of Nanyang. He heard that Ning Cheng's family was in Nanyang, and when he was about to leave, Ning Cheng came to meet him on the roadside. However, Yigong was full of energy and did not bow to Ning Cheng.

古文：至郡，遂按甯氏，破碎其家。
现代文：一到南阳郡，他就查办宁氏，抄了他的家。
English: As soon as he arrived in Nanyang County, he investigated Mr. Ning and copied his home.

古文：成坐有罪，及孔、暴之属皆奔亡，南阳吏民重足一迹。
现代文：宁成判了罪，而孔氏、暴氏等豪强都逃亡在外，南阳官吏百姓都惧怕义纵，对他的命令都不敢违抗。
English: Ningcheng was found guilty, but the powerful leaders such as the Kongs and the Tyrants had fled. Nanyang officials and people were afraid of Yizheng and did not dare to disobey his orders.

古文：而平氏朱强、杜衍杜周为纵爪牙之吏，任用，迁为廷尉史。
现代文：而平氏的朱彊、杜衍的杜周则做了义纵的爪牙属吏，被任用，升廷尉史。
English: Zhu Xi of the Ping clan and Du Zhou of the Du Yan clan, on the other hand, became subordinate officials of the Yizhong and were appointed as court officials.

古文：军数出定襄，定襄吏民乱败，于是徙纵为定襄太守。
现代文：那时，军队数次调出定襄，定襄官吏民众十分混乱腐败，于是朝廷又调义纵任定襄太守。
English: At that time, the army transferred Dingxiang several times, and the officials and people of Dingxiang were very chaotic and corrupt. Therefore, the imperial court transferred Yi and appointed Dingxiang as the governor.

古文：纵至，掩定襄狱中重罪二百余人，及宾客昆弟私入相视者亦二百余人。
现代文：义纵一到，就扣住定襄监狱中的重罪犯人二百多人，以及私入监狱探望他们的家中宾客、兄弟有二百多人。
English: As soon as Yigong arrived, he detained more than 200 felons in Dingxiang Prison, as well as more than 200 family guests and brothers who secretly visited them in prison.

古文：纵一切捕鞠，曰 为死罪解脱 。
现代文：义纵将他们全部逮捕，将他们定为 为死罪解脱 罪。
English: Yicheng arrested all of them and sentenced them to death.

古文：是日皆报杀四百余人。
现代文：当天义纵就奏请获准杀了这四百多人。
English: On the same day, he was given permission to kill more than 400 people.

古文：郡中不寒而栗，猾民佐吏为治。
现代文：从此郡中上下都吓得不寒而栗，连奸猾的刁民也帮助官吏来治理地方了。
English: From then on, everyone in the county shuddered with fear, and even the treacherous commoners helped the officials to govern the region.

古文：是时，赵禹、张汤为九卿矣，然其治尚宽，辅法而行，纵以鹰击毛挚为治。
现代文：那时赵禹、张汤已身为九卿，然而他们的管治还比较宽松，一切辅助法律加以推行，衹有义纵使用老鹰捉鹦式的严酷手段进行治理。
English: At that time, Zhao Yu and Zhang Tang had already become the nine nobles, but their governance was still relatively loose, all auxiliary laws were implemented, and there was no righteousness, even if they used harsh means such as eagle and parrot to govern.

古文：后会更五铢钱白金起，民为奸，京师尤甚，乃以纵为右内史，王温舒为中尉。
现代文：后来遇上更换五铢钱币以及白银兴起，百姓中奸盗盛行，京城尤其严重，朝廷便任命义纵为右内史，任命王温舒为中尉。
English: Later, with the replacement of the five-baht coin and the rise of silver, and the prevalence of thieves among the people, especially in Beijing, the imperial court appointed Yizheng as the right internal historian and Wang Wenshu as the lieutenant.

古文：温舒至恶，所为弗先言纵，纵必以气陵之，败坏其功。
现代文：王温舒非常酷恶，做事从不事先告诉义纵，而义纵则一定要以气势相凌，败坏他的功劳名誉。
English: Wang Wenshu was very cruel. He never told Yizhong about his work in advance, and Yizhong had to use his influence to ruin his reputation.

古文：其治，所诛杀甚多，然取为小治，奸益不胜，直指始出矣。
现代文：他们治民，所杀的人太多，然而衹能达到小治，奸盗益发增多，很难捕捉。
English: He administered political affairs and killed a lot of people, but the hasty administration was not only ineffective, but more and more evil things were happening, so officials who pointed fingers began to appear.

古文：吏之治以斩杀缚吏为务，阎奉以恶用矣。
现代文：官吏治民以杀伐绑押为主要方法，所以阎奉因为严酷暴恶而被任用。
English: The main method used by government officials to rule the people was to kill, capture, and imprison, so Yan Fong was appointed because of his harsh and brutal methods.

古文：纵廉，其治效郅都。
现代文：义纵清廉，其治民方法是效仿郅都而来。
English: It is righteous, upright, and clean, and its methods of governing the people are modeled after those of Shantou.

古文：上幸鼎湖，病久，已而卒起幸甘泉，道不治。
现代文：皇上驾临鼎湖，病了多曰，病愈后突起驾到甘泉去，然而道路还没有修好。
English: The emperor drove to Dinghu Lake. He was ill for several days. After he recovered, he drove to Ganquan. However, the road had not yet been repaired.

古文：上怒曰： 纵以我为不行此道乎？ 
现代文：皇上发怒道： 义纵难道以为我不走这条道路吗？ 
English: The emperor said angrily, "Does Yigong think I won't take this path?

古文：衔之。
现代文：便记下了这件事。
English: It's good to keep grudges in mind.

古文：至冬，杨可方受告缗，纵以为此乱民，部吏捕其为可使者。
现代文：到了冬天，杨可刚刚主持告缗一事，义纵以为这是乱民的行为，便派吏员捕捉了杨可派遣的使者。
English: By the winter, Yang Ke was being assigned to preside over the handling of the 告 case. Even though he thought that this would disturb the people, he deployed officials to arrest those who went out to work for Yang Ke.

古文：天子闻，使杜式治，以为废格沮事，弃纵市。
现代文：皇上听说这件事，让杜式加以审理，定为侵废韶书罪，将义纵处死，尸体弃于市。
English: When the emperor heard about this, he sent Du Xi to deal with it, believing that the practice of Yixing abandoned the honor of the king, destroyed the things that the king wanted to do, and abandoned Yixing.

古文：后一岁，张汤亦死。
现代文：一年后，张汤也死去。
English: A year later, Zhang Tang also died.

古文：王温舒，阳陵人也。
现代文：王温舒，阳陵人。
English: Wang Wenshu, from Yangling.

古文：少时椎埋为奸。
现代文：年少时曾以椎杀人，私加掩埋，成为盗贼。
English: He did grave robbing and other bad things when he was young.

古文：已而试县亭长，数废。
现代文：后来脱离奸党补为县亭长，几次被废。
English: Later, he broke away from the traitor party and became the county pavilion chief, and was abolished several times.

古文：数为吏，以治狱至廷尉史。
现代文：在几次被任命吏职后，王温舒因治理牢狱有方升至廷尉史。
English: After being appointed to official posts several times, Wang Wenshu was promoted to the rank of imperial lieutenant for his management of the prison.

古文：事张汤，迁为御史，督盗贼，杀伤甚多。
现代文：他在张汤手下，被调任御史，督捕盗贼，杀人伤人极多。
English: Under Zhang Tang, he was transferred to the post of imperial historian, he was in charge of catching thieves, and he killed and injured many people.

古文：稍迁至广平都尉，择郡中豪敢往吏十余人为爪牙，皆把其阴重罪，而纵使督盗贼，快其意所欲得。
现代文：后来他又逐渐升迁而官至广平都尉，他选择郡中一些生性果敢的豪杰十多人做自己的爪牙吏员，都隐瞒了他们身上的重罪，而放手让他们督捕盗贼，由于捕得所要逮的人而使得王温舒很快慰。
English: Later, he was gradually promoted to the rank of Guangping captain. He chose more than a dozen daring heroes in the county to be his minions. They all concealed their felonies, and let them go to catch thieves. Wang Wenshu was quickly comforted because he caught the person he wanted to catch.

古文：此人虽有百罪，弗法；即有避回，夷之，亦灭宗。
现代文：于是虽然此人身有百罪，也未加问治；但如果不尽力督捕，采取回避态度，就会被立即处死，并灭其宗族。
English: As a result, although this person is guilty of a hundred crimes, he has not been investigated; but if he does not do his best to supervise the arrest and takes an evasive attitude, he will be immediately executed and his clan will be destroyed.

古文：以故齐赵之郊盗不敢近广平，广平声为道不拾遗。
现代文：由此一来则齐赵边地的盗贼不敢接近广平，广平一带便开始以路不拾遣而闻名。
English: As a result, thieves in the outskirts of Qi Zhao did not dare to approach Guangping, and the area around Guangping began to be known for not paying attention to the road.

古文：上闻，迁为河内太守。
现代文：皇上听到这些情况，就调任王温舒当了河内郡太守。
English: After the emperor heard about it, Wang Wenshu was promoted to the position of the governor of Hanoi.

古文：素居广平时，皆知河内豪奸之家。
现代文：王温舒平素居住广平时，就已尽知河内郡中的豪强奸党之家。
English: When Wang Wen Shuping lived in Quang Binh, he was well aware that the tyrants in Hanoi County were raping the Party House.

古文：及往，以九月至，令郡具私马五十匹，为驿自河内至长安，部吏如居广平时方略，捕郡中豪猾，相连坐千余家。
现代文：待他到了那裹，正赶上九月已到，他便下令郡中准备私马五十匹，在道路上设置驿站，从河内一直设到长安，又吩咐吏员采用原在广平时采用过的方法，收捕郡中豪强和奸民，互相连累而有罪的达一千多家。
English: When he arrived there, just in time for the arrival of September, he ordered the county to prepare fifty private horses, set up a post on the road, from Hanoi to Chang'an, and ordered the officials to use the methods that had been used in peacetime to arrest the county's powerful and treacherous people, and more than a thousand people who were guilty of interfering with each other.

古文：上书请，大者至族，小者乃死，家尽没入偿臧。
现代文：然后他上奏朝廷，请求将罪大的诛灭其族，将罪小的本人处死，并全部没收他们家藏。
English: In the petition, he asked the emperor to declare that those guilty of major crimes should be exterminated, those guilty of minor crimes should be executed, the family's property should be completely confiscated, and the stolen goods obtained in the past should be repaid.

古文：奏行不过二日，得可，事论报，至流血十余里。
现代文：奏书送去不过两天，就得到了准奏的消息，于是依令行刑，以致被杀的人血流十多里。
English: Just two days after the report was sent, they received the news that the report was correct, so they carried out the execution as ordered, so that the blood of the person who was killed flowed more than ten miles.

古文：河内皆怪其奏，以为神速。
现代文：河内人民都奇怪这次上奏，认为真是神速。
English: People in Hanoi were surprised by Wang Wenshu's performance and thought it was very fast.

古文：尽十二月，郡中无犬吠之盗。
现代文：到十二月末，郡中已无盗贼踪影。
English: By the end of December, there was no trace of the thieves in the county.

古文：其颇不得，失之旁郡，追求，会春，温舒顿足汉曰： 嗟乎，令冬月益展一月，足吾事矣！ 
现代文：逮不着盗贼，是因为他们都逃到了邻郡，又派人去邻郡追捕，但已到了春令时节，王温舒顿足叹息道： 可惜可惜！如果让冬令再延长一月，盗贼尽除，就大功告成了！ 
English: The thieves could not be caught because they all fled to a neighboring county, and they sent someone to the neighboring county to chase them, but it was already spring time, Wang Wenshutong sighed: What a pity! If the winter time is extended by another month and the thieves are eliminated, the great work is done!

古文：其好杀行威不爱人如此。
现代文：可见他的残酷好杀、不施仁政已达到了何等的程度。
English: You can see the extent to which his cruel, murderous, and inhumane policies have reached.

古文：上闻之，以为能，迁为中尉。
现代文：皇上听说了王温舒的事，认为他有才能，就调任他为中尉。
English: The emperor heard about Wang Wenshu and thought he was talented, so he transferred him to be a lieutenant.

古文：其治复放河内，徒请召猜祸吏与从事，河内则杨皆、麻戊，关中扬赣、成信等。
现代文：其治理仿效河内郡，并召请了些好猜疑生事的官吏加以任用，在河内郡则有杨皆、麻戊，关中有扬赣、成信等。
English: Its governance was modeled after that of Hanoi County, and some suspicious officials were called in to be appointed. In Hanoi County, there were Yang Guan, Ma Wu, Guanzhong, and Chengxin.

古文：义纵为内史，惮之，未敢恣治。
现代文：义纵任内史，王温舒害怕他，便不敢滥施暴政。
English: Wang Wenshu was afraid of him and did not dare to carry out tyranny.

古文：及纵死，张汤败后，徙为廷尉。
现代文：待义纵死去，张汤事败以后，王温舒调任廷尉。
English: After Zhang Tang's defeat, Wang Wenshu was transferred to the position of court lieutenant.

古文：而尹齐为中尉坐法抵罪，温舒复为中尉。
现代文：而尹齐在中尉任上因犯法论罪，王温舒便又被任命为中尉。
English: While Yin Qi was punished for breaking the law when he was a lieutenant, Wang Wenshu was appointed as a lieutenant.

古文：为人少文，居它惛惛不辩，至于中尉则心开。
现代文：他缺少文才，在任别的官职时，往往心不在焉，对公事冷漠处之，但做了中尉之后却精神大振。
English: He lacked literary talent, and was often absent-minded and apathetic when appointed to other official positions, but after becoming a lieutenant, he was in high spirits.

古文：素习关中俗，知豪恶吏，豪恶吏尽复为用。
现代文：他一向熟悉关中习俗，广交酷恶官吏，所以他当中尉后，酷恶官吏都重新被任用。
English: He had always been familiar with the customs of the Guanzhong, and he had a wide network of vicious officials. Therefore, after he became a lieutenant, all the vicious officials were reappointed.

古文：吏苛察淫恶少年，投缿购告言奸，置伯落长以收司奸。
现代文：官吏苛刻地督察淫恶少年，还设了举报垢以征求举报，置伯及邑落之长以收捕督察奸民。
English: Officials sternly inspect the lewd boys, and also set up a reporting station to solicit reports, and set up the mayor and the head of the village to arrest the inspectors and the villains.

古文：温舒多谄，善事有势者；即无势，视之如奴。
现代文：王温舒爱好阿谀奉承，对有权势的人极能吹捧拉拢；而对无权无势的人，则视如奴隶一般。
English: Wang Wenshu is fond of flattery, and he is very good at touting and wooing powerful people, while he regards powerless people as slaves.

古文：有势家，虽有奸如山，弗犯；无势，虽贵戚，必侵辱。
现代文：对有权势的人家，即使有奸情如山，也不去冒犯；对没有权势的人家，即使是贵戚，也要加以侵辱。
English: Do not offend a powerful family, even if there is a mountain of treachery; do not insult a powerless family, even if it is a noble relative.

古文：舞文巧，请下户之猾，以动大豪。
现代文：他为人巧诈，曾奏请管治平民中的不法分子，以讽劝触动那些大豪人家。
English: He was a cunning man. He once asked the government to control the lawless elements among the common people, and used sarcasm to persuade and move those powerful families.

古文：其治中尉如此。
现代文：可见他的统治之术已达到何等圆滑的程度。
English: You can see how well he has mastered the art of governing.

古文：奸猾穷治，大氐尽靡烂狱中，行论无出者。
现代文：那些奸猾不法之民得到了彻底惩治，大都死在了狱中，极少有能出来的。
English: Those treacherous and lawless people were thoroughly punished, most of them died in prison, and very few were able to get out.

古文：其爪牙吏虎而冠。
现代文：王温舒的爪牙属吏个个如狼似虎。
English: His best men are like tigers in hats.

古文：于是中尉部中中猾以下皆伏，有势者为游声誉，称治。
现代文：于是中尉辖区内中等以下的奸猾盗贼都伏法，有权势的大豪为其歌功颂德，称赞他治民有方。
English: As a result, all the less-than-average treacherous thieves in the lieutenant's jurisdiction submitted to the law, and the powerful heroes sang his praises and praised him for his ability to govern the people.

古文：数岁，其吏多以权贵富。
现代文：几年后，他手下的小吏就多因权贵大家的保护，而个个发家致富。
English: A few years later, most of the minor officials under his command became wealthy thanks to the protection of the powerful.

古文：温舒击东越还，议有不中意，坐以法免。
现代文：王温舒出击束越回来，议政时有违天子之意，因此以罪免官。
English: Wang Wenshu was removed from his post for violating the will of heaven when he returned from the battlefield.

古文：是时，上方欲作通天台而未有人，温舒请复中尉脱卒，得数万人作。
现代文：这时皇上刚想修筑通天台而缺少人工，王温舒奏请尽召中尉以前的脱漏士卒，共得数万人工。
English: At this time, the emperor just wanted to build a penetrating roof, but there was a shortage of labor. Wang Wenshuo asked to call up all the missing soldiers before the lieutenant, a total of tens of thousands of workers.

古文：上说，拜为少府。
现代文：皇上很高兴，便任命王温舒为少府。
English: The emperor was so pleased that he appointed Wang Wenshu as the Young Prefect.

古文：徙右内史，治如其故，奸邪少禁。
现代文：后又调任右内史，其治理依然如故，奸猾邪恶之徒得以减少直至完全查禁。
English: Later, he was transferred to the Department of Internal Affairs, and his governance remained the same. The number of treacherous and evil people was reduced until they were completely banned.

古文：坐法失官，复为右辅，行中尉，如故操。
现代文：后又因获罪免官，复出后作右辅，兼任中尉，操行一切如故。
English: Later, he was removed from his post due to his conviction, and after his reinstatement, he worked as a right assistant, concurrently serving as a lieutenant, and continued to operate as before.

古文：岁余，会宛军发，诏征豪吏。
现代文：一年多以后，遇朝廷发兵征伐大宛，皇上下诏征召豪吏。
English: More than a year later, when the imperial court sent troops to conquer Dawan, the emperor issued an imperial edict to conscript officials.

古文：温舒匿其吏华成，及人有变告温舒受员骑钱，它奸利事，罪至族，自杀。
现代文：王温舒藏匿手下豪吏华成，且有人告发王温舒私下接受员骑的脏钱，和其他违法之事，论罪应该诛族，王温舒难以承受此打击，于是便畏罪自杀。
English: Wang Wenshu hid the wealthy official Huacheng from his subordinates, and someone accused Wang Wenshu of secretly accepting dirty money and other illegal things. The crime should be the Yi people. Wang Wenshu could not bear this blow, so he committed suicide for fear of crime.

古文：其时，两弟及两婚家亦各自坐它罪而族。
现代文：当时王温舒的两个弟弟及弟妻全家也各因他罪，一并族诛。
English: At that time, Wang Wenshu's two younger brothers and his younger brother's wife's entire family were also separated because of his crime.

古文：光禄勋徐自为曰： 悲夫！
现代文：光禄勋徐自为说： 可悲呀可悲！
English: Guanglu Xiu said to himself: "How sad! How sad!"

古文：夫古有三族，而王温舒罪至同时而五族乎！ 
现代文：古有诛灭三族之事，而王温舒竟罪至同时诛灭五族！ 
English: In ancient times, there was a matter of annihilating three tribes, but Wang Wenshu was so sinful that he annihilated five tribes at the same time!

古文：温舒死，家累千金。
现代文：王温舒死后，家产值千金。
English: After Wang Wenshu's death, the family's output value increased by thousands of dollars.

古文：尹齐，东郡茌平人也。
现代文：尹齐，东郡茌平县人。
English: Yin Qi, from Dong County, Suiping County.

古文：以刀笔吏稍迁至御史。
现代文：以刀笔吏逐渐调升为御史。
English: The sword-wielding clerk was gradually promoted to goshi.

古文：事张汤，汤数称以为廉。
现代文：在张汤手下做事，张汤多次称赞他为人清廉。
English: Working under Zhang Tang, Zhang Tang repeatedly praised him for his integrity.

古文：武帝使督盗贼，斩伐不避贵势。
现代文：武帝派他督察盗贼，他斩杀铲除盗贼而从不害怕他们的名望和声势。
English: Emperor Wu sent him to inspect the thieves. He killed and eradicated the thieves and never feared their fame and reputation.

古文：迁关都尉，声甚于甯成。
现代文：后调任关都尉，声望超过了宁成。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Captain Guan, and his reputation surpassed that of Ning Cheng.

古文：上以为能，拜为中尉。
现代文：皇上认为他有才能，任命他为中尉。
English: The emperor thought he had talent and appointed him as a lieutenant.

古文：吏民益凋敝，轻齐木强少文，豪恶吏伏匿而善吏不能为治，以故事多废，抵罪。
现代文：然而官吏和百姓的情况却每况愈下，世风虚伪不实，轻视伊齐木强无文采，恶吏不肯任职，善吏又无能力治事，尹齐也因职事大多荒废而被问罪。
English: However, the situation of the officials and the people was getting worse and worse. The world's style was hypocritical and untruthful. Izhiki was despised for being weak and uneducated. Bad officials refused to hold office, good officials were incapable of managing affairs, and Yin Qi was also accused of wasting most of his official duties.

古文：后复为淮阳都尉。
现代文：后来他又复出做了淮阳都尉。
English: Later, he made a comeback as the captain of Huaiyang.

古文：王温舒败后数年，病死，家直不满五十金。
现代文：王温舒败落后几年，尹齐染病而死，所遗留的家产不足五十金。
English: A few years after Wang Wenshu's defeat, Yin Qi fell ill and died, leaving behind less than fifty gold coins.

古文：所诛灭淮阳甚多，及死，仇家欲烧其尸，妻亡去，归葬。
现代文：因为他在淮阳杀人太多，等他死后，仇人想焚烧他的尸体解恨，他的妻子携尸逃去，才得以埋葬。
English: Because he killed too many people in Huaiyang, when he died, his enemies wanted to burn his body to relieve their hatred, and his wife fled with the body before it could be buried.

古文：杨仆，宜阳人也。
现代文：杨仆，宜阳人。
English: Yangshuo, Yiyang.

古文：以千夫为吏。
现代文：因千夫捐钱谷当上小吏。
English: Due to the donation of thousands of money, Qiantu became a minor official.

古文：河南守举为御史，使督盗贼关东，治放尹齐，以敢击行。
现代文：后来河南太守举荐他做了御史，被派到关东督察盗贼，治政仿效伊齐，敢做敢为。
English: Later, he was recommended by the governor of Henan Province to do imperial history, and was sent to Guandong to inspect thieves. He followed Izi's example in governance and dared to do daring things.

古文：稍迁至主爵都尉，上以为能。
现代文：逐渐升迁到主爵都尉，皇上认为他有才能。
English: Gradually promoted to Lord Lieutenant, the Emperor thought he had talent.

古文：南越反，拜为楼船将军，有功，封将梁侯。
现代文：南越反叛，杨仆被任命为楼船将军，立了功，封爵号将梁侯。
English: During the South Vietnamese rebellion, Yang Pei was appointed as the general of the Lousheng, and was awarded the title of "Liang Hou" (梁侯).

古文：东越反，上欲复使将，为其伐前劳，以书敕责之曰： 将军之功，独有先破石门、寻狭，非有斩将骞旗之实也，乌足以骄人哉！
现代文：后来束越又反叛，皇上想再次起用他为将，因为他白恃以前的功劳，就下诏书责备他说： 你做将军立下的功劳，衹有首先攻取石门、寻隁等险要之地这一点，并没有斩将拔旗的确实战功，有什么值得骄傲自满呢！
English: Later, Sokucho rebelled again, and the emperor wanted to use him again as a general, because he had neglected his previous merits, so he issued an edict to reproach him, saying, "Your merits as a general do not include the fact that you were the first to capture the Stone Gate, find the anchor, and other crucial places, and do not include the actual war merit of raising the flag. What is there to be proud of?

古文：前破番禺，捕降者以为虏，掘死人以为获，是一过也。
现代文：先前攻破番禺，收捕投降者作俘虏，掘出死人当作收获，是第一个过失。
English: The first mistake was to break through Panyu earlier, to capture those who surrendered as prisoners, and to dig out the dead as a harvest.

古文：建德、吕嘉逆罪不容于天下，将军拥精兵不穷追，超然以东越为援，是二过也。
现代文：南越王建德、贼相吕嘉叛逆之罪天地难容，将军你拥精兵不去穷追到底，使得束越从容发兵救援，是第二个过失。
English: The crime of treason committed by South Vietnam's King Trn Đình Dc and the traitor Lý Trn Đc is intolerable. The second mistake was that the general did not pursue the elite soldiers to the end, which made Sok Chng send troops to rescue them.

古文：士卒暴露连岁，为朝会不置酒，将军不念其勤劳，而造佞巧，请乘传行塞，因用归家，怀银黄，垂三组，夸乡里，是三过也。
现代文：军中士卒连年晒雨淋，举办朝会都没有酒喝，将军你不念他们的辛劳，而制造巧言，标榜自我，回乡的时候，怀揣银印金印，共三组之多，在乡里进行炫耀，是第三个过失。
English: Army sergeants are exposed to the sun and rain year after year, and they do not drink wine when they hold the imperial court banquet. If you do not miss their hard work, you will make clever remarks, flaunt yourself, and when you return to your hometown, you will carry the silver seal and gold seal. There are a total of three groups. Showing off in the countryside is the third mistake.

古文：失期内顾，以道恶为解，失尊尊之序，是四过也。
现代文：因贪守妻妾迟归，却以道路险恶加以开脱，有失祖宗礼法，是第四个过失。
English: It is the fourth fault to be late to return home due to covetousness of wife and concubine, but to be excused by a dangerous road, which is a breach of ancestral etiquette.

古文：欲请蜀刀，问君贾几何，对曰率数百，武库日出兵而阳不知，挟伪干君，是五过也。
现代文：想要配备蜀刀，问你价钱多少，答说均为数百钱，武器仓库天天有兵器出入却假作不知，以伪犯君，是第五个过失。
English: If you want to be equipped with a Shu knife, you will be asked how much the price is, and the answer will be hundreds of dollars. Weapons warehouses have weapons coming and going every day, but they pretend not to know. Being a hypocrite is the fifth fault.

古文：受诏不至兰池宫，明日又不对。
现代文：收到诏令不来兰池宫见君，曰后又不来解释。
English: After receiving the imperial edict, he did not come to Lanchi Palace to see you, and then he did not come to explain.

古文：假令将军之吏问之不对，令之不从，其罪何如？
现代文：如果将军你的属吏问而不答，有令不听，又该如何治罪呢？
English: If your subordinates do not answer the general's questions, and do not obey orders, how should they be punished?

古文：推此心以在外，江海之间可得信乎！
现代文：试想大家都像如此这般，天地之间还有什么信义可言！
English: Just imagine that everyone is like this, how can there be any trust between heaven and earth!

古文：今东越深入，将军能率众以掩过不？ 
现代文：现在束越叛军已深入汉土，将军你能带兵抗敌以功补过吗？ 
English: Now that the Sokou rebels have penetrated deep into Han territory, General, can you make up for it by leading troops to resist the enemy?

古文：仆惶恐，对曰： 愿尽死赎罪！ 
现代文：杨仆听后十分惶恐，就回答说： 我愿不惜战死以赎罪立功！ 
English: After hearing this, Yang Min was very frightened and replied, "I am willing to die in battle to atone for my sins and make meritorious deeds!"

古文：与王温舒俱破东越。
现代文：后来他与王温舒一同大破束越叛军。
English: Later, together with Wang Wenshu, he defeated the Vietcong rebels.

古文：后复与左将军荀彘俱击朝鲜，为彘所缚，语在《朝鲜传》。
现代文：又与左将军荀彘一同攻击朝鲜，被荀彘所缚，这段事迹见于《朝鲜传》之中。
English: He also attacked Korea together with General Zou Zuo, and was tied up by Zou Zuo. This incident is described in "Choreography of Korea."

古文：还，免为庶人，病死。
现代文：回朝后，杨仆被免官而沦为平民，最后得病而死。
English: After returning to the imperial court, Yang Pu was dismissed from his post and reduced to a commoner. He eventually fell ill and died.

古文：咸宣，杨人也。
现代文：咸宣，杨县人。
English: Xian Xuan, from Yang County.

古文：以佐史给事河东守。
现代文：以佐史身份供事于河东太守手下。
English: He served under the governor of Hedong Province as Sashi.

古文：卫将军青使买马河东，见宣无害，言上，征为厩丞。
现代文：卫青将军让他在河东买马，发现咸宣很有能力，便禀告了皇上，于是征召他为厩丞。
English: General Wei Qing asked him to buy a horse in Hedong. When he found that Xian Xuan was very capable, he denounced him to the emperor, who then conscripted him as a stable master.

古文：官事办，稍迁至御史及中丞，使治主父偃及淮南反狱，所以微文深诋杀者甚众，称为敢决疑。
现代文：咸宣尽职办理公事，逐渐升迁为御史及中丞，派他去办理主父偃及淮南王造的案件，他用精密的文字苛刻地攻讦，使此案处斩罪犯甚多，而被赞为敢于决断。
English: Xian Xuan did his duty in handling public affairs, and was gradually promoted to the position of imperial historian and vice-chairman. He was sent to handle the case created by his father Zou and King Huainan. He used precise writing to attack Zou harshly, so that there were many criminals in this case, and was praised for daring to make decisions.

古文：数废数起，为御史及中丞者几二十岁。
现代文：经过几次免官又几次复出，咸宣任御史及中丞职务几乎达到二十年之久。
English: He was repeatedly removed from office and repeatedly appointed, and served as imperial historian and chujo for almost twenty years.

古文：王温舒为中尉，而宣为左内史。
现代文：王温舒做中尉时，咸宣则任左内史。
English: When Wang Wenshu was a lieutenant, Xian Xuan was a left internal historian.

古文：其治米盐，事小大皆关其手，自部署县名曹宝物，官吏令丞弗得擅摇，痛以重法绳之。
现代文：这项差事十分杂细，不论大事小事他都要亲手处理，还要亲自过问各县属曹实物的收藏保管情况，官吏们都不得擅自触动，否则就要绳之以重法。
English: This errand is very detailed. No matter how big or small, he has to handle it with his own hands. He also has to personally inquire about the collection and storage conditions of the physical objects belonging to Cao in each county. Officials are not allowed to touch them without permission, otherwise they will be brought to justice.

古文：居官数年，一切为小治辩，然独宣以小至大，能自行之，难以为经。
现代文：咸宣做官数年，所处理的都是些细小之事，然而咸宣却独能以小见大，但他的工作方法衹能他自己来施行，难以成为广泛适用的常法。
English: During his several years as an official, all of the matters handled by Xian Xuan were minor. However, Xian Xuan was uniquely able to see the big picture. However, his work methods could only be implemented by himself, and it was difficult for them to become widely applicable common law.

古文：中废为右扶风，坐怒其吏成信，信亡藏上林中，宣使郿令将吏卒，阑入上林中蚕室门攻亭格杀信，射中苑门，宣下吏，为大逆当族，自杀。
现代文：其间咸宣因故撤职被降为右扶风，因此他怪罪到属吏成信身上，成信于是逃到了上林藏身，咸宣指使郡令率吏卒，擅自闯入上林苑中的蚕馆攻杀成信，射十了苑门，咸宣因此被交给司法官吏去审理，判为大逆之罪，罪该诛族，咸宣自杀。
English: In the meantime, Ham Hsun was demoted to the position of Right Fufeng because he was removed from his post. Therefore, he blamed the crime on his subordinate officer, Cheng Xin. Cheng Xin then fled to the upper forest to hide. Ham Hsun ordered the county commander to lead the officers to break into the silkworm house in the upper forest garden to attack and kill Cheng Xin, and shot down the garden gate. Ham Hsun was therefore handed over to the judicial officials for trial, and was convicted of high treason. The crime was committed by the Yi people, and Ham Hsun committed suicide.

古文：而杜周任用。
现代文：而杜周得到了任用。
English: Du Zhou was appointed.

古文：是时，郡守尉、诸侯相、二千石欲为治者，大抵尽效王温舒等，而吏民益轻犯法，盗贼滋起。
现代文：当时，郡守、都尉、诸侯相这些俸禄为二彳石一级的官吏中想把辖地治理好的，大多都效仿王温舒等人的做法，然而这却使得官吏民众对犯法的事情越加不重视，盗贼也极度滋生。
English: At that time, most of the officials who wanted to administer their jurisdictions well, such as county governors, captains, and princes, whose salaries were two rupees, followed the practice of Wang Wenshu and others. However, this made the officials and the people pay less and less attention to the things that violated the law, and thieves also bred extremely.

古文：南阳有梅免、百政，楚有段中、杜少，齐有徐勃，燕、赵之间有坚卢、范主之属。
现代文：在南阳就有梅免、百政，楚有段中、杜少，齐有徐勃，燕趟一带有坚卢、范主等人。
English: In Nanyang, there are Meimen and Baizheng, Chu has Duan and Du Shao, Qi has Xu Bo, Yanbei has Jianlu and Fan Shuzhu.

古文：大群至数千人，擅自号，攻城邑，取库兵，释死罪，缚辱郡守、都尉，杀二千石，为檄告县趋具食；小群以百数，掠卤乡里者不可称数。
现代文：他们多时聚众达数千人，擅自立号称王，攻打城镇，取出库中武器，放走死刑罪犯，捆绑羞辱郡守、都尉，甚至将其杀害，还擅写文书促令县府为他们准备食物：少时也能聚众上百，掠洗乡里的事件不可胜数。
English: They often gathered thousands of people, arrogantly claimed to be kings, attacked towns, took out weapons from storehouses, released criminals sentenced to death, tied up and humiliated county governors and captains, and even killed them. They also wrote unauthorized documents to urge the county government to prepare food for them. Sometimes they could gather hundreds of people, and there were countless incidents of looting in the countryside.

古文：于是上始使御史中丞、丞相长史使督之，犹弗能禁，乃使光禄大夫范昆、诸部都尉及故九卿张德等衣绣衣，持节、虎符，发兵以兴击，斩首大部或至万余级。
现代文：于是皇上才指令御史中丞、丞相长史督察这些事，但还是不能禁止，便又指令光禄大夫范昆、各部都尉以及前九卿张德等身着绣衣，手持符节，以军兴之法正式发兵攻打盗贼，斩杀了大部分的盗贼，共取下首级达万余个。
English: As a result, the Emperor ordered the Grand Historian, the Vice-Minister, and the Vice-Minister to inspect these matters, but they could not be prohibited. He also ordered the Guanglu Doctor, Fan Kun, the captains of various departments, and the former Nine Lords, Zhang De, to dress in embroidered clothes, hold the symbols, and officially send troops to attack the thieves with the method of military prosperity. They killed most of the thieves, and took more than 10,000 first-class ones.

古文：及以法诛通行饮食，坐相连郡，甚者数千人。
现代文：并按法律杀死了供给盗贼饮食的百姓，以串通各郡问罪的，多达数千人。
English: And according to the law, they killed thousands of people who provided food to the thieves and were accused of colluding with the counties.

古文：数岁，乃颇得其渠率。
现代文：几年过后，便捕得了许多盗贼的首领。
English: It took several years before their main leader was caught.

古文：散卒失亡，复聚党阻山川，往往而群，无可奈何。
现代文：然而他们手下的贼兵散逃到各处，又聚成族党占山为王，常常人多势众，令当地官府无可奈何。
English: However, the robber soldiers under their command scattered and fled to various places, and the Chengzong party gathered to occupy the mountain as king, often with a large number of people, leaving the local government helpless.

古文：于是作沈命法，曰： 群盗起不发觉，发觉而弗捕满品者，二千石以下至小吏主者皆死。 
现代文：于是，朝廷颁布了惩治藏匿逃亡者的 沈命法 ，说： 众盗贼起来作乱没有发觉的，及发觉后没有逮满一定盗贼人数的，郡守官以下直至小吏主管人都要处死。 
English: As a result, the imperial court promulgated the "Death Penalty Law" to punish the hiding of fugitives, saying: If a group of thieves got up to make a disturbance without being discovered, and if a certain number of thieves were not caught after they were discovered, everyone from the county warden down to the head of the petty officials would be put to death.

古文：其后小吏畏诛，虽有盗弗敢发，恐不能得，坐课累府，府亦使不言。
现代文：这以后小吏因为害怕被杀，虽知有盗贼也不敢告发，恐怕不能捕住，因检查不足数而获罪并连累郡府，郡府也让他们不要多言。
English: After that, for fear of being killed, the petty officials did not dare to report even if they knew there were thieves, fearing that they would not be able to catch them, and because of the insufficient number of inspections, they were convicted and implicated the county government, which also told them not to say more.

古文：故盗贼浸多，上下相为匿，以避文法焉。
现代文：由此一来则盗贼越来越多，上上下下相互藏匿隐瞒，用虚文掩饰真相来逃避法律的追究。
English: As a result, there are more and more thieves, hiding and concealing from each other up and down, and using false documents to cover up the truth to evade legal prosecution.

古文：田广明字子公，郑人也。
现代文：田广明，字子公，郑县人。
English: Tian Guangming, Zizi Gong, from Zheng County.

古文：以郎为天水司马。
现代文：以郎官身份当上天水司马。
English: He was appointed to the post of vice-governor of Tianshui.

古文：攻次迁河南都尉，以杀伐为治。
现代文：因功又调迁为河南都尉，用杀伐的严厉手段治理地方。
English: Due to his meritorious service, he was transferred to the post of Henan governor, and governed the region with the strict means of killing and felling.

古文：郡国盗贼并起，迁广明为淮阳太守。
现代文：当时各郡国盗贼并起，朝廷调迁田广明为淮阳太守。
English: At that time, thieves from all counties and countries rose up at the same time, and the imperial court transferred Tian Guangming to be the governor of Huaiyang.

古文：岁余，故城父令公孙勇与客胡倩等谋反，倩诈称光禄大夫，从车骑数十，言使督盗贼，止陈留传舍，太守谒见，欲收取之。
现代文：一年多后，前城父令公孙勇与其宾客胡倩等一起谋反，胡倩假称自己为光禄大夫，随从车骑数十辆，受命前来督察盗贼，在陈留驿站的旅舍歇脚，郡太守去晋见他，想请回去好好接待。
English: More than a year later, the former mayor ordered Gongsun Yong to conspire with his guests, including Hu Rong, to rebel. Hu Rong pretended to be a doctor of Guanglu, rode with dozens of cars, was ordered to come to inspect the thieves, and rested in the hostel of Chen Liuye Station. The county magistrate went to Jin to see him and wanted to invite him back for a good reception.

古文：广明觉知，发兵皆捕斩焉。
现代文：后来田广明发觉了谋反的阴谋，于是发兵将乱党都逮起来杀了。
English: Later, Tian Guangming discovered the conspiracy to rebel, so he sent troops to arrest and kill the rebels.

古文：而公孙勇衣绣衣，乘驷马车至圉，圉使小史侍之，亦知其非是，守尉魏不害与厩啬夫江德、尉史苏昌共收捕之。
现代文：然而公孙勇却身着绣衣，乘着由四匹马驾的车逃到了圉县，圉县派小史侍卫他，也发觉了其中的底细，守尉魏不害与厩啬夫江德、尉史苏昌一起收捕了公孙勇。
English: However, Gongsun Yong was dressed in embroidered clothes and fled to Jixian in a car driven by four horses. Jixian sent Xiao Shi to guard him and also discovered the details. Guard lieutenant Wei Nuxin arrested Gongsun Yong together with stableman Jiang De and lieutenant Shi Su Chang.

古文：上封不害为当涂侯，德轑阳侯，昌蒲侯。
现代文：皇上封魏不害爵号当涂侯，封江德爵号缭阳侯，封苏吕爵号蒲侯。
English: The Emperor conferred the title of Wei Fu Zhizhong on Dang Tuo, the title of Jiang De on Zhaoyang, and the title of Su Lu on Pu.

古文：初，四人俱拜于前，小史窃言。武帝问： 言何？ 
现代文：当初，四人都到御前拜见皇上，小史窃窃私语，武帝问他道： 你在说什么？ 
English: At first, all four of them came to see the emperor. Xiao Shi whispered to him, and Emperor Wu asked him, "What are you talking about?"

古文：对曰： 为侯者得东归不？ 上曰： 女欲不？
现代文：小史回答说： 被封爵号为侯的人可以不回东方去吗？ 皇上说： 你想不回去吗？
English: Xiao Shi replied, "Can a knighted person not go back to the East?" The emperor said, "Don't you want to go back?"

古文：贵矣。
现代文：我也赐你一个爵号。
English: I'm also giving you a title.

古文：女乡名为何？ 对曰： 名遗乡。 
现代文：你家乡叫什么地名？ 小史回答说： 叫遣乡。 
English: What is the name of the place in your hometown? Xiao Shi replied, "It's called Yuanxiang."

古文：上曰： 用遗汝矣。 
现代文：皇上说： 这样好像要遗弃你了。 
English: The emperor said, "It looks like I'm abandoning you."

古文：于是赐小史爵关内侯，食遗乡六百户。
现代文：于是赐小史爵号关内侯，拥有遣乡六百户的封地。
English: As a result, he was given the title of Kansai Hōkaku (関内侯) and owned 600 fiefs.

古文：上以广明连禽大奸，征入为大鸿胪，擢广明兄云中代为淮阳太守。
现代文：皇上因为田广明连连擒获大盗贼，就征召他做了大鸿胪，并提拔田广明的哥哥田云中接替任淮阳太守。
English: Because Tian Guangming had been repeatedly captured by great thieves, the emperor conscripted him to become a great thief, and promoted Tian Guangming's brother, Tian Yunzhong, to succeed him as the governor of Huaiyang.

古文：昭帝时，广明将兵击益州，还，赐爵关内侯，徙卫尉。
现代文：昭帝时，田广明率兵攻益州，还朝后，赐爵号关内侯，调任为卫尉。
English: At the time of Emperor Zhao, Tian Guangming led an army to attack Yizhou, and after returning to the imperial court, he was given the title of Guanai, and transferred to the position of guard lieutenant.

古文：后出为左冯翊，治有能名。
现代文：后来又出任左冯翊，治理方面以才能高而闻名。
English: Later, he served as Zuo Fengyao, known for his talent in governance.

古文：宣帝初立，代蔡义为御史大夫，以前为冯翊与议定策，封昌水侯。
现代文：宣帝刚即帝位时，田广明接替蔡义做了御史大夫，因先前任左冯翊时为朝廷议政有功，封爵号昌水侯。
English: At the time of Emperor Xuan's accession to the throne, Tian Guangming succeeded Cai Yi as goshi daifu, and was given the title of chang shui hu because he had made contributions to the deliberation of the imperial court when he was Zuo Fengqi.

古文：岁余，以祁连将军将兵击匈奴，出塞至受降城。
现代文：一年多后，田广明以祁连将军的身份率兵出击匈奴，北出塞上到达受降城。
English: More than a year later, Tian Guangming led the troops to attack the Xiongnu with the identity of the general of the Qilian, and reached the city of Toru from the north.

古文：受降都尉前死，丧柩在堂，广明召其寡妻与奸。
现代文：受降城都尉在先前死了，装有尸体的棺材还停在灵堂裹，田广明就召来他的守寡之妻与其通奸。
English: The capitulated city captain had died earlier, the coffin containing the body was still wrapped in the chapel, and Tian Guangming invited his widowed wife to commit adultery with her.

古文：既出不至质，引军空还。
现代文：后来他没有到达预定的目的地，就带兵空手而归。
English: He later failed to reach his intended destination and led his troops back empty-handed.

古文：下太仆杜延年簿责，广明自杀阙下，国除。
现代文：因此田广明被交给太守杜延年审理，不久自杀于天子宫阙之下，封地被解除。
English: Therefore, Tian Guangming was handed over to the eunuch Du Yan for trial, and soon he committed suicide under the imperial edict, and his fief was revoked.

古文：兄云中为淮阳守，亦敢诛杀，吏民守阙告之，竟坐弃市。
现代文：他的哥哥田云中任淮阳太守，也敢于施行杀伐政策，郡中官吏百姓到皇宫将他告下，竟因此被论罪处死，尸体弃于市中。
English: His brother, Tian Yunzhong, who was the governor of Huaiyang, also dared to carry out the policy of killing, and the officials and people in the county went to the imperial palace to report him. As a result, he was sentenced to death and his body was abandoned in the city.

古文：田延年字子宾，先齐诸田也，徙阳陵。
现代文：田延年，字子宾，是先前齐国诸田的后代，高祖时田氏被迁徙到了阳陵。
English: Tian Yan Nian, also known as Zi Bin, was a descendant of Zhu Tian of Qi, whose ancestors, the Jitian clan, were moved to Yangling.

古文：延年以材略给事大将军莫府，霍光重之，迁为长史。
现代文：田延年因才略突出供事于大将军的幕府，霍光很看重他，调他做了长史。
English: Because of his talent, Tian Ennen worked for the shogunate as a general. He was highly regarded by Huo Guang, and his transfer made a long history.

古文：出为河东太守，选拔尹翁归等以为爪牙，诛锄豪强，奸邪不敢发。
现代文：后来田延年出任河东太守，选拔尹翁归等作爪牙，杀伐镇压当地豪强，使奸盗之流不敢出来惹事生非。
English: Later, Tian Ennian served as the governor of Hedong, selected Yin Wengui and others as minions, killed and suppressed local strongmen, so that the stream of traitors did not dare to come out and cause trouble.

古文：以选入为大司农。
现代文：因此田延年被选拔入京做了大司农。
English: For this reason, Tian Ennian was selected to go to Beijing to become the Chief Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：会昭帝崩，昌邑王嗣立，淫乱，霍将军忧惧，与公卿议废之，莫敢发言。
现代文：正遇上昭帝驾崩，昌邑王刘贺继承王位，十分淫乱，霍光将军十分忧虑，便与公卿大臣们商议要废掉他，但没有敢发言的人。
English: When Emperor Zhao died, Liu He, King of Changyi, succeeded to the throne. He was very promiscuous, and General Huo Guang was very worried. He discussed with the noblemen and ministers to abolish him, but no one dared to speak out.

古文：延年按剑，廷叱群臣，即日议决，语在《光传》。
现代文：这时田延年按着宝剑，当廷叱责在场的大臣们，即日就议定了决策，这些事迹载于《霍光传》中。
English: At this time, Tian Ennian pressed the sword, the court reprimanded the ministers present, and the decision-making was agreed on the same day. These events are recorded in "The Biography of Huo Guang."

古文：宣帝即位，延年以决疑定策封阳成侯。
现代文：宣帝即位，田延年因为议定朝政有功封爵号阳成侯。
English: Emperor Xuanxuan ascended the throne, and Tian Ennian was conferred the title of Yang Chenghou (阳成侯) for his contribution to the government.

古文：先是，茂陵富人焦氏、贾氏以数千万阴积贮炭苇诸下里物。
现代文：先前，茂陵富人焦氏、贾氏以数千万钱为本积贮木炭苇草等下葬用的物资。
English: Previously, the rich Jiao and Jia families in Maoling used tens of millions of yuan to stockpile charcoal, rushes and other materials for burial.

古文：昭帝大行时，方上事暴起，用度未办，延年奏言： 商贾或豫收方上不祥器物，冀其疾用，欲以求利，非民臣所当为。
现代文：昭帝驾崩办理丧事时，这些物资的需求突然成为问题，难以办理，田延年因此上奏说： 商人中有的预先收贮下葬用的不祥物资，准备等急需时获取暴利，这不是平民和臣下们所应该做的事。
English: When Emperor Zhao passed away, the demand for these materials suddenly became a problem and was difficult to manage. Tian Yannian therefore reported: Some merchants stored ominous materials for burial in advance, preparing to make a windfall profit when they were urgently needed. This is not what commoners and subjects should do.

古文：请没入县官。 
现代文：请求予以没收入县官处理。 
English: The request was handled by the county government.

古文：奏可。
现代文：他的奏言得到了批准。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：富人亡财者皆怨，出钱求延年罪。
现代文：富人中损失钱财的都十分怨恨他，便花钱买通关系要求治田延年有罪。
English: The rich people who lost money all resented him very much, and they spent money to buy connections to demand that Harada be found guilty.

古文：初，大司农取民牛车三万两为僦，载沙便桥下，送致方上，车直千钱，延年上簿诈增僦直车二千，凡六千万，盗取其半。
现代文：当初，身为大司农的田延年租用百姓的牛车三万辆，到桥下运沙，送往陵地，一辆车的租金值一千钱，田延年上报时却虚报增值为每辆二千钱，总共六千万钱，贪污了其中的一半。
English: At first, Tian Yanren, who was the chief farmer, rented up to 30,000 people's ox carts, transported sand under the bridge, and sent it to Lingshi. The rent of one car was worth 1,000 yuan. However, when Tian Yanren submitted a report, he falsely reported that the added value was 2,000 yuan per car, a total of 60 million yuan, and he embezzled half of it.

古文：焦、贾两家告其事，下丞相府。
现代文：焦、买两家告发了这件事，田延年被交到丞相府审理。
English: Jiao and Buy both reported the matter, and Tian Enron was taken to the Prime Minister's Office for trial.

古文：丞相议奏延年 主守盗三千万，不道 。
现代文：丞相上奏认为田延年 趁主持公事之机贪污三千万钱，罪属大逆不道。 
English: The minister of justice reported that Tian Yannian took advantage of the opportunity to preside over public affairs and embezzled 30 million yuan, which is a crime of high treason.

古文：霍将军召问延年，欲为道地，延年抵曰： 本出将军之门，蒙此爵位，无有是事。 
现代文：霍光将军召问田延年，想为他疏通，田延年否认道： 我本出于将军门下，蒙受您的大恩才得到现在的爵号官位，没有这样的事。 
English: General Huo Guang summoned Tian Yannian and wanted to smooth things over for him. Tian Yannian denied: I was originally under the generals, and it was thanks to your great kindness that I got my current title and rank. There is no such thing.

古文：光曰： 即无事，当穷竟。 
现代文：霍光说： 既然没有事，应该赶快澄清事实。 
English: Huo Guang said: Since there is nothing wrong, we should quickly clarify the facts.

古文：御史大夫田广明谓太仆杜延年： 《春秋》之义，以功覆过。
现代文：御史大夫田广明对太仆杜延年说： 《春秋》一书中的思想，有以功补过这一层。
English: The chief historian Tian Guangming said to the eunuch Du Yannian: The thoughts in the book "Spring and Autumn" have made up for this layer.

古文：当废昌邑王时，非田子宾之言大事不成。
现代文：在应该废掉昌邑王刘贺时，若不是田子宾勇于直言大事就无法成功。
English: When Liu He, the king of Changyi, should have been abolished, it would not have been possible without Tian Zibin's courage to speak out.

古文：今县官出三千万自乞之何哉？
现代文：现在无非是县官出了三千万钱自己请求他收下，又算得了什么呢？
English: Now it is nothing more than a county official who has spent 30 million yuan and asked him to accept it, and what is the result?

古文：愿以愚言白大将军。 
现代文：我愿意用我的愚蠢之言劝说大将军。 
English: I am willing to use my stupid words to persuade the general.

古文：延年言之大将军，大将军曰： 诚然，实勇士也！
现代文：杜延年将听到的这些话禀告了大将军，大将军说： 当然，因延年确实是勇士！
English: Du Yanling reported these words to the general, and the general said: Of course, Du Yanling is indeed a warrior!

古文：当发大议时，震动朝廷。 
现代文：应当在朝议时发布此消息，使朝廷震动。 
English: This news should be released at the time of the imperial council, so that the imperial court is shaken.

古文：光因举手自抚心曰： 使我至今病悸！
现代文：霍光随之抬手抚在心口说： 逭件事使我至今仍在心痛！
English: Huo Guang then raised his hand, stroked his heart and said: "This matter still pains me to this day!

古文：谢田大夫晓大司农，通往就狱，得公议之。 
现代文：感谢田大夫为大司农辩白，但依照朝廷的通理田延年应该住进监狱，由公众来议决他。 
English: He thanked Dr. Tian for defending him, but according to the imperial court's reasoning, Tian Yannian should live in prison, and the public should judge him.

古文：田大夫使人语延年，延年曰： 幸县官宽我耳，何面目入牢狱，使众人指笑我，卒徒唾吾背乎！ 
现代文：田广明大夫指使人对田延年说了上述情况，田延年说： 幸亏县宫出来为我开脱，我有什么脸面进入牢狱，而让众人指着耻笑我，牢卒在我的背后唾水！ 
English: Dr. Tian Guangming instructed someone to tell Tian Yannian about the above-mentioned situation. Tian Yannian said: Fortunately, the county court came out to exonerate me, I have no face to go to prison, and let everyone point at me, laugh at me, and spit behind my back!

古文：即闭阁独居齐舍，偏袒持刀东西步。
现代文：随即关上家门独居于自己的斋舍之中，拽开半边衣服，手持着刀在屋裹来回踱步。
English: He then closed the door to his house and lived alone in his own house, tearing off half of his clothes and pacing up and down the house with a knife in his hand.

古文：数日，使者召延年诣廷尉。
现代文：几天后，使者来召田延年到廷尉处听罪。
English: A few days later, an emissary came to summon Tian Yan to the court lieutenant's office to hear the case.

古文：闻鼓声，自刎死，国除。
现代文：田延年听到鸣鼓的声音，就用刀自杀而死。
English: When Tian Yannian heard the sound of drums, he killed himself with a knife.

古文：严延年字次卿，东海下邳人也。
现代文：死后他的封地随即被收回。严延年，字逸卿，东海郡下邳县人。
English: After his death, his fiefdom was immediately taken back. Yan Yan Nian, surnamed Yixing, was from Shimoqi County, Donghai County.

古文：其父为丞相掾，延年少学法律丞相府，归为郡吏。
现代文：他的父亲是丞相的属官。腿玉蝗年轻时便在丞相府学习法律，后来回到家乡，就在郡府作官。
English: His father was a subordinate official of the prime minister. When he was young, he studied law at the prime minister's office, and later returned to his hometown to work as an official in the county government.

古文：以选除补御史掾，举侍御史。
现代文：以后经过选拔，补任御史属宫，又被推荐做了侍御史。
English: Later, he was selected to fill the position of Imperial Historian of the Imperial Palace, and was recommended to serve as Imperial Historian.

古文：是时，大将军霍光废昌邑王，尊立宣帝。
现代文：这时，大将军霍光废掉昌邑王而拥立漠宣帝。
English: At this time, the great general Huo Guang dethroned the King of Changyi and supported the Emperor Mu Xuan.

古文：宣帝初即位，延年劾奏光 擅废立主，无人臣礼，不道 。
现代文：宣帝即位不久，严延年就上书弹劾霍光，说他 擅自废立国君，失去了为人臣下的体统，犯了大逆不道之罪 。
English: Soon after Emperor Xuanxuan ascended the throne, Yan Yanannian wrote a letter to impeach Huo Guang, saying that he had abdicated the throne without authorization, lost his status as a subject, and committed the crime of high treason.

古文：奏虽寝，然朝廷肃焉敬惮。
现代文：奏章虽遭搁置，但朝廷上下却为之震肃，人们对严延年又敬重又畏惧。
English: Although the play chapter was shelved, the imperial court was shocked by it, and people respected and feared Yan Yan.

古文：延年后复劾大司农田延年持兵干属车，大司农自讼不干属车。
现代文：严延年又弹劾大司农田延年携带武器冒犯天子的后车，而大司农自己却辩白说根本没有这样的事。
English: Yan Yan also impeached the superintendent of the farmland for carrying weapons and offending the son of heaven, while the superintendent himself argued that there was no such thing.

古文：事下御史中丞，谴责延年何以不移书宫殿门禁止大司农，而令得出入宫。
现代文：于是此案下交给御史中丞去查办，御史中丞申斥严延年，责问他为什么当时不写公文给宫殿门卫阻止大司农入宫，而让大司农得以随意出入宫廷。
English: As a result, the case was handed over to the Grand Historian Chujo to investigate. The Grand Historian Chujo reprimanded Yan Yan for years, asking him why he did not write an official document to the palace gatekeeper to prevent the Grand Secretary from entering the palace, but allowed the Grand Secretary to enter and leave the palace at will.

古文：于是复劾延年阑内罪人，法至死。
现代文：这样，严延年反被检举为纵容罪人私闯宫禁，依法当判死罪。
English: As a result, Yan Yan Nian was prosecuted for conniving with a criminal to illegally break into the palace, and was sentenced to death according to law.

古文：延年亡命。
现代文：不得已严延年只好亡命出逃。
English: He was forced to live in exile for a long time.

古文：会赦出，丞相、御史府征书同日到，延年以御史书先至，诣御史府，复为掾。
现代文：后遇大赦，才敢重新露面，恰好丞相府和御史府所发来的征用文书也都在同一天内送达，由于御史府文书在先，严延年便去了御史府供职，又做了那里的属官。
English: Later, when there was an amnesty, he dared to reappear. It just so happened that the requisition documents sent by the Prime Minister's Office and the Government Historian's Office were both delivered on the same day. Since the Government Historian's Office documents came first, Yan Yan Nian went to the Government Historian's Office to work and became a subordinate officer there.

古文：宣帝识之，拜为平陵令，坐杀不辜，去官。
现代文：但宣帝还记得他弹劾霍光之事，就任命他为平陵县令，任职期间他又因错杀无辜而获罪免职。
English: However, Emperor Xuanzong still remembered his impeachment of Huo Guang and appointed him as the governor of Pingling County. During his term of office, he was convicted and removed from office for killing an innocent person.

古文：后为丞相掾，复擢好畤令。
现代文：其后被任命为丞相的属宫，接着又提拔为好时县令。
English: After that, he was appointed as a subordinate palace of the prime minister, and then he was promoted to the county magistrate of Hershey.

古文：神爵中，西羌反，强弩将军许延寿请延年为长史，从军败西羌，还为涿郡太守。
现代文：神爵年间，西羌反叛，强弩将军许延寿邀请严延年做长史，从军出征并打败了西羌。回朝后，他被任命为涿郡太守。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jimmu, Xicheng rebelled, and the strong general Xu Yanzhou invited Yan Yannian to make a long history. Yan Yannian went to war and defeated Xicheng. After returning to the imperial court, he was appointed the governor of Jixian County.

古文：时，郡比得不能太守，涿人毕野白等由是废乱。
现代文：那时，连连派往涿郡去的都是些无能太守，涿郡人毕野白等因此得以无视公法，扰乱乡里。
English: At that time, all those sent to Handan County in succession were incompetent governors. As a result, people from Handan County, such as Bi Niu Bai, were able to ignore public law and disturb the countryside.

古文：大姓西高氏、东高氏，自郡吏以下皆畏避之，莫敢与牾，咸曰： 宁负二千石，无负豪大家。 
现代文：而豪强大族西高氏和束高氏，就更加猖狂，连郡府的官吏都畏避他们，不敢与他们顶撞，都说： 宁可得罪太守，不可得罪豪门。 
English: But the powerful and powerful clans of the West Gao clan and the Sok Gao clan were even more rampant. Even the officials of the county government were afraid of them and did not dare to confront them. They all said, "It is better to offend the governor than to offend the wealthy."

古文：宾客放为盗贼，发，辄入高氏，吏不敢追。
现代文：这两家的门客在外放肆地偷窃抢劫，一旦事发，就躲进主家，官吏便不再敢追捕。
English: The clients of these two families were brazenly stealing and robbing outside, and in the event of an incident, they hid in the main house, and officials no longer dared to pursue them.

古文：浸浸日多，道路张弓拔刃，然后敢行，其乱如此。
现代文：这样日子一长，行人都得张弓拔刀才敢在路上行走，郡中的盗贼为乱，竞到如此程度。
English: For a long time, pedestrians had to draw their bows and swords before they dared to walk on the road, and the thieves in the county were in chaos, competing to such an extent.

古文：延年至，遣掾蠡吾赵绣按高氏得其死罪。
现代文：严延年到任后，即派遣郡府的属官蠡吾人趟绣去调查高家的罪行，核定他们犯有死罪。
English: After Yan Yan took office, he sent officials from the county government to investigate Gao's crimes and found them guilty of capital crimes.

古文：绣见延年新将，心内惧，即为两劾，欲先白其轻者观延年意，怒，乃出其重劾。
现代文：赵绣见严延年是新来的郡将，心裹害怕，就起草了两份劾罪书，准备先禀告轻的一份，若严延年发怒，才再把重的那份拿出来。
English: When Zhao Shuxiu saw that Yan Yan Nian was the new county magistrate, she was afraid and drafted two impeachment charges. She was prepared to denounce the light one first, and if Yan Yan Nian became angry, she would take out the heavy one.

古文：延年已知其如此矣。
现代文：谁知严延年事先就已知道了这一底细。
English: Who knows if Yan Yan already knew this in advance.

古文：赵掾至，果白其轻者，延年索怀中，得重劾，即收送狱。
现代文：趟绣一来，果然禀告了轻的劾罪书，严延年随即从赵绣怀中搜出了那份重的劾罪书，并当即把他送进了监狱。
English: As soon as Zhao Shuxiu arrived, he indeed denounced the minor impeachment, and Yan Yan immediately found the heavy impeachment from Zhao Shuxiu's bosom, and immediately sent him to prison.

古文：夜入，晨将至市论杀之，先所按者死，吏皆股弁。
现代文：头一天夜裹刚入狱，第二天一早就被押赴市中定罪斩首，死在了他所查究的高氏的前头，吓得官吏们都两腿发抖。
English: The night before, Wuchang had just been sent to prison. Early the next morning, he was taken to the middle of the city, convicted, and beheaded. He died in front of Gao, whom he was investigating, leaving the officials trembling in fear.

古文：更遣吏分考两高，穷竟其奸，诛杀各数十人。
现代文：严延年再派人分头查考两个高家，彻底追查他们纵奸为盗的罪恶，在两家各处死了数十人。
English: In the following year, officials were sent separately to investigate the two colleges and thoroughly investigate the crime of theft. Dozens of people died in both colleges.

古文：郡中震恐，道不拾遗。
现代文：郡中民众大为震惊，从此境内路不拾遣。
English: The people in the county were greatly shocked, and from then on there was no turning back.

古文：三岁，迁河南太守，赐黄金二十斤。
现代文：过了三年，严延年调任河南太守，赏赐二十金。
English: After three years, Yan Yan was transferred to the position of the governor of Henan Province with a reward of 20 gold coins.

古文：豪强胁息，野无行盗，威震旁郡。
现代文：河南郡中的豪强顿时收敛行为，郊野僻远的地方再也没有行劫的盗贼，严延年的声威震动了邻近各郡。
English: The powerful in Henan County suddenly restrained their behavior, and there were no more robbers in the remote countryside. Yan Yan's reputation shook the neighboring counties.

古文：其治务在摧折豪强，扶助贫弱。
现代文：他治理地方的宗旨是摧抑压制豪强，扶助贫弱。
English: The purpose of his local governance is to suppress the strong and help the weak.

古文：贫弱虽陷法，曲文以出之；其豪杰侵小民者，以文内之。
现代文：贫弱者即使犯法，也要庇护掩饰使他们解脱；而对那些欺压百姓的豪强恶霸，则要加重案文词语把他们抓入监狱。
English: The poor and the weak, even if they break the law, should be protected and protected, and the strong bullies who oppress the people should be arrested and put in prison.

古文：众人所谓当死者，一朝出之；所谓当生者，诡杀之。
现代文：人们都认为一定要处以死刑的犯人，却说不定什么时候就获释出狱；而那些被认为并未犯死罪的人，却又意外地被杀死。
English: Convicts who were thought certain to be sentenced to death could be released at any time, while those who were not thought to have committed capital crimes were killed by accident.

古文：吏民莫能测其意深浅，战栗不敢犯禁。
现代文：官吏百姓都无法揣测严延年执法的量刑尺度，因此大家都十分惶恐，生怕触法犯禁。
English: Officials and ordinary people are unable to guess the sentencing scale of the strict enforcement of the law, so everyone is very frightened and afraid of breaking the law.

古文：按其狱，皆文致不可得反。
现代文：可核查严延年接手的每宗案件，又都是文案缜密。无可翻改。
English: It can be verified that every case that Yan Yan took over is meticulously written and cannot be altered.

古文：延年为人短小精悍，敏捷于事，虽子贡、冉有通艺于政事，不能绝也。
现代文：严延年身材短小，精明强干，办事灵活迅速，即使是历史上以精通政务著称的子贡、冉有等人，也未必能胜过他。
English: Yan Yan Nian is short in stature, shrewd and strong, flexible and quick in doing things. Even Zigong, Ran You and others, who are famous for their proficiency in government affairs in history, may not be able to beat him.

古文：吏忠尽节者，厚遇之如骨肉，皆亲乡之，出身不顾，以是治下无隐情。
现代文：对手下吏员中忠诚奉公的人，他会像自家人一样给予优厚的待遇，亲近他们并一心为他们着想，而从不顾个人的得失，所以在他管辖的区域之内没有什么事情瞒得过他的。
English: He treated the loyal and dedicated officials under his command as if they were members of his own family. He was close to them and devoted to them, regardless of personal gain or loss. Therefore, nothing within his jurisdiction was hidden from him.

古文：然疾恶泰甚，中伤者多，尤巧为狱文，善史书，所欲诛杀，奏成于手，中主簿亲近史不得闻知。
现代文：然而严延年痛恨坏人坏事太过，被伤害的人很多，尤其是他长于写狱辞，又善于写官府文书，想要杀掉谁，就亲笔写成奏书，连掌管文书的中主簿，以及最接近他的属吏，都无从得知。
English: However, Yan Yanren's hatred of bad people and bad things was too much, and many people were hurt. In particular, he was good at writing prison letters, and he was also good at writing official documents. If he wanted to kill someone, he would write a report in his own handwriting. Even the master book in charge of the documents, as well as the officials closest to him, could not be found out.

古文：奏可论死，奄忽如神。
现代文：奏准判定一个人的死罪，快得就像神明一样。
English: They are as quick as the gods to pronounce a man guilty of the death penalty.

古文：冬月，传属县囚，会论府上，流血数里，河南号曰 屠伯 。
现代文：到了冬天行刑时，他就命令所属各县把囚犯解送到郡上，总集在郡府统一处死，此时往往血流数里，所以河南郡人都称他为 屠伯 。
English: When it came to winter executions, he ordered the counties he belonged to to send the prisoners to the county, and the general assembly was unified in the county government. At this time, the blood often flowed for several miles, so the people of Henan County called him Tu Bo.

古文：令行禁止，郡中正清。
现代文：在他的辖区裹，有令则行，有禁则止，全郡上下一派清明。
English: In his jurisdiction, if there is an order, it is allowed, if there is a ban, it is stopped, and the whole county is clear.

古文：是时，张敞为京兆尹，素与延年善。
现代文：这时，张敞任京兆尹一职，他与严延年一向友善。
English: At this time, Zhang Zhangyan held the post of Beijing Zhaoyun, and he was always friendly with Yan Yan.

古文：敞治虽严，然尚颇有纵舍，闻延年用刑刻急，乃以书谕之曰： 昔朝卢之取菟也，上观下获，不甚多杀。
现代文：张敞治理地方虽也严峻，但还能对一些犯法的人酌情从宽处理。他听说严延年使用刑律苛刻严酷，便去信劝告他说： 古时有名的良犬韩卢猎取野兔时，都要先看一看主人的眼色，然后再去追逐捕获，而不过多地捕杀。
English: Although Zhang Zhang's local governance is also severe, he can also treat some offenders with leniency as appropriate. He heard that Yan Yan's use of punishment was harsh and severe, so he wrote to advise him: When the famous good dog Han Lu hunted hares in ancient times, he should first look at the owner's eyes, and then chase the capture, but not catch and kill too much.

古文：愿次卿少缓诛罚，思行此术。 
现代文：因此希望次卿你稍稍放宽一下诛杀的刑罚，考虑效仿韩卢的办法来行事。 
English: Therefore, I hope that you will slightly relax the punishment for assassination and consider following Han Lu's method.

古文：延年报曰： 河南天下喉咽，二周余毙，莠盛苗秽，何可不锄也？ 
现代文：严延年回信说： 河南是天下咽喉所在，东西两周统治者留下的弊端太多，恶草茂盛而禾苗稀疏，怎么可以不加以铲除呢？ 
English: Yan Yan replied in a letter: Henan is the world's throat, there are too many drawbacks left by the rulers of the East and West, the weeds are lush and the seedlings are sparse, how can they not be eradicated?

古文：自矜伐其能，终不衰止。
现代文：他以此夸耀自己的才能和功绩，始终不肯放松或暂停杀人的刑罚。
English: He used it to boast of his talents and achievements, and always refused to relax or suspend the punishment for murder.

古文：时，黄霸在颍川以宽恕为治，郡中亦平，屡蒙丰年，凤皇下，上贤焉，下诏称扬其行，加金爵之赏。
现代文：这时黄霸在颖川用宽容的办法治理地方，郡内也很太平，而且连续出现丰年，凤凰也从天而降。皇上赞赏黄霸的才德，下诏表扬了他的政绩，并赏赐他黄金和爵位。
English: At this time, Huangba governed the area in Yingchuan with a tolerant approach. The county was also very peaceful, and there were consecutive good years, and the phoenix also fell from the sky. The emperor appreciated Huangba's talent, praised his political achievements, and awarded him gold and a knighthood.

古文：延年素轻霸为人，及比郡为守，褒赏反在己前，心内不服。
现代文：严延年一向鄙视黄霸的为人，想不到他在邻郡作太守，所得的奖赏反而在自己之上，因此内心实在不服气。
English: Yan Yan Nian has always despised Huang Ba as a person. He could not imagine that he was the governor of a neighboring county, but the reward he received was above his own, so he was really unconvinced.

古文：河南界中又有蝗虫，府丞义出行蝗，还见延年，延年曰： 此蝗岂凤皇食邪？ 
现代文：正巧在河南境内又出现了蝗虫，府丞义去视察灾情，回郡后去见严延年，严延年便说： 这蝗虫难道就是凤凰的食物吗？ 
English: It just so happened that locusts appeared again in Henan Province. The prefect went to inspect the disaster situation. After returning to the county, he went to see Yan Yan Nian. Yan Yan Nian said: Is this locust the food of the phoenix?

古文：义又道司农中丞耿寿昌为常平仓，利百姓，延年曰： 丞相御史不知为也，当避位去。
现代文：府丞义又谈到司农中丞耿寿昌在边郡修筑常平仓，有利于百姓。严延年说： 丞相和御史连这种办法都想不出，应该退位走人！
English: Fu Zhengyi also talked about the Minister of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Geng Shuchang, building a permanent warehouse in Bian County, which is beneficial to the people. Yan Yannian said: The Prime Minister and the Minister of History can't think of such a way, they should abdicate!

古文：寿昌安得权此？ 
现代文：寿昌怎能以此来谋取权位呢？ 
English: How can Shuchang use this to gain power?

古文：后左冯翊缺，上欲征延年，符已发，为其名酷复止。
现代文：后来左冯翊空缺，皇上打算任用严延年，征召的竹符已经发出，但由于他的残忍之名在外，便又作罢。
English: Later, when there was a vacancy at Zuo Fengye, the emperor planned to appoint Yan Yan Nian, and the call-up certificates had already been issued. However, because of his reputation for cruelty, he did not do so.

古文：延年疑少府梁丘贺毁之，心恨。
现代文：严延年怀疑少府梁丘贺在皇上面前说了自己的坏话，于是怀恨在心。
English: Yan Yan Nian suspected that the young prefect Liang Qiu He had spoken ill of him in front of the emperor, so he held a grudge.

古文：会琅邪太守以视事久病，满三月免，延年自知见废，谓丞曰： 此人尚能去官，我反不能去邪？ 
现代文：遇上琅邪太守因为在任职中长期有病，已满三个月而被免职，严延年自知也将被罢免，就对府丞说： 这个人都能免官，我反而不能免官吗？ 
English: In the case of the wicked abbot, who was removed from office after three months because he had been ill for a long time during his term of office, Yan Yanren knew that he would also be removed from office, so he said to Fu Rong: This person can be removed from office, but can I not be removed from office?

古文：又延年察狱史廉，有臧不入身，延年坐选举不实贬秩，笑曰： 后敢复有举人者矣！ 
现代文：再有，严延年举荐狱官为廉，不料此人却犯了贪脏罪，而犯贪脏罪的人又不准入选，为此，严延年因推荐人才不符实际而获罪，受到降级处分，他笑着说： 往后看还有谁敢举荐人才！ 
English: Furthermore, Yan Yan Nian was found guilty of recommending a corrupt prison officer, but this person was found to have committed a crime of corruption, and people who commit crimes of corruption are not allowed to be elected. For this reason, Yan Yan Nian was found guilty of recommending talents that did not correspond to reality, and was punished by demotion. He said with a smile: Looking back, who would dare to recommend talents!

古文：丞义年老颇悖，素畏延年，恐见中伤。
现代文：府丞义年老，心思颇有些惑乱，他向来就惧怕严延年，担心遭到伤害。
English: Fu Zheng is an old man, and his mind is somewhat confused. He has always been afraid of Yan Yan, and worried about being harmed.

古文：延年本尝与义俱为丞相史，实亲厚之，无意毁伤也，馈遗之甚厚。
现代文：严延年原先曾经与义同在丞相府做过属官，实际上对他很亲切也很厚待，并没有伤害他的意思，而且常常馋赠给他许多东西。
English: Yan Yan Nian had previously worked with Yoshitomo as a subordinate officer at the prime minister's office. In fact, he was very kind and generous to him, and did not mean to hurt him, and often gave him many things.

古文：义愈益恐，自筮得死卦，忽忽不乐，取告至长安，上书言延年罪名十事。
现代文：而义却越来越惶恐，就私下占卦问吉凶，得到的却是个死卦，他惘然若失，闷闷不乐，便藉休假机会到长安，向皇帝上书列举了构成严延年罪名的十件事。
English: However, Yixin became more and more frightened. He privately consulted fortune-tellers and asked about the fortunes of the year, but what he got was a dead riddle. He seemed lost and unhappy. He took the opportunity of a vacation to go to Chang'an and wrote to the emperor to list the ten things that constituted Yan Yan's crime.

古文：已拜奏，因饮药自杀，以明不欺。
现代文：送上了奏书，他就服毒自尽，以此来表明白己对皇上的忠诚。
English: After submitting his report, he committed suicide by taking poison to demonstrate his loyalty to the emperor.

古文：事下御史丞按验，有此数事，以结延年，坐怨望非谤政治不道弃市。
现代文：案件交由御史丞审查核实，有上面几件事属实，便足以给严延年结案了。结果，严延年以怨恨朝廷、诽谤国事及杀人无道之罪而被处以死刑，并陈尸示众。
English: The case was submitted to the Imperial Historian for review and verification, and if the above several things were true, it would be enough to close the case for Yan Yan Nian. As a result, Yan Yan Nian was sentenced to death for resentment of the imperial court, defamation of state affairs and the crime of killing without reason, and his corpse was displayed to the public.

古文：初，延年母从东海来，欲从延年腊，到雒阳，适见报囚。
现代文：当初，严延年的母亲从束海郡来，打算与严延年一起行腊祭礼。刚到洛阳，就碰上处决囚犯。
English: At first, Yan Yan Nian's mother came from Sokhaigun, intending to perform the wax festival with Yan Yan Nian. As soon as she arrived in Luoyang, she encountered executed prisoners.

古文：母大惊，便止都亭，不肯入府。
现代文：母亲很震惊，便在都亭歇止，不肯进入郡府。
English: My mother was so shocked that she stopped at the town hall and refused to enter the county seat.

古文：延年出至都亭谒母，母闭阁不见。
现代文：严延年出城到都亭去拜见母亲，母亲闭门不见。
English: Yan Yan Nian went out of the city to Du Ting to visit his mother, but she disappeared behind closed doors.

古文：延年免冠顿首阁下，良久，母乃见之，因数责延年： 幸得备郡守，专治千里，不闻仁爱教化，有以全安愚民，顾乘刑罚多刑杀人，欲以立威，岂为民父母意哉！ 
现代文：严延年在门外脱帽叩头，过了好一阵，母亲才见他，于是斥责他说： 有幸当了一郡太守，治理方圆千里的地方，没听说你以仁爱之心教化百姓，以使百姓安宁，反而靠着动用刑罚，大肆杀人，想以此来建立威信，难道身为老百姓的父母官就这样行事吗！ 
English: Yan Yan took off his cap and bowed his head outside the door for years. It took a while before his mother saw him, so she scolded him: I was fortunate enough to be a county magistrate, governing a place with a thousand-mile radius. I didn't hear that you educated the people with a heart of benevolence to keep the people calm, but instead relied on the use of punishments and wanton killing to establish prestige. Is this how you act as a parent-officer of the common people?

古文：延年服罪，重顿首谢，因自为母御，归府舍。
现代文：严延年赶忙认错，重重地叩头谢罪，于是亲自为母亲驾车，一同回郡府去。
English: Yan Yan Nian hastily admitted his mistake, bowed down and thanked him profusely, so he personally drove for his mother and went back to the county seat together.

古文：母毕正腊，谓延年： 天道神明，人不可独杀。
现代文：正腊的祭祀完毕后，母亲对严延年说： 苍天在上，明察秋毫，岂有乱杀人而不遭报应的？
English: After the sacrifice of Zhengla was completed, his mother said to Yan Yanling: "Heaven above, look at the autumn, is there a random killing without retribution?

古文：我不意当老见壮子被刑戮也！
现代文：想不到我在垂老之年还要目睹壮年的儿子身受刑戮！我去啦！
English: I never thought that in my old age I would have to witness the torture and killing of my grown-up son! I'm going!

古文：行矣！去女东归，扫除墓地耳。 
现代文：和你别离，回到东方的家乡去，为你准备好葬身之地。 母亲于是就走了。
English: Don't leave me, go back to your hometown in the East and prepare a place for you to be buried. So my mother left.

古文：遂去，归郡，见昆弟宗人，复为言之。
现代文：回到本郡，见着兄弟本家，又把以上所言对他们说了。
English: And when he was come to his own country, he found his brethren, and his father's house: and he spake unto them these same words.

古文：后岁余，果败。
现代文：过了一年多，严延年果然事情败露。
English: After more than a year, Yan Yan revealed the truth.

古文：东海莫不贤知其母。
现代文：东海郡人没有不称颂严母贤明智慧的。
English: The people of Donghai County have nothing but praise for Yan Mu's wisdom and wisdom.

古文：延年兄弟五人皆有吏材，至大官，东海号曰 万石严妪 。
现代文：严延年兄弟五人都有作官的才干，也都作了大官，因此东海郡人把严母称为 万石严妪 。
English: Yan Yan's five brothers all had the ability to become officials, and they all became high-ranking officials. Therefore, the people of Donghai County called Yan Yan's mother Wanshi Yan.

古文：次弟彭祖，至太子太傅，在《儒林传》。
现代文：严延年的二弟叫严彭祖，作官作到太子太傅，其事迹载于《儒林传》。
English: Yan Yan Nian's second brother was called Yan Peng Zu. He served as an official until he became the crown prince, and his deeds are recorded in the "Julin Biography."

古文：尹赏字子心，巨鹿杨氏人也。
现代文：尹赏，字子心，钜鹿杨氏地方人。
English: Yin Yun, character Zixin, Menglu Yang local people.

古文：以郡吏察廉为楼烦长。
现代文：因为作郡吏明察清廉而任楼烦长。
English: He was appointed to the post of chief magistrate because he was a shrewd and honest county official.

古文：举茂材、粟邑令。
现代文：后被举荐茂材，任粟邑县令。
English: After that, he was recommended by Shigeru, and was appointed as a magistrate of Ao'i County.

古文：左冯翊薛宣奏赏能治剧，徙为频阳令，坐残贼免。
现代文：左冯翊薛宣上奏说尹赏能治理艰巨的僻县，于是他被调任频阳县令，又因用刑使罪人致残免官。
English: Left Feng Zixue proclaimed that Yin Yun could govern the difficult remote counties, so he was transferred to the Fanyang County, and was dismissed for using punishment to cripple criminals.

古文：后以御史举为郑令。
现代文：后因御史推荐任郑县令。
English: Later, he was appointed as the Zheng County magistrate due to the recommendation of Mishi.

古文：永始、元延间，上怠于政，贵戚骄恣，红阳长仲兄弟交通轻侠，臧匿亡命。
现代文：永始、元延年间，皇上懈怠朝政，外戚骄横放肆，红阳长仲兄弟串通游侠，收纳亡命之徒。
English: In the years of Yongshi and Yuan Yan, the emperor's laxity in court politics, the arrogance of his maternal relatives, and the collusion of the Hongyang Chenzhong brothers with the rangers led to the capture of the outlaws.

古文：而北地大豪浩商等报怨，杀义渠长妻子六人，往来长安中。
现代文：而北地的大豪客浩商等图报私怨，杀害了义渠长及其妻子儿女共六人，并往来于长安城中。
English: However, the big tycoons of the north, such as merchants, reported personal grudges and killed the chief of the Yixian Canal, his wife and children, a total of six people, and traveled to and from Chang'an City.

古文：丞相、御史遣掾求逐党与，诏书召捕，久之乃得。
现代文：丞相、御史派遣属吏追寻贼党，朝廷也下诏书命令捕捉，很久才将其捕获。
English: The prime minister and the minister of history dispatched subordinate officials to pursue the thieves, and the imperial court also issued an imperial decree to capture them, but it took a long time to capture them.

古文：长安中奸猾浸多，闾里少年群辈杀吏，受赇报仇，相与探丸为弹，得赤丸者斫武吏，得黑丸者斫文吏，白者主治丧；城中薄墓尘起，剽劫行者，死伤横道，枹鼓不绝。
现代文：长安城中盗贼奸民极多，里巷中的游荡少年合伙杀害官吏，有的还接受贿赂替人报仇，他们做红、黑、白三色弹丸每人摸取，得到红色弹丸的去杀害武吏，得到黑色弹丸的去杀害文吏，得到白色弹丸的则为遇难的同党治理丧事；一时间城裹乌烟四起，盗贼们路劫行人，大街上死尸挡道，满城中鼓声不绝。
English: There were a lot of thieves and traitors in Chang'an City. The roving boys in the alleys cooperated in the killing of officials. Some also accepted bribes to take revenge on behalf of others. They made red, black and white three-colored projectiles, and each person fumbled for them. They got the red projectile to kill military officials, the black projectile to kill civil servants, and the white projectile to mourn the dead party members. For a while, the city was shrouded in smoke. Thieves robbed pedestrians on the road, dead bodies blocked the road on the street, and drums were heard all over the city.

古文：赏以三辅高第选守长安令，得一切便宜从事。
现代文：尹赏以三辅高第身份被选拔临时任长安令，并得到特权可以随机从事。
English: Yin Yun was selected as the third assistant high school to temporarily hold the position of Changanling, and was given the privilege of being able to randomly perform.

古文：赏至，修治长安狱，穿地方深各数丈，致令辟为郭，以大石覆其口，名为 虎穴 。
现代文：尹赏到任后，便修建了长安监狱，他命令向地下打出许多深洞，各深数丈，取出的土则在四周垒起土郭，然后用大石头盖在洞之上，并称这些洞为 虎穴 。
English: After Yin Yun took office, he built the Chang'an Prison. He ordered the excavation of many deep holes, each several feet deep. The excavated soil was used to build earthworks around the perimeter, and then large stones were used to cover the holes. These holes were called "tiger holes."

古文：乃部户曹掾史，与乡吏、亭长、里正、父老、伍人，杂举长安中轻薄少年恶子，无市籍商贩作务，而鲜衣凶服被铠扞持刀兵者，悉籍记之，得数百人。
现代文：完工之后，他就部署户曹、属吏，以及乡吏、亭长、里正、父老、伍人等下属，让他们分别举报长安城中各处的轻薄少年和不服管教的恶劣子弟，对没本地户口的商贩工匠，而身着危险服装如披镗甲着臂衣，手持刀箭兵刃的，也悉数查记，共得数百人。
English: After completion, he deployed his subordinates, such as household chiefs and subordinate officials, as well as township officials, pavilion chiefs, village chiefs, elders, and soldiers, and asked them to separately report the frivolous boys and unruly children everywhere in Chang'an City, as well as the merchants and craftsmen who did not have a local hukou, and those who wore dangerous clothing such as armor and armor, and those who held swords and arrows, totaling hundreds of people.

古文：赏一朝会长安吏，车数百辆，分行收捕，皆劾以为通行饮食群盗。
现代文：此后一天尹赏召集了长安的大小官吏，并备车马数百辆，令其分头对被查出者进行收捕，认定他们都是危害社会治安的盗贼。
English: On the following day, Yin Yun called together officials of all ranks in Chang'an, and prepared hundreds of cars and horses, and ordered his deputies to arrest those who had been detected, determining that they were all thieves endangering public security.

古文：赏亲阅，见十置一，其余尽以次内虎穴中，百人为辈，覆以大石。
现代文：尹赏亲自加以板视，每阅视十人放走一人，其余的则都被依次投入虎穴之中，每穴各一百人左右，最后以大石头盖上洞口。
English: Yin Yun personally inspected it, and every ten people who inspected it released one person, while the rest were successively thrown into the tiger's den, about a hundred people in each hole, and finally the hole was covered with a large stone.

古文：数日一发视，皆相枕藉死，便舆出，瘗寺门桓东。楬著其姓名，百日后，乃令死者家各自发取其尸。
现代文：几天以后，人们打开石头检视，见下面的人都已横七竖八地相枕而死，于是人们便将尸体取出，分别掩埋于寺门华表的东面，并各插木桩，写其姓名，一百天以后，才让死者家属各自挖出尸首取回。
English: A few days later, people opened the stone and saw that the people below had died lying side by side, so they took out the bodies and buried them separately on the east side of the temple gate flower table, and each wooden stake, writing their names. A hundred days later, the families of the deceased were allowed to dig out the bodies and retrieve them.

古文：亲属号哭，道路皆歔欷。
现代文：家属们都号啕大哭，过路的人也都为之叹息。
English: Family members were wailing loudly, and people passing by were also sighing.

古文：长安中歌之曰： 安所求子死？
现代文：长安城中有歌唱到此事说： 哪裹去找儿女尸？
English: There is a song about this in Chang'an City: "Where can I find the bodies of my children?

古文：桓东少年场。
现代文：华表束面少年场。
English: The children's playground with its trays of flower clocks.

古文：生时谅不谨，枯骨后何葬？ 
现代文：生前奸盗不修身，死后枯骨何处葬？ 
English: If a thief is incorrigible during his lifetime, where will his bones be buried after his death?

古文：赏所置皆其魁宿，或故吏善家子失计随轻黠愿自改者，财数十百人，皆贳其罪，诡令立功以自赎。
现代文：尹赏释放的都是和他有深交的老熟人，或是旧曰官吏和善良人家的子弟因一时糊涂而与盗贼有染并愿意自己改正的，才有数十近百人，尹赏都对他们缓刑处理，责令他们立功以自赎。
English: All of those released by Yin Yun were his old acquaintances with whom he had a deep friendship, or the sons of officials and good-hearted people in the old days who had an affair with a thief due to temporary confusion and were willing to correct themselves, only dozens of nearly one hundred people. Yin Yun all suspended their sentences and ordered them to redeem themselves.

古文：尽力有效者，因亲用之为爪牙，追捕甚精，甘耆奸恶，甚于凡吏。
现代文：其中努力上进的，还因此被尹赏收用为爪牙，他们善于追捕坏人，了解盗贼的好恶及行踪，比一般人在这方面强得多。
English: Among them, those who worked hard and made progress were also recruited by Yin Yun as his minions. They were good at chasing bad people and understanding the likes and dislikes of thieves and their whereabouts. They were much better than ordinary people in this regard.

古文：赏视事数月，盗贼止，郡国亡命散走，各归其处，不敢窥长安。
现代文：尹赏到长安视事数月，盗贼便停止了活动，外来盗贼由于害怕纷纷逃回原来的郡国，不敢再有窥伺长安之念。
English: After several months of observing the situation in Chang'an, the thieves stopped their activities. Foreign thieves were afraid to flee back to their original counties and no longer dared to spy on Chang'an.

古文：江湖中多盗贼，以常为江夏太守，捕格江贼及所诛吏民甚多，坐残贼免。
现代文：由于江湖盗贼泛滥，所以尹赏又被任命为江夏太守，他捕杀江湖盗贼及滥杀官吏百姓的人数极多，因 残贼 罪免宫。
English: Due to the proliferation of gangsters, Yin Yun was appointed as the governor of Jiangxia Province. He caught and killed a large number of gangsters and officials, and was pardoned for the remaining criminals.

古文：南山群盗起，以赏为右辅都尉，迁执金吾，督大奸猾。
现代文：南山一带群盗蜂起，尹赏又出任右辅都尉，后调任执金吾，负责督察大奸盗。
English: The bandits revolted in the Nanshan area, and Yin Yun was appointed as the right assistant captain. Later, he was transferred to the position of chief king, responsible for inspecting the big bandits.

古文：三辅吏民甚畏之。
现代文：三辅官吏民众对他非常畏惧。
English: Sanfu officials and people are very afraid of him.

古文：数年卒官。
现代文：几年后，尹赏死于任上。
English: A few years later, Yin Yun died in office.

古文：疾病且死，戒其诸子曰： 丈夫为吏，正坐残贼免，追思其功效，则复进用矣。
现代文：在他得病将死时，告诫他的几个孩子说： 大丈夫做官，不怕因 残贼 罪免官，事后追思其效果，则就会重新得到任用。
English: When he was on the verge of death from illness, he admonished several of his children, saying, "It's okay to be an official, don't be afraid of being removed from office for the crime of remaining a thief. If you think about it afterwards, you will be reappointed."

古文：一坐软弱不胜任免，终身废弃无有赦时，其羞辱甚于贪污坐臧。
现代文：而一旦因软弱失职而免官，就会终身被废弃而再无起用之时，这种羞辱比犯了贪污窝藏罪还要重得多。
English: And once removed from office due to weakness and dereliction of duty, it will be discarded for life and no longer used, this humiliation is much heavier than committing the crime of corruption and concealment.

古文：慎毋然！ 
现代文：望谨慎不要失职！ 
English: Be careful not to fail in your duty!

古文：赏四子皆至郡守，长子立为京兆尹，皆尚威严，有治办名。
现代文：尹赏的四个儿子都做官做到郡守，长子尹立当了京兆尹，他们都崇尚威严，有善于治理的名声。
English: All four of Yin Yun's sons became officials and county governors, and the eldest son, Yin Li, became the Jingzhao Yin. All of them advocated dignity and had a reputation for good governance.

古文：赞曰： 自郅都以下皆以酷烈为声，然都抗直，引是非，争大体。
现代文：赞曰：从郅都以下的所记传主都以严酷暴烈而闻名，然而郅都正直不阿，明是非，识大体。
English: Zang Zai said: "All the recorded preachers from Shidu and below are famous for their severity and violence. However, Shidu is honest, knows right from wrong, and has a general knowledge.

古文：张汤以知阿邑人主，与俱上下，时辩当否，国家赖其便。
现代文：而张汤却以阿谀君主，观其颜色行事得以重用，他时常以巧言搬弄是非，使国家上下阿谀之风盛行一时。
English: Zhang Tang, on the other hand, acted as an imam-monarch, and he was able to reuse his influence. He often used clever words to play tricks on others, which made the wind of imams at all levels of the state prevail for a while.

古文：赵禹据法守正。
现代文：趟禹据法办事，严守公正。
English: We will act in accordance with the law and strictly abide by justice.

古文：杜周从谀，以少言为重。
现代文：杜周顺从谀媚，凡事以少说为重。
English: Du Zhou, on the other hand, obeyed the boss's will, flattered him, and took the principle of saying little as an important principle.

古文：张汤死后，罔密事丛，浸以耗废，九卿奉职，救过不给，何暇论绳墨之外乎！
现代文：张汤死后，法禁严密，多事不宁，国家愈发动乱荒废，九卿奉职，忙于拯救治乱，哪有时间讨论法治以外的事情！
English: After Zhang Tang's death, the legal prohibition is strict, there are many troubles, the country is more and more chaotic and wasteful, the nine nobles are on duty, busy with saving and controlling the chaos, and there is no time to discuss things other than the rule of law!

古文：自是以至哀、平，酷吏众多，然莫足数，此其知名见纪者也。
现代文：自此一直到哀帝、平帝年间，酷吏众多，然而没法统计，这裹衹选其中著名的见于记载之中。
English: From that time until the reigns of Emperor Yue and Emperor Ping, there were many cruel officials, but there is no way to count them. The most famous of them can be found in the records.

古文：其廉者足以为仪表，其污者方略教道，一切禁奸，亦质有文武焉。
现代文：其中清廉的足以作为表率，其中污浊的或有谋略教化，或果敢禁查奸盗，也有文才武略之分。
English: Among them, the clean ones are enough to serve as a model, and the dirty ones are either scheming to educate, or daring to prohibit the investigation of thieves, and there are also literary and military points.

古文：虽酷，称其位矣。
现代文：他们虽然严酷，但是都能称职尽责。
English: Although they are strict, they are all capable of fulfilling their duties.

古文：汤、周子孙贵盛，故别传。
现代文：张汤、杜周后代子孙显贵兴盛，所以另外作传记加以记述。
English: Zhang Tang and Du Zhou's descendants and descendants prospered, so another biography was made to describe them.

