古文：王叔文，越州山阴人。
现代文：王叔文是越州山阴人。
English: Wang Shouwen is a native of Yuezhou Shanyin.

古文：以棋待诏。颇读书，班班言治道。
现代文：凭棋艺任翰林院待诏，很爱读书，能明晰地谈论治理天下的策略。
English: He was appointed to Hanlin Academy by virtue of his chess skills, loves to read, and can clearly talk about the strategy of governing the world.

古文：德宗诏直东宫，太子引以侍读，因论政及宫市之弊。太子曰： 寡人见上，将极言之。 
现代文：德宗皇帝命他在东宫任职，太子召他做侍读，论及政事和宫市的弊病，太子说： 我拜见父皇时，将尽情禀告这些见解。 
English: Emperor Dezong ordered him to serve in the East Palace, and the prince called him to serve as a reader, discussing political affairs and the ills of the palace. The prince said, "When I meet my father the emperor, I will do my best to report these opinions."

古文：坐皆趣赞，叔文独嘿然。
现代文：在座的人都奉承夸赞，只有叔文默不做声。
English: Everyone present was fawning and praising, except for Uncle Wen, who remained silent.

古文：既罢，太子曰： 向君无言，何哉？ 
现代文：谈论结束后，太子说： 刚才您为什么不说话呢？ 
English: After the discussion, the prince said: Why didn't you speak just now?

古文：叔文曰： 太子之事上，非视膳问安无与也。
现代文：叔文说： 太子侍奉皇帝，不是行视膳问安的礼节不能亲近。
English: Uncle Wen said: The prince serves the emperor, not the etiquette of seeing the meal and asking for greetings can not be close.

古文：且陛下在位久，有如小人间之，谓殿下收厌群情，则安解乎？ 
现代文：况且陛下在位很久了，如果小人离间您父子关系，说您收买人心，那您怎样解释呢？ 
English: Moreover, Your Majesty has been on the throne for a long time. If villains break up your father-son relationship and say that you buy people's hearts, then how do you explain it?

古文：太子谢曰： 非先生不闻此言！ 
现代文：太子感激地说 ：不是先生我就听不到这样的意见了。 
English: The prince said gratefully: "I wouldn't have heard such an opinion if it wasn't for you."

古文：繇是重之，宫中事咸与参订。
现代文：从此后很尊重他，东宫的事务都跟他商议。
English: From then on, he was held in high esteem, and the affairs of the East Palace were all discussed with him.

古文：叔文浅中浮表，遂肆言不疑，曰： 某可为相，某可为将，它日幸用之。 
现代文：王叔文心无城府，外表轻浮，于是毫无顾忌地发表意见，说： 某某人可以当宰相，某某人可以当将军，将来请您任用他们。 
English: Wang Shouwen's heart was in the right place and his appearance was frivolous, so he expressed his opinion without any scruples, saying: Someone can be prime minister, someone can be a general, in the future, please appoint them.

古文：阴结天下有名士，而士之欲速进者，率谐附之，若韦执谊、陆质、吕温、李景俭、韩晔、韩泰、陈谏、柳宗元、刘禹锡为死友，而凌准、程异又因其党进，出入诡秘，外莫得其端。
现代文：暗中交结天下著名的人物，而那些急于当官的人，都讨好巴结他。像韦执宜、陆质、吕温、李景俭、韩晔、韩泰、陈谏、柳宗元、刘禹锡等都是生死之交，而凌准、程异之又依靠他当了官，进出很诡秘，外面没有人知道他的底细。
English: Like Wei Xiyi, Lu Qi, Lü Wen, Li Jing Jian, Han Qi, Han Tai, Chen Qi, Liu Zongyuan, Liu Yuxi, etc. are all life-and-death friends, while Ling Jun and Cheng Yizhi relied on him to become an official, and his entrance and exit are very secretive, and no one outside knows his details.

古文：强籓剧帅，或阴相赂遗以自结。
现代文：势力强大的藩镇和军事统帅，也有的暗中赠送财物，与他交结。
English: Powerful feudal towns and military commanders, some of whom secretly gave gifts of property, formed alliances with him.

古文：顺宗立，不能听政，深居施幄坐，以牛昭容、宦人李忠言侍侧，群臣奏事，从幄中可其奏。
现代文：顺宗当了皇帝，不能管理朝政，住在深宫，坐在帷帐里，用牛昭容、宦官李忠信在身边侍候，臣子们禀告政事，顺宗在帷帐中批准他们的奏章。
English: When Shunzong became emperor, he was no longer able to manage the affairs of state. He lived in the Deep Palace and sat in the curtain, with Niu Zhaorong and the eunuch Li Zhongxin waiting at his side. The courtiers reported on the affairs of state, and Shunzong approved their reports in the curtain.

古文：王伾密语诸黄门： 陛下素厚叔文。 
现代文：王亻丕秘密地告诉黄门官们 ：陛下一向厚待叔文。 
English: Wang Yao secretly told the Yellow Gate officials: Your Majesty has always been kind to Uncle Wen.

古文：即繇苏州司功参军拜起居郎、翰林学士。
现代文：立即由苏州司功参军升任起居郎、翰林学士。
English: He was immediately promoted from Suzhou Shigong to Kijiro and Hanlin Baccalaureate.

古文：大抵叔文因伾，伾因忠言，忠言因昭容，更相依仗。
现代文：大抵王叔文依靠王亻丕，王亻丕依靠李忠言，忠言依靠昭容，又相互依仗。
English: Most of the time, Wang Shouwen relied on Wang Yao, Wang Yao relied on Li Zhongyan, Zhongyan relied on Zhaorong, and they relied on each other.

古文：伾主传受，叔文主裁可，乃授之中书，执谊作诏文施行焉。
现代文：王亻丕掌管传达皇帝的命令，王叔文掌管裁决，然后交给中书省，韦执宜起草诏令执行。
English: Wang Qian was in charge of conveying the emperor's order, Wang Shouwen was in charge of the ruling, and then it was handed over to the Ministry of Literature. Wei Xingyi was in charge of drafting and implementing the edict.

古文：时景俭居亲丧，温使吐蕃，惟质、泰、谏、准、毕、宗元、禹锡等倡誉之，以为伊、周、管、葛复出，忄间然谓天下无人。
现代文：当时李景俭的父亲死了在守丧，吕温出使吐蕃，只有陆质、韩泰、陈谏、凌准、韩晔、柳宗元、刘禹锡等人带头称颂他们，认为是伊尹、周公、管仲、诸葛亮再世，愤激地说天下没有人才。
English: At that time, Li Jingjian's father died in mourning, and Lu Wen sent an envoy to Tubo. Only Lu Qi, Han Tai, Chen Qi, Ling Jun, Han Qi, Liu Zongyuan, Liu Yuxi and others took the lead in praising them. They believed that Yi Yin, Zhou Gong, Guanzhong, and Zhuge Liang were reincarnated, and said indignantly that there was no talent in the world.

古文：叔文每言： 钱谷者，国大本，操其柄，可因以市士。 
现代文：王叔文常说 ：钱粮是国家的根本，掌管这个权，凭此可以收买官吏。 
English: Wang Shouwen often said: money and grain are the foundation of the country. If you control this power, you can use it to bribe officials.

古文：乃白用杜佑领度支、盐铁使，己副之，实专其政。
现代文：于是报告皇帝用杜佑任度支、盐铁使，自己担任杜佑的副职，实际上专擅大权。
English: Therefore, he reported that the emperor used Du You to appoint officials and envoys of salt and iron, and he himself served as Du You's deputy, in fact, he had exclusive power.

古文：不淹时，迁户部侍郎。
现代文：不多久，升任户部侍郎。
English: Not long after, he was promoted to the position of head waiter.

古文：宦人俱文珍忌其权，罢叔文学士。诏出，骇怅曰： 吾当数至此议事。不然，无繇入禁中。 
现代文：宦官俱文珍妒忌他的权位，罢免了叔文的翰林学士，诏令宣布后，王叔文吃惊而失望地说 ：我应该多到这里商议朝政，不这样就没有理由进皇宫了。 
English: The eunuch, Qu Wenzhen, was jealous of his position of power and dismissed Shuwen Hanlin from his post. After the edict was announced, Wang Shuwen was surprised and disappointed and said, "I should come here more often to discuss the affairs of state. Otherwise, there would be no reason to enter the palace."

古文：伾复力请，乃听三五日一至翰林，然不得旧职矣。
现代文：王亻丕又极力向皇帝请求，才允许他三五天到翰林院一次，但没有恢复原来的职位。
English: Wang Qian also made a strong request to the emperor to allow him to come to Hanlin Academy once every three to five days, but he did not resume his original position.

古文：在省不事所职，日引其党谋取神策兵，制天下之命。
现代文：王叔文在台省中不做自己职分内的事，每天带着同党谋划夺取神策军，控制国家的要害。
English: Wang Shouwen did not do his duty in Taiwan Province. He plotted with his colleagues to capture the Shenzhao Army and control the key to the country.

古文：乃以宿将范希朝为西北诸镇行营兵马使，泰为司马副之。
现代文：于是任命资深望重的将领范希朝为西北诸镇行营兵马使，韩泰任司马，担任范的副职。
English: As a result, he appointed the veteran and respected general Fan Xichang as the envoy to the northwest towns, and Han Tai as Sima, serving as Fan's deputy.

古文：于是诸将移书中尉，告且去，宦人始悟夺其权，大怒曰： 吾属必死其手！ 
现代文：在这时，各镇将领送信给护军中尉，报告他们将离职守，宦官才明白王叔文等在夺他们的兵权，大怒说 ：我们一定会死在他手里。 
English: At this time, the generals of each town sent a letter to the lieutenant of the escort army, reporting that they would leave the service. The eunuchs only understood that Wang Shouwen and others were seizing their military power, and said angrily: We will surely die in his hands.

古文：乃谕诸镇，慎毋以兵属人。
现代文：于是命令各镇将领，千万不要把兵权交给他人。
English: He then ordered the generals of each town not to hand over military power to others.

古文：希朝、泰到奉天，诸将不至，乃还。
现代文：范希朝、韩泰到了奉天，各镇将领都不来，他俩只好回到京城。
English: When Fan Xichang and Han Tai arrived in Fengtian, the town generals did not come, and they had to return to Beijing.

古文：叔文母死，匿不发，置酒翰林，忠言、文珍等皆在，裒金以饷，因扬言曰： 天子适射兔苑中，跨鞍若飞，敢异议者斩。 
现代文：王叔文的母亲死了，他隐瞒不发丧，在翰林院设酒宴，李忠言、俱文珍都在座，叔文从衣袖里拿出金子送给他俩，趁机扬言 ：天子刚刚在苑中射兔，骑马像飞一样，敢发表异议的斩首！ 
English: Wang Shouwen's mother died. He concealed the fact that he was not in mourning, and held a wine banquet at Hanlin Academy. Li Zhongyan and Qu Wenzhen were both present. Shouwen took out the gold from his sleeve and gave it to the two of them, and took the opportunity to threaten: Tianzi had just shot a rabbit in the garden, he rode like a bird, and if he dared to express dissent, he would be beheaded!

古文：又自陈： 亲疾病，以身任国大事，朝夕不得侍，今当请急，宜听。
现代文：又自己陈述说 ：母亲病重，因为身负国家重任，早晚不能侍奉，现在应当请假处理，应当准假。
English: He also said in his own statement: My mother is seriously ill, because she is responsible for the state, sooner or later she will not be able to serve, now she should ask for leave, and should be granted leave.

古文：然向之悉心戮力，难易亡所避，报天子异知尔。
现代文：但以往对朝政全心全意，事务的难易都不回避，以此来报答天子对我的特殊知遇之恩。
English: However, in the past, I have devoted myself wholeheartedly to the imperial government, and have not shied away from the difficulties and difficulties of affairs, in order to repay the grace of the Son of Heaven for my special experience.

古文：今一去此，则百谤至，孰为吾助者？ 
现代文：现在一离开这职位，各种诽谤就会落到我头上，谁能帮助我呢？ 
English: Now, as soon as I leave this post, all kinds of slander will fall on my head, who can help me?

古文：又言： 羊士谔毁短我，我将杖杀之，而执谊懦不果。
现代文：又说 ：羊士谔诽谤我，我将用杖刑处死他，但因执宜怯懦没有达到目的。
English: He also said: "A shepherd defamed me, I will punish him with the cane, but I did not achieve my goal because of my cowardice."

古文：刘辟来为韦皋求三川，吾生平不识辟，便欲前执吾手，非凶人邪？
现代文：刘辟来京城替韦皋请求治理三川，我平素不认识刘辟，他想上前来握我的手，这不是行刺的凶手吗？
English: Liu Biyi came to Beijing to request the governance of Mikawa for Wei Xuan. I don't know Liu Biyi. He wanted to come up and shake my hand. Isn't this a murderer?

古文：扫木场将斩之，而执谊持不可。每念失此二贼，令人怅恨。 
现代文：清扫木场准备杀他，但执宜说不行，每次想到放掉这两个坏家伙，就令人恼恨。 
English: The scavengers were ready to kill him, but I said no. Every time I thought about letting these two bad guys go, it was infuriating.

古文：又陈领度支所以兴利去害者为己劳。文珍随语诘折，叔文不得对。
现代文：又陈述担任度支使时兴利除害是自己的功劳，文珍随着他的话质问反驳他，叔文无话可答。
English: He also stated that it was his own merit to serve as the provincial party secretary, and Wen Zhen rebutted him with his words and questions. Uncle Wen had nothing to say.

古文：左右窃语曰： 母死已腐，方留此，将何为邪？ 
现代文：左右的人暗中说 ：母亲死了，尸体已腐坏，还留在这里想干什么呢？ 
English: People around me were whispering: My mother is dead, her body has rotted away, what is the point of staying here?

古文：明日，乃发丧。
现代文：第二天才发丧。
English: The funeral was held the next day.

古文：执谊益不用其语，乃谋起复，斩执谊与不附己者，闻者恟惧。
现代文：韦执谊更加不听他的话，于是叔文谋求在服丧期未满时复职，杀掉执谊和不依附自己的人，听到这消息的人乱纷纷的，很害怕。
English: Wei Zhengyi was even more unwilling to listen to him, so Shuwen sought to resume his post before the mourning period was over, killing Zhengyi and those who did not cling to him. When people heard this news, they were confused and very afraid.

古文：广陵王为太子，群臣皆喜，独叔文有忧色，诵杜甫诸葛祠诗以自况，歔欷泣下。
现代文：广陵王李纯被立为太子，臣子们都很高兴，只有叔文面露忧色，诵读杜甫的诸葛祠诗来自比，叹息着流下泪来。
English: Li Chun, the king of Guangling, was enthroned as the crown prince. The courtiers were all happy, except for Shu Wen, whose face was sad. He was reading Du Fu's Zhuge Ancestral Poem, sighing and shedding tears.

古文：太子已监国，贬渝州司户参军。明年，诛死。
现代文：太子代皇帝处理国政后，王叔文降职为渝州司户参军，第二年，被处死。
English: After dealing with national affairs on behalf of the crown prince, Wang Shouwen was demoted to the position of governor of Yuzhou and joined the army. He was executed the following year.

