古文：熊安生，字植之，长乐阜城人也。
现代文：熊安生字植之，长乐阜城人。
English: Xiong An Sheng Zi Zhi, a resident of Fufu City, Changle.

古文：少好学，励精不倦。
现代文：自幼喜爱学习，振奋精神，不知疲倦。
English: Since childhood, he has loved to learn, and has been tireless in his efforts to keep his spirits up.

古文：从陈达受《三传》，从房虬受《周礼》，事徐遵明，服膺历年，后受《礼》于李宝鼎，遂博通《五经》。
现代文：跟随陈达学习《三传》，跟随房箈学习《周礼》，侍奉徐遵明，认真学习了一年，后来又跟李宝鼎学习《礼》，于是博览通晓《五经》。
English: He studied the "Three Classics" with Chen Da, the "Weekly Rituals" with Fang Yao, and the "Rites" with Xu Zunming for one year. Later, he studied the "Rites" with Li Baoding, and became well-versed in the "Five Classics."

古文：然专以《三礼》教授，弟子自远方至者千余人。
现代文：然而，熊安生专门传授《三礼》，从远方来的学生有一千多人。
English: However, Xiong An Sheng specializes in teaching the "Three Rites" to more than a thousand students from far and wide.

古文：乃讨论图纬，捃摭异闻。先儒所未悟者，皆发明之。
现代文：探讨谶纬之学，搜集新奇的学说，先前的儒生没有明白的东西，都加以阐发说明。
English: To explore the study of Confucianism, to collect new theories, and to clarify and explain what the previous Confucianism did not understand.

古文：齐河清中，阳休之特奏为国子博士。
现代文：齐武成帝河清年间，阳休之特意奏请熊安生为国子博士。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qiwu Chenghe in the Qing Dynasty, Yang Xiu specially invited Xiong An Sheng to become a national doctor.

古文：时西朝既行《周礼》，公卿以下，多习其业，有宿疑硕滞者数十条，皆莫能详辨。
现代文：当时，北周《周礼》已经流行，自公卿以下，大都学习《周礼》，有过去留下的疑问和大的滞碍几十条，人们都不能详加辨明。
English: At that time, the Northern Zhou "Zhou Li" was already popular, and most people studied the "Zhou Li" from the nobility down. There were dozens of questions and major obstacles left over from the past, and people could not identify them in detail.

古文：天和三年，周齐通好，兵部尹公正使焉。与齐人语及《周礼》，齐人不能对。乃令安生至宾馆，与公正言。
现代文：北周武帝天和三年，周朝和齐朝互通友好，兵部尹公正出使齐朝，和齐人谈到《周礼》，齐人不能回答，就让熊安生到宾馆，和尹公正交谈。
English: In the 3rd year of the Northern Zhouwu Emperor's reign, the Zhou Dynasty and the Qi Dynasty had a friendly exchange. The military department sent an envoy to the Qi Dynasty, and the Qi people talked about the "Weekly Ritual." The Qi people could not answer, so they let Xiong An Sheng go to the hotel and talk to the Yin Dynasty.

古文：公正有口辩，安生语所未至者，便撮机要而骤问之。
现代文：尹公正能言善辩，熊安生说到他不知道的，就撮取关键的问题突然向熊安生发问。
English: Yin Zhengyi is a good debater. Whenever Xiong An Sheng says something he doesn't know, he suddenly asks Xiong An Sheng a key question.

古文：安生曰： 《礼》义弘深，自有条贯，必欲升堂睹奥，宁可汨其先后？
现代文：熊安生说 ：《礼》的道理弘大深奥，自然有其顺序，一定想要升堂入室看到其精奥，难道宁可打乱其先后顺序吗？
English: Xiong Ansheng said: "The principles of "Rite" are profound and profound, and naturally there is a sequence. You must want to enter the hall to see its essence. Would you rather break the sequence?

古文：但能留意，当为次第陈之。 
现代文：只要能够留意，我会为您按次序陈说它。 
English: As long as you can pay attention, I will present it in order for you.

古文：公正于是问所疑，安生皆为一一演说，咸究其根本。
现代文：尹公正于是向熊安生询问有疑问的问题，熊安生都一一讲解，探究其根本。
English: Yin Zheng then asked Xiong Ansheng about the doubtful questions, and Xiong Ansheng explained them one by one, exploring their fundamentals.

古文：公正嗟服。还，具言之于武帝，帝大钦重之。
现代文：尹公正非常佩服，回国后把这些事情都告诉了周武帝，周武帝十分钦敬看重熊安生。
English: Yin Zheng was very impressed. After returning to China, he told Emperor Zhou all these things. Emperor Zhou highly respected and valued Xiong An Sheng.

古文：及入鄴，安生遽令扫门。
现代文：进入邺都之后，熊安生急忙令人打扫门庭。
English: After entering Shidu, Xiong Ansheng hurriedly had the courtyard cleaned.

古文：家人怪而问之，安生曰： 周帝重道尊儒，必将见我矣。 
现代文：家里的人奇怪地问他，熊安生说 ：周武帝重视道术，尊重儒生，必定会来见我。 
English: People at home asked him strangely, and Xiong Ansheng said: Emperor Zhou attaches great importance to Taoism and respects Confucianism, and he will definitely come to see me.

古文：俄而帝幸其第，诏不听拜，亲执其手，引与同坐，谓曰： 朕未能去兵，以此为愧。 
现代文：不一会儿，周武帝临幸其宅第，诏令不用下拜，亲自拉着他的手，领着他一同坐下。周武帝对他说 ：朕没有能够罢却战争，因此感到惭愧。 
English: In a short while, Emperor Zhou Wudi came to Zhou's residence. He did not have to bow, but he personally took him by the hand and led him to sit down together. Emperor Zhou Wudi said to him: "I was not able to stop the war, so I feel ashamed."

古文：安生曰： 黄帝尚有阪泉之战，况陛下龚行天罚乎！ 
现代文：熊安生说： 黄帝尚且有阪泉之战，何况陛下恭敬地代行上天的惩罚呢？ 
English: Xiong An Sheng said: Even though the Yellow Emperor won the Battle of Hanquan, how much more should His Majesty respectfully carry out Heaven's punishment?

古文：帝又曰： 齐氏赋役繁兴，竭人财力，朕救焚拯溺，思革其弊，欲以府库及三台杂物散之百姓，公以为何如？ 
现代文：周武帝又说 ：齐朝赋税劳役繁重，耗尽了百姓的财力，朕救齐朝百姓于水火，想革除其弊政，准备将府库和三台的杂物分散给百姓，公以为怎么样？ 
English: Zhou Wudi also said: The Qidong imposed heavy taxes and labor, which exhausted the people's financial resources. I saved the people of the Qidong from the fire and the water. I want to get rid of its maladministration, and I am preparing to distribute the treasury and the debris of the three provinces to the people. What do you think?

古文：安生曰： 昔武王克商，散鹿台之财，发巨桥之粟，陛下此诏，异代同美。 
现代文：熊安生说： 当初，武王战胜商纣，分发鹿台的财物，发放巨桥的谷物。陛下这个诏令，时代不同，美善是相同的。 
English: Xiong Ansheng said: At the beginning, King Wu defeated the merchants, distributed the wealth of Lutetia, and distributed the grain of the Great Bridge. Your Majesty, this edict is different from the times, but the beauty and goodness are the same.

古文：帝又曰： 朕何如武王？ 
现代文：周武帝又说： 朕和武王相比怎么样？ 
English: Zhou Wudi also said: How do I compare with King Wu?

古文：安生曰： 武王伐纣，悬首白旗；陛下平齐，兵不血刃，愚谓圣略为优。 
现代文：熊安生说： 武王讨伐商纣，把纣王之首悬挂在白旗杆上，陛下平定齐国，不战而获胜利，以我的愚见，陛下的谋略为优。 
English: Xiong An Sheng said: King Wu fought the Qianlong and hung the head of the Qianlong on a white flagpole. His Majesty pacified the country and won the victory without fighting. In my humble opinion, His Majesty's strategy was superior.

古文：帝大悦，赐帛三百匹、米三百石、宅一区，并赐象笏及九镮金带，自余什物称是。
现代文：周武帝非常高兴，赐给熊安生帛三百匹、米三百石、宅院一所，并赐给象牙手板和九环金带，赏赐的其他物品和上面那些差不多。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu was very pleased and gave Xiong An three hundred horses, three hundred kilos of rice and a mansion, as well as an ivory hand board and a nine-ring gold belt. The other items given were similar to those above.

古文：又诏所司给安车驷马，令随驾入朝，并敕所在供给。
现代文：又诏令所司给熊安生安车驷马，令其随从车驾入朝，并敕令所在之地供给所需之物。
English: He also ordered the director to provide Xiong Ansheng with a car and a horse, ordered his attendant car to drive into the morning, and ordered the place to be supplied with the necessary things.

古文：至京，敕令于大乘佛寺，参议五礼。
现代文：至了京城，奉命在大乘佛寺参与讨论五礼。
English: When I arrived in Kyoto, I was ordered to participate in a discussion of the Five Rites at the Daijyo Buddhist Temple.

古文：宣政元年，拜露门博士、下大夫，时年八十余。
现代文：周武帝宣政元年，熊安生任露门博士、下大夫，这时熊安生已八十多岁。
English: In the first year of the Zhouwu Emperor's proclamation of political power, Xiong An Sheng was appointed as a Lumen doctor and junior doctor. At this time, Xiong An Sheng was more than eighty years old.

古文：寻致仕，卒于家。
现代文：不久就退休了，死在家中。
English: He soon retired and died at home.

古文：安生既学为儒宗，尝受其业，擅名于后者，有马荣伯、张黑奴、窦士荣、孔笼、刘焯、刘炫等，皆其门人焉。
现代文：熊安生的学问既然为儒生尊崇，曾经跟他学习和在他之后享有高名的人，有马荣伯、张黑奴、窦士荣、孔笼、刘焯、刘炫等，都是他的学生。
English: Since Xiong Ansheng's learning is revered by Confucians, people who once studied with him and enjoyed a high reputation after him, such as Ma Rongbo, Zhang Heinu, Dou Shirong, Kong Yue, Liu Wei, Liu Xuan, etc., are all his students.

古文：所撰《周礼义疏》二十卷，《礼记义疏》三十卷、《孝经义》一卷，并行于世。
现代文：熊安生撰著有《周礼义疏》三十卷，《礼记义疏》三十卷，《孝经义》一卷，都流传于世。
English: Xiong An Sheng wrote 30 volumes of "Zhou Li Yi Shu," 30 volumes of "Li Ji Yi Shu" and one volume of "Xiao Jing Yi," all of which have been passed down to the world.

古文：安生与同郡宗道晖、张晖、纪显敬、徐遵明等为祖师。
现代文：熊安生和同郡人宗道晖、张晖、纪显敬、徐遵明等人为北朝儒学的创始人。
English: Xiong Ansheng and his compatriots Zong Daojun, Zhang Xuan, Ji Xianjing and Xu Zunming were the founders of Northern Dynasty Confucianism.

古文：道晖好着高翅帽、大屐，州将初临，辄服以谒见，仰头举肘，拜于屐上，自言学士比三公。
现代文：宗道晖喜欢戴高翅帽，穿大木板鞋，州中将官刚到任，宗道晖就戴着高翅帽，穿着大木板鞋去拜见，仰着头，抬着胳膊肘，在大木板鞋上叩拜，自称学士等同于三公。
English: Zong Daojun likes to wear a high-winged cap and big wooden shoes. As soon as the state lieutenant general took office, Zong Daojun wore a high-winged cap and big wooden shoes to pay his respects. He bowed his head, raised his elbow and tapped his foot on the big wooden shoes. He claimed to be the equivalent of the Three Wise Men.

古文：后齐任城王湝鞭之，道晖徐呼安伟，安伟出，谓人曰： 我受鞭，不汉体。 
现代文：后来，齐任城王高氵皆鞭打宗道晖，宗道晖慢慢地呼喊安伟，安伟出来后，对人说 ：我挨鞭子，不失汉之礼仪。 
English: Later, all the successive kings of the city, including Gao Jiao, whipped Zong Daojiao. Zong Daojiao slowly called out to Anwei. After Anwei came out, he said to the people, "I received the whip, I did not lose the etiquette of Han."

古文：复蹑屐而去。
现代文：宗道晖又穿上大木板鞋离开了。
English: He put on his big wooden shoes and left.

古文：冀州人为之语曰 显公钟，宋公鼓，宗道晖屐，李洛姬肚 ，谓之四大。
现代文：冀州人为他们几个人编了几句顺口溜： 显公钟，宋公鼓，宗道晖屐，李洛姬肚。 称之为四大。
English: Jizhou has made up a few catchphrases for a few of them: Xian Gong Bell, Song Gong Drum, Zong Dao Gong, Li Luo Ji Belly. It is called the Big Four.

古文：显公，沙门也，宋公，安德太守也；洛姬，妇人也。
现代文：显公是僧人，宋公是安德太守，洛姬是一个妇女。
English: Xian Gong is a monk, Song Gong is the Grand Empress Dowager Andong, and Luo Ji is a woman.

古文：安生在山东时，岁岁游讲，从之者倾郡县。或诳之曰： 某村古冢，是晋河南将军熊光，去七十二世。
现代文：熊安生在山东时，年年到处讲学，跟随他听讲的人很多，有人诳他说： 某村有一古墓，是晋河南将军熊光的墓，距现在已七十二世了。
English: When Xiong Ansheng was in Shandong, he went everywhere to give lectures every year. Many people followed him to listen to his lectures. Someone said to him, "There is an ancient tomb in a certain village. It is the tomb of Xiong Guang, the general of the Southern Jin Dynasty. He is now 72 years old.

古文：旧有碑，为村人埋匿。 
现代文：原来有墓碑，被村里的人埋藏起来了。 
English: Originally, there was a tombstone, but it was buried by the villagers.

古文：安生掘地求之，不得，连年讼焉。
现代文：熊安生掘地寻找墓碑，没有找到，因而引起连年不断的官司。
English: Xiong An was digging in search of a tombstone, but did not find it, which led to years of litigation.

古文：冀州长史郑大讠雚判之曰： 七十二世，乃是羲皇上人；河南将军，晋无此号。诉非理记。 
现代文：冀州长史郑大灌判决道 ：距今七十二世，是羲皇上人；河南将军，晋朝没有这样的官名。
English: Governor of Hebei Province, Shi Zheng Dakan, said in his verdict: He is the 72nd generation from now, and is the son of Emperor Zhou; Henan general, there is no such official name in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：又著《春秋序义》，通贾、服说，发杜氏违，辞理并可观。
现代文：诉讼不符合道理和记载。 熊安生率领族人对着墓冢大哭。将要通报姓名，见到徐之才与和士开二人相对而坐，因徐之才名讳为 雄 和士开名讳为 安 ，就自称 触触生 ，众人都哂笑他。
English: The lawsuit does not conform to reason and records. Xiong Ansheng led the people to cry loudly at the grave. The name was to be announced, and when he saw Xu Zhicai sitting opposite the two men, because Xu Zhicai's name was Xiong and the man's name was An, he called himself Zhicai Sheng, and everyone laughed at him.

古文：初，周又有黎景熙，以古学显。黎景熙，字季明，河间郑人，少以孝行闻于世。
现代文：黎景熙字季明，河间莫阝人。少年时因孝顺而闻名于世。
English: Lai King Hee, also known as Ji Ming, was a Mohawk from Kawama. As a boy, he was famous for his filial piety.

古文：曾祖嶷，魏太武时，以军功赐爵容城县男，后为燕郡守。
现代文：曾祖黎嶷，北魏太武帝时，因军功赠爵容城县男，后为燕君郡太守。
English: Zeng Zu Lijuan, when he was the Northern Wei Emperor Taivu, he was awarded the title of Yongcheng County Man for his military service, and later became the governor of Yanjun County.

古文：祖镇、父琼，并袭爵。
现代文：祖父黎镇、父亲黎琼都世袭封爵。
English: His grandfather, Li Zhen, and his father, Li Qiong, were both hereditary knights.

古文：季明少好读书，性强记默识，而无应对之能。
现代文：黎季明小时候喜欢读书，生性记忆力强，有默默记忆的才能，而没有应酬对答之才。
English: When Li Jiming was a child, he liked to read, had a strong natural memory, and had the talent of silent memory, but did not have the talent of answering questions.

古文：其从祖广，太武时尚书郎，善古学。
现代文：他的从祖父黎广，太武帝时任尚书郎，擅长古代之学。
English: His great-great-grandfather Li Guang, who was Shang Shuro at the time of the Taiwu Emperor, was good at ancient studies.

古文：常从吏部尚书清河崔宏受字义，又从司徒崔浩学楷篆，自是家传其法。
现代文：曾经跟随吏部尚书清河人崔宏学习字义，又跟从司徒崔浩学习楷书和篆书，自此以后家传其学。
English: He once studied the meaning of Chinese characters with Choi Hong, a member of the cadre of Shangshu and Qinghe, as well as with Choi Hao, a member of the Sifu, and passed on his learning to his family.

古文：季明亦传习之，颇与许氏有异。
现代文：季明也学习字义、楷书和篆书，与许慎有很多不同。
English: Ji Ming also studies the meaning of words, Chinese characters and Chinese characters, which is very different from Xu Sheng.

古文：又好玄象，颇知术数，而落魄不事生业。
现代文：又爱好天象，对术数很是通晓，但穷困失意，不从事谋生之业。
English: He is also fond of celestial objects and is very knowledgeable about the number of operations, but he is impoverished and frustrated and does not engage in the business of earning a living.

古文：有书千余卷。
现代文：有书一千多卷。
English: There are more than a thousand volumes of books.

古文：虽穷居独处，不以饥寒易操。
现代文：虽然穷困独自居处，却不因生活所迫改变节操。
English: Although poverty is a lonely place to live, it does not force people to change their habits.

古文：与范阳卢道源为莫逆交。
现代文：和范阳人卢道源是心意相投感情深厚的朋友。
English: Lu Doyuan and Fan Yangren are friends with a deep affinity.

古文：永安中，道源劝令入仕，始为威烈将军。
现代文：北魏孝庄帝永安年间，卢道源劝说他出去做官，才做了个威烈将军。
English: During the Northern Wei Xiaozhuang Emperor Yongan, Lu Daoyuan persuaded him to go out to work as an official, and only then did he become a powerful general.

古文：孝武西迁，季明乃寓居伊洛。
现代文：北魏孝武帝西迁，季明就寄居在伊洛。
English: Emperor Xiaowu of the Northern Wei Dynasty moved to the west, and Ji Ming stayed in Ilo.

古文：侯景徇地河外，召季明从军，稍迁黎阳郡守。
现代文：侯景夺取河南之地，召季明到军队中，稍后改任黎阳郡太守。
English: Hou Jing conquered the land of Henan, called Ji Ming to the army, and later became the governor of Liyang County.

古文：季明从至悬瓠，察景终不足恃，遂去之。客于颍川。
现代文：季明跟随侯景到了悬瓠，发现侯景最终不足以依恃，就离开了他，寄居在颍川。
English: Ji Ming followed Hou Jing to the hanging basket, found that Hou Jing was ultimately not enough to snuggle, and left him, sojourning in Luchuan.

古文：时王思政镇颍川，累使召季明，留于内馆。
现代文：当时王思政镇守颍川，多次派人召见季明，留在内馆。
English: At that time, Wang Shizheng was in charge of the Lugu River, and he repeatedly sent people to summon Ji Ming and stay in the inner hall.

古文：月余，周文又征之，遂入关。
现代文：过了一个多月，周文帝又征召他，就进了关中。
English: After more than a month, Zhou Wendi conscripted him again, and he was sent to Guanzhong.

古文：乃令季明正定古今文字于东阁。
现代文：周文帝就令季明在东阁订正确定古今的文字。
English: Zhou Wendi ordered Ji Ming to revise and determine the ancient and modern characters in the East Pavilion.

古文：大统末，拜著作佐郎。
现代文：西魏文帝大统末年，授著作郎之职。
English: In the last years of the reign of Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty, he was given the post of a scholar.

古文：于时伦辈，皆位兼常伯，车服华盛，唯季明独以贫素居之，而无愧色。
现代文：当时和他同辈的人，都官位兼任侍中，车马服饰华丽丰盛，只有季明一人居于贫贱之位，而没有惭愧的表情。
English: At that time, people of his generation were both officials and attendants, and the chariot and horse costumes were gorgeous and rich. Only Ji Ming was poor, but he did not look ashamed.

古文：又勤于所职，著述不怠。
现代文：季明对其职守又很勤奋，撰著不懈怠。
English: Ji Ming is also very diligent in his duties and does not slack off in his writing.

古文：然性尤专固，不合于时，是以一为史官，遂十年不调。
现代文：然而性格特别固执，不合时宜，因此一做史官，就十年不调任。
English: However, his character is particularly stubborn and out of step with the times, so once he becomes a historian, he will not be transferred for ten years.

古文：武成末，迁外史下大夫。
现代文：周明帝武成末年，升任外史下大夫。
English: In the last years of Emperor Zhou Ming Wucheng, he was promoted to the post of foreign doctor.

古文：保定三年，盛营宫室。春夏大旱，诏公卿百僚，极言得失。
现代文：周武帝保定三年，大造宫殿，春夏二季大旱，诏令公卿和文武百官，尽力上言朝政得失。
English: In the three years of Emperor Zhouwu's reign in Baoding, he built a large palace, and there was a severe drought in the spring and summer. He issued an edict to the nobles and officials, and tried his best to influence the success or failure of the government.

古文：季明上封事曰：臣闻成汤遭旱，以六事自陈。
现代文：季明上秘密奏章道： 臣听说成汤时遭受旱灾，让六卿自己陈述得失。
English: Ji Ming secretly recited the chapter: "The vassal heard that Cheng Tang suffered from drought, so he asked the six nobles to report their own gains and losses.

古文：宣王太甚，而圭璧斯竭。
现代文：周宣王非常过分，宝玉都用尽了。
English: Zhou Xuanwang went too far and used up all the jewels.

古文：岂非远虑元元，俯哀黎庶。
现代文：难道不是为百姓作长远的考虑，俯首哀叹百姓不幸吗？
English: Isn't it time to take a long-term view of the people and bow our heads in sorrow for their misfortune?

古文：今农要之月，时雨犹愆，率土之心，有怀渴仰。
现代文：如今正是农事的关键月份，季节雨都延误过去了，普天下百姓的心里，都渴望下雨。
English: Now is the key month for agricultural affairs. The seasonal rains have been delayed, and the hearts of the people all over the world are longing for rain.

古文：陛下垂情万类，子爱群生，觐礼百神，犹未丰洽。
现代文：陛下关心普天下的事物，像爱护儿子一样爱护众人，敬重礼遇各种神灵，尚且不能丰收谐和。
English: His majesty is concerned about the things of the whole world, loves everyone like a son, respects and honors all kinds of gods, yet he cannot harvest harmony.

古文：岂或作事不节，有违时令，举措失中，当邀斯旱。
现代文：难道是有的事情没有节制，违背了时节，举动失去折中，而导致这场旱灾吗？
English: Are there things that are out of control, out of season, out of balance, that have led to this drought?

古文：《春秋》，君举必书，动为典礼。
现代文： 《春秋》中说，君主举动必定要记录下来，行动要成为典范礼仪。
English: "Spring and Autumn" said that the monarch's behavior must be recorded, and the action should become a model of etiquette.

古文：水旱阴阳，莫不应行而至。
现代文：水旱阴阳，没有不应君主的行动而至的。
English: Nothing happens without the monarch's action.

古文：孔子曰： 言行，君子之所以动天地，可不慎乎！ 
现代文：孔子说： 言语行动，是有道德的人感动天地的原因，能够不慎重吗？ 
English: Confucius said: Words and actions are the reasons why a moral person moves heaven and earth. Can one be careless?

古文：《春秋》庄公三十一年冬，不雨，《五行传》以为是岁一年而三筑台，奢侈不恤人也。
现代文：《春秋》庄公三十一年冬天，天不降雨。《五行传》认为这一年中三次修筑高台，奢侈浮华，不体恤百姓。
English: "Spring and Autumn" Zhuangguo 31 years old winter, the sky does not rain. "Five Elements" believes that the construction of the plateau three times in this year, extravagant, inconsiderate of the people.

古文：僖公二十一年夏，大旱，《五行传》以为时作南门，劳人兴役。
现代文：僖公二十一年夏天，大旱。《五行传》以为这时修建南门，让百姓辛劳，大兴劳役。
English: In the summer of the twenty-first year of King Gong, there was a big drought. "Five Elements" thought that the south gate would be built at this time, so that the people would work hard and work hard.

古文：汉惠帝二年夏，大旱，五年夏，大旱，江河水少，溪涧水绝，《五行传》以为先是发十四万六千人城长安。
现代文：汉惠帝二年夏天，大旱；五年夏天，大旱，江河中的水减少，溪水和山涧中的水断绝。《五行传》认为是在这之前出动十四万六千人修建长安城造成的。
English: In the summer of the second year of Emperor Han Hui, there was a great drought; in the summer of the fifth year, there was a great drought, the water in the rivers was reduced, and the water in the streams and mountains was cut off. "The Legend of the Five Elements" believes that it was caused by the dispatch of 146,000 people to build Chang'an City before this.

古文：汉武帝元狩三年夏，大旱，《五行传》以为是岁发天下故吏，穿昆明池。
现代文：汉武帝元狩三年夏天，大旱。《五行传》认为这一年出动天下原有的官吏，凿通昆明池。
English: In the summer of the third year of Emperor Yuan of Hanwu, there was a severe drought. "Five Elements" believes that in this year, the original officials of the world were dispatched to chisel Kunming Pond.

古文：然则土木之功，动人兴役，天辄应之以异。
现代文：这样说的话，建筑工程一类的事情，一劳动人力役，上天就有奇异之事来相应。
English: In this way, things such as construction projects, a labor service, and the heavens have strange things to correspond.

古文：典籍作诫，倘或可思，上天谴告，改之则善。
现代文：典章经籍作为警示，如果或许可以引起深思的话，上天的责备告示，改正过来就好了。
English: As a warning, if it may be thought-provoking, a heavenly rebuke, it is good to correct it.

古文：今若息人省役，以答天谴，庶灵泽时降，嘉谷有时，则年登可觊，子来非晚。《诗》云： 人亦劳止，迄可小康，惠此中国，以绥四方。 
现代文：如今如果停止百姓的劳役，来报答上天的责备，或许天降甘霖，好的庄稼有机会生长，那么，丰收的年成就可以期望了，百姓的到来就不会迟了。《诗》说： 人亦劳止，迄可小康，惠此中国，以绥四方。 
English: Today, if the labor of the people is stopped to repay the reproach of the heavens, perhaps the heavens will rain, and good crops will have the opportunity to grow, then the achievement of a bumper harvest can be expected, and the arrival of the people will not be late. "Poem" said: People also stop working, until they can be well-off, benefit this China, and benefit the four directions.

古文：或恐极阳生阴，秋多雨水，年复不登，人将无觊。
现代文：或许恐怕阳气太盛而生阴，秋天雨水多起来，年成再不丰收，人们就没有希望了。
English: Perhaps I am afraid that the yang is too strong and the yin is born, the autumn rains are more frequent, and if the harvest is not good, people have no hope.

古文：如又荐饥，为虑更甚。
现代文：如果又加饥荒，可忧虑的就更多了。 
English: If famine is added, there is even more to worry about.

古文：时豪富之家，竞为奢丽。
现代文：当时，豪强富贵人家，都争相攀比奢侈华丽。
English: At that time, powerful, rich and noble families were all competing to be the most luxurious and gorgeous.

古文：季明又上书曰：
现代文：季明又上书说：
English: Ji Ming also wrote:

古文：臣闻宽大所以兼覆，慈爱所以怀众。
现代文： 臣听说宽大是为了广为覆盖，慈爱是为了关怀众人。
English: The minister heard that generosity is to be widely covered, and love is to care for everyone.

古文：故天地称其高厚者，万物得其容养焉；四时著其寒暑者，庶类资其忠信焉。
现代文：所以，说天高地厚，是因为万物都能得到天地的包容养育；四季显示出寒冷暑热，是因为各种事物都能从四季的忠实诚信中得到帮助。
English: Therefore, it is said that the heavens are high and the earth is thick, because all things can be nurtured by the tolerance of heaven and earth; the four seasons show cold and heat, because all kinds of things can be helped by the faithfulness and integrity of the four seasons.

古文：是以帝王者，宽大象天地，忠信则四时。
现代文：因此，帝王的宽容大度像天地一样，忠实诚信像四季一样。
English: Therefore, the emperor's tolerance and generosity are like heaven and earth, and his faithfulness and honesty are like the four seasons.

古文：招摇东指，天下识其春；人君布德，率土怀其惠。
现代文：招摇星指向东方，天下的人都知道春天来了；君主布施恩德，普天下的人都怀念其恩惠。
English: The wavering star points to the east, and everyone in the world knows that spring has come; the monarch Buschend, and everyone in the world misses his grace.

古文：伏惟陛下，资乾御宇，品物咸亨，时乘六龙，自强不息，好问受规，天下幸甚。
现代文：希望陛下借助上天统御天下，各种事物都能亨通，乘驭六龙，自强不息，喜爱问询，接受规范，天下的百姓就十分幸运了。
English: I hope that His Majesty will rule the world with the help of God, and all kinds of things will be able to succeed, harness the six dragons, self-improvement, love to inquire, accept norms, and the people of the world will be very lucky.

古文：自古至道之君，亦皆广延博访，询采皞荛，置鼓树木，以求其过。
现代文： 自古以来，最具德行的君主，也都广泛请求，到处询访，询问打柴草的人，把鼓挂在树干上，以征求过失。
English: Since ancient times, the most virtuous monarchs have also made extensive requests, inquired everywhere, inquired about the woodcutter, and hung the drum on the tree trunk to solicit faults.

古文：顷者亢旱逾时，人怀望岁，陛下爰发明诏，广求六瘼，同禹、汤之罪己，高宋景之守正，澍雨应时，年谷斯稔。
现代文：前不久，大旱超过了时节，百姓渴望收成，陛下于是发布圣明的诏令，广泛搜求百姓的六种疾苦，象禹、汤那样归罪自己，推崇宋景坚守正直，及时雨顺应时节，年成因此而获得丰收。
English: Not long ago, the drought exceeded the season, and the people were eager for the harvest. Therefore, His Majesty issued the edict of the Holy Light, extensively searched for the six kinds of sufferings of the people, blamed himself like Yu and Tang, and praised Song Jing for adhering to honesty, timely rain conforms to the season, and the year is completed with a bumper harvest.

古文：克己节用，慕质去华，此则尚矣。
现代文：约束自己，节俭用品，仰慕质朴，去除浮华，这样就高尚了。
English: To restrain oneself, to be frugal, to admire the simple, to reject the flashy, and thus to be noble.

古文：然而硃紫仍耀于衢路，绮縠犹侈于豪富，短褐未充于细人，糟糠未厌于编户。
现代文：然而，高官仍在四通八达的道路上炫耀，丝罗尚且充斥于豪强富贵之家，小小老百姓连粗布衣服都穿不上，编入户籍的平民连糟糠都吃不饱。
English: However, high-ranking officials are still flaunting themselves on the roads that lead to all directions, the ranks of the rich and powerful are dwindling and the homes of the rich and powerful are full of them, the little people can't even wear coarse cloth clothes, and the commoners who have been registered as members of the household can't even eat enough scraps.

古文：此则劝导之理，有所未周故也。
现代文：这就是劝说引导的道理，有些没能周遍的缘故。
English: This is the principle of persuasion and guidance, some of which have not been fully explored.

古文：今虽导之以礼，齐之以刑，风俗固难以一矣。
现代文：如今，即使用礼仪引导他们，用刑法来约束他们，风俗也很难一致了。
English: Nowadays, even if they are guided by etiquette and restrained by criminal law, it is difficult for customs to be consistent.

古文：昔汉文帝集上书之囊，以作帷帐；惜十家之产，不造露台。后宫所幸，衣不曳地，方之今日富室之饰，尝不如婢隶之服。
现代文：当初，汉文帝收集上书用的书袋，用来作帐子；爱惜十户人家的物产，不建造露台；后宫中的佳丽，穿的衣服不及地，和今天富贵之家的服饰相比，还不如婢女奴隶的衣服。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Hanwen collected book bags used for books and used them as curtains; he spared the property of ten families and did not build terraces; the beauty in the harem wore clothes that were not suitable for the ground, and compared to the clothing of today's rich families, they were not as good as the clothes of slave maids.

古文：然而以身率下，国富刑清，庙称太宗，良有以也。
现代文：然而，汉文帝自身为属下作出表率，国家富足，刑罚清正，庙号称为太宗，确实是有原因的。
English: However, Emperor Hanwen himself set an example for his subordinates, the country was rich, the punishment was fair, and the temple was called Taizong. There was indeed a reason for this.

古文：臣闻圣人久于其道而天下化成。
现代文：臣听说，圣人长久坚持他的道义，天下就能教化成功。
English: The minister heard that if the saint adhered to his moral principles for a long time, he would succeed in enlightening the world.

古文：今承魏氏衰乱之后，贞信未兴。
现代文：如今承继魏朝衰败战乱之后，忠贞诚信没有兴起。
English: Today, following the decline and defeat of the Wei Dynasty and the war, loyalty and integrity have not emerged.

古文：宜先尊五美，屏四恶，革浮华之俗，抑流竞之风，察鸿都之小艺，焚雉头之异服，无益之货勿重于时，亏德之器勿陈于侧，则人知德矣。
现代文：应该先尊崇五美，屏除四恶，革除浮华的世俗，抑制竞相斗富的世风，察纠鸿都之中的雕虫小技，焚毁野鸡头之类的奇装异服，没有益处的货物不要在当时推重，有损德行的器物不要放置在身旁，这样，人们就知道陛下的德行了。
English: You should first respect the Five Beauties, eliminate the four evils, eliminate the flashy worldliness, suppress the world style of competing for wealth, observe the small skills of carving insects in the capital, burn the strange clothes such as the pheasant's head, do not push the goods that are not beneficial at that time, and do not place the objects that damage the virtue next to you. In this way, people will know your virtue.

古文：臣又闻之，为政之要，在于选举。
现代文： 臣又听说，从事政治的关键，在于选拔举荐。
English: The minister also heard that the key to engaging in politics lies in the selection and recommendation of leaders.

古文：若差之毫厘，则有千里之失；后来居上，则致积薪之讥。
现代文：如果有毫厘的差误，就会造成很大的损失；后来的人居于上位，就会导致堆积薪柴的讥讽。
English: If there is a millimeter of error, it will cause great losses; later people live in the upper ranks, it will lead to the irony of piling up firewood.

古文：是以古之善为政者，贯鱼以次，任必以能。
现代文：因此，古代善于从事政治的人，用人像游鱼一样一个一个地按照次序，任用必定要根据能力。
English: Therefore, people who were good at politics in ancient times employed people one by one in order, like swimming fish. Appointment must be based on ability.

古文：爵人于朝，不以私爱。
现代文：在朝中赐爵给人，不是因为个人的爱好。
English: A knighthood is not bestowed in the imperial court because of personal preference.

古文：简才以授其官，量能以任其用。
现代文：分别才能而授予官职，根据才能而加以任用。
English: They are appointed to office according to their ability, and they are promoted according to their ability.

古文：官得其才，任当其用，六辔既调，坐致千里。
现代文：授官适合其才，任命正当其用，六辔既已调和，就可全不费力地而致千里之远。
English: The appointment is suitable for his talent, the appointment is legitimate for his use, and once the six gongs have been reconciled, he can travel thousands of miles without any effort.

古文：虞舜选众，不仁者远，则庶事康哉，人知其化矣。
现代文：虞、舜选拔众人，不仁义的人就让他远远地走开，则各种事情就安康了，百姓就明白他们的教化了。
English: Yu and Zou will select everyone, and those who are not benevolent and righteous will let him go far away, then all kinds of things will be healthy, and the people will understand their enlightenment.

古文：帝览而嘉之。
现代文：周武帝看后，嘉奖黎季明。
English: After Zhou Wudi read it, he praised Li Jiming.

古文：时外史廨宇屡移，未有定所。
现代文：当时，外史的官署屡屡迁移，没有固定的处所。
English: At that time, the Foreign History Office was frequently relocated and had no fixed location.

古文：季明又上言曰： 外史之职，汉之东观，帝王所宝，此焉攸在。
现代文：季明又上言道： 外史的职守，就是汉朝的东观，是帝王珍重的，这就是外史的职责所在。
English: Ji Ming also said: The duty of foreign history is the Han Dynasty's view of the East, which is precious to the emperor. This is the duty of foreign history.

古文：自魏及周，公馆不立，臣虽愚瞽，犹知其非。
现代文：自魏朝到周朝，公馆没有设立，臣虽然愚鲁暗昧，尚且知道这样不对。
English: From the Wei Dynasty to the Zhou Dynasty, there was no official residence. Although the minister was stupid and ignorant, he still knew that this was wrong.

古文：是以去年十一月中，敢冒奏陈，特降中旨，即遣修营。
现代文：因此，去年十一月间，敢于冒昧陈奏，陛下特意颁下旨意，当即命令修建外史官署。
English: Therefore, in November of last year, daring to be presumptuous, His Majesty issued a special decree and immediately ordered the construction of the Foreign History Office.

古文：荏苒一周，未知功力。
现代文：很快过了一年，不知道功效如何。
English: A year passed quickly, and I don't know how effective it was.

古文：臣职思其忧，敢不重请。 
现代文：臣常常思虑这件忧患。怎敢不再次请求。 
English: The minister often thinks about this sorrow. How dare he not ask again.

古文：帝纳焉，于是廨宇方立。
现代文：周文帝采纳他的建议，于是官署就建造起来了。
English: Zhou Wendi accepted his suggestion, and the government office was built.

古文：天和二年，进车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：天和二年，黎季明晋升为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In 1902, Li Jiming was promoted to General of Chariot and Cavalry and Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：后以疾卒。
现代文：后来病死。
English: At that time, powerful, rich and noble families were all competing to be the most luxurious and gorgeous.

古文：又周文初，属天下分崩，时学术之士盖寡，故曲学末伎，咸见引纳。
现代文：另外，周文帝初年，适逢天下分崩离析，当时，有学问道术的人很少。所以，孤陋寡闻和有小技的人，都被引荐任用。
English: In addition, the first year of Emperor Zhouwen coincided with the disintegration of the world. At that time, there were few people who learned the art of interrogation. Therefore, those who were uneducated and had minor skills were all recommended for appointment.

古文：至若冀俊、赵文深之徒，虽才愧昔人，而名著于世，并见收用。
现代文：至于像冀俊、赵文深一类的人，虽然才能有愧于前人，而声名显于当世，都受到任用。
English: As for people like Ji Jun and Zhao Wenshen, although their talents are inferior to their predecessors, and their fame is apparent in the present world, they are all appointed.

古文：冀俊，字僧俊，太原阳邑人也。
现代文：黎景熙字季明，河间莫阝人。少年时因孝顺而闻名于世。
English: Lai King Hee, also known as Ji Ming, was a Mohawk from Kawama. As a boy, he was famous for his filial piety.

古文：性沈谨，善隶书，特工模写。
现代文：曾祖黎嶷，北魏太武帝时，因军功赠爵容城县男，后为燕君郡太守。
English: Zeng Zu Lijuan, when he was the Northern Wei Emperor Taivu, he was awarded the title of Yongcheng County Man for his military service, and later became the governor of Yanjun County.

古文：初为贺拔岳墨曹参军。
现代文：祖父黎镇、父亲黎琼都世袭封爵。
English: His grandfather, Li Zhen, and his father, Li Qiong, were both hereditary knights.

古文：岳被害，周文引为记室。
现代文：黎季明小时候喜欢读书，生性记忆力强，有默默记忆的才能，而没有应酬对答之才。
English: When Li Jiming was a child, he liked to read, had a strong natural memory, and had the talent of silent memory, but did not have the talent of answering questions.

古文：时周文志平侯莫陈悦，乃令俊伪为魏帝敕书与费也头，令将兵助周文讨悦。
现代文：他的从祖父黎广，太武帝时任尚书郎，擅长古代之学。曾经跟随吏部尚书清河人崔宏学习字义，又跟从司徒崔浩学习楷书和篆书，自此以后家传其学。
English: His grandfather, Li Guang, who was Shang Shuro at the time of the Taiwu Emperor, was good at ancient studies. He once studied the meaning of the characters with Choi Hong, a member of the Shang Shuro and Qinghe clans, and also studied the Chinese characters and the calligraphy with Choi Ho, a scholar. Since then, his family has passed down his learning.

古文：俊寻旧敕模写，及代舍人、主书等署，与真无异。
现代文：季明也学习字义、楷书和篆书，与许慎有很多不同。
English: Ji Ming also studies the meaning of words, Chinese characters and Chinese characters, which is very different from Xu Sheng.

古文：周文大悦。费也头见敕，不以为疑，遂遣兵受周文节度。
现代文：又爱好天象，对术数很是通晓，但穷困失意，不从事谋生之业。有书一千多卷。
English: He is also fond of celestial objects, and is very knowledgeable about the number of operations, but he is poor and frustrated and does not engage in the business of earning a living. There are more than a thousand volumes of books.

古文：大统初，封长安县男，从征弘农，战于沙苑，进爵为子。累迁襄乐郡守。
现代文：虽然穷困独自居处，却不因生活所迫改变节操。和范阳人卢道源是心意相投感情深厚的朋友。北魏孝庄帝永安年间，卢道源劝说他出去做官，才做了个威烈将军。北魏孝武帝西迁，季明就寄居在伊洛。
English: Although he lived alone in poverty, he did not change his self-discipline due to the pressure of life. Lu Daoyuan was a friend who had a deep affinity with the Fanyang people. During the Yongan reign of the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaozhuang, Lu Daoyuan persuaded him to go out to work as an official, and only then did he become a powerful general. When the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowu moved to the west, Ji Ming lived in Ilo.

古文：寻征还，教明帝及宋献公等隶书。
现代文：侯景夺取河南之地，召季明到军队中，稍后改任黎阳郡太守。
English: Hou Jing conquered the land of Henan, called Ji Ming to the army, and later became the governor of Liyang County.

古文：时俗入书学者亦行束修之礼，谓之谢章。
现代文：季明跟随侯景到了悬瓠，发现侯景最终不足以依恃，就离开了他，寄居在颍川。当时王思政镇守颍川，多次派人召见季明，留在内馆。
English: Ji Ming followed Hou Jing to the hanging basket, found that Hou Jing was ultimately not enough to snuggle, and left him, sojourning in the Fenchuan. At that time, Wang Shizheng was in charge of the Fenchuan, and repeatedly sent people to summon Ji Ming to stay in the inner hall.

古文：俊以书字所兴，起自苍颉，若同常俗，未为合礼，遂启周文，释奠苍颉及先圣、先师。
现代文：过了一个多月，周文帝又征召他，就进了关中。周文帝就令季明在东阁订正确定古今的文字。西魏文帝大统末年，授著作郎之职。
English: After more than a month, Emperor Zhou enlisted him again, and he entered the Guanzhong. Emperor Zhou ordered Ji Ming to revise and determine the ancient and modern characters in the East Pavilion. At the end of the Western Wei Dynasty, Emperor Wen gave Ji Ming the post of scribe.

古文：除黄门侍郎、本州大中正。累迁湖州刺史。
现代文：当时和他同辈的人，都官位兼任侍中，车马服饰华丽丰盛，只有季明一人居于贫贱之位，而没有惭愧的表情。
English: At that time, people of his generation were both officials and attendants, and the chariot and horse costumes were gorgeous and rich. Only Ji Ming was poor, but he did not look ashamed.

古文：静退，每以清约自处。
现代文：季明对其职守又很勤奋，撰著不懈怠。
English: Ji Ming is also very diligent in his duties and does not slack off in his writing.

古文：前后所历，颇有声称。
现代文：然而性格特别固执，不合时宜，因此一做史官，就十年不调任。
English: However, his character is particularly stubborn and out of step with the times, so once he becomes a historian, he will not be transferred for ten years.

古文：寻加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：周明帝武成末年，升任外史下大夫。
English: In the last years of Emperor Zhou Ming Wucheng, he was promoted to the post of foreign doctor.

古文：后进爵为昌乐侯，卒。赵文深，字德本，南阳宛人也。
现代文：周武帝保定三年，大造宫殿，春夏二季大旱，诏令公卿和文武百官，尽力上言朝政得失。
English: In the three years of Emperor Zhouwu's reign in Baoding, he built a large palace, and there was a severe drought in the spring and summer. He issued an edict to the nobles and officials, and tried his best to influence the success or failure of the government.

古文：父遐，以医术仕魏，为尚药典御。
现代文：季明上秘密奏章道： 臣听说成汤时遭受旱灾，让六卿自己陈述得失。
English: Ji Ming secretly recited the chapter: "The vassal heard that Cheng Tang suffered from drought, so he asked the six nobles to report their own gains and losses.

古文：文深少学楷隶。
现代文：周宣王非常过分，宝玉都用尽了。
English: Zhou Xuanwang went too far and used up all the jewels.

古文：年十一，献书于魏帝。
现代文：难道不是为百姓作长远的考虑，俯首哀叹百姓不幸吗？
English: Isn't it time to take a long-term view of the people and bow our heads in sorrow for their misfortune?

古文：后立义归朝，除大丞相府法曹参军。
现代文：如今正是农事的关键月份，季节雨都延误过去了，普天下百姓的心里，都渴望下雨。
English: Now is the key month for agricultural affairs. The seasonal rains have been delayed, and the hearts of the people all over the world are longing for rain.

古文：雅有钟、王之则，笔势可观。
现代文：陛下关心普天下的事物，像爱护儿子一样爱护众人，敬重礼遇各种神灵，尚且不能丰收谐和。
English: His majesty is concerned about the things of the whole world, loves everyone like a son, respects and honors all kinds of gods, yet he cannot harvest harmony.

古文：当时碑榜，唯文深、冀俊而已。
现代文：难道是有的事情没有节制，违背了时节，举动失去折中，而导致这场旱灾吗？
English: Are there things that are out of control, out of season, out of balance, that have led to this drought?

古文：大统十二年，追论立义功，封白石县男。
现代文： 《春秋》中说，君主举动必定要记录下来，行动要成为典范礼仪。
English: "Spring and Autumn" said that the monarch's behavior must be recorded, and the action should become a model of etiquette.

古文：文帝以隶书纰缪，命文深与黎季明、沈遐等依《说文》及《字林》，刊定六体，成一万余言，行于世。
现代文：水旱阴阳，没有不应君主的行动而至的。孔子说： 言语行动，是有道德的人感动天地的原因，能够不慎重吗？ 《春秋》庄公三十一年冬天，天不降雨。《五行传》认为这一年中三次修筑高台，奢侈浮华，不体恤百姓。
English: Confucius said: Words and actions are the reasons for a moral person to move heaven and earth, can you be careless? "Spring and Autumn" Zhuanggu 31st year winter, the sky does not rain. "Five Elements" believes that the construction of high plateaus three times in this year is extravagant and flashy, and does not sympathize with the people.

古文：及平江陵之后，王褒入关，贵游等翕然并学褒书。
现代文：僖公二十一年夏天，大旱。《五行传》以为这时修建南门，让百姓辛劳，大兴劳役。
English: In the summer of the twenty-first year of King Gong, there was a big drought. "Five Elements" thought that the south gate would be built at this time, so that the people would work hard and work hard.

古文：文深之书，遂被遐弃。文深惭恨，形于言色。
现代文：汉惠帝二年夏天，大旱；五年夏天，大旱，江河中的水减少，溪水和山涧中的水断绝。
English: In the summer of the second year of Emperor Han Hui, there was a big drought; in the summer of the fifth year, there was a big drought, the water in the rivers was reduced, and the water in the streams and mountains was cut off.

古文：后知好尚难及，亦改习褒书。然竟无所成，转被讥议，谓之学步邯郸焉。至于碑榜，余人犹莫之逮。
现代文：《五行传》认为是在这之前出动十四万六千人修建长安城造成的。汉武帝元狩三年夏天，大旱。
English: "The Legend of the Five Elements" believes that this was caused by the dispatch of 146,000 people to build Chang'an City before this. In the summer of the third year of Emperor Hanwu's reign, there was a severe drought.

古文：王褒亦每推先之。
现代文：《五行传》认为这一年出动天下原有的官吏，凿通昆明池。
English: "The Legend of the Five Elements" believes that in this year, the original officials of the world were dispatched to chisel Kunming Lake.

古文：宫殿楼阁，皆其迹也。
现代文：这样说的话，建筑工程一类的事情，一劳动人力役，上天就有奇异之事来相应。
English: In this way, things such as construction projects, a labor service, and the heavens have strange things to correspond.

古文：迁县伯下大夫。明帝令至江陵书影覆寺碑，汉南人士，亦以为工。
现代文：典章经籍作为警示，如果或许可以引起深思的话，上天的责备告示，改正过来就好了。
English: As a warning, if it may be thought-provoking, a heavenly rebuke, it is good to correct it.

古文：梁主萧察观而美之，赏遗甚厚。天和元年，露寝等初成，文深以题榜之功，除赵兴郡守。
现代文：如今如果停止百姓的劳役，来报答上天的责备，或许天降甘霖，好的庄稼有机会生长，那么，丰收的年成就可以期望了，百姓的到来就不会迟了。《诗》说： 人亦劳止，迄可小康，惠此中国，以绥四方。 
English: Today, if the labor of the people is stopped to repay the reproach of the heavens, perhaps the heavens will rain, and good crops will have the opportunity to grow, then the achievement of a bumper harvest can be expected, and the arrival of the people will not be late. "Poem" said: People also stop working, until they can be well-off, benefit this China, and benefit the four directions.

古文：文深虽居外任，每须题榜，辄复追之。
现代文：或许恐怕阳气太盛而生阴，秋天雨水多起来，年成再不丰收，人们就没有希望了。如果又加饥荒，可忧虑的就更多了。 
English: Perhaps people are afraid that the yang will be too strong and the yin will be too weak, that there will be more rain in the autumn, and that if the harvest is not good, people will have no hope. If famine is added, there will be more to worry about.

古文：后以疾卒。
现代文：当时，豪强富贵人家，都争相攀比奢侈华丽。
English: At that time, powerful, rich and noble families were all competing to be the most luxurious and gorgeous.

古文：辛彦之，陇西狄道人也。
现代文：季明又上书说： 臣听说宽大是为了广为覆盖，慈爱是为了关怀众人。
English: Ji Ming also wrote: The minister heard that generosity is to be widely covered, and love is to care for everyone.

古文：祖世叙，魏凉州刺史。父灵补，周渭州刺史。
现代文：所以，说天高地厚，是因为万物都能得到天地的包容养育；四季显示出寒冷暑热，是因为各种事物都能从四季的忠实诚信中得到帮助。
English: Therefore, it is said that the heavens are high and the earth is thick, because all things can be nurtured by the tolerance of heaven and earth; the four seasons show cold and heat, because all kinds of things can be helped by the faithfulness and integrity of the four seasons.

古文：彦之九岁而孤，不交非类。博涉经史，与天水牛弘同志好学。
现代文：因此，帝王的宽容大度像天地一样，忠实诚信像四季一样。
English: Therefore, the emperor's tolerance and generosity are like heaven and earth, and his faithfulness and honesty are like the four seasons.

古文：后入关，遂家京兆。周文见而器之，引为中外府礼曹，赐以衣马珠玉。
现代文：招摇星指向东方，天下的人都知道春天来了；君主布施恩德，普天下的人都怀念其恩惠。希望陛下借助上天统御天下，各种事物都能亨通，乘驭六龙，自强不息，喜爱问询，接受规范，天下的百姓就十分幸运了。
English: The wavering star points to the east, and everyone in the world knows that spring has come; the monarch is generous, and people all over the world miss his grace. I hope that His Majesty will rule the world with the help of heaven, and all kinds of things can be successful, harness the six dragons, be self-reliant, love to inquire, and accept norms, and the people of the world will be very lucky.

古文：时国家草创，朝贵多出武人，修定仪注，唯彦之而已。
现代文： 自古以来，最具德行的君主，也都广泛请求，到处询访，询问打柴草的人，把鼓挂在树干上，以征求过失。
English: Since ancient times, the most virtuous monarchs have also made extensive requests, inquired everywhere, inquired about the woodcutter, and hung the drum on the tree trunk to solicit faults.

古文：寻拜中书侍郎。及周闵帝受禅，彦之与小宗伯卢辩，专掌仪制。历典祀、太祝、乐部、御正四曹大夫，开府仪同三司，封五原郡公。
现代文：前不久，大旱超过了时节，百姓渴望收成，陛下于是发布圣明的诏令，广泛搜求百姓的六种疾苦，象禹、汤那样归罪自己，推崇宋景坚守正直，及时雨顺应时节，年成因此而获得丰收。约束自己，节俭用品，仰慕质朴，去除浮华，这样就高尚了。
English: Not long ago, the drought exceeded the season, and the people were eager for the harvest. His Majesty then issued the edict of the Holy Light, extensively searched for the six kinds of sufferings of the people, blamed himself like Yu and Tang, praised Song Jing for adhering to honesty, timely rain according to the season, and obtained a bumper harvest in the year. Constrain yourself, frugal supplies, admire simplicity, remove glitz, and thus be noble.

古文：宣帝即位，拜小宗伯。时帝立五皇后，彦之切谏，由是忤旨，免官。
现代文：然而，高官仍在四通八达的道路上炫耀，丝罗尚且充斥于豪强富贵之家，小小老百姓连粗布衣服都穿不上，编入户籍的平民连糟糠都吃不饱。这就是劝说引导的道理，有些没能周遍的缘故。
English: However, high-ranking officials are still flaunting themselves on the roads leading to everywhere, extravagance is rampant and abounds in the homes of the rich and powerful, the little people can't even wear coarse cloth clothes, and the commoners registered in the household can't even eat enough scraps. This is the reason for persuasion and guidance, and the reason why some people haven't been able to get around.

古文：晋君德薄，师旷固惜清徵。
现代文：晋国的君主缺少德行，师旷很是怜惜清澈的徵音。
English: The monarch of Jin was deficient in virtue, and Shige was a pitiful and limpid conscript.

古文：上古之时，未有音乐，鼓腹击壤，乐在其间。
现代文： 上古的时候，没有音乐，手拍肚子，敲打土块，就算是音乐了。
English: In ancient times, when there was no music, clapping one's hands to one's stomach or beating the soil was considered music.

古文：《易》曰： 先王作乐崇德，殷荐之上帝，以配祖考。 
现代文：《易》说： 远古帝王制作音乐崇尚德行，殷勤地推荐给上天，用以配享祖先。 
English: "Yi" said: The ancient emperors made music that advocated virtue, and diligently recommended it to the heavens to share with their ancestors.

古文：至于黄帝作《咸池》，颛顼作《六茎》，帝喾作《五英》，尧作《大章》，舜作《大韶》，禹作《大夏》，汤作《大濩》，武王作《大武》。
现代文：以至于有黄帝制作《咸池》，颛顼制作《六茎》，帝制作《五英》，尧制作《大章》，舜制作《大韶》，禹制作《大夏》，汤制作《大》，武王制作《大武》。
English: So much so that Emperor Huangdi produced "The Salt Pond," Emperor Gong produced "The Six Stems," Emperor Gong produced "The Five Kingdoms," Emperor Gong produced "The Great Chapter," Emperor Gong produced "The Great Dragonfly," Emperor Yu produced "The Great Summer," Emperor Tang produced "The Great" and Emperor Wu produced "The Great Wu."

古文：从夏以来，年代久远，唯有名字，其声不可得闻。
现代文：自从夏朝以来，年代久远，只留下了音乐名字，但其声音已经不能听到了。
English: Since the Xia Dynasty, a long time ago, only the music name has been left, but its voice can no longer be heard.

古文：自殷至周，备于《诗·颂》。
现代文：从殷朝到周朝的音乐，全都在《诗的·颂》中。
English: The music from the Yin Dynasty to the Zhou Dynasty is all in the Poetic Ode.

古文：故自圣贤已下，多习乐者，至如伏羲减瑟，文王足琴，仲尼击磬，子路鼓瑟，汉高击筑，元帝吹箫。
现代文：所以，自圣明的贤哲以来，学习音乐的人很多，如伏羲减少琴弦，文王补足琴弦，孔子敲击磬，子路弹奏瑟，汉高祖敲击筑，汉元帝吹箫。
English: Therefore, since the sages of Shenming, there have been many people who have studied music, such as Fuxiong reducing the strings, King Wen supplementing the strings, Confucius striking the gong, Zilu playing the zither, Han Gaozu striking the zhu, and Emperor Han Yuan blowing the gong.

古文：汉祖之初，叔孙通因秦乐人，制宗庙之乐。
现代文： 汉高祖初年，叔孙通借助秦朝的音乐家，制作汉朝宗庙的音乐。
English: In the first year of the founding of the Han Dynasty, Uncle Sun Tong used musicians from the Qin Dynasty to produce music for the Han Dynasty's ancestral temple.

古文：迎神于庙门，奏《嘉至之乐》，犹古降神之乐也。
现代文：在庙门举行迎神仪式，奏《嘉至之乐》，好像古时请神下凡的音乐一样。
English: A ceremony was held at the temple gate to welcome the gods, and the "Jiaqi Music" was played, as if the gods had been invited to listen to ordinary music in ancient times.

古文：皇帝入庙门，奏《永至之乐》，以为行步之节，犹古《采荠肆夏》也。乾豆上荐，奏《登歌之乐》，犹古清庙之歌也。登歌再终，奏《休成之乐》，美神飨也。皇帝就东厢坐定，奏《永安之乐》，美礼成也。
现代文：皇帝进入庙门，奏《永至之乐》，作为行走的节奏，好像古时的《采荠》、《肆夏》一样；当把干肉放在豆这种祭器中奉献上去时，奏《登歌之乐》，好像古时的清庙之歌一样；升堂奏歌再次结束之后，奏《休成之乐》，赞美神灵的赏赐；皇帝到东厢坐定之后，奏《永安之乐》，赞美祭礼完成。
English: When the emperor entered the gate of the temple, he played the "Song of Eternity" as the rhythm of walking, just like the ancient "Cherry Picking" and "Blessed Summer"; when the dried meat was placed in the bean as a sacrificial offering, the "Song of Ascension" was played, just like the ancient song of the Qing Temple; after the song of ascending the hall was over, the "Song of Rest" was played, praising the gift of the gods; after the emperor was seated in the east wing, the "Song of Eternity" was played, praising the completion of the ritual.

古文：其《休成》、《永至》二曲，叔孙通所制也。
现代文：其中《休成》、《永至》两支乐曲，是叔孙通制作的。
English: Among them, two pieces of music, "Hiatus" and "Forever," were produced by Uncle Sun Tong.

古文：汉高祖庙，奏《武德》、《文始》、《五行之舞》。
现代文：汉高祖时，奏《武德》、《文始》、《五行之舞》乐曲。
English: When he was the founder of Henkel, he played "Wu De," "Wen Shi," and "Dance of the Five Elements."

古文：当春秋时，陈公子完奔齐，陈是舜后，故齐有《韶》乐。
现代文：春秋的时候，陈国公子完出逃到齐国，陈国是舜的后代，所以齐国有《韶》这种音乐。
English: During the Spring and Autumn Period, Chen Guozhong fled to Qi Province. Chen Province is a descendant of Zou, so Zou's music is state-owned in Qi.

古文：孔子在齐闻韶，三月不知肉味是也。
现代文：孔子在齐国听到《韶》这种音乐，很长时间尝不出肉的味道的，就是这种音乐。
English: It was this kind of music that Confucius listened to in the State of Qi. He could not taste meat for a long time.

古文：秦始皇灭齐，《韶》乐传于秦。
现代文：秦始皇消灭齐国，《韶》的乐章传到秦国。
English: Qin Shi Huang annihilated Qi, and the music of "Dragonfly" spread to Qin.

古文：汉高祖灭秦，《韶》乐传于汉。
现代文：汉高祖灭亡秦朝，《韶》的乐章流传到汉朝。
English: After the founder of the Han Dynasty, Gao Zu, died and the Qin Dynasty was overthrown, the music of the "Shu" was passed down to the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉高祖改名《文始》，以示不相袭也。
现代文：汉高祖将《韶》改名为《文始》，用以表示不相互因袭。
English: The founder of Henkel changed the name of "" to "Wen始" to indicate that they were not influenced by each other.

古文：《五行舞》者，本周《大武》乐也，始皇改曰《五行》。
现代文：《五行舞》这种乐曲，原是周朝的《大武》乐曲，秦始皇改名为《五行》。
English: "The Dance of the Five Elements" was originally the "Great Warrior" music of the Zhou Dynasty, but it was renamed "The Dance of the Five Elements" by Qin Shihuang.

古文：及于孝文，复作《四时之舞》，以示天下安和，四时顺也。
现代文：到了汉孝文帝，又改为《四时之舞》，用以表示天下安定和平，四季顺畅。
English: When Emperor Han Xiaowen came to power, it was changed to "Dance of the Four Seasons" to indicate that the world is stable and peaceful, and the four seasons are smooth.

古文：孝景采《武德舞》以为《昭德》，孝宣又采《昭德》以为《盛德》。
现代文：孝景帝采用《武德舞》作为《昭德》。孝宣帝又采用《昭德》作为《盛德》。
English: Emperor Xiao Jing used "Wu De Bu" as "Zhao De." Emperor Xiao Xuan also used "Zhao De" as "Sheng De."

古文：虽变其名，大抵皆因秦旧事。
现代文：虽然改变名称，但大抵都是因袭秦朝的旧事。
English: Although the name was changed, it was mostly due to the old incident of following the Qin Dynasty.

古文：至于晋、魏，皆用古乐。
现代文：到了魏、晋，都是使用古乐。
English: In the Wei and Jin dynasties, ancient music was used.

古文：魏之三祖，并制乐辞。
现代文：魏国的三祖，都制作音乐词章。
English: The three forefathers of Wei all produced musical lyrics.

古文：自永嘉播越，五都倾荡，乐声南度，以是大备江东。
现代文：自晋永嘉流亡以来，五都倾覆，音乐流传到南方，因此音乐在江东大体具备。
English: Since Jin Yongjia's exile, the Five Provinces have been overthrown and music has spread to the south, so music is generally available in the east of the Yangtze River.

古文：宋、齐已来，至于梁代，所行乐事，犹皆传古。
现代文：宋、齐以来迄于梁代，实行的音乐之事，还都是从古时候流传下来的。
English: From the Song and Qi dynasties to the Liang dynasty, the practice of music has been passed down from ancient times.

古文：三雍四始，实称大盛。
现代文：辟雍、明堂、灵台三雍和岁、时、日的开始正月旦日，祭祀之乐实在可称为很隆盛。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, when the Yong, Myeongdong, and Lingdae Sanyong, and the year, hour, and day begin, the music of the ritual can truly be said to be very prosperous.

古文：及侯景篡逆，乐师分散，其四舞三调，悉度伪齐。
现代文：到侯景篡权造反时，音乐师四处流散，四时舞和清商三调，都到了僭伪的齐朝。
English: By the time of Hou Jing's usurpation of power and rebellion, musicians were scattered everywhere, and the four-hour dance and the Qing Shang three-tone had all arrived in the counterfeit Qi Dynasty.

古文：齐氏虽知传受，得曲而不用之于宗庙朝廷也。
现代文：齐朝虽然知道传授和学习，但得到乐曲之后而不把它用在宗庙和朝廷。
English: Although the Qi Dynasty knew how to teach and learn, it did not use the music in the ancestral temple and the imperial court after obtaining it.

古文：臣少好音律，留意管弦，年虽耆老，颇皆记忆。
现代文： 臣自幼爱好音乐声律，留心器乐，虽然年纪老迈，还都能记忆下来。
English: From a young age, he was fond of musical rhythms and paid attention to instrumental music. Even though he is old, he can still remember everything.

古文：及东土克定，乐人悉反，问其逗留，果云是梁人所教。
现代文：到了东方的国土平定之后，乐工都返回了。询问他们逗留之地，果然说是梁朝人教授的。
English: After the country in the east was pacified, the musicians all returned. When asked where they were staying, they said that they were taught by Liang Chaoren.

古文：今三调四舞，并皆有手，虽不能精熟，亦颇具雅声。
现代文：如今，清商三调和四时舞，都有人弹奏，虽然不能精审熟练，但也具有雅正之声。
English: Nowadays, both the Qing Shang three-tone and the four-time dance are played by people. Although they cannot be refined and skilled, they also have an elegant voice.

古文：若令教习传授，庶得流传古乐。
现代文：若让他们教导传授，可望古乐得以流传。
English: If they are allowed to teach and pass on their knowledge, it is hoped that ancient music can be passed on.

古文：然后取其会归，撮其指要，因循损益，更制嘉名，歌盛德于当今，传雅正于来叶，岂不美欤。
现代文：然后取其旨归，摘其精要，根据旧有的加以削减增益，另外制定好的名称，歌颂盛大恩德于当今，流传雅正之乐到来世，岂不是美事吗？
English: Then take its essence, extract its essence, reduce the gain according to the old one, and formulate a good name, praise the grand and great benevolence in the present day, and spread the joy of elegance to the next generation. Isn't it a beautiful thing?

古文：谨具录三调四舞曲名，又制歌辞如别。
现代文：谨抄录清商三调和四时舞的乐曲名称，又撰写歌辞在别的地方。
English: I have copied the names of the pieces of music for the three-part and four-part dances, and I have also written the lyrics elsewhere.

古文：其有声曲流宕，不可以陈于殿庭者，亦悉附之于后。
现代文：那些有乐曲流传，而不能在殿堂之上弹奏的，也都附录在后面。 
English: Those pieces that have been passed down but cannot be played in the hall of fame are also listed in the appendix below.

古文：书奏，别敕太常，取妥节度。于是作清、平、瑟三调声，又作八佾《鞸》、《铎》、《巾》、《拂》四舞。
现代文：书表上奏之后，文帝另敕令太常，采取何妥制定的节拍尺度，于是制作清、平、瑟三调之声，又制作天子所用的《舞革毕》、《铎》、《巾》、《拂》四种舞曲。
English: After the publication of the book, Emperor Wen ordered that a different rhythm should be used, and adopted the well-established rhythm scale, thus producing the voices of the three tones of clear, flat and soft, and also produced the four dances used by the heavenly son, "Dance," "Dance," "Dance" and "Dance."

古文：先是太常所传宗庙雅乐，历数十年，唯作大吕，废黄钟。
现代文：在这之前，太常寺留传下来的宗庙雅乐，已经经历了几十年，只有大吕，废除了黄钟。
English: Prior to this, the ancestral temple music that had been passed down from Taijō-ji Temple had been around for decades, and only Dairu had abolished the yellow bell.

古文：妥又深乖古意，乃奏请用黄钟。
现代文：何妥又认为这些宗庙雅乐背离古乐之意，就上奏请求用黄钟。
English: He also thought that these ancestral temple courtly music deviated from the meaning of ancient music, so he requested the use of a yellow bell.

古文：诏下公卿议，从之。
现代文：文帝下诏让公卿商议，采纳了何妥的建议。
English: Emperor Wen issued an edict to let the nobles discuss the matter, and they accepted the proposal.

古文：俄而子蔚为秘书郎。有罪当刑，上哀之，减死论。
现代文：不久，何妥的儿子何蔚任秘书郎，有罪应当施刑，皇上哀怜何妥，将何蔚减除死罪论处。
English: Soon after, He Tuo's son, He Wei, who was his secretary, was found guilty and sentenced to death. The emperor took pity on He Tuo and commuted He Wei's sentence to death.

古文：是后恩礼渐薄。
现代文：这之后，何妥所受到的恩宠礼遇就逐渐减少了。
English: After that, Ho To's favours dwindled.

古文：六年，出为龙州刺史。
现代文：开皇六年，外任龙州刺史。
English: Six years after the emperor's enthronement, he was appointed to the post of Longzhou chief historian.

古文：时有负笈游学者，妥皆为讲说教授之。
现代文：当时有背着书箱到处求学的人，何妥都为他们讲说传授。
English: At that time, there were people who went everywhere to study with a bookcase on their back, and they were taught everything.

古文：又为《刺史箴》，勒于州门外。
现代文：又撰写《刺史箴》，刻写在州门外。
English: He also wrote "The Tale of the Sting" and inscribed it outside the state gate.

古文：在职三年，以疾请还，诏许之。
现代文：任职三年，因疾病请求回京，诏令准许。
English: After three years in office, he requested to return to Beijing due to illness, and was permitted to do so by imperial decree.

古文：复知学事。
现代文：重新掌管学校之事。
English: to take back control of the school.

古文：时上方使苏夔在太常参议钟律，夔有所建议，朝士多从之。
现代文：当时，皇上刚刚让苏夔在太常寺参与议定律吕，苏夔有一些建议，朝中官员大多随从。
English: At that time, the emperor had just asked Su Shi to participate in the negotiation of the Ruling at Taiji Temple. Su Shi had some suggestions, and most of the officials of the DPRK and China followed suit.

古文：妥独不同，每言夔之短。
现代文：何妥偏偏与众不同，常常指责苏夔的短处。
English: What's so special about Su Shi is that she's different from everyone else. She often criticizes Su Shi's shortcomings.

古文：帝下其议，群臣多排妥。
现代文：文帝将其建议下达给群臣，群臣大都排斥何妥的建议。
English: Emperor Wen sent his suggestions to the courtiers, and most of the courtiers rejected his suggestions.

古文：妥复上封事，指陈得失，大抵论时政损益，并指斥当世朋党。
现代文：何妥又上秘密奏章，指点陈述得失，大概都是议论时政得失，并斥责当世结党成派之人。
English: What's the point of writing a secret report, pointing out the gains and losses of the statement, probably talking about the gains and losses of the current government, and reprimanding those who formed a faction of the party.

古文：于是苏威及吏部尚书卢恺、侍郎薛道衡等皆坐得罪。
现代文：于是，苏威和吏部尚书卢恺、侍郎薛道衡等人皆受连累而获罪。
English: As a result, Su Wei, the official Shang Shulun, the chamberlain Xue Daoheng, and others were all implicated and convicted.

古文：除伊州刺史，不行。
现代文：授予伊州刺史之职，何妥没有赴任。
English: He was awarded the post of the governor of Illinois, but he did not take up the post.

古文：寻为国子祭酒，卒官。
现代文：不久任国子祭酒，死于官任。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of Kuniko Matsuri Sake, and died in office.

古文：谥曰肃。
现代文：谥号曰肃。
English: His posthumous name is Su.

古文：因上所著《历书》，与太史令张胄玄多不同，被驳不用。
现代文：撰写有《周易讲疏》三卷、《孝经义疏》二卷、《庄子义疏》四卷。
English: He has written three volumes of "Zhou Yi Lectures," two volumes of "Xiao Jing Yi Lectures," and four volumes of "Zhuang Zi Yi Lectures."

古文：卒，刘炫为之请谥，朝廷不许。
现代文：和沈重等人撰著《三十六科鬼神感应等大义》九卷、《封神书》一卷、《乐要》一卷，《文集》十卷，都流传于世。
English: He and Shen Ju and others wrote the "Thirty-six Sciences of Ghosts and Gods," nine volumes, the "Book of Seals" one volume, the "Music" one volume, and the "Collection" ten volumes, all of which have been passed down to the world.

古文：刘炫，字光伯，河间景城人也。
现代文：刘炫字光伯，河间景城人。
English: Liu Xuan Zi Guang Bo, a native of Jingcheng, Hebei Province.

古文：少以聪敏见称。
现代文：少年时因聪明机敏受到称赞。
English: As a boy, he was praised for his intelligence and quick wit.

古文：与信都刘焯闭户读书，十年不出。
现代文：和信都人刘焯一起闭门读书，十年之间足不出户。
English: He studied behind closed doors with Liu Wei, a native of Xindu, and did not leave the house for ten years.

古文：炫眸子精明，视日不眩，强记默识，莫与为俦。
现代文：刘炫的眼睛非常明亮，看太阳不目眩，记忆力强，默默地记忆，没有人能和他相比。
English: Liu Xuan's eyes are very bright, he is not dazzled by the sun, his memory is strong, he remembers silently, and no one can compare with him.

古文：左画圆，右画方，口诵，目数，耳听，五事同举，无所遗失。
现代文：左手画圆，右手画方，口中诵读，目中数数，耳朵听讲，五件事情一起做，没有遗失。
English: Draw a circle with the left hand, learn how to draw with the right hand, read with the mouth, count with the eyes, listen with the ears, do five things together, and nothing is lost.

古文：周武帝平齐，瀛州刺史宇文亢召为户曹从事。
现代文：周武帝平定齐国，瀛州刺史宇文亢召刘炫为户曹从事。
English: Emperor Zhou of Wu conquered the State of Qi, and Liu Xuan was summoned by the governor of Zhangzhou, Shishi Yuwen, to serve as the head of the household.

古文：后刺史李绘署礼曹从事，以吏干知名。
现代文：后来，刺史李绘用为礼曹从事，因有官员的才干而广为人知。
English: Later, he was widely known for his talent as an official.

古文：隋开皇中，奉敕与著作郎王劭同修国史，俄直门下省，以待顾问。
现代文：隋开皇年间，刘炫奉敕令与著作郎王劭一同修撰国史，不久，改署于门下省，以待顾问。
English: During the reign of Emperor Sui, Liu Xuanbong wrote the national history together with the author Lang Wangqi. Soon, he was reassigned to a province under the emperor's control as a consultant.

古文：又诏诸术者修天文律历，兼于内史省考定群言。
现代文：又诏令和诸位术圩订天文律历，兼在内史省考定诸家言论。
English: He also issued a decree to establish an astronomical calendar with the magistrates, and also approved the statements of various families in the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

古文：内史令博陵李德林甚礼之。
现代文：内史令博陵人李德林待他很有礼貌。
English: Li Delin, a native of Boling, treated him very politely.

古文：炫虽遍直三省，竟不得官，为县司责其赋役。
现代文：刘炫虽然在中书、门下、内史三省都供过职，但竟然没有得到官职，被县司责讨赋税和劳役。
English: Although Liu Xuan had served in the three provinces of Zhongshu, Menzhu and Inner History, he did not get an official post and was punished by the county magistrate with taxation and labor service.

古文：炫自陈于内史，内史送诣吏部。
现代文：刘炫向内史自我陈说，内史把他送到吏部。
English: Liu Xuan self-reported to the internal history, and the internal history sent him to the personnel department.

古文：尚书韦世康问其所能，炫自为状曰： 《周礼》、《礼记》、《毛诗》、《尚书》、《公羊》、《左传》、《孝经》、《论语》，孔、郑、王、何、服、杜等注，凡十三家，虽义有精粗，并堪讲授；《周易》、《仪礼》、《谷梁》用功差少；史子文集，嘉言故事，咸诵于心；天文、律历，穷核微妙。
现代文：吏部尚书韦世康问他有什么才能，刘炫自写情状说： 《周礼》、《礼记》、《毛诗》、《尚书》、《公羊》、《左传》、《孝经》、《论语》，孔安国、郑玄、王弼、何晏、服虔、杜预等人的注释，总共十三家，虽然道理有精有粗，但都可以讲授；《周易》、《仪礼》、《谷梁》这三种，用的功夫少一些；史书、子书、文集、警句故事都能心中默诵；天文、律历，穷究其精微奥妙。
English: The clerk, Shang Shu Wei Shikang, asked him what talent he had, and Liu Xuan said that he had written the following: "Zhou Li," "Li Ji," "Mao Shi," "Shang Shu," "Ram," "Zhu Chuan," "Xiao Jing," "Analects," the commentaries of Kong An Guo, Zheng Xuan, Wang Hui, He Wei, Zhu Qian, Du Yu and others, a total of thirteen, although the reason is refined and coarse, but can be taught; "Zhou Yi," "Ritual" and "Gu Liang," these three, use less effort; history books, children's

古文：至于公私文翰，未尝假手。 
现代文：至于公私文章翰墨，从来不曾借助别人之手。 
English: As far as the public and private articles are concerned, they have never been done with the help of others.

古文：吏部竟不详试。
现代文：吏部竟然不详细考试。
English: The personnel department did not conduct a detailed examination.

古文：然在朝知名之士十余人，保明炫所陈不谬，于是除殿内将军。
现代文：然而，朝中知名人士十多人，作保证明刘炫所说的不错，于是授予刘炫殿内将军之职。
English: However, more than a dozen well-known people in the DPRK and China, as a guarantee to prove that Liu Xuan's words were good, then awarded Liu Xuan the post of general in the palace.

古文：时牛弘奏购求天下遗逸之书，炫遂伪造书百余卷，题为《连山易》、《鲁史记》等，录上送官，取赏而去。
现代文：当时，牛弘奏请购买搜求天下散佚的书籍，刘炫就伪造书籍一百多卷，题其名为《连山易》、《鲁史记》等，送到官府，领了赏就离去了。
English: At that time, Niu Hongso was asked to purchase books that were scattered around the world, and Liu Xuan forged more than a hundred volumes of books, entitled "Lianshan Yi" and "Lu Shi Ji," and sent them to the government. After receiving the reward, he left.

古文：后有人讼之，经赦免死，坐除名。
现代文：后来有人告他，经过大敕免除死罪，除去名籍。
English: Later, someone accused him, and he was exonerated of the death penalty by the grand jury, and his name and citizenship were removed.

古文：归于家，以教授为务。
现代文：回到家乡，以教授学生为业。
English: He returned to his hometown to teach students.

古文：废太子勇闻而召之。
现代文：被废除的太子杨勇知道后把他召来。
English: The abolished Prince Yang Yong knew about this and summoned him.

古文：既至京师，敕令事蜀王秀，迁延不往。
现代文：到了京城之后，敕令侍奉蜀王杨秀，刘炫拖延不去。
English: After arriving in Beijing, he was ordered to serve the Shu King Yang Xiu, and Liu Xuan did not delay.

古文：秀大怒，枷送益州。
现代文：杨秀非常愤怒，将刘炫枷起来送到益州。
English: Yang Xiu was very angry and sent Liu to Yizhou in shackles.

古文：既而配为帐内，每使执仗为门卫。
现代文：接着就发配为士卒，经常让他手执兵器当门卫。
English: He was then assigned as a soldier, and often had to guard the gate with his weapon in hand.

古文：俄而释之，典校书史。
现代文：不久就把他放了，让他主持校订书史。
English: He was soon released to take over the school's history.

古文：炫因拟屈原《卜居》为《筮涂》以自寄。
现代文：刘炫因而模仿屈原的《卜居》，作《筮途》来自我寄托。
English: As a result, Liu Xuan imitated Qu Yuan's "Buju" and commissioned me to write "The Way."

古文：及秀废，与诸儒修定五礼，授旅骑尉。
现代文：杨秀被废除之后，刘炫和诸位儒生修订五礼，授旅骑尉之职。
English: After Yang Xiu was abolished, Liu Xuan and all the Confucian scholars revised the Five Rites and conferred the post of brigadier.

古文：吏部尚书牛弘建议以为《礼》：诸侯绝傍期，大夫降一等。
现代文：吏部尚书牛弘建议，认为根据《礼》：诸侯杜绝依傍的时期，大夫官降一级。
English: Shangshu Niuhong of the cadre department suggested that according to the "Rite": the period when the lords put an end to their dependence, the doctor would be downgraded by one level.

古文：今之上柱国虽不同古诸侯，比大夫可也，官在第二品，宜降傍亲一等。
现代文：如今的上柱国虽然和古代的诸侯不同，但和大夫相比还是可以的，官职在第二品，应该比帝王的近亲降一等。
English: Although today's Shangzhu countries are different from the ancient princes, they can still be compared to doctors. Official posts are second-class, and they should be one rank lower than the emperor's close relatives.

古文：议者多以为然。
现代文：论者大多认为说得对。
English: Most commentators believe that this is correct.

古文：炫驳之曰： 古之仕者，宗一人而已，庶子不得进，由是先王重嫡。
现代文：刘炫驳斥道 ：古时候做官的人，作为正宗的只有一人，庶出之子不能进授官爵，因此，古代帝王重视嫡亲。
English: Liu Xuan refuted: In ancient times, there was only one person who was an official as an authentic, and an illegitimate son could not be promoted to a peerage. Therefore, ancient emperors valued legitimate relatives.

古文：其宗子有分禄之义，族人与宗子虽疏远，犹服衰三月，良由受其恩也。
现代文：其嫡亲长子有分享爵禄的道理，同宗的人和嫡长子虽然疏远，但还服丧服三个月，实在是因为受到了他的恩德。
English: The eldest son of the legitimate parent has the principle of sharing the peerage. Although the people of the same family are estranged from the legitimate eldest son, they still wear mourning clothes for three months, really because they have received his grace.

古文：令之仕者，位以才升，不限嫡庶，与古既异，何降之有。
现代文：如今做官的人，爵位刚刚升上去，就对嫡亲庶出不加限制，既然和古时候不同，有什么可降低的！
English: Today's officials, who have just been elevated to the peerage, place no restrictions on the birth of legitimate children. Since this is different from ancient times, there is nothing to reduce!

古文：令之贵者，多忽近亲，若或降之，人道之疏，自此始矣。 
现代文：如今，高贵的人大多忽视近亲，如果将有的人官爵降低，人类社会道德规范的疏远，就要从此开始了。 
English: Nowadays, most of the noble people ignore their close relatives. If there will be a decrease in the number of officials and nobles, and the alienation of the moral norms of human society, it will begin from here.

古文：遂寝其事。
现代文：于是就把这件事放下了。
English: So they dropped the matter.

古文：开皇二十年，废国子、四门及州县学，唯置太学，博士二人，学生七十二人。
现代文：开皇二十年，废止国子、四门和各州县的学校，只设置太学，博士二人，学生七十二人。
English: Twenty years after the founding of the emperor, the schools of Kuniko, Shimon and each prefecture and county were abolished, and only Taigaku was set up, with two doctors and 72 students.

古文：炫上表言学校不宜废，情理甚切，帝不纳。
现代文：刘炫上表，说学校不应该废止，情感和道理都很恳切，隋文帝没有采纳。
English: Liu Xuan went to the table and said that the school should not be abolished. The emotion and reason were very sincere, but the Sui Emperor did not adopt it.

古文：时国家殷盛，皆以辽东为意。炫以为辽东不可伐，作《抚夷论》以讽焉。
现代文：当时，国家富足强大，都把辽东放在心上，刘炫认为不可征伐辽东，写了一篇《抚夷论》来讽劝。
English: At that time, the country was rich and powerful, and they all had Liaodong in mind. Liu Xuan believed that Liaodong could not be conquered, and wrote a "Fujii Theory" to ironically persuade them.

古文：当时莫有悟者。
现代文：当时没有人省悟。
English: At the time, no one thought about it.

古文：及大业之季，三征不克，炫言方验。
现代文：到了大业末年，三次征伐都没有取胜，刘炫的话才得到证实。
English: In the final years of his career, Liu Xuan's words were only confirmed when he failed to win any of his three conquests.

古文：炀帝即位，牛弘引炫修律令。
现代文：隋炀帝即位，牛弘用刘炫修订刑律法令。
English: Emperor Sui Xuan ascended to the throne, and Niu Hong used Liu Xuan to revise the Criminal Law.

古文：始文帝时，以刀笔吏类多小人，年久长奸，势使然也；又以风俗陵迟，妇人无节。
现代文：自隋文帝时开始，官府中负责公文的人大都是小人一类，时间长久，奸邪滋长，是形势造成了这种局面。又因风俗衰败，妇人没有节操。
English: Since the time of the Sui Emperor, most of the people in charge of official documents in the government have been villains. It has been a long time, and adultery has grown. It is the situation that has caused this situation. And because of the decay of customs, women have no discipline.

古文：于是立格：州县佐吏，三年而代之；九品妻，无得再醮。
现代文：于是设立府吏处事的规则，州县中的辅助官员，三年更换一次；九品官员的妻子，不得再嫁。
English: As a result, the rules for the handling of prefectural officials were established. The auxiliary officials in prefectures and counties were replaced once every three years; the wives of nine-grade officials were not allowed to remarry.

古文：炫著论以为不可，弘竟从之。
现代文：刘炫著书立论，认为不可这样，牛弘竟然听从他的建议。
English: Liu dazzled with book theory and thought that this was unacceptable, and Niu Hong actually followed his advice.

古文：诸郡置学官及流外给禀，皆发于炫。
现代文：各郡设置的学官和九品以外的职官的俸给，都从刘炫这里开始。
English: The salaries of the academic officials set up in each county and the officials other than the nine grades all start from Liu Xuan here.

古文：弘尝问炫： 案《周礼》，士多而府史少，今令史百倍于前，判官减则不济。
现代文：牛弘曾经问刘炫说： 根据《周礼》，士多而官员少；如今，令史比从前多了很多倍，判官削减了就不够用了。
English: Niu Hong once asked Liu Xuan: According to "Zhou Li," there are more scholars and fewer officials; nowadays, there are many times more scholars than before, and it is not enough to reduce the number of judges.

古文：其故何也？ 
现代文：这是什么原因呢？ 
English: What is the reason for this?

古文：炫曰： 古人委任责成，岁终考其殿最，案不重校，文不繁悉，府史之任，掌要目而已。
现代文：刘炫说 ：古时候的人任命职务而责以成功，到了年终考察其政绩优劣，文案不重新校理，公文没有那么繁多，府史的责任，就是掌管要目罢了。
English: Liu Xuan said: In the old days, people were appointed to positions and were responsible for success. At the end of the year, their political performance was examined. The copy was not re-proofread, there were not so many official documents, and the responsibility of the history of the government was just to control the important points.

古文：今之文簿，恆虑勘覆锻炼，若其不密，万里追证百年旧案。
现代文：如今的文案簿籍，一直都考虑审核校订锤炼，如果不够严密，就不远万里追证很多年前的旧文案。
English: Today's copybooks have always considered reviewing and proofreading, and if they are not rigorous enough, they will not be able to verify the old copy from many years ago.

古文：故谚云： 老吏抱案死。 
现代文：所以谚语说 ：老吏抱案死。 
English: That is why the proverb says: "Old officials die with their cases open."

古文：今古不同，若此之相悬也。
现代文：今古的不同，悬殊竟像这样！
English: The difference and disparity between now and ancient times is like this!

古文：事烦政弊，职此之由。 
现代文：事务繁多，政治的弊病，都是因了这个原因。 
English: Affairs abound, and political ills abound, for this reason.

古文：弘又问： 魏、齐之时，令史从容而已，今则不遑宁舍。
现代文：牛弘又问道 ：北魏、北齐的时候，令史从从容容；如今则没有功夫在家中安静地呆一会儿。
English: Ushihiro also asked, "During the Northern Wei and Northern Qi Dynasties, Ling Shi never took things easy; nowadays, it doesn't take much effort to stay quietly at home for a while.

古文：其事何由？ 
现代文：这件事情是什么原因呢？ 
English: What is the reason for this?

古文：炫曰： 齐氏立州，不过数十；三府行台，递相统领，文书行下，不过十条。今州三百。
现代文：刘炫说 ：齐朝设立的州，不过几十个太尉、司徒、司空三府和其行台，按其顺序相互统领，文书下达，不过十条；如今，有州三百个。
English: Liu Xuan said, "The prefectures established by the Qi Dynasty consisted of only a few dozen, but the three prefectures of Taifeng, Szeto, and Sikuo, as well as their sub-prefectures, ruled each other in their own order. Only ten documents were issued; today, there are three hundred prefectures.

古文：其繁一也。
现代文：这是第一繁多。
English: This is the first of many.

古文：往者，州唯置纲纪，郡置守、丞，县唯令而已，其所具僚，则长官自辟，受诏赴任，每州不过数十。今则不然，大小之官，悉由吏部，纤介之迹，皆属考功。
现代文：以往，州中只是设置主簿，郡设置郡守、郡丞、县只有县令一人而已，其他所用僚属，则是长官自己征召，接受诏令之后赴任，每一州不过是几十个人；如今却不是这样，大大小小的官员，都由吏部任免，小小一点事迹，都由考功考核。
English: In the past, only the general ledger was set up in a prefecture, and only a prefectural governor, a prefectural governor and a prefectural governor were set up in a county, and only a prefectural governor was set up in a county. The other subordinates used were recruited by the prefect himself and sent to the post after accepting the imperial edict, and there were only a few dozen people in each prefecture. However, this is not the case now. Officials of all sizes are appointed and removed by the cadre department, and minor deeds are examined by the performance test.

古文：其繁二也。
现代文：这是第二繁多。
English: This is the second most common.

古文：省官不如省事，省事不如清心，官事不省而望从容，其可得乎！ 
现代文：减少官员不如减少事务，减少事务不如让心中清静，官员事务没有减少，而希望从从容容，怎么可能呢？ 
English: How is it possible that reducing officials is not as good as reducing affairs, reducing affairs is not as good as letting the heart be calm, and officials' affairs have not been reduced, but hope to be relaxed?

古文：弘甚善其言而不能用。
现代文：牛弘非常欣赏刘炫的言论，但是不能采纳。
English: Ushihiro very much appreciates Liu Xuan's remarks, but cannot accept them.

古文：纳言杨达举炫博学有文章，射策高第，除太学博士。
现代文：纳言杨达举荐刘炫学识渊博，有文采，射策高中，任命为太学博士。
English: Nagan Yangda recommended Liu Xuan, who was well-educated, literate, and a high school student, to be appointed as a Doctor of Science.

古文：岁余，以品卑去任。
现代文：过了一年多，因品性低下而离任。
English: After more than a year, he left the post due to low moral standards.

古文：还至长平，奉敕追诣行在所。
现代文：回乡，行至长平，奉敕令追刘炫到皇帝所在的地方。
English: Returning to his hometown, he went to Changping and, by order of the emperor, chased Liu Xuan to the place where the emperor was.

古文：或言其无行，帝遂罢之。
现代文：有人说刘炫没有德行，炀帝就作罢了。
English: Some people say that Liu Xuan has no virtue, and that he should stop playing the emperor.

古文：归于河间。
现代文：刘炫回到河间。
English: Liu Xuan returned to the river.

古文：时盗贼峰起，谷食踊贵，经籍道息，教授不行。
现代文：这时，盗贼蜂起，粮食的价格猛涨，经籍之道止息，教授学生这条道行不通了。
English: At this time, the thieves rose up, the price of grain soared, the way of doing business ceased, and the way of teaching students became impractical.

古文：炫与妻子，相去百里，声闻断绝，郁郁不得志，乃自为赞曰：
现代文：刘炫和妻子儿女，相距百里，音讯断绝。刘炫郁郁不得志，就自己作赞说：
English: Liu Xuan and his wife and children, separated by a hundred miles, lost contact. Depressed, Liu Xuan praised himself:

古文：通人司马相如、扬子云、马季长、郑康成等皆自叙徽美，传芳来叶。
现代文： 学识渊博的司马相如、扬子云、马季长、郑康成等人，都自己叙说美善，流传芳名于来世。
English: The learned Sima Xiangru, Yang Ziyun, Ma Qichang, Zheng Kangcheng and others all described their own virtues and virtues, and their fame spread to the afterlife.

古文：余岂敢仰均先进，贻笑后昆？
现代文：我岂敢上仰与先贤相比，留给后嗣笑柄？
English: Dare I compare myself to the greats and leave my heirs a laughing stock?

古文：徒以日迫桑榆，大命将近，故友飘零，门徒雨散，溘死朝露，魂埋朔野。亲故莫照其心，后人不见其迹。
现代文：只是因为时间不多了，大限就要到来，老朋友四处飘零，弟子像雨一样离散，突然死于野外，魂灵埋葬于野，亲朋故旧不知道心迹，后人见不到踪迹。
English: Just because time is running out, the deadline is approaching, old friends are scattered everywhere, disciples are scattered like rain, suddenly died in the wild, souls are buried in the wild, relatives and friends do not know the traces of the past, and posterity can not see the traces.

古文：殆及余喘，薄言胸臆，贻及行迈，传之州里，使夫将来俊哲，知余鄙志耳。
现代文：将死之人，简单地说一说心里的想法，留给路人，传到州郡里邑，让将来的俊才贤哲，知道我这鄙薄的志向罢了。
English: Let the dead man simply say what's on his mind, leave it to passers-by, spread it to the provinces and counties, and let the future talents and sages know about my despicable ambition.

古文：余从绾发以来，迄于白首，婴孩为慈亲所恕，捶挞未尝加；从学为明师所矜，榎楚弗之及。
现代文： 我自从绾结头发以来，以至于白发苍苍，婴孩之时受到慈父慈母的宽恕，不曾挨过鞭子；上学之后受到明师的怜惜，也不曾挨过老师的板子。
English: Ever since I braided my hair, my hair has turned white. When I was a baby, I was forgiven by my loving father and mother and never received a whip; after I went to school, I was pitied by my teacher and never received a teacher's board.

古文：暨乎敦叙邦族，交结等夷，重物轻身，先人后己。
现代文：至于按照亲疏辈分友爱乡党族人，结交同辈，看重别人而不顾惜自己，先人后己。
English: As for party members who love their hometown and make friends according to their relatives and contemporaries, make friends with their contemporaries, and value others without sparing themselves, the ancestors are the best.

古文：昔在幼弱，乐参长者；爰及耆艾，数接后生。
现代文：当初在幼小的时候，乐于参拜长者；到了老迈的时候，屡屡接引后生。
English: At first, when he was young, he was happy to visit the elderly; when he was old, he often invited the younger generation.

古文：学则服而不厌，诲则劳而不倦。
现代文：学生则顺从而不厌倦，教人则辛劳而不感疲倦。
English: Students are obedient and don't get tired, teachers work hard and don't get tired.

古文：幽情寡适，心事多违。
现代文：情致幽静，落落寡合，心念与事情多有违背。
English: The mood is quiet, the location is poor, and there are many contradictions between thoughts and things.

古文：内省生平，顾循终始，其大幸有四，深恨有一。
现代文：内心反省生平，回顾一生始终，大感幸慰的事情有四件，深感遗憾的事有一件。
English: Reflecting on my life from the bottom of my heart, looking back on my entire life, there are four things that I am very pleased with, and one thing that I deeply regret.

古文：性本愚蔽，家业贫窭，为父兄所饶，厕缙绅之末。遂得博览典诰，窥涉今古，小善著于丘园，虚名闻于邦国。
现代文： 生性原本愚鲁暗昧，家业贫穷，受到父兄的宽恕，侧身于官僚之末，因而得以博览典籍文诰，窥视涉猎今古，小小的善名闻于乡里，虚名传于国家。
English: His nature was originally stupid and obscure, his family business was poor, he was forgiven by his father and brother, and he leaned on the bureaucrats. As a result, he was able to read classic books and essays, peep into hunting in ancient times, and his small good name was known in the countryside, and his false name was passed on to the country.

古文：其幸一也。
现代文：这是一可幸慰的。
English: This is comforting.

古文：隐显人间，沈浮世俗，数忝徒劳之职，久执城旦之书。名不挂于白简，事不染于丹笔。立身立行，惭恧实多，启手启足，庶几可免。
现代文： 隐居显赫于人间，沉没漂浮于世俗，多次忝居白白辛劳的职位，长期执掌法令刑律，名字没有署于弹劾奏章，事迹没有沾染罪人名册，惭愧的事情实在很多，行孝善终，或许可以幸免。
English: He lived in seclusion and was prominent in the world, he sank and floated in the world, he repeatedly held positions of hard work for nothing, he was in charge of the law and criminal law for a long time, his name was not signed in the impeachment record, his deeds did not contaminate the list of criminals, there are a lot of things he is ashamed of, he is a good son, and he may be spared.

古文：其幸二也。
现代文：这是二可幸慰的。
English: This is the second consolation.

古文：以此庸虚，屡动宸眷；以此卑贱，每升天府。
现代文： 以此平庸虚浮之人，多次受到皇帝的宠幸；以此微贱之躯，经常得到朝廷的赏赐。
English: With this mediocre and vain person, he was repeatedly favored by the emperor; with this lowly body, he was often rewarded by the court.

古文：齐镳骥騄，比翼鹓鸿，整素于凤池，记言动于麟阁。
现代文：与良俊相等齐，并列朝官班行。供官于中书省，记言行于麒麟阁。
English: He was equal to Ryojun and was in the same class as the imperial officials. He served as an official in the Ministry of Chinese Literature, and recorded his words and deeds at the Kirin Pavilion.

古文：参谒宰辅，造请群公，厚礼殊恩，增荣改价。
现代文：拜见宰相辅臣，造访诸位公卿，礼遇丰厚。恩宠非常，增益荣耀，身价大增。
English: He met the Prime Minister and Vice-Minister, visited all the nobles, and was treated with great courtesy. He was greatly favored, gained glory, and his status greatly increased.

古文：其幸三也。
现代文：这是三可幸慰的。
English: There are three things to be happy about.

古文：昼漏方尽，大耋已嗟，退反初服，归骸故里。
现代文： 所有的日子就要尽了，已经生出年老的嗟叹，退隐返归于家乡，归还遗骸于故里。
English: All the days are running out, the old sigh has been born, the retreat has returned to the hometown, and the remains have been returned to the hometown.

古文：玩文史以怡神，阅鱼鸟以散虑。观省野物，登临园沼，缓步代车，无事为贵。
现代文：玩弄文史来怡养性情，观览鱼鸟来驱散忧虑，巡视野外之物，临视园中之沼，缓缓行步代替车马，无所事事以之为贵。
English: Playing with literature and history to refresh the disposition, watching fish and birds to dispel worries, inspecting things outside the field of vision, looking at the swamp in the garden, walking slowly instead of horses and carts, and valuing idleness.

古文：其幸四也。
现代文：这是四可幸慰的。
English: There are four things to be happy about.

古文：仰休明之盛世，慨道教之陵迟，蹈先儒之逸轨，伤群言之芜秽。驰骋坟典，厘改僻谬，修撰始毕，事业适成。天违人愿，途不我与，世路未夷，学校尽废，道不备于当时，业不传于身后。
现代文： 仰承美好光明的盛世，感慨道德教化衰败，沿袭先儒走过的道路，哀伤群言的荒芜肮脏，驰骋于经籍典章，析理改正偏狭谬误，修撰之事刚刚结束，事业刚刚成功，上天违背人的意愿，人生之路已经走尽，世道不平，学校都废除，道德不具备于当时，事业不流传于身后。
English: Adhering to the beautiful and bright golden age, feeling sorry for the moral enlightenment and decay, following the road traveled by the first Confucian, grieving the desolation and filth of the group of words, galloping in the scriptures and ordinances, analyzing and correcting the narrow fallacies, the editing has just ended, the cause has just been successful, the heaven is against the will of man, the road of life has been exhausted, the world is not fair, the school has been abolished, morality does not exist at that time, and the cause is not passed on to the future.

古文：衔恨泉壤，实在兹乎！
现代文：含恨地下之事，实实在在就在这里吧！
English: Let's get down to the nitty gritty here!

古文：其深恨一也。
现代文：这一点是深感怨恨的。 
English: This is deeply resented.

古文：时在郡城，粮饷断绝。
现代文：当时，刘炫在郡城，吃的东西都没有了。
English: At that time, Liu Xuan was in Guzheng, and there was nothing left to eat.

古文：其门人多随贼盗。哀炫穷乏，诣城下索炫，郡官乃出炫与之。
现代文：他的弟子大部分都跟随了盗贼，可怜刘炫穷困，到城下索要刘炫，郡中的官员就把刘炫放出来交给他们。
English: Most of his disciples followed the thief, felt sorry for Liu Xuan's poverty, and went to the city to ask for Liu Xuan. The officials in the county released Liu Xuan to them.

古文：炫为贼所将，过下城堡。
现代文：刘炫被盗贼带着，经过攻下来的城堡。
English: Liu Xuan was taken by the thieves and passed through the castle.

古文：未几，贼为官军所破，炫饥饿无所依，复投县官。
现代文：不久，贼兵被官军打败，刘炫饥饿，没有依靠，又去投奔县官。
English: Soon, the bandits were defeated by the government army. Hungry and without any support, Liu Xian went to join the county officials.

古文：县官意炫与贼相知，恐为后变，遂闭门不纳。
现代文：县官认为刘炫和盗贼来往，恐怕以后发生变故，就关闭城门不让他进来。
English: The county official thought that Liu Xuan had been in contact with the thief, and feared that something would happen in the future, so he closed the gate and did not let him in.

古文：时夜冰寒，因此冻馁而死。
现代文：当时夜间非常寒冷，刘炫因此冻饿而死。
English: At that time, the night was very cold, and Liu Xuan died of cold and hunger.

古文：其后门人谥曰宣德先生。
现代文：后来，他的弟子赠谥号为宣德先生。
English: Later, his disciples gave him the nickname Mr. Xuande.

古文：炫性躁竞，颇好俳谐，多自矜伐，好轻侮当世，为执政所丑，由是宦途不遂。
现代文：刘炫生性急躁，很喜欢调笑逗乐，自高自大，喜欢菲薄当世，受到当权者的讨厌，因此，做官的经历很不顺遂。
English: Liu Xiu is quick-tempered, likes to tease and amuse, is arrogant, likes the world of the rich and the poor, and is disliked by those in power. As a result, his experience as an official was not very successful.

古文：著《论语述议》十卷、《春秋攻昧》十卷、《五经正名》十二卷、《孝经述议》五卷、《春秋述议》四十卷、《尚书述议》二十卷、《毛诗述议》四十卷，注《诗序》一卷、《算术》一卷，并所著文集，并行于世。
现代文：著有《论语述议》十卷、《春秋攻昧》十卷、《五经正名》十二卷、《孝经述议》五卷、《春秋述议》四十卷、《尚书述议》二十卷、《毛诗述议》四十卷，注释有《诗序》一卷、《算术》一卷。这些著作和他所著的文集一道，都在世上流传。
English: He is the author of ten volumes of "Discourse on Discourse," ten volumes of "The Spring and Autumn Offensive," twelve volumes of "The Five Classics," five volumes of "The Filial Piety Discourse," forty volumes of "The Spring and Autumn Discourse," twenty volumes of "The Shang Shu Discourse," forty volumes of "The Mao Poetry Discourse," one volume of "Poetic Sequence" and one volume of "Arithmetic." These works, along with the collections of his writings, have been circulated around the world.

