古文：崔元略，博陵人。
现代文：崔元略，博陵人。
English: Cui Yuanliu, a native of Boling.

古文：祖浑之。
现代文：祖父崔浑之。
English: Grandfather Cui Hanzhi.

古文：父儆，贞元中官至尚书左丞。
现代文：父崔儆，贞元间官至尚书左丞。
English: His father, Cui Yao, was a middle-ranking official between Zhengyuan and Shang Shuzao.

古文：元略举进士，历佐使府。
现代文：崔元略应举进士，历任使府佐吏。
English: Cui Yuanliu should be promoted to the rank of a scholar, and successively appointed as an official of the embassy.

古文：元和八年，拜殿中侍御史。
现代文：元和八年，拜殿中侍御史。
English: In the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the history of the attendants in the hall of worship ended.

古文：十二年，迁刑部郎中、知台杂事，擢拜御史中丞。
现代文：十二年，调任刑部郎中、知台杂事，又擢升拜御史中丞。
English: In 1912, he was transferred to the vice-minister of the Ministry of Justice and the vice-minister of the Ministry of Chittai Affairs, and was promoted to the vice-minister of history.

古文：元和十三年，以李夷简自西川征拜御史大夫，乃命元略留司东台。
现代文：元和十三年，因李夷简自西川应召拜御史大夫，于是命崔元略留在门下省任职。
English: In the thirteenth year of Yuanhe, because Li Yijian was summoned from Xichuan to serve as an imperial historian, he ordered Cui Yuanli to stay in his subordinate province.

古文：寻除京兆少尹，知府事，仍加金紫。
现代文：不久授京兆府少尹、知府事，依例赐紫服金鱼袋。
English: Soon, he was awarded the title of Jingzhaofu Shao Yin and prefectural governor, and was given a purple goldfish bag.

古文：数月，真拜京兆尹。
现代文：数月后，正式拜京兆尹。
English: A few months later, he officially paid homage to Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：明年，改左散骑常侍。
现代文：次年，改任左散骑常侍。
English: The following year, he was reassigned to the position of Zuo Sanzhiyi no Tsunesamurai.

古文：穆宗即位，命元略使党项宣抚。辞疾不行，出为黔南观察使、兼御史中丞。
现代文：穆宗即位，命崔元略出使党项宣抚，他借病推辞不行，出任黔南观察使、兼御史中丞。
English: When Mu Zong ascended to the throne, he ordered Cui Yuan to issue a proclamation to make him a party member, but he could not take advantage of his illness to refuse, and he served as the observation envoy to southern Fujian and the vice-president of the imperial history.

古文：初，元略受命使党项，意宰臣以私憾排斥，颇出怨言。
现代文：起初，崔元略受命出使党项，认为是宰臣挟私怨排斥自己，颇有怨言。
English: At first, Cui Yuanli was ordered to send party members, and he thought it was the vice-minister's personal grudge to exclude himself. There was a lot of grumbling.

古文：宰相崔植奏曰： 比以圣意切在安抚党项，乃差元略往使。受命之后，苦不乐行，言辞之间，颇乖去就。
现代文：宰相崔相启奏道： 日前因圣上极意安抚党项，遂差崔元略为使前往，他受命之后，深以为苦而不乐于前去，言辞之间，颇失体统。
English: Prime Minister Cui Xiangqi said: Recently, due to the emperor's strong desire to appease the party, Cui Yuanli was sent as an envoy. After he received the order, he was deeply distressed and did not want to go, and his words were quite unseemly.

古文：岂有身忝重恩，不思报效？苟非便己，即不肯行。
现代文：岂能身受重恩，不思报效，只要于己不利，便不肯行。
English: Can a man receive a great blessing and not think of repaying it? If it is to his detriment, he will not do it.

古文：须有薄惩，以肃在位，请出为黔中观察使。 
现代文：必须略加惩罚，以整肃百官，请让崔元略出任黔中观察使。 
English: A little more punishment is necessary to purge hundreds of officials, please let Cui Yuanliao serve as a middle-ranking observation envoy.

古文：初，崔植任吏部郎中，元略任刑部郎中知杂。
现代文：先前，崔植任吏部郎中，崔元略任刑部郎中知杂。
English: Previously, Cui Zhi served as a junior official of the Ministry of Justice, and Cui Yuanli served as a junior official of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：时中丞改京兆尹，物议以植有风宪之望。
现代文：当时御史中丞调任京兆尹，舆论认为崔植有希望入御史台。
English: At that time, Goshi Chujo was reassigned to Jing Zhaoyun, and the public opinion believed that Cui Zhe had hope to enter the Imperial Historian's Office.

古文：元略因入阁，妄称植失仪，命御史弹之。
现代文：崔元略因此事入阁，妄称崔植失仪，命御史弹劾他。
English: As a result, Cui Yuanliu was appointed to the cabinet. He arrogantly called himself Cui Zeguangyi, and was impeached by history.

古文：时二人皆进拟为中丞，中旨果授元略，植深衔之。
现代文：此时二人皆拟进升中丞，结果诏令只授崔元略一人，崔植深为记恨。
English: At this time, both of them intended to be promoted to junior middle officer. As a result, the imperial edict only awarded Choi Won-ryu to one person, Choi Ueshen to another.

古文：及植为相，元略以左散骑常侍使于党项；元略意植之见排，辞疾不行。被谴出。
现代文：及至崔植为相，崔元略受命以左散骑常侍身份出使党项，他认为崔植排斥自己，称病推辞不往，被谪降出京。
English: As far as Cui Zhi was concerned, Cui Yuanli was ordered to dispatch party members as a left-hand rider. He thought that Cui Zhi had rejected him, saying that he would not resign due to illness, and he was banished from Beijing.

古文：逾年，转鄂州刺史、鄂岳都团练观察使。
现代文：一年后，转任鄂州刺史、鄂岳都团练观察使。
English: A year later, he was transferred to the post of the observer of the Ezhou Sashishi and Eryu Dudu regimental drill.

古文：长庆四年，入为大理卿。
现代文：长庆四年，入朝任大理卿。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Changqing, he entered the imperial court as Daricheng.

古文：敬宗即位，复为京兆尹，寻兼御史大夫。
现代文：敬宗即位，崔元略再度任京兆尹，不久兼御史大夫。
English: When Emperor Keizong ascended the throne, Cui Yuanliu was once again appointed to the post of Jingzhao Yin, and soon also to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：以误征畿甸经赦免放缗钱万七千贯，为侍御史萧澈弹劾。
现代文：因误征京师地区已经赦免的放缗钱一万七千贯，被侍御史萧澈弹劾。
English: He was impeached by the chamberlain, Shi Xiaochu, for mistakenly conscripting 17,000 cords of money, which had already been pardoned in the Beijing Division area.

古文：有诏刑部郎中赵元亮、大理正元从质、侍御史温造充三司覆理。
现代文：诏令刑部郎中赵元亮、大理正元从质、侍御史温造充任三司复查。
English: Zhao Yuanliang, Dalim Zengyuan, and Shi Wenzao, the vice-ministers of the Department of Justice, were appointed as the three inspectors.

古文：元略有中助，止于削兼大夫。
现代文：崔元略因有人背后相助，只被削职兼大夫。
English: Cui Yuanliu was only removed from his position as a doctor because someone helped him behind his back.

古文：初，元略有宰相望，及是事，望益减。
现代文：先前，崔元略有做宰相的希望，及至这事发生，希望便很小了。
English: Previously, Cui Yuan had some hope of becoming prime minister, but now that this has happened, his hope is very small.

古文：宝历元年，迁户部侍郎。
现代文：宝历元年，调任户部侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Horyaku era, he was reassigned to the position of household attendant.

古文：议者以元略版图之拜，出于宣授。
现代文：舆论认为崔元略领掌管户口疆域之重任，出于朝廷宣旨授职。
English: Public opinion believes that Cui Yuanliu was given the important task of controlling the hukou territory by the imperial court.

古文：时谏官有疏，指言内常侍崔潭峻方有权宠，元略以诸父事之，故虽被弹劾，而遽迁显要。
现代文：此时谏官有奏疏，指名陈说内常侍崔潭峻正当权宠，崔元略像对待叔伯一样侍奉他，所以虽遭弹劾，而能很快升迁要职。
English: At this time, the eunuch had a slip of the tongue, nominating Chen to say that the inner regular attendant Cui Tanjun was the legitimate power favorite, Cui Yuanliu served him like an uncle, so although he was impeached, he could quickly be promoted to an important position.

古文：元略亦上章自辨，且曰： 一昨府县条疏，台司举劾，孤立无党，谤言益彰，不谓诏出宸衷，恩延望外。
现代文：崔元略亦上章自辩，且说： 日前府县分条奏疏，谏官举报弹劾，臣孤立无援，毁谤更烈，没想到诏令出圣主慈心，恩泽降于意料之外。
English: Cui Yuanliu also defended himself in the last chapter, and said: Recently, the prefectures and counties were divided, the eunuchs reported the impeachment, the vassals were left without help, the slander was more intense, I did not expect the decree to show the Lord's mercy, and the grace was unexpected.

古文：处南宫之重位，列左户之清班，岂臣庸虚，敢自干冒。
现代文：臣处尚书省重位，列左户清贵官职，岂是臣平庸无知，自己敢于揽此职任。
English: The vassal's office is a high-ranking post in the Ministry of Education and Culture, and is ranked as a high-ranking official post in the Left House. Is it a vassal's mediocrity and ignorance that he dares to take this post?

古文：天心所择，虽惊特进之恩；众口相非，乃致因缘之说。 
现代文：天子慈心所择，虽然臣因沐殊恩而惊惶；众口指责为臣，乃至妄生仗恃人缘之说法。 
English: Chosen by the benevolence of the Son of Heaven, although the vassal was alarmed by his great favor; everyone accused him of being a vassal, and even the saying that he was born to fight and win popularity.

古文：诏答之曰： 朕所命官，岂非公选？
现代文：诏令答复道： 朕所命职官，岂非秉公挑选？
English: The edict replied, "Isn't it fair to choose the officials I appoint?

古文：卿能称职，奚恤人言！ 
现代文：卿能称职，何惧人言！ 
English: If you can do the job, don't be afraid of what people say!

古文：然元略终不能逃父事潭峻之名。
现代文：然而崔元略终究不能逃脱父事崔潭峻之丑名。
English: However, Cui Yuanliu could not escape the bad reputation of his father, Cui Tanjun.

古文：宝历二年四月，京兆府以元略前任尹日为桥道使，造东渭桥时，被本典郑位、判官郑复虚长物价，抬估给用，不还人工价直，率敛工匠破用，计赃二万一千七百九贯。
现代文：宝历二年四月，京兆府因崔元略先前为尹之日充当桥道使，造东渭桥时，被本府典吏郑位、判官郑复虚报物价，抬价供给用料，不偿付佣工力资，任意克扣工匠费用，计获赃款二万一千七百零九贯。
English: In April of the second year of the Baoli calendar, when the Donglu Bridge was built, the official Zheng Yi and the judge Zheng Fuzhou falsely reported the price, raised the price to supply materials, did not pay the labor cost, and arbitrarily deducted the craftsmen's expenses, and received a total of 21,709 yuan.

古文：敕云： 元略不能检下，有涉慢官，罚一月俸料。 
现代文：敕书说： 崔元略不能约束下级，属于怠职，罚一月俸禄及料钱。 
English: The document said: Cui Yuanliu can't restrain his subordinates, it's a dereliction of duty, he will be fined one month's salary and expenses.

古文：时刘栖楚自为京兆尹，有觊觎相位之意。
现代文：当时刘栖楚自任京兆尹以来，有凯觎相位之心。
English: At that time, Liu Qi Chu, since his appointment as Jing Zhaoyun, had the heart of a great emperor.

古文：元赂方在次对，又多游裴度门，栖楚恐碍己，以计摧之，乃按举山陵时钱物以污之。
现代文：崔元略正处于他的对手之位，又经常出入裴度宅第。刘栖楚担心他妨碍自己，立意用计搞垮他，于是趁审察修建皇陵时所费钱物之机诬陷他。
English: Cui Yuanliu was in the position of his opponent, and often went to and from Pei Du's residence. Liu Qi Chu was worried that he was getting in his way, and decided to use tricks to defeat him, so he took advantage of the money spent on inspecting the construction of the imperial mausoleum to frame him.

古文：太和三年，转户部尚书。
现代文：大和三年，调任户部尚书。
English: In the third year of the Yamato era, he was transferred to the head of the Household Department, Shosho.

古文：四年，判度支。
现代文：四年，判度支。
English: Four years, judgment branch.

古文：五年，检校吏部尚书。
现代文：五年，检校吏部尚书。
English: Five years later, the school inspector was still teaching.

古文：出为东都留守、畿汝等防御使。
现代文：出任东都留守、京畿汝州等处防御使。
English: He served as a defense attaché in the eastern capital, Gyeonggi-do, Ryukyu, and other places.

古文：是岁，又迁滑州刺史、义成军节度使。
现代文：这年，又调任滑州刺史、义成军节度使。
English: In the same year, he was also transferred to serve as the secretary of the festival of the Yicheng Army and the secretary of the history of Nanzhou.

古文：十二月卒，废朝三日，赠尚书左仆射。
现代文：十二月去世，停朝三日，追赠尚书左仆射。
English: He passed away in December. He was cremated on the third day of the month. He was posthumously given the posthumous award of Shangshu Zuopuzha.

古文：子铉。
现代文：崔元略之子名铉。
English: Cui Yuanliu's son, Mingsu.

