古文：文潞公知成都，尝于大雪会客，夜久不罢。
现代文：原文北宋仁宗时，潞国公文彦博在成都任益州知府，曾经在一个大雪天中宴请宾客，直至深夜还没有散席。
English: When the Northern Song Dynasty was under the rule of Emperor Renzong, Gongwen Yanbo, the governor of Yizhou in Chengdu, once held a banquet for guests in the middle of a snowy day, and the guests did not leave until late at night.

古文：从卒有谇语，共拆井亭烧以御寒。
现代文：随从的士兵有人大发牢骚，并且把井亭拆掉烧了避寒。
English: Some of the soldiers who followed grumbled loudly and tore down the well and burned it to keep out the cold.

古文：军校白之，座客股栗。
现代文：一个军校把这些向文彦博报告了，席上宾客听后都吓得直打颤。
English: A military school reported these to Fumihiko, and the guests at the table trembled with fear.

古文：公徐曰： 天实寒，可拆与之。 
现代文：文彦博镇定地说： 天气确实很冷，就让他们把井亭拆了去烤火吧。 
English: Fumihiko calmly said, "The weather is really cold, so let them tear down the well pavilion and make a fire."

古文：神色自若，饮宴如故。
现代文：说完神色自若的继续饮酒。
English: After saying that, he continued to drink with a look of self-confidence.

古文：卒气沮，无以为变。
现代文：跟随的士兵们泄了气，再也没有找借口闹事。
English: The soldiers who followed were discouraged and no longer looked for excuses to cause trouble.

古文：明日乃究问先拆者，杖而遣之。
现代文：第二天，文彦博查问清是谁先动手拆井亭，将这个人杖责一顿押送走了。
English: The next day, Wen Yanbo asked who was the first to dismantle the well pavilion, and sent this person away with a cane.

古文：气犹火也，挑之则发，去其薪则自熄，可以弭乱，可以息争。
现代文：评译怒气就像是火，越挑拨烧得越旺，抽去燃烧的木柴，自然就会熄灭。处置得恰当可以消弭祸乱，可以平息战争。
English: Commentary and translation: Anger is like a fire, the more it is stirred up, the more it will burn. If the burning wood is removed, it will naturally go out. If it is handled properly, it can eliminate disasters and quell wars.

古文：苏轼通判密郡，有盗发而未获。
现代文：苏轼任密州通判的时候，有盗窃发生却没有捕获盗贼。
English: When So Yeon was a judge in Missouri, there was a theft, but the thief was not caught.

古文：安抚使遣三班使臣领悍卒数十人入境捕之，卒凶暴恣行，以禁物诬民，强入其家争斗。至杀人，畏罪惊散。
现代文：安抚使派三班使臣率领强悍士卒数十人，入境来捉捕盗贼。那些士卒凶暴放肆，用禁制的物品诬陷一个百姓，强行进入百姓家中发生争斗，最后杀了人，犯事畏罪潜逃。
English: The pacifying envoy sent three groups of envoys led by dozens of strong soldiers to enter the country to catch the thieves. Those soldiers were violent and impudent, using prohibited items to frame a commoner, forced their way into a commoner's home, where a fight broke out, and finally killed a person, committing the crime of fleeing.

古文：民诉于轼，轼投其书不视，曰： 必不至此。 
现代文：百姓向苏轼控诉，苏轼丢下诉状不去看它，说： 事情不可能到这种地步。 
English: The people complained to Su Shi. Su Shi threw the complaint away without looking at it and said, "Things can't have come to this.

古文：悍卒闻之，颇用自安。
现代文：那些杀人的士卒听到这话，便放下心来。
English: When the murderous soldiers heard this, they lost heart.

古文：轼徐使人招出戮之。
现代文：之后，苏轼才慢慢派人把他们捉来处死。
English: Only after that did Su Shi slowly send people to capture and execute them.

古文：遇事须有此镇定力量，然识不到，则力不足。
现代文：遇事就需要这种镇定的力量，然而如果见识不够，力量也就不足。
English: This calm strength is needed in an emergency, but if you don't have enough insight, you don't have enough strength.

