古文：《王制》云： 东方曰夷。 
现代文：《王制》说： 东方称为夷。 
English: "Kingship" says: The East is called the East.

古文：夷者，柢也，言仁而好生，万物柢地而出。
现代文：夷是根的意思，是说上天仁爱并且爱惜生灵，万物顶着泥土长出地面。
English: Yi is the meaning of the root, is to say that heaven benevolently love and cherish the living beings, all things grow out of the ground against the soil.

古文：故天性柔顺，易以道御，至有君子、不死之国焉。
现代文：所以东方的人生性柔顺，容易用道义驾驭，以至于有君子国、不死国出现。
English: Therefore, the human nature of the East is flexible and easy to control with morality, so that there is a gentleman country and an immortal country.

古文：夷有九种，曰畎夷、于夷、方夷、黄夷、白夷、赤夷、玄夷、风夷、阳夷。
现代文：夷分为九支，他们是畎夷，于夷，方夷，黄夷，白夷，赤夷，玄夷，风夷，阳夷。
English: The Yi are divided into nine branches, they are Qiu Yi, Yu Yi, Fang Yi, Huang Yi, Bai Yi, Chia Yi, Xuan Yi, Feng Yi, Yang Yi.

古文：故孔子欲居九夷也。
现代文：所以孔子想住在九夷地区。
English: That's why Confucius wanted to live in the Jiujiang area.

古文：昔尧命羲仲宅嵎夷，曰旸谷，盖日之所出也。
现代文：从前尧命令羲仲住在蜗夷，那儿有个地方叫做旸谷，是太阳出来的地方。
English: Once upon a time, Yao ordered Xizhong to live in Zouyi. There was a place called Xizhong Valley, where the sun rose.

古文：夏后氏太康失德，夷人始畔。
现代文：夏朝的皇帝太康失去德政，夷人开始背叛。
English: Emperor Taikang of the Xia Dynasty lost power, and the barbarians began to betray him.

古文：自少康已后，世服王化，遂宾于王门，献其乐舞。
现代文：自少康以后，夷人世代钦服朝廷的教化，于是到天子门前归顺，进献他们的音乐舞蹈。
English: After Shao Kang, generations of barbarians admired the enlightenment of the imperial court, so they submitted to the gate of heaven and offered their music and dance.

古文：桀为暴虐，诸夷内侵，殷汤革命，伐而定之。
现代文：桀统治暴虐，各部落的夷入侵犯内地，殷朝的成汤变革天命，攻打并平定了夏。
English: Zhai ruled tyrannically, the tribes invaded and invaded the inland, and the Yin Dynasty's Cheng Tang revolutionized the fate of heaven, attacked and leveled Xia.

古文：至于仲丁，蓝夷作寇。
现代文：到仲丁时，蓝夷进犯内地。
English: When he reached Zhongding, Lan Yi invaded the inland.

古文：自是或服或畔，三百余年。
现代文：自这以后的三百多年，夷人有时归顺，有时背叛。
English: In the more than three hundred years since then, the barbarians have sometimes submitted and sometimes rebelled.

古文：武乙衰敝，东夷浸盛，遂分迁淮、岱，渐居中土。
现代文：武乙衰败时，东夷逐渐强盛，于是他们分别迁移到淮河、泰山一带，渐渐在中原地区生活。
English: When Wuyi was in decline, Dongyi gradually became more powerful, so they migrated to the Huaihe River and Mount Tai areas respectively, gradually living in the Central Plains region.

古文：及武王灭纣，肃慎来献石砮、楛矢。
现代文：到周武王灭纣时，肃慎国前来贡献石制箭镞和楛木制作的箭矢。
English: When King Zhou Wu was about to exterminate the Yao, the State of Shushan came to contribute stone arrowheads and arrowheads made of camphor wood.

古文：管、蔡畔周，乃招诱夷狄，周公征之，遂定东夷。
现代文：管叔、蔡叔背叛周朝廷，于是招揽引诱夷狄，周公征讨管叔、蔡叔，终于平定了束夷。
English: Guan Xiu and Cai Xiu betrayed the Zhou court, so they invited and enticed the Yidi, and Zhou Gongzheng fought against Guan Xiu and Cai Xiu, and finally subdued the Sok Yis.

古文：康王之时，肃慎复至。
现代文：周康王的时候，肃慎再次前来。
English: At the time of King Zhou Kang, Sushen came again.

古文：后徐夷僭号，乃率九夷以伐宗周，西至河上。
现代文：后来徐夷僭称天子名号，竟然率领九夷攻打宗周，向西攻到黄河岸边。
English: Later, Xu Yixuan, who claimed to be the son of heaven, actually led the nine emperors to attack Zong Zhou and attacked westward to the shore of the Yellow River.

古文：穆王畏其方炽，乃分东方诸侯，命徐偃王主之。
现代文：周穆王害怕徐夷正处强盛，就将东方的诸侯分出来，要徐偃王统领。
English: King Zhou Mu was afraid of Xu Yizheng's rise to power, so he divided the eastern princes and asked King Xu Xi to lead them.

古文：偃王处潢池东，地方五百里，行仁义，陆地而朝者三十有六国。
现代文：徐偃王住在潢池束面，土地方圆五百里，偃王推行仁义，陆地上前来朝拜的就有三十六个国家。
English: King Xu Rong lives in Suqian, Tuqi, with a land area of five hundred li. King Xu Rong promotes benevolence and righteousness. Thirty-six countries have come to pay homage to him on land.

古文：穆王后得骥騄之乘，乃使造父御以告楚，令伐徐，一日而至。
现代文：周穆王后来得到骏马赤骥、騌耳，于是派造父驾骏马告知楚国，命令楚国攻打徐国，一天就到了。
English: Later, King Zhou Mu obtained the horses Chakou and Jialu, so he sent his father to drive the horses to inform the State of Chu and ordered the State of Chu to attack the State of Xu, and the day arrived.

古文：于是楚文王大举兵而灭之。
现代文：于是楚文王大规模兴兵攻打徐国并且灭掉了徐国。
English: As a result, King Chuwen raised a large-scale army to attack Xu Province and eliminated Xu Province.

古文：偃王仁而无权，不忍斗其人，故致于败。
现代文：徐偃王仁慈但不知权术，不忍心让国人打仗，所以导致失败。
English: King Xu Bei was kind, but he did not know how to wield power. He did not have the heart to let his countrymen fight, which led to his defeat.

古文：乃北走彭城武原县东山下，百姓随之者以万数，因名其山为徐山。
现代文：徐偃王最后败走彭城武原县束山脚下，跟随他的百姓数以万计，因而称束山为徐山。
English: King Xu Xi finally defeated and fled to the foot of Sok Shan in Pengcheng Wuyuan County, followed by tens of thousands of his people, thus calling Sok Shan Xu Shan.

古文：厉王无道，淮夷入寇，王命虢仲征之，不克，宣王复命召分伐而平之。
现代文：周厉王残暴无道，淮夷进犯，天子派虢仲攻打淮夷，不能获胜，周宣王又命令召公前去征讨，平定了淮夷。
English: Zhou Li Wang was brutal and ruthless, Huaiyi attacked first, and Heaven sent Zhaozhong to attack Huaiyi, but he could not win. Zhou Xuan Wang also ordered to summon the public to go and fight, and Huaiyi was pacified.

古文：及幽王淫乱，四夷交侵，至齐桓修霸，攘而却焉。
现代文：到周幽王荒淫暴乱，四面的夷人交替入侵，直到齐桓公修霸业，才打退了夷人。
English: When Zhou Yu Wang led a wild riot, the barbarians from all sides invaded alternately, and it was not until Qi Kuan Gong reigned supreme that the barbarians were repulsed.

古文：及楚灵会申，亦来豫盟。
现代文：到楚灵王在申国会盟时，淮夷也来参加盟会。
English: When King Chuling applied for the League of Nations, Huaiyi also came to participate in the League.

古文：后越迁琅邪，与共征战，遂陵暴诸夏，侵灭小邦。
现代文：后来越国搬到琅邪，与淮夷一同征战，自此侵凌为害中原各国，侵犯灭掉小国家。
English: Later, Vietnam moved to Suiyang and joined Huaiyi in the war. Since then, the Central Plains countries have been harmed by the invasion and the small countries have been destroyed.

古文：秦并六国，其淮、泗夷皆散为民户。
现代文：秦国吞并六国，淮夷、泗夷都分散为普通民家。
English: Qin annexed the Six Kingdoms, and the Huaiyis and Jiayis were all dispersed into ordinary homes.

古文：陈涉起兵，天下崩溃，燕人卫满避地朝鲜，因王其国。
现代文：陈涉起兵，天下崩溃，燕国人卫满在朝鲜避难，因此统治了朝鲜国。
English: Chen waded into the army, the country collapsed, and the Yan people took refuge in North Korea, and thus ruled the Korean country.

古文：百有余岁，武帝灭之，于是东夷始通上京。
现代文：一百多年后，汉武帝灭掉了朝鲜，自此束夷才和京都来往。
English: More than a hundred years later, Emperor Hanwu destroyed Korea, and from then on, the Sokujis only came to and from Kyoto.

古文：王莽篡位，貊人寇边。建武之初，复来朝贡。
现代文：王莽篡位时，貊入侵犯边境，建武初年，貊人又来朝贡。
English: When Wang Mang usurped the throne, he invaded the border, and in the first year of Jianwu, the Han people came to pay tribute.

古文：时辽东太守祭肜威詟北方，声行海表，于是濊、貊、倭、韩，万里朝献，故章、和已后，使聘流通。
现代文：当时辽东太守祭肜威震北方，声望在海外很大，于是减、貊、倭、韩从万里之外入朝贡献，所以章帝、和帝以后，使者互相往来。
English: At that time, the Liaodong Empress Dowager's Festival had a great influence in the north, and its reputation was great overseas. Therefore, Min, Qu, Wa, and Han came from thousands of miles away to make contributions to the DPRK. Therefore, after Emperor Zhang and Emperor He, the emissaries exchanged with each other.

古文：逮永初多难，始入寇钞；桓、灵失政，渐滋曼焉。
现代文：到永初多难之时，束夷开始入侵抄掠；桓帝、灵帝朝政混乱，束夷逐步蔓延开来。
English: At a time of great difficulty in the beginning of the Yongle Dynasty, the Sokui began to invade and plunder; Emperor Kan and Emperor Ling were in political turmoil, and the Sokui gradually spread.

古文：自中兴之后，四夷来宾，虽时有乖畔，而使驿不绝，故国俗风土，可得略记。
现代文：自中兴以后，四境的夷人前来归顺，虽然时常出现反叛，但使者没有中断，所以这些国家的风俗人情及地理环境，能够粗略地记述。
English: After ZTE, the barbarians from all over the world came to submit. Although there were frequent rebellions, the emissaries did not stop, so the customs and geographical environment of these countries can be roughly described.

古文：东夷率皆土著，憙饮酒歌舞，或寇弁衣锦，器用俎豆。
现代文：东夷一般都在一地世代定居，喜欢喝酒、唱歌和跳舞，有时头戴冠弁，身穿丝帛衣服，器物用俎、豆。
English: Dongyi generally settled in one place for generations, like to drink, sing and dance, sometimes wearing a crown, wearing silk clothes, and using bean paste and beans for utensils.

古文：所谓中国失礼，求之四夷者也。
现代文：造就是华夏丧失礼仪而在四夷那裹可以找到的原因。
English: This is the reason why Huaxia lost its etiquette, but it can be found in Shiyanawu.

古文：几蛮、夷、戎、狄总名四夷者，犹公、侯、伯、子、男皆号诸侯云。
现代文：蛮、夷、戎、狄总称为四夷，就好像公、侯、伯、子、男都称为诸侯一样。
English: Man, Yi, Rong, and Di are collectively called the Four Emperors, just as dukes, lords, great lords, sons, and men are all called princes.

古文：夫馀国，在玄菟北千里。
现代文：夫余国，在玄菟以北有一千里地。
English: Fuyu Province, a thousand miles north of Xuanwu.

古文：南与高句骊，东与挹娄，西与鲜卑接，北有弱水。
现代文：南面同高句骊，束面同挹娄，西面同鲜卑接壤，北面有弱水。
English: In the south, it borders with Gaozu County, in the west with Xianbei, and in the north with Weak Water.

古文：地方二千里，本濊地也。
现代文：地域方圆二千里，本是减人的地盘。
English: The region has a radius of two thousand miles and was originally a site for reducing the number of people.

古文：初，北夷索离国王出行，其待兒于后身，王还，欲杀之。
现代文：起初，北夷索离国国王外出巡行，他的侍女在这之后怀孕，国王回来以后，打算杀了她。
English: At first, Bei Yisao left the king of the country to go on a tour, his maid became pregnant after this, and when the king returned, he planned to kill her.

古文：侍兒曰： 前见天上有气，大如鸡子，来降我，因以有身。 
现代文：侍女说： 之前见到天上有个气团，有鸡蛋那么大，降到我的身上，就这样有了身孕。 
English: The maid said: I saw an air mass in the sky before, the size of an egg, and it fell on my body, and that's how I got pregnant.

古文：王囚之，后遂生男。
现代文：国王将她囚禁，后来生下一个男孩。
English: So the king put her in prison, and she gave birth to a son.

古文：王令置于豕牢，豕以口气嘘之，不死。
现代文：国王下令将这男孩丢到猪圈裹，猪用嘴对他呵气，不死。
English: The king ordered that the boy be thrown into a sty and wrapped in a pig's skin. The pig breathed on him with its mouth and he did not die.

古文：复徙于马兰，马亦如之。
现代文：又将他丢到马棚裹面，马也像猪那样对他呵气。
English: and threw him into the stable, where he was beaten and made to sweat like a pig.

古文：王以为神，乃听母收养，名曰东明。
现代文：国王认为他是神，就听任孩子的母亲收养他，取名叫束明。
English: The king thought he was a god, so he let the child's mother adopt him and named him Sokumin.

古文：东明长而善射，王忌其猛，复欲杀之。
现代文：束明长大以后善于射箭，国王憎恶他的勇猛，又想杀掉他。
English: When Sokumin grows up and becomes good at archery, the king hates his bravery and wants to kill him.

古文：东明奔走，南至掩淲水，以弓击水，鱼鳖皆聚浮水上，东明乘之得度，因至夫余而王之焉。
现代文：东明逃走，向南到掩洒水，用弓拍打水面，结果鱼鳖都聚集起来浮到水面上，束明乘鱼鳖得以过河，就这样到夫余当了那儿的国王。
English: Dongming ran away, went south to cover the water, and beat the water with his bow. As a result, the fish hooks were gathered and floated to the surface. Sokming was able to cross the river with the fish hooks. In this way, he became the king there.

古文：于东夷之域，最为平敞，土宜五谷。
现代文：夫余国在东夷地域中，土地最为平坦开阔，土壤适合种植五谷。
English: Of all the provinces in the Dongyi region, the land is the flattest and most open, and the soil is suitable for growing millet.

古文：出名马、赤玉、貂豽，大珠如酸枣。
现代文：那裹出产名马、红色的玉、貂铀，玉珠大如酸枣。
English: It produces famous horses, red jade, uraninite, and jade beads as large as jujubes.

古文：以员栅为城，有宫室、仓库、牢狱。
现代文：他们用栅栏围成城墙，城内有宫室、仓库和监狱。
English: They surrounded the city walls with fences, and within the city there were palaces, warehouses and prisons.

古文：其人粗大强勇而谨厚，不为寇钞。
现代文：那儿的人生得粗大勇猛但谨慎敦厚，不做入侵抄掠的事情。
English: The people there are big and brave, but they are cautious and do not do things like invade and plunder.

古文：以弓矢刀矛为兵。
现代文：他们用弓箭和刀矛作为武器。
English: They used bows and arrows and knives and spears as weapons.

古文：以六畜名官，有马加、牛加、狗加，其邑落皆主属诸加，食饮用俎豆，会同拜爵洗爵，揖让升降。
现代文：他们用六畜作为官名，有马加、牛加、狗加，城邑村落都归各加官管辖。他们吃饭喝水都使用俎、豆，朝会时实行拜爵洗爵和揖让升降的礼仪。
English: They use six animals as their official names, including horse, ox, and dog, and all cities, towns, and villages are under the jurisdiction of their respective officials. They use yakitori and beans for eating and drinking, and perform the rites of peerage and promotion and demotion at court gatherings.

古文：以腊月祭天，大会连日，饮食歌舞，名曰 迎鼓 。
现代文：他们在腊月祭天，连续许多天举行盛大聚会，在一起吃喝、唱歌跳舞，称为 迎鼓 。
English: On the day of the lunar new year festival, they hold a grand gathering for many days in a row, eating, drinking, singing and dancing together, known as the "Welcome Drum."

古文：是时断刑狱，解囚徒。
现代文：在这时候要停止用刑和抓人入狱，释放囚犯。
English: At this time, it is necessary to stop the use of punishment and arresting people in prison, and release prisoners.

古文：有军事亦祭天，杀牛，以蹄占其吉凶。
现代文：发生战争，他们也祭天，把牛杀掉，用牛蹄占卜其吉凶。
English: In the event of war, they also sacrifice to the heavens, kill the cow, and use the cow's hoof to tell fortunes.

古文：行人无昼夜，好歌吟，音声不绝。
现代文：路上行人不管白天黑夜，喜欢唱歌叫喊，歌声不问断。
English: Regardless of day or night, pedestrians on the road like to sing and shout, and the singing does not stop.

古文：其俗用刑严急，被诛者皆没其家人为奴婢。
现代文：那裹的习俗是用刑严刻，凡被处死的人其家人全都被收为奴婢。
English: The custom of thatwrapping was to use severe punishments, and all the family members of those who were put to death were taken as slaves.

古文：盗一责十二。
现代文：偷一件东西被处罚出十二倍的东西。
English: Steal one thing and you get twelve times the punishment.

古文：男女淫，皆杀之，尤治恶妒妇，既杀，复尸于山上。
现代文：男女通奸都被处死，尤其对凶恶妒忌的妇女治罪，杀掉以后，还将尸体陈放在山上。
English: Adulterers of both sexes were put to death, especially jealous women, who were killed and their bodies left on the mountain.

古文：兄死妻嫂。
现代文：兄死则弟娶嫂为妻。
English: After the death of his elder brother, his younger brother married his sister-in-law.

古文：死则有椁无棺。
现代文：死后有外棺而没有内棺。
English: After death, there is an outer coffin but no inner coffin.

古文：杀人殉葬，多者以百数。
现代文：他们杀活人殉葬，殉葬人数多的数以百计。
English: They killed the living and buried the dead, many hundreds of them.

古文：其王葬用玉匣，汉朝常豫以玉匣付玄菟郡，王死则迎取以葬焉。
现代文：国王下葬用玉匣，汉朝廷经常预先将玉匣交给玄菟郡，国王死时就派人来迎取玉匣埋葬国王。
English: The Han court often gave the jade box to Xuanzang County in advance, and when the king died, they sent someone to pick up the jade box to bury the king.

古文：建武中，东夷诸国皆来献见。
现代文：建武年间，东夷各国都来贡献和朝见。
English: During the Jianwu period, the Eastern Yi countries all came to make contributions and visit the imperial court.

古文：二十五年，夫余王遣使奉贡，光武厚答报之，于是使命岁通。
现代文：二十五年，夫余王派使者奉献贡品，光武给他们的回报很丰厚，自此使者每年互相往来。
English: In the 25th year of King Yu's reign, he sent emissaries to offer tribute, and Guangwu rewarded them handsomely. Since then, the emissaries have exchanged visits every year.

古文：至安帝永初五年，夫余王始将步骑七八千人寇抄乐浪，杀伤吏民，后复归附。
现代文：到安帝永初五年，夫余王第一次率领七八千人的步兵和骑兵进犯抄掠乐浪，杀死杀伤官吏百姓，后来重又归顺。
English: In the first five years of the Andean Yongle Emperor's reign, Yu Wang led seven or eight thousand infantry and cavalry for the first time to attack and plunder the waves, killing and injuring officials and people. Later, he surrendered again.

古文：永宁元年，乃遣嗣子尉仇台诣阙贡献，天子赐尉仇台印绶金彩。
现代文：永宁元年，夫余王派王储尉仇台到朝廷进贡，天子赐给尉仇台印绶、黄金及丝织品。
English: In the first year of the Yongning era, her husband, King Yu, sent the crown prince, Lieutenant Qiu Tai, to pay tribute to the imperial court. Heaven bestowed upon Lieutenant Qiu Tai seal money, gold, and silk goods.

古文：顺帝永和元年，其王来朝京师，帝作黄门鼓吹、角抵戏以遣之。
现代文：顺帝永和元年，夫余王来京师朝拜，天子为夫余王演出黄门鼓吹和角抵戏为他送行。
English: In the first year of Emperor Shun's reign, her husband, Yu Wang, came to Beijing to pay homage to the emperor. Tianzi accompanied her husband, Yu Wang, with a performance of the Yellow Gate and the War of the Horns.

古文：桓帝延熹四年，遣使朝贺贡献。
现代文：桓帝延熹四年，夫余王派使者来朝贺和进贡。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Kan's reign, his husband, King Yu, sent an envoy to offer congratulations and pay tribute.

古文：永康元年，王夫台将二万余人寇玄菟，玄菟太守公孙域击破之，斩首千余级。
现代文：永康元年，国王夫台率领两万多入侵犯玄菟，玄菟太守公孙域打败了去台，杀死去盒一千多人。
English: In the first year of Yongkang, King Futai led more than twenty thousand troops to invade Xuanzang. Xuanzang's father-in-law, Gongsun Gui, defeated the troops and killed more than a thousand people.

古文：至灵帝熹平三年，复奉章贡献。
现代文：到玺童昼垩三年，夫余王再次奉上奏章，贡献物品。
English: Three years later, her husband, Yu Wang, was once again presented with a medal for his contribution.

古文：夫馀本属玄菟，献帝时，其王求属辽东云。
现代文：圭篮原先隶属直菟，麸童时，去宣逛要求归属辽墓。
English: Guibang was originally under the jurisdiction of Zhiyao, but when he was a child, he went to the tomb to claim ownership of the Liao tomb.

古文：挹娄，古肃慎之国也。
现代文：挹娄，就是古代的蛊垣玺。
English: , is the ancient 垣.

古文：在夫馀东北千余里，东滨大海，南与北沃沮接，不知其北所极。
现代文：挹玺在圭筮东北方向有一千多里远，东面靠着大海，南面与坦左沮接壤，不知道挹娄北面边界到什么地方。
English: Yunnan is more than a thousand miles away in the northeast direction of Guizhou, with the sea to the east and the border with Zhejiang to the south. It is not known where the northern border of Yunnan is.

古文：土地多山险。
现代文：那地方有许多山岭和险要之处。
English: There are many mountains and dangerous places in that area.

古文：人形似夫余，而言语各异。
现代文：人的长相像夫余人，但语言各不相同。
English: People look alike, but they speak different languages.

古文：有五谷、麻布，出赤玉、好貂。
现代文：那裹有五谷、麻布，出产红色的玉和上等的貂。
English: It was covered with grain and linen, and produced red jade and fine emeralds.

古文：无君长，其邑落各有大人。
现代文：他们没有国君长吏，每个部落各有头领。
English: They don't have a king or an official, and each tribe has its own leader.

古文：处于山林之间，土气极寒，常为穴居，以深为贵，大家至接九梯。
现代文：他们生活在山林裹面，当地气候极为寒冷，他们一般住在洞穴裹面，以洞穴深为尊贵，大产人家有深到需要用九部梯子相接的地步。
English: They live in the mountains and forests, the local climate is extremely cold, they generally live in caves and caves, with the cave depth as the most valuable, and large families are deep enough to be connected by nine ladders.

古文：好养豕，食其肉，衣其皮。
现代文：他们喜欢养猪，吃猪肉，穿猪皮制成的衣服。
English: They like to keep pigs, eat pork, and wear clothes made of pigskin.

古文：冬以豕膏涂身，厚数分，以御风寒。
现代文：冬天用猪油涂在身上，有几分厚，用来抵御风寒。
English: In winter, lard is smeared on the body, a little thick, to ward off the cold.

古文：夏则裸袒，以尺布蔽其前后。
现代文：夏天他们就裸体，用一尺布遮住前后。
English: In the summer, they go naked, covering their front and back with a foot of cloth.

古文：其人臭秽不洁，作厕于中，圜之而居。
现代文：那儿的人臭秽不干净，厕所建在正中，围着厕所居住。
English: The people there are dirty and unclean, the toilet is built in the middle, and they live around the toilet.

古文：自汉兴以后，臣属夫馀。
现代文：自龃兴起以后，遣娄归属去龃。
English: After the rise of the Jurchen, the Jurchen belonged to the Jurchen.

古文：种众虽少，而多勇力，处山险，又善射，发能入人目。
现代文：坦娄部族人口虽少，但人勇猛有力，他们生活在险要山地，而且擅长射箭，射则中人眼睛。
English: Although the population of the Tanggu tribe is small, they are brave and powerful. They live in almost mountainous areas, and are good at archery, shooting people's eyes.

古文：弓长四尺，力如弩。
现代文：弓长四尺，力量和机弩相当。
English: The bow is four feet long, and its strength and dexterity are equal.

古文：矢用楛，长一尺八寸，青石为镞，镞皆施毒，中人即死。
现代文：箭用楛木制作，长一尺八寸，箭镞用青石制作，箭镞上都抹上毒药，人被射中立刻就死。
English: The arrows were made of birch, with a length of one foot eight inches, and the arrowheads were made of bluestone. Poison was smeared on the arrowheads, and the person who was shot died immediately.

古文：便乘船，好寇盗，邻国畏患，而卒不能服。
现代文：他们善于弄船，喜好掠夺，相邻的国家都很害怕忧虑，但始终不能制服他们。
English: They are good at making boats, they like to plunder, and the neighboring countries are afraid and worried, but they still can't subdue them.

古文：东夷夫余饮食类皆用俎豆，唯挹娄独无，法俗最无纲纪者也。
现代文：塞娄夫余的饮食器具一般都用俎豆，惟独挹娄不用俎豆，这是法律习俗最没有秩序纲常的国家。
English: Peas are generally used in the eating utensils of the Saifuyu people, but the only people who do not use peas are the Saifuyu, which is the country with the most disorderly laws and customs.

古文：高句骊，在辽东之东千里，南与朝鲜、濊貊，东与沃沮，北与夫余接。
现代文：高句骊，在辽东的束面有一千里远，南面与朝鲜、减貊，束面与沃沮，北面与夫缝接壤。
English: Gao Jucun, in the east of Liaodong, is a thousand miles away from Sokmen. To the south, it is bordered by North Korea, Yancheng, Sokmen and Wudu, and to the north, by Wushe.

古文：地方二千里，多大山深谷，人随而为居。
现代文：地域方圆二千里，有许多大山和深谷，人们就依随山谷生活。
English: The area has a radius of two thousand miles, there are many mountains and deep valleys, and people live according to the valley.

古文：少田业，力作不足以自资，故其俗节于饮食，而好修宫室。
现代文：高句骊缺少田地农业，努力劳作不能满足自己需要，所以那裹的习俗是在饮食方面节省，但喜欢修建宫室。
English: Gao Guanzhong lacked field agriculture, and hard work could not meet his needs. Therefore, the custom of Na Waku was to save on food, but he liked to build a palace.

古文：东夷相传以为夫余别种，故言语法则多同，而跪拜曳一脚，行步皆走。
现代文：在塞夷相传产包骊是去缝的另一支，所以他的语言和法度很多都相同，但跪拜时拖着一只脚，走路总是奔跑。
English: According to the tradition of the Saiyans, the cormorant is the other branch to be sewn, so his language and laws are much the same, but he drags one foot when he kneels, and always runs when he walks.

古文：凡有五族，有消奴部、绝奴部、顺奴部、灌奴部、桂娄部。
现代文：高句骊总共有五个部族，有逍拯塑，绝奴部，岖扭塑，进丝部，桂娄部。
English: There are a total of five tribes in Gaoguanzhang, including Shou Zheng plastic, absolute slave, rugged twisted plastic, silk-weaving, and Guizhong.

古文：本消奴部为王，稍微弱，后桂娄部代之。
现代文：原先消奴部称王，后来渐渐衰弱，后来桂娄部取代为王。
English: Originally, the Slavery Eradication Department was the king, but it gradually weakened, and was later replaced by the Guizhong Department.

古文：其置官，有相加、对卢、沛者、古邹大加、主簿、优台、使者、帛衣先人。
现代文：高句骊设置的官职，有相加、对卢、沛者、古邹大加、主簿、优台、使者、帛衣先人。
English: The official posts set up by Gao Guzheng included the post of add, the post of Lu, the post of Pei, the post of Guzheng, the post of master, the post of superior, the post of messenger, and the post of ancestor of Xingyi.

古文：武帝灭朝鲜，以高句骊为县，使属玄菟，赐鼓吹伎人。
现代文：漠武帝灭掉朝鲜，将高句骊作为县，属玄菟管辖，赐给高句骊鼓吹乐工。
English: Emperor Mengwu annihilated Korea and made Goguryeo a county, under the jurisdiction of Xuanzang, and gave it to Goguryeo's trumpeters.

古文：其俗淫，皆洁净自熹，暮夜辄男女群聚为倡乐。
现代文：那裹的习俗淫荡，都喜欢洁净，一到夜晚就男女聚在一起歌舞。
English: The customs there are lascivious, everyone likes to be clean, and at night men and women get together to sing and dance.

古文：好祠鬼神、社稷、零星，以十月祭天大会，名曰 东盟 。
现代文：高句骊人喜欢祭祀鬼神、社稷和零星，在十月祭天并大规模聚会，称为 东盟 。
English: The Gaogu people like to offer sacrifices to ghosts and gods, social and sporadic, and hold a large-scale gathering in October, known as the ASEAN.

古文：其国东有大穴，号禭神，亦以十月迎而祭之。
现代文：高句骊束部有一个大洞穴，称做燧神，他们也在十月迎接祭祀裢神。
English: There is a large cave in the bunch section of Gaogu, known as the god of the bunch, and they also welcome the sacrifice of the god of the bunch in October.

古文：其公会衣服皆锦绣，金银以自饰。
现代文：参加聚会的人都身穿色彩花纹精美鲜艳的丝织衣服，用金银饰品打扮自己。
English: Attendees of the party were dressed in brightly colored silk clothes with exquisite patterns and adorned themselves with gold and silver jewelry.

古文：大加、主簿皆著帻，如冠帻而无后；其小加著折风，形如弁。
现代文：大加、主簿都头戴幅巾，像冠和头巾但没有后边；小加则头戴折风冠，形状像弁。
English: Daka and Mihomoyo both wear broad scarves on their heads, resembling crowns and headscarves but without the back; Koga wears a folded wind crown on his head, shaped like a valve.

古文：无牢狱，有罪，诸加评议便杀之，没入妻子为奴婢。
现代文：他们没有监狱，但有罪罚，众加官商量后就杀掉有罪的人，将罪犯的妻子儿女收为奴婢。
English: They had no prisons, but they punished the guilty, killing the guilty after consultation with other officials, and taking the wives and children of the criminals as slaves.

古文：其昏姻皆就妇家，生子长大，然后将还，便稍营送终之具。
现代文：他们的婚姻都是男人到妇女家中，生下孩子，待孩子长大，然后带回去，接着就渐渐准备送终用的器具。
English: Their marriages are all about men coming to women's homes, giving birth to children, waiting for the children to grow up, then taking them back, and then gradually preparing to send the final equipment.

古文：金银财币尽于厚葬，积石为封，亦种松柏。
现代文：金银财物钱币全花在厚葬上面，他们用石头堆积成坟，坟上也种植松柏。
English: Gold, silver, goods, money and coins were all spent on the massive tombs. They used stones to pile up the graves, and cedar trees were also planted on the graves.

古文：其人性凶急，有气力，习战斗，好寇钞，沃沮、东濊皆属焉。
现代文：那裹的人性情凶猛急躁，有力气，善于打仗格斗，喜欢为寇抄掠，沃沮、束减都属于高句骊统治。
English: That kind of human nature is ferocious, impetuous, powerful, good at fighting, likes to steal and plunder, and belongs to the rule of Gaoguanzhang.

古文：句骊一名貊，有别种，依小水为居，因名曰小水貊。
现代文：句骊又称为貊，另外有一支种族，他们傍靠小河生活，因此被称为 小水貊 。
English: There is also a race of people who live next to small rivers, and are therefore known as Xiaoshuizhong.

古文：出好弓，所谓 貊弓 是也。
现代文：句骊出产良弓，就是所谓的 貊弓 。
English: Kuching produces good bows, the so-called "Kuching bow."

古文：王莽初，发句骊兵以伐匈奴，其人不欲行，强迫遣之，皆亡出塞为寇盗。
现代文：王莽初年，微调句骊的军队攻打匈奴，那裹的人不肯出征，王莽强迫他们上路，这些人都逃出边关当了强盗。
English: In the first year of Wang Mang, the fine-tuned army attacked the Xiongnu. The Xiongnu people refused to go to war, and Wang Mang forced them to go on the road. These people all escaped from the border and became robbers.

古文：辽西大尹田谭追击，战死。
现代文：辽西大尹田谭追击句骊人，战死了。
English: West Liaoning Province Grandmaster Yin Tian Tan chased down a Jurchen and was killed in battle.

古文：莽令其将严尤击之，诱句骊侯驺入塞，斩之，传首长安。
现代文：王莽命令部将严尤攻打句骊，严尤诱骗句骊侯绉进入边关，杀了他，将他的首级送到长安。
English: Wang Mang ordered the command department to attack and fight Guan Yu, lure Guan Yu into the border, kill him, and send his head to Chang'an.

古文：莽大说，更名高句骊王为下句骊侯，于是貊人寇边愈甚。
现代文：王莽大为高兴，将高句骊王改名为下句骊侯，结果貊人入侵边境愈益严重。
English: Wang Mang was so pleased that he changed the name of Gao Quan Wang to Xie Quan Hou. As a result, the invasion of the border by the Qiang people became more and more serious.

古文：建武八年，高句骊遣使朝贡，光武复其王号。
现代文：建武八年，高句骊派使者来朝拜进贡，光武恢复了高句骊的王号。
English: In the eighth year of Jianwu, Gao Juxuan sent an envoy to pay tribute, and Guangwu restored Gao Juxuan's royal title.

古文：二十三年冬，句骊蚕支落大加戴升等万余口诣乐浪内属。
现代文：二十三年冬天，句骊蚕支落大加戴升等一万多人到乐浪归属国内。
English: In the winter of the 23rd year, more than ten thousand people, including the branching of the silkworms, came to Lelang to belong to China.

古文：二十五年春，句骊寇右北平、渔阳、上谷、太原，而辽东太守祭肜以恩信招之，皆复款塞。
现代文：二十五年春，句骊侵犯右北平、渔阳、上谷、太原，但辽东太守祭肜用恩德信义招引句骊人，他们又都开塞通好。
English: In the spring of the 25th year, the Jurchen invaded the right Beiping, Yuyang, Shanggu and Taiyuan, but the Liaodong Emperor's Festival invited the Jurchen people with Ende Xinyi, and they all opened the plug.

古文：后句骊王宫生而开目能视，国人怀之，及长勇壮，数犯边境。
现代文：后来句骊王宫生下来睁开眼睛就能看束西，国人归附他。等到他长大后非常勇猛壮健，多次侵犯边界。
English: Later, when King Kucho was born, he was able to see the west when he opened his eyes, and the people of the country followed him. When he grew up, he was very brave and strong, and repeatedly violated the border.

古文：和帝元兴元年春，复入辽东，寇略六县，太守耿夔击破之，斩其渠帅。
现代文：和帝元兴元年春天，句骊王宫又入侵辽东，抄掠六县，太守耿夔击败了句骊军，杀了他们的主帅。
English: In the spring of the first year of the reign of Emperor Yuanxing, the palace of King Jurchen invaded Liaodong and plundered six counties. The governor Geng Bi defeated the army of King Jurchen and killed their commander.

古文：安帝永初五年，宫遣使贡献，求属玄菟。
现代文：安帝永初五年，句骊王宫派使者进贡，要求归玄菟管辖。
English: In the first five years of the Andean Yongle Emperor's reign, the palace of the King of Kuching sent an envoy to pay tribute and request to return to the jurisdiction of Xuanzang.

古文：元初五年，复与濊貊寇玄菟，攻华丽城。
现代文：元初五年，句骊又与减貊入侵玄菟，攻打华丽城。
English: In the first five years of the Yuan Dynasty, the Jurchens invaded the Xuanzang and attacked the magnificent city.

古文：建光元年春，幽州刺史冯焕、玄菟太守姚光、辽东太守蔡讽等，将兵出塞击之，捕斩濊貊渠帅，获兵马财物。
现代文：建光元年春天，幽州刺史冯焕、玄菟太守姚光、辽东太守蔡讽等人率领军队出边关攻打句骊和滋貊，捕杀了溅貊主帅，获得许多武器、马匹和财物。
English: In the spring of the first year of Jianguang, Yuzhou commander Feng Huan, Xuanzang governor Yao Guang, Liaodong governor Cai Lin and others led the army to go out to the border to attack and fight the Zhengzhou and Zhisheng armies, killed the commander of the Sputtering Hail, and obtained many weapons, horses and property.

古文：宫乃遣嗣子遂成将二千余人逆光等，遣使诈降；光等信之，遂成因据险厄以遮大军，而潜遣三千人攻玄菟、辽东，焚城郭，杀伤二千余人。
现代文：宫于是派王储遂成率领二千多人迎接姚光等人，派使者假装投降；姚光等人相信了句骊王宫，遂成趁机占据险要地形拦阻大军，同时悄悄派了三千人攻打玄菟、辽东，焚毁城郭，杀死杀伤了两千多人。
English: The palace then sent Crown Prince Su Cheng to lead more than two thousand people to meet Yao Guang and others, and sent an envoy to pretend to surrender; Yao Guang and others believed the palace, and Su Cheng took the opportunity to occupy the dangerous terrain to block the army, and quietly sent three thousand people to attack Xuanzang and Liaodong, burn the castle, kill and injure more than two thousand people.

古文：于是发广阳、渔阳、右北平、涿郡属国三千余骑同救之，而貊人已去。
现代文：朝廷于是征调广阳、渔阳、右北平、涿郡属国的三千多骑兵一同援救，但貊人已经撤离。
English: As a result, the imperial court conscripted and transferred more than 3,000 cavalrymen from Guangyang, Yuyang, Right Beiping, and counties belonging to Handan to help, but the Handan people had already evacuated.

古文：夏，复与辽东鲜卑八千余人攻辽队，杀略吏人。
现代文：夏天，貊人又与在辽东的鲜卑八千多人进攻辽队，杀害抄掠官吏百姓。
English: In the summer, the Xiongnu attacked the Liao army with more than 8,000 people from Xianbei in eastern Liaodong, killing and plundering officials and civilians.

古文：蔡讽等追击于新昌，战殁，功曹耿耗、兵曹掾龙端、兵马掾公孙酺以身扞讽，俱殁于阵，死者百余人。
现代文：蔡讽等人追击敌人到新昌，蔡讽战死，功曹耿耗、兵曹掾龙端、兵马掾公孙醋用身体保护蔡讽，一同死于战阵，战死的有一百多人。
English: Cai Lian and others pursued the enemy to Xinchang. Cai Lian was killed in the battle. Gong Cao Geng Wan, soldier Cao Xing Long Duan, and Terracotta Warriors and Horses soldier Gong Sun Jie used their bodies to protect Cai Lian and died together in the battle. More than a hundred people died in the battle.

古文：秋，宫遂率马韩、濊貊数千骑围玄菟。
现代文：秋天，宫就率领马韩、减貊几千骑兵包围玄菟。
English: In autumn, the palace led several thousand cavalrymen to surround Xuanzang.

古文：夫余王遣子尉仇台将二万余人，与州郡并力讨破之。斩首五百余级。
现代文：夫余王派儿子尉仇台率领二万多人，与州郡一道合力攻打，打败了句骊王，杀死敌人五百多。
English: Her husband, Yu Wang, sent his son, Fei Xutai, to lead more than 20,000 people, and together with the state and county, they jointly attacked and defeated King Juchuan, killing more than 500 enemies.

古文：是岁宫死，子遂成立。
现代文：这一年宫死了，他的儿子遂成继位。
English: The Emperor died that year, and his son succeeded to the throne.

古文：姚光上言欲因其丧发兵击之，议者皆以为可许。
现代文：姚光上书说想趁句骊丧事攻打句骊，参加商议的人都认为可以。
English: Yao Guang wrote a letter saying that he wanted to take advantage of the death of the deceased to attack the deceased, and the participants in the deliberation thought it was OK.

古文：尚书陈忠曰： 宫前桀黠，光不能讨，死而击之，非义也。
现代文：尚书陈忠说： 宫以前凶猛狡诈，姚光不能讨伐，趁宫死而去攻打句骊，不合道义。
English: Chen Zhong, a scholar, said: "Gong used to be fierce and cunning, and Yao Guang couldn't fight against him. Taking advantage of Gong's death to attack Juchun is immoral.

古文：宜遣吊问，因责让前罪，赦不加诛，取其后善。 
现代文：应当派使者去吊唁慰问，顺便责备句骊以前的罪行，赦免前罪而不加诛伐，争取将来得到好处。 
English: An envoy should be sent to offer condolences and condolences, in addition to reproving the previous crimes, and pardoning the previous sins without adding to them, and striving to obtain benefits in the future.

古文：安帝从之。
现代文：安帝采纳了他的意见。
English: Andi agreed to the suggestion out of the blue.

古文：明年，遂成还汉生口，诣玄菟降。
现代文：第二年，遂成将掳掠去的汉人归还汉，到玄菟归降。
English: In the second year, Su Cheng returned the abducted Han people to Han and surrendered to Xuanzang.

古文：诏曰： 遂成等桀逆无状，当斩断菹醢，以示百姓，幸会赦令，乞罪请降。
现代文：天子下诏书说： 遂成等人凶暴悖逆，不可言状，应当杀掉截断肢体剁成肉酱，以告示百姓，幸而遇到赦免的诏令，请罪归降。
English: The imperial edict issued by the emperor said: Su Cheng and the others were unspeakably violent and rebellious, and they should be killed, their limbs amputated, and their bodies made into meat sauce to inform the people. Fortunately, they were pardoned by the imperial edict, and they pleaded guilty.

古文：鲜卑、濊貊连年寇钞，驱略小民，动以千数，而裁送数十百人，非向化之心也。
现代文：鲜卑、秽貊连年入侵抄掠，驱赶掳掠的百姓，动辄以千计算，然而送回的人数才几十人、几百人，不是向往德化的作法。
English: The invading, plundering, and driving away of the people who had been plundered and pillaged for years by the despicable and filthy barbarians were often counted in thousands, but the number of people sent back was only dozens or hundreds, which was not a practice of aspiring to be virtuous.

古文：自今已后，不与县官战斗而自以亲附送生口者，皆与赎直，缣人四十匹，小口半之。 
现代文：自今以后，不同朝廷打仗并且自己归顺朝廷，送还被掳掠去的人口的，都给他们赎金，送给每人四十匹细绢，送回小孩给一半。 
English: From now on, those who fight for different imperial courts and surrender themselves to the imperial court, and return the abducted and plundered people, will give them a ransom of forty fine horses for each person, and half of the children will be returned.

古文：遂成死，子伯固立。
现代文：遂成死后，他的儿子伯固继位。
English: After Suicheng's death, his son Baogu succeeded to the throne.

古文：其后濊貊率服，东垂少事。
现代文：自此以后减貊归顺，束部边境很少发生战事。
English: Since then, Yan Xuan surrendered, and there have been few wars on the Sokubo border.

古文：顺帝阳嘉元年，置玄菟郡屯田六部。
现代文：顺帝阳嘉元年，在玄菟郡设立六部屯田。
English: In the first year of Emperor Yangjia, six military garrisons were established in Xuanwu County.

古文：质、桓之间，复犯辽东西安平，杀带方令，掠得乐浪太守妻子。
现代文：质帝、桓帝年间，减貊再次侵犯辽东西安平，杀害了带方令，掳掠去乐浪太守的妻子孩子。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Qiu and Emperor Kuan, Yan Hui once again invaded East and West Anping of Liao, killed the governor and abducted the wife and child of the governor of Lelang.

古文：建宁二年，玄菟太守耿临讨之，斩首数百级，伯固降服，乞属玄菟云。
现代文：建宁二年，玄菟太守叠困攻打趟，杀了几百人，值昼归降，请求属玄菟管辖。
English: In the second year of Jianning, Xuanzang was too busy defending and attacking, killed several hundred people, and surrendered at noon. The request was under the jurisdiction of Xuanzang.

古文：东沃沮在高句骊盖马大山之东，东滨大海，北与挹娄、夫余，南与濊貊接。
现代文：束沃沮在高句骊盖马大山的束面，东边靠着大海；北面同挹娄、夫余接壤，南部同秽貊接壤。
English: Sokowo is located on the Sokou face of the Gaoguangge Mada Mountain, with the sea on the east; it is bordered by Tonglu and Fuyu in the north, and by Jinshan in the south.

古文：其地东西夹，南北长，可折方千里。
现代文：束沃沮东西方向狭窄，南北方向长，可折合千里见方。
English: Sokowo is narrow in the east-west direction and long in the north-south direction, which is equivalent to a thousand square kilometers.

古文：土肥美，背山向海，宜五谷，善田种，有邑落长帅。
现代文：那裹土地肥美，背靠山岭面向大海，适合五谷生长，人们擅长农业耕作，有村落头领。
English: That land is fertile, backed by mountains and facing the sea, suitable for growing grain, people are good at farming, and there are village leaders.

古文：人性质直强勇，便持矛步战。
现代文：那裹的人天性质朴刚直，勇猛顽强，长于手拿长矛步行作战。
English: The nature of the people of that time was simple and upright, brave and tenacious, and good at hand-to-hand combat with spears.

古文：言语、食饮、居处，衣服，有似句骊。
现代文：言语、饮食、住所、衣服和句骊有相似之处。
English: There are similarities in speech, diet, residence, clothing, and syntax.

古文：其葬，作大木椁，长十余丈，开一头为户，新死者先假埋之，令皮肉尽，乃取骨置椁中。
现代文：他们的葬礼，造一个大木棺。长十几丈，把木棺的一头挖开作为门，刚死的人先暂且埋掉，让皮肉烂尽，然后取出骨头放进棺内。
English: For their funerals, a large wooden coffin was made. It was more than a dozen feet long, and one end of the wooden coffin was dug out to serve as a door. The newly dead person was temporarily buried first, so that the skin and flesh would rot, and then the bones were taken out and placed in the coffin.

古文：家人皆共一椁，刻木如生，随死者为数焉。
现代文：一家人都放进一个棺子裹。他们用木头刻成死者生前的形象，所刻人像的数目随着死去人的数目增加。
English: They put the whole family in one coffin, and they carved wooden figures of the deceased, the number of figures increasing with the number of dead.

古文：武帝灭朝鲜，以沃沮地为玄菟郡。
现代文：武帝减掉朝鲜，以沃沮地域为玄菟郡。
English: Emperor Wu subtracted North Korea, and made Xuanwu County from the Wo Desi region.

古文：后为夷貊所侵，徙郡于高句骊西北，更以沃沮为县，属乐浪东部都尉。
现代文：后来遭夷貊侵犯，将玄菟郡迁到高句骊的西北方向，而将沃沮改为县，属乐浪东部都尉管辖。
English: Later, it was encroached upon by the Yi Dynasty and the Xuanwu County was moved to the northwest of Gaogu County, while the Wode County was changed to a county under the jurisdiction of the Eastern Governor of Le Lang.

古文：至光武罢都尉官，后皆以封其渠帅，为沃沮侯。
现代文：到光武时撤去都尉官，后来将这些地方都封沃沮的大头领沃沮侯。
English: At the time of Guangwu, the captains were removed, and later these places were all sealed by the great leader, Wou Wou.

古文：其土迫小，介于大国之间，遂臣属句骊。
现代文：沃沮土地狭小，夹在大国之间，所以臣属句骊。
English: Wo De land is narrow and small, sandwiched between the great powers, so it is subject to the ruling class.

古文：句骊复置其中大人为使者，以相监领，责其租税，貂、布、鱼、盐、海中食物，发美女为婢妾焉。
现代文：句骊又任命其中首领为使者，用来监管沃沮，要沃沮上交租税，貂、布、鱼、盐，以及海中的食物，征调沃沮的美女作为婢女和妾。
English: He also appointed the chiefs of them as emissaries to supervise them, and to require them to pay taxes, tribute, cloth, fish, salt, and food from the sea, and to conscript their beautiful women as maids and concubines.

古文：又有北沃沮，一名置沟娄，去南沃沮八百余里。
现代文：又有北沃沮，又名置沟娄，距南沃沮有八百多里。
English: There is also North Wo Desh, also known as Jie Gully, which is more than 800 miles away from South Wo Desh.

古文：其俗皆与南同。
现代文：北沃沮的习俗与南沃沮都相同。
English: The customs of the North Wode are the same as the South Wode.

古文：界南接挹娄。
现代文：边界南部与挹娄相接。
English: The southern part of the border is connected to Laos.

古文：挹娄人喜乘船寇抄，北沃沮畏之，每夏辄臧于岩穴，至冬船道不通，乃下居邑落。
现代文：挹娄人喜欢乘船只入侵抄掠，北沃沮的人害怕，每到夏天他们经常藏在山岩洞穴裹面，到冬天船水路不通，这才下山住进村落。
English: The Xiong people like to invade and plunder by boat, and the Beibuo people are afraid. Every summer, they often hide in mountain caves. In winter, the waterway is impassable, so they go down the mountain to live in the village.

古文：其耆者言，尝于海中得一布衣，其形如中人衣，而两袖长三丈。
现代文：那裹的老人说，曾经在海中得到一件粗布衣服，衣服的形状像中等个头的人穿的，但两只袖子有三丈长。
English: The shrouded old man said that he had once found a coarse cloth garment in the sea. The shape of the garment was like that worn by a medium-sized person, but the two sleeves were three feet long.

古文：又于岸际见一人乘破船，顶中复有面，与语不通，不食而死。
现代文：又在岸边见到一人乘一只破船，头顶上还长有面孔，跟他说话互相言语不通。他不吃东西而死。
English: And on the shore I saw a man in a wrecked boat, and he had a face above his head, and no one could speak to him, and no one could understand him, and he died for lack of food.

古文：又说海中有女国，无男人。
现代文：又说海中有个女儿国，没有男人。
English: It is also said that there is a country of daughters in the sea, but no men.

古文：或传其国有神井，窥之辄生子云。濊北与高句骊、沃沮，南与辰韩接，东穷大海，西至乐浪。
现代文：有的传说女儿国有个神井，在神井上看一下就能生下孩子远北面与高句骊、送回，南面与厘韩接壤，束面直通大海，西面到乐浪。
English: There is a legend that Daughters' Country has a sacred well. If you look into the sacred well, you can give birth to a child. In the far north, it borders Goguryeo and Sendai; in the south, it borders Korea; in the middle of the country, it is connected to the sea; and in the west, it is connected to Lelang.

古文：濊及沃沮、句骊，本皆朝鲜之地也。
现代文：滋和沃沮、句骊，原先都是朝鲜的地方。
English: Zhi, Wo, De, and Gu were originally all places in Korea.

古文：昔武王封箕子于朝鲜，箕子教以礼义田蚕，又制八条之教。
现代文：从前周武王将朝鲜封给箕子，箕子教给百姓礼制和种田养蚕的技术，又制订八条禁令。
English: Once upon a time, King Zhou Wu sealed Korea to the mule, and the mule taught the people the etiquette and the technology of raising silkworms in the fields. He also formulated eight prohibitions.

古文：其人终不相益，无门户之闭。
现代文：那裹的人始终不相互偷盗，用不着关门闭户。
English: People there never steal from each other, so they don't have to lock their doors.

古文：妇人贞信。
现代文：妇女贞节守信。
English: Women are expected to be chaste.

古文：饮食以笾豆。
现代文：吃饭喝酒用礼器篷、豆。
English: For eating and drinking, use a ceremonial canopy and beans.

古文：其后四十余世，至朝鲜侯准自称王。
现代文：四十多代以后，到朝鲜侯准，自称王号。
English: After more than forty generations, he went to Korea as a vassal and called himself the king.

古文：汉初大乱，燕、齐、赵人往避地者数万口，而燕人卫满击破准，而自王朝鲜，传国至孙右渠。
现代文：汉初大乱，燕国、齐国、赵国的人到朝鲜避难的有几万人，燕国人卫满打败了准而自己统治朝鲜，传国到孙子右渠。
English: At the beginning of the Han Dynasty, there were tens of thousands of people from Yan, Qi, and Zhao who took refuge in Korea. After defeating Hui Man, the Yan people ruled Korea and passed the country down to Sun Tzu.

古文：元朔元年，濊君南闾等畔右渠，率二十八万口诣辽东内属，武帝以其地为苍海郡，数年乃罢。
现代文：元朔元年，秽的头领南闾等人背叛右渠，率领二十八万人到辽东归属内地，武帝将灭的地盘设立为苍海郡，几年以后才撤销。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Shuo, the leaders of the Zushi, Nanzhao and others, betrayed the right canal and led 280,000 people to Liaodong to belong to the mainland. Emperor Wu set up the territory of Zushi as Canghai County, which was only revoked a few years later.

古文：至元封三年，灭朝鲜，分置乐浪、临屯、玄菟、真番四郡。
现代文：到元封三年，武帝灭掉朝鲜，分别设立乐浪、临屯、玄菟、真番四个郡。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Wu eliminated Korea and established four counties: Lelang, Lintun, Xuanwu and Zhenbang.

古文：至昭帝始元五年，罢临屯、真番，以并乐浪、玄菟。
现代文：到昭帝始元五年，撤销临屯、真番，合并给乐浪、玄菟。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Zhao, Lintun and Zhenban were abolished and merged into Lelang and Xuanzang.

古文：玄菟复徙居句骊。
现代文：玄菟郡治又移到句骊。
English: The county seat of Xuanzang County was moved to Kunlun again.

古文：自单单大领已东，沃沮、濊貊悉属乐浪。
现代文：从单单大岭以东，沃沮、减貊都属于乐浪。
English: To the east of the Daling Mountains, Wo Deshun and Yan Xuan belong to the music wave.

古文：后以境土广远，复分领东七县，置乐浪东部都尉。
现代文：后来由于境内土地广阔辽远，又将岭束的七个县分出来，设置乐浪东部都尉。
English: Later, due to the vast expanse of land within the territory, the seven counties of Lingzhu were divided and the eastern capital of Lelang was established.

古文：自内属已后，风俗稍薄，法禁亦浸多，至有六十余条。
现代文：减自属于国内以后，风俗逐渐衰退，法律禁令也逐渐增加，多达六十多条。
English: After independence, customs gradually declined, and legal prohibitions gradually increased, reaching more than sixty.

古文：建武六年，省都尉官，遂弃领东地，悉封其渠帅为县侯，皆岁时朝贺。
现代文：建武六年，减去都尉官，因而放弃了岭东的地方，将这些地方全部封给减的大头领并封他们为县侯，每年四季他们都来朝拜庆贺。
English: Jianwu for six years, minus the captain, and thus abandoned the Lingdong region, all these places were assigned to the minus leaders and they were appointed as county magistrates. Every four seasons they come to worship and celebrate.

古文：无大君长，其官有侯、邑君、三老。
现代文：减人没有国君长吏，他们的官职有侯、邑君、三老。
English: There are no provincial governors in the reduction, and their official posts include vassals, district governors, and elders.

古文：耆旧自谓与句骊同种，言语法俗大抵相类。
现代文：那裹的老人说自己同句骊是同一种族，语言、法度、习俗大体相似。
English: The elderly man said he was from the same tribe, with similar language, laws and customs.

古文：其人性愚悫，少嗜欲，不请丐。
现代文：那裹的人生性愚昧朴实，没什么欲望，不向别人乞求。
English: That kind of person is naïve and simple, has no desires, and does not beg from others.

古文：男女皆衣曲领。
现代文：男女都穿衣领弯曲的衣服。
English: Both men and women wear clothes with curved collars.

古文：其俗重山川，山川各有部界，不得妄相干涉。
现代文：他们的习俗是看重山，对山各自划有地域边界，相互不得妄白干涉。
English: Their custom is to attach importance to the mountains, and they have drawn their own regional boundaries for the mountains, and they must not interfere with each other.

古文：同姓不昏。
现代文：同姓的人不通婚。
English: People with the same surname do not get married.

古文：多所忌讳，疾病死亡，辄捐弃旧宅，更造新居。
现代文：他们有很多忌讳，有人生病死亡，他们经常抛弃原先的住宅，重新建造新居。
English: They have a lot of taboos, people get sick and die, they often abandon their former homes and build new ones.

古文：知种麻，养蚕，作绵布。
现代文：他们知道种麻，养蚕，做丝绵布。
English: They know how to grow hemp, raise silkworms, and make silk fabric.

古文：晓候星宿，豫知年岁丰约。
现代文：他们懂得观测星宿，事先知道年成是丰收还是歉收。
English: They know how to observe the stars and know in advance whether it will be a good or bad harvest.

古文：常用十月祭天，昼夜饮酒歌舞，名之为 舞天 。
现代文：他们一般在十月份祭天，昼夜喝酒、唱歌、跳舞，称之为 舞天 。
English: They usually hold a festival in October, and drink, sing and dance all day and night. They call it "Mai Tian."

古文：又祠虎以为神。
现代文：又把虎作为神来祭祀。
English: Tigers were also worshipped as gods.

古文：邑落有相侵犯者，辄相罚，责生口牛马，名之为 责祸 。
现代文：村落之间发生互相侵犯，总是罚对方用人口和牛马偿还，称之为 责祸 。
English: When there is mutual aggression between villages, they always punish the other side with the population and cattle and horses to repay, calling it "blame."

古文：杀人者偿死。
现代文：杀人的人偿命。
English: He who kills shall pay with his life.

古文：少寇盗。
现代文：他们很少入侵别国和偷盗。
English: They rarely invade other countries and steal.

古文：能步战，作矛长三丈，或数人共持之。
现代文：秽人能够步行作战，他们制造的矛有三丈长，有时几个人一起拿一根矛。
English: Filthy people can fight on foot, they make spears three feet long, and sometimes several people hold a spear together.

古文：乐浪檀弓出其地。
现代文：乐浪的檀弓就出产于减。
English: The sandalwood bows of Le Lang are produced in Min.

古文：又多文豹，有果下马，海出班鱼，使来皆献之。
现代文：那裹有许多身有花纹的豹子，有一种矮小的乘之可在果树下走的马，海裹出产班鱼。使者来的时候都要贡献这些东西。
English: There are leopards with many stripes on their coats, there is a small horse that can be ridden under the fruit trees, and the sea is full of fish. When the envoys come, they must bring these things.

古文：韩有三种：一曰马韩、二曰辰韩、三曰弁辰。
现代文：韩分三个种族：一叫马韩，二叫辰韩，三叫弁辰。
English: Han divides into three races: the first is called Ma Han, the second is called Chen Han, and the third is called Ben Chen.

古文：马韩在西，有五十四国，其北与乐浪，南与倭接，辰韩在东，十有二国，其北与濊貊接。
现代文：马韩在西面，有五十四个国家，马韩的北面同乐浪，南面同倭相邻。辰韩在东面，有十二个国家，辰韩的北边同减貊接境。
English: To the west of Mahan, there are fifty-four countries. To the north of Mahan, there is Tongle Wave. To the south, it is adjacent to Wa. To the east of Chenhan, there are twelve countries. To the north of Chenhan, it is bordered by Yancheng.

古文：弁辰在辰韩之南，亦十有二国，其南亦与倭接。
现代文：弁辰在辰韩的南面，也有十二个国家，弁辰的南部也同倭相邻。
English: There are also twelve countries in the south of Bentsen, and the south of Bentsen is also adjacent to Wa.

古文：凡七十八国，伯济是其一国焉。
现代文：韩总共有七十八个国家，伯济是其中的一国。
English: There are a total of seventy-eight countries in Korea, and Baekje is one of them.

古文：大者万余户，小者数千家，各在山海间，地合方四千余里，东西以海为限，皆古之辰国也。
现代文：大国有一万多户，小国有的几千户，各自生活在山岭和海之间，土地折合四千多里见方。东西方向以大海为边境，都是古代的辰国。
English: There are more than ten thousand households in the big country, and several thousand households in the small country, each living between the mountains and the sea. The land is equivalent to more than four thousand square miles. The sea is the border in the east and west, and they are all ancient Chen countries.

古文：马韩最大，共立其种为辰王，都目支国，尽王三韩之地。
现代文：马韩最大，大家一同立马韩的人为辰王，在目支国建都，统治三韩的全部地盘。
English: Mahan is the largest, and all of us together establish Mahan's person as the King of Hsun, build the capital in Mie Province, and rule the entire territory of the three Koreas.

古文：其诸国王先皆是马韩种人焉。
现代文：各国的国王原先都是马韩种族的人。
English: The kings of all countries were originally people of the Mahan race.

古文：马韩人知田蚕，作绵布。
现代文：马韩人懂得种田养蚕，制作丝绵布。
English: The Ma Han people know how to grow crops, raise silkworms, and make silk fabric.

古文：出大栗如梨。
现代文：那裹出产栗子，有梨那么大。
English: That wrap produces chestnuts the size of pears.

古文：有长尾鸡，尾长五尺。
现代文：有一种长尾鶸，尾巴有五尺长。
English: There is a long-tailed gull with a tail five feet long.

古文：邑落杂居，亦无城郭。
现代文：马韩的村落都混杂在一块居住，也没有城郭。
English: The villages of Mahan are all mixed and live in one area, and there is no castle.

古文：作土室，形如冢，开户在上。
现代文：他们用土造房屋，形状像坟冢，他们在土屋的顶上开门。
English: They built houses of clay in the shape of tombs, and on the roofs of the houses they opened doors.

古文：不知跪拜。无长幼男女之别。
现代文：他们不知道跪拜，没有男女老少的分别。
English: They do not know how to kneel, and there is no distinction between men, women and children.

古文：不贵金宝锦罽，不知骑乘牛马，唯重璎珠，以缀衣为饰，及县颈垂耳。
现代文：他们不看重金银珍宝和锦帛毛织品，不知道乘牛骑马，惟独看重玉珠，把玉珠联缀在衣服上作为装饰品，以及做项链耳坠。
English: They do not value gold, silver, precious stones, or brocade. They do not know how to ride a horse or ride an ox. They only value jade beads, which they use to decorate their clothes and make necklaces and earrings.

古文：大率皆魁头露纟介，布袍草履。
现代文：他们一般不戴冠帽，露出发髻，身穿布袍，脚穿草鞋。
English: They generally do not wear crowns and hats, they are bare-headed, wear cloth robes, and wear straw sandals.

古文：其人壮勇，少年有筑室作力者，辄以绳贯脊皮，缒以大木，欢呼为健。
现代文：那裹的人强壮勇猛，年轻人在建筑房屋时有卖弄力气的，经常用绳子将后背光溜溜地穿连起来，吊上大木头，欢呼跳跃，以为强壮。
English: The swaddled ones are strong and brave, the young ones show off their strength when building houses, often stringing their bare backs together with ropes, hanging large logs, cheering and jumping, thinking they are strong.

古文：常以五月田竟祭鬼神，昼夜酒会，群聚歌舞，舞辄数十人相随，蹋地为节。
现代文：他们经常在五月份耕种完毕祭祀鬼神，昼夜喝酒聚会，大家聚到一起唱歌跳舞，跳舞时经常是几十个人跟着用脚踏地拍打节奏。
English: In May, after they have finished cultivating, they often make sacrifices to ghosts and gods, drink alcohol day and night, and get together to sing and dance. When they dance, there are often dozens of people following the beat with their feet.

古文：十月农功毕，亦复如之。
现代文：十月份农事结束，也是如此。
English: The same applies to the end of farming in October.

古文：诸国邑各以一人主祭天神，号为 天君 。
现代文：各国的村落各有一个人负责祭祀天神，称之为 天君 。
English: Each village in each country has a person who is responsible for the worship of Tenjin, called Tenjun.

古文：又立苏涂，建大木以县铃鼓，事鬼神。
现代文：又造苏涂塔，竖起大木头，在上面悬挂铃和鼓，用来事奉鬼神。
English: They also built a stupa, erected a large tree, hung bells and drums on it, and used it to worship ghosts and gods.

古文：其南界近倭，亦有文身者。
现代文：马韩的南部边界靠近倭，也有文身的人。
English: Mahan's southern border is close to Wa, and there are also tattooed people.

古文：辰韩，耆老自言秦之亡人，避苦役，适韩国，马韩割东界地与之。
现代文：辰韩，那裹的老人说自己原是秦朝时逃亡的人，为躲避苦役，来到韩国，马韩割出东部地区给他们居住。
English: Chen Han, the elderly man in that wrap, said that he was originally a fugitive during the Qin Dynasty. In order to avoid hard labor, he came to South Korea. Ma Han carved out the eastern region for them to live in.

古文：其名国为邦，弓为弧，贼为寇，行酒为行觞，相呼为徒，有似秦语，故或名之为秦韩。
现代文：他们称 国 为 邦 ，称 弓 为 弧 ，称 贼 为 寇 ，称 行酒 为 行觞 ，彼此称对方叫 徒 ，有点像秦朝的语言，所以有人称他们为秦韩。
English: They call a country a country, a bow a bow, a thief a thief, a drunkard a drunkard, and each other a drunkard, a bit like the language of the Qin Dynasty, so some people call them Qin Han.

古文：有城栅屋室。
现代文：辰韩有围墙、栅栏和房屋。
English: They have walls, fences and houses.

古文：诸小别邑，各有渠帅，大者名臣智，次有俭侧，次有樊秪，次有杀奚，次有邑借。
现代文：一些小的城邑，各自有首领，大的首领叫臣智，其次叫俭侧，又其次叫樊祇，又其次叫杀奚，再次叫邑借。
English: Some small towns have their own chiefs. The big chiefs are called Zongzhi (臣智), the next is Jianxiang (俭侧), the next is Yaoji (祇), the next is Xidaoji (杀), and the next is Ubu-lien (邑借).

古文：土地肥美，宜五谷。
现代文：辰韩土地肥美，适合种植五谷。
English: The land in Chunhan is fertile and suitable for growing corn.

古文：知蚕桑，作缣布。
现代文：他们懂得养蚕种桑，织丝帛。
English: They know how to raise silkworms, grow mulberries and weave silk cocoons.

古文：乘驾牛马。嫁娶以礼。
现代文：他们知道驾车骑牛马，嫁娶按照礼规去做。
English: They know how to drive a car, ride a horse, and marry according to the etiquette.

古文：行者让路。
现代文：在路上人们相互让道。
English: People give way to each other on the road.

古文：国出铁，濊、倭、马韩并从市之。
现代文：辰韩出产铁，秽、倭、马韩都向他们买铁。
English: Chenhan produces iron, and Zuozhong, Wa and Mahan all buy iron from them.

古文：凡诸贸易，皆以铁为货。
现代文：他们的所有贸易，都用铁作为货币。
English: All their trade was done with iron as currency.

古文：俗喜歌舞、饮酒、鼓瑟。
现代文：那裹的习俗喜欢唱歌跳舞、喝酒敲鼓弹瑟。
English: Nawab's customs include singing, dancing, drinking, drumming and dancing.

古文：兒生欲令其头扁，皆押之以石。
现代文：生出孩子希望孩子头扁，都用石头压在孩子脑袋上。
English: If you want your child to have a flat head, use a stone to press it on the child's head.

古文：弁辰与辰韩杂居，城郭衣服皆同，语言风俗有异。
现代文：弁辰同辰韩混杂居住，城郭和衣服都一样，语言和风俗有差异。
English: Bentsen is a mixture of Han and Han, with the same castle and clothes, but different languages and customs.

古文：其人形皆长大，美发，衣服洁清。
现代文：人的长相都很高大，头发漂亮，衣服清洁。
English: The people are tall and good-looking, with beautiful hair and clean clothes.

古文：而刑法严峻。
现代文：但刑法严峻。
English: However, the criminal law is severe.

古文：其国近倭，故颇有文身者。
现代文：弁辰的国家靠近倭国，所以有不少人文身。
English: Benten's country is close to Wakoku, so there are a lot of human bodies.

古文：初，朝鲜王准为卫满所破，乃将其余众数千人走入海，攻马韩，破之，自立为韩王。
现代文：起初，朝鲜王准被卫满打败，就率领剩下的几千人逃到海上，攻打马韩，打败了马韩，自立为韩王。
English: At first, King Jun of Korea was defeated by Hui Man, so he led the remaining several thousand people to flee to the sea, attacked Ma Han, defeated Ma Han, and became King of Korea.

古文：准后灭绝，马韩人复自立为辰王。
现代文：准的后代灭绝，马韩人又立自己人为辰王。
English: After the extinction of their progeny, the Ma Han people set themselves up as the King of Hsin.

古文：建武二十年，韩人廉斯人苏马諟等，诣乐浪贡献。
现代文：建武二十年，韩国廉斯人苏马谖等人到乐浪进贡。
English: In the 20th year of Jianwu, South Korea's Kaesong people, such as Sumalong, paid tribute to Lelang.

古文：光武封苏马諟为汉廉斯邑君，使属乐浪郡，四时朝谒。
现代文：光武封苏马提为汉廉斯邑君，要他归乐浪郡管辖，四季朝见。
English: Guangwu fenced Sumati for Hanlansiyi Jun, and asked him to return to the jurisdiction of Lelang County. See you in the morning.

古文：灵帝末，韩、濊并盛，郡县不能制，百姓苦乱，多流亡入韩者。
现代文：灵帝末年，韩、减一并强盛，郡县没能力制服他们，百姓苦于祸乱，不少人流亡到韩国。
English: At the end of Emperor Ling's reign, both Han and Min were prosperous, but the counties were unable to subdue them. The people suffered from the calamity, and many people went into exile in Korea.

古文：马韩之西，海岛上有州胡国。
现代文：屋垄的西面，有一个海岛，上面有州胡国。
English: On the west side of the ridge, there is an island with the state of Hubei on it.

古文：其人短小，髡头，衣韦衣，有上无下。
现代文：那裹的人生得矮小，剃去头发，身穿皮革制成的衣服，仅有上衣而没有下衣。
English: The shrouded figure was short, shaven-headed and dressed in a leather outfit with a top and no bottoms.

古文：好养牛豕。乘船往来，货市韩中。
现代文：他们喜欢养牛、养猪，乘船往来到韩国做生意。
English: They like to raise cattle and pigs and come to South Korea by boat to do business.

古文：倭在韩东南大海中，依山岛为居，凡百余国。
现代文：倭在韩东南方向的大海中，依海岛居住，共有一百多个国家。
English: There are more than a hundred countries where the Wa live in the sea to the south-east of Korea, on islands.

古文：自武帝灭朝鲜，使驿通于汉者三十许国，国皆称王，世世传统。
现代文：自从武帝灭掉朝鲜，倭人派使者和翻译和汉来往的有三十个左右的国家，每个国家都自称国王，世代相传。
English: Since Emperor Wu wiped out Korea, the Japanese have sent envoys and translators to the Han people in about thirty countries. Each country claims to be the king, and this has been passed down from generation to generation.

古文：其大倭王居邪马台国。
现代文：大倭王住在邪马台国。
English: The great king of Wa lived in Yamatai.

古文：乐浪郡徼，去其国万二千里，去其西北界拘邪韩国七千余里。
现代文：乐浪郡的边界，距邪马台国有一万二千里，距倭的西北边界拘邪韩国有七千多里。
English: The border of Lelang County is 12,000 miles away from Yamatai Province, and more than 7,000 miles away from the northwest border of Wa and South Korea.

古文：其地大较在会稽东冶之东，与朱崖、儋耳相近，故其法俗多同。
现代文：倭地大致在会稽束冶的束面，与朱崖、儋耳相近，所以他们的法度习俗大多相同。
English: The Wa region is roughly in the area of the Bund, which is close to Zhujiajie and Yunnan, so their laws and customs are mostly the same.

古文：土宜禾稻、麻纻、蚕桑，知织绩为缣布。
现代文：那裹的土壤适合种植稻谷、麻，适合养蚕种桑，倭人懂得将丝麻织为布帛。
English: The soil there is suitable for growing rice and hemp, and for raising silkworms and mulberry trees. The Japanese know how to weave silk and hemp into cloth.

古文：出白珠、青玉。
现代文：那裹出产白玉珠和青玉。
English: It produces white and blue jade beads.

古文：其山有丹土。
现代文：山上有红土。
English: There is red soil on the mountain.

古文：气温暖，冬夏生菜茹。无牛、马、虎、豹、羊、鹊。
现代文：气候温暖，冬夏都生长蔬菜没有牛、马、虎、豹、羊、鹊。
English: The climate is warm, vegetables grow in both winter and summer, and there are no cattle, horses, tigers, leopards, sheep, or baboons.

古文：其兵有矛、楯、木弓、竹矢，或以骨为镞。
现代文：他们的兵器有矛、盾、木弓，箭用竹制作或用骨头制成箭镞。
English: Their weapons are spears, shields, wooden bows, arrows made of bamboo or arrowheads made of bone.

古文：男子皆黥面文身，以其文左右大小别尊卑之差。
现代文：男人都在脸上刺字和文身，以身上花纹的左右、大小分别尊卑贵贱。
English: The men all have tattoos on their faces, with the left and right of the body pattern, and the size, respectively.

古文：其男衣皆横幅，结束相连。
现代文：那裹男子穿的衣服都是用整幅布帛横过来，结扎相连。
English: The clothes worn by the man were tied together with a piece of cloth.

古文：女人被发屈纟介，衣如单被，贯头而着之；并以丹朱坌身，如中国之用粉也。
现代文：女人披着头发，发髻盘曲，衣服像薄被，从头向下套在身上；而且用朱砂粉敷在身上，类似中原人用粉。
English: The woman wears her hair in a bun, her clothes like a thin quilt, covering her from head to toe; moreover, she applies cinnabar powder to her body, similar to the powder used by the Central Plains people.

古文：有城栅屋室。
现代文：他们有围墙、栅栏和房屋。
English: They have walls, fences and houses.

古文：父母兄弟异处，唯会同男女无别。
现代文：父母和兄弟都分开居住，惟独聚会时没有男女分别。
English: Both parents and brothers live separately, but when they get together, there is no distinction between men and women.

古文：饮食以手，而用笾豆。
现代文：吃喝用手，并且使用礼器篷、豆。
English: Eat and drink with your hands, and use a gift canopy and beans.

古文：俗皆徒跣，以蹲踞为恭敬。
现代文：他们习惯上都赤脚，认为蹲着和坐着是对人恭敬。
English: They are habitually barefoot and consider squatting and sitting to be respectful.

古文：人性嗜酒。
现代文：人们生性嗜酒。
English: People are alcoholics by nature.

古文：多寿考，至百余岁者甚众。
现代文：很多人长寿，活到一百多岁的人非常多。
English: Many people live long lives, and there are a lot of people who live to be over 100 years old.

古文：国多女子，大人皆有四五妻，其余或两或三。
现代文：国内女性较多，首领们都有四五个妻子，其他人有的有两个妻子，有的有三个妻子。
English: There are more women in the country, the leaders have four or five wives, others have two wives, some have three wives.

古文：女人不淫不妒。
现代文：女人不淫乱，不妒忌。
English: Women are not promiscuous or jealous.

古文：又俗不盗窃，少争讼。
现代文：并且那裹的习俗不偷盗，很少有争执诉讼的事情。
English: Moreover, the local custom is not to steal, and there are few disputes and lawsuits.

古文：犯法者没其妻子，重者灭其门族。
现代文：犯法人的妻子儿女要被没收，严重的要杀掉满门全族。
English: The wives and children of legal offenders will be confiscated, and in serious cases, the entire family will be killed.

古文：其死停丧十余日，家人哭泣，不进酒食，而等类就歌舞为乐。
现代文：人死了要停尸十多天，家裹人哭泣，不吃饭不喝酒，但别的人到死者家中唱歌跳舞，以此为乐。
English: When a person dies, the corpse has to be kept in the morgue for more than ten days. People cry, do not eat or drink, but others go to the dead person's home to sing and dance for fun.

古文：灼骨以卜，用决吉凶。
现代文：他们烧烤骨头进行占卜，用来判断吉凶。
English: They grill the bones for divination, using them to determine good and bad luck.

古文：行来度海，令一人不栉沐，不食肉，不近妇人，名曰 持衰 。
现代文：他们渡海往来，让一个人不梳妆，不洗沐，不吃肉，不近女色，称之为 持衰 。
English: They travel back and forth across the sea, so that a person does not wear makeup, does not wash, does not eat meat, does not approach women, and call it "sustaining decline."

古文：若在涂吉利，则雇以财物；如病疾遭害，以为持衰不谨，便共杀之。
现代文：如果在途中吉利，就给持衰的人财物；如果在外生病或是遇害，就认为是持衰的人不严谨，就一同将他杀掉。
English: If there is good luck on the way, they will give money and goods to those who are holding out; if they get sick or are killed outside, they will think that the person holding out is not rigorous, and they will kill him together.

古文：建武中元二年，倭奴国奉贡朝贺，使人自称大夫，倭国之极南界也。
现代文：建武中元二年，倭奴国派人带了贡品前来朝拜庆贺，使者自称大夫，倭奴国在倭国的最南端。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, the country of Wa sent a man with a tribute to come to pay homage and celebrate. The messenger called himself a doctor. Wa is at the southernmost tip of the country.

古文：光武赐以印绶。
现代文：光武赐给倭奴国印绶。
English: Mitsutake bestowed the seal of the Wa no Kuni.

古文：安帝永初元年，倭国王帅升等献生口百六十人，愿请见。
现代文：安帝永初元年，倭国王帅升等人献来一百六十个人，希望能够朝见。
English: At the beginning of the first year of Andi Yong, the king of Wa, Shuai Sheng, and others presented one hundred and sixty people, hoping to meet the emperor.

古文：桓、灵间，倭国大乱，更相攻伐，历年无主。
现代文：桓帝、灵帝年间，倭国大乱，互相攻打，许多年没有国君。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Kantei and Emperor Lingdi, there was a great disturbance in Wakoku, and they fought against each other, and there was no sovereign for many years.

古文：有一女子各曰卑弥呼，年长不嫁，事鬼神道，能以妖惑众，于是共立为王。
现代文：有一个叫卑弥呼的女子，年长以后不出嫁，从事鬼神之术，能够用妖术迷惑大家，于是大家一同立她为国王。
English: There was a woman named Himiko, who did not marry when she was older, and who practiced necromancy. She was able to bewitch everyone with her magic, so everyone together made her king.

古文：侍婢千人，少有见者，唯有男子一人给饮食，传辞语。
现代文：她的侍者婢女上千人，很少有人见到她，衹有一个男子供给她饮食，传她的话。
English: She had a thousand attendants and maidservants; but she was seldom seen, except that a man-child came and gave her food and told her stories.

古文：居处宫室、楼观城栅，皆持兵守卫。
现代文：她居住的宫室楼观和栅栏城墙，都有人手拿兵器守卫。
English: The palace view and the fence wall where she lives are guarded by men with weapons.

古文：法俗严峻。
现代文：法律习俗非常严峻。
English: Laws and customs are very strict.

古文：自女王国东度海千余里，至拘奴国，虽皆倭种，而不属女王。
现代文：从女王国向东渡海一千多里，到达拘奴国，虽然都是倭人，但不属于女王管辖。
English: From the Queen's Kingdom, they sailed more than a thousand miles to the east and arrived in the Guanzhong Kingdom. Although they were all Japanese, they did not belong to the Queen's jurisdiction.

古文：自女王国南四千余里，至朱儒国，人长三四尺。
现代文：从女王国向南四千多里到达侏儒国，人有三四尺高。
English: From the Queen's Kingdom more than four thousand miles south to the Dwarf Country, people are three or four feet tall.

古文：自朱儒东南行船一年，至裸国、黑齿国，使驿所传，极于此矣。
现代文：从侏儒国向东南方向乘船走一年，可到裸国、黑齿国，使者能到的地方，就到此为止了。
English: A year's journey by boat in a south-easterly direction from the land of the dwarfs would take him as far as the land of the naked and the land of the black-toothed, as far as a messenger could go.

古文：会稽海外有东鳀人，分为二十余国。
现代文：会稽海外有束缇人，分为二十多个国家。
English: There are thousands of overseas members of the Association, which is divided into more than 20 countries.

古文：又有夷洲及澶洲。
现代文：又有夷洲和澶洲。
English: There are also Yizhou and Zhouzhou.

古文：传言秦始皇遣方士徐福将童男女数千人入海，求蓬莱神仙不得，徐福畏诛不敢还，遂止此洲，世世相承，有数万家。
现代文：传说秦始皇派方士徐福带领几千童男童女渡海，寻找蓬莱神仙，没找到神仙，徐福害怕被杀头不敢回来，就居住在夷洲上，世代相继，有几万家。
English: Legend has it that Emperor Qin Shi Huang sent the sorcerer Xu Fu to lead thousands of boys and girls across the sea in search of the Penglai immortals. When the immortals were not found, Xu Fu was afraid of being killed and did not dare to return. He lived on Yizhou for generations, with tens of thousands of families.

古文：人民时至会稽市。
现代文：百姓经常到会稽买卖。
English: People often go to the association to do business.

古文：会稽东治县人有入海行遭风，流移至澶洲者。
现代文：会稽束冶县有人在海上航行遭遇大风，被漂流到澶洲。
English: Some people in Zhuye County, Hebei Province, encountered strong winds while sailing at sea and were drifted to Zhouzhou.

古文：所在绝远，不可往来。
现代文：澶洲所在的地方非常遥远，没办法往来。
English: The place where Luzhou is located is very far away, and there is no way to travel there.

古文：论曰： 昔箕子违衰殷之运，避地朝鲜。
现代文：论曰：从前箕子远离衰败的殷商的命运，到朝鲜避难。
English: On the subject: Once upon a time, Zou Zi took refuge in North Korea, far away from the fate of the decaying Yin merchants.

古文：始其国俗未有闻也，及施八条之约，使人知禁，遂乃邑无淫盗，门不夜扃，回顽薄之俗，就宽略之法，行数百千年，故东夷通以柔谨为风，异乎三方者也。
现代文：朝鲜最初的习俗没有听说过，到箕子实行八条禁令以后，使人们知道法禁，因而城邑没有奸淫和偷盗，夜不闭户，改变了愚昧浅薄的习俗，接近宽大简略的法律，实行了几百几千年，所以束夷普遍形成温和谨慎的风气，和另外三方的夷人不同。
English: North Korea's original customs were unheard of. After the eight prohibitions were implemented in Jangzi, people were made aware of the prohibitions. As a result, there was no adultery and theft in the cities, and people did not close their homes at night. They changed the stupid and shallow customs, and the laws were close to being lenient and simple. They were implemented for hundreds of thousands of years. As a result, the Sui generally formed a gentle and cautious culture, which was different from that of the other three ethnic groups.

古文：苟政之所暢，则道义存焉。
现代文：衹要政治通达，那么就会存有道义。
English: If there is political understanding, then there will be morality.

古文：仲尼怀愤，以为九夷可居。
现代文：仲尼心怀感愤，认为九夷可以居住。
English: Zhong Ni felt indignant and thought that Jiujiang could be inhabited.

古文：或疑其陋。
现代文：有人怀疑九夷鄙陋。
English: Some people suspect that Jiujii is a scoundrel.

古文：子曰： 君子居之，何陋之有！ 
现代文：孔子说： 有才德的人在那裹居住，有什么鄙陋的呢厂也仅有这种想法罢了。
English: Confucius said, "If a gentleman lives there, how can he be a scoundrel?"

古文：亦徒有以焉尔。其后遂通接商贾，渐交上国。
现代文：白这以后朝鲜商贾往来做生意，逐渐和中原来往。
English: Since then, North Korean merchants have been doing business with each other, gradually moving closer to China.

古文：而燕人卫满扰杂其风，于是从而浇异焉。
现代文：然而燕国人卫满扰乱了朝鲜的风尚，自此风气变得浅薄不同了。
English: However, Yan Guo Ren Hei Man completely disrupted the Korean style, and since then the style has become shallow and different.

古文：《老子》曰： 法令滋章，盗贼多有。 
现代文：《老子》说： 法令愈益昭明，盗贼就有很多。 
English: "Lao Zi" said: The decrees are becoming more and more obvious, and there are many thieves.

古文：若箕子之省简文条而用信义，其得圣贤作法之原矣！
现代文：像箕子这样省简法律条文而用信义治理的，这是得到圣贤制订法律的根本了！
English: It is fundamental to get sages to formulate laws to simplify the provisions of the law and govern with faith and righteousness like Miao Zi!

古文：赞曰：宅是嵎夷，曰乃旸谷。
现代文：赞曰：居住在蜗夷，被称作旸谷的地方。
English: Zang Zai: He lives in Shiyi, a place known as Shigu.

古文：巢山潜海，厥区九族。
现代文：入山裹栖息，藏海上生活，由此和中原的宗族相区别。
English: They inhabit the mountains and live on the Tibetan Sea, which distinguishes them from the clans of the Central Plains.

古文：嬴末纷乱，燕人违难。
现代文：秦朝末年发生祸乱，燕国人逃离灾难。
English: A calamity occurred at the end of the Qin Dynasty, and the people of Yan fled the disaster.

古文：杂华浇本，遂通有汉。
现代文：糅杂进华夏人的习俗，原有的风尚浇薄，于是同汉国往来。
English: They mixed with the customs of the people from China and diluted the original customs, and thus began to have dealings with China.

古文：眇眇偏译，或从或畔。
现代文：地处遥远通过翻译，有时归顺有时背叛。
English: Far away through translation, sometimes surrendering, sometimes betraying.

