古文：刘昉
现代文：○刘昉
English: ○ Liu Xuan

古文：刘昉，博陵望都人也。
现代文：刘昉，博陵望都人。
English: Liu Wei, a resident of Bodu, Boling.

古文：父孟良，大司农。
现代文：父亲孟良，大司农。
English: His father, Meng Liang, was the Chief Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture.

古文：从魏武入关，周太祖以为东梁州刺史。
现代文：随魏武入关，北周太祖授他为东梁州刺史。
English: As Wei Wu entered the pass, the Northern Zhou Taizu awarded him the history of Eastern Liangzhou.

古文：昉性轻狡，有奸数。
现代文：刘昉生性狡猾，有奸术。
English: Liu Xuan is cunning and devious.

古文：周武帝时，以功臣子入侍皇太子。
现代文：北周武帝时，因他是功臣之子，而入朝侍奉皇太子。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhou, Liu Bei, as the son of a meritorious subject, entered the palace to serve the crown prince.

古文：及宣帝嗣位，以技佞见狎，出入宫掖，宠冠一时。
现代文：到北周宣帝继位后，他凭着技艺和奸佞而被宣帝亲近，出入宫廷，宠幸冠绝一时。
English: Zhou Xuandi succeeded to the throne, and Liu Bei was favored by Xuandi because of his treacherous skills. He was in and out of the court, and was the most favored at that time.

古文：授大都督，迁小御正，与御正中大夫颜之仪并见亲信。
现代文：他被授为大都督，迁为小御正，与御正中大夫颜之仪都被亲近、信任。
English: He was given the title of Grand Governor and moved to the position of Junior Vice-Governor. He was close to and trusted by both Vice-Governor and Junior Vice-Governor Yan.

古文：及帝不悆，召方及之仪俱入卧内，属以后事。
现代文：宣帝不行时，召刘昉和颜之仪都到卧室里去，嘱咐后事。
English: When Emperor Xuan could not come, he summoned Liu Ye and Yan Zhi Yi to his bedroom and ordered them to take care of the matter.

古文：帝喑不复能言。
现代文：宣帝哑巴了，不能再讲话。
English: Emperor Xuan is mute and can no longer speak.

古文：昉见静帝幼冲，不堪负荷。
现代文：刘昉看静帝太小，不堪国家的负担。
English: Liu Ye thought Jingdi was too small to bear the burden of the country.

古文：然昉素知高祖，又以后父之故，有重名于天下，遂与郑译谋，引高祖辅政。
现代文：刘昉素知隋高祖，又因他是皇后的父亲的缘故，有大名于天下，于是与郑译谋划，让高祖辅佐朝政。
English: Liu Bei knew Sui Gao Zu, and because he was the father of the queen, he had a great name in the world, so he planned with Zheng Yi to have Gao Zu assist the government.

古文：高祖固让，不敢当。
现代文：高祖推辞，不敢承当。
English: Gao Zu refused and did not dare to accept it.

古文：昉曰： 公若为，当速为之；如不为，昉自为也。 
现代文：刘昉说： 你想干，就快点干。如不干，我刘昉就自己干了。 
English: Liu Wei said: If you want to do it, do it quickly. If you don't, I, Liu Wei, will do it myself.

古文：高祖乃从之。
现代文：高祖于是听了他的。
English: So Gaozu listened to him.

古文：及高祖为承相，以昉为司马。
现代文：高祖为北周丞相后，以刘昉为司马。
English: After Gao Zu became the Minister of Northern Zhou Dynasty, he was succeeded by Liu Ye.

古文：时宣帝弟汉王赞居禁中，每与高祖同帐而坐。
现代文：当时宣帝的弟弟汉王宇文赞住在皇宫里，每每与高祖同帐而坐。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuan's younger brother, Han Wang Yuwenzan, lived in the imperial palace and often sat with Gao Zu.

古文：昉饰美妓进于赞，赞甚悦之。
现代文：刘昉把些美妓献给宇文赞，宇文赞很高兴。
English: Liu Wei dedicated some beautiful prostitutes to Yu Wenzan, and Yu Wenzan was very happy.

古文：昉因说赞曰： 大王先帝之弟，时望所归。
现代文：刘昉就便劝说宇文赞说： 大王您是先帝的弟弟，众望所归。
English: Liu Bei then persuaded Yu Wenzan to say: "Great King, you are the younger brother of the previous emperor, and you are highly regarded.

古文：孺子幼冲，岂堪大事！
现代文：静帝是小孩子，不懂事，怎能干大事！
English: Emperor Xuan's son is so young, how can he be in charge of such an important matter!

古文：今先帝初崩，群情尚扰，王且归第。
现代文：现在，先皇帝刚刚去世，群情尚在担忧。大王您暂回王府去。
English: Now, the former emperor has just passed away, and people are still worried. Your Majesty, please go back to the palace for a while.

古文：待事宁之后，入为天子，此万全之计也。 
现代文：等事情安宁之后，您再入宫当天子，这是万全之计呀！ 
English: Wait until things have calmed down before you re-enter the palace. That's the best way!

古文：赞时年未弱冠，性识庸下，闻昉之说，以为信然，遂从之。
现代文：宇文赞当时还未成人，见识很差劲，听了刘昉这番话，以为是真的，于是听了他的话。
English: At that time, Yu Wenzan was not yet an adult, and his eyesight was very poor. When he heard Liu Ye's words, he thought they were true, so he listened to his words.

古文：高祖以昉有定策之功，拜下大将军，封黄国公，与沛国公郑译皆为心膂。
现代文：高祖因刘昉有定策之功，授他上大将军，封他为黄国公，与沛国公郑译都是心腹。
English: Gao Zu, because of Liu Ye's ability to make decisions, gave him the title of grand general and made him the ruler of Huang Guoguo. He and Pei Guoguo were both confidants.

古文：前后赏赐巨万，出入以甲士自卫，朝野倾瞩，称为黄、沛。
现代文：他们前后得的赏赐巨万，出入都以甲士自卫，朝野瞩目，称为 黄、沛 。
English: The rewards they received before and after were huge, and they went in and out with armored soldiers to defend themselves, attracting attention from both the imperial court and the countryside. They were called Huang and Pei.

古文：时人为之语曰： 刘昉牵前，郑译推后。 
现代文：当时的人都这么说： 刘昉牵前，郑译推后。 
English: At that time, people said: Liu Bei is ahead, Zheng Yi is behind.

古文：昉自恃其功，颇有骄色。
现代文：刘昉自恃其功，颇有骄傲之色。
English: Liu Wei is quite proud of his achievement.

古文：然性粗疏，溺于财利，富商大贾，朝夕盈门。
现代文：但他生性粗疏，特贪财利，富商大贾从早到晚都有很多在他家里。
English: However, he has a coarse nature and is greedy for money and profit. The rich businessman has a lot of things in his house from morning to night.

古文：于时尉迥起兵，高祖令韦孝宽讨之。
现代文：那时尉迟迥起兵反叛，高祖令韦孝宽讨伐他。
English: At that time, the sub-commander delayed to raise an army to rebel, and Gaozhu ordered Wei Xiaokuan to fight against him.

古文：至武陟，诸将不一。
现代文：官军到了武陟，诸将行动不一。
English: When the great army arrived at Wuyi, they would not get along with each other.

古文：高祖欲遣昉、译一人往监军，因谓之曰： 须得心膂以统大军，公等两人，谁当行者？ 
现代文：高祖想派刘昉或郑译去监军，因此对他们说： 要派心腹去统领大军，你们这两个人，谁去啊？ 
English: Gao Zu wanted to send Liu Ye or Zheng Yi to supervise the army, so he said to them: You should send your heart to lead the army, you two, who will go?

古文：昉自言未尝为将，译又以母老为请，高祖不怪。
现代文：刘昉说未曾为将，郑译又以母亲年老为托辞，高祖不高兴。
English: Gao Zu was not happy when Liu Bei said that he had never been a general, and Zheng Yi used his mother's old age as an excuse.

古文：而高颎请行，遂遣之。
现代文：高赹请求让他去，于是派他去监军。
English: Gao Gan requested to go, and Emperor Wen sent Gao Gan to supervise the troops.

古文：由是恩礼渐薄。
现代文：因此高祖对他们的恩宠和礼遇渐渐差了。
English: As a result, Liu Ye's favors have been gradually reduced.

古文：又王谦、司马消难相继而反，高祖忧之，忘寝与食。
现代文：另外，王谦和司马消难相继谋反，高祖很担忧，废寝忘食。
English: In addition, Wang Qian and Sima Qian are plotting to rebel one after another. Gao Zu is very worried and loses sleep.

古文：昉逸游纵酒，不以职司为意，相府事物，多所遗落。
现代文：刘昉游玩纵酒，不以职责为念，相府的事情，多被遗忘丢下。
English: Liu Ye went on a drinking spree and did not think about his duties. Most of the things related to the government were forgotten and left behind.

古文：高祖深衔之，以高颎代为司马。
现代文：高祖很记恨他，以高赹代他当司马。
English: Gao Zu hated him very much and replaced him with Gao Yao as his steed.

古文：是后益见疏忌。
现代文：此后刘昉一天天被疏远猜忌。
English: Since then, Liu Wei has been further alienated and mistrusted.

古文：及受禅，进位柱国，改封舒国公，闲居无事，不复任使。
现代文：高祖受禅后，他升任柱国，改封为舒国公，闲居无事，高祖不再用他。
English: After Gaozhu accepted Zen, he was promoted to Zhu Guo and changed his title to Shu Guo Guo. He did not stay idle, and Gaozhu no longer used him.

古文：昉自以佐命元功，中被疏远，甚不自安。
现代文：刘昉自认为是佐命元勋，中途被疏远，心里很不安。
English: Liu Bei considered himself to be a veteran hero who assisted Emperor Wen. However, he was alienated by Emperor Wen and felt very uneasy.

古文：后遇京师饥，上令禁酒，昉使妾赁屋，当垆沽酒。
现代文：后遇京城闹饥荒，皇上下令禁酒，刘昉却派妾租房子，当垆卖酒。
English: Later, when there was a famine in Beijing, the emperor ordered a ban on alcohol, but Liu Bei sent his concubine to rent a house and sell alcohol.

古文：治书侍御史梁毗劾奏昉曰： 臣闻处贵则戒之以奢，持满则守之以约。
现代文：治书侍御史梁毗上奏高祖，弹劾刘昉，说： 我听说显贵的人要儆戒奢侈，满盈的人要注意约束。
English: Shi Liangvi, the secretary of the book, played the role of Gaozu, and impeached Liu Ye, saying: I heard that dignitaries should avoid extravagance, and those who are rich should pay attention to constraints.

古文：昉既位列群公，秩高庶尹，縻爵稍久，厚禄已淹，正当戒满归盈，鉴斯止足，何乃规曲蘖之润，竞锥刀之末，身昵酒徒，家为逋薮？
现代文：刘昉既然位列群公之中，官阶之高几近于尹，得到的官爵比较久了，而且俸禄也很多，正应戒防满盈，注意知足，怎么会求取卖酒的利润，与人竞争刀尖尖那点小利，而去与酒鬼们亲近，使家里成为逃亡者的窝子呢？
English: Since Liu Ye is ranked among the princes, his official rank is almost higher than that of Yin, he has been granted the title of nobility for a relatively long time, and his salary is also a lot, he should guard against fullness and be contented. How can he seek the profit of selling wine, compete with others for the little profit at the tip of the knife, and get close to drunkards, making his home a den of fugitives?

古文：若不纠绳，何以肃厉！ 
现代文：如不纠察处理，何以严肃法纪？ 
English: If there is no picketing, how can there be a serious legal discipline?

古文：有诏不治。
现代文：有诏不处理他。
English: There is an edict not to deal with him.

古文：昉郁郁不得志。
现代文：刘昉郁郁不得志。
English: Liu Wei was depressed and unhappy. He was very discouraged.

古文：时柱国梁士彦、宇文忻俱失职忿望，昉并与之交，数相来往。
现代文：当时柱国梁士彦、宇文忻都失职怨愤，刘昉与他们交往，多次来往。
English: At that time, Zhuangguo Liang Shihyan and Uwen Qi were both outraged by the dereliction of duty, and Liu Bei interacted with them and came and went many times.

古文：士彦妻有美色，昉因与私通，士彦不之知也，情好弥协，遂相与谋反，许推士彦为帝。
现代文：梁士彦的妻子很美，刘昉因此与她通奸，士彦不知道，与他感情更好，于是谋划造反，答应推举梁士彦为皇帝。
English: Liang Shih-yan's wife was very beautiful, so Liu Bei committed adultery with her. Shih-yan didn't know, he felt more comfortable with him, so he plotted a rebellion and promised to promote Liang Shih-yan to emperor.

古文：后事泄，上穷治之。
现代文：后来事情泄露，皇上追究不放。
English: Later, the matter was leaked, and the emperor pursued the matter.

古文：昉自知不免，默无所对。
现代文：刘昉自知躲不脱，默然无语。
English: Liu Wei knew he couldn't escape and was speechless.

古文：下诏诛之，曰：
现代文：皇上下诏杀他。
English: The emperor and empress issued an edict to kill him.

古文：朕君临四海，慈爱为心。
现代文：诏书说：我君临四海，以仁爱为心。
English: The imperial edict said: I reign over the four seas, with benevolence as my heart.

古文：加以起自布衣，入升皇极，公卿之内，非亲则友，位虽差等，情皆旧人。
现代文：加上我起自布衣，入朝为帝，公卿之中，非亲即友，地位虽不同，感情却都是朋友之情。
English: In addition, I was born in cloth, entered the imperial court, and became a noble, so I am not a relative, but a friend. Although my status is different, my feelings are those of a friend.

古文：护短全长，恆思覆育，每殷勤戒约，言无不尽。
现代文：我护公卿的短处，成全公卿的长处，总想保护、养育大家，常常殷勤告戒、约束大家，言无不尽。
English: I always want to protect and nurture everyone. I am always eager to admonish and restrain everyone. My words are inexhaustible.

古文：天之历数，定于杳冥，岂虑苞藏之心，能为国家之害？
现代文：天下的定数，是由杳冥决定的，难道要担心那包藏的祸心，能成为国家的祸害？
English: The fixed number of the world is determined by the powers that be. Should we be worried that the hidden evil spirit could become a national scourge?

古文：欲使其长守富贵，不触刑书故也。
现代文：我这么做，只是为了使他们长守富贵，不触犯刑法罢了。
English: I only did it to keep them rich and not to break the criminal law.

古文：上柱国、郕国公梁士彦，上柱国、巳国公宇文忻，柱国、舒国公刘昉等，朕受命之初，并展勤力，酬勋报效，荣高禄重。
现代文：上柱国、成阝国公梁士彦，上柱国、杞国公宇文忻，柱国、舒国公刘昉等人，在我刚受命为帝时，都出了大力。为感谢他们的功劳，他们都荣高禄重。
English: Shangzhu Guo, Chengyu Guo Gong Liang Shih Yan, Shangzhu Guo, Sheng Guo Gong U Wen Qi, Zhuo Guo, Shu Guo Gong Liu Qi and others all made great efforts when I was just appointed as the emperor. In order to thank them for their merits, they all received high honors.

古文：待之既厚，爱之实隆，朝夕宴言，备知朕意。
现代文：我对他们好，爱他们也深，朝夕与他们喝酒交谈，他们都很了解我的心。
English: I am good to them, I love them deeply, I drink and talk with them morning and evening, they all know my heart.

古文：但心如溪壑，志等豺狼，不荷朝恩，忽谋逆乱。
现代文：但他们心如沟壑一样深，志如豺狼一样狠，不感激朝廷的大恩，忽然谋划造反作乱。
English: However, their hearts are treacherous, and they are as ferocious as jackals. Unaware of the grace of the imperial court, they suddenly conspire to rebel and create chaos.

古文：士彦爰始幼来，恆自诬罔，称有相者，云其应箓，年过六十，必据九五。
现代文：梁士彦从小时起就爱胡说八道，他自称有看相的说他正当天命，六十岁以后会作皇帝。
English: Liang Shih-yan has been fond of talking nonsense since he was a child. He claims to have a premonition that he is the rightful heir to the throne and will become emperor after the age of 60.

古文：初平尉迥，暂临相州，已有反心，彰于行路。
现代文：刚平定尉迟迥，他暂居相州时，就有反叛之心，这是路人都知道的。
English: Gangping Dingfei is a tardy person. When he temporarily lived in Xiangzhou, he had a rebellious heart, which is known to passers-by.

古文：朕即遣人代之，不声其罪。
现代文：我就派人代替他，不声张他的罪过。
English: So we sent someone in his place, and we did not expose his sin.

古文：入京之后，逆意转深。
现代文：入京之后，他的叛逆之意转而更深。
English: After entering the capital, the spirit of rebellion became even more apparent.

古文：忻、昉之徒，言相扶助。
现代文：宇文忻、刘昉之徒，说愿扶持他。
English: Members of the Uwenqi and Liuqi families said they wanted to support Liang Shihang.

古文：士彦许率僮仆，克期不远，欲于蒲州起事，即断河桥，捉黎阳之关，塞河阳之路，劫调布以为牟甲，募盗贼而为战士，就食之人，亦云易集。
现代文：梁士彦答应率领僮仆造反，日期已经不远，想在蒲州起事。他们准备切断河桥，守黎阳之关，塞河阳之路，抢劫调往京师的布匹以作牟甲，招募盗贼以作战士。去吃军饷的人，也说很容易招集。
English: Liang Shih-yan promised to lead his followers to revolt. The date was not far off, and they wanted to start a riot in Puzhou. They were going to cut off the river bridge, guard the Liyang Pass, block the road to Heyang, rob the cloth sent to the Beijing Division to make armor, and recruit thieves to be fighters. They also said that it was easy to recruit people to eat military pay.

古文：轻忽朝廷，嗤笑官人，自谓一朝奋发，无人当者。
现代文：他们轻视朝廷，嗤笑我，自称一朝奋发造反，无人可阻挡。
English: They despised the imperial court, laughed at me, and claimed that they would start a rebellion overnight, and no one could stop them.

古文：其第二子刚，每常苦谏，第三子叔谐，固深劝奖。
现代文：其次子梁刚，常常苦苦劝阻；第三子梁叔谐，大大予以鼓励。
English: The second son, Liang Gang, was often discouraged; the third son, Liang Shuren, was greatly encouraged.

古文：朕既闻知，犹恐枉滥，乃授晋部之任，欲验蒲州之情。
现代文：我听到消息后，还怕冤枉他们，滥杀无辜，于是授士彦为晋州长官，想看看蒲州的真情。
English: After I heard the news, I was still afraid of wronging them and killing innocents indiscriminately, so I appointed Shihiko as the governor of Jin, and wanted to see the true feelings of Puzhou.

古文：士彦得以欣然，云是天赞，忻及昉等，皆贺时来。
现代文：士彦得到任命很高兴，说是老天相助。宇文忻和刘昉等人，也都及时来庆贺。
English: Shihiko was very happy to be appointed, saying that it was God's help. Uwen Zang and Liu Zang and others also came to celebrate in time.

古文：忻往定鄴城，自矜不已，位极人臣，犹恨赏薄。云我欲反，何虑不成。
现代文：宇文忻往日平定邺城，因此骄傲得不得了，他已位极人臣，还恨赏赐太差，说： 我如想造反，还担心不能成功？ 
English: In the past, Uwen Yao had subdued Shicheng, so he was extremely proud. He was already a very high-ranking official, but he hated the poor reward. He said, "If I want to rebel, am I still worried that I won't succeed?

古文：怒色忿言，所在流布。
现代文：他的怒色忿言，所到之处都在流传。
English: Word of his angry rant spread far and wide.

古文：朕深念其功，不计其礼，任以武候，授以领军，寄之爪牙，委之心腹。
现代文：我深念其功，不计较其无礼，授他武侯，让他领兵，让他作干将，当心腹。
English: I am deeply mindful of his merits, and regardless of his rudeness, I have given him the title of military governor, let him lead the army, let him be a leader, and beware of his underbelly.

古文：忻密为异计，树党宫闱，多奏亲友，入参宿卫。
现代文：宇文忻秘密定下反叛的计谋，甚至在宫廷之中树结党羽，奏请朝廷，让他的很多亲友入宫当宿卫。
English: Uwen Zang secretly devised a plan to rebel. He even gathered supporters in the court and asked the court to allow many of his relatives and friends to serve as palace guards.

古文：朕推心待物，言刻依许。
现代文：我推心待人，言必照准。
English: I treat people with consideration and always keep my word.

古文：为而弗止，心迹渐彰，仍解禁兵，令其改悔。
现代文：他仍不停止叛乱图谋，心迹渐渐显示出来。于是解除他掌管禁兵的职权，让他改悔。
English: Uwen Hui had been doing this without stopping, and his intentions gradually came to light. I relieved him of his duties as head of the Forbidden Army and made him correct and repent.

古文：而志规不逞，愈结于怀，乃与士彦情意偏厚，要请神明，誓不负约。
现代文：但他反志不成，心里更加郁结，于是与梁士彦情意偏厚，他们邀请神明，誓不负约。
English: However, he did not achieve his goal, and his heart was even more depressed, so he and Liang Shihong were more affectionate, they invited gods, and swore not to be bound by the contract.

古文：俱营贼逆，逢则交谋，委彦河东，自许关右，蒲津之事，即望从征，两军结东西之旅，一举合连横之势，然后北破晋阳，还图宗社。
现代文：他们一起谋反，一见面就谋划，把河东交给梁士彦，自己管关右。蒲津之事，即望从征，准备两军结合，而成纵横之势，然后北破晋阳，回来夺取皇位。
English: They plotted together to rebel, and as soon as they met, they planned to hand over Hedong to Liang Shihang and take control of Guanzhong themselves. In the case of Putuo, they expected to be conscripted and prepared to unite the two armies, which led to a vertical and horizontal trend, and then broke through Jinyang to the north and returned to seize the throne.

古文：昉入佐相府，便为非法，三度事发，二度其妇自论。
现代文：刘昉入佐相府以后，就为非作歹，他曾三次出事，有两回都是他妻子出面负责。
English: When Liu Ye entered the prime minister's office as an aide, he did something that violated the law. He was exposed three times, and both times his wife and concubine took him down.

古文：常云姓是 卯金刀 ，名是 一万日 ，刘氏应王，为万日天子。
现代文：他常说，他的姓是 卯金刀 ，名是 一万日 ，姓刘的应该当帝王，当一万日天子。
English: It is often said that his surname is Ukinji, his name is 10000 days, and his surname Liu should be called Wang, meaning 10000 days.

古文：朕训之导之，示其利害，每加宽宥，望其修改。
现代文：我教导他，引导他，告诉他利害，常常原谅他，望他改过。
English: I teach him, guide him, tell him what's best for him, forgive him often, and hope that he will change.

古文：口请自新，志存如旧，亦与士彦情好深重，逆节奸心，尽探肝鬲。
现代文：他口里请求让他自新，心里一如往日。他也与梁士彦感情很深，他的叛逆之心相同，彼此都很了解。
English: He pleaded with him to reform himself, and his heart was the same as before. He also had deep feelings for Liang Shih-yan, his rebellious heart was the same, and they understood each other very well.

古文：尝共士彦论太白所犯，问东井之间，思秦地之乱，访轩辕之里，愿宫掖之灾。
现代文：他曾与梁士彦谈论太白星所犯，问东井之间事，盼望秦地叛乱；访轩辕之里，希望皇宫里发火灾。
English: He once had a discussion with Liang Shihong about the place where Taibai Xing committed the crime. He saw that Taibai Xing committed the crime between the east and west wells. He wanted the Qin Dynasty to be in turmoil, extending to the turbulent areas, and hoped that a disaster would occur at the court.

古文：唯待蒲坂事兴，欲在关内应接。
现代文：只等待蒲坂事发，想在关内接应叛军。
English: He was just waiting for something to happen in Busaka and wanted to meet the rebels in Kansai.

古文：残贼之策，千端万绪。
现代文：这些反贼的计策，真是千端万绪。
English: These anti-thief strategies are really all over the place.

古文：惟忻及昉，名位并高，宁肯北面曲躬，臣于士彦，乃是各怀不逊，图成乱阶，一得扰攘之基，方逞吞并之事。
现代文：只是宇文忻和刘昉，名利、地位都很高，怎肯北面称臣于梁士彦？原是各怀不逊，谋划造反，一旦造反得逞，就会互相吞并。
English: However, since both Uwen Zang and Liu Zang were very famous, wealthy, and high-ranking, how could the north side claim to be a vassal of Liang Shihang? Originally, each side was insolent and plotted a rebellion, and once the rebellion succeeded, they would annex each other.

古文：人之奸诈，一至于此！
现代文：人的奸诈，到了如此地步！
English: How great is man's deceitfulness!

古文：虽国有常刑，罪在不赦，朕载思草创，咸著厥诚，情用愍然，未忍极法。
现代文：虽然国家有刑法，他们罪大恶极，不应赦免，但我想到草创之初，他们都表现出忠诚，因此我心里很怜悯他们，不忍心用极刑。
English: Although the country has a criminal law, their crimes are so heinous that they should not be pardoned, but when I think about the early days, they all showed loyalty, so I feel very sorry for them and can't bear to use capital punishment.

古文：士彦、忻、昉，身为谋首，叔谐赞成父意，义实难容，并已处尽。
现代文：梁士彦、宇文忻、刘昉，身为谋首，叔谐赞成其父谋反，义实难容，都已到极点。
English: Liang Shih-yan, Yu Wen-tao, and Liu Xi, as the ringleaders of the conspiracy, have all reached the extreme point of unquestioning approval of their father's conspiracy, and are difficult to tolerate.

古文：士彦、忻、昉兄弟叔侄，特恕其命，有官者除名。
现代文：梁士彦、宇文忻、刘昉的兄弟叔侄，特别饶恕他们的性命，有官职的去职为民。
English: The brothers, uncles and nephews of Liang Shih-yan, Uwen Hui and Liu Hui, especially spared their lives, and some officials were dismissed for the sake of the people.

古文：士彦小男女、忻母妻女及小男并放。
现代文：梁士彦的小子女、宇文忻的妻子、女儿和小儿子都释放。
English: Liang Shih-han's small children, and Uwen Yao's wife, daughter and young son were all released.

古文：士彦、叔谐妻妾及资财田宅，忻、昉妻妾及资财田宅，悉没官。
现代文：士彦、叔谐的妻妾及家产、田地、房屋，宇文忻、刘昉的妻妾及家产、田地、房屋，全部没收归官府。
English: The wives and concubines and family assets, fields, and houses of Shi Yan and Shuhei, and the wives and concubines and family assets, fields, and houses of Uwen Hui and Liu Hui, were all confiscated and returned to the government.

古文：士彦、昉兒年十五以上远配。
现代文：士彦、刘昉两家，十五岁以上的男孩，全部流放到远方。
English: The two families of Shi Yan and Liu Ye, boys over the age of fifteen, were all exiled to a faraway place.

古文：上仪同薛摩兒，是士彦交旧，上柱国府户曹参军事裴石达，是士彦府僚，反状逆心，巨细皆委。
现代文：上仪同薛摩儿，是梁士彦的老朋友；上柱国府户曹参军事裴石达，是梁士彦的部下，他们的谋反情状和叛逆野心，都告诉了他们。
English: Shang Yi, together with Xue Mo'er, was an old friend of Liang Shihong; Shang Jiu, the head of the State House, Cao Zhan, and the military Pei Shida, were Liang Shihong's subordinates, and told them about their plotting and rebellious ambitions.

古文：薛摩兒闻语，仍相应和，俱不申陈，宜从大辟。
现代文：薛摩儿听说谋反事，还与之应和，都不报告，应处以大辟之刑。
English: When Xue Mo'er heard about the conspiracy, she should have agreed with it, but did not report it. She should be punished with a large fine.

古文：问即承引，颇是恕心，可除名免死。
现代文：但因为一问他们就承认并揭发了问题，可以免除他的官职，免于一死。
English: But because he confessed and revealed the problem as soon as they asked, he could be relieved of his post and spared death.

古文：朕握图当箓，六载于斯，政事徒勤，淳化未洽，兴言轸念，良深叹愤！
现代文：我登基称帝，到现在六年了。我只是白白地忙于政事，但教化却未融洽。说这些话的时候，我心里辗转思念，的确深深地叹恨！
English: It has been six years since I ascended the throne and became emperor. I have been busy with politics in vain, but enlightenment has not been harmonious. When I say these words, my mind wanders, and I really deeply regret it!

古文：临刑，至朝堂，宇文忻见高颎，向之叩头求哀。
现代文：临刑时，到了朝廷上，宇文忻见了高赹，向他叩头求哀。
English: At the time of his execution, when he arrived at the imperial court, Uwenwen saw Gao Yao and bowed down to him and begged for mercy.

古文：昉勃然谓忻曰： 事形如此，何叩头之有！ 
现代文：刘昉勃然大怒，对宇文忻说： 事已如此，何必去叩头！ 
English: Liu Yao was furious and said to Yu Wenyao: "It's already like this, why do you have to kowtow!

古文：于是伏诛，籍没其家。
现代文：于是被杀，全部家产被没收，家人没官为奴。
English: As a result, he was killed, all his property was confiscated, and his family was enslaved.

古文：后数日，上素服临射殿，尽取昉敢、忻、士彦三家资物置于前，令百僚射取之，以为鉴诫云。
现代文：几天后，皇上穿着丧服到射殿，把刘昉、宇文忻、梁士彦三家的家产全部放在前面，令文武百官射取之，以为鉴戒。
English: A few days later, the emperor, wearing mourning clothes, went to the mortuary hall and placed all the family assets of the three families of Liu Xuan, Uwen Xuan, and Liang Shiyan in front of him, and ordered the civil and military officials to shoot them as a warning.

古文：○郑译
现代文：○郑译
English: ○ Translated by Zheng

古文：郑译，字正义，荥阳开封人也。
现代文：郑译字正义，荥阳开封人。
English: Zheng translated the word justice, Shenyang Kaifeng people.

古文：祖琼，魏太常。
现代文：祖父郑琼，魏国的太常。
English: Zheng Qiong's grandfather, the emperor of Wei.

古文：父道邕，魏司空。
现代文：父亲郑道邕，北周的司空。
English: His father, Zheng Daojun, was the governor of Northern Zhou.

古文：译颇有学识，兼知钟律，善骑射。
现代文：郑译很有学问，又通晓音乐，善于骑射。
English: Zheng Yue is very learned, knows music, and is good at riding and shooting.

古文：译从祖开府文宽，尚魏平阳公主，则周太祖元后之妹也。
现代文：郑译的堂祖父、开府郑文宽，娶魏国的平阳公主。平阳公主就是北周太祖元皇后的妹妹。
English: Zheng Yue's great-great-grandfather, the founder Zheng Wenkang, married Princess Pingyang of Wei. Princess Pingyang was the younger sister of the Empress Dowager of Northern Zhou.

古文：主无子，太祖令译后之。
现代文：平阳公主没有儿子，周太祖就让郑译过继给她家。
English: Princess Pingyang didn't have a son, so Zhou Taizu let Zheng Zi pass on to her family.

古文：由是译少为太祖所亲，恆令与诸子游集。
现代文：因此，郑译小时就被周太祖亲近，总让他与太祖诸子玩耍。
English: As a result, Zheng Zhan was close to Zhou Taizu from an early age, and always let him play with his grandfather's sons.

古文：年十余岁，尝诣相府司录李长宗，长宗于众中戏之。
现代文：十几岁时，郑译曾到相府司录李长宗处，长宗当众与郑译嬉戏。
English: When he was a teenager, Zheng Yu once went to the office of Li Changzong, the chief secretary of the imperial court, and Changzong played with Zheng Yu in public.

古文：译敛容谓长宗曰： 明公位望不轻，瞻仰斯属，辄相玩狎，无乃丧德也。 
现代文：郑译老着脸对长宗说： 明公您的地位、声望都不轻了，人们都看着您，您却这样玩耍嬉戏，这不是丧德吗？ 
English: Zheng Yi said to Changzong with a straight face, "Mingzong, your status and reputation are not light. People are looking at you, but you are playing and frolicking like this. Isn't this a waste of virtue?

古文：长宗甚异之。
现代文：长宗很奇异。
English: Nagamune is very strange.

古文：文宽后诞二子，译复归本生。
现代文：郑文宽后来生了两个儿子，郑译又回到了自己家里。
English: Zheng Wenkuan later gave birth to two sons, and Zheng Yue returned to his home.

古文：周武帝时，起家给事中士，拜银青光禄大夫，转左侍上士。
现代文：北周武帝时，郑译开始当给事中士，后任银青光禄大夫，转任左侍上士。
English: At the time of the Northern Zhou Emperor, Zheng Zi began to serve as a sergeant, later as a silver Qing Guanglu doctor, and then as a left-handed staff sergeant.

古文：与仪同刘昉恆侍帝侧。
现代文：他与仪同刘日方总在皇上身边。
English: He was always by the Emperor's side, along with Ito and Liu.

古文：译时丧妻，帝命译尚梁安固公主。
现代文：郑译那时死了妻子，周武帝令郑译娶梁国的安固公主。
English: Zheng Yi's wife died at that time, and Emperor Zhou ordered Zheng Yi to marry Princess Angu of Liang Province.

古文：及帝亲总万机，以为御正下大夫，俄转太子宫尹。
现代文：武帝亲总万机后，以郑译为御正下大夫，继而转任太子宫尹。
English: After Emperor Wu's death, Zheng Zhan was appointed as the imperial physician, and then he was transferred to the position of Crown Prince Gong Yin.

古文：时太子多失德，内史中大夫乌丸轨每劝帝废太子而立秦王，由是太子恆不自安。
现代文：当时太子大多失德，内史中大夫乌丸轨常劝武帝废掉太子而另立秦王，因此太子心里总是不安。
English: At that time, most of the princes were immoral, and Dr. Umaru, a doctor of internal history, often advised Emperor Wu to abolish the prince and establish another Qin king, so the prince was always uneasy.

古文：其后诏太子西征吐谷浑，太子乃阴谓译曰： 秦王，上爱子也。乌丸轨，上信臣也。
现代文：此后武帝下诏，让太子西征吐谷浑，太子于是私下里对郑译说： 秦王是皇上的爱子，乌丸轨是皇上的宠臣。
English: After that, Emperor Wu issued an edict to let the prince go to the west to recapture Guhun. The prince then privately said to Zheng: King Qin is the emperor's favorite son, and Emperor Wushu is the emperor's favorite subject.

古文：今吾此行，得无扶苏之事乎？ 
现代文：我这次出征，怎能免除公子扶苏被废、被杀的事呢？ 
English: How can I go to the front this time, and be exempted from the matter of Prince Fuso being deposed and killed?

古文：译曰： 愿殿下勉著仁孝，无失子道而已。勿为他虑。 
现代文：郑译说： 愿殿下弘扬仁孝，不失为子之道而已，不要为别的事担心。 
English: Zheng said: May His Royal Highness promote benevolence and filial piety, do not lose the way of being a son, and do not worry about other things.

古文：太子然之。
现代文：太子以为然。
English: The prince thought otherwise.

古文：既破贼，译以功最，赐爵开国子，邑三百户。
现代文：破贼以后，郑译因功劳最大，赐开国子爵，食邑三百户。
English: After defeating the bandits, Zheng Zi was given the title of viscount for his great service, and 300 households were provided with food.

古文：后坐亵狎皇太子，帝大怒，除名为民。
现代文：后来因他与皇太子过于亲近，武帝大怒，削职为民。
English: Later, because he was too close to the crown prince, Emperor Wu was furious and dismissed him.

古文：太子复召之，译戏狎如初。
现代文：太子又召他去，郑译仍像过去那样与太子亲近。
English: The prince called him again, and Zheng Yi remained as close to the prince as before.

古文：因言于太子曰： 殿下何时可得据天下？ 
现代文：他因此对太子说： 殿下何时可得天下？ 
English: He therefore said to the prince: When will your highness be able to rule the world?

古文：太子悦而益昵之。
现代文：太子高兴，而更加亲近他。
English: The prince was delighted and became even closer to him.

古文：及帝崩，太子嗣位，是为宣帝。
现代文：武帝去世后，太子继位，这就是周宣帝。
English: After the death of Emperor Wu, the crown prince succeeded to the throne, which is Zhou Xuandi.

古文：超拜开府、内史下大夫、封归昌县公，邑一千户，委以朝政。
现代文：宣帝越级提拔郑译当开府、内史下大夫，封他为归昌县公，食邑一千户，委他以朝政。
English: Emperor Xuan over-promoted Zheng Zhan to be the governor of Guchang County, and appointed him as the governor of Guchang County. He was responsible for a thousand households in Guchang County, and he was in charge of the imperial government.

古文：俄迁内史上大夫，进封沛国公，邑五千户，以其子善愿为归昌公，元琮为永安县男，又监国史。
现代文：不久他升任内史上大夫，晋爵为沛国公，食邑五千户，又封他儿子郑善愿为归昌公，郑元琮为永安县男，又让他监修国史。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of Inner History Doctor, promoted to the peerage as Pei Guo Quang, and fed five thousand households in the county. He also appointed his son Zheng Shanzheng as Guichang Guo, and Zheng Yuanzhang as the man of Yong'an County, and had him supervise the study of national history.

古文：译颇专权，时帝幸东京，译擅取官材，自营私第，坐是复除名为民。
现代文：郑译很专权。当时宣帝巡幸东京，郑译擅自将官府的建材据为己有，建造私人的府第。因此他又被削职为民。
English: Emperor Xuanxuan was on a tour of Tokyo at the time, and Zheng Yi took possession of the government building materials without permission and built a private residence. As a result, he was removed from his post and made a private citizen.

古文：刘昉数言于帝，帝复召之，顾待如初。
现代文：刘日方多次对宣帝说，劝重新起用他。宣帝又召他，待他如初。
English: Liu said to Emperor Xuan several times, urging him to reappoint him. Emperor Xuan also summoned him and treated him as before.

古文：诏领内史事。
现代文：下诏让他兼管内史事。
English: The order was issued for him to also be in charge of internal history.

古文：初，高祖与译有同学之旧，译又素知高祖相表有奇，倾心相结。
现代文：起初，高祖杨坚与郑译有同学之谊，郑译又素知高祖相貌堂堂，与他倾心交好。
English: At first, Gao Zu, Yang Jian and Zheng Zhan had a friendship as classmates. Zheng Zhan also knew that Gao Zu was handsome and befriended him.

古文：至是，高祖为宣帝所忌，情不自安，尝在永巷私于译曰： 久愿出籓，公所悉也。
现代文：到这时，高祖被宣帝忌恨，心里不安，曾在深巷子里私下对郑译说： 我早想出京去辅佐藩王，这是你很清楚的。
English: At this time, Gaozu was jealous of Emperor Xuan and was uneasy in his heart. He once said to the translator Zheng privately in a deep alley: I have long wanted to go to Beijing to assist the king of the clan, which you know very well.

古文：敢布心腹，少留意焉。 
现代文：我冒昧地把这托付给你，请稍稍给我留点意。 郑译说： 凭着你的功德、威望，天下归心。
English: I take the liberty of entrusting this to you, so please spare a thought for me. Zheng said: With your merits and prestige, the world will be converted.

古文：译曰： 以公德望，天下归心，欲求多福，岂敢忘也。
现代文：你想多福，我怎敢忘记？
English: How dare I forget that you want to be happy?

古文：谨即言之。 
现代文：有机会我会马上说的。 
English: If I get the chance, I'll say it right away.

古文：时将遣译南征，译请元帅。
现代文：当时，将要派郑译南征，郑译请派元帅。
English: At that time, Zheng Yi will be sent to the Southern Expedition, Zheng Yi please send a marshal.

古文：帝曰： 卿意如何？ 
现代文：宣帝说： 你的意思怎样？ 
English: After promotion, Gaozu said, "What is your opinion?

古文：译对曰： 若定江东，自非懿戚重臣无以镇抚。
现代文：郑译回答说： 若定江南，不是贵戚大臣不能镇住。
English: Zheng Yi replied: If it is in the south of the Yangtze River, the minister cannot live in the town unless he is a close relative.

古文：可令隋公行，且为寿阳总管以督军事。 
现代文：可让隋公杨坚去，暂且让他当寿阳总管，以监督军事。 
English: He could let Yang Jian, the Prince of Sui, go, and temporarily let him be the head of Shouyang to supervise the military.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：宣帝听从了他的话。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：乃下诏以高祖为扬州总管，译发兵俱会寿阳以伐陈。
现代文：于是下诏以高祖为扬州总管，郑译发兵，与杨坚相会于寿阳，以讨伐陈国。
English: Therefore, it was decreed that Gaozu would be the governor of Yangzhou, and Zheng sent troops to meet Yang Jian in Shouyang to fight Chen.

古文：行有日矣，帝不悆，遂与御正下大夫刘昉谋，引高祖入受顾托。
现代文：他们走了一些日子了，宣帝病了，于是与御正下大夫刘日方商议，带隋公回京受托。
English: After they had been gone for a few days, Emperor Xuanzong fell ill, so he consulted with the imperial physician Liu Yifang and was entrusted with taking Sui Gong back to Beijing.

古文：既而译宣诏，文武百官皆受高祖节度。
现代文：继而郑译宣诏：文武百官都受高祖节度。
English: Zheng then translated the edict as follows: All civil and military officials are subject to Gao Zu's edict.

古文：时御正中大夫颜之仪与宦者谋，引大将军宇文仲辅政。
现代文：当时，御正中大夫颜之仪与宦官商议，引大将军宇文仲辅政。
English: At that time, the Imperial Vice-Minister Yan Zhi Yi discussed with the eunuch to bring the general Uwen Zhong to assist the government.

古文：仲已至御坐，译知之，遽率开府杨惠及刘昉、皇甫绩、柳裘俱入。
现代文：宇文仲已到宣帝宝座跟前，郑译知道了，马上率领开府杨惠及刘日方、皇甫绩、柳裘一起入宫。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong learned that Wu Wenzhong had arrived at the throne of Emperor Xuanzong, he immediately led Yang Hui, Liu Yifang, Wang Fucheng, and Liu Qiu to enter the palace.

古文：仲与之仪见译等，愕然，逡巡欲出，高祖因执之。
现代文：宇文仲与颜之仪见了郑译等人，很惊愕，犹豫一会，想出宫去，高祖因便抓了他们。
English: When Wu Wenzhong and Yan Zhi Yi saw Zheng Yue and the others, they were very surprised, hesitated for a moment, and wanted to leave the palace. Gao Zu arrested them for this reason.

古文：于是矫诏复以译为内史上大夫。
现代文：于是假传圣旨，又以郑译为内史上大夫。
English: As a result, the imperial edict was falsely transmitted, and Zheng's translation was used as the official history.

古文：明日，高祖为丞相，拜译柱国、相府长史、治内史上大夫事。
现代文：次日，高祖为丞相，授郑译为柱国、相府长史、治内史上大夫事。
English: The next day, Gaozu was appointed chancellor, and Zheng translated as pillar state, minister of prefectural history, and minister of internal affairs.

古文：及高祖为大冢宰，总百揆，以译兼领天官都府司会，总六府事。
现代文：高祖为大冢宰后，总理万机，以郑译兼任天官都府司会，总管六府诸事。
English: After Gaozhu became the grand vizier, the prime minister, Wanchi, concurrently served as the heavenly official of the prefectural government, and was in charge of the affairs of the six prefectures.

古文：出入卧内，言无不从，赏赐玉帛不可胜计。
现代文：郑译出入于高祖卧室之内，高祖对郑译，言无不从，赏赐的玉帛不计其数。
English: Zheng Yi went in and out of Gao Zu's bedroom. Gao Zu listened to Zheng Yi's every word and rewarded him with countless jade ornaments.

古文：每出入，以甲士从。
现代文：郑译每次出入，都带着甲士。
English: Every time Zheng Yi comes and goes, he always brings a warrior with him.

古文：拜其子元璹为仪同。
现代文：授郑译之子郑元王寿为仪同。
English: Zheng Yuan Wang Shou, the son of Zheng Yuanzhong, also attended the ceremony.

古文：时尉迥、王谦、司马消难等作乱，高祖逾加亲礼。
现代文：当时，尉迟迥、王谦、司马消难等人造反作乱，高祖对郑译更加亲近、礼遇。
English: At that time, Ye Xizhi, Wang Qian, Sima Qian and other people made riots. Gao Zu was more close to Zheng Yu and treated him politely.

古文：俄而进位上柱国，恕以十死。
现代文：继而升他为上柱国，恕他十次死罪。
English: Subsequently, he was promoted to the top pillar country, and he was pardoned ten times.

古文：译性轻险，不亲职务，而脏货狼籍。
现代文：郑译生性浅薄，不管政务，但贪赃求货。
English: Zheng Yi is shallow by nature. He does not care about government affairs, but is greedy for goods.

古文：高祖阴疏之，然以其有定策功，不忍废放，阴敕官属不得白事于译。
现代文：高祖悄悄地疏远了他，但因他有定策之功，不忍心废掉他、放逐他。于是悄悄地告诉他的下级不要把什么事告诉郑译。
English: Gaozu quietly distanced himself from him, but since he had the power to make decisions, he could not bear to abolish him and banish him. So he quietly told his subordinates not to tell anything to Zheng.

古文：译犹坐事，无所关预。
现代文：郑译还坐在大厅上听事，却没什么事要他处理。
English: Zheng Yi was still sitting in the hall listening to the proceedings, but there was nothing for him to deal with.

古文：译惧，顿首求解职，高祖宽谕之，接以恩礼。
现代文：郑译害怕了，叩头请求免职，高祖宽解他，以礼待他。
English: Zheng Yi was afraid and bowed down and asked to be relieved of his duties. Gaozhu forgave him and treated him with courtesy.

古文：及上受禅，以上柱国公归第，赏赐丰厚。
现代文：高祖受禅后，郑译以上柱国和公爵的身份，回到他的府第，高祖给他的赏赐很多。
English: After Gaozhu accepted Zen, he returned to his capital with the status of a pillar state and a duke. Gaozhu gave him many rewards.

古文：进子元璹爵城皋郡公，邑二千户，元洵永安男。
现代文：又把他的儿子郑元王寿的爵位升为城皋郡公，食邑二千户；郑元王旬为永安男爵。
English: He also raised the title of his son, Zheng Yuan Wang Shou, to the Duke of Chengdu County, with 2,000 households; Zheng Yuan Wang Shou became the Baron of Yong'an.

古文：追赠其父及亡兄二人并为刺史。
现代文：又追赠郑译的父亲和亡兄两个人都当刺史。
English: In addition, Zheng's father and late brother, both of whom were posthumously awarded the honor of translating Zheng's works, will be enshrined in history.

古文：译自以被疏，阴呼道士章醮以祈福助，其婢奏译厌蛊左道。
现代文：郑译因被疏远，悄悄地叫来道士章醮，以祈求福份帮助。他的奴婢上告郑译搞旁门左道。
English: As Zheng Yi was estranged, he quietly called upon the Taoist priest Zhang Ye to pray for good fortune and help. His slaves appealed to Zheng Yi to take a different path.

古文：上谓译曰： 我不负公，此何意也？ 
现代文：皇上对郑译说： 我没有对不起你，你这么做，是什么意思？ 
English: The emperor said to the Zheng translator, "I didn't feel sorry for you. What do you mean by doing that?

古文：译无以对。
现代文：郑译无话回答。
English: Zheng Yi did not reply.

古文：译又与母别居，为宪司所劾，由是除名。
现代文：郑译又与他的母亲分居，被司法部门弹劾，因此被削职为民。
English: Zheng also separated from his mother, was impeached by the judiciary, and was therefore removed from office.

古文：下诏曰： 译嘉谋良策，寂尔无闻，鬻狱卖官，沸腾盈耳。
现代文：皇上下诏书说： 郑译的好计谋，我再也听不到了。他买狱卖官，沸沸扬扬，灌满了我的耳朵。
English: The Emperor's edict said: I can no longer hear the good stratagem of the Zheng translation. He bought a prison officer, and my ears were filled with the uproar.

古文：若留之于世，在人为不道之臣，戮之于朝，入地为不孝之鬼。
现代文：如留他在世上，他又是不道之臣；如果杀了他，他又是不孝之鬼。
English: If he is left on earth, he will be an immoral vassal; if he is killed, he will be an unfilial ghost.

古文：有累幽显，无以置之，宜赐以《孝经》，令其熟读。 
现代文：杀他、留他都不好，应该赐他一本《孝经》，让他熟读。 
English: It is not good to kill him or keep him. He should be given a copy of the Filial Piety Sutra so that he can study it well.

古文：仍遣与母共居。
现代文：让他与他母亲一起居住。
English: He was still allowed to live with his mother.

古文：未几，诏译参撰律令，复授开府、隆州刺史。
现代文：不久，有诏书让郑译参加撰写法律，又授他开府、隆州刺史。
English: Soon, there was an imperial edict to let Zheng Yu participate in the writing of laws, and also awarded him the history of the founding of the capital and Longzhou.

古文：请还治疾，有诏征之，见于醴泉宫。
现代文：他请求回京治病，有诏书调他回京，皇上在礼泉宫见他。
English: He requested to return to Beijing to treat his illness. An imperial edict ordered him to return to Beijing, and the emperor met him at the Reizei Palace.

古文：上赐宴甚欢，因谓译曰： 贬退已久，情相矜愍。 
现代文：皇上赐宴，与他一起喝酒，很高兴，因此对郑译说： 贬退你已很久了，我心里很挂念、怜悯你。 
English: The emperor was very happy to give a banquet and drink with him, so he said to Zheng: "It's been a long time since I humiliated you. I'm very worried about you and pity you.

古文：于是复爵沛国公，位上柱国。
现代文：于是恢复他沛国公的爵位和上柱国的官职。
English: As a result, he was reinstated in his title of Pei Guoguang and the official post of Shangzhuang.

古文：上顾谓侍臣曰： 郑译与朕同生共死，间关危难，兴言念此，何日忘之！ 
现代文：皇上对侍臣们说： 郑译与我同生共死，在我遭到曲折和危难的时候，他帮我说话。
English: The emperor said to his courtiers: Zheng Yi lived and died with me, and he helped me to speak when I was in trouble.

古文：译因奉觞上寿。
现代文：想到这些，我哪天忘记过？ 郑译因此持酒敬皇上。
English: When I think of these things, what day have I forgotten? Therefore, I drink wine and pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：上令内史令李德林立作诏书，高颎戏谓译曰： 笔干。 
现代文：皇上命内史令李德林立即起草诏书，高赹开玩笑对郑译说： 笔干了。 
English: The emperor ordered Li Delin to immediately draft the imperial edict, and Gao Gan jokingly said to Zheng: "The pen is dry."

古文：译答曰： 出为方岳，杖策言归，不得一钱，何以润笔。 
现代文：郑译回答说： 我出为刺史，拄着拐杖回来，没得到一个钱，用什么给你润笔？ 
English: Zheng replied, "I came back on crutches after pretending to be a historian. I didn't get any money. Why should I give you a fountain pen?

古文：上大笑。
现代文：皇上大笑。
English: The Emperor roared with laughter.

古文：未几，诏译参议乐事。
现代文：不久，有诏让郑译参加讨论音乐之事。
English: Soon after, there was an edict to let Zheng Rong take part in the discussion of music.

古文：译以周代七声废缺，自大隋受命，礼乐宜新，更修七始之义，名曰《乐府声调》，凡八篇。
现代文：郑译以为，北周七声废缺，从大隋受命以来，应该用新的礼乐，另外修定七始，名叫《乐府声调》，总共八篇。
English: Translator Zheng believed that the seven tones of the Northern Zhou Dynasty were no longer needed, and since the Great Sui Dynasty was ordered, it was necessary to use a new ritual music, and to revise the seven beginnings, called the "Music Hall Tone," a total of eight pieces.

古文：奏之，上嘉美焉。
现代文：上奏皇上，皇上赞扬了他。
English: The Emperor praised him.

古文：俄迁岐州刺史。在职岁余，复奉诏定乐于太常，前后所论乐事，语在《音律志》。
现代文：不久郑译升任岐州刺史，在任一年多，又奉诏回京到太常制定音乐。他前后所论音乐之事，都记在《音律志》里。
English: Soon after, Zheng Ling was promoted to the post of Qizhou music historian, and he stayed there for more than a year. He was also ordered to return to Beijing to work out music. All the things he discussed about music are recorded in the "Music History."

古文：上劳译曰： 律令则公定之，音乐则公正之。
现代文：皇上慰劳郑译说： 律令是你定的，音乐又是你校正的。
English: The emperor comforted Zheng Rong and said, "You set the precepts, and you calibrate the music.

古文：礼乐律令，公居其三，良足美也。 
现代文：礼、乐、律、令，你定了三种，的确值得赞美呀！ 
English: Ritual, music, law, order, you have set three kinds, really worthy of praise!

古文：于是还岐州。
现代文：于是回到岐州任上去。
English: So he returned to Qizhou to take up the post.

古文：开皇十一年，以疾卒官，时年五十二，上遣使吊祭焉。
现代文：开皇十一年，因病在官任上去世，时年五十二岁。皇上派使者去吊唁他。
English: In the eleventh year of the emperor's reign, he died of illness in office, at the age of fifty-two. The emperor sent an envoy to mourn him.

古文：○柳裘
现代文：○柳裘
English: ○Ryuko

古文：柳裘，字茂和，河东解人，齐司空世隆之曾孙也。
现代文：柳裘字茂和，河东解人，是齐朝司空柳世隆的曾孙。
English: Liu Qiu Zi Maowa, a scholar from Hedong, was the great-grandson of Qi Dynasty scholar Liu Shilong.

古文：祖惔，梁尚书左仆射。
现代文：祖父柳琰是梁朝的尚书左仆射。
English: Grandfather Liu Ye was a disciple of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：父明，太子舍人、义兴太守。
现代文：父亲柳明，太子舍人、义兴太守。
English: His father, Liu Ming, was crown prince, and his father, Yixing, was crown prince.

古文：裘少聪慧，弱冠有令名，在梁仕历尚书郎、驸马都尉。
现代文：柳裘年少时就很聪明，一二十岁就有美名，在梁朝时曾先后做过尚书郎、驸马都尉。
English: When Liu Qiu was young, he was very clever. At the age of ten or twenty, he had a good reputation. During the Liang Dynasty, he had successively served as Shang Shulong and Xingma Duifeng.

古文：梁元帝为魏军所逼，遣裘请和于魏。
现代文：梁元帝被北魏军队包围时，派遣柳裘到魏朝救和。
English: When Emperor Liang Yuan was besieged by the Northern Wei army, he sent Liu Qiu to the Wei Dynasty to bring peace.

古文：俄而江陵陷，遂入关中。
现代文：不久江陵沦陷，柳裘于是到关中。
English: Soon after, Gangneung fell, and Liu Qiu went to Guanzhong.

古文：周明、武间，自麟趾学士累迁太子侍读，封昌乐县侯。后除天官府都上士。
现代文：北周明帝、武帝年间，柳裘从麟趾学士一直升到太子侍读，封为昌东县侯，后升天官府都上士。
English: During the Northern Zhou, Ming and Wudi dynasties, Liu Qiu rose from a scholar to an attendant of the crown prince, was appointed as a marquis of Changdong County, and later became a staff sergeant of the government.

古文：宣帝即位，拜仪同三司，进爵为公，转御饰大夫。
现代文：周宣帝即位，拜柳裘为仪同三司，由昌乐县侯加封为昌乐县公，转任御史大夫。
English: Emperor Zhou Xuan ascended to the throne, and Bai Liuqiu was appointed to the Third Division. He was promoted from the Hou Jiafeng of Changle County to the Prince of Changle County, and was transferred to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：及帝不悆，留侍禁中，与刘昉、韦、皇甫绩同谋，引高祖入总万机。
现代文：等到周宣帝无力临朝时，柳裘留在宫中，与刘日方、韦、皇甫绩同谋，召高祖总理朝政。
English: When Emperor Zhou Xuan was too weak to come to the imperial court, Liu Qiu stayed in the palace and conspired with Liu Yifang, Wei and the emperor to summon Premier Gao Zu to the imperial court.

古文：高祖固让不许。
现代文：高祖坚决推辞。
English: Gaozu resolutely refused.

古文：裘进曰： 时不可再，机不可失，今事已然，宜早定大计。
现代文：柳裘进言说： 机不可失，时不再来，事情已经这样，应早定大计。
English: Liu Qiu Jin said: The opportunity must not be lost, the time will not come again, the situation is already like this, we should make a plan in advance.

古文：天与不取，反受其咎，如更迁延，恐贻后悔。 
现代文：上天给您您不去拿，反受惩罚，假如犹豫不决，恐怕贻误时机而后悔不及。 
English: If you do not take it, you will be punished. If you hesitate, you may miss the opportunity and regret it.

古文：高祖从之。
现代文：高祖听从了柳裘的建议。
English: Gaozu listened to him.

古文：进位上开府，拜内史大夫，委以机密。
现代文：升柳裘为上开府，拜内史大夫，委之以机密大事。
English: Shou Liu Qiu was appointed as the head of the cabinet, and Dr. Baineshi was entrusted with confidential matters.

古文：及尉迥作乱，天下骚动，并州总管李穆颇怀犹豫，高祖令裘往喻之。裘见穆，盛陈利害，穆甚悦，遂归心于高祖。
现代文：等到尉迟迥反叛时，天下骚乱，并州总管李穆五心不定，高祖令柳裘去劝说李穆，柳裘拜见李穆，晓之以利害，李穆大喜，于是归附高祖。
English: When Li Shizhen rebelled, the world was in turmoil, and the state general manager, Li Mu, was indecisive. Gaozu ordered Liu Qiu to persuade Li Mu, Liu Qiu to meet Li Mu, Liu Qiu saw Li Mu's interests, Li Mu was overjoyed, and then he was attached to Gaozu.

古文：后以奉使功，赐彩三百匹，金九环带一腰。
现代文：后柳裘因出使有功，高祖赐他彩缎三百匹、金九环带一腰。
English: After Liu Qiu's successful mission, Gao Zu gave him three hundred colored horses and nine gold rings to wear around his waist.

古文：时司马消难阻兵安陆，又令喻之，未到而消难奔陈。
现代文：当时司马消难屯兵安陆，高祖又令柳裘去游说司马消难，柳裘未到时司马消难已投靠陈朝。
English: At that time, Sima Qishan sent soldiers to settle down, and Gaozu also ordered Liu Qiu to lobby for Sima Qishan. Before Liu Qiu arrived, Sima Qishan had already defected to the Chen Dynasty.

古文：高祖即令裘随便安集淮南，赐马及杂物。
现代文：高祖就令柳裘留在淮南作官，赏赐许多马匹和杂物。
English: Gaozu ordered Liu Qiu to remain in Huainan as an official, and rewarded him with many horses and miscellaneous goods.

古文：开皇元年，进位大将军，拜许州刺史。
现代文：开皇元年，柳裘进位大将军，拜为许州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, Liu Qiu was promoted to the rank of general. He was revered as the founder of Xuzhou.

古文：在官清简，吏民怀之。
现代文：柳裘为官清廉，官吏和百姓都拥戴他。
English: Liu Qiu is a clean and honest official, and both officials and ordinary people support him.

古文：复转曹州刺史。
现代文：后调任曹州刺史。
English: Later, he was transferred to Caozhou Jishi.

古文：其后上思裘定策功，欲加荣秩，将征之，顾问朝臣曰： 曹州刺史何当入朝？ 
现代文：这以后高祖想起柳裘定策的大功，想给他加官晋爵，将要征召他时，高祖回头问朝中大臣说： 曹州刺史柳裘什么时候入朝？ 
English: After this, Gaozu thought of Liu Qiu's great contribution to the policy and wanted to give him a promotion. When he was about to be conscripted, Gaozu turned to the Minister of the Middle Kingdom and asked, "When will Caozhou assassin Liu Qiu enter the court?"

古文：或对曰： 即今冬也。 
现代文：有大臣回答说： 今年冬天。 
English: One minister replied: "This winter."

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：高祖于是作罢。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：裘寻卒，高祖伤惜者久之，谥曰安。子惠童嗣。
现代文：不久柳裘去世，高祖悲伤了很久，谥他 安 ，儿子柳惠继承爵禄。
English: Soon after, Liu Qiu passed away, Gao Zu grieved for a long time, and his son Liu Hui inherited the peerage.

古文：○皇甫绩韦纮
现代文：○皇甫绩韦纮
English: ○Emperor's tribute to Wei Wei

古文：皇甫绩，字功明，安定朝那人也。
现代文：皇甫绩字功明，安定朝那人。
English: The crown prince is a man of distinguished achievements and a stable government.

古文：祖穆，魏陇东太守。
现代文：祖父皇甫穆，魏国的陇东太守。
English: His grandfather, Emperor Fumu, was the governor of Eastern Wei.

古文：父道，周湖州刺史、雍州都督。
现代文：父亲皇甫道，北周的湖州刺史、雍州都督。
English: His father, Emperor Fudo, was the ruler of Huzhou and the governor of Yongzhou in Northern Zhou.

古文：绩三岁而孤，为外祖韦孝宽所鞠养。
现代文：皇甫绩三岁就成了孤儿，为外祖父韦孝宽所养育。
English: He became an orphan at the age of three and was raised by his maternal grandfather, Wei Xiaokuan.

古文：尝与诸外兄博奕，孝宽以其惰业，督以严训，愍绩孤幼，特舍之。
现代文：他曾与诸位表兄下棋，韦孝宽因他懒于学业，对他很严，但可怜他是孤儿，年纪又小，特别原谅他。
English: He used to play chess with your cousins. Wei Xiaokuan was very strict with him because he was lazy in his studies, but he pitied him because he was an orphan and young, and he especially forgave him.

古文：绩叹曰： 我无庭训，养于外氏，不能克躬励己，何以成立？ 
现代文：皇甫绩叹气说： 我没有父母教训，养在外祖父家，如不克己律己，自我勉励，怎能成人？ 
English: Empress Dowager Cixi sighed and said, "I did not learn from my parents and was raised by my grandfather. If I do not practice self-discipline and self-improvement, how can I become an adult?"

古文：深自感激，命左右自杖三十。
现代文：他十分激动，让别人打他三十棍子。
English: He was so excited that he let someone beat him with thirty sticks.

古文：孝宽闻而对之流涕。
现代文：孝宽听说此事，对着他流泪。
English: When Takahiro heard about this, he burst into tears.

古文：于是精心好学，略涉经史。
现代文：他于是精心好学，略涉经书史书。
English: Therefore, he was meticulously eager to learn and dabbled in the study of scriptures and history books.

古文：周武帝为鲁公时，引为侍读。
现代文：北周武帝在当鲁公时，引皇甫绩为侍读。
English: When Emperor Zhouwu of the North was the Duke of Lu, he invited Emperor Feng Rong to read for him.

古文：建德初，转宫尹中士。
现代文：建德初，他转任宫尹中士。
English: At the beginning of Jian De, he was transferred to Sergeant Gong Yin.

古文：武帝尝避暑云阳宫，时宣帝为太子监国。
现代文：周武帝曾在云阳宫避暑，当时周宣帝为太子、监国。
English: Zhou Wudi used to spend the summer at Yunyang Palace when Zhou Xuandi was crown prince and overseer of the country.

古文：卫剌王作乱，城门已闭，百僚多有遁者。
现代文：卫刺王造反作乱，京城城门已关上了，百官多有逃遁者。
English: King Vesak rebelled and caused a riot, the gates of the capital were closed, and more than a hundred officials fled.

古文：绩闻难赴之，于玄武门遇皇太子，太子下楼执绩手，悲喜交集。
现代文：皇甫绩听说大难，急忙赴难，在玄武门遇上皇太子。太子下楼来，拉着皇甫绩的手，悲喜交集。
English: When the Empress Dowager heard of the great calamity, she hurried to the scene of the calamity and met the Crown Prince at the Xuanwu Gate. The Prince came down the stairs, took the Empress Dowager's hand, and the two of them were sad and happy at the same time.

古文：帝闻而嘉之，迁小宫尹。
现代文：武帝听说此事，嘉奖皇甫绩，升他为小宫尹。
English: When Emperor Wu heard about this, he commended the Emperor's achievement and promoted him to the highest rank of Xiaoguyin.

古文：宣政初，录前后功，封义阳县男，拜畿伯下大夫，累转御正下大夫。
现代文：宣政初，录他前后功勋，封他为义阳县男爵，授他为几伯下大夫，累功转任为御正下大夫。
English: At the beginning of the proclamation of the Republic of China, his achievements were recorded, he was made a baron of Yiyang County, he was awarded the title of Jibei Lower Doctor, and he was transferred to the title of Imperial Lower Doctor.

古文：宣帝崩，高祖总己，绩有力焉，语在《郑译传》。
现代文：周宣帝去世后，隋高祖总理万机，皇甫绩对此有功，这事记载在《郑译传》里。
English: After the death of Zhou Xuandi, Sui Gao Zu, the prime minister of Wanji, the empress Dowager, contributed to this, which is recorded in the "Zheng Translation."

古文：加位上开府，转内史中大夫，进封郡公，邑千户。
现代文：升为上开府，转任内史中大夫，晋爵为郡公爵，食邑千户。
English: He was promoted to Shangkaifu, transferred to the post of doctor of internal history, promoted to the rank of county duke, and became the head of a thousand households.

古文：寻拜大将军。
现代文：不久授他为大将军。
English: He was soon promoted to general.

古文：开皇元年，出为豫州刺史，增邑通前二千五百户。
现代文：开皇元年，出京任豫州刺史，增加食邑，连前总共二千五百户。
English: In the first year of the emperor's reign, he went to Beijing to serve as a historian of Yuzhou and increased the number of food villages, bringing the total to 2,500.

古文：寻拜都官尚书。
现代文：继而授他为都官尚书。
English: Subsequently, he was awarded the title of Metropolitan.

古文：后数载，转晋州刺史，将之官，稽首而言曰： 臣实庸鄙，无益于国，每思犯难以报国恩。
现代文：几年后，转任晋州刺史。将赴任，跪拜高祖说： 我实在平庸，见识浅，对国家无益。因此常想赴难以报国家的大恩。
English: A few years later, he was transferred to the post of Jinzhou chief historian. When he was about to take up the post, he bowed down to Gao Zu and said, "I am really mediocre, my knowledge is shallow, and I am of no benefit to the country. Therefore, I often want to go there, but it is difficult to report the great benefit of the country."

古文：今伪陈尚存，以臣度之，有三可灭。 
现代文：现在陈国还在，按我看来，有三个条件，可以灭他。 
English: Now that Chen Guo is still alive, in my opinion, there are three conditions that can destroy him.

古文：上问其故， 绩答曰： 大吞小，一也；以有道伐无道，二也；纳叛臣萧岩，于我有词，三也。
现代文：皇上问其缘故，皇甫绩回答说： 以大吞小，这是一；以有道伐无道，这是二；接纳陈国的叛臣萧岩，对我国有供词，这是三。
English: The Emperor asked the reason for this, and the Empress Dowager replied: To be too big or too small, this is one; to have a way or no way, this is two; to accept the traitor of Chen Guo, Xiao Yan, and to have him confess to our country, this is three.

古文：陛下若命鹰扬之将，臣请预戎行，展丝发之效。 
现代文：陛下若命鹰扬之将，我请求参加其中，出点头发丝那么大的小力。 
English: Your Majesty, if you are destined to be the leader of the eagle's ascent, I beg you to take part in it, and to produce a small force as big as a hair strand.

古文：上嘉其壮志，劳而遣之。
现代文：皇上嘉奖其壮志，慰劳他，而打发他去。
English: The emperor commended his great ambition, consoled him, and sent him on his way.

古文：及陈平，拜苏州刺史。
现代文：平定陈国后，授他为苏州刺史。
English: After subduing Chen Guo, he was awarded the title of Suzhou Historian.

古文：高智慧等作乱江南，州民顾子元发兵应之，因以攻绩，相持八旬。
现代文：高智慧等人在江南造反，苏州州民顾子元发兵响应，因此让他进攻皇甫绩。两边相持了八十天。
English: Gao Zhizhong and others rebelled in the south of the Yangtze River, and Gu Zi Yuan, a citizen of Suzhou, sent troops in response, so he attacked the emperor. The two sides held each other for eighty days.

古文：皇天辅仁，假手朝廷，聊申薄伐，应时瓦解。
现代文：顾子元一向感激皇甫绩的恩典，在冬至日，派人送上牛肉和酒。皇甫绩在给顾子元的信里说： 皇上承受天命，与神灵相通，受禅于北周，抛弃干戈。
English: Gu Zi Yuan had always been grateful for the grace of Emperor Fuxi. On the winter solstice, he sent someone to bring him beef and wine. In a letter to Gu Zi Yuan, Emperor Fuxi said, "The emperor has received the mandate of heaven, has communed with the gods, has meditated in the northern Zhou, and has abandoned war.

古文：金陵百姓，死而复生，吴、会臣民，白骨还肉。唯当怀音感德，行歌击壤，岂宜自同吠主，翻成反噬。
现代文：大隋国东边超过了蟠木，东方朔也未去过；西边包括了流沙，张骞都没去过；北边到黄龙府之外，与各酋长来往；南边到了葱岭、榆关，那里的百姓下跪，请求派官吏去治理。金陵的百姓，死而复生；吴郡、会稽的臣民，白骨上又出生了肉。你们只应感恩戴德，放声歌唱，怎能够自比疯狗，反咬主人。
English: The eastern side of the Great Sui Kingdom exceeded the birch trees, and the eastern side has not been visited; the west side includes the quicksand, and Zhang Ye has not been there; the north side went to Huanglongfu and visited with the chiefs; the south side went to Qiuling and Shaoguan, where the people knelt down and asked for officials to be sent to govern. The people of Jinling were resurrected from the dead; the subjects of Wu County and the audit committee had meat born on their white bones. You should only be grateful and sing loudly, how can you compare yourself to a mad dog and bite your master.

古文：卿非吾民，何须酒礼？
现代文：你不是我的臣民，何必尽上酒之礼？
English: You're not my subject, why do you have to drink?

古文：吾是隋将，何容外交？
现代文：我是大隋国的将领，何必与你搞外交？
English: I am the general of the great Sui Dynasty, why should I engage in diplomacy with you?

古文：易子析骸，未能相告，况是足食足兵，高城深堑，坐待强援，绰有余力。何劳踵轻敝之俗，作虚伪之辞，欲阻诚臣之心，徒惑骁雄之志。
现代文：即便是易子析骸，也未能相告，何况你是足食足兵，高城深沟，你只需坐待援兵，对付我就绰绰有余了，何必劳你学着轻薄的风俗，说些假话，想阻拦我这个忠臣的心，白白地想迷惑我军骁雄的大志呢？
English: Even the remains of Yi Zi could not communicate with him. What's more, you are a foot soldier, and Gaocheng is a deep ditch. You only need to wait for reinforcements, which is more than enough to deal with me. Why do you bother to learn frivolous customs, tell some lies, want to block the heart of me, a loyal subject, and in vain want to confuse the ambition of our army's hero?

古文：以此见期，必不可得。
现代文：想用这些来指望我们放了你，那是不可能的。
English: You can't use that to expect us to let you go.

古文：卿宜善思活路，晓谕黎元，能早改迷，失道非远。 
现代文：你要好好地想想你的活路，并晓谕百姓，如能迷途知返，现在还不晚。 
English: Think well of your way of life, and tell the people that it is not too late to turn back.

古文：子元得书，于城下顿首陈谢。
现代文：顾子元得到书信，就在城下叩头认罪。
English: When Gu Zi Yuan received the letter, he bowed down and confessed under the castle.

古文：杨素援兵至，合击破之。
现代文：杨素的援兵也到了，合兵打破了叛军。
English: Yang Su's reinforcements also arrived, and together they defeated the rebels.

古文：拜信州总管、十二州诸军事。
现代文：授皇甫绩为信州总管、十二州诸军事。
English: The emperor was awarded the title of Shinshu chancellor, and the twelve states were awarded the title of military.

古文：高祖以有定策之功，累迁上柱国，封普安郡公。
现代文：不久因病请求退休，有诏调他回京，赐他御药。宫中的使者去看望他，络绎不绝，相望于道。
English: He soon asked to retire due to illness, and was sent back to the capital by imperial edict, and given imperial medicine. Emissaries from the imperial court visited him incessantly, looking forward to his return.

古文：开皇初，卒于蒲州刺史。
现代文：在家中去世，时年五十二岁。谥号叫 安 。
English: She died at home at the age of fifty-two. Her nickname was Ann.

古文：○卢贲
现代文：他儿子皇甫亻思继承爵位。
English: His son, Emperor Fuxi, succeeded to the title.

古文：卢贲，字子徵，涿郡范阳人也。
现代文：大业年中，皇甫亻思官至尚书主爵郎。
English: In the middle of his great career, he rose from the position of imperial tutor to the rank of scholar.

古文：父光，周开府、燕郡公。
现代文：○卢贲卢贲字子征，涿郡范阳人。父亲卢光，北周国的开府、燕郡公。
English: ○ Lu Quan Lu Quan Zi Zheng, a resident of Fanyang County, Zou County. His father, Lu Guang, was the governor of Yan County, Kaifu, North Zhou Province.

古文：贲略涉书记，颇解钟律。
现代文：卢贲略略读了点书，对音律颇有所知。
English: Lu Yao skimmed through some books and knew quite a bit about music theory.

古文：周武帝时，袭爵燕郡公，邑一千九百户。
现代文：北周武帝时，卢贲袭爵为燕郡公，食邑一千九百户。
English: At the time of the Northern Zhouwu Emperor, Lu Qianjie was the governor of Yan County, with a total of nineteen hundred households.

古文：后历鲁阳太守、太子小宫尹、仪同三司。
现代文：后来历任鲁阳太守、太子小宫尹、仪同三司。
English: Later, he successively served as the Governor of Luyang, the Crown Prince Xiaogu Yin, and the Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：平齐有功，增邑四百户，转司武上士。
现代文：平定北齐有功，增加食邑四百户，转任司武上士。
English: He contributed to the pacification of Northern Qi, increased the number of food villages by 400, and was transferred to the post of Senior Sergeant.

古文：时高祖为大司武，贲知高祖为非常人，深自推结。
现代文：当时隋高祖为大司武，卢贲知道高祖是非常人物，与他深深地交结。
English: At that time, Sui Gaozu was Daishi Wu, and Lu Wei knew that Gaozu was a very important person and had a deep connection with him.

古文：宣帝嗣位，加开府。
现代文：周宣帝继位后，加授卢贲开府。
English: After Zhou Xuandi succeeded to the throne, Lu Rongkai Prefecture was awarded.

古文：及高祖初被顾托，群情未一，乃引贲置于左右。
现代文：高祖刚受宣帝托付总理朝政时，群情还不一致。高祖就把卢贲引到自己身边。
English: When Gaozu had just been entrusted by Emperor Xuan to be the prime minister of the dynasty, the feelings of the group were still inconsistent. Gaozu brought Lu Xun to his side.

古文：高祖将之东第，百官皆不知所去。
现代文：高祖将到东宫去，文武百官都不知他的去向。
English: Gaozhu will go to the East Palace, and all the civil and military officials do not know where he is going.

古文：高祖潜令贲部伍仗卫，因召公卿而谓曰： 欲求富贵者，当相随来。 
现代文：高祖悄悄地让卢贲部署人马，然后召来百官，对他们说： 想求富贵的，就跟我来。 
English: Gaozu quietly asked Lu Yao to deploy men and horses, and then summoned hundreds of officials and said to them: "If you want to be rich, come with me."

古文：往往偶语，欲有去就。
现代文：大臣们议论纷纷，有的想跟着去，有的想离开。
English: The court nobles and ministers conferred privately in twos and threes. Some expressed their willingness to follow Yang Jian, while others wanted to remain in the imperial court.

古文：贲严兵而至，众莫敢动。
现代文：卢贲率兵赶到，大臣都不敢动。
English: At this time, Lu Xun arrived with a fully armed bodyguard, and none of the nobles and ministers dared to leave.

古文：出崇阳门，至东宫，门者拒不内。
现代文：高祖出崇阳门，到了东宫，东宫守门的卫士不让进去。
English: Gao Zu went out of the Chongyang Gate and arrived at the East Palace. The guards of the East Palace did not allow him to enter.

古文：贲谕之，不去，瞋目叱之，门者遂却。
现代文：卢贲晓谕他们，仍不行。卢贲张目呵斥，卫士才让开。
English: Lu Xun still could not speak to them. Lu Xun opened his eyes and rebuked them, and the guards moved away.

古文：既而高祖得入。
现代文：继而高祖才得进东宫。
English: Subsequently, Gao Zu was able to enter the East Palace.

古文：贲恆典宿卫，后承问，进说曰： 周历已尽，天人之望，实归明公，愿早应天顺民也。
现代文：卢贲总是守卫在高祖身边。后高祖问他，他说： 周朝的气数已完了，天人之望，实归于明公您。望早点应天顺民。
English: Lu Wei always stood guard at Gao Zu's side. After Gao Zu asked him, he said: Zhou Dynasty's Qigong has been completed, and it is the will of the gods that it should be done by you, Ming Gong. It is in accordance with the will of the gods that it should be done early.

古文：天与不取，反受其咎。 
现代文：天给您，您不要，就会反受其咎。 
English: If you don't, it will be your own fault.

古文：高祖甚然之。
现代文：高祖深以为然。
English: Gao Zu was deeply convinced.

古文：及受禅，命贲清宫，因典宿卫。
现代文：高祖受禅后，命卢贲清点宫中，主管守卫。
English: After Gaozhu received Zen, he ordered Lu Wei to clear the palace, supervising the guards.

古文：贲于是奏改周代旗帜，更为嘉名。
现代文：卢贲于是上奏，更改周代的旗帜，另取好名。
English: Lu Wei then played up, changed the banner of the Zhou Dynasty, and took another good name.

古文：其青龙、驺虞、硃雀、玄武、千秋、万岁之旗，皆贲所创也。
现代文：其青龙旗、驺虞旗、朱雀旗、玄武旗、千秋旗、万岁旗等旗名，都是卢贲取的名。
English: The names of its flags, such as the Blue Dragon Flag, the Yellow Dragon Flag, the Red Sparrow Flag, the Genbu Flag, the Autumn Festival Flag, and the Long Live Flag, are all names taken from Lu Xun.

古文：寻拜散骑常侍，兼太子左庶子、左领军、右将军。
现代文：不久授他散骑常侍，兼任太子左庶子、左领军、右将军。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Sanzhi (free-riding) regular attendant, and also served as the Prince's left illegitimate son, the left leader, and the right general.

古文：时高颎、苏威共掌朝政，贲甚不平之。
现代文：当时高赹、苏威共掌朝政，卢贲心里很不服气。
English: At that time, Gao Wei and Su Wei were in charge of the imperial government, and Lu Wei was very dissatisfied.

古文：柱国刘昉时被疏忌，贲因讽昉及上柱国元谐、李询、华州刺史张宾等，谋黜颎、威，五人相与辅政。
现代文：柱国刘日方当时被疏远猜忌，卢贲因此劝上柱国元谐、李询、华州刺史张宾等人，谋划废了高赹、苏威，五个人共同辅佐朝政。
English: At that time, Liu Ni, the pillar state, was alienated and distrusted. Lu Xun therefore persuaded Yuan Xian, Li Ying, and Zhang Bin, the scribe of Huazhou, the pillar state, to cancel the plan of Gao Jun and Su Wei, and the five people jointly assisted the imperial government.

古文：又以晋王上之爱子，谋行废立。
现代文：又因晋王杨广是皇上的爱子，谋划废立太子。
English: Also, because Yang Guang, the king of Jin, was the emperor's favorite son, they planned to abolish the position of crown prince.

古文：复私谓皇太子曰： 贲将数谒殿下，恐为上所谴，愿察区区之心。 
现代文：又私下里对皇太子说： 卢贲想拜谒殿下，又怕皇上谴责，请明白我的区区之心。 
English: She also said to the crown prince in private, "If Lu Xun wants to pay homage to Your Royal Highness, but is afraid of the emperor's condemnation, please understand my feelings.

古文：谋泄，上穷治其事。
现代文：计谋泄露，皇上穷追此事。
English: When the plot was leaked, the Emperor pursued the matter.

古文：昉等委罪于宾、贲，公卿奏二人坐当死。
现代文：刘日方等人把罪过全推在张宾、卢贲身上。大臣们上疏要处死这两个人。
English: Liu Yifang and others put all the blame on Zhang Bin and Lu Yao. The ministers wanted to put these two people to death.

古文：上以龙潜之旧，不忍加诛，并除名为民。
现代文：皇上因他们是创业登基前的朋友，不忍心杀他们，把他们都削职为民。
English: Because they were friends before he ascended to the throne, the emperor did not have the heart to kill them and had them all dismissed.

古文：宾未几卒。
现代文：张宾不久就死了。
English: Zhang Bin died soon after.

古文：岁余，贲复爵位，检校太常卿。
现代文：一年多后，卢贲恢复爵位，任检校太常卿。
English: More than a year later, Lu Wei was reinstated as a peer and appointed as the chief inspector of schools.

古文：贲以古乐宫悬七八，损益不同，历代通儒，议无定准，于是上表曰： 殷人以上，通用五音，周武克殷，得鹑火、天驷之应，其音用七。
现代文：卢贲因古乐宫悬七八，损益不同，历代的通儒，又没个一致的说法，于是上表说： 殷商人以前，通行用五音。周武王灭商，得到鹑火、天驷之应，其音于是用七种。
English: Lu Xun, because of the ancient Le Palace, had seven or eight of them, and the profit and loss were different, and the Confucianists of all ages did not have a consistent saying, so the above table said: Before the merchants of Yin, the five tones were used. When King Zhou Wu killed the merchants, he received the bonfire and the divine command, so he used seven kinds of sounds.

古文：汉兴，加应钟，故十六枚而在一虡。
现代文：汉代，又加上应钟，所以十六枚而在一。
English: In the Han Dynasty, the bell was added, so there were sixteen pieces in one.

古文：郑玄注《周礼》，二八十六为虡。
现代文：郑玄注《周礼》，以二八十六为。
English: Zheng Xuan's annotation of "Weekly Rituals" starts with 286.

古文：此则七八之义，其来远矣。
现代文：这样，那么七音、八音的意义，由来很久远了啊。
English: In this way, the meaning of the seven and eight tones has been around for a long time.

古文：然世有沿革，用舍不同，至周武帝，复改悬七，以林钟为宫。
现代文：但世有沿革，取舍不同。到了北周武帝，又改为用七音，以林钟为宫。
English: However, the world has a history, and the choice is different. When the Northern Zhouwu Emperor came, it was changed to use seven tones, with Lin Zhong as the palace.

古文：夫乐者，治之本也，故移风易俗，莫善于乐，是以吴札观而辩兴亡。
现代文：那音乐，是治天下的根本，所以移风易俗，没有比音乐更好的。因此吴公子季札观乐而辨别兴亡。
English: That music is the foundation of ruling the world, so there is nothing better than music to change customs. Therefore, Wu Gongzi began to watch music to distinguish the rise and fall.

古文：然则乐也者，所以动天地，感鬼神，情发于声，治乱斯应。
现代文：那么，音乐是动天地、感鬼神的。情发于心中，变为声音，治乱就会相应表现出来。
English: Well, music is moving heaven and earth, touching ghosts and spirits. Emotions are in the heart, become sound, and chaos will be expressed accordingly.

古文：周武以林钟为宫，盖将亡之徵也。
现代文：北周武帝以林钟为宫，大概是周代将亡的征兆。
English: The Northern Zhouwu Emperor used Lin Zhong as his palace, which is probably a sign of Zhou's impending death.

古文：且林钟之管，即黄钟下生之义。黄钟，君也，而生于臣，明为皇家九五之应。
现代文：而且林钟是黄钟派生的。黄钟是君，而在臣之下，明明是大隋得天下的征兆。
English: Moreover, Lin Zhong is a descendant of Huang Zhong. Huang Zhong is Jun, and under the minister, it is clearly a sign that the Great Sui Dynasty has won the world.

古文：又阴者臣也，而居君位，更显国家登极之祥。
现代文：又，阴是臣，而居君位，更显出我隋皇帝登基的吉祥。
English: Moreover, the fact that Yin is a vassal, while he holds the throne, shows the auspiciousness of the Sui Emperor's ascension to the throne.

古文：斯实冥数相符，非关人事。
现代文：这实在是冥冥之中的事与人事相符，与一般的人事无关。
English: This is really a matter of coincidence and personnel, and has nothing to do with general personnel.

古文：伏惟陛下握图御宇，道迈前王，功成作乐，焕乎曩策。
现代文：伏请陛下治理天下，道逾前王，功成作乐，比以前更加灿烂。
English: His Majesty is invited to rule the world, surpassing the previous king, and his achievements are even more brilliant than before.

古文：臣闻五帝不相沿乐，三王不相袭礼，此盖随时改制，而不失雅正者也。 
现代文：我听说，五帝不相沿袭音乐，三王不相沿袭礼仪，这大概是因为要随时改制，而不失雅正之道。 
English: I heard that the Five Emperors did not follow the music, and the Three Kings did not follow the etiquette. This is probably because they want to change the system at any time without losing the elegance.

古文：上竟从之，即改七悬八，以黄钟为宫。
现代文：皇上最后听了他的，就改七音为八音，以黄钟为宫。
English: When the emperor finally listened to him, he changed the seven tones to eight tones, using the yellow bell as the palace.

古文：诏贲与仪同杨庆和删定周、齐音律。
现代文：有诏令卢贲与仪同杨庆和删定北周、北齐音律。
English: There was an imperial edict ordering Lu Xuan and Yi Tong Yang Qinghe to delete and define the Northern Zhou and Northern Qi musical rhythms.

古文：未几，拜郢州刺史，寻转虢州刺史。
现代文：不久，授卢贲为郢州刺史，继而转任虢州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Luzhou Provincial Historian, and then he was transferred to the post of Luzhou Provincial Historian.

古文：后迁怀州刺史，决沁水东注，名曰利民渠，又派入温县，名曰温润渠，以溉舄卤，民赖其利。
现代文：后任怀州刺史，挖沁水东流，名叫 利民渠 。又流入温县，名叫 温润渠 ，以灌溉盐碱地，百姓靠渠得利。
English: Later, he became the chief historian of Waizhou and dug the east stream of the Yunnan River, called the Li Min Canal. It also flowed into Wenshan County, called the Wenrun Canal, to irrigate saline and alkaline land, and the people gained profits by relying on the canal.

古文：后数年，转齐州刺史。
现代文：几年后，转任齐州刺史。
English: A few years later, he was transferred to the post of chief historian of Qizhou.

古文：民饥，谷米踊贵，闭人粜而自粜之。坐是除名为民。
现代文：百姓闹饥荒，粮价猛涨。卢贲不让别人卖粮，但自己却去卖，因此被削职为民。
English: The people were starving, and grain prices were soaring. Lu Wei did not allow others to sell grain, but he went to sell it himself, and as a result, he was removed from his position as the people's representative.

古文：后从幸洛阳，上从容谓贲曰： 我始为大司马时，卿以布腹心于我。
现代文：后来，卢贲随皇上到东都洛阳。皇上闲谈时对卢贲说： 我刚当大司马的时候，你对我推心置腹。
English: Later, Lu Wei followed the emperor to Luoyang, the eastern capital. When chatting with Lu Wei, the emperor said: When I was just the grand steward, you put your heart and soul into me.

古文：及总百揆，频繁左右，与卿足为恩旧。
现代文：我当丞相后，你常在我身边。我与你可以说是老朋友了。
English: After I became prime minister, you were often by my side. You could say that I am an old friend of yours.

古文：卿若无过者，位与高颎齐。
现代文：你若没有过错，地位当与高赹相同。
English: If you are not at fault, your status should be the same as that of a high roller.

古文：坐与凶人交构，由是废黜。
现代文：因你与叛逆交好，因此废了你。
English: Because you consorted with a traitor, you're out.

古文：言念畴昔之恩，复当牧伯之位，何乃不思报效，以至于此！
现代文：但我念你往日的交情，又恢复你当州牧的地位，你怎么不思报效，到了这种地步？
English: But when I read about your past friendship and the restoration of your status as a state pastor, how come you don't want to return the favor, to this extent?

古文：吾不忍杀卿，是屈法申私耳。 
现代文：我不忍心杀你，这是枉法行私罢了。 
English: I don't have the heart to kill you, it would be a waste of my time.

古文：贲俯伏陈谢，诏复本官。
现代文：卢贲拜伏谢罪，有诏恢复原职。
English: Lu Rongbai was punished for the crime of Fuxie, and was reinstated to his former position.

古文：后数日，对诏失旨，又自叙功绩，有怨言。
现代文：几天后，与皇上交谈时，有违皇上旨意。他又自叙功绩，口出怨言。
English: A few days later, in a conversation with the emperor, he violated the emperor's will. He also recounted his exploits and complained.

古文：上大怒，顾谓群臣曰： 吾将与贲一州，观此不可复用。 
现代文：皇上大怒，对群臣们说： 我将给卢贲一个州，我看他不能再重用了！ 
English: The emperor was furious and said to his courtiers: "I will give Lu Wei one canton, I don't think he can reuse it!

古文：后皇太子为其言曰： 此辈并有佐命之功，虽性行轻险，诚不可弃。 
现代文：后来，皇太子为他说： 这些人都有佐命开国之功，虽然他们品性轻薄，但的确不能抛弃他们。 
English: Later, the crown prince said to him, "These people all contributed to the founding of the country, and although they are light-hearted, we really cannot abandon them.

古文：上曰： 我抑屈之，全其命也。
现代文：皇上说： 我抑屈他，是想保他的性命。
English: The emperor said: I suppressed him to save his life.

古文：微刘昉、郑译及贲、柳裘、皇甫绩等，则我不至此。
现代文：没有刘日方、郑译和卢贲、柳裘、皇甫绩等人，那么我就不会到今天这个样子。
English: Without the likes of Liu Yifang, Zheng Zhan, Lu Wei, Liu Qiu, and Wang Fuxi, I wouldn't be where I am today.

古文：然此等皆反覆子也。
现代文：但这些人都是反复无常的家伙。
English: But these are fickle people.

古文：当周宣帝时，以无赖得幸，及帝大渐，颜之仪等请以宗王辅政，此辈行诈，顾命于我。
现代文：在周宣帝时，他们凭着无赖而得宠。到宣帝病重时，颜之仪等人请求用宗室的王爷辅政，这些人行诈，宣帝才让我辅政。
English: At the time of Emperor Xuan of Zhou, they were favored by virtue of being scoundrels. When Emperor Xuan was gravely ill, Yan Zhi Yi and others requested that the prince of the imperial family be used to support the government. These people committed fraud, and Emperor Xuan only allowed me to support the government.

古文：我将为治，又欲乱之。
现代文：我想治天下，他们又想捣乱。
English: I want to rule the world, and they want to make trouble.

古文：故昉谋大逆于前，译为巫蛊于后。
现代文：所以刘日方谋反于前，郑译为巫惑于后。
English: Therefore, Liu and the Japanese side conspired to rebel in the past, and Zheng translated as bewitched in the past.

古文：如贲之徒，皆不满志。
现代文：像卢贲这些家伙，心里总是不满的。
English: Guys like Lu Wei are always dissatisfied in their hearts.

古文：任之则不逊，致之则怨，自难信也，非我弃之。
现代文：用他们吧，他们又不谦逊；不用吧，又会招来他们的怨恨。是他们难得让人信任，不是我抛弃他们。
English: Use them, and they are not humble; do not use them, and you will incur their hatred. They are hard to trust, I did not abandon them.

古文：众人见此，或有窃议，谓我薄于功臣，斯不然矣。 
现代文：众人见了这些，也许有人私下议论，说我对不起功臣，其实不然。 
English: When people see this, they may have a private discussion and say I'm sorry, but that's not true.

古文：苏威进曰： 汉光武欲全功臣，皆以列侯奉朝请。
现代文：苏威进言说： 汉光武帝欲保全功臣，都用列侯之位而让他们入朝。
English: Su Wei Jin said: Emperor Guangwu of Han wanted to preserve his meritorious vassals, so he used the position of vassal to let them enter the imperial court.

古文：至尊仁育，复用此道以安之。 上曰： 然。 
现代文：皇上仁爱，再用此法来安顿他们吧。 皇上说： 行。 
English: Emperor Renai, let's use this method again to settle them down.Emperor said: OK.

古文：遂废于家，是岁卒，年五十四。
现代文：于是废卢贲于家。卢贲这年去世，时年五十四岁。
English: So he left Lu Wei at home. Lu Wei died that year at the age of fifty-four.

