古文：曾子问曰： 君薨而世子生，如之何？ 
现代文：曾子问道： 国君死后灵枢停在殡宫，这时候世子诞生，该怎么行礼呢？ 
English: Zengzi asked: After the death of the king, the spiritual center stopped at the funeral hall. At this time, the heir to the throne was born. How should he bow?

古文：孔子曰： 卿、大夫？士从摄主，北面，于西阶南。
现代文：孔子回答说： 世子诞生的那天，卿、大夫、士都跟着摄主到殡宫，脸朝北，站在西阶的南面。
English: Confucius replied, "On the day of the birth of the world's son, the lord, the doctor, and the scholar all followed the cameraman to the funeral hall, facing north and standing on the south side of the west steps.

古文：大祝裨冕，执束帛，升自西阶尽等，不升堂，命毋哭。
现代文：太祝身穿裨冕，手捧束帛，从西阶往上登，登上最高的台阶，但不跨进堂内，让在场的人都不要哭泣。
English: Wearing a crown and holding a scepter in her hand, she climbed up from the west steps and ascended the highest steps, but did not step into the church, so that those present would not cry.

古文：祝声三，告曰： 某之子生，敢告。 
现代文：然后，太祝长喊三声，向灵枢享告说： 夫人某氏生了世子，特此察告。 
English: Then, Grandmother Zhu shouted three times and announced to the spiritual center: "Mrs. So-and-so has given birth to a son, and I hereby make a complaint.

古文：升，奠币于殡东几上，哭，降。
现代文：说完登堂，把束帛放在灵枢东面的几案上，哭泣一阵，然后下堂。
English: After saying that, I went into the hall, put the bundle of yarn on some cases on the east side of the spiritual center, cried for a while, and then left the hall.

古文：众主人、卿、大夫、士，房中，皆哭不踊。尽一哀，反位。
现代文：众主人、卿、大夫、士、妇女都开始哭泣，但不顿足，众人尽情哭泣一次之后，都回到平常朝夕哭的位置。
English: All the masters, lords, doctors, gentlemen, and women began to weep, but without success. After everyone had wept as much as they could, they all returned to their usual morning and evening crying positions.

古文：遂朝奠。
现代文：于是举行朝奠。
English: As a result, the Imperial Funeral Service was held.

古文：小宰升举币。三日，众主人、卿、大夫、士，如初位，北面。
现代文：礼毕，小宰走上堂，把放在几案上的束帛等祭品取下，埋在东西两阶之间。第三天，众主人、卿、大夫、士都来到殡宫，站在前天站的位置上，面向北。
English: On the third day, all the masters, lords, doctors, and nobles came to the mortuary and stood in the same position as the day before, facing north.

古文：大宰、大宗、大祝皆裨冕。
现代文：太宰、太宗、太祝都身著裨冕。
English: Dazai, Taizong, and Taizhu are all wearing crowns.

古文：少师奉子以衰；祝先，子从，宰宗人从。
现代文：少师抱着世子和孝服，太祝走在前面，少师抱着世子跟在后面，太宰、宗人又跟在世子后面。
English: The young master is holding the heir and the filial piety, the great wish is walking in front, the young master is holding the heir and following behind, the grand vizier and the patriarch are following behind the heir.

古文：入门，哭者止，子升自西阶。殡前北面。
现代文：进入殡宫的门，众人都停止哭泣。少师抱着世子从西阶登堂，走到灵枢前，面朝北而立。
English: Entering the door of the mortuary, everyone stopped crying. The young master carried his son up the west steps of the church, walked to the front of the spiritual center, and stood facing north.

古文：祝立于殡东南隅。祝声三曰： 某之子某，从执事，敢见。 
现代文：太祝则立在灵枢的东南角，长喊三声，向灵枢察告说： 夫人某氏所生世子某，让执事陪同着，特来拜见。 
English: Tai Zhu stood in the southeast corner of the spiritual center, shouted three times, and announced to the spiritual center: Mrs. So-and-so's son-in-law, let the deacon accompany you, and come to see you.

古文：子拜稽颡哭。祝、宰、宗人、众主人、卿、大夫、士，哭踊三者三，降东反位，皆袒，子踊，房中亦踊三者三。
现代文：少师抱着世子跺脚，妇女等人也跟着跺脚，也是跺三次为一节，跺够三节。然后让世子穿上孝服，拿着哭丧棒，举行朝奠。
English: The young master held the heir and stomped his feet, and the women and others also stomped their feet, and also stomped three times for one section, and three times for three sections. Then let the heir put on the filial piety clothes, hold the mourning stick, and hold the memorial service.

古文：袭衰，杖，奠出。大宰命祝史，以名遍告于五祀山川。 
现代文：礼毕，走出殡宫，太宰命令太祝、太史把世子的名字遍告五祀及山川诸神。 
English: After bowing and leaving the funeral hall, Dazai ordered Taizhu and Taishi to announce the name of the heir to the five deities and the gods of the mountains and rivers.

古文：曾子问曰： 如已葬而世子生，则如之何？ 
现代文：曾子问道： 如果国君的灵枢已埋葬而世子出生，则应当如何、行礼？ 
English: Zengzi asked: If the spirit of the sovereign has been buried and the heir has been born, how should the salute be performed?

古文：孔子曰： 大宰、大宗从大祝而告于祢。
现代文：孔子答道： 太宰、太宗跟着太祝到殡宫去向神主察告。
English: Confucius replied, "Dazai and Taizong should follow Taizhou to the funeral hall to report to God.

古文：三月，乃名于祢，以名遍告及社稷宗庙山川。 
现代文：到了三个月以后，又丢拜见神主，并给世子取名，然后把世子的名字遍告社樱、宗庙及山川诸神。
English: Three months later, he again bowed down to the Lord and gave his name to his son. He then announced his son's name to all the gods in the shrine, temple, and mountains and rivers.

古文：孔子曰： 诸侯适天子，必告于祖，奠于祢。
现代文：孔子说： 诸侯将去朝见天子，一定要在祖庙和父庙设祭察告。
English: Confucius said: Princes will go to the Imperial Court to meet the Son of Heaven, so they must set up a sacrificial notice in the ancestral temple and the father's temple.

古文：冕而出视朝，命祝史告于社稷、宗庙、山川。
现代文：然后穿上裨冕听朝，命令祝官史官告祭于社傻、宗庙、山川诸神。
English: Then he put on the crown and ordered the celebrant to offer sacrifices to the gods of the community, the ancestral temple, and the mountains and rivers.

古文：乃命国家五官而后行，道而出。
现代文：将国中事物托付给五大夫后再出发。出发的时候，还要举行祖道之祭，祈求旅途平安。
English: After entrusting the affairs of the country to the five great masters, they set off. At the time of departure, they will also hold an ancestral festival to pray for a safe journey.

古文：告者，五日而遍，过是，非礼也。
现代文：祝官和史官必须在五日之内将告祭进行完毕，超过五天，就不合礼。
English: The celebrant and the historian must complete the memorial service within five days. If it takes more than five days, it is not proper.

古文：凡告，用牲币。反，亦如之。
现代文：凡举行告祭，都以束帛为供品，返回时的告归祭祀也是如此。
English: Whenever a memorial service is held, a bundle of straw is offered as an offering, and this is also the case for the memorial service when returning home.

古文：诸侯相见，必告于祢，朝服而出视朝。命祝史告于五庙所过山川。
现代文：诸侯之间互访，也必须告祭于父庙。然后穿上朝服听朝，命令祝官、史官告祭于五庙和途经山川之神。
English: When lords and princes visit each other, they must also offer sacrifices at the father temple. Then, they put on the imperial robes to listen to the emperor, and order the celebrants and historians to offer sacrifices at the five temples and the gods of the mountains and rivers.

古文：亦命国家五官，道而出。
现代文：同样也要对留守的五大夫郑重交代一番才动身，动身之前，举行祖道之祭，以祈求旅途平安。
English: In the same way, it is necessary to make a solemn report to the five great husbands who are left behind before setting off. Before setting off, hold the ancestral festival to pray for a safe journey.

古文：反，必亲告于祖祢。
现代文：返回时，诸侯一定要亲自告祭于祖庙、父庙。
English: When returning, the princes must personally offer sacrifices at the ancestral temple and the father temple.

古文：乃命祝史告至于前所告者，而后听朝而入。 
现代文：然后命令祝官史官向出发前曾祭告过的众神举行告归之祭，然后回到朝廷听理政事。
English: He then ordered the congratulatory official historian to hold a homecoming ceremony for the gods he had preached to before setting out, and then to return to the imperial court to attend to the affairs of state.

古文：曾子问曰： 并有丧，如之何？
现代文：曾子问道： 如果有两个亲人同月而死，怎么办？
English: Zeng Zi asked: What if two relatives die in the same month?

古文：何先何后？ 
现代文：操办丧事，谁先谁后呢？ 
English: When it comes to organising a funeral, who should go first?

古文：孔子曰： 葬，先轻而后重；其奠也，先重而后轻；礼也。
现代文：孔子答道： 葬事，先埋恩轻的，后埋恩重的；祭奠，先祭恩重的，后祭恩轻的。
English: Confucius replied, "For funerals, first bury those with light grace, then those with heavy grace; for offerings, first offer those with heavy grace, then those with light grace.

古文：自启及葬，不奠，行葬不哀次；反葬奠，而后辞于殡，逐修葬事。
现代文：这是正礼。从启殡到下葬这段时间，因忙于埋葬恩轻者，所以对恩重者暂不设奠。
English: This is proper etiquette. During the period from the opening of the funeral to the burial, since people are busy burying those who have been kind to them, there will be no memorial service for those who have been kind to them.

古文：其虞也，先重而后轻，礼也。 
现代文：出葬时，灵枢经过大门外的倚庐，孝子也不在此哭踊致哀，这是因为恩重者尚停枢殡宫。
English: At the time of the funeral, the spirit of the deceased passed through the coffin outside the gate, and the filial son did not cry and dance here to mourn. This is because the benefactor still stopped at the funeral hall.

古文：孔子曰： 宗子虽七十，无无主妇；非宗子，虽无主妇可也。 
现代文：葬毕恩轻者回来后，为恩重者设奠，然后将恩重者的启殡日期告诉宾客，接着就为恩重者举行葬礼。至于葬后的虞祭，先祭恩重者，后祭恩轻者，才是正礼。 孔子说： 宗子即使已经七十岁，也不能没有主妇。
English: After returning from the funeral of a person who is kind, a funeral is held for a person who is kind, and then the guests are told the date of the funeral of the person who is kind, and then the funeral is held for the person who is kind. As for the state festival after the funeral, the first sacrifice is for the person who is kind, and the second sacrifice is for the person who is kind. Confucius said: Even if the patriarch is seventy years old, he cannot be without a housewife.

古文：曾子问曰： 将冠子，冠者至，揖让而入，闻齐衰大功之丧，如之何？ 
现代文：如果不是宗子，即使没有主妇也是可以的。 曾子问道： 将要为儿子举行加冠礼，被邀请参加冠礼的宾和赞者已经来到，并且已被以礼相迎让入庙内，这时候突然遇到齐衰或大功丧服关系的亲属的丧事，怎么办呢？ 
English: Zeng Zi asked: If there is a coronation ceremony to be held for one's son, and the guests and admirers invited to attend the ceremony have already arrived and have been ushered into the temple with formalities, what should one do when suddenly confronted with the funeral of relatives who are of the same age or who are related by death or great achievements?

古文：孔子曰： 内丧则废，外丧则冠而不醴，彻馔而扫，即位而哭。
现代文：礼毕，把行冠礼的各种陈设撤去，再把庙中打扫一下，然后按照自己和死者的关系就位而哭。
English: After bowing, remove the various furnishings of the coronation, then clean the temple, and then cry in place according to your relationship with the deceased.

古文：如冠者未至，则废。
现代文：如果被邀请参加冠礼的宾和赞者尚未来到，冠礼就停止。
English: If the guests and admirers invited to the crowning ceremony have not arrived, the crowning ceremony will be stopped.

古文：如将冠子而未及期日，而有齐衰、大功、小功之丧，则因丧服而冠。 
现代文：如果将要为儿子举行冠礼，但还没到选定的日期，主人忽然遇到了齐衰、大功、小功亲属的丧事，那就让儿子按照亲疏关系穿上相应的丧服，到时再加上丧冠。 
English: If you are going to hold a coronation for your son, but before the selected date, the owner suddenly encounters the funeral of a relative who died young, died young, or died young, then let your son wear the appropriate funeral clothes according to the relationship, and then add a funeral crown.

古文： 除丧不改冠乎？ 
现代文：曾子间道： 加丧冠的人在除丧之后是否还要补行冠礼呢？ 
English: Zeng Zima said: Does the person who adds the wreath have to perform the wreath-laying ceremony after removing the wreath?

古文：孔子曰： 天子赐诸侯大夫冕弁服于大庙，归设奠，服赐服，于斯乎有冠醮，无冠醴。
现代文：孔子答道： 天子在太庙赐给未冠的诸侯、大夫冕服、弃服，他们在回去以后，设奠察告祖宗，然后就穿戴起受赐的冠服。
English: Confucius replied, "In the Imperial Temple, the Son of Heaven bestowed crowned robes and abandoned robes on the uncrowned princes and magistrates. After they returned home, they set up a memorial to their ancestors, and then put on the crowned robes they had been given.

古文：父没而冠，则已冠扫地而祭于祢；已祭，而见伯父、叔父，而后飨冠者。 
现代文：在这种情况下，也只对冠者行酸礼，而不行醛礼。这说明不须补行冠礼改加吉冠。如果是父亲死后举行冠礼，那么，在冠礼三加之后，要打扫庙堂，向父亲的神主行祭告之礼。祭告礼毕，前去拜见伯父、叔父，然后设宴酬谢参加冠礼的宾客。 
English: In this case, only the acid ritual is performed for the winner, but not the aldehyde ritual. This shows that there is no need to make up the coronation ceremony and change it to the auspicious coronation. If the coronation ceremony is held after the death of the father, then, after the coronation ceremony, the temple must be cleaned and a sacrifice made to the father's god. After the sacrifice, go to see your uncle and uncle, and then set up a banquet to thank the guests who participated in the coronation.

古文：曾子问曰： 祭如之何则不行旅酬之事矣？ 
现代文：曾子问道： 祭祀在什么情况下才不进行旅酬呢？ 
English: Zeng Zi asked: Under what circumstances should the sacrificial rites not be paid for by travel?

古文：孔子曰： 闻之：小祥者，主人练祭而不旅，奠酬于宾，宾弗举，礼也。
现代文：孔子答道： 我听说过的。小祥的时候，主人改服练冠练服，但不举行旅酬，主人回敬宾的酒，宾接过来不饮而放下，不举杯劝饮，这是合乎礼的。
English: Confucius replied: I have heard of it. When Xiao Xiang passed away, the host changed his clothes to practice the crown and practice clothes, but did not hold the travel reward, the host returned the wine to the guests, the guests did not drink and put it down, and did not raise a glass to persuade them to drink. This is proper.

古文：昔者，鲁昭公练而举酬行旅，非礼也；孝公大祥，奠酬弗举，亦非礼也。 
现代文：从前，鲁昭公在小祥时就举行旅酬，这是性急了点，不合乎礼的要求。鲁孝公在大祥时还不举行旅酬，这是拘谨了点，也不合乎礼的要求。 
English: Once upon a time, Lu Zhaogong paid travel expenses when he was a minor, which was a bit hasty and not in accordance with the requirements of etiquette. Lu Xiaogong did not pay travel expenses when he was a major, which was a bit formal and not in accordance with the requirements of etiquette.

古文：曾子问曰： 大功之丧，可以与于馈奠之事乎？ 
现代文：曾子问道： 自己正穿大功丧服，可以参加别家的馈奠吗？ 
English: Zeng Zi asked, "I'm wearing the uniform of a great hero, can I participate in the tribute of other families?"

古文：孔子曰： 岂大功耳！自斩衰以下皆可，礼也。 
现代文：孔子答道： 岂但大功可以，从斩衰以下的丧服都可以，这是礼所规定的嘛！ 
English: Confucius replied, "It is possible to do great deeds, and it is possible to wear mourning clothes from death to death. This is prescribed by the etiquette."

古文：曾子曰： 不以轻服而重相为乎？ 
现代文：曾子问道： 这样做，岂不是看轻自己的丧服而注重别人的祭奠吗？ 
English: Zeng Zi asked, "By doing this, aren't you undervaluing your own mourning clothes and focusing on other people's memorial services?

古文：孔子曰： 非此之谓也。
现代文：孔子答道： 不能这样说。
English: Confucius replied, "You cannot say that.

古文：天子、诸侯之丧，斩衰者奠；大夫，齐衰者奠；士则朋友奠；不足，则取于大功以下者；不足，则反之。 曾子问曰： 小功可以与于祭乎？ 
现代文：如果人数不够，才可以让服小功、绍麻的人来帮忙；如果人手还不够，就让每个人多做几件事情。这岂不是自斩衰以下的丧服都可以参与馈奠吗！ 曾子问道： 身有小功丧服的人可以参加葬后之祭吗？ 
English: If the number of people is not enough, it is only possible to have people who have made small contributions or are in poor health come to help; if there are not enough people, let everyone do a few more things. Isn't it true that the funeral clothes below the level of self-sacrifice can participate in the tribute! Zeng Zi asked: Can people who are wearing small contributions and funeral clothes participate in the post-funeral ceremony?

古文：孔子曰： 何必小功耳！自斩衰以下与祭，礼也。 
现代文：孔子答道： 不一定只有小功可以参加，自穿斩衰以下丧服的人都可以参加，这是礼所规定的。 
English: Confucius replied, "It is not necessarily that only those with minor merits can participate, but anyone who wears mourning clothes from the lowest to the highest rank can participate. This is stipulated by the rite.

古文：曾子曰： 不以轻丧而重祭乎？ 
现代文：曾子问道： 这样的话，不是有点轻视丧服而看重丧祭了吗？ 
English: Zeng Zi asked, "In that case, isn't it a bit of despising the funeral clothes and valuing the funeral rites?"

古文：孔子曰： 天子、诸侯之丧祭也，不斩衰者不与祭；大夫，齐衰者与祭；士，祭不足，则取于兄弟大功以下者。 
现代文：孔子答道： 天子、诸侯的丧祭，不是穿斩衰丧服的人还没有资格参与。大夫的丧祭，不是穿齐衰丧服的人不能参与石士的丧祭，因为士无臣下，所以才让兄弟大功以下者参与。 
English: Confucius replied, "In the funeral rites of the sons of heaven and princes, those who do not wear mourning clothes are not qualified to participate. In the funeral rites of the doctors, those who do not wear mourning clothes cannot participate in the funeral rites of the stonecutters, because the stonecutters have no subordinates, so only those who have made great contributions are allowed to participate.

古文：曾子问曰： 相识，有丧服可以与于祭乎？ 
现代文：曾子又问道： 对于相识的人，自己身上正有丧服，可以参加他的吉祭吗？ 
English: Zeng Zi also asked: For someone you know, you are wearing mourning clothes, can you participate in his auspicious festival?

古文：孔子曰： 缌不祭，又何助于人。 
现代文：孔子答道： 如果自身有丧服，那怕是最轻的练麻，连自家的吉祭都不可参与，哪里还谈得上参加他人的吉祭呢？ 
English: Confucius replied, "If you have mourning clothes, even the lightest mourning clothes, and are not allowed to participate in your own family's auspicious festival, how can you participate in the auspicious festival of others?"

古文：曾子问曰： 废丧服，可以与于馈奠之事乎？ 
现代文：曾子又问道： 脱掉了丧服，可以参加他人的馈奠吗？ 
English: Zeng Zi also asked: If you take off your mourning clothes, can you take part in other people's tribute?

古文：孔子曰： 说衰与奠，非礼也；以摈相可也。 
现代文：孔子说： 刚脱掉丧服就参加他人的馈奠，显得忘掉哀痛太快了，这不符合礼的规定。如果做他人馈奠时的侯相，还差不多。 
English: Confucius said: Just taking off the mourning clothes and attending the funeral of others, it seems that the grief is forgotten too quickly, which is not in line with the rules of etiquette. If you are the groom at the time of the funeral of others, it is similar.

古文：曾子问曰： 昏礼既纳币，有吉日，女之父母死，则如之何？ 
现代文：曾子问道： 婚礼已经进行到送过聘礼，连迎娶的吉日都择定了，如果忽然女方的父亲或母亲死了，那该怎么办呢？ 
English: Zengzi asked, "The wedding ceremony has been carried out until the bride price has been paid, and even the auspicious day for the wedding has been selected. If the woman's father or mother suddenly dies, what should be done?

古文：孔子曰： 婿使人吊。
现代文：孔子答道： 南方要派人去吊丧。
English: Confucius replied: The south should send people to the funeral.

古文：如婿之父母死，则女之家亦使人吊。
现代文：如果是男方的父亲或母亲死，女方也应该派人到男方家吊丧。
English: If the man's father or mother dies, the woman should also send someone to the man's house to mourn.

古文：父丧称父，母丧称母。父母不在，则称伯父世母。
现代文：如果一方是丧父，另一方就以父亲的名义吊丧；如果一方是丧母，另一方就以母亲的名义吊丧；如果父母不在，就得以伯父、伯母的名义。
English: If one of the parents is deceased, the other will be mourned in the name of the father; if one of the parents is deceased, the other will be mourned in the name of the mother; if the parents are not present, they will be mourned in the name of the uncle or aunt.

古文：婿，已葬，婿之伯父致命女氏曰： 某之子有父母之丧，不得嗣为兄弟，使某致命。 
现代文：从男方来说，在料理完葬事之后，由男方的伯父出面向女方致意说： 某之子不幸遇到父或母之丧，居丧期间，不能和府上结为婚姻，特派我来致意。 
English: On the man's side, after the cooking of the funeral, the man's uncle came forward to pay his respects to the woman and said, "A certain son had the misfortune of losing his father or mother, and during the mourning period, he could not marry his father-in-law, so he sent me to pay his respects.

古文：女氏许诺，而弗敢嫁，礼也。
现代文：女方同意，但不把女儿另嫁他人，这是正礼。
English: The woman agrees, but does not marry off her daughter to another man, which is proper etiquette.

古文：婿，免丧，女之父母使人请，婿弗取，而后嫁之，礼也。
现代文：男方除丧之后，女方父母派人到男方家重提婚事，这时候如果男方还不迎娶，女方就可以把女儿改嫁他人，这也是正礼。
English: After the man's funeral, the woman's parents sent someone to the man's house to renew the marriage. At this time, if the man still does not marry, the woman can marry her daughter to someone else, which is also a rite.

古文：女之父母死，婿亦如之。 
现代文：如果女方的父或母死，男方也要这样。 
English: If the woman's father or mother dies, so does the man.

古文：曾子问曰： 亲迎，女在涂，而婿之父母死，如之何？ 
现代文：曾子问道： 亲迎的那天，新娘已经上路，如果突然新郎的父亲或母亲去世，该怎么办？ 
English: Zengzi asked, "On the day of the wedding, the bride is already on her way. What if the groom's father or mother suddenly dies?

古文：孔子曰： 女改服布深衣，缟总以趋丧。
现代文：孔子答道： 新娘要立即改换服装，穿上布做的深衣，用白绢束发，赶往夫家参加丧礼。
English: Confucius replied, "The bride should immediately change her clothes, put on a dark cloth dress, wear her hair in a white pigtail, and rush to her husband's house to attend the funeral.

古文：女在途，而女之父母死，则女反。 
现代文：如果是新娘已经上路，而新娘的父亲或母亲突然去世，新娘就应立即折回娘家奔丧。 
English: If the bride is already on the road, and the bride's father or mother suddenly dies, the bride should immediately return to her daughter's home to mourn.

古文： 如婿亲迎，女未至，而有齐衰大功之丧，则如之何？ 
现代文：曾子又问道： 如果新郎亲迎的那天，新娘还没来到，而新郎突然有齐衰、大功亲属去世，该怎么办？ 
English: Zeng Zi also asked: What if the day of the groom's welcoming, the bride has not yet arrived, and the groom suddenly has a setback, and relatives who have made great contributions die?

古文：孔子曰： 男不入，改服于外次；女入，改服于内次；然后即位而哭。 
现代文：孔子答道： 新郎不进大门，在外次改换服装。新娘则进入大门，在内次改换服装。然后各就其位而哭。 
English: Confucius replied, "The bridegroom does not enter the gate, but changes his clothes in the outer room. The bride enters the gate, but changes her clothes in the inner room. Then each one weeps in his place."

古文：曾子问曰： 除丧则不复昏礼乎？ 
现代文：曾子问道： 除丧之后不再补行婚礼了吗？ 
English: Zeng Zi asked: Will there be no wedding ceremony after the funeral?

古文：孔子曰： 祭，过时不祭，礼也；又何反于初？ 
现代文：孔子答道： 拿祭礼来说，过了日期就不再补祭，这才合乎礼的规定。
English: Confucius replied, "In the case of a festival, it is only proper that no offerings be made after the prescribed time.

古文：孔子曰： 嫁女之家，三夜不息烛，思相离也。
现代文：婚礼还没有祭礼重要，又有什么理由再补办一次呢！ 孔子说： 嫁女的人家，一连三夜不熄火把，是因为念及骨肉就要分离了。
English: Confucius said: A family that marries a daughter does not extinguish the torch for three nights in a row, because they are concerned that the flesh and bones will be separated.

古文：取妇之家，三日不举乐，思嗣亲也。
现代文：娶媳妇的人家，一连三天不奏乐，是因为念及传宗接代、双亲日趋衰老。
English: The family of the man who married his daughter-in-law did not play music for three days in a row, because they were concerned about the succession of the family, and their parents were getting older.

古文：三月而庙见，称来妇也。
现代文：新娘进门三月，要备礼祭祀公婆的亡灵，祝词中称之为 来做媳妇 。
English: When the bride enters the door in March, she must prepare a ritual to worship the dead spirit of her mother-in-law, which is called "coming to be a daughter-in-law" in the congratulatory speech.

古文：择日而祭于祢，成妇之义也。 
现代文：这样做了以后，才算是正式成为此家的媳妇。 
English: After doing so, she officially became the daughter-in-law of the family.

古文：曾子问曰： 女未庙见而死，则如之何？ 孔子曰： 不迁于祖，不祔于皇姑，婿不杖、不菲、不次，归葬于女氏之党，示未成妇也。 
现代文：曾子问道： 新娘没有庙见而死，该怎么力俘 孔子答道： 她的灵枢，出殡时不须朝见祖庙，她的神主也不附在祖姑神主之后，做丈夫的不须持丧棒，不须穿孝鞋，不须居丧次，归葬于她娘家的墓地，以表示她尚未成为男家的媳妇。 
English: Zeng Zi asked, "How should we capture the spirit of a bride who died without seeing a temple?" Confucius replied, "Her spirit does not need to see the ancestral temple at the funeral, her god does not follow the ancestral god, the husband does not need to hold a funeral stick, does not need to wear filial shoes, does not need to attend the funeral, and is buried in the cemetery of her mother's family to indicate that she has not yet become the man's daughter-in-law.

古文：曾子问曰： 取女，有吉日而女死，如之何？ 
现代文：曾子又问道： 迎娶新娘的吉日已经商定而新娘突然去世，该怎么办？ 
English: Zeng Zi also asked, "What should we do if the auspicious day to marry the bride has already been agreed upon and the bride suddenly dies?

古文：孔子曰： 婿齐衰而吊，既葬而除之。
现代文：孔子答道： 婿应该穿着齐衰孝服前去吊丧，新娘下葬后即可除去孝服。
English: Confucius replied: The son-in-law should go to the funeral wearing the filial piety dress, and the filial piety dress can be removed after the bride is buried.

古文：夫死亦如之。 
现代文：如果是丈夫突然死去，新娘也照此办理。 
English: If the husband died suddenly, the bride would do the same.

古文：曾子问曰： 丧有二孤，庙有二主，礼与？ 
现代文：曾子问道： 丧事有两个主人，庙里有两个神主，这是合礼的吗？ 
English: Zengzi asked: Is it proper to have two masters at a funeral and two deities in a temple?

古文：孔子曰： 天无二日，土无二王，尝禘郊社，尊无二上。
现代文：孔子答道： 天无二日，国无二王。宗庙天地之祭，最尊贵的神也只有一个。
English: Confucius replied, "There are no two days, no two kings in the country, and there is only one most precious god in the ancestral temple's festival of heaven and earth.

古文：未知其为礼也。
现代文：由此看来，恐怕难说是合理的。
English: From this point of view, I am afraid it is difficult to say that it is reasonable.

古文：昔者齐桓公亟举兵，作伪主以行。
现代文：从前齐桓公屡次起兵南征北伐，做了个假神主随军同行。
English: Once upon a time, King Qi Huan repeatedly started the Southern Expedition and the Northern Expedition, and made a false god to accompany the army.

古文：及反，藏诸祖庙。
现代文：等到胜利归来，把假神主藏到祖庙。
English: Wait until victory returns, and hide the false god master in the ancestral temple.

古文：庙有二主，自桓公始也。
现代文：一个庙里同时有两个神主，就是从齐桓公开始的。
English: There are two gods in a temple at the same time, which began with King Qiguan.

古文：丧之二孤，则昔者卫灵公适鲁，遭季桓子之丧，卫君请吊，哀公辞不得命，公为主，客人吊。
现代文：一宗丧事而有两个丧主，起因于从前卫灵公来鲁国访何，碰上了执政大臣季桓子之丧，卫君请求吊唁，鲁哀公推辞不掉。于是哀公自为丧主。
English: One funeral and two mourners, caused by the fact that the former Wei Ling Gong came to Lu to visit Ho, and encountered the funeral of the ruling minister Ji Huan Zi. Wei Jun asked for condolences, and Lu Aigong could not refuse. Therefore, Aigong himself was the mourner.

古文：康子立于门右，北面；公揖让升自东阶，西乡；客升自西阶吊。公拜，兴，哭；康子拜稽颡于位，有司弗辩也。
现代文：卫君入吊时 桓子的儿子康子站在门的右边，面朝北。哀公揖请卫君上堂，自己从东阶升堂，面西而立；卫君则从西阶升堂吊唁，哀公拜谢卫君之吊，起立，哭泣；与此同时，康子在丧主的位置上也向卫君拜谢并向灵枢叩头。
English: When the guardian was hanged, Kaneko's son, Yasuko, stood on the right side of the door, facing north. In mourning, he invited the guardian to go up the hall, and he went up the hall from the east step and stood facing west; the guardian came down from the west step of the hall to offer condolences, to mourn, to thank the guardian for hanging, to stand up, and to cry; at the same time, Yasuko, in the position of the bereaved, also thanked the guardian and bowed to the spirit.

古文：今之二孤，自季康子之过也。 
现代文：当时的司仪也没加纠正，就好像这宗丧事是有两个丧主似的。现在丧事有两个丧主，是从季康子的违礼开始的。 
English: The master of ceremonies at the time did not correct it, as if there were two mourners at the funeral. Now there are two mourners at the funeral, which began with Ji Kangzi's violation.

古文：曾子问曰： 古者师行，必以迁庙主行乎？ 
现代文：曾子间道： 古时候天子诸侯出师，必定要带着迁庙主同行吗？ 
English: Zeng Zima said, "In ancient times, when the sons of gods and lords came to teach, did they necessarily bring the relocated temple owner with them?

古文：孔子曰： 天子巡守，以迁庙主行，载于齐车，言必有尊也。
现代文：孔子答道： 天子出外巡守，带着迁庙主同行，将迁庙主载于斋车，表示有所尊崇。
English: Confucius replied, "The heavenly son went out on patrol, accompanied by the head of the relocated temple, and placed the head of the relocated temple on a cart to show his respect.

古文：今也取七庙之主以行，则失之矣。
现代文：现在呢，天子巡守，带着太祖以下七个庙主同行，这就搞错了。
English: Now, the heavenly guardian, accompanied by seven temple owners from the great-grandfather onward, has made a mistake.

古文：当七庙、五庙无虚主；虚主者，唯天子崩，诸侯薨与去其国，与祫祭于祖，为无主耳。吾闻诸老聃曰：天子崩，国君薨，则祝取群庙之主而藏诸祖庙，礼也。
现代文：在正常情况下，天子七庙、诸侯五庙都不会空着而没有神主。庙空着而没有神主，只有在天子驾崩、诸侯去世和或被迫离开自己国家的时候才会出现，再就是在太祖庙中合祭群庙神主的时候，其他庙中也无神主。我听老聃说过： 天子驾崩，诸侯国君去世，则由太祝把群庙的神主统统取来藏到太祖的庙里，这是礼的规定。
English: Under normal circumstances, the Seven Temples of the Son of Heaven and the Five Temples of the Princes would not be empty without their deities. The empty temples without their deities only appear when the Son of Heaven dies, the Princes die, or they are forced to leave their country. Moreover, when the deities of the temples of the ancestors are enshrined in the ancestral temple, there are no deities in other temples. I heard Lao Zi say: When the Son of Heaven dies, or when the Prince of the Princes dies, it is the duty of the Grand Empress Dowager to take all the deities of the temples and hide them in the ancestral temple.

古文：卒哭成事而后，主各反其庙。
现代文：等到下葬并且举行了卒哭之祭以后，再把群庙之主送回各自的庙里。
English: After the funeral and the wailing ceremony, the heads of the temples were sent back to their respective temples.

古文：君去其国，大宰取群庙之主以从，礼也。
现代文：国君逃难出奔，太宰就将群庙的神主取来同行，这也是礼当如此。
English: When the sovereign had to flee, the Dazaifu brought the chief deities of the group of temples to accompany him, which was also proper.

古文：祫祭于祖，则祝迎四庙之主。
现代文：诸侯在太祖庙里合祭群庙的神主，就让太祝把其余四庙的神主迎来。
English: When the lords and princes held a festival for the gods of the temples in the ancestral temple, they asked the emperor to usher in the gods of the remaining four temples.

古文：主，出庙入庙必跸；老聃云。 
现代文：凡是迎送神主出庙入庙，必须清除道路，禁止闲人通行。 这是老聃说的。 
English: When welcoming the deity from temple to temple, it is necessary to clear the road and prohibit idle people from passing. This is what Laozi said.

古文：曾子问曰： 古者师行，无迁主，则何主？ 
现代文：曾子又问道： 古代诸侯出师，如果没有迁庙之主可以同行，那将用什么神主呢？ 
English: Zengzi also asked: If the ancient princes did not have the master of the relocated temple to accompany them, what kind of god master would they use?

古文：孔子曰： 主命。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 那就不用神主而用神主的命令。 
English: Confucius replied, "Then don't use the Lord's name, but use the Lord's command."

古文：问曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：曾子不懂，就又问道： 什么叫做神主的命令？ 
English: Zeng Zi did not understand, so he asked again: What is the Lord's command?

古文：孔子曰： 天子、诸侯将出，必以币帛皮圭告于祖祢，遂奉以出，载于齐车以行。
现代文：孔子答道： 天子、诸侯在出行之前，一定要以币帛皮圭作供品向祖庙父庙举行告祭，祭毕，就恭敬地将这些币圭捧出，装到斋车上带着同行。
English: Confucius replied, "Son of heaven, before you travel, you must make an offering to the ancestral temple with coins. After the offering, you should respectfully take out the coins and load them onto the cart to take with you.

古文：每舍，奠焉而后就舍。
现代文：每到一个休息的地方，先祭奠这些币圭才休息。
English: Whenever they come to a place of rest, they first pay homage to these coins before resting.

古文：反必告，设奠卒，敛币玉，藏诸两阶之间，乃出。
现代文：回来以后，要在祖庙举行告至之祭。祭祀完毕，把这些作为 主命 的币圭收集起来，埋到堂下的两阶之间，然后走出来。
English: After returning, a memorial service is to be held at the ancestral temple. When the service is over, collect these coins, which are the Lord's command, bury them between the two steps of the hall, and then come out.

古文：盖贵命也。 
现代文：这样做就是表示尊敬神主的命令。 
English: To do so is to show respect for the Lord's command.

古文：子游问曰： 丧慈母如母，礼与？ 
现代文：子游问道: 天子诸侯死了慈母就像死了生母一样示哀，合乎礼吗? 
English: Ziyou asked: Is it proper to mourn the death of the beloved mother of the sons and princes of heaven as if it were the death of one's own mother?

古文：孔子曰： 非礼也。
现代文：孔子说: 不合乎礼。
English: Confucius said, "This is not proper.

古文：古者，男子外有傅，内有慈母，君命所使教子也，何服之有？
现代文：从古到今，君王的儿子在外面有师傅，在家有慈母，他们是奉君王命令教育孩子的，孩子与他们哪有什么丧服关系呢?
English: From ancient times to the present, the sons of kings have had teachers outside and loving mothers at home. They were ordered by the king to educate their children. What kind of mourning relationship do children have with them?

古文：昔者，鲁昭公少丧其母，有慈母良，及其死也，公弗忍也，欲丧之，有司以闻，曰： 古之礼，慈母无服，今也君为之服，是逆古之礼而乱国法也；若终行之，则有司将书之以遗后世。无乃不可乎！ 公曰： 古者天子练冠以燕居。 
现代文：先前，鲁孝公年幼时死了母亲，他的慈母待他很好。等到慈母死，孝公忍心不下，要为她服孝。掌管礼典的官听到后，对孝公说: 古代礼法，慈母死，不为她服丧，你现在要为慈母服丧，这是违背古礼而扰乱国家法令啊!如果你要坚持这样做，那么礼官就要记载下来流传后世，大概不能这样做吧? 孝公说: 没有关系，古时候天子为生母服丧平常是戴练冠的。 
English: Previously, Lu Xiaogong's mother died when he was young, and his loving mother treated him well. When his loving mother died, Xiaogong could not bear it and wanted to pay tribute to her. After hearing this, the official in charge of the ceremony said to Xiaogong: According to ancient etiquette, when his loving mother died, he did not mourn for her, but now he wants to mourn for his loving mother. This is a violation of ancient etiquette and disturbs the national law! If you want to insist on doing this, then the etiquette officer must record it and pass it on to future generations. Is this possible? Xiaogong said

古文：公弗忍也，遂练冠以丧慈母。
现代文：孝公不忍心不服丧，于是为慈母戴练冠服丧。
English: The filial piety did not have the heart to accept the mourning, so he wore a crown to mourn for his mother.

古文：丧慈母，自鲁昭公始也。 
现代文：诸侯为慈母服丧，是从鲁孝公开始的。 
English: Princes and lords have been mourning for their beloved mothers since the time of Lu Xiaogong.

古文：曾子问曰： 诸侯旅见天子，入门，不得终礼，废者几？ 孔子曰： 四。 
现代文：曾子问道： 众多诸侯一同朝见天子，已经进入太庙的门，但未能把朝见之礼进行到底，不得不中途而废，这样的情况有几种？ 孔子答道： 四种。 
English: Zeng Zi asked, "How many kinds of situations are there in which a large number of lords have entered the gate of the Great Temple to see the Son of Heaven together, but have not been able to complete the ceremony of seeing the Son of Heaven, and have had to give up halfway?" Confucius replied, "Four kinds."

古文：请问之。
现代文：曾子说： 请问是哪四种？ 
English: Zeng Zi also asked: What are the nine reasons?

古文：曰： 大庙火，日食，后之丧，雨沾服失容，则废。
现代文：孔子答道： 太庙失火，日蚀，王后去世，大雨琳湿衣服而有失仪容，在这四种情况下就停止行礼。
English: Confucius replied, "In the four cases of a fire in the imperial temple, a solar eclipse, the death of the queen, and the appearance of a person with wet clothes due to heavy rain, the salute should be stopped."

古文：如诸侯皆在而日食，则从天子救日，各以其方色与其兵。大庙火，则从天子救火，不以方色与兵。 
现代文：如果所有诸侯都在场而发生日蚀，那就要跟随天子去救日，救的时候，哪一方的诸侯就穿哪一方颜色的衣服和拿着当方的武器；如果是太庙失火，也要跟随天子去救火，但在诸侯的穿衣和武器方面没有要求。 
English: If there is a solar eclipse and all the lords are present, then they must follow the Son of Heaven to save the day. When saving the day, the lords of whichever side wear the clothes of whichever color and carry the weapons of that side. If there is a fire in the Imperial Temple, they must also follow the Son of Heaven to save the day, but there is no requirement for the lords' clothing and weapons.

古文：曾子问曰： 诸侯相见，揖让入门，不得终礼，废者几？ 孔子曰： 六。 
现代文：曾子又问道： 诸侯互相访问，主人已把客人礼让进门，但未能按程序行礼到底，不得不中途而废，这样的情况有几种？ 孔子答道： 六种。 
English: Zengzi also asked: How many kinds of situations are there in which princes visit each other, and the host has let the guests enter the door with courtesy, but fails to complete the formalities and has to give up halfway? Confucius replied: Six kinds.

古文：请问之。
现代文：曾子说： 请问哪六种？ 
English: Zeng Zi also asked: What are the nine reasons?

古文：曰： 天子崩，大庙火，日食，后夫人之丧，雨沾服失容，则废。 
现代文：孔子答道： 天子驾崩，太庙失火，日蚀，王后去世，国君夫人去世，大雨淋湿衣服而造成仪容不整，遇到这六种情况，就得中止行礼。 
English: Confucius replied, "In the event of the death of the emperor, a fire in the imperial temple, a solar eclipse, the death of the queen, the death of the wife of the sovereign, or a heavy rain that drenches the clothes and causes disfigurement, if you encounter these six situations, you must stop performing the salute.

古文：曾子问曰： 天子尝禘郊社五祀之祭，簠簋既陈，天子崩，后之丧，如之何？ 
现代文：曾子又问道： 天子宗庙之祭，天地之祭，七祀之祭，各项准备工作都已作好，这时如果天子突然驾崩，或者王后去世，该怎么办？ 
English: Zengzi also asked: The preparations for the festival of the heavenly son's ancestral temple, the festival of heaven and earth, and the festival of the seven deities have all been completed. At this time, if the heavenly son suddenly dies or the queen dies, what should be done?

古文：孔子曰： 废。 
现代文：孔子答道： 祭祀停止进行。 
English: Confucius replied, "The ritual should be stopped immediately."

古文：曾子问曰： 当祭而日食，太庙火，其祭也如之何？ 
现代文：曾子又问道： 如果正在祭祀的时候而发生了日蚀，或太庙失火，祭礼还要不要继续进行呢？ 
English: Zengzi also asked: If there is a solar eclipse at the time of the ritual, or if there is a fire in the imperial temple, should the ritual continue?

古文：孔子曰： 接祭而已矣。
现代文：孔子答道： 在这种情况下，要简化程序，赶快进行。
English: Confucius replied, "In this case, it is necessary to simplify the procedure and proceed quickly.

古文：如牲至，未杀，则废。
现代文：如果栖牲已被牵来但尚未杀，祭礼就应停止。
English: If the animal has been brought in but not yet killed, the ritual should be stopped.

古文：天子崩，未殡，五祀之祭不行；既殡而祭，其祭也，尸入，三饭不侑，酳不酢而已矣。
现代文：天子驾崩，灵枢未入殡宫之前，不举行五祀之祭，等到灵枢已迁入殡宫，然后举行祭祀。
English: When the heavenly son passes away, the five rites will not be held until the spirit center has moved into the mortuary, and then the rites will be held.

古文：自启至于反哭，五祀之祭不行；已葬而祭，祝毕献而已。 
现代文：但祭祀的程序要简化，尸入席之后，吃了三口饭，此后就不再劝吃；主人酌酒请尸漱口，尸在漱过之后也不再回敬主人，程序到此就算结束。
English: However, the procedure of the sacrifice should be simplified. After the corpse is seated, it eats three mouthfuls of rice, after which it is no longer persuaded to eat; the owner asks the corpse to rinse its mouth with wine. After rinsing, the corpse will no longer pay tribute to the owner, and the procedure is over.

古文：曾子问曰： 诸侯之祭社稷，俎豆既陈，闻天子崩、后之丧、君薨、夫人之丧，如之何？ 
现代文：自启殡到葬后反哭期间，不可举行五祀之祭。葬后虽然可以进行，但也要简化程序，进行到主人向祝献酒就算结束。 曾子问道： 诸侯的祭祀社稠，所有的礼器已经摆设停当，这时忽然听到天子驾崩、王后去世、国君去世、国君夫人去世的噩耗，该怎么办？ 
English: From the opening of the funeral to the period of weeping after the funeral, it is not possible to hold the five-sacred ritual. Although it can be carried out after the funeral, it is necessary to simplify the procedure, and it will be over when the host offers wine to the toast. Zengzi asked: The sacrifice of the princes is thick, all the ceremonial instruments have been set up, and then suddenly hear the bad news of the death of the emperor, the death of the queen, the death of the sovereign, and the death of the sovereign's wife, what should I do?

古文：孔子曰： 废。
现代文：孔子答道： 祭祀立刻停止。
English: Confucius replied, "The ritual should be stopped immediately."

古文：自薨比至于殡，自启至于反哭，奉帅天子。 
现代文：从初死到入殡，从启殡到反哭，这期间 祭与不祭，如何祭，都遵循天子在这种情况下的作法。 
English: From the time of death to the time of burial, from the opening of the funeral to the weeping of the mourners, during this period, whether to offer a sacrifice or not, and how to offer a sacrifice, all follow the manner of the heavenly son in this situation.

古文：曾子问曰： 大夫之祭，鼎俎既陈，笾豆既设，不得成礼，废者几？ 孔子曰： 九。 
现代文：曾子间道： 大夫的宗庙之祭，各种祭品都已准备妥当，但却不能进行到底，以至中途而废，导致这种情况出现的原因有哪些？ 孔子答道： 原因有九。 
English: Zeng Zima said: At the festival of the doctor's ancestral temple, all kinds of offerings were prepared properly, but they could not be carried out to the end, and they were abandoned halfway. What are the reasons for this situation? Confucius replied: There are nine reasons.

古文：请问之。
现代文：曾子又问： 请问哪九种原因？ 
English: Zeng Zi also asked: What are the nine reasons?

古文：曰： 天子崩、后之丧、君薨、夫人之丧、君之大庙火、日食、三年之丧、齐衰、大功，皆废。
现代文：孔子答道： 禾子驾崩，王后去世，国君去世，国君夫人去世，国君的太庙失火，日蚀，父母去世，祖父母、伯父母去世，堂兄弟去世，遇到这九种情况发生，祭祀就要停止。
English: Confucius replied, "When the grain is dying, the queen is dying, the sovereign is dying, the sovereign's wife is dying, the sovereign's ancient temple is on fire, there is a solar eclipse, the parents are dying, the grandparents and uncles are dying, and the cousins are dying, when these nine things happen, the sacrificial rites must stop.

古文：外丧自齐衰以下，行也。
现代文：至于外族亲属去世，凡齐衰以下者，祭祀都可继续进行，但也应简化程序。
English: As for the death of non-Chinese relatives, the rituals can continue for those who are less than the same age, but the procedures should also be simplified.

古文：其齐衰之祭也，尸入，三饭不侑，酳不酢而已矣；大功酢而已矣；小功、缌，室中之事而已矣。
现代文：具体地说，外丧属于齐衰亲属者，在祭祀时，尸入室内，吃了三口饭，便不再劝他继续吃，食毕，主人酌酒请尸漱口，尸漱过后便不再回敬，进行到这节目就应结束；外丧属于大功之亲的，还可以在此基础上加上尸回敬主人酒的节目；外丧属于小功、绍麻之亲的，祭祀可以在此基础上继续进行到主人、主妇、宾长向尸献酒为止。
English: Specifically, if the deceased belonged to a close relative, when the corpse entered the room and ate three mouthfuls of rice, he would no longer be advised to continue eating. After eating, the host would drink wine and ask the corpse to rinse his mouth. After the corpse was rinsed, he would no longer return the honor, and the program should end; if the deceased belonged to a relative of great merit, the program of the corpse returning the honor to the host wine could be added on top of this; if the deceased belonged to a relative of small merit, Shaoma, the sacrifice could continue on this basis until the host, housewife, and chief guest offered wine to the corpse

古文：士之所以异者，缌不祭，所祭于死者无服则祭。 
现代文：在这个问题上，士和大夫所不同的是，即使有绍麻之亲在祭祀时去世，祭祀也应停止。但是，如果所祭的祖先与死者已经没有丧服关系，那么祭祀可以照常进行。 
English: On this issue, the difference between the judges and the doctors is that even if a relative of Shoma dies during the sacrifice, the sacrifice should be stopped. However, if the ancestor being sacrificed is no longer related to the deceased, then the sacrifice can continue as usual.

古文：曾子问曰： 三年之丧，吊乎？ 
现代文：曾子问道： 在居父母之丧期间，可以到别人家去吊丧吗？ 
English: Zeng Zi asked: During the period of mourning for one's parents, can one go to someone else's home to mourn?

古文：孔子曰： 三年之丧，练，不群立，不旅行。
现代文：孔子答道： 居父母之丧，到了小祥的时候，还不和众人立在一起，不和众人一道走路。
English: Confucius replied, "In mourning for one's parents, one does not stand with the crowd and does not walk with the crowd when it is time for Xiao Xiang.

古文：君子礼以饰情，三年之丧而吊哭，不亦虚乎？ 
现代文：君子是通过礼来表达感情的，现在你自己正处在丧失父母的极大沉痛之中而到别人家去吊丧哭泣，这种哭泣岂不成为虚假的了吗？ 
English: A gentleman expresses his feelings through etiquette, and now that you are in the great pain of losing your parents, you go to someone else's home to mourn and cry. Won't this crying become false?

古文：曾子问曰： 大夫、士有私丧，可以除之矣，而有君服焉，其除之也如之何？ 孔子曰： 有君丧服于身，不敢私服，又何除焉？
现代文：曾子问道： 大夫、士正在为私亲挂孝，到了可以除孝的时候了，而国君忽然去世，又须要为国君穿斩衰的孝服，在这种情况下，原有的孝服还除去不除去？ 
English: Zeng Zi asked, "Doctors and scholars are showing filial piety for my relatives. It is time to remove filial piety, but the sovereign has died suddenly, and it is necessary to wear filial piety for the sovereign. In this case, will the original filial piety still be removed?

古文：于是乎有过时而弗除也。
现代文：于是乎就出现了大夫、士过了丧期还不能除去孝服的现象。
English: As a result, there is a phenomenon that doctors and soldiers cannot remove their filial piety after the period of mourning.

古文：君之丧，服除而后殷祭，礼也。 
现代文：等到为国君服丧期满，才可以为私亲举行小祥、大祥之祭，这是合乎礼的。 
English: It is proper to wait until the period of mourning for the sovereign is over before holding a small or large festival for a private relative.

古文：曾子问曰： 父母之丧，弗除可乎？ 
现代文：曾子又问道： 为父母所穿的孝服，永远不除可以吗？ 
English: Zeng Zi also asked: Is it okay to never take off the filial piety that you wear for your parents?

古文：孔子曰： 先王制礼，过时弗举，礼也；非弗能勿除也，患其过于制也，故君子过时不祭，礼也。 
现代文：孔子答道： 先王制定礼仪，错过了时间就不再举行，这是正理。先王并不是不能作出永远不除的规定，问题是人们是否都能做到。
English: Confucius replied, "It is correct that the previous king established the etiquette, and if the time was missed, it would not be held again. It is not that the previous king could not make a rule that would never be removed, the question is whether people can do it.

古文：曾子问曰： 君薨，既殡，而臣有父母之丧，则如之何？ 
现代文：既然不能做到，那么还是规定个时限为好。所以君子错过了祭祀的时间就不再补行，这是合乎礼的。 曾子问道： 国君死，灵枢已经停在殡宫，这时候臣子忽然得知父母突然去世，该怎么办？ 
English: Since it cannot be done, it is better to set a time limit. Therefore, it is proper for a gentleman who misses the time of the ritual to not make up for it. Zeng Zi asked: When the king died and the spiritual center had already stopped at the funeral hall, what should a courtier do when he suddenly learned that his parents had died suddenly?

古文：孔子曰： 归居于家，有殷事，则之君所，朝夕否。 
现代文：孔子答道： 臣子应该回家料理父母的丧事，但每逢初一、十五举行殷奠时，要赶回国君的殡宫，至于朝夕之奠，可以不回去。 
English: Confucius replied, "A courtier should go home to prepare for the funeral of his parents, but he should rush back to the sovereign's funeral hall every time a memorial service is held on the first day of the first month or the fifteenth day of the first month. As for the morning and evening memorial services, he may not go back.

古文：曰： 君既启，而臣有父母之丧，则如之何？ 
现代文：曾子又问： 国君的灵枢已经启殡，这时候臣子的父母突然去世，该怎么办？ 
English: Zeng Zi also asked: The spiritual center of the sovereign has been buried, at this time the parents of the vassal suddenly died, what should I do?

古文：孔子曰： 归哭而反送君。 
现代文：孔子答道： 应该穿着为国君的孝服回家哭泣致哀，然后赶快折回为国君送葬。 
English: Confucius replied, "You should go home weeping and wailing in your filial piety for the king, and then quickly return to attend the king's funeral."

古文：曰： 君未殡，而臣有父母之丧，则如之何？ 
现代文：曾子又问： 国君死，尚未停枢殡宫，这时候臣子的父母突然去世，该怎么办？ 
English: Zeng Zi also asked: When the Emperor died and the funeral hall had not yet been closed, the parents of the courtier suddenly passed away. What should be done?

古文：孔子曰： 归殡，反于君所，有殷事则归，朝夕否。
现代文：孔子答道： 臣子可以回家料理丧事，直到父母入殡，然后再回到国君的殡宫。家中初一、十五的殷奠，可以回去，至于朝夕奠，就不再回去。
English: Confucius replied, "A courtier can go home to prepare for the funeral until his parents are buried, and then return to the funeral palace of the sovereign. For the first and fifteenth days of the year, he can return home, but for the morning and evening, he will no longer return.

古文：大夫，室老行事；士，则子孙行事。
现代文：大夫家的朝夕奠，由室老代行；士家的朝夕奠，由子孙代行。
English: The morning and evening offering of the doctor's family is performed by the elder brother-in-law; the morning and evening offering of the judge's family is performed by the children and grandchildren.

古文：大夫内子，有殷事，亦之君所，朝夕否。 
现代文：大夫的正妻，每逢初一、十五的殷奠，也要到国君的殡宫去参加；至于朝夕奠，可以不去。 
English: The doctor's wife, every time the first day of the first month, the fifteenth day of the first month, should also go to the prince's funeral hall to participate; as for the morning and evening, she can not go.

古文：贱不诔贵，幼不诔长，礼也。
现代文：卑贱者不能为尊贵者作诛，晚辈不能为长辈作诛，这是礼的规定。
English: It is a rule of etiquette that the lowly should not perform the funeral rites for the distinguished, and that the younger generation should not perform the funeral rites for the elders.

古文：唯天子，称天以诔之。
现代文：虽然贵为天子，也要以天的名义为他作诛。
English: Although you are a son of heaven, you should also make sacrifices for him in the name of heaven.

古文：诸侯相诔，非礼也。
现代文：诸侯互相作诛，不合礼的规定。
English: Princes and lords make vows to each other, which is not proper.

古文：曾子问曰： 君出疆以三年之戒，以椑从。
现代文：曾子问道： 国君出国都要预备不测的后事，要随带内棺。
English: Zengzi asked, "When the emperor goes abroad, he should prepare for unforeseen events and take the inner coffin with him.

古文：君薨，其入如之何？ 
现代文：如果国君真的死了，应当如何把棺柩运回来呢？ 
English: If the sovereign is really dead, how should the coffin be transported back?

古文：孔子曰： 共殡服，则子麻，弁绖，疏衰，菲，杖。
现代文：孔子答道： 给执事人等提供殡服，国君的儿子头戴麻弁加麻绖，身穿齐衰丧服，脚穿草鞋，手扶丧棒。
English: Confucius replied: Funeral clothes are provided for the deacons and others. The son of the sovereign wears a headdress of hemp and hemp, wears a mourning dress, wears straw sandals, and carries a mourning stick.

古文：入自阙，升自西阶。
现代文：灵枢从打坏庙墙的阙口进入，从堂的西阶抬上殡宫。
English: The spiritual center entered from the gate of the broken temple wall, and was carried from the west steps of the hall to the funeral hall.

古文：如小敛，则子免而从柩，入自门，升自阼阶。
现代文：如果死者是小敛后运回来的，他的儿子就头戴着免跟在灵枢后面，从大门进来，从堂的东阶抬上殡宫，其礼数和生前一样。
English: If the deceased was a minor and was brought back, his son would wear a mitre on his head and follow behind the hearse, enter through the gate, and be carried up the eastern steps of the church to the funeral home, with the same number of courtesies as before his death.

古文：君大夫士一节也。 
现代文：大夫、士遇到这样的情况，都是用一样的仪节。 
English: When doctors and magistrates encounter such a situation, they all use the same ritual.

古文：曾子问曰： 君之丧既引，闻父母之丧，如之何？ 
现代文：曾子问道： 国君的灵枢已经出殡发引，这时候臣子突然得到父母去世的噩耗，该怎么办？ 
English: Zeng Zi asked, "The spirit of the sovereign has already left for the funeral. At this time, the vassal suddenly received the bad news of the death of his parents. What should he do?"

古文：孔子曰： 遂。既封而归，不俟子。 
现代文：孔子回答： 那就要先把国君的灵枢送到墓地，下了棺就可以回家料理丧事，不必再等国君的儿子封土、谢宾、谢乡人了。 
English: Confucius replied, "In that case, you must first take the spirit of the sovereign to the cemetery. After the coffin is lowered, you can go home to prepare for the funeral. There is no need to wait for the son of the sovereign to seal the land, thank the relatives, and thank the villagers.

古文：曾子问曰： 父母之丧既引，及涂，闻君薨，如之何？ 
现代文：曾子又问： 父母的灵枢已经出殡上路，这时候突然听到国君去世的噩耗，该怎么办？ 
English: Zeng Zi also asked: What should I do when I suddenly hear the bad news of the death of the sovereign when the spirit of my parents has already left for the funeral?

古文：孔子曰： 遂。既封，改服而往。 
现代文：孔子答道： 应该先把父母的灵枢送到墓地，下棺之后，就连忙改换服装去奔国君之丧。 
English: Confucius replied, "You should first take the spirit of your parents to the cemetery, and after the coffin is lowered, you should quickly change your clothes to go to the funeral of the sovereign.

古文：曾子问曰： 宗子为士，庶子为大夫，其祭也如之何？ 
现代文：曾子问道： 宗子的爵位是士，而庶子却是大夫，庶子祭祀祖先时，应该用什么等级呢？ 
English: Zeng Zi asked: Zeng Zi's peerage is that of a peer, but Zeng Zi's illegitimate son is that of a doctor. When Zeng Zi's illegitimate son sacrifices to his ancestors, what rank should he use?

古文：孔子曰： 以上牲祭于宗子之家。祝曰： 孝子某为介子某荐其常事。 
现代文：孔子答道： 用大夫的礼，备少牢祭于宗子之家，祝辞要说： 孝子某代替介子进献供品祭祀。 
English: Confucius replied, "Using the etiquette of a doctor, let's prepare a memorial service for the young prisoner at his father's house. In your eulogy, you should say, "A certain filial son has offered a sacrifice in place of the child."

古文：若宗子有罪，居于他国，庶子为大夫，其祭也，祝曰： 孝子某使介子某执其常事。 
现代文：如果宗子有罪，住在别的国家，而庶子爵为大夫，祭祀的时候，祝辞就要说： 孝子某让介子某代行祭祀。 
English: If the patriarch is guilty and lives in another country, and the second viscount is the doctor, when performing the sacrifice, the congratulation should say: "The filial son let the son perform the sacrifice."

古文：摄主不厌祭，不旅，不假，不绥祭，不配。
现代文：凡代替宗子主持的祭祀，就要简化程序，不厌祭，不旅酬，不祝福，不绥祭，祝词中不讲以某妃配食的话。
English: For any sacrificial rites presided over in place of the patriarch, it is necessary to simplify the procedures, do not get tired of the sacrifice, do not travel, do not bless, do not make a burnt offering, and do not say in the congratulatory speech that a certain empress will serve food.

古文：布奠于宾，宾奠而不举，不归肉。
现代文：代主人向宾劝酒时，宾取过酒杯放下，不举杯进行旅酬、祭的末了，也不向来宾分赠祭肉。
English: When advising guests to drink wine on behalf of the host, the guests take the wine cup and put it down, do not raise the cup for the journey reward, the end of the festival, and do not give the guests a portion of the sacrificial meat.

古文：其辞于宾曰： 宗兄、宗弟、宗子在他国，使某辞。  
现代文：庶子对来宾致辞说： 宗兄现在他国，所以派我代主祭祀，并让我向诸位致意。  
English: In his speech to the guests, the son-in-law said, "My elder brother is now in another country, so I was sent to offer the sacrifice on behalf of the Lord, and let me greet you all.

古文：曾子问曰： 宗子去在他国，庶子无爵而居者，可以祭乎？ 孔子曰： 祭哉！ 
现代文：曾子间道： 宗子有罪逃到他国，住在本国而没有爵位的庶子，可以代替宗子祭祀祖先吗？ 孔子答道： 可以祭祀。 
English: Zeng Zima said: Can the illegitimate son of Zeng Zi, who has fled to another country and lives in his own country without a peerage, replace Zeng Zi in sacrificing to the ancestors? Confucius replied: You can sacrifice.

古文：请问： 其祭如之何？ 
现代文：曾子又问： 请问该怎么祭祀？ 
English: Zengzi also asked: How should the sacrifice be made?

古文：孔子曰： 望墓而为坛，以时祭。
现代文：孔子答道： 庶子可以在朝着祖先墓地的方向上筑坛，一年四季按时祭祀。
English: Confucius replied, "The son-in-law can build an altar facing the direction of the ancestor's graveyard, and offer sacrifices on time all year round.

古文：若宗子死，告于墓而后祭于家。
现代文：如果宗子已经去世，则可以先到祖先墓地把情况禀告，然后在自己家中进行祭祀。
English: If the founder has passed away, you can first go to the ancestral cemetery to report the situation, and then perform the ritual in your own home.

古文：宗子死，称名不言孝，身没而已。
现代文：因为宗子已经不在，所以祭祀就以自己的名义进行，但不得自称 孝子 ，直到身死为止。
English: Since the founder is no longer alive, the sacrifice is performed in his own name, but he is not allowed to call himself a filial son until he dies.

古文：子游之徒，有庶子祭者以此，若义也。
现代文：子游的那帮学生中，有以庶子身份祭祖的，就是照此道理办事。
English: Among Ziyu's group of students, there are those who worship their ancestors as illegitimate children, and they act according to this principle.

古文：今之祭者，不首其义，故诬于祭也。 
现代文：如今庶子的祭祀，不推求古礼的意义,所以祭祀时都随意乱来。 
English: Nowadays, the significance of the ancient rite is not required for the sacrifice of a child born out of wedlock, so the ritual is carried out haphazardly.

古文：曾子问曰： 祭必有尸乎？
现代文：曾子问道： 祭祀一定是有尸吗？
English: Zengzi asked, "Is it necessary to have a corpse for the ritual?"

古文：若厌祭亦可乎？ 
现代文：像餍祭那样也可以吗？ 
English: Can it also be done like a burnt offering?

古文：孔子曰： 祭成丧者必有尸，尸必以孙。
现代文：孔子答道： 祭祀成年的死者，一定要有尸。尸必须以同昭或同穆的孙辈充当。
English: Confucius replied, "For the adult dead to be sacrificed, there must be a corpse. The corpse must be a grandchild of Tong Zhao or Tong Mu.

古文：孙幼，则使人抱之。
现代文：亲孙子如果年龄太小，充当尸时可以使人抱着。
English: If the grandchild is too young, he or she can be cradled when acting as a corpse.

古文：无孙，则取于同姓可也。
现代文：如果死者没有亲孙子，可以从同姓的孙子辈中挑选一个。
English: If the deceased did not have a grandchild, a grandchild with the same last name can be chosen.

古文：祭殇必厌，盖弗成也。
现代文：祭未成年而死者，就没有尸，采用餍祭，因为他还没有成年。
English: If the victim was a minor and died without a body, the burnt offering was to be used, since he was not yet of age.

古文：祭成丧而无尸，是殇之也。 
现代文：祭成年死者而无尸，那等于把他们当作荡来看待了。 
English: To offer up the adult dead without a body is to treat them as if they had never existed.

古文：孔子曰： 有阴厌，有阳厌。 
现代文：孔子又说： 厌祭有两种，一是阴厌，一是阳厌。 
English: Confucius also said: There are two kinds of disgusting offerings, one is disgusting and the other is disgusting.

古文：曾子问曰： 殇不祔祭，何谓阴厌、阳厌？ 
现代文：曾子间道： 祭荡的礼数简单，什么叫阴厌、阳厌？ 
English: Zeng Zima said: The number of rites in the festival is simple. What is disgust and disgust?

古文：孔子曰： 宗子为殇而死，庶子弗为后也。
现代文：孔子答道； 宗子没有成年而死，其他庶子是不能作他的后嗣的。
English: Confucius replied, "The eldest son died before he was of age, and other illegitimate children cannot be his heirs."

古文：其吉祭，特牲。
现代文：在为其衬庙而举行的吉祭时，用一条牛作牺牲。
English: In the auspicious festival held for its lining temple, a cow is sacrificed.

古文：祭殇不举，无肵俎，无玄酒，不告利成，是谓阴厌。
现代文：但因为他是未成年而死，所以不举肺脊，没有所姐，没有玄酒，最后也不报告养尸之礼完成。这就叫阴厌。
English: But because he was a minor when he died, there was no funeral, no sister, no wine, and in the end, there was no report on the completion of the funeral service. This is called shyness.

古文：凡殇，与无后者，祭于宗子之家，当室之白，尊于东房，是谓阳厌。 
现代文：凡其他未成年而死者，以及死而无后者，都祭于宗子之家，把祭品摆设在室内的西北角，把酒蹲设在东房。这就叫阳厌。 
English: All other deaths of minors, as well as deaths without the latter, are dedicated to the patriarch's house, with the offerings placed in the northwest corner of the room and the wine placed in the east room. This is called yangzhao.

古文：曾子问曰： 葬引至于堩，日有食之，则有变乎？
现代文：曾子问道： 出葬已经发引 柩车已经上路，这时忽然遇到日食，是改变葬礼呢？
English: Zengzi asked, "The funeral procession has already started, and the carriage has been on the road, when suddenly there is a solar eclipse. Is it to change the funeral?

古文：且不乎？ 
现代文：还是不改变？ 
English: Or not change?

古文：孔子曰： 昔者吾从老聃助葬于巷党，及堩，日有食之，老聃曰： 丘！
现代文：孔子答道： 从前我跟着老聃在巷党帮人家出葬，柩车也已上路，突然发生日食。老聃喊道： 孔丘！
English: Confucius replied, "Once upon a time, I was with Lao Zi at a funeral. The carriage was already on the road, and suddenly there was a solar eclipse. Lao Zi shouted, "Confucius!

古文：止柩，就道右，止哭以听变。 
现代文：把灵枢停下，靠着路的右边停放，叫大家停止哭泣，等天象变了再走。 
English: Stop the spirit center, park it on the right side of the road, tell everyone to stop crying, and wait for the sky to change before leaving.

古文：既明反而后行。曰： 礼也。 
现代文：日食过后，柩车又继续前进。老聃说： 按礼就应这样做。 
English: After the eclipse, the carriage continued on its way. Lao Zi said, "You should do this as a courtesy."

古文：反葬，而丘问之曰： 夫柩不可以反者也，日有食之，不知其已之迟数，则岂如行哉？ 老聃曰： 诸侯朝天子，见日而行，逮日而舍奠；大夫使，见日而行，逮日而舍。
现代文：葬毕返回，我就请教老聃： 柩车只能前进，不能后退。日蚀这种现象，谁也不知道要持续多久 与其在路旁等候，还不如继续前进呢，老聃说： 诸侯去朝见天子，每天日出而行，傍晚太阳尚未落山就找个地方休息，并且祭奠随行的迁庙主。大夫出使，也是每天日出而行，太阳未落就找个地方休息。
English: After returning from the funeral, I asked Lao Zang: The carriage can only go forward, not backward. No one knows how long the eclipse phenomenon will last. Rather than waiting by the roadside, it is better to continue moving forward, Lao Zang said: Princes go to see the Son of Heaven in the morning, walk every day at sunrise, find a place to rest before the sun sets in the evening, and pay tribute to the accompanying temple owner. The doctor also goes out every day at sunrise, and finds a place to rest before the sun sets.

古文：夫柩不早出，不暮宿。
现代文：灵枢不可在天亮之前就出殡，也不可到天黑下来才止宿。
English: The spiritual center should not leave for the funeral before dawn, nor should it stay until nightfall.

古文：见星而行者，唯罪人与奔父母之丧者乎！
现代文：披星戴月而赶路的，大概只有罪人和奔父母之丧的人吧。
English: The only people who travel by the stars and the moon are probably sinners and those who are mourning the death of a parent.

古文：日有食之，安知其不见星也？
现代文：遇到日食，天空一片黑暗，我们怎么会知道天空不定在什么时候会出现星星呢？
English: In the case of a solar eclipse, when the sky is completely dark, how can we know when the stars will appear in the sky?

古文：且君子行礼，不以人之亲痁患。 
现代文：如果继续前行，岂不是与夜行一样吗？君子行事依礼，总不能使别人的亲属有遇上灾祸的危险呀。 
English: If you continue to walk, isn't it the same as walking at night? A gentleman acts according to etiquette and must not put other people's relatives at risk of disaster.

古文：吾闻诸老聃云。 
现代文：我听到老聃是这样说的。 
English: I heard the old crone say so.

古文：曾子问曰： 为君使而卒于舍，礼曰：公馆复，私馆不复。
现代文：曾子问道： 奉国君之命出使他国，不幸而死于主国馆舍，礼书上说： 死在公家的驿馆里可以招魂，死在私人的馆舍里就不招魂。 
English: Zeng Zi asked, "I was ordered by the sovereign to go to another country, but unfortunately I died in my host country's residence. The eulogy said, 'Dying in a public residence can attract the soul, but dying in a private residence will not attract the soul.'

古文：凡所使之国，有司所授舍，则公馆已，何谓私馆不复也？ 
现代文：可是出使到别的国家，该国负责接待的人总是要为使者安排住处的，这可以看作就是公家的馆舍。那么，所谓 死在私人的馆舍就不招魂 是指什么呢？ 
English: However, when an envoy is sent to another country, the person in charge of the reception in that country always has to arrange accommodation for the envoy, which can be regarded as the official residence. So, what does it mean to say that death in a private residence does not attract the soul?

古文：孔子曰： 善乎问之也！
现代文：孔子答道： 这个问题问得好！
English: Confucius replied: That is a good question!

古文：自卿、大夫、士之家，曰私馆；公馆与公所为，曰公馆。
现代文：住在卿、大夫、士之家叫做私人馆舍。诸侯建的宾馆和国君指定的下榻处叫做公家馆舍。
English: The homes of lords, doctors, and aristocrats are called private residences, while the guesthouses built by feudal lords and the accommodations designated by sovereigns are called public residences.

古文：公馆复，此之谓也。 
现代文：所谓 死在公家的馆舍可以招魂 指的就是这些地方。 
English: It is these places that are referred to by the saying that death in a public building can call up the spirits.

古文：曾子问曰： 下殇：土周葬于园，遂舆机而往，途迩故也。
现代文：曾子问道： 八岁到十一岁的孩子死后，在园子中挖个坑，坑的四周用砖砌上，然后用 机 把尸体抬去下葬，这是因为路途很近的缘故。
English: Zeng Zi asked: After the death of a child between the ages of eight and eleven, a pit was dug in the garden, the pit was surrounded by bricks, and then the body was carried by machine to be buried. This was because the road was very close.

古文：今墓远，则其葬也如之何？ 
现代文：如果墓地较远，其葬法该怎样办呢？ 
English: If the cemetery is far away, how should the burial be done?

古文：孔子曰： 吾闻诸老聃曰：昔者史佚有子而死，下殇也。
现代文：孔子答道： 我听老聃讲过： 从前史佚有个儿子去世了，年龄也是八到十一岁，墓地较远。
English: Confucius replied, "I heard Lao Zi say, 'Once upon a time, there was a son of Shi Zi who died at the age of eight to eleven, and his grave was far away.

古文：墓远，召公谓之曰： 何以不棺敛于宫中？ 
现代文：召公对史佚说： 你为什么不在家里大敛入棺后再入葬呢？ 
English: Zhao Gong said to Shi Yan, "Why don't you go to the funeral after you have put everything into the coffin at home?

古文：史佚曰： 吾敢乎哉？ 
现代文：史佚说： 这是违礼的事，我不敢那样做？ 
English: Shi Yan said, "This is a violation of etiquette. How dare I do that?"

古文：召公言于周公，周公曰： 岂不可？ 
现代文：召公就在周公面前讲了此事，周公就说： 那有什么不可以的呢？ 
English: Zhao Gong spoke about the matter in front of Zhou Gong, and Zhou Gong said: What's wrong with that?

古文：史佚行之。
现代文：于是史佚就照召公说的做了。 
English: So Shi Yan did as he was told.

古文：下殇用棺衣棺，自史佚始也。 
现代文：下殇在家大敛入棺再出葬的事，是从史佚开始的。 
English: It was Shi Yan who started the tradition of putting the lower part of the body into the coffin at home and then taking it out for burial.

古文：曾子问曰： 卿、大夫将为尸于公，受宿矣，而有齐衰内丧，则如之何？ 
现代文：曾子问道： 卿大夫将在国君的祭祀中作尸，已经接受邀请并斋戒了，这时突然有家门内齐衰之亲去世，该怎么办？ 
English: Zeng Zi asked: Dr. Xing will make a corpse in the sacrifice of the king, has accepted the invitation and fasted, when suddenly a relative of the family died, what should I do?

古文：孔子曰： 出，舍于公馆以待事，礼也。 
现代文：孔子答道： 那就要离开家，住在国君的公馆里等待祭祀，这才合乎礼法。 
English: Confucius replied, "In that case, you should leave home and live in the official residence of the sovereign to await the sacrificial rites. This is in accordance with etiquette."

古文：孔子曰： 尸弁冕而出，卿、大夫、士皆下之，尸必式，必有前驱。 
现代文：孔子又说： 做尸的人冠戴而出家门，卿大夫碰见他，都要下车致敬，做尸的人必须倚靠着车轼答礼。
English: Confucius also said: The corpse-maker wears a crown and goes out of the house. When the noble doctor meets him, everyone must get off the car and salute. The corpse-maker must lean against the wheel to answer the salute.

古文：子夏问曰： 三年之丧卒哭，金革之事无辟也者，礼与？
现代文：做尸的人出门，前面必定要有开道的人。 子夏问道： 居父母之丧，卒哭之后，接到参加征战的命令就不能推辞，这是礼当如此呢？
English: Zixia asked, "After the death of one's parents, one cannot refuse the order to participate in the war, even after crying. Is this proper?

古文：初有司与？ 
现代文：还是从前主管的人规定的呢？ 
English: Or was it dictated by someone in charge in the past?

古文：孔子曰： 夏后氏三年之丧，既殡而致事，殷人既葬而致事。
现代文：孔子答道： 居父母之丧，在夏代是父母入殡后就告假守丧，在殷代是父母入葬后告假，到周代是卒哭之后告假，目的就是为了要让孝子专心致志地守孝三年。
English: Confucius replied, "When one's parents are in mourning, one should take a leave of absence after the funeral of the parents in the Summer Dynasty, after the funeral of the parents in the Yin Dynasty, and after the funeral of the parents in the Zhou Dynasty. The purpose of taking a leave of absence after the funeral of the parents in the Zhou Dynasty is to let the filial son devote himself to filial piety for three years.

古文：《记》曰： 君子不夺人之亲，亦不可夺亲也。 
现代文：古《记》上说： 有德行的人，不剥夺别人对父母的哀情，也不剥夺自己的哀情。 
English: The ancient "Record" said: A virtuous person does not deprive others of their grief for their parents, nor does he deprive himself of his grief.

古文：此之谓乎？ 
现代文：说的就是这个道理。 
English: This is exactly the situation!

古文：子夏曰： 金革之事无辟也者，非与？ 
现代文：子夏又问道： 如此说来，卒哭之后不能辞避战争征召是不合礼的？ 
English: Zixia also asked, "So, it's not proper to refuse to be drafted into the army after crying?"

古文：孔子曰： 吾闻诸老聃曰：昔者鲁公伯禽有为为之也。
现代文：孔子答道： 我听老腆讲过： 从前鲁公伯禽在特定情况下，卒哭之后兴兵讨伐过。
English: Confucius replied, "I have heard Lao Zi say, 'Once upon a time, in a particular situation, Lu Gongberi, after crying, raised an army to fight.

古文：今以三年之丧，从其利者，吾弗知也！ 
现代文：但现在许多人在守丧期间，为了私利而从事战争，我就不知道合礼性何在了。 
English: But now, many people engage in war for personal gain during the mourning period, and I don't know what is appropriate.

