古文：杨终字子山，蜀郡成都人也。
现代文：◆杨终传，杨终字子山，蜀郡成都人。
English: ◆ Yang Zhenchuan, Yang Zhenzha Zishan, from Chengdu, Shu County.

古文：年十三，为郡小吏，太守奇其才，遣诣京师受业，习《春秋》，显宗时，征诣兰台，拜校书郎。
现代文：十三岁时，做郡小吏，太守认为其才很奇特，派他到京师学习，学《春秋》。显宗时，召他到兰台，拜为校书郎。
English: At the age of thirteen, when he was a county magistrate, the emperor thought that his talent was very peculiar, and sent him to study in Beijing to study "Spring and Autumn." When he became emperor, he called him to Lantai to be a school scribe.

古文：建初元年，大旱谷贵，终以为广陵、楚、淮阳、济南之狱，徙者万数，又远屯绝域，吏民怨旷，乃上疏曰：臣闻 善善及子孙，恶恶止其身 ，百王常典，不易之道也。
现代文：建初元年，大旱，谷价昂贵，杨终认为广陵、楚、淮阳、济南等处的牢狱，充军的人达万数，又远屯于绝域，官吏百姓怨旷的甚多，于是上疏道： 臣听说 善善及子孙，恶恶止其身 ，百王常典，不变的道理。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the year, there was a big drought and grain prices were expensive. Yang finally thought that the prisons in Guangling, Chu, Huaiyang, Jinan and other places were full of thousands of people, and they were far away in the wilderness. There were a lot of resentment among officials and people. So he went to the ditch and said: "Ministers have heard that good is good and children and grandchildren are good, and evil is evil, and this is the unchanging principle of the Book of the Hundred Kings."

古文：秦政酷烈，违忤天心，一人有罪，延及三族。
现代文：秦朝政治残酷厉害，违背上天之心，一个人有罪，连累到三族。
English: The politics of the Qin Dynasty was cruel and violent. It violated the heart of heaven. One person was guilty, and the three tribes were involved.

古文：高祖平乱，约法三章。
现代文：高祖平定乱世，约法三章。
English: Gaozhu pacified the chaotic world, and there are three chapters about the Fa.

古文：太宗至仁，除去收孥。
现代文：太宗极仁慈，除去收孥之律。
English: Taizong is extremely benevolent, eliminating the law of convergence.

古文：万姓廓然，蒙被更生，泽及昆虫，功垂万世。
现代文：万姓廓然，蒙受再生之福，恩泽达到昆虫，功绩垂于万世。
English: All surnames are blameless, all are blessed with rebirth, all are favored by insects, and all are meritorious for all eternity.

古文：陛下圣明，德被四表。
现代文：陛下圣德英明，德被回表。
English: Your Majesty, virtue is wise, and virtue is a watchword.

古文：今以比年久旱，灾疫未息，躬自菲薄，广访失得，三代之隆，无以加焉。
现代文：今以连年干旱，灾疫不止，自奉菲薄，广泛访问得失，即使三代的隆盛，也不过如此，不能再增加了。
English: Now, with consecutive years of drought, continuous disasters and epidemics, self-sacrifices and feebleness, extensive visits and losses, even the prosperity of three generations is nothing more than this, and cannot be increased.

古文：臣窃桉《春秋》水旱之变，皆应暴急，惠不下流。
现代文：臣私下查《春秋》记载的水旱之变，都应暴急，恩惠不下流。
English: The minister privately checked the changes in water and drought recorded in "Spring and Autumn," and they were all urgent, and the benefits were not bad.

古文：自永平以来，仍连大狱，有司穷考，转相牵引，掠考冤滥，家属徒边。
现代文：自永平年间以来，仍连大狱，有司穷追，互相牵引，掠考犯人，冤及无辜，家属充军。
English: Since the Yongping era, there has been a series of large-scale prisons, with officers chasing and dragging each other, preying on prisoners, the wronged and the innocent, and family members joining the army.

古文：加以北征匈奴，西开三十六国，频年服役，转输烦费。
现代文：加以北方讨伐匈奴，西方开拓三十六国，连年服役，转输耗费很大。
English: With the north to fight the Huns, and the west to explore 36 countries, they served for years, and the transfer cost was very high.

古文：又远屯伊吾，楼兰、车师、戊己，民怀土思，怨结边域。
现代文：又远屯伊吾、楼兰、车师、戊己，百姓怀念家乡，怨恨结在边域。
English: In addition, Igu, Loulan, Chaishi, and Wuji are far away. People miss their hometowns, and resentment is tied to the border areas.

古文：传曰： 安土重居，谓之众庶。 
现代文：《传》说 ：安土重居，谓之众庶。 
English: "Biography" says: Returning to Azuchi means being a commoner.

古文：昔殷民近迁洛邑，且犹怨望，何况去中土之肥饶，寄不毛之荒极乎？
现代文：从前殷代人民近迁到洛邑，尚且埋怨，何况离开肥沃的中原土地，到不毛之地的荒原呢？
English: In the past, the people of the Yin Dynasty moved to Luoyang and complained about it. How about leaving the fertile Central Plains and moving to the barren wasteland?

古文：且南方暑湿，障毒互生。
现代文：并且南方暑热潮湿，障毒互生。
English: In addition, the south is hot and humid, and diseases and poisons coexist.

古文：愁困之民，足以感动天地，移变阴阳矣。
现代文：愁苦的百姓，足以感动天地，移变阴阳了。
English: The distressed people are enough to move heaven and earth, shifting yin and yang.

古文：陛下留念省察，以济元元。
现代文：陛下留心观察，救救百姓吧。 
English: Your Majesty, please pay attention and save the people.

古文：书奏，肃宗下其章。
现代文：书奏上，肃宗将奏章交给臣下讨论。
English: On the calligraphy, Su Zong handed the calligraphy to his vassals for discussion.

古文：司空第五伦亦同终议。
现代文：司空第五伦也赞同杨终的意见。
English: S.K. Fifth Luen also agrees with Yang Sheng's opinion.

古文：太尉牟融、司徒鲍昱、校书郎班固等难伦，以施行既久，孝子无改父之道，先帝所建，不宜回异。
现代文：太尉牟融、司徒鲍昱，校书郎班固等人与第五伦辩论，认为移民之法施行已久，孝子没有改父之道的权力，先帝所建制度，不应回异。
English: Captain Mu Rong, Szu Bao, school scribe Ban Gu and others debated with the Fifth Emperor, arguing that the immigration law had been in effect for a long time, that a filial son did not have the right to change his father's path, and that the system established by the former emperor should not be changed.

古文：终复上书曰： 秦筑长城，功役繁兴，胡亥不革，卒亡四海。
现代文：杨终又上书道： 秦代筑长城，功役繁兴，胡亥不思改革，终于失掉天下。
English: Yang finally wrote again: The Qin Dynasty built the Great Wall, prospered through hard work, Hu Hai did not think about reform, and finally lost the world.

古文：故孝元弃珠崖之郡，光武绝西域之国，不以介鳞易我衣裳。
现代文：所以孝元帝放弃了珠崖之郡，光武帝断绝西域之国，为的是不用远夷换我中国。
English: Therefore, Emperor Xiaoyuan gave up Zhuya County, and Emperor Guangwu cut off the countries in the western region, in order not to have to go far away to change my China.

古文：鲁文公毁泉台，《春秋》讥之曰 先祖为之而己毁之，不如勿居而己 ，以其无妨害于民也。
现代文：鲁文公毁泉台，《春秋》讥笑道 ：先祖为之而己毁之，不如勿居而已 ，为的是对百姓无妨害。
English: Lu Wen publicly destroyed the spring, "Spring and Autumn" scoffed: the ancestors did it and destroyed it, it is better not to live, so as not to disturb the people.

古文：襄公作三军。昭公舍之，君子大其复古，以为不舍则有害于民也。
现代文：襄公作三军，昭公舍弃中军，君子以为是复古，认为不舍弃就有害于民。
English: Xiang Gong made three armies, Zhaokong abandoned the Chinese army, the gentleman thought it was retro, and thought that not abandoning it would be harmful to the people.

古文：今伊吾之役，楼兰之屯，久而未还，非天意也。 
现代文：现在伊吾之役，楼兰之屯，久而不还，不是天意。 
English: It is not God's will that the battle of Igu, the battle of Loulan, has not been won for a long time.

古文：帝从之，听还徙者，悉罢边屯。
现代文：皇帝听从了，迁还那些流放之人，全部停止屯边的办法。
English: The emperor obeyed, returned those who had been exiled, and put an end to all settlement.

古文：终又言： 宣帝博征群儒，论定《五经》于石渠阁。
现代文：杨终又说： 宣帝广泛征召郡儒，论定《五经》在石渠阁。
English: Yang Zhen also said: Emperor Xuan extensively conscripted county Confucians and determined that the "Five Classics" were in Shiquijiao.

古文：方今天下少事，学者得成其业，而章句之徒，破坏大体。
现代文：当前天下太平无事，学者得以完成其业，而章句之徒，破坏大体。
English: At present, the world is peaceful and tranquil, scholars can complete their work, and the perpetrators of the chapter and verse can destroy the whole.

古文：宜如石渠故事，永为后世则。 
现代文：应照石渠旧例，永为后世的法则。 
English: We should follow the old example of the stone canal, which will always be the law of future generations.

古文：于是诏诸儒于白虎观论考同异焉。
现代文：于是诏诸儒在白虎观论考同异。
English: As a result, all the Confucianists agreed on the view of the white tiger.

古文：会终坐事系狱，博士赵博、校书郎班固、贾逵等，以终深晓《春秋》，学多异闻，表请之，终又上书自讼，即日贳出，乃得与于白虎观焉。
现代文：碰上杨终因事系狱，博士赵博、校书郎班固、贾逵等，认为杨终对《春秋》很有研究，学术上多独特见解，上表请求，杨终又上书自我表白，即日赦免，于是得以参与白虎观。
English: When Dr. Zhao Bo, the school's librarian, Mr. Ban Gu, Mr. Jia Jun, and others found Yang Duan in prison, they thought that Yang Duan had done a lot of research on "Spring and Autumn" and had many unique academic opinions. They asked for a written confession from Yang Duan, and he was pardoned on the same day. As a result, he was able to participate in the White Tiger Viewing.

古文：后受诏删《太史公书》为十余万言。
现代文：后来受诏删削《太史公书》为十多万字。
English: Later, "Tai Shi Gong Shu" was abridged by imperial edict to more than one hundred thousand words.

古文：时，太后兄卫尉马廖，谨笃自守，不训诸子。
现代文：当时太后之兄卫尉马廖，谨慎笃厚自守，不训诸子。
English: At that time, the empress dowager's brother, Lieutenant Mario, was cautious and self-protective, and did not discipline his sons.

古文：终与廖交善，以书戒之曰：终闻尧、舜之民，可比屋而封；桀、纣之民，可比屋而诛，何者？
现代文：杨终与廖友情甚善，写信劝廖道 ：我听说尧、舜的百姓，可以比屋得到封赠；桀、纣的百姓，可以比屋得到诛杀。
English: Yang eventually developed a very good friendship with Liao, and wrote a letter to advise Liao: I heard that the people of Shandong and Fujian can get a gift of a pavilion; the people of Fujian and Fujian can get a pavilion.

古文：尧、舜为之堤防，桀、纣示之骄奢故也。
现代文：为什么呢？尧舜为之提防，桀纣示之骄奢的缘故。
English: Why? Because of their arrogance.

古文：《诗》曰： 皎皎练丝，在所染之。 
现代文：《诗经》上说 ：皎皎练丝，在所染之。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Strain the silk, and it will be dyed."

古文：上智下愚，谓之不移；中庸之流，要在教化。
现代文：上智下愚，不可改变，中庸之疏，要在教而化之。
English: Wisdom is superior to folly, and cannot be changed. Moderation is rare, and must be cultivated.

古文：《春秋》杀太子母弟，直称君甚恶之者，坐失教也。
现代文：《春秋》上记载晋侯杀太子申生，直称晋侯，表示厌恶，就因为他失教缘故。
English: It is recorded in "Spring and Autumn" that Jin Hou killed Prince Shen Sheng, also known as Jin Hou, expressing his disgust because he had lost his education.

古文：《礼》制，人君之子年八岁，为置少搏，教之书计，以开其明；十五置太傅，教之经典，以道其志。
现代文：《礼记》规定，人君之子年八岁，替他设少傅，教之书写计算，以开其智慧；十五岁设太傅，教之经典，以引导他立志。
English: "Li Ji" stipulates that when a person's son is eight years old, he should set up a junior tutor to teach him writing and calculation to open his wisdom; at the age of fifteen, he should set up a senior tutor to teach him classics to guide him to make up his mind.

古文：汉兴，诸侯王不力教诲，多触禁忌，故有亡国之祸，而乏嘉善之称。
现代文：汉朝兴起，诸侯王不致力于教诲，多触禁忌，所以有亡国之祸，而缺乏嘉善的称号。
English: With the rise of the Han Dynasty, the princes and kings did not devote themselves to teaching and touched more taboos, so there was the misfortune of ruining the country, but the title of Jiashan was lacking.

古文：今君位地尊重，海内所望，岂可不临深履薄，以为至戒！
现代文：今君位置尊贵，海内寄予厚望。难道不可以如临深渊，如履薄冰，以为警戒么！
English: Now you are in a position of honor, with high hopes at sea. Can't you think of caution as if you were approaching the abyss, like treading on thin ice?

古文：黄门郎年幼，血气方盛，既无长君退让之风，而要结轻狡无行之客，纵而莫诲，视成任性，鉴念前往，可为寒心。
现代文：黄门郎年幼，血气方盛，既没有长君的退让之风度，而要结交轻狡无行之宾客，放纵而不教诲，视成任性，鉴念过去的教训，可令人寒心。
English: Huangmenlang is young and full of vigor, he does not have the long-suffering demeanor of the eldest prince, but he wants to make friends with guests who are cunning and crafty, indulge without teaching, regard as capricious, and learn the lessons of the past, which can be chilling.

古文：君侯诚宜以临深履薄为戒。
现代文：君侯应该以临深渊履薄冰为戒。 
English: Princes should beware of treading on thin ice.

古文：廖不纳。
现代文：马廖不采纳。
English: It was not adopted.

古文：子豫后坐县书诽谤，廖以就国。
现代文：儿子马豫后因悬书诽谤犯罪，马廖回到封地。
English: After his son, Ma Yu, was arrested for libel, he returned to his fiefdom.

古文：终兄凤为郡吏，太守廉范为州所考，遣凤侯终，终为范游说，坐徙北地。
现代文：杨终之兄杨凤为郡吏，太守廉范被州所考核，派杨凤候杨终，杨终替廉范游说，被充军到北地。
English: Yang Feng, Yang Zhen's brother, was a county official, and Yang Feng, Yang Zhen's brother-in-law, was sent to wait for Yang Zhen, and Yang Zhen lobbied for Yang Zhen, and was sent to the north.

古文：帝东巡狩，凤皇黄龙并集，终赞颂嘉瑞，上述祖宗鸿业，凡十五章，奏上，诏贳还故郡。
现代文：皇帝东方出巡，凤凰黄龙并集，杨终赞颂嘉瑞吉祥，上述祖宗之大业，共十五章，奏上，诏免罪回故乡。
English: The emperor went on a tour to the East, the phoenix and the yellow dragon were gathered together, and Yang finally praised the auspiciousness of Jia Rui, the great cause of the above-mentioned ancestors, a total of fifteen chapters, recorded, and returned to his hometown.

古文：著《春秋外传》十二篇，改定章句十五万言。
现代文：著《春秋外传》十二篇，改定章句十五万字。
English: He is the author of "Spring and Autumn Biography" with 12 chapters and 150,000 words of revised chapters.

古文：永元十二年，征拜郎中，以病卒。
现代文：永元十二年，召拜郎中，因病而死。
English: In the twelfth year of the Heian period, he was summoned to serve as a junior vassal and died of illness.

古文：李法字伯度，汉中南郑人也。
现代文：◆李法传，李法字伯度，汉中南郑人。
English: ◆ Li Fa Chuan, Li Fa Zi Berdu, Han Zhongnan Zheng Ren.

古文：博通群书，性刚而有节。
现代文：博通群书，性格刚直而有节。
English: Broad-minded and well-read, with an upright and disciplined personality.

古文：和帝永元九年，应贤艮方正对策。除博士，迁侍中、光禄大夫。
现代文：和帝永元九年，应贤良方正对策，授博士，升为侍中，光禄大夫。
English: In the ninth year of Emperor Yongzheng, Yingxian Liangfang made countermeasures, was awarded a doctorate, and was promoted to a chamberlain, Guanglu doctor.

古文：岁余，上疏以为朝政苛碎，违永平、建初故事；宦官权重，椒房宠盛，又讥史官记事不实，后世有识，寻功计德，必不明信。
现代文：一年多，上疏认为朝政苛碎，违背永平、建初年间旧例；宦官权势太重，后妃宠幸太多，又讥史官记事不实在，后世有识之士，寻功计德，必不明信。
English: For more than a year, Shangsuo believed that the dynastic politics were harsh and violated the old rules of Yongping and the early years of Jianchu; the eunuchs were too powerful, the empresses were too favored, and the historians' records were not true, and future generations would not believe those who were clever and sought virtue.

古文：坐失旨，下有司，免为庶人，还乡里，杜门自守。
现代文：因犯了失旨罪，下交有司法办，免职成为庶人。回到乡里，关起门来自守。
English: Because he committed the crime of defection, he was handed over to the judicial office, dismissed from his post and became a commoner. He returned to the village and closed the door to protect himself.

古文：故人儒生时有侯之者，言谈之次，问其不合上意之由，法未尝应对。
现代文：老友儒生时有问候的，言谈之余，问他不合上意的缘由，法不曾回答。
English: When an old friend, a Confucian scholar, greeted me, I asked him why he didn't like me, but he didn't answer.

古文：友人固问之，法曰： 鄙夫可与事君乎哉？
现代文：友人坚决问他，法回答道： 鄙贱之人可以和他侍君吗？
English: His friend asked him firmly, and Fa replied, "Can a despicable person serve the emperor with him?

古文：敬患失之，无所不至。
现代文：如果担心失误，谄佞的行为将无所不至。
English: If you're worried about making mistakes, you're going to be all over the place.

古文：孟子有言： 夫仁者如射，正己而后发。
现代文：孟子说过： 仁者好比射箭，必须身子站正尔后发箭。
English: Mencius said: A benevolent person is like an archer. He must stand up straight before shooting.

古文：发而不中，不怨胜己者，反诸身而已矣。  
现代文：发而不中，不必埋怨胜过自己的人，反求于自己罢了。  
English: If you do not succeed, you do not have to complain about those who are better than you. Instead, you just have to ask yourself.

古文：在家八年，征拜议郎、谏议大夫，正言极辞，无改于旧。
现代文：在家八年，征拜为议郎，谏议大夫，正言极辞，不改老毛病。
English: He has been at home for eight years. He is a solicitor, a doctor of negotiation, a straight talker, and does not change his old ways.

古文：出为汝南太守，政有声迹。
现代文：后来出去做汝南太守，政治很有名望。
English: Later, he went on to become the first abbot of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, and his political achievements were well-known.

古文：后归乡里，卒于家。
现代文：后来回到乡里，死于家中。
English: He later returned to the countryside and died at home.

古文：翟酺字子超，广汉雒人也。
现代文：◆翟酉甫传，翟酉甫字子超，广汉雒人。
English: ◆甫传,甫字子超,广汉人.

古文：四世传《诗》。
现代文：四世传《诗经》。
English: "The Book of Songs" has been passed down for four generations.

古文：酺好《老子》，尤善图纬、天文、历算。
现代文：翟酉甫好《老子》，尤其长于图纬、天文、历算。
English: Zou Fu likes "Lao Zi" and is especially good at cartography, astronomy, and calculation.

古文：以报舅仇，当徙日南，亡于长安，为卜相工，后牧羊凉州。
现代文：为了报舅仇，当充军日南，逃亡于长安，做了卜相工，后来在凉州牧羊。
English: In order to avenge his father-in-law, he served as a soldier in the south of Japan, fled to Chang'an, became a soothsayer, and later shepherded sheep in Liangzhou.

古文：遇赦还。
现代文：遇赦而回。
English: He was pardoned and returned.

古文：仕郡，征拜议郎，迁侍中。
现代文：在郡做官，召拜为议郎，迁为侍中。
English: He worked as an official in the county, was called to be a councilor, and was transferred to be a chamberlain.

古文：时，尚书有缺，诏将大夫六百石以上试对政事、天文、道术，以高第者补之。
现代文：当时尚书缺额，诏将大夫六百石以上的试对政事、天文、道术等科目，将等第高的补缺。
English: At that time, there was a shortage of books, and if a doctor with more than 600 koku was tested in subjects such as politics, astronomy, and Taoism, he would fill the highest vacancy.

古文：自恃能高，而忌故太史令孙懿，恐其先用，乃往侯懿。
现代文：翟酉甫自己仗恃能高，而忌故太史令孙懿，恐怕他先用，于是去问候孙懿。
English: Yan Fu himself had a high degree of self-confidence, but he was afraid that he would be the first to use it, so he went to greet Sun Qian.

古文：既坐，言无所及，唯涕泣流连。
现代文：已经坐下，说话没有谈到正题，只有哭泣不止。
English: He had already sat down, and his speech did not touch on the main issue, but only continued to cry.

古文：懿怪而问之，酺曰： 图书有汉贼孙登，将以才智为中官所害。观君表相，似当应之。
现代文：孙懿感到奇怪便问他，翟酉甫说： 图书有汉贼孙登，将因才智被中官所害，看君的相貌，好像当应之。
English: Sun Yat-sen felt strange and asked him about it. Zou Fu said, "The book has the Han thief Sun Deng, who was victimized by the middle-ranking officer because of his talent. Looking at your appearance, it seems that you should respond to him."

古文：酺受恩接，凄怆君之祸耳！ 
现代文：我受恩接，担心君之祸哩！ 
English: I'm grateful, but I fear for you!

古文：懿忧惧，移病不试。
现代文：孙懿很害怕，于是称病不去应试。
English: Sun Yat-sen was very scared, so he said he was too sick to take the exam.

古文：由是酺对第一，拜尚书。
现代文：由是翟酉甫对第一，拜为尚书。
English: Since it is Shifu to the first, pray for Shangshu.

古文：时，安帝始亲政事，追感祖母宋贵人，悉封其家。
现代文：这时安帝刚亲临政事，追感祖母宋贵人，全部封其家人。
English: At this time, Emperor An personally intervened in the political affairs, purged Grandmother Song Guijin, and banned all of her family members.

古文：又元舅耿宝及皇后兄弟阎显等并用威权。酺上疏谏曰：臣闻微子佯狂而去殷，叔孙通背秦而归汉，彼非自疏其君，时不可也。
现代文：又大舅耿宝及皇后兄弟阎显等并用威权，翟酉甫上疏谏道： 臣听说微子装疯而离开殷商，叔孙通背弃秦朝而归汉，他们不是自己疏远君主，时势不可哩。
English: In addition, the great-uncle Geng Bao and the brothers of the queen, Yan Xian, also used their authority, and Shufu Shang Shuxuan said: "The minister heard that the dwarf pretended to be crazy and left Yin merchants, and the uncles and grandsons abandoned the Qin Dynasty and returned to Han. They did not alienate the monarch by themselves. The situation is inevitable."

古文：臣何殊绝之恩，蒙值不讳之政，岂敢雷同受宠，而以戴天履地。
现代文：臣蒙受特殊的恩典，蒙值不讳之政，岂敢同样受宠，而戴皇天、履后土。
English: A vassal who has received special grace and has been entrusted with a worthy and outspoken government would not dare to be favored in the same way. Instead, he should respect the emperor and serve the country.

古文：伏惟陛下应天履祚，历值中兴，当建太平之功，而未闻致化之道。
现代文：想到陛下应天命而登皇位，碰上中兴之机，当建太平之功，而没听说有致化的门路。
English: I thought that His Majesty ascended to the throne in accordance with the will of heaven, encountered the opportunity of ZTE, and contributed to the construction of peace, but I did not hear that there was a way to bring about transformation.

古文：盖远者难明，请以近事征之。
现代文：大概远的不易明白，请用近事证明。
English: Probably far from easy to understand, please use recent evidence.

古文：昔窦、邓之宠，倾动四方，兼官重绂，盈金积货，至使议弄神器，改更社稷。
现代文：从前窦氏、邓氏之宠，倾动四方，兼官重绂，盈金积货，至使议弄皇位，改变社稷。
English: Formerly a favorite of the Dou and Deng dynasties, he was swayed by all sides, held high-ranking posts, amassed a fortune, and even had an emissary discuss the imperial throne and change the social system.

古文：岂不以势尊威广，以致斯患乎？
现代文：难道不是因为势尊威广，以致这种大患么？
English: Isn't it because of the power of the emperor that this kind of calamity occurs?

古文：及其破坏，头颡堕地，愿为孤豚，岂可得哉！
现代文：等到他们失败，头脑堕地，想做祭祀的孤豚，岂可得吗？
English: Wait until they fail, their heads fall to the ground, and they want to be a sacrificial pig, can they get it?

古文：未致贵无渐失必暴，受爵非道殃必疾。
现代文：致贵无渐失必暴，受爵不以正道殃必来得快。
English: If you do not gradually lose your dignity, you will be violent. If you do not take the right path, you will be knighted quickly.

古文：今外戚宠幸，功均造化，汉元以来，未有等比。
现代文：今外戚宠幸，功均造化，汉元以来，没有可以相比的。
English: Now it is a favorite of relatives abroad, and it is a product of hard work. Since the Han Dynasty, there has been nothing comparable.

古文：陛下诚仁恩周洽，以亲九族。
现代文：陛下的确仁恩周洽，以亲九族。
English: Your Majesty is indeed benevolent and friendly to the nine ethnic groups.

古文：然禄去公室，政移私门，覆车重寻，宁无摧折。
现代文：然而禄去公室，政移私门，覆车之诫重犯，难道不会摧折？
English: However, if Lu goes to the office, the government moves to a private house, and the commandment of covering the car is repeated, won't it be a crushing blow?

古文：而朝臣在位，莫肯正议，翕翕訾訾，更相佐附。
现代文：而在位的朝臣，没有人敢正议，唯唯诺诺，互相佐附。
English: However, among the reigning courtiers, no one dared to discuss the matter directly, but only nodded and supported each other.

古文：臣恐威权外假，归之良难，虎翼一奋，卒不可制。
现代文：臣恐怕威权假给外戚，收回就很难，老虎添翼，一旦起飞，不可制止。
English: I'm afraid that if a vassal gives authority to a relative, it will be difficult to take it back. If a tiger gains wings, once it takes off, it can't be stopped.

古文：故孔子曰： 吐珠于泽，谁能不含 ；老子称 国之利器，不可以示人 。
现代文：所以孔子说： 吐珠于泽，谁能不含？ 老子说 ：国之利器，不可以示人。 
English: That is why Confucius said, "Who can afford not to give beads to the poor?" Lao Tzu said, "The best weapon of a country should not be shown to others."

古文：此最安危之极戒，社稷之深计也。夫俭德之恭，政存约节。
现代文：这是最安危之戒，为社稷的长远之计哩。 俭是德之恭，政存约节。
English: This is the safest precept, and the long-term strategy of the society. Frugality is a virtue, and the government should keep its promises.

古文：故文帝爱百金于露台，饰帷帐于皁囊。
现代文：所以文帝想作露台，计值百金，饰帷帐于秔囊。
English: Therefore, Wendi wanted to make a terrace, with a value of one hundred gold, decorated with curtains in a cocoon.

古文：或有讥其俭者，上曰： 朕为天下守财耳，岂得妄用之哉！ 
现代文：有人讥他为俭。皇上说： 我是替天下守财，岂得乱用吗！ 
English: Some people ridiculed him for his frugality. The emperor said: "I am the custodian of the world's wealth, how can I misuse it!

古文：至仓谷腐而不可食，钱贯朽而不可校。
现代文：至仓谷腐而不可吃，钱串子朽了而不可数。
English: As far as the granary is rotten, it cannot be eaten, and the money strings are rotten and cannot be counted.

古文：今自初政已来，日月未久，费用赏赐已不可算。
现代文：今自初政以来，日子不长，费用赏赐已不可计算。
English: Now, since the early days of the government, the days are not long, and the cost reward has become incalculable.

古文：敛天下之财，积无功之家，帑藏单尽，民物凋伤，卒有不虞，复当重赋百姓，怨叛既生，危乱可待也。昔成王之政，周公在前，邵公在后，毕公在左，史佚在右，四子挟而维之。
现代文：敛天下之财，积无功之家，国库亏空，民物凋伤，卒有不虞之祸到来，又当重赋百姓，怨叛既生，危乱指日可待哩。 从前成王之政，周公在前，邵公在后，毕公在左，史佚在右，四个人挟而维之。
English: Gather the world's wealth, accumulate the house of no merit, the treasury is deficient, the people's property is withered, the inevitable calamity has come, and the people should be re-enriched, the rebellion has been born, and the crisis can be expected. In the past, the king's government, Zhou Gong was in front, Shao Gong was behind, Bi Gong was on the left, Shiyan was on the right, and four people held it together.

古文：目见正容，耳闻正言，一日即位，天下旷然，言其法度素定也。
现代文：眼看的是正容，耳听是是正言，一日即位，天下旷然，言其法度早已定了。
English: What the eye sees is the true face, what the ear hears is the true speech, the day of enthronement, the world is wild, and the law of speech has already been determined.

古文：今陛下有成王之尊而无数子之佐，虽欲崇雍熙，致太平，其可得乎？自去年已来，灾谴频数，地坼天崩，高岸为谷。
现代文：今陛下有成王之尊而没有几个贤人辅佐，即使想和和平平，享太平之福，可能取得吗？ 自去年以来，灾祸连续出现，地坼天崩，高岸变成低谷。
English: Now that your majesty has the honor of becoming king without the assistance of a few wise men, even if you want to be peaceful and enjoy the blessings of peace, is it possible to achieve it? Since last year, disasters have occurred continuously, the earth's crust has collapsed, and the high coast has become a trough.

古文：修身恐惧，则转祸为福；轻慢天戒，则其害弥深。
现代文：如果居上位的能修身恐惧，那么还可转祸为福；如果轻慢天戒，那么害处不浅。
English: If those at the top can cultivate their fear, then they can turn misfortune into blessing; if they despise heavenly precepts, then the harm is not shallow.

古文：愿陛下亲自劳恤，研精致思，勉求忠贞之臣，诛远佞谄之党，损玉堂之盛，尊天爵之重，割情欲之欢，罢宴私之好。
现代文：愿陛下亲自慰劳怜恤，研精致思，勉力寻求忠贞之臣，诛远佞谄之人，损玉堂之盛，尊重仁义礼智信等天爵，割除情欲之欢，罢宴私之好。
English: May His Majesty personally comfort and pity, study and think carefully, diligently seek loyal vassals, those who are far away, damage the grandeur of the Jade Hall, respect the noblemen such as benevolence, righteousness, propriety and wisdom, cut off the pleasure of lust, and banquet my good.

古文：帝王图籍，陈列左右，心存亡国所以失之，鉴观兴王所以得之，庶灾害可息，丰年可招矣。
现代文：帝王图籍，陈列左右，心想亡国的原因，鉴观兴王得天下的原因，庶几灾害可以停止，丰年可以到来了。 
English: The emperor's picture book, display left and right, think about the reasons for the downfall of the country, look at the reasons for the rise of the king, a few disasters can be stopped, and a good year can come.

古文：书奏不省，而外戚宠臣咸畏恶之。
现代文：书奏上去，不被皇上省察，而外戚宠臣都害怕、厌恶他。
English: He was not scrutinized by the emperor, and his relatives and favorites feared and loathed him.

古文：延光三年，出为酒泉太守。
现代文：延光三年，翟酉甫出为酒泉太守。
English: In the third year of Yan Guang, Yan Fu emerged as the governor of Jiuquan.

古文：叛羌千余骑徙敦煌来抄郡界，酺赴击，斩首九百级，羌众几尽，威名大震。
现代文：反叛的羌人出动千余骑兵从敦煌来抄袭郡之边界，翟酉甫去迎击，斩首九百级，羌众差点杀尽，威名大震。
English: The rebellious Han people dispatched more than a thousand cavalrymen from Dunhuang to copy the county's border, and Yan Fu went to meet the attack, beheading nine hundred levels, nearly killing the crowd, and causing a great shock.

古文：迁京兆尹。
现代文：升为京兆尹。
English: In the winter of that year, Pei Yaoqing was promoted to Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：顺帝即位，拜光禄大夫，迁将作大匠。
现代文：顺帝即位，拜为光禄大夫，迁将作大匠。
English: When Emperor Shun ascended the throne, he was worshipped as the doctor of Guanglu, and Qian Zheng became a great craftsman.

古文：损省经用，岁息四五千万。
现代文：翟酉甫损省经常用度，每年生息四五千万。
English: The province has a recurrent expenditure of 40 to 50 million yuan per year.

古文：屡因灾异，多所匡正。
现代文：屡因灾异，多所匡正。
English: Due to repeated disasters, many schools have been rectified.

古文：由是权贵共诬酺及尚书令高堂芝等交通属托，坐减死归家。
现代文：从此权贵一起诬酉甫及尚书令高堂芝等交通属托，犯了罪，减死归家。
English: From then on, the powerful and influential people together falsely accused Gaozhu Fu and Shang Shuling Gaodongzhi and other traffic trustees, committed a crime, commuted the death penalty and returned home.

古文：复被章云酺前与河南张楷等谋反，逮诣廷尉。
现代文：又被奏章说酉甫从前与河南张楷等谋反，被逮捕到廷尉那里。
English: He was also reported to have plotted a rebellion with Henan Zhang Kai and others, and was arrested by a courtier.

古文：及杜真等上书讼之，事得明释。
现代文：等到杜真等上书陈明原委，案情才得到明白解释。
English: It was not until Du Zhen et al. sent a letter to clarify the original committee that the case was clearly explained.

古文：卒于家。
现代文：死于家中。
English: He died at home.

古文：著《援神》、《钩命解诂》十二篇。
现代文：翟酉甫著有《援神》、《钩命解诂》十二篇。
English: Zou Fu is the author of 12 books, including "Supporting the Gods" and "How to Solve the Riddle of the Hook."

古文：初，酺之为大匠，上言： 孝文皇帝始置一经博士，武帝大合天下之书，而孝宣论《六经》于石渠，学者滋盛，弟子万数。
现代文：当初，翟酉甫做大匠，上书言道： 孝文皇帝始置一经博士，武帝大合天下之书，而孝宣帝论《六经》于石渠，学者很多，弟子万数。
English: At the beginning, Yan Fu was a master craftsman, and he said in his calligraphy: Emperor Xiaowen set up a doctorate in the Six Classics, Emperor Wu made it the most important book in the world, and Emperor Xiao Xuan discussed the "Six Classics" in Shiqu, and there were many scholars and tens of thousands of disciples.

古文：光武初兴，愍其荒废，起太学博士舍、内外讲堂，诸生横巷，为海内所集。
现代文：光武初兴，愍其荒废，起太学博士舍、内外讲堂，诸生横巷，被海内所集。
English: Guangwu was in its infancy, but it fell into disrepair. From then on, the doctoral dormitories, lecture halls inside and outside the country, and alleyways for all kinds of people were gathered by the sea.

古文：明帝时辟雍始成，欲毁太学，太尉赵憙以为太学、辟雍皆宜兼存，故并传至今。
现代文：明帝时大学初建成，想毁太学，太尉赵熹认为太学、辟雍都应保存，所以并传到今日。
English: At the time of Emperor Ming, when the university was first built, he wanted to destroy Taixue, but Taixue and Biyong should be preserved, which is why they have been passed down to this day.

古文：而顷者颓废，至为园采刍牧之处。
现代文：而目前秀贵废，甚至成为园采刍牧之处。
English: At present, however, it is a place of luxury and waste, and has even become a place for gardening and grazing.

古文：宜更修缮，诱进后学。 
现代文：应该修理整治，诱进后学。 
English: It is necessary to repair and rectify and induce post-secondary education.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：酺免后，遂起太学。更开拓房室，学者为酺立碑铭于学云。
现代文：翟酉甫免职后，便起太学，更开拓房室，学者替翟酉甫立碑铭于学。
English: After Zou Fu was relieved of his duties, he began to study hard and open up more rooms. Scholars erected a monument for Zou Fu and inscribed it in the school.

古文：应奉字世叔，汝南南顿人也。
现代文：◆应奉传，应奉字世叔，汝南南顿人。
English: ◆You should be revered, you should be revered, you should be revered, you should be revered, you should be revered.

古文：曾祖父顺，字华仲，和帝时为河南尹、将作大匠，公廉约己，明达政事。
现代文：曾祖父应顺，字华仲，和帝时做河南尹、将作大匠，公正廉明，约束自己，明达政事。
English: His great-grandfather Ying Shun, known as Huazhong, was Henan Yin when he was emperor, and will be a great craftsman, fair and honest, self-disciplined, and politically astute.

古文：生十子，皆有才学。
现代文：生十个儿子，都有才学。
English: If you have ten sons, all of them will be able to study.

古文：中子叠，江夏太守，叠生郴，武陵太守。
现代文：中子庆叠，江夏太守。叠生郴，武陵太守。
English: Zhongzi Qingjia, the governor of Jiangxia Province; Yanzheng Zang, the governor of Wuling Province.

古文：郴生奉。
现代文：郴生奉。
English: It's my duty.

古文：奉少聪明，自为童兒及长，凡所经履，莫不暗记。
现代文：应奉少时很聪明，从做儿童及年长时，凡所经过之处，没有不暗暗记住。
English: When he was young, he was very clever, and from childhood to old age, everywhere he went, he always remembered.

古文：读书五行并下。
现代文：读书能五行并下。
English: You can read five lines at a time.

古文：为郡决曹史，行部四十二县，录囚徒数百千人。
现代文：做郡的决曹史，巡视四十二县，录囚徒数百千人。
English: He made the history of county decisions, inspected forty-two counties, and recorded hundreds of thousands of prisoners.

古文：及还，太守备问之，奉口说罪系姓名，坐状轻重，无所遣脱，时人奇之。
现代文：等到回来以后，太守全部问及，应奉口说犯人名姓，犯罪轻重，没有遗漏，当时人感到奇怪。
English: When he came back, the governor asked all of them, and they all agreed to tell him the prisoner's name, the seriousness of the crime, and that there were no omissions. At the time, people were surprised.

古文：著《汉书后序》，多所述载。
现代文：著《汉书后序》，多有述载。
English: He is the author of "The Later Sequence of the Chinese Classics," in which many of the episodes are described.

古文：大将军梁冀举茂才。
现代文：大将军梁冀举他为茂才。
English: General Liang Ji praised him as Mao Tse-tung.

古文：先是，武陵蛮詹山等四千余人反叛，执县令，屯结连年。诏下公卿议，四府举奉才堪将帅。
现代文：先是，武陵蛮詹山等四千余人反叛，抓住县令，屯结连年，朝廷诏下公卿讨论，四府推举应奉，认为他有将帅之才。
English: First of all, more than four thousand people rebelled in Wuling, including the brutal Zhan Shan, seized the county ordinance, camped for years, discussed the court nobles under the imperial edict, and submitted to the four prefectural elections, believing that he had the ability to be a general.

古文：永兴元元，拜武陵太守。
现代文：永兴元年，拜为武陵太守。
English: In the first year of Yongxing, Baizhang became the governor of Wuling.

古文：到官慰纳，山等皆悉降散。
现代文：到官府后慰劳收纳。詹山等人都全部投降四散。
English: After arriving at the government office, they were consoled and collected. Janshan and the others all surrendered and dispersed.

古文：于是兴学校，举仄陋，政称变俗。
现代文：于是兴办学校，举仄陋之遗才，政称变俗。
English: As a result, a school was established, and the inherited talent of ugliness was promoted, and the name of the government was changed to vulgarity.

古文：坐公事免。
现代文：因公事犯罪免职。
English: Removed from office for official misconduct.

古文：延熹中，武陵蛮复寇乱荆州，车骑将军冯绲以奉有威恩，为蛮夷所服，上请与俱征。
现代文：延熹年间，武陵蛮又进犯荆州，车骑将军冯绲认为应奉有威信，被蛮夷所信服，上书请求与他一道出征。
English: During the Yanqi years, the Wuling barbarians invaded Jingzhou again. The cavalry general Feng Yu believed that he should be trusted and was convinced by the barbarians. He sent a letter to request to go to war with him.

古文：拜从事中郎。
现代文：拜为从事中郎。
English: He was engaged as a middle-man.

古文：奉勤设方略，贼破军罢，绲推功于奉，荐为司隶校尉。
现代文：应奉勤设方略，贼破军罢，冯绲推功于奉，荐为司隶校尉。
English: He should be diligent in devising strategies, stop being a thief and break the army, and Feng Jun should be commended for his service and recommended as a Sili lieutenant.

古文：纠举奸违，不避豪威，以严厉为名。
现代文：检举坏人，不避豪戚，以严厉著名。
English: He is known for his strictness in prosecuting bad people and not shying away from powerful relatives.

古文：及邓皇后败，而田贵人见幸，桓帝有建立之议。
现代文：后来邓皇后失败，而田贵人被宠幸，桓帝想立她为后。
English: Later, Empress Deng failed, but Tian Gui was favored, and Emperor Kuan wanted to make her the empress.

古文：奉以田氏微贱，不宜超登后位，上书谏曰： 臣闻周纳狄女，襄王出居于郑；汉立飞燕，成帝胤嗣泯绝。
现代文：应奉认为田氏出身微贱，不宜超登后位，上书谏道 ：臣听说周朝纳了狄女，襄王出居于郑；汉立赵飞燕，成帝灭了后裔。
English: It should be considered that the Tian clan was from a lowly background, and it was not appropriate to ascend to the next rank, the letter said: the minister heard that the Zhou dynasty had accepted Di's daughter, King Xiang was born in Zheng; Han ruled Zhao Feiyan, and Emperor Cheng exterminated the descendants.

古文：母后之重，兴废所因。
现代文：母后的重要，是国家兴废的原因。
English: The importance of the empress dowager is the reason for the rise and fall of nations.

古文：宜思《关雎》之所求，远五禁之所忌。 
现代文：应思《关睢》之所求，远王禁之所忌。 
English: We should think about the desire of "Guan Xuan" and the taboo of going too far.

古文：帝纳其言，竟立窦皇后。
现代文：皇帝采纳他的意见，竟立窦皇后。
English: The emperor took his advice and made Dou the empress.

古文：及党事起，奉乃慨然以疾自退。
现代文：等到后党事起，应奉便慨然称病退职。
English: After the party affairs, he should resign from the post, saying that he was ill.

古文：追愍屈原，因以自伤，著《感骚》三十篇，数万言。
现代文：追愍屈原，借以自叹，著《感骚》三十篇，数万字。
English: He chased after Qu Yuan, and by way of self-reproach, he wrote thirty articles of "Impression," tens of thousands of words.

古文：诸公多荐举，会病卒。
现代文：诸公多荐举他，恰逢病死。
English: He was recommended by many princes, but died of illness.

古文：子劭。
现代文：儿子应劭。
English: His son Ying Zang.

古文：劭字仲远。
现代文：◆应劭传，应劭字仲远。
English: ◆ It should be handed down, it should be spread far and wide.

古文：少笃学，博览多闻。
现代文：少年时好学，博览多闻。
English: When he was a boy, he was eager to learn and read a lot.

古文：灵帝时举孝廉，辟车骑将军何苗掾。
现代文：灵帝时举为孝廉，召为车骑将军何苗的掾吏。
English: Ling Di was promoted to filial piety, and was called to be the official of General He Miao's cavalry.

古文：中平二年，汉阳贼边章、韩遂与羌胡为寇，东侵三辅，时遣车骑将军后甫嵩西讨之。
现代文：中平二年，汉阳贼边章、韩遂与羌胡一起成为边寇，东侵三辅，当时朝廷派车骑将军皇甫嵩向西讨伐他们。
English: In the second year of the Middle Ages, the Hanyang bandits Bianzhang, Han Sui and Yan Hu together became border robbers and invaded the three auxiliary provinces in the east. At that time, the imperial court sent the chariot and cavalry general Wang Fusong to fight them in the west.

古文：嵩请发乌桓三千人。
现代文：嵩请求调动乌桓族三千人配合作战。
English: Song requested that 3,000 Wuhuans be mobilized for the war.

古文：北军中侯邹靖上言： 乌桓众弱，宜开募鲜卑。 
现代文：北军中侯邹靖上书道： 乌桓之兵势弱，应开募鲜卑人助战。 
English: The middle-ranking official of the Northern Army, Su Jing, wrote: Wu Huan's army is weak, it is necessary to recruit fresh low-ranking people to help in the war.

古文：事下四府，大将军掾韩卓议，以为： 乌桓兵寡，而与鲜卑世为仇敌，若乌桓被发，则鲜卑必袭其家。
现代文：事下到回府讨论，大将军韩卓提议，认为： 乌桓兵少，而与鲜卑世代为仇敌，如果乌桓被调动，那么鲜卑一定会袭击其家。
English: When the matter was discussed back home, General Han Zhuo proposed the following: Wu Huan had few soldiers, but was enemies with the Xianbei generation. If Wu Huan was mobilized, then the Xianbei would surely attack his home.

古文：乌桓闻之，当复弃军还救。
现代文：乌桓听说后，一定会弃军回去救援。
English: After hearing this, Wu Huan will definitely abandon the army and go back for rescue.

古文：非唯无益于实，乃更沮三军之情。
现代文：不只是对实况无益，而且更加沮丧三军的情绪。
English: Not only was it unhelpful to the actual situation, but it further depressed the mood of the three armies.

古文：邹靖居近边塞，究其态诈。
现代文：邹靖住在边境附近，知道他们的诈态。
English: He lives near the border and knows their tricks.

古文：若令靖募鲜卑轻骑五千，必有破敌之效。 
现代文：如果让邹靖募鲜卑之兵五千，必有破敌的效果。 
English: If we let him recruit five thousand soldiers from the rank and file, it will surely have the effect of defeating the enemy.

古文：邵驳之曰：鲜卑隔在漠北，犬羊为群，无君长之帅，庐落之居，而天性贪暴，不拘信义，故数犯障塞，且无宁岁。
现代文：应劭反驳他道 ：鲜卑隔在漠北，与犬羊为群，没有君长的统帅，没有庐落之居，而天性贪残暴虐，不讲信义，所以数次进犯边塞，没有安宁的岁月。
English: Ying Yao refuted him: "Xinbei is isolated in the north of the desert, with dogs and sheep as a group, there is no commander of the monarch, there is no place of disgrace, and the nature is greedy, cruel and brutal, and does not speak of faith, so he attacked the border fortress several times, and there are no peaceful years.

古文：唯至互市，乃来靡服。
现代文：只有互市之时，才来靡服。
English: It's only when there's a trade-off that it's acceptable.

古文：苟欲中国珍货，非为畏威怀德。
现代文：他们只想中国的珍宝财货，并不是畏威怀德。
English: They only want China's precious goods, not its awe-inspiring beauty.

古文：计获事足，旋踵为害。
现代文：计获事足，接着就来为害。
English: They get what they want, and then they do harm.

古文：是以朝家外而不内，盖为此也。
现代文：因此国家内诸夏而外夷狄，就是为了这个缘故。
English: That's why there's so much emigration within the country, because of this.

古文：往者匈奴反叛，度辽将军马续、乌桓校尉王元发鲜卑五千余骑，又武威太守赵冲亦率鲜卑征讨叛羌。
现代文：过去匈奴反叛，度辽将军马续、乌桓校尉王元发动鲜卑五千余骑兵，又武威太守赵冲也率领鲜卑征讨叛羌。
English: In the past, when the Xiongnu rebelled, Du Liao's General Ma Zhe and Wu Huan's Lieutenant Wang Yuan led more than five thousand cavalrymen to fight against the Xiongnu, and Zhao Chong, Wuwei's eunuch, also led the Xiongnu army to fight against the rebels.

古文：斩获丑虏，既不足言，而鲜卑越溢，多为不法。
现代文：斩获胡人头目，既不足言，而鲜卑越溢，多为不法之事。
English: Capturing the leader of the Hu people is not just a matter of words, but more than that, it is an illegal act.

古文：裁以军令，则忿戾作乱；制御小缓，则陆掠残害。
现代文：以军令制裁，就忿戾作乱；如果制御缓慢，就陆掠残害。
English: If military orders are used to impose sanctions, there will be discontent and disorder; if control is slow, there will be land grabbing and destruction.

古文：劫居人，抄商旅，啖人牛羊，略人兵马。
现代文：抢劫居民，抄掠商旅，吃人牛羊，掠人兵马。
English: They robbed residents, plundered merchants and travelers, ate cattle and sheep, and captured soldiers and horses.

古文：得赏既多，不肯去，复欲以物买铁。
现代文：得赏多了，不肯离开，又想以物买铁器。
English: He got more rewards, refused to leave, and wanted to buy ironware.

古文：边将不听，便取缣帛聚欲烧之。
现代文：边将不听，便取缣帛聚而烧之。
English: When the governor did not listen, they took the cocoons and burned them.

古文：边将恐怖，畏其反叛，辞谢抚顺，无敢拒违。
现代文：边将害怕，怕他反叛，辞谢抚顺，不敢拒绝违反。
English: The commander was afraid, afraid that he would rebel, renounce Fushun, and dare not refuse to violate.

古文：今狡寇未殄，而羌为巨害，如或致悔，其可追乎？
现代文：现在狡寇没有除尽，而羌人又为大害，如果后悔，来得及吗！
English: Now the cunning thief has not been eliminated, and the thief is a great harm. If you regret, is it too late?

古文：臣愚以为可募陇西羌胡守善不叛者，简直精勇，多其牢赏。
现代文：臣愚认为可招募陇西羌胡守善不叛的，挑选精干勇敢的，多给奖赏。
English: Zengwu believed that he could recruit the good and non-rebellious Zhu Xi Hu Shou, select the capable and brave, and give more rewards.

古文：太守李参沉静有谋，必能奖厉得其死力。
现代文：太守李参沉静而有谋略，必能奖励得其死力。
English: T'ai Shou Li San is calm and strategic, and will surely be rewarded with his death.

古文：当思渐消之略，不可仓卒望也。
现代文：应当想渐渐消灭的策略，不可仓卒存奢望。 
English: We should think about the strategy of gradual elimination, and we should not hold out extravagant hopes.

古文：韩卓复与劭相难反复。
现代文：韩卓又与应劭反复辩论。
English: Han Zhuo also repeatedly debated with Ying Yao.

古文：于是诏百官大会朝堂，皆从劭议。
现代文：于是朝廷诏百官大会朝堂，都同意应劭的看法。
English: As a result, the imperial court decreed that all officials in the imperial court should agree with the opinion of the emperor.

古文：三年，举高第，再迁，六年，拜太山太守。
现代文：三年，应劭举高第，再次升迁，六年，拜太山太守。
English: In three years, he was promoted to higher grade and promoted again, and in six years, he became the governor of Mount Tai.

古文：初平二年，黄巾三十万众入郡界。
现代文：初平二年，黄巾等三十万人进入郡界。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, 300,000 people, including the Yellow Turbans, entered the county.

古文：劭纠率文武连与贼战，前后斩首数千级，获生口老弱万余人，辎重二千两，贼皆退却，郡内以安。
现代文：应劭纠率文武连续与贼作战，前后斩首数千级，获俘虏老弱万余人，辎重二千两，贼都退却，郡内得以安宁。
English: It should be noted that the guerrillas led by Wenwu continuously fought against the bandits, beheaded thousands of people, captured more than ten thousand people, both old and weak, and captured two thousand and two. The bandits all retreated, and the county was peaceful.

古文：兴平元年，前太尉曹嵩及子德从琅邪入太山，劭遣兵迎之，未到，而徐州牧陶谦素怨嵩子操数击之，乃使轻骑追嵩、德，并杀之于郡界。
现代文：兴平元年，前太尉曹嵩和儿子曹德从琅笽入太山，应劭派兵迎他，没有到，而徐州牧陶谦素来怨恨曹嵩之子曹操数次攻打，就使轻骑追击曹嵩父子，并杀之于郡界。
English: In the first year of the Xingping era, the former captain Cao Song and his son Cao De sent troops to meet Cao Cao in Taishan. Cao Cao, Cao De's son, did not arrive, and Xuzhou Mu Tao Qian, who resented Cao Song's son Cao Cao for attacking several times, sent light cavalry to chase Cao Song and his son and killed them in the county.

古文：劭畏操诛，弃郡奔冀州牧袁绍。
现代文：应劭害怕曹操杀来，放弃郡奔向冀州牧袁绍。
English: Ying Yao was afraid of being killed by Cao Cao, so he gave up the county and ran to Jizhou to join Yuan Shao.

古文：初，安帝时河间人尹次、颍川人史玉皆坐杀人当死，次兄初及玉母军并诣官曹求代其命，而缢而物故。
现代文：起初，安帝时河间人尹次，颍川人史玉都犯了杀人罪应当处死，尹次之兄尹初及史玉之母军到官曹求代其偿命，因缢而死。
English: At first, when Emperor Ande was in power, Yin Zi from Hechuan and Shi Yu Qu from Qianchuan both committed the crime of homicide and should be put to death. Yin Zi's brother, Yin Zi, and Shi Yu's mother's army went to the official Cao to ask for their lives to be spared on their behalf, but they died as a result of the beating.

古文：尚书陈忠以罪疑从轻，议活次、玉。
现代文：尚书陈忠认为罪宜从轻发落，建议义走尹次、史玉。
English: Shangshu Chen Zhong believed that the crime should be treated lightly, and suggested that Yin Zi and Shi Yu should be released.

古文：劭后追驳之，据正典刑，有可存者。
现代文：应劭后来追驳之，据正典刑，有可存活的。
English: It was later retorted that, according to the official verdict, there was a chance of survival.

古文：其议曰：《尚书》称 天秩有礼，五服五章哉。
现代文：他的意见说： 《尚书》说： 天秩有礼，五服五章哉。
English: His opinion said: "Shangshu" said: "Heavenly rank has courtesy, five services and five chapters are enough.

古文：天讨有罪，五刑五用哉 。
现代文：天讨有罪，五刑五用哉。 
English: Heaven condemns the guilty, five punishments and five uses are enough.

古文：而孙卿亦云： 凡制刑之本，将以禁暴恶，且惩其末也，凡爵列、官秩、赏庆、刑威，皆以类相从，使当其实也。 
现代文：而孙卿也说 ：凡制刑之本，将以禁暴恶，且惩其末也。凡爵列、官秩、赏庆、刑威，皆以类相从，使当其实也。 
English: And Sun Ching also said, "All the laws of punishment will be based on prohibiting violence and evil, and punishing them to the end. The peerage, official rank, commendation, and punishment are all based on the same principle, so they should actually be.

古文：若德不副位，能不称官，赏不酬功，刑不应罪，不祥莫大焉。
现代文：如果德不与位相符，能不与官相称，赏赐不是酬答有功之人，刑罚不是针对有罪之人，那么，不祥就没有更大的了。
English: If virtue is not commensurate with one's position, ability is not commensurate with one's position, rewards are not given to those who are meritorious, and punishments are not given to those who are guilty, then there is nothing more ominous.

古文：杀人者死，伤人者刑，此百王之定制，有法之成科。
现代文：杀人的死罪，伤人者判刑，这是百王所定的制度，有法之成科可查。
English: The death penalty for murder and the sentencing of those who injure others is a system established by hundreds of emperors, which can be found in legal science.

古文：高祖入关，虽尚约法，然杀人者死，亦无宽降。
现代文：高祖入关时，虽约法三章，然而杀人的死罪，也没有宽降。
English: When Gaozhu entered the customs, although there were three chapters about the law, the death penalty for murder was not reduced.

古文：夫时化则刑重，时乱则刑轻。
现代文：时化就刑重，时乱就刑轻。
English: The penalty is heavy if the crime is committed at the wrong time, but light if the crime is committed at the wrong time.

古文：《书》曰 刑罚时轻时重 ，此之谓也。
现代文：《书经》说 ：刑罚时轻时重 ，就是这种说法。
English: "Scripture" says: the punishment is lighter and heavier, this is the argument.

古文：今次、玉公以清时释其私憾，阻兵安忍，僵尸道路。朝思在宽，幸至冬狱，而初、军愚狷，妄自投毙。
现代文：今尹次，史玉在太平时候释其私憾，恃兵安忍。朝廷恩典在宽，幸至冬狱，而初、军愚狷，妄自投毙。
English: In the present Yin period, Shi Yu released his private regret in peacetime and pacified the soldiers. The imperial court's grace was broad, and he was fortunate to be imprisoned in winter, but at the beginning, the army was foolish and threw themselves to death.

古文：昔召忽亲死子纠之难，而孔子曰 经于沟读，人莫之知 。
现代文：从前召忽亲死子纠之难，而孔子说： 自缢死于沟渎之内，别人不知道。 
English: Confucius said, "If you die in a ditch, no one will know."

古文：朝氏之父非错刻峻，遂能自陨其命，班固亦云 不知赵母指括以全其宗 。
现代文：朝氏之父非错刻峻，便能自陨其命，班固也说： 不如赵括之母以全其宗。 
English: Asashi's father was so strict that he could have killed himself, and Ban Go also said, "It's not like Zhao Kui's mother with her entire family."

古文：传曰 仆妾感慨而致死者，非能义勇，顾无虑耳 。
现代文：《传》说： 仆妾感慨而致死的，不是能现其义勇，顾由无计虑哩。 
English: "Biography" says: A servant or concubine who dies of emotion is not able to show his or her valor, and is reckless.

古文：夫刑罚威狱，以类天之震燿杀戮也；温慈和惠，以放天之生殖长育也。是故春一草枯则为灾，秋一木华亦为异。
现代文：刑罚威狱，用来像天之震耀杀戮；温慈和惠，仿照天之生殖长育。因此春天一草枯就是灾，秋天一木开花就是异。
English: Punishment and punishment are used to kill like the sky; gentleness and benevolence are used to reproduce and grow like the sky. Therefore, a withered grass in spring is a disaster, and a flowering tree in autumn is different.

古文：今杀无罪之初、军，而活当死之次、玉，其为枯华，不亦然乎？
现代文：现在杀无罪的初、军，而救活该死的次、玉，这便一枯一华，不一般吗？
English: Isn't it common now to kill innocent soldiers and save the lives of the damned?

古文：陈忠不详制刑之本，而信一时之仁，遂广引八议求生之端。
现代文：陈忠不知制刑之本，而信一时之仁，就广引八汉求生之端。
English: Chen Zhong did not know the origin of the punishment, but believed in the benevolence of the moment, and widely quoted the eight Han for survival.

古文：夫亲故贤能功贵勤宾，岂有次、玉当罪之科哉？
现代文：亲故贤能功贵勤宾，岂有次、玉当罪之科吗？
English: Is there such a thing as a criminal offense for being a virtuous, meritorious and diligent family member?

古文：若乃小大以情，原心定罪，此为求生，非谓代死可以生也。
现代文：如果认为小大之狱必以情，原心定罪，这是求生，不是说代死可以活哩。
English: If you think that a small prison must be convicted with compassion and sincerity, this is to survive, not to say that you can live instead of dying.

古文：败法乱政，悔其可追。
现代文：败法乱政，后悔不可追了。 
English: Defeat law and disorder politics, regret can not be chased.

古文：劭凡为驳议三十篇，皆此类也。
现代文：应劭共写驳议三十篇，都是这一类的文章。
English: There are a total of 30 refutations, all of which are of this type.

古文：又删定律令为《汉仪》，建安元年乃奏之。
现代文：应劭又删定律令作《汉仪》，建安元年例奏上。
English: "Hanyi" (Chinese Rites) was made in response to the edict of the emperor and the emperor's edict of censorship, and was performed for the first time in the first year of Jianan.

古文：曰：夫国之大事，莫尚载籍。
现代文：奏道： 国之大事，没有比载籍更重要。
English: Sonoda: When it comes to national affairs, there is nothing more important than passing on one's nationality.

古文：载籍也者，决嫌疑，明是非，赏刑之宜，允获厥中，俾后之人永为监焉。
现代文：载籍是为了决嫌疑，明是非，赏罚的分寸，比较恰当，使后代人有所借鉴。
English: It is more appropriate to register one's nationality in order to resolve suspicions, clarify rights and wrongs, and apportion rewards and punishments, so that future generations can learn from it.

古文：故胶西相董仲舒老病致仕，朝廷每有政议，数遣廷尉张汤亲至陋巷，问其得失。
现代文：所以胶西相董仲舒老病辞官后，朝廷每有政议，数次派廷尉张汤亲至他住的陋巷，问其得失。
English: Therefore, after Jiao Xi's consort, Dong Zhongshu, became ill and resigned from his post, the imperial court sent the courtier Zhang Tangchen to the alley where he lived several times to ask him about his merits and demerits whenever there was a political discussion.

古文：于是作《春秋决狱》二百三十二事，动以经对，言之详矣，逆臣董卓，荡覆王室，典宪焚燎，靡有孑遣，开辟以来，莫或兹酷。
现代文：于是写下《春秋决狱》二百三十二件事，动以经对，说得很详尽了。逆臣董卓，颠覆王室，烧毁书籍，没有剩下一点，开天辟地以来，没有比这更残酷的。
English: He then wrote down the 232 events of the "Spring and Autumn Expulsions" and, with the help of the scriptures, described them in great detail. The rebel minister Dong Zhuo, the overthrow of the royal family, the burning of books, there was nothing left. Since the beginning of time, nothing has been more cruel than this.

古文：今大驾东迈，巡省许都，拔出险难，其命惟新。
现代文：今大驾东征，巡视许都，拔出险难，其命惟新。
English: Now the emperor is traveling east, inspecting many provinces and capitals, eliminating dangers and difficulties, and renewing his destiny.

古文：臣累世受恩，荣祚丰衍，窃不自揆，贪少云补，辄撰具《律本章句》、《尚书旧事》、《廷尉板令》、《决事比例》、《司徒都目》、《五曹诏书》及《春秋断狱》凡二百五十篇。
现代文：臣几代受恩，受福不浅，窃不自量力，贪少云补，撰写《律本章句》、《尚书旧事》、《廷尉板令》、《决事比例》、《司徒都目》、《五曹诏书》和《春秋断狱》共二百五十篇。
English: He was favored by several generations of vassals, was blessed with many blessings, stole more than he could afford, and was greedy for more than he could repay. He wrote "Chapter of Laws," "History of Books," "Ordinance of Court Officers," "Proportions of Resolutions," "Rule of the Council of Sages," "Decree of the Five Emperors" and "Spring and Autumn Prison Break," a total of two hundred and fifty articles.

古文：蠲去复重，为之节文。
现代文：删去重复之处，成为简洁之文。
English: Duplicates have been removed to make the text more concise.

古文：又集驳议三十篇，以类相从，凡八十二事。
现代文：又集驳议三十篇，分类编辑，共八十二事。
English: It also collected 30 refutations, classified and edited, a total of 82 things.

古文：其见《汉书》二十五，《汉纪》四，皆删叙润色，以全本体。
现代文：见之于《汉书》的有二十五处，《汉记》四处，都删叙润色，以全本体。
English: There are twenty-five places in "Hanshu" where this is seen, and four places in "Hanshi," all of which are abridged and embellished, with the entire body.

古文：其二十六，博采古今瑰玮之士，文章焕炳，德义可观。
现代文：有二十六处，博采古今玮之士，文章有光彩，德义也可观。
English: There are twenty-six places to read about famous people from ancient and modern times, the articles are brilliant, and the virtue can also be observed.

古文：其二十七，臣所创造。
现代文：有二十七篇，是臣所创造。
English: Twenty-seven of them were written by his subordinates.

古文：岂自谓必合道衷，心焉愤邑，聊以藉手。
现代文：不能说必合道衷，心有所思，聊以表述罢了。
English: You can't say that you have to be sincere, thoughtful, and expressive.

古文：昔郑人以乾鼠为璞，鬻之于周，宋愚夫亦宝燕石，缇十重。
现代文：从前郑人以干鼠为璞玉，卖给周人；宋国的愚夫也以燕石为宝，缇十重。
English: Once upon a time, Zheng Ren used dried mice as jade, and sold them to Zhou Ren; Song Guofu also used oyster stone as a treasure, and it weighed ten times as much.

古文：夫睹之者掩口卢胡而笑，斯文之族，无乃类旃。《左氏》实云虽有姬姜丝麻，不弃憔悴菅蒯，盖所以代匮也。
现代文：看到的人掩口大笑，斯文之族，多半像这。《左氏》实云虽有大国姬妾，也不抛弃陋贱之人，大概是用来代替匮乏哩。
English: People who see it cover their mouths and laugh. The people of Suwen are mostly like this. "Mr. Zu" Although Sanyun has a great country and concubines, he does not abandon the lowly people. It is probably used to replace poverty.

古文：是用敢露顽才，厕于明哲之末。
现代文：因此敢露顽劣之才，附于明哲之后。
English: Therefore, dare to expose the inferiority of talent, attached to Mingzhe.

古文：虽未足纲纪国体，宣洽时雍，庶几观察，增阐圣听。惟因万机之余暇，游意省览焉。
现代文：虽未足纲纪国体，宣洽时雍，庶几可以供给圣听，希陛下日理万机之余，随便翻阅。 
English: Although it is not yet time for the National Sports Festival, the time for propaganda has begun, and a few can be provided for sacred listening. I hope that His Majesty will have plenty of time to read it.

古文：献帝善之。
现代文：献帝认为很好。
English: Kentei thinks it's great.

古文：二年，诏拜劭为袁绍军谋校尉。
现代文：二年，诏拜劭为袁绍军谋校尉。
English: Two years later, Zhao Baijun was promoted to lieutenant of Yuan Shao's army.

古文：时始迁都于许，旧章堙没，书记罕存。
现代文：这时刚迁都许昌，旧章既不存在，书记也少有。
English: At this time, Xu Chang had just moved to the capital, the old chapter did not exist, and there were few secretaries.

古文：劭慨然叹息，乃缀集所闻，著《汉官礼仪故事》，凡朝廷制度，百官典式，多劭所立。
现代文：应劭慨然叹息，于是整理所闻，著《汉书官礼仪故事》，凡朝廷制度，百官典式，多是应劭所立。
English: Ying Yao sighed with emotion, so he sorted out what he had heard and wrote the "Story of the etiquette of Chinese officials." The imperial court system and the etiquette of officials were mostly established by Ying Yao.

古文：初，父奉为司隶时，并下诸官府郡国，各上前人像赞，劭乃连缀其名，录为《状人纪》。
现代文：起初，劭之父奉做司隶时，并下诸官府郡国，各上前人像赞，应劭便连缀其名字，录为《状人纪》。
English: At first, when Gong's father served as a subordinate, he went to all the government offices, counties and provinces, and praised the predecessors. Ying Zang then attached his name and recorded it as "The Chronicle of the Ancestors."

古文：又论当时行事，著《中汉辑序》。
现代文：又论当时行事，著《中汉辑序》。
English: He also wrote about the events of that time in "Zhonghanzhixiao."

古文：撰《风俗通》，以辩物类名号，释时俗嫌疑。
现代文：撰《风俗通》，以辨物类名号，释时俗嫌疑。
English: Compiled "Customs and Customs," to distinguish the names of objects, to explain the suspicion of customs.

古文：文虽不典，后世服其洽闻。
现代文：文字虽不够典范，后世服其见闻甚广。
English: Although the script is not exemplary enough, it is widely known to posterity.

古文：凡所著述百三十六篇。
现代文：所有著述一百三十六篇。
English: A total of one hundred and thirty-six articles.

古文：又集解《汉书》，皆传于时。
现代文：又集解《汉书》，都传于当时。
English: He also compiled the "Chinese Classics," all of which were passed down at that time.

古文：后卒于鄴。
现代文：后来死于邺。
English: He later died of sepsis.

古文：弟子瑒、璩，并以文才称。
现代文：弟之子应蠩、应璩，都以文才著称。
English: The younger brother's sons, Ying Zhe and Ying Zhe, are both famous for their literary talent.

古文：中兴初，有应妪者，生四子而寡。
现代文：中兴初年，有应妪，生了四个儿子而守寡。
English: In the first year of ZTE, there was a widow who gave birth to four sons.

古文：见神光照社，试探之，乃得黄金。
现代文：看见神光照社，试探求之，便得了黄金。
English: When he saw the Divine Light Illuminating Society and tried to explore it, he found gold.

古文：自是诸子宦学，并有才名，至玚七世通显。
现代文：从此诸子宦学，都有才名，至应蠩七世通显。
English: Since then, all the sons and daughters of the school have been famous for their talents, which have been passed down to the 37th generation.

古文：霍谞字叔智，魏郡鄴人也。
现代文：◆霍谞传，霍谞字叔智，魏郡邺人。
English: ◆Fu Huan Chuan, Fu Huan Zi Shuzhi, Wei County Yongren.

古文：少为诸生，明经。
现代文：少时为诸生，明白经书。
English: When you are young, you can understand the scriptures.

古文：有人诬谞舅宋光于大将军梁商者，以为妄刊章文，坐系洛阳诏狱，掠考困极。
现代文：有人诬之舅宋光于大将军梁商的，认为宋光妄刊章文，被关在洛阳狱中，受掠考之刑困顿已极。
English: Some people slandered Song Guang, the uncle of the great general Liang Shang, and thought that Song Guang had published a chapter and was locked up in Luoyang Prison. He was extremely distressed by the punishment of plunder and examination.

古文：谞时年十五，奏记于商曰：将军天覆厚恩，愍舅光冤结，前者温教许为平议，虽未下吏断决其事，已蒙神明顾省之听。
现代文：霍谞当时十五岁，写报告给梁商道： 将军恩德如天，同情舅父宋光的冤结，前些时温教许可替他平议，虽然没有下吏断决其事，已蒙神明顾省之听。
English: At that time, he was fifteen years old and wrote a report to Liang Shangdao: General Ende is like heaven, he sympathizes with the grievances of his uncle Song Guang, and some time ago, Wen Jiao allowed him to discuss the matter, although there was no official to decide the matter, he has been listened to by the gods.

古文：皇天后土，实闻德音。
现代文：皇天后土，实闻德音。
English: The land of the Empress Dowager, the true story of Deyin.

古文：窃独踊跃，私自庆幸。
现代文：我听了十分高兴。听说《春秋》之义，根据案情确定罪过，赦事诛意。
English: I was very happy to hear it. I heard that the justice of "Spring and Autumn" determined the crime according to the circumstances of the case, and the pardon was pleasant.

古文：谞闻《春秋》之义，原情定过，赦事诛意，故许止虽弑君而不罪，赵盾以纵贼而见书。
现代文：所以许止虽有弑君之罪但不追究，赵盾因纵贼而见书。
English: Therefore, although Xu Zhizhong was guilty of the crime of kidnapping, he was not prosecuted, while Zhao Dun was punished for being a thief.

古文：此仲尼所以垂王法，汉世所宜遵前修也。
现代文：这是孔子垂王法的原因，汉代应该遵照前修理。
English: This is the reason for Confucius's Law of the King's Tongue, which the Han Dynasty should follow and repair.

古文：传曰： 人心不同，譬若其面。 
现代文：古书说 ：人心不同，譬如其面。 
English: An ancient book says: People's hearts are different, just like their faces.

古文：斯盖谓大小窳隆丑美之形，至于鼻目众窍毛发之状，未有不然者也。
现代文：这大概是说各人身高大小丑美之形各不相同，至于鼻子眼睛七窍毛发之状没有不相同的哩。
English: This probably means that everyone's height, size, shape and beauty are different, and as for the shape of the nose, eyes and hair, there is no difference.

古文：情之异者，刚柔舒急倨敬之间。
现代文：性情之不同，在刚柔舒急倨敬之间。
English: The difference in temperament is between hardness and softness, comfort and haste, and respect.

古文：至于趋利避害，畏死乐生，亦复均也。
现代文：至于趋利避害，怕死乐生，也是一样的。
English: As for the pursuit of profit and the avoidance of harm, the fear of death and the joy of life are the same.

古文：谞与光骨肉，义有相隐，言其冤滥，未必可谅，且以人情平论其理。光衣冠子孙，径路平易，位极州郡，日望征辟，亦无瑕秽纤介之累，无故刊定诏书，欲以何名？
现代文：我与宋光系骨肉之亲，义有相隐，说他冤滥，未必可以见谅，且以人情平论其理。 宋光是衣冠子孙，仕途之路极为平易，位置做到州郡，每天希望征召，也没有缺点污秽小事之牵累，无故刊定诏书，想用什么名义？
English: I am a relative of Song Guang's flesh and blood, and we have a hidden relationship, saying that he is unjust, may not be able to forgive, and reasoning with human feelings.Song Guang is a descendant of the crown, the career path is extremely easy, the location is up to the county, he hopes to be conscripted every day, there is no drawback of dirty little things, the imperial edict is published for no reason, what name do you want to use?

古文：就有所疑，当求其便安，岂有触冒死祸，以解细微？
现代文：就有所疑，当求其便利安稳，岂有触冒死祸，以解细微？
English: If there is any doubt, we should seek its convenience and stability. Is it worth risking death to solve minor problems?

古文：譬犹疗饥于附子，止渴于鸩毒，未入肠胃，已绝咽喉，岂可为哉！
现代文：犹如用附子充饥，饮鸩毒止渴，没有进入肠胃，已绝咽喉，难道可以做吗！
English: It's like using aconite to satisfy hunger, drinking poison to quench thirst, without entering the stomach and throat, can it be done?

古文：昔东海孝妇见枉不辜，幽灵感革，天应枯旱。
现代文：从前东海孝妇被冤枉，幽灵感动上天，天旱三年不雨。
English: Once upon a time, a virtuous woman in the East China Sea was wronged, a ghost moved the heavens, and there was no rain for three years.

古文：光之所坐，情既可原，守阙连年，而终不见理。
现代文：宋光所犯之罪，情有可原，守阙已经两年，而终不见理。
English: The crime committed by Song Guang is extenuating circumstances. It has been two years since he was detained, but he has not been punished.

古文：呼嗟紫宫之门，泣血两观之下，伤和致灾，为害滋甚。
现代文：在紫宫之门喊冤，在两观之下泣血，伤和致灾，为害很大。
English: Shouting out grievances at the gate of the Purple Palace, crying blood under the two views, causing injuries and disasters, has caused great harm.

古文：凡事更赦令，不应复案。
现代文：凡事经过赦令，不应复案。
English: Once a pardon has been issued, the case should not be reopened.

古文：夫以罪刑明白，尚蒙天恩，岂有冤谤无征，反不得理？
现代文：大凡罪刑明白，尚蒙天恩，岂有冤谤而无证据，反而不得受理？
English: Great crimes and punishments are clear, but by the grace of God, is there any slander without evidence, but not admissible?

古文：是为刑宥正罪，戮加诬侵也。
现代文：这是刑宥正罪，杀害诬侵哩。
English: This is the punishment for a legitimate crime, killing for a false offense.

古文：不偏不党，其若是乎？
现代文：不偏不党，能像这样么？
English: Impartiality, can it be like this?

古文：明将军德盛位尊，人臣无二，言行动天地，举厝移阴阳，诚能留神，沛然晓察，必有于公高门之福，和气立应，天下幸甚。
现代文：明将军德盛位高，人臣之中独一无二，言行感动天地，举措可移阴阳，如能得到留神，仔细考察，必有东海于公之福。和气立应，天下幸运得很。 
English: The Ming general had a high degree of virtue and was unique among his subordinates. His words and deeds moved heaven and earth, and his measures could move the yin and yang. If you can pay attention and carefully investigate, you will surely have the blessing of the East Sea in the public. The world is very lucky to have such a warm-hearted person.

古文：商高谞才志，即为奏原光罪，由是显名。
现代文：梁商认为霍谞才识水平很高，立即上奏赦免宋光之罪，从此霍谞名声很显耀。
English: Liang Shang believed that Huo Gan's talent level was very high, and immediately appealed to pardon Song Guang's crime. From then on, Huo Gan's reputation was very bright.

古文：仕郡，举孝廉，稍迁金城太守。
现代文：霍谞在那里做官，举为孝廉，稍迁为金城太守。
English: He worked there as an official, was promoted to the position of filial piety, and later became the governor of Jincheng.

古文：性明达笃厚，能以恩信化诱殊俗，甚为羌胡所敬服。
现代文：霍谞性格明达笃厚，能以恩信化诱殊俗，很被羌胡之人所敬服。
English: The character of the egret is very clever, and it is able to seduce people with its trustworthiness. It is greatly admired by people with beards.

古文：遭母忧，自上归行丧。
现代文：母亲死了，自己上书回家举行丧礼。
English: When his mother died, he wrote a letter and went home to hold a funeral.

古文：服阙，公车征，再迁北海相，入为尚书仆射。
现代文：丧服既毕，公车征召，又做了北海相，入朝做了尚书仆射。
English: After the funeral, he was conscripted to drive a bus, became the minister of the North Sea, and entered the imperial court as a clerk.

古文：是时，大将军梁冀贵戚秉权，自公卿以下莫敢违忤。
现代文：这时大将军梁冀贵戚专权，自公卿以下没有人敢违背。
English: At this time, the general Liang Jie and his noble relatives had absolute power, and no one dared to disobey them.

古文：谞与尚书令尹勋数奏其事，又因陛见陈闻罪失。
现代文：霍谞与尚书令尹勋几次奏其事，又因陛见时当面陈述罪失。
English: Hou Yi and Shang Shuling ordered Yin Xun to report the matter several times, and also to report the crime in person when he met with His Majesty.

古文：及冀诛后，桓帝嘉其忠节，封鄴都亭侯。
现代文：等到梁冀被杀后，桓帝嘉奖他的忠节，封为邺都亭侯。
English: After Liang Jie was killed, Emperor Kuan rewarded him for his loyalty and made him the Prince of Xuduting.

古文：前后固让，不许。
现代文：前后坚决辞让，没有同意。
English: He repeatedly and resolutely refused to concede and did not agree.

古文：出为河南尹，迁司隶校尉，转少府、廷尉，卒官。
现代文：后来出为河南尹，迁司隶校尉，转为少府、廷尉。死于官位。
English: Later, he was promoted to Henan Yin, transferred to the rank of lieutenant, transferred to the rank of sub-lieutenant, and transferred to the rank of courtier. He died in his official position.

古文：子俊，安定太守。
现代文：儿子霍俊，做了安定太守。
English: His son, Huo Jun, became the Prince of Stability.

古文：爰延字季平，陈留外黄人也。
现代文：◆爰延传，爰延字季平，陈留外黄人。
English: ◆延传,延字季平,陈留外黄人.

古文：清苦好学，能通经教授。
现代文：家境清苦，很好学，能通经教授学徒。
English: He comes from a poor family background, is a good student, and is able to become an apprentice through teaching.

古文：性质悫，少言辞。
现代文：性情质朴诚悫，少言辞。
English: His disposition is simple and sincere, with few words.

古文：县令陇西牛述好士知人，乃礼请延为廷掾，范丹为功曹，濮阳潜为主籍，常共言谈而已。
现代文：县令陇西牛述好士知人，于是礼请爰延做廷掾，范丹做功曹，濮阳潜做主簿，常在一块言谈而已。
English: The county ordered Shaanxi Niu to write about good friends and acquaintances, so they invited Yan Yan to be a courtier, Fan Dan to be a gong cao, and Shanyang Qian to be the main book, often just talking together.

古文：后令史昭以为乡啬夫，仁化大行，人但闻啬夫，不知郡县。
现代文：后令史昭用他做乡啬夫，仁政教化大行，人们只听说啬夫之名，不知郡县是谁。
English: Later, Shizhao used him as a village miser, a benevolent political educator. People only heard the name of the miser, but did not know who the county was.

古文：在事二年，州府礼请，不就。
现代文：在职两年，州府礼请，没有去。
English: After two years on the job, the state government politely asked him not to go.

古文：桓帝时征博士，太尉杨秉等举贤良方正，再迁为侍中。
现代文：桓帝时征博士，太尉杨秉等举贤良方正，爰延再升为侍中。
English: Emperor Kuan, Doctor Jisei, Lieutenant Yang Bing, and others promoted the virtuous Fang Zheng, and Yan Yan was promoted to the position of chamberlain.

古文：帝游上林苑，从容问延曰： 朕何如主也？ 
现代文：皇帝游上林苑，从容问爰延道： 我是什么样的君主？ 
English: The emperor swam up to the forest garden and calmly asked Yan Yan: What kind of monarch am I?

古文：对曰： 陛下为汉中主。 
现代文：答道： 陛下是汉中主。 
English: He replied: Your Majesty is the head of the Han Dynasty.

古文：帝曰： 何以言之？ 
现代文：帝问 ：怎么讲？ 
English: Emperor Wu said, "Why do you say that?

古文：对曰： 尚书令陈蕃任事则化，中常侍黄门豫政则乱，是以知陛下可与为善，可与为非。 
现代文：对道 ：尚书令陈蕃处理事就成功，中常侍黄门干预朝政不乱，因此知道陛下可与人为善，也可与人为非。 
English: On the other hand: Shang Shuling ordered Chen Qi to handle the matter successfully, and Huangmen, the Vice-regent, intervened in the court politics without disorder, so he knew that his majesty could be kind to people or not.

古文：帝曰： 昔朱云廷折栏槛，今侍中面称朕违，敬闻阙矣。 
现代文：皇上说： 从前朱云谏成帝，弄得廷折栏槛，现在侍中面称朕违，敬闻于朝廷了。 
English: The emperor said: Once upon a time, Zhu Yunzhu became emperor and made the court fold the threshold. Now, the attendants call him a traitor and he is respected by the court.

古文：拜五官中郎将，转长水校尉，迁魏郡太守，征拜大鸿胪。
现代文：于是拜爰延为五官中郎将，转为长水校尉，再升魏郡太守，征召为大鸿胪。
English: As a result, Bai Junyan was promoted to the general of the five departments, changed to the lieutenant of Changshui, and then promoted to the governor of Wei County, and was called up to be the great leader.

古文：帝以延儒生，常特宴见。
现代文：皇上以爰延系儒生，常特别宴见。
English: The emperor was a Confucian scholar from the Jinyan lineage, and they often met at special banquets.

古文：时，太史令上言客星经帝坐，帝密以问延。
现代文：当时太史令上前说客星经帝座，皇上秘密问延。
English: At that time, the Taishi ordered the guest star to come forward, and the emperor secretly asked for a delay.

古文：延因上封事曰：臣闻天子尊无为上，故天以为子，位临臣庶，威重四海。
现代文：爰延于是上书说道 ：臣听说天子是至尊无上的，所以上天以为子，位在臣庶之上，威信重于四海。
English: Yan Yan then wrote a letter saying: "The vassal heard that the Son of Heaven is supreme, so he thought that the Son of Heaven was above the vassal, and his prestige was more important than the four seas.

古文：动静以礼，则星辰顺序；意在邪僻，则晷度错违。
现代文：动静合礼，那么星辰顺序；如果意有邪僻，那么晷度错违。
English: If movement and stillness are in harmony, then the stars are in order; if the intention is perverse, then the degree is wrong.

古文：陛下以河南尹邓万有龙潜之旧，封为通侯，恩重公卿，惠丰宗室。
现代文：陛下认为河南尹邓万有龙潜之旧谊，封他为通侯，恩重于公卿，惠丰于宗室。
English: His Majesty thought that Henan Yin Deng Wan had a long-standing friendship with Long Xuan, and appointed him as a vassal lord, which was more important than the nobility, and more beneficial to the family.

古文：加顷引见，与之对博，上下黩，有亏尊严。
现代文：经常引见，和他对博，上下華黩，有损尊严。
English: It's degrading to be constantly compared to him, to be compared to him, to be compared to him, to be compared to him.

古文：臣闻之，帝左右者，所以咨政德也。
现代文：臣听说，在帝之左右，为的是咨询政德。
English: The minister heard that he was at the emperor's side in order to consult him on political ethics.

古文：故周公戒成王曰 其朋其朋 ，言慎所与也。
现代文：所以周公儆戒成王道 ：其朋其朋 ，就是说要慎交朋友哩。
English: That's why Zhou Gongzheng preached the royal road: one's friends should be one's friends, that is to say, one should be careful in making friends.

古文：昔宋闵公与强臣共博，列妇人于侧，积此无礼，以致大灾。
现代文：从前宋闵公与强臣共博，列妇人在旁边，这样无礼，以致成为大灾。
English: Once upon a time, Song Shao Gong and Qiang Chen were playing chess together, and there were a number of women nearby. This was so rude that it became a catastrophe.

古文：武帝与幸臣李延年、韩嫣同卧起，尊爵重赐，情欲无，遂生骄淫之心，行不义之事，卒延年被戮，嫣伏其事。
现代文：武帝与幸臣李延年、韩嫣同睡同起，尊爵重赐，情欲无厌，于是生骄奢淫佚之心，做出不义之事，最后延年被杀，韩嫣伏罪。
English: Emperor Wu slept with Li Yannian and Han Xuan, both of whom were blessed with the title of nobility, and they had an insatiable sexual appetite. As a result, they became arrogant and immoral, and did things that were unjust. Finally, Yan Nian was killed, and Han Xuan committed the crime of subjugation.

古文：夫爱之则不觉其过，恶之则不知其善，所以事多放滥，物情生怨。
现代文：爱之则不觉其过，恨之则不知其善，所以事多放滥，物情生怨。
English: Love is unaware of its faults, hate is unaware of its good, so things are more indulgent, things cause resentment.

古文：故王者赏人必酬其功，爵人必甄其德。善人同处，则日闻嘉训；恶人从游，则日生邪情。
现代文：故王者赏人必酬其功，以爵与人必明其德，与善人在一起，就每天听到一些好话；与恶人交游，就每天生出邪情。
English: Therefore, those who are honored by the king will be rewarded for their merits, and those who are honored by the king will be known for their virtues. When you are with good people, you will hear some good words every day; when you are with evil people, you will have evil feelings every day.

古文：孔子曰： 益者三友，损者三友。 
现代文：孔子说： 益者三友，损者三友。 
English: Confucius said: There are three kinds of beneficial friends and three kinds of harmful friends.

古文：邪臣惑君，乱妾危主，以非所言则悦于耳，以非所行则玩于目，故令人君不能远之。
现代文：邪恶之臣使君迷惑，淫乱之妾使主危险，用非所言就悦于耳，以非所行则玩于目，所以使人君不能远离他们。
English: Wicked ministers are a snare to princes, and adulterous concubines are a danger to lords: they please the ear with what they do not say, but offend the eye with what they do. Therefore, princes cannot keep away from them.

古文：仲尼曰： 惟女子与小人为难养，近之则不逊，远之则怨。 
现代文：孔子说 ：唯女子与小人为难养，近之则不逊，远之则怨。 
English: Confucius said: "Only women and children are difficult to bring up. Those who are close are not inferior, and those who are far away are resentful."

古文：盖圣人之明戒也！
现代文：这是圣人的明戒哩。
English: This is the sage's injunction.

古文：昔光武皇帝与严光俱寝，上天之异，其夕即见。
现代文：从前是光武帝与严光同寝，上天之异，当晚即现出来。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Guangwu slept with Yan Guang, and that night, miraculously, they appeared.

古文：夫以光武之圣德，严光之高贤，君臣合道，尚降此变，幸况陛下今所亲幸，以贱为贵，以卑为尊哉？
现代文：以光武之圣德，严光之高贤，君臣志同道合，还降此变异，何况陛下今所亲幸之人，以贱为贵，以卑为尊呢？
English: With the sacredness of light and martial arts, the high-mindedness of strict light, and the like-mindedness of monarchs and ministers, there is also this variation. What's more, the people whom His Majesty is personally fortunate with now, regard the lowly as precious, and the lowly as honored?

古文：惟陛下远谗谀之人，纳謇謇之士，除左右之权，寤宦官之敝。
现代文：希陛下远离谗谀之人，纳謇謇之士，除左右之权贵，悟宦官之弊端。
English: He hoped that His Majesty would stay away from the scoundrels, the mercenaries, the rich and powerful on both sides, and learn from the shortcomings of the eunuchs.

古文：使积善日熙，佞恶消殄，则乾灾可除。
现代文：使好事越多，坏事消灭，那么乾灾即可除去。 
English: Make the good things increase and the bad things disappear, then the drought can be eliminated.

古文：帝省其奏。
现代文：皇帝省察所奏。
English: The emperor paused to reflect on the music.

古文：因以病自上，乞骸骨还家。灵帝复特征，不行，病卒。
现代文：于是借病请求退职回家。灵帝又特召，不行，病死。
English: So he took advantage of his illness to request that he be allowed to return home. Ling Di was also specially summoned, but he could not, and he died of illness.

古文：子骥，白马令，亦称善士。
现代文：子爰骥，白马县令，也以善士著称。
English: Zixuan, the magistrate of Baima County, is also known as a good man.

古文：徐璆字孟玉，广陵海西人也。
现代文：徐璆传，徐趚字孟玉，广陵海西人。
English: Xu Bingzhuan, Xu Bingzhi Mengyu, Guangling Haixi people.

古文：父淑，度辽将军，有名于边。
现代文：父徐淑，度辽将军，有名望在边疆。
English: Father Xu Shu, General Du Liao, is famous in the frontier.

古文：璆少博学，辟公府，举高第。
现代文：徐趚少时博学，召入公府，举为高第。
English: Xu Yao was erudite when he was young. He was called to the public office and promoted to high-ranking official.

古文：稍迁荆州刺史。时，董太后姊子张忠为南阳太守，因势放滥，臧罢数亿。
现代文：不久升迁为荆州刺史，当时董太守的姐姐之子张忠做南阳太守，因有权势放滥不羁，得赃数亿。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Jingzhou Shishi. At that time, Zhang Zhong, the son of the sister of Dong Taizhou, became the Nanyang Taizhou, and because of his power and unrestrained behavior, he gained hundreds of millions.

古文：璆临当之部，太后遣中常侍以忠属璆。
现代文：徐趚临当之部，太后派中常侍把张忠嘱托给徐趚。
English: In the presence of Xu Xi, the Empress Dowager sent a middle-ranking attendant to entrust Zhang Zhong to Xu Xi.

古文：璆对曰： 臣身为国，不敢闻命。 
现代文：徐趚回答道： 臣身为国，不敢听命。 
English: Xu Xi replied: As a subject of a country, I dare not obey orders.

古文：太后怒，遽征忠为司隶校尉，以相威临。
现代文：太后发怒，连忙召张忠作司隶校尉，用威势相临。
English: The empress dowager was enraged and quickly summoned Zhang Zhong to be the sub-lieutenant of the sub-lieutenant of the sub-lieutenant of the sub-lieutenant of the sub-lieutenant of the sub-lieutenant of the sub-lieutenant.

古文：璆到州，举奏忠臧余一亿，使冠军县上簿诣大司农，以彰暴其事。
现代文：徐趚到州后，揭举上奏张忠臧馀一亿，派冠军县上簿给大司农，来揭发其事。
English: After Xu Yao arrived in the state, he reported Zhang Zhongyao's remaining 100 million and sent a champion county report to the chief secretary of farmers to expose the matter.

古文：又奏五郡太守及属县有臧污者，悉征案罪，威风大行。
现代文：又奏五郡太守及属县有贪贼的，全部法办，威风大行。
English: He also said that the five county governors and their subordinate counties that had corrupt officials would all be brought to justice.

古文：中平元年，与中郎将朱俊击黄巾贼于宛，破之。
现代文：中平元年，与中郎将朱俊攻打黄巾贼在宛县，破了他们。
English: In the first year of Zhongping, together with Zhongro, Zhu Jun attacked the Yellow Turban Thieves in Wan County and defeated them.

古文：张忠怨璆，与诸阉官构造无端，璆遂以罪征。
现代文：张忠恨了徐趚，与诸阉官捏造无端之罪，徐趚便因罪被召回来。
English: Zhang Zhong hated Xu Yao and fabricated a groundless crime with other eunuchs. Xu Yao was recalled for the crime.

古文：有破贼功，得免官归家。
现代文：因为破贼有功，得免官回家。
English: Because the thief was meritorious, he was allowed to go home.

古文：后再征，迁汝南太守，转东海相，所在化行。
现代文：后来再次征召，迁汝南太守，转为东海相，所在之处风化大行。
English: Later, he was called up again, and was transferred to the Southern Imperial Governor, and then to the East Sea Minister, where he behaved very badly.

古文：献帝迁许，以廷尉征，当诣京师，道为袁术所劫，授璆以上公之位。
现代文：献帝迁都许昌，徐趚以廷尉征召，应到京师供职，半路上被袁术所劫，授徐趚以上公之位。
English: Xu Chang moved the capital to dedicate it to the emperor, and Xu Xi was called up as a courtier to serve as a teacher in Beijing. On the way, he was kidnapped by Yuan Shuxu, and Xu Xi was given a higher public position.

古文：璆乃叹曰： 龚胜、鲍宣，独何人哉？
现代文：徐趚叹息道 ：龚胜，鲍宣，是何等样人？
English: Xu Yao sighed, "Yu Sheng, Bao Xuan, what kind of people are they?

古文：守之必死！ 
现代文：守之必死！ 
English: Protect it to the death!

古文：术不敢逼。
现代文：袁术不敢逼他。
English: Yuan Shu did not dare to force him.

古文：术死军破，璆得其盗国玺，及还许，上之，并送前所假汝南、东海二郡印绶。
现代文：袁术死后军破，徐趚得到袁所盗的国玺，到了许昌，上交皇帝，并送交前所假汝南、东海二郡的印绶。
English: After Yuan Shuxu's death, the army was defeated, and Xu Xi obtained Yuan's stolen imperial seal. When he arrived at Xu Chang, he presented it to the emperor, and also sent the imperial seal of the two counties in southern Ryukyu and the East China Sea that he had previously stolen.

古文：司徒赵温谓璆曰： 君遭大难，犹存此邪？ 
现代文：司徒赵温对徐趚说 ：君遭大难，还保存了这个吗？ 
English: The tutor, Zhao Wen, said to Xu Yao, "You have suffered great hardships. Did you still keep this?

古文：璆曰： 昔苏武困于匈奴，不队七尺之节，况此方寸印乎？ 
现代文：徐趚说 ：从前苏武困于匈奴，没有坠失七尺之节，况这方寸之印么？ 
English: Xu Wei said: In the past, the Soviet Union was trapped by the Huns, and did not lose seven feet of knots. Moreover, is this the mark of a square inch?

古文：后拜太常，使持节拜曹操为丞相。
现代文：后来被拜为太常，派他持节拜曹操为丞相。
English: Later, he was worshipped as Taizhang, and he was sent to hold a festival to worship Cao Cao as chancellor.

古文：操以相让璆，璆不敢当。
现代文：曹操让给徐趚，趚不敢当。
English: Cao Cao yielded to Xu Yao, but Yao did not dare to do so.

古文：卒于官。
现代文：死于官位。
English: He died in office.

