古文：玉女边洞玄崔书生骊山姥黄观福
现代文：玉女边洞玄崔书生骊山姥黄观福
English: Yuwen Biandong, Xuan Cui, Shisheng, Lushan, Granny Huang, Guan Fu

古文：玉女
现代文：玉女
English: My Fair Lady

古文：唐开元中，华山云台观有婢玉女，年四十五，大疾，遍身溃烂臭秽。
现代文：唐朝开元年间，华山云台观有个婢女叫作玉女，四十五岁那年得了一场大病，遍身溃烂，又臭又脏。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Huashan Yuntai Guan had a servant girl called Jade Girl. At the age of forty-five, she got a serious illness. Her whole body was festering, and she was smelly and dirty.

古文：观中人惧其污染，即共送于山涧幽僻之处。
现代文：观中的人害怕她传染，就共同把她送到山涧旁幽深僻静的地方。
English: The onlookers, fearing that she was contagious, took her to a secluded spot near the mountains.

古文：玉女痛楚呻吟。
现代文：玉女痛楚呻吟。
English: The lady moaned in pain.

古文：忽有道士过前，遥掷青草三四株，其草如菜，谓之曰： 勉食此，不久当愈。 
现代文：忽然有个道士从她前面走过，远远地扔给她三、四棵青草，那草像菜似的。道士对她说： 你尽量把这草吃下去，不久病就能痊愈。 
English: Suddenly, a Taoist passed in front of her and threw three or four blades of grass to her from a distance. The grass looked like vegetables. The Taoist said to her, "Eat as much of this grass as you can, and you will soon recover from your illness."

古文：玉女即茹之。
现代文：玉女就把那几株青草吃了。
English: The young lady ate the grass.

古文：自是疾渐痊，不旬日复旧。
现代文：从此玉女的疾病渐渐好转，不到十天就恢复旧日的状态。
English: From then on, the lady's illness gradually improved, and she was back to her old self in less than ten days.

古文：初忘饮食，惟恣游览，但意中飘摇，不喜人间，及观之前后左右亦不愿过。
现代文：开始她忘记吃饭喝水，只想随意游览，但心中飘忽不定，不喜欢人间，连云台观的前后左右也不愿经过。
English: At first, she forgot to eat and drink, and just wanted to visit at will, but her mind was erratic, she didn't like the human world, and she didn't even want to go around and around the observation deck.

古文：此观中人谓其消散久矣，亦无复有访之者。
现代文：这些观中人认为玉女消失很久了，也不再有寻访她的人。
English: These onlookers thought that the lady had disappeared for a long time, and there were no more people looking for her.

古文：玉女周旋山中，酌泉水、食木实而已。
现代文：玉女就在山中往来周游，渴了喝泉水，饿了就吃树籽、花果。
English: The lady travels around in the mountains, drinks spring water when she is thirsty, and eats tree seeds and flowers when she is hungry.

古文：后于岩下。忽逢前，道士谓曰： 汝疾即瘥，不用更在人间。
现代文：后来在山岩下，忽然又遇到先前那个道士，道士对她说： 你的病已经好了，不用再留在人间。
English: Later, under a rock, she suddenly ran into the former Taoist again. The Taoist said to her, "Your illness is over, you don't need to stay on earth any longer.

古文：云台观西二里有石池，汝可日至辰时，投以小石，当有水芝一本自出，汝可掇之而食，久久当自有益。 
现代文：云台观往西走二里有个石池，你可以每天到辰时，把小石子投进去，会有一棵水芝自己出来，你可把它拿来吃，时间长久了，自然会有好处。 
English: There is a stone pond two miles to the west of Yuntaiyuan. You can throw a small stone into it every day when the hour comes. A water grass will come out by itself. You can take it to eat. If the time is long, it will naturally have benefits.

古文：玉女即依其教，自后筋骸轻健，翱翔自若，虽屡为观中之人逢见，亦不知为玉女耳。
现代文：玉女就依照道士的指教去做。从这以后，玉女筋骨轻健，翱翔自如，虽然屡次被观中人碰见，但谁也认不出她就是玉女了。
English: The lady followed the advice of the Taoist. From then on, the lady was light-skinned and could soar freely. Although she was seen many times by onlookers, no one could recognize her as the lady.

古文：如此数十年，发长六七尺，体生绿毛，面如白花。
现代文：就这样过了几十年，玉女头发有六七尺长，身体上生出绿毛，面容却象一朵白色的花。
English: In this way, after several decades, Jade's hair is sixty-seven feet long, green hair grows on her body, but her face looks like a white flower.

古文：往往山中人过之，则叩头遥礼而已。
现代文：山里的人遇见她，往往离着很远就叩头行礼。
English: When people in the mountains meet her, they often bow to her from a distance.

古文：大历中，有书生班行达者，性气粗疏，诽毁释、道，为学于观西序。
现代文：大历年间，有个叫作班行达的书生，此人性情粗俗，常常诽谤诋毁佛、道二教，在云台观西厢房读书。
English: In the year of the great calendar, there was a student named Ban Xingda, who was vulgar in nature and often slandered and defamed Buddhism and Taoism. He studied in the west wing of Yuntai Guan.

古文：而玉女日日往来石池，因以为常。
现代文：而玉女每天都要往来石池，自己就把这事看作平常了。
English: The lady, on the other hand, has to go back and forth to the stone pond every day, and she considers this to be normal.

古文：行达伺候窥觇，又熟见投石采芝，时节有准。
现代文：而班行达则伺机等着偷看，又见惯了玉女投石采芝，时节都很准确。
English: While Ban Xingda is waiting for the opportunity to peep, and is used to seeing the lady throwing stones and picking up grass, the time is very accurate.

古文：于一日，稍先至池上，及其玉女投小石、水芝果出，行达乃搴取。
现代文：有一天，班行达稍稍赶在玉女先头到达石池之上，等到那个玉女投出小石头的时候，水芝果然出来了，班行达竟把水芝夺去。
English: One day, Ban Xingda was a little ahead of the lady to reach the stone pond, and when the lady threw a small stone, the water lily actually came out, and Ban Xingda actually took the water lily away.

古文：玉女远在山岩，或栖树杪，即在采去，则呼叹而还。
现代文：玉女远在山岩之上，有时停留在树梢上，既然水芝已被别人采去，玉女就只能叹息而还了。
English: The lady is far above the mountain rock, sometimes staying on the treetops. Since the shrew has been picked up by others, the lady can only sigh and give it back.

古文：明日，行达复如此。
现代文：第二天，班行达还是这样干。
English: The next day, Pan Xingda still did this.

古文：积旬之外，玉女稍稍与行达争先，步武相接。
现代文：差不多十天以后，玉女稍稍与班行达争先，脚步相接。
English: Almost ten days later, the young lady was slightly ahead of the group, and their footsteps met.

古文：歘然遽捉其发，而玉女腾去不得，因以勇力挈其肤体，仍加逼迫。
现代文：班行达突然就把玉女的头发抓住了，使玉女无法腾跃而去，班行达趁此机会凭勇力抓摸玉女的肤体，频加逼迫。
English: Pan Xingda suddenly grabbed the hair of the lady, so that the lady could not prance away. Pan Xingda took this opportunity to grasp the lady's skin with courage, and frequently persecuted her.

古文：玉女号呼求救，誓死不从，而气力困惫，终为行达所辱。
现代文：玉女哭着喊着呼救，誓死不从，但是气力不足，终于被班行达所污辱。
English: The princess cried and shouted for help, swearing to die, but her strength was not enough, and she was finally insulted by the gangster.

古文：扃之一室，翌日行达就观，乃见皤然一媪，尪瘵异常，起止殊艰，视听甚昧。
现代文：班行达把她捉回，锁在一间屋子里。第二天，班行达到那屋里一看，竟然看到一个白发苍苍的老太太，瘦病异常，起坐都很艰难，视物不清，听话不明。
English: The next day, when the patrol reached the house, they saw an old, white-haired woman who was extremely thin, had difficulty sitting up, had blurred vision, and did not know what to say.

古文：行达惊异，遽召观中人，细话其事，即共伺问玉女，玉女备述始终。
现代文：班行达很惊讶，也觉得奇怪，急忙把观中人召来，详细地告诉她们事情的经过，于是，大家一起探问玉女，玉女就把她的遭遇从头到尾详细地叙述了一遍。
English: Pan Xingda was very surprised and also felt strange. He hurriedly called the onlookers and told them the details of the incident. So, they all questioned the lady together, and the lady described her experience in detail from beginning to end.

古文：观中人固有闻知其故者，计其年盖百有余矣。
现代文：观中人本来就有听说并知道的人，估计玉女的年龄大概有一百多岁了。
English: Viewers have heard and know people who have heard and know people, and it is estimated that the age of the lady is about a hundred years old.

古文：众哀之，因共放去，不经月而殁。
现代文：大家可怜她，就共同商量这件事情放她离去，后来不到一个月，玉女就死了。
English: Everyone felt sorry for her, so they discussed the matter together and let her go. Less than a month later, the princess died.

古文：边洞玄
现代文：边洞玄
English: Byeongdonghyun

古文：唐开元末，冀州枣强县女道士边洞玄，学道服饵四十年，年八十四岁。
现代文：唐代开元末年，冀州枣强县有个女道士叫做边洞玄，学道及服仙药四十年。
English: At the end of the first century of the Tang Dynasty, there was a female Taoist in Zaoqiang County, Jizhou Province, named Biandong Xuan, who had been studying Taoism and taking celestial medicine for forty years.

古文：忽有老人，持一器汤饼，来诣洞玄曰： 吾是三山仙人，以汝得道，故来相取。
现代文：她八十四岁那年，忽然有一个老人拿着一食器汤饼，来拜访洞玄，他说： 我是三山仙人，因为你有道，特意来接取你。
English: When she was eighty-four years old, an old man suddenly came to visit Dong Xuan with a bowl of soup and cake. He said, "I am the Three Mountain Immortal, and I have come specifically to meet you because you have a way.

古文：此汤饼是玉英之粉，神仙所贵，顷来得道者多服之。
现代文：这个汤饼是玉英之粉所制，为神仙所珍视，近来得道的人多数都吃它。
English: This soup cake is made from Jade Emperor's powder and is treasured by the gods. Most of the newly enlightened people eat it.

古文：尔但服无疑，后七日必当羽化。 
现代文：你尽管服食，不要怀疑，此后七天一定能羽化成仙。 
English: No matter what you eat, don't doubt that you will be able to turn into a fairy in seven days.

古文：洞玄食毕，老人曰： 吾今先行，汝后来也。 
现代文：洞玄吃完，老人说： 我现在先走了，你随后来吧！ 
English: After eating the dongxuan, the old man said, "I'll go first now, you come later!"

古文：言讫不见。
现代文：说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：后日，洞玄忽觉身轻，齿发尽换，谓弟子曰： 上清见召，不久当往。
现代文：过了两天，洞玄忽然觉得身体轻了，牙齿和头发全换了，她就对弟子说： 上清召我去，不久就能前往。
English: After two days, Dong Xuan suddenly felt lighter, and her teeth and hair had completely changed. She said to her disciple: Shang Qing has called me, and I will be able to go soon.

古文：顾念汝等。能不恨恨？
现代文：但惦念你们这些弟子，能不遗憾吗？
English: But can I not regret missing you disciples?

古文：善修吾道，无为乐人间事，为土棺散魂耳。 
现代文：你们要好好修行我道，不要津津乐道人间之事，那只能变为土棺中的散魂而已。 
English: You should practice my way well, and do not relish worldly things, which can only turn into scattered souls in earthen coffins.

古文：满七日。弟子等晨往问讯动止，已见紫云昏凝，遍满庭户；又闻空中有数人语，乃不敢入，悉止门外。
现代文：满了七天，弟子等凌晨前往问讯洞玄、探询行止时，已经看见紫云深浓凝聚又听到空中有几个人说话，就不敢进去，全都站在门外。
English: After seven days, when the disciples waited in the early morning to go to inquire about the dongxuan and inquire about the behavior, they had already seen the purple clouds condense and heard several people talking in the air. They did not dare to go in, and all stood outside the door.

古文：须臾门开，洞玄乃乘紫云，竦身空中立，去地百余尺，与诸弟子及法侣等辞诀。
现代文：不一会儿，门开了，洞玄就乘着紫云，耸身在空中站立，离地一百多尺，与众弟子以及法侣等人告辞诀别。
English: In a short while, the door opened, and Dogen stood on a purple cloud, towering in the air, more than a hundred feet above the ground, bidding farewell to all the disciples and Dharma couples.

古文：时刺史源复，与官吏、百姓等数万人，皆遥瞻礼。
现代文：当时刺史源复与官吏百姓等数万人，都远远地瞻仰礼拜。
English: At that time, tens of thousands of people, including the chief historian Yuan Fu, government officials and ordinary people, all watched and prayed at a distance.

古文：有顷日出，紫气化为五色云，洞玄冉冉而上，久之方灭。
现代文：隔了一会儿，太阳出来了，紫气变为五色祥云，洞玄冉冉上升，紫气很久才消失。
English: After a while, the sun came out, the purple atmosphere turned into a five-colored auspicious cloud, the cave rose, and the purple atmosphere disappeared for a long time.

古文：崔书生
现代文：崔书生
English: Cui Shusheng

古文：唐开元天宝中，有崔书生，于东州逻谷口居，好植名花。
现代文：唐代开元天宝年间，有个姓崔的书生，在东州逻谷口居住，好种名花。
English: During the Tenpo era of the first century of the Tang Dynasty, there was a scholar surnamed Cui, who lived in Luogukou, Dongzhou, and was good at planting famous flowers.

古文：暮春之中，英蕊芬郁，远闻百步。
现代文：每到暮春季节，花蕊芬郁，远在百步之外就可以闻到花香。
English: Every late spring season, the flower buds are fragrant, and you can smell the scent of flowers from a hundred paces away.

古文：书生每初晨，必盥漱看之。
现代文：书生每天早晨刚起来，都是先洗漱，然后便去看花。
English: Every morning, as soon as the students get up, they first wash and then go to look at the flowers.

古文：忽有一女，自西乘马而来，青衣老少数人随后。
现代文：有一天，忽然有一个女子，从西边乘马而来，穿青衣的老少几个婢女跟随在她的后边。
English: One day, all of a sudden, a woman rode in on a horse from the west, and she was followed by several maidservants, both young and old, dressed in blue.

古文：女有殊色，所乘骏马极佳。
现代文：这女子姿色极美，所乘的骏马也极佳。
English: The woman was very beautiful to look at, and the horse she rode was very fine.

古文：崔生未及细视，则已过矣。
现代文：崔生还没来得及细看，女郎就已经过去了。
English: Before Cui Sheng could take a closer look, the girl had already passed.

古文：明日又过，崔生乃于花下，先致酒茗樽杓，铺陈茵席，乃迎马首拜曰： 某性好花木，此园无非手植。
现代文：第二天女郎又从这里经过，崔生就在花下先摆上酒茶和酒杯茶杯，铺上草垫子，在垫上又铺上席子，就去迎着女郎的马首参拜说： 我生来喜好花木，这个园子里的花没有不是我亲手栽植的。
English: The next day, when the girl passed by again, Cui Sheng first placed a cup of wine and a glass of wine under the flower, laid a straw mat, and then laid a mat on the mat. He went to meet the girl's horse head and said, "I was born with a liking for flowers and trees. There is no flower in this garden that I did not plant with my own hands."

古文：今正值香茂，颇堪流眄。
现代文：如今正赶上花香浓郁，颇值得您流连一顾。
English: Now it is catching up with the rich floral fragrance, quite worthy of your lingering look.

古文：女郎频日而过，计仆驭当疲。
现代文：女郎这几天频繁从这里经过，估计仆人和马匹都会疲劳。
English: The maidens have been passing by frequently in recent days, and it is expected that both the servants and the horses will be tired.

古文：敢具单醪，以俟憩息。 
现代文：我斗胆准备薄酒，来等您歇息。 
English: I've dared to prepare a little wine and wait for you to rest.

古文：女不顾而过。
现代文：女郎连看也没看就过去了。
English: The girl passed by without even looking.

古文：其后青衣曰： 但具酒馔，何忧不至？ 
现代文：她身后的青衣婢女说： 只管准备酒菜宴席，何愁不来？ 
English: The maidservant in blue behind her said, "Just prepare the food and wine for the banquet, why not come?"

古文：女顾叱曰： 何故轻与人言！ 
现代文：女郎回头呵叱婢女说： 为什么轻易与别人说话！ 
English: The girl turned around and scolded her maid, saying: "Why do you speak so easily to others!

古文：崔生明日又先及，鞭马随之，到别墅之前，又下马，拜请良久。
现代文：崔生第二天又先到了，扬鞭策马随在女郎后边，到了一座别墅的前面，崔生又下了马，下拜请求了很久。
English: The next day, Cui Sheng arrived first again. Yang Huizhe followed the girl on his horse and arrived in front of a villa. Cui Sheng dismounted again and bowed for a long time.

古文：一老青衣谓女曰： 马大疲，暂歇无爽。 
现代文：一个青衣老婢女对女郎说： 马太疲乏了。
English: An old maidservant in a blue dress said to the girl: "Mata is tired.

古文：因自控马，至当寝下。
现代文：暂且歇一歇也不会有什么差错。 于是女郎自己控制着马，到对着寝室的门前下来。
English: A short rest wouldn't go amiss, so the girl steered the horse herself and rode down to the bedroom door.

古文：老青衣谓崔生曰： 君即未婚，予为媒妁可乎？ 
现代文：老婢女对崔生说： 您即然没有结婚，我给你做媒妁可以吗？ 
English: The old maid said to Cui Sheng: Even though you are not married, can I be your matchmaker?

古文：崔生大悦，载拜跪请。
现代文：崔生高兴极了，又拜又跪地请求帮忙。
English: Cui Sheng was overjoyed. He bowed and knelt down to ask for help.

古文：青衣曰： 事亦必定。
现代文：老婢女说： 这件婚事必定成功。
English: The old maid said, "This marriage is sure to succeed.

古文：后十五六日，大是吉辰，君于此时，但具婚礼所要，并于此备酒肴。
现代文：过后十五六日，是个大吉之辰，您到这个时候，只管置办婚礼所必需的东西，并在这里备办酒肴。
English: The fifteenth or sixteenth day after the wedding is a lucky day. At this time, you only need to buy the necessary things for the wedding and prepare the wine and food here.

古文：今小娘子阿姊在逻谷中，有小疾，故日往看省。
现代文：如今小娘子的姐姐在逻谷中，有点小病，所以天天去探看。
English: Now the little girl's sister is in Logokul, she has a slight illness, so she goes to check on her every day.

古文：向某去后，便当咨启，期到皆至此矣。 
现代文：你走之后，就会提出请求建议，日期到了的时候我们都到这里了。 
English: After you leave, there will be a request for proposals, and by the time the date comes, we will all be here.

古文：于是俱行，崔生在后，即依言营备吉日所要。
现代文：于是一起走，崔生在后。崔生回去，就依照老婢女所说的那样，置办准备吉日所必需的物品。
English: So they walked together, with Cui Sheng following behind. When Cui Sheng went back, she did as the old maid had said and bought the necessary items to prepare for the auspicious day.

古文：至期，女及娣皆到。
现代文：到了约定的日子，女郎和她的姐姐都到了。
English: On the appointed day, the girl and her sister arrived.

古文：其姊亦仪质极丽，送留女归于崔生。
现代文：她的姐姐的仪表气质也极其俏丽，就把女郎送来留给崔生。
English: Her sister's appearance is also extremely beautiful, so she sends the girl to stay with Cui Sheng.

古文：崔生母在故居，殊不知崔生纳室。
现代文：崔生的母亲还在故居居住，一点儿也不知道崔生娶媳妇的消息。
English: Cui Sheng's mother is still living in the former residence and does not know anything about Cui Sheng marrying his daughter-in-law.

古文：崔生以不告而娶，但启以婢媵。
现代文：崔生因为没有禀告母亲而私下娶妻，就向母亲假言，她是一位侍奉自己的婢妾。
English: Because Cui Sheng did not denounce his mother and secretly married his wife, he pretended to his mother that she was a servant and concubine.

古文：母见新妇之姿甚美。
现代文：他母亲看到了新娘子也觉得她姿色很美。
English: His mother saw the bride and thought she looked beautiful.

古文：经月余，忽有人送食于女，甘香殊异。
现代文：经过一个多月了，有一天，忽然有人给女郎送来食品，那食品又甜又香，很是奇异。
English: After more than a month, one day, someone suddenly brought food to the girl. The food was sweet and fragrant, very strange.

古文：后崔生觉母慈颜衰悴，因伏问几下。
现代文：后来崔生觉得母亲衰老憔悴，于是跪伏在几案之下给母亲问安。
English: Later, Cui Sheng felt that his mother was old and frail, so he knelt down under several cases to say hello to his mother.

古文：母曰： 有汝一子，冀得求全。
现代文：他的母亲说： 我只有你这一个儿子，希望能够求得保全。
English: His mother said: "I have only one son, you, and I hope to be able to seek protection for him."

古文：今汝所纳新妇，妖媚无双，吾于土塑图画之中，未曾见此。必是狐魅之辈，伤害于汝，故致吾忧。 
现代文：如今你所娶的新媳妇，妖媚无双，我在土塑的图画当中，也不曾见到过这样的美貌女子，一定是狐狸精一类的东西，恐怕对你有伤害，所以造成我的忧虑。 
English: The new daughter-in-law you are marrying now is a matchless beauty. I have never seen such a beautiful woman in clay sculptures. She must be a vixen-like creature. I'm afraid she will be harmful to you, which is why I'm worried.

古文：崔生入室，见女泪涕交下曰： 本侍箕帚，望以终天；不知尊夫人待以狐魅辈，明晨即别。 
现代文：崔生回到自己内室，见到女郎涕泪交流，女郎说： 我侍奉你，给你作妻子，指望终老天年；没想到老夫人用对待狐狸精的态度对待我。我明天早晨就告别。 
English: When Cui Sheng returned to his inner room, he saw the girl weeping and exchanging words with him. The girl said, "I will serve you and be your wife, hoping to live forever; I didn't expect the old lady to treat me the way she treated the fox spirit. I will say goodbye tomorrow morning."

古文：崔生亦挥涕不能言。
现代文：崔生也泪流满面，说不出话来。
English: Cui Sheng was also in tears, unable to speak.

古文：明日，女车骑复至，女乘一马，崔生亦乘一马从送之。
现代文：第二天，女郎的车马又来了，女郎骑一匹马，崔生也乘一匹马跟着去送她。
English: The next day, the girl's carriage and horse came again. The girl rode a horse, and Cui Sheng also rode a horse to accompany her.

古文：入逻谷三十里，山间有一川，川中有异花珍果，不可言纪；馆宇屋室，侈于王者。
现代文：进入逻谷三十里，山间有一片平地，田野之中有异花珍果，不能用语言描绘，馆宇屋室比王公的府第还奢华。
English: Thirty miles into the Logok Valley, there is a flat land between the mountains, there are rare flowers and fruits in the fields, which cannot be described in words, and the museum room is more luxurious than the prince's palace.

古文：青衣百许迎称曰： 无行崔郎，何必将来？ 
现代文：青衣仆人上百人迎着女郎下拜，说： 这无行的崔郎，何必领来！ 
English: Hundreds of servants in dark blue bowed down to the girl and said, "Why do you have to bring this worthless Cui Rong?

古文：于是捧入，留崔生于门外。
现代文：于是簇拥着女郎把她捧了进去，而把崔生留在门外。
English: So they gathered around the girl and took her inside, leaving Cui Sheng outside the door.

古文：未几，一青衣女传姊言曰： 崔郎遗行，太夫人疑阻，事宜便绝，不合相见；然小妹曾奉周旋。亦当奉屈。 
现代文：不一会儿，一个青衣婢女传达女郎姐姐的话说： 崔郎缺乏德行，太夫人疑心阻挠，婚事应该立即断绝，本不该见他；但小妹曾奉侍过他，为他周旋，也当奉屈而入吧！ 
English: A short while later, a maid in a blue dress conveyed the words of the girl's sister: "Cui Lang lacks virtue, the great lady is suspicious and obstructive, the marriage should be broken off immediately, she should not have seen him; but the little sister had served him, handled him, and should also enter into servitude!"

古文：俄而召崔生入，责诮再三，词辨清婉。
现代文：不久，有人召崔生进去，女郎姐姐又把崔生责备了再三，清晰婉转，很有口才。
English: Soon, someone called Cui Sheng in, and the girl's sister scolded Cui Sheng again and again, clearly and gently, very eloquently.

古文：崔生但拜伏受谴而已，后遂坐于中寝对食。
现代文：崔生只能拜伏在地，接受谴责而已。后来就坐在寝室中对面吃饭。
English: Cui Sheng could only prostrate himself on the ground and accept the reprimand. Later, he sat down to eat in the opposite side of the bedroom.

古文：食讫命酒，召女乐洽奏，铿锵万变。
现代文：吃完饭命摆酒，召女乐演奏，乐曲铿锵万变。
English: After the meal, they serve wine and invite the women to play music. The music is ever-changing.

古文：乐阕，其姊谓女曰： 须令崔郎却回，汝有何物赠送？ 
现代文：乐曲停下了，女郎的姐姐对女郎说： 该让崔郎回去了，你有什么物品赠送给他？ 
English: The music stopped, and the girl's sister said to the girl: It's time to let Cui Lang go back, what items do you have to give him?

古文：女遂袖中取白玉盒子遗崔生，生亦留别，于是各呜咽而出门。
现代文：女郎就从袖子中取出一个白玉盒子赠给崔生，崔生也留下东西告别，于是各自呜咽着分手，崔生就出了门。
English: The girl took out a white jade box from her sleeve to give to Cui Sheng, Cui Sheng also left something to say goodbye, so they parted with a whimper, and Cui Sheng went out the door.

古文：至逻谷口回望，千岩万壑，无有远路。
现代文：到了逻谷口回头一望，千山万壑，看不到自己刚才走过的路。
English: When I arrived at Logoyakuchi, I looked back and couldn't see the road I had just walked.

古文：因恸哭归家，常持玉盒子，郁郁不乐。
现代文：于是崔生痛哭着回到家里，从此，他经常拿着玉盒子郁郁不乐。
English: So Cui Sheng cried bitterly and returned home. From then on, he often held the jade box and was depressed.

古文：忽有胡僧扣门求食曰： 君有至宝，乞相示也。 
现代文：忽然有个胡僧敲门找饭吃，他说： 您有最有价值的宝物，请让我看看。 
English: Suddenly a goose monk knocked at the door looking for something to eat. He said, "You have the most valuable treasure, please let me see it."

古文：崔生曰： 某贫士，何有是请？ 
现代文：崔生说： 我是个贫士，你怎么会有这种请求？ 
English: Cui Sheng said: I am a poor man, how can you make such a request?

古文：僧曰： 君岂不有异人奉赠乎？
现代文：胡僧说： 您难道没有异人赠送的东西吗？
English: The monk said, "Don't you have anything that was given to you by someone else?

古文：贫道望气知之。 
现代文：贫道一望气，便知道有这个宝物。 
English: If you are poor, you know that this treasure is there.

古文：崔生试出玉盒子示僧。
现代文：崔生抱着试探的心理拿出玉盒子给胡僧看。
English: Cui Sheng, with a tentative mind, took out a jade box to show it to the monk.

古文：僧起，请以百万市之，遂往。
现代文：胡僧站起身来，请求用一百万两银子购买它。
English: The monk stood up and asked for one million taels of silver to buy it.

古文：崔生问僧曰： 女郎谁耶？ 
现代文：买到后就想走开。崔生问那个胡僧： 那位女郎是谁呀？ 
English: After buying it, he wanted to leave. Cui Sheng asked the monk: Who is that girl?

古文：曰。 君所纳妻，西王母第三女，玉卮娘子也。
现代文：胡僧说： 您所娶的妻子，是西王母的第三个女儿玉卮娘子。
English: The monk said, "The woman you married is the third daughter of the West King's mother, Lady Jade.

古文：姊亦负美名于仙都，况复人间！
现代文：她的姐姐在仙界也负有美名，何况在人间呢？
English: Her sister also has a good name in the spirit world, let alone in the human world?

古文：所惜君纳之不得久远，若住得一年，君举家不死矣！ 
现代文：所可惜的是您娶了她时间不长，如果能同住上一年，您的全家就都可以不死了！ 
English: The pity is that you have only been married to her for a short time. If you can live together for a year, your whole family will not die!

古文：骊山姥
现代文：骊山姥
English: Lushan granny

古文：骊山姥，不知何代人也。
现代文：骊山姥，不知道是哪个朝代的人。
English: Shaoshan grandma, I don't know which dynasty she belonged to.

古文：李筌好神仙之道，常历名山，博采方术。至嵩山虎口岩石室中，得黄帝《阴符》本，绢素书，缄之甚密。
现代文：李筌喜好神仙之道，经常游历名山，广泛采集方术，在嵩山虎口岩石室中，得到了黄帝《阴符》本绢素书。
English: Li Qian liked the way of the immortals. He often traveled to famous mountains and collected a wide range of methods. He obtained a copy of the Yellow Emperor's "Yin Fu" in the Hougou rock chamber of Songshan Mountain.

古文：题云： 大魏真君二年七月七日，道士寇谦之藏之名山，用传同好。 
现代文：素书封固得很严密。上面有题字，内容是：大魏真君二年七月七日，道士寇谦之把它藏在名山，用它传给爱好相同的人。
English: The plain book is tightly sealed. There is an inscription on it, the content of which is: On July 7, the second year of Wei Zhenjun, Taoist priest Kou Qianzhi hid it in the famous mountain and used it to pass it on to people with the same hobby.

古文：以糜烂，筌抄读数千遍，竟不晓其义理。
现代文：因书已糜烂，李筌将书抄下来，并读了几千遍，但始终不明白《阴符》的义理。
English: Because the book was rotten, Li Yao copied it down and read it thousands of times, but he still did not understand the meaning of "Yin Fu."

古文：因入秦，至骊山下，逢一老母，鬓髻当顶，余发半垂，弊衣扶杖，神状甚异。
现代文：因为到陕西去，走到骊山脚下，遇到一个老妈妈，这个老妈妈的发髻从鬓边梳到头顶，其余的头发半垂，穿着破衣服，拄着拐杖，神情状态很不一般。
English: Because I went to Shaanxi, walked to the foot of Lushan Mountain, and met an old mother, this old mother's hair was combed from the ruffles to the top of her head, the rest of her hair was half-hanging down, she was wearing ragged clothes, she was on crutches, and her appearance was very unusual.

古文：路旁见遗火烧树，因自言曰： 火生于木，祸发必克。 
现代文：老妈妈看到路旁有遗火烧树，就自言自语地说： 火生于木，祸发必克。 
English: When the old mother saw a bonfire burning trees by the roadside, she said to herself, "Fire is born in wood, so disaster is bound to happen."

古文：筌闻之惊，前问曰： 此黄帝《阴符》秘文，母何得而言之？ 
现代文：李筌听到这话很惊讶，就上前问她： 这是黄帝《阴符》中的秘言，老妈妈怎么能说出它呢？ 
English: Li Qiye was very surprised to hear this, so he asked her: This is the secret word in the Yellow Emperor's "Yin Fu," how can the old mother say it?

古文：母曰： 吾受此符，已三元六周甲子矣。
现代文：老妈妈说： 我接受这个符，已经三元六周甲子了。
English: The old mother said, "I have accepted this token, and I have already gained three yuan and six weeks.

古文：三元一周，计一百八十年，六周共计一千八十年矣。
现代文：三元一周，共计一百八十年，六周共计一千零八十年了。
English: Three yuan a week, a total of one hundred and eighty years, six weeks a total of one thousand and eighty years.

古文：少年从何而知？ 
现代文：年轻人，你从哪里得知《阴符》呢？ 
English: Young man, where did you learn about Yinpu?

古文：筌稽首载拜，具告得符之所，因请问玄义。
现代文：李筌行过稽首礼又行拜礼，就详细地告诉老妈妈得符的地方，趁便请问《阴符》的玄义。
English: After Li Yan had performed the head-examination ceremony and the prayer ceremony, he told the old mother in detail where to get the charm, and took the opportunity to ask about the mystery of the "yin charm."

古文：使筌正立，向明视之曰： 受此符者，当须名列仙籍，骨相应仙，而后可以语至道之幽妙，启玄关之锁钥耳。
现代文：老妈妈让李筌正面站立，向着亮处把他看了看，说： 接受这个符的人，该当名列仙籍，骨相应当成仙，然后可以告诉他至道的幽深奥妙，付与他开启玄关之锁的钥匙。
English: The old mother asked Li Qian to stand in front of her, looked at him in the light, and said: The person who accepts this token should be ranked as a fairy, and the bone match should become a fairy, and then he can tell him the profound mystery of the Tao, and give him the key to open the lock of the entrance.

古文：不然者，反受其咎也。
现代文：如果不是这样的人，反而会受到责罚。
English: If they are not, they will be punished.

古文：少年颧骨贯于生门，命轮齐于日角，血脉未减，心影不偏，性贤而好法，神勇而乐智，真吾弟子也！
现代文：年轻人的颧骨通到生门，命轮与月角相齐，血脉未灭，心影不偏，本性贤德而又喜好法术，精神旺盛而又喜欢动脑子，真是我的弟子啊！
English: The jawbone of a young man leads to the gate of life, the wheel of life is aligned with the angle of the moon, the bloodline is not extinguished, the heart is not biased, the nature is virtuous and likes magic, the spirit is vigorous and likes to use the brain, really my disciple!

古文：然四十五岁，当有大厄。 
现代文：然而四十五岁时，你当有场大难。 
English: But when you're forty-five, you're in big trouble.

古文：因出丹书符一通，贯于杖端，令荃跪而吞之。曰： 天地相保。 
现代文：于是拿出朱砂写了一道符，串在拐杖尖上，令李筌跪着把它吞下去。说： 天地保佑你。 
English: So he took out cinnabar and wrote a sign, strung it on the tip of his crutch, and made Li Yao swallow it on his knees, saying: "Heaven and earth bless you."

古文：于是命坐，为说《阴符》之义曰： 阴符者，上清所秘，玄台所尊，理国则太平，理身则得道。
现代文：于是命季筌坐下，给他解说《阴符》的意义，她说： 阴符是上清秘密保存而又为玄台所尊崇的道经，用它治国，国家就太平；用它治理自身，自身就能得道。
English: So, she sat down and explained the meaning of the Yin Fu to him. She said, "The Yin Fu is a Taoist scripture that was kept secret by the Shang and Qing dynasties and revered by the Xuan Tai. If you use it to govern the country, the country will be peaceful; if you use it to govern yourself, you will be able to attain the Way.

古文：非独机权制胜之用，乃至道之要枢，岂人间常典耶？
现代文：不仅仅用于机变权谋以制胜，乃是至道的核心要诀，哪里是人间的一般典籍呢？
English: It is not only used to seek victory in the power of change, but is also the core essence of the Way. Where is the universal classic?

古文：昔虽有暴横，黄帝举贤用能，诛强伐叛，以佐神农之理。
现代文：从前虽有横暴，黄帝推举任用贤能的人，诛伐强暴叛逆，来帮助神农治国。
English: Although there was tyranny in the past, the Yellow Emperor promoted and appointed virtuous people to help Shennong govern the country.

古文：三年百战，而功用未成。
现代文：三年作战一百次，而功用仍没有完成。
English: Three years, a hundred battles, and the work is not yet done.

古文：斋心告天，罪己请命。
现代文：他就诚心斋戒，禀告上天，归罪自己，请求天命。
English: He fasted with a sincere heart, reported it to heaven, blamed himself, and asked for the fate of heaven.

古文：九灵金母命蒙狐之使，授以玉符，然后能通天达诚，感动天帝。
现代文：九灵金母命蒙狐使者授给黄帝玉符，然后就通天达诚，感动天帝。
English: The Fox Emissary bestowed the Jade Emblem to the Yellow Emperor by the Nine-Ringed Gold Mother's life, and then the Emperor was moved by the Jade Emblem.

古文：命玄女教其兵机，赐帝九天六甲兵信之符，此书乃行于世。
现代文：天帝又命玄女教给他兵机，赐给黄帝九天六甲兵信之符，这本书才在世上流行。
English: The Heavenly Emperor also ordered Xuan Nian to teach him military tactics, and gave the Yellow Emperor the Nine Days and Six Degrees of Faith, which made the book popular in the world.

古文：凡三百余言，一百言演道，一百言演法，一百言演术。
现代文：《阴符》总共三百多字，一百字解说道，一百字解说法，一百字解说术。
English: "Yinpu" has a total of more than three hundred words, one hundred words of explanation, one hundred words of explanation, and one hundred words of explanation.

古文：上有神仙抱一之道，中有富国安民之法，下有强兵战胜之术。
现代文：上有神仙抱一之道，中有富国安民之法，下有强兵战胜之术。
English: On the one hand, there is the way of the immortals embracing the world, on the other hand, there is the way of enriching the country and ensuring the safety of the people, and on the other hand, there is the way of defeating the strong soldiers.

古文：皆出自天机，合乎神智。
现代文：这都出自天机，合乎神智。
English: It's all by divine providence, by divine wisdom.

古文：观其精妙，则黄庭八景，不足以为玄；察其至要，则经传子史，不足以为文；较其巧智，则孙吴韩白，不足以为奇。
现代文：观看了它的精妙，黄庭八景就不以为玄；洞察它的至要，经传子史就不足以称为文章；考较它的巧智，孙吴韩白等人都不足以称作奇人。
English: After watching its subtlety, the Eight Scenes of Huangting is not considered to be a myth; insight into its essentials is not enough to be called an article; considering its cleverness, Sun Wu Hanbai and others are not enough to be called strange people.

古文：一名黄帝天机之书。
现代文：这书还有一名，叫《黄帝天机之书》，不是奇人不可随便传授。
English: This book also has another one, called "The Book of the Yellow Emperor's Heavenly Abilities," which cannot be taught casually by anyone who is not a genius.

古文：非奇人不可妄传，九窍四肢不具、悭贪愚痴、骄奢淫佚者，必不可使闻之。凡传同好，当斋而传之。有本者为师，受书者为弟子。
现代文：九窍四肢不全，或悭贫愚痴、骄奢淫逸的人，一定不能让他们知道它。凡是传给爱好相同的人，应当斋戒之后传给他，有本的人是师父，受书的人是弟子。
English: Those who are deficient in the nine points of the compass, or who are impoverished and foolish, or who are proud and debauched, must not be allowed to know it. If it is given to someone who is of the same disposition, it should be given to him after fasting. The one who has the book is the master, and the one who receives the book is the disciple.

古文：不得以富贵为重、贫贱为轻，违之者夺纪二十。
现代文：不能把富贵看得很重，把贫贱看得很轻，违背它的人则被夺去二十年寿命。
English: You cannot hold the rich in high esteem and the poor in low esteem, and those who violate it will lose twenty years of life.

古文：每年七月七日写一本，藏名山石岩中，得加算。本命日诵七遍，益心机，加年寿，出三尸，下九虫，秘而重之，当传同好耳。
现代文：每年七月七日写一本，藏在名山石岩中，就能得到增加寿算，本命日读七遍，可以有益于心机、增加寿命、跳出三尸、使九虫降服。保守秘密而珍重它，并且只能传给爱好相同的人。
English: If you write a book on the 7th of July every year and hide it in the famous mountain rock, you can get an increase in longevity. If you read it seven times on the fateful day, it can be beneficial to the heart, increase life expectancy, jump out of the three corpses, and make the nine worms surrender. Keep it a secret and treasure it, and only pass it on to people with the same hobby.

古文：此书至人学之得其道，贤人学之得其法，凡人学之得其殃，职分不同也。
现代文：这本书至人学它可以得其道，贤人学它可以得其法，凡人学它则会得到惩罚，这是因为人的职分不同啊。
English: This book can be learned by anyone and can be used as a path, by a wise person it can be used as a law, and by an ordinary person it can be used as a punishment. This is because people's duties are different.

古文：经言君子得之固躬，小人得之轻命，盖泄天机也。
现代文：经上说君子得到它可以固身，小人得到它可以丧失性命，原因是小人泄露天机。
English: It is said in the scriptures that if a gentleman obtains it, his body will be strengthened, but if a villain obtains it, he will lose his life. The reason is that the villain divulges the secrets of heaven.

古文：泄天机者沉三劫，得不戒哉！ 
现代文：泄露天机的人要沉沦三劫，能不警惕吗？ 
English: The person who leaks the secret of heaven will sink into the three disasters. Can we not be vigilant?

古文：言讫，谓筌曰： 日已晡矣，吾有麦饭，相与为食。 
现代文：说完这些道理，又对李筌说： 已经到吃饭的时候了，我有麦饭，一起吃饭吧！ 
English: Having said these things, he said to Li Yanwu: "It's time to eat, I have some barley, let's eat together!"

古文：袖中出一瓠，命筌于谷中取水。
现代文：又从袖子里拿出一个瓢，令李筌到山谷中去取水。
English: He also took out a shovel from his sleeve and told Li Yao to go to the valley to fetch water.

古文：既满，瓠忽重百余斤，力不能制而沉泉中。
现代文：瓢里的水满了以后，瓢忽然有一百多斤重，李筌的力气小，不能控制，瓢就沉到泉水中了。
English: After the water in the urn was full, the urn suddenly weighed more than a hundred pounds. Li Qian's strength was small and could not be controlled, and the urn sank into the spring water.

古文：却至树下，失姥所在，惟于石上留麦饭数升。
现代文：李筌回到树下时，骊山老妈妈已经不见了，只是在石头上留着几升麦饭。
English: When Li Yao returned to the tree, Lushan's old mother had already disappeared, leaving only a few liters of barley on the stone.

古文：怅望至夕，不复见姥，筌食麦饭。
现代文：李筌惆怅地等到晚上，也没有再见到骊山老姥。
English: Li Yan waited until the evening, and did not see Lushan Lao Bao again.

古文：自此不食，因绝粒求道，注《阴符》，述二十四机，著《太白阴经》，述《中台志阃外春秋》。
现代文：李筌吃了麦饭以后，从此不再吃饭，就绝食求道，注解《阴符》，陈述二十四机，著《太白阴经》，又写下了《中台志阃外春秋》，在世上流行。
English: After eating the barley meal, Li Wei no longer ate, so he went on a hunger strike to seek the way, annotated the "Yinpu," stated the twenty-four machines, wrote the "Taibai Yinjing," and wrote the "Zhongtai Zhiyuan Wai Spring and Autumn," which was popular in the world.

古文：以行于世。仕为荆南节度副使仙州刺史。
现代文：李筌后来做了官，任荆南节度副使、仙州刺吏。
English: Li Qian later became an official, and was appointed as the deputy envoy of Jingnan Festival and the assassin of Xianzhou.

古文：黄观福
现代文：黄观福
English: Huang Guanfu

古文：黄观福者，雅州百丈县民之女也。
现代文：黄观福，是雅州百丈县一个普通百姓家的女儿。
English: Huang Guanfu is the daughter of an ordinary family in Baizhang County, Yazhou.

古文：幼不茹荤血，好清静，家贫无香，以柏叶、柏子焚之。
现代文：她小时候就不吃荤腥之物，喜好清静。她的家里没有香，她就用柏叶、柏子当香烧。
English: When she was a child, she didn't eat spicy food and preferred peace and quiet. There was no incense in her home, so she used cypress leaves and cypress seeds as incense.

古文：每凝然静坐，无所营为，经日不倦。
现代文：她还经常凝神静坐，什么事情也不做，静坐几天不倦怠。
English: She also often concentrates on meditation, does not do anything, and does not get tired of meditating for several days.

古文：或食柏叶，饮水自给，不嗜五谷。
现代文：有时吃柏叶、饮水来供给自己，不爱吃五谷。
English: Sometimes they eat cypress leaves and drink water to feed themselves, but they don't like to eat grain.

古文：父母怜之，率任其意。
现代文：她的父母怜爱她，就全由她的性子。
English: Her parents love her and it's all down to her personality.

古文：既笄欲嫁之，忽谓父母曰： 门前水中极有异物。 
现代文：成年以后，父母想让她出嫁，她忽然对父母说： 门前水中有极灵异之物。 
English: After she became an adult, her parents wanted her to get married, and she suddenly said to her parents: There is something extremely supernatural in the water in front of the door.

古文：女常时多与父母说奇事先兆，往往信验。闻之，因以为然，随往看之。
现代文：女儿平时经常与父母说一些奇事的先兆，往往真实，得到验证，所以听了她这句话，就以为真是这样，就随着她前去看灵物。
English: Usually, daughters often tell their parents about some miraculous omens, which are often true and have been verified, so when they heard her say this, they thought it was true and followed her to see the spirit.

古文：水果来汹涌，乃自投水中，良久不出。
现代文：这时河水果然来势汹涌，黄观福就自己投进河水中，很久她也没出来。
English: At this time, the river suddenly became turbulent. Huang Guanfu threw herself into the river, and she did not come out for a long time.

古文：漉之，得一古木天尊像，金彩已驳，状貌与女无异。水即澄静。
现代文：人们去捞她，只打捞到一尊古木天尊像，像上的金彩已经掉落斑驳，像的状貌与黄观福无异，这时河水也澄清安静了。
English: When people went to salvage it, they only salvaged an ancient wooden statue of a heavenly deity. The gold on the statue had fallen and was mottled. The appearance of the statue was no different from that of Huang Guanfu. At this time, the river was also clear and quiet.

古文：便以木像置路上，号泣而归。
现代文：她的父母就把木像放在道路上，哭泣着回家了。
English: Her parents left the wooden statue on the road and went home crying.

古文：其母时来视之，忆念不已。
现代文：她的母亲时常来看她，忆念不已。
English: Her mother often came to visit her and reminisced.

古文：忽有彩云仙乐，引卫甚多，与女子三人，下其庭中，谓父母曰： 女本上清仙人也，有小过，谪在人间。
现代文：有一天，忽然有彩云仙乐，黄观福引领很多护卫，与三个女子从空中下降到黄家院子里。黄观福对她的父母说： 女人本来是上清的仙人，因为有小过错，被贬到人间。
English: One day, suddenly there was a colorful cloud fairytale. Huang Guanfu, leading many guards, and three women descended from the sky into the Huang family yard. Huang Guanfu said to her parents: Women were originally the celestial beings of the Upper Qing Dynasty, but because of a small mistake, they were relegated to the human world.

古文：年限既毕，复归天上，无至忧念也。
现代文：现在年限已毕，又回到天上。你们不要太忧愁想念了。
English: Now that the appointed time has passed and you have returned to heaven, don't be too sad.

古文：同来三人，一是玉皇侍女，一是天帝侍辰女，一是上清侍书。
现代文：同来的三个人，一位是玉皇的侍女，一位是天帝的侍辰女，一位是上清的侍书。
English: The three people who came with him, one was a maid of the Jade Emperor, one was a maid of the Heavenly Emperor, and one was a maid of the Upper Qing Dynasty.

古文：此去不复来矣。
现代文：这次离去就不再回来了。
English: This departure will not come back.

古文：今来此地，疾疫死者甚多，以金遗父母，使移家益州，以避凶岁。 
现代文：近来这个地方疾疫死人很多，我把金子留给父母，让你们把家迁移到益州，用以躲避凶年。 
English: There have been a lot of deaths from disease in this area recently, so I'm leaving the gold to my parents so that you can move your family to Yizhou to escape the bad weather.

古文：即留金数饼，升天而去。
现代文：于是她就留下几块金子，升天而去。
English: So she left a few pieces of gold and ascended into the sky.

古文：父母如其言，移家蜀郡。
现代文：父母按照她的话去做，把家搬到蜀郡。
English: Her parents did as she said and moved the family to Shu County.

古文：其岁疫毒，黎雅尤甚，十丧三四，即唐麟德年也。
现代文：那一年疫毒在黎、雅二州尤其严重，十个人中就死三四个，这就是唐代麟德年间的事。
English: In that year, the epidemic was particularly serious in the two prefectures of Li and Ya, and three or four out of ten people died. This was during the Lingde era of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：今俗呼为黄冠佛，盖以不识天尊道像，仍是相传语讹，以黄冠福为黄冠佛也。
现代文：如今世俗之人把她称作黄冠佛，原因是不认识天尊的道像，乃是相传时言语讹误，把黄冠福当作黄冠佛了。
English: Nowadays, secular people call her the Yellow-Crowned Buddha. The reason is that they do not know the image of the heavenly deity. It is because of a verbal mistake when it was passed down, and they took the Yellow-Crowned Buddha as the Yellow-Crowned Buddha.

