古文：乐四汉《鼙舞歌》五篇：《关东有贤女》、《章和二年中》、《乐久长》、《四方皇》、《殿前生桂树》。
现代文：汉代《鼙舞歌》五篇：《关东有贤女》《章和二年中》《乐久长》《四方皇》《殿前生桂树》
English: Five pieces of "Dance Song" in the Han Dynasty: "Kanto has a wise woman," "Chapter and two years," "Lokujuchang," "Sifang Emperor," "Kaiseki tree in front of the palace"

古文：魏《鼙舞歌》五篇：《明明魏皇帝》、《太和有圣帝》、《魏历长》、《天生烝民》、《为君既不易》。
现代文：魏代《鼙舞歌》五篇：《明明魏皇帝》《太和有圣帝》《魏历长》《天生燕民》《为君既不易》魏陈思王《鼙舞歌》五篇：
English: Wei Dynasty "Dance Song" five: "Ming Ming Wei Emperor" "Great and Holy Emperor" "Wei Lichang" "Natural Swallow People" "It is not easy for you" Wei Chen Si Wang "Dance Song" five:

古文：魏陈思王《鼙舞歌》五篇：
现代文：《圣皇篇》，相当于《章和二年中》。
English: "Holy Emperor" is equivalent to "Chapter and Two Years."

古文：《圣皇篇》，当《章和二年中》：圣皇应历数，正康帝道休。九州咸宾服，威德洞八幽。三公奏诸公，不得久淹留。
现代文：圣皇顺应天意登上帝位，皇道荡荡，政事宁康。九州和协臣服，圣皇的威德洞达四面八方司徒、司空、太尉一起启奏，受封的诸王不应在京城久久淹留。
English: The holy emperor ascended to the throne in accordance with the will of heaven, the imperial road is swinging, and the political affairs are doing well. Kyushu and the co-subjects obey, the holy emperor's Weidongdong reaches all directions, and the sutras, sikong, and taifeng are played together. The kings should not stay in the capital for a long time.

古文：蕃位任至重，旧章咸率由。
现代文：藩臣之职责任重大，回藩镇守自有旧章可遵守。
English: The duties and responsibilities of a vassal of a domain are significant, and a returnee to the position of a town guard of a domain can still abide by the old rules.

古文：侍臣省文奏，陛下体仁慈。
现代文：侍臣省读奏章，圣皇陛下心有仁慈的天性。
English: Attendants read from the musical score. His Holiness the Emperor has a benevolent nature.

古文：沉吟有爱恋，不忍听可之。
现代文：兄弟亲情使他沉吟不决，不忍心听从启奏，让诸王远行。
English: Brotherly kinship made him brooding and indecisive, and he could not bear to listen to the opening music, and let the kings go far away.

古文：迫有官典宪，不得顾恩私。
现代文：迫于朝廷有典章制度，不能一味顾念手足私情。
English: Forced by the imperial court to have a legal code system, we cannot be blindly concerned with personal feelings.

古文：诸王当就国，玺绶何累缞。
现代文：诸王即将启程赶赴封国，印玺绶带何其鼎盛鲜明!
English: The emperors are about to leave for their fiefdoms, and the imperial seal is in full bloom!

古文：便时舍外殿，宫省寂无人。
现代文：即日就到宫外住宿，宫廷之中顿觉寂寥冷清。
English: On the very same day, he went to stay outside the palace, and suddenly felt lonely and cold in the middle of the palace.

古文：主上增顾念，皇母怀苦辛。
现代文：圣皇增添顾念意，太后增添牵挂情。
English: The holy emperor has increased his concern, and the empress dowager has increased her concern.

古文：何以为赠赐，倾府竭宝珍。
现代文：圣皇用什么赏赐诸王?竭尽府库中的异宝和奇珍。
English: With what does the Holy Emperor reward kings? He exhausts the treasures and curiosities in the treasury.

古文：文钱百亿万，采帛若烟云。
现代文：铜钱百亿万，锦帛绸缎如烟云。
English: Hundreds of billions of dollars in copper money and millions of dollars in brocade and silk are floating like clouds of smoke.

古文：乘舆服御物，锦罗与金银。
现代文：兼有乘舆和衣物，绫罗绢帛和金银。
English: There are also clothes made from Japanese yakitori, bamboo shoots, and gold and silver.

古文：龙旗垂九旒，羽盖参斑轮。
现代文：旗用龙旗挂九旒，车用羽盖兼画轮。
English: The dragon flag is used to hang nine lanterns, and the car's wing cover doubles as a painting wheel.

古文：诸王自计念，无功荷厚德。
现代文：诸王暗思忖，无功蒙受厚恩德。
English: The kings thought about it in their hearts, and received great graces without merit.

古文：思一效筋力，糜躯以报国。鸿胪拥节卫，副使随经营。贵戚并出送，夹道交辎軿。
现代文：想要贡献全身力，粉身碎骨以报国鸿胪持节为护送，副使料理随从行，贵戚全都出城送，车马川流不息街市盈。
English: If you want to make a full-time contribution, you should report to the National Hong Kong and Macao Veterans Day as an escort, the vice-minister of food will accompany you, the relatives will all be sent out of the city, and the cars and horses will continue to flow in the streets.

古文：车服齐整设，鞾晔耀天精。
现代文：诸王的车驾齐整列，庄重鲜丽亮晶晶。
English: The chariots of the kings are lined up, solemn and bright.

古文：武骑卫前后，鼓吹箫笳声。
现代文：羽林骑兵作护卫，鼓吹箫笳奏乐声。
English: Uebayashi cavalry as guards, trumpeting the music of the gongs.

古文：祖道魏东门，泪下沾冠缨。
现代文：饯行魏都束门外，众人泪下湿冠缨。
English: Outside the gate of Wei Duzao, everyone was wet with tears.

古文：扳盖因内顾，俯仰慕同生。
现代文：车行频频回首望，兄弟不舍之情油然生。
English: The car company frequently looks back at the first glance, and the brothers' unwavering affection is born.

古文：行行将日莫，何时还阙庭。
现代文：黄昏来临曰将暮，心忧不知何才再回宫庭。
English: When dusk comes, it will be the end of the day, and I don't know what to do before returning to the palace garden.

古文：车轮为裴回，四马踌躇鸣。路人尚酸鼻，何况骨肉情。
现代文：车驾徘徊停不前，驷马留恋旧土仰首鸣行路之人皆酸楚，更何况兄弟之间骨肉情!
English: Anyone who drives a car and doesn't move forward, anyone who rides a horse and misses the old country, and anyone who drives along with their head held high are all sour, not to mention the love between brothers!

古文：《灵芝篇》，当《殿前生桂树》：灵芝生玉地，硃草被洛滨。荣华相晃耀，光采晔若神。
现代文：《灵芝篇》，相当于《殿前生桂树》。灵芝在玉池中长出，朱草在洛水之滨衍生花儿相辉映，光彩夺目如天神。
English: "Ganoderma lucidum" is equivalent to "Candlemas in front of the palace." Ganoderma lucidum grows in the jade pond, and the flowers derived from the coast of Luoshui are reflected in the vermilion grass, and the brilliance is dazzling like a heavenly god.

古文：古时有虞舜，父母顽且嚚。尽孝于田陇，烝烝不违仁。伯瑜年七十，采衣以娱亲，慈母笞不痛，歔欷涕沾巾。
现代文：古代有虞舜，父母冥顽不灵虞舜耕作尽孝道，德性淳真遵循仁，韩伯瑜年过七十岁，依然身穿彩衣怡娱母亲，慈母体衰无力鞭打不觉痛，他便伤心落泪湿衣巾。
English: In ancient times, there were cormorants. His parents were tenacious in cultivating cormorants to fulfill their filial duty. His moral character was honest and benevolent. Han Bo Yu was over seventy years old and still wore colorful clothes to amuse his mother. His loving mother was weak and could not feel the pain of whipping, so he shed tears and wet his clothes.

古文：丁兰少失母，自伤蚤孤茕，刻木当严亲，朝夕致三牲。
现代文：丁兰自幼失父母，筏独一人苦零丁。他刻木为人当双亲，朝夕礼拜祭三牲。
English: Ding Lan lost his parents when he was a child. He was left all alone. He had to take care of his parents and attend the morning and evening worship services.

古文：暴子见陵侮，犯罪以亡形，丈人为泣血，免戾全其名。
现代文：暴子侮木像，他杀死凶人甘服刑，木像眼中流泪又流血，官吏赦免工个成全其孝名。
English: The bully insults the wooden statue, he kills the murderer and is willing to serve his sentence, the wooden statue's eyes shed tears and blood, and the officials pardon the worker to complete his filial name.

古文：董永遭家贫，父老财无遗。
现代文：董丞家贫穷，父母余财无。
English: Mr. Dong's family was poor, and his parents did not have much money.

古文：举假以供养，佣作致甘肥。
现代文：他四处借贷作佣工，尽心悉意养父母。
English: He borrowed money everywhere to work as a helper and supported his parents with all his heart.

古文：责家填门至，不知何用归。
现代文：债主齐集来讨债，他无力偿还心愁苦。
English: His creditors were coming to collect and he was heartbroken that he couldn't pay them back.

古文：天灵感至德，神女为秉机。
现代文：天神被感动，神女操机为织布。
English: The sky god was moved, and the goddess operated the loom to weave the cloth.

古文：岁月不安居，乌乎我皇考！
现代文：岁月飞快流逝，哀悼我那逝去的皇考!
English: The years are flying by, I mourn the passing of the imperial examination!

古文：生我既已晚，弃我何期蚤！
现代文：生育我已晚，离我又太早。
English: I was born too late, and I will be gone too soon.

古文：《蓼莪》谁所兴，念之令人老。
现代文：《蓼莪》之篇由谁作，读来令人添烦恼。
English: The question of who wrote the story of "Dragonfly" is even more vexing.

古文：退咏《南风》诗，洒泪满袆抱。
现代文：高咏颂赞母氏的《南风》诗，使人热泪横流湿衣袍。
English: Gao Gan praises his mother's "Southern Wind" poem, causing tears to flow down his wet robe.

古文：乱曰：圣皇君四海，德教朝夕宣。
现代文：乱辞说：圣皇君临天下，德教朝夕流布。
English: The riddles say: the holy emperor is on the verge of ruling the world, and moral teachings are disseminated morning and evening.

古文：万国咸礼让，百姓家肃虔。
现代文：天下讲究礼让，百姓虔诚敬服。
English: The world is particular about politeness, and the people are pious and respectful.

古文：庠序不失仪，孝悌处中田。
现代文：学校及时施教，孝悌蔚然成风。
English: The school teaches in a timely manner, and filial piety has become a fashion.

古文：户有曾闵子，比屋皆仁贤。
现代文：个个像曾子、闵子，家家有贤士仁人。
English: Each one is like a great-grandson, a son-in-law, and each family has a wise and benevolent person.

古文：髫龀无夭齿，黄发尽其年。
现代文：儿童健康活泼，老人安享天年。
English: Children are healthy and active, and the elderly enjoy their golden years.

古文：陛下三万岁，慈母亦复然。
现代文：陛下享年三万岁，慈母太后也长寿万万年。
English: His Majesty passed away at the age of thirty thousand, and his mother, the Empress Dowager, also lived a long life.

古文：《大魏篇》，当《汉吉昌》：大魏应灵符，天禄方甫始。
现代文：《大魏篇》，相当于《汉吉昌》。太魏顺应上天的符命，天赐的福禄由此刚起始。
English: "The Great Wei" is equivalent to "Han Ji Chang." The Great Wei conformed to the sign of heaven, and the blessing of heaven just began.

古文：圣德致泰和，神明为驱使。
现代文：圣德招致天下太平，天神也心一情愿供役使。
English: Sanctity brings peace to the world, and the gods are eager to serve.

古文：左右宜供养，中殿宜皇子。
现代文：左右尽心奉事，殿中适宜众位王子。
English: They serve wholeheartedly, and the palace is suitable for many princes.

古文：陛下长寿考，群臣拜贺咸说喜。
现代文：陛下健康又长寿，群臣拜贺，都真心欢喜。
English: His Majesty is healthy and long-lived, and the courtiers offer their congratulations. They are truly delighted.

古文：积善有余庆，荣禄固天常。
现代文：积善人家会代代传下福庆，荣华福禄全是上天的赐赏。
English: Good fortune will be passed down from generation to generation, and prosperity is a gift from heaven.

古文：众善填门至，臣子蒙福祥。
现代文：各种喜事盈门而至，臣子百姓也蒙受吉祥。
English: All kinds of happy events come to the door, and the courtiers and commoners are also blessed.

古文：无患及阳遂，辅翼我圣皇。
现代文：无灾无祸风雨顺，翼佐我们圣皇。
English: No disaster, no calamity, no wind, no rain, but the wings of our Holy Emperor.

古文：众吉咸集会，凶邪奸恶并灭亡。
现代文：样样喜庆也都同时降临，凶邪奸恶全都灭亡。
English: All manner of joy and gladness will come upon the earth at the same time, and all wickedness and evil will be destroyed.

古文：黄鹄游殿前，神鼎周四阿。
现代文：黄鹄在殿前飞动，神鼎在庭院中闪耀光华。
English: The yellow dragonfly flies in front of the hall, and the divine tripod shines brightly in the courtyard.

古文：玉马充乘舆，芝盖树九华。
现代文：玉马降临为皇上驾车，九茎灵芝也开出鲜花。
English: The Jade Horse descends to drive the car for the emperor, and the nine-stemmed reishi also blooms.

古文：白虎戏西除，舍利从辟邪。
现代文：技人扮作白虎在殿阶耍戏，陪同起舞的还有神兽舍利和辟邪。
English: Technicians dressed as white tigers perform on the steps of the temple, accompanied by the divine beasts Shari and Fudei.

古文：骐驎蹑足舞，凤凰拊翼歌。
现代文：麒麟跟着起舞，凤凰也拍着翅膀唱歌，自然潇洒。
English: The unicorn dances along, and the phoenix also flaps its wings and sings, naturally dashing.

古文：丰年大置酒，玉尊列广庭。
现代文：丰收之年设宴欢庆，筵席陈设在宽大的殿廷。
English: In the year of the harvest, a banquet is held to celebrate the harvest. The banquet is set up in the spacious palace.

古文：乐饮过三爵，硃颜暴己形。式宴不违礼，君臣歌《鹿鸣》。
现代文：三次举杯共欢庆，醉意外露更显出内心的真情。欢乐喜宴也不忘礼仪，君臣一起欢歌雅乐《鹿鸣》。
English: They raised their glasses three times to celebrate together, and the drunkenness revealed their true feelings. The joyous banquet did not forget the etiquette, and the monarchs and ministers sang the elegant music "Deer Song" together.

古文：乐人舞鼙鼓，百官雷抃赞若惊。
现代文：乐人跳起鼙鼓舞，百官掌声如雷赞声震宫廷。
English: Musicians danced to the music to encourage the audience, and the applause of hundreds of officials shook the palace like thunder.

古文：储礼如江海，积善若陵山。
现代文：礼仪丰厚如江海，积聚善德胜高山。
English: Rich etiquette is like a river, and the accumulation of virtue is like a mountain.

古文：皇嗣繁且炽，孙子列曾玄。
现代文：皇家子弟繁育盛，皇族已有曾玄孙。
English: The royal children are flourishing, and the royal family already has great-great-grandchildren.

古文：群臣咸称万岁，陛下长乐寿年！
现代文：群臣齐声呼万岁，陛下长乐寿万年。
English: The courtiers shouted in unison, "Long live His Majesty."

古文：御酒停未饮，贵戚跪东厢。
现代文：皇上端酒尚未饮，贵戚跪拜在束厢。
English: The emperor has not yet drunk the wine, and the nobles are kneeling in the box.

古文：侍人承颜色，奉进金玉觞。
现代文：侍者闻命来献酒，捧上黄金白玉觞。
English: The waiter came at the last minute to offer wine, holding a gold and white jade goblet.

古文：此酒亦真酒，福禄当圣皇。
现代文：这酒也是神仙酒，带着福禄献圣皇。
English: This wine is also a divine wine, dedicated to the Holy Emperor with a blessing.

古文：陛下临轩笑，左右咸欢康。
现代文：陛下站在前殿笑，左右齐声祝安康。
English: His Majesty was standing in the vestibule, smiling and wishing everyone good health in unison.

古文：杯来一何迟，群僚以次行。
现代文：百官相互传杯饮，酒杯依次相传行。
English: The officials pass cups to each other, and the cups are passed one after another.

古文：赏赐累千亿，百官并富昌。
现代文：圣皇的赏赐超千亿，百官受赏家荣昌。
English: The Holy Emperor's bounty exceeds 100 billion, and a hundred officials have been awarded Rongchang.

古文：《精微篇》，当《关东有贤女》：精微烂金石，至心动神明。
现代文：《精微篇》，相当于《关东有贤女》。精专之心可以击穿金石，至诚之意可以感动神灵。
English: "Fine and Subtle" is equivalent to "There is a Wise Woman in Kanto." The heart of a connoisseur can pierce the precious stone, and the sincerity can move the gods.

古文：杞妻哭死夫，梁山为之倾。
现代文：杞梁之妻为丈夫累死而悲哭，梁山为她感伤而崩倾。
English: Yan Liang's wife wept for her husband's death, and Liang Shan was overcome with emotion for her.

古文：子丹西质秦，乌白马角生。
现代文：游太子丹西去童姻作人质，乌鸦变白马头竟然生出角。
English: Prince You Danxi went to a child marriage as a hostage, and the crow turned into a white horse head and gave birth to a horn.

古文：邹羡囚燕市，繁霜为夏零。
现代文：邹衍被囚在燕市，繁霜在夏天降落。
English: Yan Yan was imprisoned in the city of Yan. Heavy frosts fell in the summer.

古文：关东有贤女，自字苏来卿。
现代文：关东有个贤女子，自报姓名苏来卿。
English: In Kanto, there is a virtuous woman who calls herself Su Lai Ching.

古文：壮年报父仇，身没垂功名。
现代文：壮年时候报父仇，身虽死，却留下英名。
English: He took revenge on his father when he was in his prime, and even though he died, he left behind a famous name.

古文：女休逢赦书，白刃几在颈。
现代文：女休将被处死时遇上了赦书，利刀差一点就砍向了头颈。
English: When she was about to be put to death, she came across a pardon letter, and the sharp knife almost cut her head and neck.

古文：俱上列仙籍，去死独就生。
现代文：两人同时名列仙籍，女休却离开死神而获生。
English: Both of them were registered as immortals at the same time, but Nyokyu escaped death and was reborn.

古文：太仓令有罪，远征当就拘。
现代文：太仓令犯了罪，他被征召将被囚拘。
English: Taicangling committed a crime, he was conscripted and will be imprisoned.

古文：自悲居无男，祸至无与俱。
现代文：他因为没有男孩而悲痛，祸害来临没有谁能生死与俱。
English: He grieved not to have a boy, for no man can live or die when disaster comes.

古文：缇萦痛父言，何担西上书。
现代文：缇萦为父亲的话而哀痛，背着行李西行进京上书。
English: Sorrowful for her father's words, Zou, with her luggage on her back, traveled west to Beijing to submit her thesis.

古文：盘桓北阙下，泣泪何涟如。
现代文：在北阙之下辗转徘徊，涕泪交流痛诉凄苦。
English: Wandering around under the North Pier, we exchanged tears and lamented the hardships.

古文：乞得并姊弟，没身赎父躯。
现代文：请求代父受罚，用自己的生命换回父亲的身躯。
English: He asked to be punished on behalf of his father, and to exchange his own life for his father's body.

古文：汉文感其义，肉刑法用除。
现代文：汉文帝被她的孝义感动，为此而把肉刑之法废除。
English: Emperor Hanwen was so moved by her filial piety that he abolished corporal punishment.

古文：其父得以免，辨义在列图。
现代文：父亲因此而被免罪，缇萦自己也因为孝义而载上了《列女传图》。
English: As a result, her father was exonerated, and because of her filial piety, she herself was included in the "List of Women's Biography."

古文：多男亦何为，一女足成居。
现代文：生多了男孩又有什么用，有一个女儿也足以乐业安居。
English: What's the use of having more boys, one daughter is enough to live a happy life.

古文：简子南渡河，津吏废舟船。
现代文：赵筒子要南渡盏回，津吏却让回水冲走了舟船。
English: Zhao Zuzi wanted to take the ferry back to the south, but the Tsin officials let the backwaters wash away the boat.

古文：执法将加刑，女娟拥翟前。 妾父闻君来，将涉不测渊。
现代文：趟筒子要用刑罚处置津吏，津吏之女玄魍抱着船桨上前进言： 我父亲听说你要渡回，将要涉足那不测深渊。
English: The bailiff's daughter, Xuanzang, hugged the oars and said, "My father has heard that you are going back, and that you are going to wade into the abyss.

古文：畏惧风波起，祷祝祭名川。备礼飨神祗，为君求福先。
现代文：他担心风浪涌起，千祷万祝祭享大川备足祭品供献神祇，为君祈求事事安全。
English: He was worried about storm surges. He prayed and celebrated, enjoyed the Okawa River, prepared offerings to offer to the gods, and prayed for your safety.

古文：不胜釂祀诚，至令犯罚艰。
现代文：他祀祷神祇极尽诚心，致使违背君令丢失了舟船。
English: He prayed to the gods with the utmost sincerity, resulting in the loss of the ship in violation of the royal order.

古文：君必欲加诛，乞使知罪愆。
现代文：你如果一定要责罚我的父亲，让他知道自己的罪愆。
English: If you must punish my father, let him know his sins.

古文：妾愿以身代 ，至诚感苍天。
现代文：我愿自己代父受罚。 她这番话的诚意感动了苍天。
English: The sincerity of her words moved heaven and earth.

古文：国君高其义，其父用赦原。
现代文：国君认为她的孝义高尚，津吏的罪过为此得到了原宥。
English: The sovereign thought that her filial piety was noble, and the sins of the officials of Tsu were forgiven for this reason.

古文：河激奏中流，简子知其贤。
现代文：女娟在河中流奏起了《河激》歌，趟筒子听到歌声了解丁此女之贤。
English: The damsel in the middle of the river played the "River Excited" song, and the tuba heard the song and understood the virtue of this damsel.

古文：归娉为夫人，荣宠超后先。
现代文：回都之后就聘女娟为夫人，前前后后没有谁的荣宠胜过女娟。
English: After returning to the capital, he hired his daughter-in-law as his wife. There was no one who was more favored than his daughter-in-law.

古文：辩女解父命，何况健少年。
现代文：女子善于辩说解救了父亲，更何况聪明机智强少年。
English: The girl was good at arguing and saved her father, not to mention the clever and witty boy.

古文：黄初发和气，明堂德教施。
现代文：黄初年问萌生了冲和之气，朝廷的德政在天下广施。
English: At the beginning of the Yellow Emperor's reign, a spirit of conciliation was born, and the imperial court's German policy was widely implemented throughout the world.

古文：治道致太平，礼乐风俗移。
现代文：皇上的仁政使天下太平，礼乐教化导致了风俗改移。
English: The emperor's benevolent government brought peace to the world, and the introduction of music and ritual led to a shift in customs.

古文：刑错民无枉，怨女复何为。
现代文：刑法搁置百姓不受屈，贤女用不着为冤屈有所施为。
English: People are not subject to the criminal law, and virtuous women do not have to do anything for their grievances.

古文：圣皇长寿考，景福常来仪。
现代文：圣皇长寿万年，景福常驻，凤凰来仪。
English: Long live the Holy Emperor, Gyeongbokgung will always be there, and the phoenix will come.

古文：《孟冬篇》，当《狡兔》：孟冬十月，阴气厉清。
现代文：《孟冬篇》，相当于《狡兔》。孟冬十月，阴气厉而凄清。
English: "Meng Dong Hen" is equivalent to "Cunning Rabbit." Meng Dong October is gloomy and bleak.

古文：武官诫田，讲旅统兵。
现代文：武官下令田猎，习武练兵。
English: The military officer gave orders to hunt in the fields and train soldiers in martial arts.

古文：元龟袭吉，元光著明。
现代文：元龟卜出了吉兆，象征除旧布新的彗星分外辉明。
English: The former turtle was a good omen, symbolizing that the new comet would shine brighter than the old.

古文：蚩尤跸路，风弭雨停。
现代文：勇士在前清道，风也止，雨也停。
English: Warriors in the former Qingdao, the wind also stopped, the rain also stopped.

古文：乘舆启行，鸾鸣幽轧。
现代文：皇上车驾启程，整齐而又有节奏，车响鸾鸣。
English: The imperial car drove off, neat and rhythmic, the car was ringing.

古文：虎贲采骑，飞象珥鹖。
现代文：虎贲勇士，彩衣骑卫，羽冠闪耀，华车奔行。
English: The warriors of the vise, the color-coated guards, the shining crowns, the magnificent chariots.

古文：钟鼓铿锵，箫管嘈喝。
现代文：钟鼓铿锵，箫管齐鸣。
English: The bells, drums and gongs are beating in unison.

古文：万骑齐镳，千乘等盖。
现代文：万骑奔驰，千车并行。
English: A thousand horse-drawn carriages, a thousand cars in parallel.

古文：夷山填谷，平林涤薮。
现代文：气势可以移山填谷，扫平树林，涤荡泽薮。
English: The momentum can move mountains and fill valleys, sweep away forests, and sweep away ripples.

古文：张罗万里，尽其飞走。
现代文：罗网笼罩万里，捕尽飞禽走兽。
English: The net covers thousands of miles, catching all the birds and beasts.

古文：翟翟狡兔，扬白跳翰。
现代文：狡免跳蹦，纵跃驰驱。
English: Jump with cunning, gallop with gallop.

古文：猎以青骹，掩以修竿。
现代文：用青胆猎鹰追赶，用长竿捕取。
English: Chased by a blue-chinned falcon and caught with a long pole.

古文：韩卢宋鹊，呈才骋足。
现代文：放出韩卢、宋鹊，让它们展现才能，全力驰逐。
English: Release Han Lu and Song Tao, let them show their talents, and go all out.

古文：噬不尽厓，牵麋掎鹿。
现代文：跑不多远，就抓住了糜，捕住了鹿。
English: He didn't run very far before he caught a roe deer.

古文：魏氏发机，养基抚弦。
现代文：有魏锜的弩箭，像养由基那样张弓开弦。
English: There are Wei Zheng's crossbow arrows, and the bow opens the string like a yakitori.

古文：都卢寻高，搜索猴猨。
现代文：有都卢族的攀缘技能，登高上树，搜索猴猿。
English: They have the climbing skills of the Du Lu tribe, climbing high into the trees, searching for monkeys and apes.

古文：庆忌孟贲，蹈谷超峦。
现代文：像壁墨、垂童那样英勇矫健，跨过深谷，翻越山峦。
English: Like wall-painting and hanging children, they are as heroic and vigorous as they are, crossing deep valleys and climbing over mountains.

古文：张目决眦，发怒穿冠。
现代文：圆睁双目裂眼眦，怒发刺穿头上冠。
English: Round, double-eyelid slits, angry hair piercing the crown of the head.

古文：顿熊扼虎，蹴豹搏貙。
现代文：能击倒熊，扼死虎，脚踢豹，手搏躯。
English: He can knock down a bear, choke a tiger, kick a leopard, and fight with his hands.

古文：气有余势，负象而趋。
现代文：还有余勇，肩扛大象急趋。
English: There is still courage, shouldering the elephant rush.

古文：获车既盈，日侧乐终。
现代文：射获的猎物满车，田猎的乐曲傍晚告终。
English: The car is full of game, and the music of the field hunt ends in the evening.

古文：罢役解徒，大飨离宫。
现代文：遣散役夫，解散士卒，为举行宴会，骑士都到离宫。
English: The servants are dismissed, the soldiers are dismissed, and the knights leave the palace for a banquet.

古文：乱曰：圣皇临飞轩，论功校猎徒。
现代文：乱辞曰：圣皇登上高车论功行赏，计算猎获的飞禽走兽。
English: According to the riddles: the holy emperor climbed onto the chariot to discuss and reward the merits, and to count the birds and beasts he had hunted.

古文：死禽积如京，流血成沟渠。
现代文：猎物堆成了高丘，流血汇成了沟渠。
English: The prey is heaped up as a mound, the bloodshed as a ditch.

古文：明诏大劳赐，大官供有无。
现代文：皇上下令行赏赐，太官开仓百物布。
English: Emperors and their subordinates were rewarded for their actions, and dignitaries opened warehouses full of cloth.

古文：走马行酒醴，驱车布肉鱼。
现代文：飞马摆放酒和醴，驱车陈放肉和鱼。
English: Horses are used to display wine and gourds, and carts are used to display meat and fish.

古文：鸣鼓举觞爵，钟击位无余。
现代文：鼓声一响举觞爵，钟声齐岛，杯中酒尽滴无余。
English: The sound of the drum raises the knight, the bell chimes the island, and the wine in the glass drips down.

古文：绝网纵麟麑，弛罩出凤雏。
现代文：打开兽网和乌罩，放走幼麟和凤雏。
English: Open the animal net and the black hood, and let go of the young unicorn and the young phoenix.

古文：收功在羽校，威灵振鬼区。
现代文：整饬队伍大阅兵，威灵震撼绝远区。
English: The rectification team held a large-scale military parade, which shocked far and wide.

古文：陛下长欢乐，永世合天符。
现代文：祝愿陛下长欢乐，皇业永不衰，世世握天符。
English: I wish His Majesty a long and happy life, the imperial cause will never fade, and the world will hold the heavenly sign.

古文：《晋鼙舞歌》五篇：
现代文：晋《鼙舞歌》五篇：《洪业篇》，《鼙舞歌》。
English: Jin's "Dance Song" consists of five parts: "Hongye" and "Dance Song."

古文：《洪业篇》、《鼙舞歌》，当魏曲《明明魏皇帝》，古曲《关东有贤女》：宣文创洪业，盛德在太始。
现代文：相当于魏曲《明明魏皇帝》，古曲《关东有贤女》。
English: It is equivalent to the Wei music "Ming Ming Wei Emperor" and the ancient music "Kanto has a virtuous woman."

古文：圣皇应灵符，受命君四海。
现代文：宣帝、文帝创洪业，盛世从泰始年间开始。圣皇顺天登帝位，承担重任君临四海。
English: The holy emperor He He responded to the spirit charm and received the order from heaven to reign over the four seas.

古文：万国何所乐，上有明天子。
现代文：天下百姓为何乐，朝中有了圣明天子。
English: Why are the people of the world so happy? In the morning, there was a holy dawn.

古文：唐尧禅帝位，虞舜惟恭己。
现代文：唐尧让贤禅帝位，虞舜寻求贤才严律己。
English: From the Tang Dynasty to the German Zen Empire, the Eastern Han Dynasty was revered but self-respecting.

古文：恭己正南面，道化与时移。
现代文：端正严明居帝位，教化施行风俗移。
English: Self-respect eventually leads to sitting on the south side. Virtue becomes virtue.

古文：大赦荡萌渐，文教被黄支。
现代文：大赦令激荡万千百姓，教化波及远方黄支国。
English: The amnesty of polyester began gradually, and literature and education were far ahead of the yellow branch.

古文：象天则地，体无为。
现代文：仿效天地，君临天下无为而治。
English: Like heaven and earth, nothing is done and nothing is done.

古文：聪明配日月，神圣参两仪。
现代文：聪明可和日月匹，神圣如同天地二仪。
English: The sun and the moon are clearly seen by the astute, and the two deities are seen by the sages.

古文：虽有三凶类，静言无所施。
现代文：虽有三凶徒，依然清静无为。
English: Although there are three types of bad luck, there is nothing to be done.

古文：象天则地，体无为。
现代文：仿效天地，君临天下无为而治。
English: Like heaven and earth, nothing is done and nothing is done.

古文：稷契并佐命，伊吕升王臣。
现代文：稷、契同担股肱任，伊、吕都为辅佐臣。
English: Later, he was appointed to the same position as Ji, and became a vassal of Wang Zhen.

古文：兰芷登朝肆，下无失宿民。
现代文：正人君子入朝巾，天下没有无家可归的流散民。
English: An upright gentleman wears a morning towel, and there are no homeless wanderers in the world.

古文：声发响自应，表立景来附。
现代文：号令一发同声应，大旗高扬齐归附。
English: The holy voice of the Lord echoes spontaneously, the rod stands upright, and the shadow follows.

古文：虓虎从羁制，潜龙升天路。
现代文：猛士接受王命制，隐士也走上了出仕路。
English: The warrior accepted the king's command, and the hermit also embarked on a new path.

古文：备物立成器，变通极其数。
现代文：万物成器即起效用，变通尽展机巧和运数。
English: Preparedness can instantly become a tool, and it is extremely skillful to act flexibly.

古文：百事以时叙，万机有常度。
现代文：事事按时料理毕，处理政务有法度。
English: There is no chronological order to everything, although everything changes, there is a constant.

古文：训之以克让，纳之以忠恕。
现代文：训导大臣能谦让，接纳人才讲忠恕。
English: The vassals are disciplined with forbearance, and the hundred lieutenants are rewarded with loyalty.

古文：群下仰清风，海外同欢慕。
现代文：敬仰皇上圣风范，海外士人也齐仰慕。
English: There is no one in the group who does not admire the clear wind, and the four seas all admire it.

古文：象天则地，化云布。
现代文：仿效天地，教化如大旱雨云布。
English: Like heaven and earth, enlightenment is like a cloud.

古文：昔日贵雕饰，今尚俭与素。
现代文：从前看重雕饰美，如今崇尚俭约与朴素。
English: In the past, emperors were highly decorated, but today emperors are frugal.

古文：昔日多纤介，今去情与故。
现代文：从前嫌隙多，如今抛弃嫌隙重情愫。
English: In the past, tangled polysilicon mustard, today merciless allusion.

古文：象天则地，化云布。
现代文：仿效天地，教化如大早雨云布。
English: Like heaven and earth, enlightenment is like a cloud.

古文：济济大朝士，夙夜综万机。
现代文：泱泱大朝人才众，夙夜繁忙理万机。
English: Kyoto is a busy city in the morning, and there are many opportunities to work diligently both day and night.

古文：万机无废理，明明降畴咨。
现代文：政事不荒废，圣皇求贤遍访咨。
English: Political affairs are not in vain, and the Holy Emperor has made many visits to seek wisdom.

古文：臣譬列星景，君配朝日晖。
现代文：贤臣如群星闪光彩，明君光比朝日辉。
English: Wise men are as bright as the stars, but wise men are brighter than the morning sun.

古文：事业并通济，功烈何巍巍。
现代文：王业兴旺又发达，功烈如同山巍巍。
English: In all things, the great cause and the great benefit are the same, and the noble achievement is the same.

古文：五帝继三皇，三王世所归。
现代文：五帝继承三皇业，三王功业众望归。
English: Five emperors succeeded the three emperors, and the achievements of the three emperors are highly coveted.

古文：圣德应期运，天地不能违。
现代文：圣皇顺应天命登帝位，天地众神不违背。
English: The Holy Emperor ascended to the throne in accordance with Heaven's decree, and the gods of heaven and earth did not disobey.

古文：仰之弥已高，犹天不可阶。
现代文：仰望圣皇功业日曰增，犹如苍天不可攀。
English: The higher you look up, the higher you are.

古文：将复御龙氏，凤皇在庭栖。
现代文：塑垄旦盛世要再现，凤凰来仪栖息在庭园。
English: He wants to restore the Goryu clan, and Fenghuang and Ming are living in the courtyard.

古文：《天命篇》、《鼙舞歌》，当魏曲《太和有圣帝》，古曲《章和二年中》：圣祖受天命，应期辅魏皇。
现代文：《天命篇》，《鼙舞歌》，相当于魏曲《太和有圣帝》，古曲《章和二年中》。圣祖接受上天命，顺应天道辅助魏皇。
English: "Manifest Destiny" and "Dance Song" are equivalent to the Wei Song "The Great Emperor and the Holy Emperor" and the ancient song "Chapter and Two Years." The Holy Ancestor accepted the heavenly mission and assisted the Wei Emperor in accordance with the heavenly way.

古文：入则综万机，出则征四方。
现代文：入朝日理万机，出京率军征四方。
English: There is a comprehensive political and administrative mechanism for entering, and there is a four-way discussion for leaving.

古文：朝廷无遗理，方表宁且康。
现代文：朝廷再无废怠事，远方也呈奏宁而康。
English: The imperial court never misses a trick, and the waters around the country are clear and healthy.

古文：道隆舜臣尧，积德逾太王。
现代文：治道高过尧臣舜，德行超过古左王。
English: Duolong is like a great vassal, and he is more virtuous than the great king.

古文：孟度阻穷险，造乱天一隅。
现代文：量度依据险阻地，肆行叛乱占一隅。
English: Meng Du took advantage of the danger to obstruct Wang Shi, and made a mess of everything against his will.

古文：神兵出不意，奉命致天诛。
现代文：神兵突出意料外，王师奉命行天诛。
English: The divine soldier was unexpectedly sent down from heaven, and he was ordered to fight against the forces of evil, which led to the downfall of heaven.

古文：赦善戮有罪，元恶宗为虚。
现代文：赦免善人杀罪人，元凶之家变丘墟。
English: Pardoning a good man for killing a sinner turns the culprit's house into rubble.

古文：威风震劲蜀，武烈慑强吴。
现代文：威风震惊剽悍的蜀，武功威慑强劲的吴。
English: The mighty wind shakes the western stronghold of Shu, and the military deterrence suits the eastern stronghold of Wu.

古文：诸葛不知命，肆逆乱天常。
现代文：诸葛亮不知顺天命，肆行叛逆背天常。
English: Zhuge did not know the fate of heaven, raging against life and nature.

古文：拥徒十余万，数来寇边疆。
现代文：率军十余万，屡屡侵犯我边疆。
English: One side has more than 100,000 soldiers and has repeatedly invaded our borders.

古文：我皇迈神武，秉钺镇雍凉。
现代文：我皇勇武超常人，亲自领兵镇雍、凉。
English: My emperor is an extraordinary man of valor and bravery, and personally led the troops to relieve Yong and Liang.

古文：亮乃畏天威，未战先仆僵。
现代文：诸葛亮畏惧我皇威，未战先把性命丧。
English: Zhuge feared the might of heaven, and was afraid to move before the earthquake.

古文：盈虚自然运，时变固多难。
现代文：强弱盈虚由天定。变迁时世本多难。
English: Strengths and weaknesses are determined by heaven. It is difficult for the world to keep up with the changes.

古文：东征陵海表，万里枭贼渊。
现代文：我皇东征到海边，万里征战剿灭公孙渊。
English: My emperor marched eastward to the seashore and traveled thousands of miles to fight and annihilate Sun Yuan.

古文：受遗齐七政，曹爽又滔天。
现代文：接受遣命理朝政，曹爽倒行逆施罪滔天。
English: The Wei Emperor issued orders for a total of seven policies, and Cao Shuang's momentum was tremendous.

古文：群凶受诛殛，百禄咸来臻。
现代文：群凶个个被诛灭，福禄降临喜庆全。
English: The group of thugs who defied the law were finally arrested, and by the grace of God, Baolu Xian came to us.

古文：黄华应福始，王凌为祸先。
现代文：黄华顺应天命出首始得福，王浚私行废立为祸先。
English: The chrysanthemum with yellow flowers is the beginning of good fortune, and the chaos caused by the king's dredging is the beginning of misfortune.

古文：《景皇帝》、《鼙舞歌》，当魏曲《魏历长》，古曲《乐久长》：景皇帝，聪明命世生，盛德参天地。
现代文：《景皇帝》，《鼙舞歌》，相当于魏曲《魏历长》，古曲《乐久长》。景皇帝，聪明盖世应运生，盛德比得上天和地。
English: "Emperor Jing" and "Dragon Dance Song" are equivalent to the Wei music "Wei Lichang" and the ancient music "Lekujuchang." Emperor Jing, clever and world-class, is superior to heaven and earth.

古文：帝王道，创基既已难，继世亦未易。
现代文：帝王之业大，创基立业难，继承帝业也不易。
English: The emperor's career is great, it is difficult to establish a foundation and establish a career, and it is not easy to inherit the empire.

古文：外则夏侯玄，内则张与李，三凶称逆，乱帝纪。
现代文：外有夏侯玄，内有张和李，三个凶徒行叛逆，扰乱帝王纲纪。
English: With Xia Houxuan on the outside and Zhang and Li on the inside, three thugs rebelled and disrupted the imperial discipline.

古文：从天行诛，穷其奸宄。
现代文：景皇帝顺天行天诛，穷究奸宄。
English: Emperor Jing followed the laws of heaven, and was a ruthless tyrant.

古文：遏将御其渐，潜谋不得起。
现代文：堵住凶徒奸诈心，遏止奸谋不能起。
English: Block the treacherous heart of the murderer, and stop the treacherous plot from starting.

古文：罪人咸伏辜，威风震万里。
现代文：罪人都被诛，威风震万里。
English: Criminals have been arrested, and authority has been shaken.

古文：平衡综万机，万机无不理。
现代文：入朝掌政理万机，事事妥帖得治理。
English: Maintain a balance of a total of ten thousand machines, ten thousand machines are negligible.

古文：召陵桓不君，内外何纷纷，众小便成群。
现代文：齐桓公召陵行王令，朝廷内外议纷纷，小人乘机结成群。
English: When Emperor Qikhan issued an imperial edict calling for the construction of a mausoleum, there was much discussion both inside and outside the imperial court, and villains took advantage of the opportunity to gather in large groups.

古文：蒙昧恣心，治乱不分。
现代文：蒙昧无知恣意妄为，治乱不分。
English: Obscurity, ignorance and arbitrariness do not distinguish between chaos and order.

古文：睿圣独断，济武常以文。
现代文：圣智英明作决断，文治助武功清除妖氛。
English: I, the wise and saintly emperor, have decided that the imperial edict must be written.

古文：从天惟废立，扫霓披浮云。
现代文：顺从天意行废立，拨开妖雾扫浮云。
English: Abide by the will of heaven, sweep away the evil fog, and sweep away the floating clouds.

古文：云霓既已辟，清和未几间。
现代文：妖雾已扫清，清平政局没几天。
English: The haze has been cleared, and the political situation has been stable for a few days.

古文：羽檄首尾至，变起东南蕃。
现代文：紧急文书相继到，变乱发生在东南藩。
English: Emergency documents arrived one after another, and upheaval occurred in the Southeastern Domain.

古文：俭钦为长蛇，外则冯吴蛮。
现代文：册丘俭、文钦如蛇蝎，出外结吴蛮。
English: Chuang Qiu Jian and Wen Qin are like a snake and a scorpion. They go out to meet Wu Man.

古文：万国纷骚扰，戚戚天下惧不安。
现代文：万国骚扰纷纷乱，天下忧戚惧不安。
English: All nations are in turmoil, and the whole world is worried.

古文：神武御六军，我皇秉钺征。
现代文：景皇神武统六军，亲披战袍来出征。
English: The six armies of the Jing Emperor's Divine Military Unification personally put on their battle robes to go to war.

古文：俭钦起寿春，前锋据项城。
现代文：二贼盘踞在寿春，王师前锋据玺越。
English: The Jianqin Rebellion began in Shouchun, and the vanguard has reached the stronghold of Xiangcheng.

古文：出其不意，并纵奇兵。
现代文：出其不意，突出奇兵。
English: Heaven's fallen soldiers come out of the blue, and I, Emperor Shenwu, am leading the miraculous soldiers.

古文：奇兵诚难御，庙胜实难支。
现代文：奇兵难抵御，稳操胜算敌难支。
English: Strange soldiers such as gods are difficult to control, and temples are difficult to win.

古文：两军不期遇，敌退计无施。
现代文：两军不期而相遇，敌军败退无计施。
English: The two armies unexpectedly encountered each other, and the enemy army retreated helplessly.

古文：虎骑惟武进，大战沙阳陂。
现代文：精骑奋勇进，大战沙阳陂。
English: Riding hard and bravely forward, the great battle of sand and sun will continue.

古文：钦乃亡魂走，奔虏若云披。
现代文：文钦失魂落魄逃，贼虏望风而披靡。
English: Despondent, he ran away, leaving his captors in the lurch.

古文：天恩赦有罪，东土放鲸鲵。
现代文：皇恩赦免有罪人，东土放鲸鲵。
English: The emperor pardoned the guilty, and the whale was released.

古文：《大晋篇》、《鼙舞歌》，当魏曲《天生烝民》，古曲《四方皇》：赫赫大晋，于穆文皇。
现代文：《大晋篇》，《鼙舞歌》，相当于魏曲《天生熏民》，古曲《四方皇》赫赫去晋，功业显赫有文皇。
English: "Great Jin" and "Dancing Song" are equivalent to the Wei song "Born to be a People's Devotee" and the ancient song "Four-Sided Emperor."

古文：荡荡巍巍，道迈陶唐。
现代文：博大而又崇高，德政超过陶唐。
English: Shengde swings and sways, and its road crosses the Tao and Tang Dynasties.

古文：世称三皇五帝，及今重其光。
现代文：世人称颂三皇、五帝，如今重现盛世光芒。
English: Known as the Three Emperors and Five Emperors, it is now re-emerging.

古文：九德克明，文既显，武又章。
现代文：九德昌明，文治显赫，武功昭彰。
English: Jiude Changming, prominent in literature, distinguished in military exploits.

古文：恩弘六合，兼济万方。
现代文：恩德广施天下，皇恩兼济八方。
English: Benevolence extends far and wide throughout the world, and royal favor extends in all directions.

古文：内举元凯，朝政以纲。
现代文：内事拔举八元、邀那样的贤臣，维护振兴朝纲。
English: Inner promotion of the honored vassal, Yuan Kai, and a clear and systematic approach to imperial politics.

古文：外简虎臣，时惟鹰扬。
现代文：外事选拔勇猛的武将，征伐凶徒，像鹰一样飞扬。
English: Foreign affairs selects brave generals, conquers evil-doers, and flies like an eagle.

古文：靡从不怀，逆命斯亡。
现代文：顺从朝廷的个个归附，对抗朝命的立即败亡。
English: Those who obeyed the imperial court were immediately defeated, and those who resisted the imperial order were immediately defeated.

古文：仁配春日，威逾秋霜。
现代文：仁德有如春晖，威严赛过秋霜。
English: Benevolence is compatible with spring, and majesty is superior to autumn frost.

古文：济济多士，同兹兰芳。
现代文：人才济济，个个都像兰花那样芬芳。
English: The imperial court was very generous, and so was Lanfang.

古文：唐虞至治，四凶滔天。
现代文：卢虞时代达大治，尚有四凶罪滔天。
English: Tang Dynasty still had four fierce dynasties.

古文：致讨俭钦，罔不肃虔。
现代文：如今讨伐册丘俭、文敛，没有谁不恭敬而虔诚地从命。
English: To solicit thrift, to admire traitors, and to be respectful and pious.

古文：化感海外，海外来宾。
现代文：教化感动海外国，都来归顺人争先。
English: Indoctrination has moved people at home and abroad, and they all want to be the first to convert.

古文：献其声乐，并称妾臣。
现代文：贡献他们的声乐伎，全都拜服甘称臣。
English: He contributed his vocal music, and everyone in the club was in awe of him.

古文：西蜀猾夏，僭号方域。命将致讨，委国稽服。
现代文：西蜀乱华夏，僭称帝号据边域，主皇下令去征讨，凶徒弃国来归服。
English: West Shushan is in chaos in China, the so-called emperor is in the border area, the main emperor ordered to go to collect, the villain abandoned the country to submit.

古文：吴人放命，冯海阻江。
现代文：吴人叛逆抗王命，背海守江据一方。
English: Wu people wantonly disobeyed orders, relying on the sea to block the river.

古文：飞书告谕，响应来同。
现代文：朝廷飞书去告谕，吴人来朝拜君王。
English: The imperial court sent a letter to announce that the Wu people had come to pay homage to the king.

古文：先王建万国，九服为蕃卫。
现代文：先王分封诸侯国，四周侯国作藩卫。
English: The former king was assigned to a vassal state, and the surrounding vassals served as guards.

古文：亡秦坏诸侯，序胙不二世。
现代文：秦朝撤除诸侯国，国胙传承不到两代。
English: The Qin Dynasty abolished the vassal states, and the state seal was passed down for less than two generations.

古文：历代不能复，忽逾五百岁。
现代文：历朝未复分封制，转眼忽过五百载。
English: Historically, lordship cannot be restored, but it has been more than five hundred years old.

古文：我皇迈圣德，应期创典制。
现代文：我皇行圣德，顺应天命创典制。
English: My emperor tried his best to live a holy life, and created a system of temporary vassalage.

古文：分土五等，蕃国正封界。
现代文：土分五等各分封，建立藩国划疆界。
English: The land was divided into five different fiefs, and the boundaries of the domain were established.

古文：莘莘文武佐，千秋遘嘉会。
现代文：济济佐命文武臣，千秋盛世逢嘉会。
English: It is the first time in thousands of years that a grand marshal has been awarded this honor.

古文：洪业溢区内，仁风翔海外。
现代文：洪业建海内，仁风翔海外。
English: Hongye builds inland, Renfeng soars overseas.

古文：《明君篇》、《鼙舞歌》，当魏曲《为君既不易》，古曲《殿前生桂树》：明君御四海，听鉴尽物情。
现代文：《明君篇》，《鼙舞歌》，相当于魏曲《为君既不易》，古曲《殿前生桂树》。圣明的君王统御四海，处理政务时时体察民心世情。
English: "Ming Jun" and "Dance Song" are equivalent to the Wei Song "It's Not Easy for You" and the ancient song "Katsura Tree Born in Front of the Palace." The king of sacred Ming rules over the four seas, and always considers the people's hearts and world conditions when dealing with government affairs.

古文：顾望有谴罚，竭忠身必荣。
现代文：怀存二心必遭惩罚，竭尽忠心一定会富贵尊荣。
English: If you are double-minded, you will be punished. If you are loyal, you will be rich and honorable.

古文：兰茝出荒野，万里升紫庭。
现代文：兰苗香草生长在荒野，跨越万里被引进了朝廷。
English: The vanilla orchid seedling grew in the wilderness and was introduced to the imperial court across thousands of miles.

古文：茨草秽堂阶，扫截不得生。
现代文：杂草荆棘污秽了朝堂台阶，要扫除干净不准许蔓生。
English: The front steps of the Desecration Hall cannot be removed by sweeping.

古文：能否莫相蒙，百官正其名。
现代文：贤才庸人没有谁能蒙混，百官臣僚都能职副其名。
English: Able and unable are not the same, and Hyakugo-noshu is just as its name suggests.

古文：恭己慎有为，有为无不成。
现代文：恭谨为帝慎行政令，政令公布无事不成。
English: If you respect yourself and act prudently, you will succeed in all things.

古文：暗君不自信，群下执异端。
现代文：昏聩的君主不讲究诚信，群臣百官也就会各怀异端。
English: The dark lord is dull and lacks self-confidence, and his followers cling to heresy in droves.

古文：正直罹谮润，奸臣夺其权。
现代文：正直之人遭受谗害，奸诈之徒篡取朝廷的大权。
English: Honest people were persecuted, and treacherous people usurped the power of the imperial court.

古文：虽欲尽忠诚，结舌不敢言。
现代文：即使有人想进献忠心，也紧锁口舌不敢直言。
English: Although Shizuomi wanted to be loyal, he was too scared to say anything.

古文：结舌亦何惮，尽忠为身患。
现代文：闭口不言怕的是什么?进献忠心会带来祸患。
English: Don't be afraid to speak your mind, but don't be afraid to be honest.

古文：清流岂不洁，飞尘浊其源。
现代文：清流虽洁净，灰尘污染清流源。
English: Is not a clear stream unclean? Is not its source full of flying dust?

古文：歧路令人迷，未远胜不还。
现代文：歧途使人心迷乱，及时回头胜过那迷途不还。
English: It is better to turn back in time than to go astray and not return.

古文：忠臣立君朝，正色不顾身。
现代文：忠臣一旦进朝堂，直言进谏不顾身。
English: A loyal and fearless vassal, he established the Jun Dynasty, with a straight face and no regard for his own life.

古文：邪正不并存，譬若胡与秦。秦胡有合时，邪正各异津。
现代文：邪气正道不并存，造就如同胡与画，蠢、胡有时会联合，邪正终归不相亲。
English: Evil and righteous do not co-exist. They are like a goose and a painting. Stupid and goose sometimes come together, but evil and righteous do not get along.

古文：忠臣遇明君，乾乾惟日新。
现代文：忠臣遇明君，自强不息日更新。
English: Today, loyal vassals meet Mingjun and work tirelessly.

古文：群目统在纲，众星拱北辰。设令遭暗主，斥退为凡民。
现代文：总纲统领纲上目，君星拱北辰假使忠臣遇暗主，定被斥退为平民。
English: The general outline of the general outline of the general outline of the general outline of the general outline of the general outline of the general outline of the general outline of the general outline

古文：虽薄供时用，白茅犹可珍。
现代文：虽然不被世所用，高洁品质犹可珍。
English: Although it is not commonly used, its high quality is rare.

古文：冰霜昼夜结，兰桂摧为薪。
现代文：谗言若冰霜昼夜结，兰桂被摧残作柴薪。
English: Rain and dew condense into frost day and night, and the cinnamon tree grows into firewood.

古文：邪臣多端变，用心何委曲。
现代文：奸诈之臣善诡变，用心恶毒多邪曲。
English: The evil minister is mercurial and multi-faceted, and will follow any order with all his heart.

古文：便辟从情指，动随君所欲。
现代文：阿谀奉承顺君意，一举一动逞君欲。
English: The flattery of the flattery of the flattery of the flattery of the flattery.

古文：偷安乐目前，不问清与浊。
现代文：苟且偷安乐眼前，不问世事清与浊。
English: They are determined to steal the present peace and tranquility, regardless of political clarity and discipline.

古文：积伪罔时主，养交以持禄。
现代文：用尽奸诈欺罔君，结党营私保幸禄。
English: Accumulating falsehoods and bullying the then-master, he formed a party and started his own business.

古文：言行恆相违，难餍甚溪谷。
现代文：言行常相违，欲壑真难填。
English: Words and deeds often contradict each other, and it's really hard to satisfy one's desires.

古文：昧死射乾没，觉露则灭族。
现代文：冒险侥幸图私利，一朝败露终灭族。
English: If you are lucky enough to die, you will make a profit. If you are unlucky enough to die, you will destroy the nation.

古文：右五篇《鼙舞歌行》。
现代文：上为五篇《鼙舞歌》行。
English: Above are five lines from "Dance Song."

古文：《铎舞》歌诗二篇。
现代文：铎舞歌诗二篇：
English: Two break-dancing poems:

古文：《圣人制礼乐篇》：昔皇文武邪弥弥舍善谁吾时吾行许帝道衔来治路万邪治路万邪赫赫意黄运道吾治路万邪善道明邪金邪善道明邪金邪帝邪近帝武武邪邪圣皇八音偶邪尊来圣皇八音及来义邪同邪乌及来义邪善草供国吾咄等邪乌近帝邪武邪近帝武邪武邪应节合用武邪尊邪应节合用酒期义邪同邪酒期义邪善草供国吾咄等邪乌近帝邪武邪近帝武武邪邪下音足木上为鼓义邪应众义邪乐邪邪延否已邪乌已礼祥咄等邪乌素女有绝其圣乌乌武邪
现代文：《圣人制礼乐篇》昔皇文武邪弥弥舍善谁吾时吾行许帝道衔来治路万邪治路万邪赫赫意黄运道吾治路万邪善道明邪金邪善道明邪金邪帝邪近帝武武邪邪圣皇八音偶邪尊来圣皇八音及来义邪同邪乌及来义邪善草供国吾咄等邪乌近帝邪武邪近帝武邪武邪应节合用武邪尊邪应节合用酒期义邪同邪酒期义邪善草供国吾咄等邪乌近帝邪武邪近帝武武邪邪卜音足木上为鼓义邪应众义邪乐邪邪延否已邪乌已礼祥咄等邪乌素女有绝其圣乌乌武邪
English: "Sacred Music and Rites" The ancient emperors recited sermons, performed masses, performed good deeds, who was good at that time? The title of emperors came to rule the world, ruled the world, ruled the world, ruled the world, meant good fortune, ruled the world, ruled the world, ruled the world, was good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good

古文：《云门篇》、《铎舞歌行》，当魏《太和时》：黄《云门》，唐《咸池》，虞《韶舞》，夏殷《濩》。
现代文：《云门篇》，铎舞歌行，相当于魏曲《太和时》。当魏时有《云门》，庐壹时有《咸池》，虞舜时有《韶舞》，夏丛有《夏》，员巡有《大濩》。
English: "Cloud Gate" and "Dance Song" are equivalent to "Taihe" in the Wei Dynasty, "Cloud Gate" in the Wei Dynasty, "Halting Pool" in the Han Dynasty, "Dance Song" in the Yu Dynasty, "Summer" in the Xia Dynasty, and "Big Dragonfly" in the Shang Dynasty.

古文：列代有五，振铎鸣金，近《大武》。
现代文：历代的名曲共有五，敲铎呜锣，近代则有《大武》。
English: There are a total of five famous songs in the past, including "Knock, Knock, Knock," and "Daibu" in modern times.

古文：清歌发倡，刑为主。
现代文：不用伴奏清唱，以形为主。
English: No accompaniment is needed for a cappella singing, which is based on form.

古文：声和八音，协律吕。
现代文：歌声融和八音，协和律吕。
English: The singing voice harmonizes the eight tones and harmonizes the rhythm.

古文：身不虚动，手不徒举。
现代文：身不虚动，手不空举。
English: Don't move your body in vain, don't raise your hands in vain.

古文：应节合度，周其叙。
现代文：应和节拍，适合次序。
English: Match the beat, match the order.

古文：时奏宫商，杂之以徵羽。
现代文：有时奏宫商，夹杂征和羽。
English: Sometimes I play the palace merchant, mixed with the feather.

古文：下餍众目，上从钟鼓。
现代文：下含各种品类，上面应随钟鼓。
English: Below contains a variety of categories, above should follow the bell and drum.

古文：乐以移风，与德礼相辅，安有失其所。
现代文：音乐可以移风易俗，与德礼相成相辅，怎么会丢失它的立足之所?
English: Music can change customs and customs, complement each other with virtue and courtesy, how can it lose its foothold?

古文：右二篇《铎舞歌行》。
现代文：上为二篇铎舞歌行。
English: Above are two breakdancing songs.

古文：《拂舞》歌诗五篇：
现代文：拂舞歌诗五篇：
English: Five Whip Dance Poems:

古文：《白鸠篇》：翩翩白鸠，再飞再鸣。
现代文：《白鸠篇》翩翩飞舞的白鸠，一边飞一边鸣。
English: "The Egret" The dancing egrets sing as they fly.

古文：怀我君德，来集君庭。
现代文：怀念君子的仁德，飞来聚集在君庭。
English: With my husband's virtue in mind, I flew to gather in your court.

古文：白雀呈瑞，素羽明鲜。
现代文：白雀呈现祥瑞，素羽分外鲜明。
English: The white finches are fresh, and their feathers are bright.

古文：翔庭舞翼，以应仁乾。
现代文：在庭中翱翔起舞，预示君子的盛景。
English: The dance wings fly in your court, it is in response to my benevolence.

古文：交交鸣鸠，或丹或黄。
现代文：交交而鸣的白鸠乌，有的颜色红，有的颜色黄。
English: The chaffinches chirping in unison, some red in color, some yellow.

古文：乐我君惠，振羽来翔。
现代文：感怀君子的仁惠，从四方赶来展翅飞翔。
English: Thanks to my husband's kindness, I was able to fly thousands of miles.

古文：东壁余光，鱼在江湖。
现代文：享受束壁的余光，鱼儿遨游在江湖。
English: The lodging on the wall has some light, and the fish are enjoying their time in the lake.

古文：惠而不费，敬我微躯。
现代文：施惠于人却无损自己，藉助湖鱼养我微躯。
English: You benefit from it without any effort, and I am honored to serve you with my tiny body.

古文：策我良驷，习我驱驰。
现代文：赶着我的良马，练习策马驱驰。
English: I will drive my car well, and practice my driving.

古文：与君周旋，乐道亡余。
现代文：与君子交游，道义相乐忘疲饥。
English: Travel with a gentleman, enjoy morality and forget hunger and fatigue.

古文：我心虚静，我志沾濡。
现代文：我心境恬淡而平静，我心志从教化受沾濡。
English: My heart is empty and quiet, I am willing to be drenched by you.

古文：弹琴鼓瑟，聊以自娱。
现代文：弹琴鼓瑟。藉以自娱。
English: Play my harp and my drums, and amuse yourself with them for a while.

古文：陵云登台，浮游太清。
现代文：登上凌云台，浮游在太清。
English: When I go on stage, I would like to float in the sky.

古文：扳龙附凤，日望身轻。
现代文：依龙附凤，天天希望脱胎换骨身体轻。
English: According to the dragon and the phoenix, I hope to be reborn every day.

古文：《济济篇》：暢飞暢舞，气流芳。
现代文：《济济篇》欢畅地飞舞，播流芳香。
English: "Jiji" is flying merrily and spreading fragrance.

古文：追念三五，大绮黄。
现代文：追念三皇、五帝时，崇尚隐士绮和董。
English: When remembering the three emperors and five emperors, the hermits Zou and Dong were revered.

古文：去失有，时可行。
现代文：去失有，时可行。
English: It is possible to get rid of the loss.

古文：去来同时，此未央。
现代文：去来同时此未央。
English: They came and went at the same time.

古文：时冉冉，近桑榆。但当饮酒，为欢娱。
现代文：时光冉冉，年暮已近桑榆，将衹饮酒求欢娱。
English: As time goes by, the end of the year is near for Mulberry, and he turns to alcohol for pleasure.

古文：衰老逝，有何期。
现代文：衰老而逝何有期。
English: Aging and passing away is inevitable.

古文：多忧耿耿，内怀思。
现代文：耿耿心忧多愁思。渊池虽大鱼却稀。
English: Geng Geng's heart is sad and worried. Although the pond is big, the fish are rare.

古文：渊池广，鱼独希。愿得黄浦，众所依。
现代文：愿得黄浦作凭依。
English: I would like to have Huangpu as a reference.

古文：恩感人，世无比。
现代文：恩情感人世无比。
English: The feeling of gratitude is incomparable in the world.

古文：悲歌具舞，无极已。
现代文：悲歌具舞乐无已。
English: The tragic song and dance are in full swing.

古文：《独禄篇》：独禄独禄，水深泥浊。
现代文：《独禄篇》独禄独禄，水深而泥浊。
English: "Monologue" Monologue Monologue, the water is deep and muddy.

古文：泥浊尚可，水深杀我。
现代文：泥浊尚且可，水深淹杀我。
English: The mud is fine, but the deep water will kill me.

古文：雍雍双雁，游戏田畔。
现代文：雍雍有双雁，游戏在田畔。
English: Yong Yong and Le Shuangyan, the game begins on the edge of my field.

古文：我欲射雁，念子孤散。
现代文：我欲射杀雁，却念子孤散。
English: I want to shoot geese with a bow and arrow. My adopted son has lost his family and I am all alone.

古文：翩翩浮苹，得风遥轻。
现代文：翩翩有浮萍，顺风飞飘轻。
English: There are duckweeds fluttering in the breeze.

古文：我心何合，与之同并。
现代文：我心与谁合，心与浮萍并。
English: I'm thinking about who I want to be with, and I want to be with him.

古文：空床低帷，谁知无人。
现代文：空帐低垂帷，谁知空无人。
English: Empty shelves hang low, and no one knows where they are.

古文：夜衣锦绣，谁别伪真。
现代文：夜中穿锦绣，谁别伪与真。
English: If you wear an embroidered dress at night, you will be able to tell whether it is real or fake.

古文：刀呜削中，倚床无施。
现代文：刀在鞘中鸣，倚床无计施。
English: The sword whistles in its scabbard, and there is nothing to do but lie on the bed.

古文：父冤不报，欲活何为。
现代文：父仇不得报，苟活欲何为?
English: My father's wrongdoing cannot be avenged, so what do I want to do in this world?

古文：猛虎班班，游戏山间。
现代文：猛虎色斑斓，游戏在山间。
English: The game takes place in the mountains.

古文：虎欲啮人，不避豪贤。
现代文：猛虎要吃人，不论豪与贤。
English: A ferocious tiger wants to eat people, regardless of whether they are brave or wise.

古文：《碣石篇》：东临碣石，以观沧海。水何澹澹，山岛竦峙。
现代文：《碣石篇》束临遇五，观看沧海。水波荡漾，山岛耸峙。
English: "The Flintstones" is about a bunch of five-year-olds watching the sea of change. The water waves are rippling, and the mountains and islands are jutting out.

古文：树木丛生，百草丰茂。
现代文：树木丛生，百草丰茂。
English: The island is covered with trees, and the grass is thick and luxuriant.

古文：秋风萧瑟，洪波涌起。
现代文：秋风萧瑟，洪波涌起。
English: The autumn wind is blowing, the trees are swaying, and the sea is surging.

古文：日月之行，若出其中。
现代文：日月运行，若在洪波中。
English: When the sun and moon move across the sky, the reflection appears in the middle.

古文：星汉粲烂，若出其里。
现代文：银河灿烂，若在洪波裹。
English: The Milky Way is brilliant, if it is wrapped in a deluge.

古文：幸甚至哉！歌以咏志。
现代文：值得庆幸啊!用歌诗咏志。
English: It's worth celebrating! Let's celebrate with a song.

古文：《观沧海》。孟冬十月，北风裴回。
现代文：《观沧海》初冬十月，北风回旋吹。
English: In the early winter of October, the north wind began to blow.

古文：天气肃清，繁霜霏霏。
现代文：天气肃杀，严霜霏霏。
English: The weather was clear and crisp, with no sign of frost.

古文：鹍鸡晨鸣，雁过南飞。
现代文：鵾鸡清晨鸣，雁群往南飞。
English: Chickens chirp in the morning, and geese fly south.

古文：鸷乌潜藏，熊罴窟栖。
现代文：猛禽深深藏，熊罢洞中栖。
English: The bird of prey hides deep, the bear roosts in caves.

古文：钱袴停置，农收积场。
现代文：农具都闲置，作物堆上场。
English: Agricultural tools are idle, crops are piling up.

古文：逆旅整设，以通贾商。
现代文：旅馆整顿好，用以迎买商。
English: The guesthouse was renovated and became a lodging for visiting merchants.

古文：幸甚至哉！歌以咏志。
现代文：值得庆幸啊!用歌诗咏志。
English: It's worth celebrating! Let's celebrate with a song.

古文：《冬十月》。乡土不同，河朔隆寒。
现代文：《冬十月》水土不一样，迎面冬严寒。
English: "Winter October" The soil and water are different, and it will be very cold in the winter.

古文：流澌浮漂，舟船行难。
现代文：流冰满河漂，舟船前行难。
English: Ice floats on the river, making it difficult for boats to pass.

古文：锥不入地，丰籁深奥，水竭不流，冰坚可蹈。
现代文：尖锥不入土，丰籁生深奥，水竭川不流，冰坚人可蹈。
English: The sharp cone does not sink into the ground, abundance and abundance give rise to profundity, water drains away but the river does not flow, and the ice man can be beaten.

古文：士隐者贫，勇侠轻非。
现代文：士人常苦贫，勇侠轻为非。
English: The hermits are mostly poor and cold, while the valiant knights are often delinquent.

古文：心常叹怨，戚戚多悲。
现代文：心中常叹怨，戚戚心中悲。
English: My heart often laments, relatives often grieve.

古文：神龟虽寿，犹有竟时；腾蛇乘雾，终为土灰。
现代文：值得庆幸啊!用歌诗咏志。《土不同》神龟虽长寿，寿命有终时。腾蛇能驾雾，最终成土灰。
English: It is worth celebrating! Write a poem about it. Although the tortoise in "Different Soil" is long-lived, its life has an end. The snake can drive through the fog and eventually turn into dust.

古文：老骥伏枥，志在千里；烈士莫年，壮心不已。
现代文：老骥虽伏棍，志仍在千里；烈士至暮年，壮心仍不已。
English: Although the old man is a pawn, his ambition is still a thousand miles away; the martyrs are still strong-willed until their twilight years.

古文：盈缩之期，不但在天；养怡之福，可得永年。
现代文：寿命有长短，不衹在上天；修身养性自得福，可求活多年。
English: Life has a length and a shortness, but it does not end in heaven; self-cultivation and self-benefit, can live for many years.

古文：幸甚至哉！歌以咏志。
现代文：值得庆幸啊!用歌诗咏志。
English: It's worth celebrating! Let's celebrate with a song.

古文：《龟虽寿》。《淮南王篇》：淮南王，自言尊，百尺高楼与天连。
现代文：《龟虽寿》《淮南王篇》淮南王，自言地位尊，百尺高楼与天连。
English: "Turtle Although Life" "King of Huainan" King of Huainan, self-proclaimed status, hundred-foot high-rise and Tianlian.

古文：后园凿井银作床，金瓶素绠汲寒浆。
现代文：后园凿井银制床，用金瓶丝绳汲水浆。
English: The back garden is made of chiseled silver, and the gold bottle is made of cold milk.

古文：汲寒浆，饮少年。少年窈窕何能贤？
现代文：汲井水，饮少年，身材窈窕哪算贤?
English: Drawing water from a well, drinking alcohol, and having a slim body, which is considered virtuous?

古文：扬声悲歌音绝天。
现代文：高唱壮歌声冲天。
English: The wailing of the mourners is deafening.

古文：我欲度河河无梁，愿化双黄鹄，还故乡。
现代文：我欲渡河无桥梁，愿意变作双黄鹄，回故乡。
English: I want to cross the river without a bridge, and I am willing to turn into a double yellow dragonfly and return to my hometown.

古文：还故乡，入故里。
现代文：回故乡，进故里。
English: Back to my hometown, back to my hometown.

古文：徘徊故乡，苦身不已。
现代文：徘徊故乡，愁苦不止。
English: Wandering around his hometown, he was sad and depressed.

古文：繁舞寄声无不泰，徘徊桑梓游天外。
现代文：繁舞歌声全康泰，徘徊家乡，心游天外。
English: Traditional dance songs are in full swing, wandering around the hometown, mind wandering.

古文：右五篇《拂舞行》。
现代文：上为五篇拂舞歌行。
English: Above are five whisk dance songs.

古文：《杯盘舞》歌诗一篇：晋世宁，四海平，普天安乐永大宁。四海安，天下欢，乐治兴隆舞杯盘。
现代文：杯槃舞歌诗一篇：晋世安宁，四海太平，普天欢乐永安宁四海安宁天下欢，礼乐治国，国家兴隆舞杯盘。
English: A cup and goblet dance poem: Peace in the world, peace in the four seas, universal joy, eternal peace, peace in the four seas, happiness in the world, rule the country with music and dance, and prosperity of the country.

古文：舞杯盘，何翩翩，举坐翻覆寿万年。
现代文：舞杯盘，舞翩翩，满座反复颂万年。
English: The dancing cup and saucer, dancing and dancing, the full house repeatedly chanting for thousands of years.

古文：天与日，终与一，左回右转不相失。
现代文：天与日，终统一，杯盘旋转不丢失。
English: Heaven and earth will eventually be unified, and the rotation of cups and plates will not be lost.

古文：筝笛悲，酒舞疲，心中慷慨可健兒。
现代文：筝笛悲壮呜，酒酣舞已疲，心中慷慨情，如同军中健儿。
English: The kite flute is tragic, the wine and dance are tired, and the heart is generous, like a military jockey.

古文：樽酒甘，丝竹清，愿令诸君醉复醒。
现代文：酒甘甜，乐声清，希望诸君醉复醒。
English: The wine is sweet, the music is clear, I hope you wake up from your drunkenness.

古文：醉复醒，时合同，四坐欢乐皆言工。
现代文：醉复醒，四座同，满座欢喜颂乐工。
English: The drunk wakes up, the four of them are together, and the hall is filled with joyous music.

古文：丝竹音，可不听，亦舞此盘左右轻。
现代文：乐器音，可不听，也舞此盘旋转轻。
English: Musical instrument sound, can not hear, but also dance this disk spin light.

古文：《巾舞》歌诗一篇：吾不见公莫时吾何婴公来婴姥时吾哺声何为茂时为来婴当思吾明月之上转起吾何婴土来婴转去吾哺声何为土转南来婴当去吾城上羊下食草吾何婴下来吾食草吾哺声汝何三年针缩何来婴吾亦老吾平平门淫涕下吾何婴何来婴涕下吾哺声昔结吾马客来婴吾当行吾度四州洛四海吾何婴海何来婴海何来婴四海吾哺声熇西马头香来婴吾洛道吾治五丈度汲水吾噫邪哺谁当求兒母何意零邪钱健步哺谁当吾求兒母何吾哺声三针一发交时还弩心意何零意弩心遥来婴弩心哺声复相头巾意何零何邪相哺头巾相吾来婴头巾母何何吾复来推排意何零相哺推相来婴推非母何吾复车轮意何零子以邪相哺转轮吾来婴转母何吾使君去时意何零子以邪使君去时使来婴去时母何吾思君去时意何零子以邪思君去时思来婴吾去时母何何吾吾右《公莫巾舞歌行》。《白珝舞》歌诗三篇：高举两手白鹄翔。
现代文：自相当，满座欢乐人寿长。人寿长，将结友，千秋万岁都长寿。上为杯槃舞歌行。巾舞歌诗一篇：吾不见公莫时吾何婴公来婴姥时吾哺声何为茂时为来婴当思吾明月之上转起吾何婴土来婴转去吾哺声何为土转南来婴当去吾城上羊下食草吾何婴下来吾食草吾哺声汝何三年针缩何来婴吾亦老吾平平门淫涕下吾何婴何来婴涕下吾哺声昔结吾马客来婴吾当行吾度四州洛四海吾何婴海何来婴海何来婴四海吾哺声熵西马头香来婴吾洛道吾治五丈度汲水吾噫邪哺谁当求儿母何意零邪钱健步哺谁当吾求儿母何吾哺声三针一发交时还弩心意何零意弩，遥来婴弩心哺声复相头巾意何零何邪相哺头巾相吾来婴头巾母何何吾复来推排意何零相哺推相来婴推非母何吾复车轮意何零子以邪相哺转轮吾来婴转母何吾使君去时意何零子以邪使秸去时使来婴去时母何吾思君去时意何零子以邪思君去时思来婴吾去时母何何吾吾上为公莫巾舞歌行。白纡舞歌诗三篇：高举双手白鹄翔。
English: A long life is a long life. A long life is a long life. A long life is a long life. A long life is a long life. A long life is a long life. A long life is a long life. A long life is a long life. A long life is a long life. A long life is a long life. A long life is a long life. A long life is a long life. A long life is a long life. A long life is a long life. A long life is a long life. A long life is a long life. A long life is a long life.

古文：轻躯徐起何洋洋。
现代文：轻躯徐起意洋洋。
English: The light body slowly begins to sway.

古文：凝停善睐容仪光。
现代文：美目注视，焕发容光。
English: Beautiful gaze, radiant appearance.

古文：宛若龙转乍低昂。
现代文：宛若游龙，忽低忽昂。
English: It's like a slow-moving dragon, going up and down.

古文：随世而变诚无方。
现代文：随着时世变化，行止无方。
English: With the changes of the times, there is no way to stop.

古文：如推若引留且行。
现代文：似推似引，且留且行。
English: Like attracts like, and so on.

古文：宋世方昌乐未央。舞以尽神安可忘。
现代文：乐声不尽，宋代国运昌。用舞迎神怎可忘。
English: The music is inexhaustible, and the Song Dynasty was prosperous. How can we forget to welcome the gods with dance?

古文：爱之遗谁赠佳人。
现代文：可爱的白纡赠佳人。
English: The lovely egret presents the young lady.

古文：质如轻云色如银。
现代文：质地如云色如银。
English: The texture is cloudy and silvery.

古文：袍以光躯巾拂尘。
现代文：衣袍增添身躯光，巾用来拂尘。
English: The robe adds light to the body, and the towel is used to sweep away the dust.

古文：制以为袍余作巾。
现代文：白贮制衣袍，剩余用作巾。
English: Store the white robes, and use the rest as scarves.

古文：四坐欢乐胡可陈。
现代文：满座欢乐乐难尽。
English: A full house of joy is hard to exhaust.

古文：清歌徐舞降祗神。
现代文：清歌徐舞敬迎神。
English: Qing Dynasty songs and dances are sung to welcome the gods.

古文：右一篇。
现代文：上马一篇。
English: The above is an article.

古文：双袂齐举鸾凤翔。罗裾飘濆昭仪光。
现代文：双袖齐舞，似鸾凤高翔罗裙飘摇，焕发容光。
English: Two-sleeved dance, like a chrysanthemum phoenix soaring skirt swaying, radiant.

古文：趋步生姿进流芳。
现代文：舞步婆娑散芳香。
English: The dance of the phoenix disperses the fragrance.

古文：鸣弦清歌及三阳。
现代文：弹琴高歌迎春阳。
English: Play the piano and sing a song to welcome the spring sun.

古文：人生世间如电过。
现代文：人生在世，如同电闪倏忽过。
English: Life in this world is like a flash of lightning.

古文：乐时每少苦日多。
现代文：乐时常少苦曰多。
English: Less is often more when it comes to pleasure.

古文：幸及良辰曜春花。
现代文：趁此良辰赏春花。
English: Take advantage of this good time to enjoy spring flowers.

古文：齐倡献舞赵女歌。
现代文：齐女献舞趟女歌。
English: Qi Niang dances to a female song.

古文：羲和驰景逝不停。
现代文：羲和御曰驰不停。
English: 和御曰驰不停.

古文：春露未晞严霜零。
现代文：春露未干秋霜盈。
English: Spring dew is not dry, and autumn frost is in full bloom.

古文：百草凋索花落英。
现代文：百草凋落花枝零。
English: The grass withers and the flowers die.

古文：蟋蟀吟牖寒蝉鸣。
现代文：蟋蟀窗外吟，寒蝉树间呜。
English: The crickets chirp outside the window, the chiggers sing among the trees.

古文：百年之命忽若倾。
现代文：人生百年，突然崩倾。
English: A hundred years of life, suddenly collapsing.

古文：蚤知迅速秉烛行。
现代文：早知人生短促，不如秉烛夜行。
English: If you know that life is short, it's better to travel at night with a candle.

古文：东造扶桑游紫庭。西至昆仑戏曾城。
现代文：束到扶桑，游览紫庭西到崑喻，游历曾城。
English: Bundle to Fusang, tour the west of the Purple Garden to Jinyu, travel to Zengcheng.

古文：右一篇。
现代文：上为一篇。
English: The above is an article.

古文：阳春白日风花香。
现代文：阳春白曰，风送花香。
English: Yangchunbai said, the wind is blowing flowers.

古文：趋步明玉舞瑶珰。
现代文：快步行走，随着舞动的是明玉瑶瑺。
English: Walk briskly. The dancing accompaniment is the "Cherry Blossom Dance."

古文：声发金石媚笙簧。罗袿徐转红袖扬。
现代文：金石之乐，配合着笙簧罗衣随着人转，红袖飞扬。
English: The music of the precious stones, with the accompaniment of the cymbals, the loincloth swirls as the person turns, and the red sleeves fly.

古文：清歌流响绕凤梁。
现代文：清歌曼声，回响缭绕画凤梁。
English: Manx voice of Qing Dynasty songs, reverberating around the painting Feng Liang.

古文：如矜若思凝且翔。
现代文：像庄重，像沉思，眼光凝注忽又高扬。
English: Like solemnity, like contemplation, the gaze is concentrated and elevated.

古文：转盼遗精艳辉光。
现代文：流目顾盼洒辉光。
English: Streams of glitter streamed down the street.

古文：将流将引双雁翔。
现代文：或舞或收，似双雁飞翔。
English: Or dance or close, like two geese flying.

古文：欢来何晚意何长。
现代文：欢乐来迟情意长。
English: Joy comes late, but it's long overdue.

古文：明君御世永歌倡。
现代文：明君在位长欢唱。
English: The Emperor Ming is singing with joy.

古文：右一篇。
现代文：上为一篇。
English: The above is an article.

古文：《白珝》旧新合三篇。
现代文：新旧白纡舞歌诗合起来共三篇。
English: There are a total of three pieces of new and old egret dance poems.

古文：宋泰始歌舞曲词：
现代文：宋泰始歌舞曲词：
English: Song Taizhi Song and Dance Lyrics:

古文：《皇业颂》明帝造：皇业沿德建，帝运资勋融。
现代文：《皇业颂》歌唱从尧到楚元王、高祖，世世有圣德。
English: The "Ode to Imperial Achievement" has been sung from Jie to Chu Yuan Wang and Gao Zu, and has been sacred throughout the ages.

古文：胤唐重盛轨，胄楚载休风。尧帝兆深祥，元王衍遐庆。
现代文：旦瞪作皇业凭藉德政而建立，国运依靠勋业而兴隆。承袭卢尧的帝业重现盛朝的恢宏，继承楚元王的成就重振祖先的雄风。尧帝兆示着后代的吉祥，五王延续了远古的福庆。
English: The imperial cause of the Tang Dynasty was established by virtue of German politics, and the national movement thrived on the merits. The imperial cause inherited from Lu Wei revived the grandeur of the Han Dynasty, inherited the achievements of King Chu Yuan and reinvigorated the heroic spirit of the ancestors. The Emperor Zou signifies the auspiciousness of future generations, and the Five Kings continued the ancient Fuqing.

古文：积善传上业，祚福启英圣。
现代文：多为善政继承前代的基业，继享福祚迎来明君的睿圣。
English: Most of them are inheriting the previous generation's legacy for good governance, and succeeding Fuxin to usher in Mingjun's sagacity.

古文：衰数随金禄，登历昌水命。
现代文：晋随着金运的衰败而衰亡，宋开创帝业凭据的是水命。
English: Jin declined and died with the decline of Jin Yun, while Song's claim to be the founder of the empire was based on water.

古文：维宋垂光烈，世美流舞咏。
现代文：宋创建伟业流传后代，人人称美，欢舞歌咏。《圣祖颂》
English: The great works created by the Song Dynasty were passed down to future generations, and everyone praised the beauty, danced and sang. "Song of the Patriarchs"

古文：《圣祖颂》：圣祖惟高德，积勋代晋历。永建享鸿基，万古盛音册。
现代文：圣祖有德又有功，代晋为帝换新历。创建宏大帝业基，万古盛德载史册。
English: The holy ancestor was virtuous and meritorious, and changed the new calendar on behalf of Emperor Jin. He created a grand imperial foundation, and his virtuous deeds have been recorded in the annals of history.

古文：睿文缵宸驭，广运崇帝声。
现代文：文帝继承圣祖业，四方崇敬传颂声。
English: Emperor Wen followed in the footsteps of his holy ancestors, and was revered and eulogized in all directions.

古文：衍德被仁祉，留化洽民灵。
现代文：广布仁德造福祉，施行教化，感动百姓和神灵。
English: Spreading benevolence and virtue creates well-being, carries out enlightenment, and moves the people and gods.

古文：孝建缔孝业，允协天人谋。
现代文：孝建皇帝建孝业，和洽天人共协谋。
English: Filial piety builds up the emperor's filial piety, and makes peace with heaven and man.

古文：宇内齐政轨，宙表烛威流。
现代文：天下齐统一，四境威名流。
English: The whole world is unified, and famous celebrities from all over the world are performing.

古文：钟管腾列圣，彝铭贲重猷。
现代文：乐歌欢唱颂列圣，圣王史册记新猷。
English: Songs are sung to celebrate the canonization, and a new chapter is written in the history of the Holy King.

古文：《明君大雅》，虞龢造：明君应乾数，拨乱纽颓基。
现代文：《明君大雅》虞稣作明君顺天命，拨乱反正，挽救倾危的帝基。
English: "Mingjun Daya" depicts Mingjun following his heavenly destiny, sorting out the chaos and saving the imperiled imperial capital.

古文：民庆来苏日，国颂《薰风》诗。
现代文：百姓欢庆再生日，天下歌颂《薰风》诗。
English: The people celebrate the day of rebirth, and the whole world sings the praises of the poem "Aroma."

古文：天步或暂难，列蕃扇迷慝。
现代文：国运偶遇一时难，藩臣谋反心迷惑。
English: When the National Games encountered a temporary difficulty, the vassals of the domain plotted a counter-attack.

古文：庙胜敷九代，神谟洞七德。
现代文：圣主在朝行征伐，神机妙算扬武德。
English: The Lord of Heaven's Armies is marching toward the north.

古文：文教洗昏俗，武谊清昆埏。
现代文：文治教化移陋俗，武功平乱保边关。
English: Civil government education and reform should move away from vulgarity, and martial arts should be used to pacify chaos and maintain the border.

古文：英勋冠帝则，万寿永衍天。
现代文：明主勋业冠群帝，万年长盛寿齐天。
English: The Emperor of the Ming Dynasty was awarded the Imperial Decoration of the Crown, and lived a long and prosperous life.

古文：《通国风》，明帝造：开宝业，资贤昌，谟明盛，弼谐光。
现代文：《通国风》明帝作开拓万年业，凭藉贤士国运昌。谋划英明帝业盛，辅弼协调更增光。
English: "Tong Guo Feng" was written by Emperor Ming for the purpose of opening up a long-lasting industry, and with the help of the sages, the country was prosperous. The planning of Emperor Ming for the prosperity of the industry, and the assistance and coordination were even more brilliant.

古文：烈武惟略，景王勋。
现代文：临川烈武王有韬略，长沙景王建功勋。
English: Linchuan King Liwu has a short biography, and Changsha King Jing has made great contributions.

古文：南康华容，变政文。
现代文：绪直尘和王茎容，修订政令改条文。
English: In the wake of the scandal, the government amended the decree to amend the provisions.

古文：猛绩爰著，有左军。
现代文：武功卓著，王左将军。
English: Outstanding military exploits, General Wang Zuo.

古文：三王到氏，文武赞。
现代文：三王和到彦之，有文有武共襄赞。
English: The three kings and Hidehiko are praised by both the literati and the military.

古文：丞相作辅，属伊旦。
现代文：丞相义恭作辅佐，追随伊尹和周公旦。
English: The chancellor, Yi Qiong, served as an assistant, followed by Yi Yin and Zhou Gongdan.

古文：沈柳宗侯，皆殄乱。
现代文：选、地、塞等人都封侯，建立奇功平祸乱。
English: Zeng, Di, Ce and others were all given the title of vassal, establishing the system of "miraculous achievements and calamities."

古文：泰始开运，超百王。
现代文：壶始年间国运转，功业远超先代王。
English: At the beginning of the year, the country was running smoothly, and his achievements far exceeded those of the previous king.

古文：司徒骠骑，勋德康。
现代文：司徒休仁和骠骑体并，功高德劭国安康。
English: Both Stukiyurihito and Tsukuda were good at riding and contributed greatly to the country's prosperity.

古文：江安谋效，殷诚彰。
现代文：王江安出谋安天下，殷孝祖忠心更昭彰。
English: Wang Jiang'an went out to seek world peace, and Yin Xiaozhu's loyalty was even more outstanding.

古文：刘沈承规，功名扬。
现代文：刘劻、沈攸之秉承朝廷命，齐心合力功名扬。
English: Liu Bei and Shen Youzhi adhered to the order of the imperial court and achieved fame by working together.

古文：庆归我后，祚无疆。
现代文：福庆归我王，福柞永无疆。
English: Fuqing is my king, and Fuyao is boundless.

古文：《天符颂》，明帝造：天符革运，世诞英皇。
现代文：《天符颂》明帝作天帝改天命，人世出英皇。
English: According to the "Ode to Heavenly Symbols," Emperor Ming changed the destiny of heaven to that of heaven, and an emperor came into the world.

古文：在馆神炫，既壮龙骧。
现代文：在学校聪智辉映，长大后似龙飞扬。
English: Zongzhi Huiying at school, grew up like a dragon flying.

古文：六钟集表，四纬骈光。
现代文：乐律和辑洽天下，四方沐浴皇恩光。
English: The melody and arrangement are the best in the world, and the four directions are bathed in the light of imperial grace.

古文：于穆配天，永休厥祥。
现代文：美好功德与天齐，长享福庆长吉祥。
English: Good merits are equal to the heavens, and long-term enjoyment of happiness brings long-term good luck.

古文：《明德颂》，明帝造：明德孚教，幽符丽纪。
现代文：《明德颂》明帝作德政和教化相符合，天命体现在国家的纲纪。
English: "Ode to Ming Dynasty Virtue" Ming Dynasty's work of virtue politics and enlightenment are consistent, and the Mandate of Heaven is reflected in the country's discipline.

古文：山鼎见奇，醴液涵祉。
现代文：大鼎中现出了珍奇，醴泉中涵合着福祉。
English: There is a rarity in the dinghy, and well-being is contained in the spring.

古文：鹓雏耀仪，驺虞游趾。
现代文：鹩雏亮出了它的仪容，骝虞瑞兽也在盛世栖止。
English: The chrysanthemum chick showed off its appearance, and the yakitori shrimp was also in full bloom.

古文：福延亿祚，庆流万祀。
现代文：福禄延续亿万年，吉庆流传亿万祀。
English: Fortune has continued for hundreds of millions of years, and auspicious celebrations have been passed down for hundreds of millions of years.

古文：《帝图颂》：帝图凝远，瑞美昭宣。
现代文：《帝图颂》皇帝谋略虑深远，祥瑞吉兆四方传。
English: In the "Ode to Emperor Tutu," the emperor's strategy is far-reaching and far-reaching, and the auspiciousness of auspiciousness spreads in all directions.

古文：济流月镜，鹿毳霜鲜。
现代文：济水有如秋月明镜，白鹿更显洁白明鲜。
English: Jishui is like the bright mirror of the autumn moon, and the white deer is even more clear and white.

古文：甘露降和，花雪表年。
现代文：甘露普降兆和谐，花雪飞舞表丰年。
English: The nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar

古文：孝德载衍，芳风永传。
现代文：孝敬美德世代衍，优秀风气永流传。
English: Filial piety and virtue are passed down from generation to generation, and the excellent culture is passed down forever.

古文：《龙跃大雅》：龙跃式符，玉耀蕃宫。岁淹豫野，玺属嫔中。
现代文：《龙跃大雅》黄龙飞跃兆示天命，美玉闪耀在藩臣宫岁星停留在豫州分野，玉玺出现在束府中。
English: "Long Yue Daya" The yellow dragon's leap is a sign of destiny, the beauty ball shines in the vassal palace, the lucky star stays in the Yuzhou area, and the jade dragonfly appears in Sokfu.

古文：江波澈映，石柏开文。
现代文：江水清澈辉映，石柏也应运而呈现瑞文。
English: The water of the river is clear and sparkling, and the stone and cypress trees have also appeared in response to the movement.

古文：观毓花蕊，楼凝景云。
现代文：观中开出奇花蕊，楼前飘浮吉祥云。
English: Strange flower stamens bloom in the middle of the view, and auspicious clouds float in front of the building.

古文：白乌三获，甘液再呈。
现代文：三次获白乌，甘露一再出现。
English: Baiwu won three times, and nectar appeared repeatedly.

古文：嘉穟表沃，连理协成。
现代文：嘉禾表明有盛德，连理木预兆和谐功成。
English: Jiahe said that there is prosperity and virtue, and the long-term success is a harbinger of harmonious achievement.

古文：德充动物，道积通神。
现代文：仁德丰厚可以感动万物，道义充盈可上通天神。
English: The abundance of benevolence can move all things, and the fullness of morality can communicate with the gods.

古文：宋业允大，灵瑞方臻。
现代文：宋室帝业盛而大，各种祥瑞才集于良辰。《淮祥风》
English: The Song Dynasty flourished, and all kinds of auspicious and auspicious things gathered in good times. "Huai Xiang Feng"

古文：《淮祥风》：淮祥应，贤彦生。翼赞中兴，致太平。
现代文：淮地呈祥瑞，贤士彦才生：辅佐中兴业，天下得太平。
English: The bright land is radiant, and the virtuous man is young: the industry is booming, and the world is at peace.

古文：《宋世大雅》，虞龢造：
现代文：《宋世大雅》虞稣作
English: "Song Shidai Ya" by Yu Xiu

古文：宋世宁，在太始。醉酒欢，饱德喜。万国朝，上寿酒。
现代文：宋世安宁在泰始醉酒欢歌，为有仁德：薛万国朝拜上寿酒。
English: Song Shi Anning was drunk and sang a song at the beginning of Taizhi, for having benevolence: Xue Wan Guo worshiped the New Year's Eve wine.

古文：帝同天，惟长久。
现代文：帝同天地永长久。
English: The emperor reigns forever and ever.

古文：《治兵大雅》，明帝造：王命治兵，有征无战。
现代文：《治兵大雅》明帝作天子命治兵，号令征伐不用战。
English: In "Civil War Elegance," Emperor Ming, as the son of Heaven, orders the soldiers to fight, and orders them not to fight.

古文：巾拂以净，丑类革面。
现代文：像用巾拂几，凶徒都洗心革面。
English: Like wiping a few with a towel, the villains have washed their hearts and faces.

古文：王仪振旅，载戢在辰。
现代文：王命班师回朝，偃旗息鼓在良辰。
English: Wang Meibanshi returned to the imperial court.

古文：中虚巾拂，四表静尘。
现代文：境内用巾拂，四境无战尘。
English: Wipe with a cloth inside the country, and there will be no war dust in the four regions.

古文：《白珝篇大雅》，明帝造：在心曰志发言诗，声成于文被管丝。
现代文：《白贮篇大雅》明帝作尚在心中叫做志，抒发出来就是诗，管弦演奏配文辞。
English: "Hakuryo Zhen Daya" by Ming Di is still called "Zhi" in the heart, and it is a poem when it is expressed, and the orchestral performance accompanies the text.

古文：手舞足蹈欣泰时，移风易俗王化基。
现代文：手舞足蹈，欢欣太平时。移风易俗，是天子教化之基。
English: Dancing with one's hands and feet, rejoicing in times of peace. Changing customs, is the foundation of God's enlightenment.

古文：琴角挥韵白云舒，《箫韶》协音神凤来。
现代文：琴瑟鼓角齐奏白云舒，《箫韶》和谐的乐声招引神凤来。
English: The horns of the harpsichord and drums play in unison to the tune of Baiyunshu, and the harmonious music of "Dragonfly" attracts the divine phoenix.

古文：拊击和节咏在初，章曲乍毕情有余。
现代文：和节拍击咏盛世，歌曲虽尽情有余。
English: And the beat of the beat, although the song is more than enough.

古文：文同轨壹道德行，国靖民和礼乐成。
现代文：同文同轨道德行，国安民和礼乐成。
English: The same text, the same moral conduct, the national security and the people, and the success of the ceremony.

古文：四县庭响美勋英，八列陛倡贵人声。
现代文：四悬齐奏，庭中回响赞精英。八列起舞，堂间响起颂扬贵人声。
English: Four pianos played in unison, the courtyard reverberated with praise for the elite. Eight rows danced, and the hall resounded with the glorification of noble voices.

古文：舞饰丽华乐容工，罗裳皎日袂随风。
现代文：舞装华丽乐曲工，罗裳映袂随风。
English: The dance costumes are gorgeously arranged to the music, and the flowing robes flow with the wind.

古文：金翠列辉蕙麝丰，淑姿委体允帝衷。
现代文：金玉生辉香气丰，舞姿优美，乐在帝心中。
English: The precious gems are bright and fragrant, the dance is graceful, and the emperor is happy.

古文：汉鼓吹铙歌十八曲，《硃鹭曲》：硃鹭，鱼以乌路訾邪。
现代文：汉鼓吹铙歌十八曲：《朱鹭曲》朱鹭鱼以乌路訾邪鹭食何，食茄下。
English: The Han Dynasty promoted 18 poems of the Yingge: "Zhu Yingge" Zhu Yingge fishes eat the yakitori with the help of the cormorant.

古文：鹭何食，食茄下。不之食，不以吐，将以问诛者。
现代文：不之食不之吐，将要问谏者。
English: If you don't eat, you don't vomit.

古文：《思悲翁曲》：思悲翁，唐思，夺我美人侵以遇，悲翁也，但我思。蓬首狗，逐狡兔，食交君，枭子五。
现代文：蓬首狗，逐狡兔。
English: The shaggy-headed dog chases the cunning rabbit.

古文：枭母六，拉沓高飞莫安宿。
现代文：食狡磨，枭子有五，枭母有六。旋转高飞莫安宿。
English: Food cunning grinding, there are five pincers, there are six pincers. There is no safe place for spinning high flying.

古文：《艾如张曲》：艾而张罗，夷于何。
现代文：《艾如张曲》割草张网罗，锄平哪山坡?
English: "Ai Ru Zhang Qu" cuts the grass and stretches the net, which hillside is leveled?

古文：行成之，四时和。
现代文：德行修美，四季协和。
English: Virtue, beauty, harmony of the four seasons.

古文：山出黄雀亦有罗，雀以高飞柰雀何？
现代文：山出黄雀也有纲罗。雀已高飞奈雀何?
English: There are also a number of yellow finches in the mountains. The finches have flown high, but what about the sparrows?

古文：为此倚欲，谁肯礞室。
现代文：为此邪僻欲，谁肯毁家室。
English: For this perverse desire, who would destroy the family home.

古文：《上之回曲》：上之回，所中益。
现代文：《上之回曲》皇上到回中，行营仪从盛极。
English: "Top of the Eulogy" The emperor came to the middle of the eulogy, and the ceremony started from the peak.

古文：夏将至，行将北。
现代文：夏天将至，行往北。
English: Summer's coming, head north.

古文：以承甘泉宫，寒暑德。
现代文：抵达甘泉宫，寒暑相宜此处得。
English: Arriving at Ganquan Palace, the cold and hot weather is suitable here.

古文：游石关，望诸国，月支臣，匈奴服。
现代文：游石关，望诸国，月支称臣，匈奴归服。
English: Yuishiguan, the hope of all countries, the moon supports the vassal, and the Xiongnu submits.

古文：令从百官疾驱驰，千秋万岁乐无极。
现代文：下令百官疾驱驰，千秋万岁乐无极。
English: Order a hundred officials to drive at high speed, and there will be endless joy.

古文：《翁离曲》：拥离趾中，可筑室，何用葺之蕙用兰。
现代文：《翁离曲》拥离趾中，可以筑室。用何葺之，蕙与兰。
English: "Weng Ying Qu" is in the middle, so you can build a room. What kind of roofing is used, straw and orchid.

古文：拥离趾中。
现代文：拥离趾中。
English: Toes together, middle toe apart.

古文：《战城南曲》：战城南，死郭北，野死不葬乌可食。
现代文：《战城南曲》作战在城南，死在外城北，野外战死不埋葬，乌鸦会啄食。
English: "Battle of Nanqu" The battle is in the south of the city, the death is in the north of the outer city, the death in the field is not buried, the crow will peck.

古文：为我谓乌： 且为客豪！
现代文：为我对乌鸦说： 暂且为战死者哀号!
English: For I said to the ravens: Let the dead be mourned for a while!

古文：野死谅不葬，腐肉安能去子逃 ？
现代文：野外战死想必不会埋葬，腐肉怎能从你口中逃! 
English: If you die in the field, you will not be buried. How can the rotting flesh escape from your mouth?

古文：水深激激，蒲苇冥冥；枭骑战斗死，驽马裴回鸣。
现代文：水深清见底，蒲苇幽冥冥；善战的骏马作战死，驽马徘徊呜。
English: The water is deep and clear to see the bottom, the cormorant is dark and gloomy; the good horse fights and dies, and the horse wanders.

古文：梁筑室，何以南？
现代文：桥上筑营垒，如何去桥南?
English: Build a camp on the bridge, how to get to the south of the bridge?

古文：梁何北？
现代文：如何往桥北?
English: How to get to Qiao Bei?

古文：禾黍不获君何食？
现代文：庄稼不收获，你用什么来供食?
English: If you don't harvest your crops, what will you use for food?

古文：愿为忠臣安可得？
现代文：愿为忠臣怎可得?
English: How can one be a loyal subject?

古文：思子良臣，良臣诚可思：朝行出攻，莫不夜归！
现代文：思念战死忠良臣，良臣实在值得怀思。早上出发去进攻，夜晚不见人回归。
English: Thinking of a loyal vassal who died in battle, a vassal really worth remembering. We set out in the morning to attack, but we didn't see anyone return at night.

古文：《巫山高曲》：巫山高，高以大；淮水深，难以逝。
现代文：《巫山高曲》巫山高，高而大；进丞深，难以渡。
English: "Wushan High Melody" Wushan is high, high and big; it is deep and difficult to cross.

古文：我集无高，曳水何梁。
现代文：我想束行回故乡，为何无桥梁?
English: I want to go back to my hometown, why is there no bridge?

古文：汤汤回回，临水远望。
现代文：我想渡河无船篙。河水荡漾，临水远望。
English: I want to cross the river without a raft. The river is rippling, and I can see far away from the water.

古文：泣下沾衣，远道之人心思归。
现代文：泪流沾湿衣，远行之人心思归。
English: Tears stained the wet clothes, and those who had traveled far away returned home.

古文：谓之何？
现代文：面对淮水无奈何。《上陵曲》
English: Faced with Huai Shui helplessly. "Jangling"

古文：《上陵曲》：上陵何美美，下津风以寒。问客从何来，言从水中央。
现代文：上山情景美，下河有风且觉寒。问客从何来，来自水中央。
English: Scenery up the mountain is beautiful, down the river is windy and cold. Where did the guests come from, from the middle of the water.

古文：桂树为君船，青丝为君笮，木兰为君翟，黄金错其间。
现代文：桂树作君船，竹篾为君作竹索，木兰作君桨，黄金镶嵌在中间。
English: The laurel tree is your boat, the bamboo shoots are your bamboo ropes, the magnolia is your paddle, and the gold is inlaid in the middle.

古文：沧海之雀赤翅鸿，白雁随，山林乍开乍合，曾不知日月明。
现代文：沧海之雀赤翅鸿，白雁追随飞，山林忽开忽合，竟然不知曰月明。
English: The red-winged sparrow of the sea of vicissitudes, the white goose follows the flight, the mountains and forests suddenly open and close, and they don't even know to say the moon.

古文：醴泉之水，光泽何蔚蔚。
现代文：醴泉水，闪闪有光流不绝。
English: The water of the spring is sparkling and has a continuous stream of light.

古文：芝为车，龙为马。
现代文：芝作车，龙作马。
English: The grass is the cart, the dragon is the horse.

古文：览遨游，四海外。
现代文：观览遨游四海外。
English: The tour will visit four overseas countries.

古文：甘露初二年，芝生铜池中，仙人下来饮，延寿千万岁。
现代文：甘露初二年，芝草生在铜迤中，仙人下来饮池水，延寿千千万万岁。
English: In the first two years of the nectar, the grass sprouted in the copper cocoon, and the hermit came down to drink the pond water, extending his life by thousands and thousands of years.

古文：《将进酒曲》：将进酒，乘太白。
现代文：《将进酒曲》将进酒，举酒将浮白。
English: "Will enter the wine song" will enter the wine, and the wine will float white.

古文：辨加哉，诗审搏。
现代文：跳《驾辨》舞，诗繁博。
English: They danced the "Driving" dance, with many poems.

古文：放故歌，心所作。
现代文：高唱故歌，出自内心所作。
English: Singing old songs aloud, singing from the heart.

古文：同阴气，诗悉索。
现代文：阴气重，诗萧条瑟索。
English: The mood is gloomy and the poetry is sluggish.

古文：使禹良工，观者苦。
现代文：使禹良工，观者苦。
English: Make Yu a good worker, and the viewer will suffer.

古文：《君马黄歌》：君马黄，臣马苍，三马同逐臣马良。
现代文：《君马黄歌》君马黄，我的马苍，二马同赛我马良。
English: "Junma Huang Ge" Junma Huang, my horse, my horse is good.

古文：易之有騩蔡有赭，美人归以南，驾车驰马。美人伤我心！
现代文：换上聣马放赭马，美人回归南。驾车赶马奔，美人伤我心!
English: Put on the horse, put off the horse, the beauty returns to the south. Driving to catch up with the horse, the beauty breaks my heart!

古文：佳人归以北，驾车驰马。佳人安终极！
现代文：佳人回归北。驾车赶马奔，美人何处是终极!
English: Beauty returns to the north. Driving to catch horses, where is the ultimate beauty!

古文：《芳树曲》：芳树，日月君乱，如于风，芳树不上无心。温而鹄，三而为行。
现代文：《芳树曲》芳树朝夕与君见，纷乱似狂风。芳树不长是无心柔润而瘦弱，三株自成行。
English: "Fangshu Qu" Fangshu sees you in the morning and evening, and the chaos is like a raging wind. Fangshu is not long, it is heartless, soft and thin, and the three branches are self-sufficient.

古文：临兰池，心中怀我怅。
现代文：临兰池，心中怀惆怅。
English: Linlanchi, with sadness in my heart.

古文：心不可匡，目不可顾，石人之子悲杀人。君有它心，乐不可禁。
现代文：心不可收，目不可顾，妒人之子愁杀人。君有他心，乐不可禁。
English: The heart can't be contained, the eyes can't be ignored, the son of a jealous man is worried about killing. If you have his heart, you can't help but be happy.

古文：王将何似？
现代文：王将似何人?
English: How many people does the king resemble?

古文：如孙如鱼乎？
现代文：如孙如鱼乎?
English: Like a sun, like a fish?

古文：悲矣！
现代文：可悲啊!
English: How sad!

古文：《有所思曲》：有所思，乃在大海南。
现代文：《有所思曲》有个我想念的人，他远在大海南。
English: There is a person I miss in "Somewhat Contemplative" who lives far away in southern China.

古文：何用问遣君，双珠玳瑁簪，用玉绍缭之。
现代文：用什么赠给他?双珠玳瑁簪，再用玉环缠绕它。
English: What do you give him? A pair of beads, and then wrap a jade ring around it.

古文：闻君有它心，拉杂摧烧之。摧烧之，当风扬其灰。
现代文：听说那人变了心，折断烧毁它。烧毁它，迎风吹扬灰。
English: I heard that the man had a change of heart, broke it off and burned it. Burned it, blowing the ashes to the wind.

古文：从今以往，勿复相思！
现代文：从今以后，不再相思了!
English: From now on, no more infatuation!

古文：相思与君绝。
现代文：对那人的相思永断绝!
English: Break off your love for that person forever!

古文：鸡鸣狗吠，兄嫂当知之。
现代文：鶸鸣狗吠天将明，兄嫂将知之。
English: If a dog barks, the sky will be clear, and brothers and sisters will know.

古文：妃呼犭希！
现代文：哎呀呀!
English: Oh dear!

古文：秋风肃肃晨风穀，东方须臾高知之。
现代文：秋风萧萧晨风鸟求偶鸣，我心情烦乱，不久东方发白我将作决断。《雉子曲》
English: The autumn wind is fading, the morning breeze is fading, the birds are calling for mates, I'm in a frazzled mood, soon the East will turn white, and I'll have to make a decision.

古文：《雉子曲》：雉子，班如此，之于雉梁，无以吾翁孺。
现代文：雉子，斑斑花纹布全身，飞到雉梁上，无以迎翁孺。
English: The pigtails, speckled with patterns all over, fly onto the rafters. There is no way to catch them.

古文：雉子，知得雉子高飞止，黄鹄蜚之以千里，王可思。
现代文：雉子，知得雉子高高飞，黄鹄高飞到千里，王可思。
English: Tweezers, knowing that tweezers fly high, and kites fly high for thousands of miles, can't help but wonder.

古文：雄来蜚从雌，视子趋一雉。
现代文：雄来随雌飞，视子趋一雉。
English: The male flies with the female, and the two look alike.

古文：雉子车大驾马滕，被王送行所中，尧芊蜚从王孙行。
现代文：雉子登大车，驾马飞腾，被王送往行在所，望羊飞，随从王孙行。
English: The mule mounts the cart, the horse flies, and is sent by the king to the place of the journey. He watches the sheep fly and follows Wang Sun.

古文：《圣人出曲》：圣人出，阴阳和。
现代文：《圣人出曲》圣人出，阴阳调和。
English: "The Sage Appears" The sage appears, and yin and yang are reconciled.

古文：美人出，游九河。
现代文：美人出，游历九河。
English: Beautiful women go out and travel the nine rivers.

古文：佳人来，騑离哉何。
现代文：佳人来，马儿成对双配合。
English: When the bride comes, the horses go in pairs.

古文：驾六飞龙四时和。
现代文：驾御六飞龙，四季皆平和。
English: The four seasons are all peaceful.

古文：君之臣明护不道，美人哉，宜天子。免甘星筮乐甫始，美人子，含四海。
现代文：君之臣明补君过。美人啊，适宜作天子，不用甘公看天文，欢乐刚开始，美人啊，统四海。
English: Beauty, fit to be the son of heaven, don't need a husband to watch the sky, joy has just begun, beauty, unify the four seas.

古文：《上邪曲》：上邪！
现代文：《上邪曲》
English: "Supreme Evil"

古文：我欲与君相知，长命无绝衰。
现代文：天啊!我要与你长相爱，永生永世不减衰。
English: Oh God, I want to grow in love with you and live forever.

古文：山无陵，江水为竭，冬雷震震夏雨雪，天地合，乃敢与君绝。
现代文：高山变平地，江水干竭，冬雷震耳，夏天降雪，天地两相合，才敢与你断绝。
English: Only when the mountains become flat, the rivers dry up, the thunder rumbles in winter, the snow falls in summer, and heaven and earth become one, will I dare to break up with you.

古文：《临高台曲》：临高台以轩，下有清水清且寒。
现代文：《临高台曲》临高台，凭窗看，下有清水清又寒。
English: "Linggao Daidai Qu" In Linggao Daidai, looking out of the window, there is clear water and cold.

古文：江有香草目以兰，黄鹄高飞离哉翻。
现代文：江有香草满目兰。黄鹄高飞翩翩翻。
English: The river is full of fragrant herbs. The yellow dragonflies are soaring high.

古文：关弓射鹄，令我主寿万年。
现代文：开弓射黄鹄，要让君王寿万年。
English: Open the bow and shoot the yellow dragonfly, to make the king live forever.

古文：收中吾。
现代文：收中吾。
English: Let's wrap this up.

古文：《远如期曲》：远如期，益如寿，处天左侧，大乐，万岁与天无极。
现代文：《远如期曲》远来祝寿，住在天子左侧，大乐称万岁，乐无极。
English: "Faraway as if it were a piece of music" came from far away to celebrate his birthday. He lived on the left side of the heavenly son. He said, "Long live the great music. There is no end to the joy."

古文：雅乐陈，佳哉纷，单于自归，动如惊心。
现代文：雅乐齐奏，乐纷纭，单于来归附，震惊人心心情娱悦，万人归来。
English: Aristocratic music played in unison, a variety of music, a single one to attach, shocking people's hearts, entertaining people's moods, and bringing people back.

古文：《石留曲》：石留凉阳凉石水流为沙锡以微河为香向始冷将风阳北逝肯无敢与于杨心邪怀兰志金安薄北方开留离兰魏鼓吹曲十二篇，缪袭造：汉第一曲《硃鹭》，今第一曲《初之平》，言魏也。初之平，义兵征。
现代文：谒者导引上殿堂，历代未闻此盛况。增寿万年也应当。《石留曲》石留凉阳凉石水流为沙锡以微河为香向始溪冷将风阳北逝肯熬敢与于杨心邪怀兰志金安薄北方开留离兰魏鼓吹曲十二篇：缪袭作还第一一曲《朱鹭》，今第一曲《初之平》，歌颂魏。扭子年，义兵行。
English: "Shi Ryukyu" "Shi Ryukyu" "Shi Ryukyu" "Shi Ryukyu" "Shi Ryukyu" "Shi Ryukyu" "Shi Ryukyu" "Shi Ryukyu" "Shi Ryukyu" "Shi Ryukyu" "Shi Ryukyu" "Shi Ryukyu" "Shi Ryukyu"

古文：神武奋，金鼓鸣。
现代文：神武奋，金鼓鸣。
English: Shenwu energized, the golden drum is beating.

古文：迈武德，扬洪名。
现代文：行武德，扬威名。
English: Practice martial arts and become famous.

古文：汉室微，社稷倾。
现代文：汉室衰，社稷倾。
English: The Han family is in decline, the society is in decline.

古文：皇道失，桓与灵。
现代文：皇道失，在桓灵。
English: The emperor lost his way and ended up in Kanrin.

古文：阉宦炽，群雄争。
现代文：宦官盛，群雄争。
English: Eunuchs prosper, heroes fight.

古文：边韩起，乱金城。
现代文：边塑叛，乱金继。
English: Rebels on one side, rebels on the other.

古文：中国扰，无纪经。
现代文：中原扰，轻朝廷。
English: Zhongyuan disturbs, light court.

古文：赫武皇，起旗旌。
现代文：赫武皇，树旗旌。
English: Emperor Hetu, tree banner.

古文：麾天下，天下平。
现代文：安天下，天下平。
English: Peace on earth, good will to men.

古文：济九州，九州宁。
现代文：定九州，九州宁。
English: Kyushu Tsuzuki, Kyushu Ning.

古文：创武功，武功成。
现代文：创武功，武功成。
English: Create martial arts, achieve martial arts.

古文：越五帝，邈三王。
现代文：超五帝，胜三王。
English: Super five emperors, victorious three kings.

古文：兴礼乐，定纪纲。
现代文：兴礼乐，定纪纲。
English: Revelry and music, with a fixed program.

古文：普日月，齐晖光。
现代文：同曰月，齐辉光。
English: That same month, Qi Huiguang.

古文：右《初之平曲》凡三十句，句三字。
现代文：上为《初之平曲》共三十句，每句三字。
English: The above is a total of thirty sentences of "Hatsuno Heikyoku," each sentence is three words.

古文：战荥阳，汴水陂。
现代文：篷第二二曲《思悲翁》，今第二曲《战荣阳》，歌颂苴公。
English: The 2nd and 2nd tunes of the canopy, "The Thinker of Sorrows," and now the 2nd tune, "Battle of Glory," sing the praises of King Gong.

古文：戎士愤怒，贯甲驰。
现代文：战茔隆，岸。战士愤怒，披甲战。
English: The battle rages, the shore. The warrior rages, the battle rages.

古文：陈未成，退徐荣。二万骑，堑垒平。
现代文：阵未成，退俭莹，二万骑，堑垒平。
English: The battle is not yet won, the retreat is imminent, twenty thousand horsemen ride, and the fort is leveled.

古文：戎马伤，六军惊。
现代文：人马伤，六军惊。
English: A man and a horse were injured, and six soldiers were taken by surprise.

古文：势不集，众几倾。
现代文：人心散，军几倾。
English: Hearts are divided and the army is divided.

古文：白日没，时晦冥，顾中牟，心屏营。
现代文：太阳落，曰昏冥。望中垒，心慌惊。
English: When the sun sets, it is said to be gloomy. If you look at the middle of the base, you will be panicked.

古文：同盟疑，计无成。
现代文：同盟疑，计无成。
English: Doubtful alliance, no success.

古文：赖我武皇，万国宁。
现代文：赖我武皇，天下宁
English: Rely on me, Emperor Wu, to make the world a better place

古文：右《战荥阳》曲凡二十句，其十八句句三字，二句句四字。
现代文：上为《战荣阳曲》共二十句，其中十八句每句三字，二句每句四字。
English: The above is a total of twenty sentences of "War Rongyang", of which eighteen sentences have three words each, and two sentences have four words each.

古文：汉第三曲《艾如张》，今第三曲《获吕布》，言曹公东围临淮，生擒吕布也。
现代文：塑第三曲《艾如张》，今第三曲《获吕布》，歌咏直公束进，围攻瘟进，生擒旦壶之事。
English: The third piece, "Ai Ruzhang," was sculpted, and now the third piece, "Got Lvbu," is being sung.

古文：获吕布，戮陈宫。
现代文：获吕布，杀陈宫。
English: Got Lvbu, killed Chen Gong.

古文：芟夷鲸鲵，驱骋群雄。
现代文：铲除凶徒，驱骋群雄。
English: Eradicate the criminals and drive out the bandits.

古文：囊括天下，运掌中。
现代文：囊括天下，运于掌中。
English: Covering the world, it is in the palm of your hand.

古文：右《获吕布曲》凡六句，其三句句三字，三句句四字。
现代文：上为《获吕布曲》共六句，其中三句每句三字，三句每句四字。
English: The above is a total of six sentences of "Wu Lu Bu Qu," of which three sentences have three words each, and three sentences have four words each.

古文：汉第四曲《上之回》，今第四曲《克官渡》，言曹公与袁绍战，破之于官渡也。
现代文：汉第四曲《上之回》，今第四曲《克官渡》，歌咏曹公与袁绍作战、在官渡打败袁绍主事。
English: In the 4th Song of Han Dynasty, "The Return from Above," and now in the 4th Song of Han Dynasty, "Overcoming Guandu," Cao Gong fought with Yuan Shao, and defeated Yuan Shao in Guandu.

古文：克绍官渡，由白马。
现代文：宣避胜童韶，经皇屋。
English: The announcement to avoid Sheng Tongyi was made via the imperial palace.

古文：僵尸流血，被原野。
现代文：流血僵尸，蔽原野。
English: Bleeding zombies, covering the field.

古文：贼众如犬羊，王师尚寡。
现代文：贼军如犬羊，王师尚寡。
English: The bandits are like dogs and sheep, and Wang Shigu is still young.

古文：沙醿傍，风飞扬。
现代文：沙堆旁，风飞扬。
English: Beside the sand dunes, the wind howls.

古文：转战不利，士卒伤。
现代文：转战不利，士卒伤。
English: The turn of the war was unfavourable, and soldiers were wounded.

古文：今日不胜，后何望！
现代文：今日不胜，后无望。
English: If we don't win today, there is no hope for the future.

古文：土山地道，不可当。
现代文：土山地道，不可当。
English: It's a dirt road, not a mountain road.

古文：卒胜大捷，震冀方。
现代文：最终大捷，震冀方。
English: In the end, it was a great victory for the Zhenji side.

古文：屠城破邑，神武遂章。
现代文：攻城破邑，威名显彰。
English: The siege of the city broke the village, and the prestige was enhanced.

古文：右《克官渡曲》凡十八句，其八句句三字，一句句五字，九句句四字。
现代文：上为《克官渡曲》共一句，每句三字，一句五字，九句每句四字。
English: The above is a total of one sentence of "Kokan Watariku," each sentence has three words, one sentence has five words, and nine sentences have four words each.

古文：汉第五曲《翁离》，今第五曲《旧邦》，言曹公胜袁绍于官渡，还谯收藏士卒死亡也。
现代文：选第五曲《翁离》，今第五曲《旧邦》，歌咏直公在宣遮战胜塞韶，返回尽收埋战亡的士卒
English: Select the fifth song, "Weng Li," now the fifth song, "Old State," the song is about Zhi Zhi Gong defeating Xuan Zhai and returning to collect the dead soldiers.

古文：旧邦萧条，心伤悲。
现代文：旧邦萧条，心伤悲。
English: The old country is depressed and heartbroken.

古文：孤魂翩翩，当何依。
现代文：孤魂飘零，何处依?
English: A lone soul adrift, where to turn?

古文：游士恋故，涕如摧。
现代文：游子恋乡，泪纷飞。
English: A wanderer falls in love with his hometown and bursts into tears.

古文：兵起事大，令愿违。
现代文：作战大事，使愿违。
English: The war was a major event, and it went against our wishes.

古文：博求亲戚，在者谁。
现代文：广求亲人，存者谁?
English: Widely asking for relatives, who are the survivors?

古文：立庙置后，魂来归。
现代文：立庙置嗣，魂来归。
English: Erect a temple and place an heir, and the soul will return.

古文：右《旧邦曲》凡十二句，其六句句三字，六句句四字。
现代文：卜为《旧邦曲》共十二句，其中六句每句三字，六句每句四字。
English: Bu is a total of twelve sentences in the "Old National Anthem," of which six sentences have three words each, and six sentences have four words each.

古文：汉第六曲《战城南》，今第六曲《定武功》，言曹公初破鄴，武功之定，始乎此也。
现代文：选第六曲《战城南》，今第六曲《定武功》，歌咏直公最初破邺之事，蔓公武功的基础，由此奠定。
English: Select the sixth song, "Sengcheng South," and now the sixth song, "Jing Wukong," which is the foundation of public martial arts, which was first broken by the poet Zhi Zhaogong.

古文：定武功，济黄河。河水汤汤，旦莫有横流波。
现代文：定武功，渡董回，河水浩荡，夜有轩然大波。
English: Fixed martial arts, wading back and forth, the river is turbulent, and there is a great uproar at night.

古文：袁氏欲衰，兄弟寻干戈。
现代文：直压将衰，兄弟动干戈。
English: The direct pressure will fail, and the brothers will fight.

古文：决漳水，水流滂沱。
现代文：决漳水，水流滂沱。
English: Where there is no water, there is no flow.

古文：嗟城中如流鱼，谁能复顾室家！
现代文：城中百姓成鱼，谁能再顾室家!
English: The people in the city become fish, who can take care of the house!

古文：计穷虑尽，求来连和。
现代文：计谋穷尽，敌来求和。
English: When strategy is exhausted, the enemy comes to sue for peace.

古文：和不时，心中忧戚。
现代文：和未成，心中忧戚。
English: And the unfulfilled, the heart is saddened.

古文：贼众内溃，君臣奔北。
现代文：贼军内溃，君臣奔北。
English: The rebel army was defeated, and the princes and ministers fled north.

古文：拨鄴城，奄有魏国。
现代文：克塑越，占有魏国。
English: Kepu Yue occupied Wei.

古文：王业艰难，览观古今，可为长叹。
现代文：王业艰难，纵观古今，为之长叹。
English: Wangye is difficult, looking at the past and the present, it is a long sigh.

古文：右《定武功曲》凡二十一句，其五句句三字，三句句六字，十二句句四字，一句五字。
现代文：上马《定武功曲》共二十一句，其中五句每句三字，三句每句六字，十二句每句四字，一句五字。
English: Shangma's "Jingwu Gongqu" has a total of twenty-one sentences, of which five sentences have three words each, three sentences have six words each, twelve sentences have four words each, and one sentence has five words.

古文：汉第七曲《巫山高》，今第七曲《屠柳城》，言曹公越北塞，历白檀，破三郡乌桓于柳城也。
现代文：选第七曲《巫山高》，今第七曲《屠柳城》，歌咏姜公越过北塞，经过皇擅，在堑噬攻破三郡恳担。屠翅越，成功难。
English: The seventh song "Wushan High School" was selected, and now the seventh song "Tu Liucheng" has been selected. In the song, Jiang Gong crosses the Northern Silk Road, passes through the imperial palace, and breaks through the three counties in Zhaihai. The more wings, the harder it is to succeed.

古文：屠柳城，功诚难。越度陇塞，路漫漫。
现代文：越过陇飓，路漫漫。
English: There is a long way to go after the typhoon.

古文：北逾冈平，但闻悲风正酸。
现代文：北逾垩迩，扑面寒风鼻子酸。
English: The north is overcast, the cold wind is blowing, and the nose is sour.

古文：蹋顿授首，遂登白狼山。
现代文：杀死旦溯，登上直过山。
English: Kill the tangent, climb straight up the mountain.

古文：神武海外，永无北顾患。
现代文：海外慑神威。北境永无患。
English: There is no danger in the North.

古文：右《屠柳城曲》凡十句，其三句句三字，三句句四字，三句句五字，一句六字。
现代文：上为《屠柳城曲》共十句，其中三句每句三字，三句每句四字，三句每句五字，一句六字。
English: The above is "Tu Liu Chengqu" with a total of ten sentences, of which three sentences have three words each, three sentences have four words each, three sentences have five words each, and one sentence has six words.

古文：汉第八曲《上陵》，今第八曲《平南荆》，言曹公南平荆州也。
现代文：汉第八曲《上陵》，今第八曲《平南荆》，歌咏曹公南征，平定荆州。
English: The eighth song of the Han Dynasty, "Shangling Tombs," is now the eighth song, "Pingnanjing," singing about Cao Gong's southern expedition and the pacification of Jingzhou.

古文：南荆何辽辽，江汉浊不清。
现代文：荆州多遥远，江汉浊不清。
English: Jingzhou is far away, Jianghan is not clear.

古文：菁茅久不贡，王师赫南征。
现代文：贡品久不交，王师去南征。
English: The tribute was not paid for a long time, and Wang Shi left for the Southern Expedition.

古文：刘琮据襄阳，贼备屯樊城。
现代文：刘琮据襄阳，刘备占樊城。
English: Liu Bei was in Xiangyang, and Liu Bei was in Shicheng.

古文：六军庐新野，金鼓震天庭。
现代文：大军驻新野，战鼓震天庭。
English: A large army is stationed in Shinno, and war drums are beating in heaven.

古文：刘子面缚至，武皇许其成。
现代文：刘子自缚束，武皇许讲和。
English: Liu Zi shackled himself, and Emperor Wu agreed to make peace.

古文：许与其成，抚其民。
现代文：许其讲和，安其民。
English: May he speak peace and reassure his people.

古文：陶陶江汉间，普为大魏臣。
现代文：广阔江汉间，都作大魏臣。
English: In the vast expanse of the Han and Jiang dynasties, they were all great Wei vassals.

古文：大魏臣，向风思自新。
现代文：大魏臣，心服思自新。
English: Great Wei-Chen, surrender to the new.

古文：思自新，齐功古人。
现代文：思自新，功齐古人。
English: Think from a fresh perspective, and you will achieve the same results as the ancients.

古文：在昔虞与唐，大魏得与均。
现代文：古有虞与唐，大魏功可均。
English: The ancient and Tang dynasties had their problems, but the Great Wei Dynasty achieved the same results.

古文：多选忠义士，为喉脣。
现代文：多选忠义士，作喉唇。
English: More than one loyalist was chosen to be the mouthpiece.

古文：天下一定，万世无风尘。
现代文：天下统一，万代无战尘。
English: The whole world will be unified, and there will be no war for all generations.

古文：右《平南荆曲》凡二十四句，其十七句句五字，四句句三字，三句句四字。
现代文：上为《平南荆曲》共二十四句，其中十七句每句五字，四句每句三字，三句每句四字。
English: The above is "Pingnan Jingqu" with a total of 24 sentences, of which 17 sentences have 5 words each, 4 sentences have 3 words each, and 3 sentences have 4 words each.

古文：汉第九曲《将进酒》，今第九曲《平关中》，言曹公征马超，定关中也。
现代文：连第九曲《将进酒》，今第九曲《平关中》，歌咏曹公征讨马超，平定关中。
English: Even the ninth song "Will go into the wine," now the ninth song "Pingguanzhong," the song of Cao Gongzheng to defeat Ma Chao, to defeat Guanzhong.

古文：平关中，路向潼。
现代文：平盐生，进军连。
English: Hirai students, march into the company.

古文：济浊水，立高墉。
现代文：渡过丛，立高墉。
English: After crossing the bushes, we set up the stilts.

古文：斗韩马，离群凶。
现代文：诱韩、马，使内讧。
English: Lure Han, Ma, and cause infighting.

古文：选骁骑，纵两翼，虏崩溃，级万亿。
现代文：选骁骑，纵两翼。敌崩溃，歼敌亿。
English: Choose the horse and rider, the vertical two wings. The enemy will collapse, and the enemy will be annihilated.

古文：右《平关中曲》凡十句，句三字。
现代文：上为《平关中曲》共十句，每句三字。
English: The above is "Pingguan Zhongqu" with a total of ten sentences, each sentence with three words.

古文：汉第十曲《有所思》，今第十曲《应帝期》，言曹文帝以圣德受命，应运期也。
现代文：选第十曲《有所思》，今第十曲《应帝期》，歌咏魏：墟凭圣德接受帝位，顺应天命。
English: Select the tenth song, "Thinking," and now the tenth song, "Seeking the Throne." Sing Wei: Accept the throne by virtue of holiness, and obey the fate of heaven.

古文：应帝期，于昭我文皇，历数承天序，龙飞自许昌。
现代文：顺天命，伟大是主皇，天道循序移，天子在注旦。
English: According to heaven's destiny, the great is the Lord Emperor, the heavenly path moves in sequence, and the Son of Heaven is pouring water.

古文：聪明昭四表，恩德动遐方。
现代文：聪明扬四境，恩德感远方。
English: Wisdom expands to the four corners of the earth, and a sense of benevolence extends far and wide.

古文：星辰为垂耀，日月为重光。
现代文：星辰光辉照，曰月显重光。
English: The stars shine brightly, the moon shines brightly.

古文：河洛吐符瑞，草木挺嘉祥。
现代文：回、渣出符瑞，草木现嘉祥。
English: Grasses and trees are in full bloom.

古文：麒麟步郊野，黄龙游津梁。
现代文：麒麟行郊野，黄龙游回梁。
English: Kirin went to the countryside, Huanglong swam back to Liang.

古文：白虎依山林，凤凰鸣高冈。
现代文：白虎栖山林，凤凰呜高冈。
English: White Tiger Forest, Phoenix Hill.

古文：考圆定篇籍，功配上古羲皇。
现代文：考定图与籍，功比上古薹皇。
English: Judging by the chart and his family name, his performance is better than that of the last emperor.

古文：羲皇无遗文，仁圣相因循。运期三千岁，一生圣明君。
现代文：盏皇无律文，仁圣相遵循天命三千年，出一圣明君。
English: There is no rule for the emperor, and the benevolent saint follows the three-thousand-year-old destiny, and a saintly king emerges.

古文：尧授舜万国，万国皆附亲。
现代文：尧传舜天下，万国皆附亲。
English: It is said that all over the world, all nations are attached to relatives.

古文：四门为穆穆，教化常如神。
现代文：四方都恭敬，教化如天神。
English: All four sides are respectful, educated like gods.

古文：大魏兴盛，与之为邻。
现代文：左魏兴盛，与爱相邻。
English: Zuo Wei prospered, next to love.

古文：右《应帝期曲》凡二十六句，其一句三字，二句四字，二十二句句五字，一句六字。
现代文：上为《应帝期曲》共二十六句，其中一句三字，二句每句四字，二十二句每句五字，句六字。
English: The above is a total of twenty-six sentences of "The Emperor's Requiem," of which one sentence has three words, two sentences have four words each, twenty-two sentences have five words each, and one sentence has six words.

古文：汉第十一曲《芳树》，今第十一曲《邕熙》，言魏氏临其国，君臣邕穆，庶绩咸熙也。
现代文：汉第十一曲《芳树》，今第十一曲《邕熙》，歌咏秀啦治理国家，君臣和睦同心，百业都兴盛。
English: The 11th song of the Han Dynasty, "Fangshu," and the 11th song of the present day, "Jingxi," sing the song of "governing the country, the monarchs and the ministers are in harmony, and all the undertakings are prosperous."

古文：邕熙，君臣合德，天下治。
现代文：和乐，君臣同心，天下治。
English: Harmony, unity of lords and ministers, the rule of the world.

古文：隆帝道，获瑞宝，颂声并作，洋洋浩浩。
现代文：帝业隆，获瑞宝，颂声齐起，洋洋浩浩。
English: Emperor Ye Long, won the Rui Bao, the cheers went up, Yang Yang Ho Ho.

古文：吉日临高堂，置酒列名倡。
现代文：吉日聚高堂，置酒名伎唱。
English: On auspicious days, people gather at the high school hall to drink sake and sing.

古文：歌声一何纡余，杂笙簧。
现代文：歌声迂曲绕梁，伴笙簧。
English: The song twists and turns around the beam, accompanied by the reed.

古文：八音谐，有纪纲。
现代文：八音谐，合纪纲。
English: Eight-tone harmony, complete with syllabus.

古文：子孙永建万国，寿考乐无央。
现代文：子孙永掌万国，长寿乐无央
English: The descendants of the eternal palm all over the world, longevity without any central

古文：右《邕熙曲》凡十五句，其六句句三字，三句句四字，一句二字，三句句五字，二句句六字。
现代文：上为《邕熙曲》共十五句，其中六句每句三字，三句每句四字，一句二字，三句每句五字。二句每句六字。
English: The above is a total of fifteen sentences of "Song of Reverence," of which six sentences have three words each, three sentences have four words each, one sentence has two words, three sentences have five words each, and two sentences have six words each.

古文：汉第十二曲《上邪》，今第十二曲《太和》，言魏明帝继体承统，太和改元，德泽流布。
现代文：选第十二曲《上邪》，今第十二曲《太和》，歌咏魏明帝继承帝位，改元太和，恩德流布天下。
English: Select the twelfth song "Supreme Evil," now the twelfth song "Great Harmony," sing Wei Mingdi's succession to the throne, change the era to Great Harmony, and spread Ende around the world.

古文：灾蝗一时为绝息，上天时雨露。
现代文：在元年，皇帝登阼，圣且仁，恩德广流布。天灾虫害全平息，及时降雨露。
English: In the first year of the year, the emperor ascended to the throne, the holy and benevolent and benevolent were widely spread. Natural disasters and insect pests completely subsided, and timely rainfall and dew.

古文：五谷溢田畴，四民相率遵轨度。
现代文：五谷满田野，百姓相率遵法度。
English: The valley is full of fields, and the people are more law-abiding.

古文：事务澄清，天下狱讼察以情。
现代文：施政廉明，决狱断案查实情。
English: The administration of justice is honest, and the fact-finding of the case of prison sentence is carried out.

古文：元首明，魏家如此，那得不太平？
现代文：君圣明，魏家如此，哪能不入平?
English: Jun Shengming, the Wei family is like this, how can it not be leveled?

古文：右《太和曲》凡十三句，其二句句三字，五句句五字，三句句四字，三句句七字。
现代文：上为《太和曲》共十三句，其中二句每句三字，五句每句五字，三句每句四字，三句每句七字。
English: The above is "Taihequ" with a total of thirteen sentences, of which two sentences have three words each, five sentences have five words each, three sentences have four words each, and three sentences have seven words each.

古文：晋鼓吹歌曲二十二篇，傅玄作：《灵之祥》，古《硃鹭行》。
现代文：晋鼓吹歌曲二十二篇：傅玄作《灵之祥》，古《朱鹭行》。
English: Jin preached 22 songs: Fu Xuan's "Lingzixiang" and the ancient "Zhu Xi Xing."

古文：《灵之祥》，言宣皇帝之佐魏，犹虞舜之事尧也。
现代文：《灵之祥》，歌咏宣皇萤辅佐魏，如同卢爱辅佐尧。
English: In "Lingzixiang" (The Blessing of the Soul), the role of Emperor Xuan is played by Gu Fu Fu Zi Wei, just like Lu Ai Fu Zi Wei.

古文：既有石瑞之征，又能用武以诛孟度之逆命也。灵之祥，石瑞章。
现代文：石上已经出现置将取代魏的瑞征，宣皇帝又能用兵诛讨违命叛逆的孟度。神降吉祥，石瑞彰。
English: On the stone, Rui Zheng, who will replace Wei, has already appeared, and Emperor Xuan can use soldiers to punish the disobedient and rebellious Meng Du. God's descent is auspicious, stone Rui Zhang.

古文：旌金德，出西方。
现代文：旌扬金德，在西方。
English: Yang Jinde, from the west.

古文：天命降，授宣皇。
现代文：天命降，给宣皇。
English: It is decreed by Heaven to proclaim the Emperor.

古文：应期运，时龙骧。
现代文：顺天命，龙飞扬。
English: Due to the timing of the turbulent world, the dragon flies in one generation.

古文：继大舜，佐陶唐。
现代文：继承舜，辅佐嘘。
English: Sanctity inherits great power, such as Gong Fu Suo Tao Tang.

古文：赞武文，建帝纲。
现代文：帮助茎和塞，创建帝纲。
English: Auxiliary WeiWuWeiWen, the establishment of the imperial discipline system.

古文：孟氏叛，据南疆。
现代文：孟座叛，据南疆。
English: The Meng family rebelled against fate, and our southern Xinjiang became the epicenter.

古文：追有扈，乱五常。
现代文：追效宜尘，扰乱五常。
English: Following the ancients, there is confusion, confusion, confusion, confusion, confusion.

古文：吴寇劲，蜀虏强。
现代文：呈寇势大，蜀虏强。
English: The influence of Kossuth was great, and that of Shu Rui was strong.

古文：交誓盟，连遐荒。
现代文：订立盟约，勾结遐荒。
English: Mutual friendship and alliance, connecting the East and the West.

古文：宣赫怒，奋鹰扬。
现代文：宣皇怒，率军如鹰扬。
English: Emperor Xuan Rong was furious, and his power was like that of an eagle.

古文：震乾威，耀电光。
现代文：天威震，用兵如电光。
English: The sky is so powerful that the use of soldiers is like lightning.

古文：陵九天，陷石城。枭逆命，拯有生。
现代文：势凌九天，攻下互越，戮叛逆，救生霞。
English: For nine days, the situation was tense, with mutual conquest, rebellion, and rescue.

古文：万国安，四海宁。
现代文：万国安定，天下宁。
English: All countries are stable and the four seas are tranquil.

古文：《宣受命》，古《思悲翁行》。
现代文：《宣受命》，古《思悲翁行》。
English: "The Mandate of Heaven" and the ancient "Path of Sorrow."

古文：《宣受命》，言宣皇帝御诸葛亮，养威重，运神兵，亮震怖而死。
现代文：《宣受命》，歌咏宣皇帝抵御诸葛亮，蓄势而发，调度神兵，诸葛亮惊恐而死。
English: In "Announcing the Order," Emperor Guo Xuan resists Zhuge Liang, prepares to attack, dispatches divine soldiers, and Zhuge Liang dies of fright.

古文：宣受命，应天机。
现代文：宣帝受命，把握天机。
English: Emperor Xuan was ordered to seize the opportunity.

古文：风云时动，神龙飞。
现代文：风云涌动，神龙飞。
English: When the storm is raging, the dragon is flying.

古文：御葛亮，镇雍凉。
现代文：抵御诸葛亮，坐镇雍和凉。
English: Resist Zhuge Liang and enjoy the peace and quiet.

古文：边境安，民夷康。
现代文：边境安定，百姓安康。
English: The border is stable and the people are healthy.

古文：务节事，勤定倾。
现代文：政务从简，扶危定倾。
English: Concentrate on moderation, diligently lean to the side.

古文：览英雄，保持盈。
现代文：招揽英雄，常保人才盈。
English: Recruit heroes, and the number of regular employees will increase.

古文：渊穆穆，赫明明。
现代文：仪容沉静和美，显耀赫赫威名。
English: Her appearance is calm and beautiful, and she shines with a great reputation.

古文：冲而泰，天之经。
现代文：谦和而宽舒，顺应天道民情。
English: Modesty brings peace, this is the law of nature.

古文：养威重，运神兵。
现代文：蓄势而发，调度神兵。
English: The ordinary day is dignified, and the divine soldiers are sent at the right time.

古文：亮乃震死，平下宁。
现代文：诸葛亮惊恐而死，天下安宁。
English: Zhuge Liang died of fright, and the world was at peace.

古文：《征辽东》、古《艾而张行》。
现代文：《征辽东》，古《艾而张行》。
English: "The Conquest of Liaodong" and the ancient "Ai and Zhangxing."

古文：《征辽东》，言宣皇帝陵大海之表，讨灭公孙渊而枭其首也。
现代文：《征辽东》，歌咏宣皇帝率兵直到海边，征讨并消灭公孙渊，斩下他的首级。
English: In "The Conquest of Liaodong," Emperor Go-Shan Xuan led an army all the way to the seashore to conquer and exterminate Gongsun Yuan and cut off his head.

古文：征辽东，敌失据，威灵迈日域。渊既授首，群逆破胆，咸震怖。
现代文：征伐辽东，敌人失据。威灵震东域，公孙渊被斩首，叛贼吓破胆，都惊慌恐怖。
English: Conquest of Liaodong, the enemy is out of control. Weiling earthquake in the eastern region, Gongsun Yuan was beheaded, the traitors were scared, they were panicked and terrified.

古文：朔北响应，海表景附。
现代文：朔北唯命是从，海外亲近归附。
English: The north of the country is responding, and the sea level is rising like a shadow.

古文：武功赫赫，德云布。
现代文：武功赫赫，恩德如云布。
English: Wu gong shines brightly, and virtue shines like a cloud.

古文：《宣辅政》，古《上之回行》：《宣辅政》，言宣皇帝圣道深远，拨乱反正，网罗文武之才，以定二仪之序也。
现代文：《宣辅政》，古《上之回行》。《宣辅政》，歌咏宣皇帝有超乎寻常的圣智，谋虑深远，拨乱反正，收罗文武人才，安定天下。
English: "Xuan Yuanzheng," ancient "The Return of the Ancients." "Xuan Yuanzheng," the Song Dynasty Emperor Xuan had extraordinary wisdom, far-sightedness, set things right, gathered literary and military talents, and stabilized the world.

古文：宣皇辅政，圣列深。
现代文：宣皇辅政，功业广而深。
English: His work of proclaiming the emperor and supporting the government is extensive and profound.

古文：拨乱反正，从天心。网罗文武才，慎厥所生。
现代文：拨乱反正，顺应天，收罗文武人才，注重培养子女。
English: We should set things right, conform to the times, recruit literati and martial arts talents, and pay attention to the training of children.

古文：所生贤，遗教施，安上治民，化风移。
现代文：子女贤，教化施，安定朝廷治百姓，教化可使风俗移。
English: Children are virtuous, education is beneficial, a stable imperial court governs the people, and education can lead to the transfer of customs.

古文：肇创帝基，洪业垂。
现代文：初创帝业，大业永垂。
English: Hongye will be remembered forever for his contribution to the founding of the Imperial Foundation.

古文：于铄明明，时赫戏。
现代文：功德卓著，威名驰。
English: Shine bright, shine bright, shine bright.

古文：功济万世，定二仪。
现代文：功传万代，定天地。
English: Meritorious deeds can save the world forever, and sufficient deeds determine the world.

古文：定二仪，云泽雨施，海外风驰。
现代文：安定天地，润泽天下如云雨施，教化海外如风驰。
English: Heaven and earth are stable, the world is well-watered, and overseas enlightenment is like the wind.

古文：《时运多难》，古《拥离行》：《时运》，言宣皇帝致讨吴方，有征无战也。
现代文：《时运多难》，古《拥离行》。《时运》，歌咏宣皇帝讨伐吴国，不战而胜。
English: "Difficult Times," ancient "Embracing and Departing." "Time," Emperor Go-Shan Xuan fought against the State of Wu and won without a fight.

古文：时运多难，道教痡。
现代文：时运多难，教化未广布。
English: The times are hard, and the teachings are resisted.

古文：天地变化，有盈虚。
现代文：天地变化，有盈有虚。
English: The heavens and the earth are subject to many changes, and there are both positive and negative aspects.

古文：蠢尔吴蛮，虎视江湖。
现代文：呈蛮蠢蠢动，虎视辽溯。
English: It was a pretty stupid move, and the tiger looked back.

古文：我皇赫斯，致天诛。
现代文：我皇赫然怒，替天行诛。
English: My emperor was furious, and I was ordered to carry out the divine command.

古文：有征无战，弭其图。
现代文：不战而胜，遏止其凶图。
English: If there is conscription but no war, the plan is to quell the unrest and put an end to it.

古文：天威横被，震东隅。
现代文：天威行天下，震东隅。
English: As the sun rises, the whole world shakes.

古文：《景龙飞》，古《战城南行》。
现代文：《景龙飞》，古《战城南行》。
English: "Jing Longfei" and the ancient "Southern Campaign."

古文：《景龙飞》，言景帝克明威教，赏从夷逆，祚隆无疆，崇此洪基也。
现代文：《景龙飞》，歌咏景皇帝明威行教，从者受赏，叛者被诛，帝业前景无量国家曰昌盛。
English: "Jinglongfei" (The Flight of the Dragon), the Emperor Mingwei's teaching, followers are rewarded, rebels are executed, and the country is said to be prosperous.

古文：景龙飞，御天威。
现代文：景皇龙飞，行天威。
English: The dragon soars to harness the power of heaven.

古文：聪鉴玄发，动与神明协机。
现代文：明察玄深，每每符协天机。
English: A clear observation of the profound, a celestial machine for each chord.

古文：从之者显，逆之者灭夷。
现代文：顺从者显赫，叛逆者诛夷。
English: Those who follow it will be rewarded, and those who go against it will be destroyed.

古文：文教敷，武功巍。
现代文：教化广布，武功巍巍。
English: The teaching of ceremonial music has become commonplace, and martial arts have become prominent.

古文：普被四海，万邦望风，莫不来绥。
现代文：广施四海，万国望风降，没有一个不归依。
English: Wendebu and the four seas, all countries look forward to the wind and shadow, and there is no turning back to follow.

古文：圣德潜断，先天弗违。弗违祥，享世永长。猛以致宽，道化光。
现代文：皇上圣明作决断，天意不违不违天意，享国久长宽猛相济，教化为国增光。
English: Emperor Shengming made a decision, the will of heaven does not go against the will of heaven, the country has long been prosperous and prosperous, and enlightenment has added glory to the country.

古文：赫明明，祚隆无疆。
现代文：威名显赫，帝业兴隆永无疆。
English: I am Emperor He He Mingming, Emperor Ke Xinglong without borders.

古文：帝绩惟期，有命既集，崇此洪基。《平玉衡》，古《巫山高行》。
现代文：帝业自有机运，天命既来，要弘大帝王业基。《平玉衡》，古《巫山高行》。
English: Imperial succession has been in motion since time immemorial, and it is the destiny of heaven to promote the great Emperor Yeji. "Pingyu Heng," the ancient "Wushan Gao Xing."

古文：《平玉衡》，言景皇帝一万国之殊风，齐四海之乖心，礼贤养士，而纂洪业也。
现代文：《平玉衡》，歌唱景皂帝统一天下的不同风俗，整肃四海的乖戾之心，礼贤养士，继承大业。
English: "Ping Yuheng" sings of the Emperor Jing Soap unifying the different customs of the day, purifying the restless hearts of the four seas, nurturing the virtuous, and inheriting the great cause.

古文：平玉衡，纠奸回。
现代文：平正玉衡，矫正奸回。
English: The foundation of the child is flat and balanced, and Qi Zheng rectifies and reverses.

古文：万国殊风，四海乖。
现代文：万国风俗不同，四海人心乖违。
English: All countries have different customs, and the four seas are more divergent.

古文：礼贤养士，羁御英雄思心齐。
现代文：礼贤善士，笼络英雄要心齐。
English: The virtuous and the virtuous, the hero and the heroine should be united.

古文：纂成洪业，崇皇阶。
现代文：继承光大帝业，兴隆皇业基。
English: He succeeded Emperor Guangda, and Emperor Yeji flourished.

古文：品物咸亨，圣敬日跻。
现代文：万物部亨达，圣德曰曰跻。
English: May all the people enjoy peace and tranquility, and may the sacred light of the rising sun be respected.

古文：聪鉴尽下情，明明综天机。
现代文：聪睿察下情，机敏握天机。
English: He is astute and intelligent, knows the situation, and carefully observes the subtleties of the universe.

古文：《文皇统百揆》，古《上陵行》。
现代文：《文皇统百揆》，古《上陵行》。
English: "Wenhuangtongbaiyu" and the ancient "Jangling Tombs."

古文：《百揆》，言文皇帝始统百揆，用人有序，以敷泰平之化也。
现代文：《百揆》，歌咏文皇帝统领百官，用人有顺序，任用百官广施教化，天下太平。
English: In "The Hundred Regalia," Emperor Go-Shun-Wen commands a hundred officials, employs people in order, appoints a hundred officials to teach widely, and the world is at peace.

古文：文皇统百揆，继天理万方。
现代文：文皇统百官，秉承天意治四方。
English: The Emperor's general policy is one hundred and one, and it will be carried out in all directions in accordance with Heaven's order.

古文：武将镇四隅，英佐盈朝堂。
现代文：武将镇天下，英才辅佐满朝堂。
English: Generals rule the world, and eminent generals support the imperial court.

古文：谋言协秋兰，清风发其芳。
现代文：进言似秋兰，清风扬芳香。
English: The words are like autumn leaves, and the fresh breeze is fragrant.

古文：洪泽所渐润，砾石为珪璋。
现代文：恩泽广滋润，砂砾变珪璋。
English: Rainwater gradually gathers into a torrent, and gravel grinds into chaff.

古文：大道侔五帝，盛德逾三王。
现代文：道义齐五帝，盛德超三乇。
English: The avenue has been used by five emperors and more than three emperors.

古文：咸光大，上参天与地，至化无内外。
现代文：德义都光大，上齐天和地，教化普施无内外。
English: The salty light is great, the light is so bright that it can be seen from all over the world, and there is no popularization of enlightenment inside or outside.

古文：无内外，六合并康乂。
现代文：无内外，天下皆康泰。
English: There is no inside or outside, and the six heavens and six earths are unified and stable.

古文：并康乂，遘兹嘉会。
现代文：皆康泰，适逢盛世嘉会。
English: And Anzhi, Manchurian Literature and Martial Arts met with accolades.

古文：在昔羲与农，大晋德斯迈。
现代文：古有伏羲与神农，大晋治道已超迈。
English: In the past, there were Fuxi and Shennong, and Dajin Shengde and Yue Yue.

古文：镇征及诸州，为蕃卫。
现代文：政令布州郡，州郡为藩卫。
English: The government decreed that Buzhou County, Zhou County would be the garrison.

古文：功济四海，洪烈流万世。
现代文：功德遍四海，伟业传万代。
English: Great achievements and great deeds benefit the four seas, and virtuous deeds and glorious deeds will flow for all eternity.

古文：《因时运》，古《将进酒行》。
现代文：《因时运》，古《将进酒行》。
English: "Due to bad luck," ancient "will go into the wine line."

古文：《因时运》，言文皇帝因时运变，圣谋潜施，解长蛇之交，离群桀之党，以武济文，审其大计，以迈其德也。
现代文：《因时运》，歌咏塞皂壶顺应时世变化，谋虑英明作决断，瓦解长蛇的勾结，离析群凶的结党，用武功辅助文治，安定大局，广行德政。
English: In "Due to the Fortune of the Times," Guo Gan Soap Pot conforms to the changes of the times and the world, makes wise decisions through deliberation, disrupts the collusion of long snakes, separates the formation of vicious parties, uses martial arts to assist civil governance, stabilizes the overall situation, and pursues a wide range of ethical policies.

古文：因时运，圣策施。
现代文：顺应时势，英明决策得实施。
English: Due to the change of time, the conspiracy was carried out secretly.

古文：长蛇交解，群桀离。
现代文：长蛇勾结瓦解，群凶崩离。
English: The party that resolves long-standing friendships by force and breaks away from the crowd.

古文：势穷奔吴，虎骑厉。
现代文：势穷逃奔呈，精锐骑兵攻势厉。
English: The poor fled, the elite cavalry charged.

古文：惟武进，审大计。
现代文：推行武功，定大势。
English: However, as long as the military side can advance, the grand scheme of the trial will be successful.

古文：时迈其德，清一世。
现代文：广行德政，廓清一世。
English: Strive to be virtuous at all times, and live a life of purity.

古文：《惟庸蜀》，古《有所思行》。
现代文：《惟庸蜀》，古《有所思行》。
English: "Buyeongshu" and the ancient "Thoughtful Action."

古文：《惟庸蜀》，言文皇帝既平万乘之蜀，封建万国，复五等之爵也。
现代文：《惟庸蜀》，歌咏文皇帝平定自称为帝的蜀，封邦建国，恢复五等之爵。
English: In "Were Yong Shu," Emperor Gaozhenwen subdued the self-proclaimed Emperor Shu, founded a feudal state, and restored the title of the Fifth Rank.

古文：惟庸蜀，僭号天一隅。
现代文：在庸蜀，僭称帝号占一隅。
English: Shu, the ancient kingdom of the Yangtze River in ancient times, was called "the corner of heaven" in Yunnan.

古文：刘备逆帝命，禅亮承其余。
现代文：刘备违逆皇帝命，刘惮、诸葛亮依然走的是违命途。
English: Liu Bei had no choice but to go against the will of heaven, while Liu Shu and Zhuge Cheng led the rest.

古文：拥众数十万，窥隙乘我虚。
现代文：拥兵数十万，窥伺攻我虚。
English: On the one hand, there are hundreds of thousands of supporters, and they take advantage of the gap to spy on me.

古文：驿骑进羽檄，天下不遑居。
现代文：驿骑传急报，天下不安居。
English: A good horse is like a flying feather, the people of the world are restless.

古文：姜维屡寇边，陇上为荒墟。
现代文：姜维屡进犯，陇上变荒墟。
English: Jiang Wei's repeated attacks turned the city into a wasteland.

古文：文皇愍斯民，历世受罪辜。
现代文：文皇怜悯百姓，世代含辛茹苦。
English: Emperor Wen showed his compassion to the people and suffered the consequences of his actions.

古文：外谟蕃屏臣，内谋众士夫。
现代文：外有藩臣谋，内靠士大夫。
English: Outside, there were retainers of the domain, but inside, there were shidafu.

古文：爪牙应指授，腹心献良图。
现代文：武将听指挥，心腹献良图。
English: The military commander listens to the command and devises a good plan.

古文：良图协成文，大兴百万军。
现代文：谋划变军令，大兴百万军。
English: Jia Mu Liangtu co-authored the document, and Emperor Wen greatly promoted the million-man army.

古文：雷鼓震地起，猛势陵浮云。
现代文：鼓声如雷震，猛势气凌云。
English: The sound of thunder and drums shook the earth. It was as powerful as the swirling clouds.

古文：逋虏畏天诛，面缚造垒门。
现代文：逃虏畏天诛，自缚投降到营门。
English: The Shurukus fled in fear of Heaven, and the Shurukus were chained at the camp gate.

古文：万里同风教，逆命称妾臣。
现代文：天下统一受教化，叛逆投降自称臣。
English: Thousands of miles of clear sky are the same as the teaching of customs.

古文：光建五等，纪纲天人。
现代文：重建五等爵，顺应天道治理人。
English: Rebuild the five peerages, conform to the heavenly governance.

古文：《天序》，古《芳树行》。
现代文：《天序》，古《芳树行》。
English: "Heavenly Order" and the ancient "Fang Shu Xing."

古文：《天序》，言圣皇应历受禅，弘济大化，用人各尽其才也。
现代文：《天序》，歌咏圣皇顺应天命，接受禅让，广救百姓，化育万物，用人各尽其才。
English: According to the "Heavenly Order," the Holy Emperor Guanzhong obeyed the Mandate of Heaven, accepted Zen, saved the people, transformed and nurtured all things, and employed people to the best of their abilities.

古文：天序，应历受禅，承灵祜。
现代文：上天作安排，顺应天命受惮为帝，接受神降福祜。
English: The heavens are orderly, the emperor ascends to the throne as ordered by the heavens, and prosperity is bestowed by the spirit.

古文：御群龙，勒螭虎。
现代文：驾驭群龙，驯服螭虎。
English: Control the dragons and tame the tigers.

古文：弘济大化，英俊作辅。
现代文：广济天下，化育万物，英才作辅。
English: To enrich the world, nurture all things, and be assisted by talent.

古文：明明统万机，赫赫镇四方。
现代文：圣明之君统天下，威名赫赫镇四方。
English: The Lord of the Sacred Light will rule the world, and the town of Hehe will become famous in all directions.

古文：咎由稷契之畴，协兰芳。
现代文：丝逊扰望同等辈，协助理国留芳名。
English: Sesson disturbed his peers and helped Li Guo to stay famous.

古文：礼王臣，覆兆民。
现代文：礼待朝中臣，庇护天下民。
English: The prince of virtue, the benevolent ruler of a billion people.

古文：化之如天与地，谁敢爱其身。
现代文：化育万物如天地，谁敢顾惜身。
English: If you nurture all things as if they were heaven and earth, who would dare to spare his own life?

古文：《大晋承运期》，古《上邪行》。
现代文：《大晋承运期》，古《上邪行》。
English: "Dajin Transportation Period" and the ancient "Supreme Evil Deeds."

古文：《大晋承运期》，言圣皇应箓受图，化象神明也。
现代文：《大晋承运期》，歌咏圣皇顺应天命，登上帝位，教化施行，有如神明。
English: In "Dajin's Carrying-on Period," the holy emperor Gautama obeys his heavenly destiny, ascends to the throne of God, and carries out enlightenment, just like a god.

古文：大晋承运期，德隆圣皇。
现代文：大置顺天命，德隆在圣皇。
English: During the period of the Great Jin Dynasty inheriting the heavenly fortune, My Emperor Saint Ming Delong was born.

古文：时清晏，白日垂光。
现代文：时世清明天下安，普受恩泽传芳香。
English: At four o'clock, the sky is clear and cloudless, and the sky is said to be overcast.

古文：庆箓图，陟帝位，继天正玉衡，化行象神明。
现代文：应天命，登帝位，顺承天命正玉衡，教化施行如神明。
English: He ascended to the throne in accordance with God's will. He followed God's will to the letter, and carried out reformation like a god.

古文：至哉道隆虞与唐。
现代文：德盛高过虞与唐。
English: De Sheng Gao was superior to Yu and Tang.

古文：元首敷洪化，百僚股肱并忠良，民大康。
现代文：明君施教化，百官辅佐皆忠良，百姓享安康。
English: The Ming Emperor was a disciplinarian, all the officials and assistants were loyal, and the people enjoyed good health.

古文：隆隆赫赫，福祚盈无疆。
现代文：兴隆显赫，福祚永无疆。
English: Prosperous and illustrious, Fortune is boundless.

古文：《金灵运》，古《君马黄行》。
现代文：《金灵运》，古《君马黄行》。
English: "Jinling Yun," ancient "Junma Huang Xing."

古文：《灵运》，言圣皇践阼，致敬宗庙，而孝道施于天下也。
现代文：《金灵运》，歌咏圣皇登上帝位，礼敬宗庙，孝道在天下广为推行。
English: "Jinlingyun" (The Fortune of the Golden Bough), the enthronement of the Holy Emperor in the Song of Songs, the worship of the ancestral temple, and the practice of filial piety have been widely promoted throughout the world.

古文：金灵运，天符发。圣征见，参日月。
现代文：金德当运，天命已发圣人出世征兆现，功德比曰月。
English: Kindness is a blessing, destiny has sent a saint into the world, and merit is better than the moon.

古文：惟我皇，体神圣。
现代文：我圣皇，禀性神圣。
English: However, I, the Great Emperor Jin, was born with a sacred body.

古文：受魏禅，应天命。
现代文：受魏惮，顺应天命。
English: We should learn from the experience of the Wei and Zen dynasties, and carry forward the great mission of Heaven.

古文：皇之兴，灵有征。
现代文：圣皇兴起，神灵有征。
English: With the rise of the Holy Emperor, the gods are on the march.

古文：登大麓，御万乘。
现代文：登上帝位，驾御万乘。
English: His Eminence ascended to the throne, and gave the order to harness all things.

古文：皇之辅，若虓虎。
现代文：皇之辅臣，若城虎。
English: The emperor's aide-de-camp, a young tiger.

古文：爪牙奋，莫之御。
现代文：奋起爪牙，无人能御。
English: The minions advance in unison, and no one can resist.

古文：皇之佐，赞清化。
现代文：皇之辅佐，襄赞圣王行教化。
English: My emperor's vassal, Xiang Zan, is plotting to purify the country.

古文：百事理，万邦贺。
现代文：国事治理好，万邦皆庆贺。
English: The overnight success of Pepsi is a cause for universal celebration.

古文：神祗应，嘉瑞章。
现代文：神明应验，嘉瑞显彰。
English: In response, he was given the title of Jia Rui Zang.

古文：恭享祀，荐先皇。
现代文：恭敬享祀，祭献先王。
English: Respectfully enjoy worship, and offer sacrifice to the former king.

古文：乐时奏，磬管锵。
现代文：乐器齐奏，磬管锵锵。
English: Aristocratic music is played from time to time, and the cymbals chime.

古文：鼓渊渊，钟喤喤。
现代文：鼓声渊渊，钟声蝗。
English: Drums of the abyss, bells of the locusts.

古文：奠尊俎。实玉觞。
现代文：皂。放置樽俎，酌满玉觞。
English: Soap. Put the bottle on the stand and fill it with the soap.

古文：神歆飨，咸说康。
现代文：神灵歆飨，上下悦康。
English: God's will is done, and all is well.

古文：宴孙子，祐无疆。
现代文：保佑子孙，福祚无疆。
English: Bestow blessings on Ahn's children and grandchildren, and bless them forever.

古文：大孝烝烝，德教被万方。
现代文：孝道淳美，德化政教布万方。
English: The filial piety of Junmei, the virtues of politics and education are everywhere.

古文：《于穆我皇》，古《雉子行》。
现代文：《于穆我皇》，古《雉子行》。
English: "Yu Mu Yao" and the ancient "Chang Zi Xing."

古文：《于穆》，言圣皇受命，德合神明也。
现代文：《于穆》，歌咏圣皇承受天命，德政和神明相合。
English: In "Yu Mu," the Holy Emperor Gautama receives the Mandate of Heaven, and German politics and the gods coincide.

古文：于穆我皇，盛德圣且明。
现代文：我皇真盛美，德政圣且明。
English: How glorious is our emperor, how great is his virtue, how great is his wisdom.

古文：受禅君世，光济群生。
现代文：受惮君天下，恩德助苍生。
English: With the advent of Zen, benevolence will benefit the world.

古文：普天率土，莫不来庭。
现代文：普天之下四海内，个个称臣来朝廷。
English: Futenchizuchi soil, mo not come to the court.

古文：颙颙六合内，望风仰泰清。
现代文：天下百姓齐仰望，圣德英明天下宁。
English: There are millions of people in the world, and if you look for virtue, you will find it.

古文：万国雍雍，兴颂声。
现代文：万国雍睦，处处有颂声。
English: With the rise of the world and the rise of Xi'an, the eulogy of the eulogy arose.

古文：大化洽，地平而天成。
现代文：教化润泽万物，事事妥帖，地平而天成。
English: Yin and yang are in harmony, and the world is peaceful.

古文：七政齐，玉衡惟平。
现代文：七政循轨行，玉衡平。
English: Qingming was the most powerful of the seven dynasties, but Ping was the most powerful.

古文：峨峨佐命，济济群英。
现代文：贤德盛美佐命臣，人才济济有群英。
English: The vassal was solemn and dignified.

古文：夙夜乾乾，万机是经。
现代文：夙夜操劳求自强，天下万机皆经营。
English: Day and night, they work incessantly. The day-to-day management of all machines is a matter of course.

古文：虽治兴，匪荒宁。
现代文：虽然治道兴，兢兢业业不荒宁。
English: Although the national rejuvenation has been achieved, the world is far from peaceful.

古文：谦道光，冲不盈。
现代文：谦退之道扬，冲虚不骄盈。
English: The path of modesty is upward, the way of vanity is upward, the way of arrogance is downward.

古文：天地合德，日月同荣。
现代文：天地合德，曰月共荣。
English: Great virtue is compatible with heaven and earth, and the glory of the sun and the moon are the same.

古文：赫赫煌煌，耀幽冥。
现代文：显赫辉煌，光照幽冥。
English: Glorious and brilliant, illuminating the darkness.

古文：三光克从，于显天垂景星。
现代文：日月星三光也听命，赫赫上天现瑞星。
English: The Sun, Moon, and Stars also obeyed the order. Hehehehehehehehehehe.

古文：龙凤臻，甘露宵零。
现代文：龙凤来，甘露夜间零。
English: The divine dragon Lingfeng is salty, and the night-falling nectar drifts.

古文：肃神祗，祗上灵。
现代文：致敬神明，奉敬上灵。
English: Reverently respect the gods, solemnly pay homage to the upper spirit.

古文：万物欣戴，自天效其成。
现代文：万物欢欣，天助圣皇大功成。
English: All things are pleasing to Heaven, and they work together during the day.

古文：《仲春振旅》，古《圣人出行》。
现代文：《仲春振旅》，古《圣人出行》。
English: "Zhongchun zhen trip," ancient "saint travel."

古文：《仲春》，言大晋申文武之教，田猎以时也。
现代文：《仲春》，歌咏大晋开展文武教化，按时令进行田猎以练兵。
English: In "Mid-Spring," Utamaro Daishin teaches martial arts and conducts field hunting to train soldiers according to the schedule.

古文：仲春振旅，大致民，武教于时日新。
现代文：仲春练兵，召集人民，武教曰曰新。
English: Zhongchun trains soldiers, gathers people, and martial arts are new.

古文：师执提，工执鼓，坐作从，节有序，盛矣允文允武。
现代文：统帅掌提鼓，乐官执鼓，起坐听从鼓声，行动有节有序，德政齐备，有文有武。
English: The commander-in-chief holds the drum in his hands, the music officer holds the drum, sits up and listens to the drum, the action is orderly and orderly, the German government is ready, there is literature and martial arts.

古文：搜田表祃，申法誓，遂围禁，献社祭，允矣时明国制。
现代文：搜田立表貉祭，申明法令齐宣誓，完成围禁，献牲社祭，狩猎及时明法制。
English: Soda erected a table for the festival, affirmed the decree and swore an oath, completed the siege, sacrificed the social festival, and hunted in a timely manner.

古文：文武并用，礼之经，列车如战，大教明，古今谁能去兵。
现代文：文武并用，礼之精要不可轻。列车如临战，政教明。古今有谁能去兵?
English: Literature and martial arts are used together, and the essence of etiquette should not be taken lightly. Trains are like going to war, and politics and religion are clear. Who can go to the army in ancient and modern times?

古文：大晋继天，济群生。
现代文：大晋承天命，济助苍生、
English: Great Jin, following the destiny of heaven, will help our students.

古文：《夏苗田》，古《临高台行》。
现代文：《夏苗田》，古《临高台行》。
English: "Summer Field," ancient "Rinkodai Line."

古文：《苗田》，言大晋田狩从时，为苗除害也。
现代文：《苗田》，歌咏大晋狩猎遵从季节，如同为田中苗除害。
English: In "Seedlings," Utamaro Dajin hunts according to the season, as if he were eliminating pests for seedlings in the field.

古文：夏苗田，运将徂，军国异容，文武殊。乃命群吏，选车徒，辩其名号，赞契书。
现代文：夏天田猎，派兵将出，经邦治国显新容，文武礼仪殊命群吏，选车选徒，分别名号，大臣起草诏书。
English: In the summer, there will be hunting in the fields, soldiers will be sent out, the country will be governed by the state, the country will show a new face, the culture and military etiquette will have a special group of officials, the car will be selected, the disciples will be selected, the names will be separated, and the minister will draft the decree.

古文：王军启八门，行同上帝居。
现代文：王车从八门启程，行进有序，如同帝王居。
English: The soldiers of the king's army opened the eight gates, and my emperor marched like a god.

古文：时路建大麾，云旗翳紫虚。
现代文：玉辂车上树大旗，旌旗高耸掩紫虚。
English: A large flag is set up on the road, and the large flag is like a cloud covering the purple void.

古文：百官象其事，疾则疾，徐则徐。回衡旋轸，罢陈敝车。
现代文：百官仿天象，行进时而疾，时而徐，回马旋车收军回，解散战阵，收藏战车。
English: Hundreds of officials imitate celestial beings, march from time to time, from time to time, the carousel gathers the troops back, disbands the battle line, and collects the chariots.

古文：献禽享祠，烝烝配有虞。惟大晋，德参两仪，化云敷。《仲秋狝田》，古《远期行》。
现代文：进献猎物，祭祀宗庙，孝道厚美，名声齐有虞我大晋，德行齐天地，教化如云布。《仲秋独田》，古《远期行》。
English: Sacrificing prey, worshiping the ancestral temple, showing great filial piety, having the reputation of being a great priest, being virtuous, and being enlightened. "Mid-Autumn in Dokuda," ancient "Long Journey."

古文：《仲秋》，言大晋虽有文德，不废武事，从时以杀伐也。
现代文：《仲秋》，歌咏大晋既有文德，又不废武功，依从季节杀伐。
English: In "Mid-Autumn Festival," Utamaro Dajin has both virtue and virtue, and does not waste martial arts, and kills according to the season.

古文：仲秋狝田，金德常刚。
现代文：仲秋狮田，大晋气运昌。
English: Mid-autumn lion field, large Jin qi yunchang.

古文：凉风清且厉，凝露结为霜。
现代文：寒风凄清，白露结为霜。
English: The autumn wind is clear and cool, and the dew condenses into frost.

古文：白虎司辰，苍隼时鹰扬。
现代文：白虎司辰正当秋，苍隼应时而鹰扬。
English: The white tiger, Shichen, represents autumn, while the heron represents the eagle.

古文：鹰扬犹周尚父，从天以杀伐。
现代文：鹰扬如同周尚父，顺从天命行杀伐。
English: Eagle Yang, like Zhou Shang's father, obeys the fates and slaughters.

古文：春秋时叙，雷霆震威耀，进退由钲鼓。
现代文：四季事事顺，威如雷霆震耀，进退听釭鼓。
English: The four seasons are all in good condition, the power shines like thunder, and you can hear the gongs and drums as you go in and out.

古文：致禽祀惣，羽毛之用充军府。
现代文：擒获猎物祭宗庙，羽毛之物送军库。
English: The captured prey is sent to the ancestral temple for a festival, and the feathers are sent to the military depot.

古文：赫赫大晋德，芬烈陵三五，敷化以文，虽治不废武。
现代文：赫赫大晋德政施，英名超过三皇、五帝胜卜古，文治用教化，天下安定不废武。
English: He He Dajin was a great statesman, and his fame exceeded that of the Third Emperor and the Five Emperors. He used literature to enlighten the people, and promoted the stability of the country without abandoning the military.

古文：光宅四海，永享天之祜。
现代文：光焰照四海，永享天福祜。
English: Brightly stationed in the four seas, forever enjoying the blessings of heaven.

古文：《从天道》，古《石留行》。
现代文：《从天道》，古《石留行》。
English: "From Heaven to Earth" and the ancient "From Stone to Stone."

古文：《从天道》，言仲冬大阅，用武修文，大晋之德配天也。
现代文：《从天道》，歌咏仲冬大阅兵，施行武德，实行文治，大晋的盛德可与上天相比。
English: "From Heaven's Path," the mid-winter grand military parade of the Song Dynasty, the practice of martial arts, the practice of civil government, the grand virtue of the Great Jin Dynasty can be compared with heaven.

古文：从天道，握神契。
现代文：从天道，暗暗合神明。
English: From the heavenly way, secretly to the divine way.

古文：三时亦讲武事，冬大阅。
现代文：三季演习武事，冬季大阅兵。
English: Martial arts exercises are held in all three seasons, and a large military parade is held in winter.

古文：鸣镯振鼓铎，旌旗象虹霓。
现代文：击钮敲鼓铎，旌旗如虹霓。
English: Buttons beat drums, and flags wave like rainbows.

古文：文制其中，武不穷武，动军誓众，礼成而义举。
现代文：文治处理朝中事，武功决不滥用武。用兵先誓师，礼仪完备道义举。
English: In dealing with the affairs of the DPRK and China in a civilized manner, martial arts should never be abused. It is a moral duty to complete the etiquette before swearing in soldiers.

古文：三驱以崇仁，进止不失其序。兵卒练，将如虎。
现代文：遵从三驱古制，网开一面弘扬仁，进退有秩序兵卒部精悍，战将勇如虎。
English: Adhering to the ancient system of three drives, the net is opened to promote benevolence, the advance and retreat of the orderly soldiers are powerful, and the war will be as brave as a tiger.

古文：惟虓虎，气陵青云。
现代文：勇如械虎，士气凌云。
English: Courage like a mechanical tiger, morale soaring.

古文：解围三面，杀不殄群。
现代文：三面射猎不合围，射杀猎物不灭群。
English: Unwrap its three sides and kill it without reducing its herd.

古文：偃旌麾，班六军。
现代文：息鼓偃旗，班师收军。
English: The army was exhausted and exhausted, and the sixth army returned to the division.

古文：献享烝，修典文。嘉大晋，德配天。
现代文：进献猎物享宗庙，整饬典章条文，大晋美，盛德齐天。
English: The sacrificial prey enjoys the ancestral temple, the rectification of the provisions of the regulations, the great Jinmei, and the great virtue.

古文：禄报功，爵俟贤。飨燕乐，受兹百禄，嘉万年。
现代文：俸禄赏功臣，封爵赐贤人飨宴欢乐，受此百福，吉庆万年。
English: A stipend is awarded to a meritorious subject, a knighthood is bestowed on a wise man, and a banquet is held to celebrate his happiness.

古文：《唐尧》，《古务成行》，古曲亡。
现代文：《唐尧》，占《务成行》。占曲亡。
English: "Tang Zi," "Ming Cheng Xing," and "Zhan Qudu."

古文：《唐尧》，言圣皇陟帝位，德化光四表也。
现代文：《唐尧》，歌咏圣皇登上帝位，德政教化广施四方。
English: In "Tang Zi," the Holy Emperor Guo Zi ascended to the throne of God, and the German political and educational reform was carried out in all directions.

古文：唐尧咨务成，谦谦德所兴。
现代文：壁尧咨询务必，谦虚谨慎，美德由此而兴。
English: It is necessary to consult the niche, be modest and prudent, and virtue will emerge from this.

古文：积渐终光大，履霜致坚冰。神明道自然，河海犹可凝。舜禹统百揆，元凯以次升。
现代文：德行积累最终必光大，小心履霜自可越过危险踏上坚冰，神明之道是顺应自然，黄河大海也会冻凝，爱、禹统领百官时，丛元、八凯一类的贤臣依次晋升。
English: The accumulation of virtue will eventually shine brightly, the careful tread can cross the danger and step on the hard ice, the way of the gods is to conform to nature, the Yellow River and the sea will freeze, and when Ai and Yu lead a hundred officials, the sages such as Congyuan and Hakkai will be promoted in turn.

古文：禅让应天历，睿圣世相承。
现代文：顺应天命行禅让，英明圣主世代相承。
English: In accordance with the heavenly mandate to practice Zen, the wisdom of the sage has been passed down from generation to generation.

古文：我皇陟帝位，平衡正准绳。
现代文：我皇登上帝位，掌管国政正准绳。
English: I, the Emperor, enthroned on the throne of supreme dignity, forever hold the line of balance and rectitude.

古文：德化飞四表，祥气见其征。兴王坐俟旦，亡主恬自矜。
现代文：德政教化施四海，祥气显现种种瑞征兴国之君常忙碌达旦，亡国之君安闲享乐且自矜。
English: The teachings of the German government have spread far and wide, and the auspiciousness has manifested itself in various ways. The king of the conquering and rejuvenating country is often busy, and the king of the defeated country is enjoying leisure and enjoying himself.

古文：致远由近始，覆篑成山陵。
现代文：要到达远处必须从脚下起步，一筐筐土堆积就会成山陵。
English: From the recent beginning to the distant future, it has been covered with reeds and turned into a mountain.

古文：披图按先籍，有其证灵液。《玄云》，古《玄云行》，古曲亡。
现代文：披阅先代的图籍，可以证明确实有仙液。《玄云》，古《玄云行》。占曲。
English: Reading through the previous generation of picture books, it can be proved that there is indeed a fairy liquid. "Xuan Yun" and the ancient "Xuan Yun Xing."

古文：《玄云》，言圣皇用人，各尽其材也。
现代文：《玄云》，歌咏圣皂任用人，各尽其才。
English: In "Mystery Cloud," the appointed actors of "Song of Songs" each do their best.

古文：玄云起山岳，祥气万里会。
现代文：玄云从山岳飘起，祥瑞之气从四方来聚会。
English: Dark clouds float up from the mountains, and the auspicious atmosphere gathers from the four directions.

古文：龙飞何蜿蜿，凤翔何翙翙。昔在唐虞朝，时见青云际。
现代文：龙飞从容自得，凤翔雍容华贵从前在唐虞时代，龙凤常常出现在青云之际。
English: Dragon and phoenix fly with ease, phoenix soar with grace and splendour. In the Tang and Yu Dynasties, dragons and phoenixes often appeared at the time of Qingyun.

古文：今亲游方国，流光溢天外。
现代文：现在我亲自到四方游览古圣王的福泽洋溢中外。
English: Now I personally travel to all four corners of the globe to see how the ancient holy king's blessings have spread both at home and abroad.

古文：鹤鸣在后园，清音随风迈。
现代文：鹤在后园鸣，清音随风流逝。
English: The phoenix crane flies in the backyard, the clear sound is melodious with the wind.

古文：成汤隆显命，伊挚来如飞。
现代文：成汤顺天命而兴盛，伊挚来归附快如飞。
English: Cheng Tang Sheng Delong issued a command, and the wise men came flying.

古文：周文猎渭滨，遂载吕望归。
现代文：周文王在渭水之滨射猎，最终载着吕望同车归。
English: In addition, Genda hunted and hunted, and finally met Lü Wang.

古文：符合如影响，先天天弗违。
现代文：天命人事相符合有如影子和回声，先于天时行天道上天也不会怪罪。
English: The fates of men are like shadows and echoes, which precede the course of the heavens, and the heavens themselves are not to blame.

古文：辍耕总地纲，解褐衿天维。元功配二主，芬馨世所稀。
现代文：一个放弃耕作为圣王整顿政事，一个入朝为官调理朝廷的纲维大功可配祭二位圣主，品德芳馨世上稀。
English: One renounced farming as a holy king to rectify government affairs, one entered the imperial court as an official to adjust the imperial court, and his great achievements can be matched with the sacrifice of two saints, and his moral character is rare in the world.

古文：我皇叙群才，洪烈何巍巍。
现代文：我皇任用众英才，英才效忠功巍巍。
English: The Emperor's benevolence and virtue gathers the talents, and the King's career is booming.

古文：桓桓征四表，济济理万机。
现代文：武臣桓桓征四方，文臣济济理万机。
English: Great military might conquers the four directions, and great wealth brings about great economic opportunities.

古文：神化感无方，髦才盈帝畿。
现代文：神圣教化感八方，杰出人才盈京畿。
English: Enlightenment is like a god, there is no square, and only a good disciple can enter the kingdom of heaven.

古文：丕显惟昧旦，日新孔所咨。
现代文：日夜求圣明，曰新其德常谋咨。
English: Pray for enlightenment day and night, and say that the new way is always the best way.

古文：茂哉圣明德，日月同光辉。
现代文：圣明之德曰盛，可与日月同光辉。
English: The virtue of shenming is said to be prosperous and can shine with the sun and the moon.

古文：《伯益》，古《黄爵行》，古曲亡。
现代文：《伯益》，古《黄爵行》。古曲亡。
English: "Bo Yi," ancient "Huang Jue Xing." The death of ancient music.

古文：《伯益》，言赤乌衔书，有周以兴；今圣皇受命，神雀来也。
现代文：《伯益》，歌咏赤乌街书来，有周从此兴盛的典故，现在圣皇接受天命，神雀也来临。
English: In "Bo Yi" (Bo Yi), there is an allusion to Zhou's prosperity from this time onwards. Now that the Holy Emperor has accepted the Mandate of Heaven, the Divine Sparrow will also come.

古文：伯益佐舜禹，职掌山与川。
现代文：伯益佐舜、禹，掌管山与川。
English: Bo Yixu assisted Zou and Yu, and was in charge of Shanlin and Kawazawa.

古文：德侔十六相，思心入无间。
现代文：德比十六相，思虑密无间。
English: Its morality is in line with the Sixteen Aspects, and it is thought-provoking and uninterrupted.

古文：智理周万物，下知众鸟言。
现代文：才智出众理万物，能懂鸟语言。
English: Wisdom does not know all things, but wisdom knows the language of all birds.

古文：黄雀应清化，翔集何翩翩。
现代文：教化清明黄雀来，翔集飞翩翩。
English: The yellow chaffinch comes to enlighten and enlighten, and the cranes fly.

古文：和鸣栖庭树，徘徊云日间。
现代文：应和而鸣栖庭树，徘徊云曰间。
English: And the warblers perch on the top of the trees in the garden, and the storks soar high above the clouds.

古文：夏桀为无道，密网施山阿。
现代文：夏桀行无道，密纲施设在山阿。
English: In summer, there is no way to travel, and secret programs are set up in the mountains.

古文：酷祝振纤网，当柰黄雀何。
现代文：残酷诅咒收密纲，面对黄雀无奈何。
English: Cruel congratulation history collection fiber network, weak little yellow sparrow what.

古文：殷汤崇天德，去其三面罗。
现代文：殷汤弘扬上天德，开放三面去纲罗。
English: Benevolence exalts virtue, and compassion is the best of the three.

古文：逍遥群飞来，鸣声乃复和。
现代文：黄雀安闲群飞来，鸣声才又相应和。
English: Loose flocks of birds fly in, and the sound of their chirping is like the beginning of a new year.

古文：硃雀作南宿，凤皇统羽群。赤鸟衔书至，天命瑞周文。
现代文：南宿是朱雀，群乌随凤凰。赤乌衔书来，天降祥瑞给塞王。
English: Nanjuku is the Suzaku, and the blackbirds follow the phoenix. The redbirds come to the book, and the sky falls to the king of Sai.

古文：神雀今来游，为我受命君。
现代文：神雀今来游，就是为我受命君。
English: Today, the divine sparrow flies here and there, flying to do my bidding.

古文：嘉祥致天和，膏泽降青云。
现代文：嘉瑞预示天和顺，润泽百姓如雨云。
English: Kerry foreshadowed peace and prosperity, and the people of Yunze were like rain clouds.

古文：兰风发芳气，阖世同其芬。
现代文：兰香随着清风散，举世共芳芬。《钓竿》，古《钓竿行》。
English: The fragrance of orchids dissipates with the wind, creating a universal fragrance. "Fishing Rods," the ancient "Fishing Rods."

古文：《钓竿》，古《钓竿行》，《钓竿》，言圣皇德配尧、舜，又有吕望之佐以济大功致太平也。
现代文：汉《铙歌》二十二无《钓竿》。《钓竿》，歌咏圣皇仁德与尧、舜齐等，又有旦望之类的大臣辅佐，成就大业，实现天下太平。
English: Han Dynasty, "Yingge" 22, there is no "Fishing Rod." "Fishing Rod," the song of the Holy Emperor Rendez-vous with the dragonflies, dragonflies and so on, with the help of ministers such as Dangwang, has achieved great achievements and achieved world peace.

古文：钓竿何冉冉，甘饵芳且鲜。
现代文：钓竿冉冉垂，钓饵香又鲜。
English: The fishing rod is light and soft, and the bait is sweet and fresh.

古文：临川运思心，微纶沈九渊。
现代文：临水垂钓动思虑，细丝沉九渊。
English: Fishing close to the water, you have to think about it, and you will sink into the abyss.

古文：太公宝此术，乃在灵秘篇。
现代文：立公珍爱垂钓术，收进神奇奥秘篇。
English: Rikong cherished fishing techniques, collected into a magical mystery.

古文：机变随物移，精妙贯未然。
现代文：机变随形势，精妙预知事之前。
English: Stochastic strain from the material shift, with the intention of fine-tuning throughout.

古文：游鱼惊著钓，潜龙飞戾天。
现代文：游鱼受惊上鱼钩，潜龙高飞直冲天。
English: The swimming fish scatters at the touch of the hook, and the diving dragon flies up to the sky.

古文：戾天安所至，抚翼翔太清。
现代文：冲天至何处?振翅翔太清。
English: Where will you fly to? It's too clear to flap your wings.

古文：太清一何异，两仪出浑成。
现代文：太清真奇异，天地两仪浑然成。
English: Too much clarity makes no difference, the two instruments begin to separate and become one.

古文：玉衡正三辰，造化赋群形。
现代文：测天正定三辰位，造化赋予万物形。
English: Zhai Yu Heng Zheng Sanchen, the heavens and the earth create a group shape.

古文：退愿辅圣君，与神合其灵。
现代文：退愿辅圣君，与神合力显威灵。
English: Submission will strengthen the saint, and advance and retreat will be in harmony with the spirit of God.

古文：我君弘远略，天人不足并。
现代文：我君弘扬深远略，天人不足并。
English: Daishin Ikunohiro is a distant relative, but he is also a common name.

古文：天人初并时，昧昧何茫茫。
现代文：天人初并时，世上昧昧茫茫。
English: When God and man first met, the world was in a state of confusion.

古文：日月有征兆，文象兴二皇。
现代文：日月显征兆，天象预示兴二皇。
English: The sun and the moon showed signs, and the celestial phenomenon foreshadowed the rise of Emperor Xing.

古文：蚩尤乱生民，黄帝用兵征万方。
现代文：崖丝扰百姓，董壶用兵征万方。
English: The cliff disturbs the people, and Dong Jiu is recruiting soldiers in all directions.

古文：逮夏禹而德衰，三代不及虞与唐。
现代文：时至星禹德政衰，三代不及虞与唐。
English: As far as Xia Yu Sheng, the three generations are less than Yu and Tang.

古文：我皇圣德配尧舜，受禅即阼享天祥。
现代文：我皇圣德齐毫、舜，受惮登位享福祥。
English: I, the emperor, am endowed with the virtue of chivalry. I am honored to ascend to the throne and enjoy prosperity.

古文：率土蒙祐，靡不肃，庶事康。
现代文：率土之臣蒙福佑，无人不虔敬，百事康。
English: Led by the god of the soil, the coastal area is blessed with prosperity and prosperity.

古文：庶事康，穆穆明明。
现代文：百事康，美盛昌明。
English: All is well. Mumu is clearly my emperor.

古文：荷百禄，保无极，永泰平。
现代文：蒙受百福，久保万代，永太平。
English: If you receive a hundred blessings, you will be protected for all generations and live in eternal peace.

古文：吴鼓吹曲十二篇，韦昭造：《炎精缺》者，言汉室衰，武烈皇帝奋迅猛志，念在匡救，然而王迹始乎此也。
现代文：吴鼓吹曲十二篇：韦昭作《炎精缺》，歌咏汉室哀微，武烈皇帝壮志凌云，振奋而起，一心为匡扶朝廷，然而王业也由此开始。
English: Twelve pieces of Wu's propaganda music: Wei Zhao's "Flame is Shortage," the song of the Han family is sad, the martial emperor is ambitious, excited, and one-hearted to support the court, but the king's career also began from this.

古文：汉曲有《硃鹭》，此篇当之。
现代文：汉曲有《朱鹭》，这篇相当于汉《朱鹭曲》。
English: There is a "Zhu Xi" in Chinese classical music, which is equivalent to the Han "Zhu Xi Song."

古文：第一。
现代文：是第一篇。
English: It's the first one.

古文：炎精缺，汉道微。
现代文：炎精缺，汉室衰。
English: The flame is not enough, and the Chinese room is not enough.

古文：皇纲弛，政德违。
现代文：皇纲弛，政德乖。
English: The imperial system is weak, but politics and morality are strong.

古文：众奸炽，民罔依。
现代文：奸人盛，民无依。
English: The traitors prosper, the people are helpless.

古文：赫武烈，越龙飞。
现代文：武烈帝，正龙飞。
English: Emperor Wu, the dragon is flying.

古文：陟天衢，耀灵威。
现代文：登天街，耀灵威。
English: Climbing to the sky, shining.

古文：鸣雷鼓，抗电麾。
现代文：鼓如雷，扬旌麾。
English: The drums thunder and the music swells.

古文：抚乾衡，镇地机。
现代文：定天下，镇枢机。
English: It's all up to you, Cardinal Zhen.

古文：厉虎旅，骋熊罴。
现代文：振虎旅，骋雄师。
English: Zhenhu Brigade, Zhenxiong Division.

古文：发神听，吐英奇。
现代文：开神听，计英奇。
English: Listen carefully and you'll be amazed.

古文：张角破，边韩羁。
现代文：张角破，边韩服。
English: The cheeks are stretched, the sides of the hanbok are rolled up.

古文：宛颍平，南土绥。
现代文：宛颖平，南土绥。
English: Wan Yingping, Nan Tujing.

古文：神武章，渥泽施。
现代文：神武彰，恩泽施。
English: Jinwu Akira, Enzeshi.

古文：金声震，仁风驰。
现代文：金声震，仁德驰。
English: Jin Sheng Zhen, Rendez-Vous.

古文：显高门，启皇基。
现代文：显名门，启皇基。
English: The gate of fame, the foundation of emperors.

古文：统罔极，垂将来。
现代文：统无极，传未来。
English: Unimpeachable, passed on to the future.

古文：右《炎精缺曲》凡三十句，句三字。
现代文：上为《炎精缺曲》共三十句，每句三字。
English: The above is a total of thirty sentences, each sentence is three words.

古文：《汉之季》者，武烈皇帝悼汉之微，痛卓之乱，兴兵奋击，功盖海内也。汉曲有《曲悲翁》，此篇当之。
现代文：《汉之季》，歌咏武烈皇帝感伤漠室衰微，痛心董卓的叛乱，起兵奋击，功盖海内汉曲有《思悲翁》，这篇相当于漠《思悲翁曲》。
English: "Season of Han," the song of the Emperor Wu Rong is sentimental about the decline of the imperial palace, and is distressed by the rebellion of Dong Zhuo, who raised an army and fought hard. The most important Han song is "Pathetic," which is equivalent to the "Pathetic Song."

古文：第二。
现代文：是第二篇。
English: This is the second part.

古文：汉之季，董卓乱。
现代文：汉之末，董卓乱。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, Dong Zhuo ran amok.

古文：桓桓武烈，应时运。
现代文：桓桓武烈，顺时运。
English: Kan Kan Buretsu, good luck.

古文：义兵兴，云旗建。
现代文：义兵起，大旗建。
English: When the volunteer soldiers rise, the great banner is raised.

古文：厉六师，罗八陈。
现代文：誓六师，列八阵。
English: Six divisions, eight lines.

古文：飞鸣镝，接白刃。
现代文：呜镝飞，交白刃。
English: The vulture flies, the blade turns white.

古文：轻骑发，介士奋。
现代文：轻骑出，军士奋。
English: Ride out lightly, sergeant.

古文：丑虏震，使众散。
现代文：丑虏震，军众散。
English: Ugly troops tremble, the army is dispersed.

古文：劫汉主，迁西馆。
现代文：劫汉主，迁西馆英雄怒，元凶灭。
English: The robber lord of Han, the hero of the relocation of the West Pavilion, and the original villain were eliminated.

古文：雄豪怒，元恶偾。赫赫皇祖，功名闻。
现代文：赫赫皇祖，功名烈。
English: Emperor Hehe's ancestor, a man of great achievements.

古文：右《汉之季曲》凡二十句，其十八句句三字，二句句四字。
现代文：上马《汉之季曲》共二十句，其中十八句每句三字，二句每句四字。
English: Shangma's "Seasonal Music of Han" has a total of twenty sentences, of which eighteen sentences have three words each, and two sentences have four words each.

古文：《摅武师》者，言大皇帝卒武烈之业而奋征也。
现代文：《摅武师》，歌咏大皇帝完成武烈皇帝的大业而奋勇出征。
English: In "The Martial Artist," Emperor Go-Shirak completes the great cause of the warrior emperor and bravely goes to war.

古文：汉曲有《艾如张》，此篇当之。
现代文：漠曲有《艾如张》，这篇相当于汉《艾如张曲》。
English: "Ai Ruzhang" is a mute piece, which is equivalent to "Ai Ruzhang" of Han Dynasty.

古文：第三。
现代文：是第三篇。
English: This is the third part.

古文：摅武师，斩黄祖。
现代文：跃雄师，斩黄祖。
English: Yue Xiong Shi, behead Huang Zu.

古文：肃夷凶族，革平西夏。
现代文：肃平凶徒，革平西夏。
English: Criminals should be punished, and Western Xia should be reformed.

古文：炎炎大烈，震天下。
现代文：炎炎功烈，震天下。
English: He has made great achievements and shaken the world.

古文：右《摅武师曲》凡六句，其三句句三字，三句句四字。
现代文：上马《摅武师曲》共六句，其中三句每句三字，三句每句四字。
English: Shangma's "Song of the Warrior" has a total of six sentences, of which three sentences have three words each, and three sentences have four words each.

古文：《乌林》者，言曹操既破荆州，从流东下，欲来争锋。
现代文：《乌林》，歌咏曹操攻破荆州之后，顺流东下，想来与我一争高下。
English: In "Ulin," after Cao Cao's invasion of Jingzhou, he followed the eastward flow of the river and wanted to compete with me.

古文：大皇帝命将周瑜逆击之于乌林而破走也。
现代文：大皇帝命将领周瑜在乌拯迎击，击败赶走茎军。
English: The great emperor's general Zhou Yu met the attack in Wuzheng and defeated and drove away the stem army.

古文：汉曲有《上之回》，此篇当之。
现代文：选曲有《上之回》，这篇相当于汉《上之回曲》。
English: The selected piece is "Upper Return," which is equivalent to the Chinese "Upper Return."

古文：第四。
现代文：是第四篇。
English: It is the fourth chapter.

古文：曹操北伐，拔柳城。
现代文：曹操北伐，拔柳城。
English: Cao Cao's Northern Expedition, Bailu City.

古文：乘胜席卷，遂南征。
现代文：乘胜席卷，遂南征。
English: Sweeping to victory, the Southern Expedition began.

古文：刘氏不睦，八郡震惊。
现代文：刘氏不睦，八郡震惊。
English: The Liu family is not amicable, and the eight counties are shocked.

古文：众既降，操屠荆。
现代文：军已降，操屠荆州。
English: The army has fallen, and the slaughter of Jingzhou has begun.

古文：舟车十万，扬风声。
现代文：船车十万，扬风声。
English: A hundred thousand wagons, the wind is blowing.

古文：议者狐疑，虑无成。
现代文：议者狐疑，虑难成。
English: It is difficult for a doubter to succeed.

古文：赖我大皇，发圣明。
现代文：赖我大皇，发圣明。
English: By the grace of my great emperor, I declare a holy day.

古文：虎臣雄烈，周与程。
现代文：虎臣雄烈，周瑜与程普。
English: Tiger Chen, Zhou Yu and Cheng Pu.

古文：破操乌林，显章功名。
现代文：乌林破曹，显彰功名。
English: Ulin defeats Cao, distinguished service.

古文：右《伐乌林曲》凡十八句，其十句句四字，八句句三字。
现代文：上为《伐乌林曲》共十八句，其中十句每句四字，八句每句三字。
English: The above is a total of eighteen sentences of "Wu Linqu," of which ten sentences have four words each, and eight sentences have three words each.

古文：《秋风》者，言大皇帝说以使民，民忘其死。
现代文：《秋风》，歌咏大皇帝感化百姓然后役使他们，百姓忘却自己的生死。
English: In "Autumn Breeze," the great emperor Gautama inspires the people and then serves them, and the people forget their own life and death.

古文：汉曲有《拥离》，此篇当之。
现代文：汉曲有《拥离》，这篇相当于漠《拥离曲》。
English: There is a "Hugging Away" in Chinese classical music, which is equivalent to the "Hugging Away" in Western classical music.

古文：第五。
现代文：是第五篇。
English: It's the fifth.

古文：秋风扬沙尘，寒露沾衣裳。
现代文：秋风扬沙尘，寒露沾衣裳。
English: The autumn wind is blowing sand and dust, and cold dew is staining our clothes.

古文：角弓持弦急，鸠鸟化为鹰。
现代文：角弓弦拉繁，鸠乌变成鹰。
English: When the string of the horned bow is pulled, the cormorant turns into an eagle.

古文：边垂飞羽檄，寇贼侵界疆。
现代文：边地传羽檄，寇贼侵边疆。
English: Feathered cocoons spread along the border, and bandits invade the frontier.

古文：跨马披介胄，慷慨怀悲伤。
现代文：跨马披甲胄，慷慨情感伤。
English: Armor-plated straddle, generous emotional wound.

古文：辞亲向长路，安知存与亡。
现代文：辞家赴远地，怎知存与亡。
English: If you leave home and go to a faraway place, how can you know whether you will live or die?

古文：穷达固有分，志士思立功。
现代文：穷达本有命，壮士思立功。
English: The poor have life, the strong think of merit.

古文：邀之战场，身逸获高赏，身没有遗封。
现代文：建功战场，身全获高赏，身死有赠封。
English: He was highly commended for his service on the battlefield, and was awarded a posthumous medal.

古文：右《秋风曲》凡十五句，其十四句句五字，一句四字。
现代文：上为《秋风曲》共十五句，其中十四句每句五字，一句四字。
English: "Autumn Wind" has a total of fifteen sentences, of which fourteen sentences have five words each, and one sentence has four words.

古文：《克皖城》者，言曹操志图并兼，而令硃光为庐江太守。
现代文：《克皖城》，歌咏蔓理存有兼并之心，命朱光为龃太守。
English: In "Keshen City," there is a desire for annexation in the lyrics, and Zhu Guang is appointed as the governor of the city.

古文：上亲征光，破之于皖城也。
现代文：皇上亲征，在皖城击破朱光。
English: The emperor personally led the expedition and defeated Zhu Guang in Shicheng.

古文：汉曲有《战城南》，此篇当之。
现代文：汉曲有《战城南》，这篇相当于汉《战城南曲》。
English: "Sengcheng South" is a part of Chinese classical music, which is equivalent to "Sengcheng South" in Chinese classical music.

古文：第六。
现代文：是第六篇。
English: It is the sixth chapter.

古文：克灭皖城，遏寇贼。
现代文：攻克幢球，遏寇贼。
English: Tackle the ball, stop the thief.

古文：恶此凶孽，阻奸慝。
现代文：痛恨凶孽，止奸慝。
English: Hate evil, stop treachery.

古文：王师赫征，众倾覆。
现代文：王师出征，敞倾覆。
English: Wang Shi went to war and was overthrown.

古文：除秽去暴，戢兵革。
现代文：除秽去暴，止兵革。
English: Remove the filth, remove the violence, stop the war.

古文：民得就农，边境息。
现代文：民能归农，边境息。
English: The people's power belongs to the farmers, and the border interests them.

古文：诛君吊臣，昭至德。
现代文：伐君吊臣，昭美德。
English: Fawning over the emperor and hanging on to his vassals, this is the story of Shomeide.

古文：右《克皖城曲》凡十二句，其六句句三字，六句句四字。
现代文：上为《克皖城曲》共十二句，其中六句每句三字，六句每句四字。
English: The above is a total of twelve sentences of "Keshen Town Song," of which six sentences have three words each, and six sentences have four words each.

古文：《关背德》者，言蜀将关羽背弃吴德，心怀不轨。
现代文：《关背德》，歌咏蜀将挝塑背弃昱的恩德，心怀不轨。
English: In "Guan Pei De," Guo Pei Shu portrayed Laos as a country that had turned its back on the benevolence of the Han Dynasty, which was ill-advised.

古文：大皇帝引师浮江而禽之也。
现代文：大皇帝率兵渡江擒获挝型。
English: The great emperor led the troops across the river and won the Laos type.

古文：汉曲有《巫山高》，此篇当之。
现代文：选曲有《巫山高》，这篇相当于汉《巫山高曲》。
English: The selected piece is "Wushan High," which is equivalent to the Han "Wushan High."

古文：第七。
现代文：是第七篇。
English: It is the seventh chapter.

古文：关背德，作鸱张。
现代文：关羽背德，势嚣张。
English: Guan Yu's back morality, arrogance.

古文：割我邑城，图不祥。
现代文：割我城邑，逞凶狂。
English: Cut up my town, go berserk.

古文：称兵北伐，围樊襄阳。
现代文：举兵北伐，围樊、襄阳。
English: The Northern Expedition was launched, and the siege of Handan and Xiangyang began.

古文：嗟臂大于股，将受其殃。
现代文：叹臂大于股，将受祸殃。
English: Woe to him whose arms are bigger than his thighs.

古文：巍巍吴圣主，睿德与玄通。
现代文：巍巍吴圣主，圣德与神通。
English: Wu Sheng Rong, Sanctity and Magic.

古文：与玄通，亲任吕蒙。
现代文：与神通，任用吕蒙。
English: and Shintoku, appointed Lv Meng.

古文：泛舟洪氾池，溯涉长江。
现代文：船行洪泛池，溯渡长江。
English: Sailing through the floodplain, tracing the Yangtze River.

古文：神武一何桓桓！声烈正与风翔。
现代文：圣主神武桓桓，声名业绩飞扬。
English: Shennu Shenwuhuankan, his fame and achievements are soaring.

古文：历抚江安城，大据郢邦。
现代文：镇抚江安城，占据郢邦。
English: Zenzufu Jiang'an City, occupied Shan State.

古文：虏羽授首，百蛮咸来同，盛哉无比隆。
现代文：关羽被斩，蛮夷都来朝，兴盛国势隆。
English: Guan Yu was beheaded, barbarian barbarians came to Korea, and the country flourished.

古文：右《关背德曲》凡二十一句，其八句句四字，二句句六字，七句句五字，四句句三字。
现代文：上为《关背德曲》共二十一句，其中八句每句四字，二句每句六字，七句每句五字，四句每句三字。
English: The above is a total of twenty-one sentences of "Guanzhe Dequ," of which eight sentences have four words each, two sentences have six words each, seven sentences have five words each, and four sentences have three words each.

古文：《通荆门》者，言大皇帝与蜀交好齐盟，中有关羽自失之愆，戎蛮乐乱，生变作患，蜀疑其眩，吴恶其诈，乃大治兵，终复初好也。
现代文：《通荆门》，歌咏大皇帝与蜀结盟友好，中途因为关羽自己的过失，戎蛮喜欢动乱，乘机叛变制造祸乱，蜀厌恶戎蛮的昏惑，吴痛恨戎蛮的奸诈，于是大规模调动军队平定戎蛮，吴、蜀终又恢复以前的友好关系。
English: In "Tong Jing Men," Emperor Gaozong allied with Shu, but halfway through, because of Guan Yu's own fault, Rong Man liked turmoil and took the opportunity to rebel and create disaster. Shu loathed Rong Man's delusion, and Wu hated Rong Man's treachery. Therefore, they mobilized troops on a large scale to quell Rong Man, and Wu and Shu eventually restored their previous friendly relations.

古文：汉曲有《上陵》，此篇当之。
现代文：汉曲有《上陵》，这篇相当于汉《上陵曲》。
English: "Shangling" is one of the Chinese classics, and this piece is equivalent to the Chinese "Shangling."

古文：第八。
现代文：是第八篇。
English: It is the eighth chapter.

古文：荆门限巫山，高峻与云连。
现代文：荆门限巫山，高与青云连。
English: Jingmen as far as Wushan, Gao as far as Qingyun.

古文：蛮夷阻其险，历世怀不宾。
现代文：蛮夷凭险阻。久欲不为臣。
English: The barbarians take advantage of obstacles. The longing does not become a subject.

古文：汉王据蜀郡，崇好结和亲。
现代文：选王据蜀郡，友好结和亲。
English: According to Shu County, the prince-electors are friends and relatives.

古文：乖微中情疑，谗夫乱其间。
现代文：争执生猜疑，谗人又离间。
English: Quarrels breed suspicion, and quarrels drive people apart.

古文：大皇赫斯怒，虎臣勇气震。
现代文：大皇勃然怒，武臣勇气振。
English: The emperor flew into a rage, and the vassal lost his courage.

古文：荡涤幽薮，讨不恭。
现代文：荡涤幽薮，讨不恭。
English: It's quiet and secluded, and it doesn't make you feel like a tourist.

古文：观兵扬炎耀，厉锋整封疆。
现代文：陈兵扬神威，作战安边疆。
English: Chen Bingyang is powerful, and the war is peaceful.

古文：整封疆，阐扬威武容。
现代文：安边疆，阐扬威武容。
English: Peaceful frontiers, and the display of military prowess.

古文：功赫戏，洪烈炳章。
现代文：功显赫，大业显彰。
English: A great achievement, a great cause.

古文：邈矣帝皇世，圣吴同厥风。
现代文：远古帝皇世，圣吴同其风。
English: In the ancient imperial era, Saint Wu followed the same style.

古文：荒裔望清化，化恢弘。
现代文：四裔望教化，化恢弘。
English: The Four Descendants hope to become enlightened and magnanimous.

古文：煌煌大吴，延祚永未央。
现代文：煌煌大吴，福祚永未央。
English: The great Wu is resplendent, and the great Fu Yao is eternally young.

古文：右《通荆门曲》凡二十四句，其十七句句五字，四句句三字，三句句四字。
现代文：上为《通荆门曲》共：二十四句，其中十七句每句五字，四句每句三宇，三句每句四字。
English: The above is "Tong Jingmen Qiao" in total: twenty-four sentences, of which seventeen sentences have five words each, four sentences have three words each, and three sentences have four words each.

古文：《章洪德》者，言大皇帝章其大德，而远方来附也。
现代文：《章洪德》，歌咏大皇帝显彰大德，远方之国来归附。
English: "Zhang Hongde", the great emperor of Guozhen showed great virtue, and the distant country came to attach.

古文：汉曲有《将进酒》，此篇当之。
现代文：谨曲有《将进酒》，这篇相当于汉《将进酒曲》。
English: There is a song entitled "Will go into the wine," which is equivalent to the Han "Will go into the wine."

古文：第九。
现代文：是第九篇。
English: It is the ninth chapter.

古文：章洪德，迈威神。
现代文：彰宏德，显威神。
English: Exalting virtue, showing the dignity of God.

古文：感殊风，怀远邻。
现代文：化蛮夷，服远邻。
English: Transform barbarians into barbarians, and distant neighbors into neighbors.

古文：平南裔，齐海滨。
现代文：平南疆，定海滨。
English: Pingnanjiang, Dinghai Coast.

古文：越裳贡，扶南臣。
现代文：走噬贡，这菌臣。
English: Go and devour tribute, this mycologist.

古文：珍货充庭，所见日新。
现代文：珍宝盈庭，面貌新。
English: Jumbo Yingtei, with a new look.

古文：右《章洪德曲》凡十句，其八句句三字，二句句四字。
现代文：上为《章洪德曲》共十句，其中八句每句三字，二句每句四字。
English: The above is a total of ten sentences of "Zhang Hongdeqiu," of which eight sentences have three words each, and two sentences have four words each.

古文：《从历数》者，言大皇帝从箓图之符，而建大号也。
现代文：《从历数》，歌咏大皇帝顺随图录显示的征兆，建国号，登帝位。
English: "From the calendar," Emperor Go-Shun followed the signs shown in the picture book, founded the country, and ascended to the throne.

古文：汉曲有《有所思》，此篇当之。第十。
现代文：漠曲有《有所思》，这篇相当于汉《有所思曲》，是第十篇。
English: There is a "somebody's thoughts" in the blank piece, which is equivalent to the Han "somebody's thoughts" and is the tenth piece.

古文：从历数，于穆我皇帝。
现代文：顺天道，美盛我皇帝。
English: As fate would have it, Meisho became my emperor.

古文：圣哲受之天，神明表奇异。
现代文：圣哲由天授，神明才奇异。
English: Wisdom comes from God, and God is wondrous.

古文：建号创皇基，聪睿协神思。
现代文：建国创皇基，聪睿合神思。
English: The founding of the country and the foundation of the empire, wisdom and wisdom.

古文：德泽浸及昆虫，浩荡越前代。
现代文：德泽波及昆虫，壮阔超前代。
English: Dezhe waves and insects, magnificent beyond the previous generation.

古文：三光显精耀，阴阳称至治。
现代文：三光显异彩，天地称大治。
English: The three lights are brilliant, and heaven and earth are said to be in great harmony.

古文：肉角步郊畛，凤凰栖灵囿。
现代文：麒麟行郊野，凤凰栖苑囿。
English: The unicorn roams the countryside, the phoenix dwells in the garden.

古文：神龟游沼池，图谶摹文字。
现代文：神龟游沼池，图谶现文字。
English: A divine turtle swims in a swamp. The picture shows the words.

古文：黄龙觌鳞，符祥日月记。
现代文：黄龙出现，祥瑞日月志。
English: The yellow dragon appears, and the auspicious sun and moon appear.

古文：览往以察今，我皇多哙事。上钦昊天象，下副万姓意。
现代文：览古以观今，我皇多乐事、上顺昊天象，下符万民意。
English: Looking back at the past and looking forward to the present, I see many pleasures, the ups and downs of the sky, and the downs of people's will.

古文：光被弥苍生，家户蒙惠赉。
现代文：光辉照百姓，人人蒙惠赐。
English: The light shines on the people, and everyone is blessed.

古文：风教肃以平，颂声章嘉喜。
现代文：教化风俗正，颂声增欢喜。
English: The edifying custom is correct, and the praise increases the joy.

古文：大吴兴隆，绰有余裕。
现代文：大吴兴隆，绰有余裕。
English: Big Wu Xinglong, more than enough room.

古文：右《从历数曲》凡二十六句，其一句句三字，三句句四字，二十二句句五字，一句六字。
现代文：上为《从历数曲》共二十六句，其中一句三字，三句每句四字，二十一句每句五字，一句六字。
English: The above is a total of twenty-six sentences of "From the Calendars," of which one sentence has three words, three sentences have four words each, twenty-one sentences have five words each, and one sentence has six words.

古文：《承天命》者，言上以圣德践位，道化至盛也。
现代文：《承天命》，歌咏皇上凭藉圣德登上帝位，德政教化十分兴盛。
English: According to "The Mandate of Heaven," Emperor Go-Shun ascended to the throne by virtue of virtue, and the teaching of virtue flourished.

古文：汉曲有《芳树》，此篇当之。
现代文：汉曲有《芳树》，这篇相当于汉《芳树曲》。
English: There is "Fang Shu" in Chinese classical music, which is equivalent to the "Fang Shu" in Chinese classical music.

古文：第十一。
现代文：是第十一篇。
English: This is the eleventh article.

古文：承天命，于昭圣德。
现代文：承天命，圣德美盛。
English: Heaven's Will, starring Saint Germain.

古文：三精垂象，符灵表德。
现代文：三光示征，瑞应表德。
English: Three lights indicate, Rui should show virtue.

古文：巨石立，九穗植。
现代文：巨石立，九穗植。
English: Standing on a huge rock, with nine ears of corn.

古文：龙金其鳞，乌赤其色。
现代文：龙生金鳞，乌变赤色。
English: Dragon born with golden scales, turns red.

古文：舆人歌，亿夫叹息。
现代文：轿夫歌，万民欢喜。
English: The song of the coachman, the rejoicing of the people.

古文：超龙升，袭帝服。
现代文：登帝位，穿帝服。
English: He ascended the throne and put on the imperial robes.

古文：躬淳懿，体玄默。
现代文：德淳美，尚玄默。
English: De Junmei, Shang Xuanming.

古文：夙兴临朝，劳谦日昃。易简以崇仁，放远谗与慝。
现代文：早起临朝，操劳不息宽和而尚仁，疏远谗奸贼。
English: Rise early in the morning, work tirelessly, be broad-minded and benevolent, and keep away from traitors.

古文：举贤才，亲近有德。
现代文：举贤才，亲近有德。
English: Nurture talent, stay close to the virtuous.

古文：均田畴，茂稼穑。
现代文：均田地，丰稼穑。
English: The average field yields a good crop.

古文：审法令，定品式。
现代文：审法令，定程式。
English: Review laws and regulations, set procedures.

古文：考功能，明黜陟。
现代文：考功能，明黜陟。
English: Check the function, alum.

古文：人思自尽，惟心与力。
现代文：人思报效，尽心尽力。
English: Hard work pays off, so do your best.

古文：家国治，王道直。
现代文：家国治，王道直。
English: The family governs the country, and the king is straightforward.

古文：思我帝皇，寿万亿。
现代文：思我帝皇，寿万亿。
English: Think of me, Emperor, and live a thousand years.

古文：长保天禄，祚无极。
现代文：长保福禄，祚无极。
English: There is no end to the benefits of long-term insurance.

古文：右《承天命曲》凡三十四句，其十九句句三字，二句句五字，十三句句四字。
现代文：上为《承天命曲》共三十四句，其中十九句每句三字，二句每句五字，十三句每句四字。
English: The above is a total of thirty-four sentences of "Cherishing Heaven's Destiny," of which nineteen sentences have three words each, two sentences have five words each, and thirteen sentences have four words each.

古文：《玄化》者，言上修文训武，则天而行，仁泽流洽，天下喜乐也。
现代文：《玄化》，歌咏皇上修文练武，仿效天道行事，仁德广布，天下欢乐。
English: In "Xuanhua," the poem praises the emperor for improving literature, practicing martial arts, imitating the heavenly way, spreading benevolence, and bringing joy to the world.

古文：汉曲有《上邪》，此篇当之。
现代文：汉曲有《上邪》，这篇相当于选《上邪曲》。
English: "Top Evil" is included in Chinese classical music, and this article is equivalent to selecting "Top Evil."

古文：第十二。
现代文：是第十二篇。
English: It is the twelfth chapter.

古文：玄化象以天，陛下圣真。
现代文：仿天行教化，皇德圣真。
English: Imitating the heavens and carrying out enlightenment, the imperial virtue is sacred.

古文：张皇纲，率道以安民。
现代文：振皇纲，顺天道安民。
English: Zhenwang Gang, Shuntian Road Anmin.

古文：惠泽宣流而云布，上下睦亲。
现代文：恩德广施似云布，上下睦亲。
English: Ende Guangshi is like a cloud cloth, and the upper and lower levels are amicable.

古文：君臣酣宴乐，激发弦歌扬妙新。
现代文：君臣欢宴乐。泫歌弹奏曲妙新。
English: The music of kings and ministers enjoying a banquet. The song of the egrets playing a new melody.

古文：修文筹庙胜，须时备驾巡洛津。康哉泰，四海欢忻，越与三五邻。
现代文：修文筹胜算，待机备驾巡洛淫康且泰，四海欢欣，能与三皇五帝邻。
English: Revise the text and calculate the odds, stand by and prepare to patrol the prosperous and peaceful city, rejoice in the four seas, and be able to be neighbors with the three kings and five emperors.

古文：右《玄化曲》凡十三句，其五句句五字，二句句三字，三句句四字，三句句七字。
现代文：上为《玄化曲》共十三句，其中五句每句五字，二句每句三字，三句每句四字，三句每句七字。
English: The above is a total of thirteen sentences of "Xuanhua Music," of which five sentences have five words each, two sentences have three words each, three sentences have four words each, and three sentences have seven words each.

古文：今鼓吹铙歌词。
现代文：今鼓吹铙歌词：乐人凭声音相传，文句意义不能理解。
English: Now they are touting  lyrics: Musicians are passed down by their voices, and the meaning of the words cannot be understood.

古文：大竭夜乌自云何来堂吾来声乌奚姑悟姑尊卢圣子黄尊来餭清婴乌白日为随来郭吾微令吾
现代文：大竭夜乌自云何来堂吾来声乌奚姑悟姑尊卢圣子黄尊来韹清婴乌白曰为随来郭吾微令吾
English: In the dead of night, Wu Zi Yun asked, "Why do you come to me?" Wu Zi Gu Guo Guo Zun, the son of Lu Shengzi, Huang Zun, came to see the baby Wu Bai, and said, "I am Guo Wuxi, the son of Guo Wuxi, the son of Lu Shengzi, I am Guo Wuxi, the son of Lu Shengzi, I am Guo Wuxi, the son of Huang Zun, the son of Lu Sheng Zi, I am Guo Wuxi, the son of Huang Zi, the son of Huang Zi, I am Guo Wuxi, the

古文：应龙夜乌由道何来直子为乌奚如悟姑尊卢鸡子听乌虎行为来明吾微令吾
现代文：应龙夜乌由道何来直子为乌奚如悟贴尊卢鸡子听乌虎行为来明吾微令吾
English: In the night of the dragon and the tiger, what should Naoko do for the dragon and the tiger, and what should the chicken do for the chicken, and what should the tiger do for the tiger

古文：诗则夜乌道禄何来黑洛道乌奚悟如尊尔尊卢起黄华乌伯辽为国日忠雨令吾
现代文：诗则夜乌道禄何来黑洛道乌奚悟如尊尔尊卢起黄华乌伯辽为国曰忠雨令吾
English: In the poem, it is said that on the night of Ulu Doru, why did Ulu Doru come to Hailu Doru, how did Ulu Doru become enlightened, how did Ulu Doru become revered, how did Ulu Doru rise, how did Huanghua rise, how did Ubo rise, how did Liao become a country, how did the rain make me

古文：伯辽夜乌若国何来日忠雨乌奚如悟姑尊卢面道康尊录龙永乌赫赫福胙夜音微令吾
现代文：伯辽夜乌若国何来日忠雨乌奚如悟姑尊卢面道康尊录龙永乌赫赫福胙夜音微令吾
English: When I was young, why did I come to the land of the rain, the clouds, the clouds, the rain, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds, the clouds,

古文：右四解，《上邪曲》。
现代文：上为四章，《上邪曲》。
English: There are four chapters in the first part, "Top Evil Song."

古文：几令吾几令诸韩乱发正令吾
现代文：几令吾几令诸韩乱发正令吾
English: How many orders have I received? How many orders have I received?

古文：几令吾诸韩从听心令吾若里洛何来韩微令吾
现代文：几令吾诸韩从听心令吾若里洛何来韩微令吾
English: How many times have I told you Koreans to listen to me? How many times have you told me not to listen?

古文：尊卢忌卢文卢子路子路为路鸡如文卢炯乌诸胙微令吾
现代文：尊卢忌卢文卢子路子路马路鸡如文卢炯乌诸胙微令吾
English: It's all about me, me, me, me.

古文：几令诸韩或公随令吾
现代文：几令诸韩或公随令吾
English: How many orders from Korea or the public follow my orders?

古文：几令吾几诸或言随令吾黑洛何来诸韩微令吾
现代文：几令吾几诸或言随令吾黑洛何来诸韩微令吾
English: How many orders, how many orders, how many orders, how many orders, how many orders,

古文：尊卢安成随来免路路子为吾路奚如文卢炯乌诸胙微令吾
现代文：尊卢安成随来免路路子为吾路奚如文卢炯乌诸胙微令吾
English: With Lu Ancheng at my side, I have no choice but to follow my own path.

古文：右九解，《晚芝曲》。
现代文：上为九章，《晚芝曲》。
English: On the top, there are nine chapters, "Evening Plays."

古文：几令吾呼历舍居执来随咄武子邪令乌衔针相风其右其右
现代文：汉曲有《远期》，疑造就是。几令吾呼历舍居执来随咄武子邪令乌衔针相风其右其右
English: There is a "long-term" in Chinese classical music, and it is a dubious creation. Some people call me a dreamer, but I am determined to follow the evil order of the warrior and the wind of the needle.

古文：几令吾呼群议破葫执来随吾咄武子邪令乌今乌今狖入海相风及后
现代文：几令吾呼群议破葫执来随吾咄武子邪令乌今乌今脏入海相风及后
English: How many times have I called for a group discussion to break the stubbornness to follow me, the evil son of the evil son of the evil son of the evil son of the evil son

古文：几令吾呼无公赫吾执来随吾咄武子邪令乌无公赫吾婮立诸布始布
现代文：几令吾呼无公赫吾执来随吾咄武子邪令乌无公赫吾媚立诸布始布
English: How many orders have I issued, calling for no-godliness and no-conformity, and how many have come to follow me?

古文：右三解，《艾如张曲》。
现代文：上为三章，《艾如张曲》。
English: There are three chapters above, "Ai Ru Zhangqu."

古文：鼓吹铙歌十五篇，何承天义熙中私造：
现代文：鼓吹铙歌十五篇：何承天在义熙年间私自制作
English: Fifteen pieces of propaganda songs: He Chengtian made them himself during the Yixi era

古文：《硃路篇》：硃路扬和鸾，翠盖耀金华。
现代文：《朱路篇》朱辂传出铃鸾声，翠色车盖闪金华。
English: "Zhu Road" Zhu Yao heard the sound of a bell, and the emerald-colored car cover glittered.

古文：玄牡饰樊缨，流旌拂飞霞。
现代文：樊缨佩饰玄牡马，旌旗高耸拂飞霞。
English: The crest adorns the black stallion, and the banner flies high in the sky.

古文：雄戟辟旷涂，班剑翼高车。
现代文：勇士持戟前开路，班剑簇拥护高车。
English: Warriors holding halberd open the road in front of them, swords cluster around them to support the high-wheeled vehicle.

古文：三军且莫喧，听我奏铙歌。
现代文：三军莫喧嚷，听我奏铙歌。
English: Don't make a ruckus among the three armies, just listen to me play a song.

古文：清鞞惊短箫，朗鼓节鸣笳。
现代文：聊鼓轻脆，伴随短箫声，鼓声响亮，节拍指挥鸣笳。
English: The chat drum is light and crisp, accompanied by a short beep, the drum sound is loud, and the beat conductor chirps.

古文：人心惟恺豫，兹音亮且和。
现代文：人心思恺乐，乐声响亮且谐和。
English: The human mind thinks of music, and the music is loud and harmonious.

古文：轻风起红尘，渟澜发微波。
现代文：轻风吹扬红尘，深潭泛起微波。
English: The light wind blows the red dust, and the deep pool is covered with microwaves.

古文：逸韵腾天路，颓响结城阿。
现代文：乐声美妙腾九霄，乐音绕城泛余波。
English: The beautiful music soars to the heavens, and the music reverberates around the city.

古文：仁声被八表，威震振九遐。
现代文：仁德广布施八方，声威震边遐。
English: Benevolence is widely spread in all directions, and its prestige is tremendously high.

古文：嗟嗟介胄士，勖哉念皇家。
现代文：英豪勇武士，努力念皇家。
English: Heroic and brave samurai, strive to be a royal.

古文：《思悲公篇》：思悲公，怀衮衣。
现代文：《思悲公篇》思周公，心悲抱衮衣。
English: "Sadness Public Chapter" thinks about Zhou Gong, and embraces Zou Yi with heartfelt sorrow.

古文：东国何悲，公西归。
现代文：束国之人为何悲?周公要西归。
English: Why are the people of Sokoku sad? Zhou Gong wants to return to the West.

古文：公西归，流二叔，幼主既悟，偃禾复。
现代文：旦公西归京，流放二王叔，幼主醒悟，倒伏之禾重起复。
English: Dangongxi returned to Beijing, the two kings were exiled, the young master woke up, and the downfall was revived.

古文：偃禾复，圣志申。
现代文：倒伏之禾重起复，圣人志向得伸展。
English: The fallen grain has been revived, and the saint's aspiration has been expanded.

古文：营都新邑，从斯民。
现代文：营造新都邑，率领万民迁。
English: to build a new capital city and lead the migration of all the people.

古文：从斯民，德惟明。
现代文：率领万民迁，德圣明。
English: De Shengming led the mass migration.

古文：制礼作乐，兴颂声。
现代文：制礼作乐，奏颂声。
English: Music to be played at the beginning of the ceremony, and a hymn.

古文：兴颂声，致嘉祥。
现代文：奏颂声，获得嘉瑞兆吉祥。
English: They sang carols and received the auspiciousness of the auspicious sign of the zodiac.

古文：鸣凤爰集，万国康。
现代文：凤凰翔集，万国康。
English: Fenghuang Xiangshi, Banguo Kang.

古文：万国康，犹弗已。
现代文：万国康，壮心犹不止。
English: The country is doing well, and there is still room for improvement.

古文：握发吐餐，下群士。
现代文：握发吐哺，礼待众贤士。
English: Shake your hair, spit, and treat all the sages with courtesy.

古文：惟我君，继伊周。
现代文：我君王，继承伊和周。
English: I, the king, succeed Yi and Zhou.

古文：亲睹盛世，复何求。
现代文：亲眼见盛世，又何求!
English: Seeing prosperity with your own eyes, what more could you ask for!

古文：《雍离篇》：雍士多离心，荆民怀怨情。
现代文：《雍离篇》壅业人多有离叛心，型州百姓怀怨情。
English: In "Yong Liang Hen," most of the people in the industry are disloyal, and the people of Kenzhou are resentful.

古文：二凶不量德，构难称其兵。
现代文：二凶不量力，制造祸乱举叛兵。
English: The two villains are out of control, creating havoc and raising rebels.

古文：王人衔朝命，正辞纠不庭。
现代文：朝廷大臣奉朝命，义止辞严讨叛兵。
English: On the orders of the Emperor, the Minister of the Imperial Court issued a speech condemning the mutineers.

古文：上宰宣九伐，万里举长旌。
现代文：宰相公布九伐罪，王师万里举旗旌。
English: The prime minister announced the nine-cutting crime, and Wang Shili raised the banner.

古文：楼船掩江濆，驷介飞重英。
现代文：楼船满江面，战车急驰飞矛缨。
English: Houseboats fill the surface of the river, chariots gallop and spears fly.

古文：归德戒后夫，贾勇尚先鸣。
现代文：归附朝廷要乘早，王师余勇尚可贾，将士杀敌个个争先行。
English: It was necessary to take advantage of the early time to attach to the imperial court. Wang Shishi Yu Yong was admirable, killing enemies one by one to get ahead.

古文：逆徒既不济，愚智亦相倾。
现代文：叛逆不成功，愚智一同遭摧倾。
English: Rebellion fails, and folly goes down with it.

古文：霜锋未及染，鄢郢忽已清。
现代文：兵器尚未染上血，邮郢叛贼已肃清。
English: The weapons have not yet been stained with blood, and the ruffians have been eliminated.

古文：西川无潜鳞，北渚有奔鲸。
现代文：西川肃清叛逆贼，逃往北渚如鳄鲸。
English: Nishikawa was purged of traitors and fled to Kitanazawa like a crocodile whale.

古文：凌威致天府，一战夷三城。
现代文：声威高凌达天府，一战平定三座城。
English: His fame reached as far as Tianfu, and he conquered three cities in one battle.

古文：江汉被美化，宇宙歌太平。
现代文：丝汉蒙受美教化，四宇之内歌太平。
English: Sihanoukville has been affected by aesthetic education, and the four regions of Inner Mongolia are peaceful.

古文：惟我东郡民，曾是深推诚。
现代文：我们柬郡众百姓，深深钦服更忠诚。
English: We, the people of Cambodia, deeply admire and are more loyal to you.

古文：《战城南篇》：战城南，衡黄尘。
现代文：《战城南篇》战城南，飞黄尘。
English: "South of the Battle" South of the battle, flying yellow dust.

古文：丹旌电烻，鼓雷震。
现代文：红旗挥动如电闪，鼓声似雷震。
English: The red flags fluttered like lightning and the drums sounded like thunder.

古文：勍敌猛，戎马殷。
现代文：勃敌凶猛，战马成群。
English: Enemies are ferocious, war horses ride in herds.

古文：横陈亘野，若屯云。
现代文：横亘原野，若乌云。
English: Widespread fields, if dark clouds.

古文：仗大从，应三灵。
现代文：顺乎天道，顺应三灵。
English: To follow the heavenly path, to follow the three spirits.

古文：义之所感，士忘生。
现代文：为道义感奋，勇士忘死舍生。
English: For the moral sense of excitement, the warriors gave up their lives.

古文：长剑击，繁弱鸣。
现代文：长剑击，良弓呜。
English: Long sword stroke, good bow.

古文：飞镝炫晃，乱奔星。
现代文：飞镝闪动，势如流星。
English: The hailstones flashed like shooting stars.

古文：虎骑跃，华毦旋。
现代文：虎骑腾跃，战袍飞旋。
English: The tiger rider prances, the battle robe whirls.

古文：硃火延起，腾飞烟。
现代文：大火延烧，腾飞烟。
English: The fire continued to burn and smoke billowed.

古文：骁雄斩，高旗搴。
现代文：歼灭骁雄，大旗高搴。
English: The annihilation of Shao Xiong, the banner of Gao Xiong.

古文：长角浮叫，响清天。
现代文：号角长呜，响声震天。
English: The trumpet blasts and the sound of it shakes the heavens.

古文：夷群寇，殪逆徒。
现代文：平定群寇，灭叛贼。
English: To subdue the band of robbers and destroy the traitors.

古文：余黎沾惠，咏来苏。
现代文：百姓得恩惠，获得新生颂圣主。
English: The people are blessed with a new birth, praise the Lord.

古文：奏恺乐，归皇都。
现代文：奏起凯旋乐，归京都。
English: The triumphal music is played, and the parade returns to Kyoto.

古文：班爵献俘，邦国娱。
现代文：献俘论功授爵位，举国欢娱。
English: The whole country rejoiced when he was awarded a knighthood for his dedication to prisoners of war.

古文：《巫山高篇》：巫山高，三峡峻。
现代文：《巫山高篇》巫山高耸，三峡险峻。
English: "Wushan High" Wushan is towering, the Three Gorges are precipitous.

古文：青壁千寻，深谷万仞。
现代文：石壁千寻高，山谷深万仞。
English: The stone walls are very high and the valley is very deep.

古文：崇岩冠灵，林冥冥。
现代文：层层山岩如神灵戴冠冕，深山老林暗冥冥。
English: The layers of mountain rock are like gods wearing crowns, and the deep mountain forests are dark and gloomy.

古文：山禽夜响，晨猿相和鸣。
现代文：山禽夜间啼，清晨猿猴相和呜。
English: The wildfowl chirp at night, and in the morning the monkeys and apes appear.

古文：洪波迅澓，载逝载停。
现代文：洪波迅急而回旋，或流或停。
English: The flood wave swirls rapidly, and either flows or stops.

古文：忄妻忄妻商旅之客，怀苦情。在昔阳九，皇纲微。
现代文：悲伤商旅客，满怀凄苦情。国家昔逢阳九厄，皇纲衰微。
English: Sorrowful travelers, full of grievances. The country was once prosperous and prosperous, and the imperial system was in decline.

古文：李氏窃命，宣武耀灵威。
现代文：李氏僭越妄称帝，桓宣武显耀灵威灭李氏。
English: The Li clan arrogantly claimed to be the emperor, and Kuan proclaimed that he would use his military prowess to defeat the Li clan.

古文：蠢尔逆纵，复践乱机。
现代文：逆贼谯纵蠢蠢动，重蹈覆辙举叛兵。
English: The traitors continue to act recklessly, repeating the same pattern of raising rebels.

古文：王旅薄伐，传首来至京师。
现代文：王师去征伐，叛贼斩首送京城。
English: Wang Shi went to conquer, and the traitors were beheaded and sent to the capital.

古文：古之为国，惟德是贵。力战而虚民，鲜不颠坠。
现代文：古代治国德为贵，凭暴力虐民，很少能够不崩坠。
English: In ancient times, the virtue of governing a country was precious, and it was rarely possible to get ahead without falling apart by abusing the people with violence.

古文：矧乃叛戾，伊胡能遂。
现代文：何况叛乱行暴戾，怎能顺遂?
English: Besides, the rebellion was violent, how could it succeed?

古文：咨尔巴子，无放肆。
现代文：告诫巴地人，莫放肆!
English: Warn the Bati people, don't be reckless!

古文：《上陵者篇》：上陵者，相追攀。
现代文：《上陵者篇》上山人，互相追逐争登攀。
English: In "The Tomb Raider," climbers chase each other up the mountain.

古文：被服纤丽，振绮纨。
现代文：衣服纤丽，飘飘抖动是绮轨。
English: The clothes are slender, and the fluttering and shaking is a rut.

古文：携童幼，升崇峦。
现代文：携童幼，登高峦。
English: With children and young children, climb the high fence.

古文：南望城阙，郁盘桓。
现代文：南望城阙，幽深广大，气势桓桓。
English: Nanbo castle moat, deep and wide, the momentum swings.

古文：王公第，通衢端。高甍华屋，列硃轩。
现代文：王公府第立街端，高楼华屋，一排排红窗轩。
English: At the end of the second street of Wanggongfu, high-rise buildings, row after row of red windows.

古文：临浚谷，掇秋兰。
现代文：临深谷，采秋兰。
English: Linfu Valley, pick autumn orchids.

古文：士女悠奕，映隰原。
现代文：士女姣丽而飘逸，光彩映隰原。
English: The ladies are beautiful and graceful, and their radiance reflects the beauty of the countryside.

古文：指营丘，感牛山。
现代文：指点齐营丘，感怀生牛山。
English: Point the way to Qiying Hill, and you'll feel like you're on a mountain of raw beef.

古文：爽鸠既没，景君叹。
现代文：爽蝗旦已逝，变量公感叹。
English: Shuangluo Dan has passed away, variable public sigh.

古文：嗟岁聿，游不还。
现代文：嗟叹年岁暮，出游乐不还。
English: Lamenting the end of the year, the outing is not over.

古文：志气衰沮，玄鬓斑。
现代文：志气衰沮，两鬓斑。
English: His morale is low and his cheeks are mottled.

古文：野莽宿，坟土乾。顾此累累，中心酸。
现代文：坟头野草生多年，坟土干，见此坟上累累土，心中生悲酸。
English: The weeds at the head of the grave have been growing for many years, and the grave soil is dry. Seeing the soil piled up on this grave, my heart is filled with sadness.

古文：生必死，亦何怨。
现代文：有生必有死，有何怨。
English: There is life and there is death, what is there to complain about.

古文：取乐今日，展情欢。
现代文：取乐今日，尽情欢。
English: Have fun today, enjoy yourself.

古文：《将进酒篇》：将进酒，庆三朝。备繁礼，荐嘉肴。
现代文：《将进酒篇》将进酒，庆元旦。备厚礼，陈佳肴。
English: "Will drink wine" will drink wine, celebrate New Year's Day. Prepare thick gifts, delicious dishes.

古文：荣枯换，霜雾交。
现代文：荣枝枯叶代换生，冬霜春雾两相交。
English: The dead leaves of Rongzhu are replaced by new ones, and winter frosts and spring fogs intersect.

古文：缓春带，命朋僚。
现代文：脱春衣，唤同僚。
English: Strip, call a colleague.

古文：车等旗，马齐镳。
现代文：车旗同等南，马并驱行步伐矫。
English: The car flag is the same as the south, the horse and drive the pace correction.

古文：怀温克，乐林濠。
现代文：心怀恭敬情，游戏林中乐陶陶。
English: With respect in mind, the game begins in the forest.

古文：士失志，愠情劳。
现代文：士人不得意，怨气藉酒浇。
English: The scholar was not satisfied, and his anger was fuelled by alcohol.

古文：思旨酒，寄游遨。
现代文：思美酒，寄情于游遨。
English: Semei wine, dedicated to the wanderer.

古文：败德人，甘醇醪。耽长夜，或淫妖。
现代文：败德人，一心想美酒，耽于长夜饮，有时行淫妖。
English: Defeated Germans, with a single-minded desire for fine wine, indulge in long nights of drinking, and sometimes engage in fornication.

古文：兴屡舞，厉哇谣。
现代文：屡起舞，唱俗谣。
English: They often dance and sing folk songs.

古文：形亻差亻差，声号呶。
现代文：失态脚步乱，号呼而喧嚣。
English: There was a mad scramble of feet, shouting and tumult.

古文：首既濡，志亦荒。
现代文：沉湎于酒失仪态，志全忘。
English: Indulging in drunken debauchery, and forgetting all about one's goals.

古文：性命天，国家亡。
现代文：性命丧，国家亡。
English: Lives lost, country lost.

古文：嗟后生，节酣觞。
现代文：告诫年轻人，节制饮酒莫过量。
English: Young people should be warned not to drink too much.

古文：匪酒辜，孰为殃。
现代文：没有酒作祟，谁能降祸殃。《君马篇》
English: Without the curse of wine, who can bring disaster. "King Horse"

古文：《君马篇》：君马丽且闲，扬镳腾逸姿。
现代文：君之马，光彩焕发又高大，扬镳腾跃显逸姿。
English: Your horse, resplendent and tall, prances and leaps in a dazzling manner.

古文：骏足蹑流景，高步追轻飞。
现代文：捷足能追日光影，快足超过轻鸟飞。
English: The swift-footed can chase the sun and shadow, and the swift-footed can outrun the swift-flying birds.

古文：冉冉六辔柔，奕奕金华晖。轻霄翼羽盖，长风靡淑旗。
现代文：驾车温顺气势壮，马饰明亮闪金辉羽盖挺立天空下，长风吹拂绘龙旗。
English: The driver is meek and powerful, the horse is adorned with bright, shiny, golden feathers and stands upright under the sky, and the long wind blows the dragon flag.

古文：愿为范氏驱，雍容步中畿。
现代文：愿求范氏驾我车，雍容行王畿。
English: I would like to ask Mr. Fan to drive my car.

古文：岂效诡遇子，驰骋趣危机。
现代文：岂敢仿效诡遇子，违礼驰骋遇危机。
English: How dare they imitate the trickster and the ruffian in times of crisis.

古文：铅陵策良驷，造父为之悲。
现代文：铅陵卓于赶良马，善御造父为马悲。
English: The plumb line is superior to the good horse, and the good horse is the father of the good horse.

古文：不怨吴坂峻，但恨伯乐稀。
现代文：不怨吴坂高而峻，衹恨世上伯乐稀。
English: I don't begrudge the Wu slope for being high and steep, but I do hate the fact that there are so few Bolets in the world.

古文：赦彼岐山盗，实跻韩原师。
现代文：赦免岐山盗马人，韩原救主胜晋师。
English: The Qishan horse thief was pardoned, and Han Yuan's savior, Sheng Jin, became a teacher.

古文：柰何汉魏主，纵情营所私。
现代文：为何漠、魏主纵情专营私?
English: Why am I the only one indulging myself?

古文：疲民甘藜藿，厩马患盈肥。
现代文：疲民藜藿当美食，宫中厩马患太肥。
English: The palace stable horses are too fat.

古文：人畜贸厥养，苍生将焉归。
现代文：人畜供养两相易，百姓何处归?
English: Livestock and human sustenance are exchanged for each other. Where do the people go?

古文：《芳树篇》：芳树生北庭，丰隆正裴徊。翠颖陵冬秀，红葩迎春开。
现代文：《芳树篇》美树生北庭，躯干高耸枝叶肥翠叶越冬添秀色，红花迎春开。
English: "Fang Shu Hen" Beautiful trees grow in the north garden, the trunk is towering, the branches and leaves are lush, the leaves are beautiful in winter, and the red flowers bloom in spring.

古文：佳人闲幽室，惠心婉以谐。
现代文：佳人闭门居幽室，惠心温顺且婉谐。
English: The beautiful woman lives in a secluded room behind closed doors, and the benevolent heart is meek and gentle.

古文：兰房掩绮幌，绿草被长阶。
现代文：绮罗绣帷掩兰房，绿草如茵铺长阶。
English: The rich embroidered drapery covers the orchid room, and the long steps are covered with green grass.

古文：日夕游云际，归禽命同栖。
现代文：飞鸟天天游云际，命与归鸟同林栖。
English: Flying birds travel through the clouds every day, and life and returning birds live in the same forest.

古文：皓月盈素景，凉风拂中闺。
现代文：皓月秋夜当空照，凉风轻拂吹中闺。
English: The moon shines in the sky on an autumn night, and a cool breeze gently blows in the boudoir.

古文：哀弦理虚堂，要妙清且忄妻。
现代文：琴声哀婉回空堂，幽扬美妙情清凄。
English: The lute's mournful sound echoes back to the empty hall, and the gentle melody is wonderfully clear.

古文：啸歌流激楚，伤此硕人怀。
现代文：啸歌凄楚调高亢，感伤美人怀。
English: The song is haunting, high-pitched and full of sentimental beauty.

古文：梁尘集丹帷，微飙扬罗袿。
现代文：梁上灰尘聚丹帷，微风轻扬拂罗衣。
English: Dust gathers on the beams and the curtains, and the breeze whistles through the robes.

古文：岂怨嘉时莫，徒惜良愿乖。
现代文：岂怨良辰转瞬逝，衹惜心愿常乖违。
English: Do not regret that good times are fleeting, regret that wishes often go unfulfilled.

古文：《有所思篇》：有所思，思昔人。曾闵二子，善养亲。和颜色，奉晨昏。
现代文：《有所思篇》有所思，思古人：曾、闵二圣人，善养双亲态度和悦，奉侍晨昏。
English: "Thoughtful Thoughts" Thoughtful, thoughtful people: Zeng, Zou two saints, good at nurturing their parents' attitude and happiness, serving the morning and evening.

古文：至诚烝烝，通明神。
现代文：孝德厚实心至诚，感动天神。
English: Filial piety, thick-heartedness, and sincerity moved Tenjin.

古文：邹孟轲，为齐卿。
现代文：邹人孟轲，任齐卿。
English: Meng Wei, Ren Qiqing.

古文：称身受禄，不贪荣。
现代文：量己才德受俸禄，不圆虚荣。
English: If you measure yourself by your talent, you will be rewarded, but not by your vanity.

古文：道不用，独拥楹。
现代文：道不用，退而著书独拥楹。
English: Don't use the road, retreat and become a bookworm.

古文：三徙既谇，礼义明。飞鸟集，猛兽附。
现代文：择邻三迁受教导，礼义明飞乌集，猛兽附。
English: They are taught to choose their neighbors and relocate three times, to be polite and courteous, and to beware of wild beasts.

古文：功成事毕，乃更娶。
现代文：功成事举才再娶。
English: Marry again only when you have achieved something.

古文：哀我生，遘凶旻。
现代文：哀伤我一生，屡屡遇凶运。
English: I've been sad all my life. I've had bad luck over and over again.

古文：幼罹荼毒，备艰辛。
现代文：从小遭茶毒，备尝艰卒。
English: Suffering from tea poisoning since childhood, he was prepared for hardships.

古文：慈颜绝，见无因。长怀永思，托丘坟。
现代文：慈母逝，相见无因、长怀思念心，寄情故乡丘坟。
English: My mother passed away, I saw her for no reason, I miss her, and I sent my love to her grave in my hometown.

古文：《雉子游原泽篇》：雉子游原泽，初怀耿介心。
现代文：《雉子游原泽篇》小小雉于游原泽，白幼胸怀正直心。
English: "Hanzi Youharazawa" is about a little girl who lives in Youharazawa. She is young and has an honest heart.

古文：饮啄虽勤苦，不愿栖园林，古有避世士，抗志清霄岑。
现代文：一饮啄虽劳苦，不愿安逸栖园林。占有避世七，志气高洁超山岑。
English: Although they work hard, they don't want to live comfortably in the garden. They have seven ways to escape from the world, and they have high morals and cleanliness.

古文：浩然寄卜肆，挥棹通川阴。
现代文：正气浩然隐卜肆，乘舟荡漾遁山林。
English: Zhengyi magnificently recited incantations and rode a boat through the mountains and forests.

古文：消摇风尘外，散发抚鸣琴。卿相非所眄，何况于千金。
现代文：逍遥尘世外，披发弹弦琴；卿相之位不留恋，何况对千金。
English: He is a happy-go-lucky outsider, wearing his hair in a ponytail and playing the lute; he does not hold grudges, not to mention the thousands of dollars.

古文：功名岂不美，宠辱亦相寻。
现代文：功名非不美，宠辱功名相追寻。
English: Accomplishments are not unattractive, but the pursuit of them is.

古文：冰炭结六府，忧虞缠胸襟。
现代文：矛盾交织肺腑内，忧虞总胸襟。
English: Contradictions are interwoven in the heart, and anxiety is in the mind.

古文：当世须大度，量己不克任。三复泉流诫，自惊良已深。
现代文：当代须有大度才，量己不能担重任多次重温退隐诫，自惊此愿实已深。
English: In the contemporary world, one must be generous and not burden oneself with the responsibility of repeatedly reviewing and retracting the admonition. I am surprised that this wish has become a reality.

古文：《上邪篇》：上邪下难正，众枉不可矫。
现代文：《邪篇》上邪下难正，众人枉曲无法矫。
English: In the "evil chapter," it is difficult to correct the evil, and people can not correct the injustice.

古文：音和响必清，端影缘直表。大化扬仁风，齐人犹偃草。圣王既已没，谁能弘至道。
现代文：音乐和谐声远扬，门影端正靠的是直表大化弘扬仁义风，齐一民心如同风吹草圣王已逝去，谁能恢弘至治道?
English: The music is harmonious and far-reaching, and the door relies on the straight face to promote the benevolence and righteousness, and the people's hearts are as united as the wind blowing grass. The holy king has passed away, who can expand and govern the way?

古文：开春湛柔露，代终肃严霜。
现代文：春天来临要施雨露，改朝换代要除严霜。
English: When spring comes, it is necessary to apply rain and dew, and it is necessary to remove severe frosts when changing dynasties.

古文：承平贵孔孟，政敝侯申商。孝公明赏罚，六世犹克昌。李斯肆滥刑，秦氏所以亡。
现代文：承平之口崇尚孔、垂说，政令松散就要施行法治靠生、直耋公明赏罚，六代之后犹盛昌，李斯滥施刑，秦朝因此被灭亡。
English: The mouth of Chengping advocated Confucianism, saying that if the government decrees loosely, it is necessary to implement the rule of law and ensure the survival of the people. After six generations, Yu Shengchang and Li Si imposed punishment indiscriminately. As a result, the Qin Dynasty was destroyed.

古文：汉宣隆中兴，魏祖宁三方。
现代文：汉宣帝中兴帝王业，魏朝太祖定三方。
English: Emperor Han Xuan of the Han Dynasty revived the imperial business, and Emperor Taizu of the Wei Dynasty established the tripartite system.

古文：譬彼针与石，效疾故称良。
现代文：如同银针和药石，治病有效才称良。
English: Like silver needles and medicinal stones, it is better to treat the disease effectively.

古文：《行苇》非不厚，悠悠何讵央。
现代文：《行苇》歌咏忠厚德，仁道深广，怎样才能布四方?
English: "The Marching Band" sings of loyalty, virtue, and benevolence. How can it be spread far and wide?

古文：琴瑟时永调，改弦当更张。
现代文：琴瑟弹奏未合拍，应当改弦而更张。
English: A lute played out of tune should be re-strung.

古文：矧乃治天下，此要安可忘。
现代文：何况治天下，此中关键怎能忘?
English: How can we forget the key to ruling the world?

古文：《临高台篇》：临高台，望天衢，飘然轻举，陵太虚。
现代文：《临高台篇》登临高台，远望天衢。飘飘轻飞升，迈步游太虚。
English: "Rinkodai" climbs to the top of the hill and looks down on the heavens. It soars gently, but the steps are too short.

古文：携列子，超帝乡。
现代文：携同列子，飞升帝乡。
English: Together with his son, they fly up to the imperial village.

古文：云衣雨带，乘风翔。
现代文：云作衣，雨作带，乘风高翔。
English: The clouds make the clothes, the rain makes the belt, and the wind makes the soaring.

古文：肃龙驾，会瑶台。
现代文：迎拜仙人车驾，会聚瑶台。
English: Greet the Immortal Chariot and gather in the ring.

古文：清晖浮景，溢蓬莱。
现代文：清辉浮光，洒满蓬莱。
English: Brilliant floating light, sprinkled with rime.

古文：济四海，濯洧盘。
现代文：渡过西海，洗发在洧盘。
English: Crossed the West Sea and washed my hair in Xingpan.

古文：伫立云岳，结幽兰。
现代文：站在云中山岳，佩幽兰。
English: Standing in the mountains in the clouds, Pei Youlan.

古文：愿言桑梓，思旧游。
现代文：驾迅风，驰游南方炎州。
English: Driving the swift wind, cruising the southern Yanzhou.

古文：倾霄盖，靡电旌。降彼天涂，颓窈冥。
现代文：怀念家乡，思念老朋友，收起天作的车盖，挥动光如电闪的旗旌循天路，出天庭。
English: Miss your hometown, miss your old friends, close the lid of the car made by heaven, wave the flag of light like lightning, follow the path of heaven, and go out of heaven.

古文：辞仙族，归人群。怀忠抱义，奉明君。
现代文：告辞神仙，归人群怀抱忠义，侍奉明君。
English: Farewell immortals, return to the crowd, embrace loyalty, and serve Mingjun.

古文：任穷达，随所遭。
现代文：穷窘显达由天命，贵贱随运漂。
English: Poverty seems to be determined by the fate of the earth, and nobility floats with the tide.

古文：何为远想，令心劳。
现代文：为何作空想，白白使心劳。
English: Why do you imagine and labor in vain?

古文：《远期篇》：远期千里客，肃驾候良辰。
现代文：《远期篇》早早地期待着远方来客，恭迎车驾选择的是吉日良辰。
English: "Long-term version" is looking forward to the guests from far away, and the auspicious day is chosen by the driver.

古文：近命城郭友，具尔惟懿亲。
现代文：近处邀来本城的好友，作陪的还有兄弟或是至亲。
English: Close friends from the city are invited, as well as brothers or relatives.

古文：高门启双闱，长筵列嘉宾。
现代文：开启大门为的是迎接贵客，摆设盛筵为的是招待嘉宾。
English: The doors are opened to welcome distinguished guests, and the table is set up to entertain them.

古文：中唐儛六佾，三厢罗乐人。
现代文：中堂上跳的是六佾之舞，三厢中排列着奏乐之人。
English: The dance performed in the middle of the hall is the dance of the six cymbals, and the musicians are lined up in the three boxes.

古文：箫管激悲音，羽毛扬华文。
现代文：箫管奏出悲壮的曲调，挥动羽饰跳文舞，舞步轻而匀。
English: The gong pipe played a tragic tune, waved the feathers to dance, and the dance steps were light and even.

古文：金石响高宇，弦歌动梁尘。
现代文：金石之音在高尾中回响，弦歌乐曲震动了梁上的积尘。
English: The sound of precious stones reverberates in Takao, and string music shakes the dust on the beams.

古文：修标多巧捷，九剑亦入神。
现代文：修标舞姿灵巧敏捷，丸剑之技也更出神入化。
English: His dance moves are deft and agile, and his skill with the circular sword is even more amazing.

古文：迁善自雅调，成化由清均。
现代文：乐调高雅白会引人迁恶向善，实现教化靠的是音乐清纯。
English: High-pitched music will attract evil to good, and enlightenment is achieved by pure music.

古文：主人垂隆庆，群士乐亡身。
现代文：君王赐给臣下福庆，士人乐于为君王献身。
English: The sovereign bestows prosperity on his subjects, and the nobles are happy to sacrifice themselves for the sovereign.

古文：愿我圣明君，迩期保万春。
现代文：祝愿我圣明的君王，永保长寿万年春。
English: I wish my sacred king, Yong Bao, a long life and eternal spring.

古文：《石流篇》：石上流水，湔湔其波。
现代文：《石流篇》石上细水缓缓流，流时泛起湔湔波。
English: "Stone Stream" is a slow trickle of water on a rock, rippling as it flows.

古文：发源幽岫，永归长河。
现代文：发源深山出幽谷，源源不绝入长河看那不息长流水。
English: The source is deep in the mountains and out of the valley, the source is incessant into the long river to see the long flowing water.

古文：瞻彼逝者，岁月其偕。
现代文：岁月同逝去不停。壬迂在!
English: The years keep passing by. Imaido is here!

古文：子在川上，惟以增怀。
现代文：上观流水，徒增悲叹感伤情。
English: Looking at the flowing water, the sorrow and sadness are increasing.

古文：嗟我殷忧，载劳寤寐。
现代文：叹我心中重重忧，日夜辛劳不得休。
English: Sorrow and trouble are in my heart; I am weary from my labor day and night.

古文：遘此百罹，有志不遂。
现代文：生此乱世逢灾祸，空有抱负志难酬。
English: To live in this chaotic world is to meet with disaster. Empty aspirations are not rewarded.

古文：行年倏忽，长勤是婴。
现代文：人生短促倏忽过，辛劳忙碌度一生。
English: Life is short and fleeting, and we must work hard and be busy throughout our lives.

古文：永言没世，悼兹无成。
现代文：一旦身死离人世，感伤此身事无成。
English: Once a person dies, there is no sentimentality.

古文：幸遇开泰，沐浴嘉运。
现代文：幸遇亨通安泰时，沐浴恩德转嘉运。
English: When you are lucky enough to be prosperous and safe, you will be blessed with good fortune.

古文：缓带安寝，亦又何愠。
现代文：悠闲自在度余年，安居乐业又何恨。
English: Leisurely spend the rest of the year, what is there to hate about living a happy life.

古文：古之为仁，自求诸己。
现代文：古代之人寻仁德，自己努力求诸己。
English: The ancients sought benevolence, and strived to improve themselves.

古文：虚情遥慕，终于徒已。
现代文：虚情仰慕不施行，最终衹是徒然矣。
English: If false admiration is not put into practice, it will ultimately be in vain.

古文：《圣人制礼乐》一篇，《巾舞歌》一篇，按《景祐广乐记》言，字讹谬，声辞杂书。宋鼓吹铙歌辞四篇，旧史言，诂不可解。
现代文：《圣人制礼乐》一篇，巾舞歌一篇，按《景枯广乐记》说，字讹误很多，表声字和文辞混杂塞鼓吹铙歌四篇，以前的史书说，文字意义不可理解。
English: According to the "Record of the Jing-Kou-Guang Music," there are a lot of misspellings in the "Ritual Music of the Sage System" and a handkerchief dance song, and there are four songs in which the pronunciation and words are mixed up, and the meaning of the words is incomprehensible, according to the previous history books.

古文：汉鼓吹铙歌十八篇，按《古今乐录》，皆声、辞、艳相杂，不复可分。
现代文：漠鼓吹铙歌十八篇，按《古今乐录》，说歌辞中表声字、文辞以及楚地歌谣中的俗字互相混杂，没有办法再分辨。
English: According to the "Ancient and Modern Music Record," there are 18 pieces of eulogies, and it is said that the words of the eulogy, the words of the eulogy, and the slang words in the Chu folk songs are mixed together, and there is no way to distinguish them.

