古文：自《风》、《雅》寝声，莫或抽绪，奇文郁起，其《离骚》哉！
现代文：自从《国风》、《小雅》、《大雅》以后，再没有能与之媲美的新作。
English: Since "Kokufu," "Koya" and "Daya," there has been no comparable new work.

古文：固已轩翥诗人之后，奋飞辞家之前，岂去圣之未远，而楚人之多才乎！
现代文：后来涌现出一些奇特的妙文，那就是《离骚》了。这是在《诗经》之后兴起，活跃在辞赋家之前，大概由于离圣人还不远，而楚国人又大都富有才华的原因吧？
English: Later, some strange and wonderful texts emerged, that is, "Issao." This arose after the "Book of Songs" and was active before the Zhifu family, probably because it is not far from the sage, and the people of Chu are mostly talented, right?

古文：昔汉武爱《骚》，而淮南作《传》，以为： 《国风》好色而不淫，《小雅》怨诽而不乱，若《离骚》者，可谓兼之。
现代文：从前汉武帝喜爱《离骚》等篇，让淮南王刘安作《离骚传》。刘安认为：《国风》言情并不过分，《小雅》讽刺也很得体，而《离骚》等篇正好兼有二者的长处。
English: In the past, Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty liked "Leaving So" and other works, and asked Liu An, the king of Huainan, to write "Leaving So." Liu An believed that: "National Style" was not too excessive, "Little Ya" was also very appropriate, and "Leaving So" and other works had the advantages of both.

古文：蝉蜕秽浊之中，浮游尘埃之外，皭然涅而不缁，虽与日月争光可也。 
现代文：屈原能像蝉脱壳那样摆脱污浊的环境，能够消遥于尘俗以外，其清白是染也染不黑的，简直可以和太阳、月亮比光明了。
English: Qu Yuan can get rid of the filthy environment like a cicada shedding its shell, can disappear beyond the ordinary, and its innocence is neither tainted nor tarnished, it can be brighter than the sun and the moon.

古文：班固以为： 露才扬己，忿怼沉江。羿浇二姚，与左氏不合；昆仑悬圃，非《经》义所载。
现代文：但是班固却认为：屈原展露才华，怀着怨恨而投水自杀；他在作品中讲到后羿、过浇、二姚的故事，与《左传》中的有关记载不符合；讲到昆仑和悬圃，在儒家经典中没有记载。
English: However, Banggu believes that: Qu Yuan showed his talent and committed suicide by throwing water with resentment; the stories he told in his works about Houyu, Guoqiao and Eryao do not match the relevant records in Zuo Zhuan; there is no record in the Confucian classics about Kunlun and Suspension Garden.

古文：然其文辞丽雅，为词赋之宗，虽非明哲，可谓妙才。 
现代文：不过他的文辞很华丽、雅正，是辞赋的创始者。所以，屈原虽然算不上贤明的人，但可以说是个很有才华的人。
English: However, his words are very beautiful and elegant, and he is the founder of diction. Therefore, although Qu Yuan is not a wise man, he can be said to be a very talented person.

古文：王逸以为： 诗人提耳，屈原婉顺。
现代文：后来，王逸却以为：《诗经》的作者说什么曾提着耳朵警告，屈原就比这和缓得多。
English: Later, however, Wang Yizhong thought: "The author of the Book of Songs said that he had warned Qu Yuan with his ear, but Qu Yuan was much gentler than that.

古文：《离骚》之文，依《经》立义。驷虬乘鹥，则时乘六龙；昆仑流沙，则《禹贡》敷土。
现代文：《离骚》里边常有根据经书来写的，例如说驾龙乘凤，是根据《易经》中关于乘龙的比喻；说昆仑和流沙，是根据《禹贡》中关于土地的记载。
English: In "Issao," there are often things written based on scriptures. For example, the saying of "driving the dragon and riding the phoenix" is based on the metaphor of "riding the dragon" in "I Ching"; the saying of "Kunlun" and "Quicksand" is based on the record of "Yugong" about land.

古文：名儒辞赋，莫不拟其仪表，所谓 金相玉质，百世无匹 者也。 及汉宣嗟叹，以为 皆合经术 。扬雄讽味，亦言 体同诗雅 。
现代文：所以，后代著名学者们所写的辞赋，都以他为榜样；的确是和金玉一样值得珍贵，历史上没有可以和他并称的。此外，如汉宣帝称赞《楚辞》，以为都合于儒家学说；扬雄读了，也说和《诗经》相近。
English: Therefore, the words and phrases written by famous scholars in later generations are all based on his example; indeed, they are as precious as gold and jade, and there is nothing in history that can be called the same as his. In addition, Emperor Xuan of Han praised "Chu Ci" and thought it was suitable for Confucian doctrine; Yang Xiong read it and also said that it was similar to "Song of Songs."

古文：四家举以方经，而孟坚谓不合传，褒贬任声，抑扬过实，可谓鉴而弗精，玩而未核者也。
现代文：刘安等四人都拿《楚辞》比经书，只有班固说与经书不合。这些称赞或指责都着眼于表面，常常不符合实际，那就是鉴别不精当，玩味而没有查考。
English: Liu An and the other four all compared the "Analects of Confucius" with the scriptures, only Banggu said that it was inconsistent with the scriptures. These praises or criticisms are focused on the surface, and often do not correspond to reality, that is, the identification is not refined, and the taste is not investigated.

古文：将核其论，必征言焉。
现代文：要审核每一个人的言论，必须核对《楚辞》本身。
English: In order to review each person's speech, it is necessary to check the "Analects of Confucius" itself.

古文：故其陈尧舜之耿介，称禹汤之祗敬，典诰之体也；讥桀纣之猖披，伤羿浇之颠陨，规讽之旨也；虬龙以喻君子，云蜺以譬谗邪，比兴之义也；每一顾而掩涕，叹君门之九重，忠怨之辞也：观兹四事，同于《风》、《雅》者也。
现代文：例如《离骚》陈述唐尧、虞舜的光明和伟大，称颂商汤、夏禹的庄严与恭敬，这些都与《尚书》中的《典》《诰》记载十分接近。其中讥讽夏桀和殷纣王的狂妄褊狭，伤叹后羿与过浇的灭亡，这些就是符合经书中规劝讽喻的意思。用虬龙比喻君子，用云霓来比喻小人，这都是比兴的手法。回顾祖国要掩面流涕，叹息君门深重君王难见，是忠君爱国的言辞。这些都是《楚辞》与经书相同的地方。
English: For example, the description of the brilliance and greatness of Tang Xuan and Gu Xuan in "Leaving Xuan" and the praise of the solemnity and reverence of Shang Tang and Xia Yu in "Shang Shu" are very close to the records of "Qing" and "Jing" in "Shang Shu." Among them, the ridicule of the arrogance and narrow-mindedness of Xia Xuan and King Yin Xuan, the lamentation of the death of the queen and the over-pouring, these are in line with the meaning of the sutra's exhortation of irony. Using a dragon to compare a gentleman, using a cloud to compare a

古文：至于托云龙，说迂怪，丰隆求宓妃，鸩鸟媒娀女，诡异之辞也；康回倾地，夷羿彃日，木夫九首，土伯三目，谲怪之谈也；依彭咸之遗则，从子胥以自适，狷狭之志也；士女杂坐，乱而不分，指以为乐，娱酒不废，沉湎日夜，举以为欢，荒淫之意也：摘此四事，异乎经典者也。
现代文：至于《离骚》托龙与云旗，讲述怪诞的故事，丰隆追求洛神，鸩鸟向娀女求婚，的确是怪异的话语。《天问》说共工撞倒天柱山，后羿射日，《招魂》说九头的大力士、三只眼的土地神，这些也都是怪异的言语。《离骚》说彭咸投河的做法，《九章》伍子胥在江水里寻求快乐，这些都是狭隘的说法。《招魂》里讲述男女杂坐不分是快乐，终日饮酒是欢愉，这是负面荒淫的行为。这些是和经书不同的地方。
English: As for the "Leaving Soo," the dragon and the cloud flag, telling a grotesque story, Honglong pursuing the god of Luo, the ostrich proposing marriage to the girl, are indeed strange words. "Quest for the Heavens" says that the co-workers knocked down the Tianzhu Mountain, and the hawk shot the sun, "The Conjuring" says that the nine-headed Hercules, the three-eyed land god, these are also strange words. "Leaving Soo" says that the practice of Peng Ham throwing into the river, and "The Nine Chapters" Wu Zi Ya seeks happiness in the water of the river, these are all narrow

古文：故论其典诰则如彼，语其夸诞则如此。
现代文：所以，《楚辞》和经书相同的地方有一些，夸张的地方也有一些。
English: Therefore, there are some similarities between the "Analects of Confucius" and the scriptures, and some exaggerations.

古文：固知《楚辞》者，体宪于三代，而风杂于战国，乃《雅》、《颂》之博徒，而词赋之英杰也。
现代文：由此，我们可以了解到，《楚辞》效法古代圣贤的佳作，同时掺杂了战国时期的文学风气。与《诗经》相比可能略差，但与后世作品相比要好得多。
English: From this, we can understand that "Chu Ci" follows the excellent works of ancient sages, and at the same time mixes the literary style of the Warring States period. It may be slightly inferior to "Song of Songs," but it is much better than later works.

古文：观其骨鲠所树，肌肤所附，虽取熔《经》旨，亦自铸伟辞。
现代文：看它用来建立骨骼的主旨，作为附着骨骼肌肤的文采，虽然熔化经书的含义，但也独自创制出卓越的文采。
English: Look at the theme it uses to build bones, as a literary device attached to bones and skin. Although it melts the meaning of the scripture, it also creates an outstanding literary device.

古文：故《骚经》、《九章》，朗丽以哀志；《九歌》、《九辩》，绮靡以伤情；《远游》、《天问》，瑰诡而慧巧；《招魂》、《大招》，耀艳而深华；《卜居》标放言之致，《渔父》寄独往之才。
现代文：所以，《离骚》和《九章》表达了哀怨的志向，《九歌》和《九辩》体现了感伤的情怀，《远游》和《天问》彰显了文思和巧慧，《招魂》和《大招》应用了华丽的文采，《卜居》代表作者狂放不羁的意志，《渔父》寄托独善其身、孤芳自赏的性情。
English: Therefore, "The Parting of the Ways" and "The Nine Chapters" expressed the sorrowful aspiration, "The Nine Songs" and "The Nine Arguments" embodied the sentimental feelings, "The Long Journey" and "Question of Heaven" highlighted the wit and cleverness, "The Conjuring" and "The Grand Deception" applied the gorgeous poetry, "The Paradise Lost" represented the author's wild and uninhibited will, and "The Fisherman's Father" was based on the temperament of self-indulgence and self-appreciation.

古文：故能气往轹古，辞来切今，惊采绝艳，难与并能矣。
现代文：所以《楚辞》气概贯穿古今，辞藻华丽堪称绝伦，一时文章难有能够与它相媲美的了。
English: Therefore, the spirit of "Chu Ci" runs through the past and the present, and the gorgeousness of the words can be called extraordinary, and it is difficult for an article to be comparable to it.

古文：自《九怀》以下，遽蹑其迹，而屈宋逸步，莫之能追。
现代文：从王褒《九怀》以后，许多作品都学习《楚辞》，但屈原和宋玉的好榜样总是赶不上。
English: Since Wang Bo's "Nine Hearts," many works have learned the "Chu Ci," but the good example of Qu Yuan and Song Yu can never catch up.

古文：故其叙情怨，则郁伊而易感；述离居，则怆怏而难怀；论山水，则循声而得貌；言节侯，则披文而见时。
现代文：屈、宋所抒写的怨抑的情感，使读者为之痛苦而深深地感动；他们叙述的离情别绪，也使读者感到悲哀而难以忍受。他们谈到山水的时候，人们可以从文章音节悬想到岩壑的形貌；他们讲到四季气节的地方，人们可以从文章辞采看到时光的变迁。
English: The resentful emotions expressed by Qu and Song are painful and deeply moving to the reader; the parting sentiments they describe also make the reader feel sad and unbearable. When they talk about the landscape, one can imagine the shape of the rock cliff from the syllables of the article; when they talk about the four seasons, one can see the changes of time from the words of the article.

古文：是以枚贾追风以入丽，马扬沿波而得奇，其衣被词人，非一代也。
现代文：以后枚乘、贾谊追随他们的遗风，使作品写得华丽绚烂；司马相如、扬雄循着他们的余波，因而作品具有奇伟动人的优点。
English: Later, Shi Rong and Jia Yi followed their legacy, so that the works were written gorgeously; Sima Xiangru and Yang Xiong followed their aftermath, so the works have great and moving advantages.

古文：故才高者菀其鸿裁，中巧者猎其艳辞，吟讽者衔其山川，童蒙者拾其香草。
现代文：可见屈、宋对后人的启发，并不限于某一个时期而已。后来写作才能较高的人，就从中吸取重大的思想内容；具有小聪明的人，就学到些美丽的文辞；一般阅读的人，喜欢其中关于山水的描写；比较幼稚的人，只留连于美人芳草的比喻。
English: It can be seen that the inspiration of Sui and Song to future generations is not limited to a certain period. Later, people with higher writing ability will draw important ideological content from it; people with little intelligence will learn some beautiful words; people who read in general will like the description of the landscape; people who are more naive will only stay with the metaphor of beauty.

古文：若能凭轼以倚《雅》、《颂》，悬辔以驭楚篇，酌奇而不失其贞，玩华而不坠其实，则顾盼可以驱辞力，欬唾可以穷文致，亦不复乞灵于长卿，假宠于子渊矣。
现代文：如果我们在写作的时候，一方面依靠着《诗经》，一方面又掌握着《楚辞》，吸取奇伟的东西而能保持正常，玩味华艳的事物而不违背实际；那么刹那间就可以发挥文辞的作用，不费什么力就能够穷究文章的情趣，也就无须乎向司马相如和王褒借光叨教了。总结：
English: If, when we write, we rely on the one hand on the "Book of Poetry" and on the other hand master the "Elegant Quotations," absorb the marvelous things and can remain normal, play with the glamorous things without violating reality; then we can play the role of literature in an instant, and without much effort we can thoroughly investigate the taste of the article, and there is no need to borrow from Sima Xiangru and Wang. Summary:

古文：赞曰∶不有屈原，岂见离骚。惊才风逸，壮志烟高。
现代文：没有屈原就没有《离骚》，他惊人的才华像飘风那样奔放，他宏大的志愿像云烟那样高远。
English: Without Qu Yuan, there would be no "Leaving So." His amazing talent is as unrestrained as the wind, and his ambitious will is as lofty as the clouds.

古文：山川无极，情理实劳，金相玉式，艳溢锱毫。
现代文：山川广阔无极，情思宽广遥远，伟大作家的思想情感也同样的无边无际；因而为文学创作树立了很好的榜样，字字句句都光彩艳丽。
English: Mountains and rivers are vast and boundless, feelings are broad and distant, and the thoughts and emotions of great writers are equally boundless; thus, it has set a good example for literary creation, and every word is brilliant and beautiful.

