古文：文公即位二年，欲用其民，子犯曰： 民未知义，盍纳天子以示之义？ 
现代文：晋文公即位的第二年，就想使用他的人民进行征战，子犯说： 人民还不懂得大义，何不把周天子护送回去，以此显示大义呢？ 
English: In the second year after Emperor Jinwen ascended the throne, he wanted to use his people to go to war. The criminal said, "The people still don't understand the Great Righteousness. Why not escort Zhou Tianzi back to show the Great Righteousness?"

古文：乃纳襄王于周。
现代文：于是文公就派军护送周襄王返回周都。
English: Therefore, Wenguang sent an army to escort Zhou Xiangwang back to Zhou capital.

古文：公曰： 可矣乎？ 
现代文：文公又问： 现在可以了吧？ 
English: Wenguang also asked: Is it okay now?

古文：对曰： 民未知信，盍伐原以示之信？ 
现代文：子犯回答说： 人民还不懂得信用，何不攻打原国，来显示信用呢？ 
English: The son-in-law replied, "The people still don't understand trust. Why not attack the country of origin to show trust?"

古文：乃伐原。曰： 可矣乎？ 
现代文：于是文公就出兵征伐原国，示信于民。文公又问： 现在可以了吧？ 
English: As a result, Bunko sent troops to conquer the country of his origin, to show his faith in the people. Bunko also asked: Is it okay now?

古文：对曰： 民未知礼，盍大蒐，备师尚礼以示之。 
现代文：子犯回答说： 人民还不懂得礼仪，何不举行一次大规模的阅兵，整顿军队，崇礼尚武，来显示礼仪呢？ 
English: The son-in-law replied, "People still don't understand etiquette. Why don't we hold a large-scale military parade, rectify the army, honor the military, and show etiquette?"

古文：乃大蒐于被庐，作三军。
现代文：于是文公便在被庐举行大规模的阅兵，建立了上、中、下三军。
English: As a result, Wengong held a large-scale military parade in Biejing and established the upper, middle and lower three armies.

古文：使郤縠将中军，以为大政。郤溱佐之。
现代文：任命郤縠统帅中军，执掌国家大政，由郤溱辅佐他。
English: He was appointed commander-in-chief of the Chinese army and took charge of the country's major affairs, assisted by Gong Fu.

古文：子犯曰： 可矣。 
现代文：子犯这时候才说： 现在可以兴兵征伐了。 
English: It was only then that the son-in-law said, "Now we can raise an army and go to war."

古文：遂伐曹、卫，出谷戍，释宋围，败楚师于城濮，于是乎遂伯。
现代文：于是文公便发兵攻打曹、卫两国，赶走戍守谷地的楚军，解救宋国之围，在城濮之战中打败了楚国军队，因此而称霸诸侯。
English: As a result, Wengong sent troops to attack the two countries of Cao and Wei, drove away the Chu army guarding the valley, relieved the siege of Song, defeated the Chu army in the battle of Chengye, and thus dominated the princes.

