古文：祖权，黄门郎。
现代文：羊欣字敬元，泰山南城人。
English: Yang Xin (羊欣) and Jing Yuan (敬元) are from Taishan Nancheng.

古文：父不疑，桂阳太守。
现代文：父亲羊不疑是桂阳太守。
English: The father sheep is undoubtedly the Guiyang governor.

古文：欣少靖默，无竞于人，美言笑，善容止。
现代文：羊欣幼时温和沉静，从不与人争斗。言谈优雅，衣着整齐，举止优美。
English: His father, Sheep, was no doubt the governor of Guiyang. As a young boy, Sheep Xin had a quiet personality, never quarreled with others, had a beautiful smile, and was good at decorating his face.

古文：泛览经籍，尤长隶书。
现代文：遍览经籍群书，特别擅长隶书。
English: Reads a wide range of classics, and is particularly good at the book of rules.

古文：不疑初为乌程令，欣时年十二，时王献之为吴兴太守，甚知爱之。
现代文：羊不疑开始任乌程县令时，羊欣十二岁。当时王献之任吴兴太守，非常赏识喜爱羊欣。
English: When Yang Doubtless began to serve as the governor of Wuching County, Yang Xin was twelve years old. At that time, Wang Xian was appointed as the governor of Wu Xing, and he was very appreciative and loved Yang Xin.

古文：献之尝夏月入县，欣著新绢裙昼寝，献之书裙数幅而去。
现代文：有一个夏日他到乌程来，羊欣白天穿着一件新的绢裙在睡觉，王献之在羊欣几幅裙摆上写满了字就走了。
English: One summer day, he came to Wucheng. During the day, Yang Xin was sleeping in a new pleated skirt. Wang Xianzhi wrote a lot of words on several skirts of Yang Xin and left.

古文：欣本工书，因此弥善。
现代文：羊欣本来书法就好，从此后字写得更好了。
English: Originally, Yang Xin was good at calligraphy, but since then, she has been able to write better.

古文：起家辅国参军，府解还家。
现代文：羊欣开始任辅国参军，州府解体后就回到家乡。
English: He first joined the army as an auxiliary officer, but returned home after the military government was abolished.

古文：隆安中，朝廷渐乱，欣优游私门，不复进仕。
现代文：隆安时期东晋渐渐混乱，羊欣游历于私人府第之间，不再出来做官。
English: During the Longan period, the imperial court was gradually in turmoil, and Yang Xin was content to relax at home and no longer came out to work as an official.

古文：会稽王世子元显每使欣书，常辞不奉命，元显怒，乃以为其后军府舍人。
现代文：会稽王后代元显每次让羊欣写字，羊欣总是拒绝。元显很恼火，就要羊欣做他后军府的舍人。
English: Every time Yuan Xian, a descendant of the court examiner Wang, asked Yang Xin to write, Yang Xin always refused. Yuan Xian was very angry and asked Yang Xin to be his post-military government's secretary.

古文：此职本用寒人，欣意貌恬然，不以高卑见色，论者称焉。
现代文：这个职务本由出身寒门的人担任，羊欣却神色自若，没有表现出一点点自卑。
English: This position was originally held by a poor person, but Yang Xin is calm and does not show the nobility and lowliness of the position on the outside. Public opinion is very praiseworthy.

古文：欣尝诣领军将军谢混，混拂席改服，然后见之。
现代文：当时品评人物的人都为此称道他。羊欣曾去拜访领军将军谢混，谢整理座席，换上新衣服之后才见羊欣。
English: At that time, people who commented on the character praised him for this. Yang Xin once went to visit the leading general Xie Ming, Xie rearranged the seats, and only saw Yang Xin after changing into new clothes.

古文：时混族子灵运在坐，退告族兄瞻曰： 望蔡见羊欣，遂易衣改席。 
现代文：当时谢的侄子谢灵运也在场，退出来后将这事告诉叔伯哥哥谢瞻说： 望蔡见羊欣要换衣裳换座席。 
English: At that time, Xie's nephew, Xie Lingyun, was also present. After withdrawing, he told his uncle and brother, Xie Zhan, about this: Wang Cai said that Yang Xin wanted to change clothes and change seats.

古文：欣由此益知名。
现代文：羊欣从此更加有名。
English: Since then, Yang Xin has become even more famous.

古文：桓玄辅政，领平西将军，以欣为平西参军，仍转主簿，参预机要。
现代文：桓玄辅政任平西将军，让羊欣任平西参军，又转任主簿，让他参与机要事情。
English: Kuan Xuan Yu Zheng was appointed as the general of Pingxi, and Yang Xin was appointed as the general of Pingxi to join the army. He was also transferred to the position of chief accountant, allowing him to be involved in important matters.

古文：欣欲自疏，时漏密事，玄觉其此意，愈重之，以为楚台殿中郎。
现代文：羊欣想要疏远桓玄，常将一些机密泄露出去。桓玄察觉了他的用意，反而更重视他，任命他为楚台殿中郎。
English: Yang Xin often divulged some secrets in order to alienate Kuan Xuan. Kuan Xuan noticed his intention, but instead he valued him more and appointed him as the second-in-command of the Trudai Palace.

古文：谓曰： 尚书政事之本，殿中礼乐所出。
现代文：并对他说： 尚书是政事的根本，朝廷中礼乐都由尚书制定。
English: He said to him, "The Shangshu is the foundation of government affairs, and the palace is the source of ceremonial music.

古文：卿昔处股肱，方此为轻也。 
现代文：你过去任机密要职，而现在就要轻松了。 
English: You've had a top-secret job, and it's about to get a lot easier.

古文：欣拜职少日，称病自免，屏居里巷，十余年不出。
现代文：羊欣就职没几日就称病辞去官职，隐居民间，十多年没有出来做官。
English: Not long after taking office, Yang Xin claimed to be ill and resigned from his post. He lived in seclusion and did not come out to work as an official for more than ten years.

古文：义熙中，弟徽被遇于高祖，高祖谓咨议参军郑鲜之曰： 羊徽一时美器，世论犹在兄后，恨不识之。 
现代文：义熙年间，羊欣弟弟羊徽被高祖任用，高祖对咨议参军郑鲜之说： 羊徽是一时期的杰出之士，而世人对他的评论还排在他哥哥之后，真遗憾不能与羊欣相见。 
English: During the Yixi era, Yangxin's younger brother, Yanghui, was appointed by Gao Zu. Gao Zu said to Zheng Xianzhi, a member of the advisory council, "Yanghui is an outstanding person of the period, and the world's comments on him are still ranked after his brother. It's a pity that I can't meet with Yangxin."

古文：即板欣补右将军刘籓司马，转长史，中军将军道怜谘议参军。
现代文：于是高祖就下诏让羊欣补列右将军刘藩的司马，转任长史，中军将军道怜的咨议参军。
English: As a result, Gao Zu issued an edict to have Yang Xin fill the position of Sima of the Right General Liu Han, and he was transferred to the position of Changshi, and the Chinese General Tao Rong advised him to join the army.

古文：出为新安太守。在郡四年，简惠著称。
现代文：后出京任新安太守，在任一共四年，以简朴仁惠著称。
English: After that, he went to Beijing to serve as the new governor of An, and was in office for a total of four years. He was known for his simplicity and benevolence.

古文：除临川王义庆辅国长史，庐陵王义真车骑谘议参军，并不就。
现代文：又被任命为临川王刘义庆的辅国长史，庐陵王刘义真的车骑咨议参军，但都未到任。
English: He also appointed him as Liu Yijing, the governor of Linchuan, and Liu Yizhen, the governor of Fuling, to join the army, but neither of them took office.

古文：太祖重之，以为新安太守，前后凡十三年，游玩山水，甚得适性。
现代文：太祖十分看重他让他做新安太守，前后一共十三年。在任上，他尽情游玩山水，这很投合他的性情。
English: The great-grandfather thought highly of him and made him the new governor of An County for a total of thirteen years. During his term of office, he enjoyed the landscape to the full, which suited his temperament.

古文：转在义兴，非其好也。
现代文：后转到义兴任职，与他心意不合。
English: Later, he was transferred to Yixing, which did not agree with him.

古文：顷之，又称病笃自免归。
现代文：不久又以病重为由辞官回乡。
English: Soon after, he resigned on the grounds of serious illness and returned to his hometown.

古文：除中散大夫。
现代文：被任命为中散大夫。
English: He was appointed as a Zhongshan doctor.

古文：素好黄老，常手自书章，有病不服药，饮符水而已。
现代文：羊欣一向喜欢黄老之学，常常亲手抄写这类书籍上的章节。他有病不吃药，只喝符水而已。
English: Yang Xin has always liked the study of Huanglao, and often copies chapters from such books with his own hands. He does not take medicine when he is sick, but only drinks water.

古文：兼善医术，撰《药方》十卷。
现代文：他又精通医术，著有《药方》一书共十卷。
English: He was also well-versed in medicine and authored the ten-volume Pharmacopoeia.

古文：于是改其所居称为孝张里。
现代文：羊欣以不能忍受跪拜为由，拒不朝见皇帝，高祖和太祖都因不认识他而非常遗憾。
English: Yang Xin refused to meet the emperor on the grounds that he could not bear to kneel. Gao Zu and Taizu were very sorry because they did not know him.

古文：无子。王微，字景玄，琅邪临沂人，太保弘弟子也。
现代文：他如果不是看望最近的亲属从不轻易外出。而且他走路只走城外，从未走进宫殿之地。元嘉十九年去世，享年七十三岁。王微字景玄，琅王牙临沂人，太保王弘的侄子。
English: He never went out unless it was to visit his closest relatives. Moreover, he only walked outside the city and never went into the palace grounds. Yuan Jia died at the age of 73 in the 19th year of the Yuan Dynasty. Wang Weizhizhe Jingxuan, a disciple of Wang Ya Linyi, was the nephew of Taibo Wang Hong.

古文：父孺，光禄大夫。
现代文：父亲王孺是光禄大夫。
English: Wang Yao's father is a doctor from Guanglu.

古文：微少好学，无不通览，善属文，能书画，兼解音律、医方、阴阳术数。
现代文：王微小时候喜爱学习，博览群书，文章写得好，会书法、绘画，还懂音乐、医方、阴阳术数。
English: When Wang Wei was a child, he loved to study, read a lot of books, wrote good articles, knew calligraphy and painting, and also understood music, medicine, and yin and yang.

古文：年十六，州举秀才，衡阳王义季右军参军，并不就。
现代文：十六岁时州里举荐他为秀才、衡阳王刘义季的右军参军，他都未去就任。
English: At the age of sixteen, he was recommended by the state to join the right army of Liu Yizi, the king of Hengyang. However, he did not take up the post.

古文：起家司徒祭酒，转主簿，始兴王浚后军功曹记室参军，太子中舍人，始兴王友。
现代文：始任司徒祭酒，转任主簿，始兴王刘浚后军功曹记室参军，太子中舍人，他是始兴王的朋友。
English: He was the first priest to offer wine, and later became the chief steward. He was a friend of King Shi Xing.

古文：父忧去官，服阕，除南平王铄右军咨议参军。微素无宦情，称疾不就。
现代文：王微因服父亲的丧辞去官职。服丧期满后，任南平王刘铄的右军谘议参军，王微一向没有仕宦的欲望，称病不去就职。
English: Wang Wei resigned from his post to attend his father's funeral. After the end of the mourning period, the right army of the king of Nanping, Liu Bei, advised him to join the army. Wang Wei had never had the desire to serve, saying that he would not take up the post because of illness.

古文：仍除中书侍郎，又拟南琅邪、义兴太守，并固辞。
现代文：朝廷仍任命他为中书侍郎，又准备任命他为南琅王牙太守和义兴太守，他都坚决辞谢了。
English: The imperial court still appointed him as the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and also prepared to appoint him as the governor of Nanzhao and the governor of Yixing, but he firmly declined.

古文：吏部尚书江湛举微为吏部郎，微与湛书曰：
现代文：王微做了始兴王刘浚的府吏后，刘浚屡次关怀慰问他，王微写信答谢他，总用华丽的词采。王微写文章很有古风，抑扬起伏。
English: After Wang Wei became the government official of Shi Xing Wang Liu Jun, Liu Jun repeatedly took care of and consoled him. Wang Wei wrote a letter to thank him, always using gorgeous words. Wang Wei's writing is very old-fashioned, with ups and downs.

古文：弟心病乱度，非但蹇蹙而已，此处朝野所共知。
现代文：袁淑看了认为王的文章是诉屈，王微因此又给叔伯弟弟僧绰写了信。
English: Yuan Shuk read it and thought that Wang's article was a complaint, so Wang Wei also wrote a letter to his uncle and brother, Monseung.

古文：卿既不可解，立欲便别，且当笑。
现代文：当时有人说王微被举荐，庐江何偃也参加了议论，何偃担心被王责备，写信给他表白自己。
English: At that time, some people said that Wang Wei was recommended, and He Xuan of Minjiang also participated in the discussion. He Xuan was worried about being criticized by Wang and wrote to him to express himself.

古文：微常住门屋一间，寻书玩古，如此者十余年。
现代文：王微因此写了一封回信。王微常住在只有一个单间的房子，看看书玩赏古器物，像这样过了十几年。
English: As a result, Wang Wei wrote a letter in reply. Wang Wei often lived in a one-room house, reading books, playing games, and appreciating ancient artifacts. It has been like this for more than ten years.

古文：太祖以其善筮，赐以名蓍。
现代文：太祖因为他善于卜筮，赐给他有名的蓍草。
English: His great-grandfather, because he was good at divination, gave him the famous thistle.

古文：弟僧谦，亦有才誉，为太子舍人，遇疾，微躬自处治，而僧谦服药失度，遂卒。
现代文：王微的弟弟僧谦也有才名，任太子舍人，患了病，王微亲自为他诊治，可是僧谦不幸服药过量而亡。
English: Wang Wei's younger brother, Zeng Qian, was also famous for his talent. He was appointed as the prince's son, but he neglected his duties and became ill. Wang Wei personally treated him, but Zeng Qian unfortunately took too much medicine and died.

古文：微深自咎恨，发病不复自治，哀痛僧谦不能已，以书告灵曰：
现代文：王微因之非常内疚痛苦，发誓不再自己治疗，哀痛弟弟不止，并写信告慰于僧谦的灵前：
English: Wang Wei felt very guilty and pained because of this. He vowed not to self-medicate anymore, grieved his brother more than once, and wrote a letter of condolence to the spirit of Monk Qian:

古文：弟年十五，始居宿于外，不为察慧之誉，独沉浮好书，聆琴闻操，辄有过目之能。
现代文： 弟弟十五岁开始在外居宿，不追求名誉，只是一个人沉湎在书籍中，听到琴乐就能过耳不忘。
English: At the age of fifteen, his younger brother began to live out of the house. He did not pursue fame, but was a person who was absorbed in books and could not forget to listen to piano music.

古文：讨测文典，斟酌传记，寒暑未交，便卓然可述。
现代文：钻研文献典籍，推究历史传记，没有多久就有非常可观的成就。
English: It didn't take long for him to achieve considerable success in studying literary classics and researching historical biographies.

古文：吾长病，或有小间，辄称引前载，不异旧学。
现代文：我长期生病，有时有空闲，你就称引历史事件，与我过去学的完全一样。
English: I have been ill for a long time, and sometimes when I have free time, you quote historical events, exactly the same as I used to learn.

古文：自尔日就月将，著名邦党，方隆夙志，嗣美前贤，何图一旦冥然长往，酷痛烦冤，心如焚裂。
现代文：从那时起你日积月累，闻名四方。正要实现你一向怀有的志向，继美前贤，怎想到突然长逝。我悲痛欲绝，心如火烧刀搅。
English: Since then, you have been accumulating time and time again, famous in all directions. You were just about to realize the ambition you have always harbored, following the beauty of the past, how can you think of a sudden death. I am heartbroken, my heart is on fire.

古文：寻念平生，裁十年中耳。然非公事，无不相对，一字之书，必共咏读；一句之文，无不研赏，浊酒忘愁，图籍相慰，吾所以穷而不忧，实赖此耳。
现代文： 想起你一生，仅在十年之中如果不是公事，我们总是在一起，哪怕只有一个字的书也一起咏读，哪怕只有一句话的文章也总是一起研读赏析。一杯浊酒让我们忘记忧愁，共同读书相互慰勉。我之所以困厄而不忧愁，实在只是有赖于这样的生活啊！
English: Thinking of your life, only in ten years, if it is not a business, we are always together. Even if there is only one word of a book, we read it together. Even if there is only one sentence of an article, we always study and appreciate it together. A glass of wine let's us forget sadness, read together and comfort each other. The reason why I am troubled and not sad, really just depends on such a life!

古文：反覆万虑，无复一期，音颜仿佛，触事历然，弟今何在，令吾悲穷。
现代文：怎奈苍天无情，让我形单影只茕然独坐。回想起过去外出散心，极目远望泪流满面，我珍惜日夜的时光，又总是为我的羸弱疾病担忧，哪里想到你竟匆匆先归冥冥之天！
English: How can the sky be so merciless, leaving me sitting alone like a shadow. Recalling the past, when I went out to relax, my eyes were full of tears, I cherished the time of day and night, and always worried about my debilitating illness. Who would have thought that you would rush to the underworld first!

古文：昔仕京师，分张六旬耳，其中三过，误云今日何意不来，钟念悬心，无物能譬。方欲共营林泽，以送余年，念兹有何罪戾，见此夭酷，没于吾手，触事痛恨。
现代文：我辗转反覆万般思念但再也无法再见你一面，你的音容笑貌依然在眼前，往事也历历在目，而今你在哪里啊，令我悲伤无穷。我们正要一起隐居山水以度过余年，你有什么罪过遭此夭折，死在我的手里，想起来我心中痛恨不已。
English: I think about you all the time, but I can never see you again. Your voice, your smile, your face are still in front of my eyes. The past is also in front of my eyes. But where are you now? It makes me sad. We were going to live together in seclusion in the mountains and rivers to spend the rest of the year. What is your fault that you died so young and died in my hands? When I think about it, my heart is filled with hate.

古文：吾素好医术，不使弟子得全，又寻思不精，致有枉过，念此一条，特复痛酷。
现代文：我一向喜欢医术，不能使弟弟保全，又思虑不精，导致这样的过错，想起这就非常悲痛。
English: I have always been fond of medicine, and it grieves me to think that my failure to save my brother and my lack of forethought have led to this mistake.

古文：痛酷奈何！
现代文：痛苦又有何用？
English: What's the use of suffering?

古文：吾罪奈何！
现代文：责怪自己又有什么用啊！
English: What's the use of blaming yourself!

古文：弟为志，奉亲孝，事兄顺，虽僮仆无所叱咄，可谓君子不失色于人，不失口于人。
现代文： 弟弟为人侍奉父母忠孝，对待兄长和顺，即使对仆人也从无呵斥，可称得上君子不失色于人，不失口于人。
English: The younger brother serves his parents with loyalty and filial piety, treats his elder brother with harmony, and even never shouts at his servants. He can be called a gentleman who does not lose his temper with others and does not lose his temper with others.

古文：冲和淹通，内有皁白，举动尺寸，吾每咨之。
现代文：性情冲淡平和沉静通达，心中的爱憎好恶，行为举止的尺度，常常令我感叹不已。
English: I often marvel at the diluted, peaceful and calm disposition, the love, hate, likes and dislikes in my heart, and the standard of behavior.

古文：常云： 兄文骨气，可推英丽以自许。又兄为人矫介欲过，宜每中和。 
现代文：你常说： 兄长的文章风格，可以推为英丽，应感到自豪；兄长的为人比较偏激，应该中庸平和一些。 
English: You often said: My brother's writing style can be described as brilliant, and I should be proud of it; my brother's personality is more extreme, and I should be more moderate and peaceful.

古文：道此犹在耳，万世不复一见，奈何！
现代文：这话仍在我耳边回响，但我们万世也不能再见面了，怎么办啊！
English: The words are still ringing in my ears, but we will never see each other again. What should I do?

古文：唯十纸手迹，封拆俨然，至于思恋不可怀。
现代文：只有你的十几张手迹，封装整齐，而思念却不可得了。
English: There are only a dozen of your handprints, neatly encapsulated, but it is impossible to miss them.

古文：此亦何益冥然之痛，为是存者意耳。
现代文：当初你听说我病了，肝肠寸断。我总以为会让我一幅丝巾就足够的薄葬拖累你，怎么竟反过来殡送你呢？
English: When you first heard that I was ill, I was heartbroken. I always thought that I would let a silk scarf be enough to bury you, but how could I bury you instead?

古文：吾穷疾之人，平生意志，弟实知之。端坐向窗，有何慰适，正赖弟耳。
现代文： 我是一个困顿有疾病的人，平生的志向你很了解，终日端坐窗前，其宽慰与适意都正依赖有你在罢了。
English: I am a desperately ill man, whose life's ambition is well known to you, who sits by the window all day, and whose comfort and well-being depend on you.

古文：过中未来，已自忄妻望，今云何得立，自省惛毒，无复人理。
现代文：以前过了中午你还不来，我就急切地盼望；如今我自省自己的糊涂罪孽，再无活着的道理。
English: Before, if you didn't come by midday, I looked forward to it eagerly; now, I reflect on my foolish sins, and there is no other reason for living.

古文：比烦冤困惫，不能作刻石文，若灵响有识，不得吾文，岂不为恨。
现代文：如果我烦闷疲惫，不能作碑文，若你在天之灵看不到我的文章，岂不让我憾恨！
English: If I am bored and tired and can't make an inscription, if you can't see my article in the spirit of heaven, won't you make me regret it!

古文：傥意虑不遂谢能思之如狂，不知所告诉，明书此数纸，无复词理，略道阡陌，万不写一。
现代文：现在我写了这些也不知说了些什么，没有文理，心中的悲痛之情也没有表达出万分之一。
English: Now that I've written this, I don't know what I've said, I don't have any knowledge of literature, and I haven't expressed one ten-thousandth of the sorrow in my heart.

古文：阿谦！何图至此！
现代文：阿谦啊，哪里想到竟是这样的结果！
English: Ah Qian, where did you come up with such a result!

古文：谁复视我，谁复忧我！
现代文：谁来看我，谁来为我忧伤。
English: Who will come to see me, who will grieve for me.

古文：他日宝惜三光，割嗜好以祈年，今也唯速化耳。
现代文：过去我珍惜时光，割舍嗜好以求长生，如今我只求能迅速归化啊。
English: In the past, I valued my time and gave up my hobbies in order to live longer. Now, I just want to be naturalized quickly.

古文：吾岂复支，冥冥中竟复云何。弟怀随、和之宝，未及光诸文章，欲收所一集，不知忽忽当办此不？
现代文：你身怀和氏璧一般的才华，还未在文章中展现，我想将你的文章编成一集，不知匆匆能否来得及做到？
English: You have the same talent as Mr. Bi, but you haven't shown it in your articles yet. I want to compile your articles into an episode. I don't know if I can do it in a hurry.

古文：今已成服，吾临灵，取常共饮杯，酌自酿酒，宁有仿像不？
现代文：现在已成服，我在你的灵前用你我共饮的酒杯，喝着自酿的酒，像我们当初的情形吗？
English: Now that it's all over, will I be in front of your grave with a glass of wine that you and I drank together, drinking home-brewed wine, like we did in the beginning?

古文：冤痛！
现代文：悲痛啊！
English: Oh, the grief!

古文：冤痛！
现代文：悲痛啊！ 
English: Oh, the grief!

古文：元嘉三十年，卒，时年三十九。
现代文：元嘉三十年王微去世，时年三十九岁。
English: Wang Wei died in the 30th year of Yuan Jia, at the age of 39.

古文：僧谦卒后四旬而微终。
现代文：僧谦死后四十天王微就死了。
English: Forty days after the death of the monk, Wang Wei died.

古文：遗令薄葬，不设轜旐鼓挽之属，施五尺床，为灵二宿便毁。
现代文：他临终前要家人将他薄葬，不设丧车、灵旗、鼓乐挽灵之类的东西。放一张五尺床作为灵台，两天就撤去。
English: Before his death, he asked his family to bury him thinly, without funeral cars, flags, drum music, etc. Put a five-foot bed as a hearse, and remove it in two days.

古文：以尝所弹琴置床上，何长史来，以琴与之。何长史者，偃也。
现代文：将曾经弹过的琴放在灵台上，何长史来的话，将琴赠给他，何长史就是何偃。
English: If you put a once-played piano on the funeral table, how long will it be? If you give him a piano, how long will it be?

古文：无子。
现代文：王微没有儿子。
English: Wang Jun has no son.

古文：家人遵之。
现代文：家人听从了他的话。
English: The family took him at his word.

古文：所著文集，传于世。
现代文：王微有文集流传于世。
English: Wang Wei's literary works have been passed down to the world.

古文：世祖即位，诏曰： 微栖志贞深，文行惇洽，生自华宗，身安隐素，足以贲兹丘园，惇是薄俗。
现代文：世祖即位以后，下诏说： 王微志向忠贞深厚，文章厚和美，生自华宗，身安隐居，足以滋润丘园，使浅薄的风俗变得厚。
English: After the founding father ascended the throne, he issued the following edict: Wang Weizhong had a deep sense of loyalty, was well-spoken and beautiful. He was born into the Chinese sect and lived in seclusion, which was enough to nourish Qiuyuan and enrich the shallow customs.

古文：不幸蚤世，朕甚悼之。
现代文：不幸早逝，朕非常悼念他。
English: He died tragically early, and I mourn his loss very much.

古文：可追赠秘书监。 
现代文：可以追赠他为秘书监。 
English: He can be posthumously awarded the title of secretary superintendent.

