古文：梁统子松子竦曾孙商玄孙冀
现代文：◆梁统传，梁统，字仲宁，安定乌氏人。
English: ◆Liang Tingchuan, Liang Ting, Zha Zhongning, and Jing Wu.

古文：梁统字仲宁，安定乌氏人，晋大夫梁益耳，即其先也。统高祖父子都，自河东迁居北地，子都子桥，以资千万徙茂陵，至哀、平之末，归安定。
现代文：他的祖先是晋国大夫梁益耳。梁统的祖父叫子都，从河东迁居北地，子都的儿子梁桥，凭着千万家产迁居茂陵，到哀帝、平帝末年，回到安定。
English: His ancestor was the governor of Jin Province, Liang Yil. Liang Tong's grandfather, called Zidu, moved from the east of the river to the north, and Zidu's son, Liang Qiao, moved to Muling with tens of thousands of family assets, and returned to stability in the last years of Emperor Ying and Emperor Ping.

古文：统性刚毅而好法律。
现代文：梁统性格刚毅，喜好法律。
English: Liang Tong has a strong character and likes law.

古文：初仕州郡。
现代文：开始在州郡做官。
English: He began his career as a state and county official.

古文：更始二年，召补中郎将，使安集凉州，拜酒泉太守。
现代文：更始二年，召补中郎将，派他到氵京州，授职酒泉太守。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, he summoned a vice-governor and sent him to Shijiazhuang, where he was given the post of Sake Spring Governor.

古文：会更始败，赤眉入长安，统与窦融及诸郡守起兵保境，谋共立帅。
现代文：更始失败后，赤眉军进入长安，梁统与窦融以及各郡守起兵保卫本境，大家商议要立一个统帅。
English: After the initial failure, the Red Eyebrows Army entered Chang'an, and Liang Tong and Dou Rong, as well as the county guards, raised an army to defend the local territory. Everyone discussed the need to appoint a commander.

古文：初以位次，咸共推统，统固辞曰： 昔陈婴不受王者，以有老母也。
现代文：开始按位次排列，大家推选梁统，梁统坚决推辞道： 从前陈婴不肯做王，因为老母在世。
English: At the beginning, they were ranked in order of precedence, and everyone voted for Liang Tong. Liang Tong firmly said: Once upon a time, Chen Ying refused to be king, because his mother was still alive.

古文：今统内有尊亲，又德薄能寡，诚不足以当之。 
现代文：现在我内有尊亲，又德薄能少，的确不能胜任。 
English: Right now, I have a lot of respect for my relatives, but I'm not very capable. I'm really not up to the job.

古文：遂共推融为河西大将军，更以统为武威大守。
现代文：于是大家选窦融做河西大将军，以统做武威太守。
English: As a result, everyone chose Dou Rong to be the general of Hexi and to be the military commander.

古文：为政严猛，威行邻郡。
现代文：梁统的政治主张严猛，威信达到邻郡。
English: The political stand of Liang Tong was strict, and his prestige reached as far as the neighboring counties.

古文：建武五年，统筹各遣使随窦融长史刘钧诣阙奉贡，愿得诣行在所，诏加统宣德将军。
现代文：建武五年，梁统等各派使者随窦融长史刘钧到朝廷进贡，希望到达皇帝临时驻地，皇帝下诏加封梁统为宣德将军。
English: In the fifth year of the Jianwu era, Liang Tong and other emissaries from various factions followed Dou Rong Changshi Liu Wei to the imperial court to pay tribute, hoping to reach the emperor's temporary residence. The emperor issued an edict to add Liang Tong as the Xuande General.

古文：八年夏，光武自征隗嚣，统与窦融等将兵会车驾。
现代文：八年夏，光武帝亲自征讨隗嚣，梁统与窦融等带着兵士与光武会合。
English: In the summer of the eighth year, Emperor Guangwu personally solicited the clamor, and Liang Tong and Dou Rong brought soldiers to meet with Guangwu.

古文：及嚣败，封统为成义侯，同产兄巡、从弟腾并为关内侯，拜腾酒泉典农部尉，悉遣还河西。
现代文：等到隗嚣失败后，光武封梁统为成义侯，统的胞兄梁巡、堂弟梁腾并为关内侯。封梁腾为酒泉的典农都尉，全部遣回河西。
English: After the campaign failed, Guangwu appointed Liang Tong as the lord of Chengyi, Liang Jun and Liang Teng as the lord of Guanai, and Liang Teng as the governor of Jiuquan, all of whom were sent back to Hexi.

古文：十二年，统与融等俱诣京师，以列侯奉朝请，更封高山侯，拜太中大夫，除四子为郎。
现代文：十二年，梁统与窦融等都到京师，凭列侯身份到朝廷，又封为高山侯，拜太中大夫，封四个儿子做郎。
English: In the twelfth year, Liang Tong and Dou Rong went to Beijing to study, went to the imperial court with the status of vassals, and were also given the title of Gaoshan vassal, the title of Tai Zhong Daifu, and the title of four sons.

古文：统在朝廷，数陈便宜。
现代文：梁统在朝廷，多次上奏对国家有利的事。
English: At the imperial court, Liang Tong repeatedly appealed to the emperor for matters beneficial to the country.

古文：以为法令既轻，下奸不胜。宜重刑罚，以遵旧典，乃上疏曰：
现代文：他认为法令太轻，坏人就会增多，应该加重刑罚，遵照旧典办事。
English: He believed that the law was too light and that the number of bad people would increase, and that the punishment should be increased and that things should be done according to the old code.

古文：臣窃见元、哀二交轻殊死之刑以一百二十三事，手杀人者减死一等，自是以后，著为常准，故人轻犯法，吏易杀人。臣闻立君之道，仁义为主，仁者爱人，义者政理，爱人以除残为务，政理以去乱为心。
现代文：于是上疏道： 臣下见过元、哀二帝轻判特殊的刑罚，处理一百二十三件事，亲手杀人的减死刑一等，从此以后，立下了标准，所以人们轻易犯法，官吏随便杀人。 臣下听说立君的道理，以仁义为主，仁者才能爱护人民，义者政治才能得到治理，爱人民就应除去残暴，整理政治就应除去叛乱。
English: Therefore, Shang Suo said: His subjects have seen the Yuan Dynasty and the Second Emperor's lamentation, and they have given light sentences to special punishments, handled one hundred and twenty-three cases, and reduced the death penalty of those who killed with their own hands to the first class. Since then, a standard has been set, so people easily break the law, and officials casually kill people. His subjects have heard that the principle of establishing a prince is based on benevolence and righteousness. Only those who are benevolent can love the people, and only those who are righteous can govern the country. If you love the people, you should eliminate cruelty, and if you sort out politics, you should eliminate

古文：刑罚在衷，无取于劝，是以五帝有流、殛、放、杀之诛，三王有大辟、刻肌之法。
现代文：刑罚在于适中，不能太轻，因此五帝有流、殛、放、杀等办法，三王有大辟、刻肌肤等做法。
English: The punishment should be moderate and not too light. Therefore, the Five Emperors had the methods of exiling, beating, releasing, and killing, while the Three Kings had the methods of expelling, and cutting the skin.

古文：故孔子称 仁者必有勇 ，又曰 理财正辞，禁民为非曰义 。
现代文：孔子说： 仁者必有勇。 又说： 理财正辞，禁民为非曰义。 
English: Confucius said: "The benevolent must be brave." He also said: "Financial management is righteous, and forbidding people is not righteous."

古文：高帝受命诛暴，平荡天下，约令定律，诚得其宜。
现代文：汉高帝受天命诛暴秦，平定天下，约法三章，的确十分恰当。
English: It is indeed very appropriate that Emperor Han Gao, who was destined by heaven to crush the Qin and pacify the world, wrote three chapters about the Fa.

古文：文帝宽惠柔克，遭世康平，惟除省肉刑、相坐之法，它皆率由，无革旧章。
现代文：汉文帝主张宽惠，以柔克刚，处在太平之世，除省肉刑、相坐之法，别的都依旧章办事。
English: Emperor Hanwen advocated clemency and leniency, with softness and firmness, in a peaceful world, in addition to saving corporal punishment, the method of sitting together, everything else is still done according to the rules.

古文：武帝值中国隆盛，财力有余，征伐远方，军役数兴，豪桀犯禁，奸吏弄法，故重首匿之科，著知从之律，以破朋党，以惩隐匿。
现代文：汉武帝时正是中国强盛之时，财力有余，征伐远方，调兵多次，一些豪杰违犯禁令，奸吏钻法律的空子，所以对首犯及窝藏犯极其重视，对胁从者也应法办，用来破除朋党，惩罚隐匿不报之人。
English: In the time of Emperor Hanwu, when China was strong, there were more than enough financial resources to conquer faraway lands and repeatedly send troops. Some heroes violated the ban, and crooks took advantage of the loopholes in the law. Therefore, great importance was attached to the first offender and the hiding offender, and the threatening follower should also be dealt with according to the law. It was used to destroy the cronies and punish those who concealed and did not report.

古文：宣帝聪明正直，总御海内，臣下奉宪，无所失坠，因循先典，天下称理。
现代文：汉宣帝聪明正直，统治天下，臣下按法办事，没有错误，照先典办事，天下得到治理。
English: Emperor Han Xuan was intelligent and upright, he ruled the world, his subjects acted according to the law, there were no mistakes, they acted according to the precedent, and the world was governed.

古文：至哀、平继体，而即位日浅，听断尚寡，丞相王嘉轻为穿凿，亏除先帝旧约成律，数年之间，百有余事，或不便于理，或不厌民心。
现代文：到了哀帝、平帝继位，时间不长，办案不多，丞相王嘉随便改动先帝的旧法，几年之内，出了百多件事，有的不近情理，有的不能满足民心。
English: When Emperor Ai and Emperor Ping succeeded to the throne, the time was not long, and there were not many cases to deal with. The prime minister Wang Jia arbitrarily changed the old law of the former emperor. Within a few years, more than a hundred things happened, some of which were unreasonable, and some could not satisfy the people's hearts.

古文：谨表其尤害于体者傅奏于左。伏惟陛下包元履德，权时拨乱，功逾文、武，德侔高皇，诚不宜因循季末衰微之轨。
现代文：现在我把一些对政体有害的地方陈述在左边： 臣下想到陛下品德高尚，权宜时势，拨乱反正，功劳超过文王武王，品德与高皇帝相通，不应按照末代衰微的轨迹行事。
English: Now I will state some of the points that are harmful to the political system on the left: Subjects should think of His Majesty's high moral character, expedient situation, rectify the chaos, surpass the merits of King Wen and King Wu, and have the same moral character as Emperor Gao, and should not act according to the decline of the last generation.

古文：回神明察，考量得失，宣诏有司，详择其善，定不易之典，施无穷之法，天下幸甚。
现代文：应该明察利害，考量得失，责成官吏，择善而从，定出不变的典章，作为后代的法则，那么天下就太幸运了。 
English: We should clearly observe the interests, consider the gains and losses, instruct the officials, choose the good and follow it, and set out the invariable rules as the rules for future generations. Then the world will be too lucky.

古文：事下三公、廷尉，议者以为隆刑竣法，非明王急务，施行日久，岂一朝所厘。
现代文：事情下达到三公、廷尉那里，大家认为严刑峻法，不是明王当前的急务，旧法施行日久，不是一个早晨改得好的。
English: When the matter reached the three princes and the courtier, everyone thought that the severe punishment and harsh law was not the urgent task of the Ming King. The old law had been implemented for a long time, and it was not a good morning to change it.

古文：统今所定，不宜开可。
现代文：梁统所提，不宜采纳。
English: Liang Tong's suggestion is not suitable for adoption.

古文：统复上言曰： 有司以臣今所言，不可施行。
现代文：梁统又上书道 ：官吏们认为我所说的，不可实行。
English: Liang Tong went on to say, "Officials think that what I said cannot be implemented.

古文：寻臣之所奏，非曰严刑。
现代文：回想臣之所奏，不能叫作严刑。
English: In retrospect, what my father-in-law did cannot be called a severe punishment.

古文：窃谓高帝以后，至乎孝宣，其所施行，多合经传，宜比方今事，验之往古，聿遵前典，事无难改，不胜至愿。
现代文：我是说汉高帝以后，到孝宣帝，他们所施行的，多合经传。今天应针对实际，参验过去，遵照旧典，改也不难。这是我最大的愿望。
English: I mean, after Emperor Han Gao and up to Emperor Xiaoxuan, what they practiced was more in line with the teachings of the scriptures. Today, it should be based on reality, examine the past, follow the old scriptures, and it is not difficult to change. This is my greatest wish.

古文：愿得召见，若对尚书近臣，口陈其要。 
现代文：希望得到召见，如果面对尚书近臣，口述要点也行。 
English: They hope to be summoned, and if they are confronted with a close retainer, they can dictate the main points.

古文：帝令尚书问状，统对曰：闻圣帝明王，制立刑罚，故虽尧、舜之盛，犹诛四凶。
现代文：皇帝命令尚书问明情况，梁统答道： 听说圣帝明王，制立刑罚，所以即使尧舜的盛世，也杀了四凶。
English: The emperor ordered Shang Shu to inquire about the situation, and Liang Tong replied: I heard that the Holy Emperor Ming Wang established punishments, so even if the world was prosperous, he would kill the four villains.

古文：经曰： 天讨有罪，五刑五庸哉。 
现代文：《书经》上说 ：上天讨伐有罪之人，五种刑罚有五种用处。 
English: It is said in the "Shu Jing" that the five punishments have five uses.

古文：又曰： 爰制百姓于刑之衷。 
现代文：又说 ：士制百姓于刑之中。 
English: He also said, "People of the warrior caste are in the midst of punishment."

古文：孔子曰： 刑罚不衷，则人无所厝手足。 
现代文：孔子说 ：刑罚不恰当，那么老百姓将手足不好放在何处。 
English: Confucius said: If the punishment is not appropriate, then where should the common people put their bad limbs?

古文：衷之为言，不轻不重之谓也。
现代文：其中的意思，就是不轻不重。
English: The meaning of this is that it is neither light nor heavy.

古文：《春秋》之诛，不避亲戚，所以防患救乱，全安众庶，岂无仁爱之恩？贵绝残贼之路也。自高祖之兴，至于孝宣，君明臣忠，谟谋深博，犹因循旧章，不轻改革，海内称理，断狱益少。
现代文：《春秋》提倡大义灭亲，不回避亲戚，为的是防患救乱，安定百姓，难道没有仁爱之恩，主要是杜绝残贼的道路哩！ 自从高祖兴起，到达孝宣帝，君明臣忠，谋略深广，还遵守旧章，不随便改革，海内称为治理，断案更少。
English: "Spring and Autumn" advocates the great righteousness of eliminating relatives, not avoiding relatives, in order to prevent and relieve troubles and stabilize the people. Isn't there a benevolent grace, mainly the way to eliminate the remnants of thieves! Since the rise of Gao Zu and the arrival of Xiao Xuan Di, Junming Zhenzhong, the strategy is profound and extensive, but also abide by the old chapter, do not arbitrarily reform, known as governance at home, and fewer cases are decided.

古文：至初元、建平，所减刑罚百有余条，而盗贼浸多，岁以万数。
现代文：到了初元、建平年代，所减刑罚百多条，而盗贼反而增多，每年以万数计。
English: In the early years of the Yuan Dynasty and the Jianping era, more than a hundred punishments were reduced, but the number of thieves increased by tens of thousands every year.

古文：间者三辅从横，群辈并起，至燔烧茂陵，桂见未央。
现代文：近来京都附近，群盗并起，甚至烧毁茂陵，未央宫也见火了。
English: Recently, in the vicinity of Kyoto, a group of robbers got together and even burned down a mausoleum, and the Miang Palace also caught fire.

古文：其后坤西、北地、西河之贼，越州度郡，万里交结，攻取库兵，劫略吏人，诏书讨捕，连年不获。
现代文：后来陇西、北地、西河的盗贼，越过州郡，万里勾结，攻占仓库，劫掠官吏百姓，诏书下令讨捕，连年收获不大。
English: Later, the thieves from western Shaanxi, northern Hebei, and the West River crossed the state and county, colluded with each other, seized warehouses, robbed officials and common people, and the imperial edict ordered to crack down on them. The harvest was not good for several years.

古文：是时以天下无难，百姓安平，而狂狡之势，犹至于此，皆刑罚不衷，愚人易犯之所致也。
现代文：这时还是天下太平，百姓安定，而盗贼猖狂还是如此，都是刑罚不恰当，愚人随意犯法造成的。
English: At this time, the world is still peaceful, the people are stable, and the thieves are still rampant, all of which are caused by inappropriate punishments and fools breaking the law at will.

古文：由此观之，则刑轻之作，反生大患；惠加奸轨，而害及良善也。故臣统愿陛下采择贤臣孔光、师丹等议。
现代文：这样看来，减轻刑罚，反生大患；坏人得到好处，善良的人遭殃，所以臣下希望陛下采择贤臣孔光、师丹等人的意见。 
English: From this point of view, to lighten the punishment is to create a big problem; the bad people will benefit, and the good people will suffer. Therefore, his subjects hope that His Majesty will choose the opinions of the wise men Kong Guang, Shi Dan and others.

古文：议上，遂寝不报。
现代文：奏议送上，又被押下未报。
English: The report was submitted, but then it was withdrawn and not reported.

古文：后出为九江太守，定封陵乡侯。
现代文：后来梁统又出任九江太守，定封为陵乡侯。
English: Later, Liang Tong also served as the governor of Jiujiang, and was given the title of prince of Lingxiang.

古文：统在郡亦有治迹，吏人畏爱之。
现代文：梁统在郡也有治理的功绩，官吏百姓都畏爱他。
English: Liang Tong has also made great achievements in governance in the county, and officials and people are afraid of him.

古文：卒于官。
现代文：后死在官位。
English: He died in office.

古文：子松嗣。
现代文：◆梁冀传，梁冀字伯卓。
English: ◆Liang Ji Chuan, Liang Ji Zi Bo Zhuo.

古文：松字伯孙，少为郎，尚光武女舞阴长公主，再迁虎贲中郎将。
现代文：他两肩耸起来像老鹰的翅膀，眼睛跟豺狼一样倒竖着，直勾勾地看人，毫无神采；说话含糊不清。
English: His shoulders are hunched up like eagle's wings, his eyes are upturned like a jackal's, staring straight ahead, gormless; his speech is slurred.

古文：松博通经书，明习故事，与诸儒修明堂、辟雍、郊祀、封禅礼仪，常与论议，宠幸莫比。光武崩，受遗诏辅政。永平元年，迁太仆。松数为私书请托郡县，二年，发觉免官，遂怀怨望。四年冬，乃县飞书诽谤，下狱死，国除。
现代文：学问则只能抄抄写写记个帐。
English: In the case of learning, you can only copy, copy, write and keep an account.

古文：子扈，后以恭怀皇后从兄，永元中，擢为黄门侍郎，历位卿、校尉。
现代文：他从小就是高贵的皇亲国戚，游手好闲，横蛮放肆。他好酒贪杯，擅长射箭、弹棋、格五、六博、蹴球、意钱这类玩艺，还爱好架鹰驱犬，跑马斗鸡。起初，他担任黄门侍郎，转升侍中、虎贲中郎将、越骑、步兵校尉、执金吾等官职。
English: From childhood, he was a noble relative of the imperial family, idle and reckless. He was fond of drinking and drinking, good at archery, playing chess, checkers, backgammon, football, and money games, and also liked to set up an eagle to drive a dog, and run a horse to fight a rooster. At first, he served as a Yellow Gate waiter, and was promoted to a waiter junior, a tiger cub junior, a yakitori rider, an infantry lieutenant, and an officer.

古文：温恭谦让，亦敦《诗》、《书》。
现代文：顺帝永和元年，梁冀任河南尹。在任期间，他残暴凶妄，做了很多非法的事。
English: In the first year of Shunde Yonghe, Liang Jie served as Henan Yin. During his tenure, he was brutal and did a lot of illegal things.

古文：永初中，为长乐少府，松弟竦。
现代文：他的父亲梁商有个亲密的朋友洛阳令吕放，跟梁商谈了梁冀很多短处，梁商便因此责备梁冀。
English: His father, Liang Shang, had a close friend, Luoyang Ling Lv Fang. He talked to Liang Shang about Liang Ji's many shortcomings, and Liang Shang blamed Liang Ji for this.

古文：竦字叔敬，少习《孟习易》，弱冠能教授。后坐兄松事，与弟恭俱徙九真。
现代文：梁冀怀恨在心，便派人在路上刺杀了吕放，又怕梁商知道，就把刺杀吕放的嫌疑，推到吕放的仇人身上，还请求让吕放的弟弟吕禹做洛阳令，要他去捕捉杀死吕放的仇人。
English: With hatred in his heart, Liang Jie sent someone to assassinate Lv Fang on the road. Fearing that Liang Shang would find out, he pushed the suspicion of assassinating Lv Fang onto Lv Fang's enemies. He also asked Lv Fang's brother Lyu Yu to do Luoyang's bidding, asking him to capture and kill Lv Fang's enemies.

古文：既徂南土，历江、湖，济沅、湘，感悼子胥、屈原以非辜沉身，乃作《悼骚赋》，系玄石而沉之。显宗后诏听还本郡。竦闭门自养，以经籍为娱，著书数篇，名曰《七序》。
现代文：结果把吕放仇家的宗族、亲戚、宾客一百多人都杀光了。梁商死了还没有下葬，顺帝就任命梁冀为大将军，任命梁冀的弟弟侍中梁不疑为河南尹。到汉顺帝死时，汉冲帝只两岁，还在襁褓之中，由太后临朝执政，命令梁冀和太傅赵峻、太尉李固共同参与尚书事宜，掌管朝政。
English: As a result, more than a hundred family members, relatives and guests of Lv Fang's enemies were killed. Liang Shang died before he was buried, and Emperor Shun appointed Liang Jie as the general, and appointed Liang Jie's younger brother Liang Zhong as Henan Yin. When Emperor Shun died, Emperor Han Chong was only two years old and was still in infancy. The Empress Dowager Lin ruled the country, and ordered Liang Jie, Taifu Zhao Jun and Taifu Li Gu to jointly participate in the matter of writing and take charge of the government.

古文：班固见而称曰： 孔子著《春秋》而乱臣贼子惧，梁竦作《七序》而窃位素餐者惭。 姓好施，不事产业。
现代文：梁冀虽然辞谢不肯承当，但更加奢侈暴虐。
English: Although Liang Jie refused to accept the responsibility, he became more extravagant and tyrannical.

古文：长嫂舞阴公主赡给诸梁，亲疏有序，特重敬竦，虽衣食器物，必有加异。
现代文：不久，汉冲帝又死了，梁冀迎立质帝。
English: Soon after, Emperor Han Chong died again, and Emperor Qiu was ushered in by Emperor Liang Jie.

古文：竦悉分与亲族，自无所服。
现代文：质帝年少，却很聪明。他知道梁冀骄横，曾在朝见群臣时，注视梁冀说 ：这是个跋扈将军。 
English: Emperor Qian was young, but very clever. He knew that Liang Jie was arrogant. Once, when he was meeting with his courtiers, he looked at Liang Jie and said, "This is a great general."

古文：竦生长京师，不乐本土，身负其才，郁郁不得意。尝登高远望，叹息言曰： 大丈夫居世，生当封侯，死当庙食。如其不然，闲居可以养志，《诗》、《书》足以自娱，州郡之职，徒劳人耳。 
现代文：梁冀听了，非常愤恨，就命令亲信把毒药放到汤饼里面送给质帝吃，质帝当天就死了。质帝死后，梁冀又迎立了桓帝，并陷害李固和前太尉杜乔，海内个个嗟叹，人人自危。这件事记录在《李固传》中。
English: When Liang Jie heard this, he was very angry and ordered his cronies to put the poison in the soup cake and give it to Emperor Xue. Emperor Xue died the same day. After Emperor Xue's death, Liang Jie again welcomed Emperor Huan, and framed Li Gu and former First Lieutenant Du Qiao. Everyone in the imperial court lamented and feared for their lives. This event is recorded in the "Biography of Li Gu."

古文：后辟命交至，并无所就。有三男三女，肃宗纳其二女，皆为贵人。
现代文：汉桓帝建和元年，加封梁冀食邑一万三千户，增加大将军府推荐优异者和保荐茂才的名额，大将军府的官员人数比太尉、司徒、司空三公府的人数要多一倍。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Huan added 13,000 households in Liangji food village, and increased the number of places recommended by the general's office and the number of officials in the general's office. The number of officials in the general's office is twice that of the three public offices.

古文：小贵人生和帝，窦皇后养以为子，而竦家私相庆。
现代文：又封梁不疑为颍阴侯，梁不疑的弟弟梁蒙为西平侯，梁冀的儿子梁胤为襄邑侯，各食邑一万户。
English: In addition, Liang Doubting's brother Liang Mengmou was named Xiping Mayor, Liang Ji's son Liang Yin was named Xiangyi Mayor, and there were ten thousand households in each food village.

古文：后诸窦闻之，恐梁氏得志，终为己害，建初八年，遂谮杀二贵人，而陷竦等以恶逆。
现代文：汉桓帝和平元年，再加封梁冀食邑一万户，加上以前所封食邑共三万户。弘农人宰宣，秉性奸佞邪恶，想要讨好梁冀，于是上书皇帝说梁冀有周公辅成王那样的功勋，现在既已分封他的儿子，那么他的妻子也应封为邑君。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Emperor Han Huan added an additional 10,000 households in Liangji food villages to the previous total of 30,000 households in food villages. In order to please Liangji, the farmer Zaixuan, who had a traitorous and evil nature, wrote to the emperor saying that Liangji had the same merits as Zhou Gongyu. Now that his son had been awarded the title, his wife should also be awarded the title.

古文：诏使汉阳太守郑据传考竦罪，死狱中，家属复徙九真。
现代文：桓帝便封梁冀的妻子孙寿为襄城君。除襄城的租赋外，还享用阳翟县的租赋，每年收入共五千万，加赐赤色印绶，跟长公主相等。
English: Emperor Huan then made Sun Shou, the wife of Liang Jie, the ruler of Xiangcheng. In addition to the rent of Xiangcheng, she also enjoyed the rent of Yangpi County, with a total annual income of 50 million, plus a red seal, equal to the eldest princess.

古文：辞语连及舞阴公主，坐徙新城，使者护守。宫省事密，莫有知和帝梁氏生者。
现代文：孙寿姿色甚美，善于装出一副妖里妖气的样子，把眉毛画得又扁又细，两颊淡抹着像有泪痕的粉妆，发髻偏垂，扭腰作态，双脚似不能支撑体重，扮出一脸巧笑以媚惑梁冀。
English: Sun Shou has a very beautiful appearance, and is good at pretending to be a demon. He draws his eyebrows flat and thin, and lightly plasters his cheeks with powder makeup that looks like tear stains. His hair is parted down the middle, and he has a hunched posture. His feet seem to be unable to support his weight. He puts on a smile to charm Liang Ji.

古文：永元九年，窦太后崩，松子扈遣从兄禅奏记三府，以为汉家旧典，崇贵母氏，而梁贵人亲育圣躬，不蒙尊号，求得申议。
现代文：梁冀也改变了车舆服饰式样，制作了平顶帏幕车、埤帻、狭冠、折上巾、拥身扇、狐尾单衣。孙寿性嫉妒，她能够制服梁冀。梁冀非常宠她，也很怕她。以前，梁冀的父亲梁商把美人友通期送给汉顺帝。
English: Liang Jie also changed the clothing style of the carriage, making a flat-top curtain carriage, a skull and crossbones, a narrow crown, a folded shawl, a hugging fan, and a fox-tailed single garment. Sun Shou was jealous, and she was able to subdue Liang Jie. Liang Jie was very fond of her, and was also afraid of her. In the past, Liang Jie's father Liang Shang gave the beauty friend pass to Han Shun.

古文：太尉张酺引禅讯问事理，会后召见，因白禅奏记之状。
现代文：友通期犯了点小错，顺帝便把她归还给梁商。梁商不敢留她，把她嫁了。
English: When Shunti made a small mistake during the friendship period, he returned her to Liang Shang. Liang Shang did not dare to keep her and married her.

古文：帝感恸良久，曰： 于君意若何？ 
现代文：梁冀就派人把她抢了回来。正碰上梁商去世了，梁冀在守孝期间，和友通期偷偷地在城西同居。
English: Liang Jie sent someone to snatch her back. Just as Liang Shang passed away, Liang Jie secretly lived with his friend in the west of the city during the period of filial piety.

古文：酺对曰： 《春秋》之义，母以子贵。
现代文：孙寿探知梁冀外出，就带了许多奴仆，把友通期抢回家来，剪去头发，划破脸皮，痛加笞打，并要上书给皇帝告发这件事。
English: When Sun Shou found out that Liang Jie had gone out, he took many servants with him and brought him home. He cut off his hair, slashed his face, and beat him severely. He also wanted to write to the emperor to report the incident.

古文：汉兴以来，母氏莫不降显，臣愚以为宜上尊号，追慰圣灵，存录诸舅，以明亲亲。 
现代文：梁冀非常害怕，向孙寿的母亲叩头，请求她要孙寿别这样做。孙寿也因不得已而作罢。可是梁冀还是和友通期私通，生了个儿子取名伯玉，把他藏着不敢让他出来。
English: Liang Jie was very scared and bowed down to Sun Shou's mother, begging her to tell Sun Shou not to do this. Sun Shou was also forced to give up. However, Liang Jie still had sexual intercourse with his friend and gave birth to a son named Bo Yu. He hid him and did not dare to let him out.

古文：帝悲泣曰： 非君孰为朕思之！ 
现代文：不久，孙寿还是知道了，教她的儿子梁胤杀死了友通期一家。
English: Soon, Sun Shou learned that her son Liang Yan had killed Tomotsune's family.

古文：会贵人姊南阳樊调妻上书自讼曰：
现代文：梁冀害怕孙寿杀害伯玉，常常把他藏在夹壁里边。
English: Liang Jie was afraid that Sun Shou would kill Bo Yuping, so he often hid him behind a wall.

古文：妾同产女弟贵人，前充后宫，蒙先帝厚恩，得见宠幸。
现代文：梁冀宠爱一个奴仆总管名叫秦宫的，官做到了太仓令，得以出入孙寿的住所。
English: Liang Jie favored a slave chief named Qin Gong, and the official carried out the Taicang order and was able to enter and leave Sun Shou's residence.

古文：皇天授命，诞生圣明。
现代文：孙寿见了秦宫，常把服侍她的奴婢打发走，假托有事商量，于是就和他私通了。
English: When Sun Shou saw Qin Gong, he often sent away the slaves who served her, pretending to discuss something, and then had sexual intercourse with him.

古文：而为窦宪兄弟所见谮诉，使妾父竦冤死牢狱，骸骨不掩。
现代文：秦宫外宠于梁冀，内宠于孙寿，威势大震，刺史、郡守赴任，都要去拜见他，向他辞行。
English: The Qin court favored Liang Jie on the outside, Sun Shou on the inside, and the powerful earthquake, stabbing history, and county governor were appointed. They all went to see him and resigned to him.

古文：老母孤弟，远徙万里。独妾遗脱，逸伏草野，常恐没命，无由自达。
现代文：梁冀听了孙寿的话，把梁家许多当权的人罢免，表面上是谦让，实际是抬高孙氏宗族、亲戚的地位。
English: Liang Jie listened to Sun Shou's words and dismissed many of the Liang family members in power. On the surface, it was a concession, but in reality, it was to elevate the status of the Sun clan and relatives.

古文：今遭值陛下神圣之运，亲统万机，群物得所。宪兄弟奸恶，既伏辜诛，海内旷然，各获其宜。
现代文：孙家冒名做了侍中、卿、校尉、郡守、长吏的多达十余人。这些人都贪婪成性，凶暴荒淫。
English: The Sun family impersonated more than a dozen people, including chamberlains, lords, schoolmasters, county governors, and magistrates. These people were all greedy and violent.

古文：妾得苏息，拭目更视，乃敢昧死自陈所天。
现代文：他们各自遣亲信把所辖县内富户记录在案，加上别的罪名，把他们关押起来，严刑拷打，要他们出钱赎罪。出钱少的人，多被处死或流放。
English: They each sent cronies to record the names of wealthy households in the counties under their jurisdiction, added other charges, detained them, tortured them severely, and asked them to pay money to atone for their sins. Those who paid less money were mostly executed or exiled.

古文：妾闻太宗即位，薄氏蒙荣；宣帝继统，史族复兴。
现代文：有个扶风人叫士孙奋的，很富有而又吝啬成性。
English: There was a weather vane named Shisunfen, who was very rich but stingy.

古文：妾门虽有薄、史之亲，独无外戚余恩，诚自悼伤。
现代文：梁冀便赠给他车乘马匹，跟他借五千万钱。士孙奋给了他三千万。
English: Liang Jie then gave him a carriage and horses, and borrowed fifty million yuan from him. Shisunteng gave him thirty million yuan.

古文：妾父既冤，不可复生，母氏年殊七十，乃弟棠等，远在绝域，不知死生。
现代文：梁冀大怒，便告知郡县官府，诬指士孙奋的母亲是他家管理财物的奴婢，说她偷了白珠十斛，紫金千斤逃走了。于是把士孙奋兄弟关押起来拷打，害死在狱中，把他家钱财一亿七千多万全部没收。
English: Infuriated, Liang Jie informed the county and county government that the mother of the scholar Sun Tan was falsely accused of being a slave who managed the property of his family, saying that she had stolen ten ounces of white pearls and a thousand pounds of purple gold. Therefore, the brothers of the scholar Sun Tan were detained, tortured, and killed in prison, and all of his family's money and wealth of more than 170 million yuan were confiscated.

古文：愿乞收竦朽骨。使母、弟得归本郡，则施过天地，存殁幸赖。
现代文：那些从各方征收来的财物，以及一年四季进贡的东西，都得先把上等的送给梁冀，皇帝所得却是次等的。
English: Liang Jie had to be given the first-class property that was collected from all sides, as well as the annual tribute, but the emperor's income was second-class.

古文：帝览章感悟，乃下中常侍、掖庭令验问之，辞证明审，遂得引见，具陈其状。乃留止宫中，连月乃出，赏赐衣被钱帛第宅奴卑，旬月之间，累资千万。
现代文：官吏和老百姓带着财物到梁家求官请罪的，络绎不绝。梁冀又派人出塞，和外国联系，广泛搜求奇珍异宝。趁行路之机向各处索取歌伎僮仆，而派遣的人又倚仗权势，横行霸道，劫夺、污辱民家妇女，殴打官吏和役卒，所到之处，人人痛恨。梁冀于是大建府第，而孙寿亦在对街兴建院宅，极尽土木工程之盛，以互相夸耀竞赛。接待宾客，日常寝处，都有幽深邃密的房间，房屋相连，门户相通。庭柱墙壁，缕刻着花纹，涂着金漆。
English: Officials and ordinary people came to the Liang family with their belongings to plead guilty. Liang Jie also sent people out of Tibet to contact foreign countries and extensively search for rare treasures. Taking the opportunity to travel, he asked for Kabuki performers from all over the world. The people he sent also relied on their power, behaved in a domineering manner, robbed and insulted the women of the people's families, and beat up officials and civil servants. Everyone hated them wherever they went. Liang Jie then built a palace, and Sun Shou also built a mansion on the opposite street. They did their best in civil engineering and competed with each other in boasting. There were deep

古文：素有行操，帝益爱之，加号梁夫人；擢樊调为羽林左监。
现代文：大小窗户都缕着绮纹，刻着琐纹，饰以青色，画着云气和仙人。楼台亭阁，通道相连，可以登临互相眺望。石级桥梁，横跨河上。金银珠玉，异国珍奇，充斥仓库。
English: The windows, large and small, are all lined with wrinkles, carved with trifles, decorated with cyan, painted with clouds and fairies. The pavilion pavilion, the passage is connected, you can climb up and look at each other. Stone bridges, across the river. Gold and silver beads, exotic and rare, full of warehouses.

古文：调，光禄大夫宏兄曾孙也。
现代文：从遥远的大宛弄来汗血名马。
English: A famous horse comes from a faraway place.

古文：于是追尊恭怀皇后。
现代文：又广开园林，取土成山。
English: He also expanded the gardens and turned the soil into mountains.

古文：其冬，制诏三公、大鸿胪曰： 夫孝莫大于尊尊亲亲，其义一也。《诗》云： 父兮生我，母兮鞠我，抚我畜我，长我育我，顾我复我，出入腹我。欲报之德，昊天罔极。 
现代文：十里九坡，以仿效东西崤山。
English: Ten miles and nine slopes, in imitation of the East-West Lushan.

古文：朕不敢兴事，览于前世，太宗、中宗，实有旧典，追命外祖，以笃亲亲。
现代文：深林阴涧，仿佛天然真景。
English: The deep forest is gloomy, as if it were a natural landscape.

古文：其追封谥皇太后父竦为褒亲愍侯，比灵文、顺成、恩成侯。
现代文：珍禽驯兽，飞走其中。梁冀和孙寿同坐着人拉小车，车上张挂着羽饰车盖，镶饰着金银，府第中游览。
English: Rare birds and animals fly away. Liang Jie and Sun Shou both sit in a people-pulled carriage, with a feather-decorated car cover hanging on the car, inlaid with gold and silver, touring the prefecture.

古文：魂而有灵，嘉斯宠荣，好爵显服，以慰母心。 
现代文：他们带着很多歌伎，敲击钟磬，吹奏笙箫，一路歌声酣畅，有时通宵达旦，纵情欢乐。客人来访，守门人不给通报。客人只好重金贿赂，以至守门人的积蓄，多达千金。
English: They bring a lot of kabuki, strike the gong, blow the gong, sing along the way, sometimes all night long, indulge in joy. Guests visit, the gatekeepers do not give notice. The guests had to pay heavy bribes, and even the gatekeepers' savings, up to thousands of dollars.

古文：遣中谒者与及扈，备礼西迎竦丧，诣京师改殡，赐东园画馆、玉匣、衣衾，建茔于恭怀皇后陵傍。
现代文：梁冀又增辟园林，其禁令和皇家一样。园林的广阔，西边到达弘农，东边连接荥阳，南边与鲁阳为邻，北边与黄河、淇水相接。包揽山林沼泽，远衔丘陵旷野，周围疆界，几达千里。
English: Liang Jie also added gardens, the ban of which is the same as that of the royal family. The vastness of the gardens reaches Hongnong in the west, connects Poyang in the east, is adjacent to Luyang in the south, and is connected to the Yellow River and Qishui in the north. It covers mountains, swamps, remote hills and wilderness, and the surrounding borders are thousands of miles.

古文：帝亲临送葬，百官毕会。征还竦妻、子，封子棠为乐平侯，棠弟雍乘氏侯，雍弟翟单父侯，邑各五千户，位皆特进，赏赐第宅、奴卑、车马、兵弩、什物以巨万计，宠遇光于当世。
现代文：又于河南城西兴建菟苑，纵横数十里，调发所辖几县兵士民夫修建楼阁，用了几年时间，才营建完工。然后向地方发出文告，搜罗生兔，剪去一撮兔毛为标记，如有人违犯禁令，伤害了这些兔子，判罪重至肉刑或死刑。曾经有个西域来的做买卖的人，不知禁令，误杀了一只兔子，人们辗转告发，株连而死者达十余人。梁冀的二弟曾偷偷地派人到上党打猎，梁冀知道了，便逮捕其二弟的宾客，一时间杀死了三十多人，没有一个活着回来的。梁冀还在城西另建府第，收容那些逃亡的奸民。有时把无辜的百姓抓去，全部作为奴婢，多达数千人，名之曰 自卖人 。
English: He also built a gourd garden in the west of Henan City, with a length and width of dozens of miles. It took several years to complete the construction of the pavilion, which was built by soldiers and commoners from several counties under the jurisdiction of the Central Military Commission. Then he issued a notice to the localities to collect rabbits and cut off a pinch of rabbit hair as a mark. If someone violated the ban and harmed these rabbits, he would be sentenced to corporal punishment or death. Once, a trader from the western region, who did not know about the ban, killed a rabbit by mistake. People did not report it to the authorities, and more than ten people died. Liang J

古文：诸梁内外以亲疏并补郎、谒者。棠官至大鸿胪，雍少府。
现代文：汉桓帝元嘉元年，桓帝因为梁冀有迎立自己为皇帝的功勋，想要用特殊的恩典来尊崇他，于是大会公卿，共同商议给梁冀的礼遇。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Huan of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Huan wanted to honor Liang Jie with a special grace because of his achievement in becoming emperor. Therefore, the grand nobles of the assembly discussed the courtesy to Liang Jie.

古文：棠卒，子安国嗣，延光中为侍中，有罪免官，诸梁为郎吏者皆坐免。
现代文：主管官员便奏请梁冀上朝可以不趋拜，上殿可以穿靴带剑，拜谒皇帝和赞礼都不称他的名字，礼仪与萧何相当。把定陶、成阳封赐梁冀余下的户数，全部加封给他，共增为四县，与东汉初年邓禹相等。
English: The officials in charge then asked Liang Jie that he could not worship the previous dynasty, that he could wear shoes and carry a sword when entering the palace, and that he could not be called by his name when paying homage or praising the emperor. The etiquette was equivalent to that of Xiao He. Liang Jie's remaining households were all granted the Ding Tao and Chengyang seals, increasing the total to four counties, which was equal to that of Deng Yu in the first year of the Eastern Han Dynasty.

古文：商字伯夏，雍之子也。
现代文：赏赐金钱、奴婢、彩帛、车马、衣服、府第，与霍光相等。
English: Rewarded with money, male and female slaves, colored gongs, chariots and horses, clothes, and prefectures, equal to that of Huo Guang.

古文：少以外戚拜郎中，迁黄门侍郎。
现代文：用这些特殊礼遇来显示梁冀的殊勋。每次上朝，不与三公同座，独占一席。
English: These special privileges were used to show Liang Jie's special merit. Every time he went to the imperial court, he did not sit with the three princes, but reserved a seat for himself.

古文：永建元年，袭父封乘氏侯。
现代文：十天上一次朝，评议尚书省的事务。
English: In the morning once every ten days, the affairs of the Ministry of Education and Culture are reviewed.

古文：三年，顺帝选商女及妹入掖庭，迁侍中、屯骑校尉。
现代文：把这些做法向天下宣布，作为千秋万载的制度。梁冀还嫌所奏的礼遇微薄，很不高兴。他把持大权，行凶作恶更为放肆。
English: These practices were announced to the world as a system that would last for thousands of years. Liang Jie was not happy with the meager courtesies he received. He was more presumptuous in holding power and committing evil.

古文：阳嘉元年，女立为皇后，妹为贵人，加商位特进，更增国土，赐安车驷马，其岁拜执金吾。
现代文：朝廷大小事情，莫有不向他请示由他决断的。宫廷里的侍卫近臣，都由他一手安插，宫禁中的一切情况，极细微的事他都知道。
English: There was nothing big or small at court that he was not asked to decide. The palace guards and courtiers were all put in place by him, and he knew every detail of the confinement.

古文：二年，封子冀为襄邑侯，商让不受。
现代文：文武百官凡调动职务或受皇帝召见的，都要先到梁冀府中投书谢恩，然后才敢到尚书省接受命令。
English: All civil and military officials who are transferred or summoned by the emperor must first submit a letter of thanks to Liang Jifu before they dare to accept orders from Shangshu.

古文：三年，以商为大将军，固称疾不起。
现代文：下邳人吴树出任宛县县令，上任之前向梁冀辞行。
English: Wu Shu, a native of Lower Linyi, became the county magistrate of Wan County, but he resigned to Liang Jie before taking office.

古文：四年，使太常桓焉奉策就第即拜，商乃诣阙受命。
现代文：梁冀的亲戚朋友有很多在宛县境内。梁冀便为他们说情，托吴树关照。吴树回答说： 小人干坏事，都应该杀掉。
English: There are many relatives and friends of Liang Jie in Wan County. Liang Jie pleaded for them and asked Wu Shu to take care of them. Wu Shu replied: If a villain does bad things, they should all be killed.

古文：明年，夫人阴氏薨，追号开封君，赠印绶。
现代文：将军您凭借皇后的尊威，担任大将军的职务，应当奖掖贤良，裨补朝廷的缺失。
English: General, by virtue of the empress's prestige, you have assumed the position of general. You should reward the virtuous and make up for the shortcomings of the imperial court.

古文：商自以戚属居大位，每存谦柔，虚己进贤，辟汉阳巨览、上党陈龟为椽属。
现代文：宛县是个大都会，士人荟萃的地方，自从我侍坐聆教以来，没有听您称赞过一位忠厚的长者，而托我照应那些不该照应的人，我委实不敢听命。 
English: Wan County is a metropolis, a place where scholars come together. Since I've been teaching, I haven't heard you praise a loyal elder. But if you ask me to take care of those who shouldn't be taken care of, I really don't dare to obey.

古文：李固、周举为从事中郎，于是京师翕然，称为良辅，帝委重焉。
现代文：梁冀听了默不作声，心里很不高兴。吴树到达宛县，就杀掉了危害百姓的梁冀门客数十人。
English: When Wu Shu arrived at Wan County, he killed dozens of Liang Jidi's guests who were endangering the people.

古文：每有饥馑，辄载租谷于城门，赈与贫餧，不宣己惠。
现代文：梁冀从此深恨吴树。后来，吴树调任荆州刺史，行前向梁冀辞行，梁冀设宴为他饯行，暗中在酒里下了毒药。
English: From then on, Liang Jie deeply hated Wushu. Later, Wushu was transferred to Jingzhou and resigned to Liang Jie. Liang Jie held a banquet for him and secretly put poison in his wine.

古文：检御门族，未曾以权盛干法。
现代文：吴树一出门便死在车上。又有辽东太守侯猛，刚接到任命未去拜见梁冀，梁冀借口别的事把他腰斩了。
English: Wu Shu died in the car as soon as he left the house. Liaodong Taishou Hou Meng, who had just received the appointment, did not go to see Liang Jie, and Liang Jie cut him off on the pretext of other matters.

古文：时，郎中汝南袁著，年十九，见冀凶纵，不胜其愤，乃诣阙上书曰：
现代文：这时郎中汝南人袁著，年十九岁，看到梁冀凶狠放肆，非常愤恨。
English: At this time, his 19 year-old brother-in-law, Runan Yuan, was very angry when he saw Liang Jie's reckless behavior.

古文：臣闻仲尼叹凤鸟不至，河不出图，自伤卑贱，不能致也。
现代文：就到宫门向皇帝上书说 ：我听到过仲尼叹息凤鸟不至，黄河也不出图，感慨于自己的地位卑微，不能造成清明政局。
English: He went to the palace gate to write a letter to the emperor, saying: I have heard Zhongni sighing that the phoenix and the bird are not coming, and the Yellow River is not out of the picture, and lamenting his lowly status and his inability to create a clear political situation.

古文：今陛下居得致之位，又有能致之资，而和气未应，贤愚失序者，势分权臣，上下壅隔之故也。
现代文：现在陛下有了致政局于清明的地位，而又有使政局清明的天资，可是人间还没有和气以应大命，贤愚不得其位，那是因为权势掌握在权臣手中，朝野上下政令阻塞不通的缘故。
English: Now His Majesty has a clear position in the political situation, and the talent to make the political situation clear, but there is still no harmony in the world to meet the great destiny, and the wise and the foolish can not take their place. That is because the power is in the hands of the powerful, and the government orders from all walks of life are blocked.

古文：夫四时之运，功成则退，高爵厚宠，鲜不致灾。
现代文：四时运行，岁成即退。人世间至高的爵位，深厚的宠爱，很少有不招致灾祸的。
English: Run at four o'clock, and the year is out. The highest rank in the world, deeply loved, rarely does not cause disaster.

古文：今大将军位极功成，可为至戒，宜遵悬车之礼，高枕颐神。
现代文：目前，大将军权位到了极点，功业已成，可以深为鉴戒，应该让梁冀遵照致仕之礼，辞职告退、高卧养神。
English: At present, the power of the general has reached the extreme, the work has been accomplished, it can be deeply admonished, and Liang Jie should be allowed to comply with the ceremony of retirement, resign and retire, and lie high to raise his spirits.

古文：传曰： 木实繁者，披枝害心。 
现代文：古书上说 ：树木果实繁多，就容易折断树枝，危害树心。 
English: An ancient book says: If a tree has many fruits, it is easy to break the branches and damage the heart of the tree.

古文：若不抑损权盛，将无以全其身矣。
现代文：如果不抑制梁冀的权势，将无法保全他的身家性命。
English: If the power of Liang Jie is not curbed, it will be impossible to protect his personal and family life.

古文：左右闻臣言，将侧目切齿，臣特以童蒙见拔，故敢忘忌讳。
现代文：您的近臣听到我这些话，必将侧目而视，切齿痛恨。只是我以年轻而承蒙提拔，所以敢于冒犯忌讳，上书直言。
English: When your courtiers hear these words of mine, they will surely look at me sideways and gnash their teeth with hatred. However, I am young and have been promoted, so I dare to offend taboos and speak frankly.

古文：昔舜、禹相戒无若丹朱，周公戒成王无如殷王纣，愿除诽谤之罪，以开天下之口。
现代文：昔者舜禹互相告诫说，不要像丹朱那样傲慢逸乐；周公劝诫成王不要像殷纣王那样暴虐无道。希望陛下废除诽谤的罪刑，让天下人能敢于说话。 
English: The ancients warned each other, saying, "Don't be as arrogant as Dan Zhu; Zhou Gong advised Cheng Wang not to be as tyrannical as King Yin. I hope that Your Majesty will abolish the crime of defamation, so that people around the world can dare to speak."

古文：书得奏御，冀闻而密遣掩捕著。著乃变易姓名，后托病伪死，结蒲为人，市棺殡送。
现代文：袁著奏章送到了皇帝手中，梁冀听到了，秘密派人逮捕袁著，袁著改名换姓，后来假托因病而死，结蒲草为尸体，买了棺木殡葬。
English: Yuan Shouzhang was sent to the emperor, and Liang Jie heard about it and secretly sent someone to arrest Yuan Shou. Yuan Shou changed his name and surname. Later, he faked his death due to illness, covered his body with rushes, and bought a coffin for his funeral.

古文：冀廉问知其诈，阴求得，笞杀之，隐蔽其事。
现代文：梁冀察知袁著的骗局，暗中逮捕了袁著，把他笞击打死，并把这件事隐瞒起来。
English: Liang Jie detected Yuan Zhe's deception, secretly arrested Yuan Zhe, beat him to death, and concealed the matter.

古文：学生桂阳刘常，当世名儒，素善于著，冀召补令史以辱之。
现代文：太学生桂阳人刘常，是当世的名儒，和袁著向来要好。梁冀召他来补令史这样的小吏缺额以侮辱他。
English: Liu Chang, a student of Guiyang, is a contemporary famous Confucian, and has always been better than Yuan. Liang Jie called him to fill the shortage of minor officials such as Ling Shi to insult him.

古文：时，太原郝、胡武，皆危言高论，与著友善。
现代文：当时太原人郝薭、胡武，都爱发表正直的言论和高深的见解。他们都和袁著友善。
English: At that time, Taiyuan Renjun and Huwu both liked to make honest remarks and profound opinions. They were all friendly with Yuan Rong.

古文：先是，等连名奏记三府，荐海内高士，而不诣冀，冀追怒之，又疑为著党，敕中部官移檄捕前奏记者并杀之，遂诛武家，死者六十余人。
现代文：原先是郝薭等联名上书三公府，推荐天下志行高洁之士，而不向大将军推荐。梁冀现在回忆起这件事来，大为恼怒；又怀疑郝薭等人是袁著的同党。于是他命令中都官发公文捕捉那些向三公府上书荐贤的人，把他们都杀了。还杀害了胡武一家，共杀死了六十多人。
English: Originally, it was Yan and others who jointly wrote to the three public offices, recommending the world's noble and virtuous people, but not recommending them to the general. Liang Ji now recalls this incident and is very angry; he also suspects that Yan and others are the same party as Yuan Rong. So he ordered the central government to issue a document to capture those who recommended the virtuous people to the three public offices, and killed them all. He also killed the Huwu family, killing more than sixty people in total.

古文：初逃亡，知不得免，因舆榇奏书冀门。
现代文：郝薭以前逃走时，知道不免于祸，就用车子拉着棺材到梁冀家上书。
English: When Zhai escaped before, he knew that he could not avoid disaster, so he used a car to pull the coffin to Liang Jie's house to write a letter.

古文：书入，仰药而死，家乃得全。
现代文：书信送进去后，他就服毒自杀了。
English: After the letter was delivered, he took poison and committed suicide.

古文：及冀诛，有诏以礼祀著等。
现代文：这样才保全了他的一家。等到梁冀被处死后，朝廷下诏以礼祭奠袁著等人。
English: This was the only way to save his family. When Liang Jie was executed and died, the imperial court issued a proclamation to pay tribute to Yuan Zhi and others.

古文：冀诸忍忌，皆此类也。
现代文：梁冀干的种种残忍恶毒之事，都与这种情况相类似。
English: All kinds of cruel and vicious things that Liang Jie did were similar to this situation.

古文：不疑好经书，善待士，冀阴疾之，因中常侍白帝，转为光禄勋，又讽众人共荐其子胤为河南尹。
现代文：梁不疑喜爱经书，礼贤下士，梁冀暗中嫉妒他，就通过中常侍转告桓帝，调任他为光禄勋。又暗示众臣共同推荐梁冀的儿子梁胤任河南尹。
English: Liang undoubtedly loved the scriptures, and Liang Jie secretly envied him. Liang Jie told Emperor Huan through the middle attendant that Liang Jie's son, Liang Yin, should be promoted to Guanglu Honor. Liang Jie also hinted that all the courtiers should jointly recommend Liang Jie's son, Liang Yin, to Henan Yin.

古文：胤一名胡狗，时年十六，容貌甚陋，不胜冠带，道路见者，莫不蚩笑焉。
现代文：梁胤又叫胡狗，这时才十六岁，容貌丑陋，官衣官帽都穿戴不了。路上见到他的人，没有不嗤笑他的。
English: Liang Yin, also known as Hu Dog, was only 16 years old at the time. His appearance was ugly, and he couldn't even wear the official uniform and cap. No one who saw him on the road didn't laugh at him.

古文：不疑自耻兄弟有隙，遂让位归第，与弟蒙闭门自守。
现代文：梁不疑自以为与兄弟有隔阂而感到羞耻，于是辞官回家，和他的弟弟梁蒙关起门来不问外事。
English: Without a doubt, Liang felt ashamed because he thought there was a gap between him and his brother, so the official went home, and he and his brother Liang Meng closed the door and did not ask about foreign affairs.

古文：冀不欲令与宾客交通，阴使人变服至门，记往来者。
现代文：梁冀不想让梁不疑与宾客往来，暗中派人化装守候在他的门前，有人来往便记下来。
English: Liang Jie didn't want Liang to mingle with the guests, so he secretly sent someone in disguise to wait in front of his door. If anyone came and went, he would write it down.

古文：南郡太守马融、江夏太守田明，初除，过谒不疑，冀讽州郡以它事陷之，皆髡笞徙朔方。
现代文：南郡太守马融，江夏太守田明，刚任职的时候，去拜访梁不疑，梁冀便暗示州郡官员寻别的事来陷害他们，把他们都处以剃光头发和鞭打的刑罚，充军到朔方。
English: Ma Rong, the governor of Nan County, and Tian Ming, the governor of Jiangxia County, visited Liang when they first took office. Liang Ji suggested that the state and county officials were looking for something else to frame them, and they were all punished with shaved hair and whipping, and joined the Shuo side.

古文：融自刺不诛，明遂死于路。
现代文：马融自杀未遂，田明死在路上。
English: Ma Rong attempted suicide, Tian Ming died on the road.

古文：永兴二年，封不疑子马为颍阴侯，胤子桃为城父侯。
现代文：汉桓帝永兴二年，加封梁不疑的儿子梁马为颍阴侯，梁胤的儿子梁桃为城父侯。
English: In the second year of Emperor Han Huan's Yongxing, Liang Ma, the son of Liang Unsuspecting, was awarded the title of Jinyin Hou, and Liang Tao, the son of Liang Yin, was awarded the title of Chengfu Hou.

古文：冀一门前后七封侯，三皇后，六贵人，二大将军，夫人、女食邑称君者七人，尚公主者三人，其余卿、将、尹、校五十七人。
现代文：总计梁冀的一家前后封侯的七人，三个皇后，六个贵人，两个大将军，妇人、女儿食邑称 君 的七人，娶公主为妻的三人。其余担任卿、将、尹、校等官职的五十七人。
English: In total, Liang Ji's family had seven princes, three queens, six nobles, two generals, seven wives and daughters called Jun, and three married princesses. The remaining fifty-seven people held official positions such as Sir, General, Yin, and School.

古文：在位二十余年，究极满盛，威行内外，百僚侧目，莫敢违命，天子恭己而不得有所亲豫。
现代文：梁冀在位二十多年，权势大到无以复加的地步，在朝廷内外施加淫威，所有官员无不侧目而视，不敢违抗他的命令，天子也只得恭敬他，不敢亲自处理一切政务。
English: Liang Jie had been on the throne for more than 20 years. His power was so great that it could not be overestimated. He exerted his authority both inside and outside the imperial court. All officials looked up to him and did not dare to disobey his orders. Even the Son of Heaven had to respect him and did not dare to personally handle all government affairs.

古文：帝即不平之。
现代文：汉桓帝对梁冀的骄横早已不满。
English: Emperor Han Kuan was already dissatisfied with Liang Ji's arrogance.

古文：延熹元年，太史令陈授因小黄门徐璜，陈灾异日食之变，咎在大将军，冀闻之，讽洛阳令收考授，死于狱。帝由此发怒。
现代文：延熹元年太史令陈授通过小黄门徐璜，陈述日食的灾异，应归咎于大将军，梁冀知道了，暗示洛阳令逮捕陈授加以拷问，陈授死在狱中，桓帝因此大怒。
English: In the first year of Yancheng, Taishi ordered Chen Zuo to pass through the small yellow gate of Xu Xi, stating that the disaster of the solar eclipse should be attributed to the general. Liang Ji knew it, suggesting that Luo Yang ordered Chen Zuo to be arrested and tortured. Chen Zuo died in prison, and Emperor Huan was very angry.

古文：初，掖庭人邓香妻宣生女猛，香卒，宣更适梁纪。
现代文：当初，掖庭人邓香的妻子名宣，生了个女儿邓猛。邓香死了，宣改嫁给梁纪。
English: At first, the wife of the courtier Deng Xiang, Meixuan, gave birth to a daughter, Deng Meng. Deng Xiang died, and Meixuan married Liang Ji.

古文：梁纪者，冀妻寿之舅也。
现代文：梁纪是梁冀妻子孙寿的舅父。
English: Liang Ji is the uncle of Liang Ji's wife Sun Shou.

古文：寿引进猛入掖庭，见幸，为贵人，冀因欲认猛为其女以自固，乃易猛姓为梁。
现代文：孙寿把邓猛送入后宫，得到桓帝的宠幸，封为贵人。梁冀就想认邓猛为自己的女儿以巩固自己的地位。于是把邓猛改姓梁。
English: Sun Shou sent Deng Meng into the harem, and she was favored by Emperor Huan and made a noblewoman. Liang Ji wanted to recognize Deng Meng as his own daughter to consolidate his position. So he changed Deng Meng's surname to Liang.

古文：时猛姊婿邴尊为议郎，冀恐尊沮败宣意，乃结刺客于偃城，刺杀尊，而又欲杀宣。
现代文：当时，邓猛的姐夫邴尊做议郎。梁冀恐怕邴尊阻止宣让女儿改姓，就在偃城结交一个刺客，刺杀邴尊，还想杀害宣。
English: At that time, Deng Meng's brother-in-law, Xun Zun, acted as a mediator. Liang Jie was afraid that Xun Zun would prevent Xuan from changing his daughter's surname, so he made friends with an assassin in Lucheng, assassinated Xun Zun, and also wanted to kill Xun.

古文：宣家在延熹里，与中常侍袁赦相比，冀使刺客登赦屋，欲入宣家。
现代文：宣家在延熹里，与中常侍袁赦为邻。梁冀使刺客登上袁家房屋，想从那里进入宣家。
English: Xuan Jia lived in Yancheng, and was a neighbor of Yuan Meng, the vice-chancellor of the CPC Central Committee. Liang Ji had the assassins climb onto Yuan Jia's house, hoping to enter Xuan Jia's house from there.

古文：赦觉之，鸣鼓会众以告宣。
现代文：袁赦发觉了，就击鼓集合众人，把情况告诉宣，宣即刻跑到桓帝那里报告。
English: When Yuan Mian found out, he beat the drums to gather everyone and told Xuan about the situation. Xuan immediately ran to Emperor Huan to report the situation.

古文：宣驰入以白帝，帝大怒，遂与中常侍单超、具瑗、唐衡、左悺、徐璜等五人成谋诛冀。语在《宦者传》。
现代文：桓帝大怒，就和中常侍单超、具瑗、唐衡、左忄官、徐璜等人商议杀掉梁冀。这件事记在《宦者传》里。
English: Emperor Kuan was so angry that he discussed killing Liang Jie with Zhongzheng's attendants Shan Chao, Gu Xi, Tang Heng, Zuo Jian Guan, Xu Xi and others. This event is recorded in "The Biography of Jian Zha."

古文：冀心疑超等，乃使中黄门张恽入省宿，以防其变。
现代文：梁冀怀疑单超等人，就派中黄门张恽进宫值宿，以防事变。
English: When Liang Jie suspected Shan Chao and others, he sent Zhonghuangmen Zhang Xuan into the palace to be on duty in case of an incident.

古文：具瑗敕吏收恽，以辄从外入，欲图不轨。
现代文：具瑗命令官吏逮捕了张恽，说他擅入宫廷，图谋不轨。
English: Gooch ordered officials to arrest Zhang Ye, saying that he had trespassed into the court and was plotting.

古文：帝因是御前殿，召诸尚书入，发其事，使尚书令尹勋持节勒丞郎以下皆操兵守省阁，敛诸符节送省中。
现代文：桓帝因此来到前殿，把尚书们都召进来，宣布这件事。派尚书令尹勋，拿着符节总领尚书丞和尚书郎以下官员，都拿着兵器守卫宫中各官署。集中所有符节送到宫中。
English: Emperor Kuan therefore came to the front hall, called all the officials to come in, and announced the matter. He sent Shang Shuling Yin Xun, and the officials including the commander-in-chief of the festival, Shang Shujo, and Shang Shuro, with weapons to guard all the government offices in the palace. They concentrated all the festivals and sent them to the palace.

古文：使黄门令具瑗将左右厩驺、虎贲、羽林、都候敛戟士，合千余人，与司隶校尉张彪共围冀第。使光禄勋袁盱持节收冀大将军印绶，徙封比景都乡侯。
现代文：命令黄门令具瑗率领左右厩的骑士、虎贲、羽林、都侯剑、戟士，合计一千余人，与司隶校尉张彪共同围住梁冀府第，派光禄勋袁盱持符节收缴梁冀大将军的印绶，降封他为比景都乡侯。
English: He ordered the Yellow Gate commander, Gu Gu, to lead a total of more than one thousand knights, tigers, hares, capital swords, and soldiers from the left and right stables, together with Zhang Biao, a lieutenant of the Sili, to encircle Liangji Prefecture, and sent the Guanglu Honored Soldier, Yuan Xuan, to collect the seal of the General of Liangji, and to demote him to the status of a peasant of the capital.

古文：冀及妻寿即日皆自杀。
现代文：梁冀和他的妻子孙寿当天都自杀了。
English: Liang Jie and his wife Sun Shou both committed suicide on the same day.

古文：悉收子河南尹胤、叔父屯骑校尉让，及亲从卫尉淑、越骑校尉忠、长水校尉戟等，诸梁及孙氏中外宗亲送诏狱，无长少皆弃市。不疑、蒙先卒。其它所连及公卿、列校、尉刺史、二千石死者数十人，故吏宾客免黜者三百余人，朝廷为空，惟尹勋、袁盱及廷尉邯郸义在焉。
现代文：梁冀过去的属吏与宾客罢官免职的共三百多人。朝廷因此都空了。只有尹勋、袁盱及廷尉邯郸义在朝。
English: A total of more than three hundred of Liang Jie's former subordinates and guests were dismissed from their posts. As a result, the imperial court was empty. Only Yin Xun, Yuan Xuan and the courtier Yan Yi were in the imperial court.

古文：是时事卒从中发，使者交驰，公卿失其度，官府市里鼎沸，数日乃定，百姓莫不称庆。
现代文：当时，因为事变突然爆发于宫中，因此使者急速地来回通报，朝廷大臣都不知所措，官府民间大为哄动。好几天才安定下来，老百姓没有不拍手称庆的。
English: At that time, because the incident suddenly broke out in the palace, the emissaries quickly reported back and forth, the ministers of the court were overwhelmed, and the government and the people were greatly agitated. It took several days to settle down, and the people did not celebrate without clapping their hands.

古文：收冀财货，县官斥卖，合三十余万万，以充王府，用减天下税租之半。
现代文：没收梁冀的财产，由朝廷变卖，合计三十余亿，用来充实国库，减免天下租税的一半。
English: Liang Jie's property was confiscated and sold by the imperial court for a total of more than 3 billion yuan, which was used to replenish the national treasury and reduce and exempt half of the country's taxes.

古文：散其苑囿，以业穷民。
现代文：拆除梁冀的园林，给贫穷的老百姓耕种放牧。
English: Liang Jie's gardens will be dismantled, and the poor people will be given land for farming and grazing.

古文：录诛冀功者，封尚书令尹勋以下数十人。
现代文：评定诛灭梁冀的有功人员，封赏了尚书令尹勋以下数十人。
English: The appraisal of the meritorious personnel who fought against Liang Jie was awarded to dozens of people including Shang Shuling and Yin Xun.

