古文：宣州宁国县多积首蛇，其长盈尺，黑鳞白章，两首文彩同，但一首逆鳞耳。
现代文：宣州宁国县多有枳首蛇，长一尺多，有黑鳞和白花纹，两首的花纹颜色一样，但有一首的鳞是倒着的。
English: In Ningguo County, Xuanzhou, there are many long-necked snakes, more than a foot long, with black scales and white markings. Two of the markings are the same color, but one of the scales is upside down.

古文：人家庭槛间，动有数十同空，略如蚯蚓。
现代文：人家庭院门槛之间，动辄有几十条同在一穴中，就跟蚯蚓差不多。
English: Between the thresholds of people's homes, there are often dozens of carp in the same hole, which is almost the same as carp.

古文：信州铅山县有苦泉，流以为涧。挹其水熬之，则成胆矾。
现代文：信州铅山县有处泉水叫苦泉，水流成为山间溪水，舀取其水煎熬就能熬成胆矾，再熬胆矾就能熬成铜。
English: In Lead Mountain County, Shinshu, there is a spring called Bitter Spring. The water flows into a mountain stream. If you take the water and boil it, it can be made into gallbladder. If you boil the gallbladder again, it can be made into copper.

古文：烹胆矾则成铜；熬胆矾铁釜，久之亦化为铜。水能为铜，物之变化，固不可测。
现代文：熬胆矾的铁锅，日子久了也会变成铜。水能够变成铜，物质的变化，确也无法推测。
English: The iron pot in which gall is boiled will turn into copper after a long time. Water can turn into copper, but it is impossible to predict material changes.

古文：按《黄帝素问》有 天五行，地五行，土之所在天为湿，土能生金石，湿亦能生金石， 此其验也。
现代文：按《黄帝素问》一书记载天有五行、地有五行，土之气 在天为湿 ，土能生金石，湿气也能生金石，这水变铜的事例就是一种明验。
English: According to "Huang Di Su Qian," a record, the sky has five lines, the earth has five lines, the earth's atmosphere is wet in the sky, the soil can produce gold and stone, and the humidity can also produce gold and stone. This case of water turning into copper is a kind of enlightenment.

古文：又石穴中水，所滴皆为钟乳、殷孽。春秋分时，汲井泉则结石花；大之下，则生阴精石，皆湿之所化也。
现代文：另外在石穴中，水滴下来都能形成钟乳石、姜石；春分和秋分时节，从井泉中汲出的水能结成石花；含盐量很高的卤水地下，则能生成阴精石：这些都是由湿气所化成的。
English: In addition, in the stone cave, water droplets can form stalactites and ginger stones; during the spring and autumn equinox, water drawn from the well can form stone flowers; underground brine with high salt content can produce yin quartz: these are all converted by moisture.

古文：如木之气在天为风，木能生火，风亦能生火。盖五行之性也。
现代文：如木之气在天为风，木能生火，风也能生火，大概五行的本性就是这个样子。
English: If the wood is wind in the sky, the wood can start a fire, and the wind can start a fire, the nature of the five elements is probably like this.

古文：古之节如今之虎符，其用则有圭璋龙虎之别，皆椟，将之英荡是也。
现代文：古代的节犹如今天的虎符，但在使用时有圭节、璋节、龙节、虎节的分别，都装在木匣里携带，《周礼》所说的 英荡 就是这种匣。
English: The ancient festival is just like today's tiger emblem, but when used, there is a difference between the cucumber festival, the dragon festival, the dragon festival, and the tiger festival. They are all carried in a wooden box, and the Yinghuang mentioned in the Zhouli is such a box.

古文：汉人所持节，乃古之旄也。
现代文：汉人所持的节，其实是古代的旄。
English: The festival held by the Han people is actually an ancient festival.

古文：余在汉东，得一玉琥，美玉而微红，酣酣如醉肌，温润明洁，或云即玫瑰也。
现代文：我在汉东地方得到一件玉琥，玉很漂亮而微微发红，艳艳的就像美人醉后的肌肤，温润明洁，有人说这就是玫瑰玉。
English: I got a piece of jade amber in the Handong region. The jade is very beautiful and slightly reddish, bright like the skin of a beautiful woman after being drunk, warm and clear. Some people say that this is a rose jade.

古文：古人有以为币者，《春官》 以白琥礼西方 是也。有以为货者，《左传》 加以玉琥二 是也。有以为瑞节者， 山国用虎节 是也。
现代文：古人有以玉琥为礼物的，《周礼·春官》篇所说的 以白琥礼西方 就是礼物；有以玉琥为财物的，《左传》提到以两件玉琥赐人就是财物；有以玉琥为吉祥的符节的，《周礼》记载的 山国用虎节 就是这种用途。
English: The ancients used jade and amber as gifts. According to the Zhouli Chunguan, white amber and amber from the west were gifts; according to the Zuo Zhuan, two pieces of jade and amber were wealth; according to the Zuo Zhuan, two pieces of jade and amber were gifts; according to the Zhouli, the Mountain Tiger Festival was an auspicious festival.

古文：江湖间唯畏大风度。
现代文：在江湖上行船，就怕大风。
English: When sailing on rivers and lakes, one should be afraid of strong winds.

古文：冬月风作有渐，船行可以为备；唯盛夏风起于顾盻间，往往罹难。
现代文：冬季的风是渐渐刮起来的，要行船可以早作防备；盛夏的风则转瞬间就会刮起，行船的人往往会遇难。
English: In winter, the wind gradually picks up, so if you want to sail, you can take precautions early; in midsummer, the wind will suddenly pick up, and sailors will often be killed.

古文：曾闻江国贾人有一术，可免此患。
现代文：曾听说长江岸边的商人有一种办法，可以避免此种祸患。
English: I once heard that merchants on the banks of the Yangtze River have a way to avoid this scourge.

古文：大凡夏月风景，须作于午后。
现代文：大凡夏天的风如果暴烈，必起于午后。
English: The great summer wind, if violent, must arise in the afternoon.

古文：欲行船者，五鼓初起，视星月明洁，四际至地，皆无云气，便可行；至于巳时即止。
现代文：要行船的人，夜间五更初刻就起来看天，见天上星月明亮皎洁，四周天际直到地面都无云气，便可出行，而到中午以前就停下来。
English: Those who want to travel by boat should get up at the first moment of the night of the fifth lunar month to look at the sky. If they see that the stars and the moon in the sky are bright and clear, and there are no clouds around the sky until the ground, they can travel, and stop before noon.

古文：如此，无復与暴风遇矣。
现代文：这样，就不会再遇上暴风了。
English: That way, we won't have any more storms.

古文：国子博士李元规云： 平生游江湖，未尝遇风，用此术。 
现代文：国子博士李元规说： 平生游历江湖，行船未尝遇到过大风，用的就是这办法。 
English: Dr. Li Yuan Rong said: I have been traveling the rivers and lakes all my life, and I have never encountered a strong wind when sailing. This is the method I use.

古文：余使虏，至古契丹界，大蓟茇如车盖。中国无此大者。
现代文：我出使契丹，到了契丹人从前居住的地界，见到大蓟茇就像车盖一般大，在中原没有这么大的。
English: I went to the area where the Khitan people used to live, and I saw that the giant salamander was as big as a car bonnet. There is nothing like it in the Central Plains.

古文：其地名蓟，恐其因此也，如杨州宜杨、荆州宜荆之类。
现代文：这地方所以以蓟为地名，恐怕就是因为这种大蓟茇特别多的缘故，有如扬州适宜杨树生长、荆州适宜荆木生长之类。
English: This is why the place is called Yangzhou, I'm afraid it's because there are so many of these giant salamanders, just as Yangzhou is suitable for the growth of poplar trees and Jingzhou is suitable for the growth of wattle trees.

古文：荆或为楚，楚亦荆木之别名也。
现代文：荆又称作楚，楚也是荆木的另一名称。
English: Jing is also known as Chu, and Chu is also another name for the Jing tree.

古文：刁约使契丹，戏为四句诗曰： 抻燕移离毕，看房贺跋支。
现代文：刁约出使契丹，戏谑地写了四句诗： 押燕移离毕，看房贺跋支。
English: On the occasion of sending an envoy to Khitan, Zhai wrote four poems in a playful manner: After moving away from Oshiyan, it was time to look at the house and congratulate the family.

古文：饯行三匹裂，密赐十貔狸。 
现代文：饯行三匹裂，密赐十貔狸。 
English: Minxing three horses split, secretly give ten beetles.

古文：皆纪实也。
现代文：这四句诗记录的都是实事。
English: These four verses record the facts.

古文：移离毕，官名，如中国执政官。加跋支，如执衣防阁。匹裂，小木罂，以色绫木为之，如黄漆。貔狸，形如鼠而大，穴居，食果谷，嗜肉，狄人为珍膳，味如子而脆。
现代文：移离毕，契丹的官名，如同中国的执政官；贺跋支，如同中国官员的役从执衣、防閤；匹裂，是一种像小木罐的器物，用色绫木制造，看上去有如用黄漆漆过；貔狸，是一种外形像老鼠而稍大的野兽，在地上打洞藏身，能吃谷物，又贪吃肉，契丹人以之为珍贵的肉食，味道像小猪而肉更脆。
English: Moving away from Bi, the official name of the Khitan is the same as that of the Chinese consul; He Baozhi, like the Chinese officials, is in charge of wearing clothes and protecting against flies; Pi Ria, is a small wooden pot-like object, made of colored birch wood, looks like it has been painted with yellow paint; Civet, is a slightly larger beast shaped like a mouse, hiding in a hole in the ground, can eat cereals, and is greedy for meat, which the Khitan consider to be a precious meat, tastes like a small pig and the meat is more crispy.

古文：陈文忠为枢密，一日，日欲没时，忽有中人宣召。
现代文：陈文忠为枢密院长官，有一天将日落时，忽然有宦官传宣皇上召见。
English: Chen Wenzhong was the director of the Privy Council. One day, when the sun was setting, he was suddenly summoned to see the emperor by a eunuch.

古文：既入右掖，已昏黑，遂引入禁中。
现代文：文忠入皇城右掖门后，天已昏黑，遂被引入宫城内。
English: After Wen Zhong entered the right gate of the imperial city, it was already dark, so he was brought into the imperial city.

古文：屈曲行甚久，时见有帘帏、灯烛，皆莫知何处。
现代文：弯弯曲曲地走了好久，不时见有帘幕灯烛，都不知道是什么地方。
English: I walked around and around for a long time, and from time to time I saw curtains, lights, and candles, but I didn't know where they were.

古文：已而到一小殿，殿前有两花槛，已有数人先至，皆立廷中。殿上垂帘，蜡烛十余炬而已。
现代文：然后来到一座小殿前，有两个雕花的栏杆，已有几人先到，都站在殿前的庭院中，殿上垂着竹帘，点燃的蜡烛也不过十几支。
English: Then I came to a small hall, with two carved railings. Several people had arrived first, and they were all standing in the courtyard in front of the hall. A bamboo curtain hung over the hall, and there were no more than a dozen lit candles.

古文：相继而至者凡七人，中使乃奏班齐。唯记文忠、丁谓、杜镐三人，其四人忘之。杜镐时尚为馆职。
现代文：相继来到的共有七人，掌礼仪的宦官于是奏称 班齐 ，只记得七人中有文忠、丁谓、杜镐三人，其余四人忘记了，杜镐当时还只是馆职人员。
English: A total of seven people came one after another, and the eunuch in charge of the etiquette then called Banqi, but he only remembered three of the seven people, namely, Wenzhong, Ding Zuo, and Du Juan. The remaining four people forgot that Du Juan was only a librarian at that time.

古文：良久，乘舆自宫中出，灯烛亦不过数十而已。
现代文：许久，皇上的轿子从宫中出来，灯烛也不过几十盏。
English: For a long time, the emperor's palanquin came out of the palace, and there were only a few dozen candles.

古文：宴具甚盛。卷帘，令不拜，升殿就坐。
现代文：宴会准备得很丰盛，卷起帘子后，皇上令诸人不要叩拜，都升殿就座。
English: The banquet was very well prepared. After the curtain was rolled up, the emperor ordered everyone not to bow, and they all went up to the hall to take their seats.

古文：御座设于席东，设文忠之坐于席西，如常人宾主之位。
现代文：皇上御座设在宴席的东面，而设文忠的座位于宴席的西面，如同常人宴客的宾主之位。
English: The emperor's throne is located on the east side of the banquet, while the seat of the emperor is located on the west side of the banquet, just like the guests of the ordinary banquet.

古文：尧叟等皆惶恐不敢就位，上宣喻不已，尧叟恳陈 自古未有君臣齐列之礼 ，至于再三。
现代文：尧叟等都惶恐不敢就位，皇上不停地宣谕就座，尧叟恳切陈述自古未有君臣并排列坐的礼仪，以至于解释再三。
English: They were all afraid to take their seats, and the Emperor kept proclaiming that they should take their seats. He earnestly explained the etiquette of sitting in a row, which had not been done since ancient times, so much so that he had to explain it repeatedly.

古文：上作色曰： 本为天下太平，朝廷无事，思与卿等共乐之。
现代文：皇上不高兴地说： 本来因为天下太平，朝廷无事，想与卿等共享快乐。
English: The emperor said unhappily, "Originally, because the world is at peace, there is nothing wrong with the imperial court. I want to share happiness with my lord."

古文：若如此，何如就外朝开宴？
现代文：如果这样，哪还比得上就在外朝开宴？
English: If this is the case, what can be compared to holding a banquet in front of the emperor?

古文：今日只是宫中供办，未尝命有司，亦不召中书辅臣。
现代文：今天只是宫中供给置办的，未尝叫有关部门做什么，也不召中书辅臣参加。
English: Today, it is only the palace that supplies and procures officials, and the relevant departments have not been asked to do anything, nor have the Vice-Ministers of the Central Government been invited to participate.

古文：以卿等机密及文馆职任侍臣无嫌，且欲促坐语笑，不须多辞。 
现代文：以卿等都是担当机密职事和文馆职任的，侍从之臣没什么嫌疑，权且想促膝坐坐，说说笑笑，不必再多推辞。 
English: Yixing and others are in charge of confidential duties and library duties, and there is no suspicion of the servant's vassal, and the authority wants to urge the knee to sit, talk and laugh, and there is no need to push back.

古文：尧叟等皆趋下称谢，上急止之曰： 此等礼数，且皆置之。 
现代文：尧叟等都要趋下台阶称谢，皇上急忙制止，说： 此等礼数，暂且都放下。 
English: The Emperor hastily put a stop to it, saying, "For the time being, all such formalities should be dropped.

古文：尧叟悚慄危坐，上语笑极欢。
现代文：尧叟等惶悚战栗，正襟危坐，皇上笑语极欢畅。
English: The empress was trembling with fright, sitting with her head on her lap, and the emperor was laughing very merrily.

古文：洒五六行，膳具中各出两绛囊，置群臣之前，皆大珠也。
现代文：酒喝了五六巡，餐具中间各给放了两个红锦囊，置于诸臣之前，都是大珠宝。
English: After drinking five or six rounds of wine, two red brocade bags were placed in the middle of the tableware, and placed in front of the courtiers, all of which were large jewels.

古文：上曰： 时和歳丰，中外康富，恨不得与卿等日夕相会。
现代文：皇上说： 风调雨顺，年景丰收，中外康乐富足，恨不得与卿等每天晚上都聚会。
English: The emperor said, "The weather is fine, the harvest is bountiful, people at home and abroad are healthy, happy and prosperous. I can't wait to gather with you every evening.

古文：太平难遇，此物助卿等燕集之费。 
现代文：太平世道难遇，这点东西就算赞助你们宴集游乐的费用。 
English: If you live in a peaceful world, this thing will even sponsor the cost of your banquet and entertainment.

古文：群臣欲起谢，上云： 且坐，更有。 
现代文：诸臣欲起立称谢，皇上说： 且坐，过会儿还有。 
English: When the courtiers wanted to stand up and express their thanks, the emperor said: "Just sit down, there will be more later."

古文：每人家有病虐者，则借去挂门户上，往往遂差。不但人不识，鬼亦不识也。
现代文：如此上酒三巡，都有赐予，全是美金重宝。宴会结束，已到了四更天，当时人称这次是 天子请客 。
English: In this way, three rounds of wine were served, all of which were given, all of which were precious dollars. The banquet ended, and it was already four days later. At that time, people said that this time it was the Son of Heaven inviting guests.

古文：丞相陈秀公治第于润州，极为闳壮，池馆绵亘数百步。
现代文：文忠之子述古得知其事于文忠，颇能道其详细，这里只是略记其一二。丞相陈秀公在润州修建的宅第，极为宏阔壮丽，园池楼馆绵延一二百丈。
English: Wen Zhong's son, Zhu Gu, learned about it from Wen Zhong, and was quite able to describe it in detail, but here is only a brief description of it. The mansion built by Prime Minister Chen Xiu Gong in Renzhou is extremely grand and magnificent, and the garden and pavilion stretch for 1200 meters.

古文：宅成，公已疾甚，唯肩舆一登西楼而已。
现代文：宅第建成，秀公已病得很严重，只不过让人用轿子抬着登了一回西楼而已。
English: After the completion of the second floor, Shukong was already very ill, but he was carried by a palanquin up to the west building.

古文：人谓之 三不得 ：居不得，修不得，卖不得。
现代文：人称这宅子有 三不得 ：居不得，修不得，卖不得。
English: People say that this house has three prohibitions: it cannot be lived in, it cannot be repaired, and it cannot be sold.

古文：福建剧贼廖恩，聚徒千余人，剽掠市邑，杀害将吏，江浙为之搔然。
现代文：福建大反寇廖恩聚集徒众千余人，剽掠城邑，杀害将吏，江浙一带为之骚动。
English: The Fujian Great Anti-Collion gathered more than a thousand people, plundered cities and towns, killed officers, and caused turmoil in Jiangsu and Zhejiang.

古文：后经赦宥，乃率其徒首降，朝廷补恩右班殿直，赴三班院候差遣。
现代文：后经朝廷赦免，遂率领其徒众服罪投降，朝廷授予廖恩右班殿直的官衔，让他到三班院等候任命实际职务。
English: After being pardoned by the imperial court, he led his followers to surrender. The imperial court awarded Liao En the official rank of Uban Denshinao, and sent him to Sanbanin to await appointment to his actual position.

古文：时坐恩黜免者数十人。一时在铨班叙录其脚色，皆理私罪或公罪，独恩脚色称： 出身以来，并无公私过犯。 
现代文：当时因受廖恩起事的牵连而被降职和罢免的官员有数十人，一时在吏部铨考机构办理有关手续，他们的履历表上都必须写明因此事被治私罪或公罪，唯独廖恩的履历表自称为官以来没有公、私过犯。
English: At that time, there were dozens of officials who were demoted and removed from office because they were implicated by Liao En's uprising. They had to go through the relevant procedures at the Personnel Department's examination institution. Their resume must indicate that they were punished for private or public crimes. However, Liao En's resume did not have any public or private offenses since he was appointed as an official.

古文：予奉使按边，始为木图，写其山川道路。
现代文：我奉命出使河北察访边境事宜，始制作木版地图，以摹绘边境的山川道路。
English: I was ordered to send an envoy to Hebei to inspect the border affairs, and began to make a woodcut map to map the mountain and river roads along the border.

古文：其初遍履山川，旋以面糊木屑写其形势于木屑上。
现代文：起初先走遍了那里的山川，随后用面糊和木屑，在木案上塑制当地地形的模型。
English: At first, they walked all over the mountains and rivers there, and then used dough and wood chips to create a model of the local terrain on a wooden plan.

古文：未几寒冻，木悄不可为，又熔蜡为之。
现代文：没过多久，因为天冷冰冻，用木屑不能做成，又改用熔蜡的办法制作。
English: It didn't take long, because the weather was cold and icy, and it was not possible to make it with wood chips, so they switched to using melted wax.

古文：皆欲其轻，易赍故也。
现代文：这些都是为了使地图轻便，容易携带。
English: All of this is designed to make the map light and easy to carry.

古文：至官所，则以木刻上之。
现代文：回到官署，乃雕刻成木版地图进献朝廷。
English: Returning to the government office, he carved a woodcut map and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：上召辅臣同观。乃诏边州皆为木图，藏于内府。
现代文：皇上召集辅政大臣一起观看，于是下诏边地各州都制作木版地图，收藏于宫中的有关机构。
English: The Emperor summoned the Vice-Minister of State to watch it together. As a result, wooden maps were made of all the states along the border, which were collected by the relevant institutions in the palace.

古文：蜀中剧贼李顺，陷剑南、两川，关右震动。朝廷以为忧。
现代文：蜀中大反寇李顺攻陷剑南东西川，关西地区震动，朝廷为之忧虑。
English: Li Shun, the great anti-colonialist of Shuzhong, invaded the east and west of Jiannan, and the Kansai region was shaken. The imperial court was worried.

古文：后王师破贼，枭李顺，收復两川，书功行赏，子无间言。
现代文：后官军破寇兵，杀李顺枭首示众，收复两川，记功行赏，朝廷内外全无怀疑李顺已死的议论。
English: After the government army defeated the invaders, killed Li Shun and showed his head to the public, recovered the two rivers, and rewarded the merits, there was no doubt inside and outside the court that Li Shun was dead.

古文：至景祐中，有人告李顺尚在广州，巡检使臣陈文琏捕得之，乃真李顺也，年已七十余。
现代文：至景祐年间，有人告发说李顺尚在广州，巡检使臣陈文琏捕获其人，果然是真李顺。
English: During the reign of King Jingyu, someone reported that Li Shun was still in Guangzhou, and the inspection envoy Chen Wenyu captured his man, who was indeed the real Li Shun.

古文：推验明白，囚赴阙，覆按皆实。
现代文：当时李顺已七十多岁，审讯清楚以后，用囚车押赴京师，复核再审，知其事皆属实。
English: At that time, Li Shun was more than 70 years old. After the trial was clear, he was taken to Beijing in a prison van for review and retrial. He knew that everything was true.

古文：朝廷以平蜀将士功赏已行，不欲暴其事。但斩顺，赏文琏二官，仍阁门祗候。
现代文：由于朝廷对平蜀将士的论功行赏早已实施，因而不打算公开此事，只是杀了李顺，又给陈文琏加官两级而使之为閤门祗候了事。
English: Since the imperial court had already implemented the reward for meritorious service for the Pingshu generals, it did not intend to make the matter public, but killed Li Shun and promoted Chen Wenyu to two levels of officials to make it a secret.

古文：文琏，泉州人，康定中老归泉州，余尚识之。
现代文：文琏是泉州人，康定年间辞职回泉州，我还认识他。
English: Wenyi is a Quanzhou native. He resigned to return to Quanzhou during the Kangding era. I still know him.

古文：文琏家有《李顺案款》，本末甚详。
现代文：他家里有李顺一案的审讯案卷，记录此案的前后始末甚为详细。
English: His family has the interrogation file of the Li Shunhua case, which records the beginning and end of the case in great detail.

古文：顺本味江王小博之妻弟，始王小博反于蜀中，不能抚其徒众，乃推顺为主。
现代文：李顺本是味江王小波的妻弟，起初王小波在蜀中起兵造反，不能得到部众的拥戴，其部众于是共推李顺为首领。
English: Li Shun was originally the brother-in-law of King Xiaobo of the Wei River. At first, Wang Xiaobo rebelled in Shuzhong and could not get the support of his subordinates, so his subordinates jointly promoted Li Shun as the leader.

古文：顺初起，悉召乡里富人大姓，令具其家所有财粟，据其生齿足用之外，一切调发，大赈贫乏；录用材能，存抚良善；号令严明，所至一无所犯。
现代文：李顺初为首领，即召集乡里的所有富人大姓，下令具报其家中全部财产和粮食，除了按他们的家庭人口留下够用的之外，其余一切都调发征集，大力救济贫苦农民；录用有才干之士，存抚安分守己的人家，号令严明，所到之处一无所犯。
English: Li Shun was the leader at the beginning, that is, he gathered all the rich people in the village and ordered them to report all the property and grain in their homes. In addition to leaving enough according to their family population, everything else was sent for collection, vigorously helping poor farmers; recruiting talented people, keeping peace and keeping their own homes, the orders were clear, and there was nothing wrong wherever they went.

古文：时两蜀大饥，旬日之间，归之者数万人，所向州县，开门延纳，传檄所至，无復完垒。
现代文：其时两川正遭遇严重的饥荒，不过十天半月之间，归附李顺的就达到数万人，其兵锋所向，州县官都开门迎接，讨伐檄文传布之地，没有不被攻破的城池。
English: At that time, the two rivers were experiencing a severe famine, but within ten days and a half months, tens of thousands of people had joined Li Shun. State and county officials opened their doors to welcome his soldiers to fight the spread of the Confucianism. There was no stronghold that could not be defeated.

古文：及败，人尚怀之。故顺得脱去三十余年，乃始就戮。
现代文：到他失败之后，人们还怀念他，所以李顺得以逃脱远走，直到三十多年后才被捕杀。
English: After his defeat, people still miss him, so Li Shun was able to escape and go far away, until he was captured and killed more than thirty years later.

古文：范文正常言：史称诸葛亮能用度外人。
现代文：范文正曾说过： 史书记载诸葛亮能任用有才能而犯过错误的人。
English: Fan Wenzheng once said: It is recorded in history that Zhuge Liang can only appoint talented people who have made mistakes.

古文：用人者莫不欲尽天下之才，常患近己之好恶而不自知也；能用度外人，然后能周大事。
现代文：凡是用人，没有不希望天下人才都各尽其能的，所以经常担心因事用人近乎以个人好恶而不自知。能用犯过错误的人，然后才能使得事体周全，成就大事业。 
English: There is no servant who does not hope that all the talents in the world will do their best, so they often worry that they do not know themselves because they employ people almost with personal likes and dislikes. They can use people who have made mistakes, and then they can make things perfect and achieve great things.

古文：关中无螃蟹。
现代文：关中一带没有螃蟹。
English: There are no crabs around Guanzhong.

古文：元丰中，余在陕西，闻秦州人家收得一乾蟹。
现代文：元丰年间，我在陕西时，听说秦州一带有户人家收藏有一只干螃蟹。
English: During the Yuanfeng era, when I was in Shaanxi, I heard that a family in Qinzhou had a dried crab in their collection.

古文：土人怖其形状，以为怪物。
现代文：当地人都害怕它的样子，认为是怪物。
English: Locals are afraid of its appearance and consider it to be a monster.

古文：每人家有病虐者，则借去挂门户上，往往遂差。
现代文：每当谁家有人得了疟疾，就借去挂在门上，病往往就好了。
English: Whenever someone in the family gets malaria, they borrow it and hang it on the door, and the illness often goes away.

古文：不但人不识，鬼亦不识也。
现代文：这东西不仅人不认识，恐怕鬼也不认识。
English: Not only do people not recognize this thing, but I'm afraid ghosts don't either.

古文：宋宣献博学，喜藏异书，皆手自校雔。
现代文：宋绶学识渊博，喜欢收藏奇特的书籍，都要亲手进行校订。
English: Song Tao is very knowledgeable and likes to collect unusual books. He has to proofread them by hand.

古文：常谓 校书如扫尘，一面扫，一面生。
现代文：他经常说： 校书就像清扫灰尘，一边扫，一边生。
English: He often said: "School books are like sweeping up dust. While sweeping, one is born."

古文：故有一书每三四校，犹有脱缪 。
现代文：所以有时一本书经过三四次校勘以后，还是会有错漏讹误。 
English: So sometimes, even after a book has been proofread three or four times, there are still mistakes.

