古文：◎河渠五
现代文：河渠五
English: Canal Five

古文：○淮河泇河卫河漳河沁河滹沱河桑乾河胶莱河淮河，出河南平氏胎簪山。
现代文：淮河泇河卫河漳河沁河滹沱河桑乾河胶莱淮河，源出河南平氏胎簪山。
English: The source of the Huai River, the Wei River, the Wei River, the Wei River, the Wei River, the Wei River, the Wei River, the Mulberry River, the Mulberry River, the Jiaolai River and the Huai River is located in the mountains of the Ping family in Henan Province.

古文：经桐伯，其流始大。
现代文：经过桐柏，它的水流开始增大。
English: After Tongbai, its water flow began to increase.

古文：东至固始，入南畿颍州境，东合汝、颍诸水。
现代文：往东到固始，流入南篷题州境内，往东汇合汝、颖各水。
English: Eastward to Gushi, it flows into the territory of Nanputuizhou, and eastward to the confluence of Ru and Ying.

古文：经寿州北，肥水入焉。
现代文：经过寿州北，肥水流入其中。
English: After passing through the north of Shoushu, the fertilized water flows into it.

古文：至怀远城东，涡水入焉。
现代文：到达怀远城东，涡水流入其中。
English: When it reached the east of Huaiyuan City, the swirling water flowed into it.

古文：东经凤阳、临淮，濠水入焉。
现代文：往东经过凤阳、临淮，濠水流入其中。
English: To the east, it passes through Fengyang and Linhuai, and the water of the Yangtze River flows into it.

古文：又经五河县南，而纳浍、沱、漴、潼诸水，势盛流疾。
现代文：又经遇五河县南，然后容纳沧、沱、潦、潼各水，水势强大流速湍急。
English: It also encountered the south of Wuhe County, and then accommodated the water of the vicissitudes, rills, rills, and rills. The water potential was strong and the flow speed was rapid.

古文：经泗州城南，稍东则汴水入焉。
现代文：经过泗州城南，稍微往东则汴水流入其中。
English: Passing through the south of Luzhou City, a little to the east, the water of Luzhou River flows into it.

古文：过龟山麓，益折而北，会洪泽、阜陵、泥墩、万家诸湖。
现代文：经过龟山山脚，逐渐转而向北，汇合于洪泽、阜陵、泥墩、万家各湖水。
English: After passing through the foot of Kameyama Mountain, it gradually turns to the north and converges with the lakes of Hongze, Fulin, Mudan and Wanjia.

古文：东北至清河，南会於大河，即古泗口也，亦曰清口，是谓黄、淮交会之冲。
现代文：往东北到清河，往南汇合大河，就是古代的泗口，也叫做清口，这就是黄河、淮河交叉的地方。
English: To the northeast is the Qinghe River, and to the south is the confluence of the great rivers, which is the ancient Hukou, also known as Qingkou, which is where the Yellow River and the Huaihe River intersect.

古文：淮之南岸，漕河流入焉，所谓清江浦口。
现代文：淮河的南岸，漕河流入其中，就是所说的清江浦口。
English: The southern bank of the Huai River, into which the Caohe River flows, is the so-called Qingjiang Pukou.

古文：又东经淮安北、安东南而达於海。
现代文：又往东经过淮安北、安东南然后到达大海。
English: Further east, it passes through Huai'an in the north and Andong in the south before reaching the sea.

古文：永乐七年，决寿州，泛中都。
现代文：永乐七年，淮河在寿州决堤，泛滥于中都。
English: In the seventh year of Yongle, the Huai River burst its banks in Shoushou, flooding the central city.

古文：正统三年，溢清河。
现代文：正统三年，淹没清河。
English: After three years of orthodoxy, Qinghe River was flooded.

古文：天顺四年，溢凤阳。
现代文：天顺四年，淹没凤阳。
English: Tianshun four years, submerged Fengyang.

古文：皆随时修筑，无钜害也。
现代文：都随时进行修筑，没有造成大的灾害。
English: All of them were under construction at any time, and no major disasters were caused.

古文：正德十二年，复决漕堤，灌泗州。
现代文：正德十二年，又在漕河堤岸决口，灌注泗州。
English: In the twelfth year of Zhengde, it was poured into Luzhou at the break of the Caohe River embankment.

古文：泗州，祖陵在焉，其地最下。
现代文：泗州，祖陵在那里，其地势最低下。
English: Luzhou, where the ancestral mausoleum is located, has the lowest elevation.

古文：初，淮自安东云梯关入海，无旁溢患。
现代文：原先，淮河从安东云梯关流入大海，没有向旁边泛滥成灾。
English: Originally, the Huaihe River flowed into the sea from the Andong Yundiguan, and did not flood to the side.

古文：迨与黄会，黄水势盛，夺淮入海之路，淮不能与黄敌，往往避而东。
现代文：等到与黄河汇合，黄河水势强大，争夺淮河入海之路，淮水不能与黄水对抗，往往回转而向东流。
English: Wait until the confluence with the Yellow River, the water potential of the Yellow River is strong, competing for the road of the Huaihe River into the sea. The Huaihe River cannot compete with the Yellow River, and often turns around and flows eastward.

古文：陈瑄凿清江浦，因筑高家堰旧堤以障之。
现代文：陈埴开通清江浦，于是，修筑高家堰旧堤来保护它。
English: Chen Xi opened the Qingjiangpu, so he built the old dike of Gaojia Weir to protect it.

古文：淮、扬恃以无恐，而凤泗间数为害。
现代文：淮安、扬州依赖它可以不用担心，然而在凤阳、泗州之间多次造成灾害。
English: Huai'an and Yangzhou can rely on it without worry, but it has caused many disasters between Fengyang and Zhangzhou.

古文：嘉靖十四年用总河都御史刘天和言，筑堤卫陵，而高堰方固，淮畅流出清口，凤、泗之患弭。
现代文：嘉靖十四年，采用总河都御史刘天和的计策，修筑堤岸护卫皇陵，因而高堰纔牢固，淮水畅流出清口，凤阳、泗州的灾难消除。
English: In the 14th year of Jiajing, using the strategy of Liu Tianhe, the Grand Historian of the Grand Canal, the embankment was built to guard the imperial mausoleum. As a result, the high weir was firmly anchored, the water flowed out smoothly, and the disasters in Fengyang and Zhangzhou were eliminated.

古文：隆庆四年，总河都御史翁大立复奏浚淮工竣，淮益无事。
现代文：隆庆四年，总河都御史翁大立又上奏疏通淮河工程竣工，淮河更加没有事故发生。
English: In the fourth year of the Longqing period, the dredging project of the Huaihe River was completed, and there were no accidents on the Huaihe River.

古文：至万历三年三月，高家堰决，高、宝、兴、盐为巨浸。
现代文：到了万历三年三月，高家堰溃决，高、宝、兴、盐成为巨大的湖泽。
English: In March of the third year of Wanli, the Gaojia Weir was breached, and Gao, Bao, Xing and Yan became huge lakes.

古文：而黄水蹑淮，且渐逼凤、泗。
现代文：而黄河水紧跟淮水，并且逐渐逼近凤阳、泗州。
English: But the Yellow River water closely follows the Huai River water, and gradually approaches Fengyang and Zhangzhou.

古文：乃命建泗陵护城石堤二百馀丈，泗得石堤稍宁。
现代文：于是命令修建泗州皇陵护城石堤二百余丈，泗州得到石堤的保护稍微安宁。
English: As a result, it was ordered to build a 200-plus-meter-long stone embankment for the protection of the Bozhou Imperial Mausoleum, and Bozhou was protected by the stone embankment and became a little more peaceful.

古文：於是，总漕侍郎吴桂芳言： 河决崔镇，清河路淤。
现代文：于是，总漕侍郎昊桂芳说： 黄河在崔镇决堤，清河道路淤塞。
English: As a result, the chief oarsman Hao Guifang said: The Yellow River broke the dike in Cui Town, and the Qinghe Road was blocked.

古文：黄强淮弱，南徙而灌山阳、高、宝，请急护湖堤。 
现代文：黄河水强大淮水弱小，向南改道而灌注于山阳、高、宝，请赶快保护湖堤。 
English: The Yellow River water is strong and the Huai water is weak. It is diverted to the south and poured into Shanyang, Gao and Bao. Please quickly protect the lake dike.

古文：帝令熟计其便。
现代文：皇帝命令周密地谋划使其有利。
English: The emperor ordered careful planning to turn it to his advantage.

古文：给事中汤聘尹议请导淮入江。
现代文：给事中汤聘尹建议请求导引淮水流入艮江。
English: In the middle of the matter, Tang Binyin proposed to request the guidance of the Huai River to flow into the Min River.

古文：会河从老黄河奔入海，淮得乘虚出清口。
现代文：正值黄河水从老黄河直奔入海，淮水得以趁机流出清口。
English: At that time, the Yellow River water was rushing straight into the sea from the old Yellow River, and the river water was able to take advantage of the opportunity to flow out of the outlet.

古文：桂芳以闻，议遂寝。
现代文：吴桂芳上报，这一建议就搁置下来了。
English: As soon as Wu Guifang submitted the report, this suggestion was shelved.

古文：六年，总河都御史潘季驯言： 高堰，淮、扬之门户，而黄、淮之关键也。
现代文：六年，总河都御史潘季驯说： 高堰，是淮安、扬州的出入之处，而且是黄水、淮水的最为紧要之处。
English: Six years ago, Pan Ji Tame, the governor of the total river, said: Gaoyan is the entrance and exit point of Huai'an and Yangzhou, and it is the most important place of Huangshui and Huai'shui.

古文：欲导河以入海，必藉淮以刷沙。
现代文：要想导引黄河流入大海，必须凭借淮水来冲刷泥沙。
English: In order to guide the Yellow River into the sea, it is necessary to use brine to wash away the sediment.

古文：淮水南决，则浊流停滞，清口亦堙。
现代文：淮水向南溃决，那么浊流就会停止，清口也会被堵塞。
English: If the Huai Shui breaks out to the south, the turbulent flow will stop and the outlet will be blocked.

古文：河必决溢，上流水行平地，而邳、徐、凤、泗皆为巨浸。
现代文：黄河必然会演决泛滥，上游之水流行于平坦之地，因此。邳州、徐州、凤阳、泗州全都成为巨大的湖泽。
English: The Yellow River will inevitably flood, and the upstream water will spread to the flat land. Therefore, Luzhou, Xuzhou, Fengyang and Luzhou have all become huge lakes.

古文：是淮病而黄病，黄病而漕亦病，相因之势也。 
现代文：这是淮水发生祸害因而黄水也发生祸害，黄水发生祸害因而漕河也发生祸害，相互联系造成的。 
English: This is the result of the interrelationship between the harm caused by the Huai River and the harm caused by the Yellow River, and the harm caused by the Yellow River and the harm caused by the Cao River.

古文：於是筑高堰堤，起武家墩，经大小涧、阜陵湖、周桥、翟坝，长八十里，使淮不得东。
现代文：于是修筑高堰堤岸，起于武家墩，经过大小涧、阜陵湖、周桥、翟坝，长八十里，使淮水不能往东流。
English: As a result, the embankment of the high weir was built, starting from Bujiayuan, passing through Daxiaoyuan, Fuling Lake, Zhouqiao, and Zouba, with a length of eighty miles, so that the Huai River could not flow eastward.

古文：又以淮水北岸有王简、张福二口泄入黄河，水力分，清口易淤浅，且黄水多由此倒灌入淮，乃筑堤捍之。
现代文：又因为淮水北岸有王筒、张福二河口排泄入黄河，水力分散，清口容易淤浅，而且黄水多从这里倒灌入淮河，于是修筑堤防护卫它。
English: Also, because the northern bank of the Huai River has the Wang Du, and the Zhang Fu Er estuary discharges into the Yellow River, the hydraulic force is dispersed, the clearing is easy to be shallow, and the yellow water is mostly poured into the Huai River from here, so a dike was built to protect it.

古文：使淮无所出，黄无所入，全淮毕趋清口，会大河入海。
现代文：使淮水没有地方流出，黄水没有地方流入，整个淮水全部直奔清口，汇合大河入海。
English: So that there is no place for the yellow water to flow out, and there is no place for the yellow water to flow in, and the entire yellow water all goes straight to the clear mouth, and the confluence of the river into the sea.

古文：然淮水虽出清口，亦西淫凤、泗。
现代文：然而，淮水虽然出清口，也往西浸淫凤阳、泗州。
English: However, although the Huai River flows out of Qingkou, it also flows westward to Fengyang and Zhangzhou.

古文：八年，雨涝，淮薄泗城，且至祖陵墀中。
现代文：万历八年，雨多而造成内滂，淮水迫近泗州城，并且到了祖陵台阶中间。
English: In the eighth year of Wanli, it rained a lot and caused flooding. The floodwater approached Zhangzhou City and reached the middle of the ancestral mausoleum steps.

古文：御史陈用宾以闻。
现代文：御史陈用宾上报。
English: Mr. Chen used the guest to deliver a report.

古文：给事中王道成因言： 黄河未涨，淮、泗间霖雨偶集，而清口已不容泄。
现代文：给事中王道成于是说： 黄河水没有上涨，淮安、泗州之间偶然集中久降大雨，而清口已经不可排放。
English: In response, Wang Daocheng said: "The Yellow River has not risen, but heavy rain has been concentrated between Huai'an and Zhangzhou for a long time, and the outlet is no longer dischargeable.

古文：宜令河臣疏导堵塞之。 
现代文：应当命令河臣疏导堵塞。 
English: Kawatomi should be ordered to clear the blockage.

古文：季驯言： 黄、淮合流东注，甚迅驶。
现代文：潘季驯说： 黄河、淮河合流向东灌注，水流非常迅急。
English: Pan Jitong said: The confluence of the Yellow River and the Huai River flows eastward, and the water flow is very rapid.

古文：泗州冈阜盘旋，雨潦不及宣泄，因此涨溢。
现代文：泗州小山盘绕，雨后积水来不及排放，因此而泛滥。
English: The small mountains of Zhangzhou are coiled, and the accumulated water cannot be discharged after the rain, so it floods.

古文：欲疏凿，则下流已深，无可疏；欲堵塞，则上流不可逆堵。 
现代文：要想疏通，则下游已经很深，不可疏浚；要想堵塞，则上游不可迎水而堵。 
English: If you want to dredge, the downstream is already very deep and can't be dredged; if you want to block, the upstream can't be blocked by water.

古文：乃令季驯相度，卒听之而已。
现代文：于是命令潘季驯察看测量，最后听住它而已。
English: So he ordered Pan Ji, the trainer, to look at the measurement and finally just listen to it.

古文：十六年，季驯复为总河，加泗州护堤数千丈，皆用石。
现代文：十六年，潘季驯又担任总河，加筑泗州防护堤岸数千丈，全都用石砌成。
English: For 16 years, Pan Jitai served as the total river, and built thousands of feet of protection embankments in Zhangzhou, all of which were made of stone.

古文：十九年九月，淮水溢泗州，高於城壕，因塞水关以防内灌。
现代文：万历十九年九月，淮水淹没泗州，高于城外护城河，因此，堵塞进水口以防止向城内灌注。
English: In September of the 19th year of the Wanli calendar, the Huai River flooded Luzhou, higher than the moat outside the city, so the inlet was blocked to prevent it from pouring into the city.

古文：於是，城中积水不泄，居民十九淹没，侵及祖陵。
现代文：于是，城中积水不能排放，住在城中的百姓十分之九被淹没，淹到了祖陵。
English: As a result, the accumulated water in the city could not be drained, and nine-tenths of the people living in the city were flooded, flooding their ancestral tombs.

古文：疏泄之议不一，季驯谓当听其自消。
现代文：疏通排放的意见不统一，潘季驯认为应当听任其自行消退。
English: Opinions on dredging the discharge are not uniform, and Pan Jitong believes that it should be allowed to subside on its own.

古文：会呕血乞归，言者因请允其去。
现代文：恰巧他吐血请求返回，言官因而请求准许他离去。
English: As it happened, he vomited blood and asked to return, so the speaker asked to be allowed to leave.

古文：而帝遣给事中张贞观往勘，会总河尚书舒应龙等详议以上，计未有所定。
现代文：然后，皇帝派遣给事中张贞观前去勘测，适逢总河尚书舒应龙等详细商议并将其上奏，计策没有最后确定。
English: Then, the emperor sent Zhang Zhenguan forward to investigate the matter, which coincided with the detailed discussion and report of the general secretary Shangshu Shu Yinglong, and the strategy was not finalized.

古文：连数岁，淮东决高良涧，西灌泗陵。
现代文：连续数年，淮河向东在高良涧决堤，向西灌注泗州皇陵。
English: For several years in a row, the Huai River broke through the dike in Gaoliangyu to the east and poured into the imperial mausoleum in Ganzhou to the west.

古文：帝怒，夺应龙官，遣给事中张企程往勘。
现代文：皇帝大怒，削去舒应龙官职，派遣给事中张企程前往勘测。
English: The emperor was furious, removed Shu Yinglong from his post and sent Zhang Cheng to investigate.

古文：议者多请拆高堰，总河尚书杨一魁与企程不从，而力请分黄导淮。
现代文：议论的人多请求拆毁高堰，总河尚书杨一魁与张企程不听从，却极力请求分流黄河导引淮河。
English: Many commentators requested the demolition of the high weir, but Yang Yikui and Zhang Qicheng did not listen, but strongly requested the diversion of the Yellow River to guide the Huai River.

古文：乃建武家墩经河闸，泄淮水由永济河达泾河，下射阳湖入海。
现代文：于是，修建武家墩经河闸，排放淮水经由永济河到达泾河，下流到射阳潮流入大海。
English: As a result, a sluice gate was built to allow the discharge of water from the Huaihe River through the Yongji River to the Min River, which then flowed down to the ocean at the height of the summer tides.

古文：又建高良涧及周桥减水石闸，以泄淮水，一由岔河入泾河，一由草子湖、宝应湖下子婴沟，俱下广洋湖入海。
现代文：又修建高良涧及周桥碱水石闸门，用来排放淮水，一从岔河流入泾河，一从草子湖、宝应湖下流到子婴沟，一起下流到广洋湖，流入大海。
English: Gao Liangyu and Zhou Qiao alkali-water-rock sluice gates were also built to discharge the Huai River. The Huai River flows from the Yunnan River into the Yunnan River, flows down from the Caozi Lake and the Baoying Lake to the Ziyinggou, and together flows down to the Guangyang Lake and flows into the sea.

古文：又挑高邮茆塘港，通邵伯湖，开金家湾，下芒稻河入江，以疏淮涨，而淮水以平。
现代文：又挖深高邮茆塘港，通到邵伯湖，开通金家湾，往下到芒稻河流入长江，以疏通上涨的淮水，淮水因此变得平缓。
English: They also excavated the Shenggao Post Office Qutang Port, leading to Shaubu Lake, opening Jinjia Bay, and going down to the Mangdai River into the Yangtze River to dredge the rising floodwaters, so that the floodwaters became smooth.

古文：其后三闸渐塞。
现代文：这以后，三处闸门逐渐被堵塞。
English: After that, the three gates were gradually blocked.

古文：崇祯间，黄、淮涨溢，议者复请开高堰。
现代文：崇祯年间，黄河、淮河上涨泛滥，议论的人又请求开通高堰。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the Yellow River and the Huai River rose and flooded, and the people who discussed the issue requested the opening of the high weir.

古文：淮、扬在朝者公疏力争，议遂寝。
现代文：在朝廷做官的淮安、扬州人其同上疏极力争辩，其主张终于被停止。
English: Officials from Huai'an and Yangzhou who worked in the imperial court vigorously argued with their counterparts, and their claims were finally stopped.

古文：然是时建义诸口数决，下灌兴、盐，淮患日棘矣。
现代文：然而这时，建义各河口多次溃决，往下灌注于兴、盐，淮水的灾患一天天严重了。
English: However, at this time, the estuaries of Jianyi were repeatedly breached, and salt was poured down to Xing, and the disaster of Huai Shui became more and more serious day by day.

古文：泇河，二源。
现代文：泇河，有两处源头。
English: The Li River has two sources.

古文：一出费县南山谷中，循沂州西南流，一出峄县君山，东南与费泇合，谓之东、西二泇河。
现代文：一出于费县南山谷中，沿着沂州向西南流，另一出于峰县君山，往东南与费水洳河汇合，叫做束、西二洳河。
English: One originates in the South Valley of Feixian County and flows southwest along Luzhou, while the other originates in Junshan of Fengxian County and flows southeast to meet the Feishuiyuan River. They are called the Sokou River and the West Erqi River.

古文：南会彭河水，从马家桥东，过微山、赤山、吕孟等湖，逾葛墟岭，而南经侯家湾、良城，至泇口镇，合蛤鳗、连汪诸湖。
现代文：往南汇合彭河水，从马家桥往东，经过微山、赤山、吕孟等湖，越过葛墟岭，然后向南经过侯家湾、良城，到达洳口镇，汇合蛤鳗、连汪各湖。
English: To the south, it joins the waters of the Penghe River, and from Majiaqiao to the east, it passes through Weishan, Akayama, Lvmeng and other lakes, crosses Gejuiling, and then goes south through Hujiawan and Liangcheng to arrive at Hukou Town, where it joins the lakes of Kunlun and Lianwang.

古文：东会沂水，从周湖、柳湖，接邳州东直河。
现代文：往东汇合沂水，从周湖、柳湖流出，连接邳州东直河。
English: To the east, it merges with Surabaya Water, flows out of Zhou Lake and Liu Lake, and connects with the East Zhihe River in Luzhou.

古文：东南达宿迁之黄墩湖、骆马湖，从董、陈二沟入黄河。
现代文：往东南到达宿迁的黄墩湖、骆马湖，从董、陈二沟流入黄河。
English: To the southeast, it reaches Huangpi Lake and Luoma Lake in Suqian, and flows into the Yellow River from Dong and Chen Ergou.

古文：引泗合沂济运道，以避黄河之险，其议始於翁大立，继之者傅希挚，而成於李化龙、曹时聘。
现代文：导引泗水合于沂水补济运道，以避开黄河的危险，这个主张开始于翁大立，继续这个主张的是傅希挚，而成功于李化龙和曹时聘。
English: The idea to divert the Yellow River by guiding the waters of the Yellow River to meet and supplement the waters of the Yangtze River to avoid the danger of the Yellow River began with Weng Dalit, continued with Fu Xizhong, and succeeded with Li Hualong and Cao Shibi.

古文：隆庆四年九月，河决邳州，自睢宁至宿迁淤百八十里。
现代文：隆庆四年九月，黄河在邳州决堤，从睢宁到宿迁淤塞一百八十里。
English: In September of the Year of the Dragon, the Yellow River burst its banks in Luzhou, silting up 180 miles from Huning to Suqian.

古文：总河侍郎翁大立请开泇河以避黄水，未决而罢。
现代文：总河侍郎翁大立请求开通洳河来避开黄水，没有开通就停止了。
English: The general river steward, Weng Dali, requested the opening of the Fen River to avoid the yellow water, and it was stopped without opening.

古文：明年四月，河复决邳州，命给事中雒遵勘验。
现代文：第二年四月，黄河又在邳州决堤，命令给事中雒遵勘测察验。
English: In April of the following year, the Yellow River broke through the dike again in Luzhou, and the order was given to inspect the situation.

古文：工部尚书朱衡请以开泇口河之说下诸臣熟计。
现代文：工部尚书朱衡请求把开通洳口河的主张下发各大臣周密地谋划。
English: Zhu Heng of the Ministry of Works requested that the proposal to open the Hukou River be sent to the ministers for careful planning.

古文：帝即命遵会勘。
现代文：皇帝便命令雒遵会同众官勘测。
English: The emperor then ordered Zou Zunhui and all officials to investigate.

古文：遵言： 泇口河取道虽捷，施工实难。
现代文：雒遵说： 洳口河取道虽然捷近，但施工实在困难。
English: Hao Zun said: Although it is close to the Hekou River Trail, the construction is really difficult.

古文：葛墟岭高出河底六丈馀，开凿仅至二丈，硼石中水泉涌出。
现代文：葛墟岭高出河底六丈多，开凿只达到二丈，硼石之中水泉涌出。
English: Gexuling is more than six feet above the bottom of the river, but the excavation only reached two feet, and water springs gushed out from among the rocks.

古文：侯家湾、良城虽有河形，水中多伏石，难凿，纵凿之，湍激不可漕。
现代文：侯家湾、良城虽然有河形，但水中多有隐蔽的石头，很难凿通，即使开通它，水流湍急不能通行漕船。
English: Although Houjia Bay and Liangcheng have a river shape, there are many hidden stones in the water, which are difficult to drill through. Even if it is opened, the rapid flow of water cannot pass the rowing boat.

古文：且蛤鳗、周柳诸湖，筑堤水中，功费无算。
现代文：并且蛤鳗、周柳各湖，筑堤于水中，事功耗费不可计算。
English: In addition, the effort and cost of building dykes in the water of the lakes of Zhou and Zhouliu are incalculable.

古文：微山、赤山、吕孟等湖虽可筑堤，然须凿葛墟岭以泄正派，开地浜沟以散馀波，乃可施工。 
现代文：微山、赤山、吕孟等湖虽然可以修筑堤岸，然而，必须开通葛墟岭来排放正流，开通地浜满来分散余水，然后纔可以施工。 
English: Although lakes such as Weishan, Akayama, and Lvmeng can build dykes, it is necessary to open Gejuiling to discharge the positive current, open the beach to disperse the remaining water, and then the construction can be carried out.

古文：请罢其议。
现代文：请求停止翁大立的主张。
English: Request to stop Weng Dali's claim.

古文：诏尚书朱衡会总河都御史万恭等覆勘。
现代文：诏令尚书朱衡会同总河都御史万恭等再次进行勘测。
English: The emperor ordered Shangshu Zhu Heng to conduct a survey again together with the commander-in-chief of the capital, Shi Wanyong and others.

古文：衡奏有三难，大略如遵指。
现代文：朱衡上奏有三个困难，大约如同雒遵所指出的那样。
English: Zhu Heng has three difficulties in playing the flute, just as Gong Zun pointed out.

古文：且言漕河已通，徐、邳间堤高水深，不烦别建置。
现代文：并且说漕河已经畅通，徐州、邳州之间堤高水深，不劳烦另外建置。
English: He also said that the Caohe River has been smooth, and the embankment between Xuzhou and Zhangzhou is high and deep, so it is not troublesome to build it separately.

古文：乃罢。
现代文：于是停止开洳河。
English: Only then did Feng Dao give up.

古文：万历三年，总河都御史傅希挚言： 泇河之议尝建而中止，谓有三难。
现代文：万历三年，总河都御史傅希挚说： 开通洳河的主张曾经提出而又中途停止，认为有三处困难。
English: After three years of hard work, Fu Xizhi, the chief historian of the capital, said earnestly: The idea of opening the Minhe River was once proposed, but it was stopped halfway, and it was considered that there were three difficulties.

古文：而臣遣锥手、步弓、水平、画匠，於三难处核勘。
现代文：然而，臣派遣锥手、步弓、水平、画匠，在三个困难地方核查勘测。
English: However, the minister dispatched a cone hand, a bow, a level, and a painter to check and survey in three difficult places.

古文：起自上泉河口，开向东南，则起处低洼，下流趋高之难可避也。
现代文：起自上泉河口，开通流向东南，那么，起处低下，下游奔高的困难就可以避免了。
English: Starting from the mouth of the upper spring, the opening flows to the southeast, so the difficulty of starting low and running high downstream can be avoided.

古文：南经性义村东，则葛墟岭高坚之难可避也。
现代文：往南经过性义村束，那么，葛墟岭高而坚硬的困难就可以避免了。
English: If you go south through Seiyi village, then you can avoid the high and hard difficulties of Gexuling.

古文：从陡沟河经郭村西之平坦，则良城侯家湾之伏石可避也。
现代文：从陡沟河经过郭村西的平坦地区，那么，良城侯家湾的伏石就可以避免了。
English: From the steep ditch river through the flat area west of Guocun, then, the rockfall of Liangcheng Hujiawan can be avoided.

古文：至泇口上下，河渠深浅不一，湖塘联络相因，间有砂礓，无碍挑挖。
现代文：到达洳口上下，河道水渠深浅不一致，湖泊池塘互相衔接相互依托，问或有砂礓之地，也不妨碍挖掘。
English: When reaching upstream and downstream, the depth of the river channel is not consistent, the lakes and ponds are connected to each other and support each other, and if there is a sandy area, it will not hinder the excavation.

古文：大较上起泉河口，水所从入也，下至大河口，水所从出也。
现代文：大致往上起泉河口，是河水流入的地方，往下到大河口，是河水流出的地方。
English: The estuary of the Izumi River, roughly upstream, is where the water flows in, and the estuary of the Great River, downstream, is where the water flows out.

古文：自西北至东南，长五百三十里，比之黄河近八十里，河渠、河塘十居八九，源头活水，脉络贯通，此天子所以资漕也。
现代文：从西北到东南，全长五百三十里，比照黄河近便八十里，河流渠道、河塘占十分之八九，水源处有常流之水，主流支流互相连接，这是上天用来资助漕运的。
English: From the northwest to the southeast, the total length is 530 miles, compared with the Yellow River, which is nearly 80 miles. The river channels and ponds account for 89% of the total length. The water source has a regular flow, and the main tributaries are connected to each other. This is used by heaven to fund paddling.

古文：诚能捐十年治河之费，以成泇河，则黄河无虑壅决，茶城无虑填淤，二洪无虑艰险，运艘无虑漂损，洋山之支河可无开，境山之闸座可无建，徐、吕之洪夫可尽省，马家桥之堤工可中辍。
现代文：果真能花费十年治河的费用，用来完成洳河工程，那么，黄河就不担心堵塞和溃决，茶城就不担心淤塞，徐、吕二洪就不担心艰险，运输船只就不担心冲毁，洋山的支河可以不开通，境山的闸门可以不修建，徐、吕的治洪工役可以完全省去，马家桥的堤防工役可以停止。
English: If the cost of ten years of river management can really be used to complete the Fenhe project, then the Yellow River will not worry about blockage and bursting, the Tea Town will not worry about silting, the Xu and Lv Erhong will not worry about hardships, the transport vessels will not worry about being washed out, the tributaries of the mountains can not be opened, the gates of the mountains can not be built, the flood control work of the Xu and Lv can be completely omitted, and the dike work of the Majia Bridge can be stopped.

古文：今日不赀之费，他日所省抵有馀者也。
现代文：今天数目不小的费用，与今后的节省相抵消定有剩余。
English: Today's considerable costs, offset by future savings, must leave a surplus.

古文：臣以为开泇河便。 
现代文：臣认为开通洳河便利。 
English: The minister thought it would be convenient to open the Min River.

古文：乃命都给事中侯于赵往会希挚及巡漕御史刘光国，确议以闻。
现代文：于是，命令都给事中侯于趟前往会同傅希挚及巡漕御史刘光国，商议确定并把它上奏朝廷。
English: As a result, the order was given to go to Fu Xizhong and Liu Guangguo, the naval governor, to discuss and confirm the matter and report it to the imperial court.

古文：于赵勘上泇河事宜： 自泉河口至大河口五百三十里内，自直河至清河三百馀里，无赖於泇，事在可已。
现代文：侯于赵勘测上奏洳河事宜： 从泉河口到大河口五百三十里以内，从直河到清河三百多里，不依赖洳河，其事现在可以停止。
English: Hou Yu Zhao's survey of the Songhe River: From the mouth of the Quan River to the mouth of the Great River is less than 530 miles, from the Zhihe River to the Qinghe River is more than 300 miles, regardless of the Songhe River, the matter can now be stopped.

古文：惟徐、吕至直河上下二百馀里，河冲萧、砀则涸二洪，冲睢宁则淤邳河，宜开以避其害，约费百五十馀万金。
现代文：只有徐、旦二洪到直河上下二百多里，河水冲注萧山、砺山则二洪干涸，冲注睢宁则邳河淤塞，应当开通来避免它的危害，大略耗费一百五十多万金。
English: Only the Xu and Tan Erhong are more than 200 miles upstream and downstream of the Zhihe River, while the Xiaoshan and Lushan rivers have dried up, and the Lushan River has been silted up. It should be opened to avoid its harm, and it will cost more than 1.5 million yuan.

古文：特良城伏石长五百五十丈，开凿之力难以逆料。
现代文：只是良城暗礁长五百五十丈，开凿工程难以预料。
English: However, Liangcheng Reef is 550 meters long, and the excavation project is unpredictable.

古文：性义岭及南禹陵俱限隔河流，二处既开，则丰、沛河决，必至灌入。
现代文：性义岭及南禹陵全都阻隔河流，二处开通后，那么，丰、沛二县河堤就会被冲破，必然导致灌注其申。
English: The rivers are all blocked by Zeng Yiling and Nan Yuling. After the two places are opened, the river dikes in Feng and Pei counties will be broken, which will inevitably lead to flooding.

古文：宜先凿良城石，预修丰、沛堤防，可徐议兴功也。 
现代文：应当首先凿开良城暗礁，预先修筑丰、沛堤防，可以慢慢商议兴建工程。 
English: It is necessary to first excavate the reefs of the city, and build the Feng and Pei dikes in advance. The construction project can be discussed slowly.

古文：部覆如其言，而谓开泇非数年不成，当以治河为急。
现代文：工部回复依照他的主张，并且说开通洳河没有几年时间是不能完成的，应当把治理河道作为首要之事。
English: The Ministry of Works replied in accordance with his proposal, and said that it would not be possible to complete the opening of the Bohai River within a few years, and that the management of the river should be the first priority.

古文：帝不阅，责于赵阻扰，然议亦遂寝。
现代文：皇帝不高兴，谴责侯于趟阻挠，然而开凿洳河的主张也就搁置下来了。
English: The emperor was displeased and condemned Hou Yu's obstructionism, but the idea of excavating the Minhe River was shelved.

古文：二十年，总河尚书舒应龙开韩庄以泄湖水，泇河之路始通。
现代文：万历二十年，总河尚书舒应龙开通韩庄渠来排放湖水，洳河的水路开始畅通。
English: After twenty years of hard work, the head of the river, Shangshu Shu Yinglong, opened the Hanzhuang Canal to discharge lake water, and the waterway of the Fenhe River began to flow smoothly.

古文：至二十五年，黄河决黄堌口南徙，徐、吕而下几断流。
现代文：到二十五年，黄河在黄蝈口决堤改道向南，徐、旦二洪以下几乎断流。
English: By the 25th year, the Yellow River had broken through the dike at the mouth of the Yellow River and was diverted to the south, and the flow below the Xu and Tan Erhong Rivers was almost cut off.

古文：方议开李吉口、小浮桥及镇口以下，建闸引水以通漕，而论者谓非永久之计。
现代文：正议论开通李吉口、小浮桥和镇口以下，建立闸门导引河水来畅通漕运，然而，议论此事的人说不是长久之计。
English: The opening of Lijikou, Xiao Buoyant Bridge and below the town gate, and the establishment of sluice gates to guide the river water for smooth paddling are being discussed. However, those who discuss this matter say that it is not a long-term plan.

古文：於是工科给事中杨应文、吏科给事中杨廷兰皆谓当开泇河，工部覆议允行。
现代文：于是，工科给事中杨应文、吏科给事中杨廷兰都说应当开通洳河，工部再次讨论后准许施行。
English: As a result, Yang Yingwen in the engineering department and Yang Tinglan in the public administration department both said that the Minhe River should be opened, and the Ministry of Industry and Commerce allowed the implementation after further discussion.

古文：帝命河漕官勘报，不果。
现代文：皇帝命令河漕官勘测后上报，最终没有施行。
English: The emperor ordered the river surveyor to report after the survey, but ultimately did not implement it.

古文：二十八年，御史佴祺复请开泇河。
现代文：二十八年，御史佴祺又请求开通洳河。
English: Twenty-eight years later, Goshi also requested the opening of the Minhe River.

古文：工部覆奏云： 用黄河为漕，利与害参用；泇河为漕，有利无害。
现代文：工部再次上奏说： 用黄河作漕运，利与害兼具；用洳河作漕运，有利无害。
English: The Ministry of Works once again made a report saying: using the Yellow River for rowing transport has both benefits and harms; using the Fen River for rowing transport has both benefits and harms.

古文：但泇河之外，由微山、吕孟、周柳诸湖，伏秋水发虞风波，冬春水涸虞浅阻，须上下别凿漕渠，建闸节水。 
现代文：不过，洳河之外，由于微山、吕盂、周柳各湖水，夏秋洪水发生担心风浪，冬春河水干涸担心浅阻，必须在其上下另外开通漕渠，建立闸门控制水流。 
English: However, in addition to the Li River, due to the fact that the waters of the Weishan, Lvulun and Zhouliu lakes are intertwined, the summer and autumn floods are worried about wind and waves, and the winter and spring rivers are dry and worried about shallow resistance, it is necessary to open another canal upstream and downstream and establish a gate to control the water flow.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从其主张。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：总河尚书刘东星董其事，以地多沙石，工艰未就。
现代文：总河尚害刘束星督察这件事，因为地多沙石，工程艰难没有完成。
English: Liu Sokxing, the inspector of the total river damage, inspected this matter, because the ground was sandy and rocky, the project was difficult to complete.

古文：工科给事中张问达以为言。
现代文：工科给事中张间达将此事上报。
English: Zhang Minda reported the matter to the engineering department.

古文：御史张养志复陈开泇河之说有四：
现代文：御史张养志又陈述开通洳河的主张有四点：
English: Historian Zhang Yazhi also stated that there were four points in the proposal to open the Minhe River:

古文：一曰开黄泥湾以通入泇之径。
现代文：一是开通黄泥湾来作为通入洳河的道路。
English: First, Huangdi Bay was opened as a road into the Minhe River.

古文：邳州沂河口，入泇河门户也。
现代文：邳州沂河口，是流入洳河的门户。
English: The estuary of the Li River in Luzhou is the gateway to the Li River.

古文：进口六七里，有湖名连二汪，其水浅而阔，下多淤泥。
现代文：进入河口六七里处，有湖名叫连二汪，其水浅而宽阔，下多淤泥。
English: Six or seven miles into the estuary, there is a lake called Lianyiwang, which is shallow and wide, with a lot of silt.

古文：欲挑浚则无岸可修，欲为坝埽则无基可筑。
现代文：想挑挖疏浚而无湖岸可修，想建坝而无基可筑。
English: If you want to dig and dredge, there is no shore to repair. If you want to build a dam, there is no foundation to build.

古文：湖外有黄泥湾，离湖不远，地颇低。
现代文：湖外有黄荡游，离湖不远，地势很低。
English: Outside the lake there is a yellow swing, not far from the lake, the terrain is very low.

古文：自沂口至湖北崖约二十馀里，於此开一河以接泇口，引湖水灌之，运舟可直达泇口矣。
现代文：从沂口到湖的北边大约二十多里，在此开通一河来接通洳口，导引湖水灌注其中，运输船只就可以直达洳口了。
English: From the mouth of the lake to the north side of the lake is about more than twenty miles. Here, a river is opened to connect the mouth of the lake. The guide lake water is poured into it, and the transport vessel can reach the mouth of the lake directly.

古文：一曰凿万家庄以接泇口之源。
现代文：二是开通万家庄来接通洳口的水源。
English: The second is the opening of Wanjiazhuang to connect the water source of the estuary.

古文：万家庄，泇口迤北地也。与台家庄、侯家湾、良城诸处，皆山冈高阜，多砂礓石块，极难为工。
现代文：万家庄，是洳口以北的地方与台家庄、侯家湾、良城各处，都是山冈高地，多砂礓石块，极难施工。
English: Wanjiazhuang, the place north of Hekou, and Taijiazhuang, Houjiawan, and Liangcheng are all mountainous highlands, with a lot of sand and gravel, which is extremely difficult to construct.

古文：东星力凿成河。
现代文：刘东星极力开凿成河。
English: Liu Dongxing tried his best to dig a river.

古文：但河身尚浅，水止二三尺，宜更凿四五尺，俾韩庄之水下接泇口，则运舟无论大小，皆沛然可达矣。
现代文：不过，河床还浅，河水只有二三尺深，应当再挖深四五尺，使韩庄的水往下接通洳口，那么，运输船只不论大小，就都能迅速地到达了。
English: However, the riverbed is still shallow, and the water is only two or three feet deep. It is necessary to dig four or five feet deeper, so that the water of Hanzhuang can be connected to the mouth of the estuary, so that transport vessels, regardless of size, can quickly arrive.

古文：一曰浚支河以避微口之险。
现代文：三是疏通支河来避免微口的危险。
English: The third is to dredge tributary rivers to avoid the danger of small mouths.

古文：微山湖在韩庄西，上下三十馀里，水深丈馀。
现代文：微山湖在韩庄西边，上下三十余里，水深一丈多。
English: Weishan Lake is on the west side of Hanzhuang. It is more than 30 miles up and down, with a depth of more than a meter.

古文：必探深浅，立标为向导，风正帆悬，顷刻可过，突遇狂飚，未免败没。
现代文：必须探测深浅，树立标识作为向导，风正帆悬时，顷刻就能过去，突遇狂风时，不能避免沉没。
English: It is necessary to detect the depth, set up a sign as a guide, when the wind is hanging, it can pass in an instant, and when there is a strong wind, it cannot avoid sinking.

古文：今已傍湖开支河四十五里，上通西柳庄，下接韩庄，牵挽有路。
现代文：现在，已经靠近湖边开通支河四十五里，往上通到西柳庄，往下接通韩庄，牵拉有路可定。
English: Now, a 45-mile branch has been opened near the lake, leading upwards to Xiliu Village and downwards to Han Village.

古文：当再疏浚，庶无漂溺之患。
现代文：应当再次疏浚，希望没有沉没的祸患。
English: It should be dredged again, hopefully without the scourge of sinking.

古文：其一则以万庄一带势高，北水南下，至此必速。
现代文：其中之一则认为万庄一带地势高，北面的水南下，到了这里必然疾速。
English: One of them believes that the area around Wanzhuang is high, and the water in the north goes south, and it is inevitable to get here quickly.

古文：请即其地建闸数座，以时蓄泄。
现代文：请靠近其地建立闸门敷座，按一定的时间蓄积排放。
English: Please set up a gate bed close to the site, and accumulate emissions according to a certain time.

古文：诏速勘行。
现代文：诏令迅速勘测施行。
English: The imperial edict called for a quick survey.

古文：而东星病卒。
现代文：然而，刘束星因病死亡。
English: However, Liu Sokxing died of illness.

古文：御史高举献河漕三策，复及泇河。
现代文：御史高举进献治理河漕的三个办法，又涉及到洳河。
English: The three methods of river management proposed by Gu Shigao also involve the Minhe River.

古文：工部尚书杨一魁覆言： 泇河经良城、彭河、葛墟岭，石礓难凿，故口仅丈六尺，浅亦如之，当大加疏凿。
现代文：工部尚书杨一魁又说： 洳河经过良城、彭河、葛墟岭，砂礓土难以开凿，所以河口只有一丈六尺，水的深浅也与此一样，应当大力加以疏浚。
English: Yang Yikui, a senior official of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, also said: "The Li River passes through the Liangcheng, Penghe and Gexuling Mountains. The sandy soil is difficult to excavate, so the river mouth is only one meter high and six meters deep. The water depth is also the same. It should be dredged vigorously.

古文：其韩庄渠上接微山、吕孟，宜多方疏导，俾无淤浅。
现代文：韩庄渠上接微山、吕孟二湖，应当用多种方法疏导，使它不淤塞。
English: The Hanzhuang Canal is connected to Mount Weishan and Lvmen Second Lake. Diversion should be used to prevent silting up.

古文：顺流入马家桥、夏镇，以为运道接济之资。 
现代文：顺流入马家桥、夏镇，把它作为连接运道的帮助。 
English: It flows into Majiaqiao and Xiazhen, and is used as an aid to connecting transportation routes.

古文：帝以泇河既有成绩，命河臣更挑浚。
现代文：皇帝认为开通洳河已经很有成绩，命令河臣再进行疏浚。
English: The emperor thought that the opening of the Min River had been a great success, and ordered the river minister to dredge again.

古文：三十年，工部尚书姚继可言泇河之役宜罢，乃止不治。
现代文：万历三十年，工部尚书姚继可说洳河的工程应当停止，于是就停止不再治理。
English: After 30 years, the Ministry of Industry and Trade said that the project should be stopped, so it was stopped and no longer administered.

古文：未几，总河侍郎李化龙复议开泇河，属之直河，以避河险。
现代文：不久，总河侍郎李化龙又主张开通洳河，连接到直河，来避开河道的危险。
English: Soon, the general river steward Li Hualong also advocated the opening of the Fenhe River and connecting it to the Zhihe River to avoid the danger of the river.

古文：工科给事中侯庆远力主其说，而以估费太少，责期太远，请专任而责成之。
现代文：工科给事中侯庆远极力支持这种说法，然而，因为估计的费用太少，规定期限太短暂，请求专门委任官员并负责完成这件事。
English: Hou Qingyuan, an engineering official, strongly supported this argument, but because the estimated cost was too low and the deadline was too short, he asked for a specially appointed official to be responsible for completing the matter.

古文：三十二年正月，工部覆化龙疏，言： 开泇有六善，其不疑有二。
现代文：三十二年正月，工部回复李化龙的奏章，说： 开通洳河有六大好处，其不可怀疑之处有二。
English: In the first month of the 32nd year, the Ministry of Industry and Trade replied to Li Huilong's report, saying: There are six major benefits of opening the Fenhe River, and there are two things that cannot be doubted.

古文：泇河开而运不借河，河水有无听之，善一。
现代文：洳河开通后运河不凭借黄河，黄河水有与无任凭它，这是好处之一。
English: After the opening of the Minhe River, the canal does not rely on the Yellow River, and the Yellow River water has nothing to do with it, which is one of the benefits.

古文：以二百主十里之泇河，避三百三十里之黄河，善二。
现代文：用二百六十里的洳河，避开三百三十里的黄河，这是好处之二。
English: Using the 260-mile Li River to avoid the 330-mile Yellow River is one of the benefits.

古文：运不借河，则我为政得以熟察机宜而治之，善三。
现代文：运河不凭借黄河，那么，我执掌国政就能够详察事理而治理它，这是好处之三。
English: If the canal does not rely on the Yellow River, then when I am in charge of state affairs, I will be able to scrutinize the matter and govern it. This is the third benefit.

古文：估费二十万金，开河二百六十里，视朱衡新河事半功倍，善四。
现代文：估计耗费二十万金，开通河道二百六十里，比照朱衡新河费力少而收效大，这是好处之四。
English: It is estimated that it will cost 200,000 gold and open up 260 miles of river channels. Compared with the Zhu Heng New River, the effort is less and the effect is greater. This is the fourth benefit.

古文：开河必行召募，春荒役兴，麦熟人散，富民不扰，穷民得以养，善五。
现代文：开通河道必定进行招募，春天饥荒之时兴起工役，麦子戍熟之时解散人力，富裕百姓不受侵扰，贫穷百姓得到供养，这是好处之五。
English: The opening of the waterway will certainly lead to recruitment, labor service will rise in the spring when there is famine, manpower will be disbanded when the wheat is ripe, the rich people will not be disturbed, and the poor people will be supported, which is one of the five benefits.

古文：粮船过洪，必约春尽，实畏河涨，运入泇河，朝暮无妨，善六。
现代文：运粮船只经过大河，必定期会到春末，实际上害怕河水泛滥，运道入洳河，早晚都无妨碍，这是好处之六。
English: Grain transport vessels pass through the big river, and they will come to the end of spring on a regular basis. In fact, they are afraid of river flooding, and the transport channel into the Fen River will not be hindered sooner or later. This is the sixth benefit.

古文：为陵捍患，为民御灾，无疑者一。
现代文：治理陵谷抵挡水患，帮助百姓防止灾难，这是不怀疑的第一点。
English: It is the first point of no doubt that we should manage Linggu to resist floods and help the people to prevent disasters.

古文：徐州向苦洪水，泇河既开，则徐民之为鱼者亦少，无疑者二。 
现代文：徐州向来遭到洪水侵害之苦，洳河开通以后，徐州百姓遭受水淹也就减少，这是不可怀疑的第二点。 
English: Xuzhou has always suffered from floods. After the opening of the Bohai River, the number of people in Xuzhou suffering from floods has also decreased. This is the second point that cannot be doubted.

古文：帝深善之，令速鸠工为久远之计。
现代文：皇帝很赞许他的主张，命令迅速聚集工役作为长久之计。
English: The emperor was very much in favour of his idea and ordered the workers to be quickly assembled as a long-term solution.

古文：八月，化龙报分水河成，粮艘由泇者三之二。
现代文：八月，李化龙禀报分水河竣工，运粮船只经由洳河的有三分之二。
English: In August, Li Huilong reported that the diversion of the river was completed, and two-thirds of the grain transport vessels passed through the Minhe River.

古文：会化龙丁艰去，总河侍郎曹时聘代，上言颂化龙功。
现代文：适逢李化龙服丧离去，总河侍郎曹时聘接替，上书颂扬李化龙的功劳。
English: When Li Huilong passed away, he was succeeded by Cao Shihai, a general river attendant, and a book was published to praise Li Huilong's achievements.

古文：然是时，导河、浚泇，两工并兴，役未能竟。而黄河数溢，坏漕渠。
现代文：然而这时，疏浚黄河、疏通洳河，两处工程同时兴起，工程未能完成，而黄河几次泛滥毁坏漕运渠道。
English: However, at this time, the dredging of the Yellow River and the dredging of the Min River, two projects arose at the same time, the project could not be completed, and the Yellow River flooded several times and destroyed the paddling channel.

古文：给事中宋一韩遂诋化龙开泇之误，化龙愤，上章自辩。
现代文：给事中宋一韩便谴责李化龙开通洳河的失误，李化龙非常忿怒，上奏章为自己争辩。
English: In the middle of the matter, Song Yi Han denounced Li Hualong's mistake in opening the Minhe River. Li Hualong was very angry and argued with himself on the score.

古文：时聘亦力言泇可赖，因画善后六事以闻。
现代文：曹时聘也极力陈述洳河可以依赖，于是，谋划处理事后遗留的六件事上奏朝廷。
English: Cao Shihai also tried his best to state that Luohe could be relied on, and therefore, he planned to deal with the six matters left over after the fact and report to the imperial court.

古文：部覆皆从其议。
现代文：工部回复全都依从他们的主张。
English: All of the ministry's replies followed their suggestions.

古文：且言： 泇开於梗漕之日，固不可因泇而废黄；漕利於泇成之后，亦不可因黄而废泇。
现代文：并且说： 洳河开通于漕运阻塞的时候，本来不能因为洳河而废弃黄河；漕运便利在于洳河开通成功之后，也不能因为黄河而废弃洳河。
English: He also said: When the opening of the Minhe River was blocked by rowing traffic, the Yellow River could not be abandoned because of the Minhe River; the convenience of rowing traffic is that after the successful opening of the Minhe River, the Minhe River could not be abandoned because of the Yellow River.

古文：两利俱存，庶几缓急可赖。 
现代文：两绦河的便利都保存，差不多在情势急迫之时可以依赖。 
English: The convenience of the two rivers has been preserved, and it can be relied on when the situation is urgent.

古文：因请筑郗山堤，削顿庄嘴，平大泛口湍溜，浚猫儿窝等处之浅，建钜梁吴冲闸，增三市徐塘坝，以终泇河未就之功。
现代文：因此，请求修筑郗山堤，削减顿庄嘴，平息大泛口湍急水流，疏通猫儿窝等处的淤浅，建立巨梁昊冲闸，增筑三市徐塘坝，来完成洳河没有完成的工程。
English: Therefore, it is requested to build the Lushan Embankment, reduce the mouth of the Dongzhuang River, calm the large floodgate of the Lushan Rapid Water Flow, clear the silt in the cat's den and other places, build a giant beam to break the sluice, and build an additional three-city Xutang Dam to complete the unfinished project of the Lushan River.

古文：诏如议。
现代文：诏令依照其主张。
English: The edict was issued in accordance with his wishes.

古文：越数年，泇工未竟，督漕者复舍泇由黄。
现代文：遇了几年，洳河工程没有完成，监督漕运的人又舍弃洳河经由黄河。
English: After a few years, the Li River project was not completed, and the person supervising the paddling abandoned the Li River and passed through the Yellow River.

古文：舟有覆者，迁徙黄、泇间，运期久逾限。
现代文：船只有被颠覆的，改道于黄河、洳河之间，运输时间超过限期很久。
English: The ship has been overturned and rerouted between the Yellow River and the Fen River, and the transportation time has exceeded the deadline for a long time.

古文：三十八年，御史苏惟霖疏陈黄、泇利害，请专力於泇，略言： 黄河自清河经桃源，北达直河口，长二百四十里。
现代文：万历三十八年，御史苏惟霖上疏陈述黄河、洳河的利与害，请求把力量集中于洳河，大致是说： 黄河从清河经过桃源，向北到达直河口，全长二百四十里。
English: In the 38th year of the Wanli calendar, the Grand Historian Su Weilin Shangsuo stated the benefits and harms of the Yellow River and the Min River, and requested that the power be concentrated on the Min River, roughly saying: The Yellow River runs from the Qing River through the Taoyuan River and northward to the mouth of the Zhihe River, with a total length of 240 miles.

古文：此在泇下流，水平身广，运舟日行仅十里。
现代文：这在洳河下游，水流平稳河床宽广，运输船只每日行驶仅仅十里。
English: This is in the lower reaches of the Wei River, the water flow is stable and the river bed is wide, and the transport vessels travel only ten miles a day.

古文：然无他道，故必用之。
现代文：然而没有其他的道路，所以必须利用它。
English: However, there is no other road, so it must be used.

古文：自直河口而上，历邳、徐达镇口，长二百八十馀里，是谓黄河。又百二十里，方抵夏镇。
现代文：从直河口往上，经过邳州、徐州到达镇口，长二百八十多里，这叫做黄河，又一百二十里，纔到达夏镇。
English: Going up from the mouth of the Zhihe River, passing through Ganzhou and Xuzhou to the town of Ganzhou, it is more than 280 miles long, which is called the Yellow River, and another 120 miles to Xia Town.

古文：其东自猫窝、泇沟达夏镇，止二百六十馀里，是谓泇河。
现代文：其东边从猫窝、洳沟到达夏镇，只有二百六十多里，这叫做洳河。
English: On its eastern side, it is only more than 260 miles from Cat's Lair and Shugu to Xia Town. This is called the Shuhe River.

古文：东西相对，舍此则彼。
现代文：东西相对，舍弃此河就是彼河。
English: As opposed to things, abandoning this river is another river.

古文：黄河三四月间浅与泇同。
现代文：黄河三四月之间水浅与洳河相同。
English: Between March and April, the water level of the Yellow River is the same as that of the Min River.

古文：五月初，其流汹涌，自天而下，一步难行。
现代文：五月初，其水流汹涌，好像从天上降下来一样，前行一步都很困难。
English: At the beginning of May, the water was so turbulent that it seemed to be falling from the sky, and it was difficult to move forward.

古文：由其水挟沙而来，河口日高。
现代文：由于其水夹带泥沙而来，河口一天天淤塞增高。
English: Due to its water entrained with silt, the estuary is silting up day by day.

古文：至七月初，则浅涸十倍。
现代文：到七月初，则比原先浅少枯竭十倍。
English: By the beginning of July, it was ten times shallower and drier than before.

古文：统而计之，无一时可由者。
现代文：总合起来计算，没有一个时候能从此经过。
English: Taken together, no time has passed since then.

古文：溺人损舟，其害甚剧。
现代文：淹死船夫损毁船只，其危书很大。
English: If a boatman is drowned and the boat is damaged, the danger is great.

古文：泇河计日可达，终鲜风波，但得实心任事之臣，不三五年缺略悉补，数百年之利也。 
现代文：洳河为期不远就能到达，始终风浪很少，只要得到真心实意称职的官吏，不到三五年，欠缺之处完全可以补足，这是延续百年的便利啊。 
English: Luohe can be reached within a short period of time, and there are always few storms. As long as you get sincere and competent officials, you can completely make up for the deficiencies in less than three or five years. This is a convenience that lasts for a hundred years.

古文：工科给事中何士晋亦言： 运道最险无如黄河。
现代文：工科给事中何士晋也说： 运道最险的没有什么比得上黄河。
English: He Shijin also said in the engineering report: The most dangerous transportation route is nothing compared to the Yellow River.

古文：先年水出昭阳湖，夏镇以南运道冲阻，开泇之议始决。
现代文：从前，河水从昭阳湖流出，夏镇以南运道被冲击阻隔，开通洳河的主张纔确定。
English: In the past, the river water flowed out from Zhaoyang Lake, and the south transport channel of Xia Town was blocked by the impact, and the proposition of opening the Minhe River was determined.

古文：避浅涩急溜二洪之险，聚诸泉水，以时启闭，通行无滞者六年。
现代文：避免水浅与湍急的徐、吕二洪的危险，聚积各处泉水，按照一定的时间开关闸门，通行无阻长达六年。
English: To avoid the danger of shallow water and rushing water, spring water will accumulate everywhere, and the gate will be opened and closed according to a certain time, and the passage will be unimpeded for up to six years.

古文：乃今忽欲舍泇由黄，致仓皇损坏粮艘。
现代文：而今天突然想舍弃洳河经由黄河，导致仓皇损坏粮船。
English: But today, it suddenly wanted to abandon the Minhe River via the Yellow River, resulting in panic damage to the grain ship.

古文：或改由大浮桥，河道淤塞，复还由泇。
现代文：有时改为经由大浮桥，因河道淤塞，又恢复经由洳河。
English: Sometimes it was changed to pass through the large floating bridge, due to the silting of the river, and then resumed passing through the Wei River.

古文：以故运抵湾迟，汲汲有守冻之虑，由黄之害略可见矣。
现代文：因此，运抵水湾就延迟了，心情急切地有守候挨冻的忧虑，经由黄河的危害大致可以看到了。
English: Therefore, the arrival of the shipment to Shuiwan was delayed, and the mood was anxious to wait for frost, and the harm of passing through the Yellow River could be roughly seen.

古文：顾泇工未竟，阔狭深浅不齐。
现代文：只是洳河工程没有完成，宽窄深浅不一致。
English: However, the Li River project has not been completed, and the width, width, depth and depth are inconsistent.

古文：宜拓广浚深，与会通河相等。
现代文：应当扩宽挖深，与会通河相等。
English: The digging depth should be expanded, and the number of participants should be equal.

古文：重运空回，往来不相碍，回旋不相避，水常充盛，舟无留行。
现代文：重载运去空船返回，往来不互相妨碍，盘旋不互相回避，河水常常充足，粮船不滞留。
English: Heavy loads are transported to empty ships and returned, traffic does not interfere with each other, circling does not avoid each other, river water is often sufficient, grain ships do not linger.

古文：岁捐水衡数万金，督以廉能之吏，三年可竣工。
现代文：每年花费水衡钱几万两钱财，用廉洁有能力的官吏监督，三年就可以竣工。
English: Each year, tens of thousands of dollars are spent on water balance, and with the supervision of honest and capable officials, it can be completed in three years.

古文：然后循骆马湖北岸，东达宿迁，大兴畚锸，尽避黄河之险，则泇河之事讫矣。
现代文：然后，沿着骆马湖北岸，往东到达宿迁，大量兴起疏浚工役，完全避开黄河的危险，那么疏通洳河的事便完成了。
English: Then, along the northern shore of Luoma Lake, eastward to Suqian, a large number of dredging workers emerged, completely avoiding the danger of the Yellow River, so the dredging of the Fen River was completed.

古文：或谓泉脉细微，太阔太深，水不能有。
现代文：有的说泉水细微，太宽太深，不会有水。
English: Some say that the spring water is too thin, too wide and too deep, and there will be no water.

古文：不知泇源远自蒙、沂，近挟徐塘、许池、文武诸泉河，大率视济宁泉河略相等。
现代文：不知道洳河水源远从蒙山、沂山而来，近处挟带徐塘、许池、文武各泉河，大抵比照济宁泉河略微相等。
English: I don't know, the water source of the Min River comes from as far away as Mengshan and Lushan. Nearby, there are the springs of Xutang, Xuchi, and Wenwu, which are mostly slightly equal to the Jining Spring River.

古文：吕公堂口既塞，则山东诸水总合全收，加以闸坝堤防，何忧不足？
现代文：吕公堂河口已经堵塞，那么，山东各泉水就汇合起来全部收聚，加上使用闸坝堤防，还担心什么水不充足呢？
English: The mouth of the Lugangtang River has been blocked, so all the springs in Shandong have been gathered together and collected. In addition to the use of dams and dikes, what water is not sufficient?

古文：或谓直抵宿迁，此功迂而难竟，是在任用得人，综理有法耳。 
现代文：有人说直接到达宿迁，此工程迂回曲折很难完成，其实在于任用得到适当的人，全面整理有法罢了。 
English: Some people say that it is difficult to complete this project of detours and twists by directly arriving at Suqian. In fact, it is just a matter of appointing the right person and comprehensively sorting it out.

古文：疏入，不报。
现代文：奏疏呈入，没有答复。
English: There has been no response since the complaint was filed.

古文：明年，部覆总河都御史刘士忠《泇黄便宜疏》，言： 泇渠春夏间，沂、武、京河山水冲发，沙淤溃决，岁终当如南旺例修治。
现代文：第二年，工部审察总河都御史刘士忠《洳黄便宜疏》，说： 洳河渠道在春夏之间，被沂、武、京河山水冲发，泥沙淤积，堤岸溃决，每年年终应当依照南旺的办法来整治。
English: In the second year, the Ministry of Industry and Trade examined Liu Shizhong, the chief historian of the capital of Sichuan Province, "Qinghuang Qianxiao," and said: "Between spring and summer, the channels of the Qin River are washed out by the mountains and rivers of Yunnan, Wuxi and Beijing, silted up with mud and sand, and the embankment is breached. At the end of each year, it should be rectified according to the Nanwang method.

古文：顾别无置水之地，势不得不塞泇河坝，令水复归黄流。
现代文：但是别处没有释放河水的地方，其形势不得不堵塞洳河坝，使河水又回到黄河。
English: However, there was nowhere else to release the river water, so the situation had to be blocked by the Minhe Dam, causing the river water to return to the Yellow River.

古文：故每年三月初，则开泇河坝，令粮艘及官民船由直河进。
现代文：所以，每年三月初，就打开洳河坝，让粮船及官船民船经由直河进入。
English: Therefore, at the beginning of March each year, the Lijiang River dam is opened to allow grain ships and government vessels to enter through the Zhihe River.

古文：至九月内，则开召公坝，入黄河，以便空回及官民船往来。
现代文：到九月内，就打开召公坝，进入黄河，以便利于空船返回及官船民船往来。
English: By September, the public dam will be opened to enter the Yellow River to facilitate the return of empty ships and the exchange of official ships and civilian ships.

古文：至次年二月中塞之。
现代文：到第二年二月中旬堵塞它。
English: By mid-February of the following year, it was blocked.

古文：半年由泇，半年由黄，此两利之道也。
现代文：半年经由洳河，半年经由黄河，这是两利的办法。 
English: Half the year through the Min River, half the year through the Yellow River, this is a win-win solution.

古文：因请增驿设官。
现代文：因此，请求增加驿站设置官吏。
English: Therefore, it is requested to increase the number of officials stationed at stations.

古文：又覆惟霖疏，言： 直隶猫窝浅，为沂下流，河广沙淤，不可以闸，最为泇患。
现代文：又审寨苏惟霖的奏章，说： 直隶猫窝浅，是沂河下游，河道宽阔泥沙淤积，不适合使用闸门，是洳河的最大祸害。
English: He also reviewed Su Weilin's song and said: Zhili Cat's Lair is shallow, it is the lower reaches of the Wei River, the river is wide and silted up, it is not suitable to use the sluice gate, and it is the biggest scourge of the Wei River.

古文：宜西开一月河，以通沂口。
现代文：应当向西开通一条偃月形河道，使通到沂口。
English: A crescent-shaped channel should be opened to the west, leading to the estuary.

古文：凡水挟沙来，沙性直走，有月河以分之，则聚於洄伏之处，捞刷较易，而泇患少减矣。 
现代文：凡是河水挟带泥沙而来，泥沙的特性喜好直走，有偃月形河道来分流它，就聚积于回旋低下之处，捞取或冲刷比较容易，而洳河灾害便稍微减少了。 
English: Whenever the river comes with sediment, the characteristics of the sediment prefer to go straight, and there is a crescent-shaped river channel to divert it, it accumulates in the place where the circulation is low, it is easier to collect or wash, and the disasters of the Bohai River are slightly reduced.

古文：俱报可，其后，无河遂为永利，但需补葺而已。
现代文：全都回复可行。这以后，洳河就成为永久的便利，只需要修补整治罢了。
English: All can be restored. After this, the Li River will become a permanent convenience, and only needs to be repaired and rectified.

古文：然泇势狭窄，冬春粮艘回空仍由黄河焉。
现代文：然而，洳河河床狭窄，冬春时，粮船返空仍然经由黄河。
English: However, the riverbed of the Min River is narrow, and grain ships still return empty through the Yellow River in winter and spring.

古文：四十八年，巡漕御史毛一鹭言： 无河属夏镇者有闸九座，属中河者止藉草坝。
现代文：万历四十八年，巡漕御史毛一鹭说： 洳河连接夏镇的地方建有闸门九座，连接中河的地方只能依赖于草坝。
English: In the 48th year of the Wanli calendar, the cruiser Gu Shi Mao Yijun said: The place where the Min River connects Xia Town has nine locks, and the place connecting the middle river can only rely on the grass dam.

古文：分司官议於直口等处建闸，请举行之。 
现代文：分管官吏主张在直口等处建立闸门，请求全部施行。 
English: The officials in charge advocated the establishment of gates at the direct entrance and other places, and requested that all of them be implemented.

古文：诏从其议。
现代文：诏令依从他的主张。
English: After all, Emperor Taizong issued an edict approving this motion.

古文：崇祯四年，总漕尚书杨一鹏浚泇河。
现代文：崇祯四年，总漕尚书杨一鹏疏通洳河。
English: In the four years of Chongzhen, Yang Yipeng, the chief oarsman of Shangshu, dredged the Fenhe River.

古文：九年，总河侍郎周鼎奏重浚泇河成。
现代文：九年，总河侍郎周鼎上奏重新疏通洳河成功。
English: In the ninth year, Zhou Ding, the general river waiter, succeeded in re-dredging the Wei River.

古文：久之，鼎坐决河防远戍。
现代文：过了很久，周鼎因黄河决堤而获罪，被贬谪戍守边疆。
English: After a long time, Zhou Ding was found guilty of damming the Yellow River and was demoted to guarding the border.

古文：给事中沈胤培讼其修泇利运之功，得减论。
现代文：给事中沈胤培因为他整治洳河便利运输的功绩焉他辩白，获得减轻定罪。
English: In the case, Shen Yanpei received a reduced sentence because he pleaded guilty for his achievements in improving the convenient transportation of the Minhe River.

古文：卫河，源出河南辉县苏门山百门泉。
现代文：卫河，源出于河南辉县苏门山百门泉。
English: Wei River, the source of which is the Hyakumen Spring of Sumenshan, Hui County, Henan Province.

古文：经新乡、汲县而东，至畿南浚县境，淇水入焉，谓之白沟，亦曰宿胥渎。
现代文：经过新乡、汲县然后向东，到达畿南浚县境内，淇水流入其中，称之为白沟，也叫做宿胥演。
English: After passing through Xinxiang and Kuxian and then eastward, it reaches the territory of Jianxian County, South Gyeongsang Province, and the water flows into it, which is called Baigou, also known as Sukuyuan.

古文：宋、元时名曰御河。
现代文：宋、元时期名叫御河。
English: It was called Okawa in the Song and Yuan dynasties.

古文：由内黄东出，至山东馆陶西，漳水合焉。
现代文：从内黄向东流出，到山东馆陶西面，与漳水汇合。
English: It flows from Neihuang to the east, to the west of Shandong Pavilion Tao, and merges with Surabaya.

古文：东北至临清，与会通河合。
现代文：往东北到达临清，与会通河汇合。
English: To the northeast, it reaches Linqing and joins the Tonghe River.

古文：北历德、沧诸州，至青县南，合滹沱河。
现代文：向北经过德、沧等州，到达青县南，汇合滹沱河。
English: Passing De, Cang and other prefectures to the north, it reaches the south of Qing County and joins the Minhe River.

古文：北达天津，会白河入海。
现代文：向北到达天津，汇合白河流入大海。
English: Northward to Tianjin, the confluence of the White River into the sea.

古文：所谓卫漕也。
现代文：造就是所说的卫漕。
English: Zou is the so-called "guard boat."

古文：其河流浊势盛，运道得之，始无浅涩虞。
现代文：其河水浑浊水势强盛，运道获得它，纔没有浅滩险阻的忧虑。
English: Its river water is turbid and the water potential is strong, and there is no concern about the danger of shoals.

古文：然自德州下渐与海近，卑窄易冲溃。
现代文：然而，从德州往下逐渐与海接近，地低河窄容易被冲垮河堤。
English: However, from Texas down, it gradually approaches the sea, and the river is narrow and can easily be washed over the dike.

古文：初，永乐元年，沈阳军士唐顺言： 卫河抵直沽入海，南距黄河陆路才五十里。
现代文：当初，永乐元年，沈阳军士唐顺说： 卫河到达直沽流入大海，南边距离黄河陆路纔五十里。
English: At the beginning, in the first year of Yongle, Shenyang sergeant Tang Shun said: Weihe reaches Zhiyao and flows into the sea, and the south side is 50 miles from the Yellow River by land.

古文：若开卫河，而距黄河百步置仓廒，受南运粮饷，至卫河交运，公私两便。 
现代文：假若开挖卫河，又在距离黄河一百步的地方建立储藏粮食的处所，容纳从南方运送来的粮饷，到达卫河交接运送，公家私人两者都便利。 
English: If the Wei River is dredged and a grain storage site is built a hundred paces away from the Yellow River, it will be convenient for both the public and private sectors to store grain brought from the south and to transfer it to Wei River.

古文：乃命廷臣议，未行。
现代文：于是，命令朝廷大臣谋划，没有施行。
English: As a result, the Minister of the Imperial Court was ordered to plan, but did not implement.

古文：其冬，命都督佥事陈俊运淮安、仪真仓粮百五十万馀石赴阳武，由卫河转输北京。
现代文：这年冬，命令都督愈事陈俊运送淮安、仪真粮仓的粮食一百五十万余石到阳武，从卫河转运到北京。
English: In the winter of that year, he ordered the governor-general Chen Jun to transport the grain from the Huai'an and Yizhen granaries to Yangwu, and then from Weihe to Beijing.

古文：五年，自临清抵渡口驿决堤七处，发卒塞之。
现代文：五年，从临清到渡口驿溃决堤庠七处，派遣士兵堵塞它。
English: In five years, soldiers were dispatched to block seven levees from Linqing to Wuhou.

古文：后宋礼开会通河，卫河与之合。
现代文：后来，宋礼开通会通河，卫河与它汇合。
English: Later, the Song Dynasty opened the Tonghe River, and the Wei River merged with it.

古文：时方数决堤岸，遂命礼并治之。
现代文：当时，正屡屡出现堤岸溃决，于是命令宋礼一起治理它。
English: At that time, the embankment was repeatedly bursting, so Song Li was ordered to manage it together.

古文：礼言： 卫辉至直沽，河岸多低薄，若不究源析流，但务堤筑，恐复溃决，劳费益甚。
现代文：宋礼说： 卫辉到直沽，河道堤岸多低矮单薄，假若不探源析流，仅仅致力于堤岸的修筑，担心再次溃决，耗费人力财力会更多。
English: Song Li said: From Weihui to Zhaojun, the river embankment is low and thin. If we do not explore the source of sedimentation, we will only focus on the construction of the embankment. We are worried that it will break again, and it will consume more manpower and financial resources.

古文：会通河抵魏家湾，与土河连，其处可穿二小渠以泄於土河。
现代文：会通河到魏家湾，与土河连接，其处可以开通两条小渠来排放到土河。
English: The Huitong River flows to Weijia Bay and connects with the Tu River, where two small canals can be opened to discharge into the Tu River.

古文：虽遇水涨，下流卫河，自无横溢患。
现代文：即使遇到水涨，往下流入卫河，自然没有流出河岸的灾难。
English: Even if the water rises and flows down into the Wei River, there is naturally no disaster flowing out of the riverbank.

古文：德州城西北亦可穿一小渠。
现代文：德州城西北也可以开通一条小渠。
English: A small canal could also be opened northwest of Texas City.

古文：盖自卫河岸东北至旧黄河十有二里，而中间五里故有沟渠，宜开道七里，泄水入旧黄河，至海丰大沽河入海。 
现代文：从卫河岸东北到旧黄河十二里，而中间五里原先有沟渠，应当开通河道七里，排放河水流入旧黄河，到达海丰大沽河流入大海。 
English: From the northeast bank of the Wei River to the old Yellow River is 12 miles, and there is a ditch in the middle of the middle five miles. It is necessary to open the river channel for seven miles, discharge the river water into the old Yellow River, and reach the Haifeng Dadu River into the sea.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：诏令依从他的主张。
English: He complied.

古文：英宗初，永平县丞李祐请闭漳河以防患，疏卫河以通舟。
现代文：英宗初年，永平县丞李佑请求堵塞漳河以防水患，疏通卫河以通行船只。
English: In the first year of Emperor Yingzong's reign, the Yongping County magistrate, Li You, requested that the Wei River be dammed to prevent flooding, and that the Wei River be dredged to allow ships to pass.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的请求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：正统四年筑青县卫河堤岸。
现代文：正统四年，修筑青县境内的卫河堤岸。
English: During the four years of orthodoxy, the embankment of the Wei River in Qing County was built.

古文：十三年从御史林廷举请，引漳入卫。
现代文：十三年，依从御史林廷举的奏请，导引漳河水流入卫河。
English: In the thirteenth year, in accordance with the request made by Emperor Lin Ting, he guided the water of the Min River into the Wei River.

古文：十四年，黄河决临清四闸，御史钱清请浚其南撞圈湾河以达卫。
现代文：十四年，黄河在临清四闸决口，御史钱清请求疏通其南边的撞圈湾河使到达卫河。
English: In the 14th year, the Yellow River was at the junction of the four gates of Linqing, and the Grand Historian Qianqing requested the dredging of the collision circle Bay River on its south side to reach Weihe.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的主张。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：景泰四年，运艘阻张秋之决。
现代文：景泰四年，运粮船只因张秋的溃决被阻。
English: In the fourth year of Jing Tai, grain ships were blocked due to Zhang Qiu's defeat.

古文：河南参议丰庆请自卫辉、胙城洎於沙门，陆挽三十里入卫，舟运抵京师。
现代文：河南参议丰庆请求从卫辉、胙城到沙门，陆路运输三十里进入卫河，用船运送到京师。
English: Fengqing, the Henan councillor, requested that from Weihui and Shicheng to Shamen, it should be transported by land for thirty miles into Weihe and transported by ship to Beijing Division.

古文：命漕运都督徐恭覆报，如其策。
现代文：命令漕运都督徐恭审察上报，依照他的计策。
English: He ordered the provincial governor Xu Qiong to review and submit the report, in accordance with his strategy.

古文：山东佥事江良材尝言： 通河于卫有三便。
现代文：山东愈事江良材曾经说： 挖通黄河通卫河有三个便利。
English: Shandong Yushijiang Liangzai once said: There are three conveniences to digging through the Yellow River to the Wei River.

古文：古黄河自孟津至怀庆东北入海。
现代文：原先，黄河从孟津到达怀庆往东北流入大海。
English: Originally, the Yellow River flowed into the sea from Mengjin to Huaiqing in the northeast.

古文：今卫河自汲县至临清、天津入海，则犹古黄河道也，便一。
现代文：现在，卫河从汲县到达临清、天津流入大海，即仍是原先黄河的河道，这是便利之一。
English: Now, Weihe River flows into the sea from Kuxian to Linqing and Tianjin, which is still the original course of the Yellow River. This is one of the conveniences.

古文：三代前，黄河东北入海，宇宙全气所钟。
现代文：三代以前，黄河往东北流入大海，宇宙问纯全之气所集聚。
English: Three generations ago, the Yellow River flowed to the northeast into the sea, and the universe gathered the air of purity.

古文：河南徙，气遂迁转。
现代文：黄河改道向南，纯全之气就转移。
English: When the Yellow River is diverted to the south, the air of purity is transferred.

古文：今於河阴、原武、怀、孟间导河入卫，以达天津，不独徐、沛患息，而京师形胜百倍，便二。
现代文：现在，在河阴、原武、怀庆、孟津之间导引黄河流入卫河，到达天津，不单是徐、沛二县的水灾平息，而且京城山川壮美一百倍，这是便利之二。
English: Now, guiding the Yellow River into Weihe between Heyin, Yuanwu, Huaiqing and Mengjin, and arriving in Tianjin, not only the floods in Xu and Pei counties have subsided, but the mountains and rivers in Beijing have become a hundred times more magnificent. This is the second convenience.

古文：元漕舟至封丘，陆运抵淇门入卫。
现代文：丞塑，漕运船只到封丘，陆路运输到淇门进入卫河。
English: plastic, rowing boats to Fengqiu, and land transport to Qimen to enter Weihe.

古文：今导河注卫，冬春水平，漕舟至河阴，顺流达卫。
现代文：现在，导引黄河注入卫河，冬春水平，漕运船只到河阴，顺流到达卫河。
English: Now, the Yellow River is guided into the Wei River, the winter and spring levels, the rowing boats go to the river shade, and the downstream reaches the Wei River.

古文：夏秋水迅，仍从徐、沛达临清，以北抵京师。
现代文：夏秋水急，仍然从徐、沛到达临清，往北到达京城。
English: In summer and autumn, the water is still rapid, and it still reaches Linqing from Xu and Pei, and reaches Beijing from the north.

古文：且修其沟洫，择良有司任之，可以备旱涝，捍戎马，益起直隶、河南富强之势，便三。 
现代文：并且修整田问水道，选择好的主管官吏担任此职，可以防备旱涝灾害，抵御战乱。逐渐形成直隶、河南富强之势，这是便利之三。 
English: Moreover, it is possible to prevent droughts and floods and resist wars by tidying up fields and watercourses and selecting competent officials to serve in this position. This is the third convenience, which will gradually form a trend of direct subordination and Henan's prosperity and strength.

古文：詹事霍韬大然其画，具奏以闻。
现代文：詹事霍韬推崇并以为他的计策对，详细上奏报告朝廷。
English: Zhan Zhihuo respected Zhan Zhihuo and thought his strategy was right. He submitted a detailed report to the imperial court.

古文：不行。
现代文：结果没有施行。
English: Yang Chin is not going.

古文：万历十六年，总督河漕杨一魁议引沁水入卫，命给事中常居敬勘酌可否。
现代文：万历十六年，总督河漕杨一魁主张导引沁水流入卫河，命令给事中常居敬勘测斟酌是否可行。
English: In the 16th year of the Wanli era, Yang Yikui, the governor of Hekao, advocated guiding the flow of brackish water into Weihe, and ordered that the feasibility of the project be considered.

古文：居敬言： 卫小沁大，卫清沁浊，恐利少害多。 
现代文：常居敬说： 卫水小沁水大，卫水清沁水浊，恐怕利少害多。 
English: Changju Jing said: Wei Shui small, Wei Shui big, Wei Shui clear, Wei Shui small, I am afraid that less benefit is more harmful.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是停止。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：泰昌元年十二月，总河侍郎王佐言： 卫河流塞，惟挽漳、引沁、辟丹三策。
现代文：泰昌元年十二月，总河侍郎王佐说： 卫河水被堵塞，只有挽回漳水、导引沁水，辟开丹水三个办法。
English: In December of the first year of Taichang, Wang Zuo, the general river steward, said: The Wei River water is blocked, and there are only three ways to save the water, guide the water, and open the water.

古文：挽漳难，而引沁多患。
现代文：挽回漳水困难，而导引沁水多有祸患。
English: It is difficult to recover floodwaters, and guiding floodwaters is often a disaster.

古文：丹水则虽势与沁同，而丹口既辟，自修武而下皆成安流，建闸筑堰，可垂永利。
现代文：丹水则虽然水势与沁水相同，然而丹水口已经辟开，从修武以下都成为安稳之水，建立闸门修筑堤坝，可以留传永久的利益。 
English: On the other hand, although the water potential of Danshui is the same as that of Surabaya, the mouth of Danshui has been opened, and it has become a stable water from Xiuwu and below. The establishment of sluice gates and the construction of dams can pass on permanent benefits.

古文：制可，亦未能行也。
现代文：皇帝命令同意，而最终也没有能够施行。
English: The emperor agreed to the order, but ultimately failed to carry it out.

古文：崇祯十三年，总河侍郎张国维言： 卫河合漳、沁、淇、洹诸水，北流抵临清，会闸河以济运。
现代文：崇祯十三年，总河侍郎张国维说： 卫河汇合漳、沁、淇、洹各水，往北流到临清，汇合闸河以补济运道。
English: In the thirteenth year of Chongzhen, Zhang Guowei, the general river waiter, said: Weihe River confluence of Yangtze, Yangtze, Qing and Yangtze rivers, flowing north to Linqing, and confluence of Hailu River to supplement the transportation route.

古文：自漳河他徙，卫流遂弱，挽漳引沁之议，建而未行。
现代文：自从漳河改道别处，卫河水流减弱，挽回漳水导引沁水的主张，提出而没有施行。
English: Since the diversion of the Wei River, the water flow of the Wei River has weakened, and the idea of rescuing the Wei River and guiding the Wei River has been proposed but not implemented.

古文：宜导辉县泉源，且酌引漳、沁，辟丹水，疏通滏、洹、淇三水之利害得失，命河南抚、按勘议以闻。 
现代文：应当疏通辉县泉水，并且酌量导引漳水和沁水，辟开丹水，疏通滏、洹、淇三水的利与害得与失，命令河南巡抚、巡按勘测议定后上报。 
English: It is necessary to dredge the spring water of Huixian County, and guide the irrigation and irrigation water in a reasonable amount, open up the Dan water, and dredge the benefits, harms and losses of the three waters, and order the Henan governor and the patrol to report after agreeing on the survey.

古文：不果行。
现代文：最终没有施行。
English: In the end, it was not implemented.

古文：漳河，出山西长子曰浊漳，乐平曰清漳，俱东经河南临漳县，由畿南真定、河间趋天津入海。
现代文：漳河，出于山西长子的叫做浊漳，出于乐平的叫做清漳，一起往东经过河南临漳县，经由畿南真定、河间直奔天津流入大海。
English: The Min River, called the Min from the eldest son of Shanxi and the Qing Min from Leping, flows eastward through Linyi County in Henan Province, through Jinding in South Gyeongsang Province and Hema, and flows directly into the sea at Tianjin.

古文：其分流至山东馆陶西南五十里，与卫河合。
现代文：它的支流到山束馆陶西南五十里，与卫河汇合。
English: Its tributary flows to Yamazakukan, 50 miles southwest of Tao, and merges with the Wei River.

古文：洪武十七年，河决临漳，敕守臣防护。
现代文：洪武十七年，河水在临漳决堤，敕令守臣防护。
English: In the seventeenth year of Hongwu, the river broke through the dike in Linyi, and the imperial command was issued to protect the vassals.

古文：复谕工部，凡堤塘堰坝可御水患者，皆预修治。
现代文：又训谕工部，凡是堤塘堰坝可以防御水灾的，都要预先修治好。
English: He also instructed the engineering department that all dikes and dams that can prevent floods should be repaired in advance.

古文：有司以黄、沁、漳、卫、沙五河所决堤岸丈尺，具图计工以闻。
现代文：主管官吏把黄、沁、漳、卫、沙五河所溃决堤岸的宽度，都绘成图并计算工程耗费上报朝廷。
English: The officials in charge drew a map of the width of the embankment breached by the Yellow, Min, Yunnan, Wei and Sha Five Rivers and calculated the project cost and reported it to the Imperial Court.

古文：诏以军民兼筑之。
现代文：诏令兵士和百姓共同修筑它。
English: He ordered soldiers and civilians to work together to build it.

古文：永乐七年，决固安县贺家口。
现代文：永乐七年，在固安县贺家口决堤。
English: In the seventh year of Yongle, a dike was broken in Hejiakou, Gu'an County.

古文：九年，决西南张固村河口，与滏阳河合流，下田不可耕。
现代文：九年，在西南张固村河口演决，与滏阳河合流，低处田地不能耕种。
English: In the ninth year, in the southwest of Zhanggu village, the estuary merged with the Poyang River, and the low-lying fields could not be cultivated.

古文：临漳主簿赵永中乞令灾户於漳河旁垦高阜荒地。
现代文：临漳主簿趟永中请求让受灾人家在漳河两旁开垦高山荒地。
English: Linyi's mayor, Wai Yongzhong, asked the affected families to reclaim the alpine wasteland on both sides of the Linyi River.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的请求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：是年筑沁州及大名等府决堤。
现代文：这年，修筑沁州及大名等府演决的堤岸。
English: In this year, the embankment of the prefectural demonstration such as Bozhou and Daming was built.

古文：十三年，漳、滏并溢，漂没磁州田稼。
现代文：十三年，漳河、滏阳河一起泛滥，淹没磁州田中作物。
English: Thirteen years ago, the Min River and the Poyang River flooded at the same time, inundating crops in the magnetic state of Tanaka.

古文：二十二年，溢广宗。
现代文：二十二年，泛滥于广宗。
English: In 1922, it was rampant in Guangzong.

古文：洪熙元年，漳、滏并溢，决临漳三冢村等堤岸二十四处，发军民修筑。
现代文：洪熙元年，漳河、滏阳河一起泛滥，冲决临漳兰冢村等堤岸二十四处，派遣兵士和百姓进行修筑。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, the Min River and the Poyang River flooded at the same time, breaking through 24 embankments in Linyi, Lanyang and other villages, and soldiers and ordinary people were sent to carry out construction.

古文：宣德八年复筑三冢村堤口。
现代文：宣德八年，又修筑三冢村堤口。
English: In the eighth year of Xuande, the dam of Samye Village was built.

古文：正统元年，漳、滏并溢，坏临漳杜村西南堤。
现代文：正统元年，漳水、滏水一起泛滥，毁坏临漳杜村西南堤岸。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, floodwater and floodwater flooded together, destroying the southwest embankment of Linyi Du Village.

古文：三年，漳决广平、顺德。
现代文：三年，漳河在广平、顺德决堤。
English: In three years, the Wei River broke through the dike in Guangping and Shunde.

古文：四年，又决彰德。
现代文：四年，又在彰德决堤。
English: Four years later, the dam was breached again in Changde.

古文：皆命修筑。
现代文：都命令进行修筑。
English: All ordered to be rebuilt.

古文：十三年，御史林廷举言： 漳河自沁州发源，七十馀沟会而为一，至肥乡，堤岩逼隘，水势激湍，故为民患。
现代文：十三年，御史林廷举说： 漳河从沁州发源，七十余沟水汇合而成为一河，到肥乡，堤岸狭窄，水势迅急，所以成为百姓的祸害。
English: In the 13th year of his reign, Emperor Lin Ting said: "From its source in Bozhou, the Li River has merged with more than 70 ditches to become a single river. In Feixiang, the embankment is narrow and the water level is rapid, so it has become a scourge to the people.

古文：元时分支流入卫河，以杀其势。
现代文：元朝时期，分支流入卫河，以减缓其水势。
English: During the Yuan Dynasty, the branch flowed into the Wei River to slow down its water potential.

古文：永乐间堙塞，旧迹尚存，去广平大留村十八里。
现代文：永乐年间堵塞，旧迹尚存，离广平大留村十八里。
English: Blocked during the Yongle era, the old site still exists, eighteen miles from Guangping Dairu Village.

古文：宜发丁夫凿通，置闸，遏水转入之，而疏广肥乡水道。
现代文：应当征调役夫开通，建立闸门，阻止河水回流，然后疏通挖宽肥乡水道。
English: It is necessary to conscript officials to open, build sluice gates, prevent the backflow of river water, and then dredge the excavated Feixiang waterway.

古文：则漳河水减，免居民患，而卫河水增，便漕。 
现代文：那么漳河水就减弱，以避免百姓遭受水灾，而且卫河水增加，便利于漕运。 
English: Then the water of the Wei River will weaken to avoid the people being flooded, and the Wei River water will increase, which is convenient for paddling.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的主张。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：漳水遂通於卫。
现代文：漳水便和卫河沟通。
English: Surabaya and Weihe are in communication.

古文：正德元年浚滏阳河。
现代文：正德元年，疏浚滏阳河。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, the dredging of the Poyang River began.

古文：河旧在任县新店村东北，源出磁州。
现代文：此河原在任县新店村东北，源出磁州。
English: This river originates in the northeast of Xindian Village, Ren County, and has its source in Jiaozhou.

古文：经永年、曲周、平乡，至穆家口，会百泉等河北流。
现代文：经过永年、曲周、平乡，到达穆家口，汇合百泉等河往北流。
English: After passing through Yongnian, Quzhou, and Pingxiang, it reached Mujiakou, and flowed northward with the confluence of hundreds of rivers and springs.

古文：永乐间，漳河决而与合，二水每并为患。
现代文：永乐年间，漳河决堤而又与其汇合，二水常常一起造成灾害。
English: During the Yongle period, the Wei River broke through the dike and merged with it, and the two waters often caused disasters together.

古文：至景泰间，又合漳，冲曲周诸县，沿河之地皆筑堤备之。
现代文：到了景泰年间，又汇合漳河，直冲曲周各县，沿河之地都筑堤防备它。
English: During the Jingtai period, the Minhe River converged again, rushing straight through all the counties of Quzhou, and all the places along the river built dikes to prevent it.

古文：成化间，旧河淤，冲新店西南为新河，合沙、洺等河入穆家口，亦筑堤备之。
现代文：成化年间，旧河道淤塞，冲刷新店西南成为新河，汇合沙、沼等河流入穆家口，也筑堤防备它。
English: During the formation period, the old river was silted up and washed south-west of Xindian to become a new river. The confluence of sand, swamp and other rivers flowed into Mujiakou, and a dike was built to prevent it.

古文：英宗时，漳已通卫。
现代文：英宗时代，连丞已经沟通卫河。
English: In the era of Emperor Yingzong, Liancheng had already communicated with Weihe.

古文：弘治初，益徙入御河，遂弃滏堤不理。
现代文：弘治初年，更改道流入御河，于是，放弃滏阳河堤岸不去治理。
English: In the first year of Hongzhi, the diversion of the road into the Mihe River was changed, so the embankment of the Poyang River was abandoned and not managed.

古文：其后，漳水复入新河，两岸地皆没。
现代文：这以后，漳水又流入新河，两岸土地全被淹没。
English: After that, the floodwater flowed into the Xinhe River, and the land on both sides of the river was completely flooded.

古文：任县民高旸等以为言，下巡抚官勘奏，言： 穆家口乃众河之委，当从此先，而并浚新旧河，令分流。
现代文：任县百姓高旸等把情况上报，下交巡抚官吏勘测上奏，说： 穆家口是各条河流的聚合之处，应当从这里开始，而一起疏通新旧河道，使其分流。
English: The people of Ren County, Gao Wei and others reported the situation and submitted it to the patrol officers for investigation and report, saying: Mujiakou is the place where all rivers converge. It is necessary to start from here and dredge the old and new river channels together to divert them.

古文：漳、滏缺堤，以渐而筑。 
现代文：漳河、滏阳河的残缺堤岸依次修筑。 
English: The remaining embankments of the Min River and the Poyang River will be built one after another.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的主张。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：自此漳、滏汇流，而入卫之道渐堙矣。
现代文：从此以后，漳河、滏阳河合流，然而，流入卫河的河道渐渐堵塞了。
English: Since then, the Min River and the Poyang River have merged. However, the channel into the Wei River has gradually been blocked.

古文：万历二十八年，给事中王德完言： 漳河决小屯，东经魏县、元城，抵馆陶入卫，为一变，其害小。
现代文：万历二十八年，给事中王德完说： 漳河在小屯决堤，往东经过魏县、元城，到达馆陶流入卫河，这是一变，其灾害小。
English: In the 28th year of Wanli, Wang Deguan said in the middle of the matter: The Wei River broke through the dike in Xiaotun, went east through Wei County and Yuancheng, and reached Juntao and flowed into Wei River. This is a change, and its disaster is small.

古文：决高家口，析二流於临漳之南北，俱至成安东吕彪河合流，经广平、肥乡、永年，至曲周入滏水，同流至青县口方入漕河，为再变，其害大。
现代文：在高家口决堤，分为二支流于临漳的南北，都到成安束吕彪河合流，经过广平、肥乡、永年，到达曲周流入滏水，一起流到青县口纔流入漕河，这是第二次变化，其灾害大。
English: At Gaojiakou, the dike was broken, and it was divided into two tributaries in the north and south of Linyi, and they all flowed to the confluence of the Lviao River in Cheng'an, and after passing through Guangping, Feixiang and Yongnian, they reached the inflow of Quzhou into Surabaya, and together flowed to the inflow of Cao River in the mouth of Qingxian County. This is the second change, and its disaster is great.

古文：滏水不胜漳，而今纳漳，则狭小不能束巨浪，病溢而患在民。
现代文：滏水不能胜过漳水，然而现在容纳漳水，则狭小不能约束巨浪，不利于外流而对百姓造成灾害。
English: Surabaya cannot outperform Surabaya. However, now that Surabaya is accommodated, the narrowness cannot restrain the huge waves, which is not conducive to outflow and causes disasters to the people.

古文：卫水昔仰漳，而今舍漳，则细缓不能卷沙泥，病涸而患在运。
现代文：卫水从前依赖漳河，而现在却舍弃漳河，那么，细小缓慢的水流就不能卷走泥沙，因为干涸而对运道造成灾害。
English: As the Wei Shui once depended on the Wei River, but now abandons the Wei River, the small and slow water flow cannot sweep away the sediment, and it will cause disasters to the transportation channel because it is dry.

古文：塞高家河口，导入小屯河，费少利多，为上策。
现代文：堵塞高家河口，导引流入小屯河，耗费少而获利多，这是上策。
English: It is the best strategy to block the estuary of Gaojia River and guide it to flow into Xiaotun River, with less cost and more profit.

古文：仍回龙镇至小滩入卫，费钜害少，为中策。
现代文：仍然从回龙镇到小滩流入卫河，耗费大而受害少，这是中策。
English: It still flows into Weihe from Hulong Town to Xiaotan, with high consumption and little damage. This is the middle way.

古文：筑吕彪河口，固堤漳水，运道不资利，地方不罹害，为下策。 
现代文：修筑昌彪河口，加固漳水堤岸，运道不给与便利，本地不遭受灾害，这是下策。 
English: It is the next step to build the Changbiao estuary and strengthen the Bohai River embankment, so that the transportation channel will not be convenient and the local area will not suffer from disasters.

古文：命河漕督臣集议行之。
现代文：命令河漕督臣集中商议施行治理。
English: He ordered his vassals to discuss the implementation of governance.

古文：直隶巡按佴祺亦请引漳河。
现代文：直隶巡按佴祺也请求导引漳河。
English: The Zhili patrol boat also requested to guide the raft.

古文：并下督臣，急引漳会卫，以图永济。
现代文：一起下交督臣，急速导引漳河汇合卫河，以谋求永远流通。
English: At the same time, the governor and the minister were sent down to rapidly guide the confluence of the Wei River and the Wei River, in order to seek eternal circulation.

古文：不果行。
现代文：最终没有施行。
English: In the end, it was not implemented.

古文：沁河，出山西沁源县绵山东谷。
现代文：沁河，出于山西沁源县绵山东谷。
English: Luohe, from the East Valley of Mianshan, Liyuan County, Shanxi Province.

古文：穿太行山，东南流三十里入河南境。
现代文：穿遇太行山，往东南流三十里进入河南境内。
English: It crosses the Taihang Mountains and flows southeast for 30 miles into Henan Province.

古文：饶河内县东北，又东南至武陟县，与黄河会而东注，达徐州以济漕。
现代文：绕过河内县东北，又往东南流到武陟县，与黄河汇合然后向东流注，到达徐州以补济漕运。
English: It bypassed the northeast of Hanoi County and flowed southeast to Wuxi County, where it merged with the Yellow River and then flowed eastward to Xuzhou to supplement the transportation.

古文：其支流自武陟红荆口，经卫辉入卫河。
现代文：其支流从武陟红剂口，经过卫辉流入卫河。
English: Its tributary flows from the mouth of Wuchang Hongye through Weihui into Weihe.

古文：元郭守敬言： 沁馀水引至武陟，北流合御河灌田。 
现代文：元郭守敬说： 将沁河余水导引到武陟，往北流汇合御河灌溉田地。 
English: Yuan Guo Shoujing said: Guide the remaining water of the Wei River to Wuyi, and let it flow north to meet the irrigation fields of the Mihe River.

古文：此沁入卫之故迹也。
现代文：这是沁水流入卫河的原来的行迹。
English: This is the original course of the Surabaya water flowing into the Wei River.

古文：明初，黄河自荥泽趋陈、颍，径入於淮，不与沁合。
现代文：明朝初年，黄河从荣泽直奔陈水、颖水，径直流入淮河，不与沁水汇合。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the Yellow River ran straight from Rongze to Chenshui and Yingshui, and flowed straight into the Huai River, without merging with the Bohai River.

古文：乃凿渠引之，令河仍入沁。
现代文：于是，开凿渠道导引，使黄河仍然流入沁水。
English: As a result, the Yellow River still flows into Surabaya after the channel was dug and guided.

古文：久之，沁水尽入黄河，而入卫之故道堙矣。
现代文：遇了很久，沁水完全流入黄河，因此，流入卫河的故道堵塞了。
English: It took a long time for the floodwaters to completely flow into the Yellow River. As a result, the old path into the Wei River was blocked.

古文：武陟者，沁、黄交会处也。
现代文：武陟，是沁水、黄水汇合之处。
English: Wuxi is the confluence of the Bohai River and the Yellow River.

古文：永乐间，再决再筑。
现代文：永乐年间，两次溃决两次修筑。
English: During the Yongle era, it was destroyed twice and rebuilt twice.

古文：宣德九年，沁水决马曲湾，经获嘉至新乡，水深成河，城北又汇为泽。
现代文：宣德九年，沁水在马曲湾决堤，经过获嘉到新乡，水深成河，到城北又汇合成为湖泽。
English: In the ninth year of the Xuande era, the Surabaya broke through the dike in Maqu Bay. After passing through Hujia to Xinxiang, the water deepened into a river, and to the north of the city it merged into a lake.

古文：筑堤以防，犹不能遏。
现代文：筑堤来防御，还不能阻止。
English: Build a wall to protect, but you can't stop it.

古文：新乡知县许宣请坚筑决口，俾由故道。
现代文：新乡知县许宣请求把决口修筑坚固，使其经由故道。
English: Xu Xuan of Xinxiang Zhixian requested that the culvert be built strong so that it could pass through the old road.

古文：遣官相度，从之。
现代文：派遣官吏观察测量，依从他的主张。
English: He sent officials to observe the survey and follow his advice.

古文：沁水稍定，而其支流复入於卫。
现代文：沁水稍微安定，但它的支流又流入卫河。
English: Surabaya's water is somewhat stable, but its tributaries flow back into the Wei River.

古文：正统三、四年间，武陟沁堤复再决再筑。
现代文：正统三、四年间，武陟沁水堤岸又两次溃决两次修筑。
English: In the past three or four years, the Wuhou water embankment has been breached twice and rebuilt twice.

古文：十三年，黄河决荥泽，背沁而去。
现代文：十三年，黄河在荣泽决堤，背弃沁水而离去。
English: Thirteen years ago, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Rongze, turning its back on Surabaya and leaving.

古文：乃从武陟东宝家湾开渠三十里，引河入沁，以达淮。
现代文：于是，从武陟束宝家湾开通渠道三十里，导引黄河流入沁水，使到达淮河。
English: As a result, a thirty-mile channel was opened from Bukit Sok Bawang to guide the Yellow River into Surabaya, allowing it to reach the Huai River.

古文：自后，沁、河益大合，而沁之入卫者渐淤。
现代文：从此以后，沁水、黄河逐渐大量汇合，然而，沁水流入卫河的河道渐渐淤塞。
English: Since then, the Surabaya River and the Yellow River have gradually merged in large quantities. However, the channel through which the Surabaya River flows into the Wei River has gradually become silted up.

古文：景泰三年，佥事刘清言： 自沁决马曲湾入卫，沁、黄、卫三水相通，转输颇利。
现代文：景泰三年，愈事刘清说： 自从沁水在马曲湾决堤流入卫河，沁、黄、卫三水相通，转运非常便利。
English: After three years of Jingtai, Liu Qing said: Since the Surabaya water broke through the dike in Maqu Bay and flowed into the Wei River, the three waters of the Surabaya, Huanglong and Wei rivers are connected, and the transfer is very convenient.

古文：今决口已塞，卫河胶浅。
现代文：现在，决口已经被堵塞，卫河搁浅。
English: Now, the breach has been blocked and the Wei River has run aground.

古文：运舟悉从黄河，尝遇险阻。
现代文：运输船只全部经甴黄河，经常遭遇险阻。
English: All transport vessels pass through the Yangtze River, often encountering obstacles.

古文：宜遣官浚沁资卫，军民运船视远近之便而转输之。 
现代文：应当派遣官吏疏通沁水供给卫河，军队和百姓的运输船只比照远近的便利而运送粮食。 
English: Officials should be dispatched to dredge salty water to supply Weihe, and military and civilian transport ships should transport grain according to the convenience of far and near.

古文：诏下巡抚集议。
现代文：诏令下到巡抚会集官员商议。
English: An imperial edict was issued to summon officials of the Board of Supervisors for deliberation.

古文：明年，清复言： 东南漕舟，水浅弗能进。
现代文：第二年，刘清又说： 往东南的漕运船只，水浅不能行进。
English: In the second year, Liu Qing also said: Rowing vessels traveling to the southeast cannot travel in shallow water.

古文：请自荥泽入沁河，浚冈头百二十里以通卫河。
现代文：请求从荣泽进入沁河，疏浚冈头一百二十里使沟通卫河。
English: The request is to dredge the first 120 miles of the dike from Rongze to Weihe.

古文：且张秋之决，由沁合黄，势遂奔急。
现代文：张秋的溃决，是由于沁水汇合黄水，水势就变得迅急。
English: The collapse of Zhangqiu is due to the confluence of floodwater and yellow water, and the water potential becomes rapid.

古文：若引沁入卫，则张秋无患。 
现代文：假若导引沁水流入卫河，那么，张秋就没有灾患了。 
English: If the diversion of salty water into the Wei River is successful, then there will be no disaster in Zhangqiu.

古文：行人王晏亦言： 开冈头置闸，分沁水，使南入黄，北达卫。
现代文：行人王晏也说： 开通冈头建立闸门，分流沁水，使往南流入黄河，往北到达卫河。
English: Pedestrian Wang Yao also said: Open the head of the hill, build a gate, and divert the water so that it flows south into the Yellow River and north to the Wei River.

古文：遇涨则闭闸，漕可永无患。 
现代文：遇到水涨就关闭闸门，漕河可以永久无灾害。 
English: In the event of rising water, the gate will be closed, and the Caohe River can be permanently free of disasters.

古文：并下督漕都御史王竑等核实以闻。
现代文：一起下交督漕都御史王兹等核实后上报。
English: The report will be submitted after verification by Wang Zi, the city's transportation superintendent, and others.

古文：明年，给事中何升言： 沁河有漏港已成河。
现代文：第二年，给事中何升说： 沁河有干涸的港汊已成为河道。
English: In the second year, He Sheng said in a speech, "The estuary of the Wei River has dried up, and the estuary has become a river.

古文：临清屯聚胶浅之舟，宜使从此入黄，度二旬可达淮。 
现代文：临清集结搁浅的船只，应当使其从这里进入黄河，估计二十天就可以到达淮安。 
English: Linqing should assemble the stranded ships and let them enter the Yellow River from here. It is estimated that they can reach Huai'an in 20 days.

古文：诏竑及都御史徐有贞阅之。
现代文：诏令王弦及都御史徐有贞视察沁河支流。
English: He ordered Wang Zhen and the Grand Duke of Shishi Xu Youzhen to inspect the tributaries of the Fenhe River.

古文：既而罢引沁河议。
现代文：不久，罢除导引沁河的主张。
English: Soon, the idea of guiding the Minhe River was dismissed.

古文：初，王晏请漕沁，有司多言弗利。
现代文：原先，王晏请求用沁水漕运，主管官吏多说不利。
English: Originally, Wang Yao requested to use the ditch water tank for transportation, but the officials in charge said it was unfavorable.

古文：晏固争。
现代文：王晏坚持争辩。
English: Wang Yao persisted in arguing.

古文：吏部尚书王直请遣官行河，命侍郎赵荣同晏往。
现代文：吏部尚书王直请求派官吏巡行河道，命令侍郎趟荣协同王晏前往。
English: Wang Zhi, the secretary of the General Staff, requested that officials be sent to patrol the river, and ordered the chamberlain, Watarong, to go with Wang Yao.

古文：荣亦言不利，议乃寝。
现代文：赵荣也说不利，此主张纔停止。
English: Zhao Rong also said that it was unfavorable, and this proposal should be stopped.

古文：天顺八年，都察院都事金景辉复请浚陈桥集古河，分引沁水，北通长垣、曹州、钜野，以达漕河。
现代文：天顺八年，都察院都事金景辉又请求疏通陈桥集古河，分流导引沁水，往北通到长垣、曹州、巨野，以到达漕河。
English: In the eighth year of Tianshun, Jin Jinghui, the prefectural governor of the Duza Academy, also requested that the Chenqiao set of ancient rivers be dredged, and the diversion of water be guided to the north to Nagagaki, Caozhou, and Kono to reach the Caohe River.

古文：诏按实以闻，未能行也。
现代文：诏令按照实情呈报使朝廷知道，最终没能施行。
English: The imperial edict was reported in accordance with the facts and made known to the imperial court, but ultimately it could not be implemented.

古文：弘治二年夏，黄河决埽头五处，入沁河。
现代文：弘治二年夏，黄河溃决堤岸五处，流入沁河。
English: In the summer of the second year of Hongzhi, the Yellow River broke through the embankment in five places and flowed into the Fen River.

古文：其冬，又决祥符翟家口，合沁河，出丁家道口。
现代文：这年冬天，又在祥符翟家口决堤，汇合沁河，流到丁家道口。
English: This winter, it broke through the dike at the Xiangfu Dajiakou, joined the Dajiahe River, and flowed to the Dijia Dajiakou.

古文：十一年，员外郎谢缉以黄河南决，恐牵沁水南流，徐、吕二洪必涸。
现代文：十一年，员外郎谢缉因为黄河往南溃决，担心会牵制沁水往南流，徐、旦二洪必然干涸。
English: In the eleventh year, because the Yellow River had broken through to the south, member Wei Lang Xie Ji was worried that it would hold back the southward flow of Surabaya's water, and the rivers of Xu and Dang Erhong would inevitably dry up.

古文：请遏黄河，堤沁水，使俱入徐州。
现代文：请遏止黄河，在沁水筑堤，使其一起流入徐州。
English: Please stop the Yellow River and build a dike at Surabaya to let it flow into Xuzhou.

古文：方下所司勘议，明年漕运总兵官郭鋐上副使张鼐《引沁河议》，请於武陟木栾店凿渠抵荆隆口，分沁水入贾鲁河，由丁家道口以下徐、淮。
现代文：正下发主管部门勘测商议，第二年，漕运总兵官郭铉进呈副使张鼐《引沁河议》一书，请求在武陟木乐店开通沟渠到荆隆口，分流沁水流入贾鲁河，经由丁家道口以下徐、淮。
English: In the following year, the general officer of rowing transport, Guo Yujin, submitted to the vice-envoy, Zhang Jian, a document entitled "Proposal for diverting the Yangtze River," requesting that a trench be opened at Wuyi Mule Shop to Jinglongkou, diverting the Yangtze River water into the Jalu River, and passing through Dingjia intersection to Xu and Huai.

古文：倘河或南徙，即引沁水入渠，以济二洪之运。
现代文：倘若黄河或者改道向南，就导引沁水流入沟渠，来补济徐、旦二洪的运道。
English: If the Yellow River changes its course to the south, it will guide the floodwater into the ditch to supplement the transport path of Jixu and Dan Erhong.

古文：帝即令鼐理之。
现代文：皇帝便命令张鼐治理其河。
English: The emperor then ordered Zhang Ye to govern the river.

古文：而曹县知县邹鲁又驳鼐议，谓引沁必塞沁入河之口，沁水无归，必漫田庐。
现代文：然而，曹县知县邹鲁又驳斥张鼐的主张，说导引沁水必然堵塞沁水流入黄河的河口，乎，水不能返归河道，必然漫流于田地和民房。
English: However, Cao Xian Zhixian Jilu also refuted Zhang Xuan's claim, saying that the diversion of salty water would inevitably block the estuary of salty water flowing into the Yellow River, and that the water could not return to the river, and would inevitably flow through fields and houses.

古文：若俟下流既通而始塞之，水势捣虚，千里不折，其患更大，甚於黄陵。
现代文：假若等到下游已经畅通然后纔堵塞它，水势冲击空虚之处，千里不回，其灾害更大，超过黄陵。
English: If we wait until the downstream has been unblocked and then dam it, the water will hit the empty place, and it will not return for thousands of miles, and the disaster will be greater than Huangling.

古文：且起木栾店至飞云桥，地以千里计，用夫百万，积功十年，未能必其成也。
现代文：并且起龄木乐店到达飞云桥，占地以千里计算，需用役夫上百万，累积工夫十年，不能确保它的成功。
English: Moreover, for a wooden music store to reach Feiyun Bridge, it needs millions of man-hours and ten years of accumulated efforts, which cannot ensure its success.

古文：兖州知府龚弘主其说，因上言： 鼐见河势南行，故建此议。
现代文：兖州知府龚弘支持他的说法，于是上奏说： 张鼐看见黄河水势往南流行，所以提出此主张。
English: Zhang Hong, the governor of Zhangzhou, supported his assertion, so the report said: Zhang Hong saw that the Yellow River was flowing south, so he put forward this proposal.

古文：但今秋水逆流东北，亟宜浚筑。 
现代文：但是，今年秋天洪水逆流于东北，应当赶快疏通修筑。 
English: However, this autumn's floods are flowing in the opposite direction in the northeast, and it is necessary to clear the way for construction as soon as possible.

古文：乃从河臣抚臣议，修丁家口上下堤岸，而鼐议卒罢。
现代文：于是，依从河臣抚臣的主张，修筑丁家口上下堤岸，而张鼐的主张最终被停止。
English: As a result, the embankments at the upper and lower ends of Dingjiakou were built in accordance with the proposal of the river minister Fuxin, while the proposal of Zhang Ye was eventually stopped.

古文：至万历十五年，沁水决武陟东岸莲花池、金屹〈山当〉，新乡、获嘉尽淹没。
现代文：到万历十五年，沁水在武陟束岸莲花池、金屹当决堤，新乡、获嘉全被淹没。
English: In the 15th year of the Wanli era, the floodwaters broke through the levees at the Lotus Pond and Jinyi Dang on the Bund of Wuling, and flooded Xinxiang and Hujiaquan.

古文：廷议筑堤障之。
现代文：朝廷议论筑堤来阻塞它。
English: The court discussed building a dike to block it.

古文：都御史杨一魁言： 黄河从沁入卫，此故道也。
现代文：都御史杨一魁说： 黄河从沁水流入卫河，这是故道。
English: Metropolitan Shi Yang Yikai said: The Yellow River flows from Surabaya into Weihe, this is the old way.

古文：自河徙，而沁与俱南，卫水每涸。
现代文：自从黄河改道，而沁水与其一起往南，卫水时常干涸。
English: Since the Yellow River was rerouted and Surabaya's water flowed south with it, the water supply has often dried up.

古文：宜引沁入卫，不使助河为虐。 
现代文：应该导引沁水流入卫河，不使它帮助黄河造成灾害。 
English: It is necessary to guide the flow of salty water into the Wei River and prevent it from helping the Yellow River to cause disasters.

古文：部覆言： 沁入黄，卫入漕，其来已久。
现代文：工部回复说： 沁水流入黄河，卫水流入漕河，它的由来已经很久速。
English: The Ministry of Works replied: The source of the water that flows into the Yellow River and the water that flows into the Cao River has a long history.

古文：顷沁水决木栾莲花口而东，一魁因建此议。
现代文：最近，沁水在木乐莲花口以柬决堤，杨一魁因此提出这种主张。
English: Recently, Surabaya broke the dike at the mouth of the Mule Lotus with a camel, so Yang Yikui put forward this proposal.

古文：而科臣常居敬往勘，言： 卫辉府治卑於河，恐有冲激。
现代文：然而，科臣常居敬前去勘测，说： 卫辉府所在地低于黄河，恐怕有被冲击之灾。
English: However, Kosen Tsuneju respectfully went to investigate and said: Weihui Prefecture is located below the Yellow River, I am afraid there will be a disaster caused by the impact.

古文：且沁水多沙，入漕反为患，不如坚筑决口，广辟河身 。 
现代文：并且沁水多有泥沙，流入漕河反而造成灾害，不如坚实地筑好决口，辟宽河床。  
English: Moreover, there is a lot of mud and sand in the flood water, but the inflow into the Caohe River has caused disasters. It is better to build a solid breach and widen the riverbed.

古文：乃罢其议。
现代文：于是停止其主张。
English: It therefore withdrew its claim.

古文：三十三年，茶陵知州范守己复言： 嘉靖六年，河决丰、沛。
现代文：万历三十三年，茶陵知州范守己又说： 嘉靖六年，黄河在丰县、沛县决堤。
English: In the 33rd year of the lunar calendar, Chaling Chizhou Fan Shouji also said: In the sixth year of Jiajing, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Feng County and Pei County.

古文：胡世宁言： 沁水自红荆口分流入卫，近年始塞。
现代文：胡世宁说： 沁水从红剂口分流流入卫河，近年开始堵塞。
English: Hu Shining said: The diversion of salty water from the mouth of the Red River into the Wei River has become clogged in recent years.

古文：宜择武陟、阳武地开一河，北达卫水，以备徐、沛之塞。 
现代文：应当选择武陟、阳武之地开辟一河，往北到达卫水，以防备徐水、沛水的堵塞。
English: It is necessary to choose the place of Wuyi and Yangwu to open up a river and go north to Wei Shui to prevent the blockage of Xu Shui and Pei Shui.

古文：会盛应期主开新渠，议遂不行。
现代文：适逢盛应期主张开通新渠，这主张最终没有施行。
English: At the height of the boom, the opening of a new canal was advocated, but this proposal was ultimately not implemented.

古文：近者十年前，河沙淤塞沁口，沁水不得入河，自木栾店东决岸，奔流入卫，则世宁红荆口之说信矣。
现代文：将近十年以前，河道泥沙淤塞沁口，沁水不能流入黄河，自从木乐店向东溃决堤岸，奔流入卫河，则胡世宁红剂口的说法确实可行。
English: Nearly ten years ago, the river channel was silted up with silt, and silted water could not flow into the Yellow River. Since the Mule Shop broke through the embankment to the east and ran into the Wei River, the argument of Hu Shining's red dye mouth is indeed feasible.

古文：彼时守土诸臣塞其决口，筑以坚堤，仍导沁水入河。
现代文：那时，守土众臣堵塞其决口，修筑坚固的堤防，仍然导引沁水流入黄河。
English: At that time, the guardians of the land blocked its outlet, built a solid dike, and still guided the floodwaters into the Yellow River.

古文：而堤外河形直抵卫浒，至今存也。
现代文：而堤外河形直达卫河边，到现在还存在。
English: However, the river outside the embankment reaches right up to the edge of the Wei River and still exists today.

古文：请建石闸於堤，分引一支，由所决河道东流入卫。
现代文：请求建立石闸门于堤岸，分流导引一支河，从所决河道往东流入卫河。
English: It was requested that a stone gate be built on the embankment to divert the flow of a river, which would then flow east into the Wei River.

古文：漕舟自邳溯河而上，因沁入卫，东达临清，则会通河可废。 
现代文：漕运船只从邳州逆黄河而上，通过沁水进入卫河，往东到达临清，那么会通河就可以废弃。 
English: Rowing boats travel up the Yellow River from Zhangzhou, enter Weihe River through Zhangshui, and reach Linqing in the east. Then, they can be abandoned.

古文：帝命总河及抚、按勘议，不行。
现代文：皇帝命令总河及巡抚、巡按勘测商议，没有施行。
English: The emperor ordered the head of the river and the governor and the patrol to discuss the survey, but it was not implemented.

古文：滹沱河，出山西繁峙泰戏山。
现代文：滹沱河，出于山西繁峙泰戏山。
English: Luohe, out of Shanxi's bustling Mount Taixing.

古文：循太行，掠晋、冀，逶迤而东，至武邑合漳。
现代文：顺着太行山，掠遇晋、冀，弯曲连绵而向东，到达武邑汇合漳水。
English: Along the Taihang Mountains, raiding Jin and Hebei, bending continuously to the east, reaching Wuyi and merging with Surabaya.

古文：东北至青县岔河口入卫，下直沽。
现代文：向东北到达青县岔河口流入卫河，往下流到直沽。
English: To the northeast, it flows into the Wei River at the mouth of the Wei River in Qing County and flows down to Zhouzhuang.

古文：或云九河中所称徒骇是也。
现代文：有人说是九河中所称的徒骇就是此河。
English: Some people say that this is the river that is known as the most dangerous of the nine rivers.

古文：明初，故道由藁城、晋州抵宁晋入卫，其后迁徙不一。
现代文：明朝初年，故道从叶城、晋州到宁晋流入卫河，这以后改道不定。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the old road from Ye Cheng and Jinzhou to Ningjin flowed into Weihe. After that, the change of the road was uncertain.

古文：河身不甚深，而水势洪大。
现代文：河床不很深，而水势强大。
English: The riverbed is not very deep, but the current is strong.

古文：左右旁近地大率平漫，夏秋雨潦，挟众流而溃，往往成巨浸。
现代文：左右两岸附近之地大都平坦，夏秋雨水过多而成滂灾，挟持众多水流而冲破堤防，往往成为巨大的湖泽。
English: Most of the land near the left and right banks is flat. Excessive rain in summer and autumn causes floods, holding back many water currents and breaking through the dike, often becoming a huge lake.

古文：水落，则因其浅淤以为功。
现代文：洪水退去，则因为其河道浅窄淤塞，为此兴起工程。
English: When the floodwaters receded, the river became shallow and narrow and silted up, leading to the construction of the project.

古文：修堤浚流，随时补救，不能大治也。
现代文：修筑堤防疏通水流，随时补救，不能大规模治理。
English: The construction of dykes and dams dredges up the water flow, which can be remedied at any time, but cannot be managed on a large scale.

古文：洪武间一浚。
现代文：洪武年间第一次疏通。
English: It was the first dredging during the Hongwu era.

古文：建文、永乐间，修武强、真定决岸者三。
现代文：建文、永乐年间，修筑武强、真定溃决堤岸三处。
English: In the years of Jianwen and Yongle, Wuqiang and Zhending built three embankments.

古文：至洪熙元年夏，霪雨，河水大涨，晋、定、深三州，藁城、无极、饶阳、新乐、宁晋五县，低田尽没，而滹沱遂久淤矣。
现代文：到洪熙元年夏天，久雨，河水大肆泛滥，置、定、深三州，蓁城、无极、饶阳、新乐、宁晋五县，低处的田地全被淹没，而滹沱河就长时间被淤塞了。
English: By the summer of the first year of Hongxi, the long rain caused the river to flood wildly, and the low-lying fields in the three prefectures of Jie, Ding and Shen, and the five counties of Lucheng, Wuji, Raoyang, Xinle and Ningjin, were all flooded, and the Li River was blocked for a long time.

古文：宣德六年，山水复暴泛，冲坏堤岸，发军民浚之。
现代文：宣德六年，山中之水又突然泛滥，冲壤堤岸，派遣军队和百姓疏通。
English: Six years after the proclamation of the People's Republic of China, the water in the mountains suddenly flooded again, the embankment was breached, and the army was dispatched to clear the way for the people.

古文：正统元年溢献县，决大郭鼋窝口堤。
现代文：正统元年，河水泛滥于献县，冲破大郭鼌窝口堤。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, the river flooded in Xian County, breaking through the dike at the mouth of the Great Wall.

古文：四年溢饶阳，决丑女堤及献县郭家口堤，淹深州田百馀里，皆命有司修筑。
现代文：四年，泛滥于饶阳，冲破丑女堤及献县郭家口堤，淹没深州田地一百多里，全都命令主管部门修筑。
English: In four years, flooding in Raoyang, breaking through the Ugly Woman's Levee and the Guojiakou Levee in Xian County, and flooding more than a hundred miles of fields in Shenzhou, all of which were ordered to be built by the competent departments.

古文：十一年复疏晋州故道。
现代文：十一年，又疏通晋州故道。
English: Eleven years later, the old road in Jinzhou was cleared.

古文：成化七年，巡抚都御史杨璇言： 霸州、固安、东安、大城、香河、宝坻、新安、任丘、河间、肃宁、饶阳诸州县屡被水患，由地势平衍，水易潴积。
现代文：成化七年，巡抚都御史杨璇说： 霸州、固安、柬安、大城、香河、宝坻、新安、任丘、河间、肃宁、饶阳各州县多次遭受水灾，由于地势平坦宽广，河水容易聚积。
English: In the seventh year of Chenghua, the governor of the capital, Shi Yangjun, said: Bozhou, Gu'an, Cam'an, Dacheng, Xianghe, Baodi, Xin'an, Renqiu, Hema, Suning, and Raoyang counties have been flooded many times. Due to the flat and wide terrain, the river water is easy to accumulate.

古文：而唐、滹沱、白沟三河上源堤岸率皆低薄，遇雨辄溃。
现代文：而且，唐、滹沱、白沟三河上源堤岸全都低矮单薄，遇到大雨就会演决。
English: Moreover, the upper source embankments of the Tang, Min and Baigou rivers are all low and thin, and will collapse in the event of heavy rain.

古文：官吏东西决放，以邻为壑。
现代文：官吏往东西两边排放洪水，把邻境当作沟坑。
English: Officials released floodwaters to the east and west, treating the neighborhood as a trench.

古文：宜求故迹，随宜浚之。 
现代文：应当寻求原来的形迹，根据情况疏通它。 
English: It is necessary to search for the original trace and dredge it according to the situation.

古文：帝即命璇董其事，水患稍宁。至十八年，卫、漳、滹沱并溢，溃漕河岸，自清平抵天津决口八十六。
现代文：皇帝即刻命令杨璇督办这件事情，水灾稍微宁静到了十八年，卫河、漳河、滹沱河一起泛滥，溃决漕河堤岸，从清平到天津决口八十六处。
English: The emperor immediately ordered Yang Hui to supervise the matter. The flood calmed down a little in the 18th year. The Wei River, the Fen River, and the Fen River flooded together, breaking the embankment of the Fen River in 86 places from Qingping to Tianjin.

古文：因循者久之。
现代文：拖延了很久。
English: There was a long delay.

古文：弘治二年修真定县白马口及近城堤三千九百馀丈。
现代文：弘治二年，修筑真定县白马口和近城堤岸三干九百多丈。
English: In the second year of the Hongzhi era, the embankments at Baimakou and near the city in Jinding County were built to a height of more than 900 meters.

古文：五年又筑护城堤二道。
现代文：五年，又修筑护城堤二条。
English: In five years, two more mounds were built to protect the city.

古文：后复比年大水，真定城内外俱浸。
现代文：后来，又连年发生大水灾，真定城内外全都泡在水里。
English: Later, large floods occurred year after year, so that all the people in and around the city of Jindo were completely submerged in water.

古文：改挑新河，水患始息。
现代文：改挖新河后，水灾纔停止。
English: After the new river was re-excavated, the flooding stopped.

古文：嘉靖元年筑束鹿城西决口，修晋州紫城口堤。
现代文：嘉靖元年，修筑束鹿城西决口，修筑晋州紫城口堤岸。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the west breakwater of Shu Lucheng was built, and the embankment of the Zicheng mouth of Jinzhou was built.

古文：未几，复连岁被水。
现代文：不久，又连年遭受水害。
English: Soon after, it was flooded for the second year in a row.

古文：十年冬，巡按御史傅汉臣言： 滹沱流经大名，故所筑二堤冲败，宜修复如旧。 
现代文：十年冬，巡按御史傅汉臣说： 滹沱流经大名，所以，所修筑的两处堤岸被冲毁，应当修复如原先那样。 
English: In the winter of the tenth year, the inspector-general of history, Fu Hanchen, said: "The river flows through Daimyo, so the two embankments that were built were washed away and should be repaired as they were before.

古文：乃命抚、按官会议。
现代文：于是命令巡抚、巡按官吏汇合商议。
English: He then ordered the governor and the officials in charge of the patrol to meet and discuss the matter.

古文：其明年，敕太仆卿何栋往治之，栋言： 河发浑源州，会诸山之水，东趋真定，由晋州紫城口之南入宁晋泊，会卫河入海，此故道也。
现代文：第二午，敕令太仆卿何栋前去治理，何栋说： 河流发源于浑源州，汇合众山之水，往东直奔真定，经由晋州紫城口之南流入宁晋泊，汇合卫河流入大海，这是原先的河道。
English: In the afternoon of the second day, the Emperor ordered the Great Footman Ho Dong to go and administer the affairs. Ho Dong said, "The river originates in Hunyuan Prefecture, collects the water from the United States Mountains, runs eastward straight to Zhending, flows into Ningjin Port through the south of the entrance to the Purple City of Jinzhou, and merges with the Wei River into the sea. This is the original river course.

古文：晋州西高南下，因冲紫城东溢，而束鹿、深州诸处遂为巨浸。
现代文：晋州西边高南边低，因而直冲紫城向东泛滥，所以，束鹿、深州各处完全成为巨大的湖泽。
English: The west side of Jinzhou is high and the south side is low, so it floods directly to the east of Zicheng. Therefore, all parts of Sokcho and Shenzhou have completely become huge lakes.

古文：今宜起藁城张村至晋州故堤，筑十八里，高三丈，广十之，植椿榆诸树。
现代文：现在，应当从藁城张村到晋州旧堤，修筑十八里，高三丈，宽十分之一，种植椿榆等各种树木。
English: Now, it is necessary to build an 18-mile-long, three-story-high, one-tenth-wide embankment from Zhangcun in Lucheng to the old embankment in Jinzhou, and plant all kinds of trees such as camellias.

古文：乃浚河身三十馀里，导之南行，使归故道，则顺天、真、保诸郡水患俱平矣。 
现代文：于是疏浚河床三十余里，导引它往南流行，使其回到原先的河道，那么，顺天、真、保各郡水灾就会一起平息了。 
English: As a result, the riverbed was dredged for more than 30 miles, guiding it to flow southward and returning it to the original river channel. Then, the floods in Shun Tian, Zhen and Bao counties would have subsided together.

古文：又用郎中徐元祉言，於真定浚滹沱河以保城池，又导束鹿、武强、河间、献县诸水，循滹沱以出。
现代文：又采用郎中徐元祉的计策，在真定疏浚滹沱河来保护城池，又导引束鹿、武强、河问、献县各水，顺着滹沱河而流出。
English: He also used the strategy of his son-in-law, Xu Yuan Zhi, to dredge the Qianhe River in Zhending to protect the city pond, and guided the water of Shu Deer, Wu Qiang, Qianhe and Xian County to flow out along the Qianhe River.

古文：皆从之。
现代文：都依从他的主张。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：自后数十年，水颇戢，无大害。
现代文：从此以后数十年，河水略微收敛，没有大的灾害。
English: In the decades since then, the river has receded slightly and there have been no major disasters.

古文：万历九年，给事中顾问言： 臣令任丘，见滹沱水涨，漂没民田不可胜纪。
现代文：万历九年，给事中顾问说： 臣作任丘令，看见滹沱河水泛滥，淹没民田不可胜计。
English: In the ninth year of Wanli, he said to the consultant in the matter: "As a vassal, I was appointed as the commander of the hill, and when I saw the flooding of the Wei River, I could not help but flood the people's fields.

古文：请自饶阳、河间以下水占之地，悉捐为河，而募夫深浚河身，坚筑堤岸，以图永久。 
现代文：请求从饶阳、河间以下被水侵占之地，全部舍弃作为河道，并且征召役夫深挖河床，修筑坚固的堤岸，来谋取永久之利。 
English: He requested that all the land occupied by water from Raoyang to Hema and below be abandoned as a river channel, and conscripted laborers to dig deep into the riverbed and build a solid embankment to seek permanent profits.

古文：命下抚、按官勘议。
现代文：命令下达到巡抚、巡按官吏进行勘测商议。
English: Under the order, inspectors and patrol officers arrived to conduct surveys and discussions.

古文：增筑雄县横堤八里，任丘东堤二十里。
现代文：增筑雄县横堤八里，任丘束堤二十里。
English: There are eight miles of dike in Zengzhuang County and 20 miles of dike in Renqiu County.

古文：桑乾河，卢沟上源也。
现代文：桑干河，是卢沟的上源。
English: Sangan River is the upper source of Lugou.

古文：发源太原之天池，伏流至朔州马邑雷山之阳，有金龙池者浑泉溢出，是为桑乾。
现代文：发源于太原的天池，从地下流到朔州马邑雷山之南，有金龙池的浑泉流出，造就是桑干河。
English: Originating from the Heavenly Pool in Taiyuan, it flows from the underground to the south of the Leishan Mountain in Mayi, Shuozhou, and the muddy spring of the Golden Dragon Pool flows out, forming the Sangan River.

古文：东下大同古定桥，抵宣府保安州，雁门、应州、云中诸水皆会。
现代文：往东流到大同古定桥，抵达宣府保安州，雁门、应州、云中各水都汇合于此。
English: It flows eastward to Datong Guding Bridge, arriving at Xuanfu Security Prefecture, where the waters of the Wild Goose Gate, Yingzhou, and Yunzhong converge.

古文：穿西山，入宛平界。
现代文：通过西山，流入宛平地界。
English: Through the West Mountain, it flows into the Wanping Plateau.

古文：东南至看舟口，分为二。
现代文：往东南流到看舟口，分流成为二支。
English: It flows southeast to Kan-Zhouzhou and splits into two branches.

古文：其一东由通州高丽庄入白河。
现代文：其中之一往东从通州高丽庄流入白河。
English: One of them flows eastward from Tongzhou Gaoli Town into the Baihe River.

古文：其一南流霸州，合易水，南至天津丁字沣入漕河，曰卢沟河，亦曰浑河。
现代文：其中之一往南流到霸州，汇合易水，往南流到天津丁字沽流入漕河，叫做卢沟河，也叫做浑河。
English: One of them flows southward to Bazhou, merges with Yishui, flows southward to Tianjin and flows into Caohe, called Lugouhe, also called Hunhe.

古文：河初过怀来，束两山间，不得肆。
现代文：此河原先经过怀来，被束缚于两山之间，不能放肆。
English: The river used to flow through Huai, but it is chained between two mountains and cannot run free.

古文：至都城西四十里石景山之东，地平土疏，冲激震荡，迁徙弗常。
现代文：到达都城西四十里石景山的柬边，地势平坦土质疏松，冲击震动，改道不定。
English: Reaching the Cambodian side of Shijingshan, forty miles west of the capital, the terrain is flat and the soil is sparse, the impact is shaking, and the diversion is uncertain.

古文：《元史》名卢沟曰小黄河，以其流浊也。
现代文：《元史》称卢沟叫做小黄河，因为水流浑浊。
English: "Yuan Shi" said that Lugou is called the Small Yellow River because the water flow is turbid.

古文：上流在西山后者，盈涸无定，不为害。
现代文：上游在西山后的一段，上涨与干涸不定，不造成灾害。
English: In the upstream section behind the West Mountain, the rise and dry-up are uncertain and do not cause disasters.

古文：嘉靖三十三年，御史宋仪望尝请疏凿，以漕宣、大粮。
现代文：嘉靖三十三年，御史宋仪望曾经请求疏凿，用来漕运宣州、大镇的军粮。
English: In the 33rd year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the Grand Historian Song Yibang once requested that a ditch be dug to transport military grain from Xuanzhou and Dacheng.

古文：三十九年，都御史李文进以大同缺边储，亦请 开桑乾河以通运道。
现代文：三十九年，都御史李文进认为大同缺少边防储备，也请求 开通桑干河来畅通逗道。
English: In 1939, Li Wenjin, the governor of Datong, thought that Datong lacked border defense reserves, and also requested the opening of the Sangan River to smooth the way.

古文：自古定桥至卢沟桥务里村水运五节，七百馀里，陆运二节，八十八里。
现代文：从古定桥到卢灌煎务里：寸水运五段，七百多里，陆运二段，八十八里。
English: From Gu Ding Qiao to Luqan Defen: five stages of water transport, more than seven hundred miles, two stages of land transport, eighty-eight miles.

古文：春秋二运，可得米二万五千馀石。
现代文：春秋水陆两运，可完成运米二万五千多石。
English: Spring and autumn water and land transportation, can complete the transportation of rice more than twenty-five thousand stone.

古文：且造浅船由卢沟达天津，而建仓务里村、青白口八处，以备拨运。 
现代文：并且造浅水船从卢沟到达天津，然后修建粮仓于务里村、青白口八处，用来预备调拨转运 。
English: Moreover, a shallow-water ship was built from Lugou to Tianjin, and then grain silos were built in eight places in Wuli Village and Qingbaikou to prepare for transfer.

古文：皆不能行。
现代文：都不能施行。
English: None of them can be implemented.

古文：下流在西山前者，泛溢害稼，畿封病之，堤防急焉。
现代文：下游在西山前的一段，泛滥危害庄稼，京郊感到它是祸害，堤防修筑也严密了。
English: Downstream in the section in front of the West Mountain, flooding harms crops, the suburbs of Beijing feel it is a scourge, and the construction of dikes is also strict.

古文：洪武十六年浚桑乾河，自固安至高家庄八十里，霸州西支河二十里，南支河三十五里。
现代文：洪武十六年疏通桑干河，从固安到高家庄八十里，霸州西支河二十里，南支河三十五里。
English: In the 16th year of Hongwu, the Sanggan River was dredged, and the distance from Gu'an to Gaojiazhuang was 80 miles, the West Branch River of Bazhou was 20 miles, and the South Branch River was 35 miles.

古文：永乐七年，决固安贺家口。
现代文：永乐七年，在固安贺家口决堤。
English: In the seventh year of Yongle, the dike was broken at Gu'an Hejiakou.

古文：十年，坏卢沟桥及堤岸，没官田民庐，溺死人畜。
现代文：十年，冲坏卢沟桥及堤岸，淹没官田民房，淹死人畜。
English: In ten years, the Lugou Bridge and the embankment were washed away, the government-owned houses were flooded, and people and animals were drowned.

古文：洪熙元年，决东狼窝口。
现代文：洪熙元年，在东狼窝口决堤。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, the dike was broken at the East Wolf's Lair.

古文：宣德三年，溃卢沟堤。
现代文：宣德三年，溃决卢沟河堤。
English: In the third year of Xuande, the Lugou River dike was breached.

古文：皆发卒治之。
现代文：都派遣士兵整治其决口。
English: All of them sent soldiers to rectify their breaches.

古文：六年，顺天府尹李庸言： 永乐中，运河决新城，高从周口遂致淤塞。
现代文：六年，顺天府尹李庸说： 永乐年间，浑河在新城决堤，高从周口导致淤塞。
English: In the sixth year, Shuntianfu Yin Liyong said: During the Yongle years, the Hun River broke through the dike in Xincheng, and the high water level from the perimeter caused blockage.

古文：霸州桑圆里上下，每年水涨无所泄，漫涌倒流，北灌海子凹、牛栏佃，请亟修筑。 
现代文：霸州桑圆里上下，每年水涨没有地方排放，就泛滥倒流，往北灌注于海子凹、牛栏佃，请赶快修筑。 
English: Up and down in the Kuangyuan area of Bazhou, the water rises every year without local discharge, so it floods backwards and pours northward into the Haizi concave and the Cattle Fence, please build it quickly.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的主张。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：七年，侍郎王佐言： 通州至河西务河道浅狭，张家湾西旧有浑河，请疏浚。 
现代文：七年，侍郎王佐说： 通州到河西务河道浅而窄，张家湾西原先有浑河，请求疏通。 
English: In the seventh year, Wang Zu, the steward, said: The waterway from Tongzhou to Hexi is shallow and narrow, and there was originally the Hunhe River west of Zhangjiawan. I request that it be dredged.

古文：帝以役重止之。
现代文：皇帝认为劳役繁重停止了他的主张。
English: The emperor thought that the hard labor would stop his claim.

古文：九年，决东狼窝口，命都督郑铭往筑。
现代文：九年，在束狼窝口决堤，命令都督郑铭前去修筑。
English: In the ninth year, the embankment broke at the mouth of the Wolf's Lair, and the governor Zheng Ming was ordered to go and repair it.

古文：正统元年复命侍郎李庸修筑，并及卢沟桥小屯厂溃岸，明年工竣。
现代文：正统元年，又命令侍郎李庸修筑，同时兼顾卢沟桥小屯厂溃决的堤岸。第二年，工程竣工。
English: In the first year of the Zhengtong era, he also ordered Li Yong to build the embankment, taking into account the collapse of the Lugouqiao Xiaotun Factory. The next year, the project was completed.

古文：越三年，白沟、运河二水俱溢，决保定县安州堤五十馀处。
现代文：过了三年，白沟、浑河二水一起泛滥，溃决保定县安州堤五十多处。
English: After three years, the Baigou and Hunhe rivers flooded together, and more than 50 Anzhou dikes in Baoding County were breached.

古文：复命庸治之，筑龙王庙南石堤。
现代文：又命令李庸治理它，修筑龙王庙南石堤。
English: He also ordered Li Yong to govern it and build the southern stone embankment of the Dragon King Temple.

古文：七年筑浑河口。
现代文：七年，修筑浑河口。
English: It took seven years to build the Hun estuary.

古文：八年筑固安决口。
现代文：八年，修筑固安决口。
English: It took eight years to build the Guan culvert.

古文：成化七年，霸州知州蒋恺言： 城北草桥界河，上接浑河，下至小直沽注於海。
现代文：成化七年，霸州知州蒋恺说： 城北草桥界河，上接浑河，下到小直沽灌注于大海。
English: In the seventh year of Chenghua, Bazhou Zhizhou Jiang Wei said: the north of the city, the grass bridge border river, the upper reaches of the Hun River, and the lower reaches of the small straight dike are poured into the sea.

古文：永乐间，浑河改流，西南经固安、新城、雄县抵州，屡决为害。
现代文：永乐年间，浑河改道，往西南经过固安、新城、雄县抵达霸州，多次溃决造成祸害。
English: During the Yongle period, the Hunhe River changed its course to the southwest, passing through Gu'an, Xincheng, and Xiongxian to arrive at Bazhou, causing many disasters.

古文：近决孙家口，东流入河，又东抵三角淀。
现代文：近来，在孙家口决堤，往东流入河，又往东到三角淀。
English: Recently, the levee broke at Sunjiakou, flowing east into the river, and then east to the Yangtze River Delta.

古文：小直沽乃其故道，请因其自然之势，修筑堤岸。 
现代文：小直沽仍是其故道，请顺随其自然之势，修筑堤岸。 
English: Xiao Zhaohui is still its old way, please follow its natural trend and build the embankment.

古文：诏顺天府官相度行之。
现代文：诏令顺天府官观察测量施行治理。
English: Shun Tian prefectural officials were ordered to observe and measure the implementation of governance.

古文：十九年命侍郎杜谦督理卢沟河堤岸。
现代文：十九年，命令侍郎杜谦监督治理卢沟河堤岸。
English: In 1919, he ordered his servant Du Qian to supervise the management of the Lugou River embankment.

古文：弘治二年，决杨木厂堤，命新宁伯谭祐、侍郎陈政、内官李兴等督官军二万人筑之。
现代文：弘治二年，冲垮杨木厂河堤，命令新宁伯谭佑、侍郎陈政、内官李兴等监督官军二万人修策决堤。
English: In the second year of Hongzhi, he broke down the river levee of the Poplar Tree Plant and ordered Shining Bo Tan You, his attendant Chen Zheng, and his secretary Li Xing to supervise the army of 20,000 people to break the levee.

古文：正德元年筑狼窝决口。
现代文：正德元年，修筑狼窝决口。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, the Wolf's Lair was built.

古文：久之，下流支渠尽淤。
现代文：过了很久，下游的支流全部淤塞。
English: After a long time, all the tributaries downstream were silted up.

古文：嘉靖十年从郎中陆时雍言，发卒浚导。
现代文：嘉靖十年，依从郎中陆时雍的计策，派遣役卒疏导。
English: In the 10th year of Jiajing, he followed the strategy of his brother-in-law, Lu Shiyong, and dispatched officials to guide him.

古文：三十四年修柳林至草桥大河。
现代文：三十四年，修治柳林到草桥大河。
English: In the 34th year, he repaired Liulin to Caoqiao River.

古文：四十一年命尚书雷礼修卢沟河岸。
现代文：四十一年，命令尚书雷礼修筑卢沟河堤岸。
English: In 1941, he ordered Shang Shulei to build the embankment of Lugou River.

古文：礼言： 卢沟东南有大河，从丽庄园入直沽下海，沙淀十馀里。
现代文：雷礼说： 卢沟东南有大河，从丽庄园流入直沽往下到大海，泥沙淤积十余里。
English: Lei Li said: There is a large river in the southeast of Lugou, which flows from the Li Manor into the Zhiyao and down to the sea. The silt has accumulated for more than ten miles.

古文：稍东岔河，从固安抵直沽，势高。
现代文：稍微向东的岔河，从固安到直沽，地势高。
English: Slightly to the east of the Li River, from Gu'an to Zhaojun, the terrain is high.

古文：今当先浚大河，令水归故道，然后筑长堤以固之。
现代文：现在，应当首先疏通大河，让水归回故道，然后修筑长堤来使其安定。
English: Now, it is necessary to first dredge the river, let the water return to its former course, and then build a long dike to stabilize it.

古文：决口地下水急，人力难骤施。
现代文：决口地下水流迅急，人力难以骤然实施。
English: The groundwater flow at the breach is rapid, and it is difficult for manpower to carry out the work suddenly.

古文：西岸故堤绵亘八百丈，遗址可按，宜并筑。 
现代文：西岸故堤绵延八百丈，有遗址可依据，应当一起修筑。 
English: The old embankment on the west bank stretches for 800 meters, and there are sites that can be used as a basis. It should be built together.

古文：诏从其请。
现代文：诏令依从他的奏请。
English: The Emperor's edict granted his request.

古文：明年旋工，东西岸石堤凡九百六十丈。
现代文：第二年完工，东西两岸石堤总共九百六十丈。
English: Completed in the second year, the stone embankment on both sides of the east and west banks is a total of nine hundred and sixty meters high.

古文：万历十五年九月，神宗幸石景山，临观浑河。
现代文：万历十五年九月，神宗驾临石景山，察看浑河。
English: In September of the 15th year of Wanli, Shenzong drove to Shijingshan Mountain to inspect the Hunhe River.

古文：召辅臣申时行至幄次，谕曰： 朕每闻黄河冲决，为患不常，欲观浑河以知水势。
现代文：召唤辅臣申时行到帐幕中，告谕说： 朕每次听到黄河冲决堤岸，造成灾害没有规律，想察看浑河以知道水势。
English: Summoning the assistant minister, Shen walked to the tent and announced: "Every time I hear that the Yellow River has burst its banks, causing disasters without regularity, I want to inspect the Hun River to know the water potential.

古文：今见河流汹涌如此，知黄河经理倍难。
现代文：现在，看见河水像这样汹涌，知道黄河治理会加倍困难。
English: Now, seeing the river surging like this, I know that managing the Yellow River will be doubly difficult.

古文：宜饬所司加慎，勿以劳民伤财为故事。
现代文：应当告谕主管官吏加倍谨慎，不要把劳民伤财当作成例。
English: The competent officials should be told to be doubly cautious and not to take the injury to labor and people as an example.

古文：至选用务得人，吏、工二部宜明喻朕意。 
现代文：至于挑选使用人才务必得当，吏、工二部应当明白朕的意思。 
English: As for the selection and use of talent must be appropriate, officials and the Second Department of Labor should understand my meaning.

古文：胶莱河，在山东平度州东南，胶州东北。
现代文：胶莱河，在山东平度州东南，胶州东北。
English: Jiaolai River, in the southeast of Shandong Pingdu Prefecture, northeast of Jiaozhou.

古文：源出高密县，分南北流。
现代文：源出于高密县，分为南北流。
English: Its source is in Gaomi County, and it flows north-south.

古文：南流自胶州麻湾口入海，北流经平度州至掖县海仓口入海。
现代文：南流从胶州麻湾口入海，北流经过平度州到掖县海仓口入海。
English: The southern current enters the sea from the mouth of Ma Wan in Jiaozhou, while the northern current enters the sea from the mouth of Haicang in Handan County after passing through Pingdu.

古文：议海运者所必讲也。
现代文：这是主张海运的人所必定称说的。
English: This is what the advocates of maritime transport are bound to say.

古文：元至元十七年，莱人姚演献议开新河，凿地三百馀里，起胶西县东陈村海口，西北达胶河，出海仓口，谓之胶莱新河。
现代文：五至元十七年，莱人姚演献计开通新河，凿地三百多里，起于胶西县束陈村海口，往西北到达胶河，出海仓旦，叫做胶莱新河。
English: From the 5th to the 17th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Lai people's Yao Yuen donated a plan to open a new river, and hewed more than three hundred miles of land. It started from the Haikou of Sokchen Village, Jiaoxi County, reached the Jiaoxi River in the northwest, and went out to sea. It is called the Jiaolai New River.

古文：寻以劳费难成而罢。
现代文：不久，因为耗费大难以完成而停止。
English: It was soon stopped because it was too expensive and difficult to complete.

古文：明正统六年，昌邑民王坦上言： 漕河水浅，军卒穷年不休。
现代文：明正统六年，昌邑人王坦上奏说： 漕河水浅，士兵役卒全年不能休息。
English: In the sixth year of the Ming Dynasty, Wang Tan, a native of Changyi, said: The Caohe River is shallow, and soldiers cannot rest all year round.

古文：往者江南常海运，自太仓抵胶州。
现代文：过去，江南常常采用海运，从太仓到胶州。
English: In the past, the southern part of the Yangtze River was often transported by sea, from Taicang to Jiaozhou.

古文：州有河故道接掖县，宜浚通之。
现代文：此州有河流故道连接掖县，应当疏浚它。
English: There is a river in this prefecture that used to connect with Min County, and it should be dredged.

古文：由掖浮海抵直沽，可避东北海险数千里，较漕河为近。
现代文：从掖县航海到达直沽，可以避免东北海险数千里，比漕河更为捷近。 
English: If you sail from Jixian to Zhouzhuang, you can avoid the Northeast Sea peril for thousands of miles, which is closer than Caohe.

古文：部覆寝其议。
现代文：工部覆核搁置其提议。
English: The ministry's review put its proposal on hold.

古文：嘉靖十一年，御史方远宜等复议开新河。
现代文：嘉靖十一年，御史方远宜等又主张开通新河。
English: In the eleventh year of the Jiajing era, historians such as Yuanyi also advocated the opening of a new river.

古文：以马家墩数里皆石冈，议复寝。
现代文：因为马家墩数里全是坚硬的小山，主张又被搁置。
English: The idea was shelved again, because Ma Jiaxuan is made up entirely of hard hills.

古文：十七年，山东巡抚胡缵宗言： 元时新河石座旧迹犹在，惟马壕未通。
现代文：十七年，山东巡抚胡钻宗说： 元时新河石座旧迹还存在，只有马壕没有开通。
English: In the seventeenth year, the governor of Shandong Province, Hu Dengzong, said: In the Yuan Dynasty, the ancient sites of Xinhe Shiza still exist, only the horse ditch has not been opened.

古文：已募夫凿治，请复浚淤道三十馀里。 
现代文：已经征召民工开通修治，请求再疏浚淤塞河道三十余垦。 
English: Migrant workers have been called in to carry out repairs, and a request has been made to dredge more than 30 dams that are blocking the river.

古文：命从其议。
现代文：命令依从他的主张。
English: The order is to follow his lead.

古文：至十九年，副使王献言： 劳山之西有薛岛、陈岛，石砑林立，横伏海中，最险。
现代文：到嘉靖十九年，副使王献说： 劳山的西边有薛岛、陈岛，光石林立，隐藏海中，最危险。
English: In the 19th year of Jiajing, the deputy envoy Wang Xian said: On the west side of Mount Lao, there are Xue Island, Chen Island, and Guangshi Forest, hidden in the sea, the most dangerous.

古文：元人避之，故放洋走成山正东，逾登抵莱，然后出直沽。
现代文：元朝人避开它，所以，乘船出海从成山正东出发，越过登州到达莱州，然后出直沽。
English: The people of the Yuan Dynasty avoided it, so they sailed from Chengshan due east, crossed Danzhou to Dalaizhou, and then sailed to Zhouzhuang.

古文：考胶莱地图，薛岛西有山曰小竺，两峰夹峙。
现代文：考察胶莱地图，薛岛西边有山叫做小竺，两峰左右耸立。
English: Examining the Jiaolai map, there is a mountain called Xiaotang on the west side of Xue Island, with two peaks towering to the right and left.

古文：中有石冈曰马壕，其麓南北皆接海崖，而北即麻湾，又稍北即新河，又西北即莱州海仓。
现代文：中间有石冈叫做马壕，其山脚南北都连接海岸，往北就是麻湾，又稍微往北就是新河，又往西北就是莱州海仓。
English: In the middle there is a rocky hill called the Horse Trench, the foot of which connects the coast from north to south. To the north is Ma Wan, slightly to the north is the New River, and to the northwest is Laizhou Haicang.

古文：由麻湾抵海仓才三百三十里，由淮安逾马壕抵直沽，才一千五百里，可免铙海之险。
现代文：从麻湾到海仓纔三百三十里，从淮安经过马壕到达直沽，纔一千五百里，可以免除环绕海道的危险。
English: It is 330 miles from Ma Wan to Haicang, and 1500 miles from Huai'an to Zhouzhuang through horse ditches, which can avoid the danger of encircling the seaway.

古文：元人尝凿此道，遇石而止。
现代文：元朝人曾经开凿此道，遇到石头就停止。
English: The people of the Yuan Dynasty once dug this road, but stopped when they encountered stones.

古文：今凿马壕以趋麻湾，浚新河以出海仓，诚便。 
现代文：现在，开通马壕使直奔麻湾，疏通新河使到海仓，确实便利。 
English: Now, it is really convenient to open the horse ditch to go straight to Ma Wan, and to dredge the new river to get to the sea warehouse.

古文：献乃於旧所凿地迤西七丈许凿之。
现代文：王献就在原先所开凿的地方向西七丈左右再开通它。
English: Wang Xian reopened it in the place where it was originally excavated, about seven meters to the west.

古文：其初土石相半，下则皆石，又下石顽如铁。
现代文：开始是泥土石头各半，下面则都是石头，再下面的石头坚硬如铁。
English: At the beginning, it was all mud and stone, and then it was all stone, and then the stone underneath was as hard as iron.

古文：焚以烈火，用水沃之，石烂化为烬。
现代文：用烈火焚烧，再用水浇上它，石头破碎化为灰烬。
English: It was burned with fire, and then water was poured on it, and the stone was crushed to ashes.

古文：海波流汇，麻湾以通，长十有四里，广六丈有奇，深半之。
现代文：海浪流来汇合，麻湾因而畅通，长十四里，宽六丈多，深三丈左右。
English: When the waves converge, Ma Wan flows smoothly, with a length of 14 miles, a width of more than six meters, and a depth of about three meters.

古文：由是江、淮之舟达於胶莱。
现代文：因此，长江、淮河的船只能到达胶莱。
English: As a result, ships on the Yangtze and Huai rivers can only reach Jiaolai.

古文：逾年，复浚新河，水泉旁溢，其势深阔，设九闸，置浮梁，建官署以守。
现代文：过了一年，又疏通新河，水泉从旁边泛滥，水深河宽，建立九座闸门，设置浮桥，修建官署用来防守。
English: A year later, the New River was dredged, the water springs flooded from the side, the river was deep and wide, nine gates were built, a floating bridge was set up, and a government office was built for defense.

古文：而中间分水岭难通者三十馀里。
现代文：然而，中间分水岭难以疏通的地方三十多里。
English: However, the middle watershed is more than thirty miles away from the place where it is difficult to clear.

古文：时总河王以旂议复海运，请先开平度新河。
现代文：当时，总河王以旃主张恢复海运，请求首先开通平度新河。
English: At that time, the total river king advocated the resumption of maritime transport, and requested that the Pingdu New River be opened first.

古文：帝谓妄议生扰，而献亦适迁去，於是工未变而罢。
现代文：皇帝认为没有事实根据的言论会产生烦乱，而王献也正好进升官职而离去，于是，工程没有完成就停止了。
English: The emperor thought that the unsubstantiated remarks would cause turmoil, and Wang Xian also left just as he was promoted, so the project was stopped before it was completed.

古文：三十一年，给事中李用敬言： 胶莱新河在海运旧道西，王献凿马家壕，导张鲁、白、现诸河水益之。
现代文：嘉靖三十一年，给事中李用敬说： 胶莱新河在海运旧道的西面，王献开通马家壕，导引张鲁、白、现各条河水来增加水量。
English: In the 31st year of Jiajing, Li Yingqin said in a speech: The Jiaolai New River is on the west side of the old shipping route. Wang Xian opened the Ma Jia trench and guided the water of the Zhanglu, Bai and Xian rivers to increase the water volume.

古文：今淮舟直抵麻湾，即新河南口也，从海仓直抵天津，即新河北口也。
现代文：现在，淮河船只直达麻湾，就是新河南口，从海仓直达天津，就是新河北口。
English: At present, vessels on the Huaihe River go straight to Ma Wan, which is the south mouth of the New River, and from Haicang to Tianjin, which is the north mouth of the New River.

古文：南北三百馀里，潮水深入。
现代文：南北相距三百多里，潮水深入。
English: The distance between north and south is more than three hundred miles, and the tides are deep.

古文：中有九穴湖、大沽河，皆可引济。
现代文：中间有九穴湖、大沽河，都可以引水补济。
English: In the middle, there are Jiuzhaigou Lake and Dayuan River, both of which can draw water to replenish.

古文：其当疏浚者百馀里耳，宜急开通。 
现代文：大概应当疏浚的地方只有一百多里而已，应当赶快开通。 
English: The area that should be dredged is probably only a hundred miles or so, and it should be opened as soon as possible.

古文：给事中贺泾、御史何廷钰亦以为请。
现代文：给事中贺泾、御史何廷钮也以此向朝廷奏请。
English: As a result, He Zhen and Gu Shi He Ting Niu also appealed to the imperial court.

古文：诏廷钰会山东抚、按官行视。
现代文：诏令何廷钮会同山东巡抚、巡按官吏巡行视察。
English: It was decreed that He Tingnuo would go on a tour of inspection with the Shandong governor and officials.

古文：既而以估费浩繁，报罢。
现代文：随后，因为估量耗费太多，报讲停止。
English: Then, because it was costing too much to estimate, the reporting stopped.

古文：隆庆五年，给事中李贵和复请开浚，诏遣给事中胡槚会山东抚、按官议。
现代文：隆庆五年，给事中李贵和又请求开掘疏浚，诏令派遣给事中胡杠会同山东巡抚、巡按官吏商议。
English: In the fifth year of the Longqing era, Li Guihe also requested to excavate and dredge in the case, and Hu Laihui and the Shandong governor and the officials of the inspection and registration authority were dispatched to the case.

古文：槚言： 献所凿渠，流沙善崩，所引白河细流不足灌注。
现代文：胡杠说： 王献所开通的渠道，流沙容易溃塌，所导引的白河细流不足以灌注。
English: Hu Li said: The channel opened by Wang Xian is easily collapsed by quicksand, and the white river trickle guided by him is not sufficient for perfusion.

古文：他若现河、小胶河、张鲁河、九穴、都泊皆潢污不深广。
现代文：其它如现河、小胶河、张鲁河、九穴、都泊等都聚积不流之水，并不深不宽阔。
English: Others, such as the Zhenhe River, Xiao Jia He River, Zhang Lu River, Jiu An River, and Du Po River, are formed by the accumulation of water that does not flow, and are not deep or wide.

古文：胶河虽有微源，地势东下，不能北引。
现代文：胶河虽然有微小的水源，但地势往东低下，不能往北导引。
English: Although the Jiaohe River has a tiny water source, the terrain is low to the east and cannot be guided to the north.

古文：诸水皆不足资。
现代文：众水都不足以供给。
English: There is not enough water to go around.

古文：上源则水泉枯涸，无可仰给；下流则浮沙易溃，不能持久。
现代文：上源则水泉干涸，不可能藉助来供给；下游则浮沙容易溃散，不能持久。
English: Upstream, the springs have dried up, and it is impossible to use them to supply water; downstream, the floating sand is easy to break up and cannot last.

古文：扰费无益。 
现代文：劳烦耗费毫无益处。 
English: Toil and trouble avail nothing.

古文：巡抚梁梦龙亦言： 献误执元人废渠为海运故道，不知渠身太长，春夏泉涸无所引注，秋冬暴涨无可蓄泄。
现代文：巡抚梁梦龙也说： 王献错误地把元朝人废弃的渠道当作海运故道，不知道渠道太长，春夏水泉干涸无处引水灌注，秋冬猛然上涨又不可蓄积排放。
English: The governor Liang Menglong also said: Wang Xian mistakenly regarded the channels abandoned by the Yuan Dynasty as the old way of shipping. He did not know that the channels were too long, the spring and summer springs were dry and there was nowhere to inject water, and the autumn and winter were abruptly rising and could not accumulate emissions.

古文：南北海沙易塞，舟行滞而不通。 
现代文：南北海沙容易堵塞，船只行驶迟缓而不畅通。 
English: The sand in the north and south seas is easily clogged, and ships travel slowly and do not flow smoothly.

古文：乃复报罢。
现代文：于是又报请停止。
English: So I reported it again and asked them to stop.

古文：万历三年，南京工部尚书刘应节、侍郎徐栻复议海运，言： 难海运者以放洋之险，覆溺之患。
现代文：万历三年，南京工部尚书刘应节、侍郎徐拭又主张海运，说： 畏惧海运的人认为有乘船出海的危险，有沉没的灾难。
English: In the third year of the Wanli era, Liu Yingjie, a senior official of the Nanjing Ministry of Industry, and Xu Wu, a chamberlain, also advocated shipping, saying: People who are afraid of shipping believe that there is a danger of going to sea by ship, and there is a sinking disaster.

古文：今欲去此二患，惟自胶州以北，杨家圈以南，浚地百里，无高山长坂之隔，杨家圈北悉通海潮矣。
现代文：现在，想除去这二种灾难，祇有从胶州以北，杨家圈以南，疏通陆地一百里，没有高山长坡的阻隔，杨家圈北边全部通海潮。
English: Now, if we want to eliminate these two kinds of disasters, we only need to dredge a hundred miles of land from the north of Jiaozhou to the south of Yangjia Circle. There is no barrier of high mountains and long slopes, and the north side of Yangjia Circle is all open to the sea.

古文：综而计之，开创者什五，通浚者什三，量浚者什二。
现代文：总合起来计算，新开通的占十分之五，疏通的占十分之三，酌量疏通的占十分之二。
English: In total, the newly opened accounts for five out of ten, the dredging accounts for three out of ten, and the discretionary dredging accounts for two out of ten.

古文：以锥探之，上下皆无石，可开无疑。 
现代文：用锥探测它，上下都没有石头，可以开通是毫无疑问的。 
English: With a cone to detect it, there are no stones above and below, and there is no doubt that it can be opened.

古文：乃命〈木式〉任其事。
现代文：于是，命令徐拭担任治理工作。
English: As a result, Xu Wu was ordered to be in charge of governance.

古文：应节议主通海。
现代文：刘应节提议主张畅通海运。
English: Liu Yingjie proposed to advocate the smooth flow of maritime transport.

古文：而栻往相度，则胶州旁地高峻，不能通潮。
现代文：而徐拭前往观察测量，则胶州旁边地势高峻，不能通潮水。
English: But when Xu Wubi went to observe and measure, the terrain next to Jiaozhou was steep and could not pass the tidal water.

古文：惟引泉源可成河，然其道二百五十馀里，凿山引水，筑堤建闸，估费百万。
现代文：只有导引水源可以成为河流，然而，这条河道二百五十多里，开通山石导引水源，修筑堤防建立闸门，估计耗费上百万。
English: Only the guided water source can become a river, however, this river is more than two hundred and fifty miles long, opening the rock-guided water source, building a dike and establishing a gate, is estimated to cost millions.

古文：诏切责栻，谓其以难词沮成事。
现代文：下诏严厉责备徐拭，说他把困难作为藉口来阻止完成这件事情。
English: The next edict severely reprimanded Xu Wu, saying that he used the difficulties as an excuse to prevent the completion of the matter.

古文：会给事中光懋疏论之，且请令应节往勘。
现代文：适逢给事中光懋上疏陈述此事，又请求让刘应节前去勘测。
English: At the right time, Guangyao Shangsuo made a statement on the matter, and also requested that Liu should go to survey before the festival.

古文：应节至，谓南北海口水俱深阔，舟可乘潮，条悉其便以闻。
现代文：刘应节到了那里，说南北入海口全都水深河宽，船只可以依凭潮水，全部条陈海运的便利上奏朝廷。
English: When Liu Yingjie arrived there, he reported to the imperial court that the entrances to the sea from the north and south were all deep and wide, ships could rely on the tide, and all sea transportation was convenient.

古文：山东巡抚李世达上言： 南海麻湾以北，应节谓沙积难除，徙古路沟十三里以避之。
现代文：山东巡抚李世达上奏说： 南海麻湾以北，刘应节说泥沙淤积很难清除，改道于古路沟十三里来避开它。
English: Li Shida, the inspector general of Shandong Province, said in his report: In the north of Ma Wan in the South China Sea, Liu Yingjie said that the sediment deposition was difficult to remove, and he changed the route to the ancient road ditch thirteen miles to avoid it.

古文：又虑南接鸭绿港，东连龙家屯，沙积甚高，渠口一开，沙随潮入，故复有建闸障沙之议。
现代文：又担心往南连接鸭绿港，往东连接笼家屯，泥沙淤积很高，渠口一旦打开，泥沙随着潮水流入，所以，又有建立闸门阻隔泥沙的主张。
English: They are also worried about connecting Yalu Port to the south and Jiaojia Town to the east. The silt deposition is very high, and once the canal mouth is opened, the silt will flow in with the tide. Therefore, there is also a proposal to build a sluice gate to block the silt.

古文：臣以为闸闭则潮安从入？
现代文：臣认为闸门关闭则潮水从什么地方流入呢？
English: Where do you think the tides come from when the floodgates are closed?

古文：闸启则沙又安从障也？
现代文：闸门打开泥沙又怎么阻拦呢？
English: Open the floodgates and let the mud and sand flow in, but how do you stop it?

古文：北海仓口以南至新河闸，大率沙淤潮浅。
现代文：往北海仓口以南到新河闸，大致泥沙淤积潮水浅少。
English: To the south of the North Sea's Cangkou to Xinhe sluice, there is generally less sedimentation and shallow tidal water.

古文：应节挑东岸二里，仅去沙二尺，大潮一来，沙壅如故，故复有筑堤约水障沙之议。
现代文：刘应节挖通东岸二里，只除去泥沙二尺，大潮一旦到来，泥沙淤塞又像原来那样，所以，又有修筑堤防拦阻潮水阻隔泥沙的主张。
English: Liu Yingjie dug two miles along the east coast, only removing two feet of sediment. Once the high tide came, the silting of the sediment was the same as before. Therefore, there was also a proposal to build a dike to block the tide and block the sediment.

古文：臣以为障两岸之沙则可耳，若潮自中流冲激，安能障也？
现代文：臣认为阻隔两岸的泥沙还可以，假若潮水从中流冲击，怎么能阻隔呢？
English: The minister believes that the mud and sand on both sides of the river can be blocked. If the tidal water is impinged from the middle stream, how can it be blocked?

古文：分水岭高峻，一工止二十丈，而费千五百金。
现代文：分水岭高峻，一工只能挖掘二十丈，而耗费一千五百金。
English: The watershed is high and steep, and one worker can only excavate twenty feet, but it costs fifteen hundred gold.

古文：下多碙〈石句〉石，掣水甚难。
现代文：下面多硐殉石，引水非常困难。
English: There are many rocks below, and it is very difficult to divert the water.

古文：故复有改挑王家丘之议。
现代文：所以，又有改挖王家丘的主张。
English: Therefore, there is also a proposal to change the excavation of Wangjiakou.

古文：臣以为吴家口至亭口高峻者共五十里，大概多碙〈石句〉石，费当若何？
现代文：臣认为昊家口到亭口高峻的地方共有五十里，大概多有碉殉石，耗费应当如何？
English: According to the minister, Haojiakou to Tingkou is a total of 50 miles, and most of them are steep. What should the cost be?

古文：而舍此则又无河可行也。
现代文：然而，舍弃这里又没有别的河道可以通行。
English: However, there is no other river to pass through.

古文：夫潮信有常，大潮稍远，亦止及陈村闸、杨家圈，不能更进。
现代文：潮水确实有规律，大潮略速，也只到陈村闸、杨家圈，不能再靠近。
English: The tides are indeed regular. The high tide is slightly faster, and it only reaches Chencun sluice and Yangjia circle. It can't get any closer.

古文：况日止二潮乎？
现代文：何况一天祇有二次潮水呢？
English: What's more, there are only two high tides a day?

古文：此潮水之难恃也。
现代文：这说明潮水很难依凭。
English: This shows that the tide is difficult to rely on.

古文：河道纡曲二百里，张鲁、白、胶三水微细，都泊行潦，业已干涸。
现代文：河道迂回曲折二百里，张鲁、白、胶三水细微，都泊只是沟中的流水，已经干涸。
English: The river twists and turns for two hundred miles. The water of the Zhanglu, Bai and Jiao rivers is fine. The Duobo is just running water in a ditch. It has dried up.

古文：设遇亢旱，何泉可引？
现代文：假设遇到大旱，有什么泉水可以导引呢？
English: Suppose there is a big drought, what spring water can guide it?

古文：引泉亦难恃也。
现代文：导引泉水也很难依凭。
English: Guided spring water is also difficult to rely on.

古文：元人开浚此河，史臣谓其劳费不赀，终无成功，足为前鉴。 
现代文：元朝人开通这条河，史官说其劳役耗费不可计算，最终没有成功，这是值得引为教训的往事。 
English: The Yuan Dynasty opened this river, and historians say that the labor cost was incalculable, and ultimately it was not successful. This is a past event that is worth citing as a lesson.

古文：巡按御史商为正亦言： 挑分水岭下，方广十丈，用夫千名。
现代文：巡按御史商为正也说： 挖掘分水岭以下，长宽十丈，使用役夫上千人。
English: Shang Weizheng, inspector and historian, also said: "Digging below the watershed, the length and width are very long, and thousands of laborers are used.

古文：才下数尺为碙〈石句〉石，又下皆沙，又下尽黑沙，又下水泉涌出，甫挑即淤，止深丈二尺。
现代文：仅仅往下挖几尺就是碉殉石，又往下挖全是泥沙，再往下挖全是黑色泥沙，再往下挖水泉涌出，刚刚挖掘就被淤塞，其深只有一丈二尺。
English: Just digging down a few feet is a dead stone, and then digging down is all mud and sand, and then digging down is all black mud and sand, and then digging down springs gush out, just digging is blocked, its depth is only one and a half feet.

古文：必欲通海行舟，更须挑深一丈。
现代文：一定要通大海行驶船只，必须再挖深一丈。
English: Ships must travel through the sea, and they must dig deeper.

古文：虽二百馀万，未足了此。 
现代文：即使耗费二百多万，也不能够了结这个工程。 
English: Even if it costs more than two million won, it will not be enough to complete this project.

古文：给事中王道成亦论其失。
现代文：给事中王道成也纠弹他的过失。
English: In the process, Wang Daocheng also corrected his mistake.

古文：工部尚书郭朝宾覆请停罢。
现代文：工部尚书郭朝宾回复请求停止。
English: The Ministry of Industry and Commerce has stopped responding to requests from Shangshu Guo morning guests.

古文：遂召应节、栻还说，罢其役。
现代文：舱是，召刘应节、徐拭回到京城，停止其工程。
English: Liu Yingjie and Xu Wu were called back to Beijing to stop the project.

古文：嗣是中书程守训，御史高举、颜思忠，尚书杨一魁相继议及之，皆不果行。
现代文：随后是中书程守训，御史高举、颜思忠，尚书杨一魁一个接一个地谈论到这件事情，最终全都没有施行。
English: Subsequently, Zhongshu Cheng Shouxun, Gushi Gaozhuang, Yan Sizhong, and Shangshu Yang talked about this matter one after another, but in the end none of them were implemented.

古文：崇祯十四年，山东巡抚曾樱、户部主事邢国玺复申王献、刘应节之说。
现代文：崇祯十四年，山东巡抚曾樱、户部主事邢国玺又申述王献、刘应节的主张。
English: In the 14th year of Chongzhen, Zeng Ying, the governor of Shandong Province and the head of the Household Department of the State Council, also stated the idea of Wang Xian and Liu Ying Jie.

古文：给内帑十万金，工未举，樱去官。
现代文：供给国库的十万钱财，工程还没有兴起，曾樱就离职。
English: Zeng Ying left his post after the project had not yet begun, despite the 100,000 yuan that had been provided to the national treasury.

古文：十六年夏，尚书倪元璐请截渍粮由胶莱河转饷，自胶河口用小船抵分水岭，车盘岭脊四十里达於莱河，复用小船出海，可无岛礁漂损之患。
现代文：十六年夏，尚书倪元璐请求拦截漕粮船只从胶莱河转运军粮，从胶河口用小船运到分水岭，再用车盘绕其岭脊四十里到达莱河，又用小船运出大海，可以没有被岛屿憔石撞毁沉没的灾难。
English: In the summer of the 16th year, Shangshu Ni Yuanjun requested the interception of grain rowing vessels to transfer military grain from the Jiaolai River. From the mouth of the Jiaolai River, small boats were used to transport it to the watershed, and then cars were used to wind around its ridge for forty miles to the Jiaolai River, and small boats were used to transport it out of the sea, so that it could not be destroyed by the island's hailstones and sink.

古文：山东副总兵黄荫恩献议略同。
现代文：山东副总兵黄荫恩所进献的主张大致相同。
English: Huang Ying'en, Shandong's deputy commander-in-chief, had a similar idea.

古文：皆未及行。
现代文：都没有来得及施行。
English: None of them came into force in time.

