古文：起屠维作噩，尽上章阉茂，凡二年。
现代文：起，止，一共两年。晋安帝义熙五年
English: a total of two years. The reign of Emperor Jian of An and Emperor Yixi lasted five years.

古文：安皇帝庚义熙五年春，正月，庚寅朔，南燕主超朝会群臣，叹太乐不备，议掠晋人以补伎。
现代文：春季正月，庚寅朔，南燕国主慕容超临朝大会群臣，感叹帝室的御用音乐不完备，商议虏掠一些晋人作为补充的歌舞伎人。
English: In the first month of spring, Geng Yinshuo, the leader of the Southern Yan Kingdom, Murong Chao, lamented that the imperial music was not complete, and discussed the capture of some Jin people as supplementary Kabuki people.

古文：领军将军韩讠卓曰： 先帝以旧京倾覆，戢翼三齐。
现代文：领军将军韩说： 先帝因为故有的国都失守，所以才退守到三齐。
English: Han, the leading general, said: Because the former emperor lost all his former countries, he only retreated to Sanchi.

古文：陛下不养士息民，以伺魏衅，恢复先业，而更侵掠南邻以广仇敌，可乎！ 
现代文：陛下不计划让天下的士民得到休养生息，用以等待魏国内部出现分歧矛盾，然后利用机会恢复过去的国家大业，相反却要再去侵扰掠夺南面的邻国，扩大我们仇敌的范围，这怎么可以！ 
English: His Majesty does not plan to allow the world's people to rest and recuperate, to wait for the emergence of differences and contradictions within Wei, and then take advantage of the opportunity to restore the great cause of the country in the past. On the contrary, he wants to invade and plunder the southern neighbors and expand the scope of our enemies. How can this be!

古文：超曰： 我计已定，不与卿言。 
现代文：慕容超说： 我的计划已定，不跟你多说。 
English: Murong Chao said: My plan is set, I won't tell you more.

古文：辛卯，大赦。
现代文：辛卯，东晋实行大赦。
English: Xinwu and Liu Song granted amnesty.

古文：庚戌，以刘毅为卫将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：庚戌，东晋任命刘毅为卫将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Geng Xuan and the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed Liu Yi as the General of the Guards and the Third Division of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：毅爱才好士，当世名流莫不辐凑，独扬州主簿吴郡张邵不往。
现代文：刘毅爱好人才，喜欢读书人，所以，当时的知名人士几乎没有不聚集到他身边去的，惟独只有扬州主簿吴郡人张邵不去。
English: Liu Yi loved talents and readers, so the famous people of that time almost all gathered around him, but only Zhang Shao, the Yangzhou master of Wu County, did not go.

古文：或问之，邵曰： 主公命世人杰，何烦多问！ 
现代文：有人问他为什么，张邵说： 我的主公刘裕是应运而生的人中豪杰，哪里还用多问！ 
English: When someone asked him why, Zhang Shao said: My master Liu Yu is a hero among men who came into being at the right time.

古文：秦王兴遣其弟平北将军冲、征虏将军狄伯支等帅骑四万击夏王勃勃。
现代文：后秦王姚兴，派遣他的弟弟平北将军姚冲、征虏将军狄伯支等率领四万骑兵，进攻夏王刘勃勃。
English: Later, the Qin king Yaoxing sent his brother, the Pingbei general Yaochong, and the conscript general Di Bo to lead 40,000 cavalry to attack the Xia king Liu Gong.

古文：冲至岭北，谋还袭长安，伯支不从而止；因鸩杀伯支以灭口。
现代文：姚冲大军抵达岭北地区，打算回击长安篡权，因狄伯支不同意才中止。姚冲因此用药酒毒死狄伯支灭口。
English: Yao Chong's army arrived in the northern region of Ling, intending to strike back at Chang'an's usurpation of power, but was stopped because Di Bochi did not agree. Yao Chong therefore poisoned Di Bochi with medicinal liquor.

古文：秦王兴遣使册拜谯纵为大都督、相国、蜀王，加九锡，承制封拜，悉如王者之仪。
现代文：后秦王姚兴派遣使节前去册封谯纵为大都督、相国、蜀王，加授九锡，并可奉制书直接任命官员、封赏爵位，所用礼仪全部与君王一样。
English: Afterward, Qin King Yao Xing dispatched an envoy to register and enthrone him as the great governor, the father of the country, and the king of Shu, and awarded him nine tin, and he could directly appoint officials and reward them with knighthoods. All the etiquette used was the same as that of the king.

古文：二月，南燕将慕容兴宗、斛谷提、公孙归等帅骑寇宿豫，拔之，大掠而去，简男女二千五百付太乐教之。
现代文：二月，南燕将领慕容兴宗、斛谷提、公孙归等人率领骑兵进犯并攻克东晋的宿豫，大肆抢掠一番之后，便回去了，挑选俘虏的男女青年二千五百人，交付给管理王室音乐的机构，教习训练。
English: In February, Nanyan generals Mu Rong Xingzong, Shigutani Rongti, Gongsun Gui and others led the cavalry to attack and conquer Suyuan in the Eastern Jin Dynasty. After a large-scale looting, they went back, selected 2,500 captured young men and women, and handed them over to the institution that managed the royal music, for teaching and training.

古文：归，五楼之兄也。
现代文：公孙归是公孙五楼的哥哥。
English: Gongsun Gui is Gongsun Wu's older brother.

古文：是时，五楼为侍中、尚书、领左卫将军，专总朝政，宗亲并居显要，王公内外无不惮之。
现代文：这时，公孙五楼任侍中、尚书、领左卫将军，在朝中专权，总揽国家的一切政务，他的宗族亲属也都在朝廷官居险要位置，王公大臣、朝廷内外，对他没有不忌惮害怕的。
English: At this time, Gongsun Wulong served as the general of the middle-ranking officials, senior officials, and leading left-wing guards. He had absolute power in the court and the middle-ranking officials, and was in charge of all the government affairs of the country. His family members were also in important positions in the official residence of the imperial court. Wanggu ministers, both inside and outside the imperial court, had nothing to fear from him.

古文：南燕主超论宿豫之功，封斛谷提等并为郡、县公。
现代文：南燕国主慕容超评定宿豫之战的功劳，封斛谷提等人为郡公、县公。
English: Murong Chao, the lord of Nanyan, praised the merits of the Battle of Suyuan, and Fong Shugu Ti and others became county officials and county officials.

古文：桂林王镇谏曰： 此数人者，勤民顿兵，为国结怨，何功而封？ 
现代文：桂林王慕容镇劝阻说： 这几个人，劳师动众，为国家结下仇怨，有什么功劳可封？ 
English: Guilin Wang Murong Town dissuaded him, saying: These few people, who have worked hard to mobilize the masses, have forged a grudge for the country. What merit can be sealed?

古文：超怒，不答。
现代文：慕容超大怒，不予回答。
English: Murong was furious and did not answer.

古文：尚书都令史王俨谄事五楼，比岁屡迁，官至左丞。
现代文：尚书都令史王俨谄媚巴结公孙五楼，几年来屡次升迁，官职到了左丞。
English: Shang Shudu made Shi Wang flatter his grandson on the fifth floor, and he was promoted several times over the years, and his official position was Zojo.

古文：国人为之语曰： 欲得侯，事五楼。 
现代文：所以当时百姓根据这些编了句歌谣： 要想封侯，巴结五楼。 
English: Therefore, at that time, the people made up a song based on these: If you want to be a feudal lord, build a fifth floor.

古文：超又遣公孙归等寇济南，俘男女千馀人而去。
现代文：慕容超又派公孙归等侵犯济南，俘获了男女一千多人回去。
English: Murong Chao also sent Gongsun Gui and others to invade Jinan, capturing more than a thousand men and women to go back.

古文：自彭城以南，民皆堡聚以自固。
现代文：因此，从彭城往南，东晋居民全都修筑城堡聚居一起，进行自卫。
English: Therefore, from Pengcheng to the south, the residents of East Jin all built castles and gathered together to defend themselves.

古文：诏并州刺史刘道怜镇淮阴以备之。
现代文：朝廷下诏，命并州刺史刘道怜镇守淮阴，用来戒备南燕骚扰。
English: The imperial court issued an edict, ordering Liu Daoli, the town guard of Huaiyin, to be merged with the state. It was used to guard against Nanyan harassment.

古文：乞伏炽磐入见秦太原公懿于上邽，彭奚念乘虚伐之。
现代文：后秦河州刺史乞伏炽磐到上拜见后秦太原公姚懿，叛将彭奚念趁他后方空虚，出兵讨伐。
English: After Qin Hezhou stabbed history and begged Blazing Rock to come to the top to see the Qin Taiyuan Prince Yao Jun, the traitor Peng Jun took advantage of the emptiness behind him and sent troops to fight.

古文：炽磐闻之，怒，不告懿而归，击奚念，破之，遂围枹罕。
现代文：乞伏炽磐听说之后，大怒，来不及与姚懿告别，急忙回去迎击彭奚念，把他打得大败，于是包围了罕。
English: After hearing this, Begging Blazing Rock was furious. He had no time to say goodbye to Yao Yao, so he hurried back to meet Peng Junneng, beat him badly, and then surrounded Han.

古文：乞伏乾归从秦王兴如平凉；炽磐克枹罕，遣人告乾归，乾归逃还苑川。
现代文：乞伏乾归跟从后秦王姚兴来到平凉。乞伏炽磐攻克罕，派人向乞伏乾归报告，乞伏乾归便逃回苑川。
English: Qianfu Qianfu followed the late Qin King Yao Xing to Pingliang. Qianfu Qianfu attacked Kahan, sent a report to Qianfu Qianfu, and Qianfu Qianfu fled back to Yuanchuan.

古文：冯翊人刘厥聚众数千，据万年作乱，秦太子泓遣镇军将军彭白狼帅东宫禁兵讨之，斩厥，赦其馀党。
现代文：冯翊人刘厥聚集变民几千人，占据万年作乱。后秦太子姚泓派遣镇军将军彭白狼率东宫禁卫兵讨伐他，斩杀了刘厥，赦免了他的党羽。
English: Liu Jue, a man from Fenghuang, gathered thousands of people who had changed their religion, and caused turmoil for ten thousand years. Later, the prince of Qin, Yao Wei, sent the general of the town army, Peng Baiwu, and the guards of the East Palace to fight against him, killed Liu Jue, and pardoned his followers.

古文：诸将请露布，表言广其首级。
现代文：各位将领请求公开宣布这次胜利，上疏的时候多写些杀伤敌人的数量。
English: All generals request that this victory be publicly announced, and that the number of enemy killed and wounded be written down more frequently.

古文：泓不许，曰： 主上委吾后事，不能式遏寇逆，当责躬请罪，尚敢矜诞自为功乎！ 
现代文：姚泓没有允许。说： 皇上把后方的事全部托付给我，我不能预先消灭强盗叛逆，本当自责请罪，怎么还敢狂傲地以欺骗的手段自己夸饰功劳呢？ 
English: Yao Yao did not allow it. He said, "The emperor has entrusted all the affairs of the rear to me. I cannot eliminate the bandit rebellion in advance. I really blame myself. How dare I boast of my merits by deceptive means?"

古文：秦王兴自平凉如朝那，闻姚冲之谋，赐冲死。
现代文：后秦王姚兴从平凉抵达朝那，听说了姚冲曾想回击长安的阴谋，命令姚冲自杀。
English: After Qin King Yao Xing arrived there from Pingliang, he heard that Yao Chong had wanted to strike back at Chang'an's plot and ordered Yao Chong to commit suicide.

古文：三月，刘裕抗表伐南燕，朝议皆以为不可，惟左仆射孟昶、车骑司马谢裕、参军臧熹以为必克，劝裕行。
现代文：三月，东晋刘裕上表请求讨伐南燕，朝廷中商议，大臣们都以为不可轻举妄动。只有左仆射孟昶、车骑司马谢裕、参军臧熹认为一定能胜利，劝说刘裕出征。
English: In March, Liu Yu of the Eastern Jin Dynasty petitioned for a crusade against Nanyan, and the imperial court deliberated on it. The ministers all thought that it was important not to make any rash moves. Only the left-hand servant Sha Mengqi, the driver Ma Xieyu, and the commander Zeng Junqi believed that they would be able to win and persuaded Liu Yu to go to war.

古文：裕以昶监中军留府事。
现代文：刘裕任命孟昶为监中军留府事。
English: Liu Yu appointed Meng Hao as the commander of the Central Military Commission to stay in the capital.

古文：谢裕，安之兄孙也。
现代文：谢裕是谢安哥哥的孙子。
English: Xie Yu is the grandson of Xie An's brother.

古文：初，苻氏之败也，王猛之孙镇恶来奔，以为临澧令。
现代文：当初，前秦苻氏政权衰败的时候，王猛的孙子王镇恶投奔到东晋，朝廷任命他为临澧令。
English: At the beginning, when the former Qin Shi regime was in decline, Wang Zhen, the grandson of Wang Meng, ran away to the East Jin, and the imperial court appointed him as the second-in-command.

古文：镇恶骑乘非长，关弓甚弱，而有谋略，善果断，喜论军国大事。
现代文：王镇恶对骑术不很擅长，拉弓射箭的能力也很弱，但是却有深谋远略，善于对事情作出果决的判断，很喜欢谈论军队国家的大事。
English: Wang Zhenxiong is not very good at riding, and his ability to draw a bow and shoot arrows is also weak. However, he has a far-sighted strategy, is good at making decisive judgments on things, and likes to talk about the important things of the army and the country.

古文：或荐镇恶于刘裕，裕与语，说之，因留宿。
现代文：有人把王镇恶推荐给刘裕，刘裕和他交谈一番，很喜欢他，所以留宿在家里。
English: Someone recommended Wang Zhenxiong to Liu Yu. Liu Yu talked to him for a while and liked him very much, so he stayed at home.

古文：明旦，谓参佐曰： 吾闻将门有将，镇恶信然。 
现代文：第二天早晨，对参军佐僚们说： 我听说名将之门当出大将，王镇恶的确是这样。 
English: The next morning, he said to his advisors, "I have heard that the door of a great general opens to a great general, and this is certainly true of Wang Zhenxiong.

古文：即以为中军参军。
现代文：便任命他为中军参军。
English: He was then appointed to join the Chinese army.

古文：恒山崩。
现代文：恒山出现山崩。
English: A landslide occurred in Hengshan.

古文：夏，四月，乞伏乾归如枹罕，留世子炽磐镇之，收其众得二万，徙都度坚山。
现代文：夏季，四月，后秦镇远将军乞伏乾归从苑川来到罕，留下嫡长子乞伏炽磐镇守那里，收集自己的部众共二万，把都城迁到度坚山。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Qin's general Zhenyuan came to Han from Yuanchuan to beg for refuge, leaving his eldest son to beg for refuge at Blazing Rock, gathering a total of twenty thousand of his subordinates and moving the capital to Du Jian Mountain.

古文：雷震魏天安殿东序。
现代文：雷电击中北魏国天安殿的东墙。
English: Lightning strikes the east wall of the Tian'an Hall in Northern Wei.

古文：魏主珪恶之，命左校以冲车攻东、西序，皆毁之。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋非常忌讳这件事，命令左校用攻城时的一种冲车撞击东西墙，把墙全部撞倒。
English: The ruler of Northern Wei, Tuoba, was very suspicious of this, and ordered Zuo to use a type of vehicle used during the siege to crash into the east and west walls, knocking down the entire wall.

古文：初，珪服寒食散，久之，药发，性多躁扰，忿怒无常，至是浸剧。
现代文：当初，拓跋服食寒食散，时间一长，药性发作，他的性情便变得急躁烦闷，喜怒无常。到了这时，病情更加严重。
English: At first, Tuoba took cold medicine, but as the time passed and the drug took effect, his temperament became impatient, irritable, and moody. At this time, the condition became more serious.

古文：又灾异数见，占者多言当有急变生肘腋。
现代文：加上最近又灾祸怪事屡次发现，占卜算卦的人大多都说要在自己身旁发生急剧性的变化，使拓跋更加忧虑愤恨，心中不安。
English: Coupled with the recent repeated discovery of disasters and strange occurrences, most of the diviners and fortune-tellers said that drastic changes would occur around them, making the Tuoba more worried, angry, and uneasy.

古文：珪忧懑不安，或数日不食，或达旦不寐，追计平生成败得失，独语不止。
现代文：他或者几天不吃饭，或者整夜不睡觉，追忆感怀自己一生来的成功与失败、所得与所失，而不停地自言自语。
English: He would either not eat for days or not sleep all night, constantly talking to himself as he recalled his life's successes and failures, gains and losses.

古文：疑群臣左右皆不可信，每百官奏事至前，追记其旧恶，辄杀之；其馀或颜色变动，或鼻息不调，或步趋失节，或言辞差缪，皆以为怀恶在心，发形于外，往往以手击杀之，死者皆陈天安殿前。
现代文：他怀疑大臣们和左右的侍从护卫都是不可相信的，每当文武是百官上前启奏国事，他都往往想起启奏者过去的错误和罪过，并将其杀掉。其余的人，如有面色稍变，或呼吸不匀，或步履不稳，或话语出现错差的，他都会以为是心中有鬼、居心不良所以才表现在外表上，往往亲手把他们刺死。死的人都被摆放在天安殿前。
English: He suspected that the ministers and the attendants and guards on either side were not to be trusted. Whenever a civil or military official came forward to speak on state affairs, he would often think of the speaker's past mistakes and sins and kill him. The rest of the people, if they had a slight change of face, or uneven breathing, or unsteady gait, or if their words were wrong, he would think that they had ghosts in their hearts and bad intentions, so they would only appear on the outside, and he would often stab them to death with his own hands. The dead people were placed in front of the Tian'an Temple.

古文：朝廷人不自保，百官苟免，莫相督摄；盗贼公行，里巷之间，人为希少。
现代文：朝廷中人人觉得朝不保夕，文武百官苟且偷安，根本不考虑互相之间监督勤政的事，所以国内强盗贼寇公然作案犯法，都城的大街小巷中间，行人稀少。
English: Everyone in the imperial court felt insecure, with hundreds of civil and military officials carefully stealing security and not considering the supervision of diligence between each other. Therefore, domestic robbers and thieves openly committed crimes, and there were few pedestrians in the middle of the streets and alleys of the capital.

古文：珪亦知之，曰： 朕故纵之使然，待过灾年，当更清治之耳。 
现代文：拓跋也知道这种情况，说： 我这不过是故意放纵他们罢了，等到过去了这个灾年，我再重新清理整治这些吧。 
English: Tuoba was also aware of the situation and said, "I'm just deliberately indulging them. When this disaster year is over, I'll clean up and rectify these things again."

古文：是时，群臣畏罪，多不敢求亲近，唯著作郎崔浩恭勤不懈，或终日不归。
现代文：这时，大臣们都害怕惹祸怪罪，多数人不敢去与拓跋接近，只有著作郎崔浩恭谨勤奋，坚持不懈，有的时候整天不回家。
English: At this time, the ministers were afraid of causing trouble and blame, and most people dared not to approach Tuoba. Only the author, Cui Haoqiong, was diligent and persistent, and sometimes did not go home all day.

古文：浩，吏部尚书宏之子也。
现代文：崔浩是吏部尚书崔宏的儿子。
English: Cui Hao is the son of Cui Hong, an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：宏未尝忤旨，亦不谄谀，故宏父子独不被遣。
现代文：崔宏不曾冒犯过国主，也不谄媚阿谀，所以只有崔宠父子二人，没有受到谴责。
English: Cui Hong had never offended the lord of the country, nor was he a sycophant, so only Cui Jie and his son were not condemned.

古文：夏王勃勃帅骑二万攻秦，掠取平凉杂胡七千馀户，进屯依力川。
现代文：夏王刘勃勃率领骑兵二万人进攻后秦，抢掠了平凉地区杂居的胡族七千多户，开进到依力川屯聚。
English: Xia Wang Liu Gong led 20,000 cavalry to attack Houqin, plundered more than 7,000 mixed Hu households in the Pingliang region, and drove into Yili River to gather.

古文：己巳，刘裕发建康，帅舟师自淮入泗。
现代文：己巳，刘裕从建康出发，率水军从淮水进入泗水。
English: At that time, Liu Yu set out from Jiankang and led the navy from Huai Shui to Surabaya.

古文：五月，至下邳，留船舰、辎重，步进至琅邪。所过皆筑城，留兵守之。
现代文：五月，东晋部队到达下邳，把船舰、笨重的军用物资留下，步行开进到琅邪，所路过的地方，都修筑起城池，留下军队把守。
English: In May, the East Jin troops arrived in Jiaozuo, leaving the ships and bulky military supplies behind, and drove on foot into Yuya. Everywhere they passed, they built castles and left the army to guard them.

古文：或谓裕曰： 燕人若塞大岘之险，或坚壁清野，大军深入，不唯无功，将不能自归，奈何？ 
现代文：有人对刘裕说： 燕国人如果把大岘山的险要堵塞住，或者坚固城墙，使散居百姓聚居进去，只把空荡荡的田野留给我们，那么，我们的大部队深入到敌国重地，便不单不能建立什么功业，而且还可能无法安全返回，怎么办？ 
English: Someone said to Liu Yu: "What if the Yan people block up the dangerous parts of Dalat Mountain, or fortify the city wall, so that the scattered people can live there, leaving only the empty fields for us, then our large forces will not only not be able to build any achievements when they go deep into the enemy's country, but may not be able to return safely?

古文：裕曰： 吾虑之熟矣。鲜卑贪婪，不知远计，进利虏获，退惜禾苗，谓我孤军远入，不能持久，不过进据临朐，退守广固，必不能守险清野，敢为诸君保之。 
现代文：刘裕说： 我已经把这些考虑成熟了，鲜卑人生性贪婪，没有长远的打算，前进的时候只盼望多多地抢夺掳掠，后退的时候又吝惜田中禾苗。他们以为我们孤军深入一定不能长久坚持，因此不外乎进军驻守临朐，或者退兵戍卫广固，一定不会据险要之地抵抗、清肃四野防备我们。我敢向你们保证。 
English: Liu Yu said: I have already matured these considerations, I despise human greed, I have no long-term plan, when advancing, I only hope to rob and plunder a lot, and when retreating, I begrudge the Tanaka grass seedlings. They think that we cannot persist for a long time alone, so it is nothing more than marching into Linyi, or retreating to defend Guanggu, and we will not be able to resist and defend the four fields. I assure you.

古文：南燕主超闻有晋师，引群臣会议。
现代文：南燕国主慕容超听说有东晋军队来讨伐，便召集大臣们在一起商议对策。
English: When Murong Chao, the ruler of Nanyan, heard that the Eastern Jin army was coming to attack, he called his ministers together to discuss countermeasures.

古文：征虏将军公孙五楼曰： 吴兵轻果，利在速战，不可争锋。
现代文：征虏将军公孙五楼说： 吴地的兵众轻装果决，方便的是速战速决，不能与他们迎面作战。
English: Conscript General Gongsun Wulou said: The soldiers in Wudi are lightly armed and decisive, and it is convenient to fight quickly. It is not possible to fight them face to face.

古文：宜据大岘，使不得入，旷日延时，沮其锐气，然后徐简精骑二千，循海而南，绝其粮道，别敕段晖帅兗州之众，缘山东下，腹背击之，此上策也。
现代文：应该据守大岘，让他们无法进入，拖延时间，把他们的锐气泄掉，然后再从容地挑选精壮骑兵二千人，沿着海滨南下，断绝他们运粮草的通道，另外再命令段晖率兖州的军队沿着山地向东进军，在后背处进攻他们。
English: They should hold Dahu, make it impossible for them to enter, delay the time, let them lose their spirit, and then calmly select two thousand strong cavalry, go south along the seashore, cut off their grain and grass transportation channels, and further order Duan Yu and the army of Zhangzhou to march east along the mountains and attack them in the rear.

古文：各命守宰依险自固，校其资储之外，馀悉焚荡，芟除禾苗，使敌无所资，彼侨军无食，求战不得，旬月之间，可以坐制，此中策也。
现代文：这是最好的办法，分别命令各地的守宰官员依靠险要自己固守，考虑估计自己所用的粮食物质等以外，剩下的全部烧毁，再把田野中的庄稼全部割光，让来犯的敌人没有东西可补充给养，他们远征的部队既没粮草，求战又找不到对手，一个月之间，我们就可以坐在那里控制他们了。这是一般的办法。
English: This is the best way. We should separately order the officials of the garrisons in various regions to rely on the risk of their own self-preservation, consider estimating the grain and food quality they use, and burn all the rest, and then cut off all the crops in the fields, so that the invading enemy has nothing to supplement the supply. Their expeditionary troops have no grain and grass, and they can't find an opponent to fight. In a month, we can sit there and control them. This is a general method.

古文：纵贼入岘，出城逆战，此下策也。 
现代文：把贼兵放入岘山，然后我们再出城迎战他们，这是最不好的办法了。 
English: It would be the worst thing to do to let the bandits into Shaoshan, and then we would have to go out and fight them.

古文：超曰： 今岁星居齐，以天道推之，不战自克。
现代文：慕容超说： 今年，上天的吉星正在我们三齐的头上，按照天道推测，我们用不着作战，就会胜利。
English: Murong Chao said, "This year, the auspicious star of heaven is on the heads of all three of us. According to the prediction of heaven, we do not need to fight, we will be victorious.

古文：客主势殊，以人事言之，彼远来疲弊，势不能久。
现代文：现在客军和主人的势力相差太悬殊，按照人间事理来看，他们远道而来，疲惫不堪一定不能耽搁太久。
English: Now the power difference between the guest army and the host is too great. According to human reason, they have come a long way, and they must not delay too long because they are exhausted.

古文：吾据五州之地，拥富庶之民，铁骑万群，麦禾布野，奈何芟苗徙民，鲜自蹙弱乎！
现代文：我据守五个州的地域，拥有富庶的百姓，强大的骑兵万群，茁壮的庄稼遍布四野，怎么能割倒庄稼迁移百姓，首先自己向人示弱呢？
English: How can I defend a five-state territory, with a rich populace, a powerful cavalry, and flourishing crops all over the four fields, how can I cut down the crops and relocate the people, and first of all, show weakness to others?

古文：不如纵使入岘，以精骑蹂之，何忧不克！ 
现代文：我看，不如放他们进入大岘山，再派精壮骑兵前去践踏他们，何必担心打不败他们。 
English: In my opinion, it would be better to let them enter the Dafeng Mountains, and then send strong cavalry to trample them, why worry about defeating them.

古文：辅国将军广宁王贺赖卢苦谏不从，退谓五楼曰： 必若此，亡无日矣！ 
现代文：辅国将军广宁王慕容贺赖卢苦苦劝阻，慕容超只是不听。退朝后，慕容贺赖卢对公孙五楼说： 如果一定这样的话，亡国也就没几天了！ 
English: Murong Chao did not listen to the bitter dissuasion of the assistant general of Guangning Wang, Murong He Lailu. After retiring, Murong He Lailu said to the fifth floor of Gongsun: If this is the case, the country will be ruined in a few days!

古文：太尉桂林王镇曰： 陛下必以骑兵利平地者，宜出岘逆战，战而不胜，犹可退守，不宜纵敌为岘，自弃险固也。 
现代文：太尉、桂林王慕容镇说： 陛下如果一定认为骑兵在平地作战方便的话，就应该冲出岘山去迎战敌人，即使在战斗中不能取胜，也还可以退守。 不应该放纵敌兵进入岘山，自己放弃险要的地势。 
English: Captain Guilin Wang Murongzhen said, "Your Majesty, if you think it is convenient for cavalry to fight on flat ground, you should rush out of Shaoshan to meet the enemy, even if you cannot win in battle, you can also retreat, you should not allow the enemy to enter Shaoshan and give up the critical situation.

古文：超不从。
现代文：慕容超拒不听从。
English: Murong Chao refused to obey.

古文：镇出，谓韩讠卓曰： 主上既不能逆战却敌，又不肯徙民清野，延敌入腹，坐待攻围，酷似刘璋矣。
现代文：慕容镇退出后，对韩说： 主上既不想主动迎战，把敌人击退，又不同意迁移居民，清肃原野。把敌人引进自己的腹地，坐在那里等待敌人的进攻围困，这一点太像汉末的刘璋了。
English: After the withdrawal of Murong Town, he said to Han: The Lord does not want to take the initiative to fight and repel the enemy, but does not agree to relocate residents and clean up the fields. Bringing the enemy into his hinterland and sitting there waiting for the enemy to attack and besiege is too much like Liu Ye at the end of Han Dynasty.

古文：今年国灭，吾必死之。
现代文：今年之内我们国家就要灭亡，我只有一死。
English: Within this year, our country is going to perish. I only have one death.

古文：卿中华之士，复为文身矣。 
现代文：但是你作为中原人士，却要像江南人那样被重新纹身了。 
English: But as a person from the Central Plains, you have to be re-tattooed like a person from the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：超闻之，大怒，收镇下狱。
现代文：慕容超听说这话后，暴跳如雷，把慕容镇抓起来送进了监狱。
English: After Murong Chao heard this, he was furious and arrested Murong Town and sent him to prison.

古文：乃摄莒、梁父戌，修城隍，简士马，以待之。
现代文：于是他下令撤回莒城、梁父两地的守军，加固修筑都城的防御工程，遴选将士和战马，等待东晋兵来。
English: Therefore, he ordered the withdrawal of the defending army from the two places of Lucheng and Liangzhu, strengthened the defense project of building the capital, selected soldiers and horses, and waited for the East Jin soldiers to come.

古文：刘裕过大岘，燕兵不出。
现代文：刘裕顺利通过大岘，南燕的军队一直没有出现。
English: Liu Yu successfully passed through Dalat, and Nanyan's army never appeared.

古文：裕举手指天，喜形于色。
现代文：刘裕举起手来，指着上天，禁不住脸上露出喜色。
English: Liu Yu raised his hand, pointed to the sky, and couldn't help but smile.

古文：左右曰： 公未见敌而先喜，何也？ 
现代文：左右的侍从们说： 您没有看见敌人却先高兴起来，这是为什么？ 
English: The attendants on both sides said, "You didn't see the enemy, but you were happy first. Why is that?"

古文：裕曰： 兵已过险，士有必死之志；馀粮栖亩，人无匮乏之忧。
现代文：刘裕说： 大军已过险关，军队没有退路可走，因此一定会有拼死作战的决心；余粮尚在田亩之中储存，我们又没有了缺乏粮草的忧虑。
English: Liu Yu said: The great army has passed the critical point, the army has no way out, so it will definitely have the determination to fight to the death; the surplus grain is still stored in the fields, and we have no worries about the lack of grain and grass.

古文：虏已入吾掌中矣。 
现代文：盗匪已经完全落入了我的手中。 
English: The bandits have completely fallen into my hands.

古文：六月，己巳，裕至东莞。
现代文：六月，己巳，刘裕大军抵达东莞。
English: In June, Liu Yu's army arrived in Dongguan.

古文：超先遣公孙五楼、贺赖卢及左将军段晖等，将步骑五万屯临朐，闻晋兵入岘，自将步骑四万往就之，使五楼帅骑进据巨蔑水。
现代文：慕容超先派遣公孙五楼、慕容贺赖卢以及左将军段晖等人统领步、骑兵共五万人屯据在临朐，听说东晋兵马已经通过岘山，便亲自带领步、骑兵共四万人前去迎战，并派公孙五楼率领骑兵开进巨蔑水据守。
English: Murong Chao first sent Gongsun Vrou, Murong Herailu and the left general Duan Yu to lead the way, with a total of fifty thousand cavalry stationed in Linyi. When he heard that the East Jin soldiers and horses had passed Lushan, he personally led the way, with a total of forty thousand cavalry to meet the battle, and sent Gongsun Vrou to lead the cavalry into the Jiuyishui garrison.

古文：前锋孟龙符与战，破之，五楼退走。
现代文：东晋部队的前锋孟龙符与他展开激战，将他打败，公孙五楼败退而走。
English: The forward of the East Jin troops, Meng Longfu, launched a fierce battle with him, defeated him, and Gongsun Fifth Floor retreated.

古文：裕以车四千乘为左右翼，方轨徐进，与燕兵战于临朐南，日向昃，胜负犹未决。
现代文：刘裕用四千乘军车作为左右的屏障，排成方阵缓缓向前推进，在临朐以南的地方与南燕军队进行会战，太阳渐渐西移，双方的胜负还没有最后明朗。
English: Liu Yu used four thousand military vehicles as a barrier to the left and right, and slowly pushed forward in a square formation. In the south of Linyi, he fought with the Nanyan army. The sun gradually moved westward, and the victory or defeat of both sides was not finally clear.

古文：参军胡籓言于裕曰： 燕悉兵出战，临朐城中留守必寡，愿以奇兵从间道取其城，此韩信所以破赵也。 
现代文：东晋参军胡藩对刘裕说： 南燕倾巢出动，与我们作战，临朐城中的守军一定很少。我愿意带领一支出敌不意的部队从小路去夺取这座城池，这是韩信击败赵国的办法。 
English: Hu Han, who had joined the Eastern Jin Army, said to Liu Yu, "Nanyan will rush out to fight us, and the defenders in Linyi City must be few. I am willing to lead a surprise force to seize this city from a side road. This is Han Xin's way of defeating Zhao Guo."

古文：裕遣籓及谘议参军檀韶、建威将军河内向弥潜师出燕兵之后，攻临朐，声言轻兵自海道至矣，向弥擐甲先登，遂克之。
现代文：刘裕于是派遣胡藩以及谘议参军檀韶、建成将军河内人向弥暗自带兵绕到南燕军队的后面，进攻临朐，号称是轻装部队从海路直接赶来增援的。向弥身披铠甲，首先登上城墙，于是攻破该城。
English: Liu Yu then dispatched the Hu clan, as well as the consultative military forces of Dang Quan and Jian Quan, the general of Hanoi, to attack Linyi, leading the troops to go around the back of the Nanyan army and attack Linyi, claiming that the light-armed troops came directly from the sea to reinforce.

古文：超大惊，单骑就段晖于城南。
现代文：慕容超听说后，大吃一惊，单人匹马从城中逃出，赶到城南投奔段晖。
English: After hearing this, Murong Chao was taken aback. He ran out of the city single-handed and rushed to the south of the city to join Duan Xuan.

古文：裕因纵兵奋击，燕众大败，斩段晖等大将十馀人，超遁还广固，获其玉玺、辇及豹尾。
现代文：刘裕趁势催动大军奋力战斗，南燕军队大败，斩杀了段晖等大将十多人，慕容超逃回广固，晋兵缴获了他的玉玺、车辇以及挂在车后的豹尾。
English: Liu Yu took advantage of the situation to urge the army to fight hard. Nanyan's army was defeated and killed more than ten generals such as Duan Yu. Murong Chao fled back to Guanggu. Jin soldiers captured his jade scepter, chariot scepter and leopard's tail hanging behind the chariot.

古文：裕乘胜逐北至广固，丙子，克其大城，超收众入保小城。
现代文：刘裕乘胜追击，直到广固。丙子，又攻克了广固外围的外城。
English: Liu Yu took advantage of the victory to pursue until Guanggu. Bizi, and conquered the outer city of Guanggu.

古文：裕筑长围守之，围高三丈，穿堑三重；抚纳降附，采拔贤俊，华、夷大悦。
现代文：慕容超聚集众人进入内城据守。刘裕兴筑长墙围困他们，墙高三丈，挖了三道地沟。好言抚慰接纳投降归附的人士，选择提拔贤才俊杰，不管是汉人还是夷人，都很高兴。
English: Murong Chao gathered many people to enter the inner city and defend it. Liu Yu Xing and others built a long wall to encircle them, the wall was three stories high, and three trenches were dug. Good words comforted those who accepted surrender and affiliation, and those who chose to promote talents, whether they were Han or barbarians, were very happy.

古文：于是因齐地粮储，悉停江、淮漕运。
现代文：从此，因为夺取了齐地这里储存的粮草，便把从长江、淮河水路运输军粮的工作，全部停止。
English: From then on, because the grain and grass stored here in Qi Di was seized, the work of transporting military grain from the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River was completely stopped.

古文：超遣尚书郎张纲乞师于秦，赦桂林王镇，以为录尚书、都督中外诸军事，引见，谢之，且问计焉。
现代文：慕容超派遣尚书郎张纲向后秦请求救兵，又赦免了桂林王慕容镇，任命他为录尚书、都督中外诸军事，把他请来相见，并谢了罪，又问他有什么好办法。
English: Murong Chao sent Shang Shulang Zhang Gang to Houqin to request the rescue of soldiers, and pardoned Guilin King Murong Zhen, appointed him as Shang Shulang, the military governor of foreign countries, invited him to meet, and thanked him for his sin, and asked him what he could do.

古文：镇曰： 百姓之心，系于一人。
现代文：慕容镇说： 百姓的心事、希望，全部维系在您一个人身上。
English: Murong Town said: The people's hearts and hopes are all tied to you.

古文：今陛下亲董六师，奔败而还。群臣离心，士民丧气。
现代文：现在陛下亲自指挥大部队前去迎战，结果是战败跑回，不但大臣们的心思难以统一，百姓也都丧失了胆气。
English: Now His Majesty personally commanded a large force to go to war, but the result was defeat and retreat. Not only was it difficult to unify the minds of the ministers, but the people also lost their courage.

古文：闻秦人自有内患，恐不暇分兵救人。
现代文：我听说秦国自己也正有内患没有清除，恐怕也没有功夫分出兵力解救别人。
English: I've heard that Qin has its own internal problems that it hasn't cleared up, and I'm afraid it doesn't have the resources to send troops to rescue others.

古文：散卒还者尚有数万，宜悉出金帛以饵之，更决一战。
现代文：现在我们逃散的士兵回来的还有几万，应该把国库中的金银布匹等全部拿出来引诱他们，让他们再去决一死战。
English: Now, tens of thousands of our dispersed soldiers have returned. We should take all the gold, silver, cloth, etc. from the treasury to lure them, and let them go fight another war to the death.

古文：若天命助我，必能破敌；如其不然，死亦为美，比于闭门待尽，不犹愈乎！ 
现代文：如果天命应该帮助我们，那么这一次一定能击败敌人；如果不这样，那么死了也是一件美事。这和关起门来坐在这里等死，不也还强出许多吗？ 
English: If fate should help us, then this time we will surely defeat the enemy; if not, then death is also a beautiful thing. Isn't it a lot better than sitting here with the door closed and waiting to die?

古文：司徒乐浪王惠曰： 不然。
现代文：司徒、乐浪王慕容惠说： 不对。
English: "That's not right," said Murong Hui, a scholar and music lover.

古文：晋兵乘胜，气势百倍，我以败军之卒当之，不亦难乎！
现代文：晋军乘胜而来，气势旺盛，比原来还要超出百倍，我们用刚刚惨败的士卒抵挡他们，不也是太难了吗？
English: The Jin army has come to take advantage of the victory, it is vigorous, and it is a hundred times more powerful than the original. We use the soldiers who have just been defeated to resist them. Isn't it too difficult?

古文：秦虽与勃勃相持，不足为患；且与我分据中原，势如脣齿，安得不来相救！
现代文：秦国虽然与刘勃勃互相僵持、斗争不休，但是也不足以把这当成祸患。况且他们与我们分别占据中原地区，彼此依傍，形势就像唇齿一样，怎么能够不来救助我们呢？
English: Although the state of Qin and Liu Gong were at loggerheads with each other and fought ceaselessly, it was not enough to regard this as a calamity. Moreover, they occupied the Central Plains region separately from us, leaning on each other. The situation was like a fight to the death. How could they not come to our rescue?

古文：但不遣大臣则不能得重兵，尚书令韩范为燕、秦所重，宜遣乞师。 
现代文：但是，不派出官职重要的大臣去，就请不来更多的援兵。尚书令韩范一直被我们和秦国所重视，应该派他去请求援军。 
English: However, we cannot invite more reinforcements without sending an important official minister. Shang Shuling Han Fan has always been valued by us and Qin, and he should be sent to request reinforcements.

古文：超从之。
现代文：慕容超听从了他的意见。
English: Murong Chao followed his advice.

古文：秋，七月，加刘裕北青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：秋季七月，东晋加授刘裕为北青、北冀二州的刺吏。
English: In the autumn of July, the Eastern Jin Dynasty promoted Liu Yu to be the assassin of the Northern Qing Dynasty and Northern Hebei Province.

古文：南燕尚书略阳垣尊及弟京兆太守苗逾城来降，裕以为行参军。
现代文：南燕尚书略阳人垣尊和他的弟弟京兆太守垣苗，跳出城墙向东晋部队投降，刘裕任命他们为行参军。
English: Nanyan Shangshu, Yangren, and his younger brother, Jingzhao, jumped out of the city wall to surrender to the East Jin troops, and Liu Yu appointed them to join the army.

古文：尊、苗皆超所委任以为腹心者也。
现代文：垣尊、垣苗都是慕容超喜欢、重用并引为心腹的人。
English: Both Kakizono and Kakimea are people that Murong Chao likes and uses a lot, and considers to be his confidants.

古文：或谓裕曰： 张纲有巧思，若得纲使为攻具，广固必可拔也。 
现代文：有人对刘裕说： 张纲心灵手巧，如果把他抓来，让他制作攻城用具，广固一定可以攻克。 
English: Someone said to Liu Yu: Zhang Gang's mind is dexterous. If you capture him and let him make siege tools, Guanggu will surely be able to conquer.

古文：会纲自长安还，太山太守申宣执之，送于裕。
现代文：正好张纲从长安回来，太山太守申宣把他抓住，送给刘裕。
English: Just as Zhang Gang was returning from Chang'an, the governor of Taishan, Shen Xuan, grabbed him and gave him to Liu Yu.

古文：裕升纲于楼车，使周城呼曰： 刘勃勃大破秦军，无兵相救。 
现代文：刘裕让张纲登上很高的楼车，命令他在城的四周对城内高喊： 刘勃勃把秦军打得大败，所以没有谁能派兵来救你们了。 
English: Liu Yu ordered Zhang Gang to board a very tall carriage and ordered him to shout around the city: "Liu Gong has defeated the Qin army, so no one can send soldiers to save you."

古文：城中莫不失色。
现代文：城中将士听到这话没有不大惊失色的。
English: When the city's generals heard this, they were not a little shocked and disgraced.

古文：江南每发兵及遣使者至广固，裕辄潜遣兵夜迎之，明日，张旗鸣鼓而至，北方之民执兵负粮归裕者，日以千数。
现代文：东晋从江南每次发兵前来增援，或者派遣使者来广固慰问，刘裕都常常暗自派兵卒在前一天夜里迎候，第二天再打着大旗、敲着锣鼓到来。
English: Whenever the Eastern Jin Dynasty sent troops from the south of the Yangtze River to reinforce, or sent envoys to Guanggu to offer condolences, Liu Yu would often secretly send soldiers to meet them the night before, and then come the next day with a big flag and drums.

古文：围城益急，张华、封恺皆为裕所获，超请割大岘以南地为籓臣，裕不许。秦王兴遣使谓裕曰： 慕容氏相与邻好，今晋攻之急，秦已遣铁骑十万屯洛阳；晋军不还，当长驱而进。 
现代文：北方的百姓秦王兴遣使谓裕曰： 慕容氏相与邻好，今晋攻之急，秦已遣铁骑十万屯洛阳；晋军不还，当长驱而进。 
English: The people in the north of Qin King Xing sent an envoy to say: "The Murong clan is friendly and good-neighborly, now the Jin attack is urgent, Qin has sent an iron cavalry of 100,000 to Luoyang; the Jin army will not return, but will advance.

古文：裕呼秦使者谓曰： 语汝姚兴：我克燕之后，息兵三年，当取关、洛。今能自送，便可速来！ 
现代文：裕呼秦使者谓曰： 语汝姚兴；我克燕之后，息兵三年，当取关、洛；今能自送，便可速来！ 
English: Yuhu Qin's messenger is said to have said: "Let's go to Yaoxing; after I defeat Yan, I'll stay for three years, and when I get there, I'll go to Luo; now that I can go myself, I'll come quickly!"

古文：刘穆之闻有秦使，驰入见裕，而秦使者已去。
现代文：刘穆之闻有秦使，驰入见裕，而秦使者已去。
English: Liu Mu heard that a Qin envoy had arrived in Mianyu, but the Qin envoy had already left.

古文：裕以所言告穆之，穆之尤之曰： 常日事无大小，必赐预谋，此宜善详，去何遽尔答之！
现代文：裕以所言告穆之。穆之尤之曰： 常日事无大小，必赐预谋，此宜善详，云何遽尔答之！
English: Yu Yu told him what he had said. Mu Zhi You said: Everyday things are no big deal, you must give forethought, this should be well-known, what a hasty answer!

古文：此语不足以威敌，适足以怒之。
现代文：此语不足以威敌，适足以怒之。
English: It's not enough to intimidate, it's enough to infuriate.

古文：若广固未下，羌寇奄至，不审何以待之？ 
现代文：若广固未下，羌寇奄至，不审何以待之？ 
English: If Guanggu has not yet come down, and the election of Yankou has not yet taken place, why wait?

古文：裕笑曰： 此是兵机，非卿所解，故不相语耳。
现代文：裕笑曰： 此是兵机，非卿所解，故不相语耳。
English: Yu Xiao said: This is a military machine, it is not explained by the lord, so it is not mutually intelligible.

古文：夫兵贵神速，彼若审能赴救，必畏我知，宁容先遣信命，逆设此言！
现代文：夫兵贵神速，彼若审能赴救，必畏我知，宁容先遣信命，逆设此言！
English: A pair of soldiers are very fast, if he can go to the rescue, he will be afraid of me, I would rather trust my life in advance, contrary to this saying!

古文：是自张大之辞也。
现代文：是自张大之辞也。
English: It's also a big boast.

古文：晋师不出，为日久矣。
现代文：晋师不出，为日久矣。
English: It's been a long time since Jin Shi failed to appear.

古文：羌见伐齐，始将内惧。自保不暇，何能救人邪！ 
现代文：他们保全自己还来不及，怎么还能援救别人呢？ 
English: They can't save themselves, so how can they save others?

古文：乞伏乾归复即秦王位，大赦，改元更始，公卿以下皆复本位。
现代文：后秦镇远将军乞伏乾归重新登上秦王之位，下令大赦，改年号为更始，公卿以下的官员，全部恢复以前的职位。
English: Later, General Qin Zhenyuan begged Qian to return and ascend the throne of Qin again, ordered an amnesty, changed the year to a new beginning, and all officials below the nobility were restored to their previous positions.

古文：慕容氏在魏者百馀家，谋逃去，魏主珪尽杀之。
现代文：慕容氏家族，在北魏有一百多户，他们计划逃走，被北魏国主拓跋全部杀掉了。
English: There were more than a hundred Murong families in Northern Wei. They planned to escape, but were all killed by Tuoba, the ruler of Northern Wei.

古文：初，魏太尉穆崇与卫王仪伏甲谋弑魏主珪，不果；珪惜崇、仪之功，秘而不问。
现代文：当初，北魏太尉穆崇与卫王拓跋仪，布下埋伏全副武装的兵士，阴谋刺杀北魏国主拓跋，没有成功。拓跋惋惜穆崇、拓跋仪过去的赫赫战功，把此事压下，没有追查。
English: At first, Northern Wei Lieutenant Mu Chong and Wei King Tuoba Yi, fully armed soldiers lying in ambush, plotted to assassinate Tuoba, the ruler of Northern Wei, without success. Tuoba regretted Mu Chong and Tuoba Yi's past great war exploits, suppressed the matter, and did not investigate.

古文：及珪有疾，多杀大臣，仪自疑而出亡，追获之。
现代文：到了拓跋有病之后，杀了许多大臣，拓跋仪担心自己难逃一死，逃亡外地，被追上抓获。
English: After arriving at Tuoba, he fell ill and killed many ministers. Fearing that he would die, Tuoba fled the country and was caught.

古文：八月，赐仪死。
现代文：八月，命令拓跋仪自杀。
English: In August, he ordered Ms. Tuoba to commit suicide.

古文：封融诣刘裕降。
现代文：南燕故臣、后来投奔北魏的封融，前去拜见刘裕，投降。
English: Nanyan's old retainer, who later joined the Northern Wei Dynasty, went to see Liu Yu and surrendered.

古文：九月，加刘裕太尉，裕固辞。
现代文：九月，东晋加封刘裕为太尉。刘裕坚决推辞。
English: In September, the Eastern Jin Dynasty promoted Liu Yu to the rank of lieutenant. Liu Yu resolutely refused.

古文：秦王兴自将击夏王勃勃，至贰城，遣安远将军姚详等分督租运。
现代文：后秦主姚兴准备亲自带兵征讨夏王刘勃勃，到达贰城，派遣安远将军姚详等人分别督运粮草。
English: Afterward, the Qin lord Yao Xing prepared to personally lead an army to recruit Xia Wang Liu Gong, arrived in Shicheng, and sent Anyuan General Yao Zhe and others to supervise the transportation of grain and grass.

古文：勃勃乘虚奄至，兴惧，欲轻骑就详等。
现代文：刘勃勃乘虚突然前来袭击，姚兴非常害怕，打算轻装骑马去到姚详那里躲避。
English: Liu Gong suddenly came to attack, Yao Xing was very scared and planned to ride lightly to Yao Zhao's place to hide.

古文：右仆射韦华曰： 若銮舆一动，众心骇惧，必不战自溃，详营亦未必可至也。 
现代文：右仆射韦华说： 如果陛下的大驾一动，部众的心中就会惊骇恐惧，一定不等打仗便自行崩溃，那样的话，恐怕陛下也不一定能跑到姚详的军营中去。 
English: His right-hand man Wei Hua said, "If His Majesty makes a sudden move, the hearts of his subordinates will be shocked and frightened, and they will surely collapse without waiting for a war. In that case, I am afraid that His Majesty may not be able to run to Yao Zhe's military camp.

古文：兴与勃勃战，秦兵大败，将军姚榆生为勃勃所擒，左将军姚文宗等力战，勃勃乃退，兴还长安。
现代文：姚兴与刘勃勃对战，后秦军大败，将军姚榆生也被刘勃勃抓获。左将军姚文崇乘等人拼死力战，刘勃勃才退兵，姚兴回到长安。
English: Yao Xing and Liu Qun fought, after the Qin army was defeated, General Yao Xinsheng was also captured by Liu Qun. Left General Yao Wenzhong and others fought desperately, Liu Qun only retired, Yao Xing returned to Chang'an.

古文：勃勃复攻秦敕奇堡、黄石固、我罗城，皆拔之，徙七千馀家于大城，以其丞相右地代领幽州牧以镇之。
现代文：刘勃勃又进攻后秦的敕奇堡、黄石固、我罗城，全部攻克，把七千多户居民迁移到大城，任命他的丞相右地代兼幽州牧，镇守在那里。
English: Liu Gong also attacked Qin's Qinqibao, Huangshiqiu, and Guara, and conquered all of them, moved more than seven thousand residents to Dacheng, and appointed him as the prime minister and deputy governor of Yuzhou, and the town guard there.

古文：初，兴遣卫将军姚强帅步骑一万，随韩范往就姚绍于洛阳，并兵以救南燕，及为勃勃所败，追强兵还长安。
现代文：当初，姚兴派遣右将军姚强，统帅步兵骑兵共一万人，随韩范到洛阳与姚绍会合，然后两个合兵一起去救援南燕，等到被刘勃勃打败之后，又派人追上姚强，让他带领部队回长安。
English: At first, Yao Xing dispatched the right general Yao Qiang, the commander of the infantry and cavalry of a total of ten thousand people, followed Han Fan to Luoyang to meet with Yao Shao, and then the two soldiers went to rescue Nanyan. After being defeated by Liu Gong, he sent someone to catch up with Yao Qiang and let him lead the troops back to Chang'an.

古文：韩范叹曰： 天灭燕矣！ 
现代文：韩范叹息说： 上天让我燕灭亡了！ 
English: Han Fan sighed and said, "God let my swallow die!"

古文：南燕尚书张俊自长安还，降于刘裕，因说裕曰： 燕人所恃者，谓韩范必能致秦师也，今得范以示之，燕必降矣。 
现代文：南燕尚书张俊从长安回来，投降了刘裕，又对刘裕说： 燕人所仗恃的，是以为韩范一定能请来秦的军队。现在抓住韩范让他们看看，那么燕国一定会投降。 
English: Southern Yan Shangshu Zhang Jun returned from Chang'an, surrendered to Liu Yu, and said to Liu Yu: Yan people fought because they thought that Han Fan would definitely invite Qin's army. Now grab Han Fan and let them see, then Yan will definitely surrender.

古文：裕乃表范为散骑常侍，且以书招之，长水校尉王蒲劝范奔秦，范曰： 刘裕起布衣，灭桓玄，复晋室；今兴师伐燕，所向崩溃，此殆天授，非人力也。
现代文：于是，刘裕一面上疏给朝廷，请求封韩范为散骑常侍，一面写信给韩范，招降他。后秦长水校尉王蒲劝说韩范投奔后秦国，韩范说： 刘裕从一个平民百姓起家，剿灭桓玄，兴复晋朝皇室，这次起兵讨伐燕国，所到之处，无不土崩瓦解，这一定是上天的旨意，不是人力所能做到的。
English: As a result, Liu Yu, on the one hand, petitioned the imperial court to appoint Han Fan as a cavalryman, and on the other hand, wrote a letter to Han Fan to recruit him. After the Qin Dynasty, the Changshui lieutenant Wang Pu persuaded Han Fan to go to the Qin Dynasty. Han Fan said: Liu Yu started from a common people, exterminated Huan Xuan, and restored the imperial family of the Jin Dynasty. This time, he raised an army to fight against the Yan Kingdom, and everywhere he went, everything collapsed. This must be the will of heaven, not what man can do.

古文：燕亡，则秦为之次矣，吾不可以再辱。 
现代文：燕国亡，那么秦国紧跟着就是第二个，我不能再受一次亡国之辱。 
English: If Yan's country fell, then Qin's would be second. I can't take the humiliation of losing my country again.

古文：遂降于裕。
现代文：于是，投降了刘裕。
English: As a result, Liu Yu surrendered.

古文：裕将范循城，城中人情离沮。
现代文：刘裕带着韩范绕城一周，城中人见了，情绪顿时一落千丈，人心离散。
English: Liu Yu took Han Fan for a walk around the city. When they saw people in the city, their mood suddenly plummeted and their hearts were scattered.

古文：或劝燕主超诛范家，超以范弟讠卓尽忠无贰，并范家赦之。
现代文：有人劝说南燕国主慕容超诛杀韩范全家，慕容超则因为韩范弟弟韩为国尽忠，从无二心，所以赦免了韩范的家属。
English: Some people tried to persuade Murong Chao, the ruler of Nanyan, to kill Han Fan's entire family. However, Murong Chao pardoned Han Fan's family members because Han Fan's younger brother, Han, was loyal to the country and never had an ulterior motive.

古文：冬，十月，段宏自魏奔于裕。
现代文：冬季十月，投奔北魏的南燕旧臣段宏，从北魏投奔刘裕。
English: In the winter of October, Nan Yan's former vassal Duan Hong defected to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and Liu Yu defected from the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：张纲为裕造攻具，尽诸奇巧。
现代文：张纲为刘裕设计制造的攻城用具，每件都是奇妙精巧无比。
English: Every piece of siege equipment Zhang Gang designed and manufactured for Liu Yu is wonderfully exquisite.

古文：超怒，县纲母于城上，支解之。
现代文：慕容超大怒，把他的母亲悬挂在城墙之上，并把她活活支解。
English: Furious, Murong hanged his mother from the city wall and then skinned her alive.

古文：西秦王乾归立夫人边氏为王后，世子炽磐为太子，仍命炽磐都督中外诸军、录尚书事。
现代文：西秦王乞伏乾归册立他的夫人边氏为皇后，立他的世子乞伏炽磐为太子，仍然命乞伏炽磐都督中外诸军、录尚书事。
English: The king of Western Qin begged Fuqian for his return and made his wife Bian Shigu the empress, and made his son Fuqian the crown prince. He still begged for his life from Fuqian, the capital of all the armies at home and abroad, and recorded the matter in his records.

古文：以屋引破光为河州刺史，镇枹罕；以南安焦遗为太子太师，与参军国大谋。
现代文：任命屋引破光为河州刺史，镇守罕。任命南安人焦遗为太子太师，参与军事、国家的机密大事。
English: The appointment house broke the light for the history of Hezhou, and the town was guarded. The Nan'an people appointed Jiao Yu as the prince and teacher, and participated in military and state secret affairs.

古文：乾归曰： 焦生非特名儒，乃王佐之才也。 
现代文：乞伏乾归说： 焦先生不但是一位著名的儒士，而且还是一位辅佐君王的大人才。 
English: "Mr. Jiao is not only a famous Confucianist, but also a great talent who assisted the king," said Qian Gui.

古文：谓炽磐曰： 汝事之当如事吾。 
现代文：对乞伏炽磐说： 你对待他应该像对待我一样。 
English: And said unto the Rock, Thou shalt do unto him as he hath done unto me.

古文：炽磐拜遗于床下。
现代文：乞伏炽磐就在焦遗所坐床座之前，拜倒在地。
English: Begging, Blazing Rock prostrated himself before the bed on which the charred remains sat.

古文：遗子华至孝，乾归欲以女妻之，辞曰： 凡娶妻者，欲与之共事二亲也。
现代文：焦遗的儿子焦华，非常孝顺，乞伏乾归打算把女儿嫁给他。焦华推辞说： 凡是娶妻的人，大都打算和她一起服侍二位老人。
English: Jiao Hua, the son of Jiao Yi, was very filial and begged Qian Gui to marry his daughter to him. Jiao Hua declined, saying, "Anyone who marries a wife usually intends to serve two old men with her."

古文：今以王姬之贵，下嫁蓬茅之士，诚非其匹，臣惧其阙于中馈，非所愿也。 
现代文：现在，她以王姬那样的高贵身份，下嫁给我这样一个居住在茅草屋中的贫寒之士，实在不是合适的匹配，我害怕她将来不能很好地操持家务，尽妇人的孝道，这不是我的愿望。 
English: Now, with her noble status like Wang Ji, marrying me, a poor man living in a thatched hut, is not a suitable match. I am afraid that she will not be able to do housework well in the future and fulfill women's filial piety. This is not my wish.

古文：乾归曰： 卿之所行，古人之事，孤女不足以强卿。 
现代文：乞伏乾归说： 你所坚持的，是只有古人才有的高洁纯朴之风，我这个女儿，是不配勉强你来娶她的。 
English: "What you are insisting on is the pure and simple style that only the ancients had. This daughter of mine is not worthy for you to force her to marry you.

古文：乃以为尚书民部郎。
现代文：于是任命他为尚书民部郎。
English: As a result, he was appointed as the Minister of Popular Affairs.

古文：北燕王云自以无功德而居大位，内怀危惧，常畜养壮士以为腹心爪牙。
现代文：北燕王高云自以为没有功德，但却登上如此重大的高位，所以心中总有危险恐惧的感觉。他常常选拔、供养一些精壮的武士作为自己的心腹、爪牙。
English: The king of the Northern Yan, Gao Yun, thought that he had no merits, but he ascended to such an important high position, so there was always a feeling of danger and fear in his heart. He often selected and provided some strong samurai as his henchmen and minions.

古文：宠臣离班、桃仁专典禁卫，赏赐以巨万计，衣食起居皆与之同，而班、仁志愿无厌，犹有怨憾。
现代文：他的宠爱之臣离班、桃仁专门掌管帝室、宫廷的警卫工作，他对这二人的赏赐也都不计其数，甚至他们的衣食住行也都跟自己一样。而离班、桃仁二人又贪得无厌，即使这样，他们也还满腹怨言。
English: His favorite retainer, Taoren, who was off-duty, was in charge of guarding the imperial palace and court. He gave countless rewards to these two people, and even their food, clothing, housing, and transportation were the same as his own. And Taoren, who was off-duty, and Taoren were insatiably greedy. Even so, they were still full of complaints.

古文：戊辰，云临东堂，班、仁怀剑执纸而入，称有所启。
现代文：戊辰，高云来到东堂，离班、桃仁怀里藏着利剑，手里拿着通俗书籍走了进来，声称有事禀报。
English: When Wu Chen and Gao Yun came to the East Hall and left the class, Taoren walked in with a sharp sword hidden in his arms and popular books in his hands, claiming that there was a false report.

古文：班抽剑击云，云以几扞之，仁从旁击云，弑之。
现代文：离班突然抽出剑来直刺高云，高云用茶几抵挡，桃仁又从旁边刺高云，把他杀死。
English: He suddenly pulled out his sword to stab Gao Yun, Gao Yun used a tea set to fend him off, and Taoren stabbed Gao Yun from the side, killing him.

古文：冯跋升洪光门以观变，帐下督张泰、李桑言于跋曰： 此竖势何所至，请为公斩之！ 
现代文：冯跋登上宫城的洪光门观察事态的变化，他手下的帐下督张泰、李桑对冯跋说： 这两个小人想闹到什么程度，请您看着，我们替您把他们杀了。 
English: Feng Badu boarded the Hong Guang Gate of Miyagi to observe the changes in the state of affairs. His subordinates, Zhang Tai and Li San, said to Feng Badu: Please watch how far these two villains want to make trouble. We will kill them for you.

古文：乃奋剑而下，桑斩班于西门，泰杀仁于庭中。众推跋为主，跋以让其弟范阳公素弗，素弗不可。
现代文：于是挺剑跳下洪光门，李桑在西门杀了离班，张泰在院中杀了桃仁，大家推举冯跋做国主，冯跋则让位给自己的弟弟范阳公冯素弗，冯素弗不同意。
English: As a result, he jumped down the Hongguang Gate with his sword, Li San killed the off-duty in the West Gate, Zhang Tai killed Taoren in the hospital, everyone nominated Feng Bao as the head of the country, Feng Bao gave way to his brother Fan Yang Gong Feng Su Fu, Feng Su Fu did not agree.

古文：跋乃即天王位于昌黎，大赦，诏曰： 陈氏代姜，不改齐国。
现代文：于是冯跋便在昌黎登上天王宝座，下令大赦，并发布诏书说： 春秋战国时陈氏家族取代姜家，掌握了国家政权，但是却不改变齐国的名称。
English: As a result, Feng Baben ascended the throne of heaven in Changli, ordered an amnesty, and issued an edict saying: During the Spring and Autumn Period and the Warring States Period, the Chen family replaced the Jiang family and seized state power, but did not change the name of Qi.

古文：宜即国号曰燕。 
现代文：所以，我们也应该继续把国家称做燕。 
English: Therefore, we should also continue to call the country Yan.

古文：改元太平，谥云曰惠懿皇帝。
现代文：改年号太平，追谥高云为惠懿皇帝。
English: The new year was named Taiping, and Gao Yun became the emperor of Huizhou.

古文：跋尊母张氏为太后，立妻孙氏为王后，子永为太子，以范阳公素弗为车骑大将军、录尚书事，孙护为尚书令，张兴为左仆射，汲郡公弘为右仆射，广川公万泥为幽、平二州牧，上谷公乳陈为并、青二州牧。
现代文：冯跋尊自己的母亲张氏为太后，立自己的妻子孙氏为王后，立儿子冯永为太子。任命范阳公冯素弗为车骑大将军、录尚书事，孙护为尚书令，张兴为左仆射，汲郡公冯弘为右仆射，广川公冯万泥为幽、平二州牧，上谷公冯乳陈为并、青二州牧。
English: Feng Badu honored his mother Zhang as the empress dowager, appointed his wife Sun as the queen, and appointed his son Feng Yong as the prince. He appointed Fan Yang Gong Feng Su Fu as the general of cavalry and cavalry, recorded Shang's records, Sun Guo as Shang's secretary, Zhang Xing as the left servant, Ku County Gong Feng Hong as the right servant, Guangchuan Gong Feng Wan Di as Yu, Ping Erzhou Maki, Shanggu Gong Feng Lian Chen as Bian, and Qing Erzhou Maki.

古文：素弗少豪侠放荡，尝请婚于尚书左丞韩业，业拒之。
现代文：冯素弗小的时候便豪爽侠义、行为放荡，曾经向尚书左丞韩业求婚，被韩业拒绝。
English: When Feng Su Fu was a child, she was very brave, chivalrous and debauched. She once proposed marriage to Shang Shuzhong Han Ye, but was rejected by Han Ye.

古文：及为宰辅，待业尤厚。
现代文：等到他做了宰相辅佐朝政，对待韩业反而更加优厚。
English: By the time he became the prime minister and aide to the government, he treated Han Ye more generously.

古文：好申拔旧门，谦恭俭约，以身帅下，百僚惮之，论者美其有宰相之度。
现代文：他喜欢提拔旧的豪门士族，谦虚恭谨，勤俭节约，以身作则，给下级作出了榜样，因此文武百官都敬畏他，议论朝朝政的人也都赞美他有宰相的风采气度。
English: He liked to promote the old aristocrats, he was modest, respectful, diligent and thrifty, he set an example for his subordinates. Therefore, all the civil and military officials were in awe of him, and those who discussed the government of the dynasty also praised him for having the grace of the prime minister.

古文：魏主珪将立齐王嗣为太子。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋准册立齐王拓跋嗣为太子。
English: The head of the Northern Wei State, Tuoba Zheng, appointed Qi Wang Tuoba Zi as the crown prince.

古文：魏故事，凡立嗣子，辄先杀其母，乃赐嗣母刘贵人死。
现代文：按照北魏历史上的传统习惯，大凡立继承王位的人选的时候，常常要把他的母亲事先杀死。于是，拓跋便令拓跋嗣的母亲刘贵人自杀。
English: According to the traditional custom in the history of the Northern Wei Dynasty, when selecting a person to succeed the throne, the Great Emperor often wanted to kill his mother in advance. Therefore, Tuoba ordered Tuoba's mother, Liu Guijin, to commit suicide.

古文：珪召嗣谕之曰： 汉武帝杀钩弋夫人，以防母后预政，外家为乱也。
现代文：拓跋召见拓跋嗣告诉他说： 汉武帝杀死钩弋夫人，用来防止母后将来干预朝政及外戚家族作乱。
English: Tuoba summoned Tuoba's heir and told him: Emperor Hanwu killed Lady Hook Jaw to prevent his mother from interfering in court politics and her relatives from causing trouble in the future.

古文：汝当继统，吾故远迹古人，为国家长久之计耳。 
现代文：你应当继承国家大业，所以我效法遥远的古人的作为，这是为了国家的长久之计呵！ 
English: You should inherit the great cause of the country, so I imitate the deeds of the distant ancients. This is for the long-term strategy of the country!

古文：嗣性孝，哀泣不自胜。
现代文：拓跋嗣生性孝顺，悲哀涕泣，不能自己。
English: Tuoba Zi was born with filial piety, sad and weepy, unable to be himself.

古文：珪怒之。
现代文：拓跋为此大为恼火。
English: Tuoba was very angry about this.

古文：嗣还舍，日夜号泣，珪知而复召之。
现代文：拓跋嗣回到住处，整天整夜地哭号悲泣，拓跋听说之后又召他进宫去。
English: Tuoba went back to his home and cried all day and all night. When Tuoba heard of this, he summoned him to the palace.

古文：左右曰： 上怒甚，入将不测，不如且避之，俟上怒解而入。 
现代文：左右的侍从告诉拓跋嗣说： 皇上非常气愤，你如果进去的话，结果恐怕不好预测，不如暂时回避一下，等皇上的怒气平定之后再进宫。 
English: The attendants around him told Tuoba: "The emperor is very angry. If you go in, I'm afraid the outcome won't be predictable. It's better to avoid him for the time being and wait until the emperor's anger has subsided before entering the palace."

古文：嗣乃逃匿于外，帷帐下代人车路头、京兆王洛儿二人随之。
现代文：拓跋嗣于是逃到外面藏了起来，只有自己手下的人代人车路头、京兆人王洛儿两人跟随。
English: Tuoba Zi then fled outside and hid, with only two of his subordinates, the deputy head of the People's Commissariat for Foreign Affairs and the Peking Man Wang Lore, following him.

古文：初，珪如贺兰部，见献明贺太后之妹美，言于贺太后，请纳之。
现代文：当初，拓跋前往贺兰部落，见到自己母亲献明贺太后的妹妹非常美丽，便对贺太后说了，请求收纳她为妾。
English: At first, Tuoba went to the Horan tribe, and when he saw that his mother had told the Empress Dowager He that her younger sister was very beautiful, he told the Empress Dowager He and asked her to accept her as a concubine.

古文：贺太后曰： 不可。
现代文：贺太后说： 不行。
English: Empress Dowager He said, "No."

古文：是过美，必有不善。
现代文：太美的东西，一定有不好的地方。
English: If something is too beautiful, there must be something bad about it.

古文：且已有夫，不可夺也。 
现代文：况且她已有了丈夫，不可强夺。 
English: Besides, she already has a husband, so she can't be taken by force.

古文：珪密令人杀其夫而纳之，生清河王绍。
现代文：拓跋秘密派人把她的丈夫杀掉，把她迎娶进宫，生下了清河王拓跋绍。
English: Tuoba secretly sent someone to kill her husband, married her into the palace, and gave birth to the Qing River King Tuoba Shaowen.

古文：绍凶很无赖，好轻游里巷，劫剥行人以为乐。
现代文：拓跋绍凶狠无赖，喜欢在大街小巷里游逛，往往抢劫行人，以剥光别人的衣服逗笑取乐。
English: He is a ferocious ruffian who likes to roam the streets and alleys, often robbing pedestrians and stripping people naked for fun.

古文：珪怒之，尝倒悬井中，垂死，乃出之。
现代文：拓跋非常气愤，曾经把他倒悬在井中惩罚他，奄奄一息的时候才把他拉上来。
English: Tuoba was so angry that he once punished him by hanging him upside down in a well, and only pulled him up when he was dying.

古文：齐王嗣屡诲责之，绍由是与嗣不协。
现代文：齐王拓跋嗣多次教训责备他，拓跋绍从此与拓跋嗣的关系很不协调。
English: Qi Wang and Tuoba Zi reproached him many times, and the relationship between Tuoba Zi and Tuoba Zi was very incongruous.

古文：戊辰，珪谴责贺夫人，囚，将杀之。会日暮，未决。
现代文：戊辰，拓跋责骂夫人，并把她囚禁起来，要杀掉她，正好赶上天黑了，才没有决定。
English: Wuchen, Tuoba scolded his wife, and imprisoned her, to kill her, just in time for the dark, but did not decide.

古文：夫人密使告绍曰： 汝何以救我？ 
现代文：贺夫人秘密地派人去告诉拓跋绍说： 你怎么救我？ 
English: Mrs. He secretly sent someone to tell Tuoba Shao and said: How can you save me?

古文：左右以珪残忍，人人危惧。
现代文：左右侍从都因为拓跋凶狠残暴，个个恐惧异常。
English: The attendants on both sides are all terrified because of Tuoba's ferocious brutality.

古文：绍年十六，夜，与帐下及宦者宫人数人通谋，逾垣入宫，至天安殿。
现代文：拓跋绍年十六，当夜，与帐下武士以及宦官宫中人员等几个人联络谋划，跳墙进入宫中，来到天安殿。
English: In his sixteenth year, on the same night, he contacted and planned with several people, including the samurai under his charge and the eunuchs in the palace, jumped over the wall into the palace, and came to the Cheonan Palace.

古文：左右呼曰： 贼至！ 
现代文：左右侍卫高喊： 有贼！ 
English: Guards to the right and left shout: There's a thief!

古文：珪惊起，求弓刀不获，遂弑之。
现代文：拓跋惊醒坐起，一摸弓箭腰刀都不在，于是，被拓跋绍杀死。
English: Tuoba woke up and sat up, and as soon as he touched his bow and arrow, his waist knife was gone. As a result, he was killed by Tuoba Shao.

古文：己巳，宫门至日中不开。
现代文：己巳，宫门到中午也没有打开。
English: As expected, the palace gate did not open until noon.

古文：绍称诏，集百官于端门前，北面立。
现代文：拓跋绍谎称奉诏书，把文武百官集合在端门之前，面向北方而立。
English: Tuoba Shao falsely claimed that he had gathered hundreds of civil and military officials in front of the front gate and stood facing the north.

古文：绍从门扉间谓百官曰： 我有叔父，亦有兄，公卿欲从谁？ 
现代文：拓跋绍从门缝中对百官们说： 我有叔父，也有哥哥，你们打算听从谁的？ 
English: "I have an uncle and a brother, who are you going to listen to?

古文：众愕然失色，莫有对者。
现代文：大家全都大惊失色，一时间全愣住了，没有一个回答的。
English: Everyone was stunned, stunned for a moment, and no one answered.

古文：良久，南平公长孙嵩曰： 从王。 
现代文：很长时间后，南平公长孙嵩等说： 拥护大王。 
English: After a long time, Sun Song, the Prince of Nanping, and others said: Support the great king.

古文：众乃知宫车晏驾，而不测其故，莫敢出声，唯阴平公烈大哭而去。
现代文：众人才知道拓跋已死，但是又不明白死的原因，所以没人胆敢出声，只有阴平公拓跋烈放声大哭，转身离去。
English: Everyone knew that Tuoba was dead, but they did not understand the cause of death, so no one dared to speak out. Only Yin Ping Gong Tuoba cried loudly and turned away.

古文：烈，仪之弟也。
现代文：拓跋烈，是拓跋仪的弟弟。
English: Tuoba Li is the younger brother of Tuoba Yi.

古文：于是朝野恟恟，人怀异志。
现代文：于是，从朝廷到民间，议论纷纷，每个人都各有打算。
English: As a result, from the imperial court to the people, discussions ensued, and everyone had their own plans.

古文：肥如侯贺护举烽于安阳城北，贺兰部人皆赴之，其馀诸部亦各屯聚。
现代文：肥如侯贺护到安阳城北，点起警报的烽火，贺兰部落的人都纷纷赶来，其他那些部落也都各自把部队集合在一起。
English: Fei Ru Hou Heguo went to the north of Anyang City and lit a bonfire to sound the alarm. People from the Helan tribe came one after another, and the other tribes also gathered their troops together.

古文：绍闻人情不安，大出布帛赐王已下，崔宏独不受。
现代文：拓跋绍听说人心不定，便拿出大量的绸缎布匹，分别赏赐给王公以下的官员，希望以此收买人心，只有崔宏不接受。
English: When Tuoba Shao heard that the people were uncertain, he took out a large amount of silk and embroidered cloth and gave it to officials below the prince, hoping to win the people's hearts. Only Cui Hong did not accept it.

古文：齐王嗣闻变，乃自外还，昼伏匿山中，夜宿王洛儿家。
现代文：齐王拓跋嗣听说都城发生事变，于是从外地赶回，白天藏在山里，晚上住宿在王洛儿家。
English: Qi Wangtuo heard that there was an incident in the capital, so he rushed back from the field, hid in the mountains during the day, and stayed at Wang Lore's house at night.

古文：洛儿邻人李道潜奉给嗣，民间颇知之，喜而相告；绍闻之，收道，斩之。
现代文：拓跋绍听说之后，逮捕了李道，并把他杀了。拓跋绍收买人到处打听拓跋嗣的下落，打算杀了他。
English: After Tuoba Shao heard about it, he arrested Li Dao and killed him. Tuoba Shao hired someone to inquire everywhere about the whereabouts of Tuoba Shao, intending to kill him.

古文：绍募人求访嗣，欲杀之。猎郎叔孙俊与宗室疏属拓跋磨浑自云知嗣所在，绍使帐下二人与之偕往；俊、靡浑得出，即执帐下诣嗣，斩之。
现代文：猎郎叔孙俊与皇家宗族比较疏远的一个亲属拓跋磨浑，自己说知道拓跋嗣藏身的地方，拓跋绍便派手下的两个亲信和他们一起前往。叔孙俊与拓跋磨浑出城以后，便抓住那两个家伙前去拜见拓跋嗣，并把二人杀了。
English: The huntsman, Uncle Sun Jun, who was distantly related to the royal family, said that he knew where Tuoba Zi was hiding, so Tuoba Shao sent two of his cronies to go with them. After Uncle Sun Jun and Tuoba Zi left the city, they grabbed the two guys and went to meet Tuoba Zi, and killed them both.

古文：俊，建之子也。
现代文：叔孙俊是叔孙建的儿子。
English: Uncle Sun Jun is the son of Uncle Sun Jian.

古文：王洛儿为嗣往来平城，通问大臣，夜，告安远将军安同等。众闻之，翕然响应，争出奉迎。
现代文：王洛儿为拓跋嗣，多次往来平城，与各位重要的大臣取得联系，夜里又禀告安远将军安同等人，文武官员们听说了拓跋嗣的消息后，纷纷起来响应他，争先恐后地出城迎接。
English: Wang Lore was Tuobao's heir. He traveled to Pingcheng many times to get in touch with various important ministers. At night, he also denounced General Anyuan to his peers. After the military and civilian officials heard the news of Tuobao, they rose in response to him and rushed out of the city to meet him.

古文：嗣至城西，卫士执绍送之。
现代文：拓跋嗣来到城西，皇宫卫士抓住了拓跋绍。押送给他。
English: When Tuoba Zi came to the west of the city, the palace guards caught Tuoba Shao and escorted him away.

古文：嗣杀绍及其母贺氏，并诛绍帐下及宦官宫人为内应者十馀人。
现代文：拓跋嗣杀掉拓跋绍和她的母亲贺夫人，并诛杀拓跋绍手下武士以及作内应的宦官宫中人员，共十几人。
English: Tuoba's heirs killed Tuoba Shao and her mother, Lady He, and also killed more than a dozen of Tuoba Shao's subordinate warriors and eunuchs who worked for him.

古文：其先犯乘舆者，群臣脔食之。
现代文：其中最先刺杀拓跋的人，大臣们把他剁成肉酱吃了。
English: The first one to assassinate Tuoba was eaten by the ministers.

古文：壬申，嗣即皇帝位，大赦，改元永兴。
现代文：壬申，拓跋嗣即帝位，下令实行大赦，改年号为永兴。
English: Jinshin, the heir to the throne, ordered an amnesty and changed the year name to Yongxing.

古文：追尊刘贵人曰宣穆皇后，公卿先罢归第不预朝政者，悉召用之。
现代文：追尊刘贵人为宣穆皇后，原来被罢官回家、不参预朝廷政务的公卿们，全部召集回来任用。
English: Emperor Xuanzong appointed Liu Guigui as Empress Xuanmu, and all the court nobles who had been dismissed to go home and not participate in the pre-imperial court government affairs were summoned back for appointment.

古文：诏长孙嵩与北新侯安同、山阳侯奚斤、白马侯崔宏、元城侯拓跋屈等八人坐止车门右，共听朝政，时人谓之八公。
现代文：下诏命长孙嵩与北新侯安同、山阳侯奚斤、白马侯崔宏、元城侯拓跋屈等八人坐在皇城止车门的右首，一起仲裁国家的朝政，当时的人称他们为八公。
English: Under the imperial edict, eight people, including the eldest Sun Song, Bei Xin Hou An Tong, Sanyang Hou Yu Jin, Bai Ma Hou Cui Hong, and Yuan Cheng Hou Tuo Ba Qu, were ordered to sit on the right side of the imperial city's bus stop, and together arbitrate the country's imperial politics. People at the time called them the eight princes.

古文：屈，磨浑之父也。
现代文：拓跋屈是拓跋磨浑的父亲。
English: Tuoba is the father of Tuoba.

古文：嗣以尚书燕凤逮事什翼犍使与都坐大官封懿等入侍讲论，出议政事。
现代文：拓跋嗣因为尚书燕凤一直侍奉自己的祖父拓跋什翼犍，便让他与都坐大官封懿等人一起，入宫给自己讲解经书，出宫参与议论政事。
English: Because Tuoba Zi had always served his grandfather Tuoba Shih-tzu, Tuoba Shih-tzu had him enter the palace to explain scriptures to himself, and leave the palace to participate in discussions on political affairs, together with others such as Du-sitting Grand Official Fu Xun.

古文：以王洛儿、车路头为散骑常侍，叔孙俊为卫将军，拓跋磨浑为尚书，皆赐爵郡、县公。
现代文：任命王洛儿、车路头为散骑常侍，任命叔孙俊为卫将军，任命拓跋磨浑为尚书，并把他们全部封为郡公或者县公。
English: Appointed Wang Lore and Che Lu Tou as strolling attendants, appointed Uncle Sun Jun as Wei general, appointed Tuoba Mahun as Shangshu, and appointed them all as county magistrate or county magistrate.

古文：嗣问旧臣为先帝所亲信者为谁，王洛儿言李先。嗣召问先： 卿以何才何功为先帝所知？ 
现代文：拓跋嗣向老臣们询问，先帝最信任和赏识的是谁，王洛儿说是李先，拓跋嗣便把李先召来问道： 你因为什么才能什么功劳被先帝知遇？ 
English: Tuoba Zi asked the old ministers who was the most trusted and appreciated by the former emperor. Wang Lore said it was Li Xian. Tuoba Zi then summoned Li Xian and asked: What was your talent and what was your merit that the former emperor knew about you?

古文：对曰： 臣不才无功，但以忠直为先帝所知耳。 
现代文：李先回答说： 臣下既无才能又无功劳，只是因为忠诚正直才为先帝厚爱罢了。 
English: Li Xian replied, "A vassal has neither talent nor merit. It is only because of his loyalty and honesty that he is well-liked by the former emperor."

古文：诏以先为安东将军，常宿于内，以备顾问。
现代文：拓跋嗣便下诏任命李先为安东将军，常让他住在宫内，以备随时向他征询意见。
English: Emperor Tuoba then issued an edict appointing Li Xian as General Anton, and often let him live in the palace so that he could be consulted at any time.

古文：硃提王悦，虔之子也，有罪，自疑惧。
现代文：朱提王拓跋悦是拓跋虔的儿子。他犯下罪行，自己常常疑虑不安，万分恐惧。
English: King Tuoba-ye is the son of King Tuoba-kyi. He has committed crimes, and he is often insecure and full of fear.

古文：闰十一月，丁亥，悦怀匕首入侍，将作乱。
现代文：闰十一月，丁亥，拓跋悦怀里藏有匕首，进宫值班，准备制造祸乱。
English: Leap November, Dinghai, Tuoba Yue has a dagger hidden in her arms, enters the palace on duty, ready to create havoc.

古文：叔孙俊觉其举止有异，引手掣之，索怀中，得匕首，遂杀之。
现代文：叔孙俊觉得他的举动有些反常，抓住他的手把他拉过来，搜索他的怀中，找到匕首，于是把他杀了。
English: Uncle Sun Jun thought his behavior was a bit abnormal, grabbed his hand and pulled him over, searched his arms, found the dagger, and killed him.

古文：十二月，乙巳，太白犯虚、危。
现代文：十二月，乙巳，金星侵犯虚宿和危宿。
English: In December, Venus invades the house of falsehood and the house of danger.

古文：南燕灵台令张光劝南燕主超出降，超手杀之。
现代文：南燕灵台令张光劝南燕主慕容超出城投降，慕容超亲手把他杀了。
English: Nanyan Lingtai ordered Zhang Guang to persuade Nanyan Lord Murong to surrender outside the city, and Murong Chao killed him with his own hands.

古文：柔然侵魏。
现代文：柔然侵略北魏。
English: Solemnly invade Northern Wei.

古文：安皇帝庚义熙六年
现代文：庚义熙六年
English: Six years of Geng Yixi

古文：春，正月，甲寅朔，南燕主超登天门，朝群臣于城上。
现代文：春季，正月，甲寅朔，南燕国主慕容超登上天门，在城墙上朝会群臣。
English: In spring, in the first month of the year, Mu Rong Chao, the ruler of the Southern Yan Kingdom, ascended to the Heavenly Gate, and the courtiers of the Imperial Court gathered on the city wall.

古文：乙卯，超与宠姬魏夫人登城，见晋兵之盛，握手对泣。
现代文：乙卯，慕容超与宠爱的侍姬魏夫人登上城墙，看见东晋军队的强盛景况，握住对方的手相对哭泣。
English: One by one, Murong Chao and his favorite attendant, Lady Wei, climbed the city wall, saw the prosperous situation of the East Jin army, held each other's hands and wept.

古文：韩讠卓谏曰： 陛下遭堙厄之运，正当努力自强以壮士民之志，而更为儿女子泣邪！ 
现代文：韩规劝说： 陛下遭受险恶的命运，正应该不懈努力，强行振作，用来鼓舞将士百姓的斗志，怎么能做这小女子似的痛哭流涕的事呢？ 
English: Han Qi advised, "Your Majesty has suffered a sinister fate. You should make unremitting efforts and forcibly cheer yourself up to inspire the fighting spirit of the soldiers and the people. How can you do such a crying thing like this little girl?

古文：超拭目谢之。
现代文：慕容超擦了擦眼睛上的眼泪，表示歉意。
English: Murong Chao wiped tears from his eyes and apologized.

古文：尚书令董铣劝超降，超怒，囚之。
现代文：尚书令董诜规劝慕容超设降，慕容超大怒，把他囚禁起来。
English: Shang Shu ordered Dong Yu Jie to persuade Murong Chao to surrender. Murong Chao was furious and imprisoned him.

古文：魏长孙嵩将兵伐柔然。
现代文：北魏长孙嵩领兵前去讨伐柔然。
English: The Northern Wei chancellor Sun Song led the troops to go to the crusade.

古文：魏主嗣以郡县豪右多为民患，悉以优诏征之。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣因为郡县之中的土豪劣绅大多数都是百姓的祸患，所以，便用措辞缓和的诏书征召他们全部来京。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, because most of the local tyrants and despicable gentry in counties and counties were the scourge of the people, used a moderately worded edict to conscript them all to come to Beijing.

古文：民恋土不乐内徙，长吏逼遣之，于是无赖少年逃亡相聚，所在寇盗群起。
现代文：这些豪民留恋故土，不愿迁往都城，而郡县的官吏又逼迫他们前来，于是，有一些无赖的年轻人便逃出家乡聚在一起，因此，到处强盗、贼寇蜂起。
English: These wealthy people yearned for their homeland and did not want to move to the capital, but the county officials forced them to come. As a result, some young ruffians fled their hometowns and gathered together. As a result, robbers and thieves rose up everywhere.

古文：嗣引八公议之曰： 朕欲为民除蠹，而守宰不能绥抚，使之纷乱。
现代文：拓跋嗣召见八公议论这件事说： 我打算为民除害，但地方官吏却不能对他们平安抚慰，所以，反倒迫使他们纷纷起来叛乱。
English: Tuoba Zi summoned the eight officials to discuss the matter and said: I intend to eliminate the harm for the people, but the local officials can not comfort them safely, so, on the contrary, force them to rise up in rebellion.

古文：今犯者既众，不可尽诛，吾欲大赦以安之，何如？ 
现代文：现在，犯法的人既然已经很多，又不能把他们全杀掉，因此，我想下令大赦，以此使他们安心，怎么样？ 
English: Now, since there are many people who have broken the law and we cannot kill them all, I would like to issue an amnesty to reassure them, how about that?

古文：元城侯屈曰： 民逃亡为盗，不罪而赦之，是为上者反求于下也，不如诛其首恶，赦其馀党。 
现代文：元城侯拓跋屈说： 百姓逃亡出去做了强盗，不治他们罪反而赦免，这是在上的人反过来求在下的人了，不如杀了他们为首作恶的，把那些党羽赦免。 
English: The former lord of the city, Tuoba Qu, said: "The people fled and became robbers. Instead of punishing them, they were pardoned. The people at the top, in turn, asked the people at the bottom. It would be better to kill those who were the first to commit evil and pardon those followers."

古文：崔宏曰： 圣王之御民，务在安之而已，不与之较胜负也。
现代文：崔宏说： 圣上统御人民，目的就是要让他们安定，不是要和他们比赛谁胜谁负。
English: Cui Hong said: The purpose of ruling the people is to keep them stable, not to compete with them.

古文：夫赦虽非正，可以行权。
现代文：因此大赦虽然不是最好的办法，却可以通达权变。
English: So an amnesty, while not the best solution, could lead to a change of power.

古文：屈欲先诛后赦，要为两不能去，曷若一赦而遂定乎！
现代文：拓跋屈打算先杀后赦，关键在于两个步骤缺一不可，哪里比得上大赦一次就把他们平定了呢？
English: The key to Tuoba's plan to kill first and pardon later is that two steps are essential. How can it be compared to an amnesty that would pacify them at once?

古文：赦而不从，诛未晚也。 
现代文：大赦之后，如果有人不从，再杀也不晚哪！ 
English: After the amnesty, if someone does not comply, it is not too late to kill again!

古文：嗣从之。
现代文：拓跋嗣接受他的意见。
English: Tuoba Zi accepted his opinion.

古文：二月，癸未朔，遣将军于栗磾将骑一万讨不从命者，所向皆平。
现代文：二月，癸未朔，派遣将军于栗带领骑兵一万人讨伐不听从大赦命令，仍然叛乱的人，所到之处，全部平定。
English: In early February, General Yu Li was dispatched to lead ten thousand cavalry to fight against those who did not obey the amnesty order and still rebelled. Wherever they went, they were all subdued.

古文：南燕贺赖卢、公孙五楼为地道出击晋兵，不能却。
现代文：南燕贺赖卢、公孙五楼挖了一条地道出来袭击东晋部队，却不能把他们击退。
English: Nanyan He Lailu and Gongsun Fifth Floor dug a tunnel to attack the East Jin troops, but they could not repel them.

古文：城久闭，城中男女病脚弱者太半，出降者相继。
现代文：广固城门关闭太久，城中男女百姓患软脚病的人超过一半，因此出城投降的人一个接着一个。
English: Guanggu's gates were closed for too long, and more than half of the men and women in the city suffered from athlete's foot. As a result, the people who left the city surrendered one after another.

古文：超辇而登城，尚书悦寿说超曰： 今天助寇为虐，战士调瘁，独守穷城，绝望外援，天时人事亦可知矣。
现代文：慕容超乘辇车登上城墙，尚书悦寿劝说慕容超道： 现在，上天帮助强盗制造罪恶，我们的将士疲惫凋零，单独困守这一座穷破的城池，外援已经毫无希望，天时和人心的倾向也是可以想见的。
English: Murong Chao boarded the city wall on a stagecoach, and Shangshu Yueshou persuaded Murong Chao to take the lead: Now, heaven has helped the robbers to create evil, our soldiers are tired and withered, and they are trapped alone in this poor city. Foreign aid has no hope, and the trend of the times and people's hearts is also conceivable.

古文：苟历数有终，尧、舜避位，陛下岂可不思变通之计乎！ 
现代文：如果大数已尽，命该如此，那么，即使是尧、舜也都不能不退位，陛下怎么可以不想一下变通的办法呢？ 
English: If the majority has been exhausted, and it should be so, then, even if  and  cannot but abdicate, how can His Majesty not think of a workaround?

古文：超叹曰： 废兴，命也。
现代文：慕容超叹息说： 天下的兴起和覆亡，都是天命。
English: Murong Chao sighed and said: The rise and fall of the world are all the destiny of heaven.

古文：吾宁奋剑而死，不能衔璧而生！ 
现代文：我宁可高举利剑战斗而死，也决不能口里衔着璧玉投降求生。 
English: I'd rather die fighting with my sword held high than surrender to survive with a jewel in my mouth.

古文：丁亥，刘裕悉众攻城。
现代文：丁亥，刘裕动员全部兵力，奋力攻城。
English: Dinghai and Liu Yu mobilized all their forces and fought hard to attack the city.

古文：或曰： 今日往亡，不利行师。 
现代文：有人说： 今天是往亡日，不利于调动军队。 
English: Some people said: Today is a dead day, which is not conducive to the mobilization of the army.

古文：裕曰： 我往彼亡，何为不利！ 
现代文：刘裕说： 我去他死，怎么是不利！ 
English: Liu Yu said, "If I let him die, what a disadvantage!

古文：四面急攻之。
现代文：在城的四面发动猛攻。
English: Launch an assault on all four sides of the city.

古文：悦寿开门纳晋师，超与左右数十骑逾城突围出走，追获之。
现代文：悦寿打开城门，把东晋部队放了进来。慕容超与左右侍卫几十个骑兵越过城墙突围出去，被东晋军队追上抓获。
English: Yue Shou opened the city gate and let the East Jin troops in. Murong Chao and dozens of cavalrymen from the left and right guards broke through the city wall and were caught by the East Jin army.

古文：裕数以不降之罪，超神色自若，一无所言，惟以母托刘敬宣而已。
现代文：刘裕一一用拒不投降的罪行斥责他，慕容超神色平静，一言不发，只是把母亲托付给刘敬宣照顾而已。
English: Liu Yu reprimanded him one by one with the crime of refusing to surrender. Murong looked super calm and did not say a word, but entrusted his mother to Liu Jingxuan's care.

古文：裕忿广固久不下，欲尽坑之，以妻女以赏将士。
现代文：刘裕忿恨广固久攻不下，打算把所有军民全部活埋，然后把他们的妻子女儿，赏给自己的将士。
English: Liu Yu was angry that Guanggu could not be conquered for a long time, and planned to bury all the soldiers and civilians alive, and then reward their wives and daughters to his soldiers.

古文：韩范谏曰： 晋室南迁，中原鼎沸，士民无援，强则附之，既为君臣，必须为之尽力。
现代文：韩范劝阻说： 晋朝帝室迁移到南方去之后，中原地区混乱不堪，士人百姓无依无靠，对待强有力的政权，自然便依附过去了。既然做了人家的臣民，就一定要为人家尽力拼命。
English: Han Fan dissuaded: After the imperial family of the Jin Dynasty migrated to the south, the Central Plains region was in chaos, the scholars and the people were helpless, and they were naturally attached to the powerful regime. Since they were the subjects of others, they must do their best for others.

古文：彼皆衣冠旧族，先帝遗民；今王师吊伐而尽坑之，使安所归乎！
现代文：他们都是古老的世族，先帝遗留下来的子民。今天，王家的军队前来讨伐异族拯救他们，却要把他们全部活埋，那么您打算让百姓往哪里去呢？
English: They are all ancient clans, the people left behind by the former emperor. Today, the royal army has come to fight the foreigners and save them, but they want to bury them all alive. So where do you plan to send the people?

古文：窃恐西北之人无复来苏之望矣。 
现代文：我私下里担心西北的百姓从此不会再有盼望我们去拯救他们的愿望了。 
English: I worry privately that the people of the northwest will no longer look to us to save them.

古文：裕改容谢之，然犹斩王公以下三千人，没入家口万馀，夷其城隍，送超诣建康，斩之。
现代文：刘裕马上肃然起敬，向他道歉，但是还是杀了王公以下的三千多人，没收的家庭人口也有一万多，拆毁了广固城墙。把慕容超押回建康，斩首。
English: Liu Yu immediately showed respect and apologized to him, but still killed more than three thousand people below Wang Gong, confiscated more than ten thousand family members, demolished the Guanggu city wall, and sent Murong Chao back to Jiankang and beheaded him.

古文：臣光曰：晋自济江以来，威灵不竞，戎狄横骛，虎噬中原。
现代文：臣司马光曰：晋自从南渡长江以来，国势神威，不得伸展振作，致使戎狄异族，横行无忌，如猛虎船吞噬中原。
English: Sima Guang, a courtier, said: "Since Jin traveled south to the Yangtze River, the country's power has grown tremendously and cannot be stretched, causing the foreign troops to run rampant, as if a ferocious tiger ship were devouring the Central Plains.

古文：刘裕始劝王师剪平东夏，不于此际旌礼贤俊，慰抚疲民，宣恺悌之风，涤残秽之政，使群士向风，遗黎企踵，而更恣行屠戮以快忿心。
现代文：刘裕开始指挥王家军队，平定华夏东部地区。但是，他却不在这个时候礼贤下士，旌表俊才，安慰平抚疲惫的百姓，提倡谦抑详和的世风，清除破败污秽的劣政，使有识之士望风响应，各地遗民踮脚盼望，反而却要变本加厉地肆意而为，大开杀戒，以此快慰自己一时的愤怒。
English: Liu Yu began to command the royal army and pacify the eastern region of China. However, he was not at this time a virtuous corporal, a watchmaker and a talented man, comforting and soothing the tired people, advocating a modest and peaceful world style, removing the corrupt and filthy bad politics, making the intelligent people look forward to the wind and respond, and the survivors from all over the country stomping their feet in hope. Instead, he wanted to intensify his wanton behavior and kill openly, in order to comfort his momentary anger.

古文：迹其施设，曾苻、姚之不如，宜其不能荡壹四海，成美大之业，岂非虽有智勇而无仁义使之然哉！
现代文：查阅他的所作所为，竟连苻氏姚氏都赶不上，这也正是他不能平定四海，成就一番美好大业的真正原因。难道不是虽有智谋勇略但却没有仁义之心才使他这样的吗？
English: Even Mr. Yao of the Yao clan couldn't keep up with him, which was the real reason why he couldn't pacify the four seas and achieve the most beautiful cause. Wasn't it because he had wisdom and strategy but no sense of righteousness that made him like this?

古文：初，徐道覆闻刘裕北伐，劝卢循乘虚袭建康，循不从。
现代文：当初，东晋始兴相徐道覆听说刘裕带兵向北征伐南燕，便劝说卢循乘东晋中空虚袭击建康，卢循没有听从。
English: At the beginning of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, when Xu Daohui heard that Liu Yu was leading an army to the north to conquer Nanyan, he persuaded Lu Xun to attack Jiankang in the middle of the Eastern Jin Dynasty. Lu Xun did not listen.

古文：道覆自至番禺说循曰： 本住岭外，岂以理极于此，传之子孙邪？
现代文：徐道覆亲自来到番禺，向卢循游说道： 我们住在这五岭以南的地区，难道你还以为是因为理该如此，并且可以把它传给子孙吗？
English: Xu Daohui came to Panyu in person and said to Lu Xunyou: We live in the area south of the Wuling Mountains. Don't you think it's because we deserve it and can pass it on to our children and grandchildren?

古文：正以刘裕难与为敌故也。
现代文：我们正是因为刘裕力量强大，很难跟他为敌才这样的。
English: It is precisely because Liu Yu is powerful that it is difficult for us to be enemies with him.

古文：今裕顿兵坚城之下，未有还期，我以此思归死士掩击何、刘之徒，如反掌耳。
现代文：现在刘裕的大军集结在坚固的城池之下，什么时候回来还说不定，我们用手下这些希望回到故乡去的敢于拼命的士兵，突然进攻何无忌、刘毅这些小辈，不过就像把手掌翻过来罢了。
English: Now Liu Yu's army is massed under the solid city wall, and it is still uncertain when he will return. We can use our men, the soldiers who dared to go back to their hometowns, to launch a sudden attack, but Liu Yi, these juniors, are just like turning the palm of your hand over.

古文：不乘此机，而苟求一日之安，朝廷常以君为腹心之疾；若裕平齐之后，息甲岁馀，以玺书征君，裕自将屯豫章，遣诸将帅锐师过岭，虽复以将军之神武，恐必不能当也。
现代文：不趁这个时机起事，而只是追求一天的平安，朝廷却一直把您当做心腹大患。如果刘裕平安三齐地区之后，让军队休息一二年，再先用诏书征召您进京，随后刘裕亲自在豫章屯兵，派遣几个将领率领部队翻过五岭，即使将军再有神机勇武，恐怕也一定不能抵挡了。
English: Instead of taking advantage of this opportunity to stir up trouble, but only in pursuit of a day of peace, the imperial court has always regarded you as a close confidant. If Liu Yu let the army rest for a year or two after the peace of the three Qi regions, and then first use the edict to conscript you into Beijing, and then Liu Yu personally sent several generals to lead the troops over the Wuling Mountains, even if the general had more ingenuity and bravery, I am afraid he would not be able to resist.

古文：今日之机，万不可失。
现代文：今天这个机会，是万万不可错过的。
English: Today's opportunity must not be lost.

古文：若先克建康，倾其根蒂。裕虽南还，无能为也。
现代文：如果我们抢先攻克了建康，把他们的根基全部摧毁，刘裕即使回来，也没有什么办法了。
English: If we defeat Jiankang ahead of time and destroy all their foundations, Liu Yu will have no choice but to return.

古文：君若不同，便当帅始兴之众直指寻阳。 
现代文：您如果不同意，我就要率领始兴的兵众直接进攻寻阳。 
English: If you do not agree, I will lead the soldiers of Shixing to directly attack Xuanyang.

古文：循甚不乐此举，而无以夺其计，乃从之。
现代文：卢循非常不愿意起事，但又没有说服徐道覆的办法，因此，只好同意了他的意见。
English: Lu Xun was very reluctant to start trouble, but there was no way to convince Xu Daoyi, so he had no choice but to agree with his opinion.

古文：初，道覆使人伐船材于南康山，至始兴，贱卖之，居人争市之，船材大积而人不疑，至是，悉取以装舰，旬日而办。
现代文：当初，徐道覆派人到南康山中去砍伐制造船只的木材，到始兴廉价出售，居民们都争相购买，因而造船木材虽然堆积许多但是却引不起别人的怀疑。
English: At first, Xu Daohui sent people to the middle of the Nankang Mountains to cut wood for making ships, and sold it cheaply to Shixing. The residents all rushed to buy it, so although there was a lot of shipbuilding wood, it did not arouse the suspicion of others.

古文：循自始兴寇长沙，道覆寇南康、庐陵、豫章，诸守相皆委任奔走。
现代文：到了这个时候，他把这些木材全部聚集到一起，制造船只，十天左右就办成了。卢循从始兴出发进犯长沙，徐道覆进犯南康、庐陵、豫章，这些地方的官员都放弃了职守逃跑。
English: At this time, he gathered all the wood together and made boats, which took about ten days to complete. Lu Xun attacked Changsha from Shixing, and Xu Daohui attacked Nankang, Fuling, and Yuzhang. The officials in these places all abandoned their duties and fled.

古文：道覆顺流而下，舟械甚盛。
现代文：徐道覆顺赣江直下，船只器械异常强盛。
English: Xu Dao overturned down the Lijiang River, and the ship's equipment was unusually strong.

古文：时克燕之问未至，朝廷急征刘裕。
现代文：这时，攻克南燕的消息还没有传回朝廷，所以朝廷紧急征召刘裕。
English: At this time, the news of conquering Nanyan had not yet been transmitted back to the imperial court, so the imperial court urgently conscripted Liu Yu.

古文：裕方议留镇下邳，经营司、雍，会得诏书，乃以韩范为都督八郡军事、燕郡太守，封融为勃海太守，檀韶为琅邪太守，戊申，引兵还。
现代文：刘裕正在讨论是否留下来镇守下邳，整顿处理司、雍二州的事务，恰好接到皇帝的诏书，于是任命韩范为都督八郡军事、燕郡太守，任命封融为勃海太守，任命檀韶为琅邪太守。戊申，刘裕带兵南归。
English: Liu Yu was discussing whether to stay to guard the town of Xiamen, rectify the affairs of the Division and Yong Erzhou, and just received the emperor's edict, so he appointed Han Fan as the military governor of the eight counties, the governor of Yan County, appointed Feng Rong as the governor of Bohai, and appointed Danzhang as the governor of Suye. Wushin, Liu Yu returned to the south with the soldiers.

古文：韶，祗之兄也。
现代文：檀韵是檀祗的哥哥。
English: Dang Yun is the elder brother of Dang Yao.

古文：久之，刘穆之称范、融谋反，皆杀之。
现代文：后来，刘穆之以韩范、封融阴谋反叛为借口，把他们全杀了。
English: Later, Liu Mu killed them all under the pretext of Han Fan's rebellion against the annexation plot.

古文：安成忠肃公何无忌自寻阳引兵拒卢循。
现代文：东晋安成忠肃公何无忌从寻阳带兵出发迎击卢循。
English: East Jin, Ancheng, and Chungsu had no choice but to set out from Xuanyang with soldiers to meet Lu Xun.

古文：长史邓潜之谏曰： 国家安危，在此一举。
现代文：长史邓潜之劝阻说： 国家的安危存亡，就在于这次行动了。
English: Chief historian Deng Qianzhi dissuaded: The country's safety and survival depend on this operation.

古文：闻循兵舰大盛。势居上流，宜决南塘，守二城以待之，彼必不敢舍我远下。
现代文：听说卢循军队的船只设备精良，气势盛大，又位于赣江的上游，所以我们应该挖开南塘的堤坝，使赣江水位下降，然后坚守豫章、寻阳两座城，等待他们。他们一定不敢放下我们不管，径自向更远的地方进发。
English: I heard that the ships of the Luqun army are well-equipped, powerful, and located in the upper reaches of the Lijiang River. Therefore, we should dig up the dam of Nantang to lower the water level of the Lijiang River, and then hold fast to the two cities of Yuzhang and Huanyang and wait for them. They must not dare to leave us alone and go further away.

古文：蓄力养锐，俟其疲老，然后击之，此万全之策也。
现代文：我们正好积蓄力量，养精蓄锐，等待他们疲倦不堪之后，再发动进攻，这是万全之策。
English: We are just accumulating strength, building up energy and sharpness, waiting for them to get tired and then launch an attack, which is a perfect solution.

古文：今决成败于一战，万一失利，悔将无及！ 
现代文：现在，以一战决胜负，万一我们失利，后悔也就来不及了。 
English: Now, with a decisive victory in one battle, if we lose, it will be too late to regret.

古文：参军殷阐曰： 循所将之众皆三吴旧贼，百战馀勇，始兴溪子，拳捷善斗，未易轻也。
现代文：参军殷阐说： 卢循所带的部队都是三吴一带过去的强盗，身经百战，颇有勇力，而在始兴招募的溪族兵丁，也都力大敏捷，善于争斗，不应该轻视。
English: Yan, who joined the army, said: The troops led by Lu Xun were all former bandits from the Sanwu area. They had been through hundreds of battles and were quite brave. The soldiers from the Xixing recruited from the Xixing tribe were also very strong and agile, and good at fighting. They should not be despised.

古文：将军宜留屯豫章，征兵属城，兵至合战，未为晚也。
现代文：将军应该留在豫章屯守，征招兵丁集中到这里，等各路大军到齐之后，再一起出战，也不算太晚。
English: It is not too late for the generals to stay in Yuzhang, and for the conscripts to gather here, and wait for the armies from all directions to come together, and then go to war together.

古文：若以此众轻进，殆必有悔。 
现代文：如果仅仅依靠现有的这些军队轻易前进的话，恐怕将来您一定要后悔。 
English: If you simply rely on these existing troops to advance easily, I'm afraid you will have to regret it in the future.

古文：无忌不听。
现代文：何无忌并不听从。
English: He did not hesitate to obey.

古文：三月，壬申，与徐道覆遇于豫章，贼令强弩数百登西岸小山邀射之。
现代文：三月，壬申，与徐道覆的军队在豫章遭遇。徐道覆命令几百名强弩手爬上西岸的小山拦腰射击东晋部队，正好赶上西风骤起，把何无忌所乘坐的小船吹向东岸。
English: In March, Jinshin encountered the army of Xu Daohui in Yuanzhang. Xu Daohui ordered several hundred strong warriors to climb a hill on the west coast to stop and shoot the East Jin troops, just in time for the west wind to suddenly rise and blow the small boat they were riding on to the east coast.

古文：会西风暴急，飘无忌所乘小舰向东岸，贼乘风以大舰逼之，众遂奔溃。无忌厉声曰： 取我苏武节来！ 节至，执以督战。
现代文：贼兵又乘风用大舰进逼，东晋军卒于是纷纷奔逃溃散。何无忌厉声高叫道： 拿我的苏武节来！ 苏武节送来，他拿着此节亲自督战。
English: The robber soldiers also took advantage of the wind to use large ships to advance, and the Eastern Jin soldiers then ran away and scattered. Why not shout loudly: Take my Suwu Festival! Suwu Festival sent, he took this festival to personally supervise the battle.

古文：贼众云集，无忌辞色无挠，握节而死。
现代文：敌兵越来越多，像黑云一样包抄过来，何无忌的言辞神色仍然毫不气馁，最后手持苏武节而死。
English: More and more enemy soldiers encircled him like a black cloud, but he remained undaunted and finally died with the Suwu Festival in his hand.

古文：于是中外震骇，朝议欲奉乘舆北走就刘裕；既而知贼未至，乃止。
现代文：何无忌战死的消息，使东晋朝廷内外，震骇惊恐，朝会的时候，有人提议打算保护着安帝向北撤退，去投奔刘裕。后来知道敌兵还没有到来，这才停止。
English: The news of his death caused shock and dismay both inside and outside the Eastern Jin Dynasty court. During the court meeting, someone proposed to protect Emperor An and retreat north to Liu Yu. Later, when it was known that the enemy soldiers had not yet arrived, this was stopped.

古文：西秦王乾归攻秦金城郡，拔之。
现代文：西秦王乞伏乾归进攻并攻克了后秦金城郡。
English: The king of Western Qin invaded and conquered Jincheng County of Later Qin.

古文：夏王勃勃遣尚书朝金纂攻平凉。
现代文：夏王刘勃勃派遣尚书胡金纂进攻平凉。
English: Xia Wang Liu Gong dispatched Shang Shu Hu Jincao to attack Pingliang.

古文：秦王兴救平凉，击金纂，杀之。
现代文：后秦王姚兴带兵去援救平凉，进攻胡金纂并把他杀了。
English: Later, Qin King Yao Xing led an army to rescue Ping Liang, attacked Hu Jintao and killed him.

古文：勃勃又遣兄子左将军罗提攻拔定阳，坑将士四千馀人。
现代文：刘勃勃又派遣侄儿、左将军刘罗提进攻定阳，攻克之后，把虏获的四千多名将士全部活埋。
English: Liu Rong also sent his nephew, General Liu Rotei, to attack Dingyang. After conquering it, he buried alive all of the more than four thousand soldiers he had captured.

古文：秦将曹炽、曹云、王肆佛等各将数千亡内徙，兴处之湟山及陈仓。
现代文：后秦将领曹炽、曹云、王肆佛等各带领几千户边民迁往内地，姚兴把他们安置在湟山和陈仓。
English: After the Qin Dynasty, Cao Cao, Cao Yun, Wang Zhabo and other generals led thousands of border residents to move inland, and Yao Xing placed them in Lushan and Chencang.

古文：勃勃寇陇右，破白崖堡，遂趣清水，略阳太守姚寿都弃城走，勃勃徙其民万六千户于大城。兴自安定追之，至寿渠川，不及而还。
现代文：刘勃勃进犯陇右，击破白崖堡，于是直奔清水。略阳太守姚寿都放弃城池逃跑，刘勃勃把那里的一万六千户居民迁往大城，姚兴从安定出发，追击他们，到寿渠川仍未追上，只好回去。
English: Liu Gong attacked the right bank of the Yangtze River, broke through the White Cliff Castle, and then went straight to the Clear Water. Yaoyang Governor Yao Shudu abandoned the city and fled. Liu Gong moved the 16,000 residents there to the big city. Yao Xing started from the stable and chased them. He still could not catch up to Shugu River, so he had to go back.

古文：初，南凉王傉檀遣左将军枯木等伐沮渠蒙逊，掠临松千馀户而还。
现代文：当初，南凉王秃发檀派遣左将军枯木等带兵讨伐沮渠蒙逊，掳掠了临松的一千多户居民班师。
English: At the beginning, the king of the Southern Liang Dynasty, Balfa Dang, dispatched the left general, Kareku, and other soldiers to fight against the Mengsong, and captured more than a thousand residents of Lincong.

古文：蒙逊伐南凉，至显美，徙数千户而去。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊讨伐南凉，到达显美，也迁走几千户居民回去。
English: Despondent, Meng Song led a crusade against Nanliang and arrived at Xianmei. He also moved several thousand residents back.

古文：南凉太尉俱延复伐蒙逊，大败而归。
现代文：南凉太尉秃发俱延再一次讨伐沮渠蒙逊，却被打得大败而归。
English: Nan Liang's lieutenant, Balding Ku Yan, once again fought against Despondent Monsoon, but was defeated and returned.

古文：是月，傉檀自将五万骑伐蒙逊，战于穷泉，傉檀大败，单马奔还。
现代文：当月，秃发檀亲自带领五万骑兵征讨沮渠蒙逊，双方在穷泉会战，结果，秃发檀大败，单人匹马跑了回去。
English: That month, Bald-Faced Tan personally led fifty thousand cavalrymen to fight against Despondent, and the two sides fought in Poor Springs. As a result, Bald-Faced Tan was defeated and ran back alone.

古文：蒙逊乘胜进围姑臧，姑臧人惩王钟之诛，皆惊溃，夷、夏万馀户降于蒙逊。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊乘胜进军，包围了姑臧。姑臧人害怕再像王钟那样的被牵连，都惊恐溃散，夷族和汉人一万多户向沮渠蒙逊投降。
English: Despatch Mengxun marched to victory and encircled Guzheng. The people of Guzheng were afraid of being implicated again like Wang Zhong. They were terrified and scattered. More than ten thousand Yi and Han families surrendered to Despatch Mengxun.

古文：傉檀惧，遣司隶校尉敬归及子佗为质于蒙逊以请和，蒙逊许之。
现代文：秃发檀大为惊恐，派遣司隶校尉敬归和他的儿子敬佗到沮渠蒙逊那里去做人质，以此请求和解，沮渠蒙逊答应了他。
English: Bald-faced Tan was greatly alarmed, and he sent Lieutenant-Colonel Shih-Li Jing-Chu and his son Jing-Ju to Deshu Monson to be his hostage, in order to ask for reconciliation, which Deshu Monson agreed to.

古文：归至胡坑，逃还，佗为追兵所执，蒙逊徙其众八千馀户而去。
现代文：敬归走到胡的时候，趁机逃了回来，敬佗却又被追兵抓了回去。沮渠蒙逊把当地的八千多户百姓全部迁走。
English: When Jingfui went to Hu, he took the opportunity to escape and return, but Jinglu was chased back by the soldiers. Despondent, Mengxun moved all the more than eight thousand local people away.

古文：右卫将军折掘奇镇据石驴山以叛。
现代文：这时南凉右卫将军折掘奇镇又占据石驴山叛变。
English: At this time, General Nan Liang Yu Wei led a mutiny and occupied Shishaoshan.

古文：傉檀畏蒙孙之逼，且惧岭南为奇镇所据，乃迁于乐都，留大司农成公绪守姑臧。
现代文：秃发檀既害怕沮渠蒙逊的威胁逼迫，又担心折掘奇镇控制了整个岭南地区，于是只有迁都到乐都，留下大司农成公绪镇守姑臧。
English: Bald-haired Sandan was afraid of the threat and persecution of the monsoon, and was also worried that the excavation town controlled the entire Lingnan region, so he only moved the capital to Ledu, leaving the chief farmer Chenggongxu to guard Guzhen.

古文：傉檀才出城，魏安人侯谌等闭门作乱，收合三千馀家，据南城，推焦朗为大都督、龙骧大将军，谌自称凉州刺史，降于蒙逊。
现代文：秃发檀刚刚出城，魏安人侯谌等人便关闭城门反叛，集合起了三千多家部众，占据南城，推举焦朗为大都督、垅骧大将军，侯谌自称为凉州刺史，向沮渠蒙逊投降。
English: Baldfattan had just left the city, when the Wei'an people, Hou Yi and others, closed the city gate and rebelled, gathered more than three thousand followers, occupied the south of the city, and elected Jia Lang as the grand governor and general of the Han Dynasty. Hou Yi called himself the historian of Liangzhou, and surrendered to Deshu Monson.

古文：刘裕至下邳，以船载辎重，自帅精锐步归。
现代文：刘裕到达下邳，用船只装载军事物资，自己则统领精锐部队步行赶回。
English: Liu Yu arrived in Jiaozuo, loaded military supplies with ships, and led the elite troops back on foot.

古文：至山阳，闻何无忌败死，虑京邑失守，卷甲兼行，与数十人至淮上，问行人以朝廷消息，行人曰： 贼尚未至，刘公若还，便无所忧。 
现代文：到山阳，听说何无忌兵败战死，担心都城陷落，下令军士脱去铠甲，急行军，自己先与几十个人赶到长江北岸，向过路人打听朝廷的消息。过路人说： 敌人还没到这里，刘公如果回来了，便没有什么值得忧虑的了。 
English: When he arrived in Shanyang, he heard that many soldiers had been killed in battle and feared the fall of the capital. He ordered the sergeants to take off their armor and march quickly. He and dozens of people rushed to the north bank of the Yangtze River to ask passers-by about the news of the imperial court. The passers-by said: The enemy has not yet arrived here. If Liu Gong returns, there is nothing to worry about.

古文：裕大喜。
现代文：刘裕非常高兴。
English: Liu Yu is very happy.

古文：将济江，风急，众咸难之。
现代文：他想要渡江，但是风太大，众人都说很困难。
English: He wanted to cross the river, but the wind was too strong and everyone said it would be difficult.

古文：裕曰： 若天命助国，风当自息；若其不然，覆溺何害！ 
现代文：刘裕说： 如果天公有意帮助我们国家的话，风就应该自动止息。如果不是这样的话，翻船淹死又有什么害处呢？ 
English: Liu Yu said: "If God is willing to help our country, the wind should automatically stop. If this is not the case, what is the harm of drowning?

古文：即命登舟，舟移而风止。
现代文：便命令上船，船刚刚启动，风果然就停了。
English: He ordered them to get on the boat. The boat just started and the wind stopped.

古文：过江，至京口，众乃大安。
现代文：渡过长江之后，抵达京口，大家于是彻底安下心来。
English: After crossing the Yangtze River and arriving in Beijing, everyone felt completely at ease.

古文：夏，四月，癸未，裕至建康。
现代文：夏季，四月，癸未，刘裕来到建康。
English: In the summer, in April, Liu Yu came to Jiankang.

古文：以江州覆没，表送章绶，诏不许。
现代文：因为江州已经沦陷，他上表交回印信，安帝下诏拒绝。
English: Because Jiangzhou had already fallen, he returned the letter with the seal on the front, but Emperor An refused to do so.

古文：青州刺史诸葛长民、兗州刺史刘籓、并州刺史刘道怜各将兵入卫逮康。
现代文：青州刺史诸葛长民、兖州刺史刘藩、并州刺史刘道怜，分别带领部队来到建康防卫。
English: Zhuge Changmin, the governor of Qingzhou, Liu Han, the governor of Zhangzhou, and Liu Daorei, the governor of Zhangzhou, led the troops to Jiankang defense.

古文：籓，兗州刺史毅之从弟也。
现代文：刘藩是豫州刺史刘毅的堂弟。
English: Liu Han is the cousin of Liu Yi, the famous statesman of Yuzhou.

古文：毅闻卢循之寇，将拒之，而疾作；既瘳，将行。
现代文：刘毅听说卢循带兵进犯，正要发兵抵抗他们的时候，自己却得了病。
English: Liu Yi heard that Lu Xun led the troops to attack, and he was about to send troops to resist them when he fell ill.

古文：刘裕遗毅书曰： 吾往习击妖贼，晓其变态。
现代文：病好之后，准备出发。刘裕给他写信说： 我过去几次和这伙强盗交战，知道他们狡滑多变。
English: After he recovered from his illness, he was ready to set off. Liu Yu wrote to him saying: I have fought with this group of robbers several times in the past, and I know how cunning and changeable they are.

古文：贼新获奸利，其锋不可轻。
现代文：这次，他们刚刚饶幸获得胜利，他们的气焰及实力不可轻视。
English: This time, they have just won a victory, and their pride and strength should not be taken lightly.

古文：今修船垂毕，当与弟同举。
现代文：现在，我们对战船的修缮马上就要完毕，自当与老弟一同起兵。
English: Now that we are about to finish repairing the warship, I think I should join the army with my brother.

古文：克平之日，上流之任，皆以相委。 
现代文：扫平敌人之后，长江上游的管辖重任，便全部交给你了。 
English: After sweeping away the enemy, the heavy responsibility of governing the upper reaches of the Yangtze River will all be handed over to you.

古文：又遣刘籓往谕止之。
现代文：又派刘藩前去，让他暂时停止行动。
English: He also sent Liu Han to tell him to temporarily stop his actions.

古文：毅怒，谓籓曰： 往以一时之功相推耳，汝便谓我真不及刘裕邪！ 
现代文：刘毅勃然大怒，对刘藩说： 过去我们不过因他有一点功劳，推他做临时的盟主罢了，你就以为我真的赶不上刘裕吗？ 
English: Liu Yi flew into a rage and said to Liu Fan: In the past, we only pushed him to be the temporary leader because he had a little merit. Do you think I can't catch up with Liu Yu?

古文：投书于地，帅舟师二万发姑孰。
现代文：把刘裕的信仍在地下，率领着两万水军从姑孰出发。
English: With Liu Yu's letter still underground, he led twenty thousand sailors from Guzheng.

古文：循之初入寇也，使徐道覆向寻阳，循自将攻湘中诸郡。
现代文：卢循刚开始向北方进犯时，派徐道覆进攻寻阳，自己准备攻打湘中地区各郡。
English: When Lu Xun just began to attack the north, he sent Xu Daohui to attack Xuanyang, and prepared to attack counties in central Hunan.

古文：荆州刺史刘道规遣军逆战，败于长沙。
现代文：荆州刺史刘道规派遣部队迎战他们，在长沙战败。
English: Liu Daojian, the governor of Jingzhou, sent troops to fight them and was defeated in Changsha.

古文：循进至巴陵，将向江陵。
现代文：卢循开进到巴陵，打算直奔江陵。
English: Lu Xun drove into Baling, intending to go straight to Jiangling.

古文：徐道覆闻毅将至，驰使报循曰： 毅兵甚盛，成败之事，系之于此，宜并力摧之。
现代文：徐道覆听说刘毅就要攻来，派信使飞马报告卢循说： 刘毅的军队很强大，我们的成功失败，关键就在这次战斗，所以，应该同心协力把他打败。
English: When Xu Daohui heard that Liu Yi was about to attack, he sent a messenger, Pegasus, to report to Lu Xun, saying: Liu Yi's army is very powerful, the key to our success or failure is in this battle, so we should work together to defeat him.

古文：若此克捷，江陵不足忧也。 
现代文：如果这次能够取得胜利，那么，江陵就不值得担忧了。 
English: If we can win this time, then there is no need to worry about Gangneung.

古文：循即日发巴陵，与道覆合兵而下。
现代文：卢循当天便从巴陵出发，与徐道覆的兵力会合，然后顺流而下。
English: On the same day, Lu Xun set out from Baling, met with the troops of Xu Daohui, and then sailed down the river.

古文：五月，戊午，毅与循战于桑落洲，毅兵大败，弃船，以数百人步走，馀众皆为循所虏，所弃辎重山积。
现代文：五月，戊午，刘毅与卢循在桑落州摆开战场，结果刘毅的军队被打得大败。他扔掉船只，只带着几百名下属步行逃走，剩下的士兵全部被卢循俘虏。
English: In the afternoon of May, Liu Yi and Lu Xun waged a battle in Sanluo County. As a result, Liu Yi's army was defeated. He threw away his ships and fled on foot with only a few hundred subordinates. The remaining soldiers were all captured by Lu Xun.

古文：初，循至寻阳，闻裕已还，犹不信；既破毅，乃得审问，与其党相视失色。
现代文：他们丢弃的军事物质堆成了小山。当初，卢循抵达寻阳的时候，听说刘裕已经回来，还有些不相信。击败刘毅的军队后，才从俘虏的口中得到证实，他和他的党羽们互相对看着面色大变。
English: At first, when Lu Xun arrived at Xuanyang, he heard that Liu Yu had returned, and still did not believe it. After defeating Liu Yi's army, it was confirmed from the mouth of the prisoner that he and his followers looked at each other and changed dramatically.

古文：循欲退还寻阳，攻取江陵，据二州以抗朝廷。
现代文：卢循打算退回到寻阳，攻克江陵，占据这两个州来和朝廷对抗。
English: Lu Xun planned to retreat to Xuanyang, conquer Jiangling and occupy the two provinces to fight against the imperial court.

古文：道覆谓宜乘胜径进，固争之。
现代文：徐道覆则说应该乘胜直接进攻，并坚持自己的观点。
English: Daohui thought that he should take advantage of the victory to advance, and argued resolutely.

古文：循犹豫累日，乃从之。
现代文：卢循犹豫了好几天，才依从了他的建议。
English: Lu Xun hesitated for several days before he followed his advice.

古文：己未，大赦。
现代文：己未，东晋实行大赦。
English: That's it, amnesty.

古文：裕募人为兵，赏之同京口赴义之科。
现代文：刘裕招募百姓，充实兵力，酬赏的数量同当年从京口发兵讨伐桓玄时所酬赏的数量相同。
English: Liu Yu recruited the people and increased the number of troops, and the amount of reward was the same as the amount of reward when Liu Yu sent troops from Beijing to fight against Huan Xuan.

古文：发民治石头城。
现代文：又发动百姓营建石头城。
English: He also mobilized the people to build a stone city.

古文：议者谓宜分兵守诸津要，裕曰： 贼众我寡，若分兵屯守，则测人虚实；且一处失利，则沮三军之心。
现代文：有人议论说，应该分出兵力去把守各个交通要道，刘裕说： 敌人兵多，我们兵少，如果分开兵力据守各地，就容易把我们的虚实暴露给敌人，况且一旦一个地方失利，就会使全体军队的士气受到打击。
English: Some people argue that troops should be allocated to guard each major transportation route. Liu Yu said: The enemy has more soldiers, but we have fewer soldiers. If we separate our troops to defend various regions, it will be easy to expose our falsehood to the enemy. Moreover, once a place is lost, the morale of the entire army will be hit.

古文：今聚众石头，随宜应赴，既令彼无以测多少，又于众力不分。
现代文：现在我们把部队全部聚集在石头，按照情况的需要，应变行事，这样，既可以让敌人无法知道我们的实力多少，又可以使军队的力量不致分散。
English: Now we have gathered all the troops on the stone, and will act according to the needs of the situation, so that the enemy can not know our strength, and the strength of the army can not be dispersed.

古文：若徒旅转集，徐更论之耳。 
现代文：如果各地的军队都能够及时地辗转集结，那就以后再说吧。 
English: If the army gradually gathers, then slowly negotiate.

古文：朝廷闻刘毅败，人情恟惧。
现代文：东晋朝廷听说刘毅被打得大败，人心慌乱不安。
English: The East Jin Dynasty court heard that Liu Yi had been soundly defeated, and their hearts were in turmoil.

古文：时北师始还，将士多创病，建康战士不盈数千。
现代文：这时北伐的军队刚刚回来，将士不是受伤便是有病，而留在建康的战士又不超过几千人。
English: At this time, the army of the Northern Expedition had just returned, the soldiers were either injured or ill, and there were no more than a few thousand soldiers left in Jiankang.

古文：循既克二镇，战士十馀万，舟车百里不绝，楼船高十二丈，败还者争言其强盛。
现代文：卢循攻克江州、豫州之后，战士达到十几万人，战船战车浩浩荡荡，绵延一百里，仍然看不到头，大的楼船高达十二丈。官军战败跑回来的人都争着传说敌兵的强盛。
English: After Lu Xun conquered Jiangzhou and Yuzhou, the number of soldiers reached more than a hundred thousand, the warships and chariots were huge and vast, stretching for a hundred miles, but still no heads could be seen, and the large buildings and ships were as high as twelve feet. The people who ran back after the defeat of the government army competed for the strength of the legendary enemy soldiers.

古文：孟昶、诸葛长民欲奉乘舆过江，裕不听。
现代文：孟昶、诸葛长民打算护卫安帝渡长江向北撤退，刘裕不同意。
English: Meng Xuan and Zhuge Changmin planned to escort the Andi to the Yangtze River and withdraw to the north, but Liu Yu disagreed.

古文：初，何无忌、刘毅之南讨也，昶策其必败，已而果然。
现代文：当初，何无忌、刘毅迎击从南方袭来的敌军时，孟昶估计他们一定失败，过后果然失败。
English: At the beginning, when Liu Yi attacked the enemy forces coming from the south, Meng Xuan estimated that they would certainly fail, and they eventually did.

古文：至是，又谓裕必不能抗循，众颇信之。惟龙骧将军东海虞丘进廷折昶等，以为不然。
现代文：到了这个时候，他又以为刘裕一定抵挡不住卢循的进攻，大家对他的话都很相信，只有龙骧将军、东海人虞丘进在朝廷中驳斥孟昶等人，以为不是那么回事。
English: At this time, he also thought that Liu Yu would not be able to resist Lu Xun's attack, and everyone believed in his words. Only the Longjing general and the East China Sea person Yu Qiu Jin refuted Meng Xuan and others in the imperial court, and thought that this was not the case.

古文：中兵参军王仲德言于裕曰： 明公命世作辅，新建大功，威震六合，妖贼乘虚入寇，既闻凯还，自当奔溃。
现代文：中兵参军王仲德对刘裕说： 明公您受上天之命，当国家的辅佐，又刚刚建立了大功，声威震动天下。这些妖贼乘我们国内空虚，公然进犯，听到您带兵胜利归来，自会奔逃溃散。
English: Wang Zhongde, a member of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, said to Liu Yu: "Ming Gong, you have been ordered by heaven, when you were the assistant of the country, you have just established a great achievement, and your voice has shaken the world. These devils have taken advantage of the emptiness in our country and openly attacked. When they hear that you have brought your soldiers back successfully, they will run away and disperse.

古文：若先自遁逃，则势同匹夫，匹夫号令，何以威物！
现代文：我们如果首先自己逃跑，那么其实就和一个没用的蠢才一样了，蠢才下令，又用什么建立威信呢？
English: If we run away ourselves first, then we are actually the same as a useless idiot. The idiot gives the order, and what do we use to establish authority?

古文：此谋若立，请从此辞。 
现代文：这个渡江避难的建议如果被采纳，就请您允许我就此告辞。 
English: If such a scheme can be established, I hereby request that you withdraw from the case.

古文：裕甚悦。
现代文：刘裕非常高兴。
English: Liu Yu is very happy.

古文：昶固请不已，裕曰： 今重镇外倾，强寇内逼，人情危骇，莫有固志；若一旦迁动，便自土崩瓦解，江北亦岂可得至！
现代文：孟昶一直坚持自己的请求，刘裕说： 现在，我们的重要藩镇在外地失败，强大的敌人又步步近逼，人心恐惧不安，没有一个坚定的信心。如果我们一旦向北移动，便自然会土崩瓦解，长江以北的地区又哪里能赶得到！
English: Meng Wei has always insisted on his request, Liu Yu said: Now, our important towns have failed in other places, powerful enemies are approaching, people are afraid and uneasy, and there is no firm confidence. If we move north, we will naturally collapse, and where can we catch up with the areas north of the Yangtze River!

古文：设令得至，不过延日月耳。
现代文：即便是到了那里，也不过是拖延一些时日罢了。
English: Even if you get there, it's just a matter of time.

古文：今兵士虽少，自足一战。若其克济，则臣主同休；苟厄运必至，我当横尸庙门，遂其由来以身许国之志，不能窜伏草间苟求存活也。
现代文：现在，我们的兵士虽然很少，却也足够作最后一次决战，如果真的克敌制胜，那我们君臣一同庆幸，如果恶运一定要来，我也应当死在晋室宗庙之前，实现我长期以来以身报国的志向，但决不能逃窜到荒草林野之间只想保全个人的性命。
English: Now, although our soldiers are few, they are enough for the last decisive battle. If we really defeat the enemy and win, then we princes and ministers will be happy together. If bad luck must come, I should also die before the Jinshitsu ancestral temple, realizing my long-standing ambition to serve the country, but I must not flee to the wild grass and forests just to save my personal life.

古文：我计决矣，卿勿复言！ 
现代文：我的决心已经下定，你不要再多说了！ 
English: I've made up my mind, you don't have to say any more!

古文：昶恚其言不行，且以为必败，因请死。
现代文：孟昶因为自己的建议不被采纳而恼羞成怒，又因为认定自己这一方必定失败，所以请求先杀了自己。
English: Meng Xuan became angry and embarrassed because his suggestion was not accepted, and because he believed that his side would certainly fail, he asked to kill himself first.

古文：裕怒曰： 卿且申一战，死复何晚！ 
现代文：刘裕大怒说： 你打完这一仗，再死也不晚！ 
English: Liu Yu said angrily, "After you finish this battle, it's not too late to die!"

古文：昶知裕终不用其言，乃抗表自陈曰： 臣裕北讨，众并不同，唯臣赞裕行计，致使强贼乘间，社稷危逼，臣之罪也。
现代文：孟昶知道刘裕一定不会采纳他的意见了，于是呈上奏表，表明自己的想法： 刘裕北伐的时候，文武百官都不同意，只有我赞同刘裕出兵的计划，致使强大的敌人乘虚而入，使国家的安全受到威胁，这是我的罪过。
English: Meng Xuan knew that Liu Yu would definitely not accept his opinion, so he submitted a report form to show his thoughts: When Liu Yu was on the Northern Expedition, all the military and civilian officials disagreed. I was the only one who agreed with Liu Yu's plan to send troops, causing a powerful enemy to take advantage of the situation and threaten the security of the country. This was my fault.

古文：谨引咎以谢天下！ 
现代文：我只好承认自己的罪责，用以告慰天下人。 
English: I had to admit my guilt and use it to console the world.

古文：封表毕，仰药而死。
现代文：把奏表封上之后，他便喝下毒药自杀了。
English: After sealing the report, he drank poison and committed suicide.

古文：乙丑，卢循至淮口，中外戒严。
现代文：乙丑，卢循大军抵达秦淮河口，东晋朝廷都城内外戒严。
English: In the second year of the Ugly Emperor's reign, Lu Xun's army arrived at the mouth of the Qin Huai River, and the Eastern Jin Dynasty's capital was placed under martial law.

古文：琅邪王德文都督宫城诸军事，屯中堂皇，刘裕屯石头，诸将各有屯守。
现代文：琅邪王司马德文都督宫城诸军事，住在中堂大殿处理军务，刘裕则在石头驻扎，其他各位将领各有自己的防地。
English: The evil king, Sima Dewen, the governor of the palace city, and the military lived in the Great Hall of the Middle Hall to deal with military affairs, Liu Yu was stationed in the stone, and the other generals each had their own defense sites.

古文：裕子义隆始四岁，裕使咨议参军刘粹辅之，镇京口。
现代文：刘裕的儿子刘义隆只有四岁，刘裕派谘议参军刘粹辅佐他，镇守京口。
English: Liu Yu's son, Liu Yilong, was only four years old. Liu Yu sent Liu Ziyu to advise him to join the army, and Liu Ziyu assisted him in guarding Jingkou.

古文：粹，毅之族弟也。
现代文：刘粹是刘毅的同门族弟。
English: Liu Zi is Liu Yi's younger brother.

古文：裕见民临水望贼，怪之，以问参军张劭，劭曰： 若节钺未反，民奔散之不暇，亦何能观望？
现代文：刘裕见到许多百姓站在江边看着江中的敌军，觉得很奇怪，问参军张劭这是怎么回事，张劭说： 如果您没有回来，百姓奔逃溃散还嫌来不及，又怎么能站在那里观望呢？
English: Liu Yu saw many people standing on the riverbank watching the enemy troops in the river and felt very strange. He asked Zhang Ye, who had joined the army, what was going on. Zhang Ye said, "If you haven't come back, it's too late for the people to run and scatter, so how can you stand there and watch?"

古文：今当无复恐耳。
现代文：现在当然是不再害怕了。 
English: Now, of course, I'm not afraid anymore.

古文：贼若于新亭直进，其锋不可当，宜且回避，胜负之事未可量也；若回泊西岸，此成禽耳。 
现代文：刘裕对各位将领说： 贼兵如果从新亭直接挺进，那么他们的锋芒就不可阻挡，应该暂且回避一下，是胜是负也就不可推测了。他们如果回到西岸去停泊，这就可以擒获了。 
English: Liu Yu said to the generals: If the robber soldiers advance directly from Xinting, then their edge will be unstoppable. They should temporarily avoid it. It is impossible to predict whether they will win or lose. If they return to the west coast to anchor, they can be captured.

古文：徐道覆请于新亭至白石焚舟而上，数道攻裕。
现代文：徐道覆请求从新亭进军白石，然后烧掉战船登陆，分几路进攻刘裕。
English: Xu Daohui requested to march from Xinting to Baishi, and then burn the warship to land and attack Liu Yu in several ways.

古文：循欲以万全为计，谓道覆曰： 大军未至，孟昶便望风自裁；以大势言之，自当计日溃乱。
现代文：卢循打算以尽可能保险为目的，对徐道覆说： 我们的大军还没有到，只听见一些风声孟昶便被吓得自杀，根据大趋势来说。敌人自会在几天内崩溃散乱。
English: Lu Xun intended to be as safe as possible, and said to Xu Daojun: Our great army has not yet arrived, only heard some rumors Meng Yao was scared to suicide, according to the general trend. The enemy will collapse and scatter within a few days.

古文：今决胜负于一朝，乾没求利，既非必克之道，且杀伤士卒，不如按兵待之。 
现代文：现在，决定胜负也就是一个早上的事，一味凭侥幸在战场投机取利，既不是一定能战胜敌人的办法，又能损伤我的士卒，我看不如按兵不动，等他们上来。 
English: Now, deciding whether to win or lose is a matter of one morning. Simply taking advantage of a fluke to speculate on the battlefield is neither a sure way to defeat the enemy, nor can it damage my soldiers. I can't wait for them to come up.

古文：道覆以循多疑少决，乃叹曰： 我终为卢公所误，事必无成；使我得为英雄驱驰，天下不足定也。 
现代文：徐道覆因为卢循疑心太重又缺决断，于是叹息道： 我终将被卢公耽误，事情一定不会成功。如果我能有幸为一位英雄卖命奔波的话，天下早就平定了。 
English: Because Lu Xun was too suspicious and lacked determination, Xu Daohui sighed and said: I will eventually be delayed by Lu Gong, things will definitely not succeed. If I can have the honor of running for a hero, the world would have been leveled long ago.

古文：裕登石头城望循军，初见引向新亭，顾左右失色；既而回泊蔡洲，乃悦。
现代文：刘裕登上石头城，遥望卢循的部队，最初看见他们向新亭方向移动，刘裕看看两旁随从，脸色稍变。
English: Liu Yu boarded the Stone City and looked at the troops of Lu Zun from a distance. At first, he saw them moving in the direction of Xinting. Liu Yu looked at the attendants on both sides and his face changed slightly.

古文：于是众军转集。
现代文：后来他看见敌军船只回到蔡州停泊下来，这才高兴起来。
English: Later, he was delighted to see the enemy ships return to anchor in Caizhou.

古文：裕恐循侵轶，用虞丘进计，伐树栅石头淮口，修治越城，筑查浦、药园、廷尉三垒，皆以兵守之。
现代文：于是，他调动各路军队转移集中。刘裕恐怕卢循发动突然袭击，所以采用了虞丘进的建议，砍伐树木在石头城和秦淮河口等地全部立起栅栏。同时，他命人尽快整修越城，兴筑查浦、药园、廷尉三座堡垒，都派兵在那里把守。
English: Liu Yu was afraid that Lu Xun would launch a surprise attack, so he adopted Yu Qujin's suggestion to cut down trees and erect fences in all places such as Stone Town and the mouth of the Qin Huai River. At the same time, he ordered people to renovate Yue City as soon as possible, and build three fortresses: Chapu, Medicine Garden, and Tingyi, and sent soldiers to guard them.

古文：刘毅经涉蛮、晋，仅能自免，从者饥疲，死亡什七八。
现代文：刘毅战败以后，穿过蛮族和汉族地区，历经艰险，仅仅保住一条活命，跟随他的人连饿带累，十个人中也死了七八个。
English: After the defeat of Liu Yi, he went through the barbarian and Han regions. After experiencing hardships and dangers, he only saved one life. The people who followed him were exhausted with hunger. Seven or eight of the ten people died.

古文：丙寅，至建康，待罪。
现代文：丙寅，终于赶回建康，等候定罪。
English: Hsin-Yin finally rushed back to Jiankang, waiting for a conviction.

古文：裕慰勉之，使知中外留事。
现代文：刘裕对他善加鼓励安慰，并让他担任知中外留事。
English: Liu Yu encouraged and comforted him, and let him serve as the secretary for foreign affairs.

古文：毅乞自贬，诏降为后将军。
现代文：刘毅自己请求贬谪，安帝下诏把他降为后将军。
English: Liu Yi himself asked to be demoted, and Emperor An decreed that he be demoted to Rear Admiral.

古文：魏长孙嵩至漠北而还，柔然追围之于牛川。
现代文：北魏长孙嵩征讨柔然，到了大漠以北才回来，柔然军在牛川追上长孙嵩部队并把他们包围。
English: Northern Wei's Chosun Song's army besieged Zhu Rong, but did not return until it reached the north of the desert. Zhu Rong's army caught up with Chosun Song's army in Niu River and encircled them.

古文：壬申，魏主嗣北击柔然。
现代文：壬申，北魏国主拓跋嗣向北进军攻击柔然。
English: In Jinshin, the Northern Wei ruler Tuoba Zi marched north and attacked Suoren.

古文：柔然可汗社仑闻之，遁走，道死；其子度拔尚幼，部众立社仑弟斛律，号蔼苦盖可汗。
现代文：柔然可汗郁久闾社仑听说这人消息后，急忙逃走，结果死在路上。他的儿子郁久闾度拔年纪还小，大臣们便拥立郁久闾社仑的弟弟郁久闾斛律，叫做蔼豆盖可汗。
English: Upon hearing the news of this man, the gentle khan, Ikukyu Shahrun, fled in a hurry and died on the road. His son, Ikukyu Shahrun, was still young, and the ministers supported Ikukyu Shahrun's younger brother, Ikukyu Shahrun, who was called Aizugei Khan.

古文：嗣引兵还参合陂。
现代文：拓跋嗣带兵回参合陂。
English: Tuoba Zi led the troops back to Sanghe County.

古文：卢循伏兵南岸，使老弱乘舟向白石，声言悉众自白石步上。
现代文：卢循把伏兵布置在秦淮口南岸，命令一些老弱将士坐船向白石进发，并声称全部大军准备从白石登岸作战。
English: Lu Xun placed the ambush soldiers on the south bank of Qinhuaikou, ordered some old and weak soldiers to sail to Baishi, and claimed that the entire army was ready to fight ashore from Baishi.

古文：刘裕留参军沈林子、徐赤特戍南岸，断查浦，戒今坚守勿动；裕及刘毅、诸葛长民北出拒之。
现代文：刘裕留下参军沈林子、徐赤特戍守南岸，切断通往查浦的交通，命令他们坚守阵地，不要轻举妄动。刘裕和刘毅、诸葛长民等向北出兵迎击敌军。
English: Liu Yu left Shen Linzi and Xu Chiatu, who had joined the army, to guard the south bank, cut off the traffic leading to Chapu, and ordered them to hold their positions and not make any rash moves. Liu Yu, Liu Yi, Zhuge Changmin and others sent troops to the north to meet the enemy army.

古文：林子曰： 妖贼此言，未必有实，宜深为之防。 
现代文：沈林子说： 贼兵这样说，却不一定真这样做，应该多加防备。 
English: Shen Linzi said, "Thief soldiers say this, but they don't necessarily really do it. You should be more prepared."

古文：裕曰： 石头城险，且淮栅甚固，留卿在后，足以守之。 
现代文：刘裕说： 石头城地势险峻，而且淮口的栅栏很坚固，把你留在后方，足可以守住了。 
English: Liu Yu said, "Shi Toucheng is on a precipitous terrain, and the fence at Huai Kou is very strong. It can keep you behind and protect your feet.

古文：林子，穆夫之子也。
现代文：沈林子是沈穆夫的儿子。
English: Shen Linzi is the son of Shen Mufu.

古文：庚辰，卢循焚查浦，进至张侯桥。
现代文：庚辰，卢循火烧查浦，进兵到张侯桥。
English: Geng Chen and Lu Xun set fire to Cha Pu and marched into Zhang Hou Bridge.

古文：徐赤特将击之，林子曰： 贼声往白石而屡来挑战，其情可知。
现代文：徐赤特准备迎战，沈林子说： 贼兵声言去了白石，却几次来到这里挑战，他们的险恶用心，我们可以猜到。
English: As Xu Chiat prepared for battle, Shen Linzi said, "Thief soldiers claimed to have gone to Baishi, but they came here several times to challenge. We can guess their sinister intentions.

古文：吾众寡不敌，不如守险以待大军。 
现代文：我们的军队人少无法抵敌，不如坚守险要，等待大军回来。 
English: Our army is too few to defeat the enemy. It is better to hold fast and wait for the great army to return.

古文：赤特不从。遂出战，伏兵发，赤特大败，单舸奔淮北。
现代文：徐赤特却不听从，于是出兵交战，敌兵的伏兵突然出现，徐赤特被打得大败，乘着一条船逃往秦淮河北岸。
English: However, Xu Chet did not listen, so he sent troops to fight. An ambush of enemy soldiers suddenly appeared. Xu Chet was defeated and fled to the north bank of the Qinhuai River on a boat.

古文：林子及将军刘钟据栅力战，硃龄石救之，贼乃退。
现代文：沈林子及将军刘钟据守栅栏奋力作战，朱龄石又率援军赶来相救，敌军才撤了下去。
English: Shen Linzi and General Liu Zhong fought hard to defend the fence, Zhu Lingshi also led reinforcements to rescue, and the enemy army withdrew.

古文：循引精兵大上，至丹阳郡。
现代文：卢循带着一支精锐部队急进，到达丹阳郡。
English: Lu Xun led an elite force in a rapid advance, reaching Danyang County.

古文：裕帅诸军驰还石头，斩徐赤特，解甲。久之，乃出陈于南塘。
现代文：刘裕率着几路部队立即赶回石头，斩了徐赤特，休息了很长一段时间，才带兵到南塘列开战阵。
English: Liu Yu, leading several troops, immediately rushed back to the stone, cut off Xu Chet, and rested for a long time before leading the troops to Nantang.

古文：六月，以刘裕为太尉、中书监、加黄钺；裕受黄钺，馀固辞。
现代文：六月，东晋任命刘裕为太尉、中书监，加授黄铖。刘裕接受了黄铖，其他的职位却坚决推辞。
English: In June, the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed Liu Yu as the first lieutenant and the chief librarian of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, with the additional award of the Yellow Ribbon. Liu Yu accepted the Yellow Ribbon, but resolutely refused other positions.

古文：以车骑中军司马庾悦为江州刺史。
现代文：朝廷又任命车骑中军司马庾悦为江州刺史。
English: The imperial court also appointed Ma Jieyue, the Secretary of the Central Military Commission of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, as the chief historian of Jiangzhou.

古文：悦，准之子也。
现代文：庾悦是庾淮的儿子。
English: Hao Yue is the son of Hao Huai.

古文：司马国璠及弟叔璠、叔道奔秦。
现代文：东晋叛将司马国和他的弟弟司马叔、司马叔道投奔后秦。
English: The Eastern Jin rebel general Sima Guo and his brothers Sima Shu and Sima Shu Dao fled to Later Qin.

古文：秦王兴曰： 刘裕方诛桓玄，辅晋室，卿何为来？ 
现代文：后秦国王姚兴说： 刘裕刚刚剿灭了桓玄，辅佐晋朝宗室，你们为什么还要到这里来？ 
English: Later Qin King Yao Xing said: Liu Yu has just annihilated Huan Xuan, the assistant to the imperial family of Jin Dynasty, why do you still want to come here?

古文：对曰： 裕削弱王室，臣宗族有自修立者，裕辄除之。
现代文：他们回答说： 刘裕削弱王室的力量，我们宗族之中如果有自己发奋成才的人，常常都被刘裕除掉。
English: They replied, "Liu Yu weakened the power of the royal family. In our family, if there are people who have worked hard, they are often eliminated by Liu Yu.

古文：方为国患，甚于桓玄耳。 
现代文：他这样正是为国家制造祸患，甚至比桓玄还厉害。 
English: In this way, he is creating a calamity for the country, even worse than Kuan Xuan.

古文：兴以国璠为扬州刺史，叔道为交州刺史。
现代文：姚兴任命司马国为扬州刺史，任命司马叔道为交州刺史。
English: Yao Xing appointed Sima Guo as Yangzhou chief historian, and appointed Sima Shudo as Jiaozhou chief historian.

古文：卢循寇掠诸县无所得，谓徐道覆曰： 师老矣，不如还寻阳，并力取荆州，据天下三分之二，徐更与建康争衡耳。 
现代文：卢循进犯掠夺了几个县，什么也没抢到，对徐道覆说： 军队出来时间太长，已经疲惫不堪，我看不如回到寻阳，合力攻取荆州，这样，我们占据了三分这二的天下，就可以慢慢地再与建康的东晋政权争强斗胜了。 
English: Lu Xun advanced and plundered several counties, but did not get anything, and said to Xu Daojun: The army has been out for too long and is already exhausted. I think it is better to return to Xuanyang and work together to capture Jingzhou. In this way, we have occupied two-thirds of the world, and we can slowly fight and win against the East Jin regime of Jiankang.

古文：秋，七月，庚申，循自蔡洲南还寻阳，留其党范崇民将五千人据南陵。
现代文：秋季，七月，庚申，卢循从蔡州向南撤退回寻阳，留下他的部将范崇民带领五千人据守南陵。
English: In the autumn, in July, Gaoshen, Lu Xun retreated from Caizhou to the south and returned to Xuanyang, leaving his commander Fan Chongmin to lead five thousand people to defend Nanling.

古文：甲子，裕使辅国将军王仲德、广川太守刘钟、河间内史兰陵蒯恩、中军咨议参军孟怀玉等帅众追循。
现代文：甲子，刘裕派遣辅国将军王仲德、广川太守刘钟、河间内史兰陵人蒯恩、中军谘议参军孟怀玉等人带兵追击卢循。
English: At the same time, Liu Yu dispatched the auxiliary general Wang Zhongde, the governor of Guangchuan Liu Zhong, the people of Shilanling in Kham, Meng Huayu, who was consulted by the Chinese army and joined the army, and others to lead the troops to pursue Lu Xun.

古文：乙丑，魏主嗣还平城。
现代文：乙丑，北魏国主拓跋嗣回到平城。
English: Second Ugly, the Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba Zi returned to Pingcheng.

古文：西秦王乾归讨越质屈机等十馀部，降其众二万五千，徙于苑川。
现代文：西秦王乞伏乾归讨伐越质屈机等十几个部落，收降当地的士民二万五千人，并把他们迁到苑川居住。
English: The King of Western Qin, Qianlong, entreated more than a dozen tribes, including the Qianlong and the Qianlong, to surrender their local 25,000 people, and moved them to live in Yuanchuan.

古文：八月，乾归复都苑川。
现代文：八月，乞伏乾归恢复苑川为自己的都城。
English: In August, he begged Emperor Qianbei to restore Yuanchuan as his capital.

古文：沮渠蒙逊伐西凉，败西凉世子歆于马庙，禽其将硃元虎而还。
现代文：北凉王沮渠蒙逊讨伐西凉，在马庙把西凉公李的嫡长子李歆打败，生擒西凉将领朱元虎，回师。
English: The king of the Northern Liang Dynasty, Qiuqiu Mengxun, fought against the Western Liang Dynasty. He defeated the eldest legitimate son of the Western Liang Dynasty, Li Xuan, in the Horse Temple. The general of the Western Liang Dynasty, Zhu Yuanhu, returned to his division.

古文：凉公暠以银二千斤、金二千两赎元虎；蒙逊归之，遂与暠结盟而还。
现代文：西凉公李用二千斤白银、二千两黄金赎救朱元虎。沮渠蒙逊归还了他。于是，与李结下了联盟之后便回去了。
English: Xilang Gong Li used two thousand pounds of silver and two thousand two of gold to redeem Zhu Yuanhu. Despondent, Mengxun returned him. Therefore, after forming an alliance with Li, he went back.

古文：刘裕还东府，大治水军，遣建威将军会稽孙处、振武将军沈田子帅众三千自海道袭番禺。
现代文：东晋刘裕回到东府，大规模建设水军。他派遣建威将军会稽人孙处、振武将军沈田子率领部众三千人从海上绕道，前去袭击番禺。
English: Liu Yu of the Eastern Jin Dynasty returned to Dongfu to build a large-scale naval force. He dispatched General Jian Wei to attack Panyu by detouring from the sea with 3,000 people, led by Sun Zu, the inspector of the Association, and Zhenwu General Shen Tianzi.

古文：田子，林子之兄也。
现代文：沈田子是沈林子的哥哥。
English: Shen Tianzi is the elder brother of Shen Linzi.

古文：众皆以为 海道艰远，必至为难，且分撤见力，非目前之急。 
现代文：大家都以为 海上行军艰难遥远，一定要抵达那里是一件很难完成的任务，而且分出现有兵力去进攻广州，也不是当务之急。 
English: Everyone thought that the sea march was difficult and far away, and it was a difficult task to get there, and it was not urgent to have troops to attack Guangzhou.

古文：裕不从，敕处曰： 大军十二月之交必破妖虏，卿至时，先倾其巢窟，使彼走无所归也。 
现代文：刘裕却不听从，命令孙处说： 朝廷的大部队在十二月初一定会打败贼兵，你到那个时候，首先把他们的老窝捣毁，让他们逃跑也无家可归。 
English: However, Liu Yu did not listen, and ordered Sun Du to say: The imperial army will surely defeat the bandits at the beginning of December. At that time, you must first destroy their homes, so that they will have no place to flee.

古文：谯纵遣侍中谯良等入见于秦，请兵以伐晋。
现代文：西蜀谯纵派遣侍中谯良等人去到后秦诣见，请求出兵讨伐东晋。
English: West Shushan sent the attendants, such as Gaoliang, to meet with Emperor Qin, and asked him to send troops to fight against East Jin.

古文：纵以桓谦为荆州刺史，谯道福为梁州刺史，帅众二万寇荆州；秦王兴遣前将军苟林帅骑兵会之。
现代文：谯纵任命桓谦为荆州刺史，任命谯道福为梁州刺史，率领二万人的军队进犯荆州。后秦王姚兴派遣前将军苟林率领骑兵和他们会合。
English: Gong Zong appointed Huan Qian as the governor of Jing Province, and Gong Daofu appointed as the governor of Liang Province, and led an army of 20,000 men to invade Jing Province. Later, Qin King Yao Xing sent the former general Guolin to lead the cavalry to join them.

古文：江陵自卢循东下，不得建康之问，群盗互起。
现代文：江陵自从卢循东下之后，便再也没有得到京都建康的消息，因此一群群的强盗蜂涌而起。
English: Gangneung had not received any news of Kyoto's recovery since Lu had left for the East, so the bandits swarmed in droves.

古文：荆州刺史刘道规遣司马王镇之帅天门太守檀道济、广武将军彭城到彦之入援建康。
现代文：荆州刺史刘道规派遣司马王镇之率领天门太守檀道济、广武将军彭城人到彦之进兵去救援京都建康。
English: Liu Daojie, the governor of Jingzhou, dispatched Tianmen Daju Dangdoji, the governor of Tianmen, led by Sima Wangzhen, and Guangwu General Pengcheng to Hikone to rescue Kyoto Jiankang.

古文：道济，祗之弟也。
现代文：檀道济是檀祗的弟弟。
English: Dangdozhi is Dangduso's younger brother.

古文：镇之至寻阳，为苟林所破。
现代文：王镇之到达寻阳，被后秦将军苟林打败。
English: When Wang Zhen arrived at Xuanyang, he was defeated by the late Qin general Guo Lin.

古文：卢循闻之，以林为南蛮校尉，分兵配之，使乘胜伐江陵，声言徐道覆已克建康。
现代文：卢循听到了这个消息，任命苟林为南蛮校尉，分出一些兵交给他统辖，让他乘胜讨伐江陵，并声称徐道覆已经攻克了建康。
English: Lu Xun heard the news, appointed Guo Lin as the captain of Nanban, allocated some soldiers to him, let him take advantage of the victory to attack Jiangling, and claimed that Xu Daohui had conquered Jiankang.

古文：桓谦于道召募义旧，民投之者二万人。
现代文：桓谦在路上招集了一些讲究恩义的旧部下，投奔他的达到二万人。
English: On the way, Kuan Qian called up some of his grateful former subordinates, and as many as twenty thousand people joined him.

古文：谦屯枝江，林屯江津，二寇交逼，江陵士民多怀异心。
现代文：桓谦屯扎在枝江，苟林屯扎在江津，这两伙军队交相逼迫，使江陵城中的许多士人百姓在心中都做好了另外的打算。
English: Huan Qian was stationed in the Yangtze River, and Guo Lin was stationed in the Yangtze River. The two groups of troops forced each other, so that many people in Jiangling City had other plans in their hearts.

古文：道规乃会将士告之曰： 桓谦今在近道，闻诸长者颇有去就之计，吾东来文武足以济事，若欲去者，本不相禁。 
现代文：刘道规于是把将士们集合在一起，对他们说： 桓谦现在就在附近，听说先生们很多都有去投靠他的打算，我们这些从东方过来任职的文武官员足以应付各种事变。如果有打算去的人，我绝不禁止。 
English: Liu Daojun then gathered the generals together and said to them, "Huan Qian is now in the vicinity. I have heard that many gentlemen are planning to go to him for help. We civil and military officials who have come from the East are sufficient to deal with all kinds of incidents. If there are people who plan to go, I will never forbid it.

古文：因夜开城门，达晓不闭。
现代文：于是，当夜打开城门，一直到早晨也没有关闭。
English: So they opened the gates that night and did not close them again until morning.

古文：众咸惮服，莫有去者。
现代文：众人都非常害怕佩服，没有人离去。
English: Everyone was too scared to admire, and no one left.

古文：雍州刺史鲁宗之帅众数千自襄阳赴江陵。
现代文：雍州刺史鲁宗之率领部众几千人从襄阳赶赴江陵。
English: Thousands of people from Yangyang rushed to Gangneung, led by Yangzhou poet Shiluzong.

古文：或谓宗之情未可测，道规单马迎之，宗之感悦。
现代文：有人说，鲁宗之的意图还不可预料，但刘道规却单人匹马前去相迎，鲁宗之既感动又高兴。
English: Some people said that Lu Zongzhi's intention was still unpredictable, but Liu Daobei went to meet him alone. Lu Zongzhi was both moved and happy.

古文：道规使宗之居守，委以腹心，自帅诸军攻谦。
现代文：刘道规请鲁宗之留在这里坚守，把他当做心腹之人，自己则统帅几支军队进攻桓谦。
English: Liu Daojian asked Lu Zongzhu to stay here and stick to it, treating him as a confidant, while he himself led several armies to attack Kan Qian.

古文：诸将佐皆曰： 今远出讨谦，其胜难必。
现代文：那些将领们说： 这次您到很远的地方去讨伐桓谦，能否胜利还很难说定。
English: Those generals said, "This time, you are going to a faraway place to fight Kanchen, and it's hard to say whether you can win.

古文：苟林近在江津，伺人动静，若来攻城，宗之未必能固；脱有蹉跌，大事去矣。 
现代文：苟林就在很近的江津，等待着我们的动静，如果他来攻打这座城，鲁宗之也不一定能守住。一旦有什么闪失挫折，那么，我们的情况可就糟了。 
English: Goryo forest is very close to Jiangjin, waiting for our movement. If he attacks this city, Lu Zongzhi may not be able to defend it. If there is any setback, then our situation will be worse.

古文：道规曰： 苟林愚懦，无他奇计，以吾去未远，必不敢向城。
现代文：刘道规说： 苟林愚蠢懦弱，没什么惊人的计谋，他以为我离开得不远，一定不敢攻城。
English: Liu Daojun said: Guolin is stupid and cowardly, there is no amazing strategy, he thought I was not far away, he would not dare to attack the city.

古文：吾今取谦，往至便克；沈疑之间，已自还返。
现代文：我这次进攻桓谦，一到那里就可以胜利，就在敌人犹豫不决的时候，我已经回来了。
English: This time, I attacked Huanqian. Once I got there, I could win. While the enemy was hesitating, I came back.

古文：谦败则林破胆。岂暇得来！
现代文：桓谦失败，那么苟林便会被吓破胆了，哪里还有闲心到这里来！
English: If Kancheng fails, then Goryo will be scared out of his wits, and will have no choice but to come here!

古文：且宗之独守，何为不支数日！ 
现代文：况且鲁宗之独自率兵在这里坚守，怎么还不支持几天！ 
English: Moreover, Lu Zongzhi alone led the troops to hold out here, why not support them for a few days!

古文：乃驰往攻谦，水陆齐进。
现代文：于是他火速进军攻击桓谦，水军、陆军同时发动。
English: As a result, he quickly marched in to attack Kanqian, and the navy and army were launched simultaneously.

古文：谦等大陈舟师，兼以步骑，战于枝江。
现代文：桓谦出动了几乎所有的水师船队，用步兵骑兵相配合，在枝江双方会战。
English: Huan Qian sent out almost all of the naval fleet, with infantry and cavalry to fight on both sides of the Yangtze River.

古文：檀道济先进陷陈，谦等大败。
现代文：檀道济抢先冲锋陷阵，桓谦的军队大败。
English: Dang Daojie was the first to charge into the battle, and Kan Qian's army was soundly defeated.

古文：谦单舸奔苟林，道规追斩之。
现代文：桓谦坐着一条船逃走去投奔苟林，刘道规追上把他杀了。
English: Huanqian fled in a boat and went to Bengolin. Liu Daojun caught up with him and killed him.

古文：还，至涌口，讨林，林走，道规遣咨议参军临淮刘遵帅众追之。
现代文：他们又回军，到达涌口，进攻苟林，苟林逃跑，刘道规派遣谘议参军临淮人刘遵率众人前去追击。
English: They returned to the army, arrived in Chungkou, attacked Goryeong, Goryeong fled, and Liu Daojie sent Liu Zun, a Linhuai man who had joined the army for consultation, to chase them.

古文：初，谦至枝江，江陵士民皆与谦书。
现代文：当初，桓谦抵达枝江时，江陵的各阶层百姓，都给桓谦写信，告诉他城内的情况，打算在桓谦攻城时做内应。
English: At first, when Huan Qian arrived at the Yangtze River, people from all walks of life in Jiangling wrote letters to Huan Qian, telling him about the situation in the city and their intention to help Huan Qian when he attacked the city.

古文：言城内虚实，欲为内应；至是检得之，道规悉焚不视，众于是大安。
现代文：到这时，在桓谦大营搜检到了那些信，刘道规却命令人把信全部烧了，一封也不看，江陵的百姓从此人心非常安定。
English: By this time, the letters had been found in Huanqian's camp, but Liu Daoyi ordered all the letters to be burned. Not a single letter was read, and the people of Jiangling were very stable from then on.

古文：江州刺史庾悦以鄱阳太守虞丘进为前驱，屡破卢循兵，进据豫章，绝循粮道。
现代文：江州刺史庾悦任用鄱阳太守虞丘进为前锋，几次打败卢循的部队，开进到豫章据守，切断了卢循的运粮通道。
English: The governor of Jiangsu Province, Shu Yue, appointed the governor of Poyang, Yu Qiu Jin, as a forward. He defeated Lu Cun's troops several times, drove into Yu Zhang's garrison, and cut off Lu Cun's grain transportation channel.

古文：九月，刘遵斩苟林于巴陵。
现代文：九月，刘遵在巴陵斩杀了苟林。
English: In September, Liu Zun killed Golin in Baling.

古文：桓石绥因循入寇，起兵洛口，自号荆州刺史，征阳令王天恩自号梁州刺史，袭据西城。
现代文：桓石绥因为卢循的进犯，自己也在洛口拉起一支队伍，自称为荆州刺史，徵阳令王天恩自称为梁州刺史，他们攻占了西城。
English: Because of Lu Xun's attack, Huan Shijie himself also pulled up a team in Lokou, calling himself Jingzhou stabbing history, Zhao Yangling Wang Tian'en called himself Liangzhou stabbing history, and they captured the West City.

古文：梁州刺史傅诏遣其子魏兴太守弘之讨石绥等，皆斩之，桓氏遂灭。
现代文：梁州刺史傅韶派他的儿子魏兴太守傅弘之征讨桓石绥等，把他们全部杀了。
English: Liangzhou assassin Fu Xi sent his son Wei Xing, the governor of Taizhou, Fu Hongzhi, to subjugate Kuan Shih and others, and killed them all.

古文：韶，畅之孙也。
现代文：桓氏家族从此彻底灭绝。傅韶是傅畅的孙子。
English: The Huan family was completely wiped out from then on. Fu Xuan was the grandson of Fu Chang.

古文：西秦王乾归攻秦略阳、南安、陇西诸郡，皆克之，徙民二万五千户于苑川及枹罕。
现代文：西秦王乞伏乾归进攻后秦略阳、南安、陇西等几个郡，都攻克了，把那里的百姓二万五千家迁移到苑川和罕居住。
English: After the invasion of Western Qin by King Qianfu, Qin conquered Liaoyang, Nan'an, Shaanxi and several other counties, and moved 25,000 people from there to live in Yuanchuan and Hankan.

古文：甲寅，葬魏主珪于盛乐金陵，谥曰宣武，庙号烈祖。
现代文：甲寅，把北魏国主拓跋安葬在盛乐的金陵，谥号宣武，庙号烈祖。
English: Jia Yin buried Tuoba, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, in the golden mausoleum of Shenle. His posthumous name was Xuanwu, and his temple name was Ruizhu.

古文：刘毅固求追讨卢循，长史王诞密言于刘裕曰： 毅既丧败，不宜复使立功。 
现代文：东晋刘毅坚决要求追击征讨卢循，长史王诞偷偷地对刘裕说： 刘毅既然已经战败，丧失了队伍和权力，就不应该再让他立功了。 
English: Liu Yi of East Jin resolutely demanded to pursue and recruit Lu Xun, and Changshi Wang Zet secretly said to Liu Yu: Since Liu Yi has been defeated and lost his troops and power, he should not be allowed to make meritorious contributions anymore.

古文：裕从之。
现代文：刘裕接受了这个建议。
English: Liu Yu accepted the suggestion.

古文：冬，十月，裕帅兗州刺史刘籓、宁朔将军檀韶、冠军将军刘敬宣等南击卢循，以刘毅监太尉留府，后事皆委焉。
现代文：冬季，十月，刘裕率领兖州刺史刘藩、宁朔将军檀韶、冠军将军刘敬宣等向南进军攻打卢循，任命刘毅监太尉留府，把后方的杂事全交给了他。
English: In the winter, in October, Liu Yu led the Bozhou general Liu Han, the Ningshuo general Dang Lu, the champion general Liu Jing Xuan, and others to march south to attack Luzhu, and appointed Liu Yijun as captain to stay in the capital, and handed over all the behind-the-scenes affairs to him.

古文：癸巳，裕发建康。
现代文：癸巳，刘裕从建康出发。
English: Soon, Liu Yu set off from Jiankang.

古文：徐道覆帅众三万趣江陵，奄至破冢。
现代文：徐道覆率领三万部众，直指江陵，突然抵达破冢。
English: Xu Daohui led 30,000 followers straight to Gangneung and suddenly arrived at the broken reed.

古文：时鲁宗之已还襄阳，追召不及，人情大震。
现代文：这时鲁宗之已经回到襄阳，刘道规派人去追赶他，召他回来，已经来不及。
English: At this time, Lu Zongzhi had already returned to Yangyang. Liu Daobei sent someone to chase him and call him back, but it was too late.

古文：或传循已平京邑，遣道覆来为刺史，江、汉士民感刘道规焚书之恩，无复贰志。
现代文：因此江陵人心异常震惊恐慌。有人传说卢循已经扫平了京邑，这是派徐道覆来做刺史，但是江、汉地区的各阶层百姓却感激刘道规焚烧书信、不计前嫌的恩德，都不再有二心了。
English: As a result, the people of Gangneung were extremely shocked and panicked. Some people said that Lu Xun had already leveled Beijing. This was to send Xu Daofu to make history, but the people of all walks of life in the Jiang and Han regions were grateful to Liu Daofu for burning letters and disregarding the previously hated Ende. They no longer had any second thoughts.

古文：道规使刘遵别为游军，自拒道覆豫章口，前驱失利；遵自外横击，大破之，斩首万馀级，赴水死者殆尽。
现代文：刘道规派刘遵分兵到外地去做为游击部队，自己则在豫章口抵抗徐道覆的进攻，结果，他的前锋部队失利。刘遵这时从外围拦腰横击徐道覆军队，把他们打得大败，杀死一万多人，其余的跳水淹死很多，敌军几乎死光。
English: Liu Daoyi sent Liu Zunbun soldiers to the outlying areas to act as a guerrilla force, while he resisted Xu Daohui's attack at Yuanzhangkou. As a result, his vanguard force was defeated. At this time, Liu Zun attacked Xu Daohui's army from the periphery, defeated them, killed more than ten thousand people, and drowned many of the rest. The enemy army was almost wiped out.

古文：道覆单舸走还湓口。
现代文：徐道覆仅坐一条船逃回湓口。
English: Xu Daohui only took one boat to escape back to the estuary.

古文：初，道规使遵为游军，众咸以为强敌在胶，唯患众少，不应分割见力，置无用之地。及破道覆，卒得游军之力，众心乃服。
现代文：当初，刘道规派刘遵去做游击军，众人都认为现在强大的敌人在前，本来担心兵力太少，就不应该再把现在本来就不多的兵力分割，安排在没有用处的地方，等到打败徐道覆之后，全是依靠这支游击军的力量，大家的心中才感到佩服。
English: At first, Liu Daoyi sent Liu Zun to be a guerrilla army. Everyone thought that the powerful enemy was now in front, and they were worried that the army was too small, so they should not divide the small army and arrange it in a useless place. After defeating Xu Daohui, they all relied on the strength of this guerrilla army, and everyone was impressed.

古文：鲜卑仆浑、羌句岂、输报、邓若等师户二万降于西秦。
现代文：鲜卑族仆浑部落，羌族句岂部落、输报部落、邓若部落等，率领二万户居民向西秦投降。
English: The Xianbei tribe, the Hun tribe, the Yao tribe, the Hui tribe, the Hui tribe, and the Dengrao tribe led twenty thousand residents to surrender to the West Qin.

古文：王仲德等闻刘裕大军且至，进攻范崇民于南陵，崇民战舰夹屯两岸。
现代文：东晋辅国将军王仲德等听说刘裕的大部队就要到来，便在南陵进攻范崇民的军队。范崇民的军舰呈夹击长江的形势，屯泊在两岸。
English: After hearing that Liu Yu's large force was about to arrive, Wang Zhongde and other generals of the East Jin Auxiliary State attacked Fan Chongmin's army in Nanling. Fan Chongmin's warships were caught in the Yangtze River and docked on both sides.

古文：十一月，刘钟自行觇贼，天雾，贼钩得其舸。钟因帅左右攻舰户，贼遽闭户拒之。
现代文：十一月，刘钟亲自去侦察敌情，天降大雾，敌人把他的船用铁钩钩住，刘钟于是领着左右随从进攻敌舰的舱门，敌兵只好飞快地把舱门关上挡住他们，刘钟于是从容而回。
English: In November, Liu Zhong personally went to reconnoiter the enemy situation. A heavy fog descended from the sky, and the enemy hooked his ship with an iron hook. Liu Zhong then led his left and right followers to attack the enemy ship's cabin door. The enemy soldiers had to quickly close the cabin door to block them. Liu Zhong then calmly returned.

古文：钟乃徐还，与仲德共攻崇民，崇民走。
现代文：他与王钟德一起进攻范崇民，范崇民逃跑。
English: He attacked Fan Chongmin together with Wang Zhongde, and Fan Chongmin fled.

古文：癸丑，益州刺史鲍陋卒。
现代文：癸丑，东晋益州刺史鲍陋去世。
English: 丑, Dongjin Yizhou Zishi Baohui passed away.

古文：谯道福陷巴东，杀守将温祚、时延祖。
现代文：谯道福攻陷了巴东，杀死那里的守将温祚、时延祖。
English: Shen Daofu attacked and captured Badong, and killed the defenders there, Wen Xuan and Shi Yanzu.

古文：卢循兵守广州者不以海道为虞。
现代文：卢循留下镇守广州的军队，不认为海道上会有什么危险。
English: Lu Xun left behind an army to guard Guangzhou and did not think there would be any danger on the sea route.

古文：庚戌，孙处乘海奄至，会大雾，四面攻之，即日拔其城。
现代文：庚戌，孙处等人带兵在海上乘船突然来到，正好赶上大雾迷漫，便从四面围攻广州，当天就攻克了这座城池。
English: Geng Hui, Sun Zu and other soldiers suddenly arrived by boat on the sea, just in time for the fog, they besieged Guangzhou from all sides, and conquered the city on the same day.

古文：外抚其旧民，戮循亲党，勒兵谨守，分遣沈田子等击岭表诸郡。
现代文：孙处安抚那里旧有的居民，杀死了卢循的亲朋党羽，并在这里时刻备战，严密防守。他又分别派遣沈田子等人带兵进攻五岭以南各郡。
English: Sun Duan pacified the former residents there, killed the relatives, friends and followers of Lu Xun, and prepared for battle here at all times, closely guarded. He also separately dispatched Shen Tianzi and others to lead troops to attack the counties south of Wuling.

古文：刘裕军雷池，卢循扬声不攻雷池，当乘流径下。
现代文：刘裕在雷池驻军。卢循扬言不去进攻雷池，而要顺江水直接东下。
English: Liu Yu stationed troops in Lei Chi. Lu Xun threatened not to attack Lei Chi, but to march directly east along the river.

古文：裕知其欲战，十二月，己卯，进军大雷。
现代文：刘裕知道他打算进行一场决战。十二月，己卯，他带兵进军到大雷。
English: Liu Yu knew that he was going to fight a decisive battle. In December, he marched with his troops to Dailai.

古文：庚辰，卢循、徐道覆帅众数万塞江而下，前后莫见舳舻之际。
现代文：庚辰，卢循、徐道覆统帅几万部众涌满长江，向下游进发，前后都看不见船队的头尾。
English: Geng Chen, Lu Xun, and Xu Daoyi, the commanders of tens of thousands of ships, poured into the Yangtze River and headed downstream. The front and back of the fleet could not be seen.

古文：裕悉出轻舰，帅众军齐力击之；又分步骑屯于西岸，岸上军投火焚之，烟炎涨天。循兵大败，走还寻阳；将趣豫章。乃悉力栅断左里。
现代文：卢循的军队战船只好全部停泊在西岸。这时，岸上埋伏的东晋军队纷纷把火投向敌船，焚烧敌人，顿时浓烟四起，火焰冲天，卢循的部队大败，只好逃回寻阳，他们准备赶到豫章，于是全力在左里路上构筑栅栏等工事。
English: Lu Cun's warships were all anchored on the west coast. At this time, the East Jin army, which was lying in wait on the shore, threw fire at the enemy ships one after another, burning the enemy. Suddenly, thick smoke rose everywhere and flames shot into the sky. Lu Cun's troops were defeated and had to flee back to the sun. They were preparing to reach Yuzhang, so they did their best to build fences and other construction on the left lane.

古文：丙申，裕军至左里，不得进。
现代文：丙申，刘裕的大部队抵达左里，不能前进。
English: Bishin, Liu Yu's large force arrived in Zuoli, unable to advance.

古文：裕麾兵将战，所执麾竿折，幡沉于水，众并怪惧。
现代文：刘裕挥旗指挥军队准备战斗，他所拿的旗竿突然折断，指挥旗落入水中，大家为此感到奇怪和恐惧。
English: Liu Yu waved the flag to command the army to prepare for battle. The flagpole he was holding suddenly broke, and the command flag fell into the water. Everyone was surprised and frightened.

古文：裕笑曰： 往年覆舟之战，幡竿亦折，今者复然，贼必破矣。 
现代文：刘裕笑着说： 当年，在覆舟山那场战役中，我的指挥旗竿也折断了，现在又是那样，敌人一定失败了。 
English: Liu Yu said with a smile: That year, in the battle to encircle Zhoushan, my command flagpole also broke, and now it is the same, the enemy must have failed.

古文：即攻栅而进。
现代文：便突破栅栏路障等向前进军。
English: It immediately attacked the fence and advanced.

古文：循兵虽殊死战，弗能禁。
现代文：卢循的军队虽然拼命决战，但是也无法阻挡。
English: Although Lu Wei's soldiers fought hard, they still could not stop them.

古文：循单舸走，所杀及投水死者凡万馀人。
现代文：卢循坐着一只船逃走，他的部下被杀和被淹死的有一万多人。
English: Lu Xun fled in a boat, and more than 10,000 of his men were killed or drowned.

古文：纳其降附，宥其逼略，遣刘籓、孟怀玉轻军追之。
现代文：官军收降了敌军的一些士兵，并宽释了那些被逼参加的人。刘裕又派遣刘藩、孟怀玉带领轻装部队追击逃跑的敌人。
English: The government army captured some soldiers of the enemy army and released those who were forced to participate. Liu Yu also sent Liu Han and Meng Huaiyu to lead light-armed troops to chase the fleeing enemy.

古文：循收散卒，尚有数千人，径还番禺；道覆走保始兴。
现代文：卢循收拢逃散的士卒，还有几千人，想直接回番禺。徐道覆逃回始兴固守。
English: Lu Xun rounded up the soldiers who had fled and dispersed, and there were several thousand others who wanted to return directly to Panyu. Xu Daohui fled back to Shixing and held fast.

古文：裕板建威将军褚裕之行广州刺史。
现代文：刘裕指派建威将军褚裕之代理广州刺史。
English: Liu Yu assigned General Jian Wei to act as the representative of General Zou Yu in Guangzhou.

古文：裕之，裒之曾孙也。
现代文：褚裕之是褚裒的曾孙。
English: Yu Yu is the great-grandson of Yu Yu.

古文：裕还建康。
现代文：刘裕回建康。
English: Liu Yu returned to Jiankang.

古文：刘毅恶刘穆之，每从容与裕言穆之权太重，裕益亲任之。
现代文：刘毅讨厌刘穆之，经常对刘裕怂恿说刘穆之的权力太大，刘裕却对刘穆之越加信任亲热。
English: Liu Yi hated Liu Mu Zhi and often told Liu Yuxuan that Liu Mu Zhi's power was too great, but Liu Yuxuan trusted Liu Mu Zhi more and more.

古文：燕广川公万泥、上谷公乳陈，自以宗室，有大功，谓当入为公辅。
现代文：北燕广川公冯万泥、上谷公冯乳陈，自以为是北燕国宗室的人，又立有大功，所以应该入朝担任要职，辅佐朝政。
English: Beiyan Guangchuan Gong Feng Wandi and Shangguan Gong Feng Luchen, who believed themselves to be the ancestral family of Beiyan, also made great contributions, so they should enter the court to hold important positions and assist in court politics.

古文：燕王跋以二籓任重，久而弗征，二人皆怨。
现代文：可是北燕王冯跋却认为他们镇守的地方非常重要，过了很长时间也不把他们征调回来。两个人都满腹怨气。
English: However, Feng Bao, the king of the Northern Yan, thought that the place where they guarded the town was very important, and after a long time, he did not conscript them back. Both of them were full of resentment.

古文：是岁，乳陈密遣人告万泥曰： 乳陈有至谋，愿与叔父图之。 
现代文：这一年，冯乳陈秘密派人告诉冯万泥说： 我有一个很好的计划，愿意和叔父一起商量着办。 
English: This year, Feng Lian Chen secretly sent someone to tell Feng Wendi: I have a good plan, and I am willing to discuss it with my uncle.

古文：万泥遂奔白狼，与乳陈俱叛，跋遣汲郡公弘与张兴将步骑二万讨之。
现代文：冯万泥于是跑到白狼，与冯乳陈一起叛变，冯跋派遣汲郡公弘与张兴带领两万步兵骑兵，前去征讨他们。
English: Feng Wanzhong then ran to the White Wolf and mutinied with Feng Lian Chen. Feng Wazhong sent Gong Hong and Zhang Xing of Ku County, leading 20,000 infantry and cavalry, to fight against them.

古文：弘先遣使谕以祸福；万泥欲降，乳陈不可。
现代文：冯弘先派人告诉他们祸福利害，冯万泥打算投降，冯乳陈却不同意。
English: Feng Hongxian sent someone to tell them about the calamity and welfare damage. Feng Wandi planned to surrender, but Feng Lianchen did not agree.

古文：兴谓弘曰： 贼明日出战，今夜必来惊我营，宜为之备。 
现代文：张兴对冯弘说： 他们决定明天来决战，今天夜里就一定会来进攻我们大营，应该准备对付他们。 
English: Zhang Xing said to Feng Hong, "They have decided to fight a decisive battle tomorrow. They will definitely attack our camp tonight. We should be prepared to deal with them."

古文：弘乃密严人课草十束，畜火伏兵以待之。
现代文：冯弘于是秘密命令每个人都准备好十把草，收好火种，埋伏好了之后，等待敌兵的到来。
English: Feng Hong then secretly ordered everyone to prepare ten handfuls of grass, collect the kindling, and wait for the arrival of the enemy soldiers after the ambush.

古文：是夜，乳陈果遣壮士千馀人来斫营，众火俱起，伏兵邀击，俘斩无遗。
现代文：当天夜里，冯乳陈果然派遣精壮的士兵一千多人，前来劫营，官军的火把一起点燃，伏兵冲出，前后截击，把叛军杀的杀，俘虏的俘虏，全部歼灭。
English: On the night of the same day, Feng Luchen sent more than a thousand strong soldiers to come and rob the camp. The torches of the government army were lit together, the ambush rushed out, and the front and back were intercepted. The rebels killed the prisoners, and the prisoners killed the prisoners, and all were annihilated.

古文：万泥、乳陈惧而出降，弘皆斩之。
现代文：冯万泥、冯乳陈恐惧异常，出城投降，冯弘把他们全部杀了。
English: Feng Wandi and Feng Lian Chen were terrified and left the city to surrender. Feng Hong killed them all.

古文：跋以范阳公素弗为大司马，改封辽西公；弘为骠骑大将军，改封中山公。
现代文：冯跋任命范阳公冯素弗为大司马，改封辽西公；任命冯弘为骠骑大将军，改封中山公。
English: Feng Badu appointed Fan Yang Gong Feng Su Fu as the grand steward and changed his title to Liao Xi Gong; appointed Feng Hong as the cavalry general and changed his title to Zhongshan Gong.

