古文：李太白以布衣入翰林，既而不得官。
现代文：李太白以平民身份进入翰林院，后来没有得到官职。
English: Li Taibai entered the Hanlin Academy as a commoner, and later did not get an official post.

古文：《唐史》言高力士以脱靴为耻，摘其诗以激杨贵妃，为妃所沮止。
现代文：《唐书》说高力士以给李白脱靴为耻辱，便摘取李白诗句，激怒杨贵妃，被杨贵妃阻止了他的任职。
English: "Tangshu" said that Gao Lixi was ashamed to take off Li Bai's shoes, so he extracted Li Bai's poems and angered Yang Guifei. Yang Guifei stopped him from taking office.

古文：今集中有《雪谗诗》一章，大率载妇人淫乱败国，其略云： 彼妇人之猖狂，不如鹊之强强。
现代文：现在太白集中有《雪谗诗》一章，大概讲妇人淫乱败坏国政，大略说： 那妇人太猖狂，还不如喜鸽双飞翔。
English: Now, the Taibai Collection has a chapter on "The Snow Maiden's Poem," which is probably about a woman's adultery and corruption of state affairs, roughly saying: That woman is so wild, she's no better than a pair of doves flying.

古文：彼妇人之淫昏，不如鹑之奔奔。
现代文：那妇人太淫滥，还不如鹌鹑相随伴。
English: That woman is so lewd, she might as well be in the company of baboons.

古文：坦荡君子，无悦簧言。 
现代文：胸怀坦荡的君子啊，不要听从悦耳的细语。 
English: O thou open-hearted gentleman, hearken not unto the whisperings of the ear.

古文：又云： 妲已灭纣，褒女惑周。汉祖吕氏，食其在傍。秦皇太后，毐亦淫荒。
现代文：又说： 妲己灭了殷封，褒拟乱了西周，汉高祖吕后与可食其同床，秦始皇太后与缪毐亦淫荒。
English: He also said: Zou himself destroyed Yinfu, Bo Bo disrupted the Western Zhou Dynasty, Emperor Gaozhu and Empress Dowager Lv Gu could share the same bed, and Empress Dowager Qin Shi Huang and Empress Dowager Mu were also adulterous.

古文：螮蝀作昏，遂掩太阳。
现代文：虹霓弄昏暗，遮蔽太阳光。
English: The rainbow trout dims and blots out the sun.

古文：万乘尚尔，匹夫何伤。
现代文：皇帝还如此，百姓又何妨。
English: The emperor is still like this, and the people are no better off.

古文：词殚意穷，心切理直。如或妄谈，昊天是殛。 予味此诗，岂非贵妃与禄山淫乱，而白曾发其奸乎？
现代文：词说完，意说尽，心情迫切道理直廿如果有低话，皇天来处死， 我体味此诗，岂非杨贵妃与安禄山私通，李白曾揭发过他们的丑事？
English: After the words are said, the meaning is said, the mood is urgent, the reason is straight twenty, if there is a low word, the emperor will come to execute, I experience this poem, is it not Yang Guifei and Anlu Mountain fornicating, Li Bai has exposed their ugly things?

古文：不然，则 飞燕在昭阳 之句，何足深怨也？
现代文：不然， 飞燕在昭阳 的句子，值得这么怨恨吗？
English: Otherwise, is Fei Yan's sentence in Zhao Yang worth such resentment?

