古文：杨师厚，颍州斤沟人也。
现代文：杨师厚，颍州斤沟人。
English: Yang Shihou, from Jinsha, Ganzhou.

古文：为李罕之部将，以猛决闻，尤善骑射。
现代文：为李罕之部下将领，因勇猛果敢而闻名，尤其擅长骑马射箭。
English: He was a general under Li Han and was famous for his bravery and courage. He was particularly good at horseback archery.

古文：及罕之败，退保泽州，师厚与李铎、何絪等来降，太祖署为忠武军牙将，继历军职，累迁检校右仆射，表授曹州刺史。
现代文：到李罕之失败后，退守泽州，杨师厚与李铎、何纟因等人来投降，梁太祖暂任他为忠武军牙将，接着历任军职，迁至检校仆射，上表推荐授与曹州刺史。
English: After the defeat of Li Han, he retreated to Zezhou, Yang Shihou and Li Yu, He Yuyin and others came to surrender. Liang Taizu temporarily served as the loyal military commander, followed by successive military posts, moved to the inspection school, and was recommended by the above table to be awarded the history of Caozhou.

古文：唐天复三年，从太祖迎昭宗于岐下，李茂贞以劲兵出战，为师厚所败。
现代文：唐朝天复三年，杨师厚跟随梁太祖到岐下迎接昭宗，李茂贞以劲兵出战，被杨师厚打败。
English: Three years after the restoration of the Tang Dynasty, Yang Shihou followed Liang Taizu to meet Zhao Zong in Qishan. Li Maozhen went to war with strong soldiers, but was defeated by Yang Shihou.

古文：及王师范以青州叛，太祖遣师厚率兵东讨，时淮贼王景仁以众二万来援师范，师厚逆击，破之，追至辅唐县，斩数百级，授齐州刺史。
现代文：到王师范凭据青州反叛时，太祖派杨师厚领兵东征，这时淮南吴国贼寇王景仁率领二万部众支援王师范，杨师厚迎头痛击，打败了王景仁，追到辅唐县，杀死数百人，被授与齐州刺史。
English: When Wang Shifan rebelled in Qingzhou, the Great Ancestor sent Yang Shihou to lead the army to the east. At that time, Wang Jingren, a bandit of the Southern Huainan State of Wu, led twenty thousand people to support Wang Shifan. Yang Shihou hit Wang Shifan head-on, defeated Wang Jingren, chased him to Fu Tang County, killed hundreds of people, and was awarded the history of Qi Prefecture.

古文：将之任，太祖急召见于郓西境，遣师厚率步骑屯于临朐，而声言欲东援密州，留辎重于临朐。
现代文：将赴任时，太祖在郓州西境紧急召见杨师厚，派杨师厚率领步兵骑兵驻扎在临朐，而声称要向东支援密州，将辎重留在临朐。
English: When he was about to take office, Taizu urgently summoned Yang Shihou in the western border of Ganzhou, sent Yang Shihou to lead the infantry and cavalry stationed in Linyi, and declared that he would support Mizhou to the east, and would stay in Linyi.

古文：师范果出兵来击，师厚设伏于野，追击至圣王山，杀万余众，擒都将八十人。
现代文：王师范果然出兵前来攻击，杨师厚在野外设置埋伏，追击王师范直到圣王山，杀死敌兵一万多人，擒获都将八十人。
English: Wang Shifan did indeed send troops to attack, and Yang Shihou set up an ambush in the field, pursued Wang Shifan to Mount Saint Wang, killed more than ten thousand enemy soldiers, and captured eighty people.

古文：未几，莱州刺史王师诲以兵救师范，又大败之。
现代文：不久，莱州刺史王师诲领兵援救王师范，又被杨师厚打得大败。
English: Soon, Laizhou sent Wang Shiyan to lead the troops to rescue Wang Shimen, and was defeated by Yang Shihou.

古文：自是，师范不复敢战。
现代文：从此王师范不敢再出战。
English: Since then, Wang Shifan has not dared to fight again.

古文：师厚移军寨于城下，师范力屈，竟降。
现代文：杨师厚将军营移到青州城下，王师范势力受挫，终于投降。
English: Yang Shihou's battalion moved to the outskirts of Qingzhou, and Wang Shifan's forces suffered a setback and finally surrendered.

古文：天复四年三月，加检校司徒、徐州节度使。
现代文：天复四年三月，加封为检校司徒、徐州节度使。
English: In March of the fourth year of Tianfu, Jafeng became the inspector of the school and the envoy of the Xuzhou Festival.

古文：天祐元年，加诸军行营马步都指挥使。
现代文：天元年，加封为各军行营马军步军都指挥使。
English: In the year of Tianyuan, Jafeng was the commander of the marching troops of each army.

古文：二年八月，太祖讨赵匡凝于襄阳，命师厚统前军以进，赵匡凝严兵以备。
现代文：天二年八月，太祖到襄阳征讨赵匡凝，命令杨师厚统帅前军行进，赵匡凝严阵以待。
English: In August of the second year of Heaven, the great ancestor went to Xiangyang to recruit Zhao Kuangge, and ordered Yang Shihou to march as the commander of the front army. Zhao Kuangge waited in a tight line.

古文：师厚至谷城西童山，刊材造浮桥，引军过汉水。一战，赵匡凝败散，携妻子沿汉遁去。
现代文：杨师厚来到谷城西面的童山，砍伐树木制造浮桥，领军渡过汉水，第一次交战，赵匡凝就被打败溃散，带着妻儿沿汉水逃走。
English: Yang Shihou came to Tongshan in the west of Gucheng, cut down trees to make a pontoon bridge, and led the army across the Han River. In the first battle, Zhao Kuangge was defeated and dispersed, and fled with his wife and children along the Han River.

古文：翼日，表师厚为山南东道节度留后。《旧唐书》：天祐三年六月甲申，敕： 襄州近因赵匡凝作帅，请别立忠义军额，既非往制，固是纵权，忠义军额宜停废，依旧为山南东道节度使。 
现代文：第二天，任命杨师厚为山南东道节度留后，又令他向南征讨荆州，荆州留后赵匡明也丢下部众沿长江逃向三峡，不过十天半月，接连攻下两座城镇，于是正式任命杨师厚为襄州节度使。
English: The next day, after appointing Yang Shihou as the host of the festival in Shannan, he also ordered him to go south to fight Jingzhou. After staying in Jingzhou, Zhao Kuangming also left his subordinates along the Yangtze River and fled to the Three Gorges. However, in ten and a half days, he captured two towns in succession, so he officially appointed Yang Shihou as the festival envoy of Xiangzhou.

古文：开平元年，加检校太保、同平章事。
现代文：开平元年，加封为检校太保、同平章事。
English: In the first year of Kaiping, he was awarded the title of "Kengyo Taibo" (school inspector) and "Dongping Zhangji."

古文：明年，又加检校太傅。
现代文：第二年，又加封为检校太傅。
English: The following year, he was awarded the additional title of "school inspector."

古文：三年三月，入朝，诏兼潞州行营都招讨使。
现代文：三年三月，杨师厚入京朝拜，诏令他兼任潞州行营都招讨使。
English: In March of the third year, Yang Shihou entered Beijing to pay homage, and the emperor ordered him to also serve as an envoy for the encampment in Zhangzhou.

古文：无何，刘知俊据同州叛，师厚与刘鄩率军西讨，至潼关，擒知俊弟知浣以献。
现代文：不久，刘知俊占据同州反叛，杨师厚与刘寻阝率领军队西征，到潼关，活捉刘知俊的弟弟刘知浣献给朝廷。
English: Soon after, Liu Zhijun occupied Tongzhou and rebelled. Yang Shihou and Liu Huan led the army to the west and went to Shaoguan to capture Liu Zhijun's brother Liu Zhijuan alive and present him to the imperial court.

古文：知俊闻师厚至，即西走凤翔，师厚进攻，至长安。
现代文：刘知俊听到杨师厚杀来，就向西逃往凤翔，杨师厚继续进击，进到长安。
English: When Liu Zhijun heard that Yang Shihou was coming to kill him, he fled westward to Fengxiang. Yang Shihou continued his attack and entered Chang'an.

古文：时知俊已引岐寇据其城，师厚以奇兵傍南山急行，自西门而入，贼将王建惊愕，不知所为，遽出降。
现代文：当时刘知俊已经领着岐下贼寇占据长安城，杨师厚领奇兵靠着南山急行，从西门攻入，贼将王建十分惊愕，不知怎么应付，于是即刻出降。
English: At that time, Liu Zhijun had already led the Qixi bandits to occupy Chang'an City, and Yang Shihou led the soldiers to the Nanshan Express and invaded from the west gate. The bandit Wang Jian was very surprised and did not know how to deal with it, so he immediately surrendered.

古文：制加师厚检校太尉。
现代文：诏令加封杨师厚为检校太尉。
English: Yang Shihou was promoted to the rank of lieutenant inspector.

古文：顷之，晋王与周德威、丁会、符存审等以大众攻晋州甚急，太祖遣师厚帅兵援之。军至绛州，晋军扼蒙坑之险，师厚整众而前，晋人乃彻围而遁。
现代文：不久，晋王与周德威、丁会、符存审等人率领大军攻打晋州，非常激烈，太祖派杨师厚领兵援救，救兵来到绛州，晋军扼守蒙坑的险要地势，杨师厚整顿部队奋勇向前，晋人于是解除对晋州的包围而逃。
English: Soon after, Jin Wang, together with Zhou Dewei, Ding Hui, Fu Cunxin and others, led a large army to attack Jinzhou, which was very fierce. The great ancestor sent Yang Shihou to lead the troops to rescue, the rescuers came to Zhangzhou, the Jin army guarded the dangerous situation of Mengken, Yang Shihou rectified the troops and moved forward bravely, and the Jin people then lifted the siege on Jinzhou and fled.

古文：四年二月，移授陕州节度使。
现代文：四年二月，调任陕州节度使。
English: In February of the same year, he was transferred to the post of Shaanxi Provincial Party Secretary.

古文：五年正月，王景仁败于柏乡，晋人乘胜围邢州，掠魏博，南至黎阳。
现代文：开平五年正月，王景仁在柏乡被打败，晋人乘胜包围了邢州，掠夺魏博，南到黎阳。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of Kaiping, Wang Jingren was defeated in Baixiang, and the Jin people took advantage of the victory to encircle Zhangzhou, plunder Weibo, and go south to Liyang.

古文：师厚受诏以兵屯卫州，晋军攻魏州，不克而退；师厚追袭，过漳河，解邢州之围，改授滑州节度使。
现代文：杨师厚受诏领兵屯守卫州，晋军攻打魏州，不胜而退，杨师厚追袭晋军，渡过漳河，解除了邢州之围，改任滑州节度使。
English: Yang Shihou received the imperial edict and led the troops to guard Weizhou, the Jin army attacked Weizhou and retreated without victory. Yang Shihou pursued the Jin army, crossed the Fenhe River, lifted the siege of Fenzhou, and was appointed as the Slanting Festival envoy.

古文：及庶人友珪篡位，魏州衙内都指挥使潘晏与大将臧延范、赵训谋变，有密告者，师厚布兵擒捕，斩之。
现代文：第二年，太祖北征，令杨师厚率领大军进攻枣强，十多天都不能攻下，太祖屡加督责，杨师厚日夜奋勇攻击，才攻破枣强，屠戮全城。
English: In the second year of the Northern Expedition, Emperor Taizu ordered Yang Shihou to lead a large army to attack Zaoqiang. For more than ten days, they could not attack Zaoqiang. Emperor Taizu repeatedly ordered Yang Shihou to attack day and night, and only then did they defeat Zaoqiang and slaughter the whole city.

古文：《欧阳史》云：师厚乘间杀魏牙将潘晏、臧延范等，逐出节度使罗周翰。
现代文：车驾凯旋，杨师厚屯驻魏州。当庶人朱友王圭篡夺帝位时，魏州衙内都指挥使潘晏与大将臧延范、赵训图谋变乱，有人告发他们的阴谋，杨师厚便分布士兵捕捉他们，杀死了他们。
English: When the commoner Zhu You Wang Gui usurped the imperial throne, the commander of the Wei State Inner Court ordered Pan Ye and the generals Zou Yanfan and Zhao Xuntu to plot a coup. Someone denounced their plot, Yang Shihou then distributed soldiers to capture them and killed them.

古文：越二日，又有指挥使赵宾夜率部军擐甲，俟旦为乱。
现代文：过了两天，又有指挥使赵宾夜晚领着部下穿上铠甲，将等天亮时作乱。
English: Two days later, another commander ordered Zhao Bin to lead his men to put on armor at night and wait until dawn to start a riot.

古文：师厚以衙兵围捕，宾不能起，乃越城而遁；师厚遣骑追至肥乡，擒其党百余人，归斩于府门。
现代文：杨师厚领衙兵包围捕捉，赵宾不能起事，于是越过城墙而逃，杨师厚派骑兵追到肥乡，抓获赵宾乱党一百多人，回城在府门斩首。
English: Yang Shih Hou led the soldiers to surround and capture Zhao Bin, but Zhao Bin could not rise up, so he fled across the city wall. Yang Shih Hou sent cavalry to chase him to Feixiang, captured more than a hundred of Zhao Bin's ruffians, and returned to the city to behead him at the government gate.

古文：友珪即以师厚为魏博节度使、检校侍中。
现代文：朱友王圭任杨师厚为魏博节度使、检校侍中。
English: Zhu Youwang Gui appointed Yang Shihou as Wei Bo festival delegate and school inspection attendant.

古文：未几，镇人、晋人侵魏之北鄙，师厚率军至唐店，破之，斩首五千级，擒其都将三十余人。
现代文：不久，镇人、晋人犯魏州北部边界，杨师厚领军到达唐店，打败了他们，斩首五千级，活捉其都将三十多人。
English: Soon, the townspeople and Jin people violated the northern border of Weizhou, and Yang Shihou led the army to Tangdian, defeated them, beheaded five thousand, and captured more than thirty people alive.

古文：是时师厚握河朔兵，威望振主，友珪患之，诏师厚赴阙。
现代文：这时杨师厚手握河朔重兵，威高震主，朱友王圭以他为患，诏令杨师厚到京。
English: At this time, Yang Shihou was in the grip of the heavy army of Heshaku, and Zhu Youwang Gui took him as a threat and ordered Yang Shihou to go to Beijing.

古文：师厚乃率精甲万人至洛阳，严兵于都外，自以十余人入谒，友珪惧，厚礼而遣之。
现代文：杨师厚于是率领精壮甲兵一万人来到洛阳，在都城外严阵以待，自己带着十多人入城谒见，朱友王圭害怕，又以厚礼送走他。
English: Yang Shihou then led ten thousand elite soldiers to Luoyang and waited outside the capital. He brought more than ten people to the city to meet Zhu You Wang Gui. Zhu You Wang Gui was afraid and sent him away with a gift.

古文：及末帝将图友珪，遣使谋于师厚，深陈款效，且驰书于侍卫军使袁象先及主军大将；又遣都指挥使硃汉宾率兵至滑州以应禁旅。
现代文：当梁末帝准备除掉朱友王圭时，派使者与杨师厚商谋，深陈心意，又飞骑致信于侍卫军使袁象先及领军大将，又派遣都指挥使朱汉宾领兵到滑州以策应禁军。
English: When Emperor Liang Moku was preparing to eliminate Zhu You Wang Gui, he sent an emissary to Yang Shihou to negotiate with him and express his deep intentions. He also sent a letter to Yuan Xiangxian, the envoy of the Imperial Guards, and the general leading the army, and sent Zhu Hanbin, the commander of the Imperial Guards, to lead the army to Slanting to deal with the forbidden army.

古文：友珪既诛，末帝即位于东京，首封师厚为鄴王，加检校太师、中书令。每下诏不名，以官呼之，事无巨细，必先谋于师厚，师厚颇亦骄诞。
现代文：朱友王圭被诛后，末帝在东京即帝位，首先封杨师厚为邺王，加封检校太师、中书令，每次下诏不直呼其名，而以官爵号称呼他，事无巨细，必先与杨师厚商量，杨师厚也颇为骄傲放肆。
English: After Zhu Youwang Gui was exiled, the last emperor ascended the throne in Tokyo. First, Yang Shihou was appointed as the king of Shihou. He was also appointed as the inspector of schools and the editor of Chinese books. Every time he issued an edict, he was not called by his first name, but by his official title. No matter how big or small, he must first consult with Yang Shihou. Yang Shihou was also quite proud and presumptuous.

古文：先是，镇人以我柏乡不利之后，屡扰边境，师厚总大军直抵镇州城下，焚荡闾舍，移军掠藁城、束鹿，至深州而归。
现代文：在这以前，镇人在朝廷军队柏乡之战失利之后，屡次侵扰边境，杨师厚总领大军直抵镇州城下，焚烧扫荡街市房舍，移军掠劫稿城、束鹿，直到深州才归。
English: Prior to this, after the defeat of the imperial army in the Battle of Baoxiang, the townspeople repeatedly invaded the border. General Yang Shihou led the army straight to the town of Zhenzhou, burned the buildings of the city, and moved the army to loot the city of Zhuan and Shu Deer. They did not return until Shenzhou.

古文：乾化五年三月，卒于镇。
现代文：乾化五年三月，杨师厚卒于藩镇任上。
English: In March of the 5th year of Qianhua, Yang Shihou passed away and was appointed to the position of Hanzhen.

古文：《清异录》云：枪材难得十全，魏州石屋材多可用。杨师厚时银枪效节，都皆采于此。
现代文：末帝停止上朝三天，追赠杨师厚为太师。杨师厚纯朴谨慎敏捷能干，深为太祖赏识倚重，交给他重兵大镇，他人没有谁比得上。然而晚年居功恃众，骤然萌生不轨之意，于是专门搜刮财富赋税，设置银枪效节军共数千人，都挑选骁勇精锐，豢养放纵他们，重现以前牙军的形态，当时人以之为患。
English: The last emperor stopped ascending to the throne for three days and posthumously bestowed Yang Shihou with the title of Grand Master. Yang Shihou was simple, prudent, quick and capable. He was highly appreciated by his great-grandfather. He was given a large town with a large number of soldiers, which no one else could match. However, in his later years, his achievements were numerous, and he suddenly had a sense of being out of step. Therefore, he specially collected wealth taxes and set up a silver-shooting efficiency army with a total of thousands of people. He selected the brave elite, nurtured and indulged them, and reproduced the form of the former dental army, which was

古文：承前河朔之俗，上元比屋夜游，及师厚作镇，乃课魏人户立灯竿，千釭万炬，洞照一城，纵士女嬉游。
现代文：以前，河朔一带风俗，上元节全不夜游，到杨师厚镇守时，就要求魏州人每户立起灯竿，千万银灯火炬，洞照全城，放任男女嬉戏游乐。
English: In the past, it was a custom in the Hexuo area not to travel at night on the Lantern Festival. When the Yangshihou Town Guard arrived, the people of Weizhou required each household to set up a lamp pole, ten million silver lamps and torches, and illuminate the whole city. Men and women were allowed to play and have fun.

古文：复彩画舟舫，令女妓棹歌于御河，纵酒弥日。
现代文：又装饰舟船，令妓女驾船在御河中歌唱，纵酒连日。
English: And he decked the ships, and made the harlots sing as they went, and made them drink wine all day long.

古文：又于黎阳采巨石，将纪德政，以铁车负载，驱牛数百以拽之，所至之处，丘墓庐舍悉皆毁坏，百姓望之，皆曰 碑来 。
现代文：又在黎阳开采巨石，准备记载自己的德政，用铁车运载，驱赶数百头牛来拖它，所到之处，坟墓房舍全被毁坏，老百姓望见后，都说： 碑来了。 
English: In Liyang, huge stones were quarried in preparation for recording one's political achievements. They were transported by iron cart and hundreds of oxen were driven to drag them. Everywhere they went, the tombs were completely destroyed. When the common people saw them, they said, "Here comes the monument."

古文：及碑石才至，而师厚卒，魏人以为 悲来 之应。
现代文：而碑石刚运到，杨师厚就死了，魏州人以为是 悲来了 的报应。
English: But as soon as the monument arrived, Yang Shihou died, and the people of Weizhou thought it was the retribution of grief.

古文：末帝闻其卒也，于私庭受贺，乃议裂魏州为两镇。既而所树亲军，果为叛乱，以招外寇，致使河朔沦陷，宗社覆灭，由师厚兆之也。
现代文：末帝听到他死了，在私庭中接受群臣的庆贺，于是商议分魏州为两镇，不久杨师厚所培植的亲信部队，果然制造叛乱，招来外寇，致使河朔沦陷，宗社覆灭，这都是从杨师厚开的头。
English: When the last emperor heard of his death, he received congratulations from a group of courtiers in his private court, and then discussed the division of Weizhou into two towns. Soon, the trusted troops cultivated by Yang Shihou indeed created a rebellion, attracted foreign invaders, led to the fall of Hexuo, and the downfall of the sect. All of this started with Yang Shihou.

古文：牛存节，字赞贞，青州博昌人也。
现代文：牛存节，字赞贞，青州博昌人。
English: Cattle survival festival, Zi Zanzhen, Qingzhou Bochang people.

古文：本名礼，太祖改而字之。
现代文：本名叫礼，梁太祖给他改了名并取了字。
English: His real name was Li, but Liang Taizu changed his name and took a Chinese character.

古文：少以雄勇自负。
现代文：少年时以雄健勇敢自负。
English: When he was a boy, he prided himself on being strong and brave.

古文：唐乾符末，乡人诸葛爽为河阳节度使，存节往从之。爽卒，存节谓同辈曰： 天下汹汹，当择英主事之，以图富贵。 
现代文：唐乾符末年，同乡诸葛爽任河阳节度使，牛存节前往追随他，诸葛爽死后，牛存节对同辈人说： 天下动荡，当选择英明主人服事他，以图富贵。 
English: At the end of the Tang and Qian dynasties, Zhuge Shuang, a fellow villager of Zhuge Shuang, was appointed as the envoy of Heyang Festival, and Niu Cunjie went to follow him. After Zhuge Shuang's death, Niu Cunjie said to his contemporaries, "The world is in turmoil, we should choose a wise master to serve him in order to get rich."

古文：遂归于太祖。
现代文：于是归顺太祖。
English: As a result, he submitted to his great-grandfather.

古文：初授宣义军小将。
现代文：开始时任宣义军小将。
English: At the beginning, he was a junior general of the Xuanwu army.

古文：属蔡寇至金堤驿，犯酸枣、灵昌，存节日与之斗，凡二十余往，每往必执俘而还，前后斩首二十余级，获孳畜甚众。
现代文：遇上蔡州贼寇到了金堤驿，侵犯酸枣、灵昌，牛存节每天与他们战斗，共迎战二十多次。每次必定俘虏敌人而回，前后斩首二十多级，抓获牲畜很多。
English: Caizhou bandits came to Jintaiyu, encroached on Jujiao, Lingchang, and Niu Cunjie, and fought with them every day, a total of more than 20 times. Each time, they must capture the enemy and return, behead more than 20 levels back and forth, and capture a lot of livestock.

古文：太祖击蔡贼于板桥、赤冈、酸枣门、封禅寺、枯河北，存节皆预其行，与诸将于濮州南刘桥、范县大破郓众，自此深为太祖奖遇。
现代文：太祖在板桥、赤岗、酸枣门、封禅寺、枯河北面攻打蔡州贼寇，牛存节都参与战斗。与诸将在濮州南刘桥、范县大破郓州部众，从此深为太祖褒奖知遇。
English: Taizu fought against the Caizhou bandits in Banqiao, Chakgang, Yajuamen, Fuzan Temple, and the north of the Qianhe River, and participated in the Battle of Niu Cunjie. He was deeply honored by Taizu's praise for his battle with the Caizhou bandits in Nan Liuqiao and Fan County.

古文：文德元年夏，李罕之以并军围张宗奭于河阳，太祖遣存节率军赴之。
现代文：文德元年夏天，李罕之率领并州军队在河阳包围了张宗，太祖派牛存节领军奔赴支援张宗。
English: In the summer of the 1st year of the Wende era, Li Hanzhi led the state army to surround Zhang Zong in Heyang, and Taizu sent Niu Cun Si to lead the army to support Zhang Zong.

古文：属岁歉，饷馈不至，村民有储干椹者，存节以器用、钱帛易之，以给军食。
现代文：遇上年成欠收，没有人劳师饷馈，村民中有储存干木甚果的，牛存节用器物、钱布做交易，以供给军中粮食。
English: In the event of a poor harvest last year, there was no one to work hard to provide food. Some villagers stored dry wood and even fruits, and cattle were stored and traded with utensils and cloth to supply grain to the army.

古文：大破贼于浿河，罕之引众北走。
现代文：在氵贝河大破贼军，李罕之领着部众向北逃走。
English: After defeating the bandits at the Mu Bei River, Li Han Zhi led his followers to flee north.

古文：又预讨徐、宿有功。
现代文：又参与征讨徐州、宿州有功。
English: He also participated in the conquest of Xuzhou and Suzhou.

古文：及讨河北，存节前锋下黎阳，收临河，至内黄西，以兵千余人当魏人万二千众，大破其阵，僵仆蔽野。
现代文：到征讨黄河以北时，牛存节充当先锋攻下黎阳，收复临河，进到内黄以西，领兵一千多人抵挡魏州一万二千部众，大破敌阵，僵尸蔽野。
English: When he arrived to conquer the north of the Yellow River, Niu Cunjie acted as a pioneer to conquer Liyang, recover Linhe, enter the west of Inner Yellow, lead more than a thousand soldiers to resist the twelve thousand people in Weizhou, and break the enemy line, zombies.

古文：太祖深所叹激，谓有神兵之助。
现代文：太祖深深感叹，说有神兵的帮助。
English: The great-grandfather deeply sighed and said that he had the help of a divine soldier.

古文：大顺元年，改滑州左右厢牢城使。
现代文：大顺元年，改任滑州左右厢牢城使。
English: In the first year of Dashun, he was reappointed as the secretary of the left and right wings of the Slum.

古文：与诸将讨时溥，累破贼军。
现代文：与诸将征讨时溥，多次打败贼军。
English: He fought with generals and defeated the bandits many times.

古文：景福元年秋，改遏后都指挥使。
现代文：景福元年秋天，改任遏后都指挥使。
English: In the autumn of the first year of the reign of King Gyeongbokgol, he was promoted to the post of commander-in-chief.

古文：攻濮之役，领军先登，遂拔其垒。
现代文：在进攻濮州的战役中，领军率先登上城墙，于是占领敌人营垒。
English: In the campaign of attacking Zhangzhou, the leading army was the first to climb the city wall, and then occupied the enemy camp.

古文：二年四月，下徐州，枭时溥，存节力战，其功居多。
现代文：二年四月，攻下徐州，杀死时溥，牛存节奋力战斗，他的功劳最多。
English: In April of the second year, he conquered Xuzhou and fought hard to kill Shijie and Niu Cunjie. He deserves the most credit.

古文：乾宁二年，授检校工部尚书。
现代文：乾宁二年，被授予检校工部尚书。
English: In the second year of Qianning, he was awarded the inspection of the school engineering department.

古文：三年夏，太祖东讨郓州，存节领军次故乐亭，扼其要路，都指挥使庞师古屯马颊，存节密与都将王言谋入郓垒。
现代文：三年夏天，太祖东讨郓州，牛存节领军驻扎故乐亭，扼守要道，都指挥使庞师古驻扎在马颊，牛存节暗中与都将王言筹划攻占郓州城。
English: In the summer of the third year, Taizu Dong attacked Zhangzhou, and the leader of the Cattle Preservation Festival was stationed at the Old Music Pavilion, closely guarding the important roads. Both commanders ordered Pang Shigu to be stationed in Makou, and secretly planned with Wang Yan to capture Zhangzhou City.

古文：十二月，存节遣王言夜伏勇士于州西北，以船逾濠，举梯登陴。
现代文：十二月，牛存节派王言在夜晚埋伏勇士在州城西北，用船渡过濠沟，搭梯子登上矮墙。
English: In December, Wang Yan, a member of the Cattle Preservation Festival, ambushed warriors in the northwest of the state capital at night, using a boat to cross a gully and a ladder to climb a low wall.

古文：既而王言不克入，存节独率伏军负梯童破其西甕城，夺其濠桥，诸军俱进。
现代文：后来王言不能攻进州城，牛存节独自率领埋伏的部队背负梯子驾着攻城战车攻破州城西边的瓮城，夺取了濠桥，各路军队一齐奋进。
English: Later, Wang Yan was unable to attack the state capital, and Niu Cunjie alone led the ambush troops carrying ladders and driving the siege chariot to break through the west side of the state capital, captured the bridge, and all the troops advanced together.

古文：四年四月，陷其城，寻与葛从周降下兗州，加检校右仆射。
现代文：四年四月，攻陷郓州城，旋即与葛从周一同降服攻下兖州，被加封为检校右仆射。
English: In April of the fourth year, he captured Bozhou City, and then immediately surrendered with Ge Zhou to capture Bozhou, and was added as a school inspector.

古文：其年秋，大举以伐淮南，至濠州东，闻前军失利于清口，诸军退至瞷河，无复队伍。
现代文：那年秋天，梁军大举进攻淮南吴国，到濠州东面，听到先头部队在清口失利，各路军队都退到淠河，溃乱不成队伍。
English: In the autumn of that year, Liang's army launched a large-scale attack on Huainan and Wuzhou, and when they reached the east of Luzhou, they heard that the vanguard troops had lost at Qingkou, and all the armies retreated to the Li River. They were unable to form a line because of the chaos.

古文：存节遏其后，诸将释骑步斗，诸军稍得济，收合所部并败兵共八千余人，至于淮涘，时不食已四日矣。
现代文：牛存节断后，各位将领都放弃坐骑，徒步格斗，使各军逐渐得以渡过淠河，收聚部下败兵共八千多人，到达淮河水边时，已有四天没有进食了。
English: After the end of the Cow Survival Festival, all generals gave up riding and fought on foot, so that the armies were gradually able to cross the Wei River and gather a total of more than eight thousand defeated soldiers. When they reached the water's edge of the Huai River, they had not eaten for four days.

古文：存节训励部分，以御追寇，遂得旋师。
现代文：牛存节训导激励各部，以抵御追击的敌寇，才得以回师。
English: The training guide of the Cow Survival Day encouraged all departments to resist the pursuit of the enemy, so that they could return to the division.

古文：五年，除亳州刺史，俄迁宣武军都指挥使，改宿州刺史。
现代文：五年，任亳州刺史，不久迁任宣武军都指挥使，改任宿州刺史。
English: In the fifth year, he was appointed as the governor of Bozhou, and was soon transferred to the post of commander of the Xuanwu army, and was reappointed as the governor of Shuzhou.

古文：明年，淮贼大至彭城，存节乃以部下兵夜发，直趣彭门；淮人讶其神速，震恐而退，诸将服其智识。
现代文：第二年，淮南吴军大举攻到彭城，牛存节于是领部下士兵连夜出发，直奔彭门，淮南人惊讶他的神速，震怖惊恐而退，各将都佩服他的智略胆识。
English: In the second year, the Huainan Wu army attacked Pengcheng in a big way, and the soldiers led by Niu Cunjie set out overnight and went straight to Pengmen. The Huainan people were surprised by his speed, shocked and frightened, and retreated. All the generals admired his wisdom and courage.

古文：光化二年，罢归，复为左衙都将兼马步教练使。
现代文：光化二年，罢归，又复任左衙大将兼马军步军教练使。
English: After two years in Gwanghwamun, he returned to Korea and was reinstated as General of the Left Division of the Korean People's Army.

古文：天复元年，授潞州马步都指挥使，法令严整，士庶安之。
现代文：天复元年，任潞州马军步军都指挥使，法令严整，军民安定。
English: In the first year of the Restoration of Heaven, he was appointed commander of the foot soldiers of the Bozhou Horse Army, the laws and regulations were strict, and the military and the people were stable.

古文：及追赴行在，士卒泣送者不绝于道，加金紫光禄大夫、检校司空，改滑州左衙步军指挥使，知邢州军州事。
现代文：到前往皇帝出行所在地时，士卒们哭泣相送，不绝于道。加封金紫光禄大夫、检校司空，改任滑州左衙步军指挥使，管理邢州军政事务。
English: When they went to the location of the emperor's trip, the soldiers wept as they saw him off, never ceasing to sob. Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu, the school inspector, was appointed as the commanding officer of the Luzhou Zuoying Infantry Corps to manage the military and political affairs of Luzhou.

古文：天祐元年，授邢州团练使。
现代文：天元年，任邢州团练使。
English: In 1910, he was appointed as the training envoy of Bozhou Reunification Army.

古文：时州兵才及二百人，晋人知之，以大军来寇。
现代文：当时邢州兵士才二百人，晋人知悉后，率领大军前来侵犯。
English: At that time, there were only two hundred soldiers from Zhangzhou. When the Jin people found out, they led a large army to invade.

古文：太祖在鄴，发长直兵二千人赴援，存节率壮健出斗，以家财赏激战士，并军急攻，七日不能克而去。
现代文：太祖在邺城，发长直兵二千人奔赴支援，牛存节率勇健壮士出战，用私家财产赏赐激励战士，并州晋军紧急进攻，七天不能获胜，就退走了。
English: The great-grandfather was in Lucheng. He sent two thousand soldiers to support him. Cattle were saved, and brave and strong men were sent to fight. He used his private property to reward and encourage the soldiers, and the State Jin Army made an emergency attack. After seven days, they could not win, so they withdrew.

古文：太祖召至，劳慰久之，厚赉金帛鞍马，加检校司徒。
现代文：太祖召来牛存节，慰劳他很久，厚赐给金钱布帛鞍马，加封为检校司徒。
English: The great-grandfather summoned the cow to keep the festival, comforted him for a long time, gave him a lot of money, clothed him with a saddle horse, and sealed him as a school inspector.

古文：冬，罢军，署为元帅府左都押衙。
现代文：冬天，撤军，暂任元帅府左都押衙。
English: In winter, the troops were withdrawn, and the provisional marshal left the capital.

古文：四年，太祖受禅，除右千牛卫上将军。
现代文：四年，太祖接受禅让的帝位，任牛存节为右千牛卫上将军。
English: In the fourth year, the great-grandfather accepted the imperial throne of Zenzang, and Ren Niu Cunjie became the general of the Right Qian Niu Wei.

古文：其秋，攻潞州，以存节为行营马步军都排阵使。
现代文：那年秋天，进攻潞州，以牛存节为行营马军步军都排阵使。
English: In the autumn of that year, the attack on Zhangzhou, with the cattle festival as the camp, the horse army infantry all lined up.

古文：开平二年二月，自右监门卫上将军转右龙虎统军，驻留洛下。
现代文：开平二年二月，自右监门上将军转任右龙虎统军，驻守洛下。
English: In February of the second year of the Heian period, he was transferred from the General of the Right Gate to the General of the Right Dragon and Tiger United Army, stationed in Lokeshita.

古文：是岁，王师败于上党，晋人乘胜进迫泽州，州城将陷。
现代文：这年朝廷军队在上党战败，晋人乘胜挺进逼近泽州，州城即将陷落。
English: In that year, the imperial army was defeated at Shangtang, and the Jin people took advantage of the victory to advance closer to Zezhou, and the state capital was about to fall.

古文：河南留守张全义召存节谋，遂以本军及右龙虎、羽林等军往应接上党。
现代文：河南留守张全义召来牛存节共谋，牛存节即率本部军士及右龙虎军、羽林军等前往接应上党。
English: Zhang Quanyi, the governor of Henan Province, was summoned to conspire with Niu Cunjie. Niu Cunjie immediately led the headquarters sergeants and the right dragon and tiger army, the Ulin army, etc. to meet the party.

古文：师至天并关，存节谓诸将曰： 是行也，虽不奉诏旨，然要害之地，不可致失。 
现代文：军队开到天井关，牛存节对各位将领说： 此次出征，虽然不是奉行皇上诏旨，但泽州为要害之地，不可让它失去。 
English: The army drove to the ceiling pass, and the cow preservation festival said to the generals: Although this expedition is not in accordance with the emperor's edict, Zezhou is a key place, and it must not be lost.

古文：时晋人新胜，其锋甚盛，存节引从而前，衔枚夜至泽州，适遇守埤者已纵火鼓噪，以应外军，刺史保衙城，不知所为。
现代文：这时晋人刚获胜利，兵势强盛，牛存节领军向前，连夜疾行暗至泽州，恰逢守卫矮城的人已经放火呐喊，以响应城外晋军，刺史保守衙城，不知怎么办。
English: At this time, the Jin people had just won the victory, the army was strong, and the Cow Preservation Festival led the army forward, and they rushed to Zeshu in the dark overnight. It was a time when the people guarding the dwarf city had already set fire and shouted to respond to the Jin army outside the city. I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do.

古文：存节才入，晋军已至矣，乃分布守御。
现代文：牛存节才进城，晋军就来到了，牛存节于是分兵把守。
English: It was not until the Cow Preservation Day that the Jin army entered the city, and the army was divided to guard the Cow Preservation Day.

古文：晋军四面攻斗，开地道以入城，存节亦以隧道应之，逆战于地中，晋军不能进；又以劲弩射之，中者人马皆洞，经十三日，晋军死伤者甚众，焚营而退，郡以获全，太祖屡叹赏之。
现代文：晋军四面进攻，开掘地下通道以入城，牛存节也用隧道来对付，在地下迎战，晋军不能前进。牛存节又用强弓射击他们，中箭者都洞透身体，历时十三天，晋军伤亡众多，便焚烧军营而退，泽州得以保全。太祖多次赞叹奖励他。
English: The Jin army attacked on all sides, digging an underground passage to enter the city. Niu Cunjie also used a tunnel to deal with them. In the underground battle, the Jin army could not advance. Niu Cunjie also shot them with a strong bow, and those who were hit by the arrow were pierced through the body. It took thirteen days, and the Jin army suffered many casualties. They then burned the camp and retreated, and Zeshu was preserved. Taizu praised and rewarded him many times.

古文：五月，迁左龙虎统军，充六军马步都指挥使。
现代文：五月，迁任左龙虎统军，充任六军马步总指挥使。
English: In May, he was transferred to the United Front for the Reunification of East and West and served as the chief commander of the Sixth Route Army.

古文：十月，授绛州刺史。
现代文：十月，任绛州刺史。
English: In October, he was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：三年四月，除鄜州留后。
现代文：开平三年四月，任州留后。
English: In April of the third year of Kaiping, after staying in the state.

古文：六月，刘知俊以同州叛，寻授同州留后，未几，加检校太保、同州节度使。
现代文：六月，刘知俊据同州反叛，牛存节旋即任同州留后，不久，加封检校太保、同州节度使。
English: In June, after Liu Zhijun rebelled against the state and was appointed to stay in the same state as Niu Cunxu, he was soon promoted to the inspector of schools and the envoy of the state.

古文：乾化二年，加检校太傅，进封开国公。
现代文：乾化二年，加封检校太傅，进封开国公。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to the position of Jiefang Qianliao Taifu, and became the governor of Jiefang.

古文：存节戒严军旅，常若敌至。
现代文：牛存节严整军旅，总像大敌将至。
English: Cattle survival festival strict rectification of military travel, always like a big enemy is coming.

古文：先是，州中井水咸苦，人不可饮。及并人、岐人来迫州城，或以为兵士渴乏，陷在旦夕。
现代文：在这以前，同州井水咸苦，人不能饮用，到并州人、岐人前来逼攻州城时，有人认为兵士干渴困乏，陷落将在旦夕。
English: Prior to this, the well water in Tongzhou was salty and bitter, and people could not drink it. When people from Binzhou and Qin came to attack the state capital, some people thought that the soldiers were thirsty and exhausted, and the fall would be imminent.

古文：存节及肃拜虔祝，择地凿八十余井，其味皆甘淡，由是人马汲濯有余，众以为至诚之感。
现代文：牛存节于是谨肃叩拜虔诚祷祝，选择地方开凿八十多口井，井水味道都甘淡，因此人马饮用洗涤有余，大家都认为是牛存节的至诚感动了神灵。
English: Therefore, on the Day of the Preservation of Cows, people reverently worshiped and prayed, and chose a place to dig more than eighty wells. The taste of the well water was mild, so people and horses had more than enough to drink and wash. Everyone thought that the sincerity of the Day of the Preservation of Cows moved the gods.

古文：自八月至三年春末，人马未尝释甲，以至寇退。
现代文：从乾化二年八月到来年春末，人马未曾卸下铠甲，直到敌寇退走。
English: From August of the second year of Qianhua to the end of spring of the following year, the men and horses did not remove their armor until the enemy bandits retreated.

古文：寻加同平章事，诏赴阙。末帝召慰勉，赏赐甚厚。
现代文：接着加封为同平章事，召赴京城，末帝召见慰勉，赏赐甚厚。
English: Then, he was given a posthumous award of the same rank and was summoned to the capital, where he received a consolation award from the late emperor. The reward was very generous.

古文：十一月，加开府仪同三司，食邑一千户，授郓州节度使。
现代文：十一月，加封开府仪同三司，食邑一千户，任郓州节度使。
English: In November, Jafeng held the ceremony of opening the capital with three divisions, a thousand households in the food village, and served as the ambassador of the Bozhou Festival.

古文：四年，加淮南西北面行营招讨使，控扼淮濆，边境安之。
现代文：四年，加封淮南西北面行营招讨使，控制扼守淮河岸边，边境安宁。
English: In four years, the south-west of Huainan Province was encircled and encamped, the banks of the Huai River were controlled and guarded, and the border was tranquil.

古文：其冬，蒋殷据徐州逆命，存节方以大众戍颍州，得殷逆谋，密以上闻，遽奉诏与刘鄩同讨之，顿于埇上。
现代文：那年冬天，蒋殷据徐州叛逆，牛存节正领大军戍守颍州，得悉蒋殷阴谋，便密报朝廷，立即奉诏与刘寻阝共同讨伐他，驻扎維上。
English: That winter, Jiang Yin rebelled in Xuzhou, and Niu Cunjue was leading a large army to defend Zhangzhou. When he learned of Jiang Yin's plot, he secretly reported it to the imperial court, and immediately sent an edict to fight him together with Liu Xunjie, and stationed in Wei Shang.

古文：淮贼硃瑾以兵救殷，距宿之两舍，闻存节兵大至，即委粮弃甲而遁，竟平徐州。
现代文：淮南吴军大将朱瑾领兵援救蒋殷，离宿州六十里。听到牛存节大军来到，便丢下粮草抛弃兵甲而逃，牛存节终于平定了徐州。
English: Zhu Xi, the general of the Wu Army of Huainan, led the troops to rescue Jiang Yin, and was sixty miles away from Suzhou. When he heard that the army of the Cattle Preservation Day came, he left the grain and grass, abandoned the soldiers and fled. The Cattle Preservation Day finally leveled Xuzhou.

古文：诏加太尉。夏中病渴且痟，属河北用军，末帝令率军屯阳留以张刘鄩之势。
现代文：夏天牛存节患糖尿病，正逢河北用兵，末帝命他领军屯驻阳留以加强刘寻阝的势力。
English: In the summer of the Year of the Ox, he was suffering from diabetes, which coincided with the mobilization of troops in Hebei. The late emperor ordered him to lead the army to stay in the sun to strengthen the power of Liu Xingyao.

古文：存节忠愤弥笃，未尝言病，料敌治戎，旦夕愈厉。
现代文：牛存节忠心更挚，不言生病，对付敌人带领部队，更加日夜奋发。
English: On the Day of the Preservation of Cows, one's loyalty will be more sincere, one will not say that one is ill, one will lead the troops to deal with the enemy, and one will work harder day and night.

古文：病革，诏归汶阳，翼日而卒。
现代文：病重，诏令回到汶阳，第二天就去世了。
English: Seriously ill, Dahirong returned to Wenyang and died the next day.

古文：将终，戒其子知业、知让等以忠孝，言不及他。
现代文：临终前，告诫他的儿子牛知业、牛知让等要竭尽忠孝，而不谈及其他事。
English: Before his death, he admonished his sons, Niu Zhiyuan and Niu Zhizhang, to be loyal and filial, and not to talk about other things.

古文：册赠太师。
现代文：诏令册赠他为太师。
English: He was given the title of grand master in the imperial edict.

古文：存节武鸷慷慨，有大节，野战壁守，皆其所长，威名闻于境外，深为末帝所重，而木强忠厚，有贾复之风焉。
现代文：牛存节勇武慷慨，有大节操，野外攻战，坚城固守，都是他所擅长的，威名闻名境外，深为末帝倚重，而木讷坚强忠厚，又有贾复的风概。
English: He was brave and generous at the Cow Survival Festival. He was good at large-scale drills, field attacks, and strong city defense. His reputation was well-known abroad. He was deeply attached to the last emperor, but he was strong and loyal. He also had the demeanor of Jia Fu.

