古文：凡欲兴师动众，伐罪吊民，必任天时。
现代文：凡是要出动军队，讨伐有罪的君主，解救受难的百姓，必须顺应天时。
English: Anyone who wants to dispatch an army to fight a guilty monarch and rescue the suffering people must comply with the time of day.

古文：乃君暗政乱，兵骄民困，放逐贤人，诛杀无辜，旱蝗冰雹，敌国有此，举兵攻之，无有不胜。
现代文：而不是依靠占卜推算出兵日时的吉凶，是指敌国君主昏庸，政治混乱；军队骄横，百姓饥困；贤臣遭贬，无辜被杀；干旱蝗灾，冰雹水涝等人祸天灾接连不断。如果敌国有这些情况发生，我便乘机出兵进攻它，就没有不胜利的。
English: Instead of relying on divination to calculate the fortunes of the day and time of the soldiers, it refers to the enemy country's monarch drowsiness, political chaos; the army is arrogant, the people are starving; the wise men are demeaned, the innocent are killed; drought, locusts, hail and floods and other natural disasters are continuous. If these situations occur in the enemy country, I will take the opportunity to send troops to attack it, and there will be no failure.

古文：法曰： 顺天时而制征讨。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 顺应天时而出兵攻战。 
English: As stated in the Art of War: It is best to go to war when the time is right.

古文：北齐，后主纬，隆化元年，擢用邪佞：陆令萱、和士开、高阿那肱、穆提婆、韩长鸾等，宰制天下，陈德信、邓长、何洪珍参预机权。
现代文：北齐后主高纬隆化元年，提拔重用了一批邪恶奸佞之徒，如陆令萱、和士开、高阿那肱、穆提婆、韩长鸾等人控制朝政，发号施令，让陈德信、何洪珍等人也参掌军国大政。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Gaozhong of the Northern Qi Dynasty, the promotion and re-use of a group of evil traitors, such as Lu Lingyao, He Shikai, Gao Ananyuan, Muti Bao, Han Changyao and others, controlled the government of the dynasty, issued orders, and let Chen Deshin, He Hongzhen and others also participate in the military government.

古文：各领亲党，升擢非次，官由财进，狱以赂成，乱政害人，遂致旱魃、水潦、寇盗并起；又猜嫌诸王，皆无罪受损，丞相斛律光及弟荆山公羡，并无罪受诛。
现代文：他们拉帮结派各树党羽，提拔官员超越正常程序，官职爵位可用钱财买到，构陷冤狱能用贿赂铸成，紊乱国政随便害人，加上旱涝蝗灾、土匪强盗到处出现；他们还猜忌仇恨各亲王大臣，结果都无罪而遭到迫害。例如贤明有功的丞相斛律光及其弟荆山公斛律羡，都是无罪而同时惨遭杀害的。
English: They promoted officials beyond the normal procedures, promoted officials beyond the normal procedures, promoted officials beyond the normal procedures, promoted officials beyond the normal procedures, promoted officials above the normal procedures, promoted officials above the normal procedures, promoted officials above the normal procedures, promoted officials above the normal procedures, promoted officials above the normal procedures, promoted officials above the normal procedures, promoted officials above the normal procedures, promoted officials above the normal procedures, promoted officials above the normal procedures, promoted officials above the normal procedures, promoted officials above the normal procedures, promoted officials above the normal procedures, promoted officials above the normal procedures, promoted officials above the normal procedures, promoted officials above the normal procedures, promoted officials above the normal procedures, promoted officials above the normal procedures,

古文：渐见覆弱之萌，俄观土崩之势。周武帝乘此，一举而灭之。
现代文：就在北齐显露垮台的苗头，后来每况愈下，土崩瓦解之势很快便可看到的时候，北周武帝宇文邕乘此有利时机，亲率大军东征，一举灭亡了北齐。
English: Just when the seeds of the downfall of Northern Qi were beginning to show, and then getting worse and worse, and the potential for collapse and disintegration could soon be seen, Northern Zhou Emperor Uwenwen took advantage of this favorable opportunity, led his army eastward, and destroyed Northern Qi in one fell swoop.

