古文：庄子行于山中，见大木，枝叶盛茂。伐木者止其旁而不取也。
现代文：庄子行走于山中，看见一棵大树枝繁叶茂，伐木的人停在树的旁边却不去动手砍它。
English: Zhuangzi was walking in the mountains when he saw a large tree with thick branches and leaves. The woodcutter stopped next to the tree but did not cut it.

古文：问其故，曰： 无所可用。 
现代文：庄子问他们是什么原因，伐木的人说： 没有什么用处。 
English: Ask him why, he says; it's no use.

古文：庄子曰： 此木以不材得终其天年。 
现代文：庄子说： 这棵树就是因为不成材才能够终享天年啊！ 
English: Zhuangzi said, "This tree is able to live to a ripe old age because it is not made of wood!"

古文：夫子出于山，舍于故人之家。
现代文：庄子走出山来，留宿在朋友家中。
English: Zhuangzi came out of the mountains and stayed at a friend's house.

古文：故人喜，命竖子杀雁而烹之。
现代文：朋友很高兴，叫童仆杀鹅款待他。
English: The friend was delighted and asked the servant to kill the goose and serve it to him.

古文：竖子请曰： 其一能鸣，其一不能鸣，请奚杀？ 
现代文：童仆问主人： 有一只能叫，有一只不会叫，请问应该杀哪一只呢？ 
English: The boy servant asked his master: One can only call, one cannot call. Which one should I kill?

古文：主人曰： 杀不能鸣者。 
现代文：主人说： 杀那只不会叫的。 
English: The owner said, "Kill the one that doesn't howl."

古文：明日，弟子问于庄子曰： 昨日山中之木，以不材得终其天年；今主人之雁，以不材死。先生将何处？ 
现代文：第二天，弟子问庄子： 昨日遇见山中的大树，因为不成材而能终享天年，如今主人的鹅，因为不成材而被杀掉；先生你将怎样对待呢？ 
English: The next day, the disciple asked Zhuang Zi: Yesterday, you met a large tree in the mountains, because it did not become timber, it could enjoy the year of heaven. Today, the owner's goose was killed because it did not become timber. What will you do with him?

古文：庄子笑曰： 周将处乎材与不材之间。
现代文：庄子笑道： 处于成材与不成材之间。
English: Zhuo Zi smiled: I am in between becoming a material and not becoming a material.

古文：材与不材之间，似之而非也，故未免乎累。
现代文：在成材和不成材之间，似乎可以了但还不是根本，所以没能免除牵累。
English: Between the finished material and the unfinished material, it seems that it is possible but not essential, so it has not been able to avoid the involvement.

古文：若夫乘道德而浮游则不然，无誉无訾，一龙一蛇，与时俱化，而无肯专为。
现代文：要是把握了道德就不会这样，无所谓赞誉无所谓诋毁，时隐时现如龙见蛇蛰，随时运共同变化，不愿意固执一端。
English: If you grasp morality, it won't be like this. There is no praise or slander, it's like a snake in the grass, it changes all the time, and you don't want to be stubborn.

古文：一上一下，以和为量，浮游乎万物之祖。
现代文：一时在上一时在下，以和顺为标准，遨游在万物的本元。
English: One moment above, one moment below, with harmony as the standard, wandering in the essence of all things.

古文：物物而不物于物，则胡可得而累邪！
现代文：把握外物却不被外物所化，那样哪里会有牵累呀？
English: Grasp the foreign object but do not be transformed by the foreign object, then where will there be a drag?

古文：此神农、黄帝之法则也。
现代文：这是神农、黄帝的法则。
English: This is the law of Shennong and the Yellow Emperor.

古文：若夫万物之情，人伦之传则不然：合则离，成则毁，廉则挫，尊则议，有为则亏，贤则谋，不肖则欺。
现代文：至于万事的情状，人类的习俗就不是这样了。你要合人家就要离，你想成人家就想毁，你越穷人家就越压，你尊贵人家就谤诽，你做事人家就破坏，你贤明人家就谋算，你无能人家就欺负。
English: As for the state of all things, this is not the way of human customs. If you want to get along with people, you must leave them; if you want to be an adult, you must destroy them; the poorer you are, the more you oppress them; if you respect people, you slander them; if you do things, you destroy them; if you are wise, you make plans; if you are incompetent, you bully them.

古文：胡可得而必乎哉！
现代文：哪有可能是一定如此呀？
English: How could that possibly be?

古文：悲夫，弟子志之，其唯道德之乡乎！ 
现代文：可悲啊，同学们可要记住，只有道德的境界才是根本啊！ 
English: It's sad, but students should remember that only the moral realm is fundamental!

古文：市南宜僚见鲁侯，鲁侯有忧色。
现代文：市南宜僚拜见鲁侯，见鲁侯面带忧色。
English: Ichinan Yili met Lu Hou and was saddened to see him.

古文：市南子曰： 君有忧色，何也？ 
现代文：市南宜僚说： 国君面有忧色，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Ichinan Yili said, "The sovereign has a gloomy look on his face. Why is that?

古文：鲁侯曰： 吾学先王之道，修先君之业；吾敬鬼尊贤，亲而行之，无须臾离居。然不免于患，吾是以忧。 
现代文：鲁侯说： 我学习先王治国的办法，承继先君的事业；我敬仰鬼神尊重贤能，身体力行，没有短暂的止息，可是仍不能免除祸患，我因为这个缘故而忧虑。 
English: Lu Hou said: I learn the way of the former king to govern the country and inherit the cause of the former prince; I respect the gods and spirits, respect the virtues, and do my best, and there is no short break, but I still can't get rid of the disaster, and I am worried about this.

古文：市南子曰： 君之除患之术浅矣！
现代文：市南宜僚说： 你消除忧患的办法太浅薄了！
English: Ichinan Yili said, "Your way of eliminating sorrow is too shallow!

古文：夫丰狐文豹，栖于山林，伏于岩穴，静也；夜行昼居，戒也；虽饥渴隐约，犹且胥疏于江湖之上而求食焉，定也。
现代文：皮毛丰厚的大狐和斑斑花纹的豹子，栖息于深山老林，潜伏于岩穴山洞，这是静心；夜里行动，白天居息，这是警惕；即使饥渴也隐形潜踪，还要远离各种足迹到江湖上觅求食物，这又是稳定；然而还是不能免于罗网和机关的灾祸。
English: The big foxes with thick fur and the leopards with mottled patterns inhabit the deep mountains and old forests and lurk in the caves and caves, which is meditation; they act at night and rest during the day, which is vigilance; even if they are hungry and thirsty, they also lurk invisibly, and they have to stay away from all kinds of footprints to search for food on the rivers and lakes, which is stable; however, they are still not immune to the scourge of traps and agencies.

古文：然且不免于罔罗机辟之患，是何罪之有哉？其皮为之灾也。
现代文：这两种动物有什么罪过呢？是它们自身的皮毛给它们带来灾祸。
English: What are these two animals guilty of? It is their own fur that brings them misfortune.

古文：今鲁国独非君之皮邪？
现代文：如今的鲁国不就是为你鲁君带来灾祸的皮毛吗？
English: Isn't the present Lu country just the fur coat of the evil that Lu Jun brought to you?

古文：吾愿君刳形去皮，洒心去欲，而游于无人之野。
现代文：我希望你能剖空身形舍弃皮毛，荡涤心智摈除欲念，进而逍遥于没有人迹的原野。
English: I hope you can carve out your body, give up your fur, purify your mind, get rid of your desires, and then walk freely in the wilderness.

古文：南越有邑焉，名为建德之国。
现代文：遥远的南方有个城邑，名字叫做建德之国。
English: In the far south, there is a city called Jiande.

古文：其民愚而朴，少私而寡欲；知作而不知藏，与而不求其报；不知义之所适，不知礼之所将。猖狂妄行，乃蹈乎大方。其生可乐，其死可葬。
现代文：那里的人民纯厚而又质朴，很少有私欲；知道耕作而不知道储备，给与别人什么从不希图酬报；不明白义的归宿，不懂得礼的去向；随心所欲任意而为，竟能各自行于大道；他们生时自得而乐，他们死时安然而葬。
English: The people there are pure and simple, with few selfish desires; they know how to farm but do not know how to save, and they never expect to be rewarded for what they give to others; they do not know the destination of righteousness, do not know the direction of etiquette; they do whatever they want, but they are able to go their own way; they are happy when they are alive, and they are buried peacefully when they die.

古文：吾愿君去国捐俗，与道相辅而行。 
现代文：我希望国君你也能舍去国政捐弃世俗，从而跟大道相辅而行。 
English: I hope that you, the king, will also give up politics and abandon the world, so that you can complement the road.

古文：君曰： 彼其道远而险，又有江山，我无舟车，奈何？ 
现代文：鲁侯说： 那里道路遥远而又艰险，又有江河山岭阻隔，我没有可用的船和车，怎么办呢？ 
English: Lu Hou said, "The roads there are distant and arduous, and there are rivers and mountains blocking the way. I don't have a usable boat or car, so what should I do?

古文：市南子曰： 君无形倨，无留居，以为君车。 
现代文：市南宜僚说： 国君不要容颜高傲，不要墨守滞留，便可以此作为你的车子。 
English: Ichinan Yili said: Your Majesty, don't look haughty, don't linger, you can use this as your car.

古文：君曰： 彼其道幽远而无人，吾谁与为邻？
现代文：鲁侯说： 那里道路幽暗遥远而又无人居住，我跟谁是邻居？
English: Rouhou said: "There, the roads are dark, distant and uninhabited. Who is my neighbor?

古文：吾无粮，我无食，安得而至焉？ 
现代文：我没有粮，我没有食物，怎么能够到达那里呢？ 
English: I have no grain, I have no food, how can I get there?

古文：市南子曰： 少君之费，寡君之欲，虽无粮而乃足。
现代文：市南宜僚说： 减少你的耗费，节制你的欲念，虽然没有粮食也是充足的。
English: Ichinan Yoritomo said, "Reduce your expenses, control your desires, even though there is no food, there is plenty."

古文：君其涉于江而浮于海，望之而不见其崖，愈往而不知其所穷。
现代文：你渡过江河浮游大海，一眼望去看不到涯岸，越向前行便越发不知道它的穷尽。
English: You cross the river and swim in the sea, but you can't see the other shore at a glance. The further you go, the more you don't know how far it is.

古文：送君者皆自崖而反。君自此远矣！
现代文：送行的人都从河岸边回去，你也就从此离得越来越远了！
English: Everyone who was seeing you off walked back from the riverbank, and you've been getting further and further away ever since!

古文：故有人者累，见有于人者忧。
现代文：所以说统治他人的人必定受劳累，受制于别人的人必定会忧心。
English: Therefore, those who rule over others must be exhausted, and those who are ruled by others must be anxious.

古文：故尧非有人，非见有于人也。
现代文：而唐尧从不役使他人，也从不受制于人。
English: However, Tang Xuan never served others, nor was he controlled by others.

古文：吾愿去君之累，除君之忧，而独与道游于大莫之国。
现代文：我希望能减除你的劳累，除去你的忧患，而独自跟大道一块儿遨游于太虚的王国。
English: I hope I can relieve your fatigue, remove your worries, and travel alone with the road in the kingdom of too little.

古文：方舟而济于河，有虚船来触舟，虽有惼心之人不怒。有一人在其上，则呼张歙之。一呼而不闻，再呼而不闻，于是三呼邪，则必以恶声随之。
现代文：并合两条船来渡河，突然有条空船碰撞过来，即使心地最偏狭、性子最火急的人也不会发怒；倘若有一个人在那条船上，那就会人人大声呼喊喝斥来船后退；呼喊一次没有回应，呼喊第二次也没有回应，于是喊第三次，那就必定会骂声不绝。
English: If two boats were crossing the river together, and suddenly an empty boat collided with them, even the most narrow-minded and hot-tempered person would not get angry; if one person was on that boat, then everyone would shout loudly and shout to the boat to retreat; shouting once did not respond, shouting the second time did not respond, so shouting the third time, then there must be endless abuse.

古文：向也不怒而今也怒，向也虚而今也实。
现代文：刚才不发脾气而现在发起怒来，那是因为刚才船是空的而今却有人在船上。
English: If you don't lose your temper and get angry now, it's because the boat was empty and now there are people on it.

古文：人能虚己以游世，其孰能害之！ 
现代文：一个人倘能听任外物、处世无心而自由自在地遨游于世，谁能够伤害他！ 
English: If a person can allow external things and the world to wander freely and without intention, who can harm him?

古文：北宫奢为卫灵公赋敛以为钟，为坛乎郭门之外。三月而成上下之县。
现代文：北宫奢替卫灵公征集捐款铸造钟器，在外城门设下祭坛，三个月就造好了钟并编组在上下两层钟架上。
English: The Northern Palace took the liberty of collecting donations for Wei Ling Gong to cast a bell, set up an altar at the outer city gate, and built a bell in three months and arranged it on the upper and lower two-story bell frame.

古文：王子庆忌见而问焉，曰： 子何术之设？ 
现代文：王子庆忌看到这种情况便向他问道： 你是用的什么办法呀？ 
English: Seeing this, Prince Qingyi asked him, "What method did you use?"

古文：奢曰： 一之间无敢设也。
现代文：北宫奢说： 精诚专一而又顺其自然，不敢假设有其他什么好办法。
English: Hokuguso said, "Being sincere and single-minded and letting things take their natural course, I dare not assume that there is any other good way.

古文：奢闻之： 既雕既琢，复归于朴。 
现代文：我曾听说， 既然已细细雕刻细细琢磨，而又要返归事物的本真。 
English: I have heard it said that, now that everything has been carefully sculpted and refined, we must return to the true nature of things.

古文：侗乎其无识，傥乎其怠疑。萃乎芒乎，其送往而迎来。来者勿禁，往者勿止。从其强梁，随其曲傅，因其自穷。故朝夕赋敛而毫毛不挫，而况有大涂者乎！ 
现代文：纯朴无心是那样无知无识，忘却心智是那样从容不疑；财物汇聚而自己却茫然无知，或者分发而去或者收聚而来；送来的不去禁绝，分发的不去阻留；强横不讲理的就从其自便，隐委顺和的加以随应，依照各自的情况而竭尽力量，所以早晚征集捐款而丝毫不损伤他人，何况是遵循大道的人呢！ 
English: The simple-minded are so ignorant and unintelligent, and the forgetful are so calm and unquestioning; wealth is gathered, but they are clueless, or it is distributed, or it is collected; what is sent is not prohibited, and what is distributed is not stopped; the domineering and unreasonable are at their own convenience, and the secret committee is obedient to them, and they exert their strength according to their own situation, so sooner or later they collect donations without harming others, let alone those who follow the road!

古文：孔子围于陈蔡之间，七日不火食。
现代文：孔子一行人被围困在陈国和蔡国之间，七天七夜不能生火煮饭。
English: Confucius and his entourage were besieged between the states of Chen and Cai, and for seven days and seven nights they could not light a fire to cook rice.

古文：大公任往吊之，曰： 子几死乎？ 
现代文：大公任前去看望他，说： 先生快要饿死了吧？ 孔子说： 是的。 
English: Before taking office, the Grand Duke went to see him and said, "Is my teacher about to starve to death?" Confucius said, "Yes."

古文：曰： 然。  子恶死乎？ 
现代文：大公任又问： 你厌恶死吗？ 
English: The Grand Duke asked again, "Do you hate death?"

古文：曰： 然。 
现代文：孔子回答： 是的。 
English: Ying Hou replied: Yes.

古文：任曰： 予尝言不死之道。
现代文：大公任说： 我来谈谈不死的方法。
English: Grand Duke Ren said, "Let me talk about the method of immortality."

古文：东海有鸟焉，其名曰意怠。
现代文：东海有一种鸟，它的名字叫意怠。
English: There is a bird in the East China Sea, and its name is Ilao.

古文：其为鸟也，翂翂翐翐，而似无能；引援而飞，迫胁而栖；进不敢为前，退不敢为后；食不敢先尝，必取其绪。是故其行列不斥，而外人卒不得害，是以免于患。
现代文：这种鸟呢飞得很慢，好像不能飞行似的；它们总是要有其他鸟的协助引领，栖息时又都跟别的鸟依偎在一起；前进时不敢飞在最前面，后退时不敢落在最后面；吃食时不敢先动嘴，总是吃别的鸟所剩下的，所以它们在鸟群中从不受排斥，人们也终究不会去伤害它，因此能够免除祸患。
English: These birds fly very slowly, as if they couldn't fly; they always need the help of other birds to guide them, and they snuggle up with other birds when roosting; they don't dare to fly in front when moving forward, and they don't dare to fall behind when retreating; they don't dare to move their mouths first when eating, and they always eat the leftovers of other birds, so they are never excluded from the flocks, and people will not hurt them after all, so they can be spared from harm.

古文：直木先伐，甘井先竭。
现代文：长得很直的树木总是先被砍伐，甘甜的井水总是先遭枯竭。
English: The straight-growing trees are always the first to be cut down, and the sweet well water is always the first to be exhausted.

古文：子其意者饰知以惊愚，修身以明汙，昭昭乎如揭日月而行，故不免也。
现代文：你的用心是装扮得很有才干以便惊吓普通的人，注重修养以便彰明别人的浊秽，毫不掩饰地炫耀自己就像是举着太阳和月亮走路，所以总不能免除灾祸。
English: Your intention is to dress up very skillfully in order to frighten ordinary people, to pay attention to cultivation in order to highlight the filth of others, and to flaunt yourself unabashedly. It is like walking with the sun and the moon, so you can't avoid disaster.

古文：昔吾闻之大成之人曰： 自伐者无功，功成者堕，名成者亏。 孰能去功与名而还与众人！
现代文：从前我听圣德宏博的老子说过： 自吹自擂的人不会成就功业；功业成就了而不知退隐的人必定会毁败，名声彰显而不知韬光隐晦的必定会遭到损伤。 谁能够摈弃功名而还原跟普通人一样！
English: Once upon a time, I heard the sage Lao Zi say: Those who boast will not achieve; those who have achieved but do not know how to retreat will be destroyed; those who have achieved but do not know how to fade away will be damaged; those who have achieved but do not know how to fade away will be damaged; and those who have achieved but do not know how to fade away will be damaged.

古文：道流而不明居，得行而不名处；纯纯常常，乃比于狂；削迹捐势，不为功名。
现代文：大道广为流传而个人则韬光隐居，道德盛行于世而个人则藏誉匿耀不处其名；纯朴而又平常，竟跟愚狂的人一样；削除形迹捐弃权势，不求取功名。
English: The path is widely spread, but the individual lives in seclusion. Morality prevails in the world, but the individual hides his reputation and does not make a name for himself. He is simple and ordinary, just like a foolish person. He abandons power and does not seek fame.

古文：是故无责于人，人亦无责焉。
现代文：因此不会去谴责他人，别人也不会责备自己。
English: So they don't blame others, and others don't blame themselves.

古文：至人不闻，子何喜哉！ 孔子曰： 善哉！ 
现代文：道德修养极高的人不求闻名于世，你为什么偏偏喜好名声呢？ 孔子说： 说得实在好啊！ 
English: A highly moral person does not seek to be famous in the world, why do you prefer fame? Confucius said: That's really good!

古文：辞其交游，去其弟子，逃于大泽，衣裘褐，食杼栗，入兽不乱群，入鸟不乱行。
现代文：于是辞别朋友故交，离开众多弟子，逃到山泽旷野；穿兽皮麻布做成的衣服，吃柞树和栗树的果实；进入兽群兽不乱群，进入鸟群鸟不乱行。
English: So he bid farewell to his friends and former comrades, left his many disciples, and fled to the mountains and deserts; he wore clothes made of animal skins and linen, and ate the fruit of birch and chestnut trees; he did not go into the herds of beasts, and he did not go into the flocks of birds.

古文：鸟兽不恶，而况人乎！
现代文：鸟兽都不讨厌他，何况是人呢！
English: Birds and beasts don't hate him, let alone people!

古文：孔子问子桑雽曰： 吾再逐于鲁，伐树于宋，削迹于卫，穷于商周，围于陈蔡之间。
现代文：孔子问桑雽道： 我两次在鲁国被驱逐，在宋国遭遇伐树险境，在卫国被拒绝入境，困穷于宋国和周国，在陈国和蔡国间受到围困。
English: Confucius asked Mulberry, "I was expelled twice in the State of Lu, faced the danger of logging in the State of Song, was denied entry into the State of Wei, was stranded in the State of Song and the State of Zhou, and was besieged between the States of Chen and Cai.

古文：吾犯此数患，亲交益疏，徒友益散，何与？ 
现代文：我遭逢这么多的灾祸，亲朋故交越发疏远了，弟子友人更加离散了，这是为什么呢？ 
English: I have encountered so many calamities, friends and relatives have become more and more estranged, disciples and friends have become more and more separated. Why is this?

古文：子桑雽曰： 子独不闻假人之亡与？
现代文：桑雽回答说： 你没有听说过那假国人的逃亡吗？
English: Mulberry replied, "Didn't you hear about the fake countryman's escape?

古文：林回弃千金之璧，负赤子而趋。
现代文：林回舍弃了价值千金的璧玉，背着婴儿就跑。
English: Lin Hui abandoned the precious gems worth thousands of dollars and ran with the baby on her back.

古文：或曰： 为其布与？
现代文：有人议论： 他是为了钱财吗？
English: Some people argue: Is he in it for the money?

古文：赤子之布寡矣；为其累与？
现代文：初生婴儿的价值太少太少了；他是为了怕拖累吗？
English: The value of a newborn baby is too little, too little; is he afraid of being a burden?

古文：赤子之累多矣。
现代文：初生婴儿的拖累太多太多了。
English: The burden of a newborn is too much, too much.

古文：弃千金之璧，负赤子而趋，何也？ 
现代文：舍弃价值千金的璧玉，背着婴儿就跑，为了什么呢？ 
English: Abandoning precious gems worth thousands of dollars and running with a baby on your back, for what?

古文：林回曰： 彼以利合，此以天属也。 
现代文：林回说： 价值千金的璧玉跟我是以利益相合，这个孩子跟我则是以天性相连。 
English: Lin Hui said: The precious gemstone and I are connected by interests, but this child and I are connected by nature.

古文：夫以利合者，迫穷祸患害相弃也；以天属者，迫穷祸患害相收也。
现代文：以利益相合的，遇上困厄、灾祸、忧患与伤害就会相互抛弃；以天性相连的，遇上困厄、灾祸、忧患与伤害就会相互包容。
English: Those whose interests are compatible will abandon each other in the face of adversity, calamity, sorrow and harm; those who are connected by nature will tolerate each other in the face of adversity, calamity, sorrow and harm.

古文：夫相收之与相弃亦远矣，且君子之交淡若水，小人之交甘若醴。
现代文：相互收容与相互抛弃差别也就太远了。而且君子的交谊淡得像清水一样，小人的交情甜得像甜酒一样；君子淡泊却心地亲近，小人甘甜却利断义绝。
English: The difference between mutual acceptance and mutual abandonment is also too far. Moreover, the friendship of a gentleman is as light as water, and the friendship of a villain is as sweet as sweet wine; a gentleman is indifferent but close-hearted, and a villain is sweet but ruthless.

古文：君子淡以亲，小人甘以绝，彼无故以合者，则无故以离。 
现代文：大凡无缘无故而接近相合的，那么也会无缘无故地离散。 
English: Great things, which for no reason come close together, also come apart for no reason.

古文：孔子曰： 敬闻命矣！ 
现代文：孔子说： 我会由衷地听取你的指教！ 
English: Confucius said: I will sincerely listen to your advice!

古文：徐行翔佯而归，绝学捐书，弟子无挹于前，其爱益加进。
现代文：于是慢慢地离去，闲放自得地走了回来，终止了学业丢弃了书简，弟子没有一个侍学于前，可是他们对老师的敬爱反而更加深厚了。
English: So he slowly left, and came back with a relaxed attitude. He stopped his studies and threw away his notes. None of his disciples had ever studied before, but their love for their teacher became even deeper.

古文：异日，桑雽又曰： 舜之将死，真泠禹曰： 汝戒之哉！
现代文：有一天，桑雽又说： 舜将死的时候，用真道晓谕夏禹说： 你要警惕啊！
English: One day, Mulberry also said, "When I am about to die, I will tell Xia Yu the truth and say, 'Be on your guard!

古文：形莫若缘，情莫若率。 
现代文：身形不如顺应，情感不如率真。
English: Body shape is not as good as compliance, and emotions are not as sincere.

古文：缘则不离，率则不劳。不离不劳，则不求文以待形。不求文以待形，固不待物。 
现代文：顺应就不会背离，率真就不会劳苦；不背离不劳神，那么也就不需要用纹饰来装扮身形；无须纹饰来矫造身形，当然也就不必有求于外物。  
English: If you obey, you will not deviate, if you are sincere, you will not labor; if you do not deviate, you will not labor, so there is no need to dress up your body with decorations; there is no need to dress up your body with decorations, and of course, there is no need to seek external things.

古文：庄子衣大布而补之，正絜系履而过魏王。
现代文：庄子穿着带补丁的粗布衣，扎好腰带系好鞋子去魏王处。
English: Zhuangzi wore a coarse cloth with patches, tied his belt and tied his shoes to go to Wei Wang.

古文：魏王曰： 何先生之惫邪？ 
现代文：魏王说： 先生为何这样疲困呀？ 
English: Wei Wang said: Why is the teacher so tired?

古文：庄子曰： 贫也，非惫也。
现代文：庄子说： 是贫穷啊，不是疲困。
English: Zhuo Zi said: It is poverty, not exhaustion.

古文：士有道德不能行，惫也；衣弊履穿，贫也，非惫也，此所谓非遭时也。
现代文：志士有道德不得施行，是疲困；衣服破烂，鞋子磨穿，是贫穷，不是疲困，这是所谓没遭遇好世道。
English: If a person has a moral obligation that cannot be carried out, it is exhaustion; if his clothes are tattered and his shoes worn out, it is poverty, not exhaustion. This is the so-called bad luck.

古文：王独不见夫腾猿乎？
现代文：王难道未曾见过善于腾跃之猿猴吗？
English: Hasn't the king ever seen a prancing ape?

古文：其得楠梓豫章也，揽蔓其枝而王长其间，虽羿、蓬蒙不能眄睨也。
现代文：它们在柟梓豫章之类高大树林中，拉扯着树枝而怡然自得于其间，就是羿与蓬蒙之类善射者也不能瞄准射中它们。
English: They romp about in the tall trees such as Eucalyptus, pulling the branches and enjoying themselves in the midst of it. Even good shooters such as Eucalyptus and Pumon cannot aim to hit them.

古文：及其得柘棘枳枸之间也，危行侧视，振动悼栗，此筋骨非有加急而不柔也，处势不便，未足以逞其能也。
现代文：等到在拓棘枳枸之类带刺的灌木丛中，行动谨慎而左顾右盼，内心震惊畏惧战栗，此时并非由于过度紧张而筋骨不柔软灵活，而是所处形势不利，不足以施展其本领啊。
English: Wait until you are in thorny bushes such as thorny thistles, act cautiously and look left and right, inwardly shocked, afraid and shivering. At this time, it is not due to excessive tension that the sinews are not soft and flexible, but the situation is unfavorable and is not enough to exert its ability.

古文：今处昏上乱相之间而欲无惫，奚可得邪？
现代文：现在处于昏君与乱相之时而想要不疲困，怎么可能呀？
English: How is it possible to be in a time of confusion and chaos and not want to be exhausted?

古文：此比干之见剖心，徵也夫！ 
现代文：像比干被剖心，不是个显明的例证吗？ 
English: Isn't a clear example like a ginseng being dissected?

古文：孔子穷于陈蔡之间，七日不火食。
现代文：孔子一行受困于陈国、蔡国之间，七天不能生活做饭。
English: Confucius and his party were trapped between Chen Guo and Cai Guo, unable to live and cook for seven days.

古文：左据槁木，右击槁枝，而歌焱氏之风，有其具而无其数，有其声而无宫角。木声与人声，犁然有当于人之心。
现代文：孔子左手靠着枯树，右手敲击枯枝，唱起了神农氏时代的歌谣，不过敲击的东西并不能合符音乐的节奏，有了敲击的声响却没有符合五音的音阶，敲木声和咏歌声分得清清楚楚，而且恰如其分地表达了唱歌人的心意。
English: With his left hand leaning against a dead tree and his right hand tapping on a dead branch, Confucius sang a song from the Shennong Dynasty. However, what he tapped did not match the rhythm of the music, and the sound of the tapping did not match the five-tone scale. The sound of knocking on wood and the sound of singing were clearly distinguished and accurately expressed the singer's intention.

古文：颜回端拱还目而窥之。
现代文：颜回恭敬地在侍立在一旁，转眼看着孔子。
English: Yan Hui respectfully stood aside and looked at Confucius.

古文：仲尼恐其广己而造大也，爱己而造哀也，曰： 回，无受天损易，无受人益难。
现代文：孔子担心他把自己的道德看得过于高远而达到最了不起的境界，爱惜自己因而至于哀伤，便说： 颜回，不受自然的损害容易，不接受外人的利禄则较困难。
English: Confucius was worried that he had overestimated his own morality and had reached the greatest level, and he felt sorry for himself, so he said, "It is easy not to be harmed by nature, but it is more difficult not to accept someone else's reward.

古文：无始而非卒也，人与天一也。
现代文：世上的事没有什么开始不同时又是终了的，人与自然原本也是同一的。
English: There is nothing in the world that does not have a beginning and an end. Man and nature are originally one and the same.

古文：夫今之歌者其谁乎！ 
现代文：至于现在唱歌的人又将是谁呢？ 
English: As for the current singers, who will they be?

古文：回曰： 敢问无受天损易。 
现代文：颜回说： 我冒昧地请教什么叫做不受自然的损害容易。 
English: Yan Hui said: I ventured to ask what is called not easily damaged by nature.

古文：仲尼曰： 饥渴寒暑，穷桎不行，天地之行也，运物之泄也，言与之偕逝之谓也。
现代文：孔子说： 饥饿、干渴、严寒、酷暑，穷困的束缚使人事事不能通达，这是天地的运行，万物的变迁，说的是要随着天地、万物一块儿变化流逝。
English: Confucius said: Hunger, thirst, extreme cold, extreme heat, and the shackles of poverty make people's affairs inaccessible. This is the movement of heaven and earth, the changes of all things. It is said to change with heaven and earth and all things.

古文：为人臣者，不敢去之。
现代文：做臣子的，不敢违拗国君的旨意。
English: If you are a courtier, you dare not go against the sovereign's will.

古文：执臣之道犹若是，而况乎所以待天乎？ 
现代文：做臣子的道理尚且如此，何况是用这样的办法来对待自然呢！ 
English: The principle of being a courtier is still the same, let alone using such a method to treat nature!

古文： 何谓无受人益难？ 
现代文：颜回又问： 什么叫做不接收他人的利禄则较困难呢？ 
English: Yan Hui also asked: What do you call it that it is more difficult not to accept other people's gifts?

古文：仲尼曰： 始用四达，爵禄并至而不穷。物之所利，乃非己也，吾命有在外者也。君子不为盗，贤人不为窃，吾若取之何哉？
现代文：孔子说： 初被任用办什么事都觉得顺利，爵位和俸禄一齐到来没有穷尽，外物带来的好处，本不属于自己，只不过是我的机遇一时存在于外物。君子不会做劫盗，贤人也不会去偷窃。我若要获取外物的利益，为了什么呢？
English: Confucius said: When I was first appointed to do anything, I felt that everything was going well. The peerage and the salary came together without exhaustion. The benefits brought by external things did not belong to me, but my opportunity temporarily existed in external things. A gentleman would not commit robbery, and a wise man would not steal. If I want to obtain the benefits of external things, what for?

古文：故曰：鸟莫知于鹢鸸，目之所不宜处不给视，虽落其实，弃之而走。
现代文：所以说，鸟没有比燕子更聪明的，看见不适宜停歇的地方，绝不投出第二次目光，即使掉落了食物，也舍弃不顾而飞走。
English: Therefore, no bird is wiser than the swallow, which sees an unsuitable resting place, never casts a second glance, and even if it drops food, it ignores it and flies away.

古文：其畏人也而袭诸人间。社稷存焉尔！ 
现代文：燕子很害怕人，却进入到人的生活圈子，不过只是将它们的巢窠暂寄于人的房舍罢了。 
English: Swallows are very afraid of people, but they enter people's life circle, but only temporarily place their nests in people's houses.

古文： 何谓无始而非卒？ 
现代文：颜回又问： 什么叫做没有什么开始不同时又是终了的？ 
English: Yan Hui asked again: What is nothing that doesn't have a beginning and an end?

古文：仲尼曰： 化其万物而不知其禅之者，焉知其所终？
现代文：孔子说： 变化无穷的万物不可能知道是谁替代了谁而谁又为谁所替代，这怎么能知道它们的终了？
English: Confucius said: It is impossible for all things that change endlessly to know who has replaced whom and who has been replaced by whom. How can they know their end?

古文：焉知其所始？
现代文：又怎么能知道它们的开始？
English: And how do we know when they begin?

古文：正而待之而已耳。 
现代文：只不过谨守正道随应变化而已。 
English: It's just a matter of staying the course and adapting to change.

古文： 何谓人与天一邪？ 
现代文：颜回又问： 什么叫做人与自然原本也是同一的？ 
English: Yan Hui also asked: What do you call it when man and nature are originally the same?

古文：仲尼曰： 有人，天也；有天，亦天也。
现代文：孔子说： 人类的出现，是由于自然；自然的出现，也是由于自然。
English: Confucius said: The emergence of mankind is due to nature; the emergence of nature is also due to nature.

古文：人之不能有天，性也。圣人晏然体逝而终矣！ 
现代文：人不可能具有自然的本性，也是人固有的天性所决定的，圣人安然体解，随着自然变化而告终！ 
English: It is impossible for a person to have a natural nature, which is also determined by the inherent nature of a person. The sage calmly understands and ends with natural changes!

古文：庄周游于雕陵之樊，睹一异鹊自南方来者。翼广七尺，目大运寸，感周之颡，而集于栗林。
现代文：庄子在雕陵里游玩，看见一只奇异的鹊鸟从南方飞来，翅膀长达七尺，眼睛有一寸长，碰着庄子的额头而停歇在果树林里。
English: Zhuangzi was playing in the mausoleum when he saw a strange ostrich flying from the south. Its wings were seven feet long and its eyes were an inch long. It touched Zhuangzi's forehead and stopped in the fruit grove.

古文：庄周曰： 此何鸟哉！翼殷不逝，目大不睹。 
现代文：庄子说： 这是什么鸟呀，翅膀大却不能远飞，眼睛大视力却不敏锐？ 
English: Zhuang Zi said, "What kind of bird is this? It has big wings, but it can't fly far. Its eyes are big, but its vision isn't sharp.

古文：蹇裳躩步，执弹而留之。
现代文：于是提起衣裳快步上前，拿着弹弓静静地等待着时机。
English: So he took off his clothes and walked quickly forward, quietly waiting for the right moment with his slingshot.

古文：睹一蝉方得美荫而忘其身。螳螂执翳而搏之，见得而忘形。异鹊从而利之，见利而忘其真。
现代文：这时突然看见一只蝉，正在浓密的树荫里美美地休息而忘记了自身的安危；一只螳螂用树叶作隐蔽打算见机扑上去捕捉蝉，螳螂眼看即将得手而忘掉了自己形体的存在；那只怪鹊紧随其后认为那是极好的时机，眼看即将捕到螳螂而又丧失了自身的真性。
English: At this time, he suddenly saw a cicada, which was resting beautifully in the thick shade of a tree and forgot its own safety; a cockroach used leaves as a cover to catch a cicada at the right time, and the cockroach forgot the existence of its own body when it saw that it was about to succeed; the strange dragonfly followed and thought it was an excellent opportunity, and lost its own authenticity when it saw that it was about to catch a cockroach.

古文：庄周怵然曰： 噫！物固相累，二类相召也。 
现代文：庄子惊恐而警惕地说： 啊，世上的物类原本就是这样相互牵累、相互争夺的，两种物类之间也总是以利相召引！ 
English: Zhuo Zi was alarmed and said vigilantly: Ah, this is how things in the world originally entangled and competed with each other, and the two types of things are always attracted by each other!

古文：捐弹而反走，虞人逐而谇之。
现代文：庄子于是扔掉弹弓转身快步而去，看守栗园的人大惑不解地在后面追着责问。
English: Zhuangzi then threw away the slingshot, turned around and walked away at a fast pace. The guards of the chestnut orchard followed behind in bewilderment.

古文：庄周反入，三日不庭。
现代文：庄子返回家中，整整三天心情很不好。
English: When Zhuangzi returned home, he was in a very bad mood for three whole days.

古文：蔺且从而问之， 夫子何为顷间甚不庭乎？ 
现代文：弟子蔺且跟随一旁问道： 先生为什么这几天来一直很不高兴呢？ 
English: Disciple Zou Qi followed him and asked, "Why has Teacher been so unhappy for the past few days?"

古文：庄周曰： 吾守形而忘身，观于浊水而迷于清渊。
现代文：庄子说： 我留意外物的形体却忘记了自身的安危，观赏于混浊的流水却迷惑于清澈的水潭。
English: Zhuo Zi said: I keep the shape of the accident but forget my own safety. I enjoy watching the turbid flowing water but am puzzled by the clear pool.

古文：且吾闻诸夫子曰： 入其俗，从其令。 
现代文：而且我从老聃老师那里听说： 每到一个地方，就要遵从那里的习惯与禁忌。 
English: Moreover, I heard from my teacher in Laos: Whenever you go to a place, you must follow the customs and taboos there.

古文：今吾游于雕陵而忘吾身，异鹊感吾颡，游于栗林而忘真。栗林虞人以吾为戮，吾所以不庭也。 
现代文：如今我来到雕陵栗园便忘却了自身的安危，奇异的怪鹊碰上了我的额头，游玩于果林时又丧失了自身的真性，管园的人不理解我又进而侮辱我，因此我感到很不愉快。 
English: Now, when I come to the Jiaoling Chestnut Orchard, I forget my own safety, a strange strange beak hits my forehead, I lose my own authenticity when I play in the fruit forest, the people in charge of the orchard do not understand me and then insult me, so I feel very unhappy.

古文：阳子之宋，宿于逆旅。
现代文：阳朱去到宋国，住在旅店里。
English: Yang Zhu went to Song and stayed in an inn.

古文：逆旅人有妾二人，其一人美，其一人恶。恶者贵而美者贱。
现代文：旅店的主人有两个妾，其中一个漂亮，一个丑陋，长得丑陋的被娇宠着，长得漂亮的却被轻贱。
English: The innkeeper had two concubines, one beautiful and one ugly. The ugly one was pampered, while the pretty one was despised.

古文：阳子问其故，逆旅小子对曰： 其美者自美，吾不知其美也；其恶者自恶，吾不知其恶也。 
现代文：阳朱问这是什么缘故，年青的店主回答： 那个长得漂亮的自以为漂亮，但是我却不觉得她漂亮；那个长得丑陋的自以为丑陋，但是我却不觉得她丑陋。 
English: Yang Zhu asked the reason for this, and the young shopkeeper replied: "The beautiful one thinks she is beautiful, but I don't think she is beautiful; the ugly one thinks she is ugly, but I don't think she is ugly.

古文：阳子曰： 弟子记之：行贤而去自贤之行，安往而不爱哉！ 
现代文：阳子转身对弟子说： 弟子们记住！品行贤良但却不自以为具有了贤良的品行，去哪里不会受人喜爱呢？ 
English: Yoko turned to her disciples and said, "Remember, disciples! If you have virtuous conduct but do not think you have virtuous conduct, where will you not be loved?

