古文：汉祖至南郑，韩信亡去，萧何自追之。
现代文：汉高祖刘邦行军到达南郑，韩信不告而别，萧何亲自去追赶他。
English: Han Gao's ancestor Liu Bang marched to South Zheng, Han Xin left without saying goodbye, and Xiao He personally went to chase him.

古文：上骂曰： 诸将亡者以十数，公无所追；追信，诈也。 
现代文：高祖骂萧何说： 将领们逃跑了几十人，你都没有去追赶，却说去追赶韩信，是骗我的。 
English: Gaozu scolded Xiao He, saying, "The generals have fled by the dozens, and you have not pursued them. However, you lied to me when you said you would pursue Han Xin.

古文：何曰： 诸将易得，至如信，国士亡双，必欲争天下，非信无可与计事者。 
现代文：萧何说： 这些将领容易得到，至于韩信这样的人，则是天下无双的国士。您如果一定要争夺天下，除了他，再也没有一起讨论大事的人了。 
English: Xiao He said: These generals are easy to get, but as for Han Xin, he is a peerless statesman. If you must compete for the world, there is no one else to discuss big things with except him.

古文：乃拜信大将，遂成汉业。
现代文：于是高祖封韩信为大将军，最终完成了汉室大业。
English: As a result, Gao Zuofeng made Han Xin a great general, and finally completed the Han dynasty.

古文：唐太宗为秦王时，府属多外迁，王患之。
现代文：唐太宗李世民为秦王时，幕府属吏很多外调任职，秦王为此忧虑。
English: When Li Shimin, the Tang Taizong, was the king of Qin, many officials of the shogunate were transferred to other places. The king of Qin was worried about this.

古文：房乔曰： 去者虽多不足吝，杜如晦王佐才也，王必欲经营四方，舍如晦无共功者。 
现代文：房玄龄说： 离去的人尽管不少，也不值得可惜，杜如晦是辅佐君王的干才，大王想要经营天下大业，舍弃杜如晦就没有能共事的人了。 
English: Fang Xuanling said: Although there are a lot of people who have left, it is not worth regretting. Du Rugao is a talented assistant to the king. The great king wants to run the world's great cause. If he abandons Du Rugao, there will be no one who can work together.

古文：乃表留幕府，遂为名相。
现代文：于是，秦王上疏请将杜如晦留在幕府中，终于使他成为一代名相。
English: As a result, the Qin emperor requested that Du Rugao remain in the shogunate, finally making him a celebrity.

古文：二人之去留，系兴替治乱如此，萧、房之知人，所以为莫及也。
现代文：韩信、杜如晦的去留，与兴衰治乱竟然有这么密切的关系，而萧何、房玄龄二人善于发现人才，也是无人能比得上的。
English: Han Xin and Du Rugao's departure and stay have such a close relationship with the rise and fall of the chaos, and Xiao He and Fang Xuanling are good at discovering talents, which no one can match.

古文：樊哙从高祖起丰、沛，劝霸上之还，解鸿门之厄，功亦不细矣，而韩信羞与为伍。
现代文：樊哙跟随高祖在丰、沛起兵，攻占咸阳后劝高祖还军霸上，鸿门宴上又替高祖解脱困厄，功劳也不算小了，可是韩信却耻于和樊哙交往。
English: Han Xin followed Gao Zu in Feng and Pei to raise an army, and after conquering Xianyang, he advised Gao Zu to return to the military hegemony. At the Hongmen banquet, he also relieved Gao Zu's difficulties. The merit was not small, but Han Xin was ashamed to interact with Han Xin.

古文：唐俭赞太宗建大策，发薄津之谋，定突厥之计，非庸臣也，而李靖以为不足惜。
现代文：唐俭帮助太宗下决心灭隋建唐，在薄津揭发孤独怀恩发动叛乱的阴谋，帮太宗制定诱降突厥的办法，不能说是平庸之臣，可是李靖认为失去他并不值得惋惜。
English: Tang Jian helped Taizong make up his mind to destroy the Sui and Jian Dang dynasties, exposed Lone Pine's plot to start a rebellion in Bujin, and helped Taizong devise a plan to force the Turks to surrender. He cannot be said to be a mediocre minister, but Li Jing did not think it was worth regretting losing him.

古文：盖以信、靖而视哙、俭，犹熊罴之与狸狌耳。
现代文：这大概是以韩信和李靖的眼光来看樊哙、唐俭，就好像拿熊罴比去狸猫而已。
English: This is probably based on the perspective of Han Xin and Li Jing, and it is just like comparing a bear cub to a wildcat.

古文：帝王之功，非一士之略，必待将如韩信，相如杜公，而后用之，不亦难乎！
现代文：创建帝王之业，绝不是依靠个人谋士的谋略，一定要等到有了韩信那样的大将，杜如晦那样的贤相，然后才加以重要，岂不是太难了吗？
English: The creation of the emperor's career is by no means dependent on the strategy of an individual strategist. It must wait until there is a general like Han Xin and a sage like Du Ruwei, and then it will be important. Isn't it too difficult?

古文：惟能置萧、房于帷幄中，拔茅汇进，则珠玉无胫而至矣。
现代文：只要能把萧何、房玄龄这一类人安排在帐下，选贤进能，那么，贤能大才就会不请自至了。
English: As long as we can arrange people like Xiao He and Fang Xuanling under the account and select talents, then talents will come without invitation.

