古文：元德太子昭，炀帝长子也，生而高祖命养宫中。
现代文：○杨昭元德太子杨昭，是炀帝的长子，生下来后，高祖就让把他养在后宫中。
English: ○ Yang ZhaoYang Zhao, the first prince of the Yuan Dynasty, was the eldest son of Emperor Qian. After he was born, Gaozu had him raised in the harem.

古文：三岁时，于玄武门弄石师子，高祖与文献后至其所。
现代文：三岁时，在玄武门抚弄石狮子，高祖与文献皇后到了那里。
English: At the age of three, when he was stroking a stone lion at the Xuanwu Gate, Gao Zu and the Queen of Literature arrived there.

古文：高祖适患腰痛，举手凭后，昭因避去，如此者再三。
现代文：高祖正患腰疼，举起手，搭在皇后肩上。杨昭见了，回避在一边，像这样做了几次。
English: Gaozu, who was suffering from back pain, raised his hand and put it on the empress's shoulder. Yang Zhao saw it and avoided it, and did this several times.

古文：高祖叹曰： 天生长者，谁复教乎！ 
现代文：高祖感叹说： 这孩子是天生的长者，是哪个教他这样做的？ 
English: Gao Zu sighed and said: This child was born an elder, who taught him to do this?

古文：由是大奇之。
现代文：因此很奇异。
English: So it's very strange.

古文：高祖尝谓曰： 当为尔娶妇。 
现代文：高祖曾对他说： 我要为你娶妻。 
English: Gaozu once said to him, "I will marry a wife for you."

古文：昭应声而泣。
现代文：杨昭应声哭泣。
English: Yang Zhao burst into tears.

古文：高祖问其故，对曰： 汉王未婚时，恆在至尊所，一朝娶妇，便则出外。
现代文：高祖问其缘故，他回答说： 汉王未结婚时，总在您这里。一朝娶妻，就出外去了。
English: Gao Zu asked the reason for this, and he replied: "When Han Wang was not married, he was always here with you. As soon as he married, he went out.

古文：惧将违离，是以啼耳。 
现代文：我怕离开您，因此哭泣。 
English: I'm afraid to leave you, so I cry.

古文：上叹其有至性，特钟爱焉。
现代文：高祖感叹他有至性，特别钟爱他。
English: Gao Zu lamented that he had the supreme nature and especially loved him.

古文：年十二，立为河南王。
现代文：十二岁，立为河南王。
English: At the age of twelve, he was crowned King of Henan.

古文：仁寿初，徙为晋王，拜内史令，兼左卫大将军。
现代文：仁寿初年，转封晋王，授为内史令，兼任左卫大将军。
English: In the first year of his life, he was transferred to the court of Emperor Jin and was awarded the title of Inner Historian. He also served as the General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards.

古文：后三年，转雍州牧。
现代文：三年后，转任雍州牧。
English: Three years later, he was transferred to Yongzhou Animal Husbandry.

古文：炀帝即位，便幸洛阳宫，昭留守京师。
现代文：炀帝即位后，就巡幸洛阳宫，杨昭留守京师长安。
English: After Emperor Xian ascended the throne, he visited Luoyang Palace, while Yang Zhao stayed in the capital Chang'an.

古文：大业元年，帝遣使者立为皇太子。
现代文：大业元年，炀帝派使者来立他为皇太子。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taejo, Emperor Goryeo sent an envoy to crown him as crown prince.

古文：昭有武力，能引强弩。
现代文：杨昭有武力，能拉强弓。
English: Yang Zhao has strength and can pull a strong bow.

古文：性谦冲，言色恂恂，未尝忿怒。
现代文：他生性谦和，言色平静，未曾发怒。
English: He was gentle by nature, calm in speech, never angry.

古文：有深嫌可责者，但云 大不是 。
现代文：即使有深嫌可责的人，他也只说： 太不该这样了。 
English: Even if there is someone he deeply dislikes and blames, he only says: This is so wrong.

古文：所膳不许多品，帷席极于俭素。
现代文：他进膳不要很多食品，帷布、席子都极其节俭朴素。
English: He does not need a lot of food to eat, the curtains and mats are extremely frugal and simple.

古文：臣吏有老父母者，必亲问其安否，岁时皆有惠赐。
现代文：臣下有年老的父母的，他都要亲自问问是否安好，逢年过节都有恩赐。
English: If a vassal has elderly parents, he should personally inquire whether they are well, and there will be a gift every year.

古文：其仁爱如此。明年，朝于洛阳。
现代文：他就是这样仁爱。次年，到洛阳朝拜炀帝。
English: The following year, he went to Luoyang to pay homage to the emperor.

古文：九地黄泉，千年白日。虽金石之能久，终天壤乎长毕。
现代文：过了几个月，将回到京师去，他想再留住一段时间，炀帝不同意。他在洛阳期间，下拜、请安无数次，他一向肥胖，因此患了劳疾。炀帝让巫者看看他，巫者说： 是房陵王的鬼魂作怪。 
English: After a few months, he will return to Beijing. He wants to stay for a while longer, but Emperor Gong disagrees. During his time in Luoyang, he bowed down and asked for peace countless times. He was always fat, so he suffered from labor disease. Emperor Gong asked the sorcerer to look at him, and the sorcerer said: It is the ghost of Fangling Wang.

古文：敢图芳于篆素，永飞声而腾实。帝深追悼。
现代文：杨昭不久就死了。有诏让内史侍郎虞世基写哀策文，炀帝深深地追悼他。
English: Yang Zhao died soon after, and Emperor Xuan deeply mourned for him by issuing an edict to have his aide-de-camp Yu Shiji write a lamentation.

古文：有子三人，韦妃生恭皇帝，大刘良娣生燕王倓，小刘良娣生越王侗。
现代文：杨昭有儿子三人，韦氏妃生恭皇帝杨侑，大刘良娣生燕王杨倓，小刘良娣生越王杨侗。
English: Yang Zhao had three sons, Wei's concubine gave birth to Emperor Yang Jie, the eldest Liu Liang Jie gave birth to Yan Wang Yang Jie, and the youngest Liu Liang Jie gave birth to Yue Wang Yang Jie.

古文：燕王倓字仁安。
现代文：○杨倓燕王杨倓字仁安，聪明、智慧，仪表堂堂。
English: ○ Yang Xing Yan Wang Yang Xing Zi Ren An, clever, wise, with a magnificent appearance.

古文：敏慧美姿仪，炀帝于诸孙中特所钟爱，常置左右。
现代文：在各个孙子中，炀帝特别喜欢他，常把他带在身边。
English: Of all the grandchildren, Emperor Xuan especially liked him and often took him with him.

古文：性好读书，尤重儒素，非造次所及，有若成人。
现代文：杨倓生性爱读书，尤其重视儒学著作，非常人所及，就像大人。
English: Yang Xinsheng loves reading, especially the works of Confucianism, which are very popular, just like adults.

古文：良娣早终，每至忌日，末尝不流涕呜咽。
现代文：他生母大刘良娣死得早，每到忌日，他从未不流泪呜咽。
English: His biological mother, Liu Liangyao, died at an early age, and he has never cried without tears on the day of her death.

古文：帝由是益以奇之。
现代文：炀帝因此更感惊奇。
English: Emperor Xuan was even more surprised.

古文：宇文化及弑逆之际，倓觉变，欲入奏，恐露其事，因与梁公萧钜、千牛宇文皛等穿芳林门侧水窦而入。
现代文：宇文化及要杀炀帝时，杨倓感觉到要发生大变故，想入宫报告，又怕泄露了此事，因此与梁公萧巨、千牛宇文晶等人，穿过芳林门旁边的水窦而进去。
English: When Emperor Wu was about to be assassinated, Yang Xuan sensed that a great change was about to take place. He wanted to report to the palace, but also feared that the matter would be leaked. Therefore, together with Liang Gong Xiaoju, Qianyu Yuwenjing and others, he entered through the water ditch next to the Fanglin Gate.

古文：至玄武门，诡奏曰： 臣卒中恶，命县俄顷，请得面辞，死无所恨。 
现代文：到了玄武门，他假装上奏说： 我突然中了邪，命在旦夕，请得以与皇上当面辞别，我死而无憾。 
English: When he arrived at the Genbu-mon Gate, he pretended to play a tune and said, "I have suddenly fallen ill and my life is at stake. Please be able to say goodbye to the Emperor in person. I have no regrets about my death."

古文：冀以见帝，为司宫者所遏，竟不得闻。
现代文：希望以此见炀帝，但被掌管宫门的拦住了，竟不能报告炀帝。
English: He hoped to see the emperor this way, but he was stopped by the person in charge of the palace gate, and he couldn't report to the emperor.

古文：俄而难作，为贼所害，时年十六。
现代文：不久大乱爆发，被贼人杀害，时年十六岁。
English: Soon after, a riot broke out, and he was killed by thieves, at the age of sixteen.

古文：越王侗字仁谨，美姿仪，性宽厚。
现代文：越王杨侗字仁谨，仪表漂亮，生性宽厚。
English: Yue Wang Yang Xizhe is a benevolent person with a beautiful appearance and a generous nature.

古文：大业二年，立为越王。
现代文：大业二年，立为越王。
English: Two years later, he was crowned King of Yue.

古文：帝每巡幸，侗常留守东都。
现代文：炀帝每次出外巡幸，杨侗常常留守东都洛阳。
English: Every time Emperor Qian went on a tour, Yang Hui often stayed in Luoyang, the eastern capital.

古文：杨玄感作乱之际，与民部尚书樊子盖拒之。
现代文：杨玄感造反之时，杨侗与民部尚书樊子盖抵拒叛军。
English: When Yang Xuanxuan rebelled, Yang Hui and the Ministry of Civil Affairs resisted the rebels.

古文：及玄感平，朝于高阳，拜高阳太守。
现代文：杨玄感被平定后，他到高阳朝见炀帝，被授为高阳太守。
English: After Yang Xuanxuan was subdued, he went to Gaoyang to see Emperor Xuan, and was awarded the title of Governor of Gaoyang.

古文：俄以本官复留守东都。
现代文：不久又以本官身份，留守东都。
English: Soon after, he left for the eastern capital in his official capacity.

古文：十三年，帝幸江都，复令侗与金紫光禄大夫段达、太府卿元文都、摄民部尚书韦津、右武卫将军皇甫无逸等总留台事。
现代文：大业十三年，炀帝巡幸江都，又令杨侗与金紫光禄大夫段达、太府卿元文都、代理民部尚书韦津、右武卫将军皇甫无逸等，总留行台之事。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Taiei era, Emperor Gong toured the Yangtze River capital, and ordered Yang Xuan and Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu Dan Da, Grand Mufu Emperor Yuan Wendu, Acting Minister of the People's Department Shang Shu Wei Jin, and General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard Wang Fu Mu Yat, etc. to always stay in the capital.

古文：宇文化及之弑逆也，文都等议，以侗元德太子之子，属最为近，于是乃共尊立，大赦，改元曰皇泰。
现代文：宇文化及杀了炀帝后，元文都等人提议，因杨侗是元德太子的儿子，与皇室血缘最近，于是共同尊立他为皇帝。
English: After Emperor Yu was assassinated, Yuan Wendu and others proposed that since Yang Di was the son of Prince Yuan De and the closest blood relative to the imperial family, they should jointly make him emperor.

古文：谥帝曰明，庙号世祖。追尊元德太子为孝成皇帝，庙号世宗。
现代文：大赦天下，改元为皇泰，谥炀帝叫 明 ，庙号为世祖，追赠元德太子为孝成皇帝，庙号为世宗。
English: The world was amnestied, the Yuan was changed to Huan Tai, Emperor Zhou was called Ming, the temple name was Shizuo, the posthumous gift of Prince Yuan De was Emperor Xiaocheng, and the temple name was Shizong.

古文：尊其母刘良娣为皇太后。
现代文：追尊其母刘良娣为皇太后。
English: She succeeded her mother, Liu Liangyao, as empress dowager.

古文：以段达为纳言、右翊卫大将军、摄礼部尚书，王世充亦纳言、左翊卫大将军、摄吏部尚书，元文都内史令、左骁卫大将军，卢楚亦内史令，皇甫无逸兵部尚书、右武卫大将军，郭文懿内史侍郎，赵长文黄门侍郎，委以机务，为金书铁券，藏之宫掖。
现代文：以段达为纳言、右翊卫大将军、代理民部尚书，王世充也当纳言、左翊卫大将军、代理吏部尚书，元文都为内史令、左骁卫大将军，卢楚也是内史令，皇甫无逸任兵部尚书、右武卫大将军，郭文懿任内史侍郎，赵长文任黄门侍郎。委托他们以机密要务，并制作金书铁券，藏在宫廷里。
English: With Duanda as Nagan, General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, and Acting Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, Wang Shichong as Nagan, General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, and Acting Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, Yuanwen as the Secretary of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, General of the Left Division of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Lu Chu as the Secretary of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Emperor Fu Muxiu as the Secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, Guo Wenyi as the Secretary of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and Zhao Changwen as the Secretary of the Yellow Gate, they were entrusted with

古文：于时洛阳称段达等为 七贵 。
现代文：那时洛阳人称段达等七个人为 七贵 。
English: At this time, Luoyang said that Duanda and others were the seven treasures.

古文：未几，宇文化及立秦王子浩为天子，来次彭城，所经城邑多从逆党。
现代文：不久，宇文化及立秦王之子杨浩为天子，并带兵来驻扎在彭城，他们所经过的城邑，大多背叛朝廷，追随逆党。
English: Soon, Yang Hao, the son of Emperor Wu and Emperor Qin, became the emperor's son and brought soldiers to be stationed in Pengcheng. Most of the cities and towns they passed through betrayed the imperial court and followed the rebel party.

古文：侗惧，遣使者盖琮、马公政招怀李密。
现代文：杨侗惧怕，派使者盖琮、马公政，招降李密。
English: Yang Xuan was afraid, so he sent envoys Gaige and Ma Gongzheng to persuade Li Mi to surrender.

古文：密遂遣使请降，侗大悦，礼其使甚厚。
现代文：李密于是派使者来请求投降。杨侗很高兴，很礼遇他的使者。
English: Li Mi then sent an envoy to request the surrender. Yang Xuan was very pleased and treated his envoy very politely.

古文：即拜密为太尉、尚书令、魏国公，令拒化及。
现代文：即授李密为太尉、尚书令、魏国公，让他抵抗宇文化及。
English: Li Mi was immediately promoted to the rank of Tai Lai, Shang Shuling, and Wei Guogong, allowing him to resist the influence of Western culture.

古文：下书曰：我大隋之有天下，于兹三十八载。
现代文：杨侗下诏书说：我大隋有天下，到如今三十八年了。
English: The imperial edict issued by Yang Xuan said, "I have ruled the world since the Sui Dynasty, and it has been thirty-eight years since then.

古文：高祖文皇帝圣略神功，载造区夏。
现代文：高祖文皇帝圣略神功，创造天下。
English: Emperor Gao Zuwen created the world with great skill.

古文：世祖明皇帝则天法地，混一华戎。
现代文：世祖明皇帝效法天地，统一中华与四夷。
English: Emperor Ming, the founder of the world, followed the example of heaven and earth to unify China and the four barbarians.

古文：东暨蟠木，西通细柳，前逾丹徼，后越幽都。
现代文：东到蟠木，西通细柳，前过丹徼，后越幽都。
English: East to the birch, west to the willow, before the Danwei, after the Yue Yutu.

古文：日月之所临，风雨之所至，圆首方足，禀气食芼，莫不尽入提封，皆为臣妾。
现代文：凡是日月照耀的地方，风雨能到的地方，不管是圆首方足，还是生性食艹毛的人，都是我大隋的臣民。
English: Wherever the sun and moon shine, wherever the wind and rain can reach, whether it is a round head and square feet, or a mane-eater, they are all my great Sui subjects.

古文：加以宝贶毕集，灵瑞咸臻，作乐制礼，移风易俗。
现代文：加上宝贶毕集，灵瑞全至，作乐制礼，移风易俗。
English: In addition, Baojun Bi Ji, Ling Rui Quan Zi, make music ceremony, change the customs.

古文：智周寰海，万物咸受其赐，道济天下，百姓用而不知。
现代文：智慧周济四海，万物都受其恩赐；大道普济天下，百姓用了还不知道。
English: Wisdom encircles the four seas, and all things are blessed by her; the highways of the earth are paved with wisdom, but the people do not yet know how to use it.

古文：世祖往因历试，统临南服，自居皇极，顺兹望幸。
现代文：世祖明皇帝往日因为要到各地去看看，所以到了南方。我自居东都，盼望皇上驾临。
English: In the old days, Emperor Shizumin went to the south because he wanted to visit various places. I live in the eastern capital and look forward to the emperor's arrival.

古文：所以往岁省方，展礼肆觐，停銮驻跸，按驾清道，八屯如昔，七萃不移。
现代文：所以他往年巡视天下，放开让人朝见，銮驾停驻，按驾清道，天下各地一如往日安宁，皇上的卫队也忠贞不二。
English: Therefore, in previous years, he inspected the world, let people see what was going on, drove and stopped, and drove and cleared the way. All parts of the world were as peaceful as in the past, and the emperor's guard was also loyal.

古文：岂意衅起非常，逮于轩陛，灾生不意，延及冕旒。
现代文：岂料突起大祸，殃及皇上，灾生不测，祸及世祖。
English: Unexpectedly, a great calamity would arise and afflict the emperor, and disasters and misfortunes would befall the ancestors.

古文：奉讳之日，五情崩陨，攀号荼毒，不能自胜。
现代文：知道大祸的那天，我五内俱裂，痛哭不止，悲痛难胜。
English: On the day I learned of the disaster, I was heartbroken, weeping uncontrollably, grief-stricken.

古文：且闻之，自古代有屯剥，贼臣逆子，无世无之。
现代文：而且我听说，自古以来，每朝每代都有动乱，贼臣逆子，没哪个朝代没有。
English: Moreover, I heard that since ancient times, every dynasty and every generation has had turmoil, and there is no dynasty without a traitor.

古文：至如宇文化及，世传庸品。
现代文：至如宇文化及，是世人皆知的庸才。
English: He is a world-renowned mediocrity.

古文：其父述，往属时来，早沾厚遇，赐以婚媾，置之公辅，位尊九命，禄重万钟，礼极人臣，荣冠世表。
现代文：他的父亲宇文述，以前来投我大隋，很早就蒙受大恩，赐他家与我们通婚，把他摆在公辅的位置上，地位超过九命，爵禄重于万钟，礼极人臣，荣冠一世。
English: His father, Yu Wen, said that he had come to vote for me in the Great Sui Dynasty, and received a great favor very early, giving his family to marry with us, putting him in the position of a public servant, with a status exceeding nine lives, a peerage more than ten thousand bells, a very courteous person, and a crowned life.

古文：徒承海岳之恩，未有涓尘之益。
现代文：但他家白受山海一样的大恩，没有一点点用处。
English: But his family received the same great grace as the mountains and the sea, without the slightest use.

古文：化及以此下材，夙蒙顾盼，出入外内，奉望阶墀。
现代文：宇文化及这个不中用的东西，一向承蒙顾盼，跟随皇上出入，侍奉皇上。
English: The imperial culture and this useless thing have always followed the emperor's wishes, followed the emperor's entrances and exits, and served the emperor.

古文：昔陪籓国，统领禁卫，及从升皇祚，陪列九卿。
现代文：往日陪侍藩王，让他统领禁卫军。世祖当了天子后，又让他列入九卿之列。
English: In the past, he accompanied the king of the domain and let him lead the imperial guard. After the patriarch became the son of heaven, he also included him among the nine nobles.

古文：但本性凶狠，恣其贪秽，或交结恶党，或侵掠货财，事重刑篇，状盈狱简。
现代文：但他生性凶狠，恣意贪赃，时而交结恶党，时而抢掠财货，其罪行超过了刑法的极限，其罪状记满了监狱里的竹简。
English: However, he was born with a ferocious nature, he was greedy at will, he sometimes allied with evil parties and sometimes looted goods. His crimes exceeded the limits of criminal law, and his criminal record filled the prison's bamboo slips.

古文：在上不遗簪履，恩加草芥，应至死辜，每蒙恕免。
现代文：朝廷对他赏赐很多，可谓不遗簪履，恩典甚至泽及草芥。他本来按罪当死，但总被饶恕免死。
English: The imperial court rewarded him a lot, it can be said that they spared no effort, the grace was even great. He was originally sentenced to death, but he was always pardoned and spared death.

古文：三经除解，寻复本职，再徙边裔，仍即追还。
现代文：三次免职，继而又复职；两次放逐边裔，又随即让他回来。
English: Three times he was removed from office and then reinstated; twice he was exiled and then allowed to return.

古文：生成之恩，昊天罔极，奖擢之义，人事罕闻。
现代文：对他的活命之恩，可谓比天还高；给他的奖掖之义，可说是人间少有。
English: For him, the blessing of life is higher than the heavens; for him, the blessing of reward is rare on earth.

古文：化及枭獍为心，禽兽不若，纵毒兴祸，倾覆行宫。
现代文：宇文化及以枭獍为心，连禽兽都不如，放纵毒心，兴起祸端，倾覆行宫。
English: The culture of the universe and the heart of the dragonfly are inferior to even the beasts, indulge the poisonous heart, rise the calamity, and overturn the palace.

古文：诸王兄弟，一时残酷，痛暴行路，世不忍言。
现代文：诸王兄弟，一时被他杀尽，在大路上行暴，世人不忍开口评说。
English: He killed all the king's sons at one time, and made havoc in the highways; and the world was not able to open its mouth.

古文：有穷之在夏时，犬戎之于周代，衅辱之极，亦未是过。
现代文：有穷之在夏代，犬戎之对周朝，祸乱之极，也未超过现在。
English: In the Xia Dynasty, there was poverty, and in the Zhou Dynasty, there was chaos, but not more than now.

古文：朕所以刻骨崩心，饮胆尝血，瞻天视地，无处容身。
现代文：所以我刻骨铭心，饮胆尝血，望天看地，无处容身！
English: That's why I've committed it to memory, I've tasted blood, I've looked at the sky, I've looked at the earth, and there's no place for me!

古文：今王公卿士，庶僚百辟，咸以大宝鸿名，不可颠坠，元凶巨猾，须早夷殄，翼戴朕躬，嗣守宝位。
现代文：如今王公卿士，文武百官，都认为皇祚不可颠覆，元凶应早消灭，拥戴我继承皇位。我德行浅薄，难当大任。
English: Today, Wang Gongningshi and hundreds of civil and military officials all believe that the imperial edict cannot be overturned, and the culprit should be eliminated as soon as possible. They support my succession to the imperial throne. My virtue is shallow, and it is difficult for me to take on a great responsibility.

古文：顾惟寡薄，志不逮此。今者出黼扆而杖旄钺，释衰麻而擐甲胄，衔冤誓众，忍泪治兵，指日遄征，以平大盗。
现代文：如今我舍弃屏风而手执武器，脱下丧服而穿上甲胄，就是为了含冤誓众，忍泪治兵，指日遄征，以灭大盗。
English: Now I abandon the screen and hold the weapon in my hand, take off the mourning clothes and put on the armor, just to swear to the people, endure the tears, treat the soldiers, and collect the taxes in order to destroy the thieves.

古文：且化及伪立秦王之子，幽遏比于囚拘，其身自称霸相，专擅拟于九五。
现代文：而且，那宇文化及假装拥立秦王的儿子，实际上与把他囚禁起来是一样的。化及是一副横行霸道的样子，专权擅权与皇帝无异。
English: Moreover, the nawu culture and pretending to support the son of the Qin king is actually the same as imprisoning him. It turns into a domineering look, and the autocracy is no different from the emperor.

古文：履践禁御，据有宫闱，昂首扬眉，初无惭色。
现代文：他践踏禁地，占据行宫，抬头扬眉，并无一点惭愧之色。
English: He trampled on forbidden ground, occupied the palace, raised his eyebrows, and was not at all ashamed.

古文：衣冠朝望，外惧凶威，志士诚臣，内皆愤怨。
现代文：朝中士族，都怕这个凶徒，但他们心里都十分怨愤。
English: The sergeants of the morning are afraid of this villain, but they are very angry in their hearts.

古文：以我义师，顺彼天道，枭夷丑族，匪夕伊朝。
现代文：以我义师，又顺天道，消灭这个败类，不是今晚，就是明朝。
English: With the help of my righteous teacher and the guidance of heaven, I will exterminate this scum, either tonight or tomorrow morning.

古文：太尉、尚书令、魏公丹诚内发，宏略外举，率勤王之师，讨违天之逆。
现代文：太尉、尚书令、魏公李密，忠诚内发，宏略外举，率领勤王之师，讨伐违天的逆贼。
English: The captain, Shang Shuling, and Wei Gong Li Mi, loyal to the core, ambitious to the outside, led the king's teachers to fight against the traitors.

古文：果毅争先，熊罴竞逐，金鼓振詟，若火焚毛，锋刃纵横，如汤沃雪。
现代文：果敢之士急先恐后，熊熊之众竞相杀敌。金鼓振聋，如火烧毛；锋刃纵横，如除大雪。
English: The daredevils are in a hurry, and the raucous crowd is competing to kill the enemy. The golden drum is deafening, like a fire burning wool; the sharp blade is longitudinal and horizontal, like removing heavy snow.

古文：魏公志在匡济，投袂前驱，朕亲御六军，星言继进。
现代文：魏公李密志在匡时济世，投身而为前躯。我亲率六军，星夜继进。
English: Wei Gong Li Mi Zhi in the Kuang Dynasty, devoted himself to the front. I personally led the six armies, and the starry night followed.

古文：以此众战，以斯顺举，擘山可以动，射石可以入。
现代文：用这么多人去作战，用这次战争来顺应义举，即使劈山，也可以劈动；即使射石，也可以射入。
English: With so many people to fight, with this war to comply with the righteous move, even if splitting the mountain, can also be split; even if the projectile, can also be shot.

古文：况拥此人徒，皆有离德，京都侍卫，西忆乡家，江左淳民，南思邦邑，比来表书骆驿，人信相寻。
现代文：何况那宇文化及，虽拥有人徒，但都有离心：京都的侍卫，都西忆故乡；江东的淳朴百姓，都南思乡邦。这些时候，那里来的表章不断，人和信都接连不断。
English: Not to mention the Nahu culture and, although it has followers, it has centrifugal forces: the bodyguards in Kyoto, the west of the capital, remember their hometown; the simple people in the east of the river, the south of the capital, think of their hometown. At these times, there are more and more watches, people and letters coming from there.

古文：若王师一临，旧章暂睹，自应解甲倒戈，冰销叶散。
现代文：如王师一到，既见朝廷，他们自应解甲倒戈，叛军就会像冰块消融，如树叶飘散。
English: If, as soon as Wang Shi arrived, he saw the imperial court, they should disarm and defect, the rebels would melt like ice cubes and scatter like leaves.

古文：且闻化及自恣，天夺其心，杀戮不辜，挫辱人士，莫不道路仄目，号天踞地。
现代文：而且，听说宇文化及放纵其恶，天夺其人心，他杀辱无辜，折辱人士，人们莫不道路以目，号天踏地。
English: Moreover, I heard that the world culture and indulge its evil, the sky captures its people's hearts, he killed innocent, humiliated people, people must look at the road, the sky tramples the ground.

古文：朕今复仇雪耻，枭轘者一人，拯溺救焚，所哀者士庶。
现代文：我如今复仇雪耻，要杀的只有一人；拯救涂炭，所爱的是广大士民。
English: Now I'm avenging my shame. There's only one person I want to kill. It's the broad masses of the people I want to save.

古文：唯天鉴孔殷，祐我宗社，亿兆感义，俱会朕心。
现代文：只请老天爷明鉴我心，保佑我宗社。亿兆人有感于忠义，都与我的心意相同。
English: Just ask God to judge my heart and bless my family. Billions and trillions of people feel loyalty and are of the same mind as me.

古文：枭戮元凶，策勋饮至，四海交泰，称朕意焉。
现代文：消灭元凶，饮酒授勋，四海安泰，合我心意。
English: Yang Xuan was afraid, so he sent his emissaries, Gaige and Ma Gongzheng, to entice Li Mi. Li Mi requested to surrender, Yang Xuan was very happy and rewarded his emissaries.

古文：兵术军机，并受魏公节度。
现代文：兵术军机，一并受魏公李密节度。
English: Military art and military aircraft, both subject to Wei Gong and Li Mi.

古文：密见使者，大悦，北面拜伏，臣礼甚恭。
现代文：李密见了使者，很高兴，向北面拜伏于地，人臣之礼很恭谨。
English: Li Mi was very happy to see the envoy. He bowed to the ground facing north, and his courtesy was very respectful.

古文：密遂东拒化及。 七贵 颇不协，阴有相图之计。
现代文：李密于是向东抵抗宇文化及。 七贵 很不合拍，私下里有互相谋害之计。
English: Li Mi then went east to resist Yu Culture and the Shichigui, who were very much at odds with each other and secretly plotted to kill each other.

古文：未几，元文都、卢楚、郭文懿、赵长文等为世充所杀，皇甫无逸遁归长安。
现代文：不久，元文都、卢楚、郭文懿、赵长文等人，被王世充所杀，皇甫无逸逃到长安。
English: Soon, Yuan Wendu, Lu Chu, Guo Wenyi, Zhao Changwen and others were killed by Wang Shichong, and the emperor fled to Chang'an.

古文：世充诣侗所陈谢，辞情哀苦。
现代文：王世充到杨侗住所陈情谢罪，言辞、表情都很哀苦。
English: Wang Shichong went to Yang Hui's residence to explain the reason, and his words and facial expressions were very sad.

古文：侗以为至诚，命之上殿，被发为盟，誓无贰志。
现代文：杨侗还认为他很忠诚，让他上殿，世充披发为盟，发誓没有二心。
English: Yang Xuan thought Wang Shicheng was very sincere and ordered him to go to the palace to speak. Wang Shicheng swore an oath, saying that he had no intention of being disloyal.

古文：自是侗无所关预。
现代文：从此杨侗什么都不知道了。
English: From then on, Yang Mi no longer participated in pre-imperial politics.

古文：侗心不能平，遂与记室陆士季谋图世充，事不果而止。
现代文：杨侗心中愤愤不平，于是与记室陆士季谋划杀王世充，事情没有结果，就作罢了。
English: Yang Xuan was indignant in his heart, so he plotted to kill Wang Shichong with the recorder Lu Shiji. The matter did not bear fruit, so it was abandoned.

古文：及世充破李密，众望益归之，遂自为郑王，总百揆，加九锡，备法物，侗不能禁也。
现代文：到王世充破了李密之后，众望更加归向王世充。世充于是自封为郑王，总理大政，位加九锡，备法驾，杨侗不能禁止。
English: After Wang Shicheng defeated Li Miao, people's hopes turned more towards Wang Shicheng. Shicheng then proclaimed himself as King Zheng, Prime Minister of the Great Political Power, adding nine states, preparing laws, and Yang Xuan could not be banned.

古文：段达、云定兴等十人入见于侗曰： 天命不常，郑王功德甚盛，愿陛下揖让告禅，遵唐、虞之迹。 
现代文：段达、云定兴等十人，入见杨侗说： 天命无常，郑王功德很大，望陛下揖让告禅，遵尧舜之遗迹。 
English: Danda, Yun Dingxing and other ten people came to see Yang Jie and said, "Fate is fickle, Zheng Wang's merits are great, and I hope His Majesty will allow me to teach Zen and follow his legacy."

古文：侗闻之怒曰： 天下者，高祖之天下，东都者，世祖之东都。
现代文：杨侗一听，十分震怒，说： 天下是高祖的天下，东都是世祖的东都。
English: Hearing this, Yang Xuan was very angry and said: The world is the world of Gao Zu, and the East is the East of the ancestors.

古文：若隋德未衰，此言不可发；必天命有改，亦何论于禅让！
现代文：如隋德未衰，这话就不该说；如天命有改动，又何必说什么禅让？
English: If Sui and De did not decline, this should not be said; if there is a change in the fate of heaven, why should we say anything?

古文：公等或先朝旧臣，绩宣上代，或勤王立节，身服轩冕，忽有斯言，朕复当何所望！ 
现代文：你们有的是先朝的老臣，立功绩于上代；有的勤王立功，身穿官服，头戴官帽，忽然说出这种话来，我又有什么指望？ 
English: Some of you are veteran ministers of the previous dynasties, who have made great achievements in the previous generation; some are diligent kings who have made great achievements, wearing official uniforms and official hats, and suddenly say such words, what hope do I have?

古文：神色懔然，侍卫者莫不流汗。
现代文：杨侗神色凛然，侍卫莫不吓得流汗。
English: Yang Hui looked very dignified, and the guards were so scared that they were sweating.

古文：既而退朝，对良娣而泣。
现代文：退朝以后，杨侗对良娣哭泣。
English: Then he retreated to the palace and wept in front of his wife.

古文：世充更使人谓侗曰： 今海内未定，须得长君。
现代文：王世充又让人对杨侗说： 现在海内未定，需要君长。
English: Wang Shichong also had someone say to Yang Xuanlu: "The situation at sea is still undecided, we need a ruler."

古文：待四方乂安，复子明辟，必若前盟，义不违负。 
现代文：等天下安定后，再恢复你的帝位，一定像以前向你发誓说的那样，在道义上不违背你，不辜负你。 
English: After the world is stable, when I restore your imperial throne, I will, as I swore to you before, not violate your morals and live up to your expectations.

古文：侗不得已，逊位于世充，遂被幽于含凉殿。
现代文：杨侗不得已，让位于王世充，他于是被幽禁在含凉殿。
English: Yang Xuan had no choice but to give the position of Zen master to Wang Shichong, and he was banished to the Hall of Coolness.

古文：世充僭伪号，封为潞国公，邑五千户。
现代文：王世充称帝后，封杨侗为潞国公，食邑五千户。
English: Wang Shichong was named the empress, Yang Jie was named the prince of Shandong Province, and five thousand households in the county were provided with food.

古文：月馀，宇文儒童、裴仁基等谋诛世充，复尊立侗，事泄，并见害。
现代文：一个多月后，宇文儒童、裴仁基等人谋划杀王世充，再拥立杨侗。事情泄漏，都被杀害。
English: More than a month later, Uwen Rudeong, Pei Renji and others plotted to kill Wang Shichong and reinstate Yang Qi. The affair leaked out, and they were all killed.

古文：世充兄世恽因劝世充害侗，以绝民望。
现代文：王世充的兄长王世恽，因此劝世充害死杨侗，以绝民望。
English: Wang Shichong's elder brother, Wang Shihong, therefore persuaded Shihong to kill Yang Hui in order to crush the people's hope.

古文：世充遣其侄行本赍鸩诣侗所曰： 愿皇帝饮此酒。 
现代文：王世充派他的侄儿王行本，带着毒酒到杨侗处，说： 望皇上喝了这酒。 
English: Wang Shichong sent his nephew Wang Xingpen to take the poisoned wine to Yang Hui, saying, "Emperor Wang drank this wine.

古文：侗知不免，请与母相见，不许。
现代文：杨侗知道难免一死，请求与母亲相见，行本不许可。
English: Knowing that she could not be spared, Yang Hui asked to see her mother, but was not allowed.

古文：遂布席焚香礼佛，咒曰： 从今以去，愿不生帝王尊贵之家。 
现代文：杨侗于是以布为席，焚香拜佛，咒道： 从今以后，望再也不生在帝王尊贵之家。 
English: So Yang Xuan used cloth as a seat, burned incense and worshipped the Buddha, and chanted: From now on, hope will never be born in the noble house of the emperor.

古文：于是仰药。不能时绝，更以帛缢之。
现代文：于是喝药，不能应时绝命，王行本又用布帛缢杀他。
English: So he drank the medicine, unable to die in time, and Wang Xingben killed him with a piece of cloth.

古文：世充伪谥为恭皇帝。
现代文：王世充装模作样，谥之为 恭皇帝 。
English: Wang Shiyi put on a show and pretended to be Emperor Gong.

古文：齐王暕，字世朏，小字阿孩。
现代文：○杨暕齐王杨暕，字世月出，小名叫阿孩。
English: ○ Yang Jieqi Wang Yang Jie, his nickname is Shijie Yue, and his nickname is Ayan.

古文：美容仪，疏眉目，少为高祖所爱。
现代文：长相俊美，浓眉大眼，很小就为高祖所宠爱。
English: Good-looking, with thick eyebrows and large eyes, he was a favorite of Gao Zu at a very young age.

古文：开皇中，立为豫章王，邑千户。
现代文：开皇年间，立为豫章王，食邑千户。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong, it was established as Yuzhangwang, serving thousands of households.

古文：及长，颇涉经史，尤工骑射。
现代文：长大后，读了不少经史之书，尤其善长骑马射箭。
English: When he grew up, he read a lot of books on history, and he was especially good at horseback archery.

古文：初为内史令。仁寿中，拜扬州总管沿淮以南诸军事。
现代文：最初担任内史令，仁寿年间，授为扬州总管统领淮河以东军事。
English: At first, he served as the internal history commander, and during his life, he was awarded the Yangzhou General Administration to lead the military east of the Huaihe River.

古文：炀帝即位，进封齐王，增邑四千户。
现代文：炀帝即位，晋封为齐王，增加食邑四千户。
English: Emperor Qian ascended to the throne and was promoted to the title of King Qi, increasing the number of food villages by four thousand.

古文：大业二年，帝初入东都，盛陈卤簿，暕为军导。
现代文：大业二年，炀帝刚到东都时，杨暕向炀帝呈上许多户籍图册，担任军导。
English: In the second year of the Taie period, when Emperor Xizong had just arrived in Dongdu, Yang Zhe presented Emperor Xizong with many household registration albums and served as his military guide.

古文：寻转豫州牧。
现代文：不久，改任豫州刺史。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the post of Yuzhou chief historian.

古文：俄而元德太子薨，朝野注望，咸以暕当嗣。
现代文：后来，元德太子去世，朝内外都很关注此事，都认为杨暕应为继承人。
English: Later, when Prince Yuan De passed away, both inside and outside the imperial court were very concerned about the matter, and they all believed that Yang Mi should be the successor.

古文：帝又敕吏部尚书牛弘妙选官属，公卿由是多进子弟。
现代文：炀帝命吏部尚书牛弘精选官员，王公大臣因此多推荐自己的子弟。
English: Emperor Xizong's personal secretary, Shangshu Niuhong, was a select official, and Wang Gong, the minister, therefore recommended his own son.

古文：明年，转雍州牧，寻徙河南尹、开府仪同三司。
现代文：第二年，转任雍州刺史，不久改任河南尹、开府仪同三司。
English: In the second year, he was transferred to the post of Yongzhou chief historian, and soon he was transferred to the post of Henan Yin, Kaifu Yi and Three Departments.

古文：元德太子左右二万馀人悉隶于暕，宠遇益隆，自乐平公主及诸戚属竞来致礼，百官称谒，填咽道路。
现代文：元德太子身边二万多人都归于杨暕，皇上的恩宠更加优厚，从乐平公主到各亲属都争相致礼，百官朝拜，以致阻塞了道路。
English: More than twenty thousand people around Prince Yuan De all belonged to Yang Hui, and the emperor's grace was even more generous. From Princess Leping to all relatives, they all bowed to each other, and all officials worshiped, so that the road was blocked.

古文：暕颇骄恣，昵近小人，所行多不法，遣乔令则、刘虔安、裴该、皇甫谌、库狄仲锜、陈智伟等求声色狗马。
现代文：杨暕很骄纵，亲近小人，做的事大多不合法规。常派乔令则、刘虔安、裴该、皇甫谌、库狄仲钅奇、陈智伟等人寻求声色狗马。
English: Yang Hui is very arrogant, close to villains, and most of what he does is illegal. The regulars Qiaoling Ze, Liu Qian'an, Pei Gao, Huang Fuxi, Ku Di, Zhong Rongqi, Chen Zhiwei and others are looking for a sound horse.

古文：令则等因此放纵，访人家有女者，辄矫暕命呼之，载入暕宅，因缘藏隐，恣行淫秽，而后遣之。
现代文：乔令则等人因此放纵，访得人家有美女的，就假传杨暕的命令叫来，运到杨暕府内，隐藏起来，恣意淫乱，然后抛弃。
English: Qiaoling and others indulged in this way. If they visited someone who had a beautiful woman, they would call them on the fake order of Yang Hui, transport them to Yang Hui's residence, hide them, fornicate with them at will, and then abandon them.

古文：仲锜、智伟二人诣陇西，挝炙诸胡，责其名马，得数匹以进于。
现代文：仲钅奇、智伟两人到陇西，向胡人抢取食物，勒索名马，得数匹马进献给杨暕。
English: The two men, Zhong Rongqi and Zhi Wei, went to Shaanxi, robbed the Hu people of food, extorted famous horses, and won several horses to donate to Yang Hui.

古文：暕令还主，仲锜等诈言王赐，将归于家，暕不之知也。
现代文：杨暕命他们送还主人，仲钅奇等人谎称是胡王的赏赐品，将马归为己有，杨暕却不知真实情况。
English: Yang Hui ordered them to return the horse to its owner. Zhong Rongqi and others falsely claimed that the horse was a gift from King Hu and took it as their own. However, Yang Hui did not know the true situation.

古文：又乐平公主尝奏帝，言柳氏女美者，帝未有所答。
现代文：乐平公主曾上奏隋炀帝，说有一个柳家的女子长得很美，炀帝当时没有说什么。
English: Princess Leping once appealed to the Sui and Qian Emperors, saying that there was a woman from the Liu family who was very beautiful. The Qian Emperors did not say anything at the time.

古文：久之，主复以柳氏进于暕，暕习纳之。
现代文：过了很久，公主就把柳氏女子进献给杨暕，杨暕收纳了柳氏。
English: After a long time, the princess presented the willow girl to Yang Hui, and Yang Hui accepted the willow.

古文：其后帝问主柳氏女所在，主曰： 在齐王所。 
现代文：过后炀帝问公主柳家的美女在哪儿，公主回答说： 在齐王府。 
English: Afterward, Emperor Zhen asked the princess where the beautiful woman from the Liu family was, and the princess replied: In the palace of King Qi.

古文：帝不悦。
现代文：炀帝很不高兴。
English: Gao Di was not happy to hear this.

古文：暕于东都营第，大门无故而崩，听事栿中折，识者以为不祥。
现代文：杨暕在东都营造府第，大门却无故倒塌，大堂的房梁从中折断，有见识的人认为是不祥之兆。
English: Yang Hui built a palace in Dongdu, but the gate collapsed for no reason, and the beam of the hall broke off from it. People with insight thought it was an ominous sign.

古文：其后从帝幸榆林，暕督后军步骑五万，恆与帝相去数十里而舍。
现代文：后杨暕跟随炀帝到榆林，杨暕督五万人的步兵、骑兵在后，始终跟炀帝保持几十里的距离而驻军。
English: Later, Yang Pi followed Emperor Xizong to Yulin. Yang Pi's 50,000 infantry and cavalry followed, always keeping a distance of several dozen miles from Emperor Xizong.

古文：会帝于汾阳宫大猎，诏暕以千骑入围。
现代文：一次炀帝在汾阳宫打猎，令杨暕用一千骑兵参加围猎。
English: Once, Emperor Gong was hunting in the Poyang Palace, and he ordered Yang Pi to take part in the hunt with a thousand cavalry.

古文：暕大获麋鹿以献，而帝未有得也，乃怒从官，皆言为暕左右所遏，兽不得前。
现代文：杨暕猎获许多麋鹿进献给炀帝，而炀帝自己却未能获得猎物，于是向随从官员发怒。随从们都说是因为杨暕身边的人阻拦了道路，野兽不能前来。
English: Yang Hui hunted a lot of elk for Emperor Xizang, but Emperor Xizang himself could not get the prey, so he was angry with the officials. The followers all said that because the people around Yang Hui blocked the road, the beast could not come.

古文：帝于是发怒，求暕罪失。
现代文：炀帝因此动怒，要人查寻杨暕的过失。
English: As a result, Emperor Yao became angry and gathered Yang's sins.

古文：时制县令无故不得出境，有伊阙令皇甫诩幸于暕，违禁将之汾阳宫。
现代文：当时规定县令无故不能出境，有个伊阙县令皇甫诩受杨暕宠爱，违背禁令将到汾阳宫。
English: At that time, it was stipulated that the county magistrate could not leave the country without reason. There was an Ili county magistrate, Emperor Fuxi, who was favored by Yang Hui and would go to the Poyang Palace in violation of the ban.

古文：又京兆人达奚通有妾王氏善歌，贵游宴聚，多或要致，于是展转亦出入王家。
现代文：又有个京城的人叫达奚通，他的小妾王氏善长唱歌，贵族交游并宴饮欢聚时，常常邀请她，她于是出入于齐王家。
English: There was also a man in Beijing called Daju Tong. His concubine Wang Shizhenlong sang, and the aristocrats often invited her when they traveled and had banquets and gatherings. She then went in and out of the Qi royal family.

古文：御史韦德裕希旨劾暕，帝令甲士千馀大索暕第，因穷治其事。
现代文：御史韦德裕按皇上旨意弹劾杨暕，炀帝命令一千多带甲士兵，搜查杨暕的府第，以彻底追查他的事情。
English: Emperor Wei Deyu impeached Yang Jie in accordance with the emperor's will, and Emperor Gao ordered more than a thousand soldiers to search Yang Jie's residence to thoroughly investigate his case.

古文：暕妃韦氏者，民部尚书冲之女也，早卒，暕遂与妃姊元氏妇通，遂产一女，外人皆不得知。
现代文：杨暕的妃子韦氏，是民部尚书韦冲的女儿，较早死去。杨暕于是跟韦妃的姐姐元氏妇私通，生下一个女孩，外人都不知道。
English: Yang Hui's concubine Wei, the daughter of Shang Shu Wei Chong of the Ministry of People's Affairs, died earlier. Yang Hui then had an affair with Wei's sister Yuan, and gave birth to a girl, unknown to outsiders.

古文：阴引乔令则于第内酣宴，令则称庆，脱暕帽以为欢乐。
现代文：杨暕暗中召引乔令则在府内设宴饮酒，令则庆贺此事，就脱掉杨暕的帽子以助欢乐。
English: Yang Xuan secretly summoned Qiao Ling to hold a banquet and drink alcohol in the mansion, while Ling celebrated the event by taking off Yang Xuan's hat to add to the fun.

古文：召相工令遍视后庭，相工指妃姊曰： 此产子者当为皇后。王贵不可言。 
现代文：杨暕又招来看相的人让他遍视后庭，看相的人指着元氏妇说： 这个生孩子的妇人要做皇后，王爷您富贵不可言。 
English: Yang Xuan also invited the photographer to let him look around the backyard. The photographer pointed to the Yuan's wife and said: This woman who gave birth to a child wants to be a queen. Your wealth is beyond words.

古文：时国无储副，暕自谓次当得立。
现代文：当时国家没立太子，杨暕自己认为按照次序当立。
English: At that time, the country did not have a crown prince, but Yang Hui himself believed that he should be crowned according to the order.

古文：又以元德太子有三子，内常不安，阴挟左道，为厌胜之事。
现代文：又因为元德太子有三个儿子，杨暕心中常不安定，暗中行使邪道，做了很多厌胜之类的鬼事。
English: Also, because Prince Yuan De had three sons, Yang Hui was often unstable in his heart, secretly practised evil ways, and did a lot of evil things such as hating to win.

古文：至是，事皆发，帝大怒，斩令则等数人，妃姊赐死，暕府僚皆斥之边远。
现代文：到这时，这些事情全部暴露，炀帝大怒，杀了乔令则等数人，元氏妇赐死，杨暕的府僚都被放逐到边远地方。
English: By this time, all of these things were exposed, Emperor Gong was furious, killed Qiaoling and several others, sentenced Yuan's wife to death, and banished Yang Hui's ministers to remote places.

古文：时赵王杲犹在孩孺，帝谓侍臣曰： 朕唯有暕一子，不然者，当肆诸市朝，以明国宪也。 
现代文：这时赵王杨杲还是个小孩，炀帝对侍臣说： 我只有杨暕这一个儿子，不是这样的话，应当让他死于市朝，来显明国家法令。 
English: At this time, Zhao Wang Yang Jie was still a child. Emperor Zhou said to his vassal: I only have one son, Yang Jie. If this is not the case, he should be allowed to die in the capital to show the national decree.

古文：暕自是恩宠日衰，虽为京尹，不复关预时政。
现代文：杨暕从此受的恩宠一天天减少，虽然是京城太守，却不再参与当时的政治。
English: Since then, Yang's favor has been waning. Although he is the Beijing Yin, he is no longer involved in current politics.

古文：帝恆令武贲郎将一人监其府事，暕有微失，武贲辄奏之。
现代文：炀帝又常令武贲中郎将专人监视杨暕府的事情，杨暕有小过失，中郎将就奏到皇上那里。
English: Emperor Xuan also often ordered the middle brother Wu Xi to send a special person to monitor the affairs of Yang Xi Prefecture. If Yang Xi made a small mistake, the middle brother would report it to the emperor.

古文：帝亦常虑暕生变，所给左右，皆以老弱，备员而已。
现代文：炀帝也常常担心杨暕发动政变，所给的随从，都是老弱之人，只算充数罢了。
English: Emperor Xuan was also often worried that Yang would have a change of fortune. The people sent to Yang's side were all old and weak, just to make up the numbers.

古文：暕每怀危惧，心不自安。
现代文：杨暕常常感到惧怕，内心不能安定。
English: Yang Hui often feels fear and is not stable inside.

古文：又帝在江都宫，元会，暕具法服将朝，无故有血从裳中而下。
现代文：有一次，炀帝在江都宫，元会日，杨暕穿着法服上朝，无故有血从衣裳中流下。
English: On one occasion, Emperor Xizong was in the Jiangdu Palace, and on the day of the First Emperor's New Year's Day, Yang Hui was wearing a legal suit. For no reason, blood flowed down from his clothes.

古文：又坐斋中，见群鼠数十，至前而死，视皆无头。
现代文：又一次坐在家中，看见一群老鼠有几十个，到面前就死了，老鼠一个个都没有头。
English: Once again, I was sitting at home and saw a group of dozens of mice. They died in front of me. None of the mice had heads.

古文：暕意甚恶之。
现代文：杨暕很恐惧。
English: Yang Hui was terrified.

古文：俄而化及作乱，兵将犯跸，帝闻，顾谓萧后曰： 得非阿孩邪？ 
现代文：不久，宇文化及变乱，乱兵将要进犯宫内，炀帝听到后，回头对萧后说： 莫非是阿孩吧？ 
English: Soon, the imperial culture and chaos, the soldiers of chaos will invade the palace. After hearing this, Emperor Xuan turned back to Queen Xiao and said: Isn't he a child?

古文：其见疏忌如此。
现代文：他被疏远猜忌到如此程度。
English: He has been alienated and mistrusted to such an extent.

古文：化及复令人捕暕，暕时尚卧未起，贼既进，暕惊曰： 是何人？ 
现代文：宇文化及又令人捕杀杨暕，杨暕当时还睡着没有起来，乱兵已经进来了，杨暕吃惊地问： 是谁？ 
English: Yang Mi, who was still asleep at the time, did not get up. The soldiers had already entered. Yang Mi asked in surprise: Who is it?

古文：莫有报者，暕犹谓帝令捕之，因曰： 诏使且缓。兒不负国家。 
现代文：来人没有回答，杨暕还认为是炀帝下令逮捕他，因而说： 传诏的使者且慢，我没有做对不起国家的事。 
English: The man did not answer, and Yang Zhe still thought that Emperor Zhai had ordered his arrest, so he said: "Envoy of the proclamation, wait a minute, I have not done anything to offend the country.

古文：贼于是曳至街而斩之，及其二子亦遇害。
现代文：乱兵于是把他拉到街上杀了，他的两个儿子也一起遇害。
English: The soldiers then dragged him into the street and killed him, along with his two sons.

古文：暕竟不知杀者为谁。时年三十四。
现代文：杨暕竟不知道杀他的是谁，死时年仅三十四岁。
English: Yang Hui did not know who killed him, and he was only thirty-four years old when he died.

