古文：二十有一年春，狄侵卫。
现代文：二十一年春季，狄人入侵卫国。
English: In the spring of the twenty-first year, the Di people invaded the motherland.

古文：宋人、齐人、楚人盟于鹿上。
现代文：宋国、齐国、楚国在鹿上盟会。
English: The Song, Qi, and Chu kingdoms are united in the Shishang League.

古文：夏，大旱。
现代文：夏季，大旱。
English: Summer, drought.

古文：秋，宋公、楚子、陈侯、蔡侯、郑伯、许男、曹伯会于盂。
现代文：秋季，宋公、楚子、陈侯、蔡侯、郑伯、许男、曹伯在盂地盟会。
English: In autumn, Song Gong, Chu Zi, Chen Hou, Cai Hou, Zheng Bo, Xu Man and Cao Bo were at the Fengtian League.

古文：执宋公以伐宋。
现代文：在会上楚国抓住了宋襄公来攻打宋国
English: At the meeting, Chu seized Song Xiang Gong to attack Song.

古文：冬，公伐邾。
现代文：冬季，僖公攻打邾国。
English: In winter, Shigong attacked and conquered Yunnan.

古文：楚人使宜申来献捷。
现代文：楚国派遣宜申来献上捷报。
English: It is appropriate for Chu to send an application to present the successful report.

古文：十有二月癸丑，公会诸侯盟于薄，释宋公。
现代文：十二月癸丑日，僖公与各诸侯在薄地盟会，释放了宋襄公。
English: On the Day of the Ugly Duckling in December, the Duke of Xing and all the princes held a meeting in Boudi and released Prince Song Xiang.

古文：二十一年春，宋人为鹿上之盟，以求诸侯于楚。楚人许之。
现代文：二十一年春季，宋国和齐国人、楚国人在鹿上举行了会盟，便向楚国要求当时归附楚国的中原诸侯奉自己为盟主，楚国人答应了。
English: In the spring of the twenty-first year, the people of Song and Qi and the people of Chu held an alliance in Shuguang. They asked the Central Plains princes, who were then attached to Chu, to serve as the leaders of the alliance. The people of Chu agreed.

古文：公子目夷曰： 小国争盟，祸也。
现代文：公子目夷说： 小国争当盟主，这是灾祸。
English: Prince Menyi said, "It is a calamity for a small country to vie for leadership.

古文：宋其亡乎，幸而后败。 
现代文：宋国或许会被灭亡吧！失败得晚一点，就算运气了。 
English: Maybe Song will be destroyed! If it fails later, it's just luck.

古文：夏，大旱，公欲焚巫尪。
现代文：夏季，很久没有下雨，干旱得很。
English: In the summer, it hasn't rained for a long time, and it's very dry.

古文：臧文仲曰： 非旱备也。
现代文：僖公要烧死巫人和仰面朝天的怪人。臧文仲说： 这不是解决旱灾的办法。
English: "This is not the way to solve the drought," he said.

古文：修城郭，贬食省用，务穑劝分，此其务也。
现代文：修理城墙、节用饮食、节省开支、致力农事、劝人施舍，这是应该做的。
English: To repair the walls, to be frugal in eating and drinking, to be frugal in spending, to be industrious in farming, to exhort to almsgiving, these are the things to be done.

古文：巫尪何为？
现代文：巫人、仰面朝天的怪人能做什么？
English: What can a sorcerer, a weirdo with his back to the sky, do?

古文：天欲杀之，则如勿生，若能为旱，焚之滋甚。 
现代文：上天要杀他们，就应当不生他们；如果他们能造成旱灾，烧死他们会更厉害。 
English: If the heavens want to kill them, they should not give birth to them; if they can cause drought, they will be burned to death.

古文：公从之。
现代文：僖公听从了。
English: Cao Gong obeyed him.

古文：是岁也，饥而不害。
现代文：这一年，虽有饥荒，却没有伤害百姓。
English: This year, although there was famine, it did not harm the people.

古文：秋，诸侯会宋公于盂。
现代文：秋季，楚成王、陈穆公、蔡庄公、郑文公、许僖公、曹共公在盂地会见宋襄公。
English: In autumn, King Chu Cheng, Chen Mu Gong, Cai Zhuang Gong, Zheng Wen Gong, Xu Rong Gong and Cao Gong Gong met with Song Xiang Gong in Handan.

古文：子鱼曰： 祸其在此乎！
现代文：子鱼说： 祸根子就在这里吧！
English: The young fish said: The root of the trouble is right here!

古文：君欲已甚，其何以堪之？ 
现代文：国君的欲望太过分，那怎能忍受得了？ 
English: The prince's desire is too much, how can he bear it?

古文：于是楚执宋公以伐宋。
现代文：在会上楚国抓住了宋襄公来攻打宋国。
English: At the meeting, Chu seized Song Xiang Gong to attack Song.

古文：冬，会于薄以释之。
现代文：冬季，诸侯在薄地会盟，释放了宋襄公。
English: In winter, the princes made an alliance in the plain and released Song Xianggong.

古文：子鱼曰： 祸犹未也，未足以惩君。 
现代文：子鱼说： 祸殃还没有完，这点够不上惩罚国君。 
English: The little fish said, "The calamity is not over yet, this is not enough to punish the sovereign."

古文：任、宿、须句、颛臾，风姓也，实司大皞与有济之祀，以服事诸夏。
现代文：任国、宿国、须句、颛臾，都姓风，主管太皞和济水神的祭祀，而服从中原各国。
English: Ren Guo, Zhou Guo, Su Guo, and Zou were all surnamed Feng. They were in charge of the sacrifices to Taishan and the god of water, and served all the countries in the Central Plains.

古文：邾人灭须句，须句子来奔，因成风也。
现代文：邾国人灭亡了须句，须句君逃亡到鲁国来，这是由于须句是成风的娘家。
English: It was because of the popularity of sukuk that the people of Shanshan died out, and the ruler of sukuk fled to Lu.

古文：成风为之言于公曰： 崇明祀，保小寡，周礼也。蛮夷猾夏，周祸也。
现代文：成风对僖公说： 尊崇明祀，保护弱小，这是周的礼仪；蛮夷扰乱中原，这是周的祸患。
English: Cheng Feng said to Zou Gong: It is Zhou's etiquette to respect and venerate the sacred, and to protect the weak; it is Zhou's misfortune when barbarians disturb the Central Plains.

古文：若封须句是崇皞、济而修祀纾祸也。 
现代文：如果封了须句国的爵位，这是尊崇太皞、济水神而修明祭祀和缓解祸患啊。 
English: If the peerage of Sukogoku is sealed, this is to respect Taiko, the god of water, and to make sacrifices and alleviate the disaster.

