古文：辛丑，以宣徽南院使向训为权东京留守，以端明殿学士王朴为副留守。壬寅，车驾发京师，丁未，李穀奏，自寿州引军退守正阳。
现代文：显德三年春正月三日，李谷上奏，在上窑打败淮南贼军。四日，征发丁壮民夫十万人修筑京城外大城。六日，诏令于本月八日前往淮南。八日，御驾从京城出发。十三日，李谷上奏，从寿州领军退守正阳。
English: On the third day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Xiande, Li Gu ascended and defeated the Huainan thief army in Shangyao. On the fourth day, Ding Zhuang sent 100,000 people to build a large city outside Beijing. On the sixth day, the imperial decree went to Huainan on the eighth day of this month. On the eighth day, he set out from Beijing. On the thirteenth day, Li Gu ascended and led the army to retreat from Shoushou to Zhengyang.

古文：辛亥，李重进奏，大破淮贼于正阳，斩首二万余级，伏尸三十里，临阵斩贼大将刘彦贞，生擒偏将咸师朗已下，获戎甲三十万事、马五百匹。
现代文：十七日，李重进上奏，在正阳大败淮南贼军，斩首二万余级，伏尸三十里，临阵斩杀大将刘彦贞，活捉偏将咸师朗，获得铠甲三十万副、战马五百匹。
English: On the 17th, Li Chongjin played the first half, defeated the Huainan bandits in Zhengyang, beheaded more than 20,000 ranks, buried 30 miles, killed the general Liu Yanzhen, captured the general Ham Shilang alive, and obtained 300,000 pairs of armor and 500 horses.

古文：先是，李穀驻军于寿春城下，以攻其城，既而淮南援军大至，乃与将佐谋曰： 贼军舟棹将及正阳，我师无水战之备，万一桥梁不守，则大军隔绝矣，不如全师退守正阳浮桥，以俟銮辂。 
现代文：此前，李谷驻军于寿春城下，攻下寿春城，不久淮南援军大批赶来，李谷便与将佐们商谋说： 贼军舟船就要到正阳，我军没有做水战的准备，万一桥梁失守，就与大军隔断了。不如全军退守正阳浮桥，以待御驾。 
English: Previously, Li Gu garrisoned troops under Shouchun Castle and captured Shouchun Castle. Soon, a large number of Huainan reinforcements arrived. Li Gu then negotiated with the generals and said: The pirate boat is about to arrive in Zhengyang. Our army did not prepare for a water battle. If the bridge is lost, it will be cut off from the main army. It is better for the whole army to retreat to the Zhengyang floating bridge and wait for your arrival.

古文：诸将皆以为然，遂燔其粮草而退。
现代文：众将都认为有道理，于是焚烧了自己的粮草而退。
English: The generals all thought it was reasonable, so they burned their own grain and grass and retreated.

古文：军回之际无复严整，公私之间颇多亡失，淮北役夫亦有陷于贼境者。
现代文：退军时，部伍不再严密整齐，公家与私人，都有所丢失，淮北征来的民夫，也有陷于敌占土地上的。
English: When the army retreated, the ranks were no longer neat and tidy, both public and private were lost, and the civil servants conscripted by Huaibei were also trapped on enemy-occupied land.

古文：帝闻之，急诏侍卫都指挥使李重进率师赴之。
现代文：世宗听到后，急令侍卫都指挥使李重进领兵前往。
English: After hearing from Sejong, he quickly ordered the guards to command Li Chongjin to lead the troops.

古文：沮吾事者斩！ 比至正阳，而重进先至，未及食而战。
现代文：这时淮南贼军乘李谷退军之机，发动战船数百艘，沿淮河而上，而且摆开切断浮桥的架势，刘彦贞领大军列成战阵推进。
English: At this time, the Huainan thief army took the opportunity of Li Gu's retreat to launch hundreds of warships along the Huai River, and set up a position to cut off the pontoon bridge. Liu Yanzhen led the army to advance into a battle formation.

古文：彦贞施利刃于拒马，又刻木为兽，号捷马牌，以皮囊布铁蒺藜于地。周兵见而知其怯，一鼓而败之，彦贞死于阵。杀获之外，降者三千余人，皆为我将赵晁所杀。
现代文：李重进在到达正阳之后，听到淮军迫近，便率领众将过桥前进，与贼军相遇，李重进等人合力攻击，一战就打败了他们。除杀死和被俘的以外，投降的有三千多人，都被我方将领赵晁杀掉。
English: After Li Chongjin arrived in Zhengyang, he heard that the Huai army was approaching, and he led the crowd to cross the bridge and met the thief army. Li Chongjin and others attacked together and defeated them in the first battle. In addition to those killed and captured, more than three thousand people surrendered, all of whom were killed by our general Zhao Xi.

古文：甲寅，车驾至正阳。
现代文：二十日，世宗到达正阳。
English: On the 20th, Sejong arrived in Zhengyang.

古文：以侍卫都指挥使李重进为淮南道行营都招讨使，命宰臣李穀判寿州行府事。
现代文：以侍卫都指挥使李重进为淮南道行营都招讨使，命宰臣李谷主持寿州行府事务。
English: Li Chongjin, as the commander of the bodyguards, invited the envoys to the Huainan Road encampment, and ordered the Vice-Minister Li Gu to preside over the affairs of Shoushou.

古文：乙卯，车驾渡淮。
现代文：二十二日，世宗渡过淮河。
English: On the 22nd, Shizong crossed the Huai River.

古文：丙辰，至寿州城下，营于州西北淝水之阳，诏移正阳浮桥于下蔡。
现代文：二十三日，到达寿州城下，扎营在寿州西北面淝水北岸，诏令将正阳浮桥移到下蔡。
English: On the 23rd, they arrived at the foot of Shoushu Castle and camped on the north shore of Surabaya in the northwest of Shoushu. The imperial edict moved the Zhengyang Floating Bridge to Lower Cai.

古文：二月丙寅，幸下蔡。斩前济州马军都指挥使康俨于路左，坐桥道不谨也。
现代文：二十八日，今上赵匡胤上奏，在涡口打败淮南贼军一万多人，斩杀伪南唐兵马都监何延锡等，获得战船五十艘。二月三日，世宗驾临下蔡。
English: On the 28th, Zhao Kuangyin, who is now on the throne, defeated more than ten thousand Huainan thieves in the vortex, killed the pseudo South Tang's military governor He Yanxi, and won fifty warships. On February 3, Shizong came to visit Cai.

古文：朗州节度使王进逵奏，领兵入淮南界。
现代文：朗州节度使王进逵上奏，已领兵进入淮南地界。
English: The Langzhou Festival has made Wang Jinjun play the harp, and he has led the troops into the southern border of Huainan.

古文：戊辰，庐寿巡检使司超奏，破淮贼三千于盛唐，获都监伪吉州刺史高弼以献。诏释之。
现代文：五日，庐寿巡检使司超上奏，在盛唐打败淮军三千人，俘获都监伪吉州刺史高弼献上，世宗诏令释放他。
English: On the 5th day of the month, the inspector of the Jinshou patrol, the superintendent of the inspection, defeated 3,000 soldiers of the Huai army in the Tang Dynasty, and captured the prefectural inspector of the pseudo-Jizhou, Jishi Gao, and presented him to the emperor, and the emperor ordered to release him.

古文：壬午，江南国主李景遣其臣伪翰林学士户部侍郎钟谟、伪工部侍郎文理院学士李德明等奉表来上，叙愿依大国称臣纳贡之意，仍进金器千两，锦绮绫罗二千匹及御衣、犀带、茶茗、药物等，又进犒军牛五百头，酒二千石。是日，赐谟等锦绮绫罗二百匹，银器一百两，袭衣、金带、鞍马等。
现代文：世宗不理。十二日，今上赵匡胤押送俘获的淮南二将皇甫晖、姚凤来到，世宗令释放他们。十九日，南唐李景派部下伪翰林学士户部侍郎钟谟、伪工部侍郎文理院学士李德明等，奉表献上，传达希望依附于周称臣纳贡之意，又进上金器一千两，锦绮绫罗二千匹以及御衣、犀带、茶叶、药物等，又进上犒劳军队的牛五百头，酒二千石。这天，世宗赐给钟谟等人锦绮绫罗二百匹，银器一百两，以及套衣、金带、鞍马等。
English: Shizong did not pay attention. On the 12th, Zhao Kuangyin, who was now on the throne, came to escort the captured Huainan II generals, Emperor Fu Rong and Yao Feng, and Shizong ordered them to be released. On the 19th, the Southern Tang Li Jing sent his subordinates, the pseudo-Hanlin scholar, the servant of the household department, Zhong Moo, the servant of the pseudo-engineering department, the scholar of the Academy of Arts and Sciences, Li Deming, and so on, to present a table, to convey the hope of adhering to the tribute of Zhou Shousen. He also brought in a

古文：丙戌，侍卫马军指挥韩令坤奏，收下扬州。
现代文：二十三日，侍卫马军指挥韩令坤上奏，已攻下扬州。
English: On the 23rd, Han Lingkun, the commander of the Horse Guards Army, played the trumpet and conquered Yangzhou.

古文：《东都事略·韩令坤传》：率兵袭扬州，将吏开门以迎之，令坤整众而入，市不易肆，人甚悦。丁亥，寿州城内左神卫军使徐象等一十八人来奔。
现代文：二十四日，寿州城内左神卫军使徐象等十八人前来投奔。
English: On the 24th, eighteen people, including Xu Xiang, were ordered to flee by the Left Division of the Shoushu Inner-city Guardian Army.

古文：庚寅，朗州节度使王进逵上言领兵入鄂州界，攻长山寨，杀贼军三千余众。
现代文：二十七日，朗州节度使王进逵上奏，领兵进入鄂州境内，攻下长山寨，杀死贼军三千多人。
English: On the 27th day of the Longzhou Festival, Wang Jinjun led the troops into the territory of Ezhou, captured the Changshan Village, and killed more than three thousand soldiers.

古文：辛卯，今上表伪命天长军制置使耿谦以本军降，获粮草二千余万。
现代文：二十八日，今上赵匡胤上奏，伪天长军制置使耿谦率领本军投降，获粮草二十多万。
English: On the 28th, with Zhao Kuangyin's ascension to the throne, Geng Qian led the army to surrender, receiving more than 200,000 grain and grass.

古文：侍卫马军都指挥使韩令坤上言，泰州降。
现代文：侍卫马军都指挥使韩令坤上奏，泰州投降。
English: The guards and horse troops were all commanded to make Han Lingkun play, and Taizhou surrendered.

古文：行舒州刺史郭令图奏，收下舒州。《隆平集·王审琦传》：世宗征淮，舒州坚壁不下，以郭令图为刺史，命审琦、司超将兵攻城，一夕拔之。
现代文：三十日，荆南报告，朗州节度使王进逵被部将潘叔嗣杀害，潘叔嗣派人到潭州，请周行逢任主帅，周行逢到朗州，将潘叔嗣杀死在街上。
English: On the 30th, Jing Nan reported that during the festival of Langzhou, Wang Jinjun was killed by the commander Pan Shushi. Pan Shushi sent someone to Tanzhou to ask Zhou Xingfeng to be the commander, and Zhou Xingfeng went to Langzhou to kill Pan Shushi in the street.

古文：令图入，复见逐于郡人。审琦方进军援黄州，闻令图被逐，乃选骑衔枚袭城，夜败其众而复纳之。江南国主李景表送先隔过朝廷兵士一百五十人至行在。
现代文：三月三日，代理光州刺史何超上奏，光州伪都监张承翰献城归顺，世宗旋即任张承翰为集州刺史。七日，代理舒州刺史郭令图报告，攻下舒州。南唐国主李景上表送原周朝兵士一百五十人到世宗处。
English: On March 3rd, He Chao, the agent of the Gwangju governor, made a speech, Zhang Chenghan, the pseudo-governor of Gwangju, surrendered the city, and Shizong Rong immediately appointed Zhang Chenghan as the governor of Gwangju. On the 7th, the agent of the Shuzhou governor, Guo Lingtu, reported that he had captured Shuzhou. Li Jing, the ruler of Southern Tang, sent 150 soldiers of the original Zhou Dynasty to Shizong's place.

古文：其军即蜀军也，秦、凤之役，为王师所擒，配隶诸军，及渡淮，辄复南逸。
现代文：这些兵士本是蜀军，在秦州、凤州战役中被周朝军队俘虏后，被分配给各军，当他们渡过淮河后，又逃奔南唐。
English: These soldiers were originally from the Shu army. After being captured by the Zhou army in the Battle of Qinzhou and Fengzhou, they were assigned to various armies. After they crossed the Huai River, they fled to southern Tang.

古文：帝怒其奔窜，尽戮之。
现代文：世宗愤怒他们的叛逃，全部杀了他们。
English: The world was outraged by their defection and killed them all.

古文：丙午，江南国主李景遣其臣伪司空孙晟、伪礼部尚书王崇质等奉表来上，仍进金一千两、银十万两、罗绮二千匹，又进赏给将士茶绢金银罗帛等。
现代文：十三日，李景派臣子伪司空孙晟、伪礼部尚书王崇质等奉表呈上，又进奉黄金一千两，白银一万两，罗绮二千匹，又进奉赏给将士们的茶叶绢布金银等。
English: On the 13th, Li Jing sent his vassals, the pseudo-secretary Sun Quan and the pseudo-minister of etiquette Shang Shu Wang Chong Quan, to present the table. They also presented the table with one thousand taels of gold, ten thousand taels of silver, two thousand taels of bamboo, and tea leaves, cloth, gold and silver, etc., which were awarded to the soldiers.

古文：庚戌，两浙奏，遣大将率兵攻常州。延州留后李彦頵奏，蕃众与部民为乱，寻与兵司都监阎绾掩杀，获其酋帅高闹兒等十人，磔于市。
现代文：十七日，两浙上奏，派大将领兵攻打常州，延州留后李彦君页上奏，蕃人与部下百姓作乱，旋即与兵司都监阎绾扑灭，俘获首领高闹儿等十人，碎尸于街上。
English: On the seventeenth day, the two Zhe issued a proclamation, sent a general to lead the troops to attack Changzhou, and Li Yanjun issued a proclamation after staying in Yanzhou. He instigated a riot with his subordinates and the people, and immediately put out the riot with the commander of the army, Yansheng, and captured ten people including the leader Gao Nang'er, and the corpses were scattered on the street.

古文：彦頵本贾人也，贪而好利，蕃汉之民怨其侵刻，故至于是。
现代文：李彦君页本为商人，贪婪爱利，蕃汉人民怨恨他的剥削暴虐，所以至此。
English: Li Yanjun was originally a merchant, greedy and greedy, and the Han people resented his exploitation and tyranny, so here he is.

古文：辛亥，赐江南李景书曰：
现代文：十八日，世宗赐南唐国主书信，说： 淮南境内，已经平定六州，庐、寿、濠、黄各州，大军云集，指日可下，其他各城，不堪一击。
English: On the 18th, King Sejong sent a letter to the ruler of Southern Tang, saying, "In Huainan, six provinces have been pacified, namely, Handan, Shou, Handan, and Huangshan Provinces. A large army has gathered, and it can move at a moment's notice. All other cities are vulnerable to attack.

古文：所云愿为外臣，乞比湖、浙，彼既服义，朕岂忍人，必当别议封崇，待以殊礼。
现代文：朕志在必得淮河一带全部土地，作为我大周的屏障。至于削去南唐国号，则不必要。当淮南各州全归于大周后，我朝大军立即罢兵。如不同意，就从此决绝。 
English: I am determined to obtain all the land along the Huaihe River as a barrier to my Great Zhou. As for cutting off the name of South Tang, it is unnecessary. When all the states of South Huaihe were returned to Great Zhou, I immediately disbanded the army. If you do not agree, I will never do it again.

古文：凡尔将佐，各尽乃心，善为国家之谋，勉择恆久之利。初，李景遣钟谟、李德明奉表至行阙，使人面奏云： 本国主愿割寿、濠、泗、楚、光、海六州之地，归于大朝。 帝志在尽取江北诸郡，不允其请。
现代文：又赐给南唐将佐书信。此前，李景派钟谟、李德明奉表给世宗，使者面奏世宗说： 我国愿割让寿、濠、泗、楚、光、海六州的土地，献给大周。 世宗志在全部占领长江以北各州，不答应他们的请求。
English: He also gave a letter to the Southern Tang general Zao. Previously, Li Jing sent Zhong Mu and Li Deming to present a letter to Shizong. The envoys told Shizong that: Our country is willing to cede the land of six states, namely, Shou, Nanzhu, Gu, Chu, Guang and Hai, and dedicate it to Dazhou. Shizong did not agree to their request as Shizong occupied all the states north of the Yangtze River.

古文：使人见王师急攻寿阳，李德明奏曰： 愿陛下宽臣数日之诛，容臣自往江南，取本国表，尽献江北之地。 
现代文：使者看见周朝军队急攻寿阳，李德明便上奏说： 请陛下宽容我们几天，让我们回到江南，取回本国表章，奉献江北全部土地。 
English: When the envoy saw the Zhou and Qing armies suddenly attacking Shouyang, Li Deming sent a message saying: "Please Your Majesty, be patient with us for a few days, let us return to the south of the Yangtze River, take back our national emblem, and dedicate all the land in the north of the Yangtze River.

古文：帝许之，乃令李德明、王崇质赍此书以赐李景。
现代文：世宗应允他，于是让李德明、王崇质带这封信给李景。
English: Shizong agreed, so he asked Li Deming and Wang Chongqing to take the letter to Li Jing.

古文：夏四月甲子，以徐州节度使武行德为濠州城下行营都部署，以前邓州节度使候章为寿州城下水寨都部署。己巳，车驾发寿春，循淮而东。
现代文：夏四月七日，世宗从寿春出发，沿淮河向东。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of summer, Shuzong set out from Shuchun and headed east along the Huai River.

古文：辛未，扬州奏，江南大破两浙军于常州。
现代文：九日，扬州上奏，南唐军队在常州大败两浙军队。
English: On the 9th, Yangzhou played host, and the South Tang army defeated the two Zhejiang armies in Changzhou.

古文：初，两浙钱俶承诏遣部将率兵攻常州，为江南大将陆孟俊所败，将佐陷没者甚众，李景亦以表闻。
现代文：此前，两浙钱亻叔受命派部将领兵攻打常州。现被南唐大将陆孟俊打败，将佐被俘虏的有很多人，李景也上表报告。
English: Previously, the two Zhejiang Qianyu uncles had been ordered to send a general to lead the troops to attack Changzhou. Now they were defeated by the Southern Tang general Lu Mengjun, and there were many people who were captured, Li Jing also reported on the table.

古文：乙亥，驻跸于濠州城下。
现代文：十三日，驾临濠州城下。
English: On the 13th, I drove to the outskirts of Zhangzhou City.

古文：丁丑，扬州韩令坤破江南贼军于州之东境，获大将陆孟俊。
现代文：十五日，扬州韩令坤在该州东边打败南唐贼军，俘获大将陆孟俊。
English: On the 15th, Yangzhou Han Lingkun defeated the South Tang thief army on the east side of the state and captured General Lu Mengjun.

古文：今上表大破江南军于六合，斩首五千级。
现代文：今上赵匡胤上奏，在六合大败南唐军队，斩首五千级。
English: At this time, Zhao Kuangyin played the leading role, defeated the Southern Tang army in the Six Games, and decapitated five thousand.

古文：时李景乘常州之捷，遣陆孟俊领兵迫泰州，王师不守，韩令坤欲弃扬州而回。
现代文：当时李景乘在常州的胜利，派陆孟俊领兵迫近泰州，周朝军队失守，韩令坤想放弃扬州而回。
English: At that time, Li Jing took advantage of the victory in Changzhou and sent Lu Mengjun to lead the army to approach Taizhou. The Zhou army was defeated, and Han Lingkun wanted to give up Yangzhou and return.

古文：帝怒，急遣殿前都指挥使张永德帅亲兵往援之，又命今上领步骑二千人屯于六合。
现代文：世宗大怒，急派殿前都指挥使张永德统帅亲兵前往援助，又命今上赵匡胤领步卒骑兵二千人驻扎在六合。
English: Sejong was so angry that he dispatched the commander of the palace front, General Zhang Yongde, to send his own soldiers to help, and ordered the current Zhao Kuangyin to lead 2,000 foot cavalry stationed in Liuhe.

古文：俄而陆孟俊领其徒自海陵抵扬州，令坤迎击，败之，生擒孟俊。
现代文：接着陆孟俊领着部队从海陵抵达扬州，韩令坤迎击，打败了他们，活捉了陆孟俊。
English: Next, Lu Mengjun led the troops from Hailing to Yangzhou. Han Lingkun counterattacked, defeated them, and captured Lu Mengjun alive.

古文：李景遣其弟齐王达率大众由瓜步济江，距六合一舍而设栅。
现代文：李景派弟弟齐王李达率领大军从瓜步渡过长江，距离六合三十里设置营栅。
English: Li Jing sent his younger brother Qi Wang Li Da to lead the army to cross the Yangtze River from Guapu, and set up a camp gate at a distance of six and thirty miles.

古文：居数日，乃弃栅来迫官军。今上麾兵以击之，贼军大败，余众赴江溺死者不可胜纪。
现代文：不几天，李达放弃营栅前来迫近周军，今上赵匡胤挥兵攻击他，贼军大败，残余的部队投江而死的不可胜数。
English: Within a few days, Li Da abandoned the camp gate to approach the Zhou army, and now Zhao Kuangyin attacked him with a wave of troops. The thief army was defeated, and the remaining troops fell into the river and died in countless numbers.

古文：戊寅，以右卫上将军扈彦珂为太子太师致仕。
现代文：十七日，韩令坤上奏，在湾头堰打败楚州贼将马在贵一万多人，俘获涟州刺史秦进崇。
English: On the seventeenth day, Han Lingkun played on, defeated more than ten thousand people of the Chuzhou thief and horse in Guizhou at the Bay Head Weir, and captured the Zhangzhou thief Qin Jinshong.

古文：庚辰，以西京留守王晏为凤翔节度使。
现代文：二十五日，世宗离开濠州，到达涡口。五月一日，在涡口设置镇淮军。
English: On the 25th, Shizong left Zhangzhou and arrived at the Vortex. On the 1st of May, the Zhenhuai Army was set up in the Vortex.

古文：戊子，升赡国军为滨州。
现代文：七日，世宗从涡口出发回京。
English: On the seventh day, Sejong set off from Turukuchi to return to Kyoto.

古文：淮南道招讨使李重进奏，寿州贼军攻南寨，王师不利。
现代文：二十四日，世宗从淮南回到京城，诏令赦免京城中被囚禁的罪人。六月二十九日，淮南道招讨使李重进上奏，寿州贼军攻打南寨，周军失利。
English: On the 24th, Shizong returned to Beijing from Huainan and issued an imperial edict to pardon the criminals imprisoned in Beijing. On the 29th of June, Huainan Province invited Li Chongjin to play, Shoushou's thief army attacked Nanzhai, and Zhou's army lost.

古文：先是，诏步军都指挥使李继勋营于寿州之南，攻贼垒。
现代文：此前，诏令步军都指挥使李继勋扎营在寿州南边，进攻贼军营垒。
English: Previously, Li Jixun had ordered his foot soldiers to encamp on the south side of Shoushou and attack the encampment of the invaders.

古文：是日，贼军出城来攻我军，破栅而入，其攻城之具并为贼所焚，将士死者数百人。
现代文：这天，贼军出城来攻打周军，破营而入，周军用以攻城的器械全被贼军焚毁，将士阵亡数百人。
English: On this day, the thief army came out of the city to attack the Zhou army, breaking into the camp. The equipment used by the Zhou army to attack the city was all burned by the thief army, and hundreds of soldiers were killed.

古文：李重进在东寨，亦不能救。
现代文：李重进在东寨，也不能相救。
English: Li Chongjin is in Dongzhai, and he can't save himself.

古文：甲子，以前邓州节度使侯章复为邓州节度使，以侍卫步军都指挥使、彰信军节度使李继勋为河阳节度使。
现代文：当时敌城坚固不能攻下，军队疲劳在外，加上酷暑，粮运供应不上。李继勋失守后，周军军心动摇，众将想退军，有赖于今上赵匡胤从六合领兵回京，经过李重进城下，便驻留十来天，周军才军心重振。秋七月二十一日，淮南节度使向训从扬州班师，回到寿春驻扎。
English: At that time, the enemy city could not be captured, the army was fatigued, and the heat made it impossible to supply grain transportation. After the loss of Li Jixun, the Zhou army was shaken, and the generals wanted to withdraw. It was due to the fact that Zhao Kuangyin led the troops back to Beijing from Liuhe. After Li Chong entered the city, he stayed for ten days, and the Zhou army was able to reinvigorate the troops. On the 21st day of autumn, Huainan Festival sent Xiang Xun from Yangzhou to stay in Shouchun.

古文：乙丑，太仆卿剧可久停任，坐为举官累也。戊辰，端明殿学士王朴撰成新历上之，命曰《显德钦天历》，上亲为制序，仍付司天监行用。
现代文：当时周军攻打寿春，一年都未攻下，江、淮一带盗贼充斥，舒、蕲、和、泰等州重新被吴人占据，故放弃扬州将兵力合并于寿春。八月九日，端明殿学士王朴撰成新的历书呈上，命名为《显德钦天历》，世宗亲自写序，再交给司天监颁行。
English: At that time, the Zhou army attacked Shouchun, but did not conquer it for a year. The Jiang and Huai regions were full of thieves. Shu, Min, He and Tai provinces were reoccupied by the Wu people. Therefore, they abandoned Yangzhou and merged their forces in Shouchun. On August 9, Wang Pu, a scholar of the Duanming Palace, compiled a new calendar and presented it, named "Xian Deqin Calendar." Shizong personally wrote the preface, and then handed it to Siyuan.

古文：殿前都指挥使张永德奏，破淮贼于下蔡。
现代文：殿前都指挥使张永德上奏，在下蔡打败南唐贼军。
English: In front of the palace, the commander ordered Zhang Yongde to play up, and in the next Cai defeated the South Tang thief army.

古文：先是，江南李景以王师犹在寿州，遣其将林仁肇、郭廷谓率水陆军至下蔡，欲夺浮梁，以舟实薪刍，乘风纵火，永德御之。
现代文：此前，南唐李景因为周军还在寿州，便派大将林仁肇、郭廷谓领水军陆军到下蔡，想夺取浮桥，用船装上柴草，顺风放火，张永德抵御他。
English: Previously, because the Zhou army was still in Shoushu, Li Jing of the Southern Tang Dynasty sent the generals Lin Renzhao and Guo Ting to call the army of the territorial navy to lower Cai, wanting to seize the pontoon, load the firewood with the ship, and set fire to the wind. Zhang Yongde resisted him.

古文：有顷，风势倒指，贼众稍却，因为官军所败。
现代文：一会儿，风向倒过来，贼军逐渐后退，因而被周军打败。
English: After a while, the wind direction reversed, and the bandits gradually retreated, thus being defeated by the Zhou army.

古文：十一月己丑朔，诏废天下无名祠庙。
现代文：冬十月十四日，淮南招讨使李重进上奏，在盛唐打败南唐贼寇，斩首二千级。
English: On the 14th day of winter in October, Li Chongjin, recruited by Huainan, defeated the Southern Tang bandits in Sheng Tang and decapitated 2,000 of them.

古文：庚子，日南至，帝不受朝贺，以宣懿皇后迁祔日近也。
现代文：二十四日，右拾遗赵守微被杖击一百下，发配到沙门岛。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Zhao Shouwei, a right-handed disciple, was beaten 100 times with a cane and sent to Shamen Island.

古文：乙巳，江南进奉使孙晟下狱死，江南进奉使钟谟责授耀州司马。
现代文：赵守微本为一村民，相貌木讷朴实不加修饰，前一年以平民身份上书论事，世宗因急于举拔贤士，便任赵守微为右拾遗，听到的人对此都感惊愕。现在赵守微被他岳父告状，揭发他的丑行，所以发配他。
English: Zhao Shouwei was originally a villager, with a wooden and unadorned appearance. The previous year, he had written a book on the subject as a commoner. The world was in a hurry to promote sages, so he appointed Zhao Shouwei as the right person to collect the relics. People who heard this were all surprised. Now Zhao Shouwei has been sued by his father-in-law for exposing his ugly behavior, so he has been dispatched.

古文：戊申，放华山隐者陈抟归山。
现代文：十一月一日，诏令废除天下无名祠庙。二十日，放华山隐士陈抟归隐山林。
English: On November 1, the imperial edict abolished all nameless ancestral temples in the world. On the 20th, the mountain hermit Chen Qi returned to the mountains and forests.

古文：帝素闻抟有道术，征之赴阙，月余放还旧隐。
现代文：世宗一向听说陈抟有道术，将他征召到京城，一个多月后放回原隐居地。
English: The Sejong had always heard that Chen Xi had the ability to practice Taoism, and summoned him to the capital. More than a month later, he was allowed to return to his original place of seclusion.

古文：庚戌，殿前都指挥使张永德奏，败濠州送粮军二千人于下蔡，夺米船十余艘。
现代文：二十二日，殿前都指挥使张永德上奏，在下蔡打败濠州运送粮食的南唐军队。夺得米船十多艘。
English: On the 22nd, Zhang Yongde, the commander of the palace, defeated the Southern Tang army, which was transporting grain from Bozhou, and captured more than ten rice ships.

古文：宰臣李穀以风痹请告十旬，三上表求解所任，不允。
现代文：宰臣李谷因中风请假一百天，三次上表请求卸职，没批准。
English: Vice-Minister Li Gu took a leave of absence for 100 days due to a stroke. He requested to be relieved of duty three times, but it was not approved.

古文：十二月己未朔，以给事中张铸为光禄卿，铸诉以官名与祖讳同，寻改秘书监，判光禄寺事。
现代文：十二月一日，任给事中张铸为光禄卿，张铸说自己所任官名与自己祖讳相同，旋即改任秘书监，主管光禄寺事务。
English: On December 1, Zhang Shou was appointed as the Guanglu Emperor. Zhang Shou said that the name of the official he had appointed was the same as that of his ancestor. He was immediately appointed as the secretary and supervisor of the affairs of the Guanglu Temple.

古文：辛酉，以许州节度使韩通兼侍卫马步军都虞候。
现代文：四日，征调陈、蔡、宋、毫、颍、曹、单等州民夫筑造下蔡城。
English: On the fourth day of the month, provincial officials such as Chen, Cai, Song, Miao, Yao, Cao and Shan were recruited to build Caicheng.

古文：癸亥，诏兵部尚书张昭纂修太祖实录及梁均王、唐清泰帝两朝实录。
现代文：五日，诏令兵部尚书张昭纂修太祖实录以及梁、唐两朝末帝实录。
English: On the fifth day of the month, Zhang Zhaoxu of the Ministry of Military Affairs was ordered to compile a record of the founding father and a record of the late emperors of the Liang and Tang dynasties.

古文：戊子，淮南道招讨使李重进奏，破淮贼二千人于塌山北。
现代文：三十日，淮南道招讨使李重进上奏，在塌山以北打败南唐贼军二千人。
English: On the 30th, the South Huai Province invited Li Chongjin to march up and defeat 2,000 Southern Tang bandits north of the mountain.

