古文：谢小娥传杨娼传非烟传
现代文：谢小娥传杨娼传非烟传
English: Xie Xiao'e passed away, Yang Zhen passed away, Non-smoker passed away

古文：谢小娥传
现代文：谢小娥传
English: by Xie Xiao'e

古文：小娥姓谢氏，豫章人，估客女也。生八岁丧母，嫁历阳侠士段居贞。
现代文：小娥姓谢，豫章人，是商人的女儿，长到八岁时母亲去世，许配给了历阳的侠义之士段居贞。
English: Xiao E, surnamed Xie, was born in Yuzhang, the daughter of a merchant. When she was eight years old, her mother died, and she was betrothed to Duan Ju Zhen, a chivalrous man from Liyang.

古文：居贞负气重义，交游豪俊。
现代文：居贞刚强好胜，讲究义气，喜欢结交豪杰。
English: Ju Zhen is tough and eager to win, pays attention to loyalty, and likes to make friends with heroes.

古文：小娥父畜巨产，隐名商贾间，常与段婿同舟货，往来江湖。
现代文：小娥的父亲积蓄了巨额的财产，隐姓埋名于商人当中；常跟女婿同舟贩货，往来于江湖之上。
English: Xiao'er's father amassed a huge amount of wealth and hid his name among the merchants. He often traveled with his son-in-law to sell goods.

古文：时小娥年十四，始及笄，父与夫俱为盗所杀，尽掠金帛。
现代文：当时小娥年龄才十四，刚到成年。父亲和丈夫就都被强盗杀死，金钱财物全被抢走。
English: At that time, Xiao E was only 14 years old and had just come of age. Both her father and husband were killed by robbers, and all of their money and belongings were stolen.

古文：段之弟兄，谢之生侄，与僮仆辈数十悉沉于江。
现代文：段居贞的弟兄、谢家的外甥和侄子、还有仆人们数十口都被沉入江中。
English: Dozens of Duan Ju Zhen's brothers, Xie Jia's nephews and nieces, and servants were all drowned in the river.

古文：小娥亦伤胸折足，漂流水中，为他船所获。
现代文：小娥的胸和脚也受了重伤，漂浮在水中，被别的小船救了上来，过了一夜才苏醒过来。
English: Xiao E's chest and feet were also seriously injured. She floated in the water and was rescued by another boat. It took her one night to wake up.

古文：经夕而活。因流转乞食至上元县，依妙果寺尼净悟之室。
现代文：没办法小娥只好流浪乞讨，到了上元县，暂住在妙果寺的尼姑净悟的房子里。
English: Unable to do anything, Xiao'e had no choice but to wander and beg. When she arrived in Shangyuan County, she temporarily lived in the house of the nun Chingwu Wu of Myoga Temple.

古文：初父之死也，小娥梦父谓曰： 杀我者，车中猴，门东草。 
现代文：当初父亲刚死时，小娥梦见父亲对自己说： 杀我的人是： 车中猴，门东草 。 
English: When her father had just died, Xiao E dreamed that her father said to himself, "The person who killed me is: Monkey in the car, grass at the door."

古文：又数日，复梦其夫谓曰： 杀我者，禾中走，一日夫。 
现代文：又过了几天，又梦见她的丈夫对自己说： 杀我的人是： 禾中走，一日夫 。 
English: A few days later, she had another dream in which her husband said to himself: "The person who killed me is: Go to the fields, husband for a day.

古文：小娥不自解悟，常书此语，广求智者辨之，历年不能得。
现代文：小娥自己解释不了这些话的含义，就常把这些话写给别人看，广泛地恳求那些有智慧的人解释它，但经过一年也没有人能解释。
English: Xiao'e could not explain the meaning of these words herself, so she often wrote these words to others, and widely implored those with wisdom to explain it, but after a year, no one could explain it.

古文：至元和八年春，余罢江西从事，扁舟东下，淹泊建业。
现代文：到了元和八年春天，我被罢免了江西从事的官职，乘着小船东下，来到建业城停船逗留。
English: In the spring of the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty, I was removed from my official post in Jiangxi Province. I took a small boat to the east and came to Jianye City to stay.

古文：登瓦官寺阁，有僧齐物者，重贤好学，与余善，因告余曰： 有孀妇名小娥者，每来寺中，示我十二字谜语，某不能辨。 
现代文：我登上了瓦官寺的殿阁，有一个和尚叫齐物，他重视贤人喜欢学习，和我很友好。有一天他告诉我说： 有个寡妇名叫谢小娥，每次来到寺里，都让我看十二个字的谜语，但我解释不了。 
English: One day he told me: There is a widow named Xie Xiao'e. Every time she comes to the temple, she shows me a twelve-character riddle, but I can't explain it.

古文：余遂请齐公书于纸，乃凭槛书空，凝思默虑，坐客未倦，了悟其文。
现代文：我于是请齐物把谜语写到纸上，就靠着栏干用手在空中比划着写字，集中精神默默的思考，坐位上的游客还没觉得疲倦，我就明白了那字谜的意思。
English: I then asked the attendant to write the riddle on a piece of paper, so I leaned against the rail and wrote with my hand in the air, concentrating on silent thinking. The tourists in the seats did not feel tired, and I understood the meaning of the anagram.

古文：令寺童疾召小娥前至，询访其由。
现代文：就叫寺里的小童快去把小娥叫来，来后我就向她询问事情的原由。
English: I told the children in the temple to quickly go and call Xiao E. When she arrived, I asked her the reason for the incident.

古文：小娥呜咽良久，乃曰： 我父及夫，皆为贼所杀。迩后尝梦父告曰： 杀我者车中猴，门东草。又梦夫告曰： 杀我者，禾中走，一日夫。
现代文：小娥呜呜咽咽地哭了好久才说： 我父亲和丈夫，都被贼人杀了，不久后曾经梦见父亲告诉我： 杀我的人是 车中猴，门东草 ；又梦见丈夫告诉我： 杀我的人是 禾中走，一日夫。 
English: Xiao E whimpered and cried for a long time before saying: My father and husband were both killed by thieves. Soon after, I had a dream in which my father told me: The person who killed me was a monkey in a car, a grasshopper; I also had a dream in which my husband told me: The person who killed me was a one-day husband.

古文：岁久无人悟之。 
现代文：但多年也没人明白这些话的意思。 
English: But for years, no one understood what those words meant.

古文：余曰： 若然者，吾审详矣，杀汝父是申兰，杀汝夫是申春。
现代文：我说： 如果是这样，我就很清楚这话的意思了。杀你父亲的是申兰。杀你丈夫的是申春。
English: I said, "If that's the case, then I know exactly what you mean. It was Shen Lan who killed your father. It was Shen Chun who killed your husband."

古文：且 车中猴 ， 车 字，去上下各一画，是 申 字，又申属猴，故曰 车中猴 ； 草 下有 门 ， 门 中有 东 ，乃 兰 字也；又 禾中走 ，是穿田过，亦是 申 字也。 一日夫 者， 夫 上更一画，下有日，是 春 字也。
现代文：且说 车中猴 ，车字去上下各一画，是 申 字，申又属猴，所以说 车中猴 。草 下有 门 ， 门 中有 东 ，是 兰 字。又 禾中走 是穿 田 过，也是 申 字啊。一日夫 呢， 夫 上再有一画，下有 日 ，是 春 字啊。
English: Moreover, the monkey in the car, the characters of the car go up and down one by one, is the sign, and the sign belongs to the monkey, so it is said that the monkey in the car. There is a door under the grass, there is an east in the door, it is a blue sign. And walking in the hay is crossing the field, it is also a sign. One day husband, there is another picture on the husband, and the next day, it is a spring sign.

古文：杀汝父是申兰，杀汝夫是申春，足可明矣。 
现代文：杀你父亲的是申兰，杀你丈夫的是申春，足以证明了。 
English: It is enough to prove that it was Shen Lan who killed your father and Shen Chun who killed your husband.

古文：小娥恸哭再拜，书 申兰、申春 四字于衣中，誓将访杀二贼，以复其冤。
现代文：小娥非常悲痛地哭着拜了两拜，把 申兰 、 申春 四个字写在衣服里，发誓要寻找，杀死两个贼人，来报自己的冤仇。
English: With great sorrow, Xiao'e cried and prayed for two days. She wrote the four characters "Shen Lan" and "Shen Chun" on her clothes and vowed to find and kill the two thieves to avenge herself.

古文：娥因问余姓氏官族，垂涕而去。
现代文：小娥便问了我的姓和家世，流着眼泪走了。
English: Xiao E then asked my surname and family history and left in tears.

古文：尔后小娥便为男子服，佣保于江湖间，岁余，至浔阳郡，见竹户上有纸牓子，云召佣者。
现代文：从这以后小娥便换装穿上了男人的衣服，在江湖上给人当佣工。一年多后，来到了浔阳郡，看见竹门上有张纸招帖，上面说招收佣工。
English: From then on, Xiao E changed into men's clothes and worked as a domestic helper in the countryside. More than a year later, she came to Puyang County and saw a piece of paper on the bamboo gate saying that they were recruiting domestic helpers.

古文：小娥乃应召诣门，问其主，乃申兰也。
现代文：小娥于是应招到了那家。问那家的主人，竟是申兰！
English: Therefore, Xiao E was invited to the house. She asked the owner of the house, who turned out to be Shen Lan!

古文：兰引归，娥心愤貌顺，在兰左右，甚见亲爱。
现代文：申兰领回去。小娥心中虽然愤怒，外表却装得很恭顺。
English: Shen Lan led her back. Although Xiao E was angry in her heart, she pretended to be very obedient on the outside.

古文：金帛出入之数，无不委娥。
现代文：在申兰身边，小娥很受爱护、信任，钱财的收入支出的数目，全都交给小娥掌握。
English: Beside Shen Lan, Xiao E is very loved and trusted. The amount of money, income and expenditure are all under the control of Xiao E.

古文：已二岁余，竟不知娥之女人也。
现代文：这样过了两年多，申兰竟不知道小娥是个女子！
English: After more than two years, Shen Lan didn't even know that Xiao E was a girl!

古文：先是谢氏之金宝锦绣，衣物器具，悉掠在兰家。
现代文：谢家从前金宝锦绣、衣物器具，全被抢到了申兰家。
English: The Xie family had been robbed of all their jewelry, clothing and utensils, which were taken to the Shen Lan family.

古文：小娥每执旧物，未尝不暗泣移时。
现代文：小娥每当拿起那些旧物时，都要暗暗哭泣好久。
English: Whenever Xiao E picked up those old things, she would cry silently for a long time.

古文：兰与春，宗昆弟也，时春一家住大江北独树浦，与兰往来密洽。
现代文：申兰和申春是堂兄弟，当时申春家住在长江北面的独树浦，跟申兰来往密切、融洽。
English: Shen Lan and Shen Chun are cousins. At that time, Shen Chun's family lived in Dukshu Pu on the north side of the Yangtze River, and they had a close and harmonious relationship with Shen Lan.

古文：兰与春同去经月，多获财帛而归。
现代文：兰与春一起出去一个月，就能弄到很多钱财回来。
English: If Lan and Chun go out together for a month, they can get a lot of money back.

古文：每留娥与兰妻兰氏同守家室，酒肉衣服，给娥甚丰。
现代文：常常把小娥留下跟申兰的妻子兰氏一同守护家庭，好酒好肉好衣服经常给小娥。
English: He often left Xiao E to guard the family with Shen Lan's wife, Ms. Lan. He often gave Xiao E good wine, meat, and clothes.

古文：或一日，春携文鲤兼酒诣兰，娥私叹曰： 李君精悟玄鉴，皆符梦言，此乃天启其心，志将就矣。 
现代文：有一天，申春带着鲤鱼和酒来到申兰家。小娥私下里自己叹息说： 李君精确的分析和神妙判断，都符合梦中的话，这是上天启发了他的思想，我的心愿将要实现了。 
English: One day, Shen Chun brought eels and wine to Shen Lan's house. Xiao E privately sighed and said: Li Jun's precise analysis and wonderful judgment are consistent with the words in the dream. This is the heaven inspired his thoughts. My wish will be realized.

古文：是夕，兰与春会，群贼毕至，酣饮。
现代文：那天晚上，申兰与申春聚会，群贼全来了，喝酒喝得很尽兴。
English: That evening, Shen Lan and Shen Chun had a party. The thieves all came and enjoyed drinking.

古文：暨诸凶既去，春沉醉，卧于内室，兰亦露寝于庭。
现代文：等到那些凶手都走了以后，申春大醉，躺在里屋；申兰也醉卧在院子里。
English: After waiting for the murderers to leave, Shen Chun got very drunk and lay down in the back room; Shen Lan also got drunk and lay down in the courtyard.

古文：小娥潜锁春于内，抽佩刀，先断兰首，呼号邻人并至。
现代文：小娥暗暗地把申春锁在了黑屋，抽出佩带的刀，砍下了申兰的头，然后呼喊哭叫把邻人都引来。
English: Xiao'e secretly locked Shen Chun in a dark room, pulled out the knife she was carrying, cut off Shen Lan's head, and then called and cried to attract the neighbors.

古文：春擒于内，兰死于外，获赃收货，数至千万。
现代文：申春在里屋被擒，申兰死在屋外。起获赃物赃款，数量达到千万。
English: Shen Chun was kidnapped in a back room, while Shen Lan died outside. The stolen goods and money amount to ten million yuan.

古文：初，兰、春有党数十，暗记其名，悉擒就戮。时浔阳太守张公，善娥节行，为具其事上旌表，乃得免死。
现代文：当初，申兰、申春有同伙数十人，小娥都暗暗记下了他们的姓名，这时候就把他们全都抓来杀掉了，当时浔阳太守张公，很赞赏小娥的节操行为，就为她向上陈述了她的事迹，进行了表彰，于是小娥才未被处死。
English: At the beginning, Shen Lan and Shen Chun had dozens of accomplices, and Xiao E secretly wrote down their names. At that time, he arrested and killed all of them. At that time, Zhang Gong, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, was very appreciative of Xiao E's self-restraint, and he recounted her deeds for her and commended her. As a result, Xiao E was not executed.

古文：时元和十二年夏岁也。
现代文：当时是元和十二年夏天。
English: It was the summer of 1912.

古文：复父夫之仇毕，归本里，见亲属。
现代文：小娥报了父亲和丈夫的仇后，回到了故乡，拜见亲属。
English: After avenging her father and husband, Xiao E returned to her hometown to visit her relatives.

古文：里中豪族争求聘，娥誓心不嫁，遂剪发披褐，访道于牛头山，师事大士尼蒋律师。
现代文：故乡中的豪门争相求婚，但小娥在心中发誓绝不再嫁。于是小娥剪去了头发，穿上了粗布衣服，到牛头山寻找有学问的僧人去了。
English: Wealthy families in her hometown were competing to woo her, but she swore in her heart that she would never marry again. So she cut off her hair, put on a coarse cloth, and went to Mt. Niutu to look for a learned monk.

古文：娥志坚行苦，霜春雨薪，不倦筋力。
现代文：她找到了很有学问，又严守戒律的老尼姑蒋律师，便拜她为师。
English: She found a very learned and strict old nun, Lawyer Jiang, and took her as her teacher.

古文：十三年四月，始受具戒于泗州开元寺，竟以小娥为法号，不忘本也。
现代文：小娥志向坚定，言行谨慎又肯吃苦，在风霜中舂米，在雨露中打柴，身体也不感疲倦。元和十三年四月，才在泗州的开元寺接受了 具足戒 ，竟以 小娥 为法号，这是表示不忘本的意思。
English: Xiao E was determined in his aspirations, prudent in his words and deeds, and willing to endure hardships. He was able to make rice in the wind and rain, and make firewood in the rain and dew, and his body did not feel tired. It was only in April of the 13th year of the Yuan Dynasty that he accepted the "Sufficient Precepts" at the Kaiyuan Temple in Zhangzhou, and he actually used Xiao E as his Dharma name, which means not to forget the text.

古文：其年夏月，余始归长安，途经泗滨，过善义寺，谒大德尼令操。
现代文：那年夏天，我回长安，途中经过泗水滨，拜访善义寺，去谒见大德尼姑令操。
English: That summer, on my way back to Chang'an, I visited Zenyi Temple, passing by the Bohai Waterfront on the way, to see Grand Deaconess Ling Fu.

古文：见新戒者数十，净发鲜帔，威仪雍容，列侍师之左右。
现代文：去后看到新受戒的数十人，都剃净了头发戴着新的披肩，举止严肃而有法度，排列侍奉在师傅左右。
English: After I went there, I saw dozens of newly ordained people, all with clean-shaven hair and wearing new shawls, their demeanor was serious and dignified, and the attendants were lined up around the master.

古文：中有一尼问师曰： 此官岂非洪州李判官二十三郎者乎？ 师曰： 然 。
现代文：队列中忽然有一位尼姑问老师： 这位官员岂不是洪州李判官二十三郎吗？ 老师说： 对。 
English: Suddenly, a nun in the queue asked the teacher, "Isn't this official the twenty-third generation of Judge Hongzhou Li?" The teacher said, "Yes."

古文：曰： 使我获报家仇，得雪冤耻，是判官恩德也 。
现代文：又说： 使我报了家仇，洗雪了冤仇耻辱，多亏了这位判官的恩德啊！ 
English: He also said: "Thanks to the kindness of this judge, I was able to avenge my family and wash away the shame of my wrongdoing.

古文：顾余悲泣。余不之识，询访其由。
现代文：她看着我悲伤的哭泣，我却不认识她，就询问她这样说的原由。
English: She looked at me, sad and crying, and I didn't recognize her, so I asked her why she said that.

古文：娥对曰： 某名小娥，顷乞食孀妇也。
现代文：小娥回答说： 我的名字叫小娥，就是从前讨饭的那个寡妇。
English: Xiao'er replied, "My name is Xiao'er, the widow who used to beg.

古文：判官时为辨申兰、申春二贼名字，岂不忆念乎？ 
现代文：判官当时为我分析出了申兰、申春二贼的名字，难道没有回忆起来吗？ 
English: At that time, the judge analyzed the names of the two thieves, Shen Lan and Shen Chun, for me. Don't you remember them?

古文：余曰： 初不相记，今即悟也。 
现代文：我说： 开头不记得了，现在就想起来了。 
English: I said: I don't remember the beginning, but now I remember.

古文：娥因泣。具写记申兰、申春，复父夫之仇，志愿粗毕，经营终始艰苦之状。
现代文：小娥哭了起来，然后便详细地写了记下申兰、申春名字、报了父亲和丈夫的冤仇、志向基本实现的经历和所受的艰苦种种情况。
English: Xiao'e began to cry, and then she wrote down the names of Shen Lan and Shen Chun in detail, reported the wrongdoings of her father and husband, the experience of basically realizing her ambition, and the hardships she suffered.

古文：小娥又谓余曰： 报判官恩，当有日矣，岂徒然哉。 
现代文：小娥又对我说： 报答判官的恩情，会有机会的。怎能空口说白话呢？ 
English: Xiao'er also said to me, "There will be an opportunity to repay the judge's kindness. How can you talk nonsense?

古文：嗟乎！余能辨二盗之姓名，小娥又能竟复父夫之仇冤，神道不昧，昭然可知。
现代文：唉，我能分析出两个强盗的姓名，小娥又能终于报了父亲和丈夫的冤仇，神明之道不会不显示出来，从这件事就看得很清楚了。
English: Alas, I was able to analyze the names of the two robbers, and Xiao E was finally able to report the wrongdoing of her father and husband. The way of the gods will not go unnoticed, and it is very clear from this matter.

古文：小娥厚貌深辞，聪敏端特，炼指跛足，誓求真如。
现代文：小娥容貌忠厚，说出话来却很深刻，聪明正直，才能特出，烧自己手指，弄瘸自己的腿侍奉佛，决心追求永恒不变的真理。
English: Xiao'e has a loyal face, but her words are very profound, she is smart and honest, her talent is outstanding, she burns her fingers and twists her legs to serve the Buddha, and she is determined to pursue the eternal and unchanging truth.

古文：爰自入道，衣无絮帛，斋无盐酪；非律仪禅理，口无所言。
现代文：于是自从进入佛门，不穿絮帛的衣服，不吃有盐酪的斋饭，除了佛教戒律和思维静虑的修行之道，嘴里不说别的。
English: Therefore, since entering the Buddhist gate, I do not wear flocculent clothes, do not eat rice with salt cheese, and do not say anything other than Buddhist precepts and the way of meditation.

古文：后数日，告我归牛头山。扁舟泛淮，云游南国，不复再遇。
现代文：此后过了几天，小娥告诉我回牛头山，她要乘着小船飘浮在淮水上，到南方四处游览，我们不会再相遇了。
English: A few days later, Xiao E told me to go back to Niu Tou Shan. She was going to take a small boat to float on the Huai Shui River and travel around the south. We would not meet again.

古文：君子曰：誓志不舍，复父夫之仇，节也；佣保杂处，不知女人，贞也。
现代文：君子说： 立下志向决不放弃，终报父、夫之仇，这是气节；做佣工仆役与男人杂处，而没暴露出自己女人的身份，这是贞节。
English: The gentleman said, "It is virtuous to set one's sights on and never give up, and to finally avenge one's father and husband; it is chaste to work as a domestic servant and to be involved with men without revealing one's identity as a woman.

古文：女子之行，唯贞与节，能终始全之而已，如小娥，足以儆天下逆道乱常之心，足以观天下贞夫孝妇之节。
现代文：女子的行为，唯有贞和节能自始至终保全就可以了。像小娥，足可以警醒天下的背叛道德、违反伦常的行为，足可以看到正直的男人、孝顺的妇人的节操。
English: Women's behavior, only chastity and energy conservation from beginning to end can be preserved. Like Xiao E, feet can alert the world's betrayal of morality, behavior contrary to morality, feet can see the honest man, filial piety of the woman.

古文：余备详前事，发明隐文，暗与冥会，符于人心。
现代文：我详细地了解上面提到的事，释明哑谜，暗中与鬼神托梦时所说的话符合，也符合人心。
English: I understand the above-mentioned things in detail, explain the riddle, and secretly agree with the words said in the dream, and also with the people's hearts.

古文：知善不录，非《春秋》之义也，故作传以旌美之。
现代文：知道好事不记下来，不合《春秋》一书的旨意，所以我作了这篇传来表彰赞美这件事。
English: Knowing that it is not in accordance with the intention of the book "Spring and Autumn" not to write down good things, I made this article to commend and praise the matter.

古文：杨娼传
现代文：杨娼传
English: The Tale of the Young Whore

古文：杨娼者，长安里中之殊色也。态度甚都，复以冶容自喜。
现代文：杨娼是长安里巷妓院中特别漂亮的女子，风度很优美，又能把自己打扮得很妖艳而自己感到高兴。
English: Yang Zhen is a particularly beautiful woman in the Chang'an Li Xiang brothel. She has a very graceful demeanor, and she can dress herself up very glamorous and feel happy.

古文：王公钜人享客，竞邀致席上，虽不饮者，必为之引满尽欢。
现代文：王公大人宴请客人时，竞相邀请她到席上。即使不会喝酒的人，也会因为她的陪劝而满饮尽兴。
English: When Wang Gongda invited guests to a banquet, they competed to invite her to the table. Even people who do not drink alcohol would drink to their heart's content because of her encouragement.

古文：长安诸儿一造其室，殆至亡生破产而不悔。
现代文：长安的那些年轻人一到她家，几乎到了失去性命、倾家荡产也毫不后悔的地步。
English: As soon as those young people from Chang'an arrived at her home, they almost lost their lives and their homes, and they had no regrets.

古文：由是娼之名冠诸籍中，大售于时矣。
现代文：由此杨娼的名声在长安城在册的妓女中首屈一指，红极一时。
English: As a result, Yang Prostitute's reputation was second to none among the prostitutes registered in Chang'an City, and she became extremely popular.

古文：岭南帅甲，贵游子也。
现代文：岭南有位带兵的主将某某，是没有官职的贵族的儿子。
English: In Lingnan, there was an army commander named So-and-so, who was the son of a nobleman with no official position.

古文：妻本戚里女，遇帅甚悍。先约，设有异志者，当取死白刃下。
现代文：他妻子本是皇帝外戚的女儿，对待主将很凶狠，率先就约定，假如对她有外心，就用刀杀死他。
English: His wife, who was the daughter of the emperor's maternal uncle, treated him very cruelly, and it was first agreed that if he had feelings for her, he would kill him with a sword.

古文：帅幼贵，喜淫，内苦其妻，莫之措意。
现代文：主将幼年娇贵、好色，但在京中苦于妻子的凶悍，没办法实现自己的心愿。
English: The master will be young, delicate and lustful, but in Kyoto he will suffer from his wife's fierceness and will not be able to realize his wishes.

古文：乃阴出重赂，削去娼之籍，而挈之南海，馆之他舍。
现代文：于是暗地里用了很多财物，销去了杨娼的妓女身份，然后带着她到了南海，把她安排在另外房子里住。
English: So he secretly used a lot of wealth and sold the prostitute's prostitute status, and then took her to Nanhai and arranged for her to live in another house.

古文：公余而同，夕隐而归。
现代文：公事之余就去跟她同住，晚上就偷偷回去。
English: After work, he went to live with her and sneaked back in the evening.

古文：娼有慧姓，事帅尤谨。
现代文：杨娼性情聪明伶俐，事奉主将格外谨慎小心。
English: Yang Zhen has a clever temperament, and will serve the master with extreme caution.

古文：平居以女职自守，非其理，不妄发。复厚帅之左右，咸能得其欢心。
现代文：平日坚守妇女的职责，不合情理的，不乱说；又厚待主将身边的侍从，都能使他们人人满意，所以主将越来越宠爱她。
English: On an ordinary day, she will stick to her duties as a woman, and will not say anything unreasonable. She will also be kind to the attendants around her, which will make them all satisfied. Therefore, the Lord will love her more and more.

古文：故帅益嬖之。会间岁，帅得病，且不起。思一见娼，而惮其妻。
现代文：聚会隔了一年，主将得了病，似乎是好不了啦，就想见一见杨娼，但又害怕他的老婆。
English: A year after the party, the captain fell ill and seemed to be getting worse. He wanted to see a young prostitute, but he was afraid of his wife.

古文：帅素与监军使厚，密遣导意，使为方略。
现代文：主将一向跟监军使交情很深，就秘密地派人去转达自己的心意，让他给想个办法。
English: The commander-in-chief has always had a deep friendship with the inspector general, so he secretly sent someone to convey his thoughts and let him come up with a solution.

古文：监军乃绐其妻曰： 将军病甚，思得善奉侍煎调者视之，瘳当速矣。
现代文：监军于是骗主将的妻子说： 将军病得很厉害，想找一个擅长侍候煎药调药的人来侍候他，这样病会好得快些。
English: The overseer then lied to the general's wife, saying: "The general is very ill, and I want to find someone who is good at serving and mixing medicine to serve him, so that his illness will get better faster."

古文：某有善婢，久给事贵室，动得人意。请夫人听以婢安将军四体，如何？ 
现代文：我有一个好的婢女，长期侍候贵族人家，行动很善解人意，请夫人选用这个婢女，以便伺候好将军，怎么样？ 
English: I have a good maidservant, who has been serving aristocratic families for a long time, and whose actions are very understanding. How about asking your wife to choose this maidservant in order to serve the good general?

古文：妻曰： 中贵人信人也，果然。于吾无苦耳，可促召婢来。 
现代文：主将妻子说： 中贵人是诚实的人，果真这样的话，对我没有什么害处，可以赶快把那个婢女召来。 
English: The lord said to his wife, "The middle-ranking noble is an honest person. If this is true, there is no harm to me. You can quickly call the maid."

古文：监军即命娼冒为婢以见帅，计未行而事泄，帅之妻乃拥健婢数十，列白挺，炽膏镬于廷而伺之矣。
现代文：监军就让杨娼扮作婢妇来会见主将。
English: The supervisor of the army let the prostitute Yang dress up as a maid to meet the captain.

古文：须其至，当投之沸鬲。
现代文：不料，计划刚一实施却被泄露出去。
English: Unexpectedly, the plan was leaked out as soon as it was implemented.

古文：帅闻而大恐，促命止娼之至。且曰： 此自我意，几累于渠。
现代文：于是主将的妻子就带着健壮的婢女几十人，摆出了一排白木棍，在主将办公处把油锅烧得滚烫，等待着杨娼，打算等她来了，就把她扔到沸腾的油锅里。
English: So the captain's wife took dozens of sturdy maidservants and set up a row of white wooden sticks. At the captain's office, she heated an oil pan until it was red-hot, and waited for the prostitute. When she thought she was coming, she threw her into the boiling oil pan.

古文：今幸吾之未死也，必使脱其虎喙，不然，且无及矣。 
现代文：主将听到后非常惊恐，急忙叫人阻止杨娼前来，并且说： 这是我的想法，几乎连累了她！现在幸亏我还没死，一定要使她脱离虎口，不然，就来不及了。 
English: Hearing this, the lord was very alarmed and quickly called for someone to stop the young whore from coming, and said: "This was my idea, I almost got her! Now, fortunately, I am not dead, I must get her out of the tiger's mouth, otherwise, it will be too late."

古文：乃大遗其奇宝，命家僮傍轻舠。
现代文：于是派人给杨娼送去很多奇珍异宝，叫家中年轻仆人驾着轻快的刀形小船，护卫着杨娼回北方去。
English: So he sent someone to bring the young prostitute a lot of rare treasures, and asked the family's young servants to drive a brisk knife-shaped boat and escort the young prostitute back to the north.

古文：卫娼北归，自是帅之愤益深，不逾旬而物故。
现代文：从此主将的烦闷更加厉害，没过十天就去世了。
English: From then on, the captain's boredom became more severe, and he died in less than ten days.

古文：娼之行适及洪矣，问至，娼乃尽返帅之赂，设位而哭曰： 将军由妾而死，将军且死，妾安用生为？
现代文：杨娼北行恰好到了洪州，主将去世的消息传来后，杨娼就全部返回主将赠送的财物，设了灵位，哭着说： 将军因我而死。将军尚且死了，我还活着干什么呢？
English: Yang Zhen's northbound journey happened to arrive in Hongzhou. After the news of his master's death was reported, Yang Zhen returned all of his master's gifts, set up a shrine, and cried, "The general died because of me. Even though the general is dead, what am I still doing alive?"

古文：妾岂孤将军者耶？ 
现代文：我怎么会是辜负将军的人呢？ 
English: How could I be the one to fail the general?

古文：即撤奠而死之。
现代文：就撤掉祭奠为将军而死。
English: He removed the tribute and died for the general.

古文：夫娼以色事人者也，非其利则不合矣。而杨能报帅以死，义也；却帅之赂，廉也。
现代文：娼妓是以美色侍候人的，对她们无利的事就不会跟人一心，可是杨娼却能以死报答主将，这是义；退回主将的财物，这是廉。
English: A prostitute serves with beauty, and is not pleased with anything that is not to her advantage, but a young whore can repay her master with death, which is justice; to return the master's property, which is corruption.

古文：虽为娼，差足多乎！
现代文：虽是娼妓，她也还是值得赞美的。
English: Even though she is a prostitute, she is still worthy of praise.

古文：非烟传
现代文：非烟传
English: Non-smoking

古文：临淮武公业，咸通中，任河南府功曹参军。
现代文：临淮的武公业，在咸通年间，任河南府功曹参军。
English: Lin Huai's military public service, in the Hamdang Tong years, served as Henan Gong Cao to join the army.

古文：爱妾曰非烟，姓步氏，容止纤丽，若不胜绮罗；善秦声，好文笔，尤工击瓯，其韵与丝竹合。
现代文：他所宠爱的妾名叫非烟，姓步。容貌、举止柔弱艳丽，仿佛承受不了绮罗的衣服似的。她擅长秦地的音乐，喜欢写文章，在敲击名为瓯的乐器方面尤其有功夫，其韵律能跟弦乐、管乐配合得很好。
English: His favorite concubine was named Non-Smoke, surnamed Bu. Her appearance and demeanor were delicate and beautiful, as if she could not bear the clothes of Qin Luo. She was good at Qin music, liked to write articles, and was particularly skilled at playing a musical instrument called the gong. Its rhythm could go well with string music and wind music.

古文：公业甚嬖之。
现代文：公业很宠爱她。
English: The public sector is very fond of her.

古文：其比邻天水赵氏第也，亦衣缨之族，不能斥言。
现代文：他的近邻是天水籍姓赵的住宅，赵氏也是官宦人家，不过不便把他的名字明白地说出来。
English: His next-door neighbour is the house of a Tianshui family member surnamed Zhao. The Zhao clan is also a family of officials, but it is inconvenient to say his name clearly.

古文：其子曰象，秀端有文，才弱冠矣，时方居丧礼。
现代文：他的儿子名叫象，清秀端庄有文采，才二十岁。当时赵象正处于守丧期间。
English: His son's name was Zhao. He was handsome, dignified, and well-spoken. He was only twenty years old. At that time, Zhao Zhao was in the period of mourning.

古文：忽一日，于南垣隙中，窥见非烟，神气俱丧，废食忘寐。
现代文：忽然有一天，赵象从南墙的缝隙中偷偷地看见了非烟，一下子好像精神和魂魄全都丧失了，吃不下饭睡不着觉。
English: Suddenly one day, Zhao Xiang secretly saw the non-smoke from the gap of the south wall. Suddenly, it seemed that his spirit and soul were all lost, and he couldn't eat or sleep.

古文：乃厚赂公业之阍，以情告之。
现代文：便用很多财物贿赂公业的看门人，把自己的心事告诉了他。
English: He bribed the gatekeeper of the public sector with a lot of money and told him what was on his mind.

古文：阍有难色，复为厚利所动，乃令其妻伺非烟间处，具以象意言焉。
现代文：看门人露出为难的脸色，但那么多的财物又使他很动心，于是就叫他的妻子在非烟闲着没事时，把赵象的心事全部向她说了。
English: The doorman showed a puzzled look, but so many belongings made him very emotional, so he asked his wife to tell her all about Zhao Xiang's heart when she was not busy with smoking.

古文：非烟闻之，但含笑凝睇而不答。
现代文：非烟听了，只含笑斜眼凝视却没说什么。
English: The non-smoker listened, only smiled and stared with slanted eyes, but did not say anything.

古文：门媪尽以语象，象发狂心荡，不知所持，乃取薛涛笺，题绝句曰： 一睹倾城貌，尘心只自猜。
现代文：看门的老太婆把情况全告诉了赵象，赵象高兴得发狂，不禁心摇意荡，不知道怎样控制自己的感情了，于是取出 薛涛笺 ，在上面写了一首绝句： 一睹倾城貌，尘心只自猜。
English: The old woman who was guarding the door told Zhao Xiang all about the situation. Zhao Xiang was so happy that he went crazy. He couldn't help but shake his heart and didn't know how to control his emotions. So he took out Xue Tao Yao and wrote a final sentence on it: "One look at the city, and you can't help but guess."

古文：不随萧史去，拟学阿兰来。 
现代文：不随萧史去，拟学阿兰来。 
English: Don't follow Xiao Shi, try to learn from Alan.

古文：乃复酬篇，写于金凤笺曰： 绿惨双娥不自持，只缘幽恨在新诗。郎心应似琴心怨，脉脉春情更拟谁？ 
现代文：把写的诗密封好，请看门老太婆送给非烟。非烟读完了，感慨叹息了好久，然后对老太婆说： 我也曾偷偷看到过赵郎，才貌很好，可惜我这辈子没有福分，不能配上他。 这话的含意其实是鄙视武公业的粗鲁、凶暴，不是理想的配偶，便又答复了一首诗，写在 金凤笺 上，说： 绿惨双娥不自持，只缘幽恨在新诗，郎心应似琴心怨，脉脉春情更拟谁？ 
English: After reading the poem, he sighed with emotion for a long time, and then said to the old woman: I have also secretly seen Zhao Lang, his talent is very good, but unfortunately I have no luck in my life, I can't match him. The meaning of this is actually to despise the rudeness and ferocity of martial arts, not an ideal spouse, so he replied with another poem, written on the gold and phoenix bracelet, saying: Green misery is not self-sustaining, only hatred is in the new poem, the heart of the lover should be like the heart of the harp, and who is more like the spring?

古文：封付门媪，令遗象。
现代文：非烟把诗封好交给了看门的老太婆，叫她送给赵象。
English: He handed the sealed poem to the old woman guarding the gate and told her to give it to Zhao Xiang.

古文：象启缄，吟讽数四，拊掌喜曰： 吾事谐矣。 
现代文：赵象打开信封，把诗吟诵了好多遍，拍着手高兴地说： 我的事情成功了！ 
English: Zhao Xiang opened the envelope, recited the poem many times, clapped his hands and said happily: My business is a success!

古文：又以剡溪玉叶纸，赋诗以谢曰： 珍重佳人赠好音，彩笺芳翰两情深。
现代文：便又用 剡溪玉叶纸 ，作诗答谢说； 珍重佳人赠好音，彩笺芳翰两情深。
English: He then used the paper from the Yuye River to write a poem to say thank you. The precious lady gave him a good tone, and the beautiful lady was deeply in love with him.

古文：薄于蝉翼难供恨，密似蝇头未写心。
现代文：薄于蝉翼难供恨，密似蝇头未写心。
English: Thinner than a cicada's wing, it's hard to hate. It's like a fly's head without a heart.

古文：疑是落花迷碧洞，只思轻雨洒幽襟。
现代文：疑是落花迷碧洞，只思轻雨洒幽襟。
English: Doubt is a flower-covered cave, only thinking of light rain and sprinkling.

古文：百回消息千回梦，裁作长谣寄绿琴。 
现代文：百回消息千回梦，裁作长谣寄绿琴。 
English: A hundred times a message, a thousand times a dream, to compose a long ballad, to send a green lute.

古文：诗去旬日，门媪不复来，象忧恐事泄，或非烟追悔。
现代文：赵象的诗送去了十天，看门的老太婆也没来。赵象忧虑害怕事情泄露出去，或者非烟反悔。
English: It took ten days for Zhao Xiang's poem to be delivered, and the old woman guarding the door did not come. Zhao Xiang was worried and afraid that the matter would leak out, or that he would regret not smoking.

古文：春夕，于前庭独坐，赋诗曰： 绿暗红藏起暝烟，独将幽恨小庭前。
现代文：春天的一个晚上，赵象在前院里独坐，作诗道： 绿暗红藏起暝烟，独将幽恨小庭前。
English: One evening in spring, Zhao Xiang sat alone in the front yard and wrote a poem: Green, dark and red hide the smoke, alone will hate the small courtyard.

古文：沉沉良夜与谁语，星隔银河月半天。 
现代文：沉沉良夜与谁语？星隔银河月半天。 
English: Who would you like to spend a good night with? The stars are half a day away from the Milky Way and the moon.

古文：明日，晨起吟际，而门媪来传非烟语曰： 勿讶旬日无信，盖以微有不安。 
现代文：第二天，早晨起来吟诵时，看门老太婆却来传达非烟的话，说： 不要奇怪十天没有消息，是因为飞烟身体稍有不适。 
English: The next morning, when I got up to recite, the old woman guarding the gate came to convey non-smoking words, saying: Don't be surprised that there is no news for ten days, because flying smoke is slightly uncomfortable.

古文：因授象以连蝉锦香囊，并碧苔笺诗曰： 无力严妆倚绣栊，暗题蝉锦思难穷。
现代文：于是交给赵象一个连蝉锦香囊和写在 碧苔笺 上的诗。诗写道： 无力严妆倚绣栊，暗题蝉锦思难穷。
English: So he gave Zhao Xiang a cicada brocade incense holder and a poem written on a piece of moss. The poem reads: "Weak, tightly dressed, clinging to the embroidered cocoon, alluding to the cicada brocade, struggling to make ends meet."

古文：近来嬴得伤春病，柳弱花欹怯晓风。 
现代文：近来嬴得伤春病，柳弱花欹怯晓风。 
English: Recently, the willow has suffered from spring fever, the willow is weak, and the willow is afraid of the wind.

古文：象结锦囊于怀，细读小简，又恐烟幽思增疾，乃剪乌丝阑为回简曰： 春日迟迟，人心悄悄，自因窥觏，长役梦魂。
现代文：赵象把锦囊系到怀中，仔细读小小的书信。又怕非烟思虑，加重病情，于是剪下一块 乌丝阑 写回信说： 春天使人懒洋洋的，又那么长，而人内心又很忧愁，自从偷偷看见了你，在梦中也总想念。
English: Zhao Xiang tied the brocade bag to his bosom and carefully read the small letter. He was afraid that his worries would aggravate his illness, so he cut off a piece of dogwood and wrote a letter back saying: Spring makes people lazy, and it is so long, and people are very sad inside. Since I secretly saw you, I always miss you in my dreams.

古文：虽羽驾尘襟，难于会合；而丹诚皎日，誓以周旋。
现代文：虽然像神仙与凡人，难以相会，但我一片赤诚之心可以对日发誓：我一定要永远追随着你。
English: Although it is difficult to meet like gods and mortals, I can swear with all my heart to the sun: I must follow you forever.

古文：况又闻乘春多感，芳履违和。耗冰雪之妍姿，郁蕙兰之佳气，忧抑之极，恨不翻飞；企望宽情，无至憔悴。
现代文：何况又听到你因春伤感、玉体不适，减损冰雪一样美好的身体，蕙兰一样的气息抑郁不畅，我因此而忧愁郁闷到极点，恨不得一下子飞到你身边。
English: What's more, I heard that you are feeling sad and unwell due to the spring, which detracts from your body, which is as beautiful as ice and snow, and your breath, which is as melancholy as a lily of the valley, is not smooth. As a result, I am extremely sad and depressed, and I can't wait to fly to you.

古文：莫孤短韵，宁爽后期；恍惚寸心，书岂能尽？
现代文：盼望你宽心，不可劳累，不要辜负我在短诗里所表达的意思。哪里就会没有再见面的日子？我的心也恍惚不安，信里哪能写得完呢？
English: I hope you are at ease, don't get tired, and don't fail to live up to the meaning I expressed in the short poem. Where will there be a day when I don't see you again? My heart is also vaguely uneasy, how can I finish writing the letter?

古文：兼持菲什，仰继华藊。
现代文：再送去一首浅薄的诗，来仰攀、接续您的华美的诗篇。
English: Then send a shallow poem to follow up and follow up your gorgeous poem.

古文：诗曰：见说伤情为见春，想封蝉锦绿蛾颦。
现代文：诗是：见说伤情为见春，想封蝉锦绿蛾颦。
English: The poem is: See said injury as spring, want to seal cicada brocade green moth cocoon.

古文：叩头为报烟卿道。第一风流最损人。 
现代文：叩头为报烟卿道，第一风流最损人。 
English: kowtowing is the way of reporting to the emperor, and the first scandal is the most damaging.

古文：门媪既得回简，径赍诣烟阁中。
现代文：看门老太婆拿到回信后，径直送到了非烟住的内室中。
English: After the gatekeeper got the reply, she sent it straight to the non-smoking room.

古文：武生为府掾属，公务繁夥，或数夜一直，或竟日不归。
现代文：武公业是府中的属官，公务繁多，有时几天晚上值班一次，有时一整天不回家。
English: Wu Gongye is a subordinate official of the government, with a wide range of official duties. Sometimes he is on duty for a few nights at a time, and sometimes he does not go home for a whole day.

古文：是时适值生入府曹，烟拆书，得以款曲寻绎，既而长太息曰： 丈夫之志，女子之心，情契魂交，视远如近也。 
现代文：当时恰好赶上武公业到府曹去办公，非烟便拆开书信，仔细地研究信中含义。过了一阵，她长长叹息说： 男人的志向，女子的心愿，情意投合，心灵相通，即使在远处也就像在近处。 
English: At that time, it was just in time for Wu Gongye to go to Fu Cao's office. Non-smoking, she opened the letter and carefully studied the meaning in the letter. After a while, she sighed and said: Men's aspirations, women's wishes, feelings match, hearts are connected, even in the distance it is like being close.

古文：于是阖户垂幌，为书曰： 下妾不幸，垂髫而孤。中间为媒妁所欺，遂匹合于琐类。
现代文：于是关上门，放下帷幕，写信说： 我很不幸，幼年时就失去了父亲，中间被媒人欺骗，于是跟一个小人结合。
English: So he closed the door, put down the curtain, and wrote: I am very unfortunate, I lost my father when I was young, I was deceived by a matchmaker in the middle, so I married a child.

古文：每至清风朗月，移玉柱以增怀；秋帐冬釭，泛金徽而寄恨。
现代文：每到风清月朗的时候，我弹琴反而增加了怀念；秋天在帐中，冬天在灯前，也只能用琴寄托我的遗憾。
English: Every time the weather is fine, I play the piano, but it increases my nostalgia; autumn is in the account, winter is in front of the lamp, and I can only use the piano to place my regret.

古文：岂期公子，忽贻好音，发华缄而思飞，讽丽句而目断。
现代文：哪里想到，公子您忽然送给我美好的信息。打开华美的信封我不由思绪飞腾；吟诵优美的词句，使我望眼欲穿。
English: Where did I get the idea that you would suddenly send me a beautiful message. Opening the gorgeous envelope, my thoughts couldn't help but fly; reciting the beautiful words made me want to wear it.

古文：所恨洛川波隔，贾午墙高，联云不及于秦台，荐梦尚遥于楚岫。
现代文：遗憾的是洛水上有波浪隔断，贾午周围的墙却很高，想联结巫山的云，却无秦穆公筑的凤台，想梦中荐枕却离楚山太远。
English: Unfortunately, there is a wave barrier on Luo Shui, but the wall around Jia Wu is very high. If you want to connect the clouds of Wushan, there is no Feng Tai built by Qin Mu Gong, and if you want to recommend a pillow in your dream, it is too far from Mount Chu.

古文：犹望天从素恳，神假微机，一拜清光，九殒无恨。
现代文：希望上天能顺从我一向的恳切愿望，神仙能给我一点机会，能使我拜见您的尊容一次，即使让我死上多次，我也没有怨恨。
English: I hope that the heavens will obey my earnest wishes, and the gods will give me a chance to see your face once. Even if I have to die many times, I will not hold a grudge.

古文：兼题短什，用寄幽怀。
现代文：再写一短诗，用它传送我深深的情怀。
English: Write another short poem and use it to convey my deep feelings.

古文：诗曰： 画檐春燕须同宿，洛浦双鸳肯独飞。
现代文：诗是这样的：画檐春燕须同宿，洛浦双鸳肯独飞？
English: The poem is like this: the two Spring Swallows must live together, but the two Lopu Swallows can fly alone?

古文：长恨桃源诸女伴，等闲花里送郎归。 
现代文：长恨桃源诸女伴，等闲花里送郎归。 
English: Long-hated Taoyuan female companions, such as idle flowers, send their husbands home.

古文：封讫，召门妪，令达于象。
现代文：封好了诗、信后，把看门老太婆叫来，让她送给赵象。
English: After sealing the poem and letter, he called the old woman who was the gatekeeper and asked her to give them to Zhao Xiang.

古文：象览书及诗，以烟意稍切，喜不自持，但静室焚香，虔祷以俟息。
现代文：赵象看了信和诗，因为非烟情意渐渐亲切，而高兴得控制不住自己，只在肃静的房间里烧香，虔诚地祷告以等待好消息。
English: Zhao Xiang read the letter and poem, because the non-smoking sentiment gradually became intimate, and he was so happy that he could not control himself. He only burned incense in a quiet room and piously prayed to wait for good news.

古文：一日将夕，门妪促步而至，笑且拜曰： 赵郎愿见神仙否？ 
现代文：有一天将要黄昏时，看门老太婆快步走来，边笑边拜见说： 赵郎君愿意见见神仙吗？ 
English: One day, when dusk was approaching, the old woman guarding the gate walked up quickly, smiled and said: "Zhao Langjun, would you like to see the immortal?"

古文：象惊，连问之。
现代文：赵象很惊讶，连忙询问。
English: Zhao Xiang was very surprised and quickly inquired.

古文：传烟语曰： 今夜功曹直府，可谓良时。妾家后庭，郎君之前垣也。若不逾惠好，专望来仪。
现代文：老太婆传达非烟的话说： 今晚功曹到府里值夜班，可以说是一个有利的时机，妾家的后院就是郎君家前墙，如果你对我的情义没改变，我专候你的到来。
English: The old woman conveyed the words of the non-smoker, saying: Tonight, Gong Cao will be on night duty in the palace, which can be said to be a favorable opportunity. The backyard of the concubine's house is the front wall of the master's house. If you have not changed your attitude towards me, I will wait for your arrival.

古文：方寸万重，悉俟晤语。 
现代文：我心中的千言万语，全等见面时再说吧。 
English: A thousand words in my heart, let's wait until we meet.

古文：既曛黑，象乃跻梯而登，烟已令重榻于下。
现代文：天晚后，赵象就踏着梯子登上了墙头，非烟已叫人在墙根处重叠地摆上了榻，让赵象踩榻而下。
English: After nightfall, Zhao Xiang stepped on the ladder and climbed to the top of the wall. Non-smoke had already asked people to lay down beds at the base of the wall, and let Zhao Xiang step down.

古文：既下，见烟靓妆盛服，立于花下。
现代文：赵象下来后，看见非烟化了妆，穿戴得很漂亮，站在花下。
English: After Zhao Xiang came down, he saw a non-smoker wearing makeup, dressed very beautifully, standing under a flower.

古文：拜讫，俱以喜极不能言，乃相携自后门入堂中。遂背釭解幌，尽缱绻之意焉。
现代文：互相拜见后，都高兴到极点了，以致不知说什么好。于是二人携手从后门进入正屋，就背着灯光，放下了帐子，尽情尽欢地表达了缠绵的情意。
English: After seeing each other, they were so happy that they didn't know what to say. So the two of them walked hand in hand through the back door into the main house, put the lights on their backs, put down the blinds, and expressed their lingering feelings to their heart's content.

古文：及晓钟初动，复送象于垣下。烟执象泣曰： 今日相遇，乃前生因缘耳，勿谓妾无玉洁松贞之志，放荡如斯。直以郎之风调，不能自顾，愿深鉴之。 
现代文：等到早晨的钟声刚响，非烟拉着赵象的手哭着说： 今天相遇，是前世的因缘罢了，不要认为我没有美好、坚定的品行，如此放荡；只不过因为您的风度才情，使我控制不了自己，希望您能深深地理解我。 
English: When the bell rang in the morning, Non-Smoke took Zhao Xiang's hand and wept, saying, "Today's encounter is just the cause of the previous life. Don't think that I don't have a beautiful, firm character and am so debauched. It's just because of your demeanor and talent that I can't control myself. I hope you can deeply understand me."

古文：象曰： 挹希世之貌，见出人之心，已誓幽庸，永奉欢狎。 
现代文：赵象说： 您生成世上少有的美貌，显露出高于常人的心性，我已经向鬼神发过誓，愿意永远为您献上我的亲密。 
English: Zhao Xiang said: You have produced a rare beauty in the world, revealing a higher than ordinary human nature. I have sworn to the gods and spirits that I am willing to forever offer you my intimacy.

古文：言讫，象逾垣而归。
现代文：说完了，赵象越墙回到自己家。
English: Having said that, Zhao Xiang crossed the wall and returned to his home.

古文：明日，托门媪赠烟诗曰： 十洞三清虽路阻，有心还得傍瑶台。
现代文：第二天，赵象托看门的老太婆赠给非烟一首诗； 十洞三清虽路阻，有心还得傍瑶台。
English: The next day, Zhao Xiangtuo presented a poem to the non-smoker as a gift from the old woman who watched the door. Although the Sanqing Tunnel was a roadblock, he still had the heart to stand by the platform.

古文：瑞香风引思深夜，知是蕊宫仙驭来。 
现代文：瑞香风引思深夜，知是蕊宫仙驭来。 
English: Late at night, the sweet scent of the wind brings me to my senses. I know it's the palace fairies that are guiding me.

古文：烟览诗微笑，因复赠象诗曰： 相思只怕不相识，相见还愁却别君。
现代文：非烟看了诗后微微一笑，于是又赠给赵象一首诗： 相思只怕不相识，相见还愁却别君。
English: After Non Smoke read the poem, he smiled slightly, and then gave Zhao Zheng a poem: Love is only afraid of not knowing each other, but don't be sad when you see each other.

古文：愿得化为松下鹤，一双飞去入行云。 
现代文：愿得化为松下鹤。一双飞去入行云。 
English: I wish I could turn into a Matsushita crane. A pair of cranes fly into the clouds.

古文：封付门媪，仍令语象曰： 赖妾有小小篇咏，不然，君作几许大才面目。 
现代文：把诗封好又交给了看门老太婆，仍叫告诉赵象说： 幸亏我还能作几篇小诗，不然的话，你还能摆出多少才学？ 
English: He sealed the poem and handed it back to the old woman guarding the gate. She still told him to tell Zhao Xiang, "Fortunately, I can still write a few short poems. Otherwise, how much can you learn?

古文：兹不盈旬，常得一期于后庭。展微密之思，罄宿昔之心，以为鬼神不知，天人相助。
现代文：此后不到十天，常能在后院约会一次，诉说彼此间的微妙的思念之情，尽情地实践从前的心愿。他们认为这事鬼神也不会知道，天和人都帮助他们。
English: Less than ten days after that, they often have a date in the backyard, tell each other about their subtle feelings of longing, and practice their former wishes to the fullest. They don't think that ghosts and gods will know about this, and heaven and people help them.

古文：或景物寓目，歌咏寄情，来住频繁，不能悉载。
现代文：有时他们一起观赏景物，作诗文寄托感情。他们来往频繁，也不能一一记载。
English: Sometimes they enjoy the scenery together and write poems to express their feelings. They come and go frequently and cannot be recorded one by one.

古文：如是者周岁。
现代文：像这种情形持续了一年。
English: It went on like this for a year.

古文：无何，烟数以细过挞其女奴，奴阴衔之，乘间尽以告公业。
现代文：不久，非烟屡次因为小的过失鞭打她的婢女。婢女怀恨在心，找了一个机会把情况全都告诉了武公业。
English: Before long, Nonya repeatedly whipped her maid for minor offenses. The maid held a grudge and found an opportunity to tell Wu Gongye all about the situation.

古文：公业曰： 汝慎言，我当伺察之。 
现代文：武公业说： 你说话要谨慎，我会找机会了解这个情况。 
English: Wu Gongye said: Be careful what you say, I will look for an opportunity to understand the situation.

古文：后至直日，乃伪陈状请假。
现代文：后来到了轮值的日子，公业就假托有事情，向长官请了假。
English: Later, when it came to the day of rotation, Gongye pretended to have something to do and asked the chief for leave.

古文：迨夕，如常入直，遂潜于里门。
现代文：到了黄昏，公业装着像平常那样去值夜班的样子，但却藏在小巷的门口。
English: At dusk, Gongye disguised himself as a night watchman as usual, but hid in the doorway of the alley.

古文：街鼓既作，匍伏而归。
现代文：等到街上更鼓声响了以后，就爬着回到了家。
English: After waiting for the drums to beat louder in the street, I crawled back home.

古文：循墙至后庭，见烟方倚户微吟，象则据垣斜睇。
现代文：顺着墙根到了后院，看见非烟正倚着门低声吟诵，而赵象却按着墙在那斜看非烟。
English: He walked along the base of the wall to the backyard and saw that Non-Smoke was leaning against the door and chanting in a low voice, while Zhao Xiang was leaning against the wall to see Non-Smoke.

古文：公业不胜其忿，挺前欲擒，象觉跳去，业搏之，得其半襦。
现代文：公业非常愤怒，冲上前去想捉住赵象，赵象发觉后跳下墙逃跑。公业跟赵象搏斗，扯下了他的半截短衣。
English: Gongye was very angry and rushed forward to catch Zhao Xiang. When Zhao Xiang found out, he jumped off the wall and ran away. Gongye fought with Zhao Xiang and tore off his half-cut shorts.

古文：乃入室，呼烟诘之。
现代文：公业于是进到屋里，把非烟喊出来进行盘问。
English: The official then entered the room and called the non-smoker out for questioning.

古文：烟色动声战，而不以实告。
现代文：非烟变了脸色，声音颤抖，却没说实情。
English: Non-smoke's face turned pale and his voice trembled, but he didn't tell the truth.

古文：公业愈怒，缚之大柱，鞭楚血流。
现代文：公业更加气愤，就把非烟捆到大柱子上，用鞭子打出血来。
English: The official was even more angry, so he tied the non-smoker to a large pillar and beat him bloody with a whip.

古文：但云： 生得相亲，死亦何恨！ 
现代文：非烟只是说： 活着能互相亲近，死了也没什么遗憾。 
English: Non-smoke just said, "We can be close to each other while we are alive, and there is nothing to regret when we die."

古文：深夜，公业怠而假寐。
现代文：夜深了，公业疲倦了，坐在那儿打盹。
English: It's late at night, tired from the day's work, sitting there dozing.

古文：烟呼其所爱女仆曰： 与我一杯水。 
现代文：非烟招呼她最喜欢的婢女说： 给我一杯水。 
English: Non-Smoke beckoned to her favorite handmaid and said, "Bring me a glass of water."

古文：水至，饮尽而绝。
现代文：水拿来了，非烟喝完了就断了气。
English: I got some water. After drinking the non-smoking water, I passed out.

古文：乃解缚举置阁中，连呼之，声言烟暴疾致殒。
现代文：公业站起来，想再鞭打她。但一看已经死了，便从柱子上解下来抱着放在内室中。连连呼唤，声称非烟暴病而死。
English: Gongye stood up and wanted to whip her again, but when he saw that she was already dead, he untied her from the pillar, held her and placed her in the inner room. He called out repeatedly, claiming that she had died of non-smoking lung disease.

古文：后数日，窆于北邙，而里巷间皆知其强死矣。
现代文：此后过了几天，埋葬在北邙山上。可是里弄中的人都知道她是死于非命的。
English: A few days later, she was buried on Beilun Mountain, but everyone in the village knew that she had died a violent death.

古文：象因变服易名，远窜江浙间。
现代文：赵象于是换了衣服改了名字，远远地逃到江浙一带。
English: Zhao Xiang changed his clothes, changed his name and fled far away to Jiangsu and Zhejiang.

古文：洛阳才士有崔李二生，常与武掾游处，崔赋诗末句云： 恰似传花人饮散，空床抛下最繁枝。 
现代文：洛阳的有才德的读书人中有崔生和李生，常跟武功曹交游相处。崔生作了一首诗的末句是： 恰似传花人饮散，空床抛下最繁枝。 
English: Among the talented readers in Luoyang are Cui Sheng and Li Sheng, who often socialize with Wu Gong Cao. Cui Sheng wrote the last sentence of a poem: "Just like the flower-carrier who drinks the tea, the empty bed leaves the most branches."

古文：其夕，梦烟谢曰： 妾貌虽不迨桃李，而零落过之。
现代文：那晚上，梦见非烟来感谢说： 我的容貌虽然赶不上桃李，可是凋落的情形却超过它们。
English: That night, I dreamed of non-smoke to thank: Although my appearance is not as good as that of peach and plum, but the situation of decline is more than them.

古文：捧君佳什，愧仰无已。 
现代文：捧读您的佳作，惭愧仰慕不停。 
English: I've been reading your excellent work, and I'm ashamed to admit that I've been admiring it.

古文：李生诗末句云： 艳魄香魂如有在，还应羞见坠楼人。 
现代文：李生的诗的末句说； 艳魄香魂如有在，还应羞见坠楼人。 
English: The last sentence of Li Sheng's poem says: If there is a daring and fragrant soul, it should also be ashamed to see a person falling from a building.

古文：其夕，梦烟戟手而言曰： 士有百行，君得全乎？
现代文：那晚上，李生梦见非烟用手指着他说： 读书人有百种品德，您全具备了吗？
English: That night, Li Sheng dreamed of a non-smoker and pointed at him with his finger, saying: Readers have a hundred kinds of virtues, do you have all of them?

古文：何至矜片言苦相诋斥？
现代文：何至于一定要傲慢地用一两句话来诋毁我呢？
English: Why do you have to be so arrogant as to denigrate me in one or two sentences?

古文：当屈君于地下面证之。 
现代文：应当委屈您到阴间当面解释清楚。 
English: You should be dragged to the underworld to explain it to my face.

古文：数日，李生卒，时人异焉。
现代文：不几天，李生就死了。当时的人对此觉得很奇怪。
English: Within a few days, Li Sheng died. People at the time found this very strange.

