古文：华佗字元化，沛国谯人也，一名旉。
现代文：华佗字元化，是沛国谯县人，又名旉。
English: The characters of the Chinese character 华 have been digitized. He is a native of Pei County, Shandong Province, also known as.

古文：游学徐土，兼通数经。
现代文：离开家乡，到徐州地区求学，通晓数种经书。
English: He left his hometown and went to Xuzhou to study. He is familiar with several scriptures.

古文：沛相陈珪举孝廉，太尉黄琬辟，皆不就。
现代文：沛国的相陈圭推荐他为孝廉，太尉黄琬征召他，都不去就任。
English: Pei's partner, Chen Gui, recommended him to Xiao Lian, and Tai Lai Huang Qi recruited him, but neither of them took up the post.

古文：晓养性之术，时人以为年且百岁而貌有壮容。
现代文：懂得养生的方法，当时的人们认为他年龄将近一百岁，可外表看上去还像青壮年的容貌。
English: He knew how to take care of his health. At that time, people thought he was nearly a hundred years old, but he still looked like a young man.

古文：又精方药，其疗疾，合汤不过数种，心解分剂，不复称量，煮熟便饮，语其节度，舍去辄愈。
现代文：又精通医方医药，他治病时，配制汤药不过用几味药，心里明了药物的分量、比例，用不着再称量，把药煮熟就让病人服饮，告诉病人服药的禁忌及注意事项，离开后，病就痊愈了。
English: He was also well-versed in medicine. When he was treating a patient, he only used a few herbs to prepare the decoction. He knew the weight and proportion of the medicine in his heart. There was no need to weigh it again. He let the patient take the medicine after it was cooked, and told the patient the contraindications and precautions for taking the medicine. After he left, the patient was cured.

古文：若当灸，不过一两处，每处不过七八壮，病亦应除。
现代文：如果需要灸疗，也不过一两个穴位，每个穴位不过烧灸七、八根艾条，病痛就应手消除。
English: If moxibustion is needed, there are only one or two acupoints, and each acupoint is nothing more than seven or eight moxibustion points, and the pain can be eliminated by hand.

古文：若当针，亦不过一两处，下针言 当引某许，若至，语人 。
现代文：如果需要针疗，也不过扎一两个穴位，下针时说： 应当延伸到某处，如果到了，告诉我。 
English: If you need acupuncture, you only need to prick one or two acupoints, and when you prick the needle, say: It should extend to somewhere, and if it does, let me know.

古文：病者言 巳到 ，应便拔针，病亦行差。
现代文：当病人说 已经到了 ，应声便起针，病痛很快就痊愈了。
English: When the patient said, "I've arrived," he was given an injection, and the pain soon disappeared.

古文：若病结积在内，针药所不能及，当须刳割者，便饮其麻沸散，须臾便如醉死无所知，因破取。
现代文：如果病患集结郁积在体内，扎针吃药的疗效都不能奏效，应须剖开割去的，就饮服他配制的 麻沸散 ，一会儿便如醉死一样，毫无知觉，于是开刀后取出结积物。
English: If the patient has accumulated in the body, and the curative effect of sticking needles and taking medicine cannot be effective, it should be cut open and cut away, then drink his prepared Mabeosan, and in a moment it will be like being drunk to death, without any consciousness, so remove the accumulated matter after opening the knife.

古文：病若在肠中，便断肠湔洗，缝腹膏摩，四五日差，不痛，人亦不自寤，一月之间，即平复矣。
现代文：病患如果在肠中，就割除肠子患病部位，清洗伤口及感染部位，缝合刀口用药膏敷上，四五天后，病好了，不再疼痛，病人自己也不觉得，一个月之内，伤口便愈合复原了。
English: If the patient is in the intestine, the diseased part of the intestine is excised, the wound and the infected part are cleaned, the incision is sutured, and ointment is applied. After four or five days, the patient is well, there is no more pain, and the patient himself does not feel it. Within a month, the wound is healed and restored.

古文：故甘陵相夫人有娠六月，腹痛不安，佗视脉，曰： 胎已死矣。 
现代文：原甘陵相的夫人怀孕六个月，腹部疼痛，华佗诊脉之后，说： 胎儿已经死了。 
English: The wife of the former vice-premier was six months pregnant, had abdominal pain, and after Huayu's diagnosis, said: "The fetus is dead.

古文：使人手摸知所在，在左则男，在右则女。
现代文：又派人用手摸胎儿的位置，如在左边则是男胎，在右边则是女胎。
English: They also sent someone to feel the position of the fetus with their hands, for example, a male fetus on the left and a female fetus on the right.

古文：人云 在左 ，於是为汤下之，果下男形，即愈。
现代文：那人说 胎儿在左 ，于是华佗熬汤让孕妇喝下，果然打下一个男胎，夫人的不适就好了。
English: The man said that the fetus was on the left, so Hua Wei boiled soup for the pregnant woman to drink, and as expected, she gave birth to a male fetus, and her discomfort was over.

古文：县吏尹世苦四支烦，口中乾，不欲闻人声，小便不利。
现代文：县里的官吏尹世苦于四肢都不舒服，口中干渴，不想听到人的声音，小便也不顺利。
English: Yin Shih, an official in the county, is suffering from discomfort in his limbs, his mouth is dry, he doesn't want to hear people's voices, and his urination is not smooth.

古文：佗曰： 试作热食，得汗则愈；不汗，后三日死。 
现代文：华佗说： 试着制作热餐食，出汗了就会痊愈；如果没有出汗，三天后就会死。 
English: Hua Wei said: Try to make a hot meal. If you sweat, you will recover; if you don't sweat, you will die in three days.

古文：即作热食而不汗出，佗曰： 藏气已绝於内，当啼泣而绝。 
现代文：随即做热餐食，却不出汗，华佗说： 五脏的生气已经断绝了，应该会哭着气绝。 
English: Afterward, she made a hot meal, but didn't break a sweat. Hua Wei said, "The anger in my five internal organs has been cut off. I should be crying and exhausted."

古文：果如佗言。
现代文：后来果然像华佗说的那样。
English: Later, it turned out to be as Hua Wei said.

古文：府吏倪寻、李延共止，俱头痛身热，所苦正同。
现代文：府吏倪寻、李延一起找华佗看病，二人都是头痛，身体发热，病状相同。
English: Prefectural officials Ni Xing and Li Yan went to see Hua Wei together. Both of them had headaches, fever and the same condition.

古文：佗曰： 寻当下之，延当发汗。 
现代文：华佗说： 儿寻应当通导，李延应当发汗。 
English: Hua Wei said: "Er Huan should lead the way, Li Yan should sweat.

古文：或难其异，佗曰： 寻外实，延内实，故治之宜殊。 
现代文：有人对于用不同的方法很奇怪，华佗说： 儿寻是外热，李延是内热，所以治疗时应该有所不同。 
English: Some people are very strange about using different methods, Hua Wei said: Erhuan is external heat, Li Yan is internal heat, so the treatment should be different.

古文：即各与药，明旦并起。
现代文：随即各自给他们药物，第二天早上两人的病都好了。
English: They were then each given medication and both were well by the next morning.

古文：盐渎严昕与数人共候佗，適至，佗谓昕曰： 君身中佳否？ 
现代文：盐渎的严昕和几个人一起等待华佗，华佗来到后，对严昕说： 您身体还好吗？ 
English: Yan Xuan, who was suffering from salt poisoning, waited for Hua Xuan with several people. After Hua Xuan came, he said to Yan Xuan: Are you well?

古文：昕曰： 自如常。 
现代文：严昕说： 还是像平常一样。 
English: Yan Xuan said: It's still the same as usual.

古文：佗曰： 君有急病见於面，莫多饮酒。 
现代文：华佗说： 从您的面上表现出您有疾病，不要饮用太多酒。 
English: Hua Wei said: From your face, it shows that you have a disease. Don't drink too much wine.

古文：坐毕归，行数里，昕卒头眩堕车，人扶将还，载归家，中宿死。
现代文：严昕坐了一会就走了，走了几里路，严昕突然头晕目眩，从车上掉下来，旁人将他扶上车，载回家中，半夜就去世了。
English: Yan Xuan sat for a while and then left. After walking for several miles, Yan Xuan suddenly felt dizzy and fell off the bus. A bystander helped him onto the bus and took him home. He died in the middle of the night.

古文：故督邮顿子献得病已差，诣佗视脉，曰： 尚虚，未得复，勿为劳事，御内即死。
现代文：原来督邮顿的儿子献得的病已经快好了，到华佗那里诊脉，华佗说： 还很虚弱，没有能完全恢复，不要做辛劳的事，与妻子同房就会死。
English: It turned out that the illness presented by the son of the postmaster-general was almost over. He went to Hua Wei to have his pulse checked. Hua Wei said, "I'm still very weak, I won't be able to fully recover. Don't do anything strenuous. If you sleep with your wife, you will die."

古文：临死，当吐舌数寸。 
现代文：临死的时候，舌头会吐出几寸。 
English: When dying, the tongue will spit out a few inches.

古文：其妻闻其病除，从百馀里来省之，止宿交接，中间三日发病，一如佗言。
现代文：他的妻子得知他病好了，从百里之外前来看望他，晚上留宿，夫妻同房，过了三天就发病了，都像华佗说的那样。
English: When his wife learned that he had recovered from his illness, she came from a hundred miles away to visit him, stayed the night, and the couple shared a room. Three days later, she fell ill, just as Hua Wei said.

古文：督邮徐毅得病，佗往省之。
现代文：督邮徐毅生病，华佗前去探视他。
English: Postmaster General Xu Yi fell ill, and Hua Yu went to visit him.

古文：毅谓佗曰： 昨使医曹吏刘租针胃管讫，便苦欬嗽，欲卧不安。 
现代文：徐毅对华佗说： 昨天让医师刘租针灸完胃管，就严重咳嗽，想要躺下也不行。 
English: Xu Yi said to Hua Wei: Yesterday, after the doctor Liu Rong completed the acupuncture and moxibustion of the gastric tube, he had a severe cough and could not lie down.

古文：佗曰： 刺不得胃管，误中肝也，食当日减，五日不救。 
现代文：华佗说： 这是没有能针灸到胃管，伤到了中肝，饮食应该会每天减少，五天之后就没救了。 
English: Hua Wei said: This is because there is no acupuncture to the gastric tube, and the middle liver is injured. The diet should be reduced every day, and it will not be saved after five days.

古文：遂如佗言。
现代文：最后也像华佗说的那样。
English: In the end, it was just like Hua Wei said.

古文：东阳陈叔山小男二岁得疾，下利常先啼，日以羸困。
现代文：东阳县的陈叔山的小儿子两岁的时候就生了病，经常腹泻并啼哭不止，一天比一天羸弱。
English: The youngest son of Chen Shushan in Dongyang County fell ill when he was two years old. He often had diarrhea and cried a lot. He became weaker and weaker day by day.

古文：问佗，佗曰： 其母怀躯，阳气内养，乳中虚冷，儿得母寒，故令不时愈。 
现代文：询问华佗，华佗说： 他的母亲怀着他的时候，周身之气都内养，腹中虚冷，小孩得了母寒，所以一时间不能痊愈。 
English: When asked about Hua Wei, Hua Wei said: When his mother was pregnant with him, his whole body was cold, and his stomach was cold. The child caught the mother's cold, so he couldn't recover for a while.

古文：佗与四物女宛丸，十日即除。
现代文：华佗给了他四付女宛丸，十天之后病就好了。
English: Hua Wei gave him a four-day female prescription pill. Ten days later, his illness was cured.

古文：彭城夫人夜之厕，虿螫其手，呻呼无赖。
现代文：彭城夫人晚上到厕所，有毒虫咬到了她的手，疼痛又无可奈何。
English: When Mrs. Pengcheng went to the toilet in the evening, the poisonous insect bit her hand, and the pain was unbearable.

古文：佗令温汤近热，渍手其中，卒可得寐，但旁人数为易汤，汤令暖之，其旦即愈。
现代文：华佗让人拿来热水，让彭城夫人把手放进去，后来就能安睡，让旁人给她换几次热水，让水保持温度，第二天就全好了。
English: Hua Wei asked someone to bring hot water, let Mrs. Pengcheng put her hand in it, and then she could sleep peacefully, let others change her hot water several times, let the water keep the temperature, and the next day she was all right.

古文：军吏梅平得病，除名还家，家居广陵，未至二百里，止亲人舍。
现代文：军队中的小吏梅平得了病，除去名籍后回家，家居住在广陵，还没有走到二百里，留宿在亲戚家中。
English: Meiping, a minor official in the army, fell ill and returned home after removing his name and address. His family lived in Guangling. He had not yet walked two hundred miles and stayed at a relative's house.

古文：有顷，佗偶至主人许，主人令佗视平，佗谓平曰： 君早见我，可不至此。
现代文：一会儿，华佗偶然到了主人家里，主人请华佗察看梅平，华佗对梅平说： 您早遇到我，可以不到这种地步。
English: After a while, Hua Tuo happened to arrive at the master's house. The master asked Hua Tuo to take a look at Meiping. Hua Tuo said to Meiping: You have met me before, you can't be like this.

古文：今疾已结，促去可得与家相见，五日卒。 
现代文：如今疾病已经凝积，赶快回去还能和家人相见，五日后命终。 
English: Now the disease has condensed, I can go back quickly and see my family, but my life will end in five days.

古文：应时归，如佗所刻。
现代文：按时回去，正如华佗所说的时间。
English: Go back on time, as Hua Wei said, it's time.

古文：佗行道，见一人病咽塞，嗜食而不得下，家人车载欲往就医。
现代文：华佗走在路上，看见一个人患咽喉堵塞的病，想吃东西却吃不下，家里人用车载着他去求医。
English: Hua Wei was walking on the road when she saw a man suffering from a blocked throat. He wanted to eat but couldn't, so his family took him by car to seek medical treatment.

古文：佗闻其呻吟，驻车往视，语之曰： 向来道边有卖饼家蒜齑大酢，从取三升饮之，病自当去。 
现代文：华佗听到病人的呻吟声，停下车马去诊视，告诉他们说： 刚才我来的路边上有家卖饼的，有蒜泥和大醋，你向店主买三升来吃，病痛自然会好。 
English: Hearing the groans of the patients, Hua Wei stopped the car and horse to go to the clinic and told them: Just now, there is a family selling cakes on the roadside where I came from. They have garlic puree and vinegar. If you buy three liters from the owner to eat, your illness will naturally get better.

古文：即如佗言，立吐蛇一枚，县车边，欲造佗。
现代文：他们马上照华佗的话去做，病人吃下后立即吐出一条蛇，把虫悬挂在车边，想到华佗家去。
English: They immediately did as Hua Wei said. After eating, the patient immediately vomited out a snake and hung the insect on the side of the car, thinking of going to Hua Wei's home.

古文：佗尚未还，小儿戏门前，逆见，自相谓曰： 似逢我公，车边病是也。 
现代文：华佗还没有回家，他的两个孩子在门口玩耍，迎面看见他们，小孩相互告诉说： 像是遇见咱们的祖公了，车边挂着的病虫就是证明啦。 
English: Hua Yao had not yet returned home. His two children were playing at the gate. When they saw them face to face, the children told each other, "It's like meeting our grandfather. The bugs on the side of the car are proof of that."

古文：疾者前入坐，见佗北壁县此蛇辈约以十数。
现代文：病人上前进屋坐下，看到华佗屋里北面墙上悬挂着这类蛇大约有十几条。
English: The patient went up to the anteroom and sat down. He saw about a dozen of these snakes hanging on the wall on the north side of the anteroom.

古文：又有一郡守病，佗以为其人盛怒则差，乃多受其货而不加治，无何弃去，留书骂之。
现代文：又有一个郡守生了病，华佗认为这个人应该要大怒才能痊愈，就接受他很多的礼品，却不加以治疗，不久就离开他了，还留下一封信大骂他。
English: Another county magistrate fell ill, and Hua Tuo thought that this person should be very angry to recover, so he accepted many gifts from him, but did not treat him, and soon left him, and left a letter to scold him.

古文：郡守果大怒，令人追捉杀佗。郡守子知之，属使勿逐。守瞋恚既甚，吐黑血数升而愈。
现代文：郡守果然大怒，令人追杀华佗，郡守的儿子知道了这件事，叫部下不要追赶华佗，郡守生气到了极点，吐了几升黑血，病就痊愈了。
English: The county magistrate was so angry that people chased and killed Hua Tuo. The son of the county magistrate found out about this and told his subordinates not to chase Hua Tuo. The county magistrate was so angry that he vomited several liters of black blood, and his illness was cured.

古文：又有一士大夫不快，佗云： 君病深，当破腹取。然君寿亦不过十年，病不能杀君，忍病十岁，寿俱当尽，不足故自刳裂。 
现代文：又有一个士大夫不舒服，华佗说： 您的病已经很深了，应当剖腹取出，但您的寿命也不过十年，这个病一时间并不能让你死亡，忍受这个病痛十年，寿命也会一起尽了，不需要剖腹。 
English: Another magistrate was not feeling well. Hua Wei said, "Your illness is already very deep, you should have your abdomen removed by cesarean section, but your life expectancy is only ten years. This illness will not let you die for a while. If you endure this illness for ten years, your life expectancy will also be exhausted. There is no need to perform a cesarean section."

古文：士大夫不耐痛痒，必欲除之。
现代文：士大夫不能忍受痛痒，一定要除掉病根。
English: Shidafu can't stand the itching, so he must get rid of the root of the disease.

古文：佗遂下手，所患寻差，十年竟死。
现代文：华佗于是就动手术，士大夫的病痛就好了，十年之后这个人真的死了。
English: Hua Wei then operated, and the doctor's pain was relieved. Ten years later, the man really died.

古文：广陵太守陈登得病，胸中烦懑，面赤不食。
现代文：广陵郡太守陈登得了病，心中烦躁郁闷，脸色发红，不想吃饭。
English: Chen Deng, the governor of Guangling County, fell ill. He was irritable and depressed, his face was red, and he didn't want to eat.

古文：佗脉之曰： 府君胃中有虫数升，欲成内疽，食腥物所为也。 
现代文：华佗为他切脉说： 您胃中有虫好几升，将在腹内形成一种肿胀坚硬的毒疮，是吃生鱼、生肉造成的。 
English: "You have several liters of worms in your stomach, which will form a swollen, hard poisonous ulcer in your abdomen. This is caused by eating raw fish and raw meat.

古文：即作汤二升，先服一升，斯须尽服之。食顷，吐出三升许虫，赤头皆动，半身是生鱼脍也，所苦便愈。
现代文：马上做了二升药汤，先喝一升，一会儿把药全部喝了，过了一顿饭的功夫，吐出了约摸三升小虫，小虫赤红色的头都会动，一半身体还是生鱼脍的模样，所受病痛也就好了。
English: I immediately made two liters of medicinal soup, drank one liter first, and then drank all the medicine in a short while. After a meal of effort, I vomited about three liters of worms. The red head of the worm would move, and half of the body would still look like raw fish gills, and the pain would be better.

古文：佗曰： 此病后三期当发，遇良医乃可济救。 
现代文：华佗说： 这种病三年后会复发，碰到良医才能救活。 
English: Hua Wei said: This kind of disease will relapse after three years, and only a good doctor can save lives.

古文：依期果发动，时佗不在，如言而死。
现代文：按照预计的时间果然旧病发作，当时华佗不在，正如华佗预言的那样，陈登死了。
English: According to the expected time, the old disease finally broke out, when Hua Wei was not there, as Hua Wei predicted, Chen Deng died.

古文：太祖闻而召佗，佗常在左右。太祖苦头风，每发，心乱目眩，佗针鬲，随手而差。
现代文：太祖得知后就征召华佗，华佗经常在太祖身边侍奉，太祖苦于头痛，每次发作都会目眩神迷，华佗就针灸膈俞穴，很快就好了。
English: After the great-grandfather learned of this, he conscripted Hua Wei. Hua Wei often served at the great-grandfather's side. The great-grandfather suffered from headaches and was dizzy with every attack. Hua Wei went for acupuncture and moxibustion and soon felt better.

古文：李将军妻病甚，呼佗视脉，曰： 伤娠而胎不去。 
现代文：李将军的妻子病得很严重，叫华佗来诊脉，华佗说： 她怀孕的时候伤着，但胎儿没有落下。 
English: General Li's wife was very ill, so he called Hua Wei to come and check her pulse. Hua Wei said, "She was injured when she was pregnant, but the fetus didn't fall out.

古文：将军言： 闻实伤娠，胎已去矣。 
现代文：将军说： 听说会伤到孕妇，胎儿已经落下来了。 
English: The general said: I heard that it can hurt a pregnant woman, the fetus has fallen.

古文：佗曰： 案脉，胎未去也。 
现代文：华佗说： 现在诊脉，胎儿还没有落下。 
English: Hua Wei said, "Now that the vein has been diagnosed, the fetus has not yet dropped.

古文：将军以为不然。佗舍去，妇稍小差。
现代文：将军认为不是这样，华佗离开之后，妻子的病有了小的好转，一百多天后又复发，又请华佗来诊脉。
English: The general did not think so. After Hua Jun left, his wife's illness improved slightly, but it recurred more than a hundred days later. He asked Hua Jun to come and check her pulse again.

古文：百馀日复动，更呼佗，佗曰： 此脉故事有胎。前当生两儿，一儿先出，血出甚多，后儿不及生。
现代文：华佗说： 脉象还是像之前一样。之前应该是有双胞胎，有一胎儿先出生，出血非常多，后一胎儿来不及生下。
English: Hua Wei said: "The pulse is still the same as before. Previously, there should have been twins, one fetus was born first, with a lot of bleeding, and the second fetus was too late to be born.

古文：母不自觉，旁人亦不寤，不复迎，遂不得生。
现代文：孕妇感觉不出来，旁边的人也没有察觉到，就没有再接生，所以胎儿没有能生下来。
English: The pregnant woman does not feel it, and the person next to her does not notice it, there is no further delivery, so the fetus is not able to be born.

古文：胎死，血脉不复归，必燥著母脊，故使多脊痛。
现代文：现在胎儿已经死了，血脉不再供养胎儿，一定会枯死，贴近母背，所以母亲会感到脊背疼痛。
English: Now that the fetus is dead, the blood will no longer supply the fetus, it will surely die, close to the mother's back, so the mother will feel back pain.

古文：今当与汤，并针一处，此死胎必出。 
现代文：现在应该开汤药，再扎一针，这胎儿就能出来了。 
English: Now we should prepare a decoction, insert another needle, and the fetus will come out.

古文：汤针既加，妇痛急如欲生者。
现代文：就给孕妇服汤药并施针，孕妇非常疼痛，就像快要生产。
English: The pregnant women were given decoctions and injections. The pregnant women were in a lot of pain, as if they were about to give birth.

古文：佗曰： 此死胎久枯，不能自出，宜使人探之。 
现代文：华佗说： 这胎儿已经枯死很久，不会自己出来，应该让人探入。 
English: Hua Wei said: This fetus has been dead for a long time, it will not come out on its own, it should be allowed to enter.

古文：果得一死男，手足完具，色黑，长可尺所。
现代文：后来果然生下一男胎，手脚都完备，但肤色发黑，身长大概一尺。
English: Later, she gave birth to a male fetus, complete with hands and feet, but with a dark complexion and about a foot long.

古文：佗之绝技，凡此类也。
现代文：华佗的绝技，大概都是像上面说的那样。
English: Hua Tuo's stunts are probably like the ones mentioned above.

古文：然本作士人，以医见业，意常自悔，后太祖亲理，得病笃重，使佗专视。佗曰： 此近难济，恒事攻治，可延岁月。 
现代文：但华佗本想作为士人，后来把行医作为职业，经常感到后悔，后来太祖亲自处理朝政，病得很严重，让华佗专门为他看病，华佗说： 这种病很难一时治好，应该长期治疗，才能延年益寿。 
English: However, Hua Yu originally wanted to be a scholar, but later he took up medicine as a profession, and often felt regret. Later, his great-grandfather personally dealt with the government of the dynasty. He was very ill and asked Hua Yu to see a doctor specifically for him. Hua Yu said: This disease is difficult to cure for a while, and should be treated for a long time in order to prolong life.

古文：佗久远家思归，因曰： 当得家书，方欲暂还耳。 到家，辞以妻病，数乞期不反。
现代文：华佗长久的远离家乡，想要回到家乡，就说： 不久前收到家乡的书信，正想要暂时回家看看。 
English: Hua Yu had been away from home for a long time and wanted to return to her hometown, so she said, "I received a letter from my hometown not long ago, and I'm trying to go home for a while.

古文：太祖累书呼，又敕郡县发遣。
现代文：华佗回到家后就以妻子生病为由，不愿意回来并多次请假。
English: After returning home, Hua Wei did not want to come back and repeatedly asked for leave on the grounds that his wife was ill.

古文：佗恃能厌食事，犹不上道。
现代文：太祖反复写信，又下令郡县催促，华佗仗着身边的事情，依然没有上路。
English: The great-grandfather repeatedly wrote letters, and also ordered the county to urge the county. Due to the things around him, Hua Wei still did not go on the road.

古文：太祖大怒，使人往检。若妻信病，赐小豆四十斛，宽假限日；若其虚诈，便收送之。
现代文：太祖大怒，派人前往探视，如果华佗的妻子确实病了，就赏赐四十斛小豆，并且宽限假期；如果其中有虚假，就将他们收押起来。
English: The great-grandfather was furious and sent someone to pay a visit. If Hua Tuo's wife was indeed ill, he would reward her with forty stalks of red beans and a grace period of vacation; if it was false, he would lock them up.

古文：於是传付许狱，考验首服。
现代文：于是就将华佗关押起来，并对他拷问让他认罪。
English: As a result, Hua Jun was detained and tortured to make him confess.

古文：荀彧请曰： 佗术实工，人命所县，宜含宥之。 
现代文：荀彧请求说： 华佗的医术超凡，是能解救很多人命的，应该宽恕他。 
English: Zou pleaded, "Hua Zou's medical skills are extraordinary and can save many lives. You should forgive him.

古文：太祖曰： 不忧，天下当无此鼠辈耶？ 
现代文：太祖说： 不用担忧，难道天下没有这样的人了吗？ 
English: The great-grandfather said, "Don't worry, isn't there such a person in the world?

古文：遂考竟佗。
现代文：就将华佗拷问致死。
English: and tortured her to death.

古文：佗临死，出一卷书与狱吏，曰： 此可以活人。 
现代文：华佗临死之前，将一卷书交给狱卒，说： 这是可以救人命的。 
English: Before her death, Hua Wei handed a book to her jailer and said, "This can save lives."

古文：吏畏法不受，佗亦不强，索火烧之。
现代文：狱卒畏惧律法。不敢接受，华佗也没有勉强，就用火烧毁了。
English: The jailer was afraid of the law. He did not dare to accept it, and Hua Tuo did not force it, so it was burned with fire.

古文：佗死后，太祖头风未除。太祖曰： 佗能愈此。小人养吾病，欲以自重，然吾不杀此子，亦终当不为我断此根原耳。 
现代文：华佗去世之后，太祖的头痛并没有痊愈，太祖说： 华佗能治愈这个病，但他治疗我的病情，只是想要抬高自己的身价，但我不杀掉这个人，他最终也不会为我除去病根。 
English: After Hua Tuo's death, Taizu's headache did not get better. Taizu said: Hua Tuo can cure this disease, but he treated my illness, just to raise his status, but I will not kill this person, he will not eventually remove the root of my illness.

古文：及后爱子仓舒病因，太祖叹曰： 吾悔杀华佗，令此儿强死也。 
现代文：后来他的爱子仓舒病重，太祖感叹说： 我后悔杀了华佗，让我的儿子也病重而死。 
English: Later, his beloved son, Cangshu, fell seriously ill, and the great-grandfather lamented: "I regret that I killed Hua Tuo and let my son die seriously ill.

古文：初，军吏李成苦欬嗽，昼夜不寤，时吐脓血，以问佗。
现代文：当初，军吏李成苦于咳嗽之症，昼夜不能睡觉，经常会吐出脓血，用这病情去问华佗。
English: At first, the military official Li Chengwu suffered from a coughing disease, could not sleep day and night, often vomited blood, and used this condition to ask Hua Wei.

古文：佗言： 君病肠臃，欬之所吐，非从肺来也。
现代文：华佗说： 您的病情已经很厉害，是从肠中的毒疮而来，您吐出来的东西，不是来自肺中。
English: Hua Wei said: Your condition is already very bad, it comes from the poisonous sores in the intestines, and what you vomit does not come from the lungs.

古文：与君散两钱，当吐二升馀脓血讫，快自养，一月可小起，好自将爱，一年便健。
现代文：现在给您开两钱散剂，就会吐出两升脓血，之后应该赶快休养，一个月之后就会见效，随后小心爱护自己，一年之后就能康复。
English: Now, if you are prescribed a two-cent powder, you will vomit two liters of pus blood, after which you should quickly recuperate, it will take effect after a month, then take care of yourself, and you will be able to recover after a year.

古文：十八岁当一小发，服此散，亦行复差。
现代文：十八年后会有一次小的复发，服用这个药剂，也会渐渐好转。
English: After eighteen years, there will be a small relapse, and after taking this medicine, it will gradually improve.

古文：若不得此药，故当死。 
现代文：如果没有这副药，就会因此病死。 
English: Without the drug, he would have died from the disease.

古文：复与两钱散，成得药去。
现代文：又给他两服药，李成得了药离开。
English: He gave him two more doses of medicine, and Li Cheng got the medicine and left.

古文：五六岁，亲中人有病如成者，谓成曰： 卿今强健，我欲死，何忍无急去药，以待不祥？
现代文：五六年之后，李成有向他一样生病的亲人，亲人对李成说： 您现在很强健，而我已经快死了。你怎么忍心没有疾病却藏着药，等着我去死呢？
English: Fifty-six years later, Li Cheng had a relative who was as sick as him. The relative said to Li Cheng: You are very strong now, but I am about to die. How can you bear to have no disease but hide the medicine and wait for me to die?

古文：先持贷我，我差，为卿从华佗更索。 
现代文：先把药借给我，我痊愈之后再为您到华佗那里求。 
English: First, lend me the medicine. After I'm cured, I'll go to Hua Tuo to beg for you.

古文：成与之。
现代文：李成给了他。
English: Li Cheng gave it to him.

古文：已故到谯，適值佗见收，怱怱不忍从求。
现代文：后来亲人因故到了谯县，正直华佗被收押起来，亲人也不忍心向华佗索要。
English: Later, her relatives came to Handan County for some reason, and she was detained. Her relatives couldn't bear to ask for anything from her.

古文：后十八岁，成病竟发，无药可服，以至於死。
现代文：十八年之后，李成的病终于复发了，因为没有药可以服用，最后病死了。
English: Eighteen years later, Li Cheng's illness finally relapsed, because there was no medicine to take, and he eventually died.

古文：广陵吴普、彭城樊阿皆从佗学。
现代文：广陵县吴普、彭城县樊阿都追随华佗学医。
English: Wupu in Guangling County and Zoua in Pengcheng County both followed Hua Jun to study medicine.

古文：普依准佗治，多所全济。佗语普曰： 人体欲得劳动，但不当使极尔。
现代文：吴普依照华佗的方法治疗，病人大多都痊愈了，华佗对吴普说： 人体需要劳动，但不能过度。
English: Wu Pu was treated according to Hua Jun's method, and most of the patients were cured. Hua Jun said to Wu Pu: The human body needs labor, but it should not be excessive.

古文：动摇则谷气得消，血脉流通，病不得生，譬犹户枢不朽是也。
现代文：身体劳动，那食物中的养分就能消化，血脉会流通，就不会生病，就好像门总是开关，门枢就不会腐烂一样。
English: With physical labor, the nutrients in the food can be digested, the blood will circulate, and you will not get sick, just as the door is always open and the door will not rot.

古文：是以古之仙者为导引之事，熊颈鸱顾，引輓腰体，动诸关节，以求难老。吾有一术，名五禽之戏，一曰虎，二曰鹿，三曰熊，四曰猿，五曰鸟，亦以除疾，并利蹄足，以当导引。
现代文：因此古代长寿的人用导引的方法来强身健体，模仿熊攀枝的动作，像鸱鸟回顾一样，活动身体，以求的身体保持活力，我有一套养生的方法，名叫五禽之戏，一叫虎，二叫鹿，三叫熊，四叫猿，五叫鸟，也可以去除疾病，并使身体敏捷。
English: Therefore, the ancient long-lived people used the guided method to strengthen their body and fitness. They imitated the movement of the bear climbing the branches. Like the ostrich looking back, they moved their bodies to maintain the vitality of the body. I have a set of health methods called the five-bird play. One is called the tiger, the second is called the deer, the third is called the bear, the fourth is called the monkey, and the fifth is called the bird. It can also remove diseases and make the body agile.

古文：体中不快，起作一禽之戏，沾濡汗出，因上著粉，身体轻便，腹中欲食。 
现代文：并活动身体，使身体敏捷，如果身体感到不舒服，就起来做一次疫情之戏，全身就会出汗再敷上粉，再在身体上敷粉，身体就会轻便，也会食欲大增。 
English: And move the body, make the body agile, if the body feels uncomfortable, get up and do an epidemic play, the whole body will sweat and then apply powder, and then apply powder on the body, the body will be light, and the appetite will increase greatly.

古文：普施行之，年九十馀，耳目聪明，齿牙完坚。
现代文：吴普按照方法实行，九十多岁的时候还耳聪目明，牙齿完整尖利。
English: Wu Pu practiced according to the method, and when he was more than 90 years old, he was still bright-eyed and sharp-toothed.

古文：阿善针术。
现代文：樊阿擅长施针。
English: Yaa is good at needlework.

古文：凡医咸言背及胸藏之间不可妄针，针之不过四分，而阿针背入一二寸，巨阙胸藏针下五六寸，而病辄皆瘳。
现代文：凡是学医的人都说前胸和后背之间不能胡乱施针，施针的时候也不过四分，但樊阿针灸，后背可深入一二寸，而在肚脐沿腹线上至剑突处的任脉经穴，也能深入五六寸，病人都能痊愈。
English: Everyone who studies medicine says that you can't randomly apply needles between the forearm and the back, and the time to apply needles is only four minutes, but according to acupuncture, the back can be deepened by one or two inches, and in the navel along the abdominal line to the transverse process at the point of the sword, it can also be deepened by five or six inches, and patients can be cured.

古文：阿从佗求可服食益於人者，佗授以漆叶青黏散。
现代文：樊阿向华佗请求有益于人体的食物药方，华佗教授他漆叶青黏散。
English: Yaa asked Hua Wei for food and medicine recipes that are beneficial to the human body, and Hua Wei taught him how to make lacquer.

古文：漆叶屑一升，青黏屑十四两，以是为率，言久服去三虫，利五藏，轻体，使人头不白。
现代文：漆叶末一升，青黏末十四两，用这个作为药方，说长久服用可以去掉三种体内的寄生虫，对五脏有力，使身体轻盈，使人头发不花白。
English: One litre of lacquer leaf powder and 14 ounces of green sticky powder are used as a prescription. It is said that long-term use can remove three kinds of parasites in the body, have a strong effect on the internal organs, make the body light, and make people's hair white.

古文：阿从其言，寿百馀岁。
现代文：樊阿听从了华佗的话，活了一百多岁。
English: Yaa followed Hua Yao's advice and lived for more than a hundred years.

古文：漆叶处所而有，青黏生於丰、沛、彭城及朝歌云。
现代文：漆叶生长在各地，据说在丰县、沛县、彭城和朝歌。
English: Urushi leaves grow all over the country, and are said to originate in Feng County, Pei County, Pengcheng and Chaoga.

古文：杜夔字公良，河南人也。
现代文：杜夔，字公良，河南人，因为精通音律而担任雅乐郎。
English: Du Xuan, surnamed Gong Liang, a native of Henan Province, served as a court musician because of his mastery of musical notation.

古文：以知音为雅乐郎，中平五年，疾去官。州郡司徒礼辟，以世乱奔荆州。荆州牧刘表令与孟曜为汉主合雅乐，乐备，表欲庭观之，夔谏曰： 今将军号为天子合乐，而庭作之，无乃不可乎！ 
现代文：中平五年，因为生病辞官，州郡的司徒以礼征召他，他因为动乱而逃奔到荆州，荆州牧刘表让孟曜和他主持创作帝王朝会所用的雅乐，音乐准备好之后，刘表想要在庭院内观看，杜夔进谏说： 现在将军是以为天子准备雅乐为名义，却在庭院内欣赏，只怕不可以呀！ 
English: In the middle of the fifth year of the Heian period, because of the illness of the dictionary officer, the governor of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture of the prefecture.

古文：表纳其言而止。
现代文：刘表接纳了他的话而停止了这一行为。
English: Liu table accepted his words and stopped the act.

古文：后表子琮降太祖，太祖以夔为军谋祭酒，参太乐事，因令创制雅乐。
现代文：后来刘表的儿子刘琮投降了太祖，太祖让杜夔担任军谋祭酒，参与太乐之事，并令他创制雅乐。
English: Later, Liu Biao, the son of Liu Biao, surrendered to the great-grandfather. The great-grandfather asked Du Rong to serve as the military strategist of the sacrificial wine, participate in the Tai Le, and ordered him to create elegant music.

古文：夔善钟律，聪思过人，丝竹八音，靡所不能，惟歌舞非所长。
现代文：杜葵擅长音律，聪慧过人，各种乐器没有他不擅长的，只有唱歌跳舞不是他的专长。
English: Du Kwai is good at music, extremely intelligent, he is not good at all kinds of musical instruments, only singing and dancing is not his specialty.

古文：时散郎邓静、尹齐善咏雅乐，歌师尹胡能歌宗庙郊祀之曲，舞师冯肃、服养晓知先代诸舞，夔总统研精，远考诸经，近采故事，教习讲肄，备作乐器，绍复先代古乐，皆自夔始也。
现代文：当时的郎邓静、尹齐擅长歌咏雅乐，乐师尹胡能歌唱宗庙祭祀的乐曲，舞师冯肃、服养通晓先代的各种舞蹈，杜夔主管这些事，深入研究，考察经典，并根据前代的事例记载，给弟子讲授，并制作乐器，恢复继承先代的古乐，这些事都是从杜夔开始的。
English: At that time, Lang Deng Jing and Yin Qi were good at singing courtly music, the musician Yin Hu could sing the music of the ancestral temple, and the dancers Feng Su and Zhu Yao were familiar with the various dances of the previous generation. Du Juan was in charge of these things, conducted in-depth research, examined the classics, and based on the previous generation's case records, taught his disciples, and made musical instruments to restore the ancient music inherited from the previous generation. These things all started with Du Juan.

古文：黄初中，为太乐令、协律都尉。
现代文：黄初年间，杜夔任太乐令、协律都尉。
English: In the first year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Du Xuan served as the Tailei and the co-ruler.

古文：汉铸钟工柴玉巧有意思，形器之中，多所造作，亦为时贵人见知。
现代文：汉铸钟的工匠柴玉手艺精巧，各种器具大多是他制造的，当时的达官贵人都很看重他。
English: The craftsman of the Han casting bell, Chaiyu, was skilled in craftsmanship, and most of the various appliances were made by him. At that time, the dignitaries valued him very much.

古文：夔令玉铸铜钟，其声均清浊多不如法，数毁改作。
现代文：杜夔让柴玉铸造铜钟，声音的清浊都不合古法，杜夔就命他多次毁坏并改作。
English: Du Xun asked Chaiyu to cast a bronze bell, but the clarity of the sound was not in accordance with the ancient law. Du Xun ordered him to destroy and remake it several times.

古文：玉甚厌之，谓夔清浊任意，颇拒捍夔。
现代文：柴玉心中厌烦，认为杜葵随意指挥，心中很是抗拒。
English: Chaitama is bored in his heart and thinks that Du Kwai commands at will. In his heart, he is very resistant.

古文：夔、玉更相白於太祖，太祖取所铸钟，杂错更试，然后知夔为精而玉之妄也，於是罪玉及诸子，皆为养马士。
现代文：两人相继上报到太祖那里，太祖将柴玉所铸造的铜钟取来，敲响铜钟听音色，发现杜葵很是精通，而柴玉有很多错误，于是就惩罚了柴玉和他的儿子们，让他们都作为养马人。
English: The two successively reported to the great-grandfather. The great-grandfather took the bronze bell cast by Chaiyu, rang the bell to listen to the tone, found that Du Kwai was very proficient, and Chaiyu had many mistakes, so he punished Chaiyu and his sons, making them all horse breeders.

古文：文帝爱待玉，又尝令夔与〈马真〉等於宾客之中吹笙鼓琴，夔有难色，由是帝意不阅。
现代文：文帝曹丕看重柴玉，又曾经下令杜夔和左马真等人在宾客面前吹笙弹琴，杜夔面有难色，因此曹丕感到不悦。
English: Emperor Cao Pi valued chai yu, and once ordered Du Xi and Zuo Ma Zhen and others to play the piano in front of the guests. Du Xi did not like this, so Cao Pi was displeased.

古文：后因他事系夔，使〈马真〉等就学，夔自谓所习者雅，仕宦有本，意犹不满，遂黜免以卒。
现代文：后来因为其他的事情将杜葵收押起来，让左马真等人去向杜夔学习，杜葵认为所学习的东西是雅乐，是做官的资本，心中还存有不满，于是就被罢免，最后去世了。
English: Later, for other reasons, Du Kwai was detained, and Zuo Ma Zhen and others were sent to learn from Du Yu. Du Kwai thought that what he was learning was elegant music, the capital of being an official, and there was still dissatisfaction in his heart, so he was dismissed and finally died.

古文：弟子河南邵登、张泰、桑馥，各至太乐丞，下邳陈颃司律中郎将。
现代文：杜夔的弟子有河南邵登、张泰、桑馥，他们都各自做官到太乐丞，下邳县陈颃任司律中郎将。
English: Du Xi's disciples include Henan Shaodeng, Zhang Tai, and Mulberry, all of whom have served as officials to the rank of Tai Lezheng, and Chen Xi of Shimoqi County has served as the chief magistrate.

古文：自左延年等虽妙於音，咸善郑声，其好古存正莫及夔。
现代文：从汉代的左延年开始，他们虽然擅长音律，但大多喜欢郑国的音乐，真正喜好古代留存下来的音乐的，没有人比得上杜葵。
English: From the beginning of Zuoyan in the Han Dynasty, although they are good at music, most of them like the music of Zhengzhou. If you really like the music that has been preserved from ancient times, there is no one better than Du Ao.

古文：朱建平，沛国人也。善相术，於闾巷之间，效验非一。
现代文：朱建平，是沛国人，擅长看相之术，在民间经常有所验证。
English: Zhu Jianping, a native of Pei Province, is good at reading facial expressions, which is often verified by the general public.

古文：太祖为魏公，闻之，召为郎。
现代文：太祖担任魏公时，听说了他，征召他作为郎官。
English: When the great-grandfather served as Wei Gong, he heard about him and recruited him as a vassal.

古文：文帝为五官将，坐上会客三十馀人，文帝问己年寿，又令遍相众宾。建平曰： 将军当寿八十，至四十时当有小厄，愿谨护之。 
现代文：文帝担任五官中郎将时，召开宴会，会上的宾客有三十多人，文帝问自己的年岁，又让他看遍在座的所有宾客，朱建平说： 将军应该能活到八十岁，四十岁的时候会有小的厄运，希望好好保重。 
English: When Emperor Wen served as the general secretary, he held a banquet. There were more than thirty guests at the meeting. Emperor Wen asked how old he was, and asked him to look at all the guests present. Zhu Jianping said: The general should be able to live to the age of eighty. At the age of forty, there will be a little bad luck. I hope you take good care of yourself.

古文：谓夏侯威曰： 君四十九位为州牧，而当有厄，厄若得过，可年至七十，致位公辅。 
现代文：又对夏侯威说： 您四十久岁时担任州牧，但会有厄运危险，如果能过去，就能活到七十，岁并且能位列宰辅。 
English: He also said to Xia Hauwei: When you are forty years old, you will serve as a state pastor, but there will be a risk of bad luck. If you can pass, you can live to the age of seventy and can be ranked as a deputy.

古文：谓应璩曰： 君六十二位为常伯，而当有厄，先此一年，当独见一白狗，而旁人不见也。 
现代文：又对应璩说： 您六十二岁时能担任常伯，但也会遇到危险。在这之前一年，只有您能见到一只白狗，但旁人见不到。 
English: He also said to the stork, "When you are sixty-two years old, you will be able to serve as a great-uncle, but you will also be in danger. A year before this, only you can see a white dog, but no one else can see it.

古文：谓曹彪曰： 君据藩国，至五十七当厄於兵，宜善防之。 
现代文：对曹彪说： 您据守藩国，五十七岁的时候会在军事上有危险，应该好好的预防。 
English: He said to Cao Biao, "You are in charge of the defense of the domain. When you are fifty-seven years old, you will be in danger in the military. You should take good precautions.

古文：初，颍川荀攸、锺繇相与亲善。
现代文：当初，颍川的荀攸、钟繇。和朱建平关系很好。
English: At the beginning, the relationship between Zhu Jianping and Zhu Youyou and Zhong Ying of Beichuan was very good.

古文：攸先亡，子幼。
现代文：荀攸先去世，孩子年幼。
English: Zou Youxian died first, the child was young.

古文：繇经纪其门户，欲嫁其妾。与人书曰： 吾与公达曾共使朱建平相，建平曰： 荀君虽少，然当以后事付锺君。
现代文：钟繇帮他处理家庭事务，他想把荀攸的妾嫁出去，给人写信说： 我和荀攸曾经都让朱建平看相，朱建平说： 荀攸虽然年纪小，但也他的后事会托付给钟君。 
English: Zhong Yu helped him to deal with family affairs. He wanted to marry off Yu Yu's concubine and wrote a letter to someone saying, "Both Yu Yu and I have let Zhu Jianping see him. Zhu Jianping said, "Although Yu Yu is young, he will entrust his future affairs to Zhong Jun."

古文：吾时啁之曰： 惟当嫁卿阿骛耳。
现代文：我当时笑着说： 只是把你的妾嫁出去罢了。 
English: I smiled and said, "Just marry off your concubine."

古文：何意此子竟早陨没，戏言遂验乎！
现代文：怎么会想到他竟然真的早死，戏言竟然应验了。
English: How could I have imagined that he would actually die early, that the joke would actually come true.

古文：今欲嫁阿骛，使得善处。
现代文：现在想要把阿骛嫁出去，让她有个好去处。
English: Now I want to marry off my grandmother and give her a good place to go.

古文：追思建平之妙，虽唐举、许负何以复加也！ 
现代文：回想起朱建平的神妙，即使是唐举、许负也不能超过他。
English: Recalling the magic of Zhu Jianping, even Tang Jiu and Xu Wan could not surpass him.

古文：文帝黄初七年，年四十，病困，谓左右曰： 建平所言八十，谓昼夜也，吾其决矣。 
现代文：黄初七年，文帝四十岁，病重，对身边的侍从说： 朱建平说我能活到八十岁，是指昼夜加起来，现在我应该快要去世了。 
English: In the seventh year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Emperor Wen was forty years old and seriously ill. He said to the attendants around him: Zhu Jianping said that I could live to be eighty years old, meaning that adding up the days and nights, now I should be about to die.

古文：顷之，果崩。
现代文：不久，果然就驾崩了。
English: Soon after, he died.

古文：夏侯威为兖州刺史，年四十九，十二月上旬得疾，念建平之言，自分必死，豫作遗令及送丧之备，咸使素办。
现代文：夏侯威担任衮州刺史，四十九岁那一年，在十二月上旬生了病，想到朱建平的话，觉得一定会死，就预先留下遗命，并预备了后事，以及丧礼用品，都很素朴。
English: Xia Houwei was the 49-year-old chief historian of Zhangzhou when he fell ill in early December. Thinking of Zhu Jianping's words, he felt that he would surely die, so he left his will in advance, and prepared the after-effects, as well as the funeral supplies, all of which were simple.

古文：至下旬转差，垂以平复。
现代文：到了下旬，病情见好，不久就痊愈了。
English: By the end of the month, his condition had improved and he soon recovered.

古文：三十日日昃，请纪纲大吏设酒，曰： 吾所苦渐平，明日鸡鸣，年便五十，建平之戒，真必过矣。 
现代文：三十日傍晚，请府中的吏役备办酒席，说： 我的灾祸渐渐平定了，明天鸡鸣的时候我就五十岁了，朱建平的告诫，看来是要过去了。 
English: On the evening of the 30th, he asked the officials in the government to prepare a banquet and said, "My misfortune has gradually subsided. Tomorrow, when the rooster crows, I will be fifty years old. Zhu Jianping's warning seems to have passed."

古文：威罢客之后，合瞑疾动，夜半遂卒。
现代文：夏侯威在宾客离开之后突然发病，半夜就去世了。
English: Xia Houwei suddenly fell ill after the guests left, and died in the middle of the night.

古文：璩六十一为侍中，直省内，欻见白狗，问之众人，悉无见者。
现代文：应璩在六十一岁的时候担任了侍中，有一天到到官府时，看见一只白狗，问旁边众人，众人都没有看到。
English: At the age of sixty-one, Ying Yao served as an aide-de-camp. One day, when he arrived at the government office, he saw a white dog. He asked the people around him, but no one saw it.

古文：於是数聚会，并急游观田里，饮宴自娱，过期一年，六十三卒。
现代文：于是经常跟友人聚会并四处游玩，宴饮自乐，过了一年，在六十三岁的时候去世。
English: As a result, he often met with friends and traveled around, feasting and enjoying himself. A year later, he died at the age of 63.

古文：曹彪封楚王，年五十七，坐与王凌通谋，赐死。
现代文：曹彪被封为楚王，那一年五十七岁，因为跟王凌密谋造反而被赐死。
English: Cao Biao was crowned King of Chu. That year, at the age of 57, he was sentenced to death for plotting a rebellion with Wang Ling.

古文：凡说此辈，无不如言，不能具详，故粗记数事。
现代文：凡是说到这一些人，没有不像朱建平所预料的，因为不能详细记述，所以简略的记下几件。
English: When it comes to these people, there is nothing different from what Zhu Jianping expected. Because it is not possible to describe them in detail, I will briefly write down a few things.

古文：惟相司空王昶、征北将军程喜、中领军王肃有蹉跌云。
现代文：只有只有给司空王昶、征北将军程喜、中领军王肃有些差错。
English: However, there are some mistakes only in the accounts of Wang Qian, the commander of the Northern Expeditionary Army, Cheng Xi, and Wang Su, the leader of the Central Expeditionary Army.

古文：肃年六十二，疾笃，众医并以为不愈。肃夫人问以遣言，肃云： 建平相我逾七十，位至三公，今皆未也，将何虑乎！ 
现代文：王肃六十二岁时岁生病很重，医师都认为不能痊愈，王肃的夫人问他的遗言，王肃说： 朱建平说我会活到七十岁，位列三公，现在还没有到，要担忧什么呢？ 
English: When Wang Su was sixty-two years old, he was very ill and doctors believed that he would not recover. Wang Su's wife asked him for his last words. Wang Su said: Zhu Jianping said that I would live to the age of seventy and would be ranked as the third generation of emperors. I have not yet reached that age, so what should I worry about?

古文：而肃竟卒。
现代文：但王肃最后还是去世了。
English: But Wang Su finally passed away.

古文：建平又善相马。文帝将出，取马外入，建平道遇之，语曰： 此马之相，今日死矣。 
现代文：朱建平还善于相马，文帝将要外出时，取来一匹马，朱建平在路上看到了马，说： 这匹马的样子，今天是一定要死的。 
English: Zhu Jianping was also good at horse-sighting. When Emperor Wen was about to go out for a ride, he fetched a horse. Zhu Jianping saw the horse on the road and said, "This horse looks like it's going to die today."

古文：帝将乘马，马恶衣香，惊咬文帝膝，帝大怒，即便杀之。
现代文：文帝将要上马，马讨厌衣服上的香味，惊恐的咬文帝的膝盖，文帝大怒，随即就将马杀了。
English: Emperor Wen is about to mount his horse. The horse hates the fragrance on his clothes and bites Emperor Wen's knee in fright. Emperor Wen is furious and immediately kills the horse.

古文：建平黄初中卒。周宣字孔和，乐安人也。
现代文：黄初年间，朱建平去世。周宣，字孔和，乐安人。
English: In the first year of the Yellow Emperor, Zhu Jianping passed away. Zhou Xuan, also known as Kong He, was a man of peace.

古文：为郡吏。
现代文：在郡中担任吏役。
English: He served as an official in the county.

古文：太守杨沛梦人曰： 八月一日曹公当至，必与君杖，饮以药酒。 
现代文：太守杨沛做梦梦到一个人对他说： 八月一日曹公就会来，一定会授给您仪仗，并让您喝下药酒。 
English: Yang Pei, the daimyō, had a dream in which a man said to him, "On August 1st, Cao Gong will come, and he will surely give you an honorable battle and let you drink medicinal wine.

古文：使宣占之。是时黄巾贼起，宣对曰： 夫杖起弱者，药治人病，八月一日，贼必除灭。 
现代文：杨沛让周宣占卜这件事，当时黄巾军起兵，周宣回答说： 仪仗是为了体弱的人站起来，药是能治人病的。八月一日，贼军一定会被消灭。 
English: Yang Pei asked Zhou Xuan to divine the matter. At that time, the Yellow Turban Army raised an army. Zhou Xuan replied: The honorable battle is for the weak to stand up, and the medicine is able to cure people's diseases. On August 1, the thief army will definitely be eliminated.

古文：至期，贼果破。
现代文：到了那一天，黄巾军果然被攻破了。
English: On that day, the Yellow Turban Army was defeated.

古文：后东平刘桢梦蛇四足，穴居门中，使宣占之，宣曰： 此为国梦，非君家之事也。
现代文：后来东平的刘桢梦到蛇，有四只脚，住在门中的洞里，让周宣占卜这件事，周宣说： 这是为国家做梦，不是您自己家中的事情。
English: Later, Dongping's Liu Qian dreamed of a snake with four legs that lived in a hole in the door, and asked Zhou Xuan to divine the matter. Zhou Xuan said: This is a dream for the country, not a matter in your own home.

古文：当杀女子而作贼者。 
现代文：应该应该杀了那些身为贼人的女子。 
English: They should have killed those thieving women.

古文：顷之，女贼郑、姜遂俱夷讨，以蛇女子之祥，足非蛇之所宜故也。
现代文：不久，女贼郑氏、姜氏等人都被诛杀，因为蛇象征着女子，而蛇是没有脚的，所以这些女子会被杀。
English: Soon, the female thieves Zheng, Jiang and others were killed, because the snake symbolizes a woman, and the snake has no feet, so these women will be killed.

古文：文帝问宣曰： 吾梦殿屋两瓦堕地，化为双鸳鸯，此何谓也？ 宣对曰： 后宫当有暴死者。 
现代文：文帝问周宣说： 我梦到殿中有两片瓦落地，化成了两只鸳鸯，这是什么意思呢？ 周宣回答说： 这是后宫应该会有猝死的人。 
English: Emperor Wen asked Zhou Xuan, "What does it mean that I dreamed that two tiles in the palace fell to the ground and turned into two tadpoles?" Zhou Xuan replied, "This is a person who should have a sudden death in the harem.

古文：帝曰： 吾诈卿耳！ 
现代文：文帝说： 我只是骗你的罢了。 
English: Wendi said, "I just lied to you."

古文：宣对曰： 夫梦者意耳，苟以形言，便占吉凶。 
现代文：周宣回答说： 梦是意念所化，只需要表达语言就能占卜吉凶。 
English: Zhou Xuan replied, "Dreams are the result of thoughts. You only need to express them in words to tell fortunes.

古文：言未毕，而黄门令奏宫人相杀。
现代文：话还没有说完，就有黄门令上报说后宫有宫人互相杀害。
English: Before the speech was over, there was a report from the Yellow Gate that courtiers in the harem were killing each other.

古文：无几，帝复问曰： 我昨夜梦青气自地属天。 
现代文：不久，文帝又问说： 我昨晚梦到一股青烟，从地直升上天。 
English: Not long after, Wen Di asked again, "Last night, I dreamed of a stream of blue smoke rising from the ground to the sky.

古文：宣对曰： 天下当有贵女子冤死。 是时，帝已遣使赐甄后玺书，闻宣言而悔之，遣人追使者不及。
现代文：周宣回答说： 天下恐怕会有一个尊贵的女子冤死。 当时文帝已经派遣使者给甄皇后赐下诏书印信，听到周宣的话就很后悔，派人追赶使者，但赶不上。
English: Zhou Xuan replied, "I'm afraid there will be a noble woman who will die an unjust death." At that time, Emperor Wen had already sent an envoy to give Empress Zhen a sealed imperial edict. Hearing Zhou Xuan's words, he regretted very much and sent someone to chase the envoy, but he couldn't catch up.

古文：帝复问曰： 吾梦摩钱文，欲令灭而更愈明，此何谓邪？ 
现代文：文帝又问说： 我做梦到铜钱花纹，想把它们磨灭但是越磨越亮，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Wen Di also asked: I dreamed of the copper money pattern, I wanted to rub them out, but the more I rub them, the brighter they become. Why is this?

古文：宣怅然不对。
现代文：周宣沉默着没有回答。
English: Zhou Xuan remained silent and did not answer.

古文：帝重问之，宣对曰： 此自陛下家事，虽意欲尔而太后不听，是以文欲灭而明耳。 
现代文：文帝又再次询问，周宣回答说： 这是陛下的家事，虽然您想有所做为，但太后不允许，所以想要磨灭文字，但它却越来越亮。 
English: Emperor Wen asked again, and Zhou Xuan replied, "This is your majesty's family business. Although you want to do something, the empress dowager does not allow it, so you want to erase the writing, but it is getting brighter and brighter."

古文：时帝欲治弟植之罪，偪於太后，但加贬爵。以宣为中郎，属太史。
现代文：当时文帝想要治弟弟曹植的罪，但被太后逼迫，只是贬了爵位，文帝任命周宣为中郎，隶属于太史。
English: At that time, Emperor Wen wanted to punish his brother Cao Zhi's crime, but was forced by the empress dowager to reduce his title. Emperor Wen appointed Zhou Xuan as the middle brother, subordinate to Emperor Taishi.

古文：尝有问宣曰： 吾昨夜梦见刍狗，其占何也？ 
现代文：曾经有人问周宣说： 我昨天梦到一只小狗，这是表示什么呢？ 
English: Someone once asked Zhou Xuan: I dreamt of a puppy yesterday, what does it mean?

古文：宣答曰： 君欲得美食耳！ 
现代文：周宣回答说： 您只是能吃到美食罢了。 
English: Zhou Xuan replied: You can only eat delicious food.

古文：有顷，出行，果遇丰膳。
现代文：不久这人出去办事，果然遇上了丰盛的宴会。
English: Soon after, the man went out on an errand and was met with a sumptuous banquet.

古文：后又问宣曰： 昨夜复梦见刍狗，何也？ 宣曰： 君欲堕车折脚，宜戒慎之。 顷之，果如宣言。
现代文：后来又问周宣说： 昨天晚上又梦到小狗，为什么呢？ 周宣说： 您将会从车上掉下，折断脚，应该小心谨慎。 
English: Later, he asked Zhou Xuan: "Yesterday night, I dreamed of a puppy again, why?" Zhou Xuan said: "You will fall from the car and break your foot, you should be careful.

古文：后又问宣： 昨夜复梦见刍狗，何也？ 宣曰： 君家失火，当善护之。 
现代文：不久，果然就像周宣所说的那样。后来又问周宣说： 昨天又梦到小狗，为什么呢？ 周宣说： 您家中要失火，应该好好保护。 
English: Soon, it was just as Zhou Xuan said. Later, he asked Zhou Xuan: "Yesterday, I dreamt of a puppy again. Why?" Zhou Xuan said: "If there is a fire in your home, you should protect it well."

古文：俄遂火起。
现代文：不久果然起火了。
English: Soon after, a fire broke out.

古文：语宣曰： 前后三时，皆不梦也。聊试君耳，何以皆验邪？ 
现代文：这人对周宣说： 其实前后三次都不是梦，只是想要试探您罢了，为什么都应验了呢？ 
English: This person said to Zhou Xuan: Actually, the three times before and after were not dreams, but just to test you. Why did they all come true?

古文：宣对曰： 此神灵动君使言，故与真梦无异也。 
现代文：周宣回答说： 这是因为神灵在促使您讲话，所以跟真的做梦没有什么区别。 
English: Zhou Xuan replied: This is because the gods are urging you to speak, so there is no difference from really dreaming.

古文：又问宣曰： 三梦刍狗而其占不同，何也？ 
现代文：这人又问周宣说： 三次梦到小狗，但是它们的征兆都不同，为什么呢？ 
English: This person also asked Zhou Xuanwu: "Three times I dreamed of a puppy, but their signs were all different. Why?

古文：宣曰： 刍狗者，祭神之物。
现代文：周宣说： 小狗是用来祭神的物品。
English: Zhou Xuan said, "Puppies are items used to worship God.

古文：故君始梦，当得馀食也。
现代文：所以您刚开始梦到的时候，应该会得到美食。
English: So when you first start dreaming, you should get good food.

古文：祭祀既讫，则刍狗为车所轹，故中梦当堕车折脚也。刍狗既车轹之后，必载以为樵，故后梦忧失火也。 
现代文：祭祀完毕之后，小狗就会被车轧死，所以您会从车上摔下折断脚，小狗被车压死之后，一定会用被装进木框里，所以后面的梦是跟失火有关的。 
English: After the sacrifice is completed, the puppy will be killed by the car, so you will fall off the car and break your foot. After the puppy is crushed by the car, it will definitely be put into the wooden frame, so the following dream is related to the fire.

古文：宣之叙梦，凡此类也。
现代文：周宣说到人做梦大概都是这种情况。
English: Zhou Xuan said that this is probably the case when people dream.

古文：十中八九，世以比建平之相矣。
现代文：十次有八九次都是说中的，世人都把他和朱建平的面相术相比。
English: People compare him to Zhu Jianping's physiognomy.

古文：其馀效故不次列。
现代文：其他的事情就不列举了。
English: I won't go into the other things.

古文：明帝末卒。
现代文：周宣在明帝末年去世。
English: Zhou Xuan died at the end of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：管辂字公明，平原人也。
现代文：管辂，字公明，是平原人。
English: Guanqian, the character of Gongming, is a plain person.

古文：容貌粗丑，无威仪而嗜酒，饮食言戏，不择非类，故人多爱之而不敬也。
现代文：容貌粗犷丑陋，没有威严，喜好喝酒。无论对谁都很喜欢开玩笑，所以当地的人都很喜欢他，但并不尊敬他。
English: Rough-looking, ugly, undignified, fond of drink, and fond of playing practical jokes on everyone, he was liked but not respected by the locals.

古文：父为利漕，利漕民郭恩兄弟三人，皆得躄疾，使辂筮其所由。
现代文：管辂的父亲在利漕做官，利漕的百姓郭恩兄弟三人都得了疾病，就想要管辂占卜这个缘由。
English: Guan Yu's father was an official in Lishuo. The three Guo En brothers, who were citizens of Lishuo, fell ill and wanted to ask Guan Yu about divination.

古文：辂曰： 卦中有君本墓，墓中有女鬼，非君伯母，当叔母也。
现代文：管辂说： 卦象中说您家中有坟，坟中有一个女鬼，不是您的伯母，应该是叔母。
English: Guan Yu said: Gua Xiang said that there is a grave in your home, and there is a female ghost in the grave. It is not your aunt, it should be your aunt.

古文：昔饥荒之世，当有利其数升米者，排著井中，啧啧有声，推一大石，下破其头，孤魂冤痛，自诉於天。 
现代文：过去饥荒的年代有人想要得到她的几升米，就将她推到井中。她在井中挣扎发出声音，上面的人又推下一块大石头，砸破了她的头，您的叔母孤魂野鬼，心怀冤屈，就向上天哭诉。 
English: During the famine years of the past, someone who wanted to get a few liters of her rice pushed her into the well. She struggled in the well and made a sound. The person above pushed down a large stone and broke her head. Your aunt, a lonely ghost, with a grievance, cried to heaven.

古文：於是恩涕泣服罪。
现代文：随后郭恩就哭着认了罪。
English: Guo En then cried and confessed to the crime.

古文：广平刘奉林妇病困，已买棺器。
现代文：广平郡的刘奉林妻子病得很严重，已经买好了棺木。
English: Liu Fenglin's wife in Guangping County is seriously ill and has already bought a coffin.

古文：时正月也，使辂占，曰： 命在八月辛卯日日中之时。 
现代文：当时是正月，让管辂占卜，管辂说： 她的命数到一直八月辛卯日中午。 
English: At that time, it was the first month of the year. He asked Guan Yu to do some divination. Guan Yu said, "Her life will last until noon on the hottest day in August."

古文：林谓必不然，而妇渐差，至秋发动，一如辂言。
现代文：刘奉林认为不是，但他妻子的病情渐渐好转，到了秋天，复发而死，都像管辂说的那样。
English: Liu Fenglin thought not, but his wife's condition gradually improved, and in the autumn, she relapsed and died, just as Guan Yu said.

古文：辂往见安平太守王基，基令作卦，辂曰： 当有贱妇人，生一男儿，堕地便走入灶中死。
现代文：管辂前去拜见安平郡太守王基，王基让他算卦，管辂说： 应该会有一个低贱的妇人，生了一个男儿，但刚落地就走到灶中而死。
English: Guan Yu went to visit Wang Ji, the eunuch of Anping County. Wang Ji asked him to calculate a riddle. Guan Yu said: There should be a lowly woman who gave birth to a boy, but as soon as she fell to the ground, she went to the stove and died.

古文：又床上当有一大蛇衔笔，小大共视，须臾去之也。
现代文：床上还应该有一条大蛇衔着笔，家中老小都能一起看看，不久这条蛇就离开了。
English: There should also be a big snake holding a pen on the bed, so that the whole family can look at it together, and soon the snake will leave.

古文：又乌来入室中，与燕共斗，燕死，乌去。有此三怪。 
现代文：还有鸟飞到屋里跟燕子相斗，燕子会死，鸟会飞走，有这三件怪事。 
English: And a bird will fly into the house and fight with a swallow, and the swallow will die, and the bird will fly away, and these three strange things will happen.

古文：基大惊，问其吉凶。
现代文：王基大惊，立刻问其中的吉凶。
English: Wang Ji was shocked and immediately asked about the cause and effect.

古文：辂曰： 直客舍久远，魑魅魍魉为怪耳。
现代文：管辂说： 只是因为您的家住得离人远，所以有魑魅魍魉作怪罢了。
English: Guan Yu said, "It's just because your home is far away from people that there are ghosts.

古文：儿生便走，非能自走，直宋无忌之妖将其入灶也。
现代文：男孩生下来就能行走，不是他能自己走，只是因为有横行无忌的妖魔鬼怪将他叼到灶中。
English: The boy was born able to walk, not because he could walk on his own, but because a rampant demon chased him into the kitchen.

古文：大蛇衔笔，直老书佐耳。乌与燕斗，直老铃下耳。
现代文：大蛇叼着笔只是老书佐罢了，鸟跟燕子相斗，只是老铃坠下。
English: The snake holding a pen is just an old scribbler, the bird is fighting with the swallow, but the old bell is falling down.

古文：今卦中见象而不见其凶，知非妖咎之徵，自无所忧也。 
现代文：现在卦中有现象出现，却没有呈现凶兆，就知道这不是灾难的征兆，所以不需要忧虑。 
English: Now, if there is a phenomenon in the fortune-telling, but there is no ominous sign, you know that this is not a sign of disaster, so there is no need to worry.

古文：后卒无患。
现代文：后来果然也没有什么忧患。
English: Later, there were no worries.

古文：时信都令家妇女惊恐，更互疾病，使辂筮之。辂曰： 君北堂西头，有两死男子，一男持矛，一男持弓箭，头在壁内，脚在壁外。
现代文：当时信都县令家中的女子受惊，都相继生病，县令就让管辂占卜，管辂说： 您家中北屋西头中有两个死去的男子，一个拿着矛，一个拿着弓箭，头在壁内，脚在壁外。
English: At that time, Xindu County ordered the women in the family to be frightened, and they all fell ill one after another. The county ordered Guan Yu to do divination. Guan Yu said: There are two dead men in the west end of the north house of your family, one holding a spear, one holding a bow and arrow, with their heads inside the wall and their feet outside the wall.

古文：持矛者主刺头，故头重痛不得举也。持弓箭者主射胸腹，故心中县痛不得饮食也。
现代文：拿着矛的人，主管刺头，所以头很痛抬不起来，拿着弓箭的人主管射胸和腹部，所以女眷心中发痛不能饮食。
English: The man with the spear is in charge of stabbing the head, so the head is very painful and can't be lifted. The man with the bow and arrow is in charge of shooting the chest and abdomen, so the woman can't eat because of the pain in her heart.

古文：昼则浮游，夜来病人，故使惊恐也。 於是掘徙骸骨，家中皆愈。
现代文：他们白天四处游荡，晚上就来祸害人，所以使得女眷惊恐。 于是县令就将骸骨挖出转移走，家中女眷的病就痊愈了。
English: They roamed around during the day and came at night to wreak havoc, causing the women to panic, so the county magistrate exhumed the skeletons and moved them away, and the illness of the women in the family was cured.

古文：清河王经去官还家，辂与相见。经曰： 近有一怪，大不喜之，欲烦作卦。 
现代文：清河郡的王经从官府回家，管辂和他相见，王经说： 近来有一件怪事，让人很不喜欢，想要劳烦你算一卦。 
English: Wang Jing from Qinghe County came home from the government office. Guan Yu met him. Wang Jing said, "Recently, there was a strange thing that people didn't like very much, and they wanted to bother you.

古文：卦成，辂曰： 爻吉，不为怪也。
现代文：算完卦，管辂说： 吉卦，不是怪事。
English: After the calculation, Guan Yu said, "It's not a strange thing.

古文：君夜在堂户前，有一流光如燕爵者，入君怀中，殷殷有声，内神不安，解衣彷徉，招呼妇人，觅索馀光。 
现代文：您晚上在房门前，在堂屋前有一道流光，像燕子一样飞入您的怀中，发出很小的声音，您心中感到不安，就解开衣服，彷徨不定，招呼妻子来看，寻找余光。 
English: In the evening, in front of your door, in front of the hall, there is a streamer of light, flying into your arms like a swallow, emitting a very small sound. You feel uneasy in your heart, so you undo your clothes, hesitate, call your wife to come and look, and look for the remaining light.

古文：经大笑曰： 实如君言。 
现代文：王经大笑说： 确实像您说的那样。 
English: Wang Jing laughed loudly and said, "It really is as you said.

古文：辂曰： 吉，迁官之徵也，其应行至。 
现代文：管辂说： 这是吉兆，是升官的征兆，应该很快会应验。 
English: Guan Yu said: This is a good omen, a sign of promotion, and it should come true soon.

古文：顷之，经为江夏太守。
现代文：不久，王经就被提升为江夏太守。
English: Soon after, Wang Jing was promoted to the post of Jiangxia governor.

古文：辂又至郭恩家，有飞鸠来在梁头，鸣甚悲。
现代文：管辂又来到郭恩家，有鸟飞来待在梁上，叫声很悲切。
English: Guan Yu came to Guo En's house again. A bird flew to stay on the beam, its cry was very sad.

古文：辂曰： 当有老公从东方来，携豚一头，酒一壶。主人虽喜，当有小故。 
现代文：管辂说： 应该会有一个老人从东面过来，带着一头猪一壶酒，主人虽然欢喜，但是应该会有小的事故。 
English: Guan Yu said: There should be an old man coming from the east, with a pig and a jug of wine. Although the owner is happy, there should be a small accident.

古文：明日果有客，如所占。
现代文：第二天果然有客来到，就像管辂所占卜的那样。
English: The next day, a guest arrived, just as Guan Yu had predicted.

古文：恩使客节酒、戒肉、慎火，而射鸡作食，箭从树间激中数岁女子手，流血惊怖。
现代文：郭恩让客人少喝酒，少吃肉，并谨慎防火，但在狩猎野鸡做食物的时候，箭头从树中飞过，伤到了一个小女孩的手，手流了血，小女孩受了很大的惊吓。
English: Guo En asked guests to drink less alcohol, eat less meat, and be careful about fire safety, but when hunting pheasants for food, an arrow flew through the tree, injuring a little girl's hand. The hand bled, and the little girl was very frightened.

古文：辂至安德令刘长仁家，有鸣鹊来在閤屋上，其声甚急。
现代文：管辂到安德县令刘长仁的家，有一只喜鹊飞来到屋顶上，叫声很急切。
English: When the magistrate arrived at the home of Liu Changren, the governor of Ande County, a magpie flew onto the roof and called out eagerly.

古文：辂曰： 鹊言东北有妇昨杀夫，牵引西家人夫离娄，候不过日在虞渊之际，告者至矣。 
现代文：管辂说： 喜鹊说，东北面有一个妇人，昨天晚上杀死了丈夫，会连累到西面的人家，在太阳下山之前告状的人就会来到了。 
English: Guan Yu said, "Magpie said, there is a woman in the northeast who killed her husband last night, and she will even bother people's homes in the west, and people who sue her will arrive before the sun goes down.

古文：到时，果有东北同伍民来告，邻妇手杀其夫，诈言西家人与夫有嫌，来杀我婿。
现代文：到了黄昏时分，果然东北面有同村人来告状说邻居的女子杀死了丈夫，还声称是西面的人家因为跟丈夫有嫌隙，才杀害了她的丈夫。
English: At dusk, a fellow villager from the northeast came to complain that the neighbor's wife had killed her husband, and also claimed that someone from the west had killed her husband because they had a grudge against him.

古文：辂至列人典农王弘直许，有飘风高三尺馀，从申上来，在庭中幢幢回转，息以复起，良久乃止。
现代文：管辂到列人县典农王弘直家，有三尺多长的飘风，从天上飞下，在院中团团旋转，停了又重新刮起，过了很久才停止。
English: When I arrived at the home of Wang Hongnao, a tenant farmer in Liren County, the wind was more than three feet long. It flew down from the sky, swirled in the courtyard, stopped and started again, and only stopped after a long time.

古文：直以问辂，辂曰： 东方当有马吏至，恐父哭子，如何！ 
现代文：王弘直就用这件事情问管辂，管辂说： 东方应该会有一个马吏来到，恐怕父亲要为儿子吊丧了。 
English: Wang Hongzhi asked Guan Yu about this matter. Guan Yu said: There should be a horseman coming from the east. I'm afraid my father will mourn for his son.

古文：明日胶东吏到，直子果亡。
现代文：第二天，胶东的官吏来到，王弘直的儿子果然去世了。
English: The next day, officials from Jiaodong arrived, and Wang Hongzhi's son died.

古文：直问其故，辂曰： 其日乙卯，则长子之候也。
现代文：王弘直问管辂其中的缘故，管辂说： 这一天是乙卯日，是长子的征兆。
English: Wang Hongzhi asked Guan Yu the reason for this, Guan Yu said: This day is the day of the second son, it is the sign of the eldest son.

古文：木落於申，斗建申，申破寅，死丧之候也。
现代文：树木在申时飘落，斗建申，申破寅，这是死亡的征兆。
English: The trees are falling down at the time of Shen, and the battle of building in Shen and breaking in Shen is a sign of death.

古文：日加午而风发，则马之候也。
现代文：日到中午时起风，那这是马的征兆。
English: If the wind picks up between sunrise and midday, it's a sign that the horse has bolted.

古文：离为文章，则吏之候也。
现代文：后来化成五彩的花纹，是官吏的征兆。
English: Later transformed into colorful patterns, it is a sign of officialdom.

古文：申未为虎，虎为大人，则父之候也。 
现代文：申位代表虎，虎代表大人，是父亲的征兆。 
English: The tiger, which represents the throne, and the tiger, which represents the adults, are signs of the father's return.

古文：有雄雉飞来，登直内铃柱头，直大以不安，令辂作卦，辂曰： 到五月必迁。 
现代文：有野公鸡飞到王弘直家的内铃柱头上，王弘直心中非常不安，就让管辂算卦，管辂说： 到了五月一定会升官。 
English: A wild rooster flew to the top of Wang Hongzhi's inner bell post. Wang Hongzhi was very uneasy in his heart, so he asked Guan Yu to calculate. Guan Yu said: I will definitely be promoted in May.

古文：时三月也，至期，直果为勃海太守。
现代文：当时是三月份，到了五月，王宏直果然被提升为渤海太守。
English: It was March at the time, and by May, Wang Hongzhi was indeed promoted to governor of Bohai.

古文：馆陶令诸葛原迁新兴太守，辂往祖饯之，宾客并会。
现代文：馆陶县令诸葛原被提升为新兴太守，管辂前往践行，宾客都聚在一起。
English: Zhugeyuan, the governor of Guanduo County, was promoted to the new governor, and the guests all gathered together.

古文：原自起取燕卵、蜂窠、蜘蛛著器中，使射覆。
现代文：诸葛原亲自取下燕窝，蜂巢，蜘蛛等物品放在器皿中，让客人射覆。
English: Zhugeyuan personally took down bird's nests, beehives, spiders and other items and placed them in vessels for guests to cover.

古文：卦成，辂曰： 第一物，含气须变，依乎宇堂，雄雌以形，翅翼舒张，此燕卵也。
现代文：算卦结束，管辂说： 第一样，含着气就会变化，居住在房梁上，雌雄不同，翅膀舒展，这是燕子蛋。
English: At the end of the calculation, Guan Yu said: First, it is the same, holding the breath will change, living on the beam, male and female are different, wings stretch, this is a swallow's egg.

古文：第二物，家室倒县，门户众多，藏精育毒，得秋乃化，此蜂窠也。
现代文：第二样，它的家门倒挂，有很多门户，收藏精华的同时又孕育着毒液，秋天才化形，这是蜂窝。
English: Second, the door of its house hangs upside down, there are many portals, collecting the essence while nurturing the venom, and it takes shape only in autumn. This is the honeycomb.

古文：第三物，觳觫长足，吐丝成罗，寻网求食，利在昬夜，此蜘蛛也。 
现代文：第三样物，有很长的脚，会吐丝，依靠罗网来寻找食物，晚上最有利于捕食，这是蜘蛛。 
English: The third species, which has very long legs, can spit silk, relies on trawling to find food, and is most predatory at night, is the spider.

古文：举坐惊喜。
现代文：在座的人都很惊讶叹喜。
English: Everyone here was surprised and delighted.

古文：辂族兄孝国，居在斥丘，辂往从之，与二客会。
现代文：管辂的族兄孝国在斥丘居住，管辂前去看望他，跟两位客人会面。
English: Guan Yu's elder brother, Xiao Guo, lived in Yanqiu. Guan Yu went to visit him and met with the two guests.

古文：客去后，辂谓孝国曰： 此二人天庭及口耳之间同有凶气，异变俱起，双魂无宅，流魂于海，骨归于家，少许时当并死也。 
现代文：客人离开之后，管辂对孝国说： 这两个人的天庭和口耳之间都有凶气，将要发生变故，他们的魂灵都没有安身之所，四处漂泊，尸骨还家，不久之后应该会一同死去。 
English: After the guests left, Guan Yu said to Xiao Guo: Both of these people have evil spirits between their palate and mouth, and things are about to change. Their souls have no place to rest, they are drifting around, their bones have been returned home, and they should die together soon.

古文：复数十日，二人饮酒醉，夜共载车，牛惊下道入漳河中，皆即溺死也。
现代文：后来过了几十天，两个人饮酒喝醉了，晚上共同乘车，牛受惊，拉着车翻入漳河中，两个人都淹死了。
English: Later, after dozens of days had passed, the two of them got drunk on alcohol and rode in a car together at night. The cow got scared and pulled the car, which overturned into the Fen River. Both of them drowned.

古文：当此之时，辂之邻里，外户不闭，无相偷窃者。
现代文：当时管路的邻居，大门不关，也没有发生偷盗的事情。
English: At that time, the neighbor of the pipeline did not close the gate, and there was no theft.

古文：清河太守华表，召辂为文学掾。
现代文：清河郡的太守华表征召管辂作为文学掾。
English: The governor of Qinghe County, Ta Shouhua, called for the use of the cane as a literary implement.

古文：安平赵孔曜荐辂於冀州刺史裴徽曰： 辂雅性宽大，与世无忌，仰观天文则同妙甘公、石申，俯览周易则齐思季主。
现代文：安平郡的赵孔曜向冀州刺史裴徽举荐管辂说： 管辂性情温和宽大温厚，与世无争，仰观天文，能和甘公，石申一样神妙，钻研周易，能跟季主相提并论。
English: Zhao Kongyou of Anping County recommended Guanluo to Zishi Peihui of Jizhou Province, saying: Guanluo is mild-tempered, generous and warm-hearted, has no quarrel with the world, can look up at the sky, can be as wonderful as Gan Gong and Shishen, can study Zhou Yi, and can be compared with the quarter master.

古文：今明使君方垂神幽薮，留精九皋，辂宜蒙阴和之应，得及羽仪之时。 
现代文：现在您正留心于幽深的事物，对精妙的道理加以研究，管辂应该顺应着自然的道理，在您的身边辅佐。 
English: Now that you are paying attention to the deep things and studying the subtle principles, the gong should follow the principles of nature and assist you.

古文：徽於是辟为文学从事，引与相见，大善友之。
现代文：裴徽于是征召管路辂为文学从事，并召他前来相见，对他非常友善。
English: Pei Hui then conscripted Guan Lujuan to engage in literature, and called him to come and meet him. He was very friendly to him.

古文：徙部钜鹿，迁治中别驾。
现代文：后来官府迁移到钜鹿，管辂被提升为治中别驾。
English: Later, the government office was moved to Elk, and Guanjun was promoted to the position of vice-governor.

古文：初应州召，与弟季儒共载，至武城西，自卦吉凶，语儒云： 当在故城中见三貍，尔者乃显。 
现代文：起初响应州里的召聘，管辂和弟弟季儒同乘一车到武城西，自己算了一卦，占卜吉凶，管辂对季儒说： 我们应该会在旧城中看到三只狐狸，如果是这样的话，我们就会显达。 
English: At first, in response to the state's call, Guan Yu and his brother Ji Ru took the same car to the west of Wucheng. They made their own calculations and divined the fortunes. Guan Yu said to Ji Ru: We should see three foxes in the old city. If so, we will succeed.

古文：前到河西故城角，正见三貍共踞城侧，兄弟并喜。
现代文：他们刚到河西旧城的墙角，就看到三只狐狸盘踞在城墙边上，兄弟两人都很高兴。
English: As soon as they arrived at the corner of the wall of the old city of Hexi, they saw three foxes perched on the edge of the city wall. Both brothers were very happy.

古文：正始九年举秀才。
现代文：管辂在正始九年考上了秀才。
English: In the first nine years of the year, Guan Yu was awarded the title of "excellence."

古文：十二月二十八日，吏部尚书何晏请之，邓飏在晏许。晏谓辂曰： 闻君著爻神妙，试为作一卦，知位当至三公不？ 
现代文：十二月二十八日，吏部尚书何晏宴请管辂，当时邓飏也在何晏家中，何晏对管辂： 说听说您算卦很神妙，请尝试着算一卦，看我是否能位列三公。 
English: On December 28th, the party secretary Shangshu He invited Guan Yu to a banquet. At that time, Deng Yao was also at Guan Yu's home. He said to Guan Yu: I heard that you are very good at calculating divination, please try to calculate a divination to see if I can rank among the three kings.

古文：又问： 连梦见青蝇数十头，来在鼻上，驱之不肯去，有何意故？ 
现代文：又问管辂说： 我接连梦到几十只苍蝇前来落在鼻子上，怎么驱赶也不肯离开，有什么意思呢？ 
English: He also asked Guan Yu, "What is the meaning of my successive dreams of dozens of flies coming and landing on my nose, refusing to leave no matter how I drive them away?"

古文：辂曰： 夫飞鸮，天下贱鸟，及其在林食椹，则怀我好音，况辂心非草木，敢不尽忠？
现代文：管辂说： 飞鸮是天下的贱鸟，他们在林间食桑葚，就鸣叫怀念善人的音律，更何况我管辂并非心如草木，怎么敢不尽忠呢？
English: Guan Yu said: "The pied flycatcher is the most despised bird in the world. When they eat mulberries in the forest, they sing and miss the melody of good people. What's more, I, Guan Yu, am not as loyal as a plant. How dare I not be loyal?

古文：昔元、凯之弼重华，宣惠慈和，周公之翼成王，坐而待旦，故能流光六合，万国咸宁。
现代文：过去有八元，八凯辅佐重华，宣扬恩惠仁德宽厚，周公辅佐成王，经常昼夜不息，所以能平定天下万国，各地都很安宁。
English: In the past, there were eight dynasties, eight emperors, eight emperors, eight emperors, eight emperors, eight emperors, eight emperors, eight emperors, eight emperors, eight emperors, eight emperors.

古文：此乃履道休应。非卜筮之所明也。
现代文：这是履行正道，顺应天意的道理，并不是占卜所能明确的。
English: This is the principle of fulfilling the righteous path and conforming to the will of heaven, and it is not clear to divination.

古文：今君侯位重山岳，势若雷电，而怀德者鲜，畏威者众，殆非小心翼翼多福之仁。
现代文：现在您爵位尊贵，声势浩大，但感念您德行的人很少，畏惧您威势的人很多，您应该小心谨慎多行仁义。
English: Now that your title is high and your influence is great, there are few people who admire your virtue and many who fear your power. You should be careful and do more benevolent deeds.

古文：又鼻者艮，此天中之山，高而不危，所以长守贵也。
现代文：再者，鼻子属于艮，是天庭中的高山，高峻却不危险，才能长守富贵。
English: Furthermore, the nose belongs to the dragonfly, it is the highest mountain in heaven, high but not dangerous, in order to keep rich and valuable.

古文：今青蝇臭恶，而集之焉。位峻者颠，轻豪者亡，不可不思害盈之数，盛衰之期。
现代文：但现在苍蝇是追寻臭味的，却聚集在上面，代表着身处高位的人也会跌落的很严重，不能不考虑盈满则溢，盛满则衰的道理。
English: But now the flies are chasing the stink, but they are gathering on the top, which means that people in high positions will also fall very seriously, and we must consider the principle of fullness is overflow, fullness is decline.

古文：是故山在地中曰谦，雷在天上曰壮；谦则裒多益寡，壮则非礼不履。
现代文：所以山在地上叫做谦，雷在天上叫做壮；谦代表着聚敛的越多，感觉拥有的越少，壮意味着不符合礼教的事情就不实行。
English: Therefore, mountains on the ground are called modest, and thunder in the sky is called strong; modest means the more one gathers, the less one has the feeling, and strong means that things that do not conform to etiquette are not practiced.

古文：未有损己而不光大，行非而不伤败。
现代文：天下间没有损害自己，却得不到众人爱戴的事情，也没有行事恶劣却不败亡的事情。
English: In the world, there is no such thing as harming oneself but not being loved by others, and there is no such thing as behaving badly but not losing one's life.

古文：愿君侯上追文王六爻之旨，下思尼父彖象之义，然后三公可决，青蝇可驱也。 
现代文：愿您追思文王六爻的意旨，想想孔子彖象的含义，这样才能位列三公，才能驱赶苍蝇。 
English: May you reflect on the meaning of King Wen's "six flies" and think about the meaning of Confucius' "elephant," so that you can rank among the three kings and drive away the flies.

古文：飏曰： 此老生之常谭。 
现代文：邓飏说： 这已经是很多人都这么说的了。 
English: Deng Wei said: This has been said by many people.

古文：辂答曰： 夫老生者见不生，常谭者见不谭。 
现代文：管辂说： 老书生能看见不读书的人，常谈的人能看见不谈的人。 
English: Guan Yu said: Old students can see people who don't read, and people who talk a lot can see people who don't talk.

古文：晏曰： 过岁更当相见。 
现代文：何晏说： 过了年再召见您吧。 
English: He Yao said: Let me see you again after the New Year.

古文：辂还邑舍，具以此言语舅氏，舅氏责辂言太切至。辂曰； 与死人语，何所畏邪？ 
现代文：管辂就回到家中，将这些事都告诉自己的舅舅，舅舅责备管辂说话太直白恳切，管辂说： 跟死人说话，还担忧什么呢？ 
English: Guan Yu returned home and told all these things to his uncle. His uncle scolded Guan Yu for speaking too frankly and earnestly. Guan Yu said, "What are you worried about, talking to the dead?

古文：舅大怒，谓辂狂悖。
现代文：舅舅大怒，说管辂狂悖。
English: My uncle was furious and said that Guan Yu was crazy.

古文：岁朝，西北大风，尘埃蔽天，十馀日，闻晏、飏皆诛，然后舅氏乃服。
现代文：后来朝会，西北刮起了大风，尘埃遮天，过了十几天，听说何晏，邓飏都被诛杀了，管辂的舅舅才服气。
English: Later, at the imperial court, a strong wind blew from the northwest, covering the sky with dust. After a dozen days, it was heard that He Yao and Deng Yao had both been beaten to death, and Guan Yao's uncle was convinced.

古文：始辂过魏郡太守锺毓，共论易义，辂因言 卜可知君生死之日。 
现代文：起初管辂前去拜访魏郡的太守钟毓，跟他共同探讨周易的义旨，管辂就说： 占卜可以知道您的生死之日。 
English: At first, Guan Yu went to visit the governor of Wei County, Zhong Luo, and discussed the meaning of Zhou Yi with him. Guan Yu said: Divination can know the day of your life and death.

古文：毓使筮其生日月，如言无蹉跌。毓大愕然，曰： 君可畏也。死以付天，不以付君。 遂不复筮。毓问辂： 天下当太平否？ 
现代文：钟毓就让他占卜自己出生的日期，没有差错，钟毓非常吃惊，说： 您太可怕了，我的死亡日期可以托付给上天，但不能托付给您。 于是就不再占卜了，钟毓问管辂说： 天下会太平吗？ 
English: Jonghyun asked him to tell the date of his birth, and there was no mistake. Jonghyun was very surprised and said, "You are so terrible. I can entrust the date of my death to heaven, but I cannot entrust it to you." So he stopped divining. Jonghyun asked Guanhyun, "Will the world be peaceful?"

古文：辂曰： 方今四九天飞，利见大人，神武升建，王道文明，何忧不平？ 
现代文：管辂说： 现在飞龙在天，利于大人出现，神武升建，王道推行，为什么担忧不太平呢？ 
English: Guan Yu said: Now that the dragon is flying in the sky, it is conducive to the emergence of adults, the rise of Shenwu, and the implementation of the royal road. Why worry about not being peaceful?

古文：毓未解辂言，无几，曹爽等诛，乃觉寤云。
现代文：钟毓没有理解管辂的话，不久曹爽等人被诛杀，钟毓才醒悟过来。
English: Zhongluo did not understand Guanluo's words, and soon Cao Shuang and others were beaten to death. Only then did Zhongluo come to his senses.

古文：平原太守刘邠取印囊及山鸡毛著器中，使筮。
现代文：平原郡的太守刘邠把印囊和山鸡毛装在容器中让管辂。
English: The governor of Pingyuan County, Liu Hui, put the seal and the goose feathers in a container and let them stew.

古文：辂曰： 内方外圆，五色成文，含宝守信，出则有章，此印囊也。高岳岩岩，有鸟朱身，羽翼玄黄，鸣不失晨，此山鸡毛也。 邠曰： 此郡官舍，连有变怪，使人恐怖，其理何由？ 
现代文：占卜管路说里内里是方的，外面是圆的，文字有种颜色，代表着守信，他出现就会有印章，这是印章高山险峻，有鸟是红色的身子，黄色的羽翼名叫不错过，早晨这是山鸡的毛，刘斌说这个郡里的官府接连有怪事出现，让人担忧恐惧是什么原因呢？
English: The divination channel said that the inside of the inside is square, the outside is round, the text has a color, representing trustworthiness, he will have a seal when he appears, this is the seal of the mountain steep, the bird has a red body, the yellow wings are called not too bad, in the morning this is the hair of the mountain chicken, Liu Bin said that the government office in this county has strange things appear one after another, what is the reason for people to worry and fear?

古文：辂曰： 或因汉末之乱，兵马扰攘，军尸流血，汙染丘山，故因昬夕，多有怪形也。
现代文：广度说，也许是因为汉末动乱，兵马纷争，士兵流血浸染了山林，所以黄昏时候会出现很多怪事，但您道德高深。
English: Guangdu said that perhaps because of the unrest at the end of the Han Dynasty, the conflict between soldiers and horses, and the bloodshed of soldiers soaked the mountains and forests, so many strange things will occur at dusk, but you have high morals.

古文：明府道德高妙，自天祐之，愿安百禄，以光休宠。 
现代文：自有上天护佑，希望您能安抚百姓，以符合您的荣耀与恩宠。
English: By the grace of God, I hope that you will be able to pacify the people in accordance with your glory and grace.

古文：清河令徐季龙使人行猎，令辂筮其所得。
现代文：清河郡的县令徐季龙派人打猎，让管辂占卜所得到的猎物。
English: Xu Jilong, the county magistrate of Qinghe County, sent people to hunt, and let the prey obtained by Guan Yu's divination.

古文：辂曰： 当获小兽，复非食禽，虽有爪牙，微而不强，虽有文章，蔚而不明，非虎非雉，其名曰狸。 
现代文：管辂说： 应当会猎到小兽，但不是吃的飞禽，虽然有爪子，但很小并不锋利，虽然皮毛有光彩，但并不鲜亮，不是虎也不是山鸡，而是狐狸。 
English: Guan Yu said: You should be able to hunt small animals, but not birds for food. Although you have claws, they are small and not sharp. Although the fur is shiny, it is not bright. It is not a tiger or a mountain chicken, but a fox.

古文：猎人暮归，果如辂言。
现代文：打猎的人傍晚回来，果然像管辂说的那样。
English: The hunter came back in the evening, just as Guan Jun had said.

古文：季龙取十三种物，著大箧中，使辂射。
现代文：徐季龙取了十三种物品放在大箱子中，让管辂猜。
English: Xu Jilong took thirteen kinds of items and put them in a big box for everyone to guess.

古文：云： 器中藉藉有十三种物。 
现代文：管辂说： 箱子中一共装了十三种物品。 
English: Guan Yu said: There are a total of thirteen items in the box.

古文：先说鸡子，后道蚕蛹，遂一一名之，惟以梳为枇耳。
现代文：先说出了鸡子，又说出了蚕蛹，随后一一说出物品名字，只是把梳子说成了枇杷而已。
English: First he said chicken, then he said silkworm cocoon, and then he named the items one by one, but he only called the comb a cocoon.

古文：辂随军西行，过毌丘俭墓下，倚树哀吟，精神不乐。
现代文：管辂随军西行，经过毋丘俭的墓地，倚靠着树哀叹，精神很不好。
English: Guan Yu followed the army westward, passing through a cemetery, leaning against a tree and lamenting. He was in a bad mood.

古文：人问其故，辂曰： 林木虽茂，无形可久；碑诔虽美，无后可守。
现代文：旁人问其中缘故，管辂说： 树林虽然茂盛，但不能长久，碑文虽然华美，但没有后人看守。
English: When others asked the reason, Guan Yu said: Although the forest is lush, it cannot last long. Although the inscription is beautiful, there is no successor to guard it.

古文：玄武藏头，苍龙无足，白虎衔尸，朱雀悲哭，四危以备，法当灭族。不过二载，其应至矣。 
现代文：玄武藏着头，苍龙没有足，白虎闲着尸体，朱雀哀鸣，各种危害已经具备了，按理来讲是要被灭族了，不会超过两年，就会应验了。 
English: The black dragon has no feet, the white tiger is idle with a corpse, the blackbird is wailing, and all kinds of harm have already been done. Logically speaking, it is to be exterminated. It will not take more than two years, and it will be fulfilled.

古文：卒如其言。
现代文：后来真的像管辂说的那样。
English: Later, it turned out to be just as Li Yao had expected.

古文：后得休，过清河倪太守。
现代文：后来休沐，管辂拜访清河郡的倪太守。
English: Later, he visited Ni Taishu of Qinghe County.

古文：时天旱，倪问辂雨期，辂曰： 今夕当雨。 
现代文：当时大旱无雨，倪太守问管辂下雨的时期，管辂说： 今晚就会下雨。 
English: At that time, there was a drought and no rain. Ni Taishou asked Guan Yu about the rainy season. Guan Yu said, "It will rain tonight."

古文：是日旸燥，昼无形似，府丞及令在坐，咸谓不然。
现代文：当时太阳炎热，看不出要下雨的痕迹，府丞和县令都在都在座，大家都认为不会发生。
English: At that time, the sun was hot, and there was no sign of rain. The prefectural governor and the county magistrate were both present, and everyone thought that it would not happen.

古文：到鼓一中，星月皆没，风云并起，竟成快雨。於是倪盛脩主人礼，共为欢乐。
现代文：到了半夜，星月都被乌云遮蔽，风云并起，很快就下了大雨，于是倪太守盛请管辂，宾主都很欣喜。
English: In the middle of the night, the stars and the moon were all covered by dark clouds, the wind and the clouds rose at the same time, and soon there was heavy rain, so Ni Taisho asked for help, and the guests were very happy.

古文：正元二年，弟辰谓辂曰： 大将军待君意厚，冀当富贵乎？ 
现代文：正元二年，弟弟管辰对管辂说： 大将军对待你很优厚，你希望自己能富贵吗？ 
English: In the second year of the first century, his younger brother, Guan Chen, said to Guan Yu: "The great general treats you very generously. Do you hope to become rich?

古文：辂长叹曰： 吾自知有分直耳，然天与我才明，不与我年寿，恐四十七八间，不见女嫁儿娶妇也。若得免此，欲作洛阳令，可使路不拾遣，枹鼓不鸣。但恐至太山治鬼，不得治生人，如何！ 
现代文：管辂长叹着说： 我自己了解自己的情况，但上天赐给我聪明才智，但不赐予我寿命，恐怕四十七八岁间，没有看到女儿出嫁儿子娶媳妇就去世了，如果能免过此祸，我想做洛阳县令，一定会让当地风俗良好，没有鸣冤的人，但恐怕我要到泰山里去治理鬼魂了，不能治理生人，能怎么样呢？ 
English: Guan Yu said with a sigh: I know my own situation, but God gave me wisdom and talent, but did not give me longevity. I am afraid that at the age of forty-seven or eight, I died without seeing my daughter get married and my son marry his daughter-in-law. If I can avoid this disaster, I want to be the governor of Luoyang County, I will make sure that the local customs are good and there are no people who have grievances, but I am afraid that I have to go to Mount Tai to govern ghosts, I can't govern living people, what can I do?

古文：辰问其故，辂曰： 吾额上无生骨，眼中无守精，鼻无梁柱，脚无天根，背无三甲，腹无三壬，此皆不寿之验。
现代文：管辰就问其中的缘故，管辂说： 我的额头上没有生骨，眼中没有守精，鼻子上没有梁柱，脚下没有天根，背上没有三甲，腹部没有三壬，这些都是不能长寿的征兆。
English: Guan Chen asked the reason for this, and Guan Yu said, "I have no raw bones on my forehead, no sperm in my eyes, no bridge on my nose, no roots under my feet, no three bones on my back, and no three ribs in my abdomen. These are all signs of not being able to live long."

古文：又吾本命在寅，加月食夜生。天有常数，不可得讳，但人不知耳。
现代文：再加上我的本命年是寅年，又再加上在月食之夜出生，上天有运行的规律，不能违背，只是大家都不知道罢了。
English: In addition, my birth year is the year of the rooster, and I was born on the night of a lunar eclipse. The heavens have a pattern of operation that cannot be violated, but no one knows about it.

古文：吾前后相当死者过百人，略无错也。 是岁八月，为少府丞。明年二月卒，年四十八。
现代文：我先后给上百个快死的人占卜，都没有什么差错。 当年八月，管辂担任少府丞，第二年二月去世，去世的时候四十八岁。
English: I have divined hundreds of people who were about to die, and there was nothing wrong with them.In August of that year, Guan Yu served as Shofu-jo, and died in February of the following year, at the age of forty-eight.

古文：评曰：华佗之医诊，杜夔之声乐，朱建平之相术，周宣之相梦，管辂之术筮，诚皆玄妙之殊巧，非常之绝技矣。昔史迁著扁鹊、仓公、日者之传，所以广异闻而表奇事也。
现代文：评曰：华佗的医术，杜夔的声律，朱建平的相面术，周宣的卜梦术，管辂的占卜之术，都是非常玄妙精巧，是非常人的绝技，过去司马迁为扁鹊、仓公、日者作传，是为了采集异闻并表述奇异之事，所以这里也记录一些。
English: Comment: Hua Qian's medical skills, Du Qian's vocal rhythms, Zhu Jianping's physiognomy, Zhou Xuan's dream interpretation, and Guan Qian's divination are all very subtle and exquisite, and are very human stunts. In the past, Sima Qian wrote biographies of Bian Qian, Cang Gong, and Nichijia in order to collect anecdotes and express strange things, so some of them are also recorded here.

