古文：欲做精金美玉的人品，定从烈火中煅来；思立掀天揭地的事功，须向薄冰上履过。
现代文：想要练就精金美玉的人格品行，一定要如同烈火炼钢般经历艰苦磨练；想要建立惊天动地的事业功绩，必须如履薄冰般经历险峻的考验。
English: If you want to hone your personality and conduct, you must go through arduous training as if you were making steel in a furnace; if you want to build an earth-shattering career achievement, you must go through a severe test as if you were walking on thin ice.

古文：一念错，便觉百行皆非，防之当如渡海浮囊，勿容一针之罅漏；万善全，始得一生无愧，修之当如凌云宝树，须假众木以撑持。
现代文：一念之差造成的错误，就感觉各种品行都错了。因此，防止出错应当如同防止借以渡海的浮水皮囊出现缝隙漏洞一样，哪怕有一个针眼大小的缝隙漏洞也不行。万种善良品德都具备，才能让一生都没有什么惭愧。因此，修练善良品德应当如同培植高耸入云的参天大树需要凭借众多树木的支撑扶持一样，需要多多积累善良品德。
English: Therefore, preventing mistakes should be the same as preventing gaps from appearing in the buoyant skin bag used to cross the sea, even if there is a gap the size of a pinhole. All kinds of good qualities are available to make a lifetime nothing to be ashamed of. Therefore, cultivating good qualities should be like cultivating towering trees need to rely on the support of many trees, need to accumulate a lot of good qualities.

古文：忙处事为，常向闲中先检点，过举自稀。
现代文：总是为事物忙碌奔波，但在闲暇时一定要及时检点反省自己，以减少过分举动之类的错误。
English: They are always busy with things, but in their leisure time, they must check their points and reflect on themselves in time to reduce mistakes such as excessive actions.

古文：动时念想，预从静里密操持，非心自息。
现代文：行动时的各种设想，如能预先心平气和地周密规划部署，行动时就可以控制自己的急躁情绪和各种妄念。
English: If you can calmly and carefully plan your deployment in advance, you can control your impatience and all kinds of delusions when you act.

古文：为善而欲自高胜人，施恩而欲要名结好，修业而欲惊世骇俗，植节而欲标异见奇，此皆是善念中戈矛，理路上荆棘，最易夹带，最难拔除者也。
现代文：做了好事总想着趁机抬高自己超过别人，给人一点恩惠总想着借此结交好友，做了点功德总想着让世人惊骇，树立气节又想标榜怪异显现奇特，这些都是好的思想中的不良倾向，也是追求义理道路上的障碍，最容易夹杂裹带，最难拔除的了。
English: If you do something good, you always want to take advantage of the opportunity to elevate yourself above others; if you give someone a little favor, you always want to use it to make friends; if you do something meritorious, you always want to shock the world; if you want to build up your virtue, you want to flaunt your weirdness and show off your strangeness. These are all bad tendencies in good thoughts, and they are also obstacles on the path of pursuing the truth. They are the easiest to get entangled in, and the most difficult to remove.

古文：须是涤尽渣滓，斩绝萌芽，才见本来真体。
现代文：这些私心杂念必须全部清除干净，断绝它的萌芽之根，如此才能显现人心向善的真实本体。
English: These selfish miscellaneous thoughts must be completely cleared away, and their budding roots must be severed, so that the true nature of the human heart toward goodness can be revealed.

古文：能轻富贵，不能轻一轻富贵之心；能重名义，又复重一重名义之念。
现代文：能轻视富贵，却不能放得下自己那一颗轻视富贵的心；重视名声仁义，却又很重视自己那一颗重名义的心。
English: Can despise wealth, but can't let go of one's own heart that despises wealth; attach importance to reputation, benevolence and righteousness, but attach great importance to one's own heart that attaches importance to reputation.

古文：是事境之尘氛未扫，而心境之芥蒂未忘。
现代文：这是因为没有摆脱俗世的影响，而内心世界存有各种私心杂念。
English: This is because they are not free from the influence of the world, and there are all kinds of selfish thoughts in the inner world.

古文：此处拔除不净，恐石去而草复生矣。
现代文：这些私心杂念不清除干净，就会像石头下的小草，一旦将石头移去，就会重新生长。
English: If these selfish thoughts are not cleared away, they will be like weeds under a stone. Once the stone is removed, they will grow again.

古文：纷扰固溺志之场，而枯寂亦槁心之地。
现代文：社会的纷乱骚扰固然是沉溺心志的场所，而枯燥寂寞也是槁枯心气的地方。
English: Social turmoil and harassment is certainly a place for indulgence, while boredom and loneliness are also places for withering the spirit.

古文：故学者当栖心元默，以宁吾真体。亦当适志恬愉，以养吾圆机。
现代文：所以读书做学问的人应当从自己的内心寻求安静闲适，以保持本我志向不受干扰；也应当适当地从事一些恬淡愉快的活动，以培养圆通机变的心机。
English: Therefore, people who study should seek quiet and leisure from their own hearts to keep their own aspirations from being disturbed; they should also appropriately engage in some light and pleasant activities to cultivate the ability to change.

古文：昨日之非不可留，留之则根烬复萌，而尘情终累乎理趣；今日之是不可执，执之则渣滓未化，而理趣反转为欲根。
现代文：过去的错误不可以保留，留下它就会寻得机会再次萌发，这样凡心俗情终将累及于义理情趣；现在正确的也不可以过于执着，过于执着就会激起心中残存的私心杂念，这样义理情趣反而转化为情欲根源。
English: The mistakes of the past should not be kept, leaving it will find the opportunity to germinate again, so that the mundane feelings will eventually affect the rational feelings; now the correct can not be too persistent, too persistent will arouse the remaining selfish thoughts in the heart, so that the rational feelings will be transformed into the root of lust.

古文：无事便思有闲杂念想否。有事便思有粗浮意气否。得意便思有骄矜辞色否。失意便思有怨望情怀否。
现代文：无所事事时多想想自己有没有闲杂念头，有事忙时则想想自己有没有粗率浮躁意气用事，春风得意时多想想自己有没有骄傲自负的言辞神色，失意落魄时多想想自己有没有怨天尤人。
English: When you are idle, think more about whether you have idle thoughts, when you are busy, think about whether you are rude and impetuous, when you are proud, think more about whether you are proud and conceited, and when you are downhearted, think more about whether you are complaining.

古文：时时检点，到得从多入少、从有入无处，才是学问的真消息。
现代文：常常反省检点自己，最终会发现自己的缺点错误越来越少，以至于无，这才是做学问到了高境界。
English: Often reflect on yourself, and eventually you will find that your shortcomings and mistakes are becoming fewer and fewer, so that there are none. This is when learning reaches a high level.

古文：士人有百折不回之真心，才有万变不穷之妙用。
现代文：读书人要有百折不回的坚强意志和决心，才能学到随机应变、用之不尽的奇妙智慧。
English: The reader must have a strong will and determination to never give up, in order to learn the strange wisdom of random contingency and inexhaustibility.

古文：立业建功，事事要从实地着脚，若少慕声闻，便成伪果；讲道修德，念念要从虚处立基，若稍计功效，便落尘情。
现代文：要想建功立业，就要脚踏实地干好每一件事情。
English: If you want to build a career, you must do everything well.

古文：身不宜忙，而忙于闲暇之时，亦可儆惕惰气；心不可放，而放于收摄之后，亦可鼓畅天机。
现代文：如果心存哪怕一丁点羡慕虚名的念头，就难成正果。要想修心养德，就要专心于心性道德的修养。如果总想着计较功利得失，则落入世俗之中。身体不适宜忙忙碌碌，但是在闲暇之时找些事做，又可以儆戒警惕惰懈习气；不能放松自己的心志，但在高度紧张之后适当放松，可以让自己心气高涨，精神振奋。
English: If you have even the slightest thought of envying the vainglorious, it is difficult to achieve positive results. If you want to cultivate moral character, you must concentrate on the cultivation of mental morality. If you always think about the gains and losses, you will fall into the world. The body is not suitable for being busy, but you can find something to do in your leisure time, and you can be wary of lazy habits; you can't relax your mind, but you can relax properly after high tension, you can make your heart high and your spirits uplifted.

古文：钟鼓体虚，为声闻而招击撞；麋鹿性逸，因豢养而受羁縻。
现代文：钟和鼓形体空虚，为了声音的传播而招致敲打撞击；麋和鹿本性喜欢野外奔跑，因贪恋豢养的舒适而被羁绊，失去自由。
English: The bell and the drum are hollow, and for the sake of sound propagation they invite pounding; the mule and the deer naturally like to run in the open air, and because they are greedy for the comfort of rearing, they are bound and lose their freedom.

古文：可见名为招祸之本，欲乃散志之媒。学者不可不力为扫除也。
现代文：可见，追求声名会招致灾祸，贪图利欲会涣散心志，读书做学问的人不可以不努力清除这些东西。
English: It can be seen that the pursuit of fame will lead to disaster, the greed for profit will lead to dissipation, and those who study and do studies must strive to remove these things.

古文：一念常惺，才避去神弓鬼矢；纤尘不染，方解开地网天罗。
现代文：每一念头间头脑都要保持清醒，这样才能避开神灵的弓弩愧赧的箭矢；洁身自好不染纤尘，这样才能冲破天罗地网般的各种威逼利诱。
English: The mind must be clear between every thought, so that it can avoid the bow of the gods and the arrows of shame; it must be clean and not stained with dust, so that it can break through all kinds of threats and temptations like the net of heaven and earth.

古文：一点不忍的念头，是生民生物之根芽；一段不为的气节，是撑天撑地之柱石。
现代文：哪怕存有一点点不忍心的想法，就可以让百姓或万物获得生长的机会；哪怕树起一点点不作为肯舍弃的气度节操，也是形成支撑天地的基础。
English: Even if there is a little bit of intolerant thought, it can give people or all things the opportunity to grow; even if there is a little bit of unwillingness to give up, it is also the foundation of supporting heaven and earth.

古文：故君子于一虫一蚁不忍伤残，一缕一丝勿容贪冒，便可为万物立命、天地立心矣。
现代文：所以，品德高尚又有见识的人对一虫一蚁也不忍心伤害，对丝线小利也不去贪占，这样就可为世间万物安立生机，为天地人间树立心魂了。
English: Therefore, people with high moral character and insight do not have the heart to harm a worm or an ant, and do not covet small profits. In this way, they can establish a stable life for all things in the world, and establish a soul for heaven and earth.

古文：拨开世上尘氛，胸中自无火焰冰竞；消却心中鄙吝，眼前时有月到风来。
现代文：拨去推开人世间的尘俗气氛，胸怀中自然没有各种欲望或是人情冷漠的煎熬折磨；消除抛却内心里的鄙俗吝情，眼前便时常会有明月清风到来。
English: If you push away the mundane atmosphere of the world, there will naturally be no various desires or the torment of human indifference in your heart; if you eliminate the vulgarity and miserliness in your heart, you will often see the bright moon and clear wind coming.

古文：学者动静殊操、喧寂异趣，还是锻炼未熟，心神混淆故耳。须是操存涵养，定云止水中，有鸢飞鱼跃的景象；风狂雨骤处，有波恬浪静的风光，才见处一化齐之妙。
现代文：学者如果在行动和静止的时候有不同的表现，在喧闹和寂静的时候有不同的心绪，这就是因为修炼没有成熟，导致自身功力不够，精神依旧混乱，应该不断地提高修养，于风平浪静中看到鸢飞鱼跃，于狂风暴雨中看到恬静风光，这才显出以不变应万变、视万物如一之高妙修养。
English: If scholars have different performances when they are in action and at rest, and different moods when they are noisy and silent, it is because the cultivation is not mature, resulting in insufficient strength and confusion of spirit. They should constantly improve their cultivation, and see the flying fish jumping in the calm of the waves and the tranquil scenery in the stormy rain. This only shows the high cultivation of constantly responding to changes and treating everything as one.

古文：心是一颗明珠。
现代文：心是一颗明亮的珍珠。
English: The heart is a bright pearl.

古文：以物欲障蔽之，犹明珠而混以泥沙，其洗涤犹易；以情识衬贴之，犹明珠而饰以银黄，其洗涤最难。
现代文：用物质欲望遮蔽它，犹如明珠混杂于泥土沙石中，清洗起来还算容易；用才情见识包装它，犹如明珠装饰了白银黄金，要清洗辨认最为困难。
English: To cover it with material desires, like a pearl mixed with mud and sand, is easy to clean; to wrap it with talent, like a pearl decorated with silver and gold, is the most difficult to clean and identify.

古文：故学者不患垢病，而患洁病之难治；不畏事障，而畏理障之难除。
现代文：所以读书做学问的人不担心染上不洁的毛病，而是担心这些毛病难以根除；不畏惧做事情时出现的各种障碍，而是畏惧追求义理之路上障碍难以排除。
English: Therefore, people who study and learn are not worried about contracting unclean diseases, but are worried that these diseases are difficult to eradicate; they are not afraid of various obstacles that arise when doing things, but are afraid of obstacles that are difficult to eliminate on the road of pursuing righteousness.

古文：躯壳的我要看得破，则万有皆空而其心常虚，虚则义理来居；性命的我要认得真，则万理皆备而其心常实，实则物欲不入。
现代文：身躯皮壳的 我 要看得透彻，就会万般所有全都空虚而他的心常恒虚无，虚无则礼义伦理归来寄居；本性天命的 我 要认得真切，就会万般道理全都齐备而他的心常恒充实，充实则物质欲望不得入侵。
English: If the I of the body and skin is to be seen thoroughly, everything will be empty and his heart will always be empty, and if it is empty, then the etiquette and ethics will return to the sojourn; if the I of the nature and destiny is to be recognized truly, then all the principles will be complete and his heart will always be full, and if it is full, material desires will not invade.

古文：面上扫开十层甲，眉目才无可憎；胸中涤去数斗尘，语言方觉有味。
现代文：脸面上洗去十层盔甲般灰尘，容貌才净洁而不令人生厌；心胸中涤荡去除数斗尘土，谈吐方才感觉赋有意味。
English: Washing away ten layers of armor-like dust on the face, the appearance is clean and not repulsive; wiping away several buckets of dust in the heart, the way to talk feels meaningful.

古文：完得心上之本来，方可言了心；尽得世间之常道，才堪论出世。
现代文：将自己心之本来彻底完善，方才可以说了然自己的心性；阅尽世间的常识道理，才有资格谈论超脱人世。
English: Only when you have thoroughly perfected the nature of your heart can you speak of your heart; only when you have read all the common sense of the world are you qualified to talk about transcending the human world.

古文：我果为洪炉大冶，何患顽金钝铁之不可陶熔。
现代文：我果真是洪大的火炉，冶炼的大师，何必担心坚硬金属笨重铁石难以熔炼？
English: Am I really a huge furnace, a master smelter, why should I worry that hard metals and heavy iron and stone are difficult to smelt?

古文：我果为巨海长江，何患横流污渎之不能容纳。
现代文：我果真是广巨海洋漫长江河，何必忧患横溢河流污浊沟渠的不能包容受纳？
English: Am I really a vast ocean and a long Yangtze River, why should I worry about the overflowing rivers, filthy ditches and the inability to tolerate and accept?

古文：白日欺人，难逃清夜之鬼报；红颜失志，空贻皓首之悲伤。
现代文：白天欺负了别人，夜深人静时难以逃脱鬼怪的报复；少年丧失意志，年老时只能留下悔恨和悲伤。
English: If you bully others during the day, it is difficult to escape the revenge of ghosts in the dead of night; if you lose your will when you are young, you will only have regrets and sadness when you are old.

古文：以积货财之心积学问，以求功名之念求道德，以爱妻子之心爱父母，以保爵位之策保国家，出此入彼，念虑只差毫末，而超凡入圣，人品且判星渊矣。
现代文：用积聚货物财产的心思积聚学问，用求取功名的意志追求道德，用爱护妻子儿女的心意敬爱父母，用保持爵号官位的策略保卫国家，或这样或那样，其心思似乎差别不大，但是，如果不是从普通人的角度看，而是从圣人的角度看，从追求至高人品的角度看，其差异判若天壤之别了。
English: With the mind of accumulating goods and property to accumulate knowledge, with the will of seeking fame to pursue morality, with the mind of loving wife and children to love parents, with the strategy of maintaining the title of nobility to defend the country, or in one way or another, the mind seems to be little different, but if it is not from the perspective of ordinary people, but from the perspective of saints, from the perspective of pursuing the highest human character, the difference is like heaven.

古文：人胡不猛然转念哉！
现代文：你难道还不猛醒吗？
English: Aren't you wide awake yet?

古文：立百福之基，只在一念慈祥；开万善之门，无如寸心挹损。
现代文：建立百般幸福的根基，只在于一个念头的慈爱祥和；而要开启万般善良的大门，最好的办法是抑制自己的任何一点点私心杂念。
English: The foundation of all happiness lies in a single thought of loving-kindness and peace; and the best way to open the door to all goodness is to control every bit of selfishness.

古文：塞得物欲之路，才堪辟道义之门；弛得尘俗之肩，方可挑圣贤之担。
现代文：堵塞得了物质欲望的道路，才能开辟道德义理的大门；摒弃得了凡尘世俗之累，才可担当圣人贤达之责。
English: Only by blocking the path of material desires can we open the door to moral righteousness; only by abandoning the burdens of the mundane world can we assume the responsibilities of sages.

古文：容得性情上偏私，便是一大学问；消得家庭内嫌雪，才为火内栽莲。
现代文：容忍得了禀性感情上的偏袒徇私，就是一门大学识知识；消除得了家族门庭内的怨嫌霜雪，才是火海内栽种莲花。
English: To tolerate the stubborn emotional partiality is a university knowledge; to eliminate the resentment in the family courtyard is to plant a lotus in the sea of fire.

古文：事理因人言而悟者，有悟还有迷，总不如自悟之了了；意兴从外境而得者，有得还有失，总不如自得之休休。
现代文：事物道理因为他人言语而领悟的人，有所领悟依然有些迷惑，总是比不上自己领悟那般透彻；意境兴致从外界情境得到的人，有所得到还有所失去，总是比不上自己内心感悟到的来得安闲快乐。
English: Those who have grasped the truth of things through the words of others are still a little confused, and their understanding is always less thorough than their own understanding; those who have gained something and lost something from the external situation are always less happy than what they feel in their hearts.

古文：情之同处即为性，舍情则性不可见，欲之公处即为理，舍欲则理不可明。
现代文：众人意愿的相同之处，反映的就是人之本性，舍弃意愿，人的本性就不能显见；众人欲望的公共部分就是永恒伦理，舍弃欲望，天理道义就无法申明。
English: The commonality of the wills of all people reflects the nature of man. If the will is abandoned, the nature of man cannot be revealed. The common part of the desires of all people is the eternal ethics. If the desires are abandoned, the heavenly principles and moralities cannot be affirmed.

古文：故君子不能灭情，惟事平情而已；不能绝欲，惟期寡欲而已。
现代文：故而君子不能期望灭绝人的意愿，只能追求公允无私、不偏不倚；不能期望灭绝人的欲望，只能希望节制人的欲望、敛性收心而已。
English: Therefore, a gentleman cannot expect the will to exterminate people, he can only pursue fairness, selflessness and impartiality; he cannot expect the desire to exterminate people, he can only hope to control people's desires and restrain their desires.

古文：欲遇变而无仓忙，须向常时念念守得定；欲临死而无贪恋，须向生时事事看得轻。
现代文：想要在遭遇变故时毫不仓促慌忙，平时就应当深思熟虑，意志坚定；想要在面临死亡时毫无贪惜留恋，在活着时就应当凡事看得轻淡些。
English: If you want to be unhurried in the face of adversity, you should be thoughtful and strong-willed in ordinary times; if you want to be unsparing in the face of death, you should take a lighter view of everything when you are alive.

古文：一念过差，足丧生平之善；终身检饬，难盖一事之愆。
现代文：一念之差，一生所行善事足可丧失殆尽；一生谨慎检点，也难掩盖曾经犯过的一次过错。
English: A moment's lapse of judgment can wipe out a lifetime's worth of good deeds; a lifetime of careful observation can hardly cover up a mistake once committed.

古文：从五更枕席上参勘心体，气未动，情未萌，才见本来面目；向三时饮食中谙练世味，浓不欣，淡不厌，方为切实工夫。
现代文：清晨起床时即审视反省自己，此时心气尚未萌动，性情未萌发，更能显现自己的内在本性；一日三餐中可以学习体验人世百味，如果饭菜味浓而不欣喜，清淡而不厌弃，这就有了扎扎实实的处世功夫。
English: When you get up early in the morning, you can examine and reflect on yourself. At this time, your spirit has not yet sprouted, your temperament has not sprouted, and you can better show your inner nature; you can learn to experience the tastes of the world in three meals a day. If the meal is strong but not happy, light but not disgusted, this will have a solid and solid life.

