古文：魏观，字杞山，蒲圻人。
现代文：魏观，字杞山，薄圻人。
English: Wei Guan, the word Lushan, Bo Lushin.

古文：元季隐居蒲山。
现代文：元末时隐居蒲山。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, he lived in seclusion in Busan.

古文：太祖下武昌，聘授国子助教，再迁浙江按察司佥事。
现代文：太祖攻下武昌，聘请魏观，授为国子助教，又升为浙江按察司佥事。
English: The great ancestor conquered Wuchang, hired Wei Guan, awarded him the title of assistant professor, and promoted him to the post of inspector general of Zhejiang Province.

古文：吴元年，迁两淮都转运使。入为起居注。
现代文：吴元年，魏观升为两淮都转运使，入宫编写起居注。
English: In the first year of the Wu Dynasty, Wei Qun Sheng was transferred to the two Huai Dynasties, and entered the palace to prepare a living note.

古文：奉命偕吴琳以币帛求遗贤于四方。
现代文：又奉命偕同吴琳持钱币、丝帛广求元朝遗留的贤才。
English: He was also ordered to hold coins with Wu Lin, and to seek the talents left behind by the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：洪武元年，建大本堂，命侍太子说书及授诸王经。
现代文：洪武元年，建立大本堂，魏观受命陪太子讲解四书，向诸王教授五经。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, a large main hall was built, and Wei Guan was ordered to accompany the prince to explain the four books and teach the five sutras to the kings.

古文：未几，又命偕文原吉、詹同、吴辅、赵寿等分行天下，访求遗才，所举多擢用。
现代文：不久，又受命偕同文原吉、詹同、吴辅、赵寿等分往各地，访求元遗贤才，他们所荐举的大多被提升任用。
English: Soon after, he was ordered to send 同文原吉, Zhan Tong, Wu Shu, Zhao Shou, and others to various regions to visit the wise men and women of the Yuan Dynasty. Most of the people they recommended were promoted.

古文：三年，转太常卿，考订诸祀典。
现代文：三年，魏观转任太常卿，考订诸祭典。
English: In the third year, Wei Guan was transferred to the post of Tai Changqing, and he presided over all the festivals.

古文：观尽改宁所为，以明教化、正风俗为治。
现代文：遵照圣旨，改任侍读学士，随即迁升祭酒。
English: In accordance with the Holy Will, he was appointed as an attendant bachelor, and was immediately promoted to the position of sacrificial wine.

古文：建黉舍。聘周南老、王行、徐用诚，与教授贡颍之定学仪；王彝、高启、张羽订经史；耆民周寿谊、杨茂、林文友行乡饮酒礼。
现代文：第二年，因考订祭祀孔子之礼未及时奏报而获罪，被贬为龙南县知县，随即又被召为礼部主事。五年，廷臣根据魏观的才干，推荐他出任苏州知府。前任陈宁十分苛刻，人称 陈烙铁 。魏观尽改陈宁所为，严明教化，端正风俗，建造学校，聘请周南老、王行、徐用诚，与教授贡颍之一起制定学仪，与王彝、高启、张羽一同考订经史，与年老乡民周寿谊、杨茂、林文友共同执行乡饮酒礼。
English: In the second year, he was found guilty of failing to report in time for the examination of the ritual of Confucius. He was demoted to Longnan County, and then he was called to be the head of the ceremonial department. In the fifth year, the courtiers recommended him to be the governor of Suzhou according to his talent. Chen Ning's predecessor was very harsh, known as Chen Brandt. Wei Guan completely changed Chen Ning's behavior, strictly educated, rectified customs, built a school, hired Zhou Nanlao, Wang Xing, and Xu Yingcheng, and set up a school ritual with Professor Gong Qi. He took the examination of the history of the

古文：政化大行，课绩为天下最。
现代文：魏观致力于理政及教化，因而政绩十分突出。
English: Wei Guan was committed to rational politics and enlightenment, and his political achievements were very outstanding.

古文：明年擢四川行省参知政事。
现代文：第二年，提升为四川行省参知政事。
English: In the following year, he was promoted to the post of Sichuan Provincial Party Secretary.

古文：未行，以部民乞留，命还任。
现代文：尚未赴任，因部属、百姓请求他留下，受命还任原职。
English: He had not yet taken up his post, but his subordinates and the people asked him to stay, and he was ordered to return to his original post.

古文：初，张士诚以苏州旧治为宫，迁府治于都水行司。
现代文：当初，张士诚以苏州旧府治为宫，而将府治迁往都水行司。
English: At first, Zhang Shicheng took the old prefectural government of Suzhou as his palace, and moved the prefectural government to Doushui Xingzi.

古文：观以其地湫隘，还治旧基。
现代文：魏观因其地低洼狭小，将府治迁回旧址。
English: Because of its low-lying and narrow land, Wei Guan moved the prefectural government back to the old site.

古文：又浚锦帆泾，兴水利。
现代文：又疏通锦帆泾，兴修水利。
English: They also dredged the Ko Fan Reservoir and carried out water conservancy works.

古文：或谮观兴既灭之基。
现代文：有人恶言中伤魏观兴建张士诚已灭之基。
English: Some people slandered Wei Guan for building the foundation of Zhang Shicheng's death.

古文：帝使御史张度廉其事，遂被诛。
现代文：太祖命御史张度查访此事，魏观因此被诛。
English: Emperor Taizu's empress Dowager Zhang Du investigated the matter, and Wei Guan was arrested.

古文：帝亦寻悔，命归葬。
现代文：太祖随即后悔，下令归葬魏观。
English: The great-grandfather immediately regretted and ordered the burial of Wei Guan.

古文：陶垕仲，名铸，以字行，鄞人。
现代文：陶垕仲，名铸，以字行世，鄞人。
English: Tao Shizhong, famous casting, with the words of the world, the star.

古文：洪武十六年，以国子生擢监察御史。
现代文：洪武十六年，以国子生的身份提升为监察御史。
English: In the 16th year of Hongwu, he was promoted to the position of inspector general of history as a son of the country.

古文：纠弹不避权贵。劾刑部尚书开济至死，直声动天下。
现代文：稽查、弹劾从来不避权贵，并将刑部尚书开济弹劾至死，其正直名闻天下。
English: He never shied away from inspecting and impeaching the powerful, and he was known for his honesty.

古文：未几，擢福建按察使。诛赃吏数十人，兴学劝士，抚恤军民。
现代文：不久，提升为福建按察使，处死贪官数十人，兴办学校，奖励贤士，抚恤军民。
English: Soon, he was promoted to the post of inspector general of Fujian Province, executed dozens of corrupt officials, established schools, rewarded sages, and provided pensions to soldiers and civilians.

古文：帝下诏褒异。
现代文：太祖下诏极力褒奖。
English: The great-great-grandfather strongly praised the award.

古文：布政使薛大方贪暴，垕仲劾奏之。
现代文：布政使薛大方十分贪婪残暴，陶垕仲上奏弹劾他。
English: Bu Zheng made Xue Dafang very greedy and cruel, and Tao Zhenzhong impeached him.

古文：大方辞相连，并逮至京。
现代文：薛大方供词牵连陶垕仲，被一起逮捕至京。
English: Xue Daifang's confession implicated Tao Yuzhong and they were arrested together in Beijing.

古文：讯实，坐大方罪，诏垕仲还官。
现代文：经审讯得实情，将薛大方定罪，太祖下诏命陶垕仲回乡任官。
English: After the trial, the truth was found, Xue Dafang was convicted, and Tao Yanzhong was ordered to return to his hometown to serve as an official.

古文：垕仲言： 臣父昔为方氏部曲，以故官例徙凤阳。
现代文：陶垕仲说道： 臣父以前是方氏部属，按以往官例被徙居凤阳。
English: Tao Yanzhong said: My father-in-law used to be a subordinate of the Fang clan, and was transferred to Fengyang according to the previous government regulations.

古文：臣幼弱，依兄抚养，至于有成。今兄亦为凤阳军吏。
现代文：臣当时年幼孱弱，靠兄长抚养，至今已有所成，兄长也成为凤阳军官。
English: At that time, he was young and weak, and he was raised by his elder brother. He has achieved something so far, and his elder brother has also become a Fengyang officer.

古文：臣叨圣恩，备位司宪。欲推禄养报生育恩，使父母兄弟得复聚处，实戴圣天子孝治天下至意。 
现代文：臣叨念圣恩，任职朝廷，想辞去饷禄以报养育之恩，使父母兄弟能够团聚，一起生活，实感戴天子以孝治天下之至意。 
English: The vassal thinks about the grace of God, working for the imperial court, and wants to give up his salary to repay the grace of his upbringing, so that his parents and brothers can reunite and live together. He truly feels that it is God's will to rule the world with filial piety.

古文：帝特许迎养，去徙籍。
现代文：太祖特许他前往迎养，免其徙籍。
English: His great-grandfather gave him special permission to go to Chongqing to be raised, and he was exempted from emigration.

古文：垕仲清介自持，禄入悉以赡宾客。
现代文：陶垕仲为官清廉，能自我节制，俸禄收入均用以赡养宾客。
English: Tao Xizhong was a clean official, capable of self-restraint, and his salary income was used to support his guests.

古文：未几，卒官。
现代文：不久，死于任上。
English: He died in office shortly afterwards.

古文：时广西佥事王佑，泰和人。
现代文：广西佥事王佑，泰和人。
English: Guangxi Anecdote Wang You, Tai He Ren.

古文：按察使寻适尝咨以政体。
现代文：按察使寻适曾向他询问政事。
English: According to the inspector, he had asked him about political affairs.

古文：佑曰： 蛮方之人渎伦伤化，不及此时明礼法、示劝惩，后难治 适从之，广西称治。
现代文：王佑说 ：蛮方之人亵渎伦常有伤风化，不趁此时声明礼法，宣示奖惩，以后便难治理了。 寻适听从了他的意见，广西因而被治理得很好。
English: Wang You said, "It is often immoral for barbarians to blaspheme, and if we do not take advantage of this time to declare the etiquette and announce rewards and punishments, it will be difficult to govern in the future.

古文：蜀平，徙佑知重庆州。招徕抚辑，甚得民和。坐事免官，卒。
现代文：四川平定后，王佐迁任重庆州知州，招徕并安抚百姓，甚得百姓拥护，后因事免官而死。
English: After the pacification of Sichuan, Wang Zuoqian was appointed to Chongqing Prefecture and Zhizhou Province. He invited and appeased the people, and was even supported by the people. Later, he was removed from office and died.

古文：刘仕貆，字伯贞，安福人。
现代文：刘仕貆，字伯贞，安福人。
English: Liu Shih-tao, also known as Bo Zhen, is a member of the Anfu people.

古文：父闬，元末隐居不仕。
现代文：父亲刘闬，元末时隐居不做官。
English: His father, Liu Ye, lived in seclusion at the end of the Yuan Dynasty and did not work as an official.

古文：仕貆少受父学。
现代文：刘仕貆年少即随父亲学习。
English: At a young age, Liu Shijie began to study with his father.

古文：红巾贼乱，掠其乡，母张氏率群妇女沉茨潭死。
现代文：红巾乱军，劫掠其家乡，其母带领一群妇女沉茨潭而死。
English: The Red Scarf Rebellion looted his hometown, and his mother led a group of women to their deaths.

古文：贼械仕貆，久之得释。
现代文：刘仕貆被乱贼套上械锁，过了很久才被释放。
English: Liu Shijun was put in a mechanical lock by the bandits and was released after a long time.

古文：洪武初，以供役为安福丞张禧所辱，仕貆愤，益力学。
现代文：洪武年初，因供役而被安福丞张禧侮辱，刘仕貆十分气愤，更加拼力学习。
English: At the beginning of the year of Hongwu, he was insulted by Zhang Xiyi, Anfu Rongcheng, for serving. Liu Shijun was very angry and studied harder.

古文：十五年应 贤良 举，对策称旨，授广东按察司佥事，分司琼州。
现代文：十五年，刘仕貆应 贤良 举试，对答颇得要旨，授为广东按察司佥事，分管琼州。
English: In the fifteenth year, Liu Shijian was awarded the title of Guangdong Inspector General in charge of Qiongzhou.

古文：琼俗善蛊。
现代文：琼州风俗喜欢以蛊害人。
English: Qiongzhou customs like to harm people.

古文：上官至，辄致所产珍货为贽。
现代文：每逢官吏上任，他们总是送来当地所产珍物作为礼物。
English: Whenever officials take office, they always bring local delicacies as gifts.

古文：受则喜，不受则惧按治，蛊杀之。仕琼者多为所污。
现代文：接受的话，他们则高兴，不接受的话，他们便担心被治罪，因而以蛊杀害此官，因此，在琼州为官的人大多有污名。
English: If they accept, they are happy, but if they do not accept, they are afraid of being punished, so they kill the official with a crossbow. Therefore, most of the officials in Qiongzhou are stigmatized.

古文：仕貆廉且惠，轻徭理枉，大得民和。
现代文：刘仁貆为官清廉，恩待百姓，减轻徭役，处理冤案，深得百姓拥护。
English: Liu Renzhen is a clean and honest official. He is kind to the people, alleviates the work of the police, and deals with unjust cases. He has won the support of the people.

古文：虽却其贽，夷人不忍害也。
现代文：虽然不受礼物，夷人也不忍加害于他。
English: Although he did not accept the gift, the barbarians could not bear to harm him.

古文：辱仕貆者张禧，适调丞琼山，以属吏谒，大惭怖。
现代文：从前侮辱过刘仕貆的张禧，被贬任琼山县丞，以属官的身份前来拜见，内心十分惭愧和惶恐。
English: Zhang Xiyi, who had insulted Liu Shijun in the past, was demoted to the position of Qiongshan County magistrate, and came to visit him as a subordinate official. He was very ashamed and frightened.

古文：仁貆待之与他吏等。
现代文：但刘仁貆却像对待其他属官一样待他。
English: But Liu Renzhen treated him like any other subordinate officer.

古文：未几，朝议省佥事官，例降东莞河泊使。
现代文：不久，朝廷决定裁减佥事官，刘仕貆按例降为东莞河泊使。
English: Soon after, the imperial court decided to reduce the number of eunuch officials, and Liu Shijun was reduced to Dongguan River Emissary as usual.

古文：以忧去官。
现代文：后在乘船渡河时遇上大风落水而死。
English: Later, while crossing the river by boat, he was caught in a gale and fell into the water, where he died.

古文：王宗显，和州人，侨居严州。
现代文：同僚张仕祥将他葬于鸦矶。王宗显，和州人，侨居严州。
English: His colleague, Zhang Shixiang, buried him in Laojie. Wang Zongxian, a native of Hezhou, lived in Yanzhou.

古文：胡大海克严，礼致幕中。
现代文：胡大海攻克严州，将他以礼招至幕中。
English: Hu Haihai conquered Yanzhou and brought him to the middle of the curtain with courtesy.

古文：太祖征婺州，大海以宗显见。太祖曰： 我乡里也。 
现代文：太祖征讨婺州时，胡大海引王宗显去见，太祖说道 ：你是我的老乡啊。 
English: When Emperor Taizu was conquering Bozhou, Hu Hai took Wang Zongxian to meet him. Emperor Taizu said, "You are my fellow countryman."

古文：命至婺觇敌。
现代文：于是命王宗显到婺州去侦察敌情。
English: Therefore, Wang Zongxian was ordered to investigate the enemy situation in Ganzhou.

古文：宗显潜得城中虚实及诸将短长，还白太祖。
现代文：王宗显探知城中虚实及诸将的情形，回来报告太祖。
English: Wang Zongxian discovered the true and false situation in the city and the situation of the generals and came back to report to the ancestor.

古文：太祖喜曰： 我得婺，以尔为知府。 
现代文：太祖高兴地说 ：我得到婺州，就任你为知府。 
English: The great-grandfather said happily, "I have gained Bozhou and appointed you as the prefect."

古文：既而元枢密同佥宁安庆与守将帖木烈思贰，遣都事缒城请降，开东门纳兵，与宗显所刺事合。
现代文：不久，元枢密同佥宁安庆与守将帖木儿烈思不和，派遣都事缒城出降，打开东门让大军入城，与王宗显所刺探的情况相同。
English: Not long after, the former privy councillor, Xuning Anqing, had a disagreement with the military commander, Timur, and sent the capital out of the city, opening the east gate to let the army enter the city. The situation was the same as that of Wang Zongxian's investigation.

古文：改婺州为宁越府，以宗显知府事。
现代文：于是太祖将婺州改为宁越府，命王宗显主持府事。
English: As a result, the great-grandfather changed Bozhou to Ningyue Prefecture and ordered Wang Zongxian to preside over the affairs of the prefecture.

古文：宗显故儒者，博涉经史。开郡学，聘叶仪、宋濂为《五经》师；戴良为学正；吴沉、徐源等为训导。
现代文：王宗显是一名儒者，博涉经史，他上任后即开办郡学，聘任叶仪、宋濂为《五经》老师，戴良为学正，吴沉、徐源等为训导。
English: Wang Zongxian is a Confucianist who is well-versed in the history of the sutras. After he took office, he immediately set up a county school and appointed Ye Yi and Song Xi as teachers of the "Five Classics," Dai Liang as the head of the school, and Wu Shen and Xu Yuan as instructors.

古文：汉阳人言郡守则称 恭让 ，言县令则称 庭兰 云。王观，字尚宾，祥符人。
现代文：自从兴兵以来，学校久废，到现在才又听到学校的读书声。不久，王宗显死于任上。王观，字尚宾，祥符人。
English: Since the army was raised, the school has been abandoned for a long time, and it is only now that the school's reading voice is heard again. Wang Zongxian died soon after taking office. Wang Guan, the word Shangbin, Xiang Fu Ren.

古文：性耿介，仪度英伟，善谈论。
现代文：性情耿直，颇有见地，仪表英伟，善于谈论。
English: Honest, insightful, good-looking and a good conversationalist.

古文：由乡荐入太学，擢知苏州府。公廉有威。
现代文：由乡荐进入太学，被提升为苏州知府，王观为官公正、清廉，很有威信。
English: Wang Guan was recommended by his hometown to enter Taigaku and was promoted to the post of governor of Suzhou. Wang Guan was a fair and honest official, and was highly respected.

古文：黠吏钱英屡陷长官，观捶杀之。
现代文：有一黠吏钱英屡次陷害长官，王观施以杖刑而将其处死。
English: There was a group of officials Qian Ying repeatedly framed officials, Wang Guan imposed a cane punishment and put him to death.

古文：事闻，太祖遣行人赍敕褒之，劳以御酒。
现代文：事情上奏朝廷，太祖派遣行人携诏褒奖王观，并以御酒慰劳。
English: When the matter was brought to the attention of the imperial court, the great-grandfather sent a messenger with an imperial edict to reward Wang Guan, and consoled him with wine.

古文：岁大，民多逋赋，部使者督甚急。
现代文：有一年庄稼欠收，许多百姓逃税，部使者催征甚急。
English: One year, the crops failed to harvest, many people evaded taxes, and the Ministry's envoys were in a hurry to collect taxes.

古文：观置酒，延诸富人，劝贷贫民偿，辞指诚恳，富人皆感动，逋赋以完。
现代文：王观便摆设酒宴，邀请各有钱人，劝他们借钱给贫民交税，言辞十分诚恳，富人们都被感动了，因而逃税得以交齐。
English: Wang Guan then set up a wine banquet, invited all the rich people, and persuaded them to borrow money to pay taxes to the poor. The words were very sincere, and the rich people were moved, so the tax evasion could be paid.

古文：朝廷嘉其能，榜以励天下。
现代文：朝廷对他的才能予以嘉奖，并张榜以励天下。
English: The imperial court rewarded his talent, and he was promoted to the highest ranks.

古文：年七十卒。道同，河间人。其先蒙古族也。
现代文：担任苏州郡守的前有季亨、魏观，后有姚善、况钟，都很贤能，人称 姑苏五太守 ，都在学宫被祭祀。道同，河间人。其祖先为蒙古族。
English: Ji Heng and Wei Guan served as Suzhou's county magistrate, followed by Yao Zhen and Zhan Zhong, all of whom were very capable. They were known as the five great governors of Suzhou, and were all worshipped at the palace of learning. They were both from Doudong, Hebei Province, and their ancestors were Mongolians.

古文：事母以孝闻。
现代文：道同对母亲十分孝顺。
English: Doudong is very filial to his mother.

古文：洪武初，荐授太常司赞礼郎，出为番禺知县。
现代文：洪武年初，被推荐授为太常司赞礼郎，出任番禺知县。
English: At the beginning of the year of Hongwu, he was recommended to be awarded the title of Grand Secretary Zhanreiro and appointed to Panyu County.

古文：番禺故号 烦剧 ，而军卫尤横，数鞭辱县中佐吏，前令率不能堪。
现代文：番禺从前以骚扰严重著称，而军卫尤其横暴，多次鞭打、侮辱县里的佐吏，以前的县令全都不堪忍受。
English: Panyu was once known for serious harassment, and the guards were particularly violent, repeatedly whipping and insulting the county officials. The previous county orders were all unbearable.

古文：同执法严，非理者一切抗弗从，民赖以少安。
现代文：道同执法严格，对一切不合理的东西一律拒不听从，百姓因此而稍觉安定。
English: The government is strict in enforcing the law and refuses to listen to anything unreasonable. As a result, the people feel a little more stable.

古文：未几，永嘉侯朱亮祖至，数以威福撼同，同不为动。
现代文：不久，永嘉侯朱亮祖至番禺，多次施以威福想使道同屈从于他，而道同不为所动。
English: Before long, Yongjia Hou Zhu Liangzu came to Panyu, and he tried many times to make Daodong yield to him, but Daodong was not moved.

古文：土豪数十辈抑买市中珍货，稍不快意，辄巧诋以罪。
现代文：数十名土豪压价购买市场中的珍贵物品，稍有不快，便总是巧妙地捏造卖主罪名。
English: Dozens of local tycoons buy precious items in the market at a reduced price. If they feel uncomfortable, they always cleverly fabricate the seller's guilt.

古文：同械其魁通衢。诸豪家争贿亮祖求免。
现代文：道同将其头目套上械锁，在大路上示众，诸土豪家人纷纷贿赂朱亮祖，以求放人。
English: Daotong put a mechanical lock on its leader and paraded him on the highway. Local powerful families bribed Zhu Liangzu in order to release him.

古文：亮祖置酒召同，从容言之。
现代文：朱亮祖将道同召来，摆酒招待，从容说出此事。
English: Zhu Liangzu invited Tao to join him, served him wine and invited him to speak freely about the matter.

古文：同厉声曰： 公大臣，奈何受小人役使！ 
现代文：道同厉声说道： 你是大臣，为什么要受小人的役使呢？ 
English: "You are a minister, why do you need to be served by a villain?

古文：亮祖不能屈也。
现代文：朱亮祖不能使他屈服。
English: Zhu Liangzu could not make him give in.

古文：他日，亮祖破械脱之，借他事笞同。
现代文：有一天，朱亮祖破械放人，并借他事鞭打道同。
English: One day, Zhu Liangzu broke the armament and let the man go, and used him to whip the Taoist.

古文：富民罗氏者，纳女于亮祖，其兄弟因怙势为奸。
现代文：有一富民罗氏，将其女儿献给朱亮祖，其兄弟因此凭借权势，朋比为奸。
English: There was a rich Luo clan, who dedicated his daughter to Zhu Liangzu, and his brother, by virtue of his power, became an accomplice.

古文：同复按治，亮祖又夺之去。
现代文：道同将他们逮捕治罪，朱亮祖又强夺放人。
English: The Taoists arrested them and punished them, and Zhu Liangzu forcibly released them.

古文：同积不平，条其事奏之。未至，亮祖先劾同讪傲无礼状。
现代文：道同心积不平，便列举这些事情，予以上奏，其奏书还未到达朝廷，朱亮祖已经抢先弹劾道同诋毁上司，倨傲无礼。
English: Doudong was not satisfied, so he enumerated these matters and reported them to the emperor. The report had not yet reached the imperial court, but Zhu Liangzu had already preemptively impeached Doudong for slandering his superior and being arrogant and rude.

古文：帝不知其由，遂使使诛同。
现代文：皇上不知其由，于是派遣使臣前去处死道同。
English: The emperor didn't know why, so he sent an envoy to execute him.

古文：会同奏亦至。帝悟，以为同职甚卑，而敢斥言大臣不法事，其人骨鲠可用。复使使宥之。
现代文：正好道同的奏书也到了，皇上这才明白事情来由，并认为道同虽然职位十分卑微，却敢于指责大臣违法之事，此人耿直可用，便又派使臣前去释免道同。
English: Just at that time, Daotong's report also arrived, and only then did the emperor understand the cause of the matter. He thought that although Daotong's position was very lowly, he dared to accuse the minister of breaking the law. This person could be used, so he sent an envoy to release Daotong.

古文：两使者同日抵番禺，后使者甫到，则同已死矣。
现代文：两名使臣同日抵达番禺，后面这位使臣刚到，道同却已经被处死了。
English: The two envoys arrived in Panyu on the same day. The latter envoy had just arrived, but Doutong had already been executed.

古文：县民悼惜之，或刻木为主祀于家，卜之辄验，遂传同为神云。
现代文：县民为此悲悼、惋惜，有的还为他刻了木神牌，在家祭祀，占卜事情总是应验，于是便有人传说道同是神。
English: The people of the county mourned and lamented for this, and some even carved wooden gods for him, and made sacrifices at home. The divination always came true, so it was rumored that they were the same god.

古文：当同未死时，布政使徐本雅重同。
现代文：当道同还没死时，布政使徐本很看重他。
English: When Daotong was still alive, the cloth political leader Xu Ben valued him very much.

古文：同方笞一医未竟，而本急欲得医，遣卒语同释之。
现代文：道同有一次正在鞭打一位医生，刑还未完，而徐本急于想请这位医生，便派士兵前去让道同将他释放。
English: On one occasion, he was whipping a doctor, and the punishment was not yet over, and Xu Ben was eager to invite the doctor, so he sent soldiers to ask him to release him.

古文：同岸然曰： 徐公乃亦效永嘉侯耶？ 
现代文：道同严肃地说 ：徐公也要仿效永嘉侯吗？ 
English: Doudong said seriously, "Does Xu Gong also want to emulate Yong Jia Hou?"

古文：笞竟，始遣。
现代文：鞭打完后才派这位医生前去。
English: The doctor was only sent after the flogging was over.

古文：自是上官益严惮，然同竟用此取祸。
现代文：从此以后，他的上司更加害怕他，可是道同竟因此而罹祸。
English: From then on, his bosses were even more afraid of him, but it was too late.

