古文：八年春，王正月，宋公入曹，以曹伯阳归。
现代文：八年春季，周历正月，宋景公攻入曹国，抓住了曹伯阳带回宋国。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Song Jinggong invaded Cao, captured Cao Boyang and brought him back to Song.

古文：吴伐我。
现代文：吴国攻打鲁国。
English: Wu attacked Lu.

古文：夏，齐人取讙及阐。
现代文：夏季，齐国人占取了讙地和阐地。
English: In the summer, the people of Qi occupied the fields of straw and straw.

古文：归邾子益于邾。
现代文：鲁国将邾娄国国君益送回邾娄国。
English: The state of Lu sent the prince of the state of Shandong back to Shandong.

古文：秋，七月。
现代文：秋季七月。
English: Autumn in July.

古文：冬，十有二月癸亥，杞伯过卒。
现代文：冬季十二月癸亥日，杞伯过去世。
English: In the winter of December, on the day of the boar, Zibo passed away.

古文：齐人归讙及阐。
现代文：齐国人归还讙地和阐地。
English: The people of Qi returned the fiefdoms of Qom and Yecheng.

古文：八年春，宋公伐曹，将还，褚师子肥殿。
现代文：八年春季，宋景公进攻了曹国，准备撤兵回国，褚师子肥走在最后。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, Song Jinggong attacked Cao Guo and prepared to withdraw his troops back to China, leaving Gong Shi Zi Hui in the last place.

古文：曹人诟之，不行。师待之。
现代文：曹国人辱骂他，他就不走了，全军等待褚师子肥。
English: The people of Cao reviled him, but he did not leave, and the whole army waited for the departure of Gong Shi Zi Fu.

古文：公闻之怒，命反之。遂灭曹。执曹伯及司城彊以归，杀之。
现代文：宋景公听说了这件事，发怒，命令回兵，于是就灭了曹国，逮捕了曹伯阳和司城公孙彊回去，杀死了他们。
English: When Song Jinggong heard about this, he became angry and ordered his soldiers to return, so he destroyed Cao Guo, arrested Cao Boyang and Si Chenggong Sun Ye, and killed them.

古文：吴为邾故，将伐鲁，问于叔孙辄。叔孙辄对曰： 鲁有名而无情，伐之必得志焉。 
现代文：吴国为了邾国的缘故，准备攻打鲁国。吴王询问叔孙辄，叔孙辄回答说： 鲁国有名而无实，攻打他们，一定能如愿以偿。 
English: The State of Wu was preparing to attack the State of Lu for the sake of the State of Yan. The King of Wu asked his uncle Sun Yat about this, and his uncle Sun Yat replied: "The State of Lu is famous, but it is not real. If we attack them, we will definitely get what we want."

古文：退而告公山不狃。
现代文：退出来告诉公山不狃。
English: Withdraw and tell the public not to be fooled.

古文：公山不狃曰： 非礼也。
现代文：公山不狃说： 这是不合于礼的。
English: "This is not proper," said the public official.

古文：君子违，不適仇国，未臣而有伐之，奔命焉，死之可也。
现代文：君子离开自己的国家，不到敌国去。在鲁国没有尽到臣下责任而又去攻打它，为吴国效力，这就可以死去。
English: A gentleman leaves his own country and does not go to the enemy's country. If he does not fulfill his duties as a vassal in the State of Lu, but attacks it and works for the State of Wu, he can die.

古文：所托也则隐。
现代文：这样的委任就要避开。
English: Such appointments should be avoided.

古文：且夫人之行也，不以所恶废乡。
现代文：而且一个人离开祖国，不应该因为有所怨恨而祸害乡土。
English: Moreover, a person who leaves the motherland should not harm the countryside because of resentment.

古文：今子以小恶而欲覆宗国，不亦难乎？
现代文：现在您由于小怨而要颠覆祖国，不也很难吗？
English: Now you want to subvert the motherland because of a petty grudge, isn't that also difficult?

古文：若使子率，子必辞，王将使我。 
现代文：如果派您领兵先行，您一定要推辞。君王将会派我去。 
English: If you are sent ahead to lead the army, you must decline. The king will send me.

古文：子张病之。
现代文：叔孙辄悔恨自己说错了话。
English: Uncle Sun Yat regrets that he said the wrong thing.

古文：王问于子洩，对曰： 鲁虽无与立，必有与毙。
现代文：吴王又问公山不狃。公山不狃回答说： 鲁国平时虽然没有可靠的盟国，危急的时候却一定会有愿共同抵抗的援国。
English: King Wu also asked Gongshan Fuxuan. Gongshan Fuxuan replied: Although Lu has no reliable allies in peacetime, in times of crisis, there will certainly be countries that are willing to jointly resist.

古文：诸侯将救之，未可以得志焉。
现代文：诸侯将会救援它，是不能实现愿望的。
English: Princes will come to its rescue, but it cannot make wishes come true.

古文：晋与齐、楚辅之，是四仇也。
现代文：晋国和齐国、楚国会帮助它，这就是吴国的四个敌国了。
English: The states of Jin, Qi, and Chu would help it; these were the four enemy states of Wu.

古文：夫鲁，齐、晋之唇，唇亡齿寒，君所知也。不救何为？ 
现代文：鲁国是齐国和晋国的嘴唇，唇亡齿寒，这是您所知道的，他们不去救援还干什么？ 
English: Lu is the lips of Qi and Jin, lips and teeth cold, this is what you know, they do not go to the rescue and what else?

古文：三月，吴伐我，子洩率，故道险，从武城。
现代文：三月，吴国攻打我鲁国，公山不狃领兵先行，故意从险路进军，经过武城。
English: In March, when the State of Wu attacked the State of Ia Lu, Gongshan Bu Rong led the troops in advance, deliberately marching from the dangerous road and passing through Wucheng.

古文：初，武城人或有因于吴竟田焉，拘鄫人之沤菅者，曰： 何故使吾水滋？ 
现代文：当初，武城人有人在边境上种田，拘捕了浸泡菅草的鄫国人，说： 为什么把我的水弄脏？ 
English: At the beginning, some people from Wucheng were farming on the border, and they arrested the local people who were soaking in the Chinese herb, saying, "Why is my water dirty?

古文：及吴师至，拘者道之，以伐武城，克之。
现代文：等到吴军来到，被拘捕的那个人领着吴军攻打武城，攻下了这个城邑。
English: When the Wu army arrived, the arrested man led the Wu army to attack Wucheng and captured the town.

古文：王犯尝为之宰，澹臺子羽之父好焉。国人惧。
现代文：王犯曾经做过武城的地方官，澹台子羽的父亲和王犯友好，国内的人们害怕。
English: Wang Guan was once a local official in Wucheng. Zi Yu's father in Xingtai is friendly with Wang Guan. People in China are afraid.

古文：懿子谓景伯： 若之何？ 
现代文：孟孙对景伯说： 怎么办？ 
English: Meng Sun said to Jing Bo, "What should we do?

古文：对曰： 吴师来，斯与之战，何患焉？
现代文：景伯回答说： 吴军来就和他们作战，怕什么？
English: King Bo replied, "If the Wu army comes to fight them, what is there to be afraid of?

古文：且召之而至，又何求焉？ 
现代文：而且是去找他们来的，还要求什么？ 
English: And they came to them, and what did they ask for?

古文：吴师克东阳而进，舍于五梧，明日舍于蚕室。
现代文：吴军攻下东阳而后前进，驻扎在五梧。第二天，驻扎在蚕室。
English: The Wu army captured Dongyang and then advanced, stationed in Wugu. The next day, they were stationed in Jamsil.

古文：公宾庚、公甲叔子与战于夷，获叔子与析朱鉏。
现代文：公宾庚、公甲叔子和吴军在夷地作战，吴军俘虏了叔子和析朱鉏，把死俘献给吴王。
English: Gong Bin Geng, Gong Jia's son-in-law, and the Wu army fought in Yidi. The Wu army captured Gong Jia's son-in-law and Zhu Xi, and presented the dead prisoners to King Wu.

古文：献于王，王曰： 此同车，必使能，国未可望也。 
现代文：吴王说： 这是同一辆战车上的人，鲁国一定任用了能人。鲁国还不能觊觎呢。 
English: King Wu said, "This is the same person on the chariot. Lu must have appointed a capable person. Lu can't be defeated yet."

古文：明日，舍于庚宗，遂次于泗上。
现代文：第二天，住在庚宗，就在泗水边上驻扎。
English: The next day, he stayed in Gyeongjong and was stationed on the edge of Surabaya.

古文：微虎欲宵攻王舍，私属徒七百人，三踊于幕庭。卒三百人，有若与焉，及稷门之内。
现代文：微虎想要夜袭吴王的住处，让他的私人部队七百人在帐幕外的庭院里，每人向上跳三次，最后挑选了三百人，有若也在里边。
English: Weihu wanted to attack King Wu's residence at night, so he had his private army of seven hundred people jump up three times each in the courtyard outside the tent, and finally selected three hundred people, some of whom were also inside.

古文：或谓季孙曰： 不足以害吴，而多杀国士，不如已也。 
现代文：出发到达稷门之内，有人对季孙说： 这样做不足以危害吴国，反而让国内许多突出的人物送了命，不如停止。 
English: When they arrived at the gate, someone said to Ji Sun, "It's not enough to harm the State of Wu. On the contrary, many prominent figures in the country have lost their lives. It's better to stop."

古文：乃止之。
现代文：季孙就下令停止这样做。
English: Ji Sun ordered them to stop.

古文：吴子闻之，一夕三迁。
现代文：吴王听说这情况，一晚上迁移了三次住处。
English: When Wu Wang heard about this, he moved three times in one night.

古文：吴人行成，将盟。
现代文：吴国人求和，鲁、吴两国将要订立盟约。
English: The people of Wu are suing for peace, and the two countries of Lu and Wu are about to enter into a treaty.

古文：景伯曰： 楚人围宋，易子而食，析骸而爨，犹无城下之盟。
现代文：子服景伯说： 楚国人包围宋国，宋国人交换儿子来吃，劈开尸骨烧饭，尚且没有订立城下之盟。
English: Zifu Jingbo said: The people of Chu surrounded the people of Song, the people of Song exchanged their sons to eat, split the bones to cook, and still did not conclude the alliance under the city.

古文：我未及亏，而有城下之盟，是弃国也。
现代文：我们还不到那样的地步，订有城下之盟，这是丢掉国家。
English: We're not at that point yet. To have an alliance under the city is to lose the country.

古文：吴轻而远，不能久，将归矣。请少待之。 
现代文：吴国轻率而离本土很远，不能持久，快要回去了，请稍等一下。 
English: Wu is reckless and far away from the mainland, it can't last, it's about to go back, please wait a moment.

古文：弗从。景伯负载造于莱门，乃请释子服何于吴，吴人许之。以王子姑曹当之而后止。
现代文：不听，景伯背着盟书，去到莱门。鲁国就请求把子服景伯留在吴国，吴国人答应了，鲁国又要求用王子姑曹相抵押，结果是双方停止交换人质。
English: Not listening, Jing Bo went to Lai Men with the alliance document on his back. The State of Lu requested that Zifu Jing Bo remain in the State of Wu. The people of the State of Wu agreed, and the State of Lu also requested that Cao Cao, the prince's aunt, be used as collateral. As a result, both sides stopped exchanging hostages.

古文：吴人盟而还。
现代文：吴国人订立了盟约然后回国。
English: The people of Wu made a covenant and then returned to China.

古文：齐悼公之来也，季康子以其妹妻之，即位而逆之，季鲂侯通焉。女言其情，弗敢与也。
现代文：齐悼公来鲁国的时候，季康子把他的妹妹嫁给悼公，悼公即位以后来迎接她。季鲂侯和她私通，这个女人向季康子讲出了私通的情况。
English: When Qi Miao Gong came to Lu, Ji Kang Zi married his sister to Miao Gong, Miao Gong ascended to the throne and later welcomed her. Ji Miao Gong had an affair with her, and this woman told Ji Kang Zi about the affair.

古文：齐侯怒。
现代文：季康子不敢把她送到齐国去。
English: Ji Kangzi did not dare to send her to Qi Province.

古文：夏五月，齐鲍牧帅师伐我，取讙及阐。
现代文：齐悼公发怒。夏季五月，齐国的鲍牧带兵进攻鲁国，占领了讙地和阐地。
English: In the summer of May, Bao Mu of Qi led his soldiers to attack Lu, and occupied the provinces of Shantian and Yulong.

古文：或谮胡姬于齐侯，曰： 安孺子之党也。 
现代文：有人在齐悼公那里诬陷胡姬说： 她是安孺子的同党。 
English: Some people slandered Hu Jia at the memorial service, saying, "She is a member of Anzai's party."

古文：六月，齐侯杀胡姬。
现代文：六月，齐悼公杀了胡姬。
English: In June, mourners gathered to mourn the death of Hu Jintao.

古文：齐侯使如吴请师，将以伐我。乃归邾子。
现代文：齐悼公派人到吴国请求发兵，将要用来攻打鲁国，鲁国送回了邾子。
English: The mourners sent envoys to the State of Wu to request the dispatch of troops, which would be used to attack the State of Lu. The State of Lu sent back the mule.

古文：邾子又无道，吴子使大宰子馀讨之，囚诸楼台，栫之以棘。使诸大夫奉大子革以为政。
现代文：邾子还是无道，吴王派太宰子馀付伐他，把他囚禁在楼台里，用荆棘做成篱笆围起来，让大夫们事奉太子革执政。
English: The mule still had no way out, so the king of Wu sent the grand vizier to hunt him down, imprison him in a tower, surround him with a fence made of thorns, and let the doctors serve the crown prince to govern.

古文：秋，及齐平。
现代文：秋季，和齐国讲和。
English: In the autumn, Japan and Qi made peace.

古文：九月，臧宾如如齐涖盟。
现代文：九月，臧宾如去到齐国参加结盟。
English: In September, Zou Binru went to Qi to join the alliance.

古文：齐闾丘明来涖盟，且逆季姬以归，嬖。
现代文：齐国的闾丘明前来参加结盟，而且迎接季姬回去，齐悼公对她很宠爱。
English: Zhai Qiuming of Qi came to participate in the alliance, and to welcome Ji Ji back, Qi Miao was very fond of her.

古文：鲍牧又谓群公子曰： 使女有马千乘乎？ 
现代文：鲍牧又对公子们说： 要使你拥有四千匹马吗？ 
English: Bao Mu also said to the young men, "Do you want me to give you four thousand horses?

古文：公子愬之。
现代文：公子们告诉了齐悼公。
English: The boys told the mourners what had happened.

古文：公谓鲍子： 或谮子，子姑居于潞以察之。
现代文：齐悼公对鲍牧说： 有人说您的坏话，您姑且住在潞地观察一下。
English: Qi Yigong said to Bao Mu Rong: Some people say bad things about you, you should stay in Handan to observe.

古文：若有之，则分室以行。
现代文：如果有这件事，您就把家产的一半带走出国，如果没有，就回到原来的地方去。 
English: If this happens, you should take half of your family's property out of the country. If not, you should go back to where you came from.

古文：若无之，则反子之所。 
现代文：鲍牧出门，让他带着家产的三分之一出走。
English: When Bao Mu left home, he was allowed to take one-third of his family's property with him.

古文：出门，使以三分之一行。
现代文：走到半路，只让他带着两辆车子走。
English: When he was halfway there, he was only allowed to take two cars with him.

古文：半道，使以二乘。及潞，麇之以入，遂杀之。
现代文：到达潞地，就把他捆绑了回来，杀死了他。
English: When they got to Calvary, they tied him up, brought him back and killed him.

古文：冬十二月，齐人归讙及阐，季姬嬖故也。
现代文：冬季，十二月，齐国人把讙地和阐地归还给鲁国，这是由于季姬受到宠爱的缘故。
English: In the winter, in December, the people of Qi returned the land of Yunnan and the land of Yunnan to Lu, because Ji Ji was loved.

