古文：乡饮酒之义：主人拜迎宾于庠门之外，入，三揖而后至阶，三让而后升，所以致尊让也。
现代文：乡饮酒礼的含义是这样的：主人走出乡学门外迎宾，并向宾行再拜礼；主人与宾入门后，彼此先后行了三次作揖之礼才来到堂阶前；在升阶之前，主人与宾又互相谦让了三次，然后才主人升堂，宾也升堂。
English: The meaning of the township drinking ceremony is as follows: the host goes out of the township school gate to welcome the guests, and then bows to the guests; after the host and the guests enter the door, they have performed three times before they come to the front of the hall; before the promotion, the host and the guests have humbled each other three times, and then the host is promoted, and the guests are also promoted.

古文：盥洗扬觯，所以致洁也。
现代文：这都是为了表示对对方的尊重和谦让。
English: It's all about showing respect and humility to the other person.

古文：拜至，拜洗，拜受，拜送，拜既，所以致敬也。
现代文：洗过手以后再洗酒杯，然后才举杯饮酒，这是为了表示清洁。
English: After washing their hands, they rinse their glasses before raising their glasses to drink, which is to indicate cleanliness.

古文：尊让洁敬也者，君子之所以相接也。
现代文：宾至而主人拜迎，主人洗酒杯而宾拜洗，主人献酒而宾拜受，宾接受献酒而主人拜送，宾饮酒毕而主人拜谢干杯。
English: The guest arrives and the host welcomes them, the host washes the wine glass and the guest washes it, the host offers wine and the guest accepts it, the guest receives wine and the host sends it, the guest finishes drinking and the host gives a toast.

古文：君子尊让则不争，洁敬则不慢，不慢不争，则远于斗辨矣；不斗辨则无暴乱之祸矣，斯君子之所以免于人祸也，故圣人制之以道。
现代文：这些都是为了表示对对方的敬意。彼此尊重和谦让，饮食清洁卫生，互相致敬，君子的交往就应当如此。君子彼此尊重谦让，就不会有争斗之事；饮食清洁、互相致敬，就不会有怠慢之事。没有怠慢，一没有争斗，自然就不会有斗殴和打官司一类的事。没有斗殴和打官司一类的事，自然也就没有暴乱的灾祸了。
English: These are all to show respect for each other. Respect and courtesy to each other, clean and hygienic food, and mutual respect, this is how a gentleman's interaction should be. Gentlemen respect and courtesy to each other, there will be no fighting; clean food and mutual respect, there will be no negligence. Without negligence, once there is no fighting, there will naturally be no such thing as fights and lawsuits. Without fights and such things as lawsuits, there will naturally be no disaster of riots.

古文：乡人、士、君子，尊于房户之间，宾主共之也。
现代文：乡大夫、州长、党正以及卿大夫在举行乡饮酒礼时，酒壶放在东房门与室门之间的地方，这是表示宾主共同享用此酒。
English: When the township doctor, the governor, the party secretary and the lord doctor hold the township drinking ceremony, the wine jug is placed between the east room door and the room door, which means that the guests can enjoy this wine together.

古文：尊有玄酒，贵其质也。
现代文：两只壶中有一只壶盛的是玄酒，这是表示看重玄酒的质朴。
English: One of the two pots is filled with wine, which indicates that the wine is valued for its simplicity.

古文：羞出自东房，主人共之也。
现代文：菜肴从东房端出，而东方是主人之位，这表示菜肴是主人提供的。
English: The dishes are served from the east room, and the east is the master's seat, which means that the dishes are provided by the master.

古文：洗当东荣，主人之所以自洁，而以事宾也。
现代文：在东边屋檐下设洗，这表示本来是主人自己洗手洗脸的用具，现在也拿来敬事宾客了。
English: A wash basin was set up under the easterly eaves, which meant that what was originally the owner's own hand washing and face washing utensil was now also used by the honored guests.

古文：宾主象天地也；介僎象阴阳也；三宾象三光也；让之三也，象月之三日而成魄也；四面之坐，象四时也。
现代文：宾与主人，象征天与地。介与撰，象征阴与阳。众宾之长三人，象征曰月星。彼此谦让三次才一齐升堂，这象征月朔后三曰方重现光明。主人、宾、介、撰四面对坐，象征四季。
English: The guest and the host symbolize heaven and earth. The mediator and the scribe symbolize the yin and the yang. The longest three guests symbolize the moon and the stars. They have to be courteous to each other three times before they can go up to the hall together, which symbolizes the reappearance of light three days after the new moon. The host, the guest, the mediator, and the scribe sit four-faced, symbolizing the four seasons.

古文：天地严凝之气，始于西南，而盛于西北，此天地之尊严气也，此天地之义气也。
现代文：天地之间的严凝之气，从西南方向开始，而到了西北方向最为强盛，这是天地之间的尊严之气，是天地之间的义气。
English: The air of rigidity between heaven and earth begins in the southwest and is strongest in the northwest. This is the air of dignity between heaven and earth, and the air of righteousness between heaven and earth.

古文：天地温厚之气，始于东北，而盛于东南，此天地之盛德气也，此天地之仁气也。
现代文：天地之间的温厚之气，从东北方向开始，而到了东南方向最为强盛，这是天地之间的盛德之气，是天地之间的仁气。
English: The atmosphere of gentleness between heaven and earth begins in the northeastern direction, and is strongest in the southeastern direction. This is the atmosphere of virtue between heaven and earth, and the benevolence between heaven and earth.

古文：主人者尊宾，故坐宾于西北，而坐介于西南以辅宾，宾者接人以义者也，故坐于西北。
现代文：主人为了表示尊敬来宾，所以将宾安排在西北的席位上，而将介安排在西南的席位上以辅助宾。所谓宾，在接人待物上的突出特点是义，所以被安排在西北的席位上，以与义气相应。
English: In order to show respect for the guests, the host arranged the guests in the northwest seats, and the mediator was placed in the southwest seats to assist the guests. The so-called guests, in terms of hospitality, are distinguished by righteousness, so they were placed in the northwest seats to correspond with the spirit of righteousness.

古文：主人者，接人以德厚者也，故坐于东南。而坐僎于东北，以辅主人也。
现代文：所谓主人，在接人待物上的突出特点是仁厚德厚，所以在位子东南的席位上就坐，以与仁气相应；而让撰坐在东北的席位上以辅助主人。
English: The so-called host, in terms of hospitality, is characterized by benevolence and virtue. Therefore, the host sits in the southeast seat to correspond with benevolence; and the guest sits in the northeast seat to assist the host.

古文：仁义接，宾主有事，俎豆有数曰圣，圣立而将之以敬曰礼，礼以体长幼曰德。
现代文：仁义互相交接，宾主各得其所，待客的姐豆合乎要求的数目，这就叫圣明。在此圣明的基础上又持之以敬，这就叫礼。以礼作为规范，使大家都能身体力行，这就叫德。
English: Righteousness and benevolence intersect with each other, each guest gets his place, and the required number of guests is met, which is called sacredness. On the basis of this sacredness, it is also respected, which is called etiquette. With etiquette as a norm, so that everyone can do their best, this is called virtue.

古文：德也者，得于身也。
现代文：所谓德，就是这种身体力行的所得。
English: The so-called virtue is the result of this kind of hard work.

古文：故曰：古之学术道者，将以得身也。
现代文：所以说，古时学习道艺的人，就是要在身体力行上有所得。
English: Therefore, people who studied Taoism in ancient times had to gain something in their physical practice.

古文：是故圣人务焉。
现代文：所以圣人都努力去实行。
English: That is why sages try to practice it.

古文：祭荐，祭酒，敬礼也。哜肺，尝礼也。
现代文：主人向宾进献酒食，先献脯酸，宾取脯酿以祭先人；又献酒，宾取酒以祭先人，这是表示敬重主人之礼。
English: The host offers food and wine to the guests, first offering boric acid, and the guests take it and brew it as a sacrifice to their ancestors. The host also offers wine, and the guests take wine as a sacrifice to their ancestors. This is a sign of respect for the host.

古文：啐酒，成礼也。
现代文：宾又尝一尝肺，表示接受了主人的敬意。
English: The guest tasted the lung again, indicating that he had accepted the owner's respect.

古文：于席末，言是席之正，非专为饮食也，为行礼也，此所以贵礼而贱财也。
现代文：宾又尝了一口酒，表示成就了主人的献酒之礼。宾在尝酒时，坐在席的末端，这是表示此席的真正意义并不在于吃吃喝喝，而在于行礼，这是重礼轻财的表现。
English: The guest takes another sip of wine, signifying the completion of the host's libation. While tasting the wine, the guest sits at the end of the table, which indicates that the true meaning of this table is not to eat and drink, but to make a bow, which is a manifestation of heavy bowing and light money.

古文：卒觯，致实于西阶上，言是席之上，非专为饮食也，此先礼而后财之义也。
现代文：宾的干杯是在西阶上，也是表示坐在此席之上并不是只为了吃吃喝喝，这是先礼后财的表现。
English: The toast of the guests is on the west steps, which also means that sitting on this seat is not just for eating and drinking, this is the performance of first gift and then money.

古文：先礼而后财，则民作敬让而不争矣。
现代文：人人做到了先礼后财；人民就会兴起恭敬谦让的风气，而没有争斗之事了。
English: If everyone does this, the people will develop a culture of respect and humility, and there will be no fighting.

古文：乡饮酒之礼：六十者坐，五十者立侍，以听政役，所以明尊长也。
现代文：乡饮酒之礼：六十岁以上的人坐着，五十岁的人站着侍候，听候使唤，这表示对年长者的尊敬。
English: Local drinking etiquette: People over the age of 60 should sit down, while those over 50 should stand and wait to be served. This shows respect for the elderly.

古文：六十者三豆，七十者四豆，八十者五豆，九十者六豆，所以明养老也。
现代文：六十岁的人上三个菜，七十岁的人四个菜，八十岁的人五个菜，九十岁的人六个菜，这表示对老人的奉养。
English: Sixty-year-olds are served three dishes, seventy-year-olds four dishes, eighty-year-olds five dishes, and ninety-year-olds six dishes, which indicates the maintenance of the elderly.

古文：民知尊长养老，而后乃能入孝弟。
现代文：百姓懂得尊敬年长者，懂得奉养老人，然后才能在家里孝顺父母、敬事兄长。
English: The people know how to respect the elderly, know how to support the elderly, and then they can be filial to their parents and respect their brothers and sisters at home.

古文：民入孝弟，出尊长养老，而后成教，成教而后国可安也。
现代文：在家里能够孝顺父母、敬事兄长，到社会上才能尊敬年长的人和奉养老人，然后才能形成教化。形成了教化，然后国家才能安定。
English: At home, it is possible to be filial to one's parents and respect one's elder brothers and sisters. In society, it is possible to respect the elderly and support the elderly. Then, enlightenment can be formed. After enlightenment is formed, the country can be stable.

古文：君子之所谓孝者，非家至而日见之也；合诸乡射，教之乡饮酒之礼，而孝弟之行立矣。
现代文：君子教导人们做到孝顺父母、敬事兄长的办法，并不是挨家挨户地每天不断地去耳提面命，而是只要在举行乡射礼时把人们召集起来，把乡饮酒礼演示给他们看，就可以培养他们养成孝顺父母、敬事兄长的风气。
English: The way for a gentleman to teach people to be filial to their parents and respect their elder brothers and sisters is not to go from house to house every day to constantly ask for help, but as long as he gathers people together during the town shooting ceremony and shows them the town drinking ceremony, he can train them to be filial to their parents and respect their elder brothers and sisters.

古文：孔子曰： 吾观于乡，而知王道之易易也。 
现代文：孔子说； 我参观过乡饮酒礼以后，就知道了王者的教化得到推行是很容易的事。 
English: Confucius said, "I have seen the drinking ceremony in my hometown, and I know that it is easy to carry out the royal road.

古文：主人亲速宾及介，而众宾自从之。
现代文：乡饮酒礼开始之前，主人亲自前往邀请正宾和介；至于众宾，则不须邀请，由他们自己跟着正宾和介而来。
English: Before the township drinking ceremony begins, the host himself goes to invite the chief guest and the mediator; as for the guests, they do not need to be invited, they themselves follow the chief guest and the mediator.

古文：至于门外，主人拜宾及介，而众宾自入；贵贱之义别矣。
现代文：到了主人门外，主人向宾行拜礼，向介行拜礼；至于众宾，主人不拜，只是作一个揖，就请他们进来了。
English: When he arrived outside the master's door, the master bowed to the guests, and bowed to the host. As for the guests, the master did not bow, but only made a sign, and invited them in.

古文：三揖至于阶，三让以宾升，拜至、献、酬、辞让之节繁。
现代文：谁贵谁贱，由此不难看出。进门以后，主人与正宾彼此行了三次揖礼才来到堂阶前；升阶之前，主人与正宾又互相谦让了三次才一齐升堂；升堂以后，主人又拜谢正宾的光临；入席以后，主人要酌酒献宾，宾又回敬主人，主人又要先斟酒自饮而后斟酒劝宾再饮：你推我让的礼节非常复杂。
English: After entering the door, the host and the guest of honor bow to each other three times before coming to the front of the hall; before promotion, the host and the guest of honor bowed to each other three times before ascending the hall together; after ascending the hall, the host also thanked the guest of honor for coming; after entering the hall, the host had to offer wine to the guest of honor, the guest had to return the honor to the host, and the host had to first pour the wine and then pour the wine to persuade the guest to drink it again: the etiquette of you pushing me is very complicated.

古文：及介省矣。
现代文：至于主人对介的招待，礼数就减省多了。
English: As for the host's invitation to the mediator, the number of courtesies has been reduced.

古文：至于众宾升受，坐祭，立饮。不酢而降；隆杀之义别矣。
现代文：至于主人的招待众宾，那就更简单了、堂上没有他们的座位，他们只能登上西阶接受献酒，就在西阶上跪着祭，站着饮，饮毕也不用回敬主人就可下堂。
English: As for the host's invitation to the guests, it is simpler, there is no seat for them in the hall, they can only go up to the west steps to receive the offering of wine, kneel on the west steps, stand and drink, and after drinking they can leave the hall without having to pay tribute to the host.

古文：主人酬介工入，升歌三终，主人献之；笙入三终，主人献之；间歌三终，合乐三终，工告乐备，遂出。
现代文：招待规格的高低，由此不难看出。
English: It is not difficult to see from this how high or low the standard of invitations is.

古文：一人扬觯，乃立司正焉，知其能和乐而不流也。宾酬主人，主人酬介，介酬众宾，少长以齿，终于沃洗者焉。
现代文：乐队进来，先由歌唱队员演唱了三首歌曲。演唱完毕，主人向歌唱队员献酒。然后吹笙的队员进来，吹奏了三首乐曲。吹奏完毕，主人向吹笙者献酒。
English: The band came in, and the singers first sang three songs. After the singing, the host offered wine to the singers. Then the pipers came in and played three songs. After the playing, the host offered wine to the pipers.

古文：知其能弟长而无遗矣。降，说屦升坐，修爵无数。
现代文：下酒菜端上来以后，大家就开始彼此劝酒，不计其数，尽兴为止。
English: After the wine and vegetables were served, everyone began to persuade each other to drink, countless, until they were happy.

古文：饮酒之节，朝不废朝，莫不废夕。
现代文：饮酒时间的掌握，以早上不耽误早朝、晚上不耽误办事为原则。
English: Mastering drinking time is based on the principle of not delaying drinking in the morning and not delaying work in the evening.

古文：宾出，主人拜送，节文终遂焉。
现代文：乡饮酒礼结束，来宾退出，主人拜送于门外，自始至终，礼节毫无差错。
English: At the end of the township drinking ceremony, the guests withdraw, and the host sends them outside the door. From beginning to end, there is no mistake in the etiquette.

古文：知其能安燕而不乱也。
现代文：由此可知，乡饮酒礼能够使大家玩得痛快而又井然有序。
English: From this, it can be seen that the township drinking ceremony can make everyone have a pleasant and orderly time.

古文：贵贱明，隆杀辨，和乐而不流，弟长而无遗，安燕而不乱，此五行者，足以正身安国矣。
现代文：来宾中的贵贱分明了，招待规格的高低清楚了，和睦快乐而又不失礼仪，长幼皆被恩泽而无所遗漏，玩得痛快而又井然有序。做到了这五条，就足以使自己不犯错误，国家得到安定。
English: The nobility and lowliness of the guests are clear, the level of the invitation specification is clear, the harmony is happy and does not miss the etiquette, the elders and children are blessed and do not miss anything, they have fun and play in an orderly manner. If you do these five things, it is enough to make yourself not make mistakes and the country is stable.

古文：彼国安而天下安。
现代文：国家得到安定，天下也就自然安定了。
English: When a country is stable, the world is naturally stable.

古文：故曰： 吾观于乡，而知王道之易易也。 
现代文：所以孔子说： 我参观过乡饮酒礼以后，就知道了王者教化的推行是很容易的事。 
English: Therefore, Confucius said: "After I visited the township drinking ceremony, I knew that the implementation of the king's edification was easy.

古文：乡饮酒之义：立宾以象天，立主以象地，设介僎以象日月，立三宾以象三光。
现代文：乡饮酒礼的象征意义：设立正宾以象征天，设立主人以象征地，设立介和撰以象征曰月，设立三宾以象征三光。
English: The symbolic meaning of the township drinking ceremony: the establishment of the chief guest to symbolize heaven, the establishment of the host to symbolize earth, the establishment of the mediator to symbolize the moon, and the establishment of the three guests to symbolize the three lights.

古文：古之制礼也，经之以天地，纪之以日月，参之以三光，政教之本也。
现代文：古人在制礼时，以天地为原则，以曰月为总纲，以三光为辅佐，构成了政教的根本。
English: When the ancients made the rite, they took heaven and earth as the principle, the sun and moon as the general outline, and the three lights as the auxiliary, which constituted the foundation of politics and religion.

古文：亨狗于东方，祖阳气之发于东方也。
现代文：乡饮酒礼的牲用狗，在堂的东方加以烹煮，这是效法阳气的发自东方。
English: The livestock dog of the township drinking ceremony is cooked in the east of the hall, which is inspired by the yang qi from the east.

古文：洗之在阼，其水在洗东，祖天地之左海也。
现代文：洗放在昨阶的东南，要用的水又放在洗的东边，这是效法天地的东方是海。
English: The washer is placed in the southeast of the last step, and the water to be used is placed on the east side of the washer. This is an imitation of heaven and earth. The east is the sea.

古文：尊有玄酒，教民不忘本也。
现代文：酒蹲里装有玄酒，这是教育百姓不要忘本。
English: This is to educate the people not to forget their books.

古文：宾必南乡。
现代文：正宾一定面南而坐。
English: The guest of honor must sit facing south.

古文：东方者春，春之为言蠢也，产万物者圣也。
现代文：从五行上来说，东方是春的位置，所谓春，就是万物萌芽发生的意思，东方产育万物，这就是圣，也就是生。
English: In terms of the five elements, the East is the location of spring. The so-called spring is the meaning of the germination of all things. The East produces all things. This is the holy, that is, the birth.

古文：南方者夏，夏之为言假也，养之、长之、假之，仁也。
现代文：南方是夏的位置，所谓夏，就是大的意思。南方养育方物，使他长大，这就是仁。
English: Nanfang is the location of summer, and the so-called summer means big. Nanfang nurtures things and makes them grow up, which is Ren.

古文：西方者秋，秋之为言愁也，愁之以时察，守义者也。
现代文：西方是秋的位置，所谓秋，就是收敛的意思。按照节令进行收敛进行杀戮，这就是守义。
English: The west is the location of autumn, and the so-called autumn means convergence. Convergence and killing in accordance with the festival, this is the protection of righteousness.

古文：北方者冬，冬之言中也，中者藏也。
现代文：北方是冬的位置，所谓冬，就是中的意思，而中是收藏的意思。
English: North is the location of winter, so-called winter, is the meaning of the middle, and the middle is the meaning of the collection.

古文：是以天子之立也，左圣乡仁，右义偝藏也。
现代文：所以天子在站立的时候，总是左边傍着圣，面朝南而向着仁；右边傍着义，背朝北而依着藏。
English: Therefore, when the heavenly son is standing, he always stands on the left side next to the sacred, facing south and facing Ren; on the right side next to righteousness, with his back facing north and leaning.

古文：介必东乡，介宾主也。
现代文：介一定面向东而坐，因为他要在宾主之间起沟通作用。
English: The intermediary must sit facing east, because he has to communicate between the guests.

古文：主人必居东方，东方者春，春之为言蠢也，产万物者也；主人者造之，产万物者也。
现代文：主人一定要坐在东方。因为东方是春的位置，而春是萌动的意思，是生产万物的。
English: The host must sit in the east, because the east is the location of spring, and spring means budding, the production of all things.

古文：月者三日则成魄，三月则成时，是以礼有三让，建国必立三卿。
现代文：主人之所以就东方之位，是因为招待宾客的一切饮食也是由主人提供的。月朔后三曰，月亮的阴暗部分才恢复光明，三个月才成为一季，所以宾主有互相谦让三次之礼，建国也一定要设立三个卿位。
English: The reason why the host takes the position of the East is because all the food and drink for the guests are also provided by the host. On the third day after the new moon, the dark part of the moon will only return to light, and three months will only become a season, so the guests have three times of mutual humility, and the founding of the country must also set up three noble positions.

古文：三宾者，政教之本，礼之大参也。
现代文：乡饮酒礼设立三位宾长，也是这个意思。这是政教的根本，也是制礼的重要依据。
English: This is also the meaning of the establishment of three chief guests in the township drinking ceremony. This is the foundation of politics and religion, and is also an important basis for the establishment of etiquette.

