古文：五行二《五行传》曰： 好战攻，轻百姓，饰城郭，侵边境，则金不从革。
现代文：《五行传》说： 喜欢战攻，轻视百姓，修治城郭，侵略别国边境，就会出现金不从革的现象。
English: "The Legend of the Five Elements" says: If you like to attack, despise the people, build castles, and invade the borders of other countries, you will encounter the phenomenon of money not following leather.

古文：谓金失其性而为灾也。 
现代文：金不从革，就是指金失其本性而造成灾害。 
English: If money does not grow on trees, it means that money loses its nature and causes disasters.

古文：又曰： 言之不从，是谓不乂。厥咎僭，厥罚恆晹，厥极忧。
现代文：又说： 言之不从，造就指不能办事，它造成的灾害是诈伪，它带来的惩罚是恒旸，它的忧患是疾病。
English: He also said: Words can't do it, creation can't do it, the disaster it causes is fraud, the punishment it brings is constipation, and its sorrow is disease.

古文：时则有诗妖，时则有介虫之孽，时则有犬祸，时则有口舌之疴，时则有白眚、白祥。
现代文：有时出现诗妖，有时出现介虫之孽，有时出现犬祸，有时出现口舌之痫，有时出现白眚、白祥。
English: Sometimes there is a poem demon, sometimes there is an insect evil, sometimes there is a dog accident, sometimes there is a tongue seizure, sometimes there is an egret, a white horse.

古文：惟木沴金。 介虫，刘歆传以为毛虫。
现代文：惟木诊金 介虫，刘歆解释为毛虫。
English: However, the tree was diagnosed as an aphid, and Liu Yao interpreted it as a caterpillar.

古文：金不从革：魏世张掖石瑞，虽是晋氏之符命，而于魏为妖。
现代文：魏伐在张越的石头上出现瑞应，有 大讨曹 三字，这虽然是晋代接受天命的符瑞，但是对于稳住却属于妖异。
English: Wei Wa appears on Zhang Yue's stone as Rui Ying, with the character 大讨曹. Although this is a proof of Jin's acceptance of the Mandate of Heaven, it is strange for stability.

古文：好攻战，轻百姓，饰城郭，侵边境，魏氏三祖皆有其事。
现代文：喜欢攻战，轻视百姓，修治城郭，侵犯别国边境，魏代前三位君主都有这类事情。
English: The three forefathers of the Wei Dynasty were fond of attacking and waging war, neglecting the people, building fortresses, and encroaching on borders.

古文：刘歆以为金石同类，石图发非常之文，此不从革之异也。
现代文：刘歆认为金石是同类东西，石上显示出不同寻常的图画文字，这属于金不从革的妖异。
English: Liu Wei thought that the gold and stone were the same kind of things, and the stone showed unusual pictures and words, which belonged to the magic of gold and leather.

古文：晋定大业，多敝曹氏，石瑞文 大讨曹 之应也。
现代文：置伐建立帝业，使蔓氐大为衰敝，这正是张掖石上文字 大讨曹 的应验。
English: It is the fulfillment of the words of the Great Controversy written on the Zhangye Stone.

古文：魏明帝青龙中，盛修宫室，西取长安金狄，承露盘折，声闻数十里，金狄泣，于是因留霸城。
现代文：魏明帝壹盖年间，朝廷大规模修建宫室，派人西去搬取匡童的金人，金人的承露盘折断，声音传到数十里外，金人流下了眼泪，于是就把金人留在灵越。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei Ming, the imperial court built a large-scale palace room and sent people to the west to pick up Kuang Tong's jinren. The jinren's tray was broken, the sound was heard dozens of miles away, and the jinren shed tears, so they left the jinren in Lingyue.

古文：此金失其性而为异也。
现代文：这是金失去其本性而出现的妖异。
English: This is gold losing its character and becoming weird.

古文：吴时，历阳县有岩穿似印，咸云 石印封发，天下太平 。
现代文：吴时，历阳县有个岩洞很像印，大家都说 石印的封缄揭开，天下就会太平 。
English: At the time of Wu, there was a rock cave in Liyang County that was very similar to the seal. Everyone said that if the seal of the stone seal was opened, the world would be peaceful.

古文：孙皓天玺元年印发。
现代文：孙皓天玺元年石印揭开了。
English: The stone seal was unveiled in the first year of Sun Yat-sen's reign.

古文：又阳羡山有石穴，长十余丈。
现代文：又隧壶旦有石穴，有十几丈长。
English: There is also a stone cave at the end of the tunnel, which is more than a dozen meters long.

古文：皓初修武昌宫，有迁都之意。
现代文：逐壁起初修建武昌宫，有迁都的意思。
English: At first, Sun Yat-sen planned to rebuild Wuchang Palace, with the idea of moving the capital.

古文：是时武昌为离宫。
现代文：那时候武昌宫是离宫。
English: At that time, Wuchang was separated from the palace.

古文：班固云： 离宫与城郭同占。 
现代文：至困说： 建离宫和建城郭有同样的征兆。 
English: Zu Zui said, "Building a palace and building a castle have the same signs.

古文：饰城郭之谓也。
现代文：那建离宫就是修治城郭一类的事。
English: Rebuilding the palace is like rebuilding a castle.

古文：宝鼎三年，皓出东关，遣丁奉至合肥；建衡三年，皓又大举出华里。
现代文：宝鼎三年，孙皓出兵东关，派丁奉率兵至合肥；建衡三年，孙皓又大举出兵华里。
English: Three years after Baoding, Sun Yat-sen sent troops to Dongguan, and dispatched Ding Bong to lead the troops to Hefei; three years after Jianheng, Sun Yat-sen again sent troops to Huali.

古文：侵边境之谓也。
现代文：造就是侵犯别国边境一类的事情。
English: It is the same as violating the borders of other countries.

古文：故令金失其性，卒面缚而吴亡。
现代文：所以使金丢失了本性，最终孙皓自缚双手投降晋军而吴国就此灭亡。
English: Therefore, Kim was allowed to lose his character, and eventually he tied his arms and surrendered, and the State of Wu was destroyed.

古文：晋惠帝永兴元年，成都伐长沙，每夜戈戟锋有火光如县烛。
现代文：晋惠帝永兴元年，成都王带兵讨伐长沙王，每天夜晚戈戟的锋刃都有火光，如同点燃的悬烛。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongxing of the Jin Dynasty, the King of Chengdu led an army to fight the King of Changsha. Every night, the cutting edge of the sword had fire, like a lit candle.

古文：此轻民命，好攻战，金失其性而为变也。
现代文：这是轻视百姓的生命、爱好攻战，致使金失其本性而发生变异。
English: This is to despise the lives of the people, love war, and cause money to lose its nature and mutate.

古文：天戒若曰，兵犹火也，不戢将自焚。
现代文：上天儆戒说，战争犹如火，不收敛就将会自焚。
English: Heaven's precepts say that soldiers are like fire, and if they do not restrain themselves, they will burn themselves.

古文：成都不悟，终以败亡。
现代文：成都王不能领悟这种征兆，最终事败身死。
English: The king of Chengdu did not wake up, and finally died as a result.

古文：晋怀帝永嘉元年，项县有魏豫州刺史贾逵石碑，生金可采。
现代文：晋怀帝永嘉元年，项县有魏豫州刺史买逵的石碑，石碑上长出金来，可以采集到。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Huai Yongjia of the Jin Dynasty, Xiang County had a stone monument inscribed with the names of emperors of Wei and Yuzhou. Gold was found on the stone monument and can be collected.

古文：此金不从革而为变也。
现代文：这是金不从革而产生的变异。
English: This is a variation of gold from leather.

古文：五月，汲桑作乱，群寇飚起。
现代文：这年五月，汲桑发动叛乱，随后群寇如狂飙处处突起。
English: In May of that year, the Kuisang launched a rebellion, after which groups of robbers sprang up everywhere like a stampede.

古文：晋清河王覃为世子时，所佩金铃忽生起如粟者。
现代文：晋司马覃为清河王世子时，他佩戴的金铃上突然间长出许多如同粟米的东西。
English: When Jin Simak was the heir of King Qinghe, many things that looked like corns suddenly sprouted on the golden bell he was wearing.

古文：康王母疑不祥，毁弃之。及后为惠帝太子，不终于位，卒为司马越所杀。
现代文：他的祖母、康王的母亲担心这是不祥之兆，就把金铃毁弃到后来司马覃被立为惠帝太子，他在太子位上没呆多久就被废黜，最终被司马越所杀。
English: His grandmother, the mother of King Kang, worried that this was an ominous sign, so she destroyed the golden bell until Sima Yi was later appointed as Prince Hui. He did not stay long on the throne before he was deposed and eventually killed by Sima Yue.

古文：晋元帝永昌元年，甘卓将袭王敦，既而中止。
现代文：晋元帝永昌元年，甘卓准备袭击王敦，不久就中止了。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongchang of the Jin Dynasty, Gan Zhuo was preparing to attack Wang Dun, but soon stopped.

古文：及还家，多变怪，照镜不见其头。
现代文：甘卓回到家，家中出现很多怪异之事，他照铜镜却看不到自己的头。
English: When Gundotra returns home, many strange things happen in his house, and he can't see his own head in the mirror.

古文：此金失其性而为妖也。
现代文：这是金失去本性带来的妖异。
English: This is money losing its nature and becoming a demon.

古文：寻为敦所袭，遂夷灭。
现代文：不久，甘卓被王敦袭击，于是全家被夷灭。
English: It was soon attacked by Wang Dun and destroyed.

古文：石虎时，鄴城凤阳门上金凤凰二头，飞入漳河。
现代文：石虎自立为帝的时候，邺城凤阳门上铜铸的凤凰两只飞入漳河中。
English: When the stone tiger became emperor, the two bronze phoenixes cast on the Fengyang Gate of Lucheng flew into the Li River.

古文：晋海西太和中，会稽山阴县起仓，凿地得两大船，满中钱，钱皆轮文大形。
现代文：晋海西公太和年问，会稽山阴县建造仓库，开挖地基时挖到了两艘大船，船上盛满钱币，都是有圆形花纹的大钱。
English: Jinhai Xigongda and Nianqian, the auditor of Shanyin County, built a warehouse. When excavating the foundation, they dug up two large ships. The ship was full of coins, all of which were big money with a round pattern.

古文：时日向莫，凿者驰以告官。官夜遣防守甚严。
现代文：挖到船时已接近黄昏，挖地的人急忙驰马报告官府，官府夜晚即派人看守，防守十分严密。
English: When the ship was dug up, it was close to dusk. The diggers hurriedly galloped to report to the government. The government sent guards at night, and the defense was very tight.

古文：至明旦，失钱所在，唯有船存，视其状，悉有钱处。
现代文：到第二天早上，钱币都不知到哪儿去了，衹有船还在察看船中情况，都有存放钱的痕迹。
English: By the next morning, no one knew where the money had gone. Some ships were still checking the condition of the ship, and there were traces of money being stored.

古文：晋安帝义熙初，东阳太守殷仲文照镜不见其头，寻亦诛翦。
现代文：晋安帝义熙初年，束阳太守殷仲文照铜镜却看不见自己的头，不久他就被诛剪。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yixi of the Jin Dynasty, Sokyang Daju Yin Zhongwen could not see his own head through a bronze mirror, and he was soon beheaded.

古文：占与甘同。
现代文：这种征兆应验和甘卓之事相同。
English: The fulfillment of this sign is the same as that of Gandzha.

古文：宋后废帝元徽四年，义熙、晋陵二郡，并有霹雳车坠地，如青石，草木燋死。
现代文：宋后废帝元徽四年，义熙、晋陵二郡都有霹雳车坠落地上，车似青石，车周围的草木全都因烧焦而死。
English: In the four years of Emperor Yuanhui after the Song Dynasty, there were two carts that fell to the ground in Yixi and Jinling counties. The carts looked like bluestone, and all the plants and trees around the carts died from being scorched.

古文：言之不从：魏齐王嘉平初，东郡有讹言云，白马河出妖马，夜过官牧边鸣呼，众马皆应。
现代文：魏齐王嘉平初年，东郡流传谣言说，白马河出现妖马，夜晚经过官马马厩旁呜叫，马厩中的官马也都相应呜叫。
English: In the first year of Wei Qi Wang Jiaping, there was a rumor circulating in Dong County that a demon horse appeared in the Baima River. At night, it passed by the official horse stables and howled, and the official horses in the stables also howled accordingly.

古文：明日见其迹，大如斛，行数里，还入河。
现代文：第二天看到妖马马蹄印，蹄印像斛那么大，从蹄印看，妖马从河中出行敷里远，又返回河中。
English: The next day, I saw the hoofprints of the demon horse. The hoofprints were as big as a cormorant. Judging from the hoofprints, the demon horse traveled a long way from the river and returned to the river.

古文：楚王彪本封白马，兗州刺史令狐愚以彪有智勇，及闻此言，遂与王凌谋共立之。
现代文：楚王曹彪本封为白马王，兖州刺史令狐愚认为曹彪有智有勇，听到这流传的谣言之后，就和王酸密谋，准备共同拥立曹彪为帝。
English: Cao Biao, the king of Chu, was originally sealed in Baima. The prince of Zhangzhou, Shizhi Ling, believed that Cao Biao was wise and brave. When he heard such a rumor, he supported him together with Wang Jun.

古文：遣人谓曰： 天下事未可知，愿王自爱。 
现代文：他们派人对曹彪说： 天下之事还不知道怎样变化，希望您多多保重。 
English: They sent someone to tell Cao Biao: "We don't know how things will change in the world. I hope you take good care of yourself."

古文：彪答曰： 知厚意。 
现代文：曹彪回答说： 我知道你们这深情厚意。 
English: Cao Biao replied, "I know that you are very kind.

古文：事泄，凌、愚被诛，彪赐死。
现代文：后来，密谋泄露，王浚、令狐愚被诛，曹彪被赐死。
English: The affair was exposed, Wang Yan and Ling Fugu were beaten to death, and Cao Biao was sentenced to death.

古文：此言不从之罚也。
现代文：这是言之不从的惩罚。
English: This is a punishment that does not go well with words.

古文：诗云： 民之讹言，宁莫之惩。 
现代文：《诗》说： 百姓造谣言，怎没有人去惩罚他们。 
English: "Poetry" said: People make rumors, how can no one punish them.

古文：刘禅嗣位，谯周引晋穆侯、汉灵帝命子事讥之曰： 先主讳备，其训具也。
现代文：刘惮继承皇位，谯周援引晋穆侯、汉灵帝给儿子命名的事讥刺说： 先主名讳是备，备的意义是具备。
English: Liu Shuo succeeded to the throne, and Zou Zhou quoted the names given to his son by Jin Mou Hou and Han Lingdi, and said sarcastically: The name of the forefather is Bei, and the meaning of Bei is Bei.

古文：后主讳禅，其训授也。
现代文：后主的名讳是禅，禅的意义是禅授。
English: His posthumous name is Zen, and the meaning of Zen is Zen teaching.

古文：若言刘已具矣，当授与人，甚于穆侯、灵帝之详也。 
现代文：塑瞪继承型馑之位，好像说刘家已经具备了，将要惮授给人，这种命名是动乱败亡的征兆，比晋穆堡、汉灵帝那时的征兆更清楚、更明显啊。 
English: It is as if the Liu family has already achieved the status of a hereditary imperial family and is about to bestow it on someone else. This naming is a sign of turmoil and defeat, clearer and more obvious than the signs of Jinmubo and Hanling at that time.

古文：蜀果亡，此言之不从也。
现代文：蜀国果然灭亡，这是言之不从的结果。
English: Shu's downfall is not a good omen.

古文：刘备卒，刘禅即位，未葬，亦未逾月，而改元为建兴。
现代文：刘备死后，刘禅即位，刘备的灵柩还未下葬，人死也还没超过一个月，刘禅就急着改元，新年号定为壁兴。
English: After Liu Bei's death, Liu Zhen ascended to the throne. Liu Bei's coffin had not yet been buried, and it had not been more than a month since his death. Liu Zhen was in a hurry to change the era, and the New Year's Day was set as Qixing.

古文：此言之不从也。
现代文：这是言之不从。
English: That's not good enough.

古文：习凿齿曰： 礼，国君即位逾年而后改元者，缘臣子之心，不忍一年而有二君也。
现代文：习凿齿说： 按照礼的规定，国君即位要等先君死了一年之后才改元，这是为了顺应臣子的忠心，不忍心一年之中有两个君主。
English: Xi Zhizhen said: According to the rules of etiquette, the sovereign must wait one year after the death of the predecessor before changing the era. This is in order to comply with the loyalty of the vassal, and cannot bear to have two monarchs in one year.

古文：今可谓亟而不知礼矣。
现代文：现在刘禅的这种做法可以说是急迫而又不懂得礼啊。
English: Now Liu Zen's approach can be said to be urgent and disrespectful.

古文：君子是以知蜀之不能东迁也。 
现代文：君子由此可以知道蜀国没有能力束迁。 
English: From this, the nobles could see that Shu had no ability to relocate.

古文：后又降晋。
现代文：后来蜀国又投降了晋。
English: Later, Shu surrendered to Jin.

古文：吴孙亮、晋惠帝、宋元凶亦然。
现代文：吴国孙毫、巡蛊童、塞优五凶也都是这样匆忙改元。
English: Sun Hao of the State of Wu, the Boy Scouts, and the Five Villains of the State of Caoyou were also hastily changed in this way.

古文：亮不终其位，惠帝号令非己，元凶寻诛。
现代文：逐奎即位不久就被废黜；晋惠帝大权旁落，朝廷的号令都不能由自己决定；元凶篡位不久就被诛除。
English: Emperor Jikkui was dethroned soon after ascending to the throne; Emperor Jinhui's great power fell by the wayside, and he could not decide on his own what to order from the imperial court; the person responsible for the usurpation was soon eliminated.

古文：言不从也。
现代文：这都是言之不从的结果。
English: This is all the result of not listening.

古文：魏太和中，姜维归蜀，失其母。
现代文：魏太和年间，差雄归附蜀，与母亲失散。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei and Empress Dowager Cixi, Shaxiong was annexed to Shu and separated from his mother.

古文：魏人使其母手书呼维令反，并送当归以譬之。
现代文：逊人叫差雄的母亲亲自写信把姜维叫回来，并且送上药草当归开导差维。
English: The Wei people asked his mother to personally write a letter to Jiang Wei to summon him to return, and at the same time sent him back to serve as a parable.

古文：维报书曰： 良田百顷，不计一亩。
现代文：差雄写信回覆说： 有良田百顷，就不计较一亩地。
English: Sasao wrote back saying, "If you have 100 hectares of good farmland, it doesn't matter if it's just one mu.

古文：但见远志，无有当归。 
现代文：我衹见到远志这种药草，没有当归草。 
English: I've never seen this kind of herb, and there is no substitute for it.

古文：维卒不免。
现代文：姜维最终在蜀国被灭时也未能幸免。
English: In the end, Jiang Wei did not survive.

古文：魏明帝景初元年，有司奏帝为烈祖，与太祖、高祖并为不毁之庙。从之。
现代文：魏明帝景初元年，有司上奏，认为盟壶的庙号应当为泌邑，型旦之庙与立担、直狙之庙一并成为永不撤除之庙，明帝听从了。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Wei and Ming dynasties, there was a senior official who thought that the temple name of Mengjiao should be Seorong. The temple of Katan, together with the temple of Lidan and Zhanzhi, became a temple that would never be removed. The Ming emperor obeyed.

古文：按宗庙之制，祖宗之号，皆身没名成，乃正其礼。
现代文：根据宗庙的规制，祖宗的庙号，都应当在功成名就、自身去世之后，才依照礼法考定。
English: According to the regulation of the ancestral temple, the temple name of the ancestor should be determined in accordance with the etiquette after the success and death of the ancestor.

古文：故虽功赫天壤，德迈前王，未有豫定之典。
现代文：所以帝王即使功劳光照天地，仁德超越前代帝王，也没有在生前预先确定庙号的典则。
English: Therefore, the old system did not have a pre-determined name, even if the merits were brilliant and the virtues surpassed the previous generation of kings.

古文：此盖言之不从，失之甚者也。
现代文：这属言之不从，失误非常严重。
English: This is not what I said, and it is a very serious mistake.

古文：后二年而宫车晏驾，于是统微政逸。
现代文：造事之后二年，魏明帝驾崩，于是魏的后裔衰微，政权落入他姓之手。
English: Two years later, Emperor Ming died, leading to the decline of imperial rule and the fall of the regime.

古文：吴孙休世，乌程民有得困疾，及差，能以响言者，言于此而闻于彼。
现代文：吴国孙休在位时，有个乌程的百姓得了疲困欲睡之病，到病好以后，他能凭藉回声传话，在这个地方说而在另一个地方却可听到。
English: During the reign of Sun Xiu of the State of Wu, there was a citizen of Wucheng who suffered from a disease that made him sleepy and fatigued. After he recovered, he was able to communicate by means of an echo, which meant that he could speak in one place but be heard in another.

古文：自其所听之，不觉其声之大也；自远听之，如人对言，不觉声之自远来也。
现代文：在他说话的场所听，不觉得他的声音大；在远处听，就像在和人面对面说话，不觉得声音是从远处传来。
English: Listening to him in the place where he speaks, you don't feel that his voice is loud; listening at a distance, it's like talking to someone face to face, you don't feel that the voice is coming from far away.

古文：声之所往，随其所向，远者不过十数里。
现代文：声音传播的方向，可以随着他的意向改变，传送最远的地方不超过十几里。
English: The direction of sound propagation can be changed according to his intention, and the farthest place is no more than a dozen miles.

古文：其邻人有责息于外，历年不还。
现代文：他的邻人借了债给别人，借债的人多年不还。
English: His neighbour had borrowed money from someone and the borrower had not paid it back for years.

古文：乃假之使为责让，惧以祸福，负物者以为鬼神，即倾倒畀之。
现代文：邻人于是请求他凭藉这种神奇的能力代为索讨，用鬼神之力使负债人害怕，负债人衹听到声音不见人，就认为真是鬼神，立即尽其所有把债还给他的邻人。
English: The neighbor then asked him to use this miraculous ability to collect the debt on his behalf, using the power of ghosts and gods to make the debtor afraid. The debtor heard the sound and saw no one, thought it was really a ghost and immediately did everything he could to repay the debt to his neighbor.

古文：其人亦不自知所以然也。
现代文：这个有神奇能力的人自己也不知道产生这种能力的原因。
English: The person with the miraculous ability doesn't even know why he has this ability.

古文：言不从之咎也。
现代文：这是言之不从带来灾祸的征兆。
English: This is a calamity of unspeakable proportions.

古文：魏世起安世殿，晋武帝后居之。
现代文：魏代修建安世殿，晋武帝后来住进安世殿。
English: The Ansei-den was built in the Wei Dynasty, and Emperor Jinmu later lived in the Ansei-den.

古文：安世，武帝字也。
现代文：安世正是晋武帝的字。
English: "Ansei" is the character for "Watahito."

古文：晋武帝每延群臣，多说平生常事，未尝及经国远图。
现代文：晋武帝每次召见群臣，谈论的多是日常生活中的事情，未曾谈经邦治国的宏图大略。
English: Every time Emperor Jinwu summoned a group of ministers, they mostly talked about things in daily life, and never talked about the grand plan for governing the country.

古文：此言之不从也。
现代文：这属于言之不从一类。
English: That's not good enough.

古文：何曾谓子遵曰： 国家无贻厥之谋，及身而已，后嗣其殆乎，此子孙之忧也。 
现代文：何曾对自己的儿子何遵说： 朝廷没有造福子孙的谋略，衹是顾及自身而已，后嗣恐怕危险啊!这是我们子孙的忧虑。 
English: He once said to his son, He Zun, "The imperial court does not have a strategy to benefit our children and grandchildren. They only care about themselves. I'm afraid our heirs are in danger! This is the concern of our children and grandchildren."

古文：自永熙后，王室渐乱。
现代文：从永熙年以后，王室渐渐陷入动乱。
English: After the Yongxi year, the royal family gradually fell into turmoil.

古文：永嘉中，天下大坏。及何绥以非辜被诛，皆如曾言。
现代文：永嘉年间，天下发生大的动乱，何曾的孙子何绥无罪而被诛，时势都像何曾预言的那样。
English: During the Yongjia era, great turmoil occurred in the world. He Zeng's grandson, He Zeng, was arrested without charge. The situation was just as He Zeng had predicted.

古文：赵王伦废惠帝于金墉城，改号金墉为永安宫。
现代文：赵王司马伦废晋惠帝，迁惠帝居于金墉城，把金墉城改名为永安宫。
English: Zhao Wang Sima Lun abolished Jin Hui Emperor, moved Hui Emperor to live in Jinyuan City, and renamed Jinyuan City as Yongan Palace.

古文：帝寻复位而伦诛。
现代文：晋惠帝不久就回归帝位，而司马伦却被诛。
English: Emperor Hui was soon restored to the throne, but Emperor Tangya Jian was killed.

古文：晋惠帝永兴元年，诏废太子覃还为清河王，立成都王颖为皇太弟，犹加侍中，大都督，领丞相，备九锡，封二十郡，如魏王故事。
现代文：晋惠帝永兴元年，下诏废去司马覃太子之位，恢复他清河王的封号，立成都王司马颖为皇太弟，还加侍中，大都督，领丞相，享受九锡，封二十郡，如同魏王的先例。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongxing of the Jin Dynasty, the following edict abolished the position of Sima Xuan as the crown prince, restored his title of Qing River King, and established Chengdu King Sima Ying as the emperor's younger brother. In addition, he was given the title of chamberlain, grand governor, and leading minister, and enjoyed the privileges of Jiuxi and twenty counties, just like the precedent of the Wei King.

古文：案周礼，传国以胤不以勋，故虽公旦之圣，不易成王之嗣。所以远绝觊觎，永一宗祧。
现代文：根据周代礼法，帝位要传给后嗣，而不传给勋臣，所以即使有周公旦那样的圣明，却不能替代成王继承帝位这是长远地杜绝觊觎帝位的野心、永久地保持承继宗祧者的专一和纯正的办法。
English: According to the Zhou Dynasty etiquette, the imperial throne should be passed on to the heirs, not to the courtiers, so even if there is a holy man like Zhou Gong, it cannot replace Chengwang's succession to the imperial throne. This is a long-term way to put an end to the ambition to seize the imperial throne, and to permanently maintain the integrity and purity of the successor to the imperial throne.

古文：后代遵履，改之则乱。
现代文：后代遵循执行这条原则，改变了这条原则就会发生动乱。
English: Future generations will follow, and change will be chaotic.

古文：今拟非其实，僭差已甚。
现代文：现在把司马颖和魏王相比，实际上不能等同，僭越失礼太过分。
English: Nowadays, emulating predecessors is not worthy of the name, and the fallacy of error has become very serious.

古文：且既为国副，则不应复开封土，兼领庶职。此言之不从，进退乖爽。
现代文：况且已经成为储君，是帝位的继承人，就不应当再给予封土，不应再兼领普通官职这是言之不从，举措违背礼法。
English: Moreover, since he has become the crown prince and the heir to the imperial throne, he should no longer be given fiefs, and he should no longer hold an ordinary official post. This is beyond words, and the measure violates etiquette.

古文：故帝既播越，颖亦不终，是其咎也。
现代文：所以惠帝流亡，司马颖不久于储君之位，这正是上述违礼行为的应验。
English: Therefore, Hui Di went into exile, and Sima Ying soon took the position of crown prince, which is exactly the fulfillment of the above-mentioned violations.

古文：后犹不悟，又立怀帝为皇太弟。
现代文：后来仍不醒悟，又立怀帝为皇太弟。
English: Later generations still have not woken up to the fact, and have re-instated the bad boy as the crown prince's younger brother.

古文：怀终流弑，不永厥祚，又其应也。
现代文：怀帝流落为囚，最终被弑，福祚不长，又正是违礼行为的应验。
English: He was eventually killed in exile and was not able to continue the national movement, which was also a fulfillment.

古文：语曰： 变古易常，不乱则亡。 
现代文：古语说： 变乱古制，改易常规，不遭动乱，就会灭亡。 
English: An ancient saying goes: change the old system, change the routine, if there is no turmoil, it will perish.

古文：此之谓乎？
现代文：指的就是这类事情。
English: This is exactly the situation!

古文：晋惠帝太安中，周于阳羡起宅，始成，而边户有声如人叹咤者。
现代文：晋惠帝太安年间，周圮在阳羡建造家宅。刚刚建成，而旁门好像有人发出慨叹的声音。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taian, Emperor Jinhui, Emperor Zhou Enlai built a house in Yangxian. It had just been completed, but someone seemed to be sighing at the side door.

古文：亡后，家诛灭。
现代文：周王己死后，他家被诛灭。
English: After Zhou Wang's death, his family was wiped out.

古文：此近言不从也。
现代文：这和言之不从相近。
English: That's not even close to being true.

古文：晋元帝太兴四年，吴郡民讹言有大虫在棨中及樗树上，啮人即死。
现代文：晋元帝太兴四年，吴郡百姓中流传谣言说，有大虫藏在纡布中以及樗树上，咬了人，人立即就死。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Taixing of the Jin and Yuan Dynasties, a rumor spread among the people of Wu County that there were large insects hidden in the cocoons and on the eucalyptus trees, biting people and causing them to die immediately.

古文：晋陵民又言曰，见一老女子居市，被发从肆人乞饮，自言： 天帝令我从水门出，而我误由虫门。
现代文：晋陵百姓又传言说，见到一个老妇人居住在集市上，她披散着头发向市井之人乞讨饮食，老妇人自己说： 天帝命令我从水门出。而我却误由虫门出。
English: The people of Jinling also rumored that they saw an old woman living in the market. She spread her hair and begged for food from the people in the market. The old woman herself said: God ordered me to leave through the water gate, but I mistakenly left through the worm gate.

古文：若还，天帝必杀我。
现代文：假若回去，天帝一定杀我。
English: If I go back, the Heavenly Emperor will surely kill me.

古文：如何？ 
现代文：怎么办才好? 
English: What do you think should be done?

古文：于是百姓共相恐动，云死者已十数也。
现代文：于是百姓十分恐惧，人心扰动，说是死者已经有十几个。
English: As a result, the people were very frightened and disturbed, saying that there were already more than a dozen dead.

古文：西及京都，诸家有樗棨者，伐去之。
现代文：谣言向西传到京城，京城中凡是有樗树拧布的人家，纷纷伐去樗树，丢弃贮布。
English: The rumor spread westward to the capital city. All the people in the capital city who had eucalyptus trees for spinning cloth had to cut down the eucalyptus trees and discard the stored cloth.

古文：无几自止。
现代文：没过多久，造谣言自己止息了。
English: It didn't take long for the rumours to die down.

古文：晋元帝永昌元年，宁州刺史王逊遣子澄入质，将渝、濮杂夷数百人。
现代文：晋元帝永旦元年，空州刺史王逊派其子王进入京为质，带着逾、进一带几百名各族夷人随行。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongtan of the Jin Dynasty, King Sisi of Kuanzhou sent his son, the king, to enter Beijing as a pledge, accompanied by more than several hundred barbarians from various ethnic groups.

古文：京邑民忽讹言宁州人大食人家小兒，亲有见其蒸煮满釜甑中者。又云失兒皆有主名，妇人寻道，拊心而哭。
现代文：京城百姓中忽然流传谣言，说是宁州人大吃民间小孩，有人亲眼看见窒业人蒸煮小孩，釜甑中都已盛满又说，丢失的小孩都有家长姓名，妇人在道路上寻找，捶胸痛哭。
English: A rumor suddenly spread among the people of Beijing that the people of Ningzhou were feasting on the children of the people. Some people saw with their own eyes that the people of Ningzhou were steaming the children, and the kettle was already full. They also said that the lost children all had the names of their parents. The woman was looking for them on the road and crying bitterly.

古文：于是百姓各禁录小兒，不得出门。
现代文：于是百姓们都各自严实地藏匿自己的小孩，不准他们出门。
English: As a result, each of the villagers carefully hid their children and did not allow them to leave the house.

古文：寻又言已得食人之主，官当大航头大杖考竟。
现代文：不久又传说吃小孩的罪犯已经抓到，官府将要在大航头用大杖刑讯拷问，穷究案情。
English: Before long, it was rumoured that the child-eating criminal had been caught, and that the authorities were going to torture him with a big stick in Dahuantou to thoroughly investigate the case.

古文：而日有四五百人晨聚航头，以待观行刑。
现代文：到逭天有四五百人清晨就聚集在垃堕，等着观看行刑。
English: By mid-morning, four or five hundred people had gathered in the square, waiting to watch the execution.

古文：朝廷之士相问者，皆曰信然，或言郡县文书已上。
现代文：朝廷官员问这些人，这些人都说确有其事，有人还说郡县文书已经上呈朝廷。
English: When the court officials asked these people, they all said that it was true. Some people also said that the county documents had been submitted to the court.

古文：王澄大惧，检测之，事了无形，民家亦未尝有失小兒者，然后知其讹言也。
现代文：王澄十分害怕，查问手下，事情没有一点迹象，百姓中也未曾有丢失小孩的人家，然后才知道这是谣言。
English: Wang Cheng was very scared. He asked his subordinates, but there was no sign of the incident, and there was no family that had lost a child among the people. Only then did he know that it was a rumor.

古文：此二事，干宝云 未之能论 。
现代文：这两件事，干实说是 不能评定 。
English: These two things, in fact, cannot be evaluated.

古文：永昌二年，大将军王敦下据姑熟。
现代文：永昌二年，大将军王敦顺江而下占据姑孰。
English: In the second year of Yongchang, the great general Wang Dun went down the river to occupy Guzheng.

古文：百姓讹言行虫病，食人大孔，数日入腹，入腹则死。
现代文：当时百姓中风传谣言说是流行虫病，虫先啮食人的肛门，过了几天就进入腹中，入人腹中之后人就要死。
English: At that time, rumours spread among the common people that it was an epidemic of worms. The worms would first bite a person's anus, and after a few days they would enter the abdomen. After entering the abdomen, the person would die.

古文：治之有方，当得白犬胆以为药。
现代文：治疗这种病也有药方，要找到白犬的胆作药。
English: There is also a prescription for the treatment of this disease. It is necessary to find the white dog's gall to use as a medicine.

古文：自淮、泗遂及京都，数日之间，百姓惊扰，人人皆自云已得虫病。
现代文：谣言从淮、泗流传到京城，几天之内，百姓受到惊扰，人人都说自己得了虫病。
English: The rumor spread from Huaihe and Handan to Beijing. Within a few days, the people were alarmed, and everyone said that they had contracted an insect disease.

古文：又云，始在外时，当烧铁以灼之。
现代文：谣言又说，病还在体外时，要用烧红的铁烧灼患处。
English: He also said that when the insects are outside for the first time, you can burn the insects with a hot iron.

古文：于是翕然被烧灼者十七八矣。
现代文：于是百姓翕然风从，被烧灼的人有十分之七八。
English: So the people were very angry, and seven-tenths of the people were burned to death.

古文：而白犬暴贵，至相请夺，其价十倍。
现代文：而白犬的价格骤然间昂贵，以致相互祈请，相互争夺，价格涨到原先的十倍。
English: The white dog was suddenly very expensive, so much so that when it came to begging for it, the price went up tenfold.

古文：或有自云能行烧铁者，赁灼百姓，日得五六万，惫而后已。
现代文：有人自己说能进行烧灼治疗，为百姓烧灼患处，每天能得到五六万钱，直到劳累困顿之后才停止。
English: Some people say that they can carry out cauterization treatment, cauterize the affected area for the people, and can get fifty or sixty thousand dollars a day, until they stop after they are exhausted.

古文：四五日渐静。
现代文：四五天后人心才渐渐平定下来。
English: After four or five days, it gradually calmed down.

古文：说曰，夫裸虫人类，而人为之主，今云虫食人，言本同臭类而相残贼也。
现代文：解说这事的人说： 没有毛羽鳞甲的裸虫和人同类，人是其中的主，现在说虫啮食人，指的是本是同气质、同类属却互相残杀戕害。
English: The person who explained the matter said: The naked worms that do not have feathers and scales are the same as humans, and humans are the main ones. Now, when it is said that worms eat humans, it refers to the fact that they are of the same temperament and the same genus, but they kill and harm each other.

古文：自下而上，斯其逆也。
现代文：病白下而向上发展，造就是逆。
English: Illness develops from the bottom up, whereas the opposite is true for creativity.

古文：必入腹者，言害由中不由外也。
现代文：一定要进入人腹才危及生命，意思是指灾害从内发生，而不是由外发生。
English: It must enter the abdomen, which means that the harm comes from the inside, not from the outside.

古文：犬有守御之性，白者金色，而胆用武之主也。
现代文：犬有守御的秉性，白属五行中金的颜色，而胆是给予人们勇气的根本。
English: Dogs have a protective nature, white is the color of gold in the five elements, and gall is the root of giving people courage.

古文：帝王之运，五霸会于戌，戌主用兵。
现代文：帝王的气运，五霸都聚集在戌，戌预示着用兵，而戌之禽是犬。
English: The emperor's luck, the five overlords are gathered in the dragonfly, the dragonfly indicates the use of soldiers, and the bird of the dragonfly is the dog.

古文：金者晋行，火烧铁以治疾者，言必去其类而来，火与金合德，共治虫害也。
现代文：晋代五行属金，要用火烧铁的办法治疗疾患，指一定要除去自己同类，因而招来火与金联合起来，依靠金火的旺气共治虫害。 
English: Jin Dynasty Five Elements is gold, it is necessary to use the method of burning iron with fire to treat diseases, that is, it is necessary to eliminate its own kind, thus bringing fire and gold together, relying on the vigor of gold and fire to jointly treat insect pests.

古文：案中兴之际，大将军本以腹心受伊、吕之任，而元帝末年，遂攻京邑，明帝谅暗，又有异谋。
现代文：案，在晋伐中兴的时候，大将军王敦本来是以朝廷腹心大臣的身份接受像伊尹、吕尚那样辅佐君主的重任，而在五壶末年，竟然进攻京城，明帝守丧期间，又有反叛朝廷的图谋。
English: According to the case, at the time of the Jin campaign in Zhongxing, the great general Wang Dun originally accepted the important task of assisting the monarch as a minister of the imperial court like Yi Yin and Lushan, but in the last years of the Five Pot War, he actually attacked the capital, and during the Ming Emperor's funeral, there was also a plan to rebel against the imperial court.

古文：是以下逆上，腹心内烂也。
现代文：这是位居臣下，反叛君王，体内腹心先烂。
English: This is a vassal, a rebel king, and his inner confidant is the first to rot.

古文：及钱凤、沈充等逆兵四合，而为王师所挫，逾月而不能济。
现代文：到钱凤、沈充等人率领叛兵从四方聚合，而被朝廷军队挫败，过了一个多月逆谋不能成功。
English: After Qian Feng, Shen Chong and others led the rebels to gather from four directions, they were defeated by the imperial army, and after more than a month, the counter-plot could not succeed.

古文：北中郎将刘遐及淮陵内史苏峻率淮、泗之众以救朝廷，故其谣言首作于淮、泗也。
现代文：北中郎将刘遐以及淮陵内史苏蝗率领进、泅的军队救援朝廷，所以那谣言首先在进、回出现。
English: Bei Zhong Lang led Liu Ye and Huairing Inner Historian Su Locust into the palace, and Ye's army came to the rescue of the imperial court, so the rumor first appeared in the Ming and Qing dynasties.

古文：朝廷卒以弱制强，罪人授首，是用白犬胆可救之效也。
现代文：朝廷最终凭藉弱兵制服强敌，罪人被诛，这正是用白犬胆可以救治疾患的应验。
English: In the end, the imperial court chose the weak over the strong, and the criminals followed the law. This was the fulfillment that the white dog's gall bladder could be used for treatment.

古文：晋海西时，庾晞四五年中，喜为挽歌，自摇大铃为唱，使左右齐和。
现代文：晋海西公时，司马晞在逆谋未暴露之前的四五年中，喜欢唱挽歌，自己摇着大铃唱，命左右随从齐声应和。
English: During the four or five years of the Western Jin Dynasty, before Sima Yu's treacherous plot was exposed, he liked to sing elegies. He would swing a large bell and sing, and his subordinates would follow in unison.

古文：又燕会，辄令倡妓作新安人歌舞离别之辞，其声悲切。
现代文：又每逢宴饮会聚宾客时，往往命歌伎演唱新安人歌舞离别之辞，唱出来的聋音十分哀惋。
English: Also, whenever guests gather for a banquet, they often order the kabuki troupe to sing the parting words of the Xin'an people's song and dance, and the muffled sound that comes out is very sad.

古文：时人怪之，后亦果败。
现代文：当时人都对这种情况感到奇怪。
English: People at the time thought it was very strange, and later it was defeated.

古文：晋海西公太和以来，大家妇女，缓鬓倾髻，以为盛饰。
现代文：后来司马晞果然因为逆谋败露而被黜。晋海西公太和年以后，朝廷官员家中的妇女，鬓发长垂，发髻倾斜，大家都把这种发式当作一种美饰。
English: Later, Sima Ye was indeed executed for his treachery. After the reign of Emperor Jinhai and the reign of Empress Dowager Xi, women in the households of imperial officials wore their hair in long braids with a slanting topknot. Everyone regarded this hairstyle as a form of beauty.

古文：用发既多，不恆戴。乃先作假髻，施于木上，呼曰 假头 。
现代文：梳这种发式需添很多假发，但平素又不常戴假发，于是预先制作好假的发髻，安放在木上，人们称这种假发髻为 假头 。
English: Combing this hair style requires a lot of wigs, but it is not common to wear a wig, so a fake hair bun is made in advance and placed on the tree. People call this wig bun a fake head.

古文：人欲借，名曰 借头 ，遂布天下。
现代文：别人想要借用，叫做 借头 。这种发髻、这种称呼竟然流布天下。
English: If someone else wants to borrow it, it's called 借头. This kind of hair bun, this kind of name, is actually spreading all over the world.

古文：自此以来，人士多离事故，或亡失头首，或以草木为之。
现代文：从这以后，朝廷士人多陷入动乱变故的灾难之中，有的人丢失了头，只好用草制作假头安葬。
English: From then on, most of the courtiers fell into turmoil and misfortune. Some lost their heads and had to be buried with fake heads made of grass.

古文：假头之言，此其先兆也。
现代文：关于假头的说法，就是这种现象的先兆。
English: The story about the fake head is a harbinger of this phenomenon.

古文：晋孝武泰元中，立内殿名曰清暑，少时而崩。
现代文：晋孝武泰年间，晋孝武帝建筑内殿，取名为清暑殿，不久孝武帝就驾崩。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jinxiao Wu Tai, Emperor Jinxiao Wu named the inner hall of the building Seisho-den. Emperor Xiaowu died soon after.

古文：时人曰， 清暑 者，反言楚声也。
现代文：当时人说 清暑 反语就是 楚声 。
English: At that time, people said that Qinghao's tongue-in-cheek name was "Chu Sheng."

古文：果有哀楚之声。
现代文：孝武帝崩，果然有哀楚之声。
English: Emperor Xiaowu has passed away, and there are indeed mournful voices.

古文：有人曰： 非此之谓，岂可极言乎。谶云，代晋者楚，其在兹乎？ 
现代文：有人说： 不是指孝武帝崩造件事，怎么能那么直截了当地解释呢?谶言说，代替晋的是楚， 清暑 预示的恐怕在逭事当中吧? 
English: Some people said: It does not refer to the collapse of Emperor Xiaowu, how can it be explained so straightforwardly? The anecdote said that Jin was replaced by Chu, and the summer heat was probably foreshadowed in the anecdote?

古文：及桓玄篡逆，自号曰楚。
现代文：到桓玄叛逆篡政，白号为楚。
English: To Kuan Xuan's rebellion and usurpation of power, the white name is Chu.

古文：太元中，小兒以两铁相打于土中，名曰 斗族 。
现代文：太元年间，小孩用两块铁在土中互相击打，称之为 斗族 。
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan era, children used two pieces of iron to hit each other in the dirt, calling it a "fighting clan."

古文：后王国宝、王孝伯一姓之中，自相攻击也。
现代文：后来王国宝、王孝伯一姓中的人，自己互相攻击。
English: Later, Wang Guobao and Wang Xiaobo attacked each other.

古文：桓玄出镇南州，立斋名曰蟠龙。
现代文：桓玄出京镇守南州，建斋取名为幽暮。
English: Huan Xuan went to Beijing to guard Nanshou, and the name of the Jianzai was Yugu.

古文：后刘毅居此斋。
现代文：后来塑堑就住在这斋中。
English: Later, Shuxuan lived in this house.

古文：蟠龙，毅小字也。
现代文：坚垄是型塑的小字。
English: Kengoreng is a small word for molding.

古文：桓玄初改年为大亨，遐迩沄言曰： 二月了。 
现代文：桓玄最初把晋安帝年号改为大亨，远近的人都哗然，说： 亨字预示着二月了。 
English: At first, Emperor Kuan Xuan changed the name of the year of Emperor Jinan to Tycoon. People near and far were shocked and said, "The word Heng indicates February."

古文：故义谋以仲春发也。玄篡立，又改年为建始，以与赵王伦同，又易为永始。
现代文：所以保卫朝廷、反对但查的义军谋划就在仲春二月开始发动但玄篡位自立为帝，又把年号改为建始。因为建并与圭眶司马伦篡位时用的年号相同，又把年号改为丞丝。
English: Therefore, the plan of the rebel army to defend the imperial court and oppose the Dan investigation was launched in the middle of spring in February, but the usurpation of the throne became independent as the emperor, and the year was changed to the beginning of construction. Because it was built and the year was the same as the one used when Guizimaren usurped the throne, the year was changed to Jose.

古文：永始，复是王莽受封之年也。
现代文：丞垃又正是王差受封时的午号。
English: Zhenglai was also the name of the noon when Wang Chia received the title.

古文：始徙司马道子于安成，晋主逊位，出永安宫，封晋主为平固王，琅邪王德文为石阳公，并使住寻阳城。
现代文：艳最初把司马道子迁徙到塞盛，置主让出帝位，居于永安宫，又把晋主封为平固王，封琅夏眶司马德文为互遇全，并日让他们住在寻阳撼。
English: Yan initially moved Sima Daozi to Sai Sheng, made the lord cede the imperial throne, and lived in Yongan Palace. He also made Jin Lord the King of Pinggu, and Xia Ye Sima Dewen the King of Mutual Encounter, and let them live in Xuanyang.

古文：识者皆以为言不从之妖也。
现代文：有见识的人认为造都属于言之不从的妖异。
English: Those with insight believe that all creatures belong to the supernatural, which does not obey words.

古文：厥咎僭。
现代文：它带来的灾祸是僭越失礼。
English: The scourge it has brought about is the excess of courtesy.

古文：晋兴，何曾薄太官御膳，自取私食，子劭又过之，而王恺又过劭。
现代文：晋朝建立之后，坦兽鄙薄太官烹制的御膳，在朝廷赐宴时自己取用自家烹制的食物。他的儿子翅在豪奢考究这方面又超过他，而王恺又比坦邈更胜一筹。王恺？
English: After the establishment of the Jin Dynasty, Tan Zi despised the gourmet meals prepared by the eunuchs and used his own home-cooked food at the banquets given by the imperial court. His son Ying surpassed him in terms of luxury and sophistication, while Wang Xi was superior to Tan Zi. Wang Xi?

古文：王恺、羊琇之畴，盛致声色，穷珍极丽。
现代文：鳄之辈，极力追求声色的享受，竭力搜集各种珍奇丽物。
English: The generation of crocodiles, strongly pursue the enjoyment of sound and color, and strive to collect all kinds of rare and beautiful things.

古文：至元康中，夸恣成俗，转相高尚。石崇之侈，遂兼王、何而俪人主矣。
现代文：到五尘年间，奢侈放纵成为风气，而且互相攀比，互相推崇，此风越来越盛，互塞的奢侈，竟然倍于王恺、坦劭而和君王相媲美。
English: By the 5th century, luxury and indulgence had become the fashion, and people were comparing themselves to each other and praising each other. This trend became more and more popular, and the luxury of interlocking was twice as much as that of kings and queens, and comparable to that of kings.

古文：崇既诛死，天下寻亦沦丧。
现代文：石崇被诛之后，晋朝不久就沦亡了。
English: After Shi Chong was assassinated, the country soon fell into ruin.

古文：僭逾之咎也。
现代文：这是僭越失礼带来的灾祸。
English: This is the scourge of Xuan Yue.

古文：恆旸：魏明帝太和二年五月，大旱。
现代文：魏明帝太和二年五月，大旱。
English: In May of the second year of Emperor Wei Ming's reign, there was a severe drought.

古文：元年以来，崇广宫府之应也。
现代文：这是太和元年以来，扩建宫廷府库带来的应验。
English: This is the fulfillment brought by the expansion of the palace treasury since the first year of the Taihe era.

古文：又是春，晋宣帝南禽孟达，置二郡；张郃西破诸葛亮，毙马谡。
现代文：又在遣年春天，晋宣帝南征擒获孟达，在攻占的地方设置二郡；张郃西进，打败诸葛亮，使马谖毙命。
English: In the spring of the year of the Dragon, Emperor Jinsun's Southern Expedition captured Mengda and set up two counties in the conquered area; Zhang Xuan marched west, defeated Zhuge Liang and killed Ma Xuan.

古文：亢阳自大，又其应也。
现代文：亢阳自大，骄横寡恩，旱灾又正是这种情况的应验。
English: The yang of excitement naturally increases, and this is its fulfillment.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 欲德不用，兹谓张。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 想要明德之人却又不任用，造就叫做骄横自大。
English: Jingfang "Yi Chuan" said: Those who want to be virtuous but do not appoint are called arrogant.

古文：厥灾荒。
现代文：它带来的灾祸是灾荒。
English: The calamity it brought about was the Great Famine.

古文：其旱阴云不雨，变而赤烟四际。
现代文：发生旱灾，阴云四布却不下雨，四境赤烟弥漫。
English: When a drought occurs, there are dark clouds but no rain, and red smoke pervades the four regions.

古文：众出过时，兹谓广。
现代文：军队出征时间过长误了季节，造就叫做荒废农事。
English: The army's time away from the front is too long and the season is out of season, resulting in what is known as "wasted agriculture."

古文：其旱不生。
现代文：发生旱灾，作物不生长。
English: If there is a drought, crops will not grow.

古文：上下皆蔽，兹谓隔。
现代文：君臣上下都昏聩小明是非，造就叫做障塞不通。
English: Princes and courtiers up and down are confused about what is right and what is wrong, creating what is called a deadlock.

古文：其旱天赤三月，时有雹杀飞禽。
现代文：发生旱灾，三个月寸草不生，赤地千里，时而有冰雹击杀飞禽。
English: Droughts occur, grass does not grow for three months, thousands of miles of red earth, and hailstones sometimes kill birds.

古文：上缘求妃，兹谓僭。
现代文：为皇上四处寻求妃嫔，这就叫做差错。
English: Seeking concubines for the emperor everywhere, this is called a mistake.

古文：其旱三月大温亡云。
现代文：发生旱灾，三个月高温无云。
English: There was a drought and three months of high temperatures without a cloud.

古文：君高台府，兹谓犯。
现代文：君王高建台观宫殿，造就叫做违背常理。阴干犯阳。
English: Emperor Gao built the Taiguan Palace, which is called a violation of common sense.

古文：阴侵阳，其旱万物根死，数有火灾。
现代文：发生旱灾，万物根枯死，屡屡发生火灾。
English: Droughts occur, everything withers away, and fires repeatedly break out.

古文：庶位逾节，兹谓僭。
现代文：百官超过节制，造就叫做僭越。
English: When officials overstep their bounds, it's called overreach.

古文：其旱泽物枯，为火所伤。 
现代文：发生旱灾，低洼之处的植物都枯死，被火伤害。 
English: In the event of a drought, plants in low-lying areas die and are damaged by fire.

古文：太和五年三月，自去冬十月至此月不雨，辛巳，大雩。
现代文：从太和四年冬十月到太和五年三月一直不下雨，三月辛巳日，举行隆重的求雨仪式。
English: From October of the winter of Taihe 4th year to March of Taihe 5th year, there was no rain. On the last day of March, a grand rainmaking ceremony was held.

古文：是春，诸葛亮寇天水，晋宣王距却之，亢阳动众。
现代文：逭年春天，诸葛亮进犯天水，晋宣王抵御，迫使诸葛亮退却，阳气极盛，伤害军士。
English: In the spring of the year of the Rooster, Zhuge Liang invaded Tianshui, and Jin Xuan Wang resisted, forcing Zhuge Liang to retreat. Yang qi was at its peak, injuring the sergeant.

古文：又是时二隅分据，众出多过时也。
现代文：又这时候三家鼎立，分地割据，人们耕种多误了农时。
English: At this time, the three families stood in a triangle, the land was divided, and people missed more farming time.

古文：《春秋》说曰： 伤二谷，谓之不雨。 
现代文：《春秋说》中说： 伤害两季的谷物，这就叫做不雨。 
English: "Spring and Autumn Annals" says: If you damage the crops in the two seasons, it is called no rain.

古文：魏齐王正始元年二月，自去冬十二月至此月不雨。去岁正月，明帝崩。
现代文：从魏景初三年冬十二月到齐王正始元年二月，一直不下雨。景初三年正月，魏明帝崩。
English: From the winter of December of the first three years of the Wei Dynasty to the February of the first year of the Qi Dynasty, there was no rain. In the first month of the first year of the Wei Dynasty, Emperor Ming died.

古文：二月，曹爽白嗣主，转晋宣王为太傅，外示尊崇，内实欲令事先由己。
现代文：这年二月，曹爽禀告继位君主，命晋宣王由太尉转任太傅。曹爽这样做，表面上是显示对晋宣王的尊崇，实际上是想事事先由自己决定。
English: In February of this year, Cao Shuang announced the succession of the monarch and ordered Jin Xuan Wang to be transferred from the rank of lieutenant to the rank of taifu. On the surface, Cao Shuang did this to show his respect for Jin Xuan Wang, but in reality, he wanted to decide things in advance.

古文：是时宣王功盖魏朝，欲德不用之应也。
现代文：这时晋宣玉的功劳超过瑟塑的一切人，直垄这样做，正是想要明德之人却不任用的应验。
English: At this time, the merit of Jin Xuanyu exceeded that of all the people who were self-made, and Zhi Rong did this, which was exactly the fulfillment of those who wanted to be virtuous but were not appointed.

古文：魏高贵乡公甘露三年正月，自去秋至此月旱。
现代文：从魏高贵乡公甘露二年秋天到三年正月，天旱。
English: From the autumn of the second year to the first month of the third year of the Wei Gao Gui Township, there was a drought.

古文：时晋文王围诸葛诞，众出过时之应也。
现代文：当时晋文王在寿春城围攻诸葛诞，旱灾正是军队出征季节不宜的应验。
English: At that time, King Jinwen was besieging Zhuge in Shuchun City, and the drought was the unfavorable fulfillment of the army's campaign season.

古文：初，寿春秋夏常雨潦，常淹城，而此旱逾年，城陷乃大雨。
现代文：以前，寿春在秋夏之际常因雨水大而造成灾害，潦水常常淹城，而这次天旱却延及两年，城被攻陷才下大雨。
English: In the past, Shouchun was often hit by heavy rain in the autumn and summer, causing disasters, and floods often flooded the city. However, this drought lasted for two years, and it was only after the city was captured that it rained heavily.

古文：咸以为天亡。
现代文：大家都认为是天意要使诸葛诞败亡。
English: Everyone believes that it is the will of heaven to make Zhuge rise and fall.

古文：吴孙亮五凤二年，大旱，民饥。
现代文：吴孙亮五凤二年，天大旱，百姓遭受饥荒。
English: In the second year of Wu Sunliang's reign, there was a severe drought, and the people suffered from famine.

古文：是岁闰月，魏将文钦以淮南众数万口来奔；孙峻又破魏将曹珍于高亭。
现代文：这年的闰月，魏将文钦率领淮南将士百姓数万人投降孙吴；孙峻又在高亭击败魏将曹珍的军队。
English: In the leap month of this year, Wei general Wenqin led tens of thousands of soldiers and civilians from Huainan to surrender to Sun Wu; Sun Jun defeated Wei general Cao Zhen's army in Gaoting.

古文：三月，硃异袭安丰，不克。
现代文：三月，吴将朱异袭击安丰，没有成功。
English: In March, Wu Zhaoyi attacked Anfeng without success.

古文：七月，城广陵、东海二郡。
现代文：七月，孙吴在广陵、束海二郡筑城。
English: In July, Sun Wu began to build a city in Guangling and Sokhai counties.

古文：十二月，以冯朝为监军使者，督徐州诸军，军士怨叛。
现代文：十二月，吴命冯朝任监军使者，督徐州诸军，军士因怨恨而反叛。
English: In December, Wu Ming Feng was appointed as the envoy to supervise the army, the governor of Xuzhou's army, and the sergeant rebelled because of resentment.

古文：此亢阳自大，劳民失众之罚也。
现代文：这是亢阳自大、骄横寡恩导致的惩罚。
English: This is the punishment brought about by Shenyang's arrogance and pride.

古文：其役弥岁，故旱亦竟年。
现代文：这次劳役延续了整年，所以旱灾也延续了整年。
English: Droughts also occur throughout the year, as there is hail throughout the year.

古文：吴孙皓宝鼎元年春夏旱。
现代文：吴孙皓宝鼎元年春夏都出现旱情。
English: In the spring and summer of the first year of the year, there was a drought in Wusun and Baoding.

古文：是时皓迁都武昌，劳民动众之应也。
现代文：这时候还壁把都城迁到选旦，这旱灾就是他使百姓辛劳、惊扰百姓的应验。
English: At this time, He also moved the capital to Suo Dan, and this drought was the result of His making the people work hard and disturbing them.

古文：晋武帝泰始七年五月闰月，旱，大雩。
现代文：晋武帝泰始七年五月、闰月，天旱，举行隆重的求雨仪式。
English: At the beginning of the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, in May, a leap month, and a drought, a grand rain-making ceremony was held.

古文：是春，孙皓出华里，大司马望帅众次于准北。
现代文：这年春天，孙皓到华里，晋大司马司马望率领军队驻守淮北。
English: In the spring of that year, Sun Yat-sen went to Huali, and Ma Ximang, the Grand Marshal of the Jin Dynasty, led an army to garrison Huaibei.

古文：四月，北地胡寇金城西平，凉州刺史牵弘出战，败没。
现代文：四月，北地胡人进犯金球酉王，置违业刺史童丛出城迎战，军败被杀。
English: In April, the Northland Hu people attacked the King of the Golden Ball and the King of the Dragonfly, and set the illegal thorn, Shi Tongcong, out of the city to fight. He was defeated and killed.

古文：泰始八年五月，旱。
现代文：奉始八年五月，天旱。
English: In May of the eighth year of the Hōjō era, the drought ended.

古文：是时帝纳荀勖邪说，留贾充不复西镇，而任恺稍疏，上下皆蔽之应也。
现代文：当时晋帝接纳荀勖的邪说，留置立在京城任职，不让他西去镇守关中，而任恺渐渐被疏远，旱灾是君臣上下都被壅蔽，识见不明的应验。
English: At that time, the Jin Emperor accepted the heresy of Zhai, kept Zhai in the capital, and did not allow him to go to the west to guard the pass, while Ren Zhai was gradually alienated. The drought was covered up by the monarchs and ministers, and the fulfillment was unknown.

古文：又李喜、鲁芝、李胤等并在散职，近欲德不用之谓也。
现代文：又李意、鲁芝、李胤等都衹委任闲散的官职，这接近于人们所说的想要明德之人却不任用的情况。
English: In addition, Li Yi, Lu Zhi, Li Yin and others all appointed idle officials, which is close to the situation that people say that people who want to be virtuous are not appointed.

古文：泰始九年，自正月旱，至于六月，祈宗庙社稷山川，癸未雨。
现代文：奉始九年，从正月开始天旱，一直延续到六月，向宗庙社稷山川之神祈祷，癸末日下雨。
English: In the ninth year of the Hōjō era, a drought began in the first month of the year and lasted until June. I prayed to the god of the ancestral temple, the god of mountains and rivers, that it would rain in the end of the year.

古文：去年九月，吴西陵督步阐据城来降，遣羊祜统杨肇等众八万救迎阐。
现代文：上一年九月，呈酉堕督捌目率城投降，晋派羊祜率领提肇等人，统领八万军队援救并迎回步阐。
English: In September of the previous year, the city capitulated under the leadership of the fallen governor Zhang Mome, and the Jin sent Yang Jie to lead 80,000 troops to rescue and welcome back Zhuge Liang.

古文：十二月，陆抗大破肇军，攻阐灭之。
现代文：十二月，呈陆抗大破扰肇的军队，攻破步阐据守的城池，诛减了步阐。
English: In December, the army, which had shown great resistance against the land disturbance, broke through the fortified city and reduced the number of troops.

古文：泰始十年四月，旱。
现代文：壶始十年四月，天旱。
English: In April of the 10th year of the Heian period, there was a drought.

古文：去年秋冬，采择卿校诸葛冲等女，是春五十余人入殿简选。
现代文：上一年秋冬之时，选用文武官员壁葛地等人的女儿入宫，这年春天又有五十多个女孩入殿接受挑选。
English: In the autumn and winter of the previous year, the daughters of civil and military officials, such as Cho Kekuchi, were selected to enter the palace, and this spring, more than fifty girls entered the palace to be selected.

古文：又取小将吏女数十人，母子号哭于宫中，声闻于外，行人悲酸。
现代文：又选取了低级将吏家的女孩数十人入宫，她们母女分别时都在宫中痛哭，痛哭声传到宫墙外，行人听了都感到悲痛酸楚。
English: In addition, dozens of daughters of low-ranking generals and officials were selected. Mother and son cried bitterly in the palace, and their cries spread outside the palace, making pedestrians sad.

古文：是殆积阴生阳之应也。
现代文：天旱大概就是积阴生阳的应验。
English: The drought is probably the fulfillment of the accumulation of yin and yang.

古文：晋武帝咸宁二年五月，旱，大雩，及社稷山川。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁二年五月，天早，举行隆重的求雨仪式，并向社稷山川之神祈祷。
English: Early in the morning of May in the second year of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, a grand rain-making ceremony was held, and prayers were offered to the god of mountains and rivers.

古文：至六月，乃澍雨。
现代文：到六月，才下大雨，滋润大地。
English: By June, there is a timely rain.

古文：晋武帝太康二年，自去冬旱，至此春平吴，亢阳动众自大之应也。
现代文：从晋武帝太康元年冬天到太康二年春天，天旱，这是从太康元年冬至二年春，晋兴师平定吴，骄横寡恩、亢阳自大、劳师动众的应验。
English: From the winter of Taikang in the first year of the Jin Dynasty to the spring of the second year of the Taikang Dynasty, there was a drought. This was the fulfillment of the efforts of Jin Xing to pacify Wu, arrogant and ungrateful, arrogant and arrogant, and laborious from the winter of the first year of the Taikang Dynasty to the spring of the second year of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：太康三年四月，旱。
现代文：太康三年四月，天旱。
English: In April of the third year of Taikang, there was a drought.

古文：乙酉，诏司空齐王攸与尚书、廷尉、河南尹录讯系囚，事从蠲宥。
现代文：乙酉曰，皇上下诏命司空齐王司马攸与尚书、廷尉、河南尹一同省察审讯被拘押的囚徒，给他们宽宥减罪。
English: Yi Xuan said that the Emperor issued an edict ordering the Secretary of the State of Qi Wang Sima You and the Secretary of the State of Qi Wang Sima You, together with the Secretary of the State of Qi Wang, the Courtier, and the Henan Yin, to investigate the interrogation of the detained prisoners and give them pardon and commute their crimes.

古文：太康五年六月，旱。
现代文：太康五年六月，天旱。
English: In June of the fifth year of Taikang, there was a drought.

古文：此年正月，天阴，解而复合。
现代文：这年正月，天空布满阴云，阴云散开之后又重新聚集。
English: In the first month of this year, the sky was covered with dark clouds. After the dark clouds dispersed, they gathered again.

古文：刘毅上疏曰： 必有阿党之臣，奸以事君者，当诛而不赦也。 
现代文：刘毅上疏说： 这种天象，说明朝廷有阿谀结党之臣，以奸诈之心事奉君王，应当诛除，不能赦免。 
English: Liu Yi said, "This kind of celestial phenomenon shows that the imperial court has the vassals of the party who serve the king with treacherous hearts. They should be eliminated and cannot be pardoned."

古文：帝不答。
现代文：皇帝不作回答。
English: Emperor Wu did not answer.

古文：是时荀勖、冯紞僭作威福，乱朝尤甚。
现代文：这时候苟勖、冯沈假藉皇上名义作威作福，极为严重地扰乱了朝政。
English: Yuan Shih-tao and Yao Si used the emperor's name to make themselves look good, which led to serious chaos in imperial politics.

古文：太康六年三月，青、凉、幽、冀郡国旱。
现代文：太康六年三月，青、凉、幽、冀等郡国天旱。
English: In March of the sixth year of Taikang, the counties of Qing, Liang, Yu and Hebei were hit by drought.

古文：太康六年六月，济阴、武陵旱，伤麦。
现代文：太康六年六月，济阴、武陵天旱，麦子受到损害。
English: In June of the sixth year of the Taikang era, there was a drought in Jinyin and Wuling, and the wheat was damaged.

古文：太康七年夏，郡国十三旱。
现代文：太康七年夏，共有十三个郡国发生旱情。
English: In the summer of Taikang's seventh year, a total of thirteen counties experienced drought conditions.

古文：太康八年四月，冀州旱。
现代文：太康八年四月，冀州天早。
English: In April of the eighth year of Taikang, Jizhou was early.

古文：太康九年夏，郡国三十三旱。
现代文：太康九年夏，共有三十三个郡国发生旱情。
English: In the summer of Taikang's ninth year, drought conditions occurred in a total of 33 counties.

古文：太康九年六月，扶风、始平、京兆、安定旱，伤麦。
现代文：太康九年六月，扶风、始平、京兆、安定等处天旱，麦子受到损害。
English: In June of the ninth year of Taikang, there was a drought in Fufeng, Shihping, Jingzhao, and Ding'an, and the wheat was damaged.

古文：太康十年二月，旱。
现代文：太康十年二月，天旱。
English: February of the 10th year of Taikang, drought.

古文：晋武帝太熙元年二月，旱。
现代文：晋武帝太熙元年二月，天旱。
English: In February of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinmu, there was a drought.

古文：自太康以后，虽正人满朝，不被亲仗；而贾充、荀勖、杨骏、冯紞怜等，迭居要重。
现代文：从太康以来，虽然正直大臣充盈朝廷，但他们不被亲近任用：而贾充、荀勖、杨骏、冯紞怜等人却被重用，交替担任要职。
English: Since Taikang, although ministers of honesty have filled the imperial court, they have not been closely appointed: while Jia Chong, Zhai, Yang Xuan, Feng Ronglei and others have been reused, alternately holding important positions.

古文：所以无年不旱者，欲德不用，上下皆蔽，庶位逾节之罚也。
现代文：没有一年不发生旱灾的原因，正是对想要明德之人却不任用、君臣上下都昏聩不明是非、百官超越节制这一类现象的惩罚。
English: The reason why there is no year without a drought is precisely the punishment for such phenomena as those who want to be virtuous but are not appointed, monarchs and ministers are confused and do not know what is right and what is wrong, and a hundred officials exceed restraint.

古文：晋惠帝元康元年七月，雍州大旱，殒霜疾疫。
现代文：晋惠帝元康元年七月，雍州大旱，降霜，又流行疫病。
English: In July of the first year of Emperor Jingu's reign, Yongzhou was hit by drought, frost, and an epidemic.

古文：关中饥，米斛万钱。
现代文：关中发生饥荒，米价涨到一斛万钱。
English: A famine occurred in Guanzhong, and the price of rice rose to one million yuan.

古文：元康七年七月，秦雍二州大旱。
现代文：元康七年七月，秦雍二州大旱。
English: In July of the seventh year of the Yuan Kang, the Qin and Yong dynasties suffered a severe drought in two provinces.

古文：故其年氐羌反叛，雍州刺史解系败绩。
现代文：所以这一年氐人、羌人反叛，雍州刺史解系大败。
English: Therefore, in this year, the Xiongnu people and the Xiongnu people rebelled, and the Yongzhou Zhishu disintegration system suffered a major defeat.

古文：是年正月，周处、卢播等复败，关西震乱。
现代文：这一年正月，周处、卢播等征讨反叛的氐人、羌人，又被击败，盟酉惊恐慌惧。
English: In the first month of this year, the surrounding areas, Lu Bo, and other rebels were defeated, and the allies were shocked and frightened.

古文：交兵弥岁，至是饥疫荐臻，戎、晋并困，朝廷不能振，诏听相卖鬻。
现代文：交战整年，到这时饥荒、疫病屡屡发生，反叛的氐人、羌人和晋朝廷都已困顿，朝廷不能救助百姓，于是皇上下韶准许百姓互相买卖子女。
English: The war had been going on for a whole year, and by this time, famine and plagues had repeatedly occurred. The rebellious Xiongnu, Xiongnu and Jin imperial court were all in trouble, and the imperial court could not help the people. Therefore, the emperor and the upper and lower echelons allowed the people to buy and sell children with each other.

古文：元康七年九月，郡国五旱。
现代文：元康七年九月，五个郡国天旱。
English: In September of the seventh year of the Yuan Kang, five counties were hit by drought.

古文：晋惠帝永宁元年，自夏及秋，青、徐、幽、并四州旱。
现代文：晋惠帝永宁元年，青、徐、幽、并四州天旱，旱情从夏天延续到秋天。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongning of the Jin Dynasty, Qing, Xu, Yu, and Shizhou suffered from drought, and the drought lasted from summer to autumn.

古文：是年春，三王讨赵王伦，六旬之中，大小数十战，死者十余万人。
现代文：这年春天，三王讨伐赵王司马伦，六十天之中，发生了大小数十次战事，十余万人战死。
English: In the spring of this year, the three kings fought against Zhao Wang Simaren. During the sixty days, there were dozens of battles, and more than one hundred thousand people died in battle.

古文：十二月，郡国十二又旱。
现代文：十二月，又有十二个郡国发生旱情。
English: In December, a further 12 counties were in drought.

古文：晋怀帝永嘉三年五月，大旱。
现代文：晋怀帝永嘉三年五月，大旱。
English: In May of the third year of the reign of Emperor Huai Yongjia, there was a severe drought.

古文：襄平县梁水淡渊竭，河、洛、江、汉皆可涉。
现代文：襄平县梁水淡渊枯竭，河、洛、江、汉等河流水浅得都可徒步涉渡。
English: The Liangshui shoal in Yangping County has dried up, and rivers such as the He, Luo, Jiang, and Han are too shallow to wade through on foot.

古文：是年三月，司马越归京都，遣兵入宫，收中书令缪播等九人杀之。
现代文：这年三月，司马越回归京城，派兵进宫，收捕中书令缪播等九人，把他们杀了。
English: In March of that year, Sima Yue returned to Beijing and sent soldiers into the palace to arrest nine people, including Zhongshu Ling Miao Bo, and killed them.

古文：此僭逾之罚也。
现代文：旱灾是僭越而招致的惩罚。
English: Droughts are the punishment for overgrazing.

古文：又四方诸侯，多怀无君之心，刘渊、石勒、王弥、李雄之徒，贼害民命，流血成泥，又其应也。
现代文：又四方诸侯，多怀有不愿臣服晋的野心，刘渊、石勒、王弥、李雄之流，戕害百姓生命，血流成河，大旱又正是这种残暴行为的应验。
English: In addition, the lords of the four directions, many of whom harbored the ambition of not wanting to submit to Jin, such as Liu Yuan, Shi Le, Wang Mi, and Li Xiong, harmed the lives of the people, the blood flowed into rivers, and the drought was exactly the fulfillment of this cruel behavior.

古文：永嘉五年，自去冬旱至此春。
现代文：从永嘉四年冬至永嘉五年春，天旱。
English: From the winter of Yongjia 4 to the spring of Yongjia 5, there was a drought.

古文：去岁十二月，司马越弃京都，以大众南出，多将王公朝士，及以行台自随，斥黜禁卫，代以国人。
现代文：永嘉四年十二月，司马越放弃京城，率领大批人马出京城向南行，带领着很多王公朝士，并设置行台跟随自己，行使朝廷权力，赶走取消原有的禁卫，用自己手下人取代。
English: In December of the fourth year of Yongjia, Sima Yue abandoned Beijing and led a large number of people out of the capital to the south, leading many princes and courtiers, and set up a platform to follow himself, exercise the power of the imperial court, drive away and cancel the original ban, and replace them with his own subordinates.

古文：宫省萧然，无复君臣之节矣。
现代文：皇家宫殿萧条冷落，君臣之间的礼节再也不存在了。
English: The royal palace was deserted, and the etiquette between monarchs and their subjects no longer existed.

古文：《晋阳秋》云： 愍帝在西京，旱伤荐臻。 
现代文：《晋阳秋》说： 愍帝在西京，旱灾祸乱一再发生。 
English: "Jinyang Autumn" said: Emperor Qian was in Xijing, and droughts and disasters occurred repeatedly.

古文：无注记年月也。
现代文：没有记载具体的年月。
English: There is no record of the exact year.

古文：晋愍帝建武元元年六月，扬州旱。去年十二月，淳于伯冤死，其年即旱，而太兴元年六月又旱。
现代文：晋元帝建武元年六月，握业天旱；置趟建星四年十二月，莲王伯被冤杀，当年就发生旱情；太兴元年六月又旱。
English: In June of the first year of Emperor Jianwu of the Jin Dynasty, there was a drought in the rice industry; in December of the fourth year of Emperor Jianwu of the Jin Dynasty, there was a drought in the year of Emperor Jianwu of the Jin Dynasty; in June of the first year of Emperor Taixing of the Taixing Dynasty, there was another drought.

古文：干宝曰 杀伯之后旱三年 是也。
现代文：工资说的 杀莲王垣之后旱三年 ，就是指这种情况。
English: The "three-year drought after the killing of the lotus king," which refers to wages, refers to this situation.

古文：案前汉杀孝妇则旱，后汉有囚亦旱，见谢见理，并获雨澍，此其类也。
现代文：查考前史，前汉时冤杀孝妇就出现天旱，后漠时狱中有受冤的囚徒也出现天旱，孝妇被祭祀，冤囚被公断，都使天降大雨，遣天旱也是前漠、后漠那一类的应验。
English: According to the survey of prehistory, the drought of the heavens occurred in the former Han Dynasty when the filial daughter was unjustly killed, and the drought of the heavens also occurred in the prisoners who were wronged in the prison of the later Han Dynasty. The filial daughter was sacrificed, and the wrongful prisoner was adjudicated, all of which caused the sky to rain heavily. The drought of the heavens was also the fulfillment of the former Han Dynasty and the later Han Dynasty.

古文：班固曰： 刑罚妄加，群阴不附，则阳气胜，故其罚恆旸。 
现代文：班固说： 随意施加刑罚，那么群阴就不依附，因此阳气盛，所以带来的惩罚是恒旸。 
English: Ban Gu said: If you arbitrarily impose a penalty, then the group yin will not attach, so the yang qi is strong, so the punishment brought by the group yang qi is constant.

古文：建武元年四月，曲允等悉众御寇。
现代文：建武元年四月，盏蛆等人率领全军抵御敌寇。
English: In April of the first year of the Jianwu era, Zhengyu and others led the whole army to resist the enemy.

古文：五月，祖逖攻谯。
现代文：五月，祖逖攻打护。
English: In May, Zu Xi attacked and defended.

古文：其冬，周访讨杜曾。
现代文：那年冬天，周访讨伐杜曾。
English: In the winter of that year, Zhou Zai went to Duzeng to fight against Duzeng.

古文：又众出之应也。
现代文：天旱又是军队屡屡出征的应验。
English: The drought is also a testament to the military's frequent deployments.

古文：晋元帝太兴四年五月，旱。
现代文：晋元帝太兴四年五月，天早。
English: It was early in the morning of May in the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jinguan.

古文：是时，王敦强僭之衅渐著。
现代文：这时候王敦利用权势僭越朝廷的罪行已经渐渐显露。
English: By this time, Wang Dun's crime of using his power to usurp the imperial court had gradually come to light.

古文：又去岁蔡豹、祖逖等，并有征役。
现代文：又上一年蔡豹、祖逖等人，都有出征之役。
English: In the previous year, Cai Pan, Zu Xi and others all went to the front.

古文：晋元帝永昌元年，大旱。
现代文：晋元帝永昌元年，大旱。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongchang of the Jin Dynasty, there was a severe drought.

古文：是年三月，王敦有石头之变，二宫陵辱，大臣诛死。
现代文：这年三月，王敦在互头拥兵自重，不朝见皇上，两代皇帝受到凌辱，大臣被诛。
English: In March of this year, Wang Dun supported the soldiers with self-respect and did not go to see the emperor. Two generations of emperors were insulted, and the minister was arrested.

古文：僭逾无上，故旱尤甚也。
现代文：王敦僭越臣子的职分，目无君上，所以旱情特别严重。
English: The drought is particularly severe because Wang Dun has exceeded his duties as a vassal and has no regard for the emperor.

古文：永昌元年闰十一月，京都大旱，川谷并竭。
现代文：永昌元年闰十一月，京城大早，谷都干涸了。
English: In November of the first year of Yongchang, it was early in the morning in the capital, and the valley had dried up.

古文：晋明帝太宁三年，自春不雨，至于六月。
现代文：晋明帝太宁三年，从春天开始就不下雨，一直延续到六月。
English: In the first three years of the reign of Emperor Jimmingtin, there was no rain from the beginning of spring until June.

古文：去年秋，灭王敦，亢阳动众自大之应也。
现代文：前一年的秋天，朝廷诛灭王敦，天旱正是阳气极盛，自大寡恩、惊扰百姓的应验。
English: In the autumn of the previous year, the imperial court annihilated Wang Dun, and the drought was the fulfillment of the yang qi in full bloom, arrogant and ungrateful, and disturbing the people.

古文：晋成帝咸和元年秋，旱。
现代文：晋成帝咸和元年秋，天旱。
English: Emperor Jincheng came to Haman in the autumn of the first year of the Heian period.

古文：是时庾太后临朝称制，群臣奏事称 皇太后陛下 。
现代文：遣时候，庾太后临朝听政，掌握朝政，群臣奏事称她为 皇太后陛下 。
English: At the time of the dispatch, Empress Dowager Cixi listened to the government and mastered the government, and the ministers called her Her Majesty the Empress Dowager Cixi.

古文：此妇人专王事，言不从而僭逾之罚也。
现代文：这是妇人擅行皇帝之命，天旱正是对这种言之不从、僭越职分行为的惩罚。
English: This was a woman acting against the emperor's order, and the drought was the punishment for her disobedience and abuse of power.

古文：与汉邓太后同事。
现代文：这事和汉邓太后之事相同。
English: This is the same as what happened to the Empress Dowager of Han and Deng Dynasties.

古文：咸和二年夏，旱。
现代文：咸和二年夏，天旱。
English: The summer of the 2nd year of the Han and the drought.

古文：咸和五年五月，旱。
现代文：咸和五年五月，天旱。
English: Salty and five years in May, drought.

古文：去年殄苏峻之党，此春又讨郭默灭之。
现代文：前一年殄灭了苏峻和他的同党，这年春天又讨伐郭默，诛减了他。
English: The previous year, Su Jun and his co-partisans were annihilated, and this spring, they fought against Guo Mo and reduced him.

古文：亢阳动众之应也。
现代文：天旱正是亢阳自大、惊扰百姓的应验。
English: The drought is precisely the fulfillment of the arrogance of Shenyang and the alarm of the people.

古文：咸和六年四月，旱。
现代文：咸和六年四月，天早。
English: It was early in the morning of April in the sixth year of the Hamato era.

古文：去年八月，石勒遣郭敬寇襄阳，南中郎将周抚奔武昌。
现代文：上一年八月，石勒派皇啦进犯塞堡，南中郎将@垫逃奔到!追。
English: In August of the previous year, Shiller sent the Emperor La to invade Fort Say, and Nan Zhong Lang ran away from the mat to chase it.

古文：十月，李雄使李寿寇建平，建平太守杨谦奔宜都。
现代文：十月，奎雄派奎昼进犯建垩，建王太守握谜逃奔到宣都。
English: In October, Quixiong sent Qui Niang to invade Jianye, and Jianwang's father-in-law escaped to Xuandu.

古文：此正月，刘征略娄县，于是起众警备。
现代文：这年正月，型銮掠夺娄瑟，于是上天用干旱使大家警觉，加强守备。
English: In the first month of this year, the dragonflies plundered Gose, so God used the drought to alert everyone and strengthen their defenses.

古文：咸和八年七月，旱。
现代文：咸和八年七月，天旱。
English: In July of the eighth year of the Heian period, there was a drought.

古文：咸和九年，自四月不雨，至于八月。
现代文：咸和九年，从四月开始不下雨，一直延续到八月。
English: In the ninth year of the Heian period, there was no rain from April until August.

古文：晋成帝咸康元年六月，旱。
现代文：晋成帝咸康元年六月，天旱。
English: In June of the first year of Emperor Xiankang's reign, there was a drought.

古文：是时成帝冲弱，不亲万机，内外之政，委之将相。
现代文：这时候成帝幼弱，还不能亲自处理国家大事，内外的政务，全都交给将相办理。
English: At this time, Emperor Cheng was young and weak, and was not yet able to personally handle national affairs. All domestic and foreign government affairs were left to the generals to handle.

古文：此僭逾之罚，故连岁旱也。
现代文：这造成僭越的过失，所以连年干旱。
English: This has led to over-grazing, which has led to years of drought.

古文：至四年，王导固让太傅，复子明辟，是后不旱，殆其应也。
现代文：到咸康四年，王导坚决辞去太傅之职，还政于盛查，这以后就不再出现干早，大概就是玉遵此举的应验。
English: In the fourth year of Xiankang, Wang Du resolutely resigned from the post of Taifu and returned to Shengcha. After this, there would be no more dry mornings, which was probably the fulfillment of this move by Yuzhun.

古文：时天下普旱，会稽余姚特甚，米斗直五百，民有相鬻。
现代文：当时天下普遍干旱，会稽余挑干旱特别严重，一斗米价飞涨到五百钱，百姓中有相互买卖子女的现象。
English: At that time, there was a general drought in the world, and the drought was particularly severe. The price of a barrel of rice soared to 500 yuan, and there was a phenomenon of people buying and selling children.

古文：咸康二年三月，旱。
现代文：咸康二年三月，干旱。
English: In March of the second year of Hamkang, there was a drought.

古文：咸康三年六月，旱。
现代文：咸康三年六月，干旱。
English: In June of the third year of Hamkang, there was a drought.

古文：晋康帝建元年五月，旱。
现代文：晋康帝建元年五月，干旱。
English: In May of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinkang, there was a drought.

古文：是时宰相专政，方伯擅重兵，又与咸康初同事也。
现代文：适时候，宰相专权，地方诸侯手握重兵。这又和咸康初年事情相同。
English: When the time was right, the chancellor had absolute power, and the local lords had a heavy hand. This was the same as the first year of Hamkang.

古文：晋穆帝永和元年五月，旱。
现代文：晋穆帝永和元年五月，干旱。
English: In May of the first year of Jin Mu Di Yonghe, there was a drought.

古文：有司奏依董仲舒术，徙市开水门，遣谒者祭太社。
现代文：有司上奏，按照董仲舒的办法，迁移集市，开建水闸，派谒者在太社祭祀以求雨。
English: According to the method of Dong Zhongshu, there was a superintendent who moved the bazaar, started to build a sluice, and sent a priest to perform a ritual at Taisha to pray for rain.

古文：是时帝在衤强抱，褚太后临朝如明穆太后故事。
现代文：这时候，穆帝还在襁褓之中，褚太后仿照明穆庾太后的先例临朝听政。
English: At this time, Mu Di was still in the palace, and the empress dowager imitated the precedent of the empress dowager listening to politics in the imperial court.

古文：永和五年七月，不雨，至于十月。
现代文：永和五年七月到十月，一直没有下雨。
English: From July to October in 2015, there was no rain.

古文：是年二月，征北将军褚裒遣军伐沛，纳其民以归。
现代文：这年二月，征北将军褚裒派出军队攻打沛，收容那地方的百姓带回来。
English: In February of this year, the Northern Expeditionary Army sent troops to attack Pegu and bring back the local people.

古文：六月，又遣西中郎将陈达进据寿阳，自以舟师二万至于下邳，丧其前驱而还，达亦退。
现代文：六月，又派西中郎将陈逵进据寿阳，褚哀自己率领二万水军到下邳，前锋部队被打败，褚哀也就撤回军队，陈逵也退兵。
English: In June, he also sent Xi Zhong Lang to take Chen Qi into Shouyang, and Mo Yan himself led 20,000 naval troops to the Lower Yangtze River. The forward troops were defeated, and Mo Yan withdrew his troops, and Chen Yi also withdrew.

古文：永和六年闰月，旱。
现代文：永和六年闰月，干旱。
English: A leap month in the sixth year of the Edo period, and drought.

古文：是春，桓温以大众出夏口，上疏欲以舟军北伐，朝廷骇之。
现代文：逭年春天，桓温率领大军到夏口，上疏朝廷想率领水军北伐，朝廷对遣事感到惊骇。
English: In the spring of the year of the Rooster, Kuan Wen led a large army to Xiakou, and the Shang court wanted to lead the Northern Expedition of the Navy, and the court was shocked by the deployment.

古文：萧敬文盗涪，四蛮校尉采寿败绩。
现代文：萧敬文窃据涪反叛，西蛮校尉采寿讨伐他，被打败。
English: Xiao Jingwen secretly rebelled, and Captain Xi Ban Zhaoshou fought against him and was defeated.

古文：晋穆帝升平三年十二月，大旱。
现代文：晋穆帝升平三年十二月，大旱。
English: In December of the third year after the elevation of Emperor Jinmu, there was a severe drought.

古文：此冬十月，北中郎将郗昙帅万余人出高平，经略河、兗；又遣将军诸葛悠以舟军入河，败绩。
现代文：这年冬天十月，北中郎将郗昙率领一万余人到高平，谋划经营收复回、室之事；又派遣将军诸葛悠率领水军进入董回，被打败。
English: In the winter of October of that year, Kitanakachiro led more than ten thousand people to Takahira to plan the operation of the recovery and restoration; he also sent General Zhugeyu to lead the navy into Dongbei and was defeated.

古文：西中郎将谢万次下蔡，众溃而归。
现代文：西中郎将谢万率军驻扎在下蔡，也因为军队溃散而退回。
English: Nishinakuro stationed Xie Wan and his army in Lower Cai, but they retreated after the army was dispersed.

古文：升平四年十二月，大旱。
现代文：升平四年十二月，大旱。
English: In December of the same year, there was a severe drought.

古文：晋哀帝隆和元年夏，旱。
现代文：晋哀帝隆和元年夏，干旱。
English: The first year of the reign of Emperor Jingu and the first year of the reign of Emperor Qianlong were marked by drought.

古文：是时桓温强恣，权制朝廷，僭逾之罚也。
现代文：这时候，桓温强横，恣意妄为，掌握朝廷的权柄，干旱是对僭越过失的惩罚。
English: It was a punishment for arrogance to send Kan'un to the imperial court when he had been acting recklessly and holding power to control the court.

古文：又去年慕容恪围冀州刺史吕护，桓温出次宛陵，范汪、袁真并北伐，众出过时也。
现代文：又前一年慕容恪围攻冀州刺史吕谨，但逼出兵驻扎宛陵，范汪、袁真都率军北伐，军队出征超过用兵的季节。
English: In the previous year, Murong Ke besieged Jizhou and besieged Lugu, but he forced the soldiers to stay in Wanling. Fan Wang and Yuan Zhen both led the army to the north, and the army was sent out for more than the season of using soldiers.

古文：晋海西太和四年十二月，凉州春旱至夏。
现代文：晋海西太和四年十二月，凉州由春至夏一直干旱。
English: In December of the fourth year of the Jinhai West Pacific, Liangzhou has been dry from spring to summer.

古文：晋简文帝咸安二年十月，大旱，民饥。
现代文：晋简文帝咸安二年十月，大旱，百姓遭受饥荒。
English: In October of the second year of Emperor Jianwen's reign, there was a severe drought, and the people suffered from famine.

古文：是时嗣主幼冲，桓温陵僭。
现代文：这时候继位的君主年龄幼小，桓温欺凌朝廷，有僭越行为。
English: At this time, the monarch who succeeded to the throne was young, and Kuan Wen bullied the imperial court and acted arrogantly.

古文：晋孝武帝宁康元年二月，旱。
现代文：晋孝武帝宁康元年二月，干旱。
English: In February of the first year of Emperor Jinxiao Wu's reign, Ningkang, there was a drought.

古文：是时桓温入觐高平陵，合朝致拜，逾僭之应也。
现代文：这时候，但湿入朝，祭拜简文帝高平陵，朝廷官员都向他跪拜。
English: At this time, but wet into the morning, worship Jianwen Emperor Gao Ping Mausoleum, the court officials all bowed to him.

古文：宁康三年冬，旱。
现代文：干旱就是但过这种僭越行为的应验。宁康三年冬，干旱。
English: The drought is but the fulfillment of this act of arrogance. Ningkang three years of winter, drought.

古文：先是，氐贼破梁、益州，刺史杨亮、周仲孙奔退。
现代文：在这以前，氐贼攻破梁州、益州，刺史扰台、周仲孙失败逃跑。
English: Prior to this, the usurpers broke through Liangzhou and Yizhou, stabbed and disturbed the historical platform, and Zhou Zhongson failed to escape.

古文：明年，威远将军桓石虔击姚苌垫江，破之，退至五城。
现代文：第二年，威远将军桓石虔在姚苌进击姚苌，打败了他，迫使他们退至五城。
English: In the second year, the powerful general Huan Shikian marched into Yao Yu in Yao Yu, defeated him, and forced them to retreat to the five cities.

古文：益州刺史竺瑶帅众戍巴东。
现代文：益州刺史竺瑶率军戍守巴东。
English: Yizhou Jishi led the army to defend Badong.

古文：晋孝武帝太元四年六月，大旱。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元四年六月，大旱。
English: In June of the 4th year of the reign of Emperor Jinxiao Wu, there was a severe drought.

古文：去岁，氐贼围南中郎将硃序于襄阳，又围扬威将军戴遁于彭城。
现代文：前一年，氐贼在襄阳围攻南中郎将朱序，又在彭城围攻扬威将军戴遁。
English: In the previous year, the bandits besieged the commander of the Southern Middle Camp, Zhu Zheng, in Xiangyang, and besieged the commander of the Yangwei Camp, Dai Qu, in Pengcheng.

古文：桓嗣以江州之众次鄀援序，北府发三州民配何谦救遁。
现代文：但桓嗣领江州的军队驻扎在都，援救朱序，北府从三州百姓中征发壮丁配属何谦以救援戴遁。
English: However, the army of Kanshi's territory, Jiangzhou, was stationed in the capital to rescue Zhuxu, and the northern capital recruited and dispatched a strong man from the people of the three states, assigned to He Qian, to rescue Zhuxu.

古文：是春，襄阳、顺阳、魏兴城皆没，贼遂略淮南，向广陵。
现代文：这年春天，襄阳、顺阳、魏兴城都被攻陷。氐贼于是占据淮南，直趋广陵。
English: In the spring of that year, the cities of Yangyang, Shunyang and Weixing were all captured. The bandits then occupied Huainan and advanced as far as Guangling.

古文：征虏将军谢石率水军次涂中，兗州刺史谢玄督诸将破之。
现代文：征虏将军谢石率水军进驻涂中。兖州刺史谢玄统领众将击破氐贼南进之军。
English: Conqueror General Xie Shi led the navy into Tuizhong. Zhangzhou statesman Xie Xuan will lead the people to defeat the southward invasion of the bandits.

古文：太元八年六月，旱。
现代文：太元八年六月，干旱。
English: In June of the eighth year of the Taiyuan era, there was a drought.

古文：夏初，桓冲征襄阳，遣冠军将军桓石虔进据樊城。
现代文：夏初，桓冲攻打襄阳，派冠军将军桓石虔进军据守樊城。
English: At the beginning of the summer, Huan Chong attacked Yangyang and sent the champion general Huan Shikian to march into and defend Lucheng.

古文：朝廷又遣宣城内史胡彬次峡石为冲声势也。
现代文：朝廷又派宣城内史胡彬驻军峡石作为桓冲的声援。
English: The imperial court also sent Xuancheng's warlord Hu Bin to garrison the canyon as a show of support for Kanchong.

古文：太元十年七月，旱饥。
现代文：太元十年七月，干旱，饥荒。
English: In July of the 10th year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, drought and famine began.

古文：初八年，破苻坚；九年，诸将略地，有事徐、豫；杨亮、赵统攻讨巴、沔。
现代文：造以前，太元八年，打败苻坚的军队；九年，众将率军在徐、豫，攻城略地；杨亮、赵统率军进讨巴、沔。
English: Before the construction, in the eighth year of the Taiyuan era, he defeated the army of Yu Jian; in the ninth year, the generals led the army in Xu and Yu to attack the city; Yang Liang and Zhao led the army to fight Ba and Lu.

古文：是年正月，谢安又出镇广陵，使子琰进次彭城。
现代文：十年正月，谢安又出京镇守广陵，派其子琰进驻彭城。
English: In the first month of the tenth year, Xie An also went to Beijing to guard Guangling, and sent his son Zou to stay in Pengcheng.

古文：太元十三年六月，旱。
现代文：太元十三年六月，干旱。
English: In June 13th, there was a drought.

古文：去岁，北府遣戍胡陆，荆州经略河南。
现代文：前一年，北府派军队戍守胡陆，荆州谋划经营河南之事。
English: The year before, Beifu sent troops to defend Hulun, and Jingzhou planned to take over Henan.

古文：是年，郭铨置戍野王，又遣军破黄淮。
现代文：十三年，郭铨在戍野王设戍防守，又派军队攻破黄淮的军队。
English: In the thirteenth year, Guo Jian set up a defense in Yanyang and sent an army to break through Huang Huai's army.

古文：太元十五年七月，旱。
现代文：太元十五年七月，干早。
English: In July of the 15th year of the Taiyuan Emperor, it was an early morning.

古文：是春，丁零略兗、豫，鲜卑寇河上。
现代文：这年春天，丁零进犯兗、豫，鲜卑进犯迥上。
English: In the spring of this year, Ding Zi was promoted to the third rank, and Yu and Xianbei were promoted to the first rank.

古文：硃序、桓不才等北至太行，东至滑台，逾时攻讨，又戍石门。
现代文：硃序、桓等率军进讨，北至太行，东至滑台，攻伐超过用兵的季节，又派军戍守石门。
English: Shanzhong, Huan and others led the army to advance, from the north to Taihang, and from the east to Slidai, to attack and conquer more than the season of using soldiers, and also sent troops to defend Shimen.

古文：太元十七年秋，旱，至冬。
现代文：太元十七年秋，干旱，一直延续到冬天。
English: In the autumn of the seventeenth year of the Taiyuan, the drought continued until winter.

古文：是时茹千秋为骠骑谘议，窃弄主相威福；又丘尼乳母亲党及婢仆之子，阶缘近习，临民领众。
现代文：这时候茹千秋任骠骑谘议参军，窃取宰相权柄作威作福；又僧尼乳母举荐的亲属党徒，以及婢仆之子，都攀附近臣，藉此得以为官为将。
English: At this time, Ru Qianqiu was appointed to advise and join the army, stealing the power of the prime minister to show off and serve as a blessing; and the relatives of the party members recommended by the monks and nuns, as well as the sons of the maidservants, were all close to the vassals, and thus they were considered to be officials.

古文：又在所多上春竟囚，不以其辜，建康狱吏枉暴尤甚。
现代文：又他们为官之处多在早春处决囚犯，判决犯人并不是根据他们的罪行，至谜狱吏违法残暴特别厉害。
English: In addition, most of the places where they were in charge executed prisoners in early spring. The prisoners were not sentenced according to their crimes, so the prison officials were particularly cruel.

古文：此僭逾不从，冤滥之罚也。晋安帝隆安四年五月，旱。
现代文：旱灾是对僭越职分、言之不从、断狱冤屈失实过失的惩罚。晋安帝隆安四年五月，干旱。
English: Drought is the punishment for overstepping one's duty, not obeying orders, and breaking prison terms for wrongdoing. In May of the 4th year of Emperor Antero's reign, there was a drought.

古文：去冬桓玄迫杀殷仲堪，而朝廷即授以荆州之任；司马元显又讽百僚悉使敬己。
现代文：前一年冬天，桓玄迫使殷仲堪自杀，而朝廷就把殷仲堪的荆州刺史之职授给桓玄；司马元显又暗示朝廷百官，要他们全都礼敬自己。
English: The previous winter, Huan Xuan forced Yin Zhongkan to commit suicide, and the imperial court awarded Yin Zhongkan the post of Jingzhou chief historian to Huan Xuan; Sima Yuanxian also hinted to the imperial officials that they should all respect themselves.

古文：此皆陵僭之罚也。
现代文：这都是欺凌同僚、僭越职分的过失。
English: This is all the fault of bullying colleagues and overstepping their duties.

古文：隆安五年夏秋，大旱，十二月不雨。
现代文：隆安五年由夏至秋，大旱，有十二个月没下雨。
English: In the five years of Longan, from summer to autumn, there was a severe drought, and it did not rain for twelve months.

古文：去年夏，孙恩入会稽，杀内史谢琰；此年夏，略吴，又杀内史袁山松。
现代文：前一年夏天，莲墨攻入会稽，杀死内史谢毯；这年夏天，瑟墨攻占呈；又杀死内史袁山松。
English: In the summer of the previous year, Lianmo broke into the auditorium and killed Neishi Xiebao; this summer, Suemo broke into the auditorium and killed Neishi Yuan Shansong.

古文：军旅东讨，众出过时。
现代文：朝廷派军队东进征讨，军队出征超过用兵的季节。
English: The imperial court sent the army eastward for the purpose of conscription, and the army went to war beyond the season of conscription.

古文：晋安帝元兴元年七月，大饥；九月十月不雨。
现代文：晋安帝元兴元年七月，发生大的饥荒，九月十月都没下雨。
English: In July of the first year of the Jin-Andean dynasty, there was a great famine, and there was no rain in September and October.

古文：是年正月，司马元显以大众将讨桓玄，既而玄至，杀元显。
现代文：这年正月，司马元显率领大军将要讨伐桓玄，不久桓玄军到，把司马元显杀死。
English: In the first month of this year, Sima Yuanxian led a large army to fight Kuan Xuan. Soon, Kuan Xuan's army arrived and killed Sima Yuanxian.

古文：五月，又遣东征孙恩余党，十月，北讨刘轨。
现代文：五月，又派军队东进征讨孙恩余党，十月，北进征讨刘轨。
English: In May, the army was sent to the east to fight against Sun Enyu's party, and in October, it was sent to the north to fight against Liu Rail.

古文：元兴二年六月，不雨，冬，又旱。
现代文：元兴二年六月，未下雨，冬天，又干旱。
English: In June of the second year of Genxing, there was no rain, winter, and drought.

古文：是时桓玄奢僭，十二月，遂篡位。
现代文：这时候桓玄奢侈逾礼，僭越职分，十二月，桓玄篡位。
English: At this time, Kuan Xuan extravagantly overstepped his bounds and usurped his position. In December, Kuan Xuan usurped the throne.

古文：元兴三年八月，不雨。
现代文：元兴三年八月，未下雨。
English: In August of the third year of Genxing, there was no rain.

古文：是时王旅四伐，西夏未平。
现代文：这时候朝廷征讨四方，西境戎狄尚未平定。
English: At this time, the imperial court was recruiting from four directions, and the western region was not yet pacified.

古文：晋安帝义熙六年九月，不雨。
现代文：晋安帝义熙六年九月，未下雨。
English: In September of the sixth year of Emperor Jinnan's reign, there was no rain.

古文：是时王师北讨广固，疆理三州。
现代文：这时候朝廷军队北进征讨广固，划分三州的疆界。
English: At this time, the imperial army marched north to conquer Guanggu and divide the borders of the three states.

古文：义熙八年十月，不雨。是秋，王师西讨刘毅；分遣伐蜀。
现代文：义熙八年十月，未下雨这年秋天，朝廷军队西进征讨刘毅，并分派军队讨伐蜀。
English: In October of the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, before it rained that autumn, the imperial army marched west to fight Liu Yi, and dispatched troops to fight Shu.

古文：义熙十年九月，旱；十二月，又旱，井渎多竭。
现代文：义熙十年九月，干旱，十二月，又干旱。水井河川多干涸枯竭。
English: In the 10th year of Yixi, there was a drought in September and another one in December. Many wells and rivers were dried up and exhausted.

古文：宋文帝元嘉二年夏，旱。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉二年夏，干旱。
English: In the summer of the second year of Emperor Songwen Yuanjia, there was a drought.

古文：元嘉四年秋，京都旱。
现代文：元嘉四年秋，京城干旱。
English: In the autumn of the 4th year of the Yuan Jia, the capital was in drought.

古文：元嘉八年五月，扬州诸郡旱。
现代文：元嘉八年五月，扬州所属各郡干旱。
English: In May of the eighth year of Yuanjia, the counties belonging to Yangzhou were in drought.

古文：元嘉十九年、二十年，南兗、豫州旱。
现代文：元嘉十九年、二十年，南兖州、豫州干旱。
English: In the 19th and 20th years of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Nanluozhou and Yuzhou suffered from drought.

古文：元嘉二十七年八月，不雨，至二十八年三月。
现代文：元嘉二十七年八月，未下雨，延续到二十八年三月。
English: In August 27th, Yuan Jia, there was no rain, and it lasted until March 28th.

古文：时索虏南寇。
现代文：当时索虏向南进犯。
English: At that time, the Sorbs attacked southwards.

古文：孝武帝大明七年、八年，东诸郡大旱，民饥，死者十六七。
现代文：孝武帝大明七年、八年，东部诸郡大旱，百姓遭受饥荒，饿死的人有十分之六七。
English: In the seventh and eighth years of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, there was a severe drought in the eastern counties, and the people suffered from famine. Sixty-seven out of ten people died of starvation.

古文：先是江左以来，制度多阙，孝武帝立明堂，造五辂。
现代文：造以前，自置迁都红南之后，各种礼仪制度多有缺漏，耋迭壶建立明堂，打造皇帝专用的玉辂、金辂、象辖、革辖、木辂等五种辖车。
English: Before it was built, since the relocation of the capital to Hongnan, there were many gaps in various etiquette systems, including the establishment of the Ming Hall, and the creation of five types of imperial chariots, such as jade chariots, gold chariots, elephant chariots, leather chariots, and wooden chariots, for the exclusive use of the emperor.

古文：是时大发徒众，南巡校猎，盛自矜大，故致旱灾。
现代文：这时候又大规模征发役夫，巡狩南方，打猎游玩，十分骄矜自大，所以招致旱灾。
English: At this time, there was a large-scale recruitment of officials to patrol the south and go hunting. They were very proud and arrogant, which led to the drought.

古文：后废帝元徽元年八月，京都旱。
现代文：后废帝元徽元年八月，京都干旱。
English: After Emperor Go-Shirakawa's abdication in August of the first year of the Heian period, Kyoto was dry.

古文：诗妖：魏明帝太和中，京师歌《兜铃曹子》，其唱曰： 其奈汝曹何。 
现代文：魏明帝立和年间，京城有人唱《兜铃曹子》歌，歌辞锐： 其奈汝曹何。 
English: During the years of the Wei and Ming dynasties, some people in Beijing sang the "Ringing the Bell" song, the lyrics of which were sharp: "Chi Nai Ru Cao He."

古文：此诗妖也。
现代文：这是诗妖。
English: This is the beginning of the poem.

古文：其后曹爽见诛，曹氏遂废。
现代文：以后曹爽被诛，曹氏就衰败了。
English: After Cao Shuang was executed, the Cao clan fell into decline.

古文：魏明帝景初中，童谣曰： 阿公阿公驾马车，不意阿公东渡河。
现代文：魏明帝太和年间，童谣说： 阿公阿公驾马车，想不到阿公束渡河。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei Ming and Empress Dowager Cixi, a nursery rhyme said: "Grandpa drove a carriage, but I didn't expect Grandpa to cross the river."

古文：阿公东还当奈何！ 
现代文：阿公从束回来将干什么? 
English: What will grandpa do when he comes back from his trip?

古文：及宣王平辽东，归至白屋，当还镇长安。
现代文：到置宣王平定辽塞之后，回军行进到白屋，将要回归长安镇守。
English: After the arrival of Xuan Wang and the pacification of Liao Ce, the Hui army marched to Baiya and will return to the Chang'an town guard.

古文：会帝疾笃，急召之。
现代文：正逢皇帝病情加重，派使者急忙召回晋宣王。
English: Just as the emperor's condition worsened, an envoy was sent to urgently recall King Jinxuan.

古文：乃乘追锋车东渡河，终翦魏室，如童谣之言也。
现代文：晋宣王于是乘坐跑得特别快名为追锋车的兵车东渡河，最终剪灭了魏室，正像童谣所说的那样。
English: King Jinxuan then crossed the river to the east in a particularly fast-moving chariot called a chaser, and finally wiped out Wei Shuxuan, just as the nursery rhyme says.

古文：魏齐王嘉平中，有谣曰： 白马索羁西南驰，其谁乘者硃虎骑。 
现代文：魏齐王嘉平年间，有歌摇说： 白马戴着白色的马笼头，向西南飞驰，乘坐的人是谁?朱虎正骑坐在马背上。 
English: During the reign of King Jiaping of Wei and Qi, there was a folk song that said: A white horse wearing a white horse-cage head is galloping to the southwest. Who is the rider? Zhu Hu is riding on horseback.

古文：硃虎者，楚王彪小字也。
现代文：朱虎是楚王曹彪的小字。
English: Zhuhu is the nickname of King Chu Cao Biao.

古文：王凌、令狐愚闻此谣，谋立彪。事发，凌等伏诛，彪赐死。
现代文：王莲、全皿墨听到造歌谣，就暗中谋划拥立曹彪为帝事情败露以后，王浚等人被诛，曹彪被赐死。
English: After it was revealed that Wang Lian and Quan Dish Ink secretly plotted to support the enthronement of Cao Biao when they heard the song-making ballad, Wang Jian and others were arrested, and Cao Biao was sentenced to death.

古文：吴孙亮初，童谣曰： 吁汝恪，何若若，芦苇单衣篾钩络，于何相求成子阁。 
现代文：吴孙亮初年，童谣说： 你这个诸葛恪，为什么这样啊，芦苇作单衣，篾索为钩络，到哪裹去找你，衹能去成子阁。 
English: In the first year of Wu Sunliang, the nursery rhyme said: You Zhuge, why are you like this? The reed is a single garment, the reed rope is a hook and loop, where can I find you? I can go to Chengzihou.

古文：成子阁者，反语石子堈也。
现代文：成子合，正反相切之后就是石子垌。
English: After coming into fruition and reversing, it is a stone cocoon.

古文：钩落，钩带也。
现代文：钩络就是衣钩带。
English: The hook and loop is the hook and loop strap.

古文：及诸葛恪死，果以苇席裹身，篾束其要，投之石子堈。
现代文：到诸葛恪死，果然用苇席裹着尸身，篾索束着腰，丢到石子坦。
English: After Zhuge Ke's death, his body was wrapped in a tablecloth, tied at the waist with ropes, and thrown into a pile of stones.

古文：后听恪故吏收敛，求之此堈云。
现代文：后来准许诸葛恪原来的属吏为他收尸埋葬，就是在这个垌上寻找到他的尸体。
English: Later, Zhuge Ke's former family was allowed to adopt him, and it was on this raft that they found him.

古文：孙亮初，公安有白鼍鸣。
现代文：孙亮初年，壬辽有白龟呜叫。
English: In the first year of Sun Liang, there were egrets in the public security county.

古文：童谣曰： 白鼍鸣，龟背平，南郡城中可长生，守死不去义无成。 
现代文：童谣说： 白龟鸣，龟背平，直郡城中可长生，守死不去义无存。 
English: The nursery rhyme says: The white turtle chirps, the turtle's back is flat, you can live forever in the middle of the city, and there is no justice if you don't defend yourself.

古文：南郡城可长生者，有急，易以逃也。
现代文：直邓城可长生，是指在南郡城中，遇有急事，容易脱逃。
English: Zhi Dengcheng can live forever, refers to the Nan County City, in case of emergency, easy to escape.

古文：明年，诸葛恪败，弟融镇公安，亦见袭。
现代文：第二年，诸葛恪被杀，诸葛恪之弟谴直融镇守壬远，也被袭击。
English: The following year, Zhuge Gua was killed, and Zhuge Gua's brother, Zhaoyong Zhenguo, was also attacked.

古文：融刮金印龟，服之而死。
现代文：诸葛融刮金印龟上的金，吞食而死。
English: Zhuge Rong scraped the gold off the turtle, swallowed it and died.

古文：鼍有鳞介，甲兵之象。
现代文：龟有鳞介，正是有刀兵之事的征兆。
English: The dragonfly has scales and armor, which is a symbol of armor.

古文：又曰白祥也。
现代文：又，白色，是刀兵之事的征兆。
English: And the white is the sign of the sword.

古文：孙休永安二年，将守质子群聚嬉戏，有异小子忽来，言曰： 三公锄，司马如。 
现代文：孙休永安二年，守边将领放在朝廷为质的孩子们聚集在一起游戏，有个别处的小孩突然走来，说： 三公除去，司马来临。 
English: In the second year of Sun Xiu Yong'an, the children of the border guards, who were held hostage by the imperial court, gathered together to play. A child from another place suddenly came and said: "The Three Kings have been removed, and Sima is coming."

古文：又曰： 我非人，荧惑星也。 
现代文：又说： 我不是人，是荧惑星。 
English: He also said: "I'm not human, I'm a fluorescent planet."

古文：言毕上升，仰视若曳一匹练，有顷没。
现代文：说完就向上飞升，仰看他身后像是拖曳着一匹白绢，一会儿就消失了。
English: After he finished speaking, he rose up, and looking up at him was like dragging a white ribbon, and soon disappeared.

古文：干宝曰，后四年而蜀亡，六年而魏废，二十一年而吴平，于是九服归晋。魏与吴、蜀，并为战国， 三公锄，司马如 之谓也。
现代文：干宝说，这以后四年蜀国灭亡，六年魏国亡国，二十一年呈国被削平，于是天下都归于晋魏与吴、蜀，是割据一方、互相交战的国家，晋灭三国而统一天下， 三公除去，划马来临 说的就是这种形势。
English: Gan Bao said that after this, the four years of Shu State perished, the six years of Wei State perished, and the twenty-one years of Zhen State were leveled, so the whole world was attributed to Jin Wei and Wu and Shu, which were separated and warring countries, Jin destroyed the three countries and unified them, the three kingdoms were removed, and the horse came. This is the situation.

古文：孙皓初，童谣曰： 宁饮建业水，不食武昌鱼。宁还建业死，不止武昌居。 
现代文：孙皓初年，童谣说： 宁饮建业水，不食武昌鱼；宁回建业死，不在武昌居。 
English: In the first year of Sun Yat-sen, a nursery rhyme said: "It is better to drink Jianye water than to eat Wuchang fish; it is better to die of Jianye than to live in Wuchang."

古文：皓寻迁都武昌，民溯流供给，咸怨毒焉。
现代文：孙皓不久就迁都达旦，百姓要溯流而上，供给用度，大家都苦不堪言，怨气冲天。
English: Sun Yat-sen soon moved the capital to Datan, and the people had to move upstream to meet the demand for supplies. Everyone was miserable and resentful.

古文：孙皓遣使者祭石印山下妖祠。
现代文：孙皓派遣使者祭石印山下妖庙之神。
English: Sun Yat-sen sent an emissary to worship the god of the Stone Seal Mountain Demon Temple.

古文：使者因以丹书岩曰： 楚九州渚，吴九州都。
现代文：使者趁便用丹砂在山岩上写道： 楚是九州的小洲，吴是九州的都会。
English: The envoy took the opportunity to write on the rock with red sand: Chu is a small island in Kyushu, Wu is the capital of Kyushu.

古文：扬州士，作天子。
现代文：扬州的士人，要作天子。
English: Yangzhou, the son of heaven.

古文：四世治，太平矣。 
现代文：四代相传，天下太平。 
English: The fourth generation will rule, and there will be peace.

古文：皓闻之，意益张，曰： 从大皇帝至朕四世，太平之主，非朕复谁？ 
现代文：孙皓听到这几句话，更加骄狂，说： 从大皇帝传到我，正是四代，使天下太平的君主，不是我还有谁? 
English: Hearing these few words, Sun Yat-sen became even more arrogant and said, "From the great emperor down to me, there have been four generations of sovereigns who have brought peace to the world. Who else is there besides me?

古文：恣虐逾甚，寻以降亡。
现代文：恣意妄行、暴虐行事就更加厉害，不久就因投降晋而被灭。
English: His arbitrary and tyrannical actions were even more severe, and he was soon destroyed for surrendering to Jin.

古文：近诗妖也。
现代文：这事和诗妖的事相近。
English: This is similar to the matter of the poetry demon.

古文：孙皓天纪中，童谣曰： 阿童复阿童，衔刀游渡江。
现代文：孙皓天纪年间，童谣说： 阿童啊阿童，衔着刀游遇江。
English: During the reign of Sun Yat-sen, a nursery rhyme said: "A child returns to a child, and swims across the river with a sword."

古文：不畏岸上虎，但畏水中龙。 
现代文：不怕岸上虎，衹畏水中龙。 
English: Fear not the tiger on the shore, but the dragon in the water.

古文：晋武帝闻之，加王浚龙骧将军。
现代文：晋武帝听到这则童谣，就加赠王浚为龙骧将军。
English: When Emperor Jinwu heard this nursery rhyme, he gave Wang Jun the title of General Longyu.

古文：及征吴，江西众军无过者，而王浚先定秣陵。
现代文：到征讨县国的时候，辽西各路军马没有一支渡过辽，而王浚率先平定秣陵。
English: When it came to the conquest of Wu, many troops in Jiangxi could not cross the river, but Wang Jun first leveled Fuling.

古文：晋武帝太康后，江南童谣曰： 局缩肉，数横目，中国当败吴当复。 
现代文：晋武帝太康年后，江南童谣说： 畏畏缩缩一块肉，数字应是横着的目，中原将衰败，吴将兴复。 
English: After the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, the children's rhyme of the southern Yangtze River said: "If a piece of meat flinches, the number should be a horizontal eye, the Central Plains will decline, and Wu will recover."

古文：又曰： 宫门柱，且莫朽，吴当复，在三十年后。 
现代文：又说： 宫门柱，暂且不要朽，吴将兴复，在三十年后。 
English: He also said, "The gateposts of the palace should not be destroyed for the time being. Wu will be revived in 30 years."

古文：又曰： 鸡鸣不拊翼，吴复不用力。 
现代文：又说： 鶸鸣却不拍动双翼，呈兴复不用力。 
English: He also said, "Chickens don't grow wings, and Wu Fu doesn't have to work hard."

古文：于时吴人皆谓在孙氏子孙，故窃发乱者相继。
现代文：在那时呈人都称自己是留存的逐压子孙，所以暗中谋划叛乱的人相继出现。
English: At that time, they all claimed to be the surviving descendants of Zhuo, so the people who secretly plotted the rebellion appeared one after another.

古文：按横目者 四 字，自吴亡至晋元帝兴，几四十年，皆如童谣之言。
现代文：按 横目 就是 四 字，从吴被灭亡到晋元帝在南方中兴，接近四十年，都像童谣说的那样。
English: According to 横目, there are four characters, from the fall of Wu to the rise of Emperor Jin Yuan in the south, nearly forty years, just like the nursery rhyme says.

古文：元帝懦而少断，局缩肉，直斥之也。
现代文：元童懦弱，很少决断， 畏畏缩缩一块肉 ，是直言指责他。
English: Yuan Tong cowardly, rarely decisive, cowering shrinking piece of meat, is bluntly accusing him.

古文：干宝云 不知所斥 ，讳之也。
现代文：王室说 不知道指责的是谁 ，这是替隐讳。
English: The royal family said it did not know who was to blame, and it was a case of not speaking out.

古文：太康末，京、洛始为 折杨柳 之歌，其曲始有兵革苦辛之词，终以禽获斩截之事。
现代文：太康末年，京、洛开始流传名为《折杨柳》的歌曲，这歌曲开始有叙及战争苦难的语句，最后又讲到擒获斩杀的事情。
English: In the last years of the Taikang era, a song called "Folding Poplar Willow" began to circulate in Beijing and Luo. The song began with a passage about the hardships of war, and ended with a story about the beheading of a dragonfly.

古文：是时三杨贵盛而族灭，太后废黜而幽死。
现代文：当时三杨地位高贵权势显赫，而最终却全族被诛灭，杨太后也被废黜幽囚而死。
English: At that time, the Three Young Emperors held high positions of nobility and power, but in the end, the entire family was annihilated, and Empress Dowager Yang was also deposed and died in captivity.

古文：晋惠帝永熙中，河内温县有人如狂，造书曰： 光光文长，大戟为墙。
现代文：晋惠帝永熙年间，河内温县有人好似疯癫，写下几句话说： 权势显赫提塞垦，大戟自卫当作墙。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jin Hui Yongxi, someone in Hanoi's Vinh County went mad and wrote down a few words: "The powerful Hetisei, the self-defence wall of Daju."

古文：毒药虽行，戟还自伤。 
现代文：毒药虽然用，最终被戟伤。 
English: Although poison is possible, the baboons still self-harmed.

古文：又曰： 两火没地，哀哉秋兰。
现代文：又说： 两火入地下，可哀啊秋兰。
English: He also said: "Two fires have destroyed the land, woe to Qiu Lan."

古文：归形街邮，路人为叹。 
现代文：形骸归街邮，路人为之叹。 
English: Passers-by lament the fact that the remains belong to the street post office.

古文：及杨骏居内府，以戟为卫，死时，又为戟所害。
现代文：塞昼是圭瞪的字。扰壁居于内府的时候，甲士持戟护卫他，握坚死时，又是被戟所杀。
English: When Disturbing Wall lived in Naifu, a warrior with a halberd guarded him, and when he died, he was killed by a halberd.

古文：杨太后被废，贾后绝其膳，八日而崩，葬街邮亭北，百姓哀之。
现代文：杨左后被废黜，亘后断绝她的食物，过八天而崩。扰主后死后埋葬在街邮台北，百姓都为她哀伤。
English: Yang Zuo was dethroned, her food was cut off, and she died eight days later. After her death, she was buried in the streets of Taipei, and the people mourned for her.

古文：两火，武帝讳；兰，杨后字也。
现代文：两火，炎字，是置亘造的名讳；兰，是杨太后的字。
English: "Two fires" and "flame" are the names given to the statues by the emperor; "Lan" is the name of the Empress Dowager Yang.

古文：永熙中，童谣曰： 二月末，三月初，荆笔杨版行诏书，宫中大马几作驴。 
现代文：永熙年间，童谣说： 二月末，三月初，荆笔杨版颁行诏书，宫中大马几乎作驴。 
English: In the Yongxi period, the nursery rhyme said: At the end of February and the beginning of March, the imperial edict was issued in the Yang version, and the horse in the palace was almost a donkey.

古文：杨骏初专权，楚王寻用事，故言 荆笔杨版 也。二人不诛，则君臣礼悖，故云 几作驴。 
现代文：当初是杨骏专权，不久是楚王掌政，所以说 荆笔杨版 这二人不诛除，那么君臣之礼悖乱，所以说 几乎作驴 。
English: In the beginning, Yang Pi was in absolute power, and soon King Chu was in power, so it is said that if these two people are not eliminated, then the courtesy of the monarchs and ministers will be disrupted, so it is said that it is almost a donkey.

古文：晋惠帝元康中，京、洛童谣曰： 南风起，吹白沙，遥望鲁国何嵯峨，千岁髑髅生齿牙。 
现代文：晋惠帝元康年间，京、洛流传童谣说： 南风起，吹白沙，遥望鲁国何嵯峨，千岁髑髅生齿牙。 
English: During the reign of Emperor Jingu during the reign of Emperor Yuan Kang, a nursery rhyme was passed down in Beijing and Lu: The south wind rises, blowing white sand, looking far and wide at Lu, one thousand years old, teeth are born.

古文：又曰： 城东马子莫咙哅，比至三月缠汝鬃。 
现代文：又说： 城东马子莫嘶吼，等到三月缠汝鬃。 
English: He also said: "Don't let the horses in the eastern part of the city roar, wait until March.

古文：南风，贾后字也。
现代文：南风是贾后的字。
English: Nanfeng, is the character of Jia Guo.

古文：白，晋行也。
现代文：晋五行属金，白代表五行中金的颜色。
English: White is the color of the five elements of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：沙门，太子小名也。
现代文：沙门，是太子的小名。
English: Shamen is a nickname for the crown prince.

古文：鲁，贾谧国也。
现代文：鲁是贾谧的封国。
English: Lu, is Jia Wei's fiefdom.

古文：言贾后将与谧为乱，以危太子；而赵王因衅咀嚼豪贤，以成篡夺也。
现代文：童谣说的是买后将要和贾谧一起制造动乱，危害太子；而趟王乘着祸乱杀害豪杰贤士，以成就他的篡政夺权阴谋。
English: The nursery rhyme says that the concubine will create turmoil with Jia Zhang and endanger the prince; while the king will take advantage of the disaster to kill the hero and sage to achieve his usurpation of power.

古文：是时愍怀颇失众望，卒以废黜，不得其死。
现代文：这时候愍怀太子的行为很令众人失望，最终被废黜，被谋害而死。
English: At this time, Empress Dowager's behavior was very disappointing to everyone, and she was eventually deposed and killed.

古文：元康中，天下商农通著大鄣日，童谣曰： 屠苏鄣日覆两耳，当见瞎兒作天子。 
现代文：元康年间，天下商人、农人流行戴用屠苏草制作的大障曰帽，童谣说： 屠苏障日覆两耳，将见瞎儿作天子。 
English: During the Yuan and Kang dynasties, it was popular for merchants and farmers around the world to wear large hats made of Tu Su grass. A children's rhyme says: "Tu Su grass covers both ears, making the blind the sons of heaven."

古文：及赵王篡位，其目实眇焉。
现代文：趟王篡位，他真是瞎了一只眼睛。
English: Once the king usurped the throne, he was really blind in one eye.

古文：赵王伦既篡，洛中童谣曰： 虎从北来鼻头汗，龙从南来登城看，水从西来何灌灌。 
现代文：昙丝旦昼俭篡位以后，盗中童谣说： 虎从北来鼻头汗，龙从南来登城看，水从西来何灌灌。 
English: After Emperor Xidan usurped the throne, a children's rhyme in the middle of the theft said: The tiger sweats from the north, the dragon comes from the south to see the city, and the water comes from the west.

古文：数月而齐王、成都、河间义兵同会诛伦。
现代文：几个月后齐王、成都工、河问王讨逆的义军会集，诛除司马伦。
English: A few months later, King Qi, King Chengdu, and King Heung of Kawama gathered together to fight and kill Sima Lun.

古文：按成都西蕃而在鄴，故曰： 虎从北来 ；齐东蕃而在许，故曰 龙从南来 ；河间水区而在关中，故曰 水从西来 。齐留辅政，居宫西，有无君之心，故言 登城看 也。
现代文：按，成都是西藩而成都王在邺，所以说 虎从北来 ；齐是束藩而齐王在许。所以说 龙从南来 ；河问是水区而河间王在盟中，所以说 水从西来 齐王后来留在京城辅政，住在皇宫西，表现出了不甘为臣下的野心，所以说 登城看 。
English: According to the legend, Chengdu was the west domain and the king of Chengdu was in Shao, so the tiger came from the north; Qi was the Shao domain and the king of Qi was in Xu; so the dragon came from the south; the river was the water area and the king of the river was in the alliance, so the water came from the west. The king of Qi later stayed in Beijing to assist the government and lived in the west of the imperial palace, showing his ambition to be a subject, so he said, "Let's go to the city."

古文：晋惠帝太安中，童谣曰： 五马游度江，一马化为龙。 
现代文：晋惠帝太安年间，童谣说： 五马游渡江，一马化为龙。 
English: During the reign of Emperor Taian, the nursery rhyme said: "Five horses travel across the river, one horse turns into a dragon."

古文：后中原大乱，宗蕃多绝，唯琅邪、汝南、西阳、南顿、彭城同至江表，而元帝嗣晋矣。
现代文：后来中原发生大的动乱，宗族藩王多被杀死，衹有琅邪王、汝南王、西阳王、南蛆王、彭城王同到辽南，而元童继承了置壶之位。
English: Later, great turmoil occurred in the Central Plains, and most of the kings of the clan clan were killed. Some of them, such as King Gongye, King Runan, King Xiyang, King Nanxun, and King Pengcheng, went to Liaonan together, and Geng Tong inherited the position of potter.

古文：司马越还洛，有童谣曰： 洛中大鼠长尺二，若不蚤去大狗至。 
现代文：司马越回到络，有童谣说： 洛中大鼠长尺二，若不蚤去大狗至。 
English: Sima Yue returned to the net. There is a nursery rhyme that says: The rat in Luo is two feet long. If there are no fleas, the rat will grow into a big dog.

古文：及苟希将破汲桑，又谣曰： 元超兄弟大落度，上桑打椹为苟作。 
现代文：到苟晞将要击破汲桑时，又有歌谧说： 元超兄弟大失算，上桑打葚为苟作。 
English: When it came to the time when Goh Chung was about to defeat Kyu Sang, Goh Chung said again, "The former super brothers made a big miscalculation. It was Goh Chung's doing to fight Kyu Sang.

古文：由是越恶希，夺其兗州，隙难遂构。晋愍帝建兴中，江南歌谣曰： 訇如白坑破，合集持作甒。
现代文：因此司墨越憎忌莹递，撤去苞盐童业刺史之职，两人的怨仇就此生成。晋愍帝建兴年间，江南歌谣说： 訇如白坑破，合集持作瓶。
English: Therefore, Simo became more and more hateful of Yingying, and removed the post of the chief of the children's industry of molybdenum and salt, and the two people's resentment arose as a result. During the reign of Emperor Jianxing of the Jin Dynasty, the Jiangnan ballad said: "The molybdenum is like a broken white pit, and it is held together to make a bottle."

古文：扬州破换败，吴兴覆瓿甊。 
现代文：彊州破换败，县兴覆瓿甑。 
English: Yangzhou defeated, Wu Xing defeated.

古文：按白者晋行，坑器有口，属甕，瓦质刚，亦金之类也。 訇如白坑破 者，言二都倾覆，王室大坏也。 合集持作甒 者，言元皇帝鸠集遗余，以主社稷，未能克复中原，偏王江南，故其喻小也。
现代文：按，置五行属金，白是金的颜色。坑是一种器具，有口，瓮一类的器物，是用土烧制的瓦器，质地坚硬，也属金一类。 訇如白坑破 ，指洛阳、长安先后被攻陷，王室大为衰败。 合集持作瓤 ，指元皇帝聚集朝廷余留的大臣，自己主持国政，但未能收复中原，衹是在江南称帝。
English: According to legend, the five elements are gold, and white is the color of gold. The pit is a kind of utensil, with a mouth, a kind of bowl, a clay vessel made of clay, with a hard texture, and is also a kind of gold. If the white pit is broken, it means that Luoyang and Chang'an have been conquered successively, and the royal family is in great decline. If it is kept together, it means that the Yuan emperor gathered the remaining ministers of the court, presided over the state affairs himself, but failed to recover the Central Plains, and proclaimed himself emperor in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：及石头之事，六军大溃，兵人抄掠京邑，爰及二宫。
现代文：偏安一隅，所以用瓤比喻王朝之小。到叛军攻陷石头，朝廷大军溃败，军士抄掠京城，皇帝、太子都受到凌辱。
English: Wait until the battle of Stone Town, the great defeat of the Six Armies, the soldiers robbing and plundering the Beijing Division area, and the Imperial Palace.

古文：其后三年，钱凤复攻京邑，阻水而守，相持月余日，焚烧城邑，井堙木刊矣。
现代文：造以后三年，钱凤又向京城进攻，隔水筑垒与朝廷军队对峙，相持一个多月，钱凤叛军焚烧城邑，堵塞水井，砍伐树木。
English: In the following three years, Qianfeng attacked the Beijing Division again. According to the river guards, they held each other for more than a month, burning cities and villages, filling wells, and cutting down trees.

古文：凤等败退，沈充将其党还吴兴，官军踵之，蹈藉郡县。
现代文：钱凤等败退之后，沈充率领其党羽回到吴兴，官军随后追赶，郡县都受到践踏。
English: After the defeat and retreat of Qian Feng and others, Shen Chong led his followers back to Wuxing. The government army then chased after them, trampling all counties.

古文：充父子授首，党与诛者以百数。
现代文：沈充父子被杀，他的党羽被诛的有数百人。
English: Shen Chong and his son were killed, and hundreds of his followers were abducted.

古文：所谓 扬州破换败，吴兴覆瓿甊。 
现代文：逭就是歌谣中说的 扬州破换败，吴兴覆瓿龇 。
English: is what is said in the ballad, "Yangzhou defeated, Wu Xing defeated."

古文：瓿甊，瓦器，又小于甒也。晋明帝太宁初，童谣歌曰： 恻力恻力，放马山侧。
现代文：瓿甄是一种瓦器，比瓯小。晋明帝太宁初年，童谣唱道： 恻力恻力，放马山侧。
English: Zou Zhen is a kind of earthenware, smaller than a gong. In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taining of the Jin Dynasty, the nursery rhyme sang: "Zou Li Zou Li, Fang Ma Shan Bian."

古文：大马死，小马饿，高山崩，石自破。 
现代文：大马死，小马饿，高山崩，石白破。 
English: The big horse is dead, the little horse is hungry, the high mountain has collapsed, and the white stone is broken.

古文：及明帝崩，成帝幼，为苏峻所逼，迁于石头，御饍不足。 高山崩 ，言峻寻死； 石 ，峻弟苏石也，峻死后，石据石头，寻为诸公所破也。
现代文：明帝驾崩，成帝年幼，被苏峻逼迫，迁徙到石头，供给的御膳不足。 高山崩 ，指苏峻不久即死； 石 是指苏峻之弟苏石，苏峻死后，苏石据守石头，不久就被朝廷诸公击破。
English: Emperor Ming died, Emperor Cheng was young, was persecuted by Su Shun, migrated to Stone, the supply of imperial meals was insufficient. High mountain landslide, refers to Su Shun's death soon; Stone refers to Su Shun's brother Su Shi, after Su Shun's death, Su Shi kept the stone, and was soon broken by the court officials.

古文：晋成帝之末，民间谣曰： 郤郤何隆隆，驾车入梓宫。 
现代文：晋成帝末年，民间流传歌谣说： 躇磕何隆隆，驾车入梓宫。 
English: In the last years of Emperor Jincheng, a folk song said: "If you are not careful, you will drive into the Azusa Palace."

古文：少日而宫车晏驾。
现代文：过了不几天，皇上就驾崩了。
English: He died a few days later.

古文：晋成帝咸康二年十二月，河北谣语曰： 麦入土，杀石虎。 
现代文：晋成帝咸康二年十二月，河北民谣说： 麦入土，杀互虚。 
English: In December of the second year of Emperor Jiancheng's reign, the Hebei folk song said: "Wheat sinks into the ground, killing each other is futile."

古文：后如谣言。
现代文：后来事情正像民谣所说的那样。
English: Later, as the song says.

古文：庾亮初出镇武昌，出石头，百姓于岸上歌曰： 庾公上武昌，翩翩如飞鸟。
现代文：庾亮初出京城镇守武昌，行至石头，百姓在岸上唱道： 庐公上亘媪，翩翩如飞鸟。
English: Xiao Liang went to Wuchang for the first time to guard the capital city, and when he reached the stone, the people sang on the shore: "Hao Gong is flying like a bird.

古文：庾公还扬州，白马牵旒旐 又曰： 庾公初上时，翩翩如飞鸟。
现代文：座公回握业，白马牵旒臃。 又说： 庾公初上时，翩翩如飞鸟。
English: The white horse is pulling the donkey. He also said: When the donkey was first brought up, it was as graceful as a bird.

古文：庾公还扬州，白马牵流苏。 
现代文：尘公回握丛，白马牵流苏。 
English: Shao Gong returned to Yangzhou, and the white horse pulled the tassel.

古文：后连征不入，及薨，还都葬。
现代文：后来朝廷连连征召尘台都没有回京，到庾亮死后，他的灵柩才送回京城安葬。
English: Later, the imperial court did not return to Beijing even after summoning the empress dowager, and it was not until after his death that his coffin was sent back to Beijing for burial.

古文：庾义在吴郡，吴中童谣曰： 宁食下湖荇，不食上湖。
现代文：庾义在吴郡时，吴中童谣说： 宁食下湖荇，不食上湖莼。
English: When Puyi was in Wu County, the children's rhyme in Wu Middle School said: "It is better to eat the fish in the lower lake than to eat the fish in the upper lake."

古文：庾吴没命丧，复杀王领军。 
现代文：座、呈没命丧，又杀王领军。 
English: Zhao, who was mortally wounded, also killed the king's leading troops.

古文：无几而庾义、王洽相继亡。
现代文：没有多久，庾羲、王洽相继而死。
English: Before long, Zhai and Wang Cai died one after another.

古文：晋穆帝升平中，童子辈忽歌于道曰 阿子闻 ，曲终辄云 阿子汝闻不 。
现代文：晋穆帝升平年间，孩童们忽然在路上唱着 阿子闻 ，曲终就往往说 阿子汝闻不 。
English: During the years of Emperor Jinmu's elevation to nobility, children would suddenly sing "A Zi Wen" on the road. At the end of the song, they would often say "A Zi Ru Wen Ne."

古文：无几而穆帝崩，太后哭曰： 阿子汝闻不？ 
现代文：没过多久壁壶驾崩，太后哭!墟说： 阿子你听见了没有? 
English: Not long after, the kettles died, and the empress cried, "Azi, did you hear that?

古文：升平末，民间忽作廉歌。
现代文：升平末年，民间忽然流传起廉歌。
English: At the end of the Heian period, folk songs suddenly began to circulate.

古文：有扈谦者闻之，曰： 廉者临也。
现代文：有个名叫扈谦的人听到廉歌，说： 廉的意思是临。
English: A man named Zou Qian heard Ren's song and said, "Ren means to enter.

古文：歌云 白门廉，宫廷廉 ，内外悉临，国家其大讳乎？ 
现代文：歌词说 白门廉，宫廷廉 ，内外都要临，都要哭吊，国家恐怕有大的不幸吧。 
English: The lyrics say that the white gate is corrupt, the palace is corrupt, both inside and outside are corrupt, both will cry and hang, the country will probably have great misfortune.

古文：少时而穆帝晏驾。
现代文：不久，晋穆帝驾崩。
English: Soon after, Emperor Jinmu passed away.

古文：晋哀帝隆和初，童兒歌曰： 升平不满斗，隆和那得久！
现代文：晋哀帝隆和初年，孩童们唱道： 升平不满斗，隆和那得久!
English: In the first year of Emperor Jingu's mourning for Emperor Longwa, the children sang: To settle the dissatisfaction, Longwa is long overdue!

古文：桓公入石头，陛下徒跣走。 
现代文：但公入互题，陛下赤脚跑。 
English: Prince Kan fell into the stone, and His Majesty walked away.

古文：帝闻而恶之，复改年曰兴宁。
现代文：哀帝听到这歌十分厌恶，又更改年号叫兴宁。
English: When the emperor heard this song, he was disgusted and changed the year to Xingning.

古文：民复歌曰： 虽复改兴宁，亦复无聊生。 
现代文：百姓又唱道： 虽又改兴宁，也还是不能赖以生存。 
English: The people also sang: Although we have reformed Xingning, we still cannot rely on it to survive.

古文：哀帝寻崩。
现代文：塞壶不久就驾崩了。
English: The cork was soon popped.

古文：升平五年，穆帝崩。
现代文：丑平五年，穆帝崩。
English: Five years after Ug Ping, Mu Di passed away.

古文：不满斗，不至十年也。
现代文：不满斗，意思是不到十年。
English: Dissatisfied, meaning less than ten years.

古文：晋海西公太和中，民歌曰： 青青御路杨，白马紫游缰。
现代文：晋海西公太和年间，民间歌谣说： 青青大路杨，白马紫游缰。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi of Jinhai, folk songs said: "The Qingqing Road is Yang, and the White Horse is Ziyou.

古文：汝非皇太子，那得甘露浆。 
现代文：你不是皇太子，哪能得到甘露浆。 
English: You're not a crown prince, you can't get nectar.

古文：白者金行；马者国族；紫为夺正之色，明以紫间硃也。
现代文：置五行属金，而白色代表金；马是国姓；紫是侵犯正色的颜色，歌词说是用紫色间杂红色。
English: The five elements are gold, and white represents gold; Ma is the country's surname; purple is the color that infringes on the positive color, and the lyrics say that purple is used to blend with red.

古文：海西公寻废，三子非海西子，并死，缢以马缰死之。
现代文：迤厘公不久就被废黜，海西公的三个皇子并不是他自己的儿子，一同被杀死，是用马缰绳缢死的。
English: Balikong was soon deposed, and the three princes of Haisikong, who were not his own sons, were killed together, strangled with horse reins.

古文：明日，南方献甘露。
现代文：他们死的第二天，南方贡献甘露。
English: The day after they died, the South contributed nectar.

古文：太和末，童谣云： 犁牛耕御路，白门种小麦。 
现代文：太和末年，童谣说： 犁牛耕御路，白门种小麦。 
English: At the end of the Taiwa era, a nursery rhyme said: "The snail ploughs the road, the white gate grows wheat."

古文：及海西被废，处吴，民犁耕其门前，以种小麦，如谣言。
现代文：海西公被废黜之后，他居住在吴，百姓在他门前犁耕，种植小麦，全像童谣说的那样。
English: After Haixi Gong was deposed, he lived in Wu, and the people ploughed and planted wheat in front of his door, just like the nursery rhyme.

古文：晋海西公生皇子，百姓歌云： 凤凰生一雏，天下莫不喜。
现代文：晋海西公生皇子，百姓唱道： 凤凰生一雏，天下人人喜。
English: Jinhai Xigong gave birth to a prince, and the people sang: A phoenix gives birth to a chick, and the whole world rejoices.

古文：本言是马驹，今定成龙子。 
现代文：本说是马驹，今正成龙子。 
English: This is horse manure, now destined to become dragon eggs.

古文：其歌甚美，其旨甚微。
现代文：歌词很美，但含意微妙。
English: It's a beautiful song, but it's not deep.

古文：海西公不男，使左右向龙与内侍接，生子以为己子。
现代文：海西公不能行房事，于是他命自己的侍臣鱼蓝与妃嫔交媾，生下孩子就当作自己的儿子。
English: Lord Haixi was unable to perform household chores, so he ordered his vassal, Yu Lan, to have sexual intercourse with his concubine, giving birth to a child he considered his own son.

古文：桓石民为荆州，镇上明，民忽歌曰 黄昙子 。
现代文：桓石民任荆州刺史，镇守上明，百姓忽然唱 黄昙子 。
English: The people of Huanshi were appointed as Jingzhou stabbing history, the town guard was appointed as Shangming, and the people suddenly sang Huangzhangzi.

古文：曲终又曰： 黄昙英，扬州大佛来上明。 
现代文：曲终又说： 黄昙英，扬州大佛来上塱。 
English: At the end of the piece, he also said: Huang Rongying, the Great Buddha of Yangzhou is coming to the gong.

古文：顷之而石民死，王忱为荆州。 黄昙子 乃是王忱之字也。
现代文：不久桓石民死，王性任荆州刺史。 黄昙子 正是王性的字。
English: Soon after the death of Huan Shi Min, the kingly character of Jingzhou died out.

古文：忱小字佛大，是 大佛来上明 也。
现代文：旦区小字壹达，造就是 大佛来上明 的意思。
English: Wang Zhen's small character "佛大" means "Big Buddha" to clarify.

古文：太元末，京口谣曰： 黄雌鸡，莫作雄父啼。
现代文：太元末年，京口民说： 黄雌鶸，莫作雄鶸啼。
English: At the end of the 19th century, the people of Jingkou said: "If you can't be a male, you can't be a female."

古文：一旦去毛衣，衣被拉飒栖。 
现代文：一旦去毛衣，衣被秽杂集。 
English: Once the sweater is removed, the clothes are pulled up and put away.

古文：寻王恭起兵诛王国宝，旋为刘牢之所败也。
现代文：不久王恭起兵诛讨王国宝，旋即被刘空之击败。
English: Wang Gong soon raised an army to fight for the treasure of the kingdom, but was immediately defeated by Liu Kuanzhong.

古文：司马道子于东府造土山，名曰灵秀山。
现代文：司马道子在塞应堆造土山，取名为灵秀山。
English: Sima Daozi created a mound of earth in the Se Ying Heap and named it Lingxiu Mountain.

古文：无几而孙恩作乱，再践会稽。
现代文：不久逐墨作乱，两次践踏盒稽。
English: Soon after, Sun En started a riot and occupied the auditorium twice.

古文：会稽，道子所封。
现代文：会稽是司马道子的封地。
English: The Board of Audit is the fiefdom of Sima Daozi.

古文：灵秀，恩之字也。
现代文：灵秀是孙恩的宇。
English: Lingxiu is Sun En's son.

古文：庾楷镇历阳，民歌曰： 重罗犁，重罗犁，使君南上无还时。 
现代文：庾楷镇守历阳，民摇唱道： 重罗犁，重罗犁，刺史南上无还时。 
English: The town guards Liyang, the people sing: heavy Luo Luo, heavy Luo Luo, there is no turning back.

古文：后楷南奔桓玄，为玄所诛。
现代文：后来庾楷南去投奔桓玄，被桓玄诛杀。
English: Later, Zou Kai Nan went to fight for Kuan Xuan and was killed by Kuan Xuan.

古文：殷仲堪在荆州，童谣曰： 芒笼目，绳缚腹。
现代文：殷仲堪在荆州，童谣说： 芒笼口，绳缚腹。
English: Yin Zhongkan in Jingzhou, the nursery rhyme says: "Mang cage eyes, tethered belly."

古文：殷当败，桓当复。 
现代文：殷当败，桓当复。 
English: If you fail, you must try again.

古文：无几而仲堪败，桓玄有荆州。
现代文：没有多久殷仲堪失败，桓玄占有荆州。
English: Before long, Yin Zhongkan failed, and Huan Xuan took possession of Jingzhou.

古文：王恭镇京口，举兵诛王国宝。百姓谣云： 昔年食白饭，今年食麦麸。
现代文：王恭镇守京口，举兵诛讨王国宝，百姓中流传歌谣说： 昔年食白饭，今年食麦麸。
English: Wanghong Town guarded the capital's entrance and raised an army to fight for the treasures of the kingdom. A song circulated among the people said: "In the past, we ate white rice, but this year, we will eat wheat bran."

古文：天公诛谪汝，教汝捻咙喉。
现代文：天公诛谪汝，教汝捻喉咙。
English: For heaven's sake, wind your neck in.

古文：咙喉喝复喝，京口败复败。 
现代文：喉咙哑复哑，京口败复败。 
English: Throat-to-throat, back-and-forth, back-and-forth.

古文： 昔年食白饭 ，言得志也。 今年食麦麸 ，麸，粗秽，其精已去，明将败也，天公将加谴谪而诛之也。 捻咙喉 ，气不通，死之祥也。 败复败 ，丁宁之辞也。
现代文： 昔年吃白饭 ，是说以前得志。 今年食麦麸 ，麸是粗秽的东西，精华部分已经提取去了，这是指将要失败，天公将要加以谴谪而诛除。 捻喉咙 ，指气不通，这是死的征兆。 败复败 ，是反复强调恳切之辞。
English: Once upon a time, eating white rice was a sign of having previously achieved one's goal; this year, eating wheat bran, bran is a coarse thing, the essence part has been extracted, which means that it will fail, the heavenly father will punish it and eliminate it; twisting the throat, indicating breathlessness, this is a sign of death; repeated defeat, repeated defeat, is a repeated emphasis on earnest words.

古文：恭寻死，京都大行咳疾，而喉并喝焉。
现代文：王恭不久死去，京城广为流行咳病，而喉咙都嘶哑了。
English: Wang Qiong died soon after. There was an epidemic of coughing in Beijing, and people's throats were hoarse.

古文：王恭在京口，民间忽云： 黄头小人欲作贼，阿公在城下，指缚得。 
现代文：王恭在京口，民间忽然流传说： 黄头小人欲作贼，阿公在城卜，指缚得。 
English: Wang Gong was in the capital, and the folk suddenly spread the legend: The yellow-headed villain wanted to be a thief, but the grandfather was in the city and was able to restrain him.

古文：又云： 黄头小人欲作乱，赖得金刀作蕃捍。 
现代文：又说： 黄头小人欲作乱，赖得金刀作藩捍。 
English: He also said: The yellow-headed villain wants to create turmoil and relies on the golden sword to defend the domain.

古文： 黄 字上， 恭 字头也； 小人 ， 恭 字下也。
现代文： 黄 字的上半截，正是 恭 字的头。 小人 是 恭 字的下半截。
English: The upper half of the word "yellow" is the first half of the word "noble," and the lower half of the word "vile" is the second half.

古文：寻如谣者言焉。
现代文：不久，事情正像歌谣所说的那样。
English: Before long, things are going exactly as the song says.

古文：晋安帝隆安中，民忽作《懊恼歌》，其曲中有 草生可揽结，女兒可揽抱 之言。
现代文：晋安童隆安年间，百姓中忽然流传《懊恼歌》，歌中有 草生可揽结，女儿可揽抱 这样的话。
English: During the Longan era of the Jin and An dynasties, the "Chagrin Song" was suddenly circulated among the people. In the song, grass can be gathered, and daughters can be hugged.

古文：桓玄既篡居天位，义旗以三月二日扫定京都，玄之宫女及逆党之家子女伎妾，悉为军赏。
现代文：桓玄篡居帝位之后，讨逆义军在三月二日扫荡叛贼，平定京城，桓玄伪皇宫中的宫女以及叛党家中的子女伎妾，全都赏赐给军人。
English: After Huan Xuan usurped the imperial throne, the rebel army swept up the traitors on March 2 and pacified the capital. The concubines of Huan Xuan's pseudo-royal palace and the concubines of the rebel families were all awarded to the soldiers.

古文：东及瓯、越，北流淮、泗，皆人有所获焉。
现代文：东到匦、越，北至进、回，人人都获得赏赐。
English: To the east, to the west, to the north, to the south, to the east, to the west, to the north, to the east, to the west, to the north, to the east, to the west, to the west, to the north, to the east, to the west, to the west, to the east, to the west, to the west, to the east, to the west, to the west, to the east, to the west, to the west, to the north, to the east, to the west, to the west, to the east, to the west, to the west, to the east, to the west, to the west, to the west,

古文：时则草可结，事则女可抱，信矣。
现代文：时令正是草生长，可揽结的季节，事情是叛贼家的女子可揽抱，确实是真的。
English: It is the season for the grass to grow, the season for embracing, and it is true that a traitorous woman can be embraced.

古文：桓玄既篡，童谣曰： 草生及马腹，乌啄桓玄目。 
现代文：桓玄篡位之后，童谧说： 草生及马腹，乌啄铭目。 
English: After Kuan Xuan usurped the throne, the nursery rhyme said: Grass grows and the horse's belly, and the blackbird does not see.

古文：及玄败走至江陵，五月中诛，如其期焉。
现代文：担桓玄逃到江陵，五月中旬被诛，正是童谣中 草生及马腹 的日子。
English: Dang Huan Xuan fled to Gangneung and was arrested in mid-May, which is the day of the children's rhyme "Grass grows" and "Horse's belly."

古文：桓玄时，民谣语云： 征钟落地桓迸走。 
现代文：但玄称帝时，民谣流传说： 征钟落地桓进走。 
English: However, when the emperor was falsely proclaimed, the folk song legend went: The bell fell to the ground.

古文：征钟，至秽之服；桓，四体之下称。
现代文： 征钟 是最肮脏的衣服； 桓 是四体最下端的称呼。
English: Zheng Zhong is the dirtiest clothes; Huan is the name of the lowest of the four bodies.

古文：玄自下居上，犹征钟之厕歌谣，下体之咏民口也。
现代文：但塞从臣下之位而居于君上之位，就如同征钟却加进了歌谣的内容，下体却被百姓口中吟咏。
English: However, the abdication from the position of a subject to the position of a sovereign is like adding the content of a song to the bell, but the lower body is chanted by the people.

古文：而云 落地 ，坠地之祥，迸走之言，其验明矣。
现代文：而说 落地 ，是坠落地下的征兆， 进走 这话，就有很清楚的应验。
English: But to say that "to fall to the ground" is a sign of falling underground, and "to walk" is a very clear fulfillment of this saying.

古文：司马元显时，民谣诗云： 当有十一口，当为兵所伤。
现代文：司马元显当政时，民间流传一首诗说： 当有卜一口，当为兵所伤。
English: When Sima Yuanxian was in power, there was a poem circulating among the people that said, "When you have a slip of the tongue, you should be wounded by a soldier."

古文：木亘当北度，走入浩浩乡。 
现代文：木亘将北渡，逃入浩浩乡。 
English: He fled northward to Haohao Township.

古文：又云： 金刀既以刻，娓娓金城中。 
现代文：又说： 金刀既已刻，娓娓金城中。 
English: And he said, The golden sword is drawn, and is gone into the city of gold.

古文：此诗云襄阳道人竺昙林所作，多所道，行于世。
现代文：逭诗说是襄阳道人竺昙林所作，很多人吟唱，在天下流布。
English: The poem is said to have been composed by Yangyang Daoist Yulin, chanted by many people, and spread all over the world.

古文：孟顗释之曰， 十一口 者，玄字象也； 木亘 ，桓也。
现代文：孟颛解释这首诗说， 十一口 ，象征桓玄的 玄 字。 木亘 ，是 桓 字。
English: Meng Yao explained the poem by saying that the eleven syllables symbolize the "Xuan" character of "Kuan Xuan." "Kuwatari" is the "Kuan" character.

古文：桓氏当悉走入关、洛，故云 浩浩乡 也。 金刀 ，刘也。
现代文：桓氏将要全部逃向关、洛，所以说 浩浩乡 。 金刀 ，是 刘 字。
English: The Huan clan will all flee to Guan and Luo, so they say Hao Hao Township.

古文：倡义诸公，皆多姓刘。 娓娓 ，美盛貌也。
现代文：倡议讨逆的诸公多姓刘。 娓娓 ，是华美强盛的样子。
English: Zhu Gongduo, surnamed Liu, who advocated the counter-revolution, is gorgeous and powerful.

古文：桓玄得志，童谣曰： 长干巷，巷长干。
现代文：桓玄得意的时候，童谣说： 长干巷，巷昼王。
English: When Kuan Xuan was at his best, the nursery rhyme said: "Changgan Alley, Alley Day King."

古文：今年杀郎君，明年斩诸桓。 
现代文：今年杀郎君，明年斩诸担。 
English: If you kill your brother this year, you will have to bear all the burdens next year.

古文：及玄走而诸桓悉诛焉。
现代文：到担玄逃跑时，众多姓担的人全被诛除。
English: By the time Tantan Xuan fled, many people with the surname of Tantan had been eliminated.

古文：郎君，司马元显也。
现代文：郎君，指司马元颢。
English: His son-in-law, Shitsuji Ma Motohiro.

古文：晋安帝义熙初，童谣曰： 官家养芦化成荻，芦生不止自成积。 
现代文：晋安帝义熙初年，童谣说： 官家养芦化成荻，芦生不止自成积。 
English: In the first year of Emperor Yixi of Jin'an, a nursery rhyme said: "The officials raise the reeds to turn into reeds, and the reeds are more than self-sustaining."

古文：其时官养卢龙，宠以金紫，奉以名州，养之已极，而不能怀我好音，举兵内伐，遂成雠敌也。 芦生不止自成积 ，及卢龙作乱，时人追思童谣，恶其有成积之言。识者曰： 芟夷蕴崇之，又行火焉，是草之穷也。
现代文：那时候，官家供养卢龙，用高官厚禄赐给他以示恩宠，把大州交给他，供养他已是最为优厚了，但卢龙不能记住朝廷的恩德，竟然发兵向朝廷进攻，最终竟变成了朝廷的仇敌。卢龙叛乱的时候，当时人追忆童谣中 芦生不止自成积 这话，厌恶其中有 成积 之语，有见识的人说： 刈割然后堆积，又点火来烧，是草的最终命运。
English: At that time, the officials supported Lulong, using the high-ranking official's generous salary to show their grace to him, and gave him Dazhou, which was the most generous support to him. However, Lulong could not remember the kindness of the court, and even sent troops to attack the court, and eventually became an enemy of the court. When Lulong rebelled, people at that time recalled the nursery rhyme "There is more to life than just accumulating," and disliked the word "accumulating." People with insight said: "Cutting and then accumulating, and then lighting a fire to burn, is the ultimate fate of grass."

古文：伐斫以成积，又以为薪，亦芦荻之终也。
现代文：砍伐然后堆积，又把它作为柴草，也正是芦荻的最终命运。
English: It is the ultimate fate of reeds to be cut down and then piled up and used as firewood.

古文：其盛既极，亦将芟夷而为积焉。 
现代文：卢龙势力达到极盛之后，也要把他芟除而堆积。 
English: After the Lulong forces reach their peak, they will also be eliminated and piled up.

古文：龙既穷其兵势，盛其舟舰，卒以灭亡，僵尸如积焉。
现代文：卢龙全力调集他的兵力，尽力扩充他的船舰，最终还是被消灭，死人的尸体如草似的堆积。
English: Lulong tried his best to mobilize his forces, tried to expand his ships, and was eventually destroyed, and the bodies of the dead piled up like grass.

古文：卢龙据有广州，民间谣云： 芦生漫漫竟天半。 
现代文：卢龙占据庐业，民间歌谣说： 芦生漫漫竟天半。 
English: Lulong dominates the industry, and folk songs say: Lousheng is the center of the world.

古文：后拥有上流数州之地，内逼京辇，应 天半 之言。
现代文：后来卢龙拥有大江上游几个州的地域，向内进逼京城，正应了 天半 这话。
English: Later, Lulong owned the area of several states in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, and forced the capital city inward, which was in line with the half of the sky.

古文：义熙三年中，小兒相逢于道，辄举其两手曰 卢健健 ，次曰 斗叹斗叹 ，末复曰 翁年老，翁年老 。
现代文：义熙三年时，孩童们在路上相遇，常常举起两手说 卢健健 ，接着说 斗叹，斗叹 ，最后又说 翁年老，翁年老 。
English: When Yixi was three years old, the children met on the road and often raised their hands to say "Lu Jianjian," followed by "Dou sigh, Dou sigh," and finally "Weng old, Weng old."

古文：当时莫知所谓。
现代文：当时不知道说的是什么意思。
English: At the time, no one knew what was said.

古文：其后卢龙内逼，舟舰盖川， 健健 之谓也。
现代文：那以后卢龙进逼京城，船舰占满河川， 健健 就是指这种情况。
English: After that, Lu Long marched inland and covered the surface of the river with boats, which is the meaning of Jian Jian.

古文：既至查浦，屡克期欲与官斗， 斗叹 之应也。 翁年老 ，群公有期颐之庆，知妖逆之徒，自然消殄也。
现代文：卢龙进军到查浦，屡屡约定时间想要和官军决战，这就是 斗叹 的应验。 翁年老 ，是指朝廷大臣中有百岁之人的喜庆，由此可以知道叛逆的妖徒自会被殄灭。
English: Lulong marched to Chapu, and repeatedly agreed on a time to fight the government army, which is the fulfillment of the battle sigh. 翁老, refers to the celebration of a centenarian among the imperial ministers, from which it can be known that the rebellious demons will be annihilated.

古文：其时复有谣言曰： 卢橙橙，逐水流，东风忽如起，那得入石头。 
现代文：那时又有歌谣说： 卢橙橙，逐水流，束风忽然起，那得入石头。 
English: At that time, there was also a song saying: Lu orang orang, flowing with the water, the breeze suddenly rises, it has to go into the stone.

古文：卢龙果败，不得入石头。
现代文：后来卢龙果然战败，不能进入石头城。
English: Later, Lulong was defeated and could not enter Stone Town.

古文：昔温峤令郭景纯卜己与庾亮吉凶。
现代文：以前温崤命郭景纯为自己和庾亮占吉凶。
English: In the past, Guo Jingshun, the hot-tempered ruler, used to predict the fortunes of himself and his subordinates.

古文：景纯云 元吉 。
现代文：郭景纯说： 元吉。 
English: Guo Jingshun said: Yuanji.

古文：峤语亮： 景纯每筮，当是不敢尽言。
现代文：温崤对庾亮说： 郭景纯每次卜笼，都是不敢把话全部说出。
English: Wen Rong said to Yu Liang: Guo Jingsun did not dare to say all the words every time.

古文：吾等与国家同安危而曰元吉，事有成也。 
现代文：我们与国家同安危而郭景纯却说 元吉，事情能够成功。 
English: We are in danger together with the country, but Guo Jingshun said that things can be successful.

古文：于是协同讨灭王敦。
现代文：于是他们协力攻讨消灭王敦。
English: As a result, they jointly defeated Wang Dun.

古文：苻坚中，童谣曰： 阿坚连牵三十年，后若欲败时，当在江湖边。 
现代文：苻坚自称帝时，童谣说： 阿坚延续三十年，以后要败亡时，将在江湖边。 
English: When Yu Jian claimed to be emperor, the nursery rhyme said: "Ajian will last for thirty years, and when he falls, he will be on the edge of the lake."

古文：后坚败于淝水，在伪位凡三十年。
现代文：后来苻坚在淝水战败，他僭登帝位一共三十年。
English: Later, Yu Jian was defeated in the Battle of Surabaya, and he ascended the throne for a total of thirty years.

古文：苻坚中，谣语云： 河水清复清，苻诏死新城。 
现代文：苻坚自称帝时，民谣说： 河水清又清，苻韶死新城。 
English: When Yu Jian claimed to be emperor, the folk song said: The river is clear and clear, and the new city is dying.

古文：坚为姚苌所杀，死于新城。
现代文：后来苻坚被姚苌杀死，地点就在新越。
English: Later, Yu Jian was killed by Yao Yao, the place was in Xin Yue.

古文：苻坚中，歌云： 鱼羊田斗当灭秦。 
现代文：苻坚自称帝时，歌谣说： 鱼羊田斗将灭秦。 
English: When He Jian claimed to be the emperor, the ballad said: "Fish and sheep field fighting will destroy Qin."

古文： 鱼羊 ，鲜也； 田斗 ，卑也。
现代文： 鱼羊 是 鲜 字。 田斗 是 卑 字。
English: "Fish and sheep" is "fresh" and "rice field" is "humble."

古文：坚自号秦，言灭之者鲜卑也。
现代文：苻坚称自己朝廷为秦，歌谣说灭亡秦的是鲜卑。
English: Zhai insisted that his court was Qin, and the ballad said that the downfall of Qin was Xianbei.

古文：其群臣谏坚，令尽诛鲜卑，坚不从。
现代文：苻坚手下群臣谏劝苻坚，要他把鲜卑人杀尽。苻坚不听从。
English: The group of courtiers advised Gong Jian to kill all the commoners, but Gong Jian did not listen.

古文：及淮南败还，为慕容冲所攻，亡奔姚苌，身死国灭。
现代文：苻坚从淮南败退回来时，遭到慕容冲的进攻，苻坚逃奔到姚苌那儿，最终身死国灭。
English: When Yu Jian was defeated and retreated from Huainan, he was attacked by Murong Chong. Yu Jian fled to Yao Qi, and was eventually killed.

古文：毛虫之孽：晋武帝太康六年，南阳送两足虎，此毛虫之孽也。识者为其文曰： 武形有亏，金虎失仪，圣主应天，斯异何为。 
现代文：晋武帝太康六年，南阳献给朝廷两足虎，这是毛虫之孽。有见识的人为这事着文说： 虎形有亏损，金虎仪表失，圣主应天命，为何当异事。 
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, Nanyang offered a two-legged tiger to the imperial court, which was the evil of caterpillars. People with insight wrote about this matter: The tiger shape has a loss, the golden tiger instrument is lost, the saint is subject to the fate of heaven, why should it be a strange thing.

古文：言非乱也。
现代文：他的意思是说，这不是预示动乱。
English: What he means is that it's not a harbinger of unrest.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 足少者，下不胜任也。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 足少，下肢不能承担负载之职。 
English: Sayaka "I Chuan" said: If you lack legs, you are not competent.

古文：干宝曰： 虎者阴精，而居于阳，金兽也。南阳，火名也。
现代文：干宝说： 虎是阴精，而居于阳。虎是金兽，南阳是火名。
English: Gan Bao said: "The tiger is a yin spirit, but it lives in the sun. The tiger is a golden beast, and Nanyang is the name of fire.

古文：金精入火，而失其形，王室乱之妖也。
现代文：属金精的入火，而损伤其形体，是预示王室将蒙受动乱而出现的妖异。 
English: If a goldfinch is set on fire and its body is damaged, it is a sign that the royal family will suffer turmoil and the appearance of a monster.

古文：六，水数，言水数既极，火慝得作，而金受其败也。
现代文：六是水数，太康六年出现这种妖异，指水数到极点之后，大的灾害得以发生，而金受到火的伤害。
English: Sixth, is the water quantity, that is to say, the water quantity has reached the extreme, the fire will occur, and the gold will be damaged.

古文：至元康九年，始杀太子，距此十四年。
现代文：到元康九年，竟然杀害太子，距出现两足虎时十四年。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Yuan Kang, the crown prince was killed, fourteen years have passed since then.

古文：二七十四，火始终相乘之数也。
现代文：二七一十四，是火始火终之数相乘之积。
English: 274 is the number of fire multiplied by itself.

古文：自帝受命，至愍怀之废，凡三十五年。 
现代文：从武帝承受天命，到愍怀太子被废黜，中间一共三十五年。
English: From the time Emperor Wu received the Mandate of Heaven to the dethronement of Emperor Huai, there were a total of thirty-five years.

古文：太康九年，荆州献两足玃。
现代文：太康九年，荆州贡献两足获。
English: In the ninth year of Taikang, Jingzhou made two contributions.

古文：太康七年十一月丙辰，四角兽见于河间，河间王颙获以献。
现代文：太康七年十一月丙辰曰，在河间出现四角兽，河问王司马颐抓获它并把它贡献给朝廷。
English: In November of the 7th year of Taikang, the four-horned beast appeared in Hema. King Sima Yi of Hema captured it and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：角，兵象也。
现代文：角是战事的象征。
English: The horn is a symbol of war.

古文：董仲舒以四角为四方之象。
现代文：董仲舒认为四角是四方有战事的象征。
English: Dong Zhongshu believes that the four corners are a symbol of the four sides at war.

古文：后河间王数连四方之兵，作为乱阶，殆其应也。
现代文：后来河间王频频参与四方举兵之事，成为作乱的祸根，造恐怕就是四角兽出现的应验。
English: Later, King Kawama frequently participated in the raising of troops by the four sides, which became the root cause of the turmoil. I am afraid that this was the fulfillment of the appearance of the four-horned beast.

古文：晋怀帝永嘉五年，偃鼠出延陵，此毛虫之孽也。
现代文：晋怀帝永嘉五年，延陵的偃鼠都跑出来，这是毛虫之孽。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Jianhuai Yongjia, all the moles in Yanling ran out, which was the evil of the caterpillars.

古文：郭景纯筮之曰： 此郡东之县，当有妖人欲称制者，亦寻自死矣。 
现代文：郭景纯为造事进行卜筮说： 这个郡东边的县，将有妖人想要成为帝王，不久也就自己死了。 
English: Guo Jingshun Bu said: In this county in the east of the county, there will be monsters who want to become kings, and they will soon die.

古文：其后吴兴徐馥作乱，杀太守袁琇，馥亦时灭，是其应也。
现代文：逭以后吴兴徐馥发动叛乱，杀害太守袁璘，徐馥也在当时就被消灭，这正是偃鼠出洞的应验。
English: After that, Wu Xing's Xu Yao made a disturbance and killed the governor Yuan Yu. Xu Yao also died at that time, which was a sign.

古文：晋成帝咸和六年正月丁巳，会州郡秀孝于乐贤堂，有躭见于前，获之。
现代文：晋成帝咸和六年正月丁巳日，朝廷在乐贤堂会聚各州郡的秀才和孝廉，有麇在堂前出现，当时就把麇抓获了。
English: On the first day of the 6th month of the 6th year of the reign of Emperor Jincheng, the imperial court gathered the talents and filial piety of each state and county in the Le Xian Hall. There was a thief in front of the hall, and he was caught at that time.

古文：孙盛曰： 夫秀孝，天下之彦士，乐贤堂，所以乐养贤也。
现代文：孙盛说： 秀才、孝廉，是天下的贤才。乐贤堂，是乐贤养贤的地方。
English: Sun Sheng said: "Excellence and filial piety are the talents of the world. Le Xiantang is the place where talents are nurtured.

古文：晋自丧乱以后，风教凌夷，秀无策试之才，孝乏四行之宝。
现代文：晋自从发生动乱之后，风俗教化逐渐衰败，秀才没有参加策试的才学，孝廉缺乏坚守四种德行的品质。
English: Since the turmoil in Jin Dynasty, customs and education have gradually deteriorated. Talented people did not participate in the examination of talent, and filial piety lacked the quality of adhering to the four virtues.

古文：躭兴于前，或斯故乎。 
现代文：麇在堂前出现，或许就是这缘故吧。 
English: Maybe that's why the cocoon appeared in front of the hall.

古文：晋哀帝隆和元年十月甲申，有麈入东海第。
现代文：晋哀帝隆和元年十月甲申臼，有四不像跑进墓痉府第。
English: From the time of Emperor Jintao to October of the first year of the Jiaxun era, there are four different ways to enter the tomb.

古文：百姓沄言曰： 主入东海第。 
现代文：百姓喧哗起来说： 四不像进了束海第。 
English: The people clamored and said, "It's not like we've entered Sokkaidai."

古文：识者怪之。
现代文：有见识的人对此感到奇怪。
English: Insightful people are puzzled.

古文：及海西废为东海王，先送此第。
现代文：海西公被废黜为束海王，先送进造府第。
English: Haixi Gong was dethroned as Sokkai Wang and sent to Zofu first.

古文：晋孝武太元十三年四月癸巳，礿祠毕，有兔行庙堂上。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元十三年四月癸巳日，在宗庙举行春祭之后，有兔子在庙堂上行走。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of the 13th year of the reign of Emperor Jinxiao Wu, after the Spring Festival was held in the ancestral temple, a rabbit walked on the temple hall.

古文：兔，野物也，而集宗庙之堂，不祥莫甚焉。
现代文：兔是野生的动物，却来到宗庙的庙堂，没有什么比这更不祥了。
English: There is nothing more ominous than a hare, a wild animal, coming to the ancestral temple.

古文：宋文帝元嘉二十四年二月，雍州送六足麞，刺史武陵王表为祥瑞。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉二十四年二月，雍州贡送六足獐，刺史武陵王上表称之为吉祥的征兆。
English: In February of the 24th year of Emperor Yuanjia of the Song Dynasty, Yongzhou sent a six-legged dragonfly to King Wuling of the Song Dynasty, which was regarded as an auspicious omen.

古文：此毛虫之孽。
现代文：这是毛虫之孽。
English: It's the caterpillar's fault.

古文：宋顺帝升明元年，象三头度蔡洲，暴稻谷及园野。
现代文：宋顺帝升明元年，三头象穿过蓝溯，糟蹋稻谷，践踏田野。
English: When Emperor Song Shun ascended to the throne in the first year of the Ming Dynasty, three elephants ran across the land, trampled the rice paddies, and trampled the fields.

古文：犬祸：公孙渊家有犬冠帻绛衣上屋，此犬祸也。
现代文：公孙渊家有犬头戴愤身穿绛色衣服爬上屋顶，这是犬祸。
English: Gongsun Yuan's family had a dog with an angry-looking head dressed in dark blue clothes climb onto the roof. This was a dog accident.

古文：屋上亢阳高危之地。
现代文：屋顶上是极高、阳气极盛之地。
English: On the roof is a very high, yang-rich place.

古文：天戒若曰，渊亢阳无上，偷自尊高，狗而冠者也。
现代文：天儆戒说，公孙渊寡恩骄横，目无君上，妄自尊大，如同狗戴帽子。
English: Heavenly Precepts said, Gongsun Yuan is ungrateful, arrogant, arrogant, arrogant, like a dog wearing a hat.

古文：及自立为燕王，果为魏所灭。
现代文：公孙渊后来自立为燕王，果然被龚灭亡。
English: Gongsun Yuan later set himself up as the King of the Swallows, but he was defeated and killed.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 君不正，臣欲篡，厥妖狗出朝门。 
现代文：直崖《易传》说： 君主行为不正，臣子想要篡位，其妖异是狗到朝门。 
English: Sai Qing's "Easy Biography" said: The monarch is crooked, the vassal wants to usurp the throne, and a strange dog will appear at the gate of the imperial court.

古文：魏侍中应璩在直庐，炎见一白狗，问众人无见者。
现代文：魏国侍中应璩基在官舍直庐，突然看见一条白狗，问周围的众人，都说没有看见。
English: In the official residence of the Wei Dynasty, a servant named Ying Qi suddenly saw a white dog. He asked the people around him, but they all said they didn't see it.

古文：逾年卒。
现代文：过了一年。应璩死了。
English: A year later, Ying Xuan passed away.

古文：近犬祸也。
现代文：这接近于犬祸。
English: This is close to a canine accident.

古文：诸葛恪征淮南归，将朝会，犬衔引其衣。
现代文：诸葛恪出征进直回到京城，将赴朝会，犬叼着他的衣服往后拉。
English: Zhuge Ke straight back to the capital, will go to the Imperial Court, the dog holding his clothes pulled back.

古文：恪曰： 犬不欲我行乎？ 
现代文：诸葛恪说： 犬不想要我走吗? 
English: Zhuge Ke said: Does the dog not want me to go?

古文：还坐，有顷复起，犬又衔衣。
现代文：因此返回坐着。一会儿，诸葛恪又起来准备出发，犬又叼着他的衣服不让他走。
English: So he sat back down. A moment later, Zhuge stood up again to leave, and the dog grabbed his clothes and wouldn't let him go.

古文：乃令逐犬。
现代文：诸葛恪就命人赶走犬。
English: Zhuge ordered someone to chase the dog away.

古文：遂升车入而被害。
现代文：他于是登车入朝，就此被害。
English: He then boarded the train into the morning and was killed.

古文：晋武帝太康九年，幽州有犬，鼻行地三百余步。
现代文：晋武帝太康九年，幽州有条犬，用鼻子在地上行走了三百余步。
English: In the ninth year of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, there was a dog in Yuzhou that walked more than 300 steps on the ground with its nose.

古文：晋惠帝元康中，吴郡娄县民家闻地中有犬声，掘视得雌雄各一。
现代文：晋惠帝元康年间，吴郡娄县有个百姓在家中听到地下有犬吠的声音，于是掘开地面来看。找到雌犬雄犬各一条。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jingu during the reign of Emperor Yuankang, a villager in Min County, Wuxi County, heard the sound of a dog barking underground in his home, so he dug into the ground to take a look. He found a female dog and a male dog.

古文：还置窟中，覆以磨石，宿昔失所在。
现代文：百姓把犬放回窟窿中，用磨盘石覆盖在洞口上，第二天就不知犬到什么地方去了。
English: The villagers put the dog back into the hole and covered the mouth of the hole with grindstone. The next day, they did not know where the dog had gone.

古文：元帝太兴中，吴郡府舍又得二物头如此。
现代文：元帝太兴年间，吴郡官府房舍中又找到这样的两条犬。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taixing of the Yuan Dynasty, two more such dogs were found in the premises of the Wu County Government.

古文：其后太守张茂为吴兴兵所杀。
现代文：造以后吴郡太守张茂被吴兴军士杀死。
English: After the construction, Zhang Mao, the governor of Wu County, was killed by Sergeant Wu Xing.

古文：案《夏鼎志》曰： 掘地得狗名曰贾。 
现代文：按，《夏鼎志》说： 掘地得狗名叫买。 
English: According to "Xia Ding Zhi" said: digging the ground to get the dog's name to buy.

古文：《尸子》曰： 地中有犬，名曰地狼。 
现代文：《尸子》说： 地中有犬，名叫地狼。 
English: "The Corpse" says: There is a dog in the ground called the Ground Wolf.

古文：同实而异名也。
现代文：实际上是同样的东西，但名称不同。
English: It's actually the same thing, just under a different name.

古文：晋惠帝永兴元年，丹阳内史硃逵家犬生三子，皆无头。
现代文：晋惠帝永兴元年，且丹阳内史硃逵家中一条犬生下三只小犬，三只小犬都没有头。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingu in Yongxing, a dog in the Danyang family gave birth to three puppies, and all three puppies had no heads.

古文：后逵为扬州刺史曹武所杀。
现代文：后来朱逵被扬州刺史曹武杀死。
English: Later, Zhu Xi was killed by Yangzhou assassin Cao Wu.

古文：晋孝怀帝永嘉五年，吴郡嘉兴张林家狗人言云： 天下人饿死。 
现代文：晋孝怀帝永嘉五年，吴郡嘉兴张林家的狗突然像人似的说话。狗说： 天下人饿死。 
English: In the fifth year of Jin Xiao Huai Di Yongjia, the dog of the Zhang Lin family in Jiaxing, Wu County, suddenly spoke like a human. The dog said: People are starving to death.

古文：晋安帝隆安初，吴郡治下狗恆夜吠，聚高桥上。
现代文：晋安帝隆安初年，吴郡地区狗常常夜间聚在高桥上吠叫。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongan of the Jin Dynasty, dogs in the Wuxian area often gathered on the high bridge at night to bark.

古文：人家狗有限，而吠声甚众。
现代文：百姓家的狗数量有限，而从狗吠声判断，狗很多。
English: The number of dogs in people's homes is limited, but judging from the dogs' barking, there are a lot of dogs.

古文：或有夜出觇之者，云一狗假有两三头，皆前向乱吠。
现代文：有入夜晚出来察看，说是一条狗有两三个头，头都向着前方乱吠叫。
English: Someone came out at night to investigate and said that it was a dog with two or three heads, all of which were barking wildly in front.

古文：无几，孙恩乱于吴会。
现代文：没有多久，孙恩给吴会带来战乱。
English: Before long, Sun En brought war to Wu.

古文：桓玄将拜楚王，已设拜席，群官陪位，玄未及出，有狗来便其席，万众旺候，莫不惊怪。
现代文：桓玄将被拜授楚王，已经设置好拜席，群官陪座入位，担互还没入席，有狗来在桓玄席位上拉屎撒尿，等候但玄入席的众多人士，看到这种情况没有一个不感到惊怪。
English: Huan Xuan will be given the title of King of Chu. The place of worship has already been set up, the group officials have been seated, and the sponsors have not yet been seated. A dog has come to defecate and urinate on Huan Xuan's seat. Many people are waiting for Huan Xuan to be seated. No one is not surprised to see this situation.

古文：玄性猜暴，竟无言者，逐狗改席而已。
现代文：桓玄性情多疑而残暴，最终还是没有人把造事说出来，祇是赶走狗、改换坐席而已。
English: Huan Xuan's temper was violent, and he didn't even speak. He just chased away the dogs and replaced the pews.

古文：宋武帝永初二年，京邑有狗人言。
现代文：宋武帝永初二年，京邑有狗像人似的说话。
English: In the first two years of the reign of Emperor Songwu, a dog in Beijing spoke like a human.

古文：文帝元嘉二十九年，吴兴东迁孟慧度婢蛮与狗通好如夫妻弥年。
现代文：文帝元嘉二十九年，吴兴东迁孟慧度家名叫蛮的婢女常年与狗通好，形同夫妻。
English: In the 29th year of Emperor Wen's reign, Wu Xingdong moved to Meng Huidu's home. Meng Huidu, a servant girl, had a good relationship with the dog for many years, and they were like a husband and wife.

古文：孝武孝建初，颜竣为左卫，于省内闻犬子声在地中，掘焉得乌犬子。
现代文：孝武帝争建初年，颜竣任太子左卫率，在宫省听到地下有犬子声，掘地寻找，找到一条黑犬子。
English: In the first year of the construction of Emperor Xiaowu, Yan Shuling was appointed as the left guard of the prince. In the palace province, he heard a dog's voice underground, dug and found a black dog.

古文：养久之，后自死。
现代文：酦涂养了它很久，后来造黑犬子自己死去。
English: Tsukuda raised it for a long time, and later the black dog himself died.

古文：明帝初，晋安王子勋称伪号于寻阳，柴桑有狗与女人交，三日不分离。
现代文：明帝初年，晋安王刘子勋在寻阳建立伪王朝，柴桑有狗与女人交配，三天不分离。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Liu Zixun, the King of Jin'an, established a pseudo-dynasty in Xuanyang. A dog and a woman mated for three days.

古文：明帝泰始中，秣陵张僧护家犬生豕子。
现代文：明帝泰始年间，秣陵张僧护家犬生养出小。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty, the monk Zhang of Fuling took care of the family dog and raised it.

古文：白眚白祥：晋武帝太康十年，洛阳宫西宜秋里石生地中，始高三尺，如香钅卢形，后如伛人，盘薄不可掘。
现代文：晋武帝太康十年，洛阳宫西边宜秋里有石头从地裹长出来，开始长到三尺高，像香炉的形状，后来变得像个曲背弯腰的人，盘曲延伸，挖掘不出来。
English: In the tenth year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu Taikang, on the west side of Luoyang Palace, there was a stone that grew out of the ground. It began to grow to three feet high, like the shape of an incense burner, and later became like a person with a hunched back. It stretched and stretched, and could not be dug out.

古文：案刘向说，此白眚也。
现代文：据刘向说，这是白眚。
English: Liu Xiang said that it was the egret.

古文：明年，宫车晏驾，王室始骚，卒以乱亡。
现代文：第二年，皇上驾崩，王室开始发生骚乱，朝廷最终因为动乱而败亡。
English: The following year, after the Emperor's death, the royal family began to riot, and the court eventually fell because of the turmoil.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 石立如人，庶人为天下雄。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 石头立起来像人，预示庶人成为天下的豪雄。 
English: Kyobo "I Chuan" said: The stone stands up like a man, indicating that the common man will become the hero of the world.

古文：此近之矣。
现代文：这事和京房所说的相近。
English: This is a close approximation.

古文：晋成帝咸康初，地生毛，近白眚也。
现代文：晋成帝咸康初年，地上生出毛，这接近于白眚。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jiankang, there was hair on the ground, which was close to white hair.

古文：孙盛以为民劳之异。
现代文：孙盛认为是百姓劳苦而出现的妖异。
English: Sun Sheng believed that it was the result of the people's hard work.

古文：是后胡灭而中原向化，将相皆甘心焉。
现代文：这以后超人之国被灭，中原归服，将相都向往中原。
English: After this, Superman's country was annihilated, Central Plains submitted, and they all yearned for Central Plains.

古文：于是方镇屡革，边戍仍迁，皆拥带部曲，动有万数。
现代文：于是镇守一方的军事长官屡屡变换，戍边将领频频迁调，他们迁动时都带领自己的私家军队，往往都有几万人，其间还有征战讨伐，征发役夫。
English: At this time, the local forces repeatedly raised troops, and the border defense preparedness frequently changed. All of them led their own private armed forces, and there were tens of thousands of them.

古文：其间征伐征赋，役无宁岁，天下扰动，民以疲怨。
现代文：征收赋税，劳役不断，没有哪年能够宁静，天下惊扰骚动，百姓疲惫怨恨。
English: Taxes are levied, labor is incessant, no year can be quiet, the world is in turmoil, and the people are tired and resentful.

古文：咸康三年六月，地生毛。
现代文：咸康三年六月，地上生出毛。
English: In June of the third year of Xiankang, hair began to grow on the ground.

古文：晋孝武太元二年五月，京都地生毛。
现代文：晋孝武太元二年五月，京城地上生出毛。
English: In May of the second year of the reign of Emperor Jinxiao Wuta, a hair sprouted on the ground in Beijing.

古文：至四年而氐贼攻襄阳，围彭城，向广陵，征戍仍出，兵连不解。
现代文：到四年，压贼进攻襄阳，围攻彭城，直趋广陵，朝廷频频出动军队征伐戍守，战事连年不得停息。
English: By the fourth year, the oppressors had attacked Yangyang, besieged Pengcheng, and advanced as far as Guangling. The imperial court frequently dispatched troops to conquer and defend, and the war continued year after year.

古文：太元十四年四月，京都地生毛。是时苻坚灭后，经略多事。
现代文：太元十四年四月，京城地上长出毛这时苻坚被灭，边州多事。
English: In April of the 14th year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, when hair began to grow on the ground of the capital city, Yan Jian was eliminated, and there were many events in the border provinces.

古文：太元十七年四月，地生毛。
现代文：太元十七年四月，地上生出毛。
English: In April of the seventeenth year of the Taiyuan, hair sprouted on the ground.

古文：晋安帝隆安四年四月乙未，地生毛，或白或黑。
现代文：晋安帝隆安四年四月乙末日，地上生出毛，有的白，有的黑。
English: On the last day of April in the 4th year of Emperor Jianlong's reign, there was hair on the ground, some white, some black.

古文：晋安帝元兴三年五月，江陵地生毛。
现代文：晋安帝元兴三年五月，江陵地上生出毛。
English: In May of the third year of the reign of Emperor Yuanxing of the Jin and An dynasties, hair began to grow on the ground in Gangneung.

古文：是后江陵见袭，交战者数矣。
现代文：这以后江陵被袭击，屡屡发生战事。
English: After that, Gangneung was attacked and fought many times.

古文：晋安帝义熙三年三月，地生白毛。
现代文：晋安帝义熙三年三月，地上生出白毛。
English: In March of the third year of Emperor Jinnan's reign, white hair sprouted on the ground.

古文：义熙十年三月，地生白毛。
现代文：义熙十年三月，地上生出白毛。
English: In March of the tenth year of Yixi, white hair sprouted on the ground.

古文：明年，王旅西讨司马休之。
现代文：第二年，朝廷军队西进征讨司马休之。
English: The following year, the imperial army went west to fight against Sima Xiu.

古文：又明年，北扫关、洛。
现代文：又后一年，朝廷军队北进扫荡关、洛。
English: The following year, the imperial army swept north to sweep Guan and Luo.

古文：魏明帝青龙三年正月乙亥，陨石于寿光。
现代文：魏明帝青龙三年正月乙亥日，在寿光落下了陨石。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Wei Ming Dynasty, the meteorite fell in Shouguang.

古文：按《左氏传》，陨石，星也。
现代文：据《左氏传》，陨石就是星。
English: According to "The Tale of Zuo," a meteorite is a star.

古文：刘歆说曰： 庶民，惟星陨于宋者，象宋襄公将得诸侯而不终也。 
现代文：刘歆解释说： 百姓想到星在宋陨落，象征宋襄公将在诸侯中称霸却没有好的结果。 
English: Liu Wei explained: The people thought that the star would fall in the Song Dynasty, symbolizing that Prince Song Xiang would dominate among the princes, but it did not have a good result.

古文：秦始皇时有陨石，班固以为石阴类，又白祥，臣将危君。
现代文：秦始皇在位时出现陨石。班固认为，石是属阴类的东西，落下陨石正是白祥，预示臣将危害君。
English: When Qin Shihuang was on the throne, a meteorite appeared. Ban Gu believed that the stone was a negative thing, and the falling meteorite was Bai Xiang, foreshadowing that the minister would harm you.

古文：是后司马氏得政。
现代文：这以后司马氏掌握了魏的大权。
English: After this, Sima seized power in Wei.

古文：晋武帝太康五年五月丁巳，陨石于温及河阳各二。
现代文：晋武帝太康五年五月丁巳，在温和河阳各落下两块陨石。
English: In May of the fifth year of Emperor Taikang's reign, two meteorites each fell in Mianyang and Heyang.

古文：太康六年正月，陨石于温三。
现代文：太康六年正月，在温落下三块陨石。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of Taikang, three meteorites fell in Wenling.

古文：晋成帝咸和八年五月，星陨于肥乡一。
现代文：晋成帝咸和八年五月，在肥乡落下一颗陨星。
English: In May of the eighth year of Emperor Jincheng's reign, a meteorite fell in Feixiang.

古文：咸和九年正月，陨石于凉州。
现代文：咸和九年正月，在凉州落下陨石。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of Xianhe, a meteorite fell in Liangzhou.

古文：吴孙亮五凤二年五月，阳羡县离里山大石自立。
现代文：吴孙亮五凤二年五月，阳羡县离里山一块大石自己立起来。
English: In May of the second year of Wu Sunliang Wufeng's reign, the Lirishan Mountain in Yangzi County rose up on its own.

古文：按京房《易传》曰： 庶士为天子之祥也。 
现代文：按，京房《易传》说： 石自立，是平民要成为天子的征兆。 
English: According to the "Easy Biography" of the Beijing House: "Stone independence is a sign that the common people want to become the son of heaven.

古文：其说曰： 石立于山，同姓；平地，异姓。 
现代文：他解释说： 石立在山上，预示同姓平民要做天子。
English: He explained: The stone standing on the mountain foretells that a commoner with the same name will become the son of heaven.

古文：干宝以为孙皓承废故之家得位，其应也；或曰孙休见立之祥也。
现代文：石立在平地上，预示异姓平民要做天子。 干责认为，孙皓本是承继衰败的世家，却得到帝位，正是石立于山的应验。有人说石自立于山是孙休被立为帝的征兆。
English: Standing on the plain, the stone foreshadowed that a commoner with a different surname would become the Son of Heaven. According to scholars, the fact that Sun Yat-sen succeeded to the throne after inheriting a decadent family was the fulfillment of the stone standing on the mountain. Some people said that the stone standing on its own on the mountain was a sign of Sun Xiu being made emperor.

古文：晋惠帝元康五年十二月，有石生于宜年里。
现代文：晋惠帝元康五年十二月，宜年里长出块石头。
English: In December of the fifth year of Emperor Jingu's reign, a stone began to grow.

古文：晋惠帝永康元年，襄阳郡上言得鸣石，撞之，声闻七八里。
现代文：晋惠帝太安元年，襄阳郡上书说得到一块会呜叫的石头，撞击这石头，声音可传到七八里远的地方。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taian of the Jin Dynasty, Xiangyang County wrote in a document that it had obtained a stone that could howl. If the stone was hit, the sound could be heard seven or eight miles away.

古文：晋惠帝太安元年，丹阳湖熟县夏架湖有大石浮二百步而登岸。
现代文：晋惠帝立塞元年，旦盐湖熟县夏架湖有块大石在湖面上漂浮丁二百步然后登上岸。
English: In the first year of Emperor Jinhui's reign, there was a large rock floating on the surface of Lake Shajian in Jiu County, Yancheng Salt Lake, which floated for 200 paces and then landed on the shore.

古文：民惊噪相告曰： 石来！ 
现代文：百姓惊慌喧闸，奔走相告说： 石来了! 
English: People panicked and rushed to tell each other: The stone is coming!

古文：干宝曰： 寻有石冰入建业。 
现代文：干宝说： 不久，石冰侵入建业。 
English: Gan Bao said: Soon, stone ice invaded Jianye.

古文：晋武帝泰始八年五月，蜀地雨白毛。
现代文：晋武帝泰始八年五月，蜀地天降白毛。
English: In May of the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Jin Dynasty, white hair fell from the sky in Shu.

古文：此白祥也。是时益州刺史皇甫晏冒暑伐汶山胡，从事何旅固谏，不从。
现代文：这是白祥这时益州刺史皇甫晏冒着暑热讨伐汶山胡，他手下从事坦速坚持劝谏，皇直垦不听从。
English: This was the time of Bai Xiang, when the prince of Yizhou, Shishi Wangfujing, braved the heat to fight the Wenshan Hu. His subordinates engaged in persuasion, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：牙门张弘等因众之怨，诬晏谋逆，害之。
现代文：牙门官强弘等人趁着军众的怨怒，诬告皇甫晏图谋叛逆，害死了皇甫晏。
English: Taking advantage of the anger of the troops, Qiang Hong, the gatekeeper, and others falsely accused Emperor Fuxi of plotting to rebel, and killed Emperor Fuxi.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 前乐后忧，厥妖天雨羽。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 前乐后忧，其妖异是天降羽毛。 
English: Saiya's "I Chuan" said: First joy, then sorrow, the strange thing is the feathers falling from the sky.

古文：又曰： 邪人进，贤人逃，天雨毛。 
现代文：又说： 邪人进用，贤人奔逃，天降羽毛。 
English: He also said, "Evil men advance and good men retreat, but feathers fall from the sky."

古文：其《易妖》曰： 天雨毛羽，贵人出走。 
现代文：京房的《易妖》说： 天降毛羽，贵人出走。 
English: Its "Easy Demon" said: The sky falls down fluff, and nobles flee.

古文：三占皆应也。
现代文：三种预测都得到了应验。
English: All three predictions have come to pass.

古文：晋惠帝永宁元年，齐王冏举义军。
现代文：晋惠帝永宁元年，齐王司马同组织讨逆义军。
English: In the first year of Emperor Yongning's reign, King Sima of Qi organized an army to fight against the rebels.

古文：军中有小兒出于襄城繁昌县，年八岁，发体悉白，颇能卜。
现代文：军中有一个从襄城繁昌县来的小孩，年纪是八岁，头发身体都是白色，很会占。
English: There was a child in the army who came from Xiangcheng and Fanchang counties. He was eight years old, his hair was white, and he was very tall.

古文：于《洪范》，则白祥也。
现代文：据《洪范》，造就是白祥。
English: According to "Hong Fan," Zou is Bai Xiang.

古文：晋车骑大将军东嬴王腾自并州迁镇鄴，行次真定。
现代文：晋车骑大将军东蠃王司马腾从并州迁调镇守邺，途中驻扎在真定。
English: Wang Sima Teng, the Jin chariot cavalry general of the East Han Dynasty, was transferred from the annexing state to guard the town of Shandong, and was stationed in Shandong on the way.

古文：时久积雪，而当门前方数尺独消释，腾怪而掘之，得玉马高尺许，口齿缺。
现代文：当时积雪很久，而正当门前的几尺见方的地面积雪却全都溶化，司马腾感到奇怪，就命人挖掘这块地，得到一枚高一尺左右的玉马，牙齿残缺。
English: At that time, the snow had been accumulating for a long time, but the snow on the ground just in front of the door, which was only a few feet square, had all melted. Sima Teng felt strange, so he ordered someone to dig up the ground and got a horse that was about a foot high, with missing teeth.

古文：腾以马者国姓，上送之以为瑞。
现代文：司马腾认为马是国姓，于是把玉马向皇上贡送以作为祥瑞。
English: Sima Teng believed that Ma was the national surname, so he sent the Jade Horse to the emperor as a tribute.

古文：然论者皆云马而无齿，则不得食，妖祥之兆，衰亡之征。
现代文：但是分析这事的人都说，马齿残缺，就不能进食，这是出现灾异的凶兆，是预示衰亡的征兆。
English: However, people who analyze this matter say that if the horse's teeth are incomplete, it can't eat, which is a sign of disaster, a sign of decline.

古文：案占，此白祥也。
现代文：根据推测，这是白祥。
English: Divination, this is Bai Xiang.

古文：是后腾为汲桑所杀，而晋室遂亡。
现代文：这以后司马腾被汲桑杀死，而晋室从此衰亡。
English: After this, Sima Teng was killed by Kyusang, and the Jin family fell into decline.

古文：宋文帝元嘉中，徐湛之为丹阳尹。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉年间，徐湛之任丹阳尹。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yuanjia of the Song Dynasty, Xu Zhan was appointed as Danyang Yin.

古文：夜西门内有气如练，西南指，长数十丈。
现代文：一天夜晚西门内冒出一股气，形同白练，直指西南，有数十丈长。
English: One night, a puff of air emerged from the west gate. It was shaped like a puff of smoke, pointed directly to the southwest, and was several tens of meters long.

古文：又白光覆屋，良久而转駃乃消。
现代文：又有白光覆罩在屋顶上，过了很久快转几圈才消失。
English: There was also a white light covering the roof, and it took a long time and a few quick turns before it disappeared.

古文：此白祥也。
现代文：这是白祥。
English: This is Bai Xiang.

古文：前废帝景和元年，邓琬在寻阳，种紫花皆白，白眚也。
现代文：前废帝景和元年，邓琬在寻阳的时候，他种下去的紫花全都变白，这是白眚。
English: In the first year of the last emperor Jing and the first year of the year, when Deng Xuan was looking for the sun, all the purple flowers he planted turned white, which is the white poplar.

古文：木沴金：魏齐王正始末，河南尹李胜治听事，有小材激堕，楇受符石虎项断之。
现代文：魏齐王正始未年，河南尹李胜修治厅堂，有根小木料从屋顶上飞速坠落下来，正击中受符吏石卢的颈项，把颈打断了。
English: At the beginning of the Wei and Qi dynasties, a small piece of wood fell from the roof of the administrative hall of Yin and Li Sheng in Henan Province. It hit the neck of the official Shi Lu and broke his neck.

古文：此木沴金也。
现代文：这是木诊金的灾异。
English: This is the result of the woeful state of tree diagnosis funds.

古文：胜后旬日而败。
现代文：胜在这事之后不过十天就遭受败亡之祸。
English: Kuisho was defeated after ten days.

古文：晋惠帝元康八年三月，郊禖坛石中破为二。
现代文：晋惠帝元康八年三月，郊梅坛石从中间裂分为二。
English: In March of the eighth year of Emperor Jingu's reign, the Jubei Altar Stone split in two from the middle.

古文：此木沴金也。
现代文：这是木诊金的灾异。
English: This is the result of the woeful state of tree diagnosis funds.

古文：郊禖坛者，求子之神位，无故而自毁，太子将危之妖也。
现代文：郊梅坛，是求子的神坛，无缘无故自己毁坏，这是太子将受危害的妖异。
English: The Suburban Plum Blossom Altar is a shrine to pray for a son. If it were to self-destruct for no reason, the prince would be in danger.

古文：明年，愍怀废死。
现代文：第二年，愍怀太子被废黜后又被害死。
English: In the following year, Prince Gong Huai was deposed and then killed.

古文：晋孝武帝太元十年四月，谢安出镇广陵，始发石头，金鼓无故自破。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元十年四月，谢安出镇广陵，刚从石头出发，铜饪和鼓无缘无故自己破了。
English: In April of the tenth year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, Xie An went out of the town of Guangling. As soon as he started from the stone, the copper pipe and the drum broke for no reason.

古文：此木沴金之异也。
现代文：这是木诊金的灾异。
English: This is the result of the woeful state of tree diagnosis funds.

古文：天意若曰，安徒扬经略之声，终无其实，钲鼓不用之象也。
现代文：天儆戒说，谢安空有谋划国家大事的名声，最终也没有见到实效，铜钮和鼓不能使用就是这种情况的象征。
English: Tian Rongjie said that Xie Ankuo had the reputation of planning national events, but ultimately did not see the actual effect. The inability to use copper buttons and drums is a symbol of this situation.

古文：八月，以疾还，是月薨。
现代文：这年八月，谢安因病回京，当月就去世。
English: In August of that year, Xie An returned to Beijing due to illness, and passed away the same month.

