古文：秦并赵，北向迎燕。
现代文：秦国兼并赵国后，又让赵军向北迎击燕国军队。
English: After Qin's annexation of Zhao, Zhao's army was sent north to meet Yan's army.

古文：燕王闻之，使人贺秦王。
现代文：燕王听说后，派人去祝贺秦王。
English: After King Yan heard about it, he sent someone to congratulate King Qin.

古文：使者过赵，赵王系之。
现代文：使者经过赵国，赵王扣押了他。
English: The envoy passed through Zhao's country, and Zhao Wang detained him.

古文：使者曰： 秦、赵为一，而天下服矣。兹之所以受命于赵者，为秦也。
现代文：使者说： 秦、赵合一，使天下诸侯折服，燕国所以接受赵国的命令，是因为赵国有秦国的支持。
English: The envoy said: Qin and Zhao united to make the world's princes submit, so Yan accepted Zhao's order because Zhao had the support of Qin.

古文：今臣使秦，而赵系之，是秦、赵有郄。
现代文：现在臣下出使秦国而被赵国拘留，这就是说秦、赵两国有了隔阂。
English: Now a vassal has been sent to Qin and detained by Zhao, which means that Qin and Zhao have become estranged.

古文：秦、赵有郄，天下必不服，而燕不受命矣。
现代文：秦、赵两国有了隔阂，天下诸侯一定不会再屈服，而燕国也绝不会再接受赵国的命令。
English: The two countries of Qin and Zhao are estranged, the princes of the world will never give in again, and Yan will never again accept the orders of Zhao.

古文：且臣之使秦，无妨于赵之伐燕也。 
现代文：再说臣下出使秦国，对赵国进攻燕国也没什么妨害。 
English: Moreover, the envoys sent by his vassals to Qin did not interfere with Zhao's attack on Yan.

古文：赵王以为然而遣之。
现代文：赵王认为说得对，就放了他。
English: Zhao Wang thought he was right and let him go.

古文：使者见秦王曰： 燕王窃闻秦并赵，燕王使使者贺千金。 
现代文：使者见到秦王说： 燕王私下听说秦国兼并了赵国，就派遣我带着千金来祝贺。 
English: When the envoy saw King Qin, he said, "King Yan heard in private that Qin had annexed Zhao, so he sent me to congratulate him with a thousand gold coins."

古文：秦王曰： 夫燕无道，吾使赵有之，子何贺? 
现代文：秦王说： 燕王无道，我派赵国攻取燕国，您还道什么贺呀？ 
English: Qin Wang said: Yan Wang has no way out, I sent Zhao Guo to conquer Yan Guo, what are you congratulating?

古文：使者曰： 臣闻全赵之时，南邻为秦，北下曲阳为燕，赵广三百里，而与秦相距五十余年矣，所以不能反胜秦者，国小而地无所取。
现代文：使者说： 臣下听说赵国独立的时候，南面有秦国为邻：北面攻下益阳与燕国为邻，赵国方圆三百里，同秦国相持五十多年，没能反过来战胜秦国的原因，是因为国土狭小没什么出产。
English: The envoy said, "Our vassals have heard that when Zhao was independent, it had Qin as its neighbor to the south; it had Yiyang and Yan as its neighbor to the north; Zhao was three hundred miles in circumference and had been at war with Qin for more than fifty years. The reason why Zhao could not defeat Qin in turn was that the land was too small and there was little production.

古文：今王使赵北并燕，燕、赵同力，必不复受于秦矣。
现代文：观在大王让赵国向北兼并燕蘸，燕、赵两国同心协力，一定不会再听命予秦国了。
English: Guan Da Wang asked Zhao Guo to annex Yan'an to the north. Yan and Zhao worked together and would not listen to Qin Guo's order.

古文：臣切为王患之。 
现代文：臣下私下替大王忧虑。 
English: Privately, the vassals are worried for the great king.

古文：秦王以为然，起兵而救燕。
现代文：秦王认为是这样，就发兵援救燕国。
English: King Qin thought so, and sent troops to rescue Yan.

