古文：太史公读列封至便侯曰：有以也夫！
现代文：太史公读有关列侯分封的档案资料，读到便侯时，说道：真是事出有因啊！
English: Taishi read the archival materials about the subdivision of the feudal lords, and when he read about the feudal lords, he said: It's true that things happen for a reason!

古文：长沙王者，着令甲，称其忠焉。
现代文：长沙王被封为诸侯王，著录在法令的第一篇，他的忠诚受到称赞。
English: Changsha Wang was named the prince of princes, recorded in the first part of the decree, and his loyalty was praised.

古文：昔高祖定天下，功臣非同姓疆土而王者八国。
现代文：当初高祖平定天下，功臣之中不是皇室同姓宗亲而分疆裂土受封为诸侯王的一共有八个。
English: At the beginning of Gaozhu's reign, there were a total of eight meritorious vassals who were not imperial family members with the same surname, but were given the title of princes after the division of the empire.

古文：至孝惠时，唯独长沙全，禅五世，以无嗣绝，竟无过，为藩守职，信矣。
现代文：到孝惠帝时，只剩下长沙王能够保全自己的封国，接连传承五世，最后因为没有后嗣才绝封，自始至终没有犯什么过错，作为国家的藩守，尽心尽职，事情果真就是这样。
English: By the time of Emperor Xiao Hui, only Changsha Wang was left who was able to preserve his fiefdom, successively passing it down to the fifth generation, and finally because he had no heirs, he was cut off. From beginning to end, he did not make any mistakes. As the country's lord of the domain, he devoted himself to his duties, and this is how things really were.

古文：故其泽流枝庶，毋功而侯者数人。
现代文：所以他的德业能使旁系子孙也沾受恩惠，未立功勋而受封为列侯的就有数人。
English: Therefore, his virtuous deeds can make his collateral descendants also receive favors. There are several people who have been awarded the title of vassal without meritorious service.

古文：及孝惠讫孝景间五十载，追修高祖时遗功臣，及从代来，吴楚之劳，诸侯子弟若肺腑，外国归义，封者九十有余。
现代文：从孝惠帝之初以至孝景帝之末，其间五十多年，追录高祖时遗漏未封的功臣，以及追随孝文帝从代国入继大统的旧臣，孝景帝时在平定吴楚七国之乱的战事中功劳卓著的将相官员，身为皇室骨肉至亲的诸侯王子弟，前来投顺归化的外邦异族的首领等等，先后受封为列侯的有九十多人。
English: From the beginning of Emperor Xiao Hui to the end of Emperor Xiao Jing, more than fifty years have passed, during which the meritorious vassals who were omitted from the record of Gao Zu, as well as the old vassals who followed Emperor Xiaowen from the country to the succession, the generals and officials who made outstanding contributions in the war to quell the Seven Kingdoms of Wuchu during the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing, the princes and princes who are the closest relatives of the royal family, the leaders of foreign nations who came to naturalize, and so on, have been successively named as vassals. There are more than ninety people.

古文：咸表始终，当世仁义成功之著者也。
现代文：现在把他们受封传承等情况列表记载如下，这些都是当代有仁义、建大功的人物中比较突出的。
English: The following is a list of the circumstances of their succession to the throne. These are the more prominent contemporary figures of benevolence and great merit.

