古文：乌重胤，字保君，河东将承玭子也。
现代文：乌重胤的字叫保君，是河东将领乌承王此的儿子。
English: Wu Chung-yin's character is called Baojun, and he is the son of the general Wu Chengwang of the East River.

古文：少为潞牙将，兼左司马。
现代文：年轻时任潞州牙将，兼任左司马。
English: When he was young, he served as the commander of the Bozhou Dental Corps, and concurrently as the Left Division of the Horse Corps.

古文：节度使卢从史奉诏讨王承宗，阴与贼连。
现代文：节度使卢从史奉命讨伐王承宗，暗中和叛贼勾结。
English: So, Lu Congshi was ordered to fight Wang Chengzong and secretly colluded with the traitor.

古文：吐突承璀将图之，以告重胤，乃缚从史。帐下士持兵合讠雚，重胤叱曰： 天子有命，从者赏，违者斩！ 
现代文：吐突承璀要杀死他，告诉了乌重胤，他就把卢从史捆了起来，营帐里的士兵拿着兵器都喊起来，他叱责说 ：皇上有命令，听从的有赏，违令的杀头！ 
English: When he told Wu Chung-yin that Tu Tsung-cheng wanted to kill him, Wu Chung-yin tied up Lu Congshi. The soldiers in the camp all shouted out with their weapons, and he scolded them, saying, "The emperor has orders, and obedience is rewarded, but disobeying orders is murder!"

古文：士敛手还部无敢动。
现代文：士兵们都放下武器各自归位不敢乱动。
English: The soldiers put down their weapons and retreated to their respective positions, not daring to move.

古文：宪宗嘉其功，擢河阳节度使，封张掖郡公。
现代文：唐宪宗奖赏他的功劳，提升他任河阳节度使，封爵为张掖郡公。
English: Tang Xianzong rewarded his merits, promoted him to the post of Heyang Festival envoy, and knighted him to Zhangye County.

古文：帝讨淮蔡，诏重胤以兵压贼境，割汝州隶其军，与李光颜相掎角。
现代文：皇帝讨伐淮西蔡州，命他率军逼近叛军边境，将汝州划归他的部队，叫他和李光颜互相呼应。
English: The emperor attacked Huaxi Caizhou, ordered him to lead the army to approach the rebel border, and assigned Ruzhou to his troops, so that he and Li Guangyan would echo each other.

古文：大小百余战，凡三年，贼平，再迁检校司空，进邠国公。
现代文：进行了大小一百多次战斗，共三年，叛贼被讨平了，他两次升官后任检校司空，晋爵国公。
English: He fought more than a hundred battles, large and small, for a total of three years. The traitors were subdued, and he was twice promoted to the post of school inspector and promoted to the peerage.

古文：徙横海军，建言： 河朔能拒朝命者，盖刺史失权，镇将领军能作威福也。
现代文：后调到横海军，他上奏说： 河北藩镇能抗拒朝廷命令的原因，是刺史丧失了权力，各镇将领掌握了军队能作威作福。
English: After being transferred to Hengyang Navy, he reported: The reason why the Hebei hanzhen could resist the order of the imperial court was that Zhishi had lost power, and the generals of each town had mastered the army and could use their power to do good.

古文：使刺史得职，大帅虽有禄山、思明之奸，能据一州为叛哉？
现代文：如果刺史掌握了权力，将领即使有安禄山、史思明的野心，能够占据一州反叛吗？
English: If Zhi Shi seizes power, will the generals, even if they have the ambition of Anlu Shan and Shi Siming, be able to occupy a state of rebellion?

古文：臣所管三州，辄还刺史职，各主其兵。 
现代文：我管辖的三个州，就把权力还给了刺史，各自主管军队。 
English: The three states under my jurisdiction handed power back to the crown prince, each in charge of its own army.

古文：因请废景州。
现代文：他又请求撤销了景州。
English: He also requested the revocation of the Gyeongju Declaration.

古文：法制脩立，时以为宜。
现代文：他建立的制度，当时人都认为恰当。
English: He set up a system that everyone thought was appropriate at the time.

古文：讨王廷凑也，出屯深州，方朝廷号令乖迕，贼浸不制，重胤久不敢进。
现代文：讨伐王廷凑时，他率军驻扎在深州，当时国家指挥不当，叛贼逐渐无法制服，他长时间不敢进兵。
English: When he led the army stationed in Shenzhou to fight against Wang Tingpiao, the country was not properly commanded at that time, and the traitors were gradually unable to be subdued. He did not dare to enter the army for a long time.

古文：穆宗以为观望，诏杜叔良代之，以重胤为太子太保。
现代文：穆宗认为他持观望态度，下诏命杜叔良取代他，任命他为太子太保。
English: Mu Zong thought that he was holding a wait-and-see attitude, and ordered Du Shuliang to replace him, appointing him as the crown prince.

古文：长庆末，以检校司徒、同中书门下平章事为山南西道节度使。
现代文：长庆末年，他以检校司徒、同中书门下平章事身份任山南西道节度使。
English: At the end of the Changqing era, he was appointed as the festival envoy of Shannan West Road as the inspector of the school and the deputy secretary of the school.

古文：召至京师，改节天平军。
现代文：后召到京城，改任天平军节度使。
English: Afterward, he was summoned to Beijing and reassigned as the Tianping Army's envoy to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：文宗初，真拜司徒。
现代文：唐文宗初年，被封为司徒。
English: In the first year of Tang Wenzong, he was named a disciple.

古文：李同捷请袭父位，帝方务静安，授同捷兗海，以重胤耆将，兼节度沧景，以齐州隶军。
现代文：李同捷请求继承父亲的职位，皇帝正一心要安定，就任命李同捷为兖海节度使，因为乌重胤是老将，让他兼任沧景节度使，将齐州划归他管辖。
English: Li Tongjie requested to inherit his father's position. The emperor was only interested in stability, so he appointed Li Tongjie as the Bohai Festival Commissioner. Since Wu Chongyan was a veteran, he also appointed him as the vicissitudes Festival Commissioner, and placed Qi Prefecture under his jurisdiction.

古文：未几卒，年六十七，赠太尉，谥懿穆。
现代文：不久去世了，享年六十七岁，赠官为太尉，赐谥号叫懿穆。
English: He died not long after, at the age of sixty-seven. He was promoted to the rank of second lieutenant, and was given the posthumous title of Jimmu.

古文：重胤出行伍，善抚士，与下同甘苦。
现代文：他是下级军官出身，善于管理兵将，和部下同甘共苦。
English: He is a junior officer by birth, good at managing soldiers, and shares the hardships with his subordinates.

古文：蔡将李端降重胤，蔡人执其妻杀之，妻呼曰： 善事乌仆射！ 
现代文：蔡州将领李端投降了他，蔡州人抓住李端的妻子处死，他妻子喊道 ：好好侍奉乌仆射！ 
English: Caizhou general Li Duan surrendered to him, Caizhou people seized Li Duan's wife and put her to death. His wife shouted: "Serve Wu Fuxia well!"

古文：得士心大抵如此。
现代文：乌重胤受到兵将爱戴由此可见。
English: It can be seen from this that Ushigetane was loved by the generals.

古文：待官属有礼，当时有名士如温造、石洪皆在幕府。
现代文：他对待手下官员有礼貌，那时有名的人如温造、石洪都在他的府中供职。
English: He treated his subordinate officials with courtesy. At that time, famous people such as Wen Zou and Shi Hong served in his government.

古文：既殁，士二十余人刲股以祭。
现代文：他去世后，有二十多名兵将割下自己大腿上的肉来哀悼他。
English: After his death, more than two dozen soldiers would cut off their own thighs to mourn him.

古文：子汉弘嗣爵。
现代文：他儿子乌汉弘继承了他的爵位。
English: His son, Uhanhiro, inherited his title.

古文：居母丧，夺为左领军卫将军，固辞。帝嘉许之。
现代文：在为母亲服丧期间，被任命为左领军卫将军，他坚决推辞，皇帝赞扬了他。
English: During his mother's funeral, he was appointed General of the Left-Leading Guards, but he resolutely refused, and the emperor praised him.

古文：石洪者，字浚川，其先姓乌石兰，后独以石为氏。
现代文：石洪的字叫浚川，他祖先姓乌石兰，后来只用石做姓。
English: Shi Hong's Chinese name is Junchuan. His ancestor's surname was Wu Shilan. Later, he only used Shi as his surname.

古文：有至行，举明经，为黄州录事参军，罢归东都，十余年隐居不出。
现代文：他有很好的德行，考中了明经科，任黄州录事参军，他离职回洛阳，十几年当隐士不做官。
English: He had a good moral character. He passed the examination of the Ming Dynasty, and was allowed to join the army in Huangzhou. He left the army and returned to Luoyang. He was a hermit for more than ten years.

古文：公卿数荐，皆不答。
现代文：大官们多次推荐，他都不应允。
English: He did not agree to any of the many recommendations made by high-ranking officials.

古文：重胤镇河阳，求贤者以自重，或荐洪，重胤曰： 彼无求于人，其肯为我来邪？ 
现代文：乌重胤镇守河阳，访求贤才增加自己的名望，有人推荐了石洪，乌重胤说： 他对人无所求，是否肯来辅佐我呢？ 
English: Wu Chung-yin, the keeper of the town of Heyang, was looking for talents to increase his reputation. Someone recommended Shi Hong. Wu Chung-yin said, "He doesn't ask for anything from anyone. Would he be willing to help me?"

古文：乃具书币邀辟，洪亦谓重胤知己，故欣然戒行。
现代文：就写信送礼请他来任职，石洪也认为乌重胤是知心人，就高兴地举行仪式上路了。
English: He wrote a letter and sent a gift to invite him to serve, and Shi Hong also thought that Wu Chung-yin was a confidant, so he happily held a ceremony and went on his way.

古文：重胤喜其至，礼之。
现代文：乌重胤见他来了很高兴，对他以礼相待。
English: Wu Chongyan was very happy to see him and treated him with courtesy.

古文：后诏书召为昭应尉、集贤校理。
现代文：后来有诏书召他去任昭应县尉、集贤殿校理。
English: Later, there was an imperial edict calling him to serve as the Shaoying County Lieutenant and the principal of Jixian Palace.

古文：又有李珙者，世儒家，珙独尚材武，有崖岸。
现代文：又有个叫李珙的，家中世代都是儒生，他却单单喜欢军事，气概不凡。
English: There is also a man named Li Yan, whose family has been Confucian for generations, but he just loves the military and has an extraordinary spirit.

古文：尝至泽潞见李抱真，欲署牙将，闻其使酒，不用。
现代文：曾经到泽潞去见李抱真，李抱真本想任命他为牙将，听说他喝醉酒使性子，就没有任用。
English: I once went to Zeya to see Li Baozhen. Li Baozhen originally wanted to appoint him as a dentist, but I heard that he was drunk and had a bad temper, so he was not appointed.

古文：都将王虔休曰： 珙奇士，不能用，即杀之，无为它人得也。 
现代文：都将王虔休说： 李珙是有奇才的人，不能任用就杀了他，不要让别人得到。 
English: Wang Qianxiu said: Li Xuan is a man of great talent. If you can't appoint him, kill him. Don't let others get him.

古文：抱真不纳。
现代文：李抱真没采纳。
English: Li Baozhen did not adopt it.

古文：虔休代节度，引为将。
现代文：王虔休代理节度使时，推荐他任将领。
English: When Wang Qianxiu was acting as the chief delegate, he recommended him for the post of general.

古文：重胤禽从史，珙将救之，既闻谋出朝廷，乃止。
现代文：乌重胤抓住卢从史时，李珙准备去救他，后听说是朝廷计划的，就没去了。
English: When Wu Chung-yin caught Lu Zengshi, Li Yao was ready to save him, but after hearing that it was the imperial court's plan, he did not go.

古文：重胤爱其才，讨淮西也，表为行营都将。
现代文：乌重胤喜欢他的才干，讨伐淮西时，任命他为行营都将。
English: Wu Chung-yin liked his talent, and appointed him as the commander-in-chief during the campaign against Huaxi.

古文：终右武卫上将军。
现代文：后官当到右武卫上将军。
English: The second-ranking officer was promoted to the post of Ubu-e no shogun.

古文：王沛，许州许昌人。
现代文：王沛是许州许昌县人。
English: Wang Pei is a native of Xuchang County, Xuzhou.

古文：少勇决，为节度使上官涚所器，妻以女，署牙门将。
现代文：年轻时勇敢果断，受到节度使上官氵兑的器重，他把女儿嫁给了王沛，任命王沛为牙门将。
English: When he was young, he was brave and decisive. He was respected by his superiors for his self-restraint. He married his daughter to Wang Pei and appointed Wang Pei as the goalkeeper.

古文：涚卒，它婿田偁胁涚子袭领其军，谋杀监军。
现代文：他去世后，另一个女婿田翶胁迫他的儿子要求接管他的军队，想杀死监军。
English: After his death, another son-in-law, Tian Xuan, coerced his son to take over his army and wanted to kill the overseer.

古文：沛知其计，密告之，支党悉禽。
现代文：王沛知道了他们的计谋，秘密告发了，他们的同伙都被抓获了。
English: Wang Pei learned of their plot and revealed the secret, and their accomplices were all arrested.

古文：德宗嘉美，即拜行军司马。
现代文：德宗赞赏他，立即任命他为行军司马。
English: Emperor Dezong appreciated him and immediately appointed him as a marching steed.

古文：而刘昌裔领节度，奏沛为监察御史，有诏护涚丧还京师。
现代文：刘昌裔任节度使，上报他任监察御史，皇帝下诏命他护送上官氵兑的灵柩回京城。
English: Liu Changxiong was appointed as the festival envoy, reported that he was appointed as the inspector of imperial history, and the emperor ordered him to escort the coffin of Shangguan Xiangwei back to Beijing.

古文：帝召见叹息，以为功异等，嫌昌裔所请薄，谓沛曰： 吾意殊未厌，尔归矣，方使别奏。 
现代文：皇帝召见时感到惋惜，认为他的功勋突出，嫌刘昌裔请求任命的官小了，对王沛说： 我认为很不够，你回去吧，我将叫他另外奏报。 
English: When he was summoned by the emperor, he felt regret, thinking that his merits were outstanding, and that the official whom Liu Changxiong requested to be appointed was too small. He said to Wang Pei: I think it is not enough, you can go back, I will ask him to submit another report.

古文：沛未至许，拜兼御史中丞。
现代文：王沛还没回到许州，被封兼任御史中丞。
English: Wang Pei had not yet returned to Huzhou when he was appointed to the post of Vice-Minister of History.

古文：李光颜讨吴元济，奇沛风概，署行营兵马使，使将劲兵别屯，数破贼有功。
现代文：李光颜讨伐吴元济时，赞赏他的节操，任命他为行营兵马使，派他率领精兵单独扎营，多次打败敌人建功。
English: When Li Guangyan fought against Wu Yuanji, he appreciated his self-restraint. He appointed him as a field marshal and sent him to lead the elite soldiers to camp alone. He repeatedly defeated the enemy and made great achievements.

古文：时诏书趣战，诸将观望，不敢度溵以壁。
现代文：当时皇帝下令催促进攻，众将持观望态度，不敢渡过氵殷河扎营。
English: At that time, the emperor ordered to speed up the offensive, the general public will hold a wait-and-see attitude, do not dare to cross the Yuyin River to camp.

古文：沛引兵五千夜济合流，扼贼冲，遂城以居。
现代文：王沛率兵五千名夜晚在合流渡过了氵殷河，占据叛军要地，并筑城据守。
English: Wang Pei led five thousand soldiers to cross the Suyin River in the evening at the confluence, occupy the rebel key areas, and build a city to defend.

古文：于是河阳、宣武、太原、魏博等军继度，围郾城。
现代文：这时河阳、宣武、太原、魏博等镇的军队才接着渡河，包围了郾城。
English: At this time, the armies of Kheyang, Xuanwu, Taiyuan, Weibo and other towns continued to cross the river and surrounded Lucheng.

古文：沛先结垒与贼对，蔡将邓怀金遂降。
现代文：王沛首先筑营垒和叛军对抗，蔡州将领邓怀金就投降了。
English: Wang Pei first built a camp and confronted the rebels, and Caizhou General Deng Huijin surrendered.

古文：蔡平，加兼大夫。
现代文：蔡州平定后，加封他兼任御史大夫。
English: After the pacification of Caizhou, he was given the additional post of Imperial Historian.

古文：复从光颜定淄青。
现代文：他后来又跟随李光颜平定了淄青。
English: He later followed Li Guangyan to pacify the Qing Dynasty.

古文：及光彦镇邠，诏分许兵往戍，沛又为都将，救盐州，败吐蕃，以功擢宁州刺史。
现代文：到李光颜镇守宁时，有诏命派出部分许州军队去守卫，王沛又任都将。他曾援救过盐州，打败了吐蕃，因功升任宁州刺史。
English: When Li Guangyan came to guard Ning, he was ordered by the emperor to send a part of the Xuzhou army to guard, and Wang Pei was appointed as the commander. He had rescued Yanzhou, defeated Tubo, and was promoted to the post of Ningzhou history.

古文：徙陈州。
现代文：后调任陈州刺史。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Chenzhou chief historian.

古文：李騕之乱，以忠武节度副使率师讨騕，加检校右散骑常侍，进拜兗海沂密节度使。
现代文：李宀介反叛时，他以忠武节度副使身份率军讨伐，后升任检校右散骑常侍，兖、海、沂、密节度使。
English: When Li Xunkai rebelled, he led the army in a crusade as the vice-envoy of Zhongwu Jiedu, and later he was promoted to the attendant of the right cavalry of the inspection school, and the envoy of Jiedu, Hai, Jiedu and Mi.

古文：是时新建府，俗犷骜，沛明示法制，搜阅以时，军政大治。
现代文：当时刚设节度府，当地人很蛮横，王沛公开宣布法规制度，及时选拔任命官员，军队和地方治理得很好。
English: At that time, the Sedo Prefecture had just been established, the local people were very rude, Wang Pei publicly announced the legal system, officials were selected and appointed in a timely manner, and the army and local government were well managed.

古文：以检校工部尚书徙忠武。
现代文：后调任检校工部尚书、忠武节度使。
English: Later, he was transferred to the inspection department of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.

古文：太和元年卒，赠尚书右仆射。
现代文：他大和元年去世，赠官为尚书右仆射。
English: He died in the first year of the Yamato era, and the bestowed post was given to his right-hand man, Sho Sho.

古文：子逢，从父征伐，累功署忠武都知兵马使。
现代文：王沛的儿子王逢，跟随父亲征战，积累战功任忠武军都知兵马使。
English: Wang Pei's son, Wang Feng, followed his father into the war, accumulating military merit and serving as a loyal military attaché to the capital.

古文：太和中，入为诸卫将军。
现代文：大和年间，进京任诸卫将军。
English: During the Yamato era, he entered the capital as the general of the Imperial Guards.

古文：从刘沔、石雄破回鹘于天德，有士二千人未尝战，欲冒赏赐，逢不与。
现代文：他跟随刘沔、石雄在天德打败回纥军时，有两千名士兵没参战，想冒功领赏。
English: He followed Liu Wei and Shi Xiong in Tiande to defeat the Hui army, when there were two thousand soldiers who did not participate in the war and wanted to receive the reward.

古文：或为请之，答曰： 士奋死取赏，若无功而赏，何哉？ 
现代文：王逢不给赏，有人为他们求情，他回答说： 士兵拼死作战才有赏，如没有功劳就给赏，那是为什么？ 
English: Wang Feng did not give a reward, someone pleaded for them, he replied: Soldiers fight to the death only to be rewarded, if there is no merit to be rewarded, why is that?

古文：武宗以逢用法严，使宰相李德裕让之，逢曰： 战者，前踏白刃，不以法，人孰用命？ 
现代文：武宗认为王逢执法太严，派宰相李德裕去责备他，他说： 战士在阵前冒着生命危险，不靠法令，谁肯拼命？ 
English: Wu Zong thought that Wang Feng's enforcement of the law was too strict, and sent Prime Minister Li Deyu to reproach him. He said: Soldiers risk their lives before the battle, do not rely on laws and regulations, who is willing to fight?

古文：讨刘稹也，为太原道行营将，领陈许兵七千屯翼城。
现代文：讨伐刘稹时，他任太原道行营将，率领陈许镇七千士兵驻守翼城。
English: During the campaign against Liu Bei, he served as the commander of the Taiyuan Road Campaign, leading seven thousand soldiers from Chen Xu Town to garrison the Wing City.

古文：事败，诏以元卿尝毁家归忠，全其宗，杖死延宗于京兆府，赐还田产。
现代文：刘稹被讨平后，他升任检校右散骑常侍。据说后来也升任忠武节度使。
English: After Liu Bei was subdued, he was promoted to the position of the attendant of the right sanshaku of the inspection school. It is said that he was later promoted to the position of the attendant of the Zhongwu Festival.

古文：曹华，宋州楚丘人。
现代文：曹华是宋州楚丘县人。
English: Cao Hua is a native of Chuqiu County, Songzhou.

古文：始从宣武军。缚乱将李乃送阙下，节度使董晋署为牙将。
现代文：开始在宣武军从军，将叛乱将领李捆起来送到了京城，节度使董晋任命他为牙将。
English: He began to serve in the Xuanwu army, bundled up the rebel general Li and sent him to the capital, and the festival made Dong Jin appoint him as the commander.

古文：后避仇奔东都，会吴少诚叛，留守王翃署华襄城戍将。
现代文：他后来躲避仇人逃到洛阳，遇到吴少诚反叛，留守王罖任命他为襄城守将。
English: Later, he fled to Luoyang to avoid the enemy, encountered Wu Shaocheng's rebellion, and left-behind Wang Qian appointed him as the commander of Xiangcheng.

古文：华浚隍埤堞，日与贼搏，数禽馘，贼惮之。
现代文：他修理城墙和护城河，每天和叛军战斗，多次俘获敌人，叛军都害怕他。
English: He repaired the walls and the moat, fought the rebels every day, captured many enemies, and the rebels were afraid of him.

古文：宪宗初，累拜检校右散骑常侍，召至京师，赐矛甲缯锦，还屯。
现代文：宪宗初年，他多次升官后任检校右散骑常侍。皇帝把他召到京城，赏给他兵器铠甲和绸缎后，回到了驻地。
English: In the first year of Emperor Gensong's reign, he was promoted several times and became a regular attendant of the imperial inspection. The emperor summoned him to the capital, presented him with armor and armor, and then returned to his residence.

古文：拜宁州刺史，未行，属吴元济不受命，诏河阳怀汝节度使乌重胤讨之，重胤请华自副。
现代文：后任宁州刺史，还没上任，遇上吴元济不听命令，有诏命河阳、怀汝节度使乌重胤讨伐他，乌重胤要求让曹华做他的副手。
English: Later, when Wu Yuanji, who had not yet taken office, encountered Wu Yuanji, who did not listen to orders, Wu Chongyan was ordered by the Emperor to fight him, and Wu Chongyan asked Cao Hua to be his deputy.

古文：战青陵城，贼大奔，拔凌云栅，以功封陈留郡王。
现代文：他在青陵城作战，把叛军打得大败，又攻占了凌云栅。因功被封为陈留郡王。
English: He fought in Qingling City, defeated the rebels, and captured Lingyunzha. He was awarded the title of King of Chenliu County for his achievements.

古文：蔡平，进棣州刺史。
现代文：蔡州被讨平后，他升任捷州刺史。
English: After Caizhou was leveled, he was promoted to the post of Cizhou chief historian.

古文：州与郓比，时贼略定滴河，华遽逐贼，斩二千级，复其县。
现代文：辖境和淄青镇相邻，当时叛军攻占了滴河，曹华突然进攻叛军，杀头两千颗，收复了县城。
English: At that time, when the rebels captured Didihe, Cao Hua suddenly attacked the rebels, killed two thousand, and recovered the county seat.

古文：又募群盗可用者，贷死，补屯卒，使据孔道。
现代文：他又招募能作战的盗寇，赦免他们的死罪，补充到驻军中，派他们据守要道。
English: He also recruited thieves and robbers who could fight, pardoned their capital crimes, added them to the garrison, and sent them to guard the important roads.

古文：贼至，辄击却之，不敢北。
现代文：叛军来了，就被打败了，因此不敢北进。
English: When the rebels came, they were defeated, so they did not dare to go north.

古文：擢横海节度副使。
现代文：他后来升任横海节度副使。
English: He was later promoted to Vice-Minister of the Henghai Festival.

古文：时朝廷披郓为三镇。
现代文：当时国家将淄青分为三镇。
English: At that time, the state divided Bitumen into three towns.

古文：其明年，兗海军乱，杀观察使王遂，诏华往代。
现代文：第二年，兖海军发生骚乱，杀死了观察使王遂，有诏命曹华去接任职务。
English: The following year, a riot broke out in the Navy of the Republic of Yunnan, and Wang Sui, an observer, was killed. Cao Hua was ordered to take over the post.

古文：视事三日，合军大飨，幕甲士于庑，酒中，令曰： 天子以郓人参别而戍，有转徒劳，欲厚赏之。请郓人右，州兵左。 
现代文：他上任后第三天，召集全军会餐，将武装士兵藏在走廊帷幕后。酒宴中间，他下令说： 皇上因郓州人分到三镇防守，调动辛苦，想多给赏赐，请郓州军人站到右边，本地军人站到左边。 
English: On the third day after he took office, he convened a banquet for the whole army and hid the armed soldiers behind the curtain of the corridor. In the middle of the banquet, he ordered: The emperor, because the Zhangzhou people were divided into three towns for defense, mobilized hard, and wanted to give more rewards, asked the Zhangzhou soldiers to stand on the right and the local soldiers to stand on the left.

古文：既而出州兵，乃阖门大言曰： 天子有命，诛杀帅者！ 
现代文：他们分开后，他就叫本地军人出去，接着关上门大声说： 皇上有令，处死杀害主帅的人。 
English: When they parted, he ordered the local soldiers out, then shut the door and shouted: "The emperor has ordered the execution of the man who killed the commander."

古文：甲起于幕，环之。
现代文：武装士兵从帷幕后出来，包围了他们。
English: Armed soldiers emerged from behind a curtain and surrounded them.

古文：凡斩千二百人，血流殷渠，赤氛冒门高丈余。
现代文：共杀死了一千二百人，血流满了沟渠，血雾从门内冒出来有一丈多高。
English: A total of twelve hundred people were killed, blood flowed over the ditches, and the blood mist rising from inside the gate was as high as a kite.

古文：海、沂之人，重足屏息。
现代文：海州、沂州的人，都害怕了。
English: People in Haizhou and Zhangzhou are scared.

古文：华恶沂地褊，请治兗，许之。
现代文：曹华不喜欢偏远的沂州，请求将治所移到兖州，皇帝答应了他。
English: Cao Hua did not like the remote Bozhou and requested to move the administrative center to Bozhou. The emperor agreed.

古文：自李正己盗，齐、鲁俗益污骜，华下令曰： 邹、鲁礼义乡，不可忘本。 
现代文：自从李正己占据淄青，当地风俗渐渐邪恶横暴，曹华下令说 ：邹、鲁是礼义之乡，不能忘记了传统。 
English: Since Li Zhengyi occupied Aoxing, the local customs have gradually become evil and violent. Cao Hua ordered: Shao and Lu are the hometown of etiquette and politeness, and we must not forget the tradition.

古文：乃身见儒士，春秋祀孔子祠，立学官讲诵，斥家赀佐赡给，人乃知教，成就诸生，仕诸朝。
现代文：就亲自拜见儒家学者，春秋两季去祭祀孔子庙，设立官学讲学，拿出家财帮助供给他们，人们这才遵行礼教了。
English: He personally visited Confucian scholars, went to the Confucius Temple in the spring and autumn, set up lectures on official learning, and took out family money to help them. People only followed the rituals.

古文：镇人害田弘正，华亟请以本军进讨，不从。
现代文：他推荐有学问的儒生，使他们到朝廷任职。镇州人杀死了田弘正，曹华立即请求率自己的军队去讨伐，没有批准。
English: He recommended learned Confucian scholars to serve in the imperial court. When the people of Zhenzhou killed Tian Hongzheng, Cao Hua immediately requested permission to lead his own army to fight.

古文：进华检校工部尚书，就充节度使。
现代文：后提升他任检校工部尚书，辖境节度使。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of inspector of the school inspection department, and the jurisdiction of the festival.

古文：李騕叛，以兵取宋州。华不待命，以兵逆击，破之。
现代文：李宀介反叛，率兵进攻宋州，曹华不等诏令下达，派兵迎击，打败了叛军。
English: Li Xunjie rebelled and led the troops to attack Songzhou. Cao Hua did not wait for the imperial edict to be issued, he sent troops to meet the attack and defeated the rebels.

古文：騕平，检校尚书右仆射，徙镇义成军。
现代文：李宀介被讨平，他升任检校尚书右仆射。后调任义成军节度使。
English: Li Jiankui was defeated, and he was promoted to the post of inspector of schools, and later transferred to the post of military commander of the Yicheng Army.

古文：盗杀商贾，吏捕得，乃华嬖人。
现代文：有人杀死商人，官吏抓获了，竟是曹华宠爱的人。
English: A businessman was killed, an official was captured, and it turned out to be Cao Hua's favorite.

古文：华怒，断其颈以祭死者。
现代文：曹华发怒了，把他杀死去祭祀商人。
English: Cao Hua got angry and killed the sacrificial merchant.

古文：以刑部尚书召，辞疾，拜太子少傅。
现代文：曹华后来去世了，享年六十九岁，赠官左仆射。
English: Cao Hua later passed away at the age of sixty-nine, and was succeeded by his right-hand man.

古文：不阅月，复诏节度忠武，卒于镇，赠司空。瑀宽和，居官无赫然誉，所至称治，士人怀之。
现代文：曹华虽然是军人出身，但举动遵守礼制，尊重士人，不因为地位高而对人傲慢，甚至对奴仆也诚实讲信用，人们都认为难能可贵。
English: Although Cao Hua is from the military, his behavior of observing etiquette, respecting scholars, not being arrogant to people because of his high status, and even being honest and trustworthy to servants are all considered valuable.

古文：刘沔，字子汪，徐州彭城人。
现代文：刘沔的字叫子汪，徐州彭城县人。
English: Liu Wei's character is called Zi Wang. He is from Pengcheng County, Xuzhou.

古文：父廷珍，以羽林军扈德宗奉天，以战功官左骁卫大将军、东阳郡王。
现代文：他父亲刘廷珍，率羽林军保护德宗出逃奉天，因战功封左骁卫大将军、东阳郡王。
English: His father, Liu Tingzhen, led the Yulin Army to protect Dezong from fleeing to Fengtian, and was awarded the title of General of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards and the King of Dongyang County.

古文：沔少孤，客振武，节度使范希朝署牙将。
现代文：刘沔年幼时是孤儿，客居振武军，节度使范希朝任命他为牙将。
English: When Liu Ye was a child, he was an orphan and lived as a guest of the Zhenwu army. The festival made Fan Xichang appoint him as the commander of the imperial army.

古文：军中大会，沔捉刀立堂下，希朝奇之，召谓曰： 后日必处吾坐。 
现代文：军队中大聚会时，他提着刀站在大堂下面，范希朝认为他是奇才，召他来并对他说： 你今后一定会担任我这官职。 
English: During a large gathering in the army, he stood in the hall with a knife. Fan Xichang thought he was a genius, called him and said to him: You will definitely hold my position in the future.

古文：希朝卒，入为神策将。
现代文：范希朝去世了，他进京任神策军将领。
English: Fan Xichang passed away, and he went to Beijing to serve as the general of the Shen Zhe Army.

古文：太和末，迁累大将军，擢泾原节度使，徙振武。
现代文：大和末年，多次升官后任大将军，又升任泾原节度使，后调到振武军。
English: At the end of the Yamato era, he was promoted several times and later became a general. He was also promoted to the position of the chief of staff of the Edo bakufu, and later transferred to the Shinshu army.

古文：开成三年，突厥劫营田，沔发吐浑、契苾、沙陀部万人击之，贼一辔无返者，悉颁所获马羊于战卒，筑都护府西北四垒。
现代文：开成三年，突厥抢劫屯田区，他征调吐谷浑、契必艹、沙陀部族一万军队进攻他们，使他们没有一名骑兵生还。他把缴获的马和羊都发给作战的士兵，在都护府西北筑了四座城堡。
English: At the beginning of the third year, the Turks plundered the Tonden District, and he sent ten thousand troops from the Tukuhun, Qibao, and Shado tribes to attack them, so that none of their cavalry survived. He sent all the captured horses and sheep to the soldiers in battle, and built four castles in the northwest of the capital.

古文：进检校户部尚书。
现代文：因功升任检校户部尚书。
English: He was promoted to the post of school inspector due to his merits.

古文：武宗立，迁检校尚书左仆射。
现代文：唐武宗登基，他升任检校尚书左仆射。
English: Tang Wuzong ascended to the throne, and he was promoted to the post of inspector of schools.

古文：回鹘寇天德，诏以兵据云伽关，虏引去。
现代文：回纥入侵天德军，有诏命他率兵据守云伽关，回纥就退兵了。
English: When the German army invaded Yunnan, he was ordered by the emperor to lead his soldiers to guard Yungaguan. He then withdrew.

古文：会昌二年，又掠太原、振武，天子使兵部郎中李拭调兵食，因视诸将能否，拭独称沔，乃拜河东节度兼招抚回鹘使，进屯雁门关。
现代文：会昌二年，回纥又抢劫太原和振武军，皇帝派兵部郎中李拭调集军队和粮草，并观察众将有无才能，李拭单单称赞刘沔，于是任命他为河东节度使兼招抚回纥使，进驻雁门关。
English: In the second year of Huichang, the Hui and Qin armies again plundered Taiyuan and Zhenwu, and the emperor sent Li Wu, a member of the military department, to mobilize troops and grain and grass, and observe whether the people had talent or not. Li Wu single-handedly praised Liu Bei, and then appointed him as the Hedong Festival envoy and the recruitment of Hui and Qin envoys, stationed in Ganmen Pass.

古文：虏寇云州，沔击之，斩七裨将，败其众。
现代文：回纥进犯云州，刘沔进攻他们，杀死了回纥七名偏将，打败了他们的军队。
English: When the Uyghurs invaded Yunnan, Liu Bei attacked them, killed seven Uyghur generals and defeated their army.

古文：以还太和公主功，加检校司空。
现代文：因为夺回公主的功劳，升任检校司空。
English: For his efforts in recapturing the princess, he was promoted to school inspector.

古文：议者恨其薄，又进金紫光禄大夫，赐一子官。
现代文：有议论的人认为酬劳不够，又升任金紫光禄大夫，并任命他一个儿子当官。
English: Some people thought that the remuneration was not enough, and he was promoted to Dr. Jin Ziguanglu and appointed one of his sons as an official.

古文：虏残众走，诏沔追北，仍录李靖赐之。
现代文：回纥残兵逃跑了，有诏命他追赶，又按李靖讨平颉利可汗的规格赏赐他。
English: The remnants of the Uighur soldiers fled, and he was ordered by the emperor to pursue them, and he was rewarded according to the specifications of Li Jing to level the Uighur Khan.

古文：军还，次代州，归义军降虏三千，使隶食诸道，不受诏，据滹沱河叛，沔悉禽诛之。
现代文：军队归来，驻扎在代州时，归义军有三千投降的异族人，命他们分别受各道管辖，他们不服从命令，占据滹沱河反叛，刘沔把他们都抓住杀了。
English: When the army returned and was stationed in Daizhou, there were three thousand surrendered foreigners in the Guiyi army. They were ordered to be governed separately by each province. They disobeyed orders, occupied the Minhe River and rebelled. Liu Bei caught and killed them all.

古文：刘稹阻命，诏沔南讨，屯榆社。
现代文：刘稹不服从命令，有诏命刘沔到南边去讨伐，驻扎在榆社。
English: Liu Bei disobeyed the order, and Liu Bei was ordered by the emperor to go to the south to fight, and he was stationed in Shensha.

古文：沔素与张仲武不协，时方追幽州兵，故徙义成。
现代文：刘沔一向和张仲武不合，当时正催促幽州出兵，就把刘沔调到义成军。
English: Liu Bei had always been at odds with Zhang Zhongwu. At that time, he was urging Yuzhou to send troops, so he transferred Liu Bei to the Yicheng Army.

古文：会王宰逗留，宰相李德裕表沔镇河阳，以滑兵二千壁万善，居宰肘腋下，激之俾出军。
现代文：遇上王宰不进兵，宰相李德裕上奏命刘沔镇守河阳，派两千滑州兵在万善扎营，呆在王宰眼皮下，促使王宰出兵。
English: When Wang Zai did not march into the army, the Prime Minister Li Deyu sent an order to Liu Yanzhen to guard Heyang, and sent two thousand soldiers to camp in Wanshan, stay under Wang Zai's eyelids, and urge Wang Zai to send troops.

古文：稹平，进检校司徒，徙忠武节度使。
现代文：刘稹被讨平后，他升任检校司徒，调任忠武节度使。
English: After Liu Bei was subdued, he was promoted to the post of school inspector and transferred to the post of loyal military commander.

古文：以病改太子少保，不任谒，拜太子太傅致仕。
现代文：后因病改任太子少保，因不能上朝，改任太子太傅退休。
English: Later, due to illness, he was reassigned to the position of the Crown Prince's Junior Bodyguard. Since he was unable to ascend to the throne, he was reassigned to the position of the Crown Prince's Senior Bodyguard and retired.

古文：卒，年六十五，赠司徒。
现代文：后来去世了，享年六十五岁，赠官为司徒。
English: Later, he died at the age of sixty-five, and was given the title of sōtō.

古文：石雄，徐州人，系寒，不知其先所来。
现代文：石雄是徐州人，家族贫寒，不知道祖先从哪里迁来的。
English: Shi Xiong is from Xuzhou, his family is poor, and he doesn't know where his ancestors came from.

古文：少为牙校，敢毅善战，气盖军中。
现代文：他年轻时任牙校，勇敢坚毅善于作战，在军中有威名。
English: He was a dentist when he was young, brave and good at fighting, and had a prestigious name in the army.

古文：王智兴讨李同捷，收棣州，使雄先驱度河，鼓行无前。
现代文：王智兴讨伐李同捷，收复棣州，派石雄领先渡过黄河，所向披靡。
English: Wang Zhixing fought against Li Tongjie, recovered Zhangzhou, and sent Shi Xiong to cross the Yellow River ahead of him.

古文：初，徐军恶智兴苛酷，谋逐之而立雄。
现代文：先前，徐州军队讨厌王智兴苛刻残酷，想赶走他拥立石雄。
English: Previously, the Xuzhou army hated Wang Zhixing's harsh and cruel, and wanted to drive him away.

古文：智兴惧变，因立功奏除州刺史，诏以为壁州刺史。
现代文：王智兴害怕出乱子，趁他立了功请求任命他为州刺史。有诏任命他为壁州刺史。
English: Wang Zhixing was afraid of causing trouble, so he took advantage of his achievements to request that he be appointed as a state magistrate. An edict appointed him as a state magistrate.

古文：智兴由是杀雄素所善百余人，诬雄阴结士摇乱，请以军法论。
现代文：王智兴此后杀死了和石雄要好的一百多人，又诬蔑石雄私下结党谋反，请求按军法治罪。
English: After that, Wang Zhixing killed more than a hundred people who were friendly with Shi Xiong, and also slandered Shi Xiong for secretly forming a party and plotting a rebellion, and requested that the crime be punished according to the military law.

古文：文宗素知其能，不杀，流白州。
现代文：文宗平素知道他有才能，没杀他，把他流放到白州。
English: Wen Zong always knew that he had talent. He did not kill him, but exiled him to Baizhou.

古文：徙为陈州长史。
现代文：后升任陈州长史。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of Chen Zongshi.

古文：党项扰河西，召雄隶振武刘沔军，破羌有劳，帝难智兴，久不擢。
现代文：党项羌侵扰河西，就把石雄召去隶属于振武军刘沔的部队，打败敌军有功劳，皇帝碍着王智兴的面子，长期没有提升。
English: When the party invaded Hexi, Shi Xiong was summoned to join Liu Bei's troops of the Zhenwu Army. He had made great contributions to defeating the enemy army. The emperor had obstructed Wang Zhixing's face, and he had not been promoted for a long time.

古文：会昌初，回鹘入寇，连年掠云、朔，牙五原塞下。
现代文：会昌初年，回纥入侵，连续几年掳掠云、朔两州，大营设在五原寨下边。
English: In the first year of Huichang, Huizhou invaded and plundered Yunnan and Xinjiang for several years in a row. The large camp was set up at the bottom of Wuhuan Village.

古文：诏雄为天德防御副使，兼朔州刺史，佐刘沔屯云州。
现代文：有诏任命石雄为天德军防御副使，兼任朔州刺史，辅佐刘沔驻守云州。
English: Shi Xiong was appointed deputy defense envoy of the German army, concurrently serving as the governor of Shuozhou, and Liu Ye stationed in Yunnan.

古文：沔召雄谋曰： 虏离散，当扫除久矣。
现代文：刘沔把石雄召去谋划说： 敌人分裂了，早就该消灭掉。
English: Liu Bei called Shi Xiong to make a plan and said, "The enemy is divided and should have been eliminated long ago.

古文：国家以公主故，不欲亟攻。
现代文：皇上因为嫁出公主的原因，不想急着攻打。
English: The Emperor did not want to rush into battle because he had married off the princess.

古文：我若径趋其牙，彼不及备，必弃公主走，我当迎主归。
现代文：我们如果直捣他的大营，他们没有防备，必定会丢下公主逃跑，我们就迎接公主回国。
English: If we attack his camp directly, they will not be able to defend themselves, they will certainly abandon the princess and flee, and we will welcome the princess back to the country.

古文：有如不捷，吾则死之。 雄曰： 诺。 
现代文：如果不成功，我们就杀身成仁。 石雄说 ：遵命。 
English: If it doesn't work out, we'll kill ourselves.Ishio said, "Follow my orders."

古文：即选沙陀李国昌及契苾、拓拔杂虏三千骑，夜发马邑，旦登振武城望之，见罽车十余乘，从者硃碧衣，谍者曰： 公主帐也。 
现代文：马上挑选沙陀李国昌和契必艹、拓跋等族三千名骑兵，夜晚从马邑出发，早晨登上振武城望敌营，看见十几乘毡车，随从们穿着红绿衣裳，探子说： 这是公主的营帐。 
English: He immediately selected three thousand cavalrymen from the Sado Li Guochang, Che Bibi, Tuoba and other ethnic groups. He set out from Maiyi in the evening and boarded the Zhenwu Castle in the morning to watch the enemy camp. He saw more than a dozen armored cars, and the attendants were wearing red and green clothes. The scout said: This is the camp of the princess.

古文：雄潜使喻之曰： 天子取公主，兵合，第无动。 
现代文：石雄暗暗派人告诉他说： 皇帝要夺回公主，军队交战时，不要乱跑。 
English: Shi Xiong secretly sent someone to tell him: The emperor wants to recapture the princess. When the army is at war, don't run around.

古文：雄穴城夜出，纵牛马鼓噪，直捣乌介帐。
现代文：石雄在城墙上挖洞夜晚杀出，放出牛马击鼓呐喊，直扑乌介可汗的营帐。
English: Shi Xiong dug a hole in the city wall and went out at night, releasing horses and oxen to beat drums and shout, directly attacking the camp of Wuxi Khan.

古文：可汗大骇，单骑走，追至杀胡山，斩首万级，获马牛羊不赀，迎公主还。
现代文：可汗大惊，独自骑马逃跑，唐军追到杀胡山，杀头一万颗，缴获马牛不计其数，迎回了公主。
English: The khan was so shocked that he fled on horseback alone. The Tang army chased him to Zhihushan, killed ten thousand heads, captured countless horses and cattle, and welcomed back the princess.

古文：进丰州防御使。
现代文：因功被提升为丰州防御使。
English: For his service, he was promoted to Fuzhou Defense Envoy.

古文：武宁李彦佐讨刘稹逗留，以雄为晋绛行营诸军副使，助彦佐。
现代文：武宁节度使李彦佐讨伐刘稹，不肯进兵，故又任命石雄为晋绛行营诸军副使，帮助李彦佐。
English: Wu Ning sent Li Yanzao to fight Liu Bei, but he refused to join the army. Therefore, he appointed Shi Xiong as the deputy envoy of the troops marching to Jinbei to help Li Yanzao.

古文：是时，王宰屯万善，刘沔屯石会关，顾望莫先进。
现代文：当时，王宰驻扎在万善，刘沔驻扎在石会关，都观望不肯先进军。
English: At that time, Wang Zai was stationed in Wanshan, and Liu Ye was stationed in Shikai Pass. Both of them were unwilling to join the advanced army.

古文：雄受命，即勒兵越乌岭，破贼五壁，斩获千计，贼大震。
现代文：石雄接受了任命，立刻率军越过乌岭，攻破了叛军五座营垒，杀头上千颗，叛军大惊。
English: Shi Xiong accepted the appointment, immediately led the army across the Wuling Mountains, broke through the rebels' five camps, killed a thousand, and the rebels were shocked.

古文：雄临财廉，每朝廷赐与，辄置军门，自取一匹缣，余悉分士伍，由是众感发，无不奋。
现代文：石雄对财物很清廉，每次皇帝赏赐的东西，他都放在营帐门口，自己拿一匹绢，其余的部分分给兵将，因此兵将感动，没有不奋勇杀敌的。
English: Shi Xiong was very honest about his wealth. Every time the emperor gave him something, he put it at the gate of the camp, took a donkey himself, and gave the rest of it to the soldiers. As a result, the soldiers were moved and did not hesitate to kill the enemy.

古文：武宗喜曰： 今将帅义而勇罕雄比者。 
现代文：武宗高兴地说 ：现在将领在明大义又勇敢方面很少有和石雄一样的。 
English: Takemune said happily, "Nowadays, few generals are as righteous and brave as Ishio."

古文：就拜行营节度使，代彦佐。徙河中。
现代文：立即任命他为行营节度使，取代李彦佐，调任河中。
English: He was immediately appointed as the commander-in-chief, replacing Li Yanzo, and transferred to the middle of the river.

古文：稹危蹙，其大将郭谊密献款，请斩稹首自归。
现代文：刘稹顶不住了，他的大将郭谊秘密约降，请求割下刘稹的头起义投诚。
English: Liu Xuan could not stand it any longer. His general, Guo Yi, secretly agreed to abdicate and requested that Liu Xuan's head be cut off.

古文：众疑其诈，雄大言曰： 稹之叛，谊为谋主。
现代文：大家疑心他是诈降，石雄毫无疑虑地说： 刘稹反叛，郭谊是主要策划者。
English: Everyone suspected that he was a fraud, but Shi Xiong said without hesitation: Liu Bei rebelled, and Guo Yi was the main planner.

古文：今欲杀稹，乃谊自谋，又何疑？ 
现代文：现想杀刘稹，是他为自己考虑，还怀疑什么？ 
English: Now he wants to kill Liu Ye, is he thinking about himself, what else does he suspect?

古文：雄以七千人径薄潞，受谊降。
现代文：石雄率七千兵直奔潞州，接受郭谊投降。
English: Shi Xiong led seven thousand soldiers straight to Ganzhou to accept Guo Yi's surrender.

古文：进检校兵部尚书，徙河阳。
现代文：因功升任检校兵部尚书，调任河阳。
English: For his merits, he was promoted to the post of inspector of the school's military department, and transferred to Heyang.

古文：初，雄讨稹，水次见白鹭，谓众曰： 使吾射中其目，当成功。 
现代文：当初，石雄去讨伐刘稹时，在水边看见一只白鹭，对大家说 ：如果我射中它的眼睛，讨伐就会立功。 
English: At first, when Shi Xiong went to fight Liu Xuan, he saw an egret on the water's edge and said to everyone, "If I shoot it in the eye, I'll get credit for the fight."

古文：一发如言。
现代文：一箭就射中了。
English: One of the arrows went in.

古文：帝闻，下诏褒美。
现代文：皇帝听说后，颁诏书褒奖赞美。
English: After the emperor heard about it, he issued an edict of commendation and praise.

古文：宣宗立，徙镇凤翔。
现代文：宣宗即位，调他镇守凤翔。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, he transferred Fengxiang, the town warden.

古文：雄素为李德裕识拔。
现代文：石雄一贯受李德裕赏识提拔。
English: Shi Xiong has always been praised and promoted by Li Deyu.

古文：王宰者，智兴子，于雄故有隙。
现代文：王宰是王智兴的儿子，所以对石雄有成见。
English: Wang Zai is the son of Wang Zhixing, so he is prejudiced against Shi Xiong.

古文：潞之役，雄功最多，宰恶之，数欲沮陷。
现代文：潞州平叛，石雄的功劳最大，王宰厌恶他，多次想贬低陷害他。
English: In suppressing the rebellion in Zhangzhou, Shi Xiong's contribution was the greatest. Wang Zai detested him and tried to demean and frame him many times.

古文：会德裕罢宰相，因代归。
现代文：遇上李德裕被罢相，石雄被取代回京。
English: When Li Deyu was dismissed from his post, Shi Xiong was replaced and returned to Beijing.

古文：白敏中猥曰： 黑山、天井功，所酬已厌。 
现代文：白敏中献媚说： 黑山、天井关的功劳，酬劳够多了。 
English: Bai Minzhong said flatteringly: "Montenegro, the credit of the ceiling pass, the reward is enough."

古文：拜神武统军。
现代文：石雄被任命为神武统军。
English: Shi Xiong was appointed as the leader of the Divine Military Reunification Army.

古文：失势怏怏卒。
现代文：后他因不受重用，闷闷不乐去世了。
English: Later, he died in a sullen mood because he was not reused.

