古文：高祖上高祖武皇帝，讳霸先，字兴国，小字法生，吴兴长城下若里人，汉太丘长陈实之后也。
现代文：高祖武皇帝名霸先，字兴国，乳名法生，是吴兴长城下若里人，汉代太丘长陈定的后人。
English: Gao Zuwu, Emperor Gaozhuwu's great-great-grandson, was a descendant of Taiyukang Chending of the Han Dynasty.

古文：世居颍川。
现代文：世代居住在颖川。
English: Generations have lived in Yingchuan.

古文：实玄孙准，晋太尉。
现代文：陈塞的玄孙陈准，做过晋朝太尉。
English: Chen Jian, the great-great-grandson of Chen Xie, was a lieutenant in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：准生匡，匡生达，永嘉南迁，为丞相掾，历太子洗马，出为长城令，悦其山水，遂家焉。
现代文：陈准生陈匡，陈匡生陈达，永嘉时朝廷南迁，做过丞相掾佐，太子洗马，后出任长城县令，喜爱当地山水风光，就定居在此。
English: Chen Jun Sheng Chen Kuang, Chen Kuang Sheng Chen Da, Yong Jia, when the imperial court moved to the south, he worked as a vice-minister of the emperor, the prince washed his horse, and later served as a county magistrate of the Great Wall. He loved the local landscape and scenery and settled here.

古文：尝谓所亲曰： 此地山川秀丽，当有王者兴，二百年后，我子孙必钟斯运。 
现代文：他曾经对亲信的人说： 这个地方山川秀丽，应该有王侯兴起，二百年后，我的子孙肯定有这个好运。 
English: He once said to his close confidants: This place is beautiful, there should be a prince rising, two hundred years later, my children and grandchildren will certainly have this good luck.

古文：达生康，复为丞相掾，咸和中土断，故为长城人。
现代文：陈达生陈康，又做了丞相掾属，咸和年间整理户籍，所以定为长城人。
English: Chen Dasheng Chen Kang, also made the chancellor of the imperial family, Han and years to sort out the household registration, so as the Great Wall of China.

古文：康生盱眙太守英，英生尚书郎公弼，公弼生步兵校尉鼎，鼎生散骑侍郎高，高生怀安令咏，咏生安成太守猛，猛生太常卿道巨，道巨生皇考文赞。
现代文：陈康生盱眙太守陈英，陈英生尚书郎陈公弼，公弼生步兵校尉陈鼎，陈鼎生散骑侍郎陈高，陈高生怀安县令陈咏，陈咏生安成太守陈猛，陈猛生太常卿陈道巨，道巨生皇考陈文赞。
English: Chen Kangsheng was the father-in-law of Chen Ying, Chen Yingsheng was the father-in-law of Chen Gongsheng, Chen Gongsheng was the father-in-law of Chen Ding, Chen Dingsheng was the father-in-law of Chen Gao, Chen Gaosheng was the father-in-law of Chen Ancheng, Chen Ancheng was the father-in-law of Chen Meng, Chen Mengsheng was the father-in-law of Chen Daoju, Chen Mengsheng was the father-in-law of Chen Daoju, Chen Mengsheng was the father-in-law of Chen

古文：高祖以梁天监二年癸未岁生。
现代文：高祖生于梁天监二年癸未岁。
English: Gao Zu was born when Liang Tianjun was two years old.

古文：少倜傥有大志，不治生产。
现代文：年少时就卓异不凡胸怀大志，不参预生计之事。
English: When he was young, he had a great ambition and did not care about his future.

古文：既长，读兵书，多武艺，明达果断，为当时所推服。
现代文：长大以后，攻读兵书，武艺高强，精明通达办事果敢，被时人所推崇敬服。
English: When he grew up, he studied military books, was strong in martial arts, shrewd and courageous, and was revered and respected by the people of the time.

古文：身长七尺五寸，日角龙颜，垂手过膝。尝游义兴，馆于许氏，夜梦天开数丈，有四人硃衣捧日而至，令高祖开口纳焉。及觉，腹中犹热，高祖心独负之。
现代文：他身高七尺五寸，额头隆起有帝王之相，手长超过膝盖，他曾经游历义兴，住在盏区家中，夜间梦到天空裂开了几丈，有四个穿着朱红衣服的人捧着太阳而来，让高祖张开嘴巴吞了下去，到梦醒时，腹中还是热的，高祖心裹暗自以此自负。
English: He is seven feet five inches tall, his forehead bulges with the appearance of an emperor, and his hands are longer than his knees. He once traveled to Yixing and lived in a home in Zhanjiang District. At night, he dreamed that the sky had split several meters, and four people wearing vermilion clothes came holding the sun. He let Gao Zu open his mouth and swallowed it. When he woke up, his stomach was still warm. Gao Zu's heart was wrapped in this conceit.

古文：大同初，新喻侯萧映为吴兴太守，甚重高祖，尝目高祖谓僚佐曰： 此人方将远大。 
现代文：大同初年，新喻侯萧映做吴兴太守，很看重直担，曾看着直担对下属们说： 这个人会有远大的前程。 
English: In the first year of Datong, Xiao Ying, the new governor of Wu Xing, attached great importance to Zhishang. He once looked at Zhishang and said to his subordinates: This person will have a great future.

古文：及映为广州刺史，高祖为中直兵参军，随府之镇。
现代文：到萧映任广州刺史，高祖即为中直兵参军，跟随萧映赴任上。
English: When Xiao Ying assumed the post of Guangzhou chief historian, Gao Zu joined the army as a middle-ranking soldier and followed Xiao Ying to the post.

古文：映令高祖招集士马，众至千人，仍命高祖监宋隆郡。
现代文：萧映让高祖招募兵马，多达千人，又命高祖镇守宋隆郡。
English: Xiao Ying asked Gaozu to recruit soldiers and horses, as many as a thousand, and ordered Gaozu to guard Songlong County.

古文：所部安化二县元不宾，高祖讨平之。
现代文：其所辖的塞二县头领不顺服，直担征讨降服了他们。
English: The leaders of the two Sai counties under his jurisdiction did not obey, and he took direct responsibility for subjugating them.

古文：寻监西江督护、高要郡守。
现代文：不久任西江督护、高要郡守。
English: He was soon appointed governor of the Xijiang River and governor of Gaoyou County.

古文：先是，武林侯萧谘为交州刺史，以裒刻失众心，土人李贲连结数州豪杰同时反，台遣高州刺史孙冏、新州刺史卢子雄将兵击之，冏等不时进，皆于广州伏诛。
现代文：在这之前，武林侯芦谐任交蛆刺史，因为搜刮财物不得人心，当地人奎童联络几个州的豪杰之士同时造反，朝廷派直业刺史茎周、堑业刺史卢王雄率领军队去攻打他们，逐垣等人没有及时出军，都在广州被正法。
English: Prior to this, Wu Lin Hou Luhong was allowed to make contact with and stab history, because the search for property was unpopular. The local people, Kuidong, contacted the heroes of several states to rebel at the same time. The court sent Zhi Ye stabbed history, Zhu Zhou, and Zhi Ye stabbed history, Lu Wangxiong, to lead the army to attack them. Huigaki and others did not send troops in time and were all legalized in Guangzhou.

古文：子雄弟子略与冏子侄及其主帅杜天合、杜僧明共举兵，执南江督护沈顗，进寇广州，昼夜苦攻，州中震恐。
现代文：卢子雄的弟弟子略和孙同的子侄及主帅杜天合、杜僧明一齐举兵，抓住了直丝督护选题，进兵侵犯卢丛，日夜猛攻，州中人们都十分惊恐。
English: Lu Zixiong's younger brother and disciple, Liang, and Sun Tong's nephew and coach, Du Tianhe and Du Sengming, raised an army together, seized the election of Zhi Si Guo, invaded Lu Cong, and stormed day and night. People in the state were very frightened.

古文：高祖率精兵三千，卷甲兼行以救之，频战屡捷，天合中流矢死，贼众大溃。僧明遂降。
现代文：产担带领三千精兵，卷甲兼行赶去营救，接连打了几次胜仗，丝天合被流箭射死，敌兵溃散，杜垣塱就投降了。
English: Zotan led three thousand elite soldiers, rolled armor and hurried to rescue, successively fought several victorious battles, Si Tianhe was shot dead by a stray arrow, the enemy soldiers were dispersed, and Du Yanyu surrendered.

古文：梁武帝深叹异焉，授直阁将军，封新安子，邑三百户，仍遣画工图高祖容貌而观之。
现代文：銮亘逊对此大为惊叹，授予直合将军，封为新安子，食邑三百户，还让画工画下他的容貌以备观看。
English: Shun Wangsong was greatly surprised by this, and awarded him the title of Zhihe General, the title of Xin Anzi, and 300 households, and also asked the painter to paint his face for viewing.

古文：其年冬，萧映卒。
现代文：这年冬天，芦坠死了。
English: This winter, the reed died.

古文：明年，高祖送丧还都，至大庾岭，会有诏高祖为交州司马，领武平太守，与刺史杨㬓南讨。
现代文：第二年，产殂护送丧柩回都城，到去尘岭，正遇有韶令命尘祖为交州司马，领亘迎太守，和刺史垄蠊征讨南方。
English: In the second year, the delivery pigeon escorted the funeral pigeon back to the capital city, and when it went to the dust ridge, it was in the presence of the imperial order that the ancestor of the dust pigeon should be the secretary of the state of Jiaozhou, lead the way to welcome the governor-general, and conquer the south with the ridge pigeon.

古文：高祖益招勇敢，器械精利。
现代文：直担又广招勇士，准备好精良的军械。
English: Directly responsible and widely recruited warriors, ready for sophisticated armaments.

古文：蒨喜曰： 能克贼者，必陈司武也。 
现代文：杨瞟高兴地说： 能打败贼兵的，一定是陈司武了。 
English: Yang Hui said happily: Chen Sibu must be the one who can defeat the bandits.

古文：委以经略。
现代文：把统筹一切的任务交给他。
English: Give him the task of coordinating everything.

古文：高祖与众军发自番禺。
现代文：产担和大军从叠墨出发。
English: The burden-bearers and the large army set out from the stack of ink.

古文：是时萧勃为定州刺史，于西江相会，勃知军士惮远役，阴购诱之，因诡说蒨。
现代文：这时董垫做宣刺史，两方在酉丝会合，芦垫知道军兵们害怕远征，私下悬赏引诱他们，又狡猾地推卸到扰彊身上。
English: At this time, Dong Mat made a stabbing history, and the two sides met at the Silk Road. Lush Mat knew that the soldiers were afraid of the expedition, secretly offered a reward to lure them, and cunningly pushed them to the disturber.

古文：蒨集诸将问计，高祖对曰： 交趾叛涣，罪由宗室，遂使僭乱数州，弥历年稔。
现代文：荡堕询问众将有什么对策，高担回答说： 奎皿叛乱，罪过是在王室，才使得几州都混乱失序，达敷年之久。
English: When asked what countermeasures the generals had, Gaotan replied: "The rebellion of Kuisar, the crime is in the royal family, only made several states chaotic and disorderly, and lasted for a long time.

古文：定州复欲昧利目前，不顾大计，节下奉辞伐罪，故当生死以之。岂可畏惮宗室，轻于国宪？
现代文：定州又想贪图眼前小利，不顾全大局。您奉皇命讨伐罪臣，本就应当不计生死完成任务，怎么可以害怕宗室的权势，看轻国家的法律?
English: Dingzhou also wanted to covet the immediate small profits, regardless of the overall situation. You were ordered by the emperor to fight the criminals, and you should have completed the task regardless of life and death. How can you be afraid of the power of the family and despise the laws of the country?

古文：今若夺人沮众，何必交州讨贼，问罪之师，即回有所指矣。 
现代文：现在如果处事令众人沮丧失望，还何必去交州征讨叛贼，讨伐的军队，如果回去就会受到指责。 
English: Now, if the handling of affairs is frustrating and disappointing to everyone, why should we go to Jiaozhou to recruit traitors, the crusading army, and if we go back, we will be blamed.

古文：于是勒兵鼓行而进。
现代文：于是率领士兵击鼓前进。
English: He then led the soldiers in a drumming march.

古文：十一年六月，军至交州，贲众数万于苏历江口立城栅以拒官军。
现代文：十一年六月，军队到达交州，李贲领着敷万人在藓历辽口竖起栅栏抵抗官军。
English: In June of the eleventh year, the army arrived in Jiaozhou, and Li Zhe led thousands of people to erect a fence at the mouth of the Liao River to resist the official army.

古文：蒨推高祖为前锋，所向摧陷，贲走典澈湖，于屈獠界立砦，大造船舰，充塞湖中，众军惮之，顿湖口不敢进。
现代文：杨瞟推举高祖为前锋，所遇之敌无不击溃，李贲逃到典澈湖，在屈遮界建立营寨，大肆兴造船舰，排满湖中，军兵们很害怕，停在湖口不敢前进。
English: Yang Jie chose Gao Zu as the vanguard and defeated all the enemies he encountered. Li Jie fled to Dianche Lake, set up a camp at the Kucha border, built a shipyard, and filled the lake. The soldiers were very afraid and stopped at the mouth of the lake and did not dare to advance.

古文：高祖谓诸将曰： 我师已老，将士疲劳，历岁相持，恐非良计，且孤军无援，入人心腹，若一战不捷，岂望生全。
现代文：高祖对各位将领说： 我们的军队士气已衰，兵将们都很疲劳，长期相互抗衡，恐怕不是好办法。而且孤军深入没有后援，进入人家的腹地，如果不能一战取胜，谁敢指望全身而退。
English: Gaozu said to the generals, "Our army's morale has deteriorated, the generals are very tired, and it is probably not a good idea to compete with each other for a long time. Moreover, a lone army penetrates deep into someone's hinterland without backup. If you can't win a battle, who would dare expect to retreat completely?

古文：今藉其屡奔，人情未固，夷獠乌合，易为摧殄，正当共出百死，决力取之，无故停留，时事去矣。 
现代文：现在藉着他们奔忙未定，人心尚不稳定，遣帮蛮族不过是乌合之众，很容易摧毁，正应该同生共死，拼力打败他们，无缘无故停步不前，时机就去而不复返了。 
English: Now, with them rushing around, their minds are not yet settled, their hearts are not yet stable, the barbarians sent to help them are just a rabble, they are easy to destroy, it is time to live and die with them, to work hard to defeat them, to stop moving for no reason, the time has gone and will never return.

古文：诸将皆默然，莫有应者。
现代文：众将都沉默不语，没人回答。
English: The generals were silent, no one answered.

古文：是夜江水暴起七丈，注湖中，奔流迅激。
现代文：这天晚上江水突然涨起七丈，注入湖中，激流奔腾。
English: That evening, the river water suddenly rose seven-feet high and flowed into the lake, creating a rushing torrent.

古文：高祖勒所部兵，乘流先进，众军鼓噪俱前，贼众大溃。贲窜入屈獠洞中，屈獠斩贲，传首京师，是岁太清元年也。
现代文：高祖率领属下兵卒，乘着水流率先前进，其他各军都击鼓呐喊上前，敌兵大败溃逃，李贲窜入屈獠洞中，屈獠杀了他，将头颅送到京城。遣一年是太清元年。
English: Gao Zu led his subordinate soldiers and took the lead in advancing with the current of the water. All other armies marched forward beating drums and shouting. The enemy soldiers were routed and fled. Li Qian entered the Quyu Cave. Quyu killed him and sent his head to Beijing. The first year of Qian was the first year of the Taiqing Dynasty.

古文：贲兄天宝遁入九真，与劫帅李绍隆收余兵二万，杀德州刺史陈文戒，进围爱州，高祖仍率众讨平之。
现代文：李贲的哥哥李天实逃进九真，和盗贼首领李绍隆收拾残兵二万人，杀了德州刺史陈文戒，进兵围攻爱州，高祖仍然率领部下征服了他们。
English: Li Xuan's brother, Li Tianshi, fled to Jiu Zhen, and the leader of the thieves, Li Shaolong, gathered the remaining 20,000 soldiers, killed the Texas assassin, Chen Wenkai, and besieged Aizhou. Gaozu still led his subordinates to conquer them.

古文：除振远将军、西江督护、高要太守、督七郡诸军事。
现代文：授官振远将军、西江督护、高要太守、督七州诸军事。
English: General Zhenyuan, the governor of the Xijiang River, the governor of Gaoyao, and the governor of the seven states were awarded military positions.

古文：二年冬，侯景寇京师，高祖将率兵赴援，广州刺史元景仲阴有异志，将图高祖。
现代文：太清二年冬天，侯景侵犯京城，高祖将要带兵去增援，广州刺史元景仲私下裹有不忠的企图，想要谋害高祖。
English: In the winter of the second year of the Qing Dynasty, Hou Jing invaded Beijing, Gao Zu was going to bring reinforcements, and Guangzhou assassin Yuan Jing Zhong secretly had a disloyal attempt to assassinate Gao Zu.

古文：高祖知其计，与成州刺史王怀明、行台选郎殷外臣等密议戒严。
现代文：高祖知道他的计策，和成州刺史王怀明、行台选郎殷外臣等秘密商议严加防备。
English: Gaozu was aware of his strategy, and he was on high alert as he secretly discussed with Wang Huiming, the chancellor of Chengdu, and Yin Gaozong, the minister of foreign affairs.

古文：三年七月，集义兵于南海，驰檄以讨景仲。
现代文：三年七月，把义兵集中在南海，派兵发送讨伐景仲的檄文。
English: In July of the third year, the volunteers were concentrated in the South China Sea, and the soldiers were sent to send an obituary of the crusade against Jingzhong.

古文：景仲穷蹙，缢于阁下，高祖迎萧勃镇广州。
现代文：景仲处境艰难，在小门旁自缢而死，高祖迎接董勃镇守庐州。
English: Jingzhong was in a difficult situation. He hanged himself next to the small gate and died. Gaozu greeted Dong Bo, the town guard of Zhangzhou.

古文：是时临贺内史欧阳頠监衡州，兰裕、兰京礼扇诱始兴等十郡，共举兵攻頠，頠请援于勃。
现代文：遣时临贺内史欧阳憔监管衡州，兰裕、兰京礼煽动诱惑始兴等十个郡一同起兵攻打欧阳顿，欧阳憔向萧勃求援。
English: When Lin He Neishi sent Ouyang Jie to supervise Hengzhou, Lan Yu, Lan Jingli incited and tempted Shixing and other ten counties to attack Ouyang Tong together, Ouyang Jie asked Xiao Bo for help.

古文：勃令高祖率众救之，悉擒裕等，仍监始兴郡。
现代文：萧勃命令高祖率兵去营救他们，把兰裕等人全都抓获，仍然监管始兴郡。
English: Xiao Bo ordered Gao Zu to lead his soldiers to rescue them, capture Lan Yu and all the others, and still supervise Shixing County.

古文：十一月，高祖遣杜僧明、胡颖将二千人顿于岭上，并厚结始兴豪杰同谋义举，侯安都、张亻思等率千余人来附。
现代文：十一月，高祖派杜僧明、胡颖带领二千人驻扎在岭上，并且厚礼结交始兴郡的豪杰之士共同谋划义举，侯安都、张偬等人率兵千余人来投靠。
English: In November, Emperor Gaozong sent Du Xiangming and Hu Ying to lead two thousand people to stay on the ridge, and they had the courtesy to make friends with the heroes of Shixing County to jointly plan a charity drive. Hou Andu, Zhang Ye and others led more than a thousand soldiers to help.

古文：萧勃闻之，遣钟休悦说高祖曰： 侯景骁雄，天下无敌，前者援军十万，士马精强，然而莫敢当锋，遂令羯贼得志。
现代文：萧勃听说此事，派钟休悦劝说高祖道： 侯景骁勇雄猛，天下没有敌得过他的人，前次的十万援军，虽然兵强马壮，也没有敢抵挡其锋芒的，于是才让羯贼意图得逞，你祇凭很少的人马，想要怎么样呢?
English: When Xiao Bo heard of this, he sent Zhong Xiuyue to persuade Gao Zuo: "Hou Jingyao is brave and mighty, there is no one in the world who can defeat him. The previous hundred thousand reinforcements, although strong and powerful, did not dare to resist his sharpness. Therefore, he allowed the bandits to succeed. You only need a few people. What do you want?

古文：君以区区之众，将何所之？如闻岭北王侯又皆鼎沸，河东、桂阳相次屠戮，邵陵、开建亲寻干戈，李迁仕许身当阳，便夺马仗，以君疏外，讵可暗投？
现代文：听说大庾岭北面王侯又作鼎沸之状，河东、桂阳相继杀戮，邵陵、开建互动干戈，李迁仕投身于当阳，就失去了兵马器械，你是疏远的外臣，怎么可以胡乱投靠?
English: It is said that the Northern Princes of Dalatangling were in a state of turmoil, and that there were successive killings in Hedong and Guiyang, and that there was an interactive war of aggression between Shao Ling and Kaijian. Li Qianshi devoted himself to Dangyang, and lost his military and equestrian equipment. You are an estranged foreign minister, how can you arbitrarily take refuge?

古文：未若且住始兴，遥张声势，保此太山，自求多福。 
现代文：不如先驻守始兴，在远方大张声势，保住这片太山，为自己谋求福分。 
English: It's better to stay in Shixing first, make a big noise in the distance, keep this too-mountainous area, and seek happiness for yourself.

古文：高祖泣谓休悦曰： 仆本庸虚，蒙国成造。
现代文：高祖哭着对钟休悦说： 我本来平庸无能，蒙受国家的恩典成就功业。
English: Gaozu cried and said to Zhong Xiuyue: I was originally mediocre and incompetent, but I received the grace of the state to accomplish my work.

古文：往闻侯景渡江，即欲赴援，遭值元、兰，梗我中道。
现代文：从前听说侯景渡长江，就想去增援，碰上元景仲、兰裕的事，在半道中阻碍了我。
English: Once, when I heard that Hou Jing was crossing the Yangtze River, I wanted to go to reinforce him, but the incident with Yuan Jingzhong and Lan Yu stopped me in the middle of the road.

古文：今京都覆没，主上蒙尘，君辱臣死，谁敢爱命！
现代文：现在京城已经失守，皇上蒙受了耻辱，君主受辱臣子应以死相报，谁敢吝惜自己的生命?
English: Now the capital has been lost, the emperor has been humiliated, the monarch has been insulted, and the vassal should repay with death, who dares to begrudge his own life?

古文：君侯体则皇枝，任重方岳，不能摧锋万里，雪此冤痛，见遣一军。犹贤乎已，乃降后旨，使人慨然。
现代文：侯爷是宗室之亲，责任重如山岳，却不能远征万里击败敌军，使这令人痛心的冤仇得到洗雪，现在派出的一支军队，尚且比我强，又发下后来的命令，使人慨叹。
English: The lord of the manor is a relative of the family, and the responsibility is as heavy as a mountain, but he cannot travel thousands of miles to defeat the enemy army, so that this painful grudge can be washed away. Now he has sent an army, which is even stronger than me, and issued a later order, which makes people sigh.

古文：仆行计决矣，凭为披述。 
现代文：我的计划已经决定，随您去向侯爷报告。 
English: My plan has been decided. Go and report to the master of the house.

古文：乃遣使间道往江陵，禀承军期节度。
现代文：就派使者从小路去江陵，接受调度军队的命令。
English: He sent an emissary to Gangneung to receive the order of dispatching troops.

古文：时蔡路养起兵据南康，勃遣腹心谭世远为曲江令，与路养相结，同遏义军。
现代文：逭时蔡路养起兵占据南康，萧勃派心腹谭世远做曲江县令，和蔡路养联合，共同遏制义军。
English: At that time, Cai Luyang raised an army to occupy Nankang. Xiao Bo's henchman, Tan Shiyuan, became the governor of Qujiang County and allied with Cai Luyang to jointly contain the rebels.

古文：大宝元年正月，高祖发自始兴，次大庾岭。
现代文：大实元年正月，高祖从始兴出发，驻军大庾岭。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Dashi era, Gaozu set out from Shixing and garrisoned Dazhuling.

古文：路养出军顿南野，依山水立四城以拒高祖。
现代文：蔡路养出兵驻扎在南野，依傍山水建起四座土城以抵挡高祖。
English: Cai Lu raised an army and stationed it in Nan'an. He built four earthen cities along the mountains and rivers to resist Gaozu.

古文：高祖与战，大破之，路养脱身窜走，高祖进顿南康。
现代文：高祖和他们开战，大败敌军，蔡路养脱身逃走，高祖进驻南康。
English: Gaozu and they went to war, defeated the enemy, Cai Luyang escaped and fled, Gaozu stationed in Nankang.

古文：湘东王承制授高祖员外散骑常侍、持节、明威将军、交州刺史，改封南野县伯。
现代文：湘束王秉承皇上旨意授予高祖员外散骑常侍、持节、明威将军、交州刺史，改封南野县伯。
English: In accordance with the emperor's will, Hwang Sokwang awarded Gao Zuoren with the titles of non-commissioned cavalry officer, grand marshal, Mingwei general, and Jiaozhou magistrate, and changed his title to Nan'an county magistrate.

古文：六月，高祖修崎头古城，徙居焉。
现代文：六月，高祖修缮崎头古城，迁居于此。
English: In June, Gao Zu repaired the ancient city of Sakigashira and moved there.

古文：高州刺史李迁仕据大皋，遣主帅杜平虏率千人入赣石、鱼梁。高祖命周文育将兵击走之，迁仕奔宁都。
现代文：高州刺史李迁仕占据大皋，派主帅杜平虏率领一千人进入滑石、鱼梁，高祖命令周文育领兵击退他们，奎迁丝逃到空整。
English: Gaozhou satrap Li Qian occupied Dafu, and sent the commander Du Pingru to lead a thousand people into Talc and Fish Beam. Gaozhu ordered Zhou Wenyu to lead the troops to repel them, and Qui Qian fled to Kuang Tie.

古文：承制授高祖通直散骑常侍、使持节、信威将军、豫州刺史，领豫章内史，改封长城县侯。
现代文：秉承皇帝旨意授予产担通直散骑常侍、使持节、信威将军、豫州刺史，领豫章内史，改封长城县侯。
English: Adhering to the emperor's will, he conferred the title of county magistrate of the Great Wall County to the production manager Tong Zhizangzhuang, the envoy of the festival, the general of Xinwei, the history of Yuzhou, and the history of Yuzhang.

古文：寻授散骑常侍、使持节、都督六郡诸军事、军师将军、南江州刺史，余如故。
现代文：不久授散骑常侍、使持节、都督六郡诸军事、军师将军、南江州刺史，其他依旧。
English: Soon after, the equestrian attendants, envoys, the governor of the six counties, the military, the military division general, the governor of the South Jiangsu Province, and others were dispersed.

古文：时宁都人刘蔼等资迁仕舟舰兵仗，将袭南康，高祖遣杜僧明等率二万人据白口，筑城以御之，迁仕亦立城以相对。
现代文：当时宁都人刘蔼等资助李迁仕船只兵器，将要偷袭南康，高祖派杜僧明等人领兵二万占据，建筑城墙防御他们，李迁仕也建立城池和他相对峙。
English: At that time, the Ningdu people Liu An and others financed Li Qianshi's ships and weapons, and they were going to raid Nankang. Gao Zu sent Du Sangming and others to lead twenty thousand soldiers to occupy and build a city wall to defend them. Li Qianshi also built a city to confront him.

古文：二年三月，僧明等攻拔其城，生擒迁仕送南康，高祖斩之。
现代文：二年三月，杜僧明等人攻陷了奎迁丝的城池，活捉奎迁丝送到亩尘，直趄将他斩首。
English: In March of the second year, Du Sangming and others attacked the city of Kuijian silk, captured Kuijian silk alive and sent it to Mu Deng, and beheaded him.

古文：承制命高祖进兵定江州，仍授江州刺史，余如故。
现代文：秉承皇帝旨意命高祖进兵平定江州，又授江州刺史，其他如故。
English: Adhering to the emperor's will, Gao Zu marched into the army to pacify Jiangzhou, and was awarded the History of Jiangzhou, and the rest is as it was.

古文：六月，高祖发自南康。
现代文：六月，高祖从南康出发。
English: In June, Gaozu set out from Nankang.

古文：南康赣石旧有二十四滩，滩多巨石，行旅者以为难。
现代文：南康泼石从前有二十四处险滩，滩中有许多巨石，行路的人都颇感艰难。
English: There used to be twenty-four dangerous beaches in Nankang Rockfall. There are many boulders in the beach, and people who travel there feel quite difficult.

古文：高祖之发也，水暴起数丈，三百里间巨石皆没。
现代文：高祖出发时，河水突然涨起几丈高，三百里以内的巨石都没入水中。
English: When Gaozu set out, the river suddenly rose several feet high, and all the boulders within three hundred miles sank into the water.

古文：进军顿西昌，有龙见于水滨，高五丈许，五采鲜耀，军民观者数万人。
现代文：进兵驻扎在西昌，在水边出现了一条龙，高约五丈，色彩鲜艳夺目，军兵百姓观看的有数万人。
English: The marching troops were stationed in Xichang, and a dragon appeared on the water's edge, about five meters tall, with eye-catching bright colors, watched by tens of thousands of soldiers and civilians.

古文：是时承制遣征东将军王僧辩督众军讨侯景。
现代文：这时秉承皇上旨意派遣征束将军王僧辩都督各路军队征讨侯景。
English: At this time, upholding the emperor's will, he dispatched the conscript general Wang Sangye and the military forces of all the provincial governors to conquer Houjing.

古文：八月，僧辩军次湓城，高祖率杜僧明等众军及南川豪帅合三万人将会焉。
现代文：八月，王僧辩驻军在湓城，高祖率领杜僧明等军队同南川豪帅总计三万人要会集于此。
English: In August, Wang Sangye garrisoned troops in Lucheng, Gao Zu led Du Sangming and other troops with Nanchuan Gaoshuai, a total of 30,000 people gathered here.

古文：时西军乏食，高祖先贮军粮五十万石，至是分三十万以资之，仍顿巴丘。
现代文：当时西军缺少食物，高祖事先贮藏有军粮五十万石，这时就分出三十万石资助他们。仍然驻扎在巴丘。
English: At that time, the Western Army was short of food. Gaozu had stockpiled half a million koku of military food in advance, and then allocated 300,000 koku to support them. He was still stationed in Bachu.

古文：会侯景废简文帝，立豫章嗣王栋，高祖遣兼长史沈衮奉表于江陵劝进。
现代文：碰上侯景废了简文帝，立了豫章嗣王萧栋，高祖派兼长史沈衮奉表在江陵劝进。
English: In the face of Houjing, Emperor Jianwen was abolished, and Emperor Yuanzhang's successor, King Xiaodong, was established, and the Gaozhu faction and the elder statesman, Shen Zhenfeng, were persuaded to advance in Jiangling.

古文：十一月，承制授高祖使持节、都督会稽东阳新安临海永嘉五郡诸军事、平东将军、东扬州刺史，领会稽太守、豫章内史，余并如故。
现代文：十一月，秉承皇上旨意授予高祖使持节、都督会稽东阳新安临海永嘉五郡诸军事、平束将军、东扬州刺史，领会稽太守、豫章内史，其他都依旧。
English: In November, adhering to the emperor's will, Gao Zu was awarded the Jisi Festival, the military of the five counties of Dongyang, Xin'an, Linhai and Yongjia were inspected by the governor, the general of Hirazu, the history of Dongyang, the understanding of the inspector general, and the history of Yuzhang, and the others are still the same.

古文：三年正月，高祖率甲士三万人、强弩五千张、舟舰二千乘，发自豫章。
现代文：三年正月，高祖率领披甲兵士三万人，带着五千张强劲的弓弩、二干艘战船，从豫章出发。
English: In the first month of the third year, Gao Zu led thirty thousand armored soldiers, with five thousand strong bows and arrows, and two warships, and set out from Yuzhang.

古文：二月，次桑落洲，遣中记室参军江元礼以事表江陵，承制加高祖鼓吹一部。
现代文：二月，驻军桑落洲，派遣中记室参军江元礼向江陵上表报告此事，秉承皇帝旨意加高祖一部鼓吹。
English: In February, he stationed troops in Sanluo Zhou and dispatched the Central Records Office to report the matter to the Gangneung Palace, adhering to the emperor's will and adding Gaozu's part of the propaganda.

古文：是时僧辩已发湓城，会高祖于白茅湾，乃登岸结坛，刑牲盟约。
现代文：遣时王僧辩已经从湓城出发，在白茅湾和高祖会合，于是上岸筑坛，杀牲口定下盟约。
English: The envoy, Wang Sangye, had already set out from Lucheng and met Gao Zu in Baimou Bay, whereupon he went ashore to build an altar and make a covenant with the animal slayer.

古文：进军次芜湖，侯景城主张黑弃城走。
现代文：进军驻扎芜湖，侯景的城主张黑弃城逃走了。
English: marched into and garrisoned Wuhu, Houjing's city, advocating the abandonment of the city, fled.

古文：三月，高祖与诸军进克姑孰，仍次蔡洲。
现代文：三月。高祖和各路军队攻破姑熟，又驻扎在蔡洲。
English: In March, Gao Zu and other troops broke through the enemy lines and were stationed in Caizhou.

古文：侯景登石头城观望形势，意甚不悦，谓左右曰： 此军上有紫气，不易可当。 
现代文：侯景登上石头城了望形势，很不高兴，对身边的人说： 这支军队上空有紫色的云气，不容易抵挡。 
English: Hou Jing boarded the stone city to observe the situation, was very unhappy, and said to the people around him: There is a purple cloud over this army, which is not easy to resist.

古文：乃以叉步贮石沈塞淮口，缘淮作城，自石头迄青溪十余里中，楼雉相接。
现代文：就用小船装上石块沉入水中堵塞淮河河口。沿着淮河筑起城墙，从石头到青溪的十多里中间，城楼相互连接。
English: They used small boats to load stones and sink them into the water to block the mouth of the Huai River. The city wall was built along the Huai River, and the city buildings were connected to each other more than ten miles from the stone to Qingxi.

古文：诸将未有所决，僧辩遣杜崱问计于高祖，高祖曰： 前柳仲礼数十万兵隔水而坐，韦粲之在青溪，竟不渡岸，贼乃登高望之，表里俱尽，肆其凶虐，覆我王师。
现代文：诸位将领都没有主意，王僧辩派杜则向高祖询问计策，高祖说： 从前柳仲礼几十万兵众隔水驻守，韦粲在青溪，竟然不渡河上岸，敌军登高了望，内外情势都看全了，就肆意行凶，使我朝廷军队全军覆没。
English: All the generals were at a loss. Du Zi, the leader of the Wangzang faction, asked Gao Zu for advice. Gao Zu said, "Once upon a time, Liu Zhongli had hundreds of thousands of soldiers stationed across the water. Wei Wei was in Qingxi, and he didn't even cross the river to go ashore. The enemy troops were on high alert, and they saw the situation both at home and abroad. So they committed wanton murder and annihilated my entire imperial army.

古文：今围石头，须渡北岸。
现代文：现在围住了石头城，必须渡到北岸。
English: Now they have surrounded Stone Town and must cross to the north bank.

古文：诸将若不能当锋，请先往立栅。 
现代文：如果各位将领不能抗其锋锐，请让我先去树立营栅。 
English: If your generals cannot stand up to their sharpness, please let me set up the camp gate first.

古文：高祖即于石头城西横陇筑栅，众军次连八城，直出东北。
现代文：高祖就马上到石头城西横土岗上修筑栅栏，其他军队依次连着八城，直奔东北进军。
English: Gaozu immediately went to the west side of the stone city to build a fence on the horizontal earth mound, and the other armies connected the eight cities in turn and marched straight to the northeast.

古文：贼恐西州路断，亦于东北果林作五城以遏大路。
现代文：敌兵害怕西州的路途被截断，也在东北方果林建筑了五城来遏制大路。
English: The enemy soldiers, fearing that the road to Xizhou would be cut off, also built five cities in the northeast fruit forest to block the highway.

古文：景率众万余人、铁骑八百余匹，结阵而进。
现代文：侯景率领一万多人、铁甲战马八百多匹，结成大阵冲锋。
English: Hou Jing led more than ten thousand people and more than eight hundred iron-clad horses to form a large charge.

古文：高祖曰： 军志有之，善用兵者，如常山之蛇，首尾相应。
现代文：高祖说： 兵书上说，善于用兵的人，好像常山的蛇，首尾相互照应。
English: Gao Zu said: According to the military manual, a person who is good at using soldiers is like a snake of the ever-growing mountains.

古文：今我师既众，贼徒甚寡，应分贼兵势，以弱制强，何故聚其锋锐，令必死于我？ 
现代文：现在我们的人多，敌兵人少，应该分化敌兵的力量，以弱势遏制强势，为什么要让他们聚集起精锐部众，使他们一定要与我们拼死作战呢? 
English: Now that we have more people and the enemy soldiers are fewer, we should differentiate the strength of the enemy soldiers and use their weakness to contain their strength. Why should they be allowed to gather their elite troops so that they must fight to the death with us?

古文：乃命诸将分处置兵。
现代文：于是命令各位将领分开在各处安置兵马。
English: So he ordered the generals to separate and place soldiers and horses everywhere.

古文：贼直冲王僧志，僧志小缩，高祖遣徐度领弩手二千横截其后，贼乃却。
现代文：敌军直接向王僧志冲击，王僧志率部稍稍后退，高祖派徐度带领二千弓弩手截断敌人后路，敌兵就退却了。
English: The enemy army directly attacked Wang Sangzhi, Wang Sangzhi's army retreated a little, and Gao Zu slowly led two thousand archers to cut off the enemy's rear path, and the enemy soldiers retreated.

古文：高祖与王琳、杜龛等以铁骑悉力乘之，贼退据其栅。
现代文：高祖和王琳、杜宠等人率铁甲骑兵尽力追击，敌军退守他们的营栅。
English: Gaozu, Wang Lin, Du Qiao and others led the iron-clad cavalry to pursue as much as possible, and the enemy army retreated to their camp.

古文：景仪同卢辉略开石头北门来降。
现代文：侯景的仪同卢辉略开了石头城北门来投降。
English: Houjing Yi and Lu Hui opened the stone north gate of the city to surrender.

古文：荡主戴冕、曹宣等攻拔果林一城，众军又克其四城。
现代文：荡主戴冕、曹宣等人攻下了果林一座城，其他军队又攻下四城。
English: Wanyuan, Cao Xuan and others captured a city in Guolin, and other armies captured four cities.

古文：贼复还，殊死战，又尽夺所得城栅。
现代文：敌军返回，展开殊死的战斗，又把所有的城栅都全部夺回。
English: The enemy returned, fought a desperate battle, and recaptured all the gates.

古文：高祖大怒，亲率攻之，士卒腾栅而入，贼复散走。
现代文：高祖非常愤怒，亲自率兵攻打，士兵们跃过栅栏进入营垒，敌兵又四散而逃。
English: Gaozu was very angry and personally led the soldiers to attack. The soldiers jumped over the fence into the camp, and the enemy soldiers scattered and fled.

古文：景与百余骑弃槊执刀，左右冲阵，阵不动，景众大溃，逐北至西明门。
现代文：侯景和一百多战骑扔掉长矛手执单刀，左右冲锋，而军阵难以冲破，侯景的部下大大溃败，追逐败军追到西明门。
English: Hou Jing and more than a hundred horsemen threw away the lance hand holding a single knife and charged left and right, but the army line was difficult to break through. Hou Jing's subordinates were greatly defeated and chased the defeated army to the Ximing Gate.

古文：景至阙下，不敢入台，遣腹心取其二子而遁。
现代文：侯景到了宫阙之下，不敢进入禁城，派遣心腹之人接取他的两个儿子逃跑。
English: When Hou Jing came under the imperial edict, he did not dare to enter the Forbidden City, and sent a confidant to pick up his two sons and escape.

古文：高祖率众出广陵应接，会景将郭元建奔齐，高祖纳其部曲三千人而还。
现代文：高祖率领兵士出广陵去接应，正碰上侯景的部将郭元建投奔齐，高祖收降了他的三千人马回来。
English: Gao Zu led the soldiers out of Guangling to meet them, and just as he was meeting Houjing's general Guo Yuanjian, Gao Zu withdrew his three thousand horse and returned.

古文：僧辩启高祖镇京口。
现代文：王僧辩请高祖镇守京口。
English: Wang Sangye invited Gao Zu Zhen to guard the entrance to Beijing.

古文：五月，齐遣辛术围严超达于秦郡，高祖命徐度领兵助其固守。
现代文：五月，齐派遣辛术在秦郡围攻严超达，高祖命令徐度领兵帮助他坚守。
English: In May, Qi dispatched Xinzhu to besiege Yan Chaoda in Qin County. Gaozu ordered Xu Du to lead the troops to help him hold out.

古文：齐众七万，填堑，起土山，穿地道，攻之甚急。
现代文：齐的七万军队，填平沟谷，堆起土山，穿凿地道，攻打得很猛。
English: A total of seventy thousand troops filled the ditch, piled up the mounds of earth, dug tunnels, and attacked fiercely.

古文：高祖乃自率万人解其围，纵兵四面击齐军，弓弩乱发，齐平秦王中流矢死，斩首数百级，齐人收兵而退。
现代文：高祖就亲自率领一万人前去解围，放开兵马四面袭击齐军。弓弩不停地发射，齐的平秦王被流箭射死，又斩下敌兵敷百人的首级，齐人便撤兵了。
English: Gaozu personally led ten thousand people to relieve the siege, and let loose the soldiers and horses to attack the Qi army on all sides. The bow and arrow were fired continuously, the Qi king Ping Qin was shot dead by a stream of arrows, and the heads of hundreds of enemy soldiers were cut off, and the Qi people withdrew.

古文：高祖振旅南归，遣记室参军刘本仁献捷于江陵。
现代文：高祖整顿部队班师南归，派记室参军刘本仁向江陵报捷。
English: Gao Zu's rectification troops returned to the south, and sent Liu Benren, who had joined the army, to report the success to Jiangling.

古文：七月，广陵侨民硃盛、张象潜结兵袭齐刺史温仲邕，遣使来告，高祖率众济江以应之。
现代文：七月，广陵的侨居百姓朱盛、张象偷偷地组织人马袭击齐的刺史温仲邕，派使者来报告消息，高祖率领部队渡过长江接应他们。
English: In July, Zhu Sheng and Zhang Xiang, expatriates living in Guangling, secretly organized a group of people to attack the assassin Wen Zhongya, and sent an envoy to report the news. Gaozu led the troops across the Yangtze River to meet them.

古文：会齐人来聘，求割广陵之地，王僧辩许焉，仍豹高祖，高祖于是引军还南徐州，江北人随军而南者万余口。
现代文：正碰上齐人遣使来访，要求割让广陵地方，王僧辩许诺了他们，并报告给高祖，高祖便率军退回南徐州，江北的人随着军队南迁的有一万多。
English: When the Qi people sent an envoy to visit, demanding the cession of the Guangling region, Wang Sangye promised them and reported to Gao Zu. Gao Zu then led the army back to southern Xuzhou. More than 10,000 people from the north of the river moved south with the army.

古文：承制授高祖使持节、散骑常侍、都督南徐州诸军事、征北大将军、开府仪同三司、南徐州刺史，余并如故。
现代文：秉承皇帝旨意授高祖使持节、散骑常侍、都督南徐州诸军事、征北大将军、开府仪同三司、南徐州刺史，其他都如故。
English: Adhering to the emperor's will, Emperor Gaozong bestowed the Emperor's Award on Gaozongzhi Jisi, Zangjie Zongzhi, the military governor of South Xuzhou, the general of the Northern Expedition, the three officials of the Kaifu ceremony, and the historian of South Xuzhou, and the rest are still the same.

古文：及王僧辩率众征陆纳于湘州，承制命高祖代镇扬州。
现代文：等到王僧辩率部队去湘州征讨陆曲，秉承皇帝旨意命产祖代为镇守扬州。
English: Wait until Wang Zeng led the troops to go to Hunan to conquer Luqu, upholding the emperor's will to order the progenitors to be the town guards of Yangzhou.

古文：十一月，湘东王即位于江陵，改大宝三年为承圣元年。
现代文：十一月，湘束王在江陵即位，改大实三年为承圣元年。
English: In November, Xiangzhu Wang ascended the throne in Gangneung, and the three-year period was changed to the first year of consecration.

古文：湘州平，高祖旋镇京口。
现代文：湘州平定，高祖随即镇守京口。
English: Honshu was pacified, and Gaozu immediately became the town guard of Kyoguchi.

古文：三年三月，进高祖位司空，余如故。
现代文：三年三月。高祖之位进为司空，其他依旧。
English: In March of the third year, Gao Zu's position was promoted to Siku, and the others remained the same.

古文：十一月，西魏攻陷江陵，高祖与王僧辩等进启江州，请晋安王以太宰承制，又遣长史谢哲奉笺劝进。
现代文：十一月，酉魏攻陷了堰，直担和王乸等人进言退守江州，请晋安王以太宰身份总理朝政，又派长史谢哲上书劝进。
English: In November, the Wei Dynasty fell into the weir, and Zhitan and Wang Qi and others proposed to retreat to Jiangzhou, asking King Jinan to take over the government as prime minister, and sent Governor Shi Xiezhe to write a letter to persuade them to advance.

古文：十二月，晋安王至自寻阳，入居朝堂，给高祖班剑二十人。
现代文：十二月，晋安王从寻阳到京城，入住禁宫，赐给高祖班剑仪仗二十人。
English: In December, King Jian'an traveled from Huanyang to Beijing, stayed in the Forbidden City, and bestowed the sword of honor on twenty members of Gaozuban.

古文：四年五月，齐送贞阳侯深明还主社稷，王僧辩纳之，即位，改元曰天成，以晋安王为皇太子。
现代文：四年五月，齐送还贞阳侯萧深明执掌社稷，王僧辩接纳他，贞阳侯即位，改年号为天成，立晋安王为皇太子。
English: In May of the fourth year, they sent back Zhengyang Hou Xiao Shenming to hold the imperial scepter, Wang Sangye accepted him, Zhengyang Hou ascended the throne, changed the year name to Tiancheng, and established Jinan Wang as the crown prince.

古文：初，齐之请纳贞阳也，高祖以为不可，遣使诣僧辩苦争之，往返数四，僧辩竟不从。
现代文：当初，齐人请梁接纳贞阳侯时，高祖认为不妥，派使者与王僧辩力争，往返好几次，王僧辩始终不听从。
English: At first, when the Qi people asked Liang to accept Zhengyang Hou, Gao Zu thought it was inappropriate and sent an envoy to argue with the king and the monk. They went back and forth several times, but the king and the monk did not listen to the argument.

古文：高祖居常愤叹，密谓所亲曰： 武皇虽磐石之宗，远布四海，至于克雪仇耻，宁济艰难，唯孝元而已，功业茂盛，前代未闻。
现代文：高祖常常愤慨叹息，秘密地对亲信人说： 武皇虽然是像磐石一样不可改易的宗主，声气遗传于四海，但说到为国雪耻，拯救困苦，衹有孝元能做到，他的功业很大，是历代都没听说过的。
English: Gao Zu often sighed with indignation and secretly said to his close followers: Although Emperor Wu is as immutable as a rock, and his voice is inherited from the four seas, when it comes to saving the country from disgrace and hardship, only a filial son can do it. His work is great and has never been heard of in all ages.

古文：我与王公俱受重寄，语未绝音，声犹在耳，岂期一旦便有异图。
现代文：我和王公都受了朝廷重托，先皇的语音还在耳边回响，哪料到今天竟有不测的图谋。
English: Both Wang Gong and I have been entrusted by the imperial court, and the voice of the former emperor is still echoing in our ears. Who would have expected that there would be unexpected plans today.

古文：嗣主高祖之孙，元皇之子，海内属目，天下宅心，竟有何辜，坐致废黜，远求夷狄，假立非次，观其此情，亦可知矣。 
现代文：嗣主是高祖的孙儿，元皇的儿子，海内众人瞩目，天下万人归心，有什么过错竟然遭到废黜，现在却从遥远的夷族求回王子，设立君主失掉了先后之序，看到这样的情形，也就知道将来的命运了。 
English: The heir is the grandchild of Gao Zu, the son of the former emperor, the attention of everyone in the country, and the hearts of everyone in the world, what is the fault that he was deposed, but now he is seeking a prince from a distant barbarian tribe, the establishment of the monarch has lost the order of succession, seeing such a situation, we also know the future fate.

古文：乃密具袍数千领，及锦彩金银，以为赏赐之具。
现代文：就秘密地准备了几千件衣袍和绸缎金银等，作为赏赐用品。
English: He secretly prepared thousands of robes, silk, gold, silver, and other items as gifts.

古文：九月壬寅，高祖召徐度、侯安都、周文育等谋之，仍部列将士，分赏金帛，水陆俱进。
现代文：九月壬寅日，高祖召集徐度、侯安都、周文言等人谋划，又按部排列将士，分别赏赐金银丝帛，从水陆两路一齐进发。
English: On September 30, Gao Zu convened Xu Du, Hou An Du, Zhou Wenyan and others to plan, and arranged the soldiers according to the department, separately awarded gold and silver silk cocoons, and started from the water and land.

古文：是夜发南徐诌讨王僧辩。
现代文：这天夜间从南徐州出发征讨王僧辩。
English: On the night of this day, they set out from southern Xuzhou to recruit Wang Sangye.

古文：甲辰，高祖步军至石头前，遣勇士自城北逾入。
现代文：甲辰曰，高祖率军步行到石头城前，派勇士从城北攀墙而入。
English: According to Jiachen, Gao Zu led the army on foot to the stone city and sent warriors to climb the wall from the north of the city.

古文：时僧辩方视事，外白有兵。
现代文：当时王僧辩正在办事，外面报告说有敌兵。
English: At that time, Wang Sangye was working, and it was reported that there were enemy soldiers outside.

古文：俄而兵自内出，僧辩遽走，与其第三子頠相遇，俱出阁，左右尚数十人，苦战。
现代文：很快兵士就在城裹出现了，僧辩连忙逃走，和他的第三个儿子王憔遇见了，都出了小门，旁边还有几十个人，苦苦相战。
English: Soon, soldiers appeared in the city, and Sofen ran away in a hurry. He met his third son, Wang Yao, and they both came out of the small gate. Next to him, there were dozens of people, fighting hard.

古文：高祖大兵寻至，僧辩众寡不敌，走登城南门楼。高祖因风纵火，僧辩穷迫，乃就擒。
现代文：高祖率领大队人马很快就到了，僧辩寡不敌众，逃跑登上了城南的门楼，高祖藉着风放起火，僧辩无路可走，就被擒获。
English: Gao Zu led a large group of men and horses and soon arrived. He was outnumbered and fled to the gate tower in the south of the city. Gao Zu used the wind to start a fire. He had nowhere to go and was captured.

古文：是夜缢僧辩及頠。
现代文：这天夜裹吊死了王僧辩和王颔。
English: That night, Wang Sofen and Wang Xuan were hanged.

古文：丙午，贞阳侯逊位，百僚奉晋安王上表劝进。
现代文：丙午日，贞阳侯让位，百官尊奉晋安王上表劝他登临帝位。
English: On the afternoon of the third day, Zhengyang marquis abdicated, and hundreds of officials paid homage to King Jinan and publicly advised him to ascend to the throne.

古文：十月己酉，晋安王即位，改承圣四年为绍泰元年。
现代文：十月己酉日，晋安王即位，改承圣四年为绉泰元年。
English: On October 6, King Jinan ascended to the throne, and the fourth year of the reign was changed to the first year of the reign of King Taejo.

古文：壬子，诏授高祖侍中、大都督中外诸军事、车骑将军、扬南徐二州刺史，持节、司空、班剑、鼓吹并如故。
现代文：壬子日，韶令授高祖侍中、大都督中外诸军事、车骑将军、扬南徐二州刺史，持节、司空、班剑、鼓吹都如故。
English: On Jinsi Day, the imperial command awarded Gao Zu with the titles of middle-ranking attendant, grand governor, middle-ranking military officer, general of cavalry and cavalry, and Yang Nan Xu with the title of two-state history, and the festival, the sky, the team of swords, and the propaganda were all the same.

古文：仍诏高祖甲仗百人，出入殿省。
现代文：仍然令高祖带甲仗一百人，可随意出入宫廷与台省。
English: Gao Zu was still allowed to take one hundred people with him, and he could enter and leave the court and Taiwan Province at will.

古文：震州刺史杜龛据吴兴，与义兴太守韦载同举兵反。
现代文：霆刺史拄鑫占据昱堡，和盏堡太守皇载一同起兵谋反。
English: The thorny thorn, Shi Yuxin, occupied the fortress, and together with the governor of the fortress, Emperor Zhengyi, he raised an army to rebel.

古文：高祖命周文育率众攻载于义兴，龛遣其从弟北叟将兵拒战，北叟败归义兴。
现代文：高祖命令周文育率兵去义兴攻打韦载，拄鑫派他的堂弟韭圣领兵抵抗，丝业坚战败回到义兴。
English: Gao Zu ordered Zhou Wenyu to lead his soldiers to Yixing to attack Wei Zai, Yu Xin sent his cousin Yu Sheng to lead the troops to resist, and Silk Industry Jian was defeated and returned to Yixing.

古文：辛未，高祖表自东讨，留高州刺史侯安都、石州刺史杜棱宿卫台省。
现代文：辛未，高祖上表要亲自东征，留下高州刺史侯安都、石州刺史杜棱守卫台省。
English: Soon after, Gao Zu personally went on the Eastern Expedition, leaving Gaozhou's Zhang Shi Hou Andu and Shizhou's Zhang Shi Du Ren to guard Taiwan Province.

古文：甲戌，军至义兴。
现代文：甲戌日，大军到达义兴。
English: On Armistice Day, the large army arrived in Yixing.

古文：丙子，拔其水栅。
现代文：丙子日，拔掉了叛军的水中木栅。
English: On April Fool's Day, he pulled down the rebels' underwater wooden fence.

古文：秦州刺史徐嗣徽据其城以入齐，又要南豫州刺史任约共举兵应龛、载，齐人资其兵食。
现代文：秦州刺史徐嗣徽藉着这城进入齐国，又约好南豫州刺史任约一起举兵响应杜宠、韦载，齐国人供给他们兵卒和粮食。
English: Xu Shihui, the Qin prefect, entered Qi through this city, and made an appointment with Ren, the southern prefect, to raise an army together in response to Du Zhao and Wei Zai. The people of Qi provided them with soldiers and grain.

古文：嗣徽等以京师空虚，率精兵五千奄至阙下，侯安都领骁勇五百人出战，嗣徽等退据石头。
现代文：徐嗣徽等人以为京城兵力空虚，率领精兵五千人悄悄来到都城，侯安都带领五百名骁勇善战的士兵迎战，徐嗣徽等人退守石头城。
English: Xu Shihui and others thought that the capital's military strength was empty, and led 5,000 elite soldiers to quietly come to the capital. Hou Andu led 500 brave soldiers to fight, and Xu Shihui and others retreated to Stone City.

古文：丁丑，载及北叟来降，高祖抚而释之。
现代文：丁丑曰，韦载和杜北叟前来投降，高祖安抚并释放了他们。
English: Ding Yuxi said that Wei Zai and Du Beichen came to surrender, and Gaozu pacified and released them.

古文：以嗣徽寇逼，卷甲还都，命周文育进讨杜龛。
现代文：因为徐嗣徽叛军威胁都城，就领兵回京城，命令周文言进兵征讨杜宠。
English: Because the Xu Shihui rebels threatened the capital, he led the troops back to Beijing and ordered Zhou Wenyan to enter the army to recruit Du Zhao.

古文：十一月己卯，齐遣兵五千济渡据姑孰。
现代文：十一月己卯日，齐国派兵五千人渡河占领了姑熟。
English: On the same day in November, the State of Qi sent five thousand soldiers to cross the river and occupy Guju.

古文：高祖命合州刺史徐度于冶城寺立栅，南抵淮渚。
现代文：高祖命令合州刺史徐度在冶城寺建立木栅，向南一直修到淮河边。
English: Gao Zu ordered Hezhou Jishi to slowly build a wooden grate in Yecheng Temple, and built it all the way south to the edge of the Huai River.

古文：齐又遣安州刺史翟子崇、楚州刺史刘仕荣、淮州刺史柳达摩领兵万人，于胡墅渡米粟三万石、马千匹，入于石头。
现代文：齐国又派安州刺史翟子崇、楚州刺史刘仕荣、淮州刺史柳达摩率领一万人，在胡墅渡河运来三万石米和上千匹马，运进了石头城。
English: In addition, the State of Qi sent ten thousand people led by An Zhou's Zhi Zi Chong, Chuzhou's Zhi Liu Shirong, and Huai Zhou's Zhi Liu Damo, and transported thirty thousand koku meters and more than a thousand horses across the river to Hu Villa, and transported them to Stone City.

古文：癸未，高祖遣侯安都领水军夜袭胡墅，烧齐船千余艘，周铁虎率舟师断齐运输，擒其北徐州刺史张领州，获运舫米数千石。
现代文：癸末日，产担派堡室垫带领水军夜袭胡墅，烧毁了齐国的一千多艘船，周铁虎率领水军的船队截断了齐军的运输，抓住了他们北徐州刺史强领州，缴获粮船上的几千石米。
English: At the end of the day, the production officer sent the castle chamber cushion to lead the navy to attack the Hu villa at night and burned more than a thousand ships of Qi. Zhou Tiehu led the navy's fleet to cut off the transport of the Qi army, seized their northern Xuzhou Zhishi strong territory state, and seized several thousand stone meters on the grain ship.

古文：仍遣韦载于大航筑城，使杜棱据守。
现代文：于是派韦载在大航建造土城，让杜棱据守。
English: Therefore, Pai Wei Zai built Tucheng in Dahang and let Du Ren keep it.

古文：齐人又于仓门水南立二栅以拒官军。
现代文：齐人又在仓门的河南岸立了两道木栅来抵挡官军。
English: The Qi people also erected two wooden fences on the south bank of the river at Cangmen to resist the government army.

古文：甲辰，嗣徽等攻冶城栅，高祖领铁骑精甲，出自西明门袭击之，贼众大溃。
现代文：甲辰曰，徐鱼丑邀等人攻打迨球的营栅，直担带领精锐的铁甲骑兵，从西明门袭击他们，叛军大败溃逃。
English: According to Ji Chen, Xu Yuxiu invited others to attack the camp gate of Xuanqiu, led the elite armored cavalry to attack them from the Ximing Gate, and the rebels were defeated and fled.

古文：嗣徽留柳达摩等守城，自率亲属腹心，往南州采石，以迎齐援。
现代文：徐嗣邀留下柳崖壁等人守城，自己率领亲近的心腹将士，去南州采石，迎候齐人的援军。
English: Xu Zhi invited Liu Yabai and others to stay behind to defend the city, and he led his close confidants to quarry stone in Nanzhou to welcome Qi's reinforcements.

古文：十二月癸丑，高祖遣侯安都领舟师，袭嗣徽家口于秦州，俘获数百人。
现代文：十二月癸丑日，直祖派侯安都带领水军，袭击徐嗣徽在秦塑的家属，抓住了数百人。
English: On the Day of the Ugly Duckling in December, Nao Zi sent Hou Andu to lead the navy to attack the family members of Xu Shihui in Qinpu, and caught hundreds of people.

古文：官军连舰塞淮口，断贼水路。
现代文：官军把船只连起来堵住进河，切断了叛军的水路。
English: The government forces tied up the boats to block the river and cut off the rebels' waterway.

古文：先是太白自十一月丙戌不见。乙卯出于东方。
现代文：在造之前从十一月丙戌起太白星就隐没了，乙卯日才出现在东方。
English: Before it was built, the Taibai Star disappeared from the sky in November, and only appeared in the east on the second day of the third month.

古文：丙辰，高祖尽命众军分部甲卒，对冶城立航渡兵，攻其水南二栅。
现代文：丙辰，高祖命令所有的军兵，立即渡河接近迨越，攻打它河南岸的两道营栅。
English: Hsin-Chen, Gao Zu ordered all the soldiers to immediately cross the river and attack the two camp gates on the south bank of the river.

古文：柳达摩等渡淮置阵，高祖督兵疾战，纵火烧栅，烟尘张天。贼溃，争舟相排挤，溺死者以千数。
现代文：柳达摩等人渡过啦摆开军阵，直担督兵力战，放火烧毁了敌军的木栅，烟尘遮蔽了天空，敌军溃败，争夺船只相互推挤，溺死的人就有几千。
English: Liu Damo and others crossed the river, set up an army formation, directly supervised the troop battle, set fire to the wooden grate of the enemy army, the smoke and dust covered the sky, the enemy army was defeated, the competing ships jostled each other, and there were thousands of people who drowned.

古文：时百姓夹淮观战，呼声震天地。
现代文：当时百姓都在幽两岸观战，呼声震动天地。
English: At that time, people were watching the battle on both sides of the strait, and their cries shook the world.

古文：军士乘胜，无不一当百，尽收其船舰，贼军慑气。
现代文：官军乘胜追击，无不以一当百，把敌军的船只全部缴获，敌军大受震慑。
English: The government army took advantage of the victory to pursue, and all the enemy ships were captured, and the enemy army was greatly deterred.

古文：是日嗣徽、约等领齐兵水步万余人，还据石头，高祖遣兵往江宁。据要险以断贼路。
现代文：这天徐嗣徽、任约等人率领齐的水陆军兵一万多人，回到石头城，高祖派兵去江宁，占领险要地带以切断叛军通路。
English: On this day, more than ten thousand soldiers and sailors led by Xu Shihui, Ren You and others returned to Stone City. Gaozu sent soldiers to Jiangning to occupy the critical area to cut off the rebel army.

古文：贼水步不敢进，顿江宁浦口，高祖遣侯安都领水军袭破之，嗣徽等乘单舸脱走，尽收其军资器械。
现代文：敌军水兵步兵都不敢冒然前进，驻扎在江宁浦，高祖派侯安都率领水军打败了他们，徐嗣徽等人乘着小船脱身逃走，他们所有的军资器械都被收缴了。
English: The enemy sailors and infantry did not dare to advance. They were stationed in Jiangningpu. Gao Zu sent Hou Andu to lead the navy to defeat them. Xu Shihui and others escaped in a small boat. All of their military equipment was confiscated.

古文：己未，官军四面攻城，自辰讫酉，得其东北小城，及夜兵不解。
现代文：己未，官军从四面攻城，从辰时到酉时，先占领了东北的小城，到夜间官军仍然围困不解。
English: Before long, the government army attacked the city from four sides. From the morning to the afternoon, they first occupied the small city in the northeast. By night, the government army was still besieged.

古文：庚申，达摩遣使侯子钦、刘仕荣等诣高祖请和，高祖许之，乃于城门外刑牲盟约，其将士部曲一无所问，恣其南北。
现代文：庚申日，柳达摩派使者侯子钦、刘仕荣等到高祖这边求和，高祖允诺了他们，就在城门外杀牲口订立盟约，叛军的部下均不追究，随他们解散。
English: On Goshun's day, Liu Damo sent envoys Hou Ziqin and Liu Shirong to Gaozu to sue for peace. Gaozu promised them, and they killed an animal outside the city gate to conclude a covenant. None of the rebel army's subordinates pursued them, and they disbanded.

古文：辛酉，高祖出石头南门，陈兵数万，送齐人归北者。
现代文：辛酉曰，高祖出石头城南门，列兵数万，送齐人回北方。
English: Xin Wei said that Gao Zu came out of the stone south gate of the city, tens of thousands of soldiers, and sent Qi people back to the north.

古文：壬戌，齐和州长史乌丸远自南州奔还历阳。
现代文：壬戌，齐和州长史乌丸远从南州回奔历阳。
English: Rinchen, Qi and Governor Shi Wumaru rushed back to Liyang from Nanzhou.

古文：江宁令陈嗣、黄门侍郎曹朗据姑孰反，高祖命侯安都、徐度等讨平之，斩首数千级，聚为京观。
现代文：江宁县令陈嗣、黄门侍郎曹朗据姑熟城谋反，高祖命令侯安都、徐度等人讨伐平定，砍下数千人头，聚成土丘。
English: Jiangning County ordered Chen Zhi and Huangmen servant Cao Lang to plot a rebellion in Guzhu City, Gao Zu ordered Hou Andu, Xu Du and others to fight and pacify, cut off thousands of heads, and gathered into mounds.

古文：石头、采石、南州悉平，收获马仗船米不可胜计。
现代文：石头、采石、南州都被平定，收获的船只米粮马匹武器不可计数。
English: Stone, quarrying, and Nanzhou have all been pacified, and the ships, rice, grain, horses, and weapons that have been harvested are countless.

古文：是月杜龛以城降。
现代文：当月杜龠献城投降。
English: In the same month, Duzheng surrendered the city.

古文：二年正月癸未，诛杜龛于吴兴，龛从弟北叟、司马沈孝敦并赐死。
现代文：二年正月癸未，在吴兴杀了杜宠，杜宠的堂弟杜北叟、司马沈孝敦都被赐死。
English: In the first month of the second year, Du Wei killed Du Zhaotong in Wu Xing. Du Zhaotong's cousin, Du Beiyao, and Sima Shen Xiaodong were both sentenced to death.

古文：二月庚申，高祖遣侯安都、周铁虎率舸舰备江州，仍顿梁山起栅。
现代文：二月庚申日，高祖派侯安都、周铁虎率领舰队在江州防卫，仍然驻兵梁山建造营栅。
English: On Goshun Day in February, Gaozhu sent Hou Andu and Zhou Tiehu to lead the fleet to defend Jiangzhou, and still stationed soldiers in Liangshan to build camp fences.

古文：甲子，敕司空有军旅之事，可骑马出入城内。
现代文：甲子，韶令司空如有军事，可以骑马出入城内。
English: If there is a military, you can enter and leave the city on horseback.

古文：戊辰，前宁远石城公外兵参军王位于石头沙际获玉玺四纽，高祖表以送台。
现代文：戊辰曰，前任宁远石城公外兵参军王位在石头城沙中得到四枚玉玺，高祖上表送入朝廷。
English: Wuchen said that Ningyuan's predecessor, Shicheng Gongfei, who joined the army to take the throne, received four jade brooches in the sand of Shicheng, and Gao Zu's upper watch was sent to the imperial court.

古文：三月戊戌，齐遣水军仪同萧轨、厍狄伏连、尧难宗、东方老、侍中裴英起、东广州刺史独孤辟恶、洛州刺史李希光，并任约、徐嗣徽等，率众十万出栅口，向梁山，帐内荡主黄丛逆击，败之，烧其前军船舰，齐顿军保芜湖。
现代文：三月戊戌日，齐国派水军仪同萧轨、库狄伏连、尧难宗、东方老、侍中裴英起、东广州刺史独孤辟恶、洛州刺史李希光，和任约、徐嗣徽等人，率领十万军队出栅，向梁山进兵，帐内荡主黄丛迎击，打败了他们，烧毁了他们先头部队的战船，齐军驻守芜湖。
English: On March 30th, the State of Qi dispatched the naval forces of Yi Tong Xiao Liao, Ku Di Fulian, Gong Nan Zong, Dongfang Lao, Tongzhong Pei Yingqi, Dongguang Zhi Duyuan, Luozhou Zhi Li Xiguang, Ren You and Xu Zhihui, leading 100,000 troops out of the gate and marching to Liangshan. Huang Cong, the leader of the troops, met the attack, defeated them, and burned the warships of their leading troops. The Qi army stationed in Wuhu.

古文：高祖遣定州史沈泰、吴郡太守裴忌就侯安都，共据梁山以御之。
现代文：高祖派定州刺史沈泰、吴郡太守裴忌去侯安都处，一起固守梁山。
English: Gao Zu sent Dingzhou's grand vizier Shen Tai and Wu County's governor Pei Bo to the capital of Hou'an to jointly defend Liangshan.

古文：自去冬至是，甘露频降于钟山、梅岗、南涧及京口、江宁县境，或至三数升，大如弈棋子，高祖表以献台。
现代文：从去年冬天到这时，甘露屡次降在钟山、撞尘、直泅和塞旦、江宁县等地，有的多达三升，大小像棋子，铋上表报告朝廷。
English: From last winter to this time, the nectar has repeatedly fallen in Zhongshan, Kuching, Zhouzhuang, Sedan, Jiangning County and other places, some as much as three liters, the size of which is like a chess piece, and it has been reported to the imperial court.

古文：四月丁巳，高祖诣梁山军巡抚。
现代文：四月丁巳日，高祖到梁山巡察安抚将士。
English: On the third day of April, Gaozu went to Liangshan to inspect and pacify the soldiers.

古文：五月甲申，齐兵发自芜湖，丙申，至秣陵故治。
现代文：五月甲申日，齐兵从芜湖出发，丙申曰到达秣陵旧镇。
English: On May Jiaxun Day, Qi soldiers set out from Wuhu, and Bishen soldiers arrived at the old town of Fuling.

古文：高祖遣周文育屯方山，徐度顿马牧，杜棱顿大航南。
现代文：高祖派周文育驻守方山，徐度驻兵马牧，杜棱驻兵大航南边。
English: Gao Zu sent Zhou Wenyu to garrison Fangshan, Xu Du to garrison Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and Du Ren to garrison the south side of Dafang.

古文：己亥，高祖率宗室王侯及朝臣将帅，于大司马门外白虎阙下刑牲告天，以齐人背约，发言慷慨，涕泗交流，同盟皆莫能仰视，士卒观者益奋。
现代文：己亥日，高祖率领宗室王侯和朝中文臣武将，在大司马门外白虎阙下杀牲祭告上天，因为齐人背弃盟约，慷慨陈辞，涕泪交流，一同盟告的人也无不悲难自胜，在旁观看的士兵们更是激奋不已。
English: On the day of Ji Hai, Gao Zu, led by his father-in-law, the prince, and the Chinese vassal general, announced the sacrifice to the sky under the white tiger outside the gate of Dasima. Because they all reneged on the covenant, they made generous speeches and exchanged tears. The people who announced the alliance were all saddened and self-defeating. The soldiers who were watching were even more excited.

古文：辛丑，齐军于秣陵故县跨淮立桥栅，引渡兵马。
现代文：辛丑日，齐国军队在秣陵故县横跨淮河修建桥梁木栅，运送兵马。
English: On that fateful day, the Qi army built a wooden bridge across the Huai River in Fuling County, transporting soldiers and horses.

古文：其夜至方山。
现代文：遣天夜间到达方山。
English: The heavenly messenger arrived at Fangshan Mountain at night.

古文：侯安都、周文育、徐度等各引还京师。
现代文：侯安都、周文育、徐度等人各自率军回到京城。
English: Hou Andu, Zhou Wenyu, Xu Du and others led their respective armies back to Beijing.

古文：癸卯，齐兵自方山进及兒塘，游骑至台。
现代文：癸卯日，齐军从方山进军儿塘，游散骑兵到达禁城。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, the Qi army marched from Fangshan into the Children's Pond, and the wandering cavalry arrived at the Forbidden City.

古文：周文育、侯安都顿白土岗，旗鼓相望，都邑震骇。
现代文：周文育、侯安都驻兵白土岗，两军对阵旗鼓相望，都城中人都十分惊骇。
English: Zhou Benyu and Hou An both stationed soldiers at Bai Du Gang, and the two armies faced off against each other. People in the capital were very shocked.

古文：高祖潜撤精卒三千配沈泰，渡江袭齐行台赵彦深于瓜步，获舟舰百余艘，陈粟万斛。
现代文：高祖悄悄地撤回三千精锐士兵配给沈泰，渡过长江在瓜步袭击齐人的行台赵彦深，缴获一百余艘战船，上万斛粮食。
English: Gaozu quietly withdrew three thousand elite soldiers to provide rations to Shen Tai, crossed the Yangtze River to attack the Qi troops at Guapu, captured more than a hundred warships and tens of thousands of grains.

古文：即日天子总羽林禁兵，顿于长乐寺。
现代文：遣一天皇帝召集守卫禁中的羽林军，驻扎在长乐寺。
English: One day, the emperor summoned the Ulin Army, which was stationed at Changle Temple.

古文：六月甲辰，齐兵潜至钟山龙尾。
现代文：六月甲辰日，齐军悄悄进至钟山龙尾。
English: On the first hour of June, the Qi army quietly entered Zhongshan Longwei.

古文：丁未，进至莫府山。
现代文：丁未日，进至莫府山。
English: On the following day, he went to Mt. Mofu.

古文：高祖遣钱明领水军出江乘，要击齐人粮运，尽获其船米，齐军于是大馁，杀马驴而食之。
现代文：高祖派钱明率领水军从江乘出兵，拦腰攻打齐人的运粮部队，敌军的船只粮食全部缴获，齐军因此粮食十分匮乏，杀驴马充饥。
English: Gao Zu sent Qian Ming to lead the naval forces from the Yangtze River to attack the Qi's grain transport troops. The enemy's ships were all captured, so the Qi army was very short of grain and had to kill donkeys and horses to satisfy their hunger.

古文：庚戌，齐军逾钟山，高祖众军分顿乐游苑东及覆舟山北，断其冲要。
现代文：庚戌日，齐军越过钟山，高祖的各部军队分别驻守乐游苑束和覆舟山北，截断了交通要道。
English: On the day of the Geng Zi, the Qi army crossed Zhongshan, and Gao Zu's various armies were stationed at Le Youyuan and Zhoushan North respectively, cutting off the important traffic route.

古文：壬子，齐军至玄武湖西北莫府山南，将据北郊坛。
现代文：壬子日，查军到达玄武湖；莫府山南侧，打算占领北郊坛。
English: On Jinsi Day, the Chao army arrived at Xuanwu Lake; on the south side of Mofu Mountain, they intended to occupy the northern suburb.

古文：众军自覆舟东移，顿郊坛北，与齐人相对。
现代文：各部军队从覆舟山东进，驻兵郊坛，和齐人相对阵。
English: The armies of various departments marched eastward from Zhoushan, stationed in the suburbs, and opposed the Qi people.

古文：其夜大雨震电，暴风拔木，平地水丈余，齐军尽夜坐立泥中，悬鬲以爨，而台中及潮沟北水退路燥，官军每得番易。
现代文：这夜有雷电大雨，暴风拔起树木，平地上涨水高达一丈多，齐军日夜坐立在泥中，高挂蛾锅做饭，而禁城中和潮沟水势退落路面干燥，官军占尽了优势。
English: On this night, there was lightning and heavy rain, the storm uprooted trees, the water on the plain rose as high as more than a meter, the Qi army sat in the mud day and night, cooking in a high-hanging moth pot, while the water in the Forbidden City and the tidal ditch receded, the road surface was dry, and the government army took full advantage.

古文：甲寅，少霁，高祖命众军秣马蓐食，迟明攻之。
现代文：甲寅曰，天稍放晴，高祖命令各部军队喂饱战马早食战饭，准备黎明时发动进攻。
English: A Yin said that the weather had cleared up a little, and Gaozhu ordered all the troops to feed the war horses with breakfast and dinner, and prepare to launch an attack at dawn.

古文：乙卯旦，自率帐内麾下出莫府山南，吴明彻、沈泰等众军首尾齐举，纵兵大战，侯安都自白下引兵横出其后，齐师大溃，斩获数千人，相蹂藉而死者不可胜计，生执徐嗣徽及其弟嗣宗，斩之以徇。
现代文：乙卯晨，亲自率领部下将士出兵莫府山南侧，吴明彻、沈泰等各部军队首尾一同出击，放开兵马舆敌大战，侯安都从白下领兵横击其后，齐国军队大败溃逃，杀死和俘虏的有数千人，相互挤踏而死的不可计数，生擒了涂鱼邀和他的弟弟涂鱼迭，把他们斩首示众。
English: In the morning, Yi Duchen personally led his subordinate soldiers to the south side of Mofu Mountain. Wu Mingche, Shen Tai and other troops from various departments attacked together, unleashing a large-scale war between soldiers and horses. Hou Andu led the soldiers from Baixia to cross-attack. After that, the Qi army was defeated and fled. There were thousands of people killed and captured, and the deaths caused by jostling each other were incalculable. He and his brother, Tu Yuying, were decapitated and paraded.

古文：追奔至于临沂。
现代文：追击逃兵追到临沂。
English: Chased the deserters to Linyi.

古文：其江乘、摄山、钟山等诸军相次克捷，虏萧轨、东方老、王敬宝、李希光、裴英起等将帅凡四十六人。
现代文：江乘、摄山、钟山等地军队相继获得胜利，俘虏了萧轨、东方老、王敬宝、李希光、裴英起等敌军将帅共四十六人。
English: The armies of Jiangren, Zheshan, Zhongshan and other places won victories one after another, and captured a total of forty-six enemy generals such as Xiao Trai, Dongfanglao, Wang Jingbao, Li Xiguang, and Pei Yingqi.

古文：其军士得窜至江者，缚荻筏以济，中江而溺，流尸至京口，翳水弥岸。
现代文：齐军士兵逃到长江的，捆扎草筏渡江，在中间沉水溺死的尸体流散到京口，遍布水面和岸边。
English: The Qi soldiers who fled to the Yangtze River tied straw rafts to cross the river, and the bodies of those who drowned in the middle of the river were scattered to Beijing, all over the water and the shore.

古文：丁巳，众军出南州，烧贼舟舰。
现代文：丁巳日，各部军队从南州出兵，烧毁敌军战船。
English: On the following day, troops from all branches of the military were dispatched from Nanzhou to burn the enemy's warships.

古文：己未，斩刘归义、徐嗣彦、傅野猪于建康市。
现代文：己末日，在建康市中将刘归义、徐嗣彦、傅野猪等人斩首。
English: On the last day of his life, he beheaded Lieutenant Generals Liu Guiyi, Xu Shihong, Fu Yangsi and others in Jiankang City.

古文：是日解严。
现代文：这一天解除戒严。
English: This was the day martial law was lifted.

古文：庚申，萧轨、东方老、王敬宝、李希光、裴英起皆伏诛。
现代文：庚申日，萧轨、东方老、王敬宝、李希光、裴英起等人都被正法。
English: On Goshun's day, Xiao Rong, Dongfanglao, Wang Jingbao, Li Xiguang, Pei Yingqi and others were all rectified.

古文：高祖表解南徐州以授侯安都。
现代文：高祖上表请求解除南徐州刺史之职而授予侯安都。
English: Gaozhu requested to be relieved of the post of Southern Xuzhou chief historian and awarded it to Hou Andu.

古文：七月丙子，诏授高祖中书监、司徒、扬州刺史，进爵为公，增邑并前五千户，侍中、使持节、都督中外诸军事、将军、尚书令、班剑、鼓吹、甲仗并如故，并给油幢皁轮车。
现代文：七月丙子日，韶令授高祖中书监、司徒、扬州刺史，进爵位为公，采邑增加到五千户，侍中、使持节、都督中外诸军事、将军、尚书令、班剑、鼓吹、甲仗都如故，并赐给油幢皂轮车。
English: On the third day of July, the imperial edict awarded Gao Zu with the titles of middle school librarian, scholar, and Yangzhou historian, and promoted him to the peerage. The number of counties and townships increased to 5,000, and the ranks of attendants, envoys, military officers, generals, officials, swordsmen, propagandists, and cavalrymen all remained the same, and a soap wheel cart was given to the oil company.

古文：是月侯瑱以江州入附。
现代文：这个月侯填率江州来降。
English: This month, the voter turnout rate in Jiangzhou has fallen.

古文：遣侯安都镇上流，定南中诸郡。
现代文：派侯安都镇守上游，平定南中各郡。
English: He assigned the town of Hou'an to guard the upper reaches and pacified the south and central counties.

古文：八月癸卯，太府卿何敱、新州刺史华志各上玉玺一。高祖表以送台，诏归之高祖。
现代文：八月癸卯日，太府卿何败、新州刺史华志分别献上一块玉玺，高祖上表送进宫中，韶令归还给高祖。
English: On the last day of August, Taifu-ch'ing He Bi and Xinzhou-ch'ing Shi Hua Zhi respectively presented a piece of jade bowl, Gao Zu brought the bowl into the palace, and the imperial edict was returned to Gao Zu.

古文：是日诏高祖食安吉、武康二县，合五千户。
现代文：当天韶令高祖以安吉、武康二县作为食邑，共五千户。
English: On the same day, Gao Zu was ordered to use Anji and Bukang counties as food towns, with a total of 5,000 households.

古文：九月壬寅，改年曰太平元年。
现代文：九月壬寅日，改年号为太平元年。
English: In September, Renin Day, the year was changed to Taiping Year.

古文：进高祖位丞相、录尚书事、镇卫大将军，改刺史为牧，进封义兴郡公，侍中、司徒、都督、班剑、鼓吹、甲仗、皁轮车并如故。
现代文：高祖进为丞相、绿尚书事、镇卫大将军，改刺史为牧，进封义兴郡公，侍中、司徒、都督、班剑、鼓吹、甲仗、皂轮车均如故。
English: Gao Zu was promoted to the post of chancellor, the post of secretary of the Ministry of Education and Culture, and the post of general of the People's Guards. He was also promoted to the post of herdsman, the post of governor of Yixing County, the post of chamberlain, the post of tutor, the post of prefectural governor, the post of bannerman, the post of preacher, the post of military commander, and the post of soap wheel car.

古文：丁未，中散大夫王彭笺称今月五日平旦于御路见龙迹，自大社至象阙，亘三四里。
现代文：丁末日，中散大夫王彭上书称逭月五日清晨在御路上出现了龙的脚印，从大社到象阙，延续了三四里。
English: On the last day of Ding Dynasty, Zhongshan doctor Wang Peng wrote that in the early morning of the 5th day of the 3rd month, dragon footprints appeared on the main road, extending for three or four miles from Taisha to Xiangyao.

古文：庚申，诏追赠高祖考侍中、光禄大夫，加金章紫绶，封义兴郡公，谥曰恭。
现代文：庚申日，韶令追赠高祖先父为侍中、光禄大夫，加金章紫绶，封为义兴郡公，谧号为恭。
English: On Goshun's day, the imperial edict posthumously awarded Gao's ancestor's father with the titles of Zongzhong (侍中) and Guanglu Dafu (光禄大夫), as well as the Gold Medal with Purple Ribbon, the title of Yixing Guo Gong (義兴郡公) and the posthumous name of Gong (恭).

古文：十月甲戌，敕丞相自今入问讯，可施别榻以近扆坐。
现代文：十月甲戌，韶令丞相从此以后入宫问事，可以在帝座旁安置坐榻。
English: In October, Emperor Jiajing decreed that from then on, whenever a prime minister entered the palace, he could be accommodated next to the imperial throne.

古文：二年正月壬寅，天子朝万国于太极东堂，加高祖班剑十人，并前三十人，余如故。
现代文：太平二年正月壬寅日，天子在太极束堂受万国朝见，加封高祖班剑十人，加上以前的共三十人，其他如故。
English: On the first day of the second month of the Taiping Year, Ren Yin Day, the Heavenly Son was received by the world's dynasties at Taiji Zoku Hall, and ten people were added to Gaozubanjian, adding to the previous total of thirty people, and the others remained the same.

古文：丁未，诏赠高祖兄道谭散骑常侍、使持节、平北将军、南兗州刺史、长城县公，谥曰昭烈；弟休先侍中、使持节、骠骑将军、南徐州刺史、武康县侯，谥曰忠壮，食邑各二千户。
现代文：丁未日。韶令追赠高祖兄长陈道谈为散骑常侍、使持节、平北将军、南兖州刺史、长城县公，谧号昭烈；弟弟陈休先为侍中、使持节、骠骑将军、南徐州刺史、武康县公，谧号忠壮，食邑各一千户。
English: According to the imperial edict, Gao Zu's elder brother, Chen Daodan, was posthumously awarded the titles of "free-riding equerry," "emissary," "Pingbei general," "Southern Zhangzhou official," and "Great Wall county official," with the honorary title of "Zhao Liang"; his younger brother, Chen Xiu, was posthumously awarded the titles of "chamberlain," "emissary," "riding general," "Southern Xuzhou official," and "Wukang county official," with the honorary title of "Zhao Liang," and the honorary title of "Zhao Liang," with the honorary title of "

古文：甲寅，遣兼侍中谒者仆射陆缮策拜长城县夫人章氏为义兴国夫人。
现代文：甲寅日，派兼侍中谒者仆射陆缮策拜长城县夫人章氏为义兴国夫人。
English: On the first day of the new year, Zhang, the wife of the Great Wall County, was appointed as the wife of Yixing.

古文：丁卯，诏赠高祖祖侍中、太常卿，谥曰孝。
现代文：丁卯日，诏令追赠高祖先祖父为侍中、太常卿，谧为孝。
English: On the day of Dingwu, the imperial edict posthumously awarded Gao's ancestor's grandfather as a chamberlain, Tai Changqing, and Gao as a filial son.

古文：追封高祖祖母许氏吴郡嘉兴县君，谥曰敬；妣张氏义兴国太夫人，谥曰宣。
现代文：追封高祖先祖母许氏为吴郡嘉兴县君，谧为敬；先母张氏为义兴国太夫人，谧号宣。
English: Gao Fenggao's ancestor's grandmother, Ms. Xu, was the first lady of Jiaxing County, Wuxi County, and her surname was Jing; her ancestor's mother, Ms. Zhang, was the second lady of Yixing Province, and her surname was Xuan.

古文：二月庚午，萧勃举兵，自广州渡岭，顿南康，遣其将欧阳頠、傅泰及其子孜为前军，至于豫章，分屯要险，南江州刺史余孝顷起兵应勃，高祖命周文育、侯安都率众讨平之。
现代文：二月庚午，萧勃起兵，从广州越过大庾岭，驻兵南康，派他的大将欧阳愿、傅泰和他的儿子萧孜为先锋部队，到达豫章，分别驻扎在险要之处，南江州刺史余孝顷起兵响应萧勃，高祖命令周文育、侯安都率领军队讨伐平定了他们。
English: On the afternoon of February, Xiao Bo raised an army, crossed the Dalatangling from Guangzhou, stationed troops in Nankang, sent his generals Ouyang Zhen, Fu Tai and his son Xiao Ze as the vanguard troops, arrived in Yuzhang, and stationed in the critical places respectively. The governor of South Jiangsu Province, Yu Xiao He, raised an army in response to Xiao Bo. Gao Zu ordered Zhou Wenyu and Hou Andu to lead the army to fight and pacify them.

古文：八月甲午，进高祖位太傅，加黄钺，剑履上殿，入朝不趋，赞拜不名，并给羽葆鼓吹一部，其侍中、都督、录尚书、镇卫大将军、扬州牧、义兴郡公、班剑、甲仗、油幢皁轮车并如故。
现代文：八月甲午，高祖进为太傅，加赐黄铍，准许佩剑着履上殿言事，入朝不必急行，拜见不必称名，并赐给一部羽葆鼓吹，侍中、都督、绿尚书、镇卫大将军、扬州牧、义兴郡公、班剑、甲仗、油幢皂轮车均如故。
English: On the afternoon of August 1st, Gao Zujin was promoted to Taifu, and was given the title of Huang Qi, and was allowed to wear a sword to carry out the words of the palace. He did not have to rush to enter the palace, and he did not have to say his name when he met the emperor. He was also given a feathered fan to preach, and the positions of chamberlain, governor of the capital, Green Shangshu, Zhenwei general, Yangzhou herdsman, Yixing county magistrate, Panjian, Jiajing, and Yangtze soap wheel were all the same.

古文：丙申，加高祖前后部羽葆鼓吹。
现代文：丙申日，加高祖前后部羽葆鼓吹。
English: On the first day of the new year, Gao Zu added the front and back feather fan.

古文：是时，湘州刺史王琳拥兵不应命，高祖遣周文育、侯安都率众讨之。
现代文：这时，翅业刺史王继拥兵自重不听从命令，直担派厘塞直、堡室都率领军队讨伐。
English: At this time, Wang Shishi of the Wing Industry, following the soldiers, did not obey the order out of pride, and led the army in a crusade.

古文：九月辛丑，诏曰：
现代文：九月辛丑，皇帝下诏书说：
English: In September, the emperor issued an imperial edict saying:

古文：肇昔元胎剖判，太素氤氲，崇建人皇，必凭洪宰。
现代文：自从天地开辟，宇宙初成，尊立人间君主，必定依仗高明的统治。
English: Ever since the heavens and earth were created, and the universe was first formed, the establishment of human monarchs must have depended on the rule of wisdom.

古文：故贤哲之后，牧伯征于四方，神武之君，大监治乎万国。又有一匡九合，渠门之赐以隆，戮带围温，行宫之宠斯茂，时危所以贞固，运泰所以光熙，斯乃千载同风，百王不刊之道也。
现代文：所以贤明的君主，有牧伯之官镇守四方，神威的帝王，有大的宰臣协理万国，又有匡正天下九合诸侯之大业，赏赐渠门旗而显示隆重，戮带围温的奇功，赢得行宫的盛大恩宠，时事危急便匡扶国势，国运昌泰便发扬光大，遣正是千年以来相同，历代未加更改的正道。
English: Therefore, a wise monarch, a pastoral official who guards the four directions, a powerful emperor, a great vice-minister and assistant governor of all countries, and the great cause of correcting the world's nine concordant princes, awarding the canal gate flag and showing grandeur, winning the miracle of surrounding the palace, winning the grand grace of the palace, and supporting the national situation when the current situation is critical, and the national movement of Changtai will carry forward the glory. The way is the same for thousands of years, and the right way has not changed throughout the ages.

古文：太傅义兴公，允文允武，乃圣乃神，固天生德，康济黔首。
现代文：太傅义兴公，文才武略，具有神圣之威，实在是上天有德，以广济百姓之难。
English: Taifu Yi Xing Gong, literary talent and military strategy, with sacred authority, is really a heavenly virtue, to help the people in difficulties.

古文：昔在休期，早隆朝寄，远逾沧海，大拯交、越。
现代文：在从前昌明时期，早就不负朝廷重托，远达沧海，开拓到交州、越州。
English: In the former Changming period, it had already fulfilled the heavy trust of the imperial court, reaching as far as Canghai, and opening up to Jiaozhou and Yuezhou.

古文：皇运不造，书契未闻，中国其亡，兵凶总至。哀哀噍类，譬彼穷牢，悠悠上天，莫云斯极。
现代文：国运不利，连文字记载上都不曾有过如此惨痛之事，国家灭亡，敌兵屡至，可怜的百姓哀哀痛哭，好像身处牢狱，苍天遥远，远不可及。
English: The fortunes of the country were not good. Even in written records, there has never been such a tragic event. The country perished, enemy soldiers repeatedly arrived, and the poor people mourned and wept. It was as if they were in a prison. The sky was far away and unreachable.

古文：否终则泰，元辅应期，救此将崩，援兹已溺，乘舟履輂，架险浮深，经略中途，毕歼群丑。
现代文：然而否极泰来，辅佐之臣应命而出，挽救了即将灭亡的国运，援助了已经溺于兵灾国难中的人民，乘着舟车，在险隘处架起渡桥在深渊中救起沉溺之人，以经略之才理繁治乱，彻底消灭了众多凶恶之徒。
English: However, Negi Taira, the assistant minister, came out in response to the order, saved the national movement that was about to perish, assisted the people who were already drowning in the military disaster and the national calamity, took the boat, set up a ferry bridge in the dangerous place and rescued the drowning people in the abyss, and managed the chaos with the skill of strategy, and completely eliminated many vicious people.

古文：洎乎石头、姑孰，流髓履肠，一朝指捴，六合清晏。
现代文：从石头、姑熟，披肝沥胆历尽艰险，指挥若定，四方遂得安宁。
English: From the stone, the skillful, the brave, the perilous, the commanding, the four quarters are at peace.

古文：是用光昭下武，翼亮中都，雪三后之勍仇，夷三灵之巨慝。
现代文：因此光复了下武地区，辅佐光大了京城的帝业，消灭了三代皇帝的强敌，平定了天地人共同指斥的大恶之徒。
English: As a result, he recovered the Shimobu region, assisted Guang Guang to expand the imperial business in Beijing, eliminated the strong enemies of three generations of emperors, and leveled the great evildoers who were jointly condemned by heaven and earth.

古文：尧台禹佐，未始能阶，殷相周师，固非云拟。
现代文：即使是尧和禹的辅佐大臣也比不上太傅义兴公的功劳，殷、周两朝的相国太师也比不上太傅的才干。
English: Even the Vice-Minister of Su and Yu could not match the merit of Taifu Yixinggong, and the Taishi of Yin and Zhou dynasties could not match the talent of Taifu.

古文：重之以屯剥余象，荆楚大崩，天地无心，乘舆委御，五胡荐食，竞谋诸夏，八方棋跱，莫有匡救，强臣放命，黜我冲人，顾影于荼孺之魂，甘心于宁卿之辱。
现代文：又加上当时时局凶险，荆楚之地形势危难，天地没有秉持公心，以致皇帝之位为他人所夺，各方少数民族政权纷纷觊觎吞食中原。当此之时，各方都没有出来匡救时局的，强悍的逆臣将我朝幼主废黜，幼主衹能像荼孺的孤魂那样漂泊，甘心忍受宁卿喂牛时所遭受的那样的耻辱。
English: In addition, the situation at that time was perilous, the situation in Jingchu was in danger, heaven and earth did not uphold justice, so that the emperor's position was taken by others, and the ethnic minority regimes of all parties devoured the Central Plains. At this time, all parties did not come out to save the situation, and the strong rebellious vassal deposed my young master. The young master could wander like the lonely soul of a baboon, and was willing to endure the humiliation suffered by Ningqing when feeding cattle.

古文：却按下髻，求哀之路莫从，窃鈇逃责，容身之地无所。
现代文：他离开宫殿，披头散发，找不到求救的地方，大臣窃取王权，帝王衹能流离失所，连容身之处都没有。
English: He left the palace, lost his head, could not find a place to call for help, the minister stole the royal power, the emperor was displaced, and there was no place to hide.

古文：公神兵奄至，不日清澄，惟是孱蒙，再膺天录。
现代文：太傅义兴公的神兵所至，立刻恢复了天地的清明，因此我朝的幼主才得以重新登上上天赐予的帝位。
English: When Taifu Yixing Gong's divine soldiers arrived, they immediately restored the clarity of heaven and earth, so the young lord of my dynasty was able to re-ascend the throne given by heaven.

古文：斯又巍巍荡荡，无德而称焉。
现代文：这功业又是巍峨浩荡，无法用言语来称颂表达的。
English: This feat is so tremendous that it cannot be praised in words.

古文：加以仗兹忠义，屠彼逆，震部夷氛，稽山罢昆，番禺、蠡泽，北鄙西郊，歼厥凶徒，罄无遗种。
现代文：又凭着他的忠义之心，来平定那些妖逆之徒，不论是震泽的还是稽山的叛乱都得以平息，在番禺、蠡泽及北部和西部的边野地区，那些凶徒也被他歼灭殆尽，不再有谬种流传。
English: He also used his loyalty to quell the rebellious devils, and quelled the rebellions of both Shizawa and Jishan. In Panyu, Heze, and the northern and western regions of Henno, he also annihilated the villains, and there was no longer any propagation of heresy.

古文：斯则兆民之命，修短所县，率土之基，兴亡是赖。
现代文：这是百姓的命数所在，国家存续时间长短的关键，本朝基业的兴亡，都仰仗着他。
English: This is where the lives of the people lie, the key to the length of the country's existence, and the rise and fall of this dynasty's foundation all depend on him.

古文：于是刑礼兼训，沿革有章，中外成平，遐迩宁一，用能使阳光合魄，曜象呈晖，栖阁游庭，抱仁含信，宏勋该于厚地，大道格于玄天。
现代文：这样一来，国家无论刑法还是礼仪都得到昌明，沿袭和变革亦有章法可依。朝廷内外一片平和，远近也都安详宁静，因而能让太阳聚集光芒，月五星都呈现光辉，阁楼庭院，都具有仁信的内涵。宏大的功勋囊括了大地，大道也上达青天。
English: As a result, both the criminal law and the etiquette of the country have been enlightened, and there are rules to follow for succession and reform. There is peace inside and outside the imperial court, and peace and tranquility are near and far, so that the sun can gather light, the five stars of the moon can shine, and the attic courtyard has the connotation of benevolence. The magnificent feats have covered the earth, and the avenue has reached the blue sky.

古文：羲、农、炎、昊以来，卷领垂衣之世，圣人济物，未有如斯者也。
现代文：自伏羲、神农、炎帝、太昊四帝的时代以来，上古卷领垂衣的治世裹，圣人治理天下，也没有能像这样的了。
English: Since the era of Fuxi, Shennong, Yan Di, and Taoha four emperors, the reign of the ancient roll-necked and draped robe, the sage governing the world, has not been like this.

古文：夫备物典策，桓、文是膺，助理阴阳，萧、曹不让，未有功高于宇县，而赏薄于伊、周，凡厥人祇，固怀延伫，是由公谦捴自牧，降损为怀，嘉数迟回，永言增叹。
现代文：至于仪卫、祭祀等方面所受的特别册命，可与齐桓公、晋文公相比，协助治理国家的才能，则不亚于萧何、曹参，但从未有像他这样在治理区域内功勋卓著，得到的回报却比伊尹和周公微薄的，凡是入神都期待已久，等待国家给与他应有的回报。但实在是因为陈公举止谦逊，注意自己的修养，总想降低自己的地位，减损自己的利益，所以美好的运数迟迟不至，说起这样的情况实在令人叹惜。
English: As for the special orders received in the aspects of ceremonial guards and sacrifices, they can be compared with those of Qi Huan Gong and Jin Wen Gong, and the ability to assist in governing the country is no less than that of Xiao He and Cao San. However, there has never been anyone like him who has distinguished himself in governing the region, but the rewards he has received are more meager than those of Yi Yin and Zhou Gong. Anyone who enters the gods have been waiting for a long time, waiting for the country to give him the rewards he deserves. However, it is because Chen Gong behaves modestly, pays attention to his cultivation, and always wants to lower his status and impair his interests,

古文：岂可申兹雅尚，久废朝猷，宜戒司勋，敬升鸿典。
现代文：怎么能因为他一向谦退的美好风尚，就废除了对有功之人封赏的朝廷大典呢?应该命令主管功赏的司勋，郑重地举行赏功的大典。
English: How could he, because of his modesty and good manners, abolish the imperial ceremony for rewarding meritorious people? He should order the officials in charge of the award to solemnly hold a grand ceremony for rewarding meritorious people.

古文：且重华大圣。妫汭惟贤，盛德之祀无忘，公侯之门必复。
现代文：况且即使是舜也极其尊重贤能的人，从不忘记举行彰扬盛德的祭祀，公侯的门第一定给与恢复。
English: Moreover, even the eunuchs had the utmost respect for the virtuous. They never forgot to hold a sacrifice to celebrate their virtue, and the door of the prince was the first to be restored.

古文：是以殷嘉亶甫，继后稷之官，尧命羲和，纂重黎之位。
现代文：因此殷代时嘉奖宜甫，让他继承后稷的官位，尧任命羲和，让他承担祖先重黎的职务。
English: Therefore, during the Yin Dynasty, Yi Fu was commended, and he was allowed to inherit the official position of Hou Yi, and he was appointed to the position of Xing He, and he was allowed to assume the duties of his ancestor Zeng Li.

古文：况其本枝攸建，宜誓山河者乎？
现代文：更何况是子孙皆有封立，应该和他定下盟誓，共有天下的人呢?
English: And what is more, since all his descendants are sealed, who is he that should make a covenant with him, to be the common father of all?

古文：其进公位相国，总百揆，封十郡为陈公，备九锡之礼，加玺绂，远游冠、绿綟绶，位在诸侯王上，其镇卫大将军、扬州牧如故。
现代文：因此提升他担任相国的职位，总领百官，赏十个封郡，尊称陈公。准许设立九锡的礼仗，加赐玺绂、远游冠、绿纹绶，地位在诸侯王之上，原来的镇卫大将军、扬州牧的职位还保持原样。
English: Therefore, he was promoted to the position of the partner country, the leader of a hundred officials, awarded ten counties, and was given the honorable title of Chen Gong. He was allowed to set up a ceremonial battle of Jiuxi, and was given a scepter, a traveling crown, and a green ribbon. His position was above the princes. The original position of the Zhenwei general and Yangzhou herdsman remained unchanged.

古文：策曰：大哉乾元，资日月以贞观，至哉坤元，凭山川以载物。故惟天为大，陟配者钦明，惟王建国，翼辅者齐圣。
现代文：策书说：悠悠苍天，凭月示人正道，茫茫大地，靠山川负载万物，因此衹有天是最浩大的，能够享受配天祭祀者要具有光明的德行，君王得以建立国统，辅翼他的人可谓智虑敏达。
English: The policy book said: "The sky is vast, the moon shows people the right path, the vast land, and the mountains and rivers carry everything. Therefore, the sky is the largest. Those who can enjoy the heavenly sacrifice must have a bright virtue. The king can establish the national unity, and those who support him can be said to be intelligent and sensitive.

古文：是以文、武之佐，磻溪蕴其玉璜，尧、舜之臣，荣河镂其金版。
现代文：因此周文王、武王的辅佐大臣姜太公，就像在硒矿蕴藏了玉璜一样的美质，尧、舜的大臣，在五色云气四溢的黄河边，做出了一番事业，镂刻在了金版上。
English: Therefore, King Zhouwen and King Wu's assistant minister Jiang Taigong, just like the selenium mine that contains the same quality as jade, the ministers of jade and antimony, on the edge of the five-colored clouds of the Yellow River, made a great cause, engraved on the gold plate.

古文：况乎体得一之鸿姿，宁阳九之危厄，拯横流于碣石，扑燎火于昆岑，驱驭于韦、彭，跨弩于齐、晋，神功行而靡用，圣道运而无名者乎？
现代文：更何况他还是那样的人：能体察到天数之首得一的鸿姿，能安定历数中属阳九之敷的灾荒困厄的年景，能挽救动荡的局势，像在碣石引导洪水入海，就像在昆仑扑灭了大火，纵马奔驰在韦、彭之乡，来回行走于齐、晋之地。成就丁卓著的功绩而没有被重用，运化了圣明的道义而没有名气的人呢?
English: What's more, he is still the kind of person who can experience the glory of being the first to win the first place in days, can stabilize the years of calamity and disaster that belong to the nine years of the solar calendar, and can save the turbulent situation, such as guiding the flood into the sea in Shaoshi, like extinguishing the fire in Kunlun, and galloping in the townships of Wei and Peng, and walking back and forth in the lands of Qi and Jin. What about people who have achieved outstanding achievements but have not been reused, and have carried out sacred morality but have no fame?

古文：今将授公典策，其敬听朕命：日者昊天不吊，钟乱于我国家，网漏吞舟，强胡内赑，茫茫宇宙，惵々黎元，方足圆颅，万不遗一，太清否亢，桥山之痛已深，大宝屯如，平阳之祸相继。
现代文：现在将授给陈公典策，你要恭敬地听我的韶命：过去，上天不怜悯苍生，在我们国家降下灾乱，国家法令不严，罪大者得以逃避法网，强大的外族又不断入侵，宇宙浩渺，黎民惊恐，百姓遭到荼毒，一万人中也没有一人幸存。天道不振，帝位受到挑战而处境不利，国家遭到桥山一役的痛苦已经很是深切，又有平阳地方的祸乱继踵而至。
English: Now Chen Gong will be given the grand strategy, and you must respectfully listen to my desperate life: In the past, the heavens did not have mercy on all living beings, disaster and chaos descended on our country, the national laws were not strict, the criminals were able to escape the net of law, powerful foreigners continued to invade, the universe was vast, the Li people were terrified, the people were poisoned, and none of the ten thousand people survived. The heavenly way was not strong, the imperial throne was challenged and was in a disadvantageous position, the country suffered a very deep pain from the Battle of Qiaoshan, and the disasters in the Pingyang region followed.

古文：上宰膺运，康救兆民，鞠旅于滇池之南，扬旌于桂岭之北，悬三光于已坠，谧四海于群飞，屠猰窳于中原，斩鲸鲵于蒙汜。
现代文：陈公在此时承担起天下的气运，安抚百姓，拯救黎民。在滇池之南誓师，于桂岭以北举兵，将坠落的日月星辰重新悬挽，使群鸟惊飞的四海重新宁静。在中原他屠减了狈窳一样妖邪的凶寇，又在帝乡降服了鲸鲵一样凶猛的恶徒。
English: At this time, Chen Gong assumed the fate of the world, pacified the people, and saved the Li people. In the south of Dianchi, he swore an oath, and in the north of Guiling, he raised an army to suspend the falling sun, moon, and stars again, so that the four seas that the birds were alarmed by would be calm again. In the Central Plains, he slaughtered the evil invaders who were as evil as baboons, and in the imperial town, he subdued the villains who were as fierce as whales.

古文：荡宁上国，光启中兴。
现代文：重新使帝室安宁，月之光再次开启，中兴的局面出现了。
English: The imperial palace was restored to tranquility, the moonlight was turned on again, and the situation of ZTE appeared.

古文：此则公之大造于皇家者也。
现代文：这些是陈公为皇室做出的最大贡献。
English: These are Chen Gong's greatest contributions to the imperial family.

古文：既而天未悔祸，夷丑荐臻，南夏崩腾，西京荡覆，群胡孔炽，藉乱乘间，推纳籓枝，盗假神器，冢司昏摐，旁引寇雠，既见贬于桐宫，方谋危于汉阁。
现代文：然而上天仍然不为它所降下的灾祸懊悔，那些夷族丑类又一次作乱。国家的南部动荡纷乱，西京废毁，那些少数民族的贼寇气焰嚣张，乘着动乱的形势，另立宗室的子弟为帝，窃取了神圣的帝位。
English: However, Heaven still did not repent for the calamity it had brought down. Those ugly barbarians once again wreaked havoc. The southern part of the country was in turmoil, the western capital was destroyed, and those ethnic minority thieves and robbers were full of arrogance. Taking advantage of the turbulent situation, they set up the son of another family as emperor and stole the sacred imperial throne.

古文：皇运已殆，何殊赘旒，中国摇然，非徒如线。
现代文：国家的长官又因昏聩无能而屈从，又去结交勾引另外的贼寇，皇室的命运已经非常危殆，虚居其位而不掌握实权；国家根基摇动将绝，形势非常险恶。
English: The chiefs of the country have succumbed due to their drowsiness and incompetence, and they have made friends and seduced other thieves and robbers. The fate of the royal family is already very precarious, they are vainly occupying their positions without holding real power; the foundation of the country is about to shake, and the situation is very dangerous.

古文：公赫然投袂，匡救本朝，复莒齐都，平戎王室。朕所以还膺宝历，重履辰居，挹建武之风猷，歌宣王之雅颂。
现代文：陈公一怒之下，振衣而起，来匡救本朝，他收复了我国的首都，就像田单使莒重新成为齐国都城那样，平定戎族的王室，我因此才能又一次承当大宝之位，重新踏进天子的居所。挹取中兴汉室的光武帝的风采，高歌赞颂中兴周王朝的周宣王的诗篇。
English: Chen Gong, in a fit of anger, got up and came to the rescue of this dynasty. He regained the capital of our country, just as Tian Shan made Zou become the capital of Qi again, and pacified the royal family of the Rong people. Therefore, I can once again assume the position of a great treasure and re-enter the residence of the heavenly son. Capture the style of Emperor Guangwu of the Zhongxing Han Dynasty, and sing high praises of the poetry of King Zhou Xuan of the Zhongxing Zhou Dynasty.

古文：此又公之再造于皇家者也。
现代文：这是陈公对皇家所做出的又一次贡献。
English: This is another contribution made by Chen Gong to the royal chorus.

古文：公应务之初，登庸惟始，三川五岭，莫不窥临，银洞珠宫，所在宁谧。
现代文：陈公刚被举用就任，承担职责的时候，国中的山川峰岳，他没有不去视察亲临的，那些豪华的洞府宫合，都因此归于宁谧。
English: When Chen Gongang was appointed to the post and assumed his duties, he did not fail to visit the mountains, rivers and peaks in the country, and the luxurious Dongfu Palace, all of which belonged to Ningbo.

古文：孙、卢肇衅，越貊为灾，番部阽危，势将沦殄。
现代文：彊同、卢子雄挑起战乱，南方少数民族掀起灾祸，番禺地方面临危难，将要沦陷败亡。
English: Xing Tong and Lu Zi Xiong provoked the war, the southern ethnic minorities raised the disaster, and the Panyu side was in danger and was about to fall and perish.

古文：公赤旗所指，祅垒洞开，白羽才捴，凶徒粉溃。
现代文：陈公帅旗指向之处，那些妖孽的堡垒便轰然洞开；他的羽扇轻轻挥动，那些凶徒便像鳌粉一样地溃败了。
English: Wherever Chen Gongshuai's banner was pointed, those evil fortresses were blown open; with a flick of his feather fan, those villains were crushed like powder.

古文：非其神武，久丧南籓。
现代文：如果没有陈公的神武，南部藩属早就沦丧了。
English: If it were not for Chen Gong's bravery, Nanbu Domain would have fallen long ago.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这是陈公的又一件功绩。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：大同之末，边政不修，李贲狂迷，窃我交、爱，敢称大号，骄恣甚于尉他，据有连州，雄豪炽于梁硕。
现代文：左回末年，边疆的事务松懈败坏，李贲狂妄悖乱，盗取了交州、爱州，竟敢谐称帝号，比殿他更为骄恣，占据众多州县，他的雄豪气焰，比梁硕还要嚣张。
English: In the last years of Zuo Hui, the affairs of the frontier were slack and corrupt. Li Gan was arrogant and disorderly. He stole Jiaozhou and Aizhou, and dared to call himself emperor. He was more arrogant than the emperor and occupied many states and counties. His heroic spirit was even more arrogant than Liang Shuo.

古文：公英谟雄算，电扫风行，驰御楼船，直跨沧海，新昌、典澈，备履艰难，苏历、嘉宁，尽为京观。
现代文：陈公英姿勃发，神谋智算，像闪雷掠过，像强风疾行，驾御楼船，横跨沧海，在新昌、典澈湖、苏历、嘉宁等地备尝艰辛，终于赢得成功，在这些地方都建立起了纪念陈公功绩的京观。
English: Chen Gongying's appearance broke out, his cunning wit, like a flash of lightning, passed by, like a strong wind, drove the palace ship, across the sea of vicissitudes, prepared hardships in Hsinchang, Dianche Lake, Su Lai, Jianing and other places, and finally won success. In these places, a Beijing view commemorating Chen Gong's feats has been established.

古文：三山獠洞，八角蛮陬，逖矣水寓之乡，悠哉火山之国，马援之所不届，陶璜之所未闻，莫不惧我王灵，争朝边候，归賝天府，献状鸿胪。
现代文：无论是那些连马援、陶璜都未听闻和亲至的三山少数民族盘踞的洞穴，八角那些蛮荒边鄙的地方，还是那些偏僻的水乡泽国，悠远的遍布火山的地方，无不惧怕我王的灵威，都争先恐后地前来朝拜，敬献宝物给我朝库府，向鸿胪官署呈献表示归降的文书。
English: No matter whether it was the caves inhabited by ethnic minorities of the Three Mountains, who had not even heard of Ma'an and Tao'an and were close to them, or the wild and remote places in Bajiao, or the remote water towns of Zeguo, or the distant places full of volcanoes, all of them were afraid of my king's spiritual power. They all rushed to come to worship, to offer their treasures to my imperial treasury, and to present the instrument of surrender to the Hongyuan government office.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这是陈公的又一件功绩。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：自寇虏陵江，宫闱幽辱，公枕戈尝胆，提剑拊心，气涌青霄，神飞紫闼。
现代文：自从凶寇强虏侵犯长江一带，皇帝受到幽禁的耻辱，陈公便为此枕戈待旦，卧薪尝胆，手握长剑，抚扪胸臆，他的豪气直涌青天，神情全都系于帝王宫廷之上。
English: Since the invaders invaded the Yangtze River area and the emperor was humiliated by confinement, Chen Gong has been waiting for this, lying down and tasting the gall, holding a long sword in his hand and stroking his chest. His courage is sky-high, and his appearance is all tied to the imperial court.

古文：而番禺连率，本自诸夷，言得其朋，是怀同恶。
现代文：而番禺这些郡县，本来是各夷族的地盘，但都与陈公有相同的志向，都怀有同样的好恶之情。
English: However, these counties in Panyu were originally the territories of various barbarian tribes, but they all had the same aspirations as Chen Gong and harbored the same likes and dislikes.

古文：公仗此忠诚，乘机剿定，执沛令而衅鼓，平新野而据鞍。
现代文：陈公凭仗着这些忠诚之士，乘机剿灭平定了凶虏。就像漠高祖刘邦在沛县起兵，祭鼓出征，又像汉王刘备平定新野，壮志不老。
English: With the help of these loyal men, Chen Gong took the opportunity to annihilate and subdue the ferocious bandits. Just like Liu Bang, the founder of the Mongol Empire, who raised an army in Pei County and marched out with a ceremonial drum, and just like Liu Bei, the king of Han, who subdued Xinye, he had a strong will.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这是陈公的又一件功绩。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：世道初艰，方隅多难，勋门桀黠，作乱衡嶷，兵切池隍，众兼夷獠。
现代文：世道原本很艰难，边疆又多有祸难，有的勋贵家族又凶暴狡诈，在衡州、嶷州兴起暴乱，叛军逼近城池，兵众夹杂夷、僚族人。
English: The world was originally very difficult, there were many disasters on the frontier, and some honorable families were cruel and cunning. Riots broke out in Hengzhou and Zhangzhou, the rebels approached the city, and the soldiers were mixed with barbarians and fellow tribesmen.

古文：公以国盗边警，知无不为，恤是同盟，诛其丑类，莫不鱼惊鸟散，面缚头悬。
现代文：陈公因为国家盗贼作乱，边地告警，所以尽其所能，救济同盟，诛杀恶徒，那些凶徒都像鱼儿和鸟儿一样四散逃开，或受降或被杀。
English: Chen Gong, alarmed by the disturbance caused by the country's thieves, did his best to aid the alliance and fight and kill the villains. The villains scattered like fish and birds, either surrendering or being killed.

古文：南土黔黎，重保苏息。
现代文：南方的百姓，重新获得休养生息。
English: The people of the south have regained their ability to rest and recuperate.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：造又是陈公的一桩功绩。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：长驱岭峤，梦想京畿，缘道酋豪，递为榛梗，路养渠率，全据大都，蓄聚逋逃，方谋阻乱，百楼不战，云梯之所未窥，万驽齐张，高輣之所非敌。
现代文：陈公长驱直入岭崤，心中挂念京都，衹是因为那些酋豪，交替而为阻碍，蔡路养作为首领，完全把大都占据，蓄养聚集那些流寇，正在策划叛乱，他的高楼宏伟，无法与、之争战，架起云梯亦未能窥见，当万张弩弓一起拉开，高高的楼车也不能与之对敌。
English: Chen Gongchang drove straight into the Lingyao, his heart yearning for Kyoto. The Lingyao was because of those chieftains, alternately as an obstacle. Cai Luyang, as the leader, completely occupied most of the city, stored and gathered those roving bandits, and was planning a rebellion. His high-rise was magnificent, and he could not fight with it. He could not see the ladder being erected. When tens of thousands of bow and arrows were pulled together, the high-rise car could not compete with it.

古文：公龙骧虎步，啸吒风云，山靡坚城，野无强阵，清氛于赣石，灭沴气于雩都。
现代文：陈公龙行虎步，叱咤风云，在他的宏大的气势下，再没有什么能够阻挡他的依山而建的坚固城池，郊野裹也没有什么强大不可攻破的阵地，在渎石清除了妖逆的氛围，在雩都消灭了灾诊的气焰。
English: Chen Gonglong walked at the pace of a tiger, scolded the storm clouds, and under his grand momentum, there was nothing that could stop his solid city built on the mountain, and there was no strong and impregnable position in the countryside. He cleared the rebellious atmosphere in Zhucheng and eliminated the pride of the disaster diagnosis in Shudu.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：逭又是陈公的功绩。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：迁仕凶慝，屯据大皋，乞活类马腾之军，流民多杜弢之众，推锋转斗，自北徂南，频岁稽诛，实惟勍虏。
现代文：李迁仕凶残作乱，占据大皋并在此屯兵，其兵众的组成，多是像马腾的军队一样收容流寇，像杜殁的队伍似的聚集流民。冲锋陷阵，四处流窜，从北到南，连年杀戮，实在是强寇。
English: Li Qian led a ferocious riot, occupied Daxu and set up a garrison here. The composition of his soldiers was mostly like the army of Ma Teng to contain the wandering bandits, and like the procession of cuckoos to gather the wandering people. They stormed the front, wandered everywhere, from north to south, and killed for years on end. They were really strong bandits.

古文：公坐挥三略，遥制六奇，义勇同心，貔貅骋力，雷奔电击，谷静山空，列郡无犬吠之惊，丛祠罢狐鸣之盗。
现代文：陈公身坐帷幕中运用兵法，远远地制定奇略，勇猛的兵民们同心协力，像电闪雷鸣一样迅速打击逆徒，一时间山谷清静，凶徒被扫荡一空，各地再也没有战乱的惊恐，从此免去盗贼的骚扰。
English: Chen Gongsheng sat in the curtain and used the art of war to draw up a strange plan from afar. The brave soldiers and people worked together to strike the rebels as quickly as lightning and thunder. For a while, the valley was calm, the criminals were swept away, and there was no more fear of war in all parts of the country. From then on, they were free from the harassment of thieves.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这是陈公的又一件功续。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：王师讨虏，次届沦波，兵乏兼储，士有饥色。
现代文：朝廷的军队讨伐贼虏，驻扎在临河之处。当时军队裹缺乏足够的储备，士兵们都面带饥色。
English: The imperial army was stationed in the vicinity of the river to fight against the bandits. At that time, the army lacked sufficient reserves, and the soldiers were hungry.

古文：公回麾蠡泽，积谷巴丘，亿庾之咏斯豊，壶浆之迎是众，军民转漕，曾无砥柱之难，舻舳相望，如运敖仓之府，犀渠贝胄，顾蔑雷霆，高舰层楼，仰扪霄汉，故使三军勇锐，百战无前，承此兵粮，遂殄凶逆。
现代文：陈公回师到蠡泽，在巴丘积蓄粮食。因此谷物充盈，溢出仓外，就像《诗经》吟咏的那样，百姓们又纷纷用酒浆来迎接朝廷军队；士兵和民众一齐来运粮，但避免了当砥柱那样的船难发生，运粮的船只相接相连，就和以前搬运敖仓库藏的盛况一样。士兵们手持犀皮盾牌，身着贝胄，装备精良，连雷霆也不惧怕；又配有高高的战舰，层层叠叠的楼船，士兵站在上面抬头就可摸到霄汉，就因为有这样装备精良的士兵和供应充足的粮食，使得三军勇猛，锐不可当，纵然经历百战也英勇无敌，所以才能最终歼灭了凶徒。
English: Chen Gonghui went to Heze and stored grain in Bachu. As a result, the grain was full and overflowed outside the warehouse, as the "Song of Songs" sang, and the people greeted the imperial army with wine; soldiers and people came together to transport grain, but they avoided a shipwreck like a pillar. The ships transporting grain were connected to each other, just as they were in the past. The soldiers were armed with rhinoceros shields, dressed in fur coats, well-equipped, and were not afraid of thunder; they were also equipped with tall warships, stacked ships, and soldiers could touch the sky when they looked up.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这是陈公的又一件功绩。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：若夫英图迈俗，义旅如云，湓垒猜携，用淹戎略。
现代文：陈公识见才智超越俗众，当时勤王的军队人数众多，如云般地聚集在湓垒，但各将之间仍互相猜疑，存有二心，因而阻碍了对敌方略的执行。
English: At that time, the number of troops loyal to the king was large and gathered like a cloud at the fortress, but there were still mutual suspicions and double-mindedness between the generals, thus hindering the implementation of the enemy strategy.

古文：公志唯同奖，师克在和，鹄塞非虞，鸿门是会，若晋侯之誓白水，如萧王之推赤心，屈礼交盟，人祗感咽，故能使舟师并路，远迩朋心。
现代文：陈公的志向在于共同辅助王室，认为军队的胜利在于能够和睦团结，就不用担心发生像鹄塞和鸿门宴这样尔虞我诈的事情。相反，他们的盟约要像晋侯的白水之誓一样坚守不移，像萧王一样对盟友推心置腹。陈公降尊纡贵以礼相待，结交同盟，入神都被感动，因而能使水军朝一个方向进发，远近同心协力。
English: Chen Gong's ambition is to jointly assist the royal family. He believes that the victory of the army lies in being able to achieve harmony and unity, so there is no need to worry about things like prevarication and feasting. On the contrary, their covenant should be as unswerving as the white water oath of the prince of Jin, and like King Xiao, they should be loyal to their allies. Chen Gong treated the dignitaries with courtesy, made alliances, and was moved by the gods, so he could make the navy advance in one direction and work together from far and near.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这是陈公的又一件功绩。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：姑孰襟要，崤函阻凭，寇虏据其关梁，大盗负其扃鐍。
现代文：姑熟是要害之地，崤山和函谷关一带亦是可作阻碍和依凭的所在，强寇凶虏占据了水陆交会之处，盗贼倚仗着锁钥之地。
English: The familiar is a place of danger. The areas around Lushan and Hakodate are also places that can be used as obstacles and places to rely on. Robbers occupy the places where water and land meet. Thieves rely on the place of locks and keys.

古文：公一校裁捴，三雄并奋，左贤、右角，沙溃土崩，木甲殪于中原，氈裘赴于江水，他他藉藉，万计千群，鄂坂之隘斯开，夷庚之道无塞。
现代文：陈公率领一支军队，指挥若定，各方豪杰共同奋战，左右分队都取得了胜利。敌军像沙土崩塌一样迅速溃败，有的在中原之地被击毙，有的落入河中淹死，尸体交错杂乱，相互枕藉，数以千万计。鄂坂关隘从此被打开，夷庚这条道路上也从此畅通无阻。
English: Chen Gong led an army, the command was determined, the heroes of all parties fought together, and the left and right detachments all won victory. The enemy army was defeated as quickly as the sand collapsed, some were killed in the Central Plains, some fell into the river and drowned, the bodies were intertwined and cluttered, and there were tens of millions of them. Osaka Pass was opened from then on, and there was no obstacle on this road.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这是陈公的又一件功绩。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：义军大众，俱集帝京，逆竖凶徒，犹屯皇邑。
现代文：勤王的军队越来越多，都集中到了京都，那些叛乱的凶徒，也还屯据在那襄。
English: More and more troops loyal to the king were concentrated in Kyoto, and the rebels were still entrenched there.

古文：若夫表里山河，金汤险固，疏龙首以抗殿，揃华岳以为城，杂虏凭焉，强兵自若。
现代文：那江山内外，固若金汤，龙首山可作为高高的殿宇，华岳可作为坚固的城墙，那些贼寇占据着这些地方，拥有强大的兵力，丝毫不惧怕那些勤王的军队。
English: In and around the Najiang Mountains, Longshou Mountain can be used as a high temple, and Huayu Mountain can be used as a solid city wall. Those bandits occupy these places, have a strong military force, and are not at all afraid of those diligent troops.

古文：公回兹地轴，抗此天罗，曾不崇朝，俾无遗噍，军容甚穆，国政方修，物重睹于衣冠，民还瞻于礼乐，楚人满道，争睹于叶公，汉老衔悲，俱欢于司隶。
现代文：陈公力挽狂澜，扭转乾坤，极短的时间内，将他们一举歼灭，没有留下任何残存者。他的军队阵容肃穆，国家的政事开始得到治理，礼乐制度得到恢复重建，百姓们又可以看到文明礼教，人民拥戴他。就像当初楚人挤满道路，争相瞻仰叶公的风姿，又像汉民遣老虽然满含悲伤，但此时都和司隶同享胜利的欢乐。
English: Chen Gongli turned the tide and turned things around. In a very short time, he wiped them out in one fell swoop, leaving no survivors. His army lineup was solemn, the country's political affairs began to be governed, the ritual music system was restored and rebuilt, and the people could see the civilization and etiquette, and the people supported him. Just as the Chu people crowded the roads at the beginning, vying to see the style of Yang Ye Gong, and like the Han people sent the old man, although full of sadness, but at this time they all shared the joy of victory with the subordinates.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这是陈公的又一件功绩。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：内难初静，诸侯出关，外郡传烽，鲜卑犯塞，莫非且渠、当户，中贵名王，冀马迾于淮南，胡笳动于徐北。
现代文：国内的祸难刚刚平定，各勤王的军队刚刚散开，关外的郡邑就传来战讯的烽火，鲜卑来侵犯边塞，来的都是且渠、当户、中贵、名王等官员；北地的战马已排列于淮南，胡笳已经在徐州以北吹响。
English: The domestic calamity has just been quelled, the troops of all the kings have just been dispersed, and the bonfire of war news has come from the counties and towns outside Guan. The freshmen have come to invade the border fortress, and the officials who have come are the nobles, the dignitaries, the middle-classes, and the famous kings; the horses of the north have been lined up in Huainan, and the trumpets have been blown north of Xuzhou.

古文：公舟师步甲，亘野横江，歼厥群羝，遂殚封豨，莫不絓木而止，戎车靡遗，遇泞而旋，归骖尽殪。此又公之功也。
现代文：陈公率领着水师和步兵，遍布原野和长江，把那些入侵的北方族人全部歼灭，把那些恶徒统统赶走。他们都被拦截俘获，没有一辆战车能逃掉，由于遇到了泥泞，逃兵们只好掉头返回，返回的马车又都被消灭。这是陈公的又一件功绩。
English: Chen Gong led sailors and infantry all over the plains and the Yangtze River, annihilated all the invading northerners, and drove all the villains away. They were all intercepted and captured, and none of the chariots could escape. Because they encountered mud, the deserters had to turn around and return, and the returning chariots were all destroyed. This is another achievement of Chen Gong.

古文：公克黜祸难，劬劳皇室，而孙宁之党，翻启狄心，伊、洛之间，咸为虏戍，虽金陵佳气，石垒天严，朝暗戎尘，夜喧胡鼓。
现代文：陈公胜利地消除祸鸡，为皇室操劳效力，而孙篝等人，反而又起了勾结外族之心，因而使得北方族人的军队，遍布于伊水和洛水之间，即使是金陵王气之地，是石头垒成的天然的坚城，白天也被敌军搅起的灰尘遮暗了天空，宁静的夜晚也因为胡人的战鼓而变得喧闹不堪。
English: Chen Gong successfully eliminated the evil rooster and worked hard for the royal family, while Sun Yat-sen and others, on the contrary, colluded with the hearts of foreigners. As a result, the armies of the northerners, spread out between the Yishui and the Luoshui, even if it is the land of Jinling kingship, is a natural fortified city made of stone. During the day, the sky was darkened by the dust stirred up by the enemy army, and the quiet night became noisy because of the Hu people's war drums.

古文：公三筹既画，八阵斯张，裁举灵鉟，亦抽金仆，咸俘丑类，悉反高墉，异李广之皆诛，同庞元之尽赦。
现代文：陈公筹划阵法，调兵遣将，才举起旌旗，才抽出金色的羽箭，就俘虏了恶徒，全部收复了城池。和李广诛杀所有俘虏的举动不同，陈公反而像庞元那样，把他们都赦免了。
English: Chen Gong only raised the banner and drew out the golden feathers and arrows after he had planned the formation and dispatched the troops. He then captured the villains and recovered the city. Unlike Li Guangyao's act of killing all the captives, Chen Gong, like Pang Yuan, pardoned them all.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这是陈公的又一件功绩。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：任约叛涣，枭声不悛，戎羯贪婪，狼心无改，穹庐氈幕，抵北阙而为营，乌孙天马，指东都而成阵。
现代文：任约跋扈凶横，气焰嚣张，毫无悔改之心，戎、羯等少数民族非常贪婪，狼子野心，也从不知道改过。他们搭起一座座挂着毡幕的穹帐，紧挨着北边城楼驻扎营地，乌孙国的天马是他们的座骑，都头向着束都而结成阵仗。
English: They were ferocious, arrogant, and unrepentant, and the ethnic minorities such as the Rong and the Yao were very greedy and ambitious, and they never knew how to change. They set up a dome with a screen and camped next to the northern city tower. The Heavenly Horse of the Wusun Kingdom was their mount, and they all headed for the capital and formed a battle.

古文：公左甄右落，箕张翼舒，扫是搀枪，驱其猃狁，长狄之种埋于国门，椎髻之酋烹于军市，投秦坑而尽沸，噎濉水而不流。
现代文：陈公指挥军队，左右包抄，像簸箕张开，像乌儿的翅膀舒展，扫除了那些灾星，驱逐了这些外族，长狄之类的外族人被埋葬在都城门前，梳着椎髻的酋领被烹死在军市，即使把他们扔进秦国长平之战时坑卒用的大坑，那裹也会被填满，如果扔进濉水也能使河水堵塞，无法畅流。
English: Chen Gong commanded the army, encircling the left and right, opening like a cocoon, stretching like the wings of an owl, sweeping away those disaster stars, expelling these foreign tribes. Foreigners such as Chang Di were buried in front of the capital gate, and the chieftains with combs were boiled to death in the military market. Even if they were thrown into the large pit used by the soldiers during the battle of Changping in Qin, the shroud would be filled. If they were thrown into the water, the river would be blocked and unable to flow.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这是陈公的又一件功绩。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：一相居中，自折彝鼎，五湖小守，妄怀同恶。
现代文：一个当宰相的人居于朝廷重位，发号施令，自己断送了祖宗的基业，五湖小小的太守，狂妄地企图与凶徒狼狈为奸。
English: A person who was a prime minister lived in a high-ranking position in the imperial court, issued orders, and cut off his ancestor's inheritance, a small governor of the five lakes, and arrogantly attempted to conspire with the villain.

古文：公夙驾兼道，秉羽杖戈，玉斧将挥，金钲且戒，妖酋震慑，遽请灰钉，爇榇以表其含弘，焚书以安其反侧。
现代文：陈公早起晚睡，兼程前进，他穿着朝服，手持着戈，挥动玉斧，奏响金釭，妖逆的首领全被慑服，立刻请罪，乞求赐死。陈公烧掉他们带来乞死的棺材，以表明朝廷的宽洪大量，焚掉他们的降书来安抚他们忐忑不安的心境。
English: Chen Gong got up early in the morning and went to bed late at night, and advanced part of the way. He was wearing a court dress, holding a sword, waving a jade axe, and sounding a golden gong. The leaders of the demonic rebellion were all deterred by the dress, immediately pleaded guilty, and begged for death. Chen Gong burned the coffin they brought to beg for death to show the large amount of generosity of the court, and burned their surrender letter to appease their anxious state of mind.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这是陈公的又一件功绩。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：贼龛凶横，陵虐具区，阻兵安忍，凭灾怙乱，自古虫言鸟迹，浑沌洪荒，凡或虔刘，未此残酷。
现代文：反贼杜宠凶残横暴，蹂躏荼毒具区的百姓，倚仗着他的军队，而行残暴之道，依靠天灾人祸而乘机取利，从远古时期人类还未产生，衹有鸟兽之迹，天地未开，仍是一片浑沌蒙昧的时候起，凡有杀戮之事，都没有像他这么残酷的。
English: Du Fang, the anti-thief, is cruel and tyrannical. He has ravaged the people in the drug-supply area, relied on his army, and pursued a cruel path, relying on natural disasters and man-made disasters to take advantage of the opportunity to make profits. Since ancient times, when mankind had not yet emerged, there were traces of birds and beasts, the heavens and the earth had not yet opened, and there was still a lot of chaos and confusion, there was no killing as cruel as him.

古文：公虽宗居汝颍，世寓东南，育圣诞贤之乡，含章挺生之地，眷言桑梓，公私愤切，卓尔英状，丞规奉算，戮此大憝，如烹小鲜。
现代文：虽然陈公的宗族是在汝颖，但他的家族世代寓居东南，那是培育了圣人、诞生了贤者的乡里，是蕴含内美、优秀特异的地方，回思桑梓之情，于公于私，都令人愤恨痛切。陈公智慧超众，英姿挺拔，出谋划策，制定方略，杀戮这个大恶之徒，就像烹煮小鱼一样轻而易举。
English: Although Chen Gong's clan is in Yuying, his family has lived in the southeast for generations. It is the township that nurtured saints and gave birth to sages. It is a place that contains inner beauty, excellence and uniqueness. Reflecting on San Zi's feelings, both in public and in private, is bitterly resented. Chen Gong is superior in wisdom, dignified, and makes plans and formulates strategies. Killing this great evil is as easy as cooking a small fish.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这是陈公的又一件功绩。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：乱离永久，群盗孔多，浙左凶渠，连兵构逆，岂止千兵、五校、白雀、黄龙而已哉！
现代文：速公因为中军没有统帅，选定了亲信贤能的人来担任。那些奸贼凶寇走到了穷途末路，就像坚冰被敲碎一样，分崩离析。
English: As there was no commander-in-chief in the Chinese army, the emperor selected a trusted and capable person to take charge. Those traitors and thugs came to the end of the road, and just like the ice was broken, they fell apart.

古文：公以中军无率，选是亲贤，奸寇途穷，涔然冰泮，刑溏之所，文命动其大威，雷门之间，句践行其严戮，英规圣迹，异代同风。
现代文：在刑溏这个地方，大垂曾经以行动体现了巨大的威严，在会稽城门重塱一带，包壁进行了严酷的杀戮。比起那些英明的典范，圣人的仪轨，陈公创造的业绩虽然所处时代不同，风采却是一样的。
English: In this place of execution, Datui once embodied great majesty with his actions. In the area of the heavy gate of the city gate, Bao Wei carried out severe killings. Compared to those wise models, the rituals of saints, and the achievements created by Chen Gong, although the times are different, the style is the same.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这是陈公的又一件功绩。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：同姓有扈，顽凶不宾，凭藉宗盟，图危社稷，观兵汇泽，势震京师，驱率南蛮，已为东帝。
现代文：同姓直尘，顽劣凶横，凭藉着他同宗亲盟的关系，企图危害国家社稷。他在江泽阅兵示威，因而震动了京城，他驱逐并统率了南蛮，已经俨然而为束帝。
English: He had the same surname as Zhaochen, was vicious and violent, and attempted to endanger the national society by virtue of his relationship with the pro-Communist Party of the same clan. He held a military parade in Jiangze, which shook the capital. He expelled and led the Southern Barbarians, and was already crowned emperor.

古文：公论兵于朝堂之上，决胜于樽俎之间，寇、贾、樊、滕，浮江下濑，一朝揃扑，无待甸师，万里澄清，非劳新息。
现代文：陈公在庙堂上筹划兵事，在宴席上就决定了战斗的胜利，塞、买、望、塍等将领顺江流而下，渡过险滩，一朝之内将他们全部剪减，更不用等到甸师来执行刑罚，万里江山一片干净安宁，也不用再劳烦出动马援那样的名将了。
English: Chen Gong planned the military affairs in the temple hall, and the victory of the battle was decided at the banquet. The generals such as Zi, Mai, Wang, and Zou flowed down the river and crossed the dangerous beach, and all of them were cut down in one morning. Not to mention, there was no need to wait for the Tian division to carry out the punishment, and there was a clean peace in the mountains and rivers, and there was no need to bother the famous generals such as Zhima Yuan.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这是陈公的又一件功绩。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：豫章妖寇，依凭山泽，缮甲完聚，多历岁时，结从连横，爰洎交、广。
现代文：理童地区的妖逆凶寇，倚仗凭靠着山险水深，修补整治兵器，缮修城郭，积聚粮食，这种情况已经持续了很久了，他们结交四方，联合起来，地盘一直扩张到交、广一带。
English: In the Ladong area, there are monsters, rebels, and robbers. They rely on the mountains, dangers, and water depths to fight. They repair and refurbish weapons, renovate the city walls, and accumulate grain. This situation has lasted for a long time. They have made friends in all directions, united, and the territory has been expanding to the Jiaotong and Guangyang areas.

古文：吕嘉既获，吴濞已鏦，命我还师，征其不恪，连营尽拔，伪党斯擒，曜圣武于匡山，回神旌于蠡派。
现代文：正如员嘉已经被俘获，吴濞已经被银杀，朝廷命令我军返回，征讨那些不敬的凶徒，叛军的整个连绵的营地都被消灭，那些叛逆的人尽敷被擒，在匡山显耀了皇上的圣武英明，在蠡遂飘扬飞舞着圣朝的旗帜。
English: Just as Jian Jia has been captured, and Wu Gan has been killed, and the imperial court has ordered our army to return to collect those disrespectful thugs, the entire contiguous camp of the rebel army has been eliminated, and those who have rebelled have been thoroughly captured, the emperor's holy martial wisdom has been displayed in Kuangshan, and the banner of the Holy Dynasty has been flying and dancing in Sui.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这是陈公的又一件功绩。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：自八纮九野，瓜剖豆分，窃帝偷王，连州比县。
现代文：从荒远的大地的极限到九州地域，都被析分割据，支离破碎，他们窃取帝号，自立为王，占据的州县相连相接。
English: From the limit of the desolate land to the Kyushu region, they have been dissected and fragmented. They have stolen the imperial title, established themselves as kings, and occupied states and counties.

古文：公武灵已畅，文德又宣，折简驰书，风猷斯远，至于苍苍浴日，杳杳无雷，北洎丈夫之乡，南逾女子之国，莫不屈膝膜拜，求吏款关。
现代文：陈公武功上的神威已经大展，文教上的德业又开始进行宣扬，他衹是随便地传下书信，风教就到达遥远的地方，可以到达浩浩苍苍传说中浴的地方，也可以到达渺渺茫茫的听不到雷声的地方，北边一直达到丈夫国，南边则达到了女儿国，没有不跪伏顶礼膜拜，请求官吏准许他们叩关通好。
English: Chen Gong's prowess in martial arts has been greatly expanded, and his virtuous deeds in literature and education have begun to be propagated. He casually passed down letters, and the teachings of the wind reached far away places. They can reach places that are bathed in vast legends, and can also reach places where thunder cannot be heard. The north side has reached the husband's country, and the south side has reached the daughter's country. There is no kneeling down to worship and ask officials to allow them to pass through.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这是陈公的又一件功绩。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：京师祸乱，亟积寒暄，双阙低昂，九门寥豁。
现代文：京城掀起动乱，酿成祸难，这种情况屡次发生，持续了将近一年的时光，皇城的重阙高低起伏，九门空寂冷清，残缺不全。
English: The situation occurred repeatedly and lasted for nearly a year. The capital city was in turmoil, leading to disaster. The imperial city was in a state of flux, and the nine gates were empty, deserted, and incomplete.

古文：宁秦宫之可顾，岂鲁殿之犹存！五都簪弁，百僚卿士，胡服缦缨，咸为戎俗，高冠厚履，希复华风，宋微子《麦遂》之歌，周大夫《黍离》之叹，方之于斯，未足为悲矣。
现代文：难道是时光倒流使人又看到了秦代残坏的宫垣，或者是鲁国那毁坏的殿堂还保存到了现在五都的成年男子，百官卿士，都穿戴着胡服缦缨，依从着戎人的习俗，而戴着高冠穿着厚靴的有识之士，则希望能恢复中华的风俗。宋国微子《麦柜》的歌咏，周国大夫《黍离》篇的感叹，用来比拟现在这种情况，还不足以表达其悲惨状况。
English: Is it possible that the passage of time has brought us back to see the dilapidated palace walls of the Qin Dynasty, or that the ruined palace of Lu has been preserved to the present day? The adult men of the five capitals, the hundreds of officials and nobles, all wear Hu clothing and follow the customs of the eunuchs, while the insightful people wearing high crowns and thick shoes hope to restore the customs of China. The song "Wheat Cabinet" by Song Guo Weizi and the exclamation of Dr. Zhou Guo's "Separation" are used to compare the current situation, but are not enough to express its tragic situation.

古文：公求衣昧旦，昃食高舂，兴构宫闱，具瞻遐迩，郊痒稷宗之典，六符十等之章，还闻太始之风流，重睹永平之遗事。
现代文：陈公天未亮就起床操劳，过午才进食，一直辛劳到傍晚时分，兴修构筑宫城，为远近众人所瞻仰，重设了郊祀、庠学、宗庙、社稷等的典礼，六符十等的规章，人们又可以领略到太始时代的遣风，重新看到永平时期余留的韵事。
English: Chen Gong got up before dawn and worked hard. He did not eat until after noon. He worked hard until the evening. He built and reconstructed the palace city, which was admired by people from near and far. He re-established the ceremonies of the suburb, the school, the ancestral temple, and the community hall, and the regulations of the six signs and ten levels. People can also enjoy the wind of the beginning of the era, and re-see the remaining rhymes of the Yongping period.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这是陈公的又一件功绩。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：公有济天下之勋，重之以明德，凝神体道，合德符天，用百姓以为心，随万机而成务，耻一物非唐、虞之民，归含灵于仁寿之域，上德不德，无为以为，夏长春生，显仁藏用，忠信为宝，风雨弗愆，仁惠为基，牛羊勿践，功成治定，乐奏《咸》、《云》，安上治民，礼兼文质，物色丘园，衣裾里巷，朝多君子，野无遗贤，菽粟同水火之饶，工商富猗顿之旅。
现代文：《周南》和《召南》对此都推崇备至，旷远的四方土地中，那面朝着泱泱大海的土地单单赐予了齐国，而巍峨的泰山脚下的大地则分封给了鲁国。齐伯与鲁侯都能为王室效力，共同对付郑国。
English: Both "Southern Zhou" and "Southern Zhao" have great respect for this. In the distant lands of the four directions, the land facing the Bohai Sea was given to Qi alone, while the land at the foot of the towering Mount Tai was assigned to Lu. Both Qi Bo and Lu Hou could work for the royal family and jointly deal with Zheng.

古文：是以天无蕴宝，地有呈祥，潏露卿云，朝团晓映，山车泽马，服驭登闲，既景焕于图书，方葳蕤于史谍。
现代文：在周王室束迁之后，也能尽力辅佐。召伯所受的辅佐之命是如此的隆盛，河阳举行的典礼，也是这样的齐备。
English: After the relocation of the Zhou royal family, he was also able to assist as much as possible. Zhao Bo's order to assist was so prosperous, and the ceremony held in Heyang was also so well prepared.

古文：高勋逾于象纬，积德冠于嵩、华，固无德而称者矣。
现代文：又况且陈公治理宇宙，那功劳比女娲断鳖足来支撑天地还要深广；他救济苍生，那业绩也比大禹治水凿断龙门峡还要伟大。
English: Moreover, Chen Gong's contribution to governing the universe is more profound and extensive than that of a maiden breaking her legs to support heaven and earth; his performance in relieving sentient beings is also greater than that of Dayu chopping water and chiseling Longmen Gorge.

古文：朕又闻之，前王宰世，茂赏尊贤，式树籓长，总征群伯，《二南》崇绝，四履遐旷，泱泱表海，祚土维齐，岩岩泰山，俾侯于鲁；抑又勤王反郑，夹辅迁周，召伯之命斯隆，河阳之礼咸备；况复经营宇宙，宁唯断鰲足之功，弘济苍生，非直凿龙门之险；而畴庸报德，寂尔无闻，朕所以垂拱当宁，载怀惭悸者也。
现代文：但国家并没有对陈公的功劳德绩进行酬报，也没有让陈公的声名誉满天下，这是在我执政中让我非常挂念、非常惊惧的事情。
English: However, the state did not reward Chen Gong's merits and achievements, nor did it let Chen Gong's reputation spread all over the world. This was something that made me very concerned and very alarmed during my administration.

古文：今授公相国，以南豫州之陈留、南丹阳、宣城，扬州之吴兴、东阳、新安、新宁，南徐州之义兴，江州之鄱阳、临川十郡，封公为陈公。
现代文：现在授予陈公相国的职位，封邑是南豫州的陈留、南丹阳、宣城，扬州的县兴、东阳、新安、新宁，南徐州的义兴，江州的鄱阳、临川等十郡，正式册封您为陈公。
English: Now Chen Gong has been awarded the position of minister of state. The fiefdoms are Chen Liu, Nan Danyang and Xuancheng in South Yu Prefecture, Xing, Dongyang, Xin'an and Xining in Yang Prefecture, Yixing in South Xuzhou, and Shenyang and Linchuan in Jiangzhou. You are officially named Chen Gong.

古文：锡兹青土，苴以白茅，爰定尔邦，用建冢社。
现代文：把用白茅包裹着的青色的土赐给陈公，用以安定您的邦土，建立起祭神所用的冢社。
English: Give Chen Gong the blue soil wrapped in white maypole to stabilize your country and establish a shrine to worship the gods.

古文：昔旦、奭分陕，俱为保师，晋、郑诸侯，咸作卿士，兼其内外，礼实攸宜。
现代文：以前周公旦和召公奭分治陕遣片土地，都成为天子的保师，晋伯与郑伯等裂土封疆的诸侯，都成为天子的大臣，陈公的功业则能包含这两方面，对待陈公的礼节，正合乎您的功劳。
English: In the past, Zhou Gongdan and Zhao Gongjun divided and governed the land of Shaanxi Province, and both became tutors of the heavenly son. Jin Bo and Zheng Bo, the princes of the divided land and fiefdoms, both became ministers of the heavenly son. Chen Gong's work can contain both aspects. Treating Chen Gong with etiquette is in line with your merit.

古文：今命使持节兼太尉王通授相国印绶、陈公玺绂。使持节兼司空王瑒授陈公茅土，金虎符第一至第五左，竹使符第一至第十左。
现代文：现在令使持节兼太尉王通把相国的印绶和陈公的玺绂授给您，使持节兼司空王场授予陈公茅土，金虎符第至第五左，竹使符第一至第十左。
English: Now, I order Wang Tong, the envoy of the Festival of the Empress Dowager and the captain of the imperial guard, to bestow upon you the seal of your country and the imperial scepter of Chen Gong. I order Wang Tong, the envoy of the Festival of the Empress Dowager and the captain of the imperial guard, to bestow upon you the imperial scepter of your country and the imperial scepter of Chen Gong. I order Wang Tong, the envoy of the Festival of the Empress Dowager and the captain of the imperial guard, to bestow upon you the imperial scepter of Chen Gong and the imperial scepter of Chen Gong.

古文：相国秩逾三铉，任总百司，位绝朝班，礼由事革。
现代文：相国的品级高于三公，责任是总理各个部门，他的地位超出所有大臣之上，拥有根据事态的变化随时变革礼制的权力。
English: The rank of the partner country is higher than that of the three princes, the responsibility is the various departments of the prime minister, his position is above all ministers, and he has the power to change the etiquette at any time according to changes in the situation.

古文：其以相国总百揆，除录尚书之号，上所假节侍中貂蝉、中书监印章、中外都督太傅印绶、义兴公印策，其镇卫大将军、扬州牧如故。
现代文：陈公以相国的身份总理百官，又授予录尚书的称号，皇帝赐给他假节侍中貂蝉、中书监印章、中外都督太傅印绶、义兴公印策。陈公本来就担任的镇卫大将军、扬州牧的职务也不更改。
English: Chen Gong, as the prime minister of a neighboring country, was also awarded the title of record book, and the emperor gave him the fake festival attendant, the Chinese book inspector seal, the Chinese and foreign governor's seal, and the Yixing Gong seal. Chen Gong's original post of Zhenwei general and Yangzhou herdsman will not change.

古文：又加公九锡，其敬听后命：以公礼为桢干，律等衔策，四维皆举，八柄有章，是用锡公大辂、戎辂各一，玄牡二驷。
现代文：又赐予陈公九锡，请陈公恭敬地聆听以下诏命：因为陈公把礼作为治理万民的根本，把律令作为统治的准则，使得礼、义、廉、耻等观念得到昌明，而用以调节朝政的爵、禄、予、置、生、夺、废、诛等八种手段也都应用得明白有条理，因此赐给陈公大辖、戎辖各一架，黑色公马八匹。
English: He also gave Chen Gong Jiuxi, and asked Chen Gong to respectfully listen to the following edict: Because Chen Gong took etiquette as the basis for governing the people, and made the ritsuryo code as the governing standard, so that the concepts of etiquette, righteousness, cleanliness, and shame were enlightened, and the eight means for regulating the government of the dynasty, such as peerage, stipend, grant, place, birth, take, waste, and plunder, were also applied in a clear and orderly manner, therefore, Chen Gong was given one large jurisdiction and one military jurisdiction, and eight black horses.

古文：以公贱宝崇谷，疏爵待农，室富京坻，民知荣辱，是用锡公衮冕之服，赤舄副焉。
现代文：陈公尊重农作物而轻视珠宝，重视农业生产而轻视爵位，这使得百姓家裹谷米堆积如山，一派富裕景象，人民都具有荣耀感和羞耻心，因此赐给陈公衮衣和冠冕，另外还赐给一双赤舄。
English: Chen Gong respected crops but despised jewelry, valued agricultural production but despised titles, which made the people's homes pile up like mountains of rice. It was a rich scene, and the people had a sense of honor and shame. Therefore, Chen Gong was given a robe and a crown, and he was also given a pair of red socks.

古文：以公调理阴阳，燮谐风雅，三灵允降，万国同和，是用锡公轩县之乐，六佾之舞。
现代文：因为陈公能使天地调和，义能协理文章教化的传统，日月星辰都和谐照耀，各藩属国也齐心顺服，因此赐给陈公轩悬这样的乐器和六佾这样的舞蹈。
English: Because Chen Gongxuan was able to harmonize heaven and earth, the sun, the moon, and the stars all shine in harmony, and all the domains and dependent countries obeyed together, so Chen Gongxuan was given such a musical instrument and such a dance.

古文：以公宣导王猷，弘阐风教，光景所照，鞮象必通，是用锡公硃户以居。以公抑扬清浊，褒德进贤，髦士盈朝，幽人虚谷，是用锡公纳陛以登。
现代文：陈公能够光人王道。阐扬风教，在他的光芒照耀之下，远方的异国也都来舆中国交流，因此把大门漆成红色的宅邸，赐给陈公作为居所。陈公能够宣扬那些好人好事而抑制剪除坏人坏事，奖赏有品德的人，进用贤能的人，使英才充盈朝廷，隐士也都为国家所用，不再幽居山谷，因此赐给陈公钠陛以登的荣耀。
English: Chen Gong can illuminate the way of the king. He can expound the customs and teachings. Under his shining light, distant foreign countries also come to Ming China to communicate. Therefore, he painted the gate into a red mansion and gave Chen Gong as a residence. Chen Gong can preach those good people and good deeds and restrain and eliminate bad people and bad deeds, reward virtuous people, use virtuous people, and fill the court with talents. The hermits are also used by the country, and no longer live in the valley. Therefore, he gave Chen Gong the glory of ascending.

古文：以公嶷然廊庙，为世镕范，折冲四表，临御八荒，是用锡公武贲之士三百人。
现代文：因为陈公在朝廷上像山岳一样凝重端庄，是大家景仰的模范，平定国内的动乱，统御天下，因此赐给陈公三百个虎贲之士。
English: Because Chen Gong is as dignified and dignified as a mountain in the imperial court, and is a model admired by everyone. He has quelled domestic turmoil and ruled the world. Therefore, Chen Gong was given three hundred tigers.

古文：以公执兹明罚，期在刑措，象恭无赦，干纪必诛，是用锡公斧、钺各一。
现代文：陈公虽然执掌着刑罚，但却期望无人犯法，刑法能搁置不用，对于那些心裹倔傲而貌似恭敬的犯法者，陈公一定不会赦免他，有违犯法纪的，陈公一定会诛杀他。因此赐给陈公斧、钺各一具。
English: Although Chen Gong was in charge of the punishment, he hoped that no one would break the law and that the criminal law could be set aside. For those who broke the law with a proud and seemingly respectful heart, Chen Gong would definitely not pardon him. For those who violated the law and discipline, Chen Gong would definitely kill him. Therefore, Chen Gong was given an axe and a pickaxe.

古文：以公英猷远量，跨厉嵩溟，包一车书，括囊寰宇，是用锡公彤弓一、彤矢百、甗弓十、甗矢千。
现代文：陈公谋才出众，度量宏远，比嵩岳还要巍峨，比溟海更为深广，他统一国家的体制制度，包罗宇宙，因此赐予陈公一把彤弓，一百支彤矢，十把旅弓，一千支玆矢。
English: Chen Gongmou was outstanding in talent, far-reaching in measurement, more towering than Mount Song and more extensive than the Bohai Sea. He unified the country's system and system, encompassing the universe. Therefore, Chen Gong was given one crossbow, one hundred arrows, ten travel bows, and one thousand arrows.

古文：以公天经地义，贯彻幽明，春露秋霜，允恭粢盛，是用锡公秬鬯一卣，圭瓒副焉。
现代文：陈公在处世方面遵循礼法，天经地义，他的这种精神通达天地，陈公披霜带露，恭敬地预备祭祀神灵祖先的祭品，因此赐给陈公一卣柜鬯，以及一副圭瓒来作为相应的礼器。
English: Chen Gong adhered to the etiquette in his daily life, which was dictated by nature. This spirit of his permeated the heavens and the earth. Chen Gong wore cream and dew, and respectfully prepared the sacrificial offerings for the worship of the divine ancestors. Therefore, Chen Gong was given a pair of counters and a pair of gongs as the corresponding ceremonial objects.

古文：陈国置丞相已下，一遵旧式。
现代文：在陈公的封邑中陈公可以设置丞相，丞相以下的官员都遵照以前的例子来设置。
English: In the fiefdom of Chen Gong, Chen Gong can set up a chancellor, and officials below the chancellor are set up according to previous examples.

古文：往钦哉！
现代文：去吧，要恭敬地对待你的职务啊!
English: Go, and treat your office with respect!

古文：其恭循朕命，克相皇天，弘建邦家，允兴洪业，以光我高祖之休命！
现代文：希望你能恭谨地遵循我的命令，勤勉地辅佐皇室，建设国家，振兴基业，以使高祖对您的美好的任命发扬光大!
English: I hope that you will respectfully follow my order, diligently assist the royal family, build the country, and revitalize the heritage, so that Gaozu can carry forward your beautiful appointment!

古文：十月戊辰，进高祖爵为王，以扬州之会稽、临海、永嘉、建安，南徐州之晋陵、信义，江州之寻阳、豫章、安成、庐陵并前为二十郡，益封陈国。
现代文：十月戊辰逭一天，加封高祖的爵位为王，把扬州的会稽、临海、永嘉、建安，南徐州的晋陵、信义，江州的寻阳、豫章、安成、庐陵，连同前面一起合并为二十个郡，加封给陈国。
English: On the first day of October, the title of Gaozu was added to the title of the king, and the counties of Yangzhou, Linhai, Yongjia, Jian'an, South Xuzhou, Jinling, Xinyi, Jiangzhou, Huanyang, Yuzhang, Ancheng, and Fuling, together with the previous counties, were merged into twenty counties and added to Chen Guo.

古文：其相国、扬州牧、镇卫大将军并如故。
现代文：高祖的相国、扬州牧、镇卫大将军的职位还是和原来一样不变。
English: The positions of Gao Zu's countrymen, Yangzhou herdsmen, and Zhenwei generals are still the same as before.

古文：又命陈王冕十有二旒，建天子旌旗，出警入跸，乘金根车，驾六马，备五时副车，置旄头云罕，乐舞《八佾》，设钟虡宫县。
现代文：又赐命陈王戴十二旒的冕，可以设立天子的旌旗，出入有侍卫警戒清道，准许乘坐金根车，配以六马驾御，准许备置五时副车，可以建置以旄头为先驱的仪仗以及相应的旌旗，可设八佾之舞，可设钟篪宫悬。
English: He also ordered Chen Wang to wear a crown of twelve stars, he could set up a banner of the Son of Heaven, there were guards to guard the entrance and exit, he was allowed to ride a golden chariot, with six horses to drive him, he was allowed to set up a five o'clock carriage, he could set up a ceremonial battle with Shantou as the pioneer and a corresponding banner, he could set up a dance of eight stars, and he could set up a bell hanging in the palace.

古文：王妃、王子、王女爵命之号，陈台百官，一依旧典。
现代文：王妃、王子、王女所受的爵号，陈国内百官的设置，都依照旧制。
English: The titles of empress, prince, and princess, as well as the establishment of hundreds of officials in Chen, are all in accordance with the old system.

古文：辛未，梁帝禅位于陈，诏曰：五运更始，三正迭代，司牧黎庶，是属圣贤，用能经纬乾坤，弥纶区宇，大庇黔首，阐扬鸿烈。
现代文：辛末日，梁帝将帝位掸让给陈朝，诏书说：五行周而复始，夏、商、周三代交迭更替，管理和统治黎民百姓，这是圣贤的职责，因为他们能够规划治理天地，包罗统括全国的疆土，庇佑百姓，把宏伟的功业发扬光大。
English: At the end of the Xin Dynasty, Emperor Liang abdicated the imperial throne to the Chen Dynasty. The imperial edict said: "The five elements repeat themselves, and the Xia, Shang and San dynasties take turns to manage and rule the Li people. This is the responsibility of the sages, because they can plan and govern the world, including the national territory, protect the people, and carry forward the magnificent cause.

古文：革晦以明，积代同轨，百王踵武，咸由此则。
现代文：变革德运已经晦暗者，而代之以更光明的德运，历代都遵循这样的规律，历史上的帝王们，也都依照这种法则。
English: The dark side of the sword is the yin side, the positive side of the sword is the yang side, the positive side of the sword is the yang side, and the negative side is the yang side.

古文：梁德湮微，祸乱荐发，太清云始，见困长蛇，承圣之季，又罹封豕。爰至天成，重窃神器，三光亟沈，七庙乏祀，含生已泯，鼎命斯坠，我武、元之祚，有如缀旒，静惟屯剥，夕惕载怀。相国陈王，有命自天，降神惟狱，天地合德，晷曜齐明，拯社稷之横流，提亿兆之涂炭，东诛逆叛，北歼獯丑，威加四海，仁渐万国，复张崩乐，重兴绝礼，儒馆聿修，戎亭虚候，大功在舜，盛绩惟禹，巍巍荡荡，无得而称。
现代文：相国陈王承担了上天给他的使命，四岳降下神灵和气，陈王的品德功绩舆天地和谐，日月星辰也再一次放出光明。他力挽国势衰败的横流，把亿万百姓从灾难困苦中解救出来。在东方他诛杀了叛逆的凶徒，在北方他歼灭了獯夷丑类，他的威望笼罩四海，他的仁德广布天下，他使已经崩隳断绝的礼乐制度得到恢复和发扬，因为陈王的努力，国家的文教事业兴盛起来了，而军队机构则不再有人过问，陈王的功劳业绩一如舜和禹那样伟大，他的功业巍峨浩荡，任何语言都难以表述详确。
English: His brother-in-law, King Chen, undertook the mission given to him by heaven. The four mountains brought down gods and spirits. King Chen's moral achievements brought harmony between heaven and earth, and the sun, moon and stars once again emitted light. He worked hard to turn back the tide of national decline and rescued hundreds of millions of people from disaster and hardship. In the East, he killed the traitorous thugs. In the North, he annihilated the barbarian monsters. His prestige covered the four seas. His benevolence spread all over the world. He restored and developed the ritual music system that had been destroyed. Because of King Chen's efforts, the country's literature and

古文：来献白环，岂直皇虞之世，入贡素雉，非止隆周之日。
现代文：由于陈王的功业浩荡，因此四方属地都来进献白环，远方臣民也纷纷入贡素雉，重现了大舜及周朝隆盛时期远人归服的盛况。
English: Due to the great achievements of King Chen, the four provinces and autonomous regions all came to present the White Ring, and the distant subjects also paid tribute to Su Shi in succession, recreating the grandeur of the submission of the distant people during the prosperous period of the Dai Shi and Zhou Dynasties.

古文：固以效珍川陆，表瑞烟云，甘露醴泉，旦夕凝涌，嘉禾硃草，孳植郊甸。
现代文：水陆珍品既已呈献，又有祥烟瑞云等吉兆显现，甘美的泉露，整日喷涌，秀美的林木，绛红色的异草在郊外郁郁葱葱地生长着。
English: Water and land rarities have already been presented, and auspicious signs such as auspicious clouds have appeared, luscious spring dew, gushing all day long, beautiful forest trees, and crimson weeds are growing lushly in the suburbs.

古文：道昭于悠代，勋格于皇穹，明明上天，光华日月，革故著于玄象，代德彰于图谶，狱讼有归，讴歌爰适，天之历数，实有攸在。
现代文：堕王的品德将在绵长的世代中一直彰显，他的宏伟业绩感动了上天，天色明朗，日月灿烂，这是朝代应当变革在天象上的显示，新王朝的美德也已彰显在图谶之上，国家的司法制度有所依归了，百姓们安适地歌唱他们的新生活，朝代的更替就应在速王遣裹。
English: The moral character of the fallen king will continue to show through the long generations. His magnificent performance has moved the heavens. The sky is bright and the sun and moon are brilliant. This is a sign that the dynasty should be transformed in the celestial body. The virtues of the new dynasty have also been shown on the map. The country's judicial system has been restored, and the people are singing their new life comfortably. The replacement of the dynasty should be quickly sent to the king.

古文：朕虽庸貌，暗于古昔，永稽崇替，为日已久，敢忘列代之遗典，人祇之至愿乎。
现代文：我虽然庸碌渺小，不明白古来的道理。但惦念着将本朝结束、将政权移交给新的朝代已经很久了，我哪裹敢忘却列代遗留下来的禅让的制度，哪裹敢忽视入神共有的对改朝换代的最大的期望呢?
English: Although I am small and insignificant, I do not understand the ancient truth. However, it has been a long time since I thought about ending this dynasty and handing over power to a new dynasty. How dare I forget the system of compromise that has been passed down from generation to generation, and how dare I ignore the greatest hope for changing the dynasty that is common to all gods?

古文：今便逊位别宫，敬禅于陈，一依唐、虞、宋、齐故事。
现代文：现在我就要让出帝位，移居别宫，把皇位恭敬地禅让给速曲，这些全都依照卢、廛、塞、蛮掸让的旧典。
English: Now I am going to abdicate the throne, move to another palace, and respectfully abdicate the throne from zen to shakuhachi, all in accordance with the old canon of lu, shu, se, and brute.

古文：策曰：咨尔陈王：惟昔上古，厥初生民，骊连、栗陆之前，容成、大庭之代，并结绳写鸟，杳冥慌忽，故靡得而详焉。
现代文：策书说：陈王啊，往昔的上古时代，刚开始有生民的时候，在骊连、栗陆等上古帝王之前，在容成、大庭等帝王的时代，都是用结绳及画图记事的方式来传达讯息，这样当时的历史状况显得模糊浑沌，因此后人没有办法知道详细情况了。
English: The guidebook said: "King Chen, in ancient times, when there were still people, before the ancient emperors such as Qilian and Li Rong, and in the era of the emperors such as Rongcheng and Datu, the message was conveyed by tying ropes and drawing pictures. The historical situation at that time was vague and chaotic, so later generations had no way to know the details.

古文：自羲、农、轩、昊之君，陶唐、有虞之主，或垂衣而御四海，或无为而子万姓，居之如驭朽索，去之如脱敝屣。
现代文：从伏羲、神农、轩辕、少昊，以及陶唐、有虞这些帝王以来，有的垂衣而治理四海，有的无为而治理万民，在位时就家用腐朽的绳索驾驭六马一样危险，退位时就像脱掉鞋子一样轻易。
English: From Fuxi, Shennong, Xuanwu, Shao Hao, as well as Tao, Tang and Yougu, some emperors ruled the four seas with their clothes hanging down, while others ruled the people without doing anything. When reigning, it was as dangerous to use rotting ropes to control six horses, and when abdicating, it was as easy as taking off your shoes.

古文：裁遇许由，便能舍帝，暂逢善卷，即以让王。
现代文：当碰上像许由那样能更好地管理国家的人才时，就能把帝位交出来。一旦遇到像善卷那样的隐者，就想让出帝位。
English: When faced with a talented person who can better manage the country like Xu Yuecong, they can give up the throne. Once they meet a recluse like Zhan Zhuan, they want to give up the throne.

古文：故知玄扈璇玑，非关尊贵，金根玉辂，示表君临。
现代文：因此可以知道，玄扈的传说，璇玑的星象，并不意味着尊贵的地位，金根车、玉辖，衹是表示君主的到来。
English: Therefore, it can be known that the legend of Xuan Zang, the star of Zang, does not mean the noble status, the golden chariot, the jade jurisdiction, and Zang are the arrival of the monarch.

古文：及南观河渚，东沈刻璧，精华既竭，耄勤已倦，则抗首而笑，唯贤是与，讠劳然作歌，简能斯授，遗风余烈，昭晰图书。
现代文：在到南方巡视黄河之滨，到东方刻璧之后，最灿烂的光辉已经开始衰竭，年事已高，虽仍辛勤治事，但已开始疲倦了。那么就昂首大笑，高声而歌，衹要是贤者就加以选拔他，挑选能干的人授予他职位，这种上古遣留下来的风尚和事迹，在图籍史书中昭然可见。
English: After touring the coast of the Yellow River in the south and carving a masterpiece in the east, the most brilliant brilliance has begun to exhaust, the age is old, although it is still hard work, but it has begun to get tired. Then he laughs with his head held high, sings loudly, and if he is wise, he will be selected, and the competent people will be selected to give him a post. This kind of tradition and deeds left by the ancients can be clearly seen in the picture book history.

古文：汉、魏因循，是为故实。
现代文：汉、魏两朝都因循了这个传统，这是足以效法的旧事。
English: Both the Han and Wei dynasties followed this tradition, which is an old enough example.

古文：宋、齐授受，又弘斯义。
现代文：宋、齐二朝将王位让与他人，又再次弘扬了这种上古流传下来的大义。
English: The Song and Qi dynasties ceded the throne to others, and once again carried forward the great righteousness that had been passed down from ancient times.

古文：我高祖应期抚运，握枢御宇，三后重光，祖宗齐圣。
现代文：我朝高祖皇帝顺应运期，掌管天下气运，执掌国政，统治宇内，重现三代帝王的光彩，列祖列宗等同于圣人。
English: Emperor Gaozu of my dynasty conformed to the movement of the seasons, presided over the world's weather, presided over state affairs, ruled the world, reproduced the glory of three generations of emperors, and equated ancestors with saints.

古文：及时属阳九，封豕荐食，西都失驭，夷狄交侵，乃皋天成，轻弄龟鼎，喋喋黔首，若崩厥角，徽徽皇极，将甚缀旒。
现代文：后来时运行至灾年厄运的阶段，贪暴的元凶像大猪一样屡屡蚕食国土，西都失去控制，夷狄纷纷入侵，这种情况一直延续到丢成年间，帝位的尊严遭到轻视和侮慢，百姓受到惊扰，就像猛兽被摧断了头角，皇室衰微，大权即将旁落。
English: Later, the cycle ran to the stage of calamitous years of bad luck. The corrupt culprits repeatedly encroached on the land like big pigs. The western capital lost control, and the barbarians invaded one after another. This situation continued until the emperor was overthrown. The dignity of the imperial throne was despised and insulted, and the people were alarmed. It was as if the horns of a fierce beast had been broken. The imperial family was in decline, and great power was about to fall by the wayside.

古文：惟王乃圣乃神，钦明文思，二仪并运，四时合序，天锡智勇，人挺雄杰，珠庭日角，龙行武步，爰初投袂，日乃勤王，电扫番禺，云撤彭蠡，揃其元恶，定我京畿。及王贺帝弘，贸兹冠屦，既行伊、霍，用保冲人。
现代文：睡王圣武神明，功业道德光明浩大，天地皆能运作，四季交替合乎顺序，上天赐予他智敏英勇的品德，是人中杰出的英雄豪杰，他的天庭有日角之贵相，龙行虎步，姿态高昂，想当初他投袂而起，为王室操劳，像雷电横扫天际一样迅速地扫清番禺的妖孽，又像风吹云彩一样很快地就收复了彭蠡，消灭了那些元凶，使京畿得到安宁，王贺帝弘，变易了衣装服饰，他就像伊尹、霍光那样扶持幼帝。
English: The sleeping king, Shenwu Shenming, was a man of great virtue and morality. Heaven and earth were able to function. The four seasons alternated in order. Heaven had bestowed upon him the virtue of wisdom and valor. He was an outstanding hero among men. His heavenly court had the noble appearance of the sun angle. He walked like a tiger, and his posture was lofty. I thought that when he first rose to the throne, he worked hard for the royal family, swept away the sorcery of Panyu as quickly as lightning swept the sky, and quickly regained Penghu as quickly as the wind blew clouds, eliminated those culprits, and brought peace to Gyeonggi.

古文：震泽、稽阴，并怀叛逆，獯羯丑虏，三乱皇都，裁命偏师，二邦自殄，薄伐猃狁，六戎尽殪。
现代文：在震泽、稽阴这些地方的一些将领，都怀有叛逆之心，獯、羯等丑类，屡次地扰乱京都，陈王才下令派出数目很少的一支小军队，这两个地方的叛贼就自己灭亡了，刚稍微着意讨伐硷狁，那些戎族就被全部歼灭。
English: Some generals in places such as Shenzhe and Jingyin harbored a rebellious spirit, and villains such as Yan and Zou repeatedly disrupted Kyoto. It was only when King Chen ordered the dispatch of a small number of troops that the traitors in these two places perished on their own. As soon as there was the slightest intention to fight, those soldiers were all annihilated.

古文：岭南叛涣，湘、郢结连，贼帅既擒，凶渠传首，用能百揆时序，四门允穆，无思不服，无远不届，上达穹昊，下漏渊泉，蛟鱼并见，讴歌攸属。
现代文：岭南的叛贼跋扈蛮横，湘、郢两地结交联盟，共同作乱，逭两地的贼军首领都已经被擒获，凶徒的头颅被斩下，传观示众。陈王因而能够统领百官，各种政务也都井井有条，四方迎宾之门，皆肃静恭谨，他的主张都能顺利地下达，再远的地方都能照拂，向上直达天穹，向下直到九泉，蛟龙大鱼都出现在这个太平盛世，歌咏之声不断。
English: The traitors in Lingnan were insolent and rebellious. Hunan and Shanxi formed an alliance to jointly create turmoil. The leaders of the rebel army in Shanxi and Shanxi have been captured. The heads of the criminals were cut off and displayed to the public. As a result, King Chen was able to command hundreds of officials, and all kinds of government affairs were well organized. The four sides of the gate to welcome the guests were quiet and respectful. His proposal could be successfully reached, and it could be seen from far away. Up to the sky, down to Jiuzhen, dragons and big fish appeared in this peaceful prosperous world, and the sound of singing continued.

古文：况乎长彗横天，已徵布新之兆，璧日斯既，实表更姓之符。
现代文：更何况长长的彗星横划天际，已经预示了除旧布新的征兆，圆日当空，实际上是表明了更换国姓的符象。
English: What's more, the long comet streaking across the sky has already foreshadowed the removal of the old cloth and the new signs. The round sun in the sky is actually a sign of the change of the country's name.

古文：是以始创义师，紫云曜彩，肇惟尊主，黄龙负舟。
现代文：因此陈王刚开始创建义军，就有紫云放出耀眼的光彩，刚开始勤王，为君主效命，即有黄龙来背负舟船。
English: Therefore, as soon as Chen Wang began to create a rebel army, there was a purple cloud emitting dazzling brilliance, and as soon as he began to be loyal to the king and serve the monarch, there was a yellow dragon to carry the boat.

古文：苦矢素翚，梯山以至，白环玉玦，慕德而臻。
现代文：楛木作的箭，素色的辇毛，是四方人民翻越高山献上的贺礼，白环玉殃，也是他们仰慕速王的高德而纷纷敬献的。
English: The arrow made of birch, the plain-colored bristle, are the congratulatory gifts presented by the people of the four directions crossing the high mountains, and the white ring is also the one they admire the virtue of the speed king and pay homage to.

古文：若夫安国字萌，本因万物之志，时乘御宇，良会乐推之心。
现代文：说起来速王安定国家，抚育人民，根本是顺着万物的准则，他登上帝位，统治海内，确实是适应了人民拥戴的心意。
English: It can be said that the speed of the king to stabilize the country and nurture the people is basically in line with the principles of all things. His ascension to the throne and rule over the country is indeed in line with the will of the people.

古文：七百无常期，皇王非一族，昔木德既季，而传祚于我有梁，天之历数，允集明哲。
现代文：帝王运祚不是永久不变，皇室帝王也并非衹有一个族姓可以担任，以前齐塑的木德运行到了衰落之时，就把祚命传给了我凿塑，天命历敷，降落在明智能洞察事理并且能依此制定法制的人身上。
English: The emperor's fortune is not permanent, and the royal emperors do not have a family name to serve. When the former Qishuo's morality was in decline, he passed on his destiny to me, and the fate of fate landed on a person who was intelligent and insightful and could formulate the legal system accordingly.

古文：式遵前典，广询群议，王公卿尹，莫不攸属，敬从人祇之愿，授帝位于尔躬。
现代文：我遵照往朝典制的榜样，广泛征询大众的意见，王公百官，没有不附和赞同的，现在谨依从人民及天神的愿望，把帝位授给你陈王。
English: In accordance with the example of the former imperial edict system, I have extensively solicited the opinions of the public, and there are hundreds of officials who do not disagree and agree. Now, in accordance with the wishes of the people and the angels, I would like to award the throne to you, King Chen.

古文：四海困穷，天禄永终，王其允执厥中，轨仪前式，以副溥天之望。禋祀上帝，时膺大礼，永固洪业，岂不盛欤！
现代文：四海如果到了困窘艰难的地步，那么天赐的福禄也要永绝了，速王你要把握中庸之道，遵照前代的规章行事，以便符合普天之下对你的期望祭祀上天，应时举行大礼，长久地巩固国家基业，这不也是一件盛事吗?
English: If the four seas reach the level of distress and hardship, then the blessings given by heaven will be lost forever. Speed King, you must grasp the middle way, follow the rules of the previous generation, in order to meet the expectations of the whole world, sacrifice to heaven, hold a grand ceremony at the right time, and consolidate the national foundation for a long time. Isn't this also a grand event?

古文：又玺书曰：君子者自昭明德，达人者先天弗违，故能进退咸亨，动静元吉。
现代文：又玺书说：君子自己会显明自己的德行，通达事理的人先于天时而行事，而天意也没有与他相违背，因此损益变化都很顺利，行动止息也都有大吉洪福。
English: It also said: "A gentleman will show his virtue by himself. A man of reason will act ahead of time, and God's will does not contradict him. Therefore, the changes in profit and loss are very smooth, and there are great blessings in the cessation of action."

古文：朕虽蒙寡，庶乎景行。
现代文：我即使是德行不足以服众的人，但也算有高尚的品德，为什么呢?
English: Even if I am a person whose virtue is not enough to be obedient to the public, I still have a noble character. Why?

古文：何则？三才剖判，九有区分，情性相乖，乱离云起，是以建彼司牧，推乎圣贤，授受者任其时来，皇王者本非一族，人谋是与，屈己从万物之心，天意斯归，鞠躬奉百灵之命。
现代文：天地开辟，人类产生，以后区分为九州居住，各个地区的人们的本性互不相同，动乱流离的事情不断发生，因此要建立以官吏管理人民的制度，推举圣贤者来担任，权位的给舆和接受都应时而进行，皇室帝王本来就不是固定由一个家族来永久担任的。百姓都已心向陈王，因此我屈从自己来遵从万民的心意，上天钟意陈王，我因此鞠躬恭谨地奉行天下百灵的命令。
English: Heaven and earth were created, human beings were born, and later they were divided to live in Kyushu. The nature of people in various regions is different from each other. Turbulence and displacement are constantly occurring. Therefore, it is necessary to establish a system of officials to manage the people, and saints and sages should be elected to serve. Authority should be given and received from time to time. Royal emperors were not originally held permanently by one family. The people have their hearts set on King Chen. Therefore, I submit myself to obey the will of all the people. Heaven is pleased with King Chen. Therefore, I bow down and respectfully follow the orders of the spirits of the world.

古文：讴歌所往，则攘袂以膺之，菁华已竭，乃褰裳而去之。
现代文：唱颂歌谣的人们歌颂我，我就攘袂奋起，来承担这个使命，最光耀的时期走向衰竭时，就撩起前襟，飘然离去。
English: The carol-singers sang of me, and I rose from the ashes to take up the task, and when the brightest of times faded, I folded my arms and flew away.

古文：昔在唐、虞，鉴于天道，举其黎献，授彼明哲，虽复质文殊轨，沿革不同，历代因循，斯风靡替。
现代文：从前在唐、虞的时代，人们根据天道，从黎民百姓中进行推举，把权位授给英明的圣哲之人，即使文雅、质朴这两种制度往复循环，互不相同，历朝所承袭和替废的也不一样，但历代以来，这种制度也被沿袭下来并且一直被人们所遵循，这种风尚是无法替代的。
English: Once upon a time, in the Tang and Yu dynasties, people were elected according to the heavenly way from the Li people and the power was given to the wise sage. Even though the two systems of elegance and simplicity are reciprocally circulated, they are different from each other, and the ones inherited and replaced by successive dynasties are different, but since time immemorial, this system has also been inherited and has been followed by people. This style is irreplaceable.

古文：我大梁所以考庸太室，接礼贰宫，月正元日，受终文祖。
现代文：我左凿因此能在太室中考论功绩，在贰宫中接受承续礼制的任命，在正月元日那一天，就从有文德的祖先那裹承受了帝位。
English: As a result, I was able to pass the merit examination in the Great Hall, receive the appointment to continue the etiquette system in the Imperial Palace, and on the first day of the first month of the year, I inherited the throne from the ancestors of Wende.

古文：但运不常夷，道无恒泰，山岳倾偃，河海沸腾，电目雷声之禽，钩爪锯牙之兽，咀啮含生，不知纪极。
现代文：但是时运不会总是平坦，世道也不总是通泰安宁，就到了这样的时期，山岳倾斜倒下，河海沸腾，目光如电炬，叫声如雷鸣的怪禽，爪如钩，牙似锯般锋利的怪兽，咬啮吞食众生，不知有多少人丧生。
English: But fortune is not always smooth, and the world is not always peaceful. It comes to such a time when the mountains are tilted down, the rivers and seas are boiling, the eyes are like torches, the cries are like thundering birds, the claws are like hooks, and the teeth are like saw-sharp monsters, biting and devouring all living beings. I don't know how many people have lost their lives.

古文：二后英圣，相仍在天，六夷贪狡，争侵中国，县王都帝，人怀干纪，一民尺土，皆非梁地。
现代文：周文王、周武王遣两位帝王英明圣武，在天道上还继续沿袭，六夷贪婪狡诈，争相入侵中原，郡县之令称王，各自设立都城，自立为帝，人们怀有违法犯纪的心思，即使一个小民，一尺土地，也并非是凿塑所有。
English: King Zhouwen and King Zhouwu sent two emperors who were wise and saintly, and continued to follow them on the heavenly road. The six barbarians were greedy and cunning, competing to invade the Central Plains. The county's order was king, each set up a capital city, and became an emperor independently. People harbored the thought of breaking the law and discipline. Even if you are a commoner, one foot of land is not all you have.

古文：朕以不造，幼罹闵凶，仰凭衡佐，亟移年序。
现代文：我因为身处不幸，幼年时就遭遇忧丧之事，衹能仰仗依靠着命官辅佐，很快过了几年。
English: Due to my unfortunate situation, I suffered from depression when I was young. I could only rely on the assistance of the coroner, and a few years passed quickly.

古文：周成、汉惠，邈矣无阶，惟是童蒙，必贻颠蹶。若使时无圣哲，世靡艰难，犹当高蹈于沧洲，自求于泰伯者矣。
现代文：周成王、汉惠帝，也是这样茫然失去凭藉，衹要是以幼年及帝，一定会带来动乱灾难，即使当世没有圣哲可堪帝位，即使世间并未遭遇艰难困苦，我也应该远避于沧洲隐居，自己努力追求泰伯那样的境界。
English: Zhou Cheng Wang and Han Hui Emperor also lost their credentials in such a dazed manner. If I were young and an emperor, it would certainly bring turmoil and disaster. Even if there were no saint who could be an emperor in this world, and even if the world did not encounter hardships, I should stay away from Cangzhou seclusion and strive to pursue a realm like Tibet.

古文：惟王应期诞秀，开箓握图，性道故其难闻，嘉庸已其被物，乾行同其焘覆，日御比其贞明，登承圣于复禹之功，树鞠子于兴周之业，灭陆浑于伊、洛，歼骊戎于镐京，大小二震之骁徒，东南两越之勍寇，遽行天讨，无遗神策。
现代文：陈王是适应时世的要求而诞生的英才，拥有符录、河图等祥瑞之征，他的性命道义的修养是世间难以听说的，他的美好的功绩已经泽被万物，他的刚健的德行和天德覆盖一样，就好像为太阳神驾车的神灵日御那样贞正耀目。他辅佐承圣朝登上王位，再一次建立了像大禹那样的伟大功绩，扶植幼帝，就像古时振兴周朝的皇业。在伊、洛地区消灭了陆浑，在镐京地区剪除了骊戎，大震逭两个地区的彪悍的凶徒，东南两越地区的蛮横的贼寇，马上就遭到了合乎天意的讨伐，在神机妙算的谋策之下，没有一个贼寇能够侥幸逃出。
English: Chen Wang is a genius born to meet the requirements of the times. He possesses auspicious signs such as charms and river maps. His life and moral cultivation are hard to hear in the world. His wonderful achievements have been covered by all things. His robust virtue and heavenly virtue are the same. It is as if the sun god driving the sun god's chariot. He assisted the successor of the Holy Dynasty to ascend to the throne. He once again established great achievements like Dayu, supporting young emperors, just like the ancient revival of the Zhou Dynasty's imperial cause. In the I and Luo regions, he eliminated the mud, in the Beijing region, he eliminated the mud, and in the

古文：于是祖述尧舜，宪章文武，大乐与天地同和，大礼与天地同节，鼓之以雷霆，润之以风雨，仁沾葭苇，信及豚鱼，殷牖斯空，夏台虚设，民惟大畜，野有同人，升平颂平，无偏无党，固以云飞紫盖，水跃黄龙，东伐西征，晻映川陆。
现代文：于是远则遵照尧、舜的道义，近则效法周文王、武王，宫廷裹奏起庄严的音乐，与天地的节奏相呼应，举行隆重的大礼，和天地气数能相和谐，以雷霆振荡鼓动万物萌生，以风雨滋润万物迅速生长。他的仁心浩大，连葭草都受到了泽润，他的信用卓著，连豚鱼也能兼及。殷代的门窗已经空空荡荡，夏朝的楼台也形同虚设，人民都能像《大畜》卦所说的那样刚健笃实，光明正直，四野的广远之处也像《同人》卦所说的那样，人与人和睦相处，用心无私。
English: Therefore, Yuan followed the moral precepts of Yao and Shun, and Shang followed the example of King Zhou Wen and King Wu. The court played solemn music, echoed the rhythm of heaven and earth, held a grand grand ceremony, and was in harmony with the energy of heaven and earth. With thunder and vibration, he encouraged the germination of all things, and with wind and rain, he nourished the rapid growth of all things. His benevolence was great, and even the rushes were greened. His credibility was outstanding, and even the porpoise could match it. The doors and windows of the Yang Dynasty were empty, and the platforms of the Xia Dynasty were also empty. The people

古文：荣光暧暧，已冒郊廛，甘露瀼瀼，亟流庭苑。
现代文：处于太平盛世就歌颂太平美景，没有偏私也没有结党之事，因此有祥云飞舞，紫云遮盖，水裹亦有黄龙腾跃，东征西讨的动乱时期，山川掩映晦暗，吉祥五彩的云气虽然还昏暗微弱，但已经在郊野升起，祥瑞的甘露浓浓密密，马上降落在宫庭林苑。
English: In the prosperous Taiping era, the beauty of Taiping was praised. There was no favoritism or partisanship. Therefore, there were auspicious clouds flying, purple clouds covering, and yellow dragons leaping in the water. During the turbulent period of the East-West Expedition, the mountains and rivers were dark. Although the auspicious and colorful clouds were still dim and faint, they had already risen in the countryside. The auspicious nectar was thick and dense, and immediately landed in the palace garden.

古文：车辙马迹，谁不率从？
现代文：这些事迹像车的行迹，像马的蹄印一样有迹可循，谁会不去追随他呢?
English: These deeds are traceable like the tracks of a car, like the hoofprints of a horse. Who would not want to follow him?

古文：蟠水流沙，谁不怀德？
现代文：又像沙漠中引来的弯曲的河水，谁不感怀他的恩德?
English: And like the meandering stream in the desert, who does not feel his benevolence?

古文：祥图远至，非唯赤伏之符，灵命昭然，何止黄星之气。
现代文：祥瑞的图符从远方献来，不仅仅是赤伏符这样的帝王的符命，灵验的符命彰明于世，又哪裹衹限于黄星这样的瑞星出现。
English: The auspicious charms are brought from far away, and they are not only the imperial charms such as the red embroidered charms, but also the auspicious charms that have been shown to the world, and the auspicious charms such as the yellow star.

古文：海口河目，贤圣之表既彰，握旄执钺，君人之状斯伟。
现代文：他长着河海口，明显地显示出圣人贤者的表相，他手握旄钹，执掌军权，气势宏伟，完全符合君主的威仪。
English: He had the appearance of a sage, holding a scepter in his hand, wielding military power, with a magnificent bearing, fully in line with the majesty of the monarch.

古文：且自摄提无纪，孟陬殄灭，枉矢宵飞，天弧晓映，久矣夷羊之在牧，时哉蛟龙之出泉。
现代文：况且自从摄提星象失去秩序，农历正月的纪年也无从追记，枉矢星傍晚时在天际划过，天弧星清早时在晨光中闪映，夷羊造种神兽在放牧之地出现已经很久了，这些都显示了亡国的征兆，蛟龙从水泉中腾跃飞天的时机到了。
English: Moreover, it has been a long time since the shooting stars were out of order, the anniversaries of the first month of the lunar calendar could not be traced, the arrow star passed in the sky in the evening, the arc star shone in the morning light in the early morning, and the sheep-creating god beast appeared in the grazing land, all of which showed the signs of the country's downfall. The time has come for the dragon to leap into the sky from the spring.

古文：革运之兆咸徵，惟新之符并集，朕所以钦若勋、华，屡回星琯。
现代文：变革国运的征兆全部得到应验，去旧迎新的符命也一起出现，我想谨遵放勋、重华的旧例，禅位陈王，这是我多年来的想法。
English: All the signs of the national movement for change have been fulfilled, and the signs of going back to the old and welcoming the new have appeared at the same time. I would like to respectfully follow the old example of honoring the old and cherishing the new, and be the king of Zen. This has been my idea for many years.

古文：昔者水运斯尽，予高祖受焉。今历去炎精，神归枢纽，敬以火德，传于尔陈。
现代文：以前木德的气运到了尽头，我高祖就受命于天下，现在火德的精气也将逝去，神灵之命回归枢纽，现在郑重地把火德的气运，传给你陈王。
English: In the past, Mude's qi was carried to the end, and my great-grandfather was ordered by the world. Now, Mude's qi will also pass away, and the god's order will return to the hub. Now, I solemnly pass on Mude's qi to you, King Chen.

古文：远鉴前王，近谋群辟，明灵有悦，率土同心。
现代文：这件事情远则借鉴前代帝王的经验，近则经过与百官卿士商议而定，为此神灵皆感到欣悦，普天之下亦同此心。
English: This matter is far from drawing on the experience of previous emperors, and recently it has been decided after consultation with hundreds of officials and nobles. For this, the gods are pleased, and the whole world is of the same mind.

古文：今遣使持节兼太保侍中尚书左仆射平乐亭侯王通，兼太尉司徒左长史王锡奉皇帝玺绶。
现代文：现在派遣使持节兼太保侍中尚书左仆射平乐亭侯王通，兼太尉司徒左长史王场奉上皇帝的玺绶。
English: Now, the emissaries were dispatched to hold the festival, and the Emperor's attendant, the middle chamberlain, Shang Shu, the left-hand servant, Sha Ping Le Ting, the lord, Wang Tong, and the captain, Szu Zuo, the left-hand officer, Wang Changshi, were sent to present the Emperor's scepter.

古文：受终之礼，一依唐、虞故事。
现代文：受位的礼仪，完全依照唐、虞的旧典。
English: The etiquette of the enthronement is entirely in accordance with the Tang and Yu dynasties.

古文：王其时陟元后，宁育兆民，光阐洪猷，以承昊天之休命！
现代文：陈王你要应时登上天子之位，安定养育天下万民，光大发扬宏大的天道，以继承元气博大的上天的光明美善的天命!
English: Chen Wang, you should ascend to the position of the Son of Heaven at the right time, steadily nurture all the people in the world, and magnificently carry forward the magnificent heavenly way, so as to inherit the bright and beautiful heavenly destiny of the original energy!

古文：是日，梁帝逊于别宫。
现代文：这一天梁帝逊位迁居别宫。
English: On this day, Emperor Liang moved to another palace.

古文：高祖谦让再三，群臣固请，乃许。
现代文：高祖谦让再三，群臣坚持请他即位，于是才同意登上王位。
English: Gao Zuqian yielded again and again, the ministers insisted on inviting him to ascend the throne, so he agreed to ascend the throne.

