古文：宋人弑昭公，赵宣子请师于灵公以伐宋，公曰： 非晋国之急也。 
现代文：宋国人杀了宋昭公，赵宣子请求晋灵公出兵讨伐宋国，灵公说： 这并不是晋国的当务之急。 
English: The people of Song killed Song Zhaogong. Zhao Xuanzi asked Jin Lingong to send troops to fight against Song. Lingong said, "This is not an urgent matter for Jin."

古文：对曰： 大者天地，其次君臣，所以为明训也。
现代文：赵宣子回答道： 最大的是天地之间的关系，其次是君臣之间的关系，这是一种明确的规定。
English: Zhao Xuan Zi replied: The biggest is the relationship between heaven and earth, followed by the relationship between monarchs and ministers. This is a clear stipulation.

古文：今宋人弑其君，是反天地而逆民则也，天必诛焉。
现代文：现在宋国人杀了自己的国君，这是违反天地人伦的事情，一定要遭受天的惩罚。
English: Now the Song people have killed their own sovereign, which is a violation of heaven and earth, and must be punished by heaven.

古文：晋为盟主，而不修天罚，将惧及焉。 
现代文：晋国作为盟主，而不执行天的惩罚，恐怕、祸患就要到来了。 
English: If Jin, as the leader, does not carry out Heaven's punishment, I am afraid that disaster will come.

古文：公许之。
现代文：灵公答应了这一请求。
English: Sadagimi allowed it.

古文：乃发令于太庙，召军吏而戒乐正，令三军之钟鼓必备。
现代文：于是在太庙里发布号令，召集军吏并且告戒乐官，命令三军的钟鼓必须齐备。
English: So he issued a proclamation in the Great Temple, summoned the military officials and warned the music officials, ordering that the bells and drums of the three armies must be ready.

古文：赵同曰： 国有大役，不镇抚民而备钟鼓，何也？ 
现代文：赵同问道： 国家有重大行动，不去镇定安抚人民却准备钟鼓，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Zhao Tong asked: Why is it that when the country has a major action, it does not calm down and appease the people, but prepares the bells and drums?

古文：宣子曰： 大罪伐之，小罪惮之。侵袭之事，陵也。
现代文：宣子回答说： 大罪讨伐它，小罪威吓它，偷袭、入侵这类事，是欺凌他人。
English: Xuan Zi replied, "The major crime is to fight it, the minor crime is to threaten it, and the sneak attack, invasion and other such things are bullying others.

古文：是故伐备钟鼓，声其罪也；战以于、丁宁，儆其民也。
现代文：所以讨伐要有钟鼓，以便声讨它的罪行。打仗要用于和丁宁两种乐器，是为了警告他的人民。
English: Therefore, the crusade should have a bell and drum to denounce its crimes, and the war should use two musical instruments, the cymbal and the ding-dong, to warn his people.

古文：袭侵密声，为暂事也。
现代文：偷袭和入侵要秘而不宣，是为了让对方暂时没有防备。
English: Surreptitious attacks and invasions should be kept secret, in order to leave the other side temporarily unprepared.

古文：今宋人弑其君，罪莫大焉！
现代文：现在宋国人杀了他们的国君，没有比这罪更大的了。
English: Now the Song people have killed their sovereign, and there is no greater crime than this.

古文：明声之，犹恐其不闻也。
现代文：明白声讨它，还怕他们听不到呢。
English: Speak out against it, or they won't listen.

古文：吾备钟鼓，为君故也。 
现代文：我备齐钟鼓，是为了尊重君道的缘故呀。 
English: I have prepared all the bells and drums, for the sake of respecting the monarchy.

古文：乃使旁告于诸侯，治兵振旅，鸣钟鼓，以至于宋。
现代文：于是派人到各处去告诉诸侯，整顿军队，振饬军容，一路上鸣钟击鼓，去攻打宋国。
English: So he sent people everywhere to tell the lords to straighten out the army, shake up the military, ring bells and beat drums along the way, and attack Song.

