古文：徐溥，字时用，宜兴人。
现代文：徐溥，字时用，宜兴人。
English: Xu Xuan, the word is used, Yixing people.

古文：祖鉴，琼州知府，有惠政。
现代文：祖父徐鉴曾任琼州知府，对民众多有恩惠。
English: Grandfather Xu Jian once served as the governor of Qiongzhou and was very generous to the people.

古文：溥，景泰五年进士及第。授编修。
现代文：徐溥于景泰五年考中进士，授编修职。
English: Xu Wei was promoted to a scholar in Jingtai's five-year examination, and was awarded the post of editor.

古文：宪宗初，擢左庶子，再迁太常卿兼学士。
现代文：宪宗初年，提升为左庶子，又调升为太常卿兼学士。
English: In the first year of Emperor Gensong's reign, he was promoted to the second son of the left, and was also promoted to the post of grand secretary and academician.

古文：成化十五年拜礼部右侍郎，寻转左，久之改吏部。
现代文：成化十五年，授礼部右侍郎职，不久转为礼部左侍郎，一段时间后改在吏部任职。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Jianhua era, he served as the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, and was soon transferred to the Left Attendant of the Ceremonial Department. After a period of time, he was transferred to the Personnel Department.

古文：孝宗嗣位，兼文渊阁大学士，参预机务。旋进礼部尚书。
现代文：孝宗继位，徐溥兼任文渊阁大学士，参预机要事务，不久晋升礼部尚书。
English: Xiaozong succeeded to the throne, and Xu Xi concurrently served as a scholar of Wenyuan Pavilion University, participated in important affairs, and was soon promoted to the etiquette department.

古文：弘治五年，刘吉罢，溥为首辅，屡加少傅、太子太傅。
现代文：弘治五年，刘吉被罢免官职，徐溥任首辅，累次加封为少傅、太子太傅。
English: In the fifth year of the Hongzhi era, Liu Ji was removed from his official post, and Xu Xi served as the first assistant, and was successively awarded the titles of Shao Fu and Taifu.

古文：溥承刘吉恣睢之后，镇以安静，务守成法。与同列刘健、李东阳、谢迁等协心辅治，事有不可，辄共争之。
现代文：刘吉治政狂妄凶暴，徐溥接替刘吉以后，以安定平静为宗旨，务守成规，与同事刘健、李东阳、谢迁等同心协力辅助治理朝政，每当遇到不可行的事，总是一起争辩。
English: Liu Jie ruled the government with arrogance and ferocity. After Xu Rong succeeded Liu Jie, he took stability and calmness as the purpose and adhered to the rules. He and his colleagues Liu Jian, Li Dongyang, Xie Qian and others worked together to help govern the government. Whenever they encountered unfeasible things, they always argued together.

古文：钦天监革职监正李华为昌国公张峦择葬地，中旨复官。
现代文：钦天监中被革职的监正李华为昌国公张峦选择墓地，宫中降旨恢复他的官职。
English: The overseer Li Huai Chang Guo Gong Zhang Ye, who was dismissed from his post in Qin Tianjun, chose a cemetery, and the palace ordered him to resume his official post.

古文：溥等言： 即位以来，未尝有内降。幸门一开，未流安底。臣等不敢奉诏。 
现代文：徐溥等上言道： 陛下登基以来，未曾有过宫中降旨事，恐怕权贵亲幸之门一开，不良之徒无所顾忌，臣等不敢接受这一诏令。 
English: Xu Xi et al. said: Since His Majesty ascended the throne, there has never been a decree from the palace. I am afraid that once the door of power and nobility is opened, the bad guys will have no scruples, and the vassals will not dare to accept this edict.

古文：八年，太皇太后召崇王来朝，溥等与尚书倪岳谏，帝为请乃已。
现代文：八年，太皇太后召崇王进宫朝见，徐溥等与尚书倪岳进行劝谏，明孝宗亲自劝说太皇太后，此事才得以停止。
English: In the eighth year, the Grand Empress Dowager summoned Chong Wang to the palace for a morning meeting, Xu Xi and others consulted with Shang Shu Ni Yue, and Ming Xiaozong personally persuaded the Grand Empress Dowager to stop the matter.

古文：占城奏安南侵扰，帝欲遣大臣往解。溥等言： 外国相侵，有司檄谕之足矣，无劳遣使。
现代文：占城奏报安南入境侵犯骚扰，孝宗准备派大臣前往调解，徐溥等说： 外国之间发生侵略现象，有关部门发道檄文告诫就行了，不需派遣使臣。
English: Zhancheng reported Annan's entry violation and harassment, Xiaozong prepared to send a minister to mediate, and Xu Xi et al. said: If aggression occurs between foreign countries, the relevant departments need only issue a written warning, and there is no need to send envoys.

古文：万一抗令，则亏损国体，问罪兴师，后患滋大。 
现代文：万一安南不听使臣命令，则有损国威，再去兴师问罪，后患越来越大。 
English: In the unlikely event that Annan did not listen to the envoy's order, it would damage the country's prestige, and he would have to go back to the emperor to ask for forgiveness. The consequences would be more and more serious.

古文：于是罢不遣。
现代文：就未派遣大臣。
English: He did not send a minister.

古文：是年十二月，诏撰三清乐章。
现代文：这年十二月，孝宗下诏要撰三清乐章。
English: In December of that year, Emperor Xiaozong issued an edict to compose the Three Clear Music Movements.

古文：溥等言： 天至尊无对。
现代文：徐溥等说 ：天，至高无上，没有谁能匹配。
English: Xu Xi et al. said: Heaven, supreme, no one can match.

古文：汉祀五帝，儒者犹非之，况三清乃道家妄说耳。
现代文：汉代祭祀五帝，儒者尚且认为不对。况且三清是道家荒谬之说。
English: The Han Dynasty worshiped the Five Emperors, which the Confucians thought was wrong. Moreover, the Three Clearings was an absurd theory of the Taoists.

古文：一天之上，安得有三大帝？
现代文：一天之上，岂得有三大帝。
English: On any given day, there can be as many as three emperors.

古文：且以周柱下史李耳当其一，以人鬼列天神，矫诬甚矣。
现代文：并且以周代柱下史李耳充其中一帝，将人鬼列为天神，荒诞至极。
English: And with Shi Li Er from the Zhou Dynasty as one of the emperors, the ghosts and goblins are listed as gods and goddesses, which is the height of absurdity.

古文：郊祀乐章皆太祖所亲制，今使制为时俗词曲以享神明，亵渎尤甚。
现代文：郊祀乐章都是太祖亲自创作，现在以写作的时俗词曲祭祀神明，亵渎更甚。
English: The suburban worship music was composed by Taizu himself. Nowadays, they worship the gods with contemporary folk songs, which is even more blasphemous.

古文：臣等诵读儒书，邪说俚曲素所不习，不敢以非道事陛下。
现代文：臣等熟读儒家书籍，对邪说俚曲向来不在意，不敢用旁门左道侍奉陛下。
English: His courtiers are well-versed in Confucian books, and have never paid attention to heresies. They do not dare to serve His Majesty in the wrong way.

古文：国家设文渊阁，命学士居之，诚欲其谟谋政事，讲论经史，培养本原，匡弼阙失，非欲其阿谀顺旨，惟言莫违也。
现代文：国家设置文渊阁，命令学士在此任职，的确是想让学士为国家谋划政事，讲经论史，培养治政的根本，纠正过失，并非要其阿谀奉承，唯命是从。
English: The country set up the Academy of Letters and Humanities and ordered the baccalaureate to serve there. It is indeed to let the baccalaureate plan political affairs for the country, lecture on history, cultivate the fundamentals of governance, and correct mistakes. It is not to flatter him, but to obey his orders.

古文：今经筵早休，日讲久旷，异端乘间而入。
现代文：现在御前讲席早已停止，讲官入侍讲读很久没有进行，异端邪说乘隙而入。
English: Now, the lectures in front of the throne have long since stopped, the lectures have not been conducted for a long time, and heresies have taken advantage of the gap.

古文：此皆臣等无状，不足以启圣心，保初政。
现代文：这些都是因为臣等侍奉不当，不能够启发陛下之心，保持陛下初登位时治政的良好势头。
English: All of this is due to the fact that ministers and others have served improperly and have not been able to enlighten His Majesty's heart and maintain the good momentum of governance when His Majesty first ascended the throne.

古文：忧愧之至，无以自容。
现代文：我们万分忧心与惭愧，无地自容。
English: We are extremely worried and ashamed, and have no room for complacency.

古文：数月以来，奉中旨处分未当者封还，执奏至再至三。
现代文：数月以来，对宫中降旨中处理政事不当的，我们将其封还宫中，并再三向皇上奏明我们的看法。
English: Over the past few months, we have returned to the Imperial Palace the decrees of the Imperial Court concerning the improper handling of political affairs, and have repeatedly made our views known to the Emperor.

古文：愿陛下曲赐听从，俾臣等竭驽钝，少有裨益，非但乐章一事而已。 
现代文：希望陛下曲身听从，使臣等竭尽拙笨之力稍稍有所帮助，不仅仅只指乐章一事。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will listen to me, and that his envoys will do their best to be of some help, and not just with regard to the movement.

古文：奏入，帝嘉纳之。
现代文：奏章呈送孝宗，孝宗很赞赏，接纳了他们的劝谏。
English: The medal was presented to Takamune, who was very appreciative and accepted their advice.

古文：帝自八年后，视朝渐晏，溥等屡以为言。
现代文：孝宗自弘治八年后，上朝时间渐晚，徐溥等屡次上言劝谏。
English: Eight years after the enthronement of Emperor Hongzhi, it was getting late for Emperor Xiaozong to ascend to the throne, and Xu Xi and others repeatedly appealed to Emperor Hongzong for advice.

古文：中官李广以烧炼斋醮宠。
现代文：宦官李广借炼丹、设斋坛得到皇帝宠幸。
English: The eunuch Li Guang was favored by the emperor for his use of refined dan and the establishment of a sacrificial altar.

古文：十年二月，溥等上疏极论曰： 旧制，内殿日再进奏，事重者不时上闻，又常面召儒臣，咨访政事。
现代文：十年二月，徐溥等上疏深切地论述说： 旧制，内殿每日两次奏事，事项多的可以随时上奏，皇帝又常常召见儒臣，咨询政事。
English: In February of the tenth year, Xu Rong et al. elaborated on the following: In the old system, the Inner Court reported twice a day, and many matters could be reported at any time. The emperor also often summoned Confucian scholars to consult on political affairs.

古文：今奏事日止一次，朝参之外，不得一望天颜。
现代文：现在奏事每天只有一次，除上朝之外，再见不到陛下。
English: Now, there is only one report per day, and apart from the morning of the previous day, I never see His Majesty again.

古文：章奏批答不时断决，或稽留数月，或竟不施行。
现代文：奏章、奏议与批答不准时断决，有的滞留好几个月，有的竟然不施行。
English: The minutes, motions, and replies were not decided on time, some were delayed for months, and some were not implemented at all.

古文：事多壅滞，有妨政体。
现代文：事情大多堆集在一起，妨碍政体。
English: Things are mostly piled on top of each other, hampering the polity.

古文：经筵进讲，每岁不过数日，正士疏远，邪说得行。
现代文：御前讲席每年只开几天，疏远正直人士，邪说得以流行。
English: The throne's lecture hall is only open a few days a year, alienating honest people and allowing heresies to flourish.

古文：近闻有以斋醮修炼之说进者。
现代文：近来听说有借斋坛炼丹之说得到重用的。
English: Recently, it was heard that the practice of using the altar to make pureed dan had been put to good use.

古文：宋徽宗崇道教，科仪符箓最盛，卒至乘舆播迁。
现代文：宋徽宗崇尚道教，科条仪式符最盛行，以致颠沛流离于道路。
English: Song Huizong advocated Taoism, and the ritual symbols of science and technology were the most popular. As a result, there was a lot of traffic on the road.

古文：金石之药，性多酷烈。
现代文：金石之药，性能多是酷烈的。
English: The medicine of the stone, the performance is mostly fierce.

古文：唐宪宗信柳泌以殒身，其祸可鉴。
现代文：唐宪宗相信柳泌以致殒命，此祸可作借鉴。
English: Emperor Xianzong of the Tang Dynasty believed in the secretion of willows, which led to his death. This calamity can be used as a reference.

古文：今龙虎山上清宫、神乐观、祖师殿及内府番经厂皆焚毁无余，彼如有灵，何不自保？
现代文：现在龙虎山的上清宫、神乐观、祖师殿以及内府番经厂都被焚毁，它们如有神灵，为什么连自身也保不住？
English: Now, the Shangqing Palace, the God of Optimism, the Ancestor's Hall, and the Neifu Banjing Factory in Longhu Mountain have all been burned. If they have gods, why can't they even save themselves?

古文：天厌其秽，亦已明甚。
现代文：上天讨厌这些污秽行为，已是很明白的了。
English: Heaven abhors these foul deeds, that much is clear.

古文：陛下若亲近儒臣，明正道，行仁政，福祥善庆，不召自至，何假妖妄之说哉！
现代文：陛下如果亲近儒臣，懂得正道，施行仁政，那么福兆祥瑞，以及许多值得庆贺的好事就会不招自来，何须借助妖妄之说呢？
English: If your majesty is close to Confucianism, knows the right way, and practices benevolent government, then good fortune, auspiciousness, and many good things worthy of celebration will come uninvited. Why do you need to resort to delusion?

古文：自古奸人蛊惑君心者，必以太平无事为言。
现代文：自古以来奸人要蛊惑君王动心，必定先说太平无事。
English: Since ancient times, if a con man wants to seduce a monarch, he must first say that there is nothing to worry about.

古文：唐臣李绛有云： 忧先于事，可以无忧。
现代文：唐朝大臣李绛曾说过 ：忧心于事行之前，可以免除担忧。
English: The Tang Dynasty minister Li Xi once said, "If you are worried before you act, you can get rid of your worries."

古文：事至而忧，无益于事。 
现代文：事情干完了再担忧，于事无益。 
English: It's no good worrying about it once it's done.

古文：今承平日久，溺于晏安。
现代文：现在太平日子很长，沉溺于安逸。
English: Now Taiping days are long and indulge in ease.

古文：目前视之，虽若无事，然工役繁兴，科敛百出，士马罢敝，闾阎困穷，愁叹之声上干和气，致荧惑失度，太阳无光，天鸣地震，草木兴妖，四方奏报殆无虚月，将来之患灼然可忧。
现代文：就目前来看，虽然好像无事，然而工役频繁兴起，苛捐杂税百出，人马疲惫不堪，民间穷困，人民愁苦的叹息声影响着上天的和顺之气以致造成火星失去常规，太阳无光，天鸣地震，草木成为妖孽，四方奏报这些情况的几乎每月都有，将来的后患灼然使人担忧。
English: For the time being, although it seems to be nothing, but the frequent rise of laborers, heavy taxes, exhaustion of men and horses, poverty of the people, and the sighs of the people affect the harmony of heaven, causing Mars to lose its regularity, the sun to lose its light, the sky to ring with earthquakes, and the plants to become witches. These situations are reported by the four parties almost every month, and the future after-effects make people worry.

古文：陛下高居九重，言官皆畏罪缄默。
现代文：陛下高居深宫，言官都害怕引祸上身缄口沉默。
English: His Majesty is high and deep in the palace, and the gossips are afraid of causing trouble, so they keep their mouths shut.

古文：臣等若复不言，谁肯为陛下言者。 
现代文：臣等假如再不说，谁又肯为陛下说。 
English: If we don't say it, who will say it for His Majesty?

古文：帝感其言。
现代文：孝宗被徐溥的话所感动。
English: Xiaozong was moved by Xu Yao's words.

古文：三月甲子，御文华殿，召见溥及刘健、李东阳、谢迁，授以诸司题奏曰： 与先生辈议。 
现代文：三月二十七日，孝宗在文华殿召见徐溥以及刘健、李东阳、谢迁，把各部门的奏疏交给他们说 ：与先生辈商议。 
English: On March 27th, Xiaozong summoned Xu Xi, Liu Jian, Li Dongyang, and Xie Qian to Wenhua Hall, and handed them the reports from various departments, saying, "Consult with your elders."

古文：溥等拟旨上，帝应手改定。
现代文：徐溥等起草诏令呈上，孝宗就手批改。
English: Xu Xi and others drafted the edict and submitted it, but Xiaozong immediately criticized and amended it.

古文：事端多者，健请出外详阅。帝曰： 盍就此面议。 
现代文：事端多的，刘健请求拿出去详细阅读，孝宗说 ：何不就此地面议。 
English: There were a lot of things, Liu Jian asked to take it out and read it in detail, and Xiaozong said: Why not discuss it on the ground.

古文：既毕，赐茶而退。
现代文：事完之后，赐徐溥等饮茶方退。
English: After the matter was over, he asked Xu Yao and other tea drinkers to leave.

古文：自成化间，宪宗召对彭时、商辂后，至此始再见，举朝诩为盛事。
现代文：自从成化年间，宪宗召彭时、商辂对答以后，至此时才开始再次出现，举朝夸耀为盛事。
English: Since the year of Chenghua, when Peng Xi was summoned by Emperor Xianzong and the discussion was held, it has only begun to reappear at this time, and it has been praised as a grand event.

古文：然终溥在位，亦止此一召而已。
现代文：然而在徐溥整个任职期间，也只有这么一次受到皇帝召见。
English: However, during the entire tenure of Xu Xi, he was summoned by the emperor only once.

古文：寻以灾异求言，廷臣所上封事，经月不报，而言官论救何鼎忤旨待罪者久，溥等皆以为言。
现代文：不久，由于灾害，异常现象发生，朝廷广开言路，朝廷大臣所上的密封的奏章，过了一个月还不回答，而且言官因议论救助何鼎违背皇帝旨意等待被治罪已有很长时间，徐溥等都将这些情况向孝宗进言。
English: Soon, due to disasters, abnormal phenomena occurred, the imperial court opened the way to speak, the sealed record of the minister of the imperial court did not answer after a month, and the spokesman had been waiting for a long time to be punished for violating the emperor's will by discussing the rescue of He Ding. Xu Wei and others brought these situations to the attention of Xiaozong.

古文：于是悉下诸章，而罢诸言官弗问。
现代文：于是搁置的奏章全部批发下来，并且免言官的罪。
English: As a result, all the shelved musical scores were sold wholesale, and the officials were absolved of their sins.

古文：溥时年七十，引年求退，不许。诏风雨寒暑免朝参。
现代文：徐溥这时七十岁，以年老请求退休，孝宗不批准，下诏让他在风雨寒暑天免去朝见。
English: At this time, Xu Xi was seventy years old. He asked to retire due to old age, but Xiaozong did not approve, and issued an edict to exempt him from going to the imperial court on rainy, cold and hot days.

古文：十一年，皇太子出閤，加少师兼太子太师，进华盖殿大学士。
现代文：十一年，皇太子离开东宫，加封徐溥太子太师，升为华盖殿大学士。
English: In the eleventh year, the crown prince left the East Palace, and was given the title of crown prince's father-in-law, and was promoted to a scholar of Huagai Palace University.

古文：以目疾乞归。
现代文：因为眼病请求返乡。
English: He asked to return home because of an eye disease.

古文：帝眷留，久之乃许，恩赉有加。
现代文：孝宗舍不得放他走，很久才同意他的返乡，给徐溥很多赏赐。
English: Xiaozong was reluctant to let him go, and it took him a long time to agree to return to his hometown. He gave Xu Xi a lot of rewards.

古文：逾年卒，赠太师，谥文靖。
现代文：过了一年徐溥去世，追赠太师，赐谥号文靖。
English: One year later, Xu Xi passed away and was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master and given the posthumous title of Wenjing.

古文：溥性凝重有度，在内阁十二年，从容辅导。
现代文：徐溥生性庄重，举止有法度，在内阁十二年，从容辅助劝导。
English: Xu Yansheng is dignified and has a dignified demeanor. He has been in the cabinet for 12 years, and has been calmly assisting in persuasion.

古文：人有过误，辄为掩覆，曰： 天生才甚难，不忍以微瑕弃也。 
现代文：遇到有人犯有过失，总是为其掩盖，他说 ：天生人才很不容易，我不忍心人才因小过错被抛弃。 
English: When someone makes a mistake, he always covers it up. He said: "It's not easy to be born with talent. I can't bear to see talent discarded for a small mistake."

古文：屡遇大狱及逮系言官，委曲调剂。
现代文：屡次遇到大狱案，以及逮捕言官，他都要从中委婉调停。
English: He repeatedly encountered major prison cases, as well as arresting officers, from which he had to tactfully mediate.

古文：孝宗仁厚，多纳溥等所言，天下阴受其福。
现代文：孝宗仁慈淳厚，对徐溥等所提的意见大都接受，天下暗暗地受到他的庇护。
English: Xiaozong was benevolent and kindhearted. He accepted most of the opinions proposed by Xu Xi and others, and the whole world was secretly protected by him.

古文：尝曰： 祖宗法度所以惠元元者备矣，患不能守耳。 
现代文：徐溥曾说 ：祖宗法度在恩惠百姓的事方面已经完备，所担心的是不能守住。 
English: Xu Wei once said: The Ancestral Law has been completed in terms of benefiting the people. What we are worried about is that it cannot be kept.

古文：卒无所更置。
现代文：因此，他对祖宗成法无所变更。
English: Therefore, he made no changes to the ancestral rite.

古文：性至孝，尝再庐墓。
现代文：徐溥对父母极为孝顺，曾经两次在父母墓旁小房居住。
English: Xu Yao was extremely filial to his parents. He lived in a small room next to his parents' grave twice.

古文：自奉甚薄，好施予。
现代文：对自己的生活要求则很低，好施舍别人。
English: They have very low expectations of their own lives and are good at giving to others.

古文：置义田八百亩赡宗族，请籍记于官，以垂永久，帝为复其徭役。
现代文：购置义田八百亩赡养宗族族人，并请官府为之登记于册以求永久保存，孝宗为此免除徐溥家的徭役。
English: He purchased 800 mu of Yoshida to support the clan members, and asked the government to register it in order to preserve it forever. As a result, the Xiaozong family was exempted from the duty of supporting the Xu Ye family.

古文：邱浚，字仲深，琼山人。
现代文：丘浚，字仲深，海南琼山人。
English: Qiu Jun, Zha Zhong Sheng, Hainan Qiongshan people.

古文：幼孤，母李氏教之读书，过目成诵。
现代文：幼年失去父亲，母亲李氏教他读书，他看一遍就能背诵。
English: After losing his father at a young age, his mother, Ms. Li, taught him to read, and he can recite everything after reading it once.

古文：家贫无书，尝走数百里借书，必得乃已。
现代文：家贫无书，曾经走数百里路借书，必定将书借到才罢休。
English: My family is poor and has no books. I used to walk hundreds of miles to borrow books, and I would not stop until I had borrowed a book.

古文：举乡试第一，景泰五年成进士。
现代文：考取乡试第一名，景泰五年，考中进士。
English: Won the first place in the township examination, Jingtai for five years, and entered the middle school examination.

古文：改庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：改任庶吉士，授编修职。
English: He was reappointed to the position of deputy kishi, and the post of editor was no longer conferred.

古文：浚既官翰林，见闻益广，尤熟国家典故，以经济自负。
现代文：丘浚在翰林院任职后，见闻更加广泛，尤其熟悉国家典故，以经国济民自负。
English: After serving in the Hanlin Academy, Yau Jun has seen and heard more widely, especially familiar with national allusions, and is proud to help the people through the country.

古文：成化元年，两广用兵，浚奏记大学士李贤，指陈形势，纚纚数千言。
现代文：成化元年，两广有战事，丘浚向大学士李贤上书，指明陈述形势，井井有条数千言。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, there were two large-scale wars, and Yujun sent a letter to the university scholar Li Xian, indicating the situation, and there were thousands of words.

古文：贤善其计，闻之帝，命录示总兵官赵辅、巡抚都御史韩雍。
现代文：李贤对他的谋划很欣赏，向皇帝禀报，宪宗命将丘浚的谋划抄写下来，让总兵官赵辅、巡抚都御史韩雍看。
English: Li Xian was very appreciative of his plan and reported to the emperor that the Emperor ordered him to write down the plan of dredging the mound, so that the commander-in-chief, Zhao Fu, and the governor of the capital, Han Yong, could see it.

古文：雍等破贼，虽不尽用其策，而浚以此名重公卿间。秩满，进侍讲。
现代文：韩雍等攻破贼军，虽然不完全是用丘浚的计谋，然而丘浚因此在朝臣中颇有威望，任职期满，晋升为侍讲。
English: Han Yong and others defeated the bandits, although they did not entirely use Qiu Jun's stratagem. However, Qiu Jun gained a lot of prestige among the courtiers because of this, and after his term of office was over, he was promoted to the position of assistant lecturer.

古文：与修《英宗实录》，进侍讲学士。
现代文：参与撰写《英宗实录》，升为侍讲学士。
English: He participated in the writing of the "Eingzong Record" and was promoted to an assistant lecturer.

古文：《续通鉴纲目》成，擢学士，迁国子祭酒。
现代文：《续通鉴纲目》成书，提升为学士，调任国子祭酒。
English: "Continuation of the Appraisal Program" was published, promoted to bachelor, and transferred to Kuniko Matsuri Sake.

古文：时经生文尚险怪，浚主南畿乡试，分考会试皆痛抑之。
现代文：当时学习经义的书，好尚奇险怪异之文，丘浚在主持南畿的乡试时，在分考和会试中他都痛切地抑制这种文风。
English: At that time, he was a student of the classics and was fond of writing about strange and dangerous things. When presiding over the Nanki township examination, he was keen to suppress this style of writing in both the branch examination and the meeting examination.

古文：及是，课国学生尤谆切告诫，返文体于正。
现代文：丘浚任职国子监后，他督促国学生时，尤为恳切地告诫他们将文体返归正道。
English: After Yau Jun served as the state's son supervisor, when he urged the state's students, he especially earnestly warned them to return the style to the right path.

古文：寻进礼部右侍郎，掌祭酒事。
现代文：不久晋为礼部右侍郎，掌管祭酒事务。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, and was in charge of the ceremonial wine affairs.

古文：浚以真德秀《大学衍义》于治国平天下条目未具，乃博采群书补之。
现代文：丘浚认为真德秀著的《大学衍义》对于治国平天下的条目叙述得不完备，丘浚就博采群书补充了这些内容，写成《大学衍义补》。
English: Qiu Jun believed that "The Meaning of University" written by Zhen Dexiu was not complete in its description of the rules of governing the country. Qiu Jun supplemented these contents with a selection of books to write "The Meaning of University."

古文：孝宗嗣位，表上其书，帝称善，赉金币，命所司刊行。
现代文：孝宗继位，他向孝宗呈上此书。孝宗认为该书不错，赏赐黄金纸币奖励丘浚，并命令有关部门刊印发行。
English: He presented the book to Emperor Xiaozong when he succeeded to the throne. Emperor Xiaozong thought the book was good, awarded gold paper money to reward dredging, and ordered the relevant departments to publish and distribute it.

古文：特进礼部尚书，掌詹事府事。
现代文：特别提升为礼部尚书，掌管詹事府的事务。
English: He was specially promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and was in charge of the affairs of Janzhi Prefecture.

古文：修《宪宗实录》，充副总裁。
现代文：充任修撰《宪宗实录》的副总裁。
English: Shou Chen was appointed vice president of the "Constitutional Record."

古文：弘治四年，书成，加太子太保，寻命兼文渊阁大学士参预机务。
现代文：弘治四年，此书完成，加封丘浚为太子太保，不久兼任文渊阁大学士参预机要事务。
English: In the fourth year of Hongzhi, this book was completed, and Yujun was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo, and soon he also served as a scholar of Bunyukaku University.

古文：尚书入内阁者自浚始，时年七十一矣。
现代文：尚书入内阁任职从丘浚开始，丘浚当时七十一岁。
English: Shangshu's appointment to the cabinet began with Qiu Jun, who was 71 years old at the time.

古文：浚以《衍义补》所载皆可见之行事，请摘其要者奏闻，下内阁议行之。
现代文：他认为《大学衍义补》所撰述的都可见之行动，请求摘其要点奏报皇帝，并下内阁商议付诸实行。
English: He believed that the actions described in the "University Supplement" were all visible, and requested that its main points be reported to the emperor, and that it be discussed and implemented by the cabinet.

古文：帝报可。
现代文：孝宗批准他的请求。
English: The great-grandfather consented to the instruction.

古文：明年，浚上言： 臣见成化时彗星三见，遍扫三垣，地五六百震。
现代文：第二年，丘浚上言道： 臣在成化年间见到彗星三次出现，遍扫三垣，方圆五六百里大地发生地震。
English: In the second year, Qiu Junling said, "During my life, I saw a comet appear three times, sweep across the Three Forks, and an earthquake occurred in a radius of five or six hundred miles.

古文：迩者彗星见天津，地震天鸣无虚日，异鸟三鸣于禁中。
现代文：近来彗星出现在天河，每天地震天鸣不已，怪鸟在宫中鸣叫三声。
English: Recently, a comet appeared in the Tianhe River, earthquakes continue to ring out every day, and a strange bird chirped three times in the palace.

古文：《春秋》二百四十年，书彗孛者三，地震者五，飞禽者二。
现代文：《春秋》二百四十年，记载出现彗星三次，地震五次，飞禽两次。
English: In the 240 years of Spring and Autumn, there were three comets, five earthquakes, and two birds.

古文：今乃屡见于二十年之间，甚可畏也。
现代文：现在却在二十年之间屡次出现，非常令人害怕。
English: Now, in the space of 20 years, it's happening again and again, and it's very scary.

古文：愿陛下体上天之仁爱，念祖宗之艰难，正身清心以立本而应务。谨好尚不惑于异端，节财用不至于耗国，公任使不失于偏听。禁私谒，明义理，慎俭德，勤政务，则承风希宠、左道乱政之徒自不敢肆其奸，而天灾弭矣。 
现代文：希望陛下体会上天的仁爱，想到祖宗创业的艰难，修身清心以立根本，而适应政事的需要，谨慎对待自己所喜好、崇尚的东西，而不被异端所迷惑，节约财物，不至于耗费国家财富，公正地使用人才，不偏听偏信，禁止以私事谒见请托，明确义理，保持节俭的品行，勤于政务，那么，阿谀求宠、邪门旁道的乱政之徒就不敢为非做歹，天灾就可以清除。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will experience the benevolence of heaven, think about the difficulties of his ancestors' entrepreneurship, cultivate a pure heart to establish a foundation, and adapt to the needs of government affairs, be cautious about what he likes and respects, and not be confused by heresy, save wealth, not consume national wealth, use talent fairly, not listen to prejudice, prohibit asking for help in private affairs, clarify the principles, maintain frugal behavior, and be diligent in government affairs. Then, those who seek favor from aunts, and those who seek evil ways will not dare to do evil, and natural disasters can be eliminated.

古文：因列时弊二十二事。
现代文：接着列举二十二种时弊，孝宗都接受他的意见。
English: He then listed twenty-two evils of the times, all of which were accepted by Xiaozong.

古文：帝纳之。
现代文：六年由于眼病免去上朝。
English: The emperor took him at his word.

古文：六年以目疾免朝参。浚在位，尝以宽大启上心，忠厚变士习。
现代文：丘浚在位时，曾经用宽大为怀启发孝宗，以忠厚来改变士风。
English: When he was on the throne, he used his magnanimity to inspire his son, and his loyalty to change the style of the priesthood.

古文：顾性褊隘，尝与刘健议事不合，至投冠于地。
现代文：只是生性偏狭，曾与刘健在商议事情时，因意见不合，竟把帽子摔下地。
English: However, he is narrow-minded by nature. Once, when he and Liu Jian were discussing a matter, he actually threw his hat to the ground because of a disagreement.

古文：言官建白不当意，辄面折之。
现代文：言官说话不中他意，丘浚总是当面驳斥。
English: If a speech by a government official does not meet his expectations, he will always refute it to his face.

古文：与王恕不相得，至不交一言。
现代文：他与王恕关系紧张，以至于不说话。
English: His relationship with Wang Shu is so strained that they do not speak.

古文：六年大计群吏，恕所奏罢二千人。
现代文：六年考核群吏，王恕上奏章要罢免二千人。
English: In the six-year assessment of group officials, Wang Shou wrote a report to dismiss two thousand people.

古文：浚请未及三载者复任，非贪暴有显迹者勿斥，留九十人。
现代文：丘浚则请求未满三年的仍任原职，无特别贪婪残暴劣行的官吏仍留任，留下九十人。
English: Yau Chun, on the other hand, requested that officials with less than three years of service remain in their original posts, and that officials who had not been particularly greedy, cruel or abusive remain in their posts, leaving behind 90 people.

古文：恕争之不得，求去。
现代文：王恕争辩无结果，要求离职。
English: Wang Shu argued to no avail and demanded to leave the job.

古文：太医院判刘文泰尝往来浚家，以失职讦恕，恕疑文泰受浚指，而言者哗然，言疏稿出浚手。
现代文：太医院判刘文泰曾经与丘浚家有过来往，刘揭发王恕失职，王恕怀疑刘是受丘浚指使，而舆论大哗，说疏稿是丘浚写的。
English: The Tai Hospital judged that Liu Wentai once had a past with Yau Jun's family, Liu exposed Wang Shu's dereliction of duty, Wang Shu suspected that Liu was ordered by Yau Jun, and the public opinion was loud, saying that the draft was written by Yau Jun.

古文：恕竟坐罢，人以是大不直浚。
现代文：王恕竟由此事被罢官，人们由此对丘浚很有看法。
English: As a result, Wang Shou was actually dismissed from his post, which made people think highly of Qiu Jun.

古文：给事中毛珵，御史宋惪、周津等交章劾浚不可居相位，帝不问。
现代文：给事中毛、御史宋德、周津等纷纷上奏章弹劾丘浚不能位居相位，孝宗不理睬。
English: In the middle of the matter, Mao Zedong, Emperor Song De, Zhou Jin, and others successively raised a petition to impeach Yujun for not being able to keep up with the times, but Emperor Xiaozong ignored them.

古文：逾年，加少保。
现代文：过了一年，加封丘浚少保职。
English: A year later, he was given a higher grade and a shorter term of service.

古文：八年卒，年七十六。
现代文：八年，丘浚去世，终年七十六岁。
English: Eight years later, Yau Chun passed away at the age of 76.

古文：赠太傅，谥文庄。
现代文：追赠太傅，谥号文庄。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Taifu and the posthumous name of Wenzhuang.

古文：浚廉介，所居邸第极湫隘，四十年不易。
现代文：丘浚清廉不苟取，所居府第低下狭小，四十年不换。
English: He is scrupulously clean, and has lived in the same small town for 40 years.

古文：性嗜学，既老，右目失明，犹披览不辍。
现代文：生性嗜好学问，年老右眼失明，仍手不释卷。
English: Born with an affinity for learning, he lost his sight in his right eye in his old age and still cannot let go.

古文：议论好矫激，闻者骇愕。
现代文：所发议论好偏激，听者感到惊骇。
English: The discourse was so extreme that the listeners were appalled.

古文：至修《英宗实录》，有言于谦之死当以不轨书者。浚曰： 己巳之变，微于公社稷危矣。
现代文：到修撰《英宗实录》，有人说对于于谦之死应该按不轨判罪来记载，丘浚说： 土木堡之变，如果没有于谦，国家就很危险。
English: At the time of compiling the "Eingzong Record," some people said that the death of Yu Qian should be recorded as a wrongful conviction, and Qiu Jun said: If there is no change in the civil fort, if there is no Yu Qian, the country is very dangerous.

古文：事久论定，诬不可不白。 
现代文：事情久已有了定论，于谦所受的冤枉不能不辩白清楚。 
English: The matter has long been a foregone conclusion, and the injustice suffered by Yu Qian cannot but be clearly justified.

古文：其持正又如此。
现代文：他如此主持正义。
English: This is how he administers justice.

古文：正德中，以巡按御史言赐祠于乡。曰 景贤 。
现代文：正德年间，明武宗采纳巡按御史的建议，赐在丘浚家乡为丘浚建立祠堂起名叫 景贤 。
English: During the Zhengde era, the Mingwu sect adopted the suggestion of the imperial envoy to establish a shrine for Qiu Jun in his hometown and named him Jingxian.

古文：刘健，字希贤，洛阳人。
现代文：刘健，字希贤，洛阳人。
English: Liu Jian, surnamed Xixian, from Luoyang.

古文：父亮，三原教谕，有学行。
现代文：父亲刘亮在三原任教谕，很有学问，操行也好。
English: His father, Liu Liang, was a teacher in Mihara. He was very learned and well-behaved.

古文：健少端重，与同邑阎禹锡、白良辅游，得河东薛瑄之传。
现代文：刘健年轻时端庄持重，与同乡阎禹易、白良辅一起出游，得到河东薛蠧的学脉。
English: When he was young, Liu Jian was dignified and dignified. He traveled with his fellow townsmen Yan Yu Yi and Bai Liang Fu, and received a scholarship from Hedong Xue Yao.

古文：举天顺四年进士，改庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：天顺四年，考取进士，改任庶吉士，授编修职。
English: Tianshun was promoted to a scholar in his fourth year of junior high school, and was awarded the post of editor-in-chief.

古文：谢交游，键户读书，人以木强目之。然练习典故，有经济志。
现代文：谢绝交往，闭门读书，人们认为他质直刻板，然而他熟习典故，有经国济民的志向。
English: He refused to socialize and studied behind closed doors. People thought he was rigid and upright, but he was familiar with folk tales and aspired to help the country.

古文：成化初，修《英宗实录》，起之忧中，固辞，不许。
现代文：成化初年，修《英宗实录》时，朝廷起用正在居丧的刘健，刘健再三推辞，朝廷不同意。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, when the "Yingzong Record" was revised, the imperial court appointed Liu Jian, who was in mourning. Liu Jian repeatedly declined, and the imperial court did not agree.

古文：书成，进修撰，三迁至少詹事，充东宫讲官，受知于孝宗。
现代文：书完成后，刘健升为修撰，又连续升三级任少詹事，担任东宫讲官，为当时的太子所赏识。
English: After the book was completed, Liu Jian Sheng was promoted to the third grade of Ren Shao Zhanji and served as a lecturer at the East Palace, which was appreciated by the then prince.

古文：既即位，进礼部右侍郎兼翰林学士，入内阁参预机务。
现代文：孝宗继位，刘健升为礼部右侍郎兼翰林学士，进入内阁参预机要事务。
English: Xiaozong succeeded to the throne, and Liu Jiansheng became the Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies and the Bachelor of Hanlin, and entered the cabinet to participate in important affairs.

古文：弘治四年进尚书兼文渊阁大学士，累加太子太保，改武英殿。
现代文：弘治四年，晋升尚书兼文渊阁大学士，又加封太子太保，改任武英殿大学士。
English: In the fourth year of the Hongzhi era, he was promoted to Shangshu and Bunyukaku University Scholar, and he was also given the title of Prince Taibo, and was reappointed as Buyingdon University Scholar.

古文：十一年春，进少傅兼太子太傅，代徐溥为首辅。
现代文：十一年春天，进衔为少傅兼太子太傅，代替徐溥任首辅。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, he was promoted to the rank of Shao Fu and Prince Taifu, replacing Xu Xi as the first assistant.

古文：健学问深粹，正色敢言，以身任天下之重。
现代文：刘健的学问精深，外表严肃，敢于发表意见，以天下为己任。
English: Liu Jian's knowledge is profound, his appearance is serious, he dares to express his opinions, and he takes the world as his responsibility.

古文：清宁宫灾，太监李广有罪自杀。
现代文：清宁宫发生火灾，太监李广畏罪自杀。
English: A fire broke out in the Qingning Palace, and the eunuch Li Guangyi committed suicide.

古文：健与同列李东阳、谢迁疏言： 古帝王未有不遇灾而惧者。向来奸佞荧惑圣听，贿赂公行，赏罚失当，灾异之积，正此之由。
现代文：刘健与同事李东阳、谢迁上疏说： 古代帝王没有不遇到灾害而恐惧的，向来奸人佞臣炫惑圣明皇帝的视听，贿赂流行，赏罚失当。
English: Liu Jian and his colleagues Li Dongyang and Xie Qian Shangxu said: The ancient emperors were not afraid of disasters, and the traitors and vassals had always seduced the Holy Emperor's audio-visual, bribery was popular, and rewards and punishments were improper.

古文：今幸元恶殄丧，圣心开悟，而余慝未除，宿弊未革。伏愿奋发励精，进贤黜奸，明示赏罚。
现代文：灾异的积累，正是这些原因，现在所幸首恶消除，陛下开始醒悟，然而余恶尚未除尽，过去的积弊尚未革除，我愿意奋发有为于政事，举荐贤才，贬退奸恶，赏罚分明。
English: Accumulated disasters and abnormalities are precisely these reasons. Now, fortunately, the first evil has been eliminated, and His Majesty has begun to wake up. However, the remaining evils have not yet been eliminated, and the accumulated evils of the past have not yet been eliminated. I am willing to work hard for political affairs, recommend talents, discard evil, and reward and punish clearly.

古文：凡所当行，断在不疑，毋更因循，以贻后悔。 
现代文：凡是所应当施行的，果断处置毫不犹豫，不再因循守旧，以免后悔。 
English: Whatever needs to be done, do it decisively, without hesitation, and do not follow the old ways, so as not to regret.

古文：帝方嘉纳其言，而广党蔡昭等旋取旨予广祭葬、祠额。健等力谏，仅寝祠额。
现代文：孝宗正赞赏接纳刘健的意见，而李广同党蔡昭等随即取到圣旨，给予李广祭祀安葬和祠堂牌匾，刘健等极力劝谏，仅停祠堂牌匾。
English: Xiaozong Zheng appreciated the acceptance of Liu Jian's opinion, and Li Guang and party member Cai Zhao immediately obtained the holy will to give Li Guang a sacrificial burial and an ancestral hall plaque. Liu Jian and others strongly advised him to only stop the ancestral hall plaque.

古文：南北言官指陈时政，频有所论劾，一切皆不问。
现代文：南北言官一一陈述时政，多次进行评论、弹劾，皇帝一概不理睬。
English: The Northern and Southern Chancellors each made a statement on the current political situation, and repeatedly made comments and impeachments, but the emperor ignored all of them.

古文：国子生江瑢劾健、东阳杜抑言路。
现代文：国子监生江王容弹劾刘健、李东阳堵塞抑制言路。
English: Jiang Wang Rong, the son of a state prisoner, impeached Liu Jian, and Li Dongyang blocked the way to suppress speech.

古文：帝慰留健、东阳，而下瑢于狱，二人力救得释。
现代文：孝宗安慰挽留刘健、李东阳，而将江王容下狱，刘、李二人极力救助，江王容才被释放。
English: Xiaozong consoled and retained Liu Jian and Li Dongyang, but sent Jiang Wang Rong to prison. Liu and Li tried their best to save him, and Jiang Wang Rong was released.

古文：十三年四月，大同告警，京师戒严。
现代文：成化十三年四月，大同有敌情警报，京城戒严。
English: In April of the thirteenth year of Chenghua, there was a hostile situation alert in Datong, and the capital was placed under martial law.

古文：兵部请甄别京营诸将，帝召健及东阳、迁至平台面议去留。
现代文：兵部要求对京营诸将领进行鉴别，孝宗召刘健、李东阳和谢迁到平台面议对诸将的去留。
English: The military department requested that the generals of the Beijing camp be identified, and Xiaozong called Liu Jian, Li Dongyang and Xie Qian to the platform to discuss the departure of the generals.

古文：乃去遂安伯陈韶等三人，而召镇远侯顾溥督团营。
现代文：免去遂安伯陈韶等三人，而召镇远侯顾溥统率团营。
English: So he removed three people including Anbo Chen Yao, and called Zhenyuanhou Gu Yao to lead the battalion.

古文：时帝视朝颇晏，健等以为言，颔之而已。
现代文：当时孝宗上朝很晚，刘健等为此劝谏孝宗，孝宗仅点头而已。
English: At that time, Xiaozong was very late in the morning, Liu Jian and others advised Xiaozong to do this, and Xiaozong only nodded.

古文：十四年秋，帝以军兴缺饷，屡下廷议。健等言： 天下之财，其生有限。
现代文：十四年秋，由于战事发生，部队缺乏军饷，为此孝宗屡次要朝廷大臣讨论此事，刘健等说： 天下的财力，它的增加是有限的。
English: In the autumn of the 14th year, due to the war, the troops lacked military pay. For this reason, Xiaozong repeatedly asked the imperial minister to discuss the matter. Liu Jian and others said: The world's financial resources, its increase is limited.

古文：今光禄岁供增数十倍，诸方织作务为新巧，斋醮日费钜万。
现代文：现在光禄寺费用每年增加几十倍，各地织作作坊一味追求新奇精巧，请斋醮祭祀每天耗费以万计。
English: Now, the expenses of Koroku-ji Temple increase dozens of times every year. Weaving workshops all over the country pursue novelty and sophistication, and it costs tens of thousands of dollars every day to hold the ritual.

古文：太仓所储不足饷战士，而内府取入动四五十万。
现代文：京城储粮的大仓不能满足军队的粮食需要，而内府从太仓取粮动辄就是四五十万。
English: The large storehouse of grain stored in the capital could not meet the grain needs of the army, while the inner government took grain from Taicang at a rate of 4.5 million.

古文：宗藩、贵戚之求土田夺盐利者，亦数千万计。土木日兴，科敛不已。
现代文：皇亲贵戚请占田地，夺取盐利的，也是数千万计，大兴土木，横征暴敛。
English: The emperor's relatives and relatives were invited to occupy the fields, seize the salt profits, also in the tens of millions, construct large-scale civil engineering projects, and aggressively collect taxes.

古文：传奉冗官之俸薪，内府工匠之饩廪，岁增月积，无有穷期，财安得不匮？
现代文：传奉冗官的官俸禄，内府工匠的口粮，年增月积，没有到头的日子，财富怎会不匮乏？
English: How can there be no scarcity of wealth, when the official salary of officials who are overworked is extolled, and the rations of the craftsmen in the inner palace are increased every year, month by month, and day by day?

古文：今陕西、辽东边患方殷，湖广、贵州军旅继动，不知何以应之。望陛下绝无益之费，躬行节俭，为中外倡，而令群臣得毕献其诚，讲求革弊之策，天下幸甚。 
现代文：现在陕西、辽东边防战事正激烈，湖广、贵州军队相继调动，不知靠什么满足军队的需要，希望陛下杜绝无益的花费，亲自带头推行节俭，作为中外的表率而使群臣得以竭尽其诚，谋求革除时弊的良策，这是国家的幸运。 
English: At present, the border defense war in Shaanxi and Liaodong is in full swing. The troops of Hubei, Guangxi and Guizhou have been mobilized one after another. I do not know how to meet the needs of the army. I hope that His Majesty will eliminate wasteful spending, personally take the lead in promoting frugality, and serve as a role model for China and other countries so that his ministers can do their best and seek a good solution to eliminate the ills of the times. This is the country's good fortune.

古文：明年四月，以灾异陈勤朝讲、节财用、罢斋醮、公赏罚数事。
现代文：第二年四月，刘健借灾异向皇帝陈述要勤于朝讲、节省费用、停办斋醮、赏罚公平几件事。
English: In April of the following year, Liu Jian took advantage of the disaster to tell the emperor that he should be diligent in lecturing to the emperor, save costs, stop holding fasts, and reward and punish fairly.

古文：及冬，南京、凤阳大水，廷臣多上言时务，久之不下。健等因极陈怠政之失，请勤听断以振纪纲，帝皆嘉纳。
现代文：到冬天，南京、凤阳发大水，廷臣多次上言时务，许久没回音，刘健等为此立即向孝宗陈述怠慢朝政的过失，请求皇帝勤于听取朝臣的意见，以振朝纲，孝宗都赞许地接受其进言。
English: By the winter, Nanjing and Fengyang were flooded, and the courtiers repeatedly raised the issue of current affairs, but there was no response for a long time. Liu Jian and others immediately reported to Xiaozong the negligence of the imperial government, and asked the emperor to listen to the opinions of the courtiers, in order to strengthen the imperial system. Xiaozong accepted his suggestions with approval.

古文：《大明会典》成，加少师兼太子太师、吏部尚书、华盖殿大学士。
现代文：《大明会典》完成，加封刘健少师兼太子太师、吏部尚书、华盖殿大学士。
English: The "Daming Code" was completed, with the addition of Liu Jian as a junior teacher and prince's teacher, Shang Shu from the personnel department, and Huagai Dian University as a scholar.

古文：与东阳、迁同赐蟒衣。
现代文：与李东阳、谢迁一同接受皇帝赏赐的蟒衣。
English: Together with Li Dongyang and Xie Qian, he received the imperial robe.

古文：阁臣赐蟒自健等始。
现代文：阁臣得赐蟒衣自刘健等开始。
English: Liu Jian and others became cabinet ministers.

古文：帝孝事两宫太后甚谨，而两宫皆好佛、老。
现代文：孝宗事奉两宫太后很恭敬小心，而两宫太后都推崇佛道二教。
English: Xiaozong served the Empress Dowager of the Two Palaces very respectfully and carefully, and the Empress Dowager of the Two Palaces revered Buddhism and Taoism.

古文：先是，清宁宫成，命灌顶国师设坛庆赞，又遣中官赍真武像，建醮武当山，使使诣泰山进神袍，或白昼散灯市上。
现代文：先前，清宁宫建成，孝宗命灌顶国师设坛庆贺，又派宦官携带真武像，在武当山设置祭坛，派使者上泰山献神袍，或者大白天在街市上到处点灯。
English: In the past, when the Qingning Palace was completed, Emperor Xiaozong gave the order to set up an altar to celebrate. He also sent eunuchs to carry the image of the true warrior, set up an altar on Mount Wutang, sent emissaries to Mount Tai to offer sacred robes, or lit lights all over the street market in the daytime.

古文：帝重违太后意，曲从之，而健等谏甚力。
现代文：孝宗很怕违背太后的旨意，曲从逢迎，而刘健等极力劝谏。
English: Xiaozong was very afraid of violating the will of the empress dowager. Qu was always welcome, but Liu Jian and others tried their best to dissuade him.

古文：十五年六月诏拟《释迦哑塔像赞》，十七年二月诏建延寿塔朝阳门外，除道士杜永祺等五人为真人，皆以健等力谏得寝。
现代文：十五年六月，下诏拟撰写《释迦哑塔像赞》，十七年二月，下诏命在朝阳门外建延寿塔，任命道士林永祺等五人为真人，这些都因刘健等力谏方罢。
English: In June of the 15th year, the next imperial edict was to write the "Shaka Dumb Pagoda Image Praise," and in February of the 17th year, the next imperial edict ordered the construction of the Yanzhou Pagoda outside the Chaoyang Gate, and the appointment of five real people such as the Taoist priest Lin Yongqi. All of these were due to Liu Jian and others.

古文：是年夏，小王子谋犯大同，帝召见阁臣。健请简京营大帅，因言京军怯不任战，请自今罢其役作以养锐气。
现代文：这年夏天，小王子图谋侵犯大同，孝宗召见阁臣商议对付的办法，刘健请求精简京营大帅，接着说京军怯弱不足以应战，请求从现在起停止京军的劳役以蓄养锐气。
English: In the summer of that year, Little Prince plotted to invade Datong, and Xiaozong summoned Liu Jian to meet with his cabinet ministers to discuss how to deal with it. Liu Jian requested that the commander of the Beijing camp be streamlined, and went on to say that the Beijing army was too timid to fight, and requested that the labor service of the Beijing army be stopped from now on in order to maintain morale.

古文：帝然之。
现代文：孝宗表示同意。
English: The emperor agreed to Wang Hun's score.

古文：退复条上防边事宜，悉报允。
现代文：退朝后又上奏章对边防事宜建言，孝宗全都允准。
English: After the emperor's abdication, he submitted proposals on border defense to the emperor, which were all approved by Emperor Xiaozong.

古文：未几，边警狎至，帝惑中官苗逵言，锐欲出师。
现代文：不久，边境紧急战报交替传来，孝宗受宦官苗逵的蛊惑要出兵。
English: Soon, the border emergency war reports came in turns, and the eunuch Miao Zong was enticed by the eunuch to send troops.

古文：健与东阳、迁委曲阻之，帝意犹未回。
现代文：刘健、李东阳、谢迁进行阻止，孝宗犹豫不决。
English: Liu Jian, Li Dongyang and Xie Qian tried to stop them, but Xiaozong hesitated.

古文：兵部尚书刘大夏亦言京军不可动，乃止。
现代文：兵部尚书刘大夏也说京军不能动，这才没出兵。
English: Liu Daxia, secretary of the military department, also said that the Beijing army could not move, which is why it did not send troops.

古文：帝自十三年召对健等后，阁臣希得进见。及是在位久，益明习政事，数召见大臣，欲以次革烦苛，除宿弊。
现代文：孝宗自十三年，召见刘健等后，阁臣很少能见到皇帝，这时在位已久，更加熟悉政事，数次召见大臣，要依次革除繁法苛政，消除积弊。
English: Since the 13th year of the reign of Emperor Xiaozong, after summoning Liu Jian and others, the cabinet ministers could rarely see the emperor. At that time, he had been on the throne for a long time and was more familiar with political affairs. He summoned the ministers several times, to successively reform the cumbersome laws and harsh government, and eliminate the accumulated defects.

古文：尝论及理财，东阳极言盐政弊坏，由陈乞者众，因而私贩数倍。
现代文：曾经论及理财事，李东阳极力说明盐政的弊病，由于需求者众多，因而私盐贩运数倍增长。
English: On the subject of financial management, Li Dongyang explained the maladies of salt politics. Due to the large number of demanders, the illegal salt trafficking has increased several times.

古文：健进曰： 太祖时茶法始行，驸马欧阳伦以私贩坐死，高皇后不能救。
现代文：刘健说： 太祖时茶法刚开始施行，驸马欧阳伦因为私自贩茶被判死刑，连高皇后都不能救他。
English: Liu Jian said: At the time when the Tea Law was first implemented, Gongma Ouyanglun was sentenced to death for illegally selling tea. Even the Empress Gao couldn't save him.

古文：如伦事，孰敢为陛下言者？ 
现代文：欧阳伦这样的事谁敢跟陛下说。 
English: Who would dare to say such a thing about Ouyang Lun to His Majesty.

古文：帝曰： 非不敢言，不肯言耳。 
现代文：孝宗说： 不是不敢说，而是不肯说。 
English: "It's not that I don't dare to say it, but that I don't want to say it," said Takamune.

古文：遂诏户部核利弊，具议以闻。
现代文：于是诏令户部核实利弊，全部奏报朝廷。
English: Therefore, the emperor ordered the household department to verify the pros and cons and report all of them to the imperial court.

古文：当是时，健等三人同心辅政，竭情尽虑，知无不言。
现代文：当时，刘健等三人同心辅政，竭心尽力，知无不言。
English: At that time, Liu Jian and the other three people worked together to support the government, tried their best, and did their best.

古文：初或有从有不从，既乃益见信，所奏请无不纳，呼为 先生 而不名。
现代文：孝宗开始有的听取有的不采纳，不久刘健等更为孝宗所信任，其所奏请的事项无不接纳，不呼刘健之名，而称先生。
English: At first, Xiaozong listened to some and did not accept others. Soon, Liu Jian and others were more trusted by Xiaozong, and all matters submitted to him were accepted. He did not call Liu Jian by his name, but called him Mr.

古文：每进见，帝辄屏左右。左右间从屏间窃听，但闻帝数数称善。诸进退文武大臣，厘饬屯田、盐、马诸政，健翊赞为多。
现代文：每次晋见，孝宗总是屏退左右的人，左右的人偶尔从屏风里偷听，只听见孝宗每每称好，对任免文武大臣，治理整顿屯田、盐政、马政等各项政事，刘健辅佐协助最多。
English: Every time he met with Jin, Xiaozong was always the one who held back from the right and left, and the people on the right and left occasionally eavesdropped from the screen, only to hear Xiaozong say hello every time, to appoint and dismiss the Minister of Culture and Armed Forces, to manage and rectify various political affairs such as Tunden, Salt Politics, and Horse Politics, Liu Jian's assistant assisted the most.

古文：未几，帝疾大渐，召健等入乾清宫。
现代文：不久，孝宗病危，召刘健等到乾清宫。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xiaozong became critically ill and summoned Liu Jian to the Qianqing Palace.

古文：帝力疾起坐，自叙即位始末甚详，令近侍书之。
现代文：孝宗挣扎着坐起来，很详细地叙述在位前后的情况，命令近侍记下来。
English: Struggling to sit up, Takamune recounted in great detail the situation before and after his reign, and ordered his close attendants to write it down.

古文：已，执健手曰： 先生辈辅导良苦。
现代文：说完后，拉着刘健的手说： 先生辈辅导勤苦。
English: After he finished speaking, he took Liu Jian's hand and said, "Teachers are diligent in their guidance.

古文：东宫聪明，但年尚幼，好逸乐。先生辈常劝之读书，辅为贤主。 
现代文：太子聪明，但年纪尚幼，好安逸游乐，先生辈要常劝他读书，辅佐他成为贤主。 
English: The prince is clever, but he is still young and likes to have a good time. His teachers should always encourage him to study and help him become a wise man.

古文：健等欷歔，顿首受命而出。
现代文：刘健等哽咽着叩头领命而出。
English: Liu Jian and others choked and bowed their heads to receive their orders.

古文：翌日帝崩。
现代文：第二天孝宗去世。
English: The next day, Takamune died.

古文：武宗嗣位，健等厘诸弊政，凡孝宗所欲兴罢者，悉以遗诏行之。
现代文：武宗继位，刘健等对诸弊政进行治理。凡是孝宗所想兴办或罢免的全都以遗诏形式下令施行。
English: Wu Zong succeeded to the throne, and Liu Jian and others governed the bad politics. Everything that Xiaozong wanted to do or remove was ordered to be carried out in the form of a will.

古文：刘瑾者，东宫旧竖也，与马永成、谷大用、魏彬、张永、邱聚、高凤、罗祥等八人俱用事，时谓之 八党 。日导帝游戏，诏条率沮格不举。
现代文：刘瑾是原东宫太监，与马永成、谷大用、魏彬、张永、丘聚、高凤、罗详等八人一同受重用，时称之 八党 ，每天带领武宗游玩嬉戏，诏书所颁列的条款一概阻止不去实行。
English: Liu Bei was the former eunuch of the East Palace, and he and eight others, including Ma Yongcheng, Gu Dayong, Wei Bin, Zhang Yong, Qiu Ju, Gaofeng, and Luo Zhe, were given important positions. At that time, they were called the eight parties, and they led Emperor Wuzong to visit and play every day. The provisions listed in the edict were all prevented from being implemented.

古文：京师淫雨自六月至八月。
现代文：京师从六月到八月下雨。
English: It rains in Kyoto from June to August.

古文：健等乃上言： 陛下登极诏出，中外欢呼，想望太平。
现代文：刘健等上言道 ：陛下登基诏书发出，全国欢呼，盼望太平。
English: Liu Jian and others said: His Majesty issued the imperial edict of enthronement, the whole country cheered, hoping for peace.

古文：今两月矣，未闻汰冗员几何，省冗费几何。
现代文：到现在两个月了，未听说精简多少闲散人员，节省多少糜费。
English: Now, two months later, we still haven't heard how many idle workers will be cut and how much money will be saved.

古文：诏书所载，徒为空文。
现代文：诏书所载，仅仅是一纸空文。
English: What is contained in the imperial edict is just a piece of empty paper.

古文：此阴阳所以失调，雨旸所以不若也。
现代文：因此阴阳失调，晴雨失常。
English: As a result, yin and yang are out of balance, and rain and sunshine are abnormal.

古文：如监局、仓库、城门及四方守备内臣增置数倍，朝廷养军匠费钜万计，仅足供其役使，宁可不汰？
现代文：如监局、仓库、城门及四方守备内臣增置几倍，朝廷养军匠花费数以万计，仅仅为了满足军队的役使，却不愿淘汰。
English: If the supervisory bureau, warehouse, city gate and four-square guarding vassals are increased several times, the imperial court will spend tens of thousands to raise military artisans, just to meet the needs of the army, but they do not want to be eliminated.

古文：文武臣旷职偾事、虚糜廪禄者，宁可不黜？
现代文：对那些荒废职事、糜费俸禄的文武大臣怎可不贬斥？
English: How can the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology not denounce those wasteful jobs and wasteful salaries?

古文：画史、工匠滥授官职者多至数百人，宁可不罢？
现代文：给画史、工匠滥授官多至几百人，怎不罢免？
English: Why not dismiss up to several hundred people who are indiscriminately teaching art history and artisans?

古文：内承运库累岁支银数百余万，初无文簿，司钥库贮钱数百万，未知有无，宁可不勾校？
现代文：内承库年开支白银数百余万两，并无记录，司钥库贮存钱数百万，也不知有否，怎不查核。
English: There is no record of the annual expenditure of more than several million taels of silver in the internal repository, and there is no way to check whether there are millions of stored money in the key repository.

古文：至如纵内苑珍禽奇兽，放遣先朝宫人，皆新政所当先，而陛下悉牵制不行，何以尉四海之望？ 
现代文：至于释放皇宫花园的珍禽奇兽，遣散前朝宫人，都是新朝政事，首先需要办理的，而陛下全然不去施行，拿什么去抚慰全国臣民的期望呢？ 
English: As for the release of rare birds and beasts from the palace garden and the dismissal of former palace staff, these are the first things to be dealt with in the new government, and if His Majesty does not implement them at all, what will he do to appease the expectations of the country's subjects?

古文：帝虽温诏答之，而左右宦竖日恣，增益且日众。
现代文：武帝虽然回复语气和缓的诏命，然而左右的宦官一天比一天放纵，各种费用日益增多。
English: Although Emperor Wu responded to the edict with a gentle tone, the eunuchs on both sides became more and more indulgent day by day, and all kinds of expenses increased day by day.

古文：享祀郊庙，带刀被甲拥驾后。
现代文：武宗享祀郊庙，宦官带刀披甲簇拥在圣驾后面。
English: The Wuzong enjoyed the worship of the suburban temple, and the eunuchs with swords and armor were clustered behind the saint.

古文：内府诸监局佥书多者至百数十人，光禄日供骤益数倍。
现代文：内府诸监局佥书多到一百几十人，光禄寺每天的供应骤增几倍。
English: There are more than a hundred dozen people in the Internal Affairs Bureau, and the daily supply of Koroku-ji Temple has suddenly increased several times.

古文：健等极陈其弊，请勤政、讲学，报闻而已。
现代文：刘健等尽力陈述其弊病，请求武宗勤于政事和讲学，武宗只说知道了。
English: Liu Jian and others tried their best to explain his ailment and asked Wuzong to be diligent in politics and lectures, but Wuzong only said that he knew.

古文：正德元年二月，帝从尚书韩文言，畿甸皇庄令有司征课，而每庄仍留宦官一人、校尉十人。
现代文：正德元年二月，武宗听从尚书韩文的话，京城地区皇庄由有司征税，而每庄仍留宦官一人、校尉十人。
English: In February of the first year of Zhengde, Wu Zong obeyed the words of Shang Shu and Han Wen, and the imperial estates in the capital area were taxed by the imperial secretary, while one eunuch and ten lieutenants remained in each village.

古文：健等言 皇庄既以进奉两宫，自宜悉委有司，不当仍主以私人，反失朝廷尊亲之意 ，因备言内臣管庄扰民。
现代文：刘健等说 ：皇庄既然是供奉两宫太后的，就应该全部交付有司管理，不应该仍由私人主管，反而失去朝廷尊亲的本意。 接着详细地说明内臣管理庄田侵扰百姓。
English: Liu Jian et al. said: Since the imperial manor is dedicated to the empress dowager of the two palaces, it should all be put under the management of a steward, and should not still be managed by a private person, but lose the intention of the imperial court. Then, it was explained in detail that the vassal management of the manor intruded on the people.

古文：不省。
现代文：武宗不理睬。
English: Why do you want to enlist so rashly?

古文：吏、户、兵三部及都察院各有疏争职掌为近习所挠。
现代文：吏、户、兵三部以及都察院各有奏疏，争论职权范围，为皇帝身边的佞臣所阻挠。
English: The three departments of officials, households, and soldiers, as well as the Duka-in, each had their own records, disputed the terms of reference, and were obstructed by the vassals around the emperor.

古文：健等拟旨，上不从，令再拟。健等力谏，谓： 奸商谭景清之沮坏盐政，北征将士之无功授官，武臣神英之负罪玩法，御用监书篆之滥收考较，皆以一二人私恩，坏百年定制。
现代文：刘健等草拟旨文，武宗不同意，令重新草拟，刘健等极力劝谏，称： 奸商谭景清的败坏盐政，北征将士的无功授官，武臣神英的负罪轻视法令，御用监书吏坏乱考试制度，都是以一二个人的私恩，破坏了百年定制。
English: Liu Jian and others drafted the directive, Wu Zong did not agree, the order was redrafted, Liu Jian and others strongly advised him, saying: the corrupt salt policy of the profiteer Tan Jingqing, the meritorious awarding of the Northern Expedition soldiers, the guilty contempt decree of the vassal Shen Ying, and the corrupt examination system of the imperial librarian, were all based on the personal favor of one or two people, and destroyed the hundred-year custom.

古文：况今政令维新，而地震天鸣，白虹贯日，恒星昼见，太阳无光。
现代文：况且现今政令维新，而地震天鸣，白虹贯日，恒星白天出现，太阳无光。
English: What's more, today's government order is being revised, but the earthquake is ringing in the sky, the white rainbow is crossing the sun, the stars are appearing during the day, and the sun is not shining.

古文：内贼纵横，外寇猖獗。财匮民穷，怨谤交作。
现代文：内贼横行，外寇猖獗，财匮民穷，埋怨毁谤交相发生。
English: Intruders are rampant, foreign invaders are rampant, the people are poor and destitute, and slander and defamation are rampant.

古文：而中外臣仆方且乘机作奸，排忠直犹仇雠，保奸回如骨肉。
现代文：而朝廷内外不法臣僚正乘机作恶，排除忠直人士如排除仇敌，保护奸佞小人如保护亲生骨肉。
English: On the other hand, unscrupulous courtiers inside and outside the imperial court are taking advantage of the opportunity to do evil, eliminating loyal and upright people as if they were eliminating enemies, and protecting traitors and villains as if they were protecting their own flesh and blood.

古文：日复一日，愈甚于前，祸变之来恐当不远。
现代文：这种情形一天比一天严重，祸变的到来恐怕不远了。
English: This situation is becoming more and more serious day by day, and I'm afraid that disaster is not far off.

古文：臣等受知先帝，叨任腹心。
现代文：臣等受到先帝的信任，被当作心腹。
English: The vassals were trusted by the former emperor and were regarded as confidants.

古文：迩者旨从中下，略不与闻。
现代文：近来圣旨从宫中颁下，丝毫不让我等知道。
English: Recently, the imperial edict was issued from the palace, and there was no way for me to know about it.

古文：有所拟议，竟从改易。
现代文：如有所筹划竟听从奸臣随意改变。
English: If there is a plan, he will listen to the traitor and change it at will.

古文：似此之类，不可悉举。
现代文：诸如此类，不可胜举。
English: You can't beat that.

古文：若复顾惜身家，共为阿顺，则罔上误国，死有余辜。
现代文：臣等如再顾惜自己的身家性命，一起阿谀顺从，那么就欺上误国，死有余辜。
English: If a vassal spares his own property and life and obeys the grandpa, then he will deceive the wrong country and die with a lot of guilt.

古文：所拟四疏，不敢更易，谨以原拟封进。 
现代文：所拟定的四疏，不敢再更改，谨以原来拟定的进献。 
English: I dare not make any changes to the proposed Shisho, so I would like to make the original offering.

古文：不报。
现代文：武宗不理。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：居数日，又言： 臣等遭逢先帝，临终顾命，忄卷忄卷以陛下为托，痛心刻骨，誓以死报。
现代文：过了几天，刘健又说： 臣等时遇先帝临终授予遗命，诚恳地将陛下托付臣等，对此知遇之恩，臣等刻骨铭心，发誓以生命作为报偿。
English: A few days later, Liu Jian also said: When I met the former emperor on his deathbed, I gave him my last will and sincerely entrusted his majesty to me. Knowing the grace of this encounter, I swore by my life as a reward.

古文：即位诏书，天下延颈，而朝令夕改，迄无宁日。
现代文：陛下的即位诏书颁发后，天下人伸长脖子盼望政事革新，然而朝令夕改，迄今无安宁的日子。
English: After the issuance of His Majesty's imperial edict of enthronement, people around the world craned their necks in anticipation of political innovation. However, there has been no peace so far.

古文：百官庶府，仿效成风，非惟废格不行，抑且变易殆尽。建言者以为多言，干事者以为生事，累章执奏谓之渎扰，厘剔弊政谓之纷更。忧在于民生国计，则若罔闻知，事涉于近幸贵戚，则牢不可破。
现代文：百官各府，仿效成风，不是搁置不行，就是完全改变了诏令本意，敢于上言的认为是多话，干事的认为是无中生有，接连上奏说是轻慢打扰，治理剔除弊政说是变乱更改；对于有关民生国计的事，则置若罔闻，有关涉及到近幸、贵戚的事，则竭力保护牢不可破。
English: The governments of all levels of government, following the established practice, either shelved or completely changed the original intention of the edict. Those who dared to speak out thought it was too much, officials thought it was nothing, successive reports said it was a trifling interruption, and the government said it was a disorderly change. For matters related to the people's livelihood and the national economy, they turned a deaf ear, and for matters related to close friends and relatives, they tried their best to protect them.

古文：臣等心知不可，义当尽言。比为盐法、赏功诸事，极陈利害，拱俟数日，未蒙批答。
现代文：臣等心里知道不能说这些，从君臣之义上说应当知无不言，比如对盐法、赏功诸事的上言全面地陈述了其利害。期待数日，未见批复。
English: The vassals knew in their hearts that they could not say these things, and from the viewpoint of the dignity of the prince and the vassal, they should know everything. For example, the preamble to the salt law and the reward for meritorious deeds comprehensively stated their interests. They waited for several days, but there was no reply.

古文：若以臣等言是，宜赐施行，所言如非，即当斥责。
现代文：如果认为臣等说的对，应当下令施行，如果说的不对，就应当斥责。
English: If it is thought that what the ministers have said is correct, it should be ordered to be carried out, and if it is not correct, it should be reprimanded.

古文：乃留中不报，视之若无。
现代文：而搁置宫中不回复，就像没有这件事。
English: But the palace put it on hold and did not reply, as if there was no such thing.

古文：政出多门，咎归臣等。
现代文：政出多门，过失归于臣等。
English: There were many political scandals, with the blame falling on ministers and others.

古文：宋儒朱子有言 一日立乎其位，则一日业乎其官；一日不得乎其官，则不敢一日立乎其位。 
现代文：宋儒朱子曾说： 一天在于其位，则一天尽职于其官职；一天不尽职于其官职，则不敢一天立于其位。 
English: Song Confucius and Zhu Zi once said: "If one day one is in power, then one day one will fulfill one's official duties; if one day one does not fulfill one's official duties, then one would not dare to be in power."

古文：若冒顾命之名而不尽辅导之实，既负先帝，又负陛下，天下后世其谓臣何？
现代文：如果只冒顾命大臣之名而不尽辅导之实，既有负先帝，又负于陛下，天下后世将会说臣什么呢？
English: If you just take the name of the minister of life without doing the actual work of guidance, you will not only fail the former emperor, but also fail your majesty. What will the world and future generations say about you?

古文：伏乞圣明矜察，特赐退休。 
现代文：恳请陛下明察，特此赐臣退休。 
English: I implore Your Majesty to see clearly and hereby grant my retirement.

古文：帝优旨慰留之，疏仍不下。
现代文：武宗好言安慰挽留，但刘健所拟四疏仍不批下来。
English: Wu Zong consoled and retained, but Liu Jian's proposed four-way split was still not approved.

古文：越五日，健等复上疏，历数政令十失，指斥贵戚、近幸尤切。
现代文：过了五天，刘健等又上疏，一一列举政令十大失策，指责贵戚、近幸尤其痛切。
English: Five days later, Liu Jian and others went on a rampage, listing the top ten mistakes of the government order one by one, blaming the noble relatives and close relatives in particular.

古文：因再申前请。
现代文：接着再次重申以前的请求。
English: He then reiterated his previous request.

古文：帝不得已，始下前疏，命所司详议。
现代文：武宗不得已，才将前疏批下来，命令主管部门详细商议。
English: As a last resort, Wu Zong only approved the former exemption and ordered the competent authorities to discuss it in detail.

古文：健知志终不行，首上章乞骸骨，李东阳、谢迁继之，帝皆不许。
现代文：刘健知道自己的志向终归行不通，首先上奏章恳请退休返乡，李东阳、谢迁接着也提出退休请求，武宗都不批准。
English: Liu Jian knew that his ambition would not work in the end. First of all, he made a petition to retire and return to his hometown. Li Dongyang and Xie Qian also made a request for retirement, but Wu Zong did not approve.

古文：既而所司议上，一如健等指。
现代文：不久主管部门商议结果出来，与刘健的要求相符。
English: The result of the competent department's deliberation soon came out, which was in line with Liu Jian's request.

古文：帝勉从之，由是诸失利者咸切齿。
现代文：武宗勉强表示同意，于是诸失利者都对刘健恨得咬牙切齿。
English: Wu Zong reluctantly agreed, so all the losers were gnashing their teeth at Liu Jian.

古文：六月庚午复上言： 近日以来，免朝太多，奏事渐晚，游戏渐广，经筵日讲直命停止。
现代文：六月六日，刘健又上言说： 近日以来，陛下不上朝的时候太多，处理奏章等政务越来越晚，游玩嬉戏面更广，径直命令停止御前讲席。
English: On June 6, Liu Jian also made the following statement: Since recently, there have been too many times when His Majesty did not go to the imperial court, and it is getting later and later for him to deal with government affairs such as the imperial rescript, and there is a wider range of things for him to play with. He directly ordered to stop the imperial lecture.

古文：臣等愚昧，不知陛下宫中复有何事急于此者。
现代文：臣等愚昧，不知陛下宫中有何事比这还要紧的。
English: Ministers are so stupid that they do not know that there are more pressing matters in His Majesty's palace.

古文：夫滥赏妄费非所以崇俭德，弹射钓猎非所以养仁心，鹰犬狐兔田野之物不可育于朝廷，弓矢甲胄战斗之象不可施于宫禁。
现代文：滥赏胡乱花费是不能立崇尚节俭的风尚，射箭、钓鱼、打猎是不能修养仁人之心，鹰犬狐兔为田野之物，是不可以养在朝廷，持弓箭着盔甲是战事的象征不可以在宫禁里摆弄的。
English: Rewarding extravagant spending is not the way to establish a culture of thrift. Archery, fishing, and hunting are not the way to cultivate a humane heart. The eagle, the dog, the fox, and the rabbit are things of the field and should not be kept in the imperial court. Holding a bow and arrow and wearing armor is a symbol of war and should not be played with in the palace.

古文：今圣学久旷，正人不亲，直言不闻，下情不达，而此数者杂交于前，臣不胜忧惧。 
现代文：现在圣学很长时间不讲，对正直的人不信任，忠直之言听不进，下情不能上达，而这几者交杂在一起，臣不胜忧虑和恐惧。 
English: Now there is a mixture of a long absence from sacred learning, a distrust of honest men, a failure to listen to the honest, and a failure to listen to the base, all of which combine to create anxiety and fear.

古文：帝曰： 朕闻帝王不能无过，贵改过。
现代文：武宗说 ：朕听说帝王不可能无过错，贵在改过。
English: Emperor Wuzong said, "I've heard that the emperor can't be without fault, you have to make amends."

古文：卿等言是，朕当行之。 
现代文：卿等说的对，朕当改正。 
English: Sir, you are right. I should correct myself.

古文：健等乃录廷臣所陈时政切要者，请置坐隅朝夕省览：曰无单骑驰驱，轻出宫禁；曰无频幸监局，泛舟海子；曰无事鹰犬弹射；曰无纳内侍进献饮膳。
现代文：刘健等于是记录廷臣所陈述有关时政的重要部分，请求放在皇帝座位旁边以早晚省察浏览；疏中还说不要单独骑马驰骋，轻易离开皇宫；不要频繁临幸宦官居所、乘船游湖；不要沉湎于养鹰犬拉弓射箭；不要接受内侍进献的饮食。
English: Liu Jian is equal to recording the important part of the current political situation stated by the courtier, and the request is placed next to the emperor's seat for inspection in the morning and evening. The anecdote also says that you should not ride a horse alone and leave the palace easily; do not frequently visit the eunuch's residence and take a boat tour of the lake; do not indulge in raising eagle dogs and shooting arrows; do not accept meals donated by the chambermaid.

古文：疏入，报闻。
现代文：疏呈送上去后，武宗回答知道了。
English: The report has been submitted, and the reply has been received.

古文：先是，孝宗山陵毕，健等即请开经筵。
现代文：先前，孝宗陵墓完工，刘健等即要求开御前讲席。
English: Previously, when the mausoleum of Emperor Xiaozong was completed, Liu Jian and others requested that the throne be opened.

古文：常初勉应之，后数以朝谒两宫停讲，或云择日乘马。
现代文：武宗起初勉强答应，后来多次以朝见两宫太后停讲，或者说要骑马出行。
English: At first, Emperor Wuzong reluctantly agreed, but later he repeatedly asked to see the Empress Dowager to stop talking, or said that he wanted to ride a horse.

古文：健等陈谏甚切至。
现代文：刘健等对武宗进谏恳切至极。
English: Liu Jian and others were very earnest about Wu Zong.

古文：八月，帝既大婚，健等又请开讲。命俟九月，至期又命停午讲。
现代文：八月，武宗已经大婚，刘健等又请开讲，武宗下令等到九月，到期又命停午讲。
English: In August, Emperor Wuzong was already married, and Liu Jian and others were invited to speak again. Emperor Wuzong ordered them to wait until September, and then ordered them to stop speaking in the afternoon.

古文：健等以先帝故事，日再进讲，力争不得。
现代文：刘健等拿先帝故例，要求每日二次进讲，力争没有结果。
English: Liu Jian and others took the precedent of the previous emperor and demanded that there should be a lecture twice a day, but there was no result.

古文：当是时，健等恳切疏谏者屡矣，而帝以狎近群小，终不能改。
现代文：当时，刘健等恳切地上疏劝谏多次，而由于武宗亲近小人，终究没有改变。
English: At that time, Liu Jian and others earnestly tried to dissuade him many times, but since Wu Zong was close to the villain, there was no change in the end.

古文：既而遣中官崔杲等督织造，乞盐万二千引。
现代文：不久派宦官崔杲等监督织造，求盐一万二千引。
English: He soon sent eunuchs such as Choe Hee to supervise the weaving, and asked for 12,000 cords of salt.

古文：所司执奏，给事中陶谐、徐昂，御史杜旻、邵清、杨仪等先后谏，健等亦言不可。
现代文：主管部门就此事上奏，给事中陶谐、徐昂，御史杜、邵清、杨仪等先后进谏，刘健等也说不行。
English: The competent department made a report on this matter, and Tao Jun, Xu Ang, Mishi Du, Shao Qing, Yang Yi, etc. were successively promoted, and Liu Jian and others also said that it was not possible.

古文：帝召健等至暖阁面议，颇有所诘问，健等皆以正对。帝不能难，最后正色曰： 天下事岂皆内官所坏？朝臣坏事者十常六七，先生辈亦自知之。 
现代文：武宗召刘健等到暖阁面议，对武宗的许多责问，刘健等都给予恰当的回答，武宗见难不倒他们，最后严肃地说 ：天下事哪能都是宦官所败坏，朝臣坏事的十有六七，先生辈也应明白这一点。 
English: Emperor Wuzong summoned Liu Jian to the throne room for a face-to-face discussion. Liu Jian and others gave appropriate answers to Emperor Wuzong's many questions. Emperor Wuzong could not resist them. In the end, he said seriously, "Everything in the world can be corrupted by eunuchs. There are sixty-seven bad things done by courtiers out of ten. The elders should also understand this."

古文：因命盐引悉如杲请。
现代文：接着命崔杲所求的盐引如数发放。
English: Next, the exact number of salt was distributed as requested by Choi Min.

古文：健等退，再上章言不可。
现代文：刘健等退下，第二次上奏章说不能这样。
English: Liu Jian and others retreated, and the second time, they said it could not be done.

古文：帝自愧失言，乃俞健等所奏。
现代文：武宗自愧失言，就同意了刘健等所奏的。
English: Embarrassed by his slip of the tongue, Wu Zong agreed to what Liu Jian and others had said.

古文：于是中外咸悦，以帝庶几改过。
现代文：于是朝廷内外都高兴，认为武宗或许可以改过。
English: As a result, both inside and outside the imperial court were pleased, believing that the Emperor might be able to change his ways.

古文：健等遂谋去 八党 ，连章请诛之。
现代文：刘健等就谋划除掉 八党 ，接连上奏章请求诛 八党 。
English: Liu Jian and others plotted to eliminate the eight parties, and successively requested the eight parties.

古文：言官亦交论群阉罪状，健及迁、东阳持其章甚力。
现代文：言官也相互议论宦官罪状，刘健、谢迁及李东阳上的奏章很严厉。
English: The magistrates also discussed the eunuch's crimes with each other. Liu Jian, Xie Qian and Li Dongyang were severely punished.

古文：帝遣司礼诣阁曰： 朕且改矣，其为朕曲赦若曹。 
现代文：武宗派司礼到内阁说 ：朕已改过了，那就为朕赦免他们。 
English: The priest of the Wu sect came to the cabinet and said, "I have reformed, so forgive them for me."

古文：健等言： 此皆得罪祖宗，非陛下所得赦。 
现代文：刘健等说： 他们得罪祖宗，不是陛下能赦免的。 
English: Liu Jian and others said, "They have sinned against their ancestors, and His Majesty cannot forgive them.

古文：复上言曰： 人君之于小人，不知而误用，天下尚望其知而去之。
现代文：又上言说 ：君王对于小人，不了解而误用，天下尚且希望君王了解后而除掉。
English: He also said, "The king does not understand the villain and misuses him. The world still hopes that the king will understand and get rid of him."

古文：知而不去则小人愈肆。君子愈危，不至于乱亡不已。且邪正不并立，今举朝欲决去此数人，陛下又知其罪而故留之左右，非特朝臣疑惧，此数人亦不自安。
现代文：了解了而不去掉则小人更加放肆，君子更加危险，以至于纷乱不停，况且邪正不可并立，现在举朝要除去这几个人，陛下又知道他们的罪行而留其在左右，不仅仅朝臣疑虑恐惧，这几人自己也不会安心。
English: If it is understood but not eliminated, the villain will be more reckless and the gentleman will be more dangerous, so much so that there will be constant turmoil, and moreover, evil cannot be equated with righteousness. Now the government wants to remove these people, and His Majesty knows their crimes and leaves them around. Not only courtiers are suspicious and fearful, but these people themselves will not be at ease.

古文：上下相猜，中外不协，祸乱之机始此矣。 
现代文：上下猜疑，朝廷的内外不合，祸乱就由此而起。 
English: Suspicion from above and below, discord within and without the imperial court, and this is how the calamity began.

古文：不听。
现代文：武宗不听。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：健等以去就争。
现代文：刘健等以辞职为挟进行谏争。
English: Liu Jian and others resorted to resignation as a bargaining chip.

古文：瑾等八人窘甚，相对涕泣。
现代文：刘瑾等八人十分窘迫，相对哭泣。
English: Liu Wei and the other eight people were very distressed and were crying.

古文：而尚书韩文等疏复入，于是帝命司礼王岳等诣阁议，一日三至，欲安置瑾等南京。
现代文：而尚书韩文等又上疏，于是武宗命司礼王岳等到内阁商议，一天来三次，想将刘瑾等安置在南京。
English: However, books in Korean and other languages were in short supply, so Wang Yue, the secretary of the Bu Zong, waited until the cabinet had deliberated, three times a day, and wanted to place Liu Ye and others in Nanjing.

古文：迁欲遂诛之，健推案哭曰： 先帝临崩，执老臣手，付以大事。今陵土未乾，使若辈败坏至此，臣死何面目见先帝！ 
现代文：谢迁想就此诛杀刘瑾等，刘健推开几案哭着说： 先帝临终前，拉着我的手，将国家大事托付，现在坟土未干，而让此辈败坏到这种地步，臣死有何脸面见先帝！ 
English: Xie Qian wanted to kill Liu Ye and others in this way, Liu Jian pushed aside several cases and cried and said: Before the death of the former emperor, he took my hand and entrusted the national affairs, now the grave is not dry, and let this generation be corrupted to such an extent, what is the face of the death of a subject to the former emperor!

古文：声色俱厉。
现代文：刘健声色俱厉。
English: His voice cracked as he asked questions.

古文：岳素刚正疾邪，慨然曰： 阁议是。 
现代文：王岳向来刚正疾恶，慨然说： 内阁议论得对。 
English: Wang Yue, who has always been upright and upright, said with emotion: The cabinet's discussion is right.

古文：其侪范亨、徐智等亦以为然。
现代文：宦官范亨、徐智等也这样认为。
English: Eunuchs Fan Heng and Xu Zhi also think so.

古文：是夜，八人益急，环泣帝前。
现代文：这天晚上，刘瑾八人更加着急，围绕在武宗面前哭。
English: That evening, Liu Ye's eight people became even more anxious and gathered around crying in front of Bu Zong.

古文：帝怒，立收岳等下诏狱，而健等不知，方倚岳内应。
现代文：武宗发怒，立即将王岳等抓进诏狱，而刘健等不知道，正依仗王岳做内应。
English: Wu Zong was enraged and immediately put Wang Yue and the others into the imperial prison, while Liu Jian and the others did not know that they were relying on Wang Yue to do their bidding.

古文：明日，韩文倡九卿伏阙固争，健逆谓曰： 事且济，公等第坚持。 
现代文：第二天，韩文倡导九卿伏阙再三谏争，刘健迎面碰着说： 事快要成了，公等只管坚持。 
English: On the second day, Hanwen advocated the Nine Lords Fuxiong to fight again and again. Liu Jian met him face to face and said, "Things are about to be done, so just stick to it."

古文：顷之，事大变，八人皆宥不问，而瑾掌司礼。
现代文：顷刻事情大变，八人都宽恕不问罪，而刘瑾执掌司礼。
English: In an instant, things changed dramatically. All eight of them forgave without asking for guilt, and Liu Ye presided over the ceremony.

古文：健、迁遂乞致仕，赐敕给驿归，月廪、岁夫如故事。
现代文：刘健、谢迁于是要求辞职，武宗赐敕书提供车马食宿，按照旧例付给月粮及每年的役工。
English: Liu Jian and Xie Qian then asked him to resign, and the Emperor sent him a letter offering carriage, horses, food and lodging, and paid him a monthly stipend and an annual labor service in accordance with the old custom.

古文：健去，瑾憾不已。
现代文：刘健退职以后，刘瑾还怀恨不已。
English: After Liu Jian retired, Liu Yao still held a grudge.

古文：明年三月辛未诏列五十三人为奸党，榜示朝堂，以健为首。
现代文：第二年三月十日，拟诏列五十三人为奸党，以刘健为首，贴在朝堂。
English: On March 10 of the following year, an edict listing 53 people as traitors, with Liu Jian at the head, was posted in the imperial court.

古文：又二年削籍为民，追夺诰命。
现代文：又过二年，削去刘健的官籍，贬为百姓，追回诰命文书。
English: Two years later, Liu Jian's official status was removed, he was reduced to a commoner, and his death certificate was recovered.

古文：瑾诛，复官，致仕。
现代文：刘瑾被诛杀后，刘健恢复官职，后退休。
English: After Liu Wei was beaten to death, Liu Jian resumed his official duties and then retired.

古文：后闻帝数巡游，辄叹息不食曰： 吾负先帝。 
现代文：后来听说武宗几次出巡游玩，总是叹息不进食，他说： 我有负先帝。 
English: Later, when he heard that Emperor Wuzong had gone on several parades, always sighing and not eating, he said, "I am inferior to the former emperor."

古文：世宗立，命行人赍敕存问，以司马光、文彦博为比，赐赉有加。
现代文：世宗即位，命官员送敕慰问，将刘健与司马光、文彦博相比，赏赐有加。
English: When King Sejong ascended to the throne, officials sent condolences, and compared Liu Jian to Sima Guang and Wen Yanbo, he was given more rewards.

古文：及年跻九十，诏抚臣就第致束帛、饩羊、上尊，官其孙成学中书舍人。
现代文：到刘健年近九十岁，世宗诏令巡抚大臣到他府第送束帛、活羊、上等醇酒，封其孙子刘成学为中书舍人。
English: When Liu Jian was nearly ninety years old, Shizong issued an edict ordering the minister of the provincial governor to go to his prefecture to send bunches of strawberries, live sheep, and high-grade liquor, and to appoint his grandson Liu Chengxue as the junior high school teacher.

古文：嘉靖五年卒，年九十四。
现代文：嘉靖五年去世，终年九十四岁。
English: Jiajing died five years later, at the age of 94.

古文：遗表数千言，劝帝正身勤学，亲贤远佞。
现代文：留上数千言的遗表，鼓励世宗修身勤学，亲贤远佞。
English: He left thousands of words as a suicide note, encouraging Shizong to practice self-cultivation, study hard, and be a good friend.

古文：帝震悼，赐恤甚厚，赠太师，谥文靖。
现代文：世宗惊悸悲痛，赏赐很重，追赠太师，谥号文靖。
English: Sejong was shocked and saddened, the reward was very heavy, the posthumous award was given to Daishi, and the nickname was Wenjing.

古文：健器局严整，正己率下。
现代文：刘健气度威严，以身作则。
English: Liu Jian is dignified and leads by example.

古文：朝退，僚寀私谒，不交一言。
现代文：退朝后，同事私下晋见，他不说一句话。
English: After he retired, a colleague met with him privately, and he didn't say a word.

古文：许进辈七人欲推焦芳入吏部，健曰： 老夫不久归田，此座即焦有，恐诸公俱受其害耳。 
现代文：许进一伙要推荐焦芳进入吏部，刘健说： 老夫不久归田，这个座位将为焦芳所有，恐怕诸公都要受其所害了。 
English: Xu Jin's group wanted to recommend Jiao Fang to enter the cadre department, Liu Jian said: The old man will soon return to the field, this seat will be owned by Jiao Fang, I am afraid that all the nobles will be harmed by it.

古文：后七人果为芳所挤。
现代文：后来七人果为焦芳所排挤。
English: Later, the seven-member group was ousted by Jiao Fang.

古文：东阳以诗文引后进，海内士皆抵掌谈文学，健若不闻，独教人治经穷理。
现代文：李东阳用诗文引导后来人，海内人士都击掌谈论文学，刘健好像没听见，独教人研究经学，寻求性理的根源。
English: Li Dongyang used poetry to guide his successors. People at home and abroad all clapped their hands and talked about literature. Liu Jian didn't seem to hear. He only taught people to study scripture and seek the root of human nature.

古文：其事业光明俊伟，明世辅臣鲜有比者。孙望之，进士。
现代文：其事业光明伟大，在明朝辅臣中很少有人可以与之相比。
English: His career was brilliant and great, and few of the Ming Dynasty's aides-de-camp can compare to him.

古文：谢迁，字于乔，余姚人。
现代文：谢迁，字于乔，余姚人。
English: Xie Qian, Zi Yu Qiao, Yu Yao Ren.

古文：成化十年乡试第一。
现代文：成化十年，乡试第一名。
English: Ten years later, he won the first place in the township test.

古文：明年举进士，复第一。
现代文：第二年考中进士，又是第一名。
English: In the second year of the junior high school entrance examination, he won the first place.

古文：授修撰，累迁左庶子。
现代文：授修撰职，接着升任左庶子。
English: He was assigned to the post of teaching and writing, and then was promoted to the position of the second son.

古文：弘治元年春，中官郭镛请豫选妃嫔备六宫。
现代文：弘治元年春，宦官郭镛提出预选妃嫔以备六宫。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Heian period, the eunuch Guo Jie proposed the pre-selection of concubines to prepare for the Sixth Palace.

古文：迁上言： 山陵未毕，礼当有待。
现代文：谢迁上言道 ：先帝陵墓未完工，理应等待。
English: Xie Qian said, "The mausoleum of the former emperor is still unfinished, so we should wait."

古文：祥禫之期，岁亦不远。
现代文：除服之期也不远了。
English: The retirement period is not far off.

古文：陛下富于春秋，请俟谅阴既终，徐议未晚。 
现代文：陛下年轻，请等居丧期满后再慢慢地商议也不晚。 
English: Your majesty is young, please wait until after the mourning period is over and then slowly discuss it.

古文：尚书周洪谟等如迁议，从之。
现代文：尚书周洪谟等也同谢迁意见一致，孝宗同意了。
English: Shangshu Zhou Hongmu and others also agreed with Xie Qian, and Xiaozong agreed.

古文：帝居东宫时，迁已为讲官，及是，与日讲，务积诚开帝意。
现代文：孝宗为太子时，谢迁已是讲官，到这时，参加日讲，致力于竭诚启发开导皇帝。
English: When Xiaozong was crown prince, Xie Qian was already a lecturer. At that time, he attended Japanese lectures and devoted himself to inspiring and enlightening the emperor.

古文：前夕必正衣冠习诵，及进讲，敷词详切，帝数称善。
现代文：日讲前天晚上，他必定衣冠整齐地练习背诵，到进讲时，对词的讲解详细准确，获得孝宗多次称赞。
English: On the evening before the Japanese lecture, he must have neatly practiced reciting. By the time of the lecture, the explanation of the dialogue was detailed and accurate, and was praised by Xiaozong many times.

古文：进少詹事兼侍讲学士。
现代文：晋升为少詹事兼侍讲学士。
English: He was promoted to Shao Zhanji and served as a lecturer.

古文：八年诏同李东阳入内阁参预机务。
现代文：八年朝廷下诏书命谢迁同李东阳进入内阁参预机要事务。
English: Eight years ago, the imperial decree ordered Xie Qian and Li Dongyang to enter the cabinet to participate in important matters.

古文：迁时居忧，力辞，服除始拜命。
现代文：时逢谢迁居丧期间，他极力推辞，直到服满才接受任命。
English: During the time of Xie's relocation and funeral, he strenuously refused to accept the appointment until he had completed his service.

古文：进詹事兼官如故，皇太子出阁，加太子少保、兵部尚书兼东阁大学士。
现代文：升任詹事兼任原来官职。皇太子前往封地，加封谢迁为太子太保、兵部尚书兼东阁大学士。
English: The Crown Prince went to the fiefdom, and was given the additional titles of Crown Prince's Privy Councilor, Senior Secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and Donggak University Scholar.

古文：上疏劝太子亲贤远佞，勤学问，戒逸豫，帝嘉之。
现代文：他上疏鼓励太子亲贤远佞，勤于学习，力戒一味享乐，孝宗很赞赏。
English: He encouraged the prince to be diligent in his studies and to refrain from indulging in pleasure, which was greatly appreciated by the prince.

古文：尚书马文升以大同边警，饷馈不足，请加南方两税折银。
现代文：因为大同发生战事，满足不了供应，尚书马文升请求增加南方两税折合的银两。
English: Because of the war in Datong, the supply could not be met, and Shang Shuma Wensheng requested an increase in the amount of silver equivalent to two taxes in the south.

古文：迁曰： 先朝以南方赋重，故折银以宽之。若复议加，恐民不堪命。
现代文：谢迁说 ：先朝因为南方的赋税重，所以用折银的办法解决，假如又增加，恐怕百姓不堪忍受。
English: Xie Qian said: The previous government used the method of folding silver to solve the problem of heavy taxation in the south. If it were to increase again, I'm afraid the people would not be able to bear it.

古文：且足国在节用，用度无节，虽加赋奚益。 
现代文：况且富国在于节省费用，如果花费无节制，即使增加赋税又有什么用？ 
English: Moreover, rich countries are about saving costs, if spending is unrestrained, even if taxes are increased, what is the use?

古文：尚书倪岳亦争之，议遂寝。
现代文：尚书倪岳也持反对意见，此议于是搁置下来。
English: Shangshu Ni Yue also held an opposing view, and the motion was shelved.

古文：孝宗晚年慨然欲厘弊政。而内府诸库及仓场、马坊中官作奸骫法，不可究诘。
现代文：孝宗晚年感慨地要治理弊政，而内府诸库及粮仓、马坊的宦官行奸枉法，不能深入追究。
English: In his later years, Takamune was deeply moved by the need to correct bad government, but the eunuchs in the treasuries, granaries, and horse stables in the inner palace committed acts of treachery that could not be thoroughly investigated.

古文：御马监、腾骧四卫勇士自以禁军不隶兵部，率空名支饷，其弊尤甚。
现代文：御马监、腾骧四卫勇士自以为禁军不隶属兵部，一律以空名领取粮饷，其弊尤为厉害。
English: The overseer of horses and the four guardsmen of the Tengchong Garrison thought that the Forbidden Army did not belong to the military department, and they all received grain rations under false names, which was particularly bad.

古文：迁乘间言之，帝令拟旨禁约。
现代文：谢迁趁此机会向孝宗提出来，孝宗命令草拟旨文禁止。
English: Xie Qian took this opportunity to propose to Xiaozong, and Xiaozong ordered to prohibit the drafting of the directive.

古文：迁曰： 虚言设禁无益，宜令曹司搜剔弊端，明白奏闻。
现代文：谢迁说 ：虚言禁止无益，应该命官署收集弊端，详细地奏报朝廷。
English: Xie Qian said, "It is useless to prohibit lying, we should order the government office to collect the drawbacks and report them to the imperial court in detail."

古文：然后严立条约，有犯必诛，庶积蠹可去。 
现代文：然后严格订立条约，违犯者必诛，那样积蠹可望除掉。 
English: Then a strict treaty will be made, and violators will be punished, and the blockage will hopefully be removed.

古文：帝俞允之。
现代文：孝宗表示同意。
English: Takamune agreed.

古文：迁仪观俊伟，秉节直亮。
现代文：谢迁仪表英俊魁梧，秉性正直聪明。
English: Xie Qian is handsome and burly, honest and intelligent.

古文：与刘健、李东阳同辅政，而迁见事明敏，善持论。
现代文：他与刘健、李东阳一同辅政，而谢迁处事敏捷，善于提出主张。
English: Together with Liu Jian and Li Dongyang, he assisted in politics, while Xie Qian was quick at handling affairs and good at putting forward proposals.

古文：时人为之语曰： 李公谋，刘公断，谢公尤侃侃。 
现代文：时人为之有言道： 李公善于谋划、刘公善于决断、谢公尤其善于侃侃而谈。 
English: There was a saying at the time: Li Gong is good at planning, Liu Gong is good at making decisions, and Xie Gong is especially good at talking.

古文：天下称贤相。
现代文：天下人称谢迁为贤相。
English: People all over the world call Xie Qian a sage.

古文：武宗嗣位，屡加少傅兼太子太傅。
现代文：武宗即位，又封他少傅兼太子太傅。
English: When Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, he was also given the title of shofu and daifu.

古文：数谏，帝弗听。
现代文：几次进谏，武宗都不听。
English: After several attempts, Buson did not listen.

古文：因天变求去甚力，帝辄慰留。
现代文：因天变无常，他极力要求辞官，武宗就安慰挽留他。
English: Due to the vagaries of the weather, he insisted on resigning, and the Emperor consoled him by retaining him.

古文：及请诛刘瑾不克，遂与健同致仕归，礼数俱如健。
现代文：后要求诛杀刘瑾不成功，于是与刘健一起辞官返乡，朝廷对他的赏赐等礼数都与刘健一样。
English: After that, his request to assassinate Liu Bei was not successful, so he and Liu Jian resigned from their posts and returned home. The number of rewards and other honors given to him by the imperial court was the same as that of Liu Jian.

古文：而瑾怨迁未已。
现代文：而刘瑾对谢迁的怨恨不解。
English: But Liu Wei is puzzled by Xie Qian's resentment.

古文：焦芳既附瑾入内阁，亦憾迁尝举王鏊、吴宽自代，不及己，乃取中旨勒罢其弟兵部主事迪，斥其子编修丕为民。
现代文：焦芳已经靠依附刘瑾进入内阁，也恨谢迁曾举荐王鏊、吴宽代替自己，没有举荐他，就直接从内宫取圣旨强制罢免谢迁的弟弟兵部主事谢迪，贬谢迁的儿子编修谢丕为民。
English: Jiao Fang had already entered the cabinet by relying on Liu Bei. He also hated Xie Qian, who had recommended Wang Qian and Wu Kuan to replace him. Without recommending him, he directly took the imperial edict from the Inner Court to forcibly remove Xie Qian's brother, the head of the military department Xie Di, and demote Xie Qian's son, the editor Xie Qian, to the people.

古文：四年二月，以浙江应诏所举怀才抱德士余姚周礼、徐子元、许龙，上虞徐文彪，皆迁同乡，而草诏由健，欲因此为二人罪。
现代文：四年二月，因为浙江应诏所推荐的才德双全人士，余姚的周礼、徐子元、许龙，上虞的徐文彪都是谢迁的同乡，而草拟诏书的是刘健，刘瑾一伙想借此算成谢、刘二人的罪状。
English: In February of the fourth year, because Zhejiang was recommended by the imperial edict, Zhou Li, Xu Ziyuan, Xu Long of Yuyao, and Xu Wenbiao of Shangyu were all fellow villagers of Xie Qian, and Liu Jian and Liu Xuan drafted the imperial edict. Liu Xian's group wanted to use this to calculate the guilt of Xie and Liu.

古文：矫旨谓 余姚隐士何多，此必徇私援引 ，下礼等诏狱，词连健、迁。
现代文：假传圣旨称余姚隐士为何这么多？此必定是徇私情而援引，将周礼等人关进诏狱，供词牵连到刘健、谢迁。
English: Why are there so many false transmissions of the sacred edict calling Yuyao a hermit? This must be a personal grudge invoked to put Zhou Li and others in the imperial prison, and the confession implicated Liu Jian and Xie Qian.

古文：瑾欲逮健、迁，籍其家，东阳力解。
现代文：刘瑾要逮捕二人，没收其家产，李东阳从中极力化解。
English: Liu Wei wanted to arrest the two and confiscate their property, but Li Dongyang tried his best to dissolve the situation.

古文：芳从旁厉声曰： 纵轻贷，亦当除名！ 
现代文：焦芳在旁边厉声说： 纵使从轻宽恕，也应当取消原有身份。 
English: Next to her, Jiao Fang said in a sharp voice: Even if you forgive lightly, you should also cancel the original identity.

古文：旨下，如芳言，礼等咸戍边。
现代文：圣旨下，同焦芳说的一样，周礼等都被罚戍边。
English: According to the holy edict, just as Jiao Fang said, Zhou Li and others were all punished.

古文：尚书刘宇复劾两司以上访举失实，坐罚米，有削籍者。
现代文：尚书刘宇又弹劾刘、谢所辖两部门向上汇报失实，被判罪罚米，有的削去门籍。
English: Shangshu Liu Yu also impeached the two departments under the jurisdiction of Liu and Xie for reporting untruths, and was sentenced to a fine of rice, and some were removed from the family register.

古文：且诏自今余姚人毋选京官，著为令。
现代文：另外诏令从今后余姚人不得当选京官，并写成条文。
English: In addition, the imperial edict decreed that Yuyao people should not be elected as Beijing officials in the future, and it was written into a provision.

古文：其年十二月，言官希瑾指，请夺健、迁及尚书马文升、刘大夏、韩文、许进等诰命，诏并追还所赐玉带服物。同时夺诰命者六百七十五人。
现代文：这年十二月，言官根据刘瑾的意图，请求收回刘健、谢迁以及尚书马文升、刘大夏、韩文、许进等的诰命，下诏一并追还所赐的玉带衣物，同时被收回诰命的人有六百七十五人。
English: In December of that year, in accordance with Liu Bei's intention, the spokesman requested that the lives of Liu Jian, Xie Qian, and Shangshu Ma Wensheng, Liu Daxia, Hanwen, Xu Jin, etc. be recovered, and the jade belt clothing given was also recovered. At the same time, there were 675 people whose lives were recovered.

古文：当是时，人皆为迁危，而迁与客围棋、赋诗自若。
现代文：当时，人们都为谢迁担心，而他与客人下围棋、赋诗镇定自若。
English: At that time, people were worried about Xie Qian, but he played Go with his guests and composed himself.

古文：瑾诛，复职，致仕。
现代文：刘瑾被诛，他恢复官职，后辞官退休。
English: Liu Wei was arrested, he resumed his official duties, and retired after resigning.

古文：世宗即位，遣使存问，起迪参议，丕复官翰林。
现代文：世宗即位，遣使慰问谢迁，起用谢迪为参议，谢丕恢复翰林院的官职。
English: Sejong ascended the throne, sent an envoy to offer condolences to Xie Qian, appointed Xie Di as a councillor, and restored Xie Yao to the official post of Hanlin Academy.

古文：迁乃遣子正入谢。劝帝勤学、法祖、纳谏，优旨答之。
现代文：谢迁于是派儿子谢正入朝致谢鼓励皇帝勤学、师法祖先、纳谏。世宗优容地下旨回复。
English: Xie Qian then sent his son, Xie Zheng, to the imperial court to express his gratitude and encourage the emperor to study hard, learn from his ancestors, and pay attention to learning.

古文：嘉靖二年复诏有司存问。
现代文：嘉靖二年，又下诏命有关部门去慰问。
English: In the second year of Jiajing, the relevant departments were ordered to pay condolences.

古文：六年，大学士费宏举迁自代，杨一清欲阻张璁，亦力举迁。
现代文：六年，大学士费宏推举谢迁代替自己，杨一清想阻止张璁入选，也尽力推荐谢迁。
English: In the sixth year, Fei Hong, a university scholar, nominated Xie Qian to replace himself. Yang Yiching wanted to prevent Zhang Ye from being selected, and also tried his best to recommend Xie Qian.

古文：帝乃遣行人赍手敕即家起之，命抚、按官敦促上道。
现代文：世宗于是派遣官员送去自己亲手写的诏书到谢迁家启封宣旨，命巡抚、按官敦促他上路。
English: Sejong then dispatched officials to deliver the imperial edict written in his own handwriting to Xie Qian's home to declare the opening of the seal, and ordered the governor and officials to urge him to go on the road.

古文：迁年七十九矣，不得已拜命，比至，而璁已入阁，一清以官尊于迁无相下意。
现代文：谢迁时年七十九岁了，不得已接受任命。等到他到朝廷，而张璁已经进入内阁，杨一清因为官职高于谢迁而无意辅助他。
English: When Xie Qian was seventy-nine years old, he had no choice but to accept the appointment. When he arrived at the imperial court and Zhang Ye had already entered the cabinet, Yang Iqing had no intention of assisting him because his official position was higher than Xie Qian's.

古文：迁居位数月，力求去。
现代文：谢迁任职数月后极力请求离去。
English: After a few months in office, Xie Qian strongly requested to leave.

古文：帝待迁愈厚，以天寒免朝参，除夕赐御制诗。及以病告，则遣医赐药饵，光禄致酒饩，使者相望于道。
现代文：世宗对待他更加优待，天寒免去上朝参拜，除夕日赐御制诗，有病时则派遣太医去为他治病，并赐药和食物，光禄送去酒食，道路上尽是派往谢迁家慰问的使者。
English: The Sejong treated him more favourably. He was exempted from the cold weather to visit the Shang Dynasty, and was given the New Year's Eve to compose poems. When he was ill, he was sent to the Taiji to treat him, and was given medicine and food. Guanglu sent him wine and food. On the road were all the messengers sent to Xie Qian's home to offer condolences.

古文：迁竟以次年三月辞归。
现代文：谢迁终究在第二年三月辞官回家。
English: After all, Xie Qian resigned in March of the following year and returned home.

古文：十年卒于家，年八十有三。
现代文：十年在家去世，享年八十三岁。
English: He died at home ten years later, aged 83.

古文：赠太傅，谥文正。
现代文：追赠太傅，谥号文正。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Taifu and the posthumous title of Munzheng.

古文：迪仕至广东布政使。
现代文：谢迪官至广东布政使。
English: Xie Di official to Guangdong Bu political envoy.

古文：丕乡试第一，弘治末进士及第。历官吏部左侍郎，赠礼部尚书。
现代文：谢丕乡试第一名，弘治末年，考中进士，官至吏部左侍郎，追赠礼部尚书。
English: Xie Yan was the first in the township test, in the last year of the Hongzhi era, he was promoted to the middle school examination, he was promoted to the left hand man of the cadre department, and he was posthumously awarded the honor book of the honor department.

古文：李东阳，字宾之，茶陵人，以戍籍居京师。
现代文：李东阳，字宾之，茶陵人，以军籍身分居住京城。
English: Li Dongyang, surnamed Binzhi, a resident of Cha Ling, lives in Beijing as a military man.

古文：四岁能作径尺书，景帝召试之，甚喜，抱置膝上，赐果钞。
现代文：他四岁能够写一尺见方的大字，明景帝召见了李东阳，并且当面测试，景帝非常高兴，将东阳抱着放在自己的膝上，赐给他水果和纸币。
English: When he was four years old, he was able to write large characters that were one foot square. Emperor Mingjing summoned Li Dongyang and tested him in person. Emperor Mingjing was very pleased and held Dongyang on his lap and gave him fruit and paper money.

古文：后两召讲《尚书》大义，称旨，命入京学。
现代文：后来景帝又两次召东阳讲解《尚书》要义，很合景帝的心意，命他进入京学。
English: Later, Emperor Jing twice summoned Dongyang to explain the essentials of "Shangshu," which suited Emperor Jing's mind very well, and ordered him to enter Beijing Studies.

古文：天顺八年，年十八，成进士，选庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：天顺八年，李东阳十八岁，考中进士，被推选为庶吉士，授予编修职位。
English: In the eighth year of Tianshun, Li Dongyang was eighteen years old. He passed the junior high school entrance examination and was elected as an associate member, and was awarded the position of editor.

古文：累迁侍讲学士，充东宫讲官。
现代文：逐渐升为侍讲学士，担任东宫讲官。
English: Gradually, he rose to the rank of an assistant lecturer and served as a lecturer at the East Palace.

古文：弘治四年，《宪宗实录》成，由左庶子兼侍讲学士，进太常少卿，兼官如故。
现代文：弘治四年，《宪宗实录》编纂完毕，李东阳由左庶子兼侍讲学士，提升为太常少卿，仍旧兼任着以前的官职。
English: In the fourth year of the Hongzhi era, after the compilation of the "Constitution Record" was completed, Li Dongyang was promoted from the left illegitimate son and attendant lecturer to the junior secretary, and still held the previous official position.

古文：五年，旱灾求言。
现代文：五年，因发生旱灾朝廷广开言路。
English: Five years later, due to a drought, the imperial court widely opened the way.

古文：东阳条摘《孟子》七篇大义，附以时政得失，累数千言，上之。帝称善。
现代文：东阳一条条摘录《孟子》七篇的要义，附上对时政得失的看法，共计数千字，呈送皇帝，明孝宗很赞赏。
English: Dongyang extracted the gist of the seven chapters of "Mencius" one by one, attached his views on the gains and losses of contemporary politics, totaling thousands of words, and presented it to the emperor. Ming Xiaozong was very appreciative.

古文：阁臣徐溥等以诏敕繁，请如先朝王直故事，设官专领。
现代文：内阁大臣徐溥等因为皇帝的文告命令繁多，请求仿照先朝王直旧例设官专门负责。
English: Because the emperor's proclamations and orders were numerous, the cabinet minister Xu Xi and others requested that an official be set up to be specifically responsible, following the example of the previous emperor Wang Zhi.

古文：乃擢东阳礼部右侍郎兼侍读学士，入内阁专典诰敕。
现代文：于是提升东阳为礼部右侍郎兼侍读学士，进入内阁专门主管诏书命令。
English: As a result, Dongyang was promoted to the Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Attendant Bachelor, and entered the cabinet as a special supervisor according to the imperial decree.

古文：八年以本官直文渊阁参预机务，与谢迁同日登用。
现代文：八年以现任职务进入文渊阁，参预机要事务，与谢迁同一天到位。
English: In eight years, he entered Wen Yuange with his current position, participated in important matters in advance, and arrived on the same day as Xie Qian.

古文：久之，进太子少保、礼部尚书兼文渊阁大学士。
现代文：过了一段时间，进升为太子少保、礼部尚书兼文渊阁大学士。
English: After a period of time, he was promoted to the position of the Prince's Junior Bodyguard, and became a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a scholar at Bunyukaku University.

古文：十七年，重建阙里庙成，奉命往祭。
现代文：弘治十七年，阙里庙重新建成，东阳奉命前去祭祀。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Hongzhi era, the Baili Temple was rebuilt, and Dongyang was ordered to go to the temple.

古文：还，上疏言：臣奉使遄行，适遇亢旱。
现代文：返回后上疏说： 臣奉使命急速上路，正遇上极为严重的旱灾。
English: After returning, Shang Zuo said: I am on a mission to get on the road quickly, and I am experiencing an extremely serious drought.

古文：天津一路，夏麦已枯，秋禾未种，挽舟者无完衣，荷锄者有菜色。盗贼纵横，青州尤甚。
现代文：天津一带，夏麦已经枯死，秋稻还未下种，纤夫衣不遮体，扛锄的农人一副饥饿的面容，盗贼四处横行，其中青州尤为严重。
English: In the Tianjin area, summer barley has withered, autumn rice has not yet been sown, textile workers do not cover their bodies, farmers carrying ploughs have a hungry face, thieves are rampant everywhere, of which Qingzhou is particularly serious.

古文：南来人言：江南、浙东流亡载道，户口消耗，军伍空虚，库无旬日之储，官缺累岁之俸。
现代文：南方来的人说，江南、浙东的道路上挤满了流亡的人，地方户口减少，军队人员空虚，仓库里无十天的积储，做官的短缺好几年的俸禄。
English: People who came from the south said that the roads in the south of the Yangtze River and east of Zhejiang were crowded with exiles, local hukou were reduced, military personnel were empty, there was no ten-day storage in warehouses, and there was a shortage of salary for several years for officials.

古文：东南，财赋所出，一岁之饥已至于此；北地窳，素无积聚，今秋再歉，何以堪之。
现代文：东南是国家财赋重地，一年的大荒已经到如此地步，北方人苟且懒惰，向来没有积蓄，如果今年秋天再歉收，民众如何承受得了？
English: The southeast is the country's main source of wealth. A year of drought has brought the situation to this point. People in the north are lazy and have never saved. If there is another poor harvest this autumn, how will people be able to bear it?

古文：事变之生，恐不可测。
现代文：事情的变数，恐怕是难以预测的事。
English: The variables of the situation are, I'm afraid, difficult to predict.

古文：臣自非经过其地，则虽久处官曹，日理章疏，犹不得其详，况陛下高居九重之上耶？
现代文：臣虽然长期在官署，天天接触奏章奏议，但如果不是经过这地方，仍然不可能了解这些情况，何况陛下深处皇宫之中呢？
English: Although the minister has been in the government office for a long time, and is in daily contact with the government, it is still impossible to understand these circumstances if he does not pass through this place, not to mention the fact that His Majesty is deep in the palace.

古文：臣访之道路，皆言冗食太众，国用无经。差役频烦，科派重叠。
现代文： 臣在路上察访，都说吃白饭的闲散人太多，国家的费用没有常规，差使劳役频繁，苛捐杂税重叠。
English: On their visits, the ministers all said that there are too many idle people who eat free meals, that the state's expenses are not regular, that there are frequent laborers, and that there are overlapping taxes and fees.

古文：京城土木繁兴，供役军士财力交殚，每遇班操，宁死不赴。
现代文：京城大兴土木，使服劳役的军士财力竭尽，每逢遇到操练，宁死不去。
English: The construction of the capital city has exhausted the financial resources of the servicemen serving in the labor service, and whenever they encounter drills, they would rather die than go.

古文：势家巨族，田连郡县，犹请乞不已。
现代文：世家豪族所占的田地面积跨越郡县，还不断向上伸手要求再赐。
English: The area of farmland occupied by this powerful family spans counties and counties, and they are constantly reaching up to the top to ask for more.

古文：亲王之藩，供亿至二三十万。
现代文：亲王前往封地，供应十万至二三十万两。
English: The prince went to the fief and supplied 100,000 to 2,300,000 taels.

古文：游手之徒，托名皇亲仆从，每于关津都会大张市肆，网罗商税。
现代文：游手好闲的人，以皇亲仆从为名往往在关口、渡口及都会城市大开市场、店铺，来收取商税。
English: Idle people, in the name of the emperor's servants, often open markets and shops at checkpoints, ferry ports and metropolitan cities to collect commercial taxes.

古文：国家建都于北，仰给东南，商贾惊散，大非细故。
现代文：国家建都在北方，供应依赖东南，商人都害怕地跑了，这远不是什么小事情。
English: The country is built in the north, the supply is dependent on the southeast, and the merchants are running away in fear. This is far from a small matter.

古文：更有织造内官，纵群小掊击，闸河官吏莫不奔骇，鬻贩穷民所在骚然，此又臣所目击者。
现代文：再有织造内官放纵手下人骚扰，守闸官吏没有不惊骇而跑的，当地穷困小商小贩没有不骚动的。这又是臣所亲眼看见的事。
English: In addition, there were weaving officials who allowed their subordinates to harass them, gate-keeping officials who did not run away without being shocked, and local impoverished small merchants and hawkers who did not make a fuss. This was also something that the minister saw with his own eyes.

古文：夫闾阎之情，郡县不得而知也；郡县之情，庙堂不得而知也；庙堂之情，九重亦不得而知也；始于容隐，成于蒙蔽。
现代文： 民间的情况，郡县官府不了解，郡县的情况，朝廷不知道，朝廷的情况，深宫也不知道。起初为容忍遮盖，最后发展到蒙蔽。
English: The county government did not understand the situation of the people, the county government did not know the situation of the county, the imperial court did not know the situation of the imperial court, and the palace did not know the situation of the palace.

古文：容隐之端甚小，蒙蔽之祸甚深。
现代文：容忍的事端还小，蒙蔽的祸患就很深。
English: The cause of tolerance is still small, and the scourge of delusion is very deep.

古文：臣在山东，伏闻陛下以灾异屡见，敕群臣尽言无讳。然诏旨频降，章疏毕陈，而事关内廷、贵戚者，动为制肘，累岁经时，俱见遏罢。
现代文：臣在山东听说陛下由于灾害异常现象屡次出现，下命令要群臣不要忌讳把话都说出来，然而诏书频频下达，群臣在奏章奏议中都已把自己的见解陈述。但是事关内廷、贵戚的事，一动就受到牵制，经过好几年，拖了很长时间，最后都杳无音信。
English: In Shandong, the courtiers heard that His Majesty had ordered the courtiers not to be afraid to speak out due to the repeated occurrence of disasters and abnormal phenomena. However, the imperial edict was frequently issued, and the courtiers had already stated their opinions in the report. However, when it came to the affairs of the inner court and the noble relatives, every move was blocked. After several years, it took a long time, and in the end there was no news.

古文：诚恐今日所言，又为虚文。
现代文：我的确担心今天所说的那些话又成为虚文。
English: I do fear that what has been said today will turn out to be untrue.

古文：乞取从前内外条奏，详加采择，断在必行。
现代文：请求取出以前朝廷内外条奏，仔细地加以选择，当机立断予以实施。 
English: Requests should be carefully selected from among those previously circulated within and outside the Imperial Court, and promptly implemented.

古文：帝嘉叹，悉付所司。
现代文：孝宗表示赞许，全部条奏交给所主管官署。
English: Takamune expressed his approval and handed over the entire report to the competent authority.

古文：是时，帝数召阁臣面议政事。
现代文：这时，孝宗几次召内阁大臣当面议政。
English: At this time, Takamune summoned cabinet ministers several times to discuss politics face to face.

古文：东阳与首辅刘健等竭心献纳，时政阙失必尽言极谏。
现代文：李东阳与首辅刘健等尽心献言，对于有关时政的过失必定尽言极谏。
English: Li Dongyang and Liu Jian, the chief aide of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, have dedicated themselves to making speeches, and they will certainly make the best speeches about the faults of the current government.

古文：东阳工古文，阁中疏草多属之。
现代文：东阳擅长古文，阁中奏议大多是他写的。
English: Dongyang is good at ancient literature, and most of the cabinet motions were written by him.

古文：疏出，天下传诵。
现代文：奏议发出，天下传阅吟诵。
English: The report was issued and read and recited all over the world.

古文：明年，与刘健、谢迁同受顾命。
现代文：第二年孝宗去世，东阳与刘健、谢迁一同接受顾命，辅助太子。
English: The following year, after the death of Emperor Xiaozong, Dongyang, Liu Jian and Xie Qian accepted the offer to assist the crown prince.

古文：武宗立，屡加少傅兼太子太傅。
现代文：武宗即位，又连续加封东阳为少傅兼太子太傅。
English: Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, and Dongyang was successively promoted to Shao Fu and Taifu.

古文：刘瑾入司礼，东阳与健、迁即日辞位。中旨去健、迁，而东阳独留。
现代文：刘瑾进入司礼监，东阳与刘健、谢迁当天就要求辞去官位，皇帝御旨去掉刘健、谢迁的官职，而独个留住东阳。
English: On the same day that Liu Jian and Xie Qian were promoted to the position of chief proctor of ceremonies, Dongyang and Liu Jian and Xie Qian asked to resign from their official positions. The emperor gave the order to remove Liu Jian and Xie Qian from their official positions, leaving Dongyang alone.

古文：耻之，再疏恳请，不许。
现代文：东阳感到耻辱，第二次呈上奏章恳请辞位，皇帝不允许。
English: Dongyang felt humiliated and submitted his resignation to the emperor for the second time. The emperor did not allow it.

古文：初，健、迁持议欲诛瑾，词甚厉，惟东阳少缓，故独留。
现代文：当初，刘健、谢迁坚持要诛杀刘瑾，言辞非常严厉，只有李东阳语调稍微缓和，因此被独留。
English: At first, Liu Jian and Xie Qian insisted on fighting and killing Liu Yao, and their words were very harsh. Only Li Dongyang's tone was slightly softened, so he was left alone.

古文：健、迁濒行，东阳祖饯泣下。健正色曰： 何泣为？
现代文：刘健、谢迁临行时，东阳在路上设的饯行宴上流下眼泪，刘健严肃地说： 为什么流泪？
English: When Liu Jian and Xie Qian were about to leave, Dongyang shed tears at the farewell banquet set up on the road. Liu Jian said seriously: Why shed tears?

古文：使当日力争，与我辈同去矣。 
现代文：假如那天你也力争诛杀刘瑾，那就与我们一起离去了。 
English: If you also tried to kill Liu Ye that day, then you left with us.

古文：东阳默然。
现代文：东阳无话可说。
English: Dongyang had nothing to say.

古文：瑾既得志，务摧抑缙绅。
现代文：刘瑾得志之后，大力打击抑制朝官。
English: After Liu Bei gained power, he vigorously cracked down on officials who tried to suppress the imperial court.

古文：而焦芳入阁助之虐，老臣、忠直士放逐殆尽。
现代文：而新调入阁的焦芳助长了刘瑾的残暴，老臣、忠直人士几乎被放逐干净。
English: However, Jiao Fang, who was newly appointed to the cabinet, encouraged Liu Bei's brutality, and old ministers and loyalists were almost completely banished.

古文：东阳悒悒不得志，亦委蛇避祸。
现代文：东阳愁闷不安很不得志，也小心谨慎地躲避祸患。
English: Dongyang is very depressed and anxious, and is also careful to avoid disasters.

古文：而焦芳嫉其位己上，日夕构之瑾。
现代文：焦芳嫉妒东阳位居自己之上，一天到晚在刘瑾面前说李东阳的坏话。
English: Jiao Fang was jealous of Dongyang's position above her, and bad-mouthed Li Dongyang in front of Liu Ye all day long.

古文：先是，东阳奉命编《通鉴纂要》。既成，瑾令人摘笔画小疵，除誊录官数人名，欲因以及东阳。
现代文：此前，东阳奉命编纂《通鉴纂要》，完成之后，刘瑾命人挑出笔画小毛病，免除誊录官好几名，企图借此祸及东阳。
English: Previously, Dongyang was ordered to compile the "General Catalogue." After completion, Liu Ye ordered the person to pick out minor faults in the brushstrokes, exempt several transcribers, and attempt to take advantage of this misfortune to Dongyang.

古文：东阳大窘，属芳与张彩为解，乃已。
现代文：东阳大为窘迫，请焦芳与张彩进行调解，才了结此事。
English: Dongyang was very distressed and asked Jiao Fang to mediate with Zhang Cai to settle the matter.

古文：瑾凶暴日甚，无所不讪侮，于东阳犹阳礼敬。
现代文：刘瑾凶恶残暴一天比一天厉害，对大臣无不进行诋毁，态度怠慢，但对东阳表面上还算尊敬。
English: Liu Ye's viciousness and brutality became more and more severe day by day. He constantly slandered the minister, and his attitude was neglectful, but on the surface, he still respected Dongyang.

古文：凡瑾所为乱政，东阳弥缝其间，亦多所补救。
现代文：凡是刘瑾扰乱政事所搞的乱子，东阳左右调适，于政事也多有补救。
English: All the chaos caused by Liu Bei's disruption of political affairs has been adjusted by Dongyang, and there are many remedies for political affairs.

古文：尚宝卿崔璿、副使姚祥、郎中张玮以违制乘肩舆，从者妄索驿马，给事中安奎、御史张彧以核边饷失瑾意，皆荷重校几死。
现代文：尚宝卿崔、副使姚祥、郎中张玮因为违反礼制乘轿，随从非法索取驿站马匹，给事中安奎、御史张由于核实边饷不对刘瑾意愿，都被戴上沉重的刑具差一点死了。
English: Shang Baoqing Cui, vice-envoy Yao Xiang, and his brother-in-law Zhang Qian violated the etiquette of riding in a sedan and illegally solicited horses from a stable attendant. As a result, Ankui and Gu Shi Zhang were all put on heavy torture equipment and almost died because they verified that Ben Qian was not against Liu Qian's will.

古文：东阳力救，璿等谪戍，奎、彧释为民。
现代文：东阳全力营救，崔等被罚守边，安奎、张被释放、削职为民。
English: Dongyang made all-out efforts to rescue, Cui and others were punished for being on the sidelines, Ankui and Zhang were released and demoted.

古文：三年六月壬辰，朝退，有遗匿名书于御道数瑾罪者，诏百官悉跪奉天门外。
现代文：正德三年六月二十六日，退朝后，有人将匿名奏章放置在御道上，信中一一列举刘瑾罪行，武宗下诏书要文武百官全部跪在奉天门外。
English: On June 26th, the third year of Zhengde's reign, after the emperor's abdication, someone placed an anonymous song on the imperial road. The letter enumerated all of Liu Bei's crimes, and the emperor issued an edict ordering all of the civil and military officials to kneel outside the Gate of Heaven.

古文：顷之，执庶僚三百余人下诏狱。
现代文：不久，拘捕三百多名官员关进皇家监狱。
English: Soon, more than three hundred officials were arrested and imprisoned in the royal prison.

古文：次日，东阳等力救，会瑾亦廉知其同类所为，众获宥。
现代文：第二天，东阳等尽力解救，时逢刘瑾也查访到匿名奏章是太监所投放的，众官员才获得释放。
English: The next day, Dongyang and others tried their best to rescue them, but when Liu Wei also visited, he found that the anonymous song was released by the eunuch, and the officials were released.

古文：后数日，东阳疏言宽恤数事，章下所司。
现代文：后来过了几天，东阳上奏章请求宽免抚恤等几件事，奏章下达到有关部门。
English: A few days later, Dongyang Songzhang sent a petition to the relevant departments to ask for a pardon for several things, including a pension.

古文：既而户部覆奏，言粮草亏折，自有专司，巡抚官总领大纲，宜从轻减。
现代文：不久户部又上奏章，说粮草亏损，自有专门负责的官员，巡抚官掌管大政，应该从轻减罪。
English: Soon after, the Household Department issued another report, saying that there was a loss of grain and grass, that it had its own officials specifically responsible, that the governor was in charge of the government, and that the crime should be reduced.

古文：瑾大怒，矫旨诘责数百言，中外骇叹。
现代文：刘瑾大怒，矫造几百字的圣旨责问，朝廷内外都为之震惊叹息。
English: Liu Bei flew into a rage and fabricated several hundred words of the imperial edict, causing shock and sighs both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：瑾患盗贼日滋，欲戍其家属并邻里及为之囊橐者。
现代文：刘瑾担心盗贼越来越厉害，想派兵看守盗贼家属并邻里以及为他窝藏财物的人家。
English: Fearing that the thieves are getting more and more powerful, Liu Wei wants to send soldiers to guard the thieves' families and neighborhoods, as well as the homes of the people who are hiding his belongings.

古文：或自陈获盗七十人，所司欲以新例从事。东阳言，如是则百年之案皆可追论也，乃免。
现代文：有人自称抓获盗贼七十人，所管部门要用新例处理，东阳说，如果这样，那么百年的案子都可以追究，这才免除了。
English: Someone claimed to have caught seventy thieves, and the department in charge had to use a new example to deal with it. Dongyang said that if this was the case, then a hundred-year-old case could be investigated, and this would be eliminated.

古文：刘健、谢迁、刘大夏、杨一清及平江伯陈熊辈几得危祸，皆赖东阳而解。
现代文：刘健、谢迁、刘大夏、杨一清以及平江伯陈熊一类人几乎遭到危险，都依赖东阳而得到化解。
English: People such as Liu Jian, Xie Qian, Liu Daxia, Yang Yiqing and Pingjiang Bo Chen Xiong were almost in danger, and they all relied on Dongyang to be resolved.

古文：其潜移默夺，保全善类，天下阴受其庇。而气节之士多非之。
现代文：东阳用隐蔽的手法默默地保全善良之辈，天下人暗中受到他的庇护，然而气节之士大多责怪他。
English: Dongyang uses covert methods to silently protect the good people. People around the world are secretly protected by him. However, most of the virtuous people blame him.

古文：侍郎罗玘上书劝其早退，至请削门生籍。
现代文：侍郎罗王已写信给东阳，劝他早日退职，以至于到请求削除自己的门生身分。
English: Luo Wang, a chamberlain, has written to Dongyang, urging him to retire as soon as possible, to the point of requesting that his status as a protégé be removed.

古文：东阳得书，俯首长叹而已。
现代文：东阳看到信，低头长叹罢了。
English: Dongyang saw the letter, bowed his head and sighed.

古文：焦芳既与中人为一，王鏊虽持正，不能与瑾抗，东阳乃援杨廷和共事，差倚以自强。
现代文：焦芳已经与宦官串通一气，王鏊虽然保持正派，但不能与刘瑾抗衡，李东阳就援引杨廷和共同处理政事，勉强配合依靠以此自立。
English: Jiao Fang was already in cahoots with the eunuchs. Wang Xi, although he remained decent, could not compete with Liu Bei. Li Dongyang quoted Yang Tinghe to jointly deal with political affairs, and reluctantly cooperated with him, relying on this to become independent.

古文：已而鏊辞位，代者刘宇、曹元皆瑾党，东阳势益孤。
现代文：不久，王鏊辞去官位，接替的人刘宇、曹元都是刘瑾的党羽，东阳更加孤立。
English: Soon after, Wang Hui resigned from his post, and his successors Liu Yu and Cao Yuan were all Liu Hui's followers, leaving Dongyang even more isolated.

古文：东阳前已加少师兼太子太师，后瑾欲加芳官，诏东阳食正一品禄。
现代文：东阳以前已加少师兼太子太师职位，后来刘瑾想给焦芳加官，下诏书让东阳享受正一品俸禄。
English: Dongyang had previously been promoted to the position of junior teacher and prince's teacher. Later, Liu Ye wanted to promote Jiao Fang, and issued an edict to let Dongyang enjoy a high salary.

古文：四年五月，《孝宗实录》成，编纂诸臣当序迁，所司援《会典》故事。
现代文：正德四年五月，《孝宗实录》编纂完毕，凡参加编纂诸臣应当按次序提升官职，所管部门引用编纂《会典》的先例，提升诸臣官职。
English: In May of the 4th year of Zhengde, the compilation of "The Record of the Filial Piety" was completed. All the courtiers who participated in the compilation should be promoted to official positions in order. The relevant departments cited the precedent of the compilation of "The Code" to promote the courtiers to official positions.

古文：诏以刘健等前纂修《会典》多糜费，皆夺升职，东阳亦坐降俸。
现代文：诏书下达，借刘健等以前纂修《会典》多有浪费，全部取消所升职位，东阳也被降低俸禄。
English: An edict was issued, saying that Liu Jian and others' previous efforts to compile and revise the "Code of the Association" were mostly wasteful, all promoted positions were canceled, and Dongyang was also reduced in salary.

古文：居数日，乃以《实录》功复之。
现代文：过了几天，才以编纂《实录》的功劳恢复被降俸禄。
English: It took a few days before his salary was restored for his contribution to compiling the "Proceedings."

古文：五年春，久旱，下诏恤刑。
现代文：正德五年春，久旱无雨，皇帝下达诏书减免囚犯的刑法处置。
English: In the spring of Zhengde's fifth year, after a long drought without rain, the emperor issued an edict to reduce and exempt prisoners from the criminal law.

古文：东阳等因上诏书所未及者数条，帝悉从之。
现代文：东阳等人趁机提出几条诏书上未有的内容，明武宗完全同意如此办理。
English: Dongyang and others took the opportunity to propose several articles that were not in the edict, and Emperor Mingwuzong fully agreed to do so.

古文：而法司畏瑾，减死者止二人。
现代文：而法律部门害怕刘瑾，减免死罪的只有二人。
English: However, the legal department is afraid of Liu Wei, and only two people have been commuted to death.

古文：其秋，瑾诛，东阳乃上疏自列曰： 臣备员禁近，与瑾职掌相关。
现代文：这年秋天，刘瑾被诛杀，东阳于是呈上奏章自行陈述说 ：臣在靠近皇帝所居的翰林院官署凑数，与刘瑾主管的事有关联。
English: In the autumn of that year, Liu Bei was assassinated, and Dongyang then submitted a self-report saying: The minister made up the number at the Hanlin Academy Office, which was close to the emperor's residence, and it was related to the matter of Liu Bei's supervisor.

古文：凡调旨撰敕，或被驳再三，或径自改窜，或持回私室，假手他人，或递出誊黄，逼令落橐，真假混淆，无从别白。臣虽委曲匡持，期于少济，而因循隐忍，所损亦多。理宜黜罢。 
现代文：凡是调皇帝的诏书或撰写敕令，有的被刘瑾再三驳斥，有的被刘瑾擅自篡改，有的被刘瑾拿回自己的住所，借他人之手写成，有的他传递出来借要人用黄纸誊写之机，逼令诏书之意符合他的意图，这样就真假混淆，无法辨别，臣虽然曲折辗转纠正扶持，希望有所补救，然而因循守旧隐忍克制，所带来的损失也多，理应罢免。 
English: Whenever the emperor's imperial rescript was revised or a royal edict was written, some were repeatedly refuted by Liu Bei, some were altered by Liu Bei without authorization, some were taken back to his residence by Liu Bei and written by others, and some were passed out by him to borrow a machine to have someone transcribe them with yellow paper, forcing the meaning of the imperial rescript to match his intention. In this way, the true and false were confused and could not be distinguished. Although the minister took twists and turns to correct and support, hoping for a remedy, he still suffered a lot of losses due to adhering to the old forbearance and restraint, and should be dismissed.

古文：帝慰留之。
现代文：武宗宽慰挽留他。
English: The emperor consoled him with kind words.

古文：寘鐇平，加特进左柱国，荫一子尚宝司丞，为御史张芹所劾。
现代文：蜫钅番之乱平定，加封李东阳特进、左柱国，荫庇一子为尚宝司丞，为御史张芹所弹劾。
English: The I Chuan Rebellion was put down, and Li Dongyang Tejin and Zuozhu Guo were given additional fiefs, and Ibi's only son, Shang Bao Jie, was impeached by the Grand Historian Zhang Qin.

古文：帝怒，夺芹俸。
现代文：武宗发怒，削去张芹的俸禄。
English: Bu Zong was furious and cut off Zhang Qin's salary.

古文：东阳亦乞休辞荫，不许。
现代文：东阳也请求退休，辞去荫子的官职，武宗不答应。
English: Dongyang also requested to retire and resign from the official post of shadow, but Buson did not agree.

古文：时焦芳、曹元已罢，而刘忠、梁储入，政事一新。
现代文：这时焦芳、曹元已经罢免，而是刘忠、梁储任职，政事一新。
English: At this time, Jiao Fang and Cao Yuan had already been dismissed, but Liu Zhong and Liang Zuo were appointed, and the political situation was completely changed.

古文：然张永、魏彬、马永成、谷大用等犹用事，帝嬉游如故。
现代文：但是张永、魏彬、马永成、谷大用等仍然在位，武宗仍和过去一样醉心游玩。
English: However, Zhang Yong, Wei Bin, Ma Yongcheng, and Gu Dayong were still in power, and Emperor Wu was still as enthusiastic as ever.

古文：皇子未生，多居宿于外。又议大兴豹房之役，建寺观禁中。
现代文：皇子未生，武宗大多居宿在外，又主张大兴豹房的工程，在皇宫建寺庙道观。
English: Before the birth of the prince, most of the emperors lived outside, and advocated the construction of the Great Leopard House and the construction of a temple in the imperial palace.

古文：东阳等忧之，前后上章切谏，不报。
现代文：东阳等很担忧，前后上奏章直言极谏，得不到答复。
English: Dongyang and others were very worried. They were very blunt in their questions and received no response.

古文：七年，东阳等以京师及山西、陕西、云南、福建相继地震，而帝讲筵不举，视朝久旷，宗社祭享不亲，禁门出入无度，谷大用仍开西厂，屡上疏极谏，帝亦终不听。
现代文：正德七年因为京师以及山西、陕西、云南、福建相继发生地震，而武宗不开办经筵讲座，久不上朝，对宗社祭祀也不关心，出入皇宫大门不讲法度，谷大用仍然开西厂，东阳等人屡次上疏极力劝谏，武宗终究听不进去。
English: In the seventh year of Zhengde, due to earthquakes in Beijing, Shanxi, Shaanxi, Yunnan and Fujian successively, Wuzong did not hold lectures on the sutra, did not go to the imperial court for a long time, did not care about the religious rites of the sect, did not follow the rules when entering and leaving the imperial palace, still opened the west factory, and Dongyang and others repeatedly went to the dungeon to try to persuade him. After all, Wuzong could not listen.

古文：九载秩满，兼支大学士俸。
现代文：九年官职期满，兼领大学士的俸禄。
English: At the end of the nine-year term of office, he will also receive the salary of a university professor.

古文：河南贼平，荫子世锦衣千户。
现代文：河南贼平定，荫庇李东阳的儿子世袭锦衣千户。
English: Henan was pacified, and Li Dongyang's son inherited thousands of brocade clothes.

古文：再疏力辞，改荫六品文官。
现代文：东阳二次上疏尽力推辞，改荫六品文官。
English: Dongyang's second Shang So tried his best to refuse, and was promoted to civil servant of the sixth grade.

古文：其冬，帝欲调宣府军三千入卫，而以京军更番戍边。
现代文：这年冬天，武宗想调宣府军队三千人保卫皇宫，而以京师军队替换去守边。
English: In the winter of that year, Emperor Wu Zong wanted to transfer 3,000 troops from the Xuanwu army to defend the imperial palace, and replace them with troops from the Beijing division to guard the border.

古文：东阳等力持不可，大臣、台谏皆以为言。中官旁午索草敕，帝坐乾清宫门趣之，东阳等终不奉诏。
现代文：东阳等坚决反对，大臣、台谏都帮东阳说话，宦官交错索取诏书草稿，武宗坐在乾清宫门催促，东阳等始终拒绝起草所需敕令。
English: Dongyang and others resolutely opposed it. The minister and the Taiwanese envoy all helped Dongyang to speak. The eunuchs asked for the draft of the imperial edict in a staggered manner. Emperor Wuzong sat at the gate of the Qianqing Palace to urge. Dongyang and others always refused to draft the required imperial edict.

古文：明日竟出内降行之，江彬等遂以边兵入豹房矣。
现代文：第二天竟然降下内诏施行，于是江彬等率领边兵进入豹房。
English: The next day, he actually issued an edict to enforce it, so Jiang Bin and others led the border soldiers into the Leopard Room.

古文：东阳以老疾乞休，前后章数上，至是始许。
现代文：东阳以年老有病要求退休，前后上了好几道奏章，到这时才获允准。
English: Dongyang asked to retire due to old age and illness, and played several pieces before and after, until he was allowed to retire.

古文：赐敕、给廪隶如故事。
现代文：赐东阳敕书、供给粮食、仆人如同旧例。
English: Dongyang was granted the right to issue official documents, supply grain, and have servants as in the past.

古文：又四年卒，年七十。赠太师，谥文正。
现代文：又过了四年，李东阳去世，享年七十，追封太师，谥号文正。
English: Four years later, Li Dongyang died at the age of 70, and was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master, with the posthumous name of Wen Zheng.

古文：东阳事父淳有孝行。
现代文：东阳对父亲很孝顺。
English: Dongyang is very filial to his father.

古文：初官翰林时，常饮酒至夜深，父不就寝，忍寒待其归，自此终身不夜饮于外。
现代文：当初任翰林官时，常常在外饮酒到深夜，他父亲就不睡觉，忍着寒冷等待东阳回来，从这之后，东阳终生晚上再也不在外饮酒。
English: When he was a forestry official, he would often stay out drinking until late at night. His father would not sleep, braving the cold to wait for Dongyang to return. From then on, Dongyang never went out drinking at night again.

古文：为文典雅流丽，朝廷大著作多出其手。
现代文：他的文章典雅洒脱，朝廷里的大部头的著作大多出自李东阳之手。
English: His articles are elegant and free-flowing, and most of the large-volume works in the imperial court were written by Li Dongyang.

古文：工篆隶书，碑版篇翰流播四裔。
现代文：并擅长篆书、隶书，他的书法诗文流传到周边国家。
English: He was also good at calligraphy, and his calligraphy poetry spread to neighboring countries.

古文：奖成后进，推挽才彦，学士大夫出其门者，悉粲然有所成就。
现代文：东阳勉励后进，推荐扶植有才学的人，出于他门下的文人、士大夫都有辉煌的成就。
English: Dongyang encouraged and recommended the cultivation of talented people, and the literati and scholars under his tutelage have made brilliant achievements.

古文：自明兴以来，宰臣以文章领袖缙绅者，杨士奇后，东阳而已。
现代文：自明建国以来，宰相、大臣以文章领导百官的，杨士奇过后就只有李东阳了。
English: Since the founding of the People's Republic of China, the prime minister and ministers have led hundreds of officials with articles. After Yang Shiqui, only Li Dongyang is left.

古文：立朝五十年，清节不渝。
现代文：东阳立身朝廷五十年，高洁情操不改变。
English: Dongyang has stood up to the imperial court for 50 years, and the noble and pure sentiment has not changed.

古文：既罢政居家，请诗文书篆者填塞户限，颇资以给朝夕。
现代文：退休在家，来求他的诗文、篆字的人多得堵塞了门槛，这为东阳家庭的日常生活提供了资助。
English: Retired at home, the number of people who came to ask for his poems and calligraphy blocked the threshold, which provided funding for the daily life of Dongyang's family.

古文：一日，夫人方进纸墨，东阳有倦色。夫人笑曰： 今日设客，可使案无鱼菜耶？ 
现代文：一天，夫人正拿来纸张笔墨，东阳露出疲劳的面容，夫人笑着说： 今天要招待客人，难道能使桌上没有鱼菜吗？ 
English: One day, Mrs. Dongyang showed her tired face as she was writing on a piece of paper. Mrs. Dongyang smiled and said, "I have guests to entertain today. Is it possible to have no fish and vegetables on the table?

古文：乃欣然命笔，移时而罢，其风操如此。王鏊，字济之，吴人。
现代文：东阳才欣然提笔，过了一个时辰才罢手，这就是李东阳的风度操守。王鏊，字济之，吴地人。
English: Dongyang was only too happy to pick up a pen, and only stopped after an hour. This is Li Dongyang's demeanor and conduct. Wang Yao, Zhi Zhi, a native of Wu.

古文：父琬，光化知县。
现代文：父亲王琬曾任光化知县。
English: His father, Wang Yao, was once the mayor of Guanghua County.

古文：鏊年十六，随父读书，国子监诸生争传诵其文。
现代文：王鏊十六岁时随父读书。国子监诸生争相传诵他的文章。
English: At the age of sixteen, Wang Yao went to school with his father. All the sons and daughters of the country were eager to recite his articles.

古文：侍郎叶盛、提学御史陈选奇之，称为天下士。
现代文：侍郎叶盛、提学御史陈选感到惊奇，称他为 天下士 。
English: Surprised, Ye Sheng, Ting Xue's attendant, called Chen Xuan a "servant of heaven."

古文：成化十年乡试，明年会试，俱第一。廷试第三，授编修。
现代文：成化十年，参加乡试，第二年参加会试都是第一名，廷试第三名。
English: Ten years later, he took part in the village test, and in the second year, he took part in the club test and won the first place, and the court test and won the third place.

古文：杜门读书，避远权势。
现代文：授编修职，闭门读书，远避权势。
English: He was awarded the post of editor-in-chief, studied behind closed doors, and shunned authority.

古文：弘治初，迁侍讲学士，充讲官。
现代文：弘治初年，升为侍讲学士，充任讲官。
English: In the first year of Hongzhi, he was promoted to attendant lecturer and served as a lecturer.

古文：中贵李广导帝游西苑，鏊讲文王不敢盘于游田，反复规切，帝为动容。
现代文：显贵的侍从宦官李广引导孝宗游西苑，王鏊讲文王不敢沉于游猎，反复恳切地规劝，孝宗为之感动。
English: Li Guang, a prominent eunuch and eunuch, guided Xiaozong on a tour of the West Courtyard. Wang Yao told him that the king did not dare to indulge in hunting, and repeatedly and earnestly advised him. Xiaozong was moved by this.

古文：讲罢，谓广曰： 讲官指若曹耳。 
现代文：日讲完后，孝宗对李广说 ：讲官指的是你们。 
English: After the lecture on the second day, Xiaozong said to Li Guang: The lecturer refers to you.

古文：寿宁侯张峦故与鏊有连，及峦贵，鏊绝不与通。
现代文：寿宁侯张峦以前与王鏊有姻亲关系，到张峦显贵后，王鏊断绝与他的来往。
English: Shuning marquess Zhang Ye used to be related to Wang Ye by marriage, but after Zhang Ye became prominent, Wang Ye broke off relations with him.

古文：东宫出阁，大臣请选正人为宫僚，鏊以本官兼谕德。
现代文：东宫太子前往封地，大臣请求选正直之人任太子官属，王鏊以原官兼任谕德。
English: The crown prince of the Eastern Palace went to the fief, the minister requested that an honest person be appointed as the crown prince's official subordinate, and Wang Xi was appointed as the original official.

古文：寻转少詹事，擢吏部右侍郎。
现代文：不久转任少詹事，提升为吏部右待郎。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Shosho Zhanji, and was promoted to the post of Rikibu Umachiro.

古文：尝奏陈边计，略言： 昨火筛入寇大同，陛下宵旰不宁，而缘边诸将皆婴城守，无一人敢当其锋者，此臣所不解也。
现代文：曾经上奏章陈述安民之计，大致说： 昨天火筛入侵大同，陛下早晚不安，而沿边诸将都环城固守，无一人敢当其锋，这是臣所想不通的。
English: He once wrote a report on the strategy for the safety of the people, saying roughly: Yesterday, the fire sieve invaded Datong, His Majesty was uneasy morning and evening, but the people along the border defended the city, and no one dared to be in the forefront, which was incomprehensible to the minister.

古文：臣窃谓今日火筛、小王子不足畏，而嬖幸乱政，功罪不明，委任不专，法令不行，边圉空虚，深可畏也。
现代文：臣认为当前对火筛、小王子不值得害怕。而内宠乱政，功罪赏罚不明，委任不专，法令不行，边疆空虚，这才是令人十分恐惧的。
English: The vassal thinks that it is not worth being afraid of the fire sieve and the little prince at present, but it is very frightening that the internal favor is chaotic, the reward and punishment of merits and crimes are unknown, the appointment is not special, the decree is not good, and the frontier is empty.

古文：比年边将失律，往往令戴罪杀贼。
现代文：每年边将有了过失往往令其戴罪杀贼。
English: Every year, border guards make mistakes that often lead to them being charged with murder.

古文：副总兵姚信拥兵不进，亦得逃罪。
现代文：副总兵姚信拥兵不前，也得以逃脱惩罚。
English: The second-in-command, Yao Xin, was also able to escape punishment because he did not advance with the soldiers.

古文：此人心所以日懈，士气所以不振也。
现代文：由此人心所以日益松懈，士气所以不振。
English: As a result, the spirit of the people is increasingly slack and morale is low.

古文：望陛下大奋乾刚，时召大臣，咨询边将勇怯。
现代文：希望陛下大振皇威。经常召见大臣，咨询边将勇怯。
English: I hope that His Majesty will greatly strengthen the authority of the Emperor. He often summons ministers and consults with generals.

古文：有罪必罚，有功必赏，专主将之权。
现代文：有罪必罚，有功必赏，行使主将之权。
English: Guilty must be punished, meritorious must be rewarded, exercise the power of the captain.

古文：起致仕尚书秦纮为总制，节制诸边，提督右都御史史琳坐镇京营，遥为声援。
现代文：起用退休尚书秦为总制，节制诸边，提督右都御史史琳坐镇京营，遥相声援。
English: Retired Admiral Shangshu Qin was appointed as the commander-in-chief, and Admiral Yuto Mishi Shilin was appointed as the commander-in-chief.

古文：厚恤沿边死事之家，召募边方骁勇之士，用间以携其部曲。分兵掩击，出奇制胜，寇必不敢长驱深入。 
现代文：厚恤沿边死难者的家属，招募边疆的勇士，乘空隙带领其部曲分兵袭击，出奇制胜，寇必定不敢长驱深入。 
English: He was generous to the families of those who died along the border, recruited frontier warriors, took advantage of the gap to lead his detachment of troops to attack, and won a surprise victory. He must not dare to drive deeper.

古文：从之。
现代文：朝廷接受此计谋。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：又言： 宜仿前代制科，如博学宏词之类，以收异材。
现代文：王鏊又说 ：应该仿效前代以科举取士的制度，如博学宏词之类，以此广罗奇才。
English: Wang Yao also said that the previous system of selecting scholars by subject examination, such as erudite and grand words, should be emulated, so as to attract great talents.

古文：六年一举，尤异者授以清要之职，有官者加秩。
现代文：六年选拔一次，特别优秀者授以枢要之职，有官职的增加俸禄。
English: They are selected once every six years, and those who are particularly outstanding are given key positions, and their salaries are increased if they have a government post.

古文：数年之后，士类濯磨，必以通经学古为高，脱去謏闻之陋。 
现代文：数年之后，读书人加强了修养，一定以通经学古为高，除去满足于小有名声的毛病。 
English: After a few years, readers have strengthened their cultivation, and they must be high in the study of classics, eliminating the problem of being satisfied with a small reputation.

古文：时不能用。寻以父忧归。
现代文：朝廷当时不采纳，不久王鏊因为父亲去世而返乡。
English: The imperial court did not accept it at the time, and Wang Yao soon returned home because his father had died.

古文：正德元年四月起左侍郎，与韩文诸大臣请诛刘瑾等 八党 。
现代文：正德元年四月，王鏊被起用为左侍郎，与韩文等大臣要求诛刘瑾等 八党 。
English: In April of the first year of the Zhengde era, Wang Qi was appointed as the left attendant, and he and Han Wen and other ministers asked Liu Qi and other eight parties to take the lead.

古文：俄瑾入司礼，大学士刘健、谢迁相继去，内阁止李东阳一人。
现代文：不久刘瑾进入司礼监，大学士刘健、谢迁相继离去，内阁只李东阳一人。
English: Soon after, Liu Hui became the ceremonial supervisor of the department, university professors Liu Jian and Xie Qian left one after another, leaving only Li Dongyang in the cabinet.

古文：瑾欲引焦芳，廷议独推鏊。
现代文：刘瑾想引入焦芳，廷议只推荐王鏊。
English: Liu Ye wanted to introduce Jiao Fang, but the court only recommended Wang Ye.

古文：瑾迫公论，命以本官兼学士与芳同入内阁。
现代文：刘瑾迫于公论，命令王鏊以原官兼学士与焦芳一同进入内阁。
English: Liu Bei was forced by public opinion to order Wang Jun, a former official and bachelor, to enter the cabinet together with Jiao Fang.

古文：逾月，进户部尚书文渊阁大学士。
现代文：过了一个月，王鏊升任户部尚书、文渊阁大学士。
English: A month later, Wang Qi was promoted to the Household Department of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.

古文：明年加少傅兼太子太傅。
现代文：第二年加任少傅兼太子太傅。
English: The following year, he was appointed Junior Master and Crown Prince Master.

古文：景帝汪后薨，疑其礼。
现代文：景帝汪皇后去世，对按什么规格举行丧礼拿不定主意。
English: When Empress Wang of the Qing Dynasty died, she was undecided about the specifications for her funeral.

古文：鏊曰： 妃废不以罪，宜复故号，葬以妃，祭以后。 
现代文：王鏊说 ：皇妃并不是因罪被废，应该恢复原封号，按妃的规格安葬，按皇后的规格祭祀。 
English: Wang Yao said: The empress was not abolished for a crime, the original seal should be restored, buried according to the specifications of the empress, and sacrificed according to the specifications of the empress.

古文：乃命辍朝，致祭如制。
现代文：武宗于是下令停止上朝，按皇后的规格祭祀。
English: Therefore, Emperor Buso ordered to stop the sacrificial rites in accordance with the specifications of the Empress.

古文：宪宗废后吴氏之丧，瑾议欲焚之以灭迹，曰 不可以成服 。
现代文：宪宗废后吴氏死了，刘瑾要焚尸以灭迹，就说 ：不可以成丧服。 
English: After the abolition of the Jianzong, the Wu clan died, and Liu Bei wanted to burn the bodies to erase their memory, so he said, "You can't wear mourning clothes."

古文：鏊曰： 服可以不成，葬不可薄也。 
现代文：王鏊说 ：丧服可以不成，葬礼不可以薄。 
English: Wang Yao said: the funeral clothes can not be made, the funeral can not be thin.

古文：从之。尚宝卿崔璿等三人荷校几死。鏊谓瑾曰： 士可杀，不可辱。
现代文：尚宝卿崔璇等三人被戴上刑具几乎死去，王鏊对刘瑾说： 士可杀，不可辱。
English: Shang Baoqing, Cui Yao and three others were put on torture devices and almost died. Wang Yao said to Liu Yao: "A scholar can be killed, but not humiliated."

古文：今辱且杀之，吾尚何颜居此。 
现代文：现在对崔璇侮辱并且又要杀之，我还有何脸面留在内阁。 
English: Now that I have insulted Choe Son and want to kill him, how much face do I have left in the cabinet?

古文：李东阳亦力救，璿等得遣戍。
现代文：李东阳也极力相救，崔璇等才得以免死遣送戍边。
English: Li Dongyang also tried his best to save him, and it was only then that Cui Yao and the others were able to evacuate Luo Bian from death.

古文：瑾衔尚书韩文，必欲杀之，又欲以他事中健、迁，鏊前后力救得免。
现代文：刘瑾恨尚书韩文，一心要置韩文于死地，又想借故中伤刘健、谢迁，王鏊前后都极力相救，使刘瑾阴谋未得逞。
English: Liu Bei hated Shangshu Hanwen, and was bent on putting Hanwen to death. He also wanted to use the incident to slander Liu Jian and Xie Qian. Wang Bei tried his best to save him, but Liu Bei's plot failed.

古文：或恶杨一清于瑾，谓筑边墙糜费。
现代文：有人在刘瑾面前诽谤杨一清，称筑边墙糜费。
English: Someone slandered Yang Iqing in front of Liu Ye, saying that building the border wall would cost too much.

古文：鏊争曰： 一清为国修边，安得以功为罪。 
现代文：王鏊争辩道： 一清为国修边，岂能以功为罪？ 
English: Wang Yao argued: If one clears one's name and mends one's ways for the sake of the country, can one use one's merits as a crime?

古文：瑾怒刘大夏，逮至京，欲坐以激变罪死。
现代文：刘瑾对刘大夏发怒，将刘逮至京城，要以激变罪名判其死刑。
English: Liu Yao got angry with Liu Daxia, arrested Liu to Beijing, and sentenced him to death on the charge of violent revolution.

古文：鏊争曰： 岑猛但迁延不行耳，未叛何名激变？ 
现代文：王鏊争辩说： 岑猛不过是拖延不行罢了，未叛变怎能说为激变？ 
English: Wang Yao argued: "Fierce resistance is no more than procrastination. How can non-rebellion be described as radical change?

古文：时中外大权悉归瑾，鏊初开诚与言，间听纳。
现代文：当时朝内外大权全被刘瑾所掌握，王鏊起初开诚布公与刘瑾言说，刘瑾间或接纳。
English: At that time, all the power inside and outside the imperial court was controlled by Liu Bei. At first, Wang Bei openly told Liu Bei that Liu Bei might accept him.

古文：而芳专媕阿，瑾横弥甚，祸流缙神。
现代文：而焦芳专于阿谀奉承，刘瑾更为专横，士大夫深受其害。
English: While Jiao Fang specialized in flattery, Liu Yao was more domineering, and Shidafu suffered from it.

古文：鏊不能救，力求去。
现代文：王鏊想救而不能救，就力求辞官返乡。
English: Wang Yao wanted to help but couldn't, so he tried his best to get his resignation and return home.

古文：四年，疏三上，许之。
现代文：四年，三次上疏，才被批准。
English: It took four years and three renovations before it was approved.

古文：赐玺书、乘传、有司给廪隶，咸如故事。
现代文：武宗赐他盖皇帝大印封记的文书、马车，有关部门按旧例供应粮食、奴仆。
English: Emperor Wuzong gave him a document bearing the emperor's great seal, a carriage, and the relevant departments supplied grain and servants according to the old practice.

古文：家居十四年，廷臣交荐不起。
现代文：王鏊在家居十四年，廷臣多次推荐他都不赴任。
English: Wang Xi has lived at home for fourteen years, and courtiers have repeatedly recommended him not to take up the post.

古文：世宗即位，遣行人存问。鏊疏谢，因上讲学、亲政二篇。
现代文：世宗即位，遣官员慰问王鏊，王鏊上疏致谢，并呈上 讲学 、 亲政 两篇奏章，世宗以嘉许的口气下诏说知道了。
English: When King Sejong ascended to the throne, he sent officials to offer condolences to King Sejong, and King Sejong sent a letter of thanks to King Sejong, and presented him with two musical pieces, "Lecture" and "Personal Government." King Sejong said with a tone of appreciation, "I understand."

古文：帝优诏报闻，官一子中书舍人。嘉靖三年复诏有司存问。
现代文：封他的一个儿子为中书舍人。嘉靖三年，世宗又下诏令有关部门慰问王鏊。
English: In the third year of Jiajing, King Sejong also issued an edict to the relevant departments to offer condolences to Wang Xuan.

古文：未几卒，年七十五。
现代文：没多久王鏊去世，享年七十五岁。
English: Wang Xi passed away not long after, at the age of seventy-five.

古文：赠太傅，谥文恪。
现代文：追赠太傅，谥号文恪。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of "Taifu" and the honorary title of "Wen Ke."

古文：鏊博学有识鉴，文章尔雅，议论明畅。
现代文：王鏊博学善于识别人才，文章雅正，言谈议论明晰流畅。
English: Wang Zibo is good at recognizing talent, the article is elegant, and the speech is clear and smooth.

古文：晚著《性善论》一篇，王守仁见之曰： 王公深造，世未能尽也。 
现代文：晚年著《性善论》一篇，王守仁看了说： 王公的文章达到精深的境界，世上的人也很难达到。 
English: In his later years, Wang Shouren read an article in "Sexual Virtue Theory" and said: Wang Gong's article reached a profound level, which is difficult for people in the world to achieve.

古文：少善制举义，后数典乡试，程文魁一代。
现代文：王鏊年轻时善于制作科举时文，后来多次主管乡试，为一代文章楷模。
English: When he was young, Wang Yao was good at writing academic papers. Later, he was in charge of township examinations for many times, and he was a role model for a generation of writers.

古文：取士尚经术，险诡者一切屏去。
现代文：取士注重经学，文章险峻诡异者一概屏去。
English: The scholars paid attention to the study of classics, and the articles that were dangerous and strange were all screened.

古文：弘、正间，文体为一变。
现代文：因此弘历、正德年间的文体为之一变。
English: As a result, the literary style of the Hongli and Zhengde dynasties changed completely.

古文：刘忠，字司直，陈留人。
现代文：王恕，字宗贯，三原县人。
English: Wang Im, Zhi Zong Jun, from Mihara County.

古文：成化十四年进士。
现代文：正统十三年，考中进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 14th year of Chenghua, and was conferred the new title of Hechi County.

古文：改庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：由庶吉士授大理左评事职，升左寺副。
English: He was reappointed to the position of deputy kishi, and the post of editor was no longer conferred.

古文：弘治四年，《宪宗实录》成，迁侍讲，直经筵，寻兼侍东宫讲读。
现代文：曾经上奏条陈关于刑罚不当的六件事，都在朝廷议定而推行之。
English: The six cases of improper punishment that were reported in the past were all agreed upon and implemented by the Imperial Court.

古文：又九年进侍读学士。
现代文：调任扬州知府，不待朝廷回答就发粮救济饥民，兴办资政书院以培养读书人。
English: He was transferred to the governorship of Yangzhou. Without waiting for an answer from the imperial court, he distributed food to the starving people and established the Academy of Finance and Administration to train readers.

古文：武宗即位，以宫寮擢学士，掌翰林院，仍直经筵。
现代文：天顺四年，因为成绩突出，越级提升为江西右布政使，平定赣州寇乱。
English: In the fourth year of Tianshun, because of his outstanding achievements, he was promoted to the level of Jiangxi Right Branch Political Envoy to quell the Bozhou Coup.

古文：正德二年，刘瑾用事，日导帝游戏，乱祖宗旧章。
现代文：宪宗即位，下诏命大臣严格地考察天下各官员，罢免河南左布政使侯臣等十三人，而用王恕代替侯臣。
English: When Emperor Gensong ascended to the throne, he issued an edict ordering the minister to strictly inspect all officials in the world, dismissing thirteen officials including Hou Chen, the political envoy of Henan Province, and replacing him with Wang Ji.

古文：忠上言戒逸游、崇正学数事。已，因进讲与杨廷和傅经义，规帝阙失，而指斥近幸尤切。
现代文：成化元年，南阳、荆襄地区的流民集聚造反，朝廷提升王恕为右副都御史安抚治理流民问题。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, the displaced people in the Nanyang and Jingxiang regions gathered to rebel, and the imperial court promoted Wang Shou to the right vice-governor of the capital to pacify and manage the problem of displaced people.

古文：帝谓瑾曰： 经筵，讲书耳，浮词何为？ 
现代文：正碰上他母亲去世，朝廷下诏只准奔丧两个月即返回视事。
English: Just as his mother passed away, the imperial court decreed that he was only allowed to return two months after her death.

古文：瑾素恶两人，因讽吏部尚书许进出之南京。
现代文：王恕推辞未获允准。他与尚书白圭共同平定大盗刘通起义，又攻破其党徒石龙。
English: Wang Shou's resignation was not approved. He and Shang Shuxu Bai Gui jointly quelled the uprising of the great thief Liu Tong and defeated his party member Shi Long.

古文：南京诸部惟右侍郎一人，进特请用为礼部左侍郎。
现代文：他严格地约束部下不准滥杀人，流民各归其业。王恕被调去安抚河南。凭功绩升左副都御史，不久调升南京刑部右侍郎。
English: He strictly restrained his subordinates from indiscriminate killing, and the exiles each went about their business. Wang Shou was transferred to pacify Henan. On the basis of his achievements, he was promoted to the left vice-governor of the capital, and soon he was promoted to the right attendant of the Nanjing Criminal Department.

古文：命下，外议籍籍，进患之，甫两月，即擢忠本部尚书。
现代文：父亲去世，丧服期满，以原官职总督河道。疏通高邮、邵伯等湖，修雷公，上、下句城，陈公四水塘的水闸。由于灾异，朝廷广求消灾之策。
English: After the death of his father and the expiration of the mourning period, he became the former official governor of the river channel. He dredged the lakes of Gaoyou, Shao Bo and other lakes, the sluices of the four reservoirs of Xiu Lei Gong, the upper and lower sentences of the city, and Chen Gong. Due to the disaster, the imperial court widely sought disaster mitigation measures.

古文：其冬，就改吏部。
现代文：宪宗为此免去山东一年租，京城周围地区也对租税有许多减免。
English: For this reason, Xianzong exempted Shandong from one year's rent, and the areas around Beijing also have many tax reductions and exemptions.

古文：时留都一御史，素骄横；一郎中，张彩所昵也，秩满，皆署下考。
现代文：不多久改任王恕为南京户部左侍郎。十二年，由于云南离京城远在万里，西边控制诸夷，南接交趾，而镇守宦官钱能贪得无厌，朝廷商议派遣有威望的大臣为巡抚镇守云南，就改王恕为左副都御史前往，到云南即升为右都御史。
English: In 12 years, since Yunnan was thousands of miles away from Beijing, the west controlled Zhuyi, and the south was adjacent to each other, and the town guard eunuchs were insatiably greedy for money, the imperial court negotiated to send a prestigious minister to serve as the governor of the town guard of Yunnan, so Wang Shou was changed to the left deputy governor of the capital and went to Yunnan, where he was promoted to the right governor of the capital.

古文：疾吏胥诡名寄籍，督诸曹核汰千人。
现代文：当初，钱能派指挥郭景到京师奏事，称安南捕盗兵擅自进入云南边境，宪宗立即命令郭景去送诏书以示告诫约束。
English: At first, Qian Neng sent commander Guo Jing to the Beijing division to report the matter, saying that Annan's soldiers had entered the Yunnan border without permission, and Xianzong immediately ordered Guo Jing to send an imperial edict to show admonition and restraint.

古文：大计京官，所黜多于前。
现代文：按旧制出使安南必须从广西走，而郭景径直从云南前往安南。
English: According to the old system, Annan had to go from Guangxi, while Guo Jing went straight from Yunnan to Annan.

古文：又疏请不时纠劾，以示劝惩，无待六年考黜。
现代文：钱能托郭景送给安南王黎灏玉带、宝绦、蟒衣、珍奇诸物。黎灏遣将率兵送郭景回来，即要开辟从安南到云南的通道。
English: Qian Neng sent Guo Jing to the king of Annan, Lihong, with a jade belt, treasure necklace, embroidered clothes, and other rare items. Lihong sent soldiers to escort Guo Jing back to open up a passage from Annan to Yunnan.

古文：诏可之。忠在南京正直有风采。
现代文：郭景害怕有后患，假称先行以告诉守关者，因此脱身回来，他扬言安南寇来了，关卡戒严。
English: Guo Jing was afraid of the consequences. He pretended to be the first to tell the gatekeeper, so he escaped and came back. He threatened that Annanko was coming, and the gate was under martial law.

古文：然是时，瑾方以严苛折辱士大夫，而忠操绳墨待下，纠劾过峻。
现代文：黔国公沐琮派人告谕安南其帅，安南军才返回。而诸臣害怕钱能，隐瞒不向朝廷奏报。
English: The Duke of Shan sent a messenger to Annan to inform him of the situation, and it was not until Annan's army had returned that the courtiers, fearing Qian Neng, concealed the fact that they would not report to the imperial court.

古文：时论遂谓忠附会瑾意，颇归怨焉。
现代文：钱能又多次派遣郭景以及指挥卢安、苏本等勾结干崖、孟密等土司，接受其无数金子宝贝。王恕查访到这些情况。
English: Qian Neng repeatedly sent Guo Jing and the commanders Luan and Suben to collude with the local officials such as Dry Cliff and Meng Mi to accept his countless gold treasures. Wang Shu visited these situations.

古文：五年二月改吏部尚书兼翰林学士，专典制诏。
现代文：派骑兵去抓郭景，郭景畏罪自杀，王恕接着弹劾钱能私通外国，罪当死。
English: He sent cavalry to arrest Guo Jing, Guo Jingyi committed suicide, Wang Shou then impeached Qian Neng for foreign incest, and the crime was punishable by death.

古文：两疏乞休，不报。
现代文：宪宗下诏派刑部郎中潘蕃去处理。
English: Emperor Kenzong sent Pan Zeng, a vice-minister of the Ministry of Justice, to deal with the matter.

古文：瑾诛，以本官兼文渊阁大学士，入阁预机务。
现代文：钱能又在这中间，以驿车向皇上进献黄鹦鹉。
English: Qian Neng, in the middle of this, presented a yellow parrot to the emperor in a carriage.

古文：甫数日，以平宁夏功，加少傅兼太子太傅。
现代文：王恕要求禁绝行贿，并将钱能贪婪残暴罪行全部揭发出来，他说： 以前交趾由于镇守官员任用不当，致使一方陷没，现在这件事的危害性就很甚。
English: Wang Shu demanded that bribery be banned and that all crimes of greed and brutality involving money be exposed. He said: In the past, one party was trapped due to the improper appointment of town guard officials, and now the harmfulness of this matter is even greater.

古文：故事，阁臣加官无遽至三孤者。
现代文：陛下怎能为顾惜一个钱能，而不以安定边境为重。 
English: How can His Majesty spare a penny without considering the stability of the border?

古文：忠无功骤得，不自安，连疏固辞，不许。
现代文：钱能十分恐惧，急忙托宪宗身边所宠幸的人向宪宗要求召还王恕。
English: Qian Neng was very afraid and hurriedly asked the favored people around Xianzong to ask Xianzong to recall Wang Ji.

古文：瑾虽诛，张永、魏彬辈擅政，大臣复争与交欢，忠独无所顾。
现代文：而当时商辂、项忠等正直人士都由于与汪直意见不合被罢免，于是改任王恕掌管南京都察院，协助守备处理机要事务，弹劾钱能的事立即化解，潘蕃因将调查钱能收贿的事实报上，皇上却搁置不问。
English: At that time, Shanyu, Xiang Zhong and other honest people were dismissed because they disagreed with Wang Zhi, so they were replaced by Wang Shou in charge of the South Kyoto Procuratorate, helping to prepare and handle important matters, and the impeachment of Qian Neng was immediately resolved. Pan Yu reported the fact of investigating Qian Neng's ability to accept bribes, but the emperor did not ask.

古文：永尝遣廖鹏谒忠，忠仆隶遇之，又却其馈，由是与永辈左。
现代文：王恕在云南任职九个月，威名传到境外，黔国公以下都谨慎地服从政令。
English: Wang Shou served in Yunnan for nine months, his prestige spread abroad, and everyone from the Duke of Shandong downwards carefully obeyed government orders.

古文：前后乞休疏七八上，皆慰留。
现代文：王恕一共二十次上疏，正直的名声震撼天下。
English: Wang Shou was promoted a total of twenty times, and his reputation for honesty shook the world.

古文：明年命典会试。甫毕，帝以试录文义多舛，召李东阳示之。
现代文：当时，安南接纳江西叛人王某作为领头，偷偷地派遣间谍进入临安，又在蒙自市铸造兵器，准备伺机偷袭云南。王恕要求增设副使二名，用以加强边备，王某等的阴谋则没有得逞。
English: At that time, Annan accepted the Jiangxi traitor Wang Mou as the leader, secretly sent spies into Lin'an, and had weapons cast in the city to prepare for a sneak attack on Yunnan. Wang Shu requested the addition of two deputy envoys to strengthen the border, but Wang Mou's plot did not succeed.

古文：忠知为中官所掎，乞省墓。
现代文：到南京几个月，王恕升为兵部尚书，仍兼协助守备处理机要事务。
English: A few months after arriving in Nanjing, Wang Shou was promoted to be the secretary of the military department, and still assisted in the handling of important matters.

古文：诏乘传还。抵家，再上章乞致仕，报许。
现代文：他选拔部属时严禁熟人说情，与他同事的人都不高兴。
English: He strictly forbids acquaintances to intercede when selecting subordinates, and his colleagues are not happy.

古文：给月廪、岁隶终其身。
现代文：而钱能回来后屡次在宪宗面前进谗言。
English: However, after Qian Neng returned, he repeatedly made derogatory remarks in front of Kenzong.

古文：世宗即位，屡荐不起。
现代文：宪宗对王恕多次直言相劝也不满意，就命王恕兼右副都御史巡抚南畿。
English: Unhappy with Wang Shou's repeated blunt advice, Emperor Gensong appointed Wang Shou as the right vice-governor of Nanki.

古文：遣行人存问，忠奏谢，因有所献纳，帝褒其忠爱。
现代文：按旧制，对应天、镇江、太平、宁国、广德的官田征收租额的一半，民田田租全免。后来，民田大都归于豪门，而官田拖累贫民。
English: According to the old system, half of the amount of rent levied on government-owned fields corresponding to Tian, Zhenjiang, Taiping, Ningguo, and Guangde was exempted, and the rent on private fields was completely exempted. Later, most of the private fields were owned by wealthy families, while government-owned fields dragged down the poor.

古文：嘉靖二年卒，年七十二。
现代文：正德三年四月，王恕去世，享年九十三岁。
English: In April of the third year of Zhengde, Wang Shou passed away at the age of ninety-three.

古文：赠太保，谥文肃。赞曰：徐溥以宽厚著，邱浚以博综闻。
现代文：讣告传到宫中，武宗停止视朝一天，追赠特进、左柱国、太师，赐谥号端毅。王恕有五个儿子、十三个孙子，大多德才兼备，官位显赫。
English: An obituary notice was sent to the imperial court, and Emperor Wuzong stopped looking up to the North for a day, posthumously bestowing the titles of Tejin, Zuozhuo, and Taishi, and bestowing the posthumous title of Duan Yi. Emperor Wuzong had five sons and thirteen grandchildren, most of whom were both virtuous and talented, and held prominent official positions.

