古文：六年春正月，寔来。
现代文：六年春季正月，淳于公从曹国前来朝见。
English: In the first month of the spring of the sixth year, Junyukong came from Cao to see the emperor.

古文：夏四月，公会纪侯于成。
现代文：夏季四月，桓公在成地与纪侯会面。
English: In the summer of April, King Kan met with Ji Hou in Chengdu.

古文：秋八月壬午，大阅。
现代文：秋季八月壬午日，检阅军队。
English: In the autumn, on the afternoon of August 13th, the troops were inspected.

古文：蔡人杀陈佗。
现代文：蔡这个地方的一个人杀了陈佗。
English: Cai A person in this area killed Chen Yao.

古文：九月丁卯，子同生。
现代文：九月丁卯日，子同出生。
English: September Dingwu day, the child was born.

古文：冬，纪侯来朝。
现代文：冬天，纪侯前来朝见。
English: In winter, Ji Hou came to see me in the morning.

古文：六年春，自曹来朝。
现代文：六年春季，从曹国前来朝见。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, he came from Cao to see the emperor.

古文：书曰 寔来 ，不复其国也。
现代文：《春秋》记载作 实来 ，是由于他真正不再回国了。
English: "Spring and Autumn" was actually written because he really did not want to return to China.

古文：楚武王侵随，使薳章求成焉，军于瑕以待之。
现代文：楚武王入侵随国，先派薳章去求和，把军队驻在瑕地以等待结果。
English: When King Chuwu invaded Sui Province, he first sent Yuanzhang to sue for peace, and stationed his army in Kaechi to await the outcome.

古文：随人使少师董成。
现代文：随国人派少师主持和谈。
English: The countrymen sent a young teacher to preside over the peace talks.

古文：鬥伯比言于楚子曰： 吾不得志于汉东也，我则使然。
现代文：鬥伯比对楚武王说： 我国在汉水东边不能达到目的，是我们自己造成的。
English: Duobobi said to King Chuwu: Our country cannot achieve its goal on the east side of the Han River, which is caused by ourselves.

古文：我张吾三军而被吾甲兵，以武临之，彼则惧而协以谋我，故难间也。
现代文：我们扩大军队，整顿装备，用武力逼迫别国，他们害怕因而共同来对付我们，所以就难于离间了。
English: As we expand our army, improve our equipment, and use force to pursue other countries, they are afraid to jointly oppose us, so it is difficult to break away.

古文：汉东之国随为大，随张必弃小国，小国离，楚之利也。
现代文：在汉水东边的国家中，随国最大。随国要是自高自大，就必然抛弃小国。小国离心，对楚国有利。
English: Among the countries on the eastern side of the Han River, Suiguo is the largest. If Suiguo is arrogant, it will inevitably abandon small countries. The centrifugal force of small countries is beneficial to Chu.

古文：少师侈，请羸师以张之。 
现代文：少师这个人很骄傲，请君王隐藏我军的精锐，而让他看到疲弱的士卒，助长他的骄傲。 
English: The young master was very proud, so he asked the king to hide the best of our army, and let him see the weak soldiers, to encourage his pride.

古文：熊率且比曰： 季梁在，何益？ 
现代文：熊率且比说： 有季梁在，这样做有什么好处？ 
English: Let's say for the sake of argument: If there is a girdle, what is the benefit of doing so?

古文：鬥伯比曰： 以为后图，少师得其君。 
现代文：鬬伯比说： 这是为以后打算，因为少师可以得到他们国君的信任。 
English: "This is for the future, because young teachers can gain the trust of their sovereigns," he said.

古文：王毁军而纳少师。
现代文：楚武王故意把军容弄得疲疲塌塌来接待少师。
English: King Chuwu purposely exhausted his army to receive the young teachers.

古文：少师归，请追楚师，随侯将许之。季梁止之曰： 天方授楚，楚之羸，其诱我也，君何急焉？
现代文：少师回去，请求追逐楚军。随侯将要答应，季梁劝阻说： 上天正在帮助楚国，楚国军队显得疲塌的样子，是引诱我们。君王何必急于从事？
English: A small division went back and requested to chase the Chu army. Su Hou was about to agree, but Ji Liang dissuaded him, saying, "Heaven is helping the State of Chu. The appearance of the Chu army being exhausted is to lure us. Why should the king be in a hurry to engage?

古文：臣闻小之能敌大也，小道大淫。
现代文：下臣听说小国之所以能够抵抗大国，是小国有道，而大国君主沉溺于私欲。
English: The vassal heard that the reason why a small country can resist a big country is the small country way, while the big country monarch indulges in selfishness.

古文：所谓道，忠于民而信于神也。
现代文：所谓道，就是忠于百姓而取信于神明。
English: The so-called way is to be loyal to the people and gain the trust of the gods.

古文：上思利民，忠也；祝史正辞，信也。
现代文：上边的人想到对百姓有利，这是忠；祝史真实不欺地祝祷，这是信。
English: If the people at the top think about what is good for the people, this is loyalty; if they wish history to be true and pray without deceit, this is faith.

古文：今民馁而君逞欲，祝史矫举以祭，臣不知其可也。 
现代文：现在百姓饥饿而国君放纵个人享乐，祝史浮夸功德来祭祀，下臣不知怎样行得通？ 
English: Now that the people are starving and the sovereign is indulging in personal pleasures, congratulating history and boasting of merits to be sacrificed, the vassal does not know how to work it out?

古文：公曰： 吾牲牷肥腯，粢盛丰备，何则不信？ 
现代文：随侯说： 我祭祀用的牲口都既无杂色，又很肥大，黍稷也都丰盛完备，为什么不能取信于神明？ 
English: The steward said, "The animals I use for sacrifices are not only free of discoloration, but also very fat, and the yakitori are also plentiful and complete. Why can't I trust in the gods?

古文：对曰： 夫民，神之主也。
现代文：季梁回答说： 百姓，是神明的主人。
English: Qiliang replied, "The people are the masters of the gods.

古文：是以圣王先成民而后致力于神。
现代文：因此圣王先团结百姓，而后才致力于神明，所以在奉献牺牲的时候祝告说： 牲口又大又肥。 
English: Therefore, the saint king first united the people, and then devoted himself to the gods, so he announced at the time of offering the sacrifice: The animal is big and fat.

古文：故奉牲以告曰， 博硕肥腯 ，谓民力之普存也，谓其畜之硕大蕃滋也，谓其不疾瘯蠡也，谓其备腯咸有也。
现代文：这是说百姓的财力普遍富足，牲畜肥大而繁殖生长，并没有得病而瘦弱，又有各种优良品种。在奉献黍稷的时候祷告说： 洁净的粮食盛得满满的。 
English: This means that the financial resources of the people are generally rich, the livestock are fat and multiply and grow, they are not sick and thin, and there are all kinds of fine varieties. At the time of donating straw, pray and say: The pure grain is full.

古文：奉盛以告曰， 洁粢丰盛 ，谓其三时不害而民和年丰也。
现代文：这是说春、夏、秋三季没有天灾，百姓和睦而收成很好。在奉献甜酒的时候祝告说： 又好又清的美酒。 
English: This means that there are no natural disasters in the three seasons of spring, summer and autumn, the people are peaceful and the harvest is good.

古文：奉酒醴以告曰， 嘉栗旨酒 ，谓其上下皆有嘉德而无违心也。所谓馨香，无谗慝也。故务其三时，修其五教，亲其九族，以致其禋祀。于是乎民和而神降之福，故动则有成。
现代文：这是说上上下下都有美德而没有坏心眼。所谓的祭品芳香，就是人心没有邪念。因为春、夏、秋三季都努力于农耕，修明五教，敦睦九族，用这些行为来致祭神明，百姓便和睦，神灵也降福，所以做任何事情都能成功。
English: The so-called "sacrifice fragrance" means that there are no evil thoughts in people's hearts. Because the three seasons of spring, summer, and autumn are devoted to farming, cultivating the five religions, and keeping the nine ethnic groups in harmony, and using these actions to offer sacrifices to the gods, the people will be in harmony, and the gods will be blessed, so doing anything can be successful.

古文：今民各有心，而鬼神乏主，君虽独丰，其何福之有！
现代文：现在百姓各有各的想法，鬼神没有依靠，君王一个人祭祀丰富，又能求得什么福气呢？
English: Now the people all have their own ideas, there is no reliance on ghosts and gods, and the king alone is rich in sacrifices. What kind of blessing can one seek?

古文：君姑修政而亲兄弟之国，庶免于难。 
现代文：君王姑且修明政治，亲近兄弟国家，看能否免于祸难。 
English: The monarch should reform his politics and get closer to the brotherly country to see if he can avoid the disaster.

古文：随侯惧而修政，楚不敢伐。
现代文：随侯害怕了，从而修明政治，楚国就没有敢来攻打。
English: As a result of the fear of the Suihou and the resulting political clarification, the State of Chu did not dare to attack.

古文：夏，会于成，纪来谘谋齐难也。
现代文：夏季，鲁桓公和纪侯在成地相会。
English: In the summer, Lu Huan and Ji Hou met in Chengdu.

古文：北戎伐齐，齐侯使乞师于郑。
现代文：这是由于纪侯前来商谈如何对付齐国灭纪的企图。北戎进攻齐国，齐国派人到郑国求援。
English: This was due to Ji Hou coming to discuss how to deal with Qi's attempt to exterminate Ji. Bei Rong attacked Qi, and Qi sent people to Zheng to ask for help.

古文：郑大子忽帅师救齐。
现代文：郑国的太子忽率领军队救援齐国。
English: The prince of Zheng suddenly led the army to rescue Qi.

古文：六月，大败戎师，获其二帅大良、少良，甲首三百，以献于齐。
现代文：六月，大败戎军，俘虏了它的两个主帅大良、少良，砍了带甲戎军三百人的脑袋，献给齐国。
English: In June, he defeated the army, captured its two commanders, Daliang and Shao Liang, and cut off the heads of three hundred people from the armored army, dedicating them to Qi.

古文：于是，诸侯之大夫戍齐，齐人馈之饩，使鲁为其班，后郑。
现代文：当时，诸侯的大夫在齐国防守边境，齐国人馈送他们食物，让鲁国来确定致送各国军队的先后次序。
English: At that time, the princes' doctors were defending the border in Qi. The people of Qi fed them with food, and let Lu determine the order in which the armies of various countries should be sent.

古文：郑忽以其有功也，怒，故有郎之师。
现代文：鲁国因依照周王朝所定的次序，把郑国排在后面。郑太子忽认为自己有功劳，很恼怒，所以四年之后就有郎地的战役。
English: Lu, in accordance with the order established by the Zhou Dynasty, put Zheng at the back of the queue. Prince Zheng suddenly thought that he had made a great contribution and was very angry, so four years later there was the battle of Langdi.

古文：公之未昏于齐也，齐侯欲以文姜妻郑大子忽。
现代文：桓公在没有向齐国求婚以前，齐僖公想把文姜嫁给太子忽。
English: Before Prince Kan proposed to Prince Qi, Prince Qi wanted to marry Wenjiang to the crown prince.

古文：大子忽辞，人问其故，大子曰： 人各有耦，齐大，非吾耦也。
现代文：太子忽辞谢，别人问为什么，太子忽说： 人人都有合适的配偶，齐国强大，不是我的配偶。
English: The prince suddenly declined, and when others asked why, the prince suddenly said, "Everyone has a suitable spouse. Qi Guo is powerful, but not my spouse."

古文：《诗》云： 自求多福。 
现代文：《诗》说： 求于自己，多受福德。 
English: "Poetry" says: Seek from yourself, receive more blessings.

古文：在我而已，大国何为？ 
现代文：靠我自己就是了，要大国干什么？ 
English: I can do it on my own. What do I need a big country for?

古文：君子曰： 善自为谋。 
现代文：君子说： 太子忽善于为自己打算。 
English: The gentleman said, "The prince is not good at thinking for himself.

古文：及其败戎师也，齐侯又请妻之，固辞。
现代文：等到他打败了戎军，齐僖公又请求把别的女子嫁给他。
English: After he defeated the army, Lord Qi again asked him to marry another woman.

古文：人问其故，大子曰： 无事于齐，吾犹不敢。
现代文：太子忽坚决辞谢，别人问为什么，太子忽说： 我没有为齐国做什么事，尚且不敢娶他们的女子。
English: The prince suddenly resolutely declined to thank them. When others asked why, the prince suddenly said, "I have not done anything for the state of Qi, yet I dare not marry their women."

古文：今以君命奔齐之急，而受室以归，是以师昏也。民其谓我何？ 
现代文：现在由于国君的命令急忙地到齐国解救危急，反而娶了妻子回国，这是利用战争而成婚，百姓将会对我有什么议论呢？ 
English: Now, due to the order of the sovereign, I hurried to Qi to relieve the crisis, but I married a wife and returned to my country. This is a marriage using war. What will the people say about me?

古文：遂辞诸郑伯。
现代文：于是就用郑庄公的名义辞谢了。
English: So I thanked him in the name of Zheng Zhuang.

古文：秋，大阅，简车马也。
现代文：秋天，阅兵，检阅车马。
English: Autumn, military parade, inspection of horses and chariots.

古文：九月丁卯，子同生。以大子生之礼举之，接以大牢，卜士负之，士妻食之。公与文姜、宗妇命之。
现代文：九月二十四日，儿子同出生，举行太子出生的礼仪：父亲接见儿子时用牛、羊、豕各一的太宰，用占卜选择士人背他，用占卜选择士人的妻子给他喂奶，桓公和文姜、同宗妇人为他取名字。
English: On September 24th, his son was born, and the ceremony of the birth of the prince was held: when the father received his son, he used a cow, a sheep, and a donkey each for the Dazai, used divination to choose a scholar to carry him, used divination to choose a scholar's wife to breastfeed him, and named him Huan Gong, Wen Jiang, and a woman of the same family.

古文：公问名于申繻。
现代文：桓公向申繻询问取名字的事。
English: Lord Kan asked Shinran about the name change.

古文：对曰： 名有五：有信，有义，有象，有假，有类。
现代文：申繻回答说： 取名有五种方式，有信，有义，有像，有假，有类。
English: Shen Rong replied: There are five ways to choose a name, including belief, righteousness, likeness, falsehood, and category.

古文：以名生为信，以德命为义，以类命为象，取于物为假，取于父为类。
现代文：用出生的某一种情况来命名是信，用祥瑞的字眼来命名是义，用相类似的字眼来命名是像，假借某种事物的名称来命名是假，借用和父亲有关的字眼来命名是类。
English: To name something according to the circumstances of birth is letter, to name something according to the words of Xiang Rui is righteousness, to name something according to the similar words is image, to name something according to the names of things is false, and to name something according to the words of one's father is class.

古文：不以国，不以官，不以山川，不以隐疾，不以畜牲，不以器币。
现代文：命名不用国名，不用官名，不用山川名，不用疾病名，不用牲畜名，不用器物礼品名。
English: The naming does not use the name of the country, the name of the official, the name of the mountain, the name of the disease, the name of the livestock, or the name of the gift.

古文：周人以讳事神，名终将讳之。
现代文：周朝人用避讳来奉事神明，名，在死了以后就要避讳。
English: The people of the Zhou Dynasty used shyness to serve the gods, and they should shun shyness after death.

古文：故以国则废名，以官则废职，以山川则废主，以畜牲则废祀，以器币则废礼。
现代文：所以用国名命名，就会废除人名，用官名命名就会改变官称，用山川命名就会改变山川的神名，用牲畜命名就会废除祭祀，用器物礼品命名就会废除礼仪。
English: Therefore, naming with the name of the country will abolish the name of the person, naming with the name of the government will change the official title, naming with the name of the mountain will change the name of the mountain god, naming with the name of the livestock will abolish the sacrifice, and naming with the name of the gift will abolish the etiquette.

古文：晋以僖侯废司徒，宋以武公废司空，先君献、武废二山，是以大物不可以命。 
现代文：晋国因为僖公而废除司徒之官，宋国因为武公而废除司空之官名，我国因为先君献公、武公而废除具山、敖山二山之名，所以大的事物不可以用来命名。 
English: Jin abolished the official title of Shitou because of Shigong, Song abolished the official title of Shikong because of Wu, and our country abolished the names of Gushan and Shaoshan because of the dedication of our forefathers and their military exploits. Therefore, big things should not be named.

古文：公曰： 是其生也，与吾同物，命之曰同。 
现代文：桓公说： 这孩子的出生，和我在同一个干支，把他命名叫做同。 
English: Prince Kan said, "This child was born in the same zodiac as me, so I named him Tong.

古文：冬，纪侯来朝，请王命以求成于齐，公告不能。
现代文：冬季，纪侯前来朝见，请求鲁国代纪国取得周天子的命令去向齐国求和。桓公告诉他说自己做不到。
English: In the winter, Ji Hou came to see the emperor and asked Lu to obtain Zhou Tianzi's order to sue for peace from Qi. Huan Gong told him that he could not do it.

