古文：赵昌言，字仲谟，汾州孝义人。
现代文：赵昌言字仲谟，汾州孝义人。
English: Zhao Changyan's character is Zhong Mu, and Zhangzhou's is Xiaoyi Ren.

古文：父叡，从事使府，太宗尹开封，选为雍丘、太康二县令，后终安、申观察判官。
现代文：其父赵睿又，曾任使府从事，太宗任开封尹时，先任他为雍丘、太康二县令，后来官至安、申观察判官。
English: His father, Zhao Rui, was also a diplomat, and when Emperor Taizong was in charge of opening up the country, he first appointed him as the governor of Yongqiu and Taikang counties, and later as the governor of Zhi'an and the judge of Shen observation.

古文：昌言少有大志，赵逢、高锡、寇准皆称许之。
现代文：昌言年轻时有远大志向，赵逢、高锡、寇准都称赞他。
English: When he was young, Changyan had lofty ambitions. Zhao Feng, Gao Xi, and Kou Jun all praised him.

古文：太平兴国三年，举进士，文思甚敏，有声于场屋，为贡部首荐。
现代文：太平兴国三年，考中进士，文思非常敏捷，在考场中有声望，成为贡部的首荐。
English: Taiping Xingguo three years, the middle school entrance examination, Wensi is very agile, has a reputation in the examination hall, and has become the first recommendation of the tribute department.

古文：廷试日，太宗见其辞气俊辩，又睹其父名，谓左右曰： 是尝为东畿宰，朕之生辰，必献诗百韵为寿，善训其子，亦为可嘉也。 擢置甲科，为将作监丞，通判鄂州。
现代文：廷试那天，太宗见他辞气俊辩，又看到他父亲的名字，对身边的人说： 这人曾经任东畿宰，我的生日，他必定献上百韵诗歌祝寿，善于训导儿子，也可喜啊。 提拔录在甲科，授任将作监丞，通判鄂州。
English: On the day of the imperial examination, Emperor Taizong saw that he had resigned from the imperial court, and when he saw his father's name, he said to the people around him, "This man used to be the governor of East Kii Province, and on my birthday, he will surely present a hundred rhymes to celebrate my birthday, and he is good at disciplining his son.

古文：拜右拾遗、直史馆，赐绯鱼。
现代文：授任右拾遗、直史馆，赐给绯鱼袋。
English: Awarded the right to collect relics, direct history museum, given to the carp bag.

古文：选为荆湖转运副使，迁右补阙，会省副职，改知青州。
现代文：选任为荆湖转运副使，升为右补阙，正好朝廷减少副职，改任知青州。
English: He was appointed as the vice-envoy of Jinghu transshipment and promoted to the right-hand vice-envoy. Just as the imperial court reduced the vice-position, he was reassigned to Zhicheng and Qingzhou.

古文：入拜职方员外郎，知制诰，预修《文苑英华》。
现代文：入朝任职方员外郎，主持制诰，参预修撰《文苑英华》。
English: Gairo, an official of the imperial court, presided over the preparation of the imperial edict and participated in the preparation of "Wen Yuan Yinghua."

古文：雍熙初，加屯田郎中。
现代文：雍熙初年，加任屯田郎中。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongxi, he was appointed Tonden roju.

古文：明年，同知贡举，俄出知天雄军。
现代文：第二年，与别的大臣共同主持贡举，不久出京任知天雄军。
English: In the second year, he presided over the tribute together with other ministers, and soon left for Beijing as the leader of the Chitenai army.

古文：时曹彬、崔彦进、米信失律于歧沟，昌言遣观察支使郑蒙上疏，请诛彬等。
现代文：当时曹彬、崔彦进、米信在歧沟失败，昌言派观察支使郑蒙上疏，请求诛杀曹彬等人。
English: At that time, Cao Bin, Cui Yanjin, and Yixin failed in the gap. Zheng Meng, the observer of the Changyan faction, requested the killing of Cao Bin and others.

古文：优诏褒答，召拜御史中丞。
现代文：皇帝下诏表扬答复，召入京任御史中丞。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict praising his reply and summoned him to Beijing to serve as the imperial secretary.

古文：太宗宴金明池，特召预焉。
现代文：太宗在金明池举行宴会，特地召他参加。
English: Emperor Taizong held a banquet at Jinming Pool and specially invited him to attend.

古文：宪官从宴，自昌言始也。
现代文：检察官侍从皇上宴会，从昌言开始。
English: The procurator attends the emperor's banquet, beginning with Changyan.

古文：河东用兵，枢密副使张宏循默守位，昌言多条上边事，太宗即以昌言为左谏议大夫，代宏为枢密副使，迁工部侍郎。
现代文：朝廷在河朔用兵，枢密副使张宏因循沉默守位而已，昌言常分条上奏边事，太宗就任命昌言为左谏议大夫，代替张宏任枢密副使，升为工部侍郎。
English: The imperial court used soldiers in Hexuo, the vice-envoy of the privy council, Zhang Hong, only kept his position because of his silence. Changyan was often involved in side issues. Emperor Taizong appointed Changyan as the doctor of the left imperial council, replaced Zhang Hong as the vice-envoy of the privy council, and was promoted to the chamberlain of the work department.

古文：时盐铁副使陈象舆与昌言善，知制诰胡旦、度支副使董俨皆昌言同年，右正言梁颢尝在大名幕下。
现代文：当时盐铁副使陈象舆与昌言友善，知制诰胡旦、度支副使董俨都与昌言是同年进士，右正言梁颢曾经在大名幕府中。
English: At that time, the vice minister of salt and iron, Chen Xiangwu, was friendly with Changyan, the vice minister of intellectual affairs, Zhaohutan, and the vice minister of finance, Dong Xuan, were both promoted in the same year as Changyan, and the vice minister of justice, Liang Xuan, was once in the daimyo shogunate.

古文：四人者，日夕会昌言之第。
现代文：四人日夜在昌言家聚会。京城人说： 陈三更，董半夜。 
English: The four of them gathered at Changyan's house day and night. The people of Beijing said: Chen Sancheng, Dong midnight.

古文：京师为之语曰： 陈三更，董半夜。 有佣书翟颍，性险诞，与旦狎，旦为作大言之辞，使颍上之，为颍改姓名马周，以为唐马周复出也。
现代文：有个受雇抄写东西的翟颍，为人险诞，与胡旦亲近，胡旦替他写大言自负的文章，让他呈给皇帝，替他改姓名为马周，以为是唐朝马周复出。
English: There was a clerk who was hired to copy things. He was dangerous and close to Hudan. Hudan wrote pompous articles for him and asked him to present them to the emperor. He changed his name to Ma Zhou, thinking that it was the Tang Dynasty when Ma Zhou made a comeback.

古文：其言多毁时政，自荐为大臣，及历举数十人皆公辅器，期昌言为内应。
现代文：他的言论多诋毁时政，自荐为大臣，列举数十人都是公辅人才，希望昌言作为内应。
English: Most of his remarks denigrate the current government, recommend himself as a minister, list dozens of people who are public and auxiliary talents, and hope that Changyan will serve as a middleman.

古文：陈王尹开封，廉知以闻，诏捕颍系狱，鞠之，尽得其状。
现代文：陈王任开封尹，侦知此事告诉皇上，诏令捕捉翟颍押在监狱里，审讯后，得到全部实情。
English: Chen Wangren opened the seal of Yin, told the emperor about the matter, and ordered to arrest and detain in prison. After the interrogation, he got all the facts.

古文：昌言坐贬崇信军节度行军司马，颍仗脊黥面，流海岛，禁锢终身。
现代文：昌言因罪被贬为崇信军节度行军司马，翟颍被杖打背部，在脸上刺字，流放到海岛，禁锢终身。
English: For his crime, Changyan was relegated to being the steward of the festival march of the Chongxin Army, beaten on the back with a cane, tattooed on his face, exiled to an island, and imprisoned for life.

古文：初，太宗厚遇昌言，垂欲相之。
现代文：当初，太宗对待昌言有厚爱，即将用他为相。
English: At first, Emperor Taizong treated Changyan with great affection and was about to use him as a consort.

古文：赵普以勋旧复入，晋昌言刚戾，乃相吕蒙正。
现代文：赵普以勋旧大臣重新入朝，厌恶昌言的刚愎自用，于是任命吕蒙正为宰相。
English: Zhao Pu Yixun, a former minister, re-entered the imperial court. He detested Changyan's self-serving arrogance, and appointed Lv Mengzheng as prime minister.

古文：裁数月，会有颍狱，普以昌言树党，再劝太宗诛之，太宗特宽焉。
现代文：几个月后，正遇翟颍一案，赵普认为昌言树立朋党，多次劝太宗诛杀他，太宗特地宽恕了他。
English: A few months later, Zhao Pu believed that Changyan had set up a crony party, and repeatedly persuaded Emperor Taizong to kill him. Emperor Taizong specifically pardoned him.

古文：淳化二年，起昌言知蔡州，逾年，召拜右谏议大夫。
现代文：淳化二年，起用昌言任知蔡州，过了一年，召入朝授任右谏议大夫。
English: In the second year of the Chunhua era, Changyan was appointed to Chizhou, and a year later, he was summoned to the court to be appointed as the doctor of the Right Division of the Legislative Yuan.

古文：或议驰茶盐禁，以省转漕。
现代文：有人建议放松茶盐之禁，以减少漕运。
English: Some people suggested relaxing the ban on tea and salt to reduce the number of rowing boats.

古文：命昌言为江淮、两浙制置茶盐使，昌言极言非便，太宗不纳，趣昌言往。
现代文：任命昌言为江淮、两浙处置茶盐使，昌言极力陈说不便，太宗不听，催促昌言赴任。
English: Changyan was appointed as the envoy of the Jianghuai and the two Zhejiang provinces to deal with tea and salt. Changyan tried his best to say that it was inconvenient, but Taizong did not listen and urged Changyan to take up the post.

古文：昌言固执如初。即以户部副使雷有终代之，卒以无利而罢。
现代文：昌言仍固执己见，朝廷就以户部副使雷有终代替他，最终因无利而罢。
English: Changyan was still stubborn, and the imperial court finally replaced him with Lei You, the deputy chief of the Household Division, but eventually dismissed him for being unprofitable.

古文：昌言复知天雄军，赐钱二百万。
现代文：昌言重任知天雄军，赐钱二百万。
English: Changyan was given the important task of knowing Tianxiong's army, and was given two million yuan.

古文：大河贯府境，豪民峙刍茭图利，诱奸人潜穴堤防，岁仍决溢。
现代文：大河贯穿府境，豪民依赖茭草获利，诱使奸人在堤上秘密挖草成洞，每年河水决口。
English: A large river runs through the prefectural territory. Wealthy people rely on weeds to make a profit, and induce crooks to secretly dig weeds into holes on the embankment. Every year, the river breaks.

古文：昌言知之。
现代文：昌言知道这一情况。
English: Changyan is aware of this situation.

古文：一日，堤吏告急，命径取豪家廥积以给用，自是无敢为奸利者。
现代文：一天，堤吏告急，昌言命令直接取豪家积聚的干草以供使用，从此没有敢谋取奸利的人。
English: One day, the embankment official was in a hurry, and Changyan ordered to directly take the hay accumulated by the rich family for use. From then on, no one dared to seek profits.

古文：属澶州河决，流入御河，涨溢浸府城，昌言籍府兵负土增堤，数不及千，乃索禁卒佐役，皆偃蹇不进。
现代文：所属澶州河水决口，流入御河，河水涨溢出堤淹了府城，昌言征派府兵背土增固堤防，人数不满一千，于是搜集禁卒佐役，都迟延不进。
English: The Zhangzhou River, to which he belonged, burst its banks and flowed into the Yihe River. The rising water overflowed the dike and flooded the capital city. Changyan conscripted soldiers from the capital to reinforce the dike. The number of soldiers was less than a thousand, so the collection of banned soldiers and aides-de-camp was delayed.

古文：昌言怒曰： 府城将垫，人民且溺，汝辈食厚禄，欲坐观耶？
现代文：昌言怒道： 府城即将被淹，百姓即将溺死，你们平日拿国家厚禄，打算坐视不救吗？
English: Changyan angrily said, "The prefectural capital is about to be flooded, and the people are about to drown. Do you plan to sit back and do nothing while you take the state's generous stipend?

古文：敢不从命者斩。 众股慄赴役，不浃旬城完。
现代文：敢不服从命令者斩。 这些人害怕得双腿发抖前去工地，不过十天府城得以保全。
English: Those who dared to disobey the order were beheaded. These people were afraid to go to the construction site with trembling legs, but the prefecture was preserved in ten days.

古文：太宗手诏褒谕之，召拜给事中、参知政事，俾乘疾置以入，即赴中书。
现代文：太宗下手诏褒奖他，召入朝授任给事中、参知政事，让他乘马快速入京，立即到中书省。
English: Emperor Taizong issued an imperial edict praising him, calling him to be appointed to the post of vice-premier and the post of vice-governor, and ordering him to ride a horse to Beijing and immediately go to the Ministry of Literature.

古文：时京城连雨，昌言请出厩马分牧外郡。
现代文：当时京城接连下雨，昌言建议把厩马分给外郡养牧。
English: At that time, it rained in succession in Beijing, and Changyan suggested that the stable horses be distributed to other counties for herding.

古文：或以盛秋备敌，马不可阙。
现代文：有人认为秋天防敌，不可缺马。
English: Some people think that horses are indispensable for defense against enemies in autumn.

古文：昌言曰： 塞下积水，敌必不至。 太宗从之。
现代文：昌言说： 边塞积有大水，敌人一定不来。 太宗听从了。
English: Changyan said: There is a lot of water in the border fortress, the enemy will not come. Taizong obeyed.

古文：未几，王小波、李顺构乱于蜀，议遣大臣抚慰。
现代文：不久，王小波、李顺在四川构乱，朝廷打算派遣大臣前去抚慰。
English: Soon after, Wang Xiaobo and Li Shun instigated a riot in Sichuan, and the imperial court planned to send a minister to comfort them.

古文：昌言独请发兵，无使滋蔓，廷论未决。
现代文：昌言却请求发兵讨伐，不使叛乱滋延，朝廷议论未决。
English: Changyan, however, requested that troops be sent to fight the rebellion, so that it would not spread, but the Imperial Court was undecided.

古文：会嘉、眉连陷，始命王继恩等分路进讨。
现代文：正好嘉州、眉州接连失陷，才命令王继恩等人分路进讨。
English: It was precisely when Jiazhou and Meizhou fell one after another that Wang Jian and others were ordered to go their separate ways.

古文：昌言摄祭太庙，宿斋中，因召对滋福殿，复赞兵计，遂遣使督继恩战。
现代文：昌言主持祭祀太庙，宿在太庙中，皇帝趁机在滋福殿召见他，又谋划用兵之计，于是派使者督促继恩作战。
English: Changyan presided over the rituals of the Great Temple, and stayed in the Great Temple. The emperor took the opportunity to summon him at the Jifu Hall, and also planned to use troops, so he sent an envoy to urge the successor to fight.

古文：继恩御众寡术，余寇未殄，握兵留成都，士无斗志，郡县复有陷者。
现代文：继恩统率无术，余敌未灭，握兵留在成都，军队没有斗志，郡县又有重新失陷的。
English: There is no way to follow the leadership of En, the remaining enemies have not been eliminated, the troops remain in Chengdu, the army has no fighting spirit, and the county has lost again.

古文：太宗意颇厌兵，召昌言谓曰： 西川本自一国，太祖平之，讫今三十年矣。 昌言知意，即前指画攻取之策。
现代文：太宗心里非常厌恶战争，召来昌言对他说： 西川本来是一个国家，太祖平定到今天已三十年了。 昌言知道太宗的心意，就上前谋划攻取之策。
English: Emperor Taizong had a strong aversion to war, and summoned Changyan to say to him, "Nishikawa was originally a country, but it has been thirty years since Emperor Taizong conquered it, and Changyan knew Emperor Taizong's intentions, so he went forward to plan how to conquer it.

古文：太宗喜，命昌言为川峡五十二州招安行营马步军都部署。
现代文：太宗高兴，任命昌言为川峡五十二州招安行营马步军都部署。
English: Taizong was pleased and appointed Changyan to be deployed to the 52 states of the Sichuan Gorge to recruit and encamp horse-mounted troops.

古文：昌言恳辞，敦谕不许，赐精铠、良马、白金五千两，别赐手札数幅，皆讨贼方略。
现代文：昌言恳切谢绝，诏令不允许，赐给他精铠、良马，白金五千两，另外赐给手令几幅，都是讨贼的方略。
English: Changyan earnestly declined, which was not allowed by the edict, and he was given a fine horse, a fine horse, and five thousand taels of platinum, and he was also given several pieces of the edict, all of which were strategies to catch the thief.

古文：自继恩以下，并受节度。
现代文：自继恩以下，都受他节制。
English: Even his successors were subject to his restraint.

古文：既行，有奏昌言无嗣，鼻折山根，颇有反相，不宜遣握兵入蜀。
现代文：出发后，有人奏说昌言没有后代，鼻折山根，很有反相，不宜派去率兵入蜀。
English: After the departure, someone said that Changyan had no descendants, his nose broke the mountain root, he was very contrary, and it was not appropriate to send his soldiers to Shu.

古文：从旬日，召宰相于北苑门曰： 昨令昌言入蜀，朕思之有所未便。
现代文：十天后，召宰相到北苑门说： 前几天命令昌言入蜀，我考虑后有所不便。
English: Ten days later, he summoned the prime minister to the Beiyuan Gate and said, "I ordered Changyan to enter Shu a few days ago, but it was inconvenient after I thought about it.

古文：且蜀贼小丑，昌言大臣，未易前进。
现代文：况且四川乱贼是小丑，昌言是大臣，不宜前进。
English: Moreover, the Sichuan bandits are clowns, and Changyan is a minister, so it is not appropriate to advance.

古文：且令驻凤翔，止遣内侍卫绍钦赍手书指挥军事，亦可济也。 诏书追及，昌言已至凤州，留候馆百余日。
现代文：暂且命令他驻在凤翔，只派内侍卫绍钦拿着手令指挥军事，也可成功。 诏书追到，昌言已经到了凤州，留在公馆一百多天。
English: For the time being, he was ordered to stay in Fengxiang, but he could have been successful if he had only sent his bodyguard, Shao Qin, with orders to take command of the military. When the edict arrived, Changyan had already arrived in Fengzhou and stayed in the mansion for more than a hundred days.

古文：贼平，改户部侍郎，罢政事，知凤翔府。
现代文：叛乱平定后，改任户部侍郎，罢去参知政事。
English: After the rebellion was quelled, he was reassigned to the position of household steward and removed from his position to participate in political affairs.

古文：徙澶、泾、延三州。
现代文：任知凤翔府，改任知澶州、知泾州、知延州。
English: He was appointed to Chifeng Xiangfu, and later to Chifeng Prefecture, Chifeng Prefecture, Chifeng Prefecture, and Chiyan Prefecture.

古文：真宗即位，迁兵部侍郎、知陕州，表求还京，不许。
现代文：真宗即皇帝位，升任兵部侍郎、知陕州，上表请求回京，朝廷不允许。
English: Shinshu, that is, the emperor, was promoted to the position of the attendant of the military department, Chisen Shanzhou, and requested to return to Beijing, which was not allowed by the imperial court.

古文：未几，移知永兴军。
现代文：不久，改任知永兴军。
English: Soon, he was reassigned to the Chiyonaga army.

古文：咸平三年，与吕蒙正、寇准同召，以本官兼御史中丞、知审官院。
现代文：咸平三年，与吕蒙正、寇准一同被召回，以本官兼任御史中丞、知审官院。
English: In the third year of Xianping, he was recalled together with Lü Mengzheng and Kou Jun, and he concurrently served as the Vice-Minister of History and the Court of Chancery.

古文：有言门资官不宜任亲民，昌言手疏，以才不才在人，岂以寒隽世家为限，遂罢其议。
现代文：有人认为门资官不宜任地方官，昌言上疏，认为才与不才在乎人，岂能以寒进或世家限制，于是停止这个议论。
English: Some people think that it is not appropriate for a doorkeeper to be a local official, and that it is not wise to say so. They think that it does not matter who is in charge and who is not, and that it can not be limited by coldness or family, so stop this discussion.

古文：加工部尚书，仍兼中丞。
现代文：加任工部尚书，仍兼中丞。
English: He was also appointed to the post of Shosho of the Ministry of Works, and remained a chujo.

古文：先时，多遣台吏巡察群臣逾越法式者，昌言建议请准故事，令左右巡使分领之。会知审刑院赵安仁、判大理寺韩国华断狱失中解职，昌言因上言： 详断官宜加慎择，自今有议刑不当，严示惩罚，授以远官，若有罪被问不即引伏者，许令追摄。
现代文：从前，朝廷常派台吏巡察郡臣逾越法度者，昌言建议请按照旧例，令左右巡使分别兼任此事，正好知审刑院赵安仁、判大理寺韩国华判案不公被解除职务，昌言于是上言： 审刑官应当慎重选择，从今以后，有判刑不当者，应严加惩罚，授任远地做官职，如果有罪被审不立即引伏的，允许追捕。
English: In the past, the imperial court often sent officials from Taiwan to inspect county officials who had violated the law. Changyan suggested that, in accordance with the old practice, the left and right inspectors should be assigned to the matter separately. Just knowing that Zhao Anren of the Criminal Court and Han Hanhua of the Dali Temple were unfairly dismissed, Changyan then said: The criminal judges should be carefully selected. From now on, those who have been sentenced improperly should be severely punished, assigned to official positions far away, and if the guilty person is not immediately arrested, allowed to be pursued.

古文：又天下大辟断讫，皆录款闻奏，付刑部详覆，用刑乖理者皆行按劾。
现代文：再者天下大辟罪审判完，都分款录写上报，交付刑部详复，用刑违背理法者都应弹劾。
English: In addition, after the trial of the world's major crimes has been completed, all the paragraphs are recorded and reported, and the detailed report is submitted to the criminal department. Those who use punishment to violate the law should be impeached.

古文：惟开封府未尝奏案，或断狱有失，止罪元勘官吏，知府、判官、推官、检法官皆不及责，则何以辨明枉滥，表则方夏？
现代文：只有开封府从未上报案件，如果审判有失，只治原勘官员的罪，知府、判官、推官、检法官都未受责罚，怎么辨明枉屈，为全国表率呢？
English: Only the Kaifeng government never reported the case. If the trial is flawed, and only the original investigation officials are punished, and the prefectural government, judges, supervisors, and procurators are not punished, how can we identify wrongdoing and set an example for the whole country?

古文：望自今如外州例施行。 从之。
现代文：希望从今以后按外州常例执行。 
English: It is hoped that from now on, this will be carried out in accordance with common practice in other states.

古文：会孟州民常德方讼临津尉任懿以贿登第，事下御史，乃知举王钦若受之，昌言以闻。
现代文：朝廷采纳这一意见。正好孟州百姓常德方告临津尉以行贿登第，事情交付御史审讯，才得知是知举王钦若受贿，昌言禀告皇上。
English: This opinion was accepted by the Imperial Court. It so happened that the people of Mengzhou often complained to the German side that Lieutenant Lin Jin had bribed his way to the throne, and the matter was referred to the Imperial Court for trial. It was only then that it was learned that Wang Qin had knowingly accepted a bribe, and Changyan reported this to the Emperor.

古文：钦若自诉，诏刑昺覆按，坐昌言故入，夺官，贬安远军行军司马，移武胜军。
现代文：钦若上诉自辩，诏令邢籨复审，昌言因故意歪曲事实，被夺去官职，贬为安远军行军司马，改到武胜军。
English: Qin Ruo appealed for self-defense, the imperial edict ordered a retrial, and Changyan was deprived of his official position for deliberately distorting the facts, demoted to the marching steward of the Anduan Army, and changed to the victorious army.

古文：景德初，拜刑部侍郎。
现代文：景德初年，授任刑部侍郎。
English: In the first year of King Jingde's reign, he was appointed as a constable of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：求兼三馆职，命判尚书都省。
现代文：请求兼任三馆职务，任命为判尚书都省。
English: He was asked to concurrently hold the three posts, and was appointed as the judge of Shang Shudu Province.

古文：真宗幸澶渊，以盟津居要，增屯兵，命知河阳。
现代文：真宗到澶渊，因为盟津居险要之地，增加驻屯部队，任命他为知河阳。
English: Zhen Zong went to Qianyuan, because Meitu lived in a dangerous place, increased the garrison troops, and appointed him as the leader of Chihayang.

古文：历知天雄军府。
现代文：历任知天雄军府。
English: Successive heads of the Chitenoyu Military Government.

古文：境内有小盗，昌言榜谕： 能告执者给赏，牙吏即迁职。 枢密使王继英以为小盗不当擅为赏格，乃诏昌言易其榜，有劳者俟朝旨。
现代文：境内有小盗，昌言传榜告示： 能告发盗贼者给赏，牙使立即升职。 枢密使王继英认为对付小盗不应擅自悬赏，于是诏令昌言改变榜文，有劳者等候朝旨。
English: There were petty thieves in the territory, and Changyan announced through a poster: If you can give a reward to those who report the thieves, the dentist will be promoted immediately. The privy councilor Wang Jieying believed that the reward should not be offered without authorization to deal with the petty thieves, so he ordered Changyan to change the poster, and the workers waited for the imperial order.

古文：未几，徙知镇州，迁户部侍郎。
现代文：不久，改任知镇州，升为户部侍郎。
English: Soon, he was reassigned to Chizhen Prefecture and promoted to Household Attendant.

古文：大中祥符二年，卒，年六十五。
现代文：大中祥符二年，去世，终年六十五岁。
English: He died two years into his junior high school career, at the age of 65.

古文：赠吏部尚书，谥曰景肃。
现代文：追赠吏部尚书，赐谥号为 景肃 。
English: He posthumously bestowed the official title of Shang Shu and the posthumous title of Jingshu.

古文：录其子庆嗣为国子监丞，赋禄终丧。
现代文：录用他的儿子庆嗣为国子监丞，给他俸禄让他守丧满期。
English: He appointed his son, Qing Zi, as the son-in-law of the state, and gave him a salary so that he could complete his term of office.

古文：侄孙允明同学究出身。
现代文：侄孙允明为同学究出身。
English: His nephew, Sun Yunming, is a graduate of the same school.

古文：昌言喜推奖后进，掌漕湖外时，李沆通判潭州，昌言谓有台辅之量，表闻于朝。
现代文：昌言喜欢提拔后进，在荆湖掌管漕运时，李沆任潭州通判，昌言认为他有宰相之才，上表禀告朝廷。
English: Changyan liked to be promoted later. When he was in charge of rowing in Jinghu Lake, Li Qian served as the judge of Tanzhou. Changyan thought that he had the talent of the prime minister, and reported to the court.

古文：王旦宰岳州平江，昌言一见，识其远大，以女妻之，后皆为贤相。
现代文：王旦主管岳州平江，昌言一见他，识其志向远大，把女儿嫁给他，后来两人都是贤明宰相。
English: Wang Dan was in charge of Yuezhou Pingjiang. When Changyan saw him, he knew that his ambition was great and married his daughter to him. Later, both of them were wise prime ministers.

古文：王禹偁自卑秩擢词职，亦昌言所荐也。
现代文：王禹翶从小官升为词职，也是昌言推荐的。
English: Wang Ufan was also recommended by Changyan when he was promoted from a petty official to the post of secretary.

古文：昌言强力尚气概，当官无所顾避，所至以威断立名，虽屡经摈斥，未尝少自抑损。
现代文：昌言好权强尚气概，当官无所顾避，所到各地以威断闻名，虽然多次遭受贬斥，从未稍稍抑损自己的威断。
English: He is a strong-willed and powerful man. He has no scruples when it comes to authority. He is known to be domineering wherever he goes. Although he has been reprimanded many times, he has never curbed his domineering ways.

古文：方回子怀玉，王钦若婿，赐进士及第，大理寺丞，秘书校理。
现代文：但是刚愎故纵，对僚吏态度傲慢，当时舆论因此看不起他。
English: But public opinion at the time looked down on him because of his stubbornness and arrogant attitude towards his colleagues.

古文：李惟清，字直臣，下邑人。
现代文：庆嗣官至太子洗马。李惟清字直臣，下邑人。
English: He held various positions from Keiji official to Prince Saima. Li Weiqing was called Naosuke, and was from the lower part of the city.

古文：父仲行，为章丘簿，因徙家焉。
现代文：其父李仲行，任章丘主簿，于是迁家到章丘。
English: His father, Li Zhongxing, was the chief accountant of Zhangqiu, so the family moved to Zhangqiu.

古文：惟清，开宝中，以三史解褐涪陵尉。
现代文：惟清在开宝年间，以三史授任涪陵尉。
English: However, during the Kaibao era, the Qing Dynasty appointed him as the commander of the imperial mausoleum with the rank of Sanshi.

古文：蜀民尚淫祀，病不疗治，听于巫觋，惟清擒大巫笞之，民以为及祸。
现代文：四川百姓崇尚巫祀，有病不治疗，听命于巫士，惟清捉来大巫鞭打，百姓认为将会有祸。
English: The people of Sichuan worship witchcraft, do not treat the sick, and obey the orders of witches. However, if a witch is caught and whipped, the people believe that there will be a disaster.

古文：他日又加箠焉，民知不神。
现代文：后来又鞭打这个大巫，百姓知道巫术不灵。
English: Later, they whipped the sorcerer, so that the people would know that sorcery does not work.

古文：然后教以医药，稍变风俗。
现代文：然后教给百姓医药知识，风俗稍稍变迁。
English: Then they taught medicine to the people, and the customs changed slightly.

古文：时遣宦官督输造船木，纵恣不法，惟清奏杀之，由是知名。
现代文：当时朝廷派遣宦官督促输送造船用的木材，宦官故纵不守法，惟清上奏杀死他，从此知名。
English: At that time, the imperial court dispatched a eunuch to supervise the transportation of timber for shipbuilding. The eunuch did not follow the law, but Qing Shangso killed him, and he has been famous ever since.

古文：秩满，迁大理寺丞。
现代文：任期满后，升任大理寺丞。
English: After his term of office expired, he was promoted to Dariterajo.

古文：太平兴国三年，迁为荆湖北路转运判官。
现代文：太平兴国三年，升为荆湖北路转运判官。
English: In the third year of Taiping Xingguo, he was promoted to the judge of Jinghu North Road.

古文：五年，改左赞善大夫，充转运副使，升正使，就改监察御史，兼总南路。
现代文：太平兴国五年，改任左赞善大夫，充任转运副使，升为正使，就地改任监察御史，总管南路。
English: In the fifth year of Taiping Xingguo, he was reappointed as Zuo Zanzan Doctor, served as deputy envoy for transportation, was promoted to chief envoy, and was reappointed as inspector of history and general manager of South Road.

古文：尝入奏事，太宗问曰： 荆湖累年丰稔，又无徭役，民间苏否？ 惟清曰： 臣见官卖盐斤为钱六十四，民以三数斗稻价，方可买一斤。 。
现代文：曾经入朝奏事，太宗问他 ：荆湖连年丰收，又没有徭役，民间富裕吗？ 惟清说 ：我看见官卖盐每斤价钱六十四文钱，百姓要卖三数斗稻谷的价钱，才能买一斤盐。 
English: Once, when he was reporting to the emperor, Taizong asked him, "Jinghu has a bumper harvest year after year, but there is no overseer, are the people rich?" Woqing said, "I saw that the government sold salt at 64 mon per kilogram, while the people had to sell rice at the price of several dozen buckets to buy one kilogram of salt."

古文：乃诏斤减十钱。
现代文：于是诏令盐价每斤减十钱。
English: As a result, the emperor decreed that the price of salt would be reduced by ten yuan per catty.

古文：徙京西转运使，入为度支判官，改主客员外郎。
现代文：转任京西转运使，入朝任度支判官。改任主客员外郎。
English: He was transferred to the post of West Beijing transit envoy, and when he entered the imperial court, he was assigned to the post of deputy magistrate.

古文：雍熙三年，大举取幽州，惟清以为兵食未丰，不可轻动。
现代文：雍熙三年，朝廷发兵大举进攻幽州，惟清认为军队粮食不充足，不可轻动。
English: In the third year of the reign of Yongxi, the imperial court sent troops to attack Yuzhou in a big way. However, the Qing Dynasty believed that the army did not have enough food and should not move lightly.

古文：朝廷业已兴师，奏入不报。判度支许仲宣建议通盐法，以卖盐岁课赋于乡村，与户税均纳。
现代文：朝廷已经兴师，他的奏章入宫后未报送皇上，判度支许仲宣建议变通盐法，以卖盐每年的课收数摊给乡村百姓，与户税一同交纳。
English: The imperial court had already appointed a teacher, but his report was not reported to the emperor after he entered the palace. The judge supported Zhong Xuan's suggestion to change the salt method and distribute the annual salt sales revenue to the rural people and pay it together with the household tax.

古文：惟清奉诏往荆湖诸路详定，奏言以盐配民非便，遂罢。
现代文：惟清奉诏前往荆湖各地审定此法，上奏说明以盐配民不方便，于是停止。
English: However, Qing Bonghao went to various parts of Jinghu to validate this method, and explained that it was inconvenient to distribute salt to the people, so it was stopped.

古文：使还，上又问民间苦乐不均事，惟清言： 前在荆湖，民市清酒务官酿转鬻者，斗给耗二升，今三司给一升，民多他图，而岁课甚减。 诏复其旧。
现代文：出使回朝，皇上又问他民间苦乐不均的情况，惟清说： 以前我在荆湖时，百姓卖清酒由官酿转卖的，每斗给耗粮二升，现在三司府只给一升，百姓多图其他的好处，而每年税收大减。 诏令恢复旧价。
English: On his way back to the imperial court, the emperor also asked him about the uneven distribution of bitterness among the people, but he said clearly: When I was in Jinghu, the people used to sell sake brewed by the government and resold, and they were given two liters of grain per bucket, but now the three departments only give one liter, and the people get more other benefits, while the annual tax is greatly reduced.

古文：未几，出为京东转运使。
现代文：不久出京任京东转运使。
English: Soon after, he went to Beijing to serve as a transfer envoy for JD.com.

古文：会募丁壮为义军，惟清曰： 若是，天下不耕矣。 三上疏谏，繇是独选河北，而余路悉罢。
现代文：正好招募壮丁为义军，惟清说： 如果这样，天下不再耕种了。 三次上疏谏阻，因此只从河北招壮丁，而其余各地都停招。
English: It was time to recruit able-bodied young men for the rebel army, but Wu Qing said: "If this happens, there will be no more farming in the world." Three times, he was thwarted, so he only recruited able-bodied young men from Hebei, and stopped recruiting from the rest of the country.

古文：擢屯田郎中、度支副使。
现代文：提升为屯田郎中、度支副使。
English: He was promoted to Tonden no roju (Junior Secretary of Tonden) and Doushitsuji (Deputy Chief of the General Staff).

古文：端拱初，迁右谏议大夫，历户部使，改度支使。
现代文：端拱初年，升任右谏议大夫，历任户部使，改任度支使。
English: In the first year of the end of the arch, he was promoted to the doctor of the right side of the eaves, successively appointed to the household envoy, and reappointed to the special envoy.

古文：会遣使河朔治方田，大发兵。
现代文：恰遇朝廷派遣使者到河朔治理方田，大举发兵。
English: It just so happened that the imperial court sent an emissary to govern Fang Tian in Hexuo, and sent troops in large numbers.

古文：惟清以盛春妨农，恳求罢废。
现代文：惟清认为仲春妨碍农事，恳求罢废。
English: However, Qing believed that Zhongchun's move would hinder agricultural affairs, and implored him to cancel the move.

古文：太宗曰： 兵夫已发矣。
现代文：太宗说 ：兵夫已经出发了，只令修治边城而已。 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "The soldiers have already left, and I have only been ordered to repair the border city."

古文：止令完治边城而已。 淳化三年，迁给事中，充盐铁使，遂以帐式奏御。太宗曰： 费用若此，民力久何以堪？
现代文：淳化三年，升任给事中，充任盐铁使，于是把账本奏给皇上。太宗说： 费用像这样，百姓财力长期怎么承受？
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Junhua, he was promoted to the position of Jizhong, and was appointed to the post of salt and iron envoy, so he presented the account book to the emperor. Emperor Taizong said: With expenses like this, how can the people's financial resources bear it for a long time?

古文：如可减省，即便裁度。 惟清曰： 此开宝军兴之际，其数倍多，盖以将帅未得其人，边事未宁，屯兵至广也。
现代文：如果可以省减，就便裁减。 惟清说： 比开宝年间战争之际，数目翻了几倍，原因是将帅不得人，边事不宁，屯兵太广。
English: If it can be reduced, it will be reduced. Wei Qing said: Compared to the time of the war in the Kibo years, the number has doubled several times, the reason is that there are too many generals, there is unrest on the border, and the garrison is too large.

古文：臣闻汉有卫青、霍去病，唐有郭子仪、李晟，西北望而畏之。
现代文：我听说汉朝有卫青、霍去病，唐朝有郭子仪、李晟，西北边境的敌人望而生畏。
English: I heard that the Han Dynasty had Wei Qing and Huo Qian, and the Tang Dynasty had Guo Zi Yi and Li Qian. The enemies on the northwest border were daunted.

古文：如此则边事息而支用减矣。
现代文：这样就会边事宁息而费用减少。
English: In this way, there will be peace of mind and costs will be reduced.

古文：望慎擢将帅，以有威名者俾安边塞，庶节费用。 上言： 彼一时，此一时也。今之西北变诈，与古不同。选用将帅，亦须深体今之几宜。
现代文：希慎重提拔将领，用有威名者保安边塞，可以节约费用。 皇上说 ：彼一时，此一时也，现在的西北敌人变化狡诈，与古时敌人不同，选用将帅，也需深刻领会现在事态。
English: The emperor said, "At this time, too, the current northwestern enemy has changed cunningly, and unlike the ancient enemy, the selection of generals also requires a profound understanding of the current state of affairs.

古文：韩、彭虽古之名将，以彼时之见，制今之敌，亦恐不能成功。
现代文：韩、彭虽然是古代的名将，以他们的见解，对付今天的敌人，也恐怕不能成功。
English: Although Han and Peng are famous generals in ancient times, they may not succeed in dealing with today's enemies with their opinions.

古文：今纵得人，未可便如古委之。
现代文：今日即使得人，也不可像古人那样委用他。
English: Today, even if you get someone, you can't appoint him as the ancients did.

古文：此乃机事，卿所未知也。 
现代文：这是机要政事，你不知道。 
English: It's politics, you know.

古文：淮南榷货务卖岳茶，斤为钱百五十。
现代文：淮南榷货务卖岳茶，每斤价钱百五十。
English: Huainanqin Trading sells Yue tea at a price of 150 yuan per catty.

古文：主吏言陈恶者二十六万六千余斤，惟清擅减斤五十钱，不以闻。
现代文：主吏说陈茶恶茶有二十六万六千多斤，惟清擅自减价到每斤五十钱，不告诉朝廷。
English: The director said that there were more than 266,000 jin of stale tea and bad tea, but Qing arbitrarily reduced the price to 50 yuan per jin and did not tell the court.

古文：滁、泗、濠、楚州、涟水军亦以岳茶陈恶，减价市之。
现代文：滁、泗、濠、楚诸州、涟水军也以岳茶陈恶，减价出售。
English: Yue, Yue, Yue, Chu, Zhuzhou, and Yunnan water troops also sell Yue tea at a reduced price.

古文：计亏钱万四千余贯，为勾院吏卢守仁所发，左授卫尉少卿，黜判官李琯为本曹员外郎，赐守仁钱十五万。
现代文：共计亏损一万四千多贯钱，被勾院吏卢守仁告发，贬为卫尉少卿，贬判官李为本曹员外郎，赏赐守仁十五万钱。
English: With a total loss of more than 14,000 yuan, he was denounced by the court official Lu Shouren and demoted to the rank of lieutenant, and the judge Li was demoted to the rank of sergeant, and Shouren was awarded 150,000 yuan.

古文：俄出知广州。
现代文：不久，惟清出京任知广州。
English: Soon, Wei Qing left Beijing for Guangzhou.

古文：至道初，就拜右谏议大夫。太宗闻其廉平，诏奖之。
现代文：至道初年，就地授任右谏议大夫，太宗听说他廉洁公平，诏令表扬他。
English: In the first year of the Dao, he was awarded the title of Doctor of Right Speech and Debate on the spot. Emperor Taizong heard that he was honest and fair, and praised him in the imperial edict.

古文：二年，徙广南东、西路都转运使，寻召拜给事中。
现代文：至道二年，改任广南东、西路都转运使，不久召入朝授任给事中。
English: Two years later, he was appointed as the transfer envoy for both the east and west routes of Guangdong Province, and was soon called into the process of being assigned to the imperial court.

古文：逾月，同知枢密院事。
现代文：过了一个月，任同知枢密院事。
English: A month later, Tongzhi was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：惟清倜傥自任，有钩距。
现代文：惟清倜傥自任，有才略。
English: However, it is clear that he is a self-appointed, talented person.

古文：临事峻刻，所至称强干。
现代文：处理政事峻刻，所至各地有强干名声。
English: He has a strong reputation for dealing with the most pressing political issues.

古文：然以俗吏进，无人望。
现代文：但是以俗吏进用，没有人望。
English: However, there is no hope that a lay official will be appointed to the post.

古文：才数月，真宗即位，加刑部侍郎，复除御史中丞。
现代文：才过几个月，真宗即皇帝位，加任惟清为刑部侍郎，又授任御史中丞。
English: Just a few months later, Emperor Jinsong was enthroned, and Wo Qing was appointed as the attendant of the Department of Criminal Law, and was also appointed as the Vice-Minister of History.

古文：既去枢要，怫郁尤甚，肆情弹击。
现代文：罢去枢密职务后，非常忧郁，尽情弹击时政。
English: After resigning from the privy council, he was very melancholy and attacked the politics of the time.

古文：咸平元年。卒，年五十六，赠户部尚书。
现代文：咸平元年，去世，终年五十六岁，追赠户部尚书。
English: In the first year of Xianping, he died at the age of fifty-six, and was posthumously awarded the title of "Hubei Shangshu."

古文：子永锡，荫至光禄寺丞。
现代文：他的儿子名永锡，因父荫任光禄寺丞。
English: His son's name was Yongxi, and because of his father's influence, he was appointed as the priest of the Guanglu Temple.

古文：次子永德，至殿中丞。
现代文：次子永德，官至殿中丞。
English: His second son, Yongde, became a courtier and junior secretary.

