古文：三十年春，王正月，楚子使薳罢来聘。
现代文：三十年春季，周历正月，楚王郏敖派遣薳罢来鲁国聘问。
English: In the spring of the thirtieth year, in the first month of the lunar calendar, King Chu sent his emissary to Lu to ask questions.

古文：夏四月，蔡世子般弑其君固。
现代文：夏季四月，蔡国世子般杀掉了蔡国国君。
English: In the summer of April, Cai Guo Guojun killed Cai Guo Guojun like a son.

古文：五月甲午，宋灾。
现代文：五月甲午日，宋国发生火灾。
English: On the afternoon of May 1, a fire broke out in Song.

古文：宋伯姬卒。
现代文：宋国伯姬被烧死。
English: Song Guo Baoji was burned to death.

古文：天王杀其弟佞夫。
现代文：周景王杀了他的弟弟佞夫。
English: Zhou Jingwang killed his brother Yanfu.

古文：王子瑕奔晋。
现代文：周国大夫王子瑕逃到了晋国。
English: Dr. Zhou Guofei fled to Jin Province.

古文：秋七月，叔弓如宋，葬宋共姬。
现代文：秋季七月，叔弓去到宋国，安葬了宋共姬。
English: In the autumn of July, Shuqian went to Song and buried Song Gongxi.

古文：郑良霄出奔许。
现代文：郑国的良霄逃到了许国。
English: The good people of Zheng fled to Xu Province.

古文：自许入于郑。
现代文：又从许国进入郑国。
English: It also entered Zheng from Xu.

古文：郑人杀良霄。
现代文：郑国人杀死了良霄。
English: The people of Zheng killed Liangxiao.

古文：冬十月，葬蔡景公。
现代文：冬季十月，安葬蔡景公。
English: In the winter of October, Cai Jinggong was buried.

古文：晋人、齐人、宋人、卫人、郑人、曹人、莒人、邾人、滕人、薛人、杞人、小邾人会于澶渊，宋灾故。
现代文：晋国人、齐国人、宋国人、卫国人、郑国人、曹国人、莒国人、邾国人、滕国人、薛国人、杞国人、小邾人在澶渊会面，是因为宋国发生火灾的缘故。
English: Jin people, Qi people, Song people, Wei people, Zheng people, Cao people, Shao people, Yao people, Teng people, Xue people, Yao people, and Xiao Yao people met in Yuyuan because of a fire in Song.

古文：三十年春，王正月，楚子使薳罢来聘，通嗣君也。
现代文：三十年春季，周王朝历法的正月，楚王郏敖派遣薳罢来鲁国聘问，这是为新立的国君通好。
English: In the spring of the thirtieth year, the first month of the Zhou Dynasty calendar, King Chu dispatched his emissary to Lu to ask questions. This was a good omen for the newly established sovereign.

古文：穆叔问： 王子之为政何如？ 
现代文：穆叔问： 王子围执政的情况怎么样？ 
English: Uncle Mu asked: How is the situation of the Wang Ziwei administration?

古文：对曰： 吾侪小人，食而听事，犹惧不给命而不免于戾，焉与知政？ 
现代文：薳罢回答说： 我辈小人吃饭听使唤，还害怕不足以完成使命而不能免于罪过，哪里能参与政事？ 
English: Zou Bei replied, "Our generation of villains eat at the beck and call of others, and are still afraid of not being able to fulfill their mission and not being free from sin. Where can they participate in political affairs?

古文：固问焉，不告。
现代文：再三地询问，他还是不回答。
English: After repeated questioning, he still wouldn't answer.

古文：穆叔告大夫曰： 楚令尹将有大事，子荡将与焉，助之匿其情矣。 
现代文：穆叔告诉大夫说： 楚国的令尹将要发动大乱，薳罢将参与协助，他在隐瞒情况。 
English: Mu Xiu told the doctor: "Ling Yin of the State of Chu is about to start a big riot, Zou Bo will participate in assisting, he is concealing the situation.

古文：子产相郑伯以如晋，叔向问郑国之政焉。
现代文：子产辅助郑简公而去到晋国，叔向问起郑国的政事。
English: Zheng Jian Gong went to Jin Province to assist his son-in-law, and his uncle asked him about the political affairs of Zheng Province.

古文：对曰： 吾得见与否，在此岁也。
现代文：子产回答说： 我能不能见到，就在这一年了。
English: The child replied: "I can't see anything, it's just this year."

古文：驷、良方争，未知所成。
现代文：驷氏、良氏正在争夺，不知道怎么调和。
English: Mr. Zou and Mr. Liang are fighting, and they don't know how to reconcile.

古文：若有所成，吾得见，乃可知也。 
现代文：如果能调和，我能够见到，这就可以知道了。 
English: If it can be reconciled, if I can see it, then it can be known.

古文：叔向曰： 不既和矣乎？ 
现代文：叔向说： 不是已经和好了吗？ 
English: Uncle Xiang said, "Aren't they already reconciled?

古文：对曰： 伯有侈而愎，子晳好在人上，莫能相下也。虽其和也，犹相积恶也，恶至无日矣。 
现代文：子产回答说： 伯有奢侈倔强而又固执，子皙喜欢居于别人之上，两人互不相让，虽然他们已经和好，还是积聚了憎恶，不久就会爆发。 
English: Zi Yuan replied: "Bo is extravagant, stubborn and obstinate. Zi Yuan likes to live on top of others. The two do not give in to each other. Although they have reconciled, they have accumulated hatred, which will soon erupt.

古文：二月癸未，晋悼夫人食舆人之城杞者。
现代文：二月二十二日，晋悼公夫人请为杞国筑城的役卒吃饭。
English: On the 22nd of February, the wife of the Prince of Jin invited the officials who were building the city to dinner.

古文：绛县人或年长矣，无子，而往与于食。
现代文：绛县人中间有一个人年纪很大了，没有儿子而自己服役，也去接受夫人的饭食。
English: Among the people in Handan County, there was a very old man who did not have a son and served himself, and also went to receive his wife's meal.

古文：有与疑年，使之年。
现代文：有人怀疑他的年龄，让他说出自己的年龄。
English: Some people doubt his age, let him say his age.

古文：曰： 臣小人也，不知纪年。
现代文：他说： 下臣，是小人，不知道记录年龄。
English: He said, "My subordinate is a villain, he doesn't know how to record his age.

古文：臣生之岁，正月甲子朔，四百有四十五甲子矣，其季于今三之一也。 
现代文：下臣生的那一年，是正月初一甲子日，已经过了四百四十五个甲子日了，最末一个甲子日到今天正好是二十天。 
English: The year of my father-in-law's birth was the first day of the first month, the first day of the first month. Four hundred and forty-five days have passed, and the last day of the first month is exactly twenty days today.

古文：吏走问诸朝，师旷曰： 鲁叔仲惠伯会郤成子于承匡之岁也。
现代文：官吏走到朝廷里询问，师旷说： 这是鲁国的叔仲惠伯在承筐会见郤成子的那一年。
English: Government officials went to the imperial court to inquire, and Shigeaki said: This was the year that Lu's uncle, Zhong Huibo, met Zou Chengzong in Heihe.

古文：是岁也，狄伐鲁。叔孙庄叔于是乎败狄于鹹，获长狄侨如及虺也、豹也，而皆以名其子。
现代文：这一年，狄人进攻鲁国，叔孙庄叔当时在碱地打败狄人，俘虏了长狄侨如和虺、豹，而都用来命名他儿子。
English: In that year, the Di people attacked the State of Lu. Uncle Sun and Uncle Zhuang defeated the Di people at that time in the alkaline land, and captured the eldest Di overseas Chinese, such as He Xuan and Leopard, which were all used to name his son.

古文：七十三年矣。 
现代文：满七十三岁了。 
English: He is 73 years old.

古文：史赵曰： 亥有二首六身，下二如身，是其日数也。 
现代文：史赵说： 亥字是 二 字头 六 字身，把 二 拿下来当作身子，这就是他的日子数。 
English: Shi Zhao said: Hai Zi is the two-character beginning of the six-character body. Take the two down as the body, which is the number of his days.

古文：士文伯曰： 然则二万六千六百有六旬也。 
现代文：士文伯说： 那么是二万六千六百六十天了。 
English: Swinburne said: Then there are twenty-six thousand six hundred and sixty.

古文：赵孟问其县大夫，则其属也。
现代文：赵孟问起老人的县大夫是谁，原来就是他的下属。
English: Zhao Meng asked who the old man's county doctor was, and it turned out to be one of his subordinates.

古文：召之，而谢过焉，曰： 武不才，任君之大事，以晋国之多虞，不能由吾子，使吾子辱在泥涂久矣，武之罪也。
现代文：赵孟把老人召来向他道歉，说： 武没有才能，担负了国君的重要职务，由于晋国多有忧患，没有能任用您，让您屈居卑下已经很久了，这是武的罪过。
English: Zhao Meng called the old man to apologize to him, saying, "Wu has no talent and has taken on the important position of the country's ruler. Due to the many troubles in Jin, he has not been able to appoint you, and you have been subservient for a long time. This is Wu's sin.

古文：敢谢不才。 
现代文：谨由于没有才能而向您道歉。 
English: I'd like to apologize for my lack of talent.

古文：遂仕之，使助为政。
现代文：于是就任命老人做官，派他辅助自己执政。
English: So he appointed the old man as an official and sent him to help him govern.

古文：辞以老。与之田，使为君复陶，以为绛县师，而废其舆尉。
现代文：老人因年纪大了而辞谢，赵孟就给了他土地，让他为国君办理免除徭役的事务，做绛地县师，而撤除了他的舆尉的职务。
English: The old man resigned because he was too old, so Zhao Meng gave him the land and let him handle the matter of exempting him from serving as a magistrate for the king, and made him a magistrate for the county of Putian, and removed him from the position of a magistrate.

古文：于是，鲁使者在晋，归以语诸大夫。
现代文：当时鲁国的使臣正在晋国，回去把这件事告诉了大夫们。
English: At that time, the envoy of Lu was in Jin, went back and told the doctors about this.

古文：季武子曰： 晋未可媮也。
现代文：季武子说： 晋国不能轻视啊。
English: Ji Takeko said: "Jin Province is not to be taken lightly.

古文：有赵孟以为大夫，有伯瑕以为佐，有史赵、师旷而咨度焉，有叔向、女齐以师保其君。
现代文：有赵孟做正卿，有伯瑕做辅佐，有史赵、师旷可以咨询，有叔向、女齐做国君的师保。
English: There is Zhao Meng as Zhengqing, there is Bo Ke as assistant, there are Shi Zhao and Shi Kuang who can be consulted, and there are Unxiang and Nian Qi as tutors and guardians of the sovereign.

古文：其朝多君子，其庸可媮乎？
现代文：他们朝廷上君子很多，哪里能够轻视呢？
English: There are many gentlemen in their court, how can they be despised?

古文：勉事之而后可。 
现代文：尽力事奉他们然后才可以。 
English: Serve them to the best of your ability and then go.

古文：夏四月己亥，郑伯及其大夫盟。
现代文：夏季四月某一天，郑简公和他的大夫结盟。
English: One day in the summer of April, Zheng Jiangong and his doctor made an alliance.

古文：君子是以知郑难之不已也。
现代文：君子因此而知道郑国的祸难还没有结束。
English: The gentleman therefore knew that Zhengzhou's woes were not over.

古文：蔡景侯为大子般娶于楚，通焉。
现代文：蔡景侯为太子般在楚国娶妻，又和儿媳妇私通。
English: Cai Jinghou married a wife in the State of Chu like a prince, and had sexual intercourse with his daughter-in-law.

古文：大子弑景侯。
现代文：太子杀死了蔡景侯。
English: The crown prince killed Cai Jinghou.

古文：初，王儋季卒，其子括将见王而叹。
现代文：当初，周灵王的弟弟儋季死了，他的儿子括将要进见灵王，叹气。
English: At first, Zhou Lingwang's younger brother, Xing Ji, died, and his son, Quan, who was going to see Lingwang, sighed.

古文：单公子愆期为灵王御士，过诸廷，闻其叹而言曰： 乌乎！
现代文：单国的公子愆期做灵王侍卫，经过朝廷，听到叹气声，就说： 啊，一定是想夺取朝廷的权！ 
English: A prince of a single country, who served as an attendant of the spirit king, passed by the imperial court and heard a sigh, and said: Ah, he must be trying to seize the power of the imperial court!

古文：必有此夫！ 入以告王，且曰： 必杀之！
现代文：进去把情况报告灵王，而且说： 一定要杀了他！
English: He went in and reported the situation to the spirit king and said, "We must kill him!"

古文：不慼而愿大，视躁而足高，心在他矣。
现代文：他不悲哀而愿望大，目光到处张望而抬高脚，心在其他地方了。
English: He's not sad, he's hopeful, his eyes are everywhere, his feet are up, his mind is somewhere else.

古文：不杀，必害。 
现代文：不杀，必然造成危害。 
English: If you don't kill, you will inevitably cause harm.

古文：王曰： 童子何知？ 
现代文：灵王说： 小孩子知道什么？
English: The spirit king said: What do children know?

古文：及灵王崩，儋括欲立王子佞夫，佞夫弗知。
现代文：等到灵王死去，儋括想要立王子佞夫。佞夫不知道。
English: When the spirit king died, the brothers wanted to make the prince a widower. The widower didn't know.

古文：戊子，儋括围，逐成愆。
现代文：二十八日，儋括包围苏地，赶走成愆。
English: On the 28th, they encircled Su Di and drove it into the mountains.

古文：成愆奔平畤。
现代文：成愆逃亡到平畤。
English: Cheng Yao fled to Pingyao.

古文：五月癸巳，尹言多、刘毅、单蔑、甘过、巩成杀佞夫。
现代文：五月初四日，尹言多、刘毅、单蔑、甘过、巩成杀了佞夫。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of May, Yin Yinduo, Liu Yi, Shanli, Ganbo and Gongcheng killed the widower.

古文：括、瑕、廖奔晋。
现代文：括、瑕、廖逃亡到晋国。
English: In addition, Kechi and Liao fled to Jin.

古文：书曰： 天王杀其弟佞夫。 罪在王也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 天王杀死他的兄弟佞夫 ，这是由于罪过在于周王。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that the Heavenly King killed his brother, the Woodcutter, because the fault lay with King Zhou.

古文：或叫于宋大庙，曰： 譆譆！出出！ 
现代文：有人在宋国太庙里大喊大叫，说： 嘻嘻，出出。 
English: Someone was shouting in the Song Guotai Temple, saying: "Hee hee, get out.

古文：鸟鸣于亳社，如曰： 譆譆。 甲午，宋大灾。
现代文：鸟在亳社上鸣叫，声音好像在说： 嘻嘻。 
English: Birds chirp over the reedbeds, their voices seeming to say, "Hee hee."

古文：宋伯姬卒，待姆也。
现代文：五月初五日，宋国发生大火灾。宋伯姬被烧死，这是为了等待保姆来。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of May, a big fire broke out in Song. Song Baoji was burned to death, this was to wait for the nanny to come.

古文：君子谓： 宋共姬，女而不妇。
现代文：君子认为： 宋伯姬奉行的是大闺女而不是媳妇的守则。
English: Nobles think: Song Baoji adheres to the code of a great-granddaughter rather than a daughter-in-law.

古文：女待人，妇义事也。 
现代文：大闺女应当等待保姆，媳妇就可以看具体情况行事。 
English: The eldest daughter-in-law should wait for the nanny, and the daughter-in-law can act according to the specific situation.

古文：六月，郑子产如陈涖盟。归，复命。
现代文：六月，郑国的子产去到陈国参加结盟，回来，复命。
English: In June, Zheng Guo's sons went to Chen Guo to join the alliance, came back, and received their orders.

古文：告大夫曰： 陈，亡国也，不可与也。
现代文：告诉大夫们说： 陈国，是要灭亡的国家，不能结好。
English: Tell the doctors: Chen Guo, a country that is about to perish, cannot be reconciled.

古文：聚禾粟，缮城郭，恃此二者，而不抚其民。其君弱植，公子侈，大子卑，大夫敖，政多门，以介于大国，能无亡乎？
现代文：他们积聚粮食，修理城郭，靠了这两条而不安抚百姓，他们的国君根基不巩固，公子奢侈，太子卑微，大夫骄傲，政事各行其是，谁也作不了主，在这种情况下处于大国之间，能够不灭亡吗？
English: They accumulate grain, repair the city walls, rely on these two and do not care about the people. Their sovereign is not solid, the prince is extravagant, the prince is humble, the doctor is proud, the government does its own thing, and no one can be the master. In this situation, being between great powers, can they not perish?

古文：不过十年矣。 
现代文：不超过十年了。 
English: Not more than ten years ago.

古文：秋七月，叔弓如宋，葬共姬也。
现代文：秋季，七月，叔弓去到宋国，这是由于安葬共姬。
English: In the autumn, in July, Shuqian went to the Song Dynasty, this was due to the burial of Zeng Ji.

古文：郑伯有耆酒，为窟室，而夜饮酒，击钟焉，朝至未已。朝者曰： 公焉在？ 
现代文：郑国的伯有喜欢喝酒，造了地下室，并在夜里喝酒，奏乐。朝见的人来到，他还没有喝完酒。朝见的人说： 主人在哪里？ 
English: Bo You of Zhengzhou liked to drink. He built a cellar and drank and played music at night. When people came to see him in the morning, he had not finished drinking. The people who saw him in the morning said, "Where is my master?"

古文：其人曰： 吾公在壑穀。 
现代文：他的手下人说： 我们的主人在地下室。 
English: His men said, "Our master is in the basement."

古文：皆自朝布路而罢。
现代文：朝见的人都分路回去。
English: People who saw each other in the morning went their separate ways.

古文：既而朝，则又将使子晳如楚，归而饮酒。
现代文：不久伯有去朝见郑伯，又要派子皙去楚国，回家以后又喝酒。
English: Soon after, Bo You went to the court to meet Zheng Bo, and he also wanted to send Zixuan to Chu Province. After returning home, he drank again.

古文：庚子，子晳以驷氏之甲伐而焚之。
现代文：七月十一日，子皙带者驷氏的甲士攻打并且放火烧了他的家。
English: On July 11th, soldiers of the Xiong family attacked and set fire to his house.

古文：伯有奔雍梁，醒而后知之，遂奔许。
现代文：伯有逃亡到雍梁，酒醒以后才明白是怎么回事，于是又逃亡到许国。
English: He fled to Yongliang, and only after he sobered up did he understand what had happened, so he fled again to Xu Province.

古文：大夫聚谋。
现代文：大夫们聚在一起商量。
English: The doctors got together to discuss it.

古文：子皮曰： 《仲虺之志》云： 乱者取之，亡者侮之。
现代文：子皮说： 《仲虺之志》说： 动乱的就攻取它，灭亡的就欺侮它。 
English: Zi Pi said: "Zhong Yao Zhi" said: "The turbulent will attack it, and the perishing will bully it."

古文：推亡固存，国之利也。 
现代文：摧毁灭亡的而巩固存在的，这是国家的利益。
English: It is in the country's interest to destroy what is dead and strengthen what exists.

古文：罕、驷、豐同生。伯有汰侈，故不免。 
现代文：罕氏、驷氏、丰氏本来是同胞兄弟，伯有骄傲奢侈，所以不免于祸难。 
English: Han, Xing and Feng were originally brothers, but they were proud and extravagant, so they were not immune to misfortune.

古文：人谓子产： 就直助强！ 
现代文：有人对子产说： 要靠拢正直的帮助强大的。 
English: Some people said to the children: "We need to get closer to each other. Honest help is powerful."

古文：子产曰： 岂为我徒。
现代文：子产说： 他们难道是我的同伙？
English: And the child said, Are these my companions?

古文：国之祸难，谁知所敝？
现代文：国家的祸难，谁知道如何平定？
English: A national calamity, who knows how to quell it?

古文：或主强直，难乃不生。
现代文：如果有主持国政的人强大而且正直，祸难就不会发生。
English: If the people who run the country were strong and honest, the disaster would not have happened.

古文：姑成吾所。 
现代文：姑且保住我的地位吧。 
English: Let me keep my position.

古文：辛丑，子产敛伯有氏之死者而殡之，不及谋而遂行。
现代文：十二日，子产收了伯有氏死者的尸体而加以殡葬，来不及和大夫们商量就出走了。
English: On the twelfth day, the son-in-law collected the body of the deceased Boyo and buried it. He did not have time to discuss with the doctors and left.

古文：印段从之。
现代文：印段跟从他。
English: The press corps followed him.

古文：子皮止之。
现代文：子皮不让他走。
English: The calf wouldn't let him go.

古文：众曰： 人不我顺，何止焉？ 
现代文：大家说： 别人不顺从我们，为什么不让他走？ 
English: Everyone said: If others don't obey us, why not let him go?

古文：子皮曰： 夫子礼于死者，况生者乎？ 
现代文：子皮说： 这个人对死去的人有礼，何况对活着的人呢？ 
English: The young goat said, "How does this man show respect for the dead, much less for the living?"

古文：遂自止之。
现代文：于是就亲自劝阻子产。
English: So he took it upon himself to discourage childbearing.

古文：壬寅，子产入。
现代文：十三日，子产进入国都。
English: On the 13th, the cubs arrived in the national capital.

古文：癸卯，子石入。
现代文：十四日，印段进入国都。
English: On the 14th, the printing section entered the national capital.

古文：皆受盟于子晳氏。
现代文：两个人都在子皙家里接受了盟约。
English: Both of them accepted the covenant at Zixuan's home.

古文：乙巳，郑伯及其大夫盟于大宫。盟国人于师之梁之外。
现代文：十六日，郑简公和他的大夫们在太庙结盟，又与国内的人们在郑国城门外结盟。
English: On the 16th, Zheng Jian Gong and his doctors made an alliance in the Great Temple, and also made an alliance with people in the country outside the city gate of Zheng Guo.

古文：伯有闻郑人之盟己也怒，闻子皮之甲不与攻己也喜，曰： 子皮与我矣。 
现代文：伯有听到郑国人为他结盟，很生气；听到子皮的甲士没有参加攻打他，很高兴，说： 子皮帮助我了。 
English: He was very angry when he heard that the Zheng people had formed an alliance against him. He was very happy when he heard that Zi Pi's knights had not joined in the attack against him. He said, "Zi Pi has helped me."

古文：癸丑，晨，自墓门之渎入，因马师颉介于襄库，以伐旧北门。
现代文：二十四日，从墓门的排水洞进入，靠着马师颉用襄库的兵甲装备士兵，带着他们攻打旧北门。
English: On the 24th, soldiers equipped with armour from Xianggu entered from the drainage hole of the tomb gate, leaning on the horse-drawn carriage, and attacked the old north gate with them.

古文：驷带率国人以伐之。
现代文：驷带率领国内的人们攻打伯有。
English: The umbilical cord led the people of the country to attack Bole.

古文：皆召子产。
现代文：两家都召请子产。
English: Both families have called in midwives.

古文：子产曰： 兄弟而及此，吾从天所与。 
现代文：子产说： 兄弟之间到达这地步，我服从上天所要帮助的一家。 
English: The progeny said: Having reached this point between brothers, I submit to the family that Heaven wants to help.

古文：伯有死于羊肆，子产襚之，枕之股而哭之，敛而殡诸伯有之臣在市侧者。既而葬诸斗城。
现代文：伯有死在买卖羊的街市上，子产给伯有的尸体穿上衣服，头枕在尸体的大腿上而为他号哭，收尸并把棺材停放在街市旁边伯有家臣的家里，不久又葬在斗城。
English: Bo You died in the sheep market. His son-in-law dressed Bo You's corpse, laid his head on the corpse's lap and cried for him, collected the corpse and parked the coffin in the house of Bo You's vassal next to the market. He was soon buried in Doucheng.

古文：子驷氏欲攻子产，子皮怒之曰： 礼，国之干也，杀有礼，祸莫大焉。 
现代文：驷氏想要攻打子产。子皮为这发怒，说： 礼仪，是国家的支柱。杀死有礼的人，没有比这再大的祸患了。 
English: The Min clan wanted to attack the Zi clan. Zi Pei was angry about this and said: "Rituals are the backbone of the country. There is no greater evil than killing polite people."

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是就停止了。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：于是游吉如晋还，闻难不入，复命于介。
现代文：当时，游吉去晋国以后回来，听说发生祸难，不进入。让副手回来复命。
English: At that time, when Youji returned after going to Jin Province, he heard that a disaster had occurred and did not enter. Let the deputy come back to resume his life.

古文：八月甲子，奔晋。
现代文：八月初六日，逃亡到晋国。
English: At the beginning of August 6th, he fled to Jin Province.

古文：驷带追之，及酸枣。
现代文：驷带追赶他，到达酸枣。
English: The umbilical chases after him, reaching the jujube.

古文：与子上盟，用两珪质于河。
现代文：游吉和驷带结盟，把两件玉圭沉在黄河里表示诚意。
English: Youji allied with the umbilical cord and sank two pieces of gypsum in the Yellow River to show their sincerity.

古文：使公孙肸入盟大夫。
现代文：让公孙肸进入国都和大夫结盟。
English: Let Gongsun Rong enter the capital and make an alliance with the doctor.

古文：己巳，复归。
现代文：十一日，游吉再次回到国内。
English: On the 11th day, Youji returned to China again.

古文：书曰： 郑人杀良霄。 
现代文：《春秋》记载说： 郑人杀良霄。 
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that: Zheng people kill the good earth.

古文：不称大夫，言自外入也。
现代文：不称他为大夫，这是说伯有从国外进来已经丧失官位了。
English: He did not call him a doctor, which meant that he had come from abroad and had lost his official position.

古文：于子蟜之卒也，将葬，公孙挥与裨竈晨会事焉。
现代文：当子蟜死了以后，将要安葬时，公孙挥和裨灶早晨商量丧事。
English: When the son-in-law died and was about to be buried, the father-in-law, the son-in-law, and the son-in-law discussed the funeral in the morning.

古文：过伯有氏，其门上生莠。子羽曰： 其莠犹在乎？ 
现代文：他们路过伯有氏家时，看见门上长了狗尾草，公孙挥说： 他门上的狗尾巴草还在吗？ 
English: When they passed Mr. Bo You's house, they saw dog-tail grass growing on the door. Mr. Bo said: Is the dog-tail grass still on his door?

古文：于是岁在降娄，降娄中而旦。
现代文：当时岁星在降娄，降娄星在天空中部，天就亮了。
English: At that time, the waxing gibbous and waning gibbous stars were in the middle of the sky, and the sky was bright.

古文：裨竈指之曰： 犹可以终岁，岁不及此次也已。 
现代文：裨灶指着降娄星，说： 还可以等岁星绕一周，不过活不到岁星再到这个位置就是了。 
English: The benefactor pointed to the descending Pleiades and said, "You can also wait for the year star to circle around, but you won't live long enough for the year star to reach this position.

古文：及其亡也，岁在娵訾之口。其明年，乃及降娄。
现代文：等到伯有被杀，岁星正在娵訾的口上，明年才能到达降娄。
English: Wait until Bo You is killed, the year star is on the mouth of the cormorant, and it will not reach the lower cormorant next year.

古文：仆展从伯有，与之皆死。
现代文：仆展跟从伯有，和他一起死了。
English: His servant, who was with him, died with him.

古文：羽颉出奔晋，为任大夫。
现代文：羽颉逃亡到晋国，做了任邑的长官。
English: Hanyu fled to Jin Province and became the governor of Renwu.

古文：鸡泽之会，郑乐成奔楚，遂適晋。
现代文：鸡泽的会见，郑国的乐成逃亡到楚国，就乘机去到晋国。
English: After meeting with Jize, Le Cheng of Zheng fled to Chu and took the opportunity to go to Jin.

古文：羽颉因之，与之比，而事赵文子，言伐郑之说焉。
现代文：羽颉靠着他，和他勾结着一起奉事赵文子，提出了进攻郑国的建议。
English: Feather duster leaned on him, colluded with him to serve Zhao Wenzi, and proposed an attack on Zhengzhou.

古文：以宋之盟故，不可。
现代文：由于有宋国盟誓的缘故，赵文子不同意这项建议。
English: Because of the Song Dynasty oath, Zhao Wenzi did not agree with this suggestion.

古文：子皮以公孙鉏为马师。
现代文：子皮让公孙鉏代替羽颉做了马师。
English: Zi Pei asked Gongsun Yao to replace Fei Yao as the stable master.

古文：楚公子围杀大司马蒍掩而取其室。
现代文：楚国的公子围杀了大司马?掩而占取了他的家财。
English: The princes of the state of Chu surrounded and killed the great steed and secretly took possession of his family wealth.

古文：申无宇曰： 王子必不免。
现代文：申无宇说： 王子必然不能免于祸难。
English: Shen Wuyu said: The prince must not be spared from the disaster.

古文：善人，国之主也。
现代文：善人，是国家的栋梁。
English: Good people are the backbone of the country.

古文：王子相楚国，将善是封殖，而虐之，是祸国也。
现代文：王子辅助楚国的政事，应该培养好人，现在反倒对他们暴虐，这是危害国家。
English: Princes assist in the political affairs of Chu, and should cultivate good people. Now, however, they are being tyrannized, which is harmful to the country.

古文：且司马，令尹之偏，而王之四体也。
现代文：而且司马，是令尹的辅佐，也是国君的手足。
English: Moreover, Sima was Lingyin's assistant and the ruler's right-hand man.

古文：绝民之主，去身之偏，艾王之体，以祸其国，无不祥大焉！
现代文：断绝百姓的栋梁，去掉自己的辅佐，斩除国君的手足，以危害国家，没有比这再大的不吉利了。
English: There is no greater misfortune than cutting off the pillar of the people, eliminating one's own aides, and cutting off the limbs of the sovereign in order to endanger the country.

古文：何以得免？ 
现代文：怎么能免于祸难呢？ 
English: How can I be saved from the calamity?

古文：为宋灾故，诸侯之大夫会，以谋归宋财。
现代文：为了宋国火灾的缘故，诸侯的大夫会见，商量给宋国赠送财货。
English: Due to the fire in Song, the princes' doctors met to discuss giving gifts to Song.

古文：冬十月，叔孙豹会晋赵武、齐公孙虿、宋向戌、卫北宫佗、郑罕虎及小邾之大夫，会于澶渊。既而无归于宋，故不书其人。
现代文：冬季十月，叔孙豹和晋国赵武、齐国的公孙虿、宋国的向戌、卫国的北宫佗、郑国的罕虎以及小邾国的大夫在澶渊会见，并没有给宋国赠送什么东西，所以《春秋》没有记载与会者的姓名。
English: In the winter of October, the uncle and grandson of the leopard met with Zhao Wu of Jin, Gongsun Yao of Qi, Xiang Yao of Song, Bei Gong Yao of Wei, Hanko of Zheng, and the doctor of Xiao Yao in Qianyuan. They did not give anything to Song, so "Spring and Autumn" did not record the names of the participants.

古文：君子曰： 信其不可不慎乎！
现代文：君子说： 信用恐怕不能不谨慎吧！
English: The gentleman said, "I'm afraid you have to be careful with your trust.

古文：澶渊之会，卿不书，不信也夫。
现代文：澶渊的会见，不记载卿的名字，这是由于不守信用的缘故。
English: Shanyuan's meeting does not record the name of the lord, this is due to breach of trust.

古文：诸侯之上卿，会而不信，宠名皆弃，不信之不可也如是！
现代文：诸侯的上卿，会见了又不守信用，他们尊贵的姓名全都丢掉了，不守信用是这样的不可以啊。
English: The lords of the lords, met and did not keep the trust, they all lost their precious names, not keeping the trust is not allowed.

古文：《诗》曰： 文王陟降，在帝左右。 
现代文：《诗》说， 文王或升或降，都是在天帝的左右 ，这是说要守信义。
English: The "Poem" says that King Wen, whether ascending or descending, is at the right and left of the Heavenly Emperor, which means to keep faith.

古文：信之谓也。又曰： 淑慎尔止，无载尔伪。 
现代文：又说， 好好地谨慎你的行动，不要表现你的虚伪 ，这是说不守信义。 
English: And he said, Take heed to your ways and your doings, that there be no guile in your lips; for there is no faithfulness with you.

古文：不信之谓也。 书曰 某人某人会于澶渊，宋灾故 ，尤之也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 某人某人会于澶渊，宋灾故 ，这是为了责备他们。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that "someone" will gather in Songyuan, Song disaster, this is to blame them.

古文：不书鲁大夫，讳之也。
现代文：不记载鲁国的大夫，这是由于为他隐瞒。
English: The doctor from Russia is not recorded, because it was concealed from him.

古文：郑子皮授子产政，辞曰： 国小而偪，族大宠多，不可为也。 
现代文：郑国的子皮把政权交给子产，子产辞谢说： 国家小而逼近大国，家族庞大而受宠的人又多，我不能治理好。 
English: Zhengzhou's Zi Pi handed over power to Zi Fang. Zi Fang said: "The country is small but close to a big country, the family is huge and there are many favored people. I can't govern well."

古文：子皮曰： 虎帅以听，谁敢犯子？
现代文：子皮说： 虎率领他们听从，谁敢触犯您？
English: Zi Pi said, "If the tiger leads them to obey, who would dare to offend you?"

古文：子善相之，国无小，小能事大，国乃宽。 
现代文：您好好地辅助国政吧。国家不在于小，小国能够事奉大国，国家就可以不受逼迫了。 
English: You should do a good job of supporting national politics. The country is not small. If a small country can serve a big country, the country can be free from persecution.

古文：子产为政，有事伯石，赂与之邑。子大叔曰： 国，皆其国也。奚独赂焉？ 
现代文：子产治理政事，有事情要伯石去办，赠送给他城邑，子太叔说： 国家是大家的国家，为什么独给他送东西？ 
English: His son-in-law was in charge of government affairs, and there was something he wanted Bo Shih to do, so he gave him a town. His son-in-law said, "The country is everyone's country, so why should we give him something?

古文：子产曰： 无欲实难。
现代文：子产说： 要没有欲望确实是难的。
English: Zi Yuan said, "It's really hard to be without desire."

古文：皆得其欲，以从其事，而要其成。
现代文：使他们都满足欲望，去办他们的事情而取得成功。
English: So that they may all satisfy their desires, go about their business and prosper.

古文：非我有成，其在人乎？
现代文：这不是我的成功，难道是别人的成功吗？
English: It's not my success, is it someone else's?

古文：何爱于邑，邑将焉往？ 子大叔曰： 若四国何？ 
现代文：对城邑有什么爱惜的，它会跑到哪里去？ 子太叔说： 四方邻国将怎么看待？ 
English: What is there to cherish about the city, and where will it go? Uncle Zi said: What will the neighbors in the four directions think?

古文：子产曰： 非相违也，而相从也，四国何尤焉？
现代文：子产说： 这样做不是为了互相违背，而是为了互相顺从，四方的邻国对我们有什么可责备的？
English: Zi Yuan said, "This is not done for the purpose of violating each other, but for the purpose of mutual compliance. What do our neighbors in the four directions have to reproach us with?"

古文：《郑书》有之曰： 安定国家，必大焉先。 
现代文：《郑书》有这样的话： 安定国家，一定要优先照顾大族。 
English: "Zheng Shu" has this to say: To be a stable country, we must give priority to taking care of the big family.

古文：姑先安大，以待其所归。 
现代文：姑且先照顾大族，再看它归向何处。 
English: Let's take care of the big tribe first, and then see where it goes.

古文：既，伯石惧而归邑，卒与之。
现代文：不久，伯石恐惧而把封邑归还，最终子产还是把城邑给了他。
English: Before long, Bo Shi was afraid and returned the fiefdom, but eventually his son-in-law gave him the fief.

古文：伯有既死，使大史命伯石为卿，辞。
现代文：伯有死了以后，郑简公让太史去命令伯石做卿，伯石辞谢。
English: After Bo You died, Zheng Jian Gong asked Taishi to order Bo Shi to become a lord, and Bo Shi resigned.

古文：大史退，则请命焉。复命之，又辞。
现代文：太史退出，伯石又请求太史重新发布命令，命令下来了再次辞谢。
English: Tai Shi withdrew, Bo Shi again asked Tai Shi to reissue the order, and the order came down again.

古文：如是三，乃受策入拜。
现代文：像这样一连三次，这才接受策书入朝拜谢。
English: Like this for three times in a row, this is the first time to accept the policy book into the morning worship.

古文：子产是以恶其为人也，使次己位。
现代文：子产因此讨厌伯石的为人，但担心他作乱，就让他居于比自己低一级的地位。
English: As a result, Zibo hated Bo Shi as a person, but feared that he would make trouble, so he kept him in a lower position than himself.

古文：子产使都鄙有章，上下有服，田有封洫，庐井有伍。
现代文：子产让城市和乡村有所区别，上下尊卑各有职责，田土四界有水沟，庐舍和耕地能互相适应。
English: Offspring make a difference between cities and villages, the upper and lower ranks have their own responsibilities, there are ditches in the four regions of the field, and the outhouse and cultivated land can adapt to each other.

古文：大人之忠俭者，从而与之。
现代文：对卿大夫中忠诚俭朴的，听从他，亲近他；骄傲奢侈的，推翻他。
English: To the noble doctor, the faithful and frugal, listen to him, close to him; the proud and extravagant, overthrow him.

古文：泰侈者，因而毙之。
现代文：丰卷准备祭祀，请求猎取祭品。
English: A large scroll is prepared for the sacrifice, and a request is made to hunt for the sacrificial offering.

古文：豐卷将祭，请田焉。弗许，曰： 唯君用鲜，众给而已。 
现代文：子产不答应，说： 只有国君祭祀才用新猎取的野兽，一般人只要大致足够就可以了。 
English: Zi Yuan did not agree, saying, "Only the king of the country uses newly-hunted beasts for sacrificial rites. Ordinary people can only use roughly enough.

古文：子张怒，退而征役。
现代文：丰卷生气，退出以后就召集士兵。
English: Feng curled up in anger and summoned soldiers after quitting.

古文：子产奔晋，子皮止之而逐豐卷。
现代文：子产准备逃亡到晋国，子皮阻止他而驱逐了丰卷。
English: Zibo was preparing to flee to Jin, but Zi Pi stopped him and expelled Feng Meng.

古文：豐卷奔晋。子产请其田里，三年而复之，反其田里及其入焉。
现代文：丰卷逃亡到晋国，子产请求不要没收他的田地住宅，三年以后让丰卷回国复位，把他的田地住宅和一切收入都退还给他。
English: He fled to Jin Province, and his children pleaded with the government not to confiscate his farmhouse. Three years later, he was allowed to return to China and was given back his farmhouse and all his income.

古文：从政一年，舆人诵之曰： 取我衣冠而褚之，取我田畴而伍之。
现代文：子产参与政事一年，人们歌唱道： 计算我的家产而收财物税，丈量我的耕地而征收田税。
English: One year after the progeny participated in government affairs, people sang: Calculate my family income and collect property tax, measure my cultivated land and collect field tax.

古文：孰杀子产，吾其与之！ 
现代文：谁杀死子产，我就帮助他。 
English: Whoever kills a child, I will help him.

古文：及三年，又诵之曰： 我有子弟，子产诲之。我有田畴，子产殖之。
现代文：到了三年，又歌唱道： 我有子弟，子产教诲；我有土田，子产使之增产。
English: And at the end of three years she sang again, I have given birth to children, and I have taught them; I have given birth to fields, and they have produced abundantly.

古文：子产而死，谁其嗣之？ 
现代文：万一子产逝世谁来接替他呢？ 
English: In the event of the death of a child, who will succeed him?

