古文：克宁，武皇之季弟也。
现代文：李克宁，是武皇的小弟弟。
English: Li Kening is Emperor Wu's younger brother.

古文：初从起云中，为奉诚军使，赫连铎之攻黄花城也，克宁奉武皇及诸弟登城，血战三日，力尽备竭，杀贼万计。
现代文：起初随父兄在云中起事，任奉诚军使。赫连铎进攻黄花城时，李克宁和武皇以及各位弟弟登上城墙，血战三日，力气耗尽，杀敌数万。
English: At first, he followed his father and brother to rise in the clouds and served as a military envoy of Fengcheng. When Helianthus attacked Huanghua City, Li Kening and Emperor Wu and his brothers climbed the city wall, fought for three days, exhausted their strength, and killed tens of thousands of enemies.

古文：燕军之攻蔚州，克宁昆仲婴城拒敌，昼夜辍寝食者旬余。
现代文：燕军进攻蔚州时，李克宁兄弟拒城抗敌，昼夜不吃不睡有十几天。
English: When the Yan army attacked Ulshu, the Li Kening brothers resisted the city and resisted the enemy, and did not eat or sleep for a dozen days and nights.

古文：后从达靼入关，逐黄寇。
现代文：后来跟随武皇自鞑靼入关，驱逐黄巢军队。
English: Later, he followed Emperor Wu from Tatar into the customs and expelled the Yellow Nest army.

古文：凡征行无不卫从，于昆弟之间，最推仁孝，小心恭谨，武皇尤友爱之。
现代文：凡是征战行军无不侍卫随从，在兄弟里面是最仁孝的，小心恭谨，武皇对他尤其喜爱。
English: When marching to war, he is always accompanied by bodyguards. He is the most considerate and filial of his brothers. He is careful and respectful. Emperor Wu is especially fond of him.

古文：及镇太原，授辽州刺史，累至云州防御使。
现代文：到镇守太原时，被授予辽州刺史，升到云州防御使。
English: When he arrived at the town of Taiyuan, he was awarded the Liaozhou History Award and promoted to the Yunnan Defense Envoy.

古文：乾宁初，改忻州刺史，从入关讨王行瑜，充马步军都将，以功授检校司徒。
现代文：乾宁初年，改任忻州刺史，随从入关讨伐王行瑜，兼马军步军大将，因战功授检校司徒。
English: In the first year of Qianning, he was transferred to the post of Zhangzhou chief historian, followed by Wang Xingyu, the general of the horse army, and was awarded the title of school inspector for his war service.

古文：天祐初，授内外都制置、管内蕃汉都知兵马使、检校太保，充振武节度使，凡军政皆决于克宁。
现代文：天祐初年，授内外都制置、管内蕃汉都知兵马使、检校太保，兼振武军节度使，所有军政大事都由李克宁决定。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Tianyu, the internal and external conferment of honors was established, and the military and horse envoys of the Han Dynasty, the inspectors of schools, and the military festival envoys were appointed. All military and political events were decided by Li Kening.

古文：五年正月，武皇疾笃，克宁等侍疾，垂泣辞诀。克宁曰： 王万一不讳，后事何属？ 
现代文：天祐五年一月，武皇病重，李克宁等侍候在旁，垂涕诀别，李克宁说： 王兄万一去世，后事怎么安排？ 
English: In January of the 5th year of Tianyu, Emperor Wu was gravely ill. Li Kening and other attendants were there to bid him farewell. Li Kening said, "In the unlikely event that Brother Wang passes away, what will be the arrangements for his funeral?"

古文：因召庄宗侍侧，谓克宁、张承业曰； 亚子累公等。 
现代文：武皇因而召庄宗李存勖到身边，对李克宁、张承业说 ：亚子托付给你们了。 
English: Therefore, Emperor Wu called Zhuangzong Li Cunxu to his side and said to Li Kening and Zhang Chengye, "You have been entrusted with Yazi."

古文：言终弃代。
现代文：话说完便去世。
English: After saying this, he passed away.

古文：将发哀，克宁纪纲军府，中外无哗。
现代文：将要发丧时，李克宁用军纪整顿军府，内外没有喧哗之声。
English: When it was time to mourn, Li Kening used military discipline to rectify the military government, and there was no noise inside and outside.

古文：初，武皇奖励军戎，多畜庶孽，衣服礼秩如嫡者六七辈，比之嗣王，年齿又长，各有部曲，朝夕聚谋，皆欲为乱。
现代文：起初，武皇奖励作战勇敢的军士，多收养为义子，他们的衣服礼节待遇跟亲生嫡子相同的就有六七人，与即位的庄宗李存勖相比，岁数又较大，各有部下士兵，朝夕聚在一起谋事，都想作乱。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Wu rewarded the brave soldiers who fought in the war. Most of them were adopted as legitimate sons. Sixty-seven of them were treated with the same clothing and etiquette as their own legitimate sons. Compared with the reigning Zhuangzong Li Cunxu, they were older, each had subordinate soldiers, gathered together in the morning and evening to plan things, and all wanted to make trouble.

古文：庄宗英察，惧及于祸，将嗣位，让克宁曰： 兒年孤稚，未通庶政，虽承遗命，恐未能弹压大事。
现代文：庄宗明察其事，担心造成祸害，在将要即位时，对李克宁辞让道： 侄儿年幼，不通政事，虽然承继父王遗志，恐怕不能弹压大事。
English: Zhuo Zong was aware of the situation and, fearing that it would cause a disaster, he conceded to Li Kening's resignation when he was about to ascend the throne: My nephew is young and does not know anything about politics. Although I am carrying on the legacy of my stepfather, I am afraid that I cannot suppress important matters.

古文：季父勋德俱高，众情推伏，且请制置军府，候兒有立，听季父处分。 
现代文：叔父德高勋重，众人推服，且请统帅节制军队，等侄儿大些，再听候叔父安排。 
English: His uncle was highly respected and admired by everyone, and he asked the commander-in-chief to restrain the army and wait for his nephew to grow up before listening to his uncle's arrangements.

古文：克宁曰： 亡兄遗命，属在我兒，孰敢异议者！
现代文：李克宁说： 我死去的兄长留下遗命，传位给我侄儿，谁敢有异议！
English: Li Kening said: My dead brother left his last will and testament to my nephew, who would dare to disagree!

古文：兒但嗣世，中外之事，何忧不办。 
现代文：侄儿只须即位，朝廷内外之事，不必忧虑办不成。 
English: His nephew only needs to be enthroned, and there is no need to worry about things inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：视事之日，率先拜贺。
现代文：庄宗登位视事之日，李克宁率先拜贺。
English: On the day of Zhuangzong's enthronement, Li Kening took the lead in offering congratulations.

古文：庄宗嗣位，军民政事，一切委之，权柄既重，趣向者多附之。
现代文：庄宗即位后，军民政事，全都委托给李克宁，权力既然很大，趋炎者多附和他。
English: After Zhuangzong's accession to the throne, military and civil affairs were all entrusted to Li Kening. Since his power was so great, those who wanted to inflame the situation mostly followed him.

古文：李存颢者，以阴计干克宁曰： 兄亡弟及，古今旧事，委父拜侄，理所未安，富贵功名，当宜自立，天与不取，后悔无及。 
现代文：李存颢阴谋挑动李克宁说 ：兄死弟及，古今惯例，叔父向侄子拜贺，在情理上说不过去。富贵功名，应该自己争取，上天给与了而不要，后悔也来不及。 
English: Li Cunxu's conspiracy provoked Li Kening to say: "Brother and brother are dead, and, according to ancient and modern practice, an uncle should offer congratulations to his nephew. It is unreasonable to say. Rich and famous, you should strive for it yourself. Heaven has given it to you, but you don't want it. It's too late to regret it."

古文：克宁曰： 公毋得不祥之言！
现代文：李克宁说 ：你不要说不祥的话！
English: Li Kening said: Don't say ominous words!

古文：我家世立功三代，父慈子孝，天下知名，苟吾兄山河有托，我亦何求！
现代文：我家三代立功，父慈子孝，天下闻名，如果我兄打下的山河有了依托，我又有什么要求的！
English: My family's three generations of meritorious service, fatherly kindness and filial piety, are famous throughout the world. If the mountains and rivers that my brother created have support, what more could I ask for!

古文：公无复言，必斩尔首以徇。 
现代文：你不要再说了，再说我就杀你的头以亻敬戒他人。 
English: You don't say another word, and if you do, I'll kill you in front of everyone.

古文：克宁虽慈爱因心，而日为凶徒惑乱。群凶之妻复以此言干克宁妻孟夫人，说激百端，夫人惧事泄及祸，屡让克宁，由是愈惑。
现代文：李克宁虽然心里慈爱，但天天被凶徒迷惑淆乱，群凶的妻子又用这些话影响李克宁的妻子孟夫人，百般挑唆激发，夫人害怕事情泄密遭祸，多次责备李克宁，因此更加迷惑。
English: Although Li Kening was kindhearted, he was confused and bewildered by the thugs every day. The thugs' wives also used these words to influence Li Kening's wife, Mrs. Meng, and instigated and inspired her in various ways. Mrs. Meng was afraid that the affair would be exposed, and repeatedly blamed Li Kening, which made her even more confused.

古文：会克宁因事杀都虞候李存质，又请兼领大同节度，以蔚、朔为属郡，又数怒监军张承业、李存璋；由是知其有贰。
现代文：适逢李克宁因事杀了都虞候李存质，又请兼领大同节度，以蔚州、朔州为其属郡，又多次对监军张承业、李存璋发怒，由此知道他有二心。
English: At the right time, Li Kening killed Dugou and Li Cunxu due to an incident, and also asked him to concurrently lead the Datong Festival, with Ulshu and Shuozhou as his counties. He also repeatedly got angry with the supervisors Zhang Chengye and Li Cunxu. From this, we know that he has two hearts.

古文：近臣史敬镕素与存颢善，尽知其事。敬镕告贞简太后曰： 存颢与管内太保阴图叛乱，俟嗣王过其第即擒之，并太后子母，欲送于汴州。
现代文：近臣史敬钅容平时与李存颢友善，知道他的全部事情，史敬钅容告诉贞简太后说： 李存颢与管内太保阴谋叛乱，等庄宗经过他的府第时便逮捕他，连同太后母子，准备送给汴州，过些日子就要出事了。 
English: A close retainer, Shi Jinghongrong, who was usually friendly with Li Cunxu and knew everything about him, told Empress Dowager Zhengjian that: Li Cunxu plotted a rebellion with the imperial bodyguards under his jurisdiction, and when Zhuangzong passed by his palace, he arrested him, along with the Empress Dowager's mother and son, and prepared to send them to Zhangzhou. In a few days, something would happen.

古文：窃发有日矣。 庄宗召张承业、李存璋谓曰： 季父所为如此，无犹子之情，骨肉不可自相鱼肉，吾即避路，则祸乱不作矣。 承业曰： 老夫亲承遗托，言犹在耳。
现代文：庄宗召见张承业、李存璋说： 叔父这样做，没有叔侄之情，骨肉不可自相残杀，我立即避开，则祸乱不会发生了。 张承业说 ：老夫我亲受先王遗托，先王的话似乎仍在耳边。
English: Zhuang Zong summoned Zhang Chengye and Li Cunxu and said, "Uncle, if you do this, there is no uncle-nephew feeling, flesh and blood must not kill each other, if I avoid it immediately, then the disaster will not happen." Zhang Chengye said, "I was personally entrusted by the former king, and the former king's words still seem to be in my ears.

古文：存颢辈欲以太原降贼，王乃何路求生？
现代文：李存颢一伙人想拿太原投降敌人，王将有什么生路？
English: Li Cunxu and a group of people want to take Taiyuan and surrender to the enemy. What is the future for Wang?

古文：不即讨除，亡无日矣。 
现代文：如不立即讨伐根除，灭亡的日子就要到了。 
English: If it is not combated and eradicated immediately, the day of its demise is approaching.

古文：因令吴珙、存璋为之备。
现代文：因而下令要吴珙、李存璋做好准备。
English: Therefore, he ordered Wu Gan and Li Cunxu to get ready.

古文：二月二十日，会诸将于府第，擒存颢、克宁于坐。庄宗垂泣数之曰： 兒初以军府让季父，季父不忍弃先人遗命。
现代文：二月二十日，在府第会合各位将军，在座席上逮捕了李存颢、李克宁，庄宗流泪数落他们说： 侄儿起初把军府让给叔父，叔父不忍抛弃先人遗命。
English: On February 20th, the generals of the second meeting in the capital arrested Li Cunxu and Li Kening on the seat. Zhuangzong shed tears and said: My nephew initially gave the capital to my uncle. My uncle could not bear to abandon the lives of his predecessors.

古文：今已事定，复欲以兒子母投畀豺虎，季父何忍此心！ 
现代文：现在事情已定，又想把侄儿子母送给豺虎般的敌人手里，叔父怎么有这种残忍之心？ 
English: Now that the matter is settled, he wants to give his nephew's mother to the hands of a tiger-like enemy. How can his uncle have such a cruel heart?

古文：克宁泣对曰： 盖谗夫交构，吾复何言！ 
现代文：李克宁哭着回答 ：这是进谗言的人造成的，我还有什么话可说！ 
English: Li Kening cried and answered: "This is caused by those who are involved in slander, what else can I say!

古文：是日，与存颢俱伏法。
现代文：这一天，与李存颢一起都被处死。
English: On this day, he was executed together with Li Cunxu.

古文：克宁仁而无断，故及于祸。
现代文：李克宁仁而没有决断，所以有此祸害。
English: Li KeNingRen but no decision, so there is this scourge.

