古文：武德郗皇后讳徽，高平金乡人也。
现代文：武德郗皇后名叫郗徽，高平金乡人。
English: The Empress of Wude County is named Zou Hui. Gaoping Jin is a villager.

古文：祖绍，宋国子祭酒、领东海王师。
现代文：祖父郗绍，是宋朝的国子祭酒、兼东海王师。
English: His grandfather, Gong Shao, was the son-of-the-state sacrificial wine of the Song Dynasty, and also the prince of the East Sea.

古文：父晔，太子舍人，早卒。
现代文：父亲郗晔，是太子舍人，早死。
English: His father, the prince's son, died young.

古文：后母宋文帝女寻阳公主也，方娠，梦当生贵子。
现代文：皇后的母亲是宋文帝的女儿寻阳公主，她怀孕的时候，梦见当生贵子。
English: The mother of the empress was Princess Guanyang, the daughter of Emperor Songwen. When she was pregnant, she dreamed of giving birth to a precious son.

古文：及后生，有赤光照室，器物尽明，家人怪之。
现代文：等皇后降生，有红光照耀房间，器物都很明亮，家里的人都很奇怪。
English: When the queen is born, a red light shines in the room, the utensils are bright, and the people in the house are strange.

古文：巫言此女光高，将有所妨，乃于水滨祓除之。
现代文：巫师说这姑娘光高，将会有所妨碍，于是就在水边进行祓除。
English: The sorcerer said that the girl was too tall and would be a hindrance, so he performed an exorcism at the water's edge.

古文：后幼明慧，善隶书，读史传。
现代文：郗皇后幼年很聪明，善于写隶书，喜欢读史传。
English: The Empress Dowager Cixi was very clever as a child. She was good at writing documents and liked to read historical biographies.

古文：女工之事，无不闲习。
现代文：女红的事，都很娴熟。
English: There is no such thing as a spinster who is not proficient in spinning, embroidery and sewing.

古文：宋后废帝将纳爲后，齐初，安陆王缅又欲结婚，郗氏并辞以女疾，乃止。
现代文：宋后废帝将要把她纳为皇后，齐朝初年，安陆王萧缅又要结婚，郗氏都以女儿有病来推辞，才算罢休。
English: In the first year of the Qi Dynasty, Anlu King Xiao Ming wanted to marry again, but the Min clan refused, saying that their daughter was ill.

古文：齐建元末，嫔于武帝，生永兴公主玉姚、永世公主玉婉、永康公主玉嬛。
现代文：齐朝建元末年，嫁给武帝，生了永兴公主萧玉姚、永世公主萧玉婉、永康公主萧玉轘。
English: At the end of the first year of the Qi Dynasty, she married Emperor Wu and gave birth to Princess Yongxing Xiao Yuyao, Princess Yongxing Xiao Yuwan and Princess Yongkang Xiao Yuyao.

古文：及武帝爲雍州刺史，殂于襄阳官舍，年三十二。
现代文：后来武帝做雍州刺史，她死在襄阳官舍，年龄三十二岁。
English: Later, Emperor Wu made Yongzhou a province, and she died in a government house in Xiangyang at the age of 32.

古文：其年归葬南徐州南东海武进县东城里山。
现代文：当年归葬家乡南徐州南东海武进县东城里山。
English: This year, he was buried in Dongchengli Mountain, Nanzukaihwujin County, South Xuzhou.

古文：中兴二年，武帝爲梁公，齐帝诏赠后爲梁公妃。
现代文：中兴二年，武帝为梁公，齐帝诏令赠郗皇后为梁公妃。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Zhongxing, Emperor Wu was Liang Gong, and Emperor Qi issued a decree to bestow the Empress Dowager as Liang Gongfei.

古文：及武帝践阼，追崇爲皇后，諡曰德。
现代文：后来武帝登基，追尊为皇后，谥号为德。
English: Later, Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, Suizun became the empress, and her nickname was De.

古文：陵曰修陵。
现代文：陵墓叫修陵。
English: Her mausoleum is known as Gongling.

古文：后父晔，赠金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：皇后的父亲郗晔，赠给官号为金紫光禄大夫。
English: The queen's father, Zou, gave him the official title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：后酷妒忌，及终，化爲龙入于后宫井，通梦于帝。
现代文：郗皇后极为妒忌，死后，化为龙钻入后宫的井中，通梦给武帝。
English: The Empress Dowager was extremely jealous. After her death, she turned into a dragon and burrowed into the well of the harem, communicating her dreams to Emperor Wu.

古文：或见形，光彩照灼。
现代文：有时现出龙形，光彩照耀。
English: Sometimes a dragon shape appears, and the glory shines.

古文：帝体将不安，龙辄激水腾涌。
现代文：武帝身体将要不安的时候，龙就激水腾涌。
English: When Emperor Wu's body is about to be uneasy, the dragon will make the water surge.

古文：于露井上爲殿，衣服委积，常置银鹿卢金瓶灌百味以祀之。
现代文：于是在露天的井口上建了一座宫殿，衣服堆积在上面，经常置放银辘轳金瓶灌上各种美味来祭祀她。
English: Therefore, a palace was built on the wellhead in the open air, with clothes piled on top, and silver and gold bottles filled with various delicacies were often placed to worship her.

古文：故帝卒不置后。
现代文：所以武帝终于不再设置皇后。
English: So Emperor Wu finally stopped setting up queens.

古文：武丁贵嫔讳令光，谯国人也。
现代文：武丁贵嫔名字叫令光，谯国人。
English: Wuding Guixuan's name is Lingguang, a native of Shandong Province.

古文：祖父从官襄阳，因居沔北五女村，寓于刘惠明庑下。
现代文：祖父在襄阳担任属官，于是便居住在沔水北面的五女村，寄居在刘惠明的家中。
English: His grandfather served as a subordinate official in Xiangyang, so he lived in Wujiecun, north of Surabaya, and stayed at Liu Huiming's home.

古文：贵嫔生于樊城，初産有神光之异，紫气满室，故以 光 爲名。
现代文：丁贵嫔出生在樊城，刚产下来时候具有一种奇异的神光，满屋紫气，所以便以 光 做名字。
English: Ding Guizhen was born in Lucheng. When she was just born, she had a strange radiance, and the whole house was full of purple, so she named herself after the light.

古文：相者云 当大贵 。
现代文：相面的人说她 一定会大贵 。
English: People on the other side of the table say she's bound to be very expensive.

古文：少时与邻女月下纺绩，诸女并患蚊蚋，而贵嫔弗之觉也。
现代文：少年的时候和邻居的姑娘在月光下纺织，其他姑娘都被蚊子叮得难受，而丁贵嫔却不觉得。
English: When she was a teenager, she and a neighbor girl were weaving in the moonlight. All the other girls were stung by mosquitoes, but Ding Guijuan didn't feel it.

古文：乡人魏益德将娉之，未及成，而武帝镇樊城，尝登楼以望，见汉滨五采如龙，下有女子擘絖，则贵嫔也。
现代文：同乡人魏益德将要娶她，还没有办成，而梁武帝镇守樊城，曾经登楼了望，见汉水岸边五彩辉耀，像一条龙，下面有一个女子在分剥绵絮，就是贵嫔。
English: Fellow villager Wei Yide is going to marry her, but it hasn't been arranged yet, and Emperor Liang Wu, who is in charge of the city of Lushan, once went upstairs to take a look, and saw the coast of the Han River glittering in five colors, like a dragon, and below there was a woman peeling away the lint, that is, Gui Yao.

古文：又丁氏因人以相者言闻之于帝，帝赠以金环，纳之，时年十四。
现代文：丁家又通过别人把相面人的话让武帝闻知，武帝把一个金环赠给她，后来娶了她，当时年龄是十四岁。
English: The Ding family also let Emperor Wu know about the words of the face-to-face person through others. Emperor Wu gave her a gold ring and later married her, when she was fourteen years old.

古文：贵嫔生而有赤志在左臂，疗之不灭；又体多疣子，至是无何并失所在。
现代文：贵嫔生下来就有一颗红痣在左臂上，治疗也没有消除；又身上有许多疣子，到这时不久全都没有了。
English: The noblewoman was born with a red birthmark on her left arm, which the treatment did not remove; she also had a number of lice on her body, but by this time they had all disappeared.

古文：德后酷忌，遇贵嫔无道，使日舂五斛，舂每中程，若有助者，被遇虽严，益小心祗敬。
现代文：德皇后妒忌心极强，对待贵嫔蛮横无道，让她每天舂米五斛，而她舂米经常达到要求，好像有神在帮助。受到的待遇虽然严厉，她却越发小心恭敬。
English: The German empress was extremely jealous and treated the noblewoman outrageously, making her knead rice five times a day, and she kneaded rice often to meet the requirements, as if God was helping. Although she was treated harshly, she became more and more careful and respectful.

古文：尝于供养经案侧，髣佛若见神人，心独异之。
现代文：她曾经在供奉神佛的经案旁边，仿佛看到了神人，心里独自感到诧异。
English: She once stood next to a sutra inscribed with the names of gods and Buddhas, as if she had seen a god-man, and felt a sense of wonder in her heart.

古文：天监元年五月，有司奏爲贵人，未拜；其年八月，又奏爲贵嫔，居显阳殿。
现代文：天监元年五月，有关部门奏请封她为贵人，没有任命；当年八月，又奏请封她为贵嫔，居住在显阳殿。
English: In May of the first year of Tianjing, the relevant departments petitioned to have her appointed as a noblewoman, but she was not appointed; in August of that year, they petitioned to have her appointed as a noblewoman, and she lived in Xianyang Palace.

古文：及太子定位，有司奏曰： 皇太子副贰宸极，率土咸执吏礼。
现代文：到了太子地位确定的时候，有关部门上奏说： 皇太子是皇上的副手，普天下都对他执臣子的礼节。
English: When the status of the crown prince was determined, the relevant departments reported: The crown prince is the emperor's deputy, and all over the world he is treated with the courtesy of a vassal.

古文：既尽礼皇储，则所生不容无敬。
现代文：既然大家都尊崇太子，那么生他的母亲也就不容许不加敬重。
English: Since everyone respects the crown prince, it is not permissible for the mother who gave birth to him to be treated with less respect.

古文：王侯妃主常得通信问者，及六宫三夫人虽与贵嫔同列，并应以敬皇太子之礼敬贵嫔。
现代文：经常得到问候的王侯贵妃公主，和六宫的三夫人，虽然与贵嫔同等地位，也都应以敬奉皇太子的礼节敬奉贵嫔。
English: Princes, princesses, princes' wives, princesses, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princesses' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, wives' wives' wives, wives' wives' wives' wives'

古文：宋元嘉中，始兴、武陵国臣并以吏敬敬王所生潘淑妃、路淑媛。
现代文：宋朝元嘉年间，始兴国、武陵国的臣子都是以官吏敬王的礼节敬奉生王的潘淑妃、路淑媛。
English: During the Song Dynasty and Yuan Jia Dynasty, the vassals of the Shixing and Wuling dynasties all paid homage to the newborn king's Pan Shuxi and Lu Shuxi with the etiquette of officials paying homage to the king.

古文：贵嫔于宫臣虽非小君，其义不异，与宋泰豫朝议百官以吏敬敬帝所生，事义政同。
现代文：贵嫔对于宫中众臣来说，虽然不是小君，但是其中的道理并没有什么不同，这和宋朝泰豫元年朝官商议百官以官吏敬奉皇帝的礼节敬奉皇帝的生母，其道理正相同。
English: For the courtiers in the palace, although he is not a minor prince, the reason is no different. It is the same reason as that of the Song Dynasty and the Taiyuan Dynasty in the first year of the Song Dynasty, when the imperial officials discussed and honored the emperor's birth mother with the etiquette of officials.

古文：谓宫僚施敬，宜同吏礼，诣神兽门奉笺致谒，年节称庆，亦同如此。
现代文：主张宫中官僚奉行礼节，应该与朝中官吏相同，定时到神兽门呈帖拜见，每逢年节进行道贺，也和这是一样的。
English: He advocated that the bureaucrats in the palace should follow the same etiquette as the government officials in the DPRK, and regularly visit the Gate of the Gods and Beasts to offer their greetings, and also make a congratulatory speech every New Year's Day.

古文：且储妃作配，率由盛则，以妇踰姑，弥乖从序，谓贵嫔典章，一与太子不异。 
现代文：况且太子与妃子婚配，都是按照成规中礼仪盛美的法则，这样以儿媳超过婆母的礼节，更加不合家族的应有秩序。我们以为贵嫔的有关典章，应该完全与太子的没有差别。 
English: Moreover, the marriage of the prince and his concubine is in accordance with the established rules of etiquette and beauty, so that the daughter-in-law surpasses the mother-in-law's etiquette, and is even more out of line with the proper order of the family. We think that the relevant ordinances of the noblemen should be completely no different from the prince.

古文：于是贵嫔备典章礼数，同乎太子，言则称令。
现代文：从此以后贵嫔所具备的典章礼仪，与太子相同，说话被称为命令。
English: From then on, the etiquette of court nobles was the same as that of princes, and speaking was called an order.

古文：贵嫔性仁恕，及居宫接驭，自下皆得其欢心。
现代文：贵嫔性格仁厚宽恕，后来居住在宫中接待驾驭，从下层起都得到她的欢心。
English: Noble character of benevolence and forgiveness, and later lived in the palace to receive the driving force, from the bottom up to get her favor.

古文：不好华饰，器服无珍丽。
现代文：她不喜欢华贵的装饰，所用的器物衣服没有珍贵奇丽的东西。
English: She doesn't like ornate decoration, and the utensils and clothes she uses don't have anything precious or fancy.

古文：未尝爲亲戚私谒。
现代文：她不曾为亲戚的事而私下请求。
English: She didn't make a private plea for her relative.

古文：及武帝弘佛教，贵嫔长进蔬膳。
现代文：后来武帝弘扬佛教，贵嫔长年食用蔬菜。
English: Later, Emperor Wu promoted Buddhism, and Guizhong continued to eat vegetables for many years.

古文：受戒日，甘露降于殿前，方一丈五尺。
现代文：受戒的那天，有甘露降在宫殿的前面，一丈五尺见方。
English: On the day of her ordination, the luscious rain and dew fell in front of the temple, covering a length and breadth of one and a half meters.

古文：帝所立经义，皆得其指归，尤精净名经。
现代文：武帝所立的佛经义理，她都懂得它们的旨意，尤其精于《净名经》。
English: She knows the meaning of all the Buddhist sutras and doctrines established by Emperor Wu, and is especially proficient in the Pure Land Sutra.

古文：普通七年十一月庚辰，薨，移殡于东宫临云殿，时年四十二。
现代文：普通七年十一月十五日，去世，灵柩迁移到东宫的临云殿，当时四十二岁。
English: He died on November 15, 77, and his coffin was moved to the East Palace's Lin Yun Hall. He was 42 years old at the time.

古文：诏吏部郎张缵爲哀册文，有司奏諡曰穆，葬甯陵，祔于小庙。
现代文：诏令吏部郎张缵撰写哀悼策文，经有关部门奏请给她追加谥号为 穆 。葬在宁陵，附祭于小庙。
English: Zhao ordered the official Zhang Qian to write a condolence policy, and the relevant departments asked her to add the nickname "Mu." She was buried in Ningling and enshrined in a small temple.

古文：简文即位，追崇曰太后。
现代文：简文帝即位，追尊为太后。
English: Emperor Jianwen ascended to the throne, and Suizong became empress dowager.

古文：贵嫔父道迁，天监初，爲历阳太守。
现代文：丁贵嫔的父亲丁道迁，在天监初年，做历阳太守。
English: Ding Guizhen's father, Ding Daoqian, became the governor of Liyang in the first year of Tianjing.

古文：庐陵威王之生，武帝谓之曰： 贤女复育一男。 
现代文：庐陵威王出生后，武帝告诉他说： 您的贤女又生了一个男孩。 
English: After the birth of Fuling Wei Wang Rong, Emperor Wu told him: Your virtuous daughter has given birth to another boy.

古文：答曰： 莫道猪狗子。 
现代文：他回答说： 不要说猪狗崽子。 
English: He replied, "Don't say pig, dog, mule.

古文：陈武宣章皇后，讳要儿，吴兴乌程人。
现代文：世人做为笑谈。后来位居兖州刺史、宣城太守。陈武宣章皇后，名叫要儿，吴兴乌程人。
English: The world made fun of her. Later, she lived in Zhangzhou and became the governor of Xuancheng. The Empress of Chenwu and Xuancheng, named Yaer, was from Wuxing and Wucheng.

古文：本姓钮，父景明爲章氏所养，因改姓焉。
现代文：本来姓钮，她的父亲景明为章氏所收养，于是改姓章。
English: Originally surnamed Niu, her father, Jingming, was adopted by the Zhang family, so she changed her surname to Zhang.

古文：后母苏，尝遇道士以小龟遗己，光采五色，曰 三年有征 。
现代文：章皇后的母亲苏氏，曾经遇见一个道士把一个小龟赠给自己，光彩五色，说是 三年有征 。
English: Queen Zhang's mother, Su, once met a Taoist who gave her a small turtle with five-colored splendor, saying that it was three years old.

古文：及期，后生，紫光照室，因失龟所在。
现代文：到了所说的日期，皇后降生，紫光照耀房间，从此小龟就不见了。
English: On the appointed day, the queen was born, a purple light shone in the room, and the little turtle disappeared.

古文：后少聪慧，美容仪，手爪长五寸，色并红白。
现代文：章皇后少年聪慧，仪容美丽，手指甲长五寸，颜色都是红中透白。
English: Zhang Qiong's boy is intelligent, has a beautiful appearance, his fingernails are five inches long, and the color is red and white.

古文：每有期功之服，则一爪先折。
现代文：每次有丧事发生，则一个指甲先折。
English: Every time there is a death, a fingernail is broken first.

古文：武帝先娶同郡钱仲方女，早卒，后乃聘后。
现代文：武帝先是娶的同郡钱仲方的女儿，很早死去，后来才娶了章皇后。
English: Emperor Wu first married the daughter of Qian Zhongfang of the same county, who died very early, and later married Empress Zhang.

古文：后善书计，能诵诗及楚辞。
现代文：章皇后善于读书，能背诵《诗》和《楚辞》。
English: Empress Zhang is good at reading and can recite "Poetry" and "Wisdom."

古文：帝爲长城县公，后拜夫人。
现代文：武帝为长城县公，章皇后封为夫人。
English: Emperor Wu was the official of the Great Wall County, and Empress Zhang was his wife.

古文：永定元年，立爲皇后。
现代文：永定元年，立为皇后。
English: In the first year of Yongding, she became the empress.

古文：追赠后父梁散骑侍郎景明特进、金紫光禄大夫，加金章紫绶。
现代文：追赠皇后的父亲梁朝的散骑侍郎章景明为特进、金紫光禄大夫，加金章紫绶。
English: As a posthumous gift from the Empress's father, Emperor Liang, the horseback-riding attendant, Zhang Jieming, received a special award, the Golden Purple Star, and a gold medal with purple ribbon.

古文：拜后母苏安吉县君。
现代文：封皇后的母亲苏氏为安吉县君。
English: The empress's mother, Su, was from Anji County.

古文：二年，安吉君卒，与后父葬吴兴。
现代文：二年，安吉君去世，与皇后的父亲一起葬在吴兴。
English: Two years later, Angie died and was buried in Wuxing together with the queen's father.

古文：明年，追封后父爲广德县侯，諡曰温。
现代文：第二年，追封皇后的父亲为广德县侯，谥号为温。
English: The following year, the queen's father was named the Prince of Guangde County, and his posthumous name was Wen.

古文：武帝崩，后与中书舍人蔡景历定计，秘不发丧。
现代文：武帝逝世，章皇后和中书舍人蔡景历定计，保守秘密暂不发丧。
English: When Emperor Wu died, Empress Zhang and Cai Jingli, who was in charge of the imperial library, decided to keep the death a secret.

古文：时衡阳献王昌未至，召文帝。
现代文：当时衡阳献王萧昌没有来到，召见了文帝。
English: At that time, the king of Hengyang, Xiao Chang, did not come and summoned Emperor Wen.

古文：及即位，尊后爲皇太后，宫曰慈训。
现代文：文帝即位后，尊章皇后为皇太后，宫殿名叫慈训。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended the throne, Empress Zunzhang became the empress dowager, and the palace was named Cixun.

古文：废帝即位，后爲太皇太后。
现代文：废帝即位，章皇后为太皇太后。
English: The deposed emperor ascended to the throne, and Empress Zhang became the Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：光大二年，后下令黜废帝爲临海王，命宣帝嗣立。
现代文：光大二年，章皇后下令罢黜废帝为临海王，命令宣帝嗣位登基。
English: In the second year of Guangda University, Empress Zhang ordered the dethronement of the deposed emperor as the king of Linhai, and ordered Emperor Xuan to ascend the throne.

古文：太建元年，复爲皇太后。
现代文：太建元年，重又为皇太后。
English: In the first year of the Tai Jian era, she became the empress dowager again.

古文：二年三月丙申，崩于紫极殿，时年六十五。
现代文：二年三月十三日，在紫极殿逝世，当时年纪六十五岁。
English: In March of the second year of Hsin, the empress died in the imperial palace, at the age of sixty-five.

古文：遗令丧事并从俭约，诸馈奠不用牲牢。
现代文：遗令说丧事全部要讲求俭朴，各种祭奠都不用牲口。
English: The last will and testament said that all funerals should be frugal, and no animals should be used for any kind of memorial service.

古文：其年四月，群臣上諡曰宣，祔葬万安陵。
现代文：那年四月，群臣上谥号为宣，附葬在万安陵。
English: In April of that year, the group of courtiers were given the posthumous name of Xuan and buried in the Wan'an Mausoleum.

古文：后亲属无在朝者，唯本族兄钮洽官至中散大夫。
现代文：章皇后的亲属没有在朝中做官的，只有原来家族中的一个哥哥钮洽官至中散大夫。
English: None of Empress Zhang's relatives have served as officials in the imperial court. Only an older brother of the original family has been an official, Dr. Zhongshan Zhuang.

古文：文沈皇后讳妙容，吴兴武康人也。
现代文：文沈皇后名叫妙容，吴兴武康人。
English: Empress Wen Shen was named Myoryong, and Wu Xingwu Kangren.

古文：父法深，梁安前中录事参军。
现代文：父亲沈法深，梁朝的安前中录事参军。
English: His father, Shen Foshen, enlisted in the army during the Anzhen Middle School of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：后年十岁余，以梁大同中归于文帝。
现代文：沈皇后十岁多的时候，在梁朝的大同年间嫁给文帝。
English: When Empress Shen was more than ten years old, she married Emperor Wen in the same year of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：武帝之讨侯景，文帝时在吴兴，及后并被收，景平，乃获免。
现代文：武帝讨伐侯景，文帝当时正在吴兴，他和沈皇后都被拘禁，侯景平定了，才获得自由。
English: Emperor Wu fought against Houjing, Emperor Wen was in Wuxing at the time, he and Empress Shen were both detained, Houjing was pacified, and then he was free.

古文：武帝践阼，后爲临川王妃。
现代文：武帝登基，沈皇后为临川王妃。
English: Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, and Empress Shen became the Empress of Linchuan.

古文：文帝即位，爲皇后。
现代文：文帝即位，为皇后。
English: Emperor Wen ascended the throne and she became the empress.

古文：追赠后父法深光禄大夫，加金章紫绶，封建城县侯，諡曰恭。
现代文：追赠沈皇后的父亲沈法深为光禄大夫，加金章紫绶，封为建城县侯，谥号为恭。
English: As a posthumous gift, Queen Shen's father, Shen Foshen, was awarded the title of Guanglu Doctor, the Gold Medal with Purple Ribbon, the title of Jiancheng County Marquis, and the posthumous title of Gong.

古文：追赠后母高爲绥安县君，諡曰定。
现代文：追赠皇后的母亲高氏为绥安县君，谥号为定。
English: The queen's mother, Gao, was posthumously awarded the title of Jianan County Princess, and her posthumous name remains unchanged.

古文：废帝即位，尊后爲皇太后，宫曰安德。
现代文：废帝即位，尊沈皇后为皇太后，宫殿名为安德。
English: The deposed emperor ascended the throne, Empress Son-Shen became the empress dowager, and the palace was named the Andong Palace.

古文：时宣帝与仆射到仲举、舍人刘师知等，并受遗辅政。
现代文：当时宣帝与仆射到仲举、舍人刘师知等，都受遗诏辅佐朝政。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanxuan and his attendants, such as Zhaoju and Liu Shizhi, were all supported by the imperial edict to assist the imperial government.

古文：师知与仲举恒居禁中，参决衆事，而宣帝爲扬州刺史，与左右三百人，入居尚书省。
现代文：刘师知和到仲举总是住在宫中，参与决定各种大事，而宣帝为扬州刺史，和随从三百人，进入并住在尚书省。
English: Liu Shizhi and Zhuge Liang always lived in the palace and participated in the decision-making of various major events, while Emperor Xuan made history for Yangzhou, and accompanied by three hundred people, entered and lived in Shangshu Province.

古文：师知忌宣帝权重，矫敕令还东府理州务。
现代文：刘师知忌讳宣帝权势太重，假造圣旨命令他回到东府管理州中事务。
English: Liu Shishi knew that Emperor Xuan's power was too strong, and ordered him to return to Dongfu to manage the affairs of Shuzhong.

古文：宣帝将出，毛喜止帝曰： 今若出外，便受制于人，如曹爽愿作富家公不可得也。 
现代文：宣帝将要出京，毛喜制止他说： 今天如果出京，便会受制于人，像曹爽那样想做富家公而不可得。 
English: Emperor Xuan was about to leave Beijing, and Mao Xi stopped him, saying, "If you leave Beijing today, you will be controlled by others. If you want to be a rich man like Cao Shuang, you will not get it.

古文：宣帝乃称疾，召师知留与语，使毛喜先入，言之于后。
现代文：于是宣帝便声称有病，召刘师知留下和他说话，让毛喜先入宫中，告诉给沈皇后。
English: Emperor Xuan then claimed to be ill, summoned Liu Shizhi to stay and talk to him, let Mao Xi enter the palace first, and told Empress Shen Ruan.

古文：后曰： 今伯宗年幼，政事并委二郎,此非我意。 
现代文：沈皇后说： 现在伯宗年幼，政事都交给二郎，这不是我的意思。 
English: Empress Shen said, "Now that Bozong is young, the government affairs are left to Jiro. This is not what I meant.

古文：喜又言于废帝，废帝曰： 此自师知等所爲，非朕意也。 
现代文：毛喜又告诉给废帝，废帝说： 这全是刘师知干的，不是朕的意思。 
English: Mao Xi also told the emperor, and the emperor said: This was all done by Liu Shizhi, not by me.

古文：喜出报宣帝，帝因囚师知。
现代文：毛喜出来报告宣帝，宣帝便囚禁了刘师知。
English: Mao Xi came out to report to Emperor Xuanzong, who then imprisoned Liu Shizhi.

古文：自入见后及帝，极陈师知之短。
现代文：自己进殿去见皇后和废帝，极力述说刘师知的缺点。
English: He went into the palace to see the empress and the deposed emperor, and tried his best to describe the shortcomings of Liu Shizhi.

古文：仍自草敕请画，以师知付廷尉，其夜于狱赐死。
现代文：便自己起草了一份敕令，请废帝画押，然后把刘师知交给了廷尉，当夜在狱中赐他自杀。
English: He then drafted a royal edict himself, asking the emperor to sign it, and then handed Liu Shizhi over to the imperial lieutenant, who ordered him to commit suicide in prison that night.

古文：自是政归宣帝。
现代文：从此政权归于宣帝。
English: From then on, the political power was in the hands of Emperor Xuan.

古文：后忧闷，计无所出，乃密赂宦者蒋裕，令诱建安人张安国使据郡反，冀因此图帝。
现代文：沈皇后心中忧闷，无计可施，便秘密地贿赂宦官蒋裕，让他引诱建安人张安国使他依据本郡造反，希望由此而算计宣帝。
English: Empress Shen was depressed and helpless, so she secretly bribed eunuch Jiang Yu, asking him to entice Jianan's Zhang Anguo to rebel according to the county, hoping that this would lead to the proclamation of Emperor.

古文：安国事发被诛，时后左右近侍颇知其事，后恐连逮党与，并杀之。
现代文：张安国事情泄露被杀，当时皇后左右的近身侍卫很了解这件事，沈皇后恐怕牵连到同党，就把他们全部杀掉。
English: At that time, the close bodyguards around the empress were well aware of this matter. Queen Shen was afraid of being implicated in the same party, so she killed them all.

古文：宣帝即位，以后爲文皇后。
现代文：宣帝即位，封沈皇后为文皇后。
English: Emperor Xuan was enthroned, and Empress Shen was enthroned as Empress Wen.

古文：陈亡入隋，大业初自长安归于江南，顷之卒。
现代文：陈朝灭亡后进入隋朝，大业初年从长安回到江南，不久死去。
English: After the fall of the Chen Dynasty, he entered the Sui Dynasty. In the first year, Daye returned from Chang'an to the south of the Yangtze River and died soon after.

古文：后兄钦，袭爵建城侯，位尚书左仆射。
现代文：沈皇后的哥哥沈钦，世袭了爵位建城侯，官位达到尚书左仆射。
English: Shen Qin, the elder brother of Queen Shen, inherited the title of Jiancheng marquis, and reached the official rank of Shangshu Zuofu Jiao.

古文：贞观初卒。张贵妃名丽华，兵家女也。
现代文：他的儿子沈观承袭爵位，颇有学识，官至御史中丞。张贵妃名叫丽华，是兵家的女儿。
English: His son, Shen Guan, inherited the title of nobility, was quite learned, and was a high-ranking official. Zhang Guifei's name was Li Hua, and she was the daughter of a soldier.

古文：父兄以织席爲业。
现代文：父兄以织席为业。
English: My father and brother are weavers.

古文：后主爲太子，以选入宫。时龚贵嫔爲良娣，贵妃年十岁，爲之给使。
现代文：后主做太子的时候，被挑选入宫，当时龚贵妃为良娣，张贵妃年龄十岁，给她使唤。
English: When the latter became the crown prince, he was selected to enter the palace. At that time, Gu Guifei was a good girl, and Zhang Guifei was ten years old, and he served her.

古文：后主见而悦之，因得幸，遂有娠，生太子深。
现代文：后主一见就喜欢上了她，从而得到亲幸，于是便怀了孕，生下太子深。
English: Later, the master fell in love with her at first sight, thus gaining personal happiness, so she became pregnant and gave birth to the crown prince.

古文：后主即位，拜爲贵妃。
现代文：后主即位，封为贵妃。
English: After the Lord's accession to the throne, she was given the title of noble consort.

古文：性聪慧，甚被宠遇。
现代文：性格聪明灵慧，很受宠爱。
English: Clever and witty, he is much loved.

古文：后主始以始兴王叔陵之乱，被伤，卧于承香殿。
现代文：后主起初因为始兴王之乱，受了伤，躺在承香殿。
English: At first, because of the rebellion of King Shih Hsing, the queen mother was injured and lay in the Hall of Incense.

古文：时诸姬并不得进，唯贵妃侍焉。
现代文：当时诸姬都不得进入，只有张贵妃在身旁服侍。
English: At that time, all concubines were not allowed to enter, and only Zhang Guifei served at her side.

古文：而柳太后犹居柏梁殿，即皇后之正殿也。
现代文：柳太后仍住在柏梁殿，也就是皇后的正殿。
English: However, Empress Dowager Liu still lived in the Pat Liang Palace, and the Baijiu Palace was the main palace of the empress.

古文：而沈皇后素无宠于后主，不得侍疾，别居求贤殿。
现代文：而沈皇后向来在后主那里不曾得宠，不得服侍伤病，另外住在求贤殿。
English: However, Empress Shen has never been favored by her heirs, is not allowed to serve the wounded and sick, and lives in the House of Virtue.

古文：至德二年，乃于光昭殿前起临春、结绮、望仙三阁，高数十丈，并数十间。
现代文：至德二年，在光昭殿的前面建起了临春、结绮、望仙三阁，高几十丈，总共好几十间。
English: In the second year of Zhi De, three pavilions were built in front of the Guangzhao Hall: the Linchun Pavilion, the Knot Pavilion, and the Wangxian Pavilion. They are dozens of meters high, with a total of dozens of rooms.

古文：其窗牖、壁带、县楣、栏槛之类，皆以沈檀香爲之，又饰以金玉，间以珠翠，外施珠帘。
现代文：其中的窗户、壁带、悬楣、栏槛之类，都用沉檀香做成，又用金玉装饰，点缀上珠翠，外面加上珠帘。
English: Among them, the windows, wall strips, overhangs, sills, etc. are all made of sedimentary sandalwood, and decorated with gold beads, embellished with pearls, and pearl curtains on the outside.

古文：内有宝床宝帐，其服玩之属，瑰丽皆近古未有。
现代文：里面有宝床宝帐，那些穿用和玩赏一类的东西，它们的瑰丽都是近代以来所没有的。
English: There are treasure beds and treasure chests inside, things that are worn and played with, and their magnificence has not been seen since modern times.

古文：每微风暂至，香闻数里，朝日初照，光映后庭。
现代文：每当微风到来时，香气能在几里以外闻到，朝阳初照，光彩辉映后庭。
English: Every time the breeze suddenly blows, the aroma floats a few miles away, the sun shines for the first time in the morning, and the light shines in the backyard.

古文：其下积石爲山，引水爲池，植以奇树，杂以花药。
现代文：它的下面用石头聚垒成山，引水做池塘，种上奇树，穿插进花和药草。
English: Underneath it, stones are used to make mountains, water is diverted to make ponds, strange trees are planted, and flowers and herbs are interspersed.

古文：后主自居临春阁，张贵妃居结绮阁，龚、孔二贵嫔居望仙阁，并复道交相往来。
现代文：后主自己住在临春阁，张贵妃住在结绮阁，龚、孔二贵嫔住在望仙阁，都有复道可以互相往来。
English: Later, the master himself lived in Linchun Pavilion, Zhang Guizhi lived in Shigaki Salt, and Zou and one or two noblemen lived in Wangxian Pavilion. They all communicated with each other through the skybridge between the pavilions.

古文：又有王、季二美人，张、薛二淑媛，袁昭仪、何婕妤、江修容等七人，并有宠，递代以游其上。
现代文：又有王、季二位美人，张、薛二位淑媛，袁昭仪、何婕妤、江修容等七人，都受到宠爱，轮流到上面游玩。
English: In addition, Wang and Ji, two beauties, Zhang and Xue, two ladies, Yuan Zhaoyi, He Yao, Jiang Shurong and other seven people were all loved and took turns to visit the top.

古文：以宫人有文学者袁大舍等爲女学士。
现代文：以通晓文学的宫人袁大舍等为女学士。
English: Yuan Dashe, a courtier who was well versed in literature, and others became female baccalaureates.

古文：后主每引宾客，对贵妃等游宴，则使诸贵人及女学士与狎客共赋新诗，互相赠答。
现代文：后主每次引来宾客，和贵妃等人游宴，就让诸位贵人和女学士以及狎客共同写作新诗，互相赠答。
English: Later, every time the master invited guests to a banquet with the empress and other dignitaries, he asked the dignitaries, female scholars and guests to write new poems together and give them to each other.

古文：采其尤艳丽者，以爲曲调，被以新声。
现代文：挑选出其中特别艳丽的，作为曲调，配上新的乐曲。
English: Select the most beautiful of them, as a tune, with a new piece of music.

古文：选宫女有容色者以千百数，令习而歌之，分部叠进，持以相乐。
现代文：选出的有容色的宫女数以千百计，让她们练习好以后前去歌唱，分开乐部陆续进行，借以互相取乐。
English: There are hundreds of thousands of beautiful maids of honour who have been selected. After they have practised, let them go and sing, and then the clubs will be held one after another, so that they can have fun with each other.

古文：其曲有玉树后庭花、临春乐等。
现代文：其中的曲子有《玉树后庭花》、《临春乐》等。
English: Among the pieces are "Jade Garden Flowers," "Spring Music" and others.

古文：其略云： 璧月夜夜满，琼树朝朝新。 
现代文：其中大略说： 璧月夜夜满，琼树朝朝新。 
English: Among them, it is roughly said that: the moon is full at night, and the trees are new in the morning.

古文：大抵所归，皆美张贵妃、孔贵嫔之容色。
现代文：大致宗旨，都是赞美张贵妃、孔贵嫔的容貌颜色。
English: The general purpose is to praise the appearance color of Zhang Guifei and Kong Guizhou.

古文：张贵妃发长七尺，鬒黑如漆，其光可鉴。
现代文：张贵妃头发长七尺，浓黑如漆，光亮可以照人。
English: Zhang Guifei's hair is seven feet long, thick and black as lacquer, and bright enough to illuminate a person.

古文：特聪慧，有神彩，进止闲华，容色端丽。
现代文：特别聪明灵慧，富有神采，举动闲雅华贵，容色端庄秀丽。
English: He is particularly intelligent and witty, full of wit, with a leisurely and elegant demeanor, and a dignified and beautiful appearance.

古文：每瞻视眄睐，光彩溢目，照映左右。
现代文：每当望观瞟视，光彩在眼中流溢，映照着左右众人。
English: Every time you look at it, the brilliance in your eyes overflows, reflecting everyone around you.

古文：尝于阁上靓妆，临于轩槛，宫中遥望，飘若神仙。
现代文：她曾在阁上妆饰得极为美丽，走近阁前的栏杆，从宫中远远望去，飘飘然好像是神仙一般。
English: She had been adorned in the attic to be extremely beautiful, approached the railing in front of the attic, looked far away from the palace, and floated as if she were a fairy.

古文：才辩强记，善候人主顔色。
现代文：她很有辩才，记忆力强，善于观察皇上的脸色。
English: She was a great debater, had a strong memory, and was good at observing the Emperor's face.

古文：荐诸宫女，后宫咸德之，竞言其善。
现代文：她很受宫女们的推重，后宫的人都很感戴她，争着讲她的好处。
English: She was very much pushed by the ladies-in-waiting, and the people in the harem were very impressed with her and were eager to talk about her benefits.

古文：又工厌魅之术，假鬼道以惑后主。
现代文：她又精通祈祷技术，假借鬼道来迷惑后主。
English: She is also proficient in prayer techniques, pretending to be a ghost to confuse her successor.

古文：置淫祀于宫中，聚诸女巫使之鼓舞。
现代文：在宫中设置了各种各样的祭祀，聚集许多女巫，让她们击鼓跳舞。
English: Various rituals were set up in the palace, gathering many witches and making them play drums and dance.

古文：时后主怠于政事，百司啓奏，并因宦者蔡临儿、李善度进请，后主倚隐囊，置张贵妃于膝上共决之。
现代文：当时后主对政事十分怠惰，百官的启奏，都要通过太监蔡临儿、李善度呈递请示，后主倚着靠枕，让张贵妃坐在膝上共同决定。
English: At that time, the empress dowager was very lazy in political affairs. The opening of the hundred officials had to be submitted through the eunuchs Cai Lin'er and Li Shandu. The empress dowager leaned on the pillow and let Zhang Guifei sit on her lap to make a joint decision.

古文：李、蔡所不能记者，贵妃并爲疏条，无所遗脱。
现代文：李、蔡所记不住的，张贵妃都写成条款，无所遗漏。
English: What Li and Cai could not remember, Zhang Guifei wrote down the terms, leaving nothing out.

古文：因参访外事，人间有一言一事，贵妃必先知白之，由是益加宠异，冠绝后庭。
现代文：因为参与访察宫外的事务，社会上有一言一事，贵妃必定首先知道并且告诉给后主，由此更加受到特异的宠幸，冠绝后宫。
English: Because of her participation in the affairs outside the palace, there is a saying in society that the empress must first know and tell the heir, and thus she is more favored by the special privilege of winning the crown of the harem.

古文：而后宫之家，不遵法度，有絓于理者，但求恩于贵妃，贵妃则令李、蔡先啓其事，而后从容爲言之。
现代文：而后宫的家人，有不守法度，违背事理的，只要请求贵妃施恩，贵妃则让李、蔡先把这件事上奏，而后再慢慢替他们说情。
English: As for the family members of the harem, if there are any who do not abide by the law and act unreasonably, as long as they ask the empress for mercy, the empress will let Li and Cai first report the matter, and then slowly intercede for them.

古文：大臣有不从者，因而谮之，言无不听。
现代文：大臣有不听从的，就趁机诬陷他们，说了后主没有不听的。
English: When some ministers did not obey, he took advantage of the opportunity to frame them, saying that there were no ministers who did not obey.

古文：于是张、孔之权，熏灼四方，内外宗族，多被引用，大臣执政，亦从风而靡。
现代文：于是张、孔的权力，熏灼四方，内外宗族，很多被任用，大臣与执政者，也都是随风披靡。
English: As a result, the power of Zhang and Kong was fumigated by the four quarters, the clans at home and abroad, many were appointed, and the ministers and rulers were also swept away by the wind.

古文：阉宦便佞之徒，内外交结，转相引进。贿赂公行，赏罚无常，纲纪瞀乱矣。
现代文：太监和谄媚之徒，内外勾结，互相引荐，贿赂公行，赏罚无常，法纪全被搞乱了。
English: Eunuchs and flatterers, collusion inside and outside, mutual introduction, bribery in public affairs, reward and punishment are impermanent, law and discipline have all been disrupted.

古文：及隋军克台城，贵妃与后主俱入井，隋军出之，晋王广命斩之于青溪中桥。
现代文：后来隋军攻克了台城，贵妃与后主都藏到井里，隋军把他们搜了出来，晋王杨广命令在青溪中桥把她杀死。
English: Later, the Sui army conquered Taicheng. Guifei and her husband hid in a well. The Sui army searched them out, and the Jin king Yang Guang ordered her to be killed in the middle bridge of Qingxi.

