古文：王奂张冲王奂，字彦孙，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：王奂字彦孙，琅邪临沂人。
English: Wang Xizhe is a descendant of Yixin, and he is also a descendant of Xizhe.

古文：祖僧朗，宋左光禄、仪同。父粹，黄门郎。
现代文：祖父王僧朗为宋左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司父王粹是黄门郎。
English: His grandfather, Wang Sanglang, was a doctor of Song Zaganglu, and his father, Wang Zi, was a Huangmenlang.

古文：奂出继从祖中书令球，故字彦孙。
现代文：王奂因遇继给堂祖父中书令王球为孙，所以字彦孙。
English: Wang Yao was given the title of grandson by his great-great-grandfather because he was the heir to the throne.

古文：解褐著作佐郎，太子舍人，安陆王冠军主簿，太子洗马，本州别驾，中书郎，桂阳王司空谘议，黄门郎。
现代文：王奂最初任著作佐郎，后陆续担任过太子舍人，安陆王冠军主簿，太子洗马，本州别驾，中书郎，柱阳王司空谘议，黄门郎。
English: Wang Yao was originally known as the author of "Saro," and later successively served as the prince's concubine, the master book of the champion of Anlu King, the prince's washing horse, the Honshu Bekai, the middle school teacher, the column Yang Wang Si Ku consultation, Huangmenro.

古文：元徽元年为晋熙王征虏长史、江夏内史，迁侍中，领步兵校尉。
现代文：宋元徽元年，他任晋熙王征虏长史、江夏内史，转迁侍中，领步兵校尉。
English: In the first year of the Song and Yuan dynasties, he was appointed by King Jinxi to recruit Changshi and Jiangxia Nishi, transferred to a chamberlain, and led an infantry lieutenant.

古文：复出为晋熙王镇西长史，加冠军将军、江夏武昌太守。
现代文：又出任晋熙王镇西长史，加封冠军将军，江夏、武昌太守。
English: He also served as the Jin Xi Wang Zhen Xi Chang Shi, the champion general, the governor of Jiangxia, and the governor of Wuchang.

古文：征祠部尚书，转掌吏部。
现代文：不久又被征召回京任祠部尚书，调去掌管吏部。
English: Soon after, he was called back to Beijing to take up the post of priest, and was transferred to be in charge of the personnel department.

古文：升明初，迁冠军将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：升明初年，王奂又转迁为冠军将军、丹阳尹。
English: In the first year of ascension, Wang Yao was transferred to become the champion general, Danyang Yin.

古文：初，王晏父普曜为沈攸之长史，常虑攸之举事，不得还。
现代文：当初，王晏的父亲王普曜任沈攸之的长史，常担忧沈攸之起事而自己不能回来。
English: At first, Wang Yao's father, Wang Puyang, had a long history of leaving Shen Youzhi. He was often worried that Shen Youzhi would start a riot and he would not be able to return.

古文：时奂为吏部，转普曜为内职，晏深德之。
现代文：当时王奂掌管吏部，把王普曜调回京城任职，王晏因此深深感激他。
English: At that time, Wang Hui was in charge of the personnel department and transferred Wang Puyang back to Beijing. Wang Hui was deeply grateful to him.

古文：及晏仕世祖府，奂从弟蕴反，世祖谓晏曰： 王奂宋家外戚，王蕴亲同逆党，既其群从，岂能无异意。
现代文：及至王晏在萧赜手下供职，王奂堂弟王蕴谋反，齐世祖萧赜对王晏说： 王奂是宋室的外戚，而王蕴亲自参加逆党，王奂既然舆他有堂兄弟关系，怎会没有二心。
English: When Wang Qian served under Xiao Qian, Wang Qian's cousin Wang Yun plotted a rebellion. The ancestor of Qi Dynasty, Xiao Qian, said to Wang Qian: Wang Qian is a maternal relative of the Song Dynasty, and Wang Yun himself participated in the rebel party. Since Wang Qian believes that he has a cousin relationship, how can Wang Qian not have two hearts?

古文：我欲具以启闻。 
现代文：我想把这些情况全都上奏给朝廷。 
English: I want to report all of this to the Imperial Court.

古文：晏叩头曰： 王奂修谨，保无异志。
现代文：王晏叩头说： 王奂这个人既善良又谨慎，我担保他没有二心。
English: Wang Yao kowtowed and said, "Wang Yao is a kind and prudent man. I guarantee that he is not double-minded."

古文：晏父母在都，请以为质。 
现代文：我父母都在京都，可以把他们作为人质。 
English: My parents are both in Kyoto, so I can use them as hostages.

古文：世祖乃止。
现代文：萧迹因此才打消了这一念头。
English: It was only then that Xiao Kui gave up the idea.

古文：出为吴兴太守，秩中二千石，将军如故。
现代文：王奂出任吴兴太守，俸禄是中二千石，将军衔照旧。
English: Wang Hui became Wu Xing's governor-general, with a salary of 2,000 koku and the same rank as before.

古文：寻进号征虏将军。
现代文：不久进号为征虏将军。
English: He was soon promoted to General of Conscripts.

古文：建元元年，进号左将军。
现代文：齐建元元年，进号为左将军。
English: In the first year of Qi Jianyuan, he was promoted to General Zuo.

古文：明年，迁太常，领鄱阳王师，仍转侍中，秘书监，领骁骑将军。
现代文：第二年，转迁为太常，领鄱阳王师，并转为侍中，秘书监，领骁骑将军。
English: In the second year, he was transferred to the position of Taizheng, the leader of the Yang Wang division, and was also transferred to the position of chamberlain, secretary supervisor, and leader of the cavalry general.

古文：又迁征虏将军、临川王镇西长史、领南蛮校尉、南郡内史。
现代文：又迁调为征虏将军、临川王镇西长史、领南蛮校尉、南郡内史。
English: In addition, he was transferred to be a conscript general, Linchuan Wangzhen Xi Changshi, a lieutenant of the Southern Barbarians, and Nan County Naishi.

古文：奂一岁三迁，上表固让南蛮曰： 今天地初辟，万物载新，刑蛮来威，巴濮不扰。
现代文：王奂一年之内调任三次，所以他上表坚持谢绝任南蛮校尉之职说： 现在国家基业初创，万物更新荆蛮服威来朝拜，巴濮也不再侵扰。
English: Wang Qian was transferred three times within a year, so he insisted on resigning from the post of Southern Barbarian Captain on the table, saying: Now that the national foundation has begun, all things are updated, the barbarian clothes will come to worship, and the Baju will no longer intrude.

古文：但使边民乐业，有司修务，本府旧州，日就殷阜。
现代文：衹要使边境人民安居乐业，各级官员勤于职守，南蛮各州郡就曰渐变成殷富之地。
English: In order to make the border people live and work in peace, officials at all levels should be diligent in their duties, and the southern provinces and counties should gradually become a place of affluence.

古文：臣昔游西土，较见盈虚，兼日者戎烬之后，痍毁难复。
现代文：我以前曾在西土作过官，比较了解其真实情况，更兼最近战火之后，更是满目疮痍，很难恢复其元气。
English: I used to be an official in the West, so I have a better understanding of the real situation, and after the recent war, it is even more devastated, and it is difficult to restore its vitality.

古文：虽复缉以善政，未及来苏。
现代文：即使施行众多的善政，一时也来不及使它复苏。
English: Even if many good policies are implemented, it is too late to revive it.

古文：今复割撤大府，制置偏校，崇望不足以助强，语实安能以相弊？
现代文：现在朝廷又将大的州府分割、撤除，而设置偏小的校尉之职，让他去管辖。崇高的声望也不足以使他显得更强有力，他说的话又怎么能最后决断?
English: Now the imperial court has divided and removed the large prefectures, and set up a relatively small post of captain to govern them. His lofty reputation is not enough to make him appear more powerful, so how can his words have the final say?

古文：且资力既分，职司增广，众劳务倍，文案滋烦。
现代文：况且物力人力更分散，官职增多，各种事务成倍地增长，文书案牍也越来越繁杂。
English: Moreover, material and human resources are more dispersed, official positions have increased, various affairs have increased exponentially, and paperwork has become more and more complicated.

古文：非独臣见其难，窃以为国计非允。 
现代文：不是我衹看见其困难的一面而畏缩不前，实在是从国家大局考虑而不肯答应啊。 
English: It's not that I see its difficult side and shrink back, it's that I consider the overall situation of the country and refuse to agree.

古文：见许。于是罢南蛮校尉官。进号前将军。
现代文：朝廷答许了他的请求，于是罢免了他南蛮校尉的官职，晋封前将军称号。
English: The Imperial Court agreed to his request, and he was relieved of his post as Captain of the Southern Army and promoted to the rank of General.

古文：世祖即位，征右仆射。仍转使持节、监湘州军事、前将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：齐世祖萧迹即位，征王奂任尚书右仆射，又转任使持节监湘州军事、前将军、湘州刺史。
English: Qi Shizhu ascended to the throne, and appointed Zheng Wangjun as his right-hand man, and also transferred to the post of the military governor of Hunan Province, the former general, and the historian of Hunan Province.

古文：永明二年，徙为散骑常侍、江州刺史。
现代文：永明二年，调为散骑常侍、江州刺史。
English: In the second year of the Yongming era, he was transferred to the position of strolling equerry, and became a member of the Jiangzhou imperial court.

古文：初省江州军府。
现代文：他开始以江州军府作尚书省。
English: He began to use the Jiangzhou Military Government as the Shangshu Province.

古文：四年，迁右仆射，本州中正。
现代文：永明四年，又改迁为尚书右仆射，本州中正。
English: In the fourth year of the Yongming era, it was relocated to Shangshu Rongjiao, Honshu Junior High School.

古文：奂无学术，以事干见处。
现代文：王奂没有文才，因办事干练被重用。
English: Wang Yao did not have literary talent, but he was highly regarded for his ability to get things done.

古文：迁尚书仆射，中正如故。
现代文：又升迁为尚书仆射，中正照旧。
English: He was also promoted to Shang Shufu (尚書仆射) and remained in the middle rank.

古文：校籍郎王植属吏部郎孔琇之以校籍令史俞公喜求进署，矫称奂意，植坐免官。
现代文：校籍郎王植托吏部郎孔诱之，让他以校籍令史俞公喜的名义请求进入省署。假称这是王奂的意思，于是王植坐罪被免去官职。
English: Wang Zhi, the school's registrar, was lured by the school's registrar, Lang Kong, who asked him to enter the provincial office in the name of the school's registrar, Shi Yan Gongxi. Assuming that this was Wang Yao's intention, Wang Zhi was removed from his official post for the crime of sitting.

古文：六年，迁散骑常侍，领军将军。
现代文：永明六年，王奂调任散骑常侍，领军将军。
English: In the sixth year of Yongming, Wang Hui was transferred to the position of straggler, leading general.

古文：奂欲请车驾幸府。
现代文：王奂想恭请齐世祖去他府上。
English: Wang Yao wanted to respectfully invite Qi Shizuo to his palace.

古文：上晚信佛法，御膳不宰牲。使王晏谓奂曰： 吾前去年为断杀事，不复幸诣大臣已判，无容欻尔也。 
现代文：齐世祖晚年笃信佛教，膳食不宰杀牲畜、所以派王晏去对王奂说： 我从去年开始已经断绝丁杀牲之事，已拿定主意不再到大臣家去，现在也不想突然改变它。 
English: In his later years, Qi Shizu was a firm believer in Buddhism. He did not slaughter animals for meals, so he sent Wang Yao to tell Wang Yao: "Since last year, I have stopped killing animals. I have made up my mind not to go to the minister's house, and now I do not want to suddenly change it.

古文：王俭卒，上用奂为尚书令，以问王晏。
现代文：王俭死，世祖想起用王奂作尚书令，便征求王晏的意见。
English: After Wang Jian's death, the ancestor thought of using Wang Yao to make Shang Shuling, so he sought Wang Yao's opinion.

古文：晏位遇已重，与奂不能相推，答上曰： 柳世隆有重望，恐不宜在奂后。 
现代文：当时王晏受到皇上厚遇地位已很重要，对王奂的事又不好推诿，便回答世祖说： 柳世隆有很高的威信，他的职位恐怕不应当在王奂之下。 
English: At that time, it was very important for Wang Xi to be well received by the emperor, and it was hard to argue with Wang Xi, so he replied to the ancestor: Liu Shilong has high prestige, and I am afraid his position should not be below Wang Xi.

古文：乃转为左仆射，加给事中，出为使持节、散骑常侍、都督雍梁南北秦四州郢州之竟陵司州之随郡军事、镇北将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：于是将王奂转为左仆射，加官给事中，出任使持节，散骑常侍，都督雍、梁、南秦、北秦四州以及郢州的竞陵、司州的随郡军事，镇北将军，雍州刺史。
English: Therefore, he turned Wang Yao into a left-hand man, promoted him to a middle-ranking official, and appointed him as an envoy, a horseback riding attendant, the governor of Yong, Liang, South Qin, North Qin, four prefectures and Zhangzhou, the military attaché of Shizhou, the general of Zhenbei, and the historian of Yongzhou.

古文：上谓王晏曰： 奂于释氏，实自专至。
现代文：皇上对王晏说： 王奂对于佛教，实在有些过分专心了。
English: The emperor said to Wang Yao: Wang Yao is really a bit too devoted to Buddhism.

古文：其在镇或以此妨务，卿相见言次及之，勿道吾意也。 
现代文：他在藩镇大概会因此而妨碍政务，你见到他时要提醒他，但不要说这是我的意思。 
English: When you see him, remind him of this, but don't say it was my idea.

古文：上以行北诸戍士卒多褴缕，送袴褶三千具，令奂分赋之。
现代文：齐世祖因为防守北疆的士卒穿着大多破旧，所以送去三千套裤褶，命王奂分发给众人。
English: Because most of the uniforms worn by the soldiers defending Northern Xinjiang were worn out, Qi Shizu sent three thousand sets of trouser cuffs and distributed life jackets to everyone.

古文：十一年，奂辄杀宁蛮长史刘兴祖，上大怒，使御史中丞孔稚珪奏其事曰：
现代文：永明十一年，王奂妄杀宁蛮长史刘兴祖，齐世祖大怒，让御史中丞孔椎珪上奏此事说：
English: In the eleventh year of the Yongming era, Wang Zhaoyuan killed the long-reigning Liu Xingzu and Qi Shizu in a fit of rage, and had the second-highest official in history, Kong Shiyan, report the incident, saying:

古文：雍州刺史王奂启录小府长史刘兴祖，虚称 兴祖扇动山蛮，规生逆谋，诳言诽谤，言辞不逊 。
现代文：雍州刺史王奂奏报逮捕了府长史刘兴祖，假称 刘兴祖煽动山蛮，谋划造反，造谣生手，诽谤土司，言辞狂傲不逊 。
English: The Yongzhou Zhishi Wangqiao Newspaper arrested the governor Shi Liu Xingzu, alleging that Liu Xingzu instigated mountain barbarism, plotted rebellion, spread rumors, slandered local officials, and spoke arrogantly.

古文：敕使送兴祖下都，奂虑所启欺妄，于狱打杀兴祖，诈启称自经死。
现代文：朝廷敕命王奂送刘兴祖到京都来，王奂担心他所奏启的事是欺妄不实之辞，便在狱中将刘兴祖打死，而向朝廷报告时贝诈称是自杀身亡。
English: The imperial court ordered Wang Yao to send Liu Xingzu to Kyoto. Wang Yao was worried that what he had reported was a lie, so he beat Liu Xingzu to death in prison. When he reported to the imperial court, he falsely claimed that Liu Xingzu had committed suicide.

古文：止今体伤楗苍，事暴闻听。
现代文：直至现在他身上还留有被木棍打的深黑色的伤痕，而且这种暴行很多人都知道。
English: To this day, he bears the deep black scars of a beating with a wooden stick, and the violence is well known.

古文：摄兴祖门生刘倪到台辨问，列 兴祖与奂共事，不能相和。
现代文：抓来刘兴祖的门人刘倪到御史台审问，他供状说： 刘兴祖与王奂共事，不能和睦相处。
English: Liu Ni, a protégé of Liu Xingzu, who was arrested and interrogated at the State Administration of History, confessed: Liu Xingzu and Wang Hui worked together and could not get along.

古文：自去年朱公恩领军征蛮失利，兴祖启闻，以启呈奂，奂因此便相嫌恨。
现代文：自从去年朱公恩领军征讨蛮地失利，刘兴祖要将这事上奏给朝廷，他把奏章呈交给王奂，王奂由此而对他怨恨不满。
English: Since Zhu Gong'en led the army to a brutal defeat last year, Liu Xingzu wanted to report this to the imperial court. He submitted the report to Wang Qi, and Wang Qi was resentful and dissatisfied with him.

古文：若云兴祖有罪，便应事在民间；民间恬然，都无事迹。
现代文：如果说刘兴祖真的有罪，那么民间便会发生相应事件；但现在民间很安静，没有动乱的迹象。
English: If Liu Xingzu is really guilty, then there will be a corresponding incident among the people; but now the people are very quiet and there are no signs of unrest.

古文：去十年九月十八日，奂使仗身三十人来，称敕录兴祖付狱。安定郡蛮先在郡赃私，兴祖既知其取与，即牒启，奂不问。
现代文：去年即永明十年的九月十八曰，王奂派了身带武器的三十个人来，说是朝廷有敕命，要逮捕刘兴祖入狱先前，安定郡的蛮民在州郡中盗取资财，刘兴祖已经了解清楚事情的来龙去脉，就用公文上报给王奂，王奂却不处理查问。
English: On September 18 last year, the 10th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Wang Hui sent 30 armed men to arrest Liu Xingzu, saying that the imperial court had an urgent need to arrest him. Prior to Liu Xingzu's imprisonment, the barbarians from Anding County had stolen money in Zhouzhou County. Liu Xingzu had clearly understood the ins and outs of the matter and reported it to Wang Hui in an official document. However, Wang Hui did not investigate the matter.

古文：兴祖后执录，奂仍令蛮领仗身于狱守视。
现代文：后刘兴祖被收捕入狱，王奂仍然派蛮邦头领带着武器在监狱中看守他。
English: After Liu Xingzu was arrested and sent to prison, Wang Hui still sent barbarian leaders with weapons to guard him in prison.

古文：兴祖未死之前，于狱以物画漆柈子中出密报家，道无罪，令启乞出都一辨，万死无恨。 
现代文：刘兴祖没死之前，在狱中曾用东西在漆盘上刻划了几句话，秘密送出告诉家人，说自己无罪，要家人上奏，请求派人出京去辨明是非，即使死了也毫无遗恨。 
English: Before Liu Xingzu died, he used something to write a few words on a lacquer plate in prison, secretly sent it to tell his family, said he was not guilty, asked his family to play it, and requested that someone be sent to Beijing to clarify the truth. Even if he died, he would have no hatred left.

古文：又云： 奂驻兴祖严禁信使，欲作方便，杀以除口舌。 
现代文：又说： 王奂关押型苏坦的地方严禁传递消息，想寻找机会，杀人灭口。 
English: He also said: It is strictly forbidden to pass on information in the places where Wang Qi is holding the sultan. If you want to find an opportunity, kill the murderer.

古文：又云： 奂意乃可。奂第三息彪随奂在州，凡事是非皆干豫，扇构密除兴祖。 
现代文：又说： 王奂的本意还在其次衹是王奂第三个儿子王彪跟随王奂在雍丛，凡是州府的事务都要干预，是他煽动要构陷并秘密除掉刘兴祖的。 
English: He also said: Wang Yao's intention was that Wang Yao's third son, Wang Biao, would follow Wang Yao to Yonggong and interfere in all the affairs of the state capital. He instigated to frame and secretly eliminate Liu Xingzu.

古文：又云： 兴祖家饷糜，中下药，食两口便觉，回乞狱子，食者皆大利。
现代文：又说： 刘兴祖家送来米粥，有人在裹面下了药，刘兴祖吃了两口便觉察到了，于是便请狱卒吃，吃了的人都腹泻得很厉害。
English: He also said: Liu Xingzu's family sent rice porridge, and someone drugged the noodles. Liu Xingzu took two bites and noticed, so he asked the jailer to eat it. Everyone who ate it had severe diarrhea.

古文：兴祖大叫道： 糜中有药！ 
现代文：刘兴祖大叫说 粥中有泻药 。
English: Liu Xingzu shouted that there was laxative in the porridge.

古文：近狱之家，无人不闻。 
现代文：靠近监狱的人家，没有谁没听见喊叫声的。 
English: There wasn't a house near the prison that didn't hear the shouting.

古文：又云： 奂治著兴祖日急，判无济理。
现代文：又说： 王奂处治刘兴祖越来越急迫，判案毫无成理。
English: He also said: Wang Xi's treatment of Liu Xingzu is getting more and more urgent, and the verdict is unreasonable.

古文：十一月二十一日，奂使狱吏来报兴祖家，道兴祖于狱自经死。
现代文：十一月二十一日，王奂派狱卒到刘兴祖家报信，说刘兴祖在狱中自杀身死。
English: On November 21, Wang Wei sent a prison guard to report to Liu Xingzu's family that Liu Xingzu had committed suicide in prison.

古文：尸出，家人共洗浴之，见兴祖颈下有伤，肩胛乌，阴下破碎，实非兴祖自经死。
现代文：尸体抬出后，家人都来给他洗浴，看见刘兴祖颈下有伤，肩胛乌黑，阴部破碎，证实刘兴祖不是自杀而死的。
English: After the body was carried out, the family members all came to bathe him. They saw that Liu Xingzu had a wound under his neck, a black shoulder blade, and a broken genitals, which confirmed that Liu Xingzu did not commit suicide.

古文：家人及门义共见，非是一人。 
现代文：家属及门人都看到了，不衹是一个人所见。 
English: Family members and friends saw it, but only one person saw it.

古文：重摄检雍州都留田文喜，列与倪符同状。
现代文：再提取雍州都留田文喜来作进一步的查证，他所说的情况与刘倪的口供相同。
English: For further verification, we extracted the testimony of Wenxi Tian, a resident of Yongzhou, who said that the situation was the same as Liu Ni's confession.

古文：兴祖在狱，嗛苦望下，既蒙降旨，欣愿始遂，岂容于此，方复自经？
现代文：刘兴祖在狱中，含辛茹苦地盼望着皇帝的旨意，既然承蒙皇帝降旨，心愿才得到满足，这种时候，怎么又会去自杀?
English: Liu Xingzu was in prison, anxiously waiting for the emperor's will. Since he had accepted the emperor's will, his wish was fulfilled. At such a time, how could he commit suicide?

古文：敕以十九日至，兴祖以二十一日死，推理检迹，灼然矫假。
现代文：敕命十九日到达，刘兴祖却在二十一日死亡，这无论是从道理上去推论还是从实迹上查考。
English: He died on the 19th, but Liu Xingzu died on the 21st, whether this is inferred from reason or investigated from actual events.

古文：寻敕使送下，奂辄拒诏，所谤诸条，悉出奂意。
现代文：分明是弄虚作假。使者不久便送去敕命，王奂却抗拒诏书，我所指责的以上各条，都是出于王奂的主意。
English: It was clearly a fraud. The envoy was soon sent to his death, but Wang Hui resisted the edict. All of the above-mentioned articles that I have criticized are from Wang Hui's idea.

古文：毁故丞相若陈显达，诽讪朝事，莫此之深。
现代文：他还攻击前丞相如陈显达等，诽谤朝政，没有比他罪过更深重的。
English: He also attacked former prime ministers, such as Chen Xianda, and slandered the imperial government. There is no sin more serious than his.

古文：彪私随父之镇，敢乱王法，罪并合穷戮。
现代文：王彪私自随父到方镇去，赡敢扰乱王法，其罪行应当同受极刑惩处。
English: Wang Biao went to Fangzhen with his father and dared to disturb the royal law. His crime should be punished with capital punishment.

古文：上遣中书舍人吕文显、直阁将军曹道刚领斋仗五百人收奂。
现代文：齐世祖派中书舍人吕文显、直合将军曹道刚率领五百人带着庄严的仪仗去收捕王奂。
English: Qi Shizuo sent Lu Wenxian, a scholar, and Cao Daogang, a general from Zhouga, to capture Wang Yao, leading 500 men in a solemn battle.

古文：敕镇西司马曹虎从江陵步道会襄阳。
现代文：并敕命镇西司马曹虎从江陵走小路到襄阳会合。
English: He also ordered the town of Xishima Caohu to take a path from Jiangling to meet in Yangyang.

古文：奂子彪素凶剽，奂不能制。
现代文：王奂之子王彪平素凶猛剽悍，王奂都不能控制住他。
English: Wang Yao's son, Wang Buping, was so fierce that even Wang Yao couldn't control him.

古文：女婿殷叡惧祸，谓奂曰： 曹、吕今来，既不见真敕，恐为奸变，政宜录取，驰启闻耳。 
现代文：王奂的女婿殷观害怕遭祸，对王奂说： 曹、吕二人这次来，我们既然没有看见真正的敕命，恐怕要被他们的奸计所蒙骗，发生变故，应该把他们先抓起来，再派人火速奏报朝廷。 
English: Wang Yao's son-in-law, Yin Guan, was afraid of misfortune, and said to Wang Yao, "Since Cao and Lu have come this time, and we haven't seen any real struggle for life, I'm afraid we'll be deceived by their trickery. If something happens, we should arrest them first, and then send someone to report to the imperial court immediately."

古文：奂纳之。
现代文：王垒采纳了这个意见。
English: Wang Yao accepted Yin Rui's suggestion.

古文：彪辄令率州内得千余人，开镇库，取仗，配衣甲，出南堂陈兵，闭门拒守。
现代文：王彪则受命率领州城内新收的一千余人，打开府库，拿取武器，配备好衣帽盔甲，出南堂列兵布阵，闭门拒守。
English: Wang Biao, on the other hand, was ordered to lead more than a thousand newly recruited people in the city of Suzhou to open the government treasury, take weapons, equip themselves with clothing and armor, and go out of the South Hall to form a line of soldiers and close the door.

古文：奂门生郑羽叩头启奂，乞出城迎台使。
现代文：王奂的门生塑羽叩头恳请王鱼，要他出城去迎接朝廷使臣。
English: Wang Yao's protégé, the feathered kowtower, implored Wang Yu to leave the city to meet the imperial envoys.

古文：奂曰： 我不作贼，欲先遣启自申。政恐曹、吕辈小人相陵藉，故且闭门自守耳。 
现代文：王奂说： 我又不做反贼，正想先派人去上奏申诉衹怕被曹道刚、吕文显这类小人所欺凌，所以暂时闭门白守啊。 
English: Wang Yao said, "I'm not an anti-thief, I just want to send someone to file a complaint first. I'm afraid of being bullied by villains like Cao Daogang and Lu Wenxian, so I'll keep my mouth shut for the time being."

古文：彪遂出与虎军战，其党范虎领二百人降台军，彪败走归。
现代文：王彪于是出城与曹虎的人马作战，他的党羽范虎率领二百人投降了官军，王彪战败逃回城内。
English: Wang Biao then went out of the city to fight against Cao Hu's men. His henchman Fan Hu led 200 men to surrender to the government army. Wang Biao was defeated and fled back to the city.

古文：土人起义攻州西门，彪登门拒战，却之。
现代文：当地土人起义，攻打州城的西门，王彪登上城楼抵御抗击，打垮了上人的进攻。
English: The local natives revolted and attacked the west gate of the state capital. Wang Biao climbed the city tower to resist the attack and defeated the superior's attack.

古文：奂司马黄瑶起、宁蛮长史裴叔业于城内起兵攻奂。
现代文：王奂的司马黄瑶起、宁蛮长史裴叔业在城内起兵攻打王奂。
English: Wang Hui's steward, Huang Huiqi, and his son-in-law, Ning Ban Changshi Pei Shuhei, raised an army in the city to attack Wang Hui.

古文：奂闻兵入，还内礼佛，未及起，军人遂斩之。
现代文：王奂听说士兵已攻进州衙，便回到内署拜佛，未及起身，便被军人所斩杀，时年五十九岁。
English: Upon hearing that soldiers had invaded Zhouzhuang, Wang Yao returned to Nei Dian to worship Buddha. Before he could get up, he was killed by soldiers, at the age of fifty-nine.

古文：年五十九，执彪及弟爽、弼、殷叡，皆伏诛。
现代文：士兵们把王彪以及其弟王爽、王弼，还有殷饭都给抓起来，后来都被诛杀。
English: The soldiers arrested Wang Biao, his brothers Wang Shuang and Wang Yao, as well as Yin Rong, and later they were all beaten to death.

古文：诏曰： 逆贼王奂，险诐之性，自少及长。
现代文：诏书说： 叛贼王奂，性格阴险邪僻，从小到大，没有改变。
English: The edict said: "The traitor Wang Yao, whose character is insidious and perverse, has not changed from childhood to adulthood.

古文：外饰廉勤，内怀凶慝，贻戾乡伍，取弃衣冠。
现代文：对外伪装成廉洁勤奋的样子，内心却怀有凶狠邪恶的念头，横暴乡里，残害士绅。
English: Outwardly disguised as honest and diligent, but inwardly harboring ferocious evil thoughts, rampaging through the countryside, destroying gentry.

古文：拔其文笔之用，擢以显任，出牧樊阿，政刑弛乱。
现代文：因为他尚有才干可被取用，所以提拔他任显要的职位，让他出任藩镇的刺史，但其治政刑法都松弛混乱。
English: Because he still has the ability to be used, he was promoted to a prominent position, and he was appointed as the chief historian of the province and town, but his administrative and criminal laws are slack and chaotic.

古文：第三息彪矫弄威权，父子均势。
现代文：他第三子王彪恃威弄权，造成父子均势的不正常局面。
English: His third son, Wang Biao, bullied his way into power, creating an abnormal situation of father-son balance of power.

古文：故宁蛮长史刘兴祖忠于奉国，每事匡执，奂忿其异己，诬以讪谤，肆怒囚录，然后奏闻。
现代文：故宁蛮长史刘兴祖忠心为国，遇事总要劝导他们执守正道。王奂怨恨他与自己不同心志，所以诬陷他诽谤朝廷，放肆地先把他逮捕囚禁起来，然后才向朝廷奏报。
English: Therefore, he preferred the long history of Liu Xingzu to be loyal to the country, and always wanted to persuade them to adhere to the right path. Wang Xi resented that he had a different mind-set from himself, so he framed him for slandering the imperial court, and boldly arrested and imprisoned him first, and then reported to the imperial court.

古文：朕察奂愚诈，诏送兴祖还都，乃惧奸谋发露，潜加杀害。
现代文：朕已察觉了王奂愚蠢的欺诈行为，所以下韶命他送刘兴祖回京。他害怕奸谋暴露，便偷偷将刘兴祖杀害。
English: I had already noticed Wang Yao's stupid fraudulent behavior, so I ordered him to send Liu Xingzu back to Beijing. He was afraid of the plot being exposed, so he secretly killed Liu Xingzu.

古文：欺罔既彰，中使辩核，遂授兵登陴，逆捍王命。
现代文：欺君罔上的罪行既已明显，御史台又审察核实了。于是他又派兵登上城墙，违抗王命。
English: Since the crime of defrauding the imperial edict was already obvious and verified by the Imperial History Channel, he also sent soldiers to climb the city wall to defy the king's order.

古文：天威电扫，义夫咸奋，曾未浃辰，罪人斯获，方隅克殄，汉南肃清。
现代文：天威如闪电横扫，义士人人奋勇争先，时间不到十二天，罪人就被抓获，盘踞一隅的祸首也遭毁灭，漠南肃清。
English: As lightning sweeps across the sky, the righteous all strive to be the first. In less than twelve days, the sinners will be caught, the evil leaders who have been entrenched in one corner will also be destroyed, and the country will be cleansed.

古文：自非犯官兼预同逆谋，为一时所驱逼者，悉无所问。 
现代文：衹要不是案犯，没有参预逆谋的策划，仅仅被一时的威势逼迫驱使的民众，一概不必追究。 
English: If they are not the culprits, if they did not participate in the planning of the conspiracy, and if they are just the people who are driven by the pressure of the moment, they do not need to be investigated.

古文：奂长子太子中庶子融，融弟司徒从事中郎琛，于都弃市。余孙皆原宥。
现代文：王奂长子太于中庶子王融，王融之弟司徒从事中郎王琛，都在京城被处死，其余的孙子辈的家属都获得宽免。
English: Wang Rong's eldest son, Wang Rong's illegitimate son, Wang Rong, and Wang Rong's younger brother, Sito, who served as Wang Rong's second-in-command, were both executed in Beijing, while the rest of their grandchildren's families were pardoned.

古文：殷睿字文子，陈郡人，晋太常融七世孙也。
现代文：殷散字文子，陈郡人，是晋太常殷融的七世孙。
English: Yan San Zi Wen Zi, a native of Chen County, was the seventh-generation grandson of Jin Taizang Yan Rong.

古文：宋元嘉末，祖元素坐染太初事诛。
现代文：宋元嘉末年，祖父殷元素因舆刘劭自立为帝、改元太初之事有所牵连，获罪被杀。
English: At the end of Song Yuan Jia's life, his grandfather, Yin Ye, was convicted and killed because he was implicated in the events that led to Emperor Liu Bei's rise to power and the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：睿遗腹亦当从戮，外曾祖王僧朗启孝武救之，得免。
现代文：殷散是遣腹子也将跟着被杀，其外曾祖父王僧朗启奏宋孝武帝救他，才得幸免。
English: Yin San's great-grandfather Wang Monk Lang Kai So Song Emperor Xiaowu saved him, and he was spared.

古文：睿解文义，有口才，司徒褚渊甚重之，谓之曰： 诸殷自荆州以来，无出卿右者。 
现代文：殷散通晓文章义理，有口才，司徒褚渊很看重他，对他说： 从殷仲堪以来，没有哪位姓殷的人能超过你。 
English: Yin San was well-versed in the principles of writing and had eloquence. Szeto Shanyuan thought highly of him and said to him, "Since Yin Zhongkan, no one with the surname Yin can surpass you.

古文：睿敛容答曰： 殷族衰悴，诚不如昔，若此旨为虚，故不足降；此旨为实，弥不可闻。 
现代文：殷散正色回答说： 凿族衰败困苦，确实是今不如昔，如果你是虚情假意，这种话就不值得说；如果你所说的是真情，那就更加不可听闻了。 
English: Yin San Zhengyi replied, "The decline and hardship of the Jian people is indeed not as bad as before. If you are a fake, it is not worth saying; if you are telling the truth, it is even more inaudible.

古文：奂为雍州，启睿为府长史。
现代文：王奂任雍州刺史时，启奏让殷敬作府长史。
English: When Wang Qian was appointed as the prefectural governor of Yongzhou, the prelude was to have Yin Jing as the prefectural governor.

古文：睿族父恒，字昭度，与睿同承融后。宋司空景仁孙也。
现代文：殷徽同族的叔父殷恒，字昭度，与殷徽同是殷融的后代，是宋司空殷景仁的孙子。
English: The uncle of Yin Heng, a member of the same ethnic group as Yin Hui, Zhaodu, is a descendant of Yin Rong, the same as Yin Hui. He is the grandson of Song Siku and Yin Jingren.

古文：恒及父道矜，并有古风，以是见蚩于世，其事非一。恒，宋泰始初为度支尚书，坐属父疾及身疾多，为有司所奏。明帝诏曰： 殷道矜有生便病，比更无横疾。
现代文：殷恒和其父殷道矜，都患有古 风疾 ，因此被世人讪笑，这种事情发生过不止一次殷恒在宋泰始初年为度支尚书，因父亲有病及本身患多种疾病，被有司弹劾；明帝下诏说： 殷道矜一出生便有病，但近来没有别的病症。
English: Both Yin Heng and his father, Yin Daojun, suffered from the old-fashioned disease and were ridiculed by the world. This kind of thing happened more than once. In the first year of Song and Tai, Yin Heng was impeached by the imperial court because his father was ill and he himself suffered from many diseases. Emperor Ming said: Yin Daojun was born with a disease, but recently there has been no other disease.

古文：恒因愚习惰，久妨清叙。
现代文：殷恒由于愚笨而懒散成习，长久地妨碍他清晰地谈吐。
English: His habit of slouching through stupidity has long prevented him from speaking clearly.

古文：左迁散骑常侍，领校尉。 
现代文：降职为散骑常侍，领校尉。 
English: He was demoted to straggler, captain.

古文：恒历官清显，至金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：殷恒所任职位，大多清闲而地位尊显，最后官至金紫光禄大夫。
English: The positions held by Yin Heng were mostly idle and the status was distinguished, with the last official being the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：建武中卒。
现代文：建武年间去世。
English: He died in the Kenmu era.

古文：奂弟伷女为长沙王晃妃，世祖诏曰： 奂自陷逆节，长沙王妃男女并长，且奂又出继，前代或当有准，可特不离绝。 奂从弟缋。
现代文：王奂弟王佃之女，是长沙王萧晃的妃子，世祖下诏说： 王奂自己陷入叛逆的泥坑。长沙王妃子女都很大了，况且王奂又过继给了堂祖父。前代大约有这种特例，可以准许长沙王不与她离婚 乇奂的堂弟王绩。
English: Wang Yao's younger brother Wang Yao's daughter was the concubine of Changsha's King Xiao An. The patriarch issued an edict: Wang Yao himself had fallen into the quagmire of rebellion. The children of Changsha's concubine were all grown up, and Wang Yao had been passed down to his great-uncle. In previous generations, there would have been such a special case that would have allowed Changsha's King not to divorce his cousin Wang Jie.

古文：缋字叔素，宋车骑将军景文子也。
现代文：王绩字叔素，是宋车骑将军王景文之子。
English: Wang Jizhuxu is the son of the Song Dynasty chariot-riding general Wang Jingwen.

古文：弱冠，为秘书郎，太子舍人，转中书舍人。景文以此授超阶，令缋经年乃受。
现代文：年约二十岁时，任秘书郎，太子舍人，调任中书舍人王景文因为这是越级拜授宫职，命王绩再过 年后才止式上任。
English: When he was about twenty years old, Wang Jingwen, who had been the secretary and the prince's secretary, was transferred to the position of the middle secretary and the prince's secretary. Because this was a higher-ranking palace post, he had to wait another year before taking office.

古文：景文封江安侯，缋袭其本爵，为始平县五等男。
现代文：王景文被封为江安侯，王绩承袭了他原来的爵位，为始干县五等男。
English: Wang Jingwen was named the Prince of Jiang'an, and Wang Jie inherited his original title and became the fifth-ranked man in Shigang County.

古文：迁秘书丞，司徒右长史。
现代文：升任秘书丞、司徒右长史。
English: He was promoted to the position of secretary-general, and continued as secretary-general.

古文：元徽末，除宁朔将军、建平王征北长史、南东海太守，黄门郎，宁朔将军、东阳太守。
现代文：宋元徽末年，王绩官拜宁朔将军、建平王征北长史、南束海太守，黄门郎，宁朔将军、束阳太守。
English: In the last years of Song Yuanhui, Wang Biningshuo, Jianping Wang Zheng, North Changshi, South Zucai, Huangmenlang, Ningshuo and Zucang.

古文：世祖为抚军，吏部尚书张岱选缋为长史，呈选牒。
现代文：那时，世祖萧赜还是抚军，吏部尚书张岱已选定王绩作他的长史，选拔的文书已经呈报。
English: At that time, the founder of the dynasty, Xiao Qi, was still leading the army, and the leader, Shang Shu Zhang Qi, had already selected Wang Bei as his long history, and the selection document had already been reported.

古文：太祖笑谓岱曰： 此可谓素望。 
现代文：齐太祖笑着对张岱说： 这可是你的夙愿啊。 
English: Qi Taizu smiled and said to Zhang Ye: "This is your long-cherished wish.

古文：迁散骑常侍，骁骑将军。
现代文：迁调王绩任散骑常侍，骁骑将军。
English: Wang Bi was transferred to the post of straggler and general.

古文：出补义兴太守，辄录郡吏陈伯喜付阳羡狱，欲杀之。
现代文：王绩出任义兴太守。
English: Wang Rong served as the governor of Yixing.

古文：县令孔逭不知何罪，不受缋教，为有司所奏，缋坐白衣领职。迁太子中庶子，领骁骑，转长史兼侍中。
现代文：他随便逮捕郡吏陈伯喜，投进了阳羡县监狱，并想把他杀掉，县令孔逭不知道陈伯喜犯了什么罪，所以不接受王绩的指令，被监察官员上奏，王绩犯了无正式官衔而兼职的罪过，调任太子中庶子，领骁骑，又转为长兼侍中。
English: He arbitrarily arrested county official Chen Boxi, threw him into Yangxian County Prison, and wanted to kill him. County magistrate Kong Yao did not know what crime Chen Boxi had committed, so he did not accept Wang Yi's order, and was reported by the supervisory official. Wang Yi committed the crime of working part-time without an official title, and was transferred to the prince's middle son, the prince's son-in-law, and the prince's son-in-law.

古文：世祖出射雉，缋信佛法，称疾不从驾。
现代文：齐世祖出外射雉，王绩信佛教，所以藉口有病不随从车驾前往。
English: Qi Shizhu went out to shoot dragonflies, and Wang Shixin believed in Buddhism, so he used the excuse of being ill not to go with the car.

古文：转左民尚书，以母老乞解职，改授宁朔将军、大司马长史、淮陵太守。
现代文：又转官为左民尚书，他又以母亲年老为由请求解职，于是改授宁朔将军、大司马长史、淮陵太守。
English: He was also transferred to the post of Zuomin Shangshu, and he requested to be dismissed on the grounds of his mother's old age, so he was awarded the title of Ningshuo General, Daishi Ma Changshi, and Huairing Governor.

古文：出为宣城太守，秩中二千石。
现代文：又出任宣城太守，俸禄为中二千石。
English: He also served as the governor of Xuancheng, with a salary of 2,000 koku.

古文：隆昌元年，迁辅国将军、太傅长史，不拜。仍为冠军将军、豫章内史。
现代文：隆昌元年，王续升任辅国将军、太傅长史，但没有正式拜授，仍然任冠军将军、豫章内史。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, Wang Cui Rong was promoted to the post of auxiliary general and Taifu Changshi, but he was not officially conferred, he was still the champion general and Yuzhang Naishi.

古文：进号征虏。
现代文：进号为征虏将军。
English: His codename was "Captive General."

古文：又坐事免官。
现代文：又因犯事而被罢免官职。
English: He was also removed from office for the offense.

古文：除冠军将军，司徒左长史，散骑常侍，随王师。
现代文：后又官拜冠军将军，司徒左长史，散骑常侍，随王师。
English: Afterward, the general of the championship was also officially worshiped, and the long history of the left side of the statue, the regular attendant of horseback riding, followed Wang Shi.

古文：除征虏将军，骠骑长史，迁散骑常侍，太常。
现代文：又拜授为征虏将军，骠骑长史，调任散骑常侍，太常。
English: He was also awarded the title of Conscript General. He had a long history as a cavalryman, and was transferred to the rank of stagiaire.

古文：永元元年卒，年五十三。谥靖子。
现代文：束昏侯永元元年，王绩去世，时年五十三岁，谧靖子。
English: In the first year of Prince Yongyuan's reign, Wang Jie died at the age of fifty-three.

古文：缋女适安陆王子敬，世祖宠子。
现代文：王绩的女儿嫁给安陆王萧子敬为妃。安陆王是世祖宠爱的儿子。
English: Wang Bi's daughter married An Lu Wang Xiao Zi Jing as his wife. An Lu Wang was the beloved son of the patriarch.

古文：永明三年纳妃，修外舅姑之敬。
现代文：永明三年，正式迎娶时，对王绩夫妇行对待岳父母的礼敬。
English: In the third year of the Yongming era, when they were officially married, Wang Jie and his wife treated their parents-in-law with courtesy.

古文：世祖遣文惠太子相随往缋家置酒设乐，公卿皆冠冕而至，当世荣之。
现代文：世祖特派文惠太子跟随着迎亲的队伍去王绩家，置办酒席，安排礼乐，公卿们穿着礼服前来祝贺，当时人们认为这是非常荣耀的事。
English: King Sejong sent Crown Prince Wen Hui to accompany the welcoming party to Wang Jie's home. He set up a banquet and arranged music. The nobles came to congratulate him in ceremonial dress. At the time, people thought this was a very honorable thing.

古文：张冲，字思约，吴郡吴人。
现代文：张冲字思约，吴郡吴县人。
English: Zhang Chong is a native of Wuxian, Wuxian County.

古文：父柬，通直郎。
现代文：父张柬为通直郎。
English: Zhang Kham's father was Tong Naorong.

古文：冲出继从伯侍中景胤，小名查；父邵，小名梨。
现代文：张冲过继给伯父侍中张景胤为子。张景胤小名叫查，其父张邵，小名叫梨。
English: Zhang Chong was succeeded by his uncle, Zhang Jingtian, a chamberlain. Zhang Jingtian's nickname was Cha, and his father, Zhang Shao's nickname was Li.

古文：宋文帝戏景胤曰： 查何如梨？ 
现代文：宋文帝对张景胤开玩笑说： 楂与梨哪样味道更好? 
English: Song Wendi jokingly said to Zhang Jingyin: Which tastes better, ginger or pear?

古文：景胤答曰： 梨是百果之宗，查何敢及。 
现代文：张景胤回答说： 梨是百果之本，楂哪裹比得上。 
English: Zhang Jingyin replied, "Pears are the best of all fruits, and ginger is comparable to cucumbers.

古文：冲亦少有至性，辟州主簿，随从叔永为将帅，除绥远将军、盱眙太守。
现代文：张冲年少时便有纯厚的孝亲之情，征为州主簿，跟着堂叔张永作将帅，任绥远将军、盱眙太守。
English: When Zhang Chong was young, he had a pure filial piety, and he was enlisted as a provincial commander, followed by his uncle Zhang Yong as a general, and appointed as the general and the grand marshal.

古文：永征彭城，遇寒雪，军人足胫冻断者十七八，冲足指皆堕。
现代文：张永出征彭城时，正遇上下暴风雪，军人中有十分之七八的人冻伤了脚，张冲的脚趾都冻掉了。
English: When Zhang Yong went to fight in Pengcheng, there was a blizzard. Seven or eight out of ten soldiers had frostbite on their feet, and Zhang Chong's toes were frozen.

古文：除尚书驾部郎，桂阳王征南中兵，振威将军。
现代文：后来，张冲官拜尚书驾部郎，桂阳王征南中兵，振威将军。
English: Later, Zhang Chongguan asked Shang Shuxu to be his driver, and Guiyang Wang enlisted soldiers from the South, and became General Zhenwei.

古文：历骠骑太尉南中郎参军，不拜。
现代文：历任骠骑太尉南中郎参军，没有正式拜授。
English: Successive members of the Imperial Cavalry, such as Lieutenant Minami Chūro, joined the army without being formally awarded the rank.

古文：迁征西从事中郎，通直郎，武陵王北中郎直兵参军，长水校尉，除宁朔将军，本官如故。
现代文：转调为征西从事中郎，通直郎，武陵王北中郎盲兵参军，长水校尉，又拜授为宁朔将军，原来的官职照旧。
English: He was transferred to the Western Expedition as a middle-ranking soldier, Tong Naorong, and Wuling Wang Bei middle-ranking soldier to join the army as a blind soldier, Changshui lieutenant, and was awarded the title of Ningshuo general. His original official position remained unchanged.

古文：迁左军将军，加宁朔将军，辅国将军。
现代文：改迁为左军将军，加封为宁朔将军，辅国将军。
English: He was transferred to the position of General of the Left Army, and given the additional titles of General of Ningshuo and General of the Auxiliary Provinces.

古文：冲少从戎事，朝廷以干力相待，故历处军校之官。
现代文：张冲从年轻时起便在军中服役，朝廷把他看成是干练之才。所以历任的职位都是军校之类武官。
English: Zhang Chong served in the military from a young age, and the court regarded him as a capable person. Therefore, his previous positions were military schools and military attachés.

古文：出为马头太守，徙盱眙太守，辅国将军如故。
现代文：又出任为马颈太守，平调为盱眙太守，辅国将军照旧。
English: He also served as Ma Jia Daju, and later as Zou Daju, as well as the general of the auxiliary state.

古文：永明六年，迁西阳王冠军司马。
现代文：永明六年，升为西阳王冠军司马。
English: Six years later, he was promoted to Xiyang King Champion Sima.

古文：八年，为假节、监青冀二州刺史事，将军如故。
现代文：永明八年，任假节、监青冀二州代行刺史事，将军照旧。
English: In the eighth year of the Yongming era, the appointment holiday, the supervision of the youth of the two states of Hebei and the execution of the historical event, the general is still the same.

古文：冲父初卒，遗命曰： 祭我必以乡土所产，无用牲物。 
现代文：张冲父亲刚死时，留下遗言说： 祭奠我时一定要用家乡出产的物品，但不要用牲畜家禽。 
English: When Zhang Chong's father had just died, he left his last words: "When you pay tribute to me, be sure to use items produced in your hometown, but don't use livestock and poultry.

古文：冲在镇，四时还吴园中取果菜，流涕荐焉。
现代文：张冲在外镇任职，但每逢四时节日都要回吴县的园圃中取来果品菜蔬，流着泪向亡父祭献。
English: Zhang Chong works in an outlying town, but every four o'clock festival, he has to go back to the garden in Wuxian to fetch fruits and vegetables, shed tears and offer sacrifices to his deceased father.

古文：仍转刺史。
现代文：后转官为刺史。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of chief historian.

古文：郁林即位，进号冠军将军。
现代文：郁林王即位，晋封张冲冠军将军称号。
English: Yu Lin Wang ascended the throne and was promoted to the title of Zhang Chong Champion General.

古文：明帝即位，以晋寿太守王洪范代冲。
现代文：明帝即位，以晋寿太守王洪范代理张冲的职务。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended the throne, he appointed Jin Shou Taishou Wang Hong Fan as Zhang Chong's deputy.

古文：除黄门郎，加征虏将军。
现代文：拜张冲为黄门郎，加封征虏将军。
English: Zhang Chong was named Huangmen Lang, and he was also named General of the Conquest.

古文：建武二年，虏寇淮泗，假冲节，都督青冀二州北讨诸军事，本官如故。
现代文：建武二年，北魏军进攻淮、泗，让张冲持符节，去都督青、冀二州北讨诸军事，原任官职照旧。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, when the Northern Wei Army attacked Huai and Jian, Zhang Chong was asked to hold a military ceremony, and he went to the capital of Qing and the north of Hebei Province to join the military. His original official position remained unchanged.

古文：虏并兵攻司州青徐，诏出军分其兵势。
现代文：北魏军合力攻打司州，诏命张冲出军青州、徐州，以分魏军兵势。
English: The Northern Wei army joined forces to attack Sizhou, and the emperor ordered Zhang to rush out of the army of Qingzhou and Xuzhou to divide the Wei army.

古文：冲遣军主桑系祖由渣口攻拔虏建陵、驿马、厚丘三城，多所杀获。
现代文：张冲派军主桑系祖由渣口出击，攻占了北魏的建陵、驿马、厚丘三座城镇，杀死俘获了很多敌人。
English: Zhang Chong dispatched the commander of the army, Mulberry Ancestor, to attack from Jiekou, and captured the three towns of Jianling, Longma and Houqiu in the Northern Wei Dynasty, killing and capturing many enemies.

古文：又与洪轨范遣军主崔季延袭虏纪城，据之。
现代文：他又与王洪范派来的军主崔季延一道偷袭劫掠了北魏的纪城。
English: Together with the military commander Cui Jiyan sent by Wang Hongfan, he raided and plundered the Northern Wei's Jicheng.

古文：冲又遣军主杜僧护攻拔虏虎坑、冯时、即丘三城，驱生口辎重还。至溘沟，虏救兵至，缘道要击，僧护力战，大破之。
现代文：张冲又派军主杜僧护攻下了魏的虎坑、冯时、即丘三座城池，骊赶着俘虏，满载着辎重回来，走到溘沟，北魏军的救兵赶来，沿路截击，杜僧护全力奋战，大破魏军。
English: Zhang Chong also sent the commander Du Xiangguo to attack the three fortresses of Wei's Tiger's Pit, Feng Shi, and Zhiyu Qiu. He drove the captives and returned with a full load of baggage. He walked to Shuguo. The rescuers of the Northern Wei Army arrived and intercepted along the road. Du Xiangguo fought with all his strength and defeated the Wei Army.

古文：其年，迁庐陵王北中郎司马、加冠军将军，未拜，丰城公遥昌为豫州，上虑寇难未已，徙冲为征虏长史、南梁郡太守。
现代文：这一年，升调张冲为庐陵王北中郎司马、加封冠军将军，未正式拜授。丰城公萧遥昌任豫州刺史，明帝担心寇难不止，所以凋张冲任征虏长史、南梁郡太守。
English: In the same year, Zhang Chong was promoted to the position of the general of the Northern Middle Kingdom of Fuling and the champion of Gafeng, which was not officially conferred. Fengcheng Gong Xiao Yuchang was appointed as the governor of Yuzhou, and the Ming Emperor was worried that the invasion would not continue. Therefore, Zhang Chong was appointed as the governor of Nanliang and the governor of Nanliang.

古文：永泰元年，除江夏王前军长史。
现代文：永泰元年，又拜授为江夏王前军长史。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, he was also awarded the title of the former military commander of the King of Jiangxia.

古文：东昏即位，出为建安王征虏长史、辅国将军、江夏内史，行郢州府州事。
现代文：束昏侯即位，张冲出任建安王征虏长史、辅国将军、江夏内史，代行郢州刺史的各项职责。
English: When Sokumo ascended to the throne, Zhang Chong assumed the duties of Jian'an king, conqueror of Changshi, general of Fu Guo, governor of Jiangxia, and acting governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：永元元年，迁持节、督豫州军事、豫州刺史，代裴叔业。竟不行。
现代文：永元元年，又升为持节、督豫州军事、豫州刺史，代替裴叔业，最终未能成行。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, he was also promoted to hold the festival, supervise the military of Yuzhou, and record the history of Yuzhou, replacing Pei Shuye, but ultimately failed to go.

古文：明年，迁督南兖兖徐青冀五州、辅国将军、南兖州刺史，持节如故。
现代文：第二年。张冲改任督南兖、兖、徐、青、冀五州军事，辅国将军、南兖州刺史，持节照旧。
English: In the second year, Zhang Chong was reappointed as the military governor of the five states of Nanxun, Min, Xu, Qing and Hebei, the general of the auxiliary state, and the history of Nanxun State, and the festival continued as before.

古文：会司州刺史申希祖卒，以冲为督司州军事、冠军将军、司州刺史。
现代文：恰逢司州刺史申希祖去世，因而又以张冲为督司州军事、冠军将军、司州刺史。
English: It coincided with the death of Shenshi Zu, the military governor of Shizhou, and thus Zhang Chong became the military governor of Shizhou, the champion general, and the military governor of Shizhou.

古文：裴叔业以寿春降虏，又迁冲为督南兖兖徐青冀五州、南兖州刺史，持节、将军如故。
现代文：裴叔业以寿春投降北魏后，朝廷又调张冲为督南兖、兖、徐、青、冀五州军事，南兖州刺史，持节、将军照旧。
English: After Pei Xiuye surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty with Shuchun, the imperial court transferred Zhang Chong to be the military governor of the five states of Nanzhang, Gu, Xu, Qing and Hebei, and the history of Nanzhang, festivals and generals remained as before.

古文：并未拜。
现代文：这些职务都没有正式拜授。
English: None of these positions are formally conferred.

古文：崔慧景事平，征建安王宝夤还都，以冲为督郢司二州、郢州刺史，持节、将军如故。
现代文：崔慧景事件被平息后，朝廷征召建安王萧宝夤回京，而以张冲为督郢、司二州军事，郢州刺史，持节、将军照旧。
English: After the Cui Huijing incident was quelled, the imperial court conscripted Xiao Baojun, the king of Jian'an, to return to Beijing, and Zhang Chong was appointed as the governor, the secretary of the two-state military, and the secretary of the two-state history, festival and general as before.

古文：一岁之中，频授四州，至此受任。
现代文：一年之中，张冲被频繁地调动，先后受命为四州刺史，至此。才算正式就任了。
English: Over the course of the year, Zhang Chong was frequently transferred, and was successively ordered to write the history of the four states. It was only then that he was officially appointed.

古文：其冬，进征虏将军。封定襄侯，食邑千户。
现代文：这年冬天，进号征虏将军，封定襄侯，食邑一千户。
English: In the winter of that year, the signal was given to recruit generals, and Xianghou was sealed, with a thousand households in the food village.

古文：梁王义师起，东昏遣骁骑将军薛元嗣、制局监暨荣伯领兵及粮运百四十余船送冲，使拒西师。
现代文：梁王的义师起事，东昏派骁骑将军薛元嗣、制局监暨荣伯率领兵马及运粮船一百四十余艘交给张冲，让他抗击西方之敌。
English: Liang Wang's loyal teachers revolted, and the Eastern Conspiracy dispatched the cavalry general Xue Yuan Ci, the system bureau supervisor and Rong Bo to lead the soldiers and horses and more than 140 grain ships to Zhang Chong, so that he could resist the western enemy.

古文：元嗣等惩刘山阳之败，疑冲不敢进，停住夏口浦。
现代文：薛元嗣等以刘山阳的失败为前军之鉴，怀疑张冲不敢进兵，所以停驻在夏口浦。
English: Xue Yuanzhi and others took the defeat of Liu Shanyang as a lesson for the former army, suspecting that Zhang Chong would not dare to enter the army, so they stopped at Xiakoupu.

古文：闻义师将至，元嗣、荣伯相率入郢城。
现代文：听说萧衍的义师快要到达，薛元嗣、暨荣伯造才进入郢城。
English: I heard that Xiao Yan's mentor was about to arrive, and Xue Yuan Zi and Rong Bo Zou had just entered Lucheng.

古文：时竟陵太守房僧寄被代还至郢，东昏敕僧寄留守鲁山，除骁骑将军。
现代文：当时竟陵太守房僧寄被别人代职，他回京时到了郢州，束昏侯敕命房僧寄留守鲁山，拜为骁骑将军。
English: At that time, it turned out that the Mausoleum's chief abbot was sent by someone else to act on his behalf. When he returned to Beijing, he went to Zhangzhou. The drowsy abbot stayed in Lushan to worship the general.

古文：僧寄谓冲曰： 臣虽未荷朝廷深恩，实蒙先帝厚泽。
现代文：房僧寄对张冲说： 我虽然没有受到朝廷太深的恩宠，但确实得到了先帝深厚的恩泽。
English: The house monk said to Zhang Chong: Although I did not receive too much grace from the imperial court, I did receive the profound favor of the former emperor.

古文：荫其树者不折其枝，实欲微立尘效。 
现代文：受到大树荫庇的人是不会折断树枝的，我确实想献出我的微薄之力。 
English: A man shaded by a great tree cannot break its branches, and I really wanted to do my little bit.

古文：冲深相许诺，共结盟誓。
现代文：张冲深为赞许，并共同发誓结盟。
English: Zhang Chongxin agreed, and they vowed to form an alliance.

古文：乃分部拒守，遣军主孙乐祖数千人助僧寄据鲁山岸立城垒。
现代文：于是便分兵拒守。派军主孙乐祖带数千人协助房僧寄在鲁山高高筑起城堡据守。
English: So he sent the army commander, Sun Lezu, and several thousand men to help the monks build a castle high up on Mount Rusan and defend it.

古文：明年二月，梁王出沔口，围鲁山城。
现代文：第二年二月，梁王萧衍从沔口出击，包围了鲁山城。
English: In February of the following year, Liang Wang Xiaoyan attacked from the Hekou and surrounded the city of Lushan.

古文：遣军主曹景宗等过江攻郢城，未及尽济，冲遣中兵参军陈光静等开门出击，为义师所破，光静战死，冲固守不出。
现代文：萧衍又派遣军主曹景宗等人渡过长江来攻郢城，乘他们还没有全部渡过江时，张冲派中兵参军陈光静等人开门出击，但被义师打败，陈光静战死，从此张冲便固守城池不出战。
English: Xiao Yan also sent Cao Jingzong, commander of the army, and others across the Yangtze River to attack Handan City. When they had not all crossed the river, Zhang Chong sent soldiers to join the army Chen Guangjing and others to open the door and attack, but they were defeated by Yishi, Chen Guangjing died in battle, and from then on Zhang Chong would stick to the castle and not fight.

古文：景宗于是据石桥浦，连军相续，下至加湖。
现代文：曹景宗于是便占据着石桥浦，军营相连，直到加湖。
English: Cao Jingzong then occupied Shijiao Pu, and the military camps were connected up to Jiahu.

古文：东昏遣军主巴西梓潼二郡太守吴子阳、光子衿、李文钊、陈虎牙等十三军援郢，至加湖不得进，乃筑城举烽，城内亦举火应之。而内外各自保，不能相救。
现代文：东昏侯又派军主巴西、梓潼二郡太守吴子阳、光子衿、李文钊、陈虎牙等十三军人马去援救郢城，但到了加湖后便不能再前进了，于是便建筑城垒，燃起烽火，城内也燃起烽火相应，但两处兵马都衹能各自守护自己的城垒，却不能相互救援。
English: Dongwu also sent thirteen soldiers and horses, including the military commander Brazil, the two county governors Wu Ziyang, Guang Zijun, Li Wenqian, and Chen Hoga, to rescue the city, but they could not advance any further after reaching the lake, so they built a fortress and lit a bonfire, and the city also lit a bonfire accordingly, but the two soldiers and horses could each guard their own fortress, but they could not rescue each other.

古文：冲病死，元嗣、荣伯与冲子孜及长史江夏内史程茂固守。
现代文：张冲病死，薛元嗣、暨荣伯和张冲的儿子张孜以及长史江夏内史程茂仍然固守城池。
English: Zhang Chong died of illness, but Xue Yuan Zi, Rong Bo and Zhang Chong's son Zhang Ze, as well as Chang Shi Jiang Xia Ne Shi Cheng Mao, still clung to the castle.

古文：东昏诏赠冲散骑常侍、护军将军。
现代文：束昏侯颁诏追封张冲为散骑常侍、护军将军。
English: Sokumo issued an edict to enthrone Zhang Chong as a knight-errant and escort general.

古文：假元嗣、子阳节。
现代文：假薛元嗣、吴子阳以符节。
English: False Xue Yuan Zi, Wu Ziyang with symbols.

古文：江水暴长，加湖城淹渍，义师乘高舰攻之，子阳等大败散。
现代文：长江水暴涨，加湖城被江水所淹渍，义师乘坐着高大的战船去攻打它，吴子阳等人大败溃逃。
English: The Yangtze River water surged, and Jiahu City was flooded by the river water. Yishi took a tall warship to attack it, and Wu Ziyang and others were defeated and fled.

古文：鲁山城乏粮，军人于矶头捕细鱼供食，密治轻船，将奔夏口。
现代文：鲁山城内又缺乏粮食，军士们都到矶头上捕捉小鱼作为食品，并秘密地准备轻便的船只，预备奔往夏口。
English: There was also a shortage of grain in the city of Luzhan. The soldiers went to the head of the cliff to catch small fish as food, and secretly prepared light boats to go to Xiakou.

古文：梁王命偏军断其取路，防备越逸。
现代文：萧衍命偏师阻断他们的出路，防备他们脱逃。
English: Xiao Yan ordered the deviators to block their way out and prevent them from escaping.

古文：房僧寄病死，孙乐祖窘，以城降。
现代文：房僧寄病死，孙乐祖陷入困境，举城投降。
English: The house monk died of illness, Sun Lezu was in trouble, and the city surrendered.

古文：郢城被围二百余日，士庶病死者七八百家。
现代文：郢城被围二百多天，城中军民死去的有十分之七八。
English: Lucheng was besieged for more than 200 days. Seventy-eight out of every ten soldiers and civilians in the city died.

古文：鲁山既败，程茂及元嗣等议降，使孜为书与梁王。
现代文：鲁山失败后，程茂及薛元嗣等人商议着投降，让张孜给梁王萧衍写信。
English: After the defeat of Lushan, Chengmao, Xue Yuanzhi and others discussed surrender and asked Zhang Ze to write to Liang Wang Xiaoyan.

古文：冲故吏青州治中房长瑜谓孜曰： 前使君忠贯昊天，操逾松竹。
现代文：张冲原来的属吏青州治中房长瑜对张孜说： 已故张使君忠心横贯昊天。
English: Zhang Chong's former subordinate official, Qingzhou Jizhong Fong Changyu, said to Zhang Ze: The late Zhang Zijun's loyalty runs deep.

古文：郎君但当端坐画一，以荷析薪。
现代文：节操超过松竹郎君你祇应当正襟危坐，与先使君保持一致，以肩负起这艰难的重任。
English: If you are more conservative than Shochikuro-kun, you should just sit up straight and be consistent with the first envoy to shoulder this difficult and important task.

古文：若天运不与，幅巾待命，以下从使君。
现代文：如果老天不给你好运，那你祇有以绢帛束发，等待恶运的到来，跟从先使君于地下。
English: If God does not give you good luck, then all you have to do is wait for the bad luck to come, and follow the first to make you underground.

古文：今若随诸人之计，非唯郢州士女失高山之望，亦恐彼所不取也。 
现代文：现在若是听从别人的计谋出降，不但郢州的百姓对你失去了像对高山那样的期望之情，恐怕萧衍他们也不会答允。 
English: If you follow someone else's scheme and surrender now, not only will the people of Zhangzhou lose their expectations for you like they did for Takayama, but I'm afraid they won't agree to Xiao Yan either.

古文：鲁山陷后二日，元嗣等以郢城降。
现代文：鲁山陷落之后二天，薛元嗣等人以郢城投降。
English: Two days after the fall of Lushan, Xue Yuanzhi and others surrendered in Shicheng.

古文：东昏以程茂为督郢司二州、辅国将军、郢州刺史，元嗣为督雍梁南北秦四州郢州之竟陵司州之随郡、冠军将军、雍州刺史，并持节。
现代文：东昏侯以程茂为督郢司二州军事、辅国将军、郢州刺史，以薛元嗣为督雍、梁、南秦、北秦四州及郢州的竟陵、司州的随郡军事，冠军将军，雍州刺史，二人都是持节。
English: Dongwu marquis selected Chengmao as the governor of the Second Military Region, the general of the Auxiliary Military Region, and the chief historian of Yongzhou, and selected Xue Yuanzhi as the governor of Yong, Liang, South Qin, North Qin, Four Provinces, and Yongzhou, and the military governor of the Second Military Region, the champion general, and the chief historian of Yongzhou. Both of them were honored with festivals.

古文：时郢鲁二城已降，死者相积，竟无叛散。
现代文：但这时郢城、鲁山二城都已经投降了萧衍。当时二城军民死者尸积如山，竟然没有叛逃的。
English: However, at that time, the two cities of Lushan and Lushan had already surrendered to Xiao Yan. At that time, the dead bodies of soldiers and civilians in the two cities were piled up like a mountain, and there was no defection.

古文：时以冲及房僧寄比臧洪之被围也。
现代文：世人把张冲及房僧寄被围之事与臧洪被围相媲美。
English: People compare the siege of Zhang Chong and Fangsangye to the siege of Sui Hong.

古文：赠僧寄益州刺史。
现代文：追赠房僧寄为益州刺史。
English: The posthumous gift of a house to a monk was a turning point in the history of Yishu.

古文：时新蔡太守席谦，永明中为中书郎王融所荐。
现代文：当时，有新蔡太守席谦，他在永明年间受到中书郎王融的举荐。
English: At that time, there was a new empress dowager Cai Shuxiqian, who was recommended by the middle school teacher Wang Rong in the middle of the year.

古文：父恭穆，镇西司马，为鱼复侯所害。
现代文：其父席恭穆，任镇西司马，被鱼复侯害死。
English: His father, Zhi Gongmu, Ren Zhen Xi Sima, was killed by Yu Fu Hou.

古文：至是谦镇盆城，闻义师东下，曰： 我家世忠贞，殒死不二。 
现代文：到这时，席谦正镇守盆城，听说萧衍义师束进，说： 我家世代忠贞，至死不渝。 
English: At that time, Shi Qian, who was guarding Boncheng, heard that Xiao Yan Yi's teacher, Sokjin, said: My family has been loyal for generations, and will remain loyal until death.

古文：为陈伯之所杀。
现代文：他被陈伯之杀死。
English: He was killed by Chen Bozhi.

古文：史臣曰：石碏弃子，弘灭亲之戒；鲍永晚降，知事新之节。
现代文：史臣曰：春秋卫大夫石醋为国弃子，弘扬了大义减亲的道理；汉鲍永虽然投降光武很晚，却懂得事奉新主的机运。
English: Shichen said: Dr. Shunqiu Wei was an abandoned son of the country and promoted the principle of reducing relatives; Han Baoyong, although he surrendered to Guangwu very late, understood the opportunity to serve the new master.

古文：王奂诚在靡贰，迹允严科；张冲未达天心，守迷义运。
现代文：王奂确实没有反叛的二心，但他的行迹应当受到严厉的惩处；张冲没有通达上天的意旨，所以受旧的法度规矩的迷惑而持守不改。
English: It is true that Wang Yao did not have a rebellious heart, but his actions should have been severely punished; Zhang Chong did not reach the will of heaven, so he was confused by the old laws and rules and did not change.

古文：致危之理异，为亡之事一也。
现代文：招致危险的道理虽然各不相同，但被灭亡的结果是一样的。
English: The reasons for the danger are different, but the result of being destroyed is the same.

古文：赞曰：王居北牧，子未克家。
现代文：赞曰：王奂居北方藩镇的高位；但儿子却不能遵守家法。
English: Zang Zai said, "Wang Yao holds a high position in a northern town, but his son can't abide by the family law.

古文：终成干纪，覆此胄华。
现代文：终于冲犯了国家法纪，断送了华贵的前程。
English: Finally, he violated the national laws and regulations, and ruined Gao Gui's future.

古文：张垒穷守，死如乱麻。
现代文：张冲据守危困的孤城，使军民死如乱麻。
English: Zhang Chong firmly guarded the isolated city in peril, causing the death of soldiers and civilians.

古文：为悟既晚，辩见方赊。
现代文：他觉悟太晚，见识也很欠缺。
English: He came to his senses too late and lacked insight.

