古文：张廷尉释之者，堵阳人也，字季。
现代文：廷尉张释之，是堵阳人，字季。
English: Zhang Xizhi, a courtier, was a young man with a penchant for young women.

古文：有兄仲同居。
现代文：和他的哥哥仲生活在一起。
English: He lives with his brother, Naka.

古文：以訾为骑郎，事孝文帝，十岁不得调，无所知名。
现代文：由于家中资财多而作了骑郎，侍奉汉文帝，十年内得不到升迁，默默无名。
English: Due to the family's wealth, he became a cavalryman and served Emperor Hanwen. He was not promoted within ten years and remained anonymous.

古文：释之曰： 久宦减仲之产，不遂。 
现代文：张释之说： 长时间的做郎官，耗减了哥哥的资财，使人不安。 
English: Zhang Xizhi said, "Being a steward for a long time has depleted my brother's wealth, which makes people uneasy.

古文：欲自免归。
现代文：想要辞职回家。
English: Wants to quit and go home.

古文：中郎将袁盎知其贤，惜其去，乃请徙释之补谒者。
现代文：中郎将袁盎知道他德才兼备，惋惜他的离去。就请求汉文帝调补他做谒者。
English: Knowing that Yuan Ang possessed both virtue and talent, the viceroy regretted his departure and asked Emperor Hanwen to replace him as the executioner.

古文：释之既朝毕，因前言便宜事。文帝曰： 卑之，毋甚高论，令今可施行也。 
现代文：张释之朝见文帝后，就趋前陈说利国利民的大计方针，文帝说： 说些接近现实生活的事，不要高谈阔论，说的应该现在就能实施。 
English: After Zhang Xizhi saw Emperor Wen in the morning, he came forward to present the general policy of benefiting the country and benefiting the people. Emperor Wen said: "Speak about things that are close to real life, don't talk too much, and what you say should be able to be implemented now."

古文：於是释之言秦汉之间事，秦所以失而汉所以兴者久之。
现代文：于是，张释之又谈起秦汉之际的事，谈了很长时间关于秦朝灭亡和汉朝兴盛的原因。
English: Therefore, Zhang Xizhi also talked about the Qin and Han dynasties, and talked for a long time about the reasons for the demise of the Qin Dynasty and the prosperity of the Han Dynasty.

古文：文帝称善，乃拜释之为谒者仆射。
现代文：文帝很赞赏他，就任命他做了谒者仆射。
English: Emperor Wen appreciated him very much and appointed him to be the leader of the army.

古文：释之从行，登虎圈。上问上林尉诸禽兽簿，十馀问，尉左右视，尽不能对。
现代文：一次，张释之跟随汉文帝出行，登临虎圈，汉文帝询问书册上登记的各种禽兽的情况，问了十几个问题，上林尉只能东瞧西看，全都不能回答。
English: Once, Zhang Xizhi traveled with Emperor Hanwen and visited the tiger enclosure. Emperor Hanwen inquired about the situation of various animals registered in the book and asked more than a dozen questions. Shanglin could only look around and could not answer all of them.

古文：虎圈啬夫从旁代尉对上所问禽兽簿甚悉，欲以观其能口对响应无穷者。
现代文：看管虎圈的啬夫从旁代上林尉回答了皇帝提出的问题，答得极周全。想借此显示自己回答问题有如声响回应而且无法问倒。
English: The miserly man in charge of the tiger enclosure answered the emperor's question from the side of Lieutenant Lin, and he answered it very well. He wanted to show that his answer to the question was like a sound response and could not be asked down.

古文：文帝曰： 吏不当若是邪？
现代文：汉文帝说： 做官吏不该像这样吗？
English: Han Wenti said, "Isn't being a government official supposed to be like this?

古文：尉无赖！ 
现代文：上林尉不可依。 
English: Captain Hayashi is not to be trusted.

古文：乃诏释之拜啬夫为上林令。
现代文：于是命令张释之让啬夫做上林令。
English: Therefore, he ordered Zhang Xizhi to let the miser do the work of the forest ranger.

古文：释之久之前曰： 陛下以绛侯周勃何如人也？ 
现代文：张释之过了一会儿才上前说： 陛下认为绛侯周勃是怎样的人呢？ 
English: After a while, Zhang Xizhi came forward and said, "What kind of person does Your Majesty think Prince Zhou Bo is?"

古文：上曰： 长者也。 
现代文：文帝说： 是长者啊！ 
English: Wendi said: It's the elders!

古文：又复问： 东阳侯张相如何如人也？ 
现代文：又再一次问： 东阳侯张相如是怎样的人呢？ 
English: Once again, I would like to ask: What kind of person is Dongyang marquis Zhang Xiangru?

古文：上复曰： 长者。 
现代文：文帝再一次回答说： 是个长者。 
English: Once again, Emperor Wen replied, "He is an old man."

古文：释之曰： 夫绛侯、东阳侯称为长者，此两人言事曾不能出口，岂斅此啬夫谍谍利口捷给哉！
现代文：张释之说： 绛侯与东阳侯都被称为长者，可这两个人议论事情时都不善于言谈，现在这样做，难道让人们去效法这个喋喋不休伶牙俐齿的啬夫吗？
English: Zhang Xizhi said: "Both Gong Hou and Dongyang Hou are called elders, but these two people are not good at talking when discussing things. If they do this now, will people follow the example of this chattering, snaggle-toothed miser?

古文：且秦以任刀笔之吏，吏争以亟疾苛察相高，然其敝徒文具耳，无恻隐之实。
现代文：秦代由于重用了舞文弄法的官吏，所以官吏们争着以办事迅急苛刻督责为高，然而这样做的流弊在于徒然具有官样文书的表面形式，而没有怜悯同情的实质。
English: In the Qin Dynasty, due to the heavy use of officials using the dance and literature method, officials were competing to do things quickly and harshly. However, the disadvantage of doing so was that they had the superficial form of official documents in vain, but no mercy and sympathy.

古文：以故不闻其过，陵迟而至於二世，天下土崩。
现代文：因为这个缘故，秦君听不到自己的过失，国势日衰，到秦二世时，秦国也就土崩瓦解了。
English: Because of this, Qin could not hear his own mistakes, and the country declined. By the time of Qin II, the Qin state had collapsed.

古文：今陛下以啬夫口辩而超迁之，臣恐天下随风靡靡，争为口辩而无其实。
现代文：现在陛下因为啬夫伶牙俐齿就越级提拔他，我想恐怕天下人都会追随这种风气，争相施展口舌之能而不求实际。
English: Now that His Majesty has promoted him to a higher rank because of his bad manners and bad teeth, I'm afraid that people all over the world will follow this tradition, competing to display the power of words rather than reality.

古文：且下之化上疾於景响，举错不可不审也。 文帝曰： 善。 
现代文：况且在下位的人被在上的人感化，快得犹如影之随形声之回应一样，陛下做任何事情都不可不审慎啊！ 文帝说： 好吧！ 
English: Moreover, the people in the lower ranks are influenced by the people in the upper ranks, as fast as the shadow of the shadow of the shadow of the shadow of the shadow of the shadow of the shadow of the shadow of the shadow of the shadow of the shadow of the shadow of the shadow of the shadow of the shadow of the shadow of the shadow of the shadow of the shadow.

古文：乃止不拜啬夫。
现代文：于是，取消原来的打算，不再任命啬夫为上林令。
English: As a result, the original plan was cancelled, and the miser was no longer appointed as the forester.

古文：上就车，召释之参乘，徐行，问释之秦之敝。
现代文：文帝上了车，让张释之陪乘在身旁，车慢慢前行。
English: Wen Di got on the car, let Zhang Xizhi's companion ride beside him, and the car slowly moved forward.

古文：具以质言。至宫，上拜释之为公车令。
现代文：文帝问张释之秦政的弊端，张释之都据实而言。到了宫里，文帝就任命张释之做了公车令。
English: Emperor Wen asked Zhang Xizhi about the drawbacks of the Qin government, and Zhang Xizhi said that it was true. When he arrived at the palace, Emperor Wen made an official order to appoint Zhang Xizhi.

古文：顷之，太子与梁王共车入朝，不下司马门，於是释之追止太子、梁王无得入殿门。
现代文：不久，太子与梁王同乘一辆车入朝，到了皇宫外的司马门也没有下车，当时张释之迎上去阻止太子、梁王，不让他们进宫。
English: Soon after, the Crown Prince and Prince Leung entered the Imperial Palace together in a car. When they reached the Sima Gate outside the palace, they did not get off the car. At that time, Zhang Xizhi went to meet the Crown Prince and Prince Leung and stopped them from entering the palace.

古文：遂劾不下公门不敬，奏之。
现代文：并检举揭发他们在皇宫门外不下车犯了 不敬 罪，并报告给皇帝。
English: They were reported to the emperor for committing the crime of disrespect by not getting off the train outside the palace gate.

古文：薄太后闻之，文帝免冠谢曰： 教兒子不谨。 
现代文：薄太后知道了这件事，文帝摘下帽子陪罪说： 怪我教导儿子不严。 
English: When the Empress Dowager Bo found out about this, Emperor Wen took off his hat and apologized, saying, "I hurt my son by not being strict with him."

古文：薄太后乃使使承诏赦太子、梁王，然后得入。
现代文：薄太后也派使臣带着她的赦免太子梁王罪过的诏书前来，太子、梁王才能够进入宫中。
English: Empress Dowager Bo also sent an envoy to bring her imperial decree to pardon the sins of Prince Liang Wang, so that the prince and King Liang could enter the palace.

古文：文帝由是奇释之，拜为中大夫。
现代文：文帝由此更加看出了张释之的与众不同，任命他做了中大夫。
English: This made Emperor Wen even more aware of Zhang Xizhi's uniqueness, and he appointed him as a middle doctor.

古文：顷之，至中郎将。
现代文：又过了些时候，张释之升任中郎将。
English: Some time later, Zhang Xizhi was promoted to the position of vice-commander.

古文：从行至霸陵，居北临厕。
现代文：跟随皇帝到了霸陵，汉文帝站在霸陵的北面眺望。
English: He followed the emperor to Bailing. Emperor Hanwen stood on the north side of Bailing and looked out.

古文：是时慎夫人从，上指示慎夫人新丰道，曰： 此走邯郸道也。 
现代文：这时慎夫人也跟随前行，皇帝用手指示着通往新丰的道路给她看，并说： 这是通往邯郸的道路啊。 
English: At this time, Lady Shan also followed, and the emperor showed her the way to Xinfeng with his hand, saying, "This is the way to Handan."

古文：使慎夫人鼓瑟，上自倚瑟而歌，意惨凄悲怀，顾谓群臣曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：接着，让慎夫人弹瑟，汉文帝自己合着瑟的曲调而唱，心里很凄惨悲伤，回过头来对着群臣说： 唉！
English: Then, let Mrs. Shin play the melody, and Emperor Han Wen himself sang along with the melody. He was very sad and turned to his ministers and said, "Alas!

古文：以北山石为椁，用纻絮斫陈，蕠漆其间，岂可动哉！ 
现代文：用北山的石头做椁，用切碎的苧麻丝絮充塞石椁缝隙，再用漆粘涂在上面，哪还能打得开呢？ 
English: Using the stone from the North Mountain to make a cocoon, filling the cracks in the cocoon with chopped nettle silk, and then sticking it on with paint, how can it be opened?

古文：左右皆曰： 善。 
现代文：在身边的近侍都说： 对的。 
English: The attendants around him all said, "That's right."

古文：释之前进曰： 使其中有可欲者，虽锢南山犹有郄；使其中无可欲者，虽无石椁，又何戚焉！ 
现代文：张释之走上前去说道： 假若里面有了引发人们贪欲的东西，即使封铸南山做棺椁，也还会有缝隙；假若里面没有引发人们贪欲的东西，即使没有石椁，又哪里用得着忧虑呢！ 
English: Zhang Xizhi stepped forward and said: "If there is something inside that arouses people's greed, even if Nanshan is sealed to make a coffin, there will still be a gap; if there is nothing inside that arouses people's greed, even if there is no stone coffin, what is there to worry about!

古文：文帝称善。
现代文：文帝称赞他说得好。
English: Emperor Wen praised him for speaking well.

古文：其後拜释之为廷尉。
现代文：后来任命他做了廷尉。
English: He was later made a lieutenant of the court.

古文：顷之，上行出中渭桥，有一人从穚下走出，乘舆马惊。
现代文：此后不久，皇帝出巡经过长安城北的中渭桥，有一个人突然从桥下跑了出来，皇帝车驾的马受了惊。
English: Shortly thereafter, when the emperor was on a tour and passed the Zhongyuan Bridge in the north of Chang'an City, a man suddenly ran out from under the bridge, and the horse the emperor was driving was startled.

古文：於是使骑捕，属之廷尉。
现代文：于是命令骑士捉住这个人，交给了廷尉张释之。
English: So he ordered the knights to capture this man and handed him over to the court lieutenant Zhang Xizhi.

古文：释之治问。
现代文：张释之审讯那个人。
English: Zhang Xizhi's interrogation of the man.

古文：曰： 县人来，闻跸，匿桥下。
现代文：那人说： 我是长安县的乡下人，听到了清道禁止人通行的命令，就躲在桥下。
English: The man said, "I am a villager from Chang'an County. When I heard the order to keep the roads clear, I hid under the bridge.

古文：久之，以为行已过，即出，见乘舆车骑，即走耳。 
现代文：过了好久，以为皇帝的队伍已经过去了，就从桥下出来，一下子看见了皇帝的车队，马上就跑起来。 
English: After a long time, thinking that the emperor's procession had already passed, he came out from under the bridge, suddenly saw the emperor's motorcade, and immediately started to run.

古文：廷尉秦当，一人犯跸，当罚金。
现代文：然后廷尉向皇帝报告那个人应得的处罚，说他触犯了清道的禁令，应处以罚金。
English: Then the courtier reported to the emperor that the man deserved punishment, saying that he had violated the ban on clearing roads and should be fined.

古文：文帝怒曰： 此人亲惊吾马，吾马赖柔和，令他马，固不败伤我乎？而廷尉乃当之罚金！ 
现代文：文帝发怒说： 这个人惊了我的马，我的马幸亏驯良温和，假如是别的马，说不定就摔伤了我，可是廷尉才判处他罚金！ 
English: Emperor Wen said angrily, "This man frightened my horse. Fortunately, my horse is tame and gentle. If it had been another horse, it might have injured me, but the court lieutenant only fined him!"

古文：释之曰： 法者天子所与天下公共也。
现代文：张释之说： 法律是天子和天下人应该共同遵守的。
English: Zhang Xizhi said: The law is something that both heaven and earth should abide by.

古文：今法如此而更重之，是法不信於民也。
现代文：现在法律就这样规定，却要再加重处罚，这样法律就不能取信于民。
English: Now the law stipulates this, but the punishment must be further increased, so that the law cannot gain the trust of the people.

古文：且方其时，上使立诛之则已。
现代文：而在那时，皇上您让人立刻杀了他也就罢了。
English: But at that time, Your Majesty had him killed immediately.

古文：今既下廷尉，廷尉，天下之平也，一倾而天下用法皆为轻重，民安所措其手足？
现代文：现在既然把这个人交给廷尉，廷尉是天下公正执法的带头人，稍一偏失，而天下执法者都会任意或轻或重，老百姓岂不会手足无措？
English: Now that this person has been handed over to the imperial lieutenant, the imperial lieutenant is the leader of the world's fair law enforcement, a slight deviation, and the world's law enforcers will be arbitrary or light or heavy, will the common people be helpless?

古文：唯陛下察之。 
现代文：愿陛下明察。 
English: May His Majesty see this.

古文：良久，上曰： 廷尉当是也。 
现代文：许久，皇帝才说： 廷尉的判处是正确的。 
English: It was a long time before the emperor said: The courtier's sentence is correct.

古文：其後有人盗高庙坐前玉环，捕得，文帝怒，下廷尉治。
现代文：后来，有人偷了高祖庙神座前的玉环，被抓到了，文帝发怒，交给廷尉治罪。
English: Later, someone stole the jade ring in front of the throne of the Gaozhu Temple and was caught. Emperor Wen became angry and handed it over to a court official for punishment.

古文：释之案律盗宗庙服御物者为奏，奏当弃市。
现代文：张释之按法律所规定偷盗宗庙服饰器具之罪奏报皇帝，判处死刑。
English: Zhang Xizhi was sentenced to death for reporting to the emperor the crime of stealing the temple's clothing and utensils as stipulated by law.

古文：上大怒曰： 人之无道，乃盗先帝庙器，吾属廷尉者，欲致之族，而君以法奏之，非吾所以共承宗庙意也。 
现代文：皇帝勃然大怒说： 这人胡作非为无法无天，竟偷盗先帝庙中的器物，我交给廷尉审理的目的，想要给他灭族的惩处，而你却一味按照法律条文把惩处意见报告我，这不是我恭敬奉承宗庙的本意啊。 
English: The emperor flew into a rage and said, "This man is a lawless rogue who has stolen objects from the former emperor's temple. I wanted to give him the punishment of extermination for the purpose of giving him to the courtier for trial, but you just reported the punishment to me in accordance with the provisions of the law. This is not my intention to respect and flatter the ancestral temple.

古文：释之免冠顿首谢曰： 法如是足也。
现代文：张释之脱帽叩头谢罪说： 依照法律这样处罚已经足够了。
English: Zhang Xiezhi took off his hat and bowed to Xie Sin, saying: According to the law, this punishment is enough.

古文：且罪等，然以逆顺为差。
现代文：况且在罪名相同时，也要区别犯罪程度的轻重不同。
English: Moreover, when the charges are the same, it is also necessary to distinguish between the different degrees of severity of the crime.

古文：今盗宗庙器而族之，有如万分之一，假令愚民取长陵一抔土，陛下何以加其法乎？ 
现代文：现在他偷盗祖庙的器物就要处以灭族之罪，万一有愚蠢的人挖长陵一捧土，陛下用什么刑罚惩处他呢？ 
English: Now, he will be punished with the crime of extermination if he steals the artifacts of the ancestral temple. In the unlikely event that a stupid person digs up a handful of earth from the Naganokyo Mausoleum, what punishment will His Majesty use to punish him?

古文：久之，文帝与太后言之，乃许廷尉当。
现代文：过了一些时候，文帝和薄太后谈论了这件事，才同意了廷尉的判决。
English: After some time, Emperor Wen and Empress Dowager Bo discussed the matter before agreeing to the court officer's decision.

古文：是时，中尉条侯周亚夫与梁相山都侯王恬开见释之持议平，乃结为亲友。
现代文：当时，中尉条侯周亚夫与梁国国相山都侯王恬开看到了张释之执法论事公正，就和他结为亲密的朋友。
English: At that time, Lieutenant Zhou Yafu and Liang Guo Guo Xiangshan Du Hou Wang Huan Kai saw the justice of Zhang Xie's enforcement of the law and became close friends with him.

古文：张廷尉由此天下称之。
现代文：张释之由此得到天下人的称赞。
English: As a result, Zhang Xizhi was praised by people all over the world.

古文：後文帝崩，景帝立，释之恐，称病。
现代文：后来，文帝死去，景帝即位。张释之内心恐惧，假称生病。
English: Later, Emperor Wen died and Emperor Jing ascended to the throne. Zhang Xie was terrified and pretended to be ill.

古文：欲免去，惧大诛至；欲见谢，则未知何如。
现代文：想要辞职离去，又担心随之招致被诛杀；要当面向景帝谢罪，又不知怎么办好。
English: They want to resign and leave, but they are worried that they will be beaten to death; they want to thank Emperor Jing in person, but they don't know what to do.

古文：用王生计，卒见谢，景帝不过也。
现代文：用了王生的计策，终于见到景帝道歉谢罪，景帝没有责怪他。
English: Using Wang Sheng's strategy, he finally saw Emperor Jing apologize and apologize, and Emperor Jing did not blame him.

古文：王生者，善为黄老言，处士也。
现代文：王生是喜好黄老学说的处士。
English: Wang Sheng is a clerk who likes the doctrine of Huang Lao.

古文：尝召居廷中，三公九卿尽会立，王生老人，曰 吾穇解 ，顾谓张廷尉： 为我结韤！ 
现代文：曾被召进朝廷中，三公九卿全齐聚站在那里，王生是个老年人，说： 我的袜带松脱了。 回过头来对张廷尉说： 给我结好袜带！ 
English: Wang Sheng, an elderly man, was once called into the imperial court, where the three princes and nine nobles were all standing together. He said, "My garter is loose," and turned to Zhang Tingfei and said, "Knit me a good garter!"

古文：释之跪而结之。
现代文：张释之就跪下结好袜带。
English: Zhang Xizhi knelt down and knotted his garter belt.

古文：既已，人或谓王生曰： 独柰何廷辱张廷尉，使跪结穇？ 
现代文：事后，有人问王生说： 为什么在朝廷上羞辱张廷尉，让他跪着结袜带？ 
English: Afterwards, someone asked Wang Sheng, "Why did you humiliate Lieutenant Zhang Tingyu in the court and make him kneel to tie his garter?"

古文：王生曰： 吾老且贱，自度终无益於张廷尉。
现代文：王生说： 我年老，又地位卑下。自己料想最终不能给张廷尉什么好处。
English: Wang Sheng said, "I am old and my status is low. I don't think I can give Lieutenant Zhang any benefits in the end.

古文：张廷尉方今天下名臣，吾故聊辱廷尉，使跪结穇，欲以重之。 
现代文：张廷尉是天下名臣，我故意羞辱张廷尉，让他跪下结袜带，想用这种办法加强他的名望。 
English: Lieutenant Zhang Ting is a world-renowned minister. I deliberately humiliated Lieutenant Zhang Ting by making him kneel down to tie his garter, hoping to strengthen his reputation in this way.

古文：诸公闻之，贤王生而重张廷尉。
现代文：各位大臣们听说后，都称赞王生的贤德而且敬重张廷尉。
English: After hearing the news, all the ministers praised Wang Sheng's virtue and respected Lieutenant Zhang Tingru.

古文：张廷尉事景帝岁馀，为淮南王相，犹尚以前过也。
现代文：张廷尉侍奉景帝一年多，被贬谪为淮南王相，这还是由于以前得罪景帝的缘故。
English: Zhang Tingfei served Emperor Jing for more than a year and was demoted to the position of Huainan's prime minister. This was because he had offended Emperor Jing in the past.

古文：久之，释之卒。
现代文：过了一些时候，张释之死了。
English: After some time, Zhang Xizhi died.

古文：其子曰张挚，字长公，官至大夫，免。
现代文：他的儿子叫张挚，字长公，官职一直做到大夫，后被免职。
English: His son's name is Zhang Zhengyi, and his official title is "Chang Gong." He was a doctor until he was dismissed from his post.

古文：以不能取容当世，故终身不仕。
现代文：因为他不能迎合当时的权贵显要，所以直到死也没有再做官。
English: Because he couldn't pander to the high and mighty of the time, he never held public office again until his death.

古文：冯唐者，其大父赵人。
现代文：冯唐，他的祖父是战国时赵国人。
English: Feng Tang, his grandfather was a native of Zhao during the Warring States period.

古文：父徙代。
现代文：他的父亲移居到了代地。
English: His father moved to a new place.

古文：汉兴徙安陵。
现代文：汉朝建立后，又迁到安陵。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, it was moved to Anling.

古文：唐以孝著，为中郎署长，事文帝。
现代文：冯唐以孝行著称于时，被举荐做了中郎署长，侍奉汉文帝。
English: Feng Tang was known for his filial piety, and was recommended to be made the head of the middle-ranking official, serving Emperor Hanwen.

古文：文帝辇过，问唐曰： 父老何自为郎？家安在？ 
现代文：一次文帝乘车经过冯唐任职的官署，问冯唐说： 老人家怎么还在做郎官？家在哪里？ 
English: Once, Emperor Wen passed by Feng Tang's government office in a car and asked Feng Tang: "How come the old man is still an official? Where is home?"

古文：唐具以实对。
现代文：冯唐都如实作答。
English: Feng Tang answered truthfully.

古文：文帝曰： 吾居代时，吾尚食监高袪数为我言赵将李齐之贤，战於钜鹿下。
现代文：汉文帝说： 我在代郡时，我的尚食监高祛多次和我谈到赵将李齐的才能，讲述了他在钜鹿城下作战的情形。
English: Han Wendi said: When I was in Dai County, my Shang Food Supervisor Gao Yao talked to me many times about Zhao Zhe Li Qi's talent and told me about his battle under the Elk City.

古文：今吾每饭，意未尝不在钜鹿也。
现代文：现在我每次吃饭时，心里总会想起钜鹿之战时的李齐。
English: Now, every time I eat, I always think of Li Qi during the Battle of Elk.

古文：父知之乎？ 
现代文：老人家知道这个人吗？ 
English: Does the old man know this man?

古文：唐对曰： 尚不如廉颇、李牧之为将也。 
现代文：冯唐回答说： 他尚且比不上廉颇、李牧的指挥才能。 
English: Feng Tang replied, "He is still not as good as Li Mu, who is not only corrupt, but also has the ability to command."

古文：上曰： 何以？ 
现代文：汉文帝说： 凭什么这样说呢？ 
English: Han Wendi said, "How can you say that?

古文：唐曰： 臣大父在赵时，为官将，善李牧。
现代文：冯唐说： 我的祖父在赵国时，担任过统率士兵的职务，和李牧有很好的交情。
English: Feng Tang said: When my grandfather was in Zhao Province, he held the position of commanding soldiers, and he had a good relationship with Li Mu.

古文：臣父故为代相，善赵将李齐，知其为人也。 
现代文：我父亲从前做过代相，和赵将李齐也过从甚密，所以能知道他们的为人。 
English: My father used to be a dynast, and he was very close to Zhao Zhao and Li Qi, so I know who they are.

古文：上既闻廉颇、李牧为人，良说，而搏髀曰： 嗟乎！吾独不得廉颇、李牧时为吾将，吾岂忧匈奴哉！ 
现代文：汉文帝听完冯唐的述说，很高兴，拍着大腿说： 我偏偏得不到廉颇、李牧这样的人做将领，如果有这样的将领，我难道还忧虑匈奴吗？ 
English: After listening to Feng Tang's speech, Emperor Hanwen was very happy, patted his thigh and said: I just can't get a corrupt person like Li Mu to be a general. If there is such a general, should I still be worried about the Xiongnu?

古文：唐曰： 主臣！陛下虽得廉颇、李牧，弗能用也。 
现代文：冯唐说： 臣诚惶诚恐，我想陛下即使得到廉颇、李牧，也不会任用他们。 
English: Feng Tang said: I think your majesty would not appoint them even if you were to get Lianpo and Li Mu.

古文：上怒，起入禁中。
现代文：汉文帝大怒，起身回宫。
English: Enraged, Emperor Hanwen got up and returned to the palace.

古文：良久，召唐让曰： 公柰何众辱我，独无间处乎？ 
现代文：过了好长一会儿，才又召见冯唐责备他说： 你为什么当众侮辱我？难道就不能私下告诉我吗？ 
English: After a long while, Feng Tang was summoned again and scolded him: "Why did you insult me in public? Couldn't you have told me privately?

古文：唐谢曰： 鄙人不知忌讳。 
现代文：冯唐谢罪说： 我这个鄙陋之人不懂得忌讳回避。 
English: Feng Tang Xie Sin said: I am a despicable person who does not know how to avoid taboos.

古文：当是之时，匈奴新大入朝，杀北地都尉卬。
现代文：在这时，匈奴人新近大举侵犯朝，杀死北地都尉孙卬。
English: At this time, the Huns had recently attacked the imperial court in a big way, killing the northern captain Sun Yat-sen.

古文：上以胡寇为意，乃卒复问唐曰： 公何以知吾不能用廉颇、李牧也？ 
现代文：汉文帝正为此忧虑，就终于又一次询问冯唐： 您怎么知道我不能任用廉颇、李牧呢？ 
English: Han Wendi was worried about this, so he finally asked Feng Tang again: How do you know that I can't appoint Renpo and Li Mu?

古文：唐对曰： 臣闻上古王者之遣将也，跪而推毂，曰阃以内者，寡人制之；阃以外者，将军制之。
现代文：冯唐回答说： 我听说古时候君王派遣将军时，跪下来推着车毂说，国门以内的事我决断，国门以外的事，由将军裁定。
English: Feng Tang replied, "I heard that in ancient times, when a king sent a general, he would kneel down and push the carriage, saying, 'I will decide matters within the country, and matters outside the country will be decided by the general.'

古文：军功爵赏皆决於外，归而奏之。
现代文：所有军队中因功封爵奖赏的事，都由将军在外决定，归来再奏报朝廷。
English: In all armies, the matter of awarding knighthoods for meritorious service is decided by the generals outside, and then reported back to the imperial court.

古文：此非虚言也。
现代文：这不是虚夸之言呀。
English: This is not a boast.

古文：臣大父言，李牧为赵将居边，军市之租皆自用飨士，赏赐决於外，不从中扰也。
现代文：我的祖父说，李牧在赵国边境统率军队时，把征收的税金自行用来犒赏部下。赏赐由将军在外决定，朝廷不从中干预。
English: My grandfather said that when Li Mu took command of the army on the border of Zhao, he used the collected taxes to reward his subordinates. The reward was decided by the general outside, and the court did not intervene.

古文：委任而责成功，故李牧乃得尽其智能，遣选车千三百乘，彀骑万三千，百金之士十万，是以北逐单于，破东胡，灭澹林，西抑彊秦，南支韩、魏。
现代文：君王交给他重任，而要求他成功，所以李牧才能够充分发挥才智。派遣精选的兵车一千三百辆，善于骑射的士兵一万三千人，能够建树功勋的士兵十万人，因此能够在北面驱逐单于，大破东胡，消灭澹林，在西面抑制强秦，在南面支援韩魏。
English: The king gave him a heavy task and asked him to succeed, so Li Muyang was able to give full play to his talents. He dispatched 1300 selected chariots, 13000 soldiers who were good at riding and shooting, and 100000 soldiers who were able to make meritorious deeds. Therefore, he was able to expel Shan Yu in the north, destroy Donghu, and eliminate Yulin, suppress the strong Qin in the west, and support Han Wei in the south.

古文：当是之时，赵几霸。
现代文：在这时，赵国几乎成为霸主。
English: At this time, Zhao almost became the overlord.

古文：其後会赵王迁立，其母倡也。
现代文：后来恰逢赵王迁即位，他的母亲是卖唱的女子。
English: Later, when Zhao Wangqian ascended to the throne, his mother was a singer.

古文：王迁立，乃用郭开谗，卒诛李牧，令颜聚代之。
现代文：他一即位，就听信郭开的谗言，最终杀了李牧，让颜聚取代他。
English: As soon as he ascended the throne, he listened to Guo Kai's advice and eventually killed Li Mu and let Yan Ju replace him.

古文：是以兵破士北，为秦所禽灭。
现代文：因此军溃兵败，被秦人俘虏消灭。
English: As a result, the army was routed and wiped out by the Qin captives.

古文：今臣窃闻魏尚为云中守，其军市租尽以飨士卒，私养钱，五日一椎牛，飨宾客军吏舍人，是以匈奴远避，不近云中之塞。
现代文：如今我听说魏尚做云中郡郡守，他把军市上的税金全部用来犒赏士兵，还拿出个人的钱财，五天杀一次牛，宴请宾客、军吏、亲近左右，因此匈奴人远远躲开，不敢近云中郡的边关要塞。
English: Now I heard that Wei Shang was the governor of Yunzhong County. He used all the taxes from the military market to reward the soldiers. He also took out his personal money, killed a cow every five days, and invited guests, military officials, and relatives. Therefore, the Huns stayed far away and did not dare to approach the border fortress of Yunzhong County.

古文：虏曾一入，尚率车骑击之，所杀其众。
现代文：匈奴曾经入侵一次，魏尚率领军队出击，杀死很多敌军。
English: The Xiongnu once invaded, Wei Shang led the army to attack, killing many enemy troops.

古文：夫士卒尽家人子，起田中从军，安知尺籍伍符。
现代文：那些士兵都是一般人家的子弟，从村野来参军，哪里知道 尺籍 、 伍符 这些法令律例呢？
English: Those soldiers are the children of ordinary people. They come from villages and fields to join the army. How do they know about standards, codes, laws and regulations?

古文：终日力战，斩首捕虏，上功莫府，一言不相应，文吏以法绳之。
现代文：他们只知道整天拼力作战，杀敌捕俘，到幕府报功，只要有一句话不合实际情况，法官就用法律制裁他们。
English: All they know is to fight hard all day, kill and capture enemies, and report their exploits to the shogunate. As long as there is a sentence that does not correspond to the actual situation, the judge will use the law to sanction them.

古文：其赏不行而吏奉法必用。
现代文：应得的奖赏不能兑现，而法官却依法必究。
English: The deserved reward cannot be realized, but the judge has to investigate according to the law.

古文：臣愚，以为陛下法太明，赏太轻，罚太重。
现代文：我愚蠢地认为陛下的法令太严明，奖赏太轻，惩罚太重。
English: I foolishly thought that your majesty's decree was too strict, the reward too light, and the punishment too heavy.

古文：且云中守魏尚坐上功首虏差六级，陛下下之吏，削其爵，罚作之。
现代文：况且云中郡郡守魏尚只犯了错报多杀敌六人的罪，陛下就把他交给法官，削夺他的爵位，判处一年的刑期。
English: Moreover, the county governor of Yunzhong County, Wei Shang, only committed the crime of falsely reporting that he had killed six more enemies. His Majesty handed him over to the judge, stripped him of his title and sentenced him to one year in prison.

古文：由此言之，陛下虽得廉颇、李牧，弗能用也。
现代文：由此说来，陛下即使得到廉颇、李牧，也是不能重用的。
English: Therefore, even if His Majesty were to obtain a Li Mu, he would not be able to reuse it.

古文：臣诚愚，触忌讳，死罪死罪！ 
现代文：我确实愚蠢，触犯了禁忌，该当死罪，该当死罪！ 
English: I'm really stupid, I've broken a taboo, I deserve the death penalty, I deserve the death penalty!

古文：文帝说。是日令冯唐持节赦魏尚，复以为云中守，而拜唐为车骑都尉，主中尉及郡国车士。
现代文：文帝很高兴，当天就让冯唐拿着汉节出使前去赦免魏尚，重新让他担任云中郡郡守，而任命冯唐作车骑都尉，掌管中尉和各郡国的车战之士。
English: Emperor Wen was very pleased, and on the same day, he sent Feng Tang to pardon Wei Shang on the occasion of the Han Festival, reinstated him as the governor of Yunnan County, and appointed Feng Tang as the captain of the chariot and cavalry, the lieutenant in charge, and the chariot warrior of each county.

古文：七年，景帝立，以唐为楚相，免。
现代文：汉文帝后元七年，汉景帝即位，让冯唐去做楚国的丞相，不久被免职。
English: In the seventh year after the founding of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Han Jing ascended to the throne and asked Feng Tang to become the chancellor of Chu, but he was soon dismissed.

古文：武帝立，求贤良，举冯唐。
现代文：汉武帝即位时，征求贤良之士，大家举荐冯唐。
English: When Emperor Hanwu ascended to the throne, he solicited virtuous men, and everyone recommended Feng Tang.

古文：唐时年九十馀，不能复为官，乃以唐子冯遂为郎。
现代文：冯唐这年已九十多岁，不能再做官了，于是任用他的儿子冯遂做了郎官。
English: Feng Tang was more than ninety years old and could no longer serve as an official, so he appointed his son Feng Sui as his vassal.

古文：遂字王孙，亦奇士，与余善。
现代文：冯遂字王孙，也是杰出的人才，和我友好。
English: Feng Sui Zi Wang Sun, also an outstanding talent, is friendly with me.

古文：太史公曰：张季之言长者，守法不阿意；冯公之论将率，有味哉！
现代文：太史公说：张释之谈论长者的一番话，和他严守法度不迎合皇帝心意的事；以及冯公的谈论任用将帅，有味啊！
English: Tai Shikong said: Zhang Xizhi's talk about the elder's words, and his strict adherence to the law and not catering to the emperor's wishes; and Feng Gong's talk about the appointment of generals, tasteful!

古文：有味哉！
现代文：有味啊！
English: It's delicious!

古文：语曰 不知其人，视其友 。
现代文：俗话说： 不了解那个人，看看他结交的朋友就可知道。 
English: As the saying goes: If you don't know the man, look at his friends.

古文：二君之所称诵，可著廊庙。
现代文：他们两位所赞许长者将帅的话，应该标著于朝廷。
English: The words that the two of them praised the elder generals should be marked in the imperial court.

古文：书曰 不偏不党，王道荡荡；不党不偏，王道便便 。
现代文：《尚书》说： 不偏私不结党，王道才会平坦宽广；不结党不偏私，王道才能明辩。 
English: "Shangshu" said: Without favoritism or partisanship, the king's way will be flat and broad; without favoritism or partisanship, the king's way can be clear.

古文：张季、冯公近之矣。
现代文：张季与冯公近似于这种说法呀！
English: Zhang Ji and Feng Gong are close to this statement!

