古文：福恭王常洵，神宗第三子。
现代文：福恭王朱常洵，神宗第三子。
English: King Fukong, Zhu Changtao, the third son of Shenzong.

古文：初，王皇后无子，王妃生长子，是为光宗。
现代文：开始，王皇后无子，王妃生下长子，即为光宗。
English: At first, Empress Wang was childless, but she gave birth to her first son, named Guangzong.

古文：常洵次之，母郑贵妃最幸。
现代文：朱常洵在其后出生，母亲郑贵妃最受神宗宠幸。
English: Zhu Changyao was born later, and his mother, Zheng Guifei, was the most favored of the Shenzong.

古文：帝久不立太子，中外疑贵妃谋立己子，交章言其事，窜谪相踵，而言者不止。
现代文：神宗久久不立太子，朝中内外大臣怀疑郑贵妃谋立自己的儿子，便纷纷就此事上奏，尽管许多人相继被贬官放逐，但仍不断有上奏反对者。
English: It had been a long time since Emperor Jinzong had appointed a crown prince, and the ministers of internal affairs and foreign affairs of the DPRK and China suspected that Empress Zheng Guifei was trying to appoint her own son, and they all appealed to the emperor on this matter. Although many people were demoted and exiled one after another, there were still opponents of appealing to the emperor.

古文：帝深厌苦之。
现代文：神宗为此十分苦恼。
English: Shinso was very distressed by this.

古文：二十九年始立光宗为太子，而封常洵福王，婚费至三十万，营洛阳邸第至二十八万，十倍常制。
现代文：万历二十九年才立光宗为太子，而封朱常洵为福王，福王的结婚费用达三十万，营造洛阳的宫邸达二十八万，是平常规定的十倍。
English: In the 29th year of Wanli, Guangzong was made the prince, and Zhu Changyao was named the king of fortune. The king of fortune's wedding cost 300,000 yuan, and the palace in Luoyang cost 280,000 yuan, ten times the usual amount.

古文：廷臣请王之藩者数十百奏。
现代文：廷臣请求福王前往藩地，为此上奏数十上百次，均未获答复。
English: The courtiers asked King Fook to go to the territory of the domain, and appealed to him dozens of times, but received no reply.

古文：不报。至四十二年，始令就藩。
现代文：直到四十二年，神宗才命他启程去藩地。
English: It was not until the year 42 that Shinso ordered him to leave for the domain.

古文：先是，海内全盛，帝所遣税使、矿使遍天下，月有进奉，明珠异宝文毳锦绮山积，他搜括赢羡亿万计。
现代文：在此之前，海内兴盛，皇帝所派税使、矿使遍布天下，每月都有进奉，明珠异宝、文毳锦绮堆积如山，其他搜括盈余数以亿万计。
English: Prior to this, the sea was flourishing, the tax and mining envoys sent by the emperor were all over the world, and they were sent every month. Pearls, precious stones, and brocades were piled up like mountains, and other surplus surpluses were in the hundreds of millions.

古文：至是多以资常洵。
现代文：现在这些财宝大多用来资助朱常洵了。
English: Now most of these treasures have been used to finance Zhu Changtao.

古文：临行出宫门，召还数四，期以三岁一入朝。
现代文：朱常洵临行出宫门时，神宗四次将他召回，嘱咐他三年入朝一次。
English: When Zhu Changyao was about to leave the palace, Shenzong called him back four times and ordered him to enter the imperial court once every three years.

古文：下诏赐庄田四万顷。
现代文：并下诏赐其庄田四万顷。
English: He also granted him 40,000 hectares of farmland.

古文：所司力争，常洵亦奏辞，得减半。
现代文：经有关官员力争，朱常洵也上奏推辞，才减去一半庄田。
English: Through the efforts of relevant officials, Zhu Changyao also resigned, only to subtract half of the village.

古文：中州腴土不足，取山东、湖广田益之。
现代文：中州肥土不足，便选取山东、湖广之田加以补充。
English: Due to the shortage of fertile soil in Zhongzhou, the fields in Shandong and Hukang were selected to supplement it.

古文：又奏乞故大学士张居正所没产，及江都至太平沿江荻洲杂税，并四川盐井榷茶银以自益。
现代文：朱常洵又上奏请求得到已故大学士张居正被抄没的家产，及江都至太平沿江荻洲杂税，四川盐井专卖和茶税。
English: Zhu Changyao also filed a request to obtain the confiscated family property of the late university scholar Zhang Juzheng, as well as the miscellaneous taxes from Jiangdu to Taiping along the Yangtze River, the Sichuan salt well monopoly and tea tax.

古文：伴读、承奉诸官，假履亩为名，乘传出入河南北、齐、楚间，所至骚动。
现代文：伴读、承奉诸官，借管理庄田为名，乘车出入黄河南北、齐楚之间，所到之处都被他们扰得不得安宁。
English: Accompanied and followed by officials, in the name of managing the village, they rode in and out of the north and south of the Yellow River and between Qi Chu. Everywhere they went, they disturbed the peace.

古文：又请淮盐千三百引，设店洛阳与民市。
现代文：朱常洵又请求得到淮盐一千三百引，在洛阳设店与百姓进行交易。
English: Zhu Changyao also requested to obtain 1300 quotations of Huai salt and set up a shop in Luoyang to trade with the people.

古文：中使至淮、扬支盐，乾没要求輙数倍。
现代文：宦官到淮、扬供盐，他们从中侵吞，动辄就要求数倍之盐。
English: Eunuchs went to Huai and Yang to supply salt, but they gobbled it up, often demanding several times the amount of salt.

古文：而中州旧食河东盐，以改食淮盐故，禁非王肆所出不得鬻，河东引遏不行，边饷由此绌。
现代文：而中州以前食用的是河东盐，因改食淮盐的缘故，凡非福王店铺所出食盐则禁止出售，河东盐引被阻止通行，边饷因此不足。
English: However, Zhongzhou used to eat salt from Hedong, but due to the change of eating salt from Huai, the sale of salt from stores other than Fuwang was prohibited, and the passage of salt from Hedong was blocked, resulting in a shortage of edible salt.

古文：廷臣请改给王盐于河东，且无与民市。
现代文：廷臣请求改由河东供盐给福王，并且不再与百姓进行交易。
English: The courtiers requested that salt be supplied to King Fu from the eastern part of the river and that they no longer trade with the common people.

古文：弗听。
现代文：这个建议未被采纳。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：帝深居久，群臣章奏率不省。
现代文：神宗久居深宫，对群臣的奏章一律不予察看。
English: Shenzong lived in the Deep Palace for a long time, and did not look at any of the ministers' music.

古文：独福藩使通籍中左门，一日数请，朝上夕报可。
现代文：唯独福王的使者记名于门籍，由中左门进出宫中，一日之内数次提出要求，早晨上奏，晚上即可得到满意的答复。
English: However, the messenger of the King of Good Fortune had his name recorded in the household register, entered and left the palace through the middle left door, and made several requests within a day. He would play in the morning and receive a satisfactory answer in the evening.

古文：四方奸人亡命，探风旨，走利如鹜。
现代文：四方奸人纷纷改名换姓，逃亡在外，探听风声，趋利若鹜。
English: The four traitors changed their names and surnames one after another, fled abroad, listened to rumors, and tried to make a profit.

古文：如是者终万历之世。
现代文：这种情况一直持续到万历年终之时。
English: This situation continued until the end of the Wanli year.

古文：及崇祯时，常洵地近属尊，朝廷尊礼之。
现代文：到崇祯帝时，朱常洵地近位尊，朝廷尊之以礼。
English: At the time of Emperor Chongzhen, Zhu Changxun was close to him, and the imperial court honored him with a salute.

古文：常洵日闭阁饮醇酒，所好惟妇女倡乐。
现代文：朱常洵终日闭阁酌饮醇酒，所爱唯有妇女、歌舞。
English: Zhu Changyao shuts himself up all day drinking alcohol, and his only loves are women and singing and dancing.

古文：秦中流贼起，河南大旱蝗，人相食，民间藉藉，谓先帝耗天下以肥王，洛阳富于大内。
现代文：秦中流贼四起，河南也遭大旱、蝗灾，人们互相残食，民间一片杂乱，都说先帝耗天下之财以肥福王，洛阳富于皇宫。
English: In the middle of the Qin Dynasty, there were four outbreaks of banditry. Henan also suffered from drought and locust plagues. People left food for each other, and the people were in disarray. It was said that the former emperor used up the wealth of the world to make himself rich, and that Luoyang was rich because of the imperial palace.

古文：援兵过洛者，喧言： 王府金钱百万，而令吾辈枵腹死贼手。 
现代文：经过洛阳的援兵喧嚷道 ：王府有金钱百万，却让我们饿着肚子死于贼手。 
English: After passing through Luoyang, the reinforcements shouted loudly: The royal government has millions of money, but let us die of hunger at the hands of thieves.

古文：南京兵部尚书吕维祺方家居，闻之惧，以利害告常洵，不为意。
现代文：南京兵部尚书吕维祺正住在家中，听说之后很害怕，便将其中利害关系告知朱常洵，而朱常洵并未放在心上。
English: Lu Weiqin, the secretary of the Nanjing Military Department, was living at home. He was very scared after hearing this, so he told Zhu Changyao about the conflict of interest, but Zhu Changyao did not care.

古文：十三年冬，李自成连〈阝舀〉永宁、宜阳。
现代文：十三年冬，李自成接连攻陷永宁、宜阳。
English: In the winter of the 13th year, Li Zicheng successively invaded Yongning and Yiyang.

古文：明年正月，参政王胤昌帅众警备，总兵官王绍禹，副将刘见义、罗泰各引兵至。
现代文：第二年正月，参政王胤昌率军警戒防备，总兵官王绍禹，副将刘见义、罗泰也各自引兵而至。
English: In the first month of the second year, Sanzheng Wang Yanshang led the army to be alert and prepared, and the general officer Wang Shao Yu, vice-commander Liu Simiyi, and Luo Tai also led their troops.

古文：常洵召三将入，赐宴加礼。
现代文：朱常洵把三将召入宫中，摆酒设宴，倍加礼待。
English: Zhu Changyu invited the three generals to the palace, set up a banquet with wine, and treated them with great courtesy.

古文：越数日，贼大至，攻城。
现代文：数日之后，贼军大至，攻城。
English: A few days later, the bandit army arrived and attacked the city.

古文：常洵出千金募勇士，缒而出，用矛入贼营，贼稍却。
现代文：朱常洵拿出千金招募勇士，缒城而出，手持长矛冲入贼营，贼军才稍微退却。
English: Zhu Changyu took out a lot of money to recruit warriors, went out of Lucheng, and rushed into the bandit camp with a spear in hand. The bandit army only retreated slightly.

古文：夜半，绍禹亲军从城上呼贼相笑语，挥刀杀守堞者，烧城楼，开北门纳贼。
现代文：夜半时分，王绍禹的亲军从城上招呼贼军，互相谈笑，挥刀杀死防守城墙的士兵，焚烧城楼，打开北门引贼入城。
English: At half past midnight, Wang Shouyu's troops hailed the invaders from the top of the city, talked and laughed with each other, killed the soldiers defending the city wall with their swords, burned the city tower, and opened the north gate to lure the invaders into the city.

古文：常洵缒城出，匿迎恩寺。
现代文：朱常洵缒城而出，藏匿于迎恩寺。
English: Zhu Changyu came out of the castle and hid in Ying'en Temple.

古文：翌日，贼迹而执之，遂遇害。
现代文：第二天，贼军跟踪而至将其捉拿，朱常洵就这样遇害。
English: The next day, the bandits followed him and captured him. Zhu Changyao was killed in this way.

古文：两承奉伏尸哭，贼捽之去。
现代文：两名承奉伏尸而哭，贼军揪住他们，让他们离开。
English: Two of the victims were crying, and the thugs grabbed them and forced them to leave.

古文：承奉呼曰： 王死某不愿生，乞一棺收王骨，棆粉无所恨。 
现代文：承奉挣扎着喊道： 福王已死，我们也不愿再活，只求一付棺木收容福王尸骨，我们就是粉身碎骨也无怨言。 
English: Struggling, he cried out: King Fu is dead, and we don't want to live any more. All we want is a coffin to hold the bones of King Fu. Even if we are crushed, we have no complaints.

古文：贼义而许之。
现代文：贼军见他们这么有义气，便答应了他们的请求。
English: Seeing their loyalty, the bandits agreed to their request.

古文：桐棺一寸，载以断车，两人即其旁自缢死。
现代文：一付桐棺，载于断车，两人就在旁边自缢而死。
English: A pair of paulownia coffins were placed in the wrecked car, and the two men hanged themselves next to it.

古文：王妃邹氏及世子由崧走怀庆。
现代文：王妃邹氏及世子朱由崧逃往怀庆。
English: Wangfei Zou and her heir, Zhu Yuxuan, fled to Huaiqing.

古文：贼火王宫，三日不绝。
现代文：贼军火烧王宫，大火持续三日，仍然不绝。
English: Thieves set fire to the royal palace, and the blaze continued for three days.

古文：事闻，帝震悼，辍朝三日，令河南有司改殡。
现代文：此事传至朝廷，崇祯帝震动悲悼，辍朝三日，命河南官府为福王改殡。
English: The matter was reported to the imperial court, and Emperor Chongzhen, moved by the grief and mourning, abdicated the throne on the third day and ordered the Henan government to change the funeral for King Fu.

古文：十六年秋七月，由崧袭封，帝亲择宫中宝玉带赐之。
现代文：崇祯十六年七月，朱由崧承袭封爵，崇祯帝亲自挑选宫中宝物玉带赏赐给他。
English: In July of the 16th year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Zhu Yuxuan was knighted, and Emperor Chongzhen personally selected the treasure of the palace, the jade belt, and awarded it to him.

古文：明年三月，京师失守，由崧与潞王常淓俱避贼至淮安。
现代文：第二年三月，京城失守，朱由崧与潞王朱常氵芳都为躲避贼军来到淮安。
English: In March of the following year, the capital was lost, and both Zhu Yuxuan and Zhu Changyifang, the king of Qi, came to Huai'an to escape the invaders.

古文：四月，凤阳总督马士英等迎由崧入南京。
现代文：四月，凤阳总督马士英等将朱由崧迎入南京。
English: In April, Fengyang Governor Ma Shying and others welcomed Zhu Yuxuan to Nanjing.

古文：五月庚寅，称监国。
现代文：五月初三日，朱由崧称监国。
English: On the 3rd day of the 5th month, Zhu Yuxuan became the supervisor of the country.

古文：以兵部尚书史可法、户部尚书高弘图及士英俱为大学士，士英仍督凤阳军务。
现代文：授兵部尚书史可法、户部尚书高弘图及马士英均为大学士，马士英仍督办凤阳军务。
English: Shang Shushou, Gao Hongtu and Ma Shih-ying of the Department of Military Education, History and Law, and Shang Shushou, Gao Hongtu and Ma Shih-ying of the Household Department were all university graduates, and Ma Shih-ying still supervised the military affairs of Fengyang.

古文：壬寅自立于南京，伪号弘光。
现代文：十五日，朱由崧在南京自立为帝，伪号弘光。
English: On the 15th, Zhu Yuxuan established himself as emperor in Nanjing, using the pseudonym Hongguang.

古文：史可法督师江北。
现代文：命史可法督师江北。
English: The history of life can be traced back to Jiangbei, the religious superintendent.

古文：召士英入，分淮、扬、凤、庐为四镇，以总兵官黄得功、刘良佐、刘泽清、高杰领之。
现代文：召马士英入宫。将淮、扬、凤、庐分为四镇，命总兵官黄得功、刘良佐、刘泽清、高杰分别统领。
English: He called Ma Shih-ying into the palace. He divided Huai, Yang, Feng and Yao into four towns, with the commander-in-chief Huang Dergong, Liu Liangzuo, Liu Zeqing and Gao Jie respectively in charge.

古文：由崧性闇弱，湛于酒色声伎，委任士英及士英党阮大铖，擢至兵部尚书，巡阅江防。
现代文：朱由崧愚钝懦弱，沉溺于酒色歌妓之中，凡事都委任马士英及马士英的党羽阮大铖，将他们提升至兵部尚书，巡阅江防。
English: Zhu Yuxuan was stupid and cowardly, and indulged in drinking with prostitutes. He always appointed Ma Shiying and Ma Shiying's henchman, Ruan Daxuan, and promoted them to the military department of Shangshu to patrol the river defense.

古文：二人日以鬻官爵、报私憾为事。
现代文：但这两人整日只知卖官鬻爵，报私仇。
English: But all day long, the two of them only knew how to sell officials and nobles, and how to take revenge.

古文：事详诸臣传中。
现代文：这些事情详见诸臣传记之中。
English: These events are described in detail in the biographies of the ministers.

古文：未几，有王之明者，诈称庄烈帝太子，下之狱。
现代文：不久，有一名叫王之明的人，诈称是庄烈帝的太子，被下狱。
English: Soon, a man named Wang Zhiming, who falsely claimed to be Prince Zhuang, was sent to prison.

古文：又有妇童氏，自称由崧妃，亦下狱。
现代文：又有一妇人董氏，自称是朱由崧的妃子，也被下狱。
English: Another woman, Ms. Dong, who claimed to be Zhu Yuyao's concubine, was also sent to prison.

古文：于是中外哗然。
现代文：于是朝中内外舆论哗然。
English: As a result, public opinion inside and outside the DPRK was in an uproar.

古文：明年三月，宁南侯左良玉举兵武昌，以救太子诛士英为名，顺流东下。
现代文：第二年三月，宁南侯左良玉在武昌举兵，以救太子诛马士英为名，顺流东下。
English: In March of the following year, Ningnan marquis Zuo Liangyu raised an army in Wuchang and, in the name of rescuing the crown prince, Ma Shying, sailed down the river to the east.

古文：阮大铖、黄得功等帅师御之。
现代文：阮大铖、黄得功等率军抵御。
English: Nguyn Đi Quang, Hng Đc Quang and others led the army to resist.

古文：而我大清兵以是年五月己丑渡江。
现代文：而我大清军队在这年五月初八日渡江。
English: And I, the Qing army, crossed the river on the eighth day of the fifth month of this year.

古文：辛卯夜，由崧走太平，盖趋得功军也。
现代文：十日夜，朱由崧逃往太平，投靠黄得功军。
English: On the evening of the tenth day, Zhu Yuxuan fled to Taiping and joined Huang Dergong's army.

古文：壬辰，士英挟由崧母妃奔杭州。
现代文：十一日，马士英挟持朱由崧的母妃逃奔杭州。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Ma Shing took Zhu Yuxuan's mother-in-law hostage and fled to Hangzhou.

古文：次由榔，崇祯时，封永明王。三年八月，大兵取汀州，执唐王聿键。
现代文：九月初六日，押归京城。顺治三年八月，清朝大军攻取汀州，逮捕唐王朱聿键。
English: On the 6th day of early September, he was escorted back to Beijing. In August of the 3rd year of Shunzhi, the Qing Dynasty army captured Tingzhou and arrested Tang King Zhu Rongji.

古文：于是两广总督丁魁楚、广西巡抚瞿式耜、巡按王化澄与旧臣吕大器等共推由榔监国。
现代文：于是两广总督丁魁楚、广西巡抚瞿式耜、巡按王化澄与旧臣吕大器等共推朱由榔为监国。
English: As a result, the governor of Guangxi, Ding Kui Chu, the governor of Guangxi, Zou Shiquan, the governor of Guangxi, Wang Huacheng, and the former minister Lü Daqi all recommended Zhu Yuqi as the supervisor of the country.

古文：母妃王氏曰： 吾儿不胜此，愿更择可者。 
现代文：其母妃王氏推辞道： 我儿不能胜任，你们还是另选能承担此任的人吧。 
English: His mother, the Empress Dowager Wang, said, "My son is not up to the job. You should choose someone else who can take on this responsibility."

古文：魁楚等意益坚，合谋迎于梧。
现代文：丁魁楚等态度更加坚决，便合谋将朱由榔迎于梧州。
English: Ding Kui Chu and others were more resolute, and they conspired to welcome Zhu Yuxuan to Wuzhou.

古文：十月十四日监国肇庆，以魁楚、大器、式耜为大学士，余授官有差。
现代文：十月十四日，朱由榔在肇庆称监国，授丁魁楚、吕大器、瞿式耜为大学士，并分别授予其他人官职。
English: On October 14th, Zhu Yuxuan proclaimed himself the supervisor of the country in Zhaoqing, and awarded Ding Kui Chu, Lv Daju, and Zou Shiquan as college graduates, and granted other people official positions.

古文：是月大兵取赣州，内侍王坤仓卒奉由榔仍走梧州，式耜等力争，乃回肇庆。
现代文：这一月，大军攻取赣州，内侍王坤仓促之间尊奉朱由榔逃往梧州，瞿式耜等尽力相争，才回到肇庆。
English: This month, the army captured Bozhou, and the palace attendant Wang Kun hurriedly fled to Wuzhou between the honorable Zhu Yuxuan, and Zou Shihong, and they fought with all their might before returning to Zhaoqing.

古文：十一月，唐王弟聿钅粤自闽浮海至粤。
现代文：十一月，唐王之弟朱聿钅粤自闽经海路到粤。
English: In November, Zhu Xi Yue, the younger brother of Tang Wang, traveled to Yue by sea.

古文：时闽旧臣苏观生撤兵奔广州，与布政使顾元镜、总兵官林察等谋立聿钅粤，伪号绍武，与由榔相拒。
现代文：当时闽旧臣苏观生撤兵奔往广州，与布政使顾元镜、总兵官林察等谋立朱聿钅粤，伪号绍武，与朱由榔相抗衡。
English: At that time, his former vassal, Su Guansheng, rushed to Guangzhou to withdraw his troops, and together with the cloth political envoy, Gu Yuanjing, and the chief military officer, Lin Cha, he tried to establish Zhu Xi Yue, with the pseudonym of Shaowu, to compete with Zhu Youyi.

古文：是月由榔亦自立于肇庆，伪号永历，遣兵部侍郎林佳鼎讨聿钅粤。
现代文：这一月朱由榔也自立于肇庆，伪号永历，并派遣兵部侍郎林佳鼎前去讨伐朱聿钅粤。
English: In this month, Zhu Yuxuan also became independent from Zhao Qing, with the pseudonym Yonglian, and dispatched the attendant of the military department, Lin Jiading, to fight Zhu Yuxuan.

古文：会大兵由福建取广州，执聿钅粤，观生自缢，祭酒梁朝钟、太仆卿霍子衡等俱死。肇庆大震，王坤复奉由榔走梧州。
现代文：恰逢大军由福建出发攻取广州，逮捕朱聿钅粤，苏观生自缢而死，祭酒梁朝钟、太仆卿霍子衡等全部死去，肇庆大为震惊，王坤又尊奉朱由榔逃至梧州。
English: At the same time, a large army set out from Fujian to attack Guangzhou, arrest Zhu Xi Yue, Su Qun Sheng committed suicide and died, and Liang Zhaozhong, the minister of wine, and Huo Ziheng, the minister of servants, all died. Zhao Qing was greatly shocked, and Wang Kun also fled to Wuzhou in honor of Zhu Xi Yue.

古文：明年二月，由平乐、浔州走桂林。
现代文：第二年二月，朱由榔由平乐、浔州逃往桂林。
English: In February of the following year, Zhu Yuxuan fled from Pingle and Zhangzhou to Guilin.

古文：魁楚弃由榔，走岑溪，降于大军。
现代文：丁魁楚抛弃朱由榔，逃往岑溪，投降大军。
English: Ding Kui Chu abandoned Zhu Yucheng, fled to Lixi, and surrendered to the army.

古文：既而平乐不守，由榔大恐。
现代文：不久，平乐失守，朱由榔十分恐慌。
English: Soon, Pingle lost the game, and Zhu Yuxuan panicked.

古文：会武冈总兵官刘承胤以兵至全州，王坤请赴之。
现代文：正逢武冈总兵官刘承胤率军到达全州，王坤请求奔赴全州。
English: Just as the army led by Liu Chengyan, the military commander of Wukan, arrived in Jeonju, Wang Kun requested to go to Jeonju.

古文：式耜力谏。不听。
现代文：瞿式耜极力劝谏，朱由榔不予采纳。
English: Zhu Yuxuan would not accept it.

古文：乃以式耜及总兵官焦琏留守桂林，封陈邦传为思恩侯，守昭平，遂趋承胤军中。
现代文：于是朱由榔命瞿式耜及总兵焦琏留守桂林，封陈邦传为思恩侯，驻昭平，然后自己则投靠刘承胤军中。
English: As a result, Zhu Yuxuan died, and the general soldier Jiao Jiao remained in Guilin, and Chen Bang was given the title of Siong Hou, stationed in Zhao Ping, and then he himself joined Liu Chengyin's army.

古文：三月封承胤安国公，锦衣指挥马吉翔等为伯。
现代文：三月，朱由榔封刘承胤为安国公，锦衣卫指挥马吉翔等为伯。
English: In March, Liu Chengyin, Zhu Yu's second-in-command, was appointed governor of An Guoguo, and Ma Jixiang, the commander of Jin Yi Wei, was promoted.

古文：承胤挟由榔归武冈，改曰奉天府，政事皆决焉。
现代文：刘承胤挟持朱由榔返回武冈，改名奉天府，政事均由他决定。
English: Liu Chengyan took Zhu Yuxuan back to Wookang, changed his name to Bongtianfu, and decided on all government affairs.

古文：是时，长沙、衡、永皆不守，湖广总督何腾蛟与侍郎严起恒走白牙市。
现代文：这时，长沙、衡、永均已失守，湖广总督何腾蛟与侍郎严起恒逃往白牙市。
English: At this time, Changsha, Heng and Yongjun had already lost their defenses, and the governor of Hukang, He Tengyu, and his attendant Yanqi Heng fled to Baisha City.

古文：六月，由榔遣官召腾蛟至，密使除承胤，顾承胤势盛，腾蛟复还白牙。
现代文：六月，朱由榔派遣官员前去将何腾蛟召来，暗中命他除掉刘承胤，但因刘承胤势力很大，何腾蛟重返白牙市。
English: In June, Zhu Yuxuan sent an official to summon He Tengyu and secretly ordered him to eliminate Liu Chengyin. However, because Liu Chengyin was very powerful, He Tengyu returned to Baiya.

古文：大兵由宝庆趋武冈，马吉翔等挟由榔走靖州，承胤举城降。
现代文：大军由宝庆直趋武冈，马吉翔等挟持朱由榔逃往靖州，刘承胤则举城投降。
English: The large army led by Bao Qing headed straight for Wukan, while Ma Ji Xiang and others took Zhu Youyao hostage and fled to Jingshou, while Liu Chengyin took the city and surrendered.

古文：由榔又奔柳州。道出古泥。总兵官侯性、太监庞天寿帅舟师来迎。
现代文：朱由榔又逃奔柳州，经过古泥，总兵官侯性、太监庞天寿率水师前来迎接。
English: Zhu Yuxuan fled to Liuzhou again, and after passing through the ancient mud, the commander-in-chief, the eunuch Pang Tianshou, and the sailors came to meet him.

古文：会天雨饥饿，性供帐甚备。
现代文：当时正逢天雨、饥饿，而侯性对食宿准备十分充分。
English: At that time, it was raining and hungry, and the villagers were well prepared for food and accommodation.

古文：九月，土舍覃鸣珂作乱，大掠城中，矢及由榔舟。
现代文：九月，土舍覃鸣珂作乱，在城中大肆抢掠，弓箭射到朱由榔的船上。
English: In September, there was a riot at the Tsucheshe Shomingke, and there was a lot of looting in the city, and bows and arrows were shot at Zhu Yuxuan's boat.

古文：先是，大兵趋桂林，焦琏拒守甚力，又广州有警，大兵东向，桂林稍安。
现代文：在此之前，大军直趋桂林，焦琏拼力拒守，广州又出现紧急情况，大军往东而去，桂林才稍微安定下来。
English: Prior to this, the army headed straight for Guilin, Jiaozuo fought hard to resist, Guangzhou had an emergency, the army went east, and Guilin only settled down a little.

古文：既而湖南十三镇将郝永忠、卢鼎等俱奔赴桂林，腾蛟亦至，与式耜议分地给诸将，使各自为守。
现代文：不久，湖南十三镇将郝永忠、卢鼎等都奔赴桂林，何腾蛟也到达，与瞿式耜商议给诸将划分地域，让他们各自防守。
English: Soon, the thirteen towns of Hunan sent their generals, including Gong Yongzhong and Lu Ding, to Guilin, and He Tengyu also arrived, and negotiated with Gong Shih-tao to divide the regions among the generals and let them defend themselves.

古文：琏已先复阳朔、平乐，陈邦传复浔州，合兵复梧州，广西全省略定。
现代文：当时焦琏已收复阳朔、平乐，陈邦传收复浔州，然后合兵收复梧州，广西全省略定。
English: At that time, Jiao Wei had recovered Yangshuo and Pingle, Chen Bang was rumored to have recovered Bozhou, and then the combined forces recovered Wuzhou, and Guangxi was all decided.

古文：十二月，由榔返桂林。
现代文：十二月，朱由榔返回桂林。
English: In December, Zhu Yuxuan returned to Guilin.

古文：五年二月，大兵至灵川，郝永忠溃于兴安，奔还，挟由榔走柳州。
现代文：五年二月，大军到达灵川，郝永忠在兴安溃败，逃回桂林，挟持朱由榔逃往柳州。
English: In February of the fifth year, the large army reached Lingchuan. Yu Yongzhong was defeated in Xing'an, fled back to Guilin, and took Zhu Yuxuan hostage and fled to Liuzhou.

古文：大兵攻桂林，式耜、腾蛟拒战。
现代文：大军进攻桂林，瞿式耜、何腾蛟拼力抵抗。
English: A large army attacked Guilin, and Shih-tzu and He Teng-tao resisted with all their might.

古文：时南昌金声桓等叛，降于由榔。
现代文：当时南昌金声桓等反叛，投降朱由榔。
English: At that time, Nanchang Jin Shenghuan and other rebels surrendered to Zhu Yuxuan.

古文：八月，由榔至肇庆。
现代文：八月，朱由榔到达肇庆。
English: In August, Zhu Yuxuan arrived in Zhaoqing.

古文：六年春，大兵下湘潭，何腾蛟死。
现代文：六年春，大军攻下湘潭，何腾蛟死难。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, a large army captured Xiangtan, and He Tengyu was doomed.

古文：明年，由榔走梧州。
现代文：第二年，朱由榔逃至梧州。
English: The following year, Zhu Yuxuan fled to Wuzhou.

古文：是年十二月，大兵入桂林，瞿式耜及总督张同敞死焉。
现代文：这年十二月，大军进入桂林，瞿式耜及总督张同敞死难。
English: In December of that year, a large army entered Guilin, resulting in the death of Yu Shikai and Governor Zhang Tongzang.

古文：由榔闻报大惧，自梧州奔南宁。
现代文：朱由榔获悉，十分害怕，从梧州逃奔南宁。
English: When Zhu Yuxuan learned of this, he was very afraid and fled from Wuzhou to Nanning.

古文：时孙可望已据滇、黔，受封为秦王。
现代文：当时孙可望已占据滇、黔，受封为秦王。
English: At that time, it is expected that Sun Ke might have occupied the throne and the scepter and been crowned as the King of Qin.

古文：八年三月，遣兵来卫，杀严起恒等。
现代文：八年三月，孙可望派兵前去保卫，杀死严起恒等人。
English: In March of the eighth year, Sun Koxian is expected to send troops to defend and kill Yan Qihe and others.

古文：九年二月，可望迎由榔入安隆所，改曰安龙府。
现代文：九年二月，孙可望将朱由榔迎入安隆所，改为安龙府。
English: In February of the ninth year, Sun Kegui is expected to welcome Zhu Yuxuan into Anlong Prefecture and change it to Anlong Prefecture.

古文：久之，日益穷促，闻李定国与可望有隙，遣使密召定国，以兵来迎。
现代文：随着时间的推移，朱由榔感到日益困窘紧迫，他获悉李定国与孙可望之间有隔阂，便派使者密召李定国，率军来迎。
English: With the passage of time, Zhu Yuxuan felt increasingly embarrassed and urgent. He learned that there was a rift between Li Dingguo and Sun Kewang, so he sent an envoy to secretly summon Li Dingguo and lead an army to meet him.

古文：马吉翔党于可望，侦知之，大学士吴贞毓以下十余人皆被杀。
现代文：马吉翔是孙可望的党羽，侦探得知此事，大学士吴贞毓以下十余人均被处死。
English: Ma Jixiang was Sun Kehang's henchman. When the detectives learned of this, more than ten people, including the university scholar Wu Zhengyi, were executed.

古文：事详《贞毓传》。
现代文：此事详见《吴贞毓传》。
English: The details of this matter can be found in "The Biography of Wu Zhengyi."

古文：后二年，李定国败于新会，将由安隆入滇。
现代文：二年后，李定国在新会战败，将要由安陆进入滇。
English: Two years later, Li Dingguo was defeated in the New Association, and he was about to move from Anlu to Shao.

古文：可望患之，促由榔移贵阳就己。
现代文：孙可望十分担心，催促朱由榔移往贵阳靠近自己。
English: Sun Kehang was very worried and urged Zhu Rong to move to Guiyang to be closer to him.

古文：由榔故迟行。
现代文：朱由榔却故意延迟动身。
English: Zhu Yuxuan, however, deliberately delayed his departure.

古文：定国至，遂奉由榔由安南卫走云南，居可望署中，封定国晋王。
现代文：李定国到后，于是尊奉朱由榔由安南卫奔往云南，住在孙可望的官署中，朱由榔封李定国为晋王。
English: After the arrival of Li Dingguo, Zhu Yuquan, a respected official, left Annan and rushed to Yunnan to live in Sun Kuan's government office. Zhu Yuquan made Li Dingguo the king of Jin.

古文：可望以妻子在滇，未敢动。
现代文：孙可望因为妻儿还留在滇，未敢有所行动。
English: It is expected that Sun Ke did not dare to take any action because his wife and children were still in Handan.

古文：明年，由榔送其妻子还黔，遂举兵与定国战于三岔。
现代文：第二年，朱由榔将其妻儿送回黔，孙可望于是与李定国战于三岔。
English: In the second year, Zhu Yuxuan sent his wife and son back to Xing, and Sun Ke was expected to fight against Li Dingguo in Sanxing.

古文：可望将白文选单骑奔定国军。
现代文：孙可望的部将白文选独自骑马投奔李定国军。
English: Sun Keking's most promising general, Bai Wenxuan, rode alone to join Li Ding's national army.

古文：可望败，挈妻子赴长沙大军前降。
现代文：孙可望战败，携妻带儿奔赴长沙投降了大军。
English: Hoping to be defeated, Sun Ke ran to Changsha with his wife and son and surrendered to the great army.

古文：十五年三月，大兵三路入云南。
现代文：十五年三月，大军兵分三路进入云南。
English: In March 1915, the large army entered Yunnan in three parts.

古文：定国厄鸡公背，断贵州道，别将守七星关，抵生界立营，以牵蜀师。
现代文：李定国扼守鸡公背，截断贵州通道，其他将领防守七星关，在生界立营扎寨，牵制蜀军。
English: Li Dingguo held the chicken's back and cut off the Guizhou channel. Other generals defended the seven-star pass, set up camp in the living world, and restrained the Shu army.

古文：大兵出遵义，由水西取乌撒，守将弃关走，李定国连败于安隆，由榔走永昌。
现代文：大军兵出遵义，由水西攻取乌撒，守将弃关而逃，李定国连败于安陆，朱由榔逃往永昌。
English: A large number of soldiers came out of Zunyi, captured Usa from west of Shu, abandoned Guzheng and fled, Li Dingguo was defeated in Anlu, and Zhu Yuxuan fled to Yongchang.

古文：明年正月三日，大兵入云南，由榔走腾越。
现代文：第二年正月三日，大军进入云南，朱由榔逃往腾越。
English: On the third day of the first month of the second year, the large army entered Yunnan, and Zhu Yuxuan fled to Tengyue.

古文：定国败于潞江，又走南甸。
现代文：李定国败于潞江，又逃至南甸。
English: Li Dingguo was defeated at the Minjiang River and fled to Nandian.

古文：二十六日，抵囊木河，是为缅境。
现代文：二十六日，抵达囊木河，此地属于缅甸境内。
English: On the 26th, they arrived at the Cangmu River, which belongs to Myanmar.

古文：缅勒从官尽弃兵仗，始启关，至蛮莫。
现代文：缅甸人勒令随从官员舍弃所有兵器，才开关放人，朱由榔一行到达蛮莫。
English: The Burmese ordered the officials accompanying him to abandon all weapons, and only then did they release him. Zhu Yuxuan and his party could not have arrived at a better time.

古文：二月，缅以四舟来迎，从官自觅舟，随行者六百四十余人，陆行者自故岷王子而下九百余人，期会于缅甸。
现代文：二月，缅甸人派出四船前来迎接，随从官员自己找船，随行者六百四十余人，由陆路行走的有已故岷王之子以下九百余人，约定在缅甸会合。
English: In February, the Burmese sent four ships to meet them, and the officials who accompanied them looked for the ships themselves. There were more than 640 people in the entourage, and more than 900 people, including the son of the late King Min, walked by land. They agreed to meet in Myanmar.

古文：十八日至井亘。
现代文：十八日到达井亘。
English: I arrived in Iwata on the 18th.

古文：黔国公沐天波等谋奉由榔走户、猎二河，不果。
现代文：黔国公沐天波等企图尊奉朱由榔逃往户、猎二河，没能成功。
English: Zhu Yu's attempt to escape to his home and hunt the two rivers was not successful.

古文：五月四日，缅复以舟来迎。
现代文：五月四日，缅甸人又派船前来迎接。
English: On May 4th, the Burmese sent another ship to welcome them.

古文：明日，发井亘，行三日，至阿瓦。
现代文：第二天，从井亘出发，行走三日，到达阿瓦。
English: The next day, we set out from Iwata and walked for three days to reach Awase.

古文：阿瓦者，缅酋所居城也。
现代文：阿瓦是缅甸酋长所居之城。
English: Awa is the city where the Burmese chiefs live.

古文：又五日至赭硜。
现代文：又过了五日，到达赭。
English: After another five days, we arrived at Tsumo.

古文：陆行者缅人悉掠为奴，多自杀。
现代文：而走陆路的人全被缅甸人掠去为奴，这些人大多自杀。
English: Those who travelled overland were all taken as slaves by the Burmese, and most of them committed suicide.

古文：惟岷王子八十余人流入暹罗。
现代文：唯有岷王之子等八十余人流入暹罗。
English: Only more than eighty people, such as the son of the King of Siam, flowed into Siam.

古文：缅人于赭硜置草屋居由榔，遣兵防之。
现代文：缅甸人在赭建造一草屋让朱由榔居住，并派兵予以防范。
English: The Burmese built a grass hut in Handan for Zhu Yuyao to live in, and sent troops to prevent it.

古文：十七年，定国、文选与缅战，索其主，连败缅兵，缅终不肯出由榔。
现代文：十七年，李定国、白文选与缅甸人交战，索要其主，连败缅兵，缅甸始终不肯交出朱由榔。
English: In the seventeenth year, Li Dingguo and Bai Wenxuan fought with the Burmese, demanding their master, and repeatedly defeated the Burmese soldiers. Myanmar has always refused to hand over Zhu Yuxuan.

古文：十八年五月，缅酋弟莽猛白代立，绐从官渡河盟。
现代文：十八年五月，缅甸酋长之弟莽猛白代立为酋，哄骗朱由榔的随从官员渡河来订立盟约。
English: In May 18th, Meng Meng Bai, the brother of the Burmese chieftain, was installed as chieftain and tricked Zhu Yuxuan's officials to cross the river to sign a treaty.

古文：既至，以兵围之，杀沐天波、马吉翔、王维恭、魏豹等四十有二人，详《任国玺传》。
现代文：他们到达之后，缅人却出兵围攻，杀死沐天波、马吉翔、王维恭、魏豹等四十二人，详情见《任国玺传》。
English: After their arrival, the Burmese sent troops to besiege them, killing forty-two people, including Mu Tianbo, Majixiang, Wang Vigong, and Wei Pan. For details, see "Ren Guojun."

古文：存者由榔与其属二十五人。
现代文：仅朱由榔与其官属二十五人幸存。
English: Only Zhu Yuxuan and 25 of his subordinates survived.

古文：十二月，大兵临缅，白文选自木邦降，定国走景线，缅人以由榔父子送军前。
现代文：十二月，大军兵临缅境，白文选自木邦投降，李定国逃往景线，缅人将朱由榔父子送至军前。
English: In December, a large number of soldiers approached the Burmese border, Bai Wenxuan surrendered from Mubang, Li Dingguo fled to Jingtian, and the Burmese sent Zhu Yuxuan and his son to the front.

古文：明年四月，死于云南。
现代文：第二年四月，朱由榔死于云南。
English: In April of the following year, Zhu Yuxuan died in Yunnan.

古文：六月，李定国卒，其子嗣兴等降。
现代文：六月，李定国死，其子李嗣兴等投降。
English: In June, Li Dingguo died, and his son Li Shuxing and others surrendered.

