古文：叔孙穆子聘于晋，晋悼公飨之，乐及《鹿鸣》之三，而后拜乐三。
现代文：叔孙穆子到晋国作亲善访问，晋悼公用宴乐款待他。当乐师演奏到《鹿鸣》等三曲时，穆子才三次起身拜谢。
English: His uncle and grandson, Mu Zi, paid a goodwill visit to Jin Province, and Jin mourned and entertained him with public banquet music. When the musician played three songs such as "Deer Song," Mu Zi stood up three times to thank him.

古文：晋侯使行人问焉，曰： 子以君命镇抚弊邑，不腆先君之礼，以辱从者，不腆之乐以节之。
现代文：悼公让礼宾官问他说： 您奉君命来敝国访问，敝国以先君微薄的仪式接待您，并以音乐为您助兴。
English: The eulogist asked the protocol officer: "You have come to visit our country at your behest. Our country received you with a meager ceremony and entertained you with music.

古文：吾子舍其大而加礼于其细，敢问何礼也？ 
现代文：您置重大的乐曲于不顾却为次要的乐曲拜谢，请问这是什么礼节？ 
English: What kind of etiquette is this, that you put an important piece of music ahead of a lesser piece of music?

古文：对曰： 寡君使豹来继先君之好，君以诸侯之故，贶使臣以大礼。
现代文：穆子答道： 我的国君派我来，为的是继承先君的友好关系。贵国国君出于对诸侯国的尊重，赐我以大礼。
English: Mu Zi replied, "My sovereign sent me here in order to inherit the friendly relations of my forefathers. Your sovereign, out of respect for his vassal states, gave me a grand gift.

古文：夫先乐金奏《肆夏樊》、《遏》、《渠》，天子所以飨元侯也；夫歌《文王》、《大明》、《緜》，则两君相见之乐也。
现代文：先用金钟演奏《肆夏樊》、《遏》、《渠》三首夏曲，这是天子用来招待诸侯领袖的。再演唱《文王》、《大明》、《緜》，这三首曲子是两国国君相见时用来助兴的。
English: First, the golden bells were used to play the three summer melodies, "Boasting of Summer," "Curb" and "Drift," which were used by the emperor to invite the leaders of the princes. Then, "King Moon," "Great Ming" and "Cormorant" were sung. These three melodies were used to add to the fun when the two sovereigns met.

古文：皆昭令德以合好也，皆非使臣之所敢闻也。
现代文：这些都是表彰先王美德以加强友好的音乐，都不是我这种身份的人所敢听的。
English: This is music that praises the virtues of the past kings to strengthen friendship, and it is not music that someone like me would dare to listen to.

古文：臣以为肄业及之，故不敢拜。
现代文：我以为是乐师练习时刚好演奏到这些曲子，所以不敢拜谢。
English: I thought it was a musician who just happened to play these pieces when practicing, so I didn't dare to say thank you.

古文：今伶箫詠歌及《鹿鸣》之三，君之所以贶使臣，臣敢不拜贶。
现代文：现在乐师吹箫演唱到《鹿鸣》等三曲，这是国君赐给使臣的乐曲，我怎么敢不拜谢这个恩赐呢。
English: Now the musicians are playing and singing three pieces, including "Deersong," which was given to the ambassador by the sovereign. How dare I not thank him for this gift?

古文：夫《鹿鸣》，君之所以嘉先君之好也，敢不拜嘉。《四牡》，君之所以章使臣之勤也，敢不拜章。《皇皇者华》，君教使臣曰 每怀靡及，诹、谋、度、询，必咨于周。 
现代文：其中第一首曲子《鹿鸣》，是国君用来嘉善先君友好关系的，我岂敢不拜谢这种嘉善；第二首曲子《四牡》，是国君用来表彰使臣勤于国事的，我岂敢不拜谢这种表彰；第三首曲子《皇皇者华》中，国君教导使臣说： 每个人都怀有私心，国事将永远不能办成功。诹、谋、度、询，一定要向忠诚的人咨询。 
English: The first piece, "Deersong," was used by the sovereign to commend the friendship between his predecessors, and I dare not fail to thank him for this act of kindness; the second piece, "Four Horses," was used by the sovereign to commend his envoys for their diligence in state affairs, and I dare not fail to thank him for this commendation; in the third piece, "Emperor's Flower," the sovereign taught his envoys: "Everyone harbors selfishness, and state affairs will never be able to succeed. To advise, to plan, to measure, and to inquire, you must consult a loyal person."

古文：敢不拜教。
现代文：我岂敢不拜谢这种教导。
English: How dare I not give thanks for this teaching.

古文：臣闻之曰： 怀和为每怀，咨才为诹，咨事为谋，咨义为度，咨亲为询，忠信为周。 
现代文：我听说： 每怀就是怀私的意思，咨问事务叫诹；咨问困难叫谋；咨问礼义叫度；咨问亲戚叫询；向忠信的人咨问叫周。 
English: I've heard it said that "every concern is a concern for one's own interests. Consultation on affairs is called shun; consultation on difficulties is called strategizing; consultation on etiquette and righteousness is called degree; consultation on relatives is called inquiry; consultation on the faithful is called zhou."

古文：君贶使臣以大礼，重之以六德，敢不再拜。 
现代文：贵国国君赐我以大礼，又教导我这六德，我岂敢不再三拜谢。 
English: The sovereign of your country has given me great gifts and taught me these six virtues. How dare I not thank you three times over?

