古文：事类者，盖文章之外，据事以类义，援古以证今者也。
现代文：所谓 事类 ，就是在文章本身的写作之外，利用有关故实来表明意义，引用古事来证明今事。
English: The so-called "things" means that in addition to the writing of the article itself, the relevant facts are used to show the meaning, and ancient things are quoted to prove current events.

古文：昔文王繇《易》，剖判爻位。《既济》九三，远引高宗之伐，《明夷》六五，近书箕子之贞：斯略举人事，以征义者也。
现代文：从前周文王作解释《易经》的卦爻辞，辨析卦爻的位置，在《既济》卦阳爻的第三位，远的引到殷高宗讨伐鬼方的事；在《明夷》卦阴爻的第五位，近的写到殷末箕子的贞操：这只是简要地举出古人的事迹，用以证明意义的例子。
English: From the previous Zhou Wen Wang's interpretation of the "I Ching" of the Gua Zi, the analysis of the position of the Gua Zi, in the third place of the "Ye Zi" Gua Yang Zi, far led to the Yin Gao Zong's crusade against the devil; in the fifth place of the "Ming Yi" Gua Yin Zi, recently wrote about the chastity of Yin Zuo Zi: This is just a brief example of the deeds of the ancients to prove the meaning.

古文：至若胤征羲和，陈《政典》之训；盘庚诰民，叙迟任之言：此全引成辞以明理者也。
现代文：至如《尚书·胤征》所载胤君征讨羲和时，举出夏代《政典》中的教训；《尚书·盘庚》所载殷王盘庚告诫国人之辞，讲到上古贤人迟任的话：这就是完整地引用前人的成辞，用以说明道理的例子。
English: For example, in the "Shangshu·Tansei," when Yan Junsei called for peace, the lessons of Xia Dynasty's "Political Code" were cited; in the "Shangshu·Pan Geng," the words of Yin Wang Pan Geng admonished the Chinese people, and the words of the ancient sages were mentioned: This is an example of completely quoting the words of the predecessors to illustrate the truth.

古文：然则明理引乎成辞，征义举乎人事，乃圣贤之鸿谟，经籍之通矩也。《大畜》之象， 君子以多识前言往行 ，亦有包于文矣。
现代文：由此可见，引用前人现成的话来说明道理，列举古人有关事迹来证明意义，这是圣贤对重大问题的议论，更是经典中运用的通则。《易经·大畜》的《象辞》中说， 君子应多多记住前人的言论和行事 ，这也有助于文章的丰富。
English: From this, it can be seen that quoting the ready-made words of the predecessors to illustrate the truth, and listing the relevant deeds of the ancients to prove the meaning, this is the discussion of the sages on major issues, and it is also a general rule applied in the classics. In the "Elegy" of the "I Ching · Great Animal," it is said that the gentleman should remember more and more the words and deeds of the predecessors, which also helps to enrich the article.

古文：观夫屈宋属篇，号依诗人，虽引古事，而莫取旧辞。
现代文：考查屈原、宋玉的作品，据说是依照《诗经》的作者而写的，其中虽讲到不少古代的事，却不采用原来的辞句。
English: An examination of the works of Qu Yuan and Song Yu, which are said to have been written according to the author of the "Book of Songs," shows that although they talk about many ancient things, they do not use the original words and phrases.

古文：唯贾谊《鵩赋》，始用鹖冠之说；相如《上林》，撮引李斯之书，此万分之一会也。
现代文：到汉初贾谊的《鵩鸟赋》，才开始引用《鹖冠子》中的话；司马相如的《上林赋》，引用了李斯的《谏逐客书》：这也只是偶然引用。
English: It was not until the beginning of the Han Dynasty that Jia Yi's "Ostrich Fu" began to quote the words from "Crown of Thorns"; Sima Xiangru's "Shanglin Fu" quoted Li Si's "Guest Book": this was also just an accidental quote.

古文：及扬雄《百官箴》，颇酌于《诗》、《书》；刘歆《遂初赋》，历叙于纪传；渐渐综采矣。
现代文：到扬雄写《百官箴》，就采取《诗经》、《尚书》中的话颇多了；刘歆写《遂初赋》，更历述了不少周晋史实：这就逐渐错综引用各种古书了。
English: By the time Yang Xiong wrote "The Book of a Hundred Sages," he had taken a lot of words from "The Book of Songs" and "The Book of Songs"; Liu Xi wrote "The First Capital," and even recounted a lot of Zhou Jin's historical facts: this gradually led to the intricate citation of various ancient books.

古文：至于崔班张蔡，遂捃摭经史，华实布濩，因书立功，皆后人之范式也。
现代文：及至东汉的崔骃、班固、张衡、蔡邕等，便搜集种种经书史书，把文章写得华实满布；凭借古书以获得成就，在这方面他们是后人的典范。
English: As far back as the Eastern Han Dynasty, Cui Yu, Bangu, Zhang Heng, Cai Yu and others collected various books of scripture and history, and wrote articles in a magnificent manner; they achieved success by relying on ancient books, and in this respect they are a model for future generations.

古文：夫姜桂因地，辛在本性；文章由学，能在天资。
现代文：姜和桂都从地上生长，它们的辛辣却是其本性决定的；写好文章要通过学识，创作的才能在于作者的天赋。
English: Both ginger and cinnamon grow from the ground, but their spiciness is determined by their nature; writing a good article requires knowledge, and creative talent lies in the author's talent.

古文：才自内发，学以外成，有学饱而才馁，有才富而学贫。
现代文：才能由作家内部产生，学识则是从外部积累而成；有的人学识丰富但才力不足，有的人才力较强但学识贫乏。
English: Talent is generated from within the writer, while knowledge is accumulated from the outside; some people are rich in knowledge but lack talent, some people are strong in talent but poor in knowledge.

古文：学贫者迍邅于事义，才馁者劬劳于辞情，此内外之殊分也。
现代文：学识贫乏的作者，在引事明义方面比较困难；才力不足的作者，在遣辞达情方面相当吃力：这就是内才外学的区分。
English: Poorly educated authors have more difficulty in conveying meaning; authors with insufficient talent have a hard time conveying meaning: this is the distinction between internal talent and external learning.

古文：是以属意立文，心与笔谋，才为盟主，学为辅佐；主佐合德，文采必霸，才学褊狭，虽美少功。
现代文：所以，命意为文，在心和笔共同谋划之中，作者的才力起主要作用，学识起辅助作用。如果才力和学识兼善并美，就必然在创作上取得突出成就；如果才力和学识都欠缺，虽有小巧也难有大成效。
English: Therefore, the meaning of life is the text, and in the joint planning of heart and pen, the author's talent plays a major role, and knowledge plays a supporting role. If talent and knowledge are both good, it is inevitable to achieve outstanding achievements in creation; if talent and knowledge are lacking, it is difficult to achieve great results even if they are small.

古文：夫以子云之才，而自奏不学，及观书石室，乃成鸿采。
现代文：像扬雄那样有才华的作者，还上奏书说自己学识不足，到他在石渠阁阅读大量书籍之后，便写出了优秀的文学作品。
English: A talented writer like Yang Xiong, who once complained about his lack of knowledge, wrote excellent literary works after reading a lot of books in Shiquijie.

古文：表里相资，古今一也。
现代文：内才外学相辅而成，古往今来的作者皆是如此。
English: Inner talent and outer learning complement each other, and this is true of all authors from ancient times to the present.

古文：故魏武称张子之文为拙，以学问肤浅，所见不博，专拾掇崔杜小文，所作不可悉难，难便不知所出。
现代文：所以魏武帝曹操说： 张子的文章其所以拙劣，就由于他学问肤浅，见闻不博，只知拾取崔骃、杜笃的小文章；因此，他的作品不能完全追究，追究起来便无法知道源头在哪里。 
English: Therefore, Wei Emperor Cao Cao said: Zhang Zi's article is so bad because he is shallow in knowledge, not well-informed, and only knows how to pick up small articles of Cui Wei and Du Du; therefore, his work cannot be fully investigated, and when investigated, it is impossible to know where the source is.

古文：斯则寡闻之病也。
现代文：这就是孤陋寡闻的毛病了。
English: That's the problem with being uninformed.

古文：夫经典沉深，载籍浩瀚，实群言之奥区，而才思之神皋也。
现代文：儒家经典内容既深厚，书籍也十分的丰富，的确是各种言辞的渊薮，启迪才思的宝库。
English: The content of Confucian classics is profound, and the books are also very rich. It is indeed a wellspring of all kinds of words, and a treasure trove of inspiration.

古文：扬班以下，莫不取资，任力耕耨，纵意渔猎，操刀能割，必裂膏腴。
现代文：从汉代扬雄、班固以后的作者，无不从中各取所需：凭自己的努力去学习，任自己的心意去采取；只要善于吸取儒家经典，就必能从中获得丰富的营养。
English: The authors from the Han Dynasty, Yangxiong and Banggu, all take what they need from it: learn by their own efforts, let their own minds take it; as long as they are good at absorbing Confucian classics, they will be able to get rich nutrition from it.

古文：是以将赡才力，务在博见，狐腋非一皮能温，鸡庶必数千而饱矣。
现代文：所以，作者想要充实才力，必须首先博见广闻。一张狐皮不能制成皮袄，少量的鸡掌也不能吃饱。
English: Therefore, if the author wants to enrich his talent, he must first be widely known. A piece of fox skin cannot be made into a cocoon, and a small amount of chicken feet cannot be eaten.

古文：是以综学在博，取事贵约，校练务精，捃理须核，众美辐辏，表里发挥。
现代文：因此，综聚学识须要广博，采用事例则应简约，考校选择必须精确，吸取的道理应该核实：这些优点集中起来，就使才力和学识相互发挥。
English: Therefore, comprehensive knowledge must be extensive, the use of examples should be simple, the choice of examination schools must be precise, and the principle of absorption should be verified: these advantages together make talent and knowledge play each other.

古文：刘劭《赵都赋》云∶ 公子之客，叱劲楚令歃盟；管库隶臣，呵强秦使鼓缶。 
现代文：三国时刘劭在《赵都赋》中说： 平原君的门客毛遂，呵叱强劲的楚王，迫使他同意订盟；赵国的小臣蔺相如，斥责强盛的秦王，迫使他击缶为乐。 
English: At the time of the Three Kingdoms, Liu Bei said in "Zhaodu Fu": The disciple Mao Sui of the Plain Kingdom scolded the strong King of Chu and forced him to agree to enter into an alliance; the junior minister of the State of Zhao, Yu Xiangru, rebuked the powerful King of Qin and forced him to enjoy beating cans.

古文：用事如斯，可称理得而义要矣。
现代文：能够像这样运用故实，就可算是抓住道理而又意义重要了。
English: To be able to use the past and the present like this, it is important to grasp the truth and the meaning.

古文：故事得其要，虽小成绩，譬寸辖制轮，尺枢运关也。
现代文：所以，用事如能抓住要害，虽然事小也能有所成就，这就如像小小的铜键能够控制车轮，门户的转轴可以承运开关。
English: Therefore, if you can grasp the crux of the matter, although small things can also be achieved, this is like a small copper key can control the wheel, the portal shaft can carry the switch.

古文：或微言美事，置于闲散，是缀金翠于足胫，靓粉黛于胸臆也。
现代文：如果把精微的言辞、美妙的故实，用在无关宏旨的地方，就如像把金玉珠宝挂在脚上，把脂粉黛墨抹在胸前了。
English: If you use fine words and wonderful facts in a place that has nothing to do with the grand design, it is like hanging gold and jade jewelry on your feet and smearing ink on your chest.

古文：凡用旧合机，不啻自其口出，引事乖谬，虽千载而为瑕。
现代文：大凡引用故实得当，就像自己说的话一样；如果所引之事和自己讲的内容不吻合，就成了千年抹不掉的污点。
English: It is as important to quote accurately as to speak well; if what is quoted does not agree with what is said, it is a blot that cannot be erased for thousands of years.

古文：陈思，群才之英也，《报孔璋书》云∶ 葛天氏之乐，千人唱，万人和，听者因以蔑《韶》、《夏》矣。 
现代文：陈思王曹植，可算是群才中的英俊了，但他在《报孔璋书》中说： 葛天氏时的音乐，千人合唱，万人相和，听了这种音乐的人，对古代的《韶乐》和《大夏》都有所轻视了。 
English: Chen Si Wang Cao Zhi may be considered the most handsome of all the talents, but he said in "The Book of Revelations": "The music of Ge Tian's time, the chorus of a thousand people, the harmony of all people, the people who listened to this music, despised the ancient "Gongle" and "Big Summer."

古文：此引事之实谬也。
现代文：这就是引用古事的谬误。
English: This is the fallacy of quoting the ancients.

古文：按葛天之歌，唱和三人而已。
现代文：查葛天氏时所唱的歌，唱与和的一共只有三人而已。
English: There were only three people in total who sang the songs that Chakotay sang.

古文：相如《上林》云∶ 奏陶唐之舞，听葛天之歌，千人唱，万人和。 
现代文：司马相如《上林赋》中说： 演奏陶唐氏的乐舞，听葛天氏的音乐，千人齐唱，万人齐和。 
English: Sima Xiangru said in "Shanglin Fu" that: When playing the music and dance of the Tao Tang Clan and listening to the music of the Ge Tian Clan, thousands of people will sing in unison, and all will be at peace.

古文：唱和千万人，乃相如推之。
现代文：所谓唱和千万人，不过是司马相如的主观推测。
English: The so-called "singing along with tens of millions of people" is nothing more than Sima's subjective speculation.

古文：然而滥侈葛天，推三成万者，信赋妄书，致斯谬也。
现代文：其所以不真实地夸大《葛天氏之乐》，把 三 扩大为 万 ，是由于作者根据《上林赋》乱写，以致造成这种荒谬的。
English: The reason why he exaggerated "The Music of Gethsemane" untruthfully and expanded "三" to "万" is because the author wrote it randomly based on "Shanglin Fu," which resulted in this absurdity.

古文：陆机《园葵》诗云∶ 庇足同一智，生理合异端。 
现代文：又如陆机的《园葵》诗中说： 葵能荫庇其足，只不过一点小小的智慧，但生存的道理却有千千万万。 
English: It is also said in the poem "Garden of Sunflowers" by Lu Ji: Sunflowers can shade one's feet, just a little wisdom, but there are thousands and thousands of reasons for survival.

古文：夫葵能卫足，事讥鲍庄；葛藟庇根，辞自乐豫。
现代文：关于 葵能保卫其足 ，原是孔子讥讽齐国鲍牵的说法； 葛藤庇护其根 ，原是宋国乐豫对宋昭公说的话：这本是两码事。
English: Regarding Kwai's ability to protect his foot, it was originally Confucius who ridiculed Qi Guo Baotong's saying; while Kudou sheltered his root, it was originally Song Guo Leyu's words to Song Zhaogong: these are two different things.

古文：若譬葛为葵，则引事为谬；若谓庇胜卫，则改事失真：斯又不精之患。
现代文：如果把 葛 比作 葵 ，就是张冠李戴的错误；如果认为 庇 字比 卫 字好，则又改变事实而有失其真，这是不精确的毛病。
English: If you compare Ge to Aoi, it is the mistake of Zhang Guan Lida; if you think that Bei Zi is better than Wei Zi, you will change the facts and distort the truth, which is an imprecise problem.

古文：夫以子建明练，士衡沉密，而不免于谬。曹洪之谬高唐，又曷足以嘲哉！
现代文：以曹植的精明熟练、陆机的深沉细致，还难免有误；曹洪在《与魏文帝书》中，把 河西 误作 高唐 ，又有什么可嘲笑的呢？
English: With Cao Zhi's shrewdness and skill, and Lu Zi's profound and meticulous approach, it is inevitable that there will be mistakes; Cao Hong mistook Hexi for Gaotang in "The Book of Emperor Wei," what is there to laugh at?

古文：夫山木为良匠所度，经书为文士所择，木美而定于斧斤，事美而制于刀笔，研思之士，无惭匠石矣。
现代文：山中树木为良好的工匠所度量，儒家经书被后世文人所选取；木材美好的，便用斧子加工；事义美好的，就用笔墨写下。能如此，从事文学创作的人，也就无愧于古代善于准确斫削的匠石了。
English: The trees in the mountains were measured by good craftsmen, and the Confucian scriptures were selected by later generations of writers. If the wood is good, it is processed with an axe; if the meaning is good, it is written down with pen and ink. If so, people engaged in literary creation are worthy of the ancient craftsmen who are good at accurate milling.

古文：赞曰∶
现代文：总结：
English: What is this word? Summary:

古文：经籍深富，辞理遐亘。
现代文：儒家经典书籍精深宏富，文辞和义理都具有永恒的意义。
English: Confucian classic books are profound and rich, and the words and principles have eternal significance.

古文：皓如江海，郁若昆邓。
现代文：它像江海般广大，像昆仑山的珠玉和邓林那样繁盛。
English: It is as vast as a river and sea, and as prosperous as the jewels of Kunlun Mountain and Dunlin.

古文：文梓共采，琼珠交赠。
现代文：优质的梓木都可采伐，美好的珠宝全可赠送。
English: High-quality azusa trees can be harvested, and beautiful jewelry can be given away.

古文：用人若己，古来无懵。
现代文：只要引用前人的故事如自出其口，古往今来的读者都是欢迎的。
English: As long as the stories of the predecessors are quoted as if from their own mouths, readers from all ages are welcome.

