古文：时苗王思李凝道尧君卿萧颖士裴枢崔珙韩皋杜佑皇甫湜段文昌李德裕李潘卢罕王珙高季昌
现代文：时苗王思李凝道尧君卿萧颖士裴枢崔珙韩皋杜佑皇甫湜段文昌李德裕李潘卢罕王珙高季昌
English: Xiao Yingshi, Baizhu, Cui Han, Du You, Wang Fu, Wenchang, Li Deyu, Li Pan, Luhan, Wang Gao, Qichang

古文：时苗
现代文：时苗
English: Time is running out

古文：汉时苗为寿春令。
现代文：汉朝时，时苗任寿春县令。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Shi Miao served as the governor of Shuchun County.

古文：谒治中蒋济，济醉，不见之。
现代文：一次，去拜见郡府中管理文书档案的官员蒋济，偏巧遇上蒋济喝醉了酒，不见他。
English: On one occasion, he went to see Jiang Jie, an official in charge of document archives at the county government, but he happened to meet Jiang Jie drunk and did not see him.

古文：归而刻木人，书酒徒蒋济。以弓矢射之。
现代文：时苗回到家中后，雕刻一个木人，上面写上酒徒蒋济四个字，用弓箭射这个木人。
English: After returning home, Shi Miao carved a wooden man, wrote the four characters of the drunkard Jiang Jie on it, and shot the wooden man with a bow and arrow.

古文：牧长闻之，不能制。
现代文：郡守得知这件事情后，也拿他没有什么办法。
English: After the county governor learned of this incident, there was nothing he could do about it.

古文：王思
现代文：王思
English: Wang Si

古文：王思性急。
现代文：王思性格急躁。
English: Wang Si is impatient.

古文：执笔作书，蝇集笔端，驱去复来。
现代文：一次，他提笔写字，一只苍蝇飞落到笔端，挥手赶走它，过了一会儿又飞回来。
English: Once, when he picked up his pen to write, a fly landed on the end of the pen, he waved it away, and a moment later it flew back.

古文：思恚怒，自起逐之，不能得。
现代文：王思非常恼怒，起身追打这只苍蝇没有打到。
English: Wang Si was very angry. He got up and chased the fly, but couldn't catch it.

古文：还取笔掷地，蹋坏之。
现代文：于是回到书案前，气得将笔扔在地上，用脚将笔踏碎。
English: So he went back to the bookcase, threw the pen on the ground in anger, and crushed it with his foot.

古文：李凝道
现代文：李凝道
English: Li Gendou

古文：唐衢州龙游县令李凝道性褊急。
现代文：唐朝时，衢州龙游县令李凝道性情偏狭急躁。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the ruler of Longyou County in Bozhou, Li Jingdao, was narrow-minded and impatient.

古文：姊男年七岁，故恼之。
现代文：他姐姐有个男孩，才七岁。一次，这个小男孩故意激怒李凝道。
English: His sister has a seven-year-old boy, and on one occasion, the little boy deliberately provoked Li Jingdao.

古文：即往逐之，不及。
现代文：李凝道果然恼怒了，起身追打这个小男孩，没有追上。
English: Li Gendou was really angry. He got up and chased the little boy, but couldn't catch him.

古文：遂饼诱得之，咬其胸背流血。
现代文：于是假说给小男孩饼吃，将他骗回来，一把抓住。用牙咬小男孩的前胸后背，咬得到处流血。
English: So he pretended to give the little boy a cookie, tricked him back, and grabbed him. He bit the little boy's chest and back with his teeth, and bled everywhere he bit.

古文：姊救之得免。
现代文：他姐姐发现了，才将小男孩救走。
English: His sister found out and rescued the little boy.

古文：又乘驴于街中，有骑马人，靴鼻拨其膝，遂怒大骂，将殴之。
现代文：还有一次，李凝道骑着一头毛驴走在街上。过来一个骑马的，脚上穿的靴鼻子碰了他膝间一下，于是李凝道破口大骂这个骑马的人，近上去要殴打人家。
English: Another time, Li Gendou was riding a donkey on the street. A man on a horse came along, and the shoe he was wearing on his foot hit him between the knees, so Li Gendou cursed the man on the horse and went up to him to beat him up.

古文：走马遂无所及，忍恶不得，遂嚼路傍棘子血流
现代文：骑马人跑的快，李凝道没有追赶上，忍不下这口气，就用嘴嚼啮路边的棘刺，扎得满嘴流血。
English: The rider ran fast, but Li Jingdao did not catch up. Unable to bear this, he chewed the thorns on the roadside with his mouth, and his mouth was full of blood.

古文：尧君卿
现代文：尧君卿
English: Lord Shoujun

古文：唐贞观中，冀州武强丞尧君卿失马。
现代文：唐太宗贞观年间，冀州武强县丞尧君卿丢马了，后来将盗马贼捕获到，戴上刑枷。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong Zhenguan of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Yongzheng of Wuqiang County, Jizhou Province, lost his horse. Later, he caught the horse thief and put him in chains.

古文：既得贼，枷禁未决，君卿指贼面骂曰：老贼，吃虎胆来。敢偷我物！
现代文：可是刑枷还没有戴好呢，尧君卿指着盗马贼的鼻子大骂道：好你个老贼，吃了老虎胆了，竟敢偷你李爷的马！
English: However, the shackles had not yet been put on, so Lord Zou pointed to the horse thief's nose and cursed: "Good old thief, you have eaten the tiger and dared to steal your master Li's horse!

古文：贼举枷击之，应时脑碎而死。
现代文：这个盗马贼抢过来刑枷向尧君卿头上击去，只听扑的一声，尧君卿被击碎脑壳倒地死去。
English: The horse thief snatched the shackles and hit them over Lord Zou's head. With a single slap, Lord Zou was smashed on the head and fell to the ground dead.

古文：萧颖士
现代文：萧颖士
English: Xiao Yingshi

古文：唐萧颖士，开元中年十九擢进士第，至二十余，该博三教。
现代文：唐朝人肖颖士，唐玄宗开元年间人。才十九岁就经考试被选拔为进士。到二十几岁时，释、道、儒三教便都通晓。
English: Xiao Yingshi from the Tang Dynasty was born in the first year of the Tang Xuan Zong. He was only nineteen years old when he was selected as a scholar. By the time he was in his twenties, he was well versed in Shih, Tao, and Confucianism.

古文：性急躁忿戾，举无其比。
现代文：有人劝杜亮说：你不就是一个仆人吗？
English: Someone said to Du Liang, "Aren't you just a servant?"

古文：常使一佣仆杜亮，每一决责，以待调养平复，遵其指使如故。
现代文：何不挑选一个和善的主人侍奉呢？
English: Why not choose a kind master to serve?

古文：或劝亮曰：子佣夫也，何不择其善主，而受苦若是乎？亮曰：愚岂不知。但爱其才学博奥，以此恋恋不能去。
现代文：而在这受这样的苦。杜亮回答说：我怎么不知道这些道理呢。但是我爱他才学渊博，所以才恋恋不愿意离开他呀！
English: Du Liang replied, "How come I don't know these truths? But I only love him because he's so knowledgeable, that's why I'm in love and don't want to leave him!"

古文：卒至于死。
现代文：杜亮一直侍奉肖颖士到死。
English: Du Liang served Xiao Ying Si until his death.

古文：裴枢
现代文：裴枢
English: Baizhu

古文：河东裴枢字环中。
现代文：河东人裴枢，字环中。
English: Baizhu, a person from the east of the river, is in the middle of the word ring.

古文：季父耀卿，唐玄宗朝，位至丞相。
现代文：他的叔父裴耀卿，唐玄宗在位期间，官至宰相。
English: His uncle, Pei Yaoqing, rose to the position of prime minister during the reign of Tang Xuan Zong.

古文：开元二十一年奏开河漕，以赡国用，上深嘉纳之。
现代文：开元二十一年，裴耀卿上奏玄宗皇帝建议开放河运，用以充实国库，玄宗皇帝特别赞许并采纳了这个建议。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, Pei Yaoqing appealed to Emperor Xuanzong and proposed to open up river transportation to enrich the national treasury. Emperor Xuanzong particularly approved and adopted this proposal.

古文：亲姨夫中书舍人薛邕，时有知贡举之耗。
现代文：裴枢的亲姨夫薛邕官任中书舍人，当时传出来他有可能主持科举选拔人才工作的消息。
English: Baizhu's uncle-in-law, Xue Yukan, was appointed as the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. At that time, it was reported that he might preside over the work of selecting talents for the imperial examinations.

古文：元日，因来谒枢亲。
现代文：这年正月初一，薛邕特来拜见裴枢等家亲属。
English: On the first day of the first month of this year, Xue Bingte came to visit relatives such as Pei Zu.

古文：乃曰：几姊有处分亲故中举人否？
现代文：说：他几个姨娘有什么吩咐没有？咱们的亲朋故友中有人参加应举科考吗？
English: He said: Did his aunts and uncles give him any instructions? Did any of our relatives, friends and old friends participate in the survey?

古文：其亲指枢。
现代文：一位亲属指着裴枢说裴枢参加。
English: A relative pointed to Baizhu and said that Baizhu participated.

古文：邕整容端手板对曰：三十六郎，自是公共积选之才，不待处分矣。
现代文：薛邕手捧上朝记事用的手板，面容严肃地说：三十六郎，自然是国家积贮待选拔的人才，不用特意吩咐我了。
English: Xue Yao held up the hand board used for imperial records in his hand, his face serious as he said, "Thirty-six young men, naturally, are the talents that the country has stored for selection. You don't have to specifically order me.

古文：伏恐别有子弟。
现代文：我是深恐还有其他子弟，因此问一下。
English: I'm afraid there are other children, so let me ask.

古文：枢即应声曰：娭子失言。
现代文：裴枢当即应声说：姨夫自食其言。
English: Baizhu immediately said in response: My uncle said what he said.

古文：因举酒沥地，誓曰：薛姨夫知举，枢当绝迹匿形，不履人世。
现代文：举起一杯酒洒在地上，当场立誓说：果然是薛姨夫主持科举考试，裴枢我自当断绝跟外人的交往，藏身在家中，绝对不去参加举试。
English: He held up a glass of wine and sprinkled it on the ground, and swore on the spot: It was Auntie Xue who presided over the imperial examinations. I should have cut off contact with outsiders, hidden myself at home, and never attended the examinations.

古文：其亲决责，令拜谢邕，枢竟不屈。
现代文：这位亲属举杖责打裴枢，责令他向薛邕赔礼道歉。
English: The relative raised his cane to beat Baizhu and ordered him to apologize to Xue Yuxuan.

古文：永泰二年，贾至侍郎中举，枢一举而登选。
现代文：裴枢始终没有这样做。唐代宗永泰二年，侍郎贾至主持科举考试，裴枢一次就考中被选。
English: Baizhu has never done so. In the second year of the Tang Dynasty, Zong Yongtai, Jia Zhi presided over the imperial examination, and Baizhu was selected in the examination.

古文：后大历二年，薛邕方知举。
现代文：这之后，在唐代宗大历二年，裴枢的姨夫才主持科举考试。
English: After that, in the second year of the Tang Dynasty, Baizhu's uncle presided over the imperial examinations.

古文：枢及第后，归丹阳里，不与杂流交通。
现代文：裴枢应举中第后，回到丹阳里，不与一般闲杂人士交往。
English: Baizhu returned to Danyang in the middle of the second day of the meeting, and did not interact with ordinary people.

古文：又韦元甫除此州，计到郡之明日，合来拜其亲。
现代文：韦元甫来丹阳上任，计划在到任的时候，一块儿拜见他的亲朋。
English: Wei Yuanfu came to Danyang to take office, and planned to visit his relatives and friends together when he arrived.

古文：元甫至丹阳之明日，专使送衣服书状信物，枢怒言不纳。
现代文：韦元甫到丹阳上任的第二天，专门派人带着衣服、书信和作为凭证的物件，来到裴枢家。
English: On the second day after Wei Yuanfu took office in Danyang, he specially sent someone to come to Peizhu's house with clothes, letters and objects as evidence.

古文：后三日，元甫亲拥骑到枢别业，枢戒其仆，不令报。
现代文：裴枢气愤地将这个人赶走，没有收纳他带来的礼物。过了二天，韦元甫亲自乘车到裴枢的住处拜访他。裴枢告戒他家中的仆人，不许他们通报。
English: Peizhu angrily drove the man away and did not accept the gift he brought. Two days later, Wei Yuanfu personally drove to Peizhu's residence to visit him. Peizhu told his servants not to inform them.

古文：久停元甫车徒，不得进。
现代文：使得韦元甫的车马人众在外面停候很长时间，不能进入裴枢府中。
English: As a result, Wei Yuanfu's carriage and horse people had to wait outside for a long time and could not enter Pei's residence.

古文：元甫不怒，但云：裴君太褊。
现代文：韦元甫一点也没有生气发火，只是说：裴枢这个人啊太偏狭固执了。
English: Wei Yuanfu didn't get angry at all, he just said, "Pei Zu is too narrow-minded and stubborn."

古文：某乍到，须与军吏监军相识。
现代文：我初来乍到，须要跟军吏、监军们见见面，相互认识一下啊。
English: This is my first time here, so I need to meet with the military officials and supervisors and get to know each other.

古文：遽此深责，未敢当也。
现代文：受到这样严重的责备，不敢当啊！
English: To be so severely reproached, how dare you!

古文：亲乃遣女奴传话，延元甫就厅事，置酒。
现代文：裴枢的父母派丫环出来传话，说请刺史到厅堂暂坐，并让仆夫们准备酒宴。
English: Baizhu's parents sent a maidservant out to deliver a message, saying that they would like Zishi to sit in the hall for a while and let the servants prepare the banquet.

古文：元甫陈以公事，枢方出欢话。
现代文：韦元甫到厅堂入坐后，跟裴枢谈的都是公事，裴枢这才高高兴兴地跟他说话。
English: After Wei Yuanfu sat down in the hall, all he talked about with Pei Zu was business, which made Pei Zu speak to him cheerfully.

古文：崔珙
现代文：崔珙
English: Choi Min-soo

古文：唐崔珙为东都留守，判尚书省事。
现代文：唐朝时，崔珙任东都洛阳的留守，署理尚书省的事务。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Cui Rong was in charge of the affairs of Shangshu Province while Luoyang, the eastern capital, was away.

古文：中书舍人崔荆为庶子，公务谒珙，珙不为见。
现代文：中书舍人崔荆担任卿大夫的孩子的教养工作，因为公事拜见崔珙。崔珙不接见。
English: Cui Jing, a teacher of Chinese literature, is responsible for the upbringing of the doctor's children. Because of his official duties, he sees Cui Yao. Cui Yao does not see him.

古文：荆乃求与珙素厚善者，使候问之，珙怒不已。
现代文：崔荆于是求一个跟崔珙平素关系非常好的人，去问讯崔珙为什么不接见他？
English: Cui Jing then asked a person who had a very good relationship with Cui Jie to ask why Cui Jie did not receive him.

古文：甥族中有颖悟者，采取文采，许之。乃掌制日，贬崔珙为抚州郡丞云：因缘雁序，鼓扇浇风。
现代文：崔荆的外甥中有脑瓜转得快的人，提议采取编选文集的方式，将原来文章中崔珙不满意的地方改正过来。崔荆采纳了这个提议。就在崔珙掌管草拟皇上命令的日子里，将崔珙降职为抚州郡丞，说：所以将崔珙降职，因为崔珙借着是同族兄弟的关系，宣扬扇动浮薄不正的社会风气。
English: One of Cui Jing's nephews, a quick-witted man, proposed to take the form of compiling a collection of essays to correct the unsatisfactory parts of Cui Yao's original article. Cui Jing accepted this proposal. In the days when Cui Yao was in charge of drafting the imperial order, he demoted Cui Yao to the position of Fuzhou county magistrate, saying: "That's why I demoted Cui Yao, because Cui Yao, through the relationship of being a brother of the same race, promoted the social ethos of instigating and instigating.

古文：荆因尔成疾。
现代文：崔荆因为这件事情而气闷出病来。
English: As a result of this incident, Cui Jing became depressed and fell ill.

古文：韩皋
现代文：韩皋
English: Han Zheng

古文：唐韩皋，自中书舍人除御史中丞。
现代文：唐朝人韩皋，自中书舍人改任御史中丞。
English: Han Zheng, a member of the Tang Dynasty, was transferred from the position of middle school teacher to the position of middle school vice-president.

古文：西省故事，阁老改官词头，送以次舍人。
现代文：依照中书省的惯例，宰相改任其它官职的任命书，由副宰相草拟。
English: According to the practice of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the letter of appointment of the Prime Minister to other official positions shall be drafted by the Deputy Prime Minister.

古文：是时吕渭草敕，皋恐，问曰：仆何故转。习不告。
现代文：韩皋心中恐慌，问吕渭：我因为什么缘故改任御史中丞？按照惯例是不能告诉的。
English: Panicking in his heart, Han Zheng asked Lü Zheng: "For what reason did I change my post to the Vice-Minister of History? According to the usual practice, I can't tell you.

古文：皋劫之曰：与君一时左降？
现代文：韩皋逼问说：难道是跟你同时降职？
English: Han Xuan forcedly asked, "Was it a simultaneous demotion with you?"

古文：渭急，乃告之。
现代文：吕渭被逼问急了，就告诉了韩皋这次降职的原因。
English: Lv Yao was forced to ask urgent questions, so he told Han Yao the reason for the demotion.

古文：皋又欲诉于改相，渭执之。
现代文：韩皋还想上诉他被免去宰相的事。
English: Han Min also wants to appeal his removal as prime minister.

古文：夺其靴笏。哅哅久之，乃止。
现代文：吕渭坚决不同意他这样做，抢夺下来韩皋的朝靴和记事用的手板，大声吵嚷了很长时间，才不吵了。
English: Lv Yao strongly disagreed with him doing so, snatched Han Yao's morning shoes and clipboard, and shouted loudly for a long time before they stopped shouting.

古文：杜佑
现代文：杜佑
English: Du You

古文：唐杨茂卿客游杨州，与杜佑书。
现代文：唐朝时，有个叫杨茂卿的读书人，到扬州游说，送书信给扬州刺史杜佑。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a reader named Yang Maoxing who went to Yangzhou to lobby and send letters to Yangzhou Sisi Duyou.

古文：词多捭阖，以周公吐握之事为讽。
现代文：信中多是议论天下政事的内容，用周公一沐三握发，一饭三吐哺的典故，暗喻杜佑应礼贤下士，广求人才。
English: The letter mostly discusses the content of the world's political affairs, using the allusion of Zhou Gong's one bath, three shakes, three meals, three spits, alluding to Du You, Corporal Ying Lianxian, and seeking talents.

古文：佑讶之，时刘禹锡在坐，亦使召杨至，共饮。
现代文：杜佑看了这封信后非常惊讶。当时刘禹锡也在跟前。于是，杜佑派人将杨茂卿请来一块饮酒。
English: Du You was very surprised after reading the letter. At that time, Liu Yuxi was also in front of him. Therefore, Du You sent someone to invite Yang Maoqing for a drink.

古文：佑持茂卿书与禹锡曰：请文人一为读之。
现代文：席间，杜佑将杨茂卿给他的信，递予刘禹锡说：请文人拜读一下。
English: During the meal, Du You handed the letter to him from Yang Maoxing to Liu Yuxi and said, "Please read it."

古文：既毕，佑曰：如何？
现代文：刘禹锡读完信后，杜佑问：怎么？
English: After Liu Yuxi finished reading the letter, Du You asked: How come?

古文：禹锡曰：大凡布衣之士，皆须摆阖，以动尊贵之心。
现代文：刘禹锡说：一般的说，没有进入任途的读书人不甘寂寞，都须用游说之术，来打动高官显贵的心。
English: Liu Yuxi said: Generally speaking, readers who have not entered the career path are not willing to be lonely, and they must use the art of lobbying to impress the hearts of high-ranking officials.

古文：佑曰：休休，摆阖之事烂也。
现代文：杜佑说：快别说了。游说之术早已用烂了啊！
English: Du You said, "Stop talking about it. The art of lobbying has already been used up!

古文：独不见王舍乎，摆阖陈少游，少游刎其头，今我与公饭吃。
现代文：君不见王舍吗？向陈少游献游说之术，陈少游斩了他的头，我现在请你吃饭。
English: Don't you see Wang She? I offered Chen Shao You the art of lobbying, Chen Shao You cut off his head, now I invite you to dinner.

古文：过犹不及也。
现代文：不论做什么事情，超过了就会走向反面的啊！
English: No matter what you do, if you overdo it, it's bound to backfire!

古文：翌日，杨不辞而去。
现代文：第二天，杨茂卿悄悄地溜走了。
English: The next day, Yang Maoxing quietly slipped away.

古文：皇甫湜
现代文：皇甫湜
English: Emperor Fu Xi

古文：唐皇甫湜气貌刚质，为文古雅，恃才傲物，性复偏直。
现代文：唐朝人皇甫湜性格品貌倔强耿直，写的文章古拙高雅，而且性情高傲，秉性偏狭暴躁。
English: Emperor Fuxi of the Tang Dynasty had a stubborn and upright character, wrote ancient and elegant articles, and was proud and narrow-minded.

古文：为郎时，乘酒使气忤同列者。
现代文：皇甫湜在任工部郎中时，一次在酒桌上发脾气，跟同事争吵起来。
English: Once, when he was a junior official in the Ministry of Works, he lost his temper at the wine table and quarreled with a colleague.

古文：及醒，不自适，求分务东洛。
现代文：待到醒酒后，自己觉得不好意思，请求到东都洛阳去任职。
English: After he sobered up, he felt embarrassed and asked to work in the eastern city of Luoyang.

古文：值伊瀍仍岁歉食，淹滞曹不迁，省奉其微，困悴且甚。
现代文：正赶上伊水、湜水泛滥，连年欠收，皇甫湜又很长时间滞留在那里不得升迁。薪俸特别低，生活非常困顿愁苦。
English: It was just in time for the flooding of the Yishui and Shishui rivers, the harvest was poor for years on end, and the empress dowager stayed there for a long time and was not allowed to be promoted. Salaries were particularly low, and life was very difficult and sad.

古文：尝因积雪，门无行迹，庖突不烟。
现代文：一次，天降大雪，皇甫湜家门前连个脚印都没有，全家饿饭，厨房的烟囱都不冒烟。
English: Once, when heavy snow fell, there was not even a single footprint in front of the door of Wang Fuxuan's house. The whole family was hungry, and the chimney in the kitchen did not smoke.

古文：裴度时保厘洛宅，以美词厚币，辟为留守府从事。
现代文：当时，晋国公裴度任东都留守，在洛阳施行保民安政的政治措施。用高度的赞美、优厚的待遇，聘请皇甫湜为留守府的幕僚。
English: At that time, the governor of Jin Province, Bae Dongdu, stayed in Luoyang to implement political measures to ensure the safety of the people. With high praise and generous treatment, he hired Wang Fuxi as a staff member to stay in Luoyang.

古文：湜简率少礼，度亦优容之。
现代文：持甫湜简仆率直不拘礼仪，裴度对他也很优待宽容。
English: He was straightforward and did not care about etiquette, and Pei Du treated him with great tolerance.

古文：先是度讨淮西日，恩赐钜万，贮于集贤私第。
现代文：早年，裴度讨伐淮西叛乱有功，皇上赏赐给他价值许多万钱的礼品，贮放在集贤里的宅院中。
English: In the early years, Pei Du fought against the Huaixi Rebellion and achieved great success. The emperor rewarded him with gifts worth tens of thousands of yuan, which were stored in Jixianli's courtyard.

古文：度信浮图教，念其杀戮者众，恐贻其殃。
现代文：裴度信奉佛教，经常顾虑在征讨淮西叛军时杀人太多，会带来灾祸。
English: Pei Du believed in Buddhism, and often worried that killing too many people during the campaign against the Huaxi rebels would bring disaster.

古文：因舍讨淮叛所得，再修福先佛寺。
现代文：因此，他将这些钱财施舍给福先佛寺，让僧侣用这笔钱重修佛寺。
English: Therefore, he donated the money to the Fuxian Buddhist Temple, and asked the monks to use the money to rebuild the Buddhist temple.

古文：备极壮丽，就有日矣。
现代文：重修的福先佛寺，极为宏丽壮观。
English: The renovated Fuxian Buddhist Temple is extremely magnificent and spectacular.

古文：将至书于白居易，请为碑。
现代文：佛寺修好后，裴度正要写信请白居易为重建的佛寺写篇碑文记载这件事。
English: After the Buddhist temple was repaired, Baidu was about to write a letter asking Bai Juyi to write an inscription for the rebuilt Buddhist temple to record the matter.

古文：湜在座，忽发怒曰：近舍某而远征白，信获戾于门下矣。
现代文：当时，皇甫湜也在场。他忽然气恼地指责裴度说：我皇甫湜就在你身旁，你却写信请在远处的白居易给你写碑文。
English: At that time, the Empress Dowager was also present. He suddenly angrily rebuked Baidu, saying, "I, the Empress Dowager, am right next to you, but you wrote a letter to ask Bai Juyi, who is far away, to write an inscription for you.

古文：某文若方白之作，所谓宝琴瑶瑟而比之桑间濮上也。
现代文：我相信，一定是我违逆了你啊。我的文章如果跟白居易相比较，那么一个是阳春白雪，一个是下里巴人。
English: I believe that I must have disobeyed you. If my article is compared with Bai Juyi, then one is Yangchun Baixue, and the other is Jialiba.

古文：然何门不可曳长裾，某自此请长揖而退。
现代文：但是，为什么在你门下就容不得高贵的人呢？我现在就向你请求辞职归家。
English: But why do you not tolerate a noble person under your door? I now ask you to resign and return home.

古文：宾客无不惊栗。
现代文：在座的宾客没有人不惊恐慌悚。
English: There's not a guest in the house who isn't terrified.

古文：度婉词谢之，且曰：初不敢以仰烦长者，虑为大手笔见拒。
现代文：裴度委婉地向皇甫湜表示歉意，说：起初，我不好意思有劳老先生。考虑您是大手笔，怕遭到您的拒绝。
English: Pei Du euphemistically apologized to the Empress Dowager, saying: At first, I was embarrassed to have Mr. Lao. Considering you is a big deal, I am afraid of being rejected by you.

古文：今既尔，是所愿也。
现代文：现在既然您提出愿意撰写这篇碑文，这也是我的初衷啊！
English: Now that you have offered to write this inscription, that was my original intention!

古文：湜怒稍解，则请斗酒而归。
现代文：皇甫湜的怒火稍稍消融，向裴度要了一斗酒，便告辞回到家中。
English: The anger of the Emperor Fuxi melted a little, he asked Pei Du for a barrel of wine, then he left and returned home.

古文：至家，独饮其半，乘醉挥毫，其文立就。
现代文：一个人喝了半斗酒，乘着醉意挥笔撰写碑文，一气呵成。
English: One person drank half a bottle of wine and wrote the inscription with a drunken wave of the pen, all at once.

古文：又明日，洁本以献。
现代文：第二天抄写清楚后，送给裴度。
English: The next day, after the copy was clear, it was given to Pei Du.

古文：文思古謇，字复怪辟。
现代文：皇甫湜写的这篇碑文，文思奇僻、古奥，书法也怪诞邪僻。
English: This inscription, written by Emperor Fuxi, is eccentric and ancient, and the calligraphy is also bizarre and eccentric.

古文：度寻绎久之，不能分其句读。
现代文：裴度、忖度了好长时间也断不了句。最后，终于断句，弄明白了碑文。
English: For a long time, I couldn't break the sentence. Finally, I finally broke the sentence and figured out the inscription.

古文：毕叹曰：木玄虚，郭景纯江海之流！
现代文：他赞叹地说：真是木玄虚、郭景纯一类的隐居高士啊！
English: He said with admiration: "He really is a reclusive high-ranking official like Muxuan Hu and Guo Jingshun!

古文：因以宝车名马，缯采器玩，约千余缗，置书，遣小将就第酬之。
现代文：于是，备好宝车名马、古玩器皿和各种丝织品，价值约一百多万钱，并写了一封信，派一名小校送到皇甫湜家中。
English: As a result, he prepared luxury cars, famous horses, antique utensils and all kinds of silk fabrics, worth about one million yuan, and wrote a letter and sent a schoolboy to the home of Wang Fuxi.

古文：湜省书大怒，掷书于地，谓小将曰：寄谢侍中，何相待之薄也？
现代文：皇甫湜看完裴度给他的信后，大为恼怒，气愤地将信扔在地上，对小校说：请转告裴侍中，为什么这样亏待我啊？
English: After reading Pei Du's letter to him, the Empress Dowager was very angry. She angrily threw the letter on the ground and said to the schoolmaster, "Please tell the attendant Pei, why are you treating me so badly?"

古文：某之文，非常流之文也。曾与顾况为集序外，未尝造次许人。
现代文：我的文章不是一般的大路货，除了曾经给顾况写过集序外，还没有再为什么人写过。
English: My article is not an ordinary street goods, in addition to once having written a sequence for Gu Jiao, it has not been written by anyone else.

古文：今者请为此碑，盖受恩深厚耳。
现代文：现在裴侍中请我撰写这篇碑文，都是因为我受他的恩惠深厚啊。
English: Now I am being asked to write this epitaph because I am deeply indebted to him.

古文：其碑约三千字，一字三疋绢，更减五分钱不得。
现代文：这篇碑文约有三千字。每个字需付润笔费三疋绢，减少五分钱也不行。
English: This inscription is about three thousand words. Each word needs to pay a fee of three cents, and it is not possible to reduce it by five cents.

古文：小校既恐且怒，归具告之。
现代文：小校听了后既惊恐又愤怒，回到留守府中如实汇报给裴度。
English: After hearing this, the elementary school principal was both alarmed and angry, and returned to the government office to truthfully report to Pei Du.

古文：僚属列校，咸振腕愤悱，思脔其肉。
现代文：在场的下属与各位将校，都挥臂握拳，异常愤怒，纷纷叫嚷要将皇甫湜剁碎了吃肉。
English: The subordinates and officers present, all waving their arms and shaking their fists, were extremely angry, shouting one after another that they wanted to chop up the crown prince and eat his flesh.

古文：度闻笑曰：真奇才也。
现代文：裴度笑着说：真是奇才啊！
English: Pei Du smiled and said, "What a prodigy!

古文：立遣依数酬之。
现代文：立即派人按照皇甫湜提出的酬金数额，如数付给他。
English: Immediately send someone to pay him according to the amount of the honorarium proposed by the crown prince.

古文：自居守府正郎里第，辇负相望。
现代文：运载绢的车辆，自留守府衙到皇甫湜居住的正郎里，一辆挨着一辆。
English: The cars carrying the cocoons went from the left-behind palace to the palace where the emperor lived, one after the other.

古文：洛人聚观，比之雍绛泛舟之役。
现代文：全洛阳的人都走出家门观看这种奇观，就象观看绛车堵塞、舟船翻沉一样。
English: People from all over Luoyang came out of their homes to watch this spectacle, just like watching a train jam and a boat capsize.

古文：湜领受之无愧色。
现代文：皇甫湜欣然接受，一点没有羞愧的表示。
English: Empress Dowager Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：而卞急之性，独异于人。
现代文：皇甫湜性情急躁，是一般人所不具备的。
English: Empress Dowager Cixi was impatient, which is not common for ordinary people.

古文：尝为蜂螫手指，因大躁急。
现代文：一次，皇甫湜被蜂子螫了手指，于是大为躁怒。
English: Once, Empress Dowager Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：命奴仆暨里中小儿辈，箕敛蜂巢，购以善价。
现代文：让家中仆夫及邻里的小孩，将蜂巢取下来装在畚箕里，他用高价买下来。
English: He had the family servant and a neighbor's child take the hive down and put it in a cocoon, which he bought at a high price.

古文：俄顷山聚于庭，则命碎于砧儿，烂于杵臼，绞取津液。以酬其痛。
现代文：过了一会儿，所有的蜂子都飞聚在他家庭院中。于是，他又让家人仆夫将蜂捉住，在贴上、杵臼中砸烂捣碎，再将它们的汁液用布绞取出来，以解螫手之恨。
English: After a while, all the bees gathered in his courtyard, so he asked the family servant to catch the bees, crush them in a mortar and pestle, and then wring out their juice with a cloth to relieve the sting.

古文：又常命其子松，录诗数首。一字小误，诟詈且跃。
现代文：还有一次，皇甫湜让他儿子皇甫松抄录几首诗，发现有个字写得有些小错误，便蹦跳着大骂不止。
English: On another occasion, Emperor Fuxiong had his son, Emperor Fusong, transcribe several poems. When he discovered that there was a small mistake in one of the words, he jumped up and down and cursed.

古文：手杖不及，则啮腕血流。
现代文：他来不急用木棍打，就用牙将他儿子的手腕咬得直淌血。
English: He didn't hesitate to beat him with a wooden stick, and with his teeth he bit his son's wrist until it bled.

古文：其性褊急，皆若此。
现代文：皇甫湜的性情偏狭急躁，都象这样啊！
English: The narrow-minded and impetuous disposition of Emperor Fuxi is all like this!

古文：段文昌
现代文：段文昌
English: Duan Wenchang

古文：唐段相文昌性介狭。
现代文：唐朝时，宰相段文昌性情孤傲偏狭。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the prime minister, Duan Wenchang, was arrogant and narrow-minded.

古文：宴席宾客，有眉睫之失，必致怪讶。
现代文：在宴请宾客时，出现鼻子眉毛那么细小的漏洞。
English: While entertaining guests, a hole as small as a nose and eyebrows appeared.

古文：在西川，有进士薛大白，饮酒称名太多，明日遂不复召。
现代文：也会遭至他的责怪。在西川，有个叫薛大白的进士，喝酒时称呼人的名字过多，第二天设宴便不再请他来了。
English: In Saikawa, there was a priest named Xue Dabai who called people too many names when he was drinking, so the next day he was not invited to the banquet.

古文：李德裕
现代文：李德裕
English: Li Deyu

古文：刘禹锡唐太和中为宾客，时李德裕同分司东都。
现代文：唐文宗太和年间，刘禹锡任太子宾客，跟宰相李德裕同时兼任东都洛阳的分司。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Tang Wenzong, Liu Yuxi was a guest of the crown prince, and concurrently served as a sub-bureaucrat of Luoyang, the eastern capital, along with Prime Minister Li Deyu.

古文：禹锡因谒于德裕曰：近曾得白居易文集否？
现代文：借着这个机会，刘禹锡拜访了李德裕。问：近来，宰相可曾收到了白居易的文章吗？
English: Taking this opportunity, Liu Yuxi paid a visit to Li Deyu. Q: Has the Prime Minister received any articles by Bai Jueyi recently?

古文：德裕曰：累有相示，别令收贮，然未一披。
现代文：李德裕回答说：接连收到他送给我的文章，另外收存起来了，但是我始终没有看一眼。
English: Li Deyu replied, "I received the articles he sent me one after another and stored them separately, but I never took a look at them.

古文：今日为吾子览之。
现代文：今天拿给你看看吧。
English: Let me show it to you today.

古文：及取看，而箱笥盈溢，尘土蒙覆。
现代文：待到查找时，只见满满一书箱全是白居易的诗稿，上面履盖着一层厚厚的尘土。
English: When I looked for it, I saw a bookcase full of Bai Juyi's poetry manuscripts, covered with a thick layer of dust.

古文：既启而复卷之，谓禹锡曰：吾于此人不足久矣，其文章何必览焉。
现代文：李德裕让仆人找开书箱后立即又让将白居易的文稿收起来，并对刘禹锡说：我很长时间就认为这个人没什么值得称道的。他的文章你又何必读呢。
English: Li Deyu asked the servant to find and open the bookcase, and immediately asked him to put away Bai Juyi's manuscript, and said to Liu Yuxi: I have long thought that this person is nothing worthy of praise. Why do you have to read his article?

古文：但恐回吾精绝之心，所以不欲看览。
现代文：对于白居易的文章，我怕辜负了我的一片精妙之心，所以我不想看。
English: As for Bai Juyi's article, I'm afraid I've failed my delicate heart, so I don't want to read it.

古文：其抑才也如此。
现代文：李德裕身为宰相，就这样压抑人才啊！
English: Li Deyu, as prime minister, suppresses talent like this!

古文：初文宗命德裕朝中朋党，首以杨虞卿、牛僧孺为言。
现代文：唐文宗李昂继位之初，重用李德裕的朝中朋党时，首先以杨虞卿、牛僧儒为重。
English: At the beginning of Tang Wenzong Liang's succession to the throne, when he made heavy use of Li Deyu's imperial and Chinese pals, he first focused on Yang Yuqing and Niu Soju.

古文：杨、牛即白之密友也。
现代文：杨虞卿、牛僧儒，是白居易的亲密朋友。
English: Yang Yuqing, a cow monk, is a close friend of Bai Juyi.

古文：其不引翼，皆如此类。
现代文：他们都不引荐扶持白居易，都是一路货色啊！
English: They do not recommend supporting Baijuyi, they are all products!

古文：李潘
现代文：李潘
English: Li Pan

古文：唐礼部侍郎李潘尝缀李贺歌诗，为之集序，未成。
现代文：唐朝人礼部侍郎李潘，曾经搜集编纂过李贺诗歌集，并想给这本诗歌集撰写序文，可惜没有办成这件事。
English: Li Pan, an attendant of the Tang Dynasty Ceremonial Department, once collected and compiled the Li He Poetry Collection, and wanted to write a preface to this poetry collection, but unfortunately did not succeed in doing this.

古文：知贺有表兄，与贺笔砚之交者。
现代文：李潘得知李贺有一位表兄，李贺生前跟他有文学方面的交往。
English: Li Pan learned that Li He had a cousin, with whom Li He had literary contacts before his death.

古文：召之见，讬以搜访所遗。
现代文：于是召见这位表兄，委托他代为访察搜集李贺的遗作。
English: So he summoned this cousin and commissioned him to collect Li He's last works on his behalf.

古文：其人敬谢，且请曰：某盖记其所为，亦常见其多点窜者。
现代文：该人恭恭敬敬地答应了，并表示谢意。还请求说：李贺所有的诗作我都知道，还常常见他对自己的诗作进行反复修改。
English: The person politely and respectfully agreed and expressed his gratitude. He also requested that: I know all of Li He's poems, and I often see him repeatedly revise his poems.

古文：请得所缉者视之，当为改正。
现代文：请您将所搜集编辑的李贺诗作给我看看，我可以将其中谬误的地方改正过来。
English: Please show me the collected and edited Li He poems, and I can correct the fallacies in them.

古文：潘喜，并付之。弥年绝迹。潘怒，复召诘之。
现代文：李潘很是生气，又将李贺的这位表兄召见来，责问他怎么一点消息也没有？
English: Li Pan was very angry and summoned this cousin of Li He to see him again, scolding him for not having any news.

古文：其人曰：某与贺中外，自少多同处。
现代文：这位表兄回答说：我与李贺是表兄弟，从小就常在一起。
English: The cousin replied, "Li He and I are cousins and have been together since childhood.

古文：恨其傲忽，尝思报之。
现代文：我非常忌恨他为人傲慢，看不起人，经常想报复他。
English: I hate him very much for being arrogant and looking down on people, and I often want to take revenge on him.

古文：所得歌诗，兼旧有者，一时投溷中矣。
现代文：你交给我的那些诗歌，连同我原有的李贺的诗作，让我一块儿扔进厕所里去了。
English: Those poems you gave me, along with my original Li He poems, I threw them into the toilet.

古文：潘大怒，叱出之，嗟恨良久。
现代文：李潘听了后非常气愤，大声叱斥他出去。过了很长时间，他还为这件事感到遗憾和懊悔。
English: After hearing this, Li Pan was very angry and loudly scolded him to go out. After a long time, he still felt regret and remorse for this matter.

古文：故贺歌什传流者少也。
现代文：这也是李贺诗歌流传下来很少的缘故啊！
English: This is also the reason why very few of Li He's poems have been passed down!

古文：卢罕
现代文：卢罕
English: Luhan

古文：唐李讷除浙东，路由淮楚，时卢罕为郡守。
现代文：唐朝人李讷被授予浙东节度史，在上任的途中经由淮楚，当时是卢罕在那儿任郡守。
English: Li Ne, a member of the Tang Dynasty, was awarded the East Zhejiang Festival History. On his way to the post, he passed through Huaichu, where Lu Han was the county governor at the time.

古文：讷既到，适值远日，罕命设将送素膳于讷。
现代文：李讷到淮楚时，正逢远日，卢罕让设将为李讷送去素餐，李讷刚一看到时非常高兴。
English: When Li Ne arrived in Huai Chu, it was a sunny day. Lu Hanzhen would send Li Ne a vegetarian meal. Li Ne was very happy when she first saw it.

古文：讷初见忻然，迨览状。乃将名与讷父讳同。
现代文：等到看了卢罕附业的信后，才知到这个给他送饭食的设将的名子与自己父亲的名字相同，非常生气。
English: After reading Lu Han Zuye's letter, he was very angry to find out that the name of the designated person who brought him the meal was the same as his father's name.

古文：讷，建子也，雅性褊躁，大怒。
现代文：第二天一早，就命人开船离开淮楚。
English: The next morning, he ordered the boat to leave Huaichu.

古文：翌日仅旦，已命鼓棹前去。罕闻之，亟命驾而往，舟且行矣。
现代文：李讷，是李建的儿子，性情高雅而又偏狭急躁，卢罕听到李讷不告而辞的消息后，立即命人备好车马前往码头拜见李讷。
English: Li Ne, the son of Li Jian, is elegant and narrow-minded. After hearing the news of Li Ne's resignation, Lu Han immediately ordered someone to prepare a car and horse to go to the dock to meet Li Ne.

古文：罕知其故，逊谢良久，且言所由以不谨，笞之。
现代文：卢罕赶到码头时，李讷的官船正要开始。卢罕问明李讷不辞而别的缘由后，一再恭顺地表示歉意，并且说都是由于自己不细心造成的，一定处罚那位设将。
English: When Lu Han arrived at the dock, Li Ne's official ship was about to start. Lu Han asked Li Ne for another reason, and he repeatedly apologized, and said that it was all caused by his carelessness, and he would definitely punish the designer.

古文：讷去意益坚。
现代文：然而李讷坚决要走。
English: However, Li Ne is determined to go.

古文：罕度不可留，怒曰：大小人多名建，公何怒之深也！遂拂衣而去。
现代文：卢罕意识到怎么也挽留不住李讷了，气愤地说：不论职位高低、尊卑，很多人的名字都叫建，你为什么发这么大的火呀？说完，一掸衣袖，转身离去。
English: Lu Han realized that he couldn't hold back Li Ne, and angrily said, "Regardless of the position, high or low, many people's names are Jian. Why did you make such a big fire?" After saying this, he rolled up his sleeves and turned away.

古文：王珙
现代文：王珙
English: Wang Yao

古文：唐给事中王柷，名家子，以刚鲠自任。
现代文：唐朝末年，给事中王柷，出身于显赫之家，以刚直耿介自诩。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, Wang Qian, who was born into a prominent family, distinguished himself by his straightforwardness.

古文：黄寇前，典常州。
现代文：黄巢起兵叛乱前，在常州为官。
English: Before the Huang Chao rebellion, he was an official in Changzhou.

古文：京国乱离，盘桓江湖，甚有时望。
现代文：黄巢军攻陷京都长安期间，流落在民间，很有些名望。
English: During the fall of Kyoto and Chang'an by the Yellow Nest Army, he was exiled among the people and gained some fame.

古文：及诏征回，路经于陕。
现代文：待到朝廷征诏他回京时，途经陕西。
English: When he returned to Beijing after receiving the imperial edict, he passed through Shaanxi Province.

古文：时王珙为帅，颇凶暴。
现代文：当时，王珙为陕西的军政长官，该人特别凶狠残暴。
English: At that time, Wang Qi was the military and political commissar of Shaanxi, and he was particularly vicious and cruel.

古文：然柷将来必居廊庙，亦加礼待之。
现代文：然而，王珙考虑到王柷此次应召回京一定在朝中担任重要职务，因此更加以礼相待。
English: However, considering that Wang Hui will certainly hold an important position in the Korean government when he is recalled to Beijing this time, Wang Hui treated him with more courtesy.

古文：柷鄙其人，殊不降接。
现代文：王柷鄙视王珙为人，极不愿意屈尊接受他的款待。
English: Wang Yao despised Wang Yao as a person and was extremely unwilling to condescend to accept his hospitality.

古文：珙乃于内厅盛张宴席，列妓乐。
现代文：王珙在内厅摆设丰盛的宴席来招待王柷，并专门为他准备了乐妓献演歌舞。
English: Wang Yao was invited to a sumptuous banquet in the inner hall, and a geisha was specially prepared to perform a song and dance for him.

古文：敛容白柷曰：某虽鄙人，叨忝旌钺，今日多幸，遇轩盖经过。
现代文：席间，王珙恭恭敬敬地对王柷说：我王珙虽然是个粗鄙的人，叨忝统领陕军，今天得遇给事，途经蔽地深感荣幸。
English: During the banquet, Wang Yujun respectfully said to Wang Xuan: Although I, Wang Yujun, am a rude person, I am the commander of the Shaanxi army. Today, I have to deal with something, and I am deeply honored.

古文：苟不弃末宗，愿厕子侄之列。
现代文：若不嫌弃我这个末代族人，愿为给事叔、侄相称。
English: If you don't mind abandoning me, a member of the last generation of the tribe, I would like to be treated like an uncle or nephew.

古文：柷坚不许。
现代文：王柷听了后，坚决不应允。
English: After listening to Wang Qian, he resolutely did not agree.

古文：珙勃然作色曰：给事王程有限，不敢淹留。
现代文：王珙勃然大怒。说：王给事奉命回京的时间有限，我王某人不敢挽留。
English: Wang Yao flew into a rage. He said, "The time given by the king for me to return to Beijing is limited. I, the king, do not dare to retain someone.

古文：俄而罢宴，命将吏速请王给事离馆。
现代文：说罢，立即命人撤去酒宴，并让人催促王柷迅速离开驿馆。
English: Having said that, he immediately ordered someone to remove the wine banquet, and had someone urge Wang Yao to quickly leave the Yingguan.

古文：暗授意旨，并令害之，一家悉投黄河，尽取其囊橐。
现代文：待王柷离开驿馆后，王珙暗中授意手下将士尾随王柷。在王柷渡过黄河时将他一家人杀死投入河中，并将王柷所携带的行里包裹尽数取回。
English: After Wang Yao left the Miao Pavilion, Wang Yao secretly ordered his men to follow Wang Yao. When Wang Yao crossed the Yellow River, he killed his family and threw them into the river, and retrieved all the packages Wang Yao was carrying.

古文：以舟行没溺闻奏，朝庭多故，舍而不问。
现代文：之后，王珙假称王柷渡黄河船翻落水淹死在水中，上报朝廷。当时，朝廷混乱多事，没有时间查询这件事。
English: Later, Wang Hui reported to the imperial court that Wang Hui drowned in the Yellow River after his boat capsized. At that time, the imperial court was in turmoil and had no time to investigate the matter.

古文：时柷有一子，行至襄州，亦无故投井而死。
现代文：王柷有一个儿子，在返京途中走到襄州时，也无缘无故地被人投入井中而死。
English: Wang Yao had a son who was also thrown into a well for no reason and died when he walked to Xiangzhou on his way back to Beijing.

