古文：赵煚赵煚，字贤通，天水西人也。
现代文：赵煚字贤通，天水西人。
English: Zhao Xi Zi Xian Tong, Tianshui Westerner.

古文：祖超宗，魏河东太守。
现代文：祖父赵超宗，魏国的河东太守。
English: His grandfather, Zhao Chaozong, was the governor of the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：父仲懿，尚书左丞。
现代文：父亲赵仲懿，尚书左丞。
English: His father, Zhao Zhongyao, was Shangshu Zuorong.

古文：煚少孤，养母至孝。
现代文：赵煚小时父亲就去世了，他侍奉母亲很孝顺。
English: Zhao Yao's father died when he was very young, and he served his mother very dutifully.

古文：年十四，有人盗伐其父墓中树者，煚对之号恸，因执送官。
现代文：十四岁，有人盗伐他父亲坟墓上的树，赵煚对墓痛哭，把伐木者扭送到官府。
English: At the age of fourteen, someone was felling trees on his father's grave. Zhao Yao cried bitterly at the grave and dragged the feller to the government office.

古文：见魏右仆射周惠达，长揖不拜，自述孤苦，涕泗交集，惠达为之陨涕，叹息者久之。
现代文：他见了魏国的右仆射周惠达，只作揖，不下拜，自述孤苦，涕泪交集，周惠达为之落泪，叹息很久。
English: When he saw Zhou Huida, the right-hand man of Wei, shot, he did nothing but grovel, he did not bow down, he told of his loneliness, and his eyes were filled with tears. Zhou Huida shed tears and sighed for a long time.

古文：及长，深沉有器局，略涉书史。
现代文：长大后，赵煚深沉有才，略涉书史。
English: After he grew up, Zhao Wei was a deep thinker with talent, and he was slightly involved in the history of books.

古文：周太祖引为相府参军事。
现代文：北周太祖任他为相府参军事。
English: The great-grandfather of the Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed him as the prefect to participate in the military.

古文：寻从破洛阳。
现代文：不久随军攻破洛阳。
English: Soon the army broke through Luoyang.

古文：及太祖班师，煚请留抚纳亡叛，太祖从之。
现代文：周太祖班师时，赵煚请求留在洛阳招降纳叛，太祖听了他的。
English: When Zhou Taizu was in charge of the division, Zhao Wei asked to stay in Luoyang to recruit and accept rebels, and Taizu listened to him.

古文：煚于是帅所领与齐人前后五战，斩郡守、镇将、县令五人，虏获甚众，以功封平定县男，邑三百户。
现代文：赵煚于是率部与北齐军前后打了五仗，斩北齐的郡守、镇将、县令五个人，俘虏很多北齐军。赵煚因功封为平定县男爵，食邑三百户。
English: Zhao Qi then led his troops to fight five battles with the Northern Qi army, killing five county governors, town generals, and county magistrates of Northern Qi, and capturing many Northern Qi troops. Zhao Qi was awarded the title of Baron of Pingding County, with 300 households.

古文：累转中书侍郎。
现代文：累功提升到中书侍郎。
English: For his efforts, he was promoted to the position of Chusho-sajiro.

古文：闵帝受禅，迁陕州刺史。
现代文：北周孝闵帝受禅登基，赵煚调任陕州刺史。
English: The Northern Zhou Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, and Zhao Jun was transferred to the post of the governor of Shaanxi Province.

古文：蛮酋向天王聚众作乱，以兵攻信陵、秭归。
现代文：蛮人的酋长向天王聚众作乱，率兵进攻信陵、秭归。
English: The chiefs of the barbarians rioted against the heavenly king and led their soldiers to attack Shunling, but were driven back.

古文：煚勒所部五百人，出其不意，袭击破之，二郡获全。
现代文：赵煚率领所部五百人，出其不意，袭击破敌，二郡得以保全。
English: Zhao Wei led 500 people of the headquarters, and unexpectedly attacked and defeated the enemy, and the two counties were preserved.

古文：时周人于江南岸置安蜀城以御陈，属霖雨数旬，城颓者百余步。
现代文：当时北周人在江南岸建安蜀城以防御陈国，刚好下了几十天雨，城墙垮了一百多步。
English: At that time, the Northern Zhou people built Anshu City on the south bank of the Yangtze River to defend Chen Guo. It just rained for dozens of days, and the city wall collapsed more than a hundred steps.

古文：蛮酋郑南乡叛，引陈将吴明彻欲掩安蜀。
现代文：蛮人酋长郑南乡背叛，带领陈国将领吴明彻，想袭击安蜀城。
English: The barbarian chieftain Zheng Nanxiang betrayed and led Wu Mingcher, the general of Chen Guo, to attack Anshu City.

古文：议者皆观煚益修守御，煚曰： 不然，吾自有以安之。 
现代文：大伙都劝赵煚增修防御，赵煚说： 不然，我自有办法安定安蜀城。 
English: Everyone advised Zhao Wei to increase and improve the defense. Zhao Wei said, "Otherwise, I have my own way to stabilize Anshu City."

古文：乃遣使说诱江外生蛮向武阳，令乘虚掩袭所居，获其南乡父母妻子。
现代文：于是派人引诱、劝说江外的生蛮向武阳，让他乘虚袭击郑南乡所居，俘虏了郑南乡的父母妻儿。
English: So they sent someone to lure and persuade the barbarians from outside the river to Wuyang, and let him use the false attack on the residence of Zhengnan Township to capture the parents, wives and children of Zhengnan Township.

古文：南乡闻之，其党各散，陈兵遂退。
现代文：郑南乡听说此事，其部下各自散开了，陈国兵马于是退去。
English: When Zheng Nanxiang heard about this, his subordinates dispersed, and Chen Guo's soldiers withdrew.

古文：明年，吴明彻屡为寇患，煚勒兵御之，前后十六战，每挫其锋。获陈裨将覃冏、王足子、吴朗等三人，斩首百六十级。
现代文：次年，吴明彻屡屡进犯，赵煚领兵防御他，前后打了十六仗，每次都挫败吴明彻军队的锋锐，俘虏陈国偏将覃礒、王足子、吴朗等三人，斩首一百六十级。
English: The following year, Wu Mingche repeatedly attacked, Zhao Wei led troops to defend against him, fought sixteen battles back and forth, and defeated the sharpness of Wu Mingche's army every time. Chen Guozhong captured three people, including Gong, Wang Yuzi, and Wu Lang, and beheaded them at the 160th level.

古文：以功授开府仪同三司，迁荆州总管长史。
现代文：赵煚因功授开府仪同三司，调任荆州总管长史。
English: Zhao Hao was conferred with the honorary title of opening the prefecture and the three departments, and was transferred to the post of Jingzhou chief administrator.

古文：入为民部中大夫。
现代文：后入京为民部中大夫。
English: After that, he entered the capital as a junior doctor of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：武帝出兵巩、洛，欲收齐河南之地。
现代文：北周武帝出兵巩、洛，欲攻占北齐黄河南岸的地盘。
English: The Northern Zhouwu Emperor dispatched troops to Gong and Luo in an attempt to capture territory on the southern bank of the Yellow River in Northern Qi.

古文：煚谏曰： 河南洛阳，四面受敌，纵得之，不可以守。
现代文：赵煚劝谏说： 河南的洛阳，四面受敌，即使得到了它，也不能守住。
English: Zhao Zhe said: Luoyang in Henan Province is surrounded by enemies on all sides, and even if it is captured, it cannot be held.

古文：请从河北，直指太原，倾其巢穴，可一举以定。 
现代文：请从黄河北边去，直指太原，倾覆他的巢穴，可以一举而定北齐。 
English: Please go from the north side of the Yellow River, straight to Taiyuan, overturn his lair, you can determine the north at a stroke.

古文：帝不纳，师竟无功。
现代文：武帝不听，最后无功而还。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu did not adopt it, and the great army finally had no merit.

古文：寻从上柱国于翼率众数万，自三鸦道以伐陈，克陈十九城而还。
现代文：继而赵煚随上柱国于翼率部几万人，从三雅道以讨伐陈国，攻占陈国十九城，然后回国。
English: Subsequently, Zhao Wei followed Shangju Guo and led tens of thousands of people from Sanya Road to fight against Chen Guo, captured nineteen cities in Chen Guo, and then returned to China.

古文：以谗毁，功不见录，除益州总管长史。
现代文：因为有人上谗言害他，其大功竟然不被赏赐，只授他益州总管长史。
English: Because someone slandered him, his great service was not rewarded at all, and he was only awarded the title of Governor-General of Yizhou.

古文：未几，入为天官司会，累迁御正上大夫。
现代文：不久，调入京师当天官司会，累次升迁到御正上大夫。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the Beijing Division of the Supreme People's Procuratorate on the same day, and was repeatedly promoted to Imperial Chief Physician.

古文：煚与宗伯斛斯徵素不协，徵后出为齐州刺史，坐事下狱，自知罪重，遂逾狱而走。
现代文：赵煚与宗伯斛斯征一向关系不好，斛斯征后来出京当齐州刺史，因罪下狱，他自知罪重难赦，于是越狱逃跑了。
English: Zhao Hong and Zongbo Hongsheng have always had a bad relationship. Hongsheng later went to Beijing to assassinate Qi Zhou and was sent to prison for the crime. He knew that his crime was unforgivable, so he escaped from prison.

古文：帝大怒，购之甚急。
现代文：皇上大怒，悬赏急急捉拿他。
English: The emperor was furious and offered a reward for his quick capture.

古文：煚上密奏曰： 徵自以负罪深重，惧死遁逃，若不北窜匈奴，则南投吴越。
现代文：赵煚秘密上奏说： 斛斯征自以为罪恶深重，怕死逃走，如不北窜匈奴，就会南投吴越。
English: Zhao Yao secretly recorded: "Shishi Zheng believed that he had committed a serious crime and was afraid to run away. If he did not flee to the north, he would go south to Wuyue.

古文：徵虽愚陋，久历清显，奔彼敌国，无益圣朝。
现代文：斛斯征虽然愚笨，但他久任清显之官，因而知道跑到敌国去，无益于圣朝。
English: Although Xizeng was stupid, he had been a high-ranking official for a long time, so he knew that running away to an enemy country would not benefit the Holy Dynasty.

古文：今者炎旱为灾，可因兹大赦。 
现代文：现在旱灾严重，可因此大赦天下。 
English: Now the drought is serious, so it can be forgiven to the world.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇上听从他的。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：徵赖而获免，煚卒不言。
现代文：斛斯征因此免于一死，赵煚到最后都不说出实情。
English: As a result, Zhao Shizheng was spared from death, and Zhao Yao did not tell the truth until the end.

古文：高祖为丞相，加上开府，复拜天官都司会。
现代文：隋高祖为北周丞相时，加授赵煚为上开府，又授他为天官都司会。
English: When Sui Gaozu was the Minister of Northern Zhou Dynasty, Zhao Jun was awarded the title of Shangkaifu, and he was also awarded the title of Tiankangtousi.

古文：俄迁大宗伯。
现代文：不久升他为大宗伯。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of grand patriarch.

古文：及践阼，煚授玺绂，进位大将军，赐爵金城郡公，邑二千五百户，拜相州刺史。
现代文：高祖登基时，赵煚授高祖皇帝玉玺绶带。赵煚升为大将军，赐爵位为金城郡公，食邑二千五百户，拜授相州刺史。
English: When Gaozu ascended to the throne, Zhao Jun awarded Emperor Gaozu the jade sash. Zhao Jun was promoted to general, given the title of Jincheng County, 2,500 households, and taught the history of Xiangzhou.

古文：朝廷以煚晓习故事，征拜尚书右仆射。
现代文：朝廷因赵煚通晓礼仪故事，调他当尚书右仆射。
English: Due to Zhao Jun's familiarity with etiquette stories, the imperial court promoted him to the post of imperial secretary.

古文：视事未几，以忤旨，寻出为陕州刺史，俄转冀州刺史，甚有威德。
现代文：管事不久，因忤逆圣旨，调出京师当陕州刺史，继而转任冀州刺史。在州里，赵煚很有恩威。
English: Not long after taking office, he was recalled from Beijing to serve as the governor of Shaanxi Province, and then he was transferred to the governor of Jizhou Province. In Jizhou Province, Zhao Wei was very popular.

古文：煚尝有疾，百姓奔驰，争为祈祷，其得民情如此。
现代文：赵煚曾生病，百姓奔走，争着为他祈祷，他就是这样深得民心。
English: Zhao Wei was once ill, and the people rushed to pray for him. This is how he won the hearts of the people.

古文：冀州谷薄，市井多奸诈，煚为铜斗铁尺，置之于肆，百姓便之。
现代文：冀州民俗薄巧，市井上多有奸诈，赵煚制造铜斗、铁尺，放在街上，百姓以此为方便。
English: The folk customs of Jizhou are delicate, and there is a lot of treachery in the inner city. Zhao Wei made copper buckets and iron rulers and placed them on the streets, which was convenient for the people.

古文：上闻而嘉焉，颁告天下，以为常法。
现代文：皇上听了嘉奖他，并颁告天下，以此为常法。
English: The emperor listened and commended him, and announced to the world that this was the norm.

古文：尝有人盗煚田中蒿者，为吏所执。
现代文：曾有偷盗赵煚田里的蒿草的，被官吏抓住。
English: Officials once caught a thief who was cutting grass in Zhao Ye's field.

古文：煚曰： 此乃刺史不能宣风化，彼何罪也。 
现代文：赵煚说： 这是因为我这个刺史不能宣传教化，他有什么罪过？ 
English: Zhao Wei said: This is because I, as a historian, cannot propagandize and enlighten. What is his fault?

古文：慰谕而遣之，令人载蒿一车以赐盗者。盗者愧恧，过于重刑。
现代文：安慰他而放了他。赵煚让人满载一车蒿草送给为盗者，盗者惭愧至极，比受重刑还难受。
English: After consoling him, she let him go. Zhao Wei had a cart full of rushes given to the thief. The thief was so ashamed that he was more upset than if he had been given a heavy sentence.

古文：其以德化民，皆此类也。
现代文：他用德仁教化民众，大多像这样。
English: He uses Naruhito to educate the people, mostly like this.

古文：上幸洛阳，煚来朝，上劳之曰： 冀州大籓，民用殷实，卿之为政，深副朕怀。 
现代文：皇上巡幸洛阳，赵煚来朝拜，皇上慰劳他说： 冀州是个大地方，人民很富庶。你为政，很符合我的心意。 
English: When the emperor was on a tour of Luoyang, Zhao Wei came to pay homage. The emperor consoled him, saying, "Jizhou is a big place, and the people are very rich. Your politics are very much in line with my heart.

古文：开皇十九年卒，时年六十八。
现代文：赵煚开皇十九年去世，时年六十八岁。
English: Zhao Junkai died in the 19th year of the emperor, at the age of 68.

古文：子义臣嗣，官至太子洗马。后同杨谅反，诛。
现代文：他儿子赵义臣继承爵禄，官至太子洗马，后与杨谅造反，被杀。
English: His son, Zhao Yichen, inherited the peerage and rose to the rank of crown prince. He later rebelled against Yang Yuanzhong and was killed.

古文：○赵芬赵芬，字士茂，天水西人也。
现代文：赵芬字士茂，天水西人。
English: Zhao Fen Zi Shimo, Tianshui Westerner.

古文：父演，周秦州刺史。
现代文：父亲赵演，北周的秦州刺史。
English: His father, Zhao Yeng, was the Qin State Governor of the Northern Zhou Dynasty.

古文：芬少有辩智，颇涉经史。
现代文：赵芬少有辩才，很读了一些经史方面的书。
English: Zhao Fen had little ability to debate and read a lot of books on history.

古文：周太祖引为相府铠曹参军，历记室，累迁熊州刺史。
现代文：北周太祖任他为相府铠曹参军，历任记室，累次升迁到熊州刺史。
English: The great-grandfather of the Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed him as the prefect of Xizhao to join the army, and he was promoted successively to Xizhou.

古文：抚纳降附，得二千户，加开府仪同三司。
现代文：他招纳投降的，安抚归顺的，得到了二千户人口。加授他开府仪同三司。
English: He recruited those who surrendered, pacified those who surrendered, and obtained a population of two thousand households. He was also awarded the ceremony of opening the government and three divisions.

古文：大冢宰宇文护召为中外府掾，俄迁吏部下大夫。
现代文：大冢宰宇文护召他为中外府掾，他不久又升任吏部下大夫。
English: He was called by the grand eunuch, Uwen, to serve as the vice-governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, and was soon promoted to the position of doctor under the officials.

古文：芬性强济，所居之职，皆有声绩。
现代文：赵芬生性强干有才，不管干什么，都有政绩。
English: Zhao Fen is a strong-willed and talented person. No matter what he does, he has political achievements.

古文：武帝亲总万机，拜内史下大夫，转少御正。
现代文：北周武帝亲总万机后，授他为内史下大夫，后转任少御正。
English: After the Northern Zhouwu Emperor personally bestowed him with the title of doctor of internal history, he was later transferred to the post of Shao Gongzheng.

古文：芬明习故事，每朝廷有所疑议，众不能决者，芬辄为评断，莫不称善。
现代文：赵芬熟悉典章制度，朝廷每次有疑问，众人议论，不能决断的，赵芬就为之评断，没有不说好的。
English: Zhao Fen is familiar with the award system. Every time the imperial court has doubts, the people discuss, and can't decide, Zhao Fen makes a judgment.

古文：后为司会，申国公李穆之讨齐也，引为行军长史，封淮安县男，邑五百户。
现代文：他后来当司会。申国公李穆征讨北齐时，引赵芬为行军长史，封他为淮安县男爵，食邑五百户。
English: Later, he became the chairman of the committee. When Li Mu, the petitioner of the state, went to the north of Qi to collect taxes, he cited Zhao Fen as a long marching history, and made him a baron of Huai'an County, with 500 households.

古文：复出为淅州刺史，转东京小宗伯，镇洛阳。
现代文：又出京为淅州刺史，转任东京小宗伯，镇守洛阳。
English: He also went to Beijing to become the governor of Zhangzhou, and was transferred to the post of Tokyo Shosonbaku, and became the governor of Luoyang.

古文：高祖为丞相，尉迥与司马消难阴谋往来，芬察知之，密白高祖。
现代文：隋高祖为北周丞相时，尉迟迥与司马消难阴谋来往，赵芬觉察到了，秘密告诉高祖。
English: When Sui Gaozu was the minister of North Zhoucheng, he and Sima were in contact. Zhao Fen noticed this and told Gaozu in secret.

古文：由是深见亲委，迁东京左仆射，进爵郡公。
现代文：因此深被重用，升为东京左仆射，晋爵位为郡公。
English: As a result, he was reused, promoted to Tokyo Zashuke, and given the title of County Commissioner.

古文：开皇初，罢东京官，拜尚书左仆射，与郢国公王谊修律令。
现代文：开皇初，罢东京官职，授为尚书左仆射，与郢国公王谊一起，起草法律。
English: At the beginning of the Emperor's reign, he was given an official post in Tokyo, and was given the title of Shangshu Zuojiao, and drafted laws together with the princes and queens of the state.

古文：俄兼内史令，上甚信任之。
现代文：继而兼任内史令，高祖很信任他。
English: Subsequently, he also held the post of Inner Historian, and Gaozu trusted him very much.

古文：未几，以老病出拜蒲州刺史，加金紫光禄大夫，仍领关东运漕，赐钱百万、粟五千石而遣之。
现代文：不久，他因老病，出京任蒲州刺史，加授为金紫光禄大夫，仍兼管关东的漕运，赐他钱上百万，粮食五千石。
English: Soon, due to an old illness, he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Puzhou, and was awarded the title of Gold, Purple, and Gold Doctor. He was also in charge of the Kanto's rowing. He was given millions of money and five thousand koku of grain.

古文：仲宗迁南郡丞，元楷超拜江都郡丞，兼领江都宫使。
现代文：几年后，赵芬上表请求退休，被调回京师。赐他二马轺车、几杖被子，让他回家。
English: A few years later, Zhao Fen requested retirement and was transferred back to the Beijing Division. He was given a two-horse carriage and several quilts to let him go home.

古文：○杨尚希
现代文：皇太子又送他巾帔。
English: The crown prince also gave him a handkerchief.

古文：杨尚希，弘农人也。
现代文：几年后去世。皇上派人吊唁，鸿胪卿监护丧事。杨尚希，弘农人。
English: A few years later, he passed away. The emperor sent a condolence letter, and Hongyuqing oversaw the funeral. Yang Shangxi, a Hongnong man.

古文：祖真，魏天水太守。
现代文：祖父杨真，魏国天水太守。
English: Grandfather Yang Zhen, Emperor Tianshui of Wei.

古文：父承宾，商、直、淅三州刺史。
现代文：父亲杨承宾，商、直、淅三州刺史。
English: His father, Yang Chengbin, was a merchant, diplomat and historian of the Three Provinces.

古文：尚希龆龀而孤。
现代文：尚希很小就成了孤儿。
English: Shangxi was orphaned at a young age.

古文：年十一，辞母请受业长安。
现代文：十一岁时，请求辞别母亲，到长安学习。
English: At the age of eleven, he asked to leave his mother and study in Chang'an.

古文：涿郡卢辩见而异之，令入太学，专精不倦，同辈皆共推伏。
现代文：涿郡人卢辩见了他，很惊异，让他到太学学习。他专心学习，不知疲倦，同学们都很推重他。
English: Lu, a resident of Handan County, was surprised to see him and asked him to study at Taishu. He studied hard and tirelessly, and his classmates were very impressed with him.

古文：周太祖尝亲临释奠，尚希时年十八，令讲《孝经》，词旨可观。
现代文：北周太祖曾经亲自到太学行尊师之礼，杨尚希当时十八岁。太祖让他讲《孝经》，其言辞和义理都不错。
English: Yang Shangxi was 18 years old when the Northern Zhou Emperor personally came to Taigaku to pay homage to his teacher. The Emperor asked him to recite the "Book of Filial Piety," and his words and principles were good.

古文：太祖奇之，赐姓普六茹氏，擢为国子博士。
现代文：太祖很惊奇，赐他姓普六茹，提拔他当国子博士。
English: The great-grandfather was very surprised, gave him the surname of Pruchu, and promoted him to be a doctor of the country.

古文：累转舍人。
现代文：累次升迁，到转任舍人。
English: He was repeatedly promoted and transferred to the position of a shepherd.

古文：仕明、武世，历太学博士、太子宫尹、计部中大夫，赐爵高都县侯，东京司宪中大夫。
现代文：尚希历仕北周明帝、武帝两代，历任太学博士、太子宫尹、计部中大夫，赐爵位为高都县侯爵，任东京司宪中大夫。
English: Shangxi served the Northern Zhou Ming Emperor and Emperor Wu for two generations, successively held the posts of Doctor of Theology, Prince Gongyin, and Junior Doctor of the Ministry of Statistics, was given the title of Marquis of Gaodu County, and served as a Junior Doctor of the Tokyo Constitutional Court.

古文：宣帝时，令尚希抚慰山东、河北，至相州而帝崩，与相州总管尉迥发丧于馆。
现代文：周宣帝时，令杨尚希安抚华山以东、黄河以北地区。他到达相州，宣帝去世了，与相州总管尉迟迥在管舍发丧。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuan of Zhou, Yang Shangxi was ordered to pacify the regions east of Mount Huashan and north of the Yellow River. When he arrived in Xiangzhou, Emperor Xuan died, and he and the chief lieutenant of Xiangzhou were buried in the governor's residence.

古文：尚希出谓左右曰： 蜀公哭不哀而视不安，将有他计。
现代文：尚希出来对左右说： 蜀公尉迟迥，哭帝而不哀，眼神又不安，将有其他计谋。
English: Shang Xi came out and said to the left and right: Shu Gongfei is tardy, crying but not sad, and his eyes are uneasy. He will have other plans.

古文：吾不去，将及于难。 
现代文：我不走，将会遭难。 
English: If I don't go, I'll be in trouble.

古文：遂夜中从捷径而遁。
现代文：于是夜里走捷径而逃走。
English: So they took a shortcut in the night and fled.

古文：迟明，迥方觉，分数十骑自驿路追之，不及，遂归京师。
现代文：天亮后，尉迟迥才发现，于是分兵几十骑从驿路追赶他，没赶上，他于是回到京师。
English: After dawn, the lieutenant did not find it until later, so a detachment of several dozen horsemen chased him from the Kushiro Road. He did not catch up, so he returned to the Beijing Division.

古文：高祖以尚希宗室之望，又背迥而至，待之甚厚。
现代文：高祖因为杨尚希是宗室有名望的人，又背叛尉迟迥而回来，对他很好。
English: Gao Zu was very kind to Yang Shangxi because he was a famous person in the family and he was late to return.

古文：及迥屯兵武陟，遣尚希督宗室兵三千人镇潼关。
现代文：到尉迟迥屯兵于武陟时，高祖派尚希督促宗室兵马三千人镇守潼关。
English: When the troops arrived in Wuyi, Gao Zu sent Shang Xi to urge the three thousand soldiers and horses of the family to guard Shiguan.

古文：寻授司会中大夫。
现代文：不久授尚希司会中大夫。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of junior doctor.

古文：高祖受禅，拜度支尚书，进爵为公。
现代文：隋高祖受北周禅让后，授尚希为度支尚书，晋爵位为公爵。
English: After Sui Gao Zu was ceded by the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he was awarded the title of "Duke" and the title of "Duchess."

古文：岁馀，出为河南道行台兵部尚书，加银青光禄大夫。
现代文：一年多后，尚希出京任河南道行台兵部尚书，升任银青光禄大夫。
English: More than a year later, Shang Xi went to Beijing to serve as Shang Shu of the Henan Province Xingtai Military Department and was promoted to Yin Qing Guanglu Doctor.

古文：尚希时见天下州郡过多，上表曰： 自秦并天下，罢侯置守，汉、魏及晋，邦邑屡改。
现代文：尚希当时见天下的州郡太多，就上表说： 自从秦国统一天下，罢诸侯，置郡守，汉魏及晋代，邦邑屡屡变动。
English: At that time, Shangxi saw that there were too many counties and prefectures in the world, so he said the above table: Since the unification of Qin, there have been many changes in counties and prefectures, counties and prefectures, Han, Wei and Jin dynasties.

古文：窃见当今郡县，倍多于古，或地无百里，数县并置，或户不满千，二郡分领。
现代文：我看当今的郡县，两倍多于古代。有的地无百里，就设了几个县；有的户口不满一千，就由两郡分别管理。
English: As I see it, there are twice as many counties today as there were in ancient times. Some places have less than a hundred li, so they have several counties; some have less than a thousand hukou, so they are managed separately by two counties.

古文：具僚以众，资费日多；吏卒人倍，租调岁减。
现代文：设的官员多，用度一天比一天多。官吏、兵卒几倍于以前，租税一年年减少。
English: There are more and more officials, and more and more expenses are incurred every day. The number of officials and soldiers is several times higher than before, and taxes are reduced year by year.

古文：清干良才，百分无一，动须数万，如何可觅？
现代文：精干的良才，百里难以挑一。动不动要几万官员，哪里去寻觅？
English: It is difficult to find a good and capable person in a hundred miles. If tens of thousands of officials are needed at all times, where can they be found?

古文：所谓民少官多，十羊九牧。
现代文：这就是所谓民少官多，十只羊九人放牧。
English: This is the so-called people-less-officials-more, where ten sheep are grazed by nine people.

古文：琴有更张之义，瑟无胶柱之理。
现代文：琴有再弹之义，瑟无胶柱之理。
English: There is a sense of replay on the koto, but there is no sense of a rubber column.

古文：今存要去闲，并小为大，国家则不亏粟帛，选举则易得贤才，敢陈管见，伏听裁处。 
现代文：现在保存重要的，去掉闲差，合并小郡县，以作大郡县，国家就不会减少赋税，选举也易得贤才。我冒昧地陈述管见，拜伏于地听您裁处。 
English: Now save the important ones, eliminate the idle ones, merge small counties and counties to make large counties and counties, the country will not reduce taxes, and the election will be easy to obtain talents. I dare to state my opinion and listen to your judgment.

古文：帝览而嘉之，于是遂罢天下诸郡。
现代文：高祖看了奏章，奖励他，于是罢天下诸郡。
English: Gaozu saw the score, rewarded him, and then the whole country went into a frenzy.

古文：寻拜瀛州刺史，未之官，奉诏巡省淮南。
现代文：继而授他为瀛州刺史，没到任，又奉诏巡视淮南。
English: Subsequently, he was awarded the history of Zhangzhou, but he did not arrive at the post, and he was ordered to inspect Huainan.

古文：还除兵部尚书。
现代文：还京授为兵部尚书。
English: He was also awarded the Medal of Military Merit.

古文：俄转礼部尚书，授上仪同。
现代文：不久转任礼部尚书，授为上仪同。
English: He was soon transferred to the Ministry of Rites and Literature, and was awarded the title of Shang Yi Tong.

古文：尚希性弘厚，兼以学业自通，甚有雅望，为朝廷所重。
现代文：杨尚希天性宽厚，加上他学业自通，所以很有名望，被朝廷看重。
English: Yang Shangxi's generous nature, coupled with his self-education, made him very famous and valued by the imperial court.

古文：上时每旦临朝，日侧不倦，尚希谏曰： 周文王以忧勤损寿，武王以安乐延年。
现代文：皇上那时每天早晨上朝，日头偏西了还不疲倦。尚希劝他说： 周文王因太忧虑太勤劳而损了阳寿，周武王因安乐而延年益寿。
English: At that time, the emperor went to bed every morning, and he was still not tired when the sun set. Shang Xi advised him: Zhou Wen Wang lost his young life because he was too worried and too hardworking, and Zhou Wu Wang extended his life because he was happy.

古文：愿陛下举大纲，责成宰辅，繁碎之务，非人主所宜亲也。 
现代文：望陛下抓主要事情，责成宰相。繁杂之事，不是皇上应该亲自处理的。 
English: His Majesty is expected to deal with the most important matters and instruct the Prime Minister. Complicated matters should not be dealt with personally by the Emperor.

古文：上欢然曰： 公爱我者。 
现代文：皇上高兴地说： 你是爱我的人。 
English: The emperor said happily: You are the one who loves me.

古文：尚希素有足疾，上谓之曰： 蒲州出美酒，足堪养病，屈公卧治之。 
现代文：尚希一向有脚病，皇上对他说： 蒲州出产美酒，足以养病。委曲你睡在那里治理蒲州。 
English: Shangxi had always had a foot ailment, and the emperor said to him: "Puzhou produces fine wine, which is enough to recover from illness. I have chosen you to sleep there and govern Puzhou."

古文：于是出拜蒲州刺史，仍领本州宗团骠骑。
现代文：于是出京任蒲州刺史，并兼管本州的宗团骠骑。
English: As a result, he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Bushu Province, and was also in charge of the Shogunate of Bushu Province.

古文：尚希在州，甚有惠政，复引瀵水，立堤防，开稻田数千顷，民赖其利。
现代文：尚希在蒲州，很有仁政，又引氵粪水，建堤防，开稻田几千顷，百姓靠此得利。
English: Shangxi in Puzhou has a very benevolent government, and has diverted sewage, built dykes, and opened thousands of hectares of rice fields. The people have benefited from this.

古文：开皇十年卒官，时年五十七。
现代文：开皇十年，在蒲州刺史任上去世，时年五十七岁。
English: He was fifty-seven years old when he died in the tenth year of the Emperor's reign, while he was on the post of the governor of the state of Gushu.

古文：谥曰平。
现代文：谥号叫 平 。
English: The nickname is Ping.

古文：子旻嗣，后改封丹水县公，官至安定郡丞。
现代文：他儿子杨旻嗣继承爵禄，后改封为丹水县公爵，官至安定郡丞。
English: His son, Yang Xizhi, inherited the peerage, and was later given the title of Duke of Danshui County, and rose to the position of stable county magistrate.

古文：○长孙平长孙平，字处均，河南洛阳人也。
现代文：长孙平字处均，河南洛阳人。
English: The eldest grandson, Ping Zizhujun, was from Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：父俭，周柱国。
现代文：父亲长孙俭，北周柱国。
English: His father, Chosun Jian, was from the Northern Zhou Dynasty.

古文：平美容仪，有器干，颇览书记。
现代文：长孙平容貌仪表很漂亮，有才干，读了不少书。
English: The eldest grandchild, Ping, is beautiful, talented and has read a lot of books.

古文：仕周，释褐卫王侍读。
现代文：仕北周，开始当卫王的侍读。
English: He served as the Northern Zhou and began to serve as the attendant of the King of Wei.

古文：时武帝逼于宇文护，谋与卫王诛之，王前后常使平往来通意于帝。
现代文：那时周武帝为宇文护所逼，与卫王谋划准备杀了他，卫王常让长孙平到周武帝那里传信达意。
English: At that time, Emperor Zhou Wudi was forced by Uwen Guo to plot with Wei Wang to kill him. Wei Wang often asked the eldest Sun Ping to go to Emperor Zhou Wudi to deliver a message.

古文：及护伏诛，拜开府、乐部大夫。
现代文：到杀了宇文护后，授长孙平开府仪同三司、乐部大夫。
English: After the killing of Yuwen Guo, the ceremony of conferring the title of chief of Sunping Kaifu, the same as the three departments and the club doctor.

古文：宣帝即位，置东京官属，以平为小司寇，与小宗伯赵芬分掌六府。
现代文：周宣帝即位后，设置东京的官署，让长孙平当小司寇，与小宗伯赵芬分管六府。
English: After Emperor Zhou Xuan ascended to the throne, he set up a government office in Tokyo, and appointed his eldest grandson Ping as a minor official, and his younger son Zhao Fen to be in charge of the six prefectures.

古文：高祖龙潜时，与平情好款洽，及为丞相，恩礼弥厚。
现代文：高祖登基前，与长孙平感情很好。当了丞相后，对他更礼遇。
English: Before Gaozu ascended to the throne, he had a good relationship with the eldest Sun Ping. After he became the prime minister, he was treated more politely.

古文：尉迥、王谦、司马消难并称兵内侮，高祖深以淮南为意。
现代文：尉迟迥、王谦、司马消难都发兵造反，高祖很担心淮南。
English: Li Shixuan, Wang Qian and Sima Qianlang all rebelled, and Gao Zu was very worried about Huainan.

古文：时贺若弼镇寿阳，恐其怀二心，遣平驰驿往代之。
现代文：当时贺若弼镇守寿阳，高祖怕他有二心，派长孙平去代替他。
English: At that time, He Ruoqin was in charge of Shouyang, Gao Zu was afraid that he had a double heart and sent his eldest son, Sun Ping, to replace him.

古文：弼果不从，平麾壮士执弼，送于京师。
现代文：贺若弼果然不服从，长孙平指挥壮士抓了贺若弼，把他送到京师。
English: He Ruoqi did indeed disobey, and the elder Sun Ping commanded the strong men to arrest He Ruoqi and send him to the capital.

古文：开皇三年，征拜度支尚书。
现代文：开皇三年，长孙平调任度支尚书。
English: In the third year of the emperor's reign, Chosunping's appointment was confirmed.

古文：平见天下州县多罹水旱，百姓不给，奏令民间每秋家出粟麦一石已下，贫富差等，储之闾巷，以备凶年，各曰义仓。
现代文：长孙平见天下州县多遭水旱之灾，百姓不能自给，上奏朝廷，让民间每年秋收时每家拿出一石以下的粮食，贫少出，富多出，储存在乡里，以防备荒年，把这叫 义仓 。
English: When the eldest grandson Ping saw that most of the counties in the world suffered from floods and droughts, and the people could not provide for themselves, he appealed to the imperial court to allow the people to take out less than one stone of grain from each family during the autumn harvest every year. The poor would take out less, and the rich would take out more. The grain would be stored in the countryside to prevent a bad year. This was called "Yi Cang."

古文：因上书曰： 臣闻国以民为本，民以食为命，劝农重谷，先王令轨。
现代文：因此上书说： 我听说，国家以人民为根本，人民以粮食为性命。劝农重粮，这是先王的令式。
English: Therefore, the petition said: I have heard that the state takes the people as its foundation, and the people take grain as their life. It is the order of the former king to advise farmers to increase grain.

古文：古者三年耕而馀一年之积，九年作而有三年之储，虽水旱为灾，而民无菜色，皆由劝导有方，蓄积先备者也。
现代文：古时候，耕种三年而富余一年粮食，耕作九年而有三年的积蓄。即使水旱为灾，而人民不挨饿，都是因为劝导有方，积蓄粮食早为防备。
English: In ancient times, three years of ploughing yielded one year of grain, and nine years of ploughing yielded three years of savings. Even if floods and droughts were disasters, and the people did not go hungry, it was because they were well advised to save grain as early as possible.

古文：去年亢阳，关右饥馁，陛下运山东之粟，置常平之官，开发仓廪，普加赈赐，大德鸿恩，可谓至矣。
现代文：去年干旱，关西饥荒，陛下运关东粮食，设常平之官，打开粮仓，普遍赈济。陛下的大德鸿恩，可以说到了极点了。
English: Last year, drought, famine in Kansai, His Majesty sent grain to the eastern part of Kansai, set up a standing committee, opened grain silos, and generally provided aid. His Majesty's great virtue and benevolence can be said to have reached its peak.

古文：然经国之道，义资远算，请勒诸州刺史、县令，以劝农积谷为务。 上深嘉纳。
现代文：但治国之道，在于作长远打算。请命各州县的刺史、县令，以劝农耕种、积蓄粮食为要务。 皇上十分赞赏。
English: However, the way to govern the country is to make long-term plans. Please instruct the prefectural governor and the county magistrate of each prefecture to urge farmers to cultivate and store grain as a matter of urgency. The Emperor highly appreciates this.

古文：自是州里丰衍，民多赖焉。
现代文：从此州里粮食丰裕，人民大多依靠于他。
English: Since then, food has been plentiful in the state, and most of the people rely on him.

古文：后数载，转工部尚书，名为称职。
现代文：几年后，长孙平转任工部尚书，很称职。
English: A few years later, the eldest Sun Ping was transferred to the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, and he was very competent.

古文：时有人告大都督邴绍非毁朝廷为愦愦者，上怒，将斩之。
现代文：当时有人告大都督邴绍，说他诋毁皇上昏愦。皇上大怒，将杀他。
English: At that time, someone sued the grand governor, Yu Shao, saying that he had defamed the emperor. The emperor was furious and was going to kill him.

古文：平进谏曰： 川泽纳污，所以成其深；山岳藏疾，所以就其大。
现代文：长孙平劝告说： 河流湖泊接纳污水，所以能成就其水深；山岳收藏病树，所以能成就其山大。
English: Elder Sun Ping advised: Rivers and lakes receive sewage, so they can achieve their water depth; mountains collect diseased trees, so they can achieve their mountains.

古文：臣不胜至愿，愿陛下弘山海之量，茂宽裕之德。
现代文：我十分希望陛下弘扬山海的度量，发扬宽容的品德。
English: I very much hope that His Majesty will carry forward the measure of mountains and seas, and promote the virtue of tolerance.

古文：鄙谚曰： 不痴不聋，未堪作大家翁。 
现代文：民谣说： 不痴不聋，未堪作大家翁。 
English: The ballad says: "Not blind, not deaf, not fit to be a great man."

古文：此言虽小，可以喻大。
现代文：这话说的虽是小事，可以比喻大事。
English: Although this sentence is about a small thing, it can be used to illustrate a big thing.

古文：邴绍之言，不应闻奏，陛下又复诛之，臣恐百代之后，有亏圣德。 
现代文：邴绍的话，不该告诉陛下。
English: I shouldn't have told Your Majesty.

古文：上于是赦绍。
现代文：陛下又要杀他。
English: Your Majesty is going to kill him again.

古文：因敕群臣，诽谤之罪，勿复以闻。
现代文：我担心百代之后，后人的评说，有损陛下的圣德。 
English: I fear that after a hundred generations, posterity's comments will detract from His Majesty's sanctity.

古文：其后突厥达头可汗与都蓝可汗相攻，各遣使请授。
现代文：皇上于是赦免了邴绍。皇上因此敕令群臣，诽谤朝廷的罪过，不要再报告朝廷。此后突厥的达头可汗与都蓝可汁互相进攻，都派使者来请求增援。
English: The emperor then pardoned Gensho. Therefore, the emperor ordered the courtiers not to report the crime of slandering the court to the court. After that, the Turkic Dadu Khan and Du Lan Kiji attacked each other, and both sent envoys to request reinforcements.

古文：上使平持节宣谕，令其和解，赐缣三百匹，良马一匹而遣之。
现代文：皇上派长孙平出使突厥，命令他们和解。赐长孙平缣采三百匹、良马一匹，而派他去突厥。
English: The emperor sent his eldest son, Sun Ping, as an envoy to the Turks, ordering them to make peace. He gave his eldest son, Sun Ping, three hundred donkeys and one fine horse, and sent him to the Turks.

古文：平至突厥所，为陈利害，遂各解兵。
现代文：长孙平到了突厥，为他们陈述利害，他们于是各自罢兵。
English: The eldest grandson, Ping, came to Turkestan to present their case, whereupon they each left the army.

古文：可汗赠平马二百匹。
现代文：可汗赠送长孙平良马二百匹。
English: The khan presented the eldest son, Pingliang, with two hundred horses.

古文：及还，平进所得马，上尽以赐之。
现代文：回京后，长孙平把马全部交给皇上，皇上又全部赐给他。
English: After returning to Beijing, the eldest son Ping gave all the horses to the emperor, and the emperor gave them all to him.

古文：未几，遇谴，以尚书检校汴州事。
现代文：不久，长孙平被谴责，以尚书身份检校汴州事。
English: Soon after, the headmaster, Sun Ping, was denounced for inspecting the school in his capacity as a scholar.

古文：岁馀，除汴州刺史。
现代文：一年多后，授为汴州刺史。
English: More than a year later, he was awarded the History of Zhangzhou.

古文：其后历许、贝二州，俱有善政。
现代文：其后历任许州、贝州二州刺史，都有仁政。
English: Subsequent heads of state of Huzhou and Beizhou, both of which have a long history, were all benevolent.

古文：鄴都俗薄，旧号难治，前后刺史多不称职。
现代文：邺都风俗薄巧，旧称难治，前后的刺史多不称职。
English: Shantou's customs are subtle, formerly known as "difficult to cure," and most of the stabbing stories before and after are incompetent.

古文：朝廷以平所在善称，转相州刺史。甚有能名。
现代文：朝廷因长孙平到了哪里，哪里就说他好，让他转任相州刺史，他很有能干的名声。
English: The imperial court said that wherever the eldest Sun Ping went, he would be welcomed, and he was transferred to the post of Sangju Sashishi. He had a reputation for being very capable.

古文：在州数年，会正月十五日，百姓大戏，画衣裳为鍪甲之象，上怒而免之。
现代文：在州里几年后，碰上正月十五日，百姓大乐，把衣裳画为鍪甲。皇上发怒，免了他的职。
English: After several years in the prefecture, on the fifteenth day of the first month, the people made merry and painted their clothes as armor. The emperor was angry and relieved him of his post.

古文：俄而念平镇淮南时事，进位大将军，拜太常卿，判吏部尚书事。
现代文：不久思念长孙平镇守淮南时的事，升他为大将军，授他为太常卿，判吏部尚书事。
English: Not long after, he recalled the time when the eldest son, Sun Pingzhen, was in charge of Huainan. He was promoted to the rank of general and given the title of grand secretary.

古文：仁寿中卒官。
现代文：仁寿中在官任上去世。
English: He died in office in the middle of his life.

古文：谥曰康。
现代文：谥号叫 康 。
English: His nickname was Kang.

古文：子师孝，性轻狡好利，数犯法。
现代文：他的儿子长孙师孝，生性狡猾贪财，多次犯法。
English: His son and eldest grandson, Shitaka, is cunning and greedy by nature, and has repeatedly broken the law.

古文：上以其不克负荷，遣使吊平国官。
现代文：皇上因他不争气，派使者向长孙平封国的官员吊孝，不承认他是长孙平的儿子。
English: Because of his lack of ambition, the emperor sent an envoy to pay tribute to the officials of the fiefdom of the eldest son of Sun Ping, and did not recognize him as the son of the eldest son of Sun Ping.

古文：师孝后为渤海郡主簿，属大业之季，政教陵迟，师孝恣行贪浊，一郡苦之。
现代文：长孙师孝后来任渤海郡主簿，适逢大业末世，政教混乱，师孝就大行贪污，一郡人都以之为苦。
English: The eldest grandson, Shi Xiao, later served as the chief magistrate of Bohai County, coinciding with the end of the great career and the chaos of politics and religion. Shi Xiao was a great embezzler, and everyone in the county suffered as a result.

古文：后为王世充所害。
现代文：他后来被王世充杀害。
English: He was later killed by Wang Shichong.

古文：○元军元晖，字叔平，河南洛阳人也。
现代文：元晖字叔平，河南洛阳人。
English: Shu Ping, a native of Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：祖琛，魏恆、朔二州刺史。
现代文：祖父元琛，魏国恒、朔二州刺史。
English: The grandfathers of Yuan Shao, Wei Guo Heng, and Shuo Erzhou are the history.

古文：父翌，尚书左仆射。
现代文：父亲元翌，尚书左仆射。
English: After his father, Geng Zi, Shang Shuxu was a left-handed shot.

古文：晖须眉如画，进止可观，颇好学，涉猎书记。
现代文：元晖眉毛胡须美妙如画，举止也很美，很爱学习，广泛读书。
English: Yuan Zou's eyebrows and whiskers are as beautiful as a painting, his manners are also very beautiful, he loves to study, and he reads widely.

古文：少得美名于京下，周太祖见而礼之，命与诸子游处，每同席共砚，情契甚厚。
现代文：他年少时就在京师得到了好名声，北周太祖遇见了，很礼遇他，让他与诸皇子相处，每每同桌共砚，感情很好。
English: When he was young, he gained a good reputation in the Beijing division. When he met the Northern Zhou Taizu, he treated him very politely, let him get along with the princes, and they sat together at the same table every time, and their feelings were very good.

古文：弱冠，召补相府中兵参军，寻迁武伯下大夫。
现代文：长大成人后，召他补任相府的中兵参军，继而升任武伯下大夫。
English: After he became an adult, he was called to join the army as a vice-minister of the cabinet of ministers, and then he was promoted to the post of military commissar.

古文：于时突厥屡为寇患，朝廷将结和亲，令晖赍锦彩十万，使于突厥。
现代文：那时突厥人屡屡进犯边塞，朝廷将与他们和亲，让元晖带锦帛十万，出使突厥。
English: At that time, the Turks repeatedly invaded the border fortresses, and the imperial court would make peace with them, allowing the Yuan Dynasty to send out envoys to the Turks with 100,000 pieces of brocade.

古文：晖说以利害，申国厚礼，可汗大悦，遣其名王随献方物。
现代文：元晖晓以利害，申明国家的厚礼，可汗很高兴，派其名王随元晖入朝贡献土产。
English: The Khan was pleased and sent his great-great-grandson to accompany Yuan Shao to the North to contribute to the production of local products.

古文：俄拜仪同三司、宾部下大夫。
现代文：不久授元晖为仪同三司、宾部下大夫。
English: He was soon awarded the title of "Genren" and promoted to "Jidong" and "Sanji" and "Bin" subordinate doctors.

古文：保定初，大冢宰宇文护引为长史，会齐人来结盟好，以晖多才辩，与千乘公崔睦俱使于齐。
现代文：保定初，大冢宰宇文护任他为自己的长史，碰上北齐人来结盟和好，因元晖多有才辩，让他与千乘公崔睦一起出使北齐。
English: At the beginning of Baoding, Dazhao Uwen appointed him as his long-term guardian. When he encountered the Northern Qi people, he tried to make an alliance and make peace. Since Yuan Xuan had many talents, he sent him to the Northern Qi together with Qianren Gong Cui Mu.

古文：迁振威中大夫。
现代文：回朝后元晖升任振威中大夫。
English: After returning to the imperial court, Yuan Xuan was promoted to the post of Zhenwei Middle Doctor.

古文：武帝之娉突厥后也，令晖致礼焉。
现代文：周武帝礼聘突厥皇后时，让元晖致礼于突厥。
English: When Emperor Zhou Wu hired the Turkic empress, he asked Yuan Zheng to pay tribute to the Turk.

古文：加开府，转司宪大夫。
现代文：加授元晖为开府，后转任司宪大夫。
English: In addition, he was awarded the title of the founder of the Yuan Dynasty, and later he was transferred to the post of the constitutional doctor.

古文：及平关东，使晖安集河北，封义宁子，邑四百户。
现代文：到平定关东以后，让元晖安抚黄河以北地区，封他为义宁子爵，食邑四百户。
English: After the pacification of Guandong, Yuan Shao was asked to pacify the area north of the Yellow River, and he was given the title of Viscount Yining, with a population of 400 households.

古文：高祖总百揆，加上开府，进爵为公。
现代文：隋高祖总理北周大政后，加授元晖为上开府，进其爵位为公爵。
English: After the Northern Zhou Dajie, the Prime Minister of Sui Gao Zu, he was awarded the title of Yuan Zheng as Shang Kaifu, and was promoted to the title of Duke.

古文：开皇初，拜都官尚书，兼领太仆。
现代文：开皇初年，授元晖为都官尚书，兼任太仆。
English: In the first year of the emperor's reign, he was appointed as the official of the capital, and concurrently served as the eunuch.

古文：奏请决杜阳水灌三畤原，溉舄卤之地数千顷，民赖其利。
现代文：元晖奏请开决杜阳水灌溉三原，灌溉盐碱地几千顷，人民依赖其便利。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, Duyang water was used to irrigate the Three Plains, irrigating thousands of hectares of saline and alkaline land. The people depended on its convenience.

古文：明年，转左武候将军，太仆卿如故。
现代文：次年，元晖转任左武侯将军，仍旧兼任太仆卿。
English: The following year, Yuan Shao was transferred to the position of General of the Left Military Province, but continued to hold the position of the Great Servant of the Emperor.

古文：寻转兵部尚书，监漕渠之役。
现代文：继而转任兵部尚书，监督修漕渠的劳役。
English: Subsequently, he was transferred to the Ministry of Military Affairs to supervise the labor of repairing canals.

古文：未几，坐事免。
现代文：不久，他因事被免职。
English: He was soon relieved of his duties as a result.

古文：顷之，拜魏州刺史，颇有惠政。
现代文：继而，授为魏州刺史，颇有仁政。
English: He was soon appointed as the governor of Weizhou, and was very benevolent.

古文：在任数年，以疾去职。
现代文：在任几年，因病离职。
English: After several years in office, he left office due to illness.

古文：岁馀，卒于京师，时年六十。
现代文：一年多后，在京师去世，时年六十岁。
English: More than a year later, he died in Beijing at the age of sixty.

古文：上嗟悼久之，敕鸿胪监护丧事。
现代文：皇上嗟叹很久，敕令鸿胪监护丧事。
English: The emperor lamented for a long time, and ordered Hongyi to supervise the funeral.

古文：谥曰元。
现代文：谥号叫 元 。
English: 号元.

古文：子肃嗣，官至光禄少卿。
现代文：他儿子元肃继承爵禄，官至光禄少卿。
English: His son, Yuan Su, inherited the peerage and rose to the rank of Guanglu Shaoqing.

古文：肃弟仁器，性明敏，官至日南郡丞。
现代文：元肃的弟弟元仁器，生性敏捷，官至日南郡丞。
English: Yuan Su's younger brother, Yuan Renki, was quick-witted and rose to the position of Nichinan County magistrate.

古文：○韦师韦师，字公颖，京兆杜陵人也。
现代文：韦师字公颖，京兆杜陵人。
English: Wei Shi Zi Zi Gong Ying, Jing Zha Tulin Ren.

古文：父瑱，周骠骑大将军。
现代文：父亲韦王真，北周骠骑大将军。
English: His father, Wei Wangzhen, was a general of the Northern Zhou Dynasty.

古文：师少沉谨，有至性。
现代文：韦师小时很沉着谨慎，有至性。
English: Wei Shi was very calm and prudent at that time.

古文：初就学，始读《孝经》，舍书而叹曰： 名教之极，其在兹乎！ 
现代文：刚就学时，初读《孝经》，他放下书，感叹说： 名教的极致，大概就在这里吧！ 
English: When he was a freshman, he read "The Filial Piety" for the first time. He put down the book and sighed, "The pinnacle of famous teachings is probably right here!"

古文：少丁父母忧，居丧尽礼，州里称其孝行。
现代文：小时遭到父母之丧，他居丧尽礼，州里称赞他的孝道。
English: An hour after his parents' death, he paid his last respects, and the state praised his filial piety.

古文：及长，略涉经史，尤工骑射。
现代文：长大后，略读经书史书，尤其工于骑射。
English: When he grew up, he was good at skimming through history books, and especially good at riding and shooting.

古文：周大冢宰宇文护引为中外府记室，转宾曹参军。
现代文：北周的大冢宰宇文护，召他任中外府记室，后转任宾曹参军。
English: The grand vizier of Northern Zhou, Uwen Rong, called him to serve as the central and foreign prefectural record office, and later he was transferred to Bentsao to join the army.

古文：师雅知诸蕃风俗及山川险易，其有夷狄朝贡，师必接对，论其国俗，如视诸掌。
现代文：韦师知道各地风俗和山川险易，如有夷狄人上朝进贡，韦师肯定会出面接待、交谈。他说起他国风俗，了如指掌。
English: Wei Shishi knew the customs of various regions and the dangers of mountains and rivers. If any Yidi people came to pay tribute, Wei Shishi would certainly come forward to receive and talk to them. He knew the customs of other countries like the back of his hand.

古文：夷人惊服，无敢隐情。
现代文：夷人惊叹佩服，不敢隐瞒真情。
English: They were amazed and impressed, and did not dare to hide their true feelings.

古文：齐王宪为雍州牧，引为主簿，本官如故。
现代文：齐王宇文宪为雍州牧，召他任主簿，其原任官职依旧。
English: Qi Wang Yuwen Xian was the Yongzhou Patriarch, and he was called to be the chief steward, and his original official position remained unchanged.

古文：及武帝亲总万机，转少府大夫。
现代文：到周武帝亲理万机时，他转任少府大夫。
English: By the time Emperor Zhou Wu personally took care of everything, he was transferred to the post of Shofu doctor.

古文：及平高氏，诏师安抚山东，徙为宾部大夫。
现代文：平定高氏，有诏让韦师安抚华山以东地区，迁任宾部大夫。
English: Heping Ding Gao, who had ordered Wei Shi to pacify the area east of Huashan, was transferred to the post of guest doctor.

古文：高祖受禅，拜使部侍郎，赐爵井陉侯，邑五百户。
现代文：隋高祖受禅后，授他为吏部侍郎，赐爵位为井陉侯，食邑五百户。
English: After Sui Gao Zu accepted Zen, he was awarded the title of "Clerk of the Ministry of Civil Affairs," given the title of "Prince of Jingye," and had 500 households.

古文：数年，迁河北道行台兵部尚书，诏为山东河南十八州安抚大使。
现代文：几年后，他调任河北道行台兵部尚书，有诏让他当华山以东、黄河南岸十八州的安抚大使。
English: A few years later, he was transferred to Shangshu, the military department of Xingtao, Hebei Province, and he was appointed as the pacification ambassador of the 18 states east of Mount Huashan and south of the Yellow River.

古文：奏事称旨，赐钱三百万，兼领晋王广司马。
现代文：他回朝报告，让高祖称心如意，赐他钱三百万，兼任晋王杨广的司马。
English: He reported back to the imperial court, and Gao Zu was so pleased that he gave him three million yuan and made him the steward of the Jin King Yang Guang.

古文：其族人世康，为吏部尚书，与师素怀胜负。
现代文：他的同族人韦世康，为吏部尚书，与韦师一向比高低。
English: His compatriot, Wei Shikang, was a high-ranking official, and he was always on a par with Wei Shi.

古文：于时晋王为雍州牧，盛存望第，以司空杨雄、尚书左仆射高颎并为州都督，引师为主簿。而世康弟世约为法曹从事。
现代文：那时晋王杨广任雍州牧，手下有很多达官，让司空杨雄、尚书左仆射高赹一起当雍州都督，又让韦师当主簿，而韦世康的弟弟韦世约为法曹从事。
English: At that time, Yang Guang, the king of Jin, served as Yongzhou's herdsman. He had a number of high-ranking officials under his command, including Yang Xiong, the governor of Yongzhou, and Gao Ya, the left-hand servant of Shang Shuxu. He also had Wei Shi as the chief accountant, while Wei Shikang's younger brother Wei Shiyu was engaged in legal work.

古文：世康恚恨不能食，又耻世约在师之下，召世约数之曰： 汝何故为从事？ 
现代文：韦世康愤愤不已，吃不下饭，又以其弟韦世约在韦师之下而感到羞耻，把世约叫来，数落他说： 你为什么当从事？ 
English: Wei Shikang was so angry that he couldn't eat. He was also ashamed that his brother Wei Shijo was under Wei Shi. He called Wei Shijo and scolded him, saying, "Why should you do this?

古文：遂杖之。
现代文：因此用棍子打世约。
English: Therefore, using a stick to beat the world.

古文：后从上幸醴泉宫，上召师与左仆射高颎、上柱国韩擒等，于卧内赐宴，令各叙旧事，以为笑乐。
现代文：韦师后来随皇上巡幸礼泉宫，皇上召来韦师和左仆射高赹、上柱国韩擒虎等，在卧室内赐他们饮宴，让他们各叙往事，以为笑乐。
English: Later, Wei Shi followed the emperor on a pilgrimage to the Spring Palace. The emperor summoned Wei Shi and his left-hand servant, Gao Yao, and the upper pillar country, Han Xinghu, and gave them a banquet in the bedroom, and let them recount the past, thinking it was fun.

古文：平陈之役，以本官领元帅掾，陈国府藏，悉委于师，秋毫无所犯，称为清白。
现代文：在平定陈国的战争中，韦师以本官身份兼任元帅掾，陈国国库中的收藏，全交给韦师管理，韦师秋毫无犯，称为清白。
English: In the war to pacify Chen Guo, Wei Shi, as his own official, also served as marshal. The collection in Chen Guo's treasury was all handed over to Wei Shi for management. Wei Shiqiu did not commit any crime and was called innocent.

古文：数载，卒官，时年六十二。
现代文：后来，皇上为长宁王杨俨纳韦师之女为王妃。授汴州刺史，很有政绩，在刺史任上去世。
English: Later, the empress was the daughter of Changning King Yang Xuan Wei's teacher, Wangfei. She was awarded the post of prefect of Bozhou, had great political achievements, and died in the post of prefect.

古文：子虔逊。
现代文：谥号叫 定 。
English: His nickname is Ding Zeng.

古文：○苏孝慈兄子沙罗
现代文：他儿子韦德政继承爵禄。
English: His son, Wei Dezheng, succeeded him.

古文：苏孝慈，扶风人也。
现代文：大业中，韦德政官至给事郎。苏孝慈是扶风人。
English: In his great career, Wei De, a political official, became a giver of gifts. Su Xiaoji was a giver of wind.

古文：父武周，周兗州刺史。
现代文：父亲苏武周，是北周的兖州刺史。
English: His father, Su Wuzhou, was the governor of Zhangzhou of the Northern Zhou Dynasty.

古文：孝慈少沉谨，有器干，美容仪。
现代文：苏孝慈年少时沉着谨慎，很有才干，容貌俊美。
English: When Su Xiaoqi was young, he was calm and prudent, very talented, and handsome.

古文：周初为中侍上士。后拜都督，聘于齐，以奉使称旨，迁大都督。
现代文：北周初年任中侍上士，后来又拜授都督的官职，他出使到北齐，因其奉命出使，让皇上满意回京后升为大都督。
English: In the early years of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he served as a middle-ranking staff sergeant, and later he was given the official post of governor. He was dispatched to Northern Qi, and because he was ordered to be dispatched, he was promoted to the great governor after returning to Beijing to the emperor's satisfaction.

古文：其年又聘于齐，还授宣纳上士。
现代文：这年他又出使到齐国，回来以后授予宣纳上士。
English: In the same year, he was sent to Qi Province, and after his return, he was awarded the title of Xuan Na Staff Sergeant.

古文：后从武帝伐齐，以功进位开府，赐爵文安县公，邑千五百户。
现代文：以后他又跟随武帝讨伐齐国，因为功高而升为开府，皇上赏赐他文安县公的爵位，食邑一千五百户。
English: Later, he followed Emperor Wu to fight against Qi, and because of his great achievements, he was promoted to Kaifu. The emperor rewarded him with the title of Duke of Wen'an County, with 1,500 households.

古文：寻改封临水县公，增邑千二百户，累迁工部上大夫。
现代文：不久又改封为临水县公，增加食邑一千二百户，以后连续升迁做到工部上大夫。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of Linshui County official, increasing the number of food villages by 1,200, and later he was continuously promoted to the post of senior doctor of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：高祖受禅，进爵安平郡公，拜太府卿。
现代文：高祖接受北周禅让，登基称帝以后，苏孝慈又晋升爵位为安平郡公，授予他太府卿的官职。
English: Gaozu accepted Northern Zhou's offer, and after he was enthroned as emperor, Su Xiaoji was also promoted to the title of Anping County Duke, and was awarded the official post of Taifuqing.

古文：于时王业初基，百度伊始，征天下工匠，纤微之巧，无不毕集。孝慈总其事，世以为能。
现代文：这时皇家大业刚刚奠定，各种建筑刚刚开始，朝廷征召天下的工匠，即使只有一点点技巧的，也无不把他们全部集中起来，交由苏孝慈统领，世人称苏孝慈很有管理才能。
English: At this time, the royal cause had just been laid, various buildings had just begun, and the court conscripted craftsmen from all over the world. Even if they only had a little skill, they would all be concentrated and put under the command of Su Xiao Ci. The world said that Su Xiao Ci had great management ability.

古文：俄迁大司农，岁馀，拜兵部尚书，待遇逾密。
现代文：不久，他又升迁为大司农。一年多以后，又授予他兵部尚书的官职，皇上待他更加亲密。
English: Not long after, he was promoted to the position of the Chief Farmer. More than a year later, he was also given the post of the Secretary of the Ministry of War, and the Emperor treated him more closely.

古文：时皇太子勇颇知时政，上欲重宫官之望，多令大臣领其职。
现代文：当时皇太子杨勇对时政非常了解，皇上想提高东宫官吏的声望，就常让朝廷大臣兼任东宫的官职。
English: At that time, Crown Prince Yang Yong was very familiar with the politics of the time. The emperor wanted to enhance the prestige of the officials of the East Palace, so he often had the Minister of the Imperial Court also serve as an official of the East Palace.

古文：于是拜孝慈为太子右卫率，尚书如故。
现代文：这时皇上就授命苏孝慈做太子的右卫率，仍旧担任兵部尚书的职务。
English: At this time, the emperor ordered Su Xiaoji to become the prince's right guard, and he still held the post of Hyobusho.

古文：明年，上于陕州置常平仓，转输京下。
现代文：第二年，皇上在陕州设置常平仓，以便把粮食转运到京城。
English: In the second year, the emperor set up a depot in Shaanxi in order to transport grain to the capital.

古文：以渭水多沙，流乍深乍浅，漕运者苦之，于是决谓水为渠以属河，令孝慈督其役。
现代文：由于渭水含沙量大，水流忽深忽浅，漕运的人都很苦恼，于是朝廷决定疏通渭水，挖一道水渠同黄河相连，命苏孝慈监督这项工程。
English: Because of the large amount of sand in Surabaya's water and the fact that the water flowed from deep to shallow, the rowers were very distressed. Therefore, the imperial court decided to dredge Surabaya's water and dig a canal to connect it to the Yellow River, and ordered Su Xiaozi to supervise this project.

古文：渠成，上善之。
现代文：水渠修成后，皇上认为他做得很好。
English: After the canal was completed, the emperor thought he had done a good job.

古文：又领太子右庶子，转授左卫率，仍判工部、民部二尚书，称为干理。
现代文：后来又让他兼任太子右庶子，转而授予他左卫率的官职，仍旧担任工部尚书、民部尚书，人们都称赞他很干练。
English: Later, he also allowed him to serve as the prince's right illegitimate son, and instead gave him the official post of the left guard, still serving as the official secretary of the Ministry of Industry and the official secretary of the Ministry of People's Affairs. People praised him for being very skillful.

古文：数载，进位大将军，转工部尚书，率如故。
现代文：几年以后，他晋升为大将军，转任工部尚书，任左卫率如故。
English: A few years later, he was promoted to the rank of major general and transferred to the Ministry of Works, where he remained in the position of left guard.

古文：先是，以百僚供费不足，台省府寺咸置廨钱，收息取给。
现代文：先前，因为官吏薪金不足，台省府寺都设置贷钱的机构，收取利息作为官俸。
English: Previously, because of the shortage of official salaries, Taiwan's provincial capitals and temples have set up money lending institutions to collect interest as official salaries.

古文：孝慈以为官民争利，非兴化之道，上表请罢之，请公卿以下给职田各有差，上并嘉纳焉。
现代文：苏孝慈认为官府和百姓争利，不是教化天下的办法，就上表章请予禁止，请求对于公卿以下的官吏按职位差别分给田地，皇上都很赞成并采纳了这些建议。
English: Su Xiaoqi thought that the government and the people competing for profits was not the best way to enlighten the world, so he asked for a ban on the above-mentioned seal, and requested that officials below the nobility be assigned to the fields according to their positions. The emperor was very supportive and accepted these suggestions.

古文：开皇十八年，将废太子，惮其在东宫，出为淅州刺史。
现代文：开皇十八年，皇上将要废除太子，又担心苏孝慈在东宫辅助太子，于是就调苏孝慈出京任淅州刺史。
English: In the 18th year of the emperor's reign, the emperor was about to abolish the position of crown prince, and he was worried that Su Xiaoqi would assist the crown prince in the East Palace, so he transferred Su Xiaoqi out of Beijing to serve as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：太子以孝慈去，甚不平，形于言色。
现代文：太子因为苏孝慈离开了他，心中很不平，面色上也表露出来。
English: The prince was very upset because Su Xiaoqi had left him, and it showed on his face.

古文：其见重如此。
现代文：苏孝慈就是如此的受太子倚重。
English: That's how much he values Kouhiko-chō.

古文：仁寿初，迁洪州总管，俱有惠政。
现代文：仁寿初年，升任洪州总管，在两地他都有仁政。
English: In the first year of his life, he was promoted to the post of Hongzhou chief administrator. He had benevolent policies in both places.

古文：共后桂林山越相聚为乱，诏孝慈为行军总管，击平之。其年卒官。
现代文：这以后，桂林山越人纠结叛乱，皇上命苏孝慈任行军总管，击败了叛军，平定了叛乱，这一年苏孝慈死在任上。
English: After that, the Guilin San Yue people were entangled in a rebellion, and the emperor ordered Su Xiao Ci to be the commander-in-chief of the march, defeated the rebels, and quelled the rebellion. This year, Su Xiao Ci died in office.

