古文：地形之所载，六合之间，四极之内，照之以日月，经之以星辰，纪之以四时，要之以太岁。
现代文：大地所承载的范围，包括六合之间、四极之内。有太阳月亮照耀着它，星辰协调着它，四季治理着它，太岁制约着它。
English: The scope of the earth's bearing includes between the six confluences and within the four poles. The sun and moon shine on it, the stars coordinate it, the four seasons govern it, and the sun and moon constrain it.

古文：天地之间，九州八极。土有九山，山有九塞，泽有九薮，风有八等，水有六品。
现代文：天地之间，有九州八极，整个大地上有九座大山，九处要塞，九个湖泽，加上风有八类，水有六种。
English: Between heaven and earth, there are the eight poles of Kyushu. In the entire land, there are nine mountains, nine fortresses, and nine lakes. In addition, there are eight types of wind and six types of water.

古文：何谓九州？
现代文：那么，什么是九州？
English: So, what is Kyushu?

古文：东南神州曰农土，正南次州曰沃土，西南戎州曰滔土，正西弇州曰并土，正中冀州曰中土，西北台州曰肥土，正北泲州曰成土，东北薄州曰隐土，正东阳州曰申土。
现代文：东南神州叫农土，正南次州叫沃土，西南戎州叫滔土，正西弇州叫并土，正中冀州叫中土，西北台州叫肥土，正北泲州叫成土，东北薄州叫隐土，正东阳州叫申土。
English: Southeast Shenzhou is called farmland, south-south Zizhou is called fertile soil, southwest Rongzhou is called lofty soil, west-central Zhangzhou is called joined soil, central-central Jizhou is called middle soil, northwest Taizhou is called fertile soil, north-central Zhangzhou is called formed soil, northeastern Bozhou is called hidden soil, and east-central Yangzhou is called sinking soil.

古文：何谓九山？
现代文：什么是九山？
English: What is Jiushan?

古文：会稽、泰山、王屋、首山、太华、岐山、太行、羊肠、孟门。
现代文：指的是会稽山、泰山、王屋山、首阳山、太华山、岐山、太行山、羊肠山、孟门山。
English: It refers to Mount Huiqi, Mount Tai, Mount Wangya, Mount Shouyang, Mount Taihua, Mount Qi, Mount Taihang, Mount Yangchi and Mount Mengmen.

古文：何谓九塞？
现代文：什么是九塞？
English: What is Jiusei?

古文：曰：太汾、渑阨、荆阮、方城、殽阪、井陉、令疵、句注、居庸。
现代文：指的是太汾、渑阨、荆阮、方城、殽阪、井陉、令疵、句注和居庸。
English: It refers to Taishan, Shao, Jing Ruan, Fangcheng, Shishan, Shijiazhuang, Lingbai, Juchu and Jiuyang.

古文：何谓九薮？
现代文：什么是九薮？
English: What is the Nine Stages of Grief?

古文：曰：越之具区，楚之云梦，秦之阳纡，晋之大陆，郑之圃田，宋之孟诸，齐之海隅，赵之巨鹿，燕之昭余。
现代文：指的是越国的具区、秦国的阳纡、晋国的大陆、郑国的圃田、宋国的孟诸、齐国的海隅、赵国的钜鹿、燕国的昭余。
English: It refers to the Gu District of Yue Province, the Yang Di of Qin Province, the continent of Jin Province, the fields of Zheng Province, the Meng Zhu of Song Province, the promontory of Qi Province, the elk of Zhao Province, and the Zhao Yu of Yan Province.

古文：何谓八风？
现代文：什么是八风？
English: What are the eight winds?

古文：东北曰炎风，东方曰条风，东南曰景风，南方曰巨风，西南曰凉风，西方曰飂风，西北曰丽风，北方曰寒风。
现代文：东北风叫炎风、东风叫条风、东南风叫景风、南风叫巨风、西南风叫凉风、西风叫飂风、西北风叫丽风、北风叫寒风。
English: The northeast wind is called the hot wind, the east wind is called the wind, the southeast wind is called the wind, the south wind is called the gale, the southwest wind is called the cool wind, the west wind is called the gale, the northwest wind is called the breeze, and the north wind is called the cold wind.

古文：何谓六水？
现代文：什么是六水？
English: What is Six Rivers?

古文：曰：河水、赤水、辽水、黑水、江水、淮水。
现代文：是指黄河、赤水、辽河、黑河、长江和淮河。
English: It refers to the Yellow River, Red Water, Liao River, Black River, Yangtze River and Huai River.

古文：阖四海之内，东西二万八千里，南北二万六千里；水道八千里，通谷其名川六百；陆径三千里。
现代文：合计四海之内，东西长二万八千里，南北长二万六千里，其中水路有八千里，大峡谷六处，大河六百条，内陆河三千条。
English: In total, within the four seas, the east-west length is 28,000 miles, the north-south length is up to 26,000 miles, of which there are 8,000 miles of waterways, six Grand Canyons, 600 large rivers, and 3,000 inland rivers.

古文：禹乃使太章步自东极，至于西极，二亿三万三千五百里七十五步；使竖亥步自北极，至于南极，二亿三万三千五百里七十五步。
现代文：于是禹派太章从东极走到西极，推算测量，长达二亿三万三千五百里又七十五步；又派竖亥从北极走到南极，推算度量，长达二亿三万三千五百里又七十五步。
English: Therefore, Yu sent Taizhang to walk from the East Pole to the West Pole, calculating and measuring up to 233,500 miles and 75 steps; he also sent Zhuhai to walk from the North Pole to the South Pole, calculating and measuring up to 233,500 miles and 75 steps.

古文：凡鸿水渊薮，自三百侧以上，二亿三万三千五百五十里，有九渊。
现代文：又总计大的湖泊深潭，深度在三百仞以上的，就有二亿三万三千五百五十九个。
English: In total, there are 233,559 large lakes and deep pools with a depth of more than three hundred fathoms.

古文：禹乃以息土填洪水，以为名山。掘昆仑虚以下地，中有增城九重，其高万一千里百一十四步二尺六寸，上有木禾，其修五寻，珠树、玉树、璇树、不死树在其西，沙棠、琅环在其东，绛树在其南，碧树、瑶树在其北。
现代文：珠树、玉树、琁树、不死树在木禾的西边，沙棠、琅玕在木禾的东边，绛树在木禾的南边，碧树、瑶树在木禾的北边。
English: The pear tree, the jade tree, the eucalyptus tree and the immortelle tree are on the west side of the woodpile, the sandalwood tree and the eucalyptus tree are on the east side of the woodpile, the eucalyptus tree is on the south side of the woodpile, and the jasper tree and the eucalyptus tree are on the north side of the woodpile.

古文：有四百四十门，门间四里，里间九纯，纯丈五尺。
现代文：山旁有四百四十道门，每门相距四里，每门宽九纯，一纯是一丈五尺。
English: Beside the mountain there are four hundred and forty gates. Each gate is four miles apart, and each gate is nine cubits wide, and each cubit is five feet high.

古文：荡有九井玉横，维其西北之隅，北门开以不周之风。
现代文：旁边还有九个用玉做成栏杆的深井，环围在山的西北角。北门敞开着以接纳不周风。
English: Next to it are nine deep shafts with balustrades made of jade, surrounding the northwest corner of the mountain. The north gate is open to let in the wind.

古文：倾宫、旋室、县圃、凉风、樊桐，在昆仑阊阖之中，是其疏圃。
现代文：倾宫、旋室、县圃、凉风、樊桐都在昆仑山的阊阖门里面，是昆仑山的疏圃。
English: The leaning palace, the turning room, the county garden, the cool breeze, and the rhododendron are all inside the gate of Kunlun Mountain, and are the nurseries of Kunlun Mountain.

古文：疏圃之池，浸之黄水，黄水三周复其原，是谓丹水，饮之不死。
现代文：疏圃里的水是从黄泉里渗透出来的，这种黄水环绕三圈后又回复到它的源头，我们把它叫做白水，喝了它可以使人长生不死。
English: The water in the ditch was infiltrated from the Yellow Spring. This yellow water circled around three times and then returned to its source. We call it white water. If you drink it, it can make you immortal.

古文：河水出昆仑东北陬，贯渤海，入禹所导积石山。
现代文：黄河发源于昆仑山的东北山麓，穿过一处大海，流经禹所疏导的积石山。
English: The Yellow River originates in the northeastern foothills of Mount Kunlun, crosses a sea, and flows through the Jushishan Mountains channeled by Yu.

古文：赤水出其东南陬，西南注南海丹泽之东。
现代文：赤水发源于昆仑山的东南麓，向西南流，注入南海的丹泽之东。
English: The red water originates from the southeastern foot of Mount Kunlun, flows southwestward, and flows into the east of Danzhe in the South China Sea.

古文：赤水之东，弱水出自穷石，至于合黎，余波入于流沙。绝流沙，南至南海。
现代文：弱水发源于穷石山，流经合黎时，余波流进了沙漠，穿过沙漠，向南到达南海。
English: The weak water originates from the Kueishishan Mountain, flows through the Lijiang River, and the aftermath flows into the desert, through the desert, and southward to the South China Sea.

古文：洋水出其西北陬，入于南海羽民之南。
现代文：洋水发源于昆仑山的西北麓，流入南海羽民国之南。
English: The Yangshui originates from the northwest foot of Mount Kunlun and flows into the south of the South China Sea and the Republic of China.

古文：凡四水者，帝之神泉，以和百药，以润万物。
现代文：这四条河是天帝的神泉，用它来调和各种药剂，可以滋润万物。
English: These four rivers are God's divine spring, which is used to harmonize all kinds of medicines and can moisturize all things.

古文：昆仑之丘，或上倍之，是谓凉风之山，登之而不死；或上倍之，是谓悬圃，登之乃灵，能使风雨；或上倍之，乃维上天，登之乃神，是谓太帝之居。扶木在阳州，日之所曊。
现代文：那儿是天帝居住的地方。
English: That's where the celestial emperor lives.

古文：建木在都广，众帝所自上下，日中无景，呼而无响，盖天地之中也。
现代文：扶桑木在东方的阳州，太阳从这里开始照耀天下。建木在南方的都广，众天帝从那里上下天庭，日中心的太阳照不出影子来，呼喊时也没有回音，这大概就是天地的正中央。
English: Fusangmu is in Yangzhou in the east, and the sun begins to shine from here. Jianmu in the south is wide, and all the heavenly emperors go up and down from there. The sun in the center of the day does not shine a shadow, and there is no echo when shouting. This is probably the very center of heaven and earth.

古文：若木在建木西，末有十日，其华照下地。
现代文：若木在建木的西边，其末端有十个太阳，光芒照耀着大地。
English: The young tree on the west side of the building has ten suns at the end of it, and the light shines on the earth.

古文：九州之大，纯方千里。
现代文：九州的面积，四边缘各有千里。
English: The area of Kyushu, each of the four edges has a thousand miles.

古文：九州之外，乃有八殥，亦方千里。
现代文：九州之外，还有八，也是边缘四方各有千里。
English: In addition to Kyushu, there are also eight provinces, and there are thousands of kilometers in each of the four directions on the edge.

古文：自东北方曰大泽，曰元通；东方曰大渚，曰少海；东南方曰具区，曰元泽；南方曰大梦，曰浩泽；西南方曰渚资，曰丹泽；西方曰九区，曰泉泽；西北方曰大夏，曰海泽；北方曰大冥，曰寒泽。
现代文：从东北方起叫无通，叫大泽。东方的叫大渚，叫少海。东南方的叫具区，叫元泽。南方的叫大梦，叫浩泽。西南方的叫渚资，叫丹泽。西方的叫九区，叫泉泽。西北方的叫大夏，叫海泽。北方的叫大冥，叫寒泽。
English: From the northeast, it is called Muzong, called Osawa. From the east, it is called Dashu, called Shouhai. From the southeast, it is called Gifu, called Motozawa. From the south, it is called Daming, called Kouzawa. From the southwest, it is called Nagisa, called Danzawa. From the west, it is called Jiuzha, called Izumizawa. From the northwest, it is called Dasha, called Haizawa. From the north, it is called Dadong, called Kanzawa.

古文：凡八殥八泽之云，是雨九州。
现代文：这八殥八泽的云气凝成雨水滋润九州。
English: The clouds of these eight rivers and lakes condense into rainwater, which moistens Kyushu.

古文：八殥之外，而有八纮，亦方千里。
现代文：八之外还有八纮，也是边缘四方各有千里。
English: In addition to the eight, there are also eight ridges, and there are also thousands of miles in each of the four directions.

古文：自东北方曰和丘，曰荒土；东方曰棘林，曰桑野；东南方曰大穷，曰众女；南方曰都广，曰反户；西南方曰焦侥，曰炎土；西方曰金丘，曰沃野；西北方曰一目，曰沙所；北方曰积冰。曰委羽。
现代文：从东北方起叫和丘，叫荒土。东方的叫棘林，叫桑野。东南方的叫大穷，叫众女。南方的叫都广，叫反户。西南方的叫焦侥，叫炎土。西方的叫金丘，叫沃野。西北方的叫一目，叫沙所。北方的叫积冰，叫委羽。
English: From the northeast, it is called Wachuo, which means "wasteland." From the east, it is called Thorn Forest, which means "mulberry field." From the southeast, it is called Dabun, which means "all women." From the south, it is called Duguang, which means "rebellious house." From the southwest, it is called Jiao Hui, which means "burning soil." From the west, it is called Jinqiu, which means "fertile field." From the northwest, it is called Hitome, which means "sandbox." From the north, it is called Jie Bing, which means "accumulating ice," and from the

古文：凡八纮之气，是出寒暑，以合八正，必以风雨。
现代文：这八?的气流形成气候的寒冷暑热，和八风的风向结合，所以定能兴风作雨。
English: These eight air currents form the cold and heat of the climate, combined with the wind direction of the eight winds, so it is certain to cause wind and rain.

古文：八纮之外，乃有八极。
现代文：八纮之外，还有八极。
English: In addition to the eight gongs, there are also eight poles.

古文：自东北方曰方土之山，曰苍门；东方曰东极之山，曰开明之门；东南方曰波母之山，曰阳门；南方曰南极之山，曰暑门；西南方曰编驹之山，曰白门；西方曰西极之山，曰阊阖之门；西北方曰不周之山，曰幽都之门；北方曰北极之山，曰寒门。
现代文：自东北方起叫方土山，叫苍门。东方叫东极山，叫开明门。东南方叫波母山，叫阳门。南方叫南极山，叫暑门。西南方叫编驹山，叫白门。西方叫西极山，叫阊阖门。西北方叫不周山，叫幽都门。北方叫北极山，叫寒门。这八极的云气凝成雨水洒遍天下；这八门的风调节着四季的寒暑变化。
English: From the northeast, it is called Fangdu Mountain and called Cangmen. From the east, it is called Dongji Mountain and called Kaiming Gate. From the southeast, it is called Bo Moushan and called Yangmen. From the south, it is called South Pole Mountain and called Summer Gate. From the southwest, it is called Henan Mountain and called Baimen. From the west, it is called West Pole Mountain and called Qimen. From the northwest, it is called Wuzhoushan and called Youdu Gate. From the north, it is called North Pole Mountain and called Cold Gate. The clouds of the eight poles condense into rain and sprinkle all over the world; the winds

古文：凡八极之云，是雨天下；八门之风，是节寒暑；八纮八殥、八泽之云，以雨九州而和中土。
现代文：八纮八殥八泽的云气都凝成雨水降落九州，滋润中土大地。东方出产的美好的东西，有医毋闾山上的珣碢琪。
English: The clouds of Hachinohe and Yaze all condense into rainwater that falls on Kyushu, moisturizing the Middle Earth. The beautiful things produced in the East are more healing than the beauty of the mountains.

古文：东方之美者，有医毋阎之珣玕琪焉。
现代文：东南方出产的美好的东西，有会稽的箭竹。
English: Beautiful things produced in the southeast are made from arrow bamboo.

古文：东南方之美者，有会稽之竹箭焉。
现代文：南方出产的美好的东西，有梁山的犀角和象牙。
English: The beautiful things produced in the south include rhinoceros horns and ivory from Mount Liang.

古文：南方之美者，有华山之金石焉。
现代文：西南方出产的美好的东西，有华山的黄金和玉石。
English: The beautiful things produced in the southwest include the gold and jade of Huashan.

古文：西方之美者，有霍山之珠玉焉。
现代文：西方出产的美好的东西，有霍山的夜明珠和五色玉。
English: The beautiful things produced in the West include Huoshan's night pearls and five-colored gems.

古文：西北方之美者，有昆仑之球琳琅玕焉。
现代文：西北方出产的美好的东西，有昆仑山上的各种美玉。
English: The beautiful things produced in the northwest include all kinds of gems from the Kunlun Mountains.

古文：北方之美者，有幽都之筋角焉。
现代文：北方出产的美好的东西，有幽都的筋角硬弓。
English: The beautiful things produced in the north have the sinewy angles and hard bows of the capital.

古文：东北方之美者，有斥山之文皮焉。
现代文：东北方出产的美好的东西，有斥山的虎豹毛皮。
English: The finest products of the northeastern region are the tiger and leopard pelts from the mountains.

古文：中央之美者，有岱岳以生五谷桑麻，鱼盐出焉。
现代文：中部地区出产的美好的东西，有泰山附近的五谷、桑麻和鱼盐。
English: Good things produced in the central region include sorghum, mulberry and fish salt from the vicinity of Mount Tai.

古文：凡地形，东西为纬，南北为经。
现代文：大凡地形是，东西方向的叫纬，南北方向的叫经。
English: The general topography is called the meridian in the east-west direction and the meridian in the north-south direction.

古文：山为积德，川为积刑。高者为生，下者为死。丘陵为牡，豁谷为牧。
现代文：山因高大沉稳而象征着仁爱宽厚的美德，水因流动不居而象征着奸巧伪诈；高而朝阳处促使万物生长，低而阴暗处加速生物衰亡；丘陵山峰因雄伟而透露阳刚之气，溪谷低洼因幽深而显示阴柔之情。
English: Mountains, because of their height and stability, symbolize the virtues of benevolence, love, and generosity; water, because of its flow and impermanence, symbolizes cunning and deceit; high and sunny places promote the growth of all things, low and dark places accelerate the decline of living things; hilly peaks reveal masculinity because of their grandeur, and low-lying valleys show feminine tenderness because of their depth.

古文：水圆折者有珠，方折者有玉。清水有黄金，龙渊有玉英。
现代文：水波圆转的区域藏有珍珠，水波方正的区域藏有玉石；清澈的水域中含有黄金，混浑的龙潭中含有玉之精华。
English: The area where the water waves are round contains pearls, and the area where the water waves are square contains jade; the clear waters contain gold, and the muddy dragon pool contains the essence of jade.

古文：土地各以其类生，是故山气多男，泽气多女；障气多暗，风气多聋；林气多癃，木气多伛；岸下气多肿，石气多力；险阻气多瘿：暑气多夭，寒气多寿；谷气多痹，丘气多狂；衍气多仁，陵气多贪。
现代文：土地各以它们不同的品类而影响着所出产的物品。因此，山中云气多而使人生男孩，沼泽雾气多而使人多生女婴；湿热瘴气多使人喑哑，邪恶风气多使人耳聋；森林之气重使人腿瘸，木林之气重使人背驼，河岸之气重使人脚肿；居岩石地区的人力气大，险阻地区的人易患粗脖子病；暑热之气使人命短，寒冷之气助人长寿，山谷之气吹多使人肢体麻痹，丘陵之气吹多使人骨骼弯曲；平衍之气教人仁爱，土山之气诱人贪婪。
English: Therefore, the mountains have more clouds and produce more boys, the marshes have more fog and produce more baby girls; the hot and humid miasmas are more likely to make people dumb, and the evil spirits are more likely to make people deaf; the forest is more likely to make people limp, the woods are more likely to make people hunchbacked, and the riverbanks are more likely to make people's feet swollen; the rocky areas have more manpower, and people in dangerous areas are more likely to suffer from thick neck disease; the hot and hot winds make people's lives short, the cold winds help people live longer, the valley winds are more likely to paralyze people's lim

古文：轻土多利，重土多迟，清水音小，浊水音大；湍水人轻，迟水人重。
现代文：土质松软的地方上的人行动敏捷，土质板结的地方上的人行动迟钝。水流清澈的地方上的人声音细柔，水流浑浊的地方上的人声音粗重；生活在水流湍急边上的人身体轻飘，生活在水流迟缓边上的人身体笨重；地处九州中心的人中多出圣人。
English: People in places with soft soil move quickly, people in places with hard soil move slowly. People in places with clear water have soft voices, people in places with muddy water have heavy voices. People who live on the edge of fast-flowing water are light, people who live on the edge of slow-flowing water are heavy. People in the center of Kyushu have more saints.

古文：中土多圣人，皆象其气，皆应其类。
现代文：总之，人的心理生理特征性格都和他们生活的地形气候特征相类似，并和这些地形气候特征相呼应。
English: In short, people's psychophysiological characteristics are similar to the topographical and climatic characteristics of their lives, and echo these topographical and climatic characteristics.

古文：故南方有不死之草，北方有不释之冰；东方有君子之国，西方有形残之尸。
现代文：正因为这样，所以南方会有常绿不衰的草，北方会有长年不化的冰，东方会有长寿的君子，西方会有夭残的尸体。
English: Because of this, the south will have evergreen grass, the north will have long-lasting ice, the east will have long-lived gentlemen, and the west will have young corpses.

古文：寝居直梦，人死为鬼；磁石上飞，云母来水；土龙致雨，燕雁代飞，蛤蟹珠龟，与月盛衰。
现代文：睡觉时做梦会有应验，人死后神灵会变成鬼，磁石能吸引金属物，云母可以引来露水。土龙可以使旱天降雨，燕子大雁可以按节气南来北往。蛤、蟹、珠、龟可以随着月亮盈云而盛衰。
English: Dreams while sleeping will come true, gods will turn into ghosts after death, magnets can attract metal objects, mica can attract dew, soil dragons can make it rain on dry days, swallows and geese can travel north and south according to the solar terms, and dragonflies, crabs, beads, and turtles can rise and fall with the moon.

古文：是故坚土人刚，弱土人肥；垆土人大，沙土人细；息土人美，耗土人丑。
现代文：因此，在坚硬土地上生活的人性格刚强，在松软土地上生活的人性格脆弱；黑硬土质上生活的人身材壮大，沙土上生活的人体形矮小；土地肥沃的地方上的人长得美丽，土地贫瘠的地方上的人长得丑陋。
English: Therefore, people who live on hard soil have strong characters, while those who live on soft soil have weak characters; people who live on hard black soil are tall, while those who live on sandy soil are short; people who live on fertile land are beautiful, and people who live on poor land are ugly.

古文：食水者善游能寒，食土者无心而慧，食木者多力而拂，食草者善走而愚，食叶者有丝而蛾，食肉者勇敢而悍，食气者神明而寿，食谷者知慧而夭，不食者不死而神。
现代文：也因为这样，所以食水的鱼类善于游水而且耐寒，食土的蚯蚓类无心而不息，食木的熊罴类力大而爱发怒，食草的鹿类善于奔跑但愚蠢，食叶的蚕类抽丝作茧而最后化为飞蛾，食肉的虎豹鹰雕勇敢而且凶悍，食气的王乔赤松神明而且长寿，食五谷的人类聪明但短命，什么都不吃的倒可以修炼为神。
English: Also because of this, water-eating fish are good at swimming and cold-resistant, earth-eating mollusks are heartless and restless, wood-eating bear mollusks are strong and angry, herbivorous deer are good at running but stupid, leaf-eating silkworms make silk cocoons and finally turn into moths, carnivorous tigers and leopards eagle carvings are brave and fierce, gas-eating Wang Qiao red pine gods and long life, cereal-eating humans are smart but short-lived, but they can cultivate as gods without eating anything.

古文：凡人民禽兽万物贞虫，各有以生，或奇或偶，或飞或走，莫知其情，唯知通道者，能原本之。
现代文：所以，凡人类、飞禽、走兽，乃至一切生物体，都各自有其产生的缘由和适应环境的生存本领，或奇或偶、或飞或走，没有人能够知道其中的奥秘、真情，只有通达 道 的人才能探寻出这里的本原。
English: Therefore, all human beings, birds, beasts, and even all living organisms have their own reasons for their origin and survival ability to adapt to the environment, either strange or coincidental, or fly or walk. No one can know the secrets and true feelings. Only those who are well-versed can explore the origin here.

古文：天一地二人三，三三而九，九九八十一。
现代文：天是一为阳，地是二为阴，人生于天地，是为三，三三得九，九九八十一。
English: Heaven is one for the sun, the earth is two for the shade, born in heaven and earth, is for three, three three get nine, nine nine eighty-one.

古文：一主日，日数十，日主人，人故十月而生。
现代文：是一为阳的天主管为阳的天干，天干数是十，又主管着人类，所以人怀胎十月而出生。
English: The number of heavenly stems is ten, and it also governs human beings, which is why people are born in October.

古文：八九七十二，二主偶，偶以承奇，奇主辰，辰主月，月主马，马故十二月而生。
现代文：八九七十二，二是偶数之首，偶数为阴而不能自主，须承阳为主，奇数主管十二辰，十二辰主管月，月主管马，所以马怀胎十二月而出生。
English: 8972, the second is the first of the even numbers, the even number is yin and cannot be independent, it must follow the yang, the odd number is in charge of the 12th hour, the 12th hour is in charge of the month, and the month is in charge of the horse, so the horse was born in December.

古文：七九六十三，三主斗，斗主犬，犬故三月而生。
现代文：七九六十三，三主管北斗，北斗主管犬，所以犬怀胎三月而出生。
English: In 7963, there were three dogs in charge of Beidou and three dogs in charge of Beidou. Therefore, the dog was born in March.

古文：六九五十四，四主时，时主彘，彘故四月而生。
现代文：六九五十四，四主管春夏秋冬四季，四季主管猪，所以猪怀胎四月而出生。
English: In 654, the four seasons of spring, summer, autumn and winter were in charge of the four seasons, and the four seasons were in charge of the pig, so the pig was born in April.

古文：五九四十五，五主音，音主猿，猿故五月而生。
现代文：五九四十五，五主管五音，五音主管猿猴，所以猿猴怀胎五月而出生。
English: Five-nine-forty-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-five, five-

古文：四九三十六，六主律，律主麋鹿，麋鹿故六月而生。
现代文：四九三十六，六主管六律，六律主管麋鹿，所以麋鹿怀胎六月而出生。
English: Forty-nine thirty-six, six in charge of the six laws, six in charge of the elk, so the elk was born in June.

古文：三九二十七，七主星，星主虎，虎故七月而生。
现代文：三九二十七，七主管星宿，星宿主管老虎，所以老虎怀胎七月而出生。
English: Thirty-nine and twenty-seven, seven in charge of the stars, the stars in charge of the tiger, so the tiger was born in July.

古文：二九十八，八主风，风主虫，虫故八月而化。
现代文：二九十八，八主管八风，八风主管虫类，所以虫类八天孵化出幼虫。
English: In the year 298, the eight winds govern the eight winds, and the eight winds govern the insects. Therefore, the insects hatch their larvae in eight days.

古文：鸟鱼皆生于阴，阴属于阳，故鸟鱼皆卵生。鱼游于水，鸟飞于云，故立冬燕雀入海，化为蛤。
现代文：鸟类和鱼类都是卵生但又属于阳性动物，所以鱼类和鸟类尽管是卵生，但鱼在水里游，鸟在空中飞，所以立冬时节燕雀进入海中变成蛤。
English: Birds and fish are oviparous but also belong to the male animals, so although the fish and birds are oviparous, the fish swim in the water and the birds fly in the air, so when the terns enter the sea in winter, they become tadpoles.

古文：万物之生而各异类，蚕食而不饮，蝉饮而不食，蜉蝣不饮不食，介鳞者夏食而冬蛰，啮吞者八窍而卵生，嚼咽者九窍而胎生，四足者无羽翼，戴角者无上齿，无角者膏而无前，有角者指而无后，昼生者类父，夜生者似母，至阴生牝，至阳生牡。
现代文：万物的生活习性是各不相同的：蚕只吃桑叶而不饮水，蝉却只喝水而不吃食物，蜉蝣则不吃也不喝，有鳞壳的龟、鱼又是夏天觅食冬天伏藏。整个吞吃食物的鸟类和鱼类生有八窍且是卵生，而靠咀嚼进食的哺乳类却生有九窍且是胎生；四足动物不长羽毛翅膀，而长角动物却不生上齿。无角的动物脂肪松稀且前半部分细瘦，有角的动物脂肪紧凝且后半部分细瘦。白天出生的孩子像父亲，晚上出生的孩子像母亲。阴气极盛的生雌性，阳气极盛的生雄性。
English: The living habits of all things are different: silkworms only eat mulberry leaves and do not drink water, cicadas only drink water and do not eat food, earthworms do not eat or drink, scaly-shelled turtles and fish also forage in the summer and hide in the winter. Birds and fish that swallow food whole have eight eyes and are oviparous, while mammals that eat by chewing have nine eyes and are viviparous; tetrapods do not grow feather wings, while longhorns do not grow upper teeth. Hornless animals have thin fat and thin in the first half, horned animals have dense fat and thin in the second half.

古文：夫熊罴蛰藏，飞鸟时移。
现代文：熊罴冬眠伏藏，候鸟按时迁徙。
English: Bear cubs hibernate and hide, migratory birds migrate on time.

古文：是故白水宜玉，黑水宜砥，青水宜碧，赤水宜丹，黄水宜金，清水宜龟，汾水浊而宜麻，水通和而宜麦，河水中浊而宜菽，雒水轻利而宜禾，渭水多力而宜黍，汉水重安而宜竹，江水肥仁而宜稻。平土之人，慧而宜五谷。
现代文：所以白色的水适宜生玉，黑色的水适宜产磨石，青色的水适宜产碧，赤色的水适宜生朱砂，黄色的水适宜产黄金，清澈的水适宜龟的生存。这样，汾水濛浊而适宜麻的生长，泲水通和适宜麦类作物，黄河水中和适宜豆类生长，洛水轻畅适宜谷类作物，渭水多力适宜黍子生长，汉水重安适宜竹子生长，江水厚仁适宜水稻生长，而平原上的人聪慧适宜播种五谷。
English: Therefore, white water is suitable for the production of jade, black water is suitable for the production of grindstone, blue water is suitable for the production of sapphire, red water is suitable for the production of cinnabar, yellow water is suitable for the production of gold, and clear water is suitable for the survival of turtles. In this way, brackish water is suitable for the growth of hemp, brackish water is suitable for the growth of wheat crops, the Yellow River water is suitable for the growth of beans, Luo water is light and suitable for cereal crops, brackish water is suitable for the growth of hazelnuts, Chinese water is suitable for the growth of bamboo,

古文：东方川谷之所注，日月之所出，其人兑形小头，隆鼻大口，鸢肩企行，窍通于目，筋气属焉，苍色主肝，长大早知而不寿；其地宜麦，多虎豹。
现代文：东方是河流溪水汇聚的地方，也是日月升起的方位。居住在那里的人体形尖细，高鼻子大嘴巴，鹰肩耸起，走路踮着脚；身体的各个孔窍与眼睛相通，身上的筋络气血也连通眼睛，东方属青色主管肝脏；那里的人身材高大、智力早熟但寿命不长。那里的土质适宜种麦但虎豹很多。
English: The East is the place where the rivers and streams converge, and it is also the direction of the rising of the sun and moon. The human body that lives there is pointed, with a high nose and a large mouth, hunched shoulders, and walks with a tiptoe; the various orifices of the body are connected to the eyes, and the sinews and blood of the body are also connected to the eyes. The East is a blue-colored liver; the people there are tall, the intelligence is precocious, but the life expectancy is not long. The soil there is suitable for sowing wheat, but there are many tigers and leopards.

古文：南方，阳气之所积，暑湿居之，其人修形兑上，大口决此，窍通于耳，血脉属焉，赤色主心，早壮而夭；其地宜稻，多兕象。
现代文：南方是阳气聚集和暑热潮气停留的地方。居住在那里的人形体修长上部尖瘦，嘴大眼眶深陷；身体的各个孔窍与耳相通，身上的气脉也连通耳道，南方属赤色主管心脏；那里的人成熟得早但也短命。那里的土质适宜种稻但犀牛大象很多。
English: The south is the place where yang gathers and hot and humid air stays. The humanoids who live there are slender, with a long upper part that is pointed and thin, and a large mouth and deep-set eyelids. The various orifices of the body are connected to the ears, and the air veins on the body are also connected to the ear canals. The south belongs to the red competent heart. People there mature early, but they are short-lived. The soil quality there is suitable for growing rice, but there are many rhinoceros elephants.

古文：西方高土，川谷出焉，日月入焉，其人面末偻，修颈行，窍通于鼻，皮革属焉，白色主肺，勇敢不仁；其地宜黍，多旄犀。
现代文：西方高山高原是河流发源和太阳月亮落下的地方。居住在那里的人脊背弯曲，脖子细长，走路昂着头；身体的各个孔窍与鼻相通，身上的皮肤也连通鼻腔，西方属白色主管肺；那里的人勇敢但不仁慈。那里的土质适宜种黍子但旄牛犀牛很多。
English: The western alpine plateau is the place where rivers originate and the sun and moon set. The people who live there have curved backs, slender necks, and walk with their heads held high. The body's various orifices are connected to the nose, and the skin on the body is also connected to the nasal cavity. The west is white and is responsible for the lungs. The people there are brave but not merciful. The soil there is suitable for growing hazelnuts, but there are many yaks and rhinos.

古文：北方幽晦不明，天之所闭也，寒水之所积也，蛰虫之所伏也，其人翕形短颈，大肩下尻，窍通于阴，骨干属焉，黑色主肾，其人蠢愚，禽兽而寿；其地宜菽，多犬马。
现代文：北方幽暗不明，是天地闭合，寒冰积聚，动物蛰藏的地方。那里的人体形短缩，脖子短，肩膀宽而臀部下垂；身体的各个孔窍与阴部相通，骨骼的发育也与阴部功能相关；北方属黑色主管肾脏；那里的人愚笨但长寿。那里的土质适宜种豆类但马狗很多。
English: The north is dark and unknown, a place where heaven and earth are closed, cold ice accumulates, and animals are hidden. There, the human body is shortened, the neck is short, the shoulders are wide and the hips are sagging; the various orifices of the body are connected to the genitals, and the development of bones is also related to the function of the genitals; the north is black and is responsible for the kidneys; the people there are stupid but long-lived. The soil there is suitable for growing beans, but there are many horses and dogs.

古文：中央四达，风气之所通，雨露之所会也，其人大面短颐，美须恶肥，窍通于口，肤肉属焉，黄色主胃，慧圣而好治；其地宜禾，多牛羊及六畜。
现代文：中部地区四通八达，是风云流通、雨露汇聚的好地方。居住在那里的人脸大腮帮短，须髯美丽但过于肥胖；身体的各个孔窍与口腔相通，身上的发达肌肉与口的作用相关连；中土属黄色主管胃；那里的人聪明有才、无所不通且善于治理国事。那里的地方适宜种五谷，并有很多牛羊及家畜。
English: The central region is easily accessible and is a good place for the circulation of wind and clouds and the convergence of rain and dew. The people who live there have a short face and a beautiful beard, but they are too fat; the various orifices of the body are connected to the mouth, and the developed muscles of the body are related to the role of the mouth; the central region is a yellow competent stomach; the people there are clever and talented, all-knowing and good at governing state affairs. The place is suitable for growing cereals, and there are many cattle and sheep and livestock.

古文：木胜土，土胜水，水胜火，火胜金，金胜木，故禾春生秋死，菽夏生冬死，麦秋生夏死，荠冬生中夏死。
现代文：属土旺盛的时间，火处于衰竭阶段，金处于生长时期，木处于抑制过程而水处于死亡时候。属金旺盛的时间，土处于衰竭阶段，水处于生长时期，火处于抑制过程而木处于死亡时候。
English: When earth is in its prime, fire is in the exhaustion stage, gold is in the growth stage, wood is in the suppression stage and water is in the death stage. When gold is in its prime, earth is in the exhaustion stage, water is in the growth stage, fire is in the suppression stage and wood is in the death stage.

古文：木壮，水老火生金囚土死；火壮，木老土生水囚金死；土壮，火老金生木囚水死；金壮，土老水生火囚木死。音有五声，宫其主也；色有五章，黄其主也；味有五变，甘其主也；位有五材，土其主也。
现代文：属水旺盛的时间，金处于衰竭阶段，木处于生长时期，土处于抑制过程而火处于死亡时候。音有 宫商角徵羽 五种，其中 宫 是主音。色有 赤青黄白黑 五种，其中 黄 是主色。味有 酸辛甘苦咸 五种，其中 甘 是主味。位有 东西南北中 ，其中和 中 相配的 土 是主位。
English: It is the time when water is abundant, gold is in the exhaustion stage, wood is in the growth stage, soil is in the suppression process and fire is in the death stage. There are five kinds of sound, of which the palace is the main sound. There are five kinds of color, of which yellow is the main color. There are five kinds of taste, of which sweet is the main taste. There are five kinds of taste, of which sweet is the main taste. There are five kinds of taste, of which sweet is the main taste. There are five kinds of taste, of which sweet is the main taste. There are five kinds of taste, of which sweet is the main taste.

古文：是故炼土生木，炼木生火，炼火生云，炼云生水，炼水反土。
现代文：因此，用土可生木，用木可生火，用火可生金，用金可生水，水又可返回到土。
English: Therefore, soil can produce wood, wood can produce fire, fire can produce gold, gold can produce water, and water can return to the soil.

古文：炼甘生酸，炼酸生辛，炼辛生苦，炼苦生咸，炼咸反甘。
现代文：同样，用甘可生酸，用酸可生辛，用辛可生苦，用苦可生咸，咸又可返回到甘。
English: In the same way, sweet can be used to produce acid, acid can be used to produce pungent, pungent can be used to produce bitter, bitter can be used to produce salty, and salty can be returned to sweet.

古文：变宫生徵，变徵生商，变商生羽，变羽生角，变角生宫。
现代文：还有，变化宫音可生成 徵 ，变化徵音可生成 商 ，变化商音可生成 羽 ，变化羽音可生成 角 ，变化角音又可生成 宫 。
English: In addition, a change of palatal consonant can produce a consonant, a change of palatal consonant can produce a consonant, a change of palatal consonant can produce a plume, a change of plume can produce a horn, and a change of horn can produce a palate.

古文：是故以水和土，以土和火，以火化金，以金治木，木得反土。
现代文：所以，以水可以调和土，以土可以调和火，以火可以融化金，以金可以处治木，木又能返回到土。
English: Therefore, water can be used to temper earth, earth can be used to temper fire, fire can be used to melt gold, gold can be used to cure wood, and wood can return to the earth.

古文：五行相治，所以成器用。
现代文：这五行的相生相克就是如此，根据这些人们来制作各种器物。
English: This is how the five elements are intertwined, and people make all kinds of utensils according to them.

古文：凡海外三十六国。自西北至西南方，有修股民，天民，肃慎民，白民，沃民，女子民，丈夫民，奇股民，一臂民，三身民。自西南至东南方，结胸民，羽民，讙头国民，裸国民，三苗民，交股民，不死民，穿胸民，反舌民，豕喙民，凿齿民，三头民，修臂民。自东南至东北方，有大人国，君子国，黑齿民，玄股民，毛民，劳民。自东北至西北方，有跂踵民，句婴民，深目民，无肠民，柔利民，一目民，无继民。
现代文：海外共有三十六国：从西北到西南方，有修股民、天民、肃慎民、白民、沃民、女子民、丈夫民、奇股民、一臂民、三身民；从西南到东南方，有结胸民、羽民、碮头国民、裸国民、三苗民、交股民、不死民、穿胸民、反舌民、豕喙民、凿齿民、三头民、修臂民；从东南到东北方，有大人国、君子国、黑齿民、玄股民、毛民、劳民；从东北到西北方，有碯踵民、句婴民、深目民、无肠民、柔利民、一目民、无继民。
English: There are a total of thirty-six countries overseas: from the northwest to the southwest, there are reformers, heavenly people, prudent people, white people, virtuous people, women's people, husband people, strange people, one-armed people, and three-bodied people; from the southwest to the southeast, there are chest people, feather people, bald people, naked people, three-seeded people, cross-share people, undead people, chest people, anti-tongue people, deaf people, chiseled teeth people, three-headed people, and arm repair people; from the southeast to the northeast, there are adults, gentlemen, black-toothed people,

古文：雒棠、武人在西北贩，硥鱼在其南。
现代文：雒棠山和武人山在西北角，硥鱼在其南边。
English: Zhaotang Mountain and Wujin Mountain are in the northwest corner, and the carp fishery is in the south.

古文：有神二人连臂，为帝候夜，在其西南方。
现代文：有两位神人，手挽手为天帝在西南方值夜放哨。
English: There are two godmen, arm-in-arm, keeping watch at night for the Heavenly Emperor in the southwest.

古文：三珠树在其东北方，有玉树在赤水之上。
现代文：三珠树就在它的东北方，有玉树在赤水边上。
English: The three-pearl tree is in the northeast of it, and there is a jade tree on the edge of the red water.

古文：昆仑、华丘在其东南方，爱有遗玉、青马、视肉、杨桃、甘楂、甘华、百果所生。
现代文：昆仑山和华丘在它的东南方，那里有宝玉、青马、视肉、杨桃、甘碷、甘华等神异之物，是各种果树生长的地方。
English: Kunlun Mountain and Huaqiu in the southeast of it, where there are baobabs, blue horses, carrion, poplar peaches, caramels, camellias and other supernatural things, are the places where all kinds of fruit trees grow.

古文：和丘在其东北陬，三桑、无枝在其西，夸父、耽耳在其北方，夸父弃其策，是为邓林。
现代文：和丘在它的东北角，无枝的三桑树在它西边，夸父山、耽耳国就在它的北边。夸父与日逐走时丢掉的拐杖化为邓林就在那里。
English: Wa hill is in its northeast corner, the branchless three mulberry trees are on its west side, and Mount Kuafu and Tan Er country are on its north side. The crutches that Kuafu lost when he ran away from the sun have turned into the Dunlin forest.

古文：昆吾丘在南方。轩辕丘在西方。
现代文：昆吾山在南方，轩辕丘在西方。
English: Kunwushan in the south, Xuanqiu in the west.

古文：巫咸在其北方，立登保之山。
现代文：巫咸在它的北方，伫站在登保山顶。
English: Wuxian is to the north of it, and Handan stands on the top of Dengbao Mountain.

古文：肠谷、榑桑在东方。
现代文：旸谷、榑桑在东方。
English: Shibuya and Shosan are in the east.

古文：有娀在不周之北，长女简翟，少女建疵。
现代文：有娀国在不周山的北面，国君的公主大的叫简翟，小的叫建疵。
English: On the north side of the mountain, the princess of the prince of the country is called Jian Zhou, and the small one is called Jian Qi.

古文：西王母在流沙之濒。
现代文：西王母住流沙边的昆仑山洞中。
English: Xi Wangmu lives in a cave in the Kunlun Mountains on the edge of the quicksand.

古文：乐民、拏闾在昆仑弱水之洲。
现代文：乐民国、拏闾在昆仑、弱水的洲上。
English: The Republic of Le is in Kunlun, on the continent of Weak Water.

古文：三危在乐民西。
现代文：三危山在乐民国的西边。
English: Sanxia Mountain is located in the west of the Republic of China.

古文：宵明、烛光在河洲，所照方千里。
现代文：宵明、烛光二女神在黄河的冰洲上，光明照耀着千里大地。
English: The two goddesses of dawn and candlelight are on the ice of the Yellow River. The light shines on thousands of miles of land.

古文：龙门在河渊。
现代文：龙门山处黄河之渊。
English: Longmen Mountain is at the bottom of the Yellow River.

古文：湍池在昆仑。
现代文：湍池在昆仑山。
English: Dianchi Lake is in the Kunlun Mountains.

古文：玄耀、不周、申池在海隅。
现代文：玄耀山、不周山、申池在海边。
English: Genyao Mountain, Fuzhou Mountain and Shinchi Pond are on the seashore.

古文：孟诸在沛。
现代文：孟诸泽则在沛郡。
English: Meng Zhuze is in Pei County.

古文：少室、太室在冀州。
现代文：少室山和太室山在冀州。
English: Less Muroyama and Taimuroyama are in Jizhou.

古文：烛龙在雁门北，蔽于委羽之山，不见日，其神人面龙身而无足。
现代文：烛龙在雁门之北，隐蔽在委羽山中，不见太阳，那里的神是人面龙身，没有脚。
English: The Candle Dragon is in the north of the Wild Goose Gate, hidden in the Weiwu Mountain, without the sun. The god there is a man-faced dragon with no feet.

古文：后稷拢在建木西，其人死复苏，其半鱼在其间。
现代文：后稷的坟墓在都广泽建木的西边，那里的人能死而复生，复生后身体一半是鱼形，处在中间。
English: Houyi's grave is on the west side of Duguangze Jianmu, where people can die and come back to life, and after the resurrection, half of the body is fish-shaped, in the middle.

古文：流黄、沃民在其北方三百里，狗国在其东。
现代文：流黄和沃民在它的北边三百里。狗国在它的东面。
English: Liuhuang and Womin are three hundred miles to the north, and the Dog Kingdom is to the east.

古文：雷泽有神，龙身人头，鼓其腹而熙。
现代文：雷泽中有种神，是龙身人头，拍打着肚子在嬉戏玩耍。
English: There is a kind of god in the lightning, it is a dragon with a human head, flapping its belly in play.

古文：江出岷山，东流绝汉入海，左还北流，至于开母之北，右还东流，至于东极。
现代文：长江发源于岷山，东流会融汉水而流入大海。途中左拐向北流，到达开母以北，又右拐再向东，直到流向东方之极而入海。
English: The Yangtze River originates from the Lushan Mountains. The east stream will melt the Chinese water and flow into the sea. On the way, turn left to the north stream, reach the north of the headwaters, turn right again to the east, until it flows to the east and enters the sea.

古文：河出积石。
现代文：黄河从积石山流出。
English: The Yellow River flows out of Jishi Mountain.

古文：睢出荆山。
现代文：睢水出自荆山。
English: The spring water comes from Mount Jing.

古文：淮出桐柏山。
现代文：淮河发源于桐柏山。
English: The Huai River originates from Tongbai Mountain.

古文：睢出羽山。
现代文：睢河发源于羽山。
English: The Min River originates in Mount Hasan.

古文：清漳出楬戾。浊漳出发包。
现代文：清漳河发源于揭戾山，浊漳河发源于发包山。
English: The source of the Qingshan River is Jieyuan Mountain, and the source of the Li River is Fabaoshan Mountain.

古文：济出王屋。
现代文：济水出自王屋山。
English: Feeding water comes from Wangyashan.

古文：时、泗、沂出臺、台、术。
现代文：时水、泗水、沂水分别出自臺、台和术三处。
English: Shisui, Shisui, and Shisui come from three places in Taiwan, Taiwan, and Jiu respectively.

古文：洛出猎出。
现代文：洛河发源于猎山。
English: The Luo River originates from the Jiao Mountain.

古文：汶出弗其，西流合于济。
现代文：汶河发源于马耳山，向西流汇合于济水。
English: The Wen River originates in Mount Malta and flows westward to meet at Jishui.

古文：汉出蟠冢。
现代文：汉水发源于嶓冢山。
English: Hanshui originated in Shaoshan.

古文：径出薄落之山。
现代文：泾水发源于薄落山。
English: Surabaya's water originates from thinly sloping mountains.

古文：渭出鸟鼠同穴。
现代文：渭河发源于鸟鼠同穴的鸟鼠山。
English: The Lugu River originates from the Bird and Mouse Mountain.

古文：伊出上魏。
现代文：伊河发源于上魏。
English: The Yi River originated in the Upper Wei Dynasty.

古文：雒出熊耳。
现代文：雒水出自熊耳山。
English: Surabaya's water comes from Mount Xiong'er.

古文：浚出华窍。
现代文：浚河出自华窍。
English: The dredging of the river originated in Huatou.

古文：维出覆舟。
现代文：维水发源于覆舟山。
English: Wei Shui originated in Zhoushan.

古文：汾出燕京。
现代文：汾水发源于燕京山。
English: Surabaya's water originates from Yanjing Mountain.

古文：衽出渍熊。
现代文：衽水出自碽熊山。
English: Surabaya's water comes from Mount Raccoon.

古文：淄出目饴。
现代文：淄水出自目饴。
English: Water drips from the eyelids.

古文：丹水出高褚。
现代文：丹水发源于高褚山。
English: Danshui originates from Mount Gaochao.

古文：股出嶕山，镐出鲜于。
现代文：股水出自嶕山。镐水出自鲜于。
English: The spring water comes from Lushan. The brackish water is fresh from the estuary.

古文：凉出茅卢、石梁。
现代文：凉水发源于茅卢、石梁。
English: The cool water originates from Maolu and Shiliang.

古文：汝出猛山。
现代文：汝河发源于猛山。
English: The source of the Ryu River is in Mt.

古文：淇出大号。
现代文：淇水发源于大号山。
English: The water originates from the Daming Mountain.

古文：晋出龙山结给。
现代文：晋水发源于龙山结绌。
English: Jinshui originated from Longshan knotweed.

古文：合出封羊。
现代文：合水发源于封羊山。
English: He Shui originates from Fengyang Mountain.

古文：辽出砥石。
现代文：辽河出自砥石山。
English: Liaohe originates from Grindstone Mountain.

古文：釜出景。
现代文：釜河出自景山。
English: Kama River originates from Jingshan.

古文：岐出石桥。
现代文：岐水出自石桥。
English: Water gushes out of the stone bridge.

古文：呼沱出鲁平。
现代文：呼沱出自鲁平。
English: The purr came from Luping.

古文：泥涂渊出槁山。
现代文：泥涂河发源于磀山。
English: Muddy River originates from Lushan.

古文：维湿北流出于燕。
现代文：维湿河北流出自燕山。
English: The Humid Hebei Current originates in Yanshan.

古文：诸稽、摄提，条风之所生也。
现代文：诸稽、摄提作为天神主管东北方，条风由此产生。
English: As the god of the north-east, he is in charge of the performance and the shooting, and the wind is caused by this.

古文：通视，明庶风之所生也。
现代文：通视作为天神主管东方，明庶风由此产生。
English: As Tenjin presided over the East, the Ming and Qing dynasties arose.

古文：赤奋若，清明风之所生也。
现代文：赤奋若作为天神主管东南方，清明风由此产生。
English: If the red wind is in charge of the southeast as the sky god, the clear and bright wind will result.

古文：共工，景风之所生也。
现代文：共工作为天神主管南方，景风由此产生。
English: Both work for Tenjin, which is in charge of the south, and the scenery is created as a result.

古文：诸比，凉风之所生也。
现代文：诸比作为天神主管西南方，凉风由此产生。
English: Zhubi, as the god of heaven, is in charge of the southwest, and the cool wind is caused by this.

古文：皋稽，阊阖风之所生也。
现代文：皋稽作为天神主管西方，阊阖风由此产生。
English: As the god of the west, Zhenqi was in charge of the west, and the wind came from this.

古文：隅强，不周风之所生也。
现代文：隅强作为天神主管西北方，不周风由此产生。
English: As Tenjin, Sumi no Qiang was in charge of the northwestern part of the country, which resulted in the bad weather.

古文：穷奇，广莫风之所生也。
现代文：穷奇作为天神主管北方，广莫风由此产生。
English: Qianqi, as the god of heaven, is in charge of the north, and the wind comes from this.

古文：生海人，海人生若菌，若菌生圣人，圣人生庶人，凡者生于庶人。
现代文：生育海人，海人生育若菌，若菌生育圣人，圣人生育庶人。凡是有容貌者都是由庶人生育发展过来的。
English: Seafarers breed seafarers, seafarers breed germs, germs breed saints, saints breed commoners. All people with good looks are developed by commoners.

古文：羽嘉生飞龙，飞龙生凤皇，凤皇生鸾鸟，驾鸟生庶鸟，凡羽者生于庶鸟。
现代文：羽嘉生育飞龙，飞龙生育凤凰，凤凰生育鸾鸟，鸾鸟生育庶鸟。凡是有羽毛的鸟类都是由庶鸟生育发展过来的。
English: Feathers give birth to dragons, dragons give birth to phoenixes, phoenixes give birth to ostriches, and ostriches give birth to storks. All feathered birds evolved from storks.

古文：毛犊生应龙，应龙生建马，建马生麒麟，麒麟生庶兽，凡毛者生于庶兽。
现代文：毛犊生育应龙，应龙生育建马，建马生育麒麟，麒麟生育庶兽。凡是长毛的兽类都是由庶兽生育发展过来的。
English: The pupa gives birth to the dragon, the dragon gives birth to the horse, the horse gives birth to the unicorn, and the unicorn gives birth to the beast. All long-haired animals have developed from the birth of the beast.

古文：介鳞生蛟龙，蛟龙生鲲鲠，鲲鲠生建邪，建邪生庶鱼，凡鳞者生于庶鱼。
现代文：介鳞生育蛟龙，蛟龙生育鲲鲠，鲲鲠生育建邪，建邪生育庶鱼。凡是有鳞的鱼类都是由庶鱼生育发展过来的。
English: Scales give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to dragonflies.

古文：介潭生先龙，先龙生玄鼋，玄奄生灵龟，灵龟生庶龟，凡介者生于庶龟。
现代文：介潭生育先龙，先龙生育玄鼋，玄鼋生育灵龟，灵龟生育庶龟。凡是长甲壳的龟类都是由庶龟生育发展过来的。
English: Jietan gave birth to Xianlong, Xianlong gave birth to Xuanzang, Xuanzang gave birth to Lingzhe, and Lingzhe gave birth to Xiangzhe. All tortoises with a long carapace were developed from Xiangzhe.

古文：媛湿生容。煖湿生于毛风，毛风生于湿玄，湿玄生羽风，羽风生暖介，暖介生鳞薄，鳞薄生煖介。
现代文：暖湿之气生育了胈，而暖湿之气又是从毛风中产生，毛风又是从湿玄中产生，湿玄生育羽风，羽风生育暖介，暖介生育鳞薄，鳞薄生育暖介。
English: The warm and humid air gave birth to the cocoon, and the warm and humid air was produced from the fur wind, and the fur wind was produced from the wet wind, and the wet wind gave birth to the feather wind, and the feather wind gave birth to the warm medium, and the warm medium gave birth to the scaly, and the scaly medium gave birth to the warm medium.

古文：五类杂种兴乎外，肖形而著。
现代文：以上五类复杂繁多的物种在外界自然环境下兴盛起来，并保留各自的外形生态特征而繁衍发展。
English: The above five types of complex and numerous species have flourished in the external natural environment, and have retained their respective shape and ecological characteristics while reproducing and developing.

古文：日冯生阳阏，阳阏生乔如，乔如生干木，干木生庶木，凡根拔木者生于庶木。
现代文：日冯生育阳阏，阳阏生育乔如，乔如生育干木，干木生育庶木。凡是长根的树木都是由庶木生育发展过来的。
English: The sun gives birth to the sun, the sun gives birth to the sun, the sun gives birth to the sun, the sun gives birth to the sun, the sun gives birth to the sun, the sun gives birth to the sun, the sun gives birth to the sun, the sun gives birth to the sun, the sun gives birth to the sun.

古文：根拔生程若，程若生玄玉，玄玉生醴泉，醴泉生皇辜，皇辜生庶草，凡根茇草者生于庶草。
现代文：招摇生育程若，程若生育玄玉，玄玉生育醴泉，醴泉生育皇辜，皇辜生育庶草。凡是有根的草类都是由庶草生育发展过来的。
English: If the growth process is vigorous, if the growth process is vigorous, the astragalus will grow, the astragalus will grow, the astragalus will grow, the astragalus will grow, the astragalus will grow, and the astragalus will grow. All grasses with roots are developed from the growth of weeds.

古文：海闾生屈龙，屈龙生容华，容华生蔈，蔈生萍藻，萍藻生浮草，凡浮生不根茇者生于萍藻。
现代文：海闾生育屈龙，屈龙生育容华，容华生育蔈，蔈生育藻，藻生育浮草。凡是浮生水面无根的植物都是由萍藻浮草生育过来的。
English: Seagulls give birth to cormorants, cormorants give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to dragonflies, dragonflies give birth to algae, algae give birth to plankton.

古文：正土之气也御乎埃天。埃天五百岁生缺，缺五百岁生黄埃，黄埃五百岁生黄澒，黄澒五百岁生黄金，黄金于岁生黄龙，黄龙入藏生黄泉。
现代文：中央正土之气上升天空形成黄天的云气，这种云气经五百年化育生成磍石，磍石经五百年化育生成黄汞，黄汞经五百年化育生成黄金，黄金经一千年化育生成黄龙，黄龙潜藏地下之处形成黄泉，黄泉的精微气尘蒸发上升成为黄云。
English: The air of the Central Plain rises into the sky to form the clouds of the yellow sky. After five hundred years of chemical breeding, this cloud gas produces vermiculite. After five hundred years of chemical breeding, vermiculite produces yellow mercury. After five hundred years of chemical breeding, yellow mercury produces gold. After one thousand years of chemical breeding, gold produces yellow dragons. Yellow dragons lurk underground to form yellow springs. The fine gas and dust of yellow springs evaporate to form yellow clouds.

古文：黄泉之埃，上为黄云，阴阳相薄为雷，激扬为电，上者就下，流水就通而合于黄海。
现代文：阴气和阳气接触相迫形成雷鸣，激烈撞击形成闪电，高处云气相遇低处云气、冷热气流相交形成雨水，降落大地集中于河流而汇融于黄海。
English: When yin and yang are forced to come into contact, thunder is formed; when they collide violently, lightning is formed; when clouds at high altitudes meet clouds at low altitudes; when hot and cold air currents intersect, rain is formed; and when the earth falls, it is concentrated in rivers and merges into the Yellow Sea.

古文：偏土之气御乎清天，清天八百岁生青曾，青曾八百岁生青，青澒八百岁生青金，青金八百岁生青龙，青龙入藏生青泉。
现代文：东方偏土之气上升天空形成青天的云气，这云气经过八百年化育生成青曾，青曾经过八百年化育生成青汞，青汞经过八百年化育生成铅，铅经过一千年化育生成青龙，青龙潜藏地下之处形成青泉，青泉的精微气尘蒸发上升成为青云。
English: The air of the eastern land rises into the sky to form the cloud of the blue sky. This cloud has been chemically bred for eight hundred years to form the Qing Zeng. The blue sky has been chemically bred for eight hundred years to produce the blue mercury. The blue mercury has been chemically bred for eight hundred years to produce the lead. The lead has been chemically bred for a thousand years to produce the blue dragon. The blue dragon is hidden underground to form the Qing Quan. The fine dust of the Qing Quan evaporates and rises to become the blue cloud.

古文：青泉之埃，上为青云，阴阳相薄为雷，激扬为电，上者就下，流水就通而合于青海。
现代文：阴气和阳气接触相迫形成雷鸣，激烈撞击形成闪电，高处云气相遇低处云气、冷热气流相交形成雨水，降落大地集中于河流而汇融于青海。
English: Yin and yang forcefully come into contact to form thunder, violent collision to form lightning, high clouds meet low clouds, hot and cold air currents intersect to form rain, and falling earth is concentrated in rivers and merges into the Qinghai Sea.

古文：壮土之气，御于赤天。赤天六百岁生赤丹，赤丹七百岁生赤澒，赤澒七百岁生赤金，赤金千岁生赤龙，赤龙入藏生赤泉。
现代文：南方牡土之气上升天空形成赤天的云气，这云气经过七百年化育生成赤丹，赤丹经过七百年化育生成赤汞，赤汞经过七百年化育生成红铜，红铜经一千年化育生成赤龙，赤龙潜藏地下之处形成赤泉，赤泉的精微气尘蒸发上升成为赤云。
English: The southern oyster gas rises to the sky to form the red sky cloud gas. This cloud gas has been chemically bred for seven hundred years to produce red lead. Red lead has been chemically bred for seven hundred years to produce red mercury. Red mercury has been chemically bred for seven hundred years to produce red copper. Red copper has been chemically bred for one thousand years to produce red dragon. Red dragon lurks underground to form red spring. Red spring's fine gas and dust evaporate to form red clouds.

古文：赤泉之埃，上为赤云，阴阳相薄为雷，激扬为电，上者就下，流水就通而合于赤海。
现代文：阴气和阳气接触相迫形成雷鸣，激烈撞击形成闪电，高处云气相遇低处云气、冷热气流相交形成雨水，降落大地集中于河流而汇融于赤海。
English: Yin and yang forcefully come into contact to form thunder, violent collision to form lightning, high clouds meet low clouds, hot and cold air currents intersect to form rain, falling earth is concentrated in rivers and merges into the Red Sea.

古文：弱土之气，御于白天。白天九百岁生白礜，白礜九百岁生白澒，白澒九百岁生白金，白金千岁生白龙，白龙入藏生白泉，白泉之埃，上为白云，阴阳相薄为雷，激扬为电，上者就下，流水就通而合于白海。
现代文：西方弱土之气上升天空形成白天的云气，这种云气经过九百年化育生成白磌，白磌经过九百年化育生成白汞，白汞经过九百年化育生成白银，白银经过一千年化育生成白龙，白龙潜藏地下之处形成白泉，白泉的精微气尘蒸发上升成为白云。阴气和阳气接触相迫形成雷鸣，激烈撞击形成闪电，高处云气相遇低处云气、冷热气流相交形成雨水，降落大地集中于河流而汇融于白海。
English: The atmosphere of the western weak soil rises from the sky to form daytime clouds. This cloud gas has been chemically bred for nine hundred years to produce chalk. Chalk has been chemically bred for nine hundred years to produce white mercury. White mercury has been chemically bred for nine hundred years to produce silver. Silver has been chemically bred for a thousand years to produce white dragon. White dragon lurks underground to form white spring. The fine gas and dust of white spring evaporate and rise to become white clouds. Yin and yang gas come into contact to form thunder, intense impact to form lightning, high cloud gas meets low cloud gas, hot and cold air currents intersect to form

古文：牧土之气，御于玄天，玄大六百岁生玄砥，玄砥六百岁生玄澒，玄澒六百岁生玄金，玄金千岁生玄龙，玄龙入藏生玄泉。
现代文：北方牝土之气上升天空形成玄天的云气，这种云气经过六百年化育生成玄砥，玄砥经过六百年化育生成玄汞，玄汞经过六百年化育生成黑铁，黑铁经过一千年化育生成玄龙，玄龙潜藏地下之处形成玄泉，玄泉的精微气尘蒸发上升成为玄云。
English: The air of the northern bog rises into the sky to form the clouds of the underworld. After six hundred years, this cloud gas has been chemically bred to produce basalt. After six hundred years, the basalt has been chemically bred to produce black mercury. After six hundred years, the black mercury has been chemically bred to produce black iron. After one thousand years, the black iron has been chemically bred to produce the black dragon. The place where the black dragon lurks underground forms the black spring. The fine gas and dust of the black spring evaporate and rise to become the black cloud.

古文：玄泉之埃，上为玄云，阴阳相薄为雷，激扬为电，上者就下，流水就通而合于玄海。
现代文：阴气和阳气接触相迫形成雷鸣，激烈撞击形成闪电，高处云气相遇低处云气、冷热气流相交形成雨水，降落大地集中于河流而汇融于玄海。
English: Yin and yang forcefully come into contact to form thunder, violent collision to form lightning, high clouds meet low clouds, hot and cold air currents intersect to form rain, and falling earth is concentrated in rivers and merges into the open sea.

