古文：昔少暤金天氏有裔子曰昧，为玄冥师，生允格、台骀。
现代文：当年少暤金天氏有一个后裔子孙叫昧的，当玄冥神的老师，生了允格、台骀两个儿子。
English: When he was young, a descendant of the Jintian clan, a teacher of the god of darkness, gave birth to two sons, Yunge and Taiyu.

古文：台骀能业其官，宣汾、洮，障大泽以处太原，帝颛顼嘉之，封诸汾川。
现代文：台骀继承父亲的职业，开发汾水、洮水一带，以大湖泽作为屏障，在太原这一带建城而居，颛顼帝很赞扬他，把他分封在汾川。
English: Taiyu inherited his father's profession, developed the areas around Surabaya and Surabaya, and used the Great Lakes as a barrier to build a city and live in this area of Taiyuan. Emperor Qian highly praised him and assigned him to Surabaya River.

古文：其后四国，沈、姒、蓐、黄。
现代文：他的后代又分成四国：沈子国、姒国、蓐国、黄国。
English: His descendants were divided into four kingdoms: Shen Zi, Zang, Zang and Huang.

古文：沈子国，今汝南平舆沈亭是也。
现代文：沈子国，即今日的汝南郡平舆县的沈亭便是故址。
English: Shen Zi Province, that is, today's Yunan County, Pingyu County, Shen Ting is the former site.

古文：春秋之时，列于盟会。
现代文：春秋时代，沈子国参加诸侯大会。
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, Shenzi Province took part in the princes' assembly.

古文：定公四年，诸侯会召陵伐楚，沈子不会，晋使蔡伐沈，灭之，以沈子嘉归。其后，因国为氏。
现代文：鲁定公四年，诸侯会集召陵讨伐楚国，沈子没有参加，晋国叫蔡国攻打沈子国，消灭了它，俘虏沈子嘉而归，他的后代便以国号为姓氏。
English: In the fourth year of King Luding, the council of lords summoned Ling to attack Chu. Shen Zi did not participate. Jin ordered Cai to attack Shen Zi and destroy it. Shen Zi Jia returned as a prisoner, and his descendants took the name of the country as their surname.

古文：自兹以降，谱谍罔存。
现代文：从这往下，家谱世牒流失不见。
English: From this point onward, there was no further loss of genealogical records.

古文：秦末有沈逞，征丞相，不就。
现代文：秦朝末年有个人叫沈逞，被征调为丞相，他没有应命。
English: At the end of the Qin Dynasty, there was a man named Shen Gang, who was conscripted to be the prime minister, but he did not follow his orders.

古文：汉初逞曾孙保，封竹邑侯。
现代文：汉初沈逞曾孙沈保，被封竹邑侯。
English: At the beginning of the Han Dynasty, Shen Gan's great-grandson, Shen Bao, was given the title of Bamboo Town.

古文：保子遵，自本国迁居九江之寿春，官至齐王太傅、敷德侯。
现代文：沈保的儿子沈遵，从本国迁居九江的寿春，官至齐王太傅、敷德侯。
English: Shen Zong, the son of Shen Bao, moved from his home country to Shuchun in Jiujiang, and rose to the rank of Qi Wang Taifu and Shide Hou.

古文：遵子达，骠骑将军。
现代文：沈遵的儿子沈达，官至骠骑将军。
English: Shen Zun's son, Shen Da, rose to the rank of cavalry general.

古文：达子乾，尚书令。
现代文：沈达的儿子沈乾，官至尚书令。
English: Shen Da's son, Shen Qian, became an official.

古文：乾子弘，南阳太守。
现代文：沈乾的儿子沈弘，官至南阳太守。
English: Shen Qian's son, Shen Hong, became the governor of Nanyang.

古文：弘子勖，河内守。
现代文：沈弘的儿子沈勖，河内太守。
English: Shenhong's son, Shen Yi, became the governor of Hanoi.

古文：勖子奋，御史中丞。
现代文：沈勖的儿子沈奋，官至御史中丞。
English: Shen Yan's son, Shen Fen, rose to the rank of goshi chujo.

古文：奋子恪，将作大匠。
现代文：沈奋的儿子沈恪，将作大臣。
English: Shen Tan's son, Shen Ke, will become a minister.

古文：恪子谦，尚书、关内侯。
现代文：沈恪的儿子沈谦，尚书关内侯。
English: Shen Kuo's son, Shen Qian, is the lord of Shoushu County.

古文：谦子靖，济阴太守。
现代文：沈谦的儿子沈靖，济阴太守。
English: Shen Qian's son, Shen Jing, became the governor of Jilin Province.

古文：靖子戎，字威卿，仕州为从事，说降剧贼尹良，汉光武嘉其功，封为海昏县侯，辞不受。
现代文：沈靖的儿子沈戎字威卿，在州中当从事，说降大盗尹良，汉光武帝赞赏他的功劳，封他为海昏县侯，沈戎推辞不接受。
English: Shen Jing's son, Shen Rong Zi Weiqing, said that the great thief Yin Liang should be demoted, and Emperor Han Guangwu appreciated his merits and made him the governor of Haikou County. Shen Rong did not accept his resignation.

古文：因避地徙居会稽乌程县之余不乡，遂世家焉。顺帝永建元年，分会稽为吴郡，复为吴郡人。
现代文：因此避开迁移到会稽乌程县的余不乡，此后世世代代都居在这里，汉顺帝永建元年，分出会稽设立吴郡，又变成了吴郡人。
English: Therefore, they avoided moving to Wucheng County, which was not a hometown, and lived here for generations after that. In the first year of Emperor Han Shun's reign, the county was separated from Wu County and became Wu County.

古文：灵帝初平五年，分乌程、余杭为永安县，吴孙皓宝鼎二年，分吴郡为吴兴郡，复为郡人，虽邦邑屡改，而筑室不迁。
现代文：汉灵帝初平五年，分出乌程，余杭部分，设置永安县，吴国孙皓宝鼎二年，又分出吴郡的一部分设吴兴郡，沈氏再成为新郡人，虽然邦邑的名称多次更改，但沈氏一直没有迁移。
English: In the first five years of the Heian period, Emperor Han Ling separated Ucheng and part of Yuhang to establish Yongan County. In the second year of Sun Yat-sen's reign, part of Wuxing County was separated to establish Wuxing County. The Shen family became the new county people. Although the name of Bangyur was changed many times, the Shen family never moved.

古文：晋武帝平吴后，太康二年，改永安为武康县，史臣七世祖延始居县东乡之博陆里余乌村。
现代文：晋武帝统一吴国后，在太康二年，改永安县为武康县。史臣我七世祖沈延开始居住本县东方的博陆里余乌村。
English: After Emperor Jinwu unified the State of Wu, Yongan County was changed to Wukang County in the second year of Taikang. Shishen, my seventh-generation ancestor Shen Yan, began to live in the village of Bolu in the east of the county.

古文：王父从官京师，义熙十一年，高祖赐馆于建康都亭里之运巷。
现代文：我的祖父在京师做官，在义熙十一年，高祖刘裕赐给建康都亭里的运巷作我的居住地。
English: My grandfather was an official in the Beijing division. In the eleventh year of Yixi, the founder of Gaozhou, Liu Yu, gave Jiankangdu Pavilion to Yun Xiang as my place of residence.

古文：戎子酆，字圣通，零陵太守，致黄龙芝草之瑞。
现代文：沈戎的儿子沈丰，字圣通，官至零陵太守，曾招致黄龙芝草的瑞征。
English: Shen Rong's son, Shen Feng, also known as Shen Tong, served as the governor of Luling. He once invited Huang Long Zhi Cao's Sui Zheng.

古文：第二子浒，字仲高，安平相。
现代文：他的第二个儿子沈浒字仲高、官至安平国相。
English: His second son, Shen Zhaozhizhong Gao, rose through the ranks to become Anping minister of state.

古文：少子景，河间相，演之、庆之、昙庆、怀文其后也。
现代文：他的小儿子沈景，河间国相，沈演之、沈庆之、沈昙庆、沈怀文便是他的后人。
English: His youngest son, Shen Jing, Minister of the State of Hebei, Shen Yuanzhi, Shen Qingzhi, Shen Yuqing, and Shen Huaiwen are his descendants.

古文：浒子鸾，字建光，少有高名，州举茂才，公府辟州别驾从事史。
现代文：沈浒的儿子沈鸾字建光，少有高名，州中推举他为秀才，公府征调他为州别驾从事史。
English: Shen Yao's son, Shen Yao Zi Jianguang, has a rare and high reputation. He was selected as an outstanding talent in the middle of the state, and was recruited by the government to be the state's best driver to engage in history.

古文：时广陵太守陆稠，鸾之舅也，以义烈政绩，显名汉朝，复以女妻鸾。
现代文：当时广陵太守陆稠，是沈鸾的舅舅，因为正义刚直和卓越的政绩，在汉朝很有名气，再把女儿嫁给他。
English: At that time, the governor of Guangling, Lu Zushi, was the uncle of Shen Zhen, who was famous in the Han Dynasty for his justice and outstanding political achievements, and he married his daughter to him.

古文：年二十三，早卒。子直，字伯平，州举茂才，亦有清名，年二十八卒。
现代文：他年二十三岁，便去世了，他的儿子沈直字伯平，州里推举他做秀才，也有高洁的名声，年刚二十八岁而逝。
English: He was twenty-three years old when he died. His son, Shen Zhengyi Boping, who was selected by the state to be an outstanding talent and had a reputation for integrity, passed away at the age of twenty-eight.

古文：子仪，字仲则，少有至行，兄瑜十岁，仪九岁而父亡，居丧过礼，毁瘠过于成人。
现代文：沈直的儿子沈仪字仲则，小时候便有极其高尚的品德。兄长沈瑜十岁，沈仪本人九岁而父亲便去世了。沈仪守孝超过了礼节，悲伤超过成年人。
English: Shen Yi's son, Shen Yi Zhizhong, had an extremely noble character when he was a child. His brother, Shen Yu, was ten years old, and Shen Yi himself was nine years old when his father died. Shen Yi's filial piety exceeded etiquette, and his sadness exceeded that of an adult.

古文：外祖会稽盛孝章，汉末名士也，深加忧伤，每扰慰之，曰： 汝并黄中冲爽，终成奇器，何为逾制，自取殄灭邪！ 
现代文：他的外祖父会稽人盛孝章，是汉未名人，时常担忧，每每安抚慰藉他： 你们都是卓越爽达之人，终究会成为大器，何必过分循礼节，自取灭亡呢？ 
English: His maternal grandfather would be the inspector Sheng Xiaozhang, a Han Wei celebrity, who was often worried and comforted him every time: You are all outstanding people, and you will eventually become great, why do you have to follow the etiquette too much and ruin yourself?

古文：三年礼毕，殆至灭性，故兄弟并以孝著。
现代文：三年期满，沈仪等几乎失掉性命。所以他兄弟们都因孝义著名。
English: At the end of the three-year period, Shen Yi and others almost lost their lives. Therefore, his brothers are famous for their filial piety.

古文：瑜早卒。
现代文：沈瑜死得很早。
English: Shen Yu died very early.

古文：仪笃学有雄才，以儒素自业。
现代文：沈仪好学有文才，以研究儒学为业。
English: Shen Yi was studious and literate, studying Confucianism as his profession.

古文：时海内大乱，兵革并起，经术道弛，士少全行，而仪淳深隐默，守道不移，风操贞整，不妄交纳，唯与族子仲山、叔山及吴郡陆公纪友善。
现代文：当时海内大乱，战乱蜂起，经学之路废弛，士人很少有完美品德的，而沈仪缄默少语，坚守道德，一点也不改变，风格严谨，操行坚贞，不轻易结纳他人，只与同族侄子沈仲山、叔山和吴郡的陆公纪很好。
English: At that time, there was great turmoil at home and abroad, wars and uprisings, and the path of learning Chinese classics was worn out. Scholars rarely had perfect moral character, but Shen Yi kept silent, adhered to morality, and did not change at all. His style was strict, his conduct was firm, and he did not easily accept others. He only had good discipline with his nephews of the same race, Shen Zhongshan, Shushan, and Lu Gongjun of Wu County.

古文：州郡礼请，二府交辟，公车征，并不屈，以寿终。
现代文：州郡多次恭请他出山，二府前后征用，皇帝又征用，沈仪都不应征，寿终正寝。
English: The prefecture and county repeatedly invited him to go out to the mountains, the two prefectures requisitioned him, the emperor requisitioned him, but Shen Yi did not respond to the call-up, and died in his sleep.

古文：子宪，字元礼，左中郎、新都都尉、定阳侯，才志显于吴朝。
现代文：他的儿子沈宪字元礼，左中郎、新都都尉、定阳侯，以才志在吴朝著名。
English: His son, Shen Xian, also known as Yuan Li, Zuo Zhong Lang, Xindu Du Fu, Dingyang Hou, was famous for his talent in the Wu Dynasty.

古文：子矫，字仲桓，以节气立名，仕为立武校尉、偏将军，封列侯，建威将军、新都太守。
现代文：沈宪的儿子沈矫字仲桓，以气节高朗著称，出仕当立武校尉、偏将军、封列侯、建威将军、新都太守。
English: Shen Jiaozi Zhonghuan, the son of Shen Xian, was known for his high-spiritedness, and he served as Dang Liwu lieutenant, general, vassal lord, vassal lord, general of Jianwei, and governor of Xindu.

古文：孙皓时，有将帅之称。
现代文：孙皓的时候，沈矫被看成一个名副其实的将领。
English: At the time of Sun Yat-sen, Shen Jiaorui was regarded as a veritable general.

古文：吴平后，为郁林、长沙太守，并不就。
现代文：吴国被平定后，沈矫被任为郁林长沙二郡太守，他都没有赴任。
English: After Wu was pacified, Shen Jiao was appointed as the governor of the two counties of Yulin and Changsha, but he did not take up the post.

古文：太康末卒。
现代文：太康末年去世。
English: Taikang died at the end of his life.

古文：子陵，字景高，太傅东海王越辟为从事。
现代文：他的儿子沈陵字景高，太傅东海王越用他为从事。
English: His son Shenling Zijing Gao, Taifu Donghai Wang Yue used him to engage in.

古文：元帝之为镇东将军，命参军事。
现代文：元帝当镇东将军，叫他当参军事。
English: The Yuan emperor made Zhendong a general and ordered him to join the military.

古文：徐馥作乱，杀吴兴太守袁琇，陵讨平之。子延，字思长，桓温安西参军、颍川太守。
现代文：徐馥作乱，杀了吴兴太守袁，沈陵讨平了徐馥，他的儿子沈延字思长，官至桓温的安西参军，颍川太守。
English: Xu Rong made a disturbance and killed Wu Xing, the de facto governor of Yuan, Shen Ling defeated Xu Rong, his son Shen Yan, the de facto governor of Anxi, and the de facto governor of Fenchuan.

古文：子贺，字子宁，桓冲南中郎参军，围袁真于寿阳，遇疾卒。
现代文：他的儿子沈贺字子宁，是桓冲的南中郎参军，随同桓冲围攻袁真，遇病而死。
English: His son, Shen He Zizi Ning, was the Southern Middle Brother of Huan Chong and joined the army. He accompanied Huan Chong to besiege Yuan Zhen and died of illness.

古文：子警，字世明，惇笃有行业，学通《左氏春秋》。
现代文：沈贺的儿子沈警字世明，纯粹忠贞有志气，学通《左氏春秋》。
English: Shen He's son, Shen Guan Zi Sheming, is pure, loyal and ambitious. He is well versed in "The Spring and Autumn of the Zuo Clan."

古文：家世富殖，财产累千金，仕郡主簿，后将军谢安命为参军，甚相敬重。
现代文：他家世代富有，财产达到千两黄金，在郡中当主簿，后将军谢安叫他去当参军，很是敬重他。
English: His family had been rich for generations, and their property amounted to a thousand taels of gold. He was the chief accountant in the county. Later, General Xie An asked him to join the army, and he was highly respected.

古文：警内足于财，为东南豪士，无仕进意，谢病归。
现代文：沈警家财丰厚，是东南的豪绅，无意于出仕，称病而归。
English: Shen Guan's family was wealthy and he was a wealthy gentleman from the southeast. He had no intention of serving and returned home saying he was ill.

古文：安固留不止，乃谓警曰： 沈参军，卿有独善之志，不亦高乎！ 
现代文：谢安坚决挽留他，于是对沈警说： 沈参军，你有独善其身之志向，不是很高贵吗？ 
English: Xie An resolutely retained him, so he said to Shen Guo: Shen, you have the ambition to join the army, isn't it noble?

古文：警曰： 使君以道御物，前所以怀德而至，既无用佐时，故遂饮啄之愿尔。 
现代文：沈警答道： 使君用道德教化人士，我以前仰慕你的大德而来，既然不需我对时务有所补益，所以我还是想满足我的吃喝的愿望罢了。 
English: Shen Guan replied, "As someone who has been educated by your morality, I used to admire your great virtue. Since I don't need to make any contribution to the current affairs, I just want to satisfy my desire to eat and drink."

古文：还家积载，以素业自娱。
现代文：归家几年，以平生学术为业，自得其乐。
English: After returning home for a few years, he has been pursuing his academic career and enjoying himself.

古文：前将军、青兗二州刺史王恭镇京口，与警有旧好，复引为参军，手书殷勤，苦相招致，不得已而应之，寻复谢职。
现代文：前将军、青兖二州刺史王恭镇守京口，和沈警旧情很深，再推荐他做自己的参军，多次写信相召，沈警不得已前去了，不久又辞职而归。
English: The former general, the youth of the two states, Wang Qiong, who guarded the capital, had a deep affection for Shen Guo. He recommended him to join the army and wrote to him several times. Shen Guo had no choice but to go, but soon resigned and returned.

古文：子穆，夫字彦和，少好学，亦通《左氏春秋》。
现代文：沈警的儿子沈穆夫字彦和，少时特别好学，也精通《左氏春秋》。
English: Shen Mufu's son, Shen Mufu's son, Shen Mufu's son, Shen Mufu's son, Shen Mufu's son, Shen Mufu's son, Shen Mufu's son, Shen Mufu's son, Shen Mufu's son.

古文：王恭命为前军主簿，与警书曰： 足下既执不拔之志，高卧东南，故屈贤子共事，非以吏职婴之也。 
现代文：王恭叫他当前军主簿，写信给沈警说： 足下既然胸怀不屈的志向，高卧东南，所以委屈令郎共事，这并不是用吏事缠他。 
English: Wang Qiong asked him for the current military directory and wrote to Shen Guojun saying, "Since Gaozhongnan, who has an unyielding aspiration, is lying at his feet, it is not a matter of entangling him with bureaucratic matters.

古文：初，钱唐人杜子恭通灵有道术，东土豪家及京邑贵望，并事之为弟子，执在三之敬。警累世事道，亦敬事子恭。
现代文：当初，钱塘人杜子恭颇有道术，能通神灵，东方豪门大户和京城显贵，都虔诚地供奉他，仿佛弟子一般，把他当成天老爷，沈警家历代信仰道教，也敬奉杜子恭。
English: At first, Du Zi Gong, a man from Qiantang, was quite skilled in Taoism and able to channel the spirit of the gods. The great families of the East and the dignitaries of Beijing piously worshipped him, as if he were a disciple. They regarded him as a heavenly lord. The Shengang family believed in Taoism throughout the ages and also revered Du Zi Gong.

古文：子恭死，门徒孙泰、泰弟子恩传其业，警复事之。
现代文：杜子恭死了，他的门徒孙泰，孙泰的弟弟的儿子孙恩继承他的衣钵，沈警再奉尊他们。
English: Du Zi Gong died, his disciple Sun Tai, Sun Tai's brother's son Sun En inherited his mantle, Shen Guan then honored them.

古文：隆安三年，恩于会稽作乱，自称征东将军，三吴皆响应。
现代文：隆安三年，孙恩在会稽作乱，自称征东将军，三吴地区群起响应。
English: In the third year of Longan, Sun En staged a riot at the meeting, claiming to be a general to conquer the East, and the Sanwu region responded in droves.

古文：穆夫时在会稽，恩以为前部参军、振武将军、余姚令。
现代文：沈穆夫当时正在会稽，孙恩以他为前部参军、振武将军、余姚令。
English: At that time, Shen Mufu was in the auditor's office. Sun En took him as the front to join the army, General Zhenwu, Yu Yao Ling.

古文：其年十二月二十八日，恩为刘牢之所破，辅国将军高素于山阴回踵埭执穆夫及伪吴郡太守陆瑰之、吴兴太守丘尪，并见害，函首送京邑，事见《隆安故事》。
现代文：那年十二月二十八日，孙恩被刘牢之打败，辅国将军高素在山阴回踵埭捉住沈穆夫和伪吴郡太守陆环之，吴兴太守丘，并且把他们都杀了，把脑袋割下来送到京城，此事可见《隆安故事》。
English: On December 28 of that year, Sun En was defeated by Liu Diao, and the auxiliary general Gao Su captured Shen Mufu and the pseudo Wu County Governor Lu Huan Zhi, and Wu Xing Governor Qiu, and killed them all, cut off their heads and sent them to Beijing, which can be seen in the "Longan Story."

古文：先是，宗人沈预素无士行，为警所疾，至是警闻穆夫预乱，逃藏将免矣，预以告官，警及穆夫、弟仲夫、任夫、预夫、佩夫并遇害；唯穆夫子渊子、云子、田子、林子、虔子获全。
现代文：先前宗人沈预一向品德卑劣，沈警非常讨厌他，到这时沈警听说沈穆夫参与造反，逃脱躲藏起来，本来可以免除死亡，沈预密告官府，沈警和沈穆夫，他弟弟仲夫、任夫、预夫、佩夫都被害死，只有穆夫的儿子沈渊子、沈云子、沈田子、沈林子、沈虔子得以逃脱。
English: At that time, Shen Guo heard that Shen Mufu had participated in the rebellion, escaped and hid, and could have been exempted from death. Shen Guo secretly reported to the government that Shen Guo and Shen Mufu, his brother Zhongfu, Renfu, Zengfu, and Pefu were all killed, and only Mufu's sons, Shen Yuanzi, Shen Yunzi, Shen Tianzi, Shen Linzi, and Shen Qianzi, were able to escape.

古文：渊子，字敬深，少有志节，随高祖克京城，封繁畤县五等侯。参镇军、车骑中军事，又为道规辅国、征西参军，领宁蜀太守。与刘基共斩蔡猛于大簿，还为太尉参军，从征司马休之，与徐逵之同没。
现代文：沈渊子字敬深，小时候便有志气，坚守道义，随同高祖攻克京城，被封为繁县五等侯、参镇军、车骑中军事，又当刘道规辅国、征西将军、兼领宁蜀太守，和刘基在大簿共同杀了蔡猛，回来当太尉参军，随同征讨司马休之，和徐逵之同时牺牲。
English: Shen Yuan Zi's character was deeply respected. When he was a child, he had ambition, adhered to morality, and conquered the capital with Gao Zu. He was appointed as the fifth-ranked marquis of Shandong County, a member of the township army, and a member of the middle-ranking military in the cavalry and cavalry. He also served as Liu Dao Gui Fu Guo, the general of the Western Conquest, and the grand marshal of Ningshu. He and Liu Ji jointly killed Cai Meng in Dabou, and returned to join the army as a captain. He accompanied the conscription of Sima Xiu, and sacrificed at the same

古文：时年三十五。
现代文：时年三十五岁。
English: He was only thirty-five years old.

古文：子正，字元直，淹详有器度，美风姿，善容止，好老、庄之学。
现代文：沈正字元直，汪洋有气度，风姿秀美，会装饰，善打扮，喜欢老庄学术。
English: Shen Zheng's character is straightforward, has an air of grandeur, a beautiful appearance, can decorate, is good at dressing up, and likes Laozhuang scholarship.

古文：弱冠，州辟从事。
现代文：二十岁时，本州便征调他当从事。
English: At the age of twenty, he was recruited by Honshu to work as a carpenter.

古文：宗人光禄大夫演之称之曰： 此宗中千里驹也。 
现代文：他的同姓本家光禄大夫沈演之评判他说： 这是本族中的千里马。 
English: His namesake, the head of the family, Dr. Guanglu Shen Yanzhi, said: "This is the best horse in our family.

古文：出为始宁、乌伤、娄令，母忧去职。
现代文：沈正出外当始宁、乌伤、娄县等县令，因母亲去世离职。
English: Shen Zheng, the county magistrate of Shining, Wuxia and Jixian counties, left his post due to his mother's death.

古文：服阕，为随王诞后军安南行参军。
现代文：孝期满了之后，当随王刘诞后军安南行参军。
English: After the period of filial piety was over, he followed Wang Liu to the south to join the army.

古文：诞镇会稽，复参安东军事。
现代文：刘诞镇守会稽，沈正再当参安东军事。
English: Liu Xizhen, the town supervisor, and Shen Zheng, a member of the Andong military.

古文：元嘉三十年，元凶弑立，分江东为会州，以诞为刺史。
现代文：元嘉二十年，元凶刘邵杀文帝而立，分出江东地区部分设会州，以刘诞当刺史。
English: In the 20th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Liu Shao, the culprit of the murder of Emperor Wen, stood up and set up a state in the eastern part of the Yangtze River, with Liu Xing as the history.

古文：诞将受命，正说司马顾琛曰： 国家此祸，开辟未闻，今以江东义锐之众，为天下倡始，若驰一介，四方讵不响应。
现代文：刘诞将应命，沈正游说司马顾琛说： 国家出了这种祸乱，是开天辟地以来没有过的，今日借助江东义勇的锐兵，为天下首倡，如果再派一介使者，四方岂不响应，用这来雪洗朝廷耻辱，表明臣子的诚心。
English: Liu Xizhong complied with the order, and Shen Zheng lobbied Sima Guo to say: The country has suffered such a calamity, which has not happened since the beginning of time. Today, with the help of the brave soldiers of the East River, we are the first to advocate for the world. If we send another envoy, will the four sides not respond, and use this to wash away the disgrace of the imperial court and show the sincerity of the courtiers.

古文：以此雪朝庭冤耻，大明臣子之节，岂可北面凶逆，使殿下受其伪宠。 琛曰： 江东忘战日久，士不习兵。虽云逆顺不同，然强弱又异，当须四方有义举者，然后应之，不为晚也。 
现代文：怎么能向凶贼俯首称臣，让殿下接受他的伪宠。 顾琛说： 江东太平已久，人不知何为战争，虽然逆顺有不同，然而强弱又很悬殊，应当等待四方，有起义的，然后再响应，那还不算迟。 
English: How can you bow down to a thug and call yourself a minister, and allow your highness to accept his false favor. Gu Yao said: The East River has been peaceful for a long time, and people don't know what war is. Although there are differences between good and evil, there is also a great disparity between the strong and the weak. We should wait for the four sides, if there is an uprising, and then respond. It is not too late.

古文：正曰： 天下若有无父之国，则可矣。
现代文：沈正说： 天下如果有没有父亲的国家，那么这样是可以的。
English: Shen Zheng said: If there is no father country in the world, then this is possible.

古文：苟其不尔，宁可自安仇耻，而责义于余方。
现代文：如果不是这样，难道可以安心地生活在仇敌和辱亡中，而被别人所责备。
English: If this is not the case, how can one live in peace amidst enemies and insults, and be reproached by others?

古文：今正以弑逆冤丑，义不同戴，举兵之日，岂求必全耶！
现代文：今日我沈正与弑君逆贼魔鬼不共戴天，起兵之日，难道还想保命吗？
English: Today, I, Shen Zheng, do not share the sky with the traitors and devils. On the day of the military uprising, do I still want to save my life?

古文：冯衍有言，大汉之贵臣，将不如荆、齐之贱士乎！
现代文：冯衍说得好，大汉的贵臣，难道还不如荆齐低贱士人吗？
English: Feng Yan said it well, a dignitary of a great man, is it not better than Jing Qi, a low-ranking person?

古文：况殿下义兼臣子，事实家国者哉。 
现代文：况且殿下既是臣民又是儿子，事关国家的大事呢？ 
English: Moreover, since His Imperial Highness is both a subject and a son, what are the important matters concerning the country?

古文：琛乃与正俱入说诞，诞犹预未决。会寻阳义兵起，世祖使至，诞乃加正宁朔将军，领军继刘季之。
现代文：顾琛于是和沈正都进去说刘诞，刘诞仍然犹豫不决，恰遇浔阳义兵奋起，世祖派的人来了，刘诞于是加沈正宁朔将军，带兵继援刘季之。
English: Gu Yao and Shen Zheng then both went in to say Liu Xuan, but Liu Xuan still hesitated. It happened to be the time when the Qinyang Volunteers rose up, and the people sent by the Ancestor came. Liu Xuan then added General Shen Zheng to Ningshuo, and led the soldiers to follow Liu Jizhi.

古文：诞入为骠骑大将军，正为中兵参军，迁长水校尉。
现代文：刘诞进城当骠骑将军，沈正当中兵参军，迁任长水校尉。
English: Liu Xizhao entered the city as a cavalry general, Shen Zhengzheng joined the army as a soldier, and was transferred to the position of the captain of the Changshui.

古文：孝建元年，移青州镇历城，临淄地空，除宁朔将军、齐北海二郡太守，委以全齐之任。未拜，二年卒，时年四十三。
现代文：孝建元年，迁移青州到历城，临淄一带便空了起来，朝廷任沈正当宁朔将军，齐北海二郡太守，委任他全齐一带的重任，还未赴任，二年便去世了，时年四十三。
English: In the first year of Xiao Jian's reign, Qingzhou was moved to Licheng, and the area around Linyi became vacant. The imperial court appointed Shen Rongzheng as the general of Ningshuo and Qi Beihai as the governor of the two counties, and appointed him to all the important positions in the area. He died two years later, at the age of forty-three.

古文：正生好乐，厚自奉养，既终之后，家无余财。
现代文：沈正平生喜欢快乐，生活很奢侈，他死之后家中没有多余的财产。
English: Shen Zheng liked to be happy all his life. He lived a very luxurious life. After his death, there was no extra property in his family.

古文：渊子弟云子，元嘉中，为晋安太守。
现代文：沈渊子的弟弟沈云子，元嘉年中，当过晋安太守。
English: Shen Yuan Zi's younger brother, Shen Yun Zi, was the crown prince of Jinan in the middle of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：云子子焕，字士蔚，少为驸马都尉、奉朝请。
现代文：沈云子的儿子沈焕字士蔚，小时候当驸马都尉，奉朝请。
English: Shen Yunzi's son, Shen Huan Zi Si Wei, was a lieutenant of the Horse Guards when he was a child.

古文：元凶之入弑也，焕时兼中庶子，直坊，逼从入台。
现代文：元凶进京刺杀文帝时，沈焕当时任中庶子，正在坊中值班，被迫一同进入台城。
English: When the main culprit entered Beijing to assassinate Emperor Wen, Shen Huan, who was an illegitimate child at the time, was on duty in the middle of the square and was forced to enter Taicheng together.

古文：劭既自立，以为羽林监，辞不拜，拜员外散骑侍郎，使防南谯王义宣诸子，事在《义宣传》。仍除丞相行参军，员外散骑侍郎，南昌令，有能名。
现代文：刘邵称帝，让他当羽林监，沈焕辞官不接受，而只接受了员外散骑侍郎的官，刘邵叫他防守南淮王刘义宣的儿子们，此事可参见《刘义宣传》，同时被任命为丞相行参军、员外散骑侍郎、南昌令，在任上颇有能干的名声。
English: Liu Shao proclaimed him emperor and asked him to be the warden of the feather forest. He did not accept Shen Huan's resignation, but only accepted the position of non-commissioned cavalry officer. Liu Shao asked him to defend the sons of the South Huai King Liu Yixuan. The matter can be found in "Liu Yixuan Propaganda." At the same time, he was appointed as the minister of the army, non-commissioned cavalry officer, and Nanchang commander. He had a reputation of being quite capable in his post.

古文：晋平王休祐骠骑中兵记室参军，同僚皆以谄进，焕独不。顷之，记室参军周敬祖等为太宗所责得罪，转焕谘议参军。
现代文：又任晋平王刘休骠骑中兵记室参军，同僚们都因谄媚升官，沈焕偏是例外，不久以后，记室参军周敬祖等被太守斥责有罪，转沈焕的官为咨议参军。
English: Liu Xiuqi, a cavalry lieutenant of the King of Jin and Ping, was also appointed to join the army. His colleagues were all promoted because of their charm, but Shen Huan was an exception. Soon after, Zhou Jingzu, a member of the army, was reprimanded and convicted by the Emperor, and Shen Huan's position was changed to that of an adviser to join the army.

古文：后废帝元徽中，以为宁远将军、交州刺史，未至镇，病卒，时年四十五。
现代文：后废帝元徽中，用他当宁远将军、交州刺史，还未到任便病逝了，时年四十五岁。
English: In the former imperial emblem, he was used as Ningyuan General and Jiaozhou Historian, but died of illness before taking office, at the age of forty-five.

古文：田子，字敬光，云子弟也。从高祖克京城，进平京邑，参镇军军事，封营道县五等侯。
现代文：沈田子字敬光，是云子的弟弟，他跟从高祖攻击京口城再随同前进平定都城，曾任参镇军军事，封营道县五等侯。
English: Shen Tian Zi Zi Jing Guang was the younger brother of Yun Zi. He followed Gao Zu to attack Jingkou City and then advanced with him to pacify the capital city. He was a member of the town's military and the fifth-ranked marquis of Fengying County.

古文：义熙五年，高祖北伐鲜卑。田子领偏师，与龙骧将军孟龙符为前锋。
现代文：义熙五年，高祖北伐鲜卑，沈田子率领偏师和龙骧将军孟龙符当先锋。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, Gao Zu led the Northern Expedition against Xianbei, and Shen Tianzi led the Chosen Division and Longjing General Meng Longfu to be the vanguard.

古文：慕容超屯临朐以距大军，龙符战没，田子力战破之。及卢循逼京邑，高祖遣田子与建威将军孙季高由海道袭广州，加振武将军。
现代文：慕容超屯临朐抗拒大军，孟龙符在战斗中牺牲，沈田子经过苦战终于打败了慕容超，到卢循进逼京都时，刘裕派田子和建威将军孙季高，由海路袭击广州，加派他为振武将军。
English: Murong Chao resisted the large army in Linyi, Meng Longfu died in the battle, Shen Tianzi finally defeated Murong Chao after a hard battle, and when Lu Xun forced Kyoto, Liu Yu sent Tianzi and General Sun Jigao to attack Guangzhou by sea, and sent him as General Zhenwu.

古文：循党徐道覆还保始兴，田子复与右将军刘籓同共攻讨。
现代文：卢循的余党徐道覆还保始兴，沈田子再与右将军刘藩共同攻讨。
English: Lu Guanzhong's remaining party, Xu Daohui, also defeated Bao Shixing, and Shen Tianzi then jointly attacked with the right general Liu Han.

古文：循寻还广州围季高，田子虑季高孤危，谓籓曰： 广州城虽险固，本是贼之巢穴。今循还围之，或有内变。
现代文：卢循不久回到广州围攻孙季高，田子担心孙季高孤兵危险，对刘藩说： 广州城虽然坚固，但本来是敌人的老巢，今日卢循回去围攻，也许会发生危险。
English: Lu Xun soon returned to Guangzhou to besiege Sun Jigao. Tian Zi, worried about the danger of Sun Jigao's lone soldier, said to Liu Fan: Although Guangzhou City is strong, it was originally the enemy's nest. If Lu Xun goes back to besiege it today, there may be danger.

古文：且季高众力寡弱，不能持久。若使贼还据此，凶势复振。
现代文：况且孙季高人力太少不能持久抵抗，如果再让敌人据有此城，必然气势再起。
English: Moreover, Sun Quigong's manpower was too small to resist for a long time. If the enemy was allowed to hold the city again, the momentum would inevitably be regained.

古文：下官与季高同履艰难，泛沧海，于万死之中，克平广州，岂可坐视危逼，不相拯救。 
现代文：下官我和孙季高同受艰难，渡过苍海在万死一生之中，攻取广州，怎么能坐视危险，不去拯救。 
English: My subordinate officers and I, Sun Jigao, have suffered hardships together. We have crossed the Canghai Sea and conquered Guangzhou in the midst of a life-and-death struggle. How can we sit back and watch the danger and not try to save it?

古文：于是率军南还，比至，贼已收其散卒，还围广州。季高单守危迫，闻田子忽至，大喜。田子乃背水结陈，身率先士卒，一战破之。于是推锋追讨，又破循于苍梧、郁林、宁浦。
现代文：于是田子率军南归，到了那里，敌人已收集散兵，包围广州，孙季高单独守卫，危急万分，听说田子忽然来到，喜到极点，沈田子于是背着河水结阵，身先士卒，经一场激战，大败敌军，于是他派兵追讨，又在苍悟、郁林、宁浦大败卢循。
English: Therefore, Tian Zi led the army to return to the south. When he arrived there, the enemy had gathered scattered soldiers and encircled Guangzhou. Sun Jigao was guarding alone and was in great danger. When he heard that Tian Zi had suddenly arrived, he was overjoyed. Shen Tian Zi then formed a formation with his back to the river, leading the way, and after a fierce battle, he defeated the enemy army. So he sent troops to recoup, and he also defeated Lu Xun in Xiangwu, Yulin and Ningpu.

古文：还至广州，而季高病死。既兵荒之后，山贼竞出，攻没城郭，杀害长吏。田子随宜讨伐，旬日平殄。
现代文：待回到广州时，孙季高已病死，在兵荒之后，山民纷纷出来掳掠，甚至攻陷城镇，杀害长官，沈田子随机讨击，几十天便平定了。
English: By the time he returned to Guangzhou, Sun Jigao had already died of illness. After the war, the mountain people came out in droves to loot and plunder, and even captured towns, killed officials, and Shen Tianzi randomly counterattacked, and it was settled in dozens of days.

古文：刺史褚升度至，乃还京师。
现代文：广州刺史褚叔度到了，才回到京城。
English: It was only after he had spent his time in Guangzhou that he returned to Beijing.

古文：除太尉参军、振武将军、淮陵内史，赐爵都乡侯。复参世子征虏军事，将军、内史如故。
现代文：他被任命为太尉参军、振武将军、淮陵内史，赐爵都乡侯，再参世子征虏军事、将军，内史照旧。
English: He was appointed as the first lieutenant to join the army, the general of Zhenwu, the internal history of Huairing, the lord of the township, and then the son of the generation to recruit the military and the general, the internal history as before.

古文：八年，从讨刘毅。十一年，复从讨司马休之，领别军，与征虏将军赵伦之，参征虏军事、振武将军、扶风太守。
现代文：八年，跟从讨伐刘毅，十一年再随同讨伐司马休之，兼领别部司马，和征虏将军赵伦之，参征虏军事、振北将军、扶风太守。
English: In the eighth year, he followed the crusade of Liu Yi, and in the eleventh year, he accompanied the crusade of Sima Xiu Zhi, and also led the second division of Sima, and the conscript general Zhao Lun Zhi, and participated in the conscription of the military, the general of Zhenbei, and the governor of Fufeng.

古文：十二年，高祖北伐，田子与顺阳太守傅弘之各领别军，从武关入，屯据青泥。
现代文：十二年，高祖北伐，沈田子和顺阳太守傅弘之各带一支军队，从武关进入关中，屯据青泥。
English: In the twelfth year, Gaozu's Northern Expedition, Shen Tianzi and Shunyang's governor Fu Hong each brought an army, from Wuguan into Guanzhong, and settled in Qingde.

古文：姚泓欲自御大军，虑田子袭其后，欲先平田子，然后倾国东出。
现代文：姚泓想亲自抵挡宋军主力，担心田子袭击他的后卫，想先解决沈田子等，然后集中全国兵力再向东抵御。
English: Yao Jun wanted to personally resist the main force of the Song Army, worried that Tian Zi would attack his guard, and wanted to solve Shen Tian Zi and others first, and then concentrate the national forces to resist to the east.

古文：乃率步军数万，奄至清泥。
现代文：于是他带步兵几万，突然到达青泥。
English: So he took tens of thousands of infantry with him and suddenly arrived in the mud.

古文：田子本为疑兵，所领裁数百，欲击之。傅弘之曰： 彼众我寡，难可与敌。 
现代文：沈田子本来是作为疑兵使用的，只带几百人，他想进攻敌人，傅弘之说： 敌众我寡，不是敌人的对手。 
English: Shen Tianzi was originally used as a suspect soldier, with only a few hundred people, he wanted to attack the enemy, Fu Hongzhi said: The enemy is few, not the enemy's opponent.

古文：田子曰： 师贵用奇，不必在众。 
现代文：沈田子说： 兵贵用奇，不必在多。 
English: Shen Tianzi said, "It is not necessary to increase the number of soldiers.

古文：弘之犹固执，田子曰： 众寡相倾，势不两立。若使贼围既固，人情丧沮，事便去矣。
现代文：傅弘之仍然固执己见，田子说： 众寡悬殊，势不两立，如果敌人把我们团团围住，人心沮丧，大事便完了。
English: Fu Hongzhi remained obstinate, and Tian Zi said, "Differences are few and far between. If the enemy encircles us and our hearts are depressed, the great event will be over."

古文：及其未整，薄之必克，所谓先人有夺人之志也。 
现代文：趁着敌人阵脚不稳，进攻必然成功，所谓先入有夺人之声。 
English: Taking advantage of the unstable foothold of the enemy, the attack is bound to succeed, the so-called first entry has a captivating voice.

古文：便独率所领鼓而进。合围数重，田子抚慰士卒曰： 诸君捐亲戚，弃坟墓，出矢石之间，正希今日耳。
现代文：他独自率领部兵擂鼓而进，被秦兵包围几重，田子抚慰将士们说： 诸位兄弟远离亲戚，背向故乡，在箭石之中出出进进，正是等待今天这样的时候。
English: He single-handedly led a troop of soldiers marching into battle, surrounded several times by Qin soldiers. Tian Zi comforted the soldiers and said: "Brothers, you are far away from your relatives, you have turned your back on your hometown, and you go in and out among the arrow stones. You are just waiting for a time like today.

古文：封侯之业，其在此乎！ 
现代文：封侯的事业，大概就在这里吧？ 
English: The cause of the feudal lordship is probably here, right?

古文：乃弃粮毁舍，躬勒士卒，前后奋击，所向摧陷。
现代文：于是丢下身上的干粮，毁掉房子，亲带士兵，前后激战，所向披靡。
English: So he threw away his dry food, destroyed his house, took soldiers with him, fought fiercely back and forth, and was always victorious.

古文：所领江东勇士，便习短兵，鼓噪奔之，贼众一时溃散，所杀万余人，得泓伪乘舆服御。
现代文：他所带领的江东勇士，会用短兵器，在鼓声呐喊声中，敌人一下子溃败了。
English: The Jiangdong warriors he led would use short weapons. Amidst the sound of drums and shouts, the enemy was suddenly routed.

古文：高祖表言曰： 参征虏军事、振武将军、扶风太守沈田子，率领劲锐，背城电激，身先士卒，勇冠戎陈，奋寡对众，所向必摧，自辰及未，斩馘千数。泓丧旗弃众，奔还霸西，咸阳空尽，义徒四合，清荡余烬，势在跂踵。 
现代文：沈田子等杀了一万多敌人，得到姚泓的伪辇车和皇帝衣服，高祖上表晋安帝说： 参征虏军事、振武将军、扶风太守沈田子，率领精锐部队，背城激战，身先士卒，勇冠三军以少击多，所向必克，从辰时到未时，杀死敌人几千名，姚泓卸甲丢盔，奔逃霸河西岸，致使咸阳一带敌兵空虚，我军四面包围，清除敌人残余，就在瞬间之内可以实现。 
English: Shen Tianzi and others killed more than ten thousand enemies, and got Yao Yao's fake carriage and the emperor's clothes. Gao Zu wrote to the Emperor of Jin and An, saying: "Shen Tianzi, who was a military conscript, Zhenwu general, and Fu Feng governor, led the elite troops, fought fiercely in the rear of the city, and led the way. The three victorious armies fought more with fewer attacks. What he wanted to do was to kill thousands of enemies from morning to night. Yao Yao took off his armor and helmet, and ran away to occupy the west bank of the river. As a result, the enemy soldiers in the Xianyang

古文：天子慰劳高祖曰： 逋寇阻隘，晏安假日，举斧函谷，规延王诛，群师勤王，将离寒暑。
现代文：天子慰劳高祖说： 逃敌凭借险要地形与我们敌对，偷安一时，在函谷抗拒我军，必将招致消灭的命运。
English: Heaven's consolation Gao Zu said: "The fleeing enemy is hostile to us by virtue of the dangerous terrain, steals our peace for a while, and resists our army in Hakodate, which will surely lead to the fate of annihilation.

古文：公躬秉鈇钺，棱威首涂，戎略载脂，则郊垒叠卷，崤陕甫践，则潼塞开扃。
现代文：将帅们忠心王室，不顾酷热和严寒。宋公亲临大军，扬声中原，兵车刚一上路，敌人闭关自守，你们进入崤山陕县一带，敌人的潼关天险便为您打开。
English: The generals are loyal to the royal family, regardless of the extreme heat and cold. Song Gong personally visited the great army, the loud voice of the Central Plains, the soldiers' car just started on the road, the enemy closed the gate to protect themselves, you entered the area of Lushan Shaanxi County, and the enemy's Shaoguan natural hazard opened for you.

古文：姚泓窘逼，弃城送死，蓝田偏师，覆之霸川，甲首成林，俘获蔽野，伪首奔迸，华、戎云集，积纪逋寇，旦夕夷殄。 
现代文：姚泓窘迫之极，远离巢穴，向我军送死，我们的偏师，便将姚泓在霸上击败，敌军尸横遍野，武器堆成小山，俘虏四处逃窜，敌人首领逃窜，中华和各少数民族云集响应我们，几十年的逃敌一日之内便被歼灭。 
English: Yao Wei was extremely distressed. He was far away from his lair and sent death to our army. Our biased division defeated Yao Wei on the battlefield. The enemy's corpses were everywhere, weapons were piled up into hills, prisoners fled everywhere, enemy leaders fled, Chinese and ethnic minorities gathered in response to us, and the enemy who had been fleeing for decades was annihilated within a day.

古文：长安既平，高祖燕于文昌殿，举酒赐田子曰： 咸阳之平，卿之功也。 
现代文：长安平定之后，高祖在文昌殿举行宴会，拿起杯子赐田子喝酒说： 咸阳所以能平定，是你的功劳。 
English: After Chang'an was pacified, Gao Zu held a banquet in Wenchang Hall. He picked up a cup and gave it to Tianzi to drink, saying, "It is to your credit that Xianyang can be pacified.

古文：即以咸阳相赏。田子谢曰： 咸阳之平，此实圣略所振，武臣效节，田子何力之有。 
现代文：田子辞谢说： 咸阳所以能平定，是圣上的英明所至，各将领效忠，田子未出什么大力。 
English: In his farewell speech, Tian Zi said: The reason why Xianyang can be pacified is due to the wisdom of the saints. All generals are loyal, but Tian Zi did not show any great strength.

古文：即授咸阳、始平二郡太守。
现代文：当即授予田子为咸阳、始平二郡太守。
English: Tian Zi was immediately awarded the title of Xianyang, and Shi Ping the title of Second County Governor.

古文：大军既还，桂阳公义真留镇长安，以田子为安西中兵参军、龙骧将军、始平太守。
现代文：大军既已返回，桂阳公义真留长安，以田子为安西中兵参军、龙骧将军、始平太守。
English: After the large army had returned, Guiyang Jiyi Ma left Chang'an, with Tian Zi as the Anxi middle soldier to join the army, the Longjing general, and the Shi Ping governor.

古文：时佛佛来寇，田子与安西司马王镇恶俱出北地御之。
现代文：当时赫连勃勃前来侵略，沈田子和安西司马王镇恶都到北地抗击敌人。
English: At that time, Helian vigorously came to invade, and both Shen Tianzi and Anxi Sima Wangzhen went to the north to resist the enemy.

古文：初，高祖将还，田子及傅弘之等并以镇恶家在关中，不可保信，屡言之高祖。高祖曰： 今留卿文武将士精兵万人。
现代文：当初，高祖将回来之前，沈田子和傅弘之等人以为王镇恶家在关中，不能保证他忠心王室，多次把这告诉给高祖刘裕，高祖说： 今日留下你们文武将士一万人。
English: At first, before Gao Zu's return, Shen Tianzi, Fu Hongzhi and others thought that Wang Zhen's evil family was in custody and could not guarantee his loyalty to the royal family. They repeatedly told this to Gao Zu and Liu Yu. Gao Zu said: Today, I will leave 10,000 of you literary warriors.

古文：彼若欲为不善，正足自灭耳。勿复多言。 
现代文：他如果想图谋不轨，只是自取灭亡而已，不需多言。 
English: If he wants to plot evil, he will only destroy himself, no need to say more.

古文：及俱出北地，论者谓镇恶欲尽杀诸南人，以数千人送义真南还，因据关中反叛。
现代文：则此时田子和王镇恶都出屯北地，一些人谣传王镇恶想杀死全部的南方人，用几千人送刘义真南还，乘机占据关中反叛。
English: At this time, Tian Zi and Wang Zhenxiong both went to the north, and some people rumored that Wang Zhenxiong wanted to kill all the southerners, send Liu Yizhennan back with several thousand people, and take the opportunity to occupy Guanzhong.

古文：田子与弘之谋，矫高祖令诛之，并力破佛佛，安关中，然后南还谢罪。
现代文：沈田子和傅弘之商议，假传刘裕的命令杀掉王镇恶，合力击败赫连勃勃，定安关中，然后奔回谢罪，沈田子的同宗沈敬仁力大过人，沈田子在傅弘之营内请王镇恶商量事情。
English: Shen Tianzi and Fu Hong discussed the rumor that Liu Yu's order was to kill Wang Zhenxuan, work together to defeat He Lianqin, establish a safe passage, and then run back to Xie Sin. Shen Tianzi's fellow monk Shen Jingren was more powerful than others, and Shen Tianzi invited Wang Zhenxuan to discuss the matter in Fu Hong's camp.

古文：田子宗人沈敬仁骁果有勇力，田子于弘之营内请镇恶计事，使敬仁于坐杀之，率左右数十人自归义真。长史王修收杀田子于长安稿仓门外，是岁，义熙十四年正月十五日也。
现代文：叫沈敬仁在座位上杀了王镇恶，自己则率领手下几千人奔到刘义真那里，刘义真长史王修在长安仓门外抓住沈田子并杀了他，这年正是晋安帝义熙十四年正月十五日。
English: He told Shen Jingren to kill Wang Zhenxiong on his seat, while he himself led several thousand of his subordinates to Liu Yizhen. Liu Yizhen's eldest son Wang Xiu caught Shen Tianzi outside the Chang'an warehouse and killed him. This year was the 15th day of the first month of the 14th year of Emperor Jinnan's reign.

古文：时年三十六。田子初以功应封，因此事寝。高祖表天子，以田子卒发狂易，不深罪也。
现代文：当时他三十六岁，沈田子开始因功劳大应该受封，因此事只好作罢，高祖上表天子，说田子突发疯病，没有深究他的罪行。
English: At that time, he was thirty-six years old. Shen Tianzi began to receive the title due to his great merits. Therefore, the matter had to be abandoned. Gao Zu presented Tianzi, saying that Tianzi had a sudden attack of madness and did not investigate his crime.

古文：无子，弟林子以第二子亮为后。
现代文：田子没有儿子，他弟弟沈林子以自己的第二子沈亮继承沈田子。
English: Tian Zi did not have a son, his younger brother Shen Lin Zi succeeded Shen Tian Zi with his second son Shen Liang.

古文：亮，字道明，清操好学，善属文。未弱冠，州辟从事。
现代文：沈亮字道明，清廉有道德，好学深思，也会写文章，还不到二十岁，本州便征用他为从事。
English: Shen Liang's character is clear, honest, moral, studious and thoughtful, and he can also write articles. He was not yet twenty years old when the state requisitioned him to do so.

古文：会稽太守孟顗在郡不法，亮纠劾免官，又言灾异，转西曹主簿。
现代文：会稽太守孟岂页在郡中不守法纪，沈亮弹劾了他，他被免官，又上书说天文地理的灾难异常，因此转任西曹主簿。
English: Shen Liang impeached Meng Hanzhe, the auditor-general, for not abiding by the law in the county. He was dismissed from his post. He also wrote a letter saying that the astronomical and geographical disaster was abnormal, so he was transferred to the post of chief accountant.

古文：时三吴水淹，谷贵民饥，刺史彭城王义康使立议以救民急，亮议以： 东土灾荒，民凋谷踊，富民蓄米，日成其价。宜班下所在，隐其虚实，令积蓄之家，听留一年储，余皆勒使粜货，为制平价，此所谓常道行于百世，权宜用于一时也。
现代文：当时三吴大水淹了这一带，谷子价格昂贵，人民饥饿。刺史彭城王刘义康叫部属献计解决人民的疾苦，沈亮献议说： 东方发生灾荒，人民凋零，谷价高涨，富人屯积谷物，使价格一天天上涨，朝廷应该命令自己的下属，搞出富贫的虚实情况，叫积蓄富人，允许他们留下一年的储蓄，其余都要把米卖出来，制定平稳的价格，这是可行于千百年的好法子，权宜用于一时之间。
English: At that time, the Sanwu Flood inundated this area, the price of grain was expensive, and the people were starving. Liu Yikang, the king of the city of Zhishu and Peng, called on his subordinates to offer a plan to solve the people's suffering. Shen Liang offered a suggestion, saying: "In the East, there was a disaster, the people were withered, grain prices were soaring, and the rich were accumulating grain, causing prices to rise day by day. The imperial court should order its subordinates to create a false situation of wealth and poverty, calling for the accumulation of the rich, allowing them to leave a year's savings,

古文：又缘淮岁丰，邑富地穰，麦既已登，黍粟行就，可析其估赋，仍就交市，三吴饥民，即以贷给，使强壮转运，以赡老弱。且酒有喉脣之利，而非餐饵所资，尤宜禁断，以息游费。 
现代文：另外淮河流域今年丰收，那里富裕，土地肥沃，麦子收割，粟米将要成熟，可以分出一部分进行上交抵税，使他们在市上进行交换，三吴的饥民，又贷给他们钱财，让强壮劳力转运粮食，帮助老人小孩渡过难关，另外酒不过是喝着舒服，但离了它也可以活命，尤其应该禁止，以损减游乐的费用。 
English: In addition, the Huaihe River Basin has a good harvest this year. It is rich, the land is fertile, the wheat is harvested, and the corn is about to mature. A part of it can be allocated for tax refund, so that they can exchange in the market. The starving people in Sanwu also lend them money, let the strong laborers transport the grain, and help the elderly and children get through the difficulties. In addition, alcohol is just comfortable to drink, but it can also save lives. In particular, it should be banned to reduce the cost of recreation.

古文：即并施行。
现代文：他的这一建议被采纳实行。
English: His suggestion was accepted and implemented.

古文：世祖出镇历阳，行参征虏军事。
现代文：世祖出镇历阳，以沈亮为代参征虏军事。
English: The ancestor went out of town to Liyang, and Shen Liang took part in the military conscription on his behalf.

古文：民有盗发冢者，罪所近村民，与符伍遭劫不赴救同坐。
现代文：百姓有当盗墓贼的也让附近村民抵罪，和军队中另外一支受敌而不救援同罪。
English: The villagers also made a nearby villager confess to being a grave robber, which is the same crime as not rescuing another unit in the army that was attacked by the enemy.

古文：亮议曰：
现代文：沈亮献议说：
English: Shen Liang said in his speech:

古文：寻发冢之情，事止窃盗，徒以侵亡犯死，故同之严科。
现代文： 体会掘墓的行径，只属于盗窃，纯粹因侵犯死去之人所以把他们当成大罪。
English: The act of grave-digging, they realized, was merely theft, considered a heinous crime purely because it violated the dead.

古文：夫穿掘之侣，必衔枚以晦其迹；劫掠之党，必欢呼以威其事。故赴凶赫者易，应潜密者难。
现代文：掘墓的人，必穿着绑腿隐藏他的形迹，打家劫舍的人，则大喊大叫让别人害怕。所以做打劫的容易，做强盗的难。
English: A gravedigger must wear gaiters to hide his tracks, a mugger must shout to frighten others, so it is easy to rob and difficult to rob.

古文：且山原为无人之乡，丘垄非恆途所践，至于防救，不得比之村郭。督实效名，理与劫异，则符伍之坐，居宜降矣。
现代文：况且山野田原是无人居住的地方。山丘陇田不是寻常道路经历过的地方，想加以防守不能和村庄相比，寻名责实，盗窃方与打劫不同，那么军中不援救另外的部队的罪行，应该是比这些强盗罪重一些。
English: Moreover, Yamano-Tahara is an uninhabited place. The hills of Hieda are not a place that has experienced ordinary roads. If you want to defend it, you can't compare it to a village. Find the name and blame. The thief is different from the robbery. Then the crime of not rescuing other troops in the army should be heavier than these robberies.

古文：又结罚之科，虽有同符伍之限，而无远近之断。
现代文： 另外惩罚的条律，虽然和军中不能相比较，但是没有远近路程的等级。
English: In addition, the rules of punishment, although not comparable to those in the military, do not have a distance rating.

古文：夫冢无村界，当以比近坐之。若不域之以界，则数步之内，与十里之外，便应同罹其责。防民之禁，不可顿去，止非之宪，宜当其律。
现代文：墓地没有界限，应当当成近邻罚罪，如果不加以划分界限，那么几步之内和十里之外，便会受到同一种罪责的惩罚，防止百姓的条文，不能一下子去掉，遇上犯罪的法律，应该有适当的分别。
English: Cemeteries have no boundaries, and should be punished as if they were close neighbors. If the boundaries are not delineated, then within a few steps and ten miles away will be subject to the same kind of criminal responsibility. The provisions to prevent the people cannot be removed all at once, and in the case of criminal laws, there should be appropriate distinctions.

古文：愚谓相去百步同赴告不时者，一岁刑，自此以外，差不及罚。
现代文：我认为相隔一百步内跑去告知而不管的百姓，判徒刑一年，百步以外的地区，是不能罚罪的。 
English: I think that the people who run to inform within a hundred paces and do not care are sentenced to one year in prison, and the areas beyond a hundred paces cannot be punished.

古文：又启太祖陈府事曰： 伏见西府兵士，或年几八十，而犹伏隶；或年始七岁，而已从役。
现代文：沈亮又启告太祖关于州府中的事务说： 我看见西府中的士兵，有的年近八十，而仍然服侍长官，或者只有七岁的小孩便已服劳役，衰弱的老年人，气虚无力。
English: Shen Liang also told his great-grandfather about the affairs in the prefectural capital, saying: I saw soldiers in the western prefectures, some of whom were nearly eighty years old and still served as prefects, or children as young as seven years old who had already served as laborers, weak elderly people, weak and feeble.

古文：衰耗之体，气用湮微，兒弱之躯，肌肤未实，而使伏勤昏稚，骛苦倾晚，于理既薄，为益实轻。书制休老以六十为限，役少以十五为制，若力不周务，故当粗存优减。 
现代文：小孩子的身体，肌肤还未充实，而使他们日夜劳动，从人心的角度来说过不去，实际上是得不偿失。法令规定，老年人六十退休，少年人服役也要满十五岁，如果力气跟不上，应该给予他们优待。 
English: Children's bodies and skins are not yet fully developed, so they have to work day and night. From the perspective of the human heart, it is unbearable. In fact, it is not worth the loss. The law stipulates that the elderly should retire at the age of sixty, and the young people should serve at the age of fifteen. If their strength cannot keep up, they should be given preferential treatment.

古文：诏曰： 前已令卿兄改革，寻值迁回，竟是不施行耶，今更敕西府也。 
现代文：文帝下诏书说： 以前已经叫令兄改革这个问题，不久遇事没有施行，今天再下令叫荆州府施行。 
English: Emperor Wen issued an edict saying: In the past, I have ordered my brother to reform this problem, but it was not implemented soon after the incident. Today, I will order the Jingzhou government to implement it.

古文：时营创城府，功课严促，亮又陈之曰： 经始城宇，莫非造创，基筑既广，夫课又严，不计其劳，苟务其速，以岁月之事，求不日之成。
现代文：当时正筑州城，工役严酷而急促，沈亮又上书说： 所有的城池，都是筑成的，城基宽阔，工程庞大，督促又严急，不管劳动量的大小，只顾筑城的速度，岁月间完成的事，想几天完成。
English: At that time, it was the time of the construction of the city of Chikushu. The workmen were strict and hurried, and Shen Liang wrote: All the cities have been built, the city foundation is broad, the project is huge, the supervision is strict and urgent. Regardless of the amount of labor, only the speed of building the city should be considered. Things that have been completed over the years should be completed in a few days.

古文：比见役人未明上作，闭鼓乃休，呈课既多，理有不逮。
现代文：近来看见服役人天还未亮便上工，打了三更鼓才罢工，督促太多，自然有不到的地方。
English: Recently, I have seen servicemen go to work before dawn, and only go on strike after beating three more drums. There is too much supervision, and naturally there are places that cannot be reached.

古文：至于息日，拘备关限，方涉暑雨，多有死病，顷日所承，亦颇有逃逸。
现代文：到了休息的日子，又限制他们，一到了酷暑多雨的季节，很多人便累死了。近来看见的，颇有些人逃跑了。
English: When it came to rest days, they restricted them again, and when it came to the hot and rainy season, many people died of exhaustion. Recently, I saw quite a few people running away.

古文：窃惟此既内籓，事殊外镇，抚莅之宜，无系早晚。
现代文：我想这里是内地城镇。管理的目的，不在于一下子完工。
English: I think this is an inland town. The purpose of management is not to complete everything at once.

古文：若得少宽其工课，稍均其优剧，徒隶既苦，易以悦加，考其卒功，废阙无几。
现代文：如果稍稍宽限工期，稍稍缓和服役的人，辛苦到极点的农夫，他们是非常高兴的，综合考察最后的功效，也差不到哪儿去。
English: If you give a little grace to the construction period, a little relief to the service personnel, and the hard-working farmers, they are very happy, and a comprehensive examination of the final effect is not far off.

古文：臣闻不居其职，不谋其事，庖割有主，尸不越樽，岂臣疏小，所当预议。
现代文： 我听说不在其位，不谋其政，厨房有主人，不需他人干扰，况且像我这样疏远的小臣所能参预谋议的呢？
English: I have heard that there is no one in charge of the kitchen, no one in charge of the government, no one in charge of the kitchen, no one in charge of the kitchen, no one in charge of the kitchen, no one in charge of the kitchen, no one in charge of the kitchen, no one in charge of the kitchen, no one in charge of the kitchen, no one in charge of the kitchen, no one in charge of the kitchen, no one in charge of the kitchen, no one in charge of the kitchen.

古文：但臣泳恩岁厚，服义累世，苟是所怀，忘其常体。 
现代文：但是我每每深感皇恩浩大，世世代代忠心王室，假如心有所想，便忘记了其他的不利。 
English: But I have always deeply felt the immense grace of the emperor and have been loyal to the royal family for generations. If I think about it, I will forget the other disadvantages.

古文：诏答曰： 启之甚佳。此亦由来常患，比屡敕之，犹复如此，甚为无理。近复令孟休宣旨，想当不同，卿比可密观其优剧也。 
现代文：文帝回答诏书说： 你上表很好，这些问题是一贯存在的，近来多次叫他们改正一点，仍然如此，很是不讲道理，刚刚又叫孟休宣布诏书大概与你的提议有些不同，你回去可以暗中观察筑城情况。 
English: Emperor Wen replied to the edict, saying: Your edict is very good. These problems have always existed. Recently, you have repeatedly asked them to make some corrections. This is still the case, which is very unreasonable. You have just asked Meng Xiu to announce that the edict is probably somewhat different from your proposal. You can go back and secretly observe the construction of the city.

古文：始兴王浚临扬州，复为主簿、秣陵令，善擿奸伏，有非必禽。太祖称其能，入为尚书都官郎。
现代文：始兴王刘浚为扬州刺史，沈亮再当他的主簿和秣陵县令。沈亮善于发奸鏝伏，有罪必抓，上司觉得他很能干，调他进来当尚书都官郎。
English: Shi Xing Wang Liu Jun was the historian of Yangzhou, and Shen Liang was his accountant and the governor of Fuling County. Shen Liang was good at committing treason, and the guilty must be caught. The boss thought he was very capable, and transferred him to be the official of Shangshu.

古文：襄阳地接边关，江左来未有皇子重镇。元嘉二十二年，世祖出为抚军将军、雍州刺史。天子甚留心，以旧宛比接二关，咫尺崤、陕，盖襄阳之北捍，且表里强蛮，盘带疆场，以亮为南阳太守，加扬武将军。
现代文：襄阳与边关相接，从吴国以来，从未有皇子出镇此州，元嘉二十二年，世祖出外当抚军将军，雍州刺史，天子很关心雍州的事务，因为老宛城近邻两关，与崤山陕县相隔很近，是襄阳北边的屏障，加上这一带内外都有很强蛮人。盘踞边疆之上，便由沈亮当南阳太守，加号扬武将军。
English: Yangyang is adjacent to the Border Pass. Since the time of the State of Wu, there has never been a prince who left the town for this state. In the 22nd year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the founder of the dynasty went abroad to be the general of the army of Yongzhou, and the son of heaven was very concerned about the affairs of Yongzhou. Because the two borders of Laowan City are close to each other and are very close to Shaoshan County, it is a barrier to the north of Yangyang. In addition, there are very strong barbarians both inside and outside this area. On the border, Shen Liang was the governor of Nanyang, and he was also known as

古文：边蛮畏服，皆纳赋调，有数村狡猾，亮悉诛之。
现代文：边区蛮人非常敬畏沈亮，都缴纳租税，有几个村的村民非常狡猾。
English: The barbarians in the outlying districts were very much in awe of Shen Liang, and they all paid taxes. The villagers in several villages were very cunning.

古文：遣吏巡行诸县，孤寡老疾不能自存者，皆就蠲养，耆年老齿，岁时有饩。
现代文：沈亮将他们全部杀死，他又派官员巡视各县，孤寡老弱不能维持生命的，都让他们有所供养，年老之人，岁月节日间都有馈赠。
English: Shen Liang killed them all. He also sent officials to inspect all counties. The lonely, the old and the weak who could not sustain their lives were all provided for. The elderly received gifts during festivals.

古文：时儒学崇建，亮开置庠序，训授生徒。
现代文：当时大兴儒学，沈亮设立学校，教育后生。
English: At that time, Confucianism was flourishing, and Shen Liang set up a school to educate future students.

古文：民多发冢，并婚嫁违法，皆严为条禁。
现代文：当地百姓有很多当盗墓贼，以致亲戚受到株连，沈亮加强法制管理。
English: There are many grave robbers among the local people, so much so that relatives have been persecuted, and efforts have been made to strengthen the legal system.

古文：郡界有古时石堨，芜废岁久，亮签世祖修治之，曰： 施生兴业，首教农亩，立民崇政，训本播穑，故能殷邦康俗，礼节用成。
现代文：郡内有个古时石坝，年久荒芜，沈亮上告高祖请加以修制，他说： 爱民建功，第一便是重视农业。让人民安居乐业，政治清明，最重要的便是广加播种，所以能富国强民，礼节得以施行。
English: There is an ancient stone dam in the county, which has been deserted for a long time. Shen Liang appealed to Gao Zu to repair it. He said: "To love the people and make great achievements, the first thing is to attach importance to agriculture. Let the people live and work in peace, the politics are clear, and the most important thing is to increase the sowing, so that the country can be rich and the people can be strong, and the etiquette can be enforced.

古文：顷北洛侵芜，南宛雕毁，猃狁肆凶。犬夷充疆，远肃烽驿，近虞郊闬，遂使沃衍弗井，巨防莫修，窘力辍耕，阙于分地，凶荒无待，流冗及今。礼化孚内，威禁清外，斯实去盗修畎，昭农绪稼之时，弘图广务，拓土祈年之日。殿下降心育物，振民复古，且方提封榛棘，绥入殊荒。
现代文：近来北洛地区荒芜，南宛萧条，敌人猖獗，豺狼四布，前方则烽火相连，内地则时刻警戒，于是使肥沃的土地得不到耕种，大的水利工程失修，农民贫困以至停止耕种，失去原来的好土地，凶荒年岁缺衣少粮，一直遗留到今天，对于国内百姓用礼节教化，对外则以武力震慑，目前确实是扫除盗贼，加强农业的时候，促使农民种庄稼的良机，开辟田地，可望丰收的年岁，殿下应顺百姓的愿望，拯救人民，恢复过去的良好秩序。还要开拓荒辟的土地，管理遥远的荒山野岭。
English: Recently, the northern Luo region is desolate, the southern Luo region is depressed, the enemy is rampant, the jackals are everywhere, the front is connected by bonfires, and the inland is always on alert. As a result, fertile land cannot be cultivated, large water conservancy projects fall into disrepair, farmers are impoverished and even stop farming, losing the original good land, savage years are short of clothes and food, and have been left to this day. For the domestic people, they use etiquette to educate, and for the outside world, they use force to deter. At present, it is indeed time to sweep away thieves, strengthen agriculture, encourage farmers to grow

古文：窃见郡境有旧石堨，区野腴润，实为神皋，而芜决稍积，久废其利，凡管所见，谓宜创立。
现代文：我看到本郡境内有旧石坝，那一带土地肥沃，确是一块宝地，但是荒废太久无人耕耘，我的意见，是应加以重新改造。
English: I see that there is an old stone dam in our county. The land around it is fertile and is truly a treasure, but it has been abandoned for too long and no one has worked on it. My opinion is that it should be rebuilt.

古文：昔文翁守官，起沃成产，伟连抚民，开奥增业，惠昭二邦，庸列两汉。虽效政图功，不见所绝，联事惟忝，忧同职同。 
现代文：当年文翁当南阳太守时，开辟肥沃土地，获得丰厚收成，召公治理此地百姓，挖平深洼谷，增加产业，给这二郡带来巨大的益处，被称为两汉名臣，我和你职事相连，所以向你先告知这些问题。 
English: When Wen Weng was the governor of Nanyang at that time, he opened up fertile lands, obtained abundant harvests, summoned officials to govern the local people, dug out deep valleys, increased industries, and brought great benefits to these two counties. He was known as a famous minister of the two Han dynasties. I am connected with your work, so I will first inform you of these issues.

古文：囗囗囗囗囗囗囗囗囗囗囗囗囗囗囗囗又修治马人陂，民获其利。在任四年，迁南谯王义宣司空中兵参军。
现代文：世祖同意了沈亮的建议。沈亮又修造马人陂，当地人民获得很大好处，他任期四年，升任南谯王刘义宣司空中兵参军。
English: The patriarch agreed to Shen Liang's suggestion. Shen Liang also built a horse-drawn carriage, which brought great benefits to the local people. He was appointed to a four-year term and was promoted to Liu Yixuan, the king of Nanxun, as an airborne soldier to join the army.

古文：诏曰： 陕西心膂须才，故授卿此职。 
现代文：文帝下诏曰： 荆州重镇，需要人才，所以授予你这个职务。 
English: Emperor Wen issued an edict saying, "Jingzhou is an important town, and it needs talent, so I'm awarding you this position.

古文：随王诞镇襄阳，复为后军中兵，领义成太守。
现代文：随之刘诞镇守襄阳，沈亮再当后军中兵，兼任义成太守。
English: As a result, Liu Xizhen guarded Xiangyang, and Shen Liang became a soldier in the rear army, and also served as the governor of Yicheng.

古文：亮莅官清约，为太祖所嘉，赐以车马服玩，前后累积。
现代文：沈亮做官清正廉洁，很受文帝称赞，赐给他车马玩具服装，前后无数。
English: Shen Liang was a clean and honest official, and was highly praised by Emperor Wen. He was given countless horse and carriage toys and costumes.

古文：每远方贡献绝国勋器，辄班赉焉。又赐书二千卷。
现代文：每有远方贡献希奇器物，也赐一些给他，另外又赐给沈亮二千卷书籍。
English: Every time someone from far away contributed some marvelous artifacts, he was also given some, and Shen Liang was also given two thousand volumes of books.

古文：二十七年，卒官，时年四十七。所著诗、赋、颂、赞、三言、诔、哀辞、祭告请雨文、乐府、挽歌、连珠、教记、白事、笺、表、签、议一百八十九首。
现代文：二十七年，在任上去世，当年四十七岁，他写的诗、赋、颂、讠赞、三言诗、清文、哀悼文章、祭告求雨的文章、乐府新歌、挽歌、连珠辞、教记、白事、成、表、议共一百八十九篇。
English: In the 27th year, he died in office, at the age of 47, and he wrote a total of one hundred and eighty-nine poems, fus, odes, eulogies, three-character poems, pure texts, mourning articles, articles to pray for rain, new songs, elegies, renditions, teachings, white affairs, achievements, tables, and discussions.

古文：林子，字敬士，田子弟也。少有大度，年数岁，随王父在京口。王恭见而奇之，曰： 此兒王子师之流也。 
现代文：沈林子字敬士，是沈田子的弟弟，小时便有非凡的气度，几岁时随同父亲到京口，王恭见了后惊奇地说： 这孩子是王子师一流人物。 
English: Shen Lin Zi Zi, known as the Venerable, was the younger brother of Shen Tian Zi. As a child, he had an extraordinary air. When he was a few years old, he accompanied his father to Beijing. Wang Qiong said in surprise after seeing him: This child is a first-class prince.

古文：与众人共见遗宝，咸争趋之，林子直去不顾。
现代文：和众人一起见到丢下的宝贝，其余的人都向前抢夺，沈林子头也不回地向前走了。
English: Seeing the lost treasure with everyone else, the rest of the people rushed forward to snatch it, and Shen Linzi walked forward without looking back.

古文：年十三，遇家祸，时虽逃窜，而哀号昼夜不绝声。
现代文：十三岁时，遇到家祸，当时虽然在逃窜之中，但悲苦之声昼夜不绝于耳。
English: At the age of thirteen, he encountered a family disaster. Although he was on the run at the time, the sounds of misery were incessant day and night.

古文：王母谓之曰： 汝当忍死强视，何为空自殄绝。 
现代文：他母亲对他说： 你应该忍耐活着，何必徒然折磨自己。 
English: His mother said to him: You should be patient and live, why torture yourself in vain.

古文：林子曰： 家门酷横，无复假日之心，直以至仇未复，故且苟存尔。 一门既陷妖党，兄弟并应从诛，逃伏草泽，常虑及祸，而沈预家甚强富，志相陷灭。林子与诸兄昼藏夜出，即货所居宅，营墓葬父祖诸叔，凡六丧，俭而有礼。
现代文：沈林子说： 家门不幸遭到横祸，我再也没有活下去的愿望，只因大仇未报，所以苟且偷生罢，一门之中竟然全部被奸党连累，他兄弟们都应该被杀，只好逃窜于草泽之中，常担心被发现，而沈预家门有钱有势，也一定要消灭他们，沈林子和兄弟们便昼伏夜出，变卖他家产业，将祖父父亲叔父全部安葬，共六次丧事，每次都简洁而符合礼节。
English: Shen Linzi said: The family was unfortunately plagued by misfortune. I no longer had the desire to live. It was only because of the great revenge that was not reported, so I had to steal my life. In one family, all of them were implicated by the evil party. His brothers should have been killed. They had to flee in the grass, often fearing to be discovered, but the Shen Yue family was rich and powerful, and they must also destroy them. Shen Linzi and his brothers went out day and night, sold his family's property, and buried his grandfather, father, and uncle. A total of six funerals, each time simple and in line with etiqu

古文：时生业已尽，老弱甚多，东土饥荒，易子而食，外迫国网，内畏强仇，沈伏山草，无所投厝。
现代文：当时他家生计困难到了极点，老弱病残很多，加上东方近年饥荒，人们甚至换着儿子吃掉，沈林子外则被国法所困围，内则害怕大仇人报复。他们只好藏躲于山谷深草中间，无处投身。
English: At that time, his family's livelihood was extremely difficult, there were many old, weak and sick people, coupled with the famine in the East in recent years, people even ate their sons in exchange, Shen Linzi was besieged by the state law outside, and inside they were afraid of the great enemy's revenge. They had to hide in the middle of the valley's deep grass, nowhere to devote themselves.

古文：时孙恩屡出会稽，诸将东讨者相续，刘牢之、高素之放纵其下，虏暴纵横，独高祖军政严明，无所侵犯。林子乃自归曰： 妖贼扰乱，仆一门悉被驱逼，父祖诸叔，同罹祸难，犹复偷生天壤者，正以仇雠未复，亲老漂寄尔。
现代文：当时孙恩多次出兵会稽，官军将领们东西讨伐不断，刘牢之、高素之放纵部下，恣意掳掠，只有高祖军纪严明，对人民秋毫无犯，林子于是投奔高祖，他说： 奸贼骚乱，我一家祖父、父亲和叔父们都被逼迫，国遭祸乱，我之偷生于人间，正因为大仇未报，亲兄弟漂泊四方。
English: At that time, Sun En repeatedly dispatched troops to inspect the situation, the generals of the government army were constantly fighting against the east and west, Liu Diao Zhi and Gao Su indulged their subordinates, arbitrarily abducted and plundered, only Gao Zu had strict military discipline and did not commit any crimes against the people. Lin Zi then went to Gao Zu. He said: The traitors rioted, my grandfather, father and uncles were all persecuted, the country was plagued by calamity, I was born in the world, precisely because the great revenge was not reported, my brothers wandered in all directions.

古文：今日见将军伐恶旌善，是有道之师，谨率老弱，归罪请命。 
现代文：今日看见将军吊民伐罪，是仁义之师，我诚敬地率领家人老弱病残，请罪投身于你。 
English: Today, I saw the general hanging people for the crime of logging. He is a teacher of benevolence and righteousness. I sincerely lead my family members, the old, the weak, and the sick, and ask them to devote themselves to you.

古文：因流涕哽咽，三军为之感动。
现代文：边说边流泪呜咽，三军被他深深地打动。
English: While speaking, he shed tears and sobbed. The three armies were deeply moved by him.

古文：高祖甚奇之，谓曰： 君既是国家罪人，强雠又在乡里，唯当见随还京，可得无恙。 
现代文：高祖非常看重他，对他说： 你是国家追捕的对象，大仇人仍在故乡，只有随同我回到京口，可以免除灾祸。
English: Gaozu thought very highly of him and said to him, "You are the object of the country's pursuit, and the great enemy is still in your hometown. Only if you return to Kyoguchi with me can you be spared the disaster."

古文：乃载以别船，遂尽室移京口，高祖分宅给焉。
现代文：于是刘裕用其他船装载沈林子一家人全部迁到京口，高祖分出房子让他家住下。
English: As a result, Liu Yu used other ships to load Shen Linzi's entire family to move to Beijing. Gao Zu allocated a house for his family to live in.

古文：博览众书，留心文义，从高祖克京城，进平都邑。时年十八，身长七尺五寸。沈预虑林子为害，常被甲持戈。至是林子与兄田子还东报雠。
现代文：沈林子博览群书，留心文章，随从高祖攻下京口城，又平定京都，这年沈林子只十八岁，身高七尺五寸，沈预担心沈林子报仇，常常披挂盔甲手握刀剑，到这时沈田子和沈林子回到东方报仇。
English: Shen Linzi read a lot of books, paid attention to articles, and followed Gao Zu to conquer Kyoguchi City and subdue Kyoto. This year, Shen Linzi was only eighteen years old, with a height of seven feet and five inches. Shen was worried about Shen Linzi's revenge, and often wore armor and held a sword. At this time, Shen Tianzi and Shen Linzi returned to the East to take revenge.

古文：五月夏节日至，预正大集会，子弟盈堂，林子兄弟挺身直入，斩预首，男女无长幼悉屠之，以预首祭父、祖墓。
现代文：五月夏天的节日那天，沈预家中正举行大集会，他的兄弟、儿子、侄儿们齐集堂前，林子兄弟挺身而入，砍下沈预的脑袋，沈预家中男女老幼全部杀光，他们用沈预的脑袋祭祀祖父、父亲的坟墓。
English: On the day of the summer festival in May, a large gathering was being held at Shen Yueh's home. His brothers, sons, and nephews were gathered in front of the hall. The Linzi brothers stepped forward and cut off Shen Yueh's head. All the men, women, and children in Shen Yueh's home were killed. They used Shen Yueh's head to sacrifice to the grave of their grandfather and father.

古文：仍为本郡所命，毅又板为冠军参军，并不就。
现代文：林子、田子仍然被本郡征用。刘毅又任林子为冠军参军，沈林子没有应任。
English: Linzi and Tianzi were still requisitioned by the county. Liu Yi also appointed Linzi as the champion to join the army, but Shen Linzi did not take up the post.

古文：林子以家门荼蓼，无复仕心，高祖敦逼，至弥年不起。及高祖为扬州，辟为从事，谓曰： 卿何由遂得不仕。顷年相申，欲令万物见卿此心尔。 
现代文：他认为家门惨遭不幸，没有再出仕的心意，高祖多次敦促他，他仍一年多不应命，高祖当扬州刺史，任命他当从事官，对他说： 你怎么能不出来做官，当年的报仇，是想叫天下人看见你的志气罢了。 
English: He thought that his family had suffered a great misfortune and had no intention of serving again. Gao Zu urged him many times. He was still more than a year away from death. Gao Zu was the Yangzhou governor and appointed him as an official. He said to him: How can you not come out to be an official? The revenge of that year is to let the world see your ambition.

古文：固辞不得已，然后就职，领建熙令，封资中县五等侯，时年二十一。
现代文：他们坚决辞让，但高祖仍不同意，然后任职，兼领建熙县令，被封为资中县五等侯，当时他二十一岁。
English: They resolutely refused to give in, but Gaozu still did not agree, and then served as the leader of Jianxi County, and was named the fifth-ranked marquis of Zhizhong County, when he was twenty-one years old.

古文：义熙五年，从伐鲜卑，行参镇军军事。大军于临朐交战，贼遣虎班突骑驰军后，林子率精勇东西奋击，皆大破之。
现代文：义熙五年，沈林子跟从刘裕征伐慕容超任代理参镇军事，宋燕两军在临朐激战，燕人派虎部的突击骑兵向宋军后方出击，沈林子率精兵向东西两方奋击，都大败敌军。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, Shen Linzi followed Liu Yu to recruit Murong Chaoren as an agent to join the town's military. The two armies of Song and Yan fought fiercely in Linyi. Yan sent the assault cavalry of the Tiger Division to attack the rear of the Song Army. Shen Linzi led the elite soldiers to attack the east and west, and defeated the enemy army.

古文：慕容超退守广固，复与刘敬宣攻其西隅。
现代文：慕容超退守广固，再和刘敬宣进攻广固城的西方。
English: Murong Chao retreated to Guanggu, and then he and Liu Jingxuan attacked the west of Guanggu.

古文：广固既平，而卢循奄至。
现代文：广固攻下后，而卢循突然从广州打到建康附近。
English: After Guanggu was captured, Lu Xun suddenly moved from Guangzhou to Jiankang.

古文：初，循之下也，广固未拔，循潜遣使结林子及宗人叔长。林子即密白高祖，叔长不以闻，反以循旨动林子。
现代文：当初卢循东下进攻时，广固尚未攻拔，卢循暗中派使者结交林子同家沈叔长，林子马上密告高祖，沈叔长没有上告，反而用卢循的意思劝告林子。
English: At the beginning of Lu Xun's eastward attack, Guanggu had not yet been attacked. Lu Xun secretly sent an envoy to make friends with Lin Zi's family member Shen Shuchang. Lin Zi immediately informed Gao Zu. Shen Shuchang did not appeal, but advised Lin Zi with Lu Xun's intention.

古文：叔长素骁果，高祖以超未平，隐之，还至广固，乃诛叔长。谓林子曰： 昔魏武在官渡，汝、兗之士，多怀贰心，唯李通独断大义，古今一也。 
现代文：沈叔良一向非常骁勇果敢，高祖因为慕容超还未消灭，忍住了，回到广固后，才杀了沈叔长，高祖对林子说： 当年曹操在官渡时，汝兖一带人士，很多心怀两意，只有李通深明大义，忠贞之士真是古今相同啊！ 
English: Shen Shuliang had always been very brave and courageous. Gao Zu, because Murong Chao had not yet been eliminated, held back. After returning to Guanggu, he killed Shen Shuchang. Gao Zu said to Lin Zi: When Cao Cao was in Guandu, there were many people in the area of Rugao who were ambivalent. Only Li Tong was deeply righteous. Loyal people are really the same from ancient times to modern times!

古文：循至蔡洲，贵游之徒，皆议还徙，唯林子请移家京邑，高祖怪而问之，对曰： 耿纯尽室从戎，李典举宗居魏。林子虽才非古人，实受恩深重。 
现代文：卢循到蓼川，京城贵族都想迁得远远的，只有林子请求把家迁到京城，高祖奇怪地问他，林子回答说： 耿纯全家从军，李典满家住在魏国，林子虽然才不及古人，然确实蒙受明公大恩。 
English: Lu Xun went to the Li River, and the aristocrats of Beijing wanted to move far away. Only Lin Zi requested to move his family to Beijing. Gao Zu asked him strangely, and Lin Zi replied: Geng Chun's whole family served in the army, Li Dianman's family lived in Wei. Although Lin Zi was not as good as the ancients, he did indeed receive the great favor of Emperor Ming.

古文：高祖称善久之。林子时领别军于石头，屡战摧寇。
现代文：高祖赞扬他好久，林子当时带着一支军屯驻石头城，经多次交战屡败敌军。
English: Gaozu praised him for a long time. Linzi was stationed in Stone Town with an army at that time. After many battles, he repeatedly defeated the enemy army.

古文：循每战无功，乃伪扬声当悉众于白石步上，而设伏于南岸，故大军初起白石，留林子与徐赤将断拒查浦。
现代文：卢循每战都败，于是，假装声称要集中全部兵力从白石步行而上，而在南岸设伏，所以刘裕主力部队都集中到白石，留下林子和徐赤特截断查浦抵挡敌人。
English: Lu Xun was defeated in every battle, so he pretended to claim that he wanted to concentrate all the troops from Baishi on foot, and set up a camp on the south bank, so Liu Yu's main forces were concentrated in Baishi, leaving Linzi and Xu Chet to cut off Cha Pu to resist the enemy.

古文：林子乃进计曰： 此言妖诈，未必有实，宜深为之防。 
现代文：沈林子于是进计说： 这种说法完全是诡计，未必真有那么一回事，应该小心防守。 
English: Shen Linzi then went on to say: This statement is completely a trick, it may not be true, and it should be carefully defended.

古文：高祖曰： 石头城险，且淮栅甚固，留卿在后，足以守之。 
现代文：刘裕说： 石头城险固得很，况且秦淮渡口的栅栏非常坚实，留你在后面防守，一定守得住。 
English: Liu Yu said: The stone city is very solid, and the fence of the Qinhuai ferry port is very solid. If you stay behind to defend, you will be able to keep it.

古文：大军既去，贼果上，赤特将击之。
现代文：大军离开后，敌人果然从这边上岸，徐赤特将展开进攻。
English: After the large army left, the enemy landed on the shore from this side, and Xu Chet will launch an attack.

古文：林子曰： 贼声往白石，而屡来挑战，其情状可知矣。贼养锐待期，而吾众不盈二旅，难以有功。
现代文：林子说： 敌人声称进攻白石而却派人到我们这里来挑战，这里显而易见的是敌人养兵待机，我们的人马不过两支，难以抵挡。
English: Linzi said, "The enemy claimed to attack Shiroishi, but sent people to us to challenge us. It is obvious that the enemy is on standby. We only have two men, and it is difficult to resist.

古文：今距守此险，足以自固。若贼伪计不立，大军寻反，君何患焉？ 
现代文：如今固守石头城，足以防卫自己，如果敌人奸计不能得逞，大部队再回来，你有什么可担心呢？ 
English: Now that you have secured Stone Town well enough to defend yourself, what do you have to worry about if the enemy's plan fails and the large force returns?

古文：赤特曰： 今贼悉众向白石，留者必皆羸老，以锐卒击之，无不破也。 
现代文：徐赤特说： 今日敌人把主力都攻向白石留下的必然是老弱病残，我以精兵展开进攻，必定大败他们。 
English: Xu Chet said: Today, the enemy has brought the main force to attack Baishi, leaving behind the old, weak and sick. I will launch an attack with elite soldiers, and I will surely defeat them.

古文：便鼓噪而出，贼伏兵齐发，赤特军果败，弃军奔北岸；林子率军收赤特散兵，进战，摧破之。徐道覆乃更上锐卒，沿塘数里。林子策之曰： 贼沿塘结阵，战者不过一队。今我据其津而厄其要，彼虽锐师数里，不敢过而东必也。 
现代文：于是徐赤特的部队果然失败了，便丢下部队逃到北岸，林子率部收集赤特的残兵，再前往攻击，打败了敌人，徐道覆又另增加精兵，沿着塘边几里，林子推测说： 敌人沿塘布阵，打的人不过其中一队，如今我据守津口而扼住他们，他们虽然有几里的精兵，一定不敢过来而东去。 
English: As a result, Xu Chiat's troops were defeated, and he abandoned his troops and fled to the north bank. Lin Zi led his troops to collect the remnants of Chiat's soldiers, and then went to attack and defeated the enemy. Xu Daohui also added other elite soldiers. A few miles along the edge of the pond, Lin Zi surmised: The enemy is lined up along the pond, and those who are fighting are just one of the teams. Now I am holding them down by guarding the mouth of the pond. Although they have a few elite soldiers, they must not dare to come over and go east.

古文：于是乃断塘而斗。
现代文：于是截断河塘进行激战。
English: As a result, they cut off the river channel and fought a fierce battle.

古文：久之，会硃龄石救至，与林子并势，贼乃散走。大军至自白石，杀赤特以殉，以林子参中军军事。
现代文：战了好久，便遇朱龄石援兵到了，便和林子合兵，敌人于是逃走，大部队从白石回来，高祖将徐赤特斩首示众。用林子当参中军军事。
English: The battle went on for a long time. When reinforcements from Zhu Lingshi arrived, they joined forces with Lin Zi. The enemy then fled. The large army returned from Baishi. Gao Zu beheaded Xu Chiat in front of the public. Lin Zi was used to join the Chinese army.

古文：从征刘毅，转参太尉军事。
现代文：接着林子随同高祖征讨刘毅，转官参太尉军事。
English: Next, Linzi accompanied Gao Zu to conquer Liu Yi and was transferred to the military as a second lieutenant.

古文：十一年，复从讨司马休之。
现代文：十一年，再随从刘裕讨司马休之。
English: Eleven years later, he followed Liu Yu to recruit Sima Qiu.

古文：高祖每征讨，林子辄摧锋居前，虽有营部，至于宵夕，辄敕还内侍。
现代文：高祖每次征讨，沈林子都当击败敌人的先锋。虽然各将有自己的营区，到了傍晚，刘裕还是叫他回到主帅帐内侍候自己。
English: Every time Gao Zu went on a campaign, Shen Linzi was the vanguard to defeat the enemy. Although each of them would have their own encampment, in the evening, Liu Yu still asked him to return to the manager's office to wait for him.

古文：贼党郭亮之招集蛮众，屯据武陵，武陵太守王镇恶出奔，林子率军讨之，斩亮之于七里涧，纳镇恶。
现代文：造反的人郭亮之纠集蛮人，屯据武陵，武陵太守王镇恶出逃，沈林子率部队讨击，将郭亮之在七里涧斩首，又把王镇恶送回原郡。
English: The rebel Guo Liangzhi rallied the barbarians and took up residence in Wuling. The governor of Wuling, Wang Zhenxuan, fled. Shen Linzi led the troops to fight back, beheaded Guo Liangzhi at Qiliyao, and sent Wang Zhenxuan back to the original county.

古文：武陵既平，复讨鲁轨于石城，轨弃众奔襄阳，复追蹑之。襄阳既定，权留守江陵。
现代文：武陵平定后，他再讨伐在石城的鲁轨，鲁轨弃丢部众奔逃到襄阳，他再追击，襄阳平定后，暂时留镇江陵。
English: After the pacification of Wuling, he again fought against Lu Lu in Shicheng, abandoned Lu Lu and fled to Xiangyang. He then pursued, and after the pacification of Xiangyang, he temporarily stayed in Jiangling.

古文：十二年，高祖领平北将军，林子以太尉参军，复参平北军事。
现代文：十二年，高祖兼任北平将军，林子在太尉参军的职务处，当参平北军事。
English: In 1912, Gao Zu was concurrently serving as the General of Peking, while Lin Zi was serving as the Lieutenant of the Northern Military Region.

古文：其冬，高祖伐羌，复参征西军事，悉署三府中兵，加建武将军，统军为前锋，从汴入河。
现代文：当年冬天，高祖征讨后秦，林子再当参征西军事，同时兼任三府的中兵参军，又加号建武将军，带兵为前锋从汴水进入黄河。
English: In the winter of that year, Gao Zu was conscripted into the Qin Dynasty, and Lin Zi was conscripted into the Western Military. At the same time, he also served as the middle soldier of the three prefectures to join the army. He was also given the title of General Jianwu and led the soldiers as a forward from Surabaya into the Yellow River.

古文：时襄邑降人董神虎有义兵千余人，高祖欲绥怀初附，即板为太尉参军，加扬武将军，领兵从戎。林子率神虎攻仓垣，克之，神虎伐其功，径还襄邑。林子军次襄邑，即杀神虎而抚其众。时伪建威将军、河北太守薛帛先据解县，林子至，驰往袭之，帛弃军奔关中，林子收其兵粮。
现代文：当时襄邑投降的叫董神虎的人，有义兵一千多人，高祖想安抚刚刚依附的中原人众，便用他当太尉参军，加扬武将军，带兵跟从大军，林子带神虎进攻仓堰，攻陷了它，董神虎吹嘘自己的功劳，直接回到襄邑，林子的部队驻扎襄邑，便杀了董神虎而收编了这支部队，当时伪建威将军、河北太守薛帛先期占据解县，林子跟着到来，迅速前去袭击他们，薛帛丢下部众逃到关中，林子收下了薛帛的部队和军粮。
English: At that time, the person named Dong Shenhu who surrendered in Xiangyi had more than a thousand volunteers. Gao Zu wanted to appease the Central Plains people who had just attached themselves, so he used him as a captain to join the army. General Kayangwu led the soldiers to follow the great army. Linzi led Shenhu to attack Cangwei and captured it. Dong Shenhu boasted of his own merits and returned directly to Xiangyi. Linzi's troops were stationed in Xiangyi, and killed Dong Shenhu and incorporated this force. At that time, the pseudo Jianwei general and Hebei governor Xue Qi initially occupied Xie County. Linzi followed

古文：伪并州刺史、河东太守尹昭据蒲坂，林子于陕城与冠军檀道济同攻蒲坂，龙骧王镇恶攻潼关。姚泓闻大军至，遣伪东平公姚绍争据潼关。林子谓道济曰： 今蒲坂城坚池深，不可旬日而克，攻之则士卒伤，守之则引日久，不如弃之，还援潼关。
现代文：伪荆州刺史、河东太守尹昭据守蒲坂，林子在陕城和冠军将军檀道济共同进攻蒲坂，龙骧将军王镇恶进攻潼关，姚泓听说大军已到，派伪东平公姚绍赶快占据潼关，林子对檀道济说： 当今蒲坂城池坚固，不是十天半月能攻下的，进攻它便使士卒受伤，围守它则旷日持久，不如丢下不顾，回军援助潼关我军，况且潼关是天险。
English: Yin Zhao, the fake governor of Jingzhou, and Yin Zhao, the fake governor of Hedong Province, jointly guarded Pusan. Lin Zi jointly attacked Pusan with the champion general Dang Daoji in Shaanxi City. The dragon general Wang Zhen viciously attacked Shaoguan. When Yao Zhe heard that a large army had arrived, he sent the fake Dongping Gong Yao Shao to quickly occupy Shaoguan. Lin Zi said to Dang Daoji: Today's Pusan City is strong. It can't be conquered in ten days and a half months. If it is attacked, soldiers will be injured. If it is besieged, it

古文：且潼关天阻，所谓形胜之地，镇恶孤军，势危力屈。若使姚绍据之，则难图也。及其未至，当并力争之。若潼关事捷，尹昭可不战而服。 
现代文：正是所谓形胜地方，而王镇恶兵势单弱，形势危险，我军进攻无力，如果使姚绍据守潼关，则难以想办法了，趁敌人还未到，合力围攻，如果潼关攻下，尹昭可以不战而降。 
English: It is precisely the so-called "victorious place," while Wang Zhen's evil army is weak, the situation is dangerous, and our army's attack is weak. If Yao Shao is made to guard Shiguan, it will be difficult to find a way. Take advantage of the enemy before they arrive and jointly besiege. If Shiguan is attacked, Yin Zhao can surrender without a fight.

古文：道济从之。
现代文：檀道济听从了这个建议。
English: The charity heeded the advice.

古文：既至，绍举关右之众，设重围围林子及道济、镇恶等。时悬师深入，粮输艰远，三军疑阻，莫有固志。道济议欲渡河避其锋，或欲弃捐辎重，还赴高祖。林子按剑曰： 相公勤王，志清六合，许、洛已平，关右将定，事之济否，所系前锋。今舍已捷之形，弃垂成之业，大军尚远，贼众方盛，虽欲求还，岂可复得。
现代文：林子等到了潼关附近，姚绍纠集关中的主力，设置双层包围圈围住沈林子和檀道济、王镇恶等，当时宋军孤军深入，粮草供应没有跟进，军中猜疑，人心不稳，檀道济提议渡过黄河避开敌人的兵锋，有的人想丢弃辎重物资，回投高祖，林子按着宝剑大声喝道： 相公为王室效力，一直准备一统天下，许昌、洛阳已经平定，关右将被收回，事情的成功与否，取决于我们先锋部队，现在丢弃将成功的形势，我军主力还很遥远，敌人正多，即使我们想回去，又怎么能到达呢？
English: Lin Zi waited near Shaoguan, Yao Shao gathered the main force in Shaoguan, and set up a double-layered encirclement to surround Shen Lin Zi, Dang Daoji, Wang Zhen Qi, etc. At that time, the Song army was deeply isolated, the supply of grain and grass did not follow up, the army was suspicious, the people were not stable, Dang Daoji proposed to cross the Yellow River to avoid the enemy's front, some people wanted to discard the heavy materials and return to Gaozu, Lin Zi shouted loudly with his sword: "Friendly for the royal family, always ready to rule the world, Xu Chang and Lu

古文：下官受命前驱，誓在尽命，今日之事，自为将军办之。然二三君子，或同业艰难，或荷恩罔极，以此退挠，亦何以见相公旗鼓耶！ 
现代文：下官接受先锋的重任，誓死前进，今天的事，我可以为将军拿下，然而各位先生们，有的是同艰难的战友，有的蒙受相公大恩，此时退避，有什么脸面看相公的旗鼓呢？ 
English: The junior officer accepts the heavy duty of the vanguard and advances with all his might. I can win today's battle for the general. However, gentlemen, some of you are with difficult comrades-in-arms, some of you have received the great grace of your father-in-law, and you retreat at this time. What face do you have when you see your father-in-law's banner?

古文：塞井焚舍，示无全志，率麾下数百人犯其西北。绍众小靡，乘其乱而薄之，绍乃大溃，俘虏以千数，悉获绍器械资实。时诸将破贼，皆多其首级，而林子献捷书至，每以实闻，高祖问其故，林子曰： 夫王者之师，本有征无战，岂可复增张虚获，以自夸诞。国渊以事实见赏，魏尚以盈级受罚，此亦前事之师表，后乘之良辙也。 
现代文：于是宋军埋平水井，烧掉营帐，表示以死决战，林子率手下几百人进攻敌人西北阵脚，姚绍的人马稍稍退却，宋军乘敌人的混乱一齐攻入，姚绍的部队于是一下子崩溃了，宋军俘虏了几千秦兵，获得了姚绍的全部军粮器械，当时将领们打败敌人，都多报杀掉的敌人数目，而林子的上献胜利的书信到来，每次都按实际报告，高祖问他为什么，林子说： 王者的军队本来有征讨无战斗，怎能再增加虚假不存在的数目，夸耀自己的成功，国渊因符合实际被赏赐，魏尚因为多报首级被惩罚，这也是前事的模范，后来人的榜样。 
English: As a result, the Song army buried the wells, burned the camp, and said that it was a battle to the death. Lin Zi led several hundred of his men to attack the enemy's northwest front, and Yao Shao's men retreated slightly. The Song army took advantage of the enemy's confusion to invade all at once. Yao Shao's troops then collapsed at once. The Song army captured several thousand Qin soldiers and obtained all of Yao Shao's military food equipment. At that time, the generals defeated the enemy and reported the number of enemies killed. And Lin Zi's letters offering victory arrived, each time according to the actual report. Ga

古文：高祖曰： 乃所望于卿也。 
现代文：高祖说： 这正是我希望你做的。 
English: Gaozu said, "That's exactly what I want you to do."

古文：初，绍退走，还保定城，留伪武卫将军姚鸾精兵守险。林子衔枚夜袭，即屠其城，劓鸾而坑其众。高祖赐书曰： 频再破贼，庆快无譬。既屡摧破，想不复久尔。 
现代文：当姚绍退走，回去保守定城，留下伪武卫将军姚鸾的精兵守护险要地方，沈林子命令士兵把马脚用布缠起来，半夜袭击姚鸾，将那个城中的敌人全部杀掉，割下姚鸾的鼻子，活埋被俘虏的残余，高祖给林子赐信说： 近来我军多次打败敌人，我高兴得无法形容，既然多次打败敌人，大概不久可以平定后秦。 
English: When Yao Shao retreated and went back to protect Dingcheng, leaving the elite soldiers of the pseudo-martial arts general Yao Jun to guard the dangerous place, Shen Linzi ordered the soldiers to wrap the horse's feet with cloth, attack Yao Jun in the middle of the night, kill all the enemies in the city, cut off Yao Jun's nose, and bury the remains of the captives alive. Gaozhu gave Linzi a letter saying: Recently, our army has defeated the enemy many times. I am happy beyond description. Since we have defeated the enemy many times, we can probably pacify Houqin soon.

古文：绍复遣抚军将军姚赞将兵屯河上，绝水道。赞垒堑未立，林子邀击，连破之，赞轻骑得脱，众皆奔败。
现代文：姚绍再派抚军将军姚讠赞带兵屯驻黄河上，想断绝宋军水路，姚的军营未修好，林子趁机攻击，连续打败姚讠赞，姚讠赞骑马逃脱，余众便逃散了。
English: Yao Shao then dispatched the general Yao Yuzan to garrison the Yellow River with his troops, hoping to cut off the waterway of the Song Army. Yao's military camp was not repaired, and Linzi took advantage of the opportunity to attack, continuously defeated Yao Yuzan. Yao Yuzan escaped on horseback, and the rest fled.

古文：绍又遣长史领军将军姚伯子、宁朔将军安鸾、护军姚默骡、平远将军河东太守唐小方率众三万，屯据九泉，凭河固险，以绝粮援。高祖以通津阻要，兵粮所急，复遣林子争据河源。林子率太尉行参军严纲、竺灵秀卷甲进讨，累战，大破之，即斩伯子、默骡、小方三级，所俘馘及驴马器械甚多。所虏获三千余人，悉以还绍，使知王师之弘。兵粮兼储，三军鼓行而西矣。或曰： 彼去国远斗，其锋不可当。 
现代文：姚绍又派长史领军将军姚伯子、宁朔将军安鸾、护军姚默骡、平远将军河东太守唐小方率兵三万，屯据九泉，依河守卫，以断绝宋军粮道，高祖认为保证河道通达是特别重要的，又派林子抢占河源，林子带太尉行参军严纲、竺灵秀迅速进击，经多次激战，大败敌人，杀了姚伯子、姚默骡、唐小方等三人，其余斩首和收缴的骡马器械不计其数，林子把俘虏的三千人，全部放归姚绍，叫他知道王师宽容大量，因为兵马充足，粮食供应不愁，宋的三军擂鼓呐喊向西前进，有人说： 敌人离开国都远来迎战，军锋尖锐不可抵挡。 
English: Yao Shao also sent the leading generals of Changshi, Yao Bo Zi, Ningshuo, Anhui, Yao Muxun, and Pingyuan, the general of Hedong, Taishu, and Tang Xiao Fang, who led 30,000 soldiers, stationed in Jiuzhen and guarded along the river to cut off the food supply of the Song Army. Gao Zu believed that it was particularly important to ensure that the river was accessible. He also sent Lin Zi to seize the source of the river. Lin Zi took the lieutenant to join the army and quickly attacked. After many fierce battles, the enemy was defeated. He killed Yao Bo Zi, Yao Mux

古文：林子白高祖曰： 姚绍气盖关右，而力以势屈，外兵屡败，衰亡协兆，但恐凶命先尽，不得以衅齐斧尔。 
现代文：林子对刘裕说： 姚绍气盖关中，而势穷力竭，外围的部队不断失败，灭亡指日可待，只恐他狗急先死，不能命他来祭我们的旗鼓罢了。 
English: Lin Zi said to Liu Yu, "Yao Shao is in the middle, and his strength is exhausted. The outlying troops are constantly failing, and their demise is just around the corner. I am afraid that his dog will die first, and I can't order him to sacrifice our banner and drum."

古文：寻绍忽死，可谓天诛。于是赞统后事，鸠集余众，复袭林子。
现代文：不久姚绍果然背上生疮而死，高祖因为林子的话应验了，于是赐给他书信说： 姚绍忽然死亡，可以说是天杀。 
English: Soon after, Yao Shao died of a wound on his back. Gao Zu believed Linzi's words to be true, so he gave him a letter saying: Yao Shao's sudden death can be said to be a natural death.

古文：林子率师御之，旗鼓未交，一时披溃，赞轻骑遁走。既连战皆捷，士马旌旗甚盛，高祖赐书劝勉，并致缣帛肴浆。
现代文：在这时姚讠赞统管后面的军务，纠集残兵败将，再来袭击林子，林子率兵抵御，还未交战，秦兵便一时崩溃，姚讠赞骑马逃跑，林子既然连续作战都胜利了，兵马军旗漫天盖野，声势浩大，高祖上书勉励他，也给他送来布匹佳肴和汤水慰劳。
English: At this time, Yao Yuzan was in charge of the military affairs in the rear, gathering the remnants of the defeated soldiers, and then attacked Linzi. Linzi led the troops to resist, but did not fight. The Qin soldiers collapsed for a while, Yao Yuzan fled on horseback. Since Linzi had won all the consecutive battles, the banners of the soldiers and horses covered the sky, and the sound was huge. Gao Zu sent a letter to encourage him, and also sent him cloth dishes and soup to comfort him.

古文：高祖至阌乡，姚泓扫境内之民，屯兵尧柳。时田子自武关北入，屯军蓝田，泓自率大众攻之。高祖虑众寡不敌，遣林子步自秦岭，以相接援。比至，泓已摧破，兄弟复共追讨，泓乃举众奔霸西。
现代文：高祖到了阌乡里，姚绍搜集境内的壮丁，屯驻柳，当时沈田子从武关北进，屯军蓝田，姚泓亲自统率大军围攻田子，高祖担心田子众寡悬殊不是敌人对手，派林子从秦岭步行，相互接济，林子到时，田子已经击败姚泓，他兄弟二人再继续反击，姚泓于是退守霸桥西岸。
English: Gao Zu arrived in Lu Township. Yao Shao gathered the young men in the territory and stationed them in Liu. At that time, Shen Tianzi marched from Wuguan to the north, the troops of Lantian, and Yao Wei personally led the army to besiege Tianzi. Gao Zu was worried that Tianzi's large number was not an enemy opponent, and sent Linzi to walk from Qinling to receive mutual aid. When Linzi arrived, Tianzi had defeated Yao Wei, and his two brothers continued to fight back. Yao Wei then retreated to the west bank of the bridge.

古文：田子欲穷追，进取长安，林子止之，曰： 往取长安，如指掌尔。复克贼城，便为独平一国，不赏之功也。 
现代文：沈田子想穷追到底，林子制止他： 如果我们前去攻下长安，易如反掌，再攻克敌人的城市，便是独自平定一国，那是不能赏赐的功劳。 
English: Shen Tianzi wanted to pursue it to the end, but Linzi stopped him: If we advance to conquer Chang'an, it will be as easy as a snap of the fingers, and if we conquer the enemy's city, it will be to pacify a country alone, which is a merit that cannot be rewarded.

古文：田子乃止。
现代文：田子便停止了。
English: Then the field stopped.

古文：复参相国事，总任如前。林子威声远闻，三辅震动，关中豪右，望风请附。
现代文：林子再去当参相国事，其他的职务照旧，沈林子威声远播，三辅一带人民非常敬畏他，关中的豪杰，望风投诚。
English: Lin Zi was re-appointed as the Vice-Minister of State Affairs, and his other duties remained the same. Shen Lin Zi's prestige spread far and wide, and the people in the Sanfu area were very much in awe of him. He was a hero in Guanzhong, and was highly regarded.

古文：西州人李焉等并求立功，孙妲羌杂夷及姚泓亲属，尽相率归林子。
现代文：西州人李焉等人，都求请立功效命。孙妲羌杂夷和姚泓的亲属，都相率投靠林子。
English: People from Xizhou, such as Li Yan and others, all asked for their lives to be spared. Relatives of Sun Qizhi and Yao Qizhi all supported Linzi.

古文：高祖以林子绥略有方，频赐书褒美，并令深慰纳之。
现代文：高祖因为林子安抚有方，多次下书赞扬，并叫他认真地抚慰百姓。
English: Gaozhu repeatedly wrote a letter praising Linzi for his ability to pacify people, and told him to conscientiously soothe the people.

古文：长安既平，残羌十余万口，西奔陇上，林子追讨至寡妇水，转斗达于槐里，克之，俘获万计。
现代文：长安平定之后，残余羌人十多万人，向西逃奔陇口，林子派兵追击到寡妇水，转斗抵达槐里，打败了他们俘虏一万多人。
English: After Chang'an was pacified, more than one hundred thousand remnants of the Xiongnu fled westward to Hukou. Linzi sent troops to pursue them to Widows Water, and turned around and arrived in Yili, defeating more than ten thousand of their captives.

古文：大军东归，林子领水军于石门，以为声援。还至郡，高祖器其才智，不使出也。
现代文：宋军主力回到东方，林子率水军驻在石门，作为声援，回到朝廷，大臣们想授予他一州刺史职务统管八郡，高祖觉得林子才智出众，不让他外出镇守。
English: The main force of the Song army returned to the East, Linzi led the navy stationed in Shimen, and as a show of solidarity, returned to the imperial court. The ministers wanted to award him the post of governor of eight counties. Gaozu thought that Linzi's talent was outstanding, and would not let him go out to guard the town.

古文：故出仕以来，便管军要，自非戎军所指，未尝外典焉。后太祖出镇荆州，议以林子及谢晦为蕃佐，高祖曰： 吾不可顿无二人，林子行则晦不宜出。 
现代文：所以林子出外做官，便一直管理军情要事，如果不是出兵征讨，他一直没有到外面任职，后来太祖文帝出镇荆州，朝廷商议以沈林子和谢晦作为辅佐，高祖说： 我不能突然没有他们两个人，林子去，那么谢晦便留下。 
English: Therefore, when Linzi went abroad to work as an official, he always managed important military affairs. If he did not send troops to solicit recruits, he did not go abroad to work. Later, Emperor Taizu went to Jingzhou, and the court discussed using Shen Linzi and Xie Yu as assistants. Gaozu said, "I can't suddenly go without the two of them, Linzi, so Xie Yu will stay."

古文：乃以林子为西郎中兵参军，领新兴太守。林子思议弘深，有所陈画，高祖未尝不称善。大军还至彭城，林子以行役既久，士有归心，深陈事宜，并言： 圣王所以戒慎祗肃，非以崇威立武，实乃经国长民，宜广建蕃屏，崇严宿卫。 
现代文：于是以林子为西中郎中兵参军，兼新兴太守，林子思考问题非常深刻长远，如果有些主意，高祖从来不说不好的，当大军从北方回到彭城时，林子认为天天出兵，人们归心似箭，便陈述他的想法说： 圣人皇帝之所以戒骄戒躁，严肃认真，不是为了立威尚武，实际上是为了治理国家造福人民，当今应该建立藩镇护卫朝廷，加强警卫管理工作。 
English: Therefore, Linzi was chosen as the West Middle Elder and joined the army as a soldier, as well as the new imperial governor. Linzi thought about the problem very deeply and long-term. If there were some ideas, Gao Zu never said it was not good. When the great army returned to Pengcheng from the north, Linzi thought that soldiers were sent out every day, and people were like arrows, so he stated his thoughts and said: The reason why the sage emperor was cautious and serious was not to establish military power, but actually to govern the country for the benefit of the people. Today, it is necessary to establish a town to guard the imperial court and strengthen the management of security.

古文：高祖深相训纳。俄而谢翼谋反，高祖叹曰： 林子之见，何其明也。 
现代文：高祖深深地采用了他的意见，不久谢翼谋反，高祖感叹道，沈林子的见识，为什么这么明白呢？
English: Gaozu deeply adopted his opinion, soon Xie Ying plotted a rebellion, Gaozu lamented, Shen Linzi's insight, why is it so clear?

古文：太祖进号镇西，随府转，加建威将军、河东太守。时高祖以二虏侵扰，复欲亲戎，林子固谏，高祖答曰： 吾辄当不复自行。 
现代文：太祖晋名号为征西大将军，沈林子仍然随本府转职，加号建威将军，河东太守，当时高祖因为两个敌国不断侵扰，想再征伐，林子坚决进谏反对出兵，高祖回答说： 我将不再亲自当大军统帅。 
English: Great-grandfather Jin's title was General of the Western Expedition, while Shen Linzi still changed his position with the government, and was given the additional title of General of the Eastern Expedition. At that time, Gao Zu, because of the constant intrusion of the two enemy countries, wanted to invade again. Linzi resolutely opposed sending troops, and Gao Zu replied: I will no longer personally be the commander of the army.

古文：高祖践阼，以佐命功，封汉寿县伯，食邑六百户，固让，不许。
现代文：高祖登基称帝，林子因为开国功勋，被封为汉寿县伯，食邑六百户，他坚决辞让，未被同意。
English: Gao Zu ascended to the throne as emperor, Lin Zi was awarded the title of Han Shou County Count because of his contribution to the founding of the People's Republic of China, and there are 600 households in the county. He resolutely refused and was not approved.

古文：傅亮与林子书曰： 班爵畴勋，历代常典，封赏之发，简自帝心。主上委寄之怀，实参休否，诚心所期，同国荣戚，政复是卿诸人共弘建内外尔。足下虽存挹退，岂得独为君子邪！ 
现代文：傅亮给林子写信说： 封爵赏官是每朝的正常习惯，封爵赏赐，完全出自皇帝的真心，皇上委托重任给你的心意，确实是好坏对照作出的选择，皇上真诚的愿望，是要你跟国家同呼吸共患难，正是指望你这样的人共同建设好国家罢了，足下虽然怀有谦让的打算，怎么能一个人当君子呢？ 
English: Fu Liang wrote to Lin Zi, "The awarding of knighthoods is a normal custom of every dynasty. The awarding of knighthoods comes entirely from the emperor's true heart. The emperor's intention to entrust you with a heavy task is indeed a choice made in contrast to good and bad. The emperor's sincere wish is that you breathe with the country in times of trouble. It is just to expect people like you to jointly build a good country. Although you have a humble intention, how can you be a gentleman alone?

古文：除府谘议参军，将军、太守如故。
现代文：他被任命为宫府中咨议参军、将军，太守还照旧。
English: He was appointed by the Imperial Household Agency to join the army and become a general, while the position of daimyō remained the same.

古文：寻召暂下，以中兵局事副录事参军王华。
现代文：不久又叫他暂时出外，以中兵局事官职作录事。
English: Soon after, he was asked to leave the country temporarily to work as a clerk in the Central Military Commission.

古文：上以林子清公勤俭，赏赐重叠，皆散于亲故。家无余财，未尝问生产之事，中表孤贫悉归焉。
现代文：高祖因为林子勤劳俭朴，不断地赏赐他，林子把这些物品都散给亲朋故旧，家中没有一点多余的财物，从未问过经营发财的事。
English: Gao Zu constantly rewarded Linzi for his hard work and frugality. Linzi distributed these items to his relatives and friends. There was not a bit of excess property in the family, and he never asked about making a fortune.

古文：遭母忧，还东葬，乘舆躬幸，信使相望。
现代文：他的中表和孤寡贫穷的亲戚都投靠他，恰遇他母亲去世，回到东方处理安葬事务，高祖亲自去吊唁，中间又派使者慰问。
English: His father-in-law and his poor, widowed relatives all turned to him for help. When his mother died, he returned to the East to deal with the funeral affairs. Gaozu himself went to offer condolences, and sent an envoy to offer condolences.

古文：葬毕，诏曰： 军国多务，内外须才，前镇西谘议、建威将军、河东太守沈林子，不得遂其情事，可起辅国将军。 林子固辞，不许，赐墨诏，朔望不复还朝，每军国大事，辄询问焉。时领军将军谢晦任当国政，晦每疾宁，辄摄林子代之。林子居丧至孝，高祖深相忧愍。
现代文：安葬一完毕，高祖便下诏书说，国家军务民务繁多，内外都需要人才，前镇西咨议、建威将军、河东太守沈林子，不能完全满足他的孝心，可以让他当辅国将军出来复职，林子坚决辞让，不被同意，高祖又赐给他墨制诏书，可以在十五三十不需上朝，每有涉及国家军政的大事，都向他询问，当时领军将军谢晦执掌政事，他每次有病，都叫林子代替他，林子在守孝期间悲伤到了极点，高祖非常担心他的健康，不久林子便病了。
English: As soon as the funeral was over, Gaozu issued an imperial edict saying that the country's military and civil affairs are numerous, and talent is needed both at home and abroad. Former Zhenxi advisory council, General Jianwei, and Hedong governor Shen Linzi could not fully satisfy his filial piety, and he could be reinstated as the general of the auxiliary state. Linzi resolutely refused to give in and was not approved. Gaozu also gave him an imperial edict in ink, and he could go to the imperial court at 15:30 without having to go there. Whenever there was a major event involving the country's military and political affairs, he would ask him. At that time,

古文：顷之有疾，上以林子孝性，不欲使哭泣减损，逼与入省，日夕抚慰。敕诸公曰： 其至性过人，卿等数慰视之。 
现代文：高祖因为林子孝心特别重，不想让他哭泣过分损害身体，逼他进入台省，每天早晚不断地安慰他，高祖又赐书给各个大臣们说： 林子性情过人，你们要多多地慰劳和看理。 
English: Gao Zu, because Linzi's filial piety was particularly heavy, did not want to let him cry and damage his body excessively, forced him to enter Taiwan Province, and constantly comforted him every morning and evening. Gao Zu also gave a letter to various ministers saying: Linzi's temperament is extraordinary, you should do a lot of comfort and care.

古文：小差乃出。上寻不豫，被敕入侍医药，会疾动还外。
现代文：林子的病稍稍好一点才出走，高祖不久也病了，林子被请进去照顾高祖的病情。
English: Linzi's illness got a little better before he left. Gaozu soon fell ill as well. Linzi was invited in to take care of Gaozu's illness.

古文：永初三年，薨，时年四十六。群公知上深相矜重，恐以实启，必有损恸，每见呼问，辄答疾病还家，或有中旨，亦假为其答。
现代文：遇到林子病情复发，永初三年林子去世，当年四十六岁，公卿们知道高祖非常爱重林子，恐怕告诉真情，会增加高祖的病势，每次遇到高祖问到这事，总是回答说： 林子因病在家中休养。 或有诏书追问，也假装林子回答。
English: When Linzi's illness relapsed and Linzi passed away at the age of forty-six, the court nobles knew that Gao Zu was very fond of Linzi, and they were afraid that telling the truth would increase Gao Zu's illness. Whenever Gao Zu was asked about this, he always replied: Linzi is recuperating at home due to illness. Or if there was a demand for an imperial edict, he would also pretend to answer Linzi.

古文：高祖寻崩，竟不知也。
现代文：高祖不久便去世了，一直没有知道林子去世的消息。
English: Gaozu died soon after, and there has been no news of Linzi's death.

古文：赐东园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭，钱二十万，布二百匹。
现代文：林子去世后，朝廷赐给他东园的秘密器物，一套朝服，一套衣服，二十万钱，布帛二百匹。
English: After Linzi's death, the imperial court gave him the secret utensils of Dongyuan, a set of imperial robes, a set of clothes, 200,000 yuan, and 200 pieces of cloth.

古文：诏曰： 故辅国将军沈林子，器怀真审，忠绩允著，才志未遂，伤悼在怀。可追赠征虏将军。 有司率常典也。
现代文：诏书说： 故去的辅国将军沈林子，才智卓越，忠诚显著成绩斐然，理想还未实现便去世了，我非常悲伤，可以追赠他为征虏将军，有关人员按一般习惯来处理的。 
English: The imperial edict said: "The late General Shen Linzi of the Auxiliary State, with his outstanding talent, loyalty and remarkable achievements, passed away before his ideal was realized. I am very sad. He can be posthumously awarded as a conscripted general. The relevant personnel will deal with him according to general practice.

古文：元嘉二十五年，谥曰怀伯。
现代文：元嘉二十五年林子被追谥为怀伯。
English: In the 25th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Lin Zi was chased and captured.

古文：林子简泰廉靖，不交接世务，义让之美，著于闺门，虽在戎旅，语不及军事。所著诗、赋、赞、三言、箴、祭文、乐府、表、笺、书记、白事、启事、论、老子一百二十一首。太祖后读林子集，叹息曰： 此人作公，应继王太保。 
现代文：沈林子简洁平静，廉洁不贪，不与世人过多结交，谦让的品德，连平常深居不出的妇人也知道，他即使在军中，也从不谈论军事，他写的诗赋、赞、三言、箴、祭文、乐府诗、表、蕂，书记，白事，启事，论，老子论共一百二十一篇，太祖后来读《沈林子文集》，叹息道： 此人如果作三公，必定能继承王太保。 
English: Shen Linzi was concise and calm, honest and not greedy, did not make too many friends with the world, and had a humble character, which was known even to women who did not usually live deep. Even when he was in the army, he never talked about military affairs. He wrote a total of one hundred and twenty-one poems, praises, three sayings, proverbs, sacrificial texts, music poems, tables, urns, secretaries, white affairs, notices, discussions, and Lao Zi discussions. The great-grandfather later read "Shen Linzi's Anthology" and sighed: If this person becomes the third prince, he will certainly be able to succeed Wang

古文：子邵嗣。
现代文：他的儿子沈邵继承他的爵位。
English: His son Shen Shao succeeded to his title.

古文：劭，字道辉，美风姿，涉猎文史。袭爵，驸马都尉、奉朝请。
现代文：沈邵字道辉，外表清秀，广泛地阅读文史书籍，继承父亲的爵位，当驸马都尉，奉朝请。
English: Shen Shao Zi Daohui, outwardly handsome, widely read literary and historical books, inherited his father's knighthood, served as captain of the cavalry, and was invited to the imperial court.

古文：太祖以旧恩召见，入拜，便流涕，太祖亦悲不自胜。会强弩将军缺，上诏录尚书彭城王义康曰： 沈邵人身不恶，吾与林子周旋异常，可以补选。 于是拜强弩将军。出为钟离太守，在郡有惠政，夹淮人民慕其化，远近莫不投集。
现代文：太祖因他是功臣子弟召见了他，沈邵入内去拜谢，便流泪不止，太祖也悲痛之极，恰遇强弩将军缺人，文帝下诏书给录尚书彭城王刘义康说沈邵家门高贵，人才不差，我和林子相交不一般，可以把这个职位补任给他，于是拜他为强弩将军，出外当钟离太守，在郡中做了些好事，淮河两岸人民仰慕他的教化，远近百姓无不归附。
English: The great-grandfather summoned him because he was the son of a meritorious vassal. When Shen Shao went inside to offer thanks, he shed more than tears. The great-grandfather was also extremely sad. It just so happened that General Qianglu was short of men. The Emperor Wen issued an edict to Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, saying that Shen Shao's family was noble and his talent was not bad. I and Linzi did not have an ordinary relationship, so I could give him this position. So he was worshipped as General Qianglu. When he went abroad to be the governor, he did some good deeds in the county. People

古文：郡先无市，时江夏王义恭为南兗州，启太祖置立焉。义恭又启太祖曰： 盱眙太守刘显真求自解说，邵往莅任有绩，彰于民听，若重授盱眙，足为良二千石。 
现代文：这个郡本来没有集市，当时江夏王刘义恭当南兖州刺史，启告太守设立一个集市，义恭又上启太祖说： 盱眙太守刘显真自己请求解释说，沈邵往年任官有成绩，为人民深深敬服，如果再授予他当盱眙太守，是可以当一个好郡太守。 
English: This county did not originally have a bazaar. At that time, Liu Yigong, the king of Jiangxia, when he was making history in southern Luzhou, told the governor to set up a bazaar. Yigong also went to the governor and said: The governor Liu Xianzhen himself asked for an explanation. He said that Shen Shao had made achievements in his previous years as an official and was deeply admired by the people. If he were to be awarded the post of governor again, he could be a good governor.

古文：上不许，曰： 其愿还经年，方复作此流迁，必当大罔罔也。 。
现代文：文帝不允许，说： 只有他本人愿回来经过一年，才能再作这种任命，否则必然非常失望。 
English: Emperor Wen did not allow it, saying: Only if he himself is willing to come back after a year can he make such an appointment again, otherwise he is bound to be very disappointed.

古文：上敕州辟邵弟亮，邵以从弟正蚤孤，乞移恩于正，上嘉而许之。
现代文：文帝叫本州征用沈邵的弟弟沈免，沈邵因为堂弟年幼早孤，请求征用沈正，文帝赞许了此事。
English: Emperor Wen called on Honshu to requisition Shen Shao's younger brother Shen Min, and Shen Shao requested the requisition of Shen Zheng because his cousin was too young and orphaned. Emperor Wen approved the matter.

古文：在任六年，入为衡阳王义季右军中兵参军。
现代文：沈邵在任六年，进京当衡阳王刘义季中军中兵参军。
English: Shen Shao was in office for six years, and when he entered Beijing, soldiers from Hengyang King Liu Yizi's army joined the army.

古文：始兴王浚初开后军府，又为中兵。
现代文：始兴王刘浚刚设立后军府，沈邵又当中兵参军。
English: After the establishment of the military government by Liu Jun, the first king of Xinxing, Shen Shao and other middle-ranking soldiers joined the army.

古文：义季在江陵，安西府中兵久缺，启太祖求人，上答曰： 称意才难得。沈邵虽未经军事，既是腹心，作钟离郡，及在后军府，房中甚修理，或欲遣之。 
现代文：刘义季镇守江陵，安西府的中兵参军一直没人，便上书文帝请求任命一个，文帝回答说： 令人满意的人才难找，沈邵虽然没有经历过战争，既然是心腹之人，作过钟离郡太守，但在后军府中，房屋整理得很好！ 
English: Liu Yiji was in charge of guarding Jiangling, and there had been no soldiers from Anxi Province to join the army, so he wrote to Emperor Wen to request the appointment of one. Emperor Wen replied, "It is difficult to find a satisfactory person. Although Shen Shao has not experienced war, since he is a confidant, he has served as the county governor, but in the post-military government, the house is well organized!

古文：其事不果。入为通直郎。
现代文：也许想派他去，这事最后没有实现，而沈邵却进京当了通直郎。
English: Perhaps he wanted to send him there, but this did not come to fruition in the end, and Shen Shao went to Beijing and became Tong Nairo.

古文：时上多行幸，还或侵夜，邵启事陈论，即为简出。
现代文：当时文帝经常出外巡游，回来或许是夜晚，沈邵上表劝谏，文帝便出来得少了。
English: At that time, Emperor Wen often went out on a tour, and when he came back, it might have been at night. Shen Shao went to the table to persuade him, and Emperor Wen came out less often.

古文：前后密陈政要，上皆纳用之，深相宠待，晨夕兼侍，每出游，或敕同辇。
现代文：沈邵前后秘密陈述治国道理，文帝都采纳了，对他非常宠爱，早晚都让他侍候在身边，每次文帝出游，文帝或者叫他跟自己同坐一车。
English: Shen Shao secretly stated the principles of governing the country, and Emperor Wen adopted all of them. He was very fond of him. Sooner or later, he would let him wait by his side. Every time Emperor Wen went on a trip, Emperor Wen would ask him to ride in the same car with him.

古文：时车驾祀南郊，特诏邵兼侍中负玺，代真官陪乘。
现代文：当时文帝到南城郊区祭天，特别地下诏书叫沈邵兼任侍中背负传国玺，代替实际的侍中陪着乘坐。
English: At that time, Emperor Wen went to the suburb of Nancheng to offer sacrifices to Heaven, and a special underground edict called Shen Shao also served as an attendant to carry the imperial scepter, and accompanied the ride instead of the actual attendant.

古文：大将军彭城王义康出镇豫章，申谟为中兵参军，掌城防之任，庐陵王绍为江州，以邵为南中郎府录事参军，行府州事，事未行，会谟丁艰，邵代谟为大将军中兵，加宁朔将军。
现代文：大将军彭城王刘义康出镇豫章，申谟当中兵参军，掌管防管义康的重任。庐陵王刘邵当江州刺史，文帝以沈邵当南中郎府录事参军，代管府州事务，沈邵还未上任，恰遇申谟亲人去世，沈邵便代申谟当大将军中兵参军，另加号宁朔将军。
English: General Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, went to the town of Yuzhang, the soldiers of Shenmue joined the army, and he was in charge of the important task of the defense administration of Yikang. Liu Shao, the king of Fuling, was in charge of the history of Jiangzhou, and Emperor Wen took Shen Shao to be in charge of the records of Zhonglang Prefecture in the south to join the army, and to be in charge of the affairs of the prefecture. Shen Shao had not yet taken office when Shenmue's relatives died. Shen Shao Ben took the place of Shenmue as the general to join the army, and was

古文：邵南行，上遂相任委，不复选代，仍兼录事，领城局。
现代文：沈邵到南方，文帝便把义康之事委任给他，不再选人代替，同时兼任录事和城防长官。
English: When Shen Shao went to the south, Emperor Wen entrusted him with the matter of Yikang, and did not choose anyone to replace him. At the same time, he also served as the recorder and the city defense chief.

古文：后义康被废，邵改为庐陵王绍南中郎参军，将军如故。
现代文：后来刘义康被废为庶人，沈邵被改任庐陵王刘邵南中郎参军，将军还照旧。
English: Later, Liu Yikang was abolished as a commoner, and Shen Shao was appointed as the middle brother of Liu Shonan, the king of Fuling, to join the army. The generals remained the same.

古文：义康徙安成，邵复以本号为安成相。
现代文：义康被转移到安成，沈邵再以本职兼任安成国相。
English: Yikang was transferred to Ancheng, and Shen Shao concurrently served as Ancheng's minister of state.

古文：在郡以宽和恩信，为南土所怀。
现代文：他在郡中宽厚仁爱，被南方人民所爱戴。
English: He was loved by the people of the south for his generosity and benevolence in the county.

古文：郡民王孚有学业，志行见称州里，邵莅任未几，而孚卒，邵赠以孝廉，板教曰： 前文学主簿王孚，行洁业淳，弃华息竞，志学修道，老而弥笃。方授右职，不幸暴亡，可假孝廉檄，荐以特牲。缅想延陵，以遂本怀。 
现代文：郡中百姓王孚学业纯粹，志气不俗，被州人称道，沈邵上任不久，王孚便去世了，沈邵赠给他孝廉的荣誉，并公布教令说： 前文学生王孚行为高洁，性格淳备舍弃奢华，谦退不贪，一心向着学问，越老越虔诚，正要授予他更大的官职，不幸突然去世可以赏他孝廉名号，用特别的大牲口祭祀他的英灵，缅怀古代的延陵季子，以实现他的本来的愿望。 
English: Wang Fu, a citizen of the county, had a pure academic record and a high moral character, and was praised by the people of the county. Shortly after Shen Shao took office, Wang Fu passed away. Shen Shao presented him with the honor of filial piety, and issued an edict saying: Wang Fu, the student in the previous article, had a noble behavior, was honest and prepared to give up luxury, was modest and not greedy, and was devoted to learning. The older he got, the more pious he became. He was about to be awarded a higher official post. Unfortunately, his sudden death could award him the title of filial piety, use a special large animal to sacrifice his

古文：邵慰恤孤老，劝课农桑，前后累蒙赏赐。邵疾病，使命累续，遣御医上药，异味远珍，金帛衣裘，相望不绝。元嘉二十六年，卒，时年四十三。
现代文：沈邵慰劳孤儿鳏寡老人，劝导人民在农业桑业上勤奋劳作，前前后后多次受到文帝的赏赐，沈邵病倒后，朝廷使者前后相继来探望他，文帝又派太医给他下药，珍奇异味，金银布帛，不断地送给他，元嘉二十六年沈邵去世，时年四十三岁，文帝非常悲痛。
English: Shen Shao consoled orphans, widows and the elderly, and advised the people to work diligently in the agricultural mulberry industry. He was repeatedly rewarded by Emperor Wen. After Shen Shao fell ill, emissaries from the imperial court came to visit him one after another. Emperor Wen also sent a doctor to give him medicine, rare and strange smell, gold and silver cloth, and constantly sent it to him. Yuan Jia passed away at the age of 43 in the 26th year of Shen Shao. Emperor Wen was very sad.

古文：上甚相痛悼。子侃嗣，官至山阳王休祐骠骑中兵参军、南沛郡太守。侃卒，子整应袭爵，齐受禅，国除。
现代文：沈邵的儿子沈侃继承他的爵位，沈侃官至山阳王刘休的骠骑中兵参军，南沛郡太守，沈侃去世，他的儿子沈整继承他的爵位，齐国建立，沈整的爵位被取消。
English: Shen Shao's son, Shen Kan, inherited his title. Shen Kan, an official of the Shanyang King Liu Xiu, joined the army as a cavalry soldier. As the governor of Nanpei County, Shen Kan passed away. His son, Shen Jie, inherited his title. Qi Province was established, and Shen Jie's title was revoked.

古文：璞，字道真，林子少子也。童孺时，神意闲审，有异于众。太祖问林子： 闻君小兒器质不凡，甚欲相识。 
现代文：沈璞字道真，是沈林子的小儿子，儿童时候，他便神气闲雅从容，与众不同，太祖问沈林子： 听说你的小儿子气质不凡，我很想见一见。 
English: Shen Tongzhi Daozhen is the youngest son of Shen Linzi. When he was a child, he had a relaxed and elegant demeanor and was different from others. The great-grandfather asked Shen Linzi: I heard that your little son has an extraordinary temperament. I would like to meet him.

古文：林子令璞进见，太祖奇璞应对，谓林子曰： 此非常兒。 
现代文：沈林子叫沈璞进见，太祖很称赞沈璞的应答，对林子说： 这孩子不一般！ 
English: Shen Linzi asked Shen Yao to come and see him. Grandfather highly praised Shen Yao's response and said to Linzi, "This child is not ordinary!

古文：年十许岁，智度便有大成之姿，好学不倦，善属文，时有忆识之功。尤练究万事，经耳过目，人莫能欺之。
现代文：沈璞十岁左右，智意风度便有一种大器的味道，他手不释传，会写文章，记忆力特别的好，对日常种种事务尤其精，凡经过他看一遍或者听一遍的，别人甭想能骗他。
English: Around the age of ten, Shen Yao's intelligence and demeanor had the flavor of a great instrument. He was a great reader, could write articles, had a particularly good memory, and was especially good at various daily affairs. Anyone who read or listened to him once would think that others were trying to deceive him.

古文：居家精理，姻族资赖。
现代文：管理家务非常好，亲戚们都信赖他。
English: He manages the house very well and his relatives trust him.

古文：弱冠，吴兴太守王韶之再命，不就。
现代文：长大之后，吴兴太守王韶之两次请他做官，他都没有应命。
English: After he grew up, Wu Xing asked him to be an official twice, but he did not comply.

古文：张邵临郡，又命为主簿，除南平王左常侍。
现代文：张邵当郡太守，又叫他当主簿，又被用为南平王的左常待。
English: Zhang Shao, the governor of Dang County, also called him to be the chief accountant, and he was also used as the left attendant of Nanping Wang.

古文：太祖引见，谓曰： 吾昔以弱年出蕃，卿家以亲要见辅，今日之授，意在不薄。王家之事，一以相委，勿以国官乖清涂为罔罔也。 
现代文：太祖召见他对他说： 我当年很年轻便出外镇守，你们的先人因为亲近皇室而辅佐过我，今日授予你这职务，这官不算低，王室的事都给你负责，不要因为南平王的官职不是清显官职而心中不快乐。 
English: The great-grandfather summoned him and said to him, "When I was very young, I went out to guard the town. Your ancestors supported me because they were close to the royal family. Today, I am awarding you this position. This position is not a low one. You are responsible for all the affairs of the royal family. Don't be unhappy in your heart because the official position of King Nanping is not a high-ranking official position.

古文：元嘉十七年，始兴王浚为扬州刺史，宠爱殊异，以为主簿。
现代文：元嘉十七年，始兴王刘浚当扬州刺史，很得文帝宠爱，文帝用沈璞当刘浚的主簿。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Shixing Wang Liu Jun served as Yangzhou's chief historian. He was very much favored by Emperor Wen. Emperor Wen used Shen Yi as Liu Jun's chief secretary.

古文：时顺阳范晔为长史，行州事。
现代文：当时顺阳的范晔正当刘浚的长史，代管州中事务。
English: At that time, Fan Ye of Shunyang was in charge of the affairs of the middle school due to Liu Jun's long history.

古文：晔性颇疏，太祖召璞谓曰： 神畿之政，既不易理。浚以弱年临州，万物皆属耳目，赏罚得失，特宜详慎。范晔性疏，必多不同。卿腹心所寄，当密以在意。彼虽行事，其实委卿也。 
现代文：范晔性格颇为疏狂，文帝召见沈璞说： 京城一带的政务，是不容易管理的，刘浚以少年在任，天下人都看着你，赏罚的好坏，特别应该谨慎，范晔性格粗疏，必然有很多意见，我把你看成心腹，应该小心在意，范晔虽然管事，其实是委任给你。 
English: Fan Qi's personality was rather eccentric, and Emperor Wen summoned him to meet with Shen Qi and said: The government affairs in the Beijing area are not easy to manage, Liu Jun is in office as a teenager, the whole world is watching you, and you should be particularly cautious about whether to reward or punish. Fan Qi's personality is coarse, and there are bound to be many opinions. I see you as a confidant, and you should be careful. Although Fan Qi is in charge, it is actually delegated to you.

古文：璞以任遇既深，乃夙夜匪懈，其有所怀，辄以密启，每至施行，必从中出。
现代文：沈璞因为被如此信任。于是日夜努力，一点儿也不松懈，心中想到什么，便暗中上告，每到实行，必然从中得到指示才敢执行。
English: Because he was so trusted, Shen Zheng worked hard day and night, never slacking off. Whatever he thought of, he would secretly appeal, and whenever he implemented it, he would inevitably receive instructions from it before daring to implement it.

古文：晔正谓圣明留察，故深更恭慎，而莫见其际也。
现代文：范晔以为皇上留心扬州政务，所以也很恭谨小心。
English: Fan Rong thought that the emperor paid attention to the political affairs of Yangzhou, so he was also very respectful and careful.

古文：在职八年，神州大治，民无谤黩，璞有力焉。
现代文：沈璞在职八年，扬州几乎达到士治的局面，人民没有怨言，沈璞是有贡献的。
English: In the eight years that Shen Wei has been in office, Yangzhou has almost reached the situation of the rule of law. The people have no complaints, and Shen Wei has made contributions.

古文：二十二年，范晔坐事诛，于时浚虽曰亲览，州事一以付璞。太祖从容谓始兴王曰： 沈璞奉时无纤介之失，在家有孝友之称，学优才赡，文义可观，而沈深守静，不求名誉，甚佳。汝但应委之以事，乃宜引与晤对。 
现代文：二十二年，范晔因罪被杀，当时刘浚虽然说亲自搅权，实际州中事务全部委托给沈璞，太祖一次平静地对始兴王刘浚说： 璞在职任上没有丝毫错误，在家中有孝顺友爱的名声，学问优异，才能特别，文章华美，却又深沉安静，不求闻达，很好，你只管把大事委托给他，更应经常和他交谈。 
English: In 1922, Fan Jun was killed for his crime. At that time, although Liu Jun said that he personally stirred up the power, the actual state affairs were all entrusted to Shen Jun. The great-grandfather once calmly said to Shixing Wang Liu Jun: Shun did not make the slightest mistake in his duties. At home, he has a reputation for filial piety, excellent knowledge, and special talent. The article is beautiful, but it is deep and quiet. It is very good not to ask for information. You should only entrust important matters to him, but you should also talk to him often.

古文：浚既素加赏遇，又敬奉此旨。璞尝作《旧宫赋》，久而未毕，浚与璞疏曰： 卿常有速藻，《旧宫》何其淹耶？
现代文：刘浚既多加赏赐和照顾，又认真地执行文帝的意思，沈璞一次曾作《旧宫赋》，好久没有写成，刘浚写信给沈璞说： 你常常写得很快，《旧宫赋》为什么这么慢吧？
English: Liu Jun not only gave more rewards and care, but also conscientiously carried out the wishes of Emperor Wen. Shen Ye had once written "Old Palace Fu," which had not been written for a long time. Liu Jun wrote to Shen Ye saying: You often write quickly, "Old Palace Fu," why is it so slow?

古文：想行就尔。 
现代文：我想大概快要完成了吧。 
English: I think it's almost done.

古文：璞因事陈答，辞义可观。
现代文：沈璞按问作答，文辞优雅。
English: Shen Yi answered questions according to the questions, and his words were elegant.

古文：浚重教曰： 卿沈思淹日，向聊相敦问，还白斐然，遂兼纸翰。
现代文：刘浚又写信说： 你整天深思，前些时候随便问一问，回信写得文采斐然，甚至于写满了纸张。
English: Liu Jun also wrote: "You have been thinking deeply all day. A while ago, you asked a random question, and your reply was so well written that it even filled the paper.

古文：昔曹植有言，下笔成章，良谓逸才赡藻，夸其辞说，以今况之，方知其信。
现代文：当年曹植曾说过，他作文下笔成章。我一直以为是放肆才子的华丽文辞，夸大他的本领，以今天的情况看，才知是真有那么一回事。
English: At that time, Cao Zhi once said that his composition was written as a chapter. I always thought it was the gorgeous words of a presumptuous talent, exaggerating his ability. Looking at today's situation, I only know that there really is such a thing.

古文：执省踌躇，三复不已。吾远惭楚元，门盈申、白之宾，近愧梁孝，庭列枚、马之客，欣恧交至，谅唯深矣。薄因末牍，以代一面。 
现代文：我仔细地看你的文章，而是不断地看，我远则惭愧不如楚元王，门下没有申公白公那样的宾客，近则惭愧不如梁孝王，门庭中没有枚乘、司马相如那样的文士，我又是高兴又是惭愧，印象非常深刻，姑且写几笔，代替我们见面。 
English: I read your article carefully, but I read it continuously. I am ashamed that I am not as good as King Chu Yuan when I am far away. There is no guest like King Shengongbai under my door. I am ashamed that I am not as good as King Liang Xiao Wang when I am near. There is no scribe like that in the courtyard. I am both happy and ashamed. The impression is very deep. Let me write a few sentences to meet you instead of us.

古文：又与主簿顾迈、孔道存书曰： 沈璞淹思逾岁，卿研虑数旬，瑰丽之美，信同在昔。向聊问之，而远答累翰，辞藻艳逸，致慰良多。
现代文：刘浚又和主簿顾迈、孔道存写信说： 沈璞深思超过一年，你们研究几十天，其华美的文辞，确实和古人一样，先前随便问他，而他用长篇文章回答，辞采艳丽飘逸，使我非常快慰。
English: Liu Jun also wrote a letter to Gu Mai and Kong Dao Cun, the head librarian, saying: Shen Yao has been thinking deeply for more than a year, and you have been studying for dozens of days. His beautiful words are indeed the same as the ancients. I asked him casually before, and he answered with a long article. His words are bright and flowing, which makes me very happy.

古文：既欣股肱备此髦楚，还惭予躬无德而称。复裁少字，宣志于璞，聊因尺纸，使卿等具知厥心。 。
现代文：一方面我特别高兴有这样的助手。另一方面惭愧我没有道德相当，这里再写几个字，把我的心情告诉沈璞，随便写几句，使你们都知道我的这个心意。 
English: On the one hand, I am particularly pleased to have such an assistant. On the other hand, I am ashamed that I do not have the same morals. Here, write a few more words to tell Shen Yao about my feelings, write a few words at random, so that you all know my heart.

古文：浚年既长，璞固求辞事，上虽听许，而意甚不悦。以璞为浚始兴国大农，寻除秣陵令。
现代文：刘浚越来越大，沈璞坚决请求辞退本身职务，文帝虽然同意了，但是不是很愉快，便让沈璞当刘浚的始兴国的大农令，不久又用他当秣陵令。
English: As Liu Jun became more and more powerful, Shen Rong firmly requested that he resign from his position. Although Emperor Wen agreed, it was not very pleasant, so he let Shen Rong serve as Liu Jun's Grand Agrarian Commander of Xingxing, and soon used him as the Grand Marshal of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：时天下殷实，四方辐辏，京邑二县，号为难治。
现代文：当时天下富裕，四方商人汇集京城一带，京城边的两县被认为特别不好治理，沈璞清明严肃，以身作则，平心待人。
English: At that time, the world was rich, and merchants from the four directions gathered around the capital city. The two counties on the outskirts of the capital were considered to be particularly difficult to govern. Shenya was very clear and serious, leading by example and treating people with equanimity.

古文：璞以清严制下，端平待物，奸吏敛手，猾民知惧。
现代文：奸诈的官吏因此缩手，狡猾的百姓知道害怕。
English: The treacherous magistrate shrinks from it, and the cunning people are afraid.

古文：其闾里少年，博徒酒客，或财利争斗，妄相诬引，前后不能判者，璞皆知其名姓，及巧诈缘由，探擿是非，各标证据，或辨甲有以知乙，或验东而西事自显，莫不厌伏，有如神明。
现代文：其中的市井无赖乡间恶少，赌棍酒鬼，或者争夺财物，胡乱诬陷诽谤他人，前后不能判明的案件，沈璞都了解其中的姓名，和巧诈的来龙去脉，探明是非寻找证据，或者追究甲犯来查询乙犯，或者验证东边的事情，西边的事情自然明白，贫民无不心服口服，认为他好比神仙一样高明。
English: Among them, the villain of the city and the villain of the country, the gambler and the drunkard, or the competition for property, the random slander of others, and the cases that cannot be determined, all of them know the names, and the ins and outs of the cunning, and find evidence to prove the rights and wrongs, or investigate the criminal A to investigate the criminal B, or verify the things in the east, and the things in the west naturally understand, and the poor people are convinced and believe that he is as clever as a fairy.

古文：以疾去职。太祖厚加存问，赏赐甚厚。
现代文：沈璞因为有病离职，太祖多次好意慰劳，赏赐他很多东西。
English: When Shen Rong left his post due to illness, his great-grandfather consoled him many times and gave him many gifts.

古文：浚出为南徐州，谓璞曰： 浚既出蕃，卿故当卧而护之。 
现代文：刘浚出外当南徐州刺史，文帝对沈璞说： 刘浚出京镇守，你应该睡在床上辅佐他治理州事。 
English: Emperor Wen said to Shen Yi: Liu Jian is the governor of Beijing, you should sleep in his bed and assist him in governing the state affairs.

古文：与浚诏曰： 沈璞累年主簿，又经国卿，虽未尝为行佐，今故当正参军耶。
现代文：又给刘浚写诏书说： 沈璞是多年的主簿，又当过国家卿监的官职，虽然未曾当中军参军或部属佐吏，今天是不是让他正式当参军呢？
English: He also wrote an imperial edict to Liu Jun, saying, "Shen Xuan has been a general for many years, and has also served as the official post of the Secretary of State. Although he has never joined the Chinese army or been a subordinate staff officer, should he officially join the army today?

古文：若尔，正当署余曹，兼房任，不尔便宜行佐正署中兵，恐于选体如不多耳。 
现代文：如果这样，正应让他当其他的官职，兼任原职，不然便应该当辅助或正式中兵参军，只怕这种选拔方法不正常。 
English: If this is the case, he should be assigned to another official post, concurrently with his original post, otherwise he should join the army as an auxiliary or official soldier, just in case this selection method is not normal.

古文：乃为正佐。
现代文：于是沈璞当第一辅佐官员。
English: As a result, Shen Rong became the first assistant official.

古文：俄迁宣威将军、盱眙太守。
现代文：不久，沈璞外出任宣威将军、盱眙太守。
English: Soon after, Shen Yi went out to serve as General Xuan Wei and Empress Dowager Guo.

古文：时王师北伐，彭、汴无虞。璞以强寇对阵，事未可测，郡首淮隅，道当冲要，乃修城垒，浚重隍，聚材石，积盐米，为不可胜之算。众咸不同，朝旨亦谓为过。
现代文：当时宋军北伐，彭城汴州一带非常太平，沈璞认为宋与魏正在交战，未来什么都可能发生，而本郡又在淮河的关键路口上，于是修治城楼，补辑亭垒，挖深沟，聚集木材和石头，储藏食盐和大米，作防守的准备，其余人都觉得无此必要，朝廷认为这太神经过敏。
English: At the time of the Northern Expedition of the Song Army, Pengcheng and the area around Bozhou was very peaceful. Shen Yu believed that Song and Wei were at war and that anything could happen in the future, and that this county was at a key intersection of the Huai River. Therefore, he repaired the city tower, supplemented the pavilion, dug a deep ditch, gathered wood and stone, stored salt and rice, and prepared for defense. The rest of the people felt that this was unnecessary, and the court thought it was too sensitive.

古文：俄而贼大越逸，索虏大帅托跋焘自率步骑数十万，陵践六州，京邑为之骚惧，百守千城，莫不奔骇。腹心劝璞还京师，璞曰： 若贼大众，不盼小城，故无所惧。若肉薄来攻，则成禽也。诸军何尝见数十万人聚在一处，而不败者。昆阳、合淝，前事之明验。此是吾报国之秋，诸军封侯之日。 
现代文：不久魏军如山海般压向宋国境内，魏国国王拓跋焘亲自统率骑兵和步兵几万，践踏江北六州土地，京城也因此引起骚乱和恐惧，各地太守县令，无不望风而逃，沈璞的亲信劝他逃回京师，沈璞说： 如果敌军主力不把小城市当回事，便没有什么可怕的，如果他们赤膊攻城，必定会被我们活捉，先生们何曾看见几十万人聚在一处而不败亡的，昆阳之战，淝水之战，便是先例，目前正是我们报效祖国的良机，先生们封侯的好日子。 
English: Soon, the Wei army pressed into Song territory like a mountain sea. The king of Wei, Tuobao, personally led tens of thousands of cavalry and infantry and trampled the land of the six states north of the river. The capital city also caused unrest and fear. The governors of counties all over the country fled at the first sign of trouble. Shen Yao's close confidants advised him to flee back to the Beijing division. Shen Yao said: If the main force of the enemy army does not take small cities seriously, there is nothing terrible. If they attack the city naked, they will surely be captured alive. Gentlemen, have you ever seen hundreds of thousands of people gathered in one place and not

古文：众既见璞神色不异，老幼在焉，人情乃定。收集得二千精手，谓诸将曰： 足矣。但恐贼不过尔。 
现代文：人们既然看见沈璞镇定自若，老老少少都在城中，人心才安定下来，沈璞集中二千精兵，对手下将领们说： 够了，只怕敌人不经过我们这里。 
English: People's hearts have only settled down since they saw that Shen Yao was calm and collected, and that everyone in the city, young and old, was present. Shen Yao concentrated two thousand elite soldiers, and the generals under his command said, "That's enough. Let's just hope the enemy doesn't pass through here."

古文：贼既济淮，诸军将帅毛遐祚、胡崇之、臧澄之等，为虏所覆，无不殄尽，唯辅国将军臧质挺身走，收散卒千余人来向城。
现代文：魏人过淮河后，宋军将领毛熙祚、胡崇之、臧澄之等人，被魏人打败，基本上都战死了，只有辅国将军臧质只身而逃，收集残兵一千多人，投奔盱眙城。
English: After the Wei people crossed the Huai River, the Song Army generals Mao Xizhi, Hu Chongzhi, Jucheng and others were defeated by the Wei people and basically died in the war. Only the general of the Auxiliary only escaped, collected more than a thousand remnants and rushed to Lucheng.

古文：众谓璞曰： 若不攻则无所事众，若其来也，城中止可容见力尔，地狭人多，鲜不为患。且敌众我寡，人所共知，虽云攻守不同，故当粗量强弱，知难而退，亦用兵之要。
现代文：将领们对沈璞说： 如果敌人不进攻我们，则不需别人的帮助，如果臧质的人来了，城中只容得住现在的这些人，地小人多，很少不出麻烦的，况且敌众我少，大家都知道虽说攻守不同，也粗略地估量一下强弱形势，知难而退，也是用兵的道理。
English: The generals said to Shen Qi: "If the enemy does not attack us, then we do not need the help of others. If good-quality people come, the city can only accommodate the current people. There are many small people, few are not troublesome, and moreover, there are few enemies. Everyone knows that although the attack and defense are different, it is also the principle of using soldiers to roughly estimate the strength and weakness of the situation and retreat if necessary.

古文：若以今众法能退敌完城者，则全功不在我，若宜避贼归都，会资舟楫，则更相蹂践，正足为患。
现代文：如果以臧质的兵马和方法，打退敌人保住城池的话，那么全部的功劳便不属于我们。如果要避开敌人回到首都，人马物资不能被车船装完，那么便会自相蹂躏，只会招致更大的灾难。
English: If we beat back the enemy and keep the city by using the best troops and methods, then all the credit will not belong to us. If we want to avoid the enemy and return to the capital, and the manpower and material cannot be loaded by car and ship, then it will be self-defeating and will only lead to greater disaster.

古文：今闭门勿受，不亦可乎！ 
现代文：如今闭门不接受他们，不也很好吗？ 
English: Wouldn't it be nice not to receive them behind closed doors?

古文：璞叹曰： 不然。贼不能登城，为诸君保之。
现代文：沈璞坚定地说： 不是你们说的这样，敌人不能攻进城内，我可以为先生担保。
English: Shen Yao said firmly, "It's not what you say. The enemy can't invade the city. I can vouch for my master."

古文：舟楫之计，固已久息。
现代文：坐车南逃，现在是不可能的。
English: Fleeing by car to the south is now impossible.

古文：贼之残害，古今之未有，屠剥之刑，众所共见，其中有福者，不过得驱还北国作奴婢尔。
现代文：敌人的残暴，从未有过这么严酷的，屠杀的惨况，你们也都看见了，其中百姓稍稍走远一点的，不过是被驱到北方作奴仆罢了。
English: The brutality of the enemy has never been so severe, and you have all seen the horrors of the massacres, in which the people who were a little further away were simply driven to the north as slaves.

古文：彼虽乌合，宁不惮此耶！
现代文：臧质他们是乌合之众，难道不怕这些吗？
English: They are a rabble, aren't they afraid of that?

古文：所谓 同舟而济，胡、越不患异心 也。
现代文：古人说得好： 同船渡江，不担心胡人和越人有两样的心。 
English: The ancients said it well: When crossing the river in the same boat, do not worry that the Hu people and the Yue people have different hearts.

古文：今人多则退速，人少则退迟，吾宁欲专功缓贼乎！ 
现代文：如果我们人多，敌人退走得便快，我们人少，敌人倒退得慢，我怎么能独专大功而留住敌人呢？ 
English: If there are many of us, the enemy will retreat quickly; if there are few of us, the enemy will retreat slowly. How can I retain the enemy by myself?

古文：乃命开门纳质。质见城隍阻固，人情辑和，鲑米丰盛，器械山积，大喜，众皆称万岁。
现代文：于是便叫开门迎进臧质，臧质看见城池险固，人心团结，鱼肉大米糯米丰盛，武器物资堆得像小山，大喜过望，他手下士兵也高呼万岁。
English: So he opened the door to welcome Gongye. Gongye was overjoyed to see that the city was secure, that the people were united, that there was plenty of fish, meat, rice and glutinous rice, and that the weapons and materials were piled up like a hill. The soldiers under his command also shouted "long live."

古文：及贼至，四面蚁集攻城，璞与质随宜应拒，攻守三旬，殄其太半，焘乃遁走。
现代文：到魏军来到城下，像蚂蚁一样从四面攻城，沈璞和臧质灵活抵御，经过三十天的防守，消灭魏兵的一大半，拓跋焘才退走。
English: When the Wei army came to the city, they attacked the city from all sides like ants, and Shen Yi and Yan Qui flexibly resisted. After thirty days of defense, they eliminated more than half of the Wei soldiers, and the Tuobao only retreated.

古文：有议欲追之者，璞曰： 今兵士不多，又非素附，虽固守有余未可以言战也。但可整舟舻，示若欲渡岸者，以速其走计，不须实行。 
现代文：有人提议追击敌人，沈璞说： 我军不多，况且臧质的兵还没有跟我们习惯协作，虽然防守有余，但还不能说进攻，只需整装舟舰，显示想渡过淮河去的模样，加快敌人逃走的速度，不需要真的攻打敌人。 
English: Someone proposed to pursue the enemy, Shen Yi said: Our army is not large, moreover, our soldiers are not accustomed to working with us. Although there is more than enough defense, it cannot be said to be offensive. It is only necessary to equip the boat, show the appearance of wanting to cross the Huai River, speed up the speed of the enemy's escape, and there is no need to really attack the enemy.

古文：咸以为然。
现代文：众人都叫好计。
English: Everyone is calling it a good idea.

古文：臧质以璞城主，使自上露板。璞性谦虚，推功于质。既不自上，质露板亦不及焉。太祖嘉璞功效，遣中使深相褒美。太祖又别诏曰： 近者险急，老弱殊当忧迫耶。
现代文：臧质因为沈璞是盱眙城主人，叫沈璞自己上报防守胜利的喜讯，沈璞为人谦虚，把功劳推归臧质，沈璞既然自己不上报，臧质的报告书也没有提沈璞的功劳，太祖肯定沈璞的功劳，派人给他予以深深的表扬，太祖又下一道诏书说： 近来的危险，你们的老弱士兵一定很忧虑害怕吧？
English: Because Shen Yi was the master of the city, he asked Shen Yi to report the good news of the victory of the defense. Shen Yi was humble and attributed the credit to Shen Yi. Since Shen Yi did not report himself, the report did not mention Shen Yi's credit. The great-grandfather affirmed Shen Yi's credit and sent someone to give him deep praise. The great-grandfather also said in another edict: The recent danger, your old and weak soldiers must be very worried and afraid?

古文：念卿尔时，难为心想。百姓流转已还，此遣部运寻至，委卿量所赡济也。 
现代文：想你到那时候的情况，简直不可思议，当时百姓流转京城，我这里派的接济人马将到，将把后事委托给你办呢！ 
English: To think of your situation at that time is almost inconceivable. At that time, people were fleeing the capital. The relief workers I sent here will arrive and will entrust the aftermath to you!

古文：吾近以戎暴横斥，规效情命，收龟落簪，星舍京里，既获遄至，胡马卷迹，支离沾德，复继前绪，《行苇》之欢，实协初虑。但乖涂重隔，顾增慨涕，比恆疾卧，忧委兼叠，裁书送想，无斁久怀。 
现代文：始兴王刘浚也给沈璞写信说： 恶敌凶残，自己送到我国，伪将领被打死。他们的酋长受到的沉重打击，他们实在是我朝的威风给打倒的，也是你们这些人的忠诚勇敢取得的，我对敌人抵抗无法，使境内荒芜，人民受苦，渎职的罪过，应该受到惩罚，近来请求辞官谢罪，不被允许，所以也告诉给你。 
English: Liu Jun, the King of Shixing, also wrote to Shen Zhen, saying: "The evil and vicious enemy sent itself to our country, and the fake generals were killed. The heavy blows that their chiefs received, they were really brought down by the prestige of my dynasty, but also by the loyalty and bravery of you people. I am unable to resist the enemy, making the territory desolate, the people suffer, and the crime of dereliction of duty should be punished. Recently, I asked to resign from the post to apologize, but it was not allowed, so I also told you.

古文：征还，淮南太守，赏赐丰厚，日夕宴见。朝士有言璞功者，上曰： 臧质姻戚，又年位在前，盱眙元功，当以归之。
现代文：宣城太守王僧达也给沈璞写信慰劳。接着臧质被征还当淮南太守，文帝给他很丰厚的赏赐，每天都叫他参加宴会，朝中人有提到沈璞功劳的，文帝说： 臧质是皇室亲戚，又年龄较大，官职较高，盱眙的第一功劳，应该归到他的名下，沈璞每次都谦虚退让。
English: Wang Songda, the governor of Xuancheng, also wrote a letter of consolation to Shen Yi. Then, when Shen Yi was conscripted as the governor of Huainan, Emperor Wen gave him a very rich reward and asked him to attend a banquet every day. When someone in the court mentioned Shen Yi's merits, Emperor Wen said: Shen Yi is a relative of the royal family, and he is older, has a higher official position, and his first merit should be attributed to his name. Shen Yi humbly conceded every time.

古文：沈璞每以谦自牧，唯恐赏之居前，此士燮之意也。 
现代文：惟恐受到太大的奖赏，这是三国人士燮的风格啊。 
English: It's the style of people from the three countries to be afraid of receiving too big a reward.

古文：时中书郎缺，尚书令何尚之领吏部，举璞及谢庄、陆展，事不行。
现代文：当时中书郎缺人，尚书令何尚之管这事，推荐沈璞和谢庄、陆展。
English: At that time, Zhongshuro was short of manpower. Shang Shuling, who was in charge of this matter, recommended Shen Yi, Xie Zhuang and Lu Zhan.

古文：三十年，元凶弑立，璞乃号泣曰： 一门蒙殊常之恩，而逢若斯之运，悠悠上天，此何人哉！ 
现代文：沈璞又没有当上此官。三十年，元凶刘邵弑文帝自立，沈璞哭泣着说： 我们家蒙受皇上特别的恩宠，却遇到这样的祸事。悠悠苍天，这是为什么啊！ 
English: Shen Yao did not become this official. Thirty years later, the culprit, Liu Shaoqi, stood up for himself. Weeping, Shen Yao said, "Our family has received special grace from the emperor, but we have encountered such a calamity. My God, why is this!

古文：日夜忧叹，以至动疾。
现代文：日夜忧虑叹息，以至发病。
English: Day and night, worries and sighs, and even the onset of the disease.

古文：会二凶逼令送老弱还都，璞性笃孝，寻闻尊老应幽执，辄哽咽不自胜，疾遂增笃，不堪远迎，世祖义军至界首，方得致身。先是，琅邪颜竣欲与璞交，不酬其意，竣以致恨。及世祖将至都，方有谗说以璞奉迎之晚，横罹世难，时年三十八。
现代文：恰遇刘邵和刘浚逼迫京城人送老弱家人到首都，沈璞性格孝顺，不久听说父老会被幽禁，便哭得非常厉害，病情更加沉重，不能远迎，世祖的义军到界首，方才投诚，当年，琅笽颜竣想和沈璞交朋友，沈璞冷淡地拒绝了，颜竣便怀恨在心，到世祖将到京城时，又有人进谗言说沈璞奉迎太晚，沈璞便被冤杀，时年三十八岁。
English: It so happened that Liu Shao and Liu Jun forced the people of Beijing to send their old and weak family members to the capital. Shen Yao had a filial character. Soon after hearing that his father would be imprisoned, he cried very hard. His condition was more serious and he could not be welcomed far away. The rebel army of the ancestor of the world reached the capital before he surrendered. That year, Yan Yan Jun wanted to make friends with Shen Yao, but Shen Yao coldly refused. Yan Yan Jun held a grudge. When the ancestor of the world would arrive in Beijing, someone else said that Shen Yao was too late to welcome him. Shen Yao was unjustly killed at the

古文：所著赋、颂、赞、祭文、诔、七、吊、四五言诗、笺、表，皆遇乱零失，今所余诗笔杂文凡二十首。璞有子曰囗。
现代文：沈璞所写的赋、颂、赞、祭文、诛文、七言、吊文、四五言诗、片戋、表都遇难流失，现在剩下诗文杂记只二十篇，沈璞的儿子叫沈约。
English: The fu, ode, praise, ritual poem, waka poem, seven-character poem, hanging poem, four- or five-character poem, fragmentary poem and table all written by Shen Yao were lost in the disaster. Now there are only twenty miscellaneous poems left, and Shen Yao's son is called Shen Yao.

古文：伯玉，字德润，虔子子也。温恭有行业，能为文章。少除世祖武陵国侍郎，转右常侍，南中郎行参军，自国入府，以文义见知，文章多见世祖集。世祖践阼，除员外散骑郎，不拜。
现代文：沈伯玉字德润，是沈虔子的儿子，为人温和守礼，行业卓越，能写文章，少年时被任命为世祖武陵国的侍郎又转任右常侍，南中郎行参军，从王国到州府，因为文章节义被知遇，他的文章很多都在世祖文集中，世祖登基称帝，伯玉被任命为员外散骑郎，他没有应任。
English: Shen Bo-yu, also known as Derun, was the son of Shen Qianzi. He was a gentle and courteous person, excelled in his profession, and was able to write articles. When he was a teenager, he was appointed as the attendant of the ancestral state of Wuling, and then transferred to the right attendant. Nan Zhong Lang joined the army, from the kingdom to the state capital, because his articles were well received. Many of his articles were in the collection of the ancestral literature. The ancestor ascended to the throne and became the emperor. He was appointed as a non-commissioned officer, but he did not take up the post.

古文：左卫颜竣请为司马。出补句容令，在县有能名。复为江夏王义恭太宰行参军，与奉朝请谢超宗、何法盛校书东宫，复为余姚令，还为卫尉丞。
现代文：左卫颜竣请他当司马，又出外补任句容县令，在任上有能干的声誉，再当江夏王刘义恭太宰行参军，和奉朝请谢超宗、何法盛在东宫校对书籍，再出外当余姚县令，回京当卫尉丞。
English: Zuo Wei Yanjun asked him to be the Sima, and he went out to fill the post of Jujong County Governor, and he had a reputation for ability in the post, and then he joined the army as the Jiangxia King Liu Yigong, and he asked Xie Chaozong and He Faxian to proofread books in the East Palace, and then he went out to be the Yuyao County Governor, and he returned to Beijing as a lieutenant.

古文：世祖旧臣故佐，普皆升显，伯玉自守私门，朔望未尝问讯。颜师伯、戴法兴等并有蕃邸之旧，一不造问，由是官次不进。
现代文：世祖的老部下，普遍都升了官，伯玉自守私门。从未有人关心慰问，颜师伯，戴法兴等都和他当过老同事，因为伯玉从未造访他们，因此官职未变。
English: The grandfather's old subordinates have generally been promoted to official positions, while the grand duchess has kept her private life to herself. No one has ever cared about condolences, and Yan Shi Bo, Dai Faxing, etc. have all been old colleagues with him, because the grand duchess has never visited them, so the official position has not changed.

古文：上以伯玉容状似画图仲尼像，常呼为孔丘。旧制，车驾出行，卫尉丞直门，常戎服。
现代文：世祖因伯玉外表像当时人画的孔子，常常叫他 孔丘 ，老规矩皇帝出外巡视，卫尉丞在宫门值班，必须穿军装。
English: The ancestor of the world often called him Confucius because of his resemblance to Confucius, who was a famous painter at the time. It was a long-standing rule that the emperor would go out on inspection, and the guards would be on duty at the palace gate, and they had to wear military uniforms.

古文：张永谓伯玉曰： 此职乖卿志。 
现代文：张永对伯玉说： 这个职务不符合你的性情。 
English: Zhang Yong said to Bo Yu: This position does not suit your temperament.

古文：王景文亦与伯玉有旧，常陪辇出，指伯玉白上： 孔丘奇形容。 
现代文：王景文也和伯玉有老交情，常常陪着皇帝出视，他指着沈伯玉告诉文帝： 孔丘外表真不一般。 
English: Wang Jingwen also had an old friendship with Bo Yu, and often accompanied the emperor to make an appearance. He pointed to Shen Bo Yu and told Emperor Wen: Kongqiu's appearance is really unusual.

古文：上于是特听伯玉直门服玄衣。
现代文：文帝于是特别注意沈伯玉，见他值班时穿着黑色服装。
English: Emperor Wen therefore paid special attention to Shen Boyu, and saw him wearing black clothes while on duty.

古文：出为晋安王子勋前军行参军，侍子勋读书。
现代文：接着出外当晋安王刘子勋前行军参军，陪刘子勋读书。
English: Then he went abroad to join the army in front of the King of Jin and An, Liu Zixun, and accompanied Liu Zixun to study.

古文：随府转镇军行佐。
现代文：又随本府转任镇举行佐。
English: He was also transferred to the post of town councilor along with the prefectural government.

古文：前废帝时，王景文领选，谓子勋典签沈光祖曰： 邓琬一旦为长史行事，沈伯玉先帝在蕃囗佐，今犹不改，民生定不应佳。 
现代文：前废帝时，王景文管吏部，他对刘子勋的典签沈光祖说： 邓琬一日使当长史行事，沈伯玉是先帝当外藩刺史时的老部下，今天还不改官，他过得定不快乐。 
English: When the former emperor was deposed, Wang Jingwen, who was in charge of the personnel department, said to Liu Zixun's signature, Shen Guangzu: "Deng Xuan acted as a long-term historian. Shen Boyu was an old subordinate of the former emperor when he was a foreign domain historian. If he does not change his position today, he will definitely not be happy.

古文：戴法兴闻景文此言，乃转伯玉为参军事。
现代文：戴法兴听说此言，于是转任伯玉为参军事。
English: Dai Faxing heard this, so he transferred his post to Baoju to join the military.

古文：子勋初起兵，转府功曹。
现代文：刘子勋刚起兵时，转任本府的功曹。
English: When Liu Zixun had just raised an army, he was transferred to the post of gong cao of the capital.

古文：及即伪位，以为中书侍郎。初，伯玉为卫尉丞，太宗为卫尉，共事甚美。
现代文：到刘子勋即位伪帝时，用他当中书侍郎，当初，沈伯玉当卫尉丞时，太宗当卫尉，他们相处很好，到刘子勋失败时，伯玉被关进监狱，被释放，但仍因为在九江时无投诚心意，被责备。
English: At the time of Liu Zixun's accession to the throne of the pseudo-emperor, he used him as a secretary. At the beginning, when Shen Boyu was a lieutenant general, and when Taizong was a lieutenant, they got along very well. When Liu Zixun failed, Boyu was put in prison and released, but he was still blamed for not being sincere when he was in Jiujiang.

古文：及子勋败，伯玉下狱，见原，犹以在南无诚，被责，除南台御史，寻转武陵国詹事，又转大农，母老解职。贫薄理尽，闲卧一室，自非吊省亲旧，不尝出门。
现代文：不久被任命为南台御史，不久又转任武陵国詹事，又转任大农令，母亲年老他便辞了职，他在家贫穷无计，闲住一室，除非是吊唁逝世者，拜谒长者，未尝出门。
English: Soon he was appointed as Nantai Imperial Historian, soon he was transferred to Zhanji of Wuling Province, and then to Da Nong Rong. When his mother was old, he resigned from his post. He was poor and lived in a spare room at home. Unless he was mourning the deceased or paying homage to the elders, he did not dare to go out.

古文：司徒袁粲、司空褚渊深相知赏，选为永世令，转在永兴，皆有能名。
现代文：司徒袁粲，司空褚渊深深理解他，选举他当永世县令，又转任永兴县令，任期内都被看成有能力的人。
English: Yuan Qi, the magistrate, and Jianyuan, the magistrate, understood him deeply, and elected him as the county magistrate of Yongxing County, and he was transferred to the county magistrate of Yongxing County. Both were regarded as capable people during their term of office.

古文：后废帝元徽三年，卒，时年五十七。
现代文：后废帝元徽三年，伯玉去世，当年五十七岁。
English: Three years after the abolition of Emperor Yuanhui, Bo Yu died, at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：伯玉性至孝，奉亲有闻，未尝妄取于人，有物辄散之知故。
现代文：伯玉孝心到了极点，奉养父母非常好，从未从别人那里得到不义之财，有钱便施给亲朋好友。
English: Bo Yu's filial piety has reached the extreme. She is very good at supporting her parents. She has never received ill-gotten money from others, and when she has money, she gives it to her relatives and friends.

古文：温雅有风味，和而能辨，与人共事，皆为深交。
现代文：为人温和文雅，风度不凡，且能力出众，与人同事，都结成好朋友。
English: He is gentle and elegant, has an extraordinary demeanor, and outstanding ability. He has made good friends with his colleagues.

古文：弟仲玉，泰始末，为宁朔长史、蜀郡太守。
现代文：伯玉的弟弟仲玉，当宁朔长史，蜀郡太守。
English: Baiyu's younger brother, Zhongyu, was the ruler of Shuxi County for a long time.

古文：益州刺史刘亮卒，仲玉行府州事。
现代文：益州刺史刘亮去世，仲玉代管州中事务。
English: Liu Liang, the Vice-Chancellor of Yizhou, passed away, and Zhongyu took charge of the affairs of Yizhou Middle School.

古文：巴西李承明为乱，仲玉遣司马王天生讨平之。
现代文：巴西人李承明造反，仲玉派司马王天生讨平他们。
English: The Brazilian Li Chengming rebelled, and Zhongyu sent Sima Wang to naturally settle them.

古文：废帝诏以为安成王抚军中兵参军，加建威将军。
现代文：废帝下书用仲玉为安成王的抚军中兵参军，加号建威将军。
English: According to the emperor's will, the middle son of An Cheng Wang's tutelary army joined the army and was given the additional title of General Jian Wei.

古文：沈攸之请为征西谘议，未拜，卒。
现代文：沈攸之请他当征西谘议，还未赴任，便去世了。
English: Shen Youzhi asked him to consult on the Western Expedition, but he died before taking office.

古文：史臣年十三而孤，少颇好学，虽弃日无功，而伏膺不改。
现代文：吏臣沈约本人十三岁时父亲去世，少年时颇为好学，虽然耗费了时日没取得什么成绩，但向学的心思从未改变。
English: Shen, an official and minister, lost his father when he was about 13 years old. When he was young, he was quite eager to learn. Although he spent a lot of time and didn't get any results, he never changed his mind about learning.

古文：常以晋氏一代，竟无全书，年二十许，便有撰述之意。
现代文：常常觉得晋朝一代，竟然没有一本完整的历史书，年到二十时，便有著书的打算。
English: I often feel that the generation of the Jin Dynasty did not have a complete history book, and by the time they were 20, they had plans to write a book.

古文：泰始初，征西将军蔡兴宗为启明帝，有敕赐许，自此迄今，年逾二十，所撰之书，凡一百二十卷。
现代文：泰始初年。征西将军蔡兴宗为此启明太宗，命令允许我加以著述，从那时到现在，二十多年过去了，共撰写了一百二十卷，纲目分类虽然完成，但材料却不充实。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, the general of the Western Expedition, Cai Xingzong, issued an order to allow me to write about Taizong. Since then, more than twenty years have passed, and a total of one hundred and twenty volumes have been written. Although the program classification has been completed, the material is not sufficient.

古文：条流虽举，而采掇未周，永明初，遇盗失第五帙。建元四年未终，被敕撰国史。
现代文：永明初年，家中遇盗，失去了其中的第五册。建元四年未结束时，又被敕令写本朝的国史。
English: In the first year of Yongming, his home was robbed and he lost the fifth volume. Before the end of the fourth year of the founding of the Republic of China, he was ordered to write the national history of this dynasty.

古文：永明二年，又朅奏兼著作郎，撰次起居注。
现代文：永明二年我又兼任著作郎，撰写皇帝的起居注。
English: In the second year of Yongming, I also served as a writer, writing an annotation of the emperor's life.

古文：自兹王役，无暇搜撰。
现代文：自从这时为朝廷效劳，一直没有时间搜集材料。
English: Since then, I have been working for the imperial court and have not had time to collect materials.

古文：五年春，又被敕撰《宋书》。六年二月毕功，表上之，曰：
现代文：五年春，又被敕令撰写《宋书》，六年二月才最后完成，现在我把它们献上去。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, I was ordered by the emperor to write the "Song Book," which was finally completed in February of the sixth year. Now I present them.

古文：臣约言：臣闻大禹刊木，事炳虞书，西伯戡黎，功焕商典。
现代文：臣下沈约说： 本臣听说大禹治水，这事在《虞书》上说得很明白，西伯征伐黎国，功勋在商朝的书上记载很清楚。
English: His vassal Shen Yu said, "This vassal heard that Dayu cured the floods. This was clearly stated in the "Book of Fortunes." Xibe's conquest of Li Province and his meritorious deeds were clearly recorded in the books of the Shang Dynasty.

古文：伏惟皇基积峻，帝烈弘深，树德往朝，立勋前代，若不观风唐世，无以见帝妫之美，自非睹乱秦余，何用知汉祖之业。是以掌言未记，爰动天情，曲诏史官，追述大典。
现代文：我们的皇室基础是一步步积累而成的，皇上的智谋宏大，时时为民谋利，建立了功勋。人们如果不研究唐尧的故事，无法知道尧帝的美德；如果不看到秦朝的教训，那么怎么能了解汉高祖的伟业，所以前朝事实没被记载，使皇上心中不安，下诏书给史官追叙先朝的大事。
English: The foundation of our imperial family was built step by step. The wisdom of the emperor was great, and he always sought the benefit of the people and built up merits. If people don't study the story of Tang Xuan, they can't know the virtues of Emperor Xuan; if they don't see the lessons of the Qin Dynasty, then how can they understand the great deeds of Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty. Therefore, the facts of the previous dynasty were not recorded, which made the emperor feel uneasy, and the next imperial edict was issued to recount the important events of the previous dynasty to the historian.

古文：臣实庸妄，文史多阙，以兹不才。
现代文：我确实平庸无知，文章史书很多都没见过。
English: I am indeed mediocre and ignorant, and I haven't seen many history books.

古文：对扬盛旨，是用夕惕载怀，忘其寝食者也。
现代文：以这种不高明的本领实难完成皇上交给的任务，所以日夜兢兢业业，废寝忘食。
English: It is really difficult to complete the task given by the emperor with such a poor skill, so he works hard day and night, and forgets to eat.

古文：臣约顿首死罪：窃惟宋氏南面，承历统天，虽世穷八主，年减百载，而兵车亟动，国道屡屯，垂文简牍，事数繁广。
现代文： 本臣沈约磕头死罪，说出下面的话，我思考宋朝建国，继天而立，一共只有八个皇帝，不到一百年，但是战乱不断爆发，国家多次陷入危机，要留下的文章案牍之多，浩如烟海。
English: My vassal Shen about Shantou's capital crime, to say the following words, I think about the Song Dynasty's founding of the country, rising from the sky, a total of only eight emperors, less than a hundred years, but wars continue to break out, the country has repeatedly fallen into crisis, and there are so many articles and documents to be left behind, vast as the sea of smoke.

古文：若夫英主启基，名臣建绩，拯世夷难之功，配天光宅之运，亦足以勒铭钟鼎，昭被方策。
现代文：到英明的皇帝缔造大业，著名的大臣建立的功勋，拯救危难的伟绩，配享上天显扬祖宗的事迹，也值得刻记在钟鼎之上，写进典籍之中。
English: It is also worth inscribing the great deeds of the wise emperor, the merits established by the famous minister, the great achievements of rescuing the peril, and the deeds of the heavenly ancestors on the top of the bell and writing them into the classics.

古文：及虐后暴朝，前王罕二，国衅家祸，旷古未书，又可以式规万叶，作鉴于后。
现代文：至于暴君昏主，前朝还没有赶得上的，国难家祸，自古未有，也可鉴戒千年，作后代的教训。
English: As for the tyrant losing his head, the previous generation has not yet caught up, the national disaster and family disaster have not existed since ancient times, and can also be a warning to the millennium and a lesson for future generations.

古文：宋故著作郎何承天始撰《宋书》，草立纪传，止于武帝功臣，篇牍未广。
现代文： 宋朝的故著作郎何承天刚写《宋书》，粗略地写出纪传，只到武帝的功臣。
English: He Chengtian, the late author of the Song Dynasty, just wrote the "Song Book" and roughly wrote the biography, only to the heroism of Emperor Wu.

古文：其所撰志，唯《天文》，《律历》，自此外，悉委奉朝请山谦之。
现代文：文章篇幅还不多，他撰写的志，只有《天文志》和《律历志》，在这之外，其余全部委托奉朝请山谦之。
English: The length of the article is not large, and the only books he has written are "The Astronomical History" and "The History of the Ruling Calendar." Apart from these, all the others were commissioned by the Emperor to Yamakage.

古文：谦之，孝建初，又被诏撰述，寻值病亡，仍使南台侍御史苏宝生续造诸传，元嘉名臣，皆其所撰。
现代文：山谦之在孝建初年，又接受任务撰写，不久病故，又叫南台侍御史苏宝生接着写其他传记，元嘉朝的名臣，都是他撰写的。
English: In the first year of Xiaojian, Yam Qianzhi accepted the task of writing, and soon died of illness. He also asked the Nantai attendant Shi Su Baosheng to continue to write other biographies. He wrote the famous ministers of the Yuan Jia Dynasty.

古文：宝生被诛，大明中，又命著作郎徐爰踵成前作。
现代文：苏宝生被杀后，大明年中，又叫著作郎徐爰继续完成前人的著述。
English: After Su Baosheng was killed, in the middle of the New Year, he also asked the author, Lang Xuqi, to continue to complete the writings of his predecessors.

古文：爰因何、苏所述，勒为一史，起自义熙之初，讫于大明之末。
现代文：徐爰根据何承天苏宝生写的，编成一部史书，从义熙初年开始，直到大明末年。
English: Xu Xi compiled a history book based on the writings of He Chengtian and Su Baosheng, from the first year of Yixi to the last year of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：至于臧质、鲁爽、王僧达诸传，又皆孝武所造。
现代文：其中臧质，鲁爽，王僧达这些传记，都是孝武帝作的。
English: Among them, the biographies of Gongye, Lu Shuang, and Wang Sengda were all written by Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：自永光以来，至于禅让，十余年内，阙而不续，一代典文，始末未举。
现代文：从永光年以来，到宋朝禅让给齐朝，十多年间，欠缺而不连贯。一整朝的史书，头尾不全。
English: From the time of Yongguang to the time when the Song Dynasty ceded Zen to the Qi Dynasty, there was a gap of more than ten years. The history of the entire dynasty is incomplete.

古文：且事属当时，多非实录，又立传之方，取舍乖衷，进由时旨，退傍世情，垂之方来，难以取信。
现代文：况且当时人写的文章，很多是不合实际的，另外设立人物传记的方法，取舍也不那么合理，很多都是根据当时皇帝的意思来编的，或者受当时舆论的影响，很难让人相信。
English: Moreover, many of the articles written at that time were impractical, and the methods of setting up character biographies were not so reasonable. Many of them were compiled according to the wishes of the emperor at that time, or influenced by public opinion at that time, which was hard to believe.

古文：臣以谨更创立，制成新史，始自义熙肇号，终于升明三年。
现代文：我今天重新谨慎地改造，写成新书，从义熙元年开始，到升明三年为止。
English: Today, I have carefully remodeled and written a new book, from the first year of Yixi to the third year of Sheming.

古文：桓玄、谯纵、卢循、马、鲁之徒，身为晋贼，非关后代。
现代文：桓玄、谯纵、卢循、马、鲁等人。本身是晋朝叛逆，跟宋朝无关。
English: Kuan Xuan, Xing Zong, Lu Xun, Ma, Lu and others. They themselves were rebellious against the Jin Dynasty and had nothing to do with the Song Dynasty.

古文：吴隐、谢混、郗僧施，义止前朝，不宜滥入宋典。
现代文：吴隐、谢混、希阝僧施，事迹只和晋朝有关，不应随便编进《宋书》。
English: The deeds of Wu Yin, Xie Jian, and Hebei Monk Shi are only related to the Jin Dynasty, and should not be casually compiled into the "Song Book."

古文：刘毅、何无忌、魏咏之、檀恁之、孟昶、诸葛长民，志在兴复，情非造宋，今并刊除，归之晋籍。
现代文：刘毅、何无忌、魏泳之、檀凭之、孟昶、诸葛长民只有效劳晋朝的忠心，并不想为宋朝效力，现在都予以删除，归到《晋书》之中。
English: Liu Yi, He Muxui, Wei Yongzhi, Dang Biao Rongzhi, Meng Yao, Zhuge Changmin only served the loyalty of the Jin Dynasty, and did not want to serve the Song Dynasty. Now they are all deleted and included in the "Jin Shu."

古文：臣远愧南、董，近谢迁、固，以闾阎小才，述一代盛典，属辞比事，望古惭良，鞠躬跼蹐，靦汗亡厝。
现代文： 我远则惭愧不如南偃、董狐，近则遗憾不如司马迁和班固。凭着街巷小才，阐述一朝伟大典籍。文辞叙事，和古人是无法相比的，我惶恐，尴尬，汗颜不已，手足无措。
English: Far away, I am ashamed to be inferior to Nan Xuan and Dong Fu, and recently, I am sorry to be inferior to Sima Qian and Ban Gu. With the street talent, I expound the once great classics. The rhetoric and narrative are incomparable to the ancients, I am terrified, embarrassed, sweaty, and helpless.

古文：本纪列传，缮写已毕，合志表七十卷，臣今谨奏呈。所撰诸志，须成续上。谨条目录，诣省拜表奉书以闻。
现代文：本纪和列传，叙写已完，共七本七十卷，我今恭谨上呈，另外撰写的表志，等着以后撰述献上，在这里写出目录，到省阁上书献表告知皇上。
English: I have now completed the description of this chronicle and its series of biographies, a total of seven books of seventy volumes. I now respectfully submit to you, separately written forms, waiting to be written later, to present to you. Write out the catalogue here, and inform the Emperor of the book presentation form at the cabinet of ministers.

古文：臣约诚惶诚恐，顿首顿首！死罪死罪！
现代文： 本臣沈约诚惶诚恐，顿首顿首，死罪死罪。 
English: My vassal Shen Yuanzheng panicked and panicked, shook his head and shook his head, the death penalty was the death penalty.

