古文：崔浩崔浩，字伯渊，清河人也。白马公玄伯之长子。
现代文：崔浩，字伯渊，清河人，白马公玄伯的长子。
English: Cui Hao, surnamed Bo Yuan, a native of Qinghe, is the eldest son of Bai Ma Gong Xuan Bo.

古文：少好文学，博览经史。玄象阴阳，百家之言，无不关综，研精义理，时人莫及。
现代文：年轻时喜欢文学，广泛阅览经史著作，天象阴阳五行之学，百家之言，无不融会贯通，穷究经义的精深之处，当时没有人比得上。
English: When he was young, he liked literature, read widely historical works, studied the five elements of heaven, earth, and sun, and the sayings of a hundred schools. He was able to fuse and penetrate all of them, and delve into the depths of the scriptures. At that time, there was no one who could match him.

古文：弱冠为直郎。
现代文：二十岁左右任直郎。
English: Around the age of twenty, Ren Nairo grew up.

古文：天兴中，给事秘书，转著作郎。
现代文：天兴年间，供职秘书省，改任著作郎。
English: During the rise of Tianxing, he worked as a secretary for the Ministry of Education, and was later appointed as a writer.

古文：太祖以其工书，常置左右。
现代文：太祖因他擅长书法，常常安置在身边。
English: His great-grandfather, who was good at calligraphy, was often placed next to him.

古文：太祖季年，威严颇峻，宫省左右多以微过得罪，莫不逃隐，避目下之变。浩独恭勤不怠，或终日不归。
现代文：太祖晚年，刑罚很严酷，宫中近臣多因小过获罪，没有人不逃避隐匿，以躲避眼下的事变，崔浩独自肃敬勤勉不懈怠，有时终日不回家。
English: In the late years of the great-grandfather, the punishment was very harsh, the courtiers in the palace were mostly guilty of minor offenses, no one did not avoid hiding to avoid the current events, Cui Hao alone was serious, diligent and tireless, and sometimes did not go home all day.

古文：太祖知之，辄命赐以御粥。
现代文：太祖赏识他，常常命令把自己的粥赐给他。
English: The great-grandfather appreciated him and often ordered his porridge to be given to him.

古文：其砥直任时，不为穷通改节，皆此类也。
现代文：他公平正直以时势为己任，不因困厄显达而改变操守，都像这样。
English: He is fair and honest, takes the current situation as his own responsibility, and does not change his ethics due to difficulties and misfortunes, all like this.

古文：太宗初，拜博士祭酒，赐爵武城子，常授太宗经书。
现代文：太宗初年，任博士祭酒，被赐爵为武城子。常给太宗讲授经书。
English: In the first year of Emperor Taizong's reign, he was awarded the title of Doctor of Ceremonial Wine, and was given the title of Knight of the Castle. He often lectured on scriptures to Emperor Taizong.

古文：每至郊祠，父子并乘轩轺，时人荣之。
现代文：每当皇上去郊外祭天地，父子共乘轩朝，当时的人感觉这是很荣耀的事。
English: Whenever the emperor went to the countryside to hold a festival, and the father and son rode together, the people at the time felt that this was a very glorious thing.

古文：太宗好阴阳术数，闻浩说《易》及《洪范》五行，善之，因命浩筮吉凶，参观天文，考定疑惑。
现代文：太塞喜欢阴阳术数之学，听到崔浩讲解《周易》和《洪范》五行，以为很好，因而命令崔浩用蓍草占卜吉凶，看天象，考定疑难。
English: Taesei liked the study of yin and yang operations, and thought it was very good to hear Cui Hao explain the five elements of "Zhou Yi" and "Hong Fan," so he ordered Cui Hao to use eelgrass to tell fortunes, look at the celestial elephant, and assess difficulties.

古文：浩综覈天人之际，举其纲纪，诸所处决，多有应验。恆与军国大谋，甚为宠密。
现代文：崔浩考核天道人事之间的关系，抓住要领，他的判断，多有应验，经常参与统军治国的大计，很受宠爱。
English: Cui Hao assessed the relationship between Tiandao personnel and grasped the essentials. His judgment was often fulfilled, and he often participated in the grand plan of unifying the military and governing the country. He was very popular.

古文：是时，有兔在后宫，验问门官，无从得入。
现代文：当时，有兔子在后宫，查问守门的官，都说没有地方可以进入后宫。
English: At that time, there were rabbits in the harem, and when the gatekeepers were questioned, they all said that there was no place to enter the harem.

古文：太宗怪之，命浩推其咎徵。
现代文：太宗觉得奇怪，命令崔浩推断它的灾祸应验。
English: Emperor Taizong thought it was strange and ordered Cui Hao to deduce its calamity.

古文：浩以为当有邻国贡嫔嫱者，善应也。
现代文：崔浩认为将有邻国贡献姬妾，是吉兆。
English: Cui Hao believes that it is a good omen that there will be neighboring countries to contribute concubines.

古文：明年，姚兴果献女。
现代文：第二年，姚兴果然进献女子。
English: His eldest grandson, Song, was sent to the capital.

古文：神瑞二年，秋谷不登，太史令王亮、苏垣因华阴公主等言谶书国家当治鄴，应大乐五十年，劝太宗迁都。
现代文：神瑞二年，秋粮歉收，太史令王亮、苏垣通过华阴公主等进言说依据谶书国家应当建都邺撼，享受康乐五十年，劝太宗迁都。
English: In the second year of Shen Rui, when the autumn grain harvest was poor, Emperor Taishi ordered Wang Liang and Sugaki, through Princess Hua Yin, to say that according to the imperial edict, the country should build a capital city and enjoy 50 years of recreation, and to persuade Emperor Taizong to move the capital.

古文：浩与特进周澹言于太宗曰： 今国家迁都于鄴，可救今年之饥，非长久之策也。
现代文：崔浩与特进甩澹向左塞进言说： 现在国家迁都到邺城，可救今年的饥荒，不是长久之计。
English: Cui Hao and the head of the Special Development Division of the General Office of the People's Republic of China said: Now that the national capital has been moved to Handan, this year's famine can be saved, but it is not a long-term solution.

古文：东州之人，常谓国家居广漠之地，民畜无算，号称牛毛之众。
现代文：束部州郡的人，常以为国家处于辽阔沙漠之地，人畜不计其数，号称多如牛毛。
English: People in Sokobechu County often think that the country is located in a vast desert, with countless people and animals, known to be as numerous as the hair of a cow.

古文：今留守旧部，分家南徙，恐不满诸州之地。
现代文：现在留守旧都，又分出一部分人畜南迁，恐怕不能遍布各州的土地。
English: Now the old capital is left behind, and a part of the people and animals have moved south. I'm afraid they can't spread all over the land of the states.

古文：参居郡县，处榛林之间，不便水土，疾疫死伤，情见事露，则百姓意沮。
现代文：杂居郡县中，处于丛林间，不服水土，发生流行性传染病而死伤，事情暴露，就使百姓沮丧。
English: In the middle of a mixed county, in the middle of the jungle, not accepting water and soil, an epidemic infectious disease occurred and caused death and injury, and the matter was exposed, which made the people frustrated.

古文：四方闻之，有轻侮之意。屈丐、蠕蠕必提挈而来，云中、平城则有危殆之虑。阻隔恆代千里之险，虽欲救援，赴之甚难。如此则声实俱损矣。
现代文：四邻得知，会产生轻视之心，屈丐、蠕蠕必定相约来犯，云中、平城就有危险，中间隔着恒代两地路遥千里，虽然想救援，却很难赶到，这样就使名实都受损害。
English: If the four neighbors learn about it, they will despise each other, the beggars and the creeps will certainly come to commit crimes together, Yunzhong and Pingcheng will be in danger, and thousands of miles will separate the two places in Hengdai. Although they want to rescue, it will be difficult to reach, thus causing damage to both reputation and reality.

古文：今居北方，假令山东有变，轻骑南出，耀威桑梓之中，谁知多少？
现代文：现在处于北方，假使太行山以柬有变乱，轻骑南下，在民众聚居之处示威，谁知道有多少兵马?
English: Now it is in the north, if there is a turmoil in Taihang Mountain and Cambodia, it will ride lightly to the south and demonstrate in places where people live together. Who knows how many soldiers and horses there are?

古文：百姓见之，望尘震服。
现代文：百姓望尘而服。
English: The people are resigned to their fate.

古文：此是国家威制诸夏之长策也。
现代文：这是国家以威力制服中原的良策。
English: This is a good strategy for the state to use force to subdue Nakahara.

古文：至春草生，乳酪将出，兼有菜果，足接来秋。若得中熟，事则济矣。 
现代文：到春天草长，乳酪很多，加上蔬菜果类，足以下接来年秋天，假如获得中等收成，问题就解决了。 
English: By spring, the grass is long, there is a lot of cheese, plus vegetables and fruits, and by the following autumn, if a medium harvest is obtained, the problem is solved.

古文：太宗深然之，曰： 唯此二人，与朕意同。 
现代文：太宗认为他们说的非常正确，说： 衹有这二人与我意见相同。 
English: Emperor Taizong thought that what they said was very correct and said, "Only these two people have the same opinion as me."

古文：复使中贵人问浩、澹曰： 今既糊口无以至来秋，来秋或复不熟，将如之何？ 
现代文：又派宠幸的近臣问崔浩、周澹说： 现在既然勉强维持生活无从到达来年秋天，来年秋天如果又没有收成，将怎么办? 
English: He also sent a favored vassal to ask Cui Hao and Zhou Qi, "Now that we can barely make ends meet and can't make it to next autumn, what will happen if there is no harvest next autumn?"

古文：浩等对曰： 可简穷下之户，诸州就谷。若来秋无年，愿更图也。
现代文：崔浩等回答说： 可以挑选穷苦的民产前往谷物多的州郡就食，如果来年秋天饥荒，希望再设法对付。
English: Cui Hao et al. replied: It is possible to choose the poor people's products and go to the states and counties with more grain to eat. If there is a famine next autumn, I hope to try to deal with it.

古文：但不可迁都。 
现代文：但是不可迁都。 
English: But the capital cannot be moved.

古文：太宗从之，于是分民诣山东三州食，出仓谷以禀之。
现代文：太宗听从建议，于是分派民众到太行山以东三州取食，放出官仓谷物赐给他们。
English: Taizong listened to the suggestion, and sent people to the three provinces east of Mount Taihang to get food, and gave them grain from government warehouses.

古文：来年遂大熟。
现代文：来年竟然大丰收。
English: Next year, there will be a bumper harvest.

古文：赐浩、澹妾各一人，御衣一袭，绢五十匹，绵五十斤。
现代文：赐给崔浩、周澹妾各一人，御衣一套，绢五十匹，绵五十斤。
English: He gave one person to each of Cui Hao's and Zhou Ye's concubines, a set of imperial robes, fifty horses, and fifty pounds of linen.

古文：初，姚兴死之前岁也，太史奏：荧惑在匏瓜星中，一夜忽然亡失，不知所在。
现代文：起初，姚兴死的前一年，太史上奏：火星在匏瓜星中，一天夜裹忽然失踪，不知在哪裹。
English: At first, the year before Yao Xing's death, the story was too far-fetched: Mars was in the middle of the maple planet, and suddenly disappeared one night, I don't know where.

古文：或谓下入危亡之国，将为童谣妖言，而后行其灾祸。
现代文：有人说落入危亡的国度，将要兴起童谣妖言，而后施加灾难祸患。
English: Some people say that if a country falls into a state of peril, children's rhymes and fairy tales will arise, and then disasters and calamities will be imposed.

古文：太宗闻之，大惊，乃召诸硕儒十数人，令与史官求其所诣。
现代文：太宗听到这事，大惊，于是召来十几位大儒，命令与史官探求火星到了哪裹。
English: When Emperor Taizong heard about this, he was shocked. He summoned more than a dozen great scholars and ordered them and historians to find out where Mars had gone.

古文：浩对曰： 案《春秋左氏传》说神降于莘，其至之日，各以其物祭也。
现代文：崔扯奏说： 根据《春秋左氏传》说天神降临莘地，它到的那一天，各人拿自己的物品祭祀。
English: Cui Rinso said: According to "The Spring and Autumn Legend of Zuo Wu," it is said that the sky god descends to the earth, and on the day it arrives, each person takes their own items to sacrifice.

古文：请以日辰推之，庚午之夕，辛未之朝，天有阴云，荧惑之亡，当在此二日之内。
现代文：请根据期推测火星在哪裹，庚午日的傍晚，辛末日的早晨，天空有阴云，火星的失踪，恐怕在逭两天内。
English: Please speculate on the basis of the period where Mars is, the evening of the seventh day of the week, the morning of the last day of the week, the sky is cloudy, the disappearance of Mars, I am afraid within two days.

古文：庚之与未，皆主于秦，辛为西夷。
现代文：庚和未，方位都在秦地，辛的方位在西方少数民族。
English: The orientation of Geng and Wei is in Qin, and the orientation of Xin is in the western ethnic minorities.

古文：今姚兴据咸阳，是荧惑入秦矣。 
现代文：现在姚兴占据咸阳，可见火星已入塞地。 
English: Now that Yao Xing occupies Xianyang, it can be seen that Mars has entered the cedar.

古文：诸人皆作色曰： 天上失星，人安能知其所诣，而妄说无徵之言？ 
现代文：众人都神情严肃地说： 天上失落星辰。人怎能知晓它到了哪裹，却乱说没有实据的话。 
English: Everyone looked serious and said, "There's a lost star in the sky. How can we know where it is? It's just an unfounded rumor."

古文：浩笑而不应。
现代文：崔浩笑而不答。
English: Cui Hao smiled and did not answer.

古文：后八十余日，荧惑果出于东井，留守盘旋，秦中大旱赤地，昆明池水竭，童谣讹言，国内喧扰。
现代文：过了八十多天，火星果然在东井星宿出现，滞留盘桓，秦中地区大旱赤地千里，昆明池水竭，童谣妖言，国内纷扰。
English: After more than 80 days, Mars finally appeared in Dongjing Xingzhu, lingering hovering, Qinzhong area drought, Kunming pond water depletion, nursery rhymes, domestic disturbances.

古文：明年，姚兴死，二子交兵，三年国灭。
现代文：第二年，姚兴死，二子交战，第三年国家被消灭。
English: In the second year, Yao Xing died, the two sons fought, and the country was destroyed in the third year.

古文：于是诸人皆服曰： 非所及也。 
现代文：于是众人都佩服地说： 不是我们这些人能比得上的。 
English: Then everyone said with admiration: It's not like we can match it.

古文：泰常元年，司马德宗将刘裕伐姚泓，舟师自淮泗入清，欲氵斥河西上，假道于国。
现代文：泰常元年，司马德宗的将领刘裕征伐姚泓，水军从淮水泅水入清水，打算由黄河逆流西上，向国家借路。
English: In the first year of the Tai Chang era, Liu Yu, the general of the Sima De Zong, went to conquer Yaoshan, and the navy entered the clear water from the Huai Shui into the clear water, intending to go west from the Yellow River and borrow the road from the country.

古文：诏群臣议之。
现代文：召令群臣计议这事。
English: He summoned his courtiers to deliberate on the matter.

古文：外朝公卿咸曰： 函谷关号曰天险。
现代文：外朝的公卿大臣都说： 函谷关号称天险。
English: The court nobles and ministers of the Outer Dynasties all said: "Hakotagaseki is known as a natural hazard.

古文：一人荷戈，万夫不得进。裕舟船步兵，何能西入？
现代文：一夫当关，万夫莫开。刘裕的船只步兵，怎么能入关?
English: Liu Yu's naval infantrymen, how can they get in?

古文：脱我乘其后，还路甚难。
现代文：如果我方在他的背后掩杀，他的归路很艰难。
English: If we cover up behind his back, his way back will be very difficult.

古文：若北上河岸，其行为易。
现代文：如果登上黄河北岸，他的行动就容易。
English: If he climbs onto the north bank of the Yellow River, his actions will be easy.

古文：扬言伐姚，意或难测。
现代文：扬言征伐姚泓，意图难以猜测。
English: He threatened to invade Yao'an. It's hard to guess his intentions.

古文：假其水道，寇不可纵。宜先发军断河上流，勿令西过。 
现代文：借给他水道，但敌人不可放纵，应当先发兵在黄河上游阻截，不让西去。 
English: Lend him the waterway, but the enemy must not be indulged. They should first send troops to block the upper reaches of the Yellow River and not let it go west.

古文：又议之内朝，咸同外计。太宗将从之。
现代文：又在内朝官员中计议这事，与外朝大臣意见完全相同。太宗打算采纳它。
English: This matter has also been discussed among officials in the Inner Court, and the opinion is exactly the same as that of the Foreign Minister. Emperor Taizong intends to adopt it.

古文：浩曰： 此非上策，司马休之之徒扰其荆州，刘裕切齿来久。
现代文：崔浩说： 逭不是上策。司马休之等人侵扰他的荆州，刘裕切齿愤恨由来已久。
English: Cui Hao said: "Hanging is not the best policy. Sima Xiu and others intruded on his Jingzhou, and Liu Yu has a long history of bitter resentment.

古文：今兴死子劣，乘其危亡而伐之。臣观其意，必欲入关。
现代文：现在姚兴已死儿子恶劣，趁该国危亡去征伐它，我看他的心思，一定是想攻入函谷关。
English: Now that Yao Xing is dead, his son is evil, taking advantage of the country's peril to conquer it. I see his mind, he must want to break into Hakodate.

古文：劲躁之人，不顾后患。
现代文：刚猛急躁的人，不考虑以后的祸患。
English: A headstrong, impetuous person does not think about future disasters.

古文：今若塞其西路，裕必上岸北侵，如此则姚无事而我受敌。
现代文：现在如果阻断他西去的道路，刘裕必定上岸北犯，这样就使姚兴平安无事而我方却受攻击。
English: Now, if his way to the west is blocked, Liu Yu will definitely go ashore to the north, so that Yao Xing will be safe and we will be attacked.

古文：今蠕蠕内寇，民食又乏，不可发军。
现代文：现在蠕蠕入侵，百姓粮食又不足，不可发兵。
English: Now that the creeping invasion has begun, and the people are short of food, it is impossible to send troops.

古文：发军赴南则北寇进击，若其救北则东州复危。
现代文：发兵奔赴南方就会有北敌进攻，如果救援北方那么束部又有危险。
English: If we send troops to the south, there will be an attack from the northern enemy. If we rescue the north, there will be danger in Sokobe.

古文：未若假之水道，纵裕西入，然后兴兵塞其东归之路，所谓卞庄刺虎，两得之势也。
现代文：不如借给刘茔水道，听任他西进，然后发兵阻断他束归的道路，这是所谓卞庄刺虎，一举两得。
English: It would be better to lend Liu Xuan the waterway, let him go westward, and then send troops to block his way back. This is the so-called Xuanzhuang stabbing tiger, a one-two punch.

古文：使裕胜也，必德我假道之惠;令姚氏胜也，亦不失救邻之名。
现代文：如果刘裕得胜，一定感激我方借路；如果姚氏得胜，也不失救援邻邦的美名。
English: If Liu Yu wins, we will certainly be grateful to borrow the road; if Yao wins, it will not lose the reputation of rescuing neighbors.

古文：纵使裕得关中，县远难守，彼不能守，终为我物。
现代文：即使刘裕取得关中，相距遥远而难以固守，他不能固守，最终是我们的领土。
English: Even if Liu Yu takes Guanzhong, it is far away and difficult to adhere to, he cannot adhere to, and it is ultimately our territory.

古文：今不劳兵马，坐观成败，关两虎而收长久之利，上策也。
现代文：现在不用兵马劳顿，坐观成败，使两虎相斗而获长久的利益，是上策。
English: There is no need for soldiers to work hard now. It is the best policy to wait and see whether the two tigers fight each other and gain long-term benefits.

古文：夫为国之计，择利而为之，岂顾婚姻，酬一女子之惠哉？
现代文：为国家着想，应择利而行，怎么顾惜婚姻，而酬谢赠送了一位女子呢?
English: For the sake of the country, one should act according to one's own interests. How can a marriage be cherished while a woman is presented as a reward?

古文：假令国家弃恆山以南，裕必不能发吴越之兵与官军争夺河北也，居然可知。 
现代文：假使国家放弃旦山以南，刘登一定不能调集昱越地区的兵马与政府的军队在黄河以北争夺和防备，显然可知。 
English: If the country abandons the south of the Danshan Mountains, it is clear that Liu Deng will not be able to mobilize the soldiers and horses of the Yunnan-Vietnam region and the government's army to compete and defend north of the Yellow River.

古文：议者犹曰： 裕西入函谷，则进退路穷，腹背受敌;北上岸则姚军必不出关助我。
现代文：计议的人还说： 刘裕西入函谷关，就会进退无路，腹背受敌；往北上岸而姚迅的军队一定不会出函谷关援助我方。
English: The person who proposed the motion also said: If Liu Yuxi enters Hakodate, there will be no way out and he will suffer from the enemy; if he goes north to the shore, Yao Xun's army will definitely not come out of Hakodate to help us.

古文：扬声西行，意在北进，其势然也。 
现代文：扬言西行，意在北进，是形势决定的。 
English: Threatening to go west, but intending to go north, is dictated by the situation.

古文：太宗遂从群议，遣长孙嵩发兵拒之，战于畔城，为裕将朱超石所败，师人多伤。
现代文：太宗于是采纳群臣的意见，派长孙嵩调兵阻拦他，在畔城交战，被蛮嬷的将领苤超互打败，兵士多数受伤。
English: Emperor Taizong then adopted the opinion of his ministers and sent his commander, Sun Song, to send troops to stop him. They fought in Hencheng and were defeated by the savage generals, and most of the soldiers were injured.

古文：太宗闻之，恨不用浩计。
现代文：太宗听到消息，遗憾没用崔浩的计策。
English: When Taizong heard the news, he regretted not using Cui Hao's strategy.

古文：二年，司马德宗齐郡太守王懿来降，上书陈计，称刘裕在洛，劝国家以军绝其后路，则裕军可不战而克。
现代文：二年，司马德宗的齐郡太守王懿来投降，上书献策，声称刘裕在洛阳，劝说皇上派兵断其后路，可不战而胜刘裕。
English: In the second year, Wang Xuan, the governor of Qi County of Sima Dezong, surrendered and submitted a proposal, claiming that Liu Yu was in Luoyang, and persuaded the emperor to send troops to cut off Liu Yu's retreat. He could defeat Liu Yu without a fight.

古文：书奏，太宗善之。
现代文：建议呈上，太宗褒扬他。
English: The proposal was submitted, and Taizong praised him.

古文：会浩在前进讲书传，太宗问浩曰： 刘裕西伐，前军已至潼关。
现代文：适逢崔浩在前面讲解典籍，太宗问崔浩说： 刘裕两伐，先头部队已到潼关。
English: When Cui Hao was lecturing on classics in front of him, Taizong asked Cui Hao and said, "Liu Yu has made two expeditions, and the leading troops have arrived at Shaoguan."

古文：其事如何？
现代文：这事情怎么样?
English: How did this come about?

古文：以卿观之，事得济不？ 
现代文：以你的看法，事情能不能成功? 
English: In your opinion, will things work out?

古文：浩对曰： 昔姚兴好养虚名，而无实用。
现代文：崔浩回答说： 过去姚兴好虚名，但是没有实用价值。
English: Cui Hao replied: In the past, Yao Xing had a good name, but it had no practical value.

古文：子泓又病，众叛亲离。
现代文：儿子姚泓又失败，众叛亲离。
English: His son, Yao Yao, failed again, and the whole family turned against him.

古文：裕乘其危，兵精将勇，以臣观之，克之必矣。 
现代文：刘裕趁他危急，士卒精锐将领勇猛，以我看来，一定能战胜他。 
English: Liu Yu took advantage of his critical situation, and the soldiers and elite generals bravely took the lead. In my opinion, they will definitely be able to defeat him.

古文：太宗曰： 刘裕武能何如慕容垂？ 
现代文：太宗说： 刘裕的军事才能比起慕容垂怎样? 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "How is Liu Yu's military ability better than that of Murong Du?

古文：浩曰： 裕胜。 
现代文：崔浩说： 刘裕强些。 
English: Cui Hao said: Liu Yu is stronger.

古文：太宗曰： 试言其状。 
现代文：太宗说： 姑且说说他们的情况。 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "Let me tell you about their situation.

古文：浩曰： 慕容垂承父祖世君之资，生便尊贵，同类归之，若夜蛾之赴火，少加倚仗，便足立功。
现代文：崔浩说： 慕容垂凭藉父亲和祖父做君主的资本，生下来就尊贵，同族人归附他，像夜晚的飞蛾飞向火光，稍加依赖，便足以立功。
English: Cui Hao said: With the capital of being a monarch from his father and grandfather, Murongdiao was born with dignity. His compatriots flocked to him like moths to a flame. A little reliance is enough to make merit.

古文：刘裕挺出寒微，不阶尺土之资，不因一卒之用，奋臂大呼而夷灭桓玄，北擒慕容超，南摧卢循等，僭晋陵迟，遂执国命。
现代文：刘裕出自贫贱之家，没有一尺土地的资本，没有依托一名士卒的效力，奋臂高呼而灭掉桓玄，在北方捉拿慕容超，在南方挫败卢循等，伪晋衰败，于是执掌国家政权。
English: Liu Yu came from a poor family, did not have the capital of a foot of land, did not rely on the effectiveness of a pawn, shouted with all his might to eliminate Huan Xuan, captured Murong Chao in the north, defeated Lu Cui in the south, etc., and the pseudo-Jin fell into decline, so he took control of the state power.

古文：裕若平姚而还，必篡其主，其势然也。
现代文：刘裕如果平定姚泓而还，必定篡夺君位，这是形势决定的。
English: If Liu Yu succeeds in pacifying Yao Xuan, he will certainly usurp the throne, which is determined by the situation.

古文：秦地戎夷混并，虎狼之国，裕亦不能守之。
现代文：秦地民族掺杂，是贪残暴虐的地方，刘裕也不能固守。
English: Qin and local ethnic groups are mixed, it is a place of greed, cruelty and brutality, and Liu Yu cannot stick to it.

古文：风俗不同，人情难变，欲行荆扬之化于三秦之地，譬无翼而欲飞，无足而欲走，不可得也。
现代文：风俗不同，人情难以改变，要想在三秦地区推行荆扬地区的教化，好比没有翅膀而想飞，没有脚而想走，是不可能的。
English: Different customs, people's sentiments are difficult to change, and it is impossible to carry out the indoctrination of the Jingyang region in the Sanqin region, just as it is impossible to fly without wings and walk without feet.

古文：若留众守之，必资于寇。
现代文：如果留下军队守它，必定被敌人利用。
English: If you leave an army to defend it, it will be used by the enemy.

古文：孔子曰：善人为邦百年，或以胜残去杀。今以秦之难制，一二年间岂裕所能哉？
现代文：孔子说：有道德的人治国百年，可以使残暴的人不作恶因而废除死刑现在对于难以控制的秦地，刘裕在一二年间怎么能做到呢?
English: Confucius said: "If a moral person rules the country for a hundred years, he can make the cruel people not do evil and thus abolish the death penalty. Now, for the hard-to-control Qin, how can Liu Yu do it in one or two years?

古文：且可治戎束甲，息民备境，以待其归，秦地亦当终为国有，可坐而守也。 
现代文：暂且可以卷起甲衣整饬军队，休养民力防备边境，等待他归去，秦地也终究将为我国所有，可以轻易地守住。 
English: For the time being, we can roll up our coats of armor to tidy up the army, rest and recuperate the civilian forces to guard the border, and wait for him to return. After all, Qin land will also be owned by our country and can be easily defended.

古文：太宗曰： 裕已入关，不能进退，我遣精骑南袭彭城、寿春，裕亦何能自立？ 
现代文：太宗说： 刘裕已攻入函谷关，进退两难，我派精锐骑兵向南袭击彭城、寿春，刘裕又怎能依靠自力有所建树? 
English: Taizong said, "Liu Yu has entered the valley of Hanzhong Pass and is in a dilemma. I have sent elite cavalry to the south to attack Pengcheng and Shuchun. How can Liu Yu rely on his own strength to build something?

古文：浩曰： 今西北二寇未殄，陛下不可亲御六师。
现代文：崔浩说： 现在西北二敌未灭，陛下不可亲率大军。
English: Cui Hao said, "Now that the two enemies in the northwest have not been eliminated, Your Majesty should not personally lead a large army.

古文：兵众虽盛，而将无韩白。
现代文：虽然军队规模大，却没有韩信皇起那样的将领。
English: Although the size of the army is large, there is no general like Han Xin Wangqi.

古文：长孙嵩有治国之用，无进取之能，非刘裕敌也。
现代文：旦王蝎有治国的才能，没有攻取的能力，不是刘裕的对手。
English: The Dragon King has the ability to govern the country, but not the ability to conquer. He is not Liu Yu's rival.

古文：臣谓待之不晚。 
现代文：我以为不妨暂缓。 
English: I thought it might be a good idea to hold off.

古文：太宗笑曰： 卿量之已审矣。 
现代文：笑着说： 你已经考虑成熟了。 
English: Laughing, he said, "You're mature enough to think about it."

古文：浩曰： 臣尝私论近世人物，不敢不上闻。
现代文：崔浩说： 我曾私下衡量近代人物，不敢不向朝廷呈报。
English: Cui Hao said: I once privately measured modern figures and dared not fail to report to the imperial court.

古文：若王猛之治国，苻坚之管仲也;慕容玄恭之辅少主，慕容暐之霍光也;刘裕之平逆乱，司马德宗之曹操也。 
现代文：如王逼治国，是珏坚的笪仲；慕容玄恭辅佐年轻的君主，是蔓查膛的霍韭；型茔平定叛乱，是司马德宗的曹操。 
English: For example, if a king is forced to rule the country, it is Shujian's Shizhong; if a young monarch is supported by Murong Xuanqiong, it is Huo Zang; if a rebellion is suppressed, it is Cao Cao of the Sima De sect.

古文：太宗曰： 卿谓先帝如何？ 
现代文：太宗说： 你认为前代国君怎么样? 
English: Emperor Taizong said: What do you think of the previous sovereign?

古文：浩曰： 小人管窥县象，何能见玄穹之广大。
现代文：崔浩说： 我管窥天象，怎能见识天空的广阔。
English: Cui Hao said: I can only see the stars, how can I see the vastness of the sky?

古文：虽然，太祖用漠北醇朴之人，南入中地，变风易俗，化洽四海，自与羲农齐列，臣岂能仰名？ 
现代文：即使如此，太祖用漠北地区淳厚质朴的人，南入中原，变风易俗，教化遍及四海，自然与伏羲神农并列，我哪裹能形容。 
English: Even so, I can't describe how the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the

古文：太宗曰： 屈丐如何？ 
现代文：太宗说： 屈丐怎么样? 
English: Taizong said, "What about the beggars?

古文：浩曰： 屈丐家国夷灭，一身孤寄，为姚氏封殖。
现代文：崔浩说： 屈丐国家灭亡，独身一人寄居他乡，受姚氏扶持。
English: Cui Hao said: The pauper country is dying, a single man lives in a foreign country, supported by Yao.

古文：不思树党强邻，报仇雪耻，乃结忿于蠕蠕，背德于姚兴，撅竖小人，无大经略，正可残暴，终为人所灭耳。 
现代文：不思量与强邻结为同党，报仇雪耻，却舆蠕蠕结下怨恨，背弃姚兴的恩德，暴发的小人，没有大谋略，却这样残暴，终究为他人所灭。 
English: He didn't consider joining the same party as his powerful neighbor, taking revenge, but harbored resentment and betrayed Yao Xing's kindness. He was an outburst villain who had no grand strategy, but was so cruel that he was eventually destroyed by others.

古文：太宗大悦，语至中夜，赐浩御缥醪酒十觚，水精戎盐一两。
现代文：太宗很高兴，谈到半夜，赐给崔浩皇上用的缥醪酒十觚，晶莹明澈的戎盐一两。
English: Taizong was very pleased, and at midnight he gave Cui Hao ten jars of imperial wine and one or two jars of crystal clear Ezo salt.

古文：曰： 朕味卿言，若此盐酒，故与卿同其旨也。 
现代文：说： 我体味你的话，就像这盐酒，所以与你同享它们的美味。 
English: He said, "I have tasted your words like this salted wine, and I have enjoyed them with you.

古文：三年，彗星出天津，入太微，经北斗，络紫微，犯天棓，八十余日，至汉而灭。
现代文：三年，彗星在天津星座出现，入太微星垣，经北斗星，环绕紫微垣，进入天樯星座，八十多天，到银河后消失。
English: In three years, the comet appeared in the Tianjin constellation, entered the Taibiao constellation, passed through the Big Dipper, circled the Purple Dipper, entered the constellation of Draco, more than eighty days, and disappeared after reaching the Milky Way.

古文：太宗复召诸儒术士问之曰： 今天下未一，四方岳峙，灾咎之应，将在何国？
现代文：太宗再次召集各位儒生和术士询问遣事说： 现在天下没有统一，四方如高山峙立，灾祸的应验，将在哪个国家?
English: Taizong once again gathered all the Confucian scholars and magicians to ask the envoys: "Nowadays, the world is not unified, the four sides stand like mountains, the fulfillment of the disaster, which country will it be?"

古文：朕甚畏之，尽情以言，勿有所隐。 
现代文：我很畏惧它，尽情地说，不要有什么隐讳。 
English: I'm very scared of it, to say the least, so don't hold anything back.

古文：咸共推浩令对。
现代文：都一致推举崔造回答。
English: All of them unanimously nominated Cui Zuo to answer.

古文：浩曰： 古人有言，夫灾异之生，由人而起。
现代文：崔浩说： 古人说，灾异的产生，由人引起。
English: Cui Hao said: The ancients said that disasters are caused by people.

古文：人无衅焉，妖不自作。
现代文：人没有过失，灾祸不会自己兴起。
English: People don't have signs, and demons don't arise on their own.

古文：故人失于下，则变见于上，天事恆象，百代不易。
现代文：所以人有过失于下，灾异就显现于上，上天反应人事所经常出现的天象，百代不变。
English: Therefore, people make mistakes below, disasters and abnormalities appear above, and heaven reacts to people. The celestial phenomenon that often occurs is unchanged for hundreds of generations.

古文：《汉书》载王莽篡位之前，彗星出入，正与今同。
现代文：《漠书》记载王菱篡位之前，彗星的出入恰好与现在相同。
English: "The Book of the Desert" records that before Wang Ling usurped the throne, the comets' comings and goings were exactly the same as they are now.

古文：国家主尊臣卑，上下有序，民无异望。
现代文：我国君主尊贵臣子卑下，上下有序，百姓没有谋反的意图。
English: In our country, the monarch is respected, the dignitaries and courtiers are humble, and there is order from top to bottom. The people have no intention of rebellion.

古文：唯僭晋卑削，主弱臣强，累世陵迟，故桓玄逼夺，刘裕秉权。
现代文：伪置衰败微弱，君弱臣强，累世衰败，所以桓玄强夺君位，刘裕执掌政权。
English: Falsification and decay are weak, the ruler is weak and the vassal is strong, and they have been decaying for generations. Therefore, Huan Xuan Qiang seized the throne, and Liu Yu held power.

古文：彗孛者，恶气之所生，是为僭晋将灭，刘裕篡之之应也。 
现代文：彗星和孛星，邪恶之气滋生，这是伪晋将亡，刘裕篡位的反应。 
English: Comets and shooting stars, evil spirits breed, this is the reaction of the pseudo Jin's death and Liu Yu's usurpation.

古文：诸人莫能易浩言，太宗深然之。
现代文：众人没有谁能改变崔浩的主张，太宗认为很正确。
English: There is no one who can change Cui Hao's opinion, and Taizong thinks it is correct.

古文：五年，裕果废其主司马德文而自立。
现代文：五年，刘裕果然废黜他的君主司马德文而自立为君主。
English: Five years later, Liu Yu successfully deposed his monarch, Sima Dewen, and became the sovereign himself.

古文：南镇上裕改元赦书。
现代文：南方军镇上呈刘裕因改年号颁布的赦令文告。
English: An amnesty notice issued by Liu Yu due to the change of the year's name was submitted to the Nanfang Military Town.

古文：时太宗幸东南舄卤池射鸟，闻之，驿召浩，谓之曰： 往年卿言彗星之占验矣，朕于今日始信天道。 
现代文：当时太宗已去东南的潟卤池射乌，听到消息，用驿马传召崔浩，对他说： 往年你说的彗星的预兆应验了，我从今天开始相信天道。 
English: At that time, Taizong had already gone to the southeastern lagoon, Halogen Pond, to shoot wax. When he heard the news, he summoned Cui Hao on his steed and said to him, "The comet's omen you said in previous years has come true. From today, I believe in the heavenly way.

古文：初，浩父疾笃，浩乃剪爪截发，夜在庭中仰祷斗极，为父请命，求以身代，叩头流血，岁余不息，家人罕有知者。
现代文：起初，崔浩的父亲病重，崔崔因而剪断指甲和头发，夜晚在庭院中祷告北斗星和北极星，为父亲请命，恳求拿自己来代替，叩头叩得流血，一年多没有停止，家中的人罕有知道的。
English: At first, Cui Hao's father was seriously ill. As a result, Cui Cui cut her nails and hair. At night, she prayed for the Big Dipper and the North Star in the courtyard. She begged for her father's life, implored him to take her place, and did not stop bowing for more than a year until she bled. People at home rarely knew about it.

古文：及父终，居丧尽礼，时人称之。
现代文：到父亲去世，居丧尽礼，受到人们称赞。
English: By the time of his father's death, he had made a full recovery and was praised by people.

古文：袭爵白马公。
现代文：继承爵位为白马公。
English: The heir to the title is Lord Hakuba.

古文：朝廷礼仪、优文策诏、军国书记，尽关于浩。
现代文：朝廷的礼仪、褒奖的文告策书诏令、统军治国的书牍，都经过崔浩。
English: The etiquette of the imperial court, the announcement of awards, the issuance of imperial edicts, and the call for a unified army to govern the country all passed through Cui Hao.

古文：浩能为杂说，不长属文，而留心于制度、科律及经术之言，作家祭法，次序五宗，蒸尝之礼，丰俭之节，义理可观。
现代文：崔浩能写杂说，不擅长写文章，但是关注制度、音韵格律及经学的学说。撰写家祭法，安排五宗，祭祀的礼仪，丰俭适度，义理可取。
English: Cui Hao can write miscellaneous sayings, but is not good at writing articles, but he pays attention to the system, rhyme and meter, and the teachings of the classics. He writes about the family ritual, arranges five kinds of rituals, the etiquette of the ritual, the abundance is moderate, and the righteousness is desirable.

古文：性不好《老》、《庄》之书，每读不过数十行，辄弃之，曰： 此矫诬之说，不近人情，必非老子所作。
现代文：打心眼裹不喜欢《老子》《庄子》的书，常常读不到几十行，就放下，说： 这些虚妄的说教，不近人情，一定不是老子所写。
English: If you don't like the books of "Lao Zi" and "Zhuang Zi" with all your heart, you often can't read more than a few dozen lines, so you put it down and say: "These false teachings are not humane, and they must not be written by Lao Zi."

古文：老聃习礼，仲尼所师，岂设败法之书，以乱先王之教。
现代文：老聃通晓礼仪制度，仲尼还效法，怎能创作败坏常理的书籍，来危害前代贤明君王的教化。
English: Lao Zi was familiar with the etiquette system, and Zhong Ni also followed the example of how to create books that corrupt common sense and endanger the enlightenment of the previous generation of wise kings.

古文：袁生所谓家人筐箧中物，不可扬于王庭也。 
现代文：这就是袁生所说的妇人筐箧中的物品，不可在朝廷上宣扬。 
English: This is what Yuan Sheng said about the items in the woman's basket, which should not be announced at the court.

古文：太宗恆有微疾，怪异屡见，乃使中贵人密问于浩曰： 《春秋》：星孛北斗，七国之君皆将有咎。
现代文：太宗常有小病，怪异屡次显现，于是派宫中近臣秘密地问崔浩说： 《春秋》说：流星在北斗处出现，七国的君主都将有不幸的事。
English: Emperor Taizong often had minor ailments, and strange things repeatedly appeared, so he sent a close courtier to secretly ask Cui Hao: "Spring and Autumn" says: If a meteor appears at the North Star, the monarchs of the seven countries will have misfortune.

古文：今兹日蚀于胃昂，尽光赵代之分野，朕疾弥年，疗治无损，恐一旦奄忽，诸子并少，将如之何？
现代文：今年食出现在胃宿和昴宿，完全对应赵代地区，我病了一年，治疗没有减轻病情，担心一旦离开人世，皇子们都年幼，该怎么办呢?
English: This year, the food appeared in the gastro-lodge and gourd-lodge, completely corresponding to the Zhao Dai area. I have been ill for a year, the treatment has not alleviated the condition, I am worried that once I die, the princes are young, what should I do?

古文：其为我设图后之计。 
现代文：请为我设想身后之事。 
English: Please think about my future.

古文：浩曰： 陛下春秋富盛，圣业方融，德以除灾，幸就平愈。
现代文：崔浩说： 陛下春秋正富，帝业正昌盛，修德可以除灾，有希望逐步痊愈。
English: Cui Hao said: His majesty is prosperous, the imperial cause is flourishing, moral cultivation can eliminate disasters, and there is hope for gradual recovery.

古文：且天道悬远，或消或应。
现代文：况且显示征兆的天象高远，有的消退有的应验。
English: Moreover, the signs of the heavens are far and wide, some receding, some fulfilling.

古文：昔宋景见灾修德，荧惑退舍。
现代文：过去宋景见灾异而修德，火星向后退移。
English: In the past, Song Jing saw the calamity and built virtue, and Mars retreated.

古文：愿陛下遣诸忧虞，恬神保和，纳御嘉福，无以暗昧之说，致损圣思。
现代文：愿陛下排遣各种忧虑，使心神安宁并保持身体安适，享受幸福，不要因为愚昧的说教，致使损伤陛下的精神。
English: May His Majesty dispel all kinds of worries, calm his mind and keep his body fit, enjoy happiness, and not damage His Majesty's spirit due to foolish preaching.

古文：必不得已，请陈瞽言。
现代文：如果不能不说，敢请陈述不明事理的言论。
English: If you can't refrain from saying it, I dare you to explain your unreasonable remarks.

古文：自圣化龙兴，不崇储贰，是以永兴之始，社稷几危。
现代文：从本朝兴起，不重视立储君，因此永兴初年，国家危险。
English: Since the rise of this dynasty, no attention has been paid to the appointment of a regent, so the country has been in danger since the first year of Yongxing.

古文：今宜早建东宫，选公卿忠贤陛下素所委仗者使为师傅，左右信臣简在圣心者以充宾友，入总万机，出统戎政，监国抚军，六柄在手。
现代文：如今应当早立太子，从公卿大臣中选拔忠诚贤良素来为陛下所信赖的人担任师傅。存在陛下心中的身边诚实可信的大臣用作宾友，入朝总理万机，出外统领军政，代理国事从君出征。大权在手。
English: Now it is time to set up a crown prince early, select a loyal and virtuous person who has always been trusted by His Majesty from among the court nobles and ministers to serve as a master. There is an honest and trustworthy minister around His Majesty's heart to be used as a friend, enter the prime minister, lead the military and political affairs abroad, and act as an agent of state affairs to go to war. Power is in your hands.

古文：若此，则陛下可以优游无为，颐神养寿，进御医药。
现代文：如果这样，陛下就可以清静无为，保养精神，进用医药。
English: If this is the case, His Majesty can remain calm, maintain his spirits, and take medicine.

古文：万岁之后，国有成主，民有所归，则奸宄息望，旁无觊觎。
现代文：百年之后，国家有成年君主，百姓有所归属，就会使坏人断绝邪念，邪恶的人无所觊觎。
English: A hundred years later, when the country has an adult monarch and the people have a sense of belonging, the bad people will be cut off from evil thoughts, and the evil people will have nowhere to go.

古文：此乃万世之令典，塞祸之大备也。
现代文：这是万代的好制度，杜绝祸患的重要措施。
English: This is a good system for all generations and an important measure to eliminate the scourge.

古文：今长皇子焘，年渐一周，明睿温和，众情所系，时登储副，则天下幸甚。
现代文：如今长皇子托腿尽，年满十二，聪慧通达温良谦和，是众人情感所系，及时登太子之位，是天下的幸运。
English: Now that the eldest prince has reached his twelfth birthday, he is wise, gentle and humble. He is the object of everyone's affection, and it is the luck of the world that he ascended to the position of crown prince in time.

古文：立子以长，礼之大经。
现代文：立长子为太子，是礼仪的重要原则。
English: It is an important principle of etiquette to establish the eldest son as the crown prince.

古文：若须并待成人而择，倒错天伦，则生履霜坚冰之祸。自古以来，载籍所记，兴衰存亡，鲜不由此。 
现代文：如果必须等到他们都成人了再选择，颠倒长幼秩序，后果严重。从古以来，史籍所记载，兴衰存亡很少不由此的。 
English: If it is necessary to wait until they are all adults before choosing, reversing the order of the eldest and youngest, the consequences will be serious. Since ancient times, historical records have recorded that the rise and fall of existence is rarely due to this.

古文：太宗纳之。
现代文：太宗采纳了他的建议。
English: Emperor Taizong accepted his suggestion.

古文：于是使浩奉策告宗庙，命世祖为国副主，居正殿临朝。
现代文：于是派遣崔浩举册书祭告宗庙，任命世祖为国家的副主，留居正殿临朝听政。
English: Therefore, he sent Cui Hao to hold a book-signing ceremony to announce the ancestral temple, appointed Shizuo as the vice-president of the country, and stayed in the main hall to listen to politics.

古文：司徒长孙嵩，山阳公奚斤，北新公安同为左辅，坐东厢西面;浩与太尉穆观，散骑常侍丘堆为右弼，坐西厢东面。
现代文：司徒长孙嵩、山阳公奚斤、北新公安同为左辅，面朝西坐在束厢；崔浩与太尉穆观、散骑常侍丘堆为右弼，面朝束坐在西厢。
English: Sun Song, Sanyang Public Security Bureau, and Beixin Public Security Bureau were both left assistants, facing west and sitting in the coach compartment; Cui Hao and Lieutenant Mu Guan, strolling attendant Qiu He, were right assistants, facing west and sitting in the coach compartment.

古文：百僚总己以听焉。
现代文：百官各司其职听从政令。
English: All officials shall perform their duties in accordance with the government's orders.

古文：太宗避居西宫，时隐而窥之，听其决断，大悦。谓左右侍臣曰： 长孙嵩宿德旧臣，历事四世，功存社稷;奚斤辩捷智谋，名闻遐迩;安同晓解俗情，明练于事;穆观达于政要，识吾旨趣;崔浩博闻强识，精于天人之会;丘堆虽无大用，然在公专谨。
现代文：太宗避居西宫，时常暗中观察他们，听他们决断朝政，很高兴，对身边的侍臣说： 长孙嵩是年老有德的旧臣，依次事奉四朝，有保全国家的功劳；奚斤雄辩有智谋，远近闻名；安同理解世情，熟悉世事；穆观通达施政的要领，明白我的旨趣；崔浩博间强记，精通天人之间的关系；丘堆虽然没有大的才能，然而办理公事专心恭谨。
English: Taizong avoided the Western Palace, and often observed them in secret, listening to them decide on court politics. He was very happy, and said to the attendants around him: Chosun Song is an old and virtuous old minister, who served four dynasties in succession, and has the merit of preserving the country; Hao Jin is eloquent and witty, and is well-known far and wide; An Tong understands the world and is familiar with world affairs; Mu Guan is familiar with the essentials of governance and understands my intention; Cui Haobo is a strong mind, and is proficient in the relationship between heaven and man; Yudu, although he does not have great talent,

古文：以此六人辅相，吾与汝曹游行四境，伐叛柔服，可得志于天下矣。 
现代文：用这六人辅助，我与你们巡行四方边境，讨伐叛逆的人怀柔顺服的人，可以实现统一天下的志愿啊。 
English: With the help of these six people, I will patrol the borders of the four directions with you, and fight against the rebellious people and the submissive people, and can realize the will of unification.

古文：群臣时奏所疑，太宗曰： 此非我所知，当决之汝曹国主也。 
现代文：群臣不时陈奏疑难问题，太宗说： 这不是我所知道的，应当由你们的国主决断。 
English: The ministers from time to time raised difficult questions, and Taizong said, "This is not something I know, it should be decided by your sovereign."

古文：会闻刘裕死，太宗欲取洛阳、虎牢、滑台。
现代文：适逢听到刘裕死的消息，太宗打算攻取洛阳、虎牢、滑台。
English: Upon hearing the news of Liu Yu's death, Taizong planned to capture Luoyang, the Tiger's Lair, and the Sliding Platform.

古文：浩曰： 陛下不以刘裕欻起，纳其使贡，裕亦敬事陛下。
现代文：崔浩说： 皇上不计较刘裕的暴发，接纳他的使者和贡物，刘裕也恭敬地供奉皇上。
English: Cui Hao said: The emperor did not care about Liu Yu's outburst, accepted his messengers and tributes, and Liu Yu also respectfully served the emperor.

古文：不幸今死，乘丧伐之，虽得之不令。
现代文：不幸现在死了，乘人之丧征伐，即使成功也不美好。
English: Unfortunately, he is dead now, and even if he succeeds, it won't be pretty.

古文：《春秋》：晋士丐帅师侵齐，闻齐侯卒，乃还。
现代文：《春秋》：晋国士丐统领军队进犯齐国，听说齐侯去世，随即回师。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Jin statesmen led the army to invade Qi, heard that Qi Hou died, and then returned to the division.

古文：君子大其不伐丧，以为恩足以感孝子，义足以动诸侯。
现代文：君子称赞他不攻打丧君之国，认为恩惠足以使孝子感激，道义足以使诸侯感动。
English: The nobles praised him for not attacking the country that had lost its king, believing that the favor was enough to make the filial son grateful, and the morality was enough to move the princes.

古文：今国家亦未能一举而定江南，宜遣人吊祭，存其孤弱，恤其凶灾，布义风于天下，令德之事也。
现代文：当今国家还不能一举而平定长江以南，应该派人吊唁，慰问无依无靠的人，抚慰受难者的灾难，传播仁义，这是德行高尚的人所做的事。
English: Today's country cannot pacify the south of the Yangtze River in one fell swoop. It should send condolences, console the helpless, comfort the victims of the disaster, and spread benevolence and righteousness. This is what virtuous and noble people do.

古文：若此，则化被荆扬，南金象齿羽毛之珍，可不求而自至。
现代文：如此，就使教化遍布荆扬地区，南方珍贵的铜象牙羽毛，可以不求而自行到来。
English: In this way, the indoctrination is all over the Jingyang area, and the precious copper ivory feathers in the south can come by themselves without asking.

古文：裕新死，党与未离，兵临其境，必相率拒战，功不可必，不如缓之，待其恶稔。
现代文：刘裕刚死，党羽没有背离，派兵到达宋国边境，必定相继抵御抗击，我军不一定能成功，不如推迟行动，等待他们恶贯满盈。
English: Liu Yu has just died, the party has not deviated, and the troops sent to the border of the Song Dynasty will certainly resist the counterattack one after another. Our army may not succeed, it is better to postpone the action and wait for their evil to run rampant.

古文：如其强臣争权，变难必起，然后命将扬威，可不劳士卒，而收淮北之地。 
现代文：如果宋国的重臣争权夺利，必然引发混乱，然后派遣将帅扬我军威，可以不烦劳士兵，就取得淮水以北的土地。 
English: If the Song chieftains fight for power and profit, it will inevitably lead to chaos, and then send a handsome general to raise our military power, and can obtain the land north of Huai Shui without bothering the soldiers.

古文：太宗锐意南伐，诘浩曰： 刘裕因姚兴死而灭其国，裕死我伐之，何为不可？ 
现代文：太宗决心南伐，责问崔浩说： 刘裕趁姚兴死而灭掉他的国家，我趁刘裕死征伐宋国，为什么不可以? 
English: Taizong was determined to march south, and scolded Cui Hao: "Liu Yu took advantage of Yao Xing's death to destroy his country. I took advantage of Liu Yu's death to conquer Song, why can't I?

古文：浩固执曰： 兴死，二子交争，裕乃伐之。 
现代文：崔浩固执地说： 姚兴死，两个儿子互相争斗，刘裕才征伐他。 
English: Cui Hao said stubbornly: Yao Xing died, the two sons fought each other, Liu Yu was the first to conquer him.

古文：太宗大怒，不从浩言，遂遣奚斤南伐。
现代文：太宗十分恼怒，不接受崔造的意见，于是派遣罢丘南伐。
English: Taizong was very angry and did not accept Cui Zuo's opinion, so he dispatched troops to march south.

古文：议于监国之前曰： 先攻城也？
现代文：在监国面前商议说： 先攻打城池呢?
English: And they took counsel before the overseers of the land, saying, What shall we do, that we may smite the city first?

古文：先略地也？ 
现代文：还是先夺取地盘呢? 
English: Or should we seize the territory first?

古文：斤曰： 请先攻城。 
现代文：奚斤说： 请先攻打城池。 
English: He Jin said: Please attack the castle first.

古文：浩曰： 南人长于守城，苻氏攻襄阳，经年不拔。
现代文：崔浩说： 南方人擅长守城，苻氏攻打襄阳，一年都没能攻克。
English: Cui Hao said: Nanfang people are good at defending the city, and the Min clan attacked Xiangyang and failed to conquer it for a year.

古文：今以大国之力攻其小城，若不时克，挫损军势，敌得徐严而来。
现代文：现在以大国的兵力攻打它的小城，如果不能及时攻克，就会损伤军事力量，敌人得以从容整军而来。
English: Now it is attacking its small city with the strength of a big country. If it cannot conquer it in time, it will damage the military strength, and the enemy will be able to calmly reorganize the army.

古文：我怠彼锐，危道也。
现代文：我军疲惫敌军气势旺盛，是危险之路。
English: Our army is tired, the enemy's army is vigorous, it is a dangerous road.

古文：不如分军略地，至淮为限，列置守宰，收敛租谷。
现代文：不如分兵夺取地盘，到淮水为止，分别设置郡守县令，收取租谷。
English: It is not as good as a detachment of soldiers seizing the site, setting up county governors and county magistrates, and collecting rent until Huai Shui.

古文：滑台，虎牢反在军北，绝望南救，必沿河东走。
现代文：滑台、虎牢反而在我军北边，对南方的救援绝望，必定沿黄河向东逃窜。
English: On the contrary, the slide platform and the tiger's den were on the north side of our army. Desperate for rescue in the south, they must have fled eastward along the Yellow River.

古文：若或不然，即是囿中之物。 
现代文：如果不逃走，就是囊中之物。 
English: If you don't run, it's in the bag.

古文：公孙表请先图其城。
现代文：公孙表请求先谋取对方的城池。
English: Gongsun requested to capture the other side's castle first.

古文：斤等济河，先攻滑台，经时不拔，表请济师。
现代文：奚斤等渡黄河，先攻滑台，经久不克，上表请求援兵。
English: 斤等渡黄河,先攻滑台,经久不克,上表请求援兵.

古文：太宗怒，乃亲南巡。
现代文：太宗发怒，就亲自南征。
English: Taizong became angry and personally marched south.

古文：拜浩相州刺史，加左光禄大夫，随军为谋主。
现代文：任命崔浩为相州刺史，加授左光禄大夫，随军做主要的策划人。
English: Appointed Cui Hao as the chief historian of Xiangzhou, conferred the title of Doctor of the Left Guanglu, and became the main planner of the army.

古文：及车驾之还也，浩从太宗幸西河、太原。
现代文：到皇上回师，崔浩随从太宗到西河、太原。
English: When Emperor Gao died, Cui Hao followed Emperor Taizong to the West River and Taiyuan.

古文：登憩高陵之上，下临河流、傍览川域，慨然有感，遂与同僚论五等郡县之是非，考秦始皇、汉武帝之违失。
现代文：登上高山休息，俯视黄河流水，旁观流水所经的地域，慨然有所感，于是与同僚们议论五等分封和郡县制度的是非，论秦始皇、汉武帝的过失。
English: After resting on the mountain, looking down at the Yellow River and observing the area through which the water flowed, he was moved with emotion, so he discussed with his colleagues the merits and demerits of the five-class division and the county system, as well as the mistakes of the First Emperor of Qin and Emperor Wu of Han.

古文：好古识治，时伏其言。
现代文：爱好古代的事物认识治国的政策措施，当时的人信服他的主张。
English: His love for ancient things, his understanding of the policies and measures of governing the country, and the people of that time convinced him of his ideas.

古文：天师寇谦之每与浩言，闻其论古治乱之迹，常自夜达旦，竦意敛容，无有懈倦。
现代文：天师寇谦之常与崔浩交谈，听他谈论古人治乱的事迹，常常通宵达旦，心怀敬意仪容端庄，没有松懈倦怠。
English: Master Kuo Qian often talked with Cui Hao, listened to him talk about the deeds of the ancients to control chaos, and often stayed up all night, with a respectful demeanor and no fatigue.

古文：既而叹美之曰： 斯言也惠，皆可底行，亦当今之皋繇也。
现代文：接着赞美他说： 这人的言论仁厚，都可以如此施行，是当今的皋繇。
English: Then he praised him and said, "This man's words are gracious and can be put into practice in this way. He is today's."

古文：但世人贵远贱近，不能深察之耳。 
现代文：衹是世人重视远古的人而轻视近代的人，不能深切了解他罢了。 
English: It is just that the world attaches importance to the ancient man and despises the modern man, and cannot understand him deeply.

古文：因谓浩曰： 吾行道隐居，不营世务，忽受神中之诀，当兼修儒教，辅助泰平真君，继千载之绝统。
现代文：于是对崔浩说： 我修道隐居，不理人间的事务，忽然得到心神中的秘诀，应当兼习儒学，辅佐太平盛世的英明君主，继承中断了千年的系统。
English: So he said to Cui Hao: I live in seclusion, ignore human affairs, and suddenly get the secret in my heart and soul. I should also study Confucianism, assist the wise monarchs of the Taiping era, and inherit the system that has been interrupted for a thousand years.

古文：而学不稽古，临事暗昧。
现代文：但是没有考索古义的学问，遇事昏暗不明。
English: However, without the study of ancient wisdom, the circumstances are unclear.

古文：卿为吾撰列王者治典，并论其大要。 
现代文：你为我分条撰述古代帝王治国的制度，并分析其中的要旨。 
English: You wrote for me a detailed account of the ancient imperial system of governance, and analyzed the gist of it.

古文：浩乃著书二十余篇，上推太初，下尽秦汉变弊之迹，大旨先以复五等为本。
现代文：崔浩于是著书二十多篇，上溯远古，下迄秦汉变革衰败的事迹，主要的意思是先恢复五等分封制作为根本。
English: Cui Hao then wrote more than twenty books, tracing back to ancient times, down to the Qin and Han dynasties, the main meaning of which was to first restore the five-tiered feudal system as the fundamental.

古文：世祖即位，左右忌浩正直，共排毁之。
现代文：世祖即位，身边的人顾忌崔浩正直，共同诋毁排斥他。
English: When the founder ascended the throne, the people around him were wary of Cui Hao's honesty and jointly slandered and ostracized him.

古文：世祖虽知其能，不免群议，故出浩，以公归第。
现代文：世祖虽然知道他的才能，不能消除众人的议论，所以舍弃崔浩，使他以公爵的身份回家。
English: Although the patriarch knew of his talent, he was unable to dispel the rumors, so he gave up Cui Hao and sent him home as a duke.

古文：及有疑议，召而问焉。
现代文：及至有疑难不决的争论，召入咨询。
English: and to the extent that there are disputes that are difficult to resolve, they are called in for consultation.

古文：浩织妍洁白，如美妇人。
现代文：崔浩纤细美好洁白，像美丽的妇人。
English: Cui Hao is slender, beautiful and white, like a beautiful woman.

古文：而性敏达，长于谋计。
现代文：而生性机智通达，善于计议谋虑。
English: However, they are naturally witty and good at deliberation.

古文：常自比张良，谓已稽古过之。
现代文：常常白比张良，说自己考索古义胜过他。
English: He often compared himself unfavorably to Zhang Liang, saying that he was better than him at studying ancient texts.

古文：既得归第，因欲修服食养性之术，而寇谦之有《神中录图新经》，浩因师之。
现代文：既然得以回家，就想学习服用丹药和入静的方法，而寇谦之有《神中录图新经》，崔浩因而以他为师。
English: Since he was able to return home, he wanted to learn how to take herbal medicine and how to enter a state of tranquility, and Kou Qian had the "New Testament Recorded in the Divine Realm," so Cui Hao took him as his teacher.

古文：始光中，进爵东郡公，拜太常卿。
现代文：始光年间：晋爵东郡公，任太常卿。
English: In the first year of the Meiji Restoration: He was promoted to the peerage as the Lord of Higashi-gun, and was appointed to the position of Taijo-kyo.

古文：时议讨赫连昌，群臣皆以为难，唯浩曰： 往年以来，荧惑再守羽林，皆成钩巳，其占秦亡。
现代文：此时商议讨伐赫连昌，群臣都认为困难，衹有崔浩说： 往年以来，火星两次居于羽林星，环行的轨迹都成 己 字状的钩形，预示秦地国家灭亡。
English: At this time, they were discussing how to subdue He Lianchang, and the ministers all thought it would be difficult. One of them, Cui Hao, said, "In the past, Mars has twice resided in Hualin, and the orbits of the two planets formed a hook shape, foreshadowing the downfall of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：又今年五星并出东方，利以西伐。
现代文：又今年金木水火土五星同在东方出现，利于西伐。
English: This year, the Five Stars of Gold, Wood, Water, Fire and Earth also appeared in the East, which is conducive to the Westward Expedition.

古文：天应人和，时会并集，不可失也。 
现代文：天人相应，机遇都凑集，不可错过。 
English: According to nature and man, opportunities are all gathered together, not to be missed.

古文：世祖乃使奚斤等击蒲坂，而亲率轻骑袭其都城，大获而还。
现代文：世祖于是派遣奚斤等攻击蒲坂，亲率轻骑袭击他的都城，大量俘获而回师。
English: As a result, the founder of the dynasty sent his warriors to attack Pusaka, while his relatives attacked his capital on horseback, taking a large number of prisoners and returning to their division.

古文：及世祖复讨昌，次其城下，收众伪退。
现代文：到世祖再次讨伐赫连昌时，到达他的都城之下，集合队伍伪装退却。
English: When the founder of the world once again fought against Khelencang and reached his capital city, the assembled forces disguised themselves and retreated.

古文：昌鼓噪而前，舒阵为两翼。
现代文：赫连昌击鼓呐喊而进，阵势分成两翼。
English: He Lianchang marched in to the sound of drums and shouts, and the formation split into two wings.

古文：会有风雨从东南来，扬沙昏冥。
现代文：恰好有风雨从东南而来，尘土飞扬天昏地暗。
English: The wind and rain just happened to come from the southeast, and the sky was dark with flying dust.

古文：宦者赵倪进曰： 今风雨从贼后来，我向彼背，天不助人。
现代文：宦官赵倪进言说： 现在风雨从贼军背后来，我方迎风贼军背风，天不助我。
English: The eunuch Zhao Ni Jinyan said: Now the wind and rain are coming from the back of the thief army, we are facing the wind from the back of the thief army, and heaven will not help me.

古文：又将士饥渴，愿陛下摄骑避之，更待后日。 
现代文：而且将士饥渴，请陛下收兵，以后再作打算。 
English: Moreover, the soldiers are hungry and thirsty. I would like to ask Your Majesty to withdraw the troops and make plans later.

古文：浩叱之曰： 是何言欤！
现代文：崔浩大声斥责他说： 这是什么话!
English: Cui Hao loudly rebuked him, saying: "What kind of words are these!

古文：千里制胜，一日之中岂得变易？
现代文：不远千里前来战胜敌人，怎么能在一日之内改变?
English: Coming thousands of miles to defeat the enemy, how can it be changed in a day?

古文：贼前行不止，后已离绝，宜分军隐出，奄击不意。
现代文：贼军先头部队不停地行进，已经脱离后续部队，应当分派军队隐蔽行进，出其不意地突然进攻。
English: The vanguard of the bandit army has been marching incessantly and has been separated from the follow-up troops. The army should be dispatched to march covertly and make a surprise attack.

古文：风道在人，岂有常也！ 世祖曰： 善 。
现代文：运用风的方法在人，怎能一成不变! 世祖说： 不错。 
English: Using the wind method on people, how can it be immutable! The ancestor said: That's right.

古文：分骑奋击，昌军大溃。
现代文：分派骑兵奋力攻击，赫连昌溃不成军。
English: The cavalry was dispatched to attack vigorously, but Herenchang was defeated and could not form an army.

古文：初，太祖诏尚书郎邓渊著国记十余卷，编年次事，体例末成。
现代文：起初，太祖命令尚书郎邓渊着《国记》十多卷，编年体，体例不完备。
English: At first, Emperor Taizu ordered Shang Shulang Deng Yuan to write more than ten volumes of "National Records" as a chronicle, but the style was incomplete.

古文：逊于太宗，废而不述。
现代文：到太宗年间，停顿下来。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong, it came to a halt.

古文：神二年，诏集诸文人撰录国书，浩及弟览、高谠、邓颖、晃继、范亨、黄辅等共参著作，叙成《国书》三十卷。
现代文：神厅二年，诏令聚集众文人编写国史，崔浩及弟弟崔览、高谠、邓颖、晁继、范亨、黄辅等共同参与，成《国书》三十卷。
English: In the second year of the Divine Office, it was decreed to gather all the literati to compile the national history. Cui Hao and his brother Cui Zhan, Gao Yao, Deng Ying, Zou Ji, Fan Heng, Huang Fu and others participated together to make the "National History" thirty volumes.

古文：是年，议击蠕蠕，朝臣内外不欲行。保太后固止世祖，世祖皆不听，唯浩赞成策略。
现代文：这一年，商议攻击蠕蠕，内廷外朝的官员都不愿出征，保太后执意阻止世祖，世祖都不听从，衹有崔浩佐助并促成策略。
English: In that year, when the attack was being discussed, the officials of the Inner Court and the Outer Court did not want to go to war. The Empress Dowager was determined to stop Shizu, but Shizu did not listen. Choi Ho Sasuke was brought in to facilitate the strategy.

古文：尚书令刘洁、左仆射安原等乃使黄门侍郎仇齐推赫连昌太史张渊、徐辩说世祖曰： 今年己巳，三阴之岁，岁星袭月，太白在西方，不可举兵。
现代文：尚书令刘洁、左仆射玄厘等于是唆使黄门侍郎包蛮推荐的太史张渊、徐辩劝告世祖说： 今年是己巳年，属三阴之年，岁星掩月，太白星在西方，不可用兵。
English: Shang Shuling Liu Jie and his left-hand man Sha Xuan Li was tantamount to instigating Zhang Yuan and Xu Yan, the great historian recommended by the Yellow Gate's chamberlain Bao Man, to advise the ancestor, saying: This year is the year of the snake, the year of the three shadows, the year star covers the moon, the white star is in the west, and soldiers should not be used.

古文：北伐必败，虽克，不利于上。 
现代文：北伐必定失败，即使取胜，也不利于君主。 
English: The Northern Expedition is bound to fail, and even if it succeeds, it will not be good for the sovereign.

古文：又群臣共赞和渊等，云渊少时尝谏苻不可南征，坚不从而败。
现代文：群臣也赞同张渊等，说张渊年轻时曾经劝谏苻坚不可南征，苻坚不听从因而败亡。
English: The group of courtiers also agreed with Zhang Yuan and others, saying that when Zhang Yuan was young, he had advised Yu Jian not to go to the south, but Yu Jian did not listen and was defeated.

古文：今天时人事都不和协，何可举动！ 
现代文：当今天时人事不和，怎么能行动呢!
English: How can we act when today there is discord between people?

古文：世祖意不决，乃召浩，令与渊等辩之。
现代文：世祖拿不定主意，就召来崔浩并命令他与张渊等辩论。
English: Unable to make up his mind, the patriarch summoned Cui Hao and ordered him to debate with Zhang Yuan and others.

古文：浩难渊曰： 阳者，德也;阴者，刑也。
现代文：崔造反驳张遄说： 阳，意味着仁德；阴，意味着刑杀。
English: Cui Zou rebutted Zhang Ye and said: Yang means benevolence; Yin means execution.

古文：故日蚀修德，月蚀修刑。
现代文：所以日食就要完善德政，月食就要完善刑政。
English: Therefore, the eclipse of the sun is necessary to improve the German government, and the eclipse of the moon is necessary to improve the criminal government.

古文：夫王者之用刑，大则陈诸原野，小则肆之市朝。
现代文：帝王用刑，大刑就陈尸于原野，小刑就陈尸于朝市。
English: The emperor used punishment, the big punishment was to display the corpse in the field, and the small punishment was to display the corpse in the morning market.

古文：战伐者，用刑之大者也。以此言之，三阴用兵，盖得其类，修刑之义也。
现代文：征战，就是用大刑。照这样说来，三阴之年用兵，大约属于这一类，是完善刑政的意思。
English: To go to war is to use capital punishment. According to this, the use of soldiers in the Year of the Three Yin, which roughly belongs to this category, is the meaning of perfecting criminal policy.

古文：岁星袭月，年饥民流，应在他国，远期十二年。
现代文：岁星掩月，庄稼不收百姓流亡，应验在其他国家，最迟不出十二年。
English: The year is over, the crops are not harvested, the people are exiled, and the fulfillment is in other countries, at the latest twelve years later.

古文：太白行苍龙宿，于天文为东，不妨北伐。
现代文：太白星运行于仓龙宿，在天文上属于东方，不妨碍北伐。
English: Taibai Star runs in the Canglong Inn, belongs to the East in astronomy, and does not interfere with the Northern Expedition.

古文：渊等俗生，志意浅近，牵于小数，不达大体，难与远图。臣观天文，比年以来，月行掩昴，至今犹然。
现代文：张渊等平庸书生，浅薄卑俗，拘泥于阴阳卜筮，不识大体，不足以参与深远的谋划我观察天象，近年以来，月亮的运行遮盖了昴宿，至今还是这样。
English: Zhang Yuan and other mediocre students, shallow and vulgar, clinging to yin and yang speculation, ignorant of the general, not enough to participate in far-reaching planning I observe the stars, in recent years, the movement of the moon has covered the mansion, still like this.

古文：其占： 三年，天子大破旄头之国。 蠕蠕、高车，旄头之众也。
现代文：这预示： 三年之内，天子大破披头散发如牦牛的国家，蠕蠕、高车，就是披头散发如牦牛的人众。
English: This portends: Within three years, the Son of Heaven will break up the countries that are scattered like snails, and the creeping things and the chariots will be the people that are scattered like snails.

古文：夫圣明御时，能行非常之事。
现代文：圣明的君主统治天下，能干非同寻常的事业。
English: A saintly monarch reigns over the world, capable of extraordinary deeds.

古文：古人语曰： 非常之原，黎民惧焉，及其成功，天下晏然。 愿陛下勿疑也。 
现代文：古人的话说： 荒远陌生的原野，百姓感到恐惧，待到成功地获得，天下清平安乐，愿陛下不要犹豫。 
English: As the ancients said: "In a wild and unfamiliar field, the people will feel fear. If you wait until you succeed, the world will be peaceful and happy. Your Majesty should not hesitate."

古文：渊等惭而言曰： 蠕蠕，荒外无用之物，得其地不可耕而食，得其民不可臣而使，轻疾无常，难得而制，有何汲汲而苦劳士马也？ 
现代文：张渊等惭愧地说： 蠕蠕，八荒以外的无用之物，取得它的土地不能种，掠得它的民众不能臣服，往来疾速而且没有固定的居处，难以控制，有什么必要兴师动众呢? 
English: Zhang Yuan et al. said with shame: "Creep, creep, a useless thing outside the eight wastelands, the land it acquires cannot be cultivated, the people who plunder it cannot be subjugated, the traffic is rapid and there is no fixed place of residence, it is difficult to control, what is the need to arouse the masses?

古文：浩曰： 渊言天时，是其所职，若论形势，非彼所知。
现代文：崔浩说： 张渊谈论天时，是他职责以内的事，如果论说形势，就不是他所能见识的。
English: Cui Hao said: Zhang Yuan talking about the weather is a matter within his duties. If he talks about the situation, it is not something he can see.

古文：斯乃汉世旧说常谈，施之于今，不合事宜也。
现代文：这是漠代的老生常谈，用于当今，不合时宜。
English: This is an old truism of the desert era, which is out of step with the times.

古文：何以言之？
现代文：为什么这样说呢?
English: Why do you say that?

古文：夫蠕蠕者，旧是国家北边叛隶，今诛其元恶，收其善民，令复旧役，非无用也。
现代文：蠕蠕，本来是国家北边叛逃的奴隶，现在铲除它的首恶，收容它的良民，让他们再从事以前的劳役，不是无用。
English: It is not useless to rid the country of its chief evil, to take in its good people, and to let them resume their former labor service.

古文：漠北高凉，不生蚊蚋，水草美善，夏则北迁。
现代文：大漠以北地高天凉，蚊虫不生，水美草肥，宜于夏季生活。
English: From the desert to the north, the sky is high and cool, mosquitoes do not grow, water is beautiful and grass is fertile. It is suitable for summer life.

古文：田牧其地，非不可耕而食也。
现代文：在这片土地上耕种放牧，不是不能谋生。
English: It is not impossible to make a living from farming and grazing on this land.

古文：蠕蠕子弟来降，贵者尚公主，贱者将军、大夫，居满朝列，又高车号为名骑，非不可臣而畜也。
现代文：蠕蠕的子弟来归顺，尊贵的娶公主为妻，卑下的做将军、大夫，布满朝廷百官之列，而且高车号称名骑，不是不能臣服备用的。
English: The sons of creeps come to submit, the noble ones marry princesses, the lowly ones become generals and doctors, and the ranks of the hundred officials of the imperial court are full. Moreover, the chariot is known as a famous horse, and it is not a subordinate spare.

古文：夫以南人追之，则患其轻疾，于国兵则不然。
现代文：用南方人去追逐它，就会忧虑它的行动敏捷迅速，对于我国军队来说就不是这样。
English: To chase it with southerners is to fear its swiftness, which is not the case with our army.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：彼能远走，我亦能远逐，与之进退，非难制也。
现代文：它能远逃，我也能远追，随之进退，不难控制。
English: It can run far away, and I can chase it far away. It advances and retreats with it, and it is not difficult to control.

古文：且蠕蠕往数入国，民吏震惊。
现代文：况且蠕蠕以往频频进犯我国，官民震惊。
English: Moreover, the creep has frequently invaded our country in the past, shocking officials and the public.

古文：今夏不乘虚掩进，破灭其国，至秋复来，不得安卧。
现代文：今年夏季不乘虚进兵，灭掉该国，到秋季他再来，我们不能安眠。
English: This summer, he will not take advantage of the situation to enter the army and destroy the country, and he will come again in the autumn. We cannot sleep peacefully.

古文：自太宗之世，迄于今日，无岁不警，岂不汲汲乎哉！
现代文：从太宗朝到现在，没有哪年不使人震惊，怎能不急!
English: From the Taizong Dynasty to the present, there is no year that does not shock people, how can we not be in a hurry!

古文：世人皆谓渊、辩通解数术，明决成败。
现代文：一般人都说张渊、徐辩通晓术数，明于成败。
English: Ordinary people say that Zhang Yuan and Xu Dian are familiar with the number of skills, and are clear about success or failure.

古文：臣请试之，问其西国未灭之前有何亡徵。
现代文：我请教他们，问他们的国家未减之前有什么败亡的征兆。
English: I asked them what were the signs of their country's imminent demise.

古文：知而不言，是其不忠;若实不知，是其无术。 
现代文：知道不说，是不忠诚；如果不知道，是不学无术。 
English: To know and not to tell is disloyalty; not to know is ignorance.

古文：时赫连昌在座，渊等自以无先言，惭赧而不能对。
现代文：这时赫连昌也在座，张渊等因自己先前没有进言，惭愧得满脸通红而不能答话。
English: At this time, Herenchang was also present, Zhang Yuan and others could not answer because they had not spoken before, and they were ashamed to be red-faced.

古文：世祖大悦，谓公卿曰： 吾意决矣。
现代文：世祖很高兴，对公卿大臣说： 我的决心下定了。
English: The patriarch was delighted and said to the noble minister, "My decision is made.

古文：亡国之臣，不可与谋，信矣哉。 
现代文：不可与亡国的太师共谋大计，确实是这样啊! 
English: You must not conspire with the deceased Grand Master, that's true!

古文：而保太后犹难之，复令群君臣于保太后前评议。
现代文：但是保太后还是认为遣事困难。又命群臣到保太后面前评议。
English: However, the Empress Dowager Hōda still found it difficult to assign tasks, and ordered her retainers to discuss the matter in front of the Empress Dowager.

古文：世祖谓浩曰： 此等意犹不伏，卿善晓之令悟。 
现代文：世祖对崔浩说： 这人心裹还不服，你好好地晓谕使其醒悟。 
English: The ancestor said to Cui Hao, "This person is still not satisfied, so you should speak to him and make him wake up.

古文：既罢朝，或有尤浩者曰： 今吴贼南寇而舍之北伐。
现代文：退朝以后，有人责难崔浩说： 现在吴地的贼军侵犯我国南部却置之不顾去进行北伐。
English: After the withdrawal, someone reproached Cui Hao and said: Now the invading army from Wu has invaded the southern part of our country, but disregarded it to go on the Northern Expedition.

古文：行师千里，其谁不知？
现代文：行军千里，谁会不知道。
English: Marching thousands of miles, who would not know.

古文：若蠕蠕远遁，前无所获，后有南贼之患，危之道也。 
现代文：如果蠕蠕远逃，前去无所收获，却要忧虑后边的南方贼军，是危险之路。 
English: It is a dangerous road if one flees far away and has nothing to gain, but has to worry about the southern bandits behind.

古文：浩曰： 不然。
现代文：崔浩说： 不是这样。
English: Cui Hao said: That's different.

古文：今年不摧蠕蠕，则无以御南贼。
现代文：今年不摧毁蠕蠕，就无法抵御南方贼军。
English: If we don't destroy the Creep Creep this year, we won't be able to fend off the Southern Thieves.

古文：自国家并西国以来，南人恐惧，扬声动众以卫淮北。
现代文：自从国家吞并夏国以来，南方人恐惧，扬言调动人马捍卫淮水以北地区。
English: Since the country's annexation of Xia Guo, the southerners are afraid and threaten to mobilize people and horses to defend the area north of Huai Shui.

古文：彼北我南，彼劳我息，其势然矣。
现代文：到他北上时我已南还，他疲惫我安逸，是必然的形势。
English: By the time he went north, I had already returned to the south, and he was tired and I was at ease. It was an inevitable situation.

古文：比破蠕蠕，往还之间，故不见其至也。
现代文：等到打败蠕蠕，往返之间，一定看不见他来。
English: Wait until you beat the Creep, between rounds, you won't see him coming.

古文：何以言之？
现代文：为什么这样说呢?
English: Why do you say that?

古文：刘裕得关中，留其爱子，精兵数万，良将劲卒，犹不能固守，举军尽没。
现代文：刘裕取得关中，留下他的爱子，数万精兵，良将精兵，还是不能守住，全军覆没。
English: Liu Yu took Guanzhong, leaving behind his beloved son, tens of thousands of elite soldiers, good generals and elite soldiers, still unable to hold on, the whole army was wiped out.

古文：号哭之声，至今未已。
现代文：痛哭的声音，至今不绝。
English: The sound of wailing continues to this day.

古文：如何正当国家休明之世，士马强盛之时，而欲以驹犊齿虎口也？
现代文：怎么会在我国家政治安定的时代，兵马强壮的时刻，却想用马崽抵挡虎口呢?
English: How can it be that in an era of political stability in our country, when our soldiers and horses are strong, we want to use horse manure to fend off tigers?

古文：设令国家与之河南，彼必不能守之。
现代文：假使国家把黄河以南地区给他，他一定也守不住。
English: If the state were to give him the area south of the Yellow River, he would not be able to keep it.

古文：自量不能守，是以必不来。
现代文：自知不能守住，一定不来。
English: I know I can't hold on, so I won't come.

古文：若或有众，备边之军耳。
现代文：如果有军队，不过是应付边防的军队罢了。
English: If there is an army, it is only an army to deal with the border guards.

古文：夫见瓶水之冻，知天下之寒;尝肉一脔，识镬中之味。
现代文：看到瓶裹的水结冰，就知道普天下的寒冷；尝,块肉，就知道大锅中的味道。
English: To see water frozen in a bottle is to know the coldness of the whole world; to taste a piece of meat is to know the taste in a cauldron.

古文：物有其类，可推而得也。
现代文：事物之间有类似的地方，可以推求而得到答案。
English: There are similarities between things that can be inferred and answered.

古文：且蠕蠕恃其绝远，谓国家力不能至，自宽来久，故夏则散众放畜，秋肥乃聚，背寒向温，南来寇抄。
现代文：况且蠕蠕依仗它地处极其辽远，以为国家的力量达不到，自我宽慰由来已久，所以夏季就分散部众放牧牲畜，秋季马肥又聚集，背朝寒冷面向温暖，南下抢掠。
English: Moreover, because it is located in an extremely remote area, it is believed that the power of the country cannot reach it, and self-relief has a long history. Therefore, in the summer, the people are scattered to graze livestock, and in the autumn, horse manure is gathered again. They turn their backs on the cold and face the warmth, and go to the south to loot.

古文：今出其虑表，攻其不备。
现代文：现在出其不意，攻其不备。
English: Now it's surprise, surprise.

古文：大军卒至，必惊骇星分，望尘奔走。
现代文：大军突然出现，必定惊骇星散，望尘而逃。
English: A large army suddenly appeared, must have been terrified and fled.

古文：牡马护群，牝马恋驹，驱驰难制，不得水草，未过数日则聚而困敝，可一举而灭。
现代文：雄马护群，雌马恋子，仓惶奔驰而难以控制，又得不到水草，过不了几天就会困顿疲惫地聚集在一起，可一举而歼灭。
English: The male horse guards the herd, the female horse loves the foal, they gallop in a panic and are difficult to control, and they can't get water and grass. In a few days, they will gather together exhausted and exhausted, but they can be annihilated at one stroke.

古文：暂劳永逸，长久之利，时不可失也。
现代文：一劳永逸，长远受益，机不可失。
English: Once and for all, long-term benefit, the opportunity must not be lost.

古文：唯患上无此意，今圣虑已决，发旷世之谋，如何止之？陋矣哉，公卿也！ 
现代文：衹担心皇上没有这种打算，现在皇上决心已下，拟定旷世谋略，为什么要阻止呢?目光短浅啊，公卿们! 
English: worried that the emperor had no such intention, now the emperor has made up his mind to draw up a far-reaching strategy, why stop it? Short-sighted, my lords!

古文：诸军遂行，天师谓浩曰： 是行也，如之何，果可克乎？ 
现代文：部队于是进发。丢魉对崔造说： 这次行动，怎么样，果真能攻克吗? 
English: The troops then marched in. Duyun said to Cui Zuo, "What about this operation, can it really be defeated?"

古文：浩对曰： 天时形势，必克无疑。
现代文：崔造回答说： 看天时和力量，必然攻克无疑。
English: Cui Zong replied: According to the time and strength, there is no doubt that it will be conquered.

古文：但恐诸将琐琐，前后顾虑，不能乘胜深入，使不全举耳。 
现代文：衹担心众将领平庸无识，瞻前顾后，不能乘胜深入，不能全胜。 
English: However, I am afraid that the generals have too many concerns, looking ahead and behind, and cannot take advantage of the victory, so that they cannot achieve complete victory at one stroke.

古文：及军入其境，蠕蠕先不设备，民畜布野，惊怖四奔，莫相收摄。
现代文：等军队进入蠕蠕境内，蠕蠕事先没有布置防御，民畜遍野，惊恐地四处奔逃，不能相聚相助。
English: When the army entered the territory of Cm Cm, Cm Cm did not set up defenses in advance, and the people and animals were all over the field, running around in fear, unable to gather to help each other.

古文：于是分军搜讨，东西五千里，南北三千里，凡所俘虏及获畜产车庐，弥漫山泽，盖数百万。
现代文：于是分兵搜索讨伐，东西五千里，南北三千里，总计所有俘虏及缴获的牲畜车辆庐帐，弥漫山野，恐怕有数百万。
English: As a result, the detachment searched for the crusade, covering five thousand miles from east to west and three thousand miles from north to south, totaling all the captives and captured livestock vehicles, covering the mountains and fields, I am afraid there are millions.

古文：高车杀蠕蠕种类，归降者三十余万落。
现代文：高车击杀蠕蠕族人，归降的有三十多万家。
English: The high-wheeled vehicle killed the Cree people, and more than three hundred thousand families surrendered.

古文：虏遂散乱矣。
现代文：蠕蠕人大乱。
English: There was a big riot.

古文：世祖沿弱水西行，至涿邪山，诸大将果疑深入有伏兵，劝世祖停止不追。
现代文：世祖沿弱水西行，到达涿邪山，诸大将果然猜度深入会有伏兵，劝世祖停下来不要追击。
English: Shizuo traveled west along the weak water and arrived at Shanzha Mountain. The generals correctly guessed that there would be an ambush, and advised Shizuo to stop and not pursue.

古文：天师以浩曩日之言，固劝世祖穷讨，不听。
现代文：天师用崔浩先前的话，坚持劝世祖全力讨伐，未被采纳。
English: Tianshi used Cui Hao's previous words to insist on persuading Shizu to fight with all his strength, but it was not accepted.

古文：后有降人，言蠕蠕大檀先被疾，不知所为，乃焚烧穹庐，科车自载，将数百人入山南走。
现代文：后来有归降的人，说蠕蠕的大檀先已生病，不知所措。于是焚烧庐帐，自乘无盖小车，率领敷百人入山向南逃跑。
English: Later, some returnees said that the creepy Dandan had fallen ill and was at a loss. So he burned the money box, took a covered wagon and led hundreds of people into the mountains to escape to the south.

古文：民畜窘聚，方六十里中，无人领统。
现代文：窘迫的人畜相聚，方圆六十里中，无人统领。
English: Distressed people and animals gathered together, and in a sixty-mile radius, no one was in charge.

古文：相去百八十里，追军不至，乃徐徐西遁，唯此得免。
现代文：相距一百八十里，追兵不到，才慢慢向西逃匿，祇有这部分人得以逃脱。
English: With a distance of 180 miles between them and no pursuers in sight, they slowly fled westward. Only this part of the group was able to escape.

古文：后闻凉州贾胡言，若复前行二日，则尽灭之矣。
现代文：后来听凉州经商的胡人说，如果再向前行进两天，就能全部消灭蠕蠕。
English: Later, Liangzhou businessman Hu said that if you go forward two days, you can completely eliminate creepy crawlies.

古文：世祖深恨之。
现代文：世祖很懊悔这事。
English: The ancestor regretted it very much.

古文：大军既还，南贼竟不能动，如浩所量。
现代文：大军回师以后，南方的贼军竟然没有行动，正如崔浩估计的那样。
English: After the large army returned to the division, the southern thief army actually did not act, as Cui Hao estimated.

古文：浩明识天文，好观星变。
现代文：崔浩对天象有见识，好观察星象变化。
English: Cui Hao has insight into celestial phenomena and is good at observing changes in the stars.

古文：常置金银铜铤于酢器中，令青，夜有所见即以铤画纸作字以记其异。
现代文：常把金银铜条放在盛酒的器皿中，使它变黑，夜间有所发现就用它在纸上绘图写字记录星象的异常。
English: Often, gold, silver, and copper bars were placed in vessels containing wine to darken them, and when discovered at night, they were used to draw and write on paper to record the anomalies of the stars.

古文：世祖每幸浩第，多问以异事。
现代文：世塑每次到鲎造家，多拿难以理解的事相问。
English: Every time the company visits a foundry, they often ask questions about things that are difficult to understand.

古文：或仓卒不及束带，奉进疏食，不暇精美。
现代文：有时时间仓猝来不及整饰衣服，进献的饭菜，无暇顾及精美。
English: Sometimes the rush of time is too late to dress up clothes, present meals, and have no time to take care of beauty.

古文：世祖为举匕箸，或立尝而旋。
现代文：世祖为他而拿起羹匙和筷子，有时站着尝尝即回。
English: The ancestor picks up a spoon and chopsticks for him, sometimes standing up to try them out.

古文：其见宠爱如此。
现代文：他受到这样的宠爱。
English: He's never been so loved.

古文：于是引浩出入卧内，加侍中、特进、抚军大将军、左光禄大夫，赏谋谟之功。
现代文：于是招致崔浩出入卧室，加授侍中、特进、抚军大将军、左光禄大夫，奖赏谋划的功劳。
English: As a result, Cui Hao was invited to enter and leave the bedroom, and was additionally awarded the titles of chamberlain, special envoy, general of the army, and doctor of the Left Guanglu, as a reward for his planning.

古文：世祖从容谓浩曰： 卿才智渊博，事朕祖考，忠著三世，朕故延卿自近。
现代文：世祖从容地对崔浩说： 卿才智渊博，侍奉我的父祖之辈，忠诚着名于三代，我特意招揽你自求亲近。
English: The ancestor calmly said to Cui Hao, "Your Excellency is very talented and wise, you have served my ancestors for generations, and you have been famous for your loyalty for three generations. I specially invite you to get close to me.

古文：其思尽规谏，匡予弼予，勿有隐怀。
现代文：要思量尽力规劝，辅助我，不要隐藏真情。
English: Think about it, try your best to persuade me, help me, and don't hide your true feelings.

古文：朕虽当时迁怒，若或不用，久久可不深思卿言也。 
现代文：我虽然当时迁怒，或许不采用，久而久之能不深思你的话吗。 
English: Although I was angry at the time, I may not use it, but can I not think about your words for a long time?

古文：因令歌工历颂群臣，事在《长孙道生传》。
现代文：接着命令歌工一个一个地赞颂群臣，事在《长孙道生传》。
English: He then ordered the singers to sing the praises of the ministers one by one, which is recorded in the "Legend of the Eldest Grandson."

古文：又召新降高车渠帅数百人，赐酒食于前。
现代文：又召见新近归降的高车部落酋长数百人，在面前赐予酒食。
English: He also summoned hundreds of recently surrendered Taka tribe chiefs and gave them food and drink in front of them.

古文：世祖指浩以示之，曰： 汝曹视此人，尪纤懦弱，手不能弯弓持矛，其胸中所怀，乃逾于甲兵。
现代文：世祖指崔浩给他们看，说： 你们看这个人，瘦小柔弱，手不能弯弓持矛，他胸中所藏的，却胜过甲兵。
English: The patriarch pointed out Cui Hao to them and said, "Look at this man, he is small and frail, his hands cannot bend a bow and carry a spear, but what he hides in his chest is stronger than an armored soldier."

古文：朕始时虽有征讨之意，而虑不自决，前后克捷，皆此人导吾至此也。 
现代文：我起初虽然有征讨的打算，但是自己下不了决心，先后取胜都是这个人开导我使事情达到这一步的。 
English: At first, although I had the intention of collecting, I couldn't make up my mind. It was this person who guided me to win successively to make things reach this stage.

古文：乃敕诸尚书曰： 凡军国大计，卿等所不能决，皆先谘浩，然后施行。 
现代文：于是敕令各部尚书说： 凡统军治国的重要谋略，你们所不能决断的，都先咨询崔浩，然后施行。 
English: Therefore, the imperial edict to all ministries said in writing: All the important strategies of the unified army to govern the country, which you cannot decide, should first consult Cui Hao, and then implement.

古文：俄而南籓诸将表刘义隆大严，欲犯河南。
现代文：不久南部各镇将上报说刘义隆大力整军，想要侵犯黄河以南地区。
English: Soon all the towns in the south will report that Liu Yilong is vigorously reorganizing the army and wants to invade the areas south of the Yellow River.

古文：请兵三万，先其未发逆击之，因诛河北流民在界上者绝其乡导，足以挫其锐气，使不敢深入。
现代文：请发兵三万，趁他未行动先攻击他，因而杀掉在边界上的黄河以北地区的流民，断绝他的向导，足以挫伤他的锐气，使他不敢深入。
English: Please send thirty thousand troops to attack him before he makes a move, so as to kill the refugees in the area north of the Yellow River on the border and cut off his guide, which is enough to frustrate his spirit and make him afraid to go deeper.

古文：诏公卿议之，咸言宜许。
现代文：诏令公卿大臣商议这事，都说应该同意。
English: The imperial edict ordered the court nobles and ministers to discuss the matter, and they all said that they should agree.

古文：浩曰： 此不可从也。
现代文：崔浩说： 这事不可听从。
English: Cui Hao said, "This matter cannot be obeyed."

古文：往年国家大破蠕蠕，马力有余，南贼震惧，常恐轻兵奄至，卧不安席，故先声动众，以备不虞，非敢先发。
现代文：往年国家大败蠕蠕，马力有余，南方贼军震惊恐怖，常常怕快速部队突然来到，卧不安席，所以先扬言调动人马，以防意外，不敢首先发难。
English: In previous years, the country suffered a crushing defeat, the horsepower was more than enough, and the southern bandits were shocked and terrified. They were often afraid that the rapid troops would suddenly come, and they did not want to lie down, so they threatened to mobilize men and horses first to prevent accidents, and they did not dare to face difficulties first.

古文：又南土下湿，夏月蒸暑，水潦方多，草木深邃，疾疫必起，非行师之时。
现代文：再者南方地势低下潮湿，夏季闷热，雨水正多，草木深邃，流行性传染病必定发生，不是用兵的时节。
English: In addition, the southern terrain is low and humid, the summer is sultry, there is a lot of rain, the vegetation is deep, and epidemic infectious diseases are bound to occur. It is not the time to use soldiers.

古文：且彼先严有备，必坚城固守。
现代文：况且对方有备，必定固城坚守。
English: Moreover, if the other side is prepared, it is bound to hold fast to the city.

古文：屯军攻之，则粮食不给;分兵肆讨，则无以应敌。
现代文：集中兵马攻城，粮食不能供给；分兵袭击，又无法对付敌军。
English: If soldiers and horses are concentrated to attack a city, food cannot be supplied; if detachments attack, the enemy cannot be dealt with.

古文：未见其利。
现代文：看不到发兵的好处。
English: They don't see the benefits of sending troops.

古文：就使能来，待其劳倦，秋凉马肥，因敌取食，徐往击之，万全之计，胜必可克。
现代文：纵然能来，待对方疲惫，秋季凉爽战马肥壮，乘敌军取办粮食，从容地去攻击他，是万全之计，定能取胜。
English: Even if you can come, wait for the other side to be tired, the autumn is cool and the war horse is fat, take advantage of the enemy army to obtain food, and calmly attack him, it is a perfect plan and will surely win.

古文：在朝群臣及西北守将，从陛下征讨，西灭赫连，北破蠕蠕，多获美女珍宝，马畜成群。
现代文：朝廷群臣和西部北部边境的守将，跟从陛下征讨，西灭赫连氏，北破蠕蠕，获得许多美女珍宝，马匹杂畜成群。
English: The courtiers of the imperial court and the guards of the western and northern borders followed His Majesty to collect, the west to destroy the Khelian clan, the north to break the Khelian clan, to obtain many beautiful women and treasures, and horses and mongrel herds.

古文：南镇诸将闻而生羡，亦欲南抄，以取资财。
现代文：南部各镇将领听说后产生羡慕之心，也想南去掠夺，以取得钱财物资。
English: When the generals of the southern towns heard about this, they were envious and wanted to go south to plunder in order to obtain money and materials.

古文：是以披毛求瑕，妄张贼势，冀得肆心。
现代文：所以吹毛求疵，随意夸大敌情，以图得逞。
English: Therefore, they nitpick and exaggerate the hostile situation at will in order to succeed.

古文：既不获听，故数称贼动，以恐朝廷。
现代文：既然没有获得应允，所以多次宣称贼军调动，以使朝廷恐怖。
English: Since he received no response, he repeatedly announced the mobilization of the Kleptocratic Army in order to terrorize the imperial court.

古文：背公存私，为国生事，非忠臣也。 
现代文：损公肥私，给国家惹是生非，不是忠臣。 
English: It is not a loyal vassal who causes trouble for the country, but one who harms the public and enriches himself.

古文：世祖从浩议。
现代文：世祖采纳了崔浩的意见。
English: The patriarch accepted Choi Ho's suggestion.

古文：南镇诸将复表贼至，而自陈兵少，简幽州以南戍兵佐守，就漳水造船，严以为备。
现代文：南部各镇将领又上表称贼军已到，而且自言兵少，请求选派幽州以南的戍卫兵协助防守，在漳水造船，严加防备。
English: The generals of the towns in the south also announced on the table that the thief army had arrived, and that they had fewer soldiers, and requested that the guards south of Yuzhou should be sent to assist in defense, and that the ships should be built in Surabaya, and strict precautions should be taken.

古文：公卿议者佥然，欲遣骑五千，并假署司马楚之、鲁轨、韩延之等，令诱引边民。
现代文：参与商议的公卿大臣都认为可行，打算派遣骑兵五千，并且暂时授予司马楚之、昼孰、韩延之等官职，命令他们引诱边民。
English: The court nobles and ministers who participated in the deliberation all thought it was feasible and planned to send five thousand cavalry, and temporarily grant official positions to Sima Chu Zhi, Dayan Zhi, Han Yan and others, ordering them to lure the borderers.

古文：浩曰： 非上策也。
现代文：崔造说： 不是上策。
English: Cui Zou said, "It's not the best strategy."

古文：彼闻幽州已南精兵悉发，大造舟船，轻骑在后，欲存立司马，诛除刘族，必举国骇扰，惧于灭亡，当悉发精锐，来备北境。
现代文：对方听说幽蛆以南的精兵全部出动，大造船只，轻骑在后，打算保全司马压，消灭塑区皇族，必然举国惊慌，惧怕亡国，必定出动全部精锐部队，来防御北部边境。
English: The other side heard that all the elite soldiers south of Yuxuan had been dispatched, building large ships and lightly riding behind, intending to preserve Sima pressure and eliminate the royal family in the plastic area. The whole country was bound to panic, fearing the death of the country, and all the elite troops must be dispatched to defend the northern border.

古文：后审知官军有声无实，恃其先聚，必喜而前行，径来至河，肆其侵暴，则我守将无以御之。
现代文：后来确知朝廷的军队有声无实，依仗他行动在先，必定欣然前进，直达黄河，大肆杀掠，那么我方守将无法抵御。
English: Later, we knew for sure that the imperial army was not true, relying on him to act first, we would gladly advance, straight to the Yellow River, killing and plundering, then our defense would be unable to resist.

古文：若彼有见机之人，善设权谲，乘间深入，虞我国虚，生变不难，非制敌之良计。
现代文：如果对方有见机行事的人，善用诡诈的权谋，乘隙深入，预料我国空虚，发生变乱不难，所以不是对付敌人的良策。
English: If the other side has people who act opportunistically, make good use of deceitful power strategies, and take advantage of gaps, it is not difficult to anticipate the emptiness of our country and the occurrence of chaos, so it is not a good strategy to deal with the enemy.

古文：今公卿欲以威力攘贼，乃所以招令速至也。
现代文：现在公卿大臣想用威力驱逐贼军，却成了招致他迅速到来的原因。
English: Now the Minister of Justice wants to use force to expel the Kleptocrats, but he has become the reason for his speedy arrival.

古文：夫张虚声而召实害，此之谓矣。
现代文：扬虚名而招实害，说的就是这种情况。
English: This is the case of those who make a false name but cause real harm.

古文：不可不思，后悔无及。
现代文：不能不考虑，后悔是来不及的。
English: You can't help but think about it. It's too late to regret.

古文：我使在彼，期四月前还。
现代文：我国的使者在那里，预定四月前返回。
English: Our envoy is there and is scheduled to return before April.

古文：可待使至，审而后发，犹末晚也。
现代文：可等使者到，详究而后行动，仍然不晚。
English: However, it is still not too late to wait for the envoy to arrive, investigate in detail and then act.

古文：且楚之之徒，是彼所忌，将夺其国，彼安得端坐视之。
现代文：况且楚之之流，是他所忌恨的，打算夺取他的国家，他怎能等闲视之。
English: Besides, how could he stand idly by when the Chu Clan, whom he detested, were planning to take over his country?

古文：故楚之往则彼来，止则彼息，其势然也。
现代文：所以楚之去他就来，楚之不动他也息兵，这是必然之势。
English: Therefore, if Chu goes, he will come, and if Chu does not move, he will also retreat, which is an inevitable trend.

古文：且楚之等琐才，能招合轻薄无赖，而不能成就大功。
现代文：何况楚之等才能平庸，能纠集轻薄无赖之人，而不能成就大功。
English: What's more, Chu's talent is mediocre, and he can only gather light-skinned scoundrels, but cannot achieve great feats.

古文：为国生事，使兵连祸结，必此之群矣。
现代文：给国家惹是生非，使兵连祸结，必定是遣一群人。
English: To stir up trouble in a country is to create strife, and to send soldiers to cause trouble is to send a group of people.

古文：臣尝闻鲁轨说姚兴求入荆州，至则散败，乃免蛮贼掠买办奴，使祸及姚泓，已然之效。 
现代文：我曾听说鲁轨劝说姚兴谋求入荆州，到了却溃败，竟不免被南方贼人劫掠贩卖为奴，致使祸及姚泓，已有明证。 
English: I once heard that Lu Lu persuaded Yao Xing to seek entry into Jingzhou, but when he arrived, he was defeated, and he was inevitably plundered and sold into slavery by southern thieves, bringing disaster to Yao Xing, which has been clearly documented.

古文：浩复陈天时不利于彼，曰： 今兹害气在扬州，不宜先举兵，一也;午岁自刑，先发者伤，二也;日蚀灭光，昼昏星见，飞鸟坠落，宿值斗牛，忧在危亡，三也;荧惑伏匿于翼轸，戒乱及丧，四也;太白未出，进兵者败，五也。
现代文：崔浩又陈述天时不利于对方，说： 今年邪气在扬州，不宜先发兵，是其一；逢午之年自残肢体，先行动者受伤害，是其二；日食无光，白昼昏暗群星显现，飞鸟坠落，遇到斗牛二宿，有危亡之忧，是其三；火星隐匿于翼轸二宿，警戒祸乱及丧亡，是其四；太白星不出，进兵者失败，是其五。
English: Cui Hao also stated that the weather was unfavorable to the other side, saying: This year, the evil spirit is in Yangzhou, and it is not appropriate to send troops first, which is the first; in the year of the afternoon, the limbs are self-damaged, and the first actor is injured, which is the second; the solar eclipse is not bright, the dim stars appear in the daytime, the birds fall, the bullfight is in the second quarter, and there is a fear of death, which is the third; the Mars is hiding in the second quarter of the wing, warning of disaster and death, which is the fourth; the white star does not appear, and the

古文：夫兴国之君，先修人事，次尽地利，后观天时，故万举而万全，国安而身盛。
现代文：振兴国家的君主，先治理人事，次尽地利，后观察天时，所以每次行动都万无一失，国家安宁而自身尊贵。
English: To revitalize the country, the monarch first governs personnel, then the country, and then observes the time, so every action is foolproof, the country is peaceful, and he is noble.

古文：今义隆新国，是人事未周也;灾变屡见，是天时不协也;舟行水涸，是地利不尽也。
现代文：现在刘义隆更新国家，是人事没有周全；自然灾害屡次发生，是天时不和协；舟船行驶而水道干涸，是地利不全。
English: Now that Liu Yilong is renovating the country, the personnel is not complete; natural disasters occur repeatedly, it is not in harmony with the weather; boats travel and waterways dry up, it is incomplete.

古文：三事无一成，自守犹或不安，何得先发而攻人哉？
现代文：三事无一事齐备，自守还有所不安，怎么能先发兵去攻击他人呢?
English: The three things are not all ready, self-defense is still a little uneasy, how can you send troops to attack others first?

古文：彼必听我虚声而严，我亦承彼严而动，两推其咎，皆自以为应敌。
现代文：他必定听到我的虚声而整军，我又因他整军而行动，双方推诿过失，都自以为在应敌。
English: He must have heard my bluff and rallied his troops, and I must have acted because he rallied his troops. Both sides blamed the other side and thought they were responding to the enemy.

古文：兵法当分灾迎受害气，未可举动也。 
现代文：兵法认为应当分引灾情以让敌方迎受害气，不宜主动出击。 
English: The law of war holds that it is necessary to bring about a disastrous situation in order to make the enemy suffer, and it is not appropriate to take the initiative to attack.

古文：世祖不能违众，乃从公卿议。
现代文：世祖不能违背多数人，于是依从了公卿大臣的意见。
English: The patriarch could not go against the majority, so he followed the opinion of the nobles and ministers.

古文：浩复固争，不从。
现代文：崔浩再次执意规劝，未被采纳。
English: Cui Hao once again insisted on persuasion, but it was not accepted.

古文：遂遣阳平王杜超镇鄴，琅邪王司马楚之等屯颍川。
现代文：于是派遣阳平王杜超镇守邺城，琅邪王司马楚之等屯驻颖川。
English: As a result, Yangping King Du Chaozhen was dispatched to guard Lucheng, and Lucheng Evil King Sima Chu and others were stationed in Yingchuan.

古文：于是贼来遂疾，到彦之自清水入河，溯流西行，分兵列守南岸，西至潼关。
现代文：于是贼军就来势迅疾，到彦之由清水入黄河，逆流西进，分派兵马布列于南岸戍守，西达潼关。
English: As a result, the bandit army rapidly gained momentum. They reached Hikone from Shimizu and entered the Yellow River, heading west against the current. They dispatched soldiers and horses to defend the south bank and the western gate.

古文：世祖闻赫连定与刘义隆悬分河北，乃治兵，欲先讨赫连。
现代文：世祖听说游连室与刘盏建遥相呼应瓜分童回以北地区，于是训练军队，打算先讨伐赫连。
English: The ancestor heard that Yu Lianshu and Liu Zhan Jianyuan agreed to divide the children back to the northern region, so he trained the army and planned to fight Heron first.

古文：群臣曰： 义隆犹在河中，舍之西行，前寇未可必克，而义隆乘虚，则失东州矣。 
现代文：群臣说： 义隆还在黄河中游，置之不顾而西行，前面的敌人不一定能攻克，而义隆乘虚而入，就会失去束部诸州。 
English: The courtiers said: Yilong is still in the middle of the Yellow River, ignore it and go west, the enemy in front may not be able to conquer, and if Yilong takes advantage of the opportunity, it will lose the Sokube states.

古文：世祖疑焉，问计于浩。
现代文：世祖犹豫，向崔浩咨询办法。
English: The patriarch hesitated and consulted Cui Hao.

古文：浩曰： 义隆与赫连定同恶相招，连结冯跋，牵引蠕蠕，规肆逆心，虚相唱和。
现代文：崔浩说： 义隆与赫连定共同作恶相互串通，勾结娥，拉拢竖鳄，逞叛逆之心，表面上相互应和。
English: Cui Hao said: Yilong and He Lianding committed evil together, colluded with each other, pulled in alligators, had a rebellious heart, and appeared to be in harmony with each other.

古文：义隆望定进，定待义隆前，皆莫敢先入。
现代文：指进兵，等待刘羞隆上前，谁都不敢先进入。
English: Refers to marching into the army, waiting for Liu Shilong to come forward, no one dares to enter first.

古文：以臣观之，有似连鸡，不俱得飞，无能为害也。
现代文：在我看来，有如套在一起的鸡，不能一起飞动，不能为害。
English: In my opinion, they are like chickens in a coop. They can't fly together, and they can't do any harm.

古文：臣始谓义隆军来当屯住河中，两道北上，东道向冀州，西道冲鄴。
现代文：我起初认为义隆兵马前来将屯驻黄河中游，分两路北上，东路奔向冀州，西路进攻邺城。
English: At first, I thought that when the Yilong soldiers and horses came, they would be stationed in the middle reaches of the Yellow River. They would go north in two directions, rushing to Jizhou in the east and attacking Shicheng in the west.

古文：如此，则陛下当自致讨，不得徐行。
现代文：这样，陛下就应当亲自加以讨伐，不能迟延行动。
English: Therefore, His Majesty should personally lead the crusade and should not delay action.

古文：今则不然，东西列兵，径二千里，一处不过数千，形分势弱。
现代文：现在却不然，从东到西布列兵马，长达二千里，一个据点不过数千人，兵力分散气势衰弱。
English: Now, however, this is not the case. From the east to the west of Brest, there are soldiers and horses stretching for two thousand miles. One stronghold has only a few thousand people, and the dispersion of troops weakens the momentum.

古文：以此观之，儜兒情见，止望固河自守，免死为幸，无北渡意也。
现代文：由此看来，怯弱小子的内心暴露，衹是想巩固黄河防线以自守，免于灭亡就是幸运，没有北渡的打算。
English: From this point of view, the cowardly boy's heart is exposed. He wants to consolidate the Yellow River defense line to protect himself. It is lucky to avoid death. He has no intention of crossing the North.

古文：赫连定残根易摧，拟之必仆。
现代文：赫连定这样的残余势力易于摧毁，料想他必定覆灭。
English: But He Lianding, just like the stump of a dead tree, is easy to destroy and will fall at the first blow.

古文：克定之后，东出潼关，席卷而前，则威震南极，江淮以北无立草矣。
现代文：战胜赫连定之后，东出潼关，席卷而前，就会威震整个南方地区，使长江淮水以北望风披靡。
English: After defeating Herengding, Dongzidongguan will sweep forward, which will shake the entire southern region and make the wind north of the Yangtze River Huai Shui invincible.

古文：圣策独发，非愚近所及，愿陛下西行勿疑。 
现代文：英明的决策独发于心，不是愚昧浅见的人所能考虑到的，愿陛下西行而不要犹豫。 
English: Wise decisions come from the heart, not from the mind of a stupid man. May His Majesty go west without hesitation.

古文：平凉既平，其日宴会，世祖执浩手以示蒙逊使曰： 所云崔公，此是也。
现代文：平定平凉以后，当日举行宴会，世祖拉着崔浩的手告诉蒙逊的使者说： 所说的崔公，就是他。
English: After the pacification of Pingliang, a banquet was held on the same day. The patriarch took Cui Hao's hand and told Monson's messenger: "The Cui Gong you mentioned is him.

古文：才略之美，当今无比。
现代文：谋略的高妙，当今无人可比。
English: The sophistication of the strategy is unmatched by anyone today.

古文：朕行止必问，成败决焉，若合符契，初无失矣。 
现代文：我有所行动必定咨询，他对成败的判定，如同符节相合，完全没有差错。 
English: I always consult him before taking any action, and his judgment of success or failure, like a coincidence of signs, is completely correct.

古文：后冠军将军安颉军还，献南俘，因说南贼之言云：义隆敕其诸将，若北国兵动，先其未至，径前入河，若其不动，住彭城勿进。
现代文：后来冠军将军玄题的部队还朝，献纳南方的俘虏，因而转述南方贼军的话说，义隆敕令他的众将领，如果魏国兵马出动，就径达黄河，如果他的兵马不动，就守堑球不进兵。
English: Later, the troops of the champion general Xuanzi returned to the court and presented the captives from the south, thus paraphrasing the words of the southern thieves, saying that Yilong Yu ordered his generals that if the Wei soldiers and horses set out, they would go to the Yellow River, and if his soldiers and horses did not move, they would keep the ball and not enter the army.

古文：如浩所量。
现代文：正如崔造的估计。
English: Just as Cui Zong estimated.

古文：世祖谓公卿曰： 卿辈前谓我用浩计为谬，惊怖固谏。
现代文：世回对公卿大腼： 你们先前认为我用崔浩的计谋是不明智的，惊恐地一再劝阻。
English: Shih Hwa to the Grand Duke: You previously thought that my use of Cui Hao's stratagem was unwise, and repeatedly dissuaded me in fear.

古文：常胜之家，始皆自谓逾人远矣，至于归终，乃不能及。 
现代文：经常打胜仗的人，起初都自以为远远胜过别人，到了最后，却比不上别人。 
English: Those who are always victorious in battle begin by thinking they are far superior to others, but in the end they are no match for them.

古文：迁浩司徒。
现代文：升任崔浩为司徒。
English: Choi Ho was promoted to the position of secretary.

古文：时方士祁纤织奏立四王，以曰东西南北为名，欲以致祯吉，除灾异。
现代文：当时方士祁纤奏请立四王，用曰束西曰南北为名，想因此招致吉祥，祛除灾异。
English: At that time, the Fang Clan played the cymbals and invited the four kings to stand up, using the names of "Shu Xi" and "Nan Nan" in the hope of bringing good luck and eliminating disasters.

古文：诏浩与学士议之。
现代文：诏令崔造与学士商议这事。
English: He ordered Cui Zuo to discuss the matter with the scholar.

古文：浩对曰： 先王建国以作蕃屏，不应假名以为其福。
现代文：崔浩回答说： 前代帝王封立诸侯王国用来作为屏障，不应以名称求福。
English: Cui Hao replied: The former emperors set up the vassal kingdoms to serve as a barrier, and they should not seek happiness with their names.

古文：夫日月运转，周历四方，京都所居，在于其内。四王之称，实奄邦畿，名之则逆，不可承用。 
现代文：日月运行，遍历四方，京都所处的位置，在四方之内，四王的名称，实际上包括了国家，以此命名就是悖逆，不可沿用。 
English: The sun and moon run, traversing the four directions, the location of Kyoto, within the four directions, the name of the four kings, in fact, includes the country, this name is rebellious and can not be used.

古文：先是，纤奏改代为万年，浩曰： 昔太祖道武皇帝，应天受命，开拓洪业，诸所制置，无不循古。
现代文：先前，祁纤奏请改代为姜年，说： 过去太祖道武皇帝，顺应天命，开拓大业，各种规划，无不遵循古制。
English: Earlier, Gongfibersong asked to change the generation to Jiangnian, saying: In the past, the great-grandfather Emperor Daowu, in accordance with the destiny of heaven, developed great undertakings and various plans, all of which followed the ancient system.

古文：以始封代土，后称为魏，故代、魏兼用，犹彼殷商。
现代文：因起初被封在代地，后来称为魏，所以代、魏兼用。像那殷亩一样。
English: Because at first it was sealed in the vicarage, later it was called Wei, so both Dai and Wei are used.

古文：国家积德，著在图史，当享万忆，不待假名以为益也。
现代文：国家积累的仁政，史书有记载，应当享有万亿吉祥，不需要假藉名号来求好处。
English: The benevolent government accumulated by the country has been recorded in the history books, and it should enjoy a trillion auspicious signs. There is no need to seek benefits by using false names.

古文：纤之所闻，皆非正义。 
现代文：空哟所上奏的，都不正确不合理。 
English: None of the above is correct or reasonable.

古文：世祖从之。
现代文：世祖听从了他的意见。
English: The patriarch accepted the suggestion.

古文：是时，河西王沮渠牧犍，内有贰意，世祖将讨焉，先问于浩。
现代文：这时，河西王沮渠牧犍怀有二心，世祖将要讨伐，先向崔浩咨询。
English: At this time, the king of Hexi, Depu Qu, the herdsman, was of two minds, the ancestor was going to fight, and first consulted with Cui Hao.

古文：浩对曰： 牧犍恶心已露，不可不诛。
现代文：崔浩回答说： 牧犍叛逆之心已暴露，不可不铲除。
English: Cui Hao replied: The rebellious heart of the herdsmen has been exposed and must be eradicated.

古文：官军往年北伐，虽不克获，实无所损。
现代文：往年朝廷的军队北伐，虽然不能够有收获，但确实也没什么损耗。
English: Although our army did not gain much victory in the Northern Expedition in previous years, it actually did not suffer any losses.

古文：于时行者内外军马三十万匹，计在道死伤不满八千。岁常羸死，恆不灭万，乃不少于此。
现代文：当时出征的京师和地方的军马三十万匹，总计死伤于征途的不满八千，每年衰病而死的，通常不下一万，就不少于征途上的死伤。
English: At that time, there were 300,000 horses of the Beijing Division and local troops, and a total of less than 8,000 were killed or injured on the journey. Usually, less than 10,000 died of illness each year, which was not less than the deaths and injuries on the journey.

古文：而远方承虚，便谓大损，不能复振。
现代文：但远方听信谣传，便以为损失巨大，不能再振作起来。
English: However, when people in distant places heard the rumor, they thought the loss was huge and could not cheer up.

古文：今出其意，不图大军卒至，心惊骇骚扰，不知所出，擒之必矣。
现代文：现在出其不意，对方不料大军突然到来，一定惊恐骚乱，不知所措，必然被擒。
English: Now, unexpectedly, the unexpected arrival of a large army on the other side must have caused panic, confusion, and confusion, and they must have been captured.

古文：且牧犍劣弱，诸弟骄恣争权从横，民心离解。
现代文：而且牧犍拙劣力弱，诸弟骄横放纵，你来我往争夺权力，民心涣散。
English: Moreover, the herdsmen are weak, the brothers are arrogant and indulgent, you come and go to compete for power, and the people's hearts are scattered.

古文：加比年以来，天灾地变，都在秦凉，成灭之国也。 
现代文：加以近年以来，天灾地震等都在秦凉地区，是必定灭亡的国家。 
English: In addition, since recent years, natural disasters such as earthquakes have all occurred in the Qinliang region, which is a country that is bound to perish.

古文：世祖曰： 善，吾意亦以为然。 
现代文：世祖说： 不错，我心裹也认为是这样。 
English: The patriarch said, "That's right, my heart also thinks so."

古文：命公卿议之。
现代文：命令公卿大臣讨论这事。
English: Order the Lord High Steward to discuss the matter.

古文：弘农王奚斤等三十余人皆曰： 牧犍西垂下国，虽心不纯臣，然继父职贡，朝廷接以蕃礼。
现代文：弘农王奚斤等三十多人都说： 牧犍是西方小国，虽然内心不服，然而继承父亲向朝廷进贡，朝廷用附属国礼仪接纳。
English: More than 30 people, including Hongnong Wang Shujin, said, "Mukou is a small western country. Although I am not satisfied with myself, I inherited my father's tribute to the imperial court, and the imperial court accepted it with the etiquette of a dependent country.

古文：又王姬厘降，罪未甚彰，谓宜羁縻而已。
现代文：再者公主下嫁给他作王妃，他的罪行还不很明显，仅适宜笼络而已。
English: In addition, the princess married him as a princess, his crime was not obvious, only suitable for entrapment.

古文：今士马劳止，宜可小息。
现代文：当今士兵战马疲惫不堪，应该稍事休息。
English: Today's battle-weary soldiers deserve a break.

古文：又其地卤斥，略无水草，大军既到，不得久停。
现代文：再说那裹是盐碱地，几乎没有水草，大军到达以后，不能久留。
English: Moreover, it was a saline land, with almost no aquatic plants. After the large army arrived, it could not stay for long.

古文：彼闻军来，必完聚城守，攻则难拔，野无所掠。 
现代文：对方听说大军前来，必定修葺城垒聚集粮食而凭仗城垒坚守，我们进攻就难以取胜，野外也无物可掠夺。 
English: When the other side heard that a large army was coming, they would certainly repair the fortifications, gather grain, and hold on to the fortifications by force of arms. It would be difficult for us to win the attack, and there would be nothing to plunder in the field.

古文：于是尚书古弼、李顺之徒皆曰： 自温圉河以西，至于姑臧城南，天梯山上冬有积雪，深一丈余，至春夏消液，下流成川，引以溉灌。
现代文：于是尚书古弼、李顺等人都说： 温圉河以西至姑臧城以南，天梯山上冬天有积雪，深一丈多，到春夏时节融化，下流成河，用来灌溉。
English: As a result, Shangshu Guzheng, Li Shun and others said: From the west of the Wenchuan River to the south of the city of Guzheng, there is snow on the Tiantai Mountain in winter, which is more than a meter deep. In spring and summer, it melts and flows down into a river, which is used for irrigation.

古文：彼闻军至，决此渠口，水不通流，则致渴乏。
现代文：对方听说大军到来，堵住渠口，使水不通，就会导致干渴。
English: The other side heard that a large army was coming, blocked the mouth of the canal, and made the water impassable, which would lead to thirst.

古文：去城百里之内，赤地无草，又不任久停军马，斤等议是也。 
现代文：离城百里之内，光秃秃的土地上草也不生，又不容许兵马久留。奚斤等人的意见是正确的。 
English: Within a hundred miles of the city, grass does not grow on the bare ground, and soldiers and horses are not allowed to stay for a long time.

古文：世祖乃命浩以其前言与斤共相难抑。
现代文：世祖于是命令崔浩用先前的意见与奚斤互相辩驳。
English: The patriarch then ordered Cui Hao to use his previous opinions to argue with the eunuchs.

古文：诸人不复余言，唯曰： 彼无水草 。
现代文：众人不再有其他说法，衹是说 那裹没有水草 。崔浩说： 《漠书。
English: People no longer had any other explanation, except to say that there were no water plants there. Cui Hao said: "A book about the desert.

古文：浩曰： 汉书地理志称： 凉州之畜，为天下饶。 若无水草，何以畜牧？
现代文：地理志》称： 凉州的畜产，是天下最多的。 如果没有水草，怎样放养牲畜?
English: "Geography" said: Liangzhou's livestock production is the largest in the world. If there is no aquatic plants, how to raise livestock?

古文：又汉人为居，终不于水草之地筑城郭，立郡县也。
现代文：再说汉代人总不会在没有水草的地方筑城郭、设郡县吧。
English: Besides, Han Dynasty people would never build a castle or set up a county in a place without aquatic plants.

古文：又雪之消液，绝不敛尘，何得通渠引曹，溉灌数百万顷乎？
现代文：而且积雪融水还不够收敛尘土，怎么能水入漕渠，灌溉数百万顷呢?
English: Moreover, the snowmelt water is not enough to converge the dust, how can the water enter the canals and irrigate millions of hectares?

古文：此言大抵诬于人矣。 
现代文：这种说法是上了别人的大当了。 
English: This argument is being taken for a ride.

古文：李顺等复曰： 耳闻不如目见，吾曹目见，何可共辨！ 
现代文：李顺等又说： 耳闻不如眼见，我们亲眼所见，你怎么可以与我们争辩! 
English: Li Shun et al. also said: Hearing is not as good as seeing, what we see with our own eyes, how can you argue with us!

古文：浩曰： 汝曹受人金钱，欲为之辞，谓我目不见便可欺也！ 
现代文：崔浩说： 你们受了别人的金钱，想替他说话，以为我没亲眼看见就可欺骗吗! 
English: Cui Hao said, "You have accepted someone else's money and want to speak for him. Do you think you can deceive me without seeing it with your own eyes?

古文：世祖隐听，闻之乃出，亲见斤等，辞旨严厉，形于神色。
现代文：世祖暗中听着，听到这话才出来，亲自召见奚斤等，语意严厉，形诸神色。
English: The patriarch listened in secret, and only came out when he heard this, personally summoning the priests and elders, his tone stern, his countenance radiant.

古文：群臣乃不敢复言，唯唯而已。
现代文：群臣于是不敢再说什么，仅恭敬地答应而已。
English: The courtiers then did not dare to say anything more, but only respectfully agreed.

古文：于是遂讨凉州而平之。
现代文：于是就讨伐凉州而获胜。
English: So he led a crusade against Liangzhou and won.

古文：多饶水草，如浩所言。
现代文：水草富足，正如崔浩所说。
English: Aquatic plants are plentiful, just as Cui Hao said.

古文：乃诏浩曰： 昔皇祚之兴，世隆北土，积德累仁，多历年载，泽流苍生，义闻四海。
现代文：于是韶令崔浩说： 过去帝统兴起，世世兴盛于北方，积累仁德，历经多年，恩泽流向苍生，仁义四海闻名。
English: Therefore, the imperial commandant Cui Hao said: In the past, the imperial system arose, prospered in the north, accumulated benevolence, and after many years, the benefits flowed to all living beings, and benevolence was famous all over the world.

古文：我太祖道武皇帝，协顺天人，以征不服，应期拨乱，奄有区夏。
现代文：我太祖道武皇帝，顺应天意人心，征讨不臣服的地区，抓住时机平定祸乱，全部占有中原地区。
English: My great-great-grandfather Emperor Daowu, in accordance with the will of Heaven, conquered the rebellious regions, seized the opportunity to quell the calamity, and occupied all the Central Plains.

古文：太宗承统，光隆前绪，厘正刑典，大业惟新。
现代文：太宗继位，光大前人的事业，修正刑法，帝业才开始更新。
English: Emperor Taizong's succession, the cause of the predecessors of Guangda, the revision of the Criminal Law, and the renewal of the imperial career began.

古文：然荒域之外，犹未宾服。
现代文：然而未开化的边远地区，还未归顺。
English: However, the uncivilized outlying areas have yet to be converted.

古文：此祖宗之遗志，而贻功于后也。
现代文：这是祖宗的遣志，也是留给后人的事业。
English: This is the mission of the ancestors, and it is also the cause left to posterity.

古文：朕以眇身，获奉宗庙，战战兢兢，如临渊海，惧不能负荷至重，继名丕烈。
现代文：我以微末之身，获得奉祀宗庙的地位，战战兢兢，如临深渊和大海，害怕不能担负极重大的责任，延续名声光大功业。
English: I, with a tiny body, have obtained the status of a temple dedicated to worship. I am trembling, as if approaching the abyss and the sea, afraid of not being able to shoulder the extremely important responsibility of continuing the fame and glory of the great cause.

古文：故即位之初，不遑宁处，扬威朔裔，扫定赫连。
现代文：所以即位之初，不遑安处，显示威势于北方边远地区，扫平面。
English: Therefore, at the beginning of his reign, he showed his power in the remote areas of the north, sweeping the plane.

古文：逮于神，始命史职注集前功，以成一代之典。
现代文：年间，开始命令史官收集记载以前的功绩，写成一代典故。
English: At the beginning of the year, he ordered the historian to collect and record the previous achievements and write a generation of allusions.

古文：自尔已来，戎旗仍举，秦陇克定，徐兗无尘，平逋寇于龙川，讨孽竖于凉域。
现代文：从那时以来，军旗频举，秦陇地区被平定，徐兖地区无征尘，扫平流寇于龙川，讨伐邪恶的坏人于凉地。
English: Since then, the military flag has been raised frequently, the Qinhuangdao region has been pacified, the Xuhui region has been exempted from taxation, the Longchuan River has been swept away, and the evil villains have been defeated.

古文：岂朕一人获济于此，赖宗庙之灵，群公卿士宣力之效也。
现代文：我一人怎能获得这样的成就，有赖于朝廷的恩泽，群公卿官吏尽心尽力的效劳。
English: How I alone could achieve such a feat depended on the grace of the imperial court and the dedicated service of a group of nobles and officials.

古文：而史阙其职，篇籍不著，每惧斯事之坠焉。
现代文：但是史官疏忽了自己的职责，史籍没有编著，常常担心这事有失。
English: However, historians neglected their duties and did not compile historical records, often fearing that this was a mistake.

古文：公德冠朝列，言为世范，小大之任，望君存之。
现代文：你道德冠朝臣，言为世范，大小官职，望君留意。
English: You moral crowned courtiers, your words are a model for the world, officials of all ranks, please pay attention.

古文：命公留台，综理史务，述成此书，务众实录。 
现代文：命公留在禁中，总揽修史工作，编纂成史书，务必从实记载。 
English: His Eminence remains under house arrest, and the overall work of revising history and compiling it into a history book must be recorded truthfully.

古文：浩于是监秘书事，以中书侍郎高允、散骑侍郎张伟参著作，续成前纪。
现代文：崔浩于是主管秘书省事，以中书侍郎产叁、散骑侍郎张伟参与著作，接着前史所载而继续完成。
English: Cui Hao, the secretary-in-charge, saved his time and used the Chinese calligrapher Zhang Xuan and the horseback rider Zhang Wei to participate in the work, and then continued to complete it as described in the previous history.

古文：至于损益褒贬，折中润色，浩所总焉。
现代文：至于内容的增减和人事的褒贬，异说的折中和言词的润色，全由崔浩负责。
English: As for the increase or decrease of content and the praise or blame of personnel, the compromise of dissent and the polishing of words, all of which are responsible for Cui Hao.

古文：及恭宗始总百揆，浩复与宜都王穆寿辅政事。
现代文：开始总理国政，崔浩又与宜都王穆尽辅佐政事。
English: At the beginning of the Prime Minister's national policy, Cui Hao and Yidu Wang Muxin assisted in the political affairs.

古文：时又将讨蠕蠕，刘洁复致异议。
现代文：这时又打算讨伐蠕蠕，刘洁再次提出异议。
English: At this time, Liu Jie again raised an objection to the plan to crack down on Crum Crum.

古文：世祖逾欲讨之，乃召问浩。
现代文：世坦更加想讨伐它，于是召崔浩来咨询。
English: Shetan wanted to fight it even more, so he called Cui Hao to consult.

古文：浩对曰： 往击蠕蠕，师不多日，洁等各欲回还。
现代文：崔造回答说： 过去攻打蠕蠕，进军的子不多，刘迁等就都想回朝。
English: Cui Zong replied, "In the past, we fought against Crum Crum. There were not many sons who marched into the army. Liu Qian and others all wanted to return to the imperial court.

古文：后获其生口，云军还之时，去贼三十里。
现代文：后来俘获了它的俘虏，说军队返回的时候，仅离贼人三十里。
English: It was later captured by its captors, who said that when the army returned, it was only thirty miles from the bandits.

古文：是洁等之计过矣。
现代文：这是型辽等人计策的失误。
English: This was a strategic blunder on the part of Liao and others.

古文：夫北土多积雪，至冬时常避寒南徙。
现代文：北方地区多有积雪，到冬季常避寒南迁。
English: There is a lot of snow in the northern regions, but in winter they often move south to avoid the cold.

古文：若因其时，潜军而出，必与之遇，则可擒获。 
现代文：如果趁这时秘密出兵，必定与它相遇，则可以擒获。 
English: If you take advantage of this time to secretly send troops, you will certainly encounter it, and you can be captured.

古文：世祖以为然。
现代文：世祖认为正确。
English: The ancestor thought it was right.

古文：乃分军为四道，诏诸将俱会鹿浑海。
现代文：于是分兵为四路，诏令众将领都会师鹿浑海。
English: As a result, the division of the army was four-way, and the imperial edict ordered all generals to go to Shishihunhai.

古文：期日有定，而洁恨计不用，沮误诸将，无功而还。事在《洁传》。
现代文：虽约定了时间，但是刘洁恼恨计策没有被采用，使众将领疑惑，无功而返。事在《刘洁传》。
English: Although the time was agreed upon, Liu Jie's anger and resentment strategy was not adopted, causing the generals to doubt, to no avail. The matter is in "Liu Jie Biography."

古文：世祖西巡，诏浩与尚书、顺阳公兰延都督行台中外诸军事。
现代文：世祖西巡，诏令崔浩与尚书、顺阳公兰延总领行台中外诸军事。
English: Emperor Taizong was on a tour to the West, and he ordered Cui Hao, Shang Shu and Shun Yang Gong Lan Yan to lead the military from Taiwan and abroad.

古文：世祖至东雍，亲临汾曲，观叛贼薛永宗垒，进军围之。
现代文：世祖到束雍，亲临汾曲，观察叛逆贼人薛永宗的营垒，进军包围它。
English: The founder of the world went to Sok Yeong, personally attended the recital, observed the camp of the traitorous thief Xue Yongzong, and marched to surround it.

古文：永宗出兵欲战，世祖问浩曰： 今日可击不？ 
现代文：永宗出兵打算作战，世祖问崔浩说： 今天可以攻打吗? 
English: Yongzong planned to send troops to fight, and the ancestor asked Cui Hao: "Can we attack today?"

古文：浩曰： 永宗未知陛下自来，人心安闲，北风迅疾，宜急击之，须臾必碎。
现代文：崔浩说： 永宗不知陛下亲自来，人心安闲，北风猛烈，应当迅速出击，片刻之间必定被瓦解。
English: Cui Hao said: Yongzong did not know that his majesty would come in person, his heart was at ease, the north wind was fierce, he should strike quickly, and he would be disintegrated in a moment.

古文：若待明日，恐其见官军盛大，必夜遁走。 
现代文：如果等到天明，恐怕他看到朝廷的军队规模盛大，必然连夜逃跑。 
English: If he had waited until dawn, I am afraid he would have seen the huge size of the imperial army and would have fled during the night.

古文：世祖从之。
现代文：世祖采纳了他的意见。
English: The patriarch accepted the suggestion.

古文：永宗溃灭。
现代文：永宗崩溃灭亡。
English: Yeongjong collapsed and perished.

古文：车驾济河，前驱告贼在渭北。
现代文：皇上渡过黄河，先头部队报告贼人在渭水以北。
English: The emperor crossed the Yellow River, and the vanguard reported that the thieves were north of Surabaya.

古文：世祖至洛水桥，贼已夜遁。
现代文：世祖到洛水桥，贼人已连夜逃亡。
English: The thief fled to Luoshui Bridge overnight.

古文：诏问浩曰： 盖吴在长安北九十里。
现代文：召崔浩来问道： 盖吴在长安以北九十里。
English: He summoned Cui Hao and asked: "Gai Wu is ninety miles north of Chang'an.

古文：渭北地空，谷草不备。
现代文：渭水以北土地贫瘠，粮草不足。
English: The land north of Surabaya is barren, and there is a shortage of grain and grass.

古文：欲渡渭南西行，何如？ 
现代文：打算渡渭水向西南行进，怎么样? 
English: What about Watanabe's plan to head southwest?

古文：浩对曰： 盖吴营去此六十里，贼魁所在。
现代文：崔浩回答说： 盖吴的营垒离此地六十里，贼人首领就在那裹。
English: Cui Hao replied, "Gai Wu's camp is sixty miles away from here, and the leader of the thieves is right there.

古文：击蛇之法，当须破头，头破则尾岂能复动？
现代文：打蛇，必须打头，头破了那么尾巴岂能再动。
English: To hit a snake, you must hit the head. If the head is broken, the tail will not be able to move again.

古文：宜乘势先击吴。
现代文：应当乘势先攻打盖县。
English: We should take advantage of the situation and attack Gai County first.

古文：今军往，一日便到。
现代文：现在大军前去，一天就到。
English: Now the great army is marching forward, and will arrive any day now.

古文：平吴之后，回向长安，亦一日而至。
现代文：平定盖吴之后，转向长安，也一天就到。
English: After pacifying Gai Wu, it turned to Chang'an and arrived there the same day.

古文：一日之内，未便损伤。
现代文：一天之内，不会就受损伤。
English: You don't get injured in one day.

古文：愚谓宜从北道。
现代文：我认为应当经由北道。
English: I think we should go via the North Road.

古文：若从南道，则盖吴徐入北山，卒未可平。 
现代文：如果经由南道，董星就会从容入北山，最后不能平定。 
English: If it passes through the South Road, Dongxing will be allowed to enter the North Mountain, and finally it will not be settled.

古文：世祖不从，乃渡渭南。
现代文：世祖不采纳，于是南渡渭水。
English: The founder did not accept it, so he sailed south to Surabaya.

古文：吴闻世祖至，尽散入北山，果如浩言，军无所克。
现代文：盖吴听说世祖来到，都分散进入北山，果真如崔浩所说，军队无所获。
English: When Gai Wu heard that Shizhu had arrived, they all dispersed into Beishan. As Cui Hao said, the army did not gain anything.

古文：世祖悔之。
现代文：世殂后悔。
English: The world is full of regrets.

古文：后以浩辅东宫之勤，赐缯絮布帛各千段。
现代文：后来因崔造尽心尽力地辅佐东宫，赏赐缯絮布帛各千段。
English: Later, Cui Zuo was rewarded for his diligent assistance to the East Palace with a thousand pieces of silk cloth.

古文：著作令史太原闵湛、赵郡郄标素谄事浩，乃请立石铭，刊载《国书》，并勒所注《五经》。
现代文：著作令史太原闵湛、赵郡郄标素来逢迎崔造，于是请立石碑，刻写《国书》，并刻其所注《五经》。
English: He ordered Shi Taiyuan and Zhao County to build a stone monument inscribed with the "National Anthem" and the "Five Classics."

古文：浩赞成之。
现代文：鲎造赞成他们的建议。
English: The forger agreed to their suggestion.

古文：恭宗善焉，遂营于天郊东三里，方百三十步，用功三百万乃讫。
现代文：恭宗应诺，于是在行祭天礼仪的场所以束三里营造，方圆一百三十步，用了三百万个人工才完成。
English: In accordance with his promise, Emperor Gongzong built a three-mile-long moat at the site of the rite of sacrifice, with a circumference of one hundred and thirty paces, which took three million workers to complete.

古文：世祖搜于河西，诏浩诣行在所议军事。
现代文：世祖在河西边打猎，命令崔浩到他所在的地方商议军事。
English: Shizu was hunting on the west side of the river and ordered Cui Hao to go to his place to discuss military affairs.

古文：浩表曰： 昔汉武帝患匈奴强盛，故开凉州五郡，通西域，劝农积谷，为灭贼之资，东西迭击。
现代文：崔浩上表说： 昔日漠武帝以匈奴的强盛为忧，所以设置凉州五郡，交通西域，鼓励农耕积累谷物，作为消灭贼军的资本。从东面和西面屡次攻打。
English: Cui Hao said on the table: In the past, Emperor Mo Wu was worried about the strength of the Xiongnu, so he set up five counties in Liangzhou and the western region of Jiaotong to encourage the accumulation of grain in agriculture as the capital to eliminate the thief army. Repeatedly attacked from the east and west.

古文：故汉未疲，而匈奴已弊，后遂入朝。
现代文：所以汉朝没有疲惫，而匈奴却已疲惫了，后来就谒见天子。
English: Therefore, the Han Dynasty was not tired, but the Xiongnu was tired, and later they met the Son of Heaven.

古文：昔平凉州，臣愚以为北贼未平，征役不息，可不徙其民，案前世故事，计之长者。
现代文：过去平定凉州我认为北方贼人没有平定，征战没有停止，可以不迁徙速丛百姓，考核前代旧例，足正确的计策。
English: Calming Liangzhou in the past, I believe that the northern bandits have not been pacified, the war has not stopped, and the people can not migrate to the fast-growing grassland, and the assessment of previous generations and old cases is a correct strategy.

古文：若迁民人，则土地空虚，虽有镇戍，适可御边而已，至于大举，军资必乏。
现代文：如果迁移百姓，那么当地空虚，虽然有驻防军的营垒和城堡，仅能防守边境而已，至于大规模地行动，军需必定不足。
English: If you move people, then the local emptiness, although there are garrison camps and castles, can only defend the border, and as for large-scale operations, military supplies must be insufficient.

古文：陛下以此事阔远，竟不施用。
现代文：陛下因这事离得远，到底没有施行。
English: His Majesty was so distraught by this that he did not carry it out.

古文：如臣愚意，犹如前议，募徙豪强大家，充实凉土，军举之日，东西齐势，此计之得者。 
现代文：至于我的看法，仍然如同以前的建议，募集迁徙有权势而强横的大族，充实凉州地区，军队行动之曰，东西两路一起行动，造就实现了计策。 
English: As for my opinion, it is still the same as the previous suggestion, to recruit the migration of powerful and domineering big tribes, to enrich the Liangzhou area, the military action is to say, the east and west to act together, to create and realize the strategy.

古文：浩又上《五寅元历》，表曰： 太宗即位元年，敕臣解《急就章》、《孝经》、《论语》、《诗》、《尚书》、《春秋》、《礼记》、《周易》。
现代文：崔浩又进呈《五寅元历》，上表说： 太宗即位元年，敕令我注解《急就章》、《孝经》、《论语》、《诗经》、《尚书》、《春秋》、《礼记》、《周易》。
English: Cui Hao also presented the "Wu Yin Yuan Calendar." The above table said: In the first year of Emperor Taizong's reign, I was ordered to annotate the "Emergency Chapter," "Filial Piety Sutra," "Analects," "Song of Songs," "Shang Shu," "Spring and Autumn," "Rites and Rituals," and "Zhou Yi."

古文：三年成讫。
现代文：三年完成。
English: Completed in three years.

古文：复诏臣学天文、星历、易式、九宫，无不尽看。
现代文：又诏令我学天文、历算、《周易》的卦象、九宫算法，无不尽看。
English: He also ordered me to study astronomy, the calendar, the "Zhou Yi" conjecture, and the Nine Palace Algorithm.

古文：至今三十九年，昼夜无废。
现代文：到现在有三十九年，昼夜不懈。
English: It's been thirty-nine years now, day and night.

古文：臣禀性弱劣，力不及健妇人，更无余能，是以专心思书，忘寝与食，至乃梦共鬼争义。
现代文：我天生软弱无力，力气比不上健壮的妇人，又没有其他才能，所以专心致志，废寝忘食，以至于梦中与鬼争辩。
English: For I am weak and feeble by nature, and have not the strength of a woman of strength, neither do I have the use of any other gift; for which cause also I have laboured, and have lost sleep, and have forgotten to eat, and have fought with the devils in a dream.

古文：遂得周公、孔子之要术，始知古人有虚有实，妄语者多，真正者少。
现代文：于是得到周公、孔子的要诀，才知道古人有虚有实，虚妄不实的话多，真实的话少。
English: Therefore, they obtained the key points of Zhou Gong and Confucius, and only then did they know that the ancients had both truth and falsehood, and that there were many false and untrue words, but few true words.

古文：自秦始皇烧书之后，经典绝灭。
现代文：从秦始皇烧书以后，儒家的经典消失。
English: After Emperor Qin burned the books, the Confucian classics disappeared.

古文：汉高祖以来，世人妄造历术者有十余家，皆不得天道之正，大误四千，小误甚多，不可言尽。
现代文：汉高祖以来，世人胡乱编制历法的有十几家，都没有准确地抓住自然界的变化规律，大错四千，小错很多，不能全都记载。
English: Since the founding of the Han Dynasty, there have been more than a dozen calendars that have been compiled haphazardly by the world. None of them have accurately grasped the laws of change in the natural world. There are 4,000 big mistakes and many small mistakes, and they cannot all be recorded.

古文：臣愍其如此。
现代文：我忧虑它的这种状况。
English: I am worried about its condition.

古文：今遭陛下太平之世，除伪从真，宜改误历，以从天道。
现代文：现在遇到陛下的太平盛世，祛除虚伪服从真理，应当改正错误的历法，以顺从自然界的变化规律。
English: Now, in the face of His Majesty's peaceful and prosperous age, we should eliminate hypocrisy and obey the truth, correct the wrong calendar, and obey the laws of change in the natural world.

古文：是以臣前奏造历，今始成讫。谨以奏呈。
现代文：因此我以前奏请改订历法，现在刚刚完成。谨以此上呈。
English: Therefore, I have submitted a request to change the calendar, which has just been completed. I would like to present it here.

古文：唯恩省察，以臣历术宣示中书博士，然后施用。
现代文：希望加恩省察，把我的历法给中书博士看，然后采用。
English: I hope that Garn will reflect, show my calendar to Dr. Zhongshu, and then adopt it.

古文：非但时人，天地鬼神知臣得正，可以益国家万世之名，过于三皇、五帝矣。 
现代文：不但世人，天地鬼神也知道我的结论正确，可以增进国家的万世名声，超过三皇、五帝啊。 
English: Not only the people of the world, but also the gods and spirits of heaven and earth know that my conclusion is correct and can enhance the country's eternal reputation, surpassing the three emperors and five emperors.

古文：事在《律历志》。
现代文：事在《律历志》。
English: It's in the Almanac.

古文：真君十一年六月诛浩，清河崔氏无远近，范阳卢氏、太原郭氏、河东柳氏，皆浩之姻亲，尽夷其族。
现代文：真君十一年六月处死崔浩，清河崔氏不论远近，范阳卢氏、太原郭氏、河东柳氏，都是崔浩的姻亲，全被灭族。
English: Zhenjun executed Cui Hao in June of the eleventh year, and the Qinghe Cui clan, whether far or near, the Fanyang Lu clan, the Taiyuan Guo clan, and the Hedong Liu clan, were all Cui Hao's in-laws, and were all exterminated.

古文：初，郄标等立石铭刊《国记》，浩尽述国事，备而不典。
现代文：起初，郄标等立石碑刻写《国记》，崔浩全面地记载国事，完备但不典雅。
English: At first, the "National Record" was inscribed on the standing stone monument, and Cui Hao comprehensively recorded national affairs, which was complete but not elegant.

古文：而石铭显在衢路，往来行者咸以为言，事遂闻发。
现代文：而石碑明显地立在道路旁，往来行人，都谈论遣事，事情于是被告发。
English: But the stone monument clearly stands by the road, pedestrians are talking about the incident, and the incident was reported.

古文：有司按验浩，取秘书郎吏及长历生数百人意状。
现代文：有关部门查验崔浩，得到秘书郎吏及长历生敷百人的情况。
English: Relevant departments have investigated Cui Hao and obtained the information of the secretary, the steward and the 100 people who lived in Changli.

古文：浩伏受赇，其秘书郎吏已下尽死。
现代文：崔浩承认受贿罪，秘书郎吏以下都被处死。
English: Cui Hao confessed to the crime of accepting bribes, and the secretary, officials and others were all executed.

古文：浩始弱冠，太原郭逸以女妻之。
现代文：崔造在二十岁的时候，把女儿嫁给他。
English: When Cui Zou was twenty years old, his daughter married him.

古文：浩晚成，不曜华采，故时人未知。
现代文：崔造年龄较大才有成就，又不会炫耀，所以当时的人不看重。
English: Cui Zong was older before he achieved anything, and he didn't show off, so people at the time didn't value him.

古文：逸妻王氏，刘义隆镇北将军王种德姊也，每奇浩才能，自以为得婿。
现代文：郭逸的妻子王氏，是刘义隆的镇北将军王仲德的姐姐，常常赏识崔浩的才能，自以为找到了称心的女婿。
English: Guo Yat's wife Wang, the sister of Liu Yilong's Zhenbei General Wang Zhongde, often appreciated Cui Hao's talent and thought she had found a worthy son-in-law.

古文：俄而女亡，王深以伤恨，复以少女继婚。
现代文：不久女儿死去，王氏深感悲伤遣憾，又以小女儿延续婚姻。
English: Soon after, her daughter died, and Wang, deeply saddened and regretful, continued the marriage with a younger daughter.

古文：逸及亲属以为不可，王固执与之，逸不能违，遂重结好。
现代文：郭逸和亲属以为不能这样，王氏固执地要把女儿嫁给他，郭逸不能违拗，于是重新交结。
English: Guo Yat and his relatives thought that this was not possible. Mr. Wang stubbornly wanted to marry his daughter to him. Guo Yat could not go against his wishes, so they re-married.

古文：浩非毁佛法，而妻郭氏敬好释典，时时读诵。
现代文：崔浩非难诋毁佛教教义，而妻子郭氏信奉喜欢佛教书籍，时时诵读。
English: Cui Hao accused him of slandering Buddhist teachings, while his wife Guo Shiwen liked Buddhist books and read them all the time.

古文：浩怒，取而焚之，捐灰于厕中。
现代文：崔浩生气，拿来焚烧，把灰丢到厕所裹。
English: Angrily, Cui Hao burned it and threw the ashes into the toilet.

古文：及浩幽执，置之槛内，送于城南，使卫士数十人溲其上，呼声嗷嗷，闻于行路。
现代文：及崔浩被囚禁，放在囚车内，送往城南，让数十名卫士往囚车上排泄小便，嗷嗷的叫声，传于道路。
English: And Cui Hao was imprisoned, placed in a prison van, and sent to the south of the city. Dozens of guards were allowed to defecate on the prison van, and the cries of crickets were heard on the road.

古文：自宰司之被戮辱，未有如浩者，世皆以为报应之验也。
现代文：从来辅政大臣受刑被辱没有像崔浩这样的，世人都认为是报应。
English: No vice-minister has ever been punished and humiliated like Cui Hao, and the world thinks it is retribution.

古文：初浩构害李顺，基萌已成，夜梦秉火爇顺寝室，火作而顺死，浩与室家群立而观之。
现代文：当初崔浩陷害李顺，开端已经形成，夜晚梦见执火把点燃李顺的卧室，火起而李顺死，崔浩和家中的人站在人群中观望。
English: At first, Cui Hao framed Li Shun. The beginning has already been formed. At night, he dreamed of lighting Li Shun's bedroom with a torch. The fire started and Li Shun died. Cui Hao and his family stood in the crowd and watched.

古文：俄而顺弟息号哭而出，曰： 此辈，吾贼也！ 
现代文：不久李顺的弟弟停止号哭出来，说： 这些人，是我的祸害! 
English: Soon, Li Shun's younger brother stopped crying and said, "These people are my scourge!

古文：以戈击之，悉投于河。
现代文：用戈杀死他们，都投到河中。
English: He killed them with a club and threw them into the river.

古文：寤而恶之，以告馆客冯景仁。
现代文：醒来后厌恶这个梦，因而告诉门客冯景仁。
English: When he woke up, he hated the dream and told his houseguest Feng Jingren.

古文：景仁曰： 此真不善也，非复虚事。
现代文：景仁说： 这真的不吉利啊，不再是虚幻的事。
English: Jingren said, "This is really unlucky, it's no longer an illusion.

古文：夫以火爇人，暴之极也。
现代文：用火烧人，是最残暴的。
English: Burning people with fire is the cruellest of all.

古文：阶乱兆祸，复己招也。
现代文：祸患的预兆，又是自己招致的。
English: The portents of disaster are self-inflicted.

古文：《商书》曰： 恶之易也，如火之燎于原，不可向迩，其犹可扑灭乎？ 
现代文：《商书》说： 邪恶的蔓延，如火在原野蔓延，不可靠近，还能扑灭吗? 
English: "Commercial Book" said: The spread of evil, like a fire spreading in the field, should not be approached, can it be extinguished?

古文：且兆始恶者有终殃，积不善者无余庆。
现代文：而且开始作恶的人最终有祸患，积累邪恶的人没有留给子孙后辈的德泽。
English: Moreover, those who begin to do evil will eventually have misfortune, and those who accumulate evil will not bequeath virtue to their children and grandchildren.

古文：厉阶成矣，公其图之。 
现代文：祸端已成，公要设法对付。 
English: The disaster has already happened, and the public should try to deal with it.

古文：浩曰： 吾方思之 。而不能悛，至是而族。
现代文：崔浩说 我将想办法 ，但是不能悔改，到这时被灭族。
English: Cui Hao said, "I will find a way, but I can't repent. At this time, I will be exterminated."

古文：浩既工书，人多托写急就章。
现代文：崔浩既然擅长书法，许多人就请他写《急就章》。
English: Since Cui Hao is good at calligraphy, many people asked him to write "Emergency Chapter."

古文：从少至老，初不惮劳，所书盖以百数，必称 冯代强 ，以示不敢犯国，其谨也如此。
现代文：从少到老，始终不怕麻烦，所写的大概数以百计，必定称 冯代强 ，以表示不敢冒犯国家，谨慎到这种程度。
English: From young to old, always not afraid of trouble, written about hundreds, must be called Feng Daiqiang, to show that he dare not offend the country, cautious to such an extent.

古文：浩书体势及其先人，而妙巧不如也。
现代文：崔浩的书法在形体和气势上比得上他的亡父，但是美妙奇巧比不上。
English: Cui Hao's calligraphy is comparable to that of his late father in terms of shape and momentum, but it is no match for the beauty and magic.

古文：世宝其迹，多裁割缀连以为模楷。
现代文：世人珍爱他的墨迹，多裁割连缀以为楷模。
English: The world treasured his ink blots, and considered his multi-cut and interlocking patterns to be exemplary.

古文：浩母卢氏，谌孙女也。
现代文：崔浩的母亲卢氏，是卢谌的孙女。
English: Cui Hao's mother, Lu, is Lu Yao's granddaughter.

古文：浩著《食经叙》曰： 余自少及长，耳目闻见，诸母诸姑所修妇功，无不温习酒食。
现代文：崔浩写《食经叙》说： 我从小到大，耳闻目睹，伯母叔母及各位姑妈所学习的妇功，无不学习造酒做饭。
English: Cui Hao, who wrote the "Food Scripture," said: From childhood to adulthood, I have heard and witnessed that the women's skills that aunts and aunts learn are all learning to make wine and cook.

古文：朝夕养舅姑，四时祭祀，虽有功力，不任僮使，常手自亲焉。
现代文：朝夕供养公婆，四季祭祀，虽然耗费时间和精力，但是不用奴婢，常亲自动手。
English: In the morning and evening, they make offerings to their parents-in-law, and hold four-season sacrifices. Although it takes time and energy, they don't have to work like slaves and are often self-employed.

古文：昔遭丧乱，饥馑仍臻，饘蔬糊口，不能具其物用，十余年间不复备设。
现代文：过去遭遇丧乱，饥馑接连而至，用极简单的饭菜糊口，不能具备这方面的物品器用，十多年间没有安排。
English: In the past, they suffered from chaos, famine came one after another, and they lived on very simple meals. They did not have the necessary goods and equipment, and there was no arrangement for more than ten years.

古文：先妣虑久废忘，后生无知见，而少不习业书，乃占授为九篇，文辞约举，婉而成章，聪辩强记，皆此类也。
现代文：亡母担心长期荒废，后辈看不见，而年轻时不学习可以立业的书籍，于是口授成九篇，文辞简约，委婉成章，聪慧明辩记忆力强，都像这样。
English: The deceased mother was worried about the long-term waste, the younger generation not being able to see, and not learning books that can establish a career when they are young, so the dictation is divided into nine parts, the wording is simple, the euphemism is complete, the cleverness is explicit, and the memory is strong, all like this.

古文：亲没之后，值国龙兴之会，平暴除乱，拓定四方。
现代文：母亲去世以后，国家振起，扫除暴乱，乎定四方。
English: After the death of his mother, the country rallied, swept away the riots, and stabilized the situation.

古文：余备位台铉，与参大谋，赏获丰厚，牛羊盖泽，赀累巨万。
现代文：我位居宰辅，参与重大决策，得到的赏赐丰厚，牛羊遍地，资财巨万。
English: I am a deputy governor, participate in major decision-making, get rich rewards, cattle and sheep everywhere, and have huge wealth.

古文：衣则重锦，食则梁肉。
现代文：穿的是精美的丝织品，吃的是精美的主食和肉食。
English: They wear exquisite silk fabrics and eat exquisite staple foods and meat.

古文：远惟平生，思季路负米之时，不可复得，故序遗文，垂示来世。 
现代文：追思平生，想望季路负米的时刻，不能再有，所以为遣文作序，传诸来世。 
English: Reflecting on one's life, the moment of wishing for the season to be negative can no longer exist, so it is necessary to make a preface for the letter and pass it on to the next life.

古文：始浩与冀州刺史颐、荣阳太守模等年皆相次，浩为长，次模，次颐。
现代文：起初崔浩与冀州刺史崔赜、荣阳太守崔模等年龄相当，崔浩为大，其次崔模，其次崔赜。
English: At first, Cui Hao was the same age as Jizhou's Empress Cui Wei and Rongyang's Empress Cui Miao. Cui Hao was the oldest, followed by Cui Miao and then Cui Miao.

古文：三人别祖，而模、颐为亲。
现代文：三人不同宗，而崔模、崔赜相亲近。
English: The three are from different clans, but Cui Miao and Cui Ye are close to each other.

古文：浩恃其家世魏晋公卿，常侮模、颐。
现代文：崔浩依恃他家世代是魏晋公卿，常欺负崔模、崔赜。
English: Cui Hao and his family were Wei-Jin aristocrats in their generation, and they often bullied Cui Miao and Cui Yao.

古文：模谓人曰： 桃简正可欺我，何合轻我家周兒也？ 
现代文：崔模对人说： 桃简祇可以欺负我，怎么可以欺负我家周儿呢。 
English: Cui Miao said to the man, "If Taojian can bully me, how can he bully my daughter Zhou?

古文：浩小名桃简，颐小名周兒。
现代文：崔浩小名桃简，崔赜小名周儿。
English: Choi Ho is nicknamed Peach Jane, Choi Yeon is nicknamed Zhou Er.

古文：世祖颇闻之，故诛浩时，二家获免。
现代文：世祖已经听说这事，所以杀崔浩时，二家得到宽免。
English: The patriarch had already heard about this, so when he killed Cui Hao, the two families were pardoned.

古文：浩既不信佛、道，模深所归向，每虽粪土之中，礼拜形象。
现代文：崔浩不信佛教、道教，崔模却深信宗教，即使在秽土之中，也礼拜偶像。
English: Cui Hao does not believe in Buddhism or Taoism, but Cui Mo is deeply religious and worships idols even in the filth.

古文：浩大笑之，云： 持此头颅不净处跪是胡神也。 
现代文：崔浩大声讥笑他，说： 拿这头颅在不洁净的地方跪拜这胡神呵。 
English: Cui Hao mocked him loudly, saying, "Take this head and kneel in an unclean place to worship this evil god."

古文：史臣曰：崔浩才艺通博，究览天人，政事筹策，时莫之二，此其所以自比于子房也。
现代文：史臣曰：崔浩的学识渊博，遍读天人关系学说，对政事的谋划，当时无双，这是他自比于子房的原因。
English: Shichen said: Cui Hao's profound knowledge, reading the doctrine of the relationship between man and nature, and planning of political affairs were unparalleled at that time. This was the reason why he compared himself to Zifo.

古文：属太宗为政之秋，值世祖经营之日，言听计从，宁廓区夏。
现代文：在太宗当政的年月，在世祖治国的日子，言听计从，廓清平定中原。
English: In the years when Emperor Taizong was in power, in the days when the world's founding fathers ruled the country, they listened to what was said and did what was necessary to clear up and pacify the Central Plains.

古文：遇既隆也，勤亦茂哉。
现代文：得到的恩遇既然深厚，也就努力尽心国事。
English: Since the favors I have received are profound, I will also try to devote myself to the affairs of state.

古文：谋虽盖世，威未震主，末途邂逅，遂不自全。
现代文：谋略虽然盖世，声威却没有震惊君主，晚年意外，竟不能保全自己。
English: Although his strategy was well known, his fame did not shock the monarch, and he could not save himself from an accident in his later years.

古文：岂鸟尽弓藏，民恶其上？
现代文：难道是飞鸟尽而良弓当藏，百姓憎恶他们的君上?
English: Is it that the flying birds are good at hiding their bows, and the people hate their princes?

古文：将器盈必概，阴害贻祸？
现代文：难道是满者招损，不为人知的伤害留下了祸害?
English: Is it possible that the person who is full has incurred a loss, and the unknown injury has left a scourge?

古文：何斯人而遭斯酷，悲夫！
现代文：为什么这个人遭受这样的灾难，可悲啊!
English: Why did this man have to suffer such a tragedy, so sad!

