古文：曹彬潘美曹彬，字国华，真定灵寿人。
现代文：曹彬字国华，是真定灵寿人。
English: Cao Bin's character, Guohua, is a true spirit of life.

古文：父芸，成德军节度都知兵马使。
现代文：其父曹芸，任成德军节度都知兵马使。
English: His father, Cao Ying, was appointed as the German army's commander-in-chief.

古文：彬始生周岁，父母以百玩之具罗于席，观其所取。
现代文：曹彬出生周岁时，他的父母把各种玩具排放在桌子上，看他取什么。
English: On Cao Bin's birthday, his parents lined up all kinds of toys on the table to see what he would take.

古文：彬左手持干戈，右手持俎豆，斯须取一印，他无所视，人皆异之。
现代文：曹彬左手拿干戈，右手抓俎豆，过一会儿又拿一方印，其他的不屑一顾，人们都感到惊异。
English: Cao Bin grasped a gooseberry with his left hand and a pea with his right hand. After a while, he grasped one side of the seal and ignored the others. People were surprised.

古文：及长，气质淳厚。
现代文：年长后，禀性淳厚。
English: As they get older, they become more stubborn.

古文：汉乾祐中，为成德军牙将。
现代文：后汉乾年间，任成德军牙将。
English: During the post-Han Qian period, he was appointed as the German army's tooth general.

古文：节帅武行德见其端懿，指谓左右曰： 此远大器，非常流也。 周太祖贵妃张氏，彬从母也。
现代文：节度使武行德见他端重谨慎，指着他对身边的人说 ：这人是有远大志向与才能的，不是平常之流。 后周太祖的贵妃张氏，是曹彬的姨母。
English: Cao Bin's martial virtues made him very cautious, and he pointed to the people around him and said, "This person has great ambition and talent, and is not an ordinary person. The late Zhou Taizu's noble consort Zhang is Cao Bin's aunt.

古文：周祖受禅，召彬归京师。
现代文：周太祖受禅即皇帝位，召曹彬回京城。
English: Zhou Taizu accepted Zen as emperor and called Cao Bin back to Beijing.

古文：隶世宗帐下，从镇澶渊，补供奉官，擢河中都监。
现代文：隶属世宗军中，跟从镇守澶渊，补任供奉官，升为河中都监。
English: Belonging to the Shizong army, he followed the town guard Shenyuan, served as a supplementary officer, and was promoted to the inspector of the central city of Hezhong.

古文：蒲帅王仁镐以彬帝戚，尤加礼遇。
现代文：蒲州节度使王仁镐因为曹彬是皇帝的亲戚，对他特别礼遇。
English: Because Cao Bin was a relative of the emperor, the Puzhou Festival gave him special courtesy.

古文：彬执礼益恭，公府燕集，端简终日，未尝旁视。
现代文：曹彬执礼越发恭敬，公府举行宴会时，整天态度端重，从不旁视。
English: Cao Bin became more and more deferential in his courtesies. When a banquet was held in a government office, he kept a dignified attitude all day and never looked away.

古文：仁镐谓从事曰： 老夫自谓夙夜匪懈，及见监军矜严，始觉己之散率也。 
现代文：仁镐对属吏们说： 我自认为夙夜匪懈，到看到监军矜严端重，才感觉自己的散率啊。 
English: Rinchen told his subordinates: "I thought I was a bad person day and night, but when I saw the guards being so strict, I felt like I was losing control."

古文：显德三年，改潼关监军，迁西上阁门使。
现代文：显德三年，改任潼关监军，升为西上门合门使。
English: In the third year of Hende, he was reassigned as the supervisor of Shaoguan, and was promoted to the west gate.

古文：五年，使吴越，致命讫即还。
现代文：显德五年，出使吴越，传达完使命就回朝。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Xiande's reign, Wu Yue was sent on a mission. After delivering the mission, he returned to the North.

古文：私觌之礼，一无所受。吴越人以轻舟追遗之，至于数四，彬犹不受。
现代文：私下相见之礼，一点也不接受馈送，吴越人乘轻舟追送给他，以至再四，曹彬还是不接受。
English: He did not accept the gift of a private meeting at all. Wu Yue followed him by light boat, and even after four times, Cao Bin still did not accept it.

古文：既而曰： 吾终拒之，是近名也。 遂受而籍之以归，悉上送官。
现代文：过一会儿说 ：我最终拒绝他们，是近于邀名啊。 于是接受下来回来登记，全部送给官府。
English: After a while, he said, "I finally turned them down, I was so close to being invited," so he accepted and came back to register, giving everything to the government.

古文：世宗强还之，彬始拜赐，悉以分遗亲旧而不留一钱。
现代文：世宗强行还给他，曹彬才拜赐，全部分给亲朋旧友，自己不留一钱。
English: Shizong forcibly gave it back to him, Cao Bin was the only one to give it back, the entire portion was given to relatives, friends and old friends, and he did not keep a single penny.

古文：出为晋州兵马都监。
现代文：出朝任晋州兵马都监。
English: He went to the imperial court and was appointed as the inspector of the Jinzhou Military Region.

古文：一日，与主帅暨宾从环坐于野，会邻道守将走价驰书来诣，使者素不识彬，潜问人曰： 孰为曹监军？ 有指彬以示之，使人以为绐己，笑曰： 岂有国戚近臣，而衣弋绨袍、坐素胡床者乎？ 审视之方信。迁引进使。初，太祖典禁旅，彬中立不倚，非公事未尝造门，群居燕会，亦所罕预，由是器重焉。建隆二年，自平阳召归，谓曰： 我畴昔常欲亲汝，汝何故疏我？ 彬顿首谢曰： 臣为周室近亲，复忝内职，靖恭守位，犹恐获过，安敢妄有交结？ 迁客省使，与王全斌、郭进领骑兵攻河东平乐县，降其将王超、侯霸荣等千八百人，俘获千余人。
现代文：升任客省使，与王全斌、郭进率领骑兵攻打河东平阳县，战降敌将王超、侯霸荣等一千八百人，俘获敌人一千多人。
English: He was promoted to the guest provincial envoy, and led the cavalry with Wang Quanbin and Guo Jin to attack Pingyang County in the east of the river. The enemy generals Wang Chao, Hou Bairong and other 1800 people were defeated, and more than 1000 people were captured.

古文：既而贼将蔚进率兵来援，三战皆败之。
现代文：不久贼将考进率领军队来增援，三次作战都打败敌人。
English: Soon, the thief Gao Jin led the army to reinforce, and defeated the enemy in three battles.

古文：遂建乐平为平晋军。
现代文：于是把乐平建为平晋军。
English: As a result, Leping was established as the capital of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：乾德初，改左神武将军。
现代文：乾德初年，改任左神武将军。
English: In the first year of Qiande, he was reassigned as General Zuo Shenwu.

古文：时初克辽州，河东召契丹兵六万骑来攻平晋，彬与李继勋等大败之于城下。
现代文：当时刚刚攻克辽州，河东引契丹六万骑兵来进攻平晋，曹彬与李继勋等将领在城下打败敌军。
English: At that time, Liaozhou had just been conquered. Hedong led 60,000 cavalry of Khitan to attack Pingjin. Cao Bin and Li Jixun and other generals defeated the enemy army under the city.

古文：俄兼枢密承旨。
现代文：不久兼任枢密承旨。
English: Soon he also held the post of Privy Counsellor.

古文：二年冬，伐蜀，诏以刘光毅为归州行营前军副部署，彬为都监。
现代文：乾德二年冬天，攻伐后蜀，诏令任命刘光毅为归州行营前军副部署，曹彬为都监。
English: In the winter of Qiande's second year, after the attack on Shu, Liu Guangyi was appointed deputy commander of the army before returning to Guizhou, and Cao Bin was appointed as the supervisor of the capital.

古文：峡中郡县悉下，诸将咸欲屠城以逞其欲，彬独申令戢下，所至悦服。
现代文：峡中郡县都被攻下，诸将都想屠城来逞其杀欲，只有曹彬下令收敛部下，所到各地都感悦听命。
English: All the counties in the gorge were conquered, and all the generals wanted to slaughter the city to fulfill their desire to kill. Only Cao Bin ordered his subordinates to be restrained, and they all obeyed his orders.

古文：上闻，降诏褒之。
现代文：太祖听说，下诏褒奖他。
English: The great-great-grandfather heard that the emperor had given him a posthumous award.

古文：两川平，全斌等昼夜宴饮，不恤军士，部下渔夺无已，蜀人苦之。
现代文：平定两川后，全斌等人昼夜宴饮，不体恤军士，部下渔夺百姓不停，蜀人深感痛苦。
English: After the pacification of the two rivers, Quan Bin and others feasted day and night, showing no mercy to the soldiers, while their subordinates continued to plunder the people. The people of Shu were deeply pained.

古文：彬屡请旋师，全斌等不从。
现代文：曹彬多次请求班师，全斌等人不听从。
English: Cao Bin repeatedly asked the teacher, but Quan Bin and others did not listen.

古文：俄而全师雄等构乱，拥众十万，彬复与光毅破之于新繁，卒平蜀乱。
现代文：不久全师雄等人作乱，聚集军队十万人，曹彬又与光毅在新繁大败敌军，最终平定蜀乱。
English: Not long after, the whole division made a riot and gathered an army of 100,000 men. Cao Bin and Guang Yi defeated the enemy army in Xincheng and finally quelled the Shu Rebellion.

古文：时诸将多取子女玉帛，彬橐中唯图书、衣衾而已。
现代文：当时诸将多取子女玉帛，曹彬行装中只有图书、衣服而已。
English: At that time, generals were more likely to take their children's gongs, while Cao Bin only packed books and clothes.

古文：及还，上尽得其状，以全斌等属吏。
现代文：回朝后，皇帝都知道这些情况，把全斌等人交给官吏治罪。
English: After returning to the imperial court, the emperor was aware of these circumstances and handed Quan Bin and others over to officials to be punished.

古文：谓彬清介廉谨，授宣徽南院使、义成军节度使。
现代文：认为曹彬清介廉谨，授任为宣徽南院使、义成军节度使。
English: He thought that Cao Bin Qing Jie was honest, and appointed him as the envoy of the Southern Yuan Dynasty and the envoy of the Yicheng Army.

古文：彬入见，辞曰： 征西将士俱得罪，臣独受赏，恐无以示劝。 上曰： 卿有茂功，又不矜伐，设有微累，仁赡等岂惜言哉？
现代文：曹彬入宫朝见皇帝，谢绝说： 征西将士都被治罪，我单独受到赏赐，恐怕不能以示劝勉。 太祖说： 你立有大功，又不自我夸耀功劳，即使有点小错，仁赡等哪里值得提呢？
English: When Cao Bin entered the palace to meet the emperor, he declined to offer thanks, saying, "The Western Conquest generals have all been punished, and I alone have been rewarded, so I'm afraid I can't offer any encouragement." The great-grandfather said, "You have made great contributions, but you don't boast about your achievements. Even if you make a small mistake, what is there worth mentioning about your benevolence and support?

古文：惩劝国之常典，可无让。 
现代文：执行劝勉大臣效忠国家的常典，不必辞让。 
English: The implementation of the standing order to exhort ministers to be loyal to the state does not need to be compromised.

古文：六年，遣李继勋、党进率师征太原，命为前军都监，战洞涡河，斩二千余级，俘获甚众。
现代文：乾德六年，朝廷派遣李继勋、党进率领军队征伐太原，任命曹彬为前军都监，在洞涡河大战敌军，斩敌二千多人，俘获敌兵很多。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Qiande, the imperial court sent Li Jixun and the CPC to lead the army to conquer Taiyuan, and appointed Cao Bin as the former military governor of the capital. In the great battle of Dongtou River, the enemy army killed more than 2,000 people and captured many enemy soldiers.

古文：开宝二年，议亲征太原，复命为前军都监，率兵先往，次团柏谷，降贼将陈廷山。
现代文：开宝二年，太祖准备亲自征伐太原，又任命他为前军都监，率领军队先出发，驻扎在团柏谷，战降贼将陈廷山。
English: In the second year of Kaibao, Taizu prepared to personally conquer Taiyuan, and appointed him as the former military governor. He led the army to set out first, stationed in Tuanba Valley, and led Chen Tingshan to surrender.

古文：又战城南，薄于濠桥，夺马千余。
现代文：又在城南与敌人作战，逼近濠桥，夺得战马一千多匹。
English: He also fought with the enemy in the south of the city, approaching the Long Bridge and capturing more than a thousand horses.

古文：及太祖至，则已分砦四面，而自主其北。
现代文：太祖到来时，曹彬已在四面分设营寨，而自己主管北面。
English: When the great-grandfather arrived, Cao Bin had already set up camps on four sides, and he was in charge of the north side.

古文：六年，进检校太傅。
现代文：乾德六年，进升检校太傅。
English: Qian De was six years old, and he was promoted to school inspector.

古文：七年，将伐江南。
现代文：乾德七年，朝廷准备讨伐南唐。
English: In the seventh year of Qiande, the imperial court prepared to invade Southern Tang.

古文：九月，彬奉诏与李汉琼、田钦祚先赴荆南发战舰，潘美帅步兵继进。
现代文：九月，曹彬奉诏与李汉琼、田钦祚先行到荆南征发战舰，潘美率领步兵接着出发。
English: In September, Cao Bin, Li Hanqiong, and Tian Qinqian went to Jingnan to recruit and dispatch warships, and Pan Mei led the infantrymen.

古文：十月，诏以彬为升州西南路行营马步军战棹都部署，分兵由荆南顺流而东，破峡口砦，进克池州，连克当涂、芜湖二县，驻军采石矶。
现代文：十月，诏令任命曹彬为升州西南路行营马步军战舰都部署，分兵从荆南顺流而东，攻破峡口寨，接着攻克池州，连续攻克当涂、芜湖二县，驻扎在采石矶。
English: In October, Cao Bin was appointed by the imperial edict to deploy the warship of the Horse Infantry Battalion along the southwest road of Shengzhou. The detachment of soldiers went eastward from the south of Jing, broke through the gorge, then conquered Chizhou, continuously conquered Dangtu and the two counties of Wuhu, and was stationed in Quarry Rock.

古文：十一月，作浮梁，跨大江以济师。
现代文：十一月，造浮桥，横跨大江以渡过部队。
English: In November, a floating bridge was built across the river to ferry troops.

古文：十二月，大破其军于白鹭洲。
现代文：十二月大破南唐军于白鹭洲。
English: In December, the Southern Tang army was defeated in Baekdu.

古文：八年正月，又破其军于新林港。二月，师进次秦淮，江南水陆十余万陈于城下，大败之，俘斩数万计。
现代文：乾德八年正月，又在新林港大破江南军队，二月，军队进驻秦淮，南唐水陆军队十多万人在城下列阵，宋军大败南唐军，斩杀、俘获一万多敌人。
English: In the first month of Qiande's eighth year, the Southern Jiangsu army was again defeated in Xinlin Port. In February, the army was stationed in Qinhuai. More than 100,000 Southern Tang's naval and ground troops were lined up outside the city. The Song army defeated the Southern Tang's army, killing and capturing more than 10,000 enemies.

古文：及浮梁成，吴人出兵来御，破之于白鹭洲。
现代文：浮桥造成后，吴人出兵抵抗，宋军在白鹭洲大败吴人。
English: After the floating bridge was built, the Wu people sent troops to resist, and the Song army defeated the Wu people in Baishao.

古文：自三月至八月，连破之，进克润州。
现代文：从三月到八月，连连击败敌军，又攻克润州。
English: From March to August, they repeatedly defeated the enemy army and invaded Runzhou.

古文：金陵受围，至是凡三时，吴人樵采路绝，频经败衄，李煜危急，遣其臣徐铉奉表诣阙，乞缓师，上不之省。
现代文：金陵城被围，到此时一共有三个时辰，居民砍柴的路被断绝，南唐军屡次被打败，李煜非常危险，派遣其大臣徐铉送表到朝廷，乞求缓师停战，太祖不予同意。
English: The city of Jinling was besieged. By this time, a total of three hours had passed. The residents' way to cut firewood was cut off. The Southern Tang Army was repeatedly defeated. Li Qiye was in great danger. He sent his minister Xu Qiye to the imperial court to beg for an armistice to delay the division. The great-grandfather did not agree.

古文：先是，大军列三砦，美居守北偏，图其形势来上。
现代文：在此之前，大军排列成三寨，潘美镇守偏北方，把战争形势绘成图送给太祖。
English: Prior to this, the great army was arranged into three camps, with Panmei Town guarding the north, and the war situation was drawn as a map and sent to Taizu.

古文：太祖指北砦谓使者曰： 吴人必夜出兵来寇，尔亟去，令曹彬速成深沟以自固，无堕其计中。 既成，吴兵果夜来袭，美率所部依新沟拒之，吴人大败。
现代文：太祖指着北寨对使者说 ：吴人必定夜晚出兵来进攻，你赶快回去，命令曹彬迅速挖沟来巩固阵地，不要中了敌人的诡计。 深沟挖成后，吴兵果然夜里来突袭，潘美率领所属部队依靠新沟抵抗，吴人大败。
English: The great-grandfather pointed to Beizhai and said to the messenger: The Wu people will certainly attack at night, you should hurry back and order Cao Bin to quickly dig a trench to consolidate the position, so as not to be fooled by the enemy's trickery. After the deep trench was dug, the Wu soldiers really came to raid at night, Pan Mei led his troops to rely on the new trench to resist, and the Wu people were defeated.

古文：奏至，上笑曰： 果如此。 
现代文：上奏战报到朝廷时，太祖笑着说 ：果然如此。 
English: When the report of the battle was reported to the imperial court, the great-grandfather smiled and said, "That's right.

古文：长围中，彬每缓师，冀煜归服。
现代文：长期的围城中，曹彬常常缓攻，希望李煜能归降。
English: During the long siege of the city, Cao Bin often delayed the attack, hoping that Li Gan would surrender.

古文：十一月，彬又使人谕之曰： 事势如此，所惜者一城生聚，若能归命，策之上也。 城垂克，彬忽称疾不视事，诸将皆来问疾。
现代文：十一月，曹彬又派人晓谕他 ：事势已经如此，只可惜一城的百姓，如果你能归命，真是上策啊。 城即将攻克时，曹彬忽然称疾不处理事务，诸将都来探病。
English: In November, Cao Bin also sent someone to tell him, "The situation is already like this, it's just a pity for the people of a city, if you can return to your life, it's really the best strategy." When the city was about to be conquered, Cao Bin suddenly said that he was ill and would not deal with affairs, and all the generals came to investigate the illness.

古文：彬曰： 余之疾非药石所能愈，惟须诸公诚心自誓，以克城之日，不妄杀一人，则自愈矣。 诸将许诺，共焚香为誓。
现代文：曹彬说 ：我的病不是药石能治好的，只要诸公诚心立誓，克城之日，不妄杀一人，就会自动痊愈。 诸将答应下来，一起焚香立誓。
English: Cao Bin said, "My illness is not something that can be cured by a medicinal stone. As long as everyone sincerely swears that on the day of the siege, they will not kill a single person, they will automatically recover. Everyone will agree to burn incense and swear together.

古文：明日，稍愈。
现代文：第二天，病情稍微好转。
English: The next day, his condition improved slightly.

古文：又明日，城陷。
现代文：再过一天，金陵城被攻陷。
English: A day later, Jinling City was captured.

古文：煜与其臣百余人诣军门请罪，彬慰安之，待以宾礼，请煜入宫治装，彬以数骑待宫门外。
现代文：李煜与他的大臣们一百多人到军营请罪，曹彬安慰他，用贵宾礼接待他，请李煜入宫换装，曹彬只派几个骑兵等在宫门外。
English: More than a hundred of Li Qiye and his ministers went to the military camp to plead guilty. Cao Bin consoled him, received him with the honors of a guest of honor, and invited Li Qiye to enter the palace to change his clothes. Cao Bin only sent a few cavalrymen to wait outside the palace gate.

古文：左右密谓彬曰： 煜入或不测，奈何？ 彬笑曰： 煜素忄耎无断，既已降，必不能自引决。 煜之君臣，卒赖保全。自出师至凯旋，士众畏服，无轻肆者。
现代文：部下暗地对曹彬说： 李煜入宫如有不测，怎么办？ 曹彬笑着说 ：李煜向来懦弱不能果断，既然已经投降，一定不会自杀。 李煜的君臣，最终赖以保全，从出师到凯旋，士卒们都畏服他，不敢轻举妄动。
English: His subordinates secretly said to Cao Bin, "What should we do if there is an accident when Li Hongzhi enters the palace?" Cao Bin smiled and said, "Li Hongzhi has always been weak and indecisive. Since he has surrendered, he will not commit suicide. Li Hongzhi's princes and ministers ultimately rely on him for protection. From his graduation to his triumphant return, his subordinates are afraid of him and dare not make any rash moves.

古文：及入见，刺称 奉敕江南干事回 ，其谦恭不伐如此。
现代文：入宫朝见时，名帖上自称 奉令到江南办事回来 ，他的谦恭不夸耀就像这样。
English: When he entered the palace for the morning meeting, he said on his name card that he had been ordered to go to the south of the Yangtze River to do some work, and he did not boast of his modesty like this.

古文：初，彬之总师也，太祖谓曰： 俟克李煜，当以卿为使相。 副帅潘美预以为贺。
现代文：当初，曹彬统领军队，太祖对他说： 等攻克李煜后，任命你为使相。 副帅潘美预先向他祝贺。
English: At the beginning, Cao Bin was in charge of the army, and the great-grandfather said to him, "After conquering Li Xi, I will appoint you as the envoy." Vice-commander Pan Mei congratulated him in advance.

古文：彬曰： 不然，夫是行也，仗天威，遵庙谟，乃能成事，吾何功哉，况使相极品乎！ 美曰： 何谓也？
现代文：曹彬说： 不是这样，这次行动，仰仗天威，遵照朝廷谋略，才能成功，我又有什么功劳呢？何况使相是极品吗？ 潘美说： 怎么说呢？ 
English: Cao Bin said, "Isn't it true that this operation can only succeed if it relies on the will of heaven and follows the strategy of the imperial court? What merit do I have? What's more, is it a masterpiece?" Pan Mei said, "How can I put it?

古文：彬曰： 太原未平尔。 及还，献俘。
现代文：曹彬说 ：太原没有平定啊。 回朝后，献俘虏。
English: Cao Bin said: Taiyuan has not been pacified. After returning to the North, the captives were sacrificed.

古文：上谓曰： 本授卿使相，然刘继元未下，姑少待之。 既闻此语，美窃视彬微笑。
现代文：太祖对他说： 本来要授任你为使相，但是刘继元没有攻灭，暂且稍微等待一些时候。 听见这句话后，潘美偷看着曹彬微笑。
English: The great-grandfather said to him, "I originally wanted to appoint you as the envoy, but Liu Jiyuan did not attack, so I waited for a while." After hearing this sentence, Pan Mei secretly looked at Cao Bin and smiled.

古文：上觉，遽诘所以，美不敢隐，遂以实对。
现代文：太祖发觉后，于是责问他为什么发笑，潘美不敢隐瞒，于是按实情回答。
English: After the great-grandfather found out, he asked why she was laughing. Pan Mei did not dare to hide it, so she answered truthfully.

古文：上亦大笑，乃赐彬钱二十万。
现代文：太祖也大笑起来，于是赐给曹彬钱二十万。
English: The great-grandfather also laughed loudly, so he gave Cao Bin 200 thousand yuan.

古文：彬退曰： 人生何必使相，好官亦不过多得钱尔。 未几，拜枢密使、检校太尉、忠武军节度使。
现代文：曹彬退朝后说： 人生何必作使相，好官也不过多得些钱罢了。 不久，任命他为枢密使、检校太尉、忠武军节度使。
English: After Cao Bin retired from the imperial court, he said, "Why do you need to be an envoy all your life, a good official only needs to earn a little more money." Soon, he was appointed as a privy councilor, inspector of schools, and the loyal military festival envoy.

古文：太宗即位，加同平章事。
现代文：太宗即皇帝位，加任他为同平章事。
English: Taizong is the emperor, and his appointment is a matter of peerage.

古文：议征太原，召彬问曰： 周世宗及太祖皆亲征，何以不能克？ 彬曰： 世宗时，史彦超败于石岭关，人情惊扰，故班师；太祖顿兵甘草地，会岁暑雨，军士多疾，因是中止。 太宗曰： 今吾欲北征，卿以为何如？ 彬曰： 以国家兵甲精锐，剪太原之孤垒，如摧枯拉朽尔，何为而不可。 太宗意遂决。
现代文：商议征伐太原，召曹彬来问道： 周世宗及太祖都亲自征讨，为什么不能攻克？ 曹彬说 ：周世宗时，史彦超在石岭关失败，军情惊扰，所以班师；太祖在甘草地驻扎部队，正遇天气酷热下雨，士兵们大多染上疾病，于是中途停止。 太宗说： 现在我打算北征，你认为怎么样？ 曹彬说 ：以国家精锐军队，剪除太原这个孤垒，简直就像摧枯拉朽，为什么不可以呢？ 太宗于是决定下来。
English: They discussed the conquest of Taiyuan, and called Cao Bin to ask: Zhou Shizong and Taizu both personally conquered it, why couldn't they conquer it? Cao Bin said: When Zhou Shizong was in power, Shi Yanchao failed at Shilinguan, and the military situation was alarming, so he sent a team to conquer it; when Taizu was stationed in Licorice Land, the weather was extremely hot and rainy, and most of the soldiers were infected with diseases, so they stopped halfway. Taizu said: Now I plan to march to the north, what do you think? Cao Bin said: With the country's elite army, cutting off Taiy

古文：太平兴国三年，进检校太师，从征太原，加兼侍中。
现代文：太平兴国三年，进位检校太师，跟从太宗征讨太原，加官兼任侍中。
English: In the third year of Taiping Xingguo, he was promoted to the rank of procurator-teacher, followed the Taizong to enlist Taiyuan, and was promoted to the position of attendant.

古文：八年，为弭德超所诬，罢为天平军节度使。
现代文：太平兴国八年，被弭德超诬陷，罢去本官任天平军节度使。
English: In the eighth year of Taiping's rise to power, he was framed by Zande Chao and dismissed from his post as the military commander of the Tianping Army.

古文：旬余，上悟其谮，进封鲁国公，待之愈厚。
现代文：十多天后，太宗醒悟到是诬陷，进封他为鲁国公，对待他越发厚重。
English: More than ten days later, Taizong woke up to the fact that he had been framed. He was made the prince of Lu, and he was treated more and more harshly.

古文：雍熙三年，诏彬将幽州行营前军马步水陆之师，与潘美等北伐，分路进讨。
现代文：雍熙三年，诏令曹彬率领幽州行营前军马步水陆军队，与潘美等人北伐，分路进讨。
English: In the third year of the reign of Yongxi, Cao Bin was ordered by the emperor to lead the cavalry, infantry and cavalry army before the Yuzhou Campaign, and to advance with Pan Mei and others to the north.

古文：三月，败契丹于固安，破涿州，戎人来援，大破之于城南。
现代文：三月，在固安打败契丹兵，攻克涿州，戎人来增援，宋军在城南大败援兵。
English: In March, after defeating the Khitan soldiers in Gu'an and conquering Bozhou, the Eunuchs came to reinforce, and the Song Army defeated the reinforcements in the south of the city.

古文：四月，又与米信破契丹于新城，斩首二百级。
现代文：四月，又与米信一起在新城打败契丹，杀敌二百人。
English: In April, together with Yixin, they defeated the Khitan in Xincheng, killing 200 of their enemies.

古文：五月，战于岐沟关，诸军败绩，退屯易州，临易水而营。
现代文：五月，在歧沟关作战，诸军被打败，退守易州，面对易水扎营。
English: In May, in the Battle of Mizugoseki, the armies were defeated, retreated to Yizhou, and encamped in front of Yishui.

古文：上闻，亟令分屯边城，追诸将归阙。
现代文：太宗听说，急忙派人分兵屯守边城，追令诸将回朝。
English: Hearing of this, Taizong hurriedly sent a detachment of soldiers to guard the border town and ordered the generals to return to the imperial court.

古文：先是，贺令图等言于上曰： 契丹主少，母后专政，宠幸用事，请乘其衅，以取幽蓟。 遂遣彬与崔彦进、米信自雄州，田重进趣飞狐，潘美出雁门，约期齐举。
现代文：在此之前，贺令图等人对皇上说： 契丹主年少，母后专政，宠幸大臣们用事，请趁其灾祸，攻取幽蓟。 于是派遣曹彬与崔彦进、米信从雄州，田重进赴飞狐，潘美从雁门出发，约期一齐举事。
English: Prior to this, He Lingtu and others said to the emperor: the Qidan lord is young, the mother is a dictatorship, and the favored ministers are busy, please take advantage of their misfortune and capture Yuxuan. So Cao Bin and Cui Yanjin, Yixin from Xiongzhou, Tian Chongjin to Feixu, and Pan Mei from Ganmen were sent to carry out the work together.

古文：将发，上谓之曰： 潘美之师但先趣云、应，卿等以十万众声言取幽州，且持重缓行，不得贪利。
现代文：将出发时，太宗对曹彬说： 潘美的军队先奔赴云、应二州，你们以十万人声言攻取幽州，但持重慢行，不得贪求功利。
English: When they were about to set out, Emperor Taizong said to Cao Bin: "Pan Mei's army rushed to Yun first and responded to the two states. You claimed to capture Yuzhou with a hundred thousand people, but you should be careful and slow, and should not be greedy for material gain.

古文：彼闻大兵至，必悉众救范阳，不暇援山后矣。 既而，美之师先下寰、朔、云、应等州，重进又取飞狐、灵丘、蔚州，多得山后要害地，彬亦连下州县，势大振。
现代文：敌人听说大军到了，一定出动全部军队救范阳，无暇救山后。 不久，潘美的部队先攻下寰、朔、云、应等州，重进又攻取飞狐、灵丘、蔚州，得到很多山后要害之地，曹彬也连连攻下州县，声势大振。
English: When the enemy heard that the large army had arrived, they must have sent out the entire army to save Fanyang, and there was no time to save Shanhou. Soon, Pan Mei's troops first captured Shao, Shuo, Yun, Ying and other prefectures, and then re-entered and captured Flying Fox, Lingqiu, and Ulshou, gaining many important places behind the mountains. Cao Bin also repeatedly captured prefectures and counties, and the momentum was strong.

古文：每奏至，上已讶彬进军之速。
现代文：每次奏本到来，太宗已经很惊讶曹彬进军太快。
English: Every time the playbooks arrived, Taizong was already surprised that Cao Bin marched in too quickly.

古文：及彬次涿州，旬日食尽，因退师雄州以援饷馈。
现代文：曹彬驻扎涿州时，十天食尽，于是退到雄州补充粮草。
English: When Cao Bin was stationed in Zhangzhou, he ran out of food in ten days, so he retreated to Xiongzhou to replenish grain and grass.

古文：上闻之曰： 岂有敌人在前，反退军以援刍粟，失策之甚也。 亟遣使止彬勿前，急引师缘白沟河与米信军会，案兵养锐，以张西师之势；俟美等尽略山后地，会重进之师而东，合势以取幽州。
现代文：太宗听说后说 ：哪有敌人在前，反退兵补充粮草之理，真是太失策了。 急忙派遣使者阻止曹彬前进，急忙引军沿着白沟河与米信会师，按兵不动，蓄精养锐，声张西边部队的军势；等潘美等人全部攻占山后之地后，与田重进会师向东，合势攻取幽州。
English: After hearing this, Emperor Taizong said, "If there is an enemy in front of us, it is really a blunder to oppose the principle of withdrawing troops to replenish grain and grass. He hurriedly sent an envoy to stop Cao Bin from advancing, hurriedly led the army along the Baigou River with the Yixin Association Division, kept the troops at a standstill, kept them sharp, and announced the military strength of the western troops; after Pan Mei and others had all occupied the land behind the mountain, he and Tian Chongjin Association Division went east and joined forces to capture Yuzhou.

古文：时彬部下诸将，闻美及重进累建功，而已握重兵不能有所攻取，谋议蜂起。彬不得已，乃复裹粮再往攻涿州。
现代文：当时曹彬的部下将领，听说潘美和田重进屡建军功，而自己手握重兵不能有所攻取，谋议蜂起，曹彬不得已，于是又带着粮草再去进攻涿州。
English: At that time, Cao Bin's subordinate generals heard that Pan Mei and Hetian Chongjin had repeatedly made military achievements, but they could not capture anything with their own heavy soldiers, and planned an uprising. Cao Bin had no choice but to attack Zhangzhou again with grain and grass.

古文：契丹大众当前，时方炎暑，军士乏困，粮且尽，彬退军，无复行伍，遂为所蹑而败。
现代文：契丹大军当前，当时正炎热天气，军士困乏，粮草将尽，曹彬退兵，军队不再有阵势，于是被敌人追击战败。
English: At the time of the Khitan army, it was a hot day, the sergeants were tired, the grain and grass would run out, Cao Bin retired, the army no longer had a position, so it was chased by the enemy and defeated.

古文：彬等至，诏鞫于尚书省，令翰林学士贾黄中等杂治之，彬等具伏违诏失律之罪。
现代文：曹彬等人回朝后，诏令由尚书省审讯，命令翰林学士贾黄中等人惩治他们，曹彬等人供认违令失律之罪。
English: After Cao Bin and others returned to the imperial court, the imperial edict ordered that they be tried by Shangshu Province, and ordered Hanlin Scholar Jia Huang and others to punish them. Cao Bin and others confessed to the crime of violating the law.

古文：彬责授右骁卫上将军，彦进右武卫上将军，信右屯卫上将军，余以次黜。
现代文：曹彬被贬任右骁卫上将军，王彦进被贬任右武卫上将军，米信被贬任右屯卫上将军，其余诸将依次贬降。
English: Cao Bin was demoted to General of the Right Division of the National Guard, Wang Yanjin was demoted to General of the Right Division of the National Guard, Yixin was demoted to General of the Right Division of the National Guard, and the rest of the generals were demoted in turn.

古文：四年，起彬为侍中、武宁军节度使。
现代文：雍熙四年，复起曹彬为侍中、武宁军节度使。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Yongxi, Cao Bin was reinstated as an attendant and the ceremonial envoy of the Wu Ning Army.

古文：淳化五年，徙平卢军节度。
现代文：淳化五年，迁任平卢军节度。
English: In the fifth year of Junhua, he was transferred to be the commander of the Pinglu Army.

古文：真宗即位，复检校太师、同平章事。
现代文：真宗即皇帝位后，恢复他的检校太师、同平章事之职。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Zhenzong, he resumed his duties as a proctor of schools and a peer of the emperor.

古文：数月，召拜枢密使。
现代文：几个月后，召回朝廷授任枢密使。
English: A few months later, he was recalled to the Imperial Court and appointed a Privy Counsellor.

古文：咸平二年，被疾。
现代文：咸平二年，生病。
English: In the second year of Xianping, he fell ill.

古文：上趣驾临问，手为和药，仍赐白金万两。
现代文：真宗亲自看望，亲手替他和药，又赐他白金万两。
English: Zhen Zong personally visited him, personally took medicine for him, and gave him a million taels of platinum.

古文：问以后事，对曰： 臣无事可言。
现代文：问他后事，他回答说： 我没有事可说。
English: Asked what happened next, he replied: "I have nothing to say."

古文：臣二子材器可取，臣若内举，皆堪为将。 上问其优劣，对曰： 璨不如玮。 六月薨，年六十九。
现代文：我的两个儿子才能可用，我如果内举，都堪任为将。 真宗问他们谁优谁劣，他回答说 ：璨不如玮。 六月去世，终年六十九岁。
English: My two sons are capable, and if I were to recommend them to others, they would both do well. When the True Father asked them who was better and who was worse, he replied, "Better you than I." He died in June, at the age of 69.

古文：上临哭之恸，对辅臣语及彬，必流涕。
现代文：真宗亲自痛哭致祭，对大臣们说到曹彬时，必定流涕哭泣。
English: Shinsong himself wept bitterly at the sacrifice, and when he spoke to the ministers about Cao Bin, he must have shed tears.

古文：赠中书令，追封济阳郡王，谥武惠；且赠其妻高氏韩国夫人；官其亲族、门客、亲校十余人。
现代文：追赠中书令，追封济阳郡王，赠谥号为武惠；并且赠其妻高氏为韩国夫人；任命他的亲族、门客、亲校十多人为官。
English: He posthumously bestowed the title of the King of Jiyang County and the posthumous title of Wu Hui; he also bestowed his wife, Gao, with the title of the Lady of South Korea; and appointed more than ten of his relatives, protégés, and schoolmates as officials.

古文：八月，诏彬与赵普配飨太祖庙庭。
现代文：八月，诏令曹彬与赵普配享太祖庙庭。
English: In August, the emperor ordered Cao Bin and Zhao Pu to share the ancestral temple garden.

古文：彬性仁敬和厚，在朝廷未尝忤旨，亦未尝言人过失。
现代文：曹彬为人仁敬和厚，在朝廷从未违旨，也从未谈别人的过失。
English: Cao Bin was a kind and considerate person. He never disobeyed an order in the imperial court, nor did he ever talk about the faults of others.

古文：伐二国，秋毫无所取。
现代文：讨伐二国，丝毫无所取。
English: The crusade against the two countries has achieved nothing.

古文：位兼将相，不以等威自异。
现代文：位兼将相，不以等第威势自异于人。
English: He is both a leader and a follower, and he is different from other people because he does not rise to the top with the same degree of power.

古文：遇士夫于途，必引车避之。不名下吏，每白事，必冠而后见。
现代文：在路上遇到士大夫，一定引车回避，不称呼手下官吏的名字，每次手下官吏谈政事，一定先整冠才接见。
English: If you meet a senior official on the road, you must pull the car away, do not call the names of your subordinate officials, and every time your subordinate officials talk about politics, you must first receive the crown.

古文：居官奉入给宗族，无余积。
现代文：做官，俸禄分给宗族，没有余积。
English: As an official, the salary is distributed to the clan, and there is no surplus.

古文：平蜀回，太祖从容问官吏善否，对曰： 军政之外，非臣所闻也。 固问之，唯荐随军转运使沈伦廉谨可任。
现代文：平定后蜀回朝后，太祖从容问及官吏的善恶，他回答说 ：军政之外，不是我应该闻见的。 再三问他，只推荐随军转运使沈伦廉洁端谨可用。
English: After Shu was pacified and returned to the imperial court, the great-grandfather calmly asked about the virtues and vices of government officials, and he replied: "Outside of military and political affairs, I should not have heard about it. I asked him repeatedly, and he only recommended that I accompany the army for transportation so that I could use Shenren's honesty and integrity.

古文：为帅知徐州日，有吏犯罪，既具案，逾年而后杖之，人莫知其故。
现代文：任节度使知徐州时，有个属吏犯罪，已经结案，一年以后才杖打他，人们不知道为什么。
English: When Ren Jiedu sent Zhi Xuzhou, there was a subordinate official who committed a crime, the case was closed, and a year later he was beaten with a cane. People don't know why.

古文：彬曰： 吾闻此人新娶妇，若杖之，其舅姑必以妇为不利，而朝夕笞詈之，使不能自存。
现代文：曹彬道 ：我听说这个人刚娶媳妇，如果杖打他，他的父母必定认为是媳妇不利，而朝夕鞭打辱骂她，使她不能活下去。
English: Cao Bin said: I heard that this man just married his daughter-in-law. If he was beaten with a cane, his parents must have thought that his daughter-in-law was unfavorable, and whipped and abused her morning and evening, so that she could not live.

古文：吾故缓其事，然法亦未尝屈焉。 北征之失律也，赵昌言表请行军法。
现代文：所以我迟缓处罚，然而也没有枉法。 北征失律后，赵昌言上表请求对他执行军法。
English: Therefore, I delayed the punishment, but it was not in vain. After the Northern Expedition was out of order, Zhao Changyan formally requested that the military law be enforced against him.

古文：及昌言自延安还，被劾，不得入见。
现代文：到昌言从延安回来时，被弹劾，不能入宫见皇帝。
English: When Changyan returned from Yan'an, he was impeached and could not enter the palace to see the emperor.

古文：彬在右府，为请于上，乃许朝谒。
现代文：曹彬在宰府，替他向皇上请求，方允许昌言朝见。
English: Cao Bin was in Zaifu and asked the emperor on his behalf to allow Changyan to see the emperor.

古文：子璨、珝、玮、玹、玘、珣、琮。
现代文：儿子名璨、王羽、玮、王玄、王巳、王旬、琮。
English: His sons were named Miao, Wang Yu, Yao, Wang Xuan, Wang Si, Wang Shun, and Yao.

古文：珝娶秦王女兴平郡主，至昭宣使。
现代文：王羽娶秦王的女儿兴平郡主，官至昭宣使。
English: Wang Yu married the daughter of King Qin, Princess Xingping, and became an official of the Zhaoxuan envoy.

古文：玹左藏库副使，玘尚书虞部员外郎，珣东上阁门使，琮西上阁门副使。玘之女，即慈圣光献皇后也。
现代文：王玄任左藏库副使，王巳任尚书虞部员外郎，王旬任东上门合门使，琮任西上门副使，王巳的女儿就是慈圣光献皇后。
English: Wang Xuan was the vice-envoy of the Zuozang Library, Wang Si was the son-in-law of Shang Shuguang, Wang Shun was the vice-envoy of the East Upper Gate, and Ren was the vice-envoy of the West Upper Gate. Wang Si's daughter was the Empress Dowager Cixi Guangxian.

古文：芸，累赠魏王。
现代文：曹芸，历赠至魏王。
English: Cao Ying, a gift to the Wei king.

古文：彬，韩王。
现代文：曹彬，历赠至韩王。
English: Cao Bin, who was given to King Han.

古文：玘，吴王，谥曰安僖。
现代文：王巳，历赠至吴王，谥号为安僖。
English: Wang Si, the calendar was given to King Wu, and his posthumous name was An Qi.

古文：牷子诗，尚鲁国大长公主。
现代文：王巳的儿子名佾、傅。佾见《外戚传》。
English: Wang Si's sons were named Miao and Fu. For their names, see "The Tale of the Maternal Relatives."

古文：潘美，字仲询，大名人。
现代文：傅，皇后之兄，任荣州刺史，谥号为恭怀。潘美字仲询，大名人。
English: Fu, the queen's brother, Ren Rongzhou Zhi Shi, nicknamed Gong Hui. Pan Mei Zhaoxuan, a great celebrity.

古文：父璘，以军校戍常山。
现代文：其父潘王璘，任军校戍守常山。
English: His father, Pan Wangyao, served as the military school governor of Changshan.

古文：美少倜傥，隶府中典谒。
现代文：潘美年轻时风流倜傥，附属于府中典谒。
English: When Pan Mei was young, she was a womanizer and was attached to the prefectural middle school.

古文：尝语其里人王密曰： 汉代将终，凶臣肆虐，四海有改卜之兆。
现代文：曾经对家乡人王密说 ：汉代将要结束了，奸臣恣肆行虐，天下有改朝换代的征兆。
English: Wang Mi once said to his hometown people, "The Han Dynasty is coming to an end, treacherous vassals are running amok, and there are signs of a change of dynasty in the world."

古文：大丈夫不以此时立功名、取富贵，碌碌与万物共尽，可羞也。 会周世宗为开封府尹，美以中涓事世宗。
现代文：大丈夫不在这个时候建立功名，谋取富贵，碌碌无为与万物一并灭亡，直是羞耻啊。 正好周世宗任开封府尹，潘美任侍从官奉事世宗。
English: It would be a shame for a good man not to make a name for himself and seek wealth at this time, and for the idle to perish along with everything else. It was just right that Zhou Shizong was appointed as the governor of Kaifeng, and Pan Mei was appointed as an attendant to serve Shizong.

古文：及即位，补供奉官。
现代文：到周世宗即帝位后，补任潘美为供奉官。
English: After Zhou Shizong ascended to the throne, Pan Mei was appointed as the offering officer.

古文：高平之战，美以功迁西上阁门副使。
现代文：高平之战，潘美因为战功升迁为西上门副使。
English: During the Battle of Gaoping, Pan Mei was promoted to vice-envoy to Xishangmen because of his war service.

古文：出监陕州军，改引进使。
现代文：后出任陕州监军，改任引进使。
English: Later, he served as the inspector of troops in Shaanxi and was reassigned as the envoy of introduction.

古文：世宗将用师陇、蜀，命护永兴屯兵，经度西事。
现代文：周世宗准备用兵于陇、蜀二地，命潘美统率永兴的屯兵，管理西部战事。
English: Zhou Shizong prepared to use troops in Min and Shu, and ordered Pan Mei to lead Yongxing's troops and manage the war in the west.

古文：先是，太祖遇美素厚，及受禅，命美先往见执政，谕旨中外。
现代文：先前，太祖对潘美待遇很优厚，受禅即位后，命令潘美先去见执政大臣，宣谕圣旨于中外。
English: Previously, the great-grandfather treated Pan Mei very generously. After the enthronement, he ordered Pan Mei to first meet with the ruling minister and proclaim the holy will in China and abroad.

古文：陕帅袁彦凶悍，信任群小，嗜杀黩货，且缮甲兵，太祖虑其为变，遣美监其军以图之。
现代文：陕州主将袁彦凶悍，信任奸佞小人，喜欢杀人贪财，而且修理兵器，太祖怕他变乱，派潘美监视他的军队准备处置他。
English: The commander of Shaanxi Province, Yuan Yan, was fierce, trusted traitors and villains, liked to kill and covet wealth, and repaired weapons. The great-grandfather was afraid of his disorder, and sent Pan Mei to monitor his army and prepare to deal with him.

古文：美单骑往谕，以天命既归，宜修臣职，彦遂入朝。
现代文：潘美一人骑马前去宣谕，认为天命既定，应当克守臣职，袁彦于是入朝。
English: Pan Mei alone rode forward to proclaim, believing that the fate of heaven had been established, and that he should refrain from his duties as a vassal, so Yuan Yan entered the court.

古文：上喜曰： 潘美不杀袁彦，能令来觐，成我志矣。 
现代文：皇上高兴地说： 潘美不杀袁彦，能让他来晋见，实现了我的愿望啊。 
English: The emperor said happily, "Pan Mei did not kill Yuan Yan, but allowed him to come and see him, which fulfilled my wish."

古文：李重进叛，太祖亲征，命石守信为招讨使，美为行营都监以副之。
现代文：李重进叛乱，太祖亲自征伐，任命石守信为招讨使，潘美为行营都监做他的助手。
English: Li re-entered the rebellion, the great-grandfather personally led the expedition, appointed Shi Shouxin as the recruiting envoy, and Pan Mei as the camp commander to be his assistant.

古文：扬州平，留为巡检，以任镇抚，以功授秦州团练使。
现代文：扬州平定后，潘美留任为巡检，以行使镇抚之事，因功授为泰州团练使。
English: After Yangzhou was pacified, Pan Mei stayed on as a patrol inspector to exercise pacification, and was awarded the title of Taizhou regimental drill sergeant.

古文：时湖南叛将汪端既平，人心未宁，乃授美潭州防御使。
现代文：当时湖南叛将汪端平定后，人心不安，于是任命潘美为潭州防御使。
English: At that time, after the Hunan rebel general Wang Duan was subdued, the people were uneasy, so Pan Mei was appointed as the defense envoy of Tanzhou.

古文：岭南刘鋹数寇桂阳、江华，美击走之。
现代文：岭南刘钅长几次侵犯桂阳、江华等地，潘美把他们都赶跑了。
English: Lingnan Liu Yuchang invaded Guiyang, Jianghua and other places several times, Pan Mei drove them all away.

古文：溪峒蛮獠自唐以来，不时侵略，颇为民患。
现代文：溪峒蛮獠等少数民族从唐朝开始，时常侵犯内地，成为百姓的一大祸患。
English: From the beginning of the Tang Dynasty, ethnic minorities such as the Xizang barbarians often invaded the inland and became a major scourge for the people.

古文：美穷其巢穴，多所杀获，余加慰抚，夷落遂定。
现代文：潘美追剿到他们的老窝，诛杀俘获了很多人，对其余的人加以慰抚，这些少数民族地区才安定下来。
English: Pan Mei chased them back to their hometowns, killed and captured many of them, and comforted the rest. Only then did these ethnic minority areas settle down.

古文：乾德二年，又从兵马都监丁德裕等率兵克郴州。
现代文：乾德二年，潘美又随从兵马都监丁德裕等人率领军队攻克郴州。
English: In the second year of Qiande, Pan Mei led the army to conquer Ganzhou, following the Terracotta Warriors and Horses Supervisor Ding Deyu and others.

古文：开宝三年，征岭南，以美为行营诸军都部署、朗州团练使，尹崇珂副之。
现代文：开宝三年，朝廷下令征伐岭南，任命潘美为行营诸军都部署、朗州团练使，尹崇珂为他的副手。
English: In the third year of Kaibao, the imperial court ordered the conquest of Lingnan, and appointed Pan Mei as the commander of the army, the commander of the Langzhou Regiment, and Yin Chongke as his deputy.

古文：进克富川，鋹遣将率众万余来援，遇战大破之，遂克贺州。
现代文：军队进克富州，刘钅长派其将领率领军队一万多人来增援，潘美与他们作战大败敌军，于是攻克贺州。
English: The army entered Kefuzhou, and Liu Yingchang sent his general Zong to lead an army of more than ten thousand people to reinforce. Pan Mei fought with them and defeated the enemy army, thus conquering Hezhou.

古文：十月，又下昭、桂、连三州，西江诸州以次降。
现代文：十月，又攻下昭、桂、连三州，西江各州相继投降。
English: In October, the three prefectures of Zhao, Gui and Lian were attacked again, and the prefectures along the West River surrendered one after another.

古文：美以功移南面都部署，进次韶州。
现代文：潘美因为战功移任南面都部署，进驻韶州。
English: Pan Mei was transferred to the south due to his war exploits, and was stationed in Zhangzhou.

古文：韶，广之北门也，贼众十余万聚焉。
现代文：韶州是广州的北面门户，敌军十余万人聚结在这里。
English: Ganzhou is the northern gateway to Guangzhou. More than 100,000 enemy troops have gathered here.

古文：美挥兵进乘之，韶州遂拔，斩获数万计。
现代文：潘美指挥军队乘机进攻，韶州于是被攻下，斩杀俘虏敌军数万人。
English: Pan Mei commanded the army to take the opportunity to attack, and Zhangzhou was captured, killing and capturing tens of thousands of enemy soldiers.

古文：鋹穷蹙，四年二月，遣其臣王珪诣军门求通好，又遣其左仆射萧漼、中书舍人卓惟休奉表乞降。
现代文：刘钅长穷愁急迫，派遣他的大臣王王圭到军营来请求和好，又派他的左仆射萧氵崔、中书舍人卓唯休奉表请降。
English: Distressed and in a hurry, Liu Bei sent his minister Wang Wang Gui to the military camp to ask for reconciliation, and also sent his left-hand man, Sha Xiao Bing Cui, and his second-in-command, Zhuo Wei Hui, to ask for surrender.

古文：美因谕以上意，以为彼能战则与之战，不能战则劝之守，不能守则谕之降，不能降则死，不能死则亡非此五者他不得受。
现代文：潘美对他们宣谕皇上的意思，认为能战就与他们战，不能战就让他们守，不能守就让他们降，不能降就让他们死，不能让他死就赶走他们，除这五种结果外其他不得接受。
English: Pan Mei proclaimed the emperor's will to them, saying that if they could fight, they should fight; if they could not fight, they should defend; if they could not defend, they should surrender; if they could not surrender, they should die; if they could not let him die, they should drive them away. Anything other than these five outcomes was unacceptable.

古文：美既令殿直冉彦衮部送漼等赴阙。
现代文：潘美就命令殿直冉彦衮指挥押送萧氵崔等人到朝廷。
English: Pan Mei ordered the palace guard to escort Xiao Qi Cui and others to the imperial court.

古文：鋹复遣其弟保兴率众拒战，美即率厉士卒倍道趋栅头，距广州百二十里。
现代文：刘钅长又派他的弟弟刘保兴率领军队抵抗，潘美就率领军队兼程行军赶到栅头，离广州一百二十里远。
English: Liu Yuchang also sent his brother Liu Baoxing to lead the army to resist, and Pan Mei led the army to march to the gate, one hundred and twenty miles away from Guangzhou.

古文：鋹兵十五万依山谷坚壁以待，美因筑垒休士，与诸将计曰： 彼编竹木为栅，若攻之以火，彼必溃乱。
现代文：刘钅长的军队十五万人凭借山谷坚固阵地等待宋军，潘美于是构筑壁垒休整部队，与将领们计议说 ：敌军用竹木编为栅栏。如果用火攻，敌军一定溃乱，趁机用精锐部队夹击敌人，是万全之策。 
English: The 150,000 soldiers of Liu Xuanchang's army waited for the Song army by virtue of the solid position in the valley. Pan Mei then built a barrier to rest the troops, and discussed with the generals: the enemy army made bamboo and wood into a fence. If attacked with fire, the enemy army will certainly collapse, and it is the best strategy to seize the opportunity to attack the enemy with elite troops.

古文：因以锐师夹击之，万全策也。 遂分遣丁夫数千人，人持二炬，间道造其栅。及夜，万炬俱发，会天大风，火势甚炽。
现代文：于是分派丁夫几千人，每人拿着两个火把，秘密地行军到达敌军的栅栏。到了晚上，万余火把一齐发攻，正好天气刮着大风，火势很强。
English: So Dingfu dispatched several thousand people, each carrying two torches, to march secretly to the enemy's fence. In the evening, more than ten thousand torches attacked together, just as the weather was blowing a gale, and the fire was very strong.

古文：鋹众惊扰来犯，美挥兵急击之，鋹众大败，斩数万计。
现代文：刘钅长部队惊动来进犯，潘美指挥军队急忙迎击，刘钅长军队大败，潘美军队斩敌数万人。
English: Liu Yingchang's troops made a surprise attack, Pan Mei's commanding army rushed to meet the attack, Liu Yingchang's army was defeated, and Pan Mei's army killed tens of thousands of enemies.

古文：长驱至广州，鋹尽焚其府库，遂克之，擒鋹送京师，露布以闻。
现代文：潘美指挥军队长驱直入攻到广州，刘钅长把他的府库都焚烧了，潘美军队于是攻克广州，擒俘刘钅长押送到京师，并向朝廷报捷。
English: Pan Mei commanded the commander of the army to drive straight into and attack Guangzhou, Liu Yingchang burned his treasury, Pan Mei's army then conquered Guangzhou, and Liu Yingchang escorted the captives to the Beijing Division, and reported the victory to the imperial court.

古文：即日，命美与尹崇珂同知广州兼市舶使。
现代文：当天，朝廷任命潘美与尹崇珂同知广州兼市舶使。
English: On the same day, the imperial court appointed Pan Mei and Yin Chongke as the first and second naval envoys of Guangzhou.

古文：五月，拜山南东道节度。
现代文：五月，任命潘美为山南东道节度使。
English: In May, Pan Mei was appointed as Shannan's host festival envoy.

古文：五年，兼岭南道转运使。
现代文：五年，潘美兼任岭南道转运使。
English: For five years, Pan Mei also served as the Lingnan Road transfer envoy.

古文：土豪周思琼聚众负海为乱，美讨平之，岭表遂安。
现代文：土豪周思琼纠聚民众依仗海域叛乱，潘美讨平他们，岭南于是安定下来。
English: The local strongman Zhou Siqion rallied the people to rebel against the sea, Pan Mei fought them, and Lingnan settled down.

古文：八年，议征江南。
现代文：七年，朝廷计划征伐江南。
English: In the seventh year, the imperial court planned to conquer the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：九月，遣美与刘遇等率兵先赴江陵。
现代文：九月，派遣潘美与刘遇等将领率领军队先头到达江陵。
English: In September, Pan Mei and Liu Rong were sent to lead the army to Gangneung.

古文：十月，命美为升州道行营都监，与曹彬偕往，进次秦淮。
现代文：十月，任命潘美为升州道行营都监，与曹彬一起出发，进驻秦淮。
English: In October, Pan Mei was appointed as the inspector of Shengzhou Road, and set off with Cao Bin to enter Qinhuai.

古文：时舟楫未具，美下令曰： 美受诏，提骁果数万人，期于必胜，岂限此一衣带水而不径度乎？ 遂麾以涉，大军随之，吴师大败。
现代文：当时船只没有准备好，潘美下令说： 潘美接受诏令，指挥骁勇善战的军队数万人，期望能够一定获胜，怎能因为一条浅水所限而不敢直接渡过去呢？ 于是指挥军队渡江，吴军被打败。
English: At that time, the ships were not ready, Pan Mei ordered: Pan Mei accepted the imperial decree, commanded tens of thousands of brave and warlike troops, and expected to win a certain victory. How could he not dare to cross directly because of a shallow water limit? So he commanded the army to cross the river, and the Wu army was defeated.

古文：及采石矶浮梁成，吴人以战舰二十余鸣鼓溯流来趋利。
现代文：到采石矶浮桥做成时，吴人用二十多艘战船敲响战鼓溯水而上乘机来攻。
English: When the quarry stone pontoon bridge was completed, the Wu people used more than 20 warships to beat the war drum, followed the water and took the opportunity to attack.

古文：美麾兵奋击，夺其战舰，擒其将郑宾等七人，又破其城南水砦，分舟师守之。
现代文：潘美指挥军队奋勇而战，夺取敌军的战舰，擒获敌军将领郑宾等七人，又攻破吴军城南的水营栅栏，分派水师驻守。
English: Pan Mei commanded the army to fight bravely, captured the enemy's warships, captured seven people including the enemy's general Zheng Bin, and broke through the water camp fence south of the city of the Wu Army, and dispatched sailors to guard.

古文：奏至，太祖遣使令亟徙置战棹，以防他变。
现代文：上奏朝廷，太祖派遣使者赶快迁移战船，以防变故。
English: After appealing to the imperial court, Emperor Taizu dispatched an envoy to quickly relocate the warship in order to prevent the situation from changing.

古文：美闻诏即徙军。
现代文：潘美接到诏令马上迁移部队。
English: Pan Mei received the imperial order to immediately relocate the troops.

古文：是夜，吴人果来攻砦，不能克。
现代文：这天夜晚，吴人果然来攻水营，未能成功。
English: On this night, the Wu people really came to attack the water camp, but failed.

古文：进薄金陵，江南水陆十万陈于城下，美率兵袭击，大败之。
现代文：潘美进军金陵，江南水军、陆军共十万人在城下摆下阵势，潘美率领部队袭击，把吴军打得大败。
English: Pan Mei marched into Jinling. A total of 100,000 people from the South Yangtze River Navy and Army took up positions at the foot of the city. Pan Mei led the troops to attack and defeated the Wu Army.

古文：李煜危甚，遣徐铉来乞缓师，上不之省，仍诏诸将促令归附。
现代文：李煜非常危急，派徐铉来请求迟缓作战，皇上没有答应，仍诏令诸将促令他归附。
English: Li Gan was in a very critical situation and sent Xu Gan to request a delay in the battle. The emperor did not agree, but still ordered the generals to urge him to surrender.

古文：煜迁延未能决，夜遣兵数千，持炬鼓噪来犯我师。
现代文：李煜迁延没有结果，连夜派部队数千人，手持火把击鼓来攻宋方军队。
English: There was no result to Li Qiye's delay, and he sent thousands of troops at night to attack the Song army, holding torches and beating drums.

古文：美率精锐以短兵接战，因与大将曹彬率士晨夜攻城，百道俱进。
现代文：潘美率精锐军队与敌军短兵相接，趁机与大将军曹彬率领军队黎明攻城，分多道一齐进攻。
English: Pan Mei led the elite army to meet the enemy's short soldiers, and took the opportunity to attack the city at dawn with the army led by General Cao Bin.

古文：金陵平，以功拜宣徽北院使。
现代文：金陵平定后，因为战功潘美被封为宣徽北院使。
English: After the subjugation of Jinling, Pan Mei was appointed as the envoy of the Northern Yuan Dynasty because of his war exploits.

古文：秋，命副党进攻太原，战于汾上，破之，且多擒获。
现代文：秋季，朝廷命令潘美辅佐党进进攻太原，在汾河上交战，大破敌军，而且俘虏敌军很多。
English: In the autumn, the imperial court ordered Pan Meisuo and his party to attack Taiyuan, and they fought on the Wei River, destroying the enemy army and taking many prisoners.

古文：太平兴国初，改南院使。
现代文：太平兴国初，改任南院使。
English: At the beginning of the Taiping and Qing dynasties, he was reappointed as the envoy of the Southern Yuan.

古文：三年，加开府仪同三司。
现代文：三年，加封潘美为开府仪同三司。
English: Three years later, Pan Mei was given the additional title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi.

古文：四年，命将征太原，美为北路都招讨，判太原行府事。
现代文：四年，朝廷任命将领征伐太原，潘美任北路都招讨，判太原行府事。
English: In the fourth year, the imperial court appointed generals to conquer Taiyuan. Pan Mei Ren Bei Lu invited them all and sentenced Taiyuan to carry out government affairs.

古文：部分诸将进讨，并州遂平。
现代文：潘美部署诸将进讨，并州于是平定。
English: Pan Mei deployed generals to advance the discussion, and the state was thus pacified.

古文：继征范阳，以美知幽州行府事。
现代文：接着征伐范阳，任潘美为知幽州行府事。
English: Next, he conquered Fanyang and appointed Pan Mei to run the government of Zhiyuzhou.

古文：及班师，命兼三交都部署，留屯以捍北边。
现代文：到班师的时候，朝廷任命他兼任三交都部署，留下来驻守保卫北部边境。
English: When the squadron arrived, the imperial court appointed him to serve concurrently as the commander of the three foreign embassies, remaining behind to guard the northern border.

古文：三交西北三百里，地名固军，其地险阻，为北边咽喉。
现代文：在三交西北方三百里，有个地方叫固军，地势险阻，是北边的咽喉之地。
English: Three hundred miles northwest of Sanjiao, there is a place called Gu Jun, which is in a precarious situation, and is the land of the northern throat.

古文：美潜师袭之，遂据有其地。
现代文：潘美秘密袭击，于是占有这个地方。
English: Panmei secretly attacked and occupied the place.

古文：因积粟屯兵以守之，自是北边以宁。
现代文：于是贮积粮食驻扎兵马坚守，从此以后北边得以安定下来。
English: As a result, the soldiers and horses stationed to store grain held out, and from then on the north side was able to stabilize.

古文：美尝巡抚至代州，既秣马蓐食，俄而辽兵万骑来寇，近塞，美誓众衔枚奋击，大破之。
现代文：潘美曾经巡视到代州，整顿军备，不久辽国一万多骑兵来侵犯，靠近边塞，潘美誓师后静悄悄地进军与敌作战，大破敌军。
English: Pan Mei once made an inspection tour to Daizhou to rectify armaments. Soon, more than ten thousand cavalrymen from Liaoning Province came to invade, close to the border fortress. After Pan Mei's oath, he quietly marched into battle with the enemy and defeated the enemy army.

古文：封代国公。
现代文：朝廷封他为代国公。
English: The Imperial Court made him the acting sovereign.

古文：八年，改忠武军节度，进封韩国公。
现代文：八年，改任忠武军节度使，升封为韩国公。
English: Eight years later, he was reassigned to the post of Commander of the Loyal Military Forces and promoted to the rank of Korean noble.

古文：雍熙三年，诏美及曹彬、崔彦进等北伐，美独拔寰、朔、云、应等州。
现代文：雍熙三年，皇上下诏命潘美及曹彬、崔彦进等北伐，潘美率兵单独攻下寰、朔、云、应等州。
English: In the third year of the reign of the Yongxi Emperor, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Pan Mei, Cao Bin and Cui Yanjin to lead the Northern Expedition. Pan Mei led the army to separately capture the provinces of Min, Shuo, Yun and Ying.

古文：诏内徙其民。
现代文：朝廷命令将当地人民迁至内地。
English: The imperial court ordered the local people to be moved to the mainland.

古文：会辽兵奄至，战于陈家谷口，不利，骁将杨业死之。
现代文：遇到辽兵来攻，在陈家谷口两军交战，不能取胜，骁勇大将杨业战死。
English: When Liao soldiers attacked, the two armies clashed at the mouth of Chenjiagokou and could not win. General Yang Ye was killed in the battle.

古文：美坐削秩三等，责授检校太保。
现代文：潘美因战败被削秩三级，责授为检校太保。
English: As a result of the defeat, Pan Mei was downgraded to the third rank and was assigned to be a school inspector.

古文：明年，复检校太师。
现代文：第二年，任检校太师。
English: The following year, he was appointed inspector of schools.

古文：知真定府，未几，改都部署、判并州。
现代文：任真定知府，不久，改任都部署、并州通判。
English: Ren Zhending was appointed governor of the prefecture, and soon after that, he was reassigned to a different post, and he was appointed to the post of prefect of the prefecture.

古文：加同平章事，数月卒，年六十七。
现代文：加官同平章事，数月后去世，终年六十七岁。
English: He was promoted to the same rank, and died a few months later, at the age of 67.

古文：赠中书令，谥武惠。
现代文：追赠中书令，赐谥号为武惠。
English: He was posthumously awarded the Order of the Rising Sun, and his posthumous name was Wu Hui.

古文：咸平二年，配飨太宗庙庭。
现代文：咸平二年，配置于太宗庙附祀。
English: In the second year of Xianping, it was placed in Taizong Temple and enshrined.

古文：子惟德至宫苑使，惟固西上阁门使，惟正西京作坊使，惟清崇仪使，惟熙娶秦王女，平州刺史。
现代文：潘美的儿子潘惟德官至宫苑使，潘惟固任西上门合门使，潘惟正任西京作坊使，潘惟清任崇仪使，潘惟熙娶秦王的女儿为妻，任平州刺史。
English: Pan Weigong, the son of Pan Mei, was an official of the imperial court and an envoy to the palace, Pan Weigong was an envoy to the western gate and the gate, Pan Weigong was an envoy to the western workshop, Pan Weigong was an envoy to the Qing court, Pan Weigong married the daughter of King Qin, and was appointed as the scribe of Pingzhou.

古文：惟熙女，即章怀皇后也。
现代文：潘惟熙的女儿，就是章怀皇后。
English: The daughter of Pan Weixi is the Empress Zhang Huai.

古文：美后追封郑王，以章怀故也。
现代文：潘美后来被追封为郑王，是因为章怀皇后之故。
English: Pan Mei was later given the posthumous title of King Zheng because of Empress Zhang Huai.

