古文：越王勾践，其先禹之苗裔，而夏后帝少康之庶子也。
现代文：越王勾践的祖先是夏禹的后裔，是夏朝少康帝的庶出之子。
English: The ancestor of Yue Wang Gochan was a descendant of Xia Yu, the son-in-law of Xia Dynasty's Shao Kangdi.

古文：封于会稽，以奉守禹之祀。
现代文：少康帝的儿子被封在会稽，恭敬地供奉继承着夏禹的祭祀。
English: The son of Shoko Kantei was sealed in the auditorium, respectfully worshiping and inheriting Xia Yu's sacrificial rites.

古文：文身断发，披草莱而邑焉。
现代文：他们身上刺有花纹，剪短头发，开辟荒芜的土地，修筑了城邑。
English: They were tattooed, had their hair cut short, cleared wasteland and built towns.

古文：后二十余世，至于允常。
现代文：经过二十多代的繁衍，传到了允常。
English: After more than twenty generations of propagation, it has been passed down to Yunzheng.

古文：允常之时，与吴王阖庐战而相怨伐。
现代文：允常在位的时候，与吴王阖庐产生怨恨，互相攻伐。
English: When Yun Chang was on the throne, he developed a grudge against King Wu and they fought against each other.

古文：允常卒，子勾践立，是为越王。
现代文：允常逝世后，他的儿子勾践即位，这就是越王。
English: After the death of Emperor Yongzheng, his son Gojong ascended to the throne, which is King Yue.

古文：元年，吴王阖庐闻允常死，乃兴师伐越。
现代文：越王勾践元年，吴王阖庐听说允常逝世，就举兵讨伐越国。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Gojun of Yue, when King Wu heard of the death of Emperor Yunzang, he raised an army to invade Yue.

古文：越王勾践使死士挑战，三行，至吴陈，呼而自刭。
现代文：越王勾践派遣敢死的勇士向吴军挑战，勇士们排成三行，冲入吴军阵地，大呼着自刎身亡。
English: The king of Yue dispatched brave warriors who dared to die to challenge the Wu army. The warriors lined up in three lines, rushed into the Wu army's position, shouted and hanged themselves to death.

古文：吴师观之，越因袭击吴师，吴师败于槜李，射伤吴王阖庐。
现代文：吴兵看得目瞪口呆，越军趁机袭击了吴军，在檇李大败吴军，射伤吴王阖庐。
English: The Wu soldiers were dumbfounded. The Vietnamese army took the opportunity to attack the Wu army, defeated the Wu army, and shot and wounded Wu Wang Yao.

古文：阖庐且死，告其子夫差曰： 必毋忘越。 
现代文：阖庐在弥留之际告诫儿子夫差说： 千万不能忘记越国。 
English: On the occasion of his death, Yao warned his son, Zhu Cha, saying, "You must not forget Yue Guo.

古文：三年，勾践闻吴王夫差日夜勒兵，且以报越，越欲先吴未发往伐之。
现代文：三年，勾践听说吴王夫差日夜操练士兵，将报复越国一箭之仇，便打算先发制人，在吴未发兵前去攻打吴。
English: Three years later, when he heard that Wu Wangfu was training his soldiers day and night, and that he would take revenge for Yue Guo's attack, he planned to preemptively attack Wu before Wu sent troops.

古文：范蠡谏曰： 不可。臣闻兵者凶器也，战者逆德也，争者事之末也。
现代文：范蠡进谏说： 不行，我听说兵器是凶器，攻战是背德，强行夺取是处事中最下一等的行为。
English: Fan Junjin said, "No, I've heard that weapons are evil, fighting is treason, and taking things by force is the lowest form of conduct.

古文：阴谋逆德，好用凶器，试身于所末，上帝禁之，行者不利。 
现代文：阴谋去做违背道德的事，喜爱使用凶器，亲身参与去做下等事，定会遭到天帝的反对，这样做是不会有好结果的。 
English: Conspiring to do things that go against morality, liking to use deadly weapons, and personally participating in doing the following things will certainly be opposed by the heavenly emperor, and doing so will not have a good outcome.

古文：越王曰： 吾已决之矣。 
现代文：越王说： 我已经做出了决定。 
English: Yue Wang said: I have made my decision.

古文：遂兴师。
现代文：于是举兵进军吴国。
English: So they sent in the troops.

古文：吴王闻之，悉发精兵击越，败之夫椒。
现代文：吴王听到消息后，动用全国精锐部队迎击越军，在夫椒大败越军。
English: After hearing the news, Wu Wang used the national elite troops to fight against the Vietnamese army and defeated the Vietnamese army in Fuzhe.

古文：越王乃以余兵五千人保栖于会稽。
现代文：越王只聚拢起五千名残兵败将退守会稽。
English: Yue Wang could only gather five thousand remaining soldiers, and he was defeated and had to retreat.

古文：吴王追而围之。
现代文：吴王乘胜追击包围了会稽。
English: Wu Wang took advantage of the victory to pursue and encircle the audience.

古文：越王谓范蠡曰： 以不听子故至于此，为之奈何？ 
现代文：越王对范蠡说： 因为没听您的劝告才落到这个地步，那该怎么办呢？ 
English: Yue Wang said to Fan Ye: Because I didn't listen to your advice, I ended up in this situation. So what should I do?

古文：蠡对曰： 持满者与天，定倾者与人，节事者以地。
现代文：范蠡回答说： 能够保全自己的人，必定效法天道的盈而不溢；能够平定危机与倾覆之难的人，一定懂得人道是崇尚谦卑的；能够节制事理的人，就会遵循地道而因地制宜。
English: Fan Rong replied: Those who are able to preserve themselves must follow the heavenly way of prosperity and abundance; those who can quell crises and overthrow difficulties must understand that humanity is advocating humility; those who can control things will follow the natural way and adjust to local conditions.

古文：卑辞厚礼以遗之，不许，而身与之市。 勾践曰 诺。 
现代文：现在，您对吴王要谦卑有礼，派人给吴王送去优厚的礼物，如果他不答应，您就亲自前往事奉他，把自身也抵押给吴国。 勾践说： 好吧！ 
English: Now, you should be humble and courteous to King Wu, send someone to send a generous gift to King Wu, and if he does not agree, you should personally go to serve him and pledge yourself to the State of Wu.

古文：乃令大夫种行成于吴，膝行顿首曰： 君王亡臣勾践使陪臣种敢告下执事：勾践请为臣，妻为妾。 
现代文：于是派大夫种去向吴求和，种跪在地上边向前行边叩头说： 君王的亡国臣民勾践让我大胆的告诉您的属下：勾践请您允许他做您的奴仆，允许他的妻子做您的侍妾。 
English: So he sent a doctor to sue for peace from Wu, and the doctor kneeled on the ground and walked forward, bowing his head, and said: "The king's subjects who have lost their country, let me boldly tell your subordinates: please allow him to be your slave, and allow his wife to be your concubine.

古文：吴王将许之。
现代文：吴王将要答应种。
English: King Wu also agreed to plant cucumbers.

古文：子胥言于吴王曰： 天以越赐吴，勿许也。 
现代文：子胥对吴王说： 上天把越国赏赐给吴国，不要答应他。 
English: Zixuan said to the king of Wu, "Heaven has bestowed the reward of Yue Province to the State of Wu. Don't agree to it.

古文：种还，以报勾践。
现代文：种回越后，将情况告诉了勾践。
English: After returning to Vietnam, he reported the situation to the coach.

古文：勾践欲杀妻子，燔宝器，触战以死。
现代文：勾践想杀死妻子儿女，焚烧宝器，亲赴疆场拼一死战。
English: He wanted to kill his wife and children, burn his treasures, and personally go to the battlefield to fight a battle to the death.

古文：种止勾践曰： 夫吴太宰嚭贪，可诱以利，请间行言之。 
现代文：种阻止勾践说： 吴国的太宰嚭十分贪婪，我们可以用重财诱惑他，请您允许我暗中与他联络议和之事。 
English: He said, "The grand vizier of the State of Wu is very greedy. We can tempt him with a lot of money. Please allow me to secretly contact him and discuss the matter of peace."

古文：于是勾践乃以美女宝器令种间献吴太宰嚭。嚭受，乃见大夫种于吴王。
现代文：于是勾践便让种给太宰嚭献上美女珠宝玉器。嚭欣然接受，于是就把大夫种引见给吴王。
English: As a result, Gochun offered the seed to Dazai Yao to present beauty jewelry jade. Yao gladly accepted, so he introduced the doctor's seed to King Wu.

古文：种顿首言曰： 愿大王赦勾践之罪，尽入其宝器。
现代文：种叩头说： 希望大王能赦免勾践的罪过，我们越国将把世传的宝器全部送给您。
English: He said, "I hope that the great king can forgive my sins. We, Yue Guo, will give you all the treasures that have been passed down through the ages."

古文：不幸不赦，勾践将尽杀其妻子，燔其宝器，悉五千人触战，必有当也。 
现代文：万一不能侥幸得到赦免，勾践将把妻子儿女全部杀死，烧毁宝器，率领他的五千名士兵与您决一死战，您也将付出相当的代价。 
English: In the unlikely event that he is not pardoned, he will kill his wife and children, burn his treasures, and lead his five thousand soldiers to fight you to the death, and you will pay a considerable price.

古文：嚭因说吴王曰： 越以服为臣，若将赦之，此国之利也。 
现代文：太宰嚭借机劝说吴王： 越王已经服服贴贴地当了臣子，如果赦免了他，将对我国有利。 
English: Dazai Yan took the opportunity to persuade King Wu: King Yue had become a dutiful subject, and if he was pardoned, it would be beneficial to our country.

古文：吴王将许之。
现代文：吴王又要答应种。
English: King Wu also agreed to plant cucumbers.

古文：子胥进谏曰： 今不灭越，后必悔之。
现代文：子胥又进谏说： 现在不灭掉越国，将来一定会后悔莫及。
English: Zixuan also said: If we don't wipe out Yue at this time, we will regret it in the future.

古文：勾践贤君，种、蠡良臣，若反国，将为乱。 
现代文：勾践是贤明的君主，大夫种、范蠡都是贤能的大臣，如果勾践能够返回越国，必将作乱。 
English: Gojang is a wise monarch, and Dafu Zong and Fan Ye are wise ministers. If Gojang is able to return to Yue, he will surely cause chaos.

古文：吴王弗听，卒赦越，罢兵而归。
现代文：吴王不听子胥的谏言，终于赦免了越王，撤军回国。
English: King Wu did not listen to Zi Yao's reproach and finally pardoned King Yue and withdrew his troops back to China.

古文：勾践之困会稽也，喟然叹曰： 吾终于此乎？ 
现代文：勾践被困在会稽时，曾喟然叹息说： 我将在此了结一生吗？ 
English: When he was trapped in a rehearsal, he once sighed and said: Will I end my life here?

古文：种曰： 汤系夏台，文王囚羑里，晋重耳奔翟，齐小白奔莒，其卒王霸。
现代文：种说： 商汤被囚禁在夏台，周文王被围困在羑里，晋国重耳逃到翟，齐国小白逃到莒，他们都终于称王称霸天下。
English: For example: Shang Tang was imprisoned in Xatai, Zhou Wen Wang was besieged in Quzhou, Jin Guo Chong Er fled to Quzhou, Qi Guo Xiaobai fled to Quzhou, and they all finally claimed to be kings and ruled the world.

古文：由是观之，何遽不为福乎？ 
现代文：由此观之，我们今日的处境何尝不可能成为福分呢？ 
English: Viewed from this perspective, how can our current situation not be a blessing?

古文：吴既赦越，越王勾践反国，乃苦身焦思，置胆于坐，坐卧即仰胆，饮食亦尝胆也，曰： 女忘会稽之耻邪？ 
现代文：吴王赦免了越王，勾践回国后，深思熟虑，苦心经营，把苦胆挂到座位上，坐卧即能仰头尝尝苦胆，吃饭的时候也会尝尝苦胆。说： 你难道忘记会稽所受的耻辱了吗？ 
English: King Wu pardoned King Yue, and after returning to China, he thoughtfully and painstakingly managed to hang the gallbladder on the seat. He could taste the gallbladder when he was lying down, and he would also taste the gallbladder when he was eating. He said, "Have you forgotten the humiliation you suffered at the guild?"

古文：身自耕作，夫人自织，食不加肉，衣不重采，折节下贤人，厚遇宾客，振贫吊死，与百姓同其劳。
现代文：他亲身耕作，他的妻子亲手织布，吃饭从未有荤菜。从不穿有两层华丽的衣服，对贤人彬彬有礼，能委屈求全，招待宾客热情诚恳，能救济穷人，悼慰死者，与百姓共同劳作。
English: He farmed with his own hands, his wife wove cloth with her own hands, never had stew for dinner, never wore two layers of gorgeous clothes, was courteous to the wise, could seek redress for grievances, warmly and sincerely invited guests, could help the poor, mourn the dead, and work together with the people.

古文：欲使范蠡治国政，蠡对曰： 兵甲之事，种不如蠡；填抚国家，亲附百姓，蠡不如种。 
现代文：越王想让范蠡管理国家政务，范蠡回答说： 用兵打仗之事，种不如我；镇定安抚国家，让百姓亲近归附，我不如种。 
English: King Yue wanted to let Fan Rong manage state affairs. Fan Rong replied, "I am not good at using soldiers to fight wars. I am not good at calmly pacifying the country and bringing the people closer together.

古文：于是举国政属大夫种，而使范蠡与大夫柘稽行成，为质于吴。
现代文：于是把国家政务委托给大夫种，让范蠡和大夫柘稽求和，到吴国充当人质。
English: As a result, he entrusted the state affairs to Dafu Zhe, let Fan Zhe and Dafu Zhe make peace, and went to Wuxi to serve as a hostage.

古文：二岁而吴归蠡。
现代文：两年后吴国才让范蠡回国。
English: It took two years for Wu to allow Fan Qi to return to China.

古文：勾践自会稽归七年，拊循其士民，欲用以报吴。
现代文：勾践从会稽回国后七年，始终抚慰自己的士兵百姓，想以此报仇吴国。
English: Seven years after returning from the inspection, Gou Jian always comforted his soldiers and people, hoping to take revenge on the State of Wu.

古文：大夫逢同谏曰： 国新流亡，今乃复殷给，缮饰备利，吴必惧，惧则难必至。
现代文：大夫逢同进谏说： 国家刚刚承受了流亡之事，今天才又殷实富裕，如果我们整顿军备，吴国一定惧怕，它惧怕，灾难也就随之降临。
English: Dr. Feng Tongjin said: The country has just endured the exile, and today it is rich and prosperous. If we rectify the armament, Wu will be afraid, it will be afraid, and disaster will ensue.

古文：且鸷鸟之击也，必匿其形。
现代文：再说，凶猛的大鸟袭击目标时，一定先隐藏起来。
English: Moreover, when the ferocious bird attacks the target, it must first hide.

古文：今夫吴兵加齐、晋，怨深于楚、越，名高天下，实害周室，德少而功多，必淫自矜。
现代文：现在，吴军正在攻打齐国和晋国，又与楚、越有深仇大恨，在天下虽名声显赫，实际已经危害到周王室的威望。吴缺乏道德而战功多，一定骄横狂妄。
English: Now, the Wu army is attacking Qi and Jin, and has deep hatred for Chu. Although it is famous in the world, it has actually harmed the prestige of the Zhou royal family. Wu lacks morality and has a lot of war exploits, and must be arrogant and arrogant.

古文：为越计，莫若结齐，亲楚，附晋，以厚吴。
现代文：真为越国着想的话，那越国不如结交齐国，亲近楚国，归附晋国，厚待吴国。
English: If it is truly for the sake of Yue, then Yue should establish friendly relations with Qi, be close to Chu, attach to Jin, and treat Wu well.

古文：吴之志广，必轻战。是我连其权，三国伐之，越承其弊，可克也。 勾践曰： 善。 
现代文：吴国志向高远，对待战争一定很轻视，这样我国可以联络三国的势力，让三国攻打吴国，越国便趁它的疲惫可以攻克它了。 勾践说： 好。 
English: Wu has lofty ambitions and must treat war with disdain. In this way, our country can connect the forces of the three countries, let the three countries attack Wu, and Yue can take advantage of its exhaustion to conquer it. Guo Jian said: Good.

古文：居二年，吴王将伐齐。
现代文：过了两年，吴王将要讨伐齐国。
English: Two years later, King Wu was about to invade Qi.

古文：子胥谏曰： 未可。
现代文：子胥进谏说： 不行。
English: Zibo Jinjun said, "No.

古文：臣闻勾践食不重味，与百姓同苦乐。
现代文：我听说勾践吃从不炒两样好菜，与百姓同甘共苦。
English: I heard that Gochun never stir-fried two kinds of good dishes when eating, and shared the joys and sorrows with the common people.

古文：此人不死，必为国患。
现代文：此人不死，一定成为我国的忧患。
English: If this man does not die, he will surely become a source of sorrow for our country.

古文：吴有越，腹心之疾；齐与吴，疥癣也。
现代文：吴国有了越国，那是心腹之患，而齐对吴来说，只象一块疥癣。
English: Wu has Yue, which is a headache, and Qi is like a piece of straw for Wu.

古文：愿王释齐先越。 
现代文：希望君王放弃攻齐，先伐越国。 
English: It was hoped that the emperor would give up the idea of attacking the whole country and attack Yue first.

古文：吴王弗听，遂伐齐，败之艾陵，虏齐高、国以归。
现代文：吴王不听，就出兵攻打齐国，在艾陵大败齐军，俘虏了齐国的高、国氏回吴。
English: The king of Wu did not listen, so he sent troops to attack Qi, defeated the Qi army in Ailing, and captured Gao and Guosi of Qi back to Wu.

古文：让子胥。子胥曰： 王毋喜！ 
现代文：吴王责备子胥，子胥说： 您不要太高兴！ 
English: King Wu scolded Zixuan, and Zixuan said, "Don't be too happy!

古文：王怒，子胥欲自杀，王闻而止之。
现代文：吴王很生气，子胥想自杀，吴王听到制止了他。
English: The king of Wu was very angry. Zixuan wanted to commit suicide, but the king of Wu heard him and stopped him.

古文：越大夫种曰： 臣观吴王政骄矣，请试尝之贷粟，以卜其事。 
现代文：越国大夫种说： 我观察吴王当政太骄横了，请您允许我试探一下，向他借粮，来揣度一下吴王对越国的态度。 
English: Dr. Yue said, "I have observed that King Wu was too arrogant when he was in power. Please allow me to probe and borrow grain from him to gauge King Wu's attitude toward Yue.

古文：请贷，吴王欲与，子胥谏勿与，王遂与之，越乃私喜。
现代文：种向吴王请求借粮。吴王想借予，子胥建议不借，吴王还是借给越了，越王暗中十分喜悦。
English: The seed requested to borrow grain from the king of Wu. The king of Wu wanted to borrow it, the son suggested not to borrow it, but the king of Wu still lent it to Yue. The king of Yue was secretly very pleased.

古文：子胥言曰： 王不听谏，后三年吴其墟乎！ 
现代文：子胥说： 君王不听我的劝谏，再过三年吴国将成为一片废墟！ 
English: Zixuan said, "The king did not listen to my advice. In another three years, Wuzhong will be in ruins!"

古文：太宰嚭闻之，乃数与子胥争越议，因谗子胥曰： 伍员貌忠而实忍人，其父兄不顾，安能顾王？
现代文：太宰嚭听到这话后，就多次与子胥争论对付越国的计策，借机诽谤子胥说： 伍员表面忠厚，实际很残忍，他连自己的父兄都不顾惜，怎么能顾惜君王呢？
English: After hearing this, Dazai Yan repeatedly argued with Zi Yan about Zi Yan's strategy to deal with Vietnam, and took the opportunity to slander Zi Yan, saying: The soldier is loyal on the surface, but cruel in reality. He doesn't even care about his own father and brother. How can he care about the king?

古文：王前欲伐齐，员强谏，已而有功，用是反怨王。
现代文：君王上次想攻打齐国，伍员强劲地进谏，后来您作战有功，他反而因此怨恨您。
English: The last time the king wanted to attack Qi, the soldiers made a strong advance, and then you did a good job in the battle, but he resented you.

古文：王不备伍员，员必为乱。 
现代文：您不防备他，他一定作乱。 
English: If you don't watch out for him, he's bound to make trouble.

古文：与逢同共谋，谗之王。
现代文：嚭还和逢共同谋划，在君王面前再三再四诽谤子胥。
English: He also plotted with Feng to slander Zi Xuan in front of the king again and again.

古文：王始不从，乃使子胥于齐，闻其托子于鲍氏，王乃大怒，曰： 伍员果欺寡人！ 
现代文：君王开始也不听信谗言，于是就派子胥出使齐国，听说子胥把儿子委托给鲍氏，君王才大怒，说： 伍员果真欺骗我！ 
English: At first, the king didn't listen to the advice, so he sent Zixuan as an envoy to Qi. When he heard that Zixuan had entrusted his son to Bao, the king was furious and said, "The soldier really deceived me!"

古文：役反，使人赐子胥属镂剑以自杀。
现代文：子胥出使齐回国后，吴王就派人赐给子胥一把 属镂 剑让他自杀。
English: After all the envoys sent by Zixuan returned to the country, King Wu sent someone to give Zixuan a sacred sword and told him to commit suicide.

古文：子胥大笑曰： 我令而父霸，我又立若，若初欲分吴国半予我，我不受，已，今若反以谗诛我。
现代文：子胥大笑道： 我辅佐你的父亲称霸，又拥立你为王，你当初想与我平分吴国，我没接受，事隔不久，今天你反而因谗言杀害我。
English: Zi Yan laughed loudly, "I assisted your father to become the ruler, and I supported you to become the king. At first, you wanted to share the kingdom of Wu equally with me, but I did not accept it. It has been a short time since then, but today, you killed me for slander."

古文：嗟乎，嗟乎，一人固不能独立！ 
现代文：唉，唉，你一个人绝对不能独自立国！ 
English: Alas, alas, you alone absolutely cannot establish a country on your own!

古文：报使者曰： 必取吾眼置吴东门，以观越兵入也！ 于是吴任嚭政。
现代文：子胥告诉使者说： 一定取出我的眼睛挂在吴国都城东门上，以便我能亲眼看到越军进入都城 于是吴王重用嚭执掌国政。
English: Zixuan told the messenger, "Be sure to take out my eyes and hang them on the east gate of the capital city of Wu, so that I can see the Vietnamese army entering the capital with my own eyes."

古文：居三年，勾践召范蠡曰： 吴已杀子胥，导谀者众，可乎？ 
现代文：过了三年，勾践召见范蠡说： 吴王已杀死了胥，阿谀奉承的人很多，可以攻打吴了吗？ 
English: After three years had passed, Guo Jian summoned Fan Ye to see him and said, "Wu Wang has already killed Yao, and there are many people who are flattering him. Can you attack Wu?"

古文：对曰： 未可。 
现代文：范蠡回答说： 不行。 
English: Fan Ye replied: "No.

古文：至明年春，吴王北会诸侯于黄池，吴国精兵从王，惟独老弱与太子留守。
现代文：到第二年春天，吴王到北部的黄池去会合诸侯，吴国的精锐部队全部跟随吴王赴会了，唯独老弱残兵和太子留守吴都。
English: In the spring of the following year, King Wu went to Huangchi in the north to meet with the princes. All of the elite troops of the State of Wu followed King Wu to the meeting, except for the old and weak soldiers and the prince, who stayed behind in Wudu.

古文：勾践复问范蠡，蠡曰 可矣 。
现代文：勾践又问范蠡是否可以进攻吴国。
English: He also asked Fan Xuan if he could attack Wu.

古文：乃发习流二千人，教士四万人，君子六千人，诸御千人，伐吴。
现代文：范蠡说： 可以了 。于是派出熟悉水战的士兵两千人，训练有素的士兵四万人，受过良好教育的地位较高的近卫军六千人，各类管理技术军官一千人，攻打吴国。
English: So he sent 2,000 soldiers who were familiar with naval warfare, 40,000 well-trained soldiers, 6,000 well-educated and high-ranking guards, and 1,000 administrative and technical officers to attack Wu.

古文：吴师败，遂杀吴太子。
现代文：吴军大败，越军还杀死吴国的太子。
English: The Wu army suffered a major defeat, and the Vietnamese army also killed the prince of the State of Wu.

古文：吴告急于王，王方会诸侯于黄池，惧天下闻之，乃秘之。
现代文：吴国使者赶快向吴王告急，吴王正在黄池会合诸侯，怕天下人听到这种惨败消息，就坚守秘密。
English: The emissary of the State of Wu quickly alerted the King of Wu, who was holding a meeting of princes in Huangchi. Fearing that the world would hear the news of this disastrous defeat, he insisted on secrecy.

古文：吴王已盟黄池，乃使人厚礼以请成越。
现代文：吴王已经在黄池与诸侯订立盟约，就派人带上厚礼请求与越国求和。
English: King Wu had already signed a treaty with the princes in Huangchi, so he sent someone with a gift to ask for peace with Yue.

古文：越自度亦未能灭吴，乃与吴平。
现代文：越王估计自己也不能灭亡吴国，就与吴国讲和了。
English: King Yue estimated that he could not destroy the State of Wu, so he made peace with the State of Wu.

古文：其后四年，越复伐吴。
现代文：这以后四年，越国又攻打吴国。
English: Four years later, Yue attacked Wu again.

古文：吴士民罢弊，轻锐尽死于齐、晋。
现代文：吴国军民疲惫不堪，精锐士兵都在与齐、晋之战中死亡。
English: The army and people of Wu were exhausted, and the elite soldiers all died in the battle of Qi and Jin.

古文：而越大破吴，因而留围之三年，吴师败，越遂复栖吴王于姑苏之山。
现代文：所以越国大败了吴军，并包围吴都三年，吴军战败，越国就又把吴王围困在姑苏山上。
English: Therefore, Yue State defeated the Wu Army and besieged Wudu for three years. When the Wu Army was defeated, Yue State besieged the King of Wu on Gusu Mountain.

古文：吴王使公孙雄肉袒膝行而前，请成越王曰： 孤臣夫差敢布腹心，异日尝得罪于会稽，夫差不敢逆命，得与君王成以归。
现代文：吴王派公孙雄脱去上衣露出胳膊跪着向前行，请求与越王讲和说： 孤立无助的臣子夫差冒昧地表露自己的心愿，从前我曾在会稽得罪您，我不敢违背您的命令，如能够与您讲和，就撤军回国了。
English: The king of Wu sent Gongsun Xiong to take off his shirt and kneel down with his arms exposed, and asked him to make peace with the king of Yue. He said, "You are a lonely and helpless vassal, and you have the audacity to express your wishes. I once offended you at a meeting. I dare not disobey your order. If I can make peace with you, I will withdraw and return to my country."

古文：今君王举玉趾而诛孤臣，孤臣惟命是听，意者亦欲如会稽之赦孤臣之罪乎？ 
现代文：今天您投玉足前来惩罚孤臣，我对您将唯命是听，但我私下的心意是希望象会稽山对您那样赦免我夫差的罪过吧！ 
English: Today, you have come to punish the orphaned vassal, and I will obey your orders, but my secret wish is to forgive my husband's bad sins as you did.

古文：勾践不忍，欲许之。
现代文：勾践不忍心，想答应吴王。
English: He couldn't bear the thought of working together and wanted to agree to work for King Wu.

古文：范蠡曰： 会稽之事，天以越赐吴，吴不取。
现代文：范蠡说： 会稽的事，是上天把越国赐给吴国，吴国没有收取。
English: Fan Qi said, "The matter of the audit is that Heaven gave Yue Province to Wu Province, and Wu Province did not receive it.

古文：今天以吴赐越，越其可逆天乎？
现代文：如今是上天把吴国赐给越国了，越国难道可以违背天命吗？
English: Now that Heaven has given Wu to Yue, can Yue go against Heaven's decree?

古文：且夫君王蚤朝晏罢，非为吴邪？
现代文：再说君王早上朝晚罢朝，不就是为了吴国吗？
English: Besides, isn't it for the sake of the State of Wu that the king goes to the State of Wu in the morning and evening?

古文：谋之二十二年，一旦而弃之，可乎？
现代文：谋划伐吴已二十二年了，一旦放弃，可以这样做吗？
English: It's been twenty-two years since they planned to cut down Wu. If they give up, can they still do it?

古文：且夫天与弗取，反受其咎。 伐柯者其则不远。 
现代文：且上天赐予您却不要，那反而要受到处罚。 用斧头砍伐木材做斧柄，斧柄的样式就在身边。 
English: And what God gives you and you don't want, that's what you'll be punished for.Chopping wood with an axe to make an axe handle, the shape of the axe handle is around you.

古文：君忘会稽之厄乎？ 
现代文：君王忘记会稽的苦难了吗？ 
English: Has the monarch forgotten the agony of the Reunions?

古文：勾践曰： 吾欲听子言，吾不忍其使者。 
现代文：勾践说： 我想听从您的建议，但我不忍心如此对待他的使臣。 
English: "I want to follow your advice, but I can't bear to treat his envoys like this," he said.

古文：范蠡乃鼓进兵，曰： 王已属政于执事，使者去，不者且得罪。 
现代文：范蠡就鸣鼓进军，说： 君王已经把政务委托给我了，吴国使者赶快离去，否则就要获罪了。 
English: Fan Ye marched into the army to the sound of drums, saying, "The king has entrusted the affairs of state to me. The emissary of the State of Wu should leave at once, otherwise he will be punished."

古文：吴使者泣而去。
现代文：吴国使者伤心地哭着走了。
English: The emissary of the State of Wu went away with tears in his eyes.

古文：勾践怜之，乃使人谓吴王曰： 吾置王甬东，君百家。 
现代文：勾践怜悯他，就派人对吴王说： 我安置您到甬东！统治一百家。 
English: He took pity on him and sent a message to the king of Wu, saying, "I am sending you to Shandong to rule over a hundred households.

古文：吴王谢曰： 吾老矣，不能事君王！ 
现代文：吴王推辞说： 我已经老了，不能侍奉您了！ 
English: King Wu said, "I am too old to serve you!"

古文：遂自杀。乃蔽其面，曰： 吾无面以见子胥也！ 
现代文：说完便自杀身亡，自尽时遮住自己的面孔说： 我没脸面见到子胥！ 
English: After saying this, he killed himself. When committing suicide, he covered his face and said: "I didn't see Zizou face to face!

古文：越王乃葬吴王而诛太宰嚭。
现代文：越王安葬了吴王，杀死了太宰嚭。
English: Yue Wang buried King Wu and killed Dazaifu.

古文：勾践已平吴，乃以兵北渡淮，与齐、晋诸侯会于徐州，致贡于周。
现代文：勾践平定了吴国后，就出兵向北渡过淮河，在徐州与齐、晋诸侯会合，向周王室进献贡品。
English: After he had pacified Wu, he sent troops to the north to cross the Huai River, met with the Qi and Jin princes in Xuzhou, and paid tribute to the Zhou royal family.

古文：周元王使人赐勾践胙，命为伯。
现代文：周元王派人赏赐祭祀肉给勾践，称他为 伯 。
English: King Zhou Yuan sent someone to reward the sacrificial meat to Gochang, calling him Bo.

古文：勾践已去，渡淮南，以淮上地与楚，归吴所侵宋地于宋，与鲁泗东方百里。
现代文：勾践离开徐州，渡过淮河南下，把淮河流域的土地赠送给楚国，把吴国侵占宋国的土地归还给宋国。把泗水以东方圆百里的土地赠给了鲁国。
English: Guo Jian left Xuzhou, crossed the Huai River to the south, gave the land in the Huai River basin to Chu, returned the land occupied by Wu in Song to Song, and gave the land with a circumference of one hundred miles from east to west to Lu.

古文：当是时，越兵横行于江、淮东，诸侯毕贺，号称霸王。
现代文：当时，越军在长江、淮河以东畅行无阻，诸侯们都来庆贺，越王被称为霸王。
English: At that time, the Vietnamese army marched unimpeded east of the Yangtze River and the Huai River. The princes all came to celebrate, and King Yue was known as the overlord.

古文：范蠡遂去，自齐遗大夫种书曰： 蜚鸟尽，良弓藏；狡兔死，走狗烹。
现代文：范蠡于是离开了越王，从齐国给大夫种发来一封信。信中说： 飞鸟尽，良弓藏；狡兔死，走狗烹。
English: Fan Ye then left Yue Wang and sent a letter from Qi to Dafu Zong, saying: "Flying birds are exhausted, good bows are hidden; cunning rabbits are dead, and running dogs are cooked."

古文：越王为人长颈鸟喙，可与共患难，不可与共乐。子何不去？ 
现代文：越王是长颈鸟嘴，只可以与之共患难，不可以与之共享乐，你为何不离去？ 
English: Yue Wang is a long-necked bird's beak, you can only share the hardships with him, you can't share the joy with him. Why don't you leave?

古文：种见书，称病不朝。
现代文：种看过信后，声称有病不再上朝。
English: After reading the letter, he claimed that he was ill and would no longer go to the Imperial Palace.

古文：人或谗种且作乱，越王乃赐种剑曰： 子教寡人伐吴七术，寡人用其三而败吴，其四在子，子为我从先王试之。 
现代文：有人中伤种将要作乱，越王就赏赐给种一把剑说： 你教给我攻伐吴国的七条计策，我只采用三条就打败了吴国，那四条还在你那里，你替我去到先王面前尝试一下那四条吧！ 
English: Someone slandered that the seeds would cause a disturbance, and King Yue rewarded the seeds with a sword, saying, "You taught me seven strategies for attacking the State of Wu. I only used three to defeat the State of Wu. The other four are still with you. You should go to the previous king for me and try out the four strategies."

古文：种遂自杀。
现代文：种于是自杀身亡。
English: He committed suicide as a result.

古文：勾践卒，子王鼫与立。
现代文：勾践逝世，他的儿子王要鼫与即位。
English: After Gojan's death, his son Wang Zhaotong ascended to the throne.

古文：王鼫与卒，子王不寿立。
现代文：王鼫与逝世，他的儿子王不寿即位。
English: Wang Xizhe passed away, and his son Wang Fusong ascended to the throne.

古文：王不寿卒，子王翁立。
现代文：王不寿逝世，他的儿子王翁即位。
English: Wang Buju passed away and his son Wang Weng ascended to the throne.

古文：王翁卒，子王翳立。
现代文：王翁逝世，他的儿子王翳即位。
English: Wang Weng died, and his son Wang Yao ascended the throne.

古文：王翳卒，子王之侯立。王之侯卒，子王无强立。
现代文：王翳逝世，他的儿子王之侯即位，王之侯逝世，他的儿子王无强即位。
English: Wang Yao died, and his son Wang Zhou ascended the throne. Wang Zhou died, and his son Wang Wuqiang ascended the throne.

古文：王无强时，越兴师北伐齐，西伐楚，与中国争强。
现代文：越王无强在位的时候，越国发兵向北攻打齐国，向西攻打楚国，与中原各国争胜。
English: When King Muqiang of Yue was on the throne, Yue sent troops to attack Qi in the north and Chu in the west, competing with the Central Plains countries.

古文：当楚威王之时，越北伐齐，齐威王使人说越王曰： 越不伐楚，大不王，小不伯。
现代文：在楚威王的时候，越国攻打齐国，齐威王派人劝说越王说： 越国如果不攻打楚国，从大处说不能称王，从小处说不能称霸。
English: At the time of King Chu Wei, Yue attacked Qi. King Qi sent people to persuade Yue, saying, "If Yue does not attack Chu, it cannot claim to be a king from a big point of view, and cannot claim to be a hegemon from a small point of view."

古文：图越之所为不伐楚者，为不得晋也。韩、魏固不攻楚。
现代文：估计越国不攻楚国的原因，是因为得不到韩、魏两国的支持。韩、魏本来就不攻打楚国。
English: It is estimated that the reason why Vietnam did not attack Chu was because it did not receive support from Korea and Wei. Korea and Wei originally did not attack Chu.

古文：韩之攻楚，覆其军，杀其将，则叶、阳翟危；魏亦覆其军，杀其将，则陈、上蔡不安。
现代文：韩国如攻打楚国，它的军队就会覆灭，将领就会被杀，那么叶、阳翟就危险；魏国如攻打楚国也如此，军队覆灭、将领被杀，陈、上蔡都不安定。
English: If South Korea attacks Chu, its army will be destroyed and its generals will be killed, so Ye and Yang will be in danger; if Wei attacks Chu, its army will be destroyed and its generals will be killed, and Chen and Shang Cai will be unstable.

古文：故二晋之事越也，不至于覆军杀将，马汗之力不效。所重于得晋者何也？ 
现代文：所以韩、魏事奉越国，就不至于军队覆灭、将领被杀，汗马之劳也就不会显现，您为什么重视得到韩、魏的支持呢？ 
English: Therefore, if Han and Wei were to serve Vietnam, the army would not be destroyed, the generals would not be killed, and the hard work would not appear. Why do you attach importance to the support of Han and Wei?

古文：越王曰： 所求于晋者，不至顿刃接兵，而况于攻城围邑乎？
现代文：越王说： 我对韩、魏两国的要求，并非是与楚军短兵相接、你死我活地斗，更何况是让他们攻城围邑呢？
English: Yue Wang said, "My request to Han and Wei is not to meet the Chu army at close quarters and fight to the death, let alone let them besiege the city and the surrounding towns.

古文：愿魏以聚大梁之下，愿齐之试兵南阳莒地，以聚常、郯之境，则方城之外不南，淮、泗之间不东，商、于、析、郦、宗胡之地，夏路以左，不足以备秦，江南、泗上不足以待越矣。
现代文：我希望魏军聚集在大梁城下，齐军在南阳、莒练兵，聚结在常、郯边界，那么方城以外的楚军不再南下，淮、泗之间的楚军不再向东，商、於、析、郦、宗胡等地即中原通路西部地区的楚军不足以防备秦国，江南、泗上的楚军不足以抵御越国了。
English: I hope that the Wei army will gather under the Dalian Castle, and the Qi army will train soldiers in Nanyang and Shan, and gather at the borders of Chang and Shan. Then the Chu army outside Fangcheng will no longer go south, the Chu army between Huai and Shan will no longer go east, and the Chu army in the western regions of the Central Plains passage, such as Shang, U, Se, Shan and Zonghu, will not be enough to protect Qin, and the Chu army south of the river and on Shan will not be enough to resist Yue.

古文：则齐、秦、韩、魏得志于楚也，是二晋不战而分地，不耕而获之。
现代文：那么，齐、秦、韩、魏四国就可以在楚国实现自己的愿望，这样，韩、魏无须作战就能扩大疆土，无须耕种就能收获。
English: Then, the four countries of Qi, Qin, Han and Wei could realize their wishes in Chu. In this way, Han and Wei could expand their territory without fighting, and harvest without farming.

古文：不此之为，而顿刃于河山之间以为齐秦用，所待者如此其失计，奈何其以此王也！ 
现代文：现在，韩魏不这样做，却在黄河、华山之间互相攻伐，而为齐国和秦国所利用。所期待的韩魏如此失策，怎么能依靠他们称王呢！ 
English: Now, Han and Wei do not do this, but attack each other between the Yellow River and Huashan, and are used by Qi and Qin. The expected Han and Wei are such a blunder, how can they rely on them to be king!

古文：齐使者曰： 幸也越之不亡也！
现代文：齐国使者说： 越国没有灭亡太侥幸了！
English: The envoy of Qi said: It is too much of a fluke that Yue did not perish!

古文：吾不贵其用智之如目，见豪毛而不见其睫也。
现代文：我不看重他们使用智谋，因为那智谋就好象眼睛一样，虽然能见到毫毛却见不到自己的睫毛。
English: I do not value their use of wit, for that wit is like the eye, which sees the speck but does not see the lash.

古文：今王知晋之失计，而不自知越之过，是目论也。
现代文：今天君王知道韩魏失策了，却不知道自己的过错，这就是刚才比方的 能见到毫毛却看不到自己睫毛的眼睛 之论了。
English: Today, the monarch knows that Han Wei has made a blunder, but does not know his own fault. This is the analogy of the eye that can see a hair but cannot see its own eyelashes.

古文：王所待于晋者，非有马汗之力也，又非可与合军连和也，将待之以分楚众也。
现代文：君王所期望于韩魏的，并非是要他们的汗马功劳，也并非是与韩、魏联军联合，而是分散楚军的兵力。
English: What the emperors expected from Han and Wei was not that they should make great contributions, nor that they should unite with the allied forces of Han and Wei, but that they should disperse the forces of the Chu army.

古文：今楚众已分，何待于晋？ 
现代文：现在，楚军兵力已分散了，何必有求于韩魏呢？ 
English: Now that the strength of the Chu army has been dispersed, why do we have to ask Han Wei for help?

古文：越王曰： 奈何？ 
现代文：越王说： 怎么办？ 
English: Yue Wang said, "What should we do?

古文：曰： 楚三大夫张九军，北围曲沃、于中，以至无假之关者三千七百里，景翠之军北聚鲁、齐、南阳，分有大此者乎？
现代文：使者说： 楚国三个大夫已分率所有军队，向北包围了曲沃、於中，直到无假关，战线总长为三千七百里，景翠的军队聚结到北部的鲁国、齐国、南阳，兵力还有超过这种分散的吗？
English: The envoy said: The three doctors of Chu have divided all the armies and encircled Quvo to the north and Huzhong to the middle, until there is no false pass. The total length of the front is 3,700 miles, and Jingcui's army has gathered to the north of Lu, Qi and Nanyang. Is there more strength than this dispersion?

古文：且王之所求者，斗晋楚也；晋楚不斗，越兵不起，是知二五而不知十也。
现代文：况且君王所要求的是使晋、楚争斗；晋、楚不斗，越国不出兵，这就只知两个五却不知十了。
English: Moreover, what the king asked for was to make Jin and Chu fight; Jin and Chu did not fight, and did not cross the country to fight, which was only two-fifths but not ten-tenths.

古文：此时不攻楚，臣以是知越大不王，小不伯。
现代文：这时不攻打楚国，我因此判断越王从大处说不想称王，从小处说不想称霸。
English: At this time, they did not attack Chu, so I judged that King Yue said that he did not want to be king from a large point of view, and that he did not want to dominate from a small point of view.

古文：复雠、庞、长沙，楚之粟也；竟泽陵，楚之材也。
现代文：再说，雠、庞、长沙是楚国盛产粮食的地区，竟泽陵是楚国盛产木材的地区。
English: Moreover, Handan, Pang, and Changsha are the regions of Chu that are rich in grain, while Zering is the region of Chu that is rich in timber.

古文：越窥兵通无假之关，此四邑者不上贡事于郢矣。
现代文：越国出兵打通无假关，这四个地方将不能再向郢都进献粮、材了。
English: The soldiers dispatched by Viet Nam have passed through the border without any false passes, and these four places will no longer be able to donate grain and timber to Handan.

古文：臣闻之，图王不王，其敝可以伯。
现代文：我听说过，图谋称王却不能称王，尽管如此，还可以称霸。
English: I've heard it said that you can try to be a king, but you can't be a king, but you can still be a ruler.

古文：然而不伯者，王道失也。
现代文：然而不能称霸的，王道也就彻底丧失了。
English: However, if you can't dominate, the royal road is completely lost.

古文：故愿大王之转攻楚也。 
现代文：所以恳望您转而攻打楚国。 
English: Therefore, I implore you to attack Chu instead.

古文：于是越遂释齐而伐楚。
现代文：于是越国就放弃齐国而去攻打楚国。
English: As a result, Yue abandoned Qi and attacked Chu.

古文：楚威王兴兵而伐之，大败越，杀王无强，尽取故吴地至浙江，北破齐于徐州。
现代文：楚威王发兵迎击越军，大败越军，杀死了越王无强，把原来吴国一直到浙江的土地全部攻下，在北面的徐州大败齐军。
English: King Chu Wei sent an army to meet the Vietnamese army, defeated the Vietnamese army, killed the Vietnamese king Wu Qiang, conquered all the land of the original Wu country all the way to Zhejiang, and defeated the Qi army in Xuzhou in the north.

古文：而越以此散，诸族子争立，或为王，或为君，滨于江南海上，服朝于楚。
现代文：越国从此分崩离析，各族子弟们竞争权位，有的称王，有的称君，居住在长江南部的沿海，服服贴贴地向楚国朝贡。
English: Since then, Yue has fallen apart, and the children of various ethnic groups have competed for positions of power, some calling themselves kings, others calling themselves princes, living along the southern coast of the Yangtze River, and paying tribute to the state of Chu.

古文：后七世，至闽君摇，佐诸侯平秦。
现代文：七代后，君位传到闽君摇，他辅佐诸侯推翻了秦朝。
English: Seven generations later, the throne was passed down to Zou Junshao, who assisted the princes in overthrowing the Qin Dynasty.

古文：汉高帝复以摇为越王，以奉越后。
现代文：汉高帝又恢复摇做了越王，继续越国的奉祀。
English: Emperor Han Gao resumed shaking and became the king of Yue, continuing the worship of Yue.

古文：东越，闽君，皆其后也。
现代文：东越、闽君都是越国的后代。
English: Both the East Vietnamese and the Dong Jun are descendants of the Viets.

古文：范蠡事越王勾践，既苦身戮力，与勾践深谋二十余年，竟灭吴，报会稽之耻，北渡兵于淮以临齐、晋，号令中国，以尊周室，勾践以霸，而范蠡称上将军。
现代文：范蠡事奉越王勾践，身心辛苦，竭尽所能，与勾践运筹谋划二十多年，终于灭亡了吴国，洗雪了会稽的耻辱。越军向北进军淮河，兵临齐、晋边境，号令中原各国，尊崇周室，勾践称霸，范蠡做了上将军。
English: Fan Rong served the King of Vietnam for more than 20 years. He worked hard physically and mentally, did his best, and planned and planned for more than 20 years. He finally destroyed the State of Wu and washed away the shame of the inspection. The Vietnamese army marched north to the Huaihe River, the soldiers were close to the Qi and Jin borders, ordered the Central Plains countries to respect the Zhou Dynasty, and practiced to dominate. Fan Rong became the top general.

古文：还反国，范蠡以为大名之下，难以久居，且勾践为人可与同患，难与处安，为书辞勾践曰： 臣闻主忧臣劳，主辱臣死。
现代文：回国后，范蠡以为盛名之下，难以长久，况且勾践的为人，可与之同患难，难与之同安乐，写信辞别勾践说： 我听说，君王忧愁臣子就劳苦，君主受辱臣子就该死。
English: After returning to China, Fan Zhe thought that it was difficult to last long under a prestigious name, and moreover, he was a person who practiced, and he could suffer with it, and it was difficult to be happy with it. He wrote a letter saying: I heard that if the prince is sad, the vassal will work hard, and if the prince is insulted, the vassal should die.

古文：昔者君王辱于会稽，所以不死，为此事也。
现代文：过去您在会稽受辱，我之所以未死，是为了报仇雪恨。
English: In the past, you were humiliated in the club, and the reason why I didn't die was to take revenge.

古文：今既以雪耻，臣请从会稽之诛。 
现代文：当今既已雪耻，臣请求您给予我君主在会稽受辱的死罪。 
English: Now that the scandal has died down, I ask you to give me the death penalty for insulting the monarch.

古文：勾践曰： 孤将与子分国而有之。
现代文：勾践说： 我将和你平分越国。否则，就要加罪于你。 
English: Gochan said, "I will give you an equal share of Yue. Otherwise, you will be punished."

古文：不然，将加诛于子。 范蠡曰： 君行令，臣行意。 
现代文：范蠡说： 君主可执行您的命令，臣子仍依从自己的意趣。 
English: Fan Ye said: The monarch can carry out your orders, but the courtiers still follow their own whims.

古文：乃装其轻宝珠玉，自与其私徒属乘舟浮海以行，终不反。于是勾践表会稽山以为范蠡奉邑。
现代文：于是他打点包装了细软珠宝，与随从从海上乘船离去，始终未再返回越国，勾践为表彰范蠡把会稽山作为他的封邑。
English: So he packed up his soft jewelry and sailed away from Vietnam with his entourage. He never returned to Vietnam, and made Huaiji Mountain his fief in recognition of Fan Yu.

古文：范蠡浮海出齐，变姓名，自谓鸱夷子皮，耕于海畔，苦身戮力，父子治产。
现代文：范蠡乘船飘海到了齐国，更名改姓，自称 鸱夷子皮 ，在海边耕作，吃苦耐劳，努力生产，父子合力治理产业。
English: Fan Ye took a boat and sailed to Qi Province. He changed his name and surname, calling himself "Yi Zi Pei." He farmed by the sea, endured hardships, worked hard to produce, and father and son worked together to manage the industry.

古文：居无几何，致产数十万。
现代文：住了不久，积累财产达几十万。
English: He lived there for a short time, accumulating hundreds of thousands in property.

古文：齐人闻其贤，以为相。
现代文：齐人听说他贤能，让他做了国相。
English: The people of Qi heard that he was capable and made him minister of state.

古文：范蠡喟然叹曰： 居家则致千金，居官则至卿相，此布衣之极也。
现代文：范蠡叹息道： 住在家里就积累千金财产，做官就达到卿相高位，这是平民百姓能达到的最高地位了。
English: Fan Yu sighed, "Living at home means accumulating a lot of money and property, and being an official means attaining the high rank of chancellor, which is the highest rank that a commoner can achieve.

古文：久受尊名，不祥。 
现代文：长久享受尊贵的名号，不吉祥。 
English: It is not auspicious to enjoy a noble title for a long time.

古文：乃归相印，尽散其财，以分与知友乡党，而怀其重宝，间行以去，止于陶。
现代文：于是归还了相印，全部发散了自己的家产，送给知音好友同乡邻里，携带着贵重财宝，秘密离去，到陶地住下来。
English: So he returned the seal, gave away all his family property, gave it to a friend and neighbor in the same town, took the precious treasure with him, secretly left, and settled down in Taodi.

古文：以为此天下之中，交易有无之路通，为生可以致富矣。
现代文：他认为这里是天下的中心，交易买卖的道路通畅，经营生意可以发财致富。
English: He believes that here is the center of the world, the road of trading and buying and selling is smooth, and running a business can make a fortune.

古文：于是自谓陶朱公。
现代文：于是自称陶朱公。
English: So he called himself Tao Zhu Gong.

古文：复约要父子耕畜，废居，候时转物，逐什一之利。
现代文：又约定好父子都要耕种畜牧，买进卖出时都等待时机，以获得十分之一的利润。
English: It was also agreed that both father and son should cultivate and raise livestock, and when buying and selling, they should wait for the right time to get one-tenth of the profit.

古文：居无何，则致赀累巨万。
现代文：过了不久，家资又积累到万万。
English: Soon after, the family's assets had accumulated to tens of thousands of dollars.

古文：天下称陶朱公。
现代文：天下人都称道陶朱公。
English: People all over the world praise Tao Zhu Gong.

古文：朱公居陶，生少子。
现代文：朱公住在陶地，生了小儿子。
English: Zhu Gong lived in Taodi and gave birth to a little son.

古文：少子及壮，而朱公中男杀人，囚于楚。
现代文：小儿子成人时，朱公的二儿子杀了人，被楚国拘捕。
English: When his youngest son became an adult, Zhu Gong's second son killed someone and was arrested by the State of Chu.

古文：朱公曰： 杀人而死，职也。
现代文：朱公说： 杀人者抵命，这是常理。
English: Zhu Gong said, "It is common sense that those who kill others should pay with their lives.

古文：然吾闻千金之子不死于市。 
现代文：可是我听说家有千金的子弟，不会被杀在闹市中。 
English: But I've heard that the son of a wealthy family won't be killed in the middle of the city.

古文：告其少子往视之。
现代文：于是就嘱咐他的小儿子前往楚国探望。
English: So he told his youngest son to visit Chu.

古文：乃装黄金千溢，置褐器中，载以一牛车。
现代文：于是拿出黄金一千镒，装在褐色器具中，用一辆牛车载运。
English: So he took out a thousand ingots of gold, packed them in brown utensils, and transported them in an ox cart.

古文：且遣其少子，朱公长男固请欲行，朱公不听。
现代文：准备派小儿子出发办事时，朱公的长子坚决请求前去，朱公不同意。
English: When he was about to send his younger son out on an errand, Zhu Gong's eldest son firmly asked him to go. Zhu Gong did not agree.

古文：长男曰： 家有长子曰 家督 ，今弟有罪，大人不遣，乃遣少弟，是吾不肖。 
现代文：长子说： 家里的长子叫家督，现在弟弟犯了罪，父亲不派长子去，却派小弟弟，这说明我是不肖之子。 
English: The eldest son said: The eldest son of the family is called the head of the family, and now the younger brother has committed a crime. The father does not send the eldest son, but sends the younger brother. This shows that I am a bad son.

古文：欲自杀。
现代文：长子说完想自杀。
English: After saying this, the eldest son wanted to commit suicide.

古文：其母为言曰： 今遣少子，未必能生中子也，而先空亡长男，奈何？ 
现代文：他的母亲又替他说： 现在派小儿子去，未必能救二儿子命，却先丧失了大儿子，那怎么可以呢？ 
English: And his mother said unto him, If he slay his younger son, it will not save the life of his other two sons: but if he slay his firstborn son, how shall it be avenged?

古文：朱公不得已而遣长子，为一封书遗故所善庄生，曰： 至则进千金于庄生所，听其所为，慎无与争事。 
现代文：朱公不得已就派了长子，写了一封信要大儿子送给旧日的好友庄生，并对长子说： 到楚国后，要把千金送到庄生家，一切听从他去办理，千万不要与他发生争执。 
English: Zhu Gong had no choice but to send his eldest son, he wrote a letter to his eldest son to send to his old friend Zhuang Sheng, and said to his eldest son: "When you come to Chu, you must send a thousand gold to Zhuang Sheng's house, you must obey him in everything, and you must not quarrel with him."

古文：长男既行，亦自私赍数百金。
现代文：长子走时，也私自携带子几百镒黄金。
English: When the eldest son left, I also took with me several hundred ingots of gold.

古文：至楚，庄生家负郭，披藜藋到门，居甚贫。
现代文：长子到达楚国，看见庄生家靠近楚都外城，披开野草才能到达庄生家门，庄生居住条件十分贫穷。
English: When the eldest son arrived in Chu, he saw that Zhuang Sheng's house was close to the outer city of Chu. He had to cover himself with weeds to reach Zhuang Sheng's house. Zhuang Sheng's living conditions were very poor.

古文：然长男发书进千金，如其父言。
现代文：可是长子还是打开信，向庄生进献了千金，完全照父亲所嘱做的。
English: However, the eldest son still opened the letter and donated a large sum of money to Zhuang Sheng, exactly as his father had ordered.

古文：庄生曰： 可疾去矣，慎毋留！
现代文：庄生说： 你可以赶快离去了，千万不要留在此地！
English: Zhuang Sheng said, "You can leave as soon as possible, don't stay here!"

古文：即弟出，勿问所以然。 
现代文：等你弟弟释放，也不要询问原因。 
English: When your brother is released, don't ask why.

古文：长男既去，不过庄生而私留，以其私赍献遗楚国贵人用事者。
现代文：长子离开了庄生家，不再探望庄生，但私自留在了楚国，把自己携带的黄金送给了楚国主事的达官贵人。
English: The eldest son left Zhuang Sheng's home and no longer visited Zhuang Sheng, but he stayed in the State of Chu on his own and gave the gold he was carrying to the dignitary who was in charge of the affairs of the State of Chu.

古文：庄生虽居穷阎，然以廉直闻于国，自楚王以下皆师尊之。
现代文：庄生虽然住在穷乡陋巷，可是由于廉洁正直在楚国很闻名，从楚王以下无不尊奉他为老师。
English: Although Zhuang Sheng lived in the back streets of a poor village, he was well-known in the State of Chu for his honesty and integrity, and was revered as a teacher by everyone from the King of Chu on down.

古文：及朱公进金，非有意受也，欲以成事后复归之以为信耳。
现代文：朱公献上黄金，他并非有心收下，只是想事成之后再归还给朱公以示讲信用。
English: Zhu Gong offered the gold, but he didn't intend to accept it, he just wanted to return it to Zhu Gong after everything was done to show his trust.

古文：故金至，谓其妇曰： 此朱公之金。有如病不宿诫，后复归，勿动。 而朱公长男不知其意，以为殊无短长也。
现代文：所以黄金送来后，他对妻子说： 这是朱公的钱财，以后再如数归还朱公，但哪一天归还却不得而知，这就如同自己哪一天生病也不能事先告知别人一样，千万不要动用。 但朱公长子不知庄生的意思，以为财产送给庄生不会起什么作用。
English: Therefore, after the gold was sent, he said to his wife: This is Zhu Gong's money, and it will be returned to Zhu Gong in full in the future, but it is not known when it will be returned. Just as you cannot tell others in advance when you are sick, do not use it. However, Zhu Gong's eldest son did not know the meaning of Zhuang Sheng, and thought that giving property to Zhuang Sheng would not have any effect.

古文：庄生闲时入见楚王，言 某星宿某，此则害于楚 。
现代文：庄生乘便入宫会见楚王，说： 某星宿移到某处，这将对楚国有危害。 
English: Zhuang Sheng took the opportunity to enter the palace to meet King Chu and said, "If a certain star is moved to a certain place, it will be harmful to the state of Chu."

古文：楚王素信庄生，曰： 今为奈何？ 
现代文：楚王平时十分信任庄生，就问： 现在怎么办？ 
English: Chu Wang usually trusts Zhuang Sheng very much, so he asked: What should we do now?

古文：庄生曰： 独以德为可以除之。 
现代文：庄生说： 只有实行仁义道德才可以免除灾害。 
English: Zhuang Sheng said: Only by practicing benevolence, righteousness and morality can we avoid disasters.

古文：楚王曰： 生休矣，寡人将行之。 
现代文：楚王说： 您不用多说了，我将照办。 
English: Chu Wang said: You don't need to say more, I will do as you say.

古文：王乃使使者封三钱之府。
现代文：楚王就派使者查封贮藏三钱的仓库。
English: King Chu sent an envoy to seal the warehouse where the three coins were stored.

古文：楚贵人惊告朱公长男曰： 王且赦。 
现代文：楚国达官贵人吃惊地告诉朱公长子说： 楚王将要实行大赦。 
English: Surprised, a high-ranking official from the State of Chu told Zhu Gong's eldest son: King Chu is going to grant amnesty.

古文：曰： 何以也？ 
现代文：长子问： 怎么见得呢？ 
English: The eldest son asked: How is it possible?

古文：曰： 每王且赦，常封三钱之府。
现代文：贵人说： 每当楚王大赦时，常常先查封贮藏三钱的仓库。
English: The dignitary said: Whenever King Chu grants amnesty, the warehouse where the three coins are stored is often sealed first.

古文：昨暮王使使封之。 
现代文：昨晚楚王已派使者查封了。 
English: Last night, King Chu sent an envoy to seal it.

古文：朱公长男以为赦，弟固当出也，重千金虚弃庄生，无所为也，乃复见庄生。
现代文：朱公长子认为既然大赦，弟弟自然可以释放了，一千镒黄金等于虚掷庄生处，没有发挥作用，于是又去见庄生。
English: Zhu Gong's eldest son thought that since there was an amnesty, his younger brother could naturally be released, and a thousand ingots of gold was tantamount to throwing away Zhuang Sheng's place, and it did not play a role, so he went to see Zhuang Sheng again.

古文：庄生惊曰： 若不去邪？ 
现代文：庄生惊奇地问： 你没离开吗？ 
English: Zhuang Sheng asked in surprise: Didn't you leave?

古文：长男曰： 固未也。
现代文：长子说： 始终没离开。
English: The eldest son said: I never left.

古文：初为事弟，弟今议自赦，故辞生去。 
现代文：当初我为弟弟一事来，今天楚国正商议大赦，弟弟自然得到释放，所以我特意来向您告辞。 
English: At first, I came for the sake of my brother. Today, Chu State is discussing an amnesty, and my brother was naturally released, so I specifically came to say goodbye to you.

古文：庄生知其意欲复得其金，曰： 若自入室取金。 
现代文：庄生知道他的意思是想拿回黄金，说： 你自己到房间里去取黄金吧。 
English: Zhuang Sheng knew that he meant that he wanted to get the gold back, and said, "Go to your room and get the gold yourself."

古文：长男即自入室取金持去，独自欢幸。
现代文：大儿子便入室取走黄金离开庄生，私自庆幸黄金失而复得。
English: The eldest son then went into the room to take the gold away from Zhuang Sheng. I am glad that the gold was recovered.

古文：庄生羞为儿子所卖，乃入见楚王曰： 臣前言某星事，王言欲以修德报之。
现代文：庄生被小儿辈出卖深感羞耻，就又入宫会见楚王说： 我上次所说的某星宿的事，您说想用做好事来回报它。
English: Zhuang Sheng was deeply ashamed of being betrayed by his children, so he entered the palace again to meet King Chu and said, "You said that you wanted to repay what I said last time about a certain star.

古文：今臣出，道路皆言陶之富人朱公之子杀人囚楚，其家多持金钱赂王左右，故王非能恤楚国而赦，乃以朱公子故也。 
现代文：现在，我在外面听路人都说陶地富翁朱公的儿子杀人后被楚囚禁，他家派人拿出很多金钱贿赂楚王左右的人，所以君王并非体恤楚国人而实行大赦，却是因为朱公儿子才大赦的。 
English: Now, I listen to passers-by outside who say that the son of Zhu Gong, a Taoist millionaire, was imprisoned in Chu after he killed a man. His family sent someone to take out a lot of money to bribe people around King Chu, so the king did not grant amnesty out of sympathy for the people of Chu, but because of Zhu Gong's son.

古文：楚王大怒曰： 寡人虽不德耳，奈何以朱公之子故而施惠乎！ 
现代文：楚王大怒道： 我虽然无德，怎么会因为朱公的儿子布施恩惠呢！ 
English: King Chu said angrily, "Although I am not virtuous, how could I show favor to Zhu Gong's son?

古文：令论杀朱公子，明日遂下赦令。
现代文：就下令先杀掉朱公儿子，第二天才下达赦免的诏令。
English: He ordered that Zhu Gong's son be killed first, and only the next day did he issue a decree of amnesty.

古文：朱公长男竟持其弟丧归。
现代文：朱公长子只能携带弟弟尸体回家了。
English: Zhu Gong's eldest son could only carry his brother's body home.

古文：至，其母及邑人尽哀之，唯朱公独笑，曰： 吾固知必杀其弟也！
现代文：回到家后，母亲和乡邻们都十分悲痛，只有朱公一个人发笑，说： 我本来就知道长子一定救不了弟弟！
English: After returning home, both the mother and the neighbors were very sad. Only Zhu Gong laughed and said, "I knew the eldest son would not be able to save his younger brother!"

古文：彼非不爱其弟，顾有所不能忍者也。
现代文：他不是不爱自己的弟弟，只是有所不能忍心放弃的。
English: It's not that he doesn't love his brother, it's just something he can't bear to give up.

古文：是少与我俱，见苦，为生难，故重弃财。
现代文：他年幼就与我生活在一起，经受过各种辛苦，知道为生的艰难，所以把钱财看得很重，不敢轻易花钱。
English: He lived with me when he was young, went through all kinds of hardships, knew the difficulties of life, so he valued money very much and did not dare to spend money easily.

古文：至如少弟者，生而见我富，乘坚驱良逐狡兔，岂知财所从来，故轻弃之，非所惜吝。
现代文：至于小弟弟呢，一生下来就只看到我极为富有，乘坐上等车，驱驾千里马，到郊外去打猎，哪里知道钱财从何处来，所以把钱财看得极轻，弃之也毫不吝惜。
English: As for my little brother, all he saw when he was born was that I was extremely rich, riding in a first-class car, driving thousands of miles, going hunting in the suburbs, and no one knew where the money came from, so he thought very little of money and did not regret giving it up.

古文：前日吾所为欲遣少子，固为其能弃财故也。而长者不能，故卒以杀其弟，事之理也，无足悲者。
现代文：原来我打算让小儿子去，本来因为他舍得弃财，但长子不能弃财，结果最后害死了他的弟弟，这很合乎事理，不值得悲痛。
English: Originally I was going to let my youngest son go, originally because he was willing to give up his wealth, but my eldest son could not give up his wealth, and as a result he ended up killing his younger brother, which is very reasonable and not worth the grief.

古文：吾日夜固以望其丧之来也。 
现代文：我本来日日夜夜盼的就是二儿子的尸首送回来。 
English: What I had been looking forward to day and night was the return of my second son's body.

古文：故范蠡三徙，成名于天下，非苟去而已，所止必成名。
现代文：范蠡曾经三次搬家，扬名天下，他不是随意离开某处，他住在哪儿就在哪儿成名。
English: Fan Ye has moved three times and become famous around the world. He doesn't leave a place at will. He becomes famous wherever he lives.

古文：卒老死于陶，故世传曰陶朱公。
现代文：最后老死在陶地，所以世人相传叫他陶朱公。
English: In the end, Lao died in Tao, so the world called him Tao Zhu Gong.

古文：太史公曰：禹之功大矣，渐九川，定九州，至于今诸夏艾安。
现代文：太史公说：夏禹的功劳很大，疏导了九条大河，安定了九州大地，一直到今天，整个九州都平安无事。
English: Taishi said, "Xia Yu's contribution is great. He diverted nine major rivers and stabilized the land of Kyushu. To this day, the whole of Kyushu is safe and sound.

古文：及苗裔勾践，苦身焦思，终灭强吴，北观兵中国，以尊周室，号称霸王。
现代文：到了他的后裔勾践，辛苦劳作，深谋远思，终于灭亡了强大的吴国，向北进军中原，尊奉周室，号称霸王。
English: His descendants practiced, worked hard, and thought far and wide. Finally, the powerful State of Wu perished. They marched north into the Central Plains, honoring Zhou Shuxu, known as the Overlord.

古文：勾践可不谓贤哉！
现代文：能说句不贤能吗！
English: Can you say incompetent!

古文：盖有禹之遗烈焉。
现代文：这大概也有夏禹的遗风吧。
English: This is probably also a legacy of Natsu Yu.

古文：范蠡三迁皆有荣名，名垂后世。
现代文：范蠡三次搬家都留下荣耀的名声，并永垂后世。
English: Fan Ye has moved house three times, leaving behind a glorious reputation that will live on forever.

古文：臣主若此，欲毋显得乎！
现代文：臣子君主能做到这样，想不显赫可能吗？
English: Is it possible for a vassal of the sovereign to do this without being conspicuous?

