古文：十一月初二日出建昌南门，西行二里至麻姑山足。上山二里，半山亭，有卧瀑。又一里半，喷雪，双瀑。
现代文：两边崖壁夹立，泉流捣入中间的深谷中，人不敢往下看；架了桥在桥上俯瞰，水势又变得雄伟壮观。
English: Cliff walls cling to both sides, spring water rushes into the deep valley in the middle, and no one dares to look down. A bridge has been built for a bird's-eye view, and the water has once again become majestic.

古文：又一里，连泄五级，上有二潭甚深，旧亭新盖，又半里，龙门峡，上有桥。又半里，麻姑坛、仙都观。
现代文：沿龙门而上，溪流平缓，山峦环绕几，自成一片幽静奇异的天地，让人不再感觉到置身在高山上面。又往上半里，到达麻姑坛和仙都观。
English: Along the gantry, the stream flows smoothly, surrounded by several mountains, forming a quiet and strange world of its own, so that people no longer feel that they are on top of the mountain.

古文：左有大夫松，已死；右有通海井。
现代文：左边有棵大夫松，己经枯死；右边有口通海井。
English: On the left there is a doctor pine, which has withered and died; on the right there is a well.

古文：西上岭十里，逾篾竹岭，为丹霞洞。
现代文：往西上岭十里，翻过蔑竹岭，为丹霞洞。
English: Ten miles to the west of Shangling, across Zizhuling, is Danxia Cave.

古文：又上一里，为王仙岭，最高。
现代文：又往上一里，为王仙岭，它最高峻。
English: Another mile up is Wang Xianling, the most precipitous.

古文：西下二里，张坊。
现代文：往西朝下走二里，为张坊。
English: Two miles to the west and down is Zhangfang.

古文：西左坳中为华严庵，宿。
现代文：张坊西面左边山坳中为华严庵，于是投宿在庵中。
English: On the west side of Zhangfang, the middle of the mountain on the left is Hua Yan An, so he stayed in the hermitage.

古文：初三日王仙岭东下一岭为丹霞洞。
现代文：初三日从王仙岭东面走下一座山岭为丹霞洞。
English: On the third day of the first lunar month, the next mountain to be climbed from the east of Wangxianling was Danxia Cave.

古文：又逾篾竹岭西坳中，南上越两山，东南共五里为飞炉峰，有小石炉方尺，自军峰山南飞至。
现代文：又翻过蔑竹岭西面的山坳，向南往上越过两座山，再往东南共走五里为飞炉峰，峰上有个一尺见方的小石炉，传说它是从军峰山南面飞来的。
English: He also climbed over the mountains on the west side of the Zhizhu Mountains, climbed up two mountains to the south, and then walked a total of five miles to the southeast to the Flying Furnace Peak. On the peak there is a small stone furnace one foot square, which is said to have flown from the south side of the Junfeng Mountain.

古文：其地南为军峰，北接麻姑，东瞰盱江，西极芙蓉，盖在五老峰之西，阳华峰之西北矣。
现代文：那地方南边为军峰山，北边接着麻姑山，向东可以远望吁江，向西可以尽览芙容峰，大略在五老峰的西面、阳华峰的西北面。
English: To the south of the place is Junfeng Mountain, followed by Magu Mountain to the north. To the east, you can see the Wu River, and to the west, you can see Furong Peak. It is roughly west of Wulao Peak and northwest of Yanghua Peak.

古文：初四日出建昌东门，过太平桥南行，循溪五六界，折而西一里，出从姑之南，见山顶两石并起如双髻者。
现代文： 初四日出了建昌府东门，越过太平桥往南行，顺溪流走五六里，又折向西走一里，出了从姑峰南面，攀上天柱峰，看见一座顶上两块石头并列耸起，如同双髻的山峰。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, I went out of the east gate of Jianchang Prefecture, crossed the Taiping Bridge to the south, walked along the stream for five or six miles, and then turned to the west for one mile. I went out from the south of the Gu peak, climbed the Tianzhu peak, and saw a mountain with two stones at the top, standing side by side, like twin peaks.

古文：向登其岩，曰飞鳌峰。
现代文：向北登上那山峰间的岩石，为飞鳌峰。
English: Climbing northward on the rock between the peaks, it is the Flying Pinnacle.

古文：岩前曰长春阁。
现代文：岩前面有个阁叫长春阁。
English: In front of the rock, there is a pavilion called Changchun Pavilion.

古文：阁之东有堂曰 鳌峰 ，深处为罗先生讲学之所。
现代文：阁的东面有个堂，匾额上写着 鳌峰深处 四个字，是罗先生讲学的处所。
English: On the east side of the pavilion, there is a hall, with the words "deep inside the peak" written on the front. It is the place where Mr. Luo gives lectures.

古文：其后飞突而出，倒书曰 印空 。
现代文：堂后面岩石飞突而出，岩上倒写着 印空 两个字。
English: At the back of the hall, a rock juts out, with the word "Inku" written upside down on it.

古文：下有方池，名曰玉冷泉。
现代文：岩石下有一个方形池子，名叫玉冷泉。
English: Beneath the rock is a square pool called the Jade Cold Spring.

古文：从东上天际亭，亭后凿石悬梯而上，有洞。
现代文：我从玉冷泉东面上到天际亭，亭后凿开石壁修筑了一悬空的石阶梯，顺石阶梯爬上去，有一个洞。
English: I went from the east side of Jade Cold Spring to the Sky Pavilion. After the pavilion, I chiseled open the stone wall and built a suspended stone staircase. Climbing up the stone staircase, there was a hole.

古文：洞口隘如斗，蛇像蛇一样伏乃入，其中高穹而宽。
现代文：洞口狭窄如斗，我像蛇一样卧伏着才钻了进去，洞中高弯宽阔。
English: The mouth of the cave is as narrow as a barrel, and I had to lie down like a snake before I could get in. The cave is high and wide.

古文：此天柱之南隅也。
现代文：此洞处天柱峰的南隅。
English: This cave is located in the southern corner of Tianzhu Peak.

古文：出洞，仍下石级，沿崖从西登。
现代文：出了洞，仍然沿石瞪下来，顺着山崖从西面攀登。
English: Out of the hole, still along the stone glare down, along the cliff from the west to climb.

古文：天柱、鳌峰之间，有台一掌，上眺层崖，下临绝壁，竹拂石门，树悬崖隙，为云岩台。
现代文：天柱峰和鳌峰之间，有个手掌似的平台，上眺层崖，下临她壁，翠竹轻拂石门，绿树悬立在崖缝间，这是云岩台。
English: Between the Tianzhu Peak and the Jianfeng Peak, there is a palm-like platform, overlooking the cliff above and the wall below, the green bamboo lightly brushing the stone door, and the green tree hanging between the cliff seams. This is the Yunyantai.

古文：从其上西穿峰峡，架木崖间，曰双玉楼。
现代文：从云岩台上往西穿越山峰间的峡谷，崖壁间架着一座木楼，叫双玉楼。
English: From Yunyantai to the west through the canyon between the peaks, there is a wooden tower between the cliffs, called Shuangyulou.

古文：再西，一石欲坠未坠，两峡并起，上下离立，若中剖而分者，曰一线天。
现代文：再往西，峡谷顶上有一块石头将坠未坠，两边的崖壁并排耸起，上下崖石并立，如同从中间破裂而分开的一样，叫一线天。
English: Further west, on the top of the canyon, there is a stone that will not fall, the cliff walls on both sides rise side by side, and the upper and lower cliff stones stand side by side, as if they were separated from the middle, called the skyline.

古文：此鳌峰之北隅也。
现代文：这里处鳌峰的北隅。
English: This is the northern corner of the peak.

古文：一线既尽，峡转而北，有平石二片，一方一圆，横庋峡内，曰跏趺之盘腿坐法石。
现代文：过了一线天，峡谷转往北，有两片平整的石块，一方一圆，横置在峡谷内，称为枷跌石。
English: After a line of sky, the canyon turns to the north, there are two pieces of flat stones, one side is a circle, placed horizontally in the canyon, known as the falling stone.

古文：此二峰者，从天柱之西，鳌峰之北，又起二峰，高杀于鳌峰、天柱，而附丽成奇者也。
现代文：此二峰，即从天柱峰西面、鳌峰北面又耸起的两座山峰，高不如鳌峰和天柱峰，但由于它们的映衬，加之有一线天、枷跌石两处景观，也变得奇丽峻秀。
English: These two peaks, that is, the two peaks that rise from the west face of Tianzhu Peak and the north face of Qianfeng Peak, are not as high as Qianfeng Peak and Tianzhu Peak, but because of their contrast, combined with the skyline and the two landscapes of the Yangtze Falls, they also become strangely beautiful.

古文：其东一峰，即南与鳌峰夹成一线，又与西峰夹庋跏趺者。
现代文：其中东面的山峰，就是与南面的鳌峰夹峙而形成一线天、又与西面的山峰相夹而横卧着枷跌石的那座。
English: Among them, the mountain peak on the east is the one that forms a line of sky with the peak on the south, and the one that lies between the peaks on the west.

古文：西峰之西，又有片石横架成台，其东西俱可跏趺云。
现代文：西面那座山峰的西边，又有一块石头横架成台，这座山峰东西两面的石头都可以称为枷跌石。
English: On the west side of the mountain peak in the west, there is another stone set horizontally. The stones on both sides of this mountain peak can be called falling stones.

古文：从跏趺石东践一动石，梯东峰而上，其顶南架梁于一线，遂出鳌峰之崩，东凿级以跻，遂凌天柱之表。
现代文：从枷跌石东面踏着一块摇动着的石头，向东面那座山峰攀上去，峰顶南端一线天之上架有桥梁，越过桥便到了鳌峰峰顶；峰顶东面凿有石阶梯，沿阶梯登上去，便到了夭柱峰峰顶。
English: I stepped on a rocking stone on the east side of the falling stone and climbed up the mountain to the east. At the southern end of the peak, there was a bridge over the sky. I crossed the bridge and reached the top of the peak. On the east side of the peak, there was a stone staircase. I climbed up the stairs and reached the top of the pillar peak.

古文：于是北瞰郡城，琉璃映日；西瞻麻峤，翡翠插天。
现代文：从天柱峰顶上向北俯瞰建昌府城，琉璃瓦辉映着阳光；往西观看麻娇峰，翡翠色的峰峦直插云天。
English: From the top of Tianzhu Peak, the city of Jianchang Prefecture can be seen to the north, with the light of the glazed tiles reflecting the sun. To the west, the Jiaojiao Peak can be seen, with its emerald-colored peak sticking straight up into the sky.

古文：从此北下天柱之北，穹崖下临，片石夹立，上有古梅一株，曰 屏风石 。
现代文：当时天空云气稀薄，异常明朗。从峰顶上往北下到峰北面，弯隆的山崖下临深谷，一块大石头耸立在山崖对面，上面有一棵古梅，这块大石头叫 屏风石 。
English: At that time, the sky was thinly clouded and unusually clear. From the top of the peak to the north of the peak, the steep cliff faces a deep valley. A large stone stands on the opposite side of the cliff. There is an ancient plum tree on it. This large stone is called the screen stone.

古文：天柱北裂一隙，上有悬台可跻而坐，曰 滴水崖 。
现代文：天柱峰北面裂开一条夹缝，夹缝中有一个虚悬着的平台，可以攀到上面去坐着，它叫 滴水崖 。
English: On the north face of Tianzhu Peak, there is a crevice. In the crevice, there is a suspended platform where you can climb up and sit. It is called the dripping cliff.

古文：内有石窦，直上三丈，正与南隅悬崖之洞相对。
现代文：滴水崖内有个石洞，直通向上，有三丈深，正好与峰南隅悬在崖壁间的那个洞对着。
English: There is a stone cave in the dripping cliff, which leads straight up and is three meters deep, just opposite the hole in the southern corner of the peak, which hangs between the cliff walls.

古文：此天柱之北隅也。
现代文：这是天柱峰的北隅。
English: This is the northern corner of Tianzhu Peak.

古文：从此东下，又得穹崖一层，曰读书台，今为竹影庵。
现代文：从这里往东下去，又见到一层弯隆的山崖，叫读书台，如今上面建有竹影庵。
English: Going east from here, you will see another steep cliff, called the reading platform, which is now home to the Bamboo Shadow Hermitage.

古文：从其南攀石而登，曰梅花岩，石隙东向，可卧可憩。
现代文：从读书台南面攀着石头登上去，叫梅花岩，岩间石缝朝着东，石缝内可以睡卧可以休息。
English: Climbing up the stone from the south of the reading table, called Meihua Rock, the stone gap between the rocks faces east, and you can sleep and rest in the stone gap.

古文：此天柱东隅之下层也。
现代文：这是天柱峰东隅的下层。
English: This is the lower part of the eastern corner of Tianzhu Peak.

古文：飞鳌之西有斗姆阁，其侧有蟾窟石，下嵌为窝，上突为台，亦可趺ǜ同跗可啸。
现代文：飞鳌峰的西面有个斗姆阁，它的侧面有个蟾窟石，这石的下面如蟾蛛张着口形成石窝，上面向外凸出形成平台，台上也可以双足交叠而坐，可以放声长啸。
English: On the west side of Fei Yao Peak, there is a Doum Pavilion. On its side, there is a grotto stone. The bottom of this stone is like a cocoon spider with its mouth open to form a stone nest, and the top protrudes outward to form a platform. You can also sit on the platform with your legs crossed, and you can make a long noise.

古文：此飞鳌西隅之下层也。
现代文：这是飞鳌峰西隅的下层。
English: This is the lower ridge of the west corner of Fei Yao Peak.

古文：是日，建昌遇夏调御、丘士章。
现代文：这天在建昌府遇到夏调御、丘士章。
English: On this day, in Jianchangfu, he met Xia Jigong and Qiu Shizhang.

