古文：奚，本匈奴之别种。
现代文：奚，原是匈奴的一个分支。
English: , originally a branch of the Huns.

古文：当唐之末，居阴凉川，在营府之西，幽州之西南，皆数百里。
现代文：唐末时，居住在阴凉川，位于赞州都督府西面，幽州西南面，距离都有数酉里。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, he lived in Yin Liangchuan, located in the west of Zanzhou and the southwest of Yuzhou, both several hundred miles away.

古文：有人马二万骑。
现代文：有两万人马。
English: There are twenty thousand horses.

古文：分为五部：一曰阿荟部，二曰啜米部，三曰粤质部，四曰奴皆部，五曰黑讫支部。
现代文：分成五部：一叫阿蓄部，二叫啜米部，三叫粤质部，四叫奴皆部，五叫黑讫支部。
English: It is divided into five branches: the first is called the A-cultivation branch, the second is called the Sip-rice branch, the third is called the Yue-quality branch, the fourth is called the Nongguan branch, and the fifth is called the Heihe branch.

古文：后徙居琵琶川，在幽州东北数百里。
现代文：后来移居琵琶川，在幽州东北数百里。
English: Later he moved to Biwagawa, several hundred miles northeast of Yuzhou.

古文：地多黑羊，马嵒前蹄坚善走，其登山逐兽，下上如飞。
现代文：那里有很多黑羊，马胜遇以前，蹄坚善走，他们登山逐兽，上下如飞。
English: There are a lot of black sheep there. The horses are good at running, and their hooves are good at walking. They go up and down the mountain, following the animals.

古文：契丹阿保机强盛，室韦、奚、皆服属之。
现代文：契丹阿保机强盛时，室韦、奚、溜都归服他。
English: When Khitan Ahoji was in power, the cities of Shwe, Perak, and Yala all submitted to him.

古文：奚人常为契丹守界上，而苦其苛虐，奚王去诸怨叛，以别部西徙妫州，依北山射猎，常采北山麝香、仁参赂刘守光以自托。
现代文：奚人常替契丹把守边界，而深受契丹苛刻暴虐之苦，奚王去诸因怨愤而反叛，率领别部西迁到嫣州，依北山打猎，常采北山的麝香、人参贿赂刘守光以使自己有所依托。
English: The Xiong people often guarded the border for the Khitan, and suffered from the harsh tyranny of the Khitan. The king of the Xiong people went to Zhu and rebelled because of resentment. He led other departments to move west to Zhangzhou, hunted according to the North Mountain, and often picked fennel and ginseng from the North Mountain to bribe Liu Shouguang to support himself.

古文：其族至数千帐，始分为东、西奚。
现代文：这一族发展到敷千帐，纔分成束奚、西奚。
English: This clan developed into the Shiki Chizentetsu clan, and the clan was divided into the Sokushaku clan and the West Shaku clan.

古文：去诸之族，颇知耕种，岁借边民荒地种穄，秋熟则来获，窖之山下，人莫知其处。
现代文：去诸族，很懂得耕种，每年借边民的荒地种糜子，秋天成熟后就来收获，窖藏在山下，没有人知道藏的地方。
English: He went to various ethnic groups and was very knowledgeable about farming. Every year, he used the wasteland of the border people to grow hazelnuts. After the autumn was ripe, he came to harvest them. The cellar was hidden under the mountain, and no one knew where it was hidden.

古文：爨以平底瓦鼎，煮穄为粥，以寒水解之而饮。
现代文：用平底瓦锅烧火做饭，把糜子煮成粥，用冷水混着喝。
English: Use a flat-bottomed pot to cook, boil the hazelnuts into porridge, mix with cold water and drink.

古文：去诸卒，子扫剌立。
现代文：去诸死后，他儿子扫刺继位。
English: After his death, his son Saotome succeeded him.

古文：庄宗破刘守光，赐扫剌姓李，更其名绍威。
现代文：唐庄宗攻破刘守光，赐扫刺姓李，改他的名叫绍威。
English: Tang Zhuangzong defeated Liu Shuguang, gave him the surname Li, and changed his name to Shaowei.

古文：绍威卒，子拽剌立。
现代文：李绍威死后，儿子拽刺继位。
English: After the death of Li Shaowei, he was succeeded by his son, Tang Zhaotang.

古文：同光以后，绍威父子数遣使朝贡。
现代文：同光以后，李绍威父子多次派使臣到京师朝贡。
English: After Tongguang, Li Shaowei and his son repeatedly sent envoys to Beijing to pay tribute.

古文：初，绍威娶契丹女舍利逐不鲁之姊为妻，后逐不鲁叛亡入西奚，绍威纳之。
现代文：当初，李绍威娶契丹女舍利逐不鲁的姐姐做妻子，后来逐不鲁叛逃到西奚，李绍威收容了他。
English: At first, Li Shaowei married the sister of a Khitan woman, Sheri Zi Nulu, as his wife. Later, Zi Nulu defected to Xicheng, and Li Shaowei took him in.

古文：晋高祖入立，割幽州雁门以北入于契丹，是时绍威与逐不鲁皆已死，耶律德光已立晋北归，拽剌迎谒马前，德光曰： 非尔罪也。
现代文：晋高祖登位，把幽州和雁门以北地方割让给契丹，这时李绍威和逐不鲁都已死，耶律德光已册立后晋而北归，拽刺在马前迎拜，耶律德光说： 不是你的罪。
English: When Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne and ceded Yuzhou and the areas north of the Wild Goose Gate to Khitan, Li Shaowei and Qiblu were already dead, and Yeludoguang had already returned to the north after being enthroned. He bowed before the horse, and Yeludoguang said, "It is not your fault."

古文：负我者，扫剌与逐不鲁尔。 
现代文：对不住我的，不过是扫刺和逐不鲁罢了。 
English: If you don't feel sorry for me, it's just a matter of wiping the splinters and moving on.

古文：乃发其墓，粉其骨而扬之。
现代文：于是挖开他们的坟墓，把他们的骨头锤成粉末撒掉。
English: So they dug up their graves and hammered their bones to dust.

古文：后德光灭晋，拽剌常以兵从。
现代文：俊来耶律德光消灭后晋，拽刺曾率兵相随。
English: After the annihilation of Shunlai Yelu Deguang and Jin, Zeng Zeng led the troops to follow.

古文：其后不复见于中国。
现代文：以后就没有再出现在中原。
English: After that, it did not reappear in the Central Plains.

古文：自去诸徙妫州，自别为西奚，而东奚在琵琶川者，亦为契丹所并，不复能自见云。
现代文：自从去诸迁到嫣州，自立为西奚，而在琵琶川的束奚，也被契丹吞并，不能再单独出现。
English: Since Zhu moved to Zhangzhou, it has become independent as Xidi, while Sokou in the Biwa River has also been annexed by the Khitan, and can no longer appear alone.

古文：吐浑，本号吐谷浑，或曰乞伏乾归之苗裔。
现代文：吐潭，原称吐谷潭，有人说是乞伏干归的后代。
English: Tutan, formerly known as Tuyutan, is said to be the descendant of a beggar.

古文：自后魏以来，名见中国，居于青海之上。
现代文：自从后魏以来，名称被中原知道，住在青海旁边。
English: Since the post-Wei Dynasty, the name has been known in the Central Plains, living next to Qinghai.

古文：当唐至德中，为吐蕃所攻，部族分散，其内附者，唐处之河西。
现代文：唐至德年问，被吐蕃进攻，部族分散，内附的部族，唐朝把他们安置在河西。
English: The Tang Dynasty was attacked by the Tuobao, the tribes were scattered, and the annexed tribes were resettled in Hexi by the Tang Dynasty.

古文：其大姓有慕容、拓拔、赫连等族。
现代文：他们的大姓有慕容、拓拔、赫连等族。
English: Their family names include Murong, Tuoba, and Kherian.

古文：懿宗时，首领赫连鐸为阴山府都督，与讨庞勋，以功拜大同军节度使。
现代文：唐懿宗时，首领赫连铎任阴山府都督，协助讨伐庞勋，因功封大同军节度使。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the leader Hereng Zong served as the governor of Yinshan Prefecture, assisted in the fight against Pang Xun, and was awarded the title of the festival envoy of the Datong Army.

古文：为晋王所破，其部族益微，散处蔚州界中。
现代文：后被晋王攻破，他的部族更加衰微，散居在蔚州境内。
English: After being defeated by Jin Wang, his tribe became even weaker and dispersed in Ulshu.

古文：庄宗时，有首领白承福者，依中山北石门为栅，庄宗为置宁朔、奉化两府，以承福为都督，赐其姓名为李绍鲁。
现代文：唐庄宗时，有个首领白承福，依傍中山北面的石门修建栅寨，唐庄宗为他设置宁朔、奉化二府，任白承福为都督，赐给他姓名叫李绍鲁。
English: At the time of Tangzhuangzong, there was a leader, Bai Chengfu, who built a stockade next to the stone gate on the north side of Zhongshan Mountain. Tangzhuangzong set up two prefectures, Ningshuo and Fenghua, for him, appointed Bai Chengfu as the governor, and gave him the name Li Shaolu.

古文：终唐时，常遣使朝贡中国。
现代文：直到后唐灭亡，常派使臣到中原朝贡。
English: Until the fall of the Later Tang Dynasty, envoys were regularly sent to the Central Plains to pay tribute.

古文：晋高祖立，割雁门以北入于契丹，于是吐浑为契丹役属，而苦其苛暴。
现代文：晋高祖登位，把雁门以北割让给契丹，从此吐浑被契丹奴役，深受契丹苛刻暴虐之苦。
English: Jingu Gaozu ascended to the throne and ceded the area north of the Wild Goose Gate to the Khitans. From then on, Tuban was enslaved by the Khitans and suffered from the harsh tyranny of the Khitans.

古文：是时，安重荣镇成德，有异志，阴遣人招吐浑入塞，承福等乃自五台入处中国。
现代文：适时，安重荣镇守成德，有二心，暗中派人招吐潭入塞，白承福等人于是从五台进居中原。
English: At the right time, An Chong Rong Town, guarding Chengde, had second thoughts and secretly sent someone to recruit Tuitan into Jie. Bai Chengfu and others then moved from Wutai to Zhongyuan.

古文：契丹耶律德光大怒，遣使者责诮高祖，高祖恐惧，遣供奉官张澄率兵搜索并、镇、忻、代等州山谷中吐浑驱出之。
现代文：契丹耶律德光大怒，派使臣责备晋高祖，晋高祖恐惧，派供奉官张澄率兵搜索并、镇、忻、代等州山谷中的吐浑人把他们起走。
English: Qidan Yerudoglu was furious, sent envoys to rebuke Jingao Zu, Jingao Zu was afraid, and sent Zhang Cheng, a tributary official, to search for the soldiers and take them away from the Tuhun people in the valleys of the towns, counties, and dynasties.

古文：然晋亦苦契丹，思得吐浑为缓急之用，阴遣刘知远镇太原慰抚之。
现代文：但后晋也深受契丹之苦，想得到吐潭以便紧急关头有所应援，于是暗中派刘知速镇守太原，抚慰他们。
English: However, Hojin was also suffering from the Khitan, and wanted to get hold of Tutan so that he could provide assistance in an emergency, so he secretly sent Liu Zhihai to guard Taiyuan and comfort them.

古文：终高祖时，承福数遣使者朝贡。
现代文：整个晋高祖时期，白承福多次派遣使臣朝贡。
English: Throughout the period of the founding fathers of Jin Gao, Bai Chengfu repeatedly sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：后出帝与契丹绝盟，召承福入朝，拜大同军节度使，待之甚厚。
现代文：后来晋出帝和契丹绝交，召白承福进朝，封为大同军节度使，待他很优厚。
English: Later, Emperor Jinzhi and Khitan severed diplomatic relations, summoned Bai Chengfu to the court, and appointed him as an envoy of the Datong Army Festival. He was treated very generously.

古文：契丹与晋相距于河，承福以其兵从出帝御虏。
现代文：契丹和后晋在黄河边相拒，白承福率兵随晋出帝抗击契丹。
English: Khitan and Later Jin opposed each other on the edge of the Yellow River, and Bai Chengfu led the troops to fight against Khitan with the Emperor Jin.

古文：是岁大热，吐浑多疾死，乃遣承福归太原，居之岚、石之间。
现代文：这年很热，吐潭人很多患病而死，于是派白承福回太原，迁居到岚、石二州之间。
English: It was a very hot year, and many people in Tutan died of illness. Therefore, Bai Chengfu was sent back to Taiyuan, and he moved to the area between Shifang and Shishu.

古文：刘知远稍侵辱之，承福谋复亡出塞，知远以兵围其族，杀承福及其大姓赫连海龙、白可久、白铁匮等，其羊马赀财巨万计，皆籍没之，其余众以其别部王义宗主之。
现代文：刘知远逐渐侵辱他们，白承福策划又逃亡出塞，刘知速率兵包围他们，杀掉白承福和吐潭的大姓赫连海龙、白可久、白铁匮等人，他们的羊马资财，敷以万计，都被抄没，其余的人让他的别部王义宗统领。
English: Liu Zhiyuan gradually humiliated them, Bai Chengfu plotted and escaped from Tibet, Liu Zhizhong led the soldiers to surround them, killed Bai Chengfu and Tutan's eldest sons, Heren Hailong, Bai Kegui, Bai Tiexiao and others. Their sheep and horse resources, with tens of thousands of dollars, were all confiscated, and the rest of the people let his other department Wang Yizong lead.

古文：吐浑遂微，不复见。
现代文：吐浑于是衰微，不再出现。
English: The sputum then fades and no longer appears.

古文：初，唐以承福之族为熟吐浑。
现代文：当初，后唐把白承福族称为熟吐浑。
English: At first, the Later Tang Dynasty referred to the Bai Chengfu people as the Jiu Tu Hun.

古文：长兴中，又有生吐浑杜每兒来朝贡。
现代文：畏兴中，又有生吐浑杜每儿前来朝贡。
English: In the middle of the awe-inspiring, there was also a live spitting dogfish coming to pay tribute.

古文：每兒，不知其国地、部族。
现代文：杜每儿，不知他的国土、部族情况。
English: Du Yier, I do not know his country, tribe situation.

古文：至汉乾祐二年，又有吐浑何戛剌来朝贡，不知为生、熟吐浑，盖皆微，不足考录。
现代文：到后汉干佑二年，又有吐浑何戛刺前来朝贡，不知是生吐浑还是熟吐潭，大概都衰微了，不值得考究记载。
English: Two years after Han Ganyu's arrival, another Tu Hun Ho Gao Jian came to pay tribute. I don't know whether it was a fresh Tu Hun or a well-seasoned Tu Tan, but they were probably all withered and not worth recording.

古文：达靼，靺鞨之遗种，本在奚、契丹之东北，后为契丹所攻，而部族分散，或属契丹，或属渤海，别部散居阴山者，自号达靼。
现代文：达靼，是棘辐的后代，原在奚、契丹东北面，后来受到契丹进攻，部族分散，有的归属契丹，有的归属渤海，其余散居在阴山的部族，自称达靼。
English: The Tatars are the descendants of the spiny spokes. Originally, they lived in the northeast of Khotan and Khitan. Later, they were attacked by the Khitan, and the tribes dispersed. Some belonged to the Khitan, some to the Bohai, and the remaining tribes scattered in the Yinshan, calling themselves Tatars.

古文：当唐末，以名见中国。
现代文：唐末时，名称被中原所知。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, the name was known to the Central Plains.

古文：有每相温、于越相温，咸通中，从硃邪赤心讨庞勋。
现代文：有每相温、于越相温等人，咸通中，随朱邪赤心讨伐庞勋。
English: There are people such as Hui Xiangwen and Yu Yue Xiangwen who, in the middle of Hamdangdong, follow Zhu Yanzhong to fight Pangxun wholeheartedly.

古文：其后李国昌、克用父子为赫连鐸等所败，尝亡入达靼。
现代文：后来李国昌、李克用父子被赫连铎等人打败，曾逃亡到达靼。
English: Later, Li Guochang and Li Keji, father and son, were defeated by Helianthus and others, and fled to Tartary.

古文：后从克用入关破黄巢，由是居云、代之间。
现代文：后来随李克用进关攻破黄巢，从此住在云、代二州间。
English: Later, he followed Li Ke in breaking through the Yellow Nest, and from then on, he lived between the two states of Yun and Dai.

古文：其俗善骑射，畜多驼、马。
现代文：他们的习俗是善于骑马射箭，多养骆驼、马。
English: Their custom is to be good at riding horses and archery, and to raise more camels and horses.

古文：其君长、部族名字，不可究见，惟其尝通于中国者可见云。
现代文：他们的君长、部族名称，不能考见，只有曾和中原有过交往的人可以考见。
English: The names of their rulers and tribes cannot be ascertained. Only those who have had dealings with the Central Plains can do so.

古文：同光中，都督折文逋数自河西来贡驼、马。
现代文：同光中，都督折文逋，多次从河西前来进贡骆驼、马匹。
English: At the same time, the local governor, Eribun Yao, repeatedly came from Hexi to bring in camels and horses as tribute.

古文：明宗讨王都于定州，都诱契丹入寇，明宗诏达靼入契丹界，以张军势，遣宿州刺史薛敬忠以所获契丹团牌二百五十及弓箭数百赐云州生界达靼，盖唐常役属之。
现代文：唐明宗在定州讨伐王都，王都引诱契丹进犯，唐明宗诏令达靼进入契丹领土，以张声势，派宿州刺史薛敬忠带着缴获的二百五十个契丹团牌和数百弓箭赐给云州生界达靼，可见唐曾经役使他们。
English: Tang Mingzong besieged the royal capital in Dingzhou, and the king lured the Khitan to attack. Tang Mingzong issued an edict ordering the Tatars to enter the territory of the Khitan. With great fanfare, he sent Xue Jingzhong, the governor of Shuzhou, with the captured two hundred and fifty Khitan league cards and hundreds of bows and arrows, to the Yunnan province of the Tartars. It can be seen that Tang had served them.

古文：长兴三年，首领颉哥率其族四百余人来附。
现代文：长兴三年，首领颉哥率领四百多旗人前来归附。
English: In the third year of Changxing, the leader Yan Ge led more than four hundred bannermen to come to annex.

古文：讫于显德，常来不绝。
现代文：到颢德年间为止，常来不断。
English: Up until the years in Shunde, he often came and went.

古文：党项，西羌之遗种。
现代文：党项，是西羌的后代。
English: Dangye is a descendant of Xidi.

古文：其国在《禹贡》析支之地，东至松州，西接叶护，南界春桑，北邻吐浑，有地三千余里。
现代文：该国在《禹贡》所记载的析支地方，束到松州，西连西突压墓董，南面和春桑交界，北面和吐浑相邻，占地三千多里。
English: The country is in the analysis of the branch places recorded in "Yugong," stretching to Songzhou, Xilian West Bursting Tomb, south of the junction with Chunsang, north of the border with Tuban, covering more than three thousand miles.

古文：无城邑而有室屋，以毛罽覆之。
现代文：没有城市，只有房屋，用皮毛毡子覆盖。
English: There is no city, only houses, covered with fur.

古文：其人喜盗窃而多寿，往往百五六十岁。
现代文：他们喜欢盗窃而长寿，往往活到一百五六十岁。
English: They like to steal and live long, often up to one hundred and fifty or sixty years.

古文：其大姓有细封氏、费听氏、折氏、野利氏，拓拔氏为最强。
现代文：大姓有细封氏、费听氏、折氏、野利氏，拓拔氏最强盛。
English: The largest families include the Seifo clan, the Feihei clan, the Ori clan, and the Nori clan, with the Takubatsu clan being the most powerful.

古文：唐德宗时，党项诸部相率内附，居庆州者号东山部落，居夏州者号平夏部落。
现代文：唐德宗时，党项各部相继内附，住在庆州的称焉束山部落，住在夏州的称为平夏部落。
English: When Tang Dezong was in power, all the ministries of the party were successively attached to him. Those who lived in Gyeongju were called the Soksan tribe, and those who lived in Xiazhou were called the Binxia tribe.

古文：部有大姓而无君长，不相统一，散处邠宁、鄜延、灵武、河西，东至麟、府之间。
现代文：各部有大姓但没有君长，相互不统一，散居在合宁、郦延、灵武、河西等地，束到麟、府二州之间。
English: Each department has a daisho but no kancho, and they are not unified with each other. They are scattered in places such as Haening, Chenyan, Lingwu, and Hexi, and are clustered in Lin and between the two prefectures.

古文：自同光以后，大姓之强者各自来朝贡。
现代文：自从同光以后，强盛的大姓都各自前来朝贡。
English: Since the time of Tongguang, all the powerful and powerful families came to pay tribute.

古文：明宗时，诏沿边置场市马，诸夷皆入市中国，而回鹘、党项马最多。
现代文：唐明宗时，诏令沿边设置场务交易马匹，各地夷人都到中原做买卖，而回鹊、党项的马最多。
English: During the Tang and Ming dynasties, the imperial edict set up stalls along the edge to trade horses. People from all over the country went to the Central Plains to do business, and the horses of the Hui Dynasty and the Party were the most numerous.

古文：明宗招怀远人，马来无驽壮皆售，而所售常过直，往来馆给，道路倍费。
现代文：唐明宗为了招抚远方各族，送来的马无论优劣都买下，而买价常常高于马的价值，往来馆舍供给，途中费用加倍。
English: In order to attract people from far away, Tang Mingzong bought all the horses sent to him, no matter how good or bad they were, and the purchase price was often higher than the value of the horse.

古文：其每至京师，明宗为御殿见之，劳以酒食，既醉，连袂歌呼，道其土风以为乐，去又厚以赐赉，岁耗百万计。
现代文：他们每到京师，唐明宗都到殿上专门接见，用酒食慰劳，喝醉后，就相互拉着衣袖唱歌呼叫，谈论他们的风土人情取乐，离开时丰厚地赏赐，每年花费上百万。
English: Every time they came to Beijing, the Tang and Ming dynasties specially received them in the palace, comforted them with wine and food, and when they were drunk, they pulled their sleeves together to sing and shout, talked about their customs and feelings for fun, and rewarded them generously when they left, spending millions every year.

古文：唐大臣皆患之，数以为言。
现代文：后唐大臣都对此担忧，多次就此提意见。
English: All post-Tang ministers were concerned about this and repeatedly raised their opinions.

古文：乃诏吏就边场售马给直，止其来朝，而党项利其所得，来不可止。
现代文：于是诏令官吏到沿边场务买马付钱，禁止他们来朝，而党项贪图赏赐，不能制止他们来朝。
English: Therefore, the emperor ordered the officials to go to the fields along the border to buy and pay for horses, prohibiting them from coming to the imperial court, while the party members were greedy for rewards and could not stop them from coming to the imperial court.

古文：其在灵、庆之间者，数犯边为盗。
现代文：在灵、庆二州问的党项人，多次侵犯边地劫掠财物。
English: Party cadres in Ling and Qing Erzhou repeatedly encroached on border areas and looted property.

古文：自河西回鹘朝贡中国，道其部落，辄邀劫之，执其使者，卖之他族，以易牛马。
现代文：自从河西回髓开始到中原朝贡，每次路经他们部落，就被他们拦劫，使臣被他们抓获，卖给别的部族，用来换回牛马。
English: Since the beginning of the Western Hemisphere tributes to the Central Plains, every time they passed through their tribe, they were stopped by them, the envoys were captured by them, sold to other tribes, and used to exchange for cattle and horses.

古文：明宗遣灵武康福、邠州药彦稠等出兵讨之。
现代文：唐明宗派灵武的康福、合州的药彦稠等人出兵讨伐他们。
English: Kangfu of the Tangming sect, Hezhou's Yakuhiko Choshi and others sent troops to fight them.

古文：福等击破阿埋韦悉褒勒强赖埋厮骨尾及其大首领连香李八萨王、都统悉那埋摩、侍御乞埋嵬悉逋等族，杀数千人，获其牛羊巨万计，及其所劫外国宝玉等，悉以赐军士。
现代文：康福等人攻破阿埋、韦悉、褒勒、强赖、埋厮、骨尾和他们的大首领连香、李八萨王、都统悉那、埋摩、侍御乞埋、嵬悉逋等族，杀死数千人，缴获牛羊以万计，把他们抢劫的外国宝玉等物，全部拿来赐给军士。
English: Kangfu and others defeated the Abhina, Weixi, Bohle, Qianglai, Buried Dragonfly, Bone Tail and their great leader Lian Xiang, King Li Baxa, all from the Sina, Buried Dragonfly, Servant of the Buried Dragonfly, and Dragonfly Dragonfly, killed thousands of people, seized tens of thousands of cattle and sheep, and gave all the foreign precious stones and other things they robbed to the sergeants.

古文：由是党项之患稍息。
现代文：从此党项给中原地区带来的祸患纔逐渐消除。
English: The scourge brought to the Central Plains region by this political agenda has gradually been eliminated.

古文：至周太祖时，府州党项尼也六泥香王子、拓拔山等皆来朝贡。
现代文：到周太祖时，府州党项尼也六泥香王子、拓拔山等人都来朝贡。
English: By the time of Zhou Taizu, the Fuzhou party Xiangniya six mud incense princes, Tuobashan and others all came to pay tribute.

古文：广顺三年，庆州刺史郭彦钦贪其羊马，侵扰诸部，独野鸡族强不可近，乃诬其族犯边。
现代文：广顺三年，庆州刺史郭彦钦贪图党项的羊马，侵扰各部，祇有野鸡族强大不能靠近，于是诬陷这一族侵犯边地。
English: In the third year of Guangshun, Guo Yanqin, a Gyeongju assassin, coveted the sheep and horses of the party, invaded various departments, but the powerful pheasants could not get close, so he framed this tribe for encroaching on the border.

古文：太祖遣使招慰之。
现代文：周太祖派使臣招抚安慰他们。
English: Zhou Taizu sent envoys to appease and comfort them.

古文：野鸡族苦彦钦，不肯听命，太祖遣邠州折从阮、宁州刺史张建武等讨之。
现代文：野鹦族深受郭彦钦之苦，不愿从命，周太祖派邯州折从阮、宁州刺史张建武等人讨伐他们。
English: The wild parrot people were deeply affected by Guo Yanqin's sufferings and were unwilling to submit to his order. Zhou Taizu sent Zhang Jianwu and others to fight against them.

古文：建武勇于立功，不能通夷情，驰军击野鸡族，杀数百人。
现代文：张建武勇于立功，不能通晓夷情，疾速派军攻打野鸡族，杀死数百人。
English: Zhang Jianwu bravely made meritorious deeds, unable to understand the situation of the barbarians, he quickly sent troops to attack the pheasants, killing hundreds of people.

古文：而喜玉、折思、杀牛三族闻建武击破野鸡族，各以牛酒犒军，军士利其物，反劫掠之。
现代文：而喜玉、折思、杀牛三族听说张建武攻破野鸡族，各自用牛酒犒劳军队，士兵们贪图他们的财物，反而抢劫他们。
English: On the other hand, the three tribes of Joyful, Contemplative, and Cow-killing heard that Zhang Jianwu defeated the pheasants, and they each rewarded the army with cow wine. The soldiers coveted their belongings, but robbed them instead.

古文：三族共诱建武军至包山，度险，三族共击之，军投崖谷，死伤甚众。
现代文：三族共同引诱张建武的军队到包山，经过险峻地带时，三族一起攻打他们，张建武的军队陷在崖谷中，死伤很多。
English: The three ethnic groups jointly lured Zhang Jianwu's army to Baoshan. When they passed through the steep terrain, the three ethnic groups attacked them together. Zhang Jianwu's army was trapped in the cliff valley, and there were many deaths and injuries.

古文：太祖怒，罪建武等，选良吏为庆州刺史以招抚之。
现代文：周太祖发怒，加罪张建武等人，选良吏任庆州刺史，以便招抚三族。
English: Zhou Taizu became angry and added Zhang Jianwu and others to the list of criminals, and appointed a high-ranking official to assassinate the governor of Gyeongju in order to appease the three ethnic groups.

古文：其他诸族，散处尚边界上者甚众，然其无国地、君长，故莫得而纪次云。
现代文：其它各族，散居在沿边界上的很多，但他们没有国土、君长名称，因此无法记述。
English: There are many other tribes scattered along the border, but they do not have a country, ruler or name, so they cannot be recorded.

古文：突厥，国地、君世、部族、名号、物俗，见于唐著矣。
现代文：突厥，他们的国土、君主世次、部族、名号、风物民俗，唐朝时就已广为人知。
English: The Turks, their land, monarchical lineage, tribe, name, customs and folklore were already widely known in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：至唐之末。为诸夷所侵，部族微散。
现代文：到唐末时，受到各夷侵犯，部族衰微离散。
English: Toward the end of the Tang Dynasty, they were invaded by various barbarians, and the tribe declined and dispersed.

古文：五代之际，尝来朝贡。
现代文：五代时，曾来朝贡。
English: In the 5th generation, it once paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：同光三年，浑解楼来。
现代文：同光三年，浑解楼前来。
English: Same light for three years, come to Hunlo House.

古文：天成二年，首领张慕晋来。
现代文：天成二年，首领张慕吾前来。
English: In the second year of Tiancheng, the leader Zhang Mugu came.

古文：长兴二年，首领杜阿熟来。
现代文：长兴二年，首领杜阿熟前来。
English: In the second year of Changxing, the leader Du A Rong came.

古文：天福六年，遣使者薛同海等来。
现代文：天福六年，派使臣薛同海等人前来。
English: In the sixth year of Tianfu, he sent envoy Xue Tonghai and others.

古文：凡四至，其后不复来。
现代文：共四次来朝，以后不再来了。
English: I came four times in total, but I won't be coming back.

古文：然突厥于时最微，又来不数，故其君长史皆失不能纪。
现代文：但突厥在当时最微弱，又没有几次来朝，因此它的君长史书都失传不能记述。
English: However, the Turks were at their weakest at that time, and did not come to Korea several times, so the history books of its rulers are lost and cannot be recorded.

古文：吐蕃，国地、君世、部族、名号、物俗，见于唐著矣。
现代文：吐蕃，它的国土、君主世次、部族、名号、风物民俗，唐朝时已广为人知。
English: Tubo, its land, monarchs, tribes, names, customs and folklore, was already widely known in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：当唐之盛时，河西、陇右三十三州，凉州最大，土沃物繁而人富乐。
现代文：当唐朝兴盛时，河西、陇右的三十三个州中，凉州最大，土地肥沃、物产丰富而人们富裕快乐。
English: When the Tang Dynasty flourished, Liangzhou was the largest of the thirty-three prefectures in Hexi and Shiyu. The land was fertile, the products were plentiful, and the people were rich and happy.

古文：其地宜马，唐置八监，牧马三十万匹。
现代文：那里的土地适宜马生长，唐朝设置八个牧马监，牧马三十万匹。
English: The land there is suitable for the growth of horses, and the Tang Dynasty set up eight horse herdsmen, with 300,000 horses.

古文：以安西都护府羁縻西域三十六国。
现代文：以安西都护府笼络控制西域三十六国。
English: Anxi tutelary prefecture was established to control the 36 western provinces.

古文：唐之军、镇、监、务，三百余城，常以中国兵更戍，而凉州置使节度之。
现代文：唐朝的军、镇、监、务，三百多座城，常常派中原士兵轮流戍守，而在凉州设置节度使掌管。
English: The Tang Dynasty often sent soldiers from the Central Plains to take turns guarding more than three hundred cities, towns, counties, and townships, and set up a military governor in Liangzhou to take charge.

古文：安禄山之乱，肃宗起灵武，悉召河西兵赴难，而吐蕃乘虚攻陷河西、陇右，华人百万皆陷于虏。
现代文：安禄山作乱时，唐肃宗在灵武起兵，尽召河西兵前去救难，而吐蕃乘虚攻陷河西、陇右，百万华人陷于夷虏。
English: When the Anlu Mountains were in turmoil, Tang Su Zong raised an army in Lingwu and called on soldiers from Hexi to come to the rescue, while Tubo took advantage of the situation to invade Hexi and Shiyu, and a million Chinese were taken captive.

古文：文宗时，尝遣使者至西域，见甘、凉、瓜、沙等州城邑如故，而陷虏之人见唐使者，夹道迎呼，涕泣曰： 皇帝犹念陷蕃人民否？ 
现代文：唐文宗时，曾派使臣到西域，见甘、凉、瓜、沙等州城邑和过去一样，而身陷夷虏中的人们见到唐朝的使巨，夹道欢迎呼喊，哭泣着说： 皇帝还想得起身陷吐蕃的百姓吗？ 
English: When Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty sent envoys to the western regions, they saw Gan, Liang, Gua, Sha and other provincial cities as in the past, but the people trapped in the captivity saw the powerful envoys of the Tang Dynasty, welcomed and shouted at the same time, and wept and said: Can the emperor still think of the people trapped in Tubo?

古文：其人皆天宝时陷虏者子孙，其语言稍变，而衣服犹不改。
现代文：这些人都是天宝时身陷夷虏者的子孙后代，他们的语言略有变化，但衣着服饰仍没有改变。
English: These people are the descendants of those who were taken captive at the time of Tianbao. Their language has changed slightly, but their clothing has not changed.

古文：至五代时，吐蕃已微弱，回鹘、党项诸羌夷分侵其地，而不有其人民。
现代文：到五代时，吐蕃已经衰微弱小，回鹍、党项各羌夷分别侵占他们的土地，而不能亲善那里的百姓。
English: By the time of the fifth generation, the power of the Tubo had weakened, and the Uighurs, Taecheng, and other Yi people divided and occupied their land, but not their people.

古文：值中国衰乱，不能抚有，惟甘、凉、瓜、沙四州常自通于中国。
现代文：中原王朝正处于衰乱时期，不能安抚保护他们，只有甘、凉、瓜、沙四州常主动与中原交往。
English: At the time of the Central Plains' decline and turmoil, it was not possible to pacify and possess the Northwest, and only the four states of Gan, Liang, Gua and Sha had regular contacts with the Central Plains.

古文：甘州为回鹘牙，而凉、瓜、沙三州将吏，犹称唐官，数来请命。
现代文：甘州是回鹊牙帐，而凉、瓜、沙三州的将吏，还自称是唐朝官员，多次前来请求任命。
English: Ganzhou is a backwater, while the generals of Liang, Gua and Shanzhou, also claiming to be Tang Dynasty officials, have repeatedly come to request an appointment.

古文：自梁太祖时，尝以灵武节度使兼领河西节度，而观察甘、肃、威等州。
现代文：梁太祖时，曾以灵武节度使兼领河西节度，并为甘、肃、威等州观察使。
English: At the time of Liang Taizu, he was the Lingwu festival envoy and the leader of the Hexi festival, and was the observation envoy for Gansu, Suzhou, Wei and other states.

古文：然虽有其名，而凉州自立守将。
现代文：但虽有这个名称，而凉州却自立守将。
English: But despite the name, Liangzhou is a self-sufficient city.

古文：唐长兴四年，凉州留后孙超遣大将拓拔承谦及僧、道士、耆老杨通信等至京师求旌节，明宗问孙超等世家，承谦曰： 吐蕃陷凉州，张掖人张义朝募兵击走吐蕃，唐因以义朝为节度使，发郓州兵二千五百人戍之。
现代文：后唐长兴四年，琼州留后孙超派大将拓拔承谦和僧人、道士、耆老杨通信等人到京师请求任自己为节度使，唐明宗询问孙超等人的家世，拓拔承谦说： 吐蕃攻陷凉州，张掖人张义朝招募士兵赶走吐蕃，唐朝因而任张义朝为节度使，派鄣州兵二千五百人戍守。
English: Four years after the Tang and Changxing Dynasties, after Sun Chao stayed in Qiongzhou, he sent his general Tuoba Chengqian and monks, Taoists, and scholars such as Yang Xun to Beijing to request that he be appointed as the festival envoy. Tang Mingzong inquired about the family history of Sun Chao and others, and Tuoba Chengqian said: "Tu Wei attacked and occupied Liangzhou, Zhang Xi's men recruited soldiers from Zhang Yichang to drive away Tu Wei, so the Tang Dynasty appointed Zhang Yichang as the festival envoy and sent two thousand five hundred soldiers from Bozhou to guard it.

古文：唐亡，天下乱，凉州以东为突厥、党项所隔，郓兵遂留不得返。
现代文：唐朝灭亡后，天下大乱，凉州因东面被突厥、党项阻隔，郓州兵于是留下不能返回。
English: After the fall of the Tang Dynasty, the world was in turmoil. Because the eastern side of Liangzhou was blocked by the Turks and the Communist Party, the soldiers of Zhangzhou were left behind and could not return.

古文：今凉州汉人，皆其戍人子孙也。 
现代文：如今凉州的汉人都是戍守士兵的子孙后代。 
English: Today, the Han Chinese in Liangzhou are all descendants of the soldiers who defended the city.

古文：明宗乃拜孙超节度使。
现代文：唐明宗于是拜孙超为节度使。
English: Tang Mingzong then asked Sun Chao to be the festival envoy.

古文：清泰元年，留后李文谦来请命。
现代文：清泰元年，留后李文谦前来请求任命。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, Li Wenqian came to listen to the instructions after staying behind.

古文：后数年，凉州人逐出文谦，灵武冯晖遣牙将吴继勋代文谦为留后，是时天福七年。
现代文：几年后，凉州人赶走李文谦，灵武冯晖派牙将昊继勋代李文谦任留后，这时是天福七年。
English: A few years later, Liangzhou people ousted Li Wenqian, and Lingwu Fengya sent Fangjun Hao to succeed Li Wenqian. At that time, it was the seventh year of Tianfu.

古文：明年，晋高祖遣泾州押牙陈延晖赍诏书安抚凉州，凉州人共劫留延晖，立以为刺史。
现代文：第二年，晋高祖派泾州押牙陈延晖送诏书安抚凉州，凉州人共同劫留陈延晖，立他做刺史。
English: In the second year, Emperor Jingu's ancestor sent Chen Yanqi, the Azusa of Luzhou, with an imperial edict to pacify Liangzhou. Liangzhou people jointly kidnapped Chen Yanqi and set Chen Yanqi as the assassin.

古文：至汉隐帝时，凉州留后折逋嘉施来请命，汉即以为节度使。
现代文：到漠隐帝时，凉州留后折逋嘉施前来请求任命，后漠就任他为节度使。
English: When he arrived at Emperor Han's court, Liangzhou stayed behind to ask for an order, and Emperor Han took him as an envoy.

古文：嘉施，土豪也。
现代文：折逋嘉施，是当地的豪强。
English: Jiasi is a local hero in Liangzhou.

古文：周广顺二年，嘉施遣人市马京师，因来请命帅。
现代文：后周广顺二年，折逋嘉施派人到京师卖马，于是前来请求任命主帅。
English: Two years after Zhou Guangshun, Orio Jiasi sent someone to Beijing to sell horses, so he came to request the appointment of a coach.

古文：是时，枢密使王峻用事。
现代文：遭时，枢密使王峻专权。
English: At the time of the incident, the Privy Council gave Wang Jun absolute power.

古文：峻故人申师厚者，少起盗贼，为兗州牙将，与峻相友善，后峻贵，师厚敝衣蓬首，日候峻出，拜马前，诉以饥寒，峻未有以发。
现代文：王峻的旧友申师厚，年轻时做盗贼起家，任兖州牙将，和王峻关系很好，后来王峻显贵，申师厚穿着破衣蓬头垢面，每天等候王峻出来，在王峻马前下拜，诉说饥寒交迫，王峻没右什么表示。
English: Wang Jun's old friend Shen Shih Hou, who started his career as a thief when he was young, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, and had a good relationship with Wang Jun. Later, Wang Jun was distinguished, and Shen Shih Hou wore tattered clothes and an unkempt face. He waited for Wang Jun to come out every day, bowed down before Wang Jun's horse, and told him that he was hungry and cold. Wang Jun did not say anything.

古文：而嘉施等来请帅，峻即建言： 凉州深入夷狄，中国未尝命吏，请募率府率、供奉官能往者。 
现代文：而折逋嘉施等前来请求任命主帅，王峻就建议说； 凉州深入夷狄，中原不曾任命官吏，请求招募能够前去的率府率、供奉官。 
English: However, when Okuyama Yoshie and others came to ask for the appointment of a coach, Wang Jun suggested that; since Liangzhou was far away, Zhongyuan did not appoint officials, and asked for the recruitment of leading officials and officials who could go.

古文：月余，无应募者，乃奏起师厚为左卫将军，已而拜河西节度使。
现代文：一月多，没有应募的人，于是上奏任申师厚为左卫将军，不久拜为河西节度使。
English: For more than a month, there were no applicants, so he was appointed to the post of Shen Shi Hou as the left guard general, and soon became the Hexi Festival envoy.

古文：师厚至凉州，奏荐押衙副使崔虎心、阳妃谷首领沈念般等及中国留人子孙王廷翰、温崇乐、刘少英为将吏。
现代文：申师厚到达凉州，上奏推荐押衙副使崔虎心、阳妃谷首领沈念般等人和中原留下的人的子孙王廷翰、温崇乐、刘坐墓为将吏。
English: When Shen Shih Hou arrived in Liangzhou, he recommended the vice-envoy Cui Huxin, the leader Shen Nian of Yangfei Valley, and the descendants of those who remained in the Central Plains, such as Wang Tinghan, Wen Chongle, and Liu Zhigu, as generals.

古文：又自安国镇至凉州，立三州以控扼诸羌，用其酋豪为刺史。
现代文：又从安国镇到凉州，设立三个州以便控制各羌族，任用他们的酋豪做刺史。
English: He also set up three prefectures from An Guozhen to Liangzhou in order to control the Yi people, and appointed their chiefs to be the chiefs.

古文：然凉州夷夏杂处，师厚小人，不能抚有。
现代文：但凉州夷人和汉人杂居，申师厚是个小人，不能安抚亲善他们。
English: However, the Liangzhou barbarians and Han people live together, and Shen Shihou is a villain who cannot appease them.

古文：至世宗时，师厚留其子而逃归，凉州遂绝于中国。
现代文：到周世宗时，申师厚留下他的儿子而自己逃回，凉州于是和中原隔绝。
English: By the time of Zhou Shizong, Shen Shihou fled back on his own, leaving his son behind, and Liangzhou was cut off from the Central Plains.

古文：独瓜、沙二州，终五代常来。
现代文：祇有瓜、沙二州，直到五代结束，还时常前来朝贡。
English: Only Guazhou and Shazhou, however, had frequent contacts with the Central Plains during the entire Five Dynasties period.

古文：沙州，梁开平中有节度使张奉，自号 金山白衣天子 。
现代文：沙州，后梁开平年间有个节度使张奉，自称 金山白衣天子 。
English: In Shazhou, after Liang Kaiping, there was a festival to make Zhang Bong, who called himself the Jinshan Baiyi Tianzi.

古文：至唐庄宗时，回鹘来朝，沙州留后曹义金亦遣使附回鹘以来，庄宗拜义金为归义军节度使、瓜沙等州观察处置等使。
现代文：到唐庄宗时，回鹊前来朝拜，沙州留后曹义金也派使臣跟着回鹊前来，唐庄宗拜曹义金为归义军节度使、瓜沙等州观察处置等使。
English: After arriving in Tang, Zhuangzong sent an envoy to Huizhou to see the emperor, and after leaving Shazhou, Cao Yijin also sent an envoy to follow the envoy to Huizhou. Zhuangzong appointed Cao Yijin as the envoy to the festival of the returning rebels, and the envoy to Gua, Sha and other states to observe and deal with the situation.

古文：晋天福五年，义金卒，子元德立。
现代文：后晋天福五年，曹义金死，儿子曹元德继位。
English: Five years after the enthronement of Tianfu, Cao Yijin died, and his son Cao Yuande succeeded him.

古文：至七年，沙州曹元忠、瓜州曹元深皆遣使来。
现代文：到七年，沙州曹元忠、瓜州曹元深都派使臣前来。
English: In the seventh year, Cao DiZhong from Shazhou and Cao YuanShen from Guazhou both sent envoys.

古文：周世宗时，又以元忠为归义军节度使，元恭为瓜州团练使。
现代文：周世宗时，又任曹元忠为归义军节度使，曹元恭为瓜州团练使。
English: During Zhou Shizong's reign, Cao Yuanzhong was appointed as the envoy to celebrate the return of the rebels, and Cao Yuanxiong as the envoy to train the Guazhou regiments.

古文：其所贡：硇砂、羚羊角、波斯锦、安西白灊、金星矾、胡桐律、大鹏砂、毦褐、玉团。
现代文：他们进贡的东西有：硇砂、羚羊角、波斯锦、安西白氍、金星矾、胡桐律、大硼砂、聒褐、玉团。
English: The items they paid tribute to were: borax, antelope horn, Persian brocade, Anxi white enamel, Venus enamel, Hutongru, large borax, brown enamel, and jade.

古文：皆因其来者以名见，而其卒立、世次，史皆失其纪。
现代文：这些名称都是从来人口中得知的，至于他们的兴亡、世次，史书上都失去记载。
English: These names were learned from the population, but their rise and fall, as well as their lineage, are not recorded in history books.

古文：而吐蕃不见于梁世。
现代文：但吐蕃没有出现在后梁。
English: In the Liang Dynasty, there is no record of the Tuobao.

古文：唐天成三年，回鹘王仁喻来朝，吐蕃亦遣使附以来，自此数至中国。
现代文：后唐天成三年，回鹳王仁裕前来朝拜，吐蕃也派使臣随来，从此多次到中原。
English: After the third year of the Tang Dynasty, Hui King Renyu came to pay homage, and Tubo also sent envoys to accompany him. Since then, he has been to the Central Plains many times.

古文：明宗尝御端明殿见其使者，问其牙帐所居，曰： 西去泾州二千里。 
现代文：唐明宗曾到端明殿接见吐蕃使臣，询问他们的牙帐在哪里，回答说： 西距泾州二千里。 
English: Tang Mingzong once met with the emissary of the Tuyi Emperor in the Duanming Palace, asked the commander of the Tuyi Emperor where the camp was located, and replied: "It is two thousand miles west of Zhangzhou."

古文：明宗赐以虎皮，人一张，皆披以拜，委身宛转，落其氈帽，乱发如蓬，明宗及左右皆大笑。
现代文：唐明宗赐给他们虎皮，每人一张，都披上虎皮下拜，屈身转动，毡帽掉下，乱发如蓬，唐明宗和手下人都大笑起来。
English: Tang Mingzong gave them tiger skins, one for each of them, and they all put on the tiger skins and bowed down, bent over, turned around, their skullcaps fell off, and their hair became unkempt. Tang Mingzong and his subordinates all burst into laughter.

古文：至汉隐帝时犹来朝，后遂不复至，史亦失其君世云。
现代文：到漠隐帝时还来朝拜，以后就不再来了，史书上也失去他们的君主世次。
English: They came to pay homage to the Moon Emperor, but later they stopped coming, and the history books also lost track of their monarchs.

古文：回鹘，为唐患尤甚。
现代文：回鹍，给唐朝带来的忧患尤其严重。
English: Returning to China, the sorrow brought to the Tang Dynasty was particularly serious.

古文：其国地、君世、物俗，见于唐著矣。
现代文：它的国土、君主世次、风物民俗，在唐朝已广为人知。
English: Its land, monarchs, customs and folkways were already well known in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：唐尝以女妻之，故其世以中国为舅。
现代文：唐朝曾嫁女给他们，因此他们世代把中土皇上当成国舅。
English: The Tang Dynasty had given them a daughter in marriage, so for generations they considered the Middle Turk Emperor to be their uncle.

古文：其国本在娑陵水上、后为黠戛斯所侵，徙天德、振武之间，又为石雄、张仲武所破，其余众西徙，役属吐蕃。
现代文：国土原在娑陵水上，后来被黠戛斯侵占，迁移到天德、振武军之间，又被石雄、张仲武攻破，剩下的人西迁，受吐蕃役使。
English: The original land of the country was on the Fuling River. Later, it was occupied by the Qing Dynasty and moved to Tiande and Zhenwu armies. It was also invaded by Shixiong and Zhang Zhongwu. The rest of the people moved west and were sent to Tujia.

古文：是时吐蕃已陷河西、陇右，乃以回鹘散处之。
现代文：这时吐蕃已攻陷河西、陇右，于是把回鸜分散安置。
English: At this time, the Tu Wei had invaded the west of the river and the right bank of the river, so the Hui Wei were dispersed and resettled.

古文：当五代之际，有居甘州、西州者尝见中国，而甘州回鹘数至，犹呼中国为舅，中国答以诏书亦呼为甥。
现代文：五代时，居住在甘州、西州的回鹊曾被中原所知，其中甘州回鹊多次前来，仍称中原星上为舅，中原用诏书答复也称回鹊焉甥。
English: At the time of the fifth generation, Hui Xuan, who lived in Ganzhou and Xizhou, was once known to the Central Plains. Among them, Hui Xuan from Ganzhou came several times and still called the Central Plains his uncle, and the Central Plains also called Hui Xuan his nephew in their reply to the imperial edict.

古文：梁乾化元年，遣都督周易言等来，而史不见其君长名号，梁拜易言等官爵，遣左监门卫上将军杨沼押领还蕃。
现代文：后梁干化元年，派都督周易言等人前来，而史书上没有记载他们的君长名号，后梁封周易言等人官爵，派左监门卫上将军杨沼把他们护送回本土。
English: In the first year of Liang Ganhua, he sent the governor Zhou Yigen and others to come, but the history books did not record the names of their rulers. After Liang Feng, he sent the left supervisor, the gatekeeper general Yang Numa, to escort them back to the mainland.

古文：至唐庄宗时，王仁美遣使者来，贡玉、马，自称 权知可汗 ，庄宗遣司农卿郑续持节册仁美为英义可汗。
现代文：到唐庄宗时，王仁美派使臣前来，进献玉、马，自称 权知可汗 ，唐庄宗派司农卿郑绩持旌节册封仁美为英义可汗。
English: When he arrived at Tangzhuangzong, Wang Renyi sent an envoy to Tangzhuangzong to present jade and horses, claiming to be a powerful khan. The Tangzhuang sect's secretary of agriculture, Zheng Jian, held a festival to crown Renyi as the Yingyi khan.

古文：是岁，仁美卒，其弟狄银立，遣都督安千想等来。
现代文：这年，仁美死，他的弟弟狄银继位，派都督安千想等人前来。
English: This year, when Renmei died and his younger brother Di Yin succeeded to the throne, he sent the governor, An Qianxiang, and others to come.

古文：同光四年，狄银卒，阿咄欲立。
现代文：同光四年，狄银死，阿咄欲继位。
English: In the same year, Di Yin died, and Ah Gui took the throne.

古文：天成二年，权知国事王仁裕遣李阿山等来朝，明宗遣使者册仁裕为顺化可汗。
现代文：天成二年，权知国事王仁裕派李阿山等人前来朝拜，唐明宗派使臣册封王仁裕焉顺化可汗。
English: In the second year of Tiancheng, the powerful statesman Wang Renyu sent Li Asan and others to come to pay homage, and the Tangming sect envoys made Wang Renyu the Khan of Hue.

古文：晋高祖时又册为奉化可汗。
现代文：晋高祖时又册封为奉化可汗。
English: When he was promoted to Gaozu, he was also given the title of Fenghua Khan.

古文：阿咄欲，不知其为狄银亲疏，亦不知其立卒；而仁裕讫五代常来朝贡，史亦失其纪。
现代文：阿咄欲，不知他跟狄银的亲疏关系，也不知他何时继位去世；而仁裕，直到五代结束，常来朝贡，史书上也失去记载。
English: Ah Gui Zhi did not know the intimate relationship between him and Di Yin, nor did he know when he succeeded to the throne; and Ren Yu, until the end of the fifth generation, often came to pay tribute, and was also lost in the history books.

古文：其地出玉、犛、绿野马、独峰驼、白貂鼠、羚羊角、硇砂、腽肭脐、金刚钻、红盐、罽氎、騊駼之革。
现代文：它的土地出产玉石、耗牛、绿野马、独峰驼、白貂鼠、羚羊角、硇砂、腽肭脐、金刚钻、红盐、屙氍、驹骔皮革。
English: Its land produces jade, cattle, green mustang, dromedary camel, white muskrat, antelope horn, borax, tungsten, diamond, red salt, tungsten, and tungsten leather.

古文：其地宜白麦、青騑麦、黄麻、葱韭、胡荽，以橐驼耕而种。
现代文：适宜白麦、青稞麦、黄麻、葱韭、胡荽生长，用骆驼耕种。
English: It is suitable for the growth of white wheat, green buckwheat, jute, scallions, and gooseberries, and is cultivated by camels.

古文：其可汗常楼居，妻号天公主，其国相号媚禄都督。
现代文：他们的可汗常住在楼上，妻子称为天公主，国相称为媚禄都督。
English: Their khans often lived upstairs, their wives were called heavenly princesses, and their councillors were called mero governors.

古文：见可汗，则去帽被发而入以为礼。
现代文：拜见可汗时，就脱帽披着头发进去作为礼节。
English: When visiting a khan, it is polite to take off your hat and go in with your hair covered.

古文：妇人总发为髻，高五六寸，以红绢囊之；既嫁，则加氈帽。
现代文：妇女束上发髻，五六寸高，用红绸包着；出嫁后，就戴上毡帽。
English: Women wear their hair in a topknot, five or six inches high, wrapped in red silk; after marriage, they put on a skullcap.

古文：又有别族号龙家，其俗与回纥小异。
现代文：又有别族称为龙家，风俗和回纥大同小异。
English: There are also other ethnic groups known as the Long family, whose customs are similar to those of the Uighurs.

古文：长兴四年，回鹘来献白鹘一联，明宗命解緤放之。
现代文：长兴四年，回鹊前来进献一对白鹌，唐明宗命令解开绳子把它们放了。
English: In the fourth year of Changxing, Hui Zang came to present a pair of egrets. Tang Mingzong ordered to untie the rope and let them go.

古文：自明宗时，常以马市中国，其所赍宝玉皆属县官，而民犯禁为市者辄罪之。
现代文：从唐明宗时起，常卖马给中原，他们带来的宝玉都归朝廷，而对犯禁做买卖的百姓就加以治罪。
English: From the time of the Tang and Ming dynasties, they often sold horses to the Central Plains, and the precious stones they brought all went to the imperial court, while the people who violated the ban on trading were punished.

古文：周太祖时除其禁，民得与回鹘私市，玉价由此倍贱。
现代文：周太祖时解除禁令，老百姓得以和回髓私自做交易，玉价因此大幅下跌。
English: When Zhou Taizu lifted the ban, the people were able to do their own business with the jade, and the price of jade fell sharply.

古文：显德中，来献玉，世宗曰： 玉虽宝而无益。 
现代文：颢德中，前来献玉，周世宗说： 玉虽宝贵，但没有什么好处。 
English: When Zhou Shizong, a scholar of Taoism, came to offer jade, he said: Although jade is precious, it is of no benefit.

古文：却之。
现代文：退回了。
English: It was returned.

古文：于阗，国地、君世、物俗见于唐。
现代文：于阗，国土、君主世次、风物民俗，唐朝已有记载。
English: There are records from the Tang Dynasty about the land, monarchs, customs, and folklore of Yunnan.

古文：五代乱世，中国多故，不能抚来四夷。
现代文：五代乱世，中原多变故，不能安抚招徕四夷。
English: Five generations of turbulent times, the Central Plains are changeable, so it is not possible to appease the four barbarians.

古文：其尝自通于中国者仅以名见，其君世、终始，皆不可知。
现代文：曾和中原交往的夷族仅留下名称，他们的君主世次、兴亡，都不能考知。
English: The Yi people, who had been in contact with the Central Plains, left behind only their names, and the succession and rise and fall of their monarchs are unknown.

古文：而于阗尤远，去京师万里外。
现代文：而于阗尤其速，距京师万里之外。
English: But Yu Zou is particularly fast, a million miles away from Beijing.

古文：其国西南近葱岭，与婆罗门为邻国，而相去犹三千余里，南接吐蕃，西北至疏勒二千余里。
现代文：它的国土，西南面靠近葱岭，和婆罗门为邻国，而相距还有三千多里，南面和吐蕃连接，西北面到疏勒二千多里。
English: Its land, in the southwest, is close to the Qianling Mountains, and is a neighbor of the Brahmins, while it is still more than three thousand miles away. In the south, it is connected to Tubo, and in the northwest, it is more than two thousand miles to Shule.

古文：晋天福三年，于阗国王李圣天遣使者马继荣来贡红盐、郁金、氂牛尾、玉灊等，晋遣供奉官张匡鄴假鸿胪卿，彰武军节度判官高居诲为判官，册圣天为大宝于阗国王。
现代文：后晋天福三午，于阗国王李圣天派使臣马继荣前来进献红盐、郁金、耗牛尾、玉氍等，后晋派供奉官张匡邺代理鸿胪卿，彰武军节度判官高居诲任判官，册封李圣天焉大宝于阗国王。
English: After the Jin Dynasty, on the afternoon of the third day of Tianfu, King Li Sheng Tian sent his envoy Ma Jirong to present red salt, tulips, ox tails, and jade bracelets. Later, the Jin Dynasty sent Zhang Kuangyao, a vassal officer, to act as the representative of the Hongwu Emperor, and Gao Jiuyao, the judge of the festival of the Zhangwu Army, was appointed as the judge, and Li Sheng Tianyao's treasure was awarded to the King of Yunnan.

古文：是岁冬十二月，匡鄴等自灵州行二岁至于阗，至七年冬乃还。
现代文：这年冬十二月，张匡邺等人从灵州走了两年到达于阗，到七年冬纔返回。
English: In the winter of December of that year, Zhang Kuangyao and others walked for two years from Lingzhou to Yuyao, and returned to Yuyao in the winter of the seventh year.

古文：而居诲颇记其往复所见山川诸国，而不能道圣天世次也。
现代文：而高居诲记下很多来去见到的各国山河，但不能说清李圣天的世次。
English: Gaoju wrote down many of the mountains and rivers of various countries that he saw, but it cannot be said that he was the second generation of Qing Li Sheng Tian.

古文：居诲记曰： 自灵州过黄河，行三十里，始涉沙入党项界，曰细腰沙、神点沙。
现代文：高居诲写道： 从灵州渡过黄河，走三十里，纔经过沙漠进入党项领土，叫细腰沙、神点沙。
English: Gao Jiuyong wrote: From Lingzhou, cross the Yellow River, walk thirty miles, and enter the party territory through the desert. It is called fine loin sand and divine sand.

古文：至三公沙，宿月支都督帐。
现代文：到达三公沙，在月支都督帐中留宿。
English: Arrive at Sankongsa and stay overnight at the Moon Branch Governor's Residence.

古文：自此沙行四百余里，至黑堡沙，沙尤广，遂登沙岭。
现代文：从这里走四百多里沙漠，到达黑堡沙，沙漠尤其广阔，于是登上沙岭。
English: From here, walk more than four hundred miles of desert to Black Castle Sand, the desert is particularly vast, and then climb up the sand ridge.

古文：沙岭，党项牙也，其酋曰捻崖天子。
现代文：沙岭，是党项的牙帐，酋长叫捻崖天子。
English: Sha Ling, is the account of the party, the chief is called Twisted Cliff Tianzi.

古文：渡白亭河至凉州，自凉州西行五百里至甘州。
现代文：渡过白亭河到达凉州，从凉州西行五百里到达甘州。
English: Crossed the Baiting River to reach Liangzhou, from Liangzhou westbound five hundred miles to reach Ganzhou.

古文：甘州，回鹘牙也。
现代文：甘州，是回鹊的牙帐。
English: Ganzhou is the account book of the Hui Dynasty.

古文：其南，山百余里，汉小月支之故地也，有别族号鹿角山沙陀，云硃耶氏之遗族也。
现代文：它的南面，群山连绵一百多里，是汉朝小月支的旧地，有别族，称为尘壶山沙陀，据说是朱耶氏的遣族。
English: To the south of it, the mountains stretch for more than a hundred miles. It is the old land of the Han Dynasty's Xiaolue branch. There is another ethnic group, known as the Dustpot Mountain Shado, which is said to be the dispatched ethnic group of the Zhuye clan.

古文：自甘州西，始涉碛。碛无水，载水以行。
现代文：从甘州西行，开始经过戈壁，戈壁中没有水，带着水赶路。
English: From Ganzhou westbound, began to pass through the Gobi, there is no water in the Gobi, rushing with water.

古文：甘州人教晋使者作马蹄木涩，木涩四窍，马蹄亦凿四窍而缀之，驼蹄则包以氂皮乃可行。
现代文：甘州人教后晋使臣做马蹄木涩，木涩上有四个孔，马蹄上也凿四个孔连接木涩，骆驼蹄则用耗皮包上纔能走。
English: The people of Ganzhou taught the late Jin Dynasty envoys to make horseshoes with four holes, horseshoes with four holes to connect them, and camel's hooves with leather wraps.

古文：西北五百里至肃州，渡金河，西百里出天门关，又西百里出玉门关，经吐蕃界。
现代文：向西北走五百里到达肃州，渡过金河，向西走一百里出天门关，再向西走一百里出玉门关，经过吐蕃土地。
English: Walk five hundred miles to the northwest to reach Suizhou, cross the Jinhe River, walk a hundred miles to the west out of Tianmenguan, and then walk a hundred miles to the west out of Yumenguan, passing through the land of Tubo.

古文：吐蕃男子冠中国帽，妇人辫发，戴瑟瑟珠，云珠之好者，一珠易一良马。
现代文：吐蕃男子戴中原帽，妇女扎辫子，戴瑟瑟珠，据说好的瑟瑟珠，一个能换一匹好马。
English: In Tibet, the man wears a Chinese hat, the woman wears braids, and the woman wears beads. It is said that a good bead can be exchanged for a good horse.

古文：西至瓜州、沙州，二州多中国人，闻晋使者来，其刺史曹元深等郊迎，问使者天子起居。
现代文：西行到瓜州、沙州，二州中有很多中原人，听说后晋使臣前来，刺史曹元深等人到郊外迎接，向使臣询问天子的日常生活。
English: They traveled westward to Guazhou and Shazhou. There were many Central Plains people in the two states. When they heard that the Hojin envoys were coming, Cao Yuanshen and others went to the suburbs to meet them and ask the envoys about Tianzi's daily life.

古文：瓜州南十里鸣沙山，云冬夏殷殷有声如雷，云《禹贡》流沙也。
现代文：瓜州南面十里的鸣沙山，据说冬夏有殷殷如雷的声音，说道就是《禹贡》中所说的流沙。
English: Mingsha Mountain, ten miles south of Guazhou, is said to have thunderous voices in winter and summer, and is said to be the quicksand mentioned in "Yugong."

古文：又东南十里三危山，云三苗之所窜也。
现代文：还有东南十里处的三危山，据说是三苗流放的地方。
English: There is also Sanketsuzan, ten miles to the southeast, which is said to be the place where Sanmiao was exiled.

古文：其西，渡都乡河曰阳关。
现代文：它的西面，渡过都乡河是阳关。
English: To its west, across the Tuxiang River, is Yangguan.

古文：沙州西曰仲云，其牙帐居胡卢碛。
现代文：沙州西面足仲云，他们的牙帐在胡卢碛。
English: In the west of Shazhou, their feet are in the clouds, and their braces are in the clouds.

古文：云仲云者，小月支之遗种也，其人勇而好战，瓜、沙之人皆惮之。
现代文：据说仲云是小月支的后代，仲云人勇猛好战，瓜、沙二州的人都怕他们。
English: It is said that Zhongyun is a descendant of the Xiao Yue branch. Zhongyun people are brave and warlike, and people in Gua and Shashi states are afraid of them.

古文：胡卢碛，汉明帝时征匈奴，屯田于吾卢，盖其地也。
现代文：胡卢碛，汉明帝时征伐匈奴，屯驻在吾卢，大概就是这个地方。
English: This is probably the place where Hu Lucheng, who conquered the Xiongnu during the reign of Emperor Hanming, was stationed in Wulu.

古文：地无水而尝寒多雪，每天暖雪销，乃得水。
现代文：这里没有水而常寒冷多雪，每到天暖雪化的时候，纔能得到水。
English: There is no water here and it is often cold and snowy. Whenever the weather warms up and the snow melts, the baboons can get water.

古文：匡鄴等西行入仲云界，至大屯城，仲云遣宰相四人、都督三十七人候晋使者，匡鄴等以诏书慰谕之，皆东向拜。
现代文：张匡邺等人西行进入仲云领地，到达大屯城时，仲云派宰相四人、都督三十七人迎候后晋的使臣，张匡邺等人用韶书慰劳晓谕他们，都向东下拜。
English: Zhang Kuangyu and others went west to enter Zhongyun's territory. When they arrived at Datun City, Zhongyun sent four prime ministers and thirty-seven governors-general to welcome the envoys of the Later Jin Dynasty. Zhang Kuangyu and others wrote a letter of consolation to them, and they all bowed to the east.

古文：自仲云界西，始涉兼碛，无水，掘地得湿沙，人置之胸以止渴。
现代文：从仲云向西，开始经过盐碱滩，这里没有水，人们挖出地下的湿沙，放在胸前止渴。
English: From Zhongyun to the west, we began to pass the salt flats. There is no water here. People dig out the wet sand underground and put it on their chests to quench their thirst.

古文：又西，渡陷河，伐柽置水中乃渡，不然则陷。
现代文：再向西，渡过陷河，砍来樫树放在泥水中纔能渡过，不然就会陷下去。
English: Then to the west, across the river, cut down eucalyptus trees and put them in muddy water so that the eucalyptus can cross, otherwise it will sink.

古文：又西，至绀州。绀州，于阗所置也，在沙州西南，云去京师九千五百里矣。
现代文：再向西，到达绁州，绁州是于阗设置的州，在沙州西南面，据说距离京师九千五百里。
English: Then head west to Luzhou. Luzhou is a prefecture located in Yunnan, in the southwest of Shazhou. It is said to be 9,500 miles away from Beijing.

古文：又行二日至安军州，遂至于阗。
现代文：再走两天到达安军州，于是到达于阗。
English: It took another two days to get to Anjunzhou, and then to Yuzhong.

古文：圣天衣冠如中国，其殿皆东向，曰金册殿，有楼曰七凤楼。
现代文：李圣天的衣帽服饰同中原一样，殿堂都向东，称为金册殿，有楼叫七凤楼。
English: Li Shentian's clothes and hats are the same as those of the Central Plains, and the halls of fame are all to the east, known as the Golden Book Hall, and there is a building called the Seven-Phoenix Building.

古文：以蒲桃为酒，又有紫酒、青酒，不知其所酿，而味尤美。
现代文：用葡萄酿酒，还有紫酒、青酒，不知是用什么酿成的，而味道很好。
English: Grapes are used to make wine, as well as purple wine and blue wine. I don't know what they are made of, but they taste great.

古文：其食，粳沃以蜜，粟沃以酪。
现代文：他们的食物，是用粳稻浇上蜜糖，用米饭浇上奶酪。
English: Their food consists of glutinous rice sprinkled with honey and rice sprinkled with cheese.

古文：其衣布帛。
现代文：他们穿的，是布匹和丝绸。
English: What they wear is cloth and silk.

古文：有园圃花木。
现代文：有花木园圃。
English: There are flower and tree gardens.

古文：俗喜鬼神而好佛。
现代文：其俗迷信鬼神皈依佛教。
English: Its popular superstitious belief in ghosts and gods was converted to Buddhism.

古文：圣天居处，尝以紫衣僧五十人列侍，其年号同庆二十九年。
现代文：李圣天日常起居，经常让五十个紫衣僧人列队侍奉，这年年号是同庆二十九年。
English: In his daily life, Li Shentian often had fifty purple-robed monks line up to serve him. This year marks the 29th year of the festival.

古文：其国东南曰银州、卢州、湄州，其南千三百里曰玉州，云汉张骞所穷河源出于阗，而山多玉者此山也。 
现代文：这个国家的东南面是银州、卢州、湄州，南面一千三百里是玉州，据说汉朝张骞探索到的黄河源头出自于阗，而多玉的山就是这个山。 
English: To the southeast of this country are Yinzhou, Luzhou, and Meizhou, and 1,300 miles to the south is Yuzhou. It is said that the source of the Yellow River, which was explored by Zhang Ye during the Han Dynasty, came from Yuzhou, and Mount Dadu is this mountain.

古文：其河源所出，至于阗分为三：东曰白玉河，西曰绿玉河，又西曰乌玉河。
现代文：黄河的源流就从这里出来，到于阗分成三条河：束叫白玉河，西叫绿玉河，再向西叫乌玉河。
English: The source of the Yellow River comes from here, and it divides into three rivers at Yuquan: the bunch is called Baiyu River, the west is called the Green Yu River, and the west is called the Black Yu River.

古文：三河皆有玉而色异，每岁秋水涸，国王捞玉于河，然后国人得捞玉。
现代文：三条河都产玉，但颜色不同，每年秋天河水干涸，国王先在河中捞玉，然后国人纔能捞玉。
English: The three rivers all produce jade, but the color is different. Every autumn, the river dries up. The king first looks for jade in the river, and then the people can look for jade.

古文：自灵州渡黄河至于阗，往往见吐蕃族帐，而于阗常与吐蕃相攻劫。
现代文：从灵州渡黄河到达于阗，常常见到吐蕃族帐，而于阗常和吐蕃相互攻打劫掠。
English: After crossing the Yellow River from Lingzhou to Yu'an, the accounts of the Tu'an people were often seen, and Yu'an and Tu'an often attacked and robbed each other.

古文：匡鄴等至于阗，圣天颇责诮之，以邀誓约。
现代文：张匡邺等人到达于阗后，李圣天就指责吐蕃，要与后晋结好。
English: After Zhang Kuangyu and others arrived in Yunnan, Li Shentian accused Tuyun of wanting to make peace with Houjin.

古文：匡鄴等还，圣天又遣都督刘再升献玉千斤及玉印、降魔杵等。
现代文：张匡邺等人返回，李圣天又派都督刘再升进献一千斤玉石和玉印、降魔杵等物。
English: Zhang Kuangyao and others returned, and Li Shentian also sent the governor Liu Zensheng to offer a thousand pounds of jade and jade seals, and to bring down demonic beasts.

古文：汉乾祐元年，又遣使者王知鐸来。
现代文：后汉干佑元年，又派使臣王知铎前来。
English: In the first year of the Later Han Dynasty, Emperor Ganyu also sent an envoy, the vassal Wang Zhisheng, to Tongzhou.

古文：高丽，本扶余人之别种也。
现代文：高丽，原是扶余人的一支。
English: Goryeo was originally a branch of the Fuyu people.

古文：其国地、君世见于唐，比他夷狄有姓氏，而其官号略可晓其义。
现代文：他们的国土、君主世次见于唐朝，和别的夷狄相比，有姓氏，而且他们的官号也可略知其义。
English: Their land and monarchs were seen for the second time in the Tang Dynasty, and compared to other Yidi, they have surnames, and their official titles can also be slightly known.

古文：当唐之末，其王姓高氏。
现代文：唐末时，他们的国王姓高。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, their king's surname was Gao.

古文：同光元年，遣使广评侍郎韩申一、副使春部少卿朴岩来，而其国王姓名，史失不纪。
现代文：同光元年，派使臣广评侍郎韩申一、副使春部少卿朴岩前来，而他们国王的姓名，史书失传没有记载。
English: In the same year of the first light, Han Shin I, the attendant of the envoy Guang Jian, and the vice-envoy, Shaoqing of the Spring Department, Pak Yan, came to visit, but the names of their kings were not recorded in the lost history books.

古文：至长兴三年，权知国事王建遣使者来，明宗乃拜建玄菟州都督，充大义军使，封高丽国王。建，高丽大族也。
现代文：到长兴三年，权知国事王建派使臣前来，唐明宗于是封王建为玄菟州都督，任大义军使，封为高丽国王王建，是高丽的世家大族。
English: In the third year of Changxing, the powerful statesman Wang Jian sent envoys to Tang Mingzong. Tang Mingzong then appointed Wang Jian as the governor of Xuanzang, as the envoy of the Great Patriotic Army, and as the king of Goryeo. Wang Jian was a member of the Goryeo dynasty.

古文：开运二年，建卒，子武立。
现代文：开运二年，王建死，儿子王武继位。
English: Two years after the start of the campaign, Wang Jian died and was succeeded by his son Wang Wu.

古文：乾祐四年，武卒，子昭立。
现代文：干佑四年，王茎死，儿子王昭继位。
English: In the fourth year of Gan You, Wang Zui died, and his son Wang Zhao succeeded to the throne.

古文：王氏三世，终五代常来朝贡，其立也必请命中国，中国常优答之。
现代文：王氏三代，在整个五代时常来朝贡，拥立国王必定向中原请求任命，中原常常优待地答复他们。
English: The three generations of the Wang clan, and the entire five generations, often came to pay tribute to the court, and the supporting kings would certainly request the appointment from the Central Plains, and the Central Plains often responded favorably to them.

古文：其地产铜、银，周世宗时，遣尚书水部员外郎韩彦卿以帛数千匹市铜于高丽以铸铁。
现代文：那里出产铜、银，周世宗时，派尚书水部员外郎韩彦卿到高丽用数千匹丝绸换铜铸钱。
English: Copper and silver were produced there. When Zhou Shizong was alive, he sent his brother-in-law, Han Yanqing, a member of the Ministry of Education and Culture, to Korea to exchange thousands of horses of silk for copper to cast money.

古文：六年，昭遣使者贡黄铜五万斤。
现代文：六年，王昭派使臣进献黄铜五万斤。
English: In the sixth year, Wang Zhao sent envoys to present 50,000 catties of brass.

古文：高丽俗知文字，喜读书，昭进《别叙孝经》一卷、《越王新义》八卷、《皇灵孝经》一卷、《孝经雌图》一卷。
现代文：高丽人懂文字，喜好读书，王昭进献《别叔孝经》一卷、《越王新义》八卷、《皇灵孝经》一卷、《孝经雌图》一卷。
English: The Goryeo people understand writing and like to read. Wang Zhaojin donated one volume of "Beat Uncle Filial Piety," eight volumes of "Yue Wang Xinyi," one volume of "Imperial Soul Filial Piety" and one volume of "Female Figure of Filial Piety."

古文：《别叙》，叙孔子所生及弟子事迹；《越王新义》，以 越王 为问目，若今 正义 ；《皇灵》，述延年辟谷；《雌图》，载日食、星变。
现代文：《别叔》，记叙孔子的出生和他的弟子的事迹；《越王新义》，以 越王 为问答题目，类似现在的 正义 ；《皇灵》，叙述不吃五谷而长寿；《雌图》，记载日食、星变。
English: "Bye-Uncle" describes the birth of Confucius and the deeds of his disciples; "Yue-Wang Xinyi" uses "Yue-Wang" as a question and answer topic, similar to the current justice; "Imperial Spirit" describes long life without eating grain; "Female Figure" describes solar eclipses and star changes.

古文：皆不经之说。
现代文：都是无稽之谈。
English: It's all nonsense.

古文：渤海，本号靺鞨，高丽之别种也。
现代文：渤海，原称棘鞫，高丽的一支。
English: Bohai, formerly known as Acanthostega, a member of the Goryeo family.

古文：唐高宗灭高丽，徙其人散处中国，置安东都护府于平壤以统治之。
现代文：唐高宗消灭高丽，把他们迁移分散安置在中原，在平壤设置安柬都护府统治他们。
English: Tang Gaozong annihilated Goryeo, relocated and dispersed them in the Central Plains, and set up the Angkham Capital Protectorate in Pyongyang to rule them.

古文：武后时，契丹攻北边，高丽别种大乞乞仲象与靺鞨酋长乞四比羽走辽东，分王高丽故地，武后遣将击杀乞四比羽，而乞乞仲象亦病死。
现代文：武后时，契丹进攻北边，高丽一支大乞乞仲象和棘鞫酋长乞四比羽逃奔到辽东，在高丽旧地分别称王，武后派将领攻杀乞四比羽，而乞乞仲象也病死了。
English: When Empress Wu was in power, the Khitan invaded the north, a large Koryo begging elephant and a thorny egret chieftain fled to Liaodong, and were separately proclaimed kings in the old land of Koryo. Empress Wu sent generals to attack and kill the begging elephant, and the begging elephant also died of illness.

古文：仲象子祚荣立，因并有比羽之众，其众四十万人，据挹娄，臣于唐。
现代文：乞乞仲象的儿子祚荣继立，于是并吞乞四比羽的族人，共有四十万人众，占据挹娄，向唐朝称臣。
English: The son of the mendicant elephant, Zou Rongji Li, and the 400,000 people of the tribe who swallowed the four pheasants, occupied the capital and claimed to be the vassals of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：至中宗时，置忽汗州，以祚荣为都督，封渤海郡王，其后世遂号渤海。
现代文：到唐中宗时，设置忽汗州，任祚荣焉都督，封为渤海郡王，他的后代就称为渤海。
English: At the time of the Tang Dynasty, he set up the Khanate of Khotan, appointed Gong Rongyan as the governor of the capital, and made him the king of the county of Bohai. His descendants were called Bohai.

古文：其贵族姓大氏，开平元年，国王大諲撰遣使者来，讫显德常来朝贡。
现代文：他们的贵族姓大，开平元年，国王大谨误派使臣前来，到显德年间为止常来朝贡。
English: Their noble family name was Da, and in the first year of the Heian period, the king mistakenly sent envoys to the court, and they often paid tribute to the court until the Xiande period.

古文：其国土物产，与高丽同。
现代文：他们的国土物产，和高丽一样。
English: They are products of their land, just like Goryeo.

古文：諲撰世次、立卒，史失其纪。
现代文：大谨误的世次、兴亡，史书失去记载。
English: The history books have lost the records of the rise and fall of the erring generation.

古文：新罗，弁韩之遗种也。
现代文：新罗，是弁韩的后代。
English: Shilla, is a descendant of Ben Han.

古文：其国地、君世、物俗见于唐。
现代文：他们的国土、君主世次、风物民俗见于唐朝。
English: Their land, the succession of their monarchs, and their customs and folkways are all found in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：其大族曰金氏、朴氏，自唐高祖时封金真为乐浪郡王，其后世常为君长。
现代文：大族是金氏、朴氏，从唐高祖时封金真为乐浪郡王，他的后代常做君长。
English: The big families are the Kim clan and the Park clan. From the time of Tang Gao's ancestor, Fong Jinzhen was the king of Lelang County, and his descendants often became monarchs.

古文：同光元年，新罗国王金朴英遣使者来朝贡。
现代文：同光元年，新罗国王金朴英派使臣前来朝贡。
English: In the same year, the King of Silla, Jin Pak Ying, sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：长兴四年，权知国事金溥遣使来。
现代文：长兴四年，权知国事金溥派使臣前来。
English: In the fourth year of Changxing, the powerful statesman Jin Yong sent an envoy.

古文：朴英、溥世次、卒立，史皆失其纪。
现代文：金朴英、金溥的世次、兴亡，史书都失去记载。
English: The history books have lost all records of the lineage, rise and fall of Kim Pak Ying and Kim Yo Jong.

古文：自晋已后不复至。
现代文：从后晋以后不再前来。
English: After the Later Jin Dynasty, they stopped coming.

古文：黑水靺鞨，本号勿吉。
现代文：黑水棘辐，原称勿吉。
English: Kurosui Spine Branch, formerly known as Bekichi.

古文：当后魏时见中国。
现代文：后魏时被中原所知。
English: It was known in the Central Plains during the late Wei Dynasty.

古文：其国，东至海，南界高丽，西接突厥，北邻室韦，盖肃慎氏之地也。
现代文：它的疆域，东面到海，南面和高丽交界，西面和突厥接壤，北面和室韦相邻，大概是以煎肃慎氏的土地。
English: Its territory, east to the sea, south to the border with Goryeo, west to the border with the Turkic people, and north to the border with Muxi, is probably the land of Sheng Xuan.

古文：其众分为数十部，而黑水靺鞨最处其北，尤劲悍，无文字之记。
现代文：他们分成几十部，而黑水株缰处在最北端，尤其强劲勇悍，没有文字记载。
English: They are divided into dozens of parts, and the Blackwater cormorant is at the northernmost end, especially strong and brave, with no written records.

古文：其兵，角弓、楛矢。
现代文：他们的武器，是角弓、楛木杆箭。
English: Their weapons are crossbows, birch rods and arrows.

古文：同光二年，黑水兀兒遣使者来，其后常来朝贡，自登州泛海出青州。
现代文：同光二年，黑水棘鞠兀儿派使臣前来，后来常来朝贡，从登州航海出青州。
English: In the second year of the Guangxing Dynasty, the Black Water Jiuyuan sent envoys to Qingdao. Later, he often came to pay tribute to the imperial court, sailing from Dengzhou to Qingdao.

古文：明年，黑水胡独鹿亦遣使来。
现代文：第二年，黑水棘鞫胡独鹿也派使臣前来。
English: In the second year, the Blackwater thornbill and the white-throated deer also sent envoys.

古文：兀兒、胡独鹿若其两部酋长，各以使来。
现代文：兀儿、胡独鹿好像是黑水棘辑两个部落的酋长，各派使臣前来。
English: Hao Er and Hu Dululu seemed to be the chiefs of the two tribes in Heishui, and each sent envoys to the other.

古文：而其部族、世次、立卒，史皆失其纪。
现代文：而他们的部族、世次、兴亡，史书都失去记载。
English: And their tribe, lineage, rise and fall, all lost to the history books.

古文：至长兴三年，胡独鹿卒，子桃李花立，尝请命中国，后遂不复见云。
现代文：到长兴三年，胡独鹿死，儿子桃李花继立，曾向中原请求任命，后来就没再出现了。
English: By the third year of Changxing, Hu Dululu died, and his son, Tao Lihua, succeeded him. He had asked Zhongyuan for an appointment, but later he did not reappear.

古文：南诏蛮，见于唐。
现代文：南诏蛮，见于唐朝。
English: Nanzhao barbarian, seen in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：其国在汉故永昌郡之东、姚州之西。
现代文：这一国在过去汉朝的永昌郡柬面、姚州西面。
English: In the past Han Dynasty, this country occupied the Cambodian side of Yongchang County and the western side of Yaozhou.

古文：僖宗幸蜀，募能使南诏者，得宗室子李龟年及徐虎、虎侄蔼，乃以龟年为使，虎为副，蔼为判官，使南诏。
现代文：唐僖宗到蜀，招募能够出使南诏的人，招得宗室子弟李龟年和徐虎、徐虎的侄子徐蔼，于是任李龟年为使臣，徐虎为副使，徐蔼为判官，出使南诏。
English: Tang Xizong went to Shu to recruit people who could dispatch Nanzhao. He invited Zong's son-in-law Li Kurnian and Xu Hu, and Xu Hu's nephew Xu Aili, and appointed Li Kurnian as envoy, Xu Hu as deputy envoy, and Xu Aili as judge to dispatch Nanzhao.

古文：南诏所居曰苴絺城，龟年等不至苴絺，至善阐，得其要约与唐为甥舅。
现代文：南诏住的地方叫苴哗城，李龟年等人不到苴咩城，而到善阐，要求和唐朝结为甥舅关系。
English: The place where Nanzhao lived was called Shouguicheng. Li Kuchennian and others did not go to Shouguicheng, but went to Shanying to ask for a nephew relationship with the Tang Dynasty.

古文：僖宗许以安化公主妻之，南诏大喜，遣人随龟年求公主。已而黄巢败，收复长安，僖宗东还，乃止。
现代文：唐僖宗许诺把安化公主嫁给他，南诏大喜，派人随李龟年回来求公主，不久，黄巢失败，收复长安，唐僖宗柬归纔作罢。
English: Tang Xizong promised to marry Princess Anhua to him, Nan Zhao was overjoyed, and sent someone to come back with the Year of the Tortoise to ask for the princess. Soon, the Yellow Nest failed to recover Chang'an, and Tang Xizong and his retinue returned to their work.

古文：同光三年，魏王继岌及郭崇韬等破蜀，得王衍时所俘南诏蛮数十人，又得徐蔼，自言尝使南诏，乃矫诏还其所俘，遣蔼等持金帛招抚南诏，谕以威德，南诏不纳。
现代文：同光三年，魏王李继岌和郭崇韬等人攻破前蜀，得到王衍时俘获的南诏蛮数十人，又得到徐蔼，自称曾出使南诏，于是伪造诏害归还俘虏，派徐蔼等人带着金银绸缎招抚南韶，用威德晓谕他们，南诏不接受。
English: In the same year, the Wei king Li Jizhe and Guo Chongyi and others broke through the former Shu, and obtained dozens of Nanzhao captured at the time of Wang Yan. They also obtained Xu A, who claimed to have sent Nanzhao, so he forged the Dazhao and returned the prisoners. He sent Xu A and others to seduce Nanzhao with gold, silver and silk brocade, and told them with wisdom that Nanzhao would not accept.

古文：至明宗时，巂州山后两林百蛮都鬼主、右武卫大将军李卑晚，遣大鬼主傅能何华来朝贡，明宗拜卑晚宁远将军，又以大渡河南山前邛州六姓都鬼主怀安郡王勿定摽莎为定远将军。
现代文：到唐明宗时，俦州山后两林百蛮都鬼主、右武卫大将军李卑晚，派大鬼主傅能何华前来朝贡，唐明宗拜李卑晚为宁速将军，又以大渡河南山前邛州六姓都鬼主怀安郡王勿定揉莎为定速将军。
English: At the time of the Tang Ming Dynasty, Li Biwan, the leader of the ghosts of the two hundred barbarian cities in the back of the mountains of Bozhou and the general of the Right Division of Wuwei, sent the great ghost master Fu Neng Hehua to come to pay tribute. The Tang Ming Dynasty worshiped Li Biwan as the general of Ninghai, and the leader of the ghosts of the six capitals of Bozhou in front of the mountains of Dadu and Henan, King Baoding of Huai'an County, as the general of Dinghai.

古文：明年遣左金吾卫将军乌昭远为入蛮国信使，昭远不能达而还。
现代文：第二年派左金吾卫将军盅昭远焉入蛮国信使，乌昭速未能到达而返回。
English: In the following year, Emperor Zogongwei sent a messenger to Emperor Wu Zhao, who was far away in the barbarian country. Emperor Wu Zhao did not arrive and returned.

古文：牂牁蛮，在辰州西千五百里，以耕植为生，而无城郭聚落，有所攻击，则相屯聚。
现代文：徉柯蛮，在辰州西面一千五百里处，以耕植为生，而没有城市聚落，受到攻击时，就相互屯聚在一起。
English: In Zeng Ke Man, 1,500 miles west of Chenzhou, people make a living from farming, but there are no urban settlements. When attacked, they huddle together.

古文：刻木为契。
现代文：刻木为符契。
English: The carved wood is the contract.

古文：其首领姓谢氏，其名见于唐。
现代文：首领姓谢，名字见于唐朝。
English: The leader's surname is Xie, a name found in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：至天成二年尝一至，其使者曰清州八郡刺史宋朝化，冠带如中国，贡草豆蔻二万个、硃砂五百两、蜡二百斤。
现代文：到天成二年曾来遇一次，它的使臣叫清州八郡刺史宋朝化，衣帽服饰同中原一样，进献两万颗草豆蔻、五百两朱砂、两百斤蜡。
English: In the second year of Tiancheng, it once happened that its envoys called the eight counties of Qingzhou the Song Dynasty, and the clothes and hats were the same as those of the Central Plains. They presented twenty thousand grass pods, five hundred and two cinnabar, and two hundred pounds of wax.

古文：昆明，在黔州西南三千里外，地产羊马。
现代文：昆明，在黔州西南三千里外，出产羊、马。
English: Kunming, 3,000 miles southwest of Zhangzhou, produces sheep and horses.

古文：其人椎髻、跣足、披氈，其首领披虎皮。
现代文：那里的人结着椎形发髻、赤脚、披毡布，他们的首领披虎皮。
English: The people there wear their hair in a topknot, are barefoot, wear sackcloth, and their leaders wear tiger skins.

古文：天成二年，尝一至，其首领号昆明大鬼主，罗殿王、普露静王九部落，各遣使者来，使者号若土，附牂牁以来。
现代文：天成二年，曾来过一次，首领称昆明大鬼主，罗殿王、普露静王九部落，各派使臣前来，使臣称 若土 ，随徉柯而来。
English: In the second year of Tiancheng, there was a time when the leaders called Kunming the Great Ghost Lord, King Luo and King Plu Jing of the Nine Tribes, and envoys from various factions came. The envoys called themselves Ruandu and came with Zou Ke.

古文：占城，在西南海上。
现代文：占城，在西南海上。
English: Zhancheng, in the southwest sea.

古文：其地方千里，东至海，西至云南，南邻真脑，北抵驩州。
现代文：土地方圆一千里，束面到海，西面到云南，南面和真腊相邻，北面到达骥州。
English: The earth is a thousand miles in circumference, stretching from Sokumen to the sea, from the west to Yunnan, from the south to Zhenla, and from the north to Luzhou.

古文：其人，俗与大食同。
现代文：那里的人，风俗和大食国相同。
English: The people there have the same customs as the big-eating countries.

古文：其乘，象、马；其食，稻米、水兕、山羊。
现代文：骑的是象、马；吃的是稻米、水牛、山羊。
English: They ride elephants and horses; they eat rice, buffalo and goat.

古文：鸟兽之奇，犀、孔雀。
现代文：神奇的鸟兽，有犀牛、孔雀。
English: Magical birds and beasts, including rhinoceroses and peacocks.

古文：自前世未尝通中国。
现代文：前代不曾和中原交往。
English: The previous generation had never been in contact with the Central Plains.

古文：显德五年，其国王因德漫遣使者莆诃散来，贡猛火油八十四瓶、蔷薇水十五瓶，其表以贝多叶书之，以香木为函。
现代文：颢德五年，国王因德漫派使臣莆诃散前来，进献八十四瓶猛火油、十五瓶蔷薇水，进表写在贝多树叶上，用香木制成匣子。
English: In the 5th year of Xingde, the king sent a number of envoys to Xingde to present 84 jars of heavy fire oil and 15 jars of rose water. The delivery schedule was written on the leaves of the Bedo tree, and the box was made of fragrant wood.

古文：猛火油以洒物，得水则出火。
现代文：猛火油洒在物体上，遇水就起火。
English: Flammable oil is sprinkled on objects and catches fire when exposed to water.

古文：蔷薇水，云得自西域，以洒衣，虽敝而香不灭。
现代文：蔷薇水，据说出自西域，用来洒在衣服上，衣服穿壤了香气都不散。
English: Rose water, said to come from the western region, is used to sprinkle on clothes, and the fragrance permeates the clothes.

古文：五代，四夷见中国者，远不过于阗、占城。
现代文：五代时，四方夷狄出现在中原的，最速的不超过于阗、占城。
English: In the 5th generation, the Yifang Yidi appeared in the Central Plains, the fastest of which did not exceed the Zou and Zhancheng.

古文：史之所纪，其西北颇详，而东南尤略，盖其远而罕至，且不为中国利害云。
现代文：史书上记载的，西北面很详细，东南面尤其简略，大概是因为太远了而很少去，而且不关中原的利害。
English: As recorded in the history books, the northwest side is very detailed, and the southeast side is particularly simple, probably because it is too far and rarely visited, and it is not related to the interests of the Central Plains.

