古文：池阳小人背明鸟王琬张聘张林东瀛公长广人黄丘村韩僧真洛阳金像梁武帝惠炤师周靖帝苏氏突厥首领陈后主渭南人猫鬼长星大乌虾蟆幽州人默啜张易之孙俭太白昼见
现代文：池阳小人背明鸟王琬张聘张林东瀛公长广人黄丘村韩僧真洛阳金像梁武帝惠炤师周靖帝苏氏突厥首领陈后主渭南人猫鬼长星大乌虾蟆幽州人默啜张易之孙俭太白昼见
English: Chiyang dwarfs back bright bird king  Zhang hired Zhang Lin Dong  Duke Guangren Huangqiu village Han monk Zhen Luoyang gold statue Liangwu Emperor Hui  teacher Zhou Jing Emperor Su clan Turkic chief Chen empress  Nan people cat ghost long star big crab  Yuzhou people silently sip Zhang Yi's grandson Jian too see the light of day

古文：池阳小人
现代文：池阳小人
English: Ikeyang the dwarf sings

古文：王莽建国三年，池阳有小人，长一尺余，或乘马，或步行，操持万物，小人皆自相称。
现代文：王莽建国三年，池阳发现了小人。有一尺多高，有的骑着马，有的步行，所有的东西都能操持料理。
English: Three years after the founding of the country, Wang Mang and Chiyang discovered the little people. They were more than a foot tall, some rode horses, some walked, and all of them could cook.

古文：三日乃止。
现代文：他们自己都互相称小人。三天就没有了。
English: It only stopped after three days.

古文：莽甚恶之。
现代文：王莽非常厌恶。
English: Wang Mang was very disgusted.

古文：自后兵盗日盛，而竟被杀。
现代文：从这以后兵匪盗匪四起并且一天比一天厉害，王莽最终被杀死。
English: From then on, soldiers, bandits and robbers were on the rampage and became more and more violent day by day. Wang Mang was eventually killed.

古文：背明鸟
现代文：背明鸟
English: The backlit bird

古文：黄龙元年，吴始都武昌。
现代文：黄龙元年，吴国开始首都在武昌。
English: In the first year of the Yellow Dragon, the capital of the State of Wu was moved to Wuchang.

古文：时越雟之南献背明鸟，形如鹤状，止不向明，巢常对北，多肉少毛，其声百变，闻钟磬笙竽之声则奋翅摇头。
现代文：当时越雟的南面献来了一只背明鸟。形状好象仙鹤，它不对着亮处呆着，朝北筑鸟窝。鸟的肉多而羽毛少，它的叫声变化多端。如果听到了钟磬笙竽等乐器的声音，它就会展开翅膀摇动着脑袋翩翩起舞。
English: At that time, a bird with a bright back was presented by the south side of Yueyang. It was shaped like a crane. It did not stay in the bright place, but built a bird's nest to the north. The bird had more meat but fewer feathers, and its call varied widely. If it heard the sound of musical instruments such as the gong, it would spread its wings, shake its head and dance.

古文：时人以为吉瑞。
现代文：当时的人都认为这是吉祥的征兆。
English: At the time, people thought it was an auspicious sign.

古文：是岁迁都建业，殊方多贡珍奇。
现代文：这年吴迁都到建业。许多地方都进奉了很多的珍奇瑰宝。
English: In this year, the capital of Wu was moved to Jianye, and many places enshrined many rare treasures.

古文：吴人语讹，呼为背亡鸟。
现代文：吴人发音不同，叫成背亡鸟。
English: Wu people pronounce it differently, and call it Chengxiezhuang.

古文：国中以为大妖，不及百年，当有丧乱背叛流亡之事，散逸奔逃，墟无烟火。
现代文：国中的人都认为是大妖，不到百年，应当有丧乱背叛、流亡的事情发生。百姓失散到处奔逃，一片废墟没有烟火。
English: People in the country think that it is a great demon. In less than a hundred years, there should be chaos, betrayal, and exile. People are scattered and fleeing everywhere, and there are no fireworks in the ruins.

古文：果如斯言。后此鸟不知所在。
现代文：果然象吴人所说，后来这鸟也不知道飞到哪里去了。
English: As the Wu people said, the bird did not know where it was going.

古文：王琬
现代文：王琬
English: Wang Yao

古文：晋武帝太康七年，郊坛下有一白狗，高三尺，光色鲜明，恒卧坛侧。
现代文：晋武帝太康七年，在郊坛下有一条白狗，高三尺，毛色光亮鲜明。
English: In the seventh year of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, there was a white dog, three feet tall, with bright and shiny fur, under a suburban altar.

古文：觉见人前则去。
现代文：常常趴在坛的旁边。发觉有人上前就离开了。
English: He would often lie down next to the altar. When he noticed someone coming forward, he would leave.

古文：骑督王琬，以骏马追之。
现代文：骑督王琬，骑着骏马追赶，狗慢慢的走，但是马却追不上。
English: The cavalry officer Wang Yao, riding a fine horse, chased after him. The dog walked slowly, but the horse could not catch up.

古文：狗徐行，马不可及，射又逃，琬去复还。
现代文：用箭射，可是狗又逃掉了。王琬走了狗又返回来。
English: He shot it with an arrow, but the dog ran away again. Wang Xuan took the dog away and came back.

古文：郊丘非狗所守，后遂大乱。
现代文：郊丘不是狗能看守的，后来就发生了战乱。
English: There were no dogs to guard the hills, and then the war broke out.

古文：又武帝时，幽州有狗，鼻行地三百余步。
现代文：另外，武帝的时候，幽州有狗，能用鼻子在地上走三百多步。
English: In addition, at the time of Emperor Wu, Yuzhou had a dog that could walk more than three hundred steps on the ground with its nose.

古文：帝不思和峤之言而立惠帝，以致衰乱。
现代文：预兆反映在武帝不考虑和峤的话而立了惠帝。到了衰落混乱的地步。
English: The omen is reflected in the fact that Emperor Wu did not consider the words of conciliation and established Emperor Hui. To the point of decline and chaos.

古文：张聘
现代文：张聘
English: Zhang Ni

古文：晋惠帝太安中，江夏张聘所乘牛言曰： 天下乱，乘我。 
现代文：晋惠帝太安年间，江夏张聘所骑的牛张嘴说话了。牛说： 天下乱，就骑上我。 
English: During the reign of Emperor Taian of Jin and Hui Dynasties, the cow that Jiang Xia Zhangbei rode spoke. The cow said, "The world is in turmoil, so ride me."

古文：聘惧而还。
现代文：张聘十分害怕，就回到了家里。
English: Zhang Bei was very scared and went back home.

古文：犬又言曰： 归何早？ 
现代文：而狗又说： 为什么回来得这样早？ 
English: And the dog said, "Why did you come back so early?"

古文：寻牛人立而行。
现代文：不久牛象人那样的直立行走。
English: Soon the cow was walking upright like a man.

古文：聘□□□□曰： 天下将乱，非止一家。 
现代文：张聘说： 天下将要大乱，不只是一家。 
English: Zhang Ni said: The world is going to be in chaos, not just one family.

古文：其年张昌作乱，先略江夏，众推为帅。
现代文：那年张昌作乱，将要侵略江夏，江夏的百姓推举张聘做帅。
English: That year, Zhang Chang made a disturbance and was going to invade Jiangxia. The people of Jiangxia elected Zhang He as their leader.

古文：于是五州残乱，聘方族灭。
现代文：在这时，天下大乱，张聘全家族都被消灭了。
English: At this time, the world was in turmoil, and Zhang He's entire family was wiped out.

古文：张林
现代文：张林
English: Zhang Lin

古文：晋怀帝永嘉中，嘉兴张林有狗名阿永。
现代文：晋怀帝永嘉年间，嘉兴有个叫张林的有一条狗，名叫阿永。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yongjia of the Jin and Huai Dynasties, there was a man in Jiaxing named Zhang Lin who had a dog named A Yong.

古文：时天下饥荒，狗行欲倒。
现代文：当时天下闹饥荒，狗走起路就要倾倒。
English: At that time, there was a famine in the world, and dogs would collapse if they started to walk.

古文：林言： 阿永汝言得肉。 
现代文：张林说： 阿永，说话给你肉吃。 
English: Zhang Lin said, "Ayong, talk is meat for you.

古文：故健，今饿不复行耶。
现代文：狗以前健壮，现在饿得不能走路了。
English: The dog, once robust, is now too hungry to walk.

古文：狗忽语云： 我道天下人饥死！ 
现代文：狗忽然说： 我说天下的人都因饥饿而死。 
English: The dog suddenly said, "I said that people all over the world are dying of hunger."

古文：狗语不已，闻者怖走。
现代文：狗说个不停，听到的人都十分恐怖的吓跑了。
English: The dog kept talking, and everyone who heard it ran away in terror.

古文：时天下荒乱，帝没于胡。
现代文：当时天下正闹荒乱，怀帝死于胡。
English: At that time, the world was in turmoil, and Emperor Huai died.

古文：东瀛公
现代文：东瀛公
English: Dongluogong

古文：晋东瀛公腾，字元迈，以永嘉元年镇邺。
现代文：晋东瀛公名腾，字叫元迈，在永嘉元年时镇守邺。
English: Jin Dongyi's public name was Teng, his nickname was Yuanmai, and he became the town's governor in the first year of Yongjia.

古文：时大雪，当其门前方十数步，独液不积。腾怪而掘之，得玉马，高尺许，齿皆缺。腾以为马者国姓，称吉祥马。
现代文：当时雪下得很大，在他门前十多步的地方连水点都没有，东瀛公腾觉得很奇怪，就用锹挖那里，结果挖出了一个用玉做的马。有一尺多高，没有牙齿，东瀛公腾认为这马是国王的姓，称它是吉祥之物。
English: At that time, it was snowing heavily, and there was not even a drop of water more than ten steps in front of his door. Donglu Gongten felt very strange, so he dug there with a shovel. As a result, he dug up a horse made of jade. It was more than a foot high and had no teeth. Donglu Gongten thought that the horse was the king's surname and called it an auspicious thing.

古文：或谓马无齿则不食。
现代文：有人说马没有牙齿就不能吃东西。
English: Some people say that a horse can't eat without teeth.

古文：未几，晋大乱。
现代文：不久，晋就大乱。
English: Soon, Jin was in turmoil.

古文：长广人
现代文：长广人
English: Chang Guangren

古文：宋文帝元嘉末，长广人病瘥，便能食而不得卧，一饭辄觉身长。如此数日，头遂出屋。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉末年，有个长广人得了疫病。只是能吃东西而躺不下，吃一顿饭就发觉身子长长了，象这样的十多天，头就长出了屋子。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, Emperor Yuanjia, there was a man named Changguang who caught the plague. Although he could eat, he could not lie down. After eating a meal, he found that his body had grown longer. After more than ten days like this, his head had grown out of his body.

古文：段究为刺史，度之为三丈，复还渐缩如旧，经日而亡。
现代文：段究当时是刺史，他估计该时长广人有三丈高。过了些时候又渐渐的缩短，恢复到原来的样子，过了几天就死了。
English: At the time, it was a record, and he estimated that it was three times as long as it was tall. After a while, it gradually shortened again, returned to its original shape, and died a few days later.

古文：俄而文帝为元凶所害。
现代文：不久，文帝就被元凶所杀害了。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wen was killed by the culprit.

古文：黄丘村
现代文：黄丘村
English: Huangqiu Village

古文：宋江陵黄丘村，有羊生羔，两头一颈，在上者鸣，在下者不鸣。
现代文：宋朝江陵的黄丘村，那里有一只羊生下了一个羊羔，在脖子上面长了两个脑袋。长在上面的能鸣叫，长在下面的不能鸣叫。
English: In Huangqiu Village of Jiangling in the Song Dynasty, a goat gave birth to a lamb with two heads on its neck. The head on top could sing, while the one on the bottom could not.

古文：俄而刘义、司马休之相继作乱，人多兵死。
现代文：不久刘义、司马休相继叛乱。许多人在叛乱中战死。
English: Soon after, Liu Yi and Sima Xiu rebelled one after another. Many people died in the rebellion.

古文：韩僧真
现代文：韩僧真
English: Han Sangjin

古文：后魏肃宗熙平二年，并州祁县人韩僧真女，从母右肋而出。胡太后令付掖庭养之。
现代文：后魏肃宗熙平二年的时候，并州祁县人韩僧真的女儿，从她母亲的右肋下生出来，胡太后就叫人把她送到了宫庭中宫嫔居住的地方抚养。
English: In the second year of Emperor Suizong of the Later Wei Dynasty, the daughter of Han Zongxin, a native of Zhouzhuang County, was born from her mother's right rib. Empress Dowager Hu had someone take her to the palace courtyard where the imperial concubines lived to raise her.

古文：太后临朝，为元乂、刘腾幽于永巷，后竟被尔朱荣沈于河。
现代文：等太后上朝，那个女孩就被元乂、刘腾在永巷给囚禁了。后来竟然被尔朱荣给扔到了河里淹死了。
English: When the empress dowager ascended to the throne, the girl was imprisoned by Yuan Qi and Liu Teng in Yong Xiang. Later, she was even thrown into the river and drowned by Er Zhu Rong.

古文：魏室因兹大乱。
现代文：魏因此就发生了叛乱。
English: Wei rebelled as a result.

古文：洛阳金像
现代文：洛阳金像
English: Luoyang golden statue

古文：后魏普泰元年，洛阳金像生毛眉鬓发，悉皆具足。
现代文：后魏普泰元年的时候，洛阳的金像忽然长出了眉毛头发，全都齐备长全了。
English: In the first year of the post-Weiputai era, Luoyang's golden statue suddenly sprouted eyebrows and hair, all of which were fully grown.

古文：尚书左丞魏季景谓人曰： 张天锡有此事，其国遂灭，此亦不祥之征。 
现代文：尚书左丞魏季景对人说： 张天锡时有过这种事，他的国家于是就灭亡了，今天这种现象，也是不祥的征兆。 
English: Shang Shuzhu Zuo Wei Jiqing said to the people: Zhang Tianxi had such a thing, and his country was destroyed. Today, this phenomenon is also an ominous sign.

古文：至明年，而广陵被废死焉。
现代文：果然到了第二年，广陵被废弃而亡。
English: Sure enough, the next year, Guangling was abandoned and died.

古文：梁武帝
现代文：梁武帝
English: Emperor Liangwu

古文：梁武帝大同元年，幸玄武湖。
现代文：梁武帝大同元年时，武帝到玄武湖游赏，湖中的鱼都仰起头来，露在水面上。
English: In the first year of Emperor Liangwu's reign, Emperor Wu went to Lake Xuanwu for a swim. The fish in the lake all looked up, exposed on the surface of the water.

古文：湖中鱼皆骧者，见于水上，若顾望焉，帝入宫方没。
现代文：好象向四处张望。等武帝回宫时鱼才进到了水里。
English: He seemed to be looking everywhere. The fish only entered the water when Emperor Wu returned to the palace.

古文：此下人将举兵睥睨乘舆之象。寻有侯景之乱。
现代文：这是有人将要举兵侧目窥察皇上乘车的象征，不久就有侯景发动了叛乱。
English: This was a sign that someone was going to raise an army to spy on the emperor's ride, and soon Hou Jing launched a rebellion.

古文：惠炤师
现代文：惠炤师
English: Huizhong Division

古文：齐末惠炤师者，不知从何许而来。
现代文：齐末有个叫惠炤师的，不知是从什么地方来的。
English: At the end of Qi Dynasty, there was a carpenter named Huizhong Shi. I don't know where he came from.

古文：骑一竹枝为马，振策驰驿，盘躄回转。
现代文：他骑着一根竹枝当做马，挥动的鞭子奔跑驰骋，盘着瘸腿来回旋转。
English: He rides a bamboo branch as a horse, waves a whip, runs and gallops, and spins back and forth with his legs crossed.

古文：或时厉声云： 某处追兵甚急，何不差遣？ 
现代文：有时厉声说： 某地方追兵非常急迫，为什么不派遣我。 
English: Sometimes he would say sharply, "It is very urgent to chase soldiers somewhere, why don't you send me?"

古文：遂放杖驰走，不遑宁息。
现代文：于是就放下竹杖快速的奔跑，没有时间休息。
English: So he put down his bamboo cane and ran fast, with no time to rest.

古文：或晨往南殿，暮至北城。如其所言，果有烽檄之急。
现代文：有时早晨去南殿，晚上又到北城，象他说的那样，果然有报警的消息特别紧急。
English: Sometimes he went to the south hall in the morning and to the north hall in the evening. As he said, there was indeed a particularly urgent message to call the police.

古文：每遥见黑云飞乌群豕，但是黑之物，必低身恭敬。
现代文：每当他远远的看见黑色的乌云，飞翔的乌鸦，成群的猪，只要是黑色的东西，一定要低下身子，表现得很严肃很有礼貌的样子。
English: Whenever he sees black clouds in the distance, flying crows, hordes of pigs, as long as they are black, he must lower his body and behave very seriously and politely.

古文：忽自称云，伏喽罗语。
现代文：有时忽然的自己说自己是埋伏的盗匪。
English: Sometimes they suddenly say that they are ambush robbers.

古文：国人见者，莫不怪笑。
现代文：国内的人看见他的，没有不感到奇怪并讥笑他的。
English: When the people of his country saw him, they were astonished and mocked him.

古文：京内咸识。
现代文：京城里的人全都认识他。
English: Everyone in the capital knows him.

古文：不知名字者，呼为伏喻调马。
现代文：但不知道他叫什么名字，都叫他是伏喻调马。
English: But I don't know what his name is, everyone calls him Fuju Tunmao.

古文：齐未动之前，惠炤走杖马，来到殿西骑省，密告诸贵唐邕等，急救东方，吴儿大欲入，晓夕孜孜，守阙不去。
现代文：齐末没发生动乱以前，惠炤骑着竹杖快速奔跑，来到殿西骑省，偷偷告诉诸贵唐邕等人，赶紧救助东方，吴人将要攻进来了。
English: At the end of the Qi Dynasty, before the turmoil occurred, Hui Yao rode a bamboo cane and ran fast. He came to the West Riding Province and secretly told the nobles, including Tang Yao, to rush to the aid of the East, as the Wu people were about to invade.

古文：数日，吴明彻自广陵北侵淮楚。
现代文：而他白天晚上非常勤勉的守着城不肯离开。几天后，吴明彻从广陵北侵入淮楚。
English: However, he diligently guarded the city day and night and refused to leave. A few days later, Wu Mingcher invaded Huai Chu from Guangling North.

古文：国家遣兵将救，始集兵马。
现代文：朝廷派兵准备救助，刚开始集合兵马，惠炤已经离开城有四十里远了。
English: The imperial court sent soldiers to prepare for the rescue. They had just begun to assemble the soldiers and horses, but Huizhou was already forty miles away from the city.

古文：惠炤已去城四十里，于白壁南待军，指麾号令。大将至，谓齐安王高敬德曰： 努力，好慎浆水！ 
现代文：他在白壁的南面等侍着军队，指挥号令。就象大将军到了一样，他对齐安王高敬德说： 要努力，做好防水的准备。 
English: He waited on the south side of the White Wall and commanded the army. As if a great general had arrived, he said to King Gao Jingde of Qian: Work hard and prepare for waterproofing.

古文：后吴人纵水淹渍，齐军多有伤没。
现代文：果然后来吴人放水淹渍，齐军死伤的人很多。
English: If the Wu people then came to flood the water, there would be many dead and injured Qi soldiers.

古文：在京百官朝集，惠炤亦骑杖执策，立于武成之后。
现代文：在京城的百官纷纷上朝，惠炤也骑着竹杖，拿着马鞭，站在武成的后面。
English: Hundreds of officials in the capital came to the court one after another, and Hui Yan also rode a bamboo cane and held a horse whip, standing behind Wu Cheng.

古文：敕付天平寺，常令三人守之。
现代文：诏书下达，把惠炤交给天平寺，常常叫三个人看守他。
English: An imperial edict was issued, and Hui Yao was handed over to the Temple of Heaven. He often asked three people to watch over him.

古文：勿听浪语。
现代文：不要听他的放纵的话。
English: Don't listen to his indulgent words.

古文：炤狂言如旧，不可止约。
现代文：惠炤仍然象原来那样的狂言乱语，没有谁能拦阻限制他。
English: Hui Yao is still as crazy as ever, and no one can stop or restrict him.

古文：后于天平寺宿，与一大德僧共密语： 天地开辟，上古无为。 
现代文：后来惠炤住在天平寺，和一个名叫大德的老和尚一齐偷偷的议论着。
English: Later, Hui Yao lived in Tianping Temple and secretly discussed with an old monk named Dade.

古文：下至君臣父子、道德仁义、老经佛法，优劣多少？ 
现代文：从开天辟地、上古没有统治，一直谈到了君臣父子，仁义道德，老经佛法，有多少好的，多少坏的。
English: From the dawn of time, when there was no rule in ancient times, we have been talking about princes and ministers, father and son, benevolence and righteousness, morality, the sutras and the Dharma, and how much is good and how much is bad.

古文：凡所顾涉幽隐之事，无所不论。
现代文：凡是所涉及到的不公开的事情，没有不议论到的。
English: There is no such thing as an undisclosed matter that is not discussed.

古文：迨至天晓将去，谓曰： 慎莫漏我此语！若泄，打杀汝。 
现代文：等到天亮才离开。惠炤对老和尚说： 千万不要泄露我说的这些话。如果泄露出去，就打死你。 
English: They waited until dawn to leave. Hui Yan said to the old monk: "Don't ever reveal what I said. If you do, I'll beat you to death."

古文：去后，此僧语一二老宿名德者云，伏喻乃是大圣人，非寻常，不可轻忽。
现代文：惠炤走后，这个老和尚就告诉了一两个有资格有名望的人说： 惠炤是个大圣人，并不是寻常的人。不可以对他轻视疏忽。
English: After Hui Xuan left, the old monk told one or two qualified and reputable people that: Hui Xuan is a great saint, not an ordinary person. He should not be neglected.

古文：闻其所说，诸佛得道者，咸经亲事，序述犹如指掌。见语勿道，恐诸不知，怀骄慢心，将来获罪，所以相告。
现代文：听他所说的这些事，许多修行圆满的有道德的人，都亲自经历过，他叙述的了如指掌，你们听见这些话不要说出去，我恐怕你们不了解他，而对他怀有傲慢的想法，将来得罪了他，所以才把这些话告诉你们。 
English: Listen to what he said. Many well-trained and virtuous people have personally experienced these things. What he described is well known. When you hear these words, don't speak out. I'm afraid you don't understand him, but have arrogant thoughts about him and will offend him in the future. That's why I'm telling you these words.

古文：午后，惠炤密将拳石手巾裹来，语此僧云： 戒你莫说乃不能忍。 
现代文：午后，惠炤偷偷的把拳头大小的石头用手巾包裹着来了。对这个老和尚说 告戒你不要说出去，你却不能忍耐。 
English: In the afternoon, Hui Yao secretly brought a stone the size of a fist wrapped in a hand towel and said to the old monk, "I warned you not to speak out, but you couldn't bear it."

古文：以巾打之，一下死。
现代文：说完就用手巾打他，只打了一下就把和尚给打死了。
English: After he finished speaking, he hit him with a hand towel. After just one blow, he killed the monk.

古文：寺家执以奉闻，恕而不问。
现代文：寺里就写了状子告他，而皇上却宽恕了他。
English: The temple wrote a complaint against him, but the emperor forgave him.

古文：齐将破之时，北宫东北角割十步为弘善寺，惠炤曾到寺宿。
现代文：齐国将要灭亡的时候，在北宫的东北角割舍了十步的地方做了弘善寺，惠炤在寺里住，那天夜里他就跳墙去了太后的宫院。
English: When the State of Qi was about to fall, the northeast corner of the Northern Palace was divided into ten steps and made into the Kosen-ji Temple. Hui Rong lived in the temple. That night, he jumped over the wall and went to the Empress Dowager's palace.

古文：其夜骞墙住太后宫院，盗入宫人房里，被捉。炤曰： 不久人人皆入，何为独自约我？ 
现代文：偷着进到宫人的房里，被捉住了。惠炤说： 不久人人都会进来，为什么要单独的约束我？ 
English: He sneaked into the palace guard's room and was caught. Hui Yao said: Soon everyone will come in, why should I be restrained alone?

古文：又以状奏，诏复舍之。
现代文：人们又写了状子上奏，结果诏令又把他放了。
English: Another petition was filed, and he was again released by royal decree.

古文：时宫校贵人内外戚妃媵出家者，朔望参谒，车马衣服，侍从绮丽。
现代文：当时宫里的贵人和朝庭内外的亲戚妃子，宫女出家的人，每月的初一和十五那天，都会叩拜皇上。
English: At that time, the nobles in the palace and the relatives inside and outside the court, the concubines, the palace maids, and those who had entered the priesthood, would bow to the emperor on the first and fifteenth day of every month.

古文：惠炤寻逐车后，眼语挑弄，云： 罢道之日，与我作妇。 
现代文：骑着马坐着车来的人很多，都穿着华丽的衣服。惠炤就跟在车后边，眉目传情般挑弄她们说： 等你们停止修道的时候，给我做媳妇。 
English: There were many people on horseback and in cars, all dressed in gorgeous clothes. Hui Yao followed behind the car, teasing them with his eyes, saying: "When you stop practicing, be my daughter-in-law."

古文：官者驱逐。且语且前。贵人等以炤狂悖，为后主所容，但笑而不责。
现代文：官差撵他走，他就一边说一边往前走，贵人们都认为惠炤是个疯子，被后主所宽容，只是讥笑他而不责备他。
English: When the officials ordered him to leave, he just kept talking and moving forward. The nobles all thought that Hui Xuan was a madman, but he was tolerated by the empress. They just laughed at him and did not blame him.

古文：每逢见僧众，则恶骂嗔打，手执砖瓦，不避头面。云： 无用之时除剪！ 
现代文：惠炤每当看见和尚们，就厌恶谩骂并发怒的打他们。手里拿着砖瓦，不管是头还是脸直打过来，说： 没用的时候就全都去掉。 
English: Whenever Hui Yao saw the monks, he loathed the abuse and would beat them angrily. Holding bricks and tiles in his hands, he would hit them either on the head or the face, saying, "If it's no use, get rid of it all."

古文：僧徒值者亦必避之。
现代文：和尚们碰上他的也一定要躲开他。
English: Monks who come across him must also avoid him.

古文：于后失经五六日，忽复自来，则厕上而眠。或把杖坐睡。
现代文：在这以后失踪了五六天，忽然又自己来了，就在茅厕里睡觉，有时手把着竹杖坐着睡。
English: After that, he disappeared for five or six days, and then suddenly he came back again, sleeping in a thatched toilet, sometimes sitting and sleeping with a bamboo cane in his hand.

古文：云： 官府甚多，军马遍满，昼夜供承，不可周悉。
现代文：说： 官府这么多，军队马匹遍地是，白天黑夜都承担着供求的任务不可以不周悉。
English: He said: With so many government offices and army horses everywhere, it is essential to be familiar with the tasks of supply and demand day and night.

古文：图籍不得不造。
现代文：所以疆域图和户口册不能不制作。 
English: Therefore, the territory map and the household registration book must be produced.

古文：及周兵入晋阳，炤到太后寺浮图前，合掌落泪云： 倾！ 
现代文：等到周兵进入晋阳时，惠炤到太后寺浮图前，合掌落泪说： 法规倾覆了。 
English: When Zhou Bing entered Jinyang, Hui Yao went to the front of the float of the Empress Dowager's Temple, clapped his hands and said with tears: The regulations have been overturned.

古文：即伏地不起。
现代文：说着就趴在地上不起来了。
English: Saying that, I fell to the ground and couldn't get up.

古文：武帝平东夏，不收图籍，府库典诰，州县户口，洛京故实，并为军人毁弃。
现代文：武帝平定了东夏，没有收藏疆域图和户口册，府库里的经典诰命，州县的户口，京城里的故事史实，一起被军人毁弃。
English: Emperor Wu had pacified the Eastern Xia, but there was no collection of territory maps and household registration books, the classic death certificate in the prefectural treasury, the household registration in the prefectures and counties, and the historical facts in the capital city, all of which were destroyed by soldiers.

古文：至今大比民贯，创始营造。
现代文：到现在大比三年一次调查人口，考查官克之制为百姓所习惯，才开始谋求制作。
English: Up to now, the population has been surveyed once every three years, and the examination system of official restraint has become accustomed to the people. Only then did they begin to seek production.

古文：炤所说造籍，悉符验焉。
现代文：惠炤所说的制作户口册的事，全都符合应验了。
English: What Hui Yao said about the production of household registration books has all come true.

古文：而炤竞不知所在。
现代文：而惠炤竟然不知到哪里去了。
English: And Hui Yao didn't even know where she had gone.

古文：周靖帝
现代文：周靖帝
English: Emperor Zhou

古文：周靖帝大象元年夏，荥阳汴水北，有龙斗。
现代文：周靖帝大象元年夏天，荥阳汴水北面，有龙争斗。
English: In the summer of the first year of Emperor Zhou's reign, there was a dragon fight on the north side of the Poyang River.

古文：初见白光直属天，自东方而来，有白龙长十许丈，西北向，舐掌而鸣。
现代文：刚开始看见白光直连接天空，一会从东方来了一条白龙，有十多丈长，面向西北用舌头舔着脚掌大声的鸣叫。
English: At first, I saw a white light directly connected to the sky. A moment later, a white dragon came from the east, more than ten meters long, facing northwest, licking its paws with its tongue and chirping loudly.

古文：西北有黑龙，亦乘云而至。
现代文：在西北面有条黑龙，也乘着云彩到了。
English: In the northwest, there is a black dragon, also riding on a cloud.

古文：风雷相击，乍合乍离，暴雨大注，自午至申。
现代文：风雷撞击，忽然合拢，忽然分离，一会的工夫暴雨倾盆，从午时一直下到申时。
English: Wind and lightning hit, suddenly closing, suddenly separating, and for a while torrential rain poured down, from noon until dusk.

古文：白龙升天，黑龙坠地。
现代文：这时白龙升上了天空，黑龙坠落到地上。
English: At this time, the white dragon rose into the sky, and the black dragon fell to the ground.

古文：复有大鲤鱼三，从小鱼无数，乘空而斗。雷雨又甚，大风发屋，至瞑乃止。
现代文：又有三条大鲤鱼，有无数条小鱼跟从着，在空中争斗，这时雷雨又特别的大，大风刮坏了房屋，到了天黑时才停止。
English: There were also three large eels, followed by countless small fish, fighting in the air. At this time, the thunderstorm was particularly strong, and the wind damaged the house. It only stopped when it got dark.

古文：鱼不复见。
现代文：鱼再也看不见了。
English: I couldn't see the fish anymore.

古文：明日，有两黑蛇，大者长丈五，小者半之，并伤腰颈，死于窦前。
现代文：第二天，有两条黑蛇，大的有一丈五尺长，小的有大的一半长。两条蛇的腰和脖子都受了伤，在洞前死了。
English: The next day, two black snakes, the big one five feet long and the small one half as long as the big one, died in front of the cave with injuries to their hips and necks.

古文：黑蛇者，周天元帝及靖帝之象，大鱼三而斗者，尉迟回、王谦、司马消难，三方起兵乱之异。
现代文：黑蛇则是周天元帝及靖帝将要死的预兆，那三条大鱼争斗是尉返回、王谦、司马消难三方起兵叛乱的异常征象。
English: The black snake is an omen that Emperor Zhou Tianyuan and Emperor Jing are about to die, and the three big fish fight is an abnormal sign of the three-way mutiny of the returning lieutenant, Wang Qian and Sima Qian.

古文：苏氏
现代文：苏氏
English: Su clan

古文：周靖帝大象中，阳武苏氏，家临河。
现代文：周靖帝大象年间，阳武有个姓苏的，家靠近河边。
English: During the elephant years of Emperor Zhou Jing, Yang Wu had a son named Su, whose home was close to the river.

古文：闻园中有犬声，往视之，见三兽，状如水牛，一黄一赤一黑者。斗久之，黑者死，黄赤者俱入于河。
现代文：一天听到园子里有狗叫的声音，就去看，看见了三个野兽，形状象水牛的样子。一个黄色的，一个红色的，一个黑色的，争斗了好长时间，结果黑的死了，那黄的和红的都跳入了河里。
English: One day he heard a dog barking in the garden, so he went and looked and saw three beasts shaped like water buffaloes, a yellow one, a red one, and a black one, and they fought for a long time. As a result, the black one died, and the yellow one and the red one both jumped into the river.

古文：黑者周所尚色也，死者灭亡之象。
现代文：黑色，是周所崇尚的颜色。死的是灭亡的预兆。
English: Black is the color revered by Zhou. Death is the harbinger of doom.

古文：后数岁，周遂灭。
现代文：几年以后，周就灭亡了。
English: A few years later, Zhou was dead.

古文：隋有天下，旗牲尚赤，戎服尚黄。
现代文：隋得到了天下以后，旗帜和祭祀的用品都崇尚红色，战服崇尚黄色。
English: After the Sui Dynasty gained control of the country, flags and sacrificial objects were red, and uniforms were yellow.

古文：突厥首领
现代文：突厥首领
English: The Turkic chiefs gathered

古文：隋开皇初，突厥阿波未叛之前，有首领数十骑，逐一兔至山。
现代文：隋朝开皇初年，突厥阿波没有叛乱以前，有十多个骑马的首领，追赶一只兔子追到山上。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty's reign, before there was a rebellion in Turkic Apo, more than ten leaders on horseback chased a rabbit up the mountain.

古文：山上有鹿，临崖告人云：你等无事触他南方圣人之国，不久当灭。
现代文：山上有一只鹿，靠在山崖旁告诉人们说： 你们不要常触犯南方圣人的国家，不久就当灭亡。 
English: There is a deer on the mountain, leaning against the cliff, telling the people: "Do not often offend the country of the southern sages, and you will soon perish."

古文：俄而国内大乱。
现代文：很快国内就发动了叛乱。
English: Soon a rebellion broke out in the country.

古文：陈后主
现代文：陈后主
English: Chen Houzhong

古文：陈后主时，秣陵有泉，深不可测，产鱼鳖甚众。
现代文：陈后主时，秣陵有一个大泉。深得不能测量。泉里出产鱼鳖特别多。
English: At the time of Queen Chen, there was a large spring in Fuling. It was immeasurably deep. The spring produced a particularly large number of fish gills.

古文：恒有声如牛，邑人惧之，不敢犯。无何，忽见牛头于岸下，里民牵而出之。
现代文：常常能听到泉里有牛叫的声音，城里的人非常害怕，谁也不敢去泉里打鱼，没有多久，就在泉的岸边忽然看见了牛头，老百姓就把它拉了出来。
English: The townspeople were so afraid that no one dared to go fishing in the spring. Not long after, a cow's head was suddenly seen on the shore of the spring, and the people pulled it out.

古文：于是争捕，其鱼乃尽。
现代文：于是人们就争着捕捞，那泉里的鱼就没有了。
English: As a result, people fought over the catch, and there were no fish left in the spring.

古文：江东旧以牛头山为天关，今牛头已获，葢示国将灭而关毁也。
现代文：江东过去把牛头山做为天关，现在牛头已经被获了，这大概是启示着国家将要灭亡而天关毁坏了。
English: In the past, Jiangdong used Niutou Mountain as a gateway to heaven, but now Niutou has been captured, which is probably a revelation that the country will perish and the gateway has been destroyed.

古文：后年，隋平陈。
现代文：两年后，隋平定了陈。
English: Two years later, the Sui conquered Chen.

古文：渭南人
现代文：渭南人
English: People from southern Anhui Province

古文：隋时，渭南有人寄宿他家。
现代文：隋朝时，渭南有个人借宿别人家里。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, there was a person in southern Fujian who stayed at someone else's home.

古文：夜中闻二豕对语，其一曰： 岁将尽，阿耶明杀我供岁，何处避之？ 
现代文：另一头猪回答说： 可以去河北的一个妇女家里躲避。 于是两头猪就一起离开了。
English: Another pig replied, "You can go to a woman's house in Hebei Province to hide," and the two pigs left together.

古文：其一答曰： 可向水北妇家， 因相随而去。天将晓，主人觅豕不得。
现代文：天刚亮，主人寻找猪却没有找到。借宿的人就将听到的话跟主人都说了。
English: Just after dawn, the owner went looking for the pig but couldn't find it. The lodger told the owner everything he heard.

古文：宿客言状，至人如其言得豕。其后蜀王秀得罪，将杀，乐平公主救之得全。
现代文：主人按照他说的地方找到了猪。那以后，四川王秀犯了罪，将被处死，被乐平公主救了，得到了保全。
English: The owner found the pig in the place he said. Since then, Wang Xiu from Sichuan has committed a crime and will be executed. He was saved and protected by Princess Leping.

古文：后数岁而帝崩，天下大乱，秀竟被诛。
现代文：以后的几年里，皇帝死了，天下发生了动乱，王秀终于被杀，那猪大概预兆他们了。
English: In the next few years, the emperor died, the world was in turmoil, Wang Xiu was finally killed, and the pig probably foreshadowed them.

古文：猫鬼
现代文：猫鬼
English: The Cat Ghost

古文：隋大业之季，猫鬼事起。
现代文：隋朝大业年间，发生了猫闹鬼的事。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, there was a cat haunting.

古文：家养老猫为厌魅，颇有神灵，递相诬告。京都及郡县被诛戮者，数千余家。
现代文：家里养的老猫变成了令人厌恶的鬼魅。猫很有神灵，传送着诬陷的告密，所以京城以及郡县里被杀的有好几千家。
English: Old cats kept at home turned into repulsive ghosts. Cats are very spiritual, transmitting framed snitches, so there are thousands of homes in the capital and counties that have been killed.

古文：蜀王秀皆坐之。隋室既亡，其事亦寝。
现代文：四川王秀也因此被定了罪，隋朝灭亡以后，猫闹鬼的事也就停止了。
English: Wang Xiu of Sichuan was also convicted for this, and after the fall of the Sui Dynasty, cat hauntings ceased.

古文：长星
现代文：长星
English: Long Star

古文：唐仪凤年中，有长星半天，出东方，三十余日乃灭。
现代文：唐朝仪凤年间，在天空中有长星占了半个天，出现在东方，三十多天才消逝了。
English: During the Yifeng period of the Tang Dynasty, there was a long star in the sky that occupied half of the sky, appeared in the east, and lasted for more than 30 days.

古文：自是吐蕃叛、匈奴反、徐敬业乱、白铁余作逆、博豫骚动、忠万强梁、契丹翻营府、突厥破赵定，麻仁节、张玄遇、王孝杰等，皆没百万众。
现代文：从这时开始就有吐蕃叛变、匈奴造反、徐敬业作乱、白铁余叛逆、博豫骚动、忠万强横、契丹越过了营府、突厥突破了越定，麻仁节、张玄遇、王孝杰等一共死了一百多万人。
English: Since then, there have been the Tubo Rebellion, the Xiongnu Rebellion, the Xu Jingye Rebellion, the Baitie Rebellion, the Bo-Yuan Disturbance, the Zhong Wan Qiang Rebellion, the Khitan Invasion of Yingfu, the Turkic Invasion of Yeding, the Ma-Ren Festival, the Zhang Xuan Encounter, the Wang Xiaojie, etc. A total of more than one million people have died.

古文：三十余年，兵革不息。
现代文：三十多年，战争没有停止。
English: For more than three decades, the war has not stopped.

古文：大乌
现代文：大乌
English: The Great Wall

古文：唐调露之后，有乌大如鸠，色如乌雀，飞若风声，千万为队。时人谓之鵽雀，亦名突厥雀。
现代文：唐朝调露年间以后，有乌鸦象鸠鸟那样大，颜色象麻雀。飞起来好象是刮风的声音，成千上万的排成队，当时的人叫它是厥雀，又叫它突厥雀。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, there was a crow as big as an ostrich, the color of which was like a sparrow. When it flew, it was like the sound of a wind blowing, and thousands of people lined up. People at the time called it the Turk's sparrow and the Turk's sparrow.

古文：若来，突厥必至。
现代文：如果是大鸟飞来，那么突厥也一定到了。
English: If a large bird flies in, then a Turk must have arrived.

古文：后则无差。
现代文：后来果然没有错。
English: Later it turned out to be true.

古文：虾蟆
现代文：虾蟆
English: Prawn casserole

古文：唐高宗尝患头风，召名医于四方，终不能疗。
现代文：唐高宗曾经得了头风病。到各地寻找名医，但最终没能治好。
English: Tang Gaozong once had a head cold. He went to various places to look for a famous doctor, but in the end he could not be cured.

古文：宫人有自陈世业医术，请修药饵者，帝许之。
现代文：宫中有个人说是世代从事行医的职业，请求炼治药物，皇帝答应了他的要求。
English: A person in the imperial court said that he had been engaged in the medical profession for generations, and requested to refine the medicine. The emperor agreed to his request.

古文：初穿地置药炉，忽有一虾蟆跃出，色如黄金，背有朱书武字。
现代文：开始挖地安置炼药的炉子，忽然有一个蛤蟆从地里跳了出来，颜色好象黄色的金子一样，背上写有红色的 武 字。
English: They began to dig the ground to place the furnace for refining, and suddenly a toad jumped out of the ground, the color of which was like yellow gold, with the word "Wu" written in red on its back.

古文：宫人不敢匿，奏之。
现代文：宫人不敢隐瞒，就把这件事向皇帝禀告了。
English: The courtiers did not dare to conceal it, so they reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：帝颇惊异，遽命放于苑池。
现代文：皇帝很是惊讶奇怪，立刻命人把它放到了园林的池子里。
English: The emperor was very surprised and surprised, and immediately ordered someone to put it in the garden pool.

古文：宫人别穿地，得虾蟆如初。
现代文：宫人又在别的地方挖地，结果又挖得蛤蟆，就象开始挖出来的那个一样。
English: The courtiers went on digging in another place, and the result was another hole, just like the one they had started with.

古文：帝深以为不祥，命杀之。
现代文：皇帝认为这是不吉祥的征兆，就让人把它杀了。
English: The emperor thought it was an unlucky omen and had it killed.

古文：其夕，宫人暴卒。后武后竟革命。
现代文：那天晚上，宫人突然死了，后来武后竟然居尊夺得帝位。
English: That night, the palace attendant suddenly died, and later Empress Wu actually won the imperial throne.

古文：幽州人
现代文：幽州人
English: Yuzhou people

古文：天授中，则天好改新字，又多忌讳。
现代文：天授年间，武则天有喜欢改字造新字的习惯，但又多有忌讳。
English: During the years of Tianju, Wu Zetian had a habit of liking to change words to make new words, but there were many taboos.

古文：有幽州人寻如意，上封云： 国字中或，或乱天象。
现代文：有个幽州人叫寻如意的，呈上了一封信说：  国 字里面是个 或 ，而 或 是天下大乱的象征。
English: A man from Yuzhou asked for help and submitted a letter saying: "In the national character, there is an "or," but "or" is a symbol of chaos in the world."

古文：请□中安武以镇之。 
现代文：请在 口 里写上 武 字来镇住它。 
English: Please calm it down by writing the word "Wu" in its mouth.

古文：则天大喜，下制即依。
现代文：则天看后非常高兴，就下令按照要求造字。
English: He was very happy when he saw it, and ordered the letters to be made according to the requirements.

古文：月余，有上封者云： 武退在□中，与囚字无异。不祥之甚。 
现代文：过了一个多月的时间，又有一个人呈上一封书信说：  武 退在 口 里，这和 囚 字没有什么两样，这是非常不吉祥的。 
English: After more than a month, another person submitted a letter saying: "Wu Tie in the mouth, this is no different from the word "prisoner," this is very inauspicious.

古文：则天愕然，遽追制，改令中为八方字。
现代文：则天看后，非常惊讶。立刻追回了命令，改令 口 中为八方那个字。
English: He was very surprised when he saw it. He immediately retrieved the order and changed it to the word "Happo."

古文：后孝和即位，果幽则天于上阳宫。
现代文：后来孝和做了皇帝，果然在上阳宫囚禁了武则天。
English: Later, when Xiaohe became emperor, he imprisoned Wu Zetian in Shangyang Palace.

古文：默啜
现代文：默啜
English: Silently

古文：唐长安二年九月一日，太阳蚀尽，默啜贼到并州。
现代文：唐朝长安二年的九月一日，太阳全被遮蔽了。这天默啜贼就到了并州。
English: On the first day of September in the second year of Chang'an of the Tang Dynasty, the sun was completely obscured. On this day, the silent thief arrived in Bianzhou.

古文：至十五日，夜月蚀尽，贼并退尽。
现代文：到了十五日这天晚上月亮也全被遮蔽了。
English: On the evening of the fifteenth day, the moon was completely eclipsed.

古文：俗谚云：枣子塞鼻孔。
现代文：而默啜贼又全都退了出去。
English: And the silent thieves have all retreated.

古文：悬楼阁却种。又云：蝉鸣蛁蟟唤，黍种糕糜断。
现代文：世上流传的谚语说： 如果枣子塞进鼻孔，那么种子就要悬挂在楼阁上推迟耕种。 又说： 如果蝉鸣叫，种植黍米就不能丰收。 
English: There is a proverb in the world that says: If the jujube is stuffed into the nostrils, then the seeds should be hung in the attic to delay cultivation, and: If the cicada chirps, then the cultivation of glutinous rice will not yield a good harvest.

古文：又谚云：春雨甲子，赤地千里；夏雨甲子，乘船入市；秋雨甲子，禾头生耳，鹊巢下近地，其年大水。
现代文：又有谚语说： 春天甲子日下雨，就要千里大旱；夏天甲子日下雨就会发大水；秋天甲子日下雨，庄稼的头上就会长出枝杈；天鹅在距离地面很近的地方筑窝，那年就要发大水。
English: There is also a proverb that says: If it rains on the first day of spring, there will be a great drought; if it rains on the first day of summer, there will be a lot of water; if it rains on the first day of autumn, branches will grow on the heads of crops; if a swan builds a nest very close to the ground, there will be a lot of water that year.

古文：张易之
现代文：张易之
English: Zhang Yizhi

古文：唐长安四年十月，阴雨雪，一百余日不见星。
现代文：唐朝长安四年十月的时候，天气阴暗雨雪连绵，一百多天看不见星星。
English: In October of the fourth year of the Tang Dynasty in Chang'an, the weather was gloomy with continuous rain and snow, and the stars could not be seen for more than a hundred days.

古文：正月诛逆贼张易之、昌宗等，则天废。
现代文：到了正月杀了逆贼张易之、昌宗等人，废除了武则天。
English: In the first month of the year, he killed the traitors Zhang Yizhi, Chang Zong and others, and abolished Wu Zetian.

古文：孙俭
现代文：孙俭
English: Sun Jian

古文：唐幽州都督孙俭之入贼也，薛讷与之书曰： 季月不可入贼，大凶也。 
现代文：唐朝幽州都督孙俭发兵讨贼，薛讷给他一封信说： 月末不可以发兵，这是最不吉利的。 
English: Sun Jian, the governor of Yuzhou in the Tang Dynasty, sent soldiers to catch the thief. Xue Ne wrote him a letter saying, "You can't send troops at the end of the month. This is most unlucky."

古文：俭曰： 六月宣王北伐，讷何所知？有敢言兵出不复者斩。 
现代文：孙俭说： 六月宣王北伐，薛讷怎么知道，有敢再说不发兵的就杀了他。 
English: Sun Jian said, "Xuan Wang led the Northern Expedition in June. How did Xue Ne know? If he dared to say that he would not send troops, she would kill him.

古文：出军之日，有白虹垂头于军门。
现代文：军队出发的那天，有一道白虹在军门前，垂下了头。
English: On the day of the army's departure, there was a white rainbow in front of the army gate, hanging its head.

古文：其夜，大星落于营内。兵将无敢言者。
现代文：那以后，又有大星星坠落在军营内，但兵将没有敢说的。
English: After that, another large star fell on the military camp, but the soldiers did not dare to say anything.

古文：军行后，幽州界内鸦乌鸱鸢等并失，皆随军去。
现代文：军队出发后，幽州境内的乌鸦和鸱鸢鸟全都没有了，都跟着军队去了。
English: After the departure of the army, all the crows and ostriches in Yuzhou were gone, and they all followed the army.

古文：经二旬而军没，乌鸢食其肉焉。太白昼见
现代文：过了二十天军队就被消灭了，而乌鸦和鸱鸢鸟都来吃他们的肉。太白昼见
English: After twenty days the army was destroyed, and the crows and the storks came to eat their flesh.

古文：唐延和初七日，太白昼见经天。
现代文：唐朝延和年初正月七日，太白星显示在白天。
English: The Tang Dynasty and the seventh day of the first month of the year, the white star appears in the daytime.

古文：其月，太上皇逊帝位。
现代文：那日，太上皇辞让帝位。
English: On that day, the Emperor abdicated the throne.

古文：此易主之应也。
现代文：这是改换国主的预兆啊！
English: This is a harbinger of a change of sovereign!

古文：至八月九月，太白又昼见，改元先天。
现代文：到了八月九月，太白又在白天看见了。国改年号 先天 。
English: In August and September, Taibai saw it again during the day.

古文：至二月七日。太上皇废，诛中书令萧至忠、侍中岑羲，流崔湜，寻诛之。
现代文：明年二月七日，太上皇被废除，杀了中书令萧至忠，侍中岑羲。流放了崔湜，不久也把崔湜杀了。
English: On February 7th of the next year, Emperor Taejong was abolished, and Xiao Zhizhong, the second-in-command, was killed. Cui Yao was exiled, and Cui Yao was killed soon after.

