古文：太宗明皇帝中泰始三年
现代文：起，止，一共四年。宋明帝泰始三年
English: a total of four years. Song Ming Dynasty lasted for three years.

古文：春，正月，张永等弃城夜遁。
现代文：春季正月，张永等放弃下城，连夜逃走。
English: In the first month of spring, Zhang Yong and others abandoned the city and fled overnight.

古文：会天大雪，泗水冰合，永等弃船步走，士卒冻死者太半，手足断者什七八。
现代文：正赶上天下大雪，泗水冰封，船只不能移动，张永命部队放弃船只，徒步南奔。士卒冻死的有一大半，手脚折断的有十分之七八。
English: It was just in time for the world's heavy snows, the floodwaters were frozen, the ships could not move, and Zhang Yongsheng's troops abandoned the ships and ran south on foot. More than half of the soldiers froze to death, and seventy-eight out of ten had their hands and feet broken.

古文：尉元邀其前，薛安都乘其后，大破永等于吕梁之东，死者以万数，枕尸六十馀里，委弃军资器械不可胜计；永足指亦堕，与沈攸之仅以身免，梁、南秦二州刺史垣恭祖等为魏所虏。
现代文：尉元绕到前面堵截，薛安都在后面追杀，在吕梁的东面大败张永军，被杀者数以万计，六十里之遥，尸体重叠，抛弃的军用物资及武器，更无法计数。张永的脚趾也被冻掉，与沈攸之仅仅逃出性命。梁、南秦二州刺史垣恭祖等被北魏俘虏。
English: Lieutenant Yuan went around to the front to block and cut off, Xue An chased and killed behind, and defeated Zhang Yong's army in the east of Luliang, with tens of thousands of people killed, sixty miles away, dead bodies piled up, abandoned military supplies and weapons, and more incalculable. Zhang Yong's toes were also frozen, and he and Shen Youzhi only escaped with their lives. Liang, the Southern Qin two-state assassin, Gaki Gongzu, and others were captured by the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：上闻之，召蔡兴宗，以败书示之，曰： 我愧卿甚！ 
现代文：明帝得到消息，召见尚书左仆射蔡兴宗，把大军战败的报告拿给他看，说： 在你面前，我深感惭愧。 
English: When Emperor Ming received the news, he summoned Cai Xingzong, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, and showed him the report of the great army's defeat, saying, "In front of you, I feel deeply ashamed.

古文：永降号左将军；攸之免官，以贞阳公领职还屯淮阴。
现代文：贬张永为左将军，免除沈攸之的官职，命他以贞阳公的名义兼任现职，返回淮阴驻扎。
English: He demoted Zhang Yong to General of the Left, relieved Shen Youcun of his post, and ordered him to serve concurrently in the name of Zhengyang and return to Huaiyin.

古文：由是失淮北四州及豫州淮西之地。
现代文：从此，刘宋失去淮河以北四州和豫州的淮西地区。
English: From then on, Liu Song lost the four states north of the Huai River and the western Huai region of Yuzhou.

古文：裴子野论曰：昔齐桓矜于葵丘而九国叛，曹公不礼张松而天下分。
现代文：裴子野论曰：从前，齐桓公在葵丘会盟时态度傲慢，九个国家同时背叛。
English: Peizhino said: In the past, Qi Huan's attitude was arrogant when he was in the Kwai Chiu League, and nine countries betrayed him at the same time.

古文：一失毫厘，其差远矣。
现代文：曹操对张松没有礼遇，竟使中国三分天下。一点点疏忽，造成如此重大的差错。
English: Cao Cao did not treat Zhang Song with courtesy, and he ended up dividing China into three parts. A little bit of negligence caused such a big mistake.

古文：太宗之初，威令所被，不满百里，卒有离心，士无固色，而能开诚心，布款实，莫不感恩服德，致命效死，故西摧北荡，寓内褰开。
现代文：明帝刚刚登基之时，统治的地域不超过百里，士卒有离散之心，士大夫情绪也不稳定。但他能够敞开诚心，吐露真言，人们没有不感念他的恩德的，为他效忠，誓死不渝。所以才能西讨北征，平定叛乱。
English: When Emperor Ming first ascended to the throne, he ruled over an area of no more than a hundred miles. The nobles were disunited, and the officials were unstable. However, he was able to open his heart and tell the truth, and people did not fail to be moved by his kindness, to be loyal to him, and to pledge their lives to him. This is why he was able to march westward and quell the rebellion.

古文：既而六军献捷，方隅束手，天子欲贾其馀威，师出无名，长淮以北，倏忽为戎。惜乎！
现代文：不久，各地捷报频传，割据势力束手就降。就在这时，明帝打算显示余威，而师出无名，以致淮河以北的土地，霎时间落入北魏之手，实在可惜呀！
English: Before long, reports of victories were coming in from all over the country, and the divided forces were ready to surrender. At this time, Emperor Ming planned to show his remaining strength, but the division was unknown, so that the land north of the Huaihe River fell into the hands of the Northern Wei Dynasty in a short time. What a pity!

古文：若以向之虚怀，不骄不伐，则三叛奚为而起哉！
现代文：如果能像当初那样，虚怀若谷，不骄不躁，不夸耀自己功劳，那么三个叛贼，何至起兵对抗！
English: If you can, as you did at the beginning, be modest, not arrogant, not impatient, and not boast of your own merits, then the three traitors, what a confrontation!

古文：高祖虮虱生介胄，经启疆场；后之子孙，日蹙百里。
现代文：武帝刘裕创业时，盔甲上都生虮虱，辛苦开辟疆域，可是，后代子孙，每天几乎都要丧失百里之地。
English: When Emperor Wu Liu Yu started his business, there were holes in the armor, and he worked hard to open up the territory. However, the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of

古文：播获堂构，岂云易哉！
现代文：要保住祖先的基业，谈何容易！
English: How easy it is to talk about preserving the heritage of our ancestors!

古文：魏尉元以彭城兵荒之后，公私困竭，请发冀、相、济、兗四州粟，取张永所弃船九百艘，沿清运载，以赈新民；魏朝从之。
现代文：北魏尉元因彭城兵荒马乱之后，无论官府还是民间，财力全都枯竭，所以特向朝廷请求拨发冀、湘、济、兖四州的库存粮食，用张永所抛弃的九百艘船只，顺清河运载，赈济新并入版图的居民，北魏朝廷批准了。
English: After the Pengcheng War in the Northern Wei Dynasty, the financial resources of both the government and the people were all exhausted. Therefore, the Northern Wei Dynasty specifically requested the imperial court to allocate the grain stocks of the four states of Hebei, Hunan, Jiangxi and Fujian, and use the nine hundred ships abandoned by Zhang Yong to transport it along the Shunqing River, and provide assistance to the newly incorporated residents of the territory. The Northern Wei Dynasty approved.

古文：魏东平王道符反于长安，杀副将驸马都尉万古真等；丙午，司空和其奴等将殿中兵讨之。
现代文：北魏东平王拓跋道符在长安叛变，诛杀副将驸马都尉万古真等。丙午，司空和其奴等率宫廷禁卫军讨伐他。
English: The Northern Wei Dongping King Tuoba Daofu rebelled in Chang'an and killed the vice-commander of the imperial horse, Captain Wan Guzhen. In the afternoon, Siku and his slaves led the palace guards to fight him.

古文：丁未，道符司马段太阳攻道符，斩之；以安西将军陆真为长安镇将以抚之。
现代文：丁未，拓跋道符的司马段太阳攻击拓跋道符，并将其斩首。任命安西将军陆真为长安镇将，安抚军民。
English: Ding Wei, Tuoba Daofu's Sima Duan Sun attacked Tuoba Daofu and beheaded him. Anxi General Lu Zhen was appointed as the commander of Chang'an Town to appease the military and the people.

古文：道符，翰之子也。
现代文：拓跋道符是拓跋翰的儿子。
English: Tuoba Daofu is the son of Tuoba Han.

古文：闰月，魏以顿丘王李峻为太宰。
现代文：闰正月，北魏任命顿丘王李峻为太宰。
English: In the leap month, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Dongqiu King Li Jun as Dazai.

古文：沈文秀、崔道固为土人所攻，遣使乞降于魏，且请兵自救。
现代文：沈文秀、崔道固受到当地民军围攻，派使节前往北魏，请求归降，并请求派兵解救。
English: Shen Wenxiu and Cui Daogu were besieged by the local people's army and sent envoys to the Northern Wei Dynasty to request their surrender and to request the dispatch of troops to rescue them.

古文：二月，魏西河公石自悬瓠引兵攻汝阴太守张超，不克；退屯陈项，议还长社，待秋击之。
现代文：二月，北魏西河公拓跋石自悬瓠率军攻击汝阴太守张超，没有攻克。于是退回陈项驻扎，打算撤到长社，等到秋季再进攻。
English: In February, Northern Wei's West River Gong Tuobaishi led the army to attack Ruyin Taishou Zhang Chao from the suspension tower, but failed to conquer. Therefore, he returned to Chenxiang to stay, intending to withdraw to Changsha, and wait until the autumn to attack.

古文：郑羲曰： 张超蚁聚穷命，粮食已尽，不降当走，可翘足而待也。
现代文：郑羲说： 张超像一群蚂蚁聚在一起走投无路，粮食已经用尽。不是投降，就是逃走，不久便可看到结果。
English: Zheng Wei said: Zhang Chao is like a group of ants gathered together and cornered, the grain has been exhausted. Either surrender or escape, you will soon see the results.

古文：今弃之远去，超修城浚隍，积薪储谷，更来恐难图矣。 
现代文：现在如果放弃他而远远离去，张超将加固城墙，挖深壕沟，储备粮草，再来时恐怕更难对付。 
English: If he abandons him now and leaves far away, Zhang Chao will strengthen the city walls, dig deep trenches, and stockpile grain and grass. It will be more difficult to deal with when he returns.

古文：石不从，遂还长社。
现代文：拓跋石不听，于是，返回长社。
English: Tuobaishi did not listen, so he returned to Chosha.

古文：初，寻阳既平，帝遣沈文秀弟文炳以诏书谕文秀，又遣辅国将军刘怀珍将马步三千人与文炳偕行。
现代文：当初，寻阳政权平定后，明帝派遣沈文秀的弟弟沈文炳，携带诏书去招抚沈文秀，又派遣辅国将军刘怀珍率步骑兵三千人，与沈文炳同行。
English: At first, after the Quyang regime was pacified, the Ming Emperor sent Shen Wenshu's younger brother Shen Wenshu, carrying an imperial edict to entice Shen Wenshu, and sent the auxiliary general Liu Huaizhen with 3,000 infantry and cavalry to accompany Shen Wenshu.

古文：未至，值张永等败退，怀珍还镇山阳。
现代文：还没到达，正赶上张永攻击彭城的大军溃败，刘怀珍退回山阳镇守。
English: Not yet arrived, just in time for Zhang Yong's attack on Pengcheng's army to be defeated, Liu Huizhen returned to Sanyang to defend the town.

古文：文秀攻青州刺史明僧暠，帝使怀珍帅龙骧将军王广之将五百骑、步卒二千人浮海救之，至东海，僧暠已退保东莱。
现代文：沈文秀攻击青州刺史明僧，明帝命刘怀珍指挥龙骧将军王广之率骑兵五百人、步兵两千人，渡海前往救援。刘怀珍进抵东海，明僧已退守东莱。
English: Shen Wenshu attacked Shih Ming Monk in Qingzhou, Ming Emperor ordered Liu Huai Zhen to lead 500 cavalry and 2,000 infantry under the command of Longjing General Wang Guang to cross the sea for rescue. Liu Huai Zhen entered the East China Sea, and Ming Monk had retreated to Donglai.

古文：怀珍进据朐城，众心凶惧，欲且保郁洲，怀珍曰： 文秀欲以青州归索虏，计齐之士民，安肯甘心左衽邪！
现代文：刘怀珍进入朐城据守，军心十分不安，有人主张退保郁州，刘怀珍说： 沈文秀打算以青州归附魏虏，古齐国的士民，怎么甘心让衣襟开到左边？
English: Liu Huai Zhen entered the defense of Lucheng, the military spirit was very uneasy, some people advocated the withdrawal of Iuzhou, Liu Huai Zhen said: Shen Wenshu intends to attach Qingzhou to Wei Krup, the scholar-citizens of Guqi country, how can they be willing to let the collar open to the left?

古文：今扬兵直前，宣布威德，诸城可飞书而下。奈何守此不进，自为沮挠乎！ 
现代文：当今应该驱兵直入，宣扬皇帝的恩德和威严，各地城池，送去一封书信，便可收复，何必守在这里，不肯出动，自己阻挠自己。 
English: Today, we should drive the troops straight in, proclaim the emperor's benevolence and majesty to all parts of the country, send a letter, and it can be recovered. Why should we stay here, refuse to go out, and obstruct ourselves?

古文：遂进，至黔陬，文秀所署高密、平昌二郡太守弃城走。
现代文：于是继续前进，抵达黔陬。沈文秀任命的高密、平昌二郡太守弃城逃跑。
English: Therefore, he continued to advance and arrived in Handan. Gao Mi, who was appointed by Shen Wenshu, abandoned the city and ran away.

古文：怀珍送致文炳，达朝廷意，文秀犹不降；百姓闻怀珍至，皆喜。
现代文：刘怀珍把沈文炳送到东阳，传达朝廷旨意，沈文秀还是拒绝投降。但百姓听到官军将领刘怀珍到来，皆大欢喜。
English: Liu Huai Zhen sent Shen Wenzhou to Dongyang to convey the will of the imperial court, but Shen Wenshu still refused to surrender. However, the people were very happy to hear that Liu Huai Zhen, the general of the government army, had arrived.

古文：文秀所署长广太守刘桃根将数千人戍不其城。
现代文：沈文秀任命的长广太守刘桃根率数千人，驻防不其城。
English: The Changguang governor Liu Taogen, who was appointed by Shen Wenxiu, led thousands of troops and garrisoned the city.

古文：怀珍军于洋水，众谓且宜坚壁伺隙，怀珍曰： 今众少粮竭，悬军深入，正当以精兵速进，掩其不备耳。 
现代文：刘怀珍率军驻扎洋水，众将领都主张筑城备战，刘怀珍说： 现在我们人少，粮草又不足，孤军深入敌境，正应当命精锐部队迅速进攻，趁他们不备进行突袭。 
English: Liu Huai Zhen led the army stationed in Yangshui, and all the generals advocated building a city to prepare for war. Liu Huai Zhen said: Now we have fewer people, insufficient grain and grass, and the lone army is deep into the enemy territory. We should order the elite troops to attack quickly and take advantage of them to make a surprise attack.

古文：乃遣王广之将百骑袭不其城，拔之。
现代文：于是派王广之率一百名骑兵，袭击不其城并攻克。
English: So Wang Guangzhi sent a hundred horsemen to attack and conquer the city.

古文：文秀闻诸城皆败，乃遣使请降；帝复以为青州刺史。
现代文：沈文秀得到各城全部失败的消息，于是立即派使节请求投降，明帝任命沈文秀仍为青州刺史。
English: Shen Wenxiu received the news that all the cities had failed, so he immediately sent envoys to request surrender. Emperor Ming appointed Shen Wenxiu to write the history of Qingzhou.

古文：崔道固亦请降，复以为冀州刺史。
现代文：崔道固也请求投降，明帝也任命他为冀州刺史。
English: Cui Daogu also requested to surrender, and Emperor Ming also appointed him as the governor of Jizhou.

古文：怀珍引还。
现代文：刘怀珍随即撤退。
English: Liu Huizhen immediately withdrew.

古文：魏济阴王小新成卒。
现代文：北魏济阴王拓跋小新成去世。
English: Tuoba Xiaoxincheng, the king of Northern Wei and Jilin, passed away.

古文：沈攸之之自彭城还也，留长水校尉王玄载守下邳，积射将军沈韶守宿豫，睢陵、淮阳皆留兵戌之。
现代文：沈攸之从彭城败回时留下长水校尉王玄载驻防下邳，积射将军沈韶驻防宿豫，睢陵、淮阳也都留下部队驻守。
English: When Shen Youzhi was defeated and returned from Pengcheng, he left Changshui Lieutenant Wang Xuanzhao stationed in Xiamen, General Shen Yu stationed in Suiyuan, and troops stationed in Fuling and Huaiyang.

古文：玄载，玄谟之从弟也。
现代文：王玄载是王玄谟的堂弟。
English: Wang Xuanrui is a cousin of Wang Xuanmu.

古文：时东平太守申纂守无盐，幽州刺史刘休宾守梁邹，并州刺史清河房崇吉守升城，辅国将军清河张谠守团城，及兗州刺史王整、兰陵太守桓忻、肥城、糜沟、垣苗等戍皆不附于魏。
现代文：当时，东平太守申纂驻守无盐，幽州刺史刘休宾驻守梁邹，并州刺史清河人房崇吉驻守升城，辅国将军、清河人张谠驻守团城，交州刺史王整、兰陵太守桓忻，还有肥城、糜沟、垣苗等地的驻军，都拒绝投靠北魏。
English: At that time, the governor of Dongping Province, Shen Zuo, was stationed at Wuxi, the governor of Yuzhou Province, Liu Xubing, was stationed at Liangyao, the governor of Qinghe Province, Renfang Chongji, was stationed at Shengcheng, the general of Fu Guo Province, the governor of Qinghe Province, Zhang Qi, was stationed at Tuancheng, the governor of Jiaozhou Province, Wang Jie, the governor of Lanling Province, Huan Qi, as well as the garrisons in Feicheng, Fengtou and Kakimiao, all refused to join the Northern Wei.

古文：休宾，乘民之兄子也。
现代文：刘休宾是刘乘民的侄儿。
English: Liu Xubing is Liu Xingmin's nephew.

古文：魏遣平东将军长孙陵等将兵赴青州，征南大将军慕容白曜将骑五万为之继援。
现代文：北魏派平东将军长孙陵等领兵，进攻青州，征南大将军慕容白曜率领骑兵五万人，继续进发作为后援。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty sent General Pingdong, General Sun Ling and other leaders to attack Qingzhou, and General Murong Peiyou, who led 50,000 cavalry, continued to advance as backup.

古文：白曜，燕太祖之玄孙也。
现代文：慕容白曜是前燕国燕太祖的玄孙。
English: Murong Baiyou is the great-great-grandson of the great-great-grandfather of the former Yan.

古文：白曜至无盐，欲攻之。将佐皆以为攻具未备，不宜遽进。
现代文：慕容白曜抵达崐无盐，想要攻城，部属将领及僚佐都认为攻城的器具还不完备，不宜马上进攻。
English: When Murong Baiyang arrived at Zhouzhuang and wanted to attack the city, his subordinate generals and advisors thought that the equipment for attacking the city was not complete and it was not appropriate to attack immediately.

古文：左司马范阳郦范曰： 今轻军远袭，深入敌境，岂宜淹缓！
现代文：左司马范阳人郦范说： 我们用轻装部队远途偷袭，深入敌人领土，怎么能作久留的打算！
English: Zuo Sima Fan Yangren Gong Fan said: We use light-armed troops to make long-distance sneak attacks and go deep into enemy territory, how can we make plans to stay for a long time!

古文：且申纂必谓我军来速，不暇攻围，将不为备；今若出其不意，可一鼓而克。 
现代文：而且申纂一定认为我们来得太快，还来不及围攻，所以没有戒备，现在如果出其不意，可以一战而胜。 
English: Moreover, the censors must have thought that we had come too quickly, too late for a siege, so there was no warning, and now, if we were taken by surprise, we could win the battle.

古文：白曜曰： 司马策是也。 
现代文：慕容白曜说： 司马的主意很对。 
English: Murong Baiyou said: Sima's idea is right.

古文：乃引兵伪退。
现代文：于是率兵假装撤退。
English: So he led his troops in a pretended retreat.

古文：申纂不复设备，白曜夜中部分，三月，甲寅旦，攻城，食时，克之；纂走，追擒，杀之。
现代文：申纂果然不再戒备，慕容白曜在午夜时分进行布署。三月，甲寅，凌晨，向无盐城进攻，早饭时，攻破。申纂逃走，被追捕生擒并斩首。
English: In March, in the early hours of the morning, he attacked Wuxi City and defeated it at breakfast time. Shen Cong fled and was chased down and beheaded.

古文：白曜欲尽以无盐人为军赏，郦范曰： 齐，形胜之地，宜远为经略。
现代文：慕容白曜打算将无盐全城人一律当作战利品赏赐部下，郦范说： 古齐国地区，形势重要，应当有长远经营计划。
English: Murong Baiyou intends to reward his subordinates with all the salt-free people in the city as a war prize, Fan said: The situation in Guqi Province is important, and there should be a long-term business plan.

古文：今王师始入其境，人心未洽，连城相望，咸有拒守之志，苟非以德信怀之，未易平也。 
现代文：而今，王师刚刚入境，人心还没有归顺，城池相连，互相观望，都有固守不降的志向，假如不以恩德和信誉安抚他们，不容易平定啊。 
English: But now, Wang Shi has just entered the country, the hearts of the people have not yet been converted, the cities are connected, they are watching each other, and they all have the ambition to stick to it. If we do not appease them with grace and credibility, it will not be easy to pacify them.

古文：白曜曰： 善！ 
现代文：慕容白曜说： 好！ 
English: Murong Baiyou said: Good!

古文：皆免之。
现代文：便把百姓一律赦免。
English: He pardoned the generals.

古文：白曜将攻肥城，郦范曰： 肥城虽小，攻之引日，胜之不能益军势，不胜足以挫军威。
现代文：慕容白曜将要进攻肥城，郦范说： 肥城虽然很小，但攻打起来，很费时间，胜了他不能增加我们的声势，失败则有损于我们的军威。
English: Murong Baiyao is going to attack Fucheng, Yu Fan said: Although Fucheng is small, it is very time-consuming to attack. If we win, it will not increase our momentum, and if we lose, it will damage our military power.

古文：彼见无盐之破，死伤涂地，不敢不惧；若飞书告谕，纵使不降，亦当逃散。 
现代文：他们看到无盐城被攻陷的惨状，遍地死伤，也不会不感到恐惧，如果送去一封警告信，他们即使不投降，也会四处逃散。 
English: They would not see the devastation of the fall of the Saltless City, the dead and wounded everywhere, without feeling fear. If a warning letter was sent, they would flee everywhere, even if they did not surrender.

古文：白曜从之，肥城果溃，获粟三十万斛。
现代文：慕容白曜同意，肥城果然崩溃，北魏大军缴获粟米三十万斛。
English: Murong Baiyou agreed, Hecheng collapsed, and the Northern Wei army seized 300,000 catties of corn.

古文：白曜谓范曰： 此行得卿，三齐不足定也。 
现代文：慕容白曜对郦范说： 这次出征，有你出谋，三齐不怕不能平定。 
English: Murong Baiyou said to Fan Fan, "This time, if you come up with a plan, I'm not afraid that we won't be able to settle the conflict.

古文：遂取垣苗、麋沟二戍。
现代文：于是夺取垣苗、糜沟二城。
English: As a result, two towns, Kakimei and Shingou, were captured.

古文：一旬中连拔四城，威震齐土。
现代文：十天之内，一连攻克四城，声威震撼齐地。
English: Within ten days, they conquered four cities in a row, and their reputation was astounding.

古文：丙子，以尚书左仆射蔡兴守为郢州刺史。
现代文：丙子，明帝任命尚书左仆射蔡兴宗为郢州刺史。
English: In response, Emperor Ming appointed Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Cai Xingzong, as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：房崇吉守升城，胜兵者不过七百人。
现代文：刘宋房崇吉坚守升城，能作战的士卒不过七百人。
English: Liu Songfang and Chongji held on to Shengcheng, but only seven hundred soldiers were able to fight.

古文：慕容白曜筑长围以攻之，自二月至于夏四月，乃克之。
现代文：北魏慕容白曜兴筑长墙，发动攻击，自二月攻到夏季四月，才攻陷城池。
English: The Northern Wei Murong Baiyang built a long wall and launched an attack. It took from February to April in the summer to capture the city.

古文：白曜忿其不降，欲尽坑城中人，参军事昌黎韩麒麟谏曰： 今勍敌在前而坑其民，自此以东，诸城人自为守，不可克也。
现代文：慕容白曜对这么一个小城誓死不投降，大为忿怒，打算把城内百姓全部活埋，参军事昌黎人韩麒麟劝阻说： 眼下强敌在前，而坑杀他们的百姓，恐怕从此向东，各个城的人都会坚守，无法攻克。
English: Murong Baiyou swore never to surrender to such a small city. He was very angry and planned to bury all the people in the city alive. Han Qilin, a Changli man who participated in the military, dissuaded him by saying: At the moment, a strong enemy is in front, and if they kill their people, I am afraid that from now on, people in every city will stick to the east and will not be able to conquer.

古文：师老粮尽，外寇乘之，此危道也。 
现代文：军队出征太久，粮食吃尽，外面贼寇乘机进攻，这可是危险之道。 
English: The army has been away on campaign for too long, the grain is exhausted, and outside thieves and robbers are taking advantage of the opportunity to attack. This is a dangerous path.

古文：白曜乃慰抚其民，各使复业。
现代文：慕容白曜于是对百姓慰问安抚，使他们恢复正常生活。
English: Murong Baiyou then consoled and pacified the people, so that they could resume their normal lives.

古文：崇吉脱身走。崇吉母傅氏，申纂妻贾氏，与济州刺史卢度世有中表亲，然已疏远。
现代文：房崇吉只身逃亡，他的母亲傅氏及申纂的妻子贾氏，与北魏济州刺史卢度世原是表亲，不过关系早已疏远。
English: Fang Chongji fled alone. His mother Fu and the wife of Shen Zuo, Jia, were cousins with the Northern Wei governor of Jizhou, Sisulu, but the relationship had long been estranged.

古文：及为魏所虏，度世奉事甚恭，赡给优厚。
现代文：等到傅、贾两人被北魏军俘虏，卢度世对待她们十分恭敬，生活供给也非常优厚。
English: When Fu and Jia were captured by the Northern Wei army, Lu Duxie treated them with great respect and provided them with a very generous living allowance.

古文：度世闺门之内，和而有礼。虽世有屯夷，家有贫富，百口怡怡，丰俭同之。
现代文：卢度世家门之内，详和而有礼节，虽然时势有时动乱有时安定，财产有的贫穷有的富有，但百口之家，心情欢快，苦乐共同承担。
English: Within the Ludo family, there is peace and courtesy. Although the current situation is sometimes turbulent and sometimes stable, the property is sometimes poor and sometimes rich, but the family of a hundred people, the mood is cheerful, and the bitterness and joy are shared.

古文：崔道固闭门抿魏。
现代文：崔道固关闭城门抗拒北魏军。
English: Cui Daogu closed the city gate to resist the Northern Wei army.

古文：沈文秀遣使迎降于魏，请兵援接。
现代文：沈文秀却派人向北魏投降，请求派兵增援，慕容白曜打算派兵前往。
English: Shen Wenshu, however, sent someone to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty and requested reinforcements. Murong Baiyou planned to send troops.

古文：白曜欲遣兵赴之，郦范曰： 文秀室家坟墓皆在江南，拥兵数万，城固甲坚。强则拒战，屈则遁去。我师未逼其城，无朝夕之急，何所畏忌，而遽求援军！
现代文：郦范说： 沈文秀的家室和祖先坟墓，都在长江以南，掌握重兵数万，城墙坚固，武器精良，强大时挺身作战，衰弱时起身逃走，我军并未逼到他的城下，他也没有燃眉之急，有什么可怕的，而请求我们派兵增援？
English: Yu Fan said: Shen Wenxiu's family home and ancestral tombs are all south of the Yangtze River. He has tens of thousands of soldiers under his command. The city walls are strong and the weapons are sophisticated. When he is strong, he fights bravely, and when he is weak, he gets up and runs away. Our army has not reached his city, and he is not in a hurry. What is so terrible about asking us to send reinforcements?

古文：且观其使者，视下而色愧，语烦而志怯。此必挟诈以诱我，不可从也。
现代文：并且，我看他的使节，眼睛一直向下看，脸色惭愧，说话罗嗦而胆怯，这一定心怀奸诈，引诱我们走进圈套，不可轻信。
English: Moreover, when I see his envoys, their eyes cast down, their countenances abashed, their words mealy-mouthed and timid, it is not to be trusted that they are not treacherous and are leading us into a trap.

古文：不若先取历城，克盘阳，下梁邹，平乐陵，然后按兵徐进，不患其不服也。 
现代文：不如先夺取历城、盘阳，再拿下梁邹、乐陵，然后慢慢向前推进，不怕他们不屈服。 
English: It would be better to seize Licheng and Panyang first, and then take Liangyao and Leling, and then slowly push forward, without fear that they will not give in.

古文：白曜曰； 崔道固等兵力单弱，不敢出战；吾通行无碍，直抵东阳，彼自知必亡，故望风求服，夫又何疑！ 
现代文：慕容白曜说： 崔道固等兵力单薄，不敢出战，我们可以通行无阻，一直抵达东阳，沈文秀自知必亡，所以望风投降，又有什么可怀疑的！ 
English: Murong Bai You said: Cui Daogu and other soldiers are thin, they dare not go to war, we can pass unimpeded until we reach Dongyang, Shen Wenxiu knows that he will die, so he waits for the wind to surrender, and there is nothing to doubt!

古文：范曰： 历城兵多粮足，非朝夕可拔。
现代文：郦范说： 历城兵力雄厚，粮食充足，不是早晚之间就能攻克的。
English: Yu Fan said: Licheng has a strong military force and sufficient grain, and it is not possible to conquer it sooner or later.

古文：文秀坐据东阳，为诸城根本。
现代文：沈文秀雄据东阳，是各城的根本。
English: Shen Wenxiong, according to Dongyang, is the root of all cities.

古文：今多遣兵则无以攻历城，少遣兵则不足以制东阳；若进为文秀所拒，退为诸城所邀，腹背受敌，必无全理。
现代文：现在派兵太多，则无法攻打历城；派兵太少，又不足以制服东阳。如果前进遭沈文秀抵御，后退又被各城联军阻击，腹背受敌，绝对没有安全的道理。
English: If we send too many soldiers now, we will not be able to attack Licheng; if we send too few soldiers now, we will not be able to subdue Dongyang. If we advance and are resisted by Shen Wenshu, and if we retreat and are blocked by the allied forces of various cities, and if we are defeated by the enemy, there is absolutely no reason for security.

古文：愿更审计，无堕贼彀中。 
现代文：请再三考虑，不要落入贼寇的圈套。 
English: Please think twice before falling into the trap of the bandits.

古文：白曜乃止。文秀果不降。
现代文：慕容白曜才停止，而沈文秀果然不降。
English: Murong Baiyang only stopped, but Shen Wenxiu did not give up.

古文：魏尉元上表称： 彭城贼之要籓，不有重兵积粟，则不可固守；若资储既广，虽刘彧师徒悉起，不敢窥淮北之地。 
现代文：北魏尉元上书朝廷说： 彭城是贼寇的重要基地，如果不驻防重兵，储存粮草，就不能守住。如果军用物资丰富，就是刘出动全部军队，也不敢窥伺淮北之地。 
English: In a letter to the imperial court, the Northern Wei lieutenant Yuan said: Pengcheng is an important base for thieves and robbers. If you do not station heavy troops and store grain and grass, you will not be able to keep it. If there are abundant military materials, Liu will send out all the troops and will not dare to spy on Huaibei.

古文：又言： 若贼向彭城，必由清、泗过宿豫，历下邳；趋青州，亦由下邳、沂水经东安。
现代文：又说： 如果贼寇攻击彭城，一定经由清水、泗水，穿过宿豫、下邳。如果攻击青州，也要从下邳顺着沂水，穿过东安。
English: He also said: "If the bandits attack Pengcheng, they will certainly go through Qingshui, Lishui, Suyu, and Jiaozuo. If they attack Qingzhou, they will also go along Lishui from Jiaozuo and go through Dong'an.

古文：此数者，皆为贼用师之要。
现代文：这几个地方，都是贼寇用兵的要地。
English: These places are all important places for bandits to use soldiers.

古文：今若先定下邳，平宿豫，镇淮阳，戍东安，则青、冀诸镇可不攻而克；若四城不服，青、冀虽拔，百姓狼顾，犹怀侥幸之心。
现代文：现在，如果我们能先占领下邳，平定宿豫，驻防淮阳、戍守东安，那么青州、冀州各个据点便可以不攻而破。如果这四个城池不肯屈服，那么青州、冀州虽然攻破，居民百姓回望刘，仍怀侥幸的心理。
English: Now, if we can first occupy Xiamen, pacify Suyuan, garrison Huaiyang, and defend Dong'an, then Qingzhou and Jizhou's various strongholds can be defeated without attacking. If these four cities are not willing to give in, then although Qingzhou and Jizhou are defeated, the residents and common people will still look back at Liu with a sense of luck.

古文：臣愚以为，宜释青、冀之师，先定东南之地，断刘彧北顾之意，绝愚民南望之心；夏水虽盛，无津途可由，冬路虽通，无高城可固。
现代文：以我的愚见，应该召回逗留青、冀二州的部队，先平定东南地区，断了刘北伐的念头，清除愚民回归南方的愿望。使他们明白：夏季雨水虽大，却没有河道可走；冬天陆路虽通，却没有高大的城墙可用来固守。
English: In my foolish opinion, it is necessary to recall the troops staying in the two states of Qinghai and Hebei, first pacify the southeastern region, break the idea of Liu's Northern Expedition, and clear the desire of the foolish people to return to the south. Let them understand: Although the summer rain is heavy, there is no river to go; although the land route is open in winter, there is no tall city wall to use to hold on.

古文：如此，则淮北自举，暂劳永逸。
现代文：这样，淮河以北的土地就可以占领。暂时辛劳，可以换来永久安逸。
English: In this way, the land north of the Huai River can be occupied. Temporary toil can be exchanged for permanent ease.

古文：兵贵神速，久则生变，若天雨既降，彼或因水通，运粮益众，规为进取，恐近淮之民翻然改图，青、冀二州猝未可拔也。 
现代文：兵贵神速，时间长就容易发生变化。如果进入雨季，对方因河路畅通，得以运送粮食，增派军队，再去进攻，恐怕淮河两岸居民将改变立场，青、冀二州仓促之间也就难以攻克了。 
English: If the rainy season comes, and the other side is able to transport grain due to the smooth flow of the river, send more troops, and then attack, I am afraid that the residents on both sides of the Huaihe River will change their position, and it will be difficult to conquer between the two states of Qinghai and Hebei.

古文：五月，壬戌，以太子詹事袁粲为尚书右仆射。
现代文：五月，壬戌，刘宋任命太子詹事袁粲为尚书右仆射。
English: In May, Liu Song appointed Prince Zhan Zhi Yuan Qi as Shang Shu's right-hand man.

古文：沈攸之自送运米至下邳，魏人遣清、泗间人诈攸之云： 薛安都欲降，求军迎接。 
现代文：沈攸之亲自运粮食到下邳。北魏军队不断派清水、泗水间居民向沈攸之谎报说： 薛安都打算回归朝廷，请求派兵迎接。 
English: Shen Youzhi personally transported grain to the Lower Yangtze. The Northern Wei army constantly sent residents of Qingshui and Yanshui to falsely report to Shen Youzhi that: Xue An intended to return to the imperial court and requested that soldiers be sent to meet him.

古文：军副吴喜请遣千人赴之，攸之不许。
现代文：沈攸之部队的军副吴喜请沈攸之派一千人前往，沈攸之不允许。
English: Wu Xi, the vice-commander of Shen Youyou's troops, asked Shen Youyou to send a thousand men, but Shen Youyou did not allow it.

古文：既而来者益多，喜固请不已，攸之乃集来者告之曰： 君诸人既有诚心，若能与薛徐州子弟俱来者，皆即假君以本乡县，唯意所欲；如其不尔，无为空劳往还。 
现代文：不久，通风报信的人越来越多，吴喜坚持派军，沈攸之就把来报信的那些人集中起来，宣布说： 各位既有这份诚心，如果有能与薛安都的子弟同来的，我就任命他为本乡本县的地方官，满足你们的意愿。如果不能，就不必跑来跑去。 
English: Soon, more and more people came forward to report the news. Wu Xi insisted on sending troops, and Shen Youcun gathered those who came to report the news and announced: "Since you all have this sincerity, if there is someone who can come with Xue Andu's son, I will appoint him as a local official in his hometown and county to satisfy your wishes. If you can't, you don't have to run around.

古文：自是一去不返。
现代文：那些人于是一去不复返。
English: Those people never came back.

古文：攸之使军主彭城陈显达将千人助戍下邳而还。
现代文：沈攸之命军主彭城人陈显达率领一千人进驻下邳协助防守，自己则返回基地。
English: Chen Xianda of Pengcheng, the commander of the army ordered by Shen You, led a thousand people to enter the lower moat to assist in the defense, while he himself returned to the base.

古文：薛安都子伯令亡命梁、雍之间，聚党数千人，攻陷郡县。
现代文：薛安都的儿子薛令伯，在梁州、雍州之间奔波，纠集党羽数千人，攻陷郡县。
English: Xue Lingbo, the son of Xue Andu, ran between Liangzhou and Yongzhou, gathered thousands of party members, and conquered counties.

古文：秋，七月，雍州刺史巴陵王休若遣南阳太守张敬儿等击斩之。
现代文：秋季，七月，雍州刺史巴陵王刘休若，派南阳太守张敬儿等击斩薛令伯。
English: In the autumn, in July, Liu Xiu Rong, the king of Ba Ling in Yongzhou, sent Zhang Jing'er, the Nanyang governor, and others to behead Xue Lingbo.

古文：上复遣中领军沈攸之等击彭城。
现代文：明帝再次下诏命中领军沈攸之等攻打彭城。
English: Emperor Ming once again issued an edict ordering the leading troops, including Shen Youzhi, to attack Pengcheng.

古文：攸之以为清、泗方涸，粮运不继，固执以为不可。
现代文：沈攸之认为清水、泗水干涸，粮食不能源源不断地供应，坚持认为不可采取军事行动。
English: Shen Youzhi believed that clear water and salty water had dried up, and grain could not be supplied continuously, and insisted that military action should not be taken.

古文：使者七返，上怒，强遣之。
现代文：派去的使节往返七次，明帝大怒，强迫沈攸之出兵。
English: The envoys were sent back and forth seven times, and Emperor Ming became furious and forced Shen Youzhi to send troops.

古文：八月，壬寅，以攸之行南兗州刺史，将兵北出；使行徐州事萧道成将千人镇淮阴。
现代文：八月，壬寅，任命沈攸之代理南兖州刺史，率军北上，派代理徐州事务的萧道成率一千人进驻淮阴。
English: In August, Ren Yin appointed Xiao Daocheng, who was the agent of Shen You, as the acting governor of South Luzhou, and led the army to the north. Xiao Daocheng, who was the agent of Xuzhou affairs, sent a thousand people to Huaiyin.

古文：道成收养豪俊，宾客始盛。
现代文：萧道成广交各路豪杰，他手下人才济济。
English: Xiao Dao has become a hero in all walks of life, and his staff is full of talent.

古文：魏之入彭城也，垣崇祖将部曲奔朐山，据之，遣使来降；萧道成以为朐山戍主。
现代文：魏之入彭城也，垣崇祖将部曲奔朐山，据之，遣使来降；萧道成以为朐山戍主。
English: When Wei Zhi entered Pengcheng, Gaizhong's ancestor sent an envoy to descend from the peak of Lushan Mountain. Xiao Daoxing thought that he was the lord of Lushan Mountain.

古文：朐山滨海孤绝，人情未安，崇祖浮舟水侧，欲有急则逃入海。
现代文：朐山濒海孤绝，人情未安，崇祖浮舟水侧，欲有急则逃入海。
English: Lushan is isolated on the coast, the human condition is precarious, the ancestors of the pontoon are on the water side, and if there is an emergency, they will escape into the sea.

古文：魏东徐州刺史成固公戍城，崇祖部将有罪，亡降魏。
现代文：魏东徐州刺史成固公戍城，崇祖部将有罪，亡降魏。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Xuzhou assassinated Chenggu Gongcheng, and Chong Zu Bu was found guilty and was exiled to Wei.

古文：成固公遣步骑二万袭朐山，去城二十里；崇祖方出送客，城中人惊惧，皆下船欲去。崇祖还，谓腹心曰： 虏非有宿谋，承叛者之言而来耳，易诳也。
现代文：成固公遣步骑二万袭朐山，去城二十里；崇祖方出送客，城中人惊惧，皆下船欲去，崇祖还，谓腹心曰： 虏非有宿谋，承叛者之言而来耳，易诳也。
English: Chenggu Guanzhong sent twenty thousand horsemen to attack Lushan, and rode twenty miles to the city; Chong Anfang sent out guests, the people in the city were frightened, everyone wanted to get off the ship, and Chong Anfang also said that his confidant said: There is no premeditation, and the words of the rebels are easy to hear.

古文：今得百馀人还，事必济矣。
现代文：今得百馀人还，事必济矣。
English: Now that more than a hundred people have returned, things will get better.

古文：但人情一骇，不可敛集，卿等可亟去此一里外，大呼而来云： 艾塘义人已得破虏，须戍军速往，相助逐之。  
现代文：但人情一骇，不可敛集，卿等可亟去此一里外，大呼而来云： 艾塘义人已得破虏，须戍军速往，相助逐之。  
English: However, once the people's feelings are aroused, they cannot be restrained, and the nobles and so on can immediately go one mile away and shout loudly: Aitang righteous people have been defeated, Su Shi's army should hurry to help them.

古文：舟中人果喜，争上岸。
现代文：舟中人果喜，争上岸。
English: The people in the boat were overjoyed and wanted to get ashore.

古文：崇祖引入，据城；遣羸弱入岛，人持两炬火，登山鼓噪。
现代文：崇祖引入，据城；遣羸弱入岛，人持两炬火，登山鼓噪。
English: Introduced by the revered ancestors, according to the city; sent to the island weakly, people holding two torches, mountaineering drum noise.

古文：魏参骑以为军备甚盛，乃退。
现代文：魏参骑以为军备甚盛，乃退。
English: The Wei cavalrymen thought that the armament was very prosperous, but they retreated.

古文：上以崇祖为北琅邪、兰陵二郡太守。
现代文：明帝任命垣崇祖为北琅邪、兰陵二郡太守。
English: Emperor Ming appointed Kakisanzo as the governor of Beibei County and Lanling County.

古文：垣荣祖亦自彭城奔朐山，以奉使不效，畏罪不敢出，往依萧道成于淮阴。
现代文：垣荣祖也从彭城逃到朐山，因奉命游说薛安都不成，恐怕皇帝怪罪下来，不敢露面，前往淮阴投靠萧道成。
English: Qi Rongzu also fled from Pengcheng to Lushan. Because he was ordered to lobby Xue An, he was unable to do so. I am afraid that the emperor blamed him and did not dare to show his face. He went to Huaiyin to support Xiao Daocheng.

古文：荣祖少学骑射，或谓之曰： 武事可畏，何不学书！ 
现代文：垣荣祖少年时代就学习骑马、射箭，曾有人对他说： 舞枪弄刀，十分危险，为什么不走读书之路！ 
English: As a boy, he learned to ride a horse and shoot arrows. Someone once said to him: "Dancing with guns and swords is very dangerous. Why not take the path of studying?"

古文：荣祖曰： 昔曹公父子上马横槊，下马谈咏，此于天下，可不负饮食矣。
现代文：垣荣祖说： 从前，曹操父子上马手舞长矛，下马提笔写，这样生在天地之间，才可说是不幸负天地养育之恩。
English: Gaki Rongzu said, "Once upon a time, Cao Cao's father rode a horse, danced with a spear, and wrote with a pen. To be born between heaven and earth in this way can only be said to be the misfortune of being nurtured by heaven and earth.

古文：君辈无自全之伎，何异犬羊乎！ 
现代文：像你们这些读书人，连保护自己的能力都没有，跟犬羊有什么区别！ 
English: Like you readers, they don't even have the ability to protect themselves, so what's the difference between them and dogs and sheep!

古文：刘善明从弟僧副将部曲二千人，避魏居海岛，道成亦召而抚之。
现代文：刘善明的堂弟刘僧副，率自己的军队两千人，逃避北魏，躲到一个海岛上。萧道成对他们招降，加以安抚。
English: Liu Zhenming's cousin, Liu Zengfei, led his own army of two thousand to escape the Northern Wei Dynasty and hid on an island. Xiao Daocheng invited them to surrender and pacified them.

古文：魏于天宫寺作大像，高四十三尺，用铜十万斤，黄金六百斤。
现代文：北魏在天宫寺铸造巨大佛像，高四十三尺，共用铜十万斤，黄金六百斤。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty cast a huge Buddha statue in Tiangong Temple, 43 feet high, with a total of 100,000 catties of copper and 600 catties of gold.

古文：魏尉元遣孔伯恭帅步骑一万拒沈攸之，又以攸之前败所丧士卒瘃堕膝行者悉还攸之，以沮其气。
现代文：北魏的尉元，派遣孔伯恭率步、骑兵一万人，抗拒刘宋北伐军沈攸之，把正月战役中俘虏的双脚冻烂、只能用膝盖爬行的沈攸之的部属送还给沈攸之，用以打击他的士气。
English: The Northern Wei lieutenant Yuan dispatched Kong Bo-hsiang and ten thousand cavalry to resist Shen Youzhi of the Northern Expeditionary Army of Liu Song, and sent back to Shen Youzhi the subordinates of Shen Youzhi, whose feet were frozen and could only crawl on their knees, who were captured in the battle of the first month of the year, in order to undermine his morale.

古文：上寻悔遣攸之等，复召使还。
现代文：明帝强迫沈攸之等出发不久，也忽然后悔，又派人让他回军。
English: Not long after the Ming Emperor forced Shen Youzhi and others to leave, he suddenly regretted it and sent someone to let him return to the army.

古文：攸之至焦墟，去下邳五十馀里，陈显达引兵迎攸之至睢清口，伯恭击破之。
现代文：此时沈攸之已前进到焦墟，距离下邳只有五十余里。陈显达率军迎接沈攸之，在睢清口会师，孔伯恭发动攻击，大破陈显达。
English: At this time, Shen Youzhi had advanced to Jiaozuo, only more than fifty miles away from Jiaozuo. Chen Xianda led the army to meet Shen Youzhi, and at the junction of Jiaozuo and Qingkou, Kong Boqiong launched an attack and defeated Chen Xianda.

古文：攸之引兵退，伯恭追击之，攸之大败，龙骧将军姜彦之等战没。
现代文：沈攸之于是当即撤退，孔伯恭尾随追击，沈攸之大败，龙骧将军姜产之等战死，沈攸之也身负重伤，逃入陈显达的营垒。
English: As a result, Shen Youzhi immediately retreated, Kong Boqiong followed in pursuit, Shen Youzhi suffered a crushing defeat, Longjing General Jiang Shanzhi died in battle, and Shen Youzhi was also seriously injured and fled into Chen Xianda's camp.

古文：攸之创重，入保显达营；丁酉夜，众溃，攸之轻骑南走，委弃军资器械以万计，还屯淮阴。
现代文：丁酉，深夜，陈显达营垒崩溃，沈攸之乘轻骑向南逃命，丢弃的军用物资和武器数以万计。沈攸之逃回淮阴基地驻扎。
English: Dingyao, late at night, Chen Xianda's camp collapsed, Shen Youzhi rode south to escape, tens of thousands of military supplies and weapons were discarded. Shen Youzhi fled back to Huaiyin base to stay.

古文：尉元以书谕徐州刺史王玄载，玄载弃下邳走，魏以陇西辛绍先为下邳太守。
现代文：尉元写信给刘宋徐州刺史王玄载，王玄载于是放弃下邳逃走。北魏任命陇西人辛绍先为下邳太守。
English: Yi Yuan wrote a letter to Wang Xuan Zai, the governor of Xuzhou of the Liu Song Dynasty. Wang Xuan Zai then gave up and ran away. The Northern Wei Dynasty first appointed Xin Shaoxing, a native of Shaanxi, as the governor of Jiaozuo.

古文：绍先不尚苛察，务举大纲，教民治生御寇而已；由是下邳安之。
现代文：辛绍先处理事情，反对繁琐苛刻，凡事只把握纲要。他只是教人民生产，以及防御贼寇，如此而已。从此，下邳百姓安居乐业。
English: Xin Shao dealt with things first, opposed the cumbersome and harsh, and only grasped the outline of everything. He just taught the people to produce, and defended against thieves and robbers, that's all. From now on, the people can live and work in peace.

古文：孔伯恭进攻宿豫，宿豫戍将鲁僧遵亦弃城走。
现代文：孔伯恭进攻宿豫，宿豫守将鲁僧遵也弃城逃跑。
English: Kong Bokong attacked Suyuan, and the governor of Suyuan, Lu Zongjun, also abandoned the city and fled.

古文：魏将孔大恒等将千骑南攻淮阳，淮阳太守崔武仲焚城走。
现代文：北魏将领孔大恒等率一千多骑兵，南下攻击淮阳，淮阳太守崔武仲纵火烧城后逃走。
English: The Northern Wei general Kong Daheng led more than a thousand cavalrymen to attack Huaiyang in the south. Huaiyang's governor, Cui Wuzhong, set fire to the city and fled.

古文：慕容白曜进屯瑕丘。
现代文：慕容白曜进兵驻扎瑕丘。
English: Murong Baiyang marched in troops and stationed them in Keqiao.

古文：崔道固之未降也，绥边将军房法寿为王玄邈司马，屡破道固军，历城人畏之。及道固降，皆罢兵。
现代文：崔道固拥护寻阳政权时，朝廷所属绥边将军房法寿担任王玄邈的司马，屡次击败崔道固军。以历城人为主的崔道固军对他非常畏惧。
English: When Cui Daogu supported the Xuanyang regime, the imperial court-affiliated Lijiang general Fang Fasu served as Wang Xuanzang's steward, repeatedly defeating Cui Daogu's army. Cui Daogu's army, which was mainly composed of people from Licheng, was very afraid of him.

古文：道固畏法寿扇动百姓，迫遣法寿使还建康。
现代文：崔道固归降朝廷后，双方才都停战。但崔道固害怕房法寿煽动百姓继续与他为难，所以，用压力迫使房法寿返回建康。
English: After Cui Daogu returned to surrender to the imperial court, both sides ended the war. However, Cui Daogu was afraid that Fang Fazhou would incite the people to continue to make trouble for him, so he used pressure to force Fang Fazhou to return to Jiankang.

古文：会从弟崇吉自升城来，以母妻为魏所获，谋于法寿。
现代文：正巧，房法寿的堂弟房崇吉从升城逃来，因母亲和妻子被北魏俘虏，向房法寿请教对策。
English: Coincidentally, Fang Fazhou's cousin Fang Chongji fled from Shengcheng, because his mother and wife were captured by the Northern Wei Dynasty, and asked Fang Fazhou for advice.

古文：法寿雅不欲南行，怨道固迫之。
现代文：房法寿内心实在不愿去江南，所以对崔道固逼迫他南下十分怨恨。
English: Fang Fa Shou really did not want to go to the south of the Yangtze River, so he was very resentful of Cui Daogu forcing him to go south.

古文：时道固遣兼治中房灵宾督清河、广川二郡事，戍磐阳，法寿乃与崇吉谋袭磐阳，据之，降于慕容白曜，以赎崇吉母妻。
现代文：当时，崔道固派遣兼治中房灵宾任督清河、广川二郡事，驻防磐阳。房法寿于是与房崇吉袭击磐阳，占领那里向慕容白曜投降，用来赎回房崇吉的母亲和妻子。
English: At that time, Cui Daogu dispatched the concurrently middle-ranking Fang Lingbin as the governor of Qinghe and Guangchuan two counties, stationed in Iwanyang. Fang Fasu and Fang Chongji then attacked Iwanyang, occupied there and surrendered to Murong Baiyou, used to redeem Fang Chongji's mother and wife.

古文：道固遣兵攻之，白曜自瑕丘遣将军长孙观救磐阳，道固兵退。
现代文：崔道固派军进攻他们，慕容白曜从瑕丘派将军长孙观，解救磐阳，崔道固撤退。
English: Cui Daogu dispatched troops to attack them. Murong Baiyou rescued Iwayang from the general Sun Guan, who was a member of the Guoyu faction, and Cui Daogu retreated.

古文：白曜表冠军将军韩麒麟与法寿对为冀州刺史，以法寿从弟灵民、思顺、灵悦、伯怜、伯玉、叔玉、思安、幼安等八人皆为郡守。
现代文：慕容白曜表奏北魏，推荐冠军将军韩麒麟与房法寿同时任冀州刺史，房法寿的堂弟房灵民、房思顺、房灵悦、房伯怜、房伯玉、房叔玉、房思安、房幼安等八人，都当郡守。
English: Murong Peiyou played the Northern Wei Dynasty, and the recommended champion general Han Qilin and Fang Fazhou were also appointed as the governor of Jizhou. Fang Fazhou's cousin Fang Lingmin, Fang Sishun, Fang Lingyue, Fang Bo Rie, Fang Bo Yu, Fang Shu Yu, Fang Sian, Fang Xiao'an and other eight people all served as county governors.

古文：白曜自瑕丘引兵攻崔道固于历城，遣平东将军长孙陵等攻沈文秀于东阳。
现代文：慕容白曜自瑕丘率军攻击崔道固据守的历城，另外派平东将军长孙陵等攻击沈文秀据守的东阳。
English: Murong Baiyang attacked Licheng, which was firmly held by Cui Dao, with troops led by Zigeo Qiu, and he also sent Pingdong General Chang Sun Ling and others to attack Dongyang, which was held by Shen Wenxiu.

古文：道固拒守不降，白曜筑长围守之。
现代文：崔道固登城抵抗，不肯投降，慕容白曜构筑长墙包围了他。
English: Cui Daogu went to the city to resist and refused to surrender. Murong Baiyou surrounded him by building a long wall.

古文：陵等至东阳，文秀请降；陵等入其西郭，纵士卒暴掠。
现代文：长孙陵等抵达东阳，沈文秀请求投降，长孙陵等进入东阳西门外城，放纵士卒凶残横行，大肆抢夺。
English: Changsun Ling and others arrived in Dongyang, Shen Wenxiu asked for surrender, Changsun Ling and others entered the outer city of the West Gate of Dongyang, indulged the thugs to run rampant, and plundered extensively.

古文：文秀悔怒，闭城拒守，击陵等，破之。
现代文：沈文秀既后悔又愤怒，关闭城门，攻击长孙陵等，击溃长孙陵的部队，重新据守东阳。
English: Shen Wenxiu was both regretful and angry. He closed the city gate, attacked the Tomb of the First Sun Emperor, defeated the troops of the Tomb of the First Sun Emperor, and re-fortified Dongyang.

古文：陵等退屯清西，屡进攻城，不克。
现代文：长孙陵等撤退到清水以西，屡次攻城，没有攻克。
English: Chosunryo and others retreated to the west of Shimizu and repeatedly attacked the city, but failed to conquer it.

古文：癸卯，大赦。
现代文：癸卯，刘宋宣布大赦。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：戊申，魏主李夫人生子宏。
现代文：戊申，北魏国主的李夫人生下皇子拓跋宏。
English: Mrs. Li, the ruler of Northern Wei, gave birth to Prince Tuoba Hong.

古文：夫人，惠之女也。
现代文：李夫人是李惠的女儿。
English: Mrs. Li is the daughter of Li Hui.

古文：冯太后自抚养宏；顷之，还政于魏主。
现代文：冯太后亲自扶养拓跋宏。
English: Empress Dowager Feng personally raised Tuoba Hong.

古文：魏主始亲国事，勤于为治，赏罚严明，拔清节，黜贪污，于是魏之牧守始有以廉洁著闻者。
现代文：不久，把国家政事重新交还给北魏国主拓跋弘，拓跋弘开始亲自处理国事，辛勤治理国家，奖罚严明，提拔清廉有操守的人，罢黜贪官污吏。于是，北魏州、郡地方官中开始有人因为政廉洁而闻名了。
English: Soon, the state affairs were returned to the Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba Hong, who began to personally handle state affairs, diligently govern the country, reward and punish severely, promote clean and honest people, and dismiss corrupt officials. As a result, some of the Northern Wei state and county local officials began to be known for their political integrity.

古文：太中大夫徐爰，自太祖时用事，素不礼于上。
现代文：刘宋太中大夫徐爰，从文帝时开始掌权，对于当时还是亲王的刘一向不以礼相待。
English: Liu Song Taizhong's doctor Xu Xi, who had been in power since the time of Emperor Wen, never treated Liu, who was still a prince at the time, with courtesy.

古文：上衔之，诏数其奸佞之罪，徙交州。
现代文：刘一直记恨在心，于是下诏，一条条列出徐爰奸诈谄媚的罪状，贬谪到交州。
English: Liu always kept the grudge in mind, so he issued an edict, listing the charges of Xu Yao's treachery, deceit and flattery one by one, and demoted him to Jiaozhou.

古文：冬，十月，辛巳，诏徙义阳王昶为晋熙王，使员外郎李丰以金千两赎昶于魏。
现代文：冬季十月，辛巳，明帝下诏改封义阳王刘昶为晋熙王，派员外郎李丰带一千两黄金，向北魏赎回刘昶。
English: In the winter of October, Xin Si, Emperor Ming issued an edict to change the title of Yiyang King Liu Bei to Jinxi King, and sent his brother-in-law Li Feng with a thousand taels of gold to redeem Liu Bei to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏人弗许，使昶与上书，为兄弟之仪。
现代文：北魏人不答应，但让刘昶写信给明帝，以兄弟相称。
English: The Northern Wei people did not agree, but asked Liu Bei to write a letter to Emperor Ming, which was commensurate with a brother.

古文：上责其不称臣，不答。
现代文：明帝斥责刘昶竟不称 臣 ，拒绝回信。
English: Emperor Ming reprimanded Liu Bei for not being a vassal and refused to reply to the letter.

古文：魏主复使昶与上书，昶辞曰： 臣本实彧兄，未经为臣。
现代文：北魏国主命刘昶再写信给明帝，刘昶不写，说： 事实上我是刘的哥哥，从来没当过他的臣崐属。
English: Liu Xuan, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, then wrote to Emperor Ming, but Liu Xuan did not write, saying: In fact, I am Liu's brother, and I have never been his vassal.

古文：若改前书，事为二敬；敬或不改，彼所不纳。臣不敢奉诏。 
现代文：如今更改前一封信上的称呼，是我向两国君王，同时称臣。如果不改，他又不肯接受，我不敢听从命令。 
English: Now, changing the title on the previous letter is my way of showing my allegiance to both monarchs at the same time. If I don't change it, he won't accept it, and I don't dare to follow the order.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是才罢休。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：魏人爱重昶，凡三尚公主。
现代文：北魏人爱惜器重刘昶，刘昶先后娶三位公主为妻。
English: The Northern Wei people cherished Liu Ye, and Liu Ye married three princesses in succession.

古文：十一月，乙卯，分徐州置东徐州，以辅国将军张谠为刺史。
现代文：十一月，乙卯，刘宋分出徐州若干郡县，设立东徐州，任命辅国将军张谠为东徐州刺史。
English: In November, Liu Song divided Xuzhou into several counties and counties, set up East Xuzhou, and appointed the auxiliary general Zhang Jun as the history of East Xuzhou.

古文：十二月，庚戌，以幽州刺史刘休宾为兗州刺史。
现代文：十二月，庚戌，任命幽州刺史刘休宾为兖州刺史。
English: In December, Geng Zheng appointed Liu Xubing, the governor of Yuzhou, as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：休宾之妻，崔邪利之女也，生子文晔，与邪利皆没于魏。
现代文：刘休宾的妻子是崔邪利的女儿，生子刘文晔，与崔邪利同时被北魏俘虏。
English: Liu Xubing's wife was the daughter of Cui Yali, and his son Liu Wenqi was captured by the Northern Wei Dynasty at the same time as Cui Yali.

古文：慕容白曜将其妻子至梁邹城下示之。
现代文：慕容白曜把他的妻子和儿子送到梁邹城下，让他看到。
English: Murong Baiyang took his wife and son to the foot of Liangyao Castle to let him see.

古文：休宾密遣主簿尹文达至历城见白曜，且视其妻子；休宾欲降，而兄子闻慰不可。
现代文：刘休宾秘密派他的主簿尹文达前往历城晋见慕容白曜，并代他探望妻子和儿子。刘休宾打算投降，可是侄儿刘闻慰反对。
English: Liu Xubing secretly sent his chief secretary, Yin Wenda, to Licheng to meet with Murong Baiyou and visit his wife and son on his behalf. Liu Xubing intended to surrender, but his nephew, Liu Wenjun, objected.

古文：白曜使人至城下呼曰： 刘休宾数遣人来见仆射约降，何故违期不至！ 
现代文：慕容白曜派人在城下呼喊： 刘休宾几次派人，来见我们的仆射，相约投降，为什么过了约定时间，还不实行？ 
English: Murong Baiyou sent people to the outskirts of the city to shout: "Liu Xubing has sent people to meet with our minions several times, and they have agreed to surrender. Why hasn't it been implemented after the agreed time?

古文：由是城中皆知之，共禁制休宾不得降，魏兵围之。
现代文：于是城中守军都知道这件事，把刘休宾软禁起来，不准他投降。北魏军于是包围梁邹。
English: As a result, the defenders of the city knew about this and put Liu Xubing under house arrest, not allowing him to surrender. The Northern Wei Army then surrounded Liang Juan.

古文：魏西河公石复攻汝阴，汝阴有备，无功而还。
现代文：北魏西河公拓跋石再次进攻汝阴，汝阴防守严密，没有什么收获便回来了。
English: Northern Wei's Xihe Gong Tuobaishi once again attacked Ruyin, but Ruyin defended closely and came back without any gains.

古文：常珍奇虽降于魏，实怀贰心；刘勔复以书招之。
现代文：常珍奇虽然投降北魏，但实际怀有二心。刘又写信招抚。
English: Although Chang Zhenqi surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty, he was actually of two minds. Liu also wrote a letter to persuade him.

古文：会西河公石攻汝阴，珍奇乘虚烧劫悬瓠，驱掠上蔡、安成、平舆三县民，屯于灌水。
现代文：正赶上北魏西河公拓跋石攻打汝阴，常珍奇乘虚纵火焚掠悬瓠城，驱逐掳掠上蔡、安成、平舆三县人民，聚集在灌水。
English: Just in time for the Northern Wei's West River Gong to attack and attack Ruyin, Chang Zhenqi used false arson to burn and plunder the Hanging City, expelled and plundered the people of Shangcai, Ancheng, Pingyou three counties, and gathered in Guishui.

古文：太宗明皇帝中泰始四年春，正月，己未，上祀南郊，大赦。
现代文：泰始四年春季正月，己未，明帝到建康南郊祭天，实行大赦。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fourth year of the Taizhi era, the Ming emperor went to the southern suburb of Jiankang to hold a festival and implement an amnesty.

古文：魏汝阳司马赵怀仁帅众寇武津，豫州刺史刘勔遣龙骧将军申元德击破之，又斩魏于都公阏于拔於汝阳台东，获运车千三百乘。
现代文：北魏汝阳司马赵怀仁率军攻击武津。豫州刺史刘派龙骧将军申元德迎战，击败赵怀仁军，在汝阳台东又斩北魏于都公阏于跋，缴获运输车一千三百辆。
English: The Northern Wei Ruyang Sima Zhao Huairen led an army to attack Wuzhen. The Henzhou Sima Liu sent Longjing General Shen Yuande to fight, defeated the Zhao Huairen army, and in the east of Ruyang Tai, the Northern Wei Yu Du public army was defeated, and 1,300 transport vehicles were captured.

古文：魏复寇义阳，勔使司徒参军孙台瓘击破之。
现代文：北魏军再攻义阳，刘派司徒参军孙昙迎战，挫败北魏军。
English: The Northern Wei Army attacked Yiyang again, and Liu sent his followers to join the army of Sun Yat-sen to fight against and defeat the Northern Wei Army.

古文：淮西民贾元友上书，陈伐魏取陈、蔡之策，上以其书示刘勔。
现代文：淮西百姓贾元友上书明帝，陈述攻伐北魏及夺取淮西陈、蔡的策略，明帝把这份书奏交给刘看。
English: Jia Yuanyou, a citizen of Huaixi Province, wrote a letter to Emperor Ming stating the strategy of attacking the Northern Wei Dynasty and seizing Chen and Cai in Huaixi Province. Emperor Ming gave the letter to Liu to read.

古文：勔上言： 元友称 虏主幼弱，内外多难，天亡有期 。
现代文：刘上疏说： 贾元友指出： 胡虏主上年幼，能力薄弱，内外交困，上天注定它灭亡的日子为期不远。 
English: Liu Shangsuo said: Jia Yuanzhong pointed out: Hu Ruizhong is young, weak in ability, poor in domestic and foreign affairs, and the day of its doom is not far away.

古文：臣以为虏自去冬蹈藉王土，磐据数郡，百姓残亡；今春以来，连城围逼，国家未能复境，何暇灭虏！
现代文：我认为，胡虏自去年冬季，踏入我国领土后，盘据几个郡，我国百姓大量伤亡。本年自春季以来，城池重镇，连连被围，或被攻击，对已失去的国土都无力收复，哪有力量消灭胡虏？
English: I believe that since last winter, after the Khuriks entered our territory, they have taken control of several counties, and our people have suffered a large number of casualties. Since the spring of this year, major cities and towns have been continuously besieged or attacked, and they are powerless to recover the lost land. Is there any power to eliminate the Khuriks?

古文：元友所陈，率多夸诞狂谋，皆非实。言之甚易，行之甚难。
现代文：贾元友所陈述的意见，很多地方荒谬狂妄，无事实根据，谈起来头头是道，做起来非常艰难。
English: The opinions expressed by Jia Yuanyou are absurd and arrogant in many places, and have no factual basis. It's easy to talk about, but very difficult to do.

古文：臣窃寻元嘉以来，伧荒远人，多干国议，负担归阙，皆劝讨虏，从来信纳，皆贻后悔。
现代文：我私下认为，自元嘉年间以来，北方归附的流民，都爱议论国家大事，挑担子的下等人回到建康，都是劝伐胡虏。可是，朝廷接受的结果，每次都是失败后悔。
English: Privately, I believe that since the Yuan and Jia dynasties, all the exiles who were annexed by the north like to talk about national affairs, and the lower-class people who took up the burden to return to Jiankang were all persuading the Khurus. However, the result accepted by the imperial court was regret for failure every time.

古文：境上之人，唯视强弱：王师至彼，必壶浆候涂；裁见退军，便抄截蜂起。
现代文：边境居民，只看谁强谁弱，朝廷军队到达之处，他们一定送茶送饭，在路旁恭候迎接，可是，大军一退，居民就拿起刀箭，抄掠的事情又不断发生。
English: The border residents, who only care about who is strong and who is weak, where the imperial army arrives, they will certainly send tea and meals, and wait by the roadside to greet them. However, as soon as the army retreated, the residents picked up their swords and arrows, and looting and pillaging continued to occur.

古文：此前后所见，明验非一也。 
现代文：这是大家常见的事，事实已清楚证明不仅是一次了。 
English: This is a common occurrence for everyone, and the facts have clearly proven that this is not just a one-time occurrence.

古文：上乃止。
现代文：明帝才作罢。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：魏尉元遣使说东徐州刺史张谠，谠以团城降魏。
现代文：北魏尉元派人劝东徐州刺史张谠，张谠拱手献出团城投降。
English: Northern Wei lieutenant Yuan sent a person to persuade Zhang Ye, the East Xuzhou assassin, to surrender Tuancheng.

古文：魏以中书侍郎高闾与谠对为东徐州刺史，李璨与毕众敬对为东兗州刺史。
现代文：北魏任命中书侍郎高闾与张谠一起做东徐州刺史；又任命李璨与毕众敬一起做东兖州刺史。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the Chinese calligrapher Lang Gaoqi to write the history of East Xuzhou together with Zhang Jun; and appointed Li Jun to write the history of East Xuzhou together with Bi Zhongjing.

古文：无又说兗州刺史王整、兰陵太守桓忻，整、忻皆降于魏。
现代文：尉元又派人劝兖州刺史王整，及兰陵太守桓忻，王整、桓忻于是都投降北魏。
English: He also sent people to persuade the governor of Bozhou, Wang Jizhi, and the governor of Lanling, Huan Qi, but Wang Jizhi and Huan Qi both surrendered to the Northern Wei.

古文：魏以元为开府仪同三司、都督徐、南、北兗三州诸军事、徐州刺史，镇彭城。
现代文：北魏提升尉元为开府仪同三司，都督徐、南北兖三州诸军事和徐州刺史，镇守彭城。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, he was promoted to Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, the military governor of the three states of Xu, Nanfangye and Xuzhou, and the town guard of Pengcheng.

古文：召薛安都、毕众敬入朝，至平城，魏以上客待之，群从皆封侯，赐第宅，资给甚厚。
现代文：北魏朝廷征召薛安都、毕众敬入朝。二人抵达平城，北魏以上宾之礼款待他们，同族的兄弟，都封侯晋爵，赏赐住宅，供给物资及金钱，待遇十分优厚。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty court summoned Xue Andu and all the people to enter the court. The two arrived in Pingcheng, and the Northern Wei Dynasty honored them with the gift of the guests, the brothers of the same family, all were given the title of Marquis, rewarded with housing, supplied with materials and money, and treated very well.

古文：慕容白曜围历城经年，二月，庚寅，拔其东郭；癸巳，崔道固面缚出降。
现代文：慕容白曜包围历城已有一年。二月，庚寅，攻陷东门外城。癸巳，崔道固自己反绑双臂，出城投降。
English: It has been a year since Murong Baiyang besieged Licheng. In February, Goyang invaded Dongmen Outer City. Soon after, Cui Daogu tied his arms behind his back and surrendered.

古文：白曜遣道固之子景业与刘文晔同至梁邹，刘休宾亦出降。
现代文：慕容白曜派崔道固的儿子崔景业与刘文晔一同前往梁邹，刘休宾也出城投降。
English: Murong Baiyang sent Cui Daogu's son Cui Jingye and Liu Wenyi to Liangyao together, and Liu Xubing also left the city to surrender.

古文：白曜送道固、休宾及其僚属于平城。
现代文：慕容白曜把崔道固、刘休宾及其僚属，送到平城。
English: Murong Bai sent Cui Daogu, Liu Xubing and their colleagues to Pingcheng on Sunday.

古文：辛丑，以前龙骧将军常珍奇为都督司、北豫二州诸军事、司州刺史。
现代文：辛丑，刘宋任命前龙骧将军常珍奇为都督司、北豫二州诸军事和司州刺史。
English: Outrageously, Liu Song appointed the former Longjing General Chang Zhenqi as the governor of the capital, the military of the two states of North Henan and the governor of the state.

古文：魏西河公石攻之，珍奇单骑奔寿阳。
现代文：北魏西河公拓跋石攻击常珍奇，常珍奇单人匹马投奔寿阳。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, the West River Gong Tuo and the stone attack are often rare, and it is often rare for a single person to rush to Shouyang.

古文：乙巳，车骑大将军、曲江庄公王玄谟卒。
现代文：乙巳，刘宋车骑大将军、曲江庄公王玄谟去世。
English: At this time, Liu Song, General of Chariots and Cavalry, and Xuanzhou, Prince of Qujiangzhuang, passed away.

古文：三月，魏慕容白曜进围东阳。
现代文：三月，北魏慕容白曜进军包围东阳。
English: In March, the Northern Wei Murong Baiyang marched to encircle Dongyang.

古文：上以崔道固兄子僧祐为辅国将军，将兵数千从海道救历城，至不其，闻历城已没，遂降于魏。
现代文：明帝任命崔道固的侄儿崔僧为辅国将军，率军数千人从海路北上，援救历城，到达不其城时，听说历城已经沦陷，于是崔僧也投降北魏。
English: The Ming Emperor appointed Cui Daogu's nephew Cui Zeng as an auxiliary general. He led thousands of troops north by sea to rescue Licheng. When he arrived in Licheng, he heard that Licheng had fallen, so Cui Zeng also surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：交州刺史刘牧卒。
现代文：交州刺史刘牧去世。
English: Jiaozhou poet Liu Mu passed away.

古文：州人李长仁杀牧北来部曲，据州反，自称刺史。
现代文：交州人李长仁聚众起兵，把刘牧从北方带来的部曲杀光，占领州城反叛，自称刺史。
English: Li Changren, a resident of Jiaozhou, gathered a large number of soldiers, killed all the troops brought by Liu Mu from the north, occupied the city of Jiaozhou and rebelled, claiming to stab history.

古文：广州刺史羊希使晋康太守沛郡刘思道伐俚。
现代文：广州刺史羊希派晋康太守沛郡人刘思道讨伐俚族部落。
English: Liu Sidao, a native of Pei County, Guangzhou, sent his troops to fight the Yi tribe.

古文：思道违节度，失利，希遣收之；思道自帅所领攻州，希兵败而死。
现代文：刘思道违背上级命令，作战失败。羊希派人逮捕他，刘思道率领他的部队反攻羊希，羊希兵败被杀。
English: Liu Sidao disobeyed orders from his superiors and failed in battle. Yang Xi sent troops to arrest him, Liu Sidao led his troops to counterattack Yang Xi, and Yang Xi was defeated and killed.

古文：龙骧将军陈伯绍将兵伐俚，还，击思道，擒斩之。
现代文：龙骧将军陈伯绍也率兵征伐俚族部落，得到消息后，还击并活捉刘思道，将其斩首。
English: Longjing general Chen Bishao also led troops to conquer the Yi tribe. After receiving the news, he fought back and captured Liu Sidao alive, beheading him.

古文：希，玄保之兄子也。
现代文：羊希是羊玄保的侄儿。
English: Yang Xi is the nephew of Yang Xuan Bao.

古文：夏，四月，己卯，复减郡县田租之半。
现代文：夏季四月，己卯，刘宋又免减郡县一半田赋。
English: In the summer of April, Jiwu and Liu Song were also exempted from the reduction of half of the county's rice fields.

古文：徙东海王祎为庐江王，山阳王休祐为晋平王。
现代文：改封东海王刘为庐江王，山阳王刘休为晋平王。
English: Liu, the king of the East Sea, was renamed the king of the Minjiang River, and Liu Xiu, the king of the Sanyang River, was renamed the king of the Jinbei River.

古文：上以废帝谓祎为驴王，故以庐江封之。
现代文：明帝因废帝称刘是 驴王 ，所以把庐江封给他。
English: Emperor Ming named Liu "Donkey King" because he was the deposed emperor, so he gave him the Lijiang River.

古文：刘勔败魏兵于许昌。
现代文：刘勔在许昌击败北魏军队。
English: Liu Bei defeated the Northern Wei army in Xuchang.

古文：魏以南郡公李惠为征南大将军、仪同三司、都督关右诸军事、雍州刺史，进爵为王。
现代文：北魏任命南郡公李惠为征南大将军、仪同三司、都督关右诸军事、雍州刺史，封南郡王。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Li Hui, the governor of Nan County, as the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, the third secretary of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, the military governor of Guan Yu, the governor of Yongzhou, and the king of Nan County.

古文：五月，乙卯，魏主畋于崞山，道如繁畤，辛酉，还宫。
现代文：五月，乙卯，北魏国主前往崞山打猎，后又到繁。辛酉崐，回宫。
English: In May, Emperor Wu of the Northern Wei Dynasty went to Lushan to go hunting, and then to Shandong, Xinjiang, and back to the palace.

古文：六月，魏以昌黎王冯熙为太傅。
现代文：六月，北魏任命昌黎王冯熙为太傅。
English: In June, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Changli King Feng Xi as Taifu.

古文：熙，太后之兄也。
现代文：冯熙是冯太后的哥哥。
English: Feng Xi is the elder brother of Empress Dowager Feng.

古文：秋，七月，庚申，以骁骑将军萧道成为南兗州刺史。
现代文：秋季七月，庚申，任命骁骑将军萧道成为南兖州刺史。
English: In the autumn of July, Goshun appointed the cavalry general Xiao Dao to be the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：八月，戊子，以南康相刘勃为交州刺史。
现代文：八月，戊子，刘宋任命南康相刘勃为交州刺史。
English: In August, Wu Zi and Liu Song appointed the Southern Kangsang Liu Bo as the history of Jiaozhou.

古文：上以沈文秀之弟征北中兵参军文静为辅国将军，统高密等五郡军事，自海道救东阳。
现代文：明帝任命沈文秀的弟弟、征北中兵参军沈文静为辅国将军，指挥高密等五郡军事，从海路北上，援救东阳。
English: Emperor Ming appointed Shen Wenzhong, the younger brother of Shen Wenshu and a member of the Northern Expeditionary Force, to be the adjutant general of the country. He commanded the military of Gaomi and other five counties and sailed north by sea to rescue Dongyang.

古文：至不其城，为魏所断，因保城自固。
现代文：大军行至不其城，被北魏军截断，因此守城自保。
English: The large army marched to Fuchicheng and was cut off by the Northern Wei Army, so the city defended itself.

古文：魏人攻之，不克。
现代文：北魏军进攻他们，没有攻克。
English: The Northern Wei Army attacked them, but failed to conquer them.

古文：辛卯，分青州置东青州，以文静为刺史。
现代文：辛卯，朝廷分出一部分青州地域，设立东青州、任命沈文静为东青州刺史。
English: Soon after, the imperial court set aside a part of the Qingzhou region, established East Qingzhou, and appointed Shen Wenzhing as the new governor of East Qingzhou.

古文：九月，辛亥，魏立皇叔桢为南安王，长寿为城阳王，太洛为章武王，休为安定王。
现代文：九月，辛亥，北魏封皇叔拓跋桢为南安王，拓跋长寿为城阳王，拓跋太洛为章武王，拓跋休为安定王。
English: In September, Xinhai, the Northern Wei Emperor's uncle Tuoba Yu was the king of Nan'an, Tuoba Longevity was the king of Chengyang, Tuoba Tai Luo was the king of Zhangwu, and Tuoba Hui was the king of stability.

古文：冬，十月，癸酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季十月，癸酉朔，出现日食。
English: In the winter of October, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：发诸州兵北伐。
现代文：刘宋征发各州军队，开始北伐。
English: Liu Song dispatched troops from all the states and began the Northern Expedition.

古文：十一月，李长仁遣使请降，自贬行州事；许之。
现代文：十一月，交州变民首领李长仁派使节请求投降，自贬为代理州事，朝廷批准。
English: In November, Li Changren, the leader of the Changmin in Jiaozhou, sent an envoy to request surrender, and demeaned himself as an agent of state affairs, which was approved by the imperial court.

古文：十二月，魏人拔不其城，杀沈文静，入东阳西郭。
现代文：十二月，北魏军队攻克不其城，杀了沈文静，又攻入东阳西门外城。
English: In December, the Northern Wei army conquered the city, killed Shen Wenzhing, and invaded the outlying city of Ximen in Dongyang.

古文：义嘉之乱，巫师请发修宁陵，戮玄宫为厌胜。
现代文：刘子勋叛乱时，在巫师请求下，刘宋明帝挖掘刘子勋的祖母路太后的修宁陵，摧毁墓穴，作为对寻阳政权的一次巫术镇压。
English: During Liu Zixun's rebellion, at the request of the sorcerers, Emperor Liu Songming excavated the Shuning Mausoleum of Liu Zixun's grandmother, Empress Dowager Lu, and destroyed the tombs as a witchcraft suppression against the Xuanyang regime.

古文：是岁，改葬昭太后。
现代文：直到这一年，才把路太后再次安葬。
English: It was not until this year that the Dowager Empress Lu was buried again.

古文：先是，中书侍郎、舍人皆以名流为之。
现代文：在此之前，中书侍郎、中书舍人都是由社会上知名度很高的人士担任。
English: Prior to this, the posts of Chusho-sajiro and Chusho-sehito were held by people who were well-known in society.

古文：太祖始用寒士秋当，世祖犹杂选士庶，巢尚之、戴法兴皆用事。
现代文：文帝开始录用寒门出身的秋当。孝武帝时还混杂遴选士族和庶族出身的人联合担任，巢尚之、戴法兴都掌握大权。
English: Emperor Wen began to recruit Akitang, who was born in the Winter Palace. Emperor Xiaowu also mixed and selected people from the warrior class and commoners to jointly hold the post, and both Shanzhi and Fa Xing held great power.

古文：及上即位，尽用左右细人，游击将军阮佃夫、中书通事舍人王道隆、员外散骑侍郎杨运长等，并参预政事，权亚人主，巢、戴所不及也。
现代文：到了明帝即位，任用的全是地位低微的侍从。游击将军阮佃夫、中书通事舍人王道隆、员外散骑侍郎杨运长等，都参与政事，权力仅次于皇帝，当年巢尚之、戴法兴的权势也远不及他们。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, all the appointees were low-ranking attendants. The guerrilla general Nguyn Th Phúc, the general secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, Wang Duolong, and the foreign cavalry officer Yang Yunchang all participated in government affairs. Their power was second only to that of the emperor. At that time, the power of Trn Thc and Dai Fàxing was far less than theirs.

古文：佃夫尤恣横，人有顺迕，祸福立至。
现代文：阮佃夫尤其骄纵横暴，肆无忌惮，有人谄媚他时，立刻受赏，偶尔冒犯，便大祸临头。
English: In particular, Nguyn Xuân Văn was arrogant, violent and unscrupulous. When someone flattered him, he was immediately rewarded. Occasionally, he would offend, and then disaster would strike.

古文：大纳货赂，所饷减二百匹绢，则不报书。
现代文：他大肆收受贿赂，送给他的绢如少于二百匹，则连封信都不回。
English: He accepted bribes freely, and if he received less than two hundred yakitori, he would not even return the letter.

古文：园宅饮馔，过于诸王；妓乐服饰，宫掖不如也。
现代文：他的住宅、园林、饮食等等，豪华都超过诸王。他的歌女乐工的服饰，连宫廷里的人都赶不上。
English: His houses, gardens, food, etc. are more luxurious than those of kings, and the costumes of his singers and musicians cannot even keep up with those in the court.

古文：朝士贵贱，莫不自结。
现代文：朝中无论大小官吏，没有一个不对他巴结奉承。
English: There is not a single official in the government, big or small, who does not fawn over him.

古文：仆隶皆不次除官，捉车人至虎贲中郎部，马士至员外郎。
现代文：他的奴仆差役，纷纷被破格提拔为官吏，车夫甚至当上了虎贲中郎将，马夫甚至成了员外郎。
English: His servants and lackeys were promoted to official positions in an unprecedented manner. The coachman even became the vice-captain of the tiger cubs, and the groom even became the foreign minister.

古文：太宗明皇帝中泰始五年春，正月，癸亥，上耕籍田，大赦。
现代文：泰始五年春季正月，癸亥，明帝举行亲耕典礼，实行大赦。
English: In the spring of the first month of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, Emperor Ming held a pro-cultivation ceremony and implemented an amnesty.

古文：沈文秀守东阳，魏人围之三年，外无救援，士卒昼夜拒战，甲胄生虮虱，无离叛之志。
现代文：沈文秀据守东阳，北魏军队围城已经三年。东阳外无援兵，士卒日夜抵抗，头盔铠甲不能离身，都生了虱子，但无背叛之心。
English: Shen Wenxiu has been defending Dongyang for three years, and the Northern Wei army has been besieging the city for three years. Dongyang has no reinforcements outside, soldiers resist day and night, helmets and armor can not be separated, all have lice, but there is no heart of betrayal.

古文：乙丑，魏人拔东阳，文秀解戎服，正衣冠，取所持节坐斋内。
现代文：乙丑，北魏军队攻下东阳，沈文秀脱下戎衣，换穿文职官服，整理周正，手拿皇帝颁发的符节，端坐在屋里。
English: Second ugliness, the Northern Wei army captured Dongyang, Shen Wenshu took off his military uniform, put on a civilian official uniform, tidied up Zhou Zheng, held the symbols issued by the emperor, and sat in the house.

古文：魏兵交至，问： 沈文秀何在？ 
现代文：北魏士卒先后涌到，问： 沈文秀在哪里？ 
English: Northern Wei literati flocked to ask: Where is Shen Wenshu?

古文：文秀厉声曰： 身是！ 
现代文：沈文秀大声说： 我就是。 
English: Shen Wenxiu said loudly: I am.

古文：魏人执之，去其衣，缚送慕容白曜，使之拜，文秀曰： 各两国大臣，何拜之有！ 
现代文：北魏士卒上去把他捉住，剥下他的衣服，捆绑着押送给慕容白曜，逼迫他叩头下拜，沈文秀说： 两人都是国家的大臣，为什么要我下跪！ 
English: The Northern Wei soldiers went up to catch him, stripped him of his clothes, tied him up and escorted him to Murong Baiyou, forcing him to bow down. Shen Wenxiu said: Both are ministers of the state, why should I kneel down!

古文：白曜还其衣，为之设馔，锁送平城。
现代文：慕容白曜还给他衣服，送给他饭菜，加上脚镣手铐，押送平城。
English: Murong Baiyou gave him back his clothes, gave him food, added leg irons and handcuffs, and escorted him to Pingcheng.

古文：魏主数其罪而宥之，待为下客，给恶衣、疏食；既而重其不屈，稍嘉礼之，拜外都下大夫。
现代文：北魏国主列举他的罪过，加以斥责，然后赦免，把他当作下等宾客相待，穿粗布衣服，吃素食。不久，因为敬重他决不屈服的气慨，稍稍以礼相待，任命他为外都下大夫。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty enumerated his sins, reprimanded him, then pardoned him, treated him as an inferior guest, wore coarse cloth clothes, and ate vegetarian food. Soon, because he respected his never-yielding spirit, he treated him with a little courtesy and appointed him as a foreign doctor.

古文：于是青、冀之地尽入于魏矣。
现代文：从此，青、冀之地全部并入北魏的版图。
English: From then on, Qing and Ji provinces were all incorporated into the territory of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：二月，己卯，魏以慕容白曜为都督青、齐、东徐三州诸军事、征南大将军、开府仪同三司、青州刺史，进爵济南王。
现代文：戊辰，北魏平昌宣王和其奴去世。二月，乙卯，北魏任命慕容白曜为都督青、齐、东徐三州诸军事，征南大将军，开府仪同三司，青州刺史，封为济南王。
English: In February, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Murong Baiyou as the military governor of the three states of Qing, Qi, and Dongxu, the general of the Southern Expedition, the keeper of the imperial residences and the three departments, the historian of Qingzhou, and the king of Jinan.

古文：白曜抚御有方，东人安之。
现代文：慕容白曜安抚有方，征服的东齐一带的人民安心生活。
English: Murong Baiyou has a way of pacifying and conquering the people of the Dongqi area to live a safe life.

古文：魏自天安以来，比岁旱饥，重以青、徐用兵，山东之民疲于赋役。
现代文：北魏自天安年间以来，连年大旱饥荒，再加上对青、徐等州用兵，崤山以东人民的田赋徭役非常沉重。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, since the period of Tian'an, successive years of drought and famine, coupled with the use of soldiers in the states of Qing and Xu, the people east of Lushan have been very heavy.

古文：显祖命因民贫富，为三等输租之法，等为三品：上三品输平城，中输它州，下输本州。
现代文：献文帝命令根据人民的贫富分为三等，作为征收赋税的标准，每等再分三级，上三级运到平城，中三级运到其他各州，下三级则运到本州州府。
English: Emperor Xianwen ordered to divide the people into three classes according to their wealth and poverty. As the standard for tax collection, each class was divided into three levels. The upper three levels were shipped to Pingcheng, the middle three levels were shipped to other states, and the lower three levels were shipped to the state capital of the state.

古文：又，魏旧制：常赋之外，有杂调十五；至是悉罢之，由是民稍赡给。
现代文：另外，北魏旧制度规定：除正常的田赋之外，还有十五种杂税。这一年全部废除，从此人民生活稍稍可以自给了。
English: In addition, the old system of the Northern Wei Dynasty stipulated that in addition to the normal land tax, there were fifteen kinds of miscellaneous taxes. This year, all of them were abolished, and from then on, the people could live a little more independently.

古文：河东柳欣慰等谋反，欲立太尉庐江王祎。
现代文：河东郡人柳欣慰等聚众谋反，打算拥护太尉庐江王刘当皇帝。
English: The people of Hedong County, including Liu Jinyuan, gathered to plot a rebellion, intending to support the Tai Liang, the king of the Min River, Liu Dang, as emperor.

古文：祎自以于帝为兄，而帝及诸兄弟皆轻之，遂与欣慰等通谋相酬和。
现代文：刘自以为是明帝的哥哥，但明帝和其他兄弟都对他很轻视，于是刘与柳欣慰等结交，制订计划互相呼应配合。
English: Liu believed himself to be the elder brother of Emperor Ming, but Emperor Ming and the other brothers despised him, so Liu made friends with Liu Xinyu and others, and made plans to coordinate with each other.

古文：征北咨议参军杜幼文告之，丙申，诏降祎为车骑将军、开府仪同三司、南豫州刺史，出镇宣城，帝遣腹心杨运长领兵防卫。
现代文：征北谘议参军杜幼文向朝廷告发。丙申，明帝下诏贬黜刘为车骑将军、开府仪同三司、南豫州刺史，镇守宣城。明帝派心腹侍从杨运长率军防卫。
English: Du Youwen reported to the imperial court that he had been consulted about joining the army to conquer the north. According to Du Youwen, the Ming Emperor issued an edict to demote Liu to the rank of cavalry general, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, Nan Yu Zhou Zhishi, and the town guard of Xuancheng. The Ming Emperor sent his trusted attendant Yang Yun Chang to lead the army to defend the city.

古文：欣慰等并伏诛。
现代文：柳欣慰等全被诛杀。
English: Yanagi Kinen and others were all killed in the fighting.

古文：三月，魏人寇汝阴，太守杨文苌击却之。
现代文：三月，北魏军队进攻汝阴。汝阴太守杨文苌击退北魏的进攻。
English: In March, the Northern Wei army attacked Ruyin. Yang Wenyi, the governor of Ruyin, repulsed the Northern Wei attack.

古文：夏，四月，丙申，魏大赦。
现代文：夏季四月，丙申，北魏实行大赦。
English: In the summer of April, the Northern Wei implemented an amnesty.

古文：五月，魏徙青、齐民于平城，置升城、历城民望于桑干，立平齐郡以居之；自馀悉为奴婢，分赐百官。
现代文：五月，北魏把青州、齐州的百姓迁移到平城，把升城、历城的豪门望族安置在桑干，设立平齐郡，让他们居住在这里。其他居民则被当作奴婢，分别赏赐给文武百官。
English: In May, the Northern Wei Dynasty moved the people of Qingzhou and Qizhou to Pingcheng, and placed the high-ranking noble families of Shengcheng and Licheng in Sangan, and set up Pingqi County for them to live here. Other residents were treated as slaves and were separately rewarded to civil and military officials.

古文：魏沙门统昙曜奏： 平齐户及诸民有能岁输谷六十斛入僧曹者，即为僧祇户，粟为僧祇粟，遇凶岁，赈给饥民。 
现代文：北魏的沙门统昙曜奏请： 平齐郡郡民及其他种族人，凡能够每年捐赠谷米六十斛给寺庙的，称 僧祗户 ，所捐献的谷米，称 僧祗粟 。遇到饥荒，拿出来赈灾，救济饥民。 
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, people of the county of Pingqi and other ethnic groups were invited to donate grain to the temple. Those who were able to donate 60 mu of grain to the temple each year were called monks. The donated grain was called monks' poppy. In the event of famine, it was taken out to relieve the famine and help the hungry.

古文：又请： 民犯重罪及官奴，以为佛图户，以供诸寺扫洒。 
现代文：又请求： 民间的重刑犯和发配到官府的奴隶，可以当作 佛图户 ，到各寺庙当差洒扫。 
English: He also requested that non-governmental felons and slaves sent to government offices could be used as Buddha statues and sent to temples as scavengers.

古文：魏主并许之。
现代文：北魏国主全部批准。
English: All the Northern Wei sovereigns approved it.

古文：于是僧祇户、粟及寺户遍于州镇矣。
现代文：于是 僧祗户 、 僧祗粟 、 佛图户 遍及各州镇。
English: As a result, "Monk's residence," "Monk's poppy" and "Buddha's residence" have sprung up all over the prefectures.

古文：六月，魏立皇子宏为太子。
现代文：六月，北魏立皇子拓跋宏为太子。
English: In June, the Northern Wei Dynasty made Prince Tuoba Hong the crown prince.

古文：癸酉，以左卫将军沈攸之为郢州刺史。
现代文：癸酉，任命左卫将军沈攸之为郢州刺史。
English: On the 9th, General of the Left Division Shen Yu was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：上又令有司奏庐江王祎忿怼有怨言，请穷治；不许。
现代文：明帝命下属有关部门启奏，说庐江王刘忿恨不满而且口出怨言，请求彻底处理他。明帝不许。
English: The relevant departments under the order of Emperor Ming issued a notice, saying that Liu, the king of the Min River, was angry and dissatisfied and complained, requesting that he be dealt with thoroughly. Emperor Ming did not allow it.

古文：丁丑，免祎官爵，遣大鸿胪持节奉诏责祎，因逼令自杀，子辅国将军充明废徙新安。
现代文：丁丑，明帝下诏：免除刘的所有官爵，派大鸿胪持节带着诏书前去斥责刘，从而逼令刘自杀。刘的儿子辅国将军刘充明也被废默，放逐到新安。
English: Ding Xi, Ming Emperor issued an edict: exempt Liu from all titles and ranks, and send Dahong Zhi Jie to reprimand Liu with an edict, thus forcing Liu to commit suicide. Liu's son, General Liu Chengming, was also silenced and exiled to Xin'an.

古文：冬，十月，丁卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季十月，丁卯朔，出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurs in the winter month of October.

古文：魏顿丘王李峻卒。
现代文：北魏顿丘王李峻去世。
English: Li Jun, the king of North Weidong Hill, passed away.

古文：十一月，丁未，魏复遣使来修和亲，自是信使岁通。
现代文：十一月，丁未，北魏再次派使节来请求两国和亲。自此，两国恢复邦交，每年都有使节来往。
English: In November, Ding Wei, the Northern Wei Dynasty once again sent envoys to request peace between the two countries. Since then, the two countries have resumed diplomatic relations, and envoys have come and gone every year.

古文：闰月，戊子，以辅师将军猛阳为兗州刺史，始治淮阴。
现代文：闰十一月，戊子，任命辅师将军孟阳为兖州刺史，开始时治所设在淮阴。
English: In November of the leap year, Wu Zi appointed the assistant division general Meng Yang as the governor of Zhangzhou. At the beginning, the administrative office was located in Huaiyin.

古文：十二月，戊戌，司徒建安王休仁解扬州。
现代文：十二月，戊戌，解除司徒、建安王刘休仁的扬州刺史职务。
English: In December, the State Council of the People's Republic of China, the State Council of the People's Republic of China, and the State Council of the People's Republic of China, the State Council of the People's Republic of China.

古文：休仁年与上邻亚，素相友爱，景和之世，上赖其力以脱祸。
现代文：刘休仁跟明帝刘年龄相差不大，一向友爱。废帝时代，刘每次发生危险时，都靠刘休仁的机智救他不死。
English: There was not much difference in age between Liu Xuren and the Ming Emperor Liu, and they were always friends. In the era of the deposed emperor, whenever there was a danger, Liu would rely on Liu Xuren's wit to save him from death.

古文：及泰始初，四方兵起，休仁亲当矢石，克成大功，任总百揆，亲寄甚隆；由是朝野辐凑，上渐不悦。
现代文：到了泰始初年，全国四处兵起，刘休仁率军出征，亲冒滚石飞箭，最后终于建立大功，总管文武百官，受到明帝的宠爱和信任。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, troops were raised in all parts of the country. Liu Xiu Ren led the army to go to war, and personally took up the role of rolling stones and flying arrows. Finally, he finally established the Great Merit, the chief of the civil and military officials, and was loved and trusted by Emperor Ming.

古文：休仁悟其旨，故表解扬州。
现代文：这样自然而然，朝廷官员、民间人士，都奔走在他的门下，明帝渐渐有些不高兴。
English: As a matter of course, court officials and people from the general public all flocked to his door, and Emperor Ming gradually became somewhat unhappy.

古文：己未，以桂阳王休范为扬州刺史。
现代文：刘休仁察觉到明帝的心思，所以上疏请求解除扬州刺史的职务。己未，明帝任命桂阳王刘休范为扬州刺史。
English: Liu Xuren was aware of Emperor Ming's thoughts, so he reluctantly asked Emperor Ming to relieve him of his duties as Yangzhou's chief historian. Before long, Emperor Ming appointed Guiyang King Liu Xufan as Yangzhou's chief historian.

古文：分荆州之巴东、建平，益州之巴西、梓潼郡，置三巴校尉，治白帝。
现代文：刘宋分割荆州的巴东郡、建平郡，益州的巴西郡、梓潼郡，设立三巴校尉，治所设在白帝。
English: Liu Song divided Badong County and Jianping County in Jingzhou, and Brazil County and Zizhou County in Yizhou, and established the three-bus captain, with the administrative office in Baidu.

古文：先是，三峡蛮、獠岁为抄暴，故立府以镇之。
现代文：在此之前，三峡一带蛮族及獠族，年年抢劫抄掠，所以设立三巴府镇压他们。
English: Prior to this, the barbarians and the Yi people around the Three Gorges had been robbing and plundering year after year, so Sanba Prefecture was established to suppress them.

古文：上以司徒参军东莞孙谦为巴东、建平二郡太守。
现代文：明帝任命司徒参军东莞人孙谦为巴东、建平二郡太守。
English: Emperor Ming appointed Sun Qian, who was from Dongguan and had joined the army, as Padong and Jianping, the governor of the two counties.

古文：谦将之官，敕募千人自随，谦曰： 亦夷不宾，盖待之失节耳，何烦兵役以为国费！ 
现代文：孙谦将要前去上任，明帝准他招募一千人同去，孙谦说： 蛮夷所以叛乱，是官府对他们太苛刻之故，何必兴师动众，消耗国家经费！ 
English: When Sun Qian was about to take office, Emperor Ming allowed him to recruit a thousand people to go with him. Sun Qian said, "The reason why the barbarians rebelled was because the government was too harsh on them. Why should they mobilize and consume state funds?

古文：固辞不受。
现代文：坚决不肯接受。
English: Sun Qian resolutely refused to accept soldiers.

古文：至郡，开布恩信，蛮、獠翕然怀之，竞饷金宝；谦皆慰谕，不受。
现代文：孙谦抵达郡府，开诚布公，推广恩德信义，蛮、獠族全都心服口服，纷纷争着进献金银财宝。孙谦一一安慰教导，拒绝馈赠。
English: When Sun Qian arrived at the county seat, he was open and honest, and promoted benevolence, loyalty and righteousness. The barbarians and the Yi people were all convinced and competed to donate gold, silver and treasure. Sun Qian consoled and taught one by one, and refused to give gifts.

古文：临海贼帅田流自称东海王，剽掠海盐，杀鄞令，东土大震。
现代文：临海郡强盗首领田流自称东海王，抢劫海盐，杀了鄞县县令，东方各郡大为震惊。
English: The leader of the robbers in Linhai County, Tian Liu, claimed to be the king of the East Sea, robbed sea salt, and killed the county magistrate of Handan County. The counties in the East were greatly shocked.

古文：太宗明皇帝中泰始六年
现代文：泰始六年庚戌，公元年
English: 6th year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, AD

古文：春，正月，乙亥，初制间二年一祭南郊，间一年一祭明堂。
现代文：春季，正月，乙亥，开始建立祭礼规定：每隔二年，到南郊祭一次天；每隔一年，在明堂祭祀一次祖先。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, and the second month of the year of the boar, they began to establish the festival regulations: every two years, they would go to the southern suburbs to hold a festival; every other year, they would hold a sacrifice for their ancestors in the Ming Hall.

古文：二月，壬寅，以司徒休仁为太尉，领司徒；固辞。
现代文：二月，壬寅，任命司徒刘休仁为太尉，仍兼任司徒。
English: In February, Ren Yin appointed Liu Xuren, a scholar, as a lieutenant, and he still served as a scholar.

古文：癸丑，纳江智渊孙女为太子妃。
现代文：刘休仁坚决辞谢。癸丑，明帝命太子刘昱娶江智渊的孙女江简为太子妃。
English: Liu Xuren resolutely declined the offer. However, Emperor Ming's crown prince Liu Bei married Jiang Zhiyuan's granddaughter, Jiang Jian, to become the crown princess.

古文：甲寅，大赦。
现代文：甲寅，实行大赦。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：令百官皆献物；始兴太守孙奉伯止献琴、书，上大怒，封药赐死，既而原之。
现代文：明帝命文武百官呈献礼物，始兴太守孙奉伯只呈崐献弦琴、书籍。明帝大怒，派人送去毒药，赐孙奉伯一死，但马上又下令原谅了他。
English: Emperor Ming ordered all officials to present gifts, but Sun Bongbo, the Shixing governor, only presented a gong, a stringed instrument, and books. Emperor Ming was so angry that he sent someone to poison Sun Bongbo to death, but he immediately ordered to forgive him.

古文：魏以东郡王陆定国为司空。
现代文：北魏任命东郡王陆定国为司空。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the East County King Lu Dingguo as the Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：定国，丽之子也。
现代文：陆定国是陆丽的儿子。
English: Lu Dingguo is Lu Li's son.

古文：魏主遣征西大将军上党王长孙观击吐谷浑。
现代文：北魏国主派征西大将军上党王长孙观攻打吐谷浑。
English: The head of the Northern Wei Dynasty dispatched the general of the Western Expedition, the former king of the party, Sun Quan, to attack Tugu Hun.

古文：夏，四月，辛丑，魏大赦。
现代文：夏季四月，辛丑，北魏实行大赦。
English: In the summer of April, Xinwu, the Northern Wei Dynasty implemented an amnesty.

古文：戊申，魏长孙观与叶欲浑王拾寅战于曼头山，拾寅败走，遣别驾康盘龙入贡，魏主囚之。
现代文：戊申，北魏长孙观与吐谷浑王慕容拾寅在曼头山大战，慕容拾寅战败逃走，派别驾康盘龙到北魏进贡，北魏国主把他囚入监牢。
English: Wu Shen, Northern Wei Emperor Sun Quan and Tu Gu Hun King Murong Shu Yin fought in the Battle of Mantou Mountain. Murong Shu Yin was defeated and fled. He was assigned to drive Kangpan Long to the Northern Wei Empire to pay tribute. The Northern Wei Emperor imprisoned him.

古文：癸亥，立皇子燮为晋熙王，奉晋熙王昶后。
现代文：癸亥，明帝立皇子刘燮为晋熙王，继承晋熙王刘昶为其后嗣。
English: In the Year of the Rooster, the Ming Emperor appointed Prince Liu Bei as the King of Jinxi, and Liu Bei, who succeeded the King of Jinxi, became his heir.

古文：五月，魏立皇弟长乐为建昌王。
现代文：五月，北魏立皇弟拓跋长乐为建昌王。
English: In May, the Northern Wei Dynasty established Prince Tuoba Changle as King Jianchang.

古文：六月，癸卯，以江州刺史王景文为尚书左仆射、扬州刺史，以尚书仆射袁粲为右仆射。
现代文：六月，癸卯，任命江州刺史王景文为尚书左仆射、扬州刺史，尚书仆射袁粲为右仆射。
English: In June, he appointed Wang Jingwen, the governor of Jiangsu Province, as his right-hand man, Yangzhou governor as his left-hand man, and Yuan Qi, the governor of Jiangsu Province, as his right-hand man.

古文：上宫中大宴，裸妇人而观之，王后以户扇障面。上怒曰： 外舍寒乞！
现代文：明帝在宫中大摆宴席，命妇女脱光衣服，让大家欣赏，皇后用扇子挡住面庞，明帝大怒说： 真是穷家的寒酸相！
English: Emperor Ming held a grand banquet in the palace. He ordered the women to strip naked for everyone to admire. The empress shielded her face with a fan. Emperor Ming said angrily, "What a shabby look for a poor family!"

古文：今共为乐，何独不视！ 
现代文：今天大家一同取乐，为什么只你不看！ 
English: Today we all have fun together, why don't you watch it!

古文：后曰： 为乐之事，其方自多；岂有姑姊妹集，而裸妇人以为笑！
现代文：皇后说： 寻求欢乐的方法很多，哪有姑嫂姐妹聚在一起观看裸体妇女取乐的！
English: The Empress said, "There are many ways to seek pleasure, but how many brothers and sisters get together to watch naked women for fun!"

古文：外舍之乐，雅异于此。 
现代文：我们家的欢乐，与此不同。 
English: Our family's joy, however, is different.

古文：上大怒，遣后起。
现代文：明帝更是大怒，赶皇后出去。
English: Emperor Ming was even more furious and drove the empress out.

古文：后兄景文闻之，曰： 后在家劣弱，今段遂能刚正如此！ 
现代文：皇后的哥哥王景文听说这件事，说： 我妹妹在家时，性情柔弱，想不到这次竟如此刚正。 
English: When the queen's brother Wang Jingwen heard about this, he said, "When my sister was at home, she had a weak temperament. I didn't expect her to be so forthright this time.

古文：南兗州刺史萧道成在军中久，民间或言道成有异相，当为天子。
现代文：南兖州刺史萧道成在军旅中已经很长时间。民间有人传言说萧道成的相貌和普通人不一样，应当做天子。
English: Xiao Daocheng, the governor of Nanlu County, has been in the military for a long time. Some people say that Xiao Daocheng's appearance is different from ordinary people, and he should be the son of heaven.

古文：上疑之，征为黄门侍郎、越骑校尉。
现代文：明帝有了疑虑，下诏征召萧道成回京任黄门侍郎、越骑校尉。
English: When Emperor Ming had doubts, he issued an edict summoning Xiao Daocheng back to Beijing to serve as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain and the Yue's cavalry captain.

古文：道成惧，不欲内迁，而无计得留。
现代文：萧道成很恐惧，不想回京，可是又没有办法留下来不走。
English: Xiao Daocheng was very scared and didn't want to go back to Beijing, but there was no way he could stay.

古文：冠军参军广陵荀伯玉劝道成遣数十骑入魏境，安置标榜，魏果遣游骑数百履行境上；道成以闻，上使道成复本任。
现代文：冠军参军广陵人荀伯玉劝萧道成派数十个骑兵，深入北魏国境，张贴布告，号召居民起义。北魏果然派出游骑兵数百人，沿边境巡逻。萧道成紧急报告朝廷，明帝才恢复萧道成的原职。
English: The champion Guangling soldier Zou Boyu advised Xiao Daocheng to send dozens of cavalrymen deep into the Northern Wei border, post notices, and call on residents to revolt. The Northern Wei sent hundreds of rangers to patrol along the border. Xiao Daocheng urgently reported to the imperial court, and the Ming emperor restored Xiao Daocheng's original position.

古文：秋，九月，命道成迁镇淮阴。
现代文：秋季，九月，明帝命萧道成迁驻淮阴。
English: In the autumn, in September, the Ming Dynasty ordered Xiao Dao Cheng to move to Huaiyin.

古文：以侍中、中领军刘勔为都督南徐、兗等五州诸军事，镇广陵。
现代文：任命侍中、中领军刘为都督南徐州、兖州等五州诸军事，镇守广陵。
English: He appointed Liu, the second-in-command and commander-in-chief, as the military governor of five states, including South Xuzhou and Ganzhou, and the town guard of Guangling.

古文：戊寅，立总明观，置祭酒一人，儒、玄、文、史学士各十人。
现代文：戊寅，设立总明观，任命祭酒一人，儒学、玄学、文学、史学学士各十人。
English: Wu Yin, set up the General Mingguan, appointed one person of the sacrificial wine, and ten people of Confucianism, metaphysics, literature and history.

古文：柔然部真可汗侵魏，魏主引郡臣议之。
现代文：柔然汗国部真可汗侵略北魏，北魏国主集合群臣商议。
English: When Genghis Khan, the head of the Mongolian Khanate, invaded the Northern Wei Dynasty, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty gathered a group of vassals to discuss.

古文：尚书右仆射南平公目辰日： 若车驾亲征，京师危惧，不如持重固守。
现代文：尚书右仆射南平公拓跋目辰说： 如果皇上御驾亲征，京师将陷入惊恐，不如小心慎重，采取守势。
English: Shangshu's right-hand man, Nanping Gongtuo Baime, said: If the emperor personally leads the enlistment, the Beijing division will fall into panic. It is better to be careful and take a defensive position.

古文：虏悬军深入，粮运无继，不久自退；遣将追击，破之必矣。 
现代文：胡虏孤军深入，粮秣补给，不能供应，用不了多久，就会自行撤退；到那时派将士追击，一定会把他们击败。 
English: The Khurik's lone army is deeply entrenched, unable to resupply with grain and straw, and will withdraw on its own before long; at that time, send soldiers to chase them, and they will surely be defeated.

古文：给事中张白泽曰： 蠢尔荒愚，轻犯王略，若銮舆亲行，必望麾崩散，岂可坐而纵敌！
现代文：给事中张白泽说： 蛮荒地带的愚崐蠢丑类，轻率冒犯边界，如果御驾能够亲征，望见我们旗帜，他们就会一哄而散，怎么能坐在这里放纵敌人横行！
English: Zhang Baizhe said in the report: "The foolish, stupid and ugly people in the wild areas rashly violate the border. If you can personally go and see our flag, they will scatter at once. How can you sit here and allow the enemy to run rampant!

古文：以万乘之尊，婴城自守，非所以威服四夷也。 
现代文：陛下以万乘之尊，而环城自守，这样不能威服四方夷族。 
English: His majesty, with the veneration of the Mahayana, while surrounding the city with self-defence, could not in this way overawe the barbarians in all directions.

古文：魏主从之。
现代文：北魏国主同意。
English: Tuobao adopted Cui Hao's opinion.

古文：白泽，衮之孙也。
现代文：张白泽是张兖的孙子。
English: Zhang Baizhe is the grandson of Zhang Ye.

古文：魏主使京兆王子推等督诸军出西道，任城王云等督诸军出东道，汝阴王天赐等督诸军为前锋，陇西王源贺等督诸军为后断，镇西将军吕罗汉等掌留台事。
现代文：北魏国主命京兆王拓跋子推等率各军从西路进击，任城王拓跋云等率各军从东路进击，汝阴王拓跋天赐等率各军为先锋，陇西王源贺等率各军为后继部队，镇西将军吕罗汉等留守朝廷。
English: The armies of the Northern Wei State, led by the main commander of the Northern Wei State, Jing Zhao Wang Tuoba Zi, advanced from the west, led by Ren Shi Wang Tuoba Yun, led by the armies from the east, led by Ru Yin Wang Tuoba Tian Zi, led by the armies as the vanguard, led by the armies of the Western Wei State, led by the armies of the Western Wei State, led by the armies of the Western Wei State, led by the armies of the Western Wei State, led by the armies from the west, led by the armies from the west, led by the armies from the east, led by the armies from the east, led by the armies from the

古文：诸将会魏主于女水之滨，与柔然战，柔然大败。
现代文：各将领与北魏国主在女水河畔会合，迎战柔然汗国军队，柔然军队大败。
English: The generals and the Northern Wei sovereigns met on the banks of the Yeosu River to fight against the Joran Khan's army, and the Joran army was soundly defeated.

古文：乘胜逐北，斩首五万级，降者万馀人，犹戎马器械不可胜计。
现代文：北魏军乘胜追击，杀了五万人，受降一万多人，缴获战马、武器数不胜数。
English: The Northern Wei Army took advantage of the victory to pursue, killed fifty thousand people, surrendered more than ten thousand people, and captured countless horses and weapons.

古文：旬有九日，往返六千馀里。
现代文：北魏军在十九天中，往返六千多里。
English: The Northern Wei Army made a round trip of more than 6,000 miles in 19 days.

古文：改女水曰武川。
现代文：女水从此改名为武川。
English: Henceforth, Onna-mizu changed its name to Takekawa.

古文：司徒东安王刘尼坐昏醉，军陈不整，免官。
现代文：司徒东安王刘尼因酒醉昏迷，军阵混乱不堪，被罢了官。
English: Liu Ni, the King of Eastern An, fell into a drunken stupor, the army was in chaos, and he was dismissed from his post.

古文：壬申，还至平城。
现代文：壬申，返回平城。
English: Jinshin, back to Pingcheng.

古文：是时，魏百官不给禄，少能以廉白自立者。魏主诏： 吏受所监临羊一口、酒一斛者，死；与者以从坐论。
现代文：当时，北魏的文武百官没有俸禄，很少有人能清正廉洁，北魏国主下诏： 官员接受所管辖范围内的一只羊、一斛酒的，处死；行贿的人以从犯论处。
English: At that time, the hundreds of civil and military officials of the Northern Wei Dynasty did not have a salary, and few people could be honest and clean. The Northern Wei Dynasty issued an edict: Officials who accepted a sheep or a bunch of wine within their jurisdiction would be put to death; those who paid bribes would be punished as accomplices.

古文：有能纠告尚书已下罪状者，随所纠官轻重授之。 
现代文：如果有人揭发尚书以下官员犯罪，则免除被揭发官员的职位，由揭发人接任。 
English: If someone exposes the crime of an official below Shang Shu, the position of the exposed official will be exempted, and the whistleblower will take over.

古文：张白泽谏曰： 昔周之下士，尚有代耕之禄。
现代文：张白泽劝谏说： 从前周王时，最低级的官，都有足够他雇人耕田的薪俸。
English: Zhang Baizhe advised him: "Once upon a time, during the reign of King Zhou, the lowest-ranking official had enough salary to hire someone to cultivate the fields.

古文：今皇朝贵臣，服勤无报；若使受礼者刑身，纠之者代职，臣恐奸人窥望，忠臣懈节，如此而求事简民安，不亦难乎！
现代文：而今朝廷贵臣，辛勤工作却无报酬。如果让接受礼物的官员受到刑罚，而由揭发者代替他的职位，我恐怕奸邪之辈，乘机制造事端，忠贞之士，灰心懈怠。想如此而求得简政民安，那不也是太难了嘛！
English: Today, the hard work of the dignitaries of the imperial court is unpaid. If the official who received the gift is punished, and the whistleblower takes his place, I am afraid that I will be a traitor, take the opportunity to cause trouble, and the loyal people will be discouraged and slack. If you want to achieve a simple government and peace, that is not too difficult!

古文：请依律令旧法，仍班禄以酬廉吏。 
现代文：请依照过去所颁布的法令，发给俸禄，以酬谢清廉官吏。 
English: Please, in accordance with the decrees issued in the past, pay a salary as a reward for cleaning up corrupt officials.

古文：魏主乃为之罢新法。
现代文：北魏国主这才撤销新办法。
English: It was only then that the ruler of Northern Wei revoked the new measures.

古文：冬，十月，辛卯，诏以世祖继体，陷宪无遗，以皇子智随为世祖子，立为武陵王。
现代文：冬季十月，辛卯，宋明帝下诏说：孝武帝的儿子，因为身犯国法，全被诛杀。命皇子刘智随过继到孝武帝名下为子，封为武陵王。
English: In the winter of October, Xinwu, Song Ming Emperor issued an edict saying: The sons of Emperor Xiaowu were all killed because they violated the laws of the country. His son, Liu Zhi, became the son of Emperor Xiaowu and was named King of Wuling.

古文：初，魏乙浑专政，慕容白曜颇附之。
现代文：当初，北魏丞相乙浑当权时，慕容白曜对他很是巴结奉承。
English: At first, when the Northern Wei chancellor Yi Hun was in power, Murong Baiyou was very flattering to him.

古文：魏主追以为憾，遂称白曜谋反，诛之，及其弟如意。
现代文：北魏国主忌恨在心，就说慕容白曜阴谋反叛，杀了他和他的弟弟慕容白如意。
English: The head of the Northern Wei State had hatred in his heart, so he said that Murong Bai You plotted to rebel and killed him and his brother Murong Bai Ruyi.

古文：初，魏南部尚书李敷，仪曹尚书李讠斤，少相亲善，与中书侍郎卢度世皆以才能为世祖、显祖所宠任，参豫机密，出纳诏命。
现代文：当初，北魏南部尚书李敷、仪曹尚书李从小感情亲密，他们与中书侍郎卢度世都因为有才能而受太武帝及献文帝的宠爱信任，参与国家的机密决策，负责撰写、发布诏书。
English: At the beginning, Shangshu Li Shiki and Yi Cao Shangshu Li from the southern part of the Northern Wei Dynasty had been close to each other since childhood. They and Lu, the servant of the Chinese Emperor, were loved and trusted by Emperor Taowu and Emperor Xianwen because of their talents. They participated in the confidential decision-making of the country and were responsible for writing and issuing the imperial edict.

古文：其后讠斤出为相州刺史，受纳货赂，为人所告，敷掩蔽之。
现代文：后来，李任相州刺史，接受贿赂钱财，被人告发，李敷为他掩饰。
English: Later, Li Ren Xiangzhou stabbed history, accepted bribe money, was denounced, and Li Shiki covered up for him.

古文：显祖闻之，槛车征讠斤，案验服罪，当死。
现代文：献文帝听说后，用囚车押李回平城，调查审理的结果，贪赃枉法的证据确凿，应当处死。
English: After hearing the news, Emperor Xianwen took Li back to Pingcheng in a prison van. According to the results of the investigation and trial, the evidence of corruption was conclusive and Li should be put to death.

古文：是时敷弟弈得幸于冯太后，帝意已疏之。
现代文：当时，李敷的弟弟李奕受冯太后的宠爱，献文帝心里已对他疏远。
English: At that time, Li Shiki's younger brother Li Yi was favored by Empress Dowager Feng, and Emperor Xianwen had already distanced himself from him.

古文：有司以中旨讽讠斤告敷兄弟阴事，可以得免。
现代文：有关部门奉献文帝之命，暗示李：如果他能出面揭发李敷兄弟二人的隐私，可以免死。
English: The relevant departments dedicated the order of Emperor Wen, suggesting to Li that if he could come forward to expose the privacy of the two Li brothers, he could be spared death.

古文：讠斤谓其婿裴攸曰： 吾与敷族世虽远，恩逾同生，今在事劝吾为此，吾情所不忍。
现代文：李对他的女婿裴攸说： 我与李敷虽然不同族，但二人的恩情超过亲兄弟。如今主管官员劝我做这种事，我于心不忍。
English: Li said to his son-in-law, Pei You: Although Li and I are from different ethnic groups, our kindness exceeds that of brothers and sisters. Now that the responsible officials are urging me to do such a thing, I can't bear it in my heart.

古文：每引簪自刺，解带自绞，终不得死。
现代文：几次拔下头簪刺自己，解下腰带自己上吊自杀，但都没有死成。
English: Several times he pulled off his head and stabbed himself, and untied his belt and hanged himself, but he did not die.

古文：且吾安能知其阴事！
现代文：而且我怎么能知崐道他们的隐私呢！
English: And how am I supposed to know about their private lives!

古文：将若之何？ 
现代文：你说怎么办？
English: What do you say?

古文：攸曰： 何为为人死也！
现代文：裴攸说： 你何必做替死的事呢？
English: Baeyou said, "Why do you have to do something to die for?

古文：有冯阐者，先为敷所败，其家深怨之。今询其弟，敷之阴事可得也。 
现代文：有个叫冯阐的人，先前被李敷害死，他的家里人深恨李敷，现在去问问他的弟弟，一定能探得李敷的隐私。 
English: There is a man named Feng Ying, who was previously killed by Li Shiki. His family members deeply hated Li Shiki. If you ask his younger brother, you will definitely be able to find out about Li Shiki's private life.

古文：讠斤从之。
现代文：李同意。
English: Lee agreed.

古文：又赵郡范檦条列敷兄弟事状凡三十馀条。有司以闻，帝大怒，诛敷兄弟。
现代文：正巧，赵郡人范上书告发李敷兄弟三十余条罪状，有关部门奏报，魏主献文帝大怒，诛杀李敷、李奕兄弟。
English: Coincidentally, the people of Zhao County filed a complaint against the Li Shiki brothers with more than 30 criminal charges, the relevant departments reported the case, and Emperor Wei was enraged and killed the Li Shiki and Li Yi brothers.

古文：讠斤得减死，鞭髡配役。
现代文：李得以免死，被鞭打，剃光头发，发配到奴工营服役。
English: Li was spared death, but was whipped, had his hair shaved, and was sent to serve in a slave labor camp.

古文：未几，复为太仓尚书，摄南部事。
现代文：稍后，又命他为太仓尚书，兼管南部事务。
English: Later, he was appointed as Taicang Shangshu, concurrently in charge of the southern affairs.

古文：敷，顺之子也。
现代文：李敷是李顺的儿子。
English: Li Shiki is the son of Li Shun.

古文：魏阳平王新成卒。
现代文：北魏阳平王拓跋新成去世。
English: Northern Wei Yangping King Tuoba Xincheng passed away.

古文：是岁，命龙骧将军义兴周山图将兵屯浃口讨田流，平之。
现代文：这年，刘宋命令龙骧将军义兴人周山图率兵进驻浃口，讨伐变民首领田流，并把他平定。
English: In that year, Liu Song ordered Longjing General Yi Xingren and Zhou Shantu to lead their troops into Hekou to fight against the mutineer leader Tian Lv and subdue him.

古文：柔然攻于阗，于阗遣使者素目伽奉表诣魏求救。
现代文：柔然汗国大军进攻于阗国，于阗国派使臣素目伽携带奏章，前往北魏请求救援。
English: The great army of the Mongolian Khanate attacked Yunnan, and Yunnan sent the envoy Su Mei Ga to the Northern Wei Dynasty to request rescue.

古文：魏主命公卿议之，毕曰： 于阗去京师几万里，蠕蠕唯习野掠，不能攻城；若其可攻，寻已亡矣。虽欲遣师，势无所及。 
现代文：北魏国主命王公大臣讨论，都说： 于阗国距京师近万里，蠕蠕只知道野地抢劫，不会攻城，如果他们会攻城，于阗国早已灭亡了，就是想派兵救援，也来不及了。 
English: Wang Gong, the chief minister of the Northern Wei Dynasty, said in his discussions: Yunnan Province is nearly ten thousand miles away from the Beijing Division. Creep Creep only knows field robbery and will not attack the city. If they attack the city, Yunnan Province has already perished. Even if you want to send troops to rescue, it is too late.

古文：魏主以议示使者，使者亦以为然。乃诏之曰： 朕应仇敕诸军以拯汝难。但去汝遐阻，必不能救当时之急，汝宜知之。
现代文：北魏国主把大家的意见拿给于阗使臣看，使臣也认为是这样，于是命使者带回诏书： 朕自当紧急动员各路大军，援救你的灾难，可是既距离你们遥远路又难行，一定无法解救你们眼前的紧急情况，希望你能了解。
English: The Northern Wei sovereign showed the opinions of everyone to the envoys of Yu Xi, and the envoys also thought so, so the envoys brought back the edict: I should urgently mobilize large armies from all directions to rescue your disaster, but since it is far away from you and difficult to travel, it will certainly not be able to rescue your immediate emergency, I hope you can understand.

古文：朕今练甲养士，一二岁间，当躬帅猛将，为汝除患。
现代文：朕现在正在严格训练部队，更新铠甲武器，一两年间，当亲率雄兵猛将，为你除患。
English: I am now rigorously training the troops, updating armor weapons, and in a year or two, I will be a strong soldier with my family, and I will remove the disease for you.

古文：汝其谨修警候，以待大举。 
现代文：你应谨慎警戒，等待大规模军事行动。 
English: You should be cautious and wait for large-scale military operations.

