古文：燕昭王收破燕后即位，卑身厚币，以招贤者，欲将以报雠。
现代文：燕昭王收拾了残破的燕国之后登上王位，他礼贤下士，用丰厚的聘礼来招纳贤才，想要依靠他们来报齐国破燕杀父的国仇家恨。
English: Yan Zhao Wang ascended to the throne after cleaning up the wreckage of Yan's country. He honored the corporals, used the rich bribe to recruit talents, and wanted to rely on them to make up for the hatred of the country's enemies caused by Yan's killing his father.

古文：故往见郭隗先生曰： 齐因孤国之乱，而袭破燕。孤极知燕小力少，不足以报。
现代文：为此他去见郭隗先生，说： 齐国乘人之危，攻破我们燕国，我深知燕国势单力薄，不足以报仇。
English: For this reason, he went to see Mr. Guo Wei and said: "Qi Guo took advantage of the danger of man to break through our Yan Guo. I know very well that Yan Guo's strength alone is not enough to take revenge.

古文：然得贤士与共国，以雪先王之耻，孤之愿也。
现代文：然而如果能得到贤士与我共同谋划，以雪先王之耻，这是我的愿望。
English: However, if I can get the wise men to work with me on a plan to shame the Snow King, that is my wish.

古文：敢问以国报雠者奈何? 
现代文：请问先生要报国家的大仇应该怎么办呢？ 
English: Excuse me, sir, what should I do if I want to report the country's great revenge?

古文：郭隗先生对曰： 帝者与师处，王者与友处，霸者与臣处，亡国与役处。
现代文：郭隗先生回答说： 成就帝业的国君以贤者为师，成就王业的国君将贤者当作朋友，成就霸业的国君以贤者为臣，行将灭亡的国君以贤者为仆役。
English: Mr. Guo Wei replied, "A prince who has achieved imperial success takes a wise man as his teacher, a prince who has achieved royal success takes a wise man as his friend, a prince who has achieved hegemony takes a wise man as his vassal, and a prince who is about to perish takes a wise man as his servant.

古文：诎指而事之，北面而受学，则百己者至。先趋而后息，先问而后嘿，则什己者至。
现代文：如果能够卑躬曲节地侍奉贤者，屈居下位接受教诲，那么比自己才能超出百倍的人就会到来；早些学习晚些休息，先去求教别人过后再默思，那么才能胜过自己十倍的人就会到来。
English: If one can humbly serve the wise and learn from the humble, then one will come who has a hundred times more talent than oneself; if one can study early and rest late, if one can learn from others first and meditate later, then one will come who has ten times more talent than oneself.

古文：人趋己趋，则若己者至。
现代文：别人怎么做，自己也跟着做，那么才能与自己相当的人就会来到。
English: If you do what others do, you will be able to do the same, and then people with talents comparable to your own will come to you.

古文：冯几据杖，眄视指使，则厮役之人至。
现代文：如果凭靠几案，拄着手杖，盛气凌人地指挥别人，那么供人驱使跑腿当差的人就会来到。
English: If you rely on a few cases, carry a cane, and command others in a domineering manner, then the person who drives errands will come.

古文：若恣睢奋击，呴籍叱咄，则徒隶之人至矣。
现代文：如果放纵骄横，行为粗暴，呵斥骂人，那么就只有奴隶和犯人来了。
English: If you indulge in arrogance, behave rudely, and shout abuse, then only slaves and prisoners will come.

古文：此古服道致士之法也。
现代文：这就是古往今来实行王道和招致人才的方法啊。
English: This is how the royal road and the method of attracting talent have been practiced from ancient times to the present.

古文：王诚博选国中之贤者，而朝其门下，天下闻王朝其贤臣，天下之士必趋于燕矣。 
现代文：大王若是真想广泛选用国内的贤者，就应该亲自登门拜访，天下的贤人听说大王的这一举动，就一定会赶着到燕国来。 
English: If the great king really wants to widely select domestic sages, he should personally visit the door. When the sages of the world hear about this move of the great king, they will certainly rush to Yan's country.

古文：昭王曰： 寡人将谁朝而可? 
现代文：昭王说： 我应当先拜访谁才好呢? 
English: Zhao Wang said, "Who should I visit first?"

古文：郭隗先生曰： 臣闻古之君人，有以千金求千里马者，三年不能得。
现代文：郭隗先生说道： 我听说古时有一位国君想用千金求购千里马，可是三年也没有买到。
English: Mr. Guo Wei said: I heard that in ancient times, there was a sovereign who wanted to spend a lot of money to buy a thousand horses, but he couldn't buy one for three years.

古文：涓人言于君曰： 请求之。 
现代文：宫中有个近侍对他说道： 请您让我去买吧。
English: One of the palace attendants said to him, "Please let me buy it."

古文：君遣之。
现代文：国君就派他去了。
English: The sovereign sent him away.

古文：三月得千里马，马已死，买其首五百金，反以报君。
现代文：三个月后他终于找到了千里马，可惜马已经死了，但是他仍然用五百金买了那匹马的脑袋，回来向国君复命。
English: Three months later, he finally found Chollima. Unfortunately, the horse was already dead, but he still bought the horse's head for five hundred gold and came back to ask the sovereign for his life.

古文：君大怒曰： 所求者生马，安事死马而捐五百金? 
现代文：国君大怒道： 我要的是活马，死马有什么用，而且白白扔掉了五百金？ 
English: The sovereign angrily said, "What I want is a live horse. What is the use of a dead horse, and have I thrown away five hundred gold coins for nothing?"

古文：涓人对曰： 死马且买之五百金，况生马乎?
现代文：这个近侍胸有成竹地对君主说： 买死马尚且肯花五百金，更何况活马呢?
English: This close attendant said to the monarch with confidence: He would even spend five hundred gold to buy a dead horse, let alone a live one?

古文：天下必以王为能市马，马今至矣。 
现代文：天下人一定都以为大王您擅长买马，千里马很快就会有人送了。
English: People around the world must think that you are good at buying horses, and someone will soon send you a thousand-mile horse.

古文：于是不能期年，千里之马至者三。
现代文：于是不到一年，三匹千里马就到手了。
English: As a result, less than a year later, three thoroughbreds were acquired.

古文：今王诚欲致士，先从隗始；隗且见事，况贤于隗者乎?
现代文：如果现在大王真的想要罗致人才，就请先从我开始吧；我尚且被重用，何况那些胜过我的人呢?
English: If the king really wants to recruit talent now, let him start with me; I have been used a lot, and what about those who are better than me?

古文：岂远千里哉? 
现代文：他们难道还会嫌千里的路程太遥远了吗? 
English: Will they still think that thousands of miles away is too far?

古文：于是昭王为隗筑宫而师之。
现代文：于是昭王为郭隗专门建造房屋，并拜他为师。
English: As a result, King Zhao specially built a house for Guo Qi, and worshiped him as a teacher.

古文：乐毅自魏往，邹衍自齐往，剧辛自赵往，士争凑燕。
现代文：消息传开，乐毅从魏国赶来，邹衍从齐国而来，剧辛也从赵国来了，人才争先恐后集聚燕国。
English: The news spread. Le Yi came from Wei, Xuan Yan from Qi, and Juxin from Zhao. Talents were scrambling to gather in Yan.

古文：燕王吊死问生，与百姓同甘共苦。
现代文：昭王又在国中祭奠死者，慰问生者，和百姓同甘共苦。
English: King Zhao also went around the country to pay tribute to the dead, to console the living, and to share the joys and sorrows of the people.

古文：二十八年，燕国殷富，士卒乐佚轻战。
现代文：燕昭王二十八年的时候，燕国殷实富足，国力强盛，士兵们心情舒畅愿意效命。
English: In the 28th year of Yan Zhao's reign, Yan's country was prosperous and strong, and the soldiers were in a good mood and willing to serve.

古文：于是遂以乐毅为上将军，与秦、楚、三晋合谋以伐齐，齐兵败，湣王出亡于外。
现代文：于是昭王用乐毅为上将军，和秦楚及三晋赵魏韩联合策划攻打齐国，齐国大败，齐闵王逃到国外。
English: As a result, Zhao Wang used Le Yi as his superior general, and jointly planned with Qin Chu and the three kings Zhao Wei and Han to attack Qi. Qi was defeated, and the king of Qi fled abroad.

古文：燕兵独追北，入至临淄，尽取齐宝，烧其宫室宗庙。
现代文：燕军又单独痛击败军，一直打到齐都临淄，掠取了那里的全部宝物，烧毁齐国宫殿和宗庙。
English: Yan's army single-handedly chased and defeated the fleeing Qi army, entered the Qi capital of Linyi, seized all the treasures of Qi, and burned the imperial palace of Qi.

古文：齐城之不下者，唯独莒、即墨。
现代文：没有被攻下的齐国城邑，只剩下莒和即墨。
English: Of the cities and towns in Qi that were not conquered, only Zouhe and Jiemo remain.

