古文：于栗磾
现代文：于栗磾，是代郡人。
English: Yu Kurihata is a representative of the county.

古文：于栗磾，代人也。能左右驰射，武艺过人。
现代文：能在马上左右开弓，武艺过人。
English: He can open the bow right and left at the same time, and his martial arts are excellent.

古文：登国中，拜冠军将军，假新安子。
现代文：登国年间，任冠军将军和非正式的新安子。
English: During the year of his ascension to the throne, he served as champion general and was awarded the title of Viscount Shinan.

古文：后与宁朔将军公孙兰领步骑二万，潜自太原从韩信故道开井陉路，袭慕容宝于中山。
现代文：后来与宁朔将军公孙兰率领步、骑兵二万，偷偷地从太原出发沿着汉代韩信当年的进军路栈打通井陉，到中山袭击慕容实。
English: Later, with the Ningshuo general Gongsun Lan leading the way and twenty thousand cavalrymen, he secretly set out from Taiyuan along the roadblock of Han Xin's march in the Han Dynasty, opened the shaft, and attacked Murongshi in Zhongshan.

古文：既而车驾后至，见道路修理，大悦，即赐其名马。
现代文：皇上随之来到，见道路已修，很高兴，当即赐给他名马。
English: The emperor came along, saw that the road had been repaired, was very pleased, and immediately gave him a famous horse.

古文：及赵魏平定，太祖置酒高会，谓栗磾曰： 卿即吾之黥彭。 
现代文：等赵魏平定，太祖设宴大会群臣，对栗蝉说： 你就是我的黥布彭越。 
English: Zhao Wei Pingding and other courtiers of the great ancestor's banquet said to the chestnut cicada: You are my broom Peng Yue.

古文：大赐金帛，进假新安公。
现代文：赏赐给他大量金帛，晋升为非正式的新安公。
English: He was rewarded with a large amount of gold ingots and promoted to the unofficial position of New An Kung.

古文：太祖田于白登山，见熊将数子，顾谓栗磾曰： 卿勇干如此，宁能搏之乎？ 
现代文：太祖在白登山打猎，见老熊带着几只小熊，便回头对栗弹说： 你这样有胆略和才干，难道不能与它们格斗一番吗? 
English: The great-great-grandfather was hunting in the Baidai Mountains. When he saw an old bear with several cubs, he turned to Li Shiguo and said, "You have such courage and talent, can't you fight with them?"

古文：对曰： 天地之性，人为贵。
现代文：栗蝉回答说： 万物之中，人是最高贵的。
English: The chestnut cicada replied, "Of all things, human beings are the most precious.

古文：若搏之不胜，岂不虚毙一壮士。
现代文：如果格斗不能取胜，难道不是白白地死去一位壮士。
English: If a fight cannot be won, is not the death of a brave man in vain?

古文：自可驱致御前，坐而制之。 
现代文：可以把它们驱赶到皇上前面，轻而易举地制服它们。 
English: You can drive them right up to your car and easily overpower them.

古文：寻皆擒获。
现代文：不久全部捕获。
English: They were all captured soon after.

古文：太祖顾而谢之。
现代文：太祖回头表示歉意。
English: The great-grandfather turned around and apologized.

古文：永兴中，关东群盗大起，西河反叛。
现代文：永兴年间，关东各地盗贼纷纷起事，西河反叛。
English: During the Yongxing era, thieves in various parts of Guangdong rose up one after another, and the West River rebelled.

古文：栗磾受命征伐，所向皆平，即以本号留镇平阳。
现代文：栗弹奉命征伐，所到之处都被平定，即以本官留守平阳。
English: Chestnut shells were ordered to conquer, and everywhere they went they were subdued, that is, they stayed in Pingyang as their own officials.

古文：转镇远将军，河内镇将，赐爵新城男。
现代文：改任镇远将军，河内镇将，被赐给爵位为新城男。
English: He was promoted to General Zhenyuan, General of Hanoi Town, and given the title of "New Town Man."

古文：栗磾抚导新邦，甚有威惠。
现代文：栗弹安抚刚刚平定的地区，很有政绩。
English: Chestnut shells pacified areas that had just been pacified, which was a great achievement.

古文：刘裕之伐姚泓也，栗磾虑其北扰，遂筑垒于河上，亲自守焉。
现代文：刘裕讨伐姚泓，栗磾担心他向北进，于是在遂回边修筑营垒，亲自镇守。
English: Liu Yu fought against Yao Xuan, and Li Xuan was worried that he was heading north, so he built a camp on the edge of Sui Hui and personally guarded the town.

古文：禁防严密，斥侯不通。
现代文：戒备森严，侦察的人也不能通过。
English: Security is tight, and no scouts can get through.

古文：裕甚惮之，不敢前进。
现代文：刘裕很惧怕他，不敢前进。
English: Liu Yu was very afraid of him and did not dare to move forward.

古文：裕遗栗磾书，远引孙权求讨关羽之事，假道西上，题书曰： 黑矛公麾下。 
现代文：刘裕送信给栗磾，援引孙权谋求讨伐关羽的事，借道西进，在信上称呼他 黑矛公麾下 。
English: Liu Yu sent a letter to Chestnut, invoking Sun Quan to seek to fight Guan Yu, by way of westward, calling him in the letter "Under the command of Black Spear."

古文：栗磾以状表闻，太宗许之，因授黑矛将军。
现代文：栗磾把情况上报朝廷，太宗赞许他，因而授予他黑稍将军。
English: Kurihata reported the situation to the Imperial Court, and Emperor Taizong praised him, thus awarding him the title of General Kurochi.

古文：栗磾好持黑矛以自标，裕望而异之，故有是语。
现代文：栗磾好手持黑矛来显示自己，刘裕望见他感到惊异，所以有这样的语句。
English: Chestnut is good at holding a black spear to show himself, and Liu Yimang was surprised to see him, so there is such a statement.

古文：奚斤之征虎牢也，栗磾别率众所部攻德宗河南太守王涓之于金墉，涓之弃城遁走。
现代文：奚斤征讨虎牢，栗辉另外率领所属部队在金墉攻打德宗的河南太守王涓之，涓之放弃城池逃走。
English: In addition to conquering the Tiger's Lair, Li Hui also led his troops to attack the Henan governor Wang Qizong of Dezong in Jinqiao. Qizong abandoned the city and fled.

古文：迁豫州刺史，将军如故，进爵新安侯。
现代文：升任豫州刺史，将军的职位依旧，升爵位为新安侯。
English: He was promoted to the post of the chief historian of Yuzhou, the position of the general was still the same, and he was promoted to the peerage as the new lord of An.

古文：洛阳虽历代所都，久为边裔，城阙萧条，野无烟火。
现代文：洛阳虽然是历代建都的地方，然而长期成为边境，城市残破，居民绝迹。
English: Although Luoyang is the place where successive dynasties built the capital, it has long become a border, the city is in ruins, and the inhabitants have disappeared.

古文：栗磾刊辟榛荒，劳来安集。
现代文：栗辉砍除杂草开垦荒地，慰问安抚前来的人。
English: Li Hui cut weeds and reclaimed wasteland, and comforted those who came.

古文：德刑既设，甚得百姓之心。太宗南幸盟津，谓栗磾曰： 河可桥乎？ 
现代文：恩威并用，很得民心。太宗南行到盟津，对栗弹说： 黄河上可以架桥吗? 
English: Taizong traveled south to Meituan and said to Li Gang: Can a bridge be built over the Yellow River?

古文：栗磾曰： 杜预造桥，遗事可想。 
现代文：栗弹说： 杜预曾造桥，遗事可以参考。 
English: Yu Chestnut said: Du Yue once built a bridge, with such a past, it should be possible.

古文：乃编次大船，构桥于冶坂。
现代文：于是按次序排列大船，在冶坂建造浮桥。
English: As a result, the large ships were lined up in order and a pontoon bridge was built at Hyesaka.

古文：六军既济，太宗深叹美之。
现代文：军队遇了黄河，太宗深深地赞美他。
English: When the army encountered the Yellow River, Emperor Taizong praised him deeply.

古文：世祖之征赫连昌，敕栗磾与宋兵将军、交趾侯周几袭陕城。
现代文：世祖征讨赫连昌，敕令栗磾与宋兵将军、交趾侯周几袭击陕城。
English: The founder of the Conquest of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors

古文：昌弘农太守曹达不战而走。
现代文：赫连昌的弘农太守曹达不战而逃。
English: Cao Da, the eunuch eunuch of Helianchang, fled without a fight.

古文：乘胜长驱，仍至三辅。
现代文：于是乘胜长驱直入，到达三辅。
English: As a result, they drove straight in using the winning train and arrived at Sanshu.

古文：进爵为公，加安南将军。
现代文：晋爵为公，加授安南将军。
English: A knighthood is in order, and General Annan has been given an additional award.

古文：平统万，迁蒲坂镇将。
现代文：平定统万城，升任蒲坂镇将。
English: He subdued Bancheng and was promoted to general of Busaka Town.

古文：时弘农、河内、上党三郡贼起，栗磾讨之。
现代文：此时弘农、河内、上党三郡发生叛乱，栗磾率军讨伐他们。
English: At this time, the three counties of Hongnong, Hanoi and Shangdang rebelled, and Li Gang led the army to fight them.

古文：转虎牢镇大将，加督河内军。
现代文：改任虎牢镇大将，加授督河内军。
English: He was reappointed as the general of Huadu Town and given the additional post of the commander of the Hanoi Army.

古文：寻迁使持节，都督兗相二州诸军事、镇南将军、枋头都将。
现代文：不久升任使持节、都督兖相二州诸军事、镇南将军、枋头都将。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of envoy to Jiji-sai, the military governor of two states, the general of Zhenan, and the governor of Shantou.

古文：又为外都大官，平刑折狱，甚有声称。
现代文：又任外都大官，判决案件，很有声誉。
English: He has also served as a high-ranking official in foreign capitals, adjudicating cases, and has a great reputation.

古文：卒，年七十五。
现代文：去世，享年七十五岁。
English: He died shortly afterwards, aged 75.

古文：赐东园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭，赠太尉公。
现代文：被赐予显贵用的棺材、朝服一套、衣一套。追赠为太尉公。
English: He was given a coffin for distinguished use, a set of morning dress, and a set of clothes. He was posthumously promoted to the rank of second lieutenant.

古文：栗磾自少治戎，迄于白首，临事善断，所向无前。
现代文：栗磾早年治军，直到白头，遇事善于决断，所向无前。
English: In his early years, Chestnut ruled the army until the end of his life. He was good at making decisions in times of crisis, and never looked back.

古文：加以谦虚下士，刑罚不滥。
现代文：加上谦虚地屈身交接贤士，刑罚有节制。
English: In addition to humbly bowing down and handing over the sage, the punishment is moderate.

古文：世祖甚悼惜之。
现代文：世祖非常哀伤惋惜他。
English: The patriarch was very sad and felt sorry for him.

古文：子洛拔，袭爵。
现代文：儿子于洛拔，继承爵位。
English: His son, Hubert, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：少以功臣子，拜侍御中散。
现代文：年轻时因为是功臣的儿子，任侍御中散。
English: When he was young, because he was the son of a meritorious vassal, he was dismissed from the position of chamberlain.

古文：有姿容，善应对，恭慎小心。
现代文：仪容美好，善于对答，谦恭谨慎。
English: She has a beautiful appearance, is good at answering questions, and is modest and cautious.

古文：世祖甚加爱宠，因赐名焉。
现代文：世祖对他非常宠爱，因而赠给他名号。
English: The patriarch was very fond of him and gave him his name.

古文：车驾征讨，恆在侍卫，擢领监御曹事。
现代文：皇上征讨，常常担任侍从护卫，被提拔为领监御曹事。
English: He was recruited by the emperor, often served as an attendant escort, and was promoted to the position of supervisor.

古文：从征凉州，既平，赐奴婢四十口，转监御曹令。
现代文：跟从征讨凉州，平定以后，被赐给奴婢四十人，改任监御曹令。
English: He followed the conquest of Liangzhou, and after it was subdued, he was given forty slaves and maidservants, and was appointed as the supervisor Cao Ling.

古文：恭宗之在东宫，厚加礼遇。洛拔以恭宗虽则储君，不宜逆自结纳，恆畏避屏退。左转领侯宫曹事。
现代文：恭宗做太子时，以重礼相待，洛拔以为恭宗虽然是嗣君，不应当反过来私自结交，经常畏惧退避，降任领候宫曹事。
English: When he was crown prince, he treated his father-in-law with great courtesy. Robert thought that although he was the heir to the throne, he should not, on the other hand, make private friends. He was often afraid to withdraw and abdicate his position as a courtier-in-waiting.

古文：顷之，袭爵。
现代文：不久，继承爵位。
English: After some time, he succeeded to his father's title.

古文：出为使持节，散骑常侍，宁东将军，和龙镇都大将，营州刺史。
现代文：出任使持节、散骑常侍、宁束将军、和龙镇都大将、营州刺史。
English: The envoys Jisai, Sanzhi, General Ningzoku, Longzhen, and Yingzhou Shishi were appointed.

古文：以治有能名，进号安东将军。
现代文：因有政绩和能干的名声，晋升为安束将军。
English: Due to his political achievements and reputation for ability, he was promoted to General Anzuka.

古文：又为外都大官。
现代文：又任外都大官。
English: He also held the post of Foreign Senior Official.

古文：会陇西屠各王景文等恃险窃命，私署王侯，高宗诏洛拔与南阳王惠寿督四州之众讨平之，徒其恶党三千余家于赵魏。
现代文：适逢陇西屠各王景文等依仗险要造反夺权，私封王侯，高宗韶令洛拔与南阳王惠寿统领四州军队讨伐平定他们，把他们中的邪恶党徒三千多家迁徙到趟魏两地。
English: At the right time, King Jingwen of the Western Shaanxi Tu and other kings were in danger of rebelling and seizing power, and the princes of the Shifu, Emperor Gao Zongzong, Emperor Lobat and Nanyang King Huishou led the armies of the four states to fight and pacify them, and more than three thousand evil party members among them migrated to the two places in Wei.

古文：转拜侍中，殿中尚书。
现代文：改任侍中、殿中尚书。
English: He was reappointed to the position of Samurai-chū (chamberlain) and became a courtier.

古文：迁尚书令，侍中如故。
现代文：升任尚书令，仍兼侍中。
English: He was promoted to Shang Shuling, still serving as a chamberlain.

古文：在朝祗肃，百僚惮之。
现代文：在朝恭谨严肃，百官敬畏。
English: In the morning, respect is serious, and hundreds of officials are in awe.

古文：太安四年卒，时年四十四。
现代文：太安四年去世，享年四十四岁。
English: Taian died four years later at the age of forty-four.

古文：洛拔有六子。
现代文：洛拔有六个儿子。
English: Robert had six sons.

古文：长子烈，善射，少言，有不可犯之色。
现代文：长子于烈，善于射箭，说话不多，有不可冒犯的神色。
English: Yu Robat's eldest son, Yu Lie, is good at archery, doesn't like to talk, and has a dignified and inviolable appearance.

古文：少拜羽林中郎，迁羽林中郎将。
现代文：年轻时任羽林中郎，升任羽林中郎将。
English: When he was young, he was appointed as Uebayashi chūro, and was promoted to Uebayashi chūro shogun.

古文：延兴初，敕领宁光宫宿卫事。
现代文：延兴初年，奉敕掌管宁光宫宿卫事。
English: In the first year of Yanxing, Feng Yu was in charge of the Ningguang Palace.

古文：迁屯田给纳。
现代文：升任屯田给纳。
English: Promoted to Tonden and given a salary.

古文：太和初，秦州刺史尉洛侯，雍州刺史、宜都王目辰，长安镇将陈提等，贪残不法。烈受诏案验，咸获赃罪，洛侯、目辰等皆致大辟，提坐徙边。
现代文：太和初年，秦州刺史尉洛侯，雍州刺史、宜都王目辰，长安镇将陈提等，贪婪凶残不守法，于烈奉诏令查证，贪污受贿罪都被查明，洛侯、目辰等人都被处死，陈提被判处流放边境。
English: In the first year of the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, Luo Hou from Qinzhou, Zishi from Yongzhou, Wang Muchen from Yidu, and Chen Ti from Chang'an Town were convicted of being greedy, cruel, and lawless. They were all investigated by imperial edict and found guilty of corruption and bribery. Luo Hou and Muchen were all executed, and Chen Ti was sentenced to be exiled to the border.

古文：仍以本官行秦雍二州事。
现代文：于是以原官职代理秦雍二州事务。
English: As a result, he assumed his former official position as Qin Yong's representative for the affairs of the two states.

古文：迁司卫监，总督禁旅。
现代文：升任司卫监，总管督率禁军。
English: He was promoted to the position of Division of Sanitation Supervisor, and became the commander-in-chief of the forbidden army.

古文：从幸中山，车驾还次肆州，司空苟颓表沙门法秀玄惑百姓，潜谋不轨，诏烈与吏部尚书囗丞祖驰驿讨之。
现代文：跟从到中山，皇上返回时停驻肆州，司空苟颓启奏僧侣法秀欺骗诱惑百姓，秘谋叛乱，韶令于烈与吏部尚书阙丞祖乘驿马疾行前去讨伐。
English: They followed the emperor to Zhongshan, and when the emperor returned, they stopped at Zhouzhou. The magistrate Kuang Guo and the monk Fa Xiu deceived and tempted the people, plotted a rebellion, and ordered Yu Li and the official Shang Shuxuan Zi to ride a horse to fight.

古文：会秀已平，转左卫将军，赐爵昌国子。
现代文：适逢法秀已被平定，改任左卫将军，被赐给爵位为昌国子。
English: At the right time, when Fa Xiu had been subdued, he was appointed General of the Left Division and given the title of the son of Chang Guo.

古文：迁殿中尚书，赐帛三千匹。
现代文：升任殿中尚书，被赏赐帛三千匹。
English: He was promoted to Shosho in the palace and was rewarded with 3,000 horses.

古文：于时高祖幼冲，文明太后称制，烈与元歪，陆叡，李冲等各赐金策，许以有罪不死。
现代文：当时高祖年幼，文明太后代行皇帝的职权，于烈与元丕、陆敔、李冲等分别被赐予金策，准许有罪不被处死。
English: At that time, Gao Zu was young, and the descendants of Wenming Taiping exercised the authority of the emperor. Yu Lie and Yuan Qi, Lu Qi, Li Chong, etc. were separately given the golden policy to allow the guilty not to be executed.

古文：加散骑常侍，迁前将军，进爵洛阳侯。
现代文：加授散骑常侍，升任前将军，升爵位为洛阳侯。
English: He was additionally awarded the title of straggler, promoted to former general, and given the title of Lord of Luoyang.

古文：寻转卫尉卿。
现代文：不久改任卫尉卿。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of Lieutenant-Commander.

古文：从驾南征，加镇南将军。
现代文：跟从皇上南征，加授镇南将军。
English: Following the Emperor's Southern Expedition, he was awarded the title of Zhenan General.

古文：及迁洛阳，人情恋本，多有异议。高祖问烈曰： 卿意云何？ 
现代文：等迁都洛阳，人情依恋故土，多有不同的意见，高祖问于烈说： 你的意见是什么? 
English: There are different opinions on the relocation of the capital to Luoyang and people's attachment to their native land. Gao Zu asked Yu Lie: What is your opinion?

古文：烈曰： 陛下圣略渊远，非愚管所测。
现代文：于烈说： 陛下神圣的深谋远虑，不是见识短浅的我所能推测的。
English: Yu Lie said: His Majesty's sacred forethought is not something that I, with my short-sightedness, can surmise.

古文：若隐心而言，乐迁之与恋旧，唯中半耳。 
现代文：如果就我的本心而言，乐迁与恋旧，各占一半。 
English: As far as my original intention is concerned, relocation and nostalgia each account for half.

古文：高祖曰： 卿既不唱异，即是同，深感不言之益。
现代文：高祖说： 你既然不提出相反的意见，就是赞同，深感不说话的好处。
English: Gao Zu said: Since you do not put forward the opposite opinion, you agree and deeply feel the benefit of not speaking.

古文：宜且还旧都，以镇代邑。 
现代文：应当暂且返回旧都，以便镇守代邑。 
English: It should temporarily return to the old capital in order to defend the vicinities.

古文：敕留台庶政，一相参委。
现代文：敕令留守旧都的官署政事，一概相托付处理。
English: The imperial edict left the government affairs of the government office in the old capital, and they were all entrusted to be dealt with.

古文：车驾幸代，执烈手曰： 宗庙至重，翼卫不轻，卿当祗奉灵驾，时迁洛邑。
现代文：皇上到代邑，握着于烈的手说： 宗庙最重要，护卫的责任不轻，你应当敬奉运送先帝牌位的车子，及时迁入洛邑。
English: The emperor went to Dayeup, held Yu Lie's hand and said: The ancestral temple is the most important, the responsibility of escorting is not light, you should respect the car transporting the former emperor's place and move into Dayeup in time.

古文：朕以此事相托顾，非不重也。 
现代文：朕把这事托付于你，不是不重要啊。 
English: I'm entrusting this to you. It's not unimportant.

古文：烈与高阳王雍奉迁神主于洛阳，高祖嘉其勋诚，迁光禄卿。
现代文：于烈与高垦延丞壅恭敬地把牌位迁到渣阳，高祖嘉许他的功绩和忠诚，升任他为光禄卿。
English: Yu Rong and Gao Jian respectfully moved the card rank to Jieyang, Gao Zu commended his achievements and loyalty, and promoted him to Guangluqing.

古文：十九年，大选百僚，烈子登引例求进。
现代文：十九年，大量选拔百官，于烈的儿子于登援引旧例谋求进身为官。
English: In the 19th year of the Taihe era, there were hundreds of officials in the general election, and Yu Lie's son, Yu Deng, applied for a job as usual.

古文：烈表曰： 臣上或近臣，下不决引一人，疑而恩出分外，冀荷荣禄。
现代文：于烈上表说： 我或许是亲近的臣属，却没有荐举一个人，疑然而恩典超出本分以外，希望承受功名利禄。
English: Yu Lie said on the table: I may be a close subordinate, but I have not recommended a person, I doubt that the grace exceeds the duty, and I hope to receive fame and fortune.

古文：当今圣明之朝，理应谦让，而臣子登引人求进，是臣素无教训。请乞黜落。 
现代文：当今朝廷圣明，理应谦让，但是我的儿子于登援引人事谋求做官，这是我平素没有教导训诫的过错，恳求将他罢黜，使之落选。 
English: Today, the imperial court is sacred, and we should be humble, but my son has caused trouble in Dengyuan and is seeking to become an official. It is my fault that I have never taught discipline, and I implore him to be ousted and defeated.

古文：高祖曰： 此乃有识之言，不谓烈能辨此？ 
现代文：高祖说： 这是有见识的言论，没有想到于烈能做到这样的事。 
English: Gao Zu said: This is an insightful speech, I did not expect Yu Lie to be able to do such a thing.

古文：乃引见登，诏曰： 朕今创礼新邑，明扬天下，卿父乃行谦让之表，而有直士之风，故进卿为太子翊军校尉。 
现代文：于是接见于登，下诏说： 我现在在新都创立礼仪，选拔天下人才，你父亲却呈上谦让的表章，有正直士人的风范，所以进用你为太子翊军校尉。 
English: So he summoned Yu Deng and said to him: "I am now establishing Xinyi and Ducheng, and I hereby announce to the world that your father is a very humble and honest man, so I am appointing you as the prince's lieutenant.

古文：又加烈散骑常侍，封聊城县开国子，食邑二百户。
现代文：又加授于烈为散骑常侍，封爵为聊城县开国子，食邑二百户。
English: In addition, Yu Rong was awarded the title of knight for his horseback riding, and the title of knight for opening the country in Liaocheng County, with more than 200 households.

古文：及穆泰、陆叡谋反旧京，高祖幸代，泰等伏法。
现代文：穆泰、陆数在旧都谋反，高祖到代邑，穆泰等依法被处死刑。
English: Mutai and Lu Qi both plotted rebellion in the old days, Gao Zu went to the county seat, and Mutai and others were sentenced to death in accordance with the law.

古文：赐烈及李冲玺书，述金策之意。
现代文：赐给于烈和李冲韶书，解释不对陆敔兑现免死金策的道理。
English: A letter was given to Yu Lie and Li Chonglu to explain the reason for not honoring the death-free money policy.

古文：语在《陆叡传》。
现代文：详情记载在《陆叙传》。
English: Details are recorded in "Lu Xuanming."

古文：是逆也，代乡旧族，同恶者多，唯烈一宗，无所染预。
现代文：这次谋反，代邑一带有地位的家族，参与进去的很多，祇有于烈一个家族，没有参与。
English: This rebellion, a family with status in the daimyo, involved a lot of people. Only one family, the Yurei family, did not participate.

古文：高祖嘉其忠操，益器重之。
现代文：高祖嘉许他忠诚有节操，更加器重他。
English: Gao Zu praised him for his loyalty and self-discipline, and valued him even more.

古文：叹曰： 元俨决断威恩，深自不恶，然而为臣尽忠猛决，不如烈也。
现代文：嗟叹说： 元俨判定刑罚和奖赏，极力使自己不做恶声厉色，然而作为臣子的竭尽忠诚与勇猛果决，比不上于烈。
English: He sighed and said: Yuan Xuan judged the punishment and reward, and tried his best not to be harsh. However, as a courtier, his utmost loyalty and courageous determination were no match for the martyrs.

古文：尔日烈在代都，必即斩其五三元首耳。
现代文：当时于烈如果在代都，一定当即斩杀谋反者三五个罪魁祸昌。
English: At that time, if Yu Lie was in the capital, he would have killed the three or five culprits immediately.

古文：烈之节概，不谢金日磾也。 
现代文：于烈的志节气概，不比金曰弹差。 
English: Yu Lie's ambition is no less than that of Kim Il Sung.

古文：诏除领军将军。
现代文：诏令授任领军将军。
English: The following edict appointed Yu Lie as the leading general.

古文：以本官从征荆沔，加鼓吹一部。
现代文：以原任官职跟从征讨荆沔两地，赐予鼓吹一部。
English: With this official as a follower, the Jing'an area was conquered and given to a group of propagandists.

古文：高祖谓彭城王勰曰： 烈先朝旧德，智勇兼有，军之大计，宜共参决。 
现代文：高祖对彭城王元勰说： 于烈是先朝德高望重的老臣，智勇双全，军中大计，都应当与他共同决定。 
English: Gaozu said to Pengcheng Wangyuan: Yu Rong is a highly respected elder of the previous dynasty, both wise and brave, and the military's grand plan should be jointly decided with him.

古文：宛邓既平，车驾还洛，论功加散骑常侍，金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：宛邓二县平定以后，皇上返回洛阳，评定功劳加授散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫。
English: After Wan Deng's Second County was pacified, the emperor returned to Luoyang to evaluate the merits and award the free-riding attendant, Jin Ziguanglu doctor.

古文：二十三年，萧宝卷遣其太尉陈显达入寇马圈，高祖舆疾赴之，执烈手曰： 都邑空虚，维捍宜重，可镇卫二宫，以辑远近之望。 
现代文：二十三年，萧宝卷派遣他的太尉陈显达进犯马圈，高祖抱病登车前往，握着于烈的手说： 都城空虚，护卫应当慎重。由你镇守捍卫两座宫室，以便安定远方和近处的人心。 
English: In 233, Xiao Baotan sent his lieutenant Chen Xianda to invade the stables. Gao Zu, who was ill, boarded the carriage and, holding Yu Lie's hand, said, "The capital is empty, the guards should be cautious. You should guard the two palace chambers in order to stabilize the hearts of people both near and far."

古文：显达破走，高祖崩于行宫，彭城王勰总一六军，秘讳而返，称诏召世宗会驾鲁阳。
现代文：显达败逃，高祖在行宫逝世，彭城王元勰总领各军，隐瞒死讯而回师，宣称韶令召世宗到鲁阳会见皇上。
English: Xanda was defeated and fled, Gaozu died in the procession to the palace, and Pengcheng Wang Yuanjun, the commander of all the armies, concealed the news of his death and returned to his division, proclaiming that the imperial order was to summon Shizong to Luyang to meet the emperor.

古文：以烈留守之重，密报凶问。
现代文：因为于烈肩负留守重责，便暗中报知死讯。
English: Because Yu Rong was a senior vassal who stayed behind in Beijing, he secretly told him about the sinister letter.

古文：烈处分行留，神色无变。
现代文：于烈指挥军队调动和留驻，神色自若。
English: Yu Rong commanded the mobilization and stationing of the army, looking confident.

古文：世宗即位，宠任如前。
现代文：世宗即位，宠爱重用如故。
English: Sejong ascended to the throne, and continued to be loved and used.

古文：咸阳王禧为宰辅，权重当时，曾遣家僮传言于烈曰： 须旧羽林虎贲执仗出入，领军可为差遣。 
现代文：咸阳王元禧是辅政宰相，当时权势很大，曾差遣家奴传话给于烈说： 按照惯例需要羽林虎贲手持兵仗出入，领军可以为我派遣。 
English: Xianyang Wang Yuanxi was an assistant prime minister. He wielded great power at the time. He once sent a message to Yu Lie, saying, "According to the usual practice, it is necessary for the Yulin Tiger Cormorant to enter and leave the battlefield with soldiers, and the leader of the army can dispatch troops for me.

古文：烈曰： 天子谅暗，事归宰辅，领军但知典掌宿卫，有诏不敢违，理无私给。 
现代文：于烈说： 天子居丧，政事交给辅政大臣，领军衹知道掌管宿卫禁军，有诏令不敢违背，没有私自派遣的道理。 
English: Yu Lie said: The emperor has passed away, political affairs should be handed over to the Vice-Minister of State, the leader of the army should know that he is in charge of the Imperial Guard, he should not dare to disobey the imperial edict, and there is no reason to send troops without permission.

古文：奴惘然而返，传烈言报禧。
现代文：家奴失意地返回，把于烈的话传报给元禧。
English: The family slave returned disappointed and reported Yu Lie's words to Yuan Xi.

古文：禧复遣谓烈曰： 我是天子兒，天子叔，元辅之命，与诏何异？ 
现代文：元禧又派人对于烈说： 我是显祖的儿子，皇上的叔父，作为首席辅政大臣，我的命令与诏令有什么差别? 
English: At the turn of the millennium, he also sent someone to the emperor to say: I am the son of Emperor Xianzu and the uncle of the emperor. As the chief assistant minister, what is the difference between my order and the imperial edict?

古文：烈厉色而答曰： 向者亦不道王非是天子兒、叔。
现代文：于烈神色严厉地回答说： 上次我也没有说大王不是天子的儿子、叔父。
English: With a stern expression, Yu Lie replied, "Last time, I did not say that the great king was not the son and uncle of the son of heaven.

古文：若是诏，应遣官人，所由遣私奴索官家羽林，烈头可得，羽林不可得！ 
现代文：如果是诏令，应当派遣官吏，怎能差遣私家奴仆索要皇帝的羽林，于烈的头可以得到，羽林却不能得到! 
English: If it is a decree, officials should be sent, how can they send private servants to ask for the emperor's feather forest, Yu Lie's head can be obtained, but feather forest cannot be obtained!

古文：禧恶烈刚直，遂议出之，乃授使持节、散骑常侍、征北将军、恆州刺史。
现代文：元禧憎恨于烈刚强正直，于是谋划把他派到外地去做官，便任命他为使持节、散骑常侍、征北将军、恒州刺史。
English: Yuanxi hated Yu Lie for his strength and honesty, so he planned to send him to a foreign country to become an official, and then appointed him as an envoy, horseback riding attendant, general of the Northern Expedition, and historian of Hengzhou.

古文：烈不愿籓授，频表乞停。辄优答弗许。
现代文：于烈不愿到地方上任职，屡次上表请求收回这一任命，总是被嘉奖褒美而答覆不许。
English: Yu Lie did not want to serve at the local level, repeatedly petitioned to withdraw this appointment, and was always praised and rewarded and not allowed to reply.

古文：烈乃谓彭城王勰曰： 殿下忘先帝南阳之诏乎？
现代文：于烈便对彭城王元勰说： 殿下忘了先帝在南阳下达的诏令吗?
English: Yu Lai then said to Pengcheng Wang Yuanxuan, "Has your highness forgotten the imperial decree issued by the former emperor in Nanyang?"

古文：而逼老夫乃至于此。 
现代文：却逼迫老夫以至于此。 
English: but forced the old man to come here.

古文：遂以疾固辞。
现代文：于是藉有病坚决推辞。
English: Therefore, by virtue of his illness, he resolutely refused.

古文：世宗以禧等专擅，潜谋废之。
现代文：世宗因元禧等人擅权专断，想罢免他们。
English: Sejong wanted to dismiss them because of the arbitrary power of Genji and others.

古文：会二年正月初祭，三公并致斋于庙，世宗夜召烈子忠谓曰： 卿父忠允贞固，社稷之臣。
现代文：适逢二年正月春祭宗庙，三公都在宗庙内清心洁身，世宗夜间召见于烈的儿子于忠对他说： 你父亲忠诚公允、坚持正道，是关系国家安危的重臣。
English: On the occasion of the Spring Festival of the ancestral temple in the first month of the second year, the three princes were all pure of heart and body in the ancestral temple. Yuzong summoned Yu Lie's son Yu Zhong at night and said to him: Your father is loyal and fair, adheres to the right path, and is a senior minister who is concerned about the safety of the country.

古文：明可早入，当有处分。 
现代文：明天可以早些入宫，将有吩咐。 
English: You can enter the palace early tomorrow, you will be told.

古文：忠奉诏而出。
现代文：于忠接受韶令出宫。
English: Yuzhong received the imperial order to leave the palace.

古文：质明，烈至，世宗诏曰： 诸父慢怠，渐不可任，今欲使卿以兵召之，卿其行乎？ 
现代文：天刚亮，于烈来到，世宗告知说： 叔父怠慢，已不可信，今天想派你带兵召唤他们，你愿意前去吗? 
English: It was just after dawn when Yu Lie arrived. Shizong told him, "Uncle, your negligence is no longer believable. Today, I want to send you with soldiers to summon them. Are you willing to go?

古文：烈对曰： 老臣历奉累朝，颇以干勇赐职。
现代文：于烈回答说： 我连续侍奉几朝，颇以才干勇气受赏识。
English: Yu Lie replied: I have served several dynasties in a row, and I have been appreciated for my talent and courage.

古文：今日之事，所不敢辞。 
现代文：今天的事情，是不敢推辞的。 
English: Today's events, never dare to refuse.

古文：乃将直阁已下六十余人，宣旨召咸阳王禧、彭城王勰、北海王祥，卫送至于帝前。
现代文：于是率领直阁以下兵将六十多人，宣读圣旨召唤咸阳王元禧、彭城王元勰、北海王元详，护送到皇帝前面。
English: Therefore, he led more than sixty soldiers under the command of Zhaogu, read out the sacred edict to summon Xianyang King Yuanxi, Pengcheng King Yuanqi, and Beihai King Yuanji, and escorted them to the emperor.

古文：诸公各稽首归政。
现代文：三人分别叩头交还政权。
English: Several people knelt and bowed to the emperor.

古文：以烈为散骑常侍、车骑大将军、领军，进爵为侯，增邑三百户，并前五百户。
现代文：任命于烈为散骑常侍、车骑大将军、领军，升爵位为侯，增加食邑三百户，加上以前的共五百户。
English: Yu Lie was appointed as a straggler's equerry, chariot and cavalry general, and leader of the army, and was promoted to the peerage as a marquis, increasing the number of counties by 300, adding to the previous total of 500 counties.

古文：自是长直禁中，机密大事，皆所参焉。
现代文：从此长期在宫中值班，机密大事，他都能参与。
English: Since then, he has been on duty in the palace for a long time, and he can participate in confidential matters.

古文：太尉、咸阳王禧谋反也，武兴王杨集始驰于北邙以告。
现代文：太尉、盛阳王元禧谋反时，武兴王杨集始驱马疾行到北亡口报告。
English: When Captain Wang Yuanxi of Shengyang plotted a rebellion, King Yang Ji of Wuxing drove his horse to the North Gate to report.

古文：时世宗从禽于野，左右分散，直卫无几，仓卒之际，莫知计之所出。
现代文：当时世宗在郊外田猎。近臣分散，直宿警卫没有几个，仓猝之际，没有人知道该怎么办。
English: At that time, Sejong was hunting in the suburbs. Close retainers were scattered, and there were few live-in guards. In a sudden situation, no one knew what to do.

古文：乃敕烈子忠驰觇虚实。
现代文：于是敕令于烈的儿子于忠驱马疾行去看虚实。
English: Therefore, he ordered Yu Liang's son Yu Zhongfei to go back to the city to see the truth.

古文：烈时留守，已处分有备，因忠奏曰： 臣虽朽迈，心力犹可，此等猖狂，不足为虑。
现代文：乏型当时留守，已经做好准备，通过王盅上奏说： 我虽然年老力衰，心力尚可，这种狂妄放肆的人，不足为虑。
English: At that time, the lack of type was left behind and was already prepared, and said through Wang Xuan's report: Although I am old and weak, my heart is still good, this kind of arrogant and presumptuous person is not enough to worry about.

古文：愿缓跸徐还，以安物望。 
现代文：希望皇上从容回宫，以安民心。 
English: I would like to ask the Emperor to return safely and calmly in order to stabilize the hearts of the people.

古文：世宗闻之，甚以慰悦。
现代文：世塞听到这番话，感到很宽慰。
English: The world was relieved to hear this.

古文：及驾还宫，禧已遁逃。
现代文：等到皇上回宫，五擅已经逃跑。
English: By the time the emperor returned to the palace, the five conspirators had fled.

古文：诏烈遣直阁叔孙侯将虎贲三百人追之。
现代文：诏令于烈派遣直合叔孙侯率领虎贲三百人追赶并擒获了他。
English: The emperor ordered Yu Lie to send 300 men led by his uncle and grandson Zhi He to chase and capture him.

古文：顺后既立，以世父之重，弥见优礼。
现代文：顺后确立以后，于烈以伯父之尊，更加受到优待。
English: After Shun's empress Yu, Yu Rong was the queen's uncle, and was even more respected by the emperor.

古文：八月，暴疾卒，时年六十五。
现代文：八月，突然生病去世，时年六十五岁。
English: In August, he suddenly fell ill and died, at the age of sixty-five.

古文：世宗举哀于朝堂，给东园第一秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭;赐钱二百万，布五百匹;赠使持节、侍中、大将军、太尉公、雍州刺史;追封钜鹿郡开国公，增邑五百户，并前千户。
现代文：世宗在朝堂上哀悼，赐给贵族享用的最好的棺材，朝服一套，衣一套；赐钱二百万，布五百匹；追赠为使持节、侍中、大将军、太尉公、雍州刺史；追封为钜鹿郡开国公，增加食邑五百户，加上以前的共一千户。
English: Sejong mourned in the imperial hall and gave the nobles the best coffins to enjoy, a set of imperial robes and a set of clothes; he gave two million in money and five hundred cloth horses; posthumously, he was given the titles of envoy, chamberlain, general, captain, and Yongzhou statesman; posthumously, he was given the title of the founding father of Elk County, increasing the number of food villages by five hundred, adding to the previous total of one thousand.

古文：烈有五子。
现代文：于烈有五个儿子。
English: Yu Rong has five sons.

古文：长子祚，字万年。
现代文：长子于祚，字万年。
English: The eldest son was born in the year of the Rooster.

古文：太和中，为中散，稍迁恆州别驾。
现代文：太和年间，任中散，逐渐升任恆州别驾。
English: During the Taihe years, he was appointed to the position of Zhongshan, and gradually rose to the position of Hengzhou Beidou.

古文：袭父爵。
现代文：继承父爵。
English: He later succeeded to his father's title.

古文：除假节、振威将军，沃野镇将，贪残多所受纳。
现代文：任假节、振威将军、沃野镇将，贪婪凶残多受贿赂。
English: Ren Fuxi, General Zhenwei, General Wo Ye, greedy, brutal, and often bribed.

古文：坐免官，以公还第。
现代文：因罪免官，以公爵返回府第。
English: Dismissed for his crime, he returned to his residence as a duke.

古文：卒，赠平州刺史。
现代文：去世，被追赠为平州刺史。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of "Pingzhou Jishi."

古文：祚子若，袭爵。
现代文：于祚的儿子于若，继承爵位。
English: Yu Yao's son, Yu Rong, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：多酒过，为叔父景所挝杀。
现代文：经常酗酒而致过，被叔父于景打死。
English: He suffered from frequent alcoholism and was beaten to death by his uncle Yu Jing.

古文：子顺袭。
现代文：儿子于顺继承爵位。
English: His son, Yu Shun, succeeded to the title.

古文：卒，子馥袭。
现代文：去世，儿子工堕继承爵位。
English: He passed away, and his son, Gongcheng, inherited the title.

古文：祚弟忠，字思贤，本字千年。
现代文：于祚的弟弟于忠，字思贤，本字千年。
English: Yu Zhen's younger brother, Yu Zhong, is called Si Xian (思贤) and his real name is Millennium.

古文：弱冠拜侍御中散。
现代文：年二十岁任侍御中散。
English: At the age of twenty, he was dismissed from the position of chamberlain.

古文：文明太后临朝，刑政颇峻，侍臣左右，多以微谴得罪。
现代文：文明太后临朝听政，刑法政令很严峻，身边的侍臣，多数因小过获罪。
English: The Empress Dowager Civili was in charge of the government, and the laws were quite strict. Most of the courtiers around her were offended by small things.

古文：忠朴直少言，终无过误。
现代文：工盅朴实少言，终究没有过错。
English: Yu Zhongpu is straightforward, does not like to talk, and has never made a mistake.

古文：太和中，授武骑侍郎，因赐名登。
现代文：太和年间，任武骑侍郎，因而被赐名为登。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, he was appointed as a military cavalry equerry, and given the posthumous name Deng.

古文：转太子羽军校尉。
现代文：改任太子翊军校尉。
English: He was reassigned as a lieutenant of the Prince Shun Army.

古文：世宗即位，迁长水校尉。
现代文：世宗即位，升任长水校尉。
English: Sejong ascended to the throne and was promoted to the rank of Chosui Captain.

古文：寻除左右侍郎将，领直寝。
现代文：不久任左右郎将，领直寝。
English: Soon after, he became the left and right wing general, leading the line.

古文：元禧之谋乱也，车驾在外，变起仓卒，末知所之。
现代文：元禧谋反，皇上在外，变故发生仓猝，不知所措。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, they plotted a rebellion, the emperor was out of the country, the change happened suddenly, and they were at a loss.

古文：忠进曰： 臣世蒙殊宠，乃心王室。
现代文：于忠进言说： 我世代蒙受特殊恩宠，尽忠于王室。
English: Yu Zhongjin said: My generation has received special grace to be loyal to the royal family.

古文：臣父领军，付留守之重计，防遏有在，必无所虑。 
现代文：我父亲统领军队，被托付留守的重任，一直注意防备镇遏，必定无所忧虑。 
English: My father, in command of the army, was entrusted with the important task of remaining behind, and he always paid attention to the prevention and control, and he certainly had nothing to worry about.

古文：世宗即遣忠驰骑观之，而烈分兵严备，果如所量。
现代文：世宗当即派遣于忠驱马疾行去观察，而于烈部署军队严防，果然像他估量的那样。
English: Sejong immediately dispatched Yu Zhongfu Ma to go and observe, and Yu Rong deployed the army to prevent it, as he estimated.

古文：世宗还宫，抚背曰： 卿差强人意。 
现代文：世宗回宫，抚着他的脊背说： 你比较令人满意。 
English: Shizong returned to the palace, stroked his back and said: You are more satisfying.

古文：赐帛五百匹。
现代文：赐给帛五百匹。
English: Five hundred yakitori were awarded to Murongdol.

古文：又曰： 先帝赐卿名登，诚为美称；朕嘉卿忠款，今改卿名忠。
现代文：又说： 先帝赐给你名字为登，确实是好名字，我嘉许你的忠诚，现在更改你的名字为忠。
English: He also said, "The previous emperor gave you the name of Deng, which is indeed a good name. I commend you for your loyalty. Now change your name to Zhong."

古文：既表贞固之诚，亦所以名实相副也。 
现代文：既表彰坚持正道的忠诚，也使得名实相符。 
English: It not only commends the loyalty of adhering to the right path, but also makes the name match the reality.

古文：父忧去职。
现代文：为父亲守丧辞去官职。
English: He resigned from his post to attend his father's funeral.

古文：未几，起复本官。
现代文：不久，起用为原官。
English: It didn't take long for him to be recalled back to active duty.

古文：迁司空长史。
现代文：升任司空长史。
English: He was promoted to the position of Soku Choshi.

古文：于时太傅、录尚书、北海王详亲尊权重，将作大匠王遇多随详所欲而给之。
现代文：当时太傅、录尚书、北海王元详被亲近敬重而权力大，将作大匠王遇常常按照元详的要求供给。
English: At that time, Taifu, Luo Shangshu, and Beihai Wang Yuanxiao were close and respected and had great power. Wang Rongxiao, a great craftsman, was often supplied according to Yuanxiao's requirements.

古文：后因公事，忠于详前谓遇曰： 殿下国之周公，阿衡王室，所须材用，自应关旨，何至阿谀附势，损公惠私也。 
现代文：后来有一次处理公事时，于忠在元详面前对王遇说： 殿下如国家的周公，辅弼王室，所需要的器用，自然应该先领取圣旨，何至于阿谀奉承依附权势，损公肥私呢。 
English: Later, when dealing with official business, Yu Zhong said to Wang Yu in front of Yuan Yao: Your Royal Highness, as the Zhou Gu of the country and the assistant of the royal family, the necessary skills should naturally be obtained first. What about flattery and clinging to power, harming the public and private interests?

古文：遇既不宁，详亦惭谢。
现代文：王遇既心中不安，元详也羞惭谢过。
English: Wang Yu felt uneasy, and Yuan Ye also felt guilty out of shame.

古文：迁征虏将军，余如故。
现代文：升任征虏将军，其他官职如故。
English: He was promoted to conscript general, and his other official positions remain the same.

古文：以平元禧功，封魏郡开国公，食邑九百户。
现代文：以平定元禧的功劳，被封为魏郡开国公，食邑九百户。
English: He was named as the founding father of Wei County for his contribution to the pacification of the Yuan Dynasty, and he had 900 households in his hometown.

古文：寻迁散骑常侍，兼武卫将军。
现代文：不久升任散骑常侍，兼武卫将军。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of samurai and general of the Imperial Guards.

古文：每以鲠气正辞，为北海王详所忿，面责忠曰： 我忧在前见尔死，不忧尔见我死时也。 
现代文：每每因为刚直不阿，为北海王元详所怨恨，当面责备于忠说： 我担心先看到你死，不担心你看到我死的时候。 
English: Because he was not upright, he was resented by the king of the North Sea, Yuan Yao, who reproached Yu Zhong face to face, saying, "I am afraid of seeing you die first, but I am not afraid of you seeing me die."

古文：忠曰： 人生于世，自有定分，若应死于王手，避亦不免;若其不尔，王不能杀。 
现代文：于忠说： 人生在世，自然有预定的命运，如果应该死在大王手中，躲也躲不了；如果不是这样，大王也不能杀我。 
English: Yu Zhong said, "When one is alive, one's fate is predetermined. If I should die at the hands of the great king, I cannot escape; if not, the great king cannot kill me.

古文：详因忠表让之际，密劝世宗以忠为列卿，令解左右，听其让爵。
现代文：元详趁着于忠上表谦让之际，暗中劝世宗任命于忠为列卿，解除他近臣的职务，允许他让出爵位。
English: Taking advantage of the fact that Yuzhong made a public concession, Yuan Zhao secretly persuaded Shizong to appoint Yuzhong as a peer, relieve him of the duties of a close vassal, and allow him to give up his peerage.

古文：于是诏停其封，优进太府卿。
现代文：于是诏令停止他的封爵，优待晋升为太府卿。
English: As a result, the imperial edict stopped his knighthood, but he was given preferential treatment and promoted to daifu-kyo.

古文：正始二年秋，诏忠以本官使持节、兼侍中，为西道大使，刺史、镇将赃罪显暴者，以状申闻，守令已下，便即行决。
现代文：正始二年秋，诏令于忠以本宫使持节、兼侍中，任西道大使，把刺史、镇将贪污受贿者的情况上报朝廷，郡守县令以下官员的过错，便可当即自行处理。
English: At the beginning of the autumn of the second year, the Emperor ordered Yuzhong to serve as the ambassador of the Western Province to the Imperial Palace, and to report the situation of corruption and bribery to the Imperial Court. The fault of officials below the county governor and county magistrate could be dealt with immediately.

古文：与抚军将军、尚书李崇分使二道。
现代文：舆抚军将军、尚书李崇分别出使二道。
English: The general of the Public Security Force and Shangshu Li Chong sent envoys to the two provinces respectively.

古文：忠劾并州刺史高聪赃罪二百余条，论以大辟。
现代文：于忠弹劾并州刺史高聪贪污受贿罪二百多条，定为大辟死刑。
English: Yu Zhong impeached and accused Gao Cong of more than two hundred crimes of corruption and bribery, which was regarded as a major crime.

古文：还，除平西将军、华州刺史。
现代文：回朝，任平西将军、华州刺史。
English: He returned to the imperial court and was appointed as the general of Pingxi and the chief historian of Huazhou.

古文：遭继母忧，不行。
现代文：为继母服丧，没有赴任。
English: He did not attend the funeral of his stepmother.

古文：服阕，授安北将军，相州刺史。
现代文：守丧期满，任安北将军、相州刺史。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed as the general of Anbei, and the history of Songzhou was written.

古文：又为卫尉卿，河南邑中正。
现代文：又任卫尉卿、河南邑中正。
English: He was also appointed as the captain of the imperial guards and the vice-governor of Henan.

古文：诏忠与吏部尚书元晖、度支尚书元匡、河南尹无苌等推定代方姓族。
现代文：韶令于忠与吏部尚书元晖、度支尚书元匡、河南尹元苌等推断判定代方的姓氏家族。
English: The surnames and families of the delegates were determined by deducing the surnames and families of Yu Zhong, Shang Shuyuan, Du Zhi, Shang Shuyuan Kuang, Henan Yin Yuan and others.

古文：高肇忌其为人，欲密出之，乃言于世宗，称中山要镇，作捍须才，以忠器能，宜居其位。
现代文：高肇嫉妒他的为人，想暗中把他排挤出去，就向世宗进言，声称中山是重要城镇，捍卫它需要大才，依据于忠的才能，适合担当此任。
English: Gao Zhao envied him as a person and secretly wanted to push him out, so he proposed to Shizong, claiming that Zhongshan is an important town, defending it requires great talent, and according to the talent of loyalty, he is suitable for this position.

古文：于是出授安北将军、定州刺史。
现代文：于是被调出担任安北将军、定州刺史。
English: As a result, he was transferred to serve as the general of Anbei and the governor of Dingzhou.

古文：世宗既而悔之，复授卫尉卿、领左卫将军、恆州大中正。
现代文：世宗不久又后悔了，再次任命他为卫尉卿，领左卫将军、恒州大中正。
English: Sejong soon regretted it, and reappointed him as the Lord of the Guards, the General of the Left Division of the Guards, and the Vice-Chancellor of Hengzhou University.

古文：密遣中使诏曰： 自比股肱褫落，心膂无寄。
现代文：秘密派遣宫中使者下达诏令说： 自从近来将您这位辅佐得力的大臣发落出去，心怀大计便无入托付。
English: Secretly dispatching an emissary from the palace, he issued a decree saying: "Since I recently dispatched you, the minister who has been of great help to me, I have no intention of entrusting you.

古文：方任虽重，比此为轻。
现代文：一方军政的职责虽然重要，与此相比是轻的。
English: On the other hand, the responsibilities of the military and government, although important, are light compared to this.

古文：故辍兹外任，委以内务。
现代文：所以中止这一外任，委以朝中事务。
English: Therefore, the assignment was suspended and he was put in charge of North Korea-China affairs.

古文：当勤夙无怠，称朕所寄也。 
现代文：应当勤勉肃敬，不要懈怠，不要辜负朕的寄托。 
English: You should be diligent and respectful, do not slack off, and do not fail to live up to my trust.

古文：延昌初，除都官尚书，加平南将军，领左卫，中正如故。
现代文：延昌初年，任都官尚书，加授平南将军，领左卫、中正官保留不变。
English: In the first year of Yanchang, Shangshu was appointed as the governor of the capital, and he was also awarded the title of General of Pingnan, but the positions of the left guard and the middle officer remained unchanged.

古文：又加散骑常侍。
现代文：又加授散骑常侍。
English: They also added a samurai on horseback.

古文：尝因侍宴，赐之剑杖，举酒属忠曰： 卿世秉贞节，故恆以禁卫相委。
现代文：曾经在陪侍宴会时，世塞赐给他剑和杖，举酒嘱咐于忠说： 你家世代具有忠贞不二的节操，所以常以禁卫相托。
English: Once, when he was serving at a banquet, Shisei gave him a sword and a cane, and as he raised his glass of wine, he ordered Yu Zhong to say, "Your family's generation has the discipline to be loyal, so you often rely on your forbearance.

古文：昔以卿行忠，赐名曰忠。
现代文：过去因为你行事忠诚，赐名为忠。
English: In the past, because of your loyal behavior, you were given the name of loyalty.

古文：今以卿才堪御侮，以所御剑杖相赐。
现代文：今天因为你的才能可以抵御外侮，以所用的剑杖相赐。
English: Today, because of your ability to withstand insults, give each other the swords and staffs you use.

古文：循名取义，意在不轻。
现代文：循名责实，用意深远。
English: The name-calling is real and the intentions are far-reaching.

古文：其出入周旋，恆以自防也。 
现代文：在出入执行公务时，都要自防。 
English: When entering and leaving to perform official duties, they must protect themselves.

古文：忠顿首陈谢。
现代文：于忠叩头表示谢意。
English: Yu Zhong kowtowed and expressed his gratitude.

古文：迁侍中、领军将军。忠面陈让云： 臣无学识，不堪兼文武之任。 
现代文：升任侍中、领军将军，于忠当面陈辞谦让说： 我没有学识，没有能力兼任文武官。 
English: When he was promoted to the position of chamberlain and leading general, he humbly resigned in front of Yu Zhong, saying, "I don't have the knowledge and ability to serve as a military attaché."

古文：世宗曰： 当今学识有文者不少，但心直不如卿。
现代文：世宗说： 当今有学识才华的人不少，但是心地不如你正直。
English: Sejong said, "There are many learned and talented people today, but they are not as honest as you.

古文：欲使卿劬劳于下，我当无忧于上。 
现代文：想藉助你在朕手下多操心一点，朕在上面就没有忧虑了。 
English: So if you have to toil below, I can do it above without any worries.

古文：及世宗崩，夜中与侍中崔光遣右卫将军侯刚迎肃宗于东宫而即位。
现代文：到世宗逝世时，夜间与侍中崔光派遣右卫将军侯刚到东宫迎接肃宗即位。
English: At the time of Sejong's death, he and his chamberlain Choe Kwang dispatched the right guard general Hou Gang to the East Palace at night to welcome Sojong's enthronement.

古文：忠与门下议，以肃宗幼年，末亲机政；太尉、高阳王雍属尊望重，宜入居西柏堂，省决庶政;任城王澄明德茂亲，可为尚书令，总摄百揆。
现代文：于忠舆门下省商议，因肃宗年幼，没有亲理政务；太尉、高阳王元雍辈分高名望重，应当入居西柏堂，决断政事；任城王元澄是才德兼备的好宗亲，可以任尚书令，总领百官。
English: The provincial council was held under the tutelage of Chungmyo, and since Sojong was young, he did not have the power to manage the affairs of state himself; the Tai Lai and Goyang King Yuan Yong were of high reputation and importance, so they should live in Xibaidang and decide on the affairs of state; the King of the city, Yuan Cheng, was a good relative who was both talented and moral, and could be appointed as Shang Shuling, the leader of a hundred officials.

古文：奏中宫，请即敕授。
现代文：启奏皇后，请求立即下达任职命令。
English: Your Majesty, I request you to issue an immediate order of dismissal.

古文：御史中尉王显欲逞奸计，与中常侍、给事中孙伏连等厉色不听，寝门下之奏。
现代文：御史中尉王显打算施展奸计，与中常侍、给事中孙伏连等神色严厉不听从，扣住门下省的奏章不报。
English: Wang Xian, the lieutenant of the imperial historian, planned to carry out a treacherous scheme, and sternly disobeyed the middle attendant, the middle son Fulian, and the subordinate provinces, and did not report the report.

古文：宫囗侍中、黄门，但牒六辅姓字赍来。
现代文：宫阙侍中、黄门，衹报畿辅六郡的姓名。
English: The names of the six counties in Kii Province were announced by the palace's attendant, the Yellow Gate.

古文：孙伏连等密欲矫太后令，以高肇录尚书事，显与高猛为侍中。
现代文：孙伏连等想秘密地假托太后诏令，任命高肇为录尚书事，王显与高猛为侍中。
English: Sun Fulian and others wanted to secretly use the Empress Dowager's edict to appoint Gao Zhao as the secretary, and Wang Xian and Gao Meng as attendants.

古文：忠即于殿中收显杀之。
现代文：于忠立即在殿中收捕王显将他处死。
English: Yu Zhong immediately arrested Wang Xian in the palace and put him to death.

古文：忠既居门下，又总禁卫，遂秉朝政，权倾一时。
现代文：于忠主持门下省后，又总领禁卫军，于是掌握朝政，权势显赫一时。
English: After Yuzhong presided over the province under his tutelage, he also led the imperial guard, and thus took control of the imperial government, and his power was prominent for a while.

古文：初，太和中军国多事，高祖以用度不足，百官之禄四分减一。
现代文：起初，太和年间国家事故多，高祖因为费用不足，把百官的俸禄减去四分之一。
English: At first, there were many national accidents during the reign of Empress Taowa, and Emperor Gaozu deducted a quarter of the salary of the centurion because of insufficient expenses.

古文：忠既擅权，欲以惠泽自固，乃悉归所减之禄，职人进位一级。
现代文：于忠专权以后，想用恩泽巩固自己的权力，于是全部归还所减去的俸禄，所有官员晋升职位一级。
English: After the Yuzhong dictatorship, he wanted to use favors to consolidate his power, so he returned all the salaries that had been deducted, and all officials were promoted to the next level.

古文：旧制：天下之民绢布一匹之外，各输绵麻八两。
现代文：旧制：百姓绢布一匹的正赋之外，各自缴纳绵麻八两。
English: The old system: in addition to the people's donation of one piece of cloth, they each paid eighty taels of linen.

古文：忠悉以与之。
现代文：于忠全部予以减免。
English: Yuzhong will be granted full reduction and exemption.

古文：忠白高阳王雍，自云世宗本许优转。
现代文：于忠禀报高阳王元雍，自称世塞本来曾经许诺优先予以晋级升职。
English: Wang Yuanyong, a high-ranking official in Zhongyuan, claimed that the world had originally promised to give him priority for promotion.

古文：雍惮忠威权，便顺其意，加忠车骑大将军。
现代文：元雍惧怕于忠的威严和权势，便顺着他的意志，加授于忠为车骑大将军。
English: Yuan Yong was afraid of Yuzhong's majesty and power, so in accordance with his will, he awarded Yuzhong the title of General of Chariots and Cavalry.

古文：忠自谓新故之际，有安社稷之功，讽动百僚，令加己赏。
现代文：于忠自以为新旧相继之际，有安定国家的功劳，委婉地鼓动百官，让他们请求皇上给自己赏赐。
English: At a time when the old and the new were succeeding each other, Yu Zhongzhi thought that he had the merit of a stable country, and he euphemistically encouraged the officials to ask the emperor to give him a reward.

古文：于是太尉雍、清河王怿、广平王怀难违其意，议封忠常山郡开国公，食邑二千户。
现代文：于是太尉元雍、清河王怿、广平王元怀难以违背他的意志，提议封于忠为常山郡开国公，食邑二千户。
English: As a result, it was difficult for Taifu Yuan Yong, Qinghe Wang Yao, and Guangping Wang Yuan Huai to go against his will, and they proposed to make Yuzhong the founding father of Changshan County, with a population of 2,000 households.

古文：百僚咸以为然。
现代文：百官都同意。
English: Officials agree.

古文：忠又难于独受，乃讽朝廷，同在门下者皆加封邑。
现代文：于忠又不好独自受封，就委婉地建议朝廷，对门下省官员都给予封邑。
English: However, Yu Zhong did not dare to enjoy it alone, so he indicated that he would increase the fief together with the people under his tutelage.

古文：尚书左仆射郭祚、尚书裴植以忠权势日盛，劝雍出忠。
现代文：尚书左仆射室眯、尚书墓擅因为王盅权势日盛，劝元壅将王墨排挤出去。
English: Shangshu's left-hand servants, Shao Guozhen and Shangshu Pei Zhi, persuaded Yuan Yong to transfer Yu Zhong to a post outside the capital because of Yu Zhong's growing power.

古文：忠闻之，逼有司诬奏其罪。
现代文：工盅听说这事后，逼迫有关官员无中生有地奏陈他们的罪过。
English: After Yu Zhong found out, he forced the relevant departments to falsely accuse the two people of being guilty.

古文：郭祚有师傅旧恩，裴植拥地入国，忠并矫诏杀之。
现代文：郭祚有师傅旧恩，裴植带着土地归附本国，于忠一并假托韶令杀死他们。
English: Guo Yao had a master named Guo En. Pei Zhi took the land and annexed it to the motherland, and together with Yuzhong, they killed them under the pretext of the imperial edict.

古文：朝野愤怨，莫不切齿，王公已下，畏之累迹。
现代文：朝廷和民间愤怒怨恨，人人切齿，王公以下官员，叠足而立。
English: The court and the people are angry and resentful, everyone is gnashing their teeth, and officials from the prince on down are standing on top of each other.

古文：又欲杀高阳王雍，侍中崔光固执，乃止，遂免雍太尉，以王还第。
现代文：又想杀高阳王元雍，侍中崔光坚决反对，这才作罢，于是免去元雍的太尉官衔，保留王爵退休回家。
English: He also wanted to kill the Gaoyang king, Yuan Yong, but the chamberlain, Cui Guangram, resolutely objected. Only then did he give up, so he removed Yuan Yong's rank of captain and kept the title of prince and retired home.

古文：自此之后，诏命生杀，皆出于忠。
现代文：从此以后，韶令和生杀之权，都出自于忠。
English: From then on, imperial edicts and the power to kill and be killed came from Zhong.

古文：即尊灵太后为皇太后，居崇训宫，忠为仪同三司、尚书令、领崇训卫尉、侍中、领军如故。
现代文：灵太后被尊奉为皇太后以后，居住崇训宫，于忠任仪同三司、尚书令、领崇训卫尉，侍中、领军如故。
English: After the Empress Dowager Ling was revered as the empress dowager, she resided in the Palace of Chongxun, and remained in the same position as before, serving as the third secretary, the chief secretary, the leading officer of the Chongxun Guards, the chamberlain, and the leader of the troops.

古文：灵太后临朝，解忠侍中、领军、崇训卫尉，止为仪同、尚书令，加侍中。
现代文：灵太后临朝听政，解除于忠的侍中、领军、崇训卫尉等职务，祇任仪同、尚书令，加授侍中。
English: After Lingdai's enthronement, she listened to the government and relieved Yuzhong of his positions as chamberlain, army leader, and lieutenant of the guard of discipline. He was appointed to the position of yidong, Shangshuirei, and given the additional title of chamberlain.

古文：忠为令旬余，灵太后引门下侍官于崇训宫，问曰： 忠在端右，声听如何？ 
现代文：于忠任尚书令十几天，灵太后在崇训宫召集门下省侍官，问道： 于忠任尚书令，名声怎么样? 都说： 不称职。 
English: A dozen days after the appointment of Yu Zhongren, the Empress Dowager Ling summoned the provincial attendants under her at the Chongxun Palace and asked: What is the reputation of Yu Zhongren? They all said: Incompetent.

古文：咸曰： 不称厥位。 乃出忠使持节、都督冀定瀛三州诸军事、征北大将军、冀州刺史。
现代文：于是调于忠出任使持节、都督冀定瀛三州诸军事、征北大将军、冀州刺史。
English: As a result, Yuzhong was transferred to serve as the envoy of Jizhixi, the governor of Hebei, the military commander of the three states, the general of the Northern Expedition, and the historian of Hebei.

古文：太傅清河王等奏曰： 窃惟先帝升遐之初，皇上登极之始，四海谧然，宇内晏清。
现代文：太傅清河王等上奏说： 先帝逝世之初，皇上刚刚即位，四海平静，天下安宁。
English: Taifu Qinghe Wang et al. said: At the beginning of the previous emperor's death, the emperor had just ascended the throne, the four seas were calm, and the world was at peace.

古文：至于奉迎乘舆，侍卫省闼，斯乃臣子之常节，职司之恆理，不容以此为功，妄开井邑。
现代文：至于奉迎皇上，侍卫宫中，这是臣子固有的操节，有关主管官员寻常的行动，不允许拿这些作为功劳，随便设置封邑。
English: As for honoring the emperor and serving in the palace guards, this is the inherent discipline of courtiers and the usual actions of relevant competent officials. It is not allowed to take these as credit and arbitrarily set up fiefs.

古文：臣等前议所以广建茅土者，正以畏迫威权，苟免暴戾故也。
现代文：我等以前所以提议广泛封立爵位，衹因为畏惧威严和权势，苟且免于残暴酷虐的缘故。
English: It was for this reason that we formerly proposed the widespread establishment of titles of nobility, in order that the nobles might not, through fear of authority and power, succumb to the cruelty of tyranny.

古文：是以中议之际，以十三日夜入为无勋，唯以拒违矫令，抑黜奸回，微可褒叙。
现代文：因此宫中商议之时，认为十三日夜入宫没有功劳，仅仅对反抗虚假诏令，严惩王显等奸邪之徒，可以略加褒扬奖励。
English: Therefore, at the time of deliberation in the palace, it was considered that there was no merit in entering the palace on the night of the 13th, and only a little praise and reward could be given for resisting the false edict and severely punishing Wang Xian and other traitors.

古文：以前侍中臣忠总摄文武，侍中臣光久在枢密，赞同其意，故唯赏二人。
现代文：因为前任侍中于盅总领文武百官，侍中臣崖光长期在中枢任职，赞同他的意见，所以仅仅赏赐这两个人。
English: Because the former chamberlain Yu Yu, general of the general staff, and the chamberlain Yeka Guang, who had long served at the center, agreed with his opinion, only these two people were awarded.

古文：今尚书臣昭等无涯上诉，奉敕重议。
现代文：现在尚书臣五堕等三番五次地上诉，奉命重新审议。
English: Now, Shang Shuxin, five fallen, and others have appealed three times and five times, and have been ordered to reconsider.

古文：案王显阴结奸徒，志为不逞;高肇远同凶逆，遥构祸端。
现代文：据调查王题暗中勾结奸邪的人，想作乱；高肇早就串通悖逆，暗中制造祸端。
English: According to the investigation, Wang Qi secretly colluded with evil people and wanted to create chaos; Gao Zhao had already colluded with rebellion and secretly created disaster.

古文：无将之罪，事合洿戮，而忠等徵罪，唯以厥身，不至孥戮，又出罪人，穷治不尽。
现代文：谋逆的罪过，理应羞辱杀戮。而王盅等惩罚罪人，祇针对他们本身，没有诛戮他们的子孙，又为罪人开脱，查办不彻底。
English: The crime of plotting treason deserved to be shamed and killed. However, Wang Xi and others punished the criminals only against themselves, did not kill their children and grandchildren, and excused the criminals, and the investigation was not thorough.

古文：案律准宪，事在不轻。
现代文：按照法律，过失是不轻的。
English: According to the law, the offense is not minor.

古文：暨皇上纂历，圣后别宫，母子隔异，温清道绝，皆忠等之咎。
现代文：到皇上继位时，太后居住别宫，母子被隔绝，致使侍奉母后的孝道难以实现，都是于忠等人的罪过。
English: At the time of the emperor's succession, the empress dowager lived in a separate palace, and the mother and son were isolated, which made it difficult to achieve filial piety after serving the mother. All of these were the sins of people such as Yu Zhong.

古文：过方厥勋，功微罪重。
现代文：他们的罪过与功劳相比，功小罪重。
English: Their sins are minor compared to their merits.

古文：又忠专权之后，擅杀枢纳，辄废宰辅，令朝野骇心，远近怪愕。
现代文：而且于忠专权之后，擅自杀戮朝廷重臣，任意罢免辅政大臣，使朝野人心惶惶，远近惊异。
English: Moreover, after the Yuzhong dictatorship, high-ranking imperial court officials were arbitrarily killed, and vice-ministers were arbitrarily dismissed, which made the hearts of the people in the imperial court and in the provinces tremble with fear and surprise.

古文：功过相除，悉不合赏。
现代文：功过相抵，不应赏赐。
English: Merit should not be rewarded.

古文：请悉追夺。 
现代文：请求全部追回。 
English: Retrieve all requests.

古文：灵太后从之。
现代文：灵太后准奏。
English: Empress Dowager Ling complied with the request.

古文：熙平元年春，御史中尉元匡奏曰： 臣闻事主不以幽贞革心，奉上不以趣舍亏节。
现代文：熙平元年春。御史中尉元匡上奏说： 我听说事奉君主不因为不表彰其忠贞而改变心志，侍奉皇上不因为取舍而亏损名节。
English: In the spring of the first year of Heiping, the Lieutenant of History, Yuan Kuang, said: I have heard that serving the monarch does not change his mind because he does not commend his loyalty, and serving the emperor does not lose the festival because of the trade-off.

古文：是以倚秦宫而恸哭，复楚之功已多;陟庐龙而树勤，广魏之勋不浅。
现代文：因此申包胥在秦国宫殿外痛哭求援，光复楚国的功劳巨大；田畴经卢龙塞讨伐乌丸而建树伟绩，在扩展魏国领地方面的功劳不浅。
English: Therefore, Shen Baozhen cried for help outside the palace of Qin, and his contribution to the recovery of Chu was huge; Tian Zeng made great achievements by defeating Wu Maru through Lu Long Ce, and his contribution to the expansion of the territory of Wei was not shallow.

古文：而申包避赏，君子于是义之;田畴拒命，良史所以称美。
现代文：然而申包胥始终躲避赏赐，君子于是称赞这事符合道德规范；田畴不受封侯之命，史官因此赞美他。
English: However, Shen Baozhen always evaded the reward, so the gentleman praised this as being in line with ethical norms; Tian Zhen was not subject to the order of the feudal lord, so the historian praised him.

古文：窃唯宫车晏驾，天人位易，正是忠臣孝子致节之秋。
现代文：皇上逝世，皇位变更，正是忠臣孝子尽其忠孝之节的时候。
English: The death of the emperor and the change of the imperial throne is exactly the time for loyal subjects and children to do their best for the festival of loyalty and filial piety.

古文：前领军将军臣忠不能砥砺名行，自求多福，方因矫制，擅相除假，清官显职，岁月隆崇。
现代文：原领军将军臣于忠不能砥砺名声和品行，自求多福，假托韶令，擅自授官，清要显贵的官职，短时间内全都得到了。
English: The former leader of the army, the general and his vassal, Yu Zhong, could not polish his reputation and conduct. He asked for many blessings, falsely asked for imperial edicts, awarded officials without authorization, and received important and distinguished official positions in a short period of time.

古文：臣等在蕃之时，乃心家国，书诮往来，愤气成疚，伤礼败德，臣忠即主。
现代文：我们在地方时，关注国家大事，书信往来讥刺，愤恨成病。伤害礼教败坏道德，于忠就是祸首。
English: When we are in the local area, we pay attention to national affairs, exchange letters and ridicule, and resentment becomes a disease. Hurting etiquette and corrupting morals, loyalty is the main culprit.

古文：谨案臣忠世以鸿勋盛德，受遇累朝，出入承明，左右机近。
现代文：谨案臣于忠世代因为巨大的功绩和高尚的品德，受到累朝的恩遇，出入承明门，把持机密近要的职位。
English: Because of their great achievements and noble character, the honorable vassals of the Yuzhong generation were favored by the late dynasty, entering and leaving the imperial court, and holding confidential and important positions.

古文：幸国大灾，肆其愚戆，专擅朝命，无人臣之心。
现代文：侥幸国家有大灾祸，暴露其愚昧刚愎，独擅朝政，没有人臣之心。
English: By a stroke of luck, the country suffered a great calamity, exposing its ignorance and arrogance, its autocratic rule, and its lack of patriotism.

古文：裴郭受冤于既往，宰辅黜辱于明世。
现代文：以往裴氏郭氏受冤，在政治清明的时代辅政大臣被黜免受辱。
English: In the past, Mr. Bae and Mr. Guo were wronged, and in an era of political clarity, the Vice-Minister of State was protected from humiliation.

古文：又自矫旨为仪同三司、尚书令、领崇训卫尉，原其此意，便欲无上自处。
现代文：又自己假托圣旨任仪同三司、尚书令、领崇训宫卫尉，推究他这样做的意思，就是想自居至尊的地位。
English: He also pretended to entrust the sacred rites to Ren Rong, the third secretary, Shang Shuling, and Lian Chongxun, the palace guard, and his intention in doing so was to place himself in the highest position.

古文：既事在恩后，宜加显戮。
现代文：既然事情在加恩之后，应当斩首示众。
English: Now that the matter is behind Garn, he should be publicly beheaded.

古文：请御史一人，令史一人，就州行决。
现代文：请派御史一人、令史一人，到冀州执行处决任务。
English: Please send one official and one lay person to Jizhou to carry out the execution.

古文：崔光与忠虽同受召，而谓光既儒望，朝之礼宗，摄心虚远，不关世务。
现代文：崔光与于忠虽然一同接受韶令，但我认为崔光既是儒士所仰望的人，又是朝中守礼的典范，专心于清虚超逸的境界，不关心社会事务。
English: Although Cui Guang and Yu Zhong received the imperial edict together, I think that Cui Guang is not only a person who is looked up to by Confucianists, but also a model of etiquette in the court, concentrating on the realm of purity and transcendence, and not caring about social affairs.

古文：但忠以光意望崇重逼光，光若不同，又有危祸。
现代文：不过于忠因崔光声望高逼迫崔光，崔光如果不赞同，又有危险。
English: However, because of the high reputation of Cui Guang, Yu Zhong is persecuting Cui Guang. If Cui Guang does not agree, there is danger.

古文：伏度二圣钦明，深垂昭恕。
现代文：私下猜度二圣敬肃明察，特加宽恕。
English: Privately guess the degree of the two saints, respect the solemnity, and pay special attention to forgiveness.

古文：而自去岁正月十三日世宗晏驾以后，八月一日皇太后未亲览以前，诸有不由阶级而权臣用命，或发门下诏书，或由中书宣敕，擅相拜授者，已经恩宥，正可免其叨窃之罪。
现代文：而从去年正月十三日世宗逝世以后，八月一日皇太后未亲理政事以前，凡有不由等级而被权臣任命，或由门下省颁发诏书，或由中书省宣示敕令，擅自拜授为官的人，已经加恩宽宥，正可宽免他们窃居官位之罪。
English: However, since Sejong's death on the 13th day of the first month of last year, and before the empress dowager took office on the 1st day of August without being personally in charge of government affairs, anyone who was appointed by a powerful minister regardless of their rank, or issued an imperial edict by a subordinate province, or issued a royal edict by the Central Scripts Province, and became an official without permission, has been pardoned and can be pardoned for the crime of stealing official positions.

古文：既非时望，朝野所知，冒阶而进者，并求追夺。 
现代文：既然不是当时有声望的人，不为朝野人士所知，而越级进升的，请求一并削夺。 
English: Since he was not a person with a reputation at that time, and was not known to the people of the court and the country, if he was promoted beyond his rank, he was asked to be demoted at the same time.

古文：灵太后令曰： 直绳所纠，实允朝宪。
现代文：灵太后下令说： 御史所检举的，确实符合朝廷的法令。
English: The Empress Dowager Ling ordered, "What the Imperial Historian has reported is indeed in accordance with the Imperial Court's decree.

古文：但忠事经肆宥，又蒙特原，无宜追罪。
现代文：不过于忠的事已经过赦宥，又承蒙特别宽恕，不应当追加惩罚。
English: However, there should be no additional punishment for loyalty that has already been forgiven and specially pardoned.

古文：余如奏。 
现代文：其余的依照奏疏行事。 
English: The rest agreed to Ho Chung-tin's letter.

古文：又诏曰： 忠以往年大讳之际，开崇邑土，然酬庸理乖，有司执夺。
现代文：又下令说： 于忠在往年皇上逝世之时，增加封地，然而有些酬劳官员舆民众的措施违背了酬功的道理，被有关部门削夺。
English: He also ordered: Yu Zhong had increased his fief at the time of the emperor's death in previous years, but some measures to reward officials and the public violated the principle of reward and were taken away by the relevant departments.

古文：岂宜一谬，弃其余勋也。
现代文：怎能因一次错误而忘记他其余的功劳呢。
English: How can one mistake make him forget the rest of his work?

古文：但忠厥任禁要，诚节皎然，宜褒锡山河，以安厥望。
现代文：单就于忠担任朝廷要职，忠诚的节操昭然可见，就应当褒扬并赏赐封邑，以安其心。
English: Just because he held an important position in the imperial court, and his loyalty and self-restraint are clearly visible, he should be commended and rewarded with a fiefdom to reassure his heart.

古文：可灵寿县开国公，邑五百户。 
现代文：可以授予他灵寿县开国公，食邑五百户。 
English: He can be awarded as the founding father of Lingshou County with 500 households.

古文：初，世宗崩后，高太后将害灵太后。
现代文：当初，世宗逝世后，高太后打算加害灵太后。
English: At first, after the death of King Sejong, Empress Dowager Gao planned to harm Empress Dowager Ling.

古文：刘腾以告侯刚，刚以告忠。
现代文：刘腾把这事告诉侯刚，侯刚又告诉于忠。
English: Liu Teng told this to Hou Gang, who in turn told Yu Zhong.

古文：忠请计于崔光，光曰： 宜置胡嫔于别所，严加守卫，理必万全，计之上者。 
现代文：于忠向崔光求计，崔光说： 应当把胡嫔安置到别的地方，严加守卫，必定万无一失，这是上策。 
English: Yu Zhong asked Cui Guang for a plan. Cui Guang said, "We should relocate Hu Yao to another place, keep him under strict guard, and make sure nothing goes wrong. This is the best plan."

古文：忠等从之，具以此意启灵太后，太后意乃安。
现代文：于忠等听从这一建议，并向灵太后作了汇报，太后心裹这才安定下来。
English: Yu Zhong and others listened to this suggestion and reported to the Empress Dowager. It was only then that the Empress Dowager calmed down.

古文：故太后深德腾等四人，并有宠授。
现代文：所以太后很感谢刘腾等四人，都授予官爵。
English: Therefore, the empress dowager was deeply grateful to Liu Teng and the other four people, and they were all favored and rewarded.

古文：忠以毁之者多，惧不免祸，愿还京师，欲自营救。
现代文：于忠考虑到诋毁自己的人多。担心免不了灾祸，希望返回京师，打算自救。
English: Yu Zhong considered that there were many people who slandered him. Worried that disaster could not be avoided, he hoped to return to Beijing Division and planned to save himself.

古文：灵太后不许。
现代文：灵太后不允。
English: The Empress Dowager Ling did not agree.

古文：二年四月，除尚书右仆射，加侍中，将军如故。
现代文：二年四月，任尚书右仆射，加授侍中，将军一职照旧。
English: In April of the second year, he was appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man, and was given the title of general.

古文：神龟元年三月，复仪同三司，疾病末拜，见裴郭为祟，忠自知必死。
现代文：神龟元年三月，恢复仪同三司，因病重没有就职，幻觉中看见裴氏郭氏两鬼作怪。
English: In March of the first year of the Divine Tortoise, the restoration ceremony and the three divisions did not take office due to serious illness, and the two ghosts of Pei Guo were seen in the hallucination.

古文：表曰： 先帝录臣父子一介之诚，昭臣家世奉公之节，故申之以婚姻，重之以爵禄，至乃位亚三槐，秩班九命。
现代文：于忠自知必死，上表说： 先代皇帝重用我父子不足挂齿的忠诚，显扬我家世代忠于皇室的节操，用婚姻来加以显耀，用爵禄使之尊贵，竟至官位仅亚于三公，品秩舆上公等同。
English: The previous emperor took advantage of my father's and son's insufficient loyalty to show my family's generation's loyalty to the imperial family, using marriage to show it off, and using peerage to make it noble, to the extent that the official rank was only inferior to that of the three princes, and the rank was equivalent to that of the most senior prince.

古文：自大明利见之始，百官总己之初，臣复得猥摄禁戎，缉宁内外，斯诚社稷之灵，兆民之福，臣何力之有焉？
现代文：自从皇上登位之初，刚刚总摄百官之时，我又得以庸才之身统领禁军，负责内外和睦安宁的事务，这实在是国家的福分，百姓的福分，我有什么功劳呢。
English: Since the beginning of the emperor's ascension to the throne, when I was just appointed as the chief photographer, I have been able to lead the Imperial Army as a mediocre person and be responsible for the affairs of harmony and tranquility at home and abroad. This is truly a blessing for the country and the people. What merit do I have?

古文：但陛下以睿明御宇，皇太后以圣善临朝，衽席不遗，簪履弗弃，复乃宠穷出内，荣遍宫闱，外牧两河，入参百揆。
现代文：不过陛下凭智慧统治天下，皇太后凭贤良临朝听政，重视人才，不嫌弃我的无能无德，却令我恩宠穷尽内外，富贵遍及宫廷，出外统管两河地区，入朝参与中枢政务。
English: However, His Majesty rules the world by virtue of wisdom, the Empress Dowager listens to the government by virtue of being a virtuous person, attaches importance to talent, does not abhor my incompetence and immorality, but exhausts my grace both at home and abroad, is rich and noble throughout the court, manages the two rivers region abroad, and enters the government to participate in central government affairs.

古文：顾服知妖，省躬识戾。
现代文：看服饰而知妖孽，反省而认识罪过。
English: See the dress and know the witchcraft, reflect and know the sin.

古文：而臣将慎靡方，致兹疴疚。
现代文：但是我调养保重无方，得了这样的病。
English: But there was nothing I could do to take care of myself, and I got this disease.

古文：自去秋苦痢，缠绵迄今，药石备尝，日增无损。
现代文：从去年秋天染上痢疾，缠绵至今，吃遍了药，一天天加重而没有减轻。
English: I contracted dysentery last autumn and have been suffering from it ever since. I've taken all the medicine I can get my hands on and it's getting worse every day, not better.

古文：又今年已来，力侯转恶，微喘绪息，振复良难。
现代文：而且今年以来，病症恶化，衹剩下微弱的喘息，实在难以恢复。
English: Moreover, since this year, the disease has worsened, leaving me with weak wheezing, which is really difficult to recover from.

古文：鸿慈末酬，伏枕涕咽。
现代文：大恩未报，俯伏枕上哽咽流泪。
English: Ungrateful for the great favor, he fell on the pillow and choked back tears.

古文：臣薄福无男，遗体莫嗣，贪及余生，谨陈宿抱。
现代文：我福分浅薄没有儿子，没人传世，希望在去世之前，恭谨地陈说宿愿。
English: My fortune is shallow, I have no son, no one to pass on to the next generation. I hope that before I die, I can respectfully express my long-cherished wish.

古文：臣先养亡第四弟第二子司徒掾永超为子，犹子之念实切于心，乞立为嫡，传此山河。 
现代文：我先前收养已去世的第四个弟弟的第二个儿子司徒掾永超作为儿子，但他仍然觉得是侄子，请求确立为嫡子，继承我的封邑。 
English: I had previously adopted as my son the second son of my fourth brother, who had passed away, but he still felt that he was my nephew and asked to be recognized as my legitimate son and inherit my fiefdom.

古文：灵太后令曰： 于忠表如此。
现代文：灵太后下令说： 于忠上书表达了这样的想法。
English: The Empress Dowager Ling ordered, "Yu Zhongshang expressed such an idea in his letter.

古文：既诚勋宜录，又无子可矜。
现代文：他的忠诚与功绩既显赫可嘉，没有儿子而值得同情。
English: Commendable as his loyalty and achievements are, he is to be pitied for not having a son.

古文：临危所祈，不容致夺，可特听如请，以彰殊效。 
现代文：病重将死时的请求，不容剥夺，可以特别批准他的请求，以表彰他特殊的贡献。 
English: The request of a seriously ill person who is about to die cannot be denied, and his request may be specially approved in recognition of his special contribution.

古文：忠薨，年五十七。
现代文：王盅逝世，五十七岁。
English: Wang Xi passed away at the age of 57.

古文：给东园秘器、朝服一具、衣一袭、钱二十万、布七百匹、蜡三百斤，赠侍中、司空公。
现代文：赐给显贵用的棺材、朝服一套、衣一件、钱工十万、布七百匹、蜡三百斤，追赠为侍中、司空公。
English: He gave the dignitary a coffin, a set of imperial robes, a piece of clothing, 100,000 pieces of money, 700 pieces of cloth, and 300 pounds of wax, as well as posthumous awards for the chamberlain and the steward.

古文：有司奏： 太常少卿元端议，忠刚直猛暴，专戆好杀，案谥法刚强理直曰 武 ，怙威肆行曰 丑 ，宜谥武丑公。
现代文：有关部门上奏： 太常少卿元端建议，于忠刚强正直，勇猛暴戾，专断好杀，根据谧法刚强忠直为 武 ，仗威妄为为 丑，应当定谧号武丑公。
English: Relevant departments reported: Too often, Shaoqing Yuanfang suggested that in the case of being loyal, strong, honest, brave, violent, and arbitrary, according to the law of justice, being strong, loyal, and upright is Wu, and being arrogant is ugly, it should be designated as Wu and ugly.

古文：太常卿元修义议，忠尽心奉上，剪除凶逆，依谥法除伪宁真曰 武 ，夙夜恭事曰 敬 ，谥武敬公。
现代文：太常卿元脩义建议，于忠尽心事奉皇上，铲除凶恶悖逆的人，依照谧法除去虚伪，而使真诚的人安宁为 武，早晚恭顺地事奉为 敬 ，应定谧号武敬公。
English: Grand Councilor Yuan Shiyi suggested that to serve the emperor faithfully, to root out evil and rebellious people, to eliminate hypocrisy according to the law of war, and to make sincere people peaceful and respectful, and to serve the emperor respectfully in the morning and evening, it should be given the title of "Wu Jing Gong."

古文：二卿不同。 
现代文：二卿的意见不同。 
English: The two officials made different arguments.

古文：事奏，灵太后令曰： 可依正卿议。 
现代文：上奏后，灵太后下令说： 照正卿的建议办。 
English: After the recital, the Empress Dowager Ling ordered: "Do as Zhengqing suggested.

古文：于氏自曾祖四世贵盛，一皇后，四赠三公，领军、尚书令、三开国公。
现代文：于氏从曾祖父以来，四代兴盛，一位皇后，四人被追赠为三公，领军、尚书令，三位开国公。
English: Since Yu's great-grandfather, four generations of prosperity, one queen, four people were posthumously awarded as the three princes, the leader of the army, Shang Shuling, and the three founding princes.

古文：忠性多猜忌，不交胜己，唯与直阁将军章初瑰、千牛备身杨保元为断金之交。
现代文：于忠生性好猜忌，不与胜过自己的人交往，衹与直合将军章初瓖、千牛备身杨保元有深交。
English: Yu Zhongsheng has a suspicious nature and does not associate with people who are better than him. He has a deep friendship with Zhihe General Zhang Huzhong and Qianniu Preparation Yang Bao Yuan.

古文：李世哲求宠于忠，私以金帛宝货事初瑰、保元，初瑰、保元谈之，遂被赏爱，引为腹心。
现代文：李世哲谋求被于忠重用，私下用金钱宝物贡奉初瓖、保元，初瓖、保元在于忠面前提及他，于是得到于忠赏识，作为心腹。
English: Li Shizhe sought to be used by Yu Zhong, and secretly used money and treasures to pay tribute to Hatsushiro and Hogen. Hatsushiro and Hogen mentioned him in front of Yu Zhong, and thus gained Yu Zhong's appreciation as a confidant.

古文：忠擅权昧进，为崇训之由，皆世哲计也。
现代文：于忠专权贪图晋升，制造崇训宫事变，都是世哲的计策。
English: The Yuzhong dictatorship's greed for promotion and the creation of the Chongxun Palace Incident are all the schemes of the world's sages.

古文：忠后妻中山王尼须女，微解《诗书》，灵太后临朝，引为女侍中，赐号范阳郡君。
现代文：于忠的后妻是中山王尼须的女儿，懂得一点《诗经》《尚书》，灵太后临朝听政，让她担任女侍中，赐给称号范阳郡君。
English: Yu Zhong's second wife was the daughter of Zhongshan King Nisu, who knew a little about the "Song of Songs" and "Shang Shu." Lingdai Hou listened to the government, let her serve as a maid of honor, and gave her the title Fanyang County Jun.

古文：永超名翻，袭爵。
现代文：永超名翻，继承爵位。
English: Yong Chao changed his name and inherited a peerage.

古文：寻卒。
现代文：不久去世。
English: He died soon after.

古文：子世衡，袭。
现代文：儿子世冲，继承爵位。
English: His son, Shichong, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：齐受禅，例降。
现代文：在齐接受禅让后，依例降低爵位。
English: After accepting the compromise, the peerage was reduced as usual.

古文：忠弟景，字百年。
现代文：于忠的弟弟于景，字百年。
English: Yu Zhong's younger brother, Yu Jing, lived for a hundred years.

古文：自司州从事，稍迁步兵校尉、宁朔将军、高平镇将。
现代文：自司州从事逐渐升任步兵校尉、宁朔将军、高平镇将。
English: He gradually rose to the ranks of infantry lieutenant, Ningshuo general, and Gaoping town general.

古文：坐贪残受纳，为御史中尉王显所弹，会赦免。
现代文：因贪婪受贿，被御史中尉王显弹劾，遇到赦免。
English: For greed and bribery, he was impeached by Lieutenant Wang Xian, and was pardoned.

古文：忠薨后，景为武卫将军。
现代文：于忠逝世以后，于景任武卫将军。
English: After the death of Yu Zhong, Yu Jing became General Wu Wei.

古文：谋废元叉，叉黜为征虏将军、怀荒镇将。
现代文：谋划黜免元叉，被元叉贬职为征虏将军、怀荒镇将。
English: He plotted to get rid of Yuan Zhao, but was demoted by Yuan Zhao to a conscript general and general of Huaiya Town.

古文：及蠕蠕主阿那瑰叛乱，镇民固请粮廪，而景不给。
现代文：等到蠕蠕头领阿那坏叛乱，镇中百姓一再请求救济粮食，而于景不供给。
English: By the time Cree Cree led the Anaconda Rebellion, the people of the town had repeatedly requested relief grain, but Yu Jing did not supply it.

古文：镇民不胜其忿，遂反叛。
现代文：镇中百姓怒不可遏，于是反叛。
English: The people of the town were so angry that they rebelled.

古文：执缚景及其妻，拘守别室，皆去其衣服，令景著皮裘，妻著故绛袄。
现代文：将于景和他的妻子捆绑起来，分别关押，都去掉衣服，让：乏基穿毛皮衣服，妻子穿旧红袄。
English: They tied up Yu Jing and his wife and detained them separately, stripping them of their clothes, forcing him to wear a fur coat and his wife to wear an old red scarf.

古文：其被毁辱如此。
现代文：他们被这样地羞辱。
English: They were so humiliated.

古文：月余，乃杀之。
现代文：一个多月后，才被杀死。
English: More than a month later, he was killed.

古文：烈弟敦，自中散迁骁骑将军。
现代文：王烈的弟弟王敦，从中散升任骁骑将军。
English: Wang Lei's younger brother, Wang Dun, rose to the rank of cavalry general.

古文：景明中，假节，行并州事，除征虏将军、恆州刺史。
现代文：景明年间，假节，行韭业事，任征虏将军、刺史。
English: Scenes of the next year, the holiday, the conduct of business affairs, the appointment of conscript generals, the stabbing of history.

古文：卒官，赠使持节、平北将军、恆州刺史。
现代文：在任期间去世，被追赠为使持节、平北将军、恆州刺史。
English: He died during his term of office and was posthumously awarded the titles of Envoy, General of North Pyongan Province and Historian of Hengzhou Province.

古文：子昕，员外郎，直后，主衣都统，扬烈将军，怀朔、武川镇将，中散大夫。
现代文：儿子于昕，员外郎，直后，主衣都统，扬烈将军，怀朔、武川镇将，中散大夫。
English: His son, Yu Yu, was the second-in-command, immediately followed by his master, Du Du Tong, General Yang Li, General Wai Shuo, General Wuchuan, and Doctor Zhong San.

古文：孝昌中，使蠕蠕，与阿那瑰擒逆贼破洛汗听明、出六斤等。
现代文：孝昌年问，出使蠕蠕，与阿那瓖擒获叛逆贼人破洛汗听明、出六斤等。
English: Xiao Changnian asked, sent out Crum Crum, and Anaxun won the traitorous thief to break the Luo Khan to listen to, out of six pounds and so on.

古文：转辅国将军、北中郎将、恆州大中正。
现代文：升任辅国将军、北中郎将、恒州大中正。
English: He was promoted to General of the Auxiliary Provinces, General of the Northern Middle Provinces, and Vice President of the Middle School of the Hengzhou University.

古文：又迁抚军将军、卫尉卿。
现代文：又升任抚军将军、卫尉卿。
English: He was also promoted to General of the General Staff and Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards.

古文：出为镇东将军，殷、恆州刺史。
现代文：出任镇束将军，殷、恒二州刺史。
English: Appointed as the general of Zhenzuk, Yin, Heng two states stabbed history.

古文：还拜征东将军，领左右。
现代文：召回任征柬将军，领左右。
English: Calling back the conscripted Cambodian generals, left and right.

古文：天平中卒。
现代文：天平年间去世。
English: He died in the Tenpyo era.

古文：赠都督冀定州诸军事、卫将军、尚书仆射、仪同三司，谥曰文恭。
现代文：追赠为都督冀州定州诸军事、卫将军、尚书仆射、仪同三司，谧号为文恭。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of the Governor of Jizhou, the Military Commander of Dingzhou, the General of the Guards, the Secretary of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army, and the Third Secretary of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army. His posthumous name was Wengong.

古文：长子扬仁。
现代文：长子扬仁。
English: The eldest son, Yangren.

古文：武定中，勃海太守。
现代文：武定年间，任勃海太守。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wuding, he served as the second governor of the Bohai Sea.

古文：扬仁弟叉罗，字仲纲。
现代文：扬仁的弟弟叉罗，字仲纲。
English: Yangren's younger brother, Zhao Luo, is known as Zhonggang.

古文：中军将军、光州刺史。
现代文：中军将军、光州刺史。
English: The Chinese general, Gwangju stabbed history.

古文：叉罗弟子荣，鲁郡太守。
现代文：叉罗的弟弟子荣，任鲁郡太守。
English: Zhi Luo's younger brother, Zhi Rong, became the governor of Lu County.

古文：敦弟果，严毅直亮，有父兄之风。
现代文：于敦的弟弟于果，严厉刚毅正直信实，有父兄之风。
English: Yu Dong's younger brother, Yu Guo, is strict, courageous, honest and faithful, and has the style of his father and brother.

古文：自中散稍迁光禄大夫，守尚书，赐爵武城子。
现代文：从中散逐渐升任光禄大夫，守尚书，被赐爵武城子。
English: From middle school, he was gradually promoted to the post of doctor of Guanglu, kept the imperial edict, and was given the title of peer of Wucheng.

古文：太和中，历朔、华、并、恆四州刺史。
现代文：太和年间，历任朔、华、并、恒四州刺史。
English: During the Taihe era, successive governors of the four prefectures of Shuang, Hua, Nian, and Heng made history.

古文：子砾，袭。
现代文：儿子于砾，继承爵位。
English: His son, Yuhei, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：太子舍入、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：任太子舍人、通直散骑常侍。
English: The crown prince resigned, and Tsuchida Sanzhi, the prince's equerry, was appointed.

古文：卒，赠右将军、洛州刺史，谥曰哀。
现代文：去世，被追赠为右将军、洛州刺史，谧号为哀。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the titles of "Right General" and "Laoshou Scholar," and his nickname was "Mangong."

古文：子晖，征东将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：儿子于晖，任征束将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: His son, Yu Ye, was appointed Conscript General and Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：晖弟道扬，仪同开府谘议参军。
现代文：于晖的弟弟道扬，任仪同开府谘议参军。
English: Yu Yao's younger brother Daoyang, Ren Yi and Kaifu consulted on joining the army.

古文：砾弟祗，卒于司徒掾。
现代文：于砾的弟弟于祇，任司徒掾时去世。
English: Yu Gui's younger brother, Yu Gi, died while serving as the head monk.

古文：赠镇远将军、朔州刺史，谥曰悼。
现代文：被追赠为镇远将军、朔州刺史，谧号为悼。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Zhenyuan General and Shuozhou Scholar, and his nickname was Yu.

古文：祗子元伯，中散大夫。
现代文：于衹的儿子元伯，任中散大夫。
English: Yu Yao's son, Yuan Bo, was appointed as the doctor of Zhongshan.

古文：果弟劲，事在《外戚传》。
现代文：于果的弟弟于劲，事在《外戚传》。
English: Yu Guo's younger brother Yu Jin, the story is told in "The Tale of a Foreign Relative."

古文：劲弟须，中散。
现代文：于劲的弟弟于须，任中散。
English: Yu Jin's younger brother, Yu Su, was dismissed.

古文：迁长水校尉，稍迁武卫将军、太府卿、镇南将军、肆州刺史。
现代文：升任长水校尉，逐渐升任武卫将军、太府卿、镇南将军、肆州刺史。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Captain of Chosui, and gradually rose to the ranks of General Wuwei, Grand Mufu, General Zhenan, and Shishi of Wuzhou.

古文：卒，赠侍中、车骑大将军、尚书右仆射、仪同三司、冀州长史。
现代文：去世，被追赠为侍中、车骑大将军、尚书右仆射、仪同三司。阙冀州长史。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Chamberlain, General of Chariots and Cavalry, Right-Handed Shooter, and Third Secretary of Ceremonies.

古文：卒，赠征南将军、燕州刺史。谥曰武。
现代文：去世，被迫赠为征南将军、燕州刺史，谧号为武。
English: After his death, he was forced to be given the titles of "Southern Expeditionary General" and "Yanzhou Scholar," and his nickname was "Wu."

古文：子羽，太尉从事中郎，燕州刺史。
现代文：儿子于翊，任太尉从事中郎、燕州刺史。
English: His son, Yu Yu, was appointed captain and engaged in middle-ranking officials, and Yan Zhou was appointed chief historian.

古文：子长文，字士端。
现代文：儿子长文，字士端。
English: His son, Nagafumi, became a calligrapher.

古文：武定中，尚书考功郎。
现代文：武定年间，任尚书考功郎。
English: During the Wuding era, he was appointed as a meritorious scholar.

古文：须弟文仁，太中大夫。
现代文：于须的弟弟文仁，任太中大夫。
English: Yusu's younger brother, Fumihito, was appointed Grand Vice-Marshal.

古文：史臣曰：魏定中原，于栗磾有武功于三世。
现代文：史臣曰：北魏平定中原，于栗蝉有武功于三朝。
English: The historian said, "The Northern Wei Dynasty pacified the Central Plains, and the chestnut cicada played a military role in the Three Dynasties."

古文：兼以虚己下物，罚不滥加，斯亦诸将所希矣。
现代文：虚心谦让，不滥用刑罚，这也是将领中所罕有的。
English: He is humble and does not abuse punishment, which is rare among generals.

古文：拔任参内外，以著能名。
现代文：洛拔任职中央和地方，以能干著名。
English: Lobat has served at the central and local levels and is known for his ability.

古文：烈气概沉远，受任艰危之际，有柱石之质，殆御侮之臣。
现代文：于烈气概深沉远大，在艰难危急的时刻接受任职，有柱石的资质，大约是可以抗御外侮的大臣。
English: He has a strong spirit, is profound and far-sighted, takes office at a difficult and critical time, has the qualifications of a pillar, and is about a minister who can resist external insults.

古文：忠以鲠朴见亲，乘非其据，遂擅威权，生杀自已。
现代文：于忠以鲠直朴实受到信任，趁着没有正常的帝王在位，于是独揽威势和权柄，自主决定生杀大计。
English: Yu Zhong was trusted to be straightforward and unpretentious. Taking advantage of the fact that there was no normal emperor on the throne, he monopolized power and authority and independently decided on his life and death.

古文：苟非女主之世，何以全其门族？其不诛灭，抑天幸也。
现代文：如果不是太后作主的时代，怎能保全他的家族他没有被杀，算是幸运了。
English: If it were not for the era of the empress dowager, how could he protect his family? He was lucky not to be killed.

