古文：入孝出弟，人之小行也。上顺下笃，人之中行也；从道不从君，从义不从父，人之大行也。
现代文：在家孝敬父母，在外敬爱兄长，这是做人起码的道德修养；对上顺从，对下厚道，这是做人中等道德修养；顺从正道而不顺从君主，顺从道义不顺从父亲，这是做人的最高道德修养。
English: To show filial piety to one's parents at home and to love one's elder brothers and sisters abroad is the minimum moral cultivation; to be obedient to superiors and kind to inferiors is the medium moral cultivation; to follow the right path but not the monarch, to follow morality but not one's father, is the highest moral cultivation.

古文：若夫志以礼安，言以类使，则儒道毕矣。虽尧舜不能加毫末于是矣。
现代文：如果能根据礼义来安排志向，根据法度来指导自己的言论，那么儒家之道也就完备了，即使是尧舜这样贤明的君主，也不能在这上面有丝毫的增益了。
English: If you can arrange your aspirations according to the etiquette and guide your speech according to the law, then the Confucian way is complete. Even such a wise monarch as Yu cannot gain the slightest benefit from it.

古文：孝子所不从命有三：从命则亲危，不从命则亲安，孝子不从命乃衷；从命则亲辱，不从命则亲荣，孝子不从命乃义；从命则禽兽，不从命则修饰，孝子不从命乃敬。
现代文：孝子不服从命令的原因有三种：服从命令，父母亲就会危险；不服从命令，父母亲就安全，那么孝子不服从命令就是忠诚；服从命令，父母亲就会受耻辱；不服从命令，父母亲就光荣，那么孝子不服从命令就是奉行道义；服从命令，就会使父母的行为像禽兽一样野蛮，不服从命令，就会使父母的行为富有修养而端正，那么孝子不服从命令就是恭敬。
English: There are three reasons why a filial son or daughter disobeys an order: obeying an order puts the parents in danger; disobeying an order keeps the parents safe, so a filial son or daughter disobeying an order is loyal; obeying an order puts the parents in disgrace; disobeying an order makes the parents honorable, so a filial son or daughter disobeying an order is moral; obeying an order makes the parents behave like wild animals, disobeying an order makes the parents behave in a cultivated and proper manner, so a filial son or daughter disobeying an order is respectful.

古文：故可以从命而不从，是不子也；未可以从而从，是不衷也；明于从不从之义，而能致恭敬，忠信、端悫、以慎行之，则可谓大孝矣。
现代文：所以，可以服从而不服从，这是不尽孝子之道；不可以服从而服从，这是不忠于父母。明白了这服从或不服从的道理，并且能做到恭敬尊重、忠诚守信、正直老实地来谨慎实行它，就可以称之为大孝了。
English: Therefore, it is possible to obey and disobey, which is not the way of filial piety; it is not possible to obey and obey, which is disloyalty to parents. If you understand this principle of obedience or disobedience, and can respectfully respect, be loyal and trustworthy, and honestly and prudently practice it, you can call it great filial piety.

古文：传曰： 从道不从君，从义不从父。 
现代文：古书上说： 顺从正道而不顺从君主，顺从道义而不顺从父亲。 
English: An ancient book says: Obey the righteous path, not the ruler; obey morality, not your father.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这个道理。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：故劳苦、雕萃而能无失其敬，灾祸、患难而能无失其义，则不幸不顺见恶而能无失其爱，非仁人莫能行。诗曰： 孝子不匮。 
现代文：所以，即使自己劳苦憔悴时也不能够丧失对父母的恭敬，遭到灾祸患难时也不能够丧失对父母应尽的道义，即使不幸地因为和父母不顺而被父母憎恶时仍能不丧失对父母的爱，如果不是仁德之人是不能做到的。《诗经》上说： 孝子之孝无穷尽。 
English: Therefore, even if you cannot lose respect for your parents when you work hard, you cannot lose the moral obligation to your parents when you are afflicted with disasters and hardships, and even if you are unfortunately hated by your parents for disobeying them, you can still not lose love for your parents. If you are not a benevolent person, you cannot do it. "The Book of Songs" says: Filial piety is inexhaustible.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这个道理。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：鲁哀公问于孔子曰： 子从父命，孝乎？
现代文：鲁哀公问孔子说： 儿子服从服从了父亲的命令就是孝顺吗？
English: Lu Aikong asked Confucius, "Is it filial piety for a son to obey his father's command?"

古文：臣从君命，贞乎？ 
现代文：臣子服从君主的命令，就是忠贞吗？ 
English: If a vassal obeys the monarch's order, does that mean he is loyal?

古文：三问，孔子不对。
现代文：问了三次，孔子不回答。
English: After asking three times, Confucius did not answer.

古文：孔子趋出以语子贡曰： 乡者，君问丘也，曰： 子从父命，孝乎？
现代文：孔子小步快走而出，把这件事告诉给子贡说： 刚才，国君问我，说： 儿子服从父亲的命令，就是孝顺吗？
English: Confucius quickly walked out and told this to Zigong, saying, "Just now, the sovereign asked me, saying, 'If a son obeys his father's command, is he being dutiful?'

古文：臣从君命，贞乎？ 
现代文：臣子服从君主的命令，就是忠贞吗？ 
English: If a vassal obeys the monarch's order, does that mean he is loyal?

古文：三问而丘不对，赐以为何如？ 
现代文：问了三次而我不回答，你认为怎样？ 
English: You asked me three times and I didn't answer, what do you think?

古文：子贡曰： 子从父命，孝矣。臣从君命，贞矣，夫子有奚对焉？ 
现代文：子贡说： 儿子服从父亲的命令，就是孝顺了；臣子服从君主的命令，就是忠贞了。
English: Zigong said, "If a son obeys his father's order, he is filial; if a vassal obeys the monarch's order, he is loyal."

古文：孔子曰： 小人哉！
现代文：先生又能怎样回答他呢？ 孔子说： 真是个小人，你不懂啊！
English: How could the teacher answer him? Confucius said: What a rascal, you don't understand!

古文：赐不识也！昔万乘之国，有争臣四人，则封疆不削；千乘之国，有争臣三人，则社稷不危；百乘之家，有争臣二人，则宗庙不毁。
现代文：从前拥有万辆兵车的大国，只要有了四个敢于诤谏的大臣，那么疆界就不会被割削；拥有千辆兵车的小国，有了三个敢于诤谏的大臣，那么国家政权就不会危险；拥有百辆兵车的大夫之家，有了两个诤谏的大臣，那么宗庙就不会毁灭。
English: In the past, if a large country with ten thousand chariots had four ministers who dared to speak out, the borders would not be cut; if a small country with a thousand chariots had three ministers who dared to speak out, the national regime would not be in danger; if a doctor's family had a hundred chariots and two ministers who dared to speak out, the ancestral temple would not be destroyed.

古文：父有争子，不行无礼；士有争友，不为不义。
现代文：父亲有了诤谏的儿子，就不会做不合礼制的事；士人有了诤谏的朋友，就不会做不合道义的事。
English: If a father has a virtuous son, he will not do anything unseemly; if a scholar has a virtuous friend, he will not do anything immoral.

古文：故子从父，奚子孝？
现代文：所以，儿子一味听从父亲，怎能说这儿子是孝顺？
English: So, if a son simply obeys his father, how can it be said that this son is filial?

古文：臣从君，奚臣贞？
现代文：臣子一味听从君主，怎能说这臣子是忠贞？
English: If a vassal listens to the sovereign, how can it be said that this vassal is loyal?

古文：审其所以从之之谓孝、之谓贞也。 
现代文：弄清楚了听从的是什么才可以叫做孝顺、叫做忠贞。 
English: Only when you have clarified what it means to obey can you be called filial and loyal.

古文：子路问于孔子曰： 有人于此，夙兴夜寐，耕耘树艺，手足胼胝，以养其亲，然而无孝之名，何也？ 
现代文：子路问孔子说： 这里有个人，早起晚睡，耕地锄草栽植播种，手脚都磨出了老茧，以此来赡养自己的父母，却没有孝顺的名声，为什么呢？ 
English: Zi Lu asked Confucius, "There is a man here who gets up early and goes to bed late, ploughs the land, plants and sows, and grinds his hands and feet to support his parents, but he does not have a reputation for filial piety. Why?

古文：孔子曰： 意者身不敬与？
现代文：孔子说： 想来大概是他举止不恭敬吧！
English: Confucius said: Do you want to be disrespectful?

古文：辞不逊与？
现代文：或许是他说话不谦虚吧！
English: Perhaps it is he who is speaking immodestly!

古文：色不顺与？
现代文：或许是他脸色不温顺吧！
English: Perhaps it is his face that is not meek!

古文：古之人有言曰： 衣与！
现代文：古代的人有句话说： 给我穿啊给我吃啊，若不恭敬就不靠你。  
English: The ancients had a saying: Dress me, feed me, if I don't respect you, I don't depend on you.

古文：缪与！不女聊。 今夙兴夜寐，耕耘树艺，手足胼胝，以养其亲，无此三者，则何为而无孝之名也？
现代文：子路曰： 现在有的人并没有举止不恭敬、说话不谦虚、脸色不温顺这三种行为，那为什么会没有孝顺的名声呢？
English: Zilu said: Nowadays, some people do not have the three behaviors of disrespectful behavior, immodest speech, and unruly face, so why do they not have the reputation of filial piety?

古文：意者所友非人邪？ 孔子曰： 由志之，吾语女。
现代文：想来大概是他所交的朋友不是个仁德之人吧！ 孔子又说： 仲由，记住吧！我告诉你。
English: Come to think of it, the friend he made is probably not a benevolent person! Confucius also said: Zhongyu, remember! I'll tell you.

古文：虽有国士之力，不能自举其身。非无力也，势不可也。
现代文：即使有了全国闻名的大力士的力气，也不能自己举起自己的身体，这不是没有力气，而是客观情势不许可。
English: Even if you have the strength of a nationally famous wrestler, you can't lift your own body. It's not that you don't have the strength, but that the objective situation doesn't allow it.

古文：故入而行不修，身之罪也；出而名不章，友之过也。
现代文：所以，君子在家里行为不整饬，这是自己的罪过；在外名声不显扬，是朋友的罪过。
English: Therefore, if a gentleman behaves improperly at home, it is his own fault; if he behaves improperly abroad, it is the fault of his friends.

古文：故君子入则笃行，出则友贤，何为而无孝之名也！ 
现代文：所以，君子在家就使自己的品行忠诚厚道，出外就和贤能的人交朋友。如果能够做到这样的话，怎么会没有孝顺的名声呢？ 
English: Therefore, a gentleman should be loyal and virtuous at home, and make friends with virtuous people when he goes out. If he can do this, how can he not have a reputation for filial piety?

古文：子路问于孔子曰： 鲁大夫练而床，礼邪？ 孔子曰： 吾不知也。 
现代文：子路问孔子说： 鲁国的大夫披戴白色熟绢为父母进行周年祭祀时却在床上睡觉，这合乎礼制吗？ 孔子说： 我不知道。 
English: Zi Lu asked Confucius, "Is it proper for a doctor in Lu to wear a white robe and sleep on a bed while performing an anniversary ritual for his parents?" Confucius said, "I don't know."

古文：子路出，谓子贡曰： 吾以为夫子无所不知，夫子徒有所不知。 
现代文：子路出来后，对子贡说： 我以为先生没有什么不知道，先生却偏偏有不知道的。 
English: After Zilu came out, he said to Zigong: "I thought you didn't know anything, but you do know something.

古文：子贡曰： 汝何问哉？ 
现代文：子贡说： 你问了什么呢？ 
English: Zigong said, "What did you ask?"

古文：子路曰： 由问： 鲁大夫练而床，礼邪？ 夫子曰： 吾不知也。  
现代文：子路说： 我问： 鲁国的大夫披戴白色熟绢为父母进行周年祭祀时却在床上睡觉，这合乎礼制吗？ 先生说： 我不知道。  
English: Zilu said, "I asked, 'Is it proper for a doctor in Lu to wear a white robe and sleep on a bed while performing an anniversary ritual for his parents?' The teacher said, 'I don't know.'

古文：子贡曰： 吾将为女问之。 
现代文：子贡说： 我将给你去问问这件事。 
English: Zigong said, "I will ask you about it."

古文：子贡问曰： 练而床，礼邪？ 孔子曰； 非礼也。 
现代文：子贡问孔子说： 披戴白色熟绢为父母进行周年祭祀时却在床上睡觉，这合乎礼制吗？ 孔子说： 不合礼。 
English: Zigong asked Confucius, "Is it proper to wear a white robe and sleep in a bed while performing the anniversary ritual for your parents?" Confucius said, "It is not proper."

古文：子贡出，谓子路曰： 女谓夫子为有所不知乎！
现代文：子贡出来，对子路说： 你说先生有不知道的事吗？
English: Zigong came out and said to Zilu, "Did you say there is something your master doesn't know?

古文：夫子徒无所不知。
现代文：先生却偏偏没有什么不知道的。
English: The teacher, on the other hand, knows nothing.

古文：女问非也。
现代文：你问得不对啊。
English: You're asking the wrong question.

古文：礼：居是邑不非其大夫。 
现代文：根据礼制，住在这个城邑，就不非议管辖这城邑的大夫。 
English: According to the etiquette, if you live in this city, you should not criticize the doctor who governs this city.

古文：子路盛服而见孔子，孔子曰： 由，是裾裾何也？
现代文：子路穿戴整齐后去见孔子，孔子说： 仲由，这样衣冠楚楚的，为什么呢？
English: Zi Lu dressed neatly and went to see Confucius. Confucius said, "Nakayu, why are you so well-dressed?

古文：昔者江出于岷山，其始出也，其源可以滥觞，及其至江之津也，不放舟，不避风，则不可涉也。非维下流水多邪？
现代文：从前长江发源于岷山，它开始流出来的时候，源头小得只可以浮起酒杯，等到它流到长江的渡口时，如果不把船并在一起，不避开大风，就不能横渡过去了，这不是因为下游水大的缘故么？
English: Once upon a time, the Yangtze River originated in Lushan. When it began to flow out, the source was so small that it was only possible to float a wine glass. When it flowed to the Yangtze River ferry, if you did not connect the boats together and avoid the wind, you could not cross it. Is this not because of the large water downstream?

古文：今女衣服既盛，颜色充盈，天下且孰肯谏女矣！
现代文：现在你衣服已经穿得很庄重，脸上又神气十足，那么天下将有谁肯规劝你呢？ 
English: Now that your clothes have been dressed very solemnly, and your face is full of dignity, then who in the world would advise you?

古文：子路趋而出，改服而入，盖犹若也。
现代文：子路小步快走而出，换了衣服再进去，显得舒缓柔顺了。
English: Zi Lu walked out quickly, changed his clothes and went back in. He looked softer and softer.

古文：孔子曰： 由志之！
现代文：孔子说： 仲由啊！
English: Confucius said, "Nakayu!

古文：吾语汝：奋于言者华，奋于行者伐，色知而有能者，小人也。
现代文：你记住！
English: You remember!

古文：故君子知之曰知之，不知曰不知，言之要也；能之曰能之，不能曰不能，行之至也。
现代文：我告诉你。在说话方面趾高气扬的人往往夸夸其谈，在行动方面趾高气扬的人总是自我炫耀。百般显示自己有知识和才能的人，是小人啊。所以，君子知道了就说知道，不知道的就说不知道，这是说话的要领；能够做到的就说能做到，不能够做到的就说做不到，这是行动的最高准则。
English: I tell you, those who are arrogant in speech are often boastful in conversation, and those who are arrogant in action are always boastful. Those who show themselves to be knowledgeable and talented in various ways are villains. Therefore, when a gentleman knows, he says he knows, and when he doesn't know, he says he doesn't know, which is the essence of speech; when he can do something, he says he can do it, and when he can't do something, he says he can't do it, which is the highest standard of action.

古文：言要则知，行至则仁；既仁且知，夫恶有不足矣哉！ 
现代文：说话合乎要领就是明智，行动合乎准则就是仁德。既明智又有仁德，哪里还有不足之处了呢？ 
English: To speak according to the precepts is wisdom, and to act according to the precepts is benevolence. If there is wisdom and benevolence, what is lacking?

古文：子路入，子曰： 由！
现代文：子路进来。孔子说： 仲由！
English: Confucius said, "Get out!

古文：知者若何？
现代文：明智的人是怎样的？
English: What is a wise man like?

古文：仁者若何？ 
现代文：仁德的人是怎样的？ 
English: What about the benevolent?

古文：子路对曰： 知者使人知己，仁者使人爱己。 
现代文：子路回答说： 明智的人能使别人了解自己，仁德的人能使别人爱护自己。 
English: Zilu replied: A wise man can make others understand himself, and a benevolent man can make others love themselves.

古文：子曰： 可谓士矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 你可以称为士人了。 
English: Confucius said: You can be regarded as a high-ranking scholar.

古文：子贡入，子曰： 赐！
现代文：子贡进来。孔子说： 端木赐啊！
English: Confucius said, "Give me a piece of wood."

古文：知者若何？
现代文：明智的人是怎样的？
English: What is a wise man like?

古文：仁者若何？ 
现代文：仁德的人是怎样的？ 
English: What about the benevolent?

古文：子贡对曰： 知者知人，仁者爱人。 
现代文：子贡回答说： 明智的人能了解别人，仁德的人能爱护别人。 
English: Zigong replied, "A wise person can understand others, and a benevolent person can love others.

古文：子曰： 可谓士君子矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 你可以称为士君子了。 
English: Confucius said: You can be considered a gentleman.

古文：颜渊入，子曰： 回！
现代文：颜渊进来。孔子说： 颜回！
English: Yan Yuan came in. Confucius said: Yan Hui!

古文：知者若何？
现代文：明智的人是怎样的？
English: What is a wise man like?

古文：仁者若何？ 
现代文：仁德的人是怎样的？ 
English: What about the benevolent?

古文：颜渊对曰： 知者自知，仁者自爱。 
现代文：颜渊回答说： 明智的人有自知之明，仁德的人能自尊自爱。 
English: Yan Yuan replied, "Wise people are self-aware, and benevolent people are self-respecting.

古文：子曰： 可谓明君子矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 你可以称为贤明君子了。 
English: Confucius said, "Now you can be called a wise gentleman."

古文：子路问于孔子曰： 君子亦有忧乎？ 
现代文：子路问孔子说： 君子也有忧虑吗？ 
English: Zi Lu asked Confucius: Do nobles also have times of sorrow?

古文：孔子曰： 君子其未得也，则乐其意，既已得之，又乐其治。
现代文：孔子说： 君子，在他还没有得到职位时，就会为自己修养自我感到高兴；已经得到了职位之后，又会为自己有所作为而感到高兴。
English: Confucius said: A gentleman, when he has not yet obtained a position, will be happy to cultivate himself; after he has obtained a position, he will be happy to do something.

古文：是以有终生之乐，无一日之忧。
现代文：因此，君子有一辈子的快乐，而没有一天的忧虑。
English: Therefore, a gentleman has a lifetime of happiness, but not a day of worries.

古文：小人者其未得也，则忧不得；既已得之，又恐失之。
现代文：小人嘛，当他还没有得到职位的时候，就担忧得不到；已经得到了职位之后，又怕失去它。
English: A villain, when he hasn't got the job, doesn't worry; when he's got it, he's afraid of losing it.

古文：是以有终身之忧，无一日之乐也。 
现代文：因此，小人有一辈子的忧虑，而没有一天的快乐。 
English: Therefore, the villain has a lifetime of worries, but not a day of happiness.

