古文：○仁宗四二年春正月癸卯，以岁饥，罢上元观灯。
现代文：皇二年春正月十五日，因岁饥废除上元观灯。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the second year of the Emperor's reign, the Shangyuan Lantern Festival was abolished due to famine.

古文：壬子，命近臣同三司较天下财赋出入之数。
现代文：二十四日，命令近臣与三司一起考校全国财赋收支数额。
English: On the 24th, he ordered his close vassals and the three departments to examine the national financial revenue and expenditure of the school.

古文：二月甲申，出内库绢五十万，下河北、陕西、河东路，以备军赏。
现代文：二月二十七日，调出内库绢五十万，下拨到河北、陕西、河东路，用作军赏。
English: On February 27th, a total of 500 thousand baht was transferred from the treasury and sent to Hebei, Shaanxi and Hedong to be used as military rewards.

古文：三月戊子朔，诏季秋有事于明堂。
现代文：三月初一，下诏：秋天的最后一个月将在明堂举行祭祀活动。
English: On the first day of March, the following decree was issued: in the last month of autumn, sacrificial activities will be held in Myeongdong.

古文：己丑，以大庆殿为明堂。
现代文：初二，以大庆殿为明堂。
English: On the second day of the school year, Daechi-den is the main hall.

古文：甲午，遣官祈雨。
现代文：初七，派遣官员祈祷降雨。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, officials were dispatched to pray for rain.

古文：丁酉，月犯轩辕大星。
现代文：初十，月亮侵犯轩辕大星。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the moon encroached on the great star.

古文：戊戌，诏明堂礼成，群臣毋上尊号。
现代文：十一日，下诏：明堂礼定下来了，大臣不要上尊号。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the following edict was issued: The Myeongdong Ceremony has been set, and ministers should not use the honorific title.

古文：庚子，契丹遣使以伐夏师还来告。
现代文：十三日，契丹派遣使臣来报告攻打西夏的军队回师。十九日，降雨。
English: On the 13th, Khitan sent envoys to report the return of the army that attacked Western Xia. On the 19th, it rained.

古文：丙午，雨。己酉，诏两浙流民听人收养。
现代文：二十二日，下诏：两浙流民允许人家收养。
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued: The two Zhejiang refugees were allowed to be adopted.

古文：翰林学士赵概报使契丹。
现代文：翰林学士赵概回访契丹。
English: Hanlin Scholar Zhao Guo paid a return visit to Qidan.

古文：夏五月丁亥朔，新作明堂礼神玉。
现代文：夏五月初一，新作明堂礼神玉。
English: On the first day of summer in May, the new Myeongdong Reishin Gyakko will be released.

古文：己亥，旌定州义民李能。
现代文：十三日，表彰定州义民李能。
English: On the 13th, Li Neng, a righteous citizen of Dingzhou, was commended.

古文：六月己未，出新制明堂乐八曲。
现代文：六月初四，出示新制明堂乐八曲。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month, eight pieces of newly composed Myeongdong music were presented.

古文：丁卯，以自制黄钟五音五曲，并肄于太常。庚午，定选举县令法。
现代文：十二日，在太常用自制黄钟五音五曲练习。十五日，确定选举县令法。
English: On the 12th, the five-tone and five-song practice of the self-made yellow bell was held. On the 15th, the election county ordinance was confirmed.

古文：壬申，月犯填星。
现代文：十七日，月亮侵犯填星。
English: On the 17th, the moon invaded the stars.

古文：癸未，录系囚。
现代文：二十八日，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 28th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：八月庚申，荧惑入舆鬼，犯积尸。
现代文：八月初六，荧惑星进人舆鬼星，又侵犯积尸星。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, the fluorescent planet entered the ghost star, and also invaded the zombie star.

古文：癸亥，出内藏绢百万市籴军储。
现代文：初九，调出内藏绢一百万市来军储。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, one million Inner Tibetan rupees were transferred to the military reserve.

古文：壬申，深州大雨，坏庐舍。
现代文：十八日，深州大雨，毁坏庐舍。
English: On the 18th, heavy rain in Shenzhou destroyed the outhouse.

古文：九月丁亥，阅雅乐。
现代文：九月初三，观阅雅乐。
English: On the third day of the first month of September, watch the elegant music.

古文：己酉，朝飨景灵宫。
现代文：二十五日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, a ritual is held at the Jingling Palace.

古文：庚戌，飨太庙。
现代文：二十六日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the junior high school year, a ritual is held at Taimyo.

古文：辛亥，大飨天地于明堂，以太祖、太宗、真宗配，如圜丘。
现代文：二十七日，在明堂大祭祀天地，以太祖、太宗、真宗配享，像在圆丘祭祀天地一样。
English: On the 27th, in Myeongdong, a grand sacrifice was held for heaven and earth, with the Ether Ancestor, the Taizong, and the True Sect sharing, just as in the round mound, a sacrifice was held for heaven and earth.

古文：大赦，百官进秩一等。
现代文：大赦，百官晋升一等。
English: Amnesty, 100 officials promoted to the first grade.

古文：诏自今内降指挥，百司执奏毋辄行。
现代文：下诏： 从今以后内降命令，有关部门执奏不要实行。
English: The lower edict: From now on, the order of internal reduction should not be carried out by the relevant departments.

古文：敢因缘干请者，谏官、御史察举之。
现代文：敢因缘为私干请的人，谏官、御史检举。 
English: Anyone who dares to invite someone to do something for personal reasons, eunuchs, or imperial officials, will be reported to the authorities.

古文：冬十月庚午，荧惑犯太微上将。
现代文：冬十月十六日，荧惑星侵犯太微上将星。
English: On October 16th, the winter, the fluorescent planet invaded the faint star.

古文：乙亥，宴京畿父老于锡庆院。闰十一月己未，诏后妃之家毋得除二府职任。
现代文：二十一日，在锡庆院宴饮京瓷父老。闰十一月初六，下诏后妃之家不得在二府任职。
English: On the 21st, Kyocera's patriarchs and elders dined at Sikyong-in. On the 6th day of the 11th month, it was announced that the Empress Dowager's family would not be allowed to hold office in the two prefectures.

古文：河北水，诏蠲民租，出内藏钱四十万缗、绢四十万匹付本路，使措置是岁刍粮。
现代文：十三日，秀州发生地震，有声如雷。十四日，诏令中书门下省、两制及太常官详定太乐。河北水灾。下诏免除租税。调出内藏库钱四十万络、绢四十万匹下拨本路，让其安置购买这一年的粮草。
English: On the 13th, an earthquake occurred in Xiuzhou, and the sound was like thunder. On the 14th, the edict detailed the provinces, the two systems and the superintendent in the book. Hebei floods. The next edict exempted taxes. 400,000 rupees and 400,000 yams were transferred from the internal storage warehouse to the main road, so that they could be resettled to purchase this year's grain and grass.

古文：十二月甲申，定三品以上家庙制。
现代文：十二月初一，定三品以上家庙制。
English: On the first day of December, there will be a limit of three dishes per household.

古文：唃厮啰、西蕃瞎毡、西南蕃龙光氵能、占城、沙州来贡，泾原路生户都首领那龙男阿日丁内附。
现代文：角厮锣、西蕃瞎毡、西南蕃龙光能、占城、沙州来进贡，径源路生户都首领那龙之子阿日丁内附朝廷。
English: The tributes came from Jiaozuo, Xi'an, Guangxi, Zhancheng, and Shazhou, and the imperial court was annexed by the leader of the Qianyuan Road, the son of the dragon, Ajidin.

古文：三年春正月乙丑，幸魏国大长公主第视疾。
现代文：皇三年春正月十三日，到魏国大长公主府第探视病情。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the spring of the third year of the Emperor's reign, he went to visit the illness at the Great Elder Princess's residence.

古文：二月丙戌，宰臣文彦博等进《皇祐大飨明堂记》。
现代文：二月初五，宰臣文彦博等进呈惶大飨明堂主己。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, the Vice-Minister, Fumihiko Haku, and others presented themselves as the master of the hall.

古文：己亥，复行河北沿边州军入中粮草见钱法。
现代文：十八日，恢复实行河北沿边州军人中粮草现钱法。
English: On the 18th, the implementation of the law on the payment of grain and grass to soldiers along the border states of Hebei was resumed.

古文：三月庚申，宋庠罢，以刘沆参知政事。
现代文：三月初九，宋库被罢免，任命刘杭为参知政事。
English: On the 9th day of March, Song Ku was removed from office and Liu Hang was appointed to the post of councillor.

古文：癸酉，侬智高表献驯象及金银，却之。
现代文：二十二日，侬智高上表进献驯象和金银，朝廷拒绝。
English: On the 22nd, Nong Zhi Gao presented a tamed elephant and gold and silver, but the court refused.

古文：夏四月癸未，诏： 河北流民相属，吏不加恤，而乃饰厨传，交赂使客，以取名誉。
现代文：夏四月初三，下诏： 河北流民相属道路，官吏不加抚恤，反而文饰使臣，交赂宾客，虚取名誉。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, the following edict was issued: Hebei will follow the path of the people. Officials will not receive a pension, but will instead decorate envoys, bribe guests, and gain false honor.

古文：自今非犒设兵校，其一切禁之。 
现代文：从今以后除非搞赏兵校，其一切禁止。 
English: From now on, unless it is a military academy, it is prohibited.

古文：丙申，太白昼见。
现代文：十六日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 27th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：五月庚戌，以恩、冀州旱，诏长吏决系囚。
现代文：五月初一，因为恩、冀州早灾，下诏主管官吏审理囚犯。
English: On the first day of May, because of the early disaster in En and Jizhou, the officials in charge of the trial of prisoners were dismissed.

古文：壬申，置河渠司。
现代文：二十三日，设置河渠司。
English: On the 23rd, the Department of Canals was established.

古文：乙亥，颁《简要济众方》，命州县长吏按方剂以救民疾。
现代文：二十六日，颂布消要济众办，下命州县主管官吏按方剂救治百姓疾病。
English: On the 26th day of the month, the provincial and county officials were ordered to treat the people's diseases according to the prescription.

古文：丁丑，录系囚。
现代文：二十八日，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 28th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：六月丁亥，无为军献芝草，帝命姑免知军茹孝标罪，戒州郡自今勿复献。
现代文：六月初八，无为军进献芝草，仁宗命令姑且免了知军茹孝标的罪行，警告州县以后不要进献。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, when no troops marched to offer turf grass, Emperor Nanzong ordered that the Chinese troops be exempted from the crime of offering turf grass, and warned the prefectures not to offer turf grass.

古文：秋七月癸丑，诏： 少卿、监以下，年七十不任厘务者，御史台、审官院以闻。
现代文：秋七月初五，下诏： 少卿、监以下，七十岁不能亲自处理事务的，御史台、审官院上报。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the following edict was issued: If a person under the rank of Shokei (Junior Secretary) or Jimin (Superintendent) is unable to personally handle affairs at the age of 70, he or she should report to the Imperial Historical Records Office and the Supreme People's Procuratorate.

古文：尝任馆阁、台谏及提刑者，中书裁处。
现代文：曾经担任馆阁、台谏和提刑的，中书裁处。
English: The Chinese Court of Cassation, which once served as the cabinet, the bench and the sentencing court.

古文：待制以上能自引年，则优加恩礼。 
现代文：待制以上能自己请求退休的，则优加恩赏惠泽。 
English: Those who can ask for their own retirement above the waiting period are more likely to be rewarded.

古文：丙辰，以孔氏子孙复知仙源县事。
现代文：初八，任命孔氏子孙重新任仙源知县。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the descendants of Kong were reappointed to Senyuan County.

古文：丁巳，两制、礼官上大乐，名曰《太安》。
现代文：初九，两制、礼官呈上大乐，称为大安。
English: At the beginning of the 9th month, the two systems and the etiquette officials presented a great success, known as a great success.

古文：辛酉，河决大名府郭固口。
现代文：十三日，黄河在大名府郭固口决口。
English: On the 13th, the Yellow River broke through Guo Guokou in Daming Prefecture.

古文：乙丑，罢、徙州县长吏不任事者十有六人。
现代文：十七日，罢除和迁徙不称职的州县长官共十六人。
English: On the 17th, a total of 16 incompetent prefectural and county governors were removed and relocated.

古文：丙子，减郴、永州、桂阳监丁身米岁十万余石。
现代文：二十八日，减少郴州、永州、桂阳监丁身米每年十万余石。
English: On the 28th, more than 100,000 koku of rice per year will be reduced from Jingzhou, Yongzhou and Guiyang.

古文：八月丙戌，遣使安抚京东、淮南、两浙、荆湖、江南饥民。
现代文：八月初八，派遣使臣安抚京东、淮南、两浙、荆湖、江南饥民。
English: On the eighth day of the eighth month of August, envoys were dispatched to pacify the starving people in Jingdong, Huainan, Zhejiang, Jinghu and Jiangnan.

古文：辛卯，诏诸路监司具所部长吏治状能否以闻。是月，汴河绝流。
现代文：十三日，下诏各路监司上报所属长吏治绩好坏。这个月，汁河绝流。
English: On the thirteenth day of the month, the supervisors of each road were ordered to report on the performance of their subordinate officers. This month, the river of juice stopped flowing.

古文：冬十月庚子，文彦博罢，以庞籍同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士，高若讷为枢密使，梁适参知政事，王尧臣为枢密副使。
现代文：冬十月二十二日，文彦博被罢免，任命庞籍为同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士，高若呐为枢密使，梁适为参知政事，王尧臣为枢密副使。
English: On the 22nd day of winter in October, Wen Yanbo was removed from his post, and Pang Quan was appointed as the second-ranking official and scholar of the Shouwen Library, Gao Ruonan as the Privy Councilor, Liang Shih as the Councillor of State, and Wang Xiancheng as the Deputy Privy Councilor.

古文：十一月辛亥，减漳州、泉州、兴化军丁米。
现代文：十一月初四，减漳州、泉州、兴化军丁米。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, the reduction of Bozhou, Quanzhou, and Xinghua Jun Dingmi.

古文：十二月庚辰，新作浑仪。
现代文：十二月初三，新作浑仪。
English: On the third day of the twelfth lunar month, a new work, "Hunyi," will begin.

古文：庚子，诏文武官七十以上未致仕者，更不考课迁官。
现代文：二十三日，下诏七十岁以上的文武官员没有退休的，不予考课迁官。
English: On the 23rd, it was decreed that civil and military officials over the age of 70 who had not retired would not be transferred.

古文：甲辰，罢灾伤州军贡物。
现代文：二十七日，废罢灾伤州军贡物。
English: On the 27th, the ban on the tribute of the injured state troops was abolished.

古文：是岁，泾原樊家族密厮歌内附。
现代文：这一年，径源樊家族密厮歌内附。
English: In this year, the song of the Keiyuan family is attached.

古文：四年春正月己巳，诏诸路贷民种。
现代文：皇四年春正月二十二日，下诏各路贷给百姓粮种。
English: On the 22nd day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of the emperor, the following edict was issued to lend grain seeds to the people.

古文：乙亥，塞大名府决河。
现代文：二十八日，堵塞大名府黄河决口。
English: On the 28th, the mouth of the Yellow River in Damingfu was blocked.

古文：二月庚子，蠲湖州民所贷官米。
现代文：二月二十四日，免除湖州百姓所贷官米。
English: On February 24th, the rice loaned by the Huzhou people was exempted.

古文：三月己酉，诏礼部贡举。
现代文：三月初四，下诏礼部贡举。
English: On the fourth day of the third month of the year, the tribute of the Imperial Regalia Department will begin.

古文：丙辰，蠲江南路民所贷种数十万斛。
现代文：十一日，免除江南路百姓所贷粮种数十万解。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the people of Jiangnan Road were exempted from the loan of hundreds of thousands of grains.

古文：辛酉，录系囚。
现代文：十六日，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 16th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：辛未，诏宫禁市物给实直，非所阙者毋市。
现代文：二十六日，下诏宫中购物付给实际的价值，不购买不缺的物品。
English: On the 26th, the shopping in the Imperial Palace will pay the actual value, and will not purchase items that are not in short supply.

古文：夏四月庚辰，诏修河兵夫逃亡死伤，会其数，以议官吏之罚。
现代文：夏四月初五，下诏：修黄河兵夫逃亡死伤，清点数目，作为惩罚官吏的依据。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the summer, the following edict was issued: to rectify the death and injury caused by the Yellow River soldiers' escape, the number of clear points should be used as the basis for punishing officials.

古文：广源州蛮侬智高反。
现代文：广源州蛮侬智高反叛。
English: Guangyuan County's barbarian Nong Zhigao rebelled.

古文：五月乙巳朔，智高陷邕州，遂陷横、贵等八州，围广州。
现代文：五月初一，侬智高攻陷琶州，于是又攻陷横、贵等八州，包围广州。
English: On the first day of May, Nong Zhigao invaded and occupied Pazhou, and then invaded and occupied eight provinces, including Hengyang and Guizhou, and encircled Guangzhou.

古文：壬申，命知桂州陈曙率兵讨智高。
现代文：二十八日，命令桂州知州陈曙率兵讨伐侬智高。
English: On the 28th, he ordered Chen Shuchu from Chizhou, Guizhou to lead an army to fight against Fanon Zhigao.

古文：六月乙亥，起前卫尉卿余靖为秘书监、湖南安抚使、知潭州，前尚书屯田员外郎、直史馆杨畋体量安抚广南、提举经制盗贼事。
现代文：六月初二，起用前卫尉卿余靖为秘书监、湖南安抚使、潭州知州，前尚书屯田员外郎、直史馆杨败视察安抚广南、提举经制盗贼事。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, the former lieutenant general Yu Jing was appointed as the secretary supervisor, the Hunan pacification envoy, the Tanzhou Chizhou, the former Shangshu Tonden member Wairo, and the direct history museum Yangbei inspected and pacified Guangnan, and raised the theft of the system.

古文：庚辰，改余靖为广西安抚使、知桂州，命同提点广东刑狱李枢与陈曙讨智高，广东转运钤辖司发兵援之。
现代文：初七，改余靖为广西安抚使、桂州知州，命令同提点广东刑狱李枢与陈曙一起讨伐侬智高，广东转运铃辖司发兵援助。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, he changed Yu Jing to Guangxi Pacifying Envoy and Guizhou to Zhizhou, and ordered Li Zu and Chen Shuhe of the Guangdong Penal Prison to fight against Nong Zhigao together, and the Guangdong Transportation and Transportation Bureau to send troops to help.

古文：丁亥，以狄青为枢密副使。
现代文：十四日，任命狄青为枢密副使。
English: On the 14th, Di Qing was appointed to the post of Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：秋七月乙巳，出内藏钱绢助河北军储。
现代文：秋七月初二，调出内藏库钱绢补助河北军储。
English: On the second day of the first month of the autumn, the Hebei Military Reserve was subsidized by transferring money from the internal storage.

古文：丙午，命余靖经制广南盗贼事。
现代文：初三，命令余靖全权处理广南盗贼事宜。
English: On the third day of the first month, he ordered Yu Jing to deal with the Guangnan thieves.

古文：丁巳，大风拔木。
现代文：十四日，大风刮起树木。
English: On the 14th, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：壬戌，智高引众去广州，广东兵马钤辖张忠、知英州苏缄邀击于白田，忠战殁。
现代文：十九日，侬智高率领部众离开广州，广东兵马铃辖张忠、英州知州苏缄在白田阻击，张忠战死。
English: On the 19th, Nong Zhigao led the troops to leave Guangzhou. Zhang Zhong, who was under the command of the Guangdong Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and Su Xi, who was under the command of the Yingzhou Zhizhou Warriors and Horses, resisted in Baita. Zhang Zhong was killed in the battle.

古文：甲子，广东兵马钤辖蒋偕又败于路田。
现代文：二十一日，广东兵马铃辖蒋偕在路田失败。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Guangdong Terracotta Warriors and Horses under the command of Chiang Kai-shek failed on the road.

古文：八月癸未，诏开封府比大风雨，民庐摧圮压死者，官为祭敛之。
现代文：八月十一日，下诏开封府，吹大风降雨，民舍倒塌被压死者，官府为之埋葬。
English: On August 11th, the government announced the reopening of the provincial capital. Heavy winds and rain caused the collapse of a residential building, crushing the dead, who were buried by the government.

古文：辛卯，命枢密直学士孙沔安抚湖南、江西，内侍押班石全斌副之。
现代文：十九日，命令枢密直学士孙洒安抚湖南、江西，内侍押班石全斌为副。
English: On the 19th, he ordered the Privy Councilor and Direct Scholar Sun Xizang to pacify Hunan and Jiangxi, and the chamberlain, Oban Shi Quanbin, to be his deputy.

古文：九月丁巳，命余靖提举广南兵甲经制贼盗事。
现代文：九月十五日，命令余靖提举广南兵甲经制盗贼事宜。
English: On September 15th, he ordered Yu Jing to raise the issue of the theft of the Guangnan Armament System.

古文：庚申，广西兵马钤辖王正伦讨智高于昭州馆门驿，战殁。
现代文：十八日，广西兵马铃辖王正伦在昭州馆门骚攻讨侬智高，战死。
English: On the 18th, Wang Zhenglun, the commander of the Guangxi Terracotta Warriors and Horses, fought and died in the battle against Nonong Zhigao at Zhaozhou Pavilion Gate.

古文：智高入昭州。
现代文：侬智高进人昭州。
English: Nong Zhi Gao went to Zhaozhou.

古文：庚午，以狄青为宣徽南院使。宣抚荆湖路、提举广南经制贼盗事。
现代文：二十八日，任命狄青为宣徽南院使，宣抚荆湖路，提举广南经制贼盗事宜。
English: On the 28th, Di Qing was appointed as the envoy of the Southern Yuan of the State Council of Hubei Province, and promoted Jinghu Road, and raised the issue of Guangnan Province's anti-theft system.

古文：是月，智高袭杀蒋偕于太平场。
现代文：这个月，侬智高在太平场袭杀蒋偕。
English: This month, Nong Zhigao attacked and killed Jiang Wei at the morgue.

古文：冬十月丙子，太白犯南斗。诏鄜延、环庆、泾原路择蕃落广锐军各五千人赴广南行营。
现代文：冬十月初四，太白星侵犯南斗星，下诏延、环庆、径源路选择蕃落广锐军各五千人前往广南行营。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of winter, Taibai Xing invaded Nan Dou Xing, and the following day, five thousand soldiers of the Guang Rui Army chose Yan Yan, Huan Qing, and Chi Yuan Road to go to the camp in Guangnan.

古文：丁丑，智高入宾州。
现代文：初五，侬智高进人宾州。
English: In the fifth year of junior high school, Nongzhi High School entered Pennsylvania.

古文：甲申，复入邕州。
现代文：十二日，又进人琶州。
English: On the 12th, he entered Waza again.

古文：丁亥，以诸路饥疫并征徭科调之烦，令转运使、提点刑狱、亲民官条陈救恤之术以闻。
现代文：十五日，因各路饥荒疾疫和征摇科调烦扰，命令转运使、提点刑狱、亲民官陈述救恤办法上报朝廷。
English: On the fifteenth day, due to the troubles caused by famine, disease, and scientific research, the order to transfer the envoy, the mention of the point of imprisonment, and the pro-civil servant's statement of the relief measures were reported to the imperial court.

古文：十一月壬寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of November, there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：戊午，诏免江西、湖南、广南民供军须者今年秋租十之三。
现代文：十七日，下诏免除江西、湖南、广南供应军需百姓秋税的十分之三。
English: On the 17th, the following edict exempted three-tenths of the autumn tax of the people in Jiangxi, Hunan and Guangnan from supplying military supplies.

古文：十二月壬申朔，广西兵马钤辖陈曙讨智高兵，战于金城驿。
现代文：十二月初一，广西兵马铃辖陈曙讨伐侬智高军队，战于金城骚。
English: On the first day of December, the Guangxi Terracotta Warriors and Horses under the command of Chen Shugu fought against the troops of Zhigao Fanon in Jincheng.

古文：壬辰，观新乐。
现代文：二十一日，观赏新乐。
English: On the twenty-first day, enjoy the new music.

古文：乙未，录唐颜真卿后。
现代文：二十四日，录用唐颜真卿后代。
English: On the 24th, the descendants of Tang Yan Zhenqing were hired.

古文：是岁，河北路及鄜州水，蠲河北民积年逋负、鄜州民税役。
现代文：这一年，河北路和州水灾，免除河北百姓多年拖欠和州百姓税役。
English: This year, the floods in Hebei Province and Zhejiang Province exempted the people of Hebei Province from years of arrears and the people of Zhejiang Province from paying taxes.

古文：五年春正月壬寅朔，御大庆殿受朝。
现代文：皇五年春正月初一，到大庆殿接受朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the Emperor's fifth year, he went to Daqing Hall to receive morning greetings.

古文：庚戌，以广南用兵，罢上元张灯。
现代文：初九，因广南用兵，废除上元观灯。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the Shangyuan Lantern Festival was abolished due to the use of troops in Guangnan.

古文：白虹贯日。
现代文：白色虹横贯天空，遮掩日光。
English: A white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：丁巳，会灵观火。
现代文：十六日，会灵观发生火灾。
English: On the 16th, a fire broke out at He Ling Kung.

古文：戊午，狄青败智高于邕州，斩首五千余级，智高遁去。
现代文：十七日，狄青在琶州打败侬智高，斩首五千多级，侬智高逃跑。
English: On the 17th, Di Qing defeated Nong Zhigao in Pazhou, beheaded more than five thousand, and Nong Zhigao fled.

古文：甲子，遣使抚问广南将校，赐军士缗钱。
现代文：二十三日，派遣使臣安抚慰问广南将校，赐给军士络钱。
English: On the 23rd, an envoy was sent to appease and console the Guangnan officer, and the officer was given a sum of money.

古文：二月癸未，狄青复为枢密副使。
现代文：二月十三日，狄青升为枢密副使。
English: On February 13, Di Qing was promoted to Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：甲申，赦广南。
现代文：十四日，赦免广南。
English: On the 14th, Guangnan was pardoned.

古文：凡战没者，给槥椟护送还家，无主者葬祭之。
现代文：凡战死者，给小棺材护送回家，没有主者官府埋葬祭奠。
English: Where the war dead were escorted home in small coffins, there was no official burial ceremony.

古文：贼所过郡县，免其田租一年，死事家科徭二年。
现代文：贼盗所过郡县，免除一年田租，为国捐躯者免科摇二年。
English: Thieves and thieves who have passed through counties and counties are exempt from one year's field rent, and those who have died for the country are exempt from two years.

古文：贡举人免解至礼部，不预奏名者亦以名闻。
现代文：贡举人免解至礼部，不预奏名者也将姓名上报。
English: Those who pay tribute will be excused to the ceremonial department, and those who do not pre-record their names will also report their names.

古文：丙戌，诏广西都监萧注等追捕智高。
现代文：十六日，下诏广西都监萧注等追捕侬智高。
English: On the 16th, Xiao Zhu, the governor of Guangxi, issued an order to hunt down Nong Zhigao.

古文：丁亥，下德音：减江西、湖南系囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：十七日，颁降德音：减江西、湖南囚犯罪刑一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 17th, the following decrees were issued: Jiangxi and Hunan prisoners' criminal punishment was reduced to the first class, and they were released from prison.

古文：丁壮馈运广南军须者，减夏税之半，仍免差徭一年。
现代文：运输广南军需的丁壮减一半夏税，并免差役一年。
English: Ding Zhuang, who transported military supplies to Guangnan, was allowed to reduce his summer tax by half and was exempted from military service for one year.

古文：戊子，诏百官遇南郊奏荐，无子孙者听奏期亲一人。
现代文：十八日，下诏：百官在南郊祭祀时奏荐子孙，没有子孙的可以奏荐期亲一人。
English: On the 18th, the following edict was issued: 100 officials should recommend their children and grandchildren during the Southern Suburbs ritual. If there are no children or grandchildren, one relative should be recommended.

古文：乙未，诏宗室通经者，大宗正司以闻。
现代文：二十五日，下诏：精通经术的宗室人士，大宗正司上报姓名给朝廷。
English: On the 25th, the following edict was issued: Those in the family who are proficient in the art of medicine should report their names to the Imperial Court.

古文：三月癸亥，遣使奉安太祖御容于滁州，太宗御容于并州，真宗御容于澶州。
现代文：三月二十三日，派遣使臣分别恭敬安置太祖、太宗、真宗遗像于滁州、并州、擅州。
English: On March 23rd, envoys were dispatched to respectfully place the remaining statues of Taizu, Taizong, and Shinshu in Yezhou, Binzhou, and Ganshou, respectively.

古文：是月，赐礼部奏名进士、诸科及第出身千四十二人。
现代文：这个月，赐礼部奏名进士、各科及第出身一千零四十二人。
English: This month, 1,042 people from all disciplines and walks of life were awarded the title of "Ceremonial Musicians."

古文：夏四月甲午，命刘沆、梁适监议大乐。
现代文：夏四月二十五日，命令刘杭、梁适监议大乐。
English: On April 25th, Xia ordered Liu Hang and Liang Shih to supervise the grand concert.

古文：五月乙巳，诏辅臣凡有大政，许复对后殿。
现代文：五月初六，下诏辅臣凡有大政，允许复对后殿。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month of the year, the Emperor issued an edict to the vassals that if there was a coup, they would be allowed to return to the palace.

古文：高若讷罢，以狄青为枢密使。
现代文：高若呐被罢免，任命狄青为枢密使。
English: Gao Ruonan was deposed, and Di Qing was appointed as a privy councilor.

古文：丁未，孙沔为枢密副使。
现代文：初八，孙洒为枢密副使。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Sun San became the vice-envoy of the Privy Council.

古文：戊申，诏转运使毋取羡余以助三司。
现代文：初九，下诏转运使不得取正赋外的杂税以助三司。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, it was decreed that the transportation department should not take any miscellaneous taxes other than the regular tax to help the three departments.

古文：庚戌，诏智高所至州，无城垒，若兵力不敌而弃城者，奏裁。
现代文：十一日，下诏：侬智高所至州，因没有城垒或是兵力不敌盗贼而弃城的，奏裁。
English: On the eleventh day, the following edict was issued: Nongzhi High School moved to the state, and abandoned the city because there was no fortress or the army was unable to defeat the thieves.

古文：壬子，录系囚。
现代文：十三日，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 13th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：丁巳，诏转运司振邕州贫民，户贷米一石。
现代文：十八日，下诏转运司贩济琶州贫民，每户贷给一石米。
English: On the 18th day of the following month, the poor people of Jiwa County were given a loan of one kilo of rice per household.

古文：甲子，诏谏官、御史毋挟私以中善良，及臣僚言机密事毋得漏泄。
现代文：二十五日，下诏谏官、御史不得挟私中伤善良，不得泄漏臣僚陈述的机密事件。
English: On the 25th, the imperial edict stated that eunuchs and imperial historians must not slander the virtuous and must not divulge confidential events reported by ministers.

古文：六月乙亥，御紫宸殿，按《太安乐》，观宗庙祭器。
现代文：六月初七，到紫哀殿检察伏安采，观赏宗庙祭器。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month, they went to the Zi'ai Hall to inspect the Fuan collection and enjoy the ancestral temple's ritual vessels.

古文：丙戌，作集禧观成。
现代文：十八日，集禧观建成。
English: On the 18th, the Jubilee View was completed.

古文：乙未，诏河北荐饥，转运使察州县长吏能招辑劳来者，上其状；不称职者举劾之。
现代文：二十七日，下诏： 河北多年饥荒，转运使考察州县主管官吏能力行荒政者，上报治绩，弹勃不称职者。 
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued: Hebei has been suffering from famine for many years, and the transportation envoy will inspect the competent officials in charge of the state and county who have carried out despotism, report on their performance, and fire those who are incompetent.

古文：秋七月乙巳，诏荆湖北路民因灾伤所贷常平仓米免偿。
现代文：秋七月初八，下诏：荆湖北路百姓因灾害所贷常平仓米免偿。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the following edict was issued: The people of Jinghu North Road were exempted from paying back the rice loaned to them due to disasters.

古文：己酉，诏荐举非其人者，令御史台弹奏，见任监司以上弗许荐论。
现代文：十二日，下诏：被荐举的人没有才能者，命令御史台上奏弹勃，现任监司以上官员不准行使论职权。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the following edict was issued: If the person recommended for promotion has no talent, it was ordered to play a bugle call on the historical stage, and the current supervisors and above officials were not allowed to exercise their powers.

古文：戊午，诏太常定谥，毋为溢美。
现代文：二十一日，下诏太常寺确定溢号，不要溢美。
English: On the 21st, the next edict of Taijo-ji Temple determined that the temple should not overflow.

古文：闰月戊辰，诏广南民逃未还者，限一年归业，其复三岁。
现代文：闰七月初一，下诏：逃出未还的广南百姓，限一年内归业，免除三年的赋役。
English: On the first day of leap July, the following edict was issued: the people of Guangnan who had escaped and had not returned were required to return to work within one year and were exempt from three years of forced labor.

古文：壬申，庞籍罢，以陈执中同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士，梁适同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：初五，庞籍被罢免，任命陈执中同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士，梁适为同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the new year, Pang was removed from his post, and Chen Jizhong was appointed as the junior secretary of the middle school and the junior secretary of the Shouwen Academy, and Liang Si as the junior secretary of the middle school and the junior secretary of the Jixian Palace.

古文：乙亥，诏武臣知州军，须与僚属参议公事，毋专决。
现代文：初八，下诏武臣担任知州军，必须与僚属一起商议公事，不得专断处理公事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, it was decreed that when a samurai retainer served as a member of the Chishu army, he must consult with his colleagues and subordinates on official matters, and must not arbitrarily handle official matters.

古文：庚辰，秦凤路言总管刘焕等破蕃部，斩首二千余级。
现代文：十三日，秦凤路报告说总管刘涣等攻破蕃部，斩首二千余级。
English: On the 13th, Qinfeng Road reported that the general manager Liu Wei and others broke the skull and beheaded more than two thousand people.

古文：八月丁酉朔，诏民诉灾伤而监司不受者，听州军以状闻。
现代文：八月初一，下诏：百姓上告灾伤而监司不受理者，允许州军将情况上报朝廷。
English: On the first day of August, the following edict was issued: If the people appeal for disaster and injury and the supervisor does not accept it, the state army is allowed to report the situation to the imperial court.

古文：辛酉，策制举、武举人。
现代文：二十五日，策试制举人和武举人。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the policy of trying to make people raise and raise people.

古文：壬戌，诏南郊以太祖、太宗、真宗并配。
现代文：二十六日，下诏：南郊祭祀以太祖、太宗、真宗一起配享。
English: On the 26th, the following edict was issued: Nanjiao's offerings to the ancestors of the Tai, Taizong, and Shinshu sects would be shared equally.

古文：九月乙酉，观新乐。
现代文：九月十九日，观赏新乐。
English: On September 19th, enjoy the new music.

古文：冬十月丙申朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬十月初一，日食。十七日，作 镇国神宝 。
English: Winter On the first day of October, a solar eclipse.

古文：壬子，作 镇国神宝 。丁巳，诏以蝗旱，令监司谕亲民官上民间利害。
现代文：二十二日，下诏：因蝗灾和早灾，命令监司告谕亲民官陈述民间利害。
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued: Due to locust plagues and early disasters, the supervisors were ordered to instruct the officials to state the interests of the people.

古文：十一月丁卯，朝飨景灵宫。
现代文：十一月初二，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, the ritual at Jingling Temple began.

古文：戊辰，飨太庙、奉慈庙。
现代文：初三，祭祀太庙和奉慈庙。
English: On the third day of the junior high school, there will be a ritual at the Grand Temple and the Feng Ci Temple.

古文：己巳，祀天地于圜丘，大赦。
现代文：初四，在圆丘祭祀天地，大赦。
English: On the 4th day of the first month, the heavens and the earth will be sacrificed at the round mound, and there will be a general amnesty.

古文：丁丑，加恩百官。
现代文：十二日，加恩百官。
English: On the 12th, Gahn was promoted to centurion.

古文：戊子，放天下逋负。
现代文：二十三日，免除全国拖欠钱物。
English: On the 23rd, the national arrears of money and goods were exempted.

古文：十二月戊午，诏转运官毋得进羡余。
现代文：十二月二十三日，下诏转运官不得进献正赋之外征收的钱物。
English: On December 23rd, the following edict was issued, stating that transporters were not allowed to bring in money or goods that had been levied in addition to the tax.

古文：壬戌，以曹、陈、许、郑、滑州为辅郡，隶畿内，置京畿转运使。
现代文：二十七日，以曹、陈、许、郑、滑州为辅郡，隶属瓷内，设置京瓷转运使。
English: On the 27th, with Cao, Chen, Xu, Zheng, and Luzhou as auxiliary counties, subordinate to porcelain, set up Kyocera forwarding agents.

古文：是岁，占城国来贡。
现代文：这一年，占城国来进贡。
English: This year, the city-state of Zhancheng came to pay tribute.

古文：至和元年春正月辛未，诏京师大寒，民多冻馁死者，有司其瘗埋之。
现代文：至和元年春正月初六，下诏： 京师酷寒，百姓饥寒而死者多，有关部门予以掩埋。 
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the Heian period, the following edict was issued: It was extremely cold in Beijing, and many people died of cold and hunger. The relevant departments had to bury them.

古文：壬申，碎通天犀，和药以疗民疫。
现代文：初七，碎通天犀和药用来治疗百姓疾病。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, people used to grind rhinoceros horns and herbs to treat common diseases.

古文：癸酉，贵妃张氏薨，辍视朝七日，禁京城乐一月。
现代文：初八，贵妃张氏逝世，停止处理政事七天，禁止京城作乐一月。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Princess Zhang passed away, and the government was suspended for seven days, and the city was banned from performing musical performances for one month.

古文：丁丑，追册为皇后，赐谥温成。
现代文：十二日，追册张氏为皇后，赐给溢号温成。
English: On the 12th, Zhang was posthumously registered as empress and given the title of Wencheng.

古文：辛卯，录系囚，减三京、辅郡杂犯死罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：二十六日，讯问记录囚犯罪状，减三京、辅郡杂犯死罪一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 26th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner, reduced the death penalty to the first degree for the miscellaneous offenders in Sanjing and Fu County, and released them with a prison sentence or less.

古文：二月庚子，诏治河堤民有疫死者，蠲户税一年；无户税者，给其家钱三千。
现代文：二月初六，下诏： 治理黄河堤岸染疾疫而死者，免除户税一年；无户税的，给其家钱三千。 
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the year, the following edict was issued: For those who died after contracting the epidemic on the embankment of the Yellow River, the household tax will be exempted for one year; for those who have no household tax, the family will be given 3,000 yuan.

古文：壬戌，孙沔罢，以田况为枢密副使。
现代文：二十八日，孙洒被罢免，任命田况为枢密副使。
English: On the 28th, Sun San was removed from his post, and Tian Zhou was appointed Privy Vice-Envoy.

古文：三月己巳，王贻永罢，以王德用为枢密使。
现代文：三月初五，王贻永被罢免，任命王德用为枢密使。
English: On the 5th of March, Wang Shanyong was removed from his post and Wang Deyan was appointed as a privy councilor.

古文：辛未，命曾公亮等同试入内医官。
现代文：初七，命令曾公亮等一起考试人内医官。
English: On the seventh day of junior high school, Zeng Gongliang was ordered to take the examination as a medical officer.

古文：壬申，赐边臣攻守图。
现代文：初八，赐给边臣攻守图。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month, he gave a map to his vassals.

古文：置京畿提点刑狱。
现代文：设置京瓷提点刑狱。
English: Kyocera was given a suspended prison sentence.

古文：乙亥，太史言日当食四月朔。
现代文：十一日，太史说四月一日当为日食。
English: On the 11th, Tai Shi said that April 1st should be a solar eclipse.

古文：庚辰，下德音：改元，减死罪一等，流以下释之。
现代文：十六日，颁布德音：改元，减死罪一等，流刑以下释放。
English: On the 16th, the following decrees were promulgated: the Yuan was changed, the death penalty was reduced to the first degree, and the sentence of banishment or less was released.

古文：癸未，易服，避正殿，减常膳。
现代文：十九日，易服，不上殿治理国事，减少饮食。
English: On the 19th, change clothes, do not go to the temple to administer state affairs, and reduce diet.

古文：乙酉，诏京西民饥，宜令所在劝富人纳粟以振之。
现代文：二十一日，下诏：京西饥民，应该命令各地劝诱富人纳粟贩济。
English: On the twenty-first day, the following edict was issued: The starving people in Beijing and Xi'an should order all regions to persuade the rich to give money to the poppy sellers.

古文：夏四月甲午朔，日有食之，用牲于社。
现代文：夏四月初一，日食，用牲祭祀土地之神。
English: In the summer, on the first day of April, when there is a solar eclipse, the gods of the land are worshipped with animal sacrifices.

古文：辛丑，御正殿，复常膳。
现代文：初八，上殿治理国事，恢复饮食。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the emperor went up to the palace to administer state affairs and resume eating and drinking.

古文：祥源观火。
现代文：样源观发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out at the sample source.

古文：五月戊寅，以河北流民稍复，遣使安抚。
现代文：五月十五日，因河北流民稍稍复业，派人安抚。
English: On May 15th, due to a slight resumption of business by the Hebei refugees, someone was sent to appease them.

古文：壬辰，太白昼见。
现代文：二十九日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 29th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：秋七月丁卯，以程戡参知政事。
现代文：秋七月初六，任命程勘为参知政事。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, Cheng Kan was appointed to the post of councillor.

古文：立温成园。
现代文：立温成园。
English: Wencheng Garden was built.

古文：戊辰，梁适罢。
现代文：初七，梁适被罢免。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Liang Si was dismissed.

古文：己巳，出御史马遵、吕景初、吴中复。
现代文：初八，罢除御史马遵、吕景初、吴中复。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the governors Ma Zun, Lü Jingchuo, and Wu Zhongfu were dismissed.

古文：八月丁酉，诏： 前代帝王后尝仕本朝，官八品以下，其祖父母、父母、妻子犯流以下罪，听赎；未仕而尝受朝廷赐者，所犯非凶恶，亦听赎。 
现代文：八月初六，下诏： 曾在本朝做官的前代帝王后代，官八品以下，他的祖父母、父母、妻子犯流刑以下罪，允许赎罪；没有任职本朝但曾经受到朝廷赏赐者，所犯非凶恶之罪，也允许赎罪。 
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month of the lunar month, the following edict was issued: The descendants of the former emperors who served as officials in this dynasty, and whose rank was lower than eighth grade, and whose grandparents, parents, and wives committed crimes below banishment, were allowed to atone for their sins; those who did not serve in this dynasty but were once rewarded by the imperial court, who committed crimes that were not heinous, were also allowed to atone for their sins.

古文：丙午，以刘沆同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：十五日，任命刘杭为同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
English: On the 15th, Liu Hang was appointed as a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and a scholar of Jixianden University.

古文：命修起居注官侍经筵。
现代文：命令修起居注官侍经筵。
English: It was ordered that the residence of the chancellor should be repaired.

古文：九月乙亥，契丹遣使来告夏国平。
现代文：九月十五日，契丹派人来报告平定夏国。
English: On September 15, Khitan sent someone to report on the pacification of Xia.

古文：辛巳，遣三司使王拱辰报使契丹。
现代文：二十一日，派三司使王拱辰回访契丹。
English: On the 21st, the three departments sent Wang Gongchen to pay a return visit to Qidan.

古文：己丑，太白昼见。
现代文：二十九日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 29th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：冬十月辛卯朔，太白昼见。
现代文：冬十月初一，太白星白天出现。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Taibai Star appears in the daytime.

古文：壬辰，诏士庶家毋得以尝佣顾之人为姻，违者离之。
现代文：初二，下诏： 士庶家不得与曾经受雇用之人为婚姻，违者离之。 
English: On the second day of the first month, the following edict was issued: A member of a commoner's family may not marry a person who was once employed, and the offender must leave the family.

古文：丁酉，葬温成皇后。
现代文：初七，葬温成皇后。
English: On the seventh day of her junior year, she became the empress.

古文：丙午，温成皇后神主入庙。
现代文：十六日，温成皇后神主人庙。
English: On the 16th, Wencheng Empress God Master Temple.

古文：戊午，幸城北炮场观发炮，宴从臣，赐卫士缗钱。
现代文：二十八日，到城北炮场观摩发炮，宴饮从臣，赐给卫士络钱。
English: On the 28th, he went to the artillery field north of the city to watch the firing of cannons, dined with his vassals, and gave money to the guards.

古文：十一月甲子，出太庙禘袷、时飨及温成皇后庙祭飨乐章，肄于太常。
现代文：十一月初五，内出太庙帝合时飨及温成皇后庙祭享乐章，下太常寺练习。
English: On the 5th day of the 11th month of the lunar month, the music for the Imperial Conjunction of the Emperor and Empress Wencheng's Temple Festival was played, and they went to Taizhong Temple to practice.

古文：十二月丙午，诏司天监天文算术官毋得出入臣僚家。
现代文：十二月十七日，下诏司天监天文算术官不得出人臣僚之家。
English: On December 17th, the Astronomer and Mathematician, the next Prefect of the Celestial Observatory, was not allowed to enter the house of a minister.

古文：癸丑，诏内侍传宣，令都知司札报，被旨者覆奏。
现代文：二十四日，下诏：内侍传布圣旨和命令，命令都知司札报，接到圣旨者重新上奏报告。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the following edict was issued: The chamberlains were to spread the imperial edict and order, the order was to be reported to the secretary of state, and the person who received the imperial edict was to resubmit the report.

古文：是岁，融州大丘洞杨光朝内附。
现代文：这一年，融州大丘洞杨光朝内附朝廷。
English: In the same year, Yang Guang Chao of Yongzhou Daeka-dong was annexed to the imperial court.

古文：二年春正月丁卯，奉安真宗御容于万寿观。
现代文：至和二年春正月初八，恭敬安置真宗遗像于万寿观。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Heian period, the remains of the True Sect were respectfully placed in the Manshukon.

古文：减畿内、辅郡囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：减瓷内、辅郡囚罪一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: He was given a first-class prison sentence in Minzu County and Fu County, and was released after serving his sentence.

古文：赐诸军缗钱。
现代文：赐给各军络钱。
English: Give each army enough money.

古文：戊辰，邕州言苏茂州蛮内寇，诏广西发兵讨之。
现代文：初九，琶州报告说苏茂州蛮攻打边境，下诏广西出兵讨伐。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Pazhou reported that Sumozhou had brutally attacked the border, and Guangxi sent troops to fight.

古文：丁亥，晏殊薨。
现代文：二十八日，晏殊逝世。
English: On the 28th, Gongshu passed away.

古文：二月壬辰，汾州团练推官郭固上车战法，既试之，授卫尉丞。
现代文：二月初四，汾州团练推官郭固呈上车战法，检验之后，授给他卫尉承。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, Guo Gu, the commander of the Zhangzhou regimental drill, presented the tactics of getting on the vehicle. After examination, he was awarded the rank of lieutenant.

古文：三月丁卯，诏修起居注立于讲读官之次。
现代文：三月初九，下诏修起居注立于讲读官之后。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month, the next preceptor stood up after the reader.

古文：丙子，封孔子后为衍圣公。
现代文：十八日，封孔子后代为衍圣公。
English: On the 18th, the descendants of Confucius were conferred the title of Yansheng.

古文：是月，以旱，除畿内民逋刍及去年秋逋税，罢营缮诸役。
现代文：这个月，因早灾免除瓷内百姓拖欠草料和去年秋税，废罢营造各役。
English: This month, due to the early disaster, the people in porcelain were exempted from the arrears of grass and last year's autumn tax.

古文：夏四月己亥，契丹遣使贺乾元节，以其主之命持本国三世画像来求御容。
现代文：夏四月十一日，契丹派遣使臣祝贺乾元节，转达其国主的命令，持本国三世画像来求取遗像。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of the summer, the Khitan sent envoys to congratulate the Qianyuan Festival, conveyed the order of its sovereign, and took the image of the third generation of the country to obtain the relic.

古文：辛亥，定差衙前法。
现代文：二十三日，定差衙前法。
English: On the 23rd, the Fixed-Rate Mortgage Law came into effect.

古文：乙卯，出米京城门，下其价以济流民。
现代文：二十七日，调出米置于京城门，减价以济饥民。
English: On the 27th, rice was brought out and placed at the gate of the capital, and the price was reduced to help the hungry.

古文：五月己未，录系囚？
现代文：五月初二，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the second day of May, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：辛酉，诏中书公事并用祖宗故事。
现代文：初四，下诏中书公事一律采用祖宗成例处理。
English: On the 4th day of the first month, all official matters mentioned in the following edict were handled according to the ancestral precedent.

古文：戊寅，诏戒百官务饬官守。
现代文：二十一日，下诏告诫百官务必整治各部门的职守。
English: On the twenty-first day, the following edict warned the hundred officials that they must rectify the duties of each department.

古文：六月戊戌，陈执中罢。
现代文：六月十一日，陈执中被罢免。
English: On June 11, Chen Jian was dismissed.

古文：以文彦博同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士，刘沆监修国史，富弼同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：任命文彦博为同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士，刘杭监修国史，富弼为同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
English: He appointed Fumihiko Fumihiko as a member of the Shobunkwan and a scholar of the Shobunkwan University, Liu Hang as a supervisor of the National History, and Fumihiko Fumihiko as a member of the Shobunkwan and a scholar of the Shokenden University.

古文：乙巳，侬智高母侬氏、弟智光、子继宗、继封伏诛。
现代文：十八日，侬智高母亲侬氏，弟侬智光，子侬继宗、侬继封被处死。
English: On the 18th, Nong Zhigao's mother Nong, his younger brother Nong Zhiguang, his son Nong Jizong, and his son Nong Jifeng were all executed.

古文：秋八月戊子，减畿内、辅郡囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：秋八月初三，减瓷内、辅郡囚罪一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the third day of the third month of the autumn and the beginning of August, the first-class prisoner's crime in Minzu County and Fu County was reduced, and the prisoner was released.

古文：乙未，置台谏章奏簿。
现代文：初十，设置台谏章奏簿。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, set up a music book.

古文：壬子，诏中书、枢密院第宗姓服属，自明堂覃恩后及十年者，咸与进官。
现代文：二十七日，诏令中书、枢密院排列宗姓服属，从明堂推恩后达十年者，都予以升官。
English: On the 27th, according to the Imperial Rescript and the Privy Council's arrangement of the lineage of the family name, those who have reached ten years from the Ming Dynasty will be promoted.

古文：九月戊午，契丹使来告其国主宗真殂，帝为发哀，成服于内东门幕次，遣使祭奠、吊慰及贺其子洪基立。
现代文：九月初三，契丹派遣使臣来报告国主耶律宗真逝世，仁宗发哀，在内东门幕后成服致哀，派遣使臣祭奠、吊慰并祝贺其子耶律洪基即位。
English: On the 3rd day of the 9th month, Khitan sent envoys to report the death of the country's lord, Yeruhonzonjin, while Rinzong mourned. Behind the scenes at the Inner East Gate, he paid his respects and sent envoys to pay tribute, offer condolences, and congratulate his son, Yeruhongji, on his accession to the throne.

古文：戊辰，诏试医官须引《医经》、《本草》以对，每试十道，以六通为合格。
现代文：十三日，下诏：考试医官必须要有惬经、体势的内容，每次考试十道题，答对六道为合格。
English: On the 13th, the following edict was issued: the examination for medical officers must have the content of the sutra and posture. Each examination has ten questions, and the answer to six questions is qualified.

古文：辛己，罢辅臣、宣徽、节度使乾元节任子恩。
现代文：二十六日，废除辅臣、宣徽使、节度使乾元节任子恩。
English: On the 26th, the Auxiliary Minister, the Herald of the Imperial Emblem, and the Minister of Festivals were abolished.

古文：冬十月丙戌，录唐长孙无忌后。
现代文：冬十月初二，录用唐长孙无忌后代。
English: On the second day of October in winter, the eldest grandson of the Tang Dynasty was hired.

古文：己丑，诏京畿毋领辅郡，罢京畿转运使、提点刑狱。
现代文：初五，下诏京瓷不管辖辅郡，废罢京瓷转运使、提点刑狱。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Kyocera, regardless of the jurisdiction of the county, abolished the transfer of Kyocera, and raised the point of imprisonment.

古文：癸丑，下溪州蛮彭仕羲内寇，诏湖北路发兵捕之。
现代文：二十九日，下溪州蛮彭仕羲攻打边境，下诏湖北路出兵讨伐。
English: On the 29th, Peng Shiyan attacked the border and sent troops to fight on Hubei Road.

古文：十一月乙卯，交阯来告李德政卒，其子日尊上德政遗留物及驯象。
现代文：十一月初一，交趾来报告李德政去世，其子李日尊奉上遗留物和驯象。
English: On the first day of November, relatives came to report the death of Li Dezheng, and his son Li Rizhun presented the remains and the tamed elephant.

古文：己未，行并边见钱和籴法。
现代文：初五，沿边地区推行现钱和来法。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, cash and credit cards will be introduced along the border areas.

古文：十二月丁亥，修六塔河。
现代文：十二月初四，修六塔河。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, the construction of the six-tower river began.

古文：丁酉，诏武臣有赃滥者毋得转横行，其立战功者许之。
现代文：十四日，下诏：武臣犯贪赃罪者不得转官横行，立有战功者可以。
English: On the 14th, the following edict was issued: Those samurai vassals who had committed the crime of embezzlement were not allowed to hold public office, but those who had distinguished themselves in battle could.

古文：庚子，契丹遣使致其主宗真遗留物及谢吊祭。
现代文：十七日，契丹派人带来国主耶律宗真的遗留物并回访朝廷，对吊祭表示感谢。
English: On the 17th, Khitan sent someone to bring the relics of the country's ruler, Yerutsong Sinan, and return to the imperial court to express gratitude for the hanging ceremony.

古文：庚戌，太白昼见。
现代文：二十七日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 27th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：壬子，作醴泉观成。
现代文：二十九日，醛泉观修成。
English: On the 29th, Aldehyde Spring View was completed.

古文：是岁，西界阿讹等内附，诏遣还。
现代文：这一年，西界阿讹等内附朝廷，下诏送回。
English: In the same year, the Western Regions Grandmother and others were sent to the imperial court, and the following edict was sent back.

古文：龙赐州彭师党以其族来归，大食国、西蕃、安化州蛮来贡。
现代文：龙赐州彭师党率领族众归附，大食国、西蕃、安化州蛮来进贡。
English: Longji Prefecture's Peng Shih Party led the people to attach themselves to it, and Daxing Province, Xidi Province, and Anhua Province came to pay tribute.

古文：嘉祐元年春正月甲寅朔，御大庆殿受朝。
现代文：嘉元年春正月初一，到大庆殿接受朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the year, he came to Daqing Hall to receive morning greetings.

古文：是日，不豫。
现代文：这天，仁宗身体不适。
English: On this day, Rinzong felt unwell.

古文：辛酉，辅臣祷祠于大庆殿，斋宿殿庑。
现代文：初八，辅臣在大庆殿祈祷祠祭，斋宿殿堂。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the vassals held a prayer festival at Daqing Hall.

古文：近臣祷于寺观，及遣诸州长吏祷于岳渎诸祠。
现代文：近臣在寺观祈祷，并派各州长官祈祷于岳读各祠。
English: His close vassals prayed at the temple, and sent governors to pray at the altars.

古文：壬戌，御崇政殿。
现代文：初九，到崇政殿。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, I went to the Suisho-den.

古文：癸亥，赐在京诸军缗钱。
现代文：初十，赐给在京各军络钱。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he gave money to all the troops in Kyoto.

古文：甲子，赦天下，蠲被灾田租及倚阁税。
现代文：十一日，赦免天下，免除受灾田租税和暂停征收的租税。
English: On the 11th, the whole country was pardoned, and the affected fields were exempted from taxes and suspended taxes.

古文：戊辰，罢上元张灯。
现代文：十五日，废罢上元观灯。
English: On the 15th, the Yuan Guan Lantern was abolished.

古文：辛未，命辅臣祷天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：十八日，命令辅臣祈祷天地、宗庙、社翟。
English: On the 18th, he ordered his subordinates to pray for heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community.

古文：是月，大雨雪，木冰。
现代文：这个月，降大雪，降木冰。
English: This month, heavy snowfall, falling ice.

古文：二月甲辰，帝疾愈，御延和殿。
现代文：二月二十二日，仁宗病情好转康复，到延和殿。
English: On February 22nd, Rinzong's condition improved and he recovered and went to Yanhe Hall.

古文：三月丁巳，诏礼部贡举。
现代文：三月初五，下诏礼部贡举。
English: On the fifth day of the third month of the year, the tribute of the Imperial Regalia Department will begin.

古文：辛未，司天监言：自至和元年五月，客星晨出东方守天关，至是没。
现代文：十九日，司天监报告说：从至和元年五月，客星早晨出现在东方守天关，到这时消失。
English: On the 19th, the chief astronomer reported: From the solstice and May of the first year, the guest star appeared in the morning in the eastern celestial gate, and disappeared at this time.

古文：壬申，遣官谢天地、宗庙、社稷、寺观、诸祠。
现代文：二十日，派遣官员致谢天地、宗庙、社翟、寺观、诸祠。
English: On the 20th, officials were dispatched to express gratitude to heaven and earth, ancestral temples, shrines, temples and shrines.

古文：癸酉，契丹遣使来谢。
现代文：二十一日，契丹派人来致谢。
English: On the 21st, Khitan sent someone to thank me.

古文：闰月癸未朔，以王尧臣参知政事，程戡为枢密副使。
现代文：闰三月初一，任命王尧臣为参知政事，程勘为枢密副使。
English: On the first day of the leap month of March, Wang Shunchen was appointed to be a member of the Council of State, and Cheng Kan was appointed to be a Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：诏前后殿间日视事。
现代文：下诏前后殿隔日治事。
English: The imperial edict was issued, and the palace resumed its duties the next day.

古文：夏四月壬子朔，六塔河复决。
现代文：夏四月初一，六塔河又决堤。
English: On the first day of April in the summer, the Liuta River broke through the dike again.

古文：丙辰，裁定补荫选举法。
现代文：初五，裁定补荫选举法。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the year, the supplementary election law was decided.

古文：甲戌，录系囚。
现代文：二十三日，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 23rd, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：是月，大雨，水注安上门，门关折，坏官私庐舍数万区。
现代文：这个月，降大雨，水灌进安上门，门关被折，毁坏官私庐舍数万间。
English: This month, heavy rain fell, water poured into the Anshan Gate, the gate was broken, and tens of thousands of official and private residences were destroyed.

古文：诸路言江、河决溢，河北尤甚。
现代文：各路报告说江、河决口溢水，河北尤为严重。
English: All roads reported overflowing water at the mouths of rivers and streams, and the situation was particularly serious in Hebei Province.

古文：六月辛亥朔，诏双日不御殿，伏终如旧。
现代文：六月初一，下诏：双日不治事，伏天完后恢复旧制。
English: On the first day of June, the following edict was issued: no business would be transacted on the second day of the month, and the old system would be restored after the first day of the month was over.

古文：辛未，免畿内、京东西、河北被水民赋租。
现代文：二十一日，免除瓷内、京东西、河北遭受水灾百姓赋税。
English: On the 21st, the people who suffered from the floods in China, East and West Beijing, and Hebei were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：乙亥，雨坏太社、太稷坛。
现代文：二十五日，降雨毁坏太社坛、太翟坛。
English: On the 25th, the rain destroyed the Tai Sha Altar and the Tai Ying Altar.

古文：戊寅，遣使安抚河北。
现代文：二十八日，派遣使臣安抚河北。
English: On the 28th, an envoy was sent to pacify Hebei Province.

古文：己卯，诏群臣实封言时政阙失。
现代文：二十九日，下诏大臣密封上奏章陈述时政缺失。
English: On the 29th, the Minister of the Imperial Rescript sealed the report stating the absence of the current government.

古文：秋七月乙酉，命京东西、湖北监司分行水灾州军振饥蠲租。
现代文：秋七月初五，命令京东西、湖北监司分别到水灾州军贩济饥民免除租税。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the supervisors of Beijing, East and West, and Hubei were ordered to go to the flood-stricken prefectures to exempt the tax from the war merchants to feed the hungry.

古文：丙戌，赐河北流民米，压溺死者，赐其家钱有差。
现代文：初六，赐给河北流民米，压死和淹死者赐给其家钱不等。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, rice was given to people in Hebei Province. The amount of money given to the families of those who were crushed to death or drowned varied.

古文：己丑，出内藏银绢三十万振贷河北。
现代文：初九，拿出内藏库绢三十万贩贷河北。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, 300,000 loans from banks in Hebei Province were withdrawn.

古文：月入南斗。
现代文：月亮进人南斗星。
English: The moon enters the Southern Dipper.

古文：乙巳，贷被水灾民麦种。
现代文：二十五日，贷给遭受水灾百姓麦种。
English: On the 25th, wheat seeds were loaned to the flood-affected people.

古文：是月，彗出紫微垣，长丈余。
现代文：这个月，彗星显现在紫微垣，长丈余。
English: This month, the comet will appear in the purple of Weigaki, with a long tail.

古文：环州小遇族叛，知州张揆破降之。
现代文：环州小遇族反叛，被知州张撰攻破降服。
English: Huanzhou was attacked by a small group of rebels, and was defeated and surrendered by Zhizhou Zhang.

古文：八月庚戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of August, a solar eclipse.

古文：癸亥，狄青罢，以韩琦为枢密使。
现代文：十四日，狄青被罢免，任命韩琦为枢密使。
English: On the 14th, Di Qing was removed from office, and Han Qi was appointed as the Privy Councilor.

古文：是夕彗灭。
现代文：这天晚上彗星消失。
English: The comet disappeared that night.

古文：甲子，出恭谢乐章，肄于太常。
现代文：十五日，出示恭谢乐章，在太常寺练习。
English: On the fifteenth day, they presented the congratulatory music and practiced at Taizhoji Temple.

古文：乙亥，朝谒景灵宫，减京城系囚徒罪一等，杖笞释之。
现代文：二十六日，朝拜景灵宫。减京城囚犯徒刑一等，杖刑答刑释放。
English: On the 26th, he paid homage to the Jingling Palace. The first-class prison sentence of the Beijing prisoner was reduced, and the cane punishment was released.

古文：戊寅，诏湖北招安彭仕羲。
现代文：二十九日，下诏湖北招安彭仕羲。
English: On the 29th, the Hubei Recruitment and Selection Office was established.

古文：九月庚寅，命宰臣摄事于太庙。
现代文：九月十一日，命令宰臣摄事于太庙。
English: On September 11th, he ordered the Vice-Consul to take charge of the temple.

古文：辛卯，恭谢天地于大庆殿，大赦，改元。
现代文：十二日，在大庆殿恭谢天地，大赦，改元。
English: On the twelfth day, in Daqing Hall, congratulations to heaven and earth, amnesty, and change of era.

古文：丁酉，加恩百官。
现代文：十八日，加恩百官。
English: On the 18th, Gahn was made a centurion.

古文：庚子，赐致仕卿、监以上及曾任近侍之臣粟帛酒馔。
现代文：二十一日，赐退休卿、监以上官员和曾任近侍之臣粟帛酒撰。
English: On the 21st, retired lords, officials above the rank of superintendent, and vassals who had served as close attendants were granted the right to brew sake.

古文：癸卯，举行御史迁次格。
现代文：二十四日，实施御史迁升标准。
English: On the 24th, the historical promotion standard was implemented.

古文：自京至泗州置汴河木岸。
现代文：自京城至泅州设置汁河木岸。
English: From Jingcheng to Zhangzhou, the wooden banks of the Jiuhe River will be set up.

古文：十一月辛巳，王德用罢，贾昌朝为枢密使。
现代文：十一月初三，王德用被罢免，贾昌朝为枢密使。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Wang Deyi was deposed, and Jia Changchao became the envoy.

古文：十二月壬子，刘沆罢，以曾公亮参知政事。
现代文：十二月初五，刘杭被罢免，任命曾公亮为参知政事。
English: On the fifth day of December, Liu Hang was removed from office and Zeng Guoliang was appointed as the party secretary.

古文：甲子，白虹贯日。
现代文：十七日，白色虹遮掩日光。
English: On the 17th, a white rainbow covered the sun.

古文：是岁，西蕃磨毡角、占城、大食国来贡。
现代文：这一年，西蕃磨毡角、占城、大食国来进贡。
English: This year, tributes came from as far away as West Luzon, Zam-dong, and Taekwondo.

古文：融、桂州蛮杨克端等内附。
现代文：融、桂州蛮杨克端等内附朝廷。
English: Rong, Guizhou Mianyang Kedan, etc. were annexed by the imperial court.

古文：二年春二月己酉，梓夔路三里村夷人寇淯井监。
现代文：嘉二年春二月初三，梓夔路三里村夷人攻打清井监。
English: On the third day of the second month of the second year of spring, the barbarians of Sanli Village, Zizhi Road, attacked Kiyoshin.

古文：庚戌，录系囚，降罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：初四，讯问记录囚犯罪状，减罪一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 28th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner, the crime was reduced to the first degree, and the prisoner was released.

古文：遣使录三京、辅郡系囚。
现代文：派遣使臣讯问记录三京和辅郡囚犯罪状。
English: Dispatching envoys to interrogate and record the criminal status of prisoners in Sanjing and Fu County.

古文：壬戌，杜衍薨。
现代文：十六日，杜衍逝世。
English: On the 16th, Du Yan passed away.

古文：澧州罗城洞蛮内寇，发兵击走之。
现代文：遭州罗城洞蛮攻打边境，出兵打退他们。
English: They were brutally attacked at the border by the state of Luocheng and sent troops to repel them.

古文：癸酉，王德用卒。
现代文：二十七日，王德用去世。
English: On the 27th, Wang Dejun passed away.

古文：是月，雄、霸州地震。
现代文：这个月，雄、霸二州发生地震。
English: This month, earthquakes occurred in Xiong and Baizhou.

古文：三月戊寅，振河北被灾民。
现代文：三月初二，贩济河北饥民。
English: On the second day of the third month of the year, food was sold to the starving people of Hebei Province.

古文：乙未，契丹使耶律防、陈觊来求御容。
现代文：十九日，契丹使臣耶律防、陈凯来求遗像。
English: On the 19th, the Khitan envoys, Ye Lubao and Chen Kai, came to ask for the relic.

古文：戊戌，淮水溢。
现代文：二十二日，淮水溢出河道。
English: On the 22nd, the Huai River overflowed its course.

古文：遣张昪报使契丹。
现代文：派遣张鼻回访契丹。
English: Zhang Nana was sent to pay a return visit to Khitan.

古文：癸卯，狄青卒。
现代文：二十七日，狄青逝世。
English: On the 27th, Di Qing passed away.

古文：是月，赐礼部奏名进士、诸科及第出身八百七十七人。
现代文：这个月，赐礼部奏名进士、诸科及第出身八百七十七人。
English: This month, eight hundred and seventy-seven people from all walks of life and all disciplines were awarded the title of "Ceremonial Musicians."

古文：亲试举人免黜落始此。
现代文：亲自考试举人，免默不合格的。
English: If you personally nominate someone for the examination, you will not be disqualified.

古文：夏四月丁未，以河北地数震，遣使安抚。
现代文：夏四月初一，因河北多次发生地震，派遣使臣安抚。
English: On the first day of April in the summer, due to the repeated occurrence of earthquakes in Hebei, envoys were dispatched to pacify.

古文：丙寅，幽州地大震，坏城郭，覆压死者数万人。
现代文：二十日，幽州发生大地震，毁坏城廓，数万人被压死。
English: On the 20th, a major earthquake occurred in Yuzhou, destroying the city walls and killing tens of thousands of people.

古文：己巳，邕州火峒蛮侬宗旦入寇。
现代文：二十三日，琶州火酮蛮侬宗旦攻打边境。
English: On the 23rd, Wazhou firecracker barbarian Zontan attacked the border.

古文：癸酉，以彭仕羲未降，遣官安抚湖北。
现代文：二十七日，因为彭仕羲没有投降，派遣使臣安抚湖北。
English: On the 27th, because Peng Shijie did not surrender, he sent envoys to pacify Hubei.

古文：五月庚辰，管勾麟府军马公事郭恩为夏人所袭，殁于断道坞。
现代文：五月初五，管勾麟府军马公事郭恩被西夏人袭击，死于断道坞。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of May, Guo En, who was in charge of military and equestrian affairs in Guolinfu, was attacked by Xixia people and died in the dock.

古文：己亥，诏举行磨勘法。
现代文：二十四日，下诏实施磨勘法。
English: On the 24th, the milling method was implemented.

古文：六月戊午，夏国主谅祚遣人来谢使吊祭。
现代文：六月十三日，夏国主谅柞派人来谢使吊祭。
English: On June 13th, Xia Guozhen sent someone to thank the envoy for the hanging ceremony.

古文：戊辰，以淑妃苗氏为贤妃。
现代文：二十三日，以淑妃苗氏为贤妃。
English: On the 23rd, Shu Fei Miao was crowned as the virtuous empress.

古文：秋七月辛巳，诏河北诸道总管分遣兵官教阅所部军。
现代文：秋七月初七，下诏河北各道总管分遣兵官教阅所部军队。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn and the 7th day of the 7th month of the year, the detachment officers of the Hebei Provincial Headquarters came down to teach and read the troops of the headquarters.

古文：辛卯，命孙抃、张昪磨勘转运使及提点刑狱课绩。
现代文：十七日，命令孙打、张鼻考核转运使和提点刑狱课绩。
English: On the 17th, Sun Du and Zhang Nana were ordered to pass the transfer examination and raise their prison performance.

古文：丁酉，诏陕西、河北诸路经略安抚举文武官材堪将领者各一人。
现代文：二十三日，下诏陕西、河北各路经略安抚使推举文武官才能可以担任将领者各一人。
English: On the 23rd, Shaanxi and Hebei issued the following edict to slightly appease each side, so that only one person from each side could be promoted to civil and military officer to serve as general.

古文：八月己酉，诏：每岁赐诸道节镇、诸州钱有差。命长吏选官和药，以救民疾。
现代文：八月初五，下诏：每年赐各道节镇、各州钱不等，命长官选官和药，以救治百姓疾病。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month, the following edict was issued: Every year, various towns and states would be given varying amounts of money, officials and medicines to treat people's diseases.

古文：壬子，命富弼等详定《编敕》。
现代文：初八，命令富弼等编定蝙初。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he ordered Fuxi and others to compile the first day of the second month.

古文：庚申，录系囚，降罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：十六日，讯问记录囚犯罪状，减罪一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 16th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner, the crime was reduced to the first degree, and the prisoner was released.

古文：癸亥，策制举人。
现代文：十九日，策试制举人。
English: On the 19th, the selection was made.

古文：丁卯，置广惠仓。
现代文：二十三日，设置广惠仓。
English: On the 23rd, Guanghui Warehouse was set up.

古文：九月庚子，契丹再使萧扈、吴湛来求御容。
现代文：九月二十七日，契丹又一次派萧启、吴湛来求遗像。
English: On September 27th, Khitan once again sent Xiao Qi and Wu Zhan to ask for the relic.

古文：冬十月乙巳，遣胡宿报使契丹。
现代文：冬十月初二，派遣胡宿回访契丹。
English: On the second day of the first month of October in winter, Hu Yatang was sent to pay a return visit to Khitan.

古文：丙午，班《禄令》。
现代文：初三，颁布禄令。
English: On the third day of the new year, the award decree was issued.

古文：十一月丙申，诏三司使体量判官才否以闻。
现代文：十一月二十四日，下诏三司使考核判官有无才能上报朝廷。
English: On November 24th, the Third Division of the General Office of the Communist Party of China sent a notice to the Imperial Court to inquire about the qualifications of the judges.

古文：十二月戊申，诏： 自今间岁贡举，天下进士、诸科解旧额之半，置明经科，罢说书举人。 
现代文：十二月初六，下诏： 从今以后隔年贡举，天下进士、各科解额为原来的一半，设置明经科，废罢说书举人。 
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, the following edict was issued: From now on, the next year's tribute will be raised, the whole country will be promoted, the amount of each subject will be half of the original, and the department of classics will be set up.

古文：辛亥，立内降关白二府法。
现代文：初九，立内降关白二府法。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the Guanbai Second Prefecture Law was enacted.

古文：是岁，西蕃瞎毡并诸族、西平州黔南道王石自品、西南蕃鹣州来贡。
现代文：这一年，西蕃瞎毡和各族、西平州黔南道王石自品、西南蕃鹅州来进贡。
English: In this year, Xiling Xianzhong and various ethnic groups, Xiping County, South Shandong Province, Wangshi County, and Southwest Shandong Province came to pay tribute.

古文：三年春正月戊戌，凿永通河。
现代文：嘉三年春正月二十七日，凿永通河。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of the third year of Jiayuan Spring, the Yongtong River was chiseled.

古文：二月癸卯，契丹使来告其祖母哀，辍视朝七日，遣使祭奠吊慰。
现代文：二月初二，契丹使臣来报告其祖母去世，停止治理国事七天，派遣使臣前往奠祭吊慰。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the Khitan envoy came to report the death of his grandmother, stopped managing state affairs for seven days, and sent envoys to the ceremony to offer condolences.

古文：癸丑，录系囚，降罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：十二日，讯问记录囚犯罪状，减罪一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 12th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner, the crime was reduced to the first degree, and the prisoner was released.

古文：三月甲戌，诏礼部贡举。
现代文：三月初四，下诏礼部贡举。
English: On the fourth day of the third month of the year, the tribute of the Imperial Regalia Department will begin.

古文：夏四月甲子，吴育卒。
现代文：夏四月二十四日，吴育去世。
English: Wu Yu passed away on the 24th day of the 4th month of summer.

古文：乙丑，罢睦亲宅祖宗神御殿。
现代文：二十五日，废除睦亲宅祖宗神御殿。
English: On the 25th, the Ancestor's Shrine of the Mutsu Family Home was abolished.

古文：丙辰，诏： 守令或贪恣耄昏，以弛为宽，以苛为察，以增赋敛为劳，以出入刑罚为能，而部使者莫之举劾。
现代文：丙辰日，下诏： 守令有的贪婪悠肆，老态龙钟，以弛为宽，以苛为察，以增加征收赋税为功劳，以重罪轻判、轻罪重判为能事，而有关部门没有能够行使检举弹勃的职权。
English: On the third day of the month of June, the following edict was issued: the guards were greedy and presumptuous, old-fashioned, lax and harsh, taking credit for increasing the collection of taxes, and taking the light sentence for serious crimes and the heavy sentence for minor crimes, but the relevant departments were not able to exercise the authority to report the explosion.

古文：自今其各思率职，毋挠权幸，毋纵有罪，以称朕意。 
现代文：从今以后各部门官吏要谨守职守，不为权廊所阻挠，不放纵有罪官吏，从而符合我的意愿。 
English: From now on, officials of all departments should conscientiously perform their duties, not be obstructed by the corridors of power, and not indulge guilty officials, so as to conform to my will.

古文：五月壬申，增国子监生员。
现代文：五月初三，增加国子监生员。
English: On the third day of the fifth month, the number of Kuniko birth supervisors was increased.

古文：甲午，契丹遣使致其祖母遗留物。
现代文：二十五日，契丹派遣使臣送来其祖母的遗留物。
English: On the 25th, Khitan sent an envoy to bring back his grandmother's belongings.

古文：六月丙午，文彦博、贾昌朝罢，以富弼为昭文馆大学士，韩琦同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士，宋庠、田况为枢密使，张昪为枢密副使。
现代文：六月初七，文彦博、贾昌朝被罢免，任命富弼为昭文馆大学士，韩琦为同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士，宋序、田况为枢密使，张鼻为枢密副使。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the year, Wen Yanbo and Jia Changdong were removed from their posts, and Fuxi was appointed as a Scholar of the Shouwen Library, Han Qi was appointed as a Scholar of the Shouwen Library of the Shouwen Library of the Shouwen Library of the Shouwen Library of the Shouwen Library of the Shouwen Library of the Shouwen Library of the Shouwen Library of the Shouwen Library of the Shouwen Library of the Shouwen Library of the Shouwen Library of the Shouwen Library of the Shouwen Library of the Shouwen Library of the Shouwen

古文：甲寅，诏学士院编国朝制诰。
现代文：十五日，下诏学士院编撰国朝制浩。
English: On the fifteenth day of the following month, the Imperial Edict Academy compiled the country's imperial edict.

古文：丁卯，交止贡异兽。
现代文：二十八日，交趾进贡异兽。
English: On the 28th, the tributes to the strange beast began.

古文：秋七月丙子，诏广济河溢，原武县河决，遣官行视民田，振恤被水害者。
现代文：秋七月初八，下诏： 广济河溢出，原武县黄河决口，派官视察民田，贩济抚恤遭受水灾的人。 
English: On the eighth day of the seventh month of autumn, the following edict was issued: The Guangji River has overflowed, the Yellow River has burst its banks in Yuanwu County, officials have been dispatched to inspect people's fields, and people who have been affected by the flood have been given food and clothing.

古文：癸巳，以夔州路旱，遣使安抚。
现代文：二十五日，因夔州路早灾，派遣使臣安抚。
English: On the 25th, due to the early disaster of Luzhou Road, envoys were dispatched to appease.

古文：八月己亥朔，日有食之。己未，王尧臣卒。
现代文：八月初一，日食。二十一日，王尧臣去世。
English: On the first day of August, a solar eclipse. On the 21st day, Wang Shuxin passed away.

古文：庚申，彭仕羲率众降。
现代文：二十二日，彭仕羲率部众投降。
English: On the 22nd, Peng Shijun and his subordinates surrendered.

古文：九月癸酉，议罢榷茶法。
现代文：九月初五，讨论废罢榷茶法。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, the discussion on abolishing the tea ceremony began.

古文：己丑，契丹遣使来谢。
现代文：二十一日，契丹派遣使臣来致谢。
English: On the twenty-first day, Khitan sent an envoy to express his thanks.

古文：冬十月癸亥，除河北坊郭客户乾食盐钱。
现代文：冬十月二十六日，废除河北坊郭客户干食盐钱。
English: On October 26, Hebei Fangguo abolished the dry salt money for customers.

古文：十一月癸酉，议减冗费。
现代文：十一月初六，讨论裁减冗费。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month, the discussion on redundancy fee reduction was over.

古文：己丑，置都水监，罢三司河渠司。
现代文：二十二日，设置都水监，废罢三司河渠司。
English: On the 22nd, the Metropolitan Water Supervision Bureau was established, and the three river and canal departments were abolished.

古文：十二月己巳，诏三司岁上天下税赋之数，三岁一会亏赢以闻。
现代文：十二月己巳日，诏令三司每年上报全国赋税数额，三年计算一次亏赢上报朝廷。
English: In December of the same year, the three departments of the imperial edict reported the national tax amount every year, and the three-year calculation of the profit and loss was reported to the imperial court.

古文：闰月丁卯朔，诏： 吏人及伎术官职，毋得任知州军、提点刑狱，自军班出至正任者，方得知边要州军。 
现代文：闰十二月初一，下诏： 担任吏人和伎术官职的人，不得任知州军、提点刑狱，从军班出至正任者，才能任边防重要州军的长官。 
English: On the first day of leap December, the following edict was issued: Those who hold the posts of officials and conjurers are not allowed to be appointed to the Zhizhou Army or to be sentenced to prison, and only those who have been promoted from the military squad to the full-time position can be appointed as the commander of the important border defense state army.

古文：丁丑，诏裁定制科及进士高第人恩数。
现代文：十一日，下诏裁定制科和进士高第人的恩赏标准。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the award criteria for the Customization Division and the Gaudi Scholars were announced.

古文：庚辰，诏明年正旦日食，其自丁亥避正殿，减常膳。
现代文：十四日，下诏：明年正月初一日食，从二十一日起不上殿治理国事，减少饮食。
English: On the 14th, the following edict was issued: from the first day of the first month of the next year, there will be one meal a day, and from the 21st, there will be no going to the palace to administer state affairs, and the diet will be reduced.

古文：宴契丹使，毋作乐。
现代文：宴饮契丹使臣，不作乐。
English: Banqueting Khitan envoys, not making music.

古文：壬午，录系囚，降三京囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：十六日，讯问记录囚犯罪状，降三京囚犯罪刑一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 16th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner, and the criminal punishment of the three Beijing prisoners was reduced to the first degree, and they were released under imprisonment.

古文：以自冬雨雪不止，遣官分行京城，赐孤穷老疾钱，畿县委令佐为糜粥济饥。
现代文：这一年，安化上中下州、北遐镇蛮人来进贡。嘉四年春正月初一，日食。祭祀天地用牲。初六，上殿处理政事，恢复饮食。因自去年冬天雨雪不止，派官分行京城，赐给孤穷老病者钱，瓷县委托令佐煮粥贩济饥民。
English: In this year, barbarians from Anhua, Shangzhong, Shizhou and Beilun Towns came to pay tribute. On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, the sun eclipsed. The heavens and the earth were sacrificed. On the sixth day of the first month, the upper court dealt with political affairs and resumed eating and drinking. Due to the continuous rain and snow since last winter, officials were sent to the branch office in Beijing to give money to the lonely poor and the elderly, and porcelain county commissioned to make soup porridge to feed the hungry.

古文：壬寅，赐在京诸军班缗钱。
现代文：初七，赐给在京各军班络钱。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, money was given to each military squadron in Beijing.

古文：颁《嘉祐驿令》。
现代文：颁布嘉骚令。
English: promulgated the Jiaxao Order.

古文：二月己巳，罢榷茶。
现代文：二月初四，废罢榷茶。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, the tea ceremony was abolished.

古文：庚午，广南言交阯寇钦州。
现代文：初五，广南报告说交趾攻打钦州。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Guangnan reported that the attack on Qinzhou was successful.

古文：乙亥，以广惠仓隶司农寺。
现代文：初十，以广惠仓隶司农寺。
English: In his early twenties, he became a member of the agricultural temple in Guangyukang.

古文：戊子，白虹贯日。
现代文：二十三日，白虹遮蔽日光。
English: On the 23rd, a white rainbow blotted out the sunlight.

古文：三月戊戌，命近臣同三司减定民间科率。
现代文：三月初四，命令近臣同三司一起减定民间科率。
English: On the fourth day of the third month, he ordered his close vassals to work with the three departments to reduce the rate of folk science.

古文：是月，赐进士、诸科及第出身三百三十九人。
现代文：这个月，赐进士、各科及第出身三百三十九人。
English: This month, 339 people from all walks of life, all disciplines, and all walks of life were awarded the title of academician.

古文：夏四月丁卯，诏孟冬大袷于太庙。
现代文：夏四月初三，下诏冬季第一个月在太庙举行大祭祀。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of summer and the 1st month of winter, a grand ritual is held at Taimiao.

古文：癸酉，封柴氏后为崇义公，给田千顷，奉周室祀。
现代文：初九，封柴氏后为崇义公，给田十顷，用于周室祠祀。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, after the Chai clan was sealed, it was given to the Sui clan, and ten hectares of land were given to the Suishu Shrine.

古文：丙子，复银台司封驳制。
现代文：十二日，恢复银台司封驳制。
English: On the 12th, the sealing system of the Bank of Taiwan was restored.

古文：癸未，陈执中薨。
现代文：十九日，陈执中逝世。
English: On the 19th, Chen Xizhong passed away.

古文：辛卯，诏中外臣庶居室、器用、冠服、妾媵，有违常制，必罚毋贷。
现代文：二十七日，下诏： 中外臣庶居室、器用、冠服、妾腾，有违反制度规定的，一定予以惩罚不贷。 
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued: If there is any violation of the provisions of the system in the common room of a middle or foreign minister, the use of tools, the wearing of crowns, and the taking of concubines, they must be punished.

古文：壬辰，录系囚，降罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：二十八日，讯问记录囚犯罪状，减罪一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 28th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner, the crime was reduced to the first degree, and the prisoner was released.

古文：大震电，雨雹。
现代文：大闪电，降冰雹。
English: Big lightning, hail.

古文：五月戊戌，诏： 两制臣僚旧制不许诣执政私第，所举荐不得用为御史，今除其法。 
现代文：五月初五，下诏： 两制臣僚原来不许到执政私第，执政所荐举的官员不得用为御史，从今天起废除这个规定。 
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of the fifth month, the following edict was issued: From now on, the two-system ministers are not allowed to come to the private residence of the government, and the officials recommended by the government are not allowed to be used as imperial historians. This regulation will be abolished.

古文：庚子，诏内臣员多，权罢进养子入内。
现代文：初七，下诏：内臣人员太多，暂罢养子人内。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the following edict was issued: There are too many vassals, and it is time to temporarily stop bringing up children.

古文：壬子，遣官经界河北牧地，余募民种艺。
现代文：十九日，派官员确定河北牧地地界，其余土地募民耕种。
English: On the 19th, officials were sent to determine the Hebei pastoral land boundary, and the remaining land was recruited for cultivation.

古文：六月己巳，群臣请加尊号曰 大仁至治 ，表五上，不许。
现代文：六月初七，大臣请加尊号 大仁至治 ，五次上表，没有批准。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the year, the minister asked to add the honorific title of "大仁至治" to the name, five times, but it was not approved.

古文：癸酉，诏诸路经略安抚、转运使、提点刑狱各举本部官有行实政事者三人，以备升擢。
现代文：十一日，下诏各路经略安抚使、转运使、提点刑狱，分别推举所属官吏中有实实在在政绩的人三名，以备进升。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the following day, each of the roads, after slightly pacifying the envoy, transferring the envoy, and raising the point of imprisonment, separately elected three people who had real political achievements among the officials they belonged to, to prepare for promotion.

古文：尝任两府者，许举内外官。
现代文：曾经任职两府的官员，允许推举内外官员。
English: Officials who have served in the two prefectures are allowed to nominate internal and external officials.

古文：丁丑，诏转运司，凡邻州饥而辄闭粜者，以违制论。
现代文：十五日，下诏转运司，凡是邻州饥荒而动不动就闭桌者，以违制论处。
English: On the fifteenth day, the transportation department issued an edict that anyone who closed the table because of the famine in a neighboring state would be punished for violating the system.

古文：辛卯，放宫女二百十四人。
现代文：二十九日，放出二百一十四名宫女。
English: On the 29th, 214 maids of honor were released.

古文：秋七月丁未，放宫女二百三十六人。
现代文：秋七月十五日，放出宫女二百三十六人。
English: On the fifteenth day of the seventh month, two hundred and thirty-six maids of honor were released.

古文：八月乙亥，策制举人。
现代文：八月十三日，策试制举人。
English: On August 25th, people were selected through a selection process.

古文：冬十月壬申，朝飨景灵宫。
现代文：冬十月十一日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 11th day of October in winter, a ritual is held at the Jingling Palace.

古文：癸酉，大袷于太庙，大赦。
现代文：十二日，在太庙举行大祭，大赦。
English: On the 12th, a grand festival was held in Taimiao, and an amnesty was declared.

古文：诏诸路监司察士有学行为乡里所推者，同长吏以闻。
现代文：下诏各路监司考察有德有才为乡里推重者，连同长吏上报。
English: The supervisors of each road are hereby ordered to inspect the virtuous and talented people in the village, and report them together with the officials.

古文：民父母年八十以上，复其一丁。
现代文：百姓有八十岁以上父母，免除一丁的赋役。
English: People who have parents over the age of 80 are exempt from compulsory military service.

古文：复益州为成都府，并州为太原府。
现代文：恢复益州为成都府，并州为太原府。
English: Yizhou was reinstated as Chengdu Prefecture and Taiyuan Prefecture.

古文：戊寅，加恩百官。
现代文：十七日，加恩百官。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Gahn was promoted to centurion.

古文：十一月庚子，汝南郡王允让薨。
现代文：十一月初九，汝南郡王赵允让逝世。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month, King Zhao Yunzang of Runan County passed away.

古文：五年春正月辛卯朔，白虹贯日，太白犯岁星。
现代文：十二月十六日，白虹遮蔽日光。嘉五年春正月初一，白虹遮蔽日光，太白星侵犯岁星。
English: On December 16th, the white rainbow blocked the sunlight. On the first day of the first month of spring in the year of Jia, the white rainbow blocked the sunlight, and the white star encroached on the New Year star.

古文：己亥，录刘继元后。
现代文：初九，录用刘继元后代。
English: At the beginning of the ninth grade, Liu Jiyuan's descendants were hired.

古文：二月壬戌，录系囚。
现代文：二月初三，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the third day of the second month, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：三月壬辰，诏礼部贡举。
现代文：三月初三，下诏礼部贡举。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, the tribute of the Imperial Regalia Department will begin.

古文：癸巳，刘沆薨。
现代文：初四，刘杭逝世。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Liu Hang passed away.

古文：乙未，岁星昼见。
现代文：初六，岁星白天出现。
English: On the sixth day of the first month, the year star appears during the day.

古文：壬子，诏以蝗涝相仍，敕转运使、提点刑狱督州县振济，仍察不称职者。
现代文：二十三日，下诏蝗灾涝灾相继而来，告诫转运使、提点刑狱督促州县贩济，并且考察不称职者。
English: On the 23rd, the following locust plagues and calamities came one after another, admonishing transshipment envoys, raising the point of prison supervision to urge state and county traffickers, and inspecting incompetents.

古文：夏四月癸未，程戡罢，以孙抃为枢密副使。
现代文：夏四月二十五日，程勘被罢免，任命孙林为枢密副使。
English: On the 25th day of the 4th month of the summer, Chengkang was dismissed and Sun Lin was appointed as the vice-minister of the privy council.

古文：丙戌，命近臣同三司议均税。
现代文：二十八日，命令近臣同三司商议均税。
English: On the 28th, he ordered his close vassals to discuss the uniform tax with the three departments.

古文：五月戊子朔，京师民疫，选医给药以疗之。
现代文：五月初一，京师百姓疾疫流行，选派医生、供给医药予以治疗。
English: On the first day of May, Beijing sent doctors and medicine to treat the epidemic.

古文：己丑，京师地震。
现代文：初二，京城发生地震。
English: On the 13th, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：丁酉，诏三司置宽恤民力司。
现代文：初十，下诏三司设置宽恤民力司。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the Third Division was set up under the Third Division.

古文：己酉，王安石召入为三司度支判官。
现代文：二十二日，王安石被召为三司度支判官。
English: On the 22nd, Wang Anshi was called to be the judge of the Third Division.

古文：丁巳，录系囚，降罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：三十日，讯问记录囚犯罪状，减罪一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 30th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner, the crime was reduced to the first degree, and the prisoner was released.

古文：六月乙丑，诏戒上封告讦人罪或言赦前事，及言事官弹劾小过不关政体者。
现代文：六月初八，下诏禁止上封告汗人罪或言赦免之前的事，以及言事官弹勃官员不关政体的小过失。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, the following edict prohibited the emperor from accusing the khan of a crime or a matter before the pardon of the speech, as well as the speech officer's firing of an official for a minor fault not related to the political system.

古文：乙亥，遣官分行天下，访宽恤民力事。
现代文：十八日，派遣官员分别到全国各地，咨访宽恤民力事宜。
English: On the 18th, officials were dispatched to various parts of the country to consult on the matter of granting clemency.

古文：秋七月癸巳，邕州言交阯与甲峒蛮合兵寇边，都巡检宋士尧拒战，死之，诏发诸州兵讨捕。
现代文：秋七月初七，琶州报告说交趾与甲酮蛮联合出兵攻打边境，都巡检宋士尧抵抗战死，下诏各州出兵讨捕。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month of the autumn, Pazhou reported that Jiao Zi and Mei Xuan jointly sent troops to attack the border. They all inspected Song Shih-tao's resistance and died in battle, and ordered the states to send troops to arrest him.

古文：丙申，诏待制、台谏官、正刺史以上各举诸司使至三班使臣堪将领及行阵战斗者三人。
现代文：初十，下诏待制、台谏官、正刺史以上官员各自举荐可以担任将领率军作战的各司使至三班使臣三人。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, three envoys from each division to three groups of envoys can be appointed as generals to lead the army in battle upon the recommendation of officials above the rank of lower eunuch, Taiwan eunuch, and senior eunuch.

古文：戊戌，翰林学士欧阳修上新修《唐书》。
现代文：十二日，翰林学士欧阳修呈上新修司害书。
English: On the 12th, the scholar Ouyang Xiu, a scholar of Hanlin, presented a new book on the harm caused by Xiu Si.

古文：庚戌，诏中书门下采端实之士明进诸朝，辨激巧伪者放黜之。
现代文：二十四日，下诏中书门下省选择正直忠厚人士向朝廷推荐，投机取巧、急功近利的人罢除不用。
English: On the 24th, according to the following edict, the provincial government should select honest and loyal people to recommend to the imperial court, and those who are opportunistic and seek quick success should not be dismissed.

古文：八月壬申，诏求逸书。
现代文：八月十六日，诏求逸书。
English: On August 16th, the imperial edict was issued.

古文：庚辰，置陕西估马司。
现代文：二十四日，废除陕西估马司。
English: On the 24th, the Shaanxi Appraisal and Appraisal Department was abolished.

古文：乙酉，罢诸路同提点刑狱使臣。
现代文：二十九日，罢除各路同提点刑狱使臣。
English: On the 29th, the prison envoys were removed from their posts.

古文：丙戌，置江、湖、闽、广、四川十一路转运判官。
现代文：三十日，设置江、湖、闽、广、四川等十一路转运判官。
English: On the 30th, the transfer adjudicators of 11 routes including Jiangsu, Hubei, Fujian, Guangxi and Sichuan were set up.

古文：九月己丑，太白昼见。
现代文：九月初三，太白星白天出现。
English: On the third day of the ninth month, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：冬十月乙酉，深州言野蚕成茧，被于原野。
现代文：冬十月三十日，深州报告说野蚕成茧，遍及原野。
English: On the 30th day of October in winter, Shenzhou reported that the wild silkworms had grown into cocoons and covered the fields.

古文：十一月辛卯，罢内臣寄迁法。
现代文：十一月初六，废除内臣寄迁法。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month of the year, the law on the emigration of vassals was abolished.

古文：辛丑，宋庠罢。
现代文：十六日，宋序被罢免。
English: On the 16th, Song Xiu was removed from office.

古文：以曾公亮为枢密使，张昪、孙抃为参知政事，欧阳修、陈升之、赵概为枢密副使。
现代文：任命曾公亮为枢密使，张异、孙林为参知政事，欧阳修、陈升之、赵概为枢密副使。
English: Zeng Gongliang was appointed as a privy envoy, Zhang Yi and Sun Lin as political advisors, and Ouyang Xiu, Chen Shengzhi and Zhao You as deputy privy envoys.

古文：十二月己卯，苏茂州蛮寇邕州。
现代文：十二月二十四日，苏茂州蛮攻打琶州。
English: On December 24th, Sumo Province launched a brutal attack on Wazhou.

古文：辛巳，补诸州父老百岁以上者十二人为州助教。
现代文：二十六日，补各州父老百岁以上十二人为州助教。
English: On the 26th, twelve people over the age of 100 were appointed as state teaching assistants.

古文：是岁，大食国来贡。
现代文：这一年，大食国来进贡。
English: This year, the big-eating country came to pay tribute.

古文：六年春正月乙未，许两制与台谏相见。
现代文：嘉六年春正月十一日，允许两制与台谏官相见。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the spring of the sixth year of Jia, the two systems were allowed to meet with the Taiwanese eunuchs.

古文：二月丁巳，诏宗室赐名授官者，须年及十五方许转官。
现代文：二月初三，下诏：宗室赐名授官者，必须要等到十五岁才允许转官。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, the following edict was issued: Those who were named to an official post by their family must wait until they are 15 years old before they are allowed to transfer to another post.

古文：乙丑，诏良民子弟或为人诱隶军籍，自今两月内，父母诉官者还之。
现代文：十一日，下诏：良民子弟或被人诱隶军籍，从现在起两月内父母告诉官府，予以归还。
English: On the 11th, the following edict was issued: If a good citizen's child is lured into military service, the parents must inform the government within two months and return the child.

古文：丙寅，录系囚，降罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：十二日，讯问记录囚犯罪状，减罪一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 12th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner, the crime was reduced to the first degree, and the prisoner was released.

古文：三月己亥，富弼以母丧去位。
现代文：三月十六日，富弼因丧母离职。
English: On March 16th, Fuxi left his post due to the death of his mother.

古文：庚子，以富弼母丧，罢大宴。
现代文：十七日，因富弼母丧废罢大宴。
English: On the 17th, the grand banquet was cancelled due to the death of his mother.

古文：戊申，给西京周庙祭享器服。
现代文：二十五日，供给西京周庙祭享器服。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the clothes for enjoying the temple festival in Xijing were provided.

古文：是月，赐进士、诸科及第同出身二百九十五人。
现代文：这个月，赐进士、各科及第同出身二百九十五人。
English: This month, two hundred and ninety-five people from all walks of life, all disciplines, and all ethnic backgrounds were awarded the title of academician.

古文：夏四月辛酉，诏岭南官吏死于侬贼而其家流落未能自归者，所在给食，护送还乡。
现代文：夏四月初八，下诏：岭南死于侬智高贼的官吏家属没能归家还业的，所在供给食物，护送还乡。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month of the summer, the following edict was issued: If the family members of the government officials who died of Nongzhi Gaoqi in Lingnan could not return home and return to work, they should be provided with food and escorted back to their hometowns.

古文：庚辰，陈升之罢，以包拯为枢密副使。
现代文：二十七日，陈升之被罢免，任命包拯为枢密副使。
English: On the 27th, Chen Shengzhi was removed from his post, and Bao Zheng was appointed as the deputy envoy.

古文：出谏官唐介、赵抃、御史范师道、吕诲。
现代文：罢默谏官唐介和赵打、御史范师道和吕诲。
English: The eunuchs, Tang Jie and Zhao Du, and the scholars, Dao and Lu, were silenced.

古文：五月丙戌，官诸路敦遣行义文学之士七人。
现代文：五月初四，各路选送的有行义文学之士七人被授给官职。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, seven scholars of literature who had been selected from all walks of life were given official posts.

古文：庚戌，录系囚，降罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：二十八日，讯问记录囚犯罪状，减罪一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 28th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner, the crime was reduced to the first degree, and the prisoner was released.

古文：分命官录三京系囚。
现代文：分派官员讯问记录三京囚犯罪状。
English: Officers have been dispatched to interrogate and record the criminal status of the three Beijing inmates.

古文：六月壬子朔，日有食之。乙丑，太白昼见。
现代文：六月初一，日食。十四日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the first day of June, there was a solar eclipse. On the 14th, a white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：壬申，岁星昼见。
现代文：二十一日，岁星白天出现。
English: On the twenty-first day, the year star appears in the daytime.

古文：丙子，以司马光知谏院，入对。
现代文：二十五日，任命司马光为知谏院，到朝廷接受皇帝咨询。
English: On the 25th, Sima Guang was appointed to Zhiyuan, and went to the imperial court to receive the emperor's consultation.

古文：戊寅，以王安石知制诰。
现代文：二十七日，任命王安石为知制浩。
English: On the 27th, Wang Anshi was appointed as the successor of Zhishiehao.

古文：秋七月乙酉，泗州淮水溢。
现代文：秋七月初四，泅州淮水溢出河道。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of autumn, the Huai River in Luzhou overflowed its course.

古文：丙戌，诏淮南、江、浙水灾，差官体量蠲税。
现代文：初五，下诏淮南、江、浙水灾，派官考察免税。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the floods in Huainan, Jiangsu and Zhejiang were announced, and officials were sent to inspect and exempt from taxes.

古文：戊子，录昭宪皇太后、孝明孝惠孝章淑德皇后家子孙，进秩授官者十有九人。
现代文：初七，录用昭宪皇太后、孝明孝惠孝章淑德皇后家子孙，有十九人进升授官。
English: On the seventh day of junior high school, the descendants of Empress Dowager Shoken, Xiao Ming, Xiao Hui, Xiao Zhang and Shu De were recruited. Nineteen people were promoted to higher posts.

古文：癸巳，诏： 台谏为耳目之官，乃听险陂之人兴造飞语，中伤善良，非忠孝之行也。
现代文：十二日，下诏： 台谏为皇帝耳目之官，听从心怀恶意的小人造谤飞语，中伤善良，不是忠孝的表现。
English: On the twelfth day of the month, the following edict was issued: Taisheng is the official of the emperor's ears and eyes, and obeying the malicious small artificial slander, slandering goodness, is not a manifestation of loyalty and filial piety.

古文：中书门下其申儆百工，务敦行实，循而弗改者绌之。 
现代文：中书门下省要警告百工，务必实事求是，因袭旧弊不改者罢除不用。 
English: The Ministry of Education and Culture should warn hundreds of workers to seek truth from facts, and those who do not change due to the old evils should be dismissed.

古文：八月乙亥，策制举人。
现代文：八月二十五日，策试制举人。
English: On August 25th, people were selected through a selection process.

古文：丁丑，诏： 诸路刺举之官，未有以考其贤否，比令有司详定厥制，其各务祗新书，以称朕意。
现代文：二十七日，下诏： 各路荐举之官，没有考察所推举的人是否贤能，近来命令有关部门详细制定条例，各位官员务必按照新制办事，以符合肤的意愿。
English: On the 27th day of the month, the following edict was issued: The officials who recommended and promoted people from all walks of life did not examine whether the people they recommended were capable. Recently, they ordered the relevant departments to formulate detailed regulations. All officials must act in accordance with the new system in order to meet their own wishes.

古文：仍令考校转运、提刑，课绩院以新定条目施行。 
现代文：并且命令考校转运使、提刑课绩院按新制定条例施行。 
English: Moreover, it ordered the examination school transfer agent and the performance school to implement the newly formulated regulations.

古文：戊寅，诏州县长吏有清白不扰而实惠及民者，令本路监司保荐再任，政迹尤异，当加奖擢。
现代文：二十八日，下诏：清白正直、不骚扰百姓而向百姓施行实惠的州县官员，命令本路监司保荐连任，政绩尤其突出的，应当加以奖赏和升迁。
English: On the 28th, the following edict was issued: State and county officials who are clean and honest, do not harass the people, and provide benefits to the people, are ordered to be recommended for re-election by the supervisor of this road, and if their performance is particularly outstanding, they should be rewarded and promoted.

古文：闰月乙酉，复以成都府为剑南西川节度。
现代文：闰八月初五，又以成都府为剑南西川节度。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th lunar month, Chengdu was chosen as the location for the Jian'nan Xichuan Festival.

古文：庚子，以韩琦为昭文馆大学士，曾公亮同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士，张昪为枢密使。
现代文：二十日，任命韩琦为昭文馆大学士，曾公亮为同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士，张异为枢密使。
English: On the 20th, Han Kuo was appointed as a scholar of the Shouwen Academy, Zeng Gongliang was appointed as a scholar of the Shuhei Academy, and Zhang Yi was appointed as a Privy Counsellor.

古文：辛丑，以胡宿为枢密副使。
现代文：二十一日，任命胡宿为枢密副使。
English: On the 21st, Hu Shuku was appointed as the vice-minister of the privy council.

古文：冬十月壬午，定内侍磨勘法。
现代文：冬十月初三，制定内侍磨勘法。
English: On the third day of the first month of October in winter, the Naishi-mura method was established.

古文：丙戌，诏京西、淮、浙、荆湖增置都同巡检。
现代文：初七，下诏京西、淮、浙、荆湖增置都同巡检。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the following provinces of West Beijing, Huai, Zhejiang, and Jinghu were all added with the same inspection.

古文：壬辰，起复皇侄、前右卫大将军、岳州团练使宗实为泰州防御使、知宗正寺。
现代文：十三日，起用皇侄、前右卫大将军、岳州团练使赵宗实为泰州防御使，知宗正寺。
English: On the 13th, Zhao Zongshi, the emperor's nephew, former right guard general and Yuezhou regimental drill instructor, was appointed as the defense envoy of Taizhou, and Zhizongzheng Temple.

古文：辞以丧，不拜。
现代文：以服丧推辞没有就职。
English: He did not take up his post after resigning in mourning.

古文：十一月己巳，许夏国用汉衣冠。
现代文：十一月二十日，允许夏国采用汉族衣冠。
English: On November 20th, Xia Guo was allowed to wear Han clothing.

古文：癸酉，赐昭宪皇太后家信陵坊第。
现代文：二十四日，赐昭宪皇太后家信陵坊府宅。
English: On the 24th, the residence of Empress Dowager Jiaxin Mausoleum was granted to Empress Dowager Jiaxin.

古文：戊寅，许康州刺史李枢以己官封赠父母。
现代文：二十九日，允许康州刺史李枢用自己的官封赠父母。
English: On the 29th, he allowed Kangzhou Zishi Li Zu to present his parents with his official seal.

古文：十二月丙戌，复丰州。
现代文：十二月初七，收复丰州。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month, Fengzhou was recaptured.

古文：庚寅，命诸路总管集随军功过簿，以备迁补。
现代文：十一日，命令各路总管集随军功过簿，作为迁补官职的依据。
English: On the 11th, it ordered the chief administrators of various provinces to follow the military service record book, as a basis for reshuffling officials.

古文：是岁，冬无冰。
现代文：这一年，冬季没有结冰。
English: This year, there was no ice in the winter.

古文：占城国献驯象，安化州蛮来贡。
现代文：占城国进贡驯象。安化州蛮来进贡。
English: Zhancheng pays tribute to train elephants. Anhua is the first to pay tribute.

古文：七年春正月辛未，复命皇侄宗实为泰州防御使、知宗正寺。
现代文：嘉七年春正月二十三日，又命令皇侄赵宗实为仄州防御史，知宗正寺。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the spring of the seventh year of the Jia Dynasty, he also ordered the emperor's nephew Zhao Zongshi to write a history of the defense of Zhengzhou and to rebuild Zhizongzheng Temple.

古文：乙亥，诏南郊以太祖配为定制。
现代文：二十七日，下诏南郊祭祀配以太祖作为定制。
English: On the 27th, the Southern Suburbs Festival was added as a customization.

古文：改温成皇后庙为祠殿。
现代文：改温成皇后庙为祠殿。
English: It was converted into a temple for the empress.

古文：二月己卯朔，更江西盐法。
现代文：二月初一，改江西盐法。
English: On the first day of February, the Jiangxi Salt Law was amended.

古文：诏开封府市地于四郊，给钱瘗民之不能葬者。
现代文：下诏开封府在四郊买地，给钱掩埋不能下葬的百姓。
English: Under the edict, the government of Kaifeng bought land in the four suburbs and paid to bury the people who could not be buried.

古文：癸未，录系囚，命官录被水诸州系囚。
现代文：初五，讯问记录囚犯罪状，命令官员讯问记录遭受水灾各州的囚犯罪状。
English: On the fifth day of the month, he ordered officials to interrogate the records of prisoners in flood-hit states.

古文：三月辛亥，诏礼部贡举。
现代文：三月初四，下诏礼部贡举。
English: On the fourth day of the third month of the year, the tribute of the Imperial Regalia Department will begin.

古文：乙卯，孙抃罢，以赵概参知政事，吴奎为枢密副使。
现代文：初八，孙打被罢免，任命赵概为参知政事，吴奎为枢密副使。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Sun Du was removed from office, and Zhao You was appointed to the post of Councillor of State, and Wu Kui was appointed to the post of Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：甲子，以旱，罢大宴。
现代文：十七日，因早灾罢除大宴。
English: On the 17th, due to an early disaster, the grand banquet was cancelled.

古文：乙丑，祈雨于西太一宫。
现代文：十八日，在西太一宫祈祷降雨。
English: On the 18th, I prayed for rain in the West Taichung Palace.

古文：庚午，谢雨。
现代文：二十三日，谢降雨。
English: On the 23rd, thanks to the rain.

古文：壬申，徐州彭城、濠州钟离地生面十余顷，民皆取食。
现代文：二十五日，徐州彭城、壕州钟离地生面十余顷，百姓都采集来当食物。
English: On the 25th, more than ten hectares of crops were grown in Pengcheng, Xuzhou, and Zhongli, Hezhou, and the people gathered the crops to use as food.

古文：夏四月壬午，颁《嘉祐编敕》。
现代文：夏四月初五，颁布嚎编救。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the summer, it was promulgated that 编救.

古文：己丑，夏国主谅祚进马，求赐书，诏赐《九经》，还其马。
现代文：十二日，夏国主谅柞进马请求赐书，下诏赐给仇经，还其马。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Xia Guozhong pardoned the horse and asked for a letter, and then issued an edict to return the horse.

古文：五月戊午，太白昼见。
现代文：五月十二日，太白星白天出现。
English: On May 12, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：庚午，包拯卒。
现代文：二十四日，包拯去世。
English: Bao Zheng passed away on the 24th.

古文：六月丙子朔，岁星昼见。
现代文：六月初一，岁星白天出现。
English: On the first day of June, the year star appears in the daytime.

古文：秋七月戊申，太白经天。
现代文：秋七月初三，太白星历经一天才消失。
English: On the third day of the seventh month of autumn, Taibai Star disappeared after one day.

古文：壬子，诏季秋有事于明堂。
现代文：初七，下诏秋季的最后一个月在明堂举行祭祀。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the last month of autumn, a ritual is held in Myodo.

古文：八月乙亥朔，出明堂乐章，肄于太常。
现代文：八月初一，出明堂乐章，在太常寺练习。
English: On the first day of August, I went to the Seimei-do Hall to practice the movements at the Taijoji Temple.

古文：己卯，诏以宗实为皇子。
现代文：初五，下诏以赵宗实为皇子。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the imperial edict was issued naming Zhao Zonshi as the prince.

古文：癸未，赐名曙。
现代文：初九，赐名曙。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, the dawn of a new year.

古文：丁亥，奉安真宗御容于寿星观。
现代文：十三日，恭敬安置真宗遗像于寿星观。
English: On the 13th, the relic of the True Sect was respectfully placed in the Shou Xing Guan.

古文：庚子，以立皇子告天地宗庙诸陵。
现代文：二十六日，以立皇子告天地宗庙各陵。
English: On the 26th, Prince Eryaku announced the relocation of the tombs of the Imperial Family to the Imperial Family Mausoleum.

古文：九月乙巳朔，以皇子为齐州防御使，进封钜鹿郡公。
现代文：九月初一，任命皇子为齐州防御使，封为巨鹿郡公。
English: On the first day of September, the prince was appointed as the defense envoy of Qizhou and was named the Duke of Juya County.

古文：己酉，朝飨景灵宫。
现代文：初五，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, a ritual is held at the Jingling Palace.

古文：庚戌，飨太庙。
现代文：初六，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the junior high school year, a ritual is held at Taimyo.

古文：辛亥，大飨明堂，奉真宗配，大赦。
现代文：初七，大享明堂，奉真宗配，大赦。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of the new year, there will be a large celebration, a memorial service, and a general amnesty.

古文：己未，加恩百官。
现代文：十五日，加恩百官。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Gahn was promoted to centurion.

古文：冬十月乙亥，皇子表辞所除官，赐诏不允。
现代文：冬十月初二，皇子上表辞所授官，仁宗赐给诏书没有答应。
English: On the second day of the second month of October in the winter, the Emperor conferred the post, but the Emperor did not agree to the Imperial Rescript.

古文：丙戌，白虹贯日。
现代文：十三日，白虹遮蔽日光。
English: On the 14th, a white rainbow appeared in the sky.

古文：乙未，太白昼见。
现代文：二十二日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 22nd, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：丙申，诏内藏库、三司共出缗钱一百万，助籴天下常平仓。
现代文：二十三日，下诏内藏库、三司共同拿出一百万络，帮助来买全国常平仓粮粟。
English: On the 23rd, the Lower Dazhao Inner Repository and the Three Departments jointly took out one million rupees to help buy grain from grain silos across the country.

古文：十二月甲午，德妃沈氏为贵妃，贤妃苗氏为德妃。
现代文：十二月二十一日，以德妃沈氏为贵妃，贤妃苗氏为德妃。
English: On December 21st, with Defei Shen as the noble consort, and Xianfei Miao as Defei.

古文：丙申，幸龙图、天章阁，召群臣宗室观祖宗御书。
现代文：二十三日，到龙图阁、天章阁，召大臣宗室观赏祖宗御书。
English: On the 23rd, they went to Longtu Pavilion and Tianzhang Pavilion, and called the minister to the ancestral room to watch the ancestral book.

古文：又幸宝文阁，为飞白书，分赐从臣。
现代文：又到宝文阁，撰飞白体书法分别赐给从臣。
English: He also went to Baowenge, and separately gave a copy of the white-letter calligraphy to a subordinate.

古文：作《观书诗》，命韩琦等属和，遂宴群玉殿。
现代文：做砚书诗，命令韩琦等唱和，于是宴饮群玉殿。
English: He wrote a poem, ordered Han Xuan and others to sing it, and then held a banquet at the Great Hall of the People.

古文：庚子，再召从臣于天章阁观瑞物，复宴群玉殿。
现代文：二十七日，又召从臣到天章阁观赏瑞物，又宴饮群玉殿。
English: On the 27th, he also summoned his vassals to Tenjokaku to view the treasures and feast at Gunidama-den.

古文：是岁，冬无冰。
现代文：这一年，冬季没有结冰。
English: This year, there was no ice in the winter.

古文：占城来贡。
现代文：占城来进贡。
English: Zhancheng came to pay tribute.

古文：八年春正月辛亥，交阯贡驯象九。
现代文：嘉八年春正月初九，交趾进贡九头驯象。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 8th year of the auspicious lunar calendar, nine tame elephants were brought as a tribute.

古文：二月癸未，帝不豫。
现代文：二月十一日，仁宗身体不适。
English: On February 11, Nizong became unwell.

古文：甲申，下德音：减天下囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：十二日，颁布德音，减全国囚犯罪刑一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 12th, the Deyin was promulgated, reducing the first-class criminal punishment of prisoners across the country, and releasing those with a prison sentence or less.

古文：丙戌，中书、枢密奏事于福宁殿之西阁。
现代文：十四日，中书省、枢密院到福宁殿西阅奏事。
English: On the 14th, the Chinese Ministry of Literature and the Privy Council went to the west of the Fu Ning Palace to read the report.

古文：三月戊申，庞籍薨。
现代文：三月初六，庞籍去世。
English: On March 6, Pang died.

古文：癸亥，御内东门幄殿，优赐诸军缗钱。
现代文：二十一日，仁宗到内东门临时宫殿，优赐各军络钱。
English: On the twenty-first day, Rinzong went to the temporary palace of the Inner East Gate and gave each army money.

古文：甲子，御延和殿，赐进士、诸科及第同出身三百四十一人。
现代文：二十二日，到延和殿，赐进士、各科及第同出身三百四十一人。
English: On the twenty-second day, he went to Yanhe Hall and gave awards to three hundred and forty-one cadets, cadets of various disciplines, and cadets of the same origin.

古文：辛未，帝崩于福宁殿，遗制皇子即皇帝位，皇后为皇太后，丧服以日易月，山陵制度务从俭约。
现代文：二十九日，仁宗在福宁殿逝世，遗诏皇太子即皇帝位，皇后为皇太后，服丧以日当月，山陵制度务必节俭。
English: On the 29th, Rinzong passed away at the Funing Palace. His will decreed that the crown prince would be the emperor and the empress would be the empress dowager. The day of the funeral was the same month, and the tomb system must be frugal.

古文：谥曰神文圣武明孝皇帝，庙号仁宗。
现代文：溢号为神文圣武明孝皇帝，庙号仁宗。
English: His posthumous name was Shenwen Shenwu Mingxiao Emperor, and his temple name was Renzong.

古文：十月甲午，葬永昭陵。
现代文：十月二十七日，葬于永昭陵。
English: He was buried in Yongshao Mausoleum on October 27.

古文：赞曰：仁宗恭俭仁恕，出于天性，一遇水旱，或密祷禁庭，或跣立殿下。
现代文：评论说：仁宗谦恭、节俭、仁慈、宽厚，这是出于天性，一遇到水早灾害，或者在宫中秘密祈祷，或赤脚站在大殿下面。
English: Comment: Rinzong is humble, frugal, benevolent, and generous, which is due to nature. In the event of a sudden disaster, he would secretly pray in the palace, or stand barefoot under the main hall.

古文：有司请以玉清旧地为御苑，帝曰： 吾奉先帝苑囿，犹以为广，何以是为？ 燕私常服浣濯，帷帟衾裯，多用缯絁。
现代文：有关部门请求把玉清昭应宫旧地开辟为御花园，皇上说： 我承奉先帝的苑囿，还认为太广大了，还要这个干什么了家宴上常穿一再浆洗过的衣服，床帐被褥，多用粗绸做成。
English: The relevant departments requested that the former site of the Jade Emperor's palace be developed into a royal garden. The emperor said, "I inherited the former emperor's garden, but I still think it's too vast. Why do I want this? At family banquets, I often wear clothes that have been washed with starch, and the bedspread is made of coarse silk.

古文：宫中夜饥，思膳烧羊，戒勿宣索，恐膳夫自此戕贼物命，以备不时之须。
现代文：在宫中夜里饿了，想吃烤羊肉，告诫左右不要向御厨索要，恐怕厨夫从此滥杀生灵，来准备随时需求。
English: Hungry in the middle of the night in the palace, he wanted to eat roast lamb, and warned everyone not to ask for it from the chef. I'm afraid the chef has been killing creatures indiscriminately ever since, to prepare the demand at any time.

古文：大辟疑者，皆令上谳，岁常活千余。
现代文：判死刑尚有疑问的罪犯，都要命令重审复核，每年可使千余名死刑犯活下来。
English: Criminals whose death sentences are still in doubt must be ordered to be retried and reviewed, which can save the lives of more than a thousand death-row prisoners every year.

古文：吏部选人，一坐失入死罪，皆终身不迁。
现代文：吏部选拔人才，一旦错判致人死罪的官吏，都一辈子得不到升迁。
English: The cadre department selects talent, and once a cadre is wrongly sentenced to death, they will not be promoted for the rest of their lives.

古文：每谕辅臣曰： 朕未尝詈人以死，况敢滥用辟乎！ 
现代文：仁宗皇帝经常对近臣们说： 肤从来没有用死字骂过人，怎么敢滥用死刑呢了
English: Emperor Nenzong often said to his courtiers, "I have never cursed anyone with deadly words, how dare I abuse the death penalty

古文：至于夏人犯边，御之出境；契丹渝盟，增以岁币。
现代文：到了西夏侵犯边疆，就把他们赶出国境；契丹背弃盟约，就增加岁币。
English: When the Western Xia invaded the frontier, they drove them out of the country; when the Khitan reneged on the treaty, they increased the annual tribute.

古文：在位四十二年之间，吏治若偷惰，而任事蔑残刻之人；刑法似纵弛，而决狱多平允之士。
现代文：在位四十二年之间，吏治好像苟且怠惰，但任用官员蔑视残暴苛刻的小人；刑法好像放纵松弛，但判案官员多是公正平允的人。
English: During the forty-two years of his reign, the government seemed to be rigid and lazy, but the appointed officials despised the cruel and harsh villains; the criminal law seemed to be indulgent and slack, but the adjudicating officials were mostly fair and even-tempered people.

古文：国未尝无弊幸，而不足以累治世之体；朝未尝无小人，而不足以胜善类之气。
现代文：国家不是没有弊端，然而不足以牵累治世的国体；朝廷不是没有小人，然而远不足以压倒善良忠厚之人的正气。
English: The state is not without its drawbacks, but they are not enough to drag down the national body that governs the world; the imperial court is not without villains, but they are far from enough to overwhelm the righteous spirit of good and loyal people.

古文：君臣上下恻怛之心，忠厚之政，有以培壅宋三百余年之基。
现代文：君臣上下同情怜悯老百姓的心情，忠诚厚道的为政原则，可以说对培养宋王朝三百多年的根基起了作用。
English: It can be said that the sympathy and pity of the common people, the principles of loyalty and benevolence, played a role in cultivating the foundation of the Song Dynasty for more than 300 years.

古文：子孙一矫其所为，驯致于乱。
现代文：后代子孙一旦改变这种治国方法，天下就趋于混乱了。
English: As soon as future generations change this method of governing the country, the world will become chaotic.

古文：《传》曰： 为人君，止于仁。 
现代文：《大学》说： 做国君的做到一个仁字就可以了。 
English: "Daigaku" said: If you want to be a ruler, you only need to be a benevolent character.

古文：帝诚无愧焉。
现代文：仁宗皇帝真是当之无愧啊！
English: Emperor Nenzong really deserves it!

