古文：三十有二年春，王正月，公在乾侯。
现代文：三十二年春季，周历正月，昭公在乾侯。
English: In the spring of the 32nd year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Shoko was in the dry.

古文：取阚。
现代文：鲁国占取了阚地。
English: The Rus' took over the country.

古文：夏，吴伐越。
现代文：夏季，吴国攻打越国。
English: In summer, Wu attacked Yue.

古文：秋，七月。
现代文：秋季，七月，无事。
English: Autumn in July.

古文：冬，仲孙何忌会晋韩不信、齐高张、宋仲幾、卫世叔申、郑国参、曹人、莒人、薛人、杞人、小邾人，城成周。
现代文：冬季，仲孙何忌与晋国的韩不信、齐国的高张、宋国的仲幾、卫国的世叔申、郑国的国参、曹人、莒人、薛人、杞人、小邾人一起修筑成周的城墙。
English: In winter, Zhongsun He Boi, together with Han Kui of Jin, Gao Zhang of Qi, Zhong Qi of Song, Shishu Shen of Wei, Guo Zhan of Zheng, Cao Ren, Yao Ren, Xue Ren, Yao Ren and Xiao Yao Ren, built the city wall of Zhou.

古文：十有二月己未，公薨于乾侯。
现代文：十二月己未日，昭公在乾侯去世。
English: On the last day of December, Akihiro passed away in Sukhothai.

古文：三十二年春，王正月，公在乾侯。言不能外内，又不能用其人也。
现代文：三十二年春季，周王朝历法的正月，鲁昭公在乾侯，这是说他既不能去国外，也不能去国内，又不能使用他手下的人才。
English: In the spring of the 32nd year, the first month of the Zhou dynasty calendar, Lu Zhaogong was in a dry spell, which meant that he could neither go abroad nor go to the country, nor could he use the talents of his staff.

古文：夏，吴伐越，始用师于越也。
现代文：夏季，吴国进攻越国，这是开始对越国用兵。
English: In summer, the State of Wu attacked the State of Yue, which was the beginning of the use of troops against the State of Yue.

古文：史墨曰： 不及四十年，越其有吴乎。
现代文：史墨说： 不到四十年，越国大概要占有吴国吧！
English: Shi Mo said: In less than forty years, Yue State will probably occupy Wu State!

古文：越得岁而吴伐之，必受其凶。 
现代文：越国得到岁星的照临而吴国进攻它，必然受到岁星降下的灾祸。 
English: Yue Province was visited by the Year Star, and Wu Province attacked it. It was bound to suffer the calamity brought by the Year Star.

古文：秋八月，王使富辛与石张如晋，请城成周。
现代文：秋季，八月，周敬王派富辛和石张到晋国去，请求增筑成周的城墙。
English: In the autumn, in August, King Zhou Jing sent Fuxing and Shi Zhang to Jin Province to request the construction of additional city walls.

古文：天子曰： 天降祸于周，俾我兄弟并有乱心，以为伯父忧。
现代文：天子说： 上天给周朝降下灾祸，使我的兄弟都发生乱心，以此成为伯父的忧虑。
English: Tian Zi said, "God sent a calamity to the Zhou Dynasty, causing my brothers to be distraught, which became my uncle's worry.

古文：我一二亲昵甥舅，不皇启处，于今十年，勤戍五年。
现代文：我几个亲近的甥舅之国也不得休息，到现在已经十年。诸侯派兵来戍守也已经五年。
English: The countries of several of my close nephews have not been able to rest, and it's been ten years now. It's also been five years since the feudal lords sent soldiers to defend them.

古文：余一人无日忘之，闵闵焉如农夫之望岁，惧以待时。
现代文：我本人没有一天忘记这个，忧心忡忡地好像农夫的盼望丰收一样，提心吊胆等待收割时候到来。
English: I myself have not forgotten this for a single day, anxiously waiting for the harvest to come, like a farmer hoping for a good harvest.

古文：伯父若肆大惠，复二文之业，弛周室之忧，徼文、武之福，以固盟主，宣昭令名，则余一人有大愿矣。
现代文：伯父如果施放大恩，重建文侯、文公的功业，缓解周室的忧患，向文王、武王求取福佑，以巩固盟主的地位，宣扬美名，这就是我本人很大的愿望了。
English: It is my great hope that my uncle will show great kindness, rebuild the exploits of the princes Wen and Wengong, alleviate the worries of the Zhou family, seek blessings from King Wen and King Wu, consolidate the status of the allies, and promote the reputation.

古文：昔成王合诸侯，城成周，以为东都，崇文德焉。
现代文：从前成王会合诸侯在成周筑城，以作为东都，尊崇文治。
English: In the past, the lords of the Chengwang Association built a city in Chengzhou to serve as the eastern capital, and revered Bunji.

古文：今我欲徼福假灵于成王，修成周之城，俾戍人无勤，诸侯用宁，蝥贼远屏，晋之力也。
现代文：现在我想要向成王求取福佑，增修成周的城墙，使戍守的兵士不再辛劳，诸侯得以安宁，把坏人放逐到远方，这都是晋国的力量。
English: Now I want to seek blessings from King Jung, build more city walls, so that the soldiers no longer have to work hard, the lords can have peace, and the bad people can be banished to far away places. These are the power of Jin.

古文：其委诸伯父，使伯父实重图之。俾我一人无征怨于百姓，而伯父有荣施，先王庸之。 
现代文：谨将这件事委托给伯父，让伯父重新考虑，以使我本人不致于在百姓中召致怨恨，而伯父有了光荣的功绩，先王会酬谢伯父的。 
English: I would like to entrust this matter to my uncle and ask him to reconsider it, so that I myself do not cause resentment among the people, and my uncle has a glorious achievement, and the former king will reward my uncle.

古文：范献子谓魏献子曰： 与其戍周，不如城之，天子实云。
现代文：范献子对魏献子说： 与其在成周戍守，不如增筑那里的城墙。
English: Fan Xianzi said to Wei Xianzi, "Instead of staying in Chengzhou, it is better to build more walls there."

古文：虽有后事，晋勿与知可也。
现代文：天子已经说了话，即使以后有事，晋国可以不参加。
English: God has spoken, and even if something happens in the future, Jin Guo can choose not to participate.

古文：从王命以纾诸侯，晋国无忧。
现代文：服从天子的命令，使诸侯缓一口气，晋国就没有忧患了。
English: Obey the order of the heavenly son, make the lords breathe a sigh of relief, and there will be no sorrow in Jin.

古文：是之不务，而又焉从事？ 魏献子曰： 善。 
现代文：不致力去做这件事，又去从事什么？ 魏献子说： 好。 
English: If you don't work hard to do this, what will you do? Wei Xianzi said: Good.

古文：使伯音对曰： 天子有命，敢不奉承，以奔告于诸侯。
现代文：派伯音回答说： 天子有命令，岂敢不承奉而奔走报告诸侯，工作的进度和工程量的分配，听周天子的命令。 
English: Paiboyin replied: The Son of Heaven has an order, how dare he not obey and run to report to the lords, the progress of the work and the distribution of the amount of work, and listen to the order of Zhou Tianzi.

古文：迟速衰序，于是焉在。 冬十一月，晋魏舒、韩不信如京师，合诸侯之大夫于狄泉，寻盟，且令城成周。
现代文：冬季，十一月，晋国的魏舒、韩不信到京师，在狄泉会合诸侯的大夫，重温过去的盟约，而且命令增筑成周的城墙。
English: In the winter, in November, Wei Shu and Han Kuo of Jin came to Beijing to study, and met with the doctors of the princes in Diquan, revisited the past covenant, and ordered the construction of additional city walls.

古文：魏子南面。卫彪傒曰： 魏子必有大咎，干位以令大事，非其任也。
现代文：魏舒面朝南，卫国的彪傒说： 魏子一定要有大灾难。逾越本分而颁布重大的命令，这不是他能承担得了的。
English: Wei Shu faced south, and the defender of the country, Biao Zang, said: Wei Zi must have a great disaster. It is not possible for him to take on the responsibility of overstepping his duty and issuing a major order.

古文：《诗》曰： 敬天之怒，不敢戏豫。
现代文：《诗》说， 恭敬地对待上天的怒气，不敢轻慢。
English: "Poetry" says, "Respectfully treat the wrath of heaven, and do not dare to be contemptuous."

古文：敬天之渝，不敢驰驱。 况敢干位以作大事乎？ 
现代文：恭敬地对待上天的变异，不敢任意放纵 ，何况敢逾越本分而去做大事呢？ 
English: Respectfully treat God's variation, do not dare to indulge arbitrarily, let alone dare to exceed the duty and do great things?

古文：己丑，士弥牟营成周，计丈数，揣高卑，度厚薄，仞沟洫，物土方，议远迩，量事期，计徒庸，虑材用，书餱粮，以令役于诸侯，属役赋丈，书以授帅，而效诸刘子。
现代文：十四日，士弥牟为成周城墙的工程设计方案，计算长度，估计高低，度量厚薄，计算沟渠的深度，考察用土的数量，商计运输的远近，预算完工的日期，计算人工，考虑器材，记载所需要的粮食，以命令诸侯服役。按照情况分配劳役和工程地段，记下来交给诸侯大夫，而归总交到刘子那里。
English: On the 14th, Shimao came up with the engineering design plan for the city wall, calculated the length, estimated the height, measured the thickness, calculated the depth of the trench, examined the amount of soil, calculated the distance of transportation, estimated the date of completion, calculated the labor, considered the equipment, recorded the required grain, and ordered the lords to serve. According to the situation, the labor and the project section were allocated, and the record was handed over to the lord doctor, and the total was handed over to Liu Zi.

古文：韩简子临之，以为成命。
现代文：韩简子监工，以此作为既定方案。
English: Han Jian Zi supervises the work, and this is taken as the established plan.

古文：十二月，公疾，徧赐大夫，大夫不受。
现代文：十二月，鲁昭公生病了，把东西普遍赏赐给大夫们，大夫们不接受。
English: In December, Lu Zhaogong fell ill and generously gave gifts to the doctors, but they did not accept them.

古文：赐子家子双琥，一环，一璧，轻服，受之。
现代文：赏赐给子家子一对玉虎、一只玉环、一块玉璧、又轻又好的衣服，子家子接受了。
English: A pair of jade tigers, a jade ring, a piece of jade, light and good clothes were given to the children, and the children accepted.

古文：大夫皆受其赐。
现代文：大夫们也都接受了赏赐。
English: The doctors also received a reward.

古文：己未，公薨。子家子反赐于府人，曰： 吾不敢逆君命也。 
现代文：十四日，昭公死了，子家子把赏赐给他的东西还给管理府库的人，说： 我之所以接受是不敢违背国君的命令。 
English: On the 14th day, Shoko died, and his son returned the reward to the person in charge of the treasury, saying, "I accepted it because I did not dare to disobey the sovereign's order."

古文：大夫皆反其赐。
现代文：大夫们也都归还了赏赐的东西。
English: The doctors also returned what they had been given.

古文：书曰： 公薨于乾侯。 
现代文：《春秋》记载说 公薨于乾侯 ，这是说他死的不是地方。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that Gongjun died in Qianhou, which means that this was not the place where he died.

古文：言失其所也。赵简子问于史墨曰： 季氏出其君，而民服焉，诸侯与之，君死于外，而莫之或罪也。 
现代文：赵简子问史墨说： 季氏赶走他的国君而百姓顺服他，诸侯亲附他，国君死在外边而没有人去惩罚他，这是为什么？ 
English: Zhao Jianzi asked Shi Mo, "The Ji clan drove away his sovereign, but the people obeyed him, the princes followed him, and the sovereign died outside, but no one punished him. Why is this?

古文：对曰： 物生有两，有三，有五，有陪贰。
现代文：史墨回答说： 事物的存在有的成双、有的成三、有的成五、有的有辅佐。
English: Shi Mo replied: Some things exist in pairs, some in threes, some in fives, and some have assistants.

古文：故天有三辰，地有五行，体有左右，各有妃耦。王有公，诸侯有卿，皆有贰也。
现代文：所以天有三辰，地有五行，身体有左右，各有配偶，王有公，诸侯有卿，都是有辅助的。
English: Therefore, the sky has three hours, the earth has five lines, the body has left and right, each has a spouse, the king has a prince, the princes have a nobleman, all are assisted.

古文：天生季氏，以贰鲁侯，为日久矣。
现代文：上天生了季氏，让他辅佐鲁侯，时间已经很久了。
English: It's been a long time since God gave birth to Ji Ji and made him the second-in-command to Zaloo.

古文：民之服焉，不亦宜乎？
现代文：百姓顺服他，不也是很合适吗？
English: Wouldn't it be fitting for the people to obey him?

古文：鲁君世从其失，季氏世修其勤，民忘君矣。
现代文：鲁国的国君世世代代放纵安逸，季氏世世代代勤勤恳恳，百姓已经忘记他们的国君了。
English: The kings of Lu have been indulgent and comfortable for generations, and the Ji have been diligent and earnest for generations. The people have forgotten their kings.

古文：虽死于外，其谁矜之？
现代文：即使死在国外，有谁去怜惜他？
English: Even if he dies abroad, who will take pity on him?

古文：社稷无常奉，君臣无常位，自古以然。
现代文：社稷没有固定的祭祀人，君臣没有固定不变的地位，自古以来就是这样。
English: There is no fixed sacrificial person in the society, and there is no fixed and unchanging position of monarchs and ministers. This has been the case since ancient times.

古文：故《诗》曰： 高岸为穀，深穀为陵。 
现代文：所以《诗》说： 高高的堤岸变成深谷，深深的谷地变成山陵。 
English: Therefore, the "Poem" says: The high embankment becomes a deep valley, and the deep valley becomes a mountain.

古文：三后之姓，于今为庶，主所知也。
现代文：三王的子孙在今天成了平民，这是主人所知道的。
English: The descendants of the three kings have become commoners today, as the owner knows.

古文：在《易》卦，雷乘《乾》曰《大壮》，天之道也。
现代文：在《易》的卦像上，代表雷的《震》卦在《乾》卦之上，叫做《大壮》，这是上天的常道。
English: In the image of "Yi," the "shock" representing thunder is above the "dry" and is called "big," which is the usual way of heaven.

古文：昔成季友，桓之季也，文姜之爱子也，始震而卜，卜人谒之，曰： 生有嘉闻，其名曰友，为公室辅。 
现代文：以前的成季友，是桓公的小儿子，文姜所宠爱的儿子。刚刚怀孕就占卜，卜人报告说： 生下来就有好名声，他的名字叫友，成为公室的辅佐。 
English: In the past, Cheng Ji You was the youngest son of Prince Huan and the favorite son of Wen Jiang. She divined when she was just pregnant, and the diviner reported: He was born with a good reputation. His name was You, and he became an assistant in the office.

古文：及生，如卜人之言，有文在其手曰 友 ，遂以名之。
现代文：等到生出来，和卜人所说的一样，在左手掌上有个 友 字，就以此命名。
English: When it was born, it had a "friend" on its left palm, just like the Bo people said, so they named it after that.

古文：既而有大功于鲁，受费以为上卿。
现代文：后来在鲁国立下大功，受封在费地而做了上卿。
English: Later, he made a great contribution to the State of Lu and was awarded the title of Fei Di and became a Shangnian.

古文：至于文子、武子，世增其业，不废旧绩。
现代文：一直到文子、武子，世世代代增加家业，不废弃过去的功业。
English: All the way down to Fumiko and Takeshi, they have increased their family business over the generations, never abandoning their past achievements.

古文：鲁文公薨，而东门遂杀適立庶，鲁君于是乎失国，政在季氏，于此君也四公矣。
现代文：鲁文公去世，东门遂杀死嫡子，立了庶子，鲁国国君在这时就失掉了国政，政权落到了季氏手中，到这一位国君已经是第四代了。
English: Lu Wen Gong died, Dongmen then killed his legitimate son Cang and set up an illegitimate son. Lu Guo Guo Guo lost national politics at this time, and the power fell into the hands of the Ji clan. This ruler is already the fourth generation.

古文：民不知君，何以得国？
现代文：百姓不知道有国君，凭什么得到国政？
English: The people don't know that there is a sovereign, so how do they get national politics?

古文：是以为君，慎器与名，不可以假人。 
现代文：因此做国君的要谨慎地对待器物和名位，不可能随便拿来借给别人。
English: Therefore, as a sovereign, you should be careful with your belongings and prestige, and you cannot just lend them to others.

