古文：太史公曰：余读孟子书，至梁惠王问 何以利吾国 ，未尝不废书而叹也。
现代文：太史公说： 我读《孟子》，每当读到梁惠王问 怎样使我国获利 时，总不免放下书本而有所感叹。
English: Taishikong said, "I read "Mencius," and whenever I read that Liang Hui Wang asked how to make our country profitable, I cannot help but put down the book and sigh.

古文：曰：嗟乎，利诚乱之始也！
现代文：说：唉，谋利真是一切祸乱的开始呀！
English: "Alas," he said, "profit is the beginning of all evils.

古文：夫子罕言利者，常防其原也。
现代文：孔子极少讲关于利的问题，其原因就是想从根本上防备这个祸乱的根源。
English: The reason why Confucius rarely talked about the problem of interest is that he wanted to fundamentally prevent the root cause of this evil.

古文：故曰 放於利而行，多怨 。
现代文：所以他说 依据个人的利益而行动，会招致很多怨恨 。
English: So he says acting on one's own self-interest can lead to a lot of resentment.

古文：自天子至於庶人，好利之弊何以异哉！
现代文：上自天子下至平民，好利的弊病都存在，有什么不同呢？
English: From the gods down to the common people, good and bad all exist, so what's the difference?

古文：孟轲，驺人也。
现代文：孟轲，是邹国人。
English: Meng Wei is a native of Shan State.

古文：受业子思之门人。
现代文：他曾跟着子思的弟子学习。
English: He once studied under a disciple of Zisi.

古文：道既通，游事齐宣王，宣王不能用。
现代文：当他学业精通之后，便去游说齐宣王，齐宣王没有任用他。
English: When he was well-versed in his studies, he went to lobby King Qi Xuan, who did not appoint him.

古文：適梁，梁惠王不果所言，则见以为迂远而阔於事情。
现代文：于是到了魏国，梁惠王不但不听信他的主张，反而认为他的主张不切实情，远离实际。
English: So when he came to Wei, Liang Hui Wang not only did not believe his claim, but thought his claim was not realistic and far from reality.

古文：当是之时，秦用商君，富国彊兵；楚、魏用吴起，战胜弱敌；齐威王、宣王用孙子、田忌之徒，而诸侯东面朝齐。
现代文：当时，各诸侯国都在实行变革，秦国任用商鞅，使国家富足，兵力强大；楚国、魏国也都任用过吴起，战胜了一些国家，削弱了强敌；齐威王和宣王举用孙膑和田忌等人，国力强盛，使各诸侯国都东来朝拜齐国。
English: At that time, all the vassal states were carrying out reforms. The Qin state appointed Shang Qi, making the country rich and powerful; the Chu and Wei states also appointed Wu Qi, defeating some countries and weakening strong enemies; the king of Qi Wei and the king of Xuan used Sun Qi and Tian Qi and other people, and the national strength was strong, so that all the vassal states came to the east to worship Qi.

古文：天下方务於合从连衡，以攻伐为贤，而孟轲乃述唐、虞、三代之德，是以所如者不合。
现代文：当各诸侯国正致力于 合纵连横 的攻伐谋略，把能攻善伐看作贤能的时候，孟子却称述唐尧、虞舜以及夏、商、周三代的德政，因此不符合他所周游的那些国家的需要。
English: At a time when all the principalities were devoting themselves to the strategy of attacking the enemy from all directions, and regarded it as a virtue to be able to attack the enemy from all directions, Mencius described the German politics of the Tang, Yu, Xia, Shang and San dynasties, and therefore did not meet the needs of the countries he traveled around.

古文：退而与万章之徒序诗书，述仲尼之意，作孟子七篇。
现代文：于是就回到家乡与万章等人整理《经》《书经》，阐发孔丘的思想学说，写成《孟子》一书，共七篇。
English: So he returned to his hometown with Wanzhang and others to sort out the "Ching" and "Scripture" and expound the thoughts and doctrines of Confucius, writing a book "Mencius," a total of seven articles.

古文：其後有驺子之属。
现代文：在他之后，出现了学者邹子等人。
English: After him, scholars such as Zangzi and others appeared.

古文：齐有三驺子。
现代文：齐国有三个邹子。
English: Qizhou has three reeds.

古文：其前驺忌，以鼓琴干威王，因及国政，封为成侯而受相印，先孟子。
现代文：最早的叫邹忌，他借弹琴的技艺得以求见齐威王，随后便参与了国家政事，封为成侯并接受相印，做了宰相，他生活的时代要早于孟子。
English: The earliest is called Zouqi. He used his skill of playing the piano to gain access to King Qiwei. Later, he participated in national politics, was made a prince and received the seal of the emperor, and became prime minister. He lived in an era earlier than Mencius.

古文：其次驺衍，後孟子。
现代文：第二个叫邹衍，他生活的年代在孟子之后。
English: The second is called Yu Yan, who lived in the years after Mencius.

古文：驺衍睹有国者益淫侈，不能尚德，若大雅整之於身，施及黎庶矣。
现代文：邹衍目睹了那些掌握一国之权的诸侯们越来越荒淫奢侈，不能崇尚德政，不像《诗经·大雅》所要求的那样先整饬自己，再推及到百姓了。
English: Zou Yan witnessed that those princes who hold the power of a country are becoming more and more extravagant and extravagant, unable to advocate moral government, and unlike the requirements of "Shijing · Daya," they first rectify themselves and then push it to the people.

古文：乃深观阴阳消息而作怪迂之变，终始、大圣之篇十馀万言。
现代文：于是就深入观察万物的阴阳消长，记述了怪异玄虚的变化，如《终始》《大圣》等篇共十余万字。
English: As a result, he deeply observed the yin and yang of all things, and described the strange and mysterious changes, such as "The Beginning and the End" and "The Great Sage," totaling more than 100,000 words.

古文：其语闳大不经，必先验小物，推而大之，至於无垠。
现代文：他的话宏大广阔荒诞不合情理，一定要先从细小的事物验证开始，然后推广到大的事物，以至达到无边无际。
English: His words of grandeur, vastness and absurdity are unreasonable, we must first start with the verification of small things, and then extend to large things, so as to achieve boundlessness.

古文：先序今以上至黄帝，学者所共术，大并世盛衰，因载其禨祥度制，推而远之，至天地未生，窈冥不可考而原也。
现代文：他的学说先从当今说起再往前推至学者们所共同谈论的黄帝时代，然后再大体上依着世代的盛衰变化，记载不同世代的凶吉制度，再从黄帝时代往前推到很远很远，直到天地还没有形成的时候，真是深幽玄妙不能稽考而追究它的本源。
English: His theory was first pushed forward from the present day to the era of the Yellow Emperor, which is commonly discussed by scholars. Then, according to the rise and fall of generations, it recorded the evil fortune system of different generations. Then, it was pushed forward from the era of the Yellow Emperor to a very long time, until the heavens and the earth had not yet been formed. It was so profound and mysterious that it was impossible to examine it and investigate its origin.

古文：先列中国名山大川，通谷禽兽，水土所殖，物类所珍，因而推之，及海外人之所不能睹。
现代文：他先列出中国的名山大川，深谷禽兽，水土植被，珍贵物种，并由此推广开去，直到人们根本看不到的海外。
English: He first listed China's famous mountains and rivers, deep-valley animals and beasts, soil and water vegetation, and precious species, and thus promoted it until people could not see it at all overseas.

古文：称引天地剖判以来，五德转移，治各有宜，而符应若兹。
现代文：他称述开天辟地以来，金、木、水、火、土的五种德性相生相克，而历代帝王的更替都正好与它们相配合。
English: He said that since the creation of heaven and earth, the five virtues of gold, wood, water, fire and earth have been in conflict with each other, and the succession of emperors throughout the ages has coincided with them.

古文：以为儒者所谓中国者，於天下乃八十一分居其一分耳。
现代文：天降祥瑞与人事相应就是这样的。他认为儒家所说的中国，只不过是天下的八十一分之一罢了。
English: According to him, what Confucianism calls China is only one-eighty-first part of the world.

古文：中国名曰赤县神州。
现代文：中国称做 赤县神州 。
English: China calls it the Red County of Shenzhou.

古文：赤县神州内自有九州，禹之序九州是也，不得为州数。
现代文：赤县神州之内又有九州，就是夏禹按次序排列的九个州，但不能算是州的全部数目。
English: Within the red counties and the divine states, there is also Kyushu, which is the nine states arranged in order by Xia Yu, but it cannot be counted as the total number of states.

古文：中国外如赤县神州者九，乃所谓九州也。
现代文：在中国之外，像是赤县神州的地方还有九个。这才是所谓的九州了。
English: Outside of China, there are nine other places like Akagata, Shinshu. This is the so-called Kyushu.

古文：於是有裨海环之，人民禽兽莫能相通者，如一区中者，乃为一州。
现代文：在这里都有小海环绕着，人和禽兽不能与其他州相通，像是一个独立的区域，这才算是一州。
English: Here there is a small sea around, people and animals can not communicate with other states, like a separate area, this is a state.

古文：如此者九，乃有大瀛海环其外，天地之际焉。
现代文：像这样的州共有九个，更有大海环在它的外面，那就到了天地的边际了。
English: There are a total of nine states like this, and there is even a sea ring outside it, which is the edge of heaven and earth.

古文：其术皆此类也。
现代文：邹衍的学说都是这一类述说。
English: It is this kind of description that is at the core of Shanyan's theory.

古文：然要其归，必止乎仁义节俭，君臣上下六亲之施，始也滥耳。
现代文：然而，总括它的要领，一定都归结到仁义节俭，并在君臣上下和六亲之间施行，不过开始的述说的确泛滥无节了。
English: However, summarizing its essentials, it must all come down to benevolence, righteousness and thrift, and be implemented between the monarch and the six relatives, but the beginning of the story is really out of order.

古文：王公大人初见其术，惧然顾化，其後不能行之。
现代文：王公大人初见他的学说，感到惊异而引起思考，受到感化想要学习，结果却不能实行。
English: When Mr. Wang first saw his theory, he was surprised and thought about it. He was inspired to study it, but he couldn't put it into practice.

古文：是以驺子重於齐。
现代文：因此，邹衍在齐国受到尊重。
English: Therefore, Gongyan is respected in Qi Province.

古文：適梁，惠王郊迎，执宾主之礼。
现代文：到魏国，梁惠王远接高迎，同他行宾主的礼节。
English: When Liang Hui Wang came to Wei, he received a warm welcome from afar and followed the etiquette of the host.

古文：適赵，平原君侧行撇席。
现代文：到赵国，平原君侧身陪行，亲自为他拂试席位。
English: When he arrived in Zhao, Pingyuan accompanied him and personally whisked him to his seat.

古文：如燕，昭王拥彗先驱，请列弟子之座而受业，筑碣石宫，身亲往师之。作主运。
现代文：到燕国，燕昭王拿着扫帚清除道路为他作先导，并请求坐在弟子的座位上向他学习，还曾为他修建碣石宫，亲自去拜他为老师。他作了《主运》篇。
English: In Yan's country, Yan Zhao Wang took a broom to clear the road for him as a guide, and asked to sit on the seat of the disciple to learn from him. He also built a flint palace for him and personally went to worship him as a teacher. He made the "main move" part.

古文：其游诸侯见尊礼如此，岂与仲尼菜色陈蔡，孟轲困於齐梁同乎哉！
现代文：邹衍周游各国受到如此礼尊，这与孔子陈蔡断粮面有饥色，孟轲在齐、梁遭到困厄，岂能是相同的吗！
English: Qian Yan traveled around the countries and was treated with such courtesy. Could this be the same as Confucius, Chen Cai, starving, Meng Qian in Qi, and Liang in distress?

古文：故武王以仁义伐纣而王，伯夷饿不食周粟；卫灵公问陈，而孔子不答；梁惠王谋欲攻赵，孟轲称大王去邠。
现代文：从前周武王用仁义讨伐殷纣王从而称王天下，伯夷宁肯饿死不吃周朝的粮食；卫灵公问作战方阵，孔子却不予回答；梁惠王想要攻打赵国，孟轲却称颂太王离开邠地的事迹。
English: Once upon a time, King Zhou Wu used benevolence and righteousness to fight against King Yin of the Zhou Dynasty and thus became the king of the world. The Bo Yi preferred to starve to death rather than eat the grain of the Zhou Dynasty; Wei Ling Gong asked about the battle square, but Confucius did not answer; King Liang Hui wanted to attack Zhao Province, but Meng Wei praised the great king's departure from Shantian.

古文：此岂有意阿世俗苟合而已哉！
现代文：这些有名人物的做法，难道是有意迎合世俗讨好人主就算了吗？
English: Are the actions of these famous figures intended to pander to the world and please the good Lord?

古文：持方枘欲内圜凿，其能入乎？
现代文：拿着方榫头却要放入圆榫眼，哪能放得进去呢？
English: If you take a square bun and you want to put a round bun in it, where can you put it?

古文：或曰，伊尹负鼎而勉汤以王，百里奚饭牛车下而缪公用霸，作先合，然後引之大道。
现代文：有人说，伊尹背着鼎去给汤烹饪，却勉励汤行王道，结果汤统一了天下；百里奚在车下喂牛而秦穆公任用了他，因而称霸诸侯。他们的做法都是先投合人主的意愿，然后引导人主走上正大的道路上去。
English: Some people say that Yi Yin went to cook soup with a tripod on his back, but encouraged the soup to follow the king's way, as a result, the soup unified the world; Bai Lijuan fed cattle under the car and Qin Mu Gong appointed him, thus dominating the princes. Their practices are to first meet the wishes of the owner, and then guide the owner on the right road.

古文：驺衍其言虽不轨，傥亦有牛鼎之意乎？
现代文：邹衍的话虽然不合常理常情，或许有伊尹负鼎、百里奚饭牛的意思吧？
English: Although Huan Yan's words do not conform to common sense, perhaps they mean Yi Yin, Bai Li, and Bai Li, right?

古文：自驺衍与齐之稷下先生，如淳于髡、慎到、环渊、接子、田骈、驺奭之徒，各著书言治乱之事，以干世主，岂可胜道哉！
现代文：从邹衍到齐国稷下的诸多学士，如淳于髡、慎到、环渊、接子、田骈、邹奭等人，各自著书立说谈论国家兴亡治乱的大事，用来求取国君的信用，这些怎能说得尽呢？
English: From Qianyuan to many academicians under the reign of Qi, such as Junyu Ronglu, Shenzu, Huanyuan, Zhezi, Tianyao, Zou and others, each wrote a book to talk about the important things of the country's rise and fall and control of the turmoil, and used it to gain the trust of the sovereign. How can these be said?

古文：淳于髡，齐人也。
现代文：淳于髡，是齐国人。
English: Jun Yuxuan is a native of Qi.

古文：博闻彊记，学无所主。
现代文：见识广博，强于记忆，学业不专主一家之言。
English: Knowledge is broad, stronger than memory, and learning is not confined to the head of the family.

古文：其谏说，慕晏婴之为人也，然而承意观色为务。
现代文：从他劝说君王的言谈中看，似乎他仰慕晏婴直言敢谏的为人，然而实际上他专事察言观色，揣摩人主的心意。
English: From his talk of persuading the king, it seems that he admires people who are outspoken and daring, but in fact he specializes in observing words and colors, and guessing people's intentions.

古文：客有见髡於梁惠王，惠王屏左右，独坐而再见之，终无言也。
现代文：一次，有个宾客向梁惠王推荐淳于髡，惠王喝退身边的侍从，单独坐着两次接见他，可是他始终一言不发。
English: On one occasion, a guest recommended Jun Yuxuan to Liang Hui Wang. Hui Wang shunned the attendants around him and sat alone to receive him twice, but he never said a word.

古文：惠王怪之，以让客曰： 子之称淳于先生，管、晏不及，及见寡人，寡人未有得也。
现代文：惠王感到很奇怪，就责备那个宾客说： 你称赞淳于先生，说连管仲、晏婴都赶不上他，等到他见了我，我是一点收获也没得到啊。
English: Hui Wang felt very strange, so he scolded the guest and said, "You praised Mr. Chunyu, saying that you couldn't keep up with him even if you were a steward or a babysitter. When he saw me, I hadn't gained anything at all."

古文：岂寡人不足为言邪？
现代文：难道是我不配跟他谈话吗？
English: Am I not worthy of talking to him?

古文：何故哉？ 
现代文：到底是什么缘故呢？ 
English: What is the real reason for this?

古文：客以谓髡。
现代文：那个宾客把惠王的话告诉了淳于髡。
English: The guest relayed Hui Wang's words to Jun Yuyao.

古文：髡曰： 固也。
现代文：淳于髡说： 本来么。
English: Jun Yuxuan said, "Isn't that how it should be?"

古文：吾前见王，王志在驱逐；後复见王，王志在音声：吾是以默然。 
现代文：我前一次见大王时，大王的心思全用在相马上；后一次再见大王，大王的心思却用在了声色上：因此我沉默不语。 
English: The last time I saw him, his mind was on the horse; the next time I saw him, his mind was on the voice: so I was silent.

古文：客具以报王，王大骇，曰： 嗟乎，淳于先生诚圣人也！
现代文：那个宾客把淳于髡的话全部报告了惠王，惠王大为惊讶，说： 哎呀，淳于先生真是个圣人啊！
English: The guest reported all of Chunyu's words to King Hui, who was greatly surprised and said, "Wow, Mr. Chunyu is really a saint!

古文：前淳于先生之来，人有献善马者，寡人未及视，会先生至。
现代文：前一次淳于先生来的时候，有个人献上一匹好马，我还没来得及相一相，恰巧淳于先生来了。
English: The last time Mr. Junyu came, someone offered a good horse. I didn't have time to meet him, but Mr. Junyu happened to come.

古文：後先生之来，人有献讴者，未及试，亦会先生来。
现代文：后一次来的时候，又有个人献来歌伎，我还没来得及试一试，也遇到淳于先生来了。
English: The last time I was here, someone else brought me some kabuki, and before I had a chance to try it, I met Mr. Junyu.

古文：寡人虽屏人，然私心在彼，有之。 
现代文：我接见淳于先生时虽然喝退了身边侍从，可是心里却想着马和歌伎，是有这么回事。 
English: When I met with Mr. Junyu, although I refused the attendants around me, I was thinking about horses and kabuki. There is such a thing.

古文：後淳于髡见，壹语连三日三夜无倦。
现代文：后来淳于髡见惠王，两人专注交谈一连三天三夜毫无倦意。
English: Later, Jun Yu met with Hui Wang, and the two of them talked intently for three days and three nights without tiring.

古文：惠王欲以卿相位待之，髡因谢去。
现代文：惠王打算封给淳于髡卿相官位，淳于髡客气地推辞不受便离开了。
English: Hui Wang planned to give the position of chancellor to Chun Yuxin, but Chun Yuxin politely declined and left.

古文：於是送以安车驾驷，束帛加璧，黄金槽镒。
现代文：当时，惠王赠给他一辆四匹马驾的精致车子、五匹帛和璧玉以及百镒黄金。
English: At that time, Hui Wang presented him with a four-horse-driven exquisite car, five horseshoes and gems, and one hundred ingots of gold.

古文：终身不仕。
现代文：淳于髡终身没有做官。
English: Jun Yu-tao never held any official position.

古文：慎到，赵人。
现代文：慎到，是赵国人。
English: Careful, he's from Zhao.

古文：田骈、接子，齐人。
现代文：田骈、接子，是齐国人。
English: Tianyu and Zhezi are from Qi.

古文：环渊，楚人。
现代文：环渊，是楚国人。
English: Kuan Yuan is a native of Chu.

古文：皆学黄老道德之术，因发明序其指意。
现代文：他们都专攻黄帝、老子关于道德的理论学说，对黄老学说的意旨进行阐述发挥。
English: They all specialize in the theoretical doctrines of the Yellow Emperor and Laozi on morality, and expound on the intention of the Yellow Emperor's doctrine.

古文：故慎到著十二论，环渊著上下篇，而田骈、接子皆有所论焉。
现代文：所以他们都有著述，慎到著有十二篇论文，环渊著有上、下篇，田骈、接子也都有论著。
English: Therefore, all of them have written articles. Shentao has written twelve papers, Huan Yuan has written the first and second articles, and Tian Rong and Zhaizi have also written articles.

古文：驺奭者，齐诸驺子，亦颇采驺衍之术以纪文。
现代文：邹奭，是齐国几位邹子中的一个，他较多地采用邹衍的学说来著述文章。
English: He was one of several scholars in Qi, and he often used the theory of Qianyuan to write articles.

古文：於是齐王嘉之，自如淳于髡以下，皆命曰列大夫，为开第康庄之衢，高门大屋，尊宠之。
现代文：当时齐王很赏识这些学士，从淳于髡以下的人都任命为列大夫，为他们在人来人往的通衢大道旁建造住宅，高门大屋，以示对他们的尊崇和偏爱。
English: At that time, King Qi was very appreciative of these bachelors, and people from Jun Yuquan and below were appointed as doctors, and they built houses for them, high-gate mansions, next to the crowded Tonglu Avenue, to show their respect and preference.

古文：览天下诸侯宾客，言齐能致天下贤士也。
现代文：以此招揽各诸侯国的宾客，宣扬齐国最能招纳天下的贤才。
English: This was used to attract guests from all the principalities and to promote the idea that Qi was the best place to recruit the world's talents.

古文：荀卿，赵人。
现代文：荀卿，是赵国人。
English: Gongqing is a native of Zhao.

古文：年五十始来游学於齐。
现代文：五十岁的时候才到齐国来游说讲学。
English: When he was fifty years old, he came to Qi Province to lobby for lectures.

古文：驺衍之术迂大而闳辩；奭也文具难施；淳于髡久与处，时有得善言。
现代文：邹衍的学说曲折夸大而多空洞的论辩；邹奭的文章完备周密但难以实行；淳于髡，若与他相处日久，时常学到一些精辟的言论。
English: Zou Yan's theories are tortuous, exaggerated, and mostly empty arguments; Zou Yan's articles are complete and thorough, but difficult to implement; Jun Yu Zou, if you get along with him for a long time, often learn some incisive remarks.

古文：故齐人颂曰： 谈天衍，雕龙奭，炙毂过髡。 
现代文：所以齐国人称颂他们说： 高谈阔论的是邹衍，精雕细刻的是邹奭，智多善辩，议论不绝的是淳于髡。 
English: Therefore, the people of Qi praised them and said: "The one who talks a lot is Xuan Yuan, the one who carves is Yao, the one who is witty and eloquent, and the one who talks incessantly is Junyu Yao."

古文：田骈之属皆已死齐襄王时，而荀卿最为老师。
现代文：田骈等人都已在齐襄王时死去，此时荀卿是年最长，资历深的宗师。
English: Tian Xuan and the others had all died by the time of King Qixiang, at which time King Xuan was the oldest and most senior master.

古文：齐尚脩列大夫之缺，而荀卿三为祭酒焉。
现代文：当时齐国仍在补充列大夫的缺额，荀卿曾先后三次以宗师的身分担任稷下学士的祭酒。
English: At that time, the state of Qi was still filling the shortage of doctors, and Zouqing served as the sacrificial wine for the bachelors under him three times in succession.

古文：齐人或谗荀卿，荀卿乃適楚，而春申君以为兰陵令。
现代文：后来，齐国有人毁谤荀卿，荀卿就到了楚国，春申君让他担任兰陵令。
English: Later, some people in the State of Qi slandered Lord Zou, so Lord Zou went to the State of Chu, and Chunshen allowed him to serve as Lanlinglingling.

古文：春申君死而荀卿废，因家兰陵。
现代文：春申君死后，荀卿被罢官，便在兰陵安了家。
English: After the death of Chun Shenjun, Zouqing was dismissed from his post and settled down in Lanling.

古文：李斯尝为弟子，已而相秦。
现代文：李斯曾是他的学生，后来在秦朝任丞相。
English: Li Si was once his student, and later became the prime minister of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：荀卿嫉浊世之政，亡国乱君相属，不遂大道而营於巫祝，信禨祥，鄙儒小拘，如庄周等又猾稽乱俗，於是推儒、墨、道德之行事兴坏，序列著数万言而卒。
现代文：荀卿憎恶乱世的黑暗政治，亡国昏乱的君主接连不断地出现，他们不通晓常理正道却被装神弄鬼的巫祝所迷惑，信奉求神赐福去灾，庸俗鄙陋的儒生拘泥于琐碎礼节，再加上庄周等人狡猾多辩，败坏风俗，于是推究儒家、墨家、道家活动的成功和失败，编次著述了几万字的文章便辞世了。
English: He abhorred the dark politics of the chaotic world, and the confused monarchs of a ruined country appeared one after another. They did not understand the common sense and the right way, but they were confused by the witches and fortune-tellers who pretended to be gods. They believed in asking God for blessings and curses. The vulgar and despicable Confucianism was stuck in trivial etiquette. In addition, Zhuang Zhou and others were cunning and argumentative, corrupting customs. Therefore, he investigated the success and failure of the activities of Confucianism, Mohism, and Taoism, and compiled and wrote tens of thousands of words of articles. He died.

古文：因葬兰陵。
现代文：死后就葬在兰陵。
English: After his death, he was buried in Lanling.

古文：而赵亦有公孙龙为坚白同异之辩，剧子之言；魏有李悝，尽地力之教；楚有尸子、长卢；阿之吁子焉。
现代文：当时赵国也有个公孙龙，他曾以 离坚白 之说，同惠施的 合同异 之说展开论辩，此外还有剧子的著述；魏国曾有李悝，他提出了鼓励耕作以尽地力的主张；楚国曾有尸子、长卢，齐国东阿还有一位吁子。
English: At that time, there was also a Gongsunlong in Zhao Province, who argued on the basis of the "difference between the contract" with Huishi and the "difference between the contract" with Jianbei; in addition, there was a play written; in Wei Province, there was Li Qian, who proposed the idea of encouraging farming to the best of his ability; in Chu Province, there was Guo Zi, Changlu; in Donga, Qi Province, there was also a Wu Zi.

古文：自如孟子至于吁子，世多有其书，故不论其传云。
现代文：自孟子到吁子，世上多流传着他们的著作，所以不详叙这些著作的内容了。
English: From Mencius to Huxi, most of their works have been passed down to the world, so I will not describe the contents of these works in detail.

古文：盖墨翟，宋之大夫，善守御，为节用。
现代文：墨翟，是宋国的大夫，擅长守卫和防御的战术，竭力提倡节省费用。
English: Mo Xun, the doctor of Song, was good at guarding and defensive tactics, and tried his best to promote cost savings.

古文：或曰并孔子时，或曰在其後。
现代文：有人说他与孔子同时代，也有人说他生活在孔子之后。
English: Some say he was contemporary with Confucius, while others say he lived after Confucius.

