古文：论灾异者，已疑於天用灾异谴告人矣。
现代文：主张灾异之说的人，对于天用灾异谴责告诫君王的说法已被怀疑了。
English: Catastrophists have cast doubt on the idea that the gods used calamities to admonish kings.

古文：更说曰： 灾异之至，殆人君以政动天，天动气以应之。
现代文：他们进一步解释说： 灾异的出现，大概因为君主施政影响了天，天就运用气来应和君主。
English: They further explained: The emergence of disasters is probably because the monarch's governance has affected the heavens, and the heavens have used the qi to respond to the monarch.

古文：譬之以物击鼓，以椎扣锺，鼓犹天，椎犹政，锺鼓声犹天之应也。
现代文：以用槌击鼓，用槌敲钟作比喻，钟鼓好比是天，槌好比是施政，钟鼓的声音好比是天的应和。
English: Using the analogy of striking a drum with a mallet and striking a bell with a mallet, the bell and drum are likened to heaven, the mallet is likened to governance, and the sound of the bell and drum is likened to the harmony of heaven.

古文：人主为於下，则天气随人而至矣。 
现代文：君主在人间施政，天上的气就随着君主施政的好坏而出现了。
English: The monarch governs on earth, and the heavenly qi appears according to how well or poorly the monarch governs.

古文：曰：此又疑也。
现代文：我说：这又值得怀疑了。
English: I said: "This is doubtful again."

古文：夫天能动物，物焉能动天？
现代文：天能影响万物，万物怎么能感动天呢？
English: Heaven can affect all things. How can all things move heaven?

古文：何则？人物系於天，天为人物主也。
现代文：人和物都隶属于天，天是人和物的主宰。
English: People and things are subordinate to heaven, and heaven is the master of people and things.

古文：故曰： 王良策马，车骑盈野。 
现代文：所以说： 王良用马鞭赶马，战车战马就布满原野。 
English: Therefore it is said, "Wang Liang drove his horse with a whip, and chariots and horses filled the plains."

古文：非车骑盈野，而乃王良策马也。
现代文：不是地上先发生了战争而后王良才赶马的。
English: It wasn't that there was a war on the ground first and then Wang Liang caught up with the horse.

古文：天气变於上，人物应於下矣。
现代文：天的气在上面发生变化，人和物在地下应和。
English: The weather changes above, and people and things are in harmony below.

古文：故天且雨，商羊起舞，使天雨也。
现代文：所以天将要下雨，商羊鸟就飞舞，并不是商羊鸟飞舞才使天下雨的。
English: Therefore, when it is about to rain, the shepherd bird will fly. It is not the shepherd bird's flying that makes it rain.

古文：商羊者，知雨之物也，天且雨，屈其一足起舞矣。
现代文：商羊鸟，是能预知要下雨的鸟，天将要下雨，它就屈起它的一只脚飞舞。
English: The capercaillie is a bird that can tell when it is going to rain. If it is going to rain, it will bend one of its legs and fly.

古文：故天且雨，蝼蚁徙，丘蚓出，琴弦缓，固疾发，此物为天所动之验也。
现代文：所以天将要下雨，蝼蛄蚂蚁就会搬家，蚯蚓就会爬出泥土外，琴弦就会松弛，旧病就会复发，这就是万物受天的影响的应验。
English: Therefore, it will rain, grasshoppers and ants will move, earthworms will crawl out of the soil, the strings will slacken, and old diseases will recur. This is the fulfillment of all things being affected by the heavens.

古文：故在且风，巢居之虫动；且雨，穴处之物扰：风雨之气感虫物也。
现代文：所以天将要刮风，窝中的鸟就会飞舞，天将要下雨，洞穴中的动物就会骚动不安。这就是风和雨的气影响了虫鸟这类动物。
English: So the wind will blow, the birds in the nest will fly, the sky will rain, and the animals in the cave will be agitated and uneasy. This is how the wind and rain affect insects and other animals.

古文：故人在天地之间，犹蚤虱之在衣裳之内，蝼蚁之在穴隙之中。
现代文：因此，人生活在天地之间，好比跳蚤虱子在衣裳里面，蝼蛄蚂蚁在洞穴缝隙之中。
English: Therefore, people live between heaven and earth, like fleas and lice in clothes, and cockroaches and ants in the crevices of caves.

古文：蚤虱、蝼蚁为逆顺横从，能令衣裳穴隙之间气变动乎？
现代文：跳蚤虱子蝼蛄蚂蚁前后左右乱爬，能够使衣裳洞穴缝隙之间的气变动吗？
English: Can fleas, lice, mites, and ants crawling around the front and back make the air flow between the gaps of the clothes cave?

古文：蚤虱、蝼蚁不能，而独谓人能，不达物气之理也。
现代文：跳蚤蝼蛄蚂蚁不能够，而唯独说人能够，就是不明白物与气之间的关系。
English: Fleas and ants can't, but to say that humans can is to misunderstand the relationship between things and qi.

古文：夫风至而树枝动，树枝不能致风。
现代文：风吹来树枝会摇动，树枝本身不能招来风。
English: When the wind blows, the branches will shake, but the branches themselves cannot attract the wind.

古文：是故夏末蜻鸣，寒螀啼，感阴气也。
现代文：所以夏末蟋蟀鸣叫，寒蝉啼叫，是受了阴气的感动。
English: Therefore, the crickets chirping at the end of summer and the chilling cicadas howling are moved by the gloomy atmosphere.

古文：雷动而雉惊，发而蛇出，起气也。
现代文：春雷响动而野鸡惊飞，惊蛰到来伏蛇出洞，是受了阳气的激发。
English: Spring thunder rattles and pheasants fly in fright. The arrival of chaffinches and the emergence of snakes are stimulated by yang qi.

古文：夜及半而鹤唳，晨将旦而鸡鸣，此虽非变，天气动物，物应天气之验也。
现代文：到半夜的时候鹤就鸣叫，天将亮的时候公鸡就啼叫，这些即使不是异常现象，也是天上的气影响了万物，万物应和天上的气的应验。
English: At midnight, cranes chirp, and at dawn, roosters crow. If these are not anomalies, they are the influence of the air in the sky on all things, and all things should be the fulfillment of the air in the sky.

古文：顾可言寒温感动人君，人君起气而以赏罚；乃言以赏罚感动皇天，天为寒温以应政治乎？
现代文：只能说寒温之气感动了君主，君主受气的激发而对人施以赏罚，岂能说君主以赏罚感动了天，天用寒温之气来应和君主的政治呢？
English: It can only be said that the cold and warm atmosphere moved the monarch, and the monarch was inspired by the atmosphere to reward and punish people. Can it be said that the monarch moved heaven with reward and punishment, and heaven used the cold and warm atmosphere to respond to the monarch's politics?

古文：六情风家言： 风至，为盗贼者感应之而起。 
现代文：根据风向预测吉凶的人说： 风吹来了，干盗窃的人受到风的感应而作案。 
English: The person who predicts good and bad fortune according to the wind direction said: The wind is blowing, and the thief is induced by the wind to commit the crime.

古文：非盗贼之人精气感天，使风至也。
现代文：并不是盗贼的精气感动了天才使风吹来。
English: It is not the spirit of the thief that moves the genius to make the wind blow.

古文：风至怪不轨之心，而盗贼之操发矣。
现代文：是风吹来，引发了盗贼犯法的心理，而盗贼的偷窃行为就发生了。
English: It was the wind that blew, triggering the thief to break the law, and the thief's theft took place.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么来验证这一点呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：盗贼之人，见物而取，睹敌而杀，皆在徙倚漏刻之间，未必宿日有其思也，而天风已以贪狼阴贼之日至矣。
现代文：盗贼这种人，见到财物就偷取，发现仇人就杀害，这些行为都发生在短时间，未必往日他就有这种心思，而是天上的风正好在贪狼阴贼当道的日子刮来了。
English: A person like a thief, who steals when he sees property, and kills when he finds an enemy, all of these actions take place in a short time. It is not necessarily that he had this kind of mind in the past, but the wind of heaven just blew in the days when the wolf-eater and the thief were in charge.

古文：以风占贵贱者，风从王相乡来则贵，从囚死地来则残。
现代文：根据风向预测物价的高低，风从王相乡吹来物价就高，从囚死地吹来物价就低。
English: According to the wind direction to predict the level of price, the price is high when the wind blows from Wangxiang Township, and the price is low when the wind blows from Jiefang Township.

古文：夫贵贱、多少，斗斛故也。
现代文：谷价有高有低，谷米有多有少，但斗斛并没有改变。
English: The price of grain varies from high to low, and the quantity of grain and rice varies from more to less, but the battle has not changed.

古文：风至而籴谷之人贵贱其价，天气动怪人物者也。
现代文：风吹来了，卖谷的人依据风向就抬高或降低谷价，这是由于天上的气影响了人心和物价的缘故。
English: When the wind blows, the sellers of grain raise or lower the price of grain according to the direction of the wind. This is due to the influence of the heavenly wind on people's hearts and prices.

古文：故谷价低昂，一贵一贱矣。
现代文：因此谷价高低变化，有时贵有时贱。
English: As a result, grain prices fluctuate, sometimes high, sometimes low.

古文：《天官》之书，以正月朝占四方之风，风从南方来者旱，从北方来者湛，东方来者为疫，西方来者为兵。
现代文：《史记·天官书》上说，在夏历正月初一的早晨，根据四方之风来占测一年的吉凶。风从南方吹来就会大旱，从北方吹来就发大水，从东方吹来说发生瘟疫，就西方吹来就发生战乱。
English: According to the "Histories of Heaven and Earth," on the morning of the first day of the first month of the lunar calendar, the fortune of the year is measured according to the four winds. If the wind blows from the south, there will be a drought, if it blows from the north, there will be a flood, if it blows from the east, there will be a plague, and if it blows from the west, there will be a war.

古文：太史公实道言以风占水旱兵疫者，人物吉凶统於天也。
现代文：太史公据实论事讲根据风向预测水、旱、兵、疫、是因为人、物的吉凶都受天的支配。
English: According to the Taoist theory of history, water, drought, war and epidemics are predicted according to the wind direction, because the fortunes of people and things are controlled by the heavens.

古文：使物生者，春也；物死者，冬也。
现代文：使万物生长的，是春季；使万物衰亡的，是冬季。
English: It is the spring that makes everything grow; it is the winter that makes everything die.

古文：春生而冬杀也。天。
现代文：使万物春季生长而冬季衰亡的是上天。
English: It is God who causes all things to grow in the spring and wither in the winter.

古文：如或欲春杀冬生，物终不死生，何也？
现代文：如果有人想让万物春季衰亡而冬季生长，万物最终既不生也不死，是什么道理呢？
English: If someone wants all things to decay in the spring and grow in the winter, and all things eventually neither live nor die, what is the reason?

古文：物生统於阳，物死系於阴也。
现代文：万物生长受春阳之气的支配；万物衰亡是由冬阴之气决定的。
English: The growth of all things is governed by the spring sunshine; the decline of all things is determined by the winter gloom.

古文：故以口气吹人，人不能寒；吁人，人不能温。
现代文：因此，用嘴里的气吹人，人不会寒冷；用气呵人，人不会温暖。
English: Therefore, if you blow air from your mouth, you will not feel cold; if you blow air, you will not feel warm.

古文：使见吹吁之人，涉冬触夏，将有冻旸之患矣。
现代文：让被吹气和呵气的人，经冬历夏，就会有挨冻受晒的忧患。
English: Let the person who is blown and stroked go through the winter and summer, there will be the sorrow of being exposed to frost and sun.

古文：寒温之气，系於天地，而统於阴阳。人事国政，安能动之？
现代文：寒冷的温暖的气，归属于天地而受阴阳的支配，人事与国政，怎么能够影响它呢？
English: How can the cold and warm air, which belongs to heaven and earth and is controlled by yin and yang, influence personnel and national affairs?

古文：且天本而人末也。
现代文：况且天是根本而人是末节。
English: Moreover, heaven is the root and man is the end.

古文：登树怪其枝，不能动其株。
现代文：爬树摇树枝，不能动摇树干。
English: Climb the tree to shake the branches, not the trunk.

古文：如伐株，万茎枯矣。
现代文：如果斫伐树干，所有的树枝都会枯死。
English: If you cut down the trunk, all the branches will die.

古文：人事犹树枝，温犹根株也。
现代文：人事好比树枝，寒温之气好比树根树干。
English: Personnel affairs are like branches, and the cold and warm atmosphere is like the root and trunk.

古文：生於天，含天之气，以天为主，犹耳目手足系於心矣。
现代文：人为天所生，就含有天的气，以天为根本，好比耳目手足受心的支配。
English: As man is born of heaven, he contains the breath of heaven, with heaven as the foundation, just as the ears, eyes, hands and feet are governed by the heart.

古文：心有所为，耳目视听，手足动作，谓天应人，是谓心为耳目手足使乎？
现代文：心里想干什么，耳目就听什么看什么，手足就会随着动作起来。如果说天会应和人，这就是说心是受耳目手足所支配的吗？
English: What the mind wants to do, the ears and eyes will listen to and see, and the limbs will move accordingly. If we say that heaven responds to people, does this mean that the heart is controlled by the ears, eyes, and limbs?

古文：旌旗垂旒，旒缀於杆，杆东则旒随而西。
现代文：旌旗悬挂穗带，穗带连接在旗杆上，旗杆往东穗带就朝西飘。
English: The flag is hoisted with a spike belt, which is connected to the flagpole, and the flagpole floats westward when the spike belt is to the east.

古文：苟谓寒温随刑罚而至，是以天气为缀旒也。
现代文：如果说寒温之气是随君主的刑赏而来的，这是把天上的气当作系在旗杆上的带了。
English: If we say that the cold and warm air comes from the punishment and reward of the monarch, this is to take the air of heaven as a belt tied to the flagpole.

古文：钩星在房、心之间，地且动之占也。
现代文：钩星运行到房宿、心宿之间，是地将要震动的征兆。
English: A hooked star moving between the house and the heart is a sign that the earth is about to shake.

古文：齐太卜知之，谓景公： 臣能动地。 
现代文：齐太卜看见了这种天象，对齐景公说： 我能使大地震动。 
English: When Qidaiub saw this celestial phenomenon, he said to Qi Jing Gong, "I can make the earth tremble."

古文：景公信之。
现代文：齐景公相信了他。
English: Lord Qi Jing believed him.

古文：夫谓人君能致寒温，犹齐景公信太卜之能动地。
现代文：如果说君主能引来寒温之气，就好比齐景公相信太卜能使大地震动一样。
English: Saying that a monarch can bring cold or warm weather is like Lord Qi Jing believing that a god can make the earth tremble.

古文：夫人不能动地，而亦不能动天。
现代文：人不能使大地震动，也就不能使天感动。
English: Man cannot move the great earth, nor can he move the heavens.

古文：夫寒温，天气也。
现代文：寒温之气，是天上的气。
English: The air of cold and heat is the air of heaven.

古文：天至高大，人至卑小。
现代文：天极为高大，人极为卑小。
English: Heaven is very high, and man is very low.

古文：篙不能鸣钟，而萤火不爨鼎者，何也？
现代文：小竹枝不能敲响钟，而萤火不能烧鼎煮饭，为什么呢？
English: A small bamboo branch can't ring a bell, and a firefly can't cook rice. Why?

古文：钟长而篙短，鼎大而萤小也。
现代文：因为钟长大而竹枝短小，鼎高大而萤火细小的缘故。
English: Because the bell is tall and the bamboo branch is short, and the flute is tall and the firefly is small.

古文：以七尺之细形，感皇天之大气，其无分铢之验，必也。
现代文：凭七尺长的细小身躯，想感动皇天的大气，它不会有丝毫效验，这是必定无疑的。
English: With a seven-foot-long tiny body, if you want to move the atmosphere of the emperor, it will not have the slightest effect, this must be beyond doubt.

古文：占大将且入国邑，气寒，则将且怒，温则将喜。
现代文：占卜郡守将要进入郡的首府这件事，如果天气寒冷，就表明郡守要发怒；如果天气温和，就表明郡守会高兴。
English: If the weather is cold, it indicates that the county magistrate will be angry; if the weather is mild, it indicates that the county magistrate will be happy.

古文：夫喜怒起事而发，未入界，未见吏民，是非未察，喜怒未发，而寒温之气已豫至矣。
现代文：喜怒是有感于事情而发生的，郡守尚未进入郡界，没有见到官吏百姓，没有察明是非，喜怒尚未发生，而寒温之气已经预先来到了。
English: Happiness and anger are caused by feeling things. The county magistrate has not yet entered the county boundary, has not seen the officials and people, and has not detected the rights and wrongs. Happiness and anger have not yet occurred, but the cold and warm atmosphere has already come in advance.

古文：怒喜致寒温，怒喜之後，气乃当至。
现代文：如果怒喜能导致天气寒温的话，那么应该在郡守怒喜之后，寒温之气才能到来。
English: If anger can cause cold weather, then cold weather should come after anger.

古文：是竟寒温之气，使人君怒喜也。
现代文：这反而是寒温之气使郡守发怒或高兴了。
English: Instead, it was the cold weather that made the governor angry or happy.

古文：或曰： 未至诚也。行事至诚，若邹衍之呼天而霜降，杞梁妻器而城崩，何天气之不能动乎？ 
现代文：有人说： 这是因为不十分虔诚，如果做事十分虔诚，就像邹衍仰天长叹而天降霜，杞梁妻痛哭而城墙崩塌一样，怎么天上的气就不能感动呢？ 
English: Some people said: This is because they are not very pious. If they are very pious in doing things, how can they not be moved by the breath of heaven, just like the farmer who sighed for a long time and the sky turned frosty, or the wife of the farmer who cried bitterly and the city wall collapsed?

古文：夫至诚，犹以心意之好恶也。
现代文：所谓至诚，还是就心意的好恶来说的。
English: The so-called sincerity is still based on the likes and dislikes of the heart.

古文：有果蓏之物，在人之前，去口一尺，心欲食之，口气吸之，不能取也；手掇送口，然後得之。
现代文：有瓜果这类东西，在人的面前，距嘴只有一尺远，心里想吃它，用口里的气吸它，是不能吸来的；用手拿取送进嘴里，然后就可以得吃了。
English: There are such things as melons and fruits, in front of people, only a foot away from the mouth, the heart wants to eat it, inhale it with the breath in the mouth, it can not be inhaled; take it by hand and put it in the mouth, then you can eat it.

古文：夫以果之细，员圌易转，去口不远，至诚欲之，不能得也，况天去人高远，其气莽苍无端末乎！
现代文：就凭瓜果这样细小的东西，又圆又团极易转动，距嘴又不远，十分虔诚地想吃它，却不能得到，何况上天距人又高又远，它的气无边无际，无头无尾呢？
English: With such a small thing as a melon fruit, round and round, easy to turn, not far from the mouth, very devoutly want to eat it, but can't get it, not to mention the sky is high and far away, its breath is boundless, headless and tailless?

古文：盛夏之时，当风而立，隆冬之月，向日而坐。
现代文：盛夏时节，迎风站立；隆冬季节，向着太阳而坐。
English: In high summer, stand facing the wind; in midwinter, sit facing the sun.

古文：其夏欲得寒而冬欲得温也，至诚极矣。欲之甚者，至或当风鼓，向日燃炉，而天终不为冬夏易气，寒暑有节，不为人变改也。
现代文：这是夏天想得到凉爽而冬天想得到温暖，算是极端虔诚了，希望得到凉爽和温暖最心切的人，甚至有的迎风煽扇子，有的对着太阳而又烧燃火炉，但是上天终究不会为了他而改变寒温之气，寒来暑往有一定的规律，不会为人诚心不诚心而改变。
English: This is the summer want to get cool and winter want to get warm, is considered to be extremely pious, hope to get cool and warm the most anxious people, and even some wind fan, and some against the sun and burn the stove, but the heavens will not change the cold and heat for him, cold and heat have a certain pattern, will not change for people's sincerity.

古文：夫正欲得之而犹不能致，况自刑赏，意思不欲求寒温乎？
现代文：诚心想得到寒温之气尚且不能招来，何况君主施行刑赏时本来就没有想要得到寒温之气的意思呢。
English: Sincerely wishing to obtain cold and warm breath is not enough to attract it, and what's more, the monarch did not intend to obtain cold and warm breath when he executed the punishment and reward.

古文：万人俱叹，未能动天，一邹衍之口，安能降霜？
现代文：万众人都叹息，尚且不能感动上天，邹衍一声长叹，怎么能使上天降霜呢？
English: All mankind sighs, yet cannot move the heavens. How can a long sigh from Huan Yan bring down the frost from the heavens?

古文：邹衍之状，孰与屈原？
现代文：邹衍的处境，哪能与屈原相比？
English: How can Yan Yan's situation be compared to that of Qu Yuan?

古文：见拘之冤，孰与沉江？
现代文：被拘囚的冤屈，哪能与投江相比？
English: How can the grievances of the detainees be compared with the throwing of prisoners into the river?

古文：《离骚》《楚辞》凄怆，孰与一叹？
现代文：《离骚》、《楚辞》凄凉悲伤，一声长叹，怎能与它相比？
English: "Leaving So" and "Chu Ci" are bleak sadness, a long sigh, how can it be compared with it?

古文：屈原死时，楚国无霜，此怀、襄之世也。
现代文：屈原死的时候，楚国并没有降霜，这是楚怀王、楚襄王时的事情。
English: At the time of Qu Yuan's death, there was no frost in the state of Chu. This happened during the reigns of King Chu Huai and King Chu Xiang.

古文：厉、武之时，卞和献玉，刖其两足，奉玉泣出，涕尽续之以血。
现代文：楚厉王、楚武王时，卞和向他们呈献玉石，被砍掉了双足，卞和捧玉而流泪，眼泪流尽了接着就哭出血来。
English: At the time of King Chu Li and King Chu Wu, Gong He presented jade to them. His feet were chopped off, and Gong He shed tears while holding the jade. When his tears were all gone, he began to cry and bleed.

古文：夫邹衍之诚，孰与卞和？
现代文：邹衍的虔诚，怎能与卞和相比呢？
English: How can the piety of Qianyan be compared to that of Xinghe?

古文：见拘之冤，孰与刖足？
现代文：被拘囚的冤屈，怎能与砍掉双足相比呢？
English: How can the prisoner's grievances be compared to cutting off both feet?

古文：仰天而叹，孰与泣血？
现代文：仰天长叹，怎么能与哭出血相比呢？
English: How can a long, aghast sigh compare with weeping and bleeding?

古文：夫叹固不如泣，拘固不中刖，料计冤情，衍不如和，当时楚地不见霜。
现代文：长叹确实不如哭泣，拘囚确实不如砍足，衡量冤情，邹衍不如卞和，当时楚地也不见降霜。
English: It is true that sighing is not as good as crying, prisoners are not as good as chopping off their feet, grievances are not as good as reconciliation, and there was no frost in Chu at that time.

古文：李斯、赵高谗杀太子扶苏，并及蒙恬、蒙骜。
现代文：李斯、赵高假造遗诏杀害太子扶苏，并牵连蒙恬、蒙毅等人。
English: Li Si and Zhao Gao forged a will to kill Prince Fusu, and implicated Meng Yao, Meng Yi and others.

古文：其时皆吐痛苦之言，与叹声同；又祸至死，非徒苟徙。
现代文：当时他们都倾吐了痛苦的话，与邹衍的叹息声相同，又遭祸直到被杀死。
English: At that time, they all poured out the words of pain, the same as the sighs of Xuan Yan, and suffered until they were killed.

古文：而其死之地，寒气不生。
现代文：不仅仅是被拘囚，在他们被害死的地方，并没有寒冷之气产生。
English: Not just by the detainees, but in the place where they were killed, there was no cold air.

古文：秦坑赵卒於长平之下，四十万众，同时俱陷。
现代文：秦国坑杀赵国降卒在长平城下，四十万人同时被活埋。
English: Qin Guofeng killed Zhao Guofeng at the foot of Changping Castle. 400,000 people were buried alive at the same time.

古文：当时啼号，非徒叹也。
现代文：当时他们的哭啼叫喊，不仅仅是叹息。
English: Back then, their cries were more than just sighs.

古文：诚虽不及邹衍，四十万之冤，度当一贤臣之痛；入坑坎之啼，度过拘囚之呼。当时长平之下，不见陨霜。
现代文：他们的虔诚虽然不及邹衍，四十万人的冤屈，估计应当抵得上一位贤臣的悲痛；他们被活埋时的哭喊，估计应超过被拘囚者的呼号，当时长平城下也不见降霜。
English: Although their piety is not as high as that of the Jurchen, the grievances of the 400,000 people are estimated to be worth the grief of the last wise minister; their cries when they were buried alive are estimated to exceed the calls of the prisoners, and there was no frost under the Changping Castle at that time.

古文：《甫刑》曰： 庶僇旁告无辜於天帝。 
现代文：《尚书·吕刑》上说： 被杀害的百姓纷纷对天帝诉说自己没有罪过。 
English: "Shangshu Lv Ching" said: The people who were killed told the Heavenly Emperor one after another that they were not guilty.

古文：此言蚩尤之民被冤，旁告无罪於上天也。
现代文：这说的是蚩尤统治下的老百姓受了冤屈，纷纷对上天诉说自己没有罪过。
English: This is to say that the common people under the rule of Chu You suffered grievances and appealed to heaven one after another that they were not guilty.

古文：以众民之叫，不能致霜，邹衍之言，殆虚妄也。
现代文：以万众百姓的含冤叫屈，都不能引来降霜，邹衍长叹降霜的说法，不过是虚假荒诞之说。
English: All the people's grievances can't bring about frost reduction, and the saying that frost reduction is a long sigh is just a false and absurd saying.

古文：南方至热，煎炒烂石，父子同水而浴。
现代文：南方很热，能使沙子熔化石头酥烂，父子同在河水中沐浴。
English: It is very hot in the south, which can cause the sand to melt and the stone to become brittle. The father and son bathe in the river water.

古文：北方至寒，凝冰坼土，父子同穴而处。
现代文：北方很冷，凝结的冰块能把土地冻裂，父子同在土屋中居住。
English: It is very cold in the north, and the frozen ice can crack the ground. Father and son live together in a mud hut.

古文：燕在北边，邹衍时，周之五月，正岁三月也。
现代文：燕国地处北方，邹衍被拘之时，周历的五月，是夏历的三月。
English: Yan's country is located in the north, and when Yan Yan was detained, the May of the lunar calendar was the March of the summer calendar.

古文：中州内正月二月霜雪时降。北边至寒，三月下霜，未为变也。
现代文：中原地区，正月、二月经常降霜雪；北方很冷，三月下霜，不算是反常。
English: In the Central Plains, frost and snow often fall in January and February; in the north, it is very cold, and frost in March is not abnormal.

古文：此殆北边三月尚寒，霜适自降，而衍适呼，与霜逢会。
现代文：这大约是北方三月还在寒冷，霜恰好自天而降，而邹衍正好仰天长叹，与降霜碰到一起。
English: It was around March in the north, when it was still cold. The frost just fell from the sky, and the hailstorm just sighed against the sky and met with the frost.

古文：传曰： 燕有寒谷，不生五谷。 
现代文：传上说： 燕国有一个寒冷的山谷，里面不长五谷，邹衍吹响律管，寒谷又变温暖了。 
English: According to legend, there was a cold valley in Yan's country. There was no grain growing in it, but the reed warbler blew a rhythm tube and the cold valley became warm again.

古文：邹衍吹律，寒谷复温，则能使气温，亦能使气复寒。
现代文：如果能使天气温暖，也就能够使天气再变寒冷。
English: If you can make the weather warmer, you can also make the weather colder again.

古文：何知衍不令时人知己之冤，以天气表己之诚，窃吹律於燕谷狱，令气寒而因呼天乎？
现代文：怎么知道邹衍不是希望能使当时的人知道自己的冤屈，想借天气表明自己的诚心，偷偷地在燕国的监狱里吹响律管想使天气寒冷，于是才向天呼号的呢？
English: How do we know that Yan Yan did not hope to make the people of that time aware of his grievances, wanted to use the weather to show his sincerity, secretly blew the bell in the prison of Yan Guo to make the weather cold, and then called out to the sky?

古文：即不然者，霜何故降？
现代文：如果不是这样的话，是什么原因降霜呢？
English: If this is not the case, what is the reason for the frost?

古文：范雎为须贾所谗，魏齐僇之，折干摺胁。
现代文：范雎被须贾所诬告，魏齐侮辱范雎，折断了他的肢体肋骨。
English: Fan Qi was falsely accused by Su Jia. Wei Qi insulted Fan Qi and broke his limbs and ribs.

古文：张仪游於楚，楚相掠之，被捶流血。
现代文：张仪在楚国游说，楚相拷打他，他被鞭打得流血。
English: Zhang Yi lobbied in the State of Chu, and Chu Xiang tortured him. He was whipped until he bled.

古文：二子冤屈，太史公列记其状。
现代文：他们两人的冤屈，太史公如实记下了他们的情况。
English: The grievances of the two of them, Taishigong truthfully recorded their situation.

古文：邹衍见拘，雎、仪之比也，且子长何讳不言？
现代文：邹衍被拘囚，与范雎、张仪同类，而司马迁为什么避讳不记载呢？
English: Yan Yan was taken into custody, the same as Fan Yu and Zhang Yi, but why was Sima Qian's avoidance not recorded?

古文：案《衍列传》，不言见拘而使霜降。
现代文：考察邹衍列传，没有记载他被拘囚而使天降霜的事。
English: According to the investigation, there is no record of him being taken into custody and causing frost to fall from the sky.

古文：伪书游言，犹太子丹使日再中、天雨粟也。
现代文：伪作的书和无根据的说法，好比太子丹使偏西的太阳回到正中、天上降下谷雨一样。
English: Falsified books and groundless claims are like the westward-moving sun brought back to the center by the Prince of Denmark and the rain of grain falling from the sky.

古文：由此言之，衍呼而降霜，虚矣！
现代文：由此说来，邹衍向天呼号而天降霜，是不存在的！
English: Therefore, there is no such thing as chrysanthemums calling to the sky and the sky raining down frost!

古文：则杞梁之妻哭而崩城，妄也！
现代文：那么杞梁的妻子痛哭而使城墙倒塌，是荒诞的了！
English: It is absurd, then, that his weeping wife should have brought down the walls!

古文：顿牟叛，赵襄子帅师攻之，军到城下，顿牟之城崩者十余丈，襄子击金而退之。
现代文：顿牟反叛，赵襄子带兵讨伐顿牟。晋军到达顿牟城下，顿牟的城墙崩塌了十多丈，赵襄子鸣金而退兵。
English: When Dongmoo rebelled, Zhao Xiangzi led an army to fight Dongmoo. The Jin army arrived at the bottom of Dongmoo Castle, the walls of Dongmoo collapsed more than ten meters high, and Zhao Xiangzi withdrew with money.

古文：夫以杞梁妻哭而城崩，襄子之军有哭者乎？
现代文：如果杞梁之妻痛哭而城墙崩塌，那么赵襄子的军队中有哭泣的人吗？
English: If Gong Liang's wife cried when the city wall collapsed, would there be any weepers in Zhao Xiangzi's army?

古文：秦之将灭，都门内崩；霍光家且败，第墙自坏。
现代文：秦国将要灭亡，咸阳城门向内倒塌；霍光家族要衰败，家里的墙自己倒塌了。
English: The Qin State will perish, and the gate of Xianyang City will collapse inward; the Huo Guang family will decline, and the walls of the family will collapse.

古文：谁哭於秦宫，泣於霍光家者？
现代文：是谁向秦宫、霍光家哭泣呢？
English: Who is crying to Qin Gong and Huo Guangya?

古文：然而门崩墙坏，秦、霍败亡之征也。
现代文：然而城门崩垮院墙倒塌，是秦国、霍光家族败亡的征兆。
English: However, the collapse of the gate and the collapse of the courtyard wall is a sign of the defeat of Qin and the Huo Guang family.

古文：或时杞国且圮，而杞梁之妻适哭城下，犹燕国适寒，而邹衍偶呼也。
现代文：也许是当时杞国的城墙刚好要倒塌，而杞梁之妻又恰好在城下痛哭，正如燕国天气正好变冷，而邹衍偶然对天呼号一样。
English: Perhaps it was at that time that the walls of Yan's country were just about to collapse, and Yan Liang's wife happened to be crying under the city, just as the weather in Yan's country was just getting cold, and Yan Yan happened to call out to the sky.

古文：事以类而时相因，闻见之者或而然之。
现代文：两件事同属一类，发生的时间又恰巧相连，听到的人，有的因此也就相信两者真有因果关系了。
English: The two events belong to the same category, the time of occurrence is coincidentally connected, and some people who hear it believe that there is a causal relationship between the two.

古文：又城老墙朽，犹有崩坏。
现代文：再说城老了，墙就朽坏，也有自动倒塌的。
English: Moreover, when a city grows old, its walls begin to decay, and some even collapse of their own accord.

古文：一妇之哭，崩五丈之城，是则一指摧三仞之楹也。
现代文：一位妇人的痛哭，就能倒掉五丈城墙，如此说来，一个指头就能摧毁三仞高的柱子了。
English: A woman's tears can bring down a five-story wall, so a finger can bring down a three-story pillar.

古文：春秋之时，山多变。
现代文：春秋时期，山峰多有变化。
English: During the spring and autumn, the mountain peaks change a lot.

古文：山、城，一类也。
现代文：山和城是同一类事物。
English: Mountains and cities are the same kind of thing.

古文：哭能崩城，复能坏山乎？
现代文：痛哭能使城墙倒塌，又能够哭垮山吗？
English: Can weeping bring down a city wall, or a mountain?

古文：女然素缟而哭河，河流通。信哭城崩，固其宜也。
现代文：你相信了晋景公穿着孝服去向河而哭，被堵塞的河水就流通了的说法，那么相信杞梁妻痛哭能使城墙倒塌，本来也就是应该的了。
English: If you believe that Jin Jing Gong wore filial piety and went to the river to cry, and the blocked river water was circulated, then you should believe that Yan Liang's wife's crying can make the city wall collapse.

古文：案杞梁从军死，不归。
现代文：考察杞梁是随军出征战死的，没有活着回来。
English: The investigation found that Hao Liang went to war with the army and died. He did not come back alive.

古文：其妇迎之，鲁君吊於途，妻不受吊，棺归於家，鲁君就吊，不言哭於城下。
现代文：他的妻子迎接灵柩，齐庄公在路上吊唁，杞梁妻不接受这种吊唁，棺材运回家中，齐庄公到她家里去吊唁，并没有讲到杞梁妻在城下痛哭的事情。
English: His wife greeted the casket, Qizhuanggong offered condolences on the road, but Yan Liang's wife did not accept this condolence, the coffin was transported home, and Qizhuanggong went to her home to offer condolences, and did not talk about Yan Liang's wife crying bitterly under the city.

古文：本从军死，从军死不在城中，妻向城哭，非其处也。
现代文：本来是随军出征战死，随军战死并不在城中，杞梁妻向城痛哭，哭的不是地方。
English: Originally, he went out with the army and died in battle. He died in battle with the army and was not in the city. Xing Liang's wife cried bitterly to the city. It was not the place to cry.

古文：然则杞梁之妻哭而崩城，复虚言也。
现代文：如此说来杞梁之妻痛哭而城墙倒塌的事情，又是荒诞无稽的说法了。
English: So to say that the wife of Zou Liang cried bitterly and the city wall collapsed is another absurd statement.

古文：因类以及，荆轲秦王，白虹贯日；卫先生为秦画长平之计，太白食昴，复妄言也。
现代文：以此类推，荆轲谋刺秦王，出现白虹贯穿太阳的现象，卫先生为秦国谋划长平之战后的策略，出现金星侵犯昴宿的现象，也是荒诞的说法。
English: By analogy, it is also absurd to say that Jing Jun plotted to assassinate the Qin king, that a white rainbow appeared to run through the sun, that Mr. Wei plotted the post-war strategy of Changping for the Qin state, and that Venus appeared to invade Oshuku.

古文：夫豫子谋杀襄子，伏於桥下，襄子至桥心动。
现代文：豫让谋杀赵襄子，潜伏在桥下，赵襄子到桥头心动觉察。
English: Yuanzhang murdered Zhao Xiangzi, lurking under the bridge, Zhao Xiangzi went to the bridgehead and became aware of it.

古文：贯高欲杀高祖，藏人於壁中，高祖至柏人亦动心。
现代文：贯高预谋杀害刘邦，暗藏人在夹墙中，刘邦到达伯人县，也心动觉察。
English: Guan Gao premeditated the murder of Liu Bang, hiding the Tibetans in the wall, and Liu Bang arrived in Bo Ren County, and he was also aware of it.

古文：二子欲刺两主，两主心动；綝实论之，尚谓非二子精神所能感也。
现代文：两人预谋刺杀两位君主，两位君主都心动觉察。据实而论此事，尚且说不是两人的精神所能触动的。
English: The two of them plotted to assassinate the two monarchs, and the two monarchs were both aware of it. In fact, it is not said that the spirit of the two of them can be touched.

古文：而况荆轲欲刺秦王，秦王之心不动，而白虹贯日乎？
现代文：何况荆轲想刺杀秦王，连秦王的心也没有被触动，怎么能使白虹贯日呢？
English: What's more, Jing Zhe wanted to assassinate King Qin, and even King Qin's heart was not touched. How could he make the White Rainbow last forever?

古文：然则白虹贯日，天变自成，非轲之精为虹而贯日也。
现代文：如此说来，白虹贯日是由于天象变化而自然形成的，并不是荆轲的精气化为白虹穿过了太阳。
English: Thus, the white rainbow throughout the day is naturally formed due to changes in the celestial phenomena, and it is not the essence of the thistle that has been vaporized into a white rainbow passing through the sun.

古文：钩星在房、心间，地且动之占也。
现代文：钩星运行到房宿、心宿之间，是大地将要发生震动的征兆。
English: The movement of the hook star between the house and the heart is a sign that the earth will be shaken.

古文：地且动，钩星应房、心。
现代文：大地将要震动，钩星就相应地运行到房宿和心宿之间作为预兆。
English: The earth will be shaken, and the hook star will accordingly run between the house and the heart as an omen.

古文：夫太白食昴，犹钩星在房、心也。
现代文：金星侵犯昴宿，好比钩星运行到房宿和心宿之间。
English: Venus encroaches on the Pleiades, like a hook star moving between the house and the heart.

古文：谓卫先生长平之议，令太白食昴，疑矣！
现代文：说卫光生对长平之战后的建议，使金星侵犯昴宿，可疑得很。
English: It is very doubtful that Wei Guangsheng's post-war advice to Changping caused Venus to invade Pengdu.

古文：岁星害鸟尾，周、楚恶之。
现代文：岁星侵入 朱雀 的尾部，周国和楚国很憎恶这种天象。
English: The year star invades the tail of the starling. Zhou and Chu countries detest this kind of celestial object.

古文：然之气见，宋、卫、陈、郑灾。
现代文：慧星出现，宋、卫、陈、郑四国都遭灾害。
English: When the comet appeared, the four countries of Song, Wei, Chen and Zheng all suffered disasters.

古文：案时周、楚未有非，而宋、卫、陈、郑未有恶也。
现代文：考察当时的周国和楚国，没有什么过错，而宋、卫、陈、郑四国也没有恶迹。
English: An examination of the states of Zhou and Chu at the time reveals no wrongdoing, while the states of Song, Wei, Chen, and Zheng show no signs of wrongdoing.

古文：然而岁星先守尾，灾气署垂於天，其後周、楚有祸，宋、卫、陈、郑同时皆然。
现代文：然而岁星首先侵入 朱雀 尾部，灾气在天空垂现，在此之后，周国、楚国才有灾祸，宋、卫、陈、郑四国同时都遭了灾祸。
English: However, the star of the year first invaded the tail of the scarlet ibis, and the calamity appeared in the sky. After that, the calamity only occurred in Zhou and Chu, while Song, Wei, Chen and Zheng all suffered the calamity at the same time.

古文：岁星之害周、楚，天气灾四国也。何知白虹贯日不致刺秦王，太白食昴使长平计起也？
现代文：岁星使周、楚二国遭祸，天气使宋、卫、陈、郑四国受灾，怎么知道不是 白虹贯日 导致荆轲杀秦王，不是 太白食昴 引起卫先生在长平出谋画策呢？
English: The star of the year brought disaster to the two countries of Zhou and Chu, and the weather brought disaster to the four countries of Song, Wei, Chen, and Zheng. How do we know that it was not the white rainbow crossing the sun that led to the killing of King Qin by Jing Kun, or that it was not too much food that caused Mr. Wei to come up with a plan in Changping?

