古文：观国者观主，观家者观父。
现代文：考察一个国如何关键在君，考察一家如何关键在父。
English: Examine how the key to a country lies in you, and how the key to a family lies in the father.

古文：能为国则能为主，能为家则能为父。
现代文：能治理一国政事的堪任其君，能主持一家事务的堪当其父。
English: He who can govern the affairs of a country is a worthy ruler, and he who can preside over the affairs of a family is a worthy father.

古文：凡观国，有六逆：其子父，其臣主，虽强大不王。
现代文：在考察一个国家的时候，有六种悖逆的现象需要注意：第一是为太子具有了君父的权威。第二是作为大臣的具有了君主的权威，这样的国家虽然强大也不能称王天下。
English: When examining a country, there are six types of rebellious phenomena that need to be noted: the first is that the prince has the authority of the monarch; the second is that the minister has the authority of the monarch. Such a country, although powerful, cannot be called the king of the world.

古文：其谋臣在外位者，其国不安，其主不悟，则社稷残。
现代文：第三是谋臣有外志而不能尽忠于本国，这样国家就不会安定，君主意识不到这一点，国家就会受到损害。
English: The third reason is that if advisers have ulterior motives and are not loyal to the country, the country will not be stable. If the monarch is not aware of this, the country will be damaged.

古文：其主失位则国无本，臣不失处则下有根，国忧而存；主失位则国荒，臣失处则令不行，此之谓颓国。
现代文：第四是君主失位不能行使权力，国家便失去了依托，而大臣此时如能坚守岗位，克尽职守，国还有生存的基础，虽有忧患尚可保存；君主失位已经使得政事荒废不治，此时大臣再不能克尽职守，则政令不能下达，这便称作 颓国 。
English: The fourth is that if the monarch loses his position and is unable to exercise power, the country will lose its support, while if the minister can stick to his post and perform his duties at this time, the country still has a foundation for survival, although it can be saved; if the monarch has lost his position and the government has been abandoned, and the minister can no longer perform his duties, then the government order can not be issued, this is called 国.

古文：主暴则生杀不当，臣乱则贤不肖并立，此谓危国。
现代文：第五是君主暴戾无道，赏罚生杀失去准度，臣下贵贱位次混乱，贤与不贤的人并立无别，这便称作 危国 。
English: The fifth is that the monarch is violent and reckless, rewards and punishments for killing and killing have lost accuracy, the ranks of vassals are chaotic, and there is no difference between those who are virtuous and those who are not virtuous. This is called a dangerous country.

古文：主两则失其明，男女争威，国有乱兵，此谓亡国。
现代文：第六是君主、后妃同时掌政，政令歧出，令人迷惑无所适从，加之王、妃争权，势必导致国家内战，这便称作 亡国 。
English: The sixth is when the monarch and his consort are in power at the same time, the government orders are ambiguous, confusing and bewildering, and the king and queen compete for power, which is bound to lead to a national civil war, which is called "ruining the country."

古文：嫡子父，命曰上怫，群臣离志；大臣主，命曰雍塞：在强国削，在中国破，在小国亡。
现代文：此种情况发生在大国会使大国面临危险，发生在中等国家会使其削弱，发生在小国会使其破败。
English: If it happens in a big country, it will endanger the big country; if it happens in a medium-sized country, it will weaken the medium-sized country; if it happens in a small country, it will ruin the small country.

古文：主失位，臣不失处，命曰外根，将与祸邻：在强国忧，在中国危，在小国削；主失位，臣失处，命曰无本，上下无根，国将大损：在强破，在中国亡，在小国灭。
现代文：君主失去王位，大臣还能尽职，这就称作君主尚有依托，但已接近祸患了，此种情形，发生在大国是令人担忧的，发生在中等国家是很危险的，发生在小国会使其削弱。如果君主失位，而且大臣失职，那么国家就失去了生存的根基，根基一失，国家也就将受到绝大的损害了。此种情形，发生在大国会使其破败，发生在中等国家会使其衰亡，发生在小国会使其覆灭。
English: If the monarch is dethroned, but the ministers are still able to perform their duties, it means that the monarch still has support, but is close to disaster. Such a situation in a large country is worrying, in a medium-sized country it is dangerous, and in a small country it weakens it. If the monarch is dethroned and the minister fails to perform his duties, then the country will lose its foundation for survival. Once the foundation is lost, the country will also be greatly damaged. Such a situation in a large country will ruin it, in a medium-sized country it will decline, and in a small country it will be destroyed.

古文：主暴臣乱，命曰大荒，外戎内戎，天将降殃：国无大小，有者灭亡。
现代文：君主行为暴戾，臣下位次混乱，这就称为万事荒废不可救药，外患内乱必接踵而至，违背天理天必降灾，这种情况，无论发生在什么国家都会灭亡。
English: The violent behavior of the monarch, the confusion of the subordinates, this is called the hopelessness of everything, the external civil strife will follow, and the disaster will occur against the laws of heaven. This situation will perish no matter what country it happens in.

古文：主两，男女分威，命曰大麋，国中有师：在强国破，在中国亡，在小国灭。
现代文：君主、后妃分争权力，导致国家出现二主，这就使国人迷惑无所适从，国家因此会有兵乱，这种情形，发生在强国会使其破败，发生在中等国家会使其衰亡，发生在小国会使其覆灭。
English: Monarchs and queens fight for power, leading to the emergence of two masters of the country, which makes the people confused and bewildered. As a result, the country will have riots. This situation, when it happens in a strong country, will make it collapse, when it happens in a medium-sized country, it will make it decline, and when it happens in a small country, it will make it collapse.

古文：凡观国，有六顺：主不失其位则国有本，臣失其处则下无根，国忧而存。
现代文：考察一个国家，有六种顺当的现象，这就是：君主不失其位，国家便具备了存在的根基；而如果大臣不能尽职，这就使君主失去了依托，这样的话，国家还可以在忧患中继续生存。
English: When a country is examined, there are six suitable phenomena. These are: if the monarch does not lose his position, the country will have the foundation of existence; and if the minister cannot perform his duties, this will cause the monarch to lose support, so that the country can continue to survive in sorrow.

古文：主惠臣忠者，其国安。
现代文：君主慈惠爱下，大臣忠心事上，则国家安定。
English: If the monarch is benevolent and the ministers are loyal, the country will be stable.

古文：主主臣臣，上下不囗者，其国强。
现代文：君主大臣名副其实，不相僭越，君上臣下一心一德，则国家强盛。
English: Monarchs and ministers truly live up to their names. They do not favor one over the other. If the prince and the vassal are of one heart and one mind, then the country will prosper.

古文：主执度，臣循理者，其国霸昌。
现代文：君主理政秉法执度，大臣行事遵循事理，则国家昌盛称霸天下。
English: If the monarch upholds the rule of law, and ministers act according to reason, then the country will prosper and dominate the world.

古文：主得位臣辐属者王。
现代文：君主居得其位，大臣团结在君主周围，这样便可称王天下。
English: The monarch is in place, the ministers are united around the monarch, so they can be called kings of the world.

古文：六顺六逆乃存亡兴坏之分也。主上执六分以生杀，以赏罚，以必伐。
现代文：六顺与六逆是决定国家存亡兴坏的分界，君主掌握判断六顺、六逆的标准，并以此来施行生杀、赏罚及果决征战。
English: The six virtues and six vices are the dividing line that determines the survival and prosperity of the country. The monarch has the standard to judge the six virtues and six vices, and uses it to carry out life and death, reward and punishment, and decisive war.

古文：天下太平，正以明德，参之于天地，而兼覆载而无私也，故王天下。
现代文：天下安定宁和在于君主执度公正以明其德，同时效法天地公平无私，这样就可以称王天下。
English: The stability and tranquility of the world lies in the fact that the monarch adheres to justice with a clear virtue, and at the same time emulates the world of fairness and selflessness, so that he can be called the king of the world.

古文：王天下者之道，有天焉，有地焉，有人焉，三者参用之，然后而有天下矣。
现代文：君主要想称王天下，必须参合天时、地利、人事三方面因素，然后才能广有天下。
English: If a ruler wants to be the king of the world, he must take into account the three factors of time, geography and personnel, and then he will be able to rule the world.

古文：为人主，南面而立。臣肃敬，不敢蔽其主。
现代文：作为国君就要居得其所，真正行使其作为国君的职权。大臣恭敬，不敢蒙蔽君主。
English: As the sovereign, he must stay in his place and truly exercise his powers as the sovereign. The minister is respectful and does not dare to deceive the monarch.

古文：下比顺，不敢蔽其上。
现代文：下属和顺，不敢欺蒙其上。
English: subordinates and subordinates, do not dare to deceive them.

古文：万民和辑而乐为其主上用，地广人众兵强，天下无敌。
现代文：百姓和睦甘愿为国君效力，地域广大，民人众多，军队强盛，可无敌于天下。
English: The people are harmonious and willing to serve the sovereign, the region is vast, the people are numerous, the army is strong, and it can be invincible in the world.

古文：文德究于轻细，武刃于当罪，王之本也。
现代文：庆赏公正可极于小民，而刑罚不苟必极于当罪，这是王道的根本。
English: It is the fundamental principle of kingship that justice should be celebrated more than the common people, and punishment should be more severe than the crime.

古文：然而不知王术，不王天下。
现代文：但此外还必须懂得王术，否则不足以称王天下。
English: But in addition, you must also understand the royal art, otherwise it is not enough to be king of the world.

古文：知王术者，驱骋驰猎而不禽荒，饮食喜乐而不湎康，玩好嬛好而不惑心，俱与天下用兵，费少而有功，战胜而令行。
现代文：懂得王术的人，田猎有度，饮宴有节，珍宝声色不惑于心，这样的话，发动天下的人从事征战，就会用力极少而见功甚多，征战必胜令行禁止。
English: Those who understand the art of the king, have a certain degree of hunting in the field, feasting in the feast, and treasure are not confused in the heart. In this case, if the people of the world are mobilized to engage in war, they will use very little force and see a lot of merit. It is forbidden to engage in war to win.

古文：故福生于内，则国富而民昌。
现代文：因此会得到福佑，使得国家富强人民昌盛。
English: Therefore, they will receive blessings, making the country rich and strong and the people prosperous.

古文：圣人其留，天下其与。不知王术者，驱骋驰猎则禽荒，饮食喜乐而湎康，玩好嬛好则惑心，俱与天下用兵，费多而无功，战胜而令不行。
现代文：圣人便会居处其国而佐助他，天下人也都会亲近追随他，但如果不懂得王术，田猎无度，常常沉湎于饮宴，珍宝声色蛊惑其心，这样的话，发动天下的人从事战争，就会用力甚多而不见功效，战虽或有所胜却不能令行禁止。
English: A saint will live in his country and assist him, and all the people of the world will follow him closely. However, if one does not know the royal art, hunts without limit, often indulges in feasting, and is bewitched by the sound of precious stones, then the people of the world who start a war will use a lot of force and will not be effective. Although the war may be won, it cannot be prohibited.

古文：故福失于内，财去而仓廪空虚，与天相逆，则国贫而民荒。
现代文：因此失去福佑，财物耗尽而仓廪空虚，违逆天道，使得国困民贫。
English: As a result, they lost their blessings, depleted their wealth and became empty-handed, and went against the heavenly way, making the country poor and impoverished.

古文：至圣之人弗留，天下弗与。
现代文：有德能的人便会遗弃他，天下人也要背离他。
English: Virtuous people will abandon him, and the whole world will turn away from him.

古文：如此而又不能重士而师有道，则国人之国矣。
现代文：同时再不能重视士人，尊有道的人为师，那么国家将为他人所有了。
English: At the same time, it is no longer possible to attach importance to scholars and respect those who have the truth as teachers, then the country will be owned by others.

