古文：张守珪，陕州河北人。姿干瑰壮，慷慨尚节义，善骑射。
现代文：张守珪是陕州河北县人，容貌漂亮，身体健壮，豪爽、崇尚节操仁义，擅长骑马射箭。
English: Zhang Shouyi is a native of Hebei County, Shaanxi Province. He is good-looking, physically robust, courageous, advocates discipline and benevolence, and is good at horse riding and archery.

古文：以平乐府别将从郭虔瓘守北庭。
现代文：担任平乐府别将时跟随郭虔馞镇守北庭。
English: When he served as the general of Pingle Prefecture, he followed Guo Qianqian to guard the North Garden.

古文：突厥侵轮台，遣守珪往援，中道逢贼，苦战，斩首千馀级，禽颉斤一人。
现代文：突厥进犯轮台，派他去救援，途中碰到敌军，他拼死战斗，杀死敌人一千多，俘获敌将颉斤一名。
English: The Turks attacked the wheelhouse and sent him to the rescue. En route, he encountered the enemy army. He fought to the death, killed more than a thousand of the enemy, and captured an enemy general.

古文：开元初，虏复攻北庭，守珪从儳道奏事京师，因上书言利害，请引兵出蒲昌、轮台夹击贼。
现代文：开元初年，敌军又进攻北庭，他被派从小路到京城来报告情况，因此上奏分析形势，请求率军从蒲昌、轮台夹攻敌军。
English: In the first year after the founding of the People's Republic of China, the enemy attacked Beiting again. He was sent from Xiaolu to Beijing to report the situation. Therefore, he made a report to analyze the situation and requested to lead the army to attack the enemy from Buchang and Lintai.

古文：再迁幽州良杜府果毅。
现代文：后又升任幽州良杜府果毅官。
English: Later, he was promoted to Yuzhou Liangdu Prefecture Guo Yi official.

古文：时卢齐卿为刺史，器之，引与共榻坐，谓曰： 不十年，子当节度是州，为国重将，愿以子孙托，可僚属相期邪？ 
现代文：当时卢齐卿任刺史、器重他，拉着他坐在一起，对他说 ：不到十年，你就会任这个州的节度，成为国家的重要将领，我想把子孙托付给你，怎么能像对部下一样对你呢？ 
English: At that time, Lord Luzi took him by the scruff of the neck, weighed him, pulled him to sit with him, and said to him: "In less than ten years, you will be the governor of this state and become an important general of the country. I want to entrust my children and grandchildren to you. How can I treat you like my subordinates?"

古文：稍迁建康军使。
现代文：后又逐渐升任建康军使。
English: Later, he was gradually promoted to Jiankang envoy.

古文：王君■死，河西震惧，诏以守珪为瓜州刺史、墨离军使，督余众完故城。
现代文：王君耯战死，河西震惊害怕，有诏任命他为瓜州刺史、墨离军使，他督促残兵修复旧城。
English: Wang Junyao died in the war, and Hexi was shocked and afraid. An imperial edict appointed him as Guazhou's chief historian and envoy to the Mexican troops, and he urged the remnants to restore the old city.

古文：版筑方立，虏奄至，众失色。
现代文：才开始动工，敌军突然来了，大家吓得脸色都变了。
English: Just as construction was about to begin, the enemy suddenly arrived, and everyone's face changed with fright.

古文：守珪曰： 创痍之余，讵可矢石相确，须权以胜之。 
现代文：他说 ：战败的残兵，怎能用武力硬拼，应用计谋来战胜他们。 
English: He said: "How can the defeated remnants of the war use force to fight hard and use stratagems to defeat them?

古文：遂置酒城上，会诸将作乐。
现代文：于是在城上摆酒，和众将听音乐。
English: So wine will be placed on the castle, and the people will listen to music.

古文：虏疑有备，不敢攻，引去，守珪纵兵击败之。
现代文：敌人担心他们有准备，不敢攻城，退兵了，他派兵打败了敌军。
English: The enemy, fearing that they were prepared, did not dare to attack the city and withdrew. He sent troops to defeat the enemy.

古文：于是修复位署，招流冗使复业。
现代文：接着修复建筑，把逃亡的人召回让他们重操旧业。
English: Then they repaired the buildings and called back those who had fled to resume their old jobs.

古文：有诏以瓜州为都督府，即诏守珪为都督。
现代文：皇帝有诏将瓜州作为都督府，就下诏任命他为都督。
English: The emperor issued an edict to make Guazhou the capital, and then appointed him as the governor.

古文：州地沙脊不可蓺，常潴雪水溉田。
现代文：州中多沙漠不能耕种，曾蓄雪融化的水灌溉田地。
English: Many of the state's deserts cannot be farmed and used to store snowmelt water to irrigate fields.

古文：是时，渠堨为虏毁，材木无所出。
现代文：当时水渠塘堰被敌军毁坏了，当地没有木材。
English: At that time, the canal weir was destroyed by the enemy, and there was no timber in the area.

古文：守珪密祷于神，一昔水暴至，大木数千章塞流下，因取之，修复堰防，耕者如旧，州人神之，刻石纪事。
现代文：他暗暗对神祷告，一夜洪水来了，几千棵大树从山涧中流了下来，他们取来树木，修好了水渠塘堰，田地又像过去一样能耕种了，州里的人把他看作神，刻石碑记载了这件事。
English: He secretly prayed to God. A flood came one night. Thousands of large trees came down from the mountains. They took the trees and repaired the canals, ponds and weirs. The fields could be cultivated again as before. The people of the state regarded him as a god. Stone inscriptions record this.

古文：迁鄯州刺史、陇右节度使。
现代文：后升任善阝州刺史，陇右节度使。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of Zhenxuzhou chief historian and the right-hand section chief.

古文：徙幽州长史、河北节度副大使。
现代文：又调任幽州长史、河北节度副大使。
English: He was also transferred to the post of deputy ambassador of Hebei Province.

古文：俄加采访处置等使。
现代文：不久加封为采访、处置等使。
English: Soon to be sealed for interviews, disposition, etc.

古文：契丹、奚连年梗边，牙官可突于，胡有谋者，前长史赵含章、薛楚玉等不能制，守珪至，每战辄胜，虏遂大败。
现代文：契丹、奚族连续多年侵犯边境，契丹牙官可突于是他们中有计谋的，前任长史赵含章、薛楚玉等人不能制服他们，他去后，每次作战都得胜了，敌军被打得大败。
English: The Khitan and the Yao people have been violating the border for many years in a row. The Khitan dental officer can suddenly attack them, so they have a strategy. The former chief Shi Zhao Han Zhang, Xue Chuyu and others could not subdue them. After he left, he won every battle, and the enemy army was defeated.

古文：帝喜，诏有司告九庙。
现代文：皇帝高兴了，下诏命有关部门祭祀禀报祖庙。
English: The emperor was pleased and issued an imperial edict ordering the relevant departments to sacrifice and report to the ancestral temple.

古文：契丹酋屈剌及突于恐惧，乃遣使诈降。
现代文：契丹酋长屈刺和可突于害怕了，就派使者假装投降。
English: The Khitan chieftain, suddenly afraid, sent an emissary to pretend to surrender.

古文：守珪得其情，遣右卫骑曹王悔诣部计事，屈刺无降意，徙帐稍西北，密引突厥众将杀悔以叛。
现代文：他知道了实情，派右卫骑曹王悔到他们部落去对付他们，屈刺没有投降的诚心，把营帐迁到略为西边的地方，秘密勾引突厥想杀死王悔反叛。
English: When he learned the truth, he sent his right guard and cavalry, Cao Wangpui, to their tribe to deal with them. He stifled the sincerity of not surrendering, moved the camp to a place slightly to the west, and secretly seduced the Turks to kill Wangpui and rebel.

古文：契丹别帅李过折与突于争权不叶，悔因间诱之，夜斩屈剌及突于，尽灭其党，以众降。
现代文：契丹别帅李过折和可突于不和，王悔利用矛盾拉拢他，乘夜晚杀死了屈刺和可突于，消灭了他们的党羽，率部族来投降。
English: The Khitans were at loggerheads with each other, and Wang Kui took advantage of the conflict to win him over. He took advantage of the night to kill Qu Xuan and Qu Xuan, exterminate their followers, and lead the tribe to surrender.

古文：守珪次紫蒙川，大阅军实，赏将士，传屈刺、突于首于东都。
现代文：张守珪驻军紫蒙川，举行盛大的阅兵仪式，奖赏兵将，把屈刺和可突于的头用传骑送到了洛阳。
English: Zhang Shoucheng garrisoned troops in Zhimeng River, held a grand military parade ceremony, rewarded soldiers, and sent the bending thorns and the head of the can to Luoyang.

古文：二十三年，入见天子，会藉田毕，即酺燕为守珪饮至，帝赋诗宠之。
现代文：开元二十三年，他入京拜见皇帝，碰上皇帝行籍田礼完后，就设宴犒赏他，皇帝赠诗表示对他的宠爱。
English: In the 23rd year of the first month of the year, he went to Beijing to visit the emperor. When he met the emperor after the registration ceremony, he set up a banquet to reward him. The emperor gave a poem to show his favor.

古文：加拜辅国大将军、右羽林大将军，赐金彩，授二子官，诏立碑纪功。
现代文：加封他为辅国大将军、右羽林大将军，赐给他金器和绸缎，任命他的儿子为官，并下诏令树碑记载他的功劳。
English: He promoted him to the rank of Vice-Major-General of the State and Major-General of the Right Feather Forest, gave him gold and silk, appointed his son as an official, and ordered a monument to record his merits.

古文：久之，复讨契丹馀党于捺禄山，卤获不訾。
现代文：过了一段时间，他又在捺禄山讨伐契丹残余，缴获难以数计。
English: After a period of time, he went on to fight the remnants of the Khitan in the Qilu Mountains, capturing an incalculable number of them.

古文：会裨将赵堪、白真陀罗等强使平卢军使乌知义度湟水邀叛奚，且蹂其稼，知义辞不往，真陀罗矫诏胁之。
现代文：遇到偏将赵堪、白真陀罗等人强逼平卢军使乌知义渡过湟水去攻击反叛的奚族，并且践踏他们的庄稼，乌知义推辞不去，白真陀罗假托有诏书来胁迫他，他和奚军作战，没有获胜，就班师了。
English: Faced with the forces of Zhao Kan, Bai Zhendra and others to force the Lu army to attack the rebellious Yi people across the Surabaya River and trample on their crops, Uchi Yi refused to go. Bai Zhendra put forward an edict to coerce him. He fought with the Yi army, but did not win, and he was defeated.

古文：知义与虏斗，不胜，还，守珪匿其败，但上克获状。事颇泄，帝遣谒者牛仙童按实，守珪逼真陀罗自杀，厚赂使者，还奏如状。
现代文：张守珪隐瞒了他的战败，只奏报打胜仗的情况。这事有所泄漏，皇帝派谒者官牛仙童来核实，张守珪逼迫白真陀罗自杀，又用重金贿赂牛仙童，回去后按他的奏本报告。
English: Zhang Shoucheng concealed his defeat and only reported the situation of winning the battle. This matter leaked out, and the emperor sent the official Cow Fairy to verify. Zhang Shoucheng forced Bai Zhendra to commit suicide, and bribed Cow Fairy with heavy money. After returning, he reported this report.

古文：后仙童以赃败，事逮守珪，以功贬括州刺史，疽发背死。
现代文：后来牛仙童因受贿被治罪，事情牵连到他，因他有功，被贬任括州刺史，后来背上长毒疮去世了。
English: Later, Niu Xian Tong was punished for accepting bribes. He was implicated in the matter, and because of his merits, he was demoted to the post of prefectural chief historian. Later, he died of a long poisonous sore on his back.

