古文：十八日，饭于其远处。
现代文：十八日在张其远处吃饭。
English: On the 18th, they had dinner far away from Zhangqi.

古文：上午起身，由夏朗之西、西华山之东小径北迂，五里西转，循西华之北西行，十里，富源。
现代文：上午起身，从夏朗西面、嵩华山东面的小路往北绕行，五里后折向西，顺西华山的北面往西行，走十里，到富源。
English: Get up in the morning, go north from the small road on the west side of Xialang and the east side of Songhuashan, turn west after five miles, go west along the north side of West Huashan, and walk ten miles to Fuyuan.

古文：其西有三狮锁水口。
现代文：富源西边有三个石狮子盘踞在水口处。
English: To the west of Fuyuan, there are three stone lions entrenched at the water's edge.

古文：又西二里为泷头，彭大魁教发迹处也，溪至此折而南入山。
现代文：又往西二里为拢头，它是状元彭教的发迹处，溪流到此折往南流入山中。
English: Another two miles to the west, it is the birthplace of the founder of Peng Jiao, and the stream flows south into the mountains.

古文：又五里为潇泷，溪束两山间，如冲崖破峡，两岸石骨壁立，有突出溪中者，为 瑞石飞霞 ，峡中有八景焉。
现代文：又走五里为潇沈，溪流被夹在两山间，如冲开山崖捣破山峡向外流泻一般，两岸峭峻如骨的石头耸立如壁，有向溪中飞突出来的，那是 瑞石飞霞 景点，山峡中共有八景。
English: After another five-mile walk, it was all downhill. The stream was sandwiched between two mountains. It flowed outwards as if it had broken through the cliff and broken through the gorge. The steep, bone-like stones on both banks towered like walls. Some of them jutted out into the stream. That was the Ruishi Feixia Scenic Spot. There were a total of eight views in the gorge.

古文：由泷溪三里，出百里贤关，谓杨救贫云 百里有贤人出也 。
现代文：顺沈溪走三里，出了百里贤关，据说它是因杨救贫说过的 相隔百里就会有贤能人士出现 这句话而得名。
English: Shun Shen Creek walk three miles, out of the hundred miles of virtuous people, it is said that it is because of Yang Qianbao said that there will be virtuous people appear a hundred miles away from this sentence and got its name.

古文：又西北二里为第二关，亦有崖石危亘溪左。
现代文：又往西北走二里为第二关，也有崖石高高横贯在溪流左岸上。
English: Another two miles to the northwest is the second pass, and there are also high cliffs on the left bank of the stream.

古文：又西北三里，出罗潭，为第三关。
现代文：又往西北走三里，出了罗潭，为第三关。
English: Another three miles to the northwest, out of Luotan, for the third pass.

古文：过是山始开，其溪北去，是为查埠。
现代文：越过关后山峦才远离开。浅溪流往北去，此处为查埠。
English: After crossing the pass, the mountains are far away. The shallow stream flows to the north, here is the port.

古文：又西北五里后与溪遇，渡而北，宿于罗家埠。
现代文：又往西北走五里后与溪流相遇，渡过溪水到北岸，投宿在罗家埠。
English: After another five-mile walk to the northwest, they met the stream, crossed the stream to the north bank, and stayed in Lojia Port.

古文：十九日，昧爽行。
现代文：十九日黎明时出发。
English: We set out at dawn on the 19th.

古文：十里，复循西岩山之南而行，三里为值夏。
现代文：走十里，又顺西岩山的南面而行，三里到值夏。
English: Walk ten miles, and then walk along the south side of the West Rock Mountain, three miles to the summer.

古文：西八里，逾孟堂坳，又二里，张家渡，乃趁小舟顺流北下。
现代文：往西走八里，越过孟堂坳，就见赣江从南面流来，这里是拢洋汇入赣江处。又走二里，到张家渡，便搭乘小船顺流北下。
English: Walk eight miles to the west, cross the Mengtang Pass, and you will see the Lijiang River flowing from the south. Here is the place where the west meets the Lijiang River. Walk two miles to Zhangjiadu, and take a boat along the river to the north.

古文：十里，有市在江左，曰永和，其北涯有道，可径往青原。
现代文：行十里，有个集市位于江左岸，叫永和，它北面江边有条道路，可直通青原。
English: Ten miles away, there is a market on the left bank of the river, called Yonghe. There is a road on the north side of the river, which leads directly to Qingyuan.

古文：随舟竟往白鹭；而余同张二巫及静闻，登北涯随山东北行。
现代文：于是让送我的张家人随船直接去白鹭洲；而我同张二巫以及静闻，登上江北岸顺山往东北行。
English: So I let Zhang's family members, who were taking me, go directly to Baishao Zhou by boat; and I, along with Zhang Erwu and Jingwen, boarded the north bank of the river and went along the mountain to the northeast.

古文：五里，入两山之间。
现代文：五里，进入两山中间。
English: Five miles, into the middle of two mountains.

古文：又一里，有溪转峡而出。
现代文：又走一里，有条溪水曲折地流出山峡。
English: After another mile, there was a stream winding its way out of the gorge.

古文：渡溪南转，石山当户，清涧抱壑，青原寺西向而峙。
现代文：渡过溪水折往南，见石山正对门户耸起，清涧环绕沟壑流淌，青原寺朝向西面屹立着。
English: After crossing the stream and turning south, you can see the stone mountain rising up against the gate, the clear stream flowing around the gully, and the Qingyuan Temple standing to the west.

古文：主僧本寂留饭于其寒，亦甚幽静。
现代文：寺中主僧本寂留我们在他的小屋中吃了饭，那小屋也特别幽静。
English: The temple's head monk, Honjaku, and I ate our meal in his hut, which was also particularly secluded.

古文：盖寺为七祖旧刹，而后沦于书院，本寂以立禅恢复，尽迁诸书院于山外，而中构杰阁，犹未毕工也。
现代文：此寺是七祖先前住留过的庙宇，后被书院占用，本寂因为兴复禅宗而将原来的地方恢复为寺宇，把各书院全迁到山外，在寺中构筑高阁，但还未完工。
English: This temple is a temple where seven ancestors lived before, and was later occupied by a college. Because of the revival of Zen Buddhism, Honjaku restored the original place as a temple, moved all the colleges outside the mountain, and built a pavilion in the temple, but it has not yet been completed.

古文：寺后为七祖塔，前有黄荆树甚古，乃七祖誓而为记者。
现代文：寺后面是七祖塔，塔前有棵很屯老的黄荆树，它是七祖立誓后把誓言刻记在上面的那棵树。
English: Behind the temple is the Seven Ancestors Pagoda. In front of the pagoda there is a very old yellow wattle tree. It is the tree on which the Seven Ancestors inscribed their oaths after taking their vows.

古文：初入山，不过东西两山之夹耳；至北坞转入而南，亦但觉水石清异，涧壑潆回；及登塔院，下瞰寺基，更觉中洋开整，四山凑合向中靠拢。
现代文：初入山时，不过是东西两山间的一个峡谷罢了；到从北面山坞转向南进来的地方，也只是觉得流水山石清新奇异，山涧深谷曲折绕旋；等登上塔院，向下俯瞰寺基，更觉得中间这片展开的平地开阔齐整，四面山峦聚合。
English: When I first entered the mountain, it was just a canyon between the two mountains; when I moved from the north dock to the south, I only felt that the flowing water and rocks were fresh and strange, and the mountains and valleys twisted and twisted; when I climbed the pagoda, I looked down at the temple foundation, and I felt that the flat land in the middle was open and neat, and the mountains and mountains on all sides were converging.

古文：其坞内外两重，内坞宽而密，外坞曲而长，外以移书院，内以供佛宇，若天造地设者。
现代文：那山坞分为内外两重，内坞宽阔而幽静，外坞曲折而绵长，外坞用来移置书院，内坞用来供奉佛宇，若如天造地设的一般。
English: The dockyard is divided into two layers, inside and outside, the inner dock is wide and quiet, the outer dock is long and winding, the outer dock is used to relocate the college, and the inner dock is used to worship Buddha, as if it were made by heaven.

古文：余以为从来已久，而本寂一晤，辄言其兴复之由，始自丙寅、丁卯之间。
现代文：我原以为此种格局由来已久，但与本寂一见面，他就说他兴复寺庙，是从丙寅、丁卯年间开始的。
English: I thought this pattern had been around for a long time, but as soon as I met Honjaku, he said that the restoration of the temple began in the Heungin and Dingwu years.

古文：盖是寺久为书院，而南皋、青螺二老欲两存之，迎本寂主其事。
现代文：大概此寺长久沦为书院之地，而邹南皋、郭青螺二老想让寺庙和书院并存，恭迎来本寂主管内中事务。
English: Presumably, this temple has long been reduced to the place of a college, and the leaders of the Southern Wei Dynasty, Guo Qinglu, and others have always wanted the temple and the college to coexist, and have welcomed Honjia as the head of the internal affairs of the middle school.

古文：本寂力言，禅刹与书院必不两立，持说甚坚，始得迁书院于外，而寺田之复遂如破竹矣。
现代文：本寂极力陈说，禅寺和书院定然不能并存在同一地，因他很坚决地坚持他的主张，才得以将书院迁到外坞，而寺院田地的恢复由此便如破竹般顺利无阻了。
English: Honjaku insisted that the Zen temple and the academy could not co-exist in the same place. Because he was adamant about his position, he was able to move the academy to the outer dock, and the restoration of the temple grounds went off without a hitch.

古文：寺前有溪，由寺东南深壑中来，至寺前汇于翠屏之下。
现代文：寺前有条溪流，它从寺东南的深谷中流来，到寺前面汇合在翠屏崖下。
English: There is a stream in front of the temple. It flows from the middle of a deep valley southeast of the temple and meets in front of the temple at the foot of the Cui Ping cliff.

古文：寺左循流而上，山夹甚峻，而坞曲甚长，曲折而入十里，抵黄鲇岭。
现代文：翠屏崖被水剥蚀，山石峭峻如骨，层叠耸出，老树悬空缀在崖壁上，倒映在下面清澈的水流中，景色变幻万端。从寺左边顺流而上，两边山峦夹峙，非常峻峭，而山坞曲折延伸得很长，蜿蜓地往里走十里，抵达黄姑岭。
English: The Cuiping cliff has been eroded by the water, the rocks are as steep as bones, towering in layers, the old trees are hanging on the cliff wall, reflected in the clear water below, and the scenery is ever-changing. From the left side of the temple, follow the river upstream, the mountains on both sides are very steep, and the dock stretches for a long time. Walk ten miles and arrive at Huang Gu Ling.

古文：坞中之田，皆寺僧所耕而有者。
现代文：山坞中的田，都是青原寺的僧人耕种和所有的。
English: The fields in the dockyard are all cultivated by the monks of Qingyuan Temple.

古文：入口为寺之龙虎两砂，回锁隘甚，但知有寺，不复如寺后复有此坞也。
现代文：山坞的入口处是青原寺墓地的龙虎两砂，它们曲折盘错，相距很窄，原先我只知道有寺庙，不知道寺后又有这个山坞。
English: At the entrance of the dock is the dragon and tiger sand of the Qingyuan Temple cemetery. They are intertwined and very close together. Originally, I only knew that there was a temple, but I didn't know that there was this dock behind the temple.

古文：余自翠屏下循流攀涧，宛转其间，进进不已，觉水舂菜圃，种种不复人间。
现代文：我从翠屏崖下顺着水流攀越山涧，曲折地行进在山坞间，不停地往里进去，觉得水春菜圃等各种各类不再是人间的景物。
English: I climbed from the bottom of the Tsuiping cliff along the water flow over the mountains, zigzagged between the docks, and kept going in, feeling that the water spring vegetable garden and other various types were no longer human scenery.

古文：久之，日渐西，乃登山逾岭，仍由五笑亭入寺。
现代文：过了许久，太阳渐渐西下，这才登上山翻过岭，仍然由五笑亭进入寺中。
English: After a long time, the sun gradually set, and only then did I climb the mountain, climb over the ridge, and still enter the temple from the Five Laughing Pavilion.

古文：别立禅即本寂出山，渡溪桥，循外重案山之南五里，越而西，遂西北行十里，渡赣江，已暮烟横渚水中之小块陆地，不辨江城灯火矣。
现代文：辞别了立禅走出青原山，跨过溪上的桥，顺外层案山的南面走五里，越过山到了西面，便往西北行十里，横渡赣江，这时傍晚的烟霭已经笼罩了江中的小沙洲，分辨不清江流城池和灯火了。
English: After saying good-bye, I walked out of Mt. Qingyuan, crossed the bridge over the stream, walked five miles along the south side of the outer layer of the mountain, crossed the mountain to the west, then went northwest for ten miles and crossed the Lijiang River. At this time, the evening haze had already covered the small sandbar in the river, and it was difficult to distinguish the river flow and the lights.

古文：又三里，同二张宿于白鹭洲。
现代文：又行三里，同张二巫、张其远一道住宿在白鹭洲。
English: He also traveled three miles to stay with Zhang Erwu and Zhang Qiyuan in Baishu.

古文：二十日，同张二巫、静闻过城西北二里，入白燕山。
现代文：二十日和张二巫、静闻穿过城中往西北走二里，进入白燕山中。
English: On the 20th day, Zhang Erwu and Jing Wen walked two miles northwest through the city and entered Baiyan Mountain.

古文：山本小垅，乃天华之余支，寺僧建竖，适恰逢有白燕来翔，故以为名。
现代文：此山本是一条小土冈，是天华山的余支，寺中僧人在山上建盖屋阁时，正好有白燕来此盘旋飞舞，因而就用白燕为名。
English: This mountain is a small earth mound, which is the remaining branch of Tianhua Mountain. When the monks of the temple built a pavilion on the mountain, there just happened to be a white swallow circling and flying here, so they used the white swallow as a name.

古文：还由西门入，至北门，过黄御史园，门扃不入。
现代文：回来时由西门入城，到北门，经过黄御史园，园门关闭着没有进去。
English: When I came back, I entered the city from the west gate, went to the north gate, and passed through the Huangguoshi Park. The park gate was closed, so I didn't go in.

古文：黄名宪卿，魏珰事废。
现代文：又往北进入田中承园。
English: Further north into Tanaka Shoen.

古文：又北入田中丞园。田名仰。园外旧坊巍然，即文襄周公即永乐进士周忱之所居也，鲁灵光尚复见此，令人有山斗即泰山北斗，意指仰慕之人之想。日暮寒烟，凭吊久之，乃出昌富门，入白鹭宿。
现代文：园外旧牌坊巍然犹存，它就是文襄周公的故居，周文襄的遗迹还能在此处出现，令人不禁产生出他如同泰山北斗一样值得人们尊崇仰慕的想法。天色已晚，寒烟四起，在坊前凭吊了许久，便走出昌富门，回到白鹭洲住宿。
English: The old archway outside the park still exists. It is the former residence of Wenxiang Zhou Gong. The remains of Zhou Wenxiang can still be seen here, which makes people think that he is as worthy of respect and admiration as Mount Tai and the Big Dipper. It was late, cold smoke was everywhere, and after hanging in front of the temple for a long time, they walked out of the Changfu Gate and returned to Baishanzhou for accommodation.

古文：二十一日，张氏子有书办于郡上，房者曰启文，沽酒邀酌。
现代文：二十一日张家的儿子有一个在府衙中当书办，他妻子叫启文，这天买了酒邀请我们去喝。
English: On the twenty-first day, one of the Zhang family's sons, who works as a bookkeeper in the prefectural government, and his wife, named Qiwen, bought wine and invited us to drink.

古文：山之南旧有刘府君庙，刘名竺，陈、梁时以曲江侯为吉安郡守，保良疾奸，绰有神政，没而为神，故尊其庙曰神冈，宋封为利惠王。下临安、永小江。
现代文：然后便与张二巫、静闻从西城外往南越过铁佛桥，走八里，向南登上神冈山顶。此山在吉安府城南边十五里安福县、永新县来的江流汇入大江处。山的南边原来有座刘府君的庙，它下临安福县、永新县流来的小江。
English: Then, together with Zhang Erwu and Jingwen, they crossed the Iron Buddha Bridge from the west of the city to the south, walked eight miles, and climbed south to the top of Kamioka Mountain. This mountain is located 15 miles south of the city of Ji'an Prefecture, where the river flow from Anfu County and Yongxin County flows into the big river. On the south side of the mountain, there was originally a temple of Liu Fujun, which was next to the small river flowing from Anfu County and Yongxin County.

古文：遂由庙左转神冈东麓，北随赣江十五里，至吉安南城之螺川驿。
现代文：我们就由庙左边转到神冈山东麓，往北顺赣江走十五里，到达吉安府南城外的螺川骚。
English: We went from the left side of the temple to the eastern foot of Kamioka Mountain, walked fifteen miles to the North Shunli River, and arrived at the Reochuan So outside Nancheng, Ji'an.

古文：又三里，暮，入白鹭。
现代文：又走三里，傍晚时，回到白鹭洲。
English: Another three-mile walk, in the evening, back to Baishuanzhou.

古文：白鹭洲，首自南关之西，尾径东关，横亘江中，首伏而尾高。
现代文：白鹭洲的洲头从府城南关的西面开始，尾部经过东关，横亘在赣江中，洲头低伏而洲尾高起。
English: The tip of Shirahige Island begins on the west side of the Fucheng South Pass, and the tail passes through the East Pass, extending into the Li River. The tip of the island is low-lying, while the tip of the island is high.

古文：书院创于高处，前铸大铁犀以压水，连建三坊，一曰名臣，二曰忠节，三曰理学。
现代文：书院创办在洲中高处，前面用铁铸造大犀牛用来镇服水流。书院中接连建有三个坊，第一个叫名臣坊，第二个叫忠节坊，第三个叫理学坊。
English: The college was founded at a high place in the middle of the island, and a large rhinoceros was cast in iron in front of it to control the water flow. There are three wards in the college, the first is called Meissen wards, the second is called Zhongjie wards, and the third is called Science wards.

古文：坊内两旁排列号馆，为诸生肄业之所。
现代文：坊以内两旁排列着号馆，是生徒们修习学业的处所。
English: On both sides of the courtyard, there are dormitories, which are places for students to study.

古文：九县与郡学共十所，每所楼六楹。
现代文：九县的县学和府学，共十所，每所有六间房子。
English: There are a total of ten county schools and prefectural schools in nine counties, each with six houses.

古文：其内由桥门而进，正堂曰正学堂，中楼曰明德堂；后阁三层，下列诸贤神位，中曰 天开紫气 ，上曰 云章 。
现代文：号馆往里，从桥门进去，正堂叫正学堂，中间的楼叫明德堂；后面的阁为三层，下层列置着各位圣贤的牌位，中层的匾额上写着 天开紫气 ，上层的匾额上写着 云章阁 。
English: Entering the hall from the bridge gate, the main hall is called the main school hall, and the middle building is called the Mingde Hall; the back pavilion is three-storey, and the lower levels are lined with the plaques of saints and sages. The middle-level plaque reads Tiankhai Ziqi, and the upper-level plaque reads Yunzhang Pavilion.

古文：阁楼回环，而阁杰耸，较之白鹿，迥然大观也。
现代文：楼阁回环而高耸，比起白鹿书院来，要壮观得多。
English: Towering above the surrounding buildings, it is much more spectacular than the White Deer College.

古文：是院创于宋，至世庙时郡守汪囗受始扩而大之。
现代文：此书院创办于宋朝，到本朝世宗时知府汪口受才进行扩建，规模更大。
English: This college was founded in the Song Dynasty, and it was only during the reign of Emperor Zong that it was expanded to a larger scale.

古文：熹庙明熹宗朱由校时为魏珰指魏忠贤所毁，惟楼阁未尽撤。至崇祯初，郡守林一囗仍鼎复旧观焉。
现代文：熹宗时被宦官魏忠贤毁坏，只有楼阁未完全拆除。到崇祯初年，知府林一口仍旧尽可能地在原址恢复了书院的原貌。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zongzong, it was destroyed by the eunuch Wei Zhongxian, and only the pavilion was not completely demolished. By the first year of Emperor Zongzong's reign, the prefect Lin Bitchu still restored the original appearance of the academy at the original site as much as possible.

古文：二十三日，在复生署中自宴。
现代文：二十三日在复生的官署中独自喝酒吃饭。
English: On the 23rd day, he drank and ate alone in the rehabilitation office.

古文：二十四日，复生婿吴基美设宴。
现代文：二十四日复生的女婿吴基美设宴款待我们。
English: His son-in-law Wu Jimei, who was resurrected on the 24th, hosted a banquet for us.

古文：基美即余甥。二十五日，张侯后裔以二像入署。
现代文：二十五日张侯的后裔将两张肖像送入府衙门中。
English: On the 25th, Zhang Hou's descendants sent two portraits to the government.

古文：上午，别复生，以舆车送入永新舟，即往觅静闻，已往大觉寺。
现代文：上午，辞别复生，复生雇轿子送我到了去永新县的船中，我便去找静闻，但他已去了大觉寺。
English: In the morning, after saying goodbye to Revival, Revival hired a palanquin to take me to the boat to Yongxin County. I went to look for Jingwen, but he had already gone to Daegu Temple.

古文：及至已暮，遂泊螺川驿前。
现代文：等他回来时天色已晚，于是停泊在螺川绎前。
English: By the time he returned, it was too late, so he anchored in front of the Luo River.

古文：二十六日，舟人市买菜，晨餐始行。十里，至神冈山下，乃西入小江。
现代文：二十六日船夫去买菜，早餐后才出发，行十里，到达神冈山下，这才往西驶进小江中。
English: On the 26th, the boatman went to buy vegetables, and only after breakfast did he set off. He traveled ten miles and reached the foot of Mount Kamioka, and only then did he sail west into a small river.

古文：风色颇顺，又西二十五里，三江口。
现代文：风势很顺，又往西行二十五里，到三江口。
English: The wind was very smooth, and it continued westward for twenty-five miles, to the mouth of the Sanjiang River.

古文：一江自西北来者，为安福江；一江自西南来者，为永新江。
现代文：一江从西北流来，那是安福江；一江从西南流来，那是永新江。
English: If a river flows from the northwest, it is the Anfu River; if a river flows from the southwest, it is the Yongxin River.

古文：舟溯永新江西南行，至是始有滩。
现代文：船溯永新江往西南行，到此处江中才有滩。
English: The boat followed the Yongxin River to the southwest, where there was a beach in the middle of the river.

古文：又十五里，泊于横江渡。
现代文：又行十五里，停泊在横江渡。
English: Another fifteen miles, anchored in Yokoe.

古文：是日行五十里。
现代文：这天共行了五十里。
English: Another five miles and it was getting dark.

古文：二十七日昧爽发舟。
现代文：二十七日黎明时开船。
English: We set sail at dawn on the 27th.

古文：二十里，廖仙岩。
现代文：行二十里，到廖仙岩。
English: Twenty miles to Liao Xianyan.

古文：有石崖瞰江，南面已为泰和界，其北俱庐陵境也。
现代文：有座石崖濒临江流，南面已经是泰和县地界，而北面都是庐陵县境。
English: There is a rock cliff on the edge of the river. To the south is the border of Taihe County, and to the north is the border of Fuling County.

古文：自是舟时转北向行，盖山溪虽自西来，而屈曲南北也。
现代文：从此处起船不时地折往北行，这大概是因为山溪虽然大方向上是从西面流来，但却时常折向南北两面。
English: From here, the boat occasionally turns to the north, probably because although the mountain stream flows from the west in the general direction, it often turns to the north and south.

古文：十里，永阳，庐陵大市也，在江之北；又十五里，北过狼湖，乃山坞村居，非湖也。
现代文：行十里，到永阳，它是庐陵县的一个大集市，位于江北岸；然而江的南岸，还要过十里才属于泰和县，这是因船只顺江往北绕行的缘故。又行十五里，往北经过狼湖，它是山坞中的一个村落，不是湖泊。
English: Go ten miles to Yongyang, it is a large market in Fuling County, located on the north bank of the river; however, the south bank of the river, it takes ten miles to belong to Taihe County, this is due to the ships passing along the river to the north. Go another fifteen miles, north past Wolf Lake, it is a village in the dock, not a lake.

古文：居民尹姓，有舡百艘，俱捕鱼湖襄间为业。
现代文：居民姓尹，有上百艘船只，全都是以在湖襄间捕鱼为业。
English: The resident surnamed Yin has hundreds of boats, all of which are engaged in fishing for carp in the lake.

古文：又十五里，泊于止阳渡，有村在江之北岸。
现代文：又行十五里，停泊在止阳渡，有个村庄位于江北岸。
English: Another fifteen miles, anchored in Zhiyangdu, there is a village located on the north bank of the river.

古文：是日行六十里，两日共行百里，永新之中也。
现代文：这天行了六十里，两天共行了一百多里，到了吉安府至永新县的中间。
English: On this day, I traveled sixty miles, and in two days, I traveled more than a hundred miles, to the middle of Ji'an Prefecture and Yongxin County.

古文：先是复生以山溪多曲，欲以二骑、二担夫送至茶陵界；余自入署，见天辄酿雪，意欲从舟，复生乃索舟，并以二夫为操舟助。
现代文：原先复生因为山溪弯道多，打算用两匹马、雇两个担夫送我们到茶陵州界；我自从到了府衙门，见天空一直在酝酿着风雪，心里便想乘船走，于是复生找了船只，并请了两个男子帮助驾驭船只。
English: Originally, Revival planned to use two horses and hire two porters to take us to the border of Chaling Prefecture because there are many bends in the mountains and streams. Since I arrived at Fuximen, I saw that the sky had been brewing snowstorms, and I wanted to go by boat. So Revival found a boat and asked two men to help steer the boat.

古文：至是朔风劲甚，二夫纤荷屡从水中多次下水拉纤，余甚悯其寒，辄犒以酒资。
现代文：到此处北风刮得很猛，那两人经常下到水中牵拉或扛抬船只，我很同情他们那寒冷的样子，每每搞赏给他们一些酒钱。
English: The north wind is very strong here, and the two men often go down to the water to pull or carry boats. I sympathize with their cold appearance and give them some wine money every time.

古文：下午，浓云渐开，日色亦朗，风之力也。
现代文：下午，浓云渐渐散开，天空也逐渐亮开，这是风的功劳啊！
English: In the afternoon, the thick clouds gradually disperse, and the sky gradually brightens. It's all thanks to the wind!

古文：二十八日，昧爽，牵而行，寒甚。
现代文：二十八日黎明时，用纤索拉着船出发，气候很寒冷。
English: At dawn on the 28th, we set out with the boat pulled by a cable. The weather was very cold.

古文：二十里，敖城，始转而南。
现代文：行二十里，到敖城，才折往南。
English: Go twenty miles, get to Penang, and then turn south.

古文：挂篷五里，上黄坝滩。
现代文：挂帆航行五里，上黄坝滩。
English: Sailing for five miles, we reached Huangba Beach.

古文：复北折，遂入两山峡间。
现代文：又折往北，便进入两山间的峡谷中。
English: After another turn to the north, you enter the canyon between the two mountains.

古文：五里，枕头石。
现代文：行五里，到枕头石。
English: Five miles to Pillow Rock.

古文：转而西，仍挂帆行，三里，上黄牛滩，十八滩从此始矣。
现代文：折向西面，仍挂帆航行，三里后上黄牛滩，十八滩就从此滩开始。
English: Turning to the west, still sailing with sails, after three miles, we reached Huang Niu Beach, and the 18th Beach began from this beach.

古文：滩之上为纷丝潭，潭水深碧，两崖突束如门，至此始有夹峙之崖，激湍之石。
现代文：黄牛滩往上为纷丝潭，潭水深绿，两边山崖突立夹耸如同门一样，到此处江岸才有夹峙的山崖，江中也才有阻遏水流从而使水流变得湍急腾涌的石头。
English: The upper reaches of the Yellow Cow Beach are a maze of filigree pools, the water of which is deep green. The cliffs on both sides protrude like doors, and it is only at this point that the riverbank has cliff cliffs, and the river also has stones that block the flow of water and make the water flow faster.

古文：又七里，上二滩，为周原，山中洋壑少开，村落倚之，皆以货即卖薪为业者也。
现代文：又行七里，上了两个滩，为周原，山间展开的山谷稍微开阔了些，有村庄倚山坐落在谷中，居民都以卖柴禾为业。
English: After another seven miles, I reached two beaches. The valley between the mountains was slightly wider than the surrounding plain. There were villages nestled in the valley, and the residents were all engaged in selling firewood.

古文：又五里为画角滩，十八滩中之最长者。
现代文：又行五里为画角滩，它是十八滩中最长的。
English: Another five-mile stretch is the Bajiao Beach, which is the longest of the eighteen beaches.

古文：又五里为坪上，则庐陵、永新之界也。
现代文：又行五里为坪上，它就是庐陵、永新两县的交界处。
English: It is also five miles to Pingxiang, which is the junction of Fuling and Yongxin counties.

古文：两县分界在坪上之东，舟泊于坪上之西。
现代文：两县的分界在坪上的东边，我们的船停泊在坪上的西边。
English: The border between the two counties is on the east side of Pingyao, and our boat is moored on the west side of Pingyao.

古文：二十九日，昧爽行。
现代文：二十九日黎明时开船。
English: We set sail at dawn on the 29th.

古文：二十里，桥面上旧有桥跨溪南北，今已圮，惟乱石堆截溪流。
现代文：行二十里，到桥面，溪上原来有座桥南北横跨，如今桥已毁坏，只有些乱石堆积着，堵截了溪流。
English: Twenty miles upstream, at the bridge, there used to be a bridge across the stream from north to south, but now the bridge has been destroyed, and only a few rocks have accumulated, blocking the stream.

古文：又五里为还古。
现代文：又走五里为还古。
English: Walked another five miles to get back.

古文：望溪南大山横亘，下有二小峰拔地兀立，心觉其奇。
现代文：望见溪流南边有座大山横亘着，下面有两座小山峰拔地直立，心中觉得很奇特。
English: I saw a large mountain on the south side of the stream, and two small mountains standing upright below. I felt very strange.

古文：问之，舟人曰： 高山名义山，土人所谓上天梁也，虽大而无奇；小峰曰梅田洞，洞即在山之麓。 
现代文：向旁人询问，船夫说： 那高山名叫义山，就是当地人所称的上天梁，它虽然高大但没有奇异处；小的山峰叫梅田洞山，洞就在山麓。 
English: Asking others, the boatman said: That high mountain is called Yishan, which is what the locals call Shangtianliang. Although it is tall, there is nothing unusual about it. The small peak is called Umeda Cave, and the cave is at the foot of the mountain.

古文：余夙慕梅田之胜，亟索饭登涯，令舟子随舟候于永新。
现代文：我早就仰慕梅田洞的优美景观，于是赶忙吃了饭登上岸，叫船夫连同他的船到永新县城去等候。
English: I had long admired the beautiful scenery of Umeda Cave, so I hurriedly ate my meal, went ashore, and asked the boatman to wait for me with his boat in Yongxin County.

古文：余用静闻由还古南行五里，至梅田山下，则峰皆丛石耸叠，山麓有龙姓者居之。
现代文：我和静闻从还古往南走五里，到达梅田山下，见山峰间到处石头纵横，高耸重叠，没有毫粒泥土覆盖在其间，真像是亭亭出水的莲花。山麓有一家姓龙的人居住着。
English: Jinghan and I walked five miles southward from ancient times to reach the foot of Mount Umeda. We saw that the mountain peaks were full of stones, towering and overlapping, with not a grain of soil covering them. It really looked like a lotus blossoming out of the water. At the foot of the mountain lived a family with the surname Long.

古文：东向者三洞，北向者一洞，惟东北一角山石完好，而东南洞尽处与西北诸面，俱为烧灰者。铁削火淬，玲珑之质，十去其七矣。
现代文：朝向东面有三个洞，朝向北面有一个洞，只有东北一角山石完好，而东南面洞尽头处和西北等各面，都被烧石灰的用铁具凿削、用柴火熏烤，石质的玲珑程度失掉了十分之七。
English: There are three caves to the east and one to the north. Only the northeast corner of the rock is still intact, while the southeast end of the cave and the northwest are all chiseled with iron tools of burnt lime and smoked with firewood. The luster of the stone has lost seven-tenths.

古文：东向第一洞在穹崖下，洞左一突石障其侧。
现代文：朝向东面的第一洞在弯隆的崖壁下面，洞左侧有一块突立的石头遮挡着。
English: The east-facing first hole is below a steep cliff, with a jutting rock on the left side of the hole.

古文：由洞门入，穹然而高，十数丈后，洞顶忽盘空而起，四围俱削壁下垂，如悬帛万丈，牵绡回幄形容石壁像牵拉缠绕的布慢一般，从天而下者。
现代文：从洞门进去，弯隆而高深，走十几丈后，洞顶一下子向高空盘旋而起，四周尽是刀削般的石壁向下垂悬，如同悬挂着千万丈帛布，围着薄纱帐幕，从天上飘洒下来。
English: Entering from the cave door, the slope is steep and deep. After walking more than ten meters, the top of the cave suddenly spirals up to the sky. All around are the knife-like stone walls hanging down, as if hanging with thousands of meters of cloth, surrounded by a gauze tent, floating down from the sky.

古文：其上复嘘窦嵌空有洞穴在半壁敞开，结蜃成阁，中有一窍直透山顶，天光直落洞底，日影斜射上层，仰而望之，若有仙灵游戏其上者，恨无十丈梯，凌空置身其间也。
现代文：上面又张开些小洞，高悬在半空中，小洞中仿佛吐出屋气幻化成楼阁，其中有个孔穴直通山顶，天光直泻到洞底，日影斜射入洞的上层，仰头望去，像是有仙人和神灵在上面游玩戏耍，遗憾的是没有一架十丈的梯子，以便攀登上去凌空置身于其间。
English: There are also some small openings above, hanging high in the middle of the air. In the small hole, it seems to spit out the roof gas and turn into a castle. Among them, there is a hole straight to the top of the mountain, the skylight falls straight to the bottom of the hole, and the sun's shadow shoots diagonally into the upper layer of the hole. Looking up, it seems that there are fairies and gods playing above. Unfortunately, there is no full-height ladder to climb up and stay in the middle of the sky.

古文：由此北入，左右俱有旋螺之室，透瓣之门，伏兽垂幢，不可枚举。
现代文：由此往北进去，左右两边都有如螺一样回旋的石屋子，露出似花瓣的石门，如卧伏的怪兽和垂悬的仪仗旗帜的石块石壁，更是不可枚举。
English: Entering from here to the north, there are stone houses that swirl like snails on both sides, stone doors that look like flower petals, stone walls that look like monsters lying down and flags of honor hanging from them, and much more.

古文：而正洞垂门五重，第三重有柱中擎，剖门为二：正门在左，直透洞光；旁门在右，暗中由别窦入，至第四门之内而合。
现代文：正洞内低垂着五重门，第三重门中有根擎天石柱将门分成两道：正门在左边，洞中光线直射进来；侧门在右边，黑暗中我们从门侧边的小洞进了第三重门，到第四重门内时与正洞合在一起。
English: In the main cave, there is a low-hanging five-storey gate. In the third-storey gate, there is a root of the Skyrock pillar, which divides the door into two: the main gate is on the left, with light shining directly into the hole; the side gate is on the right. In the dark, we entered the third-storey gate from a small hole on the side of the door, and when we were inside the fourth-storey gate, we joined the main hole.

古文：再入至第五门，约已半里，而洞门穹直，光犹遥射。
现代文：再往里进到第五重门时，大约已经进洞半里远了，然而因为洞门高弯，洞内平直，光线还能远远地射进来。
English: When I went further inside to the fifth heavy gate, I was about half a mile into the cave, but because the cave gate was high and curved, the cave was flat, and light could still come in from far away.

古文：至此路忽转左，再入一门，黑暗一无所睹，但觉空洞之声，比明处更宏远耳。
现代文：到此处路忽然折往左边，再走进一个门，里面黑暗得什么都看不见，只是觉得那空阔的洞中回荡的声响，比明亮处更加宏亮悠远而已。
English: At this point, the path suddenly turns to the left, and you enter a door, where it is so dark that you can't see anything, but you feel that the sound echoing in the empty hole is more grand and distant than the bright place.

古文：欲出索炬再入，既还步，所睹比入时更显，垂乳列柱，种种满前，应接不暇，不自觉其足之不前也。
现代文：想出洞来寻找火把重新进洞游览，待往回走时，所看到的比进来时更加清晰、垂吊着的钟乳石、纵横列置的石柱等各种奇异景象布满眼前，让人应接不暇，不知不觉脚步不再向前移动。
English: Come up with a hole to find a torch to re-enter the cave tour, and when walking back, what you see is clearer than when you came in, hanging stalactites, vertical and horizontal stone columns and other strange scenes are all over your eyes, making you busy, and you will not notice that your footsteps are no longer moving forward.

古文：洞之南不十步，又得一洞，亦直北而入，最后亦转而左，即昏黑不可辨，较之第一洞，正具体而微，然洞中瑰异宏丽之状，十不及一二也。
现代文：此洞南面不足十步的远方，又有一洞，也是一直向北走进去，最后同样是折往左边，就黑暗得分辨不清景物，比起第一洞来，形态正好相同而只是小了些，然而洞中瑰丽奇异宏大多姿的景象，赶不上络 洞的十分之一二。
English: Less than ten paces to the south of this cave, there is another cave, which is also entered all the way to the north. Finally, it is also turned to the left, and the scenery is dark and indistinguishable. Compared to the first cave, the shape is exactly the same but only smaller. However, the magnificent and bizarre large-scale scenery in the cave cannot catch up with two-tenths of the network cave.

古文：既出，见洞之右壁，一隙岈然若门。
现代文：出洞后，见洞右边的崖壁间，有条幽深的石缝，如同一道门。
English: After exiting the cave, there is a deep stone crevice between the cliff walls on the right side of the cave, like a door.

古文：侧身而入，其门高五六尺，而阔仅尺五，上下二旁，方正如从绳挈矩指合规矩，而槛桔指洞门槛栏之形，宛然斫削而成者。
现代文：侧身而入，那门高有五六尺，而宽仅有一尺五，上下和左右两旁，方正得如同用墨线弹过、用曲尺量过似的，而石吐槛的形状，宛若斧劈刀削而成的。
English: Looking sideways, the door is five or six feet high, but only a foot and a half wide. The top and bottom and both sides are square, as if they had been shot with an ink line and measured with a ruler, and the shape of the stone threshold is like an axe.

古文：其内石色亦与外洞殊异，圆窦如月，侧隙如圭，玲珑曲折，止可蛇游猿倒而入。
现代文：石缝里面，石头的色泽也和外洞的大不一样，圆形的小洞如同月亮，倾斜的缝隙如同圭玉，到处玲珑曲折，只有像蛇游动或像猿猴倒挂在树枝崖壁间那样才能进到里边。
English: Inside the stone crevice, the color of the stone is also very different from that of the outer hole. The round small hole is like the moon, the sloping gap is like a bead, and there are intricate twists and turns everywhere. You can only get inside if you swim like a snake or hang upside down like a monkey between the branches and cliffs.

古文：有风蓬蓬然从圆窦出，而忽昏黑一无所见，乃蛇退而返。
现代文：有股风篷篷地从圆形的小洞中吹出来，而后里面忽然黑暗得什么都看不见，我这才如蛇一样后退，返了出来。
English: A gust of wind blew tentatively out of the round hole, and then suddenly it was too dark to see anything inside, so I retreated like a snake and came back out.

古文：出洞而南不十步，再得第三洞，则穹然两门，一东向，一南向，名合掌洞。中亦穹然明朗。
现代文：出了此洞往南不到十步，又有第三洞，它有高高隆起的两个门，一个朝向东，一个朝向南，洞中也是高弯而明朗。
English: Less than ten steps south of this hole, there is a third hole, which has two high-rise doors, one facing east and one facing south. The hole is also high and clear.

古文：初直北入，既而转右。
现代文：开始时一直往北进去，随后折向右边。
English: Go north at first, then turn right.

古文：转处有石柱洁白如削玉，上垂而为宝盖，绡围珠络，形甚瑰异。
现代文：转折处有根石柱洁白得如同磨削过的玉石，石柱顶部倒垂着，形成一个宝盖，周围缀满珠丝一样的细石条，如用峭织成的，形态非常瑰丽奇异。
English: At the turning point, there is a stone pillar as white as polished cobbles. The top of the stone pillar hangs upside down, forming a treasure lid, surrounded by bead-like strips of fine stone, as if woven with cliff, the shape is very magnificent and strange.

古文：从此东折渐昏黑，两旁壁亦渐狭，而其上甚高，亦以无火故，不能烛其上层，而下则狭者复渐低，不能容身而出。
现代文：从此处折往东逐渐变得黑暗，两旁石壁间的间隙也逐渐变得狭窄，但上边很高，也因为没有火把，不能照到洞的上层，而下面狭窄处又逐渐低陷下去，以至于不能容身而返出了洞。
English: From here it gradually became dark to the east, and the gap between the stone walls on both sides gradually became narrow, but the upper side was high, and because there was no torch, it could not shine to the upper layer of the cave, and the lower narrow place gradually sank down, so that it could not contain itself and returned out of the hole.

古文：自是而南，凌空飞云之石，俱受大斧烈焰之剥肤矣。
现代文：从此洞往南，凌空飞入云间的石头，都遭受了大斧、烈焰的凿削烧灼。
English: From this cave to the south, the stones that flew into the clouds were subjected to the chiseling and burning of large axes and flames.

古文：仍从山下转而北，见其耸峭之胜，而四顾俱无径路。
现代文：仍然从山下折往山北，虽看见了山北面岩石高耸峻峭的优美景象，但四下里看都没有路。
English: I still turned from the bottom of the mountain to the north of the mountain. Although I saw the beautiful scenery of the high and steep rocks on the north side of the mountain, there was no road in sight.

古文：仍过东北龙氏居，折而西，遇一人引入后洞。
现代文：仍旧经过山东北面的龙家住所旁，折往西走，遇到一人领我进了后洞。
English: I still passed by the residence of the Long family on the northeast side of the mountain, turned to the west, and met a person who led me into the back hole.

古文：是洞在山之北，甫入洞，亦有一洞窍上透山顶，其内直南入，亦高穹明敞。
现代文：此洞在山的北面，刚进洞，也是有个孔穴上通山顶，从孔穴以内直往南进去，同样高高隆起而明亮宽敞。
English: This cave is on the north side of the mountain, just entering the cave, there is also a hole on the top of the mountain, from inside the hole straight to the south, the same high rise and bright and spacious.

古文：当洞之中，一石柱斜骞于内，作曲折之状，曰石树。
现代文：洞的中央，有根石柱斜矗着，呈现出曲折的状态，叫石树。
English: In the center of the cave, there is a stone pillar hanging diagonally, showing a tortuous state, called a stone tree.

古文：其下有石棋盘，上有数圆子如未收者。
现代文：石树下有个石棋盘，盘上有几颗像是没有收起来的圆圆的石棋子。
English: There is a stone chessboard under a stone tree. On the board there are several round stone pieces that look like they have not been put away.

古文：俗谓 棋残子未收 。后更有平突如牛心、如马肺者，有下昂首而上、上垂乳而下者，欲接而又不接者。
现代文：它们的后面更有许多石块，有的如牛心、如马肺，有的从下昂首向上、有的从上垂乳而下，有的将要相连接而又没有连接着。
English: Behind them there are many more stones, some like a cow's heart, like a horse's lung, some from below with their heads up, some from above with their breasts hanging down, some will be connected and not connected.

古文：其内西转，云可通前洞而出，以黑暗无灯，且无导者，姑出洞外。
现代文：再往里，洞折往西面，说是可以通前洞出去，因黑暗无灯火，而且没有引路的，便姑且出了洞。
English: Further in, the cave bends to the west, saying that it is possible to go out through the front hole. Since there is no light in the dark, and there is no guide, they just leave the hole.

古文：时连游四洞，日已下舂，既不及觅炬再入，而洞外石片嶙峋，又觉空中浮动，益无暇俯幽抉閟矣此句意即无暇览那些幽闭的景色。
现代文：当时接连游览了四个洞，太阳已经快落山，既来不及找寻火把重新入洞，而洞外石片嶙峋，又让人觉得空中仿佛有物浮动，这就更加无暇返身俯探幽暗的石洞、穿进那些关闭着的石门石窗内了。
English: At that time, I visited four caves in succession. The sun had almost set, and it was too late to find a torch to re-enter the cave. The rocks outside the cave were broken, and it made people feel as if something was floating in the air. This made it even more difficult to return to the dark cave and penetrate the closed stone doors and windows.

古文：遂与静闻由石瓣中攀崖蹈隙而上，下瞰诸悬石，若削若缀，静闻心动不能从，而山下居人亦群呼无路不可登；余犹宛转峰头，与静闻各踞一石，出所携胡饼啖之，度已日暮，不及觅炊所也。
现代文：于是和静闻从如花瓣的石中攀着崖壁踩着石缝爬到上面。往下俯瞰那些悬坠着的石头，若刀削般陡滑，若连缀在崖壁上的一样，静闻心中动摇不能跟随我继续攀爬，而山下居民也一齐呼喊说没有路，不可以攀登；我还是曲折地登上了峰头，和静闻各自踞守三块石头，拿出随身带的烧饼来吃，因为已经天晚，估计来不及找寻做饭的地方。
English: So, together with Jing Huan, I climbed the cliff from the petal-like stone, stepped on the stone cracks and climbed to the top. Looking down at the hanging stones, if they were sharp and slippery, if they were attached to the cliff, Jing Huan was shaken in his heart and could not continue climbing with me, and the residents at the bottom of the mountain also shouted together that there was no road and it was impossible to climb. I still climbed the peak in a tortuous way, and each of us guarded three stones with Jing Huan. I took out the burnt cake I had brought with me and ate it, because it was already late in the day and I did not

古文：既而下山，则山之西北隅，其焚削之惨，与东南无异矣。
现代文：随即下了山，山的西北隅被烧灼凿削的惨状情景，与东南面没有差别。
English: Then I went down the mountain. The disastrous scene of the northwest corner of the mountain being scorched and chiseled was no different from the southeastern side.

古文：乃西过一涧，五里，入西山。
现代文：于是往西跨过一条山涧，走五里，进入西面山中。
English: So he crossed a ridge to the west, walked five miles, and entered the mountains to the west.

古文：循水口而入，又二里登将军坳，又二里下至西岭角，遂从大道西南行。
现代文：顺水口处进去，又走二里登上将军坳，再走二里下到西边岭角，便从大路往西南走。
English: Go in at the water's edge, walk another two miles up to the General Post Office, walk another two miles down to the western edge of the ridge, and then walk southwest from the main road.

古文：五里，则大溪自南而来，绕永新城东北而去，有浮桥横架其上，过桥即永新之东关矣。
现代文：行五里，有条大溪从南面流来，绕过永新城东北面而流去，有座浮桥横架在溪流上，跨过桥就是永新县城的东关了。
English: Five miles away, there is a large stream flowing from the south, bypassing the northeast of Yongxin City. There is a floating bridge across the stream, and crossing the bridge is the Dongguan of Yongxin County.

古文：时余舟自还古转而北去，乃折而南，迂曲甚多，且溯流逆上，尚不能至，乃入游城中，抵暮乃出，舟已泊浮桥下矣。
现代文：这时我所乘的那只船因为从还古折往北去，才又折向南，绕折得太多，并且是溯流上行，所以还未能到达县城；于是我进城游览，到天黑才出城来，这时船已经停泊在浮桥下了。
English: At this time, the boat I was on was unable to reach the county seat, because it had been heading north for a long time before turning south again. It had made too many turns and was following the current upstream. So I went into the city for a tour and did not come out of the city until dark, when the boat was already moored under the pontoon bridge.

古文：永新东二十里高山曰义山，横亘而南，为泰和、龙泉界。
现代文：永新县城东面二十里的高山叫义山，它向南横贯，是泰和、龙泉两县的分界。
English: The high mountain 20 miles east of Yongxin County is called Yishan. It cuts across to the south and is the boundary between Taihe and Longquan counties.

古文：西四十里高山曰禾山，为茶陵州界。
现代文：西面四十里的高山叫禾山，为茶陵州界。
English: The high mountain forty miles to the west is called He Mountain, which is the border of Chaling Prefecture.

古文：南岭最高者曰岭背，名七姬岭，去城五十里，乃通永宁、龙泉道也。
现代文：南面的山岭最高的叫岭背，正式的名称为七溪岭，它距离县城五十里，是通往永宁、龙泉两县的路。
English: The highest mountain ridge in the south is called Lingbei, officially known as Qixi Ridge. It is 50 miles from the county seat and is the road to Yongning and Longquan counties.

古文：永新之溪西自麻田来，至城下，绕城之南，转绕其东而北去。
现代文：永新溪从西面的麻田流来，到了城下，绕过城南，又绕折到城东而后往北流去。
English: Yongxin Creek flows from Asada in the west, flows under the city, goes around the south of the city, turns around to the east of the city and then flows north.

古文：麻田去城二十里，一水自路江东向来，一水自永宁北向来，
现代文：麻田离城二十里，一条溪水从路江向东流来，一条溪水从永宁县向北流来，汇合在麻田。
English: Asada is twenty miles from the city. A stream flows east from the Lu River, and a stream flows north from Yongning County, and they converge in Asada.

古文：三十日，永新令闵及申以遏籴禁止买米闭浮桥，且以封印谩许假装承诺开关，而竟不至。
现代文：三十日永新县令阂为了阻止受灾的邻县来买粮食，关了浮桥。他哄骗人们答应开关，而以过年停办公事为理由，自己竟然不来。
English: On the 30th, the Yongxin County magistrate closed the pontoon bridge in order to prevent the disaster-affected neighboring counties from coming to buy grain. He tricked people into agreeing to the switch, but he did not come because of the New Year's holiday.

古文：上午，舟人代为觅轿不得，遂无志永宁，而谋迳趋路江。
现代文：上午，船夫替我们去找轿子但没有找到，于是无意再去永宁县，而打算直接奔赴路江。
English: In the morning, the boatman looked for a sedan chair for us but couldn't find one, so he had no intention of going to Yongning County again, but planned to go straight to Lujiang.

古文：乃以二夫、一舟人分担行李，入东门，出南门，溯溪而西。
现代文：于是用两个担夫、一个船夫分别挑着行李，进入城东门，出城南门，溯溪往西行。
English: So they used two porters and a boatman to carry their luggage, entered the east gate of the city, left the south gate of the city, and followed the stream to the west.

古文：七里，有小溪南自七姬岭来人。
现代文：走七里，有条小溪从南面的七溪岭流来汇入溪中。
English: After walking for seven miles, a small stream flows into the stream from the Qixi Ridge in the south.

古文：又西三里，大溪自西南破壁而出，路自西北沿山而入。
现代文：又往西走三里，一条大溪从西南破壁而出，路从西北沿山延伸。
English: Another three miles to the west, a large stream breaks through the wall from the southwest, and the road extends along the mountain from the northwest.

古文：又三里，西上草墅岭。
现代文：又走三里，往西上了草墅岭。
English: I walked another three miles and went west to Caoshu Ling.

古文：三里，越岭而下为枫树，复与大溪遇。
现代文：三里后，越过岭往下走为枫树，又与大溪相遇。
English: After three miles, I crossed the ridge and walked down to the maple trees, where I met the big stream again.

古文：路由枫树西北越合口岭，八里至黄杨。
现代文：路从枫树西北翻越合口岭，走又里到黄杨。
English: The road climbs from the northwest of Maple over Hekouling, and then goes to Huangyang.

古文：溯溪而西，山径始大开，又七里，李田。去路江尚二十里。日才下午，以除夕恐居停不便，即早觅托宿处，而旅店俱不能容。
现代文：从黄杨溯溪往西行，山路才大为开阔，又走七里，到达李田。 这时才下午，因为是除夕恐怕不便寻找住所，便早早地就寻觅寄宿的地方，但旅店都不接纳。
English: From Huangyang Tracking Creek to the west, the mountain road was very open, and it took seven miles to reach Litian. At this time, it was only afternoon, because it was New Year's Eve, I was afraid it would be inconvenient to find a place to stay, so I looked for a place to stay early, but no hotels accepted.

古文：予方徬徨路口，有儒服者过而问曰： 君且南都人耶？
现代文：我正徘徊在路口，有个儒生打扮的人过来问道： 先生您是南京人吗？
English: I was wandering at a junction when a person dressed as a Confucian scholar came up to me and asked: Sir, are you from Nanjing?

古文：余亦将南往留都，岂可使贤者露处于我土地！ 
现代文：我也将要南往留都南京，怎可让贤能人士在我方露宿呢！ 
English: I'm also going south to stay in Nanjing, how can we let talented people sleep rough in our country!

古文：揖其族人，主囗其家。
现代文：他向同行的族人致礼，让我住到这人家。
English: He bowed to a fellow tribesman and let me stay at his house.

古文：余问其姓，曰 刘。 
现代文：我问他贵姓，他回答说： 姓刘。 
English: I asked him his surname, and he replied, "My surname is Liu."

古文：且曰： 吾兄亦在南都，故吾欲往。 
现代文：并且说： 我哥哥也在南京，所以我想去一趟。 
English: And he said: My brother is also in Nanjing, so I want to go there.

古文：盖指肩吾刘礼部也，名元震。始知刘为永新人，而兹其里云。
现代文：他指的就是刘肩吾礼部，我这才知道刘肩吾是永新县人，此地是他的乡里。
English: He was referring to the Liu Shoulder and Shoulder Ceremony Department. That's when I knew that Liu Shoulder and Shoulder was from Yongxin County, and this was his hometown.

古文：余以行李前往，遂同赴其族刘怀素家。
现代文：因为行李已经朝前去了，我便同他一起前往他的族人刘怀素家。
English: Since his luggage had already gone ahead, I went with him to the home of his relative, Liu Huai Su.

古文：其居甚宽整，乃村居之隐者，而非旅肆也。
现代文：住房很宽敞整洁，属于隐居者居住的村舍，而不是旅店。
English: The house is very spacious and tidy, belonging to a secluded village, not a hotel.

古文：问肩吾所居，相去尚五里，遂不及与前所遇者晤。
现代文：打听刘肩吾的故居，说相隔还有五里，这样就未能和前面遇到的他家族里边的那人会面。
English: After inquiring about Liu Shoulder and I's former home, he said that it was still five miles away, so he couldn't meet the person from his family he met before.

古文：是日止行三十五里，因市酒肉犒所从三夫，而主人以村醪制的酒饮余，竟忘逆旅之苦。
现代文：这天只行了三十五里，便就停下来买了些酒肉稿劳跟随我挑担的那三个男子，而姓刘的主人拿出自制酒让我品尝，以至竟然忘掉了寄居客舍的忧苦。
English: On this day, after traveling only thirty-five miles, I stopped to buy some wine and meat for the three men who had followed me. The owner, surnamed Liu, brought out homemade wine for me to taste, and I even forgot the sorrows of the guest house.

古文：但彻夜不闻一炮爆竹声，山乡之寥寂，真另一天地也。
现代文：只是整夜未听到一声爆竹响，山乡的寂寥，真是另一片天地。
English: It's just that I didn't hear a single firecracker all night. The solitude of the mountains is truly another world.

古文：晚看落日，北望高山甚近，问之，即禾山也。
现代文：这晚观看落日时，往北望去，一座高山离得很近，一打听，它就是禾山。
English: This evening, while watching the sunset, I looked to the north, and a high mountain was very close by. When I asked about it, I learned that it was He Mountain.

