古文：二十八日出西坡城之西北门，复西向陟岭。
现代文：二十八日出了西坡城的西北门，再向西登岭。
English: On the 28th, I went out of the northwest gate of Xipo City, and then headed for Xidenling.

古文：盘折而上二里，始升岭头，其北岭尚崇。
现代文：盘绕曲折地向上走了二里，这才登上岭头，它北边的山岭还很高。
English: After winding and zigzagging upwards for two miles, I finally reached the top of the ridge. The mountains to the north of it are still very high.

古文：循其南而西，又二里，望西北一峰，甚近而更耸，有雾笼其首，以为抵其下矣。
现代文：沿着岭头南坡往西行，又是二里，望见西北方有一座山峰，很近却更加高耸，有云雾笼罩着峰头，以为到达它下面了。
English: I drove west along the southern slope of the ridge for another two miles, and saw a mountain in the northwest, very close but even higher. A cloud shrouded the peak, and I thought I had reached the bottom of it.

古文：又西一里，稍降而下，忽有脊中度，左右复中坠成峡，分向而去，其度脊阔仅二尺，长亘二三丈而已，为东西联属之蒂。
现代文：又往西行一里，稍稍下降，忽见有山脊从中间延伸过，左右两边再次从中下陷成峡谷，分头而去，这条延伸而过的山脊宽仅二尺，长处延绵二三丈而已，是东西两山连结的结合部。
English: Another mile to the west, a slight drop, and suddenly I saw a ridge extending from the middle, and the left and right sides again fell into a canyon from the middle to the bottom, and separated. This extended ridge is only two feet wide, and the long side is only two or three feet long. It is the junction of the two mountains.

古文：始知西坡一山，正如一芝侧出，东西径仅十里，南北两垂，亦不过二三十里，而此则其根蒂所接也。
现代文：这才知道西坡一山，正如一枝灵芝斜着长出，东西长仅十里，南北两面下垂，也不超过二三十里，而此处就是它根与蒂相连接之处了。
English: Only then did I know that the west slope of a mountain, just like a reishi mushroom growing obliquely, is only ten miles long from east to west, and droops from north to south, not more than twenty or thirty miles, and this is where its root and stem are connected.

古文：度脊，始上云笼高峰。
现代文：越过山脊，开始上登云雾笼罩着的高峰。
English: We crossed the ridge and began to climb the mist-shrouded peak.

古文：又二里，盘峰之南，是为倪纳铺。
现代文：又走二里，绕到山峰的南面，这是倪纳铺。
English: Walk another two miles, around to the south side of the mountain, this is Niina's shop.

古文：数十家后倚高峰，南临遥谷，前所望方顶屏列之峰，正亘其南。
现代文：几十户人家后面紧靠着高峰，南临远远的山谷，先前望见的方顶似屏风排列着的山峰，正横亘在它的南边。
English: Behind the dozens of houses there is a peak, to the south there is a distant valley, and the previously seen peaks, arranged like a screen, are on the south side of it.

古文：指而询之，土人曰： 是为兔场营。
现代文：指着此峰打听，当地人说： 这是兔场营。
English: Pointing at the peak, locals said: "This is a rabbit camp."

古文：其南为马场营，再南为新、安二所。 
现代文：它的南面是马场营，再往南是新、安两处卫所。 
English: To the south of it is the horse camp, and further south are the new and safe sanatoriums.

古文：新为新城所，安为安笼所，即与广西安隆土司为界者。由铺之西半里，有脊自山前坞中南度，复起山一支，绕于铺前，脊东西流水，俱东南入纳溪桥之上流者，第脊西之流，坠峡南捣甚逼。
现代文：由倪纳铺的西边走半里，有山脊从山前的山坞中往南延伸，又隆起一条山脉，绕到铺前，山脊东西两面的流水，全是往东南流入纳溪桥上游的水流，只不过山脊西面的水流，坠入峡中向南冲去十分狭窄。
English: Half a mile from the west side of Ni Na Pu, there is a ridge extending southward from the dock in front of the mountain, and a mountain ridge rises around the dock. The flowing water on both sides of the ridge is all flowing southeast into the upper reaches of Na Xi Bridge. However, the water flow on the west side of the ridge is very narrow when it falls into the gorge and rushes southward.

古文：又稍北，循崇山而西半里，有脊自南岭横亘而北，中平而不高，有堡楼峙脊间，是为保家楼。
现代文：又略往北走，沿着高山往西半里，有条山脊自南边的山岭向北横亘，中段平缓而不高，有座有楼的土堡屹立在山脊上，这是保家楼。
English: A little further north, half a mile to the west along the high mountain, there is a ridge stretching from the mountain range in the south to the north, the middle section is flat but not high, there is a earthen fort with a building standing on the ridge, this is the Bao Jia Lou.

古文：已为儸儸哨守之处。其脊自西南屏列而来，至此北度，东起而为高峰，即倪纳后之雾笼者；西亘而成石崖，即与来脊排闼为西夹坞者。
现代文：这条山脊自西南方似屏风样排列而来，至此地向北延伸，在东面耸起为高峰，就是倪纳铺后方云雾笼罩着的山峰；往西绵亘成为石崖，就是与先前来时的山脊似门扉般排列相夹成西面山坞的山崖。
English: This ridge comes from the southwest, like a screen, and extends to the north here. In the east, it rises as a peak, which is the cloud-shrouded mountain behind Niinabu. To the west, it stretches as a cliff, which is the cliff of the west dock that is sandwiched with the ridge that came before, like a door.

古文：由脊北循石崖直西，行夹坞之上，是为三条岭。
现代文：由山脊北面顺着石崖一直往西，行走在两山相夹的山坞之上，这是三条岭。
English: From the ridge north along the cliff all the way to the west, walking on the dock between the two mountains, this is the Sanjo ridge.

古文：西四里，石崖垂尽，有洞高穹崖半，其门南向，横拓而顶甚平；又有一斜裂于西者，其门亦南向，而门之中有悬柱焉。
现代文：往西行四里，石崖将尽处，有个山洞高高隆起在石崖半中腰，洞口向南，横处扩展开而顶部十分平滑；又有一个斜着裂向西边的山洞，洞口也是向南，而洞口的中央有悬垂的石柱。
English: Four miles to the west, the cliff ends everywhere, there is a cave high uplifted in the middle of the cliff, the mouth of the cave is to the south, the side is expanded and the top is very smooth; there is also a cave with a diagonal crack to the west, the mouth of the cave is also to the south, and the center of the mouth has an overhanging stone pillar.

古文：其前坞中水绕入西南峡，路乃稍降。
现代文：洞前坞中的流水绕人西南方的峡中去，路于是稍稍下坡。
English: The flowing water in the dock in front of the cave goes around the people to the southwest of the gorge, so the road goes slightly downhill.

古文：复西上岭坳，共三里，为芭蕉关。
现代文：再向西登上岭坳，共行三里，是芭蕉关。
English: Then westward to Lingyao, a total of three miles, is Basho Pass.

古文：数十家倚北山南突之坳间；水绕突峰之南，复北环关西而出；过关，则坠峡而下，复与水遇。
现代文：数十户人家紧靠北山向南突出的山坳间；水流绕过南突之峰的南面，又往北环绕到关西后流出去；过了芭蕉关，就下坠到峡中，再次与流水相遇。
English: Dozens of people's homes are close to the mountains and ridges protruding southward from the North Mountain; the water flows around the south face of the peak of the South Tower, and flows out after circling north to Kansai; after passing Basho Pass, it falls down into the gorge and meets the flowing water again.

古文：是为普安东境之要害，然止铺舍夹路，实无关也。
现代文：这里是普安卫东境的要害之地，然而只有骚站的客舍夹在路旁，实际并无城关。
English: This is the key point of the eastern border of Pu'anwei. However, only the guest house of Suo Station is sandwiched by the roadside. In fact, there is no city gate.

古文：由其西降峡循水，路北重崖层突，多赭黑之色。
现代文：由芭蕉关西边下到峡中顺水走，路北面的重重山崖一层层突起，多为赫黑色。
English: From the west side of Basho Kansai to the middle of the gorge, walk along the water, the north side of the road is covered with mountains and cliffs, mostly black.

古文：闻有所谓 吊崖观音 者，随崖物色之。
现代文：听说有处所谓 吊崖观音 的地方，顺着山崖寻找它。
English: I heard that there is a place called "Suspended Cliff Guanyin," so I went along the cliff to look for it.

古文：二里，见崖间一洞，悬踞甚深，其门南向而无路。
现代文：二里路，见到山崖间有一个山洞，高悬盘踞着非常深邃，洞口向南却无路上去。
English: Two miles away, I saw a cave between the mountains and cliffs. It was very deep with a high overhanging plate, but there was no way to go south from the cave mouth.

古文：乃攀陟而登，则洞门圆仅数尺，平透直北十余丈而渐黑，似曾无行迹所入者。
现代文：于是攀援着登上去，就见洞口圆圆的仅有几尺，平行直穿向北面十多丈便渐渐黑下来，似乎像未曾有人迹进入过的样子。
English: As a result, they climbed up with the help of others and saw that the round mouth of the cave was only a few feet wide, and the parallel straight through to the north was more than ten feet high and gradually darkened, as if no one had ever entered it.

古文：乃返出洞口，则满地白骨，不知是人是畜也。
现代文：于是返身走出洞口，只见满地白骨，不知是人还是牲畜。
English: So he turned around and walked out of the cave, only to see white bones all over the ground. He didn't know if they were human or livestock.

古文：仍攀崖下。
现代文：仍旧攀着山崖下来。
English: Still climbing down the mountain cliff.

古文：自芭蕉关而来，所降不多，而上亦不远，其坞间溪犹出山上也。入东门，出西门，亦残破之余也。
现代文：又见西边有条路，再次向北上到山崖间，山崖下的洞口多半是牛马歇息的场所，污秽之物遍布洞前；洞的上层有下垂的石柱，山洞的一端空出来放着一尊小型的石制观音菩萨像，是出自于人工，不是天然形成的。再次下来，沿着大道顺溪流往西行一里，溪水转向北坠入峡中流去，从这里又往西登涉在山坡土阜之间，共走六里便来到新兴城。
English: I also saw a road on the west side, again going north to the mountain cliffs. The mouth of the cave under the cliff is mostly a place for cattle and horses to rest, and filth is all over the front of the cave. The upper layer of the cave has sagging stone pillars. At one end of the cave, a small stone statue of Guanyin Bodhisattva is exposed. It is man-made, not naturally formed. Once again, I went down and followed the stream to the west for one mile. The stream turned north and flowed into the middle of the gorge. From here, I went west and waded between the hillside soil. I walked a total of six miles

古文：有碑，为天启四年都御史乌程闵公所复。
现代文：走入东门，出了西门，也是遭毁坏后的残余物。
English: Entering the East Gate and leaving the West Gate are also remnants of the destruction.

古文：中有坐镇守备。
现代文：城中有坐镇的守备。
English: There is a garrison in the town.

古文：是晚按君宿此。又西行岭峡间二里，连逾二岭脊，皆自南北度者。
现代文：又向西行走在山岭峡谷之间二里，一连越过两道山脊，都是自南往北延伸的。
English: I also walked westward for two miles between mountain ranges and canyons, crossing two ridges in a row, both extending from south to north.

古文：忽西开一深壑，中盘旋为田，其水四面环亘，不知出处。
现代文：忽然西南裂开一个深壑，壑谷盘绕，有块块农田，壑中之水四面环流，不知从哪里流出去。
English: All of a sudden, a deep ravine opened up in the southwest, winding through a valley of reeds. There were patches of farmland, and the water in the reeds circulated on all sides, flowing out from I don't know where.

古文：路循东峰西南降一里，复转南向上一里，又转东南上半里，逾岭脊而南，乃西南下一里，西抵坞中。
现代文：路沿着东峰往西南下坡一里，再转向南往上一里，又转向东南上走半里，越过岭脊往南，于是向西南下行一里，从西面到达坞中。
English: The road followed the east peak to the southwest downhill for one mile, then turned south to the top mile, then turned to the southeast uphill for half a mile, crossed the ridge to the south, and then went down to the southwest for one mile, reaching the dock from the west.

古文：闻水声淙淙甚急，忽见一洞悬北崖之下，其门南向而甚高，溪水自南来，北向入涧，平铺洞间，深仅数寸，而阔约二丈。
现代文：听到水声哗哗响十分湍急，忽然见到一个山洞悬在北边山崖之下，洞口向南而且非常高，溪水自南流来，向北流入洞中，平淌在洞里，深仅数寸，可宽处约二丈。
English: Hearing the sound of rushing water, I suddenly saw a cave hanging below the cliff on the north side. The cave entrance faced south and was very high. Stream water coming from the south flowed north into the cave, flowing smoothly inside the cave. It was only a few inches deep and about two stories wide.

古文：洞顶高穹者将十丈，直北平入者十余丈，始西辟而有层坡，东坠而有重峡，内亘而有悬柱，然渐昏黑，不可攀陟矣。
现代文：洞顶高高隆起之处将近十丈，径直往北平伸有十多丈，这才向西拓开并有层状的斜坡，东面下坠而有深峡，洞向内延伸而去并有悬垂的石柱，但是渐渐昏暗下来，不能攀登了。
English: At the top of the cave, there is a high rise of nearly ten meters, and it extends straight to Beiping for more than ten meters. This is when it opens to the west and has a layered slope, falls to the east and has a deep gorge, and the cave extends inward and has an overhanging stone pillar, but it gradually darkens and cannot be climbed.

古文：此水当亦北透而下盘江者。
现代文：这条溪水应当也是往北穿过山洞而后流入盘江的水流。
English: This stream should also be the flow of water northward through the cave and then into the Pan River.

古文：出洞，征询问洞名于土人，对曰： 观音洞。 
现代文：出了洞，向本地人询问洞名，回答说： 观音洞。 
English: When he came out of the cave, he asked the local people for the name of the cave, and they replied, "Kuan Yin Cave."

古文：征其义，以门上崖端有置大士像于其穴者也。
现代文：追寻它的意思，是由于洞口上方崖壁顶端的洞穴里放有一尊观音像的原因。
English: The reason for tracing its meaning is that there is a statue of Guanyin in the cave at the top of the cliff above the cave entrance.

古文：洞前溪由东南峡中来，其峡底颇平，大叶蒲丛生其间，淬绿锷蒲叶于风前，摇青萍于水上，芃芃有光。
现代文：洞前的溪水由东南方的峡中流来，此峡底部很平坦，大叶蒲丛生于其间，如在风前浇淬绿色剑刃，似于水上摇动的青萍之剑，郁郁有光彩。
English: The stream in front of the cave flows from the middle of the canyon in the southeast. The bottom of this canyon is very flat, and large leaf clusters are born in the middle of it. For example, the green blade of the sword is cast before the wind, similar to the Qingping Sword that shakes on the water. It has a rich luster.

古文：循之西南半里，又西穿岭隙间，渐循坡蹑脊。
现代文：顺着此峡往西南行半里，又向西穿越在山岭的空隙之间，慢慢顺着山坡踏上山脊。
English: Follow the gorge south-west for half a mile, then head west through a gap in the mountain range, and slowly walk up the slope to the ridge.

古文：二里，有一二家在北峰下，其前陷溪纵横，水由西南破壑去，路由西北循岭上。
现代文：二里，有一二家在北峰之下，它前面深陷的溪流纵横流淌，溪水从西南方冲破壑谷流去，道路由西北沿着山岭上行。
English: For two miles, there are one or two houses below the north peak. In front of it, a deep stream flows vertically and horizontally. The stream breaks through the valley flow from the southwest, and the road goes up the mountain from the northwest.

古文：一里，出岭头，是为蔺家坡。
现代文：一里，来到岭头，这是蔺家坡。
English: One mile, came to Lingtou, this is Shijiazhuang slope.

古文：西南骋望，环山屏列甚遥，其中则峰巅簇簇，盘伏深壑间，皆若儿童匍匐成行，天与为抗。
现代文：面向西南放眼望去，屏风状环列的山十分遥远，群山之中就见一簇簇峰顶，盘踞趴伏在深壑之间，全都像排成行的儿童甸旬爬行，没有什么能与它们相抗衡。
English: Looking to the southwest, the screen-like ring of mountains is very far away. Among the mountains, you can see a cluster of peaks, crouching between the depths, all like children crawling in a row. Nothing can compete with them.

古文：从此乃西北下，直降者二里，又升降陇脊西行者二里，有庵缀峰头，曰罗汉松，以树名也。
现代文：从此向西北下走，一直下降了二里路，又在陇脊上向西上上下下行了二里，有座寺庵点缀在峰头，叫做罗汉松，是以树来起名的。
English: From then on, I walked northwest, descending two miles all the way, and then I walked westward up and down on the ridge for two miles. There was a temple and hermitage dotted at the top of the peak, called Luohansong, named after the tree.

古文：自逾新兴西南岭，群峰翠色茸茸，山始多松，然无乔枝巨本，皆弱干纠缠，垂岚拂雾，无复吾土凌霄傲风之致也。
现代文：自从越过新兴西南方的山岭，群峰翠色葱笼，山上开始有很多松树，然而没有高枝巨株，都是些细弱的枝干纠缠在一起，悬垂在山风之中，轻拂着云雾，不再有我家乡的那种凌宵傲风的情趣了。
English: Since I crossed the mountains of the emerging southwest, where the peaks are bright green, there are a lot of pine trees on the mountain, but there are no high-branched giant trees, they are all weak branches entangled together, hanging in the mountain wind, flicking clouds and fog, and there is no longer the kind of pride of my hometown.

古文：其前又西南开峡。从峡中直下者三里，转而西平行者一里，有城当坳间，是曰板桥铺城。
现代文：庵前又向西南方张开一条峡谷，从峡中一直往下走了三里，转向西平行走了一里路，有座城位于山坳间，这叫做板桥铺城。
English: In front of the hermitage, a canyon opened to the southwest. I walked three miles down from the canyon, turned to Xiping and walked one mile. There is a city between the mountains, which is called Banqiao Pu Cheng.

古文：城当峡口，仰眺两界山凌空而起，以为在深壑中矣，不知其西犹坠坑下也。
现代文：城正对峡口，抬头眺望两面的群山凌空耸起，以为身在深深的壑谷中，不知道城的西面仍然下坠成坑谷。
English: The city is facing the mouth of the gorge, looking up at the mountains on both sides of the sky, thinking that it is in a deep valley, not knowing that the west side of the city is still falling into a valley.

古文：路在城外西北隅，而入宿城中之西门。
现代文：路在城外的西北隅，随即进城住宿在城中的西门。
English: The road is in the northwest corner outside the city, then immediately enter the city and stay at the West Gate in the city.

古文：二十九日出板桥城之西门，北折入大路，遂拾级下。
现代文：二十九日出了板桥铺城的西门，往北折上大路，就沿着台阶下走。
English: On the 29th, I left the west gate of Banqiao Town, turned north onto Shangdao Road, and walked down the steps.

古文：有小水自右峡下注，逾其左随之行。
现代文：有条小溪自右边峡谷中往下流注，越到溪左随着水流前行。
English: A stream flows down from the canyon on the right and follows the current as it reaches the stream on the left.

古文：一里，则大溪汪然，自西南转峡北注，有巨石梁跨其上，即所谓三板桥也；今已易之石，而铺犹仍其名耳。
现代文：一里，就有条水势汪洋的大溪，自西南方转过山峡往北流注，有座巨大的石桥跨在溪上，就是所谓的三板桥了；今天已换为石桥，但铺名仍旧沿用板桥之名。
English: One mile away, there is a large stream with powerful water. It flows from the southwest through the mountain gorge to the north. There is a huge stone bridge across the stream, which is the so-called three-board bridge. Today, it has been changed to a stone bridge, but the name of the bridge still uses the name of the board bridge.

古文：桥上下水皆阔，独桥下石峡中束，流急倾涌。
现代文：桥上下的水流都宽阔，唯独桥下的石峡在中段束拢来，湍急的水流倾泻汹涌。
English: The water flow above and below the bridge is broad, except that the stone gorge under the bridge is narrowed in the middle section, and the rapid water flow is turbulent.

古文：其水西北自八纳山发源，流经软桥，又西南转重谷间，至是北捣而去，亦深山中一巨壑也。
现代文：这条水流在西北方从八纳山发源，流经软桥，又向西南转入重重峡谷之间，到这里往北奔流而去，也是深山中的一个巨大壑谷。
English: This water stream originates in the northwest from the Bayna Mountain, flows through the soft bridge, and turns to the southwest between the canyons, where it rushes north. It is also a huge valley deep in the mountains.

古文：越桥西，溯溪北崖行。
现代文：过到桥西头，溯溪流沿北面的山崖行。
English: Cross to the west end of the bridge and follow the stream along the cliffs to the north.

古文：一里，溪由西南谷来，路入西北峡去，于是升降陇坳，屡越冈阿。
现代文：一里，溪水由西南方的山谷中流来，路进入西北边的峡中去，于是在土陇山坳间上上下下，屡次越过山冈和土丘。
English: For a mile, the stream water flows from the valley in the southwest, and the road enters the gorge in the northwest, so it goes up and down between the mounds and hills, repeatedly crossing the mountains and hills.

古文：四里直西，山复旷然平伏，独西南一石峰耸立，路乃不从西平下，反转南仰跻。
现代文：一直向西走四里路，山势全变得开阔起来，平缓起伏，独有西南方一座石峰耸立着，路竟然不从西边平缓下走，反而转向南抬头上登。
English: I kept walking westward for four miles, and the mountains all became open and gently undulating. There was only one stone peak in the southwest, and the road did not go down smoothly from the west, but turned south and climbed up.

古文：半里，盘石峰东南，有石奋起路右，首锐而湾突，肩齐而并耸，是曰鹦哥嘴。
现代文：半里路，绕到石峰东南面，有块岩石猛地升起在路右边，顶部尖锐并弯弯地突出来，双肩平齐而且一同耸起，这叫鹦哥嘴。
English: Half a mile away, to the southeast of the stone peak, a rock suddenly rises on the right side of the road, the top is sharp and curved, the shoulders are flat and rise together, this is called the parrot's mouth.

古文：又从峡平行，缘坡升降，五里，有哨舍夹路，曰软桥哨。
现代文：又转向西下走一里半路，有些店铺夹在路旁，叫革纳铺。又从峡中平缓前行，沿着山坡上上下下，五里路，有哨房夹住道路，叫做软桥哨。
English: I turned to the west and walked a mile and a half. Some shops were sandwiched by the roadside, called GeNa shops. I walked slowly from the gorge, up and down the hillside. At Wuli Road, there was a sentry box sandwiching the road, called the soft bridge sentry box.

古文：由哨西复坠峡下，遥见有巨溪从西峡中悬迅东注；下峡一里，即与溪遇；其溪转向南峡去，路从溪北，溯溪循北山之麓西行。
现代文：由哨房西再次往峡中下坠，远远望见有条巨大的溪流从西面峡中高悬迅急地向东流注；下到峡中走一里，马上与溪流相遇；此溪转向南边的峡中流去，路从溪流北岸，溯溪沿北山山麓往西行。
English: From the west of the sentry house, I fell down into the gorge again. In the distance, I could see a huge stream flowing rapidly eastward from the middle of the gorge on the west side; I walked a mile down into the gorge and immediately met the stream; the stream turned to the middle of the gorge on the south side, and the road went west from the north bank of the stream and followed the stream along the foot of the North Mountain.

古文：二里，有巨石梁南北跨溪上，即所谓软桥也。
现代文：二里，有座巨大的石桥呈南北向跨在溪流上，这就是所谓的软桥了。
English: Two miles away, there is a huge stone bridge spanning the stream in a north-south direction. This is the so-called soft bridge.

古文：余初疑冉姓者所成，及读真武庙前断碑，始知为 软 ，想昔以篾索为之，今已易之石，而犹仍其名耳。
现代文：我起初怀疑是某个姓冉的人建成的，到读了真武庙前的断碑后，这才知道是 软 ，料想从前是用蔑条编制的绳索建成的桥，今天已换成石桥，可仍旧沿用这个名字罢了。
English: At first, I suspected that it was built by someone with the surname Ran, but after reading the broken monument in front of the Zhenwu Temple, I learned that it was a soft bridge. It is supposed that the bridge, which was once built with ropes made of slats, has been replaced by a stone bridge today, but the name is still used.

古文：度桥而南，遂从溪南西向缘南崖而上，其跻甚峻。
现代文：过到了桥南，就从溪南岸向西沿着南面的山崖上走，那上登的路十分陡峻。
English: After crossing to the south of the bridge, walk west from the south bank of the creek along the southern cliff. The path up there is very steep.

古文：半里，平眺溪北，山俱纯石，而绿树缘错成文，其中忽有一瀑飞坠，自峰顶直挂峡底。
现代文：半里，平视溪北，山体全是纯一色的岩石，而绿色的树丛顺着山势错落其间形成斑纹，山中忽然有一条瀑布飞坠而下，自峰顶一直挂到峡底。
English: Half a mile away, looking straight ahead to the north of the creek, the mountains are all pure, uniform rock, while the green bushes fall along the mountainside to form stripes. Suddenly, there is a waterfall in the mountains, hanging from the peak to the bottom of the canyon.

古文：缘南崖西上，愈上愈峻，而北眺翠纹玉瀑，步步回首不能去。
现代文：循南面的山崖向西上爬，越上去越险峻，而朝北眺望，翠绿的斑纹，白玉般的瀑布，一步步回头看不舍离去。
English: Follow the cliffs to the south and climb westward, getting steeper and steeper as you go up, while looking north, emerald green stripes, white jade-like waterfalls, step by step, I can't wait to leave.

古文：上二里，峡底溪从西北而出，岭头路向西南而上。
现代文：上走二里，峡底的溪流从西北方流出去，岭头的路向西南方上升。
English: Two miles up, the stream at the bottom of the gorge flows out from the northwest, and the road at the head of the ridge rises to the southwest.

古文：又一里，过真武庙。
现代文：又行一里，路过真武庙。
English: I walked another mile and passed the True Martial Arts Temple.

古文：按君自新兴而来，越此前去。
现代文：由庙西向南行，便下到山坞中。
English: From the west of the temple to the south, they went down to the middle of the dock.

古文：由其西，南向行，遂下坞中。又西南共四里，两越小岭而下，有峡自东南达西北，又两界山排闼而成者，其中颇平远，有聚落当其间，曰旧普安。
现代文：又往西南共走四里，两次翻越小岭后下走，有山峡从东南延到西北，又是两列山似门扉排列而成的山峡，峡中很是平旷空远，有村落位于其间，叫做旧普安。
English: Another four miles to the southwest, twice over the ridge and then down, there is a canyon stretching from the southeast to the northwest, and it is a canyon formed by two rows of mountains that look like doors. The canyon is very flat and empty, and there is a village in the middle, called Old Pu'an.

古文：按君饭于铺馆，余复先之而西北由坞中行。
现代文：巡按大人在释站客馆里吃饭，我再次先于他往西北由坞中前行。
English: The patrol master had dinner in the guest house of the Jiefang Station, and I again went ahead of him to the northwest from the dock.

古文：东北界山逶迤缭绕，不甚雄峻；西南界山蹁跹离立，复露森罗；峡踪虽远，然两头似俱连脊，中平而无泄水之隙者。
现代文：东北方的一列山通巡缭绕，不十分雄伟险峻；西南面的一列山翩跃起舞，成排矗立，再次露出森然罗列的姿态；山峡的踪迹虽然很遥远，然而两头似乎都有相连的山脊，中部平坦却无泄水的缺口。
English: In the north-east, a line of mountains twists and turns, not quite majestic and precipitous; in the south-west, a line of mountains dances and stands in rows, once again revealing a well-arranged posture; although the traces of the canyon are very distant, they seem to have a connected ridge at both ends, and the middle is flat, but there is no water leakage gap.

古文：又西三里，有石峰中起，分突坞间，神字界其下，曰双山观。
现代文：又往西三里，有石峰在中央耸起，分别突起在山坞间，神庙隔在两峰之下，叫双山观。
English: Another three miles to the west, there is a stone peak rising in the center, separately protruding between the docks, the temple is separated under the two peaks, called the double mountain view.

古文：按君自后来，复越而前去。
现代文：又向西一里，就见西面来的山脊回绕在前方，于是山坞谷地到了尽头。
English: Another mile to the west, we saw the ridge coming from the west wind around in front of us, so the dock valley came to an end.

古文：又西一里，则西脊回环于前，遂坞穷谷尽。坞底有塘一方，汇环坡之麓，四旁皆石峰森森，绕塘亦多石片林立，亦有突踞塘中者。
现代文：坞底有一方形水塘，汇积在环形山坡的山麓下，四旁皆是森森罗列的石峰，绕着池塘也有许多林立的石片，也有些石块突兀蹲踞在池塘之中。
English: At the bottom of the dock there is a square-shaped pond, which is accumulated at the foot of the circular hillside. All around are stone peaks, and there are also many standing stones around the pond, and some stones are protruding and squatting in the pond.

古文：于是从塘西南上回坡，一里，登其脊。
现代文：于是从池塘往西南踏上回绕的山坡，一里，登上坡脊。
English: So I walked from the pond to the southwest up the winding hillside, one mile, up the ridge.

古文：又宛转西行岭头，岭左右水俱分泻深谷，北出者当从软桥水而入盘江上流，南流者当从黄草坝而下盘江下流。
现代文：又曲曲折折向西行走在岭头上，山岭左右两侧的水流都分别下泻到深谷中，往北流出去的应当汇入软桥下的水流而流入盘江上游，向南流的应当是流经黄草坝后流人盘江下游。
English: Walking westward on the ridge head, the water flow on both sides of the mountain fell into the deep valley. The water flow to the north should flow into the water flow under the soft bridge and flow into the upper reaches of the Pan River, and the southward flow should flow through the lower reaches of the Huangcao Dam.

古文：又西向从岭头升陟，其上多中洼之宕，大者盘壑为田，小者坠穴为阱。
现代文：又向西在岭头上攀登，岭上多有中央下洼的坑穴，大些的盘绕成壑谷，垦为农田，小点的坠成洞穴成为陷阱。
English: They also climbed westward on the ridge head. On the ridge, there are many pits with central depressions, the larger ones are coiled into valleys, the smaller ones are farmland, and the smaller ones fall into caves and become traps.

古文：共五里，为水塘铺，乃饭于庙间。
现代文：共行五里，是水塘铺，便在庙中吃了饭。
English: After walking for five miles, they reached a pond and had lunch in a temple.

古文：过铺西下岭，逶迤山半，又五里，过高笠铺，南向行陇间。
现代文：过铺后往西下岭，透巡于半山之间，又走五里，是高笠铺，向南行走在山垄之间。
English: After passing the hut, I walked to the west of the lower ridge, through the middle of the mountain, and walked another five miles, which was the high hat hut, and walked southward between the ridges.

古文：逾一平岭西南下，又五里，有小溪自北峡来，石桥南跨之。
现代文：越过一道平缓的山岭向南下行，又是五里，有条小溪自北面峡中流来，一座石桥向南跨过小溪。
English: After crossing a gentle ridge to the south, it is another five miles downhill. A stream flows from the middle of the Beimen Gorge, and a stone bridge crosses the stream to the south.

古文：度其南，北门街夹峙冈上；逾冈南下，始成市，有街西去，为云南坡大道；直南，又一小溪自西南峡来，石桥又南跨之。
现代文：过到桥南，北门外街道夹立于山冈之上；越过山冈往南下走，开始有集市，有街道往西而去，是去云南坡的大道；一直往南走，又有一条小溪自西南方峡中流来，石桥又向南跨过小溪。
English: Passing to the south of the bridge, the streets outside the north gate stand on top of the hill; crossing the hill and going south, there is a market, and there are streets going west, which is the road to the Yunnan slope; going all the way south, there is another stream flowing from the middle of the southwest Nanfangxia, and the stone bridge crosses the stream to the south.

古文：桥南即为普安城，州、卫俱在其中。
现代文：桥南就是普安城，州、卫的衙门都在城中。
English: The south of the bridge is Pu'an City, and the gate of the prefecture and the defense are in the city.

古文：按君已驻署中矣。其城西半倚山脊，东半下临东溪，南北二门正当西脊之东麓，而东门则濒溪焉。
现代文：普安城西半边紧靠着山脊，东半边下临着东溪，南北两道城门正对着西面山脊的东麓，而东门就濒临着溪流。
English: The western half of Pu'an City is close to the ridge, the eastern half is next to the East Stream, the north and south gates are facing the eastern foot of the western ridge, and the east gate is on the edge of the stream.

古文：南门外石桥，则三溪合于北，经东门而西环城南，又南去而注于水洞者。
现代文：南门外有石桥，三条溪流在桥北合流，流经东门往西绕到城南，又向南流去注入水洞之中。
English: There is a stone bridge outside the south gate. Three streams meet on the north side of the bridge, flow through the east gate to the west, around to the south of the city, and flow south to the water cave.

古文：北门外石桥：第一桥，即云南坡之水，绕城西北隅而为堑，东下而与北溪合于城东；第二桥，即小溪自西北来者，《一统志》所云 目前山之水 也；第三桥，即小溪自北来者，《一统志》所云 沙庄之水 也。
现代文：北门外的石桥：第一座桥，就是云南坡的水流，绕到城西北隅成为堑沟，往东下流后与北溪在城东合流；第二座桥，就是自西北流来的小溪，是《一统志》所说的 目前山之水 了；第三座桥，就是自北面流来的小溪，是《一统志》所说的 沙庄之水 了。
English: The stone bridge outside the north gate: the first bridge is the water flow of the Yunnan slope, which flows around the northwest corner of the city to become a gully, flows down to the east and then merges with the North Stream in the east of the city; the second bridge is the stream flowing from the northwest, which is the current mountain water as mentioned in the "Historical Dictionary"; the third bridge is the stream flowing from the north, which is the water of Shazhuang as mentioned in the "Historical Dictionary."

古文：三溪交会于城之东北，合而南去，是为三一溪，经城南桥而入于水洞。
现代文：三条溪水在城的东北面交汇，合流后往南流去，这就是三一溪，流经城南的石桥后流入水洞。
English: Three streams meet in the north-east of the city and flow southwards after their confluence. This is the Trinity Stream, which flows through a stone bridge in the south of the city and into a water cave.

古文：后设流官，知州姓黄。
现代文：普安城在天启初年，因为水西叛乱，各支蛮族响应它，被围攻一年后攻破，至今疮痰尚未恢复。然而此城以文章仕进的气运，是贵州省的首位，从前有都御史蒋大人，当今有王宫詹，不是别的卫可以相比的。州里过去仅有土官，后来设置了流官，一同治理此地。
English: Pu'an City in the first year of the Apocalypse, because of the west-water rebellion, all barbarian tribes responded to it. It was besieged for a year and broken, and has not yet recovered. However, this city is the first in Guizhou Province to have the fortune of the article. In the past, there was the governor of the capital Shi Jiang, and today there is the palace Zhan, which is not comparable to other Wei. In the past, there were only local officials in the state, and later there were exiled officials to govern this place together.

古文：并治焉。州东北七十里有八纳。
现代文：州城东北七十里有座八纳山。
English: Seventy miles northeast of the state capital, there is a mountain called Mount Henna.

古文：其山高冠一州，四面皆石崖崭绝，惟一径盘旋而上，约三十里。
现代文：此山在全州最高，四面都是高峻的石崖绝壁，唯有一条小径盘旋着上去，约三十里长。
English: This mountain is the highest in the whole state. On all four sides are steep rocky cliffs, with only one path circling up, about thirty miles long.

古文：龙土官司在其下。其顶甚宽平，有数水塘盈贮其上，软桥之水所由出也。
现代文：山顶十分宽敞平缓，在山顶上有几个贮满水的水塘，流经软桥的溪水就是由这里流出去的。
English: The top of the mountain is very spacious and gentle. There are several reservoirs full of water on the top of the mountain, and the stream water flowing through the soft bridge flows out from here.

古文：土音以 纳 为 但 ，而《梵经》有 叭呾ｄá哆 之音，今老僧白云南京人。因称叭呾山，遂大开丛林僧从居寺院多如丛林，而彝地远隔，尚未证果。
现代文：土话把 纳 说成 但 ，而佛经中有 叭阻哆 的音，今天白云老和尚因而称之为叭阻山，于是大规模建立寺院，但彝区僻远闭塞，还没有悟道成正果。
English: The local dialect refers to Na as Dan, and the Buddhist scriptures contain the sound of horns. Today, the Baiyun old monk calls it Horns Mountain, so he built a large-scale temple. However, the area is remote and closed, and there has been no enlightenment.

古文：州南三十里有丹霞山。
现代文：州城南边三十里处有座丹霞山。
English: Thirty miles south of the state capital is Mount Danxia.

古文：其山当丛峰之上，更起尖峰卓立于中。
现代文：此山位于成丛的山峰之上，更有一座尖峰挺立于群峰之中。
English: The mountain sits atop a cluster of peaks, with one spire rising above the rest.

古文：西界有山一支，西南自平彝卫屏列而北，迤逦为云南坡，而东下结为州治。
现代文：西境内有一列山，从西南方自平彝卫似屏风样排列向北，通道巡巡形成云南坡，并往东下延纽结成州城所在之山。
English: In the west, there is a line of mountains. From the southwest, they are arranged like a screen from Pingyao to the north, forming the southern slope of Yunnan, and extending down to the east to form the mountain where Chengdu City is located.

古文：西屏之中，其最高处曰睡寺山，正与丹霞东西相对。
现代文：西面屏立的群山之中，那最高处叫睡寺山，正好与丹霞山东西相对。
English: Among the mountains on the west side of the screen, the highest point is called Sleeping Temple Mountain, just opposite the east and west of Danxia Mountain.

古文：其东界有山，南自乐民所分支而北，当丹霞山南十里。
现代文：州东境有山，从南面自乐民所分出支脉往北延，位于丹霞山南边十里处。
English: There are mountains on the eastern border of the state. From the south, the branch extending from Lemin to the north is located ten miles south of Danxia Mountain.

古文：西界屏列高山横出一支，东与东界连属，合并而北，夭矫丛沓，西突而起者，结为丹霞山；东北耸突而去者，渐东走而为兔场营方顶之山，而又东北度为安南卫脉。
现代文：四面一列屏风样排列的高山横着伸出一条支脉，往东与东境之山相连，合并起来向北延，曲曲折折，重重叠叠，往西突起的，盘结为丹霞山；在东北方耸立突兀而去的，渐渐往东延伸而成为兔场营的方顶之山，而后又往东北延伸成为安南卫境内的山脉。
English: The high mountains, arranged in a row like a screen on all four sides, protrude a branch line horizontally. They are connected to the east with the mountains of the eastern border. They merge and extend to the north, twists and turns, overlap and overlap. They protrude to the west and are coiled as Danxia Mountain. They rise abruptly in the northeast and gradually extend to the east to become the mountain of the square top of the rabbit camp, and then extend to the northeast to become the mountains in the Annan Wei territory.

古文：其横属之支，在丹霞山南十里者，其下有洞，曰山岚洞，其门北向。
现代文：那横向连接的支脉，在丹霞山南面十里之处，山下有洞，叫做山岚洞，洞口向北。
English: That laterally connected branch, ten miles south of Mount Danxia, has a cave at the bottom of the mountain, called the Hawthorn Cave, the mouth of which is to the north.

古文：水从洞中出，北流为大溪，经丹霞山之西大水塘坞中，又北过赵官屯，又东转而与南板桥之水合。
现代文：水从洞中流出，往北流去变成大溪，流经丹霞山西边大水塘所在的山坞中，又往北流过赵官屯，又向东转去与南板桥的水流会合。
English: The water flows out of the cave, flows north to become a large stream, flows through the dock where the large pond is located on the west side of Mount Danxia, flows north through Zhaoguantun, and turns east to meet the water flow of Nanbanqiao.

古文：由洞门溯其水入，南行洞腹者半里，其洞划然上透，中汇巨塘，深不可测。
现代文：由洞口溯这条水流进洞，向南在洞腹中行半里，山洞顶上豁然透出天空，中间水汇积成巨大的水塘，深不可测。
English: From the mouth of the cave, this stream of water flows into the cave, and travels half a mile southward in the belly of the cave. At the top of the cave, the sky suddenly opens up, and the water in the middle accumulates into a huge pond, unfathomable.

古文：土人避寇，以舟渡水而进，其中另辟天地，可容千人。
现代文：本地人为躲避强盗，用船渡水进去，那里面另外辟有天地，可容纳上千人。
English: In order to escape the bandits, the locals used a boat to cross the water to get in, where there was another world, which could accommodate thousands of people.

古文：而丹霞则特拔众山之上，石峰峭立，东北惟八纳山与之齐抗。
现代文：而丹霞山却独立挺拔于众山之上，石峰峭立，东北方唯有八纳山与它平齐抗衡。
English: However, Danxia Mountain stands independently above the other mountains, with its craggy peak. In the northeast, it is only rivaled by Henna Mountain.

古文：八纳以危拥为雄，此峰以峭拔擅秀。
现代文：八纳山以危峰拥立为雄，此峰以峻峭挺拔独擅秀色。
English: Mount Henna is famous for its perilous peak, which is distinguished by its steepness.

古文：昔有玄帝宫，天启二年毁于蛮寇，四年，不昧师徽州人。复鼎建，每正二月间，四方朝者骈集，日以数百计。
现代文：从前有座玄帝宫，天启二年，不昧禅师重又鼎力重建，每年正月二月间，四方的朝山者群集而来，每天以几百人来计算。
English: Once upon a time, there was an emperor's palace. In the second year of the Apocalypse, the Zen master rebuilt it with great effort. Every year, between the first month and the second month, the morning mountaineers from all over the country come in droves, numbering several hundred people each day.

古文：僧又捐资置庄田，环山之麓，岁入谷三百石。而岭间则种豆为蔬，岁可得豆三十石。
现代文：僧人们又捐款购置了庄园田地，环绕在山麓，而山岭间则种植豆子作为蔬菜，用来供给四方的来客。
English: The monks also donated money to purchase the farmland of the manor, which is surrounded by the foothills, while the mountains are planted with beans as vegetables, which are used to supply visitors from all over the world.

古文：以供四方。但艰于汲水：寻常汲之岭畔，往返三里，皆峻级；遇旱，则往返十里而后得焉。
现代文：但是汲水很艰难：平常在岭畔汲水，往返有三里路，都是陡峻的石阶；遇上干旱时，就要往返十里才能得到水。
English: However, it is very difficult to draw water: usually, the water is drawn from the ridge, and there is a three-mile round trip, all of which are steep stone steps; in the event of drought, it is necessary to travel ten miles round trip to get water.

