古文：西域《夏书》称： 西戎即序。 
现代文：《夏书》称： 西戎就是序。 
English: "The Summer Book" said: "The West is the prologue."

古文：班固云： 就而序之，非盛威武致其贡物也。 
现代文：班固说： 安置并依顺序排列，不是炫耀武功让他们进贡物品。 
English: Banggu said: Placing and arranging in order, it is not a display of martial arts to make them tribute items.

古文：汉氏初开西域，有三十六国。其后，分立五十五王，置校尉、都护以抚之。
现代文：汉代最初开通西域，共有三十六个国家，之后，又分立五十五个王，设置校尉、都护来安抚他们。
English: The Han Dynasty first opened the western region, a total of thirty-six countries, after which fifty-five kings were separated, and schoolmasters and tutors were set up to appease them.

古文：王莽篡位，西域遂绝。
现代文：王莽篡位后，便与西域断绝往来。
English: After Wang Mang usurped the throne, he cut off contact with the western region.

古文：至于后汉班超所通者五十余国，西至西海，东西万里，皆来朝贡。复置都护、校尉，以相统摄。
现代文：到了后汉，班超到达的有五十多个国家，西到西海，东西万里之遥，都来进贡，重新设置都护、校尉，以统领西域。
English: In the Later Han Dynasty, Banchao arrived in more than fifty countries, from the West to the West Sea, from the East to the West, all came to pay tribute, and re-set the capital guard and the captain to rule the western region.

古文：其后或绝或通，汉朝以为劳弊中国，其官时置时废。
现代文：之后或者断绝或者开通，汉朝认为消耗中原物力。官员有时设置有时废去。
English: After that, it was either cut off or opened, and the Han Dynasty believed that it would consume the original material resources. Officials sometimes set up and sometimes abandoned.

古文：暨魏、晋之后，互相吞灭，不可复详记焉。
现代文：到魏、晋之后，国家互相吞并，不能详细记载。
English: After the Wei and Jin dynasties, countries annexed each other, which cannot be recorded in detail.

古文：道武初，经营中原，未暇及于四表。
现代文：魏道武帝初年，发展中原，没有机会顾及四方。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wei Daowu, there was no opportunity to take into account the four directions in developing the plains.

古文：既而西戎之贡不至，有司奏依汉氏故事，请通西域，可以振威德于荒外，又可致奇货于天府。
现代文：一段时间西戎贡物不到。官吏奏请依照汉代事例，请求通使西域。可以使中原威望圣德震动边远地区，又可以招来珍奇货物到达京都。
English: For a period of time, tributes from Saigon did not arrive. Government officials, please follow the example of the Han Dynasty and request the dispatch of an envoy to the western region. It can make the remote areas of the Central Plains vibrate with prestige and sanctity, and it can bring rare goods to Kyoto.

古文：帝曰： 汉氏不保境安人，乃远开西域，使海内虚耗，何利之有？
现代文：皇帝说： 汉代不守卫边境安宁百姓，而向远方开通西域，使国内财力浪费，有什么好处？
English: The emperor said: What is the benefit of the Han Dynasty not guarding the border and tranquilizing the people, but opening the western region to the far away and wasting domestic financial resources?

古文：今若通之，前弊复加百姓矣！ 
现代文：现在如果通使西域，前代弊端又要堆在百姓身上了。 
English: Now, if the Western Regions are allowed to secede, the evils of the previous generation will pile up on the people.

古文：遂不从。
现代文：于是没有答应。
English: So he didn't say yes.

古文：历明元世，竟不招纳。
现代文：经过明元一代，竟没有招服西域。
English: After the Ming and Yuan dynasties, the western region was not conquered at all.

古文：太延中，魏德益以远闻，西域龟兹、疏勒、乌孙、悦般、渴槃陀、鄯善、焉耆、车师、粟特诸国王始遣使来献。
现代文：太延年间，魏朝圣德日益传至远方，西域龟兹、疏勒、乌孙、悦般、渴般、善阝善、焉耆、车师、粟特等国国王开始派遣使者来京都进贡。
English: During the Taiyan era, the virtue of the Wei pilgrimage was increasingly spread to distant lands. Kings of the Western Regions, such as Guzhu, Shule, Usun, Yue, Qian, Zenzhen, Yan, Chaishi, and Sogdian, began to send envoys to Kyoto to pay tribute.

古文：太武以西域汉世虽通，有求则卑辞而来，无欲则骄慢王命，此其自知绝远，大兵不可至故也。
现代文：太武帝认为西域虽然已经在汉代通使，有所求时低声下气而来，无所想时就傲视怠慢皇命。这是他们自知地处偏远，王朝大军不能到达的缘故。
English: Taiwu Emperor thought that although the Western Regions had been dispatched in the Han Dynasty, when they wanted something, they came in a low voice, and when they did not want anything, they were arrogant and neglected the imperial mission. This was because they knew that they were far away and the imperial army could not reach them.

古文：若报使往来，终无所益，欲不遣使。
现代文：如果允诺使节往来，最终不会有益处，不想派遣使节。
English: If we promise to exchange envoys, it will not be beneficial in the end. We don't want to send envoys.

古文：有司奏： 九国不惮遐险，远贡方物，当与其进，安可豫抑后来？ 
现代文：有官吏上奏说 ：九国不怕遥远艰险，自远方进贡地方特产，应当与他们互通，怎么能事先压制呢？ 
English: A high-ranking official said: "The nine countries are not afraid of distant hardships and dangers. They should pay tribute to local specialties from afar and communicate with them. How can they be suppressed in advance?"

古文：乃从之。
现代文：于是答应通使。
English: So he followed the advice of Gong Su.

古文：于是始遣行人王恩生、许纲等西使。恩生出流沙，为蠕蠕所执，竟不果达。
现代文：便开始派使者王恩生、许纲等出使西域，恩生到流沙，被蠕蠕国俘获，竟未能到达。
English: He then began to send emissaries such as Wang Ensheng and Xu Gang to the Western Regions. Ensheng went to the Quicksand and was captured by the Cree, but failed to arrive.

古文：又遣散骑侍郎董琬、高明等多赍锦帛，出鄯善，招抚九国，厚赐之。
现代文：又派遣散骑侍郎董琬、高明等携带很多锦帛，到善阝善招纳抚慰九国，重重赏赐他们。
English: He also sent horseback courtiers, such as Dong Xuan and Gao Ming, to carry a lot of brocade, to invite and comfort the nine kingdoms, and to reward them again and again.

古文：初，琬等受诏：便道之国，可往赴之。
现代文：当初，董琬等接到皇上诏令：道路方便的其他国家，可以前往。
English: At first, Dong Xuan and others received an imperial edict: they could travel to other countries with convenient roads.

古文：琬过九国，北行至乌孙国。
现代文：董琬经过九国，北行到乌孙国。
English: Dong Xuan passed through the Nine Kingdoms and traveled north to the Wusun Kingdom.

古文：其王得魏赐，拜受甚悦。
现代文：国王得到魏朝赏赐，恭敬地接受，非常高兴。
English: The king received the award from the Wei Dynasty, accepted it respectfully, and was very happy.

古文：谓琬等曰： 传闻破洛那、者舌皆思魏德，欲称臣致贡，但患其路无由耳。
现代文：对董琬等人说： 传说破洛那、者舌国都记着魏朝恩德，想称臣纳贡，只是担心没有途径。
English: To Dong Hao and others, he said: According to the legend, when Luona was defeated, all the people in the country remembered the Wei Dynasty and Ende, and wanted to claim the tribute, but they were worried that there was no way.

古文：今使君等既到此，可往二国，副其慕仰之诚。 
现代文：现在您们既然已经来到这里，可以前去那两个国家，以成全他们仰慕中原的心志。 
English: Now that you have come here, you can go to those two countries to fulfill their aspiration of admiring Central Plains.

古文：琬于是自向破洛那，遣明使者舌。
现代文：董琬于是自己去破洛那，派高明出使者舌。
English: So Dong Hao went to Luona on his own and sent Gao Ming as a messenger.

古文：乌孙王为发导译，达二国，琬等宣诏慰赐之。
现代文：乌孙王替他们派向导翻译，到达两个国家，董琬等宣读诏书抚慰赏赐他们。
English: King Wusun sent a guide to translate for them, and they reached two countries. Dong Xuan and others read an edict to comfort and reward them.

古文：已而琬、明东还，乌孙、破洛那之属遣使与琬俱来贡献者，十有六国。
现代文：后来董琬、高明东归，乌孙、破洛那等国派使节与董琬一块来中原进贡，共十六个国家。
English: Later, Dong Xuan, Gao Ming returned to the East, and Uson, Bolona and other countries sent envoys to pay tribute to the Central Plains together with Dong Xuan, a total of sixteen countries.

古文：自后相继而来，不间于城，国使亦数十辈矣。
现代文：从此相继来到中原。每年不断，国内出往使节也有数十人了。
English: Since then, they have been coming to the Central Plains one after another. Every year, there are dozens of envoys from China.

古文：初，太武每遣使西域，常诏河西王沮渠牧犍，令护送。
现代文：当初，太武帝每派遣使者出使西域，常常诏令河西王沮渠牧犍，让他护送。
English: At first, whenever Emperor Taivu sent an envoy to the Western Regions, he often ordered the King of Hexi to go and escort him.

古文：至姑臧，牧犍恆发使导路，出于流沙。
现代文：到姑臧，牧犍经常派向导领路，走出沙漠。
English: In Gulu, the herdsmen often send guides to lead the way out of the desert.

古文：后使者自西域还至武威，牧犍左右谓使者曰： 我君承蠕蠕吴提妄说，云： 去岁魏天子自来伐我，士马疫死，大败而还，我擒其长弟乐平王丕。 
现代文：后来使节从西城回到武威，牧犍身边的人对使者说 ：我们主人听信蠕蠕国吴提的荒谬说法，称： 去年魏朝皇帝亲自带兵攻打我们，士卒战马得瘟疫而死，大败而归。我擒获他的长弟乐平王丕。 
English: Later, when the envoy returned to Wuwei from the West City, the people around the herdsman said to the envoy, "Our master has listened to the absurd statement of Wu Ti of the State of Wuhou, saying, 'Last year, the Emperor of the Wei Dynasty personally led an army to attack us, the soldiers died of the plague and returned defeated. I captured his eldest brother, Leping Wang Yao.

古文：我君大喜，宣言国中。
现代文：我主人非常高兴。在国内宣扬。
English: My master was overjoyed, and he began to preach throughout the land.

古文：又闻吴提遣使告西域诸国： 魏已削弱，今天下唯我为强。
现代文：又听说吴提派使者通告西域各国：魏朝已经削弱，现在天下只有我们国家强大。
English: It was also heard that Wu Ti sent an envoy to inform the countries of the Western Regions: The Wei Dynasty has been weakened, and now only our country is strong.

古文：若更有魏使，勿复恭奉。 
现代文：如果再有魏朝使节，不要再恭敬迎送。
English: If there are any more envoys from the Wei Dynasty, do not greet them respectfully.

古文：西域诸国，亦有贰。 
现代文：西域一些国家，也有贰心。 
English: Some countries in the western region are also concerned.

古文：且牧犍事主，稍以慢堕。
现代文：加上牧犍奉事君主，逐渐地怠慢。
English: In addition, the herdsmen served the monarch and gradually became negligent.

古文：使还，具以状闻。
现代文：使节回京后，将全部情况奏呈皇上。
English: After the envoys returned to Kyoto, they reported the entire situation to the Emperor.

古文：太武遂议讨牧犍。
现代文：太武帝便商议攻打牧犍。
English: Emperor Taivu then discussed attacking the herdsmen.

古文：凉州既平，鄯善国以为辱亡齿寒，自然之道也。
现代文：凉州平定后，善阝善国认为唇亡齿寒，很自然的道理。
English: After the subjugation of Liangzhou, Zenzhong Zangguo believed that it was natural for people to have cold lips and teeth.

古文：今武威为魏所灭。次及我矣。
现代文：现在武威被魏朝灭掉，接下来便轮到我了。
English: Now that Wuwei has been wiped out by the Wei Dynasty, it's my turn next.

古文：若通其使人，知我国事，取亡必近；不如绝之，可以支久。
现代文：如果使者来往，让他们了解到我们国内一些事情，自取灭亡一定很近；不如断绝可以支撑很久。
English: If envoys come and go, let them know some things in our country, self-destruction must be very close; it is better to cut off can be supported for a long time.

古文：乃断塞行路，西域贡献，历年不入。后平鄯善，行人复通。
现代文：于是阻断塞下来往道路，西域进贡物品，多年不能进入中原，后来平定善阝善，使节又通往起来。
English: As a result, the road to the west was blocked, and tributes from the west could not enter the Central Plains for many years. Later, Zenshin was pacified, and envoys were sent to the west.

古文：始，琬等使还京师，具言凡所经见及传闻傍国，云：西域自汉武时五十余国，后稍相并，至太延中为十六国。
现代文：开始，董琬等使节回到京都，详细介绍自身经历见闻以及邻国情况，说： 西域从汉武帝时五十多个国家，后来逐渐兼并，到太延年间是十六个国家。
English: At the beginning, envoys such as Dong Hao returned to Kyoto to introduce in detail their own experiences and the situation of neighboring countries, saying: The western region has grown from more than 50 countries during the reign of Emperor Hanwu, and then gradually merged, to 16 countries during the Taien era.

古文：分其地为四域：自葱岭以东，流沙以西为一域；葱岭以西，海曲以东为一域；者舌以南，月氏以北为一域；两海之间，水泽以南为一域。
现代文：把西域地块分成四个区域：从葱岭以东，沙漠以西为一区域；葱岭以西，海曲以东为一区域；者舌以南，月氏以北为一区域；两海之间，沼泽以南为一区域。
English: Divide the western block into four regions: from the green onion ridge to the east, west of the desert as one region; west of the green onion ridge, east of the sea bend as one region; south of the tongue of man, north of the moon as one region; between the two seas, south of the swamp as one region.

古文：内诸小渠长，盖以百数。
现代文：里面各国小首领，大概可以用百统计。
English: Among them, the minor leaders of various countries can probably be counted in hundreds.

古文：其出西域，本有二道，后更为四：出自玉门，度流沙，西行二千里至鄯善，为一道；自玉门度流沙，北行二千二百里至车师，为一道；从莎车西行一百里至葱岭，葱岭西一千三百里至伽倍，为一道；自莎车西南五百里，葱岭西南一千三百里至波路，为一道焉。
现代文：从中原出使西域，原来有两条道路，后来变为四条：从玉门出发经过沙漠，西行二千里到善阝善，是一条道路；从玉门经沙漠，北行二千里到车师，是一条道路；从莎车西行一百里到葱岭，葱岭西行一千三百里到伽倍，是一条道路；从莎车西南行五百里，葱岭西南行一千三百里到波路，是一条道路。
English: From the Central Plains to the West, there were originally two roads, which later became four: from Yumen through the desert, two thousand miles west to Zhengyi, there is one road; from Yumen through the desert, two thousand miles north to Chaishi, there is one road; from Yarko westbound one hundred miles to Qixiling, Qixiling westbound one thousand three hundred miles to Gabei, there is one road; from Yarko southwestbound five hundred miles, Qixiling southwestbound one thousand three hundred miles to Bo Road, there is one road.

古文：自琬所不传而更有朝贡者，纪其名，不能具国俗也。
现代文：董琬没有记载而另有进贡的，记录国名，不能详载国家习俗。
English: If there is no record of Dong Xuan and there are other tributes, the country name should be recorded, and the national customs cannot be recorded in detail.

古文：东西魏时，中国方扰，及于齐、周，不闻有事西域，故二代书并不立记录。
现代文：东魏、西魏时，中原正逢动乱，一直到齐、周，没有听说有关西域的事情，所以两代史书都没有留下记录。
English: During the Eastern Wei and Western Wei Dynasties, the Central Plains was in turmoil, and until the Qi and Zhou Dynasties, nothing was heard about the Western Regions, so the two generations of history books did not leave any records.

古文：隋开皇、仁寿之间，尚未云经略。
现代文：隋朝开皇，仁寿年间，还不曾进行筹划。
English: During the reign of the Sui Dynasty and the reign of Emperor Jinshou, there was no planning.

古文：炀帝时，乃遣侍御史韦节、司隶从事杜行满使于西籓诸国，至罽宾得玛瑙杯，王舍城得佛经，史国得十舞女、师子皮、火鼠毛而还。
现代文：炀帝时，才派遣侍御史韦节、司隶从事杜行满出使西域各国，到剡宾得玛瑙杯，王舍城得到佛经，史国得到十个舞女、狮子皮、火鼠毛而回。
English: In the time of Emperor Xian, he sent his attendant, Shi Wei, and his subordinate, Du Xing, to the countries of the Western Regions. They won the onyx cup in Zibo, the Buddhist scriptures in Wangshecheng, and ten dancing girls, lion skins, and fire rat hair in Shikoku.

古文：帝复令闻喜公裴矩于武威、张掖间往来以引致之。
现代文：皇帝又命令闻喜公裴矩在武威、张掖之间来往招引他们。
English: The emperor also ordered Wan Xigong Pei Jian to go back and forth between Wuwei and Zhang Ye to attract them.

古文：其有君长者四十四国，矩因其使者入朝，啖以厚利，令其转相讽谕。
现代文：拥有君主的国家四十四个，裴矩借使者入朝的机会，用厚利引诱，让他们互相劝说。
English: There are forty-four countries with monarchs, and Pei Rong took the opportunity to send an envoy to the DPRK, lured them with a hefty sum of money, and let them persuade each other.

古文：大业中，相率而来朝者四十余国，帝因置西戎校尉以应接之。
现代文：大业年间，互相引导来朝中拜见的有四十多个国家，皇帝因此设置西戎校尉以应酬接待。
English: During the reign of King Taejo, more than forty countries were guided to visit the DPRK and China. Therefore, the emperor set up Lieutenant General Xi Rong to receive them.

古文：寻属中国大乱，朝贡遂绝。
现代文：紧接着中原大乱，朝贡就此断绝。
English: Immediately following the Central Plains War, the imperial tribute was discontinued.

古文：然事亡失，书所存录者二十国焉。
现代文：很多事情失传，书籍保存有记录的二十个国家。
English: Many things have been lost, but there are twenty countries that have preserved books and records.

古文：魏时所来者，在隋亦有不至，今总而编次，以备前书之《西域传》云。
现代文：在魏朝时来进贡的，到隋朝也有不来的，现在汇集编排，以完备前代史书的《西域传》。
English: The tributes that came to the Wei Dynasty and the tributes that did not come to the Sui Dynasty are now collected and arranged to complete the "History of the Western Regions" of the previous history book.

古文：至于道路远近，物产风俗，详诸前史，或有不同。斯皆录其当时，盖以备其遗阙尔。
现代文：至于道路远近，物产风俗，较以前史书详细，或者有所不同，都记录当时来往情况，主要为了弥补遗漏和不足。
English: As far as the roads are far and near, the products and customs, more detailed than the previous history books, or different, all record the traffic situation at that time, mainly in order to make up for omissions and deficiencies.

